The Thousand and One Nights, Vol. 3 (Edward William Lane (trans.), 1877)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1877 edition (https://archive.org/details/thousandonenight03laneiala). Completes the library's Lane set (vol. 1 already live): Lane's pioneering scholarly translation, 1838-40.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE  LIBRARY

OF

THE  UNIVERSITY

OF  CALIFORNIA

RIVERSIDE


Ex  Libris
C.  K.  OGDEN


LOJMDON  :

AND SON.


THE  THOUSAND  AND  ONE  NIGHTS,


COMMONLY  CALLED,  IN  ENGLAND,


Cl)c  Arabian  ligjjts'  entertainments.


A  NEW  TRANSLATION  FllOM  THE  ARABIC,  WITH  COPIOUS  NOTES


EDWARD  WILLIAM  LANE,


HON. M.K.S.L., KTC.
AUTHOR  OF "THK MODERN EGYPTIANS."


IIXITSTIEATIBB  BY  MAHY  HUNBIRIEB  ISBTGlEAVIHGa  OH  WO>OB,

<$rom  ©riginal  Designs  bjr  ^IHImm  l)arfag.

A  NEW  EDITION,
KUOM  A  COPY ANNOTATED BY  THE TRANSLATOR;

EDITED BY HIS  NEPHEW,

EDWARD  STANLEY  POOLE.

IN THltEE VOLUMES.— VOL. III.


LONDON:
BICKERS  AND SON, LEICESTER SQUARE.

MDCCCLXXVll.


: '


LONDON  :

PRINTED BY WILLIAM TLOWES AND SOSS,
STAMFORI> STREET AND CHARING CKOSS.


CONTENTS  OF  THE THIRD VOLUME.


CHAPTER  XX.

PAGE.

Story  of  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sea  and  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Land 1

First  Voyage  of  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sea 5

Second  Voyage 14

Third  Voyage 23

Fourth  Voyage 35

Fifth  Voyage * ...  50

Sixth  Voyage 61

Seventh  Voyage 70

Conclusion  of  the  Story  of  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sea  and  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Land  .  75

Notes 77

CHAPTER  XXI.

Story  of  the  City  of  Brass 109

Notes 141

Abstract  of  the  Story  of  the  King  and  his  Son  and  the  Damsel  and  the  Seven

Wezeers 145

CHAPTER  XXII.

Story  of  Joodar 168

Notes 215

'Otbeh  and  Reiya 218

'Ekrimeh  and  Khuzeynieh 222

III.  &


vi  •


CONTENTS.


PACK.

Anecdote  of  Two  Lovers  of  the  Tribe  of  the  Benee-'Odhrah 226

Another  Anecdote  of  Two  Lovers 230

CHAPTER  XXIII.

Story  of  Jnllanar  of  the  Sea 234

Story  of  Bedr  Basim  and  Jdharah 249

Notes 281

CHAPTER  XXIV.

Story  of  Seyf-el-Mulook  and  Bedeea-el-Jemal 283

Notes 343

CHAPTER  XXV.

Story  of  Hasan  of  El-Basrah 352

Notes 478

CHAPTER  XXVI.

Story  of  Khaleefeh  the  Fisherman 484

Notes 522

Anecdote  of  a  Man  of  Baghdad  and  his  Slave-girl 524

CHAPTER  XXVII.

Story  of  Aboo-Seer  and  Aboo-Keer 531

Notes 563

CHAPTER  XXVIII.

Story  -of  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land  and  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Sea 565

Notes 586

CHAPTER  XXIX.

Story  of  Ibraheem  and  Jemeeleh 588

Notes  . . . . : 612

CHAPTER  XXX.

Story  of  Maaroof H14

Notes .  f>6S


CONCLUSION 671

REVIEW 674

INDEX .687


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS  IN  VOLUME  III.


Ornamental  Title

Head-piece  to  Table  of  Contents

Head-piece  to  List  of  Illustrations

Tail-piece  to  List  of  Illustrations  .  .  •

Head-piece  to  Chapter  XX. — Es-Sindibad  of  the  Land,  and

Ornamental  Border

Head-piece  to  first  voyage. — Baghdad  (from  a  Sketch  by  Cul.

Chesney)

Es-Simlibad  of  the  Sea  in  the  Bowl

Sea-horse

Head-piece  to  Second  Voyage

Rukh'  's  Egg

The  Rukh'  carrying  off  the  Serpent

Rhinoceros  and  Elephant,  &c

Head-piece  to  Third  Voyage

The  Giant  and  his  Prisoners

Ks-Sindihdd  of  the  Sea  hailing  the  Vessel .........

Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sea  recognised  by  the  Captain


Engravers'  Names.
JACKSON  .  ,  .
M.  A.  COOK  .
GRAY  .  .  .
LANDELLS  .


Page.
i

v
vii


T.  WILLIAMS


JACKSON  ,  ,
WHIMPER  .
S.  WILLIAMS
GREEN  .  .
G.  !NICHOLLS
GREEN  .  .
LANDELLS  .
M. JACKSON
SLADER  .  .

WlLI.IAM.soN

JACKSON


5
7
9

14
16
18
21
23
26
30
34


viii  LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS.

Engravers'  Names.  Page.

Head-piece  to  Fourth  Voyage WHIMPER .... 35

Cannibals  intoxicating  Es-Sindibad's  Companions FELDWICK .... 37

The  Pepper-gatherers  listening  to  Es-Sindibad's  Story ....  WALMSLEY  .... 39

Es-Sindibad's  Friend  lowered  into  the  Sepulchral  Cavern . . .  BASTIN 43

The  Beast  in  the  Cavern GRAY 45

Es-Sindibad  quitting  the  Cavern  ... - BASTIN 47

El-Basrah  (from  a  drawing  by  Colonel  Chesney) NICHOLLS .... 49

Head-piece  to  Fifth  Voyage S.  WILLIAMS ... 50

The  Old  Man  of  the  Sea  on  Es-Sindibad's  shoulders T.  WILLIAMS ... 53

Es-Sindibad  killing  the  Old  Man  of  the  Sea HARRIET  CLARKE . 55

Gathering  Cocoa-nuts JACKSON 58

Head-piece  to  Sixth  Voyage WHIMPER .... 61

Es-Sindibad  on  the  Raft GREEN 66

El-Basrah  (from  a  Sketch  by  Colonel  Chesney) E.  EVANS .... 69

Head-piece  to  Seventh  Voyage LANDELLS .... 70

The  Elephant  uprooting  the  Tree GRAY 73

Tail-piece  to  the  Story  of  FA-Sindibad  of  the  Sea  and  Es-Sindi-
bad of  the  Land FELDWICK .... 76

Head-piece  to  Notes  to  Chapter  XX LAXDELLS .... 77

Stone-curlew MARY  ANN  COOK  . . 79

Seemurgh,  or  Rukh'  (from  a  drawing  in  the  library  of  the  Royal

Asiatic  Society) LANDELLS .... 86

Head-piece  to  Chapter  XXI GRAY 109

Jinnee  issuing  from  one  of  Suleyman's  Bottles FOLKARD . . . .111

Palace  of  Koosh  the  son  of  Sheddad Miss  WILLIAMS . .114

Horseman  of  Brass HARRIET  CLARKE .118

The  'Efreet  in  the  Pillar .  LANDELLS ....  120

The  Refractory  Jinn  overcome  by  Suleyman's  Forces ....  MASON  JACKSON . .  123

Danish  overtaken  by  Ed-Dimiryat FELDWICK . . . .125

The  Ten  Damsels  in  the  City  of  Brass LANDELLS ....  130

Tower  of  Brass EVANS 130

Mountain  and  Sea  of  El-Karkar WHIMPER ....  138

Tail-piece  to  Chapter  XXI JACKSON . . . .140

Head-piece  to  Notes  to  Chapter  XXI LANDELLS ....  141

Pavilion WILLIAMSON . . .146

Treasurer  threatening  his  Paramour  before  her  Husband . . .  T.  WILLIAMS . . .  147

Young  Prince  metamorphosed  into  a  Woman GRAY 150

Young  Prince  restored,  and  conveyed  to  his  Bride .....  BASTIN 1 52

Goldsmith  and  Robbers  in  the  Storm WHIMPER .  .153

The  Man  who  never  laughed  for  the  rest  of  his  Life MARY  CLINT . . 1  ">.">

Concealed  Door JACKSON . . . .160

Blind  Sheykh HARRIET  CLARKE .  165

Tail-piece  to  Notes  to  Chapter  XXI E.  EVANS . . . .167

Head-piece  to  Chapter  XXII. WHIMPER .... 168

Joodar  at  the  Shop  of  the  Baker T.WILLIAMS  .  172

Maghrabee  accosting  Joodar NICHOLLS . . . .173

Joodar  leading  the  Mule  to  the  Jew GRAY  17.">

Joodar  drawing  the  Maghrabee  out  of  the  Lake M.  A.  COOK  .  177

Joodar  and  the  Maghrabee  resting  on  their  Journey GRAY 181

The  Mule  descending  into  the  Earth BASTIN .  .  183

Incantation WHIMPER ....  187

Joodar  threatening  the  Semblance  of  his  Mother  . ,  .  I,ANL>I:LL-  .  188


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS.  ix

Engravers'  Names.  Page.

Bab  en-Nasr  . GREEN 191

Es-Suweys,  or  Suez FOLKARD ....  196

The  Jinnee  appearing  to  the  two  Brothers  in  the  Prison . . .  GREEN 201

The  Emeer  at  the  door  of  Joodar's  Palace M.  A.  WILLIAMS .  • .  206

The  King's  Daughter FELDWICK ....  210

Mak'ad,  &c. . . EVANS 213

Tail-piece  to  Chapter  XXII MASON . . . . .  214

Head-piece  to  Notes  to  Chapter  XXII LANDELLS ....  215

Tree  of  the  Bridegroom  and  Bride EVANS 221

Khuzeymeh  visiting  'Ekrimeh  in  the  Prison T.  WILLIAMS . . .  224

Jemeel  leading  his  Camel HARRIET  CLARKE .  226

The  Lion  about  to  destroy  the  Damsel ARMSTRONG  ....  229

Group  of  Damsel* GRAY 231

Tail-piece  to  Notes  to  Chapter  XXII JACKSON 233

Head-piece  to  Chapter  XXIII THOMPSON . . . .234

Jullanar  on  the  Sea-shore EVANS 238

Jullanar's  Relations  coming  forth  from  the  Sea JACKSON 241

Jullanar's  Relations  flying  back  into  the  Sea FELDWICK ....  246

Head-piece. — Bedr  Basim LANDELLS ....  249

Bedr  Basim  making  known  his  Passion BASTIN 252

Bedr  Basim  addressing  Jdharah  in  the  Tree GRAY 258

The  Fowler  with  the  Bird LANDELLS ....  263

The  King's  Wife  disenchanting  Bedr  Basim LANDELLS ....  265

Bedr  Basim  arriving  at  the  City  of  the  Enchanters WHIMPER ....  267

Queen  Lab  and  Bedr  Basim  reclining  at  a  Window JACKSON 271

Queen  Lab  performing  the  Incantation GREEN 275

Head-piece  to  Notes  to  Chapter  XXIII LANDELLS ....  281

Head-piece  to  Chapter  XXIV JACKSON 283

The  Two  Wezeers  advancing  amid  Suleyman's  Troops ....  FOLKARD ....  286

The  King  'Asim  and  his  Wezeer  in  the  Tree LANDELLS ....  289

The  Two  Serpents HARRIET  CLARKE  . .  289

Zawiyeh EVANS 292

The  King  'Asim  crowning  Seyf-el-Mulook NICHOLLS ....  295

Consultation  of  the  Merchants  and  Travellers GRAY 300

Storm  at  Sea WHIMPER ....  303

Queen  and  her  Captives T.  WILLIAMS . . .  307

Apes ARMSTRONG . . .  310

Son  of  the  Blue  King  carrying  off  Dolet  Khatoon M.JACKSON . . .  314

The  Coffer  rising  from  the  Sea GRAY 316

Arrival  at  'Emareeyeh WHIMPER . . . .319

Sa'ed  gathering  Pears GREEN 323

The  Ghool  slain  by  Sa'ed BASTIN 327

Seyf-el-Mulook  in  the  Garden JACKSON ....  331

Mai janeh  carrying  Seyf-el-Mulook HARRIET  CLARKE .  334

Jinnees  carrying  off  Seyf-el-Mulook GREEN 337

Tail-piece  to  Chapter  XXIV JACKSON ....  342

Head-piece  to  Notes  to  Chapter  XXIV EVANS 343

The  Sheykh  relating  the  Story EVANS 345

The  Merchant  Hasan  reading  the  Story  of  Seyf-el-Mulook  before

the  King GRAY 347

Head-piece  to  Chapter  XXV JACKSON ....  352

Market . . LANDELLS . , .  354


x.  LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS.

Engravers'  Names.  Page.

Hasan  conveyed  to  the  Ship WHIMPER ....  357

The  Magian  summoning  the  Camels HAKRIET  CLARKE .  362

Hasan  falling  from  the  Summit  of  the  Mountain WHIMPER ....  365

Hasan  slaying  the  Magian FOLKAKD ....  369

Damsels  bathing NICHOLLS ....  374

Return  of  the  Seven  Sisters GRAY . .  '  . . .376

Hasan's  Sister  carrying  him  to  the  top  of  the  Palace ....  JACKSON ....  379

Hasan  about  to  seize  his  Beloved T.  WILLIAMS . . .  382

The  Marriage LANDELLS ....  387

Hasan  taking  leave  of  his  Sister GRAY 389

Camels  kneeling  at  the  Door  of  Hasan's  House ARMSTRONG . . .  390

Hasan  taking  leave  of  his  Mother  and  WTife  and  Children . . .  NICHOLLS ....  393

The  Flight  of  Hasan's  Wife GRAY 398

Zubeydeh  apologizing  to  Hasan's  Mother GRAY 401

Hasan's  distress  on  hearing  of  the  Flight  of  his  Wife .... LANDELLS ....  404

Hasan  approaching  the  Palace  of  the  Seven  Sisters WHIMPER ....  406

'Abd-El-Kuddoos  on  the  Elephant HARRIET  CLARKE .  410

The  Elephant  at  the  Entrance  of  the  Cavern HARRIET  CLARKE .  412

Hasan  met  by  Horses  numerous  as  the  Drops  of  Rain ....  JACKSON . . . .415

Hasan  upon  the  Shoulders  of  the  'Efreet  Dahnash GREEN 419

Ships  arrived  from  the  Islands  of  Wak-Wak WHIMPER ....  421

Hasan  arming  himself MARY  ANN  COOK  . .  423

Land  of  the  Wild  Beasts JACKSON ....  426

Damsels  bathing  in  the  presence  of  Hasan FOLKARD ....  430

The  Queen  displaying  the  Women  before  Hasan . . . . . .  GRAY 436

The  Two  Children  committed  to  the  Old  Woman MASON 440

The  Two  Children  recognising  their  Father NICHOLLS ....  442

Menar-es-Senh,  in  Prison THOMPSON ....  447

Hasan  reading  the  Paper  found  on  the  Tree EVANS 450

Hasan  settling  the  Dispute  between  the  Two  Boys M.  JACKSON . . .  452

The Vessels of Glass ami China-ware falling upon the Old

Woman JACKSON 454

Hasan  discovering  himself  to  his  Wife THOMPSON ....  458

The  Seven  'Efreets  summoned  by  means  of  the  Rod GREEN 462

Another 'Efreet  presenting  himself  to  Hasan WHIMPER ....  465

Battle  with  the  Troops  of  Wak-Wak WHIMPER ....  467

The  King  Hasoon  approaching  Hasan LANDELLS ....  471

The  Elephant  of  'Abd-El-Kuddoos HARRIET  CLARKE .  473

Tail-piece  to  Chapter  XXV GREEN 477

Head-piece  to  Notes  to  Chapter  XXV LANDELLS ....  478

Tail-piece  to  Notes  to  Chapter  XXV BASTIN 483

Head-piece  to  Chapter  XXVI JACKSON 484

The  Three  Apes JACKSON 488

Khaleefeh  at  the  Shop  of  the  Jew T.WILLIAMS . . .  491

Khaleefeh  wrapped  in  his  Net HARRIET  CLARKE  . .  495

The  Khaleefeh  and  Jaafar  discovering  the  Fisherman ....  WHIMPER ....  497

Memlooks  taking  the  Fish FOLKARD . . , .501

Khaleefeh  with  Jaafar  and  the  Eunuch FOLKARD ....  506

Khaleefeh  introduced  to  the  Khaleefeh EVANS .  . .  509

Khaleefeh  purchasing  the  Chest GRAY  .  512

Khalee.'eh  on  the  Chest T.  WILLIAMS . . .513

Khaleefeh  thrown  from  the  Mule EVANS  .517


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS.  xi

Engravers'  Names.  Page.

Khaleefeh  taken  to  the  Khaleefeh BRANSTON ....  519

Tail-piece  to  Chapter  XXVI JACKSON 521

Head-piece  to  Notes  to  Chapter  XXVI EVANS 522

Young  Man  asleep  in  a  Mosque HARRIET  CLARKE .  525

River-scene — Moonlight WHIMPER ....  527

Tail-piece  to  Notes  to  Chapter  XXVI. — Gardens  on  the  River  of

El-Ubulleh GRAY 530

Head-piece  to  Chapter  XXVII. — Alexandria JACKSON 531

Door  of  Aboo-Keer's  Shop  nailed  up LANDELLS ....  533

Aboo-Seer  shaving  a  Passenger  in  the  Galleon THOMPSON ....  536

The  Galleon  moored  at  a  City BASTIN 538

Shop  of  the  Dyer GRAY 541

The  Barber  Sick GRAY . . . . . .  543

The  Bath t EVANS 547

Damsels  plaiting  the  Queen's  hair S.  WILLIAMS . . .  550

The  Dyer  going  to  the  King MARY  ANN  COOK  . .  553

The  King  making  the  sign  to  cast  Aboo-Seer  into  the  Sea  . . .  M.  A.  WILLIAMS . .  556

Aboo-Seer  emptying  the  Net WALL 557

Tail-piece  to  Chapter  XXVII. — Alexandria JACKSON 562

Head-piece  to  Notes  to  Chapter  XXVII. — Aboo-Keer ....  LANDELLS ....  563

Tail-piece  to  Notes  to  Chapter  XXVII M.  JACKSON . . .  564

Head-piece  to  Chapter  XXVIII GREEN 565

Baker's  Shop FOLKARD ....  568

'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land  carrying  a  Basket  of  Fruit HARRIET  CLARKE .  572

'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land  and 'Abd-Allah  of  the  Sea SEARES  &  WILLIAMS  .  576

The  Two  'Abd-Allahs  in  the  Sea WHIMPER . . . .579

'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land  in  the  House  of 'Abd-Allah  of  the  Sea .  JACKSON 583

Head-piece  to  Notes  to  Chapter  XXVIII JACKSON 586

Tail-piece  to  Notes  to  Chapter  XXVIII GRAY 587

Head-piece  to  Chapter  XXIX. — Bookseller's  Shop LANDELLS ....  588

Ibraheem  accosting  the  Bedawee HARRIET  CLARKE .  590

Widows'  Bridge,  El-Basrah  (from  a  Sketch  by  Colonel  Chesney) NiCHOLLS ....  594

Ibraheem  at  the  Shop  of  the  Tailor ,  EVANS 596

Ibraheem  landing  at  the  Garden HARRIET  CLARKE .  599

Antelopes,  Hares,  &c GRAY 601

Jemeeleh  Dancing T.  WILLIAMS . . .  604

Ibraheem  arrested  by  the  Officers  of  the  Walee GREEN 608

Tail-piece  to  Chapter  XXIX BASTIN 611

Head-piece  to  Notes  to  Chapter  XXIX = . .  JACKSOS . . . .612

Tail-piece  to  Notes  to  Chapter  XXIX JACKSON ....  613

Head-piece  to  Chapter  XXX JACKSON . . . .614

Maaroof  aided  by  his  Neighbours BASTIN . . . . .  616

The  Jinnee  appearing  to  Maaroof WHIMPER ....  619

The  Merchant  'Alee  dispersing  the  People FOLKARD . . . .621

Christians  detecting  Maaroof  and  'Alee M.  A.  WILLIAMS . .  623

Maaroof  giving  Alms EVANS 626

Maaroof  shewing  the  broken  Jewel  to  the  King HARRIET  CLARKE .  631

Maaroof  viewing  the  Sports FOLKARD . . . .634

The  Princess  caressing  Maaroof HARRIET  CLARKE .  637

Maaroof  bidding  farewell  to  his  Wife BASTIN 639

Man  at  the  Plough ....'. NUGENT 641

Abu-s-Sa'adat  appearing  to  Maaroof THTJRSTON  THOMPSON  643


xii  LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS.

Engravers'  Names.  Page.

Ploughman  bringing  the  Bowl  of  Lentils HARRIET  CLARKE .  64t>

Maaroof  entering  the  City GREEN 650

The  Garden LANDELLS . . . .653

The  Desert E.  M.  WILLIAMS . .  656

The  Wezeer  overcome  by  the  Princess ALEX.  LANDELLS  . .  658

Fatimeh  El-'Orrah  mourning Miss  C.  BOND  . . .661

Fatimeh  El-'Orrah  humbling  herself  before  Muaroor' ELIZA  THOMPSON  . .  663

Death  of  Fatimeh  El'Orrah MARY  A.  WILLIAMS  .  665

Tail-piece  to  Chapter  XXX EVANS 667

Head-piece  to  Notes  to  Chapter  XXX ELIZA  CLINT . . .  668

Head-piece  to  Conclusion JULIET  E.  DUDLEY .  671

Tail-piece  to  Conclusion QUARTLEY  ....  673

Head-piece  to  Review MASON 674

Head-piece  to  Index , WHEELER ....  687

Final  Device. — Motto,  "  Praise  be  to  God  alone." MARY  CLIXT . . .  702


CHAPTER XX


COMMENCING  WITH  THE  FIVE  HUNDRED
AND  THIRTY-SEVENTH  NIGHT,  AND
ENDING  WITH  PART  OP  THE  FIVE
HUNDRED  AND  SIXTY-SIXTH.


THE  STORY  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF
THE  SEA  AND  ES-SINDIBAB
OF  THE  LAND/


THERE  was,  in  the  time  of
the  Khajeefeh,  the  Prince  of  the
Faithful,  Haroon  Er-Rasheed,  in
the  city  of  Baghdad,  a  man  called
Es-Sindibad  *  the  Porter.  He
was  a  man  in  poor  circumstances,


III.


2  THE  STORY  OF  ES-SIXDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA

who  bore  burdens  for  hire  upon  his  head.  And  it  happened  to  him
that  he  bore  one  day  a  heavy  burden,  and  that  day  was  excessively
hot ;  so  he  was  wearied  by  the  load,  and  perspired  profusely,  the  heat
violently  oppressing  him.  In  this  state  he  passed  by  the  door  of  a
merchant,  the  ground  before  which  was  swept  and  sprinkled,  and
there  the  air  was  temperate  ;  and  by  the  side  of  the  door  was  a  wide
mastabah.  The  porter  therefore  put  down  his  burden  upon  that
mastabah,  to  rest  himself,  and  to  Ascent  the  air;  and  when  he  had
done  so,  there  came  forth  upon  him,  from  the  door,  a  pleasant,  gentle
gale,  and  an  exquisite  odour,  wherewith  the  porter  was  delighted.
He  seated  himself  upon  the  edge  of  the  mastabah,  and  heard  in  that
place  the  melodious  sounds  of  stringed  instruments,  with  the  lute
among  them,  and  mirth-exciting  voices,  and  varieties  of  distinct
recitations.  He  heard  also  the  voices  of  birds,  warbling,  and  praising
God  (whose  name  be  exalted !)  with  diverse  tones  and  with  all
dialects  ;3  consisting  of  turtle-doves  and  heziirs4  and  blackbirds  and
nightingales  and  ring-doves  and  keerawans  ;5  whereupon  he  wondered
in  his  mind,  and  was  moved  with  great  delight.  He  then  advanced
to  that  door,  and  found  within  the  house  a  great  garden,  wherein  he
beheld  pages  and  slaves  and  servants  and  other  dependants,  and  such
things  as  existed  not  elsewhere  save  in  the  abodes  of  Kings  and
Sultans  ;  and  after  that,  there  blew  upon  him  the  odour  of  delicious,
exquisite  viands,  of  all  different  kinds,  and  of  delicious  wine.

Upon  this  he  raised  his  eyes  towards  heaven,  and  said,  Extolled  be
thy  perfection,  0  Lord  !  0  Creator  !  0  Supplier  of  the  conveniences
of  life  !  Thou  suppliest  whom  Thou  wilt  without  reckoning  !  O
Allah,  I  implore  thy  forgiveness  of  all  offences,  and  turn  to  Thee
repenting  of  all  faults  !  0  Lord,  there  is  no  animadverting  upon
Thee  with  respect  to  thy  judgment  and  thy  power  ;  for  Thou  art  not
to  be  questioned  regarding  that  which  Thou  doest,  and  Thou  art  able
to  do  whatsoever  Thou  wilt !  Extolled  be  thy  prefection !  Thou
enrichest  whom  Thou  wilt,  and  whom  Thou  wilt  Thou  impoverishest !
Thou  magnifiest  whom  Thou  wilt,  and  whom  Thou  wilt  thou  abasest !
There  is  no  deity  but  Thou !  How  great  is  thy  dignity  !  and  how
mighty  is  thy  dominion !  and  how  excellent  is  thy  government !
Thou  hast  bestowed  favours  upon  him  whom  Thou  choosest  among
thy  servants,  and  the  owner  of  this  place  is  in  the  utmost  affluence,
delighting  himself  with  pleasant  odours  and  delicious  meats  and
exquisite  beverages  of  all  descriptions.  And  Thou  hast  appointed
unto  thy  creatures  what  Thou  wilt,  and  what  Thou  hast  predestined


AND  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  LAND.  3

for  them  ;  so  that  among  them  one  is  weary,  and  another  is  at  ease  ;
and  one  of  them  is  prosperous,  and  another  is  like  me,  in  the  extreme
of  fatigue  and  abjection  ! — And  he  recited  thus  :  —

How  many  wretched  persons  are  destitute  of  ease  !  and  how  many  are  in  luxury,

reposing  in  the  shade  ! 6
I  find  myself  afflicted  by  trouble  beyond  measure ;  and  strange  is  my  condition,

and  heavy  is  my  load !
Others  are  in  prosperity,  and  from  wretchedness  are  free,  and  never  for  a  single

day  have  borne  a  load  like  mine  ;
Incessantly  and  amply  blest,  throughout  the  course  of  life,  with  happiness  and

grandeur,  as  well  as  drink  and  meat.
All  men  whom  God  hath  made  are  in  origin  alike ;  and  1  resemble  this  man,  and

he  resembleth  me ;
But  otherwise,  between  us  is  a  difference  as  great  as  the  difference  that  we  find

between  wine  and  vinegar.
Yet  in  saying  this,  I  utter  no  falsehood  against  Thee,  TO  my  Lord ; j  for  Thou  art

wise,  and  with  justice  Thou  hast  judged.

And  when  Es-Sindibad  the  Porter  had  finished  the  recitation  of
his  verses,  he  desired  to  take  up  his  burden  and  to  depart.  But,  lo,
there  came  forth  to  him  from  that  door  a  young  page,  handsome  in
countenance,  comely  in  stature,  magnificent  in  apparel ;  and  he  laid
hold  upon  the  porter's  hand,  saying  to  him,  Enter  :  answer  the  sum-
mons of  my  master ;  for  he  calleth  for  thee.  And  the  porter  would
have  refused  to  enter  with  the  page  ;  but  he  could  not.  He  therefore
deposited  his  burden  with  the  door-keeper  in  the  entrance-passage,
and,  entering  the  house  with  the  page,  he  found  it  to  be  a  handsome
mansion,  presenting  an  appearance  of  joy  and  majesty.  And  he
looked  towards  a  grand  chamber,  in  which  he  beheld  noblemen  and
great  lords ;  and  in  it  were  all  kinds  of  flowers,  and  all  kinds  of  sweet
scents,  and  varieties  of  dried  and  fresh  fruits,  together  with  abundance
of  various  kinds  of  exquisite  viands,  and  beverage  prepared  from  the
fruit  of  the  choicest  grape-vines.  In  it  were  also  instruments  of
music  and  mirth,  and  varieties  of  beautiful  slave-girls,  all  ranged  in
proper  order.  And  at  the  upper  end  of  that  chamber  was  a  great  and
venerable  man,  in  the  sides  of  whose  beard  grey  hairs  had  begun  to
appear.  He  was  of  handsome  form,  comely  in  countenance,  with  an
aspect  of  gravity  and  dignity  and  majesty  and  stateliness.  So,  upon
this,  Es-Sindibad  the  Porter  was  confounded,  and  he  said  within  him-
self, By  Allah,  this  place  is  a  portion  of  Paradise,  or  it  is  the  palace  of
a  King  or  Sultan  !  Then,  putting  himself  in  a  respectful  posture,  he
saluted  the  assembly,  prayed  for  them,  and  kissed  the  ground  before
them  ;  after  which  he  stood,  hanging  down  his  head  in  humility.  But


4  THE  STORY  OF  ES-StNDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA,  &c.

the  master  of  the  house  gave  him  permission  to  seat  himself.  He
therefore  sat.  And  the  master  of  the  house  had  caused  him  to  draw
near  unto  him,  and  now  began  to  cheer  him  with  conversation,  and  to
welcome  him ;  and  he  put  before  him  some  of  the  various  excellent,
delicious,  exquisite  viands.  So  Es-Sindibad  the  Porter  advanced,  and
having  said,  In  the  name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful, —
ate  until  he  was  satisfied  and  satiated,  when  he  said,  Praise  be  to  God
in  every  case ! — and  washed  his  hands,  and  thanked  them  for  this.

The  master  of  the  house  then  said,  Thou  art  welcome,  and  thy  day
is  blessed.  What  is  thy  name,  and  what  trade  dost  thou  follow  ? — O
my  master,  he  answered,  my  name  is  Es-Sindibad  the  Porter,  and  I
bear  upon  my  head  men's  merchandise  for  hire.  And  at  this,  the
master  of  the  house  smiled,  and  he  said  to  him,  Know,  O  porter,  that
thy  name  is  like  mine ;  for  I  am  Es-Sindibad  of  the  sea  ;  but,  O
porter,  I  desire  that  thou  let  me  hear  the  verses  that  thou  wast
reciting  when  thou  wast  at  the  door.  The  porter  therefore  was
ashamed,  and  said  to  him,  I  conjure  thee  by  Allah  that  thou  be  not
angry  with  me ;  for  fatigue  and  trouble,  and  paucity  of  what  the  hand
possesseth,  teach  a  man  ill  manners,  and  impertinence.  His  host,
however,  replied,  Be  not  ashamed ;  for  thou  hast  become  my  brother  :
recite  then  the  verses,  since  they  pleased  me  when  I  heard  them  from
thee  as  thou  recitedst  them  at  the  door.  So  upon  this  the  porter
recited  to  him  those  verses,  and  they  pleased  him,  and  he  was  moved
with  delight  on  hearing  them.  He  then  said  to  him,  O  porter,  know
that  my  story  is  wonderful,  and  I  will  inform  thee  of  all  that  happened
to  me  and  befell  me  before  I  attained  this  prosperity  and  sat  in  this
place  wherein  thou  seest  me.  For  I  attained  not  this  prosperity  and
this  place  save  after  severe  fatigue  and  great  trouble  and  many  terrors.
How  often  have  I  endured  fatigue  and  toil  in  my  early  years  !  I  have
performed  seven  voyages,  and  connected  with  each  voyage  is  a  wonder-
ful tale,  that  would  confound  the  mind.  All  that  which  I  endured
happened  by  fate  and  destiny,  and  from  that  which  is  written  there  is
no  escape  nor  flight.


THE  FIRST  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBlD  OF  THE  SEA.

Know,  O  masters,  O  noble  persons,  that  I  had  a  father,  a  mer-
chant, who  was  one  of  the  first  in  rank  among  the  people  and  the
merchants,  and  who  possessed  abundant  wealth  and  ample  fortune.
He  died  when  I  was  a  young  child,  leaving  to  me  wealth  and  build-
ings and  fields ;  and  when  I  grew  up,  I  put  my  hand  upon  the  whole
of  the  property,  ate  well  and  drank  well,  associated  with  the  young
men,  wore  handsome  apparel,  and  passed  my  life  with  my  friends  and
companions,  feeling  confident  that  this  course  would  continue  and
profit  me ;  and  I  ceased  not  to  live  in  this  manner  for  a  length  of
time.  I  then  returned  to  my  reason,  and  recovered  from  my  heed-
lessness,  and  found  that  my  wealth  had  passed  away,  and  my  condition
had  changed,  and  all  the  [money]  that  I  had  possessed  had  gone.  I
recovered  not  to  see  my  situation  but  in  a  state  of  fear  and  confusion
of  mind,  and  remembered  a  tale  that  I  had  heard  before,  the  tale  of


6  THE  FIRST  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SIND1BAD  OF  THE  SEA.

our  lord  Suleyman  the  son  of  Daood  (on  both  of  whom  be  peace  !),
respecting  his  saying,  Three  things  are  better  than  three  :  the  day  of
death  is  better  than  the  day  of  birth ;  and  a  living  dog  is  better  than
a  dead  lion ;  and  the  grave  is  better  than  the  palace/  Then  I  arose,
and  collected  what  I  had,  of  effects  and  apparel,  and  sold  them ;  after
which  I  sold  my  buildings  and  all  that  my  hand  possessed,  and
amassed  three  thousand  pieces  of  silver ;  and  it  occurred  to  my  mind
to  travel  to  the  countries  of  other  people ;  and  I  remembered  one  of
the  sayings  of  the  poets,  which  was  this  : —

In  proportion  to  one's  labour,  eminences  are  gained ;  and  he  who  seeketh  eminence

passeth  sleepless  nights.
He  diveth  in  the  sea  who  seeketh  for  pearls,  and  succeedeth  in  acquiring  lordship

and  good  fortune.
Whoso  seeketh  eminence  without  labouring  for  it,  loseth  his  life  in  the  search  of

vanity.

Upon  this,  1  resolved,  and  arose,  and  bought  for  myself  goods  and
commodities  and  merchandise,  with  such  other  things  as  were  required
for  travel;  and  my  mind  had  consented  to  my  performing  a  sea-
voyage.  So  I  embarked  in  a  ship,  and  it  descended  to  the  city  of
El-Basrah,  with  a  company  of  merchants ;  and  we  traversed  the  sea
for  many  days  and  nights.  We  had  passed  by  island  after  island,  and
from  sea  to  sea,  and  from  land  to  land ;  and  in  every  place  by  which
we  passed  we  sold  and  bought,  and  exchanged  merchandise.  We
continued  our  voyage  until  we  arrived  at  an  island  like  one  of  the
gardens  of  Paradise,  and  at  that  island  the  master  of  the  ship  brought
her  to  anchor  with  us.  He  cast  the  anchor,  and  put  forth  the  land-
ing-plank, and  all  who  were  in  the  ship  landed  upon  that  island.
They  had  prepared  for  themselves  fire-pots,  and  they  lighted  the  fires
in  them ;  and  their  occupations  were  various :  some  cooked ;  others
washed;  and  others  amused  themselves.  I  was  among  those  who
were  amusing  themselves  upon  the  shores  of  the  island,  and  the
passengers  were  assembled  to  eat  and  drink  and  play  and  sport.  But
while  we  were  thus  engaged,  lo,  the  master  of  the  ship,  standing  upon
its  side,  called  out  with  his  loudest  voice,  0  ye  passengers,  whom  may
God  preserve !  come  up  quickly  into  the  ship,  hasten  to  embark,  and
leave  your  merchandise,  and  flee  with  your  lives,  and  save  yourselves
from  destruction  ;  for  this  apparent  island,  upon  which  ye  are,  is  not
really  an  island,  but  it  is  a  great  fish. that  hath  become  stationary  in
the  midst  of  the  sea,  and  the  sand  hath  accumulated  upon  it,  so  that
it  hath  become  like  an  island,  and  trees  have  grown  upon  it  since


THE  FIRST  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.  7

times  of  old ;  and  when  ye  lighted  upon  it  the  fire,  it  felt  the  heat,
and  put  itself  in  motion,  and  now  it  will  descend  with  you  into  the
sea,  and  ye  will  all  be  drowned  :  then  seek  for  yourselves  escape  before
destruction,  and  leave  the  merchandise  ! — The  passengers,  therefore,
hearing  the  words  of  the  master  of  the  ship,  hastened  to  go  up  into
the  vessel,  leaving  the  merchandise,  and  their  other  goods,  and  their
copper  cooking-pots,  and  their  fire-pots ;  and  some  reached  the  ship,
and  others  reached  it  not.  The  island  had  moved,  and  descended  to
the  bottom  of  the  sea,  with  all  that  were  upon  it,  and  the  roaring  sea,
agitated  with  waves,  closed  over  it.8

I  was  among  the  number  of  those  who  remained  behind  upon  the
island;  so  I  sank  in  the  sea  with  the  rest  who  sank.  But  God  (whose
name  be  exalted !)  delivered  me  and  saved  me  from  drowning,  and
supplied  me  with  a  great  wooden  bowl,  of  the  bowls  in  which  the
passengers  had  been  washing,  and  I  laid  hold  upon  it  and  got  into  it,
induced  by  the  sweetness  of  life,  and  beat  the  water  with  my  feet  as
with  oars,  while  the  waves  sported  with  me,  tossing  me  to  the  right
and  left.  The  master  of  the  vessel  had  caused  her  sails  to  be  spread,
and  pursued  his  voyage  with  those  who  had  embarked,  not  regarding
such  as  had  been  submerged ;  and  I  ceased  not  to  look  at  that  vessel
until  it  was  concealed  from  my  eye.  I  made  sure  of  destruction,  and
night  came  upon  me  while  I  was  in  this  state ;  but  I  remained  so  a
day  and  a  night,  and  the  wind  and  the  waves  aided  me  until  the  bowl
came  to  a  stoppage  with  me  under  a  high  island,  whereon  were  trees
overhanging  the  sea.  So  I  laid  hold  upon  a  branch  of  a  lofty  tree,
and  clung  to  it,  after  I  had  been  at  the  point  of  destruction ;  and  I
kept  hold  upon  it  until  I  landed  on  the  island,  when  I  found  my  legs
benumbed,  and  saw  marks  of  the  nibbling  of  fish  upon  their  hams,  of
which  I  had  been  insensible  by  reason  of  the  violence  of  the  anguish
and  fatigue  that  I  was  suffering.


8  THE  FIRST  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.

I  threw  myself  upon  the  island  like  one  dead,  and  was  unconscious
of  my  existence,  and  drowned  in  my  stupefaction  ;  and  I  ceased  not  to
remain  in  this  condition  until  the  next  day.  The  sun  having  then
risen  upon  me,  I  awoke  upon  the  island,  and  found  that  my  feet  were
swollen,  and  that  I  had  become  reduced  to  the  state  in  which  I  then
was.  Awhile  I  dragged  myself  along  in  a  sitting  posture,  and  then  I
crawled  upon  my  knees.  And  there  were  in  the  island  fruits  in
abundance,  and  springs  of  sweet  water  :  therefore  I  ate  of  those  fruits ;
and  I  ceased  not  to  continue  in  this  state  for  many  days  and  nights.
My  spirit  had  then  revived,  my  soul  had  returned  to  me,  and  my
power  of  motion  was  renewed ;  and  I  began  to  meditate,  and  to  walk
along  the  shore  of  the  island,  amusing  myself  among  the  trees  with
the  sight  of  the  things  that  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !)  had  created  ;
and  I  had  made  for  myself  a  staff  from  those  trees,  to  lean  upon  it.
Thus  I  remained  until  I  walked,  one  day,  upon  the  shore  of  the
island,  and  there  appeared  unto  me  an  indistinct  object  in  the  distance.
I  imagined  that  it  was  a  wild  beast,  or  one  of  the  beasts  of  the  sea ;
and  I  walked  towards  it,  ceasing  not  to  gaze  at  it ;  and,  lo,  it  was  a
mare,  of  superb  appearance,  tethered  in  a  part  of  the  island  by  the
sea-shore.  I  approached  her;  but  she  cried  out  against  me  with  a
great  cry,  and  I  trembled  with  fear  of  her,  and  was  about  to  return,
when,  behold,  a  man  came  forth  from  beneath  the  earth,  and  he  called
to  me  and  pursued  me,  saying  to  me,  Who  art  thou,  and  whence  hast
thou  come,  and  what  is  the  cause  of  thine  arrival  in  this  place  ?  So  I
answered  him,  0  my  master,  know  that  I  am  a  stranger,  and  I  was  in
a  ship,  and  was  submerged  in  the  sea  with  certain  others  of  the  pas-
sengers ;  but  God  supplied  me  with  a  wooden  bowl,  and  I  got  into  it,
and  it  bore  me  along  until  the  waves  cast  me  upon  this  island.  And
when  he  heard  my  words,  he  laid  hold  of  my  hand  and  said  to  me,
Come  with  me.  I  therefore  went  with  him,  and  he  descended  with
me  into  a  grotto  beneath  the  earth,  and  conducted  me  into  a  large
subterranean  chamber,  and,  having  seated  me  at  the  upper  end  of  that
chamber,  brought  me  some  food.  I  was  hungry  ;  so  I  ate  until  I  was
satiated  and  contented,  and  my  soul  became  at  ease.  Then  he  asked
me  respecting  my  case,  and  what  had  happened  to  me ;  wherefore  I
acquainted  him  with  my  whole  affair  from  beginning  to  end ;  and  he
wondered  at  my  story.

And  when  I  had  finished  my  tale,  I  said,  I  conjure  thee  by  Allah,
0  my  master,  that  thou  be  not  displeased  with  me  :  I  have  acquainted
thee  with  the  truth  of  my  case  and  of  what  hath  happened  to  me,


and  I  desire  of  thee  that  thou  inform  me  who  thou  art,  and  what  is
the  cause  of  thy  dwelling  in  this  chamber  that  is  beneath  the  earth,
and  what  is  the  reason  of  thy  tethering  this  mare  by  the  sea-side.
So  he  replied,  Know  that  we  are  a  party  dispersed  in  this  island,
upon  its  shores,  and  we  are  the  grooms  of  the  King  El-Mihraj,9
having  under  our.  care  all  his  horses  ;  and  every  month,  when  moon-
light commenceth,  we  bring  the  swift  mares,  and  tether  them  in  this
island,  every  mare  that  has  not  foaled,  and  conceal  ourselves  in  this
chamber  beneath  the  earth,  that  they  may  attract  the  sea-horses.10
This  is  the  time  of  the  coming  forth  of  the  sea-horse  ;  and  afterwards,
if  it  be  the  will  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !),  I  will  take  thee
with  me  to  the  King  El-Mihraj,  and  divert  thee  with  a  sight  of  our
country.  Know,  moreover,  that  if  thou  hadst  not  met  with  us,  thou
hadst  not  seen  any  one  in  this  place,  and  wouldst  have  died  in  misery,
none  knowing  of  thee.  But  I  will  be  the  means  of  the  preservation
of  thy  life,  and  of  thy  return  to  thy  country. — I  therefore  prayed  for
him,  and  thanked  him  for  his  kindness  and  beneficence ;  and  while


in.


10  THE  FIKST  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.

we  were  thus  talking,  the  horse  came  forth  from  the  sea,  as  he  had
said.11  And  shortly  after,  his  companions  came,  each  leading  a  mare  ;
and,  seeing  me  with  him,  they  inquired  of  me  my  story,  and  I  told
them  what  I  had  related  to  him.  They  then  drew  near  to  me,  and
spread  the  table,  and  ate,  and  invited  me  :  so  I  ate  with  them ;  after
which,  they  arose,  and  mounted  the  horses,  taking  me  with  them,
having  mounted  me  on  a  mare.12

We  commenced  our  journey,  and  proceeded  without  ceasing  until
we  arrived  at  the  city  of  the  King  El-Mihraj,  and  they  went  in  td
him  and  acquainted  him  with  my  story.  He  therefore  desired  my
presence,  and  they  took  me  in  to  him,  and  stationed  me  before  him  ;
whereupon  I  saluted  him,  and  he  returned  my  salutation  and  welcomed
me,  greeting  me  in  an  honourable  manner,  and  inquired  of  me  respect-
ing my  case.  So  I  informed  him  of  all  that  had  happened  to  me,
and  of  all  that  I  had  seen,  from  beginning  to  end  ;  and  he  wondered
at  that  which  had  befallen  me  and  happened  to  me,  and  said  to  me,

0  my  son,  by  Allah  thou  hast  experienced  an  extraordinary  perserva-
tion,  and  had  it  not  been  for  the  predestined  length  of  thy  life,  thou
hadst  not  escaped  from  these  difficulties;  but  praise  be  to  God  for
thy  safety  ! Then  he  treated  me  with  beneficence  and  honour,  caused
me  to  draw  near  to  him,  and  began  to  cheer  me  with  conversation  and
courtesy ;  and  he  made  me  his  superintendent  of  the  sea-port,  and
registrar  of  every  vessel  that  came  to  the  coast. I  stood  in  his  presence
to  transact  his  affairs,  and  he  favoured  me  and  benefited  me  in  every
respect ;  he  invested  me  with  a  handsome  and  costly  dress,  and  I
became  a  person  high  in  credit  with  him  in  intercessions,  and  in  ac-
complishing the  affairs  of  the  people. I  ceased  not  to  remain  in  his
service  for  a  long  time ;  and  whenever  I  went  to  the  shore  of  the  sea,

1  used  to  inquire  of  the  merchants  and  travellers  and  sailors  respect-
ing the  direction  of  the  city  of  Baghdiid,  that  perchance  some  one
might  inform  me  of  it,  and  I  might  go  with  him  thither  and  return
to  my  country ;  but  none  knew  it,  nor  knew  any  one  who  went  to  it.
At  this  I  was  perplexed,  and  I  was  weary  of  the  length  of  my  absence
from  home ;  and  in  this  state  I  continued  for  a  length  of  time,  until
I  went  in  one  day  to  the  King  El-Mihraj,  and  found  with  him  a  party
of  Indians. I  saluted  them,  and  they  returned  my  salutation,  and
welcomed  me,  and  asked  me  respecting  my  country ;  after  which,  I
questioned  them  as  to  their  country,  and  they  told  me  that  they  con-
sisted of  various  races. Among  them  are  the  Shakireeyeh,13  who  are
the  most  noble  of  their  races,  who  oppress  no  one,  nor  offer  violence


THE  FIRST  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SIND1BAD  OF  THE  SEA.  n

to  any.  And  among  them  are  a  class  called  the  Bnihmans,  a  people
who  never  drink  wine ;  but  they  are  persons  of  pleasure  and  joy  and
sport  and  merriment,'4  and  possessed  of  camels  and  horses  and  cattle.
They  informed  me  also  that  the  Indians I5  are  divided  into  seventy-
two  classes;16  and  I  wondered  at  this  extremely.  And  I  saw,  in  the
dominions  of  the  King  El-Mihraj,  an  island,  among  others,  which  is
called  Kasil,17  in  which  is  heard  the  beating  of  tambourines  and  drums
throughout  the  night,  and  the  islanders  and  travellers  informed  us
that  Ed-Dejjal  is  in  it.18  I  saw  too,  in  the  sea  in  which  is  that  island,
a  fish  two  hundred  cubits  long,  and  the  fishermen  fear  it ;  wherefore
they  knock  some  pieces  of  wood,  and  it  fleeth  from  them  :19  and  I  saw
a  fish  whose  face  was  like  that  of  the  owl.20  I  likewise  saw  during
that  voyage  many  wonderful  and  strange  things,  such  that,  if  I  related
them  to  you,  the  description  would  be  too  long.

I  continued  to  amuse  myself  with  the  sight  of  those  islands  and
the  things  that  they  contained,  until  I  stood  one  day  upon  the  shore
of  the  sea,  with  a  staff  in  my  hand,  as  was  my  custom,  and,  lo,  a  great
vessel  approached,  wherein  were  many  merchants ;  and  when  it  arrived
at  the  harbour  of  the  city,  arid  its  place  of  anchoring,  the  master
furled  its  sails,  brought  it  to  an  anchor  by  the  shore,  and  put  forth
the  landing-plank  ;  and  the  sailors  brought  out  every  thing  that  was
in  that  vessel  to  the  shore.  They  were  slow  in  taking  forth  the  goods,
while  I  stood  writing  their  account,  and  I  said  to  the  master  of  the
ship,  Doth  aught  remain  in  thy  vessel  ?  He  answered,  Yes,  0  my
master  ;  I  have  some  goods  in  the  hold  of  the  ship ;  but  their  owner
was  drowned  in  the  sea  at  one  of  the  islands  during  our  voyage  hither,
and  his  goods  are  in  our  charge  ;  so  we  desire  to  sell  them,  and  to
take  a  note  of  their  price,  in  order  to  convey  it  to  his  family  in  the
city  of  Baghdad,  the  Abode  of  Peace.  I  therefore  said  to  the  master,
What  was  the  name  of  that  man,  the  owner  of  the  goods?  He
answered,  His  name  was  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sea,  and  he  was  drowned
on  his  voyage  with  us  in  the  sea.  And  when  I  heard  his  words,  I
looked  at  him  with  a  scrutinizing  eye,  and  recognised  him;  and  I
cried  out  at  him  with  a  great  cry,  and  said,  O  master,  know  that  I  am
the  owner  of  the  goods  which  thou  hast  mentioned,  and  I  am  Es-
Sindibad  of  the  Sea,  who  descended  upon  the  island  from  the  ship,
with  the  other  merchants  who  descended ;  and  when  the  fish  that  we
were  upon  moved,  and  thou  calledst  out  to  us,  some  got  up  into  the
vessel,  and  the  rest  sank,  and  I  was  among  those  who  sank.  But  God
(whose  name  be  exalted  !)  preserved  me  and  saved  me  from  drowning


12  THE  FIRST  VOYAGE  OF  ES  SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA,

by  means  of  a  large  wooden  bowl,  of  those  in  which  the  passengers
were  washing,  and  I  got  into  it,  and  began  to  beat  the  water  with  my
feet,  and  the  wind  and  the  waves  aided  me  until  I  arrived  at  this
island,  when  I  lauded  on  it,  and  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !)
assisted  me,  and  I  met  the  grooms  of  the  King  El-Mihraj,  who  took
me  with  them  and  brought  me  to  this  city.  They  then  led  me  in  to
the  King  El-Mihraj,  and  I  acquainted  him  with  my  story ;  whereupon
he  bestowed  benefits  upon  me,  and  appointed  me  clerk  of  the  harbour
of  this  city,  and  I  obtained  profit  in  his  service,  and  favour  with  him.
Therefore  these  goods  that  thou  hast  are  my  goods  and  my  portion.

But  the  master  said,  There  is  no  strength  nor  power  but  in  God,
the  High,  the  Great !  There  is  no  longer  faith  nor  conscience  in  any
one ! — Wherefore,  O  master,  said  I,  when  thou  hast  heard  me  tell
thee  my  story  ?  He  answered,  Because  thou  heardest  me  say  that  I
had  goods  whose  owner  was  drowned  :  therefore  thou  desirest  to  take
them  without  price ;  and  this  is  unlawful  to  thee ;  for  we  saw  him
when  he  sank,  and  there  were  with  him  many  of  the  passengers,  not
one  of  whom  escaped.  How  then  dost  thou  pretend  that  thou  art  the
owner  of  the  goods  ? — So  I  said  to  him,  0  master,  hear  my  story,  and
understand  my  words,  and  my  veracity  will  become  manifest  to  thee ;
for  falsehood  is  a  characteristic  of  the  hypocrites.  Then  I  related  to
him  all  that  I  had  done  from  the  time  that  I  went  forth  with  him
from  the  city  of  Baghdad  until  we  arrived  at  that  island  upon  which
we  were  submerged  in  the  sea,  and  1  mentioned  to  him  some  circum-
stances that  had  occurred  between  me  and  him.  Upon  this,  therefore,
the  master  and  the  merchants  were  convinced  of  my  veracity,  and
recognised  me ;  and  they  congratulated  me  on  my  safety,  all  of  them
saying,  By  Allah,  we  believed  not  that  thou  hadst  escaped  drowning ;
but  God  hath  granted  thee  a  new  life.  They  then  gave  me  the  goods,
and  I  found  my  name  written  upon  them,  and  nought  of  them  was
missing.  So  I  opened  them,  and  took  forth  from  them  something
precious  and  costly ;  the  sailors  of  the  ship  carried  it  with  me,  and  I
went  up  with  it  to  the  King  to  offer  it  as  a  present,  and  informed  him
that  this  ship  was  the  one  in  which  I  was  a  passenger.  I  told  him
also  that  my  goods  had  arrived  all  entire,  and  that  this  present  was  a
part  of  them.  And  the  King  wondered  at  this  affair  extremely  ;  my
veracity  in  all  that  I  had  said  became  manifest  to  him,  and  he  loved
me  greatly,  and  treated  me  with  exceeding  honour,  giving  me  a  large
present  in  return  for  mine.

Then  I  sold  my  bales,  as  well  as  the  other  goods  that  1  had,  and


THE  FIRST  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.  13

gained  upon  them  abundantly ;  and  I  purchased  other  goods  and
merchandise  and  commodities  of  that  city.  And  when  the  merchants
of  the  ship  desired  to  set  forth  on  their  voyage,  I  stowed  all  that  I
had  in  the  vessel,  and,  going  in  to  the  King,  thanked  him  for  his
beneficence  and  kindness ;  after  which  I  begged  him  to  grant  me
permission  to  depart  on  my  voyage  to  my  country  and  my  family.  So
he  bade  me  farewell,  and  gave  me  an  abundance  of  things  at  my  de-
parture, of  the  commodities  of  that  city ;  and  when  I  had  taken  leave
of  him,  I  embarked  in  the  ship,  and  we  set  sail  by  the  permission  of
God,  whose  name  be  exalted  !  Fortune  served  us,  and  destiny  aided
us,  and  we  ceased  not  to  prosecute  our  voyage  night  and  day  until  we
arrived  in  safety  at  the  city  of  El-Basrah.  There  we  landed,  and
remained  a  short  time ;  and  I  rejoiced  at  my  safety,  and  my  return  to
my  country ;  and  after  that,  I  repaired  to  the  city  of  Baghdad,  the
Abode  of  Peace,  with  abundance  of  bales  and  goods  and  merchandise
of  great  value.  Then  I  went  to  my  quarter,  and  entered  my  house,
and  all  my  family  and  companions  came  to  me.  I  procured  for  myself
servants  and  other  dependants,  and  memlooks  and  concubines  and
male  black  slaves,  so  that  I  had  a  large  establishment ;  and  I  pur-
chased houses  and  other  immovable  possessions,  more  than  I  had  at
first.  I  enjoyed  the  society  of  my  companions  and  friends,  exceeding
my  former  habits,  and  forgot  all  that  I  had  suffered  from  fatigue,  and
absence  from  my  native  country,  and  difficulty,  and  the  terrors  of
travel^  I  occupied  myself  with  delights  and  pleasures,  and  delicious
meats  and  exquisite  drinks,  and  continued  in  this  state.  Such  were
the  events  of  the  first  of  my  voyages ;  and  to-morrow,  if  it  be  the  will
of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !),  I  will  relate  to  you  the  tale  of  the
second  of  the  seven  voyages.

Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sea  then  made  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Land  to  sup
with  him ;  after  which  he  gave  orders  to  present  him  with  a  hundred
pieces  of  gold,  and  said  to  him,  Thou  hast  cheered  us  by  thy  company
this  day.  So  the  porter  thanked  him,  and  took  from  him  what  he
had  given  him,  and  went  his  way,  meditating  upon  the  events  that
befell  and  happened  to  mankind,  and  wondering  extremely.  He  slept
that  night  in  his  abode ;  and  when  the  morning  came,  he  repaired  to
the  house  of  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sea,  and  went  in  to  him;  and  he
welcomed  him,  and  treated  him  with  honour,  seating  him  by  him.
And  after  the  rest  of  his  companions  had  come,  the  food  and  drink
were  set  before  them,  and  the  time  was  pleasant  to  them,  and  they
were  merry.  Then  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sea  began  his  narrative  thus  : —


THE  SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBlD  OF  THE  SEA.

Know,  O  my  brothers,  that  I  was  enjoying  a  most  comfortable
life,  and  the  most  pure  happiness,  as  ye  were  told  yesterday,  until  it
occurred  to  my  mind,  one  day,  to  travel  again  to  the  lands  of  other
people,  and  I  felt  a  longing  for  the  occupation  of  traffic,  and  the
pleasure  of  seeing  the  countries  and  islands  of  the  world,  and  gaining
my  subsistence.  I  resolved  upon  that  affair,  and,  having  taken  forth
from  my  money  a  large  sum,  I  purchased  with  it  goods  and  merchan-
dise suitable  for  travel,  and  packed  them  up.  Then  I  went  to  the
bank  of  the  river,  and  found  a  handsome,  new  vessel,  with  sails  of
comely  canvas,  and  it  had  a  numerous  crew,  and  was  superfluously
equipped.  So  I  embarked  my  bales  in  it,  as  did  also  a  party  of  mer-
chants besides,  and  we  set  sail  that  day.  The  voyage  was  pleasant  to
us,  and  we  ceased  not  to  pass  from  sea  to  sea,  and  from  island  to


THE  SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBA"D  OF  THE  SEA.  15

island ;  and  at  every  place  where  we  cast  anchor,  we  met  the  merchants
and  the  grandees,  and  the  sellers  and  buyers,  and  we  sold  and  bought,
and  exchanged  goods.  Thus  we  continued  to  do  until  destiny  con-
veyed us  to  a  beautiful  island,  abounding  with  trees  bearing  ripe  fruits,
where  flowers  diffused  their  fragrance,  with  birds  warbling,  and  pure
rivers  :  but  there  was  not  in  it  an  inhabitant,  nor  a  blower  of  a  fire.81
The  master  anchored  our  vessel  at  that  island,  and  the  merchants
with  the  other  passengers  landed  there,  to  amuse  themselves  with  the
sight  of  its  trees,  and  to  extol  the  perfection  of  God,  the  One,  the
Omnipotent,  and  to  wonder  at  the  power  of  the  Almighty  King.  I
also  landed  upon  the  island  with  the  rest,  and  sat  by  a  spring  of  pure
water  among  the  trees.  I  had  with  me  some  food,  and  I  sat  in  that
place  eating  what  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !)  had  allotted  me.
The  zephyr  was  sweet  to  us  in  that  place,  and  the  time  was  pleasant
to  me ;  so  slumber  overcame  me,  and  I  reposed  there,  and  became
immersed  in  sleep,  enjoying  that  sweet  zephyr,  and  the  fragrant  gales.
I  then  arose,  and  found  not  in  the  place  a  human  being  nor  a  Jinnee.
The  vessel  had  gone  with  the  passengers,  and  not  one  of  them  re-
membered me,  neither  any  of  the  merchants  nor  any  of  the  sailors :  so
they  left  me  in  the  island.

I  looked  about  it  to  the  right  and  left,  and  found  not  in  it  any
one  save  myself.  I  was  therefore  affected  with  violent  vexation,  not
to  be  exceeded,  and  my  gall-bladder  almost  burst  by  reason  of  the
severity  of  my  grief  and  mourning  and  fatigue.  I  had  not  with  me
aught  of  worldly  goods,  neither  food  nor  drink,  and  I  had  become
desolate,  weary  in  my  soul,  and  despairing  of  life ;  and  I  said,  Not
every  time  doth  the  jar  escape  unbroken  :  and  if  I  escaped  the  first
time,  and  found  him  who  took  me  with  him  from  the  shore  of  the
island  to  the  inhabited  part,  far,  far  from  me  this  time  is  the  prospect
of  my  finding  him  who  will  convey  me  to  inhabited  lands !  Then  I
began  to  weep  and  wail  for  myself  until  vexation  overpowered  me ;
and  I  blamed  myself  for  that  which  I  had  done,  and  for  my  having
undertaken  this  voyage  and  fatigue  after  I  had  been  reposing  at  ease
in  my  abode  and  my  country,  in  ample  happiness,  and  enjoying  good
food  and  good  drink  and  good  apparel,  and  had  not  been  in  want  of
any  thing,  either  of  money  or  goods  or  merchandise.  1  repented  of
my  having  gone  forth  from  the  city  of  Baghdad,  and  set  out  on  a
voyage  over  the  sea,  after  the  fatigue  that  1  had  suffered  during  my
first  voyage,  and  I  felt  at  the  point  of  destruction,  and  said,  Verily  to
God  we  belong,  and  verily  unto  Him  we  return  !  And  1  was  in  the


16


THE  SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.


predicament  of  the  mad.  After  that,  I  rose  and  stood  up,  and  walked
about  the  island  to  the  right  and  left}  unable  to  sit  in  one  place.
Then  I  climbed  up  a  lofty  tree ;  and  began  to  look  from  it  to  the  right
and  left ;  but  saw  nought  save  sky  and  water,  and  trees  and  birds,
and  islands  and  sands.  Looking,  however,  with  a  scrutinizing  eye,
there  appeared  to  me  on  the  island  a  white  object,  indistinctly  seen  in
the  distance,  of  enormous  size :  so  I  descended  from  the  tree,  and
went  towards  it,  and  proceeded  in  that  direction  without  stopping
until  I  arrived  at  it ;  and,  lo,  it  was  a  huge  white  dome,  of  great  height
and  large  circumference.  1  drew  near  to  it,  and  walked  round  it ;  but
perceived  no  door  to  it ;  and  I  found  that  I  had  not  strength  nor  activity
to  climb  it,  on  account  of  its  exceeding  smoothness.  I  made  a  mark
at  the  place  where  I  stood,  and  went  round  the  dome  measuring  its
circumference ;  and,  lo,  it  was  fifty  full  paces ;  and  I  meditated  upon
some  means  of  gaining  an  entrance  into  it.

The  close  of  the  day,  and  the  setting  of  the  sun,  had  now  drawn
near ;  and,  behold,  the  sun  was  hidden,  and  the  sky  became  dark,  and
the  sun  was  veiled  from  me.  I  therefore  imagined  that  a  cloud  had
come  over  it ;  but  this  was  in  the  season  of  summer :  so  I  wondered ;
and  I  raised  my  head,  and,  contemplating  that  object  attentively,  I
saw  that  it  was  a  bird,  of  enormous  size,  bulky  body,  and  wide  wings,
flying  in  the  air;  and  this  it  was  that  concealed  the  body  of  the  sun,
and  veiled  it  from  view  upon  the  island.  At  this  my  wonder  increased,
and  I  remembered  a  story  which  travellers  and  voyagers  had  told  me
long  before,  that  there  is,  in  certain  of  the  islands,  a  bird  of  enormous
size,  called  the  rukh',  that  feedeth  its  young  ones  with  elephants.  I
was  convinced,  therefore,  that  the  dome  which  I  had  seen  was  one  of
the  eggs  of  the  rukh'.22  I  wondered  at  the  works  of  God  (whose  name


THE  SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OP  THE  SEA.  17

be  exalted  !  and  while  I  was  in  this  state,  lo,  that  bird  alighted  upon
the  dome,  and  brooded  over  it  with  its  wings,  stretching  out  its  legs
behind  upon  the  ground ;  and  it  slept  over  it. — Extolled  be  the  per-
fection of  Him  who  sleepeth  not ! — Thereupon  I  arose,  and  unwound
my  turban  from  my  head,  and  folded  it  and  twisted  it  so  that  it
became  like  a  rope ;  and  I  girded  myself  with  it,  binding  it  tightly
round  my  waist,  and  tied  myself  by  it  to  one  of  the  feet  of  that  bird,
and  made  the  knot  fast,  saying  within  myself,  Perhaps  this  bird  will
convey  me  to  a  land  of  cities  and  inhabitants,  and  that  will  be  better
than  my  remaining  in  this  island.  I  passed  the  night  sleepless,  fear-
ing that,  if  I  slept,  the  bird  would  fly  away  with  me  when  I  was  not
aware ;  and  when  the  dawn  came,  and  morn  appeared,  the  bird  rose
from  its  egg,  and  uttered  a  great  cry,  and  drew  me  up  into  the  sky.
It  ascended  and  soared  up  so  high  that  I  imagined  it  had  reached  the
highest  region  of  the  sky;  and  after  that,  it  descended  with  me
gradually  until  it  alighted  with  me  upon  the  earth,  and  rested  upon  a
lofty  spot.  So  when  I  reached  the  earth,  I  hastily  untied  the  band
from  its  foot,  fearing  it,  though  it  knew  not  of  me  nor  was  sensible  of
me ;  and  after  I  had  loosed  my  turban  from  it,  and  disengaged  it  from
its  foot,  shaking  as  I  did  so,  I  walked  away.  Then  it  took  something
from  the  face  of  the  earth  in  its  talons,  and  soared  to  the  upper  region
of  the  sky ;  and  I  looked  attentively  at  that  thing,  and,  lo,  it  was  a
serpent,  of  enormous  size,  of  great  body,  which  it  had  taken  and
carried  off  towards  the  sea ;  and  I  wondered  at  that  event.23

After  this,  I  walked  about  that  place,  and  found  myself  upon  an
eminence,  beneath  which  was  a  large,  wide,  deep  valley ;  and  by  its
side,  a  great  mountain,  very  high ;  no  one  could  see  its  summit  by
reason  of  its  excessive  height,  and  no  one  had  power  to  ascend  it.  I
therefore  blamed  myself  for  that  which  I  had  done,  and  said,  Would
that  I  had  remained  in  the  island,  since  it  is  better  than  this  desert
place ;  for  in  the  island  are  found,  among  various  fruits,  what  I  might
have  eaten,  and  I  might  have  drunk  of  its  rivers ;  but  in  this  place  are
neither  trees  nor  fruits  nor  rivers  :  and  there  is  no  strength  nor  power
but  in  God,  the  High,  the  Great !  Verily  every  time  that  I  escape
from  a  calamity,  I  fall  into  another  that  is  greater  and  more  severe  !
— Then  I  arose,  and  emboldened  myself,  and  walked  in  that  valley  ;
and  I  beheld  its  ground  to  be  composed  of  diamonds,  with  which  they
perforate  minerals  and  jewels,  and  with  which  also  they  perforate
porcelain  and  the  onyx;  and  it  is  a  stone  so  hard  that  neither  iron
nor  rock  have  any  effect  upon  it,  nor  can  any  one  cut  off  aught  from  it,

in.  i)


or  break  it,  unless  by  means  of  the  lead-stone.24  All  that  valley  was
likewise  occupied  by  serpents  and  venomous  snakes,  every  one  of  them
like  a  palm-teee ;  and  by  reason  of  its  enormous  size,  if  an  elephant
came  to  it,  it  would  swallow  it.25  Those  serpents  appeared  in  the
night,  and  hid  themselves  in  the  day,  fearing  lest  the  rukh'  and  the
vulture  should  carry  them  off,  and  after  that  tear  them  in  pieces ;  and
the  cause  of  that  I  know  not.  I  remained  in  that  valley,  repenting  of
what  I  had  done,  and  said  within  myself,  By  Allah,  I  have  hastened
my  own  destruction  !  The  day  departed  from  me,  and  I  began  to
walk  along  that  valley,  looking  for  a  place  in  which  to  pass  the  night,
fearing  those  serpents,  and  forgetting  my  food  and  drink  and  sub-
sistence, occupied  only  by  care  for  my  life.  And  there  appeared  to
me  a  cave  near  by ;  so  I  walked  thither,  and  I  found  its  entrance
narrow.  I  therefore  entered  it,  and  seeing  a  large  stone  by  its  mouth,
I  pushed  it,  and  stopped  with  it  the  mouth  of  the  cave  while  I  was
within  it ;  and  I  said  within  myself,  I  am  safe  now  that  I  have  entered
this  place ;  and  when  daylight  shineth  upon  me,  I  will  go  forth,  and


THE  SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBlD  OF  THE  SEA.  19

see  what  destiny  will  do.  Then  I  looked  within  the  cave,  and  beheld
a  huge  serpent  sleeping  at  the  upper  end  of  it  over  its  eggs.  At  this
my  flesh  quaked,  and  I  raised  my  head,  and  committed  my  case  to
fate  and  destiny  ;  and  I  passed  all  the  night  sleepless,  until  the  dawn
rose  and  shone,  when  I  removed  the  stone  with  which  I  had  closed
the  entrance  of  the  cave,  and  went  forth  from  it,  like  one  intoxicated,
giddy  from  excessive  sleeplessness  and  hunger  and  fear.

I  then  walked  along  the  valley;  and  while  I  was  thus  occupied,
lo,  a  great  slaughtered  animal  fell  before  me,  and  I.  found  no  one.
So  I  wondered  thereat  extremely ;  and  I  remembered  a  story  that  I
had  heard  long  before  from  certain  of  the  merchants  and  travellers,
and  persons  in  the  habit  of  journeying  about, — that  in  the  mountains
of  the  diamonds  are  experienced  great  terrors,  and  that  no  one  can
gain  access  to  the  diamonds,  but  that  the  merchants  who  import  them
know  a  stratagem  by  means  of  which  to  obtain  them  :  that  they  take
a  sheep,  and  slaughter  it,  and  skin  it,  and  cut  up  its  flesh,  which  they
throw  down  from  the  mountain  to  the  bottom  of  the  valley  :  so,  de-
scending fresh  and  moist,  some  of  these  stones  stick  to  it.  Then  the
merchants  leave  it  until  midday,  and  birds  of  the  large  kind  of  vulture
and  the  aquiline  vulture  descend  to  that  meat,  and,  taking  it  in  their
talons,  fly  up  to  the  top  of  the  mountain ;  whereupon  the  merchants
come  to  them,  and  cry  out  at  them,  and  they  fly  away  from  the  meat.
The  merchants  then  advance  to  that  meat,  and  take  from  it  the  stones
sticking  to  it ;  after  which  they  leave  the  meat  for  the  birds  and  the
wild  beasts,  and  carry  the  stones  to  their  countries.  And  no  one  can
procure  the  diamonds  but  by  means  of  this  stratagem. — Therefore
when  I  beheld  that  slaughtered  animal,  and  remembered  this  story,
I  arose  and  went  to  the  slaughtered  beast.  I  then  selected  a  great
number  of  these  stones,  and  put  them  into  my  pocket,  and  within  my
clothes  :  and  I  proceeded  to  select,  and  to  put  into  my  pockets  and
my  girdle  and  my  turban,  and  within  my  clothes.  And  while  I
was  doing  thus,  lo,  another  great  slaughtered  animal.  So  I  bound
myself  to  it  with  my  turban,  and,  laying  myself  down  on  my  back,
placed  it  upon  my  bosom,  and  grasped  it  firmly.  Thus  it  was  raised
high  above  the  ground  ;  and,  behold,  a  vulture  descended  upon  it,
seized  it  with  its  talons,  and  flew  up  with  it  into  the  air,  with  me
attached  to  it ;  and  it  ceased  not  to  soar  up  until  it  had  ascended  with
it  to  the  summit  of  the  mountain,  when  it  alighted  with  it,  and  was
about  to  tear  off  some  of  it.  And  thereupon  a  great  and  loud  cry
arose  from  behind  that  vulture,  and  something  made  a  clattering  with


20  THE  SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIB^D  OF  THE  SEA.

a  piece  of  wood  upon  the  mountain ;  whereat  the  vulture  flew  away  in
fear,  and  soared  into  the  sky.26

I  therefore  disengaged  myself  from  the  slaughtered  animal,  with
the  blood  of  which  my  clothes  were  polluted ;  and  I  stood  by  its  side.
And,  lo,  the  merchant  who  had  cried  out  at  the  vulture  advanced  to
the  slaughtered  animal,  and  saw  me  standing  there.  He  spoke  not
to  me  ;  for  he  was  frightened  at  me,  and  terrified  ;  but  he  came  to  the
slaughtered  beast,  and  turned  it  over;  and,  not  finding  anything  upon
it,  he  uttered  a  loud  cry,  and  said,  Oh,  my  disappointment !  _  There
is  no  strength  nor  power  but  in  God  !  We  seek  refuge  with  God
from  Satan  the  accursed ! — He  repented,  and  struck  hand  upon  hand,27
and  said,  Oh,  my  grief!  What  is  this  affair? — So  I  advanced  to
him,  and  he  said  to  me,  Who  art  thou,  and  what  is  the  reason  of  thy
coming  to  this  place?  I  answered  him,  Fear  not,  nor  be  alarmed;
for  I  am  a  human  being,  of  the  best  of  mankind;  and  I  was  a
merchant,  and  my  tale  is  marvellous,  and  my  story  extraordinary,  and
the  cause  of  my  coming  to  this  mountain  and  this  valley  is  wondrous
to  relate.  Fear  not ;  for  thou.  shalt  receive  of  me  what  will  rejoice
thee  :  I  have  with  me  abundance  of  diamonds,  of  which  I  will  give
thee  as  much  as  will  suffice  thee,  and  every  piece  that  I  have  is  better
than  all  that  would  come  to  thee  by  other  means :  therefore  be  not
timorous  nor  afraid. — And  upon  this  the  man  thanked  me,  and  prayed
for  me,  and  conversed  with  me;  and,  lo,  the  other  merchants  heard
me  talking  with  their  companion;  so  they  came  to  me.  Each
merchant  had  thrown  down  a  slaughtered  animal ;  and  when  they
came  to  us,  they  saluted  me,  and  congratulated  me  on  my  safety,  and
took  me  with  them  ;  and  I  acquainted  them  with  my  whole  story,
relating  to  them  what  I  had  suffered  on  my  voyage,  and  telling  them
the  cause  of  my  arrival  in  this  valley.  Then  I  gave  to  the  owner  of
the  slaughtered  animal  to  which  I  had  attached  myself  an  abundance
of  what  I  had  brought  with  me  ;  and  he  was  delighted  with  me,  and
prayed  for  me,  and  thanked  me  for  that ;  and  the  other  merchants
said  to  me,  By  Allah,  a' new  life  hath  been  decreed  thee ;  for  no  one
ever  arrived  at  this  place  before  thee  and  escaped  from  it ;  but  praise
be  to  God  for  thy  safety ! — They  passed  the  next  night  in  a  pleasant
and  safe  place,  and  I  passed  the  night  with  them,  full  of  the  utmost
joy  at  my  safety  and  my  escape  from  the  valley  of  serpents,  and  my
arrival  in  an  inhabited  country.

And  when  day  came,  we  arose  and  journeyed  over  that  great
mountain,  beholding  in  that  valley  numerous  serpents ;  and  we  con-


THK  SKCOM)  VOYAGE  OF KS-SIXDIBA"D  OF  THE  SEA.


21


tinned  to  advance  until  we  arrived  at  a  garden  in  a  great  and  beautiful
island,  wherein  were  camphor-trees,  under  each  of  which  trees  a
hundred  men  might*  shade  themselves.23  When  any  one  desireth  to
obtain  some  camphor  from  one  of  these  trees,  he  maketh  a  perforation
in  the  upper  part  of  it  with  something  long,  and  catcheth  what
descerideth  from  it.  The  liquid  camphor  floweth  from  it,  and  con-
creteth  like  gum.  It  is  the  juice  of  that  tree ;  and  after  this  operation,
the  tree  drieth,  and  becometh  firewood.  In  that  island  too  is  a  kind
of  wild  beast  called  the  rhinoceros,29  which  pastureth  there  like  oxen
and  buffaloes  in  our  country;  but  the  bulk  of  that  wild  beast  is
greater  than  the  bulk  of  the  camel,  and  it  eateth  the  tender  leaves  of
trees.30  It  is  a  huge  beast,  with  a  single  horn,  thick,  in  the  middle
of  its  head,  a  cubit31  in  length,  wherein  is  the  figure  of  a  man.32  And
in  that  island  are  some  animals  of  the  ox-kind.  Moreover,  the
sailors  and  travellers,  and  persons  in  the  habit  of  journeying  about  in
the  mountains  and  the  lands,  have  told  us,  that  this  wild  beast  which
is  named  the  rhinoceros  lifteth  the  great  elephant  upon  its  horn,33  and
pastureth  with  it  upon  the  island  and  the  shores,  without  being
sensible  of  it ;  and  the  elephant  dieth  upon  its  horn  ;  and  its  fat,
melting  by  the  heat  of  the  sun,  and  flowing  upon  its  head,  entereth
its  eyes,  so  that  it  becometh  blind.  Then  it  lieth  down  upon  the
shore,  and  the  rukh'  cometh  to  it,  and  carrieth  it  off  [with  the
elephant]  in  its  talon?  to  its  young  ones,  and  feedeth  them  with  it

and  with  that  which  is  upon  its  horn,
[namely  the  elephant].34  1  saw  also  in
that  island  abundance  of  the  buffalo-
kind,  the  like  of  which  existeth  not


22  THE  SECOND  VOYAGE  OP  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.

The  valley  before  mentioned  containeth  a  great  quantity  of
diamonds  such  as  I  carried  off  and  hid  in  my  pockets.  For  these  the
people  gave  me  in  exchange  goods  and  comm'odities  belonging  to
them ;  and  they  conveyed  them  for  me,  giving  me  likewise  pieces  of
silver  and  pieces  of  gold ;  and  I  ceased  not  to  proceed  with  them,
amusing  myself  with  the  sight  of  different  countries,  and  of  what
God  hath  created,  from  valley  to  valley  and  from  city  to  city,  we,  in
our  way  selling  and  buying,  until  we  arrived  at  the  city  of  El-Basrah.
We  remained  there  a  few  days,  and  then  I  came  to  the  city  of
Baghdad,  the  Abode  of  Peace,  and  came  to  my  quarter,  and  entered
rny  house,  bringing  with  me  a  great  quantity  of  diamonds,  and  money
and  commodities  and  goods  in  abundance.  I  met  my  family  and
relations,  bestowed  alms  and  gifts,  made  presents  to  all  my  family  and
companions,  and  began  to  eat  well  and  drink  well  and  wear  handsome
apparel.  I  associated  with  friends  and  companions,  forgot  all  that  I
had  suffered,  and  ceased  not  to  enjoy  a  pleasant  life  and  joyful  heart
and  dilated  bosom,  with  sport  and  merriment.  Every  one  who  heard
of  my  arrival  came  to  me,  and  inquired  of  me  respecting  my  voyage,
and  the  states  of  the  different  countries :  so  I  informed  him,  relating
to  him  what  I  had  experienced  and  suffered  :  and  he  wondered  at  the
severity  of  my  sufferings,  and  congratulated  me  on  my  safety. — This
is  the  end  of  the  account  of  the  events  that  befell  me  and  happened
to  me  during  the  second  voyage ;  and  to-morrow,  if  it  be  the  will  of
God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !),  I  will  relate  to  you  the  events  of  the
third  voyage.

And  when  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sea  had  finished  his  story  to  Es-
Sindibad  of  the  Land,  the  company  wondered  at  it.  They  supped
with  him  ;  and  he  gave  orders  to  present  to  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Land
a  hundred  pieces  of  gold ;  and  the  latter  took  them,  and  went
his  way,  wondering  at  the  things  that  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sea  had
suffered.  He  thanked  him,  and  prayed  for  him  in  his  house ;  and
when  the  morning  came,  and  diffused  its  light  and  shone,  Es-Sindibad
the  Porter  arose,  performed  the  morning-prayers,  and  repaired  to  the
house  of  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sea,  as  he  had  commanded  him.  He
went  in  to  him  and  wished  him  good  morning,  and  Es-Sindibad  of
the  Sea  welcomed  him  ;  and  he  sat  with  him  until  the  rest  of  his
companions  and  party  had  come ;  and  after  they  had  eaten  and  drunk,
and  enjoyed  themselves,  and  were  merry  and  happy,  Es-Sindibad  of
the  Sea  began  thus  :-


THE  THIRD  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.

Know,  0  my  brothers  (and  hear  from  me  the  story  of  the  third
voyage,  for  it  is  more  wonderful  than  the  preceding  stories,  hitherto
related — and  God  is  all-knowing  with  respect  to  the  things  which  He
hideth,  and  omniscient),35  that,  in  the  times  past,  when  I  returned
from  the  second  voyage,  and  was  in  a  state  of  the  utmost  joy  and
happiness,  rejoicing  in  my  safety,  having  gained  great  wealth,  as  I
related  to  you  yesterday,  God  having  compensated  me  for  all  that  I
had  lost,  I  resided  in  the  city  of  Baghdad  for  a  length  of  time  in  the
most  perfect  prosperity  and  delight,  and  joy  and  happiness.  Then
my  soul  became  desirous  of  travel  and  diversion,  and  I  longed  for
commerce  and  gain  and  profits ;  the  soul  being  prone  to  evil.  So  I
meditated,  and  bought  an  abundance  of  goods  suited  for  a  sea-voyage,


24  THE  THIRD  VOYAGE  OF  ES-S1NDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.

and  packed  them  up,  and  departed  with  them  from  the  city  of
Baghdad  to  the  city  of  El-Basrah.  There,  coming  to  the  bank  of
the  river,  I  beheld  a  great  vessel,  in  which  were  many  merchants  and
other  passengers,  people  of  worth,  and  comely  and  good  persons,
people  of  religion  and  kindness  and  probity.  I  therefore  embarked
with  them  in  that  vessel,  and  we  departed  in  reliance  on  the  blessing
of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !),  and  his  aid  and  favour,  rejoicing  in
expectation  of  good  fortune  and  safety.  We  ceased  not  to  proceed
from  sea  to  sea,  and  from  island  to  island,  and  from  city  to  city ;  at
every  place  by  which  we  passed  diverting  ourselves,  and  selling  and
buying,  in  the  utmost  joy  and  happiness.  Thus  we  did  until  we
were,  one  day,  pursuing  our  course  in  the  midst  of  the  roaring  sea,
agitated  with  waves,  when,  lo,  the  master,  standing  at  the  side  of  the
vessel,  looked  at  the  different  quarters  of  the  sea,  and  then  slapped  his
face,  furled  the  sails  of  the  ship,  cast  its  anchors,  plucked  his  beard,
rent  his  clothes,  and  uttered  a  great  cry.  So  we  said  to  him,  O
master,  what  is  the  news  ?  And  he  answered,  Know,  0  passengers,
whom  may  God  preserve  !  that  the  wind  hath  prevailed  against  us,
and  driven  us  out  of  our  course  in  the  midst  of  the  sea,  and  destiny
hath  cast  us,  through  our  evil  fortune,  towards  the  Mountain  of
Apes.36  No  one  hath  ever  arrived  at  this  place  and  escaped,  and  my
heart  is  impressed  with  the  conviction  of  the  destruction  of  us  all. —
And  the  words  of  the  master  were  not  ended  before  the  apes  had  come
to  us  and  surrounded  the  vessel  on  every  side,  numerous  as  locusts,
dispersed  about  the  vessel  and  on  the  shore.  We  feared  that,  if  we
killed  one  of  them,  or  struck  him,  or  drove  him  away,  they  would
kill  us,  on  account  of  their  excessive  number ;  for  numbers  prevail
against  courage;  and  we  feared  them  lest  they  should  plunder  our
goods  and  our  commodities.  They  are  the  most  hideous  of  beasts,
and  covered  with  hair  like  black  felt,37  their  aspect  striking  terror.
No  one  uuderstandeth  their  language  or  their  state,  they  shun  the
society  of  men,  have  yellow  eyes,  and  black  faces,  and  are  of  small
size,  the  height  of  each  one  of  them  being  four  spans.  They  climbed
up  the  cables,  and  severed  them  with  their  teeth,  and  they  severed  all
the  ropes  of  the  vessel  in  every  part ;  so  the  vessel  inclined  with  the
wind,  and  stopped  at  their  mountain,  and  on  their  coast.  Then,
having  seized  all  the  merchants  and  the  other  passengers,  and  lauded
upon  the  island,  they  took  the  vessel  with  the  whole  of  its  contents,
and  went  their  way  with  it.38

They  left  us  upon  the  island,  the  vessel  became  concealed  from  us,


THE  THIRD  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA  25

and  we  knew  not  whither  they  went  with  it.  And  while  we  were
upon  that  island  eating  of  its  fruits  and  its  herbs,  and  drinking  of
the  rivers  that  were  there,  lo,  there  appeared  to  us  an  inhabited  house
in  the  midst  of  the  island.  We  therefore  went  towards  it,  and  walked
to  it;  and,  behold,  it  was  a  pavilion,  with  lofty  angles,  with  high
walls,  having  an  entrance  with  folding  doors,  which  were  open ;  and
the  doors  were  of  ebony.  We  entered  this  pavilion,  and  found  in  it  a
wide,  open  space,  like  a  wide,  large  court,  around  which  were  many
lofty  doors,  and  at  its  upper  end  was  a  high  and  great  mastabah.
There  were  also  in  it  utensils  for  cooking,  hung  over  the  fire-pots,  and
around  them  were  many  bones.  But  we  saw  not  there  any  person ;
and  we  wondered  at  that  extremely.  We  sat  in  the  open  space  in  that
pavilion  a  little  while,  after  which  we  slept ;  and  we  ceased  not  to
sleep  from  near  the  mid-time  between  sunrise  and  noon  until  sunset.
And,  lo,  the  earth  trembled  beneath  us,  and  we  heard  a  confused  noise
from  the  upper  air,  and  there  descended  upon  us,  from  the  summit  of
the  pavilion,  a  person  of  enormous  size,  in  human  form,  and  he  was
of  black  complexion,  of  lofty  stature,  like  a  great  palm-tree  :  he  had
two  eyes39  like  two  blazes  of  fire,  and  tusks  like  the  tusks  of  swine,
and  a  mouth  of  prodigious  size,  like  the  mouth  of  a  well,  and  lips  like
the  lips  of  the  camel,  hanging  down  upon  his  bosom,  and  he  had  ears
like  two  mortars,  hanging  down  upon  his  shoulders,  and  the  nails  of
his  hands  were  like  the  claws  of  the  lion.  So  when  we  beheld  him
thus,  we  became  unconscious  of  our  existence,  our  fear  was  vehement,
and  our  terror  was  violent,  and  through  the  violence  of  our  fear  and
dread  and  terror  we  became  as  dead  men.  And  after  he  had  descended
upon  the  ground,  he  sat  a  little  while  upon  the  mastabah.  Then  he
arose  and  came  to  us,  and  seizing  me  by  my  hands  from  among  my
companions  the  merchants,  lifted  me  up  from  the  ground  in  his  hand^
and  felt  me  and  turned  me  over;  and  I  was  in  his  hand  like  a  little
mouthful.  He  continued  to  feel  me  as  the  butcher  feeleth  the  sheep
that  he  is  about  to  slaughter ;  but  he  found  me  infirm  from  excessive
affliction,  and  lean  from  excessive  fatigue  and  from  the  voyage  ;  having
no  flesh.  He  therefore  let  me  go  from  his  hand,  and  took  another,
from  among  my  companions;  and  he  turned  him  over  as  he  had
turned  me  over,  and  felt  him  as  he  had  felt  me,  and  let  him  go.  He
ceased  not  to  feel  us  and  turn  us  over,  one  after  another,  until  he
came  to  the  master  of  our  ship,  who  was  a  fat,  stout,  broad-shouldered
man  ;  a  person  of  strength  and  vigour  :  so  he  pleased  him,  and  he
seized  him  as  the  butcher  seizeth  the  animal  that  he  is  about  to


in.


slaughter,  and  having  thrown  him  on  the  ground,  put  his  foot  upon
his  neck,  which  he  thus  broke.  Then  he  brought  a  long  spit,  and
thrust  it  into  his  throat,  and  spitted  him ;  after  which  he  lighted  a
fierce  tire,  and  placed  over  it  that  spit  upon  which  the  master  was
spitted,  and  ceased  not  to  turn  him  round  over  the  burning  coals  until
his  flesh  was  thoroughly  roasted ;  when  he  took  him  off  from  the  fire,
put  him  before  him,  and  separated  his  joints  as  a  man  separates  the
joints  of  a  chicken,  and  proceeded  to  tear  in  pieces  his  flesh  with  his
nails,  and  to  eat  of  it.  Thus  he  continued  to  do  until  he  had  eaten
his  flesh,  and  gnawed  his  bones,  and  there  remained  of  him  nothing
but  some  bones,  which  he  threw  by  the  side  of  the  pavilion.  He  then
sat  a  little,  and  threw  himself  down,  and  slept  upon  that  mastabah,
making  a  noise  with  his  throat  like  that  which  is  made  by  a  lamb  or
other  beast  when  slaughtered ;  and  he  slept  uninterruptedly  until  the
morning,  when  he  went  his  way.

As  soon,  therefore,  as  we  were  sure  that  he  was  far  from  us,  we
conversed  together,  and  wept for  ourselves,  saying, Would  that  we


THE  THIRD  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.  27

had  been  drowned  in  the  sea,  or  that  the  apes  had  eaten  us ;  for  it
were  better  than  the  roasting  of  a  man  upon  burning  coals !  By
Allah,  this  death  is  a  vile  one  !  But  what  God  willeth  cometh  to
pass,  and  there  is  no  strength  nor  power  but  in  God,  the  High,  the
Great !  We  die  in  sorrow,  and  no  one  knoweth  of  us ;  and  there  is
no  escape  for  us  from  this  place  !  We  then  arose  and  went  forth
upon  the  island,  to  see  for  us  a  place  in  which  to  hide  ourselves,  or
to  flee ;  and  it  had  become  a  light  matter  to  us  to  die,  rather  than
that  our  flesh  should  be  roasted  with  fire.  But  we  found  not  for  us  a
place  in  which  to  hide  ourselves ;  and  the  evening  overtook  us.  So
we  returned  to  the  pavilion,  by  reason  of  the  violence  of  our  fear,  and
sat  there  a  little  while;  and,  lo,  the  earth  trembled  beneath  us,  and
that  black  approached  us,  and,  coming  among  us,  began  to  turn  us
over,  one  after  another,  as  on  the  former  occasion,  and  to  feel  us,
until  one  pleased  him;  whereupon  he  seized  him,  and  did  with  him
as  he  did  with  the  master  of  the  ship  the  day  before.  He  roasted
him,  and  ate  him  upon  that  mastabah,  and  ceased  not  to  sleep  that
night,  making  a  noise  with  his  throat  like  a  slaughtered  animal ;  and
when  the  day  came,  he  arose  and  went  his  way,  leaving  us  as  usual.
Upon  this  we  assembled  together  and  conversed,  and  said,  one  to
another,  By  Allah,  if  we  cast  ourselves  into  the  sea  and  die  drowned,
it  will  be  better  than  our  dying  burnt ;  for  this  mode  of  being  put  to
death  is  abominable  !  And  one  of  us  said,  Hear  my  words.  Verily
we  will  contrive  a  stratagem  against  him  and  kill  him,  and  be  at  ease
from  apprehension  of  his  purpose,  and  relieve  the  Muslims  from  his
oppression  and  tyranny. — So  I  said  to  them,  hear  O  my  brothers.
If  we  must  kill  him,  we  will  transport  this  wood,  and  remove  some  of
this  firewood,  and  make  for  ourselves  rafts,  each  to  bear  three  men  ;40
after  which  we  will  contrive  a  stratagem  to  kill  him,  and  embark  on
the  rafts,  and  proceed  over  the  sea  to  whatsoever  place  God  shall  desire.
Or  we  will  remain  in  this  place  until  a  ship  shall  pass  by,  when  we
will  embark  in  it.  And  if  we  be  not  able  to  kill  him,  we  will  embark
[on  our  rafts],  and  put  out  to  sea ;  and  if  we  be  drowned,  we  shall
be  preserved  from  being  roasted  over  the  fire,  and  from  being  slaugh-
tered. If  we  escape,  we  escape  ;  and  if  we  be  drowned,  we  die  martyrs.41
—To  this  they  all  replied,  By  Allah,  this  is  a  right  opinion  and  a
wise  proceeding.  And  we  agreed  upon  this  matter,  and  commenced
the  work.  We  removed  the  pieces  of  wood  out  of  the  pavilion,  and
constructed  rafts,  attached  them  to  the  sea-shore,  and  stowed  upon
them  some  provisions  ;  after  which  we  returned  to  the  pavilion.


28  THE  THIKI)  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.

And  when  it  was  evening,  lo,  the  earth  trembled  with  us,  and  the
black  came  in  to  us,  like  the  biting  dog.  He  turned  us  over  and  felt
us,  one  after  another,  and  having  taken  one  of  us,  did  with  him  as  he
had  done  with  the  others  before  him.  He  ate  him,  and  slept  upon
the  mastabah,  and  the  noise  from  his  throat  was  like  thunder.  So
thereupon  we  arose,  and  took  two  iron  spits,  of  those  which  were  set
up,  and  put  them  in  the  fierce  fire  until  they  were  red-hot,  and
became  like  burning  coals ;  when  we  grasped  them  firmly,  and  went
with  them  to  that  black  while  he  lay  asleep  snoring,  and  we  thrust
them  into  his  eyes,  all  of  us  pressing  upon  them  with  our  united
strength  and  force.  Thus  we  pushed  them  into  his  eyes  as  he  slept,
and  his  eyes  were  destroyed,  and  he  uttered  a  great  cry,  whereat  our
hearts  were  terrified.  Then  he  arose  resolutely  from  that  mastabah,
and  began  to  search  for  us,  while  we  fied  from  him  to  the  right  and
left,  and  he  saw  us  not ;  for  his  sight  was  blinded  ;  but  we  feared  him
with  a  violent  fear,  and  made  sure,  in  that  time,  of  destruction,  and
despaired  of  safety.  And  upon  this  he  sought  the  door,  feeling  for  it,
and  went  forth  from  it,  crying  out,  while  we  were  in  the  utmost  fear
of  him ;  and,  lo,  the  earth  shook  beneath  us,  by  reason  of  the  vehe-
mence of  his  cry.  So  when  he  went  forth  from  the  pavilion,  we  fol-
lowed him,  and  he  went  his  way,  searching  for  us.  Then  he  returned,
accompanied  by  a  female,  greater  than  he,  and  more  hideous  in  form  :
and  when  we  beheld  him,  and  her  who  was  with  him,  more  horrible
than  he  in  appearance,  we  were  in  the  utmost  fear.  As  soon  as  the
female  saw  us,  we  hastily  loosed  the  rafts  that  we  had  constructed,
and  embarked  on  them,  and  pushed  them  forth  into  the  sea.  But
each  of  the  two  blacks  had  a  mass  of  rock,  and  they  cast  at  us  until
the  greater  number  of  us  died  from  the  casting,  there  remaining  of  us
only  three  persons,  I  and  two  others ;  and  the  raft  conveyed  us  to
another  island.42

We  walked  forward  upon  that  island  until  the  close  of  the  day,
and  the  night  overtook  us  in  this  state ;  so  we  slept  a  little  ;  and  we
awoke  from  our  sleep,  and,  lo,  a  serpent  of  enormous  size,  of  large  body
and  wide  belly,  had  surrounded  us.  It  approached  one  of  us,  and
swallowed  him  to  his  shoulders  :  then  it  swallowed  the  rest  of  him,
and  we  heard  his  ribs  break  in  pieces  in  its  belly  ;  after  which  it  went
its  way.  At  this  we  wondered  extremely,  and  we  mourned  for  onr
companion,  and  were  in  the  utmost  fear  for  ourselves,  saying,  By
Allah,  this  is  a  wonderful  thing!  Every  death  that  we  witness  is
more  horrible  than  the  preceding  one  !  We  were  rejoiced  at  our


THE  THIRD  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.  29

escape  from  the  black ;  but  our  joy  is  not  complete !  There  is  no
strength  nor  power  but  in  God  !  By  Allah,  we  have  escaped  from
the  black  and  from  drowning ;  but  how  shall  we  escape  from  this  un-
lucky serpent  ? — Then  we  arose  and  walked  on  over  the  island,  eating
of  its  fruits,  and  drinking  of  its  rivers,  and  we  ceased  not  to  proceed
till  morning,  when  we  found  a  great,  lofty  tree.  So  we  climbed  up
it,  and  slept  upon  it ;  I  having  ascended  to  the  highest  of  its  branches.
But  when  the  night  arrived,  and  it  was  dark,  the  serpent  came,  look-
ing to  the  right  and  left,  and,  advancing  to  the  tree  upon  which  we
were,  came  up  to  my  companion,  and  swallowed  him  to  his  shoulders ;
and  it  wound  itself  round  the  tree  with  him,  and  I  heard  his  bones
break  in  pieces  in  its  belly  :  then  it  swallowed  him  entirely,  while  I
looked  on  ;  after  which  it  descended  from  the  tree,  and  went  its  way.43
—I  remained  upon  that  tree  the  rest  of  the  night ;  and  when  the  day
came,  and  the  light  appeared,  I  descended  from  the  tree,  like  one
dead,  by  reason  of  excessive  fear  and  terror,  and  desired  to  cast  myself
into  the  sea,  that  I  might  be  at  rest  from  the  world ;  but  it  was  not  a
light  matter  to  me  to  do  so ;  for  life  is  dear.  So  I  tied  a  wide  piece
of  wood  upon  the  soles  of  my  feet,  crosswise,  and  I  tied  one  like  it
upon  my  left  side,  and  a  similar  one  upon  my  right  side,  and  a  similar
one  upon  the  front  of  my  body,  and  I  tied  one  long  and  wide  upon
the  top  of  my  head,  crosswise,  like  that  which  was  under  the  soles  of
my  feet.  Thus  I  was  in  the  midst  of  these  pieces  of  wood,  and  they
enclosed  me  on  every  side.  I  bound  them  tightly,  and  threw  myself
with  the  whole  upon  the  ground  ;  so  I  lay  in  the  midst  of  the  pieces
of  wood,  which  enclosed  me  like  a  closet.  And  when  the  evening
arrived,  the  serpent  approached  as  it  was  wont,  and  saw  me,  and  drew
towards  me ;  but  it  could  not  swallow  me  when  I  was  in  that  state,
with  the  pieces  of  wood  round  me  on  every  side.  It  went  round  me ;
but  could  not  come  at  me :  and  I  looked  at  it,  being  like  a  dead  man,
by  reason  of  the  violence  of  my  fear  and  terror.  The  serpent  retired
from  me,  and  returned  to  me  ;  and  thus  it  ceased  not  to  do  :  every
time  that  it  desired  to  get  at  me  to  swallow  me,  the  pieces  of  wood
tied  upon  me  on  every  side  prevented  it.  It  continued  to  do  thus
from  sunset  until  daybreak  arrived  and  the  light  appeared  and  the  sun
rose,  when  it  went  its  way,  in  the  utmost  vexation  and  rage.  Upon
this,  therefore,  I  stretched  forth  my  hands  and  loosed  myself  from
those  pieces  of  wood,  in  a  state  like  that  of  the  dead,  through  the  seve-
rity of  that  which  I  had  suffered  from  that  serpent.

I  then  arose,  and  walked  along  the  island  until  I  came  to  the  ex-


30  THE  THIRD  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.

tremity  of  it ;  when  I  cast  a  glance  towards  the  sea,  and  beheld  a  ship
at  a  distance,  in  the  midst  of  the  deep.  So  I  took  a  great  branch  of
a  tree,  and  made  a  sign  with  it  to  the  passengers,  calling  out  to  them ;
and  when  they  saw  me,  they  said,  We  must  see  what  this  is.  Perhaps
it  is  a  man. — Then  they  approached  me,  and  heard  my  cries  to  them.
They  therefore  came  to  me,  and  took  me  with  them  in  the  ship,  and
asked  me  respecting  my  state :  so  I  informed  them  of  all  that  had
happened  to  me  from  beginning  to  end,  and  of  the  troubles  that  I
had  suffered  ;  whereat  they  wondered  extremely.  They  clad  me  with
some  of  their  clothes,  attiring  me  decently ;  and  after  that,  they  put
before  me  some  provisions,  and  I  ate  until  I  was  satisfied.  They  also
gave  me  to  drink  some  cool  and  sweet  water,  and  my  heart  was
revived,  my  soul  became  at  ease,  and  I  experienced  great  comfort.
God  (whose  name  be  exalted !)  had  raised  me  to  life  after  my  death  :
so  I  praised  Him  (exalted  be  bis  name!)  for  his  abundant  favours,
and  thanked  Him.  My  courage  was  strengthened  after  I  had  made
sure  of  destruction,  so  that  it  seemed  to  me  that  all  which  I  then  ex-
perienced was  a  dream. — We  proceeded  on  our  voyage,  and  the  wind
was  fair  to  us  by  the  permission  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !)
until  we  came  in  sight  of  an  island  called  the  Island  of  Es-Selahit,44
where  sandal-wood  is  abundant,45  and  there  the  master  anchored  the
ship,  and  the  merchants  and  other  passengers  landed,  and  took  forth


THE  THIRD  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.  31

their  goods  to  sell  and  buy.  The  owner  of  the  ship  then  looked
towards  me,  and  said  to  me,  Hear  my  words.  Thou  art  a  stranger
and  poor,  and  hast  informed  us  that  thou  hast  suffered  many  horrors ;
I  therefore  desire  to  benefit  thee  with  something  that  will  aid  thee  to
reach  thy  country,  and  thou  wilt  pray  for  me. — I  replied,  So  be  it,  and
thou  shalt  have  my  prayers.  And  he  rejoined,  Know  that  there  was
with  us  a  man  voyaging,  whom  we  lost,  and  we  know  not  whether  he
be  living  or  dead,  having  heard  no  tidings  of  him.  I  desire  to  com-
mit to  thee  his  bales  that  thou  mayest  sell  them  in  this  island,  Thou
shalt  take  charge  of  them,  and  we  will  give  thee  something  propor-
tionate to  thy  trouble  and  thy  service ;  and  what  reruaineth  of  them
we  will  take  and  keep  until  we  return  to  the  city  of  Baghdad,  when
we  will  inquire  for  the  owner's  family,  and  give  to  them  the  remainder,
together  with  the  price  of  that  which  shall  be  sold  of  them.  Wilt
thou  then  take  charge  of  them,  and  land  with  them  upon  this  island,
and  sell  them  as  do  the  merchants  ? — I  answered,  I  hear  and  obey
thee,  O  my  master ;  and  thou  art  beneficent  and  kind.  And  I
prayed  for  him  and  thanked  him  for  that.

He  thereupon  ordered  the  porters  and  sailors  to  land  those  goods
upon  the  island,  and  to  deliver  them  to  me.  And  the  clerk  of  the
ship  said,  O  master,  what  are  these  bales  which  the  sailors  and  porters
have  brought  out,  and  with  the  name  of  which  of  the  merchants
shall  I  mark  them  ?  He  answered,  Write  upon  them  the  name  of  Es-
Sindibad  of  the  Sea,  who  was  with  us,  and  was  drowned  [or  left
behind]  at  the  island  [of  the  rukh'],  and  of  whom  no  tidings  have
come  to  us ;  wherefore  we  desire  that  this  stranger  sell  them,  and
take  charge  of  the  price  of  them,  and  we  will  give  him  somewhat  of  it
in  requital  of  his  trouble  and  his  sale  of  them.  What  shall  remain
we  will  take  with  us  until  we  return  to  the  city  of  Baghdad,  when,  if
we  find  him,  we  will  give  it  to  him ;  and  if  we  find  him  not,  we  will
give  it  to  his  family  in  Baghdad. — So  the  clerk  replied,  Thy  words
are  good  and  thy  notion  is  excellent.  And  when  I  heard  the  words
of  the  master,  mentioning  that  the  bales  were  to  be  inscribed  with
my  name,  I  said  within  myself,  By  Allah,  I  am  Es-Sindibad  of  the
Sea.48  Then  I  fortified  myself,  and  waited  till  the  merchants  had
landed  and  had  assembled  conversing  and  consulting  upon  affairs  of
selling  and  buying,  when  I  advanced  to  the  owner  of  the  ship,  and
said  to  him,  O  my  master,  dost  thou  know  what  manner  of  man  was
the  owner  of  the  bales  which  thou  hast  committed  to  me  that  I  may
sell  them  ?  He  answered  me,  I  know  not  his  condition  ;  but  he  was


32  THE  THIRD  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.

a  man  of  the  city  of  Baghdad,  called  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sea ;  and  we
had  cast  anchor  at  one  of  the  islands,  where  he  was  lost/7  and  we
have  had  no  tidings  of  him  to  the  present  time.  So  upon  this  I
uttered  a  great  cry,  and  said  to  him,  O  master  (whom  may  God  pre-
serve !),  know  that  I  am  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sea.  I  was  not  drowned,
but  when  thou  anchoredst  at  the  island,  and  the  merchants  and
other  passengers  landed,  I  also  landed  with  the  party,  taking  with  me
something  to  eat  on  the  shore  of  the  island.  Then  I  enjoyed  myself
in  sitting  in  that  place,  and,  slumber  overtaking  me,  I  slept,  and
became  immersed  in  sleep ;  after  which  I  arose,  and  found  not  the
ship,  nor  found  I  any  one  with  me.  Therefore  this  wealth  is  my
wealth,  and  these  goods  are  my  goods.  All  the  merchants  also  who
transport  diamonds  saw  me  when  I  was  upon  the  mountain  of  the
diamonds,  and  they  will  bear  witness  for  me  that  I  am  Es-Sindibad
of  the  Sea,  as  I  informed  them  of  my  story  and  of  the  events  that
befell  me  with  you  in  the  ship.  I  informed  them  that  ye  had  for-
gotten me  upon  the  island,  asleep,  and  that  I  arose  and  found  not
any  one,  and  that  what  had  befallen  me  befell  me.

And  when  the  merchants  and  other  passengers  heard  my  woras,
they  assembled  around  me  ;  and  some  of  them  believed  me,  and  others
disbelieved  me.  But  while  we  were  thus  talking,  lo,  one  of  the  mer-
chants, on  his  hearing  me  mention  the  valley  of  diamonds,  arose  and
advanced  to  me,  and  said  to  them,  Hear,  0  company,  my  words.
When  I  related  to  you  the  most  wonderful  thing  that  I  had  seen  in
my  travels,  I  told  you  that,  when  we  cast  down  the  slaughtered
animals  into  the  valley  of  diamonds,  I  casting  down  mine  with  the
rest,  as  I  was  accustomed  to  do,  there  came  up  with  my  slaughtered
beast  a  man  attached  to  it,  and  ye  believed  me  not.  But  accused  me
of  falsehood, — They  replied,  Yes :  thou  didst  relate  to  us  this  thing,
and  we  believed  thee  not.  And  the  merchant  said  to  them,  This  is
the  man  who  attached  himself  to  my  slaughtered  animal,  and  he  gave
me  some  diamonds  of  high  price,  the  like  of  which  exist  not,  reward-
ing me  with  more  than  would  have  come  up  writh  my  slaughtered
animal ;  and  I  took  him  as  my  companion  until  we  arrived  at  the  city
of  El-Basrah,  whence  he  proceeded  to  his  country,  having  bidden  us
farewell,  and  we  returned  to  our  own  countries.  This  is  he,  and  he
informed  us  that  his  name  was  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sea ;  he  told  us
likewise  of  the  departure  of  the  ship,  and  of  his  sitting  in  that  island.
And  know  ye  that  this  man  came  not  to  us  here  but  in  order  that  ye
might  believe  my  words  respecting  the  matter  which  I  told  you  ;  and


THE  THIRD  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.  33

all  these  goods  are  his  property ;  for  he  informed  us  of  them  at  the
time  of  his  meeting  with  us,  and  the  truth  of  his  assertion  hath
become  manifest. — So  when  the  master  heard  the  words  of  that  mer-
chant, he  arose  and  came  to  me,  and,  having  looked  at  me  awhile  with
a  scrutinizing  eye,  said,  What  is  the  mark  of  thy  goods  ?  I  answered
him,  Know  that  the  mark  of  my  goods  is  of  such  and  such  a  kind.
And  I  related  to  him  a  circumstance  that  had  occurred  between  me
and  him  when  I  embarked  with  him  in  the  vessel  from  El-Basrah.
He  therefore  was  convinced  that  I  was  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sea,  and
he  embraced  me  and  saluted  me,  and  congratulated  me  on  my  safety,
saying  to  me,  By  Allah,  O  my  master,  thy  story  is  wonderful,  and  thy
case  is  extraordinary !  But  praise  be  to  God  who  hath  brought  us
together,  and  restored  thy  goods  and  thy  wealth  to  thee !

Upon  this,  I  disposed  of  my  goods  according  to  the  knowledge  I
possessed,  and  they  procured  me,  during  that  voyage,  great  gain,
whereat  I  rejoiced  exceedingly,  congratulating  myself  on  my  safety,
and  on  the  restoration  of  my  wealth  to  me.  And  we  ceased  not  to
sell  and  buy  at  the  islands  until  we  arrived  at  the  country  of  Es-
Sind/8  where  likewise  we  sold  and  bought.  And  I  beheld  in  that  sea
[which  we  navigated,  namely  the  Sea  of  India,]  many  wonders  and
strange  things  that  cannot  be  numbered  nor  calculated.  Among  the
things  that  I  saw  there  were  a  fish  in  the  form  of  the  cow,49  and  a  crea-
ture in  the  form  of  the  ass ;  and  I  saw  a  bird  that  cometh  forth  from
a  sea-shell,  and  layeth  its  eggs  and  hatcheth  them  upon  the  surface  of
the  water,  and  never  cometh  forth  from  the  sea  upon  the  face  of  the
earth.50 — After  this  we  continued  our  voyage,  by  permission  of  God
(whose  name  be  exalted  !),  and  the  wind  and  voyage  were  pleasant  to
us,  until  we  arrived  at  El-Basrah,  where  I  remained  a  few  days.  Then  I
came  to  the  city  of  Baghdad,  and  repaired  to  my  quarter,  entered  my
house,  and  saluted  my  family  and  companions  and  friends.  I  rejoiced
at  my  safety  and  my  return  to  my  country  and  my  family  and  city  and
district,  and  I  gave  alms  and  presents,  and  clad  the  widows  and  the
orphans,  and  collected  my  companions  and  friends.  And  I  ceased
not  to  live  thus,  eating  and  drinking,  and  sporting  and  making
merry,  eating  well  and  drinking  well,  associating  familiarly  and
mingling  in  society ;  and  I  forgot  all  that  had  happened  to  me,  and  the
distresses  and  horrors  that  I  had  suffered.  And  I  gained  during  that
voyage  what  could  not  be  numbered  nor  calculated. — Such  were  the
most  wonderful  of  the  things  that  I  beheld  during  that  voyage;  and
to-morrow,  if  it  be  the  will  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !),  thou

III.  F


34  THE  THIKD  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.

shalt  come,  [0  Sindibad  of  the  Land,]  and  I  will  relate  to  thee  the
story  of  the  fourth  voyage  ;  for  it  is  more  wonderful  than  the  stories
of  the  preceding  voyages.

Then  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sea  gave  orders  to  present  to  the  porter
a  hundred  pieces  of  gold,  as  usual,  and  commanded  to  spread  the
table.  So  they  spread  it,  and  the  company  supped,  wondering  at
that  story  and  at  the  events  described  in  it ;  and  after  the  supper,
they  went  their  ways.  Es-Sindibad  the  Porter  took  the  gold  that
Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sea  had  ordered  to  be  given  to  him,  and  went  his
way,  wondering  at  that  which  he  had  heard,  and  passed  the  night  in
his  house ;  and  when  the  morning  came,  and  diffused  its  light  and
shone,  he  arose,  and  performed  the  morning-prayers,  and  walked  to
the  house  of  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sea.  He  went  in  to  him  and  saluted
him ;  and  he  received  him  with  joy  and  gayety,  and  made  him  sit  by
him  until  the  rest  of  his  companions  had  come  •  when  the  servants
brought  forward  the  food,  and  the  party  ate  and  drank  and  enjoyed
themselves.  Then  Es-Sindibad  to  the  Sea  began  to  address  them,
and  related  to  them  the  fourth  story,  saying, —


THE  FOURTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.

Know,  0  my  brothers,  that  when  I  returned  to  the  city  of
Baghdad,  and  met  my  companions  and  my  family  and  my  friends,
and  was  enjoying  the  utmost  pleasure  and  happiness  and  ease,  and
had  forgotten  all  that  I  had  experienced,  by  reason  of  the  abundance
of  my  gains,  and  had  become  immersed  in  sport  and  mirth,  and  the
society  of  friends  and  companions,  leading  the  most  delightful  life,
my  wicked  soul  suggested  to  me  to  travel  again  to  the  countries  of
other  people,  and  I  felt  a  longing  for  associating  with  the  different
races  of  men,  and  for  selling  and  gains.  So  I  resolved  upon  this,
and  purchased  precious  goods,  suitable  to  a  sea-voyage,  and,  having
packed  up  many  bales,  more  than  usual,  I  went  from  the  city  of
Baghdad  to  the  city  of  El-Basrah,  where  I  embarked  my  bales  in  a
ship,  and  joined  myself  to  a  party  of  the  chief  men  of  El-Basrah,  and
we  set  forth  on  our  voyage.  The  vessel  proceeded  with  us,  confiding


36  FOURTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SIXDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.

in  the  blessing  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted!),  over  the  roaring
sea  agitated  with  waves,  and  the  voyage  was  pleasant  to  us ;  and  we
ceased  not  to  proceed  in  this  manner  for  a  period  of  nights  and  days,
from  island  to  island  and  from  sea  to  sea,  until  a  contrary  wind  rose
against  us  one  day.  The  master  therefore  cast  the  anchors,  and
stayed  the  ship  in  the  midst  of  the  sea,  fearing  that  she  would  sink
in  the  midst  of  the  deep.  And  while  we  were  in  this  state,  supplicat-
ing, and  humbling  ourselves  to  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !),  there
rose  against  us  a  great  tempest,  which  rent  the  sails  in  strips,  and  the
people  were  submerged  with  all  their  bales  and  their  commodities  and
wealth.  I  was  submerged  among  the  rest,  and  I  swam  in  the  sea  for
half  a  day,  after  which  I  abandoned  myself;  but  God  (whose  name  be
exalted  !)  aided  me  to  lay  hold  upon  a  piece  of  one  of  the  planks
of  the  ship,  and  I  and  a  party  of  the  merchants  got  upon  it.  We
continued  sitting  upon  this  plank,  striking  the  sea  with  our  feet,  and
the  waves  and  the  wind  helping  us ;  and  we  remained  in  this  state  a
day  and  a  night.  And  on  the  following  day,  shortly  before  the  mid-
time  between  sunrise  and  noon,  a  wind  rose  against  us,  the  sea  became
boisterous,,  the  waves  and  the  wind  were  violent,  and  the  water  cast
us  upon  an  island ;  and  we  were  like  dead  men,  from  excess  of  sleep-
lessness and  fatigue,  and  cold  and  hunger,  and  fear  and  thirst.

We  walked  along  the  shores  of  that  island,  and  found  upon  it
abundant  herbs  ;  so  we  ate  some  of  them  to  stay  our  departing  spirits,
and  to  sustain  us;  and  passed  the  next  night  upon  the  shore  of  the
island.  And  when  the  morning  came,  and  diffused  its  light  and
shone,  we  arose  and  walked  about  the  island  to  the  right  and  left,  and
there  appeared  to  us  a  building  in  the  distance.  We  therefore  pro-
ceeded over  the  island  in  the  direction  of  that  building  which  we  had
seen  from  a  distance,  and  ceased  not  to  proceed  until  we  stood  at  its
door.  And  while  we  were  standing  there,  lo,  there  came  forth  to  us
from  that  door  a  party  of  naked  men,  who,  without  speaking  to  us,
seized  us,  and  took  us  to  their  King,  and  he  commanded  us  to  sit.
So  we  sat;  and  they  brought  to  us  some  food,  such  as  we  knew
not,  nor  in  our  lives  had  we  seen  the  like  of  it ;  wherefore  my
stomach  consented  not  to  it,  and  I  ate  none  of  it  in  comparison  with
my  companions,  and  my  eating  so  little  of  it  was  owing  to  the  grace
of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !),  in  consequence  of  which  I  have
lived  to  the  present  time.  For  when  my  companions  ate  of  that  food,
their  minds  became  stupified,  and  they  ate  like  madmen,  and  their
states  became  changed.  Then  the  people  brought  to  them  cocoa-nut-


THE  FOURTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA,  37

oil,  and  gave  them  to  drink  of  it,  and  anointed  them  with  it ;  and
when  my  companions  drank  of  that  oil,  their  eyes  became  turned  in
their  faces,  and  they  proceeded  to  eat  of  that  food  contrary  to  their
usual  manner.  Upon  this,  therefore,  I  was  confounded  respecting
their  case,  and  grieved  for  them,  and  became  extremely  anxious  by
reason  of  the  violence  of  my  fear  for  myself  with  regard  to  these  naked
men.  I  observed  them  attentively,  and,  lo,  they  were  a  Magian
people,  and  the  King  of  their  city  was  a  ghool ; 51  and  every  one  who
arrived  at  their  country,  or  whom  they  saw  or  met  in  the  valley  or  the
roads,  they  brought  to  their  King,  and  they  fed  him  with  that  food,
and  anointed  him  with  that  oil,  in  consequence  of  which  his  body
became  expanded,  in  order  that  he  might  eat  largely ;  and  his  miud
was  stupitied,  his  faculty  of  reflection  was  destroyed,  and  he  became
like  an  idiot.  Then  they  gave  him  to  eat  and  drink  in  abundance  of
that  food  and  oil,  until  he  became  fat  and  stout,  when  they  slaugh-
tered him  and  roasted  him,  and  served  him  as  meat  to  their  King.
But  as  to  the  companions  of  the  King,  they  ate  the  flesh  of  men  with-
out roasting  or  otherwise  cooking  it.  So  when  I  saw  them  do  thus,  I
was  in  the  utmost  .anguish  on  my  own  account  and  on  account  of  my
companions.  The  latter,  by  reason  of  the  excessive  stupefaction  of
their  minds,  knew  not  what  was  done  unto  them,  and  the  people  com-
mitted them  to  a  person  who  took  them  every  day  and  went  forth  to
pasture  them  on  that  island  like  cattle.

But  as  for  myself,  I  became,  through  the  violence  of  fear  and
hunger,  infirm  and  wasted  in  body,  and  my  flesh  dried  upon  my
bones.  So  when  they  saw  me  in  this  state,  they  left  me  and  forgot
me,  and  not  one  of  them  remembered  me,  nor  did  I  occur  to  their
minds,  until  I  contrived  a  stratagem  one  day,  and,  going  forth  from
that  place,  walked  along  the  island  to  a  distance.  And  I  saw  a  herds-


38  THE  FOURTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.

man  sitting  upon  something  elevated  in  the  midst  of  the  sea;  and  I
certified  myself  of  him,  and,  lo,  he  was  the  man  to  whom  they  had
committed  my  companions  that  he  might  pasture  them  ;  and  he  had
with  him  many  like  them.  As  soon,  therefore,  as  that  man  beheld
me,  he  knew  that  I  was  in  possession  of  my  reason,  and  that  nought
of  that  which  had  afflicted  my  companions  had  afflicted  me.  So  he
made  a  sign  to  me  from  a  distance,  and  said  to  me,  Turn  back,  and
go  along  the  road  that  is  on  thy  right  hand :  thou  wilt  so  reach  the
King's  highway.  Accordingly  I  turned  back,  as  this  man  directed
me,  and,  seeing  a  road  on  my  right  hand,  I  proceeded  along  it,  and
ceased  not  to  go  on,  sometimes  running  by  reason  of  fear,  and  some-
times walking  at  my  leisure  until  I  had  taken  rest.  Thus  I  continued
to  do  until  I  was  hidden  from  the  eyes  of  the  man  who  directed  me
to  the  way,  and  I  saw  him  not  nor  did  he  see  me.  The  sun  had  dis-
appeared from  me,  and  darkness  approached ;  wherefore  I  sat  to  rest,
and  desired  to  sleep ;  but  sleep  came  not  to  me  that  night  on  account
of  the  violence  of  n.y  fear  and  hunger  and  fatigue.  And  when  it  was
midnight,  I  arose  and  walked  on  over  the  island,  and  I  ceased  not  to
proceed  until  day  arrived,  and  the  morning  came  and  diffused  its  light
and  shone,  and  the  sun  rose  over  the  tops  of  the  high  hills  and  over
the  low  gravelly  plains.  I  was  tired  and  hungry  and  thirsty;  so  I
began  to  eat  of  the  herbs  and  vegetables  that  were  upon  the  island,
and  continued  to  eat  of  them  till  I  was  satiated,  and  my  departing
spirit  was  stayed ;  after  which  I  arose  and  walked  on  again  over  the
island;  and  thus  I  ceased  not  to  do  all  the  day  and  the  next  night ;
whenever  I  was  hungry,  eating  of  the  vegetables.52

In  this  manner  I  proceeded  for  the  space  of  seven  days  with  their
nights;  and  on  the  morning  of  the  eighth  day,  I  cast  a  glance,  and
beheld  a  faint  object  in  the  distance.  So  I  went  towards  it,  and
ceased  not  to  proceed  until  I  came  up  to  it,  after  sunset;  and  I
looked  at  it  with  a  scrutinizing  eye,  while  I  was  yet  distant  from  it,
and  with  a  fearful  heart  in  consequence  of  what  I  had  suffered  first
and  after,  and,  lo,  it  was  a  party  of  men  gathering  pepper.53  And
when  I  approached  them,  and  they  sawr  me,  they  hastened  to  me,
and  came  to  me  and  surrounded  me  on  every  side,  saying  to  me,  Who
art  thou,  and  whence  hast  thou  come?  I  answered  them,  Know  ye,
O  people,  that  I  am  a  poor  foreigner.  And  I  informed  them  of  my
whole  case,  and  of  the  horrors  and  distresses  that  had  befallen  me,
and  what  I  had  suffered  ;  whereupon  they  said,  By  Allah,  this  is  a
wonderful  thing !  But  how  didst  thou  escape  from  the  blacks,  and


THE  FOURTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBA'D  OF  THE  SKA.


39


how  didst  them  pass  by  them  in  .this  island,  when  they  are  a  numerous
people,  and  eat  men,  and  no  one  is  safe  from  them,  nor  can  any  pass
by  them  ? — So  I  acquainted  them  with  that  which  had  befallen  me
among  them,  and  with  the  manner  in  which  they  had  taken  my  com-
panions, and  fed  them  with  food  of  which  I  did  not  eat.  And  they
congratulated  me  on  my  safety,  and  wondered  at  that  which  had
befallen  me.  Then  they  made  me  sit  among  them  until  they  had
finished  their  work,  and  they  brought  me  some  nice  food.  I  there-
fore ate  of  it,  being  hungry,  and  rested  with  them  a  while;  after
which  they  took  me  and  embarked  with  me  in  a  vessel,  and  went  to
their  island  and  their  abodes.  They  then  took  me  to  their  King,  and
I  saluted  him,  and  he  welcomed  me  and  treated  me  with  honour,  and
inquired  of  me  my  story.  So  I  related  to  him  what  I  had  experi-
enced, and  what  had  befallen  me  and  happened  to  me  from  the  day
of  my  going  forth 'from  the  city  of  Baghdad  until  I  had  come  unto
him.  And  the  King  wondered  extremely  at  my  story,  and  at  the
events  that  had  happened  to  me ;  he,  and  all  who  were  present  in  his
assembly.  After  that,  he  ordered  me  to  sit  with  him.  Therefore  I
sat;  and  he  gave  orders  to  bring  the  food,  which  accordingly  they
brought,  and  I  ate  of  it  as  much  as  sufficed  me,  and  washed  my
hands,  and  offered  up  thanks  for  the  favour  of  God  (whose  name  be
exalted !),  praising  Him  and  glorifying  Him.  I  then  rose  from  the
presence  of  the  King,  and  diverted  myself  with  a  sight  of  his  city ;
and,  lo,  it  was  a  nourishing  city,  abounding  with  inhabitants  and
wealth,  and  with  food  and  markets  and  goods,  and  sellers  and  buyers.
So  I  rejoiced  at  my  arrival  at  that  city,  and  my  heart  was  at  ease  ;
I  became  familiar  with  its  inhabitants,  and  was  magnified  and
honoured  by  them  and  by  their  King  above  the  people  of  his  domi-


40  THE  FOURTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.

nions  and  the  great  men  of  his  city.  And  I  saw  that  all  its  great
men  and  its  small  rode  excellent  and  fine  horses  without  saddles ;
whereat  I  wondered ;  and  I  said  to  the  King,  Wherefore,  0  my  lord,
dost  thou  not  ride  on  a  saddle ;  for  therein  is  ease  to  the  rider,  and
additional  power?  He  said,  What  kind  of  thing  is  a  saddle ?  This
is  a  thing  that  in  our  lives  we  have  never  seen,  nor  have  we  ever
ridden  upon  it. — And  I  said  to  him,  Wilt  thou  permit  me  to  make
for  thee  a  saddle  to  ride  upon  and  to  experience  the  pleasure  of  it  ?
He  answered  me,  Do  so.  I  therefore  said  to  him,  Furnish  me  with
some  wood.  And  he  gave  orders  to  bring  me  all  that  I  required.
Then  I  asked  for  a  clever  carpenter,  and  sat  with  him,  and  taught
him  the  construction  of  the  saddle,  and  how  he  should  make  it.
Afterwards  I  took  some  wool,  and  teased  it,  and  made  felt  of  it ;  and
I  caused  some  leather  to  be  brought,  and  covered  the  saddle  with  it,
and  polished  it.  I  then  attached  its  straps,  and  its' girth  :  after  which
I  brought  the  blacksmith,  and  described  to  him  the  form  of  the
stirrups,  and  he  forged  an  excellent  pair  of  stirrups  ;  and  I  tiled  them,
and  tinned  them.  Then  I  attached  fringes  of  silk.  Having  done
this,  I  arose  and  brought  one  of  the  best  of  the  King's  horses,  girded
upon  him  that  saddle,  attached  to  it  the  stirrups,  bridled  him,  and
brought  him  forward  to  the  King ;  and  it  pleased  him,  and  was
agreeable  to  him.  He  thanked  me,  and  seated  himself  upon  it,  and
was  greatly  delighted  with  that  saddle ;  and  he  gave  me  a  large  pre-
sent as  a  reward  for  that  which  I  had  done  for  him.  And  when  his
Wezeer  saw  that  I  had  made  that  saddle,  he  desired  of  me  one  like  it.
So  I  made  for  him  a  saddle  like  it.  The  grandees  and  dignitaries
likewise  desired  of  me  saddles,  and  I  made  for  them.  I  taught  the
carpenter  the  construction  of  the  saddle;  and  the  blacksmith,  the
mode  of  making  stirrups;  and  we  employed  ourselves  in  making
these  things,  and  sold  them  to  the  great  men  and  masters.  Thus  I
collected  abundant  wealth,  and  became  in  high  estimation  with  them,
and  they  loved  me  exceedingly.

I  continued  to  enjoy  a  high  rank  with  the  King  and  his  attendants
and  the  great  men  of  the  country  and  the  lords  of  the  state,  until  I
sat  one  day  with  the  King,  in  the  utmost  happiness  and  honour ;  and
while  I  was  sitting,  the  King  said  to  me,  Know,  O  thou,  that  thou
hast  become  magnified  and  honoured  among  us,  and  hast  become  one
of  us,  and  we  cannot  part  with  thee,  nor  can  we  suffer  thee  to  depart
from  our  city ;  and  I  desire  of  thee  that  thou  obey  me  in  an  affair,
and  reject  not  that  which  I  shall  say.  So  I  said  to  him.  And  what


THE  FOURTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.  II

dost  thou  desire  of  me,  O  King  ?  For  I  will  not  reject  that  which
thou  shalt  say,  since  thou  hast  shewn  favour  and  kindness  and  bene-
ficence to  me,  and  (praise  be  to  God !)  I  have  become  one  of  thy
servants. — And  he  answered,  I  desire  to  marry  thee  among  us  to  a
beautiful,  lovely,  elegant  wife,  possessed  of  wealth  and  loveliness,  and
thou  shalt  become  a  dweller  with  us,  and  I  will  lodge  thee  by  me  in
my  palace:  therefore  oppose  me  not,  nor  reject  what.  I  say.  And
when  I  heard  the  words  of  the  King,  I  was  abashed  at  him,  and  was
silent,  returning  him  no  answer,  by  reason  of  the  exceeding  bashful-
ness  with  which  I  regarded  him.  So  he  said,  Wherefore  dost  thou
not  reply  to  me,  0  my  son  ?  And  I  answered  him,  0  my  master,  it
is  thine  to  command,  O  King  of  the  age  !  And  upon  this  he  sent
immediately  and  caused  the  Kadee  and  the  witnesses  to  come,  and
married  me  forthwith  to  a  woman  of  noble  rank,  of  high  lineage,  pos-
sessing abundant  wealth  and  fortune,  of  great  origin,  of  surprising
loveliness  and  beauty,  owner  of  dwellings  and  possessions  and  build-
ings. Then  he  gave  me  a  great,  handsome  house,  standing  alone,
and  he  gave  me  servants  and  other  dependants,  and  assigned  me
supplies  and  salaries.  Thus  I  became  in  a  state  of  the  utmost  ease
and  joy  and  happiness,  forgetting  all  the  fatigue  and  affliction  and
adversity  that  had  happened  to  me;  and  I  said  within  myself,  When
I  set  forth  on  my  voyage  to  my  country,  I  will  take  her  with  me.
But  every  event  that  is  predestined  to  happen  to  man  must  inevit-
ably take  place,  and  no  one  knoweth  what  will  befall  him.  I  loved
her  and  she  loved  me  with  a  great  affection,  concord  existed  between
me  and  her,  and  we  lived  in  a  most  delightful  manner,  and  most
comfortable  abode,  and  ceased  not  to  enjoy  this  state  for  a  length  of
time.

Then  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !)  caused  to  die  the  wife  of  my
neighbour,  and  he  was  a  companion  of  mine.  So  I  went  in  to  him
to  console  him  for  the  loss  of  his  wife,  and  beheld  him  in  a  most  evil
state,  anxious,  weary  in  soul  and  heart ;  and  upon  this  I  consoled  him
and  comforted  him,  saying  to  him,  Mourn  not  for  thy  wife.  God  will
happily  compensate  thee  by  giving  thee  one  better  than  she,  and  thy
life  will  be  long  if  it  be  the  will  of  God,  whose  name  be  exalted ! — -But
he  wept  violently,  and  said  to  me,  O  my  companion,  how  can  I
marry  another  after  her,  or  how  can  God  compensate  me  by  giving  me
a  better  than  she,  when  but  one  day  remaineth  of  my  life  ?  So  1
replied,  O  my  brother,  return  to  thy  reason,  and  do  not  announce
thine  own  death  ;  for  thou  art  well,  in  prosperity  and  health.  But  he
in.  c


42  THE  FOURTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SKA.

said  to  me,  O  my  companion,  by  thy  life,  to-morrow  thou  wilt  lose
me,  and  never  in  thy  life  wilt  thou  see  me  again. — And  how  so  ?  said
I.  He  answered  me,  This  day  they  will  bury  iny  wife,  and  they  will
bury  me  with  her  in  the  sepulchre ;  for  it  is  our  custom  in  our
country,  when  the  wife  dieth,  to  bury  with  her  her  husband  alive ;
and  when  the  husband  dieth,  they  bury  with  him  his  wife  alive ;  that
neither  of  them  may  enjoy  life  after  the  other.  I  therefore  said  to
him,  By  Allah,  this  custom  is  exceedingly  vile,  and  none  can  endure
it ! — And  while  we  were  thus  conversing,  lo,  most  of  the  people  of
the  city  came,  and  proceeded  to  console  my  companion  for  the  loss  of
his  wife  and  for  himself.  They  began- to  prepare  her  body  for  burial
according  to  their  custom,  brought  a  bier,  and  carried  the  woman  in
it,  with  all  her  apparel  and  ornaments  and  wealth,54  taking  the
husband  with  them  ;  and  they  went  forth  with  them  to  the  outside  of
the  city,  and  came  to  a  place  in  the  side  of  a  mountain  by  the  sea.
They  advanced  to  a  spot  there,  and  lifted  up  from  it  a  great  stone,
and  there  appeared,  beneath  the  place  of  this,  a  margin  of  stone,  like
the  margin  of  a  well.  Into  this  they  threw  down  that  woman  ;  and,
lo,  it  was  a  great  pit  beneath  the  mountain.  Then  they  brought  the
man,  tied  him  beneath  his  bosom  by  a  rope  of  fibres  of  the  palm-tree,
and  let  him  down  into  the  pit.  They  also  let  down  to  him  a  great
jug  of  sweet  water,  and  seven  cakes  of  bread  ;  and  when  they  had
let  him  down,  he  loosed  himself  from  the  rope,  and  they  drew  it  up,
and  covered  the  mouth  of  the  pit  with  that  great  stone  as  it  was
before,  and  went  their  ways,  leaving  my  companion  with  his  wife  in
the  pit. — So  I  said  within  myself,  By  Allah,  this  death  is  more
grievous  than  the  first  death  !  I  then  went  to  their  King,  and  said
to  him,  0  my  lord,  how  is  it  that  ye  bury  the  living  with  the  dead
in  your  country  ?  And  he  answered  me,  Know  that  this  is  our
custom  in  our  country :  when  the  husband  dieth,  we  bury  with  him
his  wife  ;  and  when  the  wife  dieth,  we  bury  with  her  her  husband
alive ;  that  we  may  not  separate  them  in  life  nor  in  death  ;  and  this
custom  we  have  received  from  our  forefathers.  And  I  said,  O  King
of  the  age,  and  in  like  manner  the  foreigner  like  me,  when  his  wife
dieth  among  you  do  ye  with  him  as  ye  have  done  with  this  man  ?
He  answered  me,  Yes :  we  bury  him  with  her,  and  do  with  him  as
thou  hast  seen.  And  when  I  heard  these  words  from  him,  my  gall-
bladder almost  burst  by  reason  of  the  violence  of  my  grief  and  mourn-
ing for  myself;  my  mind  was  stupified,  and  I  became  fearful  lest  my
wife  should  die  before  me  and  they  should  bury  me  alive  with  her.


THE  FOURTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAI)  OF  THE  SEA.

Afterwards,  however,  I  comforted  myself,
and  said,  Perhaps  I  shall  die  before  her:
and  no  one  kuoweth  which  will  precede
and  which  will  follow.  And  I  proceeded
to  beguile  myself  with  occupations."

And  but  a  short  time  had  elapsed  after
that  when  my  wife  fell  sick,  and  she  remained
so  a  few  days,  and  died.  So  the  greater
number  of  the  people  assembled  to  console
rne,  and  to  console  her  family  for  her  death  j
and  the  King  also  came  to  console  me  for
the  loss  of  her,  as  was  their  custom.  They
then  brought  for  her  a  woman  to  wash  her,
and  they  washed  her,  and  decked  her  with
the  richest  of  her  apparel,  and  ornaments  of
gold,  and  necklaces  and  jewels.  And  when
they  had  attired  my  wife,  and  put  her  in
the  bier,  and  carried  her  and  gone  with  her
to  that  mountain,  and  lifted  up  the  stone
from  the  mouth  of  the  pit,  and  cast  her
into  it,  all  my  companions,  and  the  family
of  my  wife,  advanced  to  bid  me  farewell  and
to  console  me  for  the  loss  of  my  life.  I  was
crying  out  among  them,  I  am  a  foreigner,
and  am  unable  to  endure  your  custom !
But  they  would  not  hear  what  I  said,  nor
pay  any  regard  to  my  words.  They  laid
hold  upon  me  and  bound  me  by  force,  tying
with  me  seven  cakes  of  bread  and  a  jug  of
sweet  water,  according  to  their  custom,  and


44  THE  FOURTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.

let  me  down  into  that  pit.  And,  lo,  it  was  a  great  cavern  beneath
that  mountain.  They  said  to  me,  Loose  thyself  from  the  ropes.  But
I  would  not  loose  myself.  So  they  threw  the  ropes  down  upon  me,
and  covered  the  mouth  of  the  pit  with  the  great  stone  that  was  upon
it,  and  went  their  ways.  I  beheld  in  that  cavern  many  dead  bodies,
and  their  smell  was  putrid  and  abominable :  and  I  blamed  myself  for
that  which  I  had  done,  saying,  By  Allah,  I  deserve  all  that  happeneth
to  me  and  befalleth  me  !  I  knew  not  night  from  day ;  and  I  sus-
tained myself  with  little  food,  not  eating  until  hunger  almost  killed
me,  nor  drinking  until  my  thirst  became  violent,  fearing  the  exhaus-
tion of  the  food  and  water  that  I  had  with  me.  I  said,  There  is  no
strength  nor  power  but  in  God,  the  High,  the  Great !  What  tempted
me  to  marry  in  this  city  ?  And  every  time  that  I  say,  I  have
escaped  from  a  calamity,  I  fall  into  a  calamity  that  is  more  mighty
than  the  preceding  one !  By  Allah,  my  dying  this  death  is  unfortu-
nate !  Would  that  I  had  been  drowned  in  the  sea,  or  had  died  upon
the  mountains !  It  had  been  better  for  me  than  this  evil  death ! —
And  I  continued  in  this  manner,  blaming  myself.  I  laid  myself  down
upon  the  bones  of  the  dead,  begging  aid  of  God  (whose  name  be
exalted !),  and  wished  for  death,  but  I  found  it  not,  by  reason  of  the
severity  of  my  sufferings.  Thus  I  remained  until  hunger  burned  my
stomach,  and  thirst  inflamed  me ;  when  I  sat,  and  felt  for  the  bread,
and  ate  a  little  of  it,  and  I  swallowed  after  it  a  little  water.  Then  I
rose  and  stood  up,  and  walked  about  the  sides  of  the  cavern ;  and  I
found  that  it  was  spacious  sideways,  and  with  vacant  cavities  ;  but
upon  its  bottom  were  numerous  dead  bodies,  and  rotten  bones,  that
had  lain  there  from  old  times.  And  upon  this  I  made  for  myself  a
place  in  the  side  of  the  cavern,  remote  from  the  fresh  corpses,  and
there  I  slept.

At  length  my  provision  became  greatly  diminished,  little  remain-
ing with  me.  During  each  day,  or  in  more  than  a  day,  I  had  eaten
but  once,  and  drunk  one  draught,  fearing  the  exhaustion  of  the  water
and  food  that  was  with  me  before  my  death  ;  and  I  ceased  not  to  do
thus  until  I  was  sitting  one  day,  and  while  I  sat,  meditating  upon  my
ease,  thinking  what  I  should  do  when  my  food  and  water  were
exhausted)  lo,  the  mass  of  rock  was  removed  from  its  place,  and  the
light  beamed  down  upon  me.  So  I  said,  What  can  be  the  matter  ?
And,  behold,  the  people  were  standing  at  the  top  of  the  pit,  and  they
let  down  a  dead  man  with  his  wife  with  him  alive,  and  she  was  weep-
ing and  crying  out  for  herself;  and  they  let  down  with  her  a  large


quantity  of  food  and  water.58  I  saw  the  woman  ;  but  she  saw  not
me ;  and  they  covered  the  mouth  of  the  pit  with  the  stone,  and  went
their  ways.  Then  I  arose,  and,  taking  in  my  hand  a  long  bone  of  a
dead  man,  I  went  to  the  woman,  and  struck  her  upon  the  middle  of
the  head ;  whereupon  she  fell  down  senseless ;  and  I  struck  her  a
second  and  a  third  time,  and  she  died.  So  I  took  her  bread  and
what  else  she  had,  and  I  found  upon  her  abundance  of  ornaments  and
apparel,  necklaces  and  jewels  and  minerals.  And  having  taken  the
water  and  food  that  was  with  her,  I  sat  in  a  place  that  I  had  prepared
in  a  side  of  the  cavern,  wherein  to  sleep,  and  proceeded  to  eat  a  little
of  that  food,  as  much  only  as  would  sustain  me,  lest  it  should  be
exhausted  quickly,  and  I  should  die  of  hunger  and  thirst.

I  remained  in  that  cavern  a  length  of  time;  and  whenever  they
buried  a  corpse,  I  killed  the  person  who  was  buried  with  it  alive,
and  took  that  person's  food  and  drink,  to  subsist  upon  it,  until  I  was
sleeping  one  day,  and  I  awoke  from  ray  sleep,  and  heard  somethimg
make  a  noise  in  a  side  of  the  cavern.  So  I  said,  What  can  this  be  ?
I  then  arose  and  walked  towards  it,  taking  with  me  a  long  bone  of  a
dead  man  ;  and  when  it  was  sensible  of  my  presence,  it  ran  away,  and
tied  from  me,  and,  lo,  it  was  a  wild  beast.  But  I  followed  it  to  the
upper  part  of  the  cavern,  and  thereupon  a  light  appeared  to  me  from
a  small  spot,  like  a  star.  Sometimes  it  appeared  to  me,  and  some-
times it  was  concealed  from  me.  Therefore  when  I  saw  it,  I  advanced
towards  it,  and  the  nearer  I  approached  to  it,  the  larger  did  the  light
from  it  appear  to  me.  So  upon  this  I  was  convinced  that  it  was  a
hole  in  that  cavern,  communicating  with  the  open  country;  and  I
said  within  myself,  There  must  be  some  cause  for  this  :  either  it  is  a
second  mouth,  like  that  from  which  thcv  let  me  down,  or  it  is  a  fissure


46  THE  FOURTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.

in  this  place.  I  meditated  in  my  mind  a  while,  and  advanced  towards
the  light ;  and,  lo,  it  was  a  perforation  in  the  back  of  that  mountain^
which  the  wild  beasts  had  made,  and  through  which  they  entered  this
place ;  and  they  ate  of  the  dead  bodies  until  they  were  satiated,  and
went  forth  through  this  perforation.  When  I  saw  it,  therefore,  my
mind  was  quieted,  my  soul  was  tranquillized,  and  my  heart  was  at
ease ;  I  made  sure  of  life  after  death,  and  became  as  in  a  dream.
Then  I  managed  to  force  my  way  through  that  perforation,  and  found
myself  on  the  shore  of  the  sea,  upon  a  great  mountain,  which  formed
a  barrier  between  the  sea  on  the  one  side,  and  the  island  and  city  on
the  other,  and  to  which  no  one  could  gain  access.57  So  I  praised  God
(whose  name  be  exalted  !),  and  thanked  Him,  and  rejoiced  exceedingly,
and  my  heart  was  strengthened.  I  then  returned  through  that  per-
foration into  the  cavern,  and  removed  all  the  food  and  water  that  was
in  it,  that  I  had  spared.  I  also  took  the  clothes  of  the  dead,  and  clad
myself  in  some  of  them,  in  addition  to  those  I  had  on  me ;  and  I  took
abundance  of  the  things  that  were  on  the  dead,  consisting  of  varieties
of  necklaces  and  jewels,  long  necklaces  of  pearls,  ornaments  of  silver
and  gold  set  with  various  minerals,  and  rarities ;  and,  having  tied  up
some  clothes  of  the  dead  in  apparel  of  my  own,  I  went  forth  from  the
perforation  to  the  back  of  the  mountain,  and  stood  upon  the  shore  of
the  sea.  Every  day  I  entered  the  cavern,  and  explored  it ;  and  when-
ever they  buried  a  person  alive,  I  took  the  food  and  water,  and  killed
that  person,  whether  male  or  female ;  after  which  I  went  forth  from
the  perforation,  and  sat  upon  the  shore  of  the  sea,  to  wait  for  relief
from  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !),  by  means  of  a  ship  passing  by
me.  And  I  removed  from  that  cavern  all  the  ornaments  that  I  found,
and  tied  them  up  in  the  clothes  of  the  dead.

I  ceased  not  to  remain  in  this  state  for  a  length  of  time ;  and
afterwards,  as  I  was  sitting,  one  day,  upon  the  shore  of  the  sea,  medi-
tating upon  my  case,  lo,  a  vessel  passed  along  in  the  midst  of  the
roaring  sea  agitated  with  waves.  So  I  took  in  my  hand  a  white  gar-
ment, of  the  clothes  of  the  dead,  and  tied  it  to  a  staff,  and  ran  with
it  along  the  sea-shore,  making  a  sign  to  the  people  with  that  gar-
ment, until  they  happened  to  look,  and  saw  me  upon  the  summit  of
the  mountain.  They  therefore  approached  me,  and  heard  my  voice,
and  sent  to  me  a  boat  in  which  was  a  party  of  men  from  the  ship  j
and  when  they  drew  near  to  me  they  said  to  me,  Who  art  thou,  and
what  is  the  reason  of  thy  sitting  in  this  place,  and  how  didst  thou
arrive  at  this  mountain  ;  for  in  our  lives  we  have  never  seen  any  one


THE  FOURTH  VOYAGK  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THK  SEA.


47


who  hath  come  unto  it  ?  So  I  answered  them,  I  am  a  merchant.
The  vessel  that  I  was  in  was  wrecked,  and  I  got  upon  a  plank,  toge-
ther with  my  things,  and  God  facilitated  my  landing  at  this  place,
with  my  things,  by  means  of  iny  exertion  and  my  skill,  after  severe
toil.  They  therefore  took  me  with  them  in  the  boat,  and  embarked
all  that  I  had  taken  from  the  cavern,  tied  up  in  the  garments  and
grave-clothes,  and  they  proceeded  with  me  until  they  took  me  up
into  the  ship,  to  the  master,  and  all  my  things  with  me.  And  the
master  said  to  me,  O  man,  how  didst  thou  arrive  at  this  place,  which
is  a  great  mountain,  with  a  great  city  behind  it  ?  All  my  life  I  have
been  accustomed  to  navigate  this  sea,  and  to  pass  by  this  mountain ;
but  have  never  seen  any  thing  there  except  the  wild  beasts  and  the
birds. — I  answered  him,  I  am  a  merchant.  I  was  in  a  great  ship,  and
it  was  wrecked,  and  all  my  merchandise,  consisting  of  these  stuffs  and
clothes  which  thou  seest,  was  submerged;  but  I  placed  it  upon  a
great  plank,  one  of  the  planks  of  the  ship,  and  destiny  and  fortune
aided  me,  so  that  I  landed  upon  this  mountain,  where  I  waited  for
some  one  to  pass  by  and  take  me  with  him. — And  I  acquainted  them
not  with  the  events  that  had  befallen  me  in  the  city,  or  in  the  cavern ;


48  THE  FOURTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.

fearing  that  there  might  be  with  them  in  the  ship  some  one  from  that
city.  Then  I  took  forth  and  presented  to  the  owner  of  the  ship  a
considerable  portion  of  my  property,  saying  to  him,  O  my  master,
thou  hast  been  the  means  of  my  escape  from  this  mountain  :  therefore
receive  from  me  this  as  a  recompense  for  the  favour  which  thou  hast
done  to  me.  But  he  would  not  accept  it  from  me;  and  he  said  to
me,  We  take  nothing  from  any  one;  and  when  we  behold  a  ship-
wrecked person  on  the  shore  of  the  sea  or  on  an  island,  we  take  him
with  us,  and  feed  him  and  give  him  to  drink ;  and  if  he  be  naked,  we
clothe  him;  and  when  we  arrive  at  the  port  of  safety,  we  give  him
something  of  our  property  as  a  present,  and  act  towards  him  with
kindness  and  favour  for  the  sake  of  God,  whose  name  be  exalted  ! —
So  upon  this  I  offered  up  prayers  for  the  prolongation  of  his  life.

We  ceased  not  to  proceed  on  our  voyage  from  island  to  island  and
from  sea  to  sea.  I  hoped  to  escape,  and  was  rejoiced  at  my  safety  ;
but  every  time  that  I  reflected  upon  my  abode  in  the  cavern  with  my
wife,  my  reason  left  me.  We  pursued  our  course  M  until  we  arrived
at  the  Island  of  the  Bell,59  whence  we  proceeded  to  the  Island  of
Kela 60  in  six  days.  Then  we  came  to  the  kingdom  of  Kela,  which  is
adjacent  to  India,  and  in  it  are  a  mine  of  lead,  and  places  where  the
Indian  cane  groweth,  and  excellent  camphor  ;  and  its  King  is  a  King
of  great  dignity,  whose  dominion  extendeth  over  the  Island  of  the
Bell.  In  it  is  a  city  called  the  City  of  the  Bell,61  which  is  two  days'
journey  in  extent. — At  length,  by  the  providence  of  God,  we  arrived
in  safety  at  the  city  of  El-Basrah,  where  I  landed,  and  remained  a
few  days;  after  which  I  came  to  the  city  of  Baghdad,  and  to  my
quarter-  and  entered  my  house,  met  my  family  and  my  com-
panions, and  made  inquiries  respecting  them ;  and  they  rejoiced  at
my  safety,  and  congratulated  me.  I  stored  all  the  commodities  that
I  had  brought  with  me  in  my  magazines,  gave  alms  and  presents,  and
clad  the  orphans  and  the  widows ;  and  I  became  in  a  state  of  the
utmost  joy  and  happiness,  and  returned  to  my  former  habit  of  asso-
ciating with  familiars  and  companions  and  brothers,  and  indulging  in
sport  and  merriment. — Such  were  the  most  wonderful  of  the  events
that  happened  to  me  in  the  course  of  the  fourth  voyage.  But,  O  my
brother,  [0  Sindibad  of  the  Land,]  sup  thou  with  me,  and  observe
thy  custom  by  coming  to  me  to-morrow,  when  I  will  inform  thee  what
happened  to  me  and  what  befell  me  during  the  fifth  voyage ;  for
it  was  more  wonderful  and  extraordinary  than  the  preceding  voyages.

He  then  gave  orders  to  present  the  porter  with  a  hundred  pieces  of


THE  FOURTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.


49


gold,  and  the  table  was  spread,  and  the  party  supped ;  after  which
they  went  their  ways,  wondering  extremely  ;  each  story  being  more
extraordinary  than  the  preceding  one.  Es-Sindibad  the  Porter  went
to  his  house,  and  passed  the  night  in  the  utmost  joy  and  happiness,
and  in  wonder ;  and  when  the  morning  came,  and  diffused  its  light
and  shone,  he  arose,  and  performed  the  morning-prayers,  and  walked
on  until  he  entered  the  house  of  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sea,  and  wished
him  good  morning.  And  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sea  welcomed  him,  and
ordered  him  to  sit  with  him  until  the  rest  of  his  companions  came.
And  they  ate  and  drank,  and  enjoyed  themselves  and  were  merry,  and
conversation  flowed  round  among  them.  Then  Es-Sindibad  of  the
Sea  began  his  narrative,  saying  thus  : —


""*%£===—


III.


THE  FIFTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.

Know,  O  my  brothers,  that  when  I  returned  from  the  fourth
voyage,  arid  became  immersed  in  sport  and  merriment  and  joy,  and
had  forgotten  all  that  I  had  experienced,  and  what  had  befallen  me,
and  what  I  had  suffered,  by  reason  of  my  excessive  joy  at  the  gain
and  profit  and  benefits  that  I  had  obtained,  my  mind  again  suggested
to  rne  to  travel,  and  to  divert  myself  with  the  sight  of  the  countries  of
other  people,  and  the  islands.  So  I  arose  and  meditated  upon  that
subject,  and  bought  precious  goods,  suited  for  a  sea  voyage.  I
packed  up  the  bales,  and  departed  from  the  city  of  Baghddd  to  the
city  of  El-Basrah ;  and,  walking  along  the  bank  of  the  river,  I  saw  a
great,  handsome,  lofty  vessel,  and  it  pleased  me ;  wherefore  I  pur-
chased it.  Its  apparatus  was  new,  and  I  hired  for  it  a  master  and


THE  FIFTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.  51

sailors,  over  whom  I  set  my  black  slaves  and  my  pages  as  superin-
tendents, and  I  embarked  in  it  my  bales.  And  there  came  to  me  a
company  of  merchants,  who  also  embarked  their  bales  in  it,  and  paid
me  hire.  We  set  sail  in  the  utmost  joy  and  happiness,  and  rejoicing
in  the  prospect  of  safety  and  gain,  and  ceased  not  to  pursue  our
voyage  from  island  to  island  and  from  sea  to  sea,  diverting  ourselves
with  viewing  the  islands  and  towns,  and  landing  at  them  and  selling
and  buying.  Thus  we  continued  to  do  until  we  arrived  one  day  at  a
large  island  destitute  of  inhabitants.  There  was  no  person  upon  it :
it  was  deserted  and  desolate ;  but  on  it  was  an  enormous  white  dome,
of  great  bulk ;  and  we  landed  to  amuse  ourselves  with  a  sight  of  it,
and,  lo,  it  was  a  great  egg  of  a  rukh'.  Now  when  the  merchants  had
landed,  and  were  diverting  themselves  with  viewing  it,  not  knowing
that  it  was  the  egg  of  a  rukh',  they  struck  it  with  stones  j  whereupon
it  broke,  and  there  poured  down  from  it  a  great  quantity  of  liquid,
and  the  young  rukh'  appeared  within  it.  So  they  pulled  it  and  drew
it  forth  from  the  shell,  and  killed  it,  and  took  from  it  abundance  of
meat.  I  was  then  in  the  ship,  and  knew  not  of  it,  and  they  acquainted
me  not  with  that  which  they  did.  But  in  the  mean  time  one  of  the
passengers  said  to  me,  O  my  master,  arise  and  divert  thyself  with  the
sight  of  this  egg  which  we  imagined  to  be  a  dome.  I  therefore  arose
to  take  a  view  of  it,  and  found  the  merchants  striking  the  egg.  I
called  out  to  them,  Do  not  this  deed ;  for  the  rukh'  will  come  and
demolish  our  ship,  and  destroy  us.  But  they  would  not  hear  my
words.

And  while  they  were  doing  as  above  related,  behold,  the  sun
became  concealed  from  us,  and  the  day  grew  dark,  and  there  came
over  us  a  cloud  by  which  the  sky  was  obscured.  So  we  raised  our
heads  to  see  what  had  intervened  between  us  and  the  sun,  and  saw
that  the  wings  of  the  rukh'  were  what  veiled  from  us  the  sun's  light,
so  that  the  sky  was  darkened.  And  when  the  rukh'  came,  and  beheld
its  egg  broken,  it  cried  out  at  us ;  whereupon  its  mate,  the  female
bird,  came  to  it,  and  they  flew  in  circles  over  the  ship,  crying  out  at
us  with  a  voice  more  vehement  than  thunder.  So  I  called  out  to  the
master  and  the  sailors,  and  said  to  them,  Push  off  the  vessel,  and  seek
safety  before  we  perish.  The  master  therefore  hastened,  and,  the
merchants  having  embarked,  he  loosed  the  ship,  and  we  departed
from  that  island.  And  when  the  rukh's  saw  that  we  had  put  forth  to
sea,  they  absented  themselves  from  us  for  a  while.  We  proceeded,
and  made  speed,  desiring  to  escape  from  them,  and  to  quit  their


52  THE  FIFTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.

country ;  but,  lo,  they  had  followed  us,  and  they  now  approached  us,
each  of  them  having  in  its  claws  a  huge  mass  of  rock  from  a  moun-
tain ;  and  the  male  bird  threw  the  rock  that  he  had  brought  upon  us.
The  master,  however,  steered  away  the  ship,  and  the  mass  of  rock
missed  her  by  a  little  space.  It  descended  into  the  sea  by  the  ship,
and  the  ship  went  up  with  us,  and  down,  by  reason  of  the  mighty
plunging  of  the  rock,  and  we  beheld  the  bottom  of  the  sea  in  conse-
quence of  its  vehement  force.  Then  the  mate  of  the  male  rukh'  threw
upon  us  the  rock  that  she  had  brought,  which  was  smaller  than  the
former  one,  and,  as  destiny  had  ordained,  it  fell  upon  the  stern  of  the
ship,  and  crushed  it,  making  the  rudder  fly  into  twenty  pieces,  and
all  that  was  in  the  ship  became  submerged  in  the  sea.64

I  strove  to  save  myself,  impelled  by  the  sweetness  of  life,  and  God
(whose  name  be  exalted !)  placed  within  my  reach  one  of  the  planks
of  the  ship ;  so  I  caught  hold  of  it,  and,  having  got  upon  it,  began  to
row  upon  it  with  my  feet,  and  the  wind  and  the  waves  helped  me  for-
ward. The  vessel  had  sunk  near  an  island  in  the  midst  of  the  sea,
and  destiny  cast  me,  by  permission  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !),
to  that  island.  I  therefore  landed  upon  it ;  but  I  was  at  my  last
breath,  and  in  the  state  of  the  dead,  from  the  violence  of  the  fatigue
and  distress  and  hunger  and  thirst  that  I  had  suffered.  I  then  threw
myself  down  upon  the  shore  of  the  sea,  and  remained  lying  there  a
while,  until  my  soul  felt  at  ease,  and  my  heart  was  tranquillized,  when
I  walked  along  the  island,  and  saw  that  it  resembled  one  of  the
gardens  of  Paradise.  Its  trees  bore  ripe  fruits,  its  rivers  were  flowing,
and  its  birds  were  warbling  the  praises  of  Him  to  whom  belongeth
might  and  permanence.  Upon  that  island  was  an  abundance  of  trees
and  fruits,  with  varieties  of  flowers.  So  I  ate  of  the  fruits  until  I  was
satiated,  and  I  drank  of  those  rivers  until  I  was  satisfied  with  drink  -,
and  I  praised  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !)  for  this,  and  glorified
Him.  I  then  remained  sitting  upon  the  island  till  evening  came,  and
night  approached ;  whereupon  I  rose ,  but  I  was  like  a  slain  man,  by
reason  of  the  fatigue  and  fear  that  I  had  experienced  ;  and  I  heard  not
in  that  island  a  voice,  nor  did  I  see  in  it  any  person.

I  slept  there  without  interruption  until  the  morning,  and  then
rose  and  stood  up,  and  walked  among  the  trees ;  and  I  saw  a  stream-
let,63 by  which  sat  an  old  man,  a  comely  person,  who  was  clad  from
the  waist  downwards  with  a  covering  made  of  the  leaves  of  trees.  So
I  said  within  myself,  Perhaps  this  old  man  hath  landed  upon  this
island  and  is  one  of  the  shipwrecked  persons  with  whom  the  vessel  fell


to  pieces.  I  then  approached  him  and  saluted  him,  and  he  returned
the  salutation  by  a  sign,  without  speaking  j  and  I  said  to  him,  O
sheykh,  what  is  the  reason  of  thy  sitting  in  this  place  ?  Whereupon
he  shook  his  head,  and  sighed,  and  made  a  sign  to  me  with  his  hand,
as  though  he  would  say,  Carry  me  upon  thy  neck,  and  transport  me
from  this  place  to  the  other  side  of  the  streamlet.  I  therefore  said
within  myself,  I  will  act  kindly  with  this  person,  and  transport  him
to  this  place  to  which  he  desireth  to  go :  perhaps  I  shall  obtain  for  it
a  reward  [in  heaven].  Accordingly  I  advanced  to  him,  and  took
him  upon  my  shoulders,  and  conveyed  him  to  the  place  that  he  had
indicated  to  me  ;  when  I  said  to  him,  Descend  at  thine  ease.  But  he
descended  not  from  my  shoulders.  He  had  twisted  his  legs  round


54  THE  FIFTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAT)  OF  THE  SEA

my  neck,  and  I  looked  at  them,  and  I  saw  that  they  were  like  the
hide  of  the  buffalo  in  blackness  and  roughness.  So  I  was  frightened
at  him,  and  desired  to  throw  him  down  from  my  shoulders ;  but  he
pressed  upon  my  neck  with  his  feet,  and  squeezed  my  throat,  so  that
the  world  became  black  before  my  face,  and  I  was  unconscious  of  my
existence,  falling  upon  the  ground  in  a  fit,  like  one  dead.  He  then
raised  his  legs,  and  beat  me  upon  my  back  and  my  shoulders  ;  and  I
suffered  violent  pain ;  wherefore  I  rose  with  him.  He  still  kept  his
seat  upon  my  shoulders,  and  I  had  become  fatigued  with  bearing
him  j  and  he  made  a  sign  to  me  that  I  should  go  in  among  the  trees,
to  the  best  of  the  fruits.  When  I  disobeyed  him,  he  inflicted  upon
me,  with  his  feet,  blows  more  violent  than  those  of  whips ;  and  he
ceased  not  to  direct  me  with  his  hand  to  every  place  to  which  he
desired  to  go,  and  to  that  place  I  went  with  him.  If  I  loitered,  or
went  leisurely,  he  beat  me;  and  I  was  as  a  captive  to  him.  We  went
into  the  midst  of  the  island,  among  the  trees,  and  he  descended  not
from  my  shoulders  by  night  nor  by  day  :  when  he  desired  to  sleep,  he
would  wind  his  legs  round  my  neck,  and  sleep  a  little,  and  then  he
would  arise  and  beat  me,  whereupon  I  would  arise  with  him  quickly,
unable  to  disobey  him,  by  reason  of  the  severity  of  that  which  I
suffered  from  him ;  and  I  blamed  myself  for  having  taken  him  up,
and  having  had  pity  on  him.  I  continued  with  him  in  this  condition,
enduring  the  most  violent  fatigue,  and  said  within  myself,  I  did  a
good  act  unto  this  person,  and  it  hath  become  an  evil  to  myself !  By
Allah,  I  will  never  more  do  good  unto  any  one  as  long  as  I  live ! — I
begged  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !),  at  every  period  and  in  every
hour,  that  I  might  die,  in  consequence  of  the  excessive  fatigue  and
distress  that  I  suffered.

Thus  I  remained  for  a  length  of  time,  until  I  carried  him  one  day
to  a  place  in  the  island  where  1  found  an  abundance  of  pumpkins,
many  of  which  were  dry.  Upon  this  I  took  a  large  one  that  was  dry,
and,  having  opened  its  upper  extremity,  and  cleansed  it,  I  went  with
it  to  a  grape-vine,  and  filled  it  with  the  juice  of  the  grapes.  I  then
stopped  up  the  aperture,  and  put  it  in  the  sun,  and  left  it  for  some
days,  until  it  had  become  pure  wine ;  and  every  day  I  used  to  drink
of  it,  to  help  myself  to  endure  the  fatigue  that  I  underwent  with  that
obstinate  devil ;  for  whenever  I  was  intoxicated  by  it,  my  energy  was
strengthened.  So,  seeing  me  one  day  drinking,  he  made  a  sign  to
me  with  his  hand,  as  though  he  would  say,  What  is  this  ?  And  I
answered  him,  This  is  something  agreeable,  that  invigorateth  the


THE  FIFTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.


55


heart,  and  dilateth  the  mind.  Then  I  ran  with  him,  and  danced
among  the  trees ;  I  was  exhilarated  by  intoxication,  and  clapped  my
hands,  and  sang,  and  was  joyful.  Therefore  when  he  beheld  me  in
this  state,  he  made  a  sign  to  me  to  hand  .him  the  pumpkin,  that  he
might  drink  from  it ;  and  I  feared  him,  and  gave  it  to  him  ;  where-
upon he  drank  what  remained  in  it,  and  threw  it  upon  the  ground,
and,  being  moved  with  merriment,  began  to  shake  upon  my  shoulders.
He  then  became  intoxicated,  and  drowned  in  intoxication ;  all  his
limbs,  and  the  muscles  of  his  sides,  became  relaxed,  and  he  began  to
lean  from  side  to  side  upon  my  shoulders.  So  when  I  knew  that  he
was  drunk,  and  that  he  was  unconscious  of  existence,  I  put  my  hand
to  his  feet,  and  loosed  them  from  my  neck.  Then  I  stooped  with
him,  and  sat  down,  and  threw  him  upon  the  ground.  I  scarcely
believed  that  I  had  liberated  myself  and  escaped  from  the  state  in
which  I  had  been ;  but  I  feared  him,  lest  he  should  arise  from  his
intoxication,  and  torment  me.  I  therefore  took  a  great  mass  of  stone
from  among  the  trees,  and,  coming  to  him,  struck  him  upon  his  head
as  he  lay  asleep,  so  that  his  flesh  became  mingled  with  his  blood,  and
he  was  killed.  May  no  mercy  of  God  be  on  him  ! 64

After  that,  I  walked  about  the  island,  with  a  happy  mind,  and
came  to  the  place  where  I  was  before,  on  the  shore  of  the  sea.  And  I
remained  upon  that  island,  eating  of  its  fruits,  and  drinking  of  the


56  THE  FIFTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.

water  of  its  rivers>  for  a  length  of  time,  and  watching  to  see  some
vessel  passing  by  me,  until  I  was  sitting  one  day,  reflecting  upon  the
events  that  had  befallen  me  and  happened  to  me,  and  I  said  within
myself,  I  wonder  if  God  will  preserve  me  in  safety,  and  if  I  shall
return  to  my  country,  and  meet  my  family  and  my  companions.  And,
lo,  a  vessel  approached  from  the  midst  of  the  roaring  sea  agitated  with
waves,  and  it  ceased  not  in  its  course  until  it  anchored  at  that  island ;
whereupon  the  passengers  landed  there.  So  I  walked  towards  them ;
and  when  they  beheld  me,  they  all  quickly  approached  me  and  as-
sembled around  me,  inquiring  respecting  my  state,  and  the  cause  of
my  coming  to  that  island.  I  therefore  acquainted  them  with  my  case,
and  with  the  events  that  had  befallen  me;  whereat  they  wondered
extremely.  And  they  said  to  me,  This  man  who  rode  upon  thy
shoulders  is  called  the  Old  Man  of  the  Sea,  and  no  one  ever  was
beneath  his  limbs  and  escaped  from  him  except  thee ;  and  praise  be  to
God  for  thy  safety  !  Then  they  brought  me  some  food,  and  I  ate
until  I  was  satisfied ;  and  they  gave  me  some  clothing,  which  I  put
on,  covering  myself  decently.  After  this,  they  took  me  with  them  in
the  ship ;  and  when  we  had  proceeded  days  and  nights,  destiny  drove
us  to  a  city  of  lofty  buildings,  all  the  houses  of  which  overlooked  the
sea.  That  city  is  called  the  City  of  the  Apes ;  and  when  the  night
cometh,  the  people  who  reside  in  it  go  forth  from  the  doors  that  open
upon  the  sea,  and,  embarking  in  boats  and  ships,  pass  the  night  upon
the  sea,  in  their  fear  of  the  apes,  lest  they  should  come  down  upon
them  in  the  night  from  the  mountains.65

I  landed  to  divert  myself  in  this  city,  and  the  ship  set  sail  without
my  knowledge.  So  I  repented  of  my  having  landed  there,  remember-
ing my  companions,  and  what  had  befallen  them  from  the  apes,  first
and  afterwards ;  and  I  sat  weeping  and  mourning.  And  thereupon  a
man  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  city  advanced  to  me  and  said  to  me,  O
my  master,  it  seemeth  that  thou  art  a  stranger  in  this  country.  I
therefore  replied,  Yes :  I  am  a  stranger,  and  a  poor  man.  I  was  in  a
ship  which  anchored  at  this  city,  and  I  landed  from  it  to  divert  myself
in  the  city,  and  returned,  but  saw  not  the  ship. — And  he  said,  Arise
and  come  with  us,  and  embark  in  the  boat ;  for  if  thou  remain  in  the
city  during  the  night,  the  apes  will  destroy  thee.  So  I  replied,  I  hear
and  obey.  I  arose  immediately,  and  embarked  with  the  people  in  the
boat,  and  they  pushed  it  off  from  the  land  until  they  had  propelled  it
from  the  shore  of  the  sea  to  the  distance  of  a  mile.  They  passed  the
night,  and  I  with  them;  and  when  the  morning  came,  they  returned


THE  FIFTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.  57

in  the  boat  to  the  city,  and  landed,  and  each  of  them  went  to  his
occupation.  Such  hath  been  always  their  custom,  every  night ;  and
to  every  one  of  them  who  remaineth  behind  in  the  city  during  the
night,  the  apes  come,  and  they  destroy  him.  In  the  day,  the  apes  go
forth  from  the  city,  and  eat  of  the  fruits  in  the  gardens,  and  sleep  in
the  mountains  until  the  evening,  when  they  return  to  the  city.  And
this  city  is  in  the  furthest  parts  of  the  country  of  the  blacks. — Among
the  most  wonderful  of  the  events  that  happened  to  me  in  the  treat-
ment that  I  met  with  from  its  inhabitants,  was  this.  A  person  of  the
party  with  whom  I  passed  the  night  said  to  me,  0  my  master,  thou
art  a  stranger  in  this  country.  Art  thou  skilled  in  any  art  with
which  thou  mayest  occupy  thyself  ? — And  I  answered  him,  No,  by
Allah,  0  my  brother :  I  am  acquainted  with  no  art,  nor  do  I  know
how  to  make  any  thing.  I  was  a  merchant,  a  person  of  wealth  and
fortune,  and  I  had  a  ship,  my  own  property,  laden  with  abundant
wealth  and  goods  ;  but  it  was  wrecked  in  the  sea,  and  all  that  was  in
it  sank,  and  I  escaped  not  drowning  but  by  the  permission  of  God ;
for  He  provided  me  with  a  piece  of  a  plank,  upon  which  I  placed
myself;  and  it  was  the  means  of  my  escape  from  drowning. — And
upon  this  the  man  arose  and  brought  me  a  cotton  bag,  and  said  to
me,  Take  this  bag,  and  fill  it  with  pebbles  from  this  city,  and  go  forth
with  a  party  of  the  inhabitants.  I  will  associate  thee  with  them,  and
give  them  a  charge  respecting  thee,  and  do  thou  as  they  shall  do.
Perhaps  thou  wilt  accomplish  that  by  means  of  which  thou  wilt  be
assisted  to  make  thy  voyage,  and  to  return  toothy  country.

Then  that  man  took  me  and  led  me  forth  from  the  city,  and  I
picked  up  small  pebbles,  with  which  I  filled  that  bag.  And,  lo,  a  party
of  men  came  out  from  the  city,  and  he  associated  me  with  them,
giving  them  a  charge  respecting  me,  and  saying  to  them,  This  is  a
stranger ;  so  take  him  with  you,  and  teach  him  the  mode  of  gathering.
Perhaps  he  may  gain  the  means  of  subsistence,  and  ye  will  obtain
[from  God]  a  reward  and  recompense. — And  they  replied,  We  hear
and  obey.  They  welcomed  me,  and  took  me  with  them,  and  pro-
ceeded, each  of  them  having  a  bag  like  mine,  filled  with  pebbles  ;  and
we  ceased  not  to  pursue  our  way  until  we  arrived  at  a  wide  valley,
wherein  were  many  lofty  trees,  which  no  one  could  climb.  In  that
valley  were  also  many  apes,  which,  when  they  saw  us,  fled  from  us,
and  ascended  those  trees.  Then  the  men  began  to  pelt  the  apes  with
the  stones  that  they  had  with  them  in  the  bags  ;  upon  which  the  apes
began  to  pluck  off  the  fruits  of  those  trees,  and  to  throw  them  at  the
in.  I


K' *' "%%^S;^  -  "  '^^


men ;  and  I  looked  at  the  fruits  which  the  apes  threw  down,  and,  lo,
they  were  cocoa-nuts.  Therefore  when  I  beheld  the  party  do  thus,  I
chose  a  great  tree,  upon  which  were  many  apes,  and,  advancing  to  it,
proceeded  to  pelt  those  apes  with  stones  ;•  and  they  broke  off  nuts
from  the  tree  and  threw  them  at  me.  So  I  collected  them  as  the  rest
of  the  party  did,  and  the  stones  were  not  exhausted  from  my  bag
until  I  had  collected  a  great  quantity.  And  when  the  party  had
ended  this  work,  they  gathered  together  all  that  was  with  them,  and
each  of  them  carried  off  as  many  of  the  nuts  as  he  could.66  We  then
returned  to  the  city  during  the  remainder  of  the  day,  and  I  went  to
the  man,  my  companion,  who  had  associated  me  with  the  party,  and
gave  him  all  that  I  had  collected,  thanking  him  for  his  kindness.
But  he  said  to  me,  Take  these  and  sell  them,  and  make  use  of  the
price.  And  afterwards  he  gave  me  the  key  of  a  place  in  his  house,
and  said  to  me,  Put  here  these  nuts  that  thou  hast  remaining  with
thee,  and  go  forth  every  day  with  the  party  as  thou  hast  done  this


THE  FIFTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.  5d

day  ;  and  of  what  thou  bringest,  separate  the  bad,  and  sell  them,  and
make  use  of  their  price;  and  the  rest  keep  in  thy  possession  in  this
place.  Perhaps  thou  wilt  accumulate  of  them  what  will  aid  thee  to
make  thy  voyage. — So  I  replied,  Thy  reward  is  due  from  God,
whose  name  be  exalted !  I  did  as  he  told  me,  and  continued  every
day  to  fill  the  bag  with  stones,  and  to  go  forth  with  the  people,  and
do  as  they  did.  They  used  to  commend  me,  one  to  another,  and  to
guide  me  to  the  tree  upon  which  was  abundance  of  fruit ;  and  I
ceased  not  to  lead  this  life  for  a  length  of  time,  so  that  I  collected  a
great  quantity  of  good  cocoa-nuts,  and  I  sold  a  great  quantity,  the
price  of  which  became  a  large  sum  in  my  possession.  I  bought
every  thing  that  I  saw  and  that  pleased  me,  my  time  was  pleasant,  and
my  good  fortune  increased  throughout  the  whole  city.

I  remained  in  this  state  for  some  time;  after  which,  as  I  was
standing  by  the  seaside,  lo,  a  vessel  arrived  at  that  city,  and  cast
anchor  by  the  shore.  In  it  were  merchants,  with  their  goods,  and
they  proceeded  to  sell  and  buy,  and  to  exchange  their  goods  for  cocoa-
nuts  and  other  things.  So  I  went  to  my  companion,  informed  him
of  the  ship  that  had  arrived,  and  told  him  that  I  desired  to  make  the
voyage  to  my  country.  And  he  replied,  It  is  thine  to  determine.  I
therefore  bade  him  farewell,  and  thanked  him  for  his  kindness  to  me.
Then  I  went  to  the  ship,  and,  accosting  the  master,  engaged  with
him  for  my  passage,  and  embarked  in  that  ship  the  cocoa-nuts  and
other  things  that  I  had  with  me,  after  which  they  set  sail  that  same
day.  We  continued  our  course  from  island  to  island  and  from  sea  to
sea,  and  at  every  island  at  which  we  cast  anchor  I  sold  some  of  those
cocoa-nuts,  and  exchanged  ;  and  God  compensated  me  with  more  than
I  had  before  possessed  and  lost.  We  passed  by  an  island  in  which
are  cinnamon  and  pepper,67  and  some  persons  told  us  that  they  had
seen,  upon  every  bunch  of  pepper,  a  large  leaf  that  shadeth  it  and
wardeth  from  it  the  rain  whenever  it  raineth ;  and  when  the  rain
ceaseth  to  fall  upon  it,  the  leaf  turneth  over  from  the  bunch,  and
hangeth  down  by  its  side.68  From  that  island  I  took  with  me  a  large
quantity  of  pepper  and  cinnamon,  in  exchange  for  cocoa-nuts.  We
passed  also  by  the  Island  of  El-'Asinit,69  which  is  that  wherein  is  the
Kamaree  aloes-wood.  And  after  that,  we  passed  by  another  island,
the  extent  of  which  is  five  days'  journey,  and  in  it  is  the  Sanfee70
aloes-wood,  which  is  superior  to  the  Kamaree;  but  the  inhabitants
of  this  island  are  worse  in  condition  and  religion  than  the  inhabitants
of  the  island  of  the  Kamaree  aloes-wood ;  for  they  love  depravity  and


60  THE  FIFTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBlD  OF  THE  SKA.

the  drinking  of  wines,  and  know  not  the  call  to  prayer,  nor  the  act  of
prayer.71  And  we  came  after  that  to  the  pearl-fisheries ;  whereupon  I
gave  to  the  divers  some  cocoa-nuts,  and  said  to  them.  Dive  for  my
luck  and  lot.  Accordingly  they  dived  in  the  bay7*  there,  and  brought
up  a  great  number  of  large  and  valuable  pearls ;  and  they  said  to  me,
0  my  master,  by  Allah,  thy  fortune  is  good  !  So  I  took  up  into  the
ship  what  they  had  brought  up  for  me,  and  we  proceeded,  relying  on
the  blessing  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted!),  and  continued  our
voyage  until  we  arrived  at  El-Basrah,  where  I  landed,  and  remained
a  short  time.  I  then  went  thence  to  the  city  of  Baghdad,  entered  my
quarter,  came  to  my  house,  and  saluted  my  family  and  companions,
who  congratulated  me  on  my  safety.  I  stored  all  the  goods  and
commodities  that  I  had  brought  with  me,  clothed  the  orphans  and  the
widows,  bestowed  alms  and  gifts,  and  made  presents  to  my  family  and
my  companions  and  my  friends.  God  had  compensated  me  with  four
times  as  much  as  I  had  lost,  and  I  forgot  what  had  happened  to  me,
and  the  fatigue  that  I  had  suffered,  by  reason  of  the  abundance  of  my
gain  and  profits,  and  resumed  my  first  habits  of  familiar  intercourse
and  fellowship. — Such  were  the  most  wonderful  things  that  happened
to  me  in  the  course  of  the  fifth  voyage :  but  sup  ye,  and  to-morrow
come  again,  and  I  will  relate  to  you  the  events  of  the  sixth  voyage ;
for  it  was  more  wonderful  than  this.

Then  they  spread  the  table,  and  the  party  supped ;  and  when  they
had  finished  their  supper,  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sea  gave  orders  to
present  Es-Sindibad  the  Porter  with  a  hundred  pieces  of  gold  :  so  he
took  them  and  departed,  wondering  at  this  affair.  He  passed  the
night  in  his  abode,  and  when  the  morning  came,  he  arose  and  per-
formed the  morning-prayers ;  after  which  he  walked  to  the  house  of
Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sea,  went  in  to  him,  and  wished  him  good
morning;  and  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sea  ordered  him  to  sit.  He  there-
fore sat  with  him,  and  he  ceased  not  to  converse  with  him  until  the  rest
of  his  companions  came.  And  they  conversed  together,  and  the
servants  spread  the  table,  and  the  party  ate  and  drank,  and  enjoyed
themselves  and  were  merry.  Then  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sea  began  to
relate  to  them  the  story  of  the  sixth  voyage,  saying  to  them, —


THE  SIXTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.

Know,  O  my  brothers  and  my  friends  and  my  companions,  that
when  I  returned  from  that  fifth  voyage,  and  forgot  what  I  had  suffered,
by  reason  of  sport  and  merriment  and  enjoyment  and  gayety,  and  was
in  a  state  of  the  utmost  joy  and  happiness,  I  continued  thus  until  I
was  sitting  one  day  in  exceeding  delight  and  happiness  and  gayety ;
and  while  I  sat,  lo,  a  party  of  merchants  came  to  me,  bearing  the
marks  of  travel.  And  upon  this  I  remembered  the  days  of  my  return
from  travel,  and  my  joy  at  meeting  my  family  and  companions  and
friends,  and  at  entering  my  country ;  and  my  soul  longed  again  for
travel  and  commerce.  So  I  determined  to  set  forth.  I  bought  for
myself  precious,  sumptuous  goods,  suitable  for  the  sea,  packed  up  my
bales,  and  went  from  the  city  of  Baghdad  to  the  city  of  El-Basrah,
where  I  beheld  a  large  vessel,  in  which  were  merchants  and  great
men,  and  with  them  were  precious  goods.  I  therefore  embarked  my
bales  with  them  in  this  ship,  and  we  departed  in  safety  from  the  city


62  .  THE  SIXTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBJCD  OF  THE  SEA.

of  El-Basrah.  We  continued  our  voyage  from  place  to  place  and
from  city  to  city,  selling  and  buying,  and  diverting  ourselves  with
viewing  different  countries.  Fortune  and  the  voyage  were  pleasant  to
us,  and  we  gained  our  subsistence,  until  we  were  proceeding  one  day,
and,  lo,  the  master  of  the  ship  vociferated  and  called  out,  threw  down
his  turban,  slapped  his  face,  plucked  his  beard,  and  fell  down  in  the
hold  of  the  ship  by  reason  of  the  violence  of  his  grief  and  rage.  So
all  the  merchants  and  other  passengers  came  together  to  him  and  said
to  him,  O  master,  what  is  the  matter  ?  And  he  answered  them,
Know,  O  company,  that  we  have  wandered  from  our  course,  having
passed  forth  from  the  sea  in  which  we  were,  and  entered  a  sea  of
which  we  know  not  the  routes ;  and  if  God  appoint  not  for  us  some
means  of  effecting  our  escape  from  this  sea,  we  all  perish  :  therefore
pray  to  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !)  that  He  may  save  us  from
this  case.  Then  the  master  arose  and  ascended  the  mast,  and  desired
to  loose  the  sails;  but  the  wind  became  violent  upon  the  ship,  and
drove  her  back,  and  her  rudder  broke  near  a  lofty  mountain  ;  where-
upon the  master  descended  from  the  mast,  arid  said,  There  is  no
strength  nor  power  but  in  God,  the  High,  the  Great !  No  one  is  able
to  prevent  what  is  predestined !  By  Allah,  we  have  fallen  into  a
great  peril,  and  there  remaineth  to  us  no  way  of  safety  or  escape  from
it ! — So  all  the  passengers  wept  for  themselves  :  they  bade  one  another
farewell,  because  of  the  expiration  of  their  lives,  and  their  hope  was
cut  off.  The  vessel  drove  upon  that  mountain,  and  went  to  pieces ;
its  planks  were  scattered,  and  all  that  was  in  it  was  submerged  ;  the
merchants  fell  into  the  sea,  and  some  of  them  were  drowned,  and
some  caught  hold  upon  that  mountain,  and  landed  upon  it.

I  was  of  the  number  of  those  who  landed  upon  the  mountain ;
and,  lo,  within  it  was  a  large  island.73  By  it  were  many  vessels
broken  in  pieces,  and  upon  it  were  numerous  goods,  on  the  shore  of
the  sea,  of  the  things  thrown  up  by  the  sea  from  the  ships  that  had
been  wrecked,  and  the  passengers  of  which  had  been  drowned.  Upon
it  was  an  abundance,  that  confounded  the  reason  and  the  mind,  of
commodities  and  wealth  that  the  sea  cast  upon  its  shores.  I  ascended
to  the  upper  part  of  the  island,  and  walked  about  it,  and  I  beheld  in
the  midst  of  it  a  stream  of  sweet  water,  flowing  forth  from  beneath
the  nearest  part  of  the  mountain,  and  entering  at  the  furthest  part  of
it,  on  the  opposite  side  [of  the  valley]/4  Then  all  the  other  pas-
sengers went  over  that  mountain  to  [the  interior  of]  the  island,  and
dispersed  themselves  about  it,  and  their  reason  w:is  confounded  at  that


THE  SIXTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDII5AD  OF  THE  SEA.  63

which  they  beheld.  They  became  like  madmen  in  consequence  of
what  they  saw  upon  the  island,  of  commodities  and  wealth  lying  on
the  shore  of  the  sea.  I  beheld  also  in  the  midst  of  the  above-
mentioned  stream  an  abundance  of  various  kinds  of  jewels  and
minerals,  with  jacinths  and  large  pearls,  suitable  to  Kings.  They
were  like  gravel  in  the  channels  of  the  water  which  flowed  through
the  fields ;  and  all  the  bed  of  that  stream  glittered  by  reason  of  the
great  number  of  minerals  and  other  things  that  it  contained.  We
likewise  saw  on  that  island  an  abundance  of  the  best  kind  of  Sanfee75
aloes-wood,  and  Kamjiree  aloes-wood.  And  in  that  island  is  a  gushing
spring  of  crude  ambergris,  which  floweth  like  wax  over  the  side  of
that  spring  through  the  violence  of  the  heat  of  the  sun,  and  spreadeth
upon  the  sea-shore,76  and  the  monsters  of  the  deep77  come  up  from  the
sea  and  swallow  it,  and  descend  with  it  into  the  sea ;  but  it  becometh
hot  in  their  stomachs,  therefore  they  eject  it  from  their  mouths  into
the  sea,  and  it  congealeth  on  the  surface  of  the  water.  Upon  this,  its
colour  and  its  qualities  become  changed,  and  the  waves  cast  it  up  on
the  shore  of  the  sea :  so  the  travellers  and  merchants  who  know  it
take  it  and  sell  it.  But  as  to  the  crude  ambergris  that  is  not
swallowed,  it  floweth  over  the  side  of  that  fountain,  and  congealeth
upon  the  ground ;  and  when  the  sun  shineth  upon  it,  it  melteth,  and
from  it  the  odour  of  the  whole  of  that  valley  becometh  like  the  odour
of  musk.  Then,  when  the  sun  withdraweth  from  it,  it  congealeth
again.  The  place  wherein  is  this  crude  ambergris  no  one  can  enter :
no  one  can  gain  access  to  it :  for  the  mountain  surroundeth  that
island.78

We  continued  to  wander  about  the  island,  diverting  ourselves
with  the  view  of  the  good  things  which  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !)
had  created  upon  it,  and  perplexed  at  our  case,  and  at  the  things  that
we  beheld,  and  affected  with  violent  fear.  We  had  collected  upon  the
shore  of  the  sea  a  small  quantity  of  provisions,  and  we  used  it  spar-
ingly, eating  of  it  every  day,  or  two  days,  only  one  meal,  dreading  the
exhaustion  of  our  stock,  and  our  dying  in  sorrow,  from -the  violence
of  hunger  and  fear.  Each  one  of  us  that  died  we  washed,  and
shrouded  in  some  of  the  clothes  and  linen  which  the  sea  cast  upon
the  shore  of  the  island ;  and  thus  we  did  until  a  great  number  of  us
had  died,  and  there  remained  of  us  but  a  small  party,  who  were
weakened  by  a  colic  occasioned  by  the  sea.  After  this,  we  remained
a  short  period,  and  all  my  associates  and  companions  died,  one  after
another,  and  each  of  them  who  died  we  buried.  Then  I  was  alone  on


64  THE  SIXTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SIXDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.

that  island,  and  there  remained  with  me  but  little  of  the  provisions,
after  there  had  been  much.  So  I  wept  for  myself,  and  said,  Would
that  1  had  died  before  my  companions,  and  that  they  had  washed  uie
and  buried  me !  There  is  no  strength  nor  power  but  in  God,  the
High,  the  Great ! — And  I  remained  a  short  time  longer;  after  which
I  arose  and  dug  for  myself  a  deep  grave  on  the  shore  of  the  island,
and  said  within  myself,  When  I  fall  sick,  and  know  that  death  hath
come  to  me,  I  will  lie  down  in  this  grave,  and  die  in  it,  and  the  wind
will  blow  the  sand  upon  me,  and  cover  me ;  so  1  shall  become  buried
in  it.79  I  blamed  myself  for  my  little  sense,  and  my  going  forth  from
my  country  and  my  city,  and  my  voyaging  to  foreign  countries,  after
what  I  had  suffered  in  the  first  instance,  and  the  second  and  the  third
and  the  fourth  and  the  fifth  ;  and  when  I  had  not  performed  one  of  my
voyages  without  suffering  in  it  horrors  and  distresses  more  trouble-
some and  more  difficult  than  the  horrors  preceding.  I  believed  not
that  I  could  escape  and  save  myself,  and  repented  of  undertaking  sea-
voyages,  and  of  my  returning  to  this  life  when  I  was  not  in  want  of
wealth,  but  had  abundance,  so  that  I  could  not  consume  what  I  had,
nor  spend  half  of  it  during  the  rest  of  my  life  ;  having  enough  for  me,
and  more  than  enough.

Then  I  meditated  in  my  mind,  and  said,  This  river  must  have  a
beginning  and  an  end,  and  it  must  have  a  place  of  egress  into  an
inhabited  country.  The  right  plan  in  my  opinion  will  be  for  me  to
construct  for  myself  a  small  raft,80  of  sufficient  size  for  me  to  sit  upon
it,  and  I  will  go  down  and  cast  it  upon  this  river,  and  depart  on  it.
If  I  find  safety,  I  am  safe,  and  escape,  by  permission  of  God  (whose
name  be  exalted !)  ;  and  if  I  find  no  way  of  saving  myself,  it  will  be
better  for  me  to  die  in  this  river  -than  in  this  place.81 — And  I  sighed
for  myself.  Then  I  arose  and  went  and  collected  pieces  of  wood  that
were  upon  that  island,  of  Sanfee82  and  Kamaree  aloes-wood,  and
bound  them  upon  the  shore  of  the  sea  with  some  of  the  ropes  of  the
ships  that  had  been  wrecked;  and  I  brought  some  straight  planks,  of
the  planks  of  the  ships,  and  placed  them  upon  those  pieces  of  wood.
I  made  the  raft  to  suit  the  width  of  the  river,  less  wide  than  the
latter,  and  bound  it  well  and  firmly;  and,  having  taken  with  me
some  of  those  minerals  and  jewels  and  goods,  and  of  the  large  pearls
that  were  like  gravel,  as  well  as  other  things  that  were  upon  the
island,  and  some  of  the  crude,  pure,  excellent  ambergris,  I  put  them
upon  that  raft,  with  all  that  I  had  collected  upon  the  island,  and  took
with  me  what  remained  of  the  provisions.  I  then  launched  the  raft


THE  SIXTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.  65

upon  the  river,  made  for  it  two  pieces  of  wood  like  oars,  and  acted  in
accordance  with  the  following  saying  of  one  of  the  poets : — -

Depart  from  a  place  wherein  is  oppression,  and  leave  the  house  to  tell  its  builder's

fate;
For  thou  wilt  find,  for  the  land  that  thou  quittest,  another ;  but  no  soul  wilt  thon

find  to  replace  thine  own.  ,

Grieve  not  on  account  of  nocturnal  calamities ;  since  every  affliction  will  have  its

end;
And  he  whose  death  is  decreed  to  take  place  in  one  land  will  not  die  in  any  land

but  that.
Send  not  thy  messenger  on  an  errand  of  importance  j  for  the  soul  hath  no  faithful

minister  save  itself.

I  departed  upon  the  raft  along  the  river,  meditating  upon  what  might
be  the  result  of  my  case,  and  proceeded  to  the  place  where  the  river
entered  beneath  the  mountain.  I  propelled  the  raft  into  that  place,
and  became  in  intense  darkness  within  it,  and  the  raft  continued  to
carry  me  in  with  the  current  to  a  narrow  place  beneath  the  mountain,
where  the  sides  of  the  raft  rubbed  against  the  sides  of  the  channel  of
the  river,  and  my  head  rubbed  against  the  roof  of  the  channel.  I  was
unable  to  return  thence,  and  I  blamed  myself  for  that  which  I  had
done,  and  said,  If  this  place  become  narrower  to  the  raft,  it  will
scarcely  pass  through  it,  and  it  cannot  return :  so  I  shall  perish  in
this  place  in  sorrow,  inevitably  !  I  threw  myself  upon  my  face  on
the  raft,  on  account  of  the  narrowness  of  the  channel  of  the  river,  and
ceased  not  to  proceed,  without  knowing  night  from  day,  by  reason  of
the  darkness  in  which  I  was  involved  beneath  that  mountain,  together
with  my  terror  and  fear  for  myself  lest  I  should  perish.  In  this  state
I  continued  my  course  along  the  river,  which  sometimes  widened  and
at  other  times  contracted ;  but  the  intensity  of  the  darkness  wearied
me  excessively,  and  slumber  overcame  me  in  consequence  of  the
violence  of  my  distress.  So  I  lay  upon  my  face  on  the  raft,  which
ceased  not  to  bear  me  along  while  I  slept,  and  knew  not  whether  the
time  was  long  or  short.83

At  length  I  awoke,  and  found  myself  in  the  light ;  and,  opening
my  eyes,  I  beheld  an  extensive  tract,  and  the  raft  tied  to  the  shore  of
an  island,  and  around  me  a  company  of  Indians  and  [people  like]
Abyssinians.  When  they  saw  that  I  had  risen,  they  rose  and  came
to  me,  and  spoke  to  me  in  their  language ;  but  I  knew  not  what  they
said,  and  imagined  that  it  was  a  dream,  and  that  this  occurred  in
sleep,  by  reason  of  the  violence  of  my  distress  and  vexation.  And
when  they  spoke  to  me  and  I  understood  not  their  speech,  and

III.  K


returned  them  not  an  answer,  a  man  among  them  advanced  to  me,
and  said  to  me,  in  the  Arabic  language,  Peace  be  on  thee,  O  our
brother !  What  art  thou,  and  whence  hast  thou  come,  and  what  is  the
cause  of  thy  corning  to  this  place  ?  We  are  people  of  the  sown  lands
and  the  fields,  and  we  came  to  irrigate  our  fields  and  our  sown  lands,
and  found  thee  asleep  on  the  raft :  so  we  laid  hold  upon  it,  and  tied
it  here  by  us,  waiting  for  thee  to  rise  at  thy  leisure.  Tell  us  then
what  is  the  cause  of  thy  coming  to  this  place. — I  replied,  I  conjure
thee  by  Allah,  O  my  master,  that  thou  bring  me  some  food ;  for  I  am
hungry ;  and  after  that,  ask  of  me  concerning  what  thou  wilt.  And
thereupon  he  hastened,  and  brought  me  food,  and  I  ate  until  I  was
satiated  and  was  at  ease,  and  my  fear  subsided,  my  satiety  was  abun-
dant, and  my  soul  returned  to  me.  I  therefore  praised  God  (whose
name  be  exalted !)  for  all  that  had  occurred,  rejoicing  at  my  having
passed  forth  from  that  river,  aiid  having  come  to  these  people ;  and  I
told  them  of  all  that  had  happened  to  me  from  beginning  to  end,  and
of  what  I  had  experienced  upon  that  river,  and  of  its  narrowness.
They  then  talked  together,  and  said,  We  must  take  him  with  us  and
present  him  to  our  King,  that  he  may  acquaint  him  with  what  hath


THE  SIXTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBlD  OF  THE  SEA.  67

happened  to  him.  Accordingly  they  took  me  with  them,  and  con-
veyed with  ine  the  raft,  together  with  all  that  was  upon  it,  of  riches
and  goods,  and  jewels  and  minerals,  and  ornaments  of  gold,  and  they
took  me  in  to  their  King,  who  was  the  King  of  Sarandeeb,84  and
acquainted  him  with  what  had  happened ;  whereupon  he  saluted  me
and  welcomed  me,  and  asked  me  respecting  my  state,  and  respecting
the  events  that  had  happened  to  me.  I  therefore  acquainted  him
with  all  my  story,  and  what  I  had  experienced,  from  first  to  last ;  and
the  King  wondered  at  this  narrative  extremely,  and  congratulated  me
on  my  safety.  Then  I  arose  and  took  forth  from  the  raft  a  quantity
of  the  minerals  and  jewels,  and  aloes-wood  and  crude  ambergris,  and
gave  it  to  the  King ;  and  he  accepted  it  from  me,  and  treated  me  with
exceeding  honour,  lodging  me  in  a  place  in  his  abode.  I  associated
with  the  best  and  the  greatest  of  the  people,  who  paid  me  great
respect,  and  I  quitted  not  the  abode  of  the  King.88

The  island  of  Sarandeeb  is  under  the  equinoctial  line  ;88  its  night
being  always  twelve  hours,  and  its  day  also  twelve  hours.  Its  length
is  eighty  leagues  ;  and  its  breadth,  thirty  ;  and  it  extendeth  largely
between  a  lofty  mountain  and  a  deep  valley.  This  mountain  is  seen
from  a  distance  of  three  days,  and  it  containeth  varieties  of  jacinths,
and  different  kinds  of  minerals,  and  trees  of  all  sorts  of  spices,  and
its  surface  is  covered  with  emery,  wherewith  jewels  are  cut  into  shape :
in  its  rivers  also  are  diamonds,  and  pearls  are  in  its  valleys.  I
ascended  to  the  summit  of  the  mountain,  and  diverted  myself  with  a
view  of  its  wonders,  which  are  not  to  be  described ;  and  afterwards  I
went  back  to  the  King,  and  begged  him  to  give  me  permission  to  return
to  my  country.87  He  gave  me  permission  after  great  pressing,  and
bestowed  upon  me  an  abundant  present  from  his  treasuries;  and  he
gave  me  a  present  and  a  sealed  letter,  saying  to  me,  Convey  these  to
the  Khaleefeh  Haroon  Er-Rasheed,  and  give  him  many  salutations
from  us.  So  I  replied,  I  hear  and  obey.  Then  he  wrote  for  me  a
letter  on  skin  of  the  khawee,88  which  is  finer  than  parchment,  of  a
yellowish  colour;  and  the  writing  was  in  ultramarine.  And  the  form
of  what  he  wrote  to  the  Khaleefeh  was  this : — Peace  be  on  thee,  from
the  King  of  India,  before  whom  are  a  thousand  elephants,89  and  on
the  battlements  of  whose  palace  are  a  thousand  jewels.  To  proceed  :
we  have  sent  to  thee  a  trifling  present :  accept  it  then  from  us.  Thou
art  to  us  a  brother  and  sincere  friend,  and  the  affection  for  you  that  is
in  our  hearts  is  great :  therefore  favour  us  by  a  reply.  The  present
is  not  suited  to  thy  dignity ;  but  we  beg  of  thee,  0  brother,  to  accept


68  THE  SIXTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OP  THE  SEA,

it  graciously.  And  peace  be  on  thee ! — And  the  present  was  a  cup
of  ruby,  a  span  high,  the  inside  of  which  was  embellished  with  pre-
cious pearls ;  and  a  bed  covered  with  the  skin  of  the  serpent  that
swalloweth  the  elephant,  which  skin  hath  spots,  each  like  a  piece  of
gold,  and  whosoever  sitteth  upon  it  never  becometh  diseased ;°°  and
a  hundred  thousand  mithkals  of  Indian  aloes-wood ;  and  a  slave-girl
like  the  shining  full-moon.  Then  he  bade  me  farewell,  and  gave  a
charge  respecting  me  to  the  merchants  and  the  master  of  the  ship.

So  I  departed  thence,  and  we  continued  our  voyage  from  island  to
island  and  from  country  to  country  until  we  arrived  at  Baghdad,
whereupon  I  entered  my  house,  and  met  my  family  and  my  brethren ;
after  which  I  took  the  present,  with  a  token  of  service  from  myself
for  the  Khaleefeh.  On  entering  his  presence,  I  kissed  his  hand,  and
placed  before  him  the  whole,  giving  him  the  letter ;  and  he  read  it,
and  took  the  present,  with  which  he  was  greatly  rejoiced,  and  he
treated  me  with  the  utmost  honour.  He  then  said  to  me,  0  Sindibad,
is  that  true  which  this  King  hath  stated  in  his  letter  ?  And  I  kissed
the  ground,  and  answered,  0  my  lord,  I  witnessed  in  his  kingdom
much  more  than  he  hath  mentioned  in  his  letter.  On  the  day  of  his
public  appearance,  a  throne  is  set  for  him  upon  a  huge  elephant,
eleven  cubits  high,  and  he  sitteth  upon  it,  having  with  him  his  chief
officers  and  pages  and  guests,  standing  in  two  ranks,  on  his  right  and
on  his  left.  At  his  head  standeth  a  man  having  in  his  hand  a  golden
javelin,  and  behind  him  a  man  in  whose  hand  is  a  great  mace  of  gold,
at  the  top  of  which  is  an  emerald  a  span  in  length,  and  of  the  thick-
ness of  a  thumb.  And  when  he  mounteth,  there  mount  at  the  same
time  with  him  a  thousand  horsemen  clad  in  gold  and  silk;  and  as  the
King  proceedeth,  a  man  before  him  proclaimeth,  saying,  This  is  the
King  of  great  dignity,  of  high  authority !  And  he  proceedeth  to
repeat  his  praises  in  terms  that  I  remember  not,  at  the  end  of  his
panegyric  saying,  This  is  the  King  the  owner  of  the  crown  the
like  of  which  neither  Suleyman  nor  the  Mihraj  possessed  !  Then  he
is  silent ;  and  one  behind  him  proclaimeth,  saying,  He  will  die !
Again  I  say,  He  will  die!  Again  I  say,  He  will  die! — And  the
other  saith,  Extolled  be  the  perfection  of  the  Living  who  dieth  not  ! 9l
— Moreover,  by  reason  of  his  justice  and  good  government  and  in-
telligence, there  is  no  Kadee  in  his  city;  and  all  the  people  of  his
country  distinguish  the  truth  from  falsity. — And  the  Khaleefeh
wondered  at  my  words,  and  said,  How  great  is  this  King  !  His  letter
hath  shewn  me  this  ;  and  as  to  the  greatness  of  his  dominion,  thou


THE  SIXTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.


69


hast  told  us  what  thou  hast  witnessed.  By  Allah,  he  hath  been
endowed  with  wisdom  and  dominion  ! — Then  the  Khaleefeh  conferred
favours  upon  me,  and  commanded  me  to  depart  to  my  abode.  So
I  came  to  my  house,  and  gave  the  legal  and  other  alms,  and  continued
to  live  in  the  same  pleasant  circumstances  as  at  present.  I  forgot
the  arduous  troubles  that  I  had  experienced,  discarded  from  my  heart
the  anxieties  of  travel,  rejected  from  my  mind  distress,  and  betook
myself  to  eating  and  drinking,  and  pleasures  and  joy.

And  when  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sea  had  finished  his  story,  every
one  who  was  present  wondered  at  the  events  that  had  happened  to
him.  He  then  ordered  his  treasurer  to  give  to  Es-Sindibad  of  the
Land  a  hundred  pieces  of  gold,  and  commanded  him  to  depart,  and
to  return  the  next  day  with  the  boon-companions,  to  hear  his  seventli
story.  So  the  porter  went  away  happy  to  his  abode,  and  on  the
morrow  he  was  present  with  all  the  boon-companions ;  and  they  sat
according  to  their  usual  custom,  and  employed  themselves  in  eating
and  drinking  and  enjoyment  until  the  end  of  the  day,  when  Es-
Sindibad  of  the  Sea  made  a  sign  to  them  that  they  should  hear  his
seventh  story,  and  said, —


THE  SEVENTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBlD  OF  THE  SEA.

When  I  relinquished  voyaging,  and  the  affairs  of  commerce,  I  said
within  myself,  What  hath  happened  to  me  sufficeth  me.  And  my
time  was  spent  in  joy  and  pleasures.  But  while  I  was  sitting  one
day,  the  door  was  knocked  :  so  the  door-keeper  opened,  arid  a  page
of  the  Khaleefeh  entered  and  said,  The  Khaleefeh  summoneth  thee.
I  therefore  went  with  him  to  his  majesty,  and  kissed  the  ground
before  him  and  saluted  him,  whereupon  he  welcomed  me  and  treated
me  with  honour ;  and  he  said  to  me,  0  Sindibad,  I  have  an  affair  for
thee  to  perform.  Wilt  thou  do  it  ? — So  I  kissed  his  hand,  and  said
to  him,  O  my  lord,  what  affair  hath  the  master  for  the  slave  to
perform  ?  And  he  answered  me,  I  desire  that  thou  go  to  the  King  of
Sarandeeb,  and  convey  to  him  our  letter  and  our  present;  for  he  sent
to  us  a  present  and  a  letter.  And  I  trembled  thereat,  and  replied,
By  Allah  the  Great,  0  my  lord,  I  have  taken  a  hatred  to  voyaging ;


THE  SEVENTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.  71

and  when  a  voyage  on  the  sea,  or  any  other  travel,  is  mentioned  to
me,  my  joints  tremble,  in  consequence  of  what  hath  befallen  me  and
what  I  have  experienced  of  troubles  and  horrors,  and  I  have  no  desire
for  that  whatever.  Moreover  I  have  bound  myself  by  an  oath  not  to
go  forth  from  Baghdad. — Then  I  informed  the  Khaleefeh  of  all  that
had  befallen  me  from  first  to  last;  and  he  wondered  exceedingly,  and
said,  By  Allah  the  Great,  O  Sindibad,  it  hath  not  been  heard  from
times  of  old  that  such  events  have  befallen  any  one  as  have  befallen

,  *

thee,  and  it  is  incumbent  on  thee  that  thou  never  mention  the  subject
of  travel.  But  for  my  sake  thou  wilt  go  this  time,  and  convey  our
present  and  our  letter  to  the  King  of  Sarandeeb ;  and  thou  shalt
return  quickly  if  it  be  the  will  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !),  that
we  may  no  longer  have  a  debt  of  favour  and  courtesy  to  the  King. —
So  I  replied  that  I  heard  and  obeyed,  being  unable  to  oppose  his
command.  He  then  gave  me  the  present  and  the  letter,  with  money
for  my  expenses,  and  I  kissed  his  hand  and  departed  from  him.

I  went  from  Baghdiid  to  the  sea,  and  embarked  in  a  ship,  and  we
proceeded  days  and  nights,  by  the  aid  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !),
until  we  arrived  at  the  island  of  Sarandeeb,  and  with  us  were  many
merchants.  As  soon  as  we  arrived,  we  landed  at  the  city,  and  I  took
the  present  and  the  letter,  and  went  in  with  them  to  the  King,  and
kissed  the  ground  before  him.  And  when  he  saw  me,  he  said,  A
friendly  welcome  to  thee,  O  Sindibad  !  By  Allah  the  Great,  we  have
longed  to  see  thee,  and  praise  be  to  God  who  hath  shewn  us  thy  face
a  second  time ! — Then  he  took  me  by  my  hand,  and  seated  me  by  his
side,  welcoming  me,  and  treating  me  with  familiar  kindness,  and  he
rejoiced  greatly.  He  began  to  converse  with  me,  and  addressed  me
with  courtesy,  and  said,  What  was  the  cause  of  thy  coming  to  us,  O
Sindibad  ?  So  I  kissed  his  hand,  and  thanked  him,  and  answered
him,  0  my  lord,  I  have  brought  thee  a  present  and  a  letter  from  my
master  the  Khaleefeh  Haroon  Er-Rasheed.  I  then  offered  to  him  the
present  and  the  letter,  and  he  read  the  letter,  and  rejoiced  at  it
greatly.  The  present  was  a  horse  worth  ten  thousand  pieces  of  gold,
with  its  saddle  adorned  with  gold  set  with  jewels;  and  a  book,  and  a
sumptuous  dress,  and  a  hundred  different  kinds  of  white  cloths  of
Egypt,  and  silks  of  Es-Suweys92  and  El-Koofeh  and  Alexandria,  and
Greek  carpets,  and  a  hundred  menus  of  silk  and  flax,  and  a  wonderful,
extraordinary  cup  of  crystal,  in  the  midst  of  which  was  represented
the  figure  of  a  lion  with  a  man  kneeling  before  him  and  having  drawn
an  arrow  in  his  bow  with  his  utmost  force,  and  also  the  table  of


72  THE  SEVENTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA.

Suleyman  the  son  of  Daood,  on  whom  be  peace  !93  And  the  contents
of  the  letter  were  as  follows : — Peace  from  the  King  Er-Rasheed,
strengthened  by  God  (who  hath  given  to  him  and  to  his  ancestors  the
rank  of  the  noble,  and  wide-spread  glory),  on  the  fortunate  Sultan.
To  proceed :  thy  letter  hath  reached  us,  and  we  rejoiced  at  it ;  and
we  have  sent  the  book  [entitled]  the  Delight  of  the  Intelligent,  and
the  Hare  Present  for  Friends;94  together  with  varieties  of  royal
rarities ;  therefore  do  us  the  favour  to  accept  them  :  and  peace  be  on
thee ! — Then  the  King  conferred  upon  me  abundant  presents,  and
treated  me  with  the  utmost  honour ;  so  I  prayed  for  him,  and  thanked
him  for  his  beneficence  ;  and  some  days  after  that,  I  begged  his  per-
mission to  depart ;  but  he  permitted  me  not  save  after  great  pressing.
Thereupon  I  took  leave  of  him,  and  went  forth  from  bis  city,  with
merchants  and  other  companions,  to  return  to  my  country,  without
any  desire  for  travel  or  commerce.

We  continued  our  voyage  until  we  had  passed  many  islands ;  but
in  the  midst  of  our  course  over  the  sea,  there  appeared  to  us  a  number
of  boats,  which  surrounded  us,  and  in  them  were  men  like  devils,
having,  in  their  hands,  swords  and  daggers,  and  equipped  with  coats
of  mail,  and  arms  and  bows.  They  smote  us,  and  wounded  and  slew
those  of  us  how  opposed  them,  and,  having  taken  the  ship  with  "its
contents,  conveyed  us  to  an  island,  where  they  sold  us  as  slaves,  for
the  smallest  price.  But  a  rich  man  purchased  me,  and  took  me  into
his  house,  fed  me  and  gave  me  to  drink,  and  clad  me  and  treated  me
in  a  friendly  manner.  So  my  soul  was  tranquillized,  and  I  rested  a
little.  Then,  one  day,  he  said  to  rr.e,  Dost  thou  not  know  any  art  or
trade  ?  I  answered  him,  O  my  lord,  I  am  a  merchant :  I  know
nothing  but  traffic.  And  he  said,  Dost  thou  know  the  art  of  shooting
with  the  bow  and  arrow  ? — Yes,  I  answered :  I  know  that.  And
thereupon  he  brought  me  a  bow  and  arrows,  and  mounted  me  behind
him  upon  an  elephant :  then  he  departed  at  the  close  of  night,  and,
conveying  me  among  some  great  trees,  came  to  a  lofty  and  firm  tree,
upon  which  he  made  me  climb ;  and  he  gave  me  the  bow  and  arrows,
saying  to  me,  Sit  here  now,  and  when  the  elephants  come  in  the  day-
time to  this  place,  shoot  at  them  with  the  arrows  i  perhaps  thou  wilt
strike  one  of  them  ;  and  if  one  of  them  fall,  come  to  me  and  inform
me.  He  then  left  me  and  departed ;  and  I  was  terrified  and  fright-
ened. I  remained  concealed  in  the  tree  until  the  sun  rose ;  when  the
elephants  came  forth  wandering  about  among  the  trees,  and  I  ceased
not  to  discharge  my  arrows  till  I  shot  one  of  them.  I  therefore  went


in  the  evening  to  my  master,  and  informed  him  ;  and  he  was  delighted
with  me,  and  treated  me  with  honour  ;  and  he  went  and  removed  the
slain  elephant.

lu  this  manner  I  continued,  every  day  shooting  one,  and  my
master  coming  and  removing  it,  until,  one  day,  I  was  sitting  in  the
tree,  concealed,  and  suddenly  elephants  innumerable  came  forth,  and
I  heard  the  sounds  of  their  roaring  and  growling,  which  were  such
that  I  imagined  the  earth  trembled  beneath  them.  They  all  sur-
rounded the  tree  in  which  I  was  sitting,  their  circuit  being  fifty  cubits,

111.  L


74  THE  SKVEXTH  VOYAGE  OF  ES-SIND1BAD  OF  THE  SEA

and  a  huge  elephant,  enormously  great,  advanced  and  came  to  the
tree,  and,  having  wound  his  trunk  around  it,  pulled  it  up  by  the
roots,  and  cast  it  upon  the  ground.  I  fell  down  senseless  among  the
elephants,  and  the  great  elephant,  approaching  me,  wound  his  trunk
around  me,  raised  me  on  his  back,  and  went  away  with  me,  the  other
elephants  accompanying.  And  he  ceased  not  to  proceed  with  me,
while  I  was  absent  from  the  world,  until  he  had  taken  me  into  a  place,
and  thrown  me  from  his  back,  when  he  departed,  and  the  other
elephants  followed  him.  So  I  rested  a  little,  and  my  terror  subsided ;
and  I  found  myself  among  the  bones  of  elephants.  I  knew  therefore
that  this  was  the  burial-place  of  the  elephants,  and  that  that  elephant
had  conducted  me  to  it  on  account  of  the  teeth.95

I  then  arose,  and  journeyed  a  day  and  a  night  until  I  arrived  at
the  house  of  my  master,  who  saw  me  changed  in  complexion  by  fright
and  hunger.  And  he  was  rejoiced  at  my  return,  and  said,  By  Allalb
thou  hast  pained  our  heart ;  for  I  went  and  found  the  tree  torn  up,
and  I  imagined  that  the  elephants  had  destroyed  thee.  Tell  me,
then,  how  it  happened  with  thee. — So  I  informed  him  of  that  which
had  befallen  me ;  whereat  he  wondered  greatly,  and  rejoiced ;  and  he
said  to  me,  Dost  thou  know  that  place  ?  I  answered,  Yes,  O  my
master.  And  he  took  me,  and  we  went  out,  mounted  on  an  elephant,
and  proceeded  until  we  came  to  that  place;  and  when  my  master
beheld  those  numerous  teeth,  he  rejoiced  greatly  at  the  sight  of  them  ;
and  he  carried  away  as  much  as  he  desired,  and  we  returned  to  the
house.  He  then  treated  me  with  increased  favour,  and  said  to  me,  O
my  son,  thou  hast  directed  us  to  a  means  of  very  great  gain.  May
God  then  recompense  thee  well !  Thou  art  freed  for  the  sake  of  God,
whose  name  be  exalted  !  These  elephants  used  to  destroy  many  of  us
on  account  of  [our  seeking]  these  teeth ;  but  God  hath  preserved  thee
from  them,  and  thou  hast  profited  us  by  these  teeth  to  which  thou
hast  directed  us. — I  replied,  0  my  master,  may  God  free  thy  neck
from  the  fire  [of  Hell]  !  And  I  request  of  thee,  O  my  master,  that
thou  give  me  permission  to  depart,  to  my  country. — Yes,  said  he :
thou  shall  have  that  permission  :  but  we  have  a  fair,  on  the  occasion
of  which  the  merchants  come  to  us  and  purchase  the  teeth  of  these
elephants  of  us.  The  time  of  the  fair  is  now  near  ;  and  when  they
have  come  to  us,  I  will  send  thee  with  them,  and  will  give  thee  what
will  convey  thee  to  thy  country. — -So  I  prayed  for  him  and  thanked
him  ;  and  I  remained  with  him  treated  with  respect  and  honour.

Then,  some  days  after  this,  the  merchants  came  as  he  had  said,


THE  CONCLUSION  OF  THK  STORY  OF  ES-SINDIBAD.  75

and  bought  and  sold  and  exchanged  ;  and  when  they  were  about  to
depart,  my  master  came  to  me,  and  said,  The  merchants  are  going :
therefore  arise  that  thou  mayest  depart  with  them  to  thy  country.
Accordingly  I  arose,  determined  to  go  with  them.  They  had  bought
a  great  quantity  of  those  teeth,  and  packed  up  their  loads,  and
embarked  them  in  the  ship;  and  my  master  sent  me  with  them.  He
paid  for  me  the  money  for  my  passage  in  the  ship,  together  with  all
that  was  required  of  me,  and  gave  me  a  large  quantity  of  goods.  And
we  pursued  our  voyage  from  island  to  island  until  we  bad  crossed  the
sea  and  landed  on  the  shore,  when  the  merchants  took  forth  what  was
with  them,  and  sold.  I  also  sold  what  I  had  at  an  excellent  rate ;
and  I  purchased  some  of  the  most  elegant  of  things  suited  for  presents,
and  beautiful  rarities,  with  every  thing  that  I  desired.  I  likewise
bought  for  myself  a  beast  to  ride,  and  we  went  forth,  and  crossed  the
deserts  from  country  to  country  until  I  arrived  at  Baghdad ;  when  I
went  in  to  the  Khaleefeh,  and,  having  given  the  salutation,  and  kissed
his  hand,  I  informed  him  of  what  had  happened  and  what  had
befallen  me ;  whereupon  he  rejoiced  at  my  safety,  and  thanked  God
(whose  name  be  exalted !)  ;  and  he  caused  my  story  to  be  written  in
letters  of  gold.  I  then  entered  my  house,  and  met  my  family  and  my
brethren. — This  is  the  end  of  the  history  of  the  events  that  happened
to  me  during  my  voyages;  and  praise  be  to  God,  the  One,  the
Creator,  the  Maker !


THE  CONCLUSION  OF  THE  STORY  OF  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  SEA
AND  ES-SINDIBAD  OF  THE  LAND.

And  when  Es-Sindibiid  of  the  Sea  had  finished  his  story,  he
ordered  his  servant  to  give  to  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Land  a  hundred
pieces  of  gold,  and  said  to  him,  How  now,  O  oiy  brother  ?  Hast
thou  heard  of  the  like  of  these  afflictions  and  calamities  and  distresses,
or  have  such  troubles  as  have  befallen  me  befallen  any  one  else,  or
hath  any  one  else  suffered  such  hardships  as  I  have  suffered  ?  Know
then  that  these  pleasures  are  a  compensation  for  the  toil  and  humilia-
tions that  I  have  experienced. — And  upon  this,  Es-Sindibad  of  the
Land  advanced,  and  kissed  his  hands,  and  said  to  him,  O  my  lord,  by
Allah,  thou  hast  undergone  great  horrors,  and  hast  deserved  these
abundant  favours  :  continue  then,  0  my  lord,  in  joy  and  security ;


76


THE  CONCLUSION  OF  THE  STORY  OF  ES-SINDIBAD.


for  God  hath  removed  from  thee  the  evils  of  fortune ;  and  I  beg  of
God  that  He  may  continue  to  thee  thy  pleasures,  and  hless  thy  days.
— And  upon  this,  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sea  bestowed  favours  upon  him,
and  made  him  his  boon -companion  ;  and  he  quitted  him  not  by  night
nor  by  day  as  long  as  they  both  lived.

Praise  be  to  God,  the  Mighty,  the  Omnipotent,  the  Strong,  the
Eminent  in  power,  the  Creator  of  the  heaven  and  the  earth,  arid  of
the  land  and  the  seas  ! 96


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTIETH.


NOTE  1.  Before  I  considered  the  composition  of  this  story,  it  appeared  to  me
utterly  incredible  that  one  person,  or  even  two  or  three,  could  have  composed  the
greater  portion  of  a  series  of  tales  so  numerous  and  so  varied  as  those  of  the  Thousand
and  One  Nights.  But  my  opinion  was  changed  when  I  found  that  nearly  every  one
of  the  most  wonderful  incidents  occurring  in  the  voyages  of  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sea  was
described  in  other  Arabic  works,  and  when  I  considered  that,  these  works  being  pro-
fessedly scientific,  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  entertain  the  slightest  suspicion  that
their  authors  borrowed  from  a  tale  of  fiction.  Thus  I  discovered  that  one  of  the  tales
which  seemed  to  have  required  in  its  composer  the  greatest  power  of  imagination  did
in  reality  require  very  little  of  this  faculty,  and  that  the  merit  of  the  composition  lay
not  so  much  in  the  matter,  as  in  the  manner.  I  obtained  also  a  confirmation  of  De
Sacy's  opinion  (which  some  learned  men  have  doubted),  that  the  story  of  the  voyages
of  Es-Sindibad  is  a  "  roman  vraiment  arabe  d'origine,"  and  not  "  the  Book  of  Es-
Sindibad  "  mentioned  in  the  passage  relating  to  the  Hezar  Afsaneh  in  the  Golden
Meadows  of  El-Mes'oodee.  May  not  most  of  the  tales  of  the  Thousand  and  One  Nights
have  been  composed  in  the  same  manner  as  the  one  which  I  now  endeavour  to  illus-
trate ?

Of  the  age  in  which  this  story  was  composed,  I  can  offer  no  certain  evidence ;  but  I
see  no  reason  to  think  it  older  than  most  of  the  tales  in  the  present  work.  It  is
evidently  founded  upon  the  exaggerated  reports  of  a  variety  of  travellers,  and  almost
all  these  reports  I  find  related  in  the  "  'Ajaib  el-Makhlookat "  of  El-Kazweenee  and
the  "  Khareedet  el-'Ajaib  "  of  lbn-El-Wardee.  The  former  author  flourished  in  the
latter  half  of  the  thirteenth  century,  and  the  latter  died  about  the  middle  of  the  four-
teenth. I  am  unable  to  discover  whether  the  "  travellers'  lies  "  here  alluded  to  have
been  recorded  by  earlier  writers ;  but  considering  the  popularity  of  the  two  works
above  mentioned,  I  think  it  probable  that  they  were  the  mines  from  which  the  author
of  the  voyages  of  Es-Sindilxid  of  the  Sea  drew  most  of  the  materials  for  the  composition,
of  this  tale.

M  r.  Hole's  ingenious  ;in<l  admirable  illustration*  <>t'  tlii>  storv,  which,  he  observes,


78  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTIETH.

"  may  be  not  unjustly  denominated  '  the  Arabian  Odyssey,'  ...  if  small  things  may
be  compared  with  great,''  are  well  known;  and  I  shall  often  avail  myself  of  them  in  the
present  series  of  notes ;  but  not  so  amply  as  I  should  have  done  had  I  not  traced
almost  all  the  marvels  of  the  tale  to  their  proper  Arabian  sources. — Here  I  must  also
mention  a  learned  and  instructive  article  on  the  Thousand  and  One  Nights  in  No.  17
of  the  Foreign  Quarterly  Review.  The  writer  of  that  article  (the  perusal  of  which
has  afforded  me  much  gratification l),  alluding  to  the  voyages  of  Es-Sindibad,  observes,
that  a  singular  poem,  which  has  escaped  the  notice  of  Hole,  contains  some  highly
curious  coincidences  with  these  voyages  and  with  some  other  portions  of  the  Arabian
Nights.  "They  tend  at  the  same  time,''  he  adds,  "to  prove  the  antiquity  of  these
particular  stories,  as  it  is  improbable  that  the  eastern  story-tellers  should  have  been
indebted  to  the  writer  of  a  German  metrical  romance  of  the  twelfth  century.  The
romance  alluded  to  is  Duke  Ernest  of  Bavaria.  It  was  composed  in  German  Rhyme
by  Henry  of  Veldeck,  who  flourished  about  1160 ;  and  a  Latin  poem  on  the  same
subject,  by  one  Odo,  appeared  about  the  same  time.  A  prose  version  of  the  outlines  of
the  story  is  still  popular  in  Germany.  In  this  singular  romance  we  find  the  aeronautic
excursion  in  the  second  voyage  of  Sindbad,  with  no  material  variation ;  the  pigmies
and  cranes  as  well  as  the  adventure  borrowed  from  the  Odyssey  in  the  third  voyage ;
and  the  subterraneous  voyage  in  the  sixth.  We  have  likewise  the  magnetic  mountain,
occurring  in  the  story  of  the  Third  Calender,  which  has  also  been  transplanted  into  the
miraculous  legend  of  the  Irish  Saint,  Braudanus." — It  will  be  seen,  however,  that  the
incidents  in  Es-Sindibad's  Voyages  here  alluded  to,  and  many  more,  occur  in  other
works;  and  I  think  it  may  be  reasonably  inferred,  that  they  were  subjects  of  common
report  in  the  East  long  before  they  were  introduced  into  the  present  collection.

In  the  translation,  I  have  occasionally  deviated  from  the  Cairo  edition,  following,
in  cases  which  will  be  pointed  out  in  the  notes,  the  Breslau  edition  of  the  Thousand
and  One  Nights,  the  Calcutta  edition  of  the  first  two  hundred  Nights,  and  an  edition
of  the  story  of  Es-Sindibad  in  the  original  Arabic  appended  by  the  learned  M.  Langles
to  Savary's  Grammaire  de  la  Langue  Arahe,  and  also  published  in  a  separate  form,
accompanied  by  a  faithful  version  in  French.  [I  have  carefully  compared  with
Mr.  Lane's  translation  and  notes  the  text  of  the  story  of  Es-Sindibad  in  the  complete
edition  of  the  Thousand  and  One  Nights  printed  at  Calcutta,  without,  however,  finding
various  readings  of  any  importance.  The  edition  referred  to  was  not  published  at  the
time  this  translation  was  made.  I  may  add  that  it  was  printed  from  an  Egyptian
MS.,  and  that  it  agrees  throughout,  substantially,  with  the  Cairo  edition.  But  the
style  is  inferior  to  that  of  the  latter .^ — ED.]

NOTE  2.  In  Langles'  edition,  and  the  Calcutta  edition  of  the  first  two  hundred
Nights,  the  porter  is  called  "  El-Hindibad."  The  etymology  of  this  name,  and  of
"  Es-Siudibad,"  I  must  leave  in  doubt.  If  the  former  be  the  name  by  which  the
author  of  the  tale  called  the  porter,  I  conclude  that  he  derived  the  two  names,
respectively,  from  "  El-Hind  "  and  "  Es-Sind ,"  the  former  of  which  is  the  appellation
of  the  main  portion  of  India ;  and  the  latter,  that  of  Western  India.  "  Es-Sindibud  "
is  a  name  which  not  unfrequently  occurs  in  Arabian  tales.

NOTE  3. See  Note  30  to  the  Introduction,  and  Note  1  to  Chapter  5.x.

NOTE  4. See  Note  19  to  Chapter  xviii.

NOTE  5. The  "  keerawan,"  more  commonly,  and  I  believe  more  properly,  called


1  I  must  say  the  same  of  a  very  able  article  in  former  subject,  I  have  incurred  the  very  imputa-

No.  &i  of  the  London  and  Westminster  Review  ;  tion  which  I  desired,  by  that  silence,  to  avoid,

as  the  writer  has  reproved  me  for  not  noticing  at  Some  of  the  objections  I  cannot  conveniently  and

all  the  encouragements  of  my  critics,  and  not  suf-  fully  remark  upon  until  the  completion  of  my

fidently  their  objections. By  my  silence  on  the  work.


"  karawan,"  Is  the  stone-curlew,  or  eharadrius  cedicnemus  of  Linnaeus.  The  following
extract  from  the  Encyclopaedia  Britannica,  art.  "  Charadrius,"  appears  to  be  a  good
account  of  this  bird.  "  Hasselquist  informs  us,  that  this  bird  is  also  met  with  in
Lower  Egypt,  in  the  acacia  groves,  near  the  villages  of  Abusir  [Aboo-Seer]  and
Saekhara  [Sakkarah],  near  the  sepulchres  of  the  ancient  Egyptians,  and  in  the  deserts.
The  Arabians  call  it  Kervan  [karawan].  It  has  a  shrill  voice,  somewhat  resembling
that  of  the  black  woodpecker,  which  it  raises  and  lowers  successively,  uttering  agree-
able notes.  The  Turks  and  Egyptians  value  it  much,  if  they  can  get  it  alive ;  and
keep  it  in  a  cage  for  the  sake  of  its  singing.  Its  flesh  is  hard,  and  of  a  very  good  taste,
inclined  to  aromatic.  'It  is  a  very  voracious  bird,  catching  and  devouring  rats  and
mice,  which  abound  in  Egypt.  It  seldom  drinks ;  and  when  taken  young,  and  kept  in
a  cage  in  Egypt,  they  give  it  no  water  for  several  months,  but  feed  it  with  fresh  meat
macerated  in  water,  which  it  devours  very  greedily.  It  is  found  in  deserts,  and  is
therefore  accustomed  to  be  without  water."

NOTE  6. In  the  latter  hemistich  of  this  verse  I  follow  the  Breslau  edition.

NOTE  7.  "  The  day  of  death  is  better  than  the  day  of  birth,  because  nothing  is
wanted  after  the  day  of  death,  and  the  contrary  is  the  case  with  respect  to  the  day  ot
birth.  And  a  living  dog  is  better  than  a  dead  lion,  because  the  uses  of  the  lion  end
with  his  death  :  so  the  living  dog  is  better  than  he,  because  advantage  may  be  hoped
for  from  him.  And  the  grave  that  hideth  the  poor  man  is  better  than  the  palace,  in
which  a  man  is  in  want."  (Marginal  note  by  my  sheykh.) — The  first  saying  is  from
Ecclesiastes,  ch.  vii.  v.  1 ;  and  the  second,  from  the  same  book,  ch.  ix.  v.  4..  The  third
saying,  in  Langles'  edition,  and  in  the  Calcutta  edition  of  the  first  two  hundred  Nights,
is,  "  the  grave  is  better  than  poverty :"  but  I  do  not  know  any  saying  of  Solomon  in
the  Bible  agreeing  with  either  reading.

NOTE  8. — The  Fish  mistaken  for  an  Island.  The  origin  of  this  first  marvel  related
by  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sea  I  find  in  El-Kazweenee's  "  'Aja'ib  el-M  akhlookat."  In  his
account  of  animals  of  the  water,  he  says,  "The  tortoise  ('sulahfah,'  also  written
'sulahfa,'  &c.,)  is  a  sea  and  land  animal.  As  to  the  sea-tortoise,  it  is  very  enormous,
so  that  the  people  of  the  ship  imagine  that  it  is  an  island.  One  of  the  merchants  hath
related,  saying,  '  We  found  in  the  sea  an  island  elevated  above  the  water,  having  upon
it  green  plants ;  and  we  went  forth  to  it,  and  dug  [holes  for  fire]  to  cook  ;  whereupon
the  island  moved,  and  the  sailors  said,  Come  ye  to  your  place ;  for  it  is  a  tortoise,  and
the  heat  of  the  fire  hath  hurt  it ;  lest  it  carry  you  away  ! — By  reason  of  the  enormity
of  its  body,'  saith  he,  [i.  e.  the  narrator  above  mentioned,]  '  it  was  as  though  it  were
an  island  ;  and  earth  collected  upon  its  back  in  the  length  of  time,  so  that  it  became
like  land,  and  produced  plants.'  "

Though  the  above  is  so  apposite,  I  am  tempted  to  copy  from  Hole's  work  (pages  22


80  NOTES  TO  CHAPTKK  TWENTIETH.

and  23)  tin?  following  quotation  from  Milton,  who  mentions  the  Leviathan  as  "  that

sea-beast  "

-  .  --  which  God  of  all  his  works
Created  hugest  that  swim  the  ocean  flood.
Him  haply  slumbering  on  the  Norway  foam,
The  pilot  of  some  small  night-foundered  skiff,
Deemin some  island,  oft,  as  seamen  tell,
With  fixed  anchor  in  his  scaly  rind,
Moors  by  his  side."


and  another  (in  pages  253  and  254}  from  Olaus  Magnus  :  —

"  Habet  etiam  Cetus  super  corium  suum  superficiem  tanquam  sabulmn  quod  est
juxta  littns  maris  :  unde  plerumque  elevato  dorso  suo  super  nndas  a  navigantibus  nihil
aliud  creditur  esse  quam  insula.  Itaque  nautse  ad  ilium  appellunt  et  super  eum
descendunt,  inque  ipsum  palos  figunt,  naves  alligant,  focos  pro  cibis  coquendis  accen-
dunt  :  donee  tandem  cetus  sentiens  ignem  sese  in  profundum  mergat,  atque  in  ejus
dorso  manentes,  nisi  funibus  a  navi  protesis  se  liberare  queant,  submergantur."
(L.  xxi.  c.  25.)

Pliny,  as  Hole  suggests,  may  have  been  "  the  general  source  of  these  sea-monsters."

NOTE  9.  Thus  this  title  is  pronounced  and  written  by  the  Arabs.  Tn  my  original,
and  in  the  Breslau  edition,  it  is  written  "  El-Mahrajan."  It  is  a  corruption  of  the
Indian  title  '•  Maha  Raja,"  or  "  Great  King."  The  situation  of  the  kingdom  of  the
Mihraj  will  presently  be  considered.

NOTE  10.  —  On  the  Sea-Horse.  Here  I  have  abridged  a  little.  —  "  The  Water-  Horse,"
says  El-Kazweenee,  in  his  account  of  animals  of  the  water,  "  is  like  the  land-horse,  save
that  he  is  larger  in  the  mane  and  tail,  and  more  handsome  in  colour  ;  and  his  hoof  is
cloven,  like  the  hoof  of  the  wild  ox  (bakar  el-wahsh,  a  species  of  bovine  antelope),  and
his  size  is  smaller  than  that  of  the  land-horse,  but  larger  than  that  of  the  ass,  by  a
little."  He  adds  that  sometimes  a  foal  is  produced  having  a  water-horse  for  its  sire  and
a  land-mare  for  its  dam,  and  that  it  is  of  extreme  excellence  and  beauty  ;  and  he
mentions  «an  instance  (similar  to  what  is  related  in  the  Thousand  and  One  Nights)  :
the  water-horse,  in  this  case,  was  black,  with  white  spots  like  pieces  of  silver.  He  also
states  that  it  is  found  in  the  Nile  ;  and  it  is  evident  from  this  that  the  well-known
hippopotamus  is  the  animal  thus  incorrectly  described,  and  which  has  suggested  the
fable  here  related.

NOTE  11. Here  again  I  abridge  a  little.

NOTE  12.  —  On  the  Island  of  the  Mihraj,  and  some  other  Islands  in  the  Seas  of  China
and  India.  I  shall  here  endeavour  to  determine  the  positions  of  several  islands  in  the
Seas  of  China  and  India,  including,  among  these  islands,  that  of  the  Mihraj.  After
having  commenced  with  one  of  which  the  position  is  most  easily  ascertained,  I  shall
pass  on  to  others  which  are  mentioned  in  the  story  that  I  am  illustrating,  and  on  sub-
sequent occasions  I  shall  refer  the  reader  to  this  note.

In  the  "  Accounts  of  India  and  China  by  two  Mohammadan  Travellers  in  the  ninth
Century,"  we  are  told  (in  page  3  of  the  English  translation)  that  among  the  islands  of
the  Sea  of  [E1-]  Harkend  [a  name  given  both  to  the  Sea  of  China  and  to  a  part  of  that
of  India],  towards  Sarendeeb  [or  Ceylon],  one  "is  called  Ramni,  and  is  under  several
princes;  being  eight  or  nine  hundred  leagues  in  dimension.  ("Afterwards,  in  page  61,
this  island  is  mentioned  by  the  name  of  Rahmi,  and  is  said  to  be  eight  hundred  leagues
in  compass.]  Here,"  it  is  added,  "  are  gold-mines,  and  particularly  those  called  Fansur
(or  Fanfur  ?)  ;  as  also  an  excellent  sort  of  Camphire."  —  It  appears  hence,  beyond  a
doubt,  that  the  island  called  by  the  Arab  geographers  "  Raminee,"  "  Ramin,"'
"  Ramee,"  &c.,  is  Sumatra,  the  Java  Minor  of  Marco  Polo,  described  by  him  'book  iii.
ch.  16,)  as  two  thousand  miles  in  circuit  (which  appears  to  be  near  the  truth),  and  as


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTIETH.  81

containing  eight  kingdoms,  governed  by  so  many  kings;  one  of  which  kingdoms  is
called  by  him  Fansur,  or  Fanfur,*  and  said  to  contain  the  best  kind  of  camphor,  much
superior  in  quality  to  any  other.  This  kingdom,  and  five  of  the  others,  Marco  Polo
visited  ;  and  he  remained  in  one  of  the  ports  of  the  island  five  months :  his  authority
therefore,  which  is  in  general  good,  is  in  this  case  especially  so. — El-Kazweenee  says
that  in  the  island  of  Ramin,3  in  the  Sea  of  China,  are  a  naked  people,  whose  language
is  not  understood :  for  it  is  like  whistling.  He  adds  that  they  shun  mankind,  that  the
height  of  one  of  them  is  four  spans,  that  on  their  faces  is  red  downy  hair,  and  that  they
climb  up  trees ;  and  he  states  that  in  it  are  the  camphor-tree,  brasil-wood,  and  the
Indian  cane,  and  likewise  the  rhinoceros,  and  buffaloes  without  tails.

The  next  island  of  which  I  shall  consider  the  position  is  that  which  is  called  in  the
works  of  the  Arab  geographers  "  Zanij,"  "  Zalij,"  "  Zabij,"  "  Ranij."4  "  Ralij,"  "  Raij,"
"  Ranch,"  &c.  The  name  of  this  island,  which  name  is  also  employed  to  include  some
other  islands  dependant  on  the  principle  one,  is  written  in  the  "  Accounts  of-  India  and
China,"  above  quoted,  "  Zabage  "  (page  10),  and  "  Zapage  "  (page  60),  in  both  places
probably  for  "Zabij."  In  the  latter  place  we  are  informed,  that  "the  province  of
Zapage  is  opposite  to  China,  and  a  month's  sail  distant  therefrom  by  sea,  or  less,  if  the
wind  be  fair.  The  King  of  this  country,"  it  is  added, "  is  called  Mehrage,  and  they  say
it  is  nine  hundred  leagues  in  circumference,  and  that  this  King  is  master  of  many
islands  which  lie  round  about ;  thus  this  kingdom  is  above  a  thousand  leagues  in
extent.  Among  these  islands  there  is  one  called  Serbeza,  which  is  said  to  be  four
hundred  leagues  in  circuit,  [nearly  the  circuit  of  Java,*]  and  that  also  of  Rahmi "
[above  indentified  with  Sumatra]. — From  these  descriptions  of  the  size  of  the  great
Island  of  the  Mihraj,  and  its  situation  with  respect  to  China  and  Sumatra,  it  seems
evident  to  me  that  it  can  be  no  other  island  then  Borneo,  as  Sir  .William  Jones  and
others  have  supposed.  El-Kazweenee  says  that  the  King  of  the  Island  of  Ray  (or
Zabij  &c.)  is  called  El-Mihraj ;  that  in  this  island  is  a  mountain  where  are  huge
serpents,  some  of  which  will  swallow  the  elephant ;  and  that  it  contains  also  the
camphor-tree,  which  is  of  enormous  size.  El-Kazweenee  describes  this  island  as  "on
the  confines  of  China,  the  furthest  of  the  countries  of  India."

"  In  this  same  kingdom  [I  continue  the  extract  from  the  'Accounts  of  India  and
China  *  begun  in  the  preceding  paragraph]  is  the  Island  of  Cala,  which  is  in  the  mid-
passage  between  China  and  the  country  of  the  Arabs.  This  island,  they  say,  is  four-
score leagues  in  circumference;  and  hither  they  bring  all  sorts  of  merchandise,
wood-aloes  of  several  sorts,  camphire,  sandal-wood,  ivory,  the  lead  called  Cabahi,  ebony,
red-wood,  every  kind  of  spice,  and  many  other  things  too  tedious  to  enumerate.  At
present  the  commerce  is  most  usually  carried  on  from  Oman  ['Oman]  to  this  island,
and  from  this  island  to  Oman."  (Page  61.)  In  my  MS.  of  Ibn-El-Wardee,  this  island
is  called  •'  Kulleh."  This  geographer  describes  it  as  in  the  "  Sea  of  India  "  (a  very
vague  appellation),  and  says,  "It  ia  a  great  island :  in  it  are  trees  and  rivers  and
fruits.  A  King  of  the  sons  of  Jabeh  the  Indian  dwelleth  in  it ;  and  in  it  are  mines  of
tin,  and  camphor-trees,6  one  tree  of  which  shadeth  a  hundred  men,  and  more :  in  it


2  Sec  Marsden,  note  1229.  this  island  may  have  had  another  name,  like  that

3  In  my  MS.  of  Ibn-El-Wardee  (who  says  that  of  the  Mihraj . "  In  the  Island  of  Jabeh,"  says  El-
it  is  seven  hundred  leagues  long),  "  Raminee."  By  Kazweenee,  "  is  a  mountain  whereon  is  seen  a
El-Idreesee  it  is  called  "  the  Island  of  Er-Ramee."'  great  fire  by  night  from  afar,  and  by  day,  a  smoke :
In  quoting  from  the  latter  writer,  I  make  use  of  none  can  approach  it [In  Java  are  thirty-eight
Jaubort's  translation.  volcanoes.] In  it  also  are  aloes-wood  and  the

4  This  word,  in  Arabic,  signifies  the  cocoa-nut.  banana  and  the  cocoa-nut  and  the  sugar-cane.  Ita

5  It  seems  probable  that  to  this  island  apply  inhabitants  are  a  tawny  people,  in  the  form  of
more  than  one  uame,  and  perhaps  that  of  "  Jdbeh,"  men,  save  that  their  faces  are  in  their  bosoms.''
ii)  the  works  of  the  Arab  geographers. "  Jdbeh  "  6  I  doubt  the  truth  of  this. It  has  been  said
was  the  title  of  the  King  of  the  Island  of  Jabeh  above  that  camphor  was  among  the  articles  brought
(as  will  be  seen  in  the  next  paragraph) :  therefore  to  this  island.

III.  M


82  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTIETH.

also  is  the  Indian  cane ;  and  among  its  wonders  are  such  things  that  the  describer  of
them  would  incur  disbelief."  El-Idreesee  (1st  Climate,  9th  Section,)  describes  this
island,  mentions  the  same  particulars,  and  gives  an  account  of  the  mode  of  obtaining
the  camphor  similar  to  that  in  Es-Sindibad's  Second  Voyage.  He  adds,  that  in  the
neighbourhood  of  the  said  island  are  those  of  Jabeh,  Selahit,  and  Hereej  ;  each  about
two  leagues  from  another ;  and  states  that  they  all  obey  the  same  King,  named  Jabeh.
—From  these  notices  of  situation,  size,  and  the  existence  of  tin-mines,  I  am  induced  to
think  that  this  island  is  the  one  called  in  our  maps  Banco.,  the  rich  tin-mines  of  which
are  well  known  ;7  though  Renaudot  places  it  near  the  point  of  Malabar,  and  does  not
consider  it  as  an  island.  From  page  1 5  of  the  English  translation  of  his  Remarks  on  the
"  Accounts,"  it  appears  that  in  page  10  of  the  latter,  "  Calabar  "  is  put  for  the  name
which  in  the  extract  at  the  commencement  of  this  paragraph  is  written  "  Cala."  Now
in  this  page  of  the  "  Accounts,"  the  place  thus  named  is  said  to  have  been  dependant
on  "  the  Kingdom  of  Zabage."  That  a  tract  near  the  point  of  Malabar  should  be  so  is
extremely  improbable ;  and  it  is  afterwards  said,  as  I  have  shewn  above,  that  it  was  in
that  Kingdom.  It  is  stated  in  the  same  work  (page  9),  that  from  Mascat  (or  Maskat)
to  Kaucammali,  in  the  course  to  China,  is  a  month's  sail,  with  the  wind  aft.  [The  name
of  the  latter  place  is  written  by  El-Idreesee  (2nd  Climate,  7th  Section,)  "  Koolam
Melee."  It  is  evidently  the  Koulaui  of  Marco  Polo  (who  says  that  it  was  a  resort  of
Arabian  and  Manji,  or  Southern  Chinese,  merchants),  and  the  Coulan  of  our  maps,  in
Malabar,  or  Malayala,  nearly  ninety  British  miles  from  Cape  Comorin.]  Hero  the
Arabs,  we  are  told,  in  the  voyage  to  China,  took  in  water :  then  they  entered  the  sea
of  El-Harkend,  and  having  sailed  across  it,  they  touched  at  Lajabalus  [before  called
(in  page  4)  "Najabalus"  (supposed  to  be  the  Nicobar  Islands)],  and,  after  about  a
month's  voyage  from  Kaukam  [»'.  e.  Koulam],  arrived  at  Cala  [in  the  translation
Calabar].  It  is  added,  that  from  this  place  to  one  called  Betuma  is  ten  days,  in  the
course  to  China ;  that  ten  days  further  in  the  same  course  is  Kadrange ;  ten  days  fur-
ther, Senef  [or  Sanf],  whence  "  conies  the  aromatic  wood  we  call  Hud  al  Senefi  "  [el
'ood  es-Sanfee] ;  ten  days  further,  Sandarfulat ;  and  a  month  further,  China :  alto-
gether, from  the  place  in  question  to  "  Canfu  "  [or  "  Khanfoo,"  also  written  by  Arab
geographers  "  Khankoo,"  supposed  to  be  "  Kuang-cheu-fu,"  called  by  us  "  Canton  "],
the  chief  port  of  China,  two  months  and  ten  days.  The  latter  part  of  the  voyage,  it
appears,  was  tedious :  it  was  probably  circuitous,  for  the  sake  of  traffic ;  and  eight
whole  days  were  consumed  in  clearing  some  rocks  and  shoals  called  the  Gates  of  China.
I  next  consider  the  position  of  Sauf.  Its  distance  from  the  supposed  Canton  haa
been  stated  above,  as  one  month  and  ten  days.  El-Idreesee  (2nd  Climate,  9th  Section,)
calls  it  a  Chinese  island,  or  peninsula  (the  term  generally  rendered  "  island  "  is  very
vague),  and  afterwards  (1st  Climate,  10th  Section.)  he  makes  it  only  fourteen  days  from
Khankoo  (or  Canton?);  but  his  authority  I  think  of  much  less  weight  than  that
before  cited.  He  states  also,  that  from  Sanf  to  Melay  or  Malay  was  a  voyage  of
twelve  days,  among  islands  and  rocks. — These  indications  of  its  position,  and  the  asser-
tion of  El-Idreesee  (1st  Climate,  9th  Section,)  and  others,  that  it  produces  the  best
kind  of  aloes-wood,  lead  me  to  conclude  that  it  is  the  tract  called  in  our  maps  Tsiampa.
Mr.  Marsden  has  shewn  (in  note  1172  to  his  translation  of  Marco  Polo)  that  the  best
kind  of  aloes- wood  is  that  of  the  mountains  of  Tsiampa,  on  the  south  of  Cochinchina,
about  the  13th  degree  of  north  latitude.  This  is  called  Kalambak  and  Kalambak.
The  resemblance  of  the  names  "  Tsiampa  "  and  "  Sanf  "  I  also  think  of  some  weight ;
especially  as  the  Arabs,  having  no  p,  substitute,  for  that  letter,  f  or  b. — The  author  of
the  Kamoos  says,  that  the  Sanfee  aloes-wood  (or  aloes-wood  of  Sanf)  is  inferior  to  the


7  Since  the  above  was  written,  I  have  been  gra-  name  given  to  this  island  by  the  Arabs  may  be  a

tified  by  finding  that  Langles,  in  a  note  on  a  corruption  of  the  Malay  word  "  kelang,"  signify-

passage  in  the  Fourth  Voyaga,  has  expressed  the  ing  '•  tin."
same  opinion. He  has  also  observed,  that  the


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTIETH.  83

Kamaree;  but  the  contrary  statement,  being  more  fully  expressed,  I  think  more
entitled  to  credit.

The  position  of  Kamar,8  which  produced  the  Kamaree  aloes-wood,  is  more  difficult
to  determine.  In  the  "  Accounts  of  India  and  China,"  which  mention  its  aloes-wood,
the  island  (or  peninsula)  of  Kamar  9  is  said  (in  page  64)  to  be  divided  from  the  king-
dom of  the  Mihraj  (or  Borneo)  "  by  a  passage  of  ten  or  twenty  days'  sail,  with  a  very
easy  gale."  This  will  by  no  means  allow  us  to  identity  it  with  Cape  Comorin,  as  some
European  writers  have  done.  El-Idreesee  says  (1st  Climate,  9th  Section),  that  it  is
near  Sanf,  separated  only  by  three  miles ;  but  perhaps  "  miles  "  may  be  a  mistake  for
"  days."  I  can  only  conjecture  that  it  is  either  a  part  of  the  Malayan  peninsula,  or  on
the  opposite  side  of  the  Gulf  of  Siam,  adjacent  to  Tsiampa.

I  now  revert  to  the  Mihraj  and  his  Island,  which  is  described  in  the  "  Accounts  of
India  and  China"  (page  61)  as  "extremely  fertile,  and  so  very  populous  that  the
towns  almost  crowd  one  upon  the  other."  In  the  next  page  it  is  said  that  the  palace
of  a  former  Mihraj  was  "  still  to  be  seen,"  in  the  time  of  the  author,  "  on  a  river  as
broad  as  the  Tigris  at  Baghdad  or  at  El-Basrah."  And  it  is  added,  "  The  sea  inter-
cepts the  course  of  its  waters,  and  sends  them  back  again  with  the  tide  of  flood ;  and
during  the  tide  of  ebb,  it  streams  out  fresh  water  a  good  way  into  the  sea.  This
river  is  let  into  a  small  pond  close  to  the  King's  palace,  and  every  morning  the  officer
who  has  charge  of  his  household  brings  an  ingot  of  gold  wrought  in  a  particular
manner,  which  is  unknown,  and  throws  it  into  the  pond  in  the  presence  of  the  King.
The  tide  rising  with  the  flood  covers  it  with  many  others,  its  fellows,  and  quite  con-
ceals it  from  sight ;  but  low  water  discovers  them,  and  they  appear  plain  by  the  beams
of  the  sun.  The  King  comes  to  view  them  at  the  same  time  that  he  repairs  to  an
apartment  of  state  which  looks  upon  this  pond.  This  custom  is  very  scrupulously
observed,  and  thus  they  every  day  throw  an  ingot  of  gold  into  this  pond,  as  long  as
the  King  lives,  nor  touch  the  same  upon  any  account.  When  the  King  dies,  his  suc-
cessor causes  them  all  to  be  taken  out,  and  not  one  of  them  is  ever  missed.  They
count  them,  and  melt  them  down,  and  this  done,  the  sums  provening  from  this  great
quantity  of  gold  are  distributed  to  those  of  the  royal  household,  to  the  men,  to  the
women,  and  to  the  children,  to  the  superior  and  to  the  inferior  officers,  each  receiving
a  part,  in  proportion  to  the  rank  he  bears,  and  according  to  the  order  established
among  them  for  this  distribution  ;  and  the  surplus  is  given  away  to  the  poor,  and  to
the  infirm.  Then  they  reckon  up  the  number  of  ingots,  and  what  they  weigh,  and  say,
Such  a  one  reigned  so  many  years,  for  he  left  so  many  ingots  of  gold  in  the  pond  of
the  Kings,  and  they  were  distributed,  after  his  death,  to  the  people  of  his  kingdom.
It  is  a  glory,  with  them,  to  have  reigned  a  long  while,  and  to  have  thus  multiplied  the
number  of  these  ingots,  to  be  given  away  at  their  death." — Nearly  the  same  account
is  given  in  other  Arabic  works. — "  The  hospitality  power,  and  magnificence,  of  the
King  of  Borneo.  Raia  Siripada,  is  mentioned  by  Pigafetta  (Purchas's  Pilg  v.  i.  b.  2.),
Magellan's  fellow-traveller,  and  the  first  literary  circumnavigator.  He  reigned,  it  is
said,  over  many  other  kings,  islands,  and  cities,  and  that  which  was  his  place  of  resi-
dence contained  25,000  houses,  Maximilian  of  Transylvania,  who  gives  an  account  of
the  same  voyage,  enlarges  on  these  circumstances  ;  but  adds,  equi  perexigui  et  exiles
sunt.'  We  are  not  to  wonder,  therefore,  that  the  monarch  in  the  text  was  so  desirous
of  improving  the  diminutive  race."  10

NOTE  13.  The  "  Shakireeyeh,"  called  in  the  Breslau  edition  'Sekaribeh, '  and
by  El-Idreesee  "  Sakireeyeh,''  are  evidently  the  "  Kshatriyas,"  the  second  caste  of  the
Hindoos.  By  El-Idreesee,  as  well  as  in  the  Thousand  and  One  Nights,  they  are  called


8  I  write  the  name  thus  on  the  authority  of  the  "  Written in the translation of that work

Kimoos.  "  Koinar."

10  Hole,  pp.  3H  and  33.


84  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTIETH.

the  first  caste.  He  says  (1st  Climate,  10th  Section),  "  They  are  the  most  noble :  it  is
from  among  them,  only,  that  the  Kings  are  chosen  [which  is  true].  All  the  others,''
he  adds,  "  prostrate  themselves  before  them ;  but  they  do  not  prostrate  themselves
before  any  others."

NOTE  14.  This  idea  of  the  Brahmans  I  suppose  to  be  derived  from  the  music  and
dances  at  relfgious  ceremonies.

NOTE  15.  So  in  the  Breslau  edition.  In  the  Cairo  edition,  "Jews"  (Yahood),
which  is  clearly  a  mistake.

NOTE  16.  In  the  Breslau  edition,  "forty -two  sects."  So  also  says  El-Idreesee.
[This  refers  probably  to  the  inferior  castes  formed  by  intermarriages  between  members
of  the  principal  castes. — ED.]

NOTE  17.  Thus  written  in  the  Breslau  edition,  the  Calcutta  edition  of  the  first
two  hundred  Nights,  and  in  Langles'  edition  :  in  the  edition  of  Cairo,  "  Kabil."  It  is
evidently  the  island  called  by  El-Kazweenee  that  of  "  Bartail."  He  describes  it  as  in
the  Sea  of  India,  and  near  to  the  Islands  of  Ez-Zenj  (evidently  a  mistake  for  Zanij,  i.  e.
Borneo),  and  says,  on  the  authority  of  Ibn-El-Fakeeh,  "  There  are  in  it  a  people
whose  faces  are  like  the  shields  made  of  coats  of  leather,  and  their  hair  is  like  the
tails  of  pack-horses ;  and  in  it  is  the  rhinoceros.  In  it  also  are  mountains  whence
are  heard  by  night  the  sounds  of  the  drum  and  tambourine,  and  disturbing  cries,  and
disagreeable  laughter,  and  the  sailors  say  that  Ed-Dejjal11  is  in  it,  and  that  he  will
come  forth  from  it.  In  this  island,  moreover,  cloves  are  sold,  and  in  this  manner.
The  merchants  land  there,  and  put  their  goods  and  commodities  upon  the  shore,  and,
having  returned  to  their  ships,  pass  the  night  in  them.  Then,  when  they  arise  in  the
morning  they  come  to  their  commodities,  and  find  by  the  side  of  each  lot  of  goods  a
quantity  of  cloves.  If  the  owner  of  the  goods  approve  of  this,  he  taketh  it,  and  leaveth
the  goods ;  but  if  he  take  the  goods  and  the  cloves,  the  ship  cannot  depart  until  the
taker  of  the  goods  restoreth  them  to  their  place.  And  if  any  one  desire  an  addition,
he  leaveth  the  goods  and  the  cloves,  and  an  addition  to  these  is  made  for  him.  One  of
the  merchants  hath  related,  that  he  went  up  into  this  island,  and  saw  there  a  people
beardless,  of  yellow  complexion,  whose  faces  were  like  the  faces  of  the  Turks,  and  their
ears  were  perforated,  and  their  hair  was  like  that  of  women.  They  disappeared  from
his  sight,  and  the  merchants  after  that  continued  a  long  time  frequenting  the  shore  ;
but  no  cloves  were  brought  out  to  them ;  so  they  knew  that  this  was  on  account  of
their  looking  at  them.  Then,  after  some  years,  they  resumed  their  former  habit.'1 —
Cloves,  it  should  be  observed,  grow  only  within  the  tropics .  but  they  are  not  the
growth  of  either  Borneo  or  Java.  (See  Marsden,  M.  Polo,  p.  591.)  The  Island  of
Bartail  or  Kasil  I  suppose  to  have  been  not  far  from  Borneo.  Hole  suggests  (p.  38  ,
that  the  roaring  of  the  waves  amidst  its  hollow  rocks  might,  not  improbably,  have  re-
sembled the  sound  of  drums ;  and  afterwards  (page  41  >  he  remarks,  "Bartholomew
Leonardo  de  Argensola,  a  learned  divine,  employed  by  the  president  and  council  of  the


11  Of  Ed-Dejjal,  also  called  El-Meseeh  ed-Dejjal  ass;  that  he  will  be  followed  by  70,000  Jews  of

(the  False,  or  Lying,  Christ),  the  Antichrist  of  the  Ispahan,  and  continue  on earth  forty  days, of

Muslims,  the  following  is  Sale's  account. "  He  is  which  one  will  be  equal  in  length  to  a  year,  another

to  be  one-eyed,  and  marked  on  the  forehead  with  to  a  month,  another  to  a  week,  and  the  rest  will

the  letters  C.  [or  K.]  V.  R ,  signifying  Cafir  [or  be  common  days .  that  he  is  to  lay  waste  all  places,

Kafir],  or  Infidel. They  say  that  the  Jews  give  but  will  not  enter  Mekkeh  or  El-Medeeneh,  which

him  the  name  of '  Messiah  Hen  David,'  and  pre-  are  to  be  guarded  by  angels  •  and  that  at  length

tend  he  is  to  come  in  the  last  days,  and  to  be  lord  he  will  be  slain  by  Jesus  who  is  to  encounter  him

both  of  land  and  sea,  and  that  he  will  restore  the  at  the  gate  of  Lud. It  is  said  that  Mohammad

kingdom  to  them. According  to  the  traditions  of  foretold  several  Antichrists, to  the  number  of

Mohammad,  he  is  to  appear  first  between  El-'Erak  about  thirty; but  one  of  greater  note  than  the

and  Syria,  or  according  to  other?,  In  the  province  rest."— Preliminary Discourse, Section  iv.— See

of  Khurasan ;  they  add  that  he  is  to  ride  on  an  also  Hole,  page  35.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTIETH.  85

Indies  to  write  a  history  of  the  discovery  and  conquest  of  the  Moluccas,  observes,  that
near  Banda  is  '  a  desert  and  uninhabited  island,  called  Poelsetton,  infamous  for  stronger
reasons  than  the  Acroceraunian  rocks.  There  are  cries,  whistles,  and  roarings,  in  it  at
all  times,  and  dreadful  apparitions  are  seen,  &c. ;  and  long  experience  has  shewn  that
it  is  inhabited  by  Devils.' 12  "  May  it  not  be  reasonably  suspected,"  he  adds,  "  that  this
is  the  same  island  as  Kasil ;  and  that  the  Spanish  writer,  like  the  Arabian,  appropriated
to  the  superstition  of  his  own  country  a  traditional  report  of  India  ?" — I  think  the
reader  must  answer,  •'  Yes."

NOTE  18.  Thus  in  the  Calcutta  edition  of  the  first  two  hundred  Nights,  and  in
Langles'  edition  :  in  the  Cairo  edition,  instead  of  the  words  "  that  Ed-Dejjal  is  in  it,"  we
read,  "  that  they  [the  inhabitants]  are  a  people  of  industry  and  good  judgment." — Neces-
sary illustrations  of  this  passage  have  been  given  in  the  note  immediately  preceding.

NOTE  19.  The  words  "and  the  fishermen  fear  it,"  &c.,  are  inserted  on  the
authority  of  the  Calcutta  edition  of  the  first  two  hundred  Nights  and  Langles'  edition.
El-Kazweenee  says,  "  In  the  Sea  of  China  is  a  fish  more  than  three  hundred  cubits
long :  fear  is  entertained  for  the  ship  on  account  of  it ;  and  it  is  found  by  the  island  of
\Vak-VVak ; 13  and  when  the  people  know  of  its  passing  by,  they  call  out,  and  beat  with
vvood,  that  it  may  flee  away  at  their  noises  :  when  it  raiseth  its  fin,  it  is  like  an  enor-
mous sail."  The  same  writer  also,  and  Ibn-El-Wardee,  say,  that  in  the  Sea  of  El-
Kulzum  is  an  enormous  fish,  that  beateth  the  ship  with  its  tail,  and  sinketh  it :  its
length  is  about  two  hundred  cubits.  [El-Idreesee  (1st  Climate,  8th  Section,)  describes
a  somewhat  similar  creature  in  the  Sea  of  China,  about  one  hundred  cubits  long;
and  mentions  the  same  mode  of  driving  it  away.  He  says  that  it  is  called  the
Gheydeh.— ED.]

NOTE  20.  The  two  authors  just  cited  state,  that  in  the  Sea  of  El-Kulzum  is  also
a  fish  a  cubit  long,  the  body  of  which  is  like  that  of  a  fish,  and  its  face  like  the  face  of
the  owl.

NOTE  21. This  is  a  common  phrase  to  express  utter  desolation.

NOTE  22. — On  the  Rukh'.  This  enormous  bird  has  already  been  mentioned,  and
some  idea  of  its  size,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Arabs,  has  been  conveyed  by  an  anecdote  in
page  538  of  the  second  volume  of  this  work ;  but  it  is  time  to  give  some  further  ac-
count of  it. — Ibn-El-Wardee  mentions,  among  the  islands  of  the  Sea  of  China,  the
Island  of  the  Rukh',  and  says,  "  The  Rukh',  by  the  name  of  which  this  island  is  known,
is  an  enormous  and  extraordinary  bird,  of  terrible  appearance ;  so  much  so  that  it  is
said,  that  the  length  of  one  of  its  wings  is  about  ten  thousand  fathoms"!  This  he
relates  on  the  authority  of  a  zoological  work  by  El-Hafiz  Ibn-El-Joozee,  who  had  been
visited  by  an  eye-witness  of  the  bird,  'Abd-Er-Rahman  El-Maghrabee,  also  surnamed
the  Chinese,  on  account  of  his  long  residence  in  China,  the  person  mentioned  in  the
anecdote  above  referred  to.  He  then  narrates  two  anecdotes,  one  of  which  is  that  just
mentioned,  and  another  which  would  illustrate  the  incident  to  which  this  note  refers,
but  which  more  particularly  agrees  with  an  adventure  in  Es-Sindibad's  Fifth  Voyage :
therefore  I  defer  the  insertion  of  it.  [A  Chinese  work,  entitled  "  San  thsa'i  thou  hoei "
(cited  by  Klaproth,  "Nouveau  Journal  Asiatique,"  vol.  xii.  p.  235),  says  that  in  the
country  of  "  Kuen  lun,"  in  the  sea  to  the  south-west  of  China,  is  a  bird  called  pheng,
which  in  flying  obscures  the  sun,  and  can  swallow  a  camel,  and  that  of  its  quills  are
made  water-tuns. — ED.]


12  See  Steven's  Collection  of  Voyages,  vol  i.  p.  thest  parts  of  the  S^a  of  China. As  these  islands
168.  are  not  yet  mentioned  in  my  original,  I  defer  the

13  "  Wfik-Wak  "  is  an  appellation  employed  by  insertion  of  some  accounts  of  them  given  by  Arab
the  Arabs  to  designate  a  number  of  islands  adja-  writers. — Bee  Note  32  to  Chapter  xxv.

cent  to  that  of  the  Mihraj  (or  Borneo),  in  the  fur-


Of  this  bird,  Marco  Polo  heard  during  his  travels.  He  says,  "  The  people  of  the
island  [of  Madagascar]  report  that  at  a  certain  season  of  the  year,  an  extraordinary
kind  of  bird,  which  they  call  a  rukh  ,14  makes  its  appearance  from  the  southern  region.
In  form  it  is  said  to  resemble  the  eagle;  but  it  is  incomparably  greater  in  size;  being
so  large  and  strong  as  to  seize  an  elephant  with  its  talons,  and  to  lift  it  into  the  air ;
from  whence  it  lets  it  fall  to  the  ground,  in  order  that,  when  dead,  it  may  prey  upon
the  carcase.  Persons  who  have  seen  this  bird  assert  that  when  the  wings  are  spread
they  measure  sixteen  paces  in  extent  from  point  to  point ;  and  that  the  feathers  are
eight  paces  in  length,  and  thick  in  proportion."  He  adds  that  some  messengers'  sent
to  the  island  by  the  Grand  Khan  brought  back  with  them  "  a  feather  of  the  rukh'
positively  affirmed  to  have  measured  ninety  spans,  and  the  quill-part  to  have  been  two
palms  in  circumference."  (Marsden's  Transl.  p.  707.;

Several  writers  have  remarked,  that  the  condor  suggested  the  monstrous  descrip-
tions of  the  rukh''  and  Bishop  Heber,  who  was  of  this  opinion,  says  in  his  "Journal,"'
"  Lieutenant  Fisher  shot  one  very  lately  at  Degra,  which  measured  thirteen  feet
between  the  tips  of  its  extended  wings,  and  had  talons  eight  inches  long.  He  was  of
a  deep  black  colour,  with  a  bald  head  and  neck."  But  Mr.  Harvey,  in  his  designs  illus-
trative of  Es-Sindibad's  Voyages,  has  taken  the  bearded  vulture  as  the  archetype  of  the
rukh' ;  justly  observing  to  me,  that  the  talons  of  the  condor  are  not  so  formed  as  to
enable  it  to  carry  off  with  them  any  weighty  animal ;  and  pointing  out  to  me,  that  a
bearded  vulture  "  killed  in  the  French  expedition  to  Egypt,  and  measured  in  the
presence  of  MM.  Monge  and  Berthollet,  is  said  by  M.  Larrey  to  have  exceeded
fourteen  Parisian,  or  upwards  of  fifteen  English  feet,"  from  point  to  point  of  its  ex-
panded wings.  (See  "  Gardens  and  Menagerie  of  the  Zoological  Society  Delineated,"'


14  Here,  as  generally  elsewhere,  in  citing  other
writers,  Mr.  Lane  uses  his  own.  mode  of  transcrib-


ing Oriental  words,  for  the  sake  of  uniformity.—
ED.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTIETH.  87

vol.  ii.  p.  181.)  It  should  also  be  observed  that  the  condor  is  a  native  of  South
America,  confined  to  the  region  of  the  Andes;  and  it  is  therefore  improbable  that  a
solitary  specimen  should  have  strayed  to  the  Chinese  or  Indian  Seas,  and  given  rise  to
the  fable  of  the  rukh'.— The  rukh',  however,  may  be  purely  imaginary.  If  so,  it  may
be  a  fabulous  species  of  a  fabulous  genus :  but  I  rather  think  that  it  is  the  same  as  the
'anka,  and  seemurgh,  which  Arab  and  Persian  writers  have  described  in  the  like
monstrous  manner.  El-Kazweenee  states,  that  the  'ankk  is  the  greatest  of  birds  •  that
it  carries  off  the  elephant  as  the  kite  carries  off  the  mouse;  that,  in  consequence 'of  its
carrying  off  a  bride,  God,  at  the  prayer  of  a  prophet  named  Handhalah,  banished  it  to
an  island  m  the  Circumambient  Ocean,  unvisited  by  men,  under  the  Equinoctial  Line;
that  it  lives  one  thousand  and  seven  hundred  years,  &c.  He  also  states,  that  when  the
young  'anka  has  grown  up,  if  it  be  a  female,  the  old  female  bird  burns  herself;  and  if
a  male,  the  old  male  bird  does  so.  This  reminds  us  of  the  phoenix.

The  design  of  the  bird  and  the  elephants  on  the  opposite  page  is  copied,  by  per-
mission, from  a  very  beautiful  Oriental  coloured  drawing  in  the  library  of  the  Royal
Asiatic  Society,  bearing  the  following  title,  in  Persian,  "  Tasweer  Seemnrgh  ya  Rukh'  "
(i.  e.  "Picture  of  the  Seemurgh  or  Rukh'":  but  the  words  signifying  "or  Rukh'"  are
added  in  pencil).  Beneath  this  title  is  written,  "  The  Simurg,  or  Roc  of  the  Arabian
Nights."

NOTE  23.— The  Aerial  Voyage.  I  scarcely  hoped  to  find  any  narrative,  related  as  a
fact,  that  could  have  suggested  the  description  of  this  wond'erful  adventure ;  but  I
have  succeeded  in  doing  so.  El-Kazweeuee,  in  his  account  of  the  Sea  of  Persia,  relates
the  following  anecdote.15

"  The  author  of  the  '  Kitab  el-'Aja'ib ' 16  saith,  A  man  of  Isfahan  related  tome,  that
lie  was  burdened  with  debts  and  the  expense  of  supporting  his  family ;  so  he  quitted
Isfahan,  and  misfortunes  so  encompassed  him  that  he  went  to  sea  with  some  merchants.
The  waves,  saith  he,  beat  us  about  until  we  came  to  the  well-known  whirlpool  (durdoor)
of  the  Sea  of  Persia ;  whereupon  the  merchants  came  together  to  the  master,  and  said,
Dost  thou  know  any  way  of  escape  for  us  from  this  predicament  ?  He  answered,  O
people,  verily  no  ship  escapeth  from  this  whirlpool  save  such  as  God  (whose  name  be
exalted  !)  willeth  [to  escape]  :  but  if  one  of  you  will  liberally  give  himself  for  his  com-
panions, I  will  use  my  endeavours.  Perhaps  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !)  will  save
us. — So  I  said,  O  people,  we  are  all  in  a  place  of  destruction,  and  I  am  a  man  wearied
by  misery.  I  wished  for  death ;  and  there  was  in  the  ship  a  party  of  men  of  Isfahan  :
I  therefore  said  to  them,  Swear  that  ye  will  discharge  my  debts,  and  act  with  bene-
ficence to  my  children,  and  I  will  ransom  you  with  myself.  And  I  said  to  the  master,
What  dost  thou  command  me  to  do  ?  He  answered,  That  thou  stand  upon  this  island
(for  there  was  near  unto  the  whirlpool  an  island,  the  extent  of  which  was  six  days'
journey  with  their  nights),  and  that  thou  cease  not  to  beat  this  druin.1'  So  I  replied,
I  will  do  it.  Accordingly  the  swore  to  me  severe  oaths  that  they  would  comply  with
the  condition  that  I  had  imposed  upon  them ;  and  they  gave  me  of  water  and  food
what  would  suffice  me  for  some  days.  And  I  stood  on  the  shore  of  the  island,  and
began  to  beat  the  drum ;  whereupon  I  beheld  the  waters  move,  and  they  bore  the  ship
along,  while  I  looked  at  it,  until  it  was  out  of  my  sight.  I  then  went  to  and  fro  upon


15  Th!s anecdote  is  also related  by  Ibn-El-  part  similar  to  the  story  first  mentioned :  here,

Wardee,  who  quotes  it  from  El-Kazweenee. [An  however,  the  bird  is  a  supernatural  creature.  -

incident  in  the  Story  of  the  Third  Royal  Mendicant  ED.]

is  curious  as  resembling  the* aerial  voyage  of  Es-  16  Several  Arabic  works  bearthis  title  (the  Book

Sindibiid,  although  it  is  not  clearly  referred  to  of  Wonders).

natural  agency.  One  of  the  tales  contained  in  the  '"  The  word  is  "  duhul "  (Persian). In  my  copy

story  of  the  King  and  his  Son  &e.  (appended  to  of  El-Kazweenee,  the  letter  re,  and  in  that  oflbn-

the  Notes  to  Chapter  xxi.)— that  of  "the  Man  EMVardee,  dhal,  is  put  for  d&l.
who  never  laughed  for  the  rest  of  his  life  " — is  in


88  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTIETH.

the  island,  and,  lo,  I  beheld  an  island  on  which  was  an  enormous  tree,  such  that  I  have
not  seen  any  greater ;  and  upon  it  was  something  like  a  large  roof.  And  at  the  close
of  the  day,  I  heard  a  great,  vehement,  harsh  voice ; 18  and,  lo,  a  huge  bird,  than  which
I  have  not  seen  any  greater,  came  and  alighted  upon  the  roof  on  that  tree.  So  I  hid
myself,  fearing  lest  he  should  make  me  his  prey,  until  the  light  of  morning  approached,
when  he  shook  his  wings,  and  flew  away.  The  next  night,  he  came  and  alighted
again  upon  his  nest,  and  again  I  was  in  despair  of  my  life,  and  was  content  to  meet
destruction.  I  approached  him  ;  but  he  shewed  no  hostility  to  me,  and  flew  away  in
the  morning.  And  when  the  third  night  came,  I  sat  by  him  without  consternation,
until  he  shook  his  wings  at  daybreak ;  and  on  his  doing  so,  I  laid  hold  upon  his  legs,
and  he  flew  away  with  me  with  a  most  rapid  flight  until  the  daylight  rose,  when  I
looked  towards  the  earth,  and  saw  not  aught  save  an  abyss  of  water.  Upon  this  I  was
about  to  quit  my  hold  of  his  legs,  by  reason  of  the  violence  of  the  pain  that  affected
me;  but  I  constrained  myself  to  have  patience,  and,  looking  again  at  the  earth,  I
beheld  the  villages,  or  towns,  and  the  people  looking  at  it  [at  the  bird],  and  I  beheld
the  dwellings.  Then  it  approached  the  earth,  and  set  me  down  upon  a  heap  of  straw
in  a  threshing-floor  belonging  to  one  of  the  villages,  after  which  it  left  me,  and  soared
into  the  sky,  and  became  absent  from  me.  And  the  people  collected,  and  conveyed  me
to  then*  chief,  and,  having  brought  to  me  a  man  who  understood  my  language,  they
said  to  me,  Whence  art  thou  ?  So  I  related  to  them  my  whole  story,  whereupon  they
wondered  at  me,  and  they  suffered  me  to  remain  with  them,  and  the  chief  gave  orders
to  present  me  with  money.  I  remained  with  them  some  days ;  and  having  walked  one
day  to  the  sea-shore  to  divert  myself,  lo,  I  met  the  ship  of  my  companions,  who,  when
they  beheld  me,  hastened  to  me,  asking  me  respecting  my  case.  And  I  answered
them,  O  people,  verily  I  gave  myself  away  for  the  sake  of  God  (whose  name  be
exalted  !)  and  He  delivered  me  in  a  wonderful  way,  and  made  me  a  sign  unto  men,  and
blessed  me  with  wealth,  and  brought  me  to  the  place  of  destination  before  you. — This
is  a  wonderful  story,  and  it  is  not  [a  case]  foreign  from  the  grace  of  God,  whose  name
be  exalted!"19

NOTE  24.  Though  I  believe  that  there  is  no  known  substance  with  which  the
diamond  can  be  cut  or  ground,  except  its  own  substance,  I  think  it  not  improbable
that  the  Eastern  lapidaries  may  be  acquainted  with  some  ore,  really,  or  supposed  by
them  to  be,  an  ore  of  lead,  by  which  it  may  be  broken,  and  that  this  is  what  is  here
called  "the  lead-stone,"  or  "the  stone  of  lead."  It  is  well  known  that  those
diamonds  which  are  unfit  for  any  other  purpose  than  that  of  cutting  and  grinding
others  are  broken  iu  a  steel  mortar.

NOTE  25. See  above,  the  third  paragraph  of  Note  12.

NOTE  26.— The  Valley  of  Diamonds.  El-Kazweenee,  after  describing  the  diamond, —
saying,  "It  breaketh  all  other  stones  except  [that  of]  lead  (el-usrub-°) ;  for  If  it  be
struck  with  this,  the  diamond  breaketh," — relates  as  follows  : —

"  To  the  place  in  which  the  diamond  is  found,  no  one  can  gain  access.  It  is  a
valley  in  the  land  of  India,  the  bottom  of  which  the  sight  reacheth  not ;  and  in  it  are
venomous  serpents  which  no  one  seeth  but  he  dieth ;  and  they  have  a  summer-abode
for  six  months,  and  a  winter-abode  [where  they  hide  themselves]  for  the  like  period.
El-Iskender  [either  Alexander  the  Great  or  the  first  Zu-1-Karneyn21]  commanded  to


's  I  read "heddin" (without the tenween,  w  See  also  the  thiiji  paragraph  of  Xote  1  in  the

11  hedd,")  for  a  word  which  is  written  "  hudoowin ' present  series.

in  my  MS.  of  El-Kazweenee,  and  which  is  uncer-  *°  El-Kazweenee  says,  in  his  account  of  the

tain  in  the  transcript  of  this  anecdote  in  my  copy metals,  that  usrub  is  a  bad  kind  of  lead. See  also
of  Ibn-El-Wardee.  Note  24,  above.

«  See  Vol.  i.  p.  20


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTIETH.  83

take  some  mirrors  and  to  throw  them  into  the  valley,  that  the  serpents  might  see  in
them  their  forms,  and  die  in  consequence.  It  is  said  also  that  he  watched  for  the
time  of  their  absenting  themselves  [or  retiring  into  their  winter-quarters],  and  threw
down  pieces  of  meat,  and  diamonds  stuck  to  these :  then  the  birds  came  from  the  sky,
and  took  pieces  of  that  meat,  and  brought  them  up  out  of  the  valley ;  whereupon  El-
Iskender  ordered  his  companions  to  follow  the  birds,  and  to  pick  up  what  they  easily
could  of  the  meat."

The  valley  or  valleys  of  diamonds  we  also  find  described  by  other  writers,  and
among  these  by  Marco  Polo,  in  his  account  of  the  kingdom  of  Murphili  or  Monsul.
This,  observes  Mr.  Marsden,  "  is  no  other  than  Muchli-patan,  or,  as  it  is  more  com-
monly named,  Masuli-patam ;  the  name  of  a  principal  town,  by  a  mistake  not  unusual,
being  substituted  for  that  of  the  country.  ...  It  belongs  to  what  was  at  one  period
termed  the  kingdom  of  Golconda,  more  anciently  named  Telingana.  .  .  .  Golconda,  of
which  Masulipatain  is  the  principal  sea-port,  is  celebrated  for  the  product'ion  of
diamonds.  In  the  astronomical  observations  of  Mr.  Topping,  printed  in  Dalrym-
ple's  Oriental  Repertory,  mention  is  made  of  the  famous  diamond-mines  of  Golconda,
at  a  place  named  Malvellee,  not  far  from  Ellore.  Vol.  i.  p.  435.  Caesar  Fredericke,
who  was  at  Bijanagar  in  1567,  mentions  that  the  diamond-mines  were  six  days'
journey  from  that  city."22 — Es-Sindibad's  adventure  in  the  valley  of  diamonds  has
been  amply  illustrated  by  the  learned  writer  from  whom  the  above  remarks  are
borrowed,  and  by  Hole ;  and  I  shall  quote  some  of  their  observations,  after  inserting
an  extract  from  Marco  Polo's  Travels.

"  In  the  mountains  of  this  kingdom  "  [of  Murphili],  says  the  Venetian  Traveller,
"  it  is  that  diamonds  are  found.  During  the  rainy  season  the  water  descends  in
violent  torrents  amongst  the  rocks  and  caverns,  and  when  these  have  subsided,  the
people  go  to  search  for  diamonds  in  the  beds  of  the  rivers,  where  they  find  many.
Messer  Marco  was  told  that  in  the  summer,  when  the  heat  is  excessive  and  there  is  no
rain,  they  ascend  the  mountains  with  great  fatigue,  as  well  as  with  considerable
danger  from  the  number  of  snakes  with  which  they  are  infested.  Near  the  summit  it
is  said  there  are  deep  valleys  full  of  caverns  and  surrounded  by  precipices,  amongst
which  the  diamonds  are  found,  and  here  many  eagles  and  white  storks,  attracted  by
the  snakes  on  which  they  feed,  are  accustomed  to  make  their  nests.  The  persons  who
are  in  quest  of  the  diamonds  take  their  stand  near  the  mouths  of  the  caverns,  and
from  thence  cast  down  several  pieces  of  flesh,  which  the  eagles  and  storks  pursue  into
the  valleys,  and  carry  off  with  them  to  the  tops  of  the  rocks.  Thither  the  men  im-
mediately ascend,  drive  the  birds  away,  and,  recovering  the  pieces  of  meat,  frequently
find  diamonds  sticking  to  them." 23

Mr.  Marsden,  in  a  note,  alludes  to  the  adventures  of  Es-Sindibad,  and  says,  of  the
Arabian  Tales,  "  These  tales,  as  appears  from  the  mention  of  persons  and  circumstances
in  the  course  of  the  narrative,  must  have  been  composed  chiefly  in  the  thirteenth
century,  and  one  of  them  in  particular  is  fixed,  by  an  astronomical  observation,  taken
by  a  singular  personage,  to  the  year  1255."  But  surely  this  date,  even  if  it  were  the
same  in  every  MS.  (which  is  not  the  case24),  would  prove  nothing  more  than  that  the
tale  in  which  it  occurs  was  not  composed  before  this  period :  or  rather  it  should  lead
us  to  infer  that  the  tale  was  composed  long  after,  as  it  professes  to  relate  events  of
ancient  times. — Mr.  Marsden  afterwards  transcribes,  from  Hole's  ingenious  work,
part  of  a  quotation  from  Epiphanius ;  upon  which  he  remarks,  "  Thus  it  appears  in-
con  trovertibly,  that  so  early  as  the  fourth  century  of  our  era,  the  tale  [of  the  valley
of  diamonds,  and  of  the  mode  of  procuring  the  precious  stones  from  it,]  was  current,
divested,  it  is  true,  of  the  extraordinary  incident  of  the  adventurous  sailor's  escape,


23  Marsden's  Marco  Polo,  pp.  658  and  659.  «  idem,  pp.  657  and  658.

2'  See  Vol.  i.  p.  384. (Note  59.)
III.  N


90  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTIETH.

but  in  conformity  with  what  was  related  to  our  -author  [Marco  Polo] ;  with  the  ex-
ception of  the  scene  being  laid  in  Scythia  or  western  Tartary,  where,  in  fact,
diamonds  are  not  found.  The  question  of  locality,"  he  adds,  "  is  however  determined
by  another  oriental  navigator,  Nicolo  di  Conti,  who  visited  the  coast  of  the  peninsula
in  the  fifteenth  century."  He  then  gives  a  quotation  from  this  navigator,  differing
little  from  the  story  of  Marco  Polo  given  above,  and  that  of  Epiphanius  afterwards
alluded  to,  but  making  the  site  fifteen  days'  journey  from  Bisinagar  (or  Bijanagar),
towards  the  north. — Hole  observes  (in  page  60),  that  a  story  somewhat  resembling
this  of  the  valley  of  diamonds  is  recorded  in  the  travels  of  Benjamin  of  Tudela  (Engl.
transl.,  p.  144) ;  and  that  the  translator  supposes  it  to  have  been  borrowed  from  the
Thousand  and  One  Nights.  "  I,  however,"  he  adds,  with  better  judgment,  "  rather
suspect,  that  the  account  of  Benjamin  of  Tudela  and  of  Es-Sindibad  were  derived  from
some  common  origin."

NOTE  27.  My  sheykh  remarks,  in  a  marginal  note,  that  many  men  strike  their
hands  together  when  they  are  enraged ;  that  persons  clap  their  hands  also  to  call  a
servant,  as  the  Franks  ring  a  bell ;  and  likewise  to  testify  joy ;  and  that  some  of  the
performers  of  zikrs  do  so.  On  various  occasions  of  rejoicing  too,  or  for  amusement  at
other  times,  the  Egyptian  peasants,  forming  a  ring,  clap  their  hands  in  time,  and  to
certain  measures,  with  or  without  singing.

NOTE  28.  In  the  Calcutta  edition  of  the  first  two  hundred  Nights,  and  in
Langles'  edition,  this  island  is  called  "  Er-Raha,"  "  Er-Ruha,"  or  "  Er-Riha  ;"  and  in
the  old  version,  "Roha;"  but  I  do  not  know  any  island  so  named.  From  the  camphor-
trees  here  mentioned,  and  the  rhinoceros  afterwards,  and  a  strange  kind  of  buffalo,  I
doubt  not  that  Sumatra  is  the  island  meant.  (See  the  second  paragraph  of  Note  12
in  the  present  series.  See  also  the  fourth  paragraph  of  the  same  note.)  Mr.  Marsden
says  ^  that  the  camphor-tree  does  not  grow  anywhere  to  the  south  of  the  line ;  and
that  the  finest  kinds  of  camphor  are  produced  by  a  tree  in  Sumatra  and  Borneo  ;  but
perhaps  he  applies  the  first  remark  only  to  Sumatra ;  for  I  believe  that  this  tree
grows  to  the  south  of  the  line  in  Borneo.  He  also  observes  x  that  the  camphor-tree  of
China  and  Japan,  "  the  only  species  of  the  laurel-genus  growing  in  China,  and  there  a
large  and  valuable  timber-tree,  ...  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  the  camphor-tree  of
Borneo  and  Sumatra,  which  is  also  remarkable  for  its  great  size,  but  is  of  a  genus
entirely  distinct  from  the  launis."

NOTE  29.  In  the  Cairo  edition  (erroneously),  "kezkezan:"  in  others  "karkadan  "
and  "  karkend."  "  Karkadan "  is  the  vulgar  modern  term :  the  correct  term  is
"  Karkedden."

NOTE  30.  The  word  "  'alak "  I  have  rendered  "  the  tender  leaves  of  trees."  It
oftener  signifies  "the  leech,"  or  "  leeches."

NOTE  31.  So  in  the  Calcutta  edition  of  the  first  two  hundred  Nights,  and  in
Langles'  edition :  in  the  editions  of  Cairo  and  Breslau,  "  ten  cubits."

NOTE  32.  El-Kazweenee  says,  in  his  description  of  the  rhinoceros,  "upon  its  horn
is  a  curved  branch,  the  curve  of  which  is  contrary  in  direction  to  that  of  the  [main]
horn.  It  hath  virtues ;  and  the  sign  of  its  perfection  is  this;  that  there  is  seen  in  it
the  form  of  a  horseman.  That  branch,"  he  adds,  "  is  not  found  save  in  the  possession
of  the  Kings  of  India."  He  mentions  also  its  various  virtues,  which  are  medicinal
and  magical. — El-Idreesee  gives  a  somewhat  different  account,  agreeing  more  with
what  is  said  in  the  Old  Version,  and  the  Calcutta  edition  of  the  first  two  hundred
Nights,  and  the  edition  of  Langles ;  especially  the  last.  He  says,  that  in  some


K  Travels  of  Marco  Polo,  pp.  613  and  615.  "E  Idem,  p.  561.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTIETH  91

rhinoceros'  horns,  when  cut,  are  seen  the  figures  of  men,  hirds,  &c.,  perfectly  portrayed
in  white;  and  that  with  these  are  made  girdles,  of  high  price.  These  girdles
are  mentioned  in  the  two  Arabic  editions  above  referred  to,  and  their  price  is  said  to
be  a  thousand  pieces  of  gold.

NOTE  33.  "The  account  of  the  rhinoceros,  and  its  combat  with  the  elephant,"
says  Hole  (pp.  61  and  62),  "  after  allowing  for  one  or  two  trifling  additions,  agrees  with
what  is  said  by  Pliny  (Nat.  Hist.  L.  viii.  c.  20),  Julian  (Nat.  An.  L.  xvii.  c.  44),  and
Diodorus  Siculus  (L.  lii.  c.  2)."

NOTE  34.  See  the  representation  of  the  seemurgh  or  rukh'  and  the  elephants  in
page  86.

NOTE  35.  These  words,  "  and  God  is  all  knowing,"  &c.,  are  an  apology  of  the
writer  for  relating  such  fables.

NOTE  36.  In  the  Calcutta  edition  of  the  first  two  hundred  Nights,  and  in
Langles'  edition,  "the  islands  of  the  wild,  downy  [creatures j."

NOTE  37.  In  the  two  editions  just  mentioned,  they  are  described  as  red  downy
creatures.

NOTE  38. — The  Island  of  Apes.  What  is  called  in  my  translation  (from  the  Cairo
edition)  "the  Mountain  of  Apes,"  is  named  in  the  edition  of  Breslau,  "the  Island  of
Apes ;"  and  Ibn-El- Wardee  gives  the  following  account  of  it. — "  Among  the  islands  of
the  Sea  of  China  is  the  Island  of  Apes.  It  is  large,  and  in  it  are  marshy  forests,  and
numerous  apes ;  and  the  apes  have  a  king  there,  to  whom  they  submit  themselves :
they  carry  him  upon  their  shoulders  and  their  necks ;  and  he  governeth  the  island  so
that  none  oppresseth  another.  Those,  however,  who  come  to  them  in  ships,  they
torture  with  biting  and  scratching  and  stoning ;  but  the  people  of  the  two  Islands  of
Khartan  and  Martan  '-17  employ  stratagems  against  them  and  hunt  them,  and  sell  them
for  a  high  price.  The  people  of  El- Yemen  desire  them  much,  and  take  them  as  guards
of  their  shops,  like  slaves ;  and  they  are  endowed  with  extreme  acuteness." — El-
Idreesee  '1st  Climate,  7th  Section,)  gives  a  similar  account;  but  states  that  this  island
is  two  days'  voyage  from  that  of  Sukutra  (or  Socotra).  There  is,  however,  a  con-
trariety in  his  text;  and  though  what  is  said  of  the  inhabitants  of  Khartan  and
Martan  seems  to  favour  the  opinion  that  the  island  in  question  is  not  far  from
Arabia,  I  think  that  it  is  Sumatra.  It  is  very  probable  that  different  navigators  often
designated  the  same  island  by  different  names,  and  thus  misled  the  geographers.  El-
Idreesee  also  describes  the  apes  as  of  a  reddish  colour.  (See  the  note  immediately  pre-
ceding this.)  Creatures  in  the  island  of  Rainin  (or  Sumatra)  four  spans  high,  and
with  red  downy  hair  on  their  faces,  have  already  been  mentioned  (in  the  second
paragraph  of  Note  12  in  the  present  series),  on  the  authority  ot  El-Kazweenee,  who
likewise  says,  "  The  sailors  relate  that  when  the  waves  of  the  sea  of  China  are
tumultuous,  there  appear  from  it  black  persons,  each  of  four  spans  high,  like  the
children  of  the  Abyssinians •"  but  he  adds,  "and  they  ascend  the  ships  without
injury.'

That  the  pigmies  of  antiquity,  and  of  early  travellers,  were  apes,  oannot  reasonably
be  doubted.  It  is  remarkable  that  Marco  Polo  mentions23  pretended  pigmies  which
were  brought  from  India,  and  which  were  the  bodies  of  apes  stuffed  in  Java  Minor,
or  Sumatra ;  mentioned  above  as  the  country  of  red-downy-faced  creatures,  four  spans


27  These  two  islands,  says  Fl-ltlrecsce,  belong  to  the  province  of  Shehr  (in  the  middle  of  the  south-
east coast  of  Arabia).

28  See  Marsden's  translation,  p.  604.


92  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTIETH.

high.— For  ample  illustrations  of  the  pigmies,  see  Hole,  pp.  64 — 78.19 [See  also  Note
65  below.— ED.]

NOTE  39.  In  the  old  version,  this  giant  is  described  as  having  only  one  eye,  in  his
forehead ;  but  not  so  in  any  of  the  four  editions  of  the  original  that  I  have  by  me.
In  these  editions,  however,  subsequent  incidents  are  remarkable  for  their  agreement
with  the  story  of  Polyphemus.  Stories  of  monsters  like  the  Cyclops  appear  to  have
been  current  in  the  East ;  and  so  also,  probably,  was  the  tale  of  Ulysses  and  Poly-
phemus. Sir  John  Mandeville  says,30  that  in  one  of  the  Indian  islands  were  giants
who  had  but  one  eye,  in  the  middle  of  the  front,  and  who  ate  nothing  but  raw  flesh
and  raw  fish.  He  mentions  others  who  ate  more  gladly  man's  flesh  than  any  other
flesh.  In  another  isle,  he  was  told  that  there  were  giants  of  greater  stature,  some  of
fifty  cubits  high,  who  many  times  took  men  out  of  the  sea  in  their  ships,  and  brought
them  to  land,  two  in  one  hand  and  two  in  another,  eating  them  going,  all  raw  and  all
quick. — Hole  thinks  that  Virgil  and  Ovid  supplied  the  knight  with  the  preceding
descriptions ;  but  this  I  doubt.  El-Kazweenee  says,  that  behind  the  island  of  El-
Beenan,  in  the  Sea  of  China,  are  two  islands  of  great  length  and  breadth,  wherein  are
a  black  people  like  the  tribe  of  Ad,31  of  enormous  size,  with  crisp  hair,  and  long  faces :
the  foot  of  one  of  them,  he  adds,  is  a  cubit  long ;  and  they  eat  men.  One  of  these
two  islands  our  author  may  have  confounded  with  that  of  the  Apes.  El-Idreesee  (1st
Climate,  8th  Section,)  places  the  Island  of  El-Beenan  on  the  south  of  that  of  Er-
Ramee  or  Sumatra).  Our  giant  had  enormous  ears,  hanging  down  upon  his  shoulders ;
and  Mr,  Marsden  (as  observed  by  Hole32)  says,  that  "  the  inhabitants  of  Neas,  an
adjacent  island  to  Sumatra,  [on  the  south-west  of  the  latter,]  bore  their  ears,  and
encourage  the  aperture  to  a  monstrous  size,  so  as  in  many  instances  to  be  large  enough
to  admit  the  hand,  the  lower  parts  being  stretched  till  they  touch  the  shoulders."

NOTE  40.  In  the  Cairo  edition,  "  and  make  for  ourselves  a  vessel  like  a  boat."  The
reading  I  have  adopted  is  that  of  the  Calcutta  edition  of  the  first  two  hundred  Nights,
and  of  Langles'  edition,  as  well  as  of  the  old  version.

NOTE  41. See  Note  88  to  Chapter  iii.

XOTE  42.  "Ulysses  and  his  friends  were  more  fortunate  in  their  escape  from
Polypheme,  but  suffered  nearly  in  the  same  manner  by  Antiphates  and  his  gigantic
attendants."  ^

NOTE  43.  El-Kazweenee  says,  that  among  the  creatures  of  the  Sea  of  China  are
"  two  enormous  serpents,  that  come  forth  upon  the  land,  and  one  of  them  will  swallow
the  buffalo  or  the  elephant,  and  wind  itself  round  a  tree  or  rock,  and  so  break  in  pieces
the  bones  of  the  animal  in  its  belly."

NOTE  44.  The  name  of  this  island  is  thus  written  in  Langles'  edition  and  by  El-
Idreesee  ;  in  the  Cairo  edition, "  Es-Selahitah ;"  in  the  Calcutta  edition  of  the  first  two
hundred  Nights,  "  Es-Selamit  •"  and  in  the  Breslau  edition,  "  El-Kalasitah."  It  has
been  mentioned  in  a  former  note  (Note  12  in  the  present  series,  fourth  paragraph) ;
and  from  what  is  there  said,  I  suppose  it  to  be  near  Java.  In  my  copy  of  El-
Kazweenee,  its  name  is  written  Es-Selamit.  He  says,  "  From  it  are  brought  sandal-
wood,  spikenard,  and  camphor  j94  ....  and  in  it  is  a  spring  that  spouteth  up,  the

29  See  also  the  third  paragraph  of  Note  1  in  the  Malays  believe  to  be  invulnerable. . . . This

present  series. The  apes  appear  to  be  correctly  species  is  readily tamed ; but, unconquerably

described  (as  black,  &c.,)  in  my  original,  and  my  timid,  it  never  displays  familiarity." (Griffith's

supposition that their island is Sumatra is  Animal  Kingdom,  i.  256,  quoted  in  Stark's  Ele-

strengthened  by  an  account  of  the  kind  of  Gibbon  ments  of  Natural  History,  i.  44.)

called  Siamang  (the  Pithecus  Syndactylus  of  Des-  *>  See  Hole,  pp.  80—82.

marest,  and  Simla  Syndactyla  of  Raffles),  pointed  31  See  Note  37  to  Chapter  ii.

out  to  me  by  my  friend  Mr.  Harvey. It  states  3-  Pages  74  and  75.

that "these  animals  are common  in Sumatra.  ^  Hole,  p.  85.

They are generally found  assembled in  large  3»  In  El-Idrcesee,  instead  of  camphor,  "cloves."
troops,  conducted,  it  is  said,  by  a  chief,  whom  the


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTIETH.  93

water  boiling  from  it,  and  near  it  is  a  lake,  into  winch  it  descendeth :  what  remaineth
of  the  sprinkled  water  in  the  day  becometh  white  stone,  and  what  renmineth  of  it  in
the  night  becometh  black  stone."  El-Idreesee  (1st  Climate,  9th  Section,)  describes  hi
it  a  volcano  constantly  and  exceedingly  active.  Such  a  volcano  there  is  in  the  island
called  in  our  maps  "  Sumbawa,"  well  known.

NOTE  45.  The  words  "  where  sandal-wood  is  abundant "  are  inserted  on  the
authority  of  the  Calcutta  edition  of  the  first  two  hundred  Nights,  and  Langles'
edition.

NOTE  46.  Here  is  added  in  my  original,  "  and  I  was  submerged  at  the  island,
with  the  rest  who  were  submerged :"  but  this  was  during  the  First  Voyage.

NOTE  47. Here  the  master  says,  that  many  were  drowned  at  that  island,  and
Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sea  among  them  :  but  this  again  refers  to  the  First  Voyage.
NOTE  48. "  Es-Sind  "  is  Western  India.

NOTE  49.  El-Kazweenee  and  Ibn-El-War«lee  relate,  that  in  the  Sea  of  El-
Kulzum  &  is  a  fish  in  the  form  of  a  cow,  which  bringeth  forth  its  young  and  suckleth
like  a  cow.  The  Calcutta  edition  of  the  first  two  hundred  Nights,  and  Langles'
edition,  mention  these  particulars,  and  add,  "  and  shields  are  made  of  its  skin."  The
same  editions  also  here  mention  "  fish  twenty  cubits  long,  a  tortoise  twenty  cubits
wide,  and  fish  in  the  form  of  camels."  The  two  Arab  writers  quoted  above  say,  that
in  the  Sea  of  El-Kulznm  is  a  fish  twenty  cubits  long,  the  back  of  which  is  [like]  ex-
cellent tortoise-shell,  and  it  bringeth  forth  young  and  suckleth  like  human  beings.
El-Kazweenee  also  relates,  that  in  the  Sea  of  China  are  "  tortoises  each  twenty  cubits
in  circumference.36  Each  of  them,"  he  adds,  "layeth  a  thousand  eggs:  and  this  is
found  at  the  island  of  Wak-Wak."  37 — But  these  are  too  small.  Revert  to  Note  8.

"  The  account  of  these  animals,"  observes  Hole  (pp.  90  et  seqq.),  "  is  not  to  be
attributed  to  a  licentious  exuberance  of  fancy  in  the  Arabian  author.  He  might  have
seen  in  ./Elian  (Hist.  An.  L.  xvi.  c.  17.)  that  tortoises  whose  shells  were  fifteen  cubits
in  length,  and  sufficiently  large  to  coyer  a  house,  were  to  be  found  near  the  island  of
Taprobane.  Pliny  (Nat.  Hist.  L.  ix.  c.  10.)  and  Strabo  (Geog.  L.  xv.)  mention  the
same  circumstance  :  they  likewise  turn  them  upside  down,  and  say,  that  men  used  to
row  in  them  as  in  a  boat.  Diodorus  Siculus  adds  to  their  testimony,  and  assures  us
(B.  iii.  c.  2.),  on  the  faith  of  an  historian,  that  the  Chelonophagi  (or  shell-fish-eaters)
derived  a  threefold  advantage  from  the  tortoise,  which  occasionally  supplied  them  with
a  roof  to  their  houses,  a  boat,  and  a  dinner.  ...  I  have  been  informed  that  boats,
made  of  wicker,  and  covered  with  a  skin,  resembling  the  upper  skin  of  a  tortoise,  are
frequently  used  for  passing  rivers  in  different  parts  of  India.  May  we  not  suppose
that  inaccurate  observation,  misapprehension,  or  wilful  misrepresentation  of  the
natives,  misled  in  this  and  many  other  respects  the  voyagers  of  antiquity  ?  Boats  of  a
similar  structure  are  to  be  found  in  Wales,  where  they  are  called  Coracles.  They
appear  to  be  the  vitilia  naviyia  of  Pliny,  and  are  supposed  to  have  derived  their  name
from  being  covered  with  coria  or  hides.  They  are  mentioned  likewise  by  Caesar  and
Lucan. — The  fish  like  a  cow  may  be  intended  for  the  hippopotamus,  whose  skin,  as
Pliny  observes,  is  scarcely  to  be  penetrated  by  any  missive  weapon,  and  therefore  may,
with  great  probability,  have  been  used  as  a  covering  for  bucklers  by  different  nations.
[Shields,  it  is  said,  are  made  of  the  hippopotamus'  hide  by  the  Nubians.  I  have  a
Nubian  shield  of  the  hide  of  the  giraffe  or  hippopotamus  (I  am  not  certain  which;,
and  another  of  crocodile's  hide.]  .  .  .  He  observes,  that  those  animals  live  indifferently
in  rivers,  or  in  the  ocean,  or  on  the  land.  .  .  .  The  Manatee,  or  Cowfish,  agrees


35  The  Bed  Sea.  3T  Mentioned  before,  in  Note  19  in  the  present

36  According  to  lbn-El-\\  ardec,  "Jurty  cubits, series. See  Note  32  to  Chapter  xxv.
by  their  cubit."


94,  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTIETH.

likewise  with  Es-Sindibad's  account,  and  is  to  be  found  in  the  Mauritius,  the  Philip-
pine, and  the  Coniori  islands  :  it  suckles  its  young,  like  the  seal  and  porpoise ;  and  the
dorsal  protuberance  of  the  latter  would  naturally  suggest  to  Arabian  seamen  the  idea
of  a  camel."

NOTE  50.  A  creature  with  the  head  of  an  ass  in  the  Indian  Sea  is  mentioned  by
Pliny  (Nat.  Hist.  L.  ix.  c.  3. — See  Hole,  p.  96) ;  as  well  as  others  with  the  heads  of
horses,  and  of  bulls :  but  what  could  have  suggested  the  idea  ot  the  "  bird  that  cometh
forth  from  the  sea-shell, '  unless  it  were  the  nautilus,  I  am  unable  to  conjecture.

NOTE  51. "  Ghool, "  here,  may  signify  merely  a  cannibal. See  Vol.  i.  p.  32.

NOTE  52. —  The  Cannibals  who  stupify  and  fatten  Men,  and  then  eat  them.  The
adventure  of  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sea,  and  his  companions,  among  these  cannibals
appears  to  be  mainly  founded  on  the  following  anecdote,  related  by  Ibn-El- \Vardce
and  El-Kazweenee.  In  translating  it,  I  avail  myself  of  the  narratives  of  both  these
writers.

"Among  the  islands  of  the  Sea  of  the  Zenj  (or  Ethiopians)  is  the  Island  of  Seksar ,38
Yaakoob  Ibn-Is-hak,  the  traveller,  saith,  I  met  with  a  man  having  many  scratches  on
his  face,  and  asked  him  respecting  them,  and  he  said,  I  went  upon  the  sea,  and  the
wind  drove  me  to  the  Island  of  Seksar,  and  we  could  not  depart  from  it  on  account  of
the  violence  of  the  wind.  And  there  came  to  us  a  people  whose  faces  were  like  the
faces  of  dogs,  and  their  bodies  like  the  bodies  of  men  ;  and  one  of  them  came  forward
to  us  with  a  staff,  and  a  party  came  behind  us,  and  drove  us  to  their  abodes,  where  we
saw  skulls  and  legs  and  arms  of  men.  They  then  took  us  into  a  house  in  which  was  a
sick  man,  and  brought  us  fruits  and  other  food,  whereupon  that  man  said,  They  feed
you  that  ye  may  become  fat,  and  him  among  you  who  is  fat  they  eat.  So  I  ate  little,
that  I  might  not  grow  fat ;  and  every  one  of  my  companions  who  became  fat  they  ate,
until  only  I  and  that  man  remained ;  for  I  was  lean,  and  he  was  ill.  And  that  man
said  to  me,  A  festival  of  theirs  hath  arrived,  and  they  all  go  out  to  celebrate  it,  and
are  absent  at  it  three  days :  so  if  thou  canst  make  thine  escape,  do  so  .  but  as  for  me,
as  thou  seest,  I  ain  unable  to  move,  and  cannot  flee :  see  then  to  thyself  I  therefore
replied,  May  God  compensate  thee  with  Paradise !  I  went  forth,  and  journeyed  by
night,  and  hid  myself  in  the  day  And  when  they  returned  from  their  festival,  they
searched  for  me,  and  followed  my  track,  and  overtook  me  as  I  lay  beneath  a  tree ;  but
they  quitted  me." — This  is  not  the  whole  of  the  anecdote;  but  the  remaining  portion
I  reserve  for  a  subsequent  note,  as  it  illustrates  an  incident  in  the  Fifth  Voyage.

Marco  Polo's  account  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  Andaman  Islands,  which  he  calls
"  Angaman,"  remarkably  agrees  with  what  is  said  above  of  the  cannibals  of  Seksar ;
and  though  this  island  is  described  as  in  the  Ethiopian  Sea,  we  might  almost  conclude,
from  his  statement,  that,  if  the  anecdote  which  I  have  just  given  be  not  entirely  a
fiction,  its  narrator  was  cast  upon  one  of  the  Andamans.  "  The  inhabitants  f  of
Angaman],"  says  the  Venetian  traveller,  " are  idolaters,  and  are  a  most  brutish  and
savage  race,  having  heads,  eyes,  and  teeth,  resembling  those  of  the  canine  species.
Their  dispositions  are  cruel,  and  every  person,  not  being  of  their  own  nation,  whom
they  can  lay  their  hands  upon,  they  kill  and  eat."  ^ — Our  author  might  perhaps  also
have  heard  of  an  island  in  the  Sea  of  India,  called  the  Island  of  El-Kasr  (or  the
Pavilion),  on  which,  as  related  by  El-Kazweenee,  is  a  white  pavilion,  and  whoever
enters  this,  sleep  and  insensibility  overcome  him,  and  the  inhabitants  take  him. — But
several  circumstances  connected  with  the  adventures  of  Es-Sindibad  on  the  island  of
the  cannibals  seem  rather  to  point  out  Sumatra  as  the  scene ;  and  I  think  it  most


38  The  orthography  of  this  name  is  doubtful ;  the  signs  which  would  fix  it  being  omitted.

39  Marsdcu's  translation,  p.  619.


NOTKS  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTIETH.  95

probable  that  this  island  is  meant  by  "Seksar.''40  Hole  observes  (page  111),  "Not-
withstanding the  striking  similarity  between  the  inhabitants  of  the  Andamans  and  Es-
Sindibdd's  negroes,  other  circumstances  render  it  more  probable  that  he  was  wrecked
on  the  coast  of  Sumatra.  Some  old  voyagers  mention  a  stupifying,  or  rather  ine-
briating, vegetable  as  peculiar  to  it :  others  say  that  it  was  customary  with  its  in-
habitants to  fatten  children  in  order  to  eat  them.  The  Moharamadan  travellers  in  the
ninth  century  describe  them  as  cannibals,  and  those  of  the  kingdom  of  Batta  continue
so  to  this  day. — '  In  Lamaray '  (Sumatra),  says  Mandeville,  •  is  a  cursed  custom,  for
thei  eaten  more  gladly  mannes  flesche  than  any  other  flesche.  .  .  .  Thidre  gon  mar-
chauntes,  and  bryngen  with  hem  children,  to  selle  to  hem  of  the  contree,  and  thei
byzen  [buy]  hem  :  and  zif  thei  ben  fatte,  thei  eten  hem  anon :  and  zif  thei  ben  lene,
thei  feden  hem,  tille  thei  ben  fatte,  and  thanne  thei  eten  hem.'  "  (Page  214.)

The  food  which  stupified  the  companions  of  Es-Sindibad  we  may  suppose  to  have
been  mixed  with  hemp,  henbane,  hellebore,  datura,  or  opium ;  all  of  which  are  often
used  in  various  countries  of  the  East  for  this  purpose,  though  more  frequently  to
induce  a  pleasurable  intoxication.  Hole  remarks  (page  126),  that  "  Davis,  who  sailed
to  Sumatra  in  the  year  1599,  says,  '  In  this  country  there  is  a  kind  of  seed,  whereof  a
little  being  eaten,  maketh  a  man  to  turn  fool,  all  things  seeming  to  him  to  be  meta-
morphosed.'"— "Dampier,"  also,  he  observes,  "mentions  that  the  inhabitants  of
Sumatra  '  make  use  of  a  certain  herb  like  hemp,  called  Ganga  or  Bang,  which,  if
infused  in  any  liquor,  exerts  its  operation  upon  those  that  taste  it  after  a  very  odd
manner,  according  to  their  different  constitutions ;  for  some  it  stupifies,  others  it
makes  sleepy,  others  merry,  and  some  quite  mad.'"  The  term  "benj,"  or  "beng,"  is
applied  by  the  Arabs  both  to  hemp  and  henbane  :  the  former,  from  the  efrects  above
described,  appears  to  be  here  meant.  Dampier  might  have  been  ignorant  of  the  in-
toxicating property  of  hemp,  and  therefore  prudently  used  the  words  "  like  hemp." —
It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  add,  that  Sumatra  abounds  with  cocoa-nuts.

NOTE  53.  "  Es-Sindibad's  travelling  eight  days  [or  seven  days  and  nights]  before
he  finds  white  men  on  another  part  of  the  coast  will  not  agree  with  the  contracted  size
of  the  Andaman  or  Nicobar  islands.  .  .  .  Pepper  is  the  common  product  of  the  Sunda
islands,  and  more  peculiarly  so  of  Sumatra."  (Hole,  page  130.)

NOTE  54.  The  words  "  with  all  her  apparel  and  ornaments  and  wealth  "  I  have
inserted  on  the  authority  of  the  Calcutta  edition  of  the  first  two  hundred  Nights,  and
Langles'  edition.

NOTE  55.  The  name  of  the  island  where  the  living  spouse  was  buried  with  the
dead  is  not  mentioned ;  but  we  may  suppose  it  to  be  not  far  from  Sumatra.  That
such  a  custom  prevailed  in  any  of  the  Eastern  islands  or  elsewhere,  the  reader  will  not
expect  to  be  proved :  but  the  burial  of  the  living  husband  with  the  dead  wife,  in  a  city
beyond  an  extensive  desert  on  the  northern  frontiers  of  India,  is  mentioned  in  another
Oriental  romance.41  Mandeville,  also,  "  mentions,  that  in  '  the  yle  of  Calanak  ["  an
island  supposed  to  be  not  very  remote  from  Java,'' 42  and  consequently  perhaps  the
island  where  this  custom  is 'said  to  have  prevailed  in  our  story],  zif  a  man  that  is
maryed  dye,  men  buryen  his  wif  with  him  alle  quyk.'  ....  Mr.  Grose,  likewise,  in  his
Voyage  to  the  East  Indies  in  1745,  says,  that  among  a  particular  caste  of  Indians,  a
plate  of  rice,  a  jar  of  water,  and  the  cloaths  and  jewels  a  wife  wore  when  alive,  were
buried  with  her.  But  he  further  informs  us,  that  the  husband  usually  divested  her  of


40  In  the  passage  which  describes  Seksar  as  in  beyond  a  doubt,  to  have  been  made  in  one  ease

the  Sea  of  the  Zenj,  a  copyist  may  perhaps  have  which  I  have  shewn  in  a  former  note,  No.  17.

put  "  Zenj,"  for  "  Zanij  "  (a  name  of  Borneo),  upon  *'  See  Forbes's  translation  of  the  "  Adventures

which  Sumatra  is  said  to  have  been  dependent.  of  Hatim  Tai,"  p.  153.

See  the  third  paragraph  of  Note  12  in  the  present  «  Hole,  p.  92.
scries. This error in transcription appears,


96  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTIETH.

the  latter  before  the  grave  was  filled  up."  (Hole,  page  139.)  Perhaps,  then,  our
author  might  have  heard  some  account  of  the  custom  which  he  here  describes  j  or
merely  the  Hindoo  practice  of  burning  the  widow  with  the  corpse  of  her  husband  may
have  suggested  to  him  the  idea.

NOTE  56.  My  sheykh  observes  that  this  is  a  mistake,  unless  it  be  meant  that  the
women,  because  they  were  weaker  than  the  men,  had  a  larger  stock  of  provisions.  In
the  Breslau  edition  we  read  here  "  a  mug  of  water  and  seven  cakes  of  bread,"  as  usual.

NOTE  57.  Hole  remarks  (page  140),  that  Es-Sindibad's  escape  "may  have  been
suggested  by  an  incident  that  took  place  in  a  very  early  period  of  Grecian  history,
relative  to  Aristomenes,  the  Messenian  general,  who  was  taken  prisoner  by  the
Spartans,  and  with  fifty  of  his  countrymen  precipitated  into  a  deep,  gloomy  cavern.
All  the  others  were  killed  by  the  fall ;  and  for  three  days  he  lay  almost  dead  with
hunger  and  with  the  stench  of  corrupted  carcases,  when  he  perceived  a  fox  near  him,
gnawing  a  dead  body.  With  one  hand  he  caught  it  by  the  hind  leg,  and  with  the
other  held  its  jaw  when  it  attempted  to  tite  him.  Following,  as  well  as  he  could,  hij
struggling  guide  to  the  narrow  crevice  at  which  he  entered,  he  there  let  him  go,  and
soon  forced  himself  a  passage  through  it  to  the  welcome  face  of  day."

NOTE  58. This  and  the  next  two  sentences  I  insert  from  Langles'  edition.

NOTE  59.  Of  "the  Island  of  the  Bell"  I  find  no  mention  in  any  other  work.
May  it  not  be  the  island  mentioned  in  Note  17  in  the  present  series  ?  The  original
meaning  of  the  word  which  I  have  rendered  "bell"  (namely  "nakoos")  is,  a  wooden
instrument  used  by  the  Eastern  Christians  to  announce  the  times  of  prayer,  consistiii!;
of  two  pieces  of  wood  of  unequal  lengths,  which  were  knocked  together.  The  noisy
island  of  Bartail  might  therefore  not  inaptly  be  called  "  the  Island  of  the  Nakoos."

NOTE  60.  The  orthography  of  this  name  is  uncertain,  as  the  signs  that  would  fix  it
are  omitted.  It  is  evidently  the  "Cala"  and  "Kulleh"  in  the  fourth  paragraph  of
Note  12  in  the  present  series;  which  see.  For  the  word  "Kingdom,''  afterwards
occurring,  we  may  read  "  seat  of  government ;"  and  for  "  a  mine  of  lead,"  it  appears
that  we  should  read  "  a  mine  of  tin."

NOTE  61.  In  the  Calcutta  edition  of  the  first  two  hundred  Nights,  this  is  called
"the  City  of  El-Abateel,"  that  is  " of  Vanities,"  or  "Lies,"'  &c.

NOTE  62. —  The  Egg  of  the  Rukh',  and  the  consequence  of  breaking  it.  Ibn-El-Wardee,
after  having  given  the  brief  notice  which  I  have  quoted  in  Note  22  in  the  present
series,  respecting  the  Island  of  the  Rukh',  and  the  bird  after  which  it  was  named,  on
the  authority  of  'Abd-Er-Rahman  El-Maghrabee,  relates  two  anecdotes  of  this  man,
both  of  which  are  included  among  the  historical  anecdotes  of  the  Cairo  edition  of  the
Thousand  and  One  Nights.  Of  the  former  I  have  given  a  translation  in  page  538  of
the  second  volume  of  this  work.  The  latter  I  omitted  there  that  I  might  not  antici-
pate the  adventures  of  Es-Sindibad  to  which  this  note,  and  the  one  above  referred  to,
relate.  It  is  given  in  Ibn-El-Wardee"s  work  as  follows,  and  nearly  in  the  same  words
in  the  Thousand  and  One  Nights,  in  both  works  as  related  by  'Abd-Er-Rahman  El-
Maghrabee.

"  He  said  that  he  made  a  voyage  in  the  Sea  of  China,  and  the  wind  drove  them  to
a  great,  large,  wide  island,  where  the  people  of  the  ship  landed  to  procure  water  and
firewood,  taking  with  them  axes  and  ropes  and  water-skins,  and  he  was  with  them.
And  they  saw  upon  the  island  a  dome,  white,  of  enormous  size,  shining,  glistening,
more  than  a  hundred  cubits  high.  So  they  went  towards  it  and  approached  it,  and,  lo,
it  was  an  egg  of  the  rukh'.  They  began  to  strike  it  with  the  axes  and  with  masses  of
rock  and  with  wood,  until  it  broke,  and  disclosed  the  young  rukh',  which  was  like  a
firm  mountain  ;  and  they  caught  hold  of  a  feather  of  its  wing,  and  pulled  it ;  where-
upon it  became  dissevered  from  the  wing  ;  and  the  formation  of  the  feathers  was  not


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTIETH.  97

complete.  After  this  they  killed  the  bird,  and  carried  away  as  much  as  they  could  of
its  flesh.  They  also  cut  off  the  lower  portion  of  the  feather,  from  the  extremity  of  the
quill-part,  and  departed.  And  some  of  those  who  entered  the  island  had  cooked
of  the  flesh,  and  eaten.  Among  these  were  old  men  with  white  beards ;  and  when
they  arose  in  the  morning,  they  found  that  their  beards  had  become  black ;  and  not
one  of  the  people  who  ate  became  grey  after  that :  wherefore  they  said,  that  the  stick
with  which  they  stirred  what  was  in  the  pot  of  the  flesh  of  the  young  rukh'  was  of  the
tree  of  youth :  but  God  is  all-knowing.  And  when  the  sun  rose,  and  the  people  were
in  the  ship,  and  she  was  proceeding  with  them,  lo,  the  rukh'  [the  old  bird]  approached,
coming  down  like  a  vast  cloud,  having  in  its  claw  a  fragment  of  a  mountain,  like  an
enormous  house,  and  bigger  than  the  ship.  And  when  it  came  over  the  ship,  in  the
sky,  it  cast  down  the  stone  upon  her,  and  upon  those  who  were  in  her.  But  the  ship
was  swift  in  her  course ;  so  she  got  before  the  stone,  which  fell  into  the  sea,  and  its
fall  occasioned  a  most  terrible  commotion  in  the  sea.  God,  says  the  narrator,  decreed
us  safety,  and  delivered  us  from  destruction."

The  above  anecdote  is  also  related  by  Ed-  Demeeree,  who  died,  according  to  D'Her-
belot,  in  the  year  of  the  Flight  808  (A.D.  1405-6),  and  apparently  with  little  variation,
judging  from  a  Latin  translation  of  it  by  Bochart  (Hierozoicon,  vol.  ii.  p.  854),  which
Hole  has  quoted.

NOTE  63.  The  word  which  I  have  rendered  "a  streamlet"  (namely  "sakiyeh")
is  also  applied  to  a  water-wheel  for  irrigation,  and  is  used  in  this  sense  in  my  original
and  in  the  Breslau  edition ;  but  not  so  in  the  two  other  editions  that  I  have  by  me.
We  must  suppose  that  there  were  no  men  who  could  make  use  of  a  water-wheel  in  this
part.

NOTE  64. —  The  Old  Man  of  the  Sea.  I  must  now  continue  the  anecdote  commenced
in  Note  52  in  the  present  series,  describing  the  adventures  of  a  man  upon  an  island
which,  as  there  stated,  I  suppose  to  be  Sumatra.

"  Being  then  secure  from  them,  I  journeyed  over  that  island,  night  and  day,  and
came  at  last  to  trees  bearing  fruits,  beneath  which  were  men  of  handsome  form,  but
without  bones  in  their  legs.  I  sat,  and  I  understood  not  their  language,  nor  did
they  understand  mine ;  and  I  was  not  aware  of  it  before  one  of  them  mounted  on  my
neck,  wound  his  legs  round  my  throat,  and  urged  me  to  rise.  So  I  rose  with  him,  and
strove  to  release  myself  from  him,  and  to  throw  him  down  from  me ;  but  I  could  not ;
and  he  began  to  scratch  my  face  with  his  sharp  nails.  I  therefore  proceeded  to  carry
him  about  among  the  trees,  and  he  ate  of  their  fruits,  and  fed  his  companions,  who
laughed  at  me.  But  while  I  was  bearing  him  about  among  the  trees,  a  thorn  of  a
tree  entered  his  eye,  and  he  became  blind.  Then  I  pressed  for  him  some  grapes,43  and
said  to  him,  Stoop.  And  he  stooped ;  whereupon  his  legs  became  loosened  from  me,
and  I  threw  him  down  from  my  neck,  and  departed,  and  God  saved  me  by  his  grace.
And  these  scratches  were  made  by  him."

El-Kazweenee  also  mentions,  in  the  khatimeh  (or  conclusion)  of  his  work,  that  in
the  island  in  which  is  a  people  with  faces  like  the  faces  of  dogs,  that  is,  the  island
which  is  said  to  have  been  the  scene  of  the  adventure  above  related,  "  there  is  a
people  in  the  form  of  men,  like  the  handsomest  existing,  and  there  is  no  bone  in  their
legs."  He  adds,  "They  drag  themselves  along;  and  when  they  find  a  man  walking,
they  leap  upon  his  neck,  and  fold  their  legs  upon  that  walking  man ;  and  if  the  latter
strive  to  throw  down  the  man  upon  his  neck,  he  scratcheth  him  upon  his  face,  and  he
curbeth  him  as  one  of  us  curbeth  his  beast,"

But  in  another  place,  in  his  account  of  animals  of  the  water,  he  gives  a  somewhat


43  The  pressing  of  the  grapes  is  mentioned  by think  it  has  been  inserted  in  the  work  of  the
El-Kazweenee,  but not by Ibn-El-Wardee. I former  by  some  copyist.

III.  °


98  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTIETH.

different  account  of  "the  Old  Man  of  the  Sea;"  as  follows :—" The  water-man

resembleth  a  man,  saving  that  he  hath  a  tail One  of  them  was  found  in  our

time  dried,  and  was  shewn  to  the  people,  and  his  form  was  as  we  have  described  it.  It
is  related  that,  from  the  Sea  of  Syria,  sometimes,  there  cometh  up  from  the  water  to
the  abode  of  men  [a  creature  in]  the  form  of  a  man,  having  a  white  beard,  and  they
name  it  the  Old  Man  of  the  Sea,  and  it  remaineth  some  days,  without  descending ;  and
when  the  people  see  it,  they  rejoice  in  expectation  of  plenty.  It  is  also  related
that  a  water-man  was  brought  to  one  of  the  Kings,  Who  desired  to  know  his  condition :
so  he  married  a  woman  to  him,  and  they  had  a  son  who  understood  the  languages  of
both  his  parents.  And  it  was  said  to  the  son,  What  saith  thy  father  ?  To  which  lie
answered,  He  saith,  The  tails  of  all  [other]  animals  are  on  the  lower  part  of  their
bodies :  how  then  is  it  that  the  tails  of  these  are  upon  their  faces  ?" — This  important
observation  of  the  water-man  does  not  confirm  what  is  said  before,  that  this  creature
hath  a  white  beard :  but  the  above  account  was  apparently  founded"  011  the  fact  of  the
exhibition  of  the  dried  water-man.

Is  it  not  highly  probable  that  this  dried  Old  Man  of  the  Sea  was  one  of  the  apes
mentioned  in  a  former  note,  No.  38  in  the  present  series?  And  does  not  this
strengthen  the  opinion  that  Sumatra  is  the  island  of  this  creature  ?  Es-Sindibad's
next  adventure  after  his  escape  from  the  Old  Man  of  the  Sea  also  appears  to  me  to
confirm  this  opinion.  I  agree  with  Hole  in  the  latter  of  the  two  conjectures  which  he
thus  states  (as  well  as  in  the  inference  he  thence  draws). — "  I  would  willingly  suppose
the  phrase  'of  the  sea '  to  be  an  addition  of  the  translator,  not  countenanced  by  the
original ;  or  that  it  was  applied  to  Es-Sindibad's  persecutor  merely  on  account  of  his
insular  abode,  or  usual  appearance  by  the  sea-side. — If  either  of  these  conjectures,''  he
adds,  "  be  allowed,  we  may  pronounce  him,  without  any  hesitation,  to  be  an  Ourang
Outan.  It  is  to  be  observed,  that  he  never  speaks,  but  expresses  his  meaning  by  ges-
ticulation ;  he  lives  on  fruits  ;  the  skin  of  his  legs  resembles  that  of  a  cow  [or  buffalo]  ;
and  his  winding  them  round  Es-Sindibad's  neck  is  consistent  with  the  pliability  of
limb  belonging  to  that  animal:  even  his  draining  the  calabash,  in  imitation  of  Es-
Sindibad,  is  characteristic  of  our  humiliating  copyists."44

Two  stories  similar  to  that  of  Es-Sindibad  and  the  Old  Man  of  the  Sea  occur  in  two
other  Eastern  romances.  One  I  have  met  with  in  the  romance  of  Seyt  Zu-1-Yezen.
Two  of  Seyf"s  companions  are  related  to  have  fallen  into  the  power  of  the  monsters
above  mentioned,  whom  they  intoxicated,  and  thus  they  effected  their  liberation.  This
romance,  I  was  told  in  Cairo,  is  much  older  than  the  Thousand  and  One  Nights. — The
other  story,  which  was  pointed  out  to  me  by  Dr.  W.  C.  Taylor,  is  in  the  Adventures  of
Camarupa.  See  pages  72 — 81  of  the  translation  by  Franklin,  who  shews,  in  a  note,
the  prevalence  of  a  belief  in  the  existence  of  the  monsters  in  question,  whom  his
author  calls  "  Duwal  Payan, "  that  is,  ''men  with  slender  and  pliant  legs,"  or,  as  be
renders  the  words,  "men  with  leathern  feet."  I  find  them  described  in  Richardson's
Dictionary  (Johnson's  edition),  as,  "  a  people  in  India,  who,  according  to  Castellns,
have  legs  thin  and  ductile,  like  leathern  straps  :  they  pretend  to  be  lame,  and  impor-
tune travellers  to  carry  them  on  their  backs ;  which  proves  fatal  to  such  whose  com-
passion induces  them  to  comply ;  as  the  villains  twist  their  legs  round  their  necks,  and
instantly  strangle  them."  And  here  I  may  appropriately  add  an  extract  from  No.  47
of  the  Foreign  Quarterly  Review,  before  referred  to. — "  In  the  story  of  Sindibad,  many
of  the  incidents  which  are  attributed  to  the  Greeks  were  undoubtedly  borrowed  by
them  from  Persia ;  and  the  fabulous  deduction  assuredly  sprung  from  an  historical
fact.  Thus,  as  noted  on  a  former  occasion,  the  Old  Man  of  the  Sea  simply  signifies  the
chief  (sar)  of  the  sea  or  lake  (yangi),  t.  e.  of  the  coast ; — and  there  is  no  greater  perver-
sion in  the  translation  than  in  that  of  sheykh,  used  sometimes  as  chief,  sometimes  as


Pages  151  and  152.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTIETH.  99

old  man,  or  elder,  (so  too  our  eoldermann,)  as  in  patriarchal  countries.  The  same
compound  word,  sar-yangi,  is  obviously  the  name  preserved  by  Arrian,  and  Quintus
Curtius,  as  Zarango>,  a  Scytho-Persic  tribe.  This  singular  identity  is  established  by
the  fact  that  the  Avari,  or  shepherds,  of  our  Indian  frontier,  Scyths  also,  arc  in  n
vulgar  tradition  represented  as  riding  upon  the  conquered  inhabitants;  while  the
buskin,  mentioned  (if  we  remember  rightly,  by  Herodotus,)  as  the  appendage  of  the
Scythian  tribes,  at  once  explains  the  phantasy,  of  the  leather  legs  of  these  man-
bestriding  Ancients."  ( Pages  145  and  146.)  May  not  the  name  of  the  Old  Man  of  the
Sea  have  originated  hence  and  been  transferred  by  the  Arabs  to  a  kind  of  Ape,  which
they  imagined  a  man  ?  That  they  applied  this  name  to  an  ape  I  cannot  doubt.

NOTE  65.  The  City  of  tlie  Apes  appears  to  be  in  the  Island  of  Apes,  which  I
suppose  to  be  Sumatra.  See  above,  Note  38.  If  Es-Sindibad's  adventures  during  his
Fifth  Voyage  were  founded  on  the  experience  and  reports  of  a  single  navigator,  and
agreed  with  the  account  of  the  latter  in  the  order  of  events,  there  would  still  be,  here,
nothing  inconsistent  with  what  immediately  precedes ;  as  a  person  might  be  several
"  days  and  nights  "  in  passing  from  one  part  of  Sumatra  to  another.  What  follows,
too,  is  especially  applicable  to  this  island.

NOTE  66.  Hole  mentions  (page  157),  on  the  authority  of  Grossier's  Description  of
China,  a  similar  mode  of  gathering  tea,  said  to  be  practised  in  that  country;  and
Chinese  drawings  confirming  the  account.  I  have  myself  likewise  seen  paintings  in
ancient  Egyptian  tombs  representing  the  mode  of  gathering  fruit  by  means  of  tame
monkeys.  See  an  engraving  of  one  of  these  designs  in  the  invaluable  work  on  the
Ancient  Egyptians  by  Sir  Gardner  Wilkinson,  vol.  ii.  p.  150.

NOTE  67.  This,  as  Hole  observes,  might  be  any  of  the  islands  near  the  straits  of
Sunda.  The  cinnamon  is  mentioned  only  in  one  of  the  four  editions  that  I  have  of  the
original.45  In  the  Breslau  edition,  for  "  cinnamon  "  we  have  "  cloves.1'

NOTE  68.  El-Kazweenee  says  of  the  pepper-vine,  that  when,  the  sun  becomes  hot
upon  the  bunches  of  pepper  leaves  fold  over  each  bunch,  that  it  may  not  be  burnt  by
the  sun ;  and  when  the  sun  is  withdrawn  from  it,  the  leaves  are  also,  that  it  may
receive  the  zephyr ;  but  I  remember  to  have  seen,  somewhere  in  the  work  of  El-
Idreesee,  an  account  agreeing  with  that  of  our  author.

NOTE  69.  In  Langles'  edition,  this  is  called  the  Island  of  El-Kamaree ;  and  in  the
same  edition,  after  mentioning  the  aloes-wood,  it  is  added,  "its  inhabitants  prohibit
fornication  and  wine."  This  is  also  added  in  the  Calcutta  edition  of  the  first  two
hundred  Nights,  which  does  not  mention  the  name  of  the  island.  Hence  it  is  evident
that  the  name  should  be  Kamar  (respecting  which  see  Note  12  in  the  present  series) ;
for  in  the  "  Accounts  of  India  and  China  "  (before  quoted),  the  same  remark  is  made
(page  64)  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  island  or  country  so  called.

NOTE  70.  I  read  "  Sanfee  "  for  "  Seenee  "  (or  "  Chinese  ").  See  again  the  note
just  referred  to,  fifth  paragraph.  But  it  what  I  have  there  said,  respecting  the
position  of  Sanf,  be  correct,  an  Arab  writer  might  regard  this  country  as  a  part  of
China,  and  I  have  shewn  that  El-Idreesee  calls  it  "a  Chinese  island"  (or  peninsula).
In  Langles'  edition,  the  Sanfee  aloes-wood  is  mentioned  as  the  product  of  the  Island  of
"  El-Kamaree."

NOTE  71.  In  the  Breslau  edition,  these  remarks  are  applied  to  the  inhabitants  of
the  Island  of  the  Kamaree  aloes-wood.

NOTE  72. The  word  which  I  render  "bay''  is  "birkeh." It  generally  signifies  a


«  It  is  mentioned  in  the  Calcutta  edition  of  the  complete  work.— ED.


100  NOTES  TO  CHAFfKi:  T \VEXTIKTH.

lake  or  pool;  but  is  also  applied  to  a  bay  (ex.  gr.  "Birket  Far'ooii,"  or  "  Pharaoh's
Bay,"  in  the  Ked  Sea),  and  to  a  reach  of  a  river.  There  is  a  pearl-fishery  "  in  the
gulf  of  a  bay  that  lies  between  Maabar  [the  southernmost  part  of  India]  and  the  island
of  Zeilan  for  CeylonJ,"  4S  in  the  course  of  Es-Sindibad's  homeward  voyage.

NOTE  73.  Or  rather  a  peninsula,  as  the  sequel  will  shew;  for  it  afterwards
appears  that  the  vessel  was  wrecked  upon  the  coast  of  Ceylon,  though,  as  Hole
remarks,  it  would  be  no  easy  matter  to  find  the  particular  spot  here  described.  The
author  seems,  in  this  case,  to  have  given  the  reins  to  his  imagination,  and  scarcely  to
have  curbed  it  on  any  occasion  until  his  mention,  by  name,  of  the  island  of  Sarandeeb,
or  Ceylon.

NOTE  74.  The  introduction  of  the  words  here  inserted  between  crotchets  is
justified  by  what  follows  in  the  text. — In  the  old  version,  the  stream  of  sweet  water
here  mentioned  is  said  to  run  out  of  the  sea.  But  in  this  passage,  I  think  Galland  lias
mistaken  the  sense  of  his  original :  in  the  Calcutta  edition  of  the  first  two  hundred
Nights,  and  in  Langles'  edition,  the  stream,  or  river,  is  described  as  coming  forth  from
the  seaside.  Hole  mentions  submarine  springs  of  fresh  water  in  the  Persian  Gulf,  near
El-Bahreyn,  on  the  authority  of  Ives  and  Chardin.

NOTE  75.  So  in  Langles'  edition.  In  the  Cairo  edition,  "  Chinese,"  as  in  a
former  instance.  The  reading  of  the  Breslau  edition  is  "good  aloes-wood." — What  is
said  of  the  abundance  of  jewels  in  this  place  is  founded  upon  truth.  Marco  Polo
observes  (Book  iii.  chap.  19),  that  the  island  of  Ceylon  "produces  more  beautiful  and
valuable  rubies  than  are  found  in  any  other  part  of  the  world,  and  likewise  sapphires,
topazes,  amethysts,  garnets,  and  many  other  precious  and  costly  stones.'*  And  his
learned  translator,  Mr.  Marsden,  adds,  "  Mr.  Cordiner  enumerates,  as  the  production  of
Ceylon,  the  ruby,  emerald,  topaz,  amethyst,  sapphire,  cat's-eye  or  opal,  cinnamon-stone
or  garnet,  agate,  sardonix,  and  some  others."  Ancient  authors  also  give  similar
accounts  of  the  natural  riches  of  this  island,  called  by  them  "  Taprobane."

NOTE  76.  Through  an  opening,  we  may  suppose,  in  the  mountain. — In  the  old
version,  this  spring  is  called  "a  sort  of  fountain  of  pitch  or  bitumen;"  and  Hole
remarks  (pp.  168 — 171),  "The  fountain  of  pitch  and  bitumen  is  not  to  be  objected
against.  Similar  ones  existed  on  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates  at  a  place  called  Kit  or
Ait  [properly,  HeetJ,  about  five  days' journey  from  ancient  Babylon,  and  two  'from
modern  Babylon  or  Bagdad. '  .  .  .  If  we  are  to  credit  Bartholomew  de  Argensola,  we
must  consider  Es-Sindibad  as  merely  stating  a  well-known  matter  of  fact .  tor  he
assures  us,  that  in  Ceylon  were  :  springs  of  liquid  bitumen  thicker  than  our  oil,  and
some  of  pure  balsam.'"  El-Idreesec  (1st  Climate,  close  of  7th  Section,)  says,  that
ambergris  is  a  substance  which  flows  from  sources  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  as  naphtha
flows  from  the  sources  of  Heet.  See  Note  78  below.

NOTE  77.  In  the  original,  "  el-hawaish"  ( plural  of  "  haisheh ").  My  sheykh,  in  a
marginal  note,  explains  that  this  term  is  applied  to  "  such  creatures  as  the  crocodile
and  buffalo  and  terrific  things  that  come  forth  froin  the  sea:  but  as  to  common  tish,''
he  adds,  "  they  are  not  so  called.''  The  author  seems  to  have  intended  to  allude  to
the  whale,  of  which  El-Kazweenee,  describing  it  under  the  name  of ';bal,"  says,  that
some  of  the  Zenj  (or  Ethiopians)  catch  it,  and  take  forth  from  it  ambergris.

NOTE  78.  It  is  added  in  my  original,  "and  no  one  can  ascend  that  mountain  :"
but  we  are  told  that  Es-Sindibad  and  his  companions  did.  It  should  rather  have  been
said,  "  and  no  ship  can  approach  it  in  safety.''

"  In  regard  to  the  ambergris  which  the  waves  threw  on  the  beach,  it  may  be
observed,"  says  Hole  (page  171),  "that  'the  Mohammadan  traveller47  [of  the  ninth


11  Marsilcn's  Marco  Polo,  p.  »L'5.

47  One  of  the  two  travellers  so  often  cited  in  these  notes


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTIETH.  101

century]  mentions  :i  particular  species  of  it  which  was  frequently  cast  by  the  sea  on
the  Barbarian  and  Indian  coasts ;  which  swam  in  great  lumps,  and,  when  swallowed
by  certain  fish  of  the  whale  kind,  destroyed  them/48  Renaudot,  in  his  observations.
says,  that  '  these  authors  thought  with  some  of  the  ancients  that  it  grew  like  a  plant
at  the  bottom  of  the  sea ,'  and  that  another  asserted,  'it  rose  in  springs 4g  like  pitch
'  and  bitumen.'  He  quotes  another  who  observes,  that  '  one  sort  of  it  was  black  like
pitch,  soft,  and  often  ill-scented,  because,  as  the'  inhabitants  report,  whales  and  other
fishes,  and  evea  birds,  swallow  it  as  often  as  they  see  it  flouting  on  the  surface.'50 —
These  circumstances,  which  the  author  of  the  tale  might  have  heard  but  not  thoroughly
understood,  suggested  possibly  the  idea  in  the  text  of  the  supposed  metamorphosis
these  inflammatory  substances  underwent  by  being  lodged  for  a  short  period  in  the
stomach  of  a  fish.  Ambergris  is  said  to  abound  chiefly  in  those  seas  that  are  inhabited
by  the  spermaceti-whale,  and  is  often  found  in  the  body  and  the  excrements  of  that
animal.  Yet  many  naturalists  agree  in  opinion  with  the  Mohammadan  traveller,  and
imagine  it  to  be  a  fossil  or  vegetable  substance,  which,  when  devoured  by  the  whale,
throws  it  into  a  state  of  torpidity  and  sickness.'" — Kl-Kazweenee  says,  some  persons
assert  that  ambergris  comes  from  a  spring  in  the  sea,  like  bitumen ',  others,  that  it  is  a
kind  of  dew ;  and  others,  that  it  is  from  an  animal  of  the  water.  He  adds,  that  it  is
not  denied  that  tfhe  sea  throws  it  up  on  the  shore ;  and  states  that  the  sea  of  the  Zenj
(or  Ethiopians)  throws  up  large  masses,  the  largest  being  a  thousand  mithkals  ;51  that
it  is  often  found  in  the  belly  of  the  sea-fish  ;  and  that  the  fish  which  eats  it  dies. — It
is  mostly  found  on  the  eastern  shores  of  Africa,  and  on  the  shores  of  -the  adjacent
islands.  Sir  Gardner  Wilkinson  has  shewn  me  a  cylindrical  lump  of  ambergris  three
inches  and  a  quarter  in  length,  and  one  inch  and  a  half  in  diameter,  which  he  found  on
the  western  shore  of  the  Red  Sea,  at  Jebel  ez-Zeyt.  He  was  informed  by  the  Arabs
that  similar,  but  smaller,  lumps  were  often  found  there.

NOTE  79.  This  is  not  unfrequently  done  in  similar  cases.  See  my  work  on  the
Modern  p]gyptians,  vol.  ii.  ch.  xv.,  first  paragraph.

NOTE  80.  Here,  and  afterwards,  I  read  "  kelek "  for  "  fulk,"  as  in  a  former
instance.  In  Langles'  edition,  and  the  Calcutta  edition  of  the  first  two  hundred
Nights,  what  is  called  a  boat  in  the  edition  of  Cairo  is  sometimes  termed  a  boat  and
sometimes  a  raft  ("kelek,"  and  "remes,"  for  "remeth'').

NOTE  81.  Because,  by  being  drowned,  he  would  die  a  martyr.  See  Note  88  to
Chapter  iii.

NOTE  82. Here  again  I  read  "  Sanfee  ''  for  "  Seenee,"  or  Chinese.

NOTE  83.  In  the  Romance  of  Seyf  Zu-1-Yezen,  mentioned  before,  I  find  a  similar
story  of  a  subterranean  river,  and"  a  voyage  upon  it,  which  may  have  suggested  this
incident  to  our  author ;  or  perhaps,  as  Hole  observes,  the  idea  may  have  been  taken
from  the  fact  that  the  river  Zendarood  passes  under  the  earth  from  Ispahan  to
Kirman/'2

NOTE  81.  The  words  "  who  was  the  King  of  Sarandeeb  "  (i.  c.  Ceylon)  are  in  the
Calcutta  edition  of  the  first  two  hundred  Nights,  and  in  Langles'  edition ;  but  not  in
the  editions  of  Cairo  and  Breslau.

NOTE  85.  For  the  remainder  of  this  voyage,  and  the  whole  of  the  next  (which  is
the  last  ,  I  follow  the  text  of  the  Calcutta  edition  of  the  first  two  hundred  Nights,  and


"•  I'airo  !U.  5I  About  twelve  pounds  and  a  half,  Apothecaries'  weight.

>'•'  Xoti's,  p  Kl.  5-  See  also  the  third  paragraph  of  Note  1  in  the  present  series.

50  Idem,  p.  US.


102  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTIETH.

occasionally  that  of  Laugles'  edition ;  for  in  the  Cairo  edition,  and  in  that  of  Breslau
also,  the  latter  part  of  the  Sixth  Voyage  is  less  amply  related,  and  the  Seventh  is
altogether  very  different  from  that  in  the  old  version.  I  therefore  think  it  better  to
subjoin  a  translation  of  the  Seventh  Voyage  as  related  in  the  Cairo  edition  to  tin-
present  series  of  notes.

NOTE  86.  Though  this  is  far  from  the  truth,  Diodorus  Siculus  and  Ptolemy  have
said  the  same  of  this  island,  the  ancient  Taprobane.  See  Hole,  p.  176.

NOTE  87.  Es-Sindibad's  brief  description  of  Sarandeeb  for  Ceylon)  has  been
amply  illustrated  by  Hole,  pp.  178 — 187.  Its  jewels  I  have  already  noticed  ;  and  I  shall
only  add  a  few  words  respecting  its  great  mountain,  called  by  the  Arabs  "  Er-
Rahoon;"  and  by  Europeans,  "  Adam's  Peak."  The  Arabs  say,  that  when  our  first
parents  were  cast  down  from  Paradise,  Adam  fell  upon  this  mountain  ;  and  Eve,  near
Jnddah  (commonly  called  Jiddeh),  the  port  of  Mekkeh.  They  also  say,  that  on  the
summit  of  the  said  mountain  is  the  print  of  Adam's  foot ;  and  that,  when  one  of  his
feet  was  on  this  spot,  the  other  was  in  the  sea.

NOTE  88.  This  word  I  find  only  in  Langles'  edition,  and  what  animal  is  meant
by  it  I  know  not.  Hole  states  (page  192),  on  the  authority  of  a  gentleman  who
long  resided  in  the  East  Indies,  that  "  the  skin  of  the  hog-deer,  a  beautiful  and  un-
common animal  found  at  Prince's  Island  in  the  straits  of  Sunda,  is  of  a  yellowish
colour  when  alive,  and  might  easily  be  dressed  as  yellow  parchment."

NOTE  89.  The  elephants  of  Ceylon  are  said  to  be  the  best  in  the  world.  See
Hole,  p.  194.

NOTE  90.  The  belief  in  the  sanative  properties  of  a  serpent's  skin  is  a  superstition
of  ancient  times,  and  still  prevailing,  as  shewn  by  Hole,  pages  2Ci  and  :i05.  VA-
Kazweenee  says,  "  In  the  sea  of  the  Zenj  (or  Ethiopians)  is  the  island  of  Ed-Doda  (/'.  c.
Vociferation),  which  is  a  white  island,53  whence  are  heard  vociferation  and  clamour.
No  one  of  mankind  dwelleth  in  it;  but  sometimes  the  sailors  have  entered  it,  and
drunk  of  its  water,  which  they  have  found  sweet  and  good,  and  having  the  odour  of
camphor  ,  and  they  say, '  We  know  not  its  extremity  ;  but  near  it  are  great  mountains,
wherein  burneth  by  night  a  great  fire.'  They  have  related  also,  that  on  its  shores  a
serpent  appeareth  once  every  year,  and  the  Kings  of  the  Zenj  find  death  in  taking  it ;
and  when  they  have  taken  it,  they  cook  it,  and  make,  of  its  skin,  beds,  upon  which  the
person  who  is  afflicted  with  elephantiasis54  sitteth,  and  so  becometh  cured  of  his
disease  •  and  that  [skin]  is  found  in  the  treasuries  of  Kings."- — Serpents  that  swallow
the  elephant  have  been  mentioned  in  Note  12  (3rd  paragraph)  and  Note  43,  in  the
present  series.

NOTE  91.  This  ceremony  is  consistent  with  what  we  read  in  the  "  Accounts  of
India  and  China,"  page  31.  "  When  a  King  dies  in  the  Island  of  Sarandeeb,  they  lay
his  body  on  a  car,  in  such  a  manner  that  his  head  hangs  backwards  till  it  almost
touches  the  ground,  and  his  hair  is  upon  the  earth ;  and  this  car  is  followed  by  a
woman  with  a  broom  in  her  hand,  therewith  to  sweep  dust  on  the  face  of  the  deceased,
while  she  cries  out  with  a  loud  voice,  'O  men!  behold  your  King  who  was  yesterday
your  master ;  but  now  the  empire  he  exercised  over  you  is  vanished  and  gone.  He  is
reduced  to  the  state  you  behold,  having  left  the  world;  and  the  arbiter  of  death  hath
withdrawn  his  soul.  Reckon  therefore  no  more  upon  the  uncertain  hopes  of  life.'  " 5o


53  Ibn-El-Wardec  gives  a  similar  account  of  this  scribes,  in  nearly  the  same  manner,  the  ceremonies
island  and  its  wonders; but  savs  hero,  "  in  it  is  ;i  observed  on  the  occasion  of  the  death  of  the  King
city  i >f  white  stone,  wherein  is  no  inhabitant.'  nf  India  ;  and  the  author  of  the  Jlir-at  ez-Xeman,

54  In  Ibn-Kl-Wardee,  "  consumption."  still  more  nearly,  in  his  account  of  India;  both
«  El-ldreesec  (2nd  Climate,  «th Section,)  de-  addinar  that  the  body  is  afterwards  burnt.— ED.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTIETH.  103

NOTE  92. Es-Suweys  is  the  town  commonly  called  by  us  "  Suez."

NOTE  93.  "  The  Table  of  Suleyman"  I  suppose  to  be  a  figure  engraved  in  the  cup.
The  figure  called  the  Seal  of  Suleyman  M  is  often  engraved  in  the  bottom  of  a  drinking-
cup. — The  word  rendered  "  carpets,"  in  the  same  passage,  is  "  zawalee."  I  have  so
rendered  it  conjecturally,  judging  from  the  manner  in  which  I  have  found  it  used  in
other  instances,  where  it  expressly  denotes  either  carpets  or  mattresses  of  some  kind.
I  suppose  it  to  be  the  same  as  "  zelalee."

NOTE  94.  I  do  not  know  any  book  having  this  title ;  but  similar  titles  are  borne
by  many  Oriental  works.

NOTE  95.  Here  and  afterwards  I  have  taken  the  liberty  of  writing  "  teeth"  for
"  bones." — And  now  I  must  insert  one  more  extract  from  Hole's  learned  and  entertain-
ing "  Remarks."

"Nothing  material  occurs  in  the  last  voyage,  this  instance  of  the  elephant's
sagacity  excepted.  They  had  slain,  it  appears,  many  former  slaves  employed  in  the
same  office  Es-Sindibad  had  undertaken ;  but  finding  no  end  to  their  persecution,  and
being  aware  of  its  cause,  they  adopted  this  judicious  method  of  suppressing  the
merchants'  hostilities,  which  proceeded  solely  from  their  avarice :  and  it  were  devoutly
to  be  wished  that  this  was  a  solitary  instance  of  warfare  originating  from  the  same
principle.— This  story  relative  to  the  half-reasoning  elephant  is  sufficiently  consonant
to  European  as  well  as  Asiatic  ideas  concerning  him,  to  vindicate  the  author  from  the
charge  of  extravagance.  We  find  an  anecdote  in  Topsell's  Gesner  (page  152)  which
likewise  represents  these  animals  as  equally  sensible  of  the  value  which  mankind  set  on
their  teeth;  and,  therefore,  when  they  dropped  out,  which  was  commonly  the  case
every  tenth  year,  they  carefully  covered  them  with  earth,  to  hide  them  from  the  view
of  their  persecutors."  5T — Hole  afterwards  shews,  "  that  the  elephants  of  Pliny  and  Es-
Sindibad  were  equally  conscious  of  the  value  which  mankind  set  on  their  teeth.'' 58

NOTE  96. For  the  reason  given  in  a  former  note,  I  here  subjoin  a  translation  of

The  Seventh  Voyage  of  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sex  as  related  in  the  Cairo  Edition  of  the
Thousand  and  One  Siyhts.

Know,  O  company,  said  Es-Sindibad  of  the  Sea,  that  when  1  returned  from  the
sixth  voyage,  and  resumed  my  former  life  of  enjoyment  and  pleasure,  and  sport  and
merriment,  I  remained  thus  for  a  length  of  time  in  uninterrupted  joy  and  happiness
night  and  day ;  and  had  acquired  abundant  gains,  and  great  profits.  Then  my  soul
again  longed  for  diversion  in  other  countries,  and  voyaging  upon  the  sea,  and  as-
sociating with  the  merchants,  and  hearing  news.  So  I  resolved  upon  that.  1  packed
up  bales  suited  for  the  sea,  consisting  of  costly  commodities,  and  conveyed  them  from
the  city  of  Baghdad  to  the  city  of  El-Basrah,  where  I  saw  a  ship  prepared  for  a
voyage,  and  in  her  was  a  company  of  great  merchants.  I  therefore  embarked  with
them,  and  made  myself  familiar  with  them,  and  we  set  forth  in  safety  and  health  on
our  voyage.  The  wind  was  fair  to  us  until  we  arrived  at  a  city  called  the  City  of
China,59  and  we  were  in  the  utmost  joy  and  happiness,  conversing  together  on  travel
and  commerce.  But  while  we  wore  in  this  state,  a  stormy  wind  arose  from  the  quarter
a-head  of  the  ship,  and  there  fell  upon  us  a  violent  rain,  by  which  we  were  wetted,  and
our  bales  also  :  wherefore  we  covered  the  bales  with  felt  and  canvass,  fearing  that  the
goods  would  be  spoiled  by  the  rain ;  and  we  began  to  supplicate  God  (whose  name  be


M  See  Note  11  to  Chapter  iii.  "  Page  217.

57  Pages  214  and  215  M  In  the  Breslau  edition,  this  city  is  not  mentioned.


104  NOTES  TO  CHAPfEK  TWENTIETH.

exalted !)  and  to  humble  ourselves  before  Him,  that  He  might  remove  the  affliction
that  had  befallen  us.  And  thereupon  the  master  of  the  ship  arose,  and  tightened  his
girdle  and  tucked  up  his  clothes,  and  ascended  the  mast.  Then  he  turned  his  eyes  to
the  right  and  left,  after  which  he  looked  at  the  people  of  the  ship,  and  slappeJl  his  face
and  plucked  his  beard.  So  we  said,  O  master,  what  is  the  news  ?  And  lie  answered
us,  Seek  ye  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !)  escape  from  the  peril  into  which  we  have
fallen,  and  weep  for  yourselves,  and  bid  one  another  farewell;  for  know  that  the  wind
hath  prevailed  against  us,  and  cast  us  into  the  furthest  of  the  seas  of  the  world.  The
master  then  descended  from  the  mast-head,  and  opened  his  chest,  and  took  forth  from
it  a  cotton  bag,  which  he  untied,  and  he  took  out  of  it  some  dust  like  ashes,  moistened
this  with  water,  and,  having  waited  over  it  a  little,  he  smelt  it ;  after  which  he  took
forth  from  that  chest  a  small  book,  and  read  in  it,  and  said  to  us,  Know,  O  ye  passen-
gers, that  in  this  book  is  a  wonderful  property,  indicating  that  whosoever  arriveth  at
this  region,  he  will  not  escape  from  it,  but  will  perish ;  for  this  region  is  called  the
Clime  of  the  Kings,60  and  in  it  is  the  tomb  of  our  lord  Suleyman  the  son  of  Daood  (on
both  of  whom  be  peace  !),61  in  which  are  serpents  of  enormous  size  and  of  terrible
appearance ;  and  whatsoever  ship  arriveth  at  this  region,  there  cometh  up  to  her  from
the  sea  a  great  fish,  which  swalloweth  her  with  all  that  she  containeth.

So  when  we  heard  these  words  from  the  master,  we  wondered  extremely  at  his
account ;  and  he  had  not  finished  his  speech  to  us,  when  the  ship  began  to  rise  with
us  from  the  water,  and  then  to  descend,  and  we  heard  a  great  cry,  like  the  loud-pealing
thunder,  whereat  we  were  struck  with  terror,  and  became  as  dead  men,  making  sure,
at  that  moment,  of  destruction.  And,  lo,  a  great  fish  approached  the  ship,  like  a  lofty
mountain,  and  we  were  terrified  at  it.  We  wept  for  ourselves  with  a  violent  weeping,
and  prepared  for  death,  and  were  looking  at  that  great  fish,  wondering  at  its  terrible
formation,  when,  lo,  another  great  fish  approached  us ;  and  we  had  not  beheld  aught
more  monstrous  than  it,  nor  any  thing  greater.  Upon  this,  therefore,  we  bade  one
another  farewell,  weeping  for  ourselves.  And,  lo,  a  third  great  fish  approached,  and  it
was  greater  than  the  two  that  had  come  to  us  before  it.  So  we  became  without
memory  and  without  understanding,  and  our  minds  were  stupified  by  the  violence  of
our  fear  and  terror.  Then  these  three  great  fishes  began  to  compass  the  ship,  and  the
third  fish  darted  down  to  swallow  the  ship  with  all  that  was  in  her.  But,  lo,  there
rose  a  great  wind,  whereupon  the  ship  rose,  and  fell  upon  a  great  resf,  and  broke  in
pieces ;  all  the  planks  were  separated,  and  all  the  bales,  and  the  merchants  and  other
passengers,  were  submerged  in  the  sea.  I  therefore  pulled  off  all  the  clothes  that  were
upon  me  except  one  garment,  and  swain  a  little,  and  reached  one  of  the  planks  of  the
ship,  and  caught  hold  of  it.  Then  I  got  upon  it  and  bestrode  it,  and  the  waves  and
the  wind  sported  with  me  upon  the  face  of  the  water,  while  I  kept  grasping  that  plank.
The  waves  carried  me  up  and  down,  and  I  was  in  a  state  of  the  most  violent  distress


co  In  the  Breslau  edition,  "  the  Clime  of  the  with  the  royal  ring  on  his  finger,  appearing  as

King."  though  he  were  still  alive,  protected  by  twelve

61  The  learned  among  the  Muslims  are  divided  guardians,  night  and  day.  No  one  hath  arrived  at

in  opinion  respecting  the  situation  of  the  tomb  of  his  tomb  except  two  persons,  'Affan  and  Bulookiya.

Solomon  the  son  of  David.  Some  say,  that  it  is  (whose  adventures  are  fully  related  in  a  tale  of  the

in  Jerusalem,  and  that  he  and  his  father  were  Thousand  and  One  Nights,  mentioned  at  the  close

buried  in  one  tomb :  others,  that  it  is  on  the  shore  of  my  Notes  to  Chapter  xix.].  'Allan  went  to  seek

of  the  Lake  of  Tiberias.  But  a  statement  pro-  for  the  seal  of  Suleyman,  and  took  Bulookiya  as

fessedly  resting  on  high  authority  agrees  with  his  companion.  With  extreme  pains  they  arrived

that  in  our  text.  The  following  is  an  abstract  of  at  the  spot  above  mentioned,  and  'Allan  was  about

the  Prophet's  reply,  on  this  subject,  to  a  question  to  carry  oft'  the  ring,  when  a  thunderbolt  struck

put  to  him  by  some  Jews,  as  given  in  the  history  and  consumed  him.  So  Bulookiya  returned,

of  Et-Tabaree  : — The  tomb  of  Suleyman  is  in  the  Suleyman  was  borne  on  his  throne  to  this  place,

midst  of  a  sea,  which  forms  part  of  the  great  after  his  death,  by  the  Jinn.  (Dubeux's  "Chronique

sea,  in  a  palace  excavated  in  a  rork.  This  palace  de  Tabari, '  printed  for  the  Oriental  Translation

contains  a  throne,  ou  which  Suleyman  is  placed,  Fund,  vol.  i.  pp.  56  and  57.)


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTIETH.  105

and  fear,  and  hunger  and  thirst.  I  began  to  blame  myself  for  that  which  I  had  done ;
my  soul  was  weary  after  enjoying  ease,  and  I  said  to  myself,  O  Sindibad  of  the  Sea,
thou  repentedst  not ;  and  every  time  thou  sufferest  troubles  and  fatigue,  yet  repentest
not  of  voyaging  upon  the  sea ;  and  if  thou  sayest  that  thou  repentest,  thou  liest :  suffer
then  all  that  thou  meetest  with ;  for  thou  deservest  all  that  happeneth  to  thee.  All
this,  I  added,  is  decreed  to  befall  me  by  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !)  that  I  may
relinquish  my  covetousness ;  and  this  that  I  suffer  is  occasioned  by  my  covetousness ;
for  I  had  abundant  wealth. — Then  I  returned  to  my  reason,  and  said,  Verily,  in  this
voyage,  I  turn  unto  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !)  sincerely  repenting  of  travel,  and  I
will  never  again  in  my  life  mention  it  with  my  tongue,  nor  in  my  mind.  I  ceased  not
to  humble  myself  before  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !)  and  to  weep  ;  and  afterwards
I  reflected  in  my  mind  upon  my  former  state  of  ease  and  happiness  and  sport  and
merriment  and  joy.  Thus  I  continued  the  first  day  and  the  second  day,  until  I  landed
upon  a  great  island,  wherein  were  many  trees  and  rivers.  So  I  ate  of  the  fruits  of
those  trees,  and  drank  of  the  water  of  those  rivers,  until  I  was  revived,  and  my  soul
returned  to  me,  and  my  energy  was  strengthened,  and  my  bosom  expanded.

I  then  walked  along  the  island,  and  I  beheld,  in  its  opposite  side,  a  great  river  of
sweet  water,  running  with  a  strong  current,  whereupon  I  remembered  the  affair  of  the
raft 62  upon  which  I  was  before,  and  said  within  myself,  I  must  make  for  me  a  raft  like
it,  and  perhaps  I  may  escape  from  this  predicament.  If  I  so  escape,  my  desire  is
attained,  and  I  turn  unto  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !)  repenting  of  travel ;  and  if  I
perish,  my  heart  is  relieved  from  fatigue  and  distress.  Then  I  arose  and  collected
pieces  of  wood  from  those  trees,  consisting  of  high-priced  sandal-wood,  the  like  of
which  existeth  not ;  but  I  knew  not  what  it  was.  And  when  I  had  collected  those
pieces  of  wood,  I  made  shift  with  twigs  and  herbs  of  the  island,  twisting  them  like
ropes,  and  bound  with  them  the  raft ;  and  I  said  If  I  be  preserved,  it  will  be  by  God's
help.  I  embarked  upon  .the  raft,  and  proceeded  upon  it  along  that  river  °  during  the
first  day  and  the  second  day  and  the  third  day  after  my  departure  thence.  I  lay
down,  and  ate  not  during  this  period  any  thing;  but  when  I  thirsted,  I  drank  of  that
river ;  and  I  was  like  a  giddy  young  bird,  by  reason  of  the  violence  of  my  fatigue  and
hunger  and  fear,  until  the  raft  conveyed  me  to  a  high  mountain,  beneath  which  the
river  entered.  So  when  I  saw  this,  I  feared  for  myself,  on  account  of  the  distress  that
I  had  sxiffered  before  on  the  former  river,  and  I  desired  to  stop  the  raft,  and  to  get  off
from  it  to  the  side  of  the  mountain ;  but  the  current  overpowered  me,  and  drew  the
raft,  with  me  upon  it,  and  descended  with  it  beneath  the  mountain.  On  beholding
this,  therefore,  I  made  sure  of  destruction,  and  said,  There  is  no  strength  nor  power
but  in  God,  the  High,  the  Great !  The  raft  ceased  not  to  proceed  for  a  short  distance,
after  which  it  passed  forth  into  a  wide  place,  and,  lo,  it  was  a  great  valley,  through
which  the  water  roared,  making  a  noise  like  thunder  and  with  a  rapidity  like  that  of
the  wind.  I  grasped  the  raft  with  my  hand,  fearing  lest  I  should  fall  from  upon  it,
the  waves  tossing  me  to  the  right  and  left  in  the  midst  of  the  stream.  The  raft  con-
tinued to  descend  with  the  current  along  that  valley,  and  I  could  not  prevent  it,  nor
was  I  able  to  bring  it  to  the  land,  until  it  stopped  with  me  by  a  city  of  grand  appear-
ance, well  built,  and  containing  a  numerous  population.  And  when  the  people  beheld
me  upon  that  raft,  descending  in  the  midst  of  the  river  with  the  current,  they  cast  a
net  and  ropes  upon  me  and  the  raft,  and  drew  forth  the  raft  from  the  river  to  the
land.

I  fell  down  in  the  midst  of  them  like  a  dead  man,  by  reason  of  excessive  hunger
and  sleeplessness  and  fenr ;  and  there  came  to  me  from  among  the  assemblage  an  aged


62  Here  (as  I  have  done  in  other  passages  in  the  C3  In  the  Cairo  edition,  but  not  in  the  edition  of

Voyages  of  Es-Sindibad,  pointed  out  in  Notes  40 Breslau,  the  following  is  here  added,  "  until  I
and  80,)  I  substitute  "  raft "  for  "  boat."  passed  forth  from  the  extremity  of  the  island,  and

became  far  from  it.''

in.  P


106  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTIETH.

man,  a  sheykh  of  high  dignity,  who  welcomed  me,  and  threw  over  me  an  abundance  of
comely  apparel,  with  which  I  covered  myself  decently.  Then  he  took  me  and  con-
ducted me  into  the  bath,  brought  me  reviving  beverages  and  exquisite  scents,  and,
after  we  had  come  forth  from  the  bath,  took  me  to  his  house,  and  led  me  into  it ;  and
his  family  rejoiced  at  my  coming.  He  seated  me  in  an  elegant  place,  and  prepared  for
me  some  rich  food :  so  I  ate  until  1  was  satiated,  and  praised  God  (whose  name  be
exalted ! ;  for  my  escape ;  and  after  that,  his  pages  brought  to  me  hot  water,  and  I
washed  my  hands ;  and  his  female  slaves  brought  to  me  drying-towels  of  silk,  with
which  I  dried  my  hands,  and  wiped  my  mouth.  Then  that  sheykh  arose  immediately,
and  appropriated  to  me  a  place  alone,  in  a  part  of  his  house,  and  made  his  pages  and
his  female  slaves  to  serve  me,  and  to  perform  my  wants  and  all  my  affairs.  They
therefore  paid  constant  attention  to  me,  and  in  this  manner  I  ceased  not  to  remain
with  him  in  the  mansion  of  entertainment  three  days,  enjoying  good  eating  and  good
drinking  and  sweet  scents,  until  my  soul  returned  to  me,  and  my  terror  subsided,  and
my  heart  was  calmed,  and  my  mind  was  at  ease.  And  on  the  fourth  day,  the  sheykh
came  to  me  and  said  to  me,  Thou  hast  cheered  us  by  thy  company,  O  my  son,  and
praise  be  to  God  for  thy  safety  !  Wilt  thou  now  arise  and  go  with  me  to  the  bank  of
the  river,  and  go  down  into  the  market  and  sell  the  goods  and  receive  their  price  ?
Perhaps  thou  wilt  buy  for  thyself  with  it  something  wherewith  thou  mayest  traffic.
— So  I  was  silent  for  a  little  while,  and  said  within  myself,  Whence  have  1  goods,  and
what  is  the  cause  of  these  words  ?  And  the  sheykh  said,  O  my  son,  be  not  anxious
nor  be  thoughtful ;  but  arise  and  go  with  us  to  the  market,  and  if  we  see  any  one  who
will  give  thee  for  thy  goods  a  price  that  will  content  thee,  I  will  receive  it  for  thee  ;  but
if  what  will  content  thee  be  not  offered  for  them,  I  will  deposit  them  for  thee  in  my
magazines  until  the  days  of  selling  and  buying  arrive.  So  I  meditated  upon  my  case,
and  said  to  myself,  Comply  with  his  desire,  that  thou  mayest  see  what  these  goods  are.
And  I  said  to  him,  I  hear  and  obey,  O  my  uncle  the  sheykh,  and  what  thou  doest  will
be  attended  by  blessing,  and  it  is  impossible  to  oppose  thee  in  aught.  I  then  went
with  him  to  the  market,  and  found  that  he  had  unbound  the  raft  on  which  I  came,  and
which  was  of  sandal-wood,  and  he  commissioned  the  crier  to  announce  it  for  sale.  The
merchants  came,  and  opened  the  bidding  for  the  wood,  and  increased  their  offers  for  it
until  its  price  amounted  to  a  thousand  w  pieces  of  gold ;  whereupon  they  ceased  to  bid
more ;  and  the  sheykh,  looking  towards  me,  said,  Hear,  0  my  son :  this  is  the  price  of
thy  goods  in  such  days  as  the  present.  Wilt  thou  then  sell  them  for  this  price,  or  wilt
thou  wait,  and  shall  I  put  them  for  thee  in  my  magazines  until  the  time  come  when
their  price  will  be  greater,  and  then  sell  them  for  thee  ? — I  answered  him,  O  my
master,  the  affair  is  thine :  so  do  what  thou  desirest.  And  he  said,  O  my  son,  wilt  thou
sell  me  this  wood  for  a  hundred  pieces  of  gold  above  what  the  merchants  have  offered
for  it  ? — Yes,  I  answered  him  :  I  have  sold  it  to  thee,  and  received  the  price.  And
upon  this  he  ordered  his  young  men  to  transport  that  wood  to  his  magazines,  and  I
returned  with  him  to  his  house,  where  we  sat,  and  he  counted  to  me  the  whole  price  of
the  wood,  brought  to  me  bags,  and,  having  put  the  money  into  them,  locked  them  up
with  a  lock  of  iron,  of  which  he  gave  me  the  key.

And  after  a  period  of  some  days  and  nights,  the  sheykh  said,  O  my  son,  I  will
propose  to  thee  something,  and  I  hope  that  thou  wilt  comply  with  my  desire  respect-
ing it.  So  I  said  to  him,  And  what  is  that  affair  ?  And  he  answered  me,  Know  that
I  have  become  a  man  of  great  age,  and  I  have  not  a  male  child;  but  I  have  a
daughter,  small  in  age,  elegant  in  form,  having  abundant  wealth  and  loveliness ;
therefore  I  desire  to  marry  her  to  thee,  and  thou  shalt  reside  with  her  in  our
country :  then  I  will  put  thee  in  possession  of  all  that  I  have,  and  what  my  hand
possesseth ;  for  I  have  become  an  old  man,  and  thou  wilt  supply  my  place.  And  I  was


64  In  the  Breslau  edition,  "  ten  thousand."


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTIETH.  10?

silent,  and  spoke  not.  And  he  said  to  ine,  Obey  me,  O  my  son,  in  that  which  I  say  to
thee ;  for  iny  wish  to  thee  is  good,  and  if  thou  comply  with  my  desire,  I  will  marry
thee  to  my  daughter,  and  thou  shalt  be  as  my  son ;  and  all  that  my  hand  hath,  and
what  I  possess,  shall  be  thine ;  and  if  thou  desire  to  traffic,  and  to  return  to  thy
country,  no  one  will  prevent  thee  :  this  is  thy  property,  under  thy  disposal :  do  there-
fore with  it  what  thou  wilt  and  what  thou  choosest.  So  I  replied,  By  Allah,  O  my
illicit:  the  sheykh,  thou  hast  become  as  my  father :  I  have  suffered  many  horrors,  and
have  neither  judgment  nor  knowledge  remaining  :  it  is  thine,  therefore,  to  determine
in  all  that  thou  desirest  to  do.  And  upon  this  the  sheykh  ordered  his  pages  to  bring
the  Kiidee  and  the  witnesses.  Accordingly  they  brought  them,  and  he  married  me  to
his  daughter,  made  for  us  a  grand  entertainment  and  a  great  feast,  and  introduced  me
to  her ;  and  I  found  her  to  be  endowed  with  the  utmost  beauty  and  loveliness,  with
handsome  figure  and  just  stature,  and  upon  her  was  au  abundance  of  various  orna-
ments and  articles  of  apparel,  minerals,  and  ornaments  of  gold,  and  necklaces  and
precious  jewels,  the  value  of  which  was  not  less  than  thousands  of  thousands  of  pieces
of  gold,  and  no  one  could  pay  their  price.  When  I  went  into  her  presence,  she
pleased  me ;  affection  for  each  other  ensued,  and  I  remained  with  her  for  a  length  of
time  in  a  state  of  the  utmost  delight  and  enjoyment.  Her  father  was  then  admitted
to  the  mercy  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !),  and  we  prepared  his  body  for  the  grave,
and  buried  him,  and  I  put  my  hand  upon  his  property  :  all  his  young  men  became
mine,  and  under  my  authority  in  my  service,  and  the  merchants  instated  me  in  his
office;  for  he  was  their  chief,  and  none  of  them  purchased  aught  but  with  his  know-
ledge and  by  his  permission ;  he  being  their  sheykh ;  and  I  became  in  his  place.

Now  when  I  mixi-d  with  the  people  of  that  city,  I  found  that  their  state  became
changed  every  month,  and  there  appeared  upon  them  wings,65  wherewith  they  flew  to
the  upper  region  of  the  sky,  and  there  remained  not  behind  in  the  city  any  but  the
children  and  the  women.  So  I  said  within  myself,  When  the  first  day  of  the  month
cometh,  I  will  ask  one  of  them,  and  perhaps  they  will  convey  me  with  them  whither
they  go.  And  when  the  first  day  of  that  month  came,  their  appearances  became
altered,  and  their  forms  became  changed,  and  I  went  in  to  one  of  them,  and  said  to
him,  I  conjure  thee  by  Allah  that  thou  convey  me  with  thee,  in  order  that  I  may
divert  myself  and  return  with  you.  He  replied,  This  is  a  thing  that  cannot  be.  But
I  ceased  not  to  solicit  him  until  he  granted  that  favour.  I  agreed  with  them,  and
caught  hold  of  that  man,  and  he  soared  with  me  in  the  air  ;  but  I  informed  not  any
one  of  my  family  nor  any  of  my  young  men  nor  any  of  my  companions ;  and  that  man
continued  to  fly,  with  me  upon  his  shoulders,  until  he  rose  so  high  with  me  into  the
sky  that  I  heard  the  praises  of  the  angels  in  the  vault  of  the  heavens.  So  1  wondered
at  that,  and  said,  Extolled  be  the  perfection  of  God  !  and  praise  be  to  God  !  And  I
had  not  finished  the  words  of  praise  when  there  came  forth  a  fire  from  heaven,  and  it
almost  burnt  them.  They  therefore  all  descended,  and,  having  cast  me  upon  a  lofty
mountain,  departed  in  the  utmost  rage  against  me,  and  they  went  and  left  me.  Thus
I  became  alone  upon  that  mountain,  and  I  blamed  myself  for  that  which  I  had  done,
and  said,  There  is  no  strength  nor  power  but  in  God,  the  High,  the  Great !  Verily,
every  time  that  I  escape  from  a  calamity,  I  fall  into  a  calamity  that  is  mightier  than
the  former  one !

I  remained  upon  that  mountain,  and  knew  not  whither  to  go,  when,  lo,  two  young
men  passed  along,  like  two  moons,  each  having  in  his  hand  a  rod  of  gold,  on  which  he
leaned.  I  advanced  to  them,  and  saluted  them,  and  they  returned  my  salutation ;  and


65  In  the  Breslau  edition  it  is  here  said,  "and  page  85,  in  this  volume),  as  will  be  seen  in  the

their  faces  became  changed,  and  they  assumed  the  story  of  Hasan  of  El-Basrah  ;  and  these  islands,  I

forms  of  birds."  The  same  is  fabled  of  inhabitants  suppose,  our  author  had  here  in  view,
of  the  Islands  of  \Vak-\Vak  (before  mentioned,  in


108  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTIETH.

I  said  to  them,  I  conjure  you  by  Allah  to  tell  me  who  ye  are  and  what  is  your
business.  And  they  answered  ine,  We  are  of  the  servants  of  God,  whose  name  be
exalted !  Then  they  gave  me  a  rod  of  red  gold  that  they  had  with  them,  and  went
their  way  and  left  me.  And  I  proceeded  along  the  top  of  that  mountain,  leaning  upon
the  rod,  and  reflecting  upon  the  case  of  these  two  young  men,  and,  lo,  a  serpent  came
forth  from  beneath  the  mountain,  having  in  its  mouth  a  man  whom  it  had  swallowed
to  his  middle,  and  he  was  crying  out  and  saying,  Whosoever  will  deliver  me,  God  will
deliver  him  from  every  difficulty  !  I  therefore  advanced  to  that  serpent,  and  struck  it
with  the  rod  of  gold  on  its  head,  whereat  it  threw  the  man  from  its  mouth.  And
upon  this  the  man  came  to  me  and  said,  Since  my  deliverance  from  this  serpent  hath
been  effected  by  thy  means,  I  will  not  henceforth  quit  thee :  thou  hast  become  my
companion  on  this  mountain.  So  I  replied,  Thou  art  welcome.  And  we  proceeded
along  the  mountain.  And,  lo,  'a  party  of  people  came  towards  us,  and  I  looked  at
them,  and  among  them  was  the  man  who  bore  me  upon  his  shoulders  and  flew  with
me.  Therefore  I  advanced  to  him,  and  excused  myself  to  him,  addressing  him  cour-
teously, and  saying  to  him,  O  my  friend,  friends  act  not  thus  one  to  another.  The
man  replied,  Thou  wouldst  have  destroyed  ns  by  thy  words  of  praise  upon  my  back.
And  I  rejoined,  Be  not  displeased  with  me ;  for  I  had  no  knowledge  of  the  matter  ;
but  I  will  never  again  speak.  So  he  consented  to  take  me  with  him,  making  a  con-
dition with  me  that  I  should  not  mention  God.  nor  praise  Him,  upon  his  back.  He
then  took  me  up,  and  flew  away  with  me  as  before,  until  he  conveyed  me  to  my  abode,
when  my  wife  met  me  and  saluted  me,  and  congratulated  me  on  my  safety ;  and  she
said  to  me,  Beware  of  going  forth  again  with  these  people,  and  be  not  familiar  with
them ;  for  they  are  the  brothers  of  the  devils,  and  they  know  not  the  celebration  of
God,  whose  name  be  exalted !  I  said  to  her,  How  did  thy  father  live  with  them  ?
And  she  answered  me,  My  father  was  not  of  them,  nor  did  he  as  they ;  and  it  is  my
opinion,  since  my  father  is  dead,  that  thou  shouldst  sell  all  that  we  have,  and  purchase
goods  with  the  price,  and  voyage  back  to  thy  country  and  thy  family,  and  I  will  go
with  thee  ;  for  1  have  no  need  of  residing  here  in  this  city  after  the  loss  of  my  mother
and  my  father.  '

So  upon  this  I  betook  myself  to  selling  the  commodities  of  the  sheykh,  one  thing
after  another,  and  to  watching  for  some  one  who  would  set  forth  on  a  voyage  from  that
city,  that  I  might  go  with  him.  And  while  I  was  so  doing,  lo,  a  company  of  men  in
the  city  desired  to  perform  a  voyage,  but  found  not  for  themselves  a  ship ;  wherefore
they  bought  wood,  and  made  for  them  a  great  ship ;  and  I  engaged  for  a  passage  with
them,  and  paid  them  the  whole  of  the  hire.  I  then  embarked  my  wife,  and  all  that
we  had,  in  the  ship :  and,  leaving  the  other  possessions  and  the  estates,  we  proceeded,
and  ceased  not  in  our  course  over  the  sea  from  island  to  island,  and  from  sea  to  sea  ;
and  the  wind  and  the  voyage  were  pleasant  to  us  until  we  arrived  in  safety  at  the  city
of  El-Basrah.  I  sojourned  not  there;  but  engaged  for  a  passage  in  another  vessel,  to
which  I  transferred  all  that  I  had  with  me,  and  I  went  on  to  the  city  of  Baghdad.
Then  I  entered  my  quarter  and  came  to  my  house,  met  my  family  and  companions
and  friends,  and  stowed  all  the  goods  that  I  had  with  me  in  my  magazines ;  and  my
family  calculated  the  period  of  my  absence  from  them  during  the  seventh  voyage,  and
found  it  to  be  seven  and  twenty  years ;  so  that  they  had  given  up  all  hope  of  my
return.

[I  am  proud  to  express  here  my  thanks  to  Colonel  (now  Major-General)  Chesney,
for  his  liberality  and  kindness  in  allowing  Mr.  Harvey  to  copy,  for  the  illustration
of  the  Voyages  of  Es-Sindibad,  some  beautiful  and  interesting  drawings  selected  from  his
valuable  portfolio.  These  form  the  subjects  of  the  engravings  in  pages  5,  49,  and  69.]


CHAPTER XXL

COMMENCING  WITH  PART  OP  THE  FIVE  HUNDRED  AND  SIXTY-SIXTH

NIGHT,  AND  ENDING  WITH  PART  OP  THE  FIVE  HUNDRED

AND  SEVENTY-EIGHTH.


THE  STORY  OF  THE  CITY  OF  BRASS.1

THERE  was,  in  olden  time,  and  in  an  ancient  age  and  period,  in
Damascus  of  Syria,  a  King,  one  of  the  Khaleefehs,  named  'Abd-El-
Melik  the  son  of  Marwan ;  2  and  he  was  sitting,  one  day,  having  with
him  the  great  men  of  his  empire,  consisting  of  Kings  and  Sultsins,
when  a  discussion  took  place  among  them,  respecting  the  traditions
of  former  nations.  They  called  to  mind  the  stories  of  our  lord


110  THE  STORY  OP  THE  CITY  OF  BRASS.

Suleyman  the  son  of  Daood  (on  both  of  whom  be  peace !),  and  the
dominion  and  authority  which  God  (whose  name  he  exalted!)  had
bestowed  upon  him  over  mankind  and  the  Jinn  and  the  birds  and  the
wild  beasts  and  other  things ; 3  and  they  said,  We  have  heard  from
those  who  were  before  us,  that  God  (whose  perfection  be  extolled,
and  whose  name  be  exalted !)  bestowed  not  upon  any  one  the  like  of
that  which  He  bestowed  upon  our  lord  Suleyman,  and  that  he  attained
to  that  to  which  none  other  attained,  so  that  he  used  to  imprison  the
Jinn  and  the  Marids  and  the  Devils  in  bottles 4  of  brass,  and  pour
molten  lead  over  them,  and  seal  this  cover  over  them  with  his  signet.
Then  Talib  [the  son  of  Sahl]  related,  that  a  man  embarked  in  a
ship  with  a  company  of  others,  and  they  voyaged  to  the  island  of
Sicily,5  and  ceased  not  in  their  course  until  there  arose  against  them
a  wind  which  bore  them  away  to  one  of  the  lands  of  God,  whose  name
be  exalted !  This  happened  during  the  black  darkness  of  night,  and
when  the  day  shone  forth,  there  came  out  to  them,  from  caves  in  that
land,  people  of  black  complexion  and  with  naked  bodies,  like  wild
beasts,  not  understanding  speech.  They  had  a  King  of  their  own
race,  and  none  of  them  knew  Arabic  save  their  King.  So  when  they
saw  the  ship  and  those  who  were  in  her,  he  came  forth  to  them
attended  by  a  party  of  his  companions,  and  saluted  them  and
welcomed  them,  and  inquired  of  them  respecting  their  religion.  They
therefore  acquainted  him  with  their  state ;  and  he  said  to  them,  No
harm  shall  befall  you.  And  when  he  asked  them  respecting  their
religion,  each  of  them  was  of  some  one  of  the  religions  prevailing
before  the  manifestation  of  El-Islam,  and  before  the  mission  of
Mohammad,  may  God  bless  and  save  him ! — wherefore  the  people
of  the  ship  said,  We  know  not  what  thou  sayest."  Then  the
King  said  to  them,  There  hath  not  come  to  us  any  one  of  the  sons  of
Adam  before  you.  And  he  entertained  them  with  a  banquet  of  the
flesh  of  birds  and  of  wild  beasts  and  of  fish,  beside  which  they  had  no
food.  And  after  this,  the  people  of  the  ship  went  down  to  divert
themselves  in  the  city,  and  they  found  one  of  the  fishermen  who  had
cast  his  net  in  the  sea  to  catch  fish,  and  he  drew  it  up,  and,  lo,  in
it  was  a  bottle  of  brass,  stopped  with  lead,  which  was  sealed  with  the
signet  of  Suleyman  the  son  of  Daood,  on  both  of  whom  be  peace  !
And  the  fisherman  came  forth  and  broke  it ;  whereupon  there  pro-
ceeded from  it  a  blue  smoke,  which  united  with  the  clouds  of  heaven  ;
and  they  heard  a  horrible  voice,  saying.  Repentance !  repentance !  O
Prophet  of  God  ! — Then,  of  that  smoke  there  was  formed  a  person  of


THE  STORY  OF  THE  CITY  OF  BRASS,


111


terrible  aspect,  of  terrific  make,  whose  head  would
reach  [as  high  as]  a  mountain ;  and  he  disap-
peared from  before  their  eyes.  As  to  the  people
of  the  ship,  their  hearts  were  almost  eradicated ;
but  the  blacks  thought  nothing  of  the  event.
And  a  man  returned  to  the  King,  and  asked  him
respecting  this ;  and  the  King  answered  him,
Know  that  this  is  one  of  the  Jinn  whom  Suley-
nuin  the  son  of  Daood,  when  he  was  incensed
against  them,  imprisoned  in  these  bottles,  and  he
poured  lead  over  them,  and  threw  them  into  the
sea.  When  the  fisherman  casteth  his  net,  it
generally  bringeth  up  these  bottles ;  and  when
they  are  broken,  there  cometh  forth  from  them  a
Jinnee,  who  imagineth  that  Suleyman  is  still
living;  wherefore  he  repenteth,  and  saith,  Re-
pentance !  O  Prophet  of  God !

And the  Prince of  the Faithful,  'Abd-El-
Melik  the  son  of  Marwan,  wondered at these
words,  and  said,  Extolled  be  the perfection  of
God ! Suleyman  was endowed  with a  mighty
dominion  ! — And  among  those  who  were  present
in  that  assembly  was  En-Nabighah  Edh-Dhub-
yanee ;  and  he  said,  Talib  hath  spoken  truth
in  that  which  he  hath  related,  and  the  proof  of
his  veracity  is  the saying of  the  Wise, the
First  [thus  versified]  :7 —

And  [consider]  Suleyman,  when  the  Deity  said  to  him,
Perform  the  office  of  Khaleefeh,  and  govern  with
diligence ;

And  whoso  obeyeth  thee,  honour  him  for  doing  soj
and  whoso  disobeyeth  thee,  imprison  him  for  ever.

He  used  to  put  them  into  bottles  of  brass,


112  THE  STORY  OF  THE  CITY  OF  BRASS.

and  to  cast  them  into  the  sea. — And  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful
approved  of  these  words,  and  said,  By  Allah,  I  desire  to  see  some  of
these  bottles !  So  Talib  the  son  of  Sahl  replied,  0  Prince  of  the
Faithful,  thou  art  able  to  do  so,  and  yet  remain  in  thy  country.  Send
to  thy  brother  'Abd-El-'Azeez  the  son  of  Marwan  desiring  him  to
bring  them  to  thee  from  the  Western  Country,8  that  he  may  write
orders  to  Moosa  to  journey  from  the  Western  Country  to  this  mountain
which  we  have  mentioned,  and  to  bring  thee  what  thou  desirest  of
these  bottles ;  for  the  furthest  tract  of  his  province  is  adjacent  to  this
mountain. — And  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful  approved  of  his  advice,
and  said,  0  Talib,  thou  hast  spoken  truth  in  that  which  thou  hast  said,
and  I  desire  that  thou  be  my  messenger  to  Moosa  the  son  of  Nuseyr9
for  this  purpose,  and  thou  shalt  have  a  white  ensign,10  together  with
what  thou  shalt  desire  of  wealth  or  dignity  or  other  things,  and  I  will
be  thy  substitute  to  take  care  of  thy  family.  To  this,  Talib  replied,
Most  willingly,  O  Prince  of  the  Faihtful.  And  the  Khaleefeh  said  to
him,  Go  in  dependence  on  the  blessing  of  God,  and  his  aid.  Then
he  gave  orders  that  they  should  write  for  him  a  letter  to  his  brother
'Abd-El-'Azeez,  his  viceroy  in  Egypt,  and  another  letter  to  Moosa,  his
viceroy  in  the  Western  Country,  commanding  him  to  journey,  himself,
in  search  of  the  bottles  of  Suleyman,  to  leave  his  son  to  govern  the
country  in  his  stead,  and  to  take  with  him  guides,  to  expend  wealth,
and  to  collect  a  large  number  of  men,  and  not  to  be  remiss  in  accom-
plishing that  object,  nor  to  use  any  pretext  to  excuse  himself.  He
sealed  the  two  letters,  and  delivered  them  to  Talib  the  son  of  Sahl,
commanding  him  to  hasten,  and  to  elevate  the  ensigns  over  his  head ;
and  he  gave  him  riches  and  riders  and  footmen  to  aid  him  in  his  way :
he  gave  orders  also  to  supply  his  house  with  every  thing  requisite.

So  Talib  went  forth  on  his  way  to  Egypt.  He  proceeded  with
his  companions,  traversing  the  districts  from  Syria,  until  they  en-
tered Misr;11  when  the  Governor  of  Egypt  met  him,  and  lodged  him
with  him ;  and  he  treated  him  with  the  utmost  honour  during  the
period  of  his  stay  with  him.  Then  -he  sent  with  him  a  guide  who
accompanied  him  to  Upper  Egypt  until  they  came  to  the  Emeer
Moosa  the  son  of  Nuseyr;  and  when  he  knew  of  his  approach,  he
went  forth  to  him  and  met  him,  and  rejoiced  at  his  arrival ;  and
Talib  handed  to  him  the  letter.  So  he  took  it  and  read  it,  and
understood  its  meaning;  and  he  put  it  upon  his  head,  saying,  I  hear
and  obey  the  command  of  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful.  He  deter-
mined to  summon  his  great  men;  and  they  presented  themselves;


THE  STORY  OP  THE  CITY  OP  BRASS.  113

and  he  inquired  of  them  respecting  that  which  had  been  made  known
to  him  by  the  letter ;  whereupon  they  said,  O  Emeer,  if  thou  desire
him  who  will  guide  thee  to  that  place,  have  recourse  to  the  sheykh
'Abd-Es-Samad  the  son  of  'Abd-El-Kuddoos  Es-Samoodee  ;12  for  he
is  a  knowing  man,  and  hath  travelled  much,  and  he  is  acquainted
with  the  deserts  and  wastes  and  the  seas,  and  their  inhabitants  and
their  wonders,  and  the  countries  and  their  districts.  Have  recourse
therefore  to  him,  and  he  will  direct  thee  to  the  object  of  thy  desire. —
Accordingly  he  gave  orders  to  bring  him,  and  he  came  before  him ;
and,  lo,  he  was  a  very  old  man,  whom  the  vicissitudes  of  years  and
times  had  rendered  decrepit.  The  Emeer  Moosa  saluted  him,  and
said  to  him,  O  sheykh  'Abd-Es-Samad,  our  lord  the  Prince  of  the
Faithful,  'Abd-El-Melik  the  son  of  Marwan,  hath  commanded  us
thus  and  thus,  and  I  possess  little  knowledge  of  that  land,  and  it
hath  been  told  me  that  thou  art  acquainted  with  that  country  and
the  routes.  Hast  thou  then  a  wish  to  accomplish  the  affair  of  the
Prince  of  the  Faithful  ? — The  sheykh  replied,  Know,  O  Emeer,  that
this  route  is  difficult,  far  extending,  with  few  tracks.  The  Emeer
said  to  him,  How  long  a  period  doth  it  require  ?  He  answered,  It  is
a  journey  of  two  years  and  some  months  going,  and  the  like  return-
ing ;  and  on  the  way  are  difficulties  and  horrors,  and  extraordinary
and  wonderful  things.  Moreover,  thou  art  a  warriour  for  the  defence
of  the  faith,  and  our  country  is  near  unto  the  enemy ;  so  perhaps  the
Christians  may  come  forth  during  our  absence :  it  is  expedient  there-
fore that  thou  leave  in  thy  province  one  to  govern  it. — He  replied,  Well.
And  he  left  his  son  Haroon  as  his  substitute  in  his  province,  exacted  an
oath  of  fidelity  to  him,  and  commanded  the  troops  that  they  should  not
oppose  him,  but  obey  him  in  all  that  he  should  order  them  to  do.
And  they  heard  his  words,  and  obeyed  him.  His  son  Haroon  was  of
great  courage,  an  illustrious  hero,  and  a  bold  champion  ;  and  the
sheykh  'Abd-Es-Sarnad  pretended  to  him  that  the  place  in  which
were  the  things  that  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful  desired  was  four
months'  journey  distant,  on  the  shore  of  the  sea,  and  that  throughout
the  whole  route  were  halting-places  adjacent  one  to  another,  and
grass  and  springs.  And  he  said,  God  will  assuredly  make  this  affair
easy  to  us  through  the  blessing  attendant  upon  thee,  0  Viceroy  of
the  Prince  of  the  Faithful.  Then  the  Emeer  Moosa  said,  Knowest
thou  if  any  one  of  the  Kings  have  trodden  this  land  before  us  ?  He
answered  him,  Yes,  O  Emeer  :  this  land  belonged  to  the  King  of
Alexandria,  Darius  the  Greek.13

in.  Q


114


THE  STORY  OF  THE  CITY  OF  BRASS.


After  this  they  departed,  and  they  continued  their  journey  until
they  arrived  at  a  palace ;  whereupon  the  sheykh  said,  Advance  with
us  to  this  palace,  which  presenteth  a  lesson  to  him  who  will  be
admonished.  So  the  Emeer  Moosa  advanced  thither,  together  with
the  sheykh  'Abd-Es-Samad  and  his  chief  companions,  till  they  came
to  its  entrance.  And  they  found  it  open,  and  having  lofty  angles,
and  steps,  among  which  were  two  wide  steps  of  coloured  marbles,  the
like  of  which  hath  not  been  seen :  the  ceilings  and  walls  were
decorated  with  gold  and  silver  and  minerals,  and  over  the  entrance
was  a  slab,  whereon  was  an  inscription  in  ancient  Greek ;  and  the
sheykh  'Abd-Es-Samad  said,  Shall  I  read  it,  0  Emeer  ?  The  Emeer
answered,  Advance  and  read.  May  God  bless  thee  !  for  nought  hath
happened  to  us  during  this  journev  "but  what  hath  been  the  result  of


THE  STORY  OF  THE  CITY  OF  BRASS.  115

the  blessing  attendant  upon  tbee. — So  he  rea<l  it ;  and,  lo,  it  was
poetry  ;  and  it  was  this  : —

Here  was  a  people  whom,  after  their  works,  thou  shalfc  see  wept  over  for  their  lost

dominion ;

And  in  this  palace  is  the  last  information  respecting  lords  collected  in  the  dust.
Death  hath  destroyed  them  and  disunited  them,  and  in  the dust  they  have  lost

what  they  amassed ;
As  though  they  had  only  put  down  their  loads  to  rest  a  while :  quickly  have  they

departed !

And  the  Emeer  Moosa,  wept  until  he  became  insensible,  and  he  said,
There  is  no  deity  but  God,  the  Living,  the  Enduring  without  failure !
He  then  entered  the  palace,  and  was  confounded  by  its  beauty  and  its
construction;  and  he  looked  at  the  figures  and  images  that  it  con-
tained. And,  lo,  over  the  second  door  were  inscribed  some  verses.
So  the  Emeer  Moosa  said,  Advance,  O  sheykh,  and  read.  Accord-
ingly he  advanced  and  read ;  and  the  verses  were  these : —

How  many  companies  have  alighted  in  the  tabernacles 14  since  times  of  old,  and

taken  their  departure !
Consider  thou  then  what  the  accidents  of  fortune  have  done  with  others  when

they  have  befallen  them.
They  have  shared  together  what  they  collected,  and  they  have  left  the  pleasure

thereof,  and  departed.
What  enjoyments  they  had !  and  what  food  did  they  eat !  and  then  in  the  dust

they  themselves  were  eaten !

And  again  the  Emeer  Moosa  wept  violently :  the  world  became  yellow
before  his  face;  and  he  said,  We  have  been  created  for  a  great
object  !15

Then  they  attentively  viewed  the  palace ;  and,  lo,  it  was  devoid  of
inhabitants,  destitute  of  household  and  occupants  :  its  courts  were
desolate,  and  its  apartments  were  deserted  ;  and  in  the  midst  of  it  was
a  chamber  covered  with  a  lofty  dome,  rising  high  into  the  air,  around
which  were  four  hundred  tombs.  To  these  tombs  the  Emeer  Moosa
drew  near,  and,  behold,  among  them  was  a  tomb  constructed  of
marble,  whereon  were  engraved  these  verses: —

How  often  have  I  stood  [in  fight]  !  and  how  often  slain !  and  to  how  many  things

have  I  been  a  witness  !
And  how  often  have  I  eaten  !  and  how  often  drunk  !  and  how  often  have  I  heard

the  songs  of  beauteous  damsels  !
And  how  often  have  I  ordered !  and  how  often  forbidden  !  and  how  many  strong

fortresses  are  seen,
Which  I  have  besieged  and  searched,  and  from  which  I  have  taken  the  lovely

females'  ornaments!
But  in  my  ignorance  I  transgressed  to  obtain  things  wished  for  which  proved  at

last  to  be  frail.


116  THE  STORY  OF  THE  CITY  OF  BRASS.

Then  consider  attentively  thy  case,  O  man,  before  thou  shalt  drink  the  cup  ot

death ;
For  after  a  little  while  shall  the  dust  be  poured  upon  thee,  and  thou  wilt  be

lifeless.

And  the  Emeer  Moosa,  and  those  who  were  with  him,  wept.  Then
he  drew  near  to  the  dome-crowned  chamber,  and,  lo,  it  had  eight
doors  of  sandal-wood,  with  nails  of  gold,  ornamented  with  stars  of
silver  set  with  various  jewels.  And  over  the  first  door  were  inscribed
these  verses  : —

What  I  have  left,  I  left  not  from  generosity;  but  through  the  sentence  and

decree  operating  upon  man.

Long  time  I  lived,  happy  and  enraged,  defending  my  asylum  like  a  fierce  lion.
I  was  never  quiet,  nor  would  I  bestow  a  mustard-seed,  by  reason  of  my  avarice.

though  I  were  cast  into  the  fire.
Thus  did  I  until  I  was  smitten  by  the  decree  of  the  glorious  Deity,  the  Creator,

the  Maker.
When  my  death  was  appointed  soon  to  take  place,  I  could  not  prevent  it  by  my

numerous  stratagems ;
My  troops  that  I  had  collected  availed  not,  and  none  of  my  friends  aided  me,  nor

my  neighbour.
Throughout  my  whole  life  was  I  wearied  in  my  journey  to  the  grave,  now  in  ease,

and  now  in  difficulty.
So,  when  the  purses  have  become  laden,  shouldst  thou  accumulate  deemir  upon

deenar,16
It  will  all  pass  before  the  morning  to  another,  and  they  will  have  brought  thee  a

camel-driver  and  a  grave-digger ;
And  on  the  day  of  thy  judgment,  lone  shalt  thou  meet  God,  laden  with  sin  and

crimes  and  heavy  burdens.
Then  let  not  the  world  deceive  thee  with  its  beauty ;  but  see  what  it  hath  done  to

thy  family  and  neighbour.

And  when  the  Emeer  Moosa  heard  these  verses,  he  wept  again  so
violently  that  he  became  insensible ;  and  after  he  had  recovered,  he
entered  the  chamber  covered  with  the  dome,  and  beheld  in  it  a  long
tomb,  of  terrible  appearance,  whereon  was  a  tablet  of  iron  of  China  ;
and  the  sheykh  'Abd-Es-Samad  drew  near  to  it,  and  read  its  inscrip-
tion ;  and,  lo,  on  it  was  written, —

In  the  name  of  God,  the  Eternal,  the  Everlasting  throughout  all  ages :  in  the  name
of  God,  who  begetteth  not,  and  who  is  not  begotten,  and  \rnto  whom  there  is  none
like:  in  the  name  of  God,  the  Mighty  and  Powerful :  in  the  name  of  the  Living  who
dieth  not. — To  proceed : — O  thou  who  arrivest  at  this  place,  be  admonished  by  the
misfortunes  and  calamities  that  thou  beholdest,  and  be  not  deceived  by  the  world  and
ts  beauty,  and  its  falsity  and  calumny,  and  its  fallacy  and  finery;  for  it  is  a  flatterer,
a  cheat,  a  traitor.  Its  things  are  borrowed,  and  it  will  take  the  loan  from  the  borrower  :
and  it  is  like  the  confused  visions  of  the  sleeper,  and  the  dream  of  the  dreamer,  as
though  it  were  the  sardb 17  of  the  plain,  which  the  thirsty  imagineth  to  be  water  :  the
Devil  adorneth  it  for  man  until  death.  These  are  the  characteristics  of  the  world  :
confide  not  therefore  in  it,  nor  incline  to  it;  for  it  will  betray  him  who  depeudeth


THE  STORY  OF  THE  CITY  OF  BRASS.  117

upon  it,  and  who  in  his  affairs  relieth  upon  it.  Fall  not  in  its  snares,  nor  jling  to  its
skirts.  For  I  possessed  four  thousand  bay  horses  in  a  stable ;  and  I  married  a  thousand
damsels,  of  the  daughters  of  Kings,  high-bosomed  virgins,  like  moons ;  and  I  was
blessed  with  a  thousand  children,  like  stern  lions ;  and  I  lived  a  thousand  years,  happy
in  mind  and  heart ;  and  I  amassed  riches  such  as  the  Kings  of  the  regions  of  the  earth
were  unable  to  procure,  and  I  imagined  that  my  enjoyments  would  continue  without
failure.  But  I  was  not  aware  when  there  alighted  among  us  the  terminator  of
delights  and  the  separator  of  companions,  the  desolater  of  abodes  and  the  ravager  of
inhabited  mansions,  the  destroyer  of  the  great  and  the  small  and  the  infants  and  the
v-hildren  and  the  mothers.  We  had  resided  in  this  palace  in  security  until  the  event
decreed  by  the  Lord  of  all  creatures,  the  Lord  of  the  heavens  and  the  Lord  of  the
earths,  befell  us,  and  the  thunder  of  the  Manifest  Truth  assailed  us,  and  there  died  of
us  every  day  two,  till  a  great  company  of  us  had  perished.  So  when  I  saw  that  de-
struction had  entered  our  dwellings,  and  had  alighted  among  us,  and  drowned  us  in
the  sea  of  deaths,  I  summoned  a  writer,  and  ordered  him  to  write  these  verses  and
admonitions  and  lessons,  and  caused  them  to  be  engraved  upon  these  doors  and  tablets
and  tombs.  I  had  an  army  comprising  a  thousand  thousand  bridles,  composed  of
hardy  men,  with  spears,  and  coats  of  mail  and  sharp  swords,  and  strong  arms ;  and  I
ordered  them  to  clothe  themselves  with  the  long  coats  of  mail,  and  to  hang  on  the
keen  swords,  and  to  place  in  rest  the  terrible  lances,  and  mount  the  high-blooded
horses.  Then,  when  the  event  appointed  by  the  Lord  of  all  creatures,  the  Lord  of  the
earth  and  the  heavens,  befell  us,  I  said,  O  companies  of  troops  and  soldiers,  can  ye
prevent  that  which  hath  befallen  me  from  the  Mighty  King  ?  But  the  soldiers  and
troops  were  unable  to  do  so,  and  they  said,  How  shall  we  contend  against  Him  from
whom  none  hath  secluded,  the  Lord  of  the  door  that  hath  no  door-keeper  ?  So  I  said,
Bring  to  me  the  wealth.  (And  it  was  contained  in  a  thousand  pits,  in  each  of  which
were  a  thousand  hundred-weights  of  red  gold,  and  in  them  were  varieties  of  pearls  and
jewels,  and  there  was  the  like  quantity  of  white  silver,  with  treasures  such  as  the
Kings  of  the  earth  were  unable  to  procure.)  And  they  did  so;  and  when  they  had
brought  the  wealth  before  me,  I  said  to  them,  Can  ye  deliver  me  by  means  of  all  these
riches,  and  purchase  for  me  therewith  one  day  during  which  t  may  remain  alive  ?
But  they  could  not  do  so.  They  resigned  themselves  to  fate  and  destiny,  and  I  sub-
mitted to  God  with  patient  endurance  of  fate  and  affliction  until  He  took  my  soul,  and
made  me  to  dwell  in  my  grave.  And  if  thou  ask  concerning  my  name,  I  am  Koosh  the
son  of  Sheddad  the  son  of  'Ad  the  Greater.18

And  upon  the  same  tablet  were  also  inscribed  these  verses  :-

Shouldst  thou  think  upon  me  after  the  length  of  my  age,  and  the  vicissitudes  of

days  and  circumstances,
I  am  the  son  of  Sheddad,  who  held  dominion  over  mankind  and  each  tract  of  the

whole  earth.
All  the  stubborn  troops  became  abject  unto  me,  and  Esh-Sham  from  Misr  unto

'Adiuin.19
111  glory  I reigned,  abasing  their Kings,  the people  of  the  earth  fearing  my

dominion ;
And  I  beheld  the  tribes  and  armies  in  my  power,  and  saw  the  countries  and  their

inhabitants  dread  me.
When  I  mounted,  1  beheld  my  army  comprising  a  million  bridles  upon  neighing

steeds  ;
And  1  possessed  wealth  that  could  not  be  calculated,  which  1  treasured  up  against

misfortunes,

Determining  to  devote  the  whole  of  my  property  l'"r  th-  I'lirjK'se  of  extending  tin-
term  of  my  life.


But  the  Deity  would  nought  save  the  execution  of  his  purpose;  and  thus  I  became

separated  from  iny  brethren.
Death,  the  disuniter  of  mankind,  came  to  me,  and  I  was  removed  from  grandeur

to  the  mansion  of  contempt ;
And  I  found  [the  recompense  of]  all  my  past  actions,  for  which  I  am  pledged  r2"

for  I  was  sinful !
Then  raise  thyself,  lest  thou  be  upon  a  brink ;  and  beware  of  calamities  ! Mayest

thou  be  led  aright !

And  again  the  Emeer  Moosa  wept  until  he  became  insensible,  in  con-
sidering the  fates  of  the  people ;  after  which,  as  they  were  going
about  through  the  different  apartments  of  the  palace,  and  viewing
attentively  its  chambers  and  its  places  of  diversion,  they  came  to  a
table  upon  four  legs  of  alabaster,  whereon  was  inscribed, —

Upon  this  table  have  eaten  a  thousand  one-eyed  Kings,  and  a  thousand  Kings  each
sound  in  both  eyes.  All  of  them  have  quitted  the  world,  and  taken  up  their  abode  in
the  burial-grounds  and  the  graves.

And  the  Emeer  Moosa  wrote  all  this.  Then  he  went  forth,  and  took
not  with  him  from  the  palace  aught  save  the  table.


THE  STORY  OF  THE  CITY  OF  BRASS.  119

The  soldiers  proceeded,  with  the  sheykh  'Abd-Es-Samad  before
them  shewing  them  the  way,  until  all  the  first  day  had  passed,  and
the  second,  and  the  third.  They  then  came  to  a  high  hill,  at  which
they  looked,  and,  lo,  upon  it  was  a  horseman  of  brass,  on  the  top  of
whose  spear  was  a  wide  and  glistening  head  that  almost  deprived  the
beholder  of  sight,  and  on  it  was  inscribed,  0  thou  who  comest  unto
me,  if  thou  know  not  the  way  that  leadeth  to  the  City  of  Brass,  rub
the  hand  of  the  horseman,  and  he  will  turn,  and  then  will  stop,  and
in  whatsoever  direction  he  stoppeth,  thither  proceed,  without  fear  and
without  difficulty  ;  for  it  will  lead  thee  to  the  City  of  Brass. — And .
when  the  Emeer  Moosa  had  rubbed  the  hand  of  the  horseman,  it
turned  like  the  blinding  lightning,  and  faced  a  different  direction
from  that  in  which  they  were  travelling.

The  party  therefore  turned  thither  and  journeyed  on,  and  it  was
the  right  way.  They  took  that  route,  and  continued  their  course  the
same  day  and  the  next  night  until  they  had  traversed  a  wide  tract  of
country.  And  as  they  were  proceeding,  one  day,  they  came  to  a
pillar  of  black  stone,  wherein  was  a  person  sunk  to  his  arm-pits,  and
he  had  two  huge  wings,  and  four  arms ;  two  of  them  like  those  of  the
sons  of  Adam,  and  two  like  the  fore-legs  of  lions,  with  claws.  He  had
hair  upon  his  head  like  the  tails  of  horses,  and  two  eyes  like  two
burning  coals,  and  he  had  a  third  eye,  in  his  forehead,  like  the  eye  of
the  lynx,  from  which  there  appeared  sparks  of  fire.  He  was  black
and  tall ;  and  he  was  crying  out,  Extolled  be  the  perfection  of  my
Lord,  who  hath  appointed  me  this  severe  affliction  and  painful
torture  until  the  day  of  resurrection !  When  the  party  beheld  him,
their  reason  fled  from  them,  and  they  were  stupified  at  the  sight  of
his  form,  and  retreated  in  flight ;  and  the  Emeer  Moosa  said  to  the
sheykh  'Abd-Es-Samad,  What  is  this  ?  He  answered,  I  know  not
what  he  is.  And  the  Emeer  said,  Draw  near  to  him,  and  investigate
his  case :  perhaps  he  will  discover  it,  and  perhaps  thou  wilt  learn  his
history.  The  sheykh  'Abd-Es-Samad  replied,  May  God  amend  the
state  of  the  Emeer  !  Verily  we  fear  him. — Fear  ye  not,  rejoined  the
Emeer;  for  he  is  withheld  from  injuring  you  and  others  by  the  state
in  which  he  is.  So  the  sheykh  'Abd-Es-Samad  drew  near  to  him,
and  said  to  him,  O  thou  person,  what  is  thy  name,  and  what  is  thy
nature,  and  what  hath  placed  thee  here  in  this  manner  ?  And  he
answered  him,  As  to  me,  I  am  an  'Efreet  of  the  Jinn,  and  my  name
is  Danish  the  son  of  El-Aamash/1  and  I  am  restrained  here  by  the
majesty,  confined  by  the  power,  [of  God,]  tormented  as  long  as  God


(to  whom  be  ascribed  might  and  glory  !)  willeth.  Then  the  Emeer
Moosa  said,  O  sheykh  'Abd-Es-Samad,  ask  him  what  is  the  cause  of
his  confinement  in  this  pillar.  He  therefore  asked  respecting  that,
and  the  'Efreet  answered  him,  Verily  my  story  is  wonderful ;  and  it  is
this : —

There  belonged  to  one  of  the  sons  of  Iblees  an  idol  of  red  car-
nelion,  of  which  I  was  made  guardian  ;  and  there  used  to  worship  it
one  of  the  Kings  of  the  sea,  of  illustrious  dignity,  of  great  glory,
leading,  among  his  troops  of  the  Jann,  a  million  warriours  who  smote
with  swords  before  him,  and  who  answered  his  prayer  in  cases  of
difficulty.  These  Jann  who  obeyed  him  were  under  my  command


THE  STORY  OF  THE  CITY  OF  BIJASS.  121

and  authority,  following  my  words  when  I  ordered  them :  all  of  them
were  in  rebellion  against  Suleymiin  the  son  of  Daood  (on  both  of
whom  be  peace !)  ;  and  I  used  to  enter  the  body  of  the  idol,  and
command  them  and  forbid  them.  Now  the  daughter  of  that  King
was  a  frequent  adorer  of  the  idol,  assiduous  in  the  worship  of  it,  and
she  was  the  handsomest  of  the  people  of  her  age,  endowed  with
beauty  and  loveliness,  and  elegance  and  perfection  ;  and  I  described
her  to  Suleyman,  on  whom  be  peace  !  So  he  sent  to  her  father,  say-
ing to  him,  Marry  to  me  thy  daughter,  and  break  thy  carueliou-idol,
and  bear  witness  that  there  is  no  deity  but  God,  and  that  Suleynuin
is  the  Prophet  of  God.  If  thou  do  so,  thy  due  shall  be  the  same  as
our  due,  and  thy  debt  as  our  debt.  But  if  thou  refuse,  I  bring
against  thee  forces  with  which  thou  hast  not  power,  to  contend:
therefore  prepare  an  answer  to  the  question,22  and  put  on  the  garment
of  death ;  for  I  will  come  to  thee  with  forces  that  shall  fill  the  vacant
region,  and  leave  thee  like  yesterday  that  hath  passed. — And  when
the  messenger  of  Suleymiin  (on  whom  be  peace !)  came  to  him,  he
was  insolent  and  contumacious,  and  magnified  himself  and  was  proud.
Then  he  said  to  his  wezeers,  What  say  ye  respecting  the  affair  of
Suleyimiu  the  son  of  Daood?  For  he  hath  sent  demanding  rny
daughter,  and  commanding  me  to  break  my  carnelion-idol,  and  to
adopt  his  faith. — And  they  replied,  O  great  King,  can  Suleyman  do
unto  thee  that,  when  thou  art  in  the  midst  of  this  vast  sea  ?  If  he
come  unto  thee,  he  cannot  prevail  against  thee ;  since  the  Marids  of
the  Jinn  will  fight  on  thy  side ;  and  thou  shalt  seek  aid  against  him
of  thine  idol  that  thou  worshippest ;  for  he  will  aid  thee  against  him
and  will  defend  thee.  The  right  opinion  is,  that  thou  consult  thy
lord  (and  they  meant  by  him  the  red  carnelion-idol),  and  hear  what
will  be  his  reply  :  if  he  counsel  thee  to  fight  him,  fight  him  ;  but
otherwise,  do  not. — And  upon  this  the  King  went  immediately,  and,
going  in  to  his  idol,  after  he  had  offered  a  sacrifice  and  slain  victims,
fell  down  before  it  prostrate,  and  began  to  weep,  and  to  recite  these
verses  : —

O  my  lord,  verily  I  know  thy  dignity ;  and,  behold,  Suleyman  desireth  to  break

thee.
O  my  lord,  verily  I  seek  thy  defence :  command  then ;  for  I  am  obedient  to  thy

command.

(Then  that  'Efreet,  the  half  of  whom  was  in  the  pillar,  said  to  the
sheykh  'Abd-Es-Samad,  while  those  around  him  listened,)  And  there-
upon I  entered  the  body  of  the  idol,  by  reason  of  my  ignorance,  and

III.  K


122  THE  STORY  OF  THE  CITY  OF  BRASS.

the  paucity  of  my  sense,  and  my  solicitude  respecting  the  affair  of
Suleyman,  and  recited  this  couplet : —

As  for  me,  I  am  not  in  fear  of  him ;  for  I  am  acquainted  with  every  thing.
If  he  wish  to  wage  war  with  me,  I  will  go  forth,  and  I  will  snatch  his  soul  from
him.

So  when  the  King  heard  my  reply  to  him,  his  heart  was  strengthened,
and  he  determined  to  wage  war  with  Suleyman  the  Prophet  of  God
(on  whom  be  peace !)  and  to  fight  against  him.  Accordingly,  when  the
messenger  of  Suleyman  came,  he  inflicted  upon  him  a  painful  beating,
and  returned  him  a  shameful  reply;  and  he  sent  to  threaten  Suleym:in,
saying  to  him,  by  the  messenger,  Thy  mind  hath  suggested  to  thee
desires.  Dost  thou  threaten  me  with  false  words  ?  Either  come
thou  to  me,  or  I  will  go  to  thee.

Then  the  messenger  returned  to  Suleyman,  and  acquainted  him
with  all  that  had  occurred  and  happened  to  him.  And  when  the
Prophet  of  God,  Suleyman,  heard  that,  [it  was  as  though]  his  resur-
rection took  place  f3  his  resolution  was  roused,  and  he  prepared  his
forces,  consisting  of  Jinn  and  men,  and  wild  beasts,  and  birds  and
reptiles.  He  commanded  his  Wezeer  Ed-Dimiryat,  the  King  of  the
Jinn,  to  collect  the  Marids  of  the  Jinn  from  every  place :  so  he  col-
lected for  him,  of  the  Devils,  six  hundred  millions.  He  also  com-
manded Asaf  the  son  of  Barkhiya  [his  Wezeer  of  men]  to  collect  his
soldiers  of  mankind;  and  their  number  was  one  million,  or  more.
He  made  ready  the  accoutrements  and  weapons,  and  mounted,  with
his  forces  of  the  Jinn  and  of  mankind,  upon  the  carpet,24  with  the
birds  flying  over  his  head,  and  the  wild  beasts  beneath  the  carpet
marching,  until  he  alighted  upon  his  enemy's  coast,  and  surrounded
his  island,  having  filled  the  land  with  the  forces.  He  then  sent  to  our
King,  saying  to  him,  Behold,  I  have  arrived  :  therefore  repel  from  thee
that  which  hath  come  down,  or  else  submit  thyself  to  my  authority,
and  acknowledge  my  mission,  and  break  thine  idol,  and  worship  the
One,  the  Adored  God,  and  marry  to  me  thy  daughter  according  to
law,  and  say  thou,  and  those  who  are  with  thee,  I  testify  that  there  is
no  deity  but  God,  and  I  testify  that  Suleyman  is  the  Prophet  of  God.
If  thou  say  that,  peace  and  safety  shall  be  thy  lot.  But  if  thou  re-
fuse, thy  defending  thyself  from  me  in  this  island  shall  not  prevent
thee :  for  God  (whose  name  be  blessed  and  exalted !)  hath  com-
manded the  wind  to  obey  me,  and  I  will  order  it  to  convey  me  unto
thee  on  the  carpet,  and  will  make  thee  an  example  to  restrain  others.
—  So  the  messenger  came  to  him,  and  communicated  to  him  the


message  of  the  Prophet  of  God,  Suleyman,  on  whom  be  peace  !  But
the  King  said  to  him,  There  is  no  way  for  the  accomplishment  of  this
thing  that  he  requireth  of  me :  therefore  inform  him  that  I  am
coming  forth  unto  him.  Accordingly  the  messenger  returned  to
Suleyman,  and  gave  him  the  reply.  The  King  then  sent  to  the  peo^
pie  of  his  country,  and  collected  for  himself,  of  the  Jinn  that  were
under  his  authority,  a  million ;  and  to  these  he  added  others,  of  the
Maiids  and  Devils  that  were  in  the  islands  of  the  seas  and  on  the
tops  of  the  mountains ;  after  which  he  madeN  ready  his  forces,  and
opened  the  armouries,  and  distributed  to  them  the  weapons.  And  as
to  the  Prophet  of  God,  Suleymau  (on  whom  be  peace  !),  he  disposed
his  troops,  commanding  the  wild  beasts  to  form  themselves  into  two
divisions,  on  the  right  of  the  people  and  on  their  left,  and  command-
ing the  birds  to  be  upon  the  islands.  He  ordered  them  also,  when


124  THE  STORY  OF  THE  CITY,OF  BRASS.

the  assault  should  be  made,  to  tear  out  the  eyes  of  their  antagonists
with  their  beaks,  and  to  beat  their  faces  with  their  wings ;  and  he
ordered  the  wild  beasts  to  tear  in  pieces  their  horses ;  and  they  re-
plied, We  hear  and  obey  God  and  thee,  0  Prophet  of  God!  Then
Suleyman,  the  Prophet  of  God,  set  for  himself  a  couch  of  alabaster
adorned  with  jewels,  and  plated  with  plates  of  red  gold,  and  he
placed  his  Wezeer  Asaf  the  son  of  Barkhiya  on  the  right  side,  and
his  Wezeer  Ed-Dimiryat  on  the  left  side,  and  the  Kings  of  mankind
on  his  right,  and  the  Kings  of  the  Jinn  on  his  left,  and  the  wild
beasts  and  the  vipers  and  serpents  before  him.

After  this,  they  carne  upon  us  all  together,  and  we  contended
with  him  in  a  wide  tract  for  a  period  of  two  days  ;  and  calamity  befell
us  on  the  third  day,  and  the  decree  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !)
was  executed  among  us.  The  first  who  charged  upon  Suleytmin  were
I  and  my  troops ;  and  I  said  to  my  companions,  Keep  in  your  places
in  the  battle-field  while  I  go  forth  to  them  and  challenge  Ed-
Dimiryat.  And,  lo,  he  came  forth,  like  a  great  mountain,  his  fires
flaming,  and  his  smoke  ascending;  and  he  approached,  and  smote  me
with  a  flaming  fire ;  and  his  arrow  prevailed  over  my  fire.  He  cried
out  at  me  with  a  prodigious  cry,  so  that  I  imagined  the  heaven  had
fallen  and  closed  over  me,  and  the  mountains  shook  at  his  voice.
Then  he  commanded  his  companions,  and  they  charged  upon  us  all
together  :  we  also  charged  upon  them,  and  we  cried  out,  one  to
another :  the  fires  rose  and  the  smoke  ascended,  the  hearts  of  the
combatants  were  almost  cleft  asunder,  and  the  battle  raged.  The
birds  fought  in  the  air ;  and  the  wild  beasts  in  the  dust ;  and  I  con-
tended with  Ed-Dimiryat  until  he  wearied  me  and  I  wearied  him  ;
after  which  I  became  weak,  and  my  companions  and  troops  were
enervated,  and  my  tribes  were  routed.  The  Prophet  of  God,  Suley-
man, cried  out,  Take  ye  this  great  tyrant,  the  ill-omened,  the  in-
famous !  And  the  men  charged  upon  the  men,  and  the  Jinn  upon  the
Jinn ;  defeat  befell  our  King,  and  we  became  unto  Suleyman  a  spoil.
His  troops  charged  upon  our  forces,  with  the  wild  beasts  on  their
right  and  left,  and  the  birds  were  over  our  heads,  tearing  out  the
eyes  of  the  people,  sometimes  with  their  talons  and  sometimes  with
their  beaks,  and  sometimes  they  beat  with  their  wings  upon  the  faces
of  the  combatants,  while  the  wild  beasts  bit  the  horses  and  tore  in
pieces  the  men,  until  the  greater  portion  of  the  party  lay  upon  the
face  of  the  earth  like  the  trunks  of  palm-trees.  As  to  me,  I  flew
from  before  Ed-Dimiryat ;  but  he  followed  me  a  journey  of  three


months,  until  be  overtook  me.25  I  had  fallen  down  through  fatigue,
and  he  rushed  upon  me,  and  made  me  a  prisoner.  So  I  said  to  him,
By  Him  who  hath  exalted  thee  and  abased  me,  pity  me,  and  take  me
before  Suleyimin,  on  whom  be  peace !  But  when  I  came  before
Suleyrmin,  he  met  me  in  a  most  evil  manner :  he  caused  this  pillar  to
be  brought,  and  hollowed  it,  and  put  me  in  it,  and  sealed  me  with  his
signet ;  after  which,  he  chained  me,  and  Ed-Dimiryat  conveyed  me  to
this  place,  where  he  set  me  down  as  thou  seest  me ;  and  this  pillar  is
my  prison  until  the  day  of  resurrection.  He  charged  a  great  king 26
to  guard  me  in  this  prison,  and  I  am  in  this  condition  tortured  as
thou  seest  me.

The  party  therefore  wondered  at  him,  and  at  the  horrible  nature
of  his  form  ;  and  the  Emeer  Moosa  said,  There  is  no  deity  but  God  !
Suleyman  was  endowed  with  a  mighty  dominion  ! — And  the  sheykh
'Abd-Es-Samad  said  to  the  'Efreet,  O  thou,  I  ask  thee  concerning  a
thing  of  which  do  thou  inform  us.  The  'Efreet  replied,  Ask  concern-
ing what  thou  wilt.  And  the  sheykh  said,  Are  there  in  this  place


126  THE  STORY  OF  THE  CITY  OF  BRASS.

any  of  the  'Efreets  confined  in  bottles  of  brass  from  the  time  of
Suleyman,  on  whom  be  peace  ?  He  answered,  Yes,  in  the  Sea  of
El-Karkar,27  where  are  a  people  of  the  descendants  of  Nooh  (on  whom
be  peace!),  whose  country  the  deluge  reached  not,  and  they  are
separated  there  from  [the  rest  of]  the  sons  of  Adam. — And  where,
said  the  sheykh,  is  the  way  to  the  City  of  Brass,  and  the  place  wherein
are  the  bottles  ?  What  distance  is  there  between  us  and  it  ? — The
'Efreet  answered,  It  is  near.  So  the  party  left  him,  and  proceeded ;
and  there  appeared  to  them  a  great  black  object,  with  two.  [seeming]
fires  corresponding  with  each  other  in  position,  in  the  distance,  in
that  black  object ;  whereupon  the  Emeer  Moosa  said  to  the  sheykh,
What  is  this  great  black  object,  and  what  are  these  two  corresponding
fires  ?  The  guide  answered  him,  Be  rejoiced,  0  Emeer ;  for  this  is
the  City  of  Brass,  and  this  is  the  appearance  of  it  that  I  find  described
in  the  Book  of  Hidden  Treasures ;  that  its  wall  is  of  black  stones,
and  it  hath  two  towers  of  brass  of  El-Andalus,23  which  the  beholder
seeth  resembling  two  corresponding  fires ;  and  thence  it  is  named  the
City  of  Brass. — They  ceased  not  to  proceed  until  they  arrived  at  it ;
and,  lo,  it  was  lofty,  strongly  fortified,  rising  high  into  the  air,
impenetrable :  the  height  of  its  walls  was  eighty  cubits,  and  it  had
five  and  twenty  gates,  none  of  which  would  open  but  by  means  of
some  artifice ;  and  there  was  not  one  gate  to  it  that  had  not,  within
the  city,  one  like  it :  such  was  the  beauty  of  the  construction  and
architecture  of  the  city.  They  stopped  before  it,  and  endeavoured  to
discover  one  of  its  gates  ;  but  they  could  not ;  and  the  Emeer  Moosa
said  to  the  sheykh  'Abd-Es-Samad,  0  sheykh,  I  see  not  to  this  city
any  gate.  The  sheykh  replied,  0  Emeer,  thus  do  I  find  it  described
in  the  Book  of  Hidden  Treasures ;  that  it  hath  five  and  twenty  gates,
and  that  none  of  its  gates  may  be  opened  but  from  within  the  city. —
And  how,  said  the  Emeer,  can  we  contrive  to  enter  it,  and  divert  our-
selves with  a  view  of  its  wonders  ?

Then  the  Emeer  Moosa  ordered  one  of  his  young  men  to  mount
a  camel,  and  ride  round  the  city,  in  the  hope  that  he  might  discover
a  trace  of  a  gate,  or  a  place  lower  than  that  to  which  they  were
opposite.29  So  one  of  his  young  men  mounted,  and  proceeded  around
it  for  two  days  with  their  nights,  prosecuting  his  journey  with
diligence,  and  not  resting;  and  when  the  third  day  arrived,  he  came
in  sight  of  his  companions,  and  he  was  astounded  at  that  which  he
beheld  of  the  extent  of  the  city,  and  its  height.  Then  he  said,  O
Emeer,  the  easiest  place  in  it  is  this  place  at  which  ye  have  alighted.


THE  STORY  OF  THE  CITY  OF  BRASS.  127

And  thereupon  the  Erueer  Moosa  took  Talib  the  son  of  Sahl,  and  the
sheykh  'Abd-Es-Samad,  and  they  ascended  a  mountain  opposite  the
city,  and  overlooking  it ;  and  when  they  had  ascended  that  mountain,
they  saw  a  city  than  which  eyes  had  not  beheld  any  greater.  Its
pavilions  were  lofty,  and  its  domes  were  shining ;  its  mansions  were
in  good  condition,  and  its  rivers  were  running ;  its  trees  were  fruitful,
and  its  gardens  bore  ripe  produce.  It  was  a  city  with  impenetrable
gates,  empty,  still,  without  a  voice  or  a  cheering  inhabitant,  but  the
owl  hooting  in  its  quarters,  and  birds  skimming  in  circles  in  its  areas,
and  the  raven  croaking  in  its  districts  and  its  great  thoroughfare-
streets,  and  bewailing  those  who  had  been  in  it.  The  Emeer  Moosa
paused,  sorrowing  for  its  being  devoid  of  inhabitants,  and  its  being
despoiled  of  people  and  dwellers;  and  he  said,  Extolled  be  the
perfection  of  Him  whom  ages  and  times  change  not,  the  Creator  of
the  creation  by  his  power  !  And  while  he  was  extolling  the  perfection
of  God  (to  whom  be  ascribed  might  and  glory  !),  he  happened  to  look
aside,  and,  lo,  there  were  seven  tablets  of  white  marble,  appearing
from  a  distance.  So  he  approached  them,  and,  behold,  they  were
sculptured  and  inscribed ;  and  he  ordered  that  their  writing  should
be  read  :  therefore  the  sheykh  'Abd-Es-Samad  advanced  and  examined
them  and  read  them ;  and  they  contained  admonition,  and  matter  for
example  and  restraint,  unto  those  endowed  with  faculties  of  discern-
ment. Upon  the  first  tablet  was  inscribed,  in  the  ancient  Greek
character,-

O  son  of  Adam,  how  heedless  art  thou  of  the  case  of  him  who  hath  heen  before
thee !  Thy  years  and  age  have  diverted  thee  from  considering  him.  Knowest  thou
not  that  the  cup  of  death  will  he  filled  for  thee,  and  that  in  a  short  time  thou  wilt
drink  it  ?  Look  then  to  thyself  before  entering  thy  grave.  Where  are  those  who
possessed  the  countries  and  abased  the  servants  of  God  and  led  armies  ?  Death  hath
come  upon  them ;  and  God  is  the  terminator  of  delights  and  the  separator  of  com-
panions and  the  devastator  of  nourishing  dwellings;  so  He  hath  transported  them
from  the  amplitude  of  palaces  to  the  straitness  of  the  graves.

Arid  in  the  lower  part  of  the  tablet  were  inscribed  these  verses :

Where  are  the  Kings  and  the  peoplers  of  the  earth  ? They  have  quitted  that

which  they  have  built  and  peopled  •
And  in  the  grave  they  are  pledged  for  their  past  actions :  there,  after  destruction,

they  have  become  putrid  corpses.
Where  are  the  troops  ? They  repelled  not,  nor  profited. And  where  is  that

which  they  collected  and  hoarded  ?
The  decree  of  the  Lord  of  the  Throne  surprised  them. Neither  riches  nor  refuge

saved  them  from  it.

And  the  Emeer  Moosa  fainted  ;  his  tears  ran  down  upon  his  cheeks,


128  THE  STORY  OF  THE  CITY  OF  BRASS.

and  he  said,  By  Allah,  indifference  to  the  world  is  the  most  appro-
priate and  the  most  sure  course !  Then  he  caused  an  inkhora  and
a  paper  to  be  brought,  and  he  wrote  the  inscription  of  the  first
tablet ;  after  which  he  drew  near  to  the  second  tablet,30  and  the  third,
and  the  fourth ;  and,  having  copied  what  was  inscribed  on  them,  he,
descended  from  the  mountain ;  and  the  world  had  been  pictured
before  his  eyes.

And  when  he  came  back  to  the  troops,  they  passed  the  day  devising
means  of  entering  the  city ;  and  the  Emeer  Moosa  said  to  his
Wezeer,  Talib  the  son  of  Sahl,  arid  to  those  of  his  chief  officers  who
were  around  him,  How  shall  we  contrive  to  enter  the  city,  that  we
may  see  its  wonders  ?  Perhaps  we  shall  find  in  it  something  by
which  we  may  ingratiate  ourselves  with  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful. —
Talib  the  son  of  Sahl  replied,  May  God  continue  the  prosperity  of
the  Emeer !  Let  us  make  a  ladder,  and  mount  upon  it,  and  perhaps
we  shall  gain  access  to  the  gate  from  within. — And  the  Emeer  said,
This  is  what  occurred  to  my  mind,  and  excellent  is  the  advice.  Then
he  called  to  the  carpenters  and  blacksmiths,  and  ordered  them  to
make  straight  some  pieces  of  wood,  and  to  construct  a  ladder  covered
with  plates  of  iron.  And  they  did  so,  and  made  it  strong.  They
employed  themselves  in  constructing  it  a  whole  month,  and  many
men  were  occupied  in  making  it.  And  they  set  it  up  and  fixed  it
against  the  wall,  and  it  proved  to  be  equal  to  the  wall  in  height,  as
though  it  had  been  made  for  it  before  that  day.  So  the  Emeer
Moosa  wondered  at  it,  and  said,  God  bless  you !  It  seemeth,  from
the  excellence  of  your  work,  as  though  ye  had  adapted  it  by  measure-
ment to  the  wall. — He  then  said  to  the  people,  Which  of  you  will
ascend  this  ladder,  and  mount  upon  the  wall,  and  walk  along  it,
and  contrive  means  of  descending  into  the  city,  that  he  may  see  how
the  case  is,  and  then  inform  us  of  the  mode  of  opening  the  gate  ?
And  one  of  them  answered,  I  will  ascend  it,  0  Emeer,  and  descend
and  open  the  gate.  The  Emeer  therefore  replied,  Mount.  God  bless
thee! — Accordingly,  the  man  ascended  the  ladder  until  he  reached
the  top  of  it ;  when  he  stood,  and  fixed  his  eyes  towards  the  city,
clapped  his  hands,  and  cried  out  with  his  loudest  voice,  saying,  Thou
art  beautiful !  Then  he  cast  himself  down  into  the  city,  and  his
flesh  became  mashed  with  his  bones.  So  the  Emeer  Moosa  said,
This  is  the  action  of  the  rational.  How  then  will  the  insane  act  ?
If  we  do  thus  with  all  our  companions,  there  will  not  remain  of  them
OIK;  ;  and  we  shall  be  unable  to  accomplish  our  affair,  and  the  affair  of


THE  STORY  OF  THE  CITY  OF  BRASS  129

the  Prince  of  the  Faithful.  Depart  ye ;  for  we  have  no  concern  with
this  city. — But  one  of  them  said,  Perhaps  another  than  this  may  be
more  steady  than  he.  And  a  second  ascended,  and  a  third,  and  a
fourth,  and  a  fifth ;  and  they  ceased  not  to  ascend  by  that  ladder  to
the  top  of  the  wall,  one  after  another,  until  twelve  men  of  them  had
gone,  acting  as  acted  the  first.  Therefore  the  sheykh  'Abd-Es-Samad
said,  There  is  none  for  this  affair  but  myself,  and  the  experienced  is
not  like  the  inexperienced.  But  the  Emeer  Moosa  said  to  him,
Thou  shalt  not  do  that,  nor  will  I  allow  thee  to  ascend  to  the  top
of  this  wall ;  for  shouldst  thou  die,  thou  wouldst  be  the  cause  of  the
death  of  us  all,  and  there  would  not  remain  of  us  one ;  since  thou
art  the  guide  of  the  party.  The  sheykh  however  replied,  Perhaps
the  object  will  be  accomplished  by  my  means,  through  the  will  of
God,  whose  name  be  exalted !  And  thereupon  all  the  people  agreed
to  his  ascending.

Then  the  sheykh  'Abd-Es-Samad  arose,  and  encouraged  himself,
and,  having  said,  In  the  name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the
Merciful ! — he  ascended  the  ladder,  repeating  the  praises  of  God
(whose  name  be  exalted !),  and  reciting  the  Verses  of  Safety,31  until
he  reached  the  top  of  the  wall;  when  he  clapped  his  hands,  and
fixed  his  eyes.  The  people  therefore  all  called  out  to  him,  and  said,
O  sheykh  'Abd-Es-Samad,  do  it  not,  and  cast  not  thyself  down!
And  they  said,  Verily  to  God  we  belong,  and  verily  unto  Him  we
return  !  If  the  sheykh  'Abd-Es-Samad  fall,  we  all  perish  ! — Then
the  sheykh  'Abd-Es-Samad  laughed  immoderately,  and  sat  a  long
time  repeating  the  praises  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !),  and
reciting  the  Verses  of  Safety ;  after  which  he  rose  with  energy,  and
called  out  with  his  loudest  voice,  0  Emeer,  no  harm  shall  befall  you ;
for  God  (to  whom  be  ascribed  might  and  glory  !)  hath  averted  from
me  the  effect  of  the  artifice  and  fraudulence  of  the  Devil,  through  the
blessing  resulting  from  the  utterance  of  the  words,  In  the  name  of
God,  the  Compassionate,,  the  Merciful. — So  the  Emeer  said  to  him,
What  hast  thou  seen,  0  sheykh  ?  He  answered,  When  I  reached
the  top  of  the  wall,  I  beheld  ten  damsels,  like  moons,  who  made  a
sign  with  their  hands,  as  though  they  would  say,  Come  to  us.  And
it  seemed  to  me  that  beneath  me  was  a  sea  (or  great  river)  of  water ;
whereupon  I  desired  to  cast  myself  down,  as  our  companions  did:
but  I  beheld  them  dead  ;  so  I  withheld  myself  from  them,  and  recited
some  words  of  the  book  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !),  whereupon
God  averted  from  me  the  influence  of  those  damsels'  artifice;  and
in.  s


130


THE  STORY  OF  THE  CITY  OF  BRASS.


from


me


therefore  I
cast  not  my-
self down,
and  God  re-
pelled from
me  the  effect
of  their  arti-
fice and  en-
chantment.
There  is  no  doubt  that  this  is  an  en-
chantment and  an  artifice  which  the
people  of  this  city  contrived  in  order
to  repel  from  it  every  one  who  should
desire  to  look  down  upon  it,  and  wish
to  obtain  access  to  it ;  and  these  our
companions  are  laid  dead.

He  then  walked  along  the  wall  till
he  came  to  the  two  towers  of  brass,
when  he  saw  that  they  had  two  gates
of  gold,  without  locks  upon  them,  or
any  sign  of  the  means  of  opening
them.  Therefore  the  sheykh  paused
as  long  as  God  willed,32  and,  looking
attentively,  he  saw  in  the  middle  of
one  of  the  gates  a  figure  of  a  horse-
man of  brass,  having  one  hand  ex-
tended, as  though  he  were  pointing
with  it,  and  on  it  was  an  inscription,
which  the  sheykh  read,  and,  lo,  it  con-
tained these  words  : — Turn  the  pin
that  is  in  the  middle  of  the  front  of
the  horseman's  body  twelve  times,
and  then  the  gate  will  open.  So  he
examined  the  horseman,  and  in  the
middle  of  the  front  of  his  body  was
a  pin,  strong,  firm,  well  fixed ;  and
he  turned  it  twelve  times ;  whereupon
the  gate  opened  immediately,  with  a
noise  like  thunder ;  and  the  sheykh


THE  STORY  OF  THE  CITY  OF  BRASS.  131

Abd-Es-Samad  entered.  He  was  a  learned  man,  acquainted  with  all
languages  and  characters.  And  he  walked  on  until  he  entered  a  Ion"-
passage,  whence  he  descended  some  steps,  and  he  found  a  place
with  handsome  wooden  benches,  on  which  were  people  dead,  and
over  their  heads  were  elegant  shields,  and  keen  swords,  and  strun°-
bows,  and  notched  arrows.  And  behind  the  [next]  gate  were  a
bar  of  iron,  and  barricades  of  wood,  and  locks  of  delicate  fabric,
and  strong  apparatus.  Upon  this,  the  sheykh  said  within  himself,
Perhaps  the  keys  are  with  these  people.  Then  he  looked,  and,  lo,
there  was  a  sheykh  who  appeared  to  be  the  oldest  of  them,  and  he
was  upon  a  high  wooden  bench  among  the  dead  men.  So  the
sheykb  'Abd-Es-Samad  said,  May  not  the  keys  of  the  city  be  with
this  sheykh !  Perhaps  he  was  the  gate-keeper  of  the  city,  and
these  were  under  his  authority. — He  therefore  drew  near  to  him,
and  lifted  up  his  garments,  and,  lo,  the  keys  were  hung  to  his
waist.  At  the  sight  of  them,  the  sheykh  'Abd-Es-Samad  rejoiced
exceedingly ;  his  reason  almost  fled  from  him  in  consequence  of  his
joy;  and  he  took  the  keys,  approached  the  gate,  opened  the  locks,
and  pulled  the  gate  and  the  barricades  and  other  apparatus,  which
opened,  and  the  gate  also  opened,  with  a  noise  like  thunder,  by
reason  of  its  greatness  and  terribleness,  and  the  enormousness  of  its
apparatus.  Upon  this,  the  sheykh  exclaimed,  God  is  most  great ! 33 —
and  the  people  made  the  same  exclamation  with  him,  rejoicing  at  the
event.  The  Eqieer  Moosa  also  rejoiced  at  the  safety  of  the  sheykh
'Abd-Es-Samad,  and  at  the  opening  of  the  gate  of  the  city;  the
people  thanked  the  sheykh  for  that  which  he  had  done,  and  all  the
troops  hastened  to  enter  the  gate.  But  the  Emeer  Moosa  cried  out
to  them,  saying  to  them,  0  people,  if  all  of  us  enter,  we  shall  not  be
secure  from  some  accident  that  may  happen.  Half  shall  enter,  and
half  shall  remain  behind.

The  Emeer  Moosa  then  entered  the  gate,  and  with  him  half  of
the  people,  who  bore  their  weapons  of  war.  And  the  party  saw  their
companions  lying  dead :  so  they  buried  them.  They  saw  also  the
gate-keepers  and  servants  and  chamberlains  and  lieutenants  lying
upon  beds  of  silk,  all  of  them  dead.  And  they  entered  the  market
of  the  city,  and  beheld  a  great  market,  with  lofty  buildings,  none  of
which  projected  beyond  another :  the  shops  were  open,  and  the  scales
hung  up,  and  the  utensils  of  brass  ranged  in  order,  and  the  khans
were  full  of  all  kinds  of  goods.  And  they  saw  the  merchants  dead  in
their  shops  :  their  skins  were  dried,  and  their  bones  were  carious,  and


132  THE  STORY  OF  THE  CITY  OF  BRASS.

they  had  become  examples  to  him  who  would  be  admonished.  They
saw  likewise  four  markets  of  particular  shops  filled  with  wealth.  And
they  left  this  place,  and  passed  on  to  the  silk-market,  in  which  were
silks  and  brocades  interwoven  with  red  gold  and  white  silver  upon
various  colours,  and  the  owners  were  dead,  lying  upon  skins,  and
appearing  almost  as  though  they  would  speak.  Leaving  these,  they
went  on  to  the  market  of  jewels  and  pearls  and  jacinths ;  and  they
left  it,  and  passed  on  to  the  market  of  the  money-changers,  whom
they  found  dead,  with  varieties  of  silks  beneath  them,  and  their  shops
were  filled  with  gold  and  silver.  These  they  left,  and  they  proceeded
to  the  market  of  the  perfumers ;  and,  lo,  their  shops  were  filled  with
varieties  of  perfumes,  and  bags  of  musk,  and  ambergris,  and  aloes-
wood,  and  nedd,34  and  camphor,  and  other  things ;  and  the  owners
were  all  dead,  not  having  with  them  any  food.  And  when  they  went
forth  from  the  market  of  the  perfumers,  they  found  near  unto  it  a
palace,  decorated,  and  strongly  constructed;  and  they  entered  it,  and
found  banners  unfurled,  and  drawn  swords,  and  strung  bows,  and
shields  hung  up  by  chains  of  gold  and  silver,  and  hemlets  gilded
with  red  gold.  And  in  the  passages  of  that  palace  were  benches  of
ivory,  ornamented  with  plates  of  brilliant  gold,  and  with  silk,  on
which  were  men  whose  skins  had  dried  upon  the  bones:  the  ignorant
would  imagine  them  to  be  sleeping ;  but,  from  the  want  of  food,  they
had  died,  and  tasted  mortality.  Upon  this,  the  Emeer  Moosa  paused,
extolling  the  perfection  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !),  and  his
holiness,  and  contemplating  the  beauty  of  that  palace,  and  its. strong
construction,  and  its  wonderful  fabrication  in  the  most  beautiful  form
and  with  the  firmest  architecture ;  and  most  of  its  decoration  was  in
ultramarine.3''  Around  it  were  inscribed  these  verses  : —


Consider  what  thou  beholdest,  0  man ;  and  be  on  thy  guard  before  thou  de-

partest ;
And  prepare  good  provision,  that  thou  mayest  enjoy  it ;  for  every  dweller  in  a

house  shall  depart.
Consider  a  people  who  decorated  their  abodes,  and in  tho dust have  become

pledged  for  their  actions.
They  built ;  but  their  buildings  availed  not : and  treasured  ; but  their  wealth  did

not  save  them  when  the  term  had  expired.
How  often  they  hoped  for  what  was  not  decreed  them  ! But  they  passed  to  the

graves,  and  hope  did  not  protit  them  ;
And  from  their  high  and  glorious  state  they  were  removed  to  the  narrowness  of

the  sepulchre. Evil  is  their  abode  !
Then  there  came  to  them  a  crier,  after  they  were  buried,  saying,  Where  are  the

thrones  and  the  crowns  and  the  apparel :-


THE  STORY  OF  THE  CITY  OF  BRASS.  133

Where  are  the  faces  which  were  veiled  and  curtained,  and  on  which,  for  their

beauty,  proverbs  were  composed  ? —
And  the  grave  plainly  answered  the  inquirer  for  them,  As  to  the  cheeks,  the  rose

is  gone  from  them.
Long  time  they  ate  and  drank ;  but  now,  after  pleasant  eating,  they  themselves

have  been  eaten.

And  the  Emeer  Moosa  wept  until  he  became  senseless,  and
afterwards,  having  given  orders  to  write  these  verses,  he  went  on
into  the  interior  of  the  palace.  There  he  beheld  a  great  hall,  and
four  large  and  lofty  chambers,  each  one  fronting  another,  wide,
decorated  with  gold  and  silver  and  with  various  colours.  In  the
midst  of  the  hall  was  a  great  fountain  of  alabaster,  over  which  was
a  canopy  of  brocade  ;  and  in  those  chambers  were  places  [one  in
each  chamber]  containing  decorated  fountains,  and  tanks  lined  with
marble ;  and  channels  of  water  flowed  along  the  floors  of  those
chambers,  the  four  streams  meeting  together  in  a  great  tank  lined
with  marbles  of  various  colours. — The  Emeer  Moosa  then  said  to
the  sheykh  'Abd-Es-Samad,  Enter  these  chambers  with  us.  So  they
entered  the  first  chamber;  and  they  found  it  filled  with  gold  and
with  white  silver,  and  pearls  and  jewels,  and  jacinths  and  precious
minerals.  They  found  in  it  also  chests  full  of  red  and  yellow  and
white  brocades.  And  they  went  thence  to  the  second  chamber,  and
opened  a  closet  in  it,  and,  lo,  it  was  filled  with  arms  and  weapons  of
war,  consisting  of  gilded  helmets,  and  Davidean  coats  of  mail,  and
Indian  swords,  and  lances  of  Khatt  Hejer,  and  maces  of  Khuwarezm,
and  other  instruments  of  war  and  battle.36  Then  they  passed  thence
to  the  third  chamber,  in  which  they  found  closets  having  upon  their
doors  closed  locks,  and  over  them  were  curtains  worked  with  various
kinds  of  embroidery.  They  opened  one  of  these  closets,  and  found  it
filled  with  weapons  decorated  with  varieties  of  gold  and  silver  and
jewels.  And  they  went  thence  to  the  fourth  chamber,  where  also
they  found  closets,  one  of  which  they  opened,  and  they  found  it  full
of  utensils  for  food  and  drink,  consisting  of  various  vessels  of  gold
and  silver,  and  saucers  of  crystal,  and  cups  set  with  brilliant  pearls,
and  cups  of  carnelion,  and  other  things.  So  they  began  to  take  what
suited  them  of  those  things,  and  each  of  the  soldiers  carried  off  what
he  could.  And  when  they  determined  to  go  forth  from  those
chambers,  they  saw  there  a  door  of  saj 87  inlaid  with  ivory  and  ebony,
and  adorned  with  plates  of  brilliant  gold,  in  the  midst  of  that  palace.
Over  it  was  hung  a  curtain  of  silk  worked  with  various  kinds  of
embroidery;  and  upon  it  were  locks  of  white  silver,  to  be  opened  by


134  THE  STORY  OF  THE  CITY  OF  BRASS

artifice,  without  a  key.  The  sheykh  'Abd-Es-Samad  therefore  ad-
vanced to  those  locks,  and  he  opened  them  by  his  knowledge  and
boldness  and  excellent  skill.  And  the  party  entered  a  passage  paved
with  marble,  upon  the  sides  of  which  were  curtains88  whereon  were
figured  various  wild  beasts  and  birds,  all  these  being  worked  with
red  gold  and  white  silver,  and  their  eyes  were  of  pearls  and  jacinths :
whosoever  beheld  them  was  confounded.  Next  they  came  to  a  saloon,
on  beholding  which  the  Emeer  Moosa  and  the  sheykh  'Abd-Es-
Samad  were  amazed  at  its  construction.

They  then  passed  on,  and  found  a  saloon  constructed  of  polished
marble  adorned  with  jewels.  The  beholder  imagined  that  upon  its
floor  was  running  water,  and  if  any  one  walked  upon  it  he  would
slip.  The  Emeer  Moosa  therefore  ordered  the  sheykh  'Abd-Es-
Samad  to  throw  upon  it  something  that  they  might  be  enabled
to  walk  on  it ;  and  he  did  this,  and  contrived  so  that  they  passed  on.
And  they  found  in  it  a  great  dome  constructed  of  stones  gilded
with  red  gold.  The  party  had  not  beheld,  in  all  that  they  had
seen,  any  thing  more  beautiful  than  it.  And  in  the  midst  of  that
dome  was  a  great  dome-crowned  structure  of  alabaster,  around  which
were  lattice-windows,  decorated,  and  adorned  with  oblong  emeralds,
such  as  none  of  the  Kings  could  procure.  In  it  was  a  pavilion  of
brocade,  raised  upon  columns  of  red  gold,  and  within  this  were  birds,
the  feet  of  which  were  of  emeralds ;  beneath  each  bird  was  a  net  of
brilliant  pearls,  spread  over  a  fountain ;  and  by  the  brink  of  the
fountain  was  placed  a  couch  adorned  with  pearls  and  jewels  and
jacinths,  whereou  was  a  damsel  resembling  the  shining  sun.  Eyes
had  not  beheld  one  more  beautiful.  Upon  her  was  a  garment  of
brilliant  pearls,  on  her  head  was  a  crown  of  red  gold,  with  a  fillet
of  jewels,  on  her  neck  was  a  necklace  of  jewels  in  the  middle  of
which  were  refulgent  gems,  and  upon  her  forehead  were  two  jewels
the  light  of  which  was  like  that  of  the  sun;  and  she  seemed  as
though  she  were  looking  at  the  people,  and  observing  them  to  the
right  and  left.  When  the  Emeer  Moosa  beheld  this  damsel,  he
wondered  extremely  at  her  loveliness,  and  was  confounded  by  her
beauty  and  the  redness  of  her  cheeks  and  the  blackness  of  her  hair.
Any  beholder  would  imagine  that  she  was  alive,  and  not  dead.  And
they  said  to  her,  Peace  be  on  thee,  O  damsel !  But  Talib  the  son
of  Sahl  said  to  the  Emeer,  May  God  amend  thy  state  !  Know  that
this  damsel  is  dead.  There  is  no  life  in  her.  How  then  can  she
return  the  salutation? — And  he  added,  O  Emeer,  she  is  skilfully


THE  STORY  OF  THE  CITY  OF  BRASS.  135

embalmed ;  and  her  eyes  have  been  taken  out  after  her  death,  and
quicksilver  hath  been  put  beneath  them,  after  which  they  have  been
restored  to  their  places  ;  so  they  gleam ;  and  whenever  the  air  putteth
them  in  motion,  the  beholder  imagineth  that  she  twinkleth  her  eyes,
though  she  is  dead.39 — Upon  this  the  Emeer  Moosa  said,  Extolled  be
the  perfection  of  God,  who  hath  subdued  his  servants  by  death ! —
And  as  to  the  couch  upon  which  was  the  damsel,  it  had  steps,  and
upon  the  steps  were  two  slaves,  one  of  them  white  and  the  other
black  ;  and  in  the  hand  of  one  of  them  was  a  weapon  of  steel,  and  in
the  hand  of  the  other  a  jewelled  sword  that  blinded  the  eyes ;  and
before  the  two  slaves  was  a  tablet  of  gold,  whereon  was  read  an
inscription,  which  was  this : —

In  the  name  of  God,  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.  Praise  be  to  God,  the
Creator  of  Man ;  and  He  is  the  Lord  of  lords,  and  the  Cause  of  causes.  In  the  name  of
God,  the  Everlasting,  the  Eternal :  in  the  name  of  God,  the  Ordainer  of  fate  and  des-
tiny. O  son  of  Adam,  how  ignorant  art  thou  in  the  long  indulgence  of  hope  !  and  how
unmindful  art  thou  of  the  arrival  of  the  predestined  period !  Knowest  thou  not  that
death  hath  called  for  thee,  and  hath  advanced  to  seize  thy  soul  ?  Be  ready  then  for
departure,  and  make  provision  in  the  world ;  for  thou  wilt  quit  it  soon.  Where  is
Adam,  the  father  of  mankind  ?  Where  are  Nooh  and  his  offspring  ?  Where  are  the
sovereign  Kisras  and  Cecsars  ?  Where  are  the  Kings  of  India  and  El-'Erak  ?  Where
are  the  Kings  of  the  regions  of  the  earth  ?  Where  are  the  Amalekites  ?  Where  are
the  mighty  monarchs  ?  The  mansions  are  void  of  their  presence,  and  they  have  quitted
their  families  and  homes.  Where  are  the  Kings  of  the  foreigners  and  the  Arabs  ?
They  have  all  died,  and  become  rotten  bones.  Where  are  the  lords  of  high  degree  ?
They  have  all  died.  Where  are  Karoon  and  Haman  ?  m  Where  is  Sheddad  the  son  of
'Ad  ?  Where  are  Ken' an  and  the  Lord  of  the  Stakes  ?41  God  hath  cut  them  off,  and
it  is  He  who  cutteth  short  the  lives  of  mankind,  and  He  hath  made  the  mansions  to  be
void  of  their  presence.  Did  they  prepare  provision  for  the  day  ot  resurrection,  and
make  themselves  ready  to  reply  to  the  Lord  of  men  ? — O  thou,  if  thou  know  me  not,  I
will  acquaint  thee  with  my  name  and  my  descent.  I  am  Tedmur,42  the  daughter  of
the  King  of  the  Amalekites,  of  those  who  ruled  the  country  with  equity.  I  possessed
what  none  of  the  Kings  possessed,  and  ruled  with  justice,  and  acted  impartially  towards
my  subjects :  I  gave  and  bestowed,  and  I  lived  a  long  time  in  the  enjoyment  of  happi-
ness and  an  easy  life,  and  possessing  emancipated  female  and  male  slaves.  Thus  I  did
until  the  summoner  of  death  came  to  my  abode,  and  disasters  occurred  before  me.
And  the  case  was  this : — Seven  years  in  succession  came  upon  us,  during  which  no
water  descended  on  us  from  heaven,  nor  did  any  grass  grow  for  us  on  the  face  of  the
earth.  So  we  ate  what  food  we  had  in  our  dwellings,  and  after  that  we  fell  upon  the
beasts  and  ate  them,  and  there  remained  nothing.  Upon  this,  therefore,  I  caused  the
wealth  to  be  brought,  and  meted  it  with  a  measure,  and  sent  it  by  trusty  men,  who
went  about  with  it  through  all  the  districts,  not  leaving  unvisited  a  single  large  city,
to  seek  for  some  food.  But  they  found  it  not ;  and  they  returned  to  us  with  the
wealth,  after  a  long  absence.  So  thereupon  we  exposed  to  view  our  riches  and  our
treasures,  locked  the  gates  of  the  fortresses  in  our  city,  and  submitted  ourselves  to
the  decree  of  our  Lord,  committing  our  case  to  our  Master,  and  thus  we  all  died,  as
thou  beholdest,  and  left  what  we  had  built  and  what  we  had  treasured.  This  is  the
story :  and  after  the  substance  there  remaineth  not  aught  save  the  vestige.


136  THE  STORY  OF  THE  CITY  OF  BRASS.

And  they  looked  at  the  lower  part  of  the  tablet,  and  saw  inscribed
upon  it  these  verses : —

Child  of  Adam,  let  not  hope  make  game  of  thee. From  all  that  thy  hands  have

treasured  thou  shalt  be  removed.
I  see  thee  desirous  of  the  world  and  its  embellishments ;  and  the  past  generations

have  pursued  the  same  course.
They  acquired  wealth,  both  lawful  and  forbidden ;  but  it  repelled  not  fate  when

the  term  expired :
They  led  troops  in  multitudes,  and  collected  riches;  and  they  left  their  wealth

and  buildings,  and  departed
To  the  narrow  graves,  and  lay  down  in  the  dust ;  and  there  they  have  remained,

pledged  for  their  actions ;
As  if  the  company  of  travellers  had  put  down  their  baggage  during  night  in  :i

house  where  was  no  food  for  guests,
And  its  owner  had  said  to  them,  O  people,  there  is  not  any  lodging  for  you  in  it.

So  they  packed  after  alighting :
And  they  all  thereupon  became  fearful  and  timid  :  neither  halting  nor  journeying

was  pleasant  unto  them.
Then  prepare  good  provision  that  will  rejoice  thee  to-morrow ;  and  act  not  save

agreeably  with  the  fear  of  thy  Lord.

And  upon  the  tablet  were  also  inscribed  these  words  : 43 —

Whoso  arriveth  at  our  city,  and  entereth  it,  God  facilitating  his  entrance  into  it,  let
him  take  of  the  wealth  what  he  can,  but  not  touch  any  thing  that  is  on  my  body  ;  for
it  is  the  covering  of  my  person,  and  the  attire  with  which  I  am  fitted  forth  from  the
world.  Therefore  let  him  fear  God,  and  not  seize  aught  of  it ;  for  he  would  destroy  him-
self. I  have  caused  this  to  be  an  admonition  from  me  unto  him,  and  a  charge  which  I
give  him  in  confidence.  And  peace  be  on  you !  I  beg  God,  moreover,  to  save  you
from  the  evil  of  trials  and  sickness.

The  Emeer  Moosa,  wlien  he  heard  these  words,  again  wept  so
violently  that  he  became  insensible;  and  after  he  had  recovered,
he  wrote  all  that  he  saw,  and  was  admonished  by  what  he  witnessed.
He  then  said  to  his  companions,  Bring  the  sacks,44  and  fill  them  with
part  of  these  riches  and  these  vessels  and  rarities  and  jewels.  And
thereupon,  Talib  the  son  of  Sahl  said  to  the  Emeer  Moosa,  0  Emeer,
shall  we  leave  this  damsel  with  the  things  that  are  upon  her  ?  They
are  things  that  have  no  equal,  nor  is  the  like  of  them  at  any  time
found,  and  they  are  more  than  the  riches  thou  hast  taken,  and  will
be  the  best  present  by  which  thou  mayest  ingratiate  thyself  with  the
Prince  of  the  Faithful. — But  the  Emeer  replied,  O  thou,  heardest
thou  not  that  which  the  damsel  hath  given  as  a  charge,  in  the
inscription  upon  this  tablet?  Moreover,  and  especially,  she  hath
given  it  as  a  charge  offered  in  confidence,  and  we  are  not  of  the
people  of  treachery. — The  Wezeer  Talib,  however,  saidr  And  on
account  of  these  words  wilt  thou  leave  these  riches  and  these  jewels,


THE  STORY  OF  THE  CITY  OF  BRASS.  137

when  she  is  dead  ?  What  then  should  she  do  with  these  things,
which  are  the  ornaments  of  the  world,  and  the  decoration  of  the
living  ?  With  a  garment  of  cotton  might  this  damsel  be  covered,  and
we  are  more  worthy  of  the  things  than  she. — Then  he  drew  near  to
the  steps,  and  ascended  them  until  he45  reached  the  spot  between  the
two  men  [the  slaves  before  mentioned],  when,  lo,  one  of  these  two
smote  him  upon  his  back,  and  the  other  smote  him  with  the  sword
that  was  in  his  hand,  and  struck  off  his  head,  and  he  fell  down  dead.
So  the  Emeer  Moosa  said,  May  God  not  regard  with  mercy  thy
resting-place !  There  was,  in  these  riches,  a  sufficiency ;  and  covet-
ousness  doth  doubtlessly  dishonour  the  person  in  whom  it  existeth  !  —
He  thereupon  gave  orders  for  the  entry  of  the  troops,  who  accord-
ingly entered,  and  they  loaded  the  camels  with  part  of  those  riches
and  minerals ;  after  which  the  Etneer  Moosa  commanded  them  to
close  the  gate  as  it  was  before.

They  then  proceeded  along  the  sea-coast  until  they  came  in  sight
of  a  high  mountain  overlooking  the  sea.  In  it  were  many  caves,
and,  lo,  in  these  was  a  people  of  the  blacks,  clad  in  hides,  and  with
burnuses  of  hides46  upon  their  heads,  whose  language  was  not  known.
And  when  they  saw  the  troops,  they  ran  away  from  them,  and  fled  to
those  caves,  while  their  women  and  their  children  stood  at  the
entrances  of  the  caves.  So  the  Emeer  Moosa  said,  0  sheykh  'Abd-
Es-Samad,  what  are  these  people  ?  And  he  answered,  These  are  the
objects  of  the  inquiry  of  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful.  They  therefore
alighted,  and  the  tents  were  pitched,  and  the  riches  were  put  down ;
and  they  had  not  rested  when  the  King  of  the  blacks  came  down
from  the  mountain,  and  drew  near  to  the  troops.  He  was  acquainted
with  the  Arabic  language;  wherefore,  when  he  came  to  the  Emeer
Moosa,  he  saluted  him  ;  and  the  Emeer  returned  his  salutation,  and
treated  him  with  honour.  Then  the  King  of  the  blacks  said  to  the
Emeer,  Are  ye  of  mankind,  or  of  the  Jinn  ?  The  Emeer  answered,
As  to  us,  we  are  of  mankind ;  and  as  to  you,  there  is  no  doubt  but
that  ye  are  of  the  Jinn,  because  of  your  seclusion  in  this  mountain
that  is  separated  from  the  world,  and  because  of  the  greatness  of  your
make.  But  the  King  of  the  blacks  replied,  Nay,  we  are  a  people  of
the  race  of  Adam,  of  the  sons  of  Ham  the  son  of  Nooh,  on  whom  be
peace !  And  as  to  this  sea,  it  is  known  by  the  name  of  El-Karkar. —
So  the  Emeer  Moosa  said  to  him,  And  whence  obtained  ye  know-
ledge, when  there  hath  not  come  unto  you  any  prophet  divinely
inspired  in  such  a  country  as  this  ?  He  answered  Know,  0  Emeer,

III.  T


that  there  appeareth  unto  us,  from  this  sea,  a  person  diffusing  a  light
whereby  the  surrounding  tracts  are  illuminated;  and  he  proclaimeth,
with  a  voice  which  the  distant  and  the  near  hear,  0  sons  of  Ham,  be
abashed  at  Him  who  seeth  and  is  not  seen  ;  and  say,  There  is  no
deity  but  God  :  Mohammad  is  the  Apostle  of  God.  And  I  am  Abu-1-
Abbas  El-Khidr.47 — Before  that,  we  used  to  worship  one  another;
but  he  called  us  to  the  worship  of  the  Lord  of  mankind. — Then  he
said  to  the  Emeer  Moosa,  He  hath  also  taught  us  some  words  to  say.
— And  what,  asked  the  Emeer,  are  those  words  ?  .He  answered,
They  are  these : — There  is  no  deity  but  God  alone  :  He  hath  no
partner :  to  Him  belongeth  dominion,  and  to  Him  belougeth  praise  :
He  giveth  life  and  killeth ;  and  He  is  able  to  accomplish  every  thing.
And  we  seek  not  access  to  God  (to  whom  be  ascribed  might  and.
glory !)  save  by  these  words,  nor  know  we  any  others.  Also,  every
night  of  Friday  48  we  see  a  light  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  we
hear  a  voice  saying,  Perfect !  Holy !  Lord  of  the  Angels  and  the


THE  STORY  OF  THE  CITY  OF  BRASS.  139

Spirit  !49  Whatsoever  God  willeth  cometh  to  pass,  and  what  He
willeth  not  cometh  not  to  pass!  Every  benefit  from  God  is  a  gra-
tuitous favour !  And  there  is  no  strength  nor  power  but  in  God  the
High,  the  Great !

The  Emeer  Moosa.  then  said  to  him,  We  are  the  associates  of  the
King  of  El -Islam,  'Abd-El-Melik  the  son  of  Marwan  ;  and  we  have
corne  on  account  of  the  bottles  of  brass  that  are  here  in  your  sea,  and
wherein  are  the  devils  imprisoned  from  the  time  of  Suleyman  the  son
of  Dtiood  (on  both  of  whom  be  peace!).  He  hath  commanded  us  to
bring  him  some  of  them,  that  he  may  see  them,  and  divert  himself
by  the  view  of  them. — And  the  King  of  the  blacks  replied,  Most
willingly.  Then  he  feasted  him  with  fish,  and  ordered  the  divers  to
bring  up  from  the  sea  some  of  the  bottles  of  Suleyman ;  and  they
brought  up  for  them  twelve  bottles  ;  wherewith  the  Emeer  Moosa
was  delighted,  and  the  sheykh  ^Abd-Es-Sarnad  also,  and  the  soldiers,
on  account  of  the  accomplishment  of  the  affair  of  the  Prince  of  the
Faithful.  The  Emeer  Moosa  thereupon  presented  to  the  King  of  the
blacks  many  presents,  and  gave  him  large  gifts.  In  like  manner  too
the  King  of  the  blacks  gave  to  the  Emeer  Moosa  a  present  consisting
of  wonders  of  the  sea,  in  the  form  of  human  beings,  and  said  to  him,
Your  entertainment  for  these  three  days  shall  be  of  these  fish.  And
the  Erneer  replied,  Wre  must  carry  with  us  some  of  them,  that  the
Prince  of  the  Faithful  may  see  them  ;  for  thereby  will  his  heart  be
pleased  more  than  by  the  bottles  of  Suleyimin.

Then  they  bade  him  farewell,  and  they  journeyed  back  until  they
came  to  the  land  of  Syria,  and  went  in  to  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful ;
whereupon  the  Emeer  Moosa  acquainted  him  with  all  that  he  had
seen,  and  all  that  bad  occurred  to  him  with  respect  to  the  verses  and
histories  and  admonitions,  and  told  him  of  the  case  of  Talib  the  son
of  Sahl.  And  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful  said  to  him,  Would  that  I
had  been  with  you,  that  I  might  have  beheld  what  ye  beheld!  He
then  took  the  bottles,  and  proceeded  to  open  one  after  another,  and
the  devils  came  forth  from  them,  saying,  Repentance,  O  Prophet  of
God !  We  will  not  return  to  the  like  conduct  ever ! — And  'Abd-El-
Melik  the  son  of  Marwan  wondered  at  this.  But  as  to  the  damsels
of  the  sea,  with  the  like  of  which  the  King  of  the  blacks  feasted  them,
they  made  for  them  troughs  of  wood,  which  they  filled  with  water,
and  into  these  they  put  them.  They  died,  however,  in  consequence
of  the  intensity  of  the  heat.  After  this,  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful
caused  the  riches  to  be  brought  before  him,  and  divided  them  among


140


THE  STORY  OF  THE  CITY  OF  BRASS.


the  Muslims.  And  he  said,  God  hath  not  bestowed  upon  any  one
the  like  of  what  He  bestowed  upon  Suleyman  the  son  of  Daood.
Then  the  Erneer  Moosa  begged  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful  that  he
might  appoint  his  son  in  his  place  as  Governor  of  the  province,  and
that  he  might  himself  go  to  the  noble  Jerusalem,50  there  to  worship
God.  So  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful  appointed  his  son  to  the  govern-
ment, and  he  himself  went  to  the  noble  Jerusalem,  and  he  died  there.
This  is  the  end  of  that  which  hath  come  down  to  us,  of  the  his-
tory of  the  City  of  Brass,  entire.  And  God  is  all-knowing.51


AI^W- ^^<-y^^ms^J^>t('i  !


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-FIRST.


NOTE  1.  THIS  city,  which,  we  are  told  in  the  tale,  derived  its  name  from  its  having
two  towers  of  brass  (or  yellow  copper),  is  not  to  he  identified  with  that  which  is  men-
tioned in  the  Story  of  Aboo-Mohammad  the  La/.y;  as  the  latter  was  in  a  different  part
of  the  world,  though  it  was  like  the  former  in  having  no  visible  gate.  The  Story  of
the  City  of  Brass  appears  to  have  been  suggested  partly  by  a  tradition  related  by  Et-
Tubaree,1  and  partly  by  accounts,  or  actual  observation,  of  the  ancient  temples  and
tombs  of  Egypt,  with  their  inscriptions,  statues,  mummies,  &c.  And  here  I  may  men-
tion, that  the  term  <;  maskhoot,"  employed  to  signify  "  a  human  being  converted  by  the
wrath  of  God  into  stone,"  is  commonly  applied  in  Egypt  to  an  ancient  statue.  Hence
the  Arabs  have  become  familiar  with  the  idea  of  cities  whose  inhabitants  are  petrified,
such  as  that  described  in  "  the  Story  of  the  First  of  the  Three  Ladies  of  Baghdad.''

NOTE  2.  'Abd-El-Melik  the  son  of  Marwan  was  the  fifth  Khaleefeh  of  the  house  of
Umeiyeh,  and  reigned  A.  D.  685 — 705.

NOTE  3. Namely,  reptiles,  and  the  wind. See  vol.  i.  page  31.

NOTE  4.  The  word  rendered  "  bottles  "  is  the  plural  of  "  kumkuin."  For  a  de-
scription of  the  vessel  thus  called  see  Note  2  to  Chapter  ii.

NOTE  5.  Thus  in  the  edition  of  Kreslau.  In  the  Cairo  edition,  "to  the  land  of
India.''  The  reading  which  I  have  adopted  is  more  agreeable  with  the  sequel.

NOTE  G. Here,  in  my  original,  but not  in  the  Breslau edition,  is  added,  "  nor
know  we  aught  of  this  religion."

NOTE  7.  Our  author  has  erred  in  making  En-Nabighah  Edh-I)huby:inee  contem-
porary with  'Abd-El-Melik  the  ..son  of  Marwan  ;  for  he  flourished  in  the  reign  of  En-


1  Sec  Dubcux's  "Clirouique  dc  Tabari"'  (printed  for  the  Oriental  Translation  Fund),  vol.  i.  part  i.
ch.  xiii.


142  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-FIRST.

Noaman  Ibn-El-Mundhir,  surnamed  Aboo-Kaboos,  and  died  before  the  promulgation
of  El-Islam.  The  verses,  also,  given  as  bis  paraphrase  of  words  addressed  to  Solomon
by  God  ("  the  Wise,  the  First  "),  are  misquoted.  In  their  stead  we  should  read, —

Except  Suleyman,  when  the  Deity  said  to  him,  Assume  the  government  of  mankind,  and  with-
hold them  from  error :

And  bring  under  the  Jinn  ;  for  I  have  commanded  them  to  construct  Tedmur2  with  slabs  and
pillars.

Whoso  obeyeth,  reward  him  for  his  obedience;  as  he  hath  obeyed  thee,  direct  him  aright:

And  whoso  opposeth  thee,  punish  him  severely  :  so  prohibit  the  unjust. . .

See  the  original  in  De  Sacy's  Chrestomathie  Arabe,  2nd  ed.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  145-6  of  the
Arabic  text ;  and  his  translation  and  notes,  pp.  406  and  442.—  Hence  it  is  evident,  as
this  great  scholar  has  remarked,  that  the  legends  relating  to  Solomon  which  are  read
in  the  Kur-an,  especially  in  Chapters  34  and  38,  were  current  among  the  Arabs  before
Mohammad.

NOTE  8. "  The  Western  Country  "  is  Northern  Africa,  west  of  Egypt.
NOTE  9. In  my  original,  erroneously  written  *'  Nasr."

NOTE  10.  "  That  is,  '  a  white  ensign  to  take  with  thee.'  It  is  also  said,  in  the
vulgar  dialect,  '  The  ensign  of  such-a-one  is  white,'  when  he  fails  not  in  the  perform-
ance of  his  affairs."3  White  ensigns,  &c.,  were  more  particularly  distinctive  of  the
rivals  of  the  'Abbasee  Khaleefehs ;  and  black,  of  the  'Abbasees  themselves ;  but  these
also  gave  white  ensigns  to  their  governors.

NOTE  11.  By  "  Misr ''  we  must  here  understand  El-Fustat,  now  vulgarly  called
"  Masr  el-'Ateekah  "  (or  old  Masr) ;  as  Cairo  was  not  yet  founded.

NOTE  12.  "'Abd-Es-Samad  "  signifies  "Servant  of  the  Lord,"  or  " — of  the  Ever-
lasting," &c. ;  and  " 'Abd-El-Kuddoos,"  "  Servant  of  the  Holy."  The  surname  written
in  my  original  "  Es-Samoodee ''  is  doubtful;  in  the  Breslau  edition  it  is  "  El-Mas-
moodee."

NOTE  13.  In  my  original,  "  Daran." — The  Breslau  edition  describes  preparations
made  for  encountering  the  hot  and  dry  winds  of  the  desert ;  but  110  mention  is  after-
wards made  of  these  difficulties.  It  also  relates,  that  the  party  wandered  from  the
right  way  before  they  arrived  at  the  first  of  the  wonderful  objects  which  they  beheld
in  their  journey.

NOTE  14.  <l  That  is,  in  the  tabernacles  of  the  world,  or  the  tabernacles  of  their
souls.'  4

NOTE  1 5. "  For  worship,  and  what  will  follow  it."5

NOTE  16.  This  terse,  omitted  in  my  original,  I  have  inserted  from  the  Breslau
edition.

NOTE  17. See  Note  95  to  Chapter  x.

NOTE  18.  This  is  doubtless  a  mistake  for  "  Koosh  the  son  of  Ham,"  or  Cush  the
son  of  Ham.

NOTE  19.  "  Esh-Sham,"  which  generally  applies  to  Syria,  or  its  capital  Damascus,
here  signifies  the  northern  parts  of  Arabia,  opposed  to  El-Yemen  ;  and  "from  Misr
unto  'Adnan,"  from  the  country  of  Misr  (i.  e.  Egypt)  to  that  of  'Adnan,  ancestor  of  most
of  the  Ishmaelite  Arabs.  My  sheykh  remarks,  that  these  verses  are  a  modern  forgery,
as  is  shewn,  among  other  things,  by  the  fact  that  'Adnan  lived  long  after  Koosh.  The-
tale  presents  numerous  anachronisms  throughout.


2  The  city  of  Palmyra.  4  Marginal  note  by  my  sheykh.

3  Marginal  note  by  my  sheykh.  5  Idem.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTK1!  TAVENTY-FIIJST.  143

NOTE  20.  "  Every  man  is  given  on  pledge  for  that  which  he  shall  have  wrought."
(Knix'm,  eh.  lii.  v.  21.  That  is.  as  Salt-  explains  the  words,  "  Every  man  is  pledged
unto  God  for  his  behaviour;  and  if  he  does  well,  he  redeems  his  pledge;  but  if  evil,  he
forfeits  it :'  or,  as  El-Bey  dawee  says,  if  he  act  righteously,  He  will  release  him;  but
otherwise,  He  will  destroy  him."

NOTE  21.  "  Danish  "  signifies  "  amazed ;  "  and  "  aamash,"  "  having  weak  eyes,
with  a  frequent  flowing  of  tears."

NOTE  22. That  is,  prepare  to  answer  God,  on  the  day  of  judgment.

NOTE  2  >.  This  is  a  common  phrase,  and  may  be  rendered,  li  his  fury,  or  passion,
rose,"  or  "  he  was  violently  moved."

NOTE  24. See  Note  115  to  Chapter  xi.

NOTE  25.  From  this  point  to  the  end  of  the  next  paragraph  is  from  the  edition  of
Breslan ;  very  little  of  it  being  in  the  Cairo  edition.

NOTE  26.  By  the  word  rendered  "  king,"  I  suppose  a  king  of  the  Jinn  to  be
meant.

NOTE  27.  This  name  I  suppose  to  be  imaginary,  unless  it  be  a  mistake  for
'  K<x)koo,"  which  word,  in  Arabic  characters,  differs  little  from  "  Karkar."  If  the
"Kookoo"  of  El-Idreesee  were  the  "  Kouka"  of  our  modern  maps  (the  chief  town  of
Bornou),  the  sea  in  question  might  be  the  great  lake  "  Tchad,  "  or  "  Tsad ; "  but  Kouka,
as  Dr.  Barth  tells  us,  is  quite  a  modern  place.  Ibn-El-Wardee,  however,  mentions  a
place  in  Central  Africa  called  "  Karkar;"  probably  the  same  as  the  "  Kerker,"  or
"Gerger,"  of  Dr.  Barth.

NOTE  28.  "  El-Andalus  "  is  the  name  by  which  the  Arabs  call,  not  merely  Andalu-
sia, but  the  whole  of  Spain.  In  the  tradition  related  by  Et-Tabaree,  and  alluded  to  in
the  first  of  these  notes,  the  City  of  Brass  is  said  to  have  been  built  in  a  desert,  beyond
a  city  named  El-Andalus.  But  according  to  its  tradition,  the  whole  city  was  con-
structed of  brass.  God.  as  we  are  told  in  the  Kur-an,6  made  a  fountain  of  molten  brass
to  flow  for  Snleym&n ;  and  the  tradition  relates,  that  the  Jinn,  having  transported  this
fountain  to  the  place  above  mentioned,  built  there  a  great  city,  twelve  miles  in  length,
and  the  same  in  breadth,  in  which  he  (Solomon)  deposited  his  books  and  treasures.
The  tradition  also  narrates  some  particulars  of  the  expedition  of  Moosa  the  son  of
Nuseyr  to  this  city,  stating  its  result,  however,  to  have  been  unsuccessful. — The  Book
of  Hidden  Treasures,  mentioned  in  the  paragraph  to  which  this  note  refers,  is  probably
the  name  of  ;\  work  on  the  treasures  still  currently  believed  in  the  East  to  be  concealed
in  ancient  edifices  and  similar  places.

NOTE  29. I  have  made  a  correction  here  on  the  authority  of  the  Breslau  edition.

NOTE  30.  In  my  original,  the  inscriptions  of  three,  more  of  the  tablets  are  given,
and  in  the  Breslau  edition,  those  of  all  the  seven ;  but  they  are  so  much  alike,  that  I
have  thought  it  sufficient  to  give  only  one  as  a  specimen.

NOTE  31.  That  is,  the  versos  which  cause  safety  to  their  reciter ;  as  the  saying
of  Him  whose  name  be  exalted! — 'And  wherefore  should  we  not  put  our  trust  in  God?'
[Kur-an,  ch.  xiv.  v.  15.]—'  Say,  Nothing  shall  befall  us  but  what  God  hath  decreed  for
us.'  "7  [Idem,  ch.  ix.  v.  51. ]8

NOTE  :V_'. This  phrase  means  "  a  long  time."

NOTE  33. "  God  is  most  great !"  is  the  usual  Muslim  cry  of  victory.

NOTE  34. See  Note  67  to  Chapter  v.


6  Chap,  xxxiv.  v.  11.  8  See  my  work  on  the  Modern  Egyptians,  vol.  L

'  Marginal  note  by  my  sheykh.  rh.  xi.  second  paragraph.


144  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-FIRST.

NOTE  35.  Literally,  "  green  lapis-lazuli ;"  but  this  is  doubtless  a  mistake  of  a
copyist.

NOTE  36.  Respecting  the  coats  of  mail  and  the  lances  here  mentioned,  see  Note  5
to  Chapter  viii.,  and  Note  2  to  Chapter  vi.

NOTE  37. See  Note  7  to  Chapter  xiii.

NOTE  38.  The  word  here  rendered  ''curtains"  is  the  plural  of  "  burko ','' which
generally  signifies  "a  woman's  face  veil;"  but  it  is  also  sometimes  applied  to  a  door-
curtain.  The  curtain  which  is  suspended  over  the  entrance  of  the  Kaabeh  is  thus
called.

NOTE  39.  In  this  sentence  are  some  errors  in  my  original  which  the  Breslau  edition
has  enabled  me  to  correct. — The  greater  part  of  the  description  of  the  palace  given  in
the  edition  of  Cairo  is  wanting  in  that  of  Breslau.

NOTE  40.  Respecting  Karoon  and  Hainan  see  the  twenty-eighth  chapter  of  the
Kur-an.  The  former  is  the  Korah  of  the  Bible  :  the  latter  was  the  chief  minister  of
the  Pharaoh  who  oppressed  the  Israelites.

NOTE  41.  "  Ken'an  "  is  the  Canaan  of  the  Bible  ;  and  "  the  Lord  of  the  Stakes  "  is
an  appellation  given  (in  the  Kur-an,  ch.  xxxviii.  v.  11.)  to  the  Pharaoh  above  mentioned.
The  words  bearing  this  meaning  Sale  renders  "  the  contriver  of  the  stakes  ;"  and  he
gives  the  following  note  upon  them  : — "  For  they  say  Pharaoh  used  to  tie  those  he  had
a  mind  to  punish,  by  the  hands  and  feet,  to  four  stakes  fixed  in  the  ground,  and  so  tor-
mented them.  Some  interpret  the  words,  which  may  also  be  translated.  The  Lord  of
master  of  the  stakes,  figuratively,  of  the  firm  establishment  of  Pharaoh's  kingdom  ;
because  the  Arabs  fix  their  tents  with  stakes;  but  they  ma  v  possibly  intend  that
prince's  obstinacy  and  hardness  of  heart."

NOTE  42.  There  are  errors  here  in  the  Cairo  and  Breslau  editions.  I  have  followed
what  appears  (from  Tre'butien's  translation)  to  be  the  reading  of  Von  Hammer's  MS. —
"  Tedmur  "  is  the  original  and  present  name  of  Palmyra,  which,  according  to  the  Arabs,
was  named  after  its  Queen  Tedmur,  the  daughter  of  Hassan  the  son  of  Udheyneh.  Our
author,  however,  can  hardly  be  supposed  to  have  here  meant  this  Queen ;  the  situation
and  grand  remains  of  the  city  bearing  her  name  being  so  well  known.

NOTE  43.  Some  words  in  my  original,  immediately  following  the  verses,  I  omit,  as
they  are  similar  to  the  many  exhortations  which  have  occured  before,  and  are  not  in-
serted in  the  Breslau  edition.

NOTE  44.  The  word  rendered  "  sacks  "  (namely  "  aadal  ")  is  also  applied  to  other
receptacles  for  provisions,  &c.,  two  of  which  form  a  camel's  load,  one  being  attached  on
each  side  of  the  animal.  .

NOTE  45.  It  is  said,  in  my  original,  that  he  ascended  the  steps  "  until  he  was
l>etween  the  two  columns,  and  reached  the  spot  between  the  two  men."  These  columns
not  being  elsewhere  mentioned,  I  have  omitted  the  words  here  relating  to  them.

NOTE  46.  The  "  burnus,"  also  called  "  burnoos,"  is  a  hooded  cloak,  generally  made
of  white  woollen  stuff,  and  mostly  worn  by  the  people  of  Northern  Africa.  The  people
of  Kookoo  are  described  by  El-Idreesee 9  as  wearing  skins.  Revert  to  Note  27.

NOTE  47.  Or  El-Khadir.  According  to  my  sheykh,  this  does  not  apply  to  the
prophet  [or  saint]  mentioned  in  vol.  i.  p.  20  :  but  I  know  not  whom  else  it  can  mean.
[The  words  taught  by  this  personage  compose  a  common  Muslim  formula,  used  at
Zikrs  and  other  religious  ceremonies. — ED.  ]


»  First  Climate,  third  Section.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-FIRST,  145

NOTE  48.  What  the  Muslims  term  "  the  night  of  Friday  ''  is  the  night  imme-
diately preceding  the  day  of  Friday ;  as  they  class  each  night  with  the  day  which

immediately  follows  it.

NOTE  49. By  "  the  Spirit "  is  here  meant  the  Angel  Gabriel.

NOTE  50.  Jerusalem  is  here  called  in  my  original,  and  by  the  Muslims  generally,
"El-Kuds,"  which  signifies  "holiness."  The  Muslims,  like  the  Christians  and  Jews,
regard  it  with  great  veneration.  [Its  great  mosque,  called  the  Mosque  of  'Omar,  is
regarded  with  a  veneration  inferior  only  to  that  entertained  for  the  Temple  at  Mekkeh
and  the  Tomb  of  the  Prophet  at  El-Medeeneh. — ED.]

NOTE  51.  The  next  story  in  my  original  is  that  of  "  the  King  and  his  Son  and  the
Damsel  and  the  Seven  Wezeers,"  which  ends  with  part  of  the  six  hundred  and  sixth
Night.  It  is  similar  in  its  frame-work  to  the  Bakhtyar  Nameh,  as  observed  by  an
orientalist  who  (in  the  Asiatic  Journal,  N.  S.  vol.  xxx.,  No.  120)  has  given  a  summary
of  its  contents,  comprising  numerous  short  tales  selected  from  it,  translated  from  a
manuscript  of  a  portion  of  the  Thousand  and  One  Nights  in  the  British  Museum  ;  in
which  manuscript  the  story  is  related  nearly  as  in  the  Cairo  edition.10  It  is  also  related
nearly  in  the  same  manner  in  a  fragment  of  the  Thousand  and  One  Nights  brought
from  India ;  and  from  that  fragment,  Dr.  Jonathan  Scott  made  a  translation,  which  is
included  in  his  "  Tales,  &c.,  from  the  Arabic  and  Persian."11  The  story  in  my  original,
as  well  as  in  the  manuscripts  above  mentioned,  abounds  with  indecent  passages  and
incidents ;  but  among  the  s"hort  tales  of  which  it  is  composed  are  some  of  considerable
interest,  and  some  others  which  I  think  not  entirely  unworthy  of  being  presented  to
the  English  reader.  I  shall  therefore  follow  the  example  of  the  first  of  the  translators
mentioned  above,  and,  distinguishing  by  inverted  commas  the  portions  which  will  be
fully  rendered,  or  only  curtailed  of  a  few  objectionable  words,  give  an


Abstract  of  the  Story  of  the  King  and  his  Son  and  the  Damsel  and
the  Seven  Wezeers.

There  was,  in  ancient  times,  a  certain  King,  of  great  power,  who  had  reigned  a  long
time,  but  had  not  been  blessed  with  a  son.  At  length,  however,  after  he  had  earnestly
prayed  for  an  heir,  his  wife,  the  daughter  of  his  uncle,  bore  him  a  male  child,  with  a
face  like  the  disc  of  the  moon  in  its  fourteenth  night.  At  the  age  of  five  years,  the  boy
was  committed  to  the  care  of  a  sage  named  Es-Sindibad,  and  he  became  unequalled  in
science,  and  polite  learning,  and  intelligence,  and  horsemanship.  But  one  day  the  sage
discovered,  by  observing  the  stars,  that  the  young  man  was  threatened  with  destruc-
tion, if,  during  the  next  seven  days,  he  should  speak  one  word.  The  King,  therefore,
by  the  sage's  advice,  delivered  him  to  a  female  slave,  to  be  diverted  with  music  in  the
pavilion  of  the  women,  and  to  be  kept  there  until  the  expiration  of  that  period.  Now
there  were  in  the  pavilion  forty  private  chambers,  in  each  of  which  were  ten  slave-girls,
every  one  of  whom  had  a  musical  instrument,  and  when  any  one  of  them  played,  the
pavilion  danced  at  the  melodious  sounds  that  she  produced ;  and  around  the  pavilion
ran  a  river,  the  banks  of  which  were  planted  with  all  kinds  of  fruit-trees  and  sweet-
smelling  flowers.  But  here  the  favourite  concubine  of  the  King  became  violently
enamoured  of  his  son :  the  young  man  was  indignant  at  hearing  from  her  the  avowal
of  her  passion ;  and  she  in  consequence  complained  to  his  father,  reversing  the  true
state  of  the  case.  The  King  thereupon  was  furiously  enraged,  and,  having  summoned
his  Wezeers,  ordered  them  to  put  his  son  to  death.  The  Wezeers,  however,  feared  that


10  This  MS.  was  brought  from  Baghdad. It  belonged  to  the  collection  of  Mr.  Rich.

11  Von  Hammer's  MS.  likewise  contains  this  story.


III.


he  would  afterwards  repent,  and  blame  them  for  not  having  dissuaded  him :  so  they
determined  to  divert  him,  if  possible,  from  his  purpose.  This  they  endeavoured  to  do
by  relating  to  him  numerous  short  tales ;  and  the  guilty  damsel  endeavoured  to  coun-
teract their  influence  by  similar  means.

The  First  Wezeer,  as  an  instance  of  the  stratagems  (but  not  of  the  wickedness)  of
women,  begins  by  relating  that, —

A  certain  King  saw  a  beautiful  damsel  upon  the  roof  of  her  house,  and  was  capti-
vated by  her  charms,  and,  learning  that  she  was  the  wife  of  his  Wezeer,  he  sent  this
minister  to  examine  the  state  of  one  of  the  provinces,  and  went  to  pay  her  a  visit.  But
he  received  from  her  a  reproof12  which  confounded  him.  He  quitted  her  abode
abruptly,  leaving  his  seal-ring  by  mistake,  m  his  confusion,  beneath  the  cushion
against  which  he  had  been  reclining ;  and  when  the  Wezeer  returned  to  his  house,  he
happened  to  put  his  hand  beneath  the  cushion,  and  there  found  the  King's  seal :  so  he
separated  himself  from  his  wife  for  the  space  of  a  whole  year,  not  even  speaking  to  her.
She  knew  not  the  cause  of  his  anger ;  and  at  length,  when  she  was  wearied  by  his  con-
duct, she  complained  to  her  father,  who  went  in  to  the  King,  and, "  finding  the  Wezeer
in  his  presence,  and  the  Kddee  of  the  army  before  hun,  accused  the  Wezeer  in  these
words : — May  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !)  amend  the  circumstances  of  the  King !  I
had  a  beautiful  garden,  which  1  planted  with  my  hand,  and  I  expended  upon  it  my
wealth,  until  it  bore  fruit,  and  its  fruit  was  ripe,  when  I  gave  it  to  this  thy  Wezeer,
and  he  ate  of  it  what  was  pleasant  to  him,  after  which  he  abandoned  it ;  so  its  flowers
withered,  and  its  beauty  departed,  and  its  state  altogether  changed. — And  thereupon
the  Wezeer  said,  O  King,  this  person  bath  spoken  truth  in  that  which  he  hath  said.  I
guarded  it,  and  ate  of  it ;  but  I  went  one  day  to  it,  and  saw  the  footstep  of  the  lion


1  "  A  reproof  very  much  like  that  related  in  the  Deeamerone,  Xov.  v.  giorn.  1." (Asiatic  Journal.
N.  S.  vol.  xxi.  p.  276.)


there ;  so  I  was  afraid  of  him,  and  withdrew  myself  from  it. — The  King  therefore  un-
derstood that  the  footstep  which  the  Wezeer  had  found  was  the  King's  seal  that  he  had
left  by  mistake  in  the  house ;  and  npon  this  he  said  to  the  Wezeer,  Return,  O  Wezeer
to  thy  garden,  and  thou  wilt  he  safe  and  secure  ;  for  the  lion  drew  not  near  it.  It
hath  been  told  me  that  the  lion  came  thither ;  but  he  did  it  no  injury,  by  the  honour
of  my  fathers  and  my  ancestors ! — So  the  Wezeer,  on  hearing  this,  said,  I  hear  and
obey.  He  returned  to  his  house,  and  sent  to  his  wife,  made  peace  with  her,  and  con-
fided in  her  honesty."

The  same  Wezeer  then  relates  the  story  of  the  Husband  and  the  Parrot.13  The
Damsel  next  tells  a  short  tale  of  a  father  who  perished  in  attempting  to  save  his  son
from  drowning,  and  another  tale  unfit  for  translation.  Then  the  Second  Wezeer
relates  a  story  of  a  nasty  trick  played  upon  a  merchant  by  an  old  woman,  and  a  tale  u
which  is  as  follows : —

A  woman  received  visits  from  two  men  unknown  to  her  husband :  one  of  them  was
the  treasurer  of  the  King,  and  the  other  was  that  officer's  young  man.  And  one  day,
when  the  latter  was  with  her,  his  master  knocked  at  the  door :  so  she  took  the  young
man,  and  put  him  down  into  a  chamber  beneath  a  trap-door ;  after  which,  she  opened
the  door,  and  the  master  entered.  "But,  lo,  her  husband  knocked  at  her  door;
whereupon  he  said  to  her,  Who  is  this  ?  She  answered,  My  husband.  And  he  said  to


13  In  Chapter  ii.  of  the  present  work.

14  "  Out  of  the  Hitopadesa." (Asiatic  Journal,  N.  S.  vol.  xxx.  p.  277.)


148  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-FIRST.

her,  What  shall  I  do,  and  what  shall  be  my  resource  in  this  case  ?  She  answered  him,
Arise,  draw  thy  sword,  and  stand  at  the  entrance  of  the  passage  :  then  abuse  me  and
revile  me;  and  when  my  husband  cometh  in  to  thee,  depart,  and  go  thy  way.  He
therefore  did  so ;  and  when  her  husband  came  in,  he  saw  the  King's  treasurer  stand-
ing, with  his  drawn  sword  in  his  hand,  reviling  his  wife,  and  threatening  her ;  and  the
treasurer,  on  seeing  him,  was  abashed,  and  sheathed  his  sword,  and  went  forth  from
the  house.  So  the  man  said  to  his  wife,  What  is  the  cause  of  this  ?  And  she  answered
him,  How  blessed  is  this  hour  m  which  thou  hast  come!  Thou  hast  delivered  a
believing  soul  from  slaughter.  And  the  case  was  no  other  than  this  :  I  was  spinning
upon  the  house-top,  and,  lo,  a  young  man  came  in  unto  me,  an  outcast,  distrurtrd.
panting  in  fear  of  slaughter;  and  this  man,  with  his  drawn  sword,  was  hastening  at'trr
him  striving  in  pursuit  of  him.  So  the  young  man  threw  himself  upon  my  protection,
kissing  my  hands  and  my  feet,  and  said,  0  my  mistress,  deliver  me  from  him  who  de-
sireth  my  slaughter  unjustly  !  Wherefore  I  hid  him  in  the  chamber  here  beneath  the
trap-door ;  and  when  I  saw  that  this  man  had  entered,  with  his  sword  drawn,  I  denied
the  voung  man  to  him  on  his  demanding  him  of  me,  and  he  began  to  revile  me  and
threaten  me  as  thou  sawest.  And  praise  be  to  God  who  hath  sent  thee  unto  me ;  for
I  was  perplexed,  having  no  one  with  me  to  rescue  me. — Her  husband  thereupon  said  to
her,  Excellently  hast  thou  done,  O  woman  !  Thy  reward  is  due  from  God,  and  He  will
recompense  thee  well  for  thy  deed. — Then  her  husband  went  to  the  chamber  beneath
the  trap-door,  and  called  the  young  man,  saying  to  him,  Come  up !  Xo  harm  shall
befall  thee. — So  he  came  up  from  the  chamber,  but  in  a  state  of  fear ;  and  the  man
said  to  him,  Cheer  thyself.  No  harm  shall  befall  thee. — And  lie  was  grieved  for  that
which  had  befallen  him,  while  the  young  man  prayed  for  him.  Thus  they  both  went
forth,  and  knew  not  of  the  stratagem  which  this  woman  had  contrived."

On  the  third  day  (for  on  each  day  one  Wezeer  tries  his  influence),  the  Damsel  relates
''the  Story  of  the  Envious  Wezeer  and  the  Prince  and  the  Ghooleh."15  Then  the  Third
Wezeer  enters,  and  narrates  the  two  following  anecdotes  : —

"  There  was  a  huntsman  who  hunted  the  wild  beasts  in  the  desert,  and  one  day  he
entered  a  cave  in  a  mountain,  and  found  in  it  a  hollow  which  was  filled  with  honey.
So  he  collected  some  of  that  honey  in  a  water-skin  that  he  had  with  him  :  then  he
carried  it  upon  his  shoulder,  and  conveyed  it  to  the  city,  having  with  him  a  hound  that
was  dear  unto  him.  And  the  huntsman  stopped  at  the  shop  of  an  oilman,  to  whom  he
offered  the  honey  for  sale,  and  the  shopman,  agreeing  to  buy  it,  opened  the  water-skin
and  emptied  from  it  the  honey,  to  see  it.  But  there  dropped  from  the  skin  a  drop  of
honey,  and  a  bird  pounced  down  upon  it ;  and  the  oilman  had  a  cat,  and  it  sprang  upon
the  bird ;  and  the  huntsman's  dog  saw  it,  and  sprang  upon  the  cat  and  killed  it ;  and
the  oilman  sprang  upon  the  huntsman's  dog  and  killed  it ;  and  the  huntsman  sprang
upon  the  oilman  and  killed  him  ;  and  the  oilman  was  of  one  village,  and  the  huntsman
of  another,  and  the  people  of  these  two  villages  heard  of  this  event ;  so  they  took  their
weapons  and  arms,  and  rose  against  each  other  in  anger  :  the  two  ranks  met.  and
the  swords  ceased  not  to  be  brandished  about  among  them  until  there  died  of  them
a  great  multitude,  the  number  of  whom  none  knoweth  but  God,  whose  name  be
exalted  !16

"  It  hath  been  told  me  also.  O  King,  among  the  stories  of  the  artifice  of  women,
that  a  woman's  husband  gave  her  a  piece  of  silver  to  buy  some  rice,  and  she  took  it  of
him  and  went  with  it  to  the  rice-dealer,  who  gave  her  the  rice,  and  began  to  joke  with
her  and  ogle  her;  and  he  said  to  her,  Rice  is  not  sweet  unless  with  sugar;  and  if  thou


15  Xearly  as  told  in  Chapter  ii.  in  this  work.  Egypt,  called  Saad  and  Haram,  and  two  in  Syria,

is  Petty  wars  occasioned  by  events  as  trifliiiz  as  called  Keys  and  Yemen,  have  rendered  themselves

that  here  related  have  been  common  among  the  proverbial  by  such  wars.

Arabs  to  the  present  day. Two  tribes  in  Lower


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-FIRST.  II'.)

desire  it,  come  in.  So  the  woman  went  into  his  shop,  and  he  said  to  his  slave,  Weigh
for  her  a  dirhem's  worth  of  sugar.  And  he  gave  him  a  wink ;  whereupon  the  slave  took
the  handkerchief  from  the  woman,  and,  having  emptied  it  of  the  rice,  put  in  the  place
of  it  dust;  and  instead  of  sugar,  he  put  stones;  after  which,  he  tied  the  hankerchief,
and  left  it  by  her.  Therefore  when  the  woman  went  forth  from  him,  she  took  her
handkerchief  and  departed  to  her  abode,  thinking  that  what  was  in  her  handkerchief
was  rice  and  sugar ;  and  on  arriving  at  her  abode,  she  put  the  handkerchief  before  her
husband,  who  found  in  it  dust  and  stones.  So  when  she  brought  the  cooking-pot,  her
husband  said  to  her,  Did  we  tell  thee  that  we  had  aught  to  build,  that  thou  hast
brought  us  dust  and  stones  ?"  And  on  her  seeing  this,  she  knew  that  the  slave  of  the
dealer  had  cheated  her ;  and  having  brought  the  cooking-pot  in  her  hand,  she  said  to
her  husband,  O  man,  in  consequence  of  the  trouble  of  mind  that  hath  befallen  me,  I
went  to  bring  the  sieve  and  brought  the  cooking-pot.  Her  husband  said  to  her,  And
what  hath  troubled  thy  mind  ?  And  she  answered  him,  O  man,  the  piece  of  silver  that
1  had  with  me  dropped  from  me  in  the  market,  and  I  was  ashamed  before  the  people
to  search  for  it,  and  it  was  not  a  light  matter  to  me  that  the  piece  of  silver  should  go
from  me ;  wherefore  I  collected  the  dust  from  the  place  where  it  fell,  and  desired  to
sift  it ;  and  I  was  going  to  bring  the  sieve  and  brought  the  cooking-pot.  Then  she
went  and  brought  the  sieve,  and  gave  it  to  her  husband,  saying  to  him,  Sift  thou  it ;  for
thy  sight  is  more  clear  than  mine.  So  the  man  sat  sifting  the  dust  until  his  face  and
his  beard  were  covered  with  it,  and  he  perceived  not  her  artifice,  and  discovered  not
that  which  had  happened  to  her."

On  the  fourth  day.  the  Damsel  again  presents  herself  to  the  King,  and  relates  an
instance  of  the  perfidy  of  men.18

A  King  of  former  times  had  an  only  son,  whom  he  contracted  in  marriage  to  the
daughter  of  another  King.  But  the  damsel,  who  was  endowed  with  great  beauty,  had
a  cousin  who  had  sought  her  in  marriage,  and  had  been  rejected ;  wherefore  he  sent
great  presents  to  the  Wezeer  of  the  King  first  mentioned,  requesting  him  to  employ
some  stratagem  by  which  to  destroy  his  master's  son,  or  to  induce  him  to  relinquish  the
damsel ;  and  the  Wezeer  consented.  Then  the  father  of  the  damsel  sent  to  the  King's
son,  inviting  him  to  come  and  introduce  himself  to  his  daughter,  to  take  her  as  his
wife ;  and  the  father  of  the  young  man  sent  him  with  the  treacherous  Wezeer,  attended
by  a  thousand  horsemen,  and  provided  with  rich  presents.  And  when  they  were  pro-
ceeding over  the  desert,  the  We/eer  remembered  that  there  was  near  unto  them  a
spring  of  water,  called  Ez-Zahra,ic  and  whosoever  drank  of  it,  if  he  were  a  man,  he
became  a  woman.  He  therefore  ordered  the  troops  to  alight  near  it,  and  induced  the
Prince  to  go  thither  with  him  ;  and  when  they  arrived  at  that  spring,  the  King's  son
dismounted  from  his  courser,  and  washed  his  h:mds,  and  drank  ;  and,  lo,  he  became  a
woman ;  whereupon  he  cried  out  and  wept  until  he  fainted.  The  We/eer  asked  him
what  had  befallen  him  ;  so  the  young  man  informed  him  ;  and  on  hearing  his  words,
the  We/eer  affected  to  be  grieved  for  him,  and  wept.  The  King's  son  then  sent  the
We/eer  back  to  his  father,  to  inform  him  of  this  event,  determining  not  to  proceed
nor  to  return  until  his  affliction  should  be  removed  from  him,  or  until  he  should  die.

He  remained  by  that  fountain  during  a  period  of  three  days  with  their  nights,
neither  eating  nor  drinking ;  and  on  the  fourth  night  there  came  to  him  a  horseman
with  a  crown  upon  his  bond,  appearing  like  one  of  the  sons  of  the  Kings,  and  this
horseman  said  to  him,  Who  brought  thee,  O  young  man,  unto  this  place  ?  So  the
young  man  told  him  his  story;  and  when  the  horseman  heard  it,  he  pitied  him,  and
said  to  him,  The  Wezeer  of  thy  father  is  the  person  who  hath  thrown  thee  into  this


'"  See  a  foot-note  (Xo. 21) in pane 53-1 of  ls  The  first  paragraph  of  this  story  is  here  eon-

vol.  ii.  .sidcrnbly  abridged:  the  rest,  very  little.

19  "  Kz-ZahrH  ''  signifies  "  thr  bright,"  "the  splendid,"  iy.


calamity ;  for  no  one  of  mankind  knoweth  of  this  spring  except  one  man.  Then  the
horseman  ordered  him  to  mount  with  him.  He  therefore  mounted;  and  the  horseman
said  to  him,  Come  with  me  to  my  abode  ;  for  thou  art  my  guest  this  night.  The  young
man  replied,  Inform  me  who  thou  art  before  I  go  with  thee.  And  the  horseman  said,
I  am  son  of  a  King  of  the  Jann,  and  thou  art  son  of  a  King  of  mankind  :  and  now  be
of  good  heart  and  cheerful  eye  on  account  of  that  which  shall  dispel  thine  anxiety  and
thy  grief;  for  it  is  unto  me  easy.

So  the  young  man  proceeded  with  him  from  the  commencement  of  the  day,  for-
saking his  troops  and  soldiers  (whom  the  Wezeer  had  left  at  their  halting-place),  and
ceased  not  to  travel  on  with  his  conductor  until  midnight,  when  the  son  of  the  King  of
the  Jinn  said  to  him,  Kuowest  thou  what  space  we  have  traversed  during  this  period  ?
The  young  man  answered  him,  I  know  not.  And  the  son  of  the  King  of  the  Jinn  said,
We  have  traversed  a  space  of  a  year's  journey  to  him  who  travelleth  with  diligence.
So  the  young  man  wondered  thereat,  and  asked,  How  shall  I  return  to  my  family  ?
The  other  answered,  This  is  not  thine  affair :  it  is  my  affair ;  and  when  thou  shalt  have
recovered  from  thy  misfortune,  thou  shalt  return  to  thy  family  in  less  time  than  the
twinkling  of  an  eye;  for  to  accomplish  that  will  be  to  me  easy.  Arid  the  young  man,
on  hearing  these  words  from  the  Jinnee,  almost  flew  with  excessive  delight :  he  thought
that  the  event  was  a  result  of  confused  dreams,  and  said,  Extolled  be  the  perfection  of
Him  who  is  able  to  restore  the  wretched,  and  render  him  prosperous  !  They  ceased
not  to  proceed  until  morning,  when  they  arrived  at  a  verdant,  bright  land,  with  tall
trees,  and  warbling  birds,  and  gardens  of  surpassing  beauty,  and  fair  palaces ;  and
thereupon  the  son  of  the  King  of  the  Jinn  alighted  from  his  courser,  commanding  the
young  man  also  to  dismount.  He  therefore  dismounted,  and  the  Jinnee  took  him  by
the  hand,  and  they  entered  one  of  those  palaces,  where  the  young  man  beheld  an


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-FIRST.  151

exalted  King  and  a  Sultan  of  great  dignity,  and  he  remained  with  him  that  day,  eat-
ing and  drinking,  until  the  approach  of  night.  Then  the  son  of  the  King  of  the  Jinn
arose  and  mounted  his  courser,  and  the  son  of  the  King  of  men  mounted  with  him,  and
they  went  forth  and  proceeded  during  the  night  with  diligence  until  morning ;  and,  lo,
they  came  to  a  black  land,  not  inhabited,  abounding  with  black  rocks  and  stones,  as
though  it  were  a  part  of  Hell ;  whereupon  the  son  of  the  King  of  men  said  to  the
Jinnee,  What  is  the  appellation  of  this  land  ?  And  he  answered,  It  is  called  the
Dusky  Land,20  and  belongeth  to  one  of  the  Kings  of  the  Jinn,  whose  name  is  Zu-1-
Jenaheyn  :21  none  of  the  Kings  can  attack  him,  nor  doth  any  one  enter  his  territory
unless  by  his  permission ;  so  stop  in  thy  place  while  I  ask  his  permission.  Accordingly
the  young  man  stopped,  and  the  Jinnee  was  absent  from  him  for  a  while,  and  then
returned  to  him  ,  and  they  ceased  not  to  proceed  until  they  came  to  a  spring  flowing
from  black  mountains ;  when  the  Jinnee  said  to  the  young  man,  Alight.  He  therefore
alighted  from  his  courser,  and  the  Jinnee  said  to  him,  Drink  of  this  spring.  And  the
young  man  drank  of  it,  and  immediately  became  again  a  male,  as  he  was  at  first,  by
the  power  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !) ;  whereat  he  rejoiced  with  great  joy,  not
to  be  exceeded.  And  he  said  to  the  Jinnee,  O  my  brother,  what  is  the'  name  of  this
spring  ?  The  Jinnee  answered,  It  is  called  the  Spring  of  the  Women :  no  woman
drinketh  of  it  but  she  becometh  a  man :  therefore  praise  God  and  thank  him  for  thy
restoration,  and  mount  thy  courser.  So  the  King's  son  prostrated  himself,  thanking
God,  whose  name  be  exalted !

Then  he  mounted,  and  they  journeyed  with  diligence  during  the  rest  of  the  day
until  they  had  returned  to  the  land  of  that  Jinnee;  and  the  young  man  passed  the
night  in  his  abode  in  the  most  comfortable  manner ;  after  which  they  ate  and  drank
until  the  next  night,  when  the  son  of  the  King  of  the  Jinn  said  to  him,  Dost  thou
desire  to  return  to  thy  family  this  night  ?  The  young  man  answered,  Yes.  So  the
son  of  the  King  of  the  Jinn  called  one  of  his  father's  slaves,  whose  name  was  Rajiz,
and  said  to  him,  Take  this  young  man  hence,  and  carry  him  upon  thy  shoulders,  and
let  not  the  dawn  overtake  him  before  he  is  with  his  father-in-law  and  his  wife.  The
slave  replied,  I  hear  and  obey,  and  with  feelings  of  love  and  honour  will  I  do  it.  Then
the  slave  absented  himself  from  him  for  a  while  and  approached  in  the  form  of  an
'Efreet :  and  when  the  young  man  saw  him,  his  reason  fled,  and  he  was  stupified ;  but
the  son  of  the  King  of  the  Jinn  said  to  him,  No  harm  shall  befall  thee.  Mount  thy
courser,  and  on  it  ascend  upon  his  shoulders. — The  young  man  however  replied,  Nay,
I  will  mount  alone  upon  his  shoulders,  and  leave  the  courser  with  thee.  He  then
alighted  from  the  courser,  and  mounted  upon  the  slave's  shoulders ;  and  the  son  of  the
King  of  the  Jinn  said  to  him,  Close  thine  eyes.  So  he  closed  his  eyes;  and  the  slave
flew  with  him  between  heaven  and  earth,  and  ceased  not  to  fly  along  with  him,  while
the  young  man  was  unconscious  ;  and  the  last  third  of  the  night  came  not  before  he
was  on  the  top  of  the  palace  of  his  father-in-law,  whereupon  the'  Efreet  said  to  him,
Alight.  He  therefore  alighted  .  and  he  said  to  him,  Open  thine  eyes ;  for  this  is  the
palace  of  thy  father-in-law  and  his  daughter.  Then  he  left  him  and  departed.  And
as  soon  as  the  day  shone,  and  the  alarm  of  the  young  man  subsided,  he  descended  from
the  roof  of  the  palace ;  and  when  his  father-in-law  beheld  him,  he  rose  to  him  and  met
him,  wondering  at  seeing  him  descend  from  the  top  of  the  palace,  and  he  said  to  him,
We  see  other  men  come  through  the  doors ,  but  thou  coinest  down  from  the  sky.  The
young  man  replied,  What  God  (whose  perfection  be  extolled,  and  whose  name  be
exalted !)  desired  hath  happened.  And  when  the  sun  rose,  his  father-in-law  ordered
his  Wezeer  to  prepare  great  banquets,  and  the  wedding  was  celebrated ;  the  young
man  remained  there  two  months,  and  then  departed  with  his  wife  to  the  city  of  his
father.  But  as  to  the  cousin  of  the  damsel,  he  perished  by  reason  of  his  jealousy  and
envy.

*>  El-Ard  ed-Dahma.  »  The  Two-Winged.


152


NOTES  TO  CHATTER  TWENTY-FIRST.


Next,  the  Fourth  Wezeer  relates  a  story  of  a  bath-keeper  and  his  wife  and  a  young
man :  but  this  must  be  passed  over.  He  then  tells  a  story  of  which  the  following  is  a
very  brief  abstract : —

A  young  and  beautiful  and  virtuous  wife  was  corrupted  by  an  old  woman,  and  sent
her  to  bring  a  young  man  who  was  enamoured  of  her.  But  the  old  woman,  being
unable  to  find  the  lover  at  the  time  appointed,  brought  another  man,  whom  she  knew
not,  and  this  happened  to  be  the  damsel's  husband,  who  had  been  on  a  journey.  She
conducted  him  into  the  saloon,  and  when  the  wife  came  in,  and  her  eye  fell  upon  her
husband,  she  quickly  had  recourse  to  a  stratagem.  Pulling  -off  her  khuff22  from  her
foot,  she  said  to  her  husband,  Not  thus  is  our  mutual  vow  observed !  How  is  it  that
thou  deceivest  me,  and  actest  with  me  m  this  manner  ?  When  I  heard  of  thine
arrival  I  tried  thee  by  means  of  this  old  woman,  and  I  have  caused  thee  to  fall  into
that  against  which  I  cautioned  thee,  and  have  certified  myself  of  thy  conduct,  and
that  thou  hast  violated  the  vow  that  was  between  me  and  thee.  Before  now  I
imagined  that  thou  wast  chaste,  until  T  beheld  thee  with  mine  eye  with  this  old
woman,  and  found  that  thou  frequentest  women  of  bad  character. — Then  she  began  to
beat  him  with  the  khuff  upon  his  head,  while  he  declared  himself  to  be  innocent  of  the
offence,  and  swore  to  her  that  he  had  never  deceived  her  during  the  course  of  his  life.
But  she  still  beat  him,  and  wept  and  cried  out,  saying,  Come  to  me,  O  Muslims !  So
he  held  her  mouth  with  his  hand,  and  she  bit  it ;  and  he  humbled  himself  to  her,  kiss-


22  See  a  foot-note  (No.  39)  in  page  300  of  vol.  ii.


ing  her  hands  and  her  feet.  And  after  she  had  continued  some  time  longer  slapping
him,  she  made  a  sign  to  the  old  woman  that  she  should  withhold  her  hand  from  him.
The  old  woman  therefore  came  to  her,  and  proceeded  to  kiss  her  hands  and  her  feet
until  she  made  them  both  sit  down  ;  when  the  husband  kissed  the  old  woman's  hand,
and  said  to  her,  May  God  recompense  thee  with  every  thing  good,  for  thy  having
delivered  me  from  her  !  And  the  old  woman  wondered  at  the  artifice  of  the  wife.

On  the  fifth  day,  the  Damsel  comes  in  to  the  King  with  a  cup  of  poison  in  her
hand,  threatening  to  destroy  herself  with  it  if  he  gratify  not  her  revenge  ;  and  sho
relates  a  story  of  which  an  abridgement  is  here  inserted.

A  certain  amorous  goldsmith  saw  upon  a  wall  of  a  chamber  in  the  house  of  a  friend
a  picture  of  a  most  beautiful  damsel,  and  was  smitten  by  it  with  so  violent  a  passion
that  he  fell  sick  and  was  at  the  point  of  destruction.  But  learning  that  the  damsel  of
whom  it  was  a  portrait  was  a  singing-girl  belonging  to  one  of  the  Wezeers,  and  that
she  was  in  the  city  of  Kashmeer,  he  encouraged  himself,  and  journeyed  thither,  from
Persia,  where  he.  resided.  On  his  arrival  there,  he  inquired  of  a  perfumer  respecting
the  character  of  the  King,  and  was  informed  that  he  was  a  just  monarch,  hating
nothing  in  the  world  except  enchanters,  and  that  every  enchanter  or  enchantress  who
fell  into  his  hand  he  cast  into  a  pit  outside  the  city,  and  left  to  die  of  hunger.  Then
the  goldsmith  questioned  the  perfumer  respecting  the  King's  wezeers;  and  the  latter
informed  him  of  the  character  of  each  Wezeer  until  he  mentioned  the  singing-girl,  and
he  told  him  that  she  was  with  such  a  Wezeer.  So  the  goldsmith  waited  after  that
some  days,  till  he  had  contrived  a  stratagem  ;  and  during  a  night  of  rain  and  thunder
and  stormy  winds,  he  took  with  him  a  band  of  robbers,  and  repaired  to  the  mansion  of
the  Wezeer  who  was  the  owner  of  the  damsel.  He  attached  a  ladder  with  grappling-
irons,  and  ascended  to  the  roof  of  the  palace,  and  thence  he  descended  into  its  court,
where  he  beheld  all  the  female  skves  sleeping,  each  upon  her  couch ;  and  he  saw  a
couch  of  alabaster,  whereon  was  a  damsel  like  the  full  moon.  He  approached  her,  and
seated  himself  at  her  head,  and  removed  the  covering  from  her.  It  was  a  covering  of

III.  X


151  NOTES  TO  CHAPTETl  TWENTY-FIRST.

gold  stuff;  and  at  her  head  was  a  candle,  and  at  her  feet  a  candle,  each  in  a  candlestick
of  brilliant  gold,  and  these  two  candles  were  of  ambergris;  and  beneath  the  cushion
was  a  box  of  silver,  containing  all  her  ornaments,  covered,  and  placed  at  her  head.
And  thereupon  he  took  forth  a  knife,  and  struck  her  upon  the  hip,  making  a  manifest
wound.  So  the  damsel  awoke  in  terror ;  but  when  she  saw  him,  she  feared  to  cry  out ;
wherefore  she  was  silent,  imagining  that  he  desired  to  take  the  ornaments.  She  then
said  to  him,  Take  the  box  and  what  is  in  it.  The  slaughter  of  me  will  not  profit  thee  ;
and  I  throw  myself  upon  thy  protection  and  thy  generosity  ! — The  man  therefore  took
the  box  with  its  contents,  and  departed.

And  on  the  following  morning  he  took  the  box  in  which  were  the  ornaments,  and,
going  in  with  it  to  the  King  of  the  city,  kissed  the  ground  before  him,  and  said  to
him,  O  King,  I  am  a  man  who  would  give  thee  good  counsel.  I  am  of  the  country  of
Khurasan,  and  have  come  a  refugee  unto  thy  majesty,  on  account  of  the  fame  of  thv
good  qualities  and  thy  justice  to  thy  subjects  :  wherefore  I  desired  to  be  under  thy
banner.  I  arrived  at  this  city  at  the  close  of  the  day,  and  found  the  gate  shut :  so  I
slept  outside  it;  and  while  I  was  between  sleeping  and  waking,  lo,  I  saw  four  women,
one  of  them  riding  upon  a  broom,23  and  one  of  them  riding  upon  a  fan.  I  therefore
knew,  O  King,  that  they  were  enchantresses  who  would  enter  thy  city ;  and  one  of
them  drew  near  to  me,  and  kicked  me  with  her  foot,  and  beat  me  with  the  tail  of  a  fox
that  was  in  her  hand,  and  pained  me :  so  passion  seized  me  by  reason  of  the  blow,  and
I  struck  her  with  a  knife  that  was  with  me,  wounding  her  hip,  as  she  turned  her  back
in  flight.  And  when  I  wounded  her,  she  fled  away  before  me,  and  there  fell  from  her
this  box  with  its  contents ;  and  I  took  it  and  opened  it,  whereupon  I  saw  in  it  these
precious  ornaments.  Therefore  take  thou  it ;  for  I  have  no  need  of  it,  as  I  am  a
wanderer  about  the  mountains,  and  have  rejected  the  world  from  my  heart,  and  for-
saken it  with  what  it  coutaineth,  seeking  to  behold  the  face  of  God,  whose  name  be
exalted ! — Then  he  left  the  box  before  the  King,  and  departed ;  and  when  he  had  gone
forth,  the  King  opened  the  box,  and,  having  taken  out  all  the  ornaments  from  it,  began
to  turn  them  over,  and  found  among  them  a  necklace  which  he  had  bestowed  upon  the
Wezeer,  the  master  of  the  damsel.  So  the  King  summoned  the  Wezeer ;  and  when  he
came  before  him,  he  said  to  him,  This  is  the  necklace  that  I  presented  to  theo.  And  as
soon  as  the  Wezeer  saw  it,  he  knew  it,  and  said  to  the  King,  Yes^;  and  I  presented  it
to  a  singing-girl  in  my  abode.  The  King  therefore  said  to  him,  Bring  to  me  the
damsel  immediately.  And  he  brought  her ;  and  when  she  came  before  the  King,  he
said  to  her  master,  Uncover  her  hip,  and  see  if  there  be  a  wound  upon  it,  or  not.
Accordingly  the  Wezeer  uncovered  it,  and  saw  upon  it  a  wound  inflicted  by  a  knife :
so  he  said  to  the  King,  Yes,  O  my  lord :  there  is  a  wound  upon  it.  And  the  King
thereupon  said  to  the  Wezeer,  This  is  an  enchantress,  as  the  devotee  told  me,  without
doubt.  Then  he  gave  orders  to  put  her  into  the  pit  of  the  enchanters ;  and  they  sent
her  thither  that  day.

Therefore  when  the  night  came,  and  the  goldsmith  knew  that  his  stratagem  was
accomplished,  he  went  to  the  guard  of  the  pit,  having  in  his  hand  a  purse  containing  a
thousand  pieces  of  gold;  and  he  sat  with  the  guard  conversing  until  the  expiration  of
the  first  third  of  the  night,  when  he  said  to  him,  Know,  O  my  brother,  that  this  damsel
is  innocent  of  this  crime  which  they  have  laid  to  her  charge,  and  it  was  I  who  caused
her  to  fall  into  the  calamity.  And  he  related  to  him  the  story  from  beginning  to  end ;
after  which  he  said  to  him,  O  my  brother,  Take  this  purse ;  for  in  it  are  a  thousand
pieces  of  gold ;  and  give  me  the  damsel,  that  I  may  journey  with  her  to  my  country ;


23  In  a  notice  of  this  story  in  the  Asiatic  Jour-  curious  agreement  of  Eastern  and  Western  super-
nal •  X.  S.  vol.  xn.  p.  279).  only  one  woman  is  stitions.  In  Scott's  translation,  one  of  the  women
mentioned,  who  is  said  to  have  passed  through  is  described  as  mounted  upon  a  hyama,  another
the  goldsmith's  room  as  he  slept,  mow  ted  on  a  upon  a  ram,  a  third  upon  a  black  bitch,  and  the
llack  liiu-h.  Each  reading  of  the  passage  shews  a  fourth  upon  a  leopard.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-FIRST.


155


for  these  pieces  ot  gold  will  be  more  profitable  to
thee  than  the  imprisonment  of  the  damsel.  Obtain
our  recompense,  and  we  both  will  offer  prayers  in
thy  favour  for  prosperity  and  safety. — And  when  he
heard  his  words,  he  wondered  extremely  at  this  stra-
tagem and  its  accomplishment.  He  then  took  the
purse  with  its  contents,  and  left  the  damsel  to  him,
binding  him  not  to  remain  with  her  in  the  city  a
single  hour.  So  the  goldsmith  took  her  immediately,
and  departed,  and  he  journeyed  with  diligence  until
lio  arrived  at  his  country,  having  attained  his  desire.

The  Fifth  Wezeer  then  enters,  and  relates  the
following  story  of  "  the"  man  who  never  laughed  for
the  rest  of  his  life :" —

"There  was  a  man,  of  those  possessed  of  houses
and  riches,  who  had  wealth  and  servants  and  slaves
and  other  possessions,  and  he  departed  from  the
world  to  receive  the  mercy  of  God  (whose  name  be
exalted !),  leaving  a  young  son.  And  when  the  son
grew  up,  he  took  to  eating  and  drinking,  and  the
hearing  of  instruments  of  music,  and  songs,  and  was  ,-
liberal,  and  gave  gifts,  and  expended  the  riches  that  his  '  ?<,*.&<
father  had  left  to  him  until  all  the  wealth  had  gone.  He  then  betook  himself  to  the  sale
of  the  male  black  slaves  and  the  female  slaves,  and  other  possessions,  and  expended  all
that  he  had  of  his  father's  wealth  and  other  things,  and  became  so  poor  that  he  worked
with  the  labourers.  In  this  state  he  remained  for  a  period  of  years ;  and  while  he  was
sitting  one  day  beneath  a  wall,  waiting  to  see  who  would  hire  him,  lo,  a  man  of  comely
countenance  and  apparel  drew  near  to  him  and  saluted  him.  So  the  youth  said  to  him,
O  uncle,  hast  thou  known  me  before  now  ?  The  man  answered  him,  I  have  not  known
thee,  O  my  son,  at  all ;  but  I  see  the  traces  of  affluence  upon  thee,  though  thou  art  in
this  condition.  The  young  man  replied,  O  uncle,  what  fate  and  destiny  have  ordained
hath  come  to  pass.  '  But  bast  thou,  O  uncle,  O  comely-faced,  any  business  in  which  to
employ  me  ? — And  the  man  said  to  him,  O  my  son,  I  desire  to  employ  thee  in  an  easy
business.  The  youth  asked,  And  what  is  it,  O  uncle  ?  And  the  man  answered  him,  I
have  with  me  ten  sheykhs  in  one  abode,  and  we  have  no  one  to  perform  our  wants.
Thou  shalt  receive  from  us,  of  food  and  clothing,  what  will  suffice  thee,  and  shalt  serve
us,  and  thou  shalt  receive  of  us  thy  portion  of  benefits  and  money.  Perhaps,  also,  God
will  restore  to  thee  thine  affluence  by  our  means. — The  youth  therefore  replied,  I  hear
and  obey.  The  sheykh  then  said  to  him,  I  have  a  condition  to  impose  upon  thee.— And
what  is  thy  condition,  0  uncle  ?  asked  the  youth.  He  answered  him,  O  my  son,  it  is,
that  thou  keep  our  secret  with  respect  to  the  things  that  thou  shalt  see  us  do ;  and
when  thou  seest  us  weep,  that  thou  ask  us  not  respecting  the  cause  of  our  weeping.
And  the  young  man  replied,  Well,  O  uncle.

"  So  the  sheykh  said  to  him,  O  my  son,  come  with  us,  relying  on  the  blessing  of  God,
whose  name  be  exalted !  And  the  young  man  followed  the  sheykh  until  the  latter  con-
ducted him  to  the  bath,  when  he  took  him  into  it,  and  caused  the  hardened  dirt  to  be
removed  from  his  person ;  after  which  lie  sent  a  man,  who  brought  him  a  comely  gar-
ment of  linen,  and  he  clad  him  with  it,  and  went  with  him  to  his  abode  and  his
associates.  And  when  the  young  man  entered,  he  found  tt  to  be  a  high  mansion,  with
lofty  angles,  ample,  with  chambers  facing  one  another,  and  saloons  ;  and  in  each  saloon
was  a  fountain  of  water,  and  birds  were  warbling  over  it,  and  there  were  windows
overlooking,  on  every  side,  a  beautiful  garden  within  that  mansion.  The  sheykh  con-
ducted him  into  one  of  the  chambers,  and  he  found  it  decorated  with  coloured  marbles,


156  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-FIRST.

and  found  its  ceiling  decorated  with  ultramarine  and  brilliant  gold,  and  it  was  spread
with  carpets  of  silk  j  and  he  found  in  it  ten  sheykhs  sitting  facing  one  another,  wearing
the  garments  of  mourning,  weeping  and  wailing.  So  the  young  man  wondered  at  their
case,  and  was  about  to  question  the  sheykh  [who  had  brought  him] ;  but  he  remembered
the  condition,  and  therefore  withheld  his  tongue.  Then  the  sheykh  committed  to  the
young  man  a  chest  containing  thirty  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  saying  to  him,  O  my  son,
expend  upon  us  out  of  this  chest,  and  upon  thyself,  according  to  what  is  just,  and  be
thou  faithful,  and  take  care  of  that  wherewith  I  have  intrusted  thee.  And  the  young
man  replied,  I  hear  and  obey.  He  continued  to  expend  upon  them  for  a  period  of  days
and  nights;  after  which,  one  of  them  died  ;  whereupon  his  companions  took  him,  and
washed  him  and  shrouded  him,  and  buried  him  in  a  garden  behind  the  mansion.  And
death  ceased  not  to  take  of  them  one  after  another,  until  there  remained  only  the
sheykh  who  had  hired  the  young  man :  so  he  remained  with  the  young  man  in  that
mansion,  and  there  was  not  with  them  a  third,  and  they  remained  thus  for  a  period  of
years.  Then  the  sheykh  fell  sick ;  and  when  the  young  man  despaired  of  his  life,  he
addressed  him  w$h  courtesy,  and  was  grieved  for  him,  and  said  to  him,  O  uncle,  I  have
served  you,  and  not  failed  in  your  service  one  hour  for  a  period  of  twelve  years,  but
acted  faithfully  to  you,  and  served  you  according  to  my  power  and  ability.  The  sheykh
replied,  Yes,  O  my  son,  thou  hast  served  us  until  these  sheykhs  have  been  taken  unto
God  (to  whom  be  ascribed  might  and  glory!},  and  we  must  inevitably  die.  And  the
young  man  said,  O  my  master,  thou  art  in  a  state  of  peril,  and  I  desire  of  thee  that
thou  inform  me  what  hath  been  the  cause  of  your  weeping,  and  the  continuance  of  your
wailing  and  your  mourning  and  your  sorrow.  He  replied,  O  my  son,  thou  hast  no
concern  with  that,  and  require  me  not  to  do  what  I  am  unable  to  do ;  for  I  have
begged  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !)  not  to  afflict  any  one  with  my  affliction.  Xow
if  thou  desire  to  be  safe  from  that  into  which  we  have  fallen,  open  not  that  door  (and
he  pointed  to  it  with  his  hand,  and  cautioned  him  against  it) ;  and  if  thou  desire  that
what  hath  befallen  us  should  befall  thee,  open  it,  and  thou  wilt  know  the  cause  of  that
which  thou  hast  beheld  in  our  conduct ;  but  thou  wilt  repent,  when  repentance  will
not  avail  thee. — Then  the  illness  increased  upon  the  sheykh,  and  he  died ;  arid  the
young  man  washed  him  with  his  own  hand,  and  shrouded  him,  and  buried  him  by  his
companions.

"  He  remained  in  that  place,  which  with  its  contents  was  sealed  ;84  but  notwith-
standing this,  he  was  uneasy,  reflecting  upon  the  conduct  of  the  sheykhs.  And  while
he  was  meditating  one  day  upon  the  words  of  the  sheykh,  and  his  charge  to  him  not  to
open  the  door,  it  occurred  to  his  mind  that  he  might  look  at  it.  So  he  went  in  that
direction,  and  searched  until  he  saw  an  elegant  door,  over  which  the  spider  had  woven
its  webs,  and  upon  it  were  four  locks  of  steel ;  and  when  he  beheld  it,  he  remembered
the  action  against  which  the  sheykh  had  cautioned  him,  and  departed  from  it.  His
soul  desired  him  to  open  the  door,  and  he  restrained  it,  during  a  period  of  seven  days ;
but  on  the  eighth  day,  his  soul  overcame  him,  and  he  said,  I  must  open  that  door,  and
see  what  \yill  happen  to  me  in  consequence ;  for  nothing  will  repel  what  God  (whose
name  be  exalted !)  decreeth  and  predestineth,  and  no  event  will  happen  but  by  his  will.
Accordingly  he  arose,  and  opened  the  door,  after  he  had  broken  the  locks  ;  and  when
he  had  opened  the  door,  he  saw  a  narrow  passage,  along  which  he  walked  for  the  space
oi  three  hours ;  and,  lo,  he  came  forth  upon  the  bank  of  a  great  river.  At  this  the
young  man  wondered ;  and  he  walked  along  that  bank,  looking  to  the  right  and  left ;
and,  behold,  a  great  eagle  had  descended  from  the  sky,  and,  taking  up  the  young  man
with  its  talons,  it  flew  with  him  between  heaven  and  earth,  until  it  conveyed  him  to
an  island  in  the  midst  of  the  sea,  and  it  threw  him  down  upon  it,  and  departed  from
him.


21  That  is,  seals  were  affixed  to  its  doors.


NOTES  TO  CHATTER  TWENTY-FIRST.  157

"So  the  young  man  was  perplexed  at  his  case,  not  knowing  whither  to  go;  but
while  he  was  sitting  one  day,  lo,  the  sail  of  a  vessel  appeared  to  him  upon  the  sea,  like
the  star  in  the  sky ;  wherefore  the  heart  of  the  young  man  became  intent  upon  the
vessel,  in  the  hope  that  his  escape  might  be  effected  in  it.  He  continued  looking  at  it
until  it  came  near  unto  him ;  and  when  it  arrived,  he  beheld  a  bark  of  ivory  and  ebony ;
the  oars  of  which  were  of  sandal-wood  and  aloes-wood,  and  the  whole  of  it  was  encased
with  plates  of  brilliant  gold.  There  were  also  in  it  ten  damsels,  virgins,  like  moons;
and  when  the  damsels  saw  him,  they  landed  to  him  from  the  bark,  and  kissed  his  hands,
saying  to  him,  Thou  art  the  King,  the  bridegroom.  Then  there  advanced  to  him  a
damsel  who  wras  like  the  shining  sun  in  the  clear  sky,  having  in  her  hand  a  kerchief  of
silk,  in  which  were  a  royal  robe,  and  a  crown  of  gold  set  with  varieties  of  jacinths ;  and
having  advanced  to  him,  she  clad  him  and  crowned  him ;  after  which  the  other  damsels
carried  him  upon  their  arms  to  that  bark,  and  he  found  in  it  varieties  of  carpets  of  silk
of  divers  colours.  They  then  spread  the  sails,  and  proceeded  over  the  abysses  of  the
sea. — Now  when  I  proceeded  with  them,  says  the  young  man,  I  felt  sure  that  this  was
a  dream,  and  knew  not  whither  they  were  going  with  me.  And  when  they  came  in
sight  of  the  land,  I  beheld  it  filled  with  troops,  the  number  of  which  none  knew  but
God  (whose  perfection  be  extolled,  and  whose  name  be  exalted  !),  clad  in  coats  of  mail.
They  brought  forward  to  me  five  marked  horses,25  with  saddles  of  gold  set  with  varieties
of  pearls  and  precious  stones ;  and  I  took  a  horse  from  among  these,  and  mounted  it.
The  four  others  proceeded  with  me;  and  when  I  mounted,  the  ensigns  and  banners
were  set  up  over  my  head,  the  drums  and  the  cymbals  were  beaten,  and  the  troops  dis-
posed themselves  in  two  divisions,  right  and  left.  I  wavered  in  opinion  as  to  whether
I  were  asleep  or  awake,  and  ceased  not  to  advance,  not  believing  in  the  reality  of  my
stately  procession,  but  imagining  that  it  was  a  result  of  confused  dreams,  until  we  came
in  sight  of  a  verdant  meadow,  in  which  were  palaces  and  gardens,  and  trees  and  rivers
and  flowers,  and  birds  proclaiming  the  perfection  of  God,  the  One,  the  Omnipotent.
And  now  there  came  forth  an  army  from  among  those  palaces  and  garden?,  like  the
torrent  when  it  poureth  down,  until  it  filled  that  meadow  ;  and  when  the  troops  drew
near  to  me,  they  halted ;  and,  lo,  a  King  advanced  from  among  them,  riding  alone,
preceded  by  some  of  his  chief  officers  walking.

"  The  King,  on  approaching  the  young  man,  alighted  from  his  courser ;  and  the
young  man,  seeing  him  do  so,  alighted  also ;  and  they  saluted  each  other  with  the  most
courteous  salutation.  Then  they  mounted  their  horses  again,  and  the  King  said  to  the
young  man,  Accompany  us;  for  thou  art  my  guest.  So  the  young  man  proceeded  with
him,  and  they  conversed  together,  while  the  stately  trains  in  orderly  disposition  went
on  before  them  to  the  palace  of  the  King,  where  they  alighted,  and  all  of  them  entered
the  palace,  together  with  the  King  and  the  young  man,  the  young  man's  hand  being
in  the  hand  of  the  King,  who  thereupon  seated  him  on  a  throne  of  gold,  and  seated
himself  by  him.  And  when  the  King  removed  the  litham  26  from  his  face,  lo,  this  sup-
posed King  was  a  damsel,  like  the  shining  sun  in  the  clear  sky,  a  lady  of  beauty  and
loveliness,  and  elegance  and  perfection,  and  conceit  and  amorous  dissimulation.  The
young  man  beheld  vast  affluence  and  great  prosperity,  and  wondered  at  the  beauty  and
loveliness  of  the  damsel.  Then  the  damsel  said  to  him,  Know,  O  King,  that  I  am  the
Queen  of  this  land,  and  all  these  troops  that  thou  hast  seen,  including  every  one,
whether  of  cavalry  or  infantry,  are  women :  there  are  not  among  them  any  men.  The
men  among  us,  in  this  land,  till  and  sow  and  reap,  employing  themselves  in  the  culti-
vation of  the  land,  and  the  building  and  repairing  of  the  towns,  and  in  attending  to
the  affairs  of  the  people  by  the  pursuit  of  every  kind  of  art  and  trade  ;  but  as  to  the
women,  they  are  the  governors  and  magistrates  and  soldiers. — And  the  young  man


K  Horses  marked  on  account  of  their  excellence,  and  to  shew  their  breed.
26  See  Note  32  to  Chapter  vi.


158  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-FIRST.

wondered  at  this  extremely.  And  while  they  were  thus  conversing,  the  Wezeer
entered ;  and,  lo,  she  was  a  gray-haired  old  woman,  having  a  numerous  retinue,  of
venerable  and  dignified  appearance ;  and  the  Queen  said  to  her,  Bring  to  us  the  Kadee
and  the  witnesses.  So  the  old  woman  went  for  that  purpose ;  and  the  Queen  turned
towards  the  young  man,  conversing  with  him  and  cheering  him,  and  dispelling  his  fear
hy  kind  words,  and,  addressing  him  courteously,  she  said  to  him,  Art  thou  content  for
me  to  be  thy  wife  ?  And  thereupon  he  arose  and  kissed  the  ground  before  her ;  but
she  forbade  him ;  and  he  replied,  O  my  mistress,  I  am  less  than  the  servants  who  serve
thee.  She  then  said  to  him,  Seest  thou  not  these  servants  and  soldiers,  and  wealth
and  treasures  and  hoards  ?  He  answered  her,  Yes.  And  she  said  to  him,  All  these
are  at  thy  disposal ;  thou  shalt  make  use  of  them,  and  give  and  bestow,  as  seemeth  fit
to  thee.  Then  she  pointed  to  a  closed  door,  and  said  to  him,  A.ll  these  things  thou
shalt  dispose  of;  but  this  door  thou  shalt  not  open ;  for  if  thou  open  it,  thou  wilt
repent,  when  repentance  will  not  avail  thee.  And  her  words  were  not  ended  when  the
Wezeereh,27  with  the  Kadee  and  the  witnesses,  entered,  and  all  of  them  were  old
women,  with  their  hair  spreading  over  their  shoulders,  and  of  venerable  and  dignified
appearance ;  and  when  they  came  before  the  Queen,  she  ordered  them  to  perform  the
ceremony  of  the  marriage-contract.  So  they  married  her  to  the  young  man ;  and  she
prepared  the  banquets  and  collected  the  troops ;  and  when  they  had  eaten  and  drunk,
the  young  man  took  her  as  his  wife ;  and  he  resided  with  her  seven  years,  passing  the
most  delightful  and  most  comfortable  and  most  agreeable  and  most  sweet  life.

"  But  he  meditated  one  day  upon  opening  the  door,  and  said,  Were  it  not  that  there
are  within  it  great  treasures,  better  than  what  I  have  seen,  she  had  not  prohibited  me
from  opening  it.  He  then  arose,  and  opened  the  door ;  and,  lo,  within  it  was  the  bird
that  had  carried  him  from  the  shore  of  the  great  river  and  deposited  him  upon  the
island ;  and  when  the  bird  beheld  him,  it  said  to  him,  No  welcome  to  a  face  that  will
never  be  happy !  So  when  he  saw  it,  and  heard  its  words(>he  fled  from  it ;  but  it
followed  him,  and  carried  him  off,  and  flew  with  him  between  heaven  and  earth  for  the
space  of  an  hour,  and  deposited  him  in  the  place  from  which  it  had  carried  him  away ;
after  which  it  disappeared  from  him.  He  thereupon  sat  in  that  place,  and,  returning
to  his  reason,  he  reflected  upon  what  he  had  seen  of  affluence  and  glory  and  honour,
and  the  riding  of  the  troops  before  him,  and  commanding  and  forbidding ;  and  he  wept
and  wailed.  He  remained  upon  the  shore  of  the  great  river,  where  that  bird  had  put
him,  for  the  space  of  two  months,  wishing  that  he  might  return  to  his  wife ;  but  while
he  was  one  night  awake,  mourning  and  meditating,  a  speaker  spoke  (and  he  heard  his
voice,  but  saw  not  his  person),  calling  out,  How  great  were  the  delights  !  Far,  far  from
thee  is  the  return  of  what  is  past !  And  how  many  therefore  will  be  the  sighs  ! — So
when  the  young  man  .heard  it,  he  despaired  of  meeting  again  that  Queen,  and  of  the
return  to  him  of  the  affluence  in  which  he  had  been  living.  He  then  entered  the
mansion  where  the  sheykhs  had  resided,  and  knew  that  they  had  experienced  the  like
of  that  which  had  happened  unto  him,  and  that  this  was  the  cause  of  their  weeping  and
their  mourning ;  wherefore  he  excused  them  thereupon.  Grief  and  anxiety  came  upon
the  young  man,  and  he  entered  his  chamber,  and  ceased  not  to  weep  and  moan,  relin-
quishing food  and  drink,  and  pleasant  scents,  and  laughter,  until  he  died;  and  he  was
buried  by  the  side  of  the  sheykhs."23

On  the  sixth  day,  the  Damsel  presents  herself  before  the  King  with  a  drawn  knife
in  her  hand,  threatening  to  stab  herself  if  he  persist  in  sparing  his  son,  and  tells  a  tale
of  a  King's  son  who  was  enamoured  of  the  wife  of  a  jealous  merchant,  and  caused  him-
self to  be  conveyed  into  her  abode  in  a  chest.  She  also  relates  a  story  of  a  slave  who


"Wezeereh"  is  the  feminine  of  "Wezeer.''  member  any  talc  tnat  resemoles  tne  aoove  so

28  The  opening  of  a  forbidden  door  is  an  incident nearly  as  that  of  "  the  Third  Royal  Mendicant ; "
described  in  many  Arab  tales. But  I  do  not  re- respecting  which,  see  Note  83  to  Chapter  iii.


NOTES  TO  CHAFPER  TWENTY-FIRST.  159

inveigled  his  master's  wife  by  pretending  to  understand  the  language  of  birds.  Then
enters  the  Sixth  Wezeer,  who  tells  two  humorous  but  gross  stories.  The  former  of
these  is  similar  to  the  "  Story  of  the  Lady  of  Cairo  and  her  Four  Gallants  "  in  Scott's
version  :  in  some  respects  more  humorous,  but  in  others  less  so,  and  related  in  such  a
manner  that  I  must  omit  it.  The  latter  differs  little,  except  in  its  abominable  gross-
ness,  from  a  tale  familiar  to  us  from  childhood  :  it  is  the  tale  of  the  Three  Wishes. —
On  the  Seventh  day,  the  Damsel,  for  the  last  time,  tries  the  influence  of  her  tales  upon
the  King.  Having  lighted  a  great  fire,  and  declared  to  him  her  determination  to  cast
herself  into  it  if  he  avenge  her  not  upon  his  son,  she  relates  to  him  three  tales ;  but
they  are  of  little  interest,  and  therefore  here  but  slightly  noticed.  The  first  is  similar
to  the  story  of  the  Maid  and  the  Magpie.  The  wife  of  a  king,  while  bathing,  left  a
valuable  necklace  under  the  care  of  a  holy  woman ;  and  while  the  latter  was  praying,  a
bird  curried  off  the  necklace,  and  hid  it  in  a  crevice  in  a  wall  of  the  palace.  The  King
accused  the  holy  woman  of  the  theft,  and  tortured  and  imprisoned  her ;  but  afterwards
discovered  his  error. — The  second  tale  is  of  two  pigeons,  a  male  and  a  female,  who  stored
up  some  wheat  and  barley  in  their  nest  for  the  days  of  winter.  During  the  summer,
the  grains,  drying,  appeared  less  in  number ;  and  the  male  bird  accused  his  mate  of
having  eaten  of  them,  and  killed  her.  In  the  winter,  however,  the  grains  recovered
their  original  size,  and  he  was  convinced  that  he  had  killed  her  unjustly,  and  pined
a  way  until  he  died. — The  third  tale  is  of  a  King's  daughter,  named  Ed-Detmil,  a  damsel
of  unequalled  beauty,  who  (like  several  heroines  of  Arab  and  of  European  romances)
refused  to  marry  any  man  that  could  not  overcome  her  in  single  combat.  Each  suitor
whom  she  vanquished  she  despoiled  of  his  horse  and  arms  and  apparel,  and  branded  on
the  forehead  with  the  words,  This  is  the  freedman  of  Ed-Detma.  A  Persian  prince,
named  Bahrain,  engaged  her,  and  was  on  the  point  of  overcoming  her,  when  she  dis-
played her  face,  and  he  was  so  confounded  by  her  beauty,  that  his  energy  failed  him,
and  he  was  unhorsed  and  branded.  But  afterwards,  by  a  stratagem,  he  inveigled  her
in  her  garden,  and,  with  her  consent,  carried  her  off. — After  the  relation  of  these  tales,
the  Seventh  Wezeer  enters,  and  narrates  the  story  of  the  Old  Woman  and  the  Son  of
the  Merchant,  of  which  the  following  is  an  abstract : —

The  son  of  a  wealthy  merchant  journeyed  to  Baghdad,  and  selected  for  his  residence
a  magnificent  mansion ;  but  its  door-keeper  informed  him  that  every  one  who  lodged  in
it  remained  there  no  more  than  a  week,  or  two  weeks,  and  came  not  forth  from  it,
without  being  either  sick  or  dead ;  in  consequence  of  which  its  monthly  rent  was  only
ten  pieces  of  gold.  On  hearing  this,  the  young  man  reflected,  and,  having  sought
refuge  with  God  from  Satan  the  accursed,  and  dismissed  apprehension  from  his  mind,
he  took  up  his  abode  in  it,  and  sold  and  bought  j  and  some  days  passed  over  him  with-
out there  befalling  him  any  thing  of  the  kind  mentioned  to  him  by  that  door-keeper.
"  But  as  he  was  sitting  one  day  at  the  door  of  the  house,  there  passed  by  him  a  gray-
haired  old  woman,  like  the  speckled,  black  and  white,  serpent :  she  was  uttering  many
ejaculations  expressive  of  the  perfection  and  holiness  of  God,  and  removing  the  stones
and  other  hurtful  things  from  the  way  j29  and,  seeing  the  youth  sitting  at  the  door,
she  looked  at  him,  and  wondered  at  his  case.  So  he  said  to  her,  O  woman,  dost  thou
know  me,  or  dost  thou  doubt  of  me  whether  I  be,  or  be  not,  some  one  whom  thou
knowest  ?  And  when  she  heard  his  words,  she  walked  quickly  up  to  him,  and  saluted
him,  saying  to  him,  How  long  hast  thou  been  residing  in  this  house  ?  He  answered  her,
O  my  mother,  a  period  of  two  months.  And  she  said,  At  this  I  wonder;  for  I,  O  my
son,  know  thee  not,  nor  dost  thou  know  me,  nor  did  I  doubt  of  thee  whether  thou  wort
some  one  known  to  me  or  not ;  but  I  wondered  because  no  one  but  thyself  inhabiteth
this  house  without  coming  forth  from  it  either  dead  or  sick  j  and  I  doubt  not  but  that
thou,  O  my  son,  art  exposing  thy  youth  to  peril.  Hast  thou  not  ascended  to  the  top


-9  Such  actions  are  among  the  characteristics  of  the  pious. (Marginal  note  by  my  sheykh.)


160


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-FIRST.


of  the  pavilion,  nor  looked  from  the
mandharah30  that  is  in  it? — Then
the  .old  woman  went  her  way;  and
when  she  had  parted  from  him,  the
youth  meditated  upon  her  words,
and  said  within  himself,  I  have  not
ascended  to  the  top  of  the  pavilion,
and  know  not  that  there  is  in  it  a
mandharah.  And  thereupon  he  en-
tered immediately,  and  began  to
search  about  the  corners  of  the  house,
until  he  saw  in  a  corner  of  it  an
elegant  door,  over  which  the  spider
had  woven  its  webs  among  the  trees.
So  when  he  saw  it,  he  said  within
himself,  Probably  the  spider  hath  not
woven  its  webs  over  this  door  but
because  death  is  within  it.  But  he
placed  his  reliance  upon  [the  efficacy
of  uttering]  the  saying  of  God  (whose
name  be  exalted !),  say,  Nothing  shall
befall  us  but  what  God  hath  decreed
for  us.31  He  then  opened  that  door,
and  ascended  a  flight  of  elegant
stairs  until  he  came  to  the  top,  when
he  saw  a  mandharah,  and  he  seated
himself  in  it  to  rest  and  divert  him-
self, and  beheld  an  elegant,  clean
abode,  on  the  top  of  which  was  a
lofty  mak'ad32  overlooking  the  whole
of  Baghdad,  and  in  that  mak'ad  was
a  damsel  like  a  Hooreeyeh.  She
took  possession  of  his  whole  heart,
and  deprived  him  of  his  reason  and
understanding,  occasioning  him  the  malady  of  Eiyoob,  and  the  grief  of  Yaakoob.33
When  the  youth,  therefore,  beheld  her,  and  viewed  her  exactly,  he  said  within  himself,
Probably  the  people  say  that  no  one  dwelleth  in  this  mansion  without  dying  or  falling
sick  on  account  of  this  damsel  j  and  would  that  I  knew  how  my  deliverance  may  be
effected ;  for  my  reason  hath  departed."

He  then  descended,  and  seated  himself  again  at  the  door ;  and,  lo,  the  old  woman
passed  by  as  before.  So  when  the  youth  saw  her,  he  rose  upon  his  feet,  greeted  her
first  with  salutation  and  compliments,  and  said  to  her,  O  my  mother,  I  was  in  pros-
perity and  health  until  thou  advisedst  me  to  open  the  door,  and  I  have  seen  the
mandharah  and  opened  it,  and,  looking  from  it,  I  beheld  what  stupifiedme.  I  imagine
now  that  I  am  about  to  perish,  and  I  know  that  there  is  no  physician  for  me  except
thee. — And  when  she  heard  him,  she  laughed,  and  replied,  No  harm  shall  befall  thee,
if  it  be  the  will  of  God.  So  the  youth  arose,  and  entered  the  house,  and  brought  out
to  her,  in  his  sleeve,  a  hundred  pieces  of  gold,  which  he  gave  to  her  j  and  she  desired


"  Mandharah  "  ("commonly  pronounced  "man-
darah")  here  signifies,  as  in  many  other  instances,
"  a  belvedere."  The  name  is  now  generally  ap-
plied to  an  apartment  for  the  reception  of  male
visitors,  on  the  ground-floor  of  a  house,  having  a

33  The  sickness  of  Job,  and  the  grief  of  Jacob  for  the  loss  of  Joseph.


wide,  wooden,  grated  window,  or  two  windows  of
this  kind,  commanding  a  view  of  the  court.

31  See  above,  Note  31,  page  143.

32  See  Note  20  to  Chapter  viii.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-FIRST.  161

him  to  go  to  the  silk-market,  to  inquire  for  the  shop  of  Abu-1-Fet-h  the  son  of  Keydam
(the  husband  of  the  damsel),  and  to  purchase  of  him  the  most  beautiful  face-veil  in  his
possession.  Accordingly,  on  the  following  morning,  he  purchased  the  veil,  for  which  he
gave  fifty  pieces  of  gold,  and  he  returned  happy  to  his  residence.  The  old  woman  then
came  again,  and  he  gave  her  the  veil ;  whereupon  she  took  a  live  coal,  and  burnt  with
it.the  edge  of  the  veil ;  after  which,  she  folded  it  up,  and  went  with  it  to  the  house  of
Abu-1-Fet-h.  Being  acquainted  with  the  mother  of  the  damsel,  she  obtained  admission
by  pretending  that  she  desired  to  perform  the  ablution  and  to  pray;  and  while  the
damsel  was  inadvertent,  she  put  the  veil  under  a  cushion  of  the  mattress  upon  which
the  husband  usually  sat,  and  departed.  And  at  the  close  of  the  day,  the  merchant
came  home,  and  seated  himself  upon  the  mattress;  and  after  he  had  eaten,  he  reclined
upon  the  cushion,  and,  lo,  the  edge  of  the  veil  appeared  from  beneath  it.  So  when  he
saw  it,  he  knew  it,  and  conceived  an  evil  suspicion  of  the  damsel.  He  therefore  called
her|  and  said  to  her,  Whence  came  to  thee  this  veil  ?  And  she  swore  to  him  that  no
man  had  come  to  her  but  himself;  whereupon  he  was  silent,  fearing  to  be  publicly
disgraced;  for  he  was  accustomed  to  sit  with  the  Khaleefeh.  He  then  said  to  the
damsel,  It  hath  been  told  me  that  thy  mother  is  lying  sick,  from  a  pain  in  her  heart,1"
and  that  all  the  women  are  with  her,  weeping  for  her  :  so  1  desire  thee  to  go  forth  to
her.  Accordingly  she  went  to  her  mother ;  but  when  she  entered  the  house,  she  found
her  mother  well ;  and  soon  after,  the  porters  came  to  her,  bringing  all  her  things  from
the  merchant's  house.  Her  mother  therefore  asked  her  what  had  happened  to  her;
and  she  denied  having  offended ;  and  the  mother  wept  and  mourned  for  the  separation
of  her  daughter  from  that  man.

Then,  some  days  after  this,  the  old  woman  came  to  the  damsel,  and  saluted  her,
expressing  the  longing  she  had  felt  to  see  her  again,  and  said  to  her,  What  is  the
matter  with  thee,  O  my  daughter,  O  my  beloved  ?  Thou  hast  disturbed  my  mind. —
And  she  went  in  to  the  damsel's  mother,  and  said  to  her,  O  my  sister,  what  is  the  news,
and  what  is  the  story  of  the  damsel  with  her  husband ;  for  it  hath  been  told  me  that
he  hath  divorced  her  ?  What  offence  then  hath  she  committed  that  requireth  all  this  ?
— The  damsel's  mother  replied,  Perhaps  her  husband  will  return  to  her  by  means  of
the  blessing  attendant  upon  thee  :  so  pray  for  her,  O  my  sister ;  for  thou  fastest  much,
and  art  up  all  thy  night  [in  prayer]. — And  after  this,  the  old  woman  repaired  to  the
young  man,  and  desired  him  to  make  ready  for  the  reception  of  the  damsel.  She  then
returned  to  the  damsel's  mother,  and  said  to  her,  0  my  sister,  we  are  celebrating  a
wedding-festivity :  so  send  the  damsel  with  me,  that  she  may  divert  herself,  and  that
her  anxiety  and  grief  may  be  dispelled  :  then  I  will  bring  her  back  to  thee  as  I  took
her  from  thee.  The  damsel's  mother  therefore  arose,  and  clad  her  in  the  richest  of  her
apparel,  adorning  her  with  the  best  of  her  ornaments  and  attire,  and  the  damsel  went
forth  with  the  old  woman.  Her  mother  went  with  her  to  the  door,  and  charged  the
old  woman,  saying  to  her,  Beware  of  suffering  any  man  of  the  creatures  of  God  (whose
name  be  exalted  !)  to  see  her  ;  for  thou  knowest  the  station  of  her  husband  with  the
Khaleefeh  ;  and  delay  not ;  but  return  with  her  as  soon  as  possible.  So  the  old  woman
took  her  to  the  residence  of  the  young  man ;  the  damsel  imagining  that  it  was  the
house  where  the  wedding  was  celebrated ;  and  when  the  damsel  entered  the  house,  and
saw  the  young  man,  she  was  amazed  at  his  beauty,  and  easily  consented  to  his  taking
her  as  his  wife.35 — But  she  was  eventually  taken  back  to  her  mother's  house,  and  re-
stored to  her  former  husband  by  means  of  a  stratagem  contrived  by  the  old  woman,
and  thus  put  in  practice.


"4  Or,  "in  her  stomach."  damsel  may  be  supposed  to  have  waited,  after  her
35  1  am  purposely  somewhat  unfaithful  here  to  divorce,  a  sufficient  period  to  enable  her  biraily
my  original ;  but  without  making  the  story  im-  to  contract  a  new  marriage.— See  the  fourth  para-
probable,  or  inconsistent  with  Muslim  law. The  graph  of  Note  39  to  Chapter  iv.


III.


162  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-FIRST.

Tho  young  man  repaired  to  the  shop  of  the  merchant  Abn-1-Fet-h  and  seated  himself
with  him  ;  and,  lo,  the  old  woman  passed  by  the  shop,  having  in  her  hand  a  string  of
beads,  with  which  she  was  telling  her  ejaculations  in  praise  of  God ;  whereupon  the
young  man  arose  and  pulled  her  by  her  clothes,  and  began  to  revile  her  and  abuse  her,
while  she,  addressing  him  with  courtesy,  said  to  him,  O  my  son,  thon  art  excused.  So
the  people  of  the  market  assembled  around  them,  saying.  What  is  the  matter  ?  And
the  young  man  answered,  O  people,  I  purchased  of  this  merchant  a  veil  for  fifty  pieces
of  gold,  and  my  slave-girl  wore  it  for  one  hour,  and  sat  fumigating  it  ;3fi  and  there  flew
forth  a  spark,  which  burned  its  edge  ;  wherefore  we  delivered  it  to  this  old  woman,
that  she  might  give  it  to  some  one  who  should  darn  it,  and  return  it  to  us ;  but  from
that  time  we  have  never  seen  her  until  now.  The  old  woman  then  said,  This  youth
hath  spoken  truth.  Yes,  1  took  it  of  him,  and  went  with  it  into  one  of  the  houses  that
I  am  accustomed  to  enter,  and  left  it  by  mistake  in  some  place  in  one  of  those  houses ;
but  know  not  where  it  is;  and  being  a  poor  woman,  I  feared  its  owner,  and  did  not
face  him. — So  when  the  merchant  Abu-1-Fet-h  heard  this,  he  begged  God's  forgiveness
of  his  faults  and  suspicion,  and  said  to  the  old  woman,  Dost  thou  enter  our  abode  ?
She  answered  him,  O  my  son,  I  do  enter  thine  abode,  and  the  abodes  of  others,  for  the
sake  of  alms ;  and  from  that  day,  no  one  hath  given  me  tidings  of  the  veil.  The  mer-
chant said  to  her,  Hast  thou  asked  any  one  respecting  it  in  our  house  ?  She  answered,
O  my  master,  I  went  to  the  house  and  inquired ;  but  they  said  to  me,  The  merchant
hath  divorced  the  lady  of  the  house.  So  I  returned,  and  asked  not  any  one  after  that
to  the  present  day. — And  thereupon  the  merchant  looked  towards  the  young  man,  and
said  to  him,  Let  this  old  woman  go ;  for  the  veil  is  in  my  possession.  And  he  took  it
forth  from  the  shop,  and  gave  it  to  the  darner  before  the  people  who  were  present.
Then  he  went  to  the  damsel,  gave  her  some  money,  and  took  her  again  as  his  wife,
after  he  had  made  abundant  excuses  to  her,  and  begged  God's  forgiveness,  not  knowing
what  the  old  wouiau  had  done.

The  same  Wezeer  then  tells  the  story  of  the  damsel  kept  by  an  'Efreet  in  a  box,
nearly  as  related  in  the  Introduction  to  this  work ;  and  the  King  thereupon  determines
that  lie  will  not  kill  his  son.  On  the  eighth  day,  the  King's  son,  being  no  longer
withheld  from  speaking  by  the  foreseen  danger,  goes  in  to  the  King,  and,  in  most
eloquent  words,  praises  his  father  and  his  Wezeers,  and  the  lords  of  his  empire,  and
thanks  them.  And  the  King  says  to  his  Wezeers,  If  I  had  killed  my  son,  would  the
crime  have  1  ?en  on  me  or  on  the  damsel  or  on  the  instructor  Es-Sindibad  ?37  But  the
persons  present  rre  silent.  And  Es-Sindibad  says  to  the  youth,  Give  the  answer,  O
my  son.  So  the  King's  son  says, —

"  I  have  heard  that  a  guest  alighted  at  the  house  of  a  certain  merchant,  who  there-
upon sent  his  slave-girl  to  purchase  for  him  from  the  market  some  milk  in  ajar.  And
she  took  the  milk  in  her  jar,  desiring  to  return  to  the  house  of  her  master;  but  while
she  was  on  her  way,  there  passed  over  her  a  kite  flying  with  a  serpent  in  its  talons,
and  pressing  it  with  them ;  and  there  dropped  a  drop  of  poison  from  the  serpent  into
the  jar,  without  the  girl's  knowing  it.  So  when  she  came  to  the  house,  the  master
took  from  her  the  milk,  and  drank  of  it,  he  and  his  guests  j38  and  the  milk  had  not
settled  in  their  stomachs  before  they  all  died."

See  then,  O  King  (adds  the  youth),  whose  was  the  fault  in  this  case. — One  of  the
persons  present  says,  The  fault  was  on  the  part  of  those  who  drank  the  milk.  Another
says,  The  fault  was  ou  the  part  of  the  damsel,  who  left  the  jar  uncovered.  But  Es-


6  This  is  generally  done  with  the  fumes  of  cautioned  him  not  to speak  during  the  seven

aloes-wood  placed  on  burning  charcoal  in  a  cen-  days : so  the  young  man  could  not,  without  dis-

ser. A  very  agreeable  scent  is  thus  imparted  to  obedience,  exculpate  himself,

the  veil.  ss  jt  seems  that  he  had  invited  one  or  more  of

37  For  Es-Sindibad  was  the  means  of  introduc-  his  friends  to  meet  his  first  guest.
3ng  the  youth  into  the  pavilion  cf  the  women,  and


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-FIRST.  163

Sindihad  desires  the  young  man  to  give  his  opinion,  and  the  latter  says,  They  have
erred  :  the  fault  was  not  on  the  part  of  the  damsel,  nor  of  the  people  who  drank ;  for
the  terms  of  their  lives  had  expired,  with  their  means  of  subsistence,  and  their  death
\v;is  decreed  to  be  effected  by  means  of  that  event. — Upon  this,  the  persons  present
wonder  extremely  at  the  youth,  and  declare  him  to  be  unequalled  in  wisdom.  He
however,  replies,  that  a  blind  sheykh,  and  a  boy  three  years  old,  and  a  boy  five  years

old,  were  wiser  than  he,  as  shewn  by  three  stories  which  he  relates. The  first  is  this:

"There  was  a  certain  merchant,  who  possessed  great  riches,  and  had  travelled  much
to  all  cities,  and,  desiring  again  to  journey  to  a  city,  he  inquired  of  those  who  had  come
from  it,  and  said  to  them,  What  merchandise  is  productive  of  great  gain  there  ?  And
they  answered  him,  Sandal-wood;  for  it  is  there  sold  at  a  dear  price.  The  merchant
therefore  purchased  sandal-wood  with  all  the  money  that  he  had,  and  journeyed  to
that  city.  Now  when  he  arrived  there,  it  was  the  close  of  the  day ;  and,  lo,  there  was
an  old  woman  driving  some  sheep  belonging  to  her;  and  on  her  seeing  the  merchant,
she  said  to  him,  Who  art  thou,  O  man  ?  He  answered  her,  I  am  a  merchant,  a  stranger.
And  she  said  to  him,  Beware  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  city ;  for  they  are  cheats  and
thieves :  they  deceive  the  stranger  that  they  may  overcome  him  and  eat  what  he  hath
with  him  :  and  I  have  given  thee  good  advice.  Then  she  departed  from  him.  And
when  the  morning  came,  a  man  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  city  met  him,  and  saluted
him  and  said  to  him,  O  my  master,  whence  hast  thou  come  ?  He  answered  him,  I  have
come  from  such  a  city.  And  the  man  said,  What  merchandise  hast  thou  brought  with
thee  ?  He  answered,  Sandal-wood ;  for  I  have  heard  that  it  is  of  value  with  you.
But  the  man  of  the  city  said,  He  hath  erred  who  advised  thee  to  do  so ;  for  we  burn
not  beneath  the  cooking-pot  any  thing  but  that  sandal -wood,  and  the  value  of  it  is
with  us  the  same  as  that  of  common  firewood.  And  when  the  merchant  heard  the
words  of  that  man,  he  sighed  and  repented ;  but  wavered  between  believing  and  disbe-
lieving. He  then  alighted  at  one  of  the  Khans  of  the  city,  and  made  a  fire  of  sandal-
wood  beneath  the  cooking-pot.  So  when  that  man  saw  him,  he  said  to  him,  Wilt  thou
sell  this  sandal-wood  for  a  saa39  of  whatsoever  thy  soul  shall  desire  ?40  The  merchant
answered  him,  I  sell  it  thee.  The  man  therefore  removed  all  the  sandal-wood  that  the
merchant  had,  and  deposited  it  in  his  own  abode ;  and  the  seller  purposed  to  take  gold.41
And  on  the  following  morning,  the  merchant  walked  in  the  city,  and  there  met  him  a
blue-eyed  man,  of  the  inhabitants  of  that  city  :  this  man  had  lost  one  eye,  and  he  laid
hold  upon  the  merchant,  saying  to  him,  Thou  art  the  person  who  deprived  me  of42  my
eye,  and  I  will  never  let  thee  go.  So  the  merchant  denied  that,  and  replied,  This  can-
not be  established.  And  the  people  collected  around  them,  and  asked  the  one-eyed
man  to  grant  the  other  a  delay  until  the  morrow,  when  the  latter  should  give  him  the
price  of  his  eye  ;*  wherefore  the  merchant  appointed  a  person  to  be  his  guarantee,
and  so  they  let  him  go.  Then  the  merchant  went  away;  and  his  shoe  was  rent  in  con-
sequence of  the  dragging  of  the  one-eyed  man.  He  therefore  stopped  at  the  shop  of  a
cobbler,  and  gave  it  to  him,  saying  to  him,  Repair  it,  and  thou  shalt  receive  of  me
what  will  please  thee.  He  then  departed  from  him  ;  and,  lo,  there  were  some  people
sitting  playing ;  and  he  seated  himself  with  them,  by  reason  of  his  anxiety  and  grief,
and  they  asked  him  to  play.  So  he  played  with  them,  and  they  overcame  him,  and,


39  The  sua  is  explained  in  the  Kiimoos  as  being  *°  In  the  original  it  is  said,  "  Wilt  thou  sell  this

equal  to  four  mudds,  each  mudd  being  a  pound  sandal-wood,  each  saa  for  what  thy  soul  shall  de-

aiul  one  third;  and  more  simply,  it  is  explained  sire?" — But  this  is  erroneously  expressed: the

as  being  four  times  the  measure  of  a  man's  two  right  reading  is  shewn  after.

hands  of  ordinary  size. According  to  my  sheykh,  «  Here  again  is  an  error  in  the  original,  which

it  is  about  the  forty-eighth  part  of  the  ardebb  of  adds,  "  equal  in  quantity  to  what  the  buyer  took :"

Cairo  ;  and  consequently  very  nearly  equal  to  six  namely,  the  wood.

English  pints  and  two  thirds. It  is  the  measure  tf  Literally,  "destroyed:"  but  this  sense  seems

employed  in  meting  corn  and  other  things  re-  to  me  to  be  at  variance  with  the  sequel,

quired  by  the  law  to  bo  given  as  alms,  &c.  **  See  Note  53  to  Chapter  v


164  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-FIRST

having  done  so,  gave  him  his  choice,  either  to  drink  up  the  sea,44  or  else  to  disburse
the  whole  of  his  wealth ;  whereupon  he  arose  and  said  to  them,  Allow  me  a  delay  until
to-inorrow.

"  He  went  away,  grieved  for  that  which  he  had  done,  and  not  knowing  what  would
be  the  result  of  his  case.  So  he  sat  in  a  place,  meditating,  sorrowful,  anxious ;  and,  lo,
the  old  woman  passed  by  him,  and,  looking  towards  him,  she  said  to  him,  Probably  the
people  of  the  citv  have  overcome  thee ;  for  I  see  thee  anxious  on  account  of  that  which
hath  befallen  thee.  He  therefore  related  to  her  all  that  had  happened  from  first  to
last ;  and  she  said  to  him,  Who  is  he  who4*  hath  cheated  thee  in  the  affair  of  the
sandal-wood ;  for  with  us  the  value  of  every  pound  of  sandal-wood  is  ten  pieces  of
gold  ?  But  I  will  contrive  for  thee  a  plan,  by  means  of  which  I  hope  thy  deliverance
may  be  effected ;  and  it  is  this  :  that  thou  go  towards  such  a  gate ;  for  in  that  place  is
a  blind  sheykh,  who  is  deprived  of  the  use  of  his  legs,  and  he  is  wise,  knowing,  old,
skilful.  All  the  people  visit  him,  asking  him  respecting  what  they  will,  and  he  pointeth
out  to  them  what  will  be  advisable  for  them ;  for  he  is  acquainted  with  artifice  and
enchantment  and  tricking.  He  is  a  sharper,  and  the  sharpers  meet  at  his  abode  by
night.  Therefore  go  thou  thither,  and  hide  thyself  from  thine  offenders,  so  that  thou
mayest  hear  their  words  and  they  may  not  see  thee;  for  he  will  acquaint  them  with
the  case  in  which  one  overcometh  and  that  in  which  one  is  overcome.  Probably  thou
wilt  hear  from  him  the  mention  of  a  subterfuge  that  may  deliver  thee  from  thine
offenders.

"  So  the  merchant  departed  from  her  to  the  place  of  which  she  had  told  him,  and
hid  himself.  He  then  looked  at  the  sheykh,  and  seated  himself  near  unto  him  ;  and
there  had  not  elapsed  more  than  a  short  time  when  there  came  his  party,  who  resorted
to  him  as  their  judge.  On  their  coming  before  the  sheykh,  they  saluted  him  and  each
other,  and  seated  themselves  around  him ;  and  when  the  merchant  saw  them,  he  found
his  four  offenders  among  the  number  of  those  who  were  present.  The  sheykh  caused
some  food  to  be  placed  before  them,  and  they  ate ;  after  which,  each  of  them  related
his  story  of  the  events  that  had  happened  to  him  during  the  past  day.  The  buyer  of
the  sandal -wood  advanced,  and  informed  the  sheykh  of  that  which  had  happened  to
him  that  day  ;  that  he  had  bought  sandal-wood  of  a  man  for  less  than  its  value  ;  and
that  the  sale  had  been  settled  between  them  on  the  condition  of  his  giving  the  measure
of  a  saa  of  whatsoever  the  seller  should  desire.  Upon  this  the  shekyh  said  to  him,
Thine  adversary  hath  overcome  thee.  The  man  asked,  How  can  he  overcome  me  ?  The
sheykh  replied.  If  he  say  to  thee,  I  will  take  the  measure  in  gold  or  silver — wik  thou
give  it  him  ?  The  man  said,  Yes,  I  will  give  it  him,  and  1  shall  be  the  gainer.  But
the  sheykh  rejoined,  And  if  he  say  to  thee,  I  win  take  the  measure  of  a  saa  of  fleas,
half  males  and  half  females-r-what  wilt  thou  do  ?  So  the  man  knew  that  he  was  over-
come.— Then  the  one-eyed  man  advanced,  and  said,  O  sheykh,  I  saw  to  day -a  blue-eyed
man,46  who  is  a  stranger  to  the  country,  and  I  assailed  him  and  laid  hold  upon  him,
saying  to  him,  Thou  hast  deprived  me  of  my  eye — and  I  let  him  not  go  until  a  party
had  become  guarantees  that  he  should  return  to  me  and  satisfy  me  for  my  eye.  But
the  sheykh  replied,  If  he  desire  to  overcome  thee,  he  will  overcome  thee. — Aud  how,
said  the  man,  will  he  do  so?  He  answered,  He  may  say  to  thee,  Pull  out  thine  eye,
and  I  will  pull  out  my  eye,  and  we  will  weigh  each  of  them ;  and  if  my  eye  be  equal


14  The  word  here  rendered  "sea''  also  signifies  have  been  blue-eyed,  but  that  this  supposition  is
"  a  large  river."  not  satisfactory. I  think,  however,  that  in  read-

15  1  here  read  "men  dha-lledhec"  instead  of  ing  what  follows  in  the  text  he  may  have  altered
"  mina-lledhee,''  which  should  be  rendered  "  [All  his  opinion,  and  neglected  to  correct  his  iii ito ;  t.  >r
this  hath  resulted]  from  hitn  who ."  it  seems  that  the  one-eyed  man  preferred  against

*-  My  sheykh  has  remarked,  in  a  marginal  note,  the  other  the  absurd  charge  of  having  stolen  his

that  the  wie-ei/erf  man  is  before  thus  described ;  eye  and  put  it  ill  his  own  head,
and  he  has  added,  that  U'th  may  bo  supposed  to


in  weight  to  thine,  thou  art  veracious  in  that  which  tliou  hast  asserted.  Then  thou
wilt  owe  him  the  fine  for  his  eye,  and  thou  wilt  be  blind  ;  but  he  will  see  with  his  other
eye. — So  the  man  knew  that  the  merchant  might  overcome  him  by  means  of  this  sub-
terfuge.— Next,  the  cobbler  advanced,  and  said,  O  sheykh,  I  saw  to-day  a  man  who
gave  me  his  shoe,  and  said  to  me,  Repair  it.  Whereupon  I  said  to  him,  Wilt  thou  not
give  me  the  remuneration  ?  And  he  answered  me,  Repair  it,  and  thou  shalt  receive  of
me  what  will  please  thee.  Now  nothing  will  please  me  but  all  his  wealth. — The  sheykh
however  replied,  If  he  desire  to  take  his  shoe  from  thee  and  not  give  thee  aught,  he
may  take  it. — And  how  so?  said  the  cobbler.  The  sheykh  answered,  He  may  say  to
thee,  The  enemies  of  the  Sultan  are  defeated,  and  his  opponents  have  become  weak,
and  his  children  and  his  auxiliaries  are  multiplied.  Art  thou  pleased  or  not  ? — If  thou
say,  I  am  pleased — he  will  take  his  shoe  from  thee  and  depart :  and  if  thou  say,  No —
lie  will  take  his  shoe  and  beat  with  it  thy  face  and  the  back  of  thy  neck.47 — He  there-
fore knew  that  he  was  overcome. — Then  advanced  the  man  who  played  with  the  mer-
chant for  a  wager,  and  he  said,  O  sheykh,  I  found  a  man,  and  laid  a  wager  with  him
and  overcame  him  ;  whereupon  I  said  to  him,  If  thou  drink  up  this  sea,  I  will  give  up
the  whole  of  my  wealth  to  thee  ;  and  if  thou  drink  it  not,  give  thou  up  the  whole  of
thy  wealth  to  me.-18  The  sheykh  replied,  If  he  desire  to  overcome  thee,  he  may  over-


47  General  loyalty  is  a  necessary  result  of  the
( (institution  of  Muslim  society,  and  essential  to
the  existence  of  Muslim  government ;  for  the
Muslim  tyrant  is  not  absolute :  he  cannot  be  a
ik'spot :  if  lie  transgress  certain  limits,  prescribed
by  the  Kur-;in  and  the  Traditions  of  the  Prophet,
he  forfeits  his  throne;  and  so  long  as  he  keeps
within  those  limits,  his  subjects  are  bound,  by  all


that  they  hold  sacred,  to  acknowledge  and  main-
tain his  authority.

48  Arabs  often  play  a  game  on  the  condition
that  the  loser  shall  do  what  the  gainer  shall  after-
wards determine;  each  confiding  in  the  modera-
tion of  the  other.  The  penalty  is  generally  some-
thing ridiculous.


166  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-FIRST.

come  thee.  The  man  said,  And  how  so  ?  And  the  sheykh  answered,  He  may  say  to
thee,  Hold  for  me  the  mouth  of  the  sea  with  thy  hand,  and  hand  it  to  me,  and  I  will
drink  it.  And  thou  wilt  not  he  able :  so  he  will  overcome  thee  by  means  of  this
subterfuge.

"  When  the  merchant  therefore  heard  that,  he  knew  what  subterfuges  to  employ
against  his  offenders.  Then  they  arose  and  left  the  sheykh,  and  the  merchant  departed
to  his  lodging.  And  when  the  morning  arrived,  the  man  who  had  laid  the  bet  with
him  came  to  him."  The  merchant  proposed  to  him  what  the  sheykh  had  said,  and  the
man  released  himself  by  paying  him  a  hundred  pieces  of  gold.  Then  came  the  cobbler;
and  the  merchant  took  his  shoe  without  giving  remuneration.  Next  came  the  one-
eyed  man ;  and  he  was  obliged  to  conciliate  the  merchant  by  giving  him  a  hundred
pieces  of  gold.  Lastly  came  the  buyer  of  the  sandal-wood ;49  and  this  man  also  was
compelled  to  release  himself  by  paying  the  merchant  a  hundred  pieces  of  gold,  and  re-
turning the  wood.  The  merchant  then  sold  the  sandal-wood  as  he  desired,  received
its  price,  and  journeyed  back  to  his  own  country.

The  tale  relating  to  the  boy  three  years  old  is  unworthy  of  translation.  The  other
instance  of  precocious  intelligence  is  thus  related : —

"  Four  merchants  were  sharers  in  a  sum  of  a  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  which  they
had  mixed  together,  and  put  into  one  purse ;  and  they  went  with  it  to  purchase  mer-
chandise, and,  finding  in  their  way  a  beautiful  garden,  they  entered  it,  and  left  the
purse  with  a  woman  who  was  the  keeper  of  that  garden.  Having  entered,  they
diverted  themselves  in  a  tract  of  the  garden,  and  ate  and  drank  and  were  happy ;  and
one  of  them  said,  I  have  with  me  some  perfume.  Come,  let  us  wash  our  heads  with
this  running  water;  and  perfume  ourselves. — Another  said,  We  want  a  comb.  And
another  said,  We  will  ask  the  keeper :  perhaps  she  hath  with  her  a  comb.  And  upon
this,  one  of  them  arose  and  went  to  the  keeper,  and  said  to  her,  Give  me  the  purse.
She  replied,  When  ye  all  present  yourselves,  or  thy  companions  order  me  to  give  it
thee.  Now  his  companions  were  in  a  place  where  the  keeper  could  see  them,  and  she
could  hear  their  words.  And  the  man  said  to  his  companions,  She  is  not  willing  to
give  me  aught.  So  they  said  to  her,  Give  him.  And  when  she  heard  their  words,  she
gave  him  the  purse ;  and  he  wont  forth  fleeing  from  them.  Therefore  when  he  had
wearied  them  by  the  length  of  his  absence,  they  came  to  the  keeper,  and  said  to  her,
Wherefore  didst  thou  not  give  him  the  comb  ?  And  she  replied,  He  demanded  of  me
nothing  but  the  purse,  and  I  gave  it  not  to  him  save  with  your  permission,  and  he
hath  departed  hence  and  gone  his  way.  And  when  they  heard  the  words  of  the  keeper,
they  slapped  their  faces,  and  seized  her  with  their  hands,  saying  to-  her,  We  gave  thee
not  permission  save  to  give  the  comb.  She  replied,  He  did  not  mention  to  me  a  comb.
And  they  seized  her  and  took  her  up  to  the  Kadee ;  and  when  they  presented  them-
selves before  him,  they  stated  to  him  the  case  ;  whereupon  he  bound  the  keeper  to
restore  the  purse,  and  bound  a  number  of  her  debtors  to  be  answerable  for  her.

"  So  she  went  forth  perplexed,  not  knowing  her  way ;  and  there  met  her  a  boy,
whose  age  was  five  years ;  and  when  the  boy  saw  her,  thus  perplexed,  he  said  to  her,
What  is  the  matter,  O  my  mother  ?  But  she  returned  him  not  an  answer,  despising
him  on  account  of  the  smallness  of  his  age.  And  he  repeated  his  question  to  her  a  first
and  a  second  and  a  third  time."  So  at  length  she  told  him  what  had  happened  to  her.
"  And  the  boy  said  to  her,  Give  me  a  piece  of  silver  that  I  may  buy  some  sweatmeat
with  it,  and  I  will  tell  thee  something  by  which  thine  acquittance  may  be  effected.
The  keeper  therefore  gave  him  a  piece  of  silver,  asking  him,  What  hast  thou  to  say  ?
And  the  boy  answered  her,  Return  to  the  Kadee,  and  say  to  him,  It  was  agreed  between
me  and  them  that  I  should  not  give  them  the  purse  save  in  the  presence  of  all  the  four.


49  Here  is  another  error  in  the  original,  similar each  saa  of  sandal-wood,  a  s;ia  of  something  else,
to  the  first  that  J  have  pointed  out  in  this  story. as  sold  or  silver.
It  is  said  that  the  buyer  had  agreed  to  give,  tor


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-FIRST.


167


So  the  keeper  retunied  to  the  Kadee,  and  said  to  him  as  the  boy  had  told  her ;  upon
which  the  Kadee  said  to  the  three  men,  Was  it  thus  agreed  between  you  and  her?
They  answered,  Yes.  And  the  Kadee  said  to  them,  Bring  to  me  your  companion  and
take  the  purse.  Thus  the  keeper  went  forth  free,  no  injury  befalling  her;  and  she
went  her  way."  *°

The  King's  son  is  then  highly  applauded  by  all  present,  and  embraced  and  kissed
by  his  father,  who  desires  him  to  decide  upon  the  punishment  of  the  Damsel ;  to  kill
her,  or  to  do  what  else  he  may  choose  with  her.  The  young  man  replies,  "  Banish  her
from  the  city."


50  "  It  is  singular  enough  that  this  story  is  told
of  the  Attorney-General  Noy,  in  the  reign  of  James
II.  For  merchants  we  have  graziers,  and  for  a
guardian  of  a  garden  a  keeper  of  an  inn,  and  the
littli.-  buy,  five  years  old,  is  the  lawyer,  William
Noy,  beginning  his  learned  labours,  arid  much


advanced  in  reputation,  it  is  said,  by  this  story.
It  may  or  may  not  be  true,  and  we  have  no  higher
authority  for  it  than  a  collection  of  anecdotes ;  but
it  is  something  to  find  it  thus  wandering — seeking
an  owner  so  far  from  its  native  soil."  (Asiatic
Journal,  N.  S.  vol.  xxx.  p  280.)


CHAPTER XXII.


COMMENCING  WITH  PART  OF  THE  SIX  HUNDRED  AND  SIXTH  NIGHT,

AND  ENDING  WITH  PART  OP  THE  SIX  HUNDRED

AND  TWENTY-FOURTH.


THE  STORY  OF  JOODAR.

A  MERCHANT,  whose  name  was  'Omar,  had  issue  consisting  of
three  sons ;  one  of  whom  was  named  Salim,  and  the  youngest  was
named  Joodar,1  and  the  middle  one  was  named  Seleem.  He  reared
them  until  they  became  men ;  but  he  loved  Joodar  more  than  his  two
brothers;  and  when  it  became  manifest  that  he  so  loved  Joodar,
jealousy  seized  them,  and  they  hated  Joodar,  and  it  was  evident  to
their  father  that  they  hated  their  brother.  Now  their  father  was  of
great  age,  and  he  feared  that,  when  he  died,  Joodar  would  suffer


THE  STORY  OP  JOODAB.  169

trouble  from  his  brothers :  so  he  summoned  several  persons  of  his
family,  and  some  of  the  Kadee's  dividers  of  property,  and  some  of  the
men  of  science,  and  said,  Bring  ye  to  me  my  wealth  and  my  stuffs.
Accordingly  they  brought  to  him  all  the  wealth  and  the  stuffs  ;  and
he  said,  0  men,  divide  this  wealth  and  these  stuffs  into  four  portions
conformably  to  the  law.  They  therefore  divided  the  property ;  and
he  gave  to  each  son  a  portion,  and  himself  took  a  portion,  saying,
This  was  my  property,  and  I  have  divided  it  among  them,  and  there
remaineth  not  to  them  aught  to  claim  of  me,  nor  aught  for  one  to
claim  of  another :  so  when  I  die,  discord  will  not  ensue  among  them  ;
for  I  have  divided  among  them  the  inheritance  during  my  life,  and
this  property  that  I  myself  have  taken  shall  be  for  my  wife,  the
mother  of  these  children,  that  she  may  have  recourse  to  it  for  her
subsistence.3

Then,  after  a  short  period,  their  father  died.  But  neither  of  the
two  envious  brothers  was  content  with  that  which  their  father  'Omar
had  done :  on  the  contrary,  they  demanded  more  of  Joodar,  and  said
to  him,  The  wealth  of  our  father  is  in  thy  possession.  He  therefore
referred  his  case  with  them  to  the  judges,  and  the  Muslims  who  were
present  at  the  time  of  the  division  came  and  testified  of  that  which
they  knew,  and  the  judge  forbade  their  injuring  one  another;  but
Joodar  lost  a  considerable  sum  of  money,  and  his  brothers  lost  in
like  manner,  by  reason  of  the  litigation  ;3  and  they  left  him  a  while.
Then  they  plotted  against  him  a  second  time,  and  he  referred  his
case  with  them  to  the  judges;  so  they  lost  a  considerable  sum  of
money  again,  on  account  of  the  judges.  And  they  ceased  not  to  seek
his  harm,  appealing  from  tyrant  to  tyrant,  they  losing  and  he  losing,
until  they  had  given  all  their  wealth  as  food  to  the  tyrants,  and  the
three  became  paupers.  The  tv/o  brothers  of  Joodar  then  came  to
their  mother,  and,  mocking  her,  took  her  money,  and  beat  her  and
turned  her  out.  She  therefore  came  to  her  son  Joodar,  and  said  to
him,  Thy  two  brothers  have  done  unto  me  thus  and  thus,  and  taken
my  money.  And  she  began  to  curse  them  ;  whereupon  Joodar  said
to  her,  O  my  mother,  do  not  curse  them ;  for  God  will  requite  each
of  them  for  his  conduct.  But,  O  my  mother,  I  have  become  poor,
and  my  two  brothers  are  poor,  and  contention  occasioneth  the  loss  of
money.  I  have  contended  with  them  much  before  the  judges,  and
it  profited  us  not  at  all :  on  the  contrary,  we  have  lost  all  that  our
father  left  us,  and  the  people  have  defamed  us  on  account  of  our
giving  testimony  [one  against  another].  Shall  I  then  on  thine
in.  z


170  THE  STORY  OF  JOODAR.

account  contend  with  them,  and  shall  we  refer  the  case  to  the  judges?
This  is  a  thing  that  must  not  be.  Only  do  thou  reside  with  me,  and
the  cake  of  bread  that  I  eat  I  will  leave  for  thee.  Pray  thou  for  me,
and  God  will  supply  me  with  the  means  of  thy  subsistence ;  and  do
thou  leave  both  of  them  to  receive  from  God  the  recompense  of  their
conduct,  and  console  thyself  with  the  saying  of  the  poet : —

If  an  ignorant  fellow  oppress  thee,  leave  him,  and  look  for  the  time  of  vengeance

on  the  oppressor ; 4
And  avoid  noxious  tyranny ;  for  if  a  mountain  oppressed  a  mountain,  the  oppressor

would  be  shattered.

— And  he  proceeded  to  sooth  the  mind  of  his  mother  until  she  con-
sented ;  and  she  remained  with  him.

He  then  procured  for  himself  a  net,  and  he  used  to  go  to  the  river
and  the  lakes,  and  to  every  place  in  which  was  water:  every  day  he
went  to  some  place ;  and  he  earned  one  day  ten,  and  one  day  twenty,
and  one  day  thirty  [nusfs5],  which  he  expended  upon  his  mother,  and
he  ate  well  and  drank  well.  But  his  two  brothers  neither  worked
nor  sold  nor  bought ;  ruin  and  destruction  and  overtaking  calamity
entered  their  abode,  and  they  had  consumed  what  they  had  taken
from  their  mother,  and  become  of  the  number  of  the  wretched
paupers,  and  naked.  So  sometimes  they  would  come  to  theii
mother,  humbling  themselves  to  her  excessively,  and  complaining  to
her  of  their  hunger ;  and,  the  mother's  heart  being  compassionate,
she  would  give  them  some  stinking  bread  ;  and  if  any  food  cooked
the  day  before  were  there,  she  would  say  to  them,  Eat  it  quickly,  and
go  before  your  brother  cometh  ;  for  it  will  not  be  agreeable  to  him,
and  it  will  harden  his  heart  against  me,  and  ye  will  disgrace  me  with
him.  Wherefore  they  would  eat  in  haste  and  go.  But  they  came  in
to  their  mother  one  day,  and  she  put  for  them  some  cooked  meat  and
some  bread,  which  they  proceeded  to  eat ;  and,  lo,  their  brother  Joodar
entered.  So  his  mother  was  abashed  and  confounded  at  the  sight  of
him,  fearing  that  he  would  be  incensed  against  her,  and  she  hung
down  her  head  towards  the  ground  in  her  abashment  at  her  son.  He,
however,  smiled  in  their  faces,  and  said,  Welcome,  O  my  brothers !
It  is  a  blessed  day.  What  hath  happened  that  ye  have  visited  me  on
this  blessed  day  ? — And  he  embraced  them,  and  loved  them,  and  said,
It  was  not  my  wish  that  ye  should  leave  me  desolate,  and  not  come
to  me,  nor  visit  me  nor  your  mother.  They  therefore  replied,  By
Allah,  O  our  brother,  we  longed  to  see  thee,  and  nothing  hindered  us


THE  STORY  OP  JOODAR.  171

but  abashment  in  consequence  of  what  hath  happened  between  us  and
thee;  but  we  have  repented  greatly.  This  was  the  doing  of  the  Devil
(may  God — whose  name  be  exalted ! — execrate  him  !) ;  and  we  have
no  blessing  except  thee  and  our  mother. — Joodar  rejoined,  I  have  no
blessing  except  you  two.  And  his  mother  said  to  him,  O  my  son,
may  God  whiten  thy  face,6  and  may  God  increase  thy  prosperity  !
Thou  art  the  superior  [in  generosity7],  O  my  son. — He  then  said,
Welcome  to  you  both  !  Reside  with  me;  for  God  is  bountiful,  and
good  things  with  me  are  plentiful. — He  became  reconciled  to  them,
and  they  passed  the  night  with  him,  and  supped  with  him,  and  on
the  following  day  they  breakfasted  with  him ;  after  which,  Joodar
took  up  the  net,  and  went  forth  relying  upon  Providence.  His  two
brothers  also  went,  and  were  absent  until  noon,  when  they  returned.;
and  their  mother  put  before  them  the  dinner;  and  in  the  evening
their  brother  came,  bringing  meat  and  vegetables.  In  this  state  they
continued  for  a  period  of  a  month ;  Joodar  catching  fish  and  selling
them,  and  expending  their  price  upon  his  mother  and  his  brothers,
and  the  latter  eating  and  frolicking.

Now  it  happened  one  day  that  Joodar  took  the  net  to  the  river,
and  cast  it,  and  drew  it,  and  it  came  up  empty ;  and  he  cast  it  a
second  time,  and  it  came  up  empty.  He  therefore  said  within  him-
self, There  are  no  fish  in  this  place.  Then  he  removed  to  another
place,  and  there  cast  the  net ;  but  again  it  came  up  empty.  And  he
removed  to  another  place,  and  ceased  not  to  change  his  place  from
morning  to  evening;  but  caught  not  a  single  minnow.8  So  he  said,
Wonderful !  Are  the  fish  exhausted  from  the  river,  or  what  is  the
cause  ? — He  then  put  the  net  upon  his  back,  and  returned  grieved
and  vexed,  suffering  anxiety  for  his*  two  brothers  and  his  mother,  and
not  knowing  wherewith  to  give  them  to  sup.  And  he  came  to  an
oven,  and  saw  the  people  crowding  to  take  the  bread,  with  money  in
their  hands,  and  the  baker  was  not  looking  towards  them.  Upon
this,  he  stopped  and  sighed;  and  the  baker  said  to  him,  Welcome  to
thee,  O  Joodar  !  Dost  thou  want  bread  ? — And  he  was  silent;  but
the  baker  said  to  him,  If  thou  have  not  with  thee  money,  take  what
will  suffice  thee,  and  thou  shalt  have  a  delay.  So  Joodar  said,  Give
me  bread  for  ten  nusfs.  The  baker  replied,  Take  these  ten  nusfs
besides,  and  to-morrow  bring  me  fish  for  the  twenty.  And  Joodar
said,  On  the  head  and  the  eye.  He  therefore  took  the  bread  and  the
ten  nusfs,  and  bought  with  these  some  meat  and  vegetables,  saying,
To-morrow  the  Lord  will  dispel  the  trouble  of  my  case.  He  went  to


his  abode,  and  his  mother  cooked  the  food,  and  he  supped  and  slept ;
and  on  the  following  day,  he  took  the  net.  His  mother  said  to  him,
Remain  and  breakfast.  But  he  replied,  Breakfast  thou  with  my  two
brothers.  And  he  repaired  to  the  river,  and  cast  the  net  in  it  a  first
time,  and  a  second,  and  a  third,  and  changed  his  place ;  and  he
ceased  not  to  do  thus  until  the  time  of  afternoon-prayers  ;  but  nothing
fell  to  his  lot ;  wherefore  he  took  up  the  net,  and  went  away  vexed.
Now  his  way  was  none  other  than  that  which  led  by  the  baker  ;  and
when  Joodar  came  to  him,  the  baker  saw  him,  and  counted  out  to
him  the  bread  and  the  money,  saying  to  him,  Come,  take  and  go.  If
there  is  nothing  to-day  there  will  be  to-morrow. — And  Joodar  desired
to  excuse  himself  to  him ;  but  the  baker  said  to  him,  Go.  No  excuse
is  necessary.  Hadst  thou  caught  any  thing,  it  had  been  with  thee  ;
and  when  I  saw  thee  empty-handed,  I  knew  that  nothing  had  betided
thee ;  and  if  to-morrow  nothing  betide  thee,  come,  take  bread,  and  be


THE  STORY  OF  JOODAll.


173


not  abashed.  Thou  shalt  have  a  delay. — Then,  on  the  third  day,  he
went  from  lake  to  lake  until  the  time  of  afternoon-prayers ;  but  saw
not  in  them  aught.  So  he  went  to  the  baker,  and  received  from  him
the  bread  and  the  money.  And  thus  he  continued  to  do  for  a  period
of  seven  days.

He  then  became  straitened  in  mind,  and  said  to  himself,  Go  to-
day to  the  Lake  of  Karoon.9  And  when  he  had  arrived  there,  he  was
about  to  cast  the  net,  and  was  not  aware  of  it  when  there  approached
him  a  Maghrabee 10  riding  upon  a  mule,  .and  wearing  a  magnificent
dress,  and  on  the  back  of  the  mule  was  a  pair  of  embroidered  saddle-
bags, and  every  thing  that  was  on  the  mule  was  embroidered.  The
Maghrabee  alighted  from  the  back  of  the  mule,  and  said,  Peace  be  on
thee,  O  Joodar,  0  son  of  'Omar!  So  Joodar  replied,  And  on  thee  be
peace,  0  my  master  the  pilgrim  !  "  And  the  Maghrabee  said  to  him,
O  Joodar,  I  have  an  affair  for  thee  to  perform ;  and  if  thou  comply
with  my  desire,  thou  wilt  obtain  abundant  good  fortune,  and  be  on
account  thereof  my  companion,  and  perform  for  me  my  affairs.
Joodar  therefore  said,  O  my  master  the  pilgrim,  tell  me  what  is  in
thy  mind,  and  I  will  obey  thee :  I  have  no  opposition  to  shew  thee.
And  the  Maghrabee  said  to  him,  Recit6  the  Fatehah.12  So  he  recited
it  with  him.  And  after  this,  the  Maghrabee  took  forth  and  gave  him
a  cord  of  silk,  and  said  to  him,  Bind  my  hands  behind  rne,  and  make
my  bond  very  tight ;  then  throw  me  into  the  lake,  and  wait  over  me
a  little ;  and  if  thou  see  me  put  forth  my  hands  from  the  water,
raising  them  high,  before  I  appear,  cast  thou  the  net  upon  me,  and
draw  me  out  quickly ;  but  if  thou  see  me  put  forth  my  feet,  know


174  THE  STORY  OP  JOODAR.

that  I  am  dead.  In  this  case,  leave  me,  and  take  the  mule  and  the
saddle-bags,  and  go  to  the  market  of  the  merchants : 13  thou  wilt  find
a  Jew,  whose  name  is  Shumey'ah ;  give  thou  to  him  the  mule,  and  he
will  give  thee  a  hundred  pieces  of  gold  :  so  take  them,  and  conceal
the  secret,  and  go  thy  way. — He  therefore  bound  his  hands  tightly
behind  him,  the  Maghrabee  saying  to  him,  Pull  tightly  the  bonds.
Then  the  latter  said,  Push  me  until  thou  shalt  have  thrown  me  into
the  lake.  Accordingly  he  pushed  him,  and  threw  him  into  it ;  where-
upon he  sank  ;  and  Joodar  stood  waiting  for  him  a  considerable  time ;
and,  lo,  the  feet  of  the  Maghrabee  came  forth.  Therefore  Joodar
knew  that  he  was  dead,  and  he  took  the  mule  and  left  him,  and  went
to  the  market  of  the  merchants,  where  he  saw  the  Jew  sitting  upon  a
chair  at  the  door  of  the  magazine.  And  when  he  saw  the  mule,  the
Jew  said,  Verily  the  man  hath  perished.  Then  he  said,  Nought
caused  him  to  perish  save  covetousness.  And  he  took  from  him  the
mule,  and  gave  him  a  hundred  pieces  of  gold,  charging  him  to  con-
ceal the  secret.  So  Joodar  took  the  pieces  of  gold,  and  went,  and
took  as  much  bread  as  he  required  of  the  baker,  saying  to  him,  Take
this  piece  of  gold.  He  therefore  took  it,  and  calculated  what  was
owing  to  him,  and  replied,  I  have  yet  to  give  thee  two  days'  bread.14
Joodar  then  went  from  the  baker  to  the  butcher,  to  whom  he  gave
another  piece  of  gold,  and  he  took  the  meat,  saying  to  the  butcher,
Retain  the  rest  of  the  piece  of  gold  on  account.  He  bought  also
some  vegetables,  and  went ;  and  he  saw  his  two  brothers  begging  of
his  mother  something  to  eat,  and  she  was  saying  to  them,  Wait  until
your  brother  shall  have  come ;  for  I  have  nothing.  So  he  went  in  to
them,  and  said  to  them,  Take,  eat.  And  they  fell  upon  the  bread
like  ghools.  Then  Joodar  gave  to  his  mother  the  rest  of  the  gold,
saying,  Take,  0  my  mother ;  and  when  my  brothers  come,  give  to
them,  that  they  may  buy  and  eat  during  my  absence.

He  passed  that  night,  and  when  he  arose  in  the  morning,  he  took
the  net,  and  went  to  the  Lake  of  Karoon,  and,  stopping  there,  he
was  about  to  cast  the  net.  And,  lo,  another  Magbrabce  approached,
riding  upon  a  mule,  and  more  bedecked  than  he  who  had  died ;  and
he  had  with  him  a  pair  of  saddle-bags,  in  which  were  two  little  boxes  :
in  each  side  of  it  was  a  little  box.  And  he  said,  Peace  be  on  thee,  O
Joodar.  So  Joodar  replied,  On  thee  be  peace,  O  my  master  the
pilgrim  !  And  the  Maghrabee  said,  Did  there  come  to  thee  yesterday
a  Maghrabee  riding  upon  a  mule  like  this  mule  ?  Upon  this,  Joodar
feared,  and  denied,  saying,  I  saw  not  any  one — fearing  that  he  would


say,  Whither  is  he  gone  ? — and  if  he  answered  him,  He  was  drowned
in  the  lake — perhaps  he  -might  say,  Thou  drownedst  him.  It  was
therefore  impossible  for  him  to  do  aught  save  to  deny.  The  Maghra-
bee  then  said  to  him,  0  poor  man,,  this  was  my  brother,  and  he  hath
gone  before  me.  Joodar  replied,  I  have  no  knowledge  of  him.  But
the  Maghrabee  rejoined,  Didst  thou  not  bind  his  hands  behind  him,
and  throw  him  into  the  lake,  and  did  he  not  say  to  thee,  If  my  hands
come  forth,  cast  upon  me  the  net,  and  draw  me  out  quickly ;  but  if
my  feet  come  forth,  I  shall  be  dead,  and  take  thou  the  mule,  and  give
it  to  the  Jew  Shumey'ah,  and  he  will  give  thee  a  hundred  pieces  of
gold  ? — and  his  feet  came  forth,  and  thou  tookest  the  mule,  and
gavest  it  to  the  Jew,  and  he  gave  thee  a  hundred  pieces  of  gold. — So
Joodar  said,  Since  thou  knowest  this,  wherefore  dost  thou  ask  me?
The  Maghrabee  answered,  It  is  my  desire  that  thou  do  with  me  as
thou  didst  with  my  brother.  And  he  took  forth  and  gave  him  a  cord
of  silk,  saying,  Bind  my  hands  behind  me,  and  throw  me  in ;  and  if


176  THE  STOKY  OF  JOODAR

the  like  of  that  which  befell  my  brother  befall  me,  take  the  mule,  and
give  it  to  the  Jew,  and  receive  from  him  a  hundred  pieces  of  gold.
He  therefore  said  to  him,  Advance.  Accordingly  he  advanced,  and
Joodar  bound  his  hands  behind  him,  and  pushed  him ;  whereupon  he
fell  into  the  lake,  and  sank ;  and  he  waited  for  him  a  while,  and  his
feet  came  up.  Therefore  Joodar  said,  He  is  gone  to  perdition  !  If  it
be  the  will  of  God,  every  day  may  Maghrabees  come  to  me,  and  I
will  bind  their  hands  behind  them,  and  they  shall  die,  and  a  hundred
pieces  of  gold  from  each  one  who  dieth  will  suffice  me. — He  then
took  the  mule,  and  went  away ;  and  when  the  Jew  saw  him,  he  said
to  him,  The  other  hath  died !  Joodar  replied,  May  thy  head  long
survive !  And  the  Jew  said  to  him,  This  is  the  recompense  of  the
covetous.  And  he  took  the  mule  from  him,  and  gave  him  a  hundred
pieces  of  gold.  So  Joodar  took  them,  and  repaired  to  his  mother,
and  gave  them  to  her ;  whereupon  she  said  to  him,  O  my  son,  whence
came  unto  thee  this  ?  He  therefore  informed  her ;  and  she  said  to
him,  Go  not  again  henceforth  to  the  Lake  of  Karoon ;  for  I  fear  for
thee  with  respect  to  the  Maghrabees.  But  he  replied,  O  my  mother,
I  throw  them  not  in  save  with  their  own  consent ;  and  how  shall  I
act?  This  is  a  trade  from  which  there  accrueth  to  us  every  day  a
hundred  pieces  of  gold,  and  I  return  quickly  :  so  by  Allah  I  will
not  desist  from  going  to  the  Lake  of  Karoon  until  all  traces  of  the
Maghrabees  cease,  and  not  one  of  them  remaineth

Then,  on  the  third  day,  he  went  and  stood  there ;  and,  lo,  there
came  a  Maghrabee  riding  upon  a  mule,  and  having  with  him  a  pair  of
saddle-bags;  but  he  was  more  bedecked  than  the  two  former  ones;
and  he  said,  Peace  be  on  thee,  O  Joodar,  O  son  of  'Omar !  So  Joodar
said  within  himself,  Whence  do  they  all  know  me  ?  Then  he  returned
his  salutation.  And  the  Maghrabee  said,  Have  any  Maghrabees  passed
by  this  place  ?  Joodar  answered  him,  Two.  The  Maghrabee  asked
him,  Whither  went  they? — I  bound  their  hands  behind  them,
answered  Joodar,  and  threw  them  into  this  lake;  so  they  were
drowned;  and  the  same  end  is  for  thee  also.  And  the  Maghrabee
laughed,  and  said,  O  poor  man,  every  living  being  hath  his  destiny.
He  then  alighted  from  the  mule,  and  said,  O  Joodar,  do  with  me  as
thou  didst  with  both  of  them.  And  he  took  forth  the  cord  of  silk.
So  Joodar  said  to  him,  Turn  round  thy  hands  that  I  may  bind  them
behind  thy  back ;  for  I  am  in  haste,  and  my  time  is  gone.  He  there-
fore turned  round  his  hands  towards  him,  and  Joodar  tied  them  be-
hind his  back,  and  pushed  him  ;  whereupon  he  fell  into  the  lake,  and


THE  STORY  OF  JOODAK.


177


Joodar  stood  waiting  for  him.  And,  lo,  the  Maghrabee  put  forth  to
him  his  hands,  saying  to  him,  Cast  the  net,  O  poor  man  !  Accord-
ingly he  cast  the  net  over  him,  and  drew  it ;  and,  behold,  he  was
grasping  in  his  hands  two  fishes,  the  colour  of  which  was  red,  like
coral ;  in  each  hand  a  fish ;  and  he  said  to  Joodar,  Open  the  two
little  boxes.  So  he  opened  them  for  him ;  and  he  put  in  each  little
box  a  fish,  and  covered  the  mouths  of  the  boxes  over  them.  Then  he
pressed  Joodar  to  his  bosom,  and  kissed  him  on  the  right  cheek  and
on  the  left,  and  said  to  him,  May  God  deliver  thee  from  every  diffi-
culty !  By  Allah,  hadst  thou  not  cast  the  net  over  me,  and  drawn
me  out,  I  had  not  ceased  to  grasp  these  two  fishes,  submerged  in  the
water,  until  I  had  died,  and  I  had  not  been  able  to  come  forth  from
the  water. — And  Joodar  said  to  him,  O  my  master  the  pilgrim,  I  con-
jure thee  by  Allah  that  thou  acquaint  me  with  the  affair  of  the  two
who  were  drowned  before,  and  with  the  truth  of  the  history  of  these
two  fishes,  and  with  the  affair  of  the  Jew.

The  Maghrabee  therefore  replied,  O  Joodar,  know  that  the  two
who  were  drowned  before  were  my  brothers.  One  of  them  was  named
'Abd-Es-Seliim,  and  the  other  was  named  'Abd-El-Ahad  ;  I  am  named
'Abd-Es-Samad,  and  the  Jew  is  our  brother;  his  name  is  'Abd-Er-
llaheem  :  he  is  not  a  Jew,  but  a  Muslim,  of  the  Malikee  persuasion.15
Our  father  taught  us  the  arts  of  solving  mysteries  and  opening  hidden
treasures,  and  enchantment ;  and  we  strove  until  the  Marids  of  the
Jinn,  and  the  'Efreets,  served  us.  We  were  four  brothers,  and  the
name  of  our  father  was  'Abd-El-Wadood ;  and  our  father  died,  leaving
to  us  an  abundance  of  things ;  whereupon  we  divided  the  treasures
and  riches  and  talismans  until  we  came  to  the  books,  which  also  we
divided.  But  there  ensued  among  us  a  dissension  respecting  a  book
entitled  The  Stories  of  the  Ancients,  the  like  of  which  existeth  not,
nor  can  any  one  give  its  price,  nor  can  its  equivalent  be  made  up  in
jewels ;  for  in  it  are  given  accounts  of  all  the  hidden  treasures,  and


IIL


2  A


178  THE  STORY  OF  JOODAR.

the  solutions  of  mysteries.  Our  father  was  in  the  habit  of  making
use  of  it,  and  we  committed  to  memory  a  little  of  its  contents,  and
each  of  us  desired  to  possess  it,  that  he  might  know  what  was  in  it.
Now  when  a  dissension  occurred  between  us,  there  was  present  with
us  our  father's  sheykh,  who  had  reared  him  and  taught  him  enchant-
ment and  divination,  and  he  was  named  the  Diviner  El-Abtan  ;16  and
he  said  to  us,  Bring  ye  the  book.  So  we  gave  him  the  book;  and  he
said,  Ye  are  the  sons  of  my  son,  and  it  is  impossible  that  I  should
wrong  any  one  of  you.  Then  let  him  who  desireth  to  take  this  book
go  and  strive  to  accomplish  the  opening  of  the  treasure  of  Esh-Sha-
mardal,17  and  bring  me  the  celestial  planisphere,  and  the  kohl-pot,
and  the  seal-ring,  and  the  sword.  For  the  seal-ring  hath  a  Marid
that  serveth  it,  whose  name  is  Er-Raad  el-Kasif  ;18  and  whoso  pos-
sesseth  this  seal-ring,  neither  King  nor  Sultan  can  prevail  against
him ;  and  if  he  desire  to  possess  the  earth,  in  all  its  length  and
breadth,  he  will  be  able  to  do  so.  And  as  to  the  sword,  if  it  be
drawn  against  an  army,  and  its  bearer  shake  it,  he  will  rout  the  army ;
and  if  he  say  to  it,  at  the  time  of  his  shaking  it,  Slay  this  army —
there  will  proceed  from  that  sword  a  lightning,  which  will  slay  the
whole  army.  And  as  to  the  celestial  planisphere,  whoso  possesseth  it,
if  he  desire  to  behold  all  the  countiies  from  the  east  to  the  west,  he
will  behold  them,  and  divert  himself  with  viewing  them,  while  he
sitteth  :  whatsoever  quarter  he  desireth  to  see,  he  will  turn  the  face  of
the  planisphere  towards  it,  and,  looking  in  the  planisphere,  he  will
see  that  quarter  and  its  inhabitants,  as  though  all  were  before  him.
Moreover,  if  he  be  incensed  against -a  city,  and  turn  the  face  of  the
planisphere  towards  the  sun's  disk,  desiring  to  burn  that  city,  it  will
be  burned.  And  as  to  the  kohl-pot,  whosoever  applieth  kohl  from  it
to  his  eyes,  he  will  see  the  treasures  of  the  earth.  But  I  have  a
condition  to  impose  upon  you ;  and  it  is  this ;  that  whosoever  is
unable  to  open  this  treasure,  he  shall  not  have  any  claim  to  the
book;  and  he  who  openeth  this  treasure,  and  bringeth  me  these  four
reposited  things,  shall  be  entitled  to  take  this  book. — And  we  con-
sented to  the  condition.

He  then  said  to  us,  0  my  sons,  know  that  the  treasure  of  Esh-
Shamardal  is  under  the  dominion  of  the  sons  of  the  Red  King,  and
your  father  informed  me  that  he  had  striven  to  open  that  treasure,
and  had  not  been  able ;  but  that  the  sons  of  the  Red  King  had  fled
from  him  to  a  lake  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  called  the  Lake  of  Karoon,
where  they  withstood  his  authority ;  and  he  pursued  them  to  Cairo ;


THE  STORY  OF  JOODAR.  179

but  could  not  prevail  against  them,  on  account  of  their  descending
into  that  lake ;  for  it  was  guarded  by  a  talisman.  He  then  returned
overcome,  and  could  not  open  the  treasure  of  Esh-Shamardal  by
reason  of  the  sons  of  the  Red  King.  So  when  your  father  was  un-
able to  prevail  against  them,  he  came  to  me,  and  complained  to  me.
I  therefore  made  for  him  an  astrological  calculation,  and  saw  that  this
treasure  could  not  be  opened  save  by  the  good  fortune  of  a  young
man  of  the  sons  of  Cairo,  named  Joodar  the  son  of  'Omar ;  for  that
he  would  be  the  means  of  the  seizure  of  the  sons  of  the  Red  King.
Also,  that  the  said  young  man  would  be  a  fisherman,  that  the  meeting
with  him  would  be  by  the  Lake  of  Karoon,  and  that  the  charm  would
not  be  dissolved  unless  Joodar  should  bind  behind  his  back  the  hands
of  the  person  whose  lot  it  was  to  accomplish  this,  and  throw  him  into
the  lake ;  whereupon  he  would  contend  with  the  sons  of  the  Red
King ;  and  whosoever  should  have  the  fortune  to  do  so  would  seize
the  sons  of  the  Red  King.  But  he  saw  that  he  who  should  not  be
fortunate  would  perish,  and  his  feet  would  appear  from  the  water ;
and  that  he  who  should  be  safe,  his  hands  would  appear;  and  it
would  be  requisite  that  Joodar  should  cast  over  him  the  net,  and  take
him  forth  from  the  lake. — Upon  this,  [two  of]  my  brothers  said,  We
will  go,  though  we  perish.  And  I  said,  I  will  go  also.  But  as  to
our  brother  who  is  in  the  garb  of  a  Jew,  he  said,  I  have  no  desire.
So  we  agreed  with  him  that  he  should  repair  to  Cairo  in  the  disguise
of  a  Jewish  merchant,  in  order  that  if  one  of  us  should  die  in  the
lake,  he  might  receive  the  mule  and  the  saddle-bags  from  Joodar,  and
give  him  a  hundred  pieces  of  gold.  And  when  the  first  came  to  thee,
the  sons  of  the  Red  King  slew  him ;  and  they  slew  my  second
brother ;  but  they  could  not  prevail  against  me  :  so  I  seized  them.

Upon  this,  Joodar  said,  Where  are  they  whom  thou  seizedst?
The  Maghrabee  replied,  Didst  thou  not  see  them  ?  I  have  impri-
soned them  in  the  two  little  boxes. — Joodar  said,  These  are  fishes.
The  Maghrabee  however  replied,  These  are  not  fishes :  verily  they  are
'Efreets  in  the  form  of  fishes.  But,  O  Joodar,  know  that  the  opening
of  the  treasure  cannot  be  accomplished  save  by  thy  good  fortune.
Wilt  thou  then  comply  with  my  desire,  and  go  with  me  to  the  city  of
Fas  and  Mikniis,19  and  open  the  treasure  ?  If  so,  I  will  give  thee
what  thou  shalt  desire.  Thou  hast  become  my  brother  by  a  covenant
before  God,  and  thou  shalt  return  to  thy  family  with  a  comforted
heart. — Joodar  said  to  him,  0  my  master  the  pilgrim,  I  have  in  my
charge  my  mother  and  my  two  brothers,  and  I  am  he  who  provideth


180  THE  STORY  OF  JOODAH.

for  them  ;  and  if  I  go  with  thee,  who  will  give  them  bread  to  eat  ?
But  the  Maghrabee  replied,  This  is  a  vain  pretext ;  and  if  it  be  on
account  of  the  money  required  for  expenses,  we  will  give  thee  a
thousand  pieces  of  gold  which  thou  shalt  give  to  thy  mother  that  she
may  expend  of  it  until  thou  shalt  return  to  thy  country  ;  and  if  thou
go  away,  thou  shalt  return  before  four  months.  And  when  Joodar
heard  the  mention  of  the  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  he  said,  Give  me,
O  pilgrim,  the  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  and  I  will  leave  them  with
my  mother,  and  will  go  with  thee.  So  the  Maghrabee  took  forth  and
gave  him  the  gold,  and  he  took  it,  and  went  to  his  mother,  and  ac-
quainted her  with  that  which  had  happened  between  him  and  the
Maghrabee,  saying  to  her,  Take  these  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  and
expend  of  them  upon  thyself  and  upon  my  two  brothers,  while  I
journey  with  the  Maghrabee  to  the  west,  and  I  shall  be  absent  four
months,  and  abundant  good  fortune  will  betide  me  t  so  pray  for  me,
O  my  mother.  She  replied,  O  my  sou,  thou  wilt  render  me  desolate,
and  I  fear  for  thee.  But  he  said,  O  my  mother,  no  harm  will  befall
him  whom  God  preserveth ;  and  the  Maghrabee  is  a  good  man.  And
he  proceeded  to  praise  to  her  his  state.  So  she  replied,  May  God
incline  his  heart  to  thee !  Go  with  him,  0  my  son.  Perhaps  he  will
give  thee  something.

He  therefore  bade  farewell  to  his  mother,  and  went,  and  when  he
came  to  the  Maghrabee  'Abd-Es-Samad,  the  latter  said  to  him,  Hast
thou  consulted  thy  mother  ?  He  answered,  Yes,  and  she  prayed  for
me.  And  the  Maghrabee  said  to  him,  Mount  behind  me.  So  he
got  upon  the  back  of  the  mule,  and  they  journeyed  from  noon  until
the  time  of  afternoon-prayers,  when  Joodar  was  hungry,  and  he  saw
not  with  the  Maghrabee  any  thing  to  be  eaten  ;  wherefore  he  said  to
him,  O  my  master  the  pilgrim,  probably  thou  hast  forgotten  to  bring
for  us  any  thing  to  eat  on  the  way.  The  Maghrabee  said,  Art  thou
hungry?  Joodar  answered,  Yes.  And  upon  this  the  Maghrabee
alighted  from  the  mule,  with  Joodar,  and  said,  Put  down  the  pair  of
saddle-bags.  So  he  put  it  down.  Then  the  Maghrabee  said  to  him,
What  thing  dost  thou  desire,  0  my  brother  ?  Joodar  answered  him,
Any  thing.  The  Maghrabee  however  replied,  I  conjure  thee  by  Allah
that  thou  tell  me  what  thing  thou  desirest.  Joodar  said,  Bread  and
cheese.  But  the  Maghrabee  replied,  O  poor  man,  bread  and  cheese
are  not  suitable  to  thy  condition  :  therefore  demand  something  good.
— In  my  estimation,  said  Joodar,  at  this  time  every  thing  is  good,
And  the  Maghrabee  asked  him,  Dost  thou  like  browned  chickens?20


He  answered,  Yes.  And  the  Maghrabee  said,  Dost  thou  like  rice
with  honey  ?  He  answered,  Yes.  And  the  Maghrabee  said,  Dost
thou  like  such  a  dish,  and  such  a  dish  ? — until  he  had  named  to  him
four  and  twenty  different  dishes  of  food.  Then  Joodar  said  within
himself,  Is  he  mad.  ?  Whence  will  he  bring  me  the  dishes  of  food
that  he  hath  named,  when  he  hath  neither  kitchen  nor  cook  ?  But
say  to  him,  It  is  enough. — So  he  said  to  him,  It  is  enough.  Dost
thou  make  me  desire  the  dishes  when  I  shall  see  nothing  ? — The
Maghrabee  however  replied,  Welcome  to  thee,  O  Joodar !  And  he
put  his  hand  into  the  saddle-bag,  and  took  forth  a  dish  of  gold  con-
taining two  browned,  hot  chickens.  Then  he  put  his  hand  a  second
time,  and  took  forth  a  dish  of  gold  containing  keb;ib.21  And  he
ceased  not  to  take  forth  from  the  pair  of  saddle  bags  until  he  had
taken  forth  the  four  and  twenty  dishes  that  he  had  mentioned,  entire
and  complete  ;  whereupon  Joodar  was  confounded.  He  then  said  to


182  THE  STORY  OF  JOODAR.

him,  Eat,  O  poor  man.  And  Joodar  said,  O  my  master,  dost  thou
]>ut  in  this  pair  of  saddle-bags  a  kitchen  and  people  to  cook  ?  So
the  Maghrabee  laughed,  and  replied,  This  is  enchanted,  having  a
servant :  were  we  to  demand  every  hour  a  thousand  dishes,  the
servant  would  bring  them  and  make  them  ready  instantly.  Joodar
therefore  said,  An  excellent  thing  is  this  pair  of  saddle-bags  !  Then
they  ate  until  they  were  satisfied,  and  what  remained  they  threw  upon
the  ground ;  after  which  the  Maghrabee  replaced  the  dishes,  empty,
in  the  saddle-bags,  and,  having  put  in  his  hand,  took  forth  a  ewer;
and  they  drank,  and  performed  the  ablution,  recited  the  afternoon-
prayers,  and  replaced  the  ewer  in  the  pair  of  saddle-bags.  The
Maghrabee  then  put  into  them  the  two  little  boxes,  placed  the
saddle-bags  on  the  mule,  and  mounted,  saying,  Mount,  that  we  may
journey  on.  And  he  said,  0  Joodar,  knowest  thou  what  space  we
have  traversed  from  Cairo  unto  this  place  ?  Joodar  answered  him,
By  Allah,  I  know  not.  And  the  Maghrabee  said  to  him,  We  have
traversed  a  space  of  a  whole  month's  journey. — And  how  so  ?  asked
Joodar.  The  Maghrabee  answered  him.  0  Joodar,  know  that  the
mule  which  is  beneath  us  is  one  of  the  Marids  of  the  Jinn,  that  will
travel  in  a  day  a  year's  journey ;  but  for  thy  sake  it  proceeded
leisurely. — They  then  journeyed  on  until  sunset ;  and  when  they
halted  in  the  evening,  the  Maghrabee  took  forth  from  the  saddle-bags
the  supper ;  and  in  the  morning  he  took  forth  the  breakfast.  Thus
they  continued  to  do  for  a  period  of  four  days,  journeying  until  mid-
night, and  alighting  and  sleeping,  and  proceeding  in  the  morning ;
and  all  that  Joodar  desired  he  demanded  of  the  Maghrabee,  who
produced  it  to  him  from  the  pair  of  saddle-bags.  And  on  the  fifth
day,  they  arrived  at  Fas  and  Miknas.

They  entered  the  city ;  and  when  they  entered,  every  one  who  met
the  Maghrabee  saluted  him  and  kissed  his  hand.  Thus  he  proceeded
until  he  came  to  a  door ;  whereupon  he  knocked  at  it.  and,  lo,  the
door  opened,  and  there  appeared  from  it  a  damsel  like  the  moon,  to
whom  he  said,  0  Rahmeh,22  0  my  daughter,  open  for  us  the  pavilion.
She  replied,  On  the  head  and  the  eye,  O  my  father.  And  she  entered,
wriggling  her  sides,23  so  that  Joodar's  reason  fled,  and  he  said,  This  is
none  other  than  the  daughter  of  a  King  !  Then  the  damsel  opened
the  pavilion,  and  the  Maghrabee  took  the  pair  of  saddle-bags  from
the  back  of  the  mule,  and  said  to  it,  Depart :  God  bless  thee  !  And,
behold,  the  ground  clove  asunder,  and  the  mule  descended,  and  the
ground  became  again  as  it  was.  So  Joodar  said,  O  Excellent  Pro-


••


tector!  Praise  be  to  God,  who  delivered  us  upon  its  back! — The
Maghrabee  however  said,  Wonder  not,  0  Joodar ;  for  I  told  thee  that
the  mule  is  an  'Efreet :  but  come  up  with  us  into  the  pavilion.  And
when  they  entered  that  pavilion,  Joodar  was  amazed  at  the  abundance
of  the  rich  furniture,  and  at  what  he  beheld  in  it  of  rarities,  and
articles  of  jewels  and  minerals  ;  and  after  they  had  seated  themselves,
the  Maghrabee  ordered  the  damsel,  saying  to  her,  O  Rahmeh,  bring
such  a  wrapper.  She  therefore  arose  and  brought  a  wrapper,  which
she  put  down  before  her  father;  and  he  opened  it  and  took  forth
from  it  a  dress  worth  a  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  and  said,  Put  it  on,
O  Joodar.  Welcome  to  thee ! — So  he  put  on  the  dress,  and  became
like  one  of  the  Kings  of  the  West ;  after  which  the  Maghrabee  placed
the  saddle-bags  before  him,  and,  having  put  his  hand  into  them,  took
forth  from  them  dishes  containing  varieties  of  viands  until  they  com-
posed a  table  of  forty  different  dishes,  when  he  said,  O  my  lord,


184  THE  STORY  OF  JOODAIJ.

advance  and  eat,  and  be  not  displeased  with  us.  We  know  not  what
viands  thou  desirest :  therefore  tell  us  what  thou  wouldst  have,  and
we  will  place  it  before  thee  without  delay. — Joodar  replied,  By  Allah,
O  my  master  the  pilgrim,  I  love  all  viands,  and  hate  not  aught :  then
ask  me  not  respecting  any  thing ;  but  bring  all  that  occur  to  thy
mind,  and  I  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  eat. — Then  he  resided  with
him  twenty  days.  Every  day  the  Maghrabee  clad  him  with  a  dress,
and  the  food  was  from  the  pair  of  saddle-bags ;  the  Maghrabee  not
buying  any  thing,  either  of  meat  or  bread,  nor  cooking ;  but  taking
forth  all  that  he  required  from  the  saddle-bags,  even  the  different
kinds  of  fruit.

After  this,  the  Maghrabee,  on  the  one  and  twentieth  day,  said,
0  Joodar,  arise  with  us ;  for  this  is  the  day  decreed  for  the  opening  of
the  treasure  of  Esh-Shamardal.  So  he  arose  with  him,  and  they
walked  to  the  extremity  of  the  city.  Then  they  went  forth  from  it,
and  Joodar  mounted  a  mule,  and  the  Maghrabee  mounted  a  mule,
and  they  ceased  not  to  journey  on  until  noon,  when  they  came  to  a
river  of  running  water.  There  'Abd-Es-Samad  alighted,  and  he  said,
Alight,  0  Joodar.  And  he  alighted;  and  'Abd-Es-Samad  said,
Quick  ! — making  a  sign  with  his  hand  to  the  two  slaves  [who  accom-
panied him]  ;  whereupon  they  took  the  two  mules,  and  each  slave
departed  by  one  way,  and  they  were  absent  a  little  while  ;  after  which,
one  of  them  approached  with  a  tent,  which  he  pitched  ;  and  the  other
approached  with  a  mattress,  which  he  spread  in  the  tent,  placing
around  it  cushions  and  pillows.  Then  one  of  them  went  and  brought
the  two  little  boxes  in  which  were  the  two  fishes ;  and  the  other
brought  the  pair  of  saddle-bags.  Upon  this,  the  Maghrabee  arose  and
said,  Come,  O  Joodar.  So  he  came,  and  seated  himself  by  his  side;
and  the  Maghrabee  took  forth  from  the  saddle-bags  the  dishes  of
viands,  and  they  dined ;  after  which,  the  Maghrabee  took  the  two  little
boxes,  and  recited  a  charm  over  them,  whereupon  those  who  were  within
them  began  to  say,  At  thy  service,  O  diviner  of  the  world !  Have
mercy  upon  us ! — They  prayed  for  help,  while  he  recited  his  charm
over  them,  until  the  two  little  boxes  burst,  and  became  broken  in
pieces,  the  fragments  flying  about,  and  there  appeared  from  them  two
beings  with  their  hands  bound  behind  them,  saying,  Quarter!
O  diviner  of  the  world  1  What  dost  thou  desire  to  do  unto  us  ? — He
answered,  My  ciesire  is,  either  to  burn  you,  or  that  ye  promise  me  to
open  the  treasure  of  Esh-Shamardal.  And  they  replied,  We  promise
thee,  and  we  will  open  for  thee  the  treasure  ;  but  on  the  condition  that


THE  STORY  OF  JOODAH  185

thou  bring  here  Joodar  the  fisherman ;  for  the  treasure  cannot  be
opened  but  by  his  good  fortune,  and  no  one  can  enter  it  except  Joodar
the  son  of  'Omar.  So  he  said  to  them,  Him  whom  ye  mention  I  have
brought,  and  he  is  here,  hearing  you  and  beholding  you.  They
therefore  promised  him  to  open  the  treasure,  and  he  released  them.
Then  he  took  forth  a  tube,  and  some  tablets  of  red  carnelion,  which
he  placed  upon  the  tube ;  and  he  took  a  perfuming-vessel,  put  in  it
some  charcoal,  and  blew  it  with  a  single  puff,  wherewith  he  kindled
it ;  and,  having  made  ready  the  incense,  he  said,  O  Joodar,  I  will
recite  the  charm,  and  throw  on  the  incense,  and  when  I  have  begun
the  charm  I  cannot  speak ;  for  the  charm  would  be  frustrated ;  and  I
desire  to  inform  thee  how  thou  shalt  act  to  attain  thy  wish.  So
Joodar  replied,  Inform  tne.

The  Maghrabee  therefore  said,  Know  that  when  I  have  recited  the
charm,  arid  thrown  on  the  incense,  the  water  will  dry  up  from  the  bed
of  the  river,  and  there  will  appear  to  thee  a  door  of  gold,  of  the  size
of  the  city-gate,  with  two  rings  of  metal.  Descend  to  the  door,  and
knock  it  lightly,  and  wait  a  while :  then  knock  a  second  time,  with
more  force  than  the  first  time :  after  that,  give  three  knocks  without
intermission,  one  after  another.  Thereupon  thou  wilt  hear  a  speaker
say,  Who  knocketh  at  the  door  of  the  treasures  and  knoweth  not  how
to  solve  the  mysteries  ?  And  do  thou  answer,  I  am  Joodar  the
fisherman,  the  son  of  'Omar.  Then  he  will  open  to  thee  the  door ;
and  there  will  come  forth  to  thee  a  person  with  a  sword  in  his  hand,
who  will  say  to  thee,  If  thou  be  that  man,  stretch  forth  thy  neck  that
I  may  smite  off  thy  head.  And  stretch  thou  forth  to  him  thy  neck,
and  fear  not ;  for  when  he  raiseth  his  hand  with  the  sword  and  smiteth
thee,  he  will  fall  clown  before  thee,  and  after  a  while  thou  wilt  see  him
a  body  without  a  soul,  and  thou  wilt  not  suffer  pain  from  the  blow,
nor  will  aught  befall  thee  :  but  if  thou  oppose  him,  he  will  slay  thee. —
And  after  that,  when  thou  hast  annulled  his  talisman  by  obedience,
enter  on  until  thou  seest  another  door,  which  knock.  There  will
come  forth  to  thee  a  horseman  riding  upon  a  horse,  and  having  upon
his  shoulder  a  spear,  and  he  will  say,  What  hath  brought  thee  into
this  place,  which  no  one  entereth,  either  of  mankind  or  of  the  Jinn  ?
And  he  will  shake  at  thee  the  spear :  but  open  to  him  thy  bosom,
and  he  will  smite  thee,  and  will  fall  down  instantly,  and  thou  wilt  see
him  a  body  without  a  soul.  If  thou  oppose  him,  however,  he  will
slay  thee. — Then  enter  the  third  door.  There  will  come  forth  to  thee
a  son  of  Adam  having  in  his  hand  a  bow  and  arrows,  and  he  will  shoot
in.  2  B


ISC  THE  STORY  OF  JOODAH.

at  thee  with  the  bow :  but  open  thou  to  him  thy  bosom,  and  he  will
smite  thee,  and  will  fall  down  before  thee  a  body  without  a  soul :  but
if  thou  oppose  him,  he  will  slay  thee. — Next  enter  the  fourth  door.
There  will  come  forth  to  thee  a  huge  lion,  who  will  rush  upon  thee,
opening  his  mouth,  and  shewing  thee  that  he  desireth  to  devour  thee  :
yet  fear  thou  not,  nor  flee  from  him ;  but  when  he  cometh  up  to  thee,
give  him  thy  hand,  and  when  he  biteth  at  thy  hand  he  will  fall  down
instantly,  and  nought  will  befall  thee. — After  this,  enter  the  fifth
door.  There  will  come  forth  to  thee  a  black  slave,  who  will  say  to
thee,  Who  art  thou  ?  Answer  him,  I  am  Joodar.  And  he  will  say
to  thee,  If  thou  be  that  man,  enter  the  sixth  door. — Advance  there-
fore to  that  door,  and  say,  O  'Eesa,  tell  Moosa  to  open  the  door.
Thereupon  the  door  will  be  opened,  and  do  thou  enter.  Thou  wilt
find  two  serpents ;  one  of  them  on  the  left,  and  the  other  on  the  right.
Each  of  them  will  open  its  mouth,  and  they  will  dart  upon  thee
instantly  :  but  stretch  thou  forth  to  them  thy  two  hands,  and  each  of
them  will  bite  at  a  hand :  if  thou  oppose,  however,  they  will  kill
thee. — Then  enter  on  to  the  seventh  door,  and  knock  it.  [The  sem-
blance of]  thy  mother  will  come  forth  to  thee,  and  will  say  to  thee,
Welcome,  0  my  son  !  Advance,  that  I  may  salute  thee. — But  do
thou  reply,  Keep  far  from  me,  and  pull  off  thine  apparel.  She  will
thereupon  say  to  thee,  O  my  son,  I  am  thy  mother,  and  I  have  a  claim
upon  thy  duty  for  suckling  and  rearing  thee.  How  then  wouldst  thou
strip  me  of  my  clothing  ? — Do  thou,  however,  say  to  her,  If  thou  pull
not  off  thy  clothing,  I  will  slay  thee.  And  look  on  thy  right  side  :
thou  wilt  see  a  sword  suspended  on  the  wall :  so  take  it,  and  draw  it
upon  her,  and  say  to  her,  Pull  off.  Then  she  will  endeavour  to  beguile
thee,  and  will  humble  herself  unto  thee  :  yet  pity  her  not ;  but  every
time  that  she  pulleth  off  to  thee  any  thing,  say  to  her,  Pull  off  the
rest.  And  cease  not  to  threaten  her  with  slaughter  until  she  pulleth
off  to  thee  all  that  is  upon  her,  and  falleth  down. — Upon  this,  the  mys-
terious contrivances  will  have  become  dissolved,  and  the  talismans
annulled,  and  thou  wilt  be  secure.  So  enter:  thou  wilt  find  the  gold
in  heaps  within  the  treasury :  pay  no  regard,  however,  to  aught  of  it :
but  thou  wilt  see  a  private  chamber  at  the  upper  end  of  the  treasury,
with  a  curtain  over  its  entrance.  Remove  the  curtain,  and  thou  wilt
see  the  diviner  Esh-Shamardal  lying  upon  a  couch  of  gold,  having  at
his  head  something  round,  shining  like  the  moon ;  and  it  is  the  celes-
tial planisphere.  He  is  also  equipped  with  the  sword,  hung  upon  his
side;  and  upon  his  finger  is  a  seal-ring;  and  upon  his  neck  is  a  chain,


to  which  is  attached  a  kohl-pot.  Bring  therefore  the  four  reposited
things ;  and  beware  of  forgetting  aught  of  the  things  with  which  I
have  acquainted  thee ;  and  act  not  contrary  to  the  directions  ;  for  thou
wouldst  repent,  and  fear  would  be  entertained  for  thee. — Then  he
repeated  to  him  the  charge,  a  second  and  a  third  and  a  fourth  time,
until  he  said,  I  have  it  in  my  memory :  but  who  is  able  to  face  these
talismans  that  thou  hast  mentioned,  and  to  endure  these  great  horrors  ?
The  Maghrabee  replied,  O  Joodar,  fear  not ;  for  they  are  bodies  with-
out souls.  And  he  proceeded  to  tranquillize  him.  So  Joodar  said,  I
rely  upon  God.

Then  the  Maghrabee  'Abd-Es-Samad  threw  on  the  incense,  and
continued  a  while  reciting  the  charm ;  and,  lo,  the  water  had  gone,
and  the  bottom  of  the  river  appeared,  and  the  door  of  the  treasure.
Joodar  therefore  descended  to  the  door,  and  knocked  it ;  and  he  heard


188  THE  STORY  OF  JOODAR.

a  speaker  say,  Who  knocketh  at  the  doors  of  the  treasures  and  know-
eth  not  how  to  solve  the  mysteries  ?  So  he  answered,  I  am  Joodar
the  son  of  'Omar.  And  upon  this,  the  door  opened,  and  the  person
came  forth  to  him,  and  drew  the  sword,  saying  to  him,  Stretch  forth
thy  neck.  Accordingly,  he  stretched  forth  his  neck,  and  the  person
smote  him,  and  fell  down.  In  like  manner  did  Joodor  at  the  second
door,  and  so  on  until  he  had  annulled  the  talismans  of  [six  of]  the
seven  doors.  Then  [the  semblance  of]  his  mother  came  forth  to  him,
saying  to  him,  Salutations  to  thee,  0  my  son !  And  he  said  to  her
as  the  Maghrabee  had  directed  him  ;  but  after  she  had  long  remon-
strated with  him,  and  done  nearly  all  that  he  had  commanded  her,  she
said  to  him,  O  my  son,  is  thy  heart  stone  ?  Is  not  this  unlawful  ? —
And  he  replied,  Thou  hast  spoken  truth.  So  when  he  had  uttered
these  words,  she  cried  out  and  said,  He  hath  erred:  therefore  beat  ye
him  !  And  there  fell  upon  him  blows  like  the  drops  of  rain :  the
servants  of  the  treasure  assembled  around  him,  and  they  inflicted
upon  him  a  beating  that  he  forgot  not  during  his  life ;  after  which
they  pushed  him,  and  cast  him  forth  outside  the  door  of  the  treasure,
and  the  doors  of  the  treasure  became  closed  as  they  were  before.  So
when  they  cast  him  outside  the  door,  the  Maghrabee  took  him  up  in-
stantly, and  the  waters  flowed  as  before.  Then  'Abd-Es-Samad  the
Maghrabee  recited  over  Joodar  a  charm,  until  he  recovered  from  his
intoxication,  when  he  said  to  him,  What  hast  thou  done,  0  poor  man?
Joodar  therefore  told  him  what  had  happened ;  whereupon  the
Maghrabee  replied,  Did  I  not  say  to  thee,  Act  not  contrary  to  the
directions  ?  Thou  hast  done  ill  to  me  and  to  thyself.  But  now
thou  'must  remain  with  me  till  the  next  year,  to  the  like  of  this


THE  STORY  OF  JOODAK.  189

day. — And  he  called  out  immediately  to  the  two  slaves,  who  forth-
with struck  the  tent  and  carried  it  away,  and,  after  they  had  been  absent
a  little  while,  returned  with  the  two  mules ;  and  the  Maghrabee  and
Joodar  each  mounted  a  inule,  and  they  returned  to  the  city  of  Fas.

Joodar  remained  with  the  Maghrabee,  eating  well  and  drinking
well,  and  every  day  the  latter  clad  him  in  a  rich  dress,  until  the
year  had  ended,  and  that  day  arrived ;  when  the  Maghrabee  said  to
him,  This  is  the  appointed  day  :  so  repair  with  us.  Joodar  replied,
Well.  The  Magbrabee  therefore  took  him  outside  the  city,  and
they  saw  the  two  slaves  with  the  two  mules,  and  rode  until  they
arrived  at  the  river ;  whereupon  the  two  slaves  pitched  the  tent,
and  spread  the  furniture  in  it,  and  the  Maghrabee  took  forth  the
table  of  viands,  and  they  dined.  After  this,  the  Maghrabee  took
forth  the  tube  and  the  tablets,  as  on  the  first  occasion,  kindled  the
tire,  made  ready  his  incense,  and  said,  O  Joodar,  I  desire  to  charge
thee.  He  replied,  O  my  master  the  pilgrim,  if  I  have  forgotten  the
beating,  I  may  have  forgotten  the  charge.  So  the  Maghrabee  said
to  him,  Dost  thou  retain  the  charge  in  thy  memory?  He  answered,
Yes.  And  the  Maghrabee  said,  Keep  thy  self-possession,  and  ima-
gine not  that  the  woman  is  thy  mother ;  for  she  is  only  a  talisman
in  the  form  of  thy  mother,  and  her  desire  is  to  make  thee  err ;  and
if  the  first  time  thou  earnest  forth  alive,  this  time,  if  thou  err,  they
will  cast  thee  forth  slain.  He  replied,  If  I  err,  I  shall  deserve  their
burning  me.  Then  the  Maghrabee  put  the  incense,  and  recited  the
charm,  and  the  river  dried  up.  So  Joodar  advanced  to  the  door  and
knocked  it;  whereupon  it  opened,  and  he  annulled  all  the  talismans
until  he  came  to  [the  semblance  of]  his  mother,  who  said  to  him,
Welcome,  0  my  son  !  But  he  replied,  How  should  I  be  thy  son,
0  accursed?  Pull  off! — And  she  endeavoured  to  beguile  him;  but
he  insisted ;  and  when  she  had  done  as  he  commanded  her,  she
became  a  body  without  a  soul.  He  therefore  entered,  and  saw  the
gold  in  heaps,  but  paid  no  regard  to  aught  of  it.  Then  he  came
to  the  private  chamber,  and  beheld  the  diviner  Esh-Shamardal  lying,
with  the  sword  on  his  side,  and  the  seal-ring  upon  his  finger,  and  the
kohl  pot  upon  his  bosom ;  and  he  saw  the  celestial  planisphere  over
his  head.  So  he  advanced,  and  loosed  the  sword,  and  took  the  seal-
ring  and  the  celestial  planisphere  and  the  kohl-pot,  and  went  forth ;
and,  lo,  a  set  of  musical  instruments  sounded  in  honour  of  him,  and
the  servants  [of  the  treasure]  began  to  call  out,  Mayest  thou  enjoy
that  which  thou  hast  obtained,  0  Joodar  !  The  instruments  ceased


190  THE  STORY  OF  JOODAR.

not  to  sound  until  he  went  forth  from  the  treasure,  and  came  to  the
Maghrabee,  who  thereupon  ceased  from  the  recitation  of  the  charm,
and  the  fumigation,  and,  rising,  pressed  him  to  his  bosom,  and
saluted  him  ;  and  Joodar  gave  him  the  four  reposited  articles.  So
the  Maghrabee  took  them,  and  called  out  to  the  two  slaves,  who  forth-
with took  the  tent,  and  restored  it  to  its  place ;  after  which  they
returned  with  the  two  mules,  and  the  Maghrabee  and  Joodar  mounted
them,  and  entered  the  city  of  Fas.  The  Maghrabee  then  brought  the
pair  of  saddle-bags,  and  proceeded  to  take  forth  from  it  the  dishes
containing  the  various  viands  until  a  complete  table  was  before
him,  when  he  said,  O  my  brother,  0  Joodar,  eat.  He  therefore  ate
until  he  was  satisfied,  and  the  Maghrabee  emptied  the  remains  of  the
viands  into  other  dishes,  and  put  back  the  empty  dishes  into  the
saddle-bags.

Then  the  Maghrabee  'Abd-Es-Samad  said,  O  Joodar,  thou  quit-
tedst  thy  land  and  thy  country  on  our  account,  and  hast  accomplished
our  affair;  wherefore  tbou  hast  a  claim  upon  us  for  some  object  of
desire  ;  so  demand  of  us  what  thou  wishest ;  for  God  (whose  name  be
exalted !)  giveth  thee,  and  we  are  [merely]  the  means.  Require  then
what  thou  wilt,  and  be  not  abashed,  since  thou  deservest. — He  there-
fore replied,  0  my  master,  I  desire  of  God,  and  then  of  thee,  that
thou  give  me  this  pair  of  saddle-bags.  And  the  Maghrabee  said
[to  his  slave],  Bring  the  pair  of  saddle-bags.  Accordingly  he  brought
it ;  and  he  said  to  Joodar,  Take  it ;  for  it  is  thy  due ;  and  hadst  thou
desired  something  else,  we  had  given  it  to  thee.  But,  O  poor  man,
this  will  not  profit  thee  save  in  food,  and  thou  hast  wearied  thyself
with  us,  and  we  promised  thee  that  we  would  restore  thee  to  thy
country  with  a  comforted  heart;  wherefore  thou  shalt  eat  from  this
pair  of  saddle-bags,  and  we  will  give  thee  another  pair  of  saddle-bags,
full  of  gold  and  jewels,  and  have  thee  conveyed  to  thy  country ;  so
thou  shalt  become  a  merchant,  and  clothe  thyself  and  thy  family,  and
not  stand  in  need  of  money  for  thy  expenses.  Eat  thou  and  thy
family  from  this  pair  of  saddle-bags ;  and  the  mode  of  acting  with
it  is  this :  that  thou  put  forth  thy  hand  into  it,  and  say,  By  the  great
names  that  have  influence  over  thee,  0  servant  of  this  pair  of  saddle-
bags, bring  me  such  a  dish  !  Thereupon  he  will  bring  thee  what  thou
demandest,  even  if  thou  demand  every  day  a  thousand  different  dishes
of  food. — Then  he  caused  a  slave  to  come  with  a  mule,  and  filled  for
Joodar  a  pair  of  saddle-bags,  one  half  with  gold,  and  the  other  half
with  jewels  and  minerals,  and  said  to  him,  Mount  this  mule,  and  the


slave  will  walk  before  thee ;  for  he  will  acquaint  thee  with  the  way
until  he  conveyeth  thee  to  the  door  of  thy  house ;  and  when  thou  hast
arrived,  take  the  two  pairs  of  saddle-bags,  and  give  him  the  mule,  and
he  will  bring  it  back.  But  let  not  any  one  know  thy  secret.  And
now  we  commit  thee  unto  God. — So  Joodar  replied,  May  God  increase
thy  prosperity !  He  put  the  two  pairs  of  saddle-bags  upon  the  back
of  the  mule,  and  mounted ;  and  the  slave  walked  before  him.  The
mule  followed  the  slave  that  day,  and  all  the  following  night ;  and  on
the  second  day,  in  the  morning,  he  entered  the  Bab  en-Nasr,24  and
beheld  his  mother  sitting  and  saying,  Something  for  the  sake  of  God !
So  his  reason  fled,  and,  having  alighted  from  the  back  of  the  mule,
he  threw  himself  upon  her  ;  and  when  she  saw  him,  she  wept.  Then
he  mounted  her  upon  the  mule,  and  walked  by  her  stirrup  until  he
arrived  at  the  house,  when  he  set  down  his  mother,  took  the  two
pairs  of  saddle-bags,  and  left  the  mule  to  the  slave,  who  took  it  and
departed  to  his  master :  for  the  slave  was  a  devil  and  the  mule  was
a  devil.


192  THE  STORY  OF  JQODAR

But  as  to  Joodar,  the  fact  of  his  mother's  begging  was  grievous  to
him ;  and  when  he  entered  the  house,  he  said  to  her,  0  my  mother,
are  my  two  brothers  well  ?  She  answered,  Well.  And  he  said,  Where-
fore dost  thou  beg  in  the  way  ?  She  answered,  0  my  son,  in  conse-
quence of  my  hunger.  He  replied,  I  gave  thee,  before  I  departed,  a
hundred  pieces  of  gold  the  first  day,  and  a  hundred  pieces  of  gold  the
second  day,  and  I  gave  thee  a  thousand  pieces  of  gold  on  the  day  that
I  departed. — 0  my  son,  she  said,  they  have  cheated  me,  and  taken
them  from  me,  saying,  We  desire  to  purchase  with  them  merchan-
dise. And  they  took  them,  and  turned  me  out :  so  I  betook  myself
to  begging  in  the  way,  by  reason  of  the  violence  of  my  hunger. — He
then  said,  O  my  mother,  no  harm  shall  befall  thee  now  that  I  have
come  :  therefore  suffer  no  anxiety.  This  is  a  pair  of  saddle-bags  full
of  gold  and  jewels,  and  good  things  are  abundant. — And  she  replied,
O  my  son,  thou  art  fortunate !  May  God  be  well  pleased  with  thee,
and  increase  his  favours  to  thee!  Arise,  O  my  son;  bring  for  us
some  bread ;  for  I  have  passed  the  night  in  violent  hunger,  without
supper. — Upon  this,  he  laughed,  and  said  to  her,  Welcome  to  thee,
O  my  mother !  Demand  then  whatever  thou  desirest  to  eat,  and  I
will  present  it  to  thee  immediately.  I  need  not  to  purchase  from
the  market,  nor  need  I  any  one  to  cook. — So  she  said,  0  my  son,  I
see  not  with  thee  any  thing.  He  replied,  I  have  with  me,  in  the
pair  of  saddle-bags,  of  every  kind  of  viands.  And  she  said,  0  my
son,  whatever  is  ready  will  stay  hunger. — Thou  hast  spoken  truth,
he  replied ;  for  when  plenty  is  wanting,  man  is  content  with  the
smallest  thing ;  but  when  plenty  is  at  hand,  man  desireth  to  eat  of
what  is  good ;  and  I  have  plenty ;  therefore  demand  what  thou
desirest.  And  she  said  to  him,  O  my  son,  some  hot  bread,  and  a
piece  of  cheese.  But  he  replied,  0  my  mother,  this  is  not  suitable
to  thy  condition.  So  she  said  to  him,  Thou  knowest  my  condition ;
wherefore,  what  is  suitable  to  my  condition,  thereof  give  me  to  eat.
And  he  said,  O  my  mother,  suitable  to  thy  condition  are  browned
meat,  and  browned  chickens,  and  boiled  rice  with  butter  and  salt  and
pepper;  and  suitable  to  thy  condition  are  sausages,  and  stuffed  gourds,
and  stuffed  lamb,  and  stuffed  ribs  of  lamb,  and  kunafeh  with  broken
almonds  and  hazel-nuts,  and  honey  and  sugar,  and  kattu'f,  and
baklaweh.25  His  mother  therefore  thought  that  he  was  laughing
at  her,  and  making  jest  of  her:  so  she  said  to  him,  Yooh  !  Yooh  I26
What  hath  happened  unto  thee  ?  Dost  thou  dream,  or  hast  thou
become  mad  ? — He  asked  her,  Whence  learnedst  thou  that  I  had


THE  STORY  OF  JOODAR.  193

become  mad  ?  She  answered  him,  Because  thou  mentionest  to  me
all  kinds  of  excellent  dishes  ;  and  who  can  afford  their  price,  or  who
krioweth  how  to  cook  them  ?  And  he  replied,  By  my  life,  I  must  give
thee  to  eat  of  all  that  I  have  mentioned  to  thee,  immediately.  She
said,  I  see  not  aught.  And  he  said  to  her,  Bring  me  the  pair  of  saddle-
bags. She  therefore  brought  him  the  pair  of  saddle-bags,  and,  feeling
it/found  it  to  be  empty  ;  and  she  put  it  before  him.  And  he  proceeded
to  stretch  forth  his  hand  and  to  take  out  filled  dishes  until  he  had
produced  to  her  all  that  he  had  mentioned.  So  his  mother  said  to
him,  O  my  son,  verily  the  pair  of  saddle-bags  is  small,  and  it  was
empty,  with  nothing  in  it ;  yet  thou  hast  taken  forth  from  it  all  these
things :  then  where  were  these  dishes  ?  And  he  answered,  0  my
mother,  know  that  the  Maghrabee  gave  me  this  pair  of  saddle-bags,
and  it  is  enchanted,  and  hath  a  servant :  if  a  man  desire  any  thing,
and  recite  over  it  the  names,  and  say,  O  servant  of  this  pair  of  saddle-
bags, bring  me  such  a  dish  ! — he  will  bring  it.  Upon  this,  his  mother
said  to  him,  Shall  I  stretch  forth  my  hand  and  demand  of  him  ?  He
answered,  Stretch  forth  thy  hand.  And  she  did  so,  saying,  By  the
names  that  have  influence  over  thee,  0  servant  of  this  pair  of  saddle-
bags, bring  me  stuffed  ribs  of  lamb !  And  she  saw  that  the  dish  had
come  into  the  bag :  so  she  put  forth  her  hand  and  took  it,  and  found
in  it  delicate  stuffed  ribs.  Then  she  demanded  the  bread,  and  de-
manded every  thing  that  she  desired,  of  various  kinds  of  viands.  And
he  said  to  her,  0  my  mother,  after  thou  shalt  have  finished  eating,
empty  the  rest  of  the  viands  into  other  dishes  than  these,  and  put
back  the  empty  dishes  into  the  saddle-bags;  for  the  charm  is  on  this
condition :  and  take  care  of  the  pair  of  saddle-bags.  She  therefore
removed  the  pair  of  saddle-bags,  and  took  care  of  it.  And  he  said
to  her,  O  my  mother,  conceal  the  secret,  and  keep  it ;  and  whenever
thou  wantest  any  thing,  take  it  forth  from  the  saddle-bags,  and  give
alms,  and  feed  my  two  brothers,  whether  in  my  presence  or  in  my
absence.

After  this,  he  began  to  eat  with  her,  and,  lo,  his  two  brothers
came  in  to  him.  The  news  had  been  given  to  them  by  a  man  of
the  sons  of  his  quarter,  who  said  to  them,  Your  brother  hath  come,
mounted  on  a  mule,  with  a  slave  before  him,  and  wearing  a  dress  of
which  the  like  existeth  not.  So  they  said,  one  to  the  other,  Would
that  we  had  not  distressed  our  mother !  She  will  doubtless  acquaint
him  with  that  which  we  have  done  unto  her.  Oh,  how  we  shall  be
disgraced  by  him ! — But  one  of  them  said,  Our  mother  is  tender-
in.  2  c


194  THE  STORY  OF  JOODAR.

hearted ;  and  if  she  inform  him,  our  brother  is  more  tender-hearted
than  she  towards  us ;  and  when  we  excuse  ourselves  to  him,  he  will
accept  our  excuse. — Then  they  went  in  to  him ;  and  he  rose  to  them
upon  his  feet,  and  saluted  them  with  the  best  salutation,  and  said  to
them,  Sit  and  eat.  So  they  sat  and  ate;  ami  they  were  weak  from
hunger ;  wherefore  they  ceased  not  to  eat  until  they  were  satiated.
And  Joodar  said  to  them,  O  my  brothers,  take  the  remainder  of  the
food,  and  distribute  it  to  the  poor  and  needy.  They  replied,  O  our
brother,  leave  it  that  we  may  make  our  supper  of  it.  But  he  said  to
them,  At  the  time  of  supper  there  will  be  brought  to  you  more  than
this.  They  therefore  took  forth  the  rest  of  the  viands,  and  to  every
poor  person  who  passed  by  them  they  said,  Take  and  eat — until
nothing  remained.  Then  they  took  back  the  dishes,  and  Joodar  said
to  his  mother,  Put  them  into  the  saddle-bags. — And  in  the  evening,
he  entered  the  saloon,  and  took  forth  from  the  saddle-bags  a  table
of  forty  different  dishes ;  after  which,  he  went  up  [into  another
apartment] ;  and  when  he  sat  between  his  two  brothers,  he  said  to
his  mother,  Bring  the  supper.  So  when  she  entered  the  saloon,  she
saw  the  dishes  full ;  and  she  placed  the  table,  and  brought  the  dishes,
one  after  another,  until  the  forty  dishes  were  all  put.  They  then
supped;  and  after  the  supper,  Joodar  said,  Take  ye,  and  feed  the
poor  and  the  needy.  Accordingly  they  took  the  rest  of  the  viands,
and  distributed  them.  And  after  they  had  supped,  Joodar  produced
to  them  sweetmeats,  of  which  they  ate  ;  and  what  remained  of  them,
Joodar  told  them  to  give  to  the  neighbours  to  eat.  On  the  following
day  they  breakfasted  in  the  same  manner,  and  they  ceased  not  to
remain  in  this  state  for  a  period  of  ten  days.

Then  Salim  said  to  Seleem,  What  is  the  cause  of  this  thing,  that
our  brother  produceth  to  us  a  feast  in  the  morning,  and  a  feast  at
noon,  and  a  feast  at  sunset,  and,  at  the  end  of  the  night,  sweetmeats,
and  that  every  thing  that  remaineth  he  distributeth  to  the  poor  ?
This  is  the  action  of  Sultans.  And  whence  came  to  him  this  pros-
perity ?27  We  never  see  him  buy  any  thing,  nor  doth  he  light  a  fire,
nor  hath  he  either  kitchen  or  cook.  Shall  we  not  inquire  respecting
these  various  viands,  and  respecting  these  sweetmeats  ? — His  brother
replied,  By  Allah,  I  know  not.  But  knowest  thou  any  one  who  will
acquaint  us  with  the  truth  of  this  matter  ? — None,  said  Salim,  will
acquaint  us  except  our  mother. — They  therefore  contrived  for  them-
selves a  stratagem,  and,  going  in  to  their  mother  during  the  absence
of  their  brother,  they  said,  O  our  mother,  we  are  hungry.  So  she


THE  STORY  OF  JOODAR.  395

replied,  Rejoice  at  good  news.  And  she  entered  the  saloon,  de-
manded of  the  servant  of  the  pair  of  saddle-bags,  and  brought  out  to
them  hot  viands  ;  whereupon  they  said,  0  our  mother,  this  food  is
hot,  and  thou  hast  not  cooked,  nor  blown  [a  fire].  She  replied,  It
is  from  the  pair  of  saddle-bags.  And  they  said  to  her,  What  is  this
pair  of  saddle-bags  ?  She  answered  them,  It  is  enchanted,  and  the
demand  is  obtained  by  virtue  of  the  charm.  And  she  acquainted
them  with  the  case,  and  said  to  them,  Conceal  the  secret.  They
replied,  The  secret  is  concealed,  O  our  mother;  but  teach  us  the
mode  of  this.  She  therefore  taught  them  ;  and  they  proceeded  to
put  forth  their  hands,  and  to  take  out  the  thing  that  they  demanded.
And  their  brother  had  no  knowledge  thereof.  So  when  they  knew
the  property  of  the  pair  of  saddle-bags,  Salim  said  to  Seleem,  0  my
brother,  how  long  shall  we  remain  with  Joodar  like  servants,  and  eat
his  alms  ?  Shall  we  not  employ  a  stratagem  against  him,  and  take
this  pair  of  saddle-bags,  and  enjoy  it  ? — How,  said  Seleem,  shall  the
stratagem  be  contrived  ?  Salim  answered,  We  will  sell  our  brother
to  the  Captain  of  the  Sea  of  Es-Suweys.28 — And  how  shall  we
manage,  asked  the  other,  that  we  may  sell  him  ? — I  will  go  with  thee,
answered  Salim,  to  that  Captain,  and  we  will  invite  him  to  an  enter-
tainment with  two  of  his  company  ;  and  what  I  shall  say  to  Joodar,
do  thou  declare  me  to  be  veracious  therein  ;  and  at  the  close  of  the
night,  I  will  shew  thee  what  I  will  do.

Thus  they  agreed  to  sell  their  brother.  They  went  to  the  house
of  the  Captain  of  the  Sea  of  Es-Suweys,  and  Salim  and  Seleem  both
went  in  to  the  Captain  and  said  to  him,  0  Captain,  we  have  come  to,
thee  on  account  of  an  affair  that  will  rejoice  thee.  So  he  replied,
Good.  And  they  said  to  him,  We  are  two  brothers,  and  we  have  a
third  brother,  a  profligate,  in  whom  is  no  good ;  and  our  father  died,
leaving  to  us  a  sum  of  money.  Then  we  divided  the  money,  and  he
took  what  fell  to  his  lot  of  the  inheritance,  and  expended  it  in  de-
bauchery and  vice ;  and  when  he  was  reduced  to  poverty,  he  domi-
neered over  us,  and  proceeded  to  complain  against  us  to  the
oppressors,  and  to  say,  Ye  two  have  taken  my  property,  and  the
property  of  my  father — and  we  referred  our  case  to  the  judges,  and
lost  the  property.  After  this,  he  suffered  us  a  while,  and  complained
against  us  a  second  time,  so  that  he  brought  us  to  poverty,  and  he
desisted  not  from  oppressing  us ;  wherefore  we  have  become  impatient
of  him,  and  ,desu'e  that  thou  purchase  him  of  us. — So  he  said  to
them,  Can  ye  employ  a  stratagem  against  him,  and  bring  him  to  me


here  ?  If  so,  I  will  send  him  quickly  to  the  sea. — They  answered,
We  cannot  bring  him ;  but  thou  shalt  be  our  guest,  and  bring  with
thee  two ;  no  more ;  and  when  he  sleepeth,  we  five  will  assist  one
another  against  him,  and  seize  him,  and  put  a  gag  in  his  mouth,  and
take  him  under  the  covering  of  night.  Then  thou  shalt  carry  him
forth  from  the  house,  and  do  with  him  as  thou  wilt. — And  he  said,  I
hear  and  obey.  Will  ye  sell  him  for  forty  pieces  of  gold  ? — They
answered  him,  Yes  :  and  after  the  time  of  afternoon-prayers,  thou
shalt  come  to  such  a  quarter,  where  thou  wilt  find  one  of  us  waiting
for  thee.  And  he  replied,  Go  ye.

They  therefore  sought  Joodar ;  and  after  they  had  waited  a  while,
Salim  advanced  to  him,  and  kissed  his  hand.  So  Joodar  said  to  him,
What  dost  thou  want,  0  my  brother  ?  And  he  answered  him,  Know
,that  I  have  a  friend,  who  invited  me  to  entertainments  many  times  in
his  house  during  thine  absence,  and  he  is  entitled  to  a  thousand
kindnesses  from  me,  and  he  always  treateth  me  with  honour,  as  my
brother  knoweth.  Now  I  saluted  him  to-day,  and  he  invited  me;
but  I  said  to  him,  I  cannot  quit  my  brother.  He  therefore  said,
Bring  him  with  thee.  And  I  replied,  He  will  not  consent  to  that ;
but  if  thou  and  thy  brothers  will  be  my  guests — for  his  brothers
were  sitting  by  him;  so  I  invited  them,  thinking  that  I  should  in-
vite them  and  they  would  refuse.  But  when  I  invited  him  and  his
brothers,  he  consented,  and  said,  Wait  for  me  at  the  door  of  the
Zawiyeh,20  and  I  will  come  with  my  brothers.  Therefore  I  fear  that
he  will  come,  and  am  abashed  at  thee.  Wilt  thou  then  comfort  my
heart,  and  entertain  them  this  night  ?  Thy  good  things  are  abun-
dant, O  my  brother.  But  if  thou  consent  not,  give  me  leave  to  take
them  into  the  neighbours'  house. — And  Joodar  said  to  him,  Where-


THE  STORY  OF  JOODAR.  197

fore  shouldst  thou  take  them  into  the  neighbours'  house?  Is  out-
house then  narrow,  or  have  we  not  aught  wherewith  to  give  them  a
supper  ?  Shame  upon  thee  to  consult  me.  Thou  hast  nothing  to
require  but  nice  viands  and  sweetmeats  in  such  quantities  that  there
shall  remain  of  them ;  and  if  thou  bring  people  and  I  be  absent,
demand  of  thy  mother,  and  she  will  produce  to  thee  viands  more
than  enough.  Go  :  bring  them.  Blessings  have  betided  us. — So  he
kissed  his  hand,  and  went  and  sat  at  the  door  of  the  Zawiyeh  till
after  the  time  of  afternoon-prayers ;  and,  lo,  they  approached  him.
He  therefore  took  them  and  conducted  them  into  the  house;  and
when  Joodar  saw  them,  he  said  to  them,  Welcome  to  you  !  And  he
seated  them,  and  made  himself  familiar  with  them,  not  knowing  what
was  secretly  purposed  to  betide  him  from  them.  Then  he  demanded
of  his  mother  the  supper,  and  she  proceeded  to  take  forth  from  the
pair  of  saddle-bags,  while  he  said,  Bring  such  a  dish — until  there  were
before  them  forty  different  dishes.  So  they  ate  until  they  were
satisfied,  and  the  table  was  removed ;  the  sailors  thinking  that  this
hospitable  entertainment  proceeded  from  Salim.  And  when  a  third
of  the  night  had  passed,  Joodar  caused  the  sweetmeats  10  be  brought
to  them ;  and  Salim  was  the  one  who  served  them.  Joodar  and
Seleem  sat  until  they  expressed  a  desire  to  sleep  ;  when  Joodar  arose
and  laid  himself  down,  and  the  others  lay  down  until  he  was  inad-
vertent j  whereupon  they  arose,  and  assisted  each  other  against  him,
and  he  awoke  not  until  the  gag  was  in  his  mouth.  They  bound  his
hands  behind  him,  carried  him  away,  and  took  him  forth  from  the
pavilion  under  the  covering  of  the  night,  and  sent  him  to  Es-Suweys,
where  they  put  shackles  upon  his  feet,  and  he  served  in  silence,  and
ceased  not  to  serve  in  the  manner  of  captives  and  slaves  for  a  whole
year. — Such  was  the  case  of  Joodar.

But  as  to  the  case  of  his  two  brothers,  when  they  arose  iu  the
morning,  they  went  in  to  their  mother,  and  said  to  her,  O  our
mother,  our  brother  Joodar  hath  not  awoke.  So  she  replied,  Wake
ye  him.  They  asked  her,  Where  is  he  lying  ?  And  she  answered
them,  With  the  guests  They  said,  Probably  he  hath  gone  with  the
gitests  while  we  were  asleep,  O  our  mother.  It  seemeth  that  our
brother  hath  tasted  absence  from  his  country,  and  desired  to  enter
the  hidden  treasures :  for  we  heard  him  speaking  with  the  Maghra-
bees,  and  they  said  to  him,  We  will  take  thee  with  us,  and  we  will
open  for  thee  the  treasure. — Hath  he,  she  said,  been  with  the
Maghrabees  ?  They  replied,  Were  they  not  guests  with  us  ?  And


198  THE  STORY  OF  JOODAR.

she  said,  Probably  be  bath  gone  with  them ;  but  God  will  direct  him
right.  This  is  a  fortunate  person ;  he  will  certainly  come  back  with
abundant  riches. — And  she  wept,  and  his  separation  was  grievous
unto  her.  So  they  said  to  her,  0  accursed,  dost  thou  love  Joodar
with  all  this  love,  when,  if  we  are  absent  or  present,  thou  neither
rejoicest  in  us,  nor  mournest  for  us  ?  Are  we  not  thy  sons  as  Jobdar
is  thy  son  ?  — She  answered,  Ye  are  my  sons ;  but  ye  are  wicked
wretches,  and  .ye  are  entitled  to  no  favour  from  me ;  for  from  the  day
that  your  father  died  I  have  not  experienced  from  you  any  good ;  and
as  to  Joodar,  I  have  experienced  from  him  abundant  good,  and  he
hath  comforted  my  heart,  and  treated  me  with  honour :  therefore  it
behooveth  me  to  weep  for  him ;  for  his  kindness  was  shewn  to  me  and
to  you. — And  when  they  heard  these  words,  they  reviled  her  and  beat
her ;  and  they  entered,  and  proceeded  to  search  for  the  pair  of  saddle-
bags until  they  found  it ;  and  they  took  the  jewels  from  the  one  half
[of  one  pair  of  saddle-bags],  and  the  gold  from  the  other  half,  and
the  enchanted  pair  of  saddle-bags  also,  saying  to  her,  This  was  the
property  of  our  father.  She  replied,  No,  by  Allah;  but  it  is  the
property  of  your  brother  Joodar,  who  brought  it  from  the  country  of
the  Maghrabees.  They  said  to  her,  Thou  liest:  this  was  the  pro-
perty of  our  father,  and  we  will  dispose  of  it.  So  they  divided  it
[that  is,  the  jewels  and  gold,]  between  them ;  but  a  dissension  en-
sued between  them  respecting  the  enchanted  pair  of  saddle-bags.
Salim  said,  I  will  take  it.  And  Seleem  said,  I  will  take  it.  And
opposition  took  place  between  them.  Their  mother  therefore  said,  0
my  sons,  the  pair  of  saddle-bags,  in  which  were  the  jewels  and  the
gold  ye  have  divided,  and  this  cannot  be  divided,  nor  can  its  value  be
given  iii  money,  and  if  it  be  cut  in  twain,  its  charm  will  be  annulled ;
but  leave  it  with  me,  and  I  will  take  forth  for  you  what  ye  shall  eat
on  every  occasion,  and  will  be  content  to  take  with  you  a  morsel :  if,
moreover,  ye  clothe  me  with  any  thing,  it  will  be  of  your  favour;
and  each  of  you  shall  establish  for  himself  a  traffic  with  the  people.
Ye  are  my  sons,  and  I  am  your  mother ;  then  let  us  remain  in  our
present  state  lest  your  brother  come,  in  fear  of  disgrace. — But  they
accepted  not  her  proposal.  They  passed  the  next  night  contending
together;  and  a  man  heard  them,  a  kowwas 30  belonging  to  the  guards
of  the  King,  being  a  guest  in  a  house  adjoining  the  house  of  Joodar,
a  window  of  which  was  open.  So  the  kowwas  looked  from  the  win-
dow, and  heard  the  whole  of  the  dispute,  and  the  words  that  they
uttered,  and  the  division.  And  when  the  morning  came,  this  kowwas


THE  STORY  OF  JOODA15.  190

went  in  to  the  King,  whose  name  was  Shems-ed-D61eh,31  the  King  of
Egypt  in  that  age;  and  when  the  kowwas  went  in  to  him,  he  ac-
quainted him  with  that  which  he  had  heard  ;  whereupon  the  King  sent
to  the  two  brothers  of  Joodar,  and  brought  them,  and  subjected  them
to  torture.  So  they  confessed ;  and  he  took  the  two  pairs  of  saddle-
bags from  them,  and  put  them  in  prison.  Then  he  assigned  to  the
mother  of  Joodar  such  allowances  every  day  as  would  suffice  her. —
Thus  did  it  happen  unto  them.

Now  again  as  to  Joodar,  he  remained  a  whole  year  serving  at  Es-
Suweys,  and  after  the  year,  he  and  others  were  in  the  ship,  and  there
rose  against  them  a  wind  which  cast  the  ship  wherein  they  were  upon
a  mountain,  and  it  broke  in  pieces,  and  all  that  was  in  it  was  sub-
merged. None  reached  the  shore  except  Joodar ;  and  the  rest  died.
And  when  he  had  reached  the  shore,  he  journeyed  until  he  came  to  an
encampment  of  Arabs  by  water  and  pasture ;  and  they  asked  him
respecting  his  state ;  wherefore  he  informed  them  that  he  was  a  sailor
in  a  ship,  and  he  related  to  them  his  story.  Now  there  was  in  the
encampment  a  merchant,  of  the  people  of  Juddeh  f2  and  he  pitied
him,  and  said  to  him,  Wilt  thou  serve  us,  O  man  of  Cairo  ?  If  so,  I
will  clothe  thee,  and  take  thee  with  me  to  Juddeh. — So  he  served  him,
and  journeyed  with  him  until  they  arrived  at  Juddeh  ;  and  the
merchant  treated  him  with  much  favour.  Then  his  master  the  mer-
chant desired  to  perform  the  pilgrimage,  and  took  him  with  him  to
Mekkeh  :  so  when  they  entered  it,  Joodar  went  to  perform  the  coin-
passings  in  the  Temple  ;33  and  while  he  was  compassing,  lo,  he  found
his  friend  the  Maghrabee  'Abd-Es-Samad  compassing  also.  Therefore
when  the  Maghrabee  saw  him>  he  saluted  him,  and  asked  him  re-
specting his  state.  And  he  wept,  and  acquainted  him  with  that  which
had  befallen  him.  And  upon  this  the  Maghrabee  took  him  with  him
until  he  entered  his  house,  where  he  treated  him  honourably,  and  clad
him  in  a  dress  of  which  there  existed  not  the  equal ;  and  he  said  to
him,  Evil  hath  quitted  thee,  O  Joodar.  He  then  performed  for  him
an  operation  of  geomancy,  whereupon  that  which  had  befallen  Joodar's
two  brothers  appeared  to  him,  and  he  said,  Know,  0  Joodar,  that
such  and  such  things  have  befallen  thy  two  brothers,  and  they  are
confined  in  the  prison  of  the  King  of  Egypt :  but  thou  shalt  be  wel-
come [as  my  guest]  until  thou  hast  accomplished  thy  rites  of  sacrifice  ;3*
and  nothing  shall  betide  but  good  fortune.  So  Joodar  said  to  him,
O  my  master,  wait  until  I  go  and  take  leave  of  the  merchant  with
whom  I  have  been  living,  and  come  back  unto  thee.  And  the


200  THE  STORY  OF  JOODAR.

Maghrabee  said,  Dost  thou  owe  money  ?  He  answered,  No.  The
Maghrabee  therefore  said,  Go;  take  leave  of  him,  and  come  back
immediately;  for  bread  imposeth  obligation  in  the  estimation  of  the
ingenuous.35  Accordingly  he  went  and  took  leave  of  the  merchant,
and  said  to  him,  I  have  met  my  brother.  And  the  merchant  said  to
him,  Go ;  bring  him,  and  we  will  make  for  him  an  entertainment.
But  Joodar  replied,  It  is  not  necessary ;  for  he  is  of  the  people  of
affluence,  and  hath  many  servants.  And  the  merchant  gave  him
twenty  pieces  of  gold,  saying  to  him,  Acquit  me  of  responsibility.36
So  he  took  leave  of  him,  and  went  forth  from  him,  and,  seeing  a  poor
man,  he  gave  him  the  twenty  pieces  of  gold.

He  then  repaired  to  'Abd-Es-Samad  the  Maghrabee,  and  he  re-
mained with  him  until  they  had  accomplished  the  rites  of  the  sacrifice
of  the  pilgrimage  ;  whereupon  the  Maghrabee  gave  him  the  seal-ring
that  he  had  taken  forth  from  the  treasure  of  Esh-Sharnardal,  and  said
to  him,  Take  this  seal-ring ;  for  it  will  cause  thee  to  attain  thy  desire,
since  it  hath  a  servant  whose  name  19  Er-Raad  el-Kasif,  and  whatever
thou  shalt  require  of  the  things  of  the  world,  rub  the  seal-ring,  and
thy  servant  will  appear  to  thee  [and  he  will  bring  it  thee]  ;  and  what-
ever thou  shalt  command  him  to  do,  he  will  do  it  for  thee.  And  he
rubbed  it  before  him ;  whereupon  the  servant  appeared  to  him,  calling
out,  At  thy  service,  0  my  master !  What  dost  thou  demand  ?  It
shall  be  given  thee.  Wilt  thou  then  render  flourishing  a  ruined  city,
or  ruin  a  city  that  is  flourishing,  or  slay  a  King,  or  rout  an  army  ?—
The  Maghrabee  replied,  0  Raad,  this  hath  become  thy  master ;  and
act  thou  well  to  him.  Then  he  dismissed  him,  and  said  to  Joodar,
Rub  the  seal-ring,  and  its  servant  will  appear  before  thee,  and  do  thou
command  him  to  do  what  thou  desirest:  for  he  will  not  disobey  thee.
Kepair  to  thy  country,  and  take  care  of  the  ring ;  for  thou  wilt  delude
with  it  thine  enemies ;  and  be  not  ignorant  of  the  potency  of  this
ring. — Joodar  therefore  replied,  O  my  master,  with  thy  permission  I
will  repair  to  my  country.  And  the  Maghrabee  said  to  him,  Rub  the
seal-ring :  thereupon  the  servant  will  appear  to  thee,  and  mount  thou
upon  his  back ;  and  if  thou  say  to  him,  Convey  me  this  day  to  my
country, — he  will  not  disobey  thy  command.

Joodar,  upon  this,  bade  'Abd-Es-Samad  farewell,  and  rubbed  the
seal-ring,  and  Er-Raad  el-Kasif  presented  himself  before  him,  saying
to  him,  At  thy  service!  Demand  :  it  shall  be  given  thee. — So  he  said
to  him,  Convey  me  to  Cairo  this  day.  And  he  replied,  That  shall  be
done  for  thee.  He  took  him  up,  and  flew  with  him  from  the  time  of


THE  STORY  OF  JOODAR.


201


noon  until  midnight,  when  he  alighted  with  him  in  the  court  of  the
house  of  his  mother,  and  departed.  He  therefore  went  in  to  his
mother;  and  when  she  saw  him,  she  arose  and  wept,  and  saluted  him,
and  informed  him  of  that  which  had  been  done  to  bis  two  brothers  by
the  King,  how  he  had  beaten  them,  and  taken  the  enchanted  pair  of
saddle-bags  and  the  pair  of  saddle-bags  containing  the  gold  and
jewels.  And  when  Joodar  heard  that,  the  state  of  his  brothers  was
not  a  light  matter  to  him  ;  but  he  said  to  his  mother,  Grieve  not  for
that  which  hath  escaped  thee ;  for  instantly  I  will  shew  thee  what  I
will  do,  and  I  will  bring  my  brothers.  Then  he  rubbed  the  seal-ring,
and  the  servant  appeared  to  him,  saying,  At  thy  service  !  Demand :
it  shall  be  given  thee.— And  he  said  to  him,  I  command  thee  to  bring
me  my  two  brothers  from  the  King's  prison.  So  he  descended  into
the  earth,  and  came  not  up  save  in  the  midst  of  the  prison.  Now
Salim  and  Seleem  were  in  the  most  violent  distress,  and  in  great
affliction,  by  reason  of  the  misery  of  imprisonment :  they  had  wished
for  death,  and  one  of  them  was  saying  to  the  other,  By  Allah,  O  my


in.


2  D


202  THE  STORY  OF  JOODAR.

brother,  our  trouble  hath  become  wearisome  to  us,  and  how  long  shall
we  remain  in  this  prison  ?  Death  in  it  would  be  ease  to  us. — And
while  they  were  in  this  state,  lo,  the  earth  clove  asunder,  and  Er-Raad
el-Kasif  came  forth  to  them,  and,  taking  them  both  up,  descended
into  the  earth.  They  swooned  in  consequence  of  the  violence  of  their
fear  ;  and  when  they  recovered,  they  found  themselves  in  their  house,
where  they  saw  their  brother  sitting  with  his  mother  by  his  side.  And
he  said  to  them,  Salutations  to  .you,  0  my  brothers !  Ye  have  cheered
me  by  your  presence. — Upon  this,  they  inclined  their  faces  towards
the  ground,  and  began  to  weep.  But  he  said  to  them,  Weep  not ;  for
the  Devil  and  covetousness  forced  you  to  do  that.  How  could  you
sell  me  ?  But  I  will  console  myself  by  remembering  Yoosuf ;  for  his
brothers  did  unto  him  what  was  worse  than  your  deed,  since  they  cast
him  into  the  pit.  Turn  ye,  however,  with  repentance  unto  God,  and
beg  his  forgiveness,  and  He  will  forgive  you  ;  for  He  is  the  Abundant
in  forgiveness,  the  Merciful.  I  have  pardoned  you.  Welcome  to
you  !  No  harm  shall  befall  you. — And  he  proceeded  to  appease  their
minds  until  he  had  soothed  their  hearts ;  and  he  related  to  them  all
that  he  had  suffered  at  Es-Suweys  [and  afterwards]  until  he  met  with
the  sheykh  'Abd-Es-Samad,  informing  them  also  of  the  seal-ring.  So
they  said,  0  our  brother,  be  not  angry  with  us  this  time.  If  we  re-
turn to  our  former  conduct,  do  with  us  what  thou  wilt. — He  replied,
No  harm  :  but  tell  me  what  the  King  did  unto  you.  And  they  said,
He  beat  us  and  threatened  us,  and  took  the  two  pairs  of  saddle-bags
from  us.

Thereupon  he  said,  Will  he  not  care  ?  And  he  rubbed  the  seal-
ring.  So  the  servant  presented  himself  before  him.  And  when  his
brothers  beheld  him,  they  feared  him,  and  imagined  that  Joodar  would
order  the  servant  to  slay  them.  They  therefore  went  to  their  mother,
and  began  to  say,  O  our  mother,  we  throw  ourselves  upon  thy  gene-
rosity !  O  our  mother,  intercede  for  us ! — And  she  replied,  O  my
sons,  fear  not. — Then  Joodar  said  to  the  servant,  I  command  thee  to
bring  me  all  that  is  in  the  treasury  of  the  King,  of  jewels  and  other
things,  and  to  leave  not  in  it  aught :  also,  that  thou  bring  me  the
enchanted  pair  of  saddle-bags,  and  the  pair  of  saddle-bags  containing
the  jewels  [and  gold],  which  the  King  took  from  my  two  brothers.
So  he  replied,  I  hear  and  obey.  And  he  went  immediately,  collected
what  was  in  the  treasury,  brought  the  two  pairs  of  saddle-bags  with  the
enclosed  deposites,  and  placed  all  that  was  in  the  treasury  before
Joodar,  saying,  O  my  master,  I  have  not  left  in  the  treasury  any


THE  STORY  OF  JOODAR.  203

thing.  Upon  this,  Joodar  ordered  his  mother  to  take  care  of  the  pair
of  saddle-bags  containing  the  jewels  [and  gold],  put  the  enchanted
pair  of  saddle-bags  before  him,  and  said  to  the  servant,  I  command
thee  to  build  for  me,  during  this  night,  a  lofty  palace,  and  to  decorate
it  with  liquid  gold,  and  spread  it  with  magnificent  furniture,  and  let
not  morning  come  before  thou  hast  completed  the  whole  of  it.  The
servant  replied,  That  shall  be  done  for  thee.  And  he  descended  into
the  earth.  Then  Joodar  took  forth  the  viands,  and  they  ate,  and  en-
joyed themselves,  and  slept. — But  as  to  the  affair  of  the  servant,  he
collected  his  'Ons,  and  gave  orders  to  build  the  palace.  So  some  of
them  began  to  hew  the  stones,  and  some  to  build,  and  some  to  white-
wash, and  some  to  paint,  and  some  to  spread  the  furniture ;  and  the
daylight  came  not  before  the  order  of  the  palace  was  perfect.  The
servant  thereupon  went  up  to  Joodar,  and  said,  O  my  master,  the
palace  is  finished,  and  its  order  is  perfect ;  if  then  thou  wilt  go  forth
and  divert  thyself  with  a  view  of  it,  go  forth.

He  therefore  went  forth  with  his  mother  and  his  two  brothers,  and
saw  this  palace  to  be  one  of  which  there  .existed  not  the  like,  con-
founding the  minds  by  the  beauty  of  its  order.  So  Joodar  was
delighted  with  it,  while  he  was  yet  passing  along  the  beaten  track ;
and  with  all  this,  he  had  expended  nothing  upon  it.  He  then  said  to
his  mother,  Wilt  thou  reside  in  this  palace?  She  answered  him,  0
my  son,  I  will  reside  in  it.  And  she  prayed  for  him.  Then  he  rubbed
the  seal-ring  ;  whereupon  the  servant  appeared,  saying,  At  thy  service !
And  he  said  to  him,  I  command  thee  to  bring  me  forty  white  and
beautiful  slave-girls,  and  forty  black  slave-girls,  and  forty  memlooks,
and  forty  male  black  slaves.  The  servant  replied,  That  shall  be  done
for  thee.  And  he  repaired  with  forty  of  his  'Ons  to  the  countries  of
India  and  Es-Sind  and  Persia ;  and  whenever  they  beheld  a  beautiful
damsel  they  carried  her  off;  and  when  they  saw  a  young  man,  they
carried  him  off.  He  sent  also  forty  others,  who  brought  elegant  black
slave-girls ;  and  forty  others  brought  male  black  slaves.  All  came  to
the  abode  of  Joodar,  and  they  filled  it.  Then  he  displayed  them  to
Joodar,  and  they  pleased  him ;  and  he  said,  Bring  for  each  person  a
dress,  of  the  most  magnificent  apparel.  The  servant  replied,  Ready.
And  Joodar  said,  Bring  a  dress  for  my  mother  to  put  on,  and  a  dress
for  myself  to  put  on.  So  he  brought  all,  and  clad  the  female  slaves,
and  said  to  them,  This  is  your  mistress :  therefore  kiss  her  hand,  and
disobey  her  not,  but  serve  her,  white  and  black.  The  memlooks  also
clad  themselves,  and  kissed  the  hand  of  Joodar ;  and  his  two  brothers


2<U  THE  STORY  OF  JOODAli.

clad  themselves  ;  and  Joodar  became  like  a  king,  and  his  two  brothers
like  wezeers.  His  house  was  ample  :  so  he  lodged  Salim  and  his
female  slaves  in  one  part,  and  Seleem  and  his  female  slaves  in  another
part ;  and  he  and  his  mother  resided  in  the  new  palace ;  each  being
in  his  abode  like  a  king. — Such  was  their  case.

But  as  to  the  Treasurer  of  the  King,  he  desired  to  take  some
things  from  the  treasury ;  so  he  entered,  and  saw  not  in  it  aught,  but
found  it  as  the  poet  hath  said, —

The  chambers  were  like  a  bee-hive  well  stocked :  when  their  bees  quitted  them,
they  became  empty.

Upon  this  he  uttered  a  great  cry,  and  fell  down  in  a  swoon  ;  and
when  he  recovered,  he  went  forth  from  the  treasury,  leaving  its  door
open,  and,  going  in  to  the  King  Shems-ed-D61eh,  he  said,  O  Prince
of  the  Faithful,37  what  we  tell  thee  is  this,  that  the  treasury  hath
become  empty  during  this  night.  So  the  King  said,  What  hast  thou
done  with  my  riches  that  were  in  my  treasury  ?  He  answered.  By
Allah,  I  have  not  done  with  them  aught,  nor  do  I  know  the  cause  of
their  being  exhausted.  Yesterday  I  entered  the  treasury,  and  beheld
it  filled  ;  and  to-day  I  entered  it,  and  beheld  it  empty,  with  nothing
in  it :  yet  the  doors  were  locked,  and  it  hath  not  been  broken  through,
nor  hath  its  wooden  lock  been  broken,  nor  hath  a  thief  entered  it.
And  the  King  said,  Have  the  two  pairs  of  saddle-bags  gone  from
it  ?  The  Treasurer  answered,  Yes.  And  upon  this,  the  reason  of  the
King  fled  from  his  head,  and  he  rose  upon  his  feet,  and  said  to  the
Treasurer,  Go  before  me.  So  he  went ;  and  the  King  followed  him
until  they  came  to  the  treasury,  and  he  found  not  in  it  aught.  The
King  therefore  was  vexed,  and  he  said,  Who  hath  assaulted  my
treasury,  and  not  feared  my  authority  ?  And  he  was  violently  en-
raged. He  then  went  forth,  and  held  a  court,  and  the  great  officers
of  the  army  came,  every  one  of  them  imagining  that  the  King  was
incensed  against  him ;  and  the  King  said,  0  soldiers,  know  that  my
treasury  hath  been  plundered  during  this  night,  and  I  know  not  who
hath  done  this  deed  and  assaulted  me  and  not  feared  me.  So  they
said,  And  how  hath  this  happened  ?  He  replied,  Ask  the  Treasurer.
They  therefore  asked  him,  and  he  answered,  Yesterday  it  was  full,
and  to-day  I  entered  it  and  beheld  it  empty :  yet  it  hath  not  been
broken  through,  nor  hath  its  door  been  broken.

Now  all  the  soldiers  wondered  at  these  words,  and  no  reply  had
been  given  by  them,  when  the  kowwas,  who,  on  a  former  occasion,


THE  STORY  OF  JOODAK.  205

betrayed  Seleem  and  Salim,  came  in  to  the  King,  and  said,  O  King
of  the  age,  all  the  night  I  have  been  amusing  myself  with  the  sight
of  builders  building,  and  when  daylight  came,  I  saw  a  palace  con-
structed, the  like  of  which  existeth  not.  I  therefore  asked,  and  it
was  said  to  me,  that  Joodar  had  come  and  built  this  palace,  and  with
him  were  memlooks  and  black  slaves  ;  that  he  had  brought  abundant
riches,  and  delivered  his  two  brothers  from  the  prison,  and  was  in  his
mansion  like  a  Sultan. — So  the  King  said,  Examine  the  prison.  And
they  examined  it,  and  saw  not  Salim  and  Seleem.  They  therefore
returned,  and  acquainted  him  with  that  which  had  happened  ;  where-
upon the  King  said,  My  offender  hath  become  manifest ;  for  he  who
delivered  Salim  and  Seleem  from  the  prison,  and  took  the  two  pairs
of  saddle-bags,38  is  the  person  who  took  my  property.  And  the
Wezeer  said,  0  ruy  lord,  who  is  he?  The  King  answered,  Their
brother  Joodar :  but,  O  Wezeer,  send  to  him  an  Emeer  with  fifty
men  to  seize  him  and  his  two  brothers,  and  to  put  seals  upon  all  his
property,  and  to  bring  them  to  me  that  I  may  hang  them.  And  he
was  violently  enraged,  and  said,  Ho !  quickly  send  to  them  an  Emeer
to  bring  them  to  me  that  I  may  put  them  to  death.  But  the  Wezeer
said  to  him,  Be  clement,  for  God  is  clement :  He  is  not  hasty  towards
his  servant  when  he  disobeyeth  Him.  He  who  hath  built  a  palace  in
one  night,  as  they  have  said,  no  one  in  the  world  can  be  compared
with  him  ;  and  I  fear  for  the  Emeer  that  some  trouble  may  befall  him
from  Joodar.  Have  patience,  therefore,  that  I  may  contrive  for  thee
some  plan,  or  till  thou  see  the  truth  of  the  case;  and  what  thou
desirest  thou  wilt  attain,  0  King  of  the  age. — So  the  King  said,
Contrive  for  me  a  plan,  O  Wezeer.  The  Wezeer  replied,  Send  to  him
the  Emeer,  and  invite  him  to  an  entertainment.  Then  I  will  pay  all
attention  to  him  for  thee,  and  make  a  show  of  friendship  to  him,  and
ask  him  respecting  his  state.  After  that,  thou  shalt  see :  if  his
courage  be  strong,  we  will  employ  some  stratagem  against  him;  and
if  his  courage  be  weak,  seize  thou  him,  and  do  with  him  as  thou
desirest. — And  the  King  said,  Send  and  invite  him.

Accordingly  he  ordered  an  Emeer,  whose  name  was  the  Emeer
'Osmiin,  to  go  to  Joodar  and  invite  him,  and  to  say  to  him,  The  King
sumrnoneth  thee  to  an  entertainment.  And  the  King  said  to  him,
Return  not  but  with  him.  Now  that  Emeer  was  stupid,  and  haughty
in  mind ;  and  when  he  descended,  he  saw  before  the  door  of  the
palace  [of  Joodar]  a  eunuch  sitting  upon  a  chair ;  and  when  the
Emeer  'Osman  arrived  at  the  palace,  the  eunuch  rose  not  to  him,  but


remained  as  though  no  one  were  approaching  him  :  yet  there  were
with  the  Erneer  'Osman  fifty  men.  And  the  Emeer  'Osman  came  up,
and  said  to  him,  O  slave,  where  is  thy  master  ?  He  answered  him,
In  the  palace.  And  he  proceeded  to  speak  to  him  in  a  reclining
posture.  So  the  Emeer  'Osman  was  enraged,  and  said  to  him,  O  ill-
omened  slave,  art  thou  not  abashed  at  me,  that  when  I  speak  to  thee
thou  liest  down  like  those  who  have  no  shame  ?  But  he  replied,  Go
along.  Be  not  loquacious. — And  the  Emeer  heard  not  from  him
these  words  before  he  became  infused  with  rage,  and,  drawing  forth
his  mace,  he  was  about  to  beat  the  eunuch,  not  knowing  that  he  was
a  devil.  When  the  eunuch,  however,  saw  that  he  had  drawn  forth
the  mace,  he  arose  and  rushed  upon  him,  took  the  mace  from  him,
and  struck  him  four  blows ;  and  when  the  fifty  men  saw  it,  the  beat-


THE  STORY  OF  JOODAR.  207

ing  of  their  master  displeased  them  :  they  therefore  drew  their  swords,
and  desired  to  slay  the  slave.  But  he  said  to  them,  Do  ye  draw  the
swords,  O  dogs  ?  And  he  fell  upon  them,  breaking  the  bones  of
every  one  whom  he  smote  with  the  mace,  and  drowning  him  in  blood.
So  they  were  routed  before  him,  and  ceased  not  to  flee,  while  he  still
beat  them  until  they  were  far  from  the  door  of  the  palace,  when  he
returned,  and  seated  himself  again  upon  his  chair,  not  caring  for  any
one.  But  as  to  the  Emeer  'Osman  and  his  company,  they  returned
routed  and  beaten  until  they  stood  before  the  King  Shems-ed-D61eh,
and  they  acquainted  him  with  that  which  had  happened  unto  them,
the  Emeer  'Osman  saying  to  the  King,  0  King  of  the  age,  when  I
arrived  at  the  door  of  the  palace,  I  saw  a  eunuch  sitting  at  the  door,
upon  a  chair  of  gold,  and  he  was  haughty :  when  he  beheld  me
approaching  him,  he  laid  himself  down,  after  he  had  been  sitting,
and  despised  me,  not  rising  to  me;  and  I  began  to  speak  to  him;
but  he  replied  to  me  still  lying  down.  So  passion  seized  me,  and  I
drew  forth  the  mace  upon  him,  and  was  about  to  beat  him  ;  but  he
took  the  mace  from  me,  and  beat  me  with  it.  He  beat  also  my  party,
breaking  their  heads,  and  we  fled  from  before  him,  and  could  not
prevail  against  him. — Upon  this,  the  King  was  enraged,  and  he  said,
Let  a  hundred  men  go  clown  to  him.  They  therefore  went  down  to
him,  and  approached  him ;  but  he  rose  against  them  with  the  mace,
and  ceased  not  to  deal  his  blows  among  them  until  they  fled  from
before  him ;  whereupon  he  returned,  and  seated  himself  again  upon
the  chair.  So  the  hundred  men  went  back  ;  and  when  they  came  to
the  King,  they  informed  him,  saying  to  him,  0  King  of  the  age,  we
have  fled  from  before  him  in  our  fear  of  him.  Then  the  King  said,
Let  two  hundred  go  down.  And  they  went  down;  but  he  routed
them,  and  they  returned.  Therefore  the  King  said  to  the  Wezeer,  I
require  thee,  O  Wezeer,  to  go  down  with  five  hundred  men,  and  to
bring  me  this  eunuch  quickly,  together  with  his  master  Jooclar  and
his  two  brothers.  He  replied,  0  King  of  the  age,  I  need  not  soldiers  ;
but  I  will  go  alone  to  him,  without  weapon.  And  the  King  said,  Go,
and  do  what  thou  sbalt  see  fit.

So  the  Wezeer  threw  down  the  weapon,  clad  himself  in  a  white
vesture,39  and,  taking  in  his  hand  a  string  of  beads,  walked  alone,
without  a  second  person,  until  he  arrived  at  the  palace  of  Jpodar,  and
saw  the  slave  sitting.  And  when  he  saw  him,  he  approached  him
without  weapon,  and  seated  himself  by  his  side  in  a  polite  manner.
Then  he  said.  Peace  be  on  you  !  And  the  slave  replied,  And  on  you


208  THE  STORY  OF  JOODAR.

be  peace,  O  human  being !  What  dost  thou  desire  ? — When  the
Wezeer  therefore  heard  him  say,  0  human  being — he  knew  that  he
was  of  the  Jinn,  and  he  trembled  by  reason  of  his  fear,  and  said  to
him,  O  my  master,  is  thy  master  Joodar  here  ?  The  slave  answered,
Yes,  in  the  palace.  And  the  Wezeer  said  to  him,  O  my  master,  go
to  him  and  say  to  him,  The  King  Shems-ed-D61eh  inviteth  thee,  and
maketh  for  thee  a  banquet,  and  greeteth  thee  with  peace,  saying  to
thee,  Honour  my  abode,  and  eat  of  my  banquet.  So  the  slave  replied,
Stay  thou  here  until  I  consult  him.  Accordingly  the  Wezeer  stayed,
in  a  respectful  posture,  and  the  Marid  went  up  into  the  palace,  and
said  to  Joodar,  Know,  0  my  master,  that  the  King  sent  unto  thee  an
Emeer,  and  I  beat  him ;  and  there  were  with  him  fifty  men,  and  I
routed  them.  Then  he  sent  a  hundred  men,  and  I  beat  them.  Then
he  sent  two  hundred  men,  and  I  routed  them.  Then  he  sent  unto
thee  the  Wezeer,  without  weapon,  inviting  thee  to  visit  him  and  to  eat
of  his  banquet.  What  then  sayest  thou  ? — Joodar  replied,  Go,  bring
the  Wezeer  hither.  So  he  descended  from  the  palace,  and  said  to
him,  O  Wezeer,  answer  the  summons  of  my  master.  And  he  replied,
On  the  head  !  He  ascended,  and  went  in  to  Joodar,  and  he  saw  him
to  be  greater  than  the  King,  sitting  upon  furniture  the  like  of  which
the  King  could  not  spread.  His  mind  was  confounded  by  the  beauty
of  the  palace,  and  by  its  painting  and  its  furniture,  which  made  the
Wezeer  seem  in  comparison  with  him  to  be  a  pauper.  And  he  kissed
the  ground,  and  prayed  for  him  ;  and  Joodar  said  to  him.  What  is
thy  business,  0  Wezeer  ? — 0  my  master,  he  answered,  the  King
Shems-ed-D61eh,  thy  friend,  greeteth  thee  with  peace,  and  is  desirous
of  beholding  thy  face,  and  he  hath  made  for  thee  a  banquet.  Wilt
thou  then  comfort  his  heart  ? — Joodar  replied,  Since  he  is  my  friend,
salute  him,  and  tell  him  to  come  unto  me.  So  the  Wezeer  said  to
him,  On  the  head.  Then  Joodar  took  forth  the  seal-ring,  and  rubbed
it,  and  the  servant  presented  himself;  and  Joodar  said  to  him,  Bring
me  a  dress,  of  the  best  of  apparel.  He  therefore  brought  him  a  dress;
and  Joodar  said,  Put  on  this,  0  Wezeer.  And  he  put  it  on.  Joodar
then  said  to  him,  Go :  acquaint  the  King  with  that  which  I  have  said.
And  he  descended,  wearing  that  dress,  the  like  of  which  he  had  never
before  worn,  and,  going  in  to  the  King,  informed  him  of  the  state  of
Joodar,  and  praised  the  palace  with  the  things  that  it  contained  ;  and
he  said,  Joodar  hath  invited  thee.

Upon  this,  the  King  said,  Rise,  0  soldiers  ! So  all  of  them  rose
upon  their  feet. And  he  said,  Mount  your  horses,  and  bring  unto


THE  STORY  OF  JOODAR.  209

me  my  courser,  that  we  may  go  to  Joodar.  Then  the  King  mounted,
and  took  the  troops,  and  they  repaired  to  Joodar's  palace. — Now  as  to
Joodar,  he  said  to  the  Marid,  I  desire  that  thou  bring  us  some  'Efreets
of  thy  'Ons,  in  the  form  of  human  beings,  to  be  as  soldiers,  and  to
stand  in  the  court  of  the  palace,  that  the  King  may  see  them,  and
that  they  may  terrify  him  and  inspire  him  with  dread,  so  that  his
heart  may  tremble,  and  he  may  know  that  my  power  is  greater  than
his.  He  therefore  brought  two  hundred  in  the  garb  of  soldiers,
equipped  with  magnificent  arms ;  and  they  were  strong  and  bulky. —
So  when  the  King  arrived,  he  beheld  the  strong  and  bulky  troop,  and
his  heart  feared  them.  Then  he  went  up  into  the  palace,  and  entered
into  the  presence  of  Joodar,  whom  he  saw  sitting  in  a  state  in  which  no
king  nor  sultan  had  sat ;  and  he  saluted  him,  and  raised  his  hands  to
his  head  before  him.  But  Joodar  rose  not  to  him,  nor  paid  him  honour,
nor  did  he  say  to  him,  Sit : — he  left  him  standing  till  fear  seized  him,
and  he  became  unable  either  to  sit  or  to  go  forth,  and  began  to  say
within  himself,  Were  he  in  fear  of  me,  he  had  not  left  me  unheeded,
and  probably  he  will  do  me  some  hurt,  on  account  of  that  which  I  did
with  his  brothers.  Then  Joodar  said,  O  King  of  the  age,  it  is  not  the
proper  business  of  such  as  you  to  tyrannize  over  men  and  to  take  their
goods.  So  he  replied,  O  my  master,  blame  me  not ;  for  covetousness
constrained  me  to  do  so,  and  destiny  took  effect ;  and  were  it  not  for
offence,  there  were  no  such  thing  as  forgiveness.  And  he  proceeded
to  excuse  himself  to  him  for  his  former  conduct,  and  to  seek  of  him
pardon  and  lenity,  to  such  a  degree  that  among  his  expressions  of
apology  he  recited  to  him  these  verses  : —

O  thou  of  noble  ancestors  and  gentle  disposition,  blame  me  not  for  that  which  hath
proceeded  from  me.

If  thou  be  an  oppressor,  we  pardon  thee  :  and  if  I  be  an  oppressor,  thou  wilt  par-
don me.40

And  he  ceased  not  to  humble  himself  before  him  until  he  said  to
him,  May  God  pardon  thee ! — and  ordered  him  to  sit.  So  he  sat ;
and  Joodar  invested  him  with  the  garments  of  mercy,41  and  ordered
his  two  brothers  to  spread  the  table.  Then,  when  they  had  eaten,  he
clad  the  King's  company,  and  treated  them  with  honour ;  and  after
that,  he  ordered  the  King  to  depart.

He  therefore  went  forth  from  the  abode  of  Joodar ;  and  every  day
after,  he  used  to  go  thither,  and  used  not  to  hold  his  court  save  in
Joodar's  abode.  Their  mutual  familiarity  and  friendship  increased,
and  they  continued  a  while  in  this  state.  But  after  that,  the  King

III.  2 E


had  a  private  interview  with  his  Wezeer,  and  said  to  him,  O  Wezeer,
I  fear  lest  Joodar  should  slay  me,  and  take  the  kingdom  from  me.
The  Wezeer  however  replied,  O  King  of  the  age,  as  to  the  act  of
taking  the  kingdom,  fear  it  not ;  for  the  state  which  Joodar  enjoyeth
is  more  exalted  than  the  state  of  the  King,  and  the  taking  of  the
kingdom  would  be  a  lowering  of  his  dignity ;  but  if  thou  fearest  that
he  will  slay  thee,  thou  hast  a  daughter :  so  marry  her  to  him,  and
thou  and  he  will  be  of  one  condition.  And  he  replied,  O  Wezeer,
thou  shalt  be  an  intermediary  between  me  and  him.  The  Wezeer
therefore  said  to  him,  Invite  him  to  an  entertainment  in  thy  palace ;
then  we  will  sit  up  at  night  in  a  saloon,  and  command  thou  thy
daughter  to  deck  herself  in  the  most  magnificent  manner,  and  to  pass
by  him  from  the  door  of  the  saloon  ;  for  as  soon  as  he  seeth  her,  he
will  be  enamoured  of  her  ;  and  when  we  perceive  in  him  that  result,
I  will  incline  towards  him  and  inform  him  that  she  is  thy  daughter,
and  I  will  keep  up  a  conversation  with  him  as  though  thou  hadst  no
knowledge  of  the  matter,  so  that  he  shall  demand  her  of  thee  in  mar-
riage. When  thou  shalt  have  married  to  him  the  damsel,  thou  and
he  will  be  one,  and  thou  wilt  be  secure  from  any  injury  on  his  part ;
and  if  he  die,  thou  wilt  inherit  largely  from  him. — So  the  King  re-
plied, Thou  hast  spoken  truth,  0  my  Wezeer.  And  he  prepared  the
entertainment,  and  invited  him.  Joodar  therefore  came  to  the


THE  STORY  OF  JOODAR.  211

Sultan's  palace,  and  they  sat  in  the  saloon  in  exceeding  sociableness
until  the  close  of  the  day.  The  King  had  sent  to  his  wife,  desiring
her  to  deck  the  damsel  in  the  most  magnificent  manner,  and  to  pass
with  her  by  the  door  of  the  saloon.  And  she  did  as  he  had  said.
She  passed  by  with  the  damsel,  and  Joodar  saw  her;  and  she  was
endowed  with  beauty  and  loveliness,  having  no  equal.  So  when
Joodar  took  an  accurate  view  of  her,  he  said,  Ah ! — and  his  limbs
became  loosened,  passion  and  desire  became  violent  in  him,  ecstasy
and  distraction  seized  him,  and  his  complexion  became  sallow.  The
Wezeer  therefore  said  to  him,  May  no  harm  befall  thee,  0  my
master !  Wherefore  do  I  see  thee  changed  and  in  pain  ? — And  he
said,  0  Wezeer,  whose  daughter  is  this  damsel  ?  for  she  hath  cap-
tivated me,  and  deprived  me  of  my  reason.  So  he  answered,  This  is
the  daughter  of  thy  friend  the  King ;  and  if  she  please  thee,  I  will
speak  with  the  King,  that  he  may  marry  her  to  thee.  And  Joodar
said,  0  Wezeer,  speak  to  him,  and  I,  by  my  life,  will  give  thee  what
thou  shalt  desire,  and  will  give  to  the  King  what  he  shall  desire  as
her  dowry,  and  we  will  become  friends  and  connexions.  The  Wezeer
replied,  Thy  desire  must  be  accomplished.  Then  the  Wezeer  spoke
to  the  King  privately,  saying  to  him,  O  King  of  the  age,  Joodar  is
thy  friend,  and  desireth  affinity  to  thee,  and  he  hath  requested  thee,
by  me,  to  rnarry  to  him  thy  daughter,  the  lady  Asiyeh  :  therefore
disappoint  me  not,  but  accept  my  intercession ;  and  whatever  thou
shalt  demand  as  her  dowry,  he  will  give  thee.  And  the  King  re-
plied, The  dowry  hath  been  paid  me,42  and  the  damsel  is  a  slave-girl
in  his  service:  I  will  marry  her  to  him,  and  he  will  do  a  favour  by
accepting  her.

They  passed  that  night,  and  the  King  arose  in  the  morning  and
held  a  court,  at  which  he  caused  the  high  and  the  low  to  be  present,
and  the  Sheykh  el-Islum 43  was  there  also.  Then  Joodar  demanded
the  damsel  in  marriage,  and  the  King  said,  The  dowry  hath  been
paid.  So  they  performed  the  ceremony  of  the  marriage-contract,  and
Joodar  sent  desiring  that  the  pair  of  saddle-bags  containing  the
jewels  [and  gold]  should  be  brought,  and  he  gave  it  to  the  King  as
the  dowry  of  the  damsel.  The  drums  were  beaten  and  the  pipes
were  sounded,  the  festal  necklaces  were  strung,  and  Joodar  took  the
damsel  as  his  wife.  Thus  he  and  the  King  became  as  one,  and  they
remained  together  for  a  period  of  days.  Then  the  King  died,  and
the  troops  desired  Joodar  as  Sultan,  and  they  ceased  not  to  urge  him,
while  he  refused  to  comply  with  their  request,  until  at  last  he  con-


212  THE  STORY  OF  JOODAR.

sented.  So  they  made  him  Sultan ;  and  he  gave  orders  to  build  a
congregational  mosque  over  the  sepulchre  of  the  King  Shems-ed-
Doleh,  and  endowed  it ;  and  it  is  in  the  district  of  El-Bundukanee-
yeen.44  The  house  of  Joodar  was  in  the  quarter  of  El-Yemaneeyeh ;
and  when  he  became  Sultan,  he  constructed  buildings  and  a  congre-
gational mosque,  and  the  quarter  hath  been  named  after  him,  its
name  having  become — the  Quarter  of  El-Joodareeyeh.45  He  con-
tinued as  King  some  time,  and  made  his  two  brothers  we/eers ;  Salim
the  wezeer  of  his  right  hand,  and  Seleem  the  wezeer  of  his  left ;  and
they  remained  thus  one  year,  and  no  more.

After  this,  Salim  said  to  Seleem,  0  my  brother,  how  long  shall
this  state  last  ?  Shall  we  pass  our  lives  entirely  as  servants  of  Joodar,
and  shall  we  not  enjoy  dominion  nor  prosperity  so  long  as  Joodar  is
living  ? — And  how  shall  we  manage  to  kill  him,  said  Seleem,  and  to
take  from  him  the  seal-ring  and  the  pair  of  saddle-bags  ?  Thou  art
more  knowing  than  I :  therefore  contrive  for  us  a  stratagem  in  order
that  we  may  kill  him  thereby. — Salim  said,  If  I  contrive  for  thee  a
stratagem  by  which  to  kill  him,  wilt  thou  consent  that  I  shall  be
Sultan,  and  that  thou  shalt  be  wezeer  of  the  right  hand,  and  that
the  seal-ring  shall  be  mine  and  the  pair  of  saddle-bags  thine?  Seleem
answered,  I  consent.  So  they  agreed  to  kill  Joodar,  on  account  of
the  love  of  the  world  and  of  dominion.  Then  Seleem  and  Salim  con-
trived a  stratagem  against  Joodar,  and  said  to  him,  0  our  brother,  we
desire  that  we  may  glory  in  thee,  and  that  thou  wouldst  enter  our
houses,  and  eat  of  our  banquet,  and  comfort  our  heart.  And  they
proceeded  to  beguile  him,  saying  to  him,  Comfort  our  heart,  and  eat
of  our  banquet.  So  he  replied,  No  harm.  In  the  house  of  which  of
you  will  be  the  banquet  ? — Salim  answered,  In  my  house  ;  and  after
thou  shalt  have  eaten  of  my  banquet,  thou  shalt  eat  of  the  banquet  of
my  brother.  And  he  said,  No  harm  : — and  went  with  him  to  his
house.  Then  his  brother  placed  the  food  for  him,  and  put  into  it
poison ;  and  when  he  had  eaten,  his  flesh  fell  to  pieces  with  his
bones.  So  upon  this,  Salim  arose  to  take  the  seal-ring  from  his
finger ;  but  it  resisted  his  attempt :  therefore  he  cut  off  his  finger
with  a  knife.  He  then  rubbed  the  ring,  and  the  Marid  presented
himself  to  him,  saying,  At  thy  service !  Demand  then  what  thou
wilt. — And  he  said  to  him,  Seize  my  brother,  and  slay  him,  and  take
up  the  two,  the  poisoned  and  the  slain,  and  throw  them  before  the
troops.  Accordingly  he  took  Seleem  and  slew  him,  and  took  up  the
two,  and,  going  forth  with  them,  cast  them  before  the  great  officers  of


the  army.  They  were  sitting  at  the,  table  in  the  mak'ad  of  the  house,
eating ;  and  when  they  beheld  Joodar  and  Seleem  killed,  they  raised
their  hands  from  the  food,  and  fear  disturbed  them,  and  they  said  to
the  Miiriil,  Who  hath  done  these  deeds  with  the  King  and  the
Wezeer  1  So  he  answered  them,  Their  brother  Siilim.

And,  lo,  Salim  approached  them,  and  said,  O  soldiers,  eat,  and
enjoy  yourselves  ;  for  I  have  obtained  possession  of  the  seal-ring  from
my  brother  Joodar,  and  this  Marid  is  the  servant  of  the  ring ;  he
who  is  before  you.  I  ordered  him  to  slay  my  brother  Seleem,  that
he  might  not  contend  with  me  for  the  kingdom,  because  he  \vas
treacherous,  and  I  feared  that  he  would  act  treacherously  towards  me.
And  now  this  Joodar  hath  been  put  to  death,  and  I  have  become
Sultan  over  you.  Do  ye  accept  me,  or  shall  I  rub  the  ring,  and  shall
its  servant  slay  you,  great  and  small '? — They  answered  him,  We


214  THE  STORY  OF  JOODAR.

accept  thee  as  King  and  Sultan.  Then  he  gave  orders  to  bury  his
two  brothers,  and  held  a  court ;  and  some  of  the  people  attended  the
funeral,  while  others  walked  before  him  in  the  state-procession.  And
when  they  came  to  the  court,  he  seated  himself  upon  the  throne,  and
they  swore  allegiance  to  him  as  King ;  after  which  he  said,  I  desire
to  perform  the  contract  of  my  marriage  to  the  wife  of  my  brother.
They  replied,  When  the  period  of  widowhood46  shall  have  expired
But  he  said  to  them,  I  know  not  a  period  of  widowhood  nor  any
thing  else.  By  my  head,  I  must  take  her  as  my  wife  this  night. —
So  they  performed  the  ceremony  of  the  contract  for  him,  and  sent
and  informed  the  wife  of  Joodar,  the  daughter  of  Shems-ed-D61eh ;
and  she  replied,  Invite  him  to  come  in.  And  when  he  carne  in  to
her,  she  made  a  show  of  joy  to  him,  receiving  him  with  expressions  of
welcome.  But  she  put  poison  for  him  in  the  water,  and  destroyed
him.  Then  she  took  the  seal-ring  and  broke  it,  that  no  one  might
thereafter  possess  it ;  and  she  rent  the  pair  of  saddle-bags ;  after
which  she  sent  and  informed  the  Sheykh  el-Islam,  and  sent  a  mes-
sage to  him  and  the  people,  saying  to  them,  Choose  for  yourselves  a
King  to  be  Sultan  over  you.

This  is  what  hath  come  down  to  us  of  the  Story  of  Joodar,  entire
and  complete.47


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-SECOND.


NOTE  1.  MY  sheykh  supposes  "Joodar''  to  be  for  "  Ju-dhar,"  which  signifies
"  the  young  of  the  wild  cow  "  (a  kind  of  antelope)  :  hut  it  will  he  seen  by  «  note  (No.
45)  on  a  passage  near  the  end  of  the  story,  that  the  appellation  of  a  quarter  in  Cairo
suggested  this  name  to  the  author,  and  that  the  said  quarter  was  not,  as  he  pretends,
called  after  a  person  named  Joodar.  Joodar  is,  however,  a  proper  name,  as  appears
from  El-Makreczee ;  although  my  sheykh  does  not  seem  to  have  known  of  it.

NOTE  2.  Had  the  merchant  left  his  property  to  be  divided  after  his  death,  and  not
made  a  will,  his  wife  would  only  have  inherited  one  eighth.  By  will,  he  might  have
left  to  her  one  third  of  his  property,  and  she  would  have  inherited  besides  one  eighth
of  the  remainder ;  but  he  could  not  have  thus  increased  the  share  of  a  relation  without
the  consent  of  all  the  co-heirs.

NOTE  3.  My  sheykh  observes,  in  a  marginal  note,  that  this  alludes  to  bribes,  as
well  as  to  the  legal  fees.  The  bribery  practised  in  Muslim  courts  of  law  is  notorious.
For  a  striking  instance,  see  my  work  on  the  Modern  Egyptians,  vol.  i.  ch.  iv.

NOTE  4.  That  is,  look  for  the  time  when  vengeance  and  punishment  shall  befall
the  oppressor  from  God.1

NOTE  5.  That  the  word  "  nusfs"  (which  is  omitted  in  the  original)  should  be  here
supplied  seems  evident  from  the  sequel.  Respecting  the  nusf,  see  Note  17  to  Chapter
iii.,  and  Note  14,  next  page.

NOTE  6. See  Note  24  to  Chapter  viii.

NOTE  7.  I  suppose  "  karaman,"  or  some  similar  word,  to  be  here  understood,  and
the  meaning  to  be,  "  Thou  art  the  superior  in  generosity  to  me"


Marginal  note  by  my  sheykh.


216  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-SECOND.

NOTE  8.  The  word  which  I  have  rendered  "minnow"  is  '•  secrcli."  My  sheykh
merely  states,  that  the  seereh  is  "  the  smallest  of  fishes ; '  and  I  am  unable  to  define
its  species.  It  has  been  differently  described  by  different  authors,  as  may  be  seen  in
De  Sacy's  "  Relation  de  1'Egypte  par  Abd-allatif,"  pp.  278-288.

NOTE  9.  The  Lake  of  Karoon  (Birket  Karoon)  was  at  the  southern  extremity  ot
Cairo,  when  that  city  had  extended  to  about  its  present  limits.  El-Makreezee  2  suffi-
ciently points  out  its  situation  when  he  says,  that  the  great  dike  called  El-Jisr  el-
Aazam,  which  had  in  his  time  (early  in  the  fifteenth  century)  become  a  great  thorough-
fare-street, leading  from  the  Kal'at  el-Kebsh  to  the  two  bridges  called  Kanatir  es-Sibaa,
divided  this  lake  from  that  of  the  Elephant  (Birket  el-Feel).  The  extent  which  it
occupied  is  doubtful,  and  its  bed,  I  believe,  has  long  since  been  entirely  filled  up.

NOTE  10. See  the  last  note  at  the  foot  of  page  538  in  volume  ii.

NOTE  11.  This  appellation  is  very  commonly  given  to  Maghrabees  in  Egypt,  be-
cause great  numbers  of  them  pass  through  that  country  every  year  on  pilgrimage.

NOTE  12. See  Note  21  to  Chapter  xi.

NOTE  1 3.  As  Cairo  contains  so  great  a  number  of  markets,  I  suppose  the  market  of
the  Maghrabee  merchants  to  be  here  meant.

NOTE  14.  From  this  and  some  preceding  passages,  it  appears  that  the  story  of
Joodar  was  composed  after  the  conquest  of  Egypt  by  the  'Osmanlee  Turks,  or  that  it
has  been  altered  by  a  copyist.  During  the  seven  days  before  mentioned,  Joodar  in-
curred a  debt  of  a  hundred  and  forty  nusfs  to  the  baker.  He  then  took  at  least  his
usual  daily  quantity  of  bread,  of  the  value  of  ten  nusfs,  and  gave  the  baker  a  deenar,
or  piece  of  gold;  and  the  baker  still  owed  him  the  value  of  twenty  nusfs.  Now,
towards  the  close  of  the  Circassian  dynasty  in  Egypt,  the  nusf  became  less  than  a
quarter  of  a  dirhem,  and  more  than  a  hundred  and  twenty  may  have  passed  for  a
deenar.  I  do  not  know  the  precise  period  when  a  hundred  and  seventy  nusfs  passed
for  a  deenar ;  but  it  must  have  been  considerably  later.

NOTE  15.  Nearly  all  the  Maghrabees  are  of  the  Malikee  persuasion.3 — The  names
mentioned  in  the  passage  to  which  this  note  refers  signify,  respectively,  "  Servant  of
[the  God  of]  Peace,"  "  Servant  of  the  One  [God],"  "  Servant  of  the  Eternal  Lord,"  or
" —  of  the  Everlasting,"  &c.,  and  "Servant  of  the  Merciful;"  and  the  name  of  the
father,  afterwards  mentioned,  signifies  "  Servant  of  the  Loving."

NOTE  16. "  El-Abtan  "  seems  here  to  mean  "  the  Most  Profound."
NOTE  17. "  Esh-Shamardal "  signifies  "  the  Tall,"  &c.

NOTE  18.  "  Er-Raad  el-Kasif"  signifies  "the  Loud-pealing,  or  the  Breaking
Thunder."

NOTE  19.  Fas  and  Miknas  (or  Fes  and  Miknes,  as  the  names  are  pronounced  by
the  natives,)  are  the  two  cities  called  by  our  geographers  "  Fez "  and  '•  Mequinez."
They  seem  to  be  regarded  by  our  author  as  one  city.

NOTE  20. See  Note  13  to  Chapter  xvi.

NOTE  21.  Kebab  is  mutton  or  lamb  cut  into  small  morsels,  which  are  roasted  upon
skewers.

NOTE  22. "  Rahmeh  "  here  signifies  "  a  gift  of  God's  mercy."
NOTE  23. See  Note  65  to  Chapter  viii.
NOTE  24. See  Note  12  to  Chapter  v.


2  In  his  "  Khitat ; "  account  of  the  lakes  of  Cairo.  3  See  Note  1  tc  the  Introduction.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-SECOND.  217

NOTE  25.  The  stuffed  gourds  are  generally  of  the  size  and  shape  of  a  small  cucum-
ber, and  the  stuffing  usually  consists  of  rice  and  minced  meat,  delicately  seasoned  with
salt,  pepper,  and  onions,  and  often  with  garlic,  parsley,  &c.  They  are  bo'led. — The
stuffing  of  the  lamb  commonly  consists  of  minced  meat  (of  the  same  kind),  with  hazel-
nuts  or  pistachio-nuts,  &c. — Respecting  kunafeh,  kataif,  and  baklaweh,  see,  respec-
tively, Note  66  to  Chapter  iii.,  Note  23  to  Chapter  viii.,  and  Note  22  to  Chapter  viii.

NOTE  26. This  is  a  common  ejaculation  of  women.

NOTE  27.  Here,  in  the  original,  some  words  are  misplaced,  and  others  repeated-
by  a  mistake  of  a  copyist  or  compositor.

NOTE  28.  By  "the  Captain  of  the  Sea  of  Es-Suweys,"  which  is  commonly  called
by  us  "  Suez,"  is  meant,  the  chief  in  command  of  tl»e  ships  of  the  Red  Sea. — That  the
free  have  sometimes  (though  very  rarely)  been  sold  as  slaves,  has  been  shewn  in  the  last
paragraph  of  Note  13  to  Chapter  i.

NOTE  29. "  Zawiyeh  "  is  a  name  given  in  Egypt  to  a  small  mosque.

NOTE  30.  A  kowwas  (also  written  kowwas)  is  a  sergeant,  an  officer  whose  business
is  to  execute  the  commands  of  a  magistrate  or  any  person  in  authority.

NOTE  31.  Shems-ed-D61eh  (thus  commonly  pronounced  in  the  present  day),  like
Joodar,  is  an  imaginary  person.

NOTE  32. Juddeh,  vulgarly  called  Jiddeh,  is  the  port  of  Mekkeh.

NOTE  33.  The  compassing  of  the  Kaabeh  seven  times  is  one  of  the  chief  ceremonies
which  are  required  to  be  performed  by  every  person  who  enters  Mekkeh,  whether  he
be  a  pilgrim  or  not,  before  he  attends  to  any  worldly  business.4

NOTE  34. See  Note  1  to  the  Introduction.

NOTE  35.  My  sheykh  observes,  in  a  marginal  note  on  this  passage,  that  when  a
person  has  eaten  of  the  bread  of  another,  the  former  becomes  obliged  to  the  latter,  and
among  the  duties  which  he  owes  him  is  that  of  taking  leave  of  him  when  he  is  about  to
perform  a  journey.  The  reader  may  remember  a  former  note  on  this  subject.5

NOTE  36.  This  is  commonly  said  both  by  the  master  and  by  the  servant,  when  the
latter  quits  the  former  voluntarily,  or  is  dismissed ;  and  the  reply  given  in  each  case  is,
"  May  God  acquit  thee  of  responsibility."  The  custom  serves  to  illustrate  some  remarks
in  Note  26  to  Chapter  xi.

NOTE  37.  If  this  title  be  not  introduced  by  a  copyist,  we  must  suppose  that  the
author  referred  the  events  described  in  this  tale  to  the  times  of  the  Khaleefehs.

NOTE  38.  The  words  "  and  took  the  two  pairs  of  saddle-bags  "  I  have  transposed
agreeably  with  an  opinion  of  my  sheykh,  stated  in  the  margin  of  the  original.

NOTE  39.  White  garments  are  indicative  of  peace,  as  well  as  of  joy. — See  Note  78
to  Chapter  xi.

NOTE  40.  My  sheykh  questions  the  propriety  of  inserting  these  verses,  as  uttered
by  a  King.

NOTE  41.  As  a  dress  is  given  in  token  of  honour  or  favour,  one  conferred  upon
an  offender  is  a  token  of  mercy.

NOTE  42. This  is  said  as  a  compliment ;  for  the  dowry  had  not  been  paid.


*  If  any  reader  require  to  be  fully  informed  of  Burckhardt, who has described them in his

the  practices  here  alluded  to,  and  the  subsequent  "  Travels  in  Arabia."

ceremonies  of  the  pilgrimage,  he  may  consult  5  Note  21  to  Chapter  sv.

III.  2 F


218  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-SECOND.

NOTE  44.  The  Sheykb  el-Islam  la  the  chief  Muftee  (or  Doctor  of  the  Law),
the  Muftee  of  the  capital.  D'Ohsson  states,  that  this  title  was  first  conferred  by
Mohammad  II.,  when  he  conquered  Constantinople,  hi  1453,  and  there  established  the
seat  of  his  empire.

NOTE  44.  The  district  of  El-Bundukaneeyeen  was  so  called,  according  to  El-
Makreezee,6  because  it  contained  a  number  of  shops  in  which  cross-hows  were  made.
The  same  author  relates  that  its  shops  and  houses  were  destroyed  by  a  great  fire,  in  the
year  of  the  Flight  751.  The  name,  slightly  changed  (to  El-Bundukaneeyeh,  which  is
synonymous  with  the  former  name,  signifying  "  the  cross-bow  makers  "),  is  still  retained.
The  situation  of  this  district  is  near  the  well-known  Khan  of  El-Hamzawee,  and  is
between  the  quarter  of  the  Jews  and  the  principal  street  of  the  city.

NOTE  45.  El-Makreezee  states,7  that  the  quarter  of  El-Jcodareeyeh,  or  (as  the
name  is  pronounced  by  the  inhabitants  of  Cairo)  El-Goodareeyeh,  was  so  called  after  a
particular  division,  thus  named,  of  the  army  of  the  Khaleefehs  of  the  house  of  Fatimeh.
He  does  not  mention  that  it  was  previously  called  the  quarter  of  El-Yemaneeyeh  :  so
I  suppose  this  was  not  the  case.  It  is  situate  not  far  from  the  Khan  of  El-Hamzawee
(mentioned  in  the  note  immediately  preceding),  towards  the  south-west.

NOTE  46.  The  period  during  which  a  widow  must  wait  before  she  can  contract  a
new  marriage  is  here  meant.  It  is  four  months  and  ten  days.

NOTE  47.  Next  follows,  in  my  original,  the  Story  of  'Ajeeb  and  Ghareeb,  a  long
tale,  ending  with  part  of  the  Six  Hundred  and  Eightieth  Night ;  much  resembling  the
romance  of  Seyf  Zu-1-Yezen.  Its  subjects,  almost  exclusively,  are  superhuman  exploits
in  war,  and  other  extravagant  adventxires  of  men  and  Jinn,  related  in  such  a  manner
that  Von  Hammer  considers  the  story  as  an  ironical  satire  upon  the  belief  in  genii
sanctioned  by  the  Kur-an,  and  upon  the  propagation  of  El-Islam  by  compulsion.  In
this  point  of  view,  he  regards  it  as  extremely  curious,  and  it  would,  I  doubt  not,  interest
many  English  readers ;  but  I  consider  it  so  inferior  to  most  of  the  tales  of  the  Thousand
and  One  Nights,  that  I  have  no  hesitation  in  omitting  it. — Then  follows  a  series  of
thirteen  anecdotes,  ending  with  part  of  the  Six  Hundred  and  Ninety-eighth  Night.  Of
these  I  here  insert  only  four.

'Otbeh  and  Reiyi.8

It  is  related  that  'Abd-Allah  the  son  of  Maamar  El-Keysee  said,  I  performed  the
pilgrimage,  one  year,  to  the  sacred  House  of  God  ;9  and  when  I  had  accomplished  my
pilgrimage,  I  returned  to  visit  the  tomb  of  the  Prophet  (may  God  bless  and  save  him !) ;
and  as  I  was,  one  night,  sitting  in  the  Rodah,10  between  the  tomb  and  the  pulpit,  I
heard  a  gentle  lamentation,  uttered  in  a  soft  tone ;  so  I  listened  to  it,  and  the  voice
said, —

Hath  the  moaning  of  the  pigeons  of  the  lote-tree  saddened  thee,  and  excited  anxious  thoughts  in

thy  bosom?
Or  doth  the  remembrance  of  a  beauteous  damsel,  who  hath  caused  thee  troubles  of  mind,  disturb

thee?


•  In  his  "  Khitat ;"  account  of  the  districts  of  9  The  Temple  of  Mekkeh.

Cairo,  and  account  of  the  markets.  1°  "Rodah"  signifies  "a  garden." This  name

7  Idem ;  account  of  the  quarters  of  Cairo.  is  given  to  a  part  of  the  southern  portico  of  the

8  "  Le  sujet  de  cette  anecdote  est  tout-a-fait  le  great  mosque  of  El-Medeeneh,  because  the  Pro-
m6me  que  celui  du  charraant  poeme d'OIna  et  phet  said,  "  Between  my  tomb  and  my  pulpit  is  a
Riya,  par  le  celebre  Djami,  et  dont  M.  de  Chezy  a  garden  of  the  gardens  of  Paradise."— See  Burck
donne  une  elegante  traduction  dans  le  premier  hardt's  Arabia,  p.  337.

volume  du  Journal  Asiatique,  p.  1-W." (Note  in
Trebutieu  s  version,  vol.  iii.  p.  457.)


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-SECOND.  219

0  night,  that  art  tedious  to  one  constantly  disordered,  complaining  of  desire  and  of  the  failure  of

patience,
Thou  hast  rendered  him  sleepless  who  is  suffering  the  fire  of  a  love  that  burneth  like  red-hot

coals !
The  full  moon  beareth  witness  that  I  am  engrossed  by  love  of  one  who  resembleth  tne  full  moon.

1  thought  not  myself  thus  engrossed  by  love  until  I  was  afflicted  when  1  was  not  aware  of  it.

Then  the  voice  ceased,  and  I  knew  not  whence  it  came  to  me ;  wherefore  I  was  per-
plexed ;  and  presently  the  complainer  repeated  the  lamentation,  and  recited  thus  :

Hath  the  phantom  of  Reiya,  visiting,  saddened  thee,  in  the  thick  darkness  of  black-haired  night,

And  hath  love  rendered  thine  eye  sleepless,  and  the  phantom-visiter  agitated  thy  heart  ?

I  exclaimed  to  my  night,  whose  darkness  resembled  a  sea  in  which  swelling  waves  were  dashing,

0  night,  thou  art  tedious  to  a  lover  unto  whom  there  is  no  assister  nor  helper  save  the  morning !
But  the  night  replied,  Complain  not  of  my  length ;  for  love  is  the  present  cause  of  abjection.

I  arose  and  went  towards  him  on  his  commencing  the  recitation  of  these  verses,  pro-
ceeding towards  the  quarter  whence  the  voice  came,  and  he  had  not  ended  the  verses
hefore  I  was  by  him,  when  I  saw  a  young  man  of  the  utmost  beauty  :  the  down  of  the
sides  of  his  face  had  not  begun  to  grow,  and  tears  had  made  two  tracks  down  his
cheeks.  I  said  to  him,  An  excellent  young  man  art  thou  !  He  replied,  And  thou  too.
But  who,  he  asked,  is  the  man  before  me  ?  I  answered,  'Abd-Allah  the  son  of  Maamar
El-Keysee. — Dost  thou  want  any  thing  ?  said  he.  I  answered,  I  was  sitting  in  the
Rddah  and  nought  surprised  me  but  thy  voice.  With  my  life  would  I  ransom  thee.
What  is  it  that  thou  sufferest  ? — He  said,  Sit.  So  I  sat ;  and  he  said,  I  am  'Otbeh  the
son  of  El-Hobab11  the  son  of  El-Mundhir  the  son  of  El-Jamooh  the  Ansaree.12  I  went
in  the  morning  to  the  Mesjid  el-Ahzab,13  and  continued  niy  inclinations  and  prostra-
tions ;  after  which  I  withdrew  alone  to  occupy  myself  with  devotion ;  and,  lo,  some
women  came  along,  walking  with  a  vacillating  gait,  resembling  moons,  and  in  the
midst  of  them  was  a  damsel  of  surprising  loveliness,  of  perfect  beauty,  who  stopped
before  me,  and  said  to  me,  O  'Otbeh,  what  sayest  thou  of  union  with  the  person  who
desireth  union  with  thee  ?  Then  she  left  me  and  departed,  and  I  have  not  heard  any
tidings  of  her,  nor  have  I  discovered  any  trace  of  her ;  and  I  am  perplexed,  removing
from  place  to  place. — Having  said  this,  he  cried  out,  and  fell  down  upon  the  ground  in
a  fit,  and  when  he  recovered,  he  was  as  though  his  cheeks  were  dyed  with  saffron  ;14
and  he  recited  these  verses : —

1  see  you  with  my  heart  from  distant  tracts. Do  you  also  see  us  with  the  heart  from  afar  ?
My  heart  and  my  eye  are  sorrowing  for  you :  my  soul  is  with  you,  and  you  are  ever  in  my  mind.

I  should  not  delight  in  life  without  seeing  you,  even  were  I  in  Paradise,  or  the  Garden  of
Eternity.15

Upon  this  I  said  to  him,  O  'Otbeh,  0  son  of  my  brother,  turn  with  repentance  unto
thy  Lord  and  beg  the  forgiveness  of  thine  offence ;  for  thou  hast  to  experience  the
dreadful  trial  of  the  judgment  before  God.  But  he  replied,  Far  be  it  from  me  to  do
so !  I  shall  not  cease  to  love  until  the  two  karadh-gatherers  return.16 — I  remained


11  In  the  original,  El-Jeban:  corrected  by  my  my  possession,  entitled  "Khulfisat el-Wefa  fee
sheykh.  Akhbar  D&r  El -Mustafa"),  compared  with  Burck-

12  The descendants of  those  citizens of  El-  hardt's  description  of  that  city.

Medecneh  who  assisted  the  Prophet  when  he  was  '*  The  word  which  I  have  rendered  "saffron,"

obliged  to  flee  from  Mekkeh  are  called  "  Ansiirees,"  is  "  wars." The  "  wars  "  is  said  to  be  peculiar  to

from  "  Ansar,"  which  signifies  "  Assistants."  El-Yemen ;  but  the  name  of  "  wars  "  is  given  to

13  A  mosque  of  El-Medeeneh. It  is  also  called  the  "  curcuma"  of  other  countries.
"Mesjid  el-Fet-h"  (a  name likewise  given to  K  See  vol.  i.  p.  19.

several  mosques  in  the  neighbourhood  of  that  here  16  Two  men  went  forth  to  gather  karadh,  and

alluded  to),  and  "  El-Mesjidcl-Aala,"  and  is  situate  never  returned:  hence  the  proverbial  expression

upon  the  slightly  elevated  tract  which  was  for-  in  the  text. "  Karadh "  is  the  name  of  the  fruit

merly  called  "  Jebel Sela,"  and is now,  "  the  of  the  Bant  (mimosa  Nilotica  of  Linnieus)  and  of

Munakh." These  particulars  I  learn  from  Es-  the  leaves  of  the  selem  (mimosa  flava  of  Forskal).
Sumhoodee's  History  of  El-Medeeneh  (a  MS.  in


220  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-SECOND.

with  him  until  daybreak,  when  I  said  to  him,  Arise  and  accompany  us  to  the  Mesjid
[el-Ahzab].  And  we  sat  there  until  we  performed  the  noon-prayers;  and,  lo,  the
women  came ;  but  as  to  the  damsel,  she  was  not  among  them ;  and  they  said,  O
'Otbeh,  what  thinkest  thou  of  her  who  desireth  union  with  thee  ?  He  said,  And  what
of  her?  They  answered,  Her  father  hath  taken  her,  and  departed  to  Es-Semawi-h.1?
And  I  asked  them  what  was  the  name  of  the  damsel.  They  answered,  Reiya  the
daughter  of  El-Ghitreef  Es-Sularnee.13  And  he  raised  his  head,  and  recited  these  two


O  my  friend,  Reiya  hath  hastened  in  the  morning,  and  to  the  district  of  Es-Senniwch  her  caravan

hath  gone.
O  my  friend,  I  have  faulted  by  reason  of  my  weeping. Hath  any  one  else,  then,  a  tear  that  I

may  borrow  ?

I  then  said  to  him,  O  'Otbeh,  I  have  brought  with  me  great  wealth,  with  which  I
desire  to  protect  the  generous  from  disgrace.  By  Allah,  I  will  expend  it  for  thee,  that
thou  mayest  attain  thy  desire,  and  more  than  thy  desire.  Arise  then  and  accompany
us  to  the  assembly  of  the  Ansarees. — We  therefore  arose,  and  proceeded  until  we
beheld  their  assembly,  when  I  saluted  them,  and  they  returned  the  salutation  courte-
ously ;  after  which  I  said,  O  assembly,  what  say  ye  of  'Otbeh  and  his  father  ?  They
answered,  Of  the  chiefs  of  the  Arabs.  And  I  said,  Know  ye  that  he  hath  been  smitten
with  the  calamity  of  love,  and  I  desire  your  aid  and  company  to  Es-Semaweh.  They
replied,  We  hear  and  obey.  So  we  mounted,  and  the  party  mounted  with  us,  and  we
proceeded  until  we  came  in  sight  of  the  abode  of  the  Benee-Suleyrn,  when  El-Ghitreef
became  acquainted  with  our  place,  and  came  forth  in  haste  and  met  us,  saying,  May  ye
live,  O  generous  men  !  We  replied,  And  thou,  mayest  thou  live  !  We  are  thy  guests.
— And  he  said,  Ye  have  alighted  at  a  most  hospitable,  ample  abode.  And  he  alighted,
and  called  out,  O  company  of  slaves,  come  down !  So  the  slaves  came  down,  and
they  spread  the  skins  and  placed  the  pillows,  and  slaughtered  the  cattle  and  the  sheep.
But  we  said,  We  will  not  taste  thy  food  until  thou  shalt  have  performed  our  want. —
And  what,  said  he,  is  your  want  ?  We  answered,  We  demand  in  marriage  thy  gene-
rous daughter  for  'Otbeh  the  son  of  El-Hobab  the  son  of  El-Mundhir,  the  high  in
nobility,  the  good  in  origin.  And  he  replied,  O  my  brothers,  she  whom  ye  demand  in
marriage  is  at  her  own  disposal,  and  I  will  go  in  and  inform  her.  Then  he  arose  in
anger,  and  went  in  to  Reiya.  So  she  said,  O  my  father,  wherefore  do  I  see  anger  appa-
rent in  thy  countenance  ?  And  he  answered,  A  party  of  the  Ansarees  have  come  to
me,  demanding  thee  of  me  in  marriage.  She  replied,  They  are  generous  chiefs.  I  beg
forgiveness  for  them  of  the  Prophet,  on  whom  be  the  most  excellent  salutations,  and
peace !  And  for  whom  among  them,  she  asked,  is  the  demand  ? — He  answered  her,
For  a  youth  known  by  the  name  of  'Otbeh,  the  son  of  El-Hobab.  She  replied,  I  have
heard  of  this  'Otbeh,  that  he  performeth  that  which  he  promiseth,  and  attaineth  that
which  he  seeketh.  But  he  said,  I  swear  that  I  will  never  marry  thee  to  him ;  for  some
of  thy  conversation  with  him  hath  been  reported  to  me. — What  was  that  ?  she  asked.
But,  she  added,  I  swear  that  the  Ansarees  shall  not  be  rejected  in  a  foul  manner  :  so
give  them  a  fair  reply. — How  ?  said  he.  She  answered,  Make  the  dowry  heavy  to
them ;  for  then  they  will  desist.  And  lie  replied,  How  excellent  is  that  which  thou
hast  said  !  Then  he  went  forth  in  haste,  and  said,  The  damsel  of  the  tribe  hath  con-
sented ;  but  she  desireth  a  dowry  like  herself,  and  who  can  give  it  ? — I,  answered
'Abd-Allah.  And  he  said,  I  desire  for  her  a  thousand  bracelets  of  red  gold,  and  five


"  " Es-Semaweh,''  according  to  my  sheykh,  is  Koofeh. According  to  the Kamoos,  it  is  the

the  name  of  a  wide  desert  (mcfazeh),  which  I  sup-  name  of  a  place  between  El-Koofeh  and  Syria,
pose  to  be  so  called  from  its  being  adjacent  to  a i8  That  is,  "of  the  tribe  of  the  Benee-Suleyra-."

place  bearing  this  name  on  the  south-west  bank  It  is  erroneously  written  in  my  original  "Suley-

of  the Euphrates,  between  El-Basrah  and  El-  mee."


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-SECOND.


221


thousand  dirheins  of  the  coin  of  Hejer,19  and  of  burds  and  heberehs20  a  hundred  pieces,
and  five  skins  of  ambergris. — Thou  shalt  have  this  demand,  said  'Abd-Allah ;  then  dost
thou  consent  ?  He  answered,  I  do  consent.

'Abd-Allah  therefore  sent  some  persons  of  the  Ansarees  to  the  Illumined  City,21
and  they  brought  all  that  he  had  guaranteed  to  give.  The  cattle  and  the  sheep  were
slaughtered,  and  the  people  assembled  to  eat  the  food. — We  continued  in  this  state,
says  'Abd-Allah,  forty  days ;  after  which  El-Ghitreef  said,  Take  ye  your  damsel.  So
we  mounted  her  in  a  hodaj  ;  and  he  furnished  her  with  thirty  camels  laden  with  rari-
ties. Then  he  bade  us  farewell,  and  departed;  and  we  proceeded  until  there  remained
between  us  and  the  Illumined  City  one  day's  journey ;  whereupon  there  came  forth
against  us  a  party  of  horsemen  with  intent  to  plunder,  and  I  imagine  that  they  were
of  the  Benee-Suleym.  So  'Otbeh  the  son  of  El-Hobab  charged  upon  them,  and  slew  a
number  of  men,  and  he  turned  away,  wounded  by  a  thrust  of  a  spear.  Then  he  fell  to
the  earth ;  and  assistance  came  to  us  from  the  inhabitants  of  that  part,  and  they
repelled  from  us  the  horsemen.  But  'Otbeh  had  ended  his  days,  and  we  said,  Alas,


"  That  is,  coined  at  Hejer.  (Note  by  my
shcykh.)

20  The  "burdch,"  which  is  a  single  piece,  or
garment,  of  the  kind  called  "  burd,"  is  an  oblong
piece  of  thick  woollen  stuff,  used  to  envelop  the
body  by  clay,  and  also  as  a  night-covering,  and
generally  brown  or  greyish.  It  appears  to  have
been,  in  earlier  times,  always  striped ;  but  some
modern  burdehs  are  plain,  and  others  have  stripes
so  narrow  and  near  together  that  at  a  little  dis-


tance the  stuff  appears  to  be  of  one  colour.  The
Prophet's  burdeh  is  described  as  about  seven  feet
and  a  half  in  length,  and  four  and  a  half  in  width.
— The  "  hebereh  "  is  a  kind  of  burd  of  the  manu-
facture of  El-Yemen.  It  is  not  to  be  confounded
with  the  modern  "  habarah,"  which  is  mentioned
in  Note  2  to  Chapter  iii.,  and  particularly  described
in  my  work  on  the  Modern  Egyptians.

21  El-Medeeneh  (i.e. "  ttte  City  "),  originally  called
"  Yuthrib,"  has  several  appellations  of  this  kind.


222  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-SECOND.

'Otbeh !  The  damsel  therefore  heard  this,  and  she  cast  herself  down  from  the  camel,
threw  herself  upon  him,  and  cried  out  in  anguish  and  repeated  these  verses  : —

I  affected  patience;  but  I  was  not  patient :  I  only  beguiled  myself;  for  I  am  about  to  join  thee.
Had  my  soul  acted  justly,  it,  rather  than  any  of  the  creation,  had  gone  before  thee  to  destruction.
After  me  and  thee,  therefore,  none  will  be  just  to  a  friend,  nor  soul  agree  with  soul

Then  she  uttered  one  groan,  and  her  days  were  ended.  So  we  dug  for  them  one  grave,
and  interred  them,  and  I  returned  to  the  country  of  my  people,  where  I  remained  seven
years ;  after  which  I  went  again  to  the  Hejaz,22,  and  entered  the  Illumined  City  to
visit  ;3  and  I  said,  By  Allah,  I  will  go  again  to  the  tomb  of  'Otbeh.  And  I  came  to  it,
and,  lo,  over  it  was  a  tall  tree,  on  which  were  red  and  yellow  and  green  strips  of  stuff  ;**
and  I  said  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  [adjacent]  halting-place,  What  is  this  tree  called  ?
They  answered,  The  Tree  of  the  Bridegroom  and  Bride.  And  I  remained  by  the  tomb
a  day  and  a  night,  and  departed.  This  was  the  last  that  I  knew  of  'Otbeh.  May
God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !)  have  mercy  on  him  !

'Ekrimeh  and  Khuzeymeh.

There  was,  in  the  days  of  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful,  Suleyman  the  son  of  'Abd-El-
Melik,54  a  man  named  Khuzeymeh  the  son  of  Bishr,  of  the  tribe  of  the  Benee-Asad,  who
was  distinguished  by  manifest  generosity,  and  abundant  wealth,  and  beneficence  and
kindness  to  his  brethren.  He  continued  thus  until  misfortune  crippled  him,  so  that
he  became  in  need  of  the  assistance  of  his  brethren  towards  whom  he  had  exercised  his
generosity,  and  whom  he  had  comforted ;  and  they  comforted  him  a  while ;  but  after
that  they  became  weary  of  him  And  when  their  altered  conduct  towards  him
appeared  unto  him,  he  went  to  his  wife,  who  was  the  daughter  of  his  paternal  uncle,
and  said  to  her,  O  daughter  of  my  uncle,  I  have  experienced  from  my  brethren  a
change  of  conduct,  and  I  have  determined  to  confine  myself  to  my  house  until  death
shall  come  to  me.  So  he  closed  his  door  upon  himself,  and  proceeded  to  sustain  him-
self by  the  provision  that  he  had  until  it  was  consumed,  when  he  became  perplexed.

Now  'Ekrimeh  El-Feiyad  *6  Er-Raba'ee,  the  Governor  of  El-Jezeereh,2?  knew  him  ;
and  as  he  was  in  his  hall  of  assembly,  Khuzeymeh  the  son  of  Bishr  was  mentioned,  and
'Ekrimeh  El-Feiyad  said,  In  what  state  is  he  ?  So  they  answered  him,  He  hath  become
reduced  to  a  condition  not  to  be  described ;  he  hath  closed  his  door,  and  confined  him-
self to  his  house.  Upon  this,  'Ekrimeh  El-Feiyad  said,  This  hath  happened  to  him
only  in  consequence  of  his  excessive  generosity,  and  how  is  it  that  Khuzeymeh  the  son
of  Bishr  findeth  not  a  comforter  nor  a  fulfiller  of  his  duty  ?  They  replied,  He  hath
found  nothing  of  the  kind. — And  when  night  came,  he  took  four  thousand  pieces  of
gold  and  put  them  into  one  bag.  Then  he  gave  orders  to  saddle  his  beast,  went  forth
secretly  from  his  family,  and  mounted,  attended  by  one  of  his  young  men  carrying  the
money.  He  proceeded  until  he  stopped  at  the  door  of  Khuzeymeh,  when  he  took  the
purse  from  his  young  man,  and,  having  sent  him  to  a  distance  from  him,  advanced  to
the  door,  and  pushed  it.  So  Khuzeymeh  came  forth  to  him,  and  he  handed  to  him  the
bag,  saying  to  him,  Amend  with  this  thy  circumstances.  He  therefore  took  it,  and  he


53  The  Hejaz  is  that  large  and  famous  province  nature-worship  of  the  Arabs ;  for  among  the  objects

of  Arabia  containing  the  two  sacred  cities,  Mekkeh  of  this  worship  were  trees,  as  well  as  rocks,  Ac.

and  El-Medeeneh. Arab  geographers  differ  much  »  The seventh Khaleefeh of  the house of

as  to  its  limits.  Umeiyeh. He  reigned  A.D.  715 — 717.

43  That  is,  to  visit  the  tomb  of  the  Prophet.  *"  El-Feiyad " literally  signifies "the  Over-

84  Such  strips  I  have  often  seen  upon  trees  by  flowing;" and  hence,  "the  Bountiful,"  or  "the

the  tombs  of  saints. My  inquiries  never  procured  Munificent." 'Ekrimeh  was  so  called  on  account

for  me  any  information  respecting  them,  further  of  his  profuse  munificence,

than  this,  that  they  were  merely  memorials  of  *<  Mesopotamia,
visiters. Perhaps  they  are  remains  of  the  ancient


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-SECOND.  223

found  it  to  be  heavy;  whereupon  he  put  it  down  from  his  hand,  and  laid  hold  of  the
bridle  of  the  beast,  saying  to  'Ekrimeh,  Who  art  thou  ?  May  my  soul  be  thy  ransom !
— But  'Ekrimeh  replied,  O  thou,  I  came  not  to  thee  in  such  a  time  as  this  and  desire
that  thou  shouldst  know  me.  Khuzeymeh  rejoined,  Then  I  will  not  release  thee  until
thou  inform  me  who  thou  art.  So  he  said,  I  am  a  repairer  of  the  slips  of  the  generous.
— And  tell  me  more,  said  Khuzeymeh. — No,  replied  'Ekrimeh.  Then  he  departed.
And  Khuzeymeh  went  in  with  the  bag  to  the  daughter  of  his  uncle,  and  said  to  her,
Rejoice  at  good  tidings  ;  for  God  hath  brought  speedy  relief,  and  wealth ;  for  if  these
be  pieces  of  silver,  they  are  many.  Arise  and  light  a  lamp. — But  she  replied,  There  is
no  means  of  lighting  the  lamp.  So  he  passed  the  night  feeling  the  coins  with  his  hand,
and  he  felt  the  roughness  of  pieces  of  gold,  yet  believed  not  that  they  were  pieces  of
gold. — As  to  'Ekrimeh,  however,  he  returned  to  his  abode,  and  found  that  his  wife  had
missed  him,  and  asked  respecting  him,  and  been  informed  of  his  having  ridden  forth;
wherefore  she  suspected  him  for  this  conduct,  and  doubted  of  him,  and  said  to  him,
The  Governor  of  El- Jezeereh  goeth  not  forth  after  a  period  of  the  night,  without  his
young  men,  unknown  to  his  family,  save  to  a  wife  or  a  concubine.  He  replied,  God
knoweth  that  I  went  not  forth  unto  either  of  those  two.  And  she  said,  Tell  me  for
what  purpose  thou  wentest  forth.  He  replied,  I  went  not  forth  at  this  time  save  in
order  that  no  one  should  know  it.  But  she  rejoined,  I  must  be  informed.  He  said,
Wilt  thou  conceal  the  thing  if  I  tell  thee  ?  She  answered,  Yes.  So  he  acquainted  her
with  the  state  of  the  case,  and  with  that  which  he  had  done  ;  after  which  he  said,  Dost
thou  wish  that  I  should  swear  to  thee  also  ?  She  answered,  No,  no;  for  my  heart  hath
become  at  ease,  and  hath  relied  upon  that  which  thou  hast  stated.

But  as  to  Khuzeymeh,  when  he  arose  in  the  morning,  he  appeased  the  creditors,  and
put  in  order  his  affairs.  Then  he  equipped  himself,  desiring  to  repair  to  Suleyman  the
son  of  'Abd-El-Melik,  who  was  then  sojourning  in  Falasteen  ;28  and  when  he  stopped
at  his  door,  and  begged  permission  of  his  chamberlains  to  enter,  a  chamberlain  went  in
and  informed  the  Khaleefeh  of  his  being  there.  As  he  was  celebrated  for  generosjty,
and  Suleyman  knew  him,  he  gave  him  permission  to  enter ;  and  on  his  entering,  he
saluted  Suleyman  with  the  salutation  usual  to  Khaleefehs  j29  whereupon  Suleyman  the
son  of  'Abd-El-Melik  said  to  him,  O  Khuzeymeh,  what  hath  kept  thee  so  long  from  us  ?
He  answered,  The  evil  state  of  my  affairs. — And  what,  said  the  Khaleefeh,  prevented
thy  having  recourse  to  us  ?  He  answered,  My  infirmity,  O  Prince  of  the  Faithful.
The  Khaleefeh  said,  Then  how  is  it  that  thou  hast  come  now  ? — Know,  O  Prince  of  the
Faithful,  he  answered,  that  I  was  in  my  house,  after  a  portion  of  the  night  had  elapsed,
and,  lo,  a  man  knocked  at  the  door,  and  thus  and  thus  did  he. — And  he  acquainted
him  with  his  story  from  first  to  last ;  and  Suleyman  said,  Knowest  thou  the  man  ?
Khuzeymeh  answered,  I  do  not  know  him,  0  Prince  of  the  Faithful ;  for  he  was  proud,
and  I  heard  not  of  his  speech  aught  but  his  saying,  I  am  a  repairer  of  the  slips  of  the
generous.  Upon  this,  Suleyman  the  son  of  'Abd-El-Melik  burned  and  anxiously  longed
to  know  him,  and  said,  If  we  knew  him,  we  would  requite  him  for  his  kindness.  Then
he  tied  an  ensign30  for  Khuzeymeh  the  Son  of  Bishr,  and  appointed  him  Governor  of
El- Jezeereh,  in  the  place  of  'Ekrimeh  El-Feiyad.

So  Khuzeymeh  went  forth  on  his  way  to  El-Jezeereh,  and  when  he  drew  near  to  it,
'Ekrimeh  came  forth  and  met  him,  and  the  people  of  El-Jezeereh  also  came  out  to  meet
him,  and  they  saluted  one  another.  They  then  proceeded  all  together  until  Khuzeymeh
entered  the  city,  and  alighted  at  the  government-house,  when  he  gave  orders  that  a
guarantee  should  be  taken  on  the  part  of  'Ekrimeh,  and  that  he  should  be  called  to
account.  He  was,  therefore,  called  to  account,  and  Khuzeymeh  found  him  to  owe


28  Palestine.  ^  This  was  a  usual  ceremony  on  the  occasion  of

89  Saying,  "Peace  be  on  thee,  O  Prince  of  the appointing  a  Governor  of  a  province.
Faithful !"


large  sums  of  money,  and  required  him  to  pay  them  -,  but  he  said,  I  have  no  means  of
paying  aught. — They  must  be  paid,  said  Khuzeymeh.  'Ekrimeh  replied,  The  money  is
not  in  my  possession  ;  so  do  as  thou  wilt.  And  Khuzeymeh  gave  orders  to  take  him  to
prison,  and  sent  to  him  again,  requiring  him  to  pay  what  he  owed.  But  he  sent  back,
saying  to  him,  I  am  not  of  those  who  preserve  their  wealth  by  sacrificing  their  honour ;
so  do  as  thou  wilt.  And  Khuzeymeh  ordered  that  his  feet  should  be  shackled  with
irons,  and  that  he  should  be  kept  in  prison ;  and  he  remained  a  month,  or  more,  until
that  treatment  emaciated  him,  and  his  imprisonment  afflicted  him.31

Then  information  of  his  state  reached  the  daughter  of  his  uncle,32  and  she  was
grieved  thereat  extremely,  and,  having  called  an  emancipated  female  slave  who  had
belonged  to  her,  who  was  endowed  with  abundant  intellect  and  knowledge,  she  said  to
her,  Go  immediately  to  the  door  of  the  Emeer  Khuzeymeh  the  son  of  Bishr,  and  say,
I  have  an  admonition  to  give  : — and  if  any  one  ask  it  of  thee,  reply,  I  will  not  tell  it
save  to  the  Emeer.  Then,  when  thou  hast  gone  in  to  him,  demand  of  him  a  private
interview;  and  when  thou  art  alone  with  him,  say  to  him,  What  is  this  deed  that
thou  hast  done  ?  Was  the  requital  that  the  repairer  of  the  slips  of  the  generous
should  receive  of  thee  nought  save  thy  requiting  him  with  severe  imprisonment,  and
strait  confinement  in  irons  ? — The  female  slave  therefore  did  as  she  commanded ;  and
when  Khuzeymeh  heard  her  words,  he  called  out  with  his  loudest  voice,  Alas,  my
baseness !  Verily  he  is  the  person ! — She  replied,  Yes.  So  he  gave  orders  imme-
diately to  bring  his  beast,  and  it  was  saddled ;  and  he  summoned  the  chief  men  of  the
city,  brought  them  together  to  him,  and  went  with  them  to  the  door  of  the  prison,
and  opened  it.  Khu/eymeh  and  those  who  were  with  him  entered,  and  they  saw


31  Perhaps  we  should  derive  some  excuse  for  Khuzeymeh  from  the  ingratitude  of  his  friends.

32  His  wife.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-SECOND.  225

'Ekrimeh  sitting,  changed  in  condition,  the  beating  and  affliction  that  he  suffered
having  emaciated  hiui ;  and  when  he  beheld  Khuzeymeh,  the  sight  abashed  him,  and
he  hung  down  his  head.  But  Khuzeymeh  approached,  and  threw  himself  upon
'Kkriiiu'h's  head,  kissing  it.  So  'Ekrimeh  raised  his  head  towards  him,  and  said  to
him,  What  hath  occasioned  this  conduct  of  thine  ?  He  answered,  Thy  generous  actions,
and  my  evil  requital.  And  'Ekrimeh  replied,  May  God  forgive  us  and  thee !  Then
Khuzeymeh  commanded  the  jailer  to  loose  the  chains  from  him,  and  ordered  that
they  should  be  put  upon  his  own  feet ;  whereupon  'Ekrimeh  said,  What  is  this  that
thou  desirest  to  do  ?  He  answered,  I  desire  that  I  may  suffer  like  as  thou  hast
suffered.  But  'Ekrimeh  said,  I  conjure  thee  by  Allah  that  thou  do  it  not ! — Then
they  all  went  forth,  and  proceeded  until  they  arrived  at  the  mansion  of  Khuzevmeh,
when  'Ekrimeh  bade  him  farewell,  and  desired  to  depart.  Khuzeymeh,  however,  pre-
vented his  doing  so ;  and  'Ekrimeh  said,  What  dost  thou  desire  ?  He  answered,  I
desire  to  change  thy  condition;  for  my  shame  with  respect  to  the  daughter  of  thine
uncle  is  greater  than  rny  shame  with  respect  to  thee.  He  then  gave  orders  to  clear
the  bath.  So  they  cleared  it,  and  they  entered  together,  and  Khuzeymeh  himself
served  'Ekrhneh.  After  that,  they  went  forth,  and  Khuzeymeh  bestowed  upon
'Ekrimeh  a  sumptuous  dress,  mounted  him  upon  a  beast,  and,  conveying  with  him  a
large  sum  of  money,  went  with  him  to  his  house,  and  begged  his  permission  to  excuse
himself  to  the  daughter  of  his  uncle;  and  he  did  excuse  himself  to  her;  after  which,
he  asked  '  Ekrimeh  to  go  with  him  to  Suleyman  the  son  of  'Abd-El-Melik,  who  was
then  staying  at  Er-llamleh,33  and  he  consented  to  do  so.

They  both  proceeded  until  they  came  to  Suleyman  the  son  of 'Abd-El-Melik,  when
the  chamberlain  entered,  and  acquainted  him  with  the  arrival  of  Khuzevmeh  the  son
of  Bishr;  and  this  alarmed  him,  and  he  said,  Doth  the  Governor  of  El-Jezeereh  come
without  our  order!  This  is  on  account  of  nought  save  a  great  occurrence!  And  he
gave  him  permission  to  enter ;  and  when  he  entered,  he  said  to  him,  before  he  had
saluted  him,  What  tidings  bringest  thou,  O  Khuzeymeh  ?  He  answered  him,  Good,  O
Prince  of  the  Faithful. — And  what  hath  brought  thee  ?  said  the  Khaleefeh.  He
answered,  I  have  got  the  repairer  of  the  slips  of  the  generous,  and  I  wished  to  rejoice
thee  with  him,  having  seen  thine  anxious  desire  to  know  him,  and  thy  longing  to
behold  him.  The  Khaleefeh  said,  And  who  is  he?  And  he  answered,  'Ekrimeh  El-
Feiyad.  So  he  gave  him  permission  to  approach  ;  and  he  approached,  and  saluted  him
as  Khaleefeh ;  and  the  Khaleefeh  welcomed  him,  caused  him  to  draw  near  to  the
place  where  he  sat,  and  said  to  him,  O  'Ekrimeh,  thy  good  action  to  him  was  nought
but  a  trouble  to  thyself.  Then  Suleyman  said,  Write  all  thy  wants,  and  every  thing
that  thou  requirest,  in  a  note.  And  he  did  so;  and  the  Khaleefeh  gave  orders  to
accomplish  all  that  he  required  immediately.  He  gave  orders  also  to  present  him
with  ten  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  besides  the  needful  things  that  he  had  written,  and
twenty  chests  of  clothes,  which  were  also  an  addition  to  the  things  that  he  had  written  ,
after  which,  he  called  for  a  spear,  and  tied  for  him  an  ensign,  as  Governor  of  El-
Jezeereh  and  Irmeeneeyeh  34  and  Adhrabeejan  ;3'  and  he  said  to  him,  The  case  of
Khuzeymeh  is  submitted  to  thee  :  if  thou  wilt,  thou  shalt  confirm  him  ;  and  if  thou
wilt,  thou  shalt  displace  him.  'Ekrimeh  replied,  Nay,  I  will  restore  him  to  his  post,
O  Prince  of  the  Faithful.  Then  they  both  departed  from  him  ;  and  they  ceased  not
to  be  Governors  under  Suleyman  the  son  of  'Abd-El-Melik  as  long  as  he  was  Kha-
leefeh.

[Of  four  anecdotes  which  I  Hfcre  omit,  the  last  is  that  of  Ibraheem  El-M6silee  and
the  Devil,  which  I  have  already  related,  in  page  201  of  the  first  volume  of  this  work.
See  a  foot-note  (No.  29)  in  page  294  of  volume  ii.]


33  The  ancient  Rama  of  Ephraim.  K  In  the  original,  "  Azreejan."

3*  Written  in  my  original,  "Armamyeli."

in.  2  »


226


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-SECOND.


Anecdote  of  Tuo  Lovers  of
the  Tri'ie  of  the  Benee-
'Odhrah.

The  Prince  of  the  Faith-
ful, Haroon  Er-Rasheed,
being  troubled  one  night
with  exceeding  restlessness,
desired  Jemeel  the  son  of
Maamar  El-'Odhree  to  re-
late to  him  a  story,  and  the
latter  said,36—

Know,  O  Prince 'of  the
faithful,  that  I  was  fasci-
nated by  a  damsel,  ena-
moured of  her,  and  I  used
often  to  visit  her,  as  she
was  the  object  of  my  desire
and  ambition  among  the
things  of  the  world.  Then
her  family  removed  with
her,  on  account  of  the  scarcity  of  pasture;
and  I  remained  a  while  without  seting  her;
after  which,  desire  disquieted  me,  and  attracted
me  to  her:  so  my  soul  suggested  to  me  a
journey  to  her ;  and  on  a  certain  night,  desire
excited  me  to  repair  to  her.  I  therefore  arose,
and  girded  my  saddle  upon  my  she-camel,  bound  my  turban  round  my  head,  put  on
my  old  clothes,37  slung  on  my  sword,  armed  myself  with  my  spear,  mounted  my  she-
camel,  and  went  forth  to  seek  her.  I  journeyed  quickly,  and  I  was  proceeding  one
night. — it  was  a  night  of  thick  darkness,  yet,  notwithstanding  that,  I  endured  the
difficulties  of  descending  into  the  valleys  and  ascending  the  mountains, — and  I  heard
the  roaring  of  the  lions,  and  the  howling  of  the  wolves,  and  the  noises  of  wild
beasts  on  every  side.  My  reason  was  confounded,  my  mind  was  disordered,  and  my
tongue  desisted  not  from  repeating  the  praises  of  God,  whose  name  be  exalted !  And
while  I  was  proceeding  in  this  state,  sleep  overcame  me,  and  the  camel  conveyed
me  by  a  different  way  from  that  in  which  I  was  :  sleep  overpowered  me,  and,  lo,  some-
thing struck  me  upon  my  head.  So  I  awoke  alarmed  and  terrified  ;  and,  behold,  there
wore  trees  and  rivers,  and  birds  upon  the  branches  of  those  trees  were  warbling  with
their  various  tongues  and  notes,38  and  the  trees  of  that  verdant  spot  were  entangled,
one  with  another.  1  therefore  alighted  from  my  she-camel,  and  took  her  halter  in
my  hand,  and  ceased  not  to  endeavour  by  gentle  means  to  get  clear  until  I  led  her
forth  from  those  trees  to  a  desert  tract ;  whereupon  I  placed  her  saddle  right,  and
seated  myself  properly  on  her  back

I  knew  not  whither  to  go,  nor  unto  what  place  destiny  would  urge  me ;  but  I
looked  over  that  desert,  and  a  fire  appeared  to  me  at  its  further  extremity.  So  I
struck  my  she-camel,  and  proceeded  towards  the  fire  until  I  arrived  at  it;  and  I  drew


38  In  the  original,  this  anecdote  has  an  intro-
duction like  that  of  the  story  of  Ibn-Mansoor  and
the  Lady  Budoor,  save  that  it  wants  the  advice  of
Mesroor.


3?  For  travelling.

38  He  should  rather  have  said  that  owls  were
hooting;  as  the  incident  took  place  in  the  night.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-SECOND.  227

near  to  it,  and  looked  attentively ;  and,  lo,  there  was  a  Bedawee  tent  pitched,  with
a  spear  stuck  in  the  ground,  and  a  beast  standing,  and  horses,  and  pasturing  camels.
I  therefore  said  within  myself,  Probably  great  importance  attaches  to  this  tent ;  for
I  see  not  in  this  desert  any  other.  Then  I  advanced  towards  it,  and  said,  Peace  be
on  you,  O  people  of  the  tent,  and  the  mercy  of  God,  and  his  blessings .  And  there
came  forth  to  me  from  it  a  young  man,  of  the  youths  of  nineteen  years,  who  was  like
the  full  moon  when  it  shineth,  and  courage  was  manifest  in  his  countenance;39  and
he  said,  And  on  thee  be  peace,  and  the  mercy  of  God,  and  his  blessings,  0  brother  of
the  Arabs !  Verily  I  imagine  that  thou  hast  wandered  from  the  way.— I  replied,  The
case  is  so.  Direct  me :  may  God  have  mercy  on  thee ! — But  he  said,  O  brother  of  the
Arabs,  verily  this  our  district  is  a  place  abounding  with  wild  beasts,  and  this  night  is
dark  and  dreary,  exceedingly  dark  and  cold,  and  I  should  not  be  without  fear  for  thee
lest  the  wild  beast  should  tear  thee;  therefore  alight  and  rest  with  me,  and  envoy
amplitude  and  ease;  and  when  the  morrow  cometh,  I  will  direct  thee  to  the  right
way.— Accordingly  I  alighted  from  my  she-camel,  tied  up  one  of  her  fore-feet  with  the
end  of  her  halter,40  and,  having  pulled  off  the  clothes  that  were  upon  me,  attired
myself  lightly,  and  sat  a  while.  And,  lo,  the  young  man  took  a  sheep  and  slaughtered
it,  and  he  kindled  and  lighted  up  a  fire  ;  after  which,  he  entered  the  tent,  and  took
forth  some  fine  41  spices,  and  good  salt,  and  began  to  cut  off  pieces  of  the  meat  of  that
sheep,  and  to  roast  them  upon  the  fire,  and  give  to  me ;  sighing  at  one  time,  and
weeping  at  another.  Then  he  uttered  a  great  groan,  wept  violently,  and  recited  these
verses  : —

There  remaineth  not  aught  save  a  flitting  breath,  and  an  eye  of  which  the  pupil  is  confounded

[in  its  vision].

There  remaineth  not  a  joint  of  any  of  his  limbs  but  in  it  is  a  constant  disease ;
And  his  tears  are  flowing,  and  his  bowels  burning;  but,  notwithstanding  this,  he  is  silent.
His  enemies  weep  for  him  in  pity. Alas  for  him  whom  the  exulting  foe  pitieth !

So  I  knew,  upon  this,  O  Prince  of  the  Faithful,  that  the  young  man  was  a  dis-
tracted lover,  and  none  knoweth  love  but  he  who  hath  tasted  it.  I  therefore  said
within  myself,  Shall  I  ask  him  ?  But  then  I  consulted  my  mind,  and  said,  How  shall
I  attack  him  with  inquiry  when  I  am  in  his  abode?  So  I  restrained  myself;  and  ate
of  that  meat  as  much  as  sufficed  me ;  and  when  we  had  finished  eating,  the  young
man  arose,  and  entered  the  tent,  and  brought  forth  a  clean  basin,  with  a  handsome
ewer,  and  a  napkin  of  silk,  the  ends  of  which  were  embroidered  with  red  gold,  and  a
sprinkling-bottle  full  of  rose-water  infused  with  musk.  I  wondered  therefore  at  his
elegance  and  delicacy,  and  said  within  myself,  I  knew  not  elegance  in  the  desert.
Then  we  washed  our  hands,  and  conversed  a  while  ;  after  which  he  arose,  and  entered
the  tent,  and  made  a  partition  between  me  and  him  with  a  piece  of  red  brocade,  and
said,  Enter,  O  chief  of  the  Arabs,  and  take  thy  place  of  repose  ;  for  thou  hast  expe-
rienced fatigue  this  night,  and  excessive  toil  in  this  thy  journey.

So  I  entered,  and,  lo,  I  found  a  bed  of  green  brocade,  and  thereupon  I  pulled  off
the  clothes  that  were  upon  me,  and  passed  such  a  night  as  I  had  never  passed  in  my
life ;  but  all  the  while  I  was  meditating  upon  the  case  of  this  young  man  until  the
night  was  dark,  and  eyes  slept.  Then  suddenly  I  heard  a  low  voice,  than  which  I  had
never  heard  any  more  soft  or  delicate.  I  therefore  raised  the  partition  that  was  put
between  us,  and,  lo,  I  beheld  a  damsel,  than  whom  I  had  never  seen  one  more  beau  •
tiful  in  face.  She  was  by  his  side,  and  they  were  weeping,  and  complaining  to  each
other  of  the  pain  of  love  and  desire  and  ardent  passion,  and  of  the  violence  of  their
longing  to  meet  each  other.  So  I  said,  O  Allah,  how  I  wonder  at  this  second  person  !


39  Literally,  "between  his  eyes."  *n  Folding  the  leg,  and  tying  the  curd  round  it  a  few  inches

from  the  knee,  as  represented  in  the  cut  in  page  42  of  vol.  ii. 41  That  is,  finely  beaten  or  powdered.


228  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-SECOND.

For  when  I  entered  this  tent,  I  saw  not  in  it  any  one  hut  this  young  man,  and  he
had  not  any  one  with  him. — Then  I  said  within  myself,  No  doubt  this  damsel  is  of
the  daughters  of  the  Jinn  :  she  loveth  this  young  man,  who  hath  segregated  himself
with  her  in  this  place;  and  she  hath  segregated  herself  with  him.  But  afterwards
I  looked  intently  at  her,  and,  behold,  she  was  a  human,  Arab  girl :  when  she  uncovered
her  face,  she  put  to  shame  the  shining  sun,  and  the  tent  was  illuminated  by  the  light
of  her  countenance.  So  when  I  certified  myself  that  she  was  his  beloved,  I  thought
upon  the  jealousy  of  the  lover ;  wherefore  I  let  down  the  curtain,  and  covered  my
face,  and  slept.  And  when  I  arose  in  the  morning,  I  put  on  my  clothes,  performed
the  ablution  for  my  prayers,  and  acquitted  myself  of  the  divinely-ordained  prayers
that  were  incumbent  on  me  ;42  after  which  I  said  to  the  young  man,  O  brother  of
the  Arabs,  wilt  thou  direct  me  to  the  right  way  ?  Thou  hast  bestowed  favours-  upon
me. — But  he  looked  towards  me,  and  answered,  At  thy  leisure,  O  chief  of  the  Arabs.
The  period  of  the  entertainment  of  a  guest  is  three  days ;  and  I  am  not  one  who  will
let  thee  go  until  after  three  days.

I  therefore  remained  with  him  three  days,  says  Jemeel ;  and  on  the  fourth  day,
we  sat  to  converse,  and  I  conversed  with  him,  and  asked  him  his  name  and  genealogy ;
whereupon  he  said,  As  to  my  genealogy,  I  am  of  the  Benee-'Odhrah  ;  and  as  to  my
name,  I  am  such-a-one,  the  son  of  such-a-one,  and  my  paternal  uncle  is  such-a-one.
And,  lo,  he  was  the  son  of  my  paternal  uncle,  O  Prince  of  the  Faithful,  and  he  was  of
the  most  noble  house  of  the  Benee-'Odhrah.  So  I  said,  O  son  of  my  uncle,  what  induced
thee  to  do  as  I  see,  segregating  thyself  in  this  desert ;  and  how  is  it  that  thou  hast
forsaken  thy  comforts  and  the  comforts  of  thy  fathers ;  and  how  is  it  that  thou  hast
forsaken  thy  male* slaves  and  thy  female  slaves,  and  segregated  thyself  in  this  place  ?
And  when  he  heard,  O  Prince  of  the  Faithful,  my  words,  his  eyes  filled  with  tears,
and  he  answered,  O  son  of  my  uncle,  I  was  in  love  with  the  daughter  of  my  paternal
uncle,  fascinated  by  her,  distracted  with  love  of  her,  rendered  insane  by  passion  for
her,  unable  to  endure  separation  from  her ;  and  my  passion  for  her  became  excessive.
So  I  demanded  her  in  marriage  of  my  uncle ;  but  he  refused,  and  he  married  her  to
a  man  of  the  Benee-'Odhrah,  who  took  her  as  his  wife,  and  conveyed  her  to  the
place  of  his  residence  last  year.  And  when  she  was  distant  from  me,  and  I  was  pre-
vented from  seeing  her,  the  burnings  of  love,  and  the  violence  of  desire  and  ardent
passion,  induced  me  to  forsake  my  family,  and  to  quit  my  tribe  and  my  friends  and
all  my  comforts,  and  I  took  up  my  abode  alone  in  this  tent  in  this  desert,  and  accus-
tomed myself  to  my  solitude. — And  where,  said  I,  are  their  tents  ?  He  answered,
They  are  near,  on  the  summit  of  this  mountain  ;  and  every  night,  when  eyes  sleep,  in
the  stillness  of  night,  she  stealeth  away  secretly  from  the  tribe,  so  that  no  one  knoweth
of  her  movement,  and  I  accomplish  my  desire  by  discourse  with  her,  and  she  accom-
plisheth  her  desire  in  like  manner.  I  am  remaining  in  this  state,  consoling  myself
with  her  during  a  period  of  the  uight,  until  God  shall  accomplish  a  tiling  that  must
come  to  pass,  or  my  object  be  attained  in  spite  of  the  enviers,  or  until  God  shall
determine  for  me,  and  He  is  the  best  of  those  who  determine. — So  when  the  young
man  informed  me,  O  Prince  of  the  Faithful,  his  case  grieved  me,  and  I  became  per-
plexed by  reason  of  the  zeal  that  affected  me  thereupon.  Then  I -said  to  him,  O  son
of  my  uncle,  shall  I  shew  thee  a  stratagem  that  I  would  counsel  thee  to  employ,  where-
in, if  it  be  the  will  of  God,  thou  wilt  find  the  most  advisable  course,  and  the  way  to  a
right  and  successful  issue,  and  by  means  of  which  God  will  dispel  from  thee  that  which
thou  dreadest  ?  The  young  man  answered,  Tell  me,  O  son  of  my  uncle.  And  I  said
to  him,  When  it  is  night,  and  the  damsel  hath  come,  put  her  upon  my  she-camel ;  for
she  is  swift ;  and  mount  thou  thy  courser.  I  also  will  mount  one  of  these  she-camels,
and  proceed  with  you  both  all  the  night,  and  the  morning  will  not  have  come  before


42  That  is,  the  prayers  which  he  had  neglected  at  their  proper  times.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-SECOND.


229


1  shall  have  traversed  with  you  deserts  and  wastes ;  so  thou  wilt  have  attained  thy
desire,  and  got  possession  of  the  beloved  of  thy  heart.  The  expanse  of  God's  earth
is  wide,  and  I,  by  Allah,  will  aid  thee  while  I  live  with  my  soul  and  my  wealth  and
my  sword.— And  when  he  heard  this,  he  replied,  O  son  of  my  uncle,  wait  until  I  consult
her  on  this  subject;  for  she  is  intelligent,  prudent,  having  clear  judgment.

But  when  the  night  became  dark,  and  the  time  of  her  coming  had  arrived,  and  he
was  expecting  her  at  the  known  period,  she  was  behind  her  usual  time;  and  I  saw  the
young  man  go  forth  from  the  door  of  the  tent,  and  open  his  mouth,  and  begin  to  inhale
the  breeze  that  blew  from  the  quarter  whence  she  caine,  smelling  her  odour;  and  he
recited  these  two  verses  : —

O  zephyr,  thou  bringest  me  a  gentle  gale  from  the  place
in  which  the  beloved  is  dwelling.

O  wind,  thou  bearest  a  token  of  the  beloved.  Knowest
thou,  then,  when  she  will  arrive?

Then  he  entered  the  tent,  and  sat  a  while  weep-
ing; after  which  he  said,  O  son  of  my  uncle,  verily
something  hath  occurred  to  the  daughter  of  my
uncle  this  night,  and
some  accident  hath  hap-
pened to  her,  or  some
obstacle  hath  prevented
her  from  coming  to  me.
He  then  said  to  me,  Stay
in  thy  place  until  I  bring
thee  the  news.  And  there-
upon he  took  his  sword
and  his  shield,  and  after
he  had  been  absent  from
me  for  a  period  of  the
night,  he  approached
bearing  something  upon
his  hands,  and  called  out
to  me.  So  I  hastened  to

him,  and  he  said,  O  son  of  my  uncle,  knowest  thou  what  hath  happened  ?  I  answered,
No,  by  Allah.  And  he  said,  Verily  I  have  been  afflicted  with  respect  to  the  daughter
of  my  uncle  this  night ;  for  she  was  coining  to  us,  and  a  lion  opposed  her  in  her  way,
and  rent  her,  and  there  remained  not  of  her  aught  save  what  thon  seest.  Then  he
threw  down  what  was  upon  his  hand;  and,  lo,  it  was  the  ends  of  the  bones  of  the
damsel,  and  what  else  remained  of  her  bones.  And  he  wept  violently,  and,  having
cast  the  shield43  from  his  hand,  took  in  his  hand  a  bag,  and  said  to  me,  Go  not
hence  until  I  come  to  thee,  if  it  be  the  will  of  God,  whose  name  be  exalted !  He
then  departed,  and  was  absent  from  me  a  while ;  after  which  he  returned  with  the
head  of  the  lion  in  his  hand,  and  he  threw  it  down  from  his  hand,  and  demanded
water.  So  I  brought  it  to  him ;  and  he  washed  the  mouth  of  the  lion,  and  began  to
kiss  it,  and  to  weep.  His  mourning  for  her  was  excessive ;  and  he  recited  these  verses : —

Olion,  who  hast  exposed  thyself  to  destruction,  thou  hast  perished,  and  hast  roused  up  my  grief

for  my  beloved.
Thou  hast  rendered  me  solitary  who  was  lately  her  companion,  and  made  the  bowels  of  the  earth

to  be  her  grave.*4
I  say  to  time,  that  hath  afflicted  me  with  her  separation,  God  forbid  that  thou  shouldst  shew  me

a  friend  in  her  stead !


43  In  the  original,  "  bow."  **  This  is  not  quite  apt,  as  my  sheykh  has  observed ;  the  lion's

body  having  become  the  grave  of  the  greater  part  of  her.


230  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-SECOND.

He  then  said,  O  son  of  my  uncle,  I  implore  thee  by  Allah,  and  by  the  claim  of  rela-
tionship and  consanguinity  that  subsisteth  between  me  and  thee,  that  tliou  keep  my
charge.  Thou  wilt  see  me  presently  dead  before  thee ;  and  thereupon  do  thou  wash
me,  and  shroud  me  together  with  these  remains  of  the  bones  of  the  daughter  of  my
uncle  in  this  garment,  and  bury  us  both  in  one  grave,  and  inscribe  upon  our  grave
these  two  verses : —

We  lived  upon  the  earth  a  life  of  comfort,  united  in  fellowship,  and  in  abode  and  home  ;
But  fortune,  with  its  changes,  parted  us  from  each  other,  and  now  the  grave-clothes  have
united  us.

Then  he  wept  violently,  and  entered  the  tent,  and  was  absent  from  me  a  while ;  after .
which  he  came  forth ;  and  he  began  to  sigh  and  to  cry  out,  and,  uttering  a  deep  groan,
he  quitted  the  world.  So  when  1  beheld  him  thus  die,  the  event  grieved  me  and
afflicted  me  so  that  I  almost  joined  him  by  reason  of  the  violence  of  my  sorrow  for
him.  I  then  advanced  to  him,  and  laid  him  on  the  ground,  and  did  with  him  as  he
had  ordered  me.  I  shrouded  him  with  the  remains  of  the  damsel  together,  and  buried
them  in  one  grave,  and  remained  by  their  grave  three  days ;  after  which  I  departed  ;
and  I  continued  for  two  years  to  visit  them  frequently. — Such  were  the  events  of  their
history,  O  Prince  of  the  Faithful.

And  when  Er-Rasheed  heard  his  story,  he  approved  it ;  and  he  bestowed  upon  him
a  robe  of  honour,  and  conferred  upon  him  a  handsome  gift.

[The  next  anecdote  is  that  of  the  Bedawee  and  his  Wife,  related  (though  not  so
fully  as  it  is  told  in  the  original)  in  page  467  of  the  first  volume  of  the  present
work.45  Then  follows  an  anecdote  so  nearly  agreeing  with  the  story  of  Ibn-Mansoor
and  the  Lady  Budoor  that  I  think  it  needless  to  give  a  translation  of  it :  the  latter
appears  to  me  to  be  founded  on  the  former ;  or  perhaps  the  reverse  may  be  the  case.
The  next  also  I  pass  over  for  a  similar  reason  :  it  is  an  anecdote  of  Is-hak  El-Mdsilee
and  the  Devil,  very  similar  (except  in  some  particulars  rather  too  free  for  translation
and  for  insertion  in  this  work)  to  that  of  Ibraheem  El-Mdsilee  and  the  Devil,  which  I
have  before  related,  in  page  201  of  volume  i.]


Another  Anecdote  of  Two  Lovers.

Is-hak  the  son  of  Ibraheem 48  saith,  I  was  entirely  devoted  to  the  Barmekees  ;  and
while  I  was  one  day  in  my  abode,  lo,  my  door  was  knocked :  so  my  young  man  went
forth,  and  he  returned  and  said  to  me,  At  the  door  is  a  comely  youth,  asking  per-
mission to  come  in.  I  therefore  gave  him  permission,  and  there  entered  a  young
man  who  bore  traces  of  illness ;  and  he  said,  Verily  I  have  been  for  some  time  desiring
to  meet  thee,  and  I  have  need  of  thine  assistance. — And  what  is  it  that  thou  wantest  ?
said  I.  And  he  took  forth  three  hundred  pieces  of  gold,  which  he  put  before  me,
saying,  I  request  thee  to  accept  them  from  me,  and  to  compose  for  me  an  air  to  two
verses  that  I  have  uttered.  So  I  said  to  him,  Recite  them  to  me.  And  lie  recited,
saying, —

By  Allah,  0  mine  eye,  which  hast  oppressed  my  heart,  extinguish  with  my  tears  the  fire  of

my  grief.
Fortune  joins  in  reproving  me  on  account  of  my  beloved,  and  I  shall  not  see  her*?  though  I  be

wrapped  in  my  grave-clothes.

I  therefore  composed  for  him  an  air  of  a  plaintive  kind,  and  sang  it ;  whereupon
he  fainted,  and  I  imagined  that  he  had  died. He  recovered,  however,  and  said,  Re-


45  See a foot-note (Xo.  29)  in  page  294  of the  son  of  Is-hak." Perhaps  the  right  reading
vol.  ii.  may  be  "  rbrahaem  the  father  of  Is-hak;."

48  So  in  Trebutien. In  my  original,  "  Ibraheem  *<  Literally,  "  him."


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-SECOND.


231


peat  it.  But  I  conjured  him  by  Allah,  and  said,  I  fear  thou  wilt  die.  He  replied,
Would  that  such  an  event  happened !  And  he  ceased  not  to  humble  himself  and  to
supplicate  until  I  had  pity  on  him,  and  repeated  it.  And  thereupon  he  fell  into  a  fit
more  severe  than  the  first,  and  I  doubted  not  of  his  death ;  but  I  ceased  not  to
sprinkle  rose-water  upon  him  until  he  recovered  and  sat  up.  So  I  praised  God  for  his
safety,  and  put  his  pieces  of  gold  before  him,  saying  to  him,  Take  thy  money,  and
depart  from  me.  But  he  replied,  I  have  no  need  of  it,  and  thou  shalt  have  the  like  of
it  if  thou  repeat  the  air.  And  my  heart  was  dilated  at  the  prospect  of  the  money ;
wherefore  I  said  to  him,  I  will  repeat  it ;  but  on  three  conditions:  the  first  of  them
is,  that  thou  shalt  remain  with  me  and  eat  of  my  food,  in  order  that  thy  soul  may
be  strengthened ;  and  the  second,  that  thou  shalt  drink  of  the  wine  as  much  as  will
restrain  thy  heart ;  and  the  third,  that  thou  shalt  relate  to  me  thy  story.  And  he  did
so,  and  said. —

I  am  a  man  of  the  people  of  El-Medeeneh.  I  went  forth  for  recreation,  and  pro-
ceeded by  the  way  to  El-'Akeek,48  with  my  brothers  ;  and  I  saw  a  damsel,  with  girls
who  were  like  a  branch  covered  with  dew.  She  looked  with  two  eyes  whose  glance
was  not  withdrawn  save  with  the  soul  that  contemplated  them ;  and  they  remained
until  the  day  closed,  when  they  departed ;  and  I  found  in  my  heart  wounds  slow  to
heal.  So  I  returned  endeavouring  to  obtain  information  of  her;  but  found  not  any
one  to  acquaint  me;  wherefore  I  proceeded  to  seek  diligently  after  her  in  the  market  -
streets  ;  yet  found  not  any  tidings  of  her.  And  I  fell  sick  of  grief,  and  told  my  story
to  one  of  my  relations ;  but  he  said  to  me,  No  harm  shall  befall  thee.  These  days
of  the  spring  are  not  ended,  and  the  heaven  will  rain,  and  thereupon  she  will  go


18  A  valley  near  EI-Mcdccnoli.


232  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-SECOND.

forth.49  I  also  will  go  forth  with  thee,  and  do  thou  what  thou  wilt. — My  soul  there-
fore was  tranquillized  thereby  until  El-'Akeek  flowed  with  water,  and  the  people  went
forth.  Thereupon  I  likewise  went  forth,  with  my  brothers  and  my  relations,  and  we
sat  in  the  same  place  as  before ;  and  we  had  not  remained  long  when  the  women
approached,  running  like  two  horses  for  a  wager.  So  I  said  to  a  damsel  of  my  relations,
Say  to  this  damsel,  This  man  saith  unto  thee,  Well  did  he  express  himself  who  uttered
this  verse : —

She  smote  me  with  an  arrow  which  pierced50  the  heart,  and  she  withdrew,  having  left  in  it  a
wound  and  scars.

She  therefore  went  to  her,  and  said  to  her  thus;  and  she  replied,  Say  to  him,  Well
hath  he  said  who  replied  with  this  verse  : —

We  feel  the  like  of  that  which  thou  bemoanest :  so  have  patience :  we  may  see  relief  that  will
soon  heal  our  hearts.

And  I  abstained  from  speaking,  in  fear  of  disgrace,  and  rose  and  departed.  On  my
rising,  she  also  rose,  and  I  followed  her,  and  she  looked  at  me  until  I  knew  her  abode ;
and  after  this,  she  used  to  come  to  me,  and  I  used  to  go  to  her.  Thus  we  had  inter-
views with  each  other,  and  our  meetings  were  so  frequent  that  the  case  became  public
and  manifest,  and  her  father  knew  of  it.  Yet  I  ceased  not  to  be  assiduous  in  meeting
her,  and  complained  of  the  case  to  my  father,  who  thereupon  collected  our  family,  and
went  to  her  father  to  request  her  in  marriage.  He,  however,  said,  Had  that  matter
been  known  to  me  before  he  had  disgraced  her  [by  his  visits],  I  had  done  as  ye  desire :
but  the  thing  hath  become  notorious,  and  I  would  not  verify  the  assertion  of  the
people.

So  I  repeated  to  him  the  air,  says  Is-hak,  and  he  acquainted  me  with  his  abode ;
after  which  he  departed  ;  and  we  had  become  familiar  with  each  other.  Then  Jaafar
the  son  of  Yahya  sat,  and  I  presented  myself  as  was  my  custom,  and  sang  to  him  the
verses  of  the  youth ;  whereupon  he  was  moved  with  delight,  and  drank  some  cups,  and
said,  Wo  to  thee  1  Whose  air  is  this  ?— I  therefore  told  him  the  story  of  the  youth,
and  he  ordered  me  to  ride  to  him,  and  to  assure  him  of  the  attainment  of  the  object
of  his  desire.  Accordingly  I  went  to  him,  and  I  brought  him,  and  Jaafar  desired
him  to  repeat  the  story ;  wherefore  he  related  it  to  him ;  and  Jaafar  said,  Depend
upon  me  that  I  will  marry  thee  to  her.  So  his  soul  was  comforted,  and  he  remained
with  us.  And  when  the  morning  came,  Jaafar  rode  to  Er-Rasheed,  and  related  to
him  the  story  ;  and  he  admired  it,  and  commanded  that  we  should  all  present  ourselves.
He  then  desired  the  repetition  of  the  air,  and  drank  to  it ;  after  which  he  gave  orders
to  write  a  letter  to  the  Governor  of  the  Hejaz,  requiring  him  to  send  the  father  of
the  woman  with  her  family  in  an  honourable  manner  to  his  presence,  and  to  expend
upon  them  amply.  And  but  a  short  time  had  elapsed  before  they  came,  when  Er-
Rasheed  commanded  to  bring  the  man  before  him.  So  he  came ;  and  he  ordered  him
to  marry  his  daughter  to  the  youth,  and  gave  him  a  hundred  thousand  51  pieces  of  gold.
Then  the  man  returned  to  his  family ;  and  the  youth  ceased  not  to  be  one  of  the  boon-
companions  of  Jaafar  until  that  happened  which  happened  ;52  whereupon  the  youth
returned  with  his  family  to  El-Medeeneh. — May  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !)  have
mercy  upon  the  souls  of  all  of  them  !

[One  more  anecdote  follows  in  the  original ;  but  it  must  be  omitted  here. — Then
follows  the  story  of  the  Crafty  Deleeleh,  which  ends  with  part  of  the  Seven  Hundred


13  To  enjoy  the  refreshing  coolness  produced  by  51  In  Trebutien's  version,  "one  thousand,"  a

the  rain.  more  probable  sum.

50  "Afsada"is  put  in  my  original  for  "Ak sada."  5J  This  r  lludes  to  the  unhappy  fate.1  of  the  T?ar-

Thp  correction  has  been  made  by  my  sheykh.  mekee  family.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-SECOND.


233


and  Ninetieth  Night.  I  should  hesitate  to  introduce  it  in  the  present  collection  of
tales  on  account  of  its  vulgarity ;  but  it  is  rendered  more  objectionable  by  indecent
incidents,  and,  without  making  many  and  great  alterations,  I  could  not  offer  it  to  the
English  reader. — The  next  story  is  that  of  Ardesheer  and  Hayat-en-Nufoos,  ending
with  part  of  the  Seven  Hundred  and  Thirty-eighth  Night.  This  also  I  pass  over  as  it
is  little  more  than  a  repetition,  word  for  word,  of  the  story  of  Taj-el-Mulook  and  the
Lady  Dunyk.

I  must  here  add,  that  the  architectural  portion  of  the  engraving  in  page  213  is
copied,  by  permission,  from  one  of  the  valuable  drawings  of  M.  Coste,  in  the  possession
of  my  friend  Robert  Hay,  Esq.,  of  Linplum.  Of  most  of  these  drawings,  M.  Coste  had
duplicates,  of  which  he  has  published  engravings.]


III.


2  ii


CHAPTER XXIII.


COMMENCING  WITH  PART  OV  THE  SEVEN  HUNDRED  AND  THIRTY-
EIGHTH  NIGHT,  AND  ENDING  WITH  PART  OF  THE
SEVEN  HUNDRED  AND  FIFTY-SIXTH.


THE  STORY  OF  JULLANAB  OF  THE  SEA.

THERE  was,  in  olden  time,  and  in  an  ancient  age  and  period,  in
the  land  of  the  Persians,  a  King  named  Shah-Zeman,1  and  the  place
of  his  residence  was  Khurasan.  He  had  a  hundred  concubines ;  but
he  had  not  been  blest,  during  his  whole  life,  with  a  male  child  by  any
of  them,  nor  a  female ;  and  he  reflected  upon  this,  one  day,  and
lamented  that  the  greater  portion  of  his  life  had  passed,  and  he  had
not  been  blessed  with  a  male  child  to  inherit  the  kingdom  after  him
as  he  had  inherited  it  from  his  fathers  and  forefathers.  So  the  ut-
most grief,  and  violent  vexation,  befell  him  on  this  account.


THE  STORY  OF  JULLANAR  OF  THE  SEA.  235

Now  while  he  was  sitting  one  day,  one  of  his  memlooks  came  in
to  him,  and  said  to  him,  0  my  lord,  at  the  door  is  a  slave-girl  with  a
merchant :  none  more  beautiful  than  she  hath  been  seen.  And  he
replied,  Bring  to  me  the  merchant  and  the  slave-girl.  The  merchant
and  the  slave-girl  therefore  came  to  him  ;  and  when  he  saw  her,  he
found  her  to  resemble  the  Rudeynee  2  lance.  She  was  wrapped  in  an
izar  of  silk  embroidered  with  gold,  and  the  merchant  uncovered  her
face,  whereupon  the  place  was  illuminated  by  her  Beauty,  and  there
hung  down  from  her  forehead  seven  locks  of  hair  reaching  to  her
anklets,  like  the  tails  of  horses.  She  had  eyes  bordered  with  kohl,
and  heavy  hips,  and  slender  waist :  she  was  such  as  would  cure  the
malady  of  the  sick,  and  extinguish  the  fire  of  the  thirsty,  and  was  as
the  poet  hath  said  in  these  verses  : —

I  am  enamoured  of  her :  she  is  perfect  in  beauty,  and  perfect  also  in  gravity  and

in  dignity.
She  is  neither  tall  nor  short ;  but  her  hips  are  such  that  the  izar  is  too  narrow

for  them.
Her  stature  is  a  mean  between  the  small  and  the  large  :\^  there  is  neither

tallness  nor  shortness  to  find  fault  with.
Her  hair  reacheth  to  her  anklets,  [and  is  black  as  night,]  but  her  face  is  ever

like  the  day.

The  King,  therefore,  wondered  at  the  sight  of  her,  and  at  her  beauty
and  loveliness,  and  her  stature  and  justness  of  form ;  and  he  said  to
the  merchant,  O  sheykh,  for  how  much  is  this  damsel  to  be  sold  f
The  merchant  answered,  O  my  lord,  I  purchased  her  for  two  thousand
pieces  of  gold  of  the  merchant  who  owned  her  before  me,  and  I  have
been  for  three  years  travelling  with  her,  and  she  hath  cost,  to  the
period  of  her  arrival  at  this  place,  three  thousand  pieces  of  gold ;  and
she  is  a  present  from  me  unto  thee.  Upon  this,  the  King  conferred
upon  him  a  magnificent  robe  of  honour,  and  gave  orders  to  present
him  with  ten  thousand  pieces  of  gold.  So  he  took  them,  and  kissed
the  hands  of  the  King,  thanking  him  for  his  bounty  and  beneficence,
and  departed.  Then  the  King  committed  the  damsel  to  the  tire-
women, saying  to  them^  Amend  the  state  of  this  damsel,  and  deck
her,  and  furnish  for  her  a  private  chamber,  ancTtake  her  into  it.  He
also  gave  orders  to  his  chamberlains  that  every  thing  which  she
required  should  be  conveyed  to  her.  The  seat  of  government  where
he  resided  was  on  the  shore  of  the  sea,  and  his  city  was  called  the
White  City.3  And  they  conducted  the  damsel  into  a  private  chamber,
which  chamber  had  windows  overlooking  the  sea ;  and  the  King


236 THE  STORY  OF  JULLANlR  OF  THE  SEA.

commanded  his  chamberlains  to  close  all  the  doors  upon  her  after
taking  to  her  all  that  she  required.

The  King  then  went  in  to  visit  the  damsel ;  but  she  rose  not  to
him,  nor  took  any  notice  of  him.  So  the  king  said,  It  seemeth  that
she  hath  been  with  people  who  have  not  taught  her  good  manners.
And  looking  at  the  damsel,  he  saw  her  to  be  a  person  surpassing  in
beauty  and  loveliness,  and  in  stature  and  justness  of  form ;  her  face
was  like  the  disk  of  the  moon  at  thejull,  or  the  shining  sun  in  the
clear  sky ;  and  he  wondered  at  her  beauty  and  loveliness,  and  stature
and  justness  of  form,  extolling  the  perfection  of  God,  the  Creator:
lauded  be  his  power !  then  the  King  advanced  to  the  damsel,  and
seated  himself  by  her  side,  pressed  ber  to  his  bosom,  and  seated  her
upon  his  thigh ;  and  he  kissed  her  lips,  which,  bf  fann<\  to  be  sweeter
than  honey.  After  this,  he  gave  orders  to  bring  tables  of  the  richest
viands,  comprising  dishes  of  every  kind;  and  the  king  ate,  and  put
morsels  into  her  mouth  until  she  was  satisfied ;  but  she  spoke  not  a
single  word.  The  King  talked  to  her,  and  inquired  of  her  her  name ;
but  she  was  silent,  not  uttering  a  word,  nor  returning  him  an  answer,
ceasing  not  to  hang  down  her  head  towards  the  ground ;  and  what
protected  her  from  the  anger  of  the  King  was  the  excess  of  her  beauty
and-4oveliness,  and  her  tenderness  of  manner.  So  the  King  said
within  himself,  Extolled  be  the  perfection  of  God,  the  Creator  of  this
damsel !  How  elegant  is  she,  saving  that  she  doth  not  speak  !  But
perfection  belongeth  unto  God,  whose  name  be  exalted ! — Then  the
King  asked  the  female  slaves  whether  she  had  spoken ;  and  they
answered  him,  From  the  time  of  her  arrival  to  the  present  moment
she  hath  not  spoken  one  word,  and  we  have  not  heard  her  talk.  The
King  therefore  caused  some  of  the  female  slaves  and  concubines  to
come,  and  ordered  them  to  sing  to  her,  and  to  make  merry  with  her,
thinking  that  then  she  might  perkaps  speak.  Accordingly  the  female
slaves  and  concubines  played  before  her  with  all  kinds  of  musical
instruments,  and  enacted  sports  and  other  performances,  and  they
sang  so  that  every  one  who  was  present  was  moved  with  delight,
except  the  damsel,  who  looked  at  them  and  was  silent,  neither  laugh-
ing nor  speaking,  So  the  heart  of  the  King  was  contracted.  He
however  inclined  to  her  entirely,  paying  no  regard  to  others,  but
relinquishing  all  the  rest  of  his  concubines  and  favourites.

He  remained  with  her  a  whole  year,  which  seemed  as  one  day,  and
still  she  spoke  not ;  and  he  said  to  her  one  day,  when  his  love  of  her,
and  his  passion,  were  excessive,  O  desire  of  souls,  verily  the  love  that

^


THE  STORY  OF  JULLANAR  OP  THE  SEA.  237

I  have  for  thee  is  great,  and  I  have  relinquished  for  thy  sake  all  my
female  slaves,  and  the  concubines  and  the  women  and  the  favourites,
and  made  thee  my  worldly  portion,  and  been  patient  with  thee  a
whole  year.  I  beg  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !)  that  He  will,  in
his  grace,  soften  thy  heart  towards  me,  and  that  thou  mayest  speak  to
me.  Or,  if  thou  be  dumb,  inform  me  by  a  sign,  that  I  may  give  up
hope  of  thy  speaking.  I  also  beg~of  God  (whose  perfection  be  ex-
tolled !)  that  He  will  bless  me  by  thee  with  a  male  child  that  may
inherit  my  kingdom  after  me ;  for  I  am  single  and  solitary,  having
none  to  be  my  heir,  and  my  age  hath  become  great.  I  conjure  thee
then  by  Allah,  if  thou  love  me,  that  thou  return  me  a  reply. — And
upon  this,  the  damsel  hung  down  her  head  towards  the  ground,  medi-
tating. Then  she  raised  her  head,  and  smiled  in  the  face  of  the  King,
whereat  it  appeared  to  the  King  that  lightning  filled  the  private
chamber ;  and  she  said,  0  magnanimous  King,  and  bold  lion,  God
hath  answered  thy  prayer ;  for  I  am  about  to  bear  thee  issue,  and  the
time  is  [almost]  come.  But  I  know  not  whether  the  child  is  male  or
female.  And  were  it  not  for  my  being  in  this  state,  I  had  not  spoken
to  thee  one  word. — And  when  the  King  heard  what  she  said,  his  face
brightened  up  with  joy  and  happiness,  and  he  kissed  her  head  and
her  hands  by  reason  of  the  violence  of  his  joy,  and  said,  Praise  be  to
God  who  hath  favoured  me  with  things  that  I  desired ;  the  first,  thy
speaking ;  and  the  second,  thy  information  that  thou  art  about  to
bear  me  issue.  Then  the  King  arose  and  went  forth  from  her,  and
seated  himself  upon  the  throne  of  his  kingdom  in  a  state  of  exceeding
happiness;  and  he  ordered  the  Wezeei^ to  give  out  to  the  poor  and
the  needy  and  the  widows  and  others  a  hundred  thousand  pieces  of
gold  as  a  thank-offering  to  God  (whose  name  be  exalted!)  and  an  alms
on  his  part.  So  the  Wezeer  did  as  the  King  had  commanded  him.
And  after  that,  the  King  went  in  to  the  damsel,  and  sat  with  her,  and
embraced  her  and  pressed  her  to  his  bosom,  saying  to  her,  0  my
mistress,  who  ownest  me  as  thy  slave,  wherefore  hath  been  this  silence,
seeing  that  thou  hast  been  with  me  a  whole  year,  night  and  day,
awake  and  asleep,  yet  hast  not  spoken  to  me  during  this  year,  except
on  this  day  ?  What  then  hath  been  the  cause  of  thy  silence  ?

The  damsel  answered,  Hear,  O  King  of  the  age,  and  know  that  I
am  a  poor  person,  a  stranger,  broken-hearted :  I  have  become  sepa-
rated from  my  mother  and  my  family  and  my  brother.  And  when
the  King  heard  her  words,  he  knew  her  desire,  and  he  replied,  As
to  thy  saying  that  thou  art  poor,  there  is  no  occasion  for  such  an


238  THE  STORY  OF  JULLANAR  OF  THE  SEA.

assertion  ;  for  all  my  kingdom  and  my  goods  and  possessions  are  at
thy  service,  and  I  also  have  become  thy  memlook :  and  as  to  thy  say-
ing, I  have  become  separated  from  my  mother  and  my  family  and  my
brother — inform  me  in  what  place  they  are,  and  I  will  send  to  them,
and  bring  them  to  thee.  So  she  said  to  him,  Know,  0  fortunate
King,  that  my  name  is  Jullanar 4  of  the  Sea.  My  father  was  one  of
the  Kings  of  the  Sea,  and  he  died,  and  left  to  us  the  kingdom ;  but
while  we  were  enjoying  it,  one  of  the  Kings  came  upon  us,  and  took
the  kingdom  from  our  hands.  I  have  also  a  brother  named  Sfileh,5
and  my  mother  is  of  the  women  of  the  sea ;  and  I  quarrelled  with  my
brother,  and  swore  that  I  would  throw  myself  into  the  hands  of  a  man
of  the  inhabitants  of  the  land.  Accordingly  I  came  forth  from  the


sea,  and  sat  upon  the  shore  of  an  island  in  the  moonlight,  and  there
passed  by  me  a  man  who  took  me  and  conducted  me  to  his  abode,  and
desired  to  make  me  his  concubine ;  but  I  smote  him  upon  his  head,
and  he  almost  died;  wherefore  he  went  forth  and  sold  me  to  this
man  from  whom  thou  tookest  me,  and  he  was  an  excellent,  virtuous
man,  a  person  of  religion  and  fidelity  and  kindness.  But  had  not
thy  heart  loved  me,  and  hadst  thou  not  preferred  me  above  all  thy
concubines,  I  had  not  remained  with  thee  one  hour;  for  I  should
have  cast  myself  into  the  sea  from  this  window,  and  gone  to  my
mother  and  my  people.  I  was  ashamed,  however,  to  go  to  them  in
the  state  in  which  I  am  ;  for  they  would  imagine  evil  of  me,  and
would  not  believe  me,  even  though  I  should  swear  to  them,  were  I  to


THK  STORY  OF  JULLANAR  OF  THE  SEA.  239

tell  them  that  a  King  had  purchased  me  with  his  money,  and  had
made  me  his  worldly  portion,  and  chosen  me  in  preference  to  his
wives  and  all  that  his  right  hand  possessed.  This  is  my  story,  and
peaee-be  on.  thee ! — And  when  he  heard  her  words,  he  thanked  her,
and  kissed  her  between  her  eyes,  and  said  to  her,  By  Allah,  0  my
mistress,  and  light  of  my  eyes,  I  cannot  endure  thy  separation  for
one  hour ;  and  if  thou  quit  me,  I  shall  -die  instantly.  How  then  shall
the  affair  be  ? — She  answered,  0  my  master,  the  time  of  the  birth  is
near,  and  my  family  must  come. — And  how,  said  the  King,  do  they
walk  in  the  sea  without  being  wetted  ?  She  answered,  We  walk  in
the  sea  as  ye  walk  upon  the  land,  through  the  influence  of  the  names
engraved  upon  the  seal  of  Suleyman  the  son  of  Daood,  upon  both  of
whom  be  peace!  But,  0  King,  when  my  family  and  my  brethren
come,  I  will  inform  them  that  thou  boughtest  me  with  thy  money,
and  hast  treated  me  with  kindness  and  beneficence,  and  it  will  bejueet
that  thou  confirm  my  assertion  to  them.  They  will  also  see  thy  state
with  their  eyes,  and  will  know  that  thou  art  a  King,  the  son  of  a
King. — And  thereupon  the  King  said,  O  my  mistress,  do  what
seemeth  fit  to  thee,  and  what  thou  wishest ;  for  I  will  comply  with
thy  desire  in  all  that  thou  wilt  do.  And  the  damsel  said,  Know,  O
King  of  the  age,  that  we  walk  in  the  sea  with  our  eyes  open,  and  see
what  is  in  it,  and  we  see  the  sun  and  the  moon  and  the  stars  and  the
sky  as  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  this  hurteth  us  not.  Know  also,
that  in  the  sea  are  many  peoples  and  various  forms  of  all  the  kinds
that  are  on  the  land ;  and  know,  moreover,  that  all  that  is  on  the
land,  in  comparison  with  what  is  in  the  sea,  is  a  very  small  matter. —
And  the  King  wondered  at  her  words.8

Then  the  damsel  took  forth  from  her  shoulders  two  pieces  of
Kamitree 7  aloes-wood,  and  took  a  bit  of  them,  and,  having  lighted  a
fire  in  a  perfuming-vessel,  threw  into  it  that  bit,  and  she  uttered  a
loud  whistle,  and  proceeded  to  speak  words  which  no  one  understood ;
whereupon  a  great  smoke  arose,  while  the  King  looked  on.  After
this,  she  said  to  the  King,  O  my  lord,  arise  and  conceal  thyself  in  a
closet,  that  I  may  shew  thee  my  brother  and  my  mother  and  my
family  without  their  seeing  thee  ;  for  I  desire  to  bring  them,  and  thou
shalt  see  in  this  place,  at  this  time,  a  wonder,  and  shalt  wonder  at
the  various  shapes  and  strange  forms  that  God  (whose  name  be
exalted !)  hath  created.  So  the  King  arose  immediately,  and  entered
a  closet,  and  looked  to  see  what  she  would  do.  And  she  proceeded
to  burn  perfume  and  repeat  spells  until  the  sea  foamed  and  was


240  THE  STORY  OF  JULLANAR  OF  THE  SEA.

agitated,  and  there  came  forth  from  it  a  young  man  of  comely  form,
of  beautiful  countenance,  like  the  moon  at  the  full,  with  shining  fore-
head, and  red  cheek,  and  hair  resembling  pearls  and  jewels ;  he  was,
of  all  the  creation,  the  most  like  to  his  sister,  and  the  tongue  of  the
case  itself  seemed -to  recite  in  his  praise  these  verses  : —

The  moon  becometh  perfect  onoe  in  each  month ;  but  the  loveliness  of  thy  face

is  perfect  every  day.
Its  abode  is  in  the  heart  of  one  sign  at  a  time ;  but  thine  abode  is  in  all  hearts

at  once.

Afterwards,  there  came  forth  from  the  sea  a  grizzly-haired  old  woman,
and  with  her  five  damsels,  resembling  moons,  and  bearing  a  likeness
to  the  damsel  whose  name  was  Jullanar. Then  the  King  saw  the
young  man  and  the  old  woman  and  the  damsels  walk  upon  the  surface
of  the  water  until  they  came  to  the  damsel  Jullanar;  and  when  they
drew  near  to  the  window,  and  Jullanar  beheld  them,  she  rose  to  them
and  met  them  with  joy  and  happiness.  On  their  seeing  her,  they
knew  her,  and  they  went  in  to  her  and  embraced  her,  weeping
violently;  and  they  said  to  her,  O  Jullanar,  how  is  it  that  thou
leavest  us  for  four  years,  and  we  know  not  the  place  in  which  thou
art  ?  By_jUlah,  the  world  was  contracted  unto  us^  by  reason  of  the
distress  occasioned  by  thy  separation,  and  we  had  no  delight  in  food
nor  in  drink  a  single  day,  weeping  night  and  day  on  account  of  the
excess  of  our  longing  to  see  thee. — Then  the  damsel  began  to  kiss  the
hand  of  the  young  man  her  brother,  and  the  hand  of  her  mother,  and
so  also  the  hands  of  the  daughters  of  her  uncle,  and  they  sat  with  her
a  while,  asking  her  respecting  her  state,  and  the  things  that  had  hap-
pened to  her,  and  her  present  condition.

So  she  said  to  them,  Know  ye,  that  when  I  quitted  you,  and
came  forth  from  the  sea,  I  sat  upon  the  shore  of  an  island,  and  a  man
took  me,  and  sold  me  to  a  merchant,  and  the  merchant  brought  me
to  this  city,  and  sold  me  to  its  King  for  ten  thousand  pieces  of  gold.
Then  he  treated  me  with  attention,  and  forsook  all  his  concubines  and
his  women  and  his  favourites  for  my  sake,  and  was  diverted  by  his
regard  for  me  from  every  thing  that  be  possessed  and  what  was  in  his
city. — And  when  her  brother  heard  her  words,  he  said,  Praise  be  to
God  who  hath  reunited  us  with  thee  !  But  it  is  my  desire,  0  my
sister,  that  thou  wouldst  arise  and  go  with  us  to  our  country  and  our
family. — So  when  the  King  heard  the  words  of  her  brother,  his  reason
fled  in  consequence  of  his  fear  lest  the -damsel  should  accept  the  pro-


THE  STORY  OF  JULLAN^R  OF  THE  SEA.


241


posal  of  her  brother,  and  he  could  not  prevent  her,  though  he  was
inflamed  with  love  of  her ;  wherefore  he  became  perplexed,  in  violent
fear  of  her  separation.  But  as  to  the  damsel  Jullanar,  on  hearing  the
words  of  her  brother,  she  said,  By  Allah,  O  my  brother,  the  man  who
purchased  me  is  the  King  of  this  city,  and  he  is  a  great  King,  and  a


man  of  wisdom,  generous,  of  the  utmost  libera-  j

lity. He  hath  treated  me  with  honour,  and  he  :i  i|^

is  a  person  of  kindness,  and  of  great  wealth,  ri^X,"
in.  2 i


242  THE  STORY  OF  JULLANAR  OF  THE  SEA.

but  hath  no  male  child  nor  a  female.  He  hath  shewn  favour  to  me,
and  acted  well  to  me  in  every  respect ;  and  from  the  day  when  I  came
to  him  to  the  present  time,  I  have  not  heard  from  him  a  bad  word  to
grieve  my  heart ;  but  he  hath  not  ceased  to  treat  me  with  courtesy,
and  hath  done  nothing  without  consulting  me,  and  I  am  living  with
him  in  the  best  of  states,  and  the  most  perfect  of  enjoyments.  More-
over, if  I  quitted  him,  he  would  perish  :  for  he  can  never  endure  my
separation  even  for  a  single  hour.  I  also,  if  I  quitted  him,  should
die,  by  reason  of  the  violence  of  my  love  for  him  in  consequence  of
the  excess  of  his  kindness  to  me  during  the  period  of  my  residence
with  him ;  for  if  my  father  were  living,  my  condition  with  him  would
not  be  like  my  condition  with  this  great,  glorious  King.  Ye  have
seen,  too,  that  I  am  about  to  bear  him  issue ;  and  praise  be  to  God
who  hath  made  me  to  be  a  daughter  of  a  King  of  the  Sea,  and  my
husband  the  greatest  of  the  Kings  of  the  Land.  God  (whose  name
be  exalted !)  afflicted  me  not,  but  compensated  me  well ;  and  as  the
King  hath  not  a  male  child  nor  a  female,  I  beg  God  (whose  name  be
exalted !)  to  bless  me  with  a  male  child  that  may  inherit  of  this  great
King  these  buildings  and  palaces  and  possessions  of  which  God  hath
made  him  owner. — And  when  her  brother,  and  the  daughters  of  her
uncle,  heard  her  words,  their  eyes  became  cheerful  thereat,  and  they
said  to  her,  0  Jullanar,  thou  knowest  the  place  which  thou  hast  in
our  estimation,  and  art  acquainted  with  our  affection  for  thee,  and
thou  art  assured  that  thou  art  the  dearest  of  all  persons  to  us,  and  art
certain  that  we  desire  for  thee  comfort,  without  trouble  or  toil.
Therefore  if  thou  be  not  in  a  state  of  comfort,  arise  and  accompany
us  to  our  country  and  our  family ;  but  if  thou  be  comfortable  here,
in  honour  and  happiness,  this  is  our  desire  and  wish  ;  for  \ve  desire
not  aught  save  thy  comfort  in  every  respect. — And  Jullanar  replied,
By  Allah,  I  am  in  a  state  of  the  utmost  comfort  and  enjoyment,  in
honour  and  desirable  happiness.  So  when  the  King  heard  these
words  from  her,  he  rejoiced,  and  his  heart  became  tranquillized,  and
he  thanked  her  for  them  ;  his  love  for  her  increased,  and  penetrated
to  his  heart's  core,  and  he  knew  that  she  loved  him  as  he  loved  her,
and  that  she  desired  to  remain  with  him  to  see  his  child  which  she
was  to  bear  him

Then  the  damsel  Jullanar  of  the  Sea  gave  orders  to  the  female
slaves  to  bring  forward  the  tables  and  the  viands  of  all  kinds ;  and
Jullanar  herself  was  the  person  who  superintended  the  preparation  of
the  viands  in  the  kitchen.  So  the  female  slaves  brought  to  them  the


THE  STORY  OF  JULLANAR  OF  THE  SEA.  243

viands  and  the  sweetmeats  and  the  fruits ;  and  she  ate  with  her
family.  But  afterwards  they  said  to  her,  0  Jullanar,  thy  master  is  a
man  who  is  a  stranger  to  us,  and  we  have  entered  his  abode  without
his  permission  and  without  his  knowledge  of  us,  and  thou  praisest  to
us  his  excellence,  and  hast  also  brought  to  us  his  food,  and  we  have
eaten,  but  have  not  had  an  interview  with  him,  nor  seen  him,  nor  hath
he  seen  us,  nor  come  into  our  presence,  nor  eaten  with  us,  that  the
bond  of  bread  and  salt  might  be  established  between  us.  And  they
all  desisted  from  eating,  and  were  enraged  at  her,  and  fire  hegan_J;o
issue  fronutheiiMnouths  as  from  cressets.8  So  when  the  King  beheld
this,  his  reason  fled,  in  consequence  of  the  violence  of  his  fear  of  them.
Then  Jullanar  rose  to  them,  and  soothed  their  lieart§^  after  which  she
walked  along  until  she  entered  the  closeVm  which  was  the  King  her
master;  and  she  said  to  him,  0  my  master,  didst  thou  see,  and  didst
thou  hear  my  thanks  to  thee,  and  my  praise  of  thee  in  the  presence  of
my  family ;  and  didst  thou  hear  what  they  said  to  me,  that  they
desired  to  take  me  with  them  to  our  family  and  our  country  ?  The
King  answered  her,  I  heard  and  saw.  May  God  recompense  thee  for
us  well !  By  Allah,  I  knew  not  the  extent  of  the  love  that  thou
feelest  for  me  until  this  blessed  hour,  and  I  doubt  not  of  thy  love  for
me. — She  replied,  0  my  master,  is  the  recompense  of  beneficence
aught  but  beneficence  ?  Thou  hast  treated  me  with  beneficence,  and
bestowed  upon  me  great  favours,  and  I  see  that  thou  lovest  me  with
the  utmost  love,  and  thou  hast  shewn  me  every  kindness,  and  preferred
me  above  all  whom  thou  lovest  and  desirest.  How  then  could  my
heart  be  happy  to  quit  thee,  and  to  depart  from  thee ;  and  how  could
that  be  when  thou  bestowest  benefits  and  favours  upon  me  ?  Now  I
desire  of  thy  goodness  that  thou  come  and  salute  my  family,  and
see  them,  and  that  they  may  see  thee,  and  that  pleasure  and  mutual
friendship  may  ensue.  But  know,  O  King  of  the  age,  that  my
brother  and  my  mother  and  the  daughters  of  my  uncle  have  conceived
a  great  love  for  thee  in  consequence  of  my  praising  thee  to  them,  and
they  have  said,  We  will  not  depart  from  thee  to  our  country  until  we
have  an  interview  with  the  King,  and  salute  him.  So  they  desire  to
behold  thee,  and  to  become  familiar  with  thee. — And  the  King  said
to  her,  I  hear  and  obey ;  for  this  is  what  I  desire.  He  then  rose
from  his  place,  and  went  to  them,  and  saluted  them  with  the  best
salutation;  and  they  hastened  to  rise  to  him;  they  met  him  in  the
most  polite  manner,  and  he  sat  with  them  in  the  pavilion,  ate  with
them  at  the  table,  and  remained  with  them  for  a  period  of  thirty


244  THE  STORY  OF  JULLANAR  OF  THE  SEA.

days.  Then  they  desired  to  return  to  their  country  and  abode.  So
they  took  leave  of  the  King,  and  the  Queen  Julla>wir  of  the  Sea,  and
departed  from  them,  after  the  King  had  treated  them  with  the  utmost
honour.

After  this,  Jullanar  fulfilled  her  period,  and  she  gave  birth  to  a
boy,  resembling  the  moon  at  the  full,  whereat  the  King  experienced
the  utmost  happiness,  because  he  had  not  before  been  blessed  with  a
son  nor  a  daughter  during  his  life.  They  continued  the  rejoicings,  and
the  decoration  [of  the  city],  for  a  period  of  seven  days,  in  the  utmost
happiness  and  enjoyment ;  and  on  the  seventh  day,  the  mother  of  the
Queen  Jullanar,  and  her  brother,  and  the  daughters  of  her  uncle,  all
came,  when  they  knew  that  Jullanar  had  given  birth  to  her  child.
The  King  met  them,  rejoicing  at  their  arrival,  and  said  to  them,  1
said  that  I  would  not  name  my  son  until  ye  should  come,  and  that  ye
should  name  him  according  to  your  knowledge.  And  they  named
him  Bedr  Basim  ;9  all  of  them  agreeing  as  to  this  name.  They  then
presented  the  boy  to  his  maternal  uncle,  Saleh,  who  took  him  upon
his  hands,  and,  rising  with  him  from  among  them,  walked  about  the
palace  to  the  right  and  left ;  after  which,  he  went  forth  with  him
from  the  palace,  descended  with  him  to  the  sea,  and  walked  on  until
be  became  concealed  from  the  eye  of  the  King.  So  when  the  King
saw  that  he  had  taken  his  son,  and  disappeared  from  him  at  the
bottom  of  the  sea,  he  despaired  of  him,  and  began  to  weep  and.  wa.il.
But  Jullanar,  seeing  him  in  this  state,  said  to  him,  O  King  of  the
age,  fear  not  nor  grieve  for  thy  son ;  for  I  love  my  child  more  than
thou,  and  my  child  is  with  my  brother ;  therefore  care  not  for  the  sea,
nor  fear  his  being  drowned.  If  my  brother  knew  that  any  injury  would
betide  the  little  one,  he  had  not  done  what  he  hath  done ;  and  pre-
sently he  will  bring  thee  thy  son  safe,  if  it  be  the  will  of  God,  whose
name  be  exalted ! — And  but  a  short  time  had  elapsed  when  the  sea
was  agitated  and  disturbed,  and  the  uncle  of  the  little  one  came  forth
from  it,  having  with  him  the  King's  son  safe,  and  he  flew  from  the
sea  until  he  came  to  them,  with  the  little  one  in  his  arms,  silent,  and
his  face  resembling  the  moon  in  the  night  of  its  fulness.  Then  the
uncle  of  the  little  one  looked  towards  the  King,  and  said  to  him,
Perhaps  thou  fearedst  some  injury  to  thy  son  when  I  descended  into
the  sea,  having  him  with  me.  So  he  replied,  Yes,  O  my  master,  I
feared  for  him,  and  I  did  not  imagine  that  he  would  ever  come  forth
from  it  safe.  And  Saleh  said  to  him,  O  King  of  the  Land,  we  applied
to  his  eyes  a  colly rium  that  we  know,  and  repeated  over  him  the


THE  STORY  OF  JULLANAll  OF  THE  SEA.  245

names  engraved  upon  the  seal  of  Suleyman  the  son  of  Daood  (on
both  of  whom  be  peace !) ;  for  when  a  child  is  born  among  us,  we  do
to  him  as  1  have  told  thee.  Fear  not  therefore,  on  his  account,
drowning,  nor  suffocation,  nor  all  the  seas  if  he  descend  into  them.
Like  as  ye  walk  upon  the  land,  we  walk  in  the  sea.

He  then  took  forth  from  his  pocket  a  case,  written  upon,  and
sealed ;  and  he  broke  its  seal,  and  scattered  its  contents,  whereupon
there  fell  from  it  strung  jewels,  consisting  of  all  kinds  of  jacinths  and
other  gems,  together  with  three  hundred  oblong  emeralds,  and  three
hundred  oblong  large  jewels,  of  the  size  of  the  eggs  of  the  ostrich,  the
light  of  which  was  more  resplendent  than  the  light  of  the  sun  and  the
moon.  And  he  said,  0  King  of  the  age,  these  jewels  and  jacinths  are
a  present  from  me  unto  thee ;  for  we  never  brought  thee  a  present,
because  we  knew  not  the  place  of  Jullamir's  abode,  nor  were  ac-
quainted with  any  trace  or  tidings  of  her.  So  when  we  saw  thee  to
have  become  united  to  her,  and  that  we  all  had  become  one,  we
brought  thee  this  present ;  and  after  every  period  of  a  few  days,  we
will  bring  thee  the  like  of  it,  if  it  be  the  will  of  God,  whose  name  be
exalted  !  For  these  jewels  and  jacinths  with  us  are  more  plentiful
than  the  gravel  upon  the  land,  and  we  know  the  excellent  among
them,  and  the  bad,  and  all  the  ways  to  them,  and  the  places  where
they  are  found,  and  they  are  easy  of  access  to  us. — And  when  the
King  looked  at  those  jewels  and  jacinths,  hisjeason  was  confounded
and  his  mind  was  bewildered,  and  he  said,  By  Allah,  one  of  these
jewels  is  worth  my  kingdom !  Then  the  King  thanked  Saleh  of  the
Sea  for  his  generosity,  and,  looking  towards  the  Queen  Jullanar,  he
said  to  her,  I  am  abashed  at  thy  brother ;  for  he  hath  shewn  favour
to  me,  and  presented  me  with  this  magnificent  present,  which  the
people  of  the  earth  would  fail  to  procure.  So  Jullanar  thanked  her
brother  for  that  which  he  had  done ;  but  her  brother  said,  0  King  of
the  age,  thou  hadst  a  prior  claim  upon  us,  and  to  thank  thee  hath
been  incumbent  on  us;  for  thou  hast  treated  my  sister  with  bene-
ficence, and  we  have  entered  thine  abode,  and  eaten  of  thy  provision  ;
and  the  poet  hath  said, —

Had  I  wept  before  she  did,  in  my  passion  for  Soada,  I  had  healed  my  soul  before

repentance  came.
But  she  wept  before  7  did:  her  tears  drew  mine;  and  I  said,  The  merit  belongs

to  the  precedent.

Then  Saleh  said,  If  we  stood  serving  thee,,  0  King  of  the  age,  a  thou-
sand years,  regarding  nothing  else,  we  could  not  requite  thee,  and


our  doing  so  would  be  but  a  small  thing  in  comparison  with  thy
desert. — The  King  therefore  thanked  him  eloquently.  And  Salch
remained  with  the  King,  he  and  his  mother  and  the  daughters  of  his
uncle,  forty  days  ;  after  which  he  arose  and  kissed  the  ground  before
the  King,  the  husband  of  his  sister.  So  the  King  said  to  him,  What
dost  thou  desire,  O  Saleh.  ?  And  he  answered,  0  King  of  the  age,
thou  hast  conferred  favours  upon  us,  and  we  desire  of  thy  goodness
that  thou  wouldst  grant  us  a  boon,  and  give  us  permission  to  depart ;
for  we  have  become  desirous  of  seeing  again  our  family  and  our
country  and  our  relations  and  our  homes.  We  will  not,  however,
relinquish  the  service  of  thee,  nor  that  of  my  sister  nor  the  son  of  my
sister ;  and  by  Allah,  O  King  of  the  age,  to  quit  you  is  not  pleasant  to
my  heart ;  but  how  can  we  act,  when  we  have  been  reared  in  the  sea,  and
the  land  is  not  agreeable  to  us  ? — So  when  the  King  heard  his  words,
he  rose  upon  his  feet,  and  bade  farewell  to  Saleh  of  the  Sea  and  his
mother  and  the  daughters  of  his  uncle,  and  they  wept  together  on
account  of  the  separation.  Then  they  said  to  the  King,  In  a  short
time  we  shall  be  with  you,  and  we  will  never  relinquish  you,  but  after
every  period  of  a  few  days  we  will  visit  you.  And  after  this,  they
flew  towards  the  sea,  and  descended  into  it,  and  disappeared.

The King  treated  Jullanar  with  beneficence,  and  honoured  her


THE  STORY  OF  JULLANA"R  OF  THE  SEA.  247

exceedingly,  and  the  little  one  grew  up  well ;  and  his  maternal  uncle,
with  his  grandmother  and  the  daughters  of  his  uncle,  after  every
period  of  a  few  days  used  to  come  to  the  residence  of  the  King,  and
to  remain  with  him  a  month,  and  two  months,  and  then  return  to
their  places.  The  boy  ceased  not,  with  increase  of  age,  to  increase  in
beauty  and  loveliness  until  his  agfTbecame  fifteen  years  ;  and  he  was
incomparable  in  his  perfect  beauty,  and  his  stature  and  his  justness  of
form.  He  had  learned  writing  and  reading,  and  history  and  grammar
and  philology,  and  archery;  and  he  learned  to  play  with  the  spear;
and  he  also  learned  horsemanship,  and  all  that  the  sons  of  the  Kings
required.  There  was  not  one  of  the  children  of  the  inhabitants  of  the
city,  men  and  women,  that  talked  not  of  the  charms  of  that  young
man ;  for  he  was  of  surpassing  loveliness  and  perfection ;  and  the
King  loved  him  greatly.  Then  the  King  summoned  the  Wezeer.  and
the  emeers,  and  the  lords  of  the  empire,  and  the  great  men  of  the
kingdom,  and  made  them  swear  by  binding  oaths  that  they  would
make  Bedr  Basim  King  over  them  after  his  father;  so  they  swore  to
him  by  binding  oaths,  and  rejoiced  thereat;  and  the  King  himself
was  beneficent  to  the  people,  courteous  in  speech,  of  auspicious  aspect,
saying  nothing  but  what  was  for  the  good  of  the  people.  And  on  the
following  day,  the  King  mounted,  together  with  the  lords  of  the
empire  and  all  the  emeers,  and  all  the  soldiers  walked  with  him
through  the  city  and  returned;  and  when  they  drew  near  to  the
palace,  the  King  dismounted  to  wait  upon  his  son,  and  he  and  all  the
emeers  and  the  lords  of  the  empire  bore  the  ghashiyeh 10  before  him.
Each  one  of  the  emeers  and  the  lords  of  the  empire  bore  the  ghashiyeh
a  while ;  and  they  ceased  not  to  proceed  until  they  arrived  at  the
vestibule  of  the  palace ;  the  King's  son  riding.  Thereupon  he
alighted,  and  his  father  embraced  him,  he  and  the  emeers,  and  they
seated  him  upon  the  throne  of  the  kingdom,  while  his  father  stood,  as
also  did  the  emeers,  before  him.  Then  Bedr  Basim  judged  the
jreople,  displaced  the  tyrannical  and  invested  the  just,  and  continued
to  give  judgment  until  near  midday,  when  he  rose  from  the  throne  of
the  kingdom,  and  went  in  to  his  mother  Jullanar  of  the  Sea,  having
upon  his  head  the  crown,  and  resembling  the  moon.  So  when  his
mother  saw  him,  and  the  King  before  him,  she  rose  to  him  and  kissed
him,  and  congratulated  him  on  his  elevation  to  the  dignity  of  Sultan ;
and  she  offered  up  a  prayer  in  favour  of  him  and  his  father  for  length
of  life,  and  victory  over  their  enemies.  He  then  sat  with  his  mother
and  rested ;  and  when  the  time  of  afternoon-prayers  arrived,  he  rode


248  THE  STORY  OF  JULLANA"R  OF  THE  SEA

with  the  emeers  before  him  until  he  came  to  the  horse-course,  where
he  played  with  arms  till  the  time  of  nightfall,  together  with  his  father
and  the  lords  of  his  empire ;  after  which  he  returned  to  the  palace,
with  all  the  people  before  him.  Every  day  he  used  to  ride  to  the
horse-course ;  and  when  he  returned,  he  sat  to  judge  the  people,  and
administered  justice  between  the  emeer  and  the  poor  man.  He  ceased
not  to  do  thus  for  a  whole  year ;  and  after  that,  he  used  to  ride  to
the  chase,  and  to  go  about  through  the  cities  and  provinces  that  were
under  his  rule,  making  proclamation  of  safety  and  security,  and  doing
as  do  the  Kings  ;  and  he  was  incomparable  among  the  people  of  his
age  in  glory  and  courage,  and  in  justice  to  the  people.

Now  it  came  to  pass  that  the  old  King,  the  father  of  Bedr  Basim,
fell  sick  one  day,  whereupon  his  heart  throbbed,  and  he  felt  that  he
was  about  to  be  removed  to  the  mansion  oL- eternity.  Then  his
malady  increased  so  that  he  was  at  the  point  of  death.  He  therefore
summoned  his  son,  and  charged  him  to  take  care  of  his  subjects  and
his  mother  and  all  the  lords  oi  his  empire  and  all  the  dependants.
He  also  made  them  swear,  and  covenanted  with  them,  that  they
would  obey  his  son,  a  second  time ;  and  he  confided  in  their  oaths.
And  after  this  he  remained  a  few  days,  and  was  admitted  to  the
mercy  of  God,  whose  name  be  exalted !  His  son  Bedr  Basim,  and
his  wife  Jullanar  and  the  emeers  and  wezeers  and  the  lords  of  the
empire  mourned  over  him;  and  they  made  for  him  a  tomb,  and
buried  him  in  it,  and  continued  the  ceremonies  of  mourning  for  him
a  whole  month.  Saleh,  the  brother  of  Jullanar,  and  her  mother,  and
the  daughters  of  her  uncle,  also  came,  and  consoled  them  for  the  loss
of  the  King;  and  they  said,  0  Jullanar,  if  the  King  hath  died,  he

Vhath  left  this  ingenuous  youth,  and  he  who  hath  left  such  as  he  is
hath  not  died.  This  is  he  who  hath  not  an  equal,  the  crushing  lion,
and  the  splendid  moon. — Then  the  lords  of  the  empire,  and  the
grandees,  went  in  to  the  King  Bedr  Basim,  and  said  to  him,  0  King,
there  is  no  harm  in  mourning  for  the  King ;  but  mourning  becometh
not  any  save  women;  therefore  trouble  not  thy  heart  and  ours  by
mourning  for  thy  father;  for  he  hath  died  and  left  thee,  and  he  who
hath  left  such  as  thou  art  jhatk  not  died.  They  proceeded  to  address
him  with  soft  words,  and  to  console  him,  and  after  that  they  con-
ducted him  into  the  bath  ;  and  when  he  came  forth  from  the  bath,  he
put  on  a  magnificent  suit  woven  of  gold,  adorned  with  jewels  and
jacinths,  and  he  put  the  royal  crown  upon  his  head,  seated  himself
upon  the  throne  of  his  kingdom,  and  performed  the  affairs  of  the


THE  STORY  OF  BEDH  BASIM  AND  J0HARAI1.  249

people,  deciding  equitably  between  the  strong  and  the  weak,  and
exacting  for  the  poor  man  his  due  from  the  emeer;  wherefore  the
people  loved  him  exceedingly.  Thus  he  continued  to  do  for  the  space
of  a  whole  year ;  and  after  every  short  period,  his  family  of  the  sea
visited  him ;  so  his  life  was  pleasant,  and  his  eye  was  cheerful :  and
he  ceased  not  to  live  in  this  state  for  a  length  of  time.


THE  STORY  OF  BEDR  BASIM  AND  J6HARAH.

After  this  it  happened  that  his  maternal  uncle  came  in  one  night
to  Jullanar,  and  saluted  her;  whereupon  she  rose  to  him  and
embraced  him,  and  seated  him  by  her  side,  and  said  to  him,  O  my
brother,  how  art  thou,  and  how  are  my  mother  and  the  daughters  of
my  uncle  ?  He  answered  her,  O  my  sister,  they  are  well,  in  pros-
perity and  great  happiness,  and  nothing  is  wanting  to  them  but  the
sight  of  thy  face.  Then  she  offered  him  some  food,  and  he  ate  ;  and,
conversation  ensuing  between  them,  they  mentioned  the  King  Bedr
Basim,  and  his  beauty  and  loveliness,  and  his  stature  and  justness  of
form,  and  his  horsemanship  and  intelligence  and  polite  accomplish-
ments. Now  the  King  Bedr  Basim  was  reclining;  and  when  he
heard  his  mother  and  his  uncle  mentioning  him  and  conversing

III.  2 K


250  THE  STORY  OF  BEDR  BXSIM  AND  J6HARAH.

respecting  him,  he  pretended  that  he  was  asleep,  and  listened  to  their
talk.  And  Saleh  said  to  his  sister  Jullanar,  The  age  of  thy  son  is
seventeen  years,  and  he  hath  not  married,  and  we  fear  that  something
may  happen  to  him,  and  he  may  not  have  a  son.  I  therefore  desire
to  marry  him  to  one  of  the  Queens  of  the  Sea,  that  shall  be  like  him
in  beauty  and  loveliness. — So  Jullanar  replied,  Mention  them  to  me ;
for  I  know  them.  Accordingly  he  proceeded  to  enumerate  them  to
her,  one  after  another,  while  she  said,  I  approve  not  of  this  for  my
son,  nor  will  I  marry  him  save  to  her  who  is  like  him  in  beauty  and
loveliness,  and  intelligence  and  religion,  and  polite  accomplishments
and  kindness  of  nature,  and  dominion  and  rank  and  descent.  And
he  said  to  her,  I  know  not  one  more  of  the  daughters  of  the  Kings
of  the  Sea,  and  I  have  enumerated  to  thee  more  than  a  hundred
damsels,  yet  not  one  of  them  pleaseth  thee :  but  see,  O  my  sister,
whether  thy  son  be  asleep  or  not.  She  therefore  felt  him,  and  she
found  that  he  bore  the  appearance  of  sleep :  so  she  said  to  him,  He
is  asleep  :  what  then  hast  thou  to  say,  and  what  is  thy  desire  with
regard  to  his  sleeping  ?

He  answered  her,  O  my  sister,  know  that  I  have  remembered  a
damsel,  of  the  damsels  of  the  Sea,  suitable  to  thy  son ;  but  I  fear  to
mention  her,  lest  thy  son  should  be  awake,  and  his  heart  should  be
entangled  by  love  of  her,  and  perhaps  we  may  not  be  able  to  gain
access  to  her :  so  he  and  we  and  the  lords  of  his  empire  would  be
wearied,  and  trouble  would  befall  us  in  consequence  thereof.  The
poet  hath  said, —

Love,  at  its  commencement,  is  like  running  saliva  ; but  when  it  hath  gained
ascendancy,  it  is  like  a  wide  sea.

— And  when  his  sister  heard  his  words,  she  replied,  Tell  me  what  is
the  condition  of  this  damsel,  and  what  is  her  name ;  for  I  know  the
damsels  of  the  Sea,  the  daughters  of  Kings  and  of  others;  and  if  I
see  her  to  be  suitable  to  him,  I  will  demand  her  in  marriage  of  her
father,  though  I  expend  upon  her  all  that  my  hand  possesseth.  Ac-
quaint me  therefore  with  her,  and  fear  not  aught;  for  my  son  is
asleep. — He  said,  I  fear  that  he  may  be  awake ;  and  the  poet  hath
said, —

I  loved  her  when  her  qualities  were  described ; for  sometimes  the ear loveth
before  the  eye.

But  Jullanar  replied,  Say,  and  be  brief,  and  fear  not,  0  my  brother.
And  he  said,  By  Allah,  O  my  sister,  none  is  suitable  to  thy


THE  STORY  OP  BEDR  BASIM  AND  JOHARAH.  251

son  except  the  Queen  Joharah,11  the  daughter  of  the  King  Es-
Semendel,12  and  she  is  like  him  in  beauty  and  loveliness  and  elegance
and  perfection,  and  there  existeth  not  in  the  sea  nor  on  the  land  any
one  more  graceful  or  more  sweet  in  natural  endowments  than  she.
For  she  hath  beauty  and  loveliness,  and  handsome  stature  and  just
form,  and  red  cheek  and  bright  forehead,  and  hair  like  jewels,13  and
large  black  eye,  and  heavy  hips  and  a  slender  waist,  and  a  lovely
countenance.  When  she  looketh  aside,  she  putteth  to  shame  the  wild
cows  u  and  the  gazelles ;  and  when  she  walketh  with  a  vacillating  gait,
the  willow-branch  is  envious ;,  and  when  she  displayeth  her  counte-
nance, she  confoundeth  the  sun  and  the  moon,  and  captivateth  every
beholder :  she  is  sweet-lipped,  gentle  in  disposition. — And  when  she
heard  the  words  of  her  brother,  she  replied,  Thou  hast  spoken  truth,
O  my  brother.  By  Allah,  I  have  seen  her  many  times,  and  she  was
my  companion  when  we  were  little  children ;  but  now  we  have  no
acquaintance  with  each  other,  because  of  the  distance  between  us ;
and  for  eighteen  years  I  have  not  seen  her.  By  Allah,  none  is  suit-
able to  my  son  except  her.

Nosv  when  Bedr  Basim  heard  their  words,  and  understood  what
they  said  from  first  to  last  in  description  of  the  damsel  that  Saleh
mentioned,  Joharah  the  daughter  of  the  King  Es-Semendel,  he
became  enamoured  of  her  by  the  ear ;  but  he  pretended  to  them  that
he  was  asleep.  A  flame  of  fire  was  kindled  in  his  heart  on  her  account,
and  he  was  drowned  in  a  sea  of  which  neither  shore  nor  bottom  was
seen.  Then  Saleh  looked  towards  his  sister  Jullanar,  and  said  to  her,
By  Allah,  O  my  sister,  there  is  not  among  the  Kings  of  the  Sea  any
one  more  stupid  than  her  father, 'nor  is  there  any  of  greater  power
than  he.  Therefore  acquaint  not  thy  son  with  the  case  of  this  damsel
until  we  demand  her  in  marriage  for  him  of  her  father;  and  if  he
favour  us  by  assenting  to  our  proposal,  we  praise  God  (whose  name
be  exalted !)  ;  and  if  he  reject  us,  and  marry  her  not  to  thy  son,  we
will  remain  at  ease,  and  demand  in  marriage  another. — And  when
Jullauar  heard  what  her  brother  Saleh  said,  she  replied,  Excellent  is
the  opinion  that  thou  hast  formed.  Then  they  were  silent ;  and  they
passed  that  night.  In  the  heart  of  the  King  Bedr  Basim  was  a  flame
of  fire,  kindled  by  his  passion  for  the  Queen  Joharah ;  but  he  con-
cealed his  case,  and  said  not  to  his  mother  nor  to  his  uncle  aught
respecting  her,  though  he  was  tortured  by  love  of  her  as  though  he
were  on  burning  coals.  And  when  they  arose  in  the  morning,  the
King  and  his  uncle  entered  the  bath,  and  washed  :  then  they  came


^r,L'  THE  STORY  OF  BEDR  BASIM  AND  JOHARAH.

forth,  and  drank  some  wine,  and  the  attendants  placed  before  them
the  food  :  so  the  King  Bedr  Basim  and  his  mother  and  his  uncle  ate
until  they  were  satisfied,  and  washed  their  hands.  And  after  that,
Saleh  rose  upon  his  feet,  and  said  to  the  King  Bedr  Basim  and  his
mother  Jullanar,  With  your  permission,  I  would  go  to  my  mother ;
for  I  have  been  with  you  a  period  of  days,  and  the  hearts  of  my  family
are  troubled  respecting  me,  and  they  are  expecting  me.  But  the
King  Bedr  Basim  said  to  his  uncle  Saleh.  Remain  with  us  this  day.
And  he  complied  with  his  request.

Bedr  Basim  then  said  Arise  with  us,  0  my  uncle,  and  go  forth
with  us  to  the  garden.  So  they  went  to  the  garden,  and  proceeded
to  divert  and  recreate  themselves  ;  and  the  King  Bedr  Basim  seated
himself  beneath  a  shady  tree,  desiring  to  rest  and  sleep ;  but  he  re-
membered what  his  uncle  Saleh  had  said,  describing  the  damsel  and
her  beauty  and  loveliness,  and  he  shed  many  tears,  and  recited  these
two  verses  : —

Were  it  said  to  me,  while  the  flame  is  burning  within  me,  and  the  fire  blazing

in  my  heart  and  bowels,
Wouldst thou rather that  thou  shouldst  behold  them,  or a  draught  ^of  pure

water  ? — I  would  answer,  Them.


THE  STORY  OF  BEDU  BASIM  AND  JOHAKAH.  'J53

Then  he  lamented  and  groaned  and  wept,  and  recited  these  two  other

verses  : —

Who  will  save  me  from  the  love  of  a  charming  gazelle,  with  a  face  like  the  sun :

nay,  more  lovely  ?
My  heart  was  at  ease,  free  from  love  of  her ;  but  now  burneth  with  passion  for

the  daughter  of  Es-Sernendel.

So  when  his  uncle  Saleh  heard  what  he  said,  he  struck  hand  upon
hand,  and  said,  There  is  no  deity  but  God :  Mohammad  is  the  Apostle
of  God  :  and  there  is  no  strength  nor  power  but  in  God,  the  High,
the  Great !  Then  he  said  to  him,  Didst  thou  hear,  0  my  son,  what
I  and  thy  mother  said  respecting  the  Queen  Joharah,  and  our  mention
of  her  qualities  ?  Bedr  Basim  answered,  Yes,  O  my  uncle,  and  I
became  enamoured  of  her  from  hearsay,  when  I  heard  what  ye  said.
My  heart  is  devoted  to  her,  and  I  have  not  patience  to  remain  absent
from  her. — Saleh  therefore  said  to  him,  0  King,  let  us  return  to  thy
mother  and  acquaint  iitr  with  the  case,  and  I  will  ask  her  to  permit
me  to  take  thee  with  me  and  to  demand  in  marriage  for  thee  the
Queen  Joharah.  Then  we  will  bid  her  farewell,  and  I  will  return
with  thee ;  for  I  fear  that,  if  I  took  thee  and  went  without  her  per-
mission, she  would  be  incensed  against  me ;  and  she  would  be  right,
as  I  should  be  the  cause  of  your  separation,  like  as  I  was  the  cause  of
her  separation  from  us.  The  city,  too,  would  be  without  a  King,  its
people  having  none  to  govern  them,  and  to  see  to  their  cases :  so  the
state  of  the  empire  would  become  adverse  unto  thee,  and  the  kingdom
would  depart  from  thy  hand. — But  when  Bedr  Basim  heard  the  words
of  his  uncle  Saleh,  he  replied,  Know,  O  my  uncle,  that  if  I  return  to
my  mother  and  consult  her  on  this  subject,  she  will  not  allow  me  to
do  it ;  therefore  I  will  not  return  to  her,  nor  consult  her  ever.  And
he  wept  before  his  uncle,  and  said  to  him,  I  will  go  with  thee,  and
I  will  not  inform  her,  and  then  I  will  return.  So  when  Saleh  heard
the  words  of  his  sister's  sou,  he  was  perplexed  at  his  case,  and  said,
I  beg  aid  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !)  in  every  circumstance.

Then  Siileh,  seeing  his  sister's  son  in  this  state,  and  knowing  that
he  desired  not  to  return  to  his  mother,  but  would  go  with  him,  took
from  his  finger  a  seal-rinsr  on  which  were  engraved  some  of  the

C?  O  O

names  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !),  and  handed  it  to  the  King
Bedr  Basim,  saying  to  him,  Put  this  upon  thy  finger,  and  thou  wilt
be  secure  from  drowning  and  from  other  accidents,  and  from  the
noxiousness  of  the  beasts  of  the  sea  and  its  great  fishes.  So  the  King


254  THE  STORY  OF  BEDR  BASIM  AND  JOHARAH.

Bedr  Basira  took  the  seal-ring  from  his  uncle  Saleh,  and  put  it  upon
his  finger ;  after  which,  they  plunged  into  the  sea,  and  ceased  not  in
their  course  until  they  arrived  at  the  palace  of  Saleh,  when  they
entered  it,  and  Bedr  Basim's  grandmother,  the  mother  of  his  mother,
saw  him,  as  she  sat,  attended  by  her  relations.  When  they  went  in
to  them,  they  kissed  their  hands  ;  and  as  soon  as  Bedr  Basim's  grand-
mother saw  him,  she  rose  to  him  and  embraced  him,  kissed  him
between  the  eyes,  and  said  to  him,  Thine  arrival  is  blessed,  O  my  son !
How  didst  thou  leave  thy  mother  Jullanar  ? — He  answered  her,  Well ;
in  prosperity  and  health ;  and  she  saluteth  thee  and  the  daughters  of
her  uncle.  Then  Saleh  acquainted  his  mother  with  that  which  had
occurred  between  him  and  his  sister  Jullanar,  and  that  the  King  Bedr
Basim  had  become  enamoured  of  the  Queen  Joharah,  the  daughter  of
the  King  Es-Seinendel,  from  hearsay.  He  related  to  her  the  story
from  beginning  to  end,  and  said,  He  hath  not  come  but  for  the
purpose  of  demanding  her  in  marriage  of  her  father,  and  marrying  her.
But  when  the  grandmother  of  the  King  Bedr  Basim  heard  the
words  of  Saleh,  she  was  violently  incensed  against  him,  and  was
agitated  and  grieved,  and  she  said  to  him,  O  my  son,  thou  hast  erred
in  mentioning  the  Queen  Joharah,  the  daughter  of  the  King  Es-
Semendel,  before  the  son  of  thy  sister;  for  thou  knowest  that  the
King  Es-Semendel  is  stupid,  overbearing,  of  little  sense,  of  great
power,  niggardly  of  his  daughter  Joharah  towards  those  who  demand
her  in  marriage ;  for  all  the  Kings  of  the  Sea  have  demanded  her  of
him,  and  he  refused,  and  approved  not  one  of  them,  but  rejected
them  all,  and  said  to  them,  Ye  are  not  equal  to  her  in  beauty  nor  in
loveliness,  nor  in  other  qualities  than  those.  And  we  fear  to  demand
her  in  marriage  of  her  father ;  for  he  would  reject  us  as  he  hath  re-
jected others  ;  and  we  are  people  of  kindness  ;  so  we  should  return
broken-hearted. — And  when  Saleh  heard  what  his  mother  said,  he
replied,  0  my  mother,  what  is  to  be  done  ?  For  the  King  Bedr
Basim  became  enamoured  of  this  damsel  when  I  mentioned  her  to  my
sister  Jullanar,  and  he  said,  We  must  demand  her  in  marriage  of  her
father  though  I  should  give  away  all  my  kingdom.  And  he  hath
asserted  that  if  he  marry  her  not  he  will  die  of  love  and  desire  for
her. — Then  Saleh  said  to  his  mother,  Know  that  the  son  of  my  sister
is  more  beautiful  and  more  lovely  than  she,  and  that  his  father  was
King  of  all  the  Persians,  and  he  is  now  their  King,  and  Joharah  is
not  suitable  to  any  but  him.  I  have  resolved  that  I  will  take  [to  her
father]  some  jewels,  consisting  of  jacinths  and  other  gems,  and  convey


THE  STORY  OF  BEDR  BASIM  AND  J(3HARAH.  255

a  present  befitting  him,  and  demand  her  offiiiin  in  marriage.  If  he
allege  as  a  pretext  to  us  that  he  is  a  King,  so  also  is  he  a  King,  the
son  of  a  King.  And  if  he  allege  as  a  pretext  to  us  her  loveliness,  he
is  more  lovely  than  she.  Again,  if  he  allege  as  a  pretext  to  us  the
extent  of  dominions,  he  hath  more  extensive  dominions  than  she  and
than  her  father,  and  hath  more  numerous  troops  and  guards ;  for  his
kingdom  is  greater  than  the  kingdom  of  her  father.  I  must  endeavour
to  accomplish  this  affair  ot  the  son  of  my  sister,  though  my  life  be
lost  thereby,  since  I  was  the  cause  of  this  event ;  and  as  I  cast  him
into  the  seas  of  her  love,  I  will  strive  to  effect  his  marriage  to  her ;
and  may  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !)  aid  me  to  do  that ! — So  his
mother  said  to  him,  Do  as  thou  wilt,  and  beware  of  speaking  rudely
to  him  when  thou  addressest  him  ;  for  thou  knowest  his  stupidity  and
his  power,  and  I  fear  lest  he  make  a  violent  attack  upon  thee,  since
he  knoweth  not  the  dignity  of  any  one.  And  he  replied,  I  hear  and
obey.

He  then  arose,  and  took  with  him  two  leathern  bags  full  of  jewels
and  jacinths,  and  oblong  emeralds,  and  precious  minerals  of  all  kinds
of  stones,  and,  having  made  his  young  men  carry  them,  he  proceeded
with  them,  he  and  the  son  of  his  sister,  to  the  palace  of  the  King  Es-
Semendel.  He  asked  permission  to  go  in  to  him,  and  permission
was  given  him ;  and  when  he  entered,  he  kissed  the  ground  before
him,  and  saluted  with  the  best  salutation.  And  when  the  King  Es-
Semendel  saw  him,  he  rose  to  him,  treated  him  with  the  utmost
honour,  and  ordered  him  to  sit.  So  he  sat,  and  after  he  had  been
seated  a  while,  the  King  said  to  him,  Thine  arrival  is  blessed.  Thou
hast  made  us  desolate  by  thine  absence,  0  Saleh.  What  is  thy  want,
that  thou  hast  come  unto  us  ?  Acquaint  me  with  thy  want,  that  I
may  perftmn  it  for  thee. — And  upon  this  he  rose,  and  kissed  the
ground  a  second  time,  and  said,  O  King  of  the  age,  my  want  re-
specteth  God,  and  the  magnanimous  King,  and  the  bold  lion,  the
report  of  whose  good  qualities  the  caravans  have  borne  abroad,  and
whose  fame  hath  been  published  in  the  provinces  and  cities,  for
liberality  and  beneficence,  and  pardon  and  clemency  and  obliging
conduct.  Then  he  opened  the  two  leathern  bags,  and  took  forth
from  them  the  jewels  and  other  things,  and  scattered  them  before  the
King  Es-Semendel,  saying  to  him,  O  King  of  the  age,  perhaps  thou
wilt  accept  my  present,  and  shew  favour  to  me,  and  comfort  my  heart
by  accepting  it  from  me.  Upon  this,  the  King  Es-Semendel  said  to
him,  For  what  reason  hast  thou  presented  to  me  this  present  ?  Tell


256  THE  STORY  OF  BKDU  15ASIM  AND  J(5HARAH.

me  thine  affair,  and  acquaint  me  with  thy  want ;  and  if  I  be  able  to
perform  it,  I  will  perform  it  for  thee  this  instant,  and  not  oblige  thee
to  weary  thyself;  but  if  I  be  unable  to  perform  it,  God  imposeth  not
upon  a  person  aught  save  what  he  is  able  to  accomplish.15 — Then
Saleh  rose,  and  kissed  the  ground  three  times,  and  said,  O  King  of
the  age,  verily  the  thing  that  I  require  thou  art  able  to  perform,  and
it  is  in  thy  power,  and  thou  art  master  of  it.  I  impose  not  upon  the
King  a  difficulty,  nor  am  I  mad,  that  I  should  ask  of  the  King  a
thing  that  he  is  unable  to  do ;  for  one  of  the  sages  hath  said,  If  thou
desire  that  thy  request  should  be  complied  with,  ask  that  which  is
possible.  Now  as  to  the  thing  that  I  have  come  to  demand,  the
King  (may  God  preserve  him!)  is  able  to  do  it. — So  the  King  said  to
him,  Ask  the  thing  that  thou  requirest,  and  explain  thine  affair,  and
demand  what  thou  desirest.  And  he  said  to  him,  0  King  of  the  age,
know  that  I  have  come  to  thee  as  a  marriage-suitor,  desiring  the  unique
pearl,  and  the  hidden  jewel,  the  Queen  Joharah,  the  daughter  of  our
lord ;  then  disappoint  not,  O  King,  him  who  applieth  to  thee.

But  when  the  King  heard  his  words,  he  laughed  so  that  he  fell
backwards,  in  derision  of  him,  and  replied,  0  Saleh,  I  used  to  think
thee  a  man  of  sense,  and  an  excellent  young  man,  who  attempted  not
aught  but  what  was  right,  and  uttered  not  aught  but  what  was  just.
What  hath  happened  to  thy  reason,  and  urged  thee  to  this  monstrous
thing,  and  great  peril,  that  thou  demandest  in  marriage  the  daughters
of  Kings,  the  lords  of  cities  and  provinces.  Art  thou  of  a  rank  to
attain  to  this  high  eminence,  and  hath  thy  reason  decreased  to  this
extreme  degree  that  thou  confroutest  me  with  these  words  ? — So
Saleh  said,  May  God  amend  the  state  of  the  King  !  I  demanded  her
not  in  marriage  for  myself;  yet  if  I  demanded  her  for  myself,  I  am
her  equal ;  nay  more ;  for  thou  kuowest  that  my  father  was  one  of
the  Kings  of  the  Sea,  if  thou  art  now  our  King.  But  I  demanded
her  not  in  marriage  save  for  the  King  Bedr  Basim,  lord  of  the  pro-
vinces of  Persia,  whose  father  was  the  King  Shah-Zeman,  and  thou
knowest  his  power.  If  thou  assert  that  thou  art  a  great  King,  the
King  Bedr  Basim  is  a  greater  King :  and  if  thou  boastest  that  thy
daughter  is  lovely,  the  King  Bedr  Basim  is  more  lovely  than  she,  and
more  beautiful  in  form,  and  more  excellent  in  rank  and  descent ;  and
he  is  the  horseman  of  his  age.  So  if  thou  assent  to  that  which  I
have  asked  of  thee,  thou  wilt,  0  King  of  the  age,  have  put  the  thing
in  its  proper  place;  and  if  thou  behave  arrogantly  towards  us,  thou
treatest  us  not  equitably,  nor  pursuest  with  us  the  right  way.  Thou


THE  STORY  OF  BEDR  BASIM  AND  J^HARAH.  257

knowest,  O  King,  that  this  Queen  Joharah,  the  daughter  of  our  lord
the  King,  must  be  married ;  for  the  sage  saith,  The  inevitable  lot  of
the  damsel  is  either  marriage  or  the  grave ; — and  if  thou  design  to
marry  her,  the  sou  of  my  sister  is  more  worthy  of  her  than  all  the
rest  of  men. — But  when  the  King  Es-Semendel  heard  the  words  of
the  King  Saleh,  he  was  violently  enraged  ;  his  reason  almost  departed,
and  his  soul  almost  quitted  his  body,  and  he  said  to  him,  0  dog  of
men,  doth  such  a  one  as  thyself  address  me  with  these  words,  and
dost  thou  mention  my  daughter  in  the  assemblies,  and  say  that  the
son  of  thy  sister  Jullanar  is  her  equal  ?  Who  then  art  thou,  and
who  is  thy  sister,  and  who  is  her  son,  and  who  was  his  father,  that
thou  sayest  to  me  these  words,  and  addressest  me  with  this  discourse  ?
Are  ye,  in  comparison  with  her,  aught  but  dogs  ? — Then  he  called
out  to  his  young  men,  and  said,  0  young  men,  take  the  head  of  this
young  wretch  !

So  they  took  the  swords  and  drew  them,  and  sought  to  slay  him  ;
but  he  turned  his  back  in  flight,  seeking  the  gate  of  the  palace  ;  and
when  he  arrived  at  the  gate  of  the  palace,  he  saw  the  sons  of  his
uncle,  and  his  relations  and  tribe  and  young  men,  who  were  more
than  a  thousand  horsemen,  buried  in  iron  and  in  coats  of  mail  put
one  over  another,  and  having  in  their  hands  spears  and  bright  swords.
On  their  seeing  Saleh  in  this  state,  they  said  to  him,  What  is  the
news  ?  He  therefore  told  them  his  story.  And  his  mother  had  sent
them  to  his  assistance.  So  when  they  heard  his  words,  they  knew
that  the  King  was  stupid  and  of  great  power,  and  they  alighted  from
their  horses,  and  drew  their  swords,  and  went  in  to  the  King  Es-
Sernendel.  They  saw  him  sitting  upon  the  throne  of  his  kingdom,
heedless  of  these  people,  and  violently  enraged  against  Saleh ;  and
they  saw  his  servants  and  his  young  men  and  his  guards  unprepared;
and  when  he  beheld  them,  with  the  drawn  swords  in  their  hands,  he
called  out  to  his  people,  saying,  Oh  !  wo  to  you  !  Take  ye  the  heads
of  these  dogs ! — But  there  had  not  elapsed  more  than  a  little  while
before  the  party  of  the  King  Es-Semendel  were  routed,  and  betook
themselves  to  flight ;  and  Saleh  and  his  relations  had  seized  the  King
Es-Semendel,  and  bound  his  hands  behind  him.

Now  Joharah,  awaking  from  sleep,  was  informed  that  her  father
was  taken  a  captive,  and  that  his  guards  had  been  slain.  So  she
went  forth  from  the  palace,  and  fled  to  one  of  the  islands,  where  she
repaired  to  a  lofty  tree,  and  she  concealed  herself  upon  it.  And  when
these  tyyo  parties  contended  together,  some  of  the  young  men  of  the


258  THE  STORY  OF  HEDR  BASIM  AND  JdHAllAH.

King  Es-Semendel  fled,  and  Bedr  Basim,  seeing  them,  asked  them
respecting  their  case  ;  whereupon  they  acquainted  him  with  that
which  had  happened.  Therefore,  on  his  hearing  that  the  King  Es-
Semendel  had  been  seized,  he  turned  his  back  in  flight,  fearing  for
himself,  and  said  in  his  heart,  Verily  this  disturbance  originated  on
my  account,  and  none  is  the  object  of  search  but  myself.  He  turned
back  in  flight,  seeking  safety,  and  knew  not  whither  to  go.  But  the
destinies  fixed  from  all  eternity  drove  him  to  that  island  upon  which
was  Joharah,  the  daughter  of  the  King  Es-Semeridel ;  and  he  came
to  the  tree,  and  threw  himself  down  like  one  slain,  desiring  to  take
rest  by  his  prostrate  position,  and  not  knowing  that  every  one  who  is
an  object  of  search  resteth  not ;  and  none  knoweth  what  is  hidden
from  him  in  the  secrets  of  destiny.  And  when  he  lay  down,  he  turned
up  his  eyes  towards  the  tree,  and  his  eye  met  that  of  Joharah  :  so  he
looked  at  her,  and  saw  her  to  be  like  the  moon  when  it  shineth  ;  and
he  said,  Extolled  be  the  perfection  of  the  Creator  of  this  surprising
form  !  and  He  is  the  Creator  of  every  thing,  and  is  Almighty !
Extolled  be  the  perfection  of  God,  the  Great,  the  Creator,  the  Maker,
the  Former !  By  Allah,  if  my  imagination  tell  me  truth,  this  must  be

Joharah  the  daughter  of  the
King  Es-Semeudel.  I  suppose
that  when  she  heard  of  the  con-
flict happening  between  the  two
parties,  she  fled,  and  came  to
this  island,  and  hid  herself  upon
this  tree  ;  but  if  this  be  not  the
Queen  Joharah,  this  is  more
beautiful  than  she.-Then  he
proceeded  to  meditate  upon  her
case,  and  said  within  himself,  I
will  rise  and  lay  hold  upon  her,
and  ask  her  respecting  her  state ;
and  if  this  be  she,  I  will  demand
her  in  marriage  of  herself,  and
this  is  the  thing  I  seek.  So  he
stood  erect  upon  his  feet,  and
said  to  Joharah,  0  utmost  object
of  desire,  who  art  thou,  and  who
brought  thce  unto  this  place  ?
And  Joharah,  looking  at  Bedr


THE  STORY  OF  HKDK  1JASIM  AND  JOHAKAH.  269

Basim,  saw  him  to  be  like  the  full  moon  when  it  appeareth  from
behind  the  black  clouds,  of  elegant  stature,  comely  in  his  smile.
She  therefore  said  to  him,  O  thou  endowed  with  comely  qualities,
I  am  the  Queen  Joharah,  the  daughter  of  the  King  Es-Semendel,
and  I  have  fled  to  this  place  because  Siileh  and  his  troops  have
fought  with  my  father  and  slain  his  troops,  and  made  him  a
captive,  together  with  some  of  his  troops :  so  I  fled,  in  fear  for
myself.  Then  the  Queen  Joharah  said  to  the  King  Bedr  Basim,
And  I  came  not  to  this  place  save  in  flight,  fearing  slaughter;  and
I  know  not  what  fortune  hath  done  with  my  father.  And  when
Bedr  B<isim  heard  her  words,  he  wondered  extremely  at  this  strange
coincidence,  and  said,  No  doubt  I  have  attained  my  desire  by  the
capture  of  her  father.  He  then  looked  at  her,  and  said  to  her,
Descend,  O  my  mistress;  for  I  am  a  victim  of  thy  love,  and  thine
eyes  have  captivated  me.  On  account  of  me  and  thee  were  this  dis-
turbance and  these  conflicts.  Know  that  I  am  the  King  Bedr  Biisim,
the  King  of  Persia,  and  that  Siileh  is  my  maternal  uncle,  and  he
is  the  person  who  came  to  thy  father  and  demanded  thee  of  him  in
marriage.  I  have  left  my  kingdom  on  thine  account,  and  our  meet-
ing now  is  a  wonderful  coincidence.  Arise  then,  and  descend  to
me,  that  I  may  go  with  thee  to  the  palace  of  thy  father,  and  ask
my  uncle  Saleh  to  release  him,  and  marry  thee  lawfully.

But  when  Joharah  heard  the  words  of  Bedr  Basim,  she  said  within
herself,  On  account  of  this  base  young  wretch  hath  this  event  happened,
and  rny  father  hath  been  made  a  captive,  and  his  chamberlains  and
his  attendants  have  been  slain,  and  I  have  become  separated  from  my
palace,  and  come  forth  an  exile  from  my  country  to  this  island.  If
now  I  employ  not  some  stratagem  with  him,  thereby  to  defend  myself
from  him,  he  will  gain  possession  of  me,  and  attain  his  desire;  for  he
is  in  love ;  and  the  lover,  whatever  he  doth,  is  not  to  be  blamed  for
it. — Then  she  beguiled  him  with  words,  and  with  soft  discourse,  and
he  knew  not  what  artifices  she  had  devised  against  him  ;  and  she  said
to  him,  O  my  master,  and  light  of  mine  eye,  art  thou  the  King  Bedr
Basim,  the  son  of  the  Queen  Jullamir  ?  So  he  answered  her,  Yes,
0  my  mistress.  And  she  said,  May  God  cut  off  my  father,  and  de-
prive him  of  his  kingdom,  and  not  comfort  his  heart,  nor  restore  him
from  estrangement,  if  he  desire  a  person  more  comely  than  thou,  and
aught  more  comely  than  these  charming  endowments  !  By  Allah,  he
is  of  little  sense  and  judgment ! — She  then  said  to  him,  0  King  of
the  age,  blame  not  my  father  for  that  which  he  hath  done.  If  the


260  THE  STORY  OF  BEDK  BASIM  AND  JOHARAH.

measure  of  thy  love  for  me  be  a  span,  that  of  my  love  for  thee  is  a
cubit.  I  have  fallen  into  the  snare  of  thy  love,  and  become  of  the
number  of  thy  victims.  The  love  that  thou  hadst  is  transferred  to
me,  and  there  remaineth  not  of  it  with  thee  aught  save  as  much  as
the  tenth  part  of  what  I  feel. — Then  she  descended  from  the  tree,  and
drew  near  to  him,  and  came  to  him  and  embraced  him,  pressing  him
to  her  bosom,  and  began  to  kiss  him.  So  when  the  King  Bedr  Basim
saw  what  she  did  to  him,  his  love  for  her  increased,  and  his  desire  for
her  became  violent.  He  imagined  that  she  was  enamoured  of  him,
and  he  confided  in  her,  and  proceeded  to  embrace  her  and  kiss  her.
And  he  said  to  her,  0  Queen,  by  Allah,  my  uncle  Saleh  did  not
describe  to  me  the  quarter  of  the  tenth  part  of  thy  loveliness,  nor  the
quarter  of  a  keerat  of  four  and  twenty  keerats.16  Then  Joharah
pressed  him  to  her  bosom,  and  uttered  some  words  not  to  be  under-
stood ;  after  which,  she  spat  in  his  face,  and  said  to  him,  Be  changed
from  this  human  form  into  the  form  of  a  bird,  the  most  beautiful  of
birds,  with  white  feathers,  and  red  bill  and  feet.  And  her  words
were  not  ended  before  the  King  Bedr  Basim  became  transformed  into
the  shape  of  a  bird,  the  most  beautiful  that  could  be  of  birds ;  and  he
shook,  and  stood  upon  his  feet,  looking  at  Joharah.  Now  she  had
with  her  a  damsel,  one  of  her  female  slaves,  named  Marseeneh,17  and
she  looked  at  her  and  said,  By  Allah,  were  it  not  that  I  fear  on
account  of  my  father's  being  a  captive  with  his  uncle,  1  had  slain  him,
and  may  God  not  recompense  him  well ;  for  how  unfortunate  was  his
coming  unto  us ;  all  this  disturbance  having  been  effected  by  his
means !  But,  O  slave-girl,  take  him,  and  convey  him  to  the  Thirsty
Island,  and  leave  him  there  that  he  may  die  ot  thirst. — So  the  slave-
girl  took  him,  and  conveyed  him  to  the  island,  and  was  about  to
return  from  him ;  but  she  said  within  herself,  By  Allah,  the  person
endowed  with  this  beauty  and  loveliness  deserveth  not  to  die  of  thirst.
Then  she  took  him  forth  from  the  Thirsty  Island,  and  brought  him
to  an  island  abounding  with  trees  and  fruits  and  rivers,  and,  having
put  him  upon  it,  returned  to  her  mistress,  and  said  to  her,  I  have  put
him  upon  the  Thirsty  Island. — Such  was  the  case  of  Bedr  Basim.

But  as  to  Saleh,  the  uncle  of  the  King  Bedr  Basim,  when  he  had
got  possession  of  the  King  Es-Semendel,  and  slain  his  guards  and
servants,  and  the  King  had  become  his  captive,  he  sought  Jobarah,
the  King's  daughter;  but  found  her  not.  So  he  returned  to  his
palace,  to  the  presence  of  his  mother,  and  said,  O  my  mother,  where
is  the  son  of  my  sister,  the  King  Bedr  Basim  ?  She  answered,  0  my


THE  STORY  OF  BEDB  BASIM  AND  JOHARAH.  261

son,  by  Allah,  I  have  no  knowledge  of  him,  nor  know  I  whither  he
hath  gone;  for  when  he  was  told  that  thou  hadst  fought  with  the
King  Es-Seinendel,  and  that  conflicts  and  slaughter  had  ensued
between  you,  he  was  terrified,  and  fled.  So  when  Saleh  heard  the
words  of  his  mother,  he  grieved  for  the  son  of  his  sister,  and  said,
0  my  mother,  By  Allah,  we  have  acted  negligently  with  respect  to
the  King  Bedr  Basim,  and  I  fear  that  he  will  perish,  or  that  one  of
the  soldiers  of  the  King  Es-Semendel  may  fall  upon  him,  or  that  the
King's  daughter,  Joharah,  may  fall  upon  him,  and  shame  will  betide
us  from  his  mother,  and  good  will  not  betide  us  from  her ;  for  I  took
him  without  her  permission.  Then  he  sent  guards  and  spies  after
him,  through  the  sea  and  in  other  directions,  but  they  met  with  no
tidings  of  him  ;  wherefore  they  returned,  and  informed  the  King
Siileh  thereof ;  and  his  anxiety  and  grief  increased,  and  his  bosom
became  contracted  on  account  of  the  King  Bedr  Basim. — Thus  was  it
with  them.

Next,  with  regard  to  Bedr  Biisim's  mother,  Jullanar  of  the  Sea,
when  her  son  had  descended  into  the  sea  with  his  uncle  Saleh,  she
waited  expecting  him  ;  but  he  returned  not  to  her,  and  tidings  of
him  were  long  kept  from  her.  So  she  remained  many  days  expect-
ing him ;  after  which  she  arose,  and  descended  into  the  sea,  and  came
to  her  mother ;  and  when  her  mother  saw  her,  she  rose  to  her,  and
kissed  her  and  embraced  her,  as  did  also  the  daughters  of  her  uncle.
She  then  asked  her  mother  respecting  the  King  Bedr  Basim,  and  her
mother  answered  her,  0  my  daughter,  he  came  with  his  uncle,  and
his  uncle  took  jacinths  and  jewels,  and  went  with  them,  he  and  Bedr
Basim,  to  the  King  Es-Semendel,  and  demanded  in  marriage  his
daughter:  but  the  King  assented  not  to  his  proposal,  and  he  was
violent  to  thy  brother  in  his  words.  I  therefore  sent  to  thy  brother
about  a  thousand  horsemen,  and  a  conflict  ensued  between  them  and
the  King  Es-Sernendel ;  but  God  aided  thy  brother  against  them,  and
he  slew  his  guards  and  his  troops,  and  made  the  King  Es-Semendel
a  captive.  So  tidings  of  this  event  reached  thy  son,  and  apparently
he  feared  for  himself;  wherefore  he  fled  from  us  without  our  will,
and  he  returned  not  to  us  after  that,  nor  have  we  heard  any  tidings  of
him. — Then  Jullanar  inquired  of  her  respecting  her  brother  Saleh,
and  she  informed  her,  saying,  He  is  sitting  upon  the  throne  of  the
kingdom  in  the  place  of  the  King  Es-Semendel,  and  he  hath  sent  in
every  direction  to  search  for  thy  son  and  the  Queen  Joharah.  So
when  Jullanar  heard  the  words  of  her  mother,  she  mourned  for  her


262  THE  STORY  OF  BEDll  BASIM  AND  JOHAKAH.

son  violently,  and  her  anger  was  fierce  against  her  brother  Saleh,
because  he  had  taken  her  son  and  descended  with  him  into  the  sea
without  her  permission.  She  then  said,  O  my  mother,  verily  I  fear
for  our  kingdom  ;  for  I  came  to  you  and  informed  not  any  one  of  the
people  of  the  empire,  and  I  dread,  if  I  remain  long  away  from  them,
that  the  kingdom  will  be  alienated  from  us,  and  that  the  dominion
will  depart  from  our  hands.  The  right  opinion  is,  that  I  should
return,  and  govern  the  empire  until  God  shall  order  for  us  the  affair
of  my  son ;  and  forget  not  ye  my  son,  nor  neglect  his  case ;  for  if
mischief  befall  him,  I  perish  inevitably  ;  since  I  regard  not  the  world
save  in  connection  with  him,  nor  delight  save  in  his  life. — So  her
mother  replied,  With  feelings  of  love  and  honour  will  I  comply,  O  my
daughter.  Inquire  not  what  we  suffer  by  reason  of  his  separation  and
absence. — Then  her  mother  sent  to  search  for  him,  and  Bedr  Busim's
mother  returned  with  mourning  heart  and  weeping  eye  to  the  empire.
The  world  had  become  strait  to  her,  her  heart  was  contracted,  and  her
case  was  grievous.

Now  again  as  to  the  King  Bedr  Basim,  when  the  Queen  Joharah
had  enchanted  him,  and  sent  him  with  her  female  slave  to  the  Thirsty
Island,  saying  to  her,  Leave  him  upon  it  to  die  of  thirst — the  slave-
girl  put  him  not  save  upon  a  verdant,  fruitful  island,  with  trees  and
rivers.  So  he  betook  himself  to  eating  of  the  fruits,  and  drinking  of
the  rivers ;  and  he  ceased  not  to  remain  in  this  state  for  a  period  of
days  and  nights,  in  the  form  of  a  bird,  not  knowing  whither  to  go,
nor  how  to  fly.  And  while  he  was  one  day  upon  that  island,  lo,  there
came  thither  a  fowler,  to  catch  something  wherewith  to  sustain  himself;
and  he  saw  the  King  Bedr  Basim  in  the  form  of  a  bird,  with  white
feathers  and  with  red  bill  and  feet,  captivating  the  beholder,  and
astonishing  the  mind.  So  the  fowler  looked  at  him,  and  he  pleased
him,  and  he  said  within  himself,  Verily  this  bird  is  beautiful :  I  have
not  seen  a  bird  like  it  in  its  beauty,  nor  in  its  form.  Then  he  cast
the  net  over  him,  and  caught  him,  and  he  went  with  him  into  the
city,  saying  within  himself,  I  will  sell  it,  and  receive  its  price.  And
one  of  the  people  of  the  city  met  him,  and  said  to  him,  For  how  much
is  this  bird  to  be  sold,  0  fowler  ?  The  fowler  said  to  him,  If  thou
buy  it,  what  wilt  thou  do  with  it  ?  The  man  answered,  I  will  kill  it
and  eat  it.  But  the  fowler  said  to  him,  "Whose  heart  would  be
pleased  to  kill  this  bird  and  eat  it  ?  Verily  I  desire  to  present  it  to
the  King,  and  he  will  give  me  more  than  the  sum  that  thou  wouldst
give  me  as  its  price,  and  will  not  kill  it,  but  will  divert  himself  with


beholding  it,  and  observing  its  beauty  and  loveliness ;  for  during  my
whole  life,  while  I  have  been  a  fowler,  I  have  not  seen  the  like  of  it
among  the  prey  of  the  sea  nor  among  the  prey  of  the  land.  If  thou
be  desirous  of  it,  the  utmost  that  thou  wouldst  give  me  as  its  price
would  be  a  piece  of  silver ;  and  I,  by  Allah  the  Great,  will  not  sell  it.
—Then  the  fowler  went  with  him  to  the  palace  of  the  King;  and
when  the  King  saw  him,  his  beauty  and  loveliness  pleased  him,  and
the  redness  of  his  bill  and  his  feet ;  so  he  sent  to  the  fowler  a  eunuch
to  purchase  him  of  him;  and  the  eunuch  came  to  the  fowler,  and
said  to  him,  Wilt  thou  sell  this  bird  ?  He  answered,  No ;  it  is  for
the  King,  as  a  present  from  me  unto  him.  The  eunuch  therefore  took
him,  and  went  with  him  to  the  King,  and  acquainted  him  with  that
which  he  had  said ;  whereupon  the  King  took  the  bird,  and  gave  to
the  fowler  ten  pieces  of  gold ;  and  he  received  them,  and  kissed  the
ground,  and  departed.  The  eunuch  then  brought  the  bird  to  the
King's  pavilion,  put  him  in  a  handsome  cage,  hung  it  up,  and  put
with  him  what  he  might  eat  and  drink.  And  when  the  King  came
down,  he  said  to  the  eunuch,  Where  is  the  bird  ?  Bring  it  that  I
may  see  it.  By  Allah,  it  is  beautiful ! — So  the  eunuch  brought  him,
and  put  him  before  the  King  ;  and  he  saw  that,  of  the  food  that  was


2G4  THE  STORY  OF  BEDR  BASIM  AND  JdHARAH.

with  him,  he  had  not  eaten  aught ;  wherefore  the  King  said,  By  Allah,
I  know  not  what  it  will  eat,  that  I  may  feed  it.  Then  he  gave  orders
to  bring  the  repast.  The  tables  therefore  were  brought  before  him,
and  the  King  ate  of  the  repast ;  and  when  the  bird  looked  at  the
flesh-meat  and  other  viands,  and  the  sweetmeats  and  fruits,  he  ate  of
all  that  was  upon  the  table  before  the  King,  and  the  King  was  amazed
at  him,  and  wondered  at  his  eating,  as  did  also  the  other  persons  who
were  present.  And  upon  this  the  King  said  to  the  eunuchs  and
memlooks  who  were  around  him,  In  my  life  I  have  never  seen  a  bird
eat  like  this  bird.

The  King  then  commanded  that  his  wife  should  come  to  divert
herself  with  the  sight  of  him.  So  the  eunuch  went  to  bring  her;
and  when  he  saw  her,  he  said  to  her,  0  my  mistress,  the  King  desireth
thy  presence,  in  order  that  thou  mayest  divert  thyself  with  the  sight
of  this  bird  that  he  hath  bought ;  for  when  we  brought  the  repast,  it
flew  from  the  cage,  and  pitched  upon  the  table,  and  ate  of  all  that
was  upon  it.  Arise  then,  O  my  mistress ;  divert  thyself  with  the
sight  of  it  \  for  it  is  beautiful  in  appearance,  and  it  is  a  wonder  among
the  wonders  of  the  age. — Therefore  when  she  heard  the  words  of  the
eunuch,  she  came  quickly ;  but  as  soon  as  she  looked  at  the  bird,  and
discovered  him,  she  veiled  her  face,  and  turned  back.  So  the  King
rose  and  followed  her,  and  said  to  her,  Wherefore  didst  thou  cover
thy  face,  when  there  are  not  in  thy  presence  any  but  the  female  slaves
and  the  eunuchs  who  serve  thee,  and  thy  husband  ?  And  she  an-
swered, 0  King,  verily  this  is  not  a  bird  ;  but  it  is  a  man  like  thee.
But  when  he  heard  the  words  of  his  wife,  he  said  to  her,  Thou  utterest
falsehood.  How  much  dost  thou  jest !  How  can  it  be  aught  but  a
bird  ? — She  replied,  By  Allah,  I  jested  not  with  thee,  nor  did  I  tell
thee  any  thing  but  truth.  Verily  this  bird  is  the  King  Bedr  Basim,
the  son  of  the  King  Shah-Zeman,  lord  of  the  countries  of  the  Persians,
and  his  mother  is  Jullanar  of  the  Sea. — And  how,  said  he,  hath  he
become  transformed  into  this  shape  ?  She  answered  him,  The  Queen
Joharah,  the  daughter  of  the  King  Es-Semendel,  hath  enchanted
him.  Then  she  related  to  him  what  had  happened  to  him  from  first
to  last,  telling  him  that  he  had  demanded  Joharah  in  marriage  of  her
father,  and  that  her  father  consented  not  thereto,  and  that  his  maternal
uncle  Saleh  had  fought  with  the  King  Es-Semendel,  and  that  Saleh
had  overcome  him,  and  made  him  a  captive.  And  when  the  King
heard  the  words  of  his  wife,  he  wondered  extremely.  Now  this  Queen,
his  wife,  was  the  most  skilful  in  enchantment  among  the  people  of


her  age.  The  King  therefore  said  to  her,  By  my  life,  1  conjure  thee
to  free  him  from  his  enchantment,  and  not  leave  him  tormented.
May  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !)  cut  off  the  hand  of  Joharah !
How  vile  is  she,  and  how  little  is  her  religion,  and  how  great  are  her
deceit  and  her  artifice ! — His  wife  replied,  Say  to  him,  0  Bedr  Basim,
enter  this  closet.  So  the  King  ordered  him  to  enter  the  closet ;  and
when  he  heard  the  King's  words,  he  entered  it.  Then  the  wife  of  the
King  arose,  and,  having  veiled  her  face,  took  in  her  hand  a  cup  of
water,  and  entered  the  closet ;  and  she  uttered  over  the  water  some
words  not  to  be  understood,  and  [sprinkling  him  with  it]  said  to
him,  By  virtue  of  these  great  names,  and  excellent  verses  [of  the
Kur-an],  and  by  the  power  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !),  the
Creator  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and  the  Reviver  of  the  dead,
and  the  Distributor  of  the  means  of  subsistence  and  the  terms  of  life,
quit  this  form  in  which  thou  now  art,  and  return  to  the  form  in
which  God  created  thee  !  And  her  words  were  not  ended  when  he
shook  violently,  and  returned  to  his  original  form,  whereupon  the
King  beheld  him  a  comely  young  man,  than  whom  there  was  not
upon  the  face  of  the  earth  one  more  beautiful.

When  the  King  Bedr  Basim  beheld  this  thing,  he  said,  There  is
no  deity  but  God :  Mahammad  is  the  Apostle  of  God  !  Extolled  be
the  perfection  of  the  Creator  of  all  creatures,  and  the  Ordainer  of
their  means  of  subsistence  and  their  terms  of  life ! — Then  he  kissed
the  hands  of  the  King,  and  prayed  for  long  life  for  him ;  and  the
King  kissed  the  head  of  Bedr  Basim,  and  said  to  him,  O  Bedr  Basim,
relate  to  me  thy  story  from  beginning  to  end.  So  he  related  to  him
his  story,  not  concealing  from  him  aught;  and  the  King  wondered
thereat,  and  said  to  him,  O  Bedr  Basirn,  God  hath  delivered  thee
from  the  enchantment ;  what  then  doth  thy  good  pleasure  demand,
in.  2  M


266  THE  STORY  OF  BEDR  B^SIM  AND  JOHARAH.

and  what  dost  thou  desire  to  do  ?  He  answered  him,  0  King  of  the
age,  I  desire  of  thy  beneficence  that  thou  wouldst  prepare  for  me  a
ship,  and  a  company  of  thy  servants,  and  all  that  I  require ;  for  I
have  been  absent  a  long  time,  and  I  fear  that  the  empire  may  depart
from  me.  Moreover,  I  imagine  not  that  my  mother  is  alive,  on
account  of  my  separation.  What  seems  most  probable  to  me  is,  that
she  hath  died  in  consequence  of  her  mourning  for  me;  since  she
knoweth  not  what  hath  happened  to  me,  nor  whether  I  be  living  or
dead.  I  therefore  beg  thee,  O  King,  to  complete  thy  beneficence  to
me  by  granting  that  which  I  have  requested  of  thee. — And  when  the
King  considered  his  beauty  and  loveliness  and  his  eloquence,  he
replied  and  said  to  him,  I  hear  and  obey.  He  then  prepared  far  him
a  ship,  transported  to  it  what  he  required,  and  despatched  with  him  a
company  of  his  servants.  So  he  embarked  in  the  ship,  after  he  had
bidden  farewell  to  the  King,  and  they  proceeded  over  the  sea.

'  The  wind  aided  them,  and  they  ceased  not  to  proceed  for  ten  days
successively ;  but  on  the  eleventh  day,  the  sea  became  violently  agitated,
the  ship  began  to  rise  and  pitch,  and  the  sailors  were  unable  to  manage
her.  They  continued  in  this  state,  the  waves  sporting  with  them,
until  they  drew  near  to  one  of  the  rocks  of  the  sea,  and  the  ship  fell
upon  that  rock,  and  broke  in  pieces,  and  all  who  were  in  her  were
drowned,  except  the  King  Bedr  Basim ;  for  he  mounted  upon  one  of
the  planks,  after  he  had  been  at  the  point  of  destruction.18  The
plank  ceased  not  to  bear  him  along  the  sea,  and  he  knew  not  whither
he  was  going,  nor  had  he  any  means  of  checking  the  motion  of  the
plank ;  it  carried  him  with  the  water  and  the  wind,  and  continued  to
do  so  for  a  period  of  three  days.  But  on  the  fourth  day,  the  plank
was  cast  with  him  upon  the  shore  of  the  sea,  and  he  found  there  a
city,  white  as  a  very  white  pigeon,  built  upon  an  island  by  the  shore
of  the  sea,  with  lofty  angles,  beautiful  in  construction,  with  high
walls,  and  the  sea  beat  against  its  walls.  So  when  the  King  Bedr
Biisim  beheld  the  island  upon  which  was  this  city,  he  rejoiced  greatly ;
and  he  had  been  at  the  point  of  destruction  by  reason  of  hunger  and
thirst.  He  therefore  landed  from  the  plank,  and  desired  to  go  up  to
the  city ;  but  there  came  to  him  mules  and  asses  and  horses,  numerous
as  the  grains  of  sand,  and  they  began  to  strike  him,  and  to  prevent
his  going  up  from  the  sea  to  the  city.  So  he  swam  round  behind
that  city,  and  landed  upon  the  shore,  and  he  found  not  there  any  one ;
wherefore  he  wondered,  and  said,  To  whom  doth  this  city  belong,  not
having  a  King  nor  any  one  in  it,  and  whence  are  these  mules  and


asses  and  horses  that  prevented  me  from  landing  ?  And  he  proceeded
to  meditate  upon  his  case  as  he  walked  along,  not  knowing  whither
to  go.

Then,  after  that,  he  saw  a  sheykh,  a  grocer ;  and  when  the  King
Bedr  Basim  saw  him,  he  saluted  him ;  and  the  sheykh  returned  the
salutation,  and,  looking  at  him,  saw  him  to  be  a  comely  person :  so
he  said  to  him,  O  young  man,  whence  hast  thou  come,  and  what
brought  thee  to  this  city  ?  He  therefore  related  to  him  his  story
from  beginning  to  end ;  and  he  wondered  at  it,  and  said  to  him,  O
my  son,  didst  thou  not  see  any  one  in  thy  way  ?  He  answered  him,
0  my  father,  I  only  wonder  at  this  city  seeing  that  it  is  devoid  of
people.  And  the  sheykh  said  to  him,  O  my  son,  come  up  into  the
shop,  lest  thou  perish.  So  Bedr  Basirn  went  up,  and  seated  himself
in  the  shop.  And  the  sheykh  arose,  and  brought  him  some  food,
saying  to  him,  0  my  son,  come  into  the  inner  part  of  the  shop.  Ex-
tolled be  the  perfection  of  Him  who  hath  preserved  thee  from  this  she-
devil  ! — The  King  Bedr  Basim  therefore  feared  violently.  He  then
ate  of  the  food  of  the  sheykh  until  he  was  satisfied,  and  washed  his
hands,  and,  looking  at  the  sheykh,  said  to  him,  O  my  master,  what  is
the  reason  of  these  words  ?  For  thou  hast  made  me  to  be  frightened
at  this  city  and  its  people. — And  the  sheykh  answered  him,  0  my  son,


268  THE  STORY  OF  BEDR  BlSIM  AND  jtfHARAH.

know  that  this  city  is  the  City  of  the  Enchanters,  and  in  it  is  a  Queen
who  is  an  enchantress,  like  a  she-devil ;  she  is  a  sorceress,  a  great
enchantress,  abounding  in  artifice,  exceedingly  treacherous,  and  the
horses  and  mules  and  asses  that  thou  sawest,  all  these  are  like  me  and
thee  of  the  sons  of  Adam ;  but  they  are  strangers  ;  for  whoever  entereth
this  city  and  is  a  young  man  like  thyself,  this  infidel  enchantress
taketh  him,  and  she  remaineth  with  him  forty  days,  and  after  the  forty
days  she  enchanteth  him,  and  he  becometh  a  mule  or  a  horse  or  an
ass,  of  these  animals  that  thou  hast  seen  upon  the  shore  of  the  sea.
Therefore  when  thou  desiredst  to  land,  they  feared  for  thee  lest  she
should  enchant  tbee  like  them,  and  they  said  to  thee  by  signs,  Land
not,  lest  the  enchantress  see  thee — in  pity  for  thee ;  for  perhaps  she
might  do  unto  thee  as  she  did  unto  them. — And  he  said  to  him,  She
got  possession  of  this  city  from  her  family  by  enchantment :  and  her
name  is  the  Queen  Lab ;  the  meaning  of  which  in  Arabic  is  Esh-
Shems19  (that  is,  The  Sun).

Now  when  the  King  Bedr  Basirn  heard  these  words  from  the
sheykh,  he  feared  violently,  and  began  to  tremble  like  the  reed  that  is
shaken  by  the  wind ;  and  he  said  to  him,  I  believed  not  that  I  had
escaped  from  the  calamity  in  which  I  was  involved  by  enchantment,
and  now  destiny  casteth  me  into  a  situation  more  abominable  than
that !  And  he  proceeded  to  reflect  upon  his  case,  and  upon  the  events
that  had  happened  to  him ;  and  when  the  sheykh  looked  at  him,  he
saw  that  his  fear  was  violent ;  so  he  said  to  him,  0  my  son,  arise  and
sit  at  the  threshold  of  the  shop,  and  look  at  those  creatures  and  at
their  dress  and  their  forms,20  and  the  states  in  which  they  are  through
enchantment ;  but  fear  not ;  for  the  Queen,  and  every  one  in  the  city,
loveth  me  and  regardeth  me,  and  agitateth  not  my  heart,  nor  wearieth
my  mind.  Therefore  when  the  King  Bedr  Biisim  heard  these  words
of  the  sheykh,  he  went  forth  and  sat  at  the  door  of  the  shop,  diverting
himself;  and  there  passed  by  him  people,  and  he  beheld  creatures  not
to  be  numbered.  And  when  the  people  saw  him,  they  advanced  to
the  sheykh,  and  said  to  him,  0  sheykh,  is  this  thy  captive,  and  a
prey  that  thou  hast  taken  during  these  days  ?  But  he  answered  them,
This  is  the  son  of  my  brother.  I  heard  that  his  father  had  died;  so
I  sent  for  him,  and  caused  him  to  come,  that  I  might  quench  the  fire
of  my  desire  by  his  company. — They  replied,  Verily  this  young  man
is  a  comely  youth ;  but  we  fear  for  him  on  account  of  the  Queen  Lab,
lest  she  turn  upon  thee  with  treachery  and  take  him  from  thee ;  for
she  loveth  the  comely  young  men.  The  sheykh  however  said  to  them,


THE  STORY  OP  BEDR  BASIM  AND  JOHARAH.  269

Verily  the  Queen  will  not  thwart  me ;  she  regardeth  me  favourably,
and  loveth  me ;  and  when  she  knoweth  that  he  is  the  son  of  my
brother,  she  will  not  offer  him  any  injury,  nor  afflict  me  with  respect
to  him,  nor  trouble  my  heart  on  his  account. — And  the  King  Bedr
Busim  remained  with  the  sheykh  for  a  period  of  months,  eating  and
drinking,  and  the  sheykh  loved  him  greatly.

After  this,  Bedr  Basim  was  sitting  at  the  shop  of  the  sheykh  one
day  as  was  his  custom,  and,  lo,  a  thousand  eunuchs,  with  drawn
swords  in  their  hands,  clad  in  various  kinds  of  apparel,  having  upon
their  waists  girdles  adorned  with  jewels,  riding  upon  Arab  horses,  and
equipped  with  Indian  swords;  and  they  came  to  the  shop  of  the
sheykh,  and  saluted  him,  and  passed  on.  Then,  after  them,  came  a
thousand  damsels,  like  moons,  clad  in  various  dresses  of  silk  and  satin
embroidered  with  gold  and  adorned  with  varieties  of  jewels,  and  all  of
them  were  armed  with  spears  ;  and  in  the  midst  of  them  was  a  damsel
riding  upon  an  Arab  mare,  upon  which  was  a  saddle  of  gold  set  with
varieties  of  jewels  and  jacinths.  They  ceased  not  to  proceed  until  they
arrived  at  the  shop  of  the  sheykh,  when  they  saluted  him,  and  passed
on.  And,  lo,  the  Queen  Lab  approached,  in  a  magnificent  procession,
and  she  ceased  not  to  approach  until  she  came  to  the  shop  of  the
sheykh  ;  whereupon  she  saw  the  King  Bedr  Bsisim  sitting  at  the  shop,
resembling  the  moon  at  the  full.  So  when  the  Queen  Lab  beheld
him,  she  was  confounded  at  his  beauty  and  loveliness,  and  amazed,
and  she  became  distracted  with  love  of  him.  She  came  to  the  shop,
and  alighted,  and,  having  seated  herself  by  the  King  Bedr  Basim,  she
said  to  the  sheykh,  Whence  obtainedst  thou  this  comely  person  ?
He  answered,  This  is  the  son  of  my  brother ;  he  came  to  me  a  short
time  ago.  And  she  said,  Let  him  be  with  me  to-night,  that  I  may
converse  with  him.  The  sheykh  said  to  her,  Wilt  thou  take  him  from
me  and  not  enchant  him  ?  She  answered,  Yes.  He  said,  Swear  to
me.  And  she  swore  to  him  that  she  would  not  hurt  him  nor  enchant
him.  Then  she  gave  orders  to  bring  forward  to  him  a  handsome
horse,  saddled,  and  bridled  with  a  bridle  of  gold,  and  all  that  was
upon  him  was  of  gold  set  with  jewels;  and  she  presented  to  the
sheykh  a  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  saying  to  him,  Seek  aid  for  thyself
therewith.  The  Queen  Lab  then  took  the  King  Bedr  Basim,  and
departed  with  him  ;  and  he  was  like  the  moon  in  its  fourteenth  night.
He  proceeded  with  her ;  and  the  people,  as  often  as  they  looked  at
him,  and  observed  his  beauty,  were  pained  for  him,  and  said,  By
Allah,  this  young  man  doth  not  deserve  that  this  accursed  woman


270  THE  STORY  OF  BEDR  BA'SIM  AND  JOHARAH.

should  enchant  him  !  And  the  King  Bcdr  Basim  heard  the  words  of
the  people  ;  but  he  was  silent,  and  had  committed  his  case  to  God,
whose  name  be  exalted  !

He  ceased  not  to  proceed with  the  Queen  Lab  and  her  retinue
until  they  arrived  at  the  gate  of  the  palace ;  when  the  emeers  and
eunuchs  and  the  great  men  of  the  empire  alighted. She  had  com-
manded the  chamberlains  to  order  all  the  great  men  of  the  empire  to
depart :  so  they  kissed  the  ground  and  departed. And  the  Queen,
with  the  eunuchs  and  the  female  slaves,  entered  the  palace ;  and  when
the  King  Bedr  Basim  looked  at  the  palace,  he  beheld  a  palace  of
which  he  had  never  seen  the  like. Its  walls  were  constructed  of  gold,
and  in  the  midst  of  it  was  a  great  pool,  abounding  with  water,  in  a
great  garden  ;  and  the  King  Bedr  Basim  looked  at  the  garden,  and
saw  in  it  birds  warbling  with  all  varieties  of  tongues  and  voices,  mirth-
exciting  and  plaintive,  and  those  birds  were  of  all  forms  and  colours.
The  King  Bedr  Basim  beheld  great  majesty,  and  he  said,  Extolled  be
the  perfection  of  God  for  his  bounty  and  his  clemency  ! He  sustaineth
the  person  who  worshippeth  other  than  Himself!21 — The  Queen  seated
herself  at  a  lattice-window  overlooking  the  garden. She  was  on  a
couch  of  ivory,  upon  which  was  magnificent  furniture  ;  and  the  King
Bedr  Basim  sat  by  her  side ;  and  she  kissed  him,  and  pressed  him  to
her  bosom. Then  she  ordered  the  female  slaves  to  bring  a  table  ;
whereupon  there  was  brought  a  table  of  red  gold  set  with  large  pearls
and  with  jewels,  and  upon  it  were  dishes  of  all  kinds  of  viands. "So
they  ate  until  they  were  satisfied,  and  washed  their  hands. The  female
slaves  next  brought  vessels  of  gold  and silver  and  crystal,  and  they
brought  also  all  kinds  of  flowers,  and  plates  of  dried  fruits; after
which  the  Queen gave  orders  to  bring  singing-women  ;  and there
carne  ten  damsels  like  moons,  with  all  kinds  of  musical  instruments  in  .
their  hands. Then  the  Queen  filled  a  cup,  and  drank  it ;  and  she
filled  another,  and  handed  it  to  the  King  Bedr  Basim,  who  took  it
and  drank  it ;  and  they  ceased  not  to  do  thus,  drinking  until  they
were  satisfied  ;  when  the  Queen  ordered  the  female  slaves  to  sing. So
they  sang  all  kinds  of  melodies,  and  it  seemed  to  the  King  Bedr  Basim
as  though  the  palace  danced  with  delight  at  the  sounds. His  reason
was  captivated,  and  his  bosom  was  dilated,  and  he  forgot  his  estrange-
ment from  his  country,  and  said,  Verily  this  Queen  is  a  comely  damsel !
I  will  never  henceforth  quit  her ;  for  her  kingdom  is  larger  than  mine,
and  she  is  preferable  to  the  Queen  Joharah. — He  ceased  not  to  drink
with  her  until  it  was  evening,  and  the  lamps  and  candles  were  lighted,


and  the  attendants  gave  vent  to  the  fumes  of  the  sweet-scented  sub-
stances in  the  censers ;  and  they  gave  not  over  drinking  until  they
were  both  intoxicated,  while  the  female  singers  continued  singing.
And  when  the  Queen  Lab  was  intoxicated,  she  arose  from  her  place,
and  slept  upon  a  couch,  having  commanded  the  female  slaves  to  de-
part ;  and  she  ordered  the  King  Bedr  Basim  to  lie  down  by  her  side.
Then,  on  the  following  morning,  she  entered  the  bath  in  the  palace,
and  he  did  the  same ;  and  when  they  had  come  forth,  she  caused  him
to  be  clad  in  the  most  beautiful  apparel,  and  gave  orders  to  bring  the
drinldng-vessels.  Accordingly  the  female  slaves  brought  them,  and
they  drank ;  after  which  the  Queen  arose,  and  took  the  hand  of  the
King  Bedr  Basim,  and  they  sat  upon  the  throne,  and  she  gave  orders
to  bring  the  food  :  so  they  ate,  and  washed  their  hands.  The  female
slaves  then  brought  to  them  the  drinking-vessels,  and  the  fresh  fruits


272  THE  STORY  OF  BEDR  BASIM  AND  JOHARAH.

and  the  flowers  and  the  dried  fruits ;  and  they  ceased  not  to  eat  and
drink,  while  the  female  slaves  sang  various  melodies,  till  evening.

They  continued  eating  and  drinking,  and  delighting  themselves,
for  a  period  of  forty  days;  after  which  she  said  to  him,  O  Bedr
Basim,  is  this  place  the  more  pleasant,  or  the  shop  of  thine  uncle  the
grocer  ?  He  answered  her,  By  Allah,  O  Queen,  this  is  pleasant ;  for
my  uncle  is  a  poor  man  who  selleth  beans.  And  she  laughed  at  his
words.  Then  they  slept :  but  in  the  morning,  the  King  Bedr  Basini
awoke  from  his  sleep  and  found  not  the  Queen  Lab  by  his  side  :  so
he  said,  Whither  can  she  have  gone  ?  He  became  sad  on  account  of
her  absence,  and  perplexed  respecting  his  case;  and  she  had  been
absent  from  him  a  long  time,  and  had  not  returned  ;  wherefore  he  said
within  himself,  Whither  hath  she  gone  ?  He  then  put  on  his  clothes,
and  proceeded  to  search  for  her  ;  but  he  found  her  not ;  and  he  said
within  himself,  Perhaps  she  hath  gone  to  the  garden.  He  therefore
went  to  the  garden,  and  he  saw  in  it  a  running  river,  by  the  side  of
which  was  a  white  bird,  and  on  the  bank  of  that  river  was  a  tree,
whereon  were  birds  of  various  colours.  So  he  looked  at  the  birds;
but  they  saw  him  not ;  and,  lo,  a  black  bird  alighted  by  that  white
bird,  and  began  to  feed  her  with  his  bill  like  a  pigeon ;  and  after  a
while,  the  latter  bird  became  changed  into  a  human  form,  at  which  he
looked  attentively,  and,  lo,  she  was  the  Queen  Lab.  He  therefore
knew  that  the  black  bird  was  an  enchanted  man,  and  that  she  loved
him,  and  for  that  reason  transformed  herself  by  enchantment  into  a
bird ;  in  consequence  of  which,  jealousy  seized  him,  and  he  was
incensed  against  the  Queen  Lab,  on  account  of  the  black  bird.  Then
he  returned  to  his  place,  and  laid  himself  upon  his  bed ;  and  after  a
while,  she  returned  to  him,  and  began  to  kiss  him  and  to  jest  with
him ;  but  he  was  violently  incensed  against  her,  and  uttered  not  to
her  a  single  word.  So  she  knew  what  he  felt,  and  was  convinced  that
he  saw  her  when  she  became  a  bird.  She  however  did  not  manifest
to  him  any  thing ;  but  concealed  her  feelings.

After  this,  he  said  to  her,  0  Queen,  I  desire  thee  to  permit  me  to
go  to  the  shop  of  my  uncle ;  for  I  have  conceived  a  desire  to  visit
him,  and  for  forty  days  I  have  not  seen  him.  And  she  replied,  Go  to
him ;  but  be  not  long  absent  from  me,  since  I  cannot  part  with  thee,
nor  endure  to  be  away  from  thee  for  one  hour.  So  he  said  to  her,  I
hear  and  obey.  He  then  mounted,  and  went  to  the  shop  of  the
sheykh,  the  grocer,  who  welcomed  him  and  rose  to  him  and  embraced
him,  and  said  to  him,  How  art  thou  with  this  iutidel  woman  ?  He


THE  STORY  OF  BEDK  BASIM  AND  JOHARAH.  273

therefore  answered  him,  I  was  well,  in  prosperity  and  health ;  but  she
was  this  last  night  sleeping  by  my  side,  and  I  awoke  and  saw  her  not.
So  I  put  on  my  clothes,  and  went  about  searching  for  her,  until  I
came  to  the  garden. — And  he  informed  him  of  that  which  he  had  seen,
of  the  river,  and  the  birds  upon  the  tree.  And  when  the  sheykh
heard  his  words,  he  said  to  him,  Beware  of  her,  and  know  that  the
birds  that  were  upon  the  tree  were  all  young  men,  strangers,  whom
she  loved,  and  she  transformed  them  by  enchantment  into  birds  ;  and
that  black  bird  that  thou  sawest  was  of  the  number  of  her  memlooks.
She  used  to  love  him  greatly ;  but  he  cast  his  eye  upon  one  of  the
female  slaves  ;  so  she  transformed  him  by  enchantment  into  a  black
bird  ;  and  whenever  she  desireth  to  visit  him,  she  transformeth  herself
by  enchantment  into  a  bird ;  for  she  still  loveth  him  greatly.  And
when  she  knew  that  thou  wast  acquainted  with  her  case,  she  meditated
evil  against  thee ;  and  she  doth  not  offer  thee  a  sincere  affection.  But
thou  shalt  suffer  no  harm  from  her  so  long  as  I  have  a  care  for  thee ;
therefore  fear  not ;  for  T  am  a  Muslim,  and  my  name  is  Abd-Allah,22
and  there  is  not  in  my  age  any  one  more  skilled  in  enchantment  than
I :  yet  I  make  not  use  of  enchantment  save  when  I  am  constrained  to
do  so.  Often  do  I  annul  the  enchantment  of  this  accursed  woman,
and  deliver  people  from  her :  and  I  care  not  for  her,  since  she  hath  no
way  of  injuring  me  :  on  the  contrary,  she  feareth  me  violently,  as  also
doth  every  one  in  the  city  who  is  an  enchanter  like  her,  after  this
manner :  they  all  fear  me,  and  all  of  them  are  of  her  religion,  wor-
shipping lire  instead  of  the  Almighty  King.  But  to-morrow  come  to
me  again,  and  acquaint  me  with  that  which  she  shall  do  to  thee ;  for
this  night  she  will  exert  herself  to  destroy  thee,  and  I  will  tell  thee
what  thou  shalt  do  with  her  that  thou  mayest  save  thyself  from  her
artifice.

Then  the  King  Bedr  Basim  bade  farewell  to  the  sheykh,  and  re-
turned to  her,  and  found  her  sitting  expecting  him.  And  when  she
saw  him,  she  rose  to  him  and  seated  him,  welcoming  him  ;  and  she
brought  him  food  and  drink.  So  they  ate  till  they  were  satisfied^
and  washed  their  hands  ;  after  which,  she  gave  orders  to  bring  the
wine.  It  was  therefore  brought,  and  they  drank  until  midnight,  when
she  served  him  with  the  cups,  and  she  continued  to  ply  him  until  he
was  intoxicated,  and  lost  his  sense  and  his  reason.  And  when  she
saw  him  in  this  state,  she  said  to  him,  By  Allah  I  conjure  thee,  and
by  the  Object  of  thy  worship,  if  I  ask  thee  concerning  a  thing,  tell
me,  wilt  thou  inform  me  thereof  truly,  and  reply  to  my  question  ?  So
in.


-.'74  THE  STORY  OF  BEDR  BASIM  AND  JOHARAH.

he  answered  her,  being  in  a  state  of  intoxication,  Yes,  0  my  mistress.
And  she  said  to  him,  0  my  master,  and  light  of  mine  eye,  when  thou
awokest  from  thy  sleep,  and  foundest  me  not,  thou  searchest  for  me
and  earnest  to  me  in  the  garden,  and  sawest  the  blackbird.  Now  I
will  acquaint  thee  with  the  truth  of  the  case  of  this  bird.  He  was  one
of  my  memlooks,  and  I  loved  him  greatly ;  but  he  cast  his  eye  one
day  upon  one  of  my  female  slaves  ;  so  jealousy  came  upon  me,  and  I
transformed  him  by  enchantment  into  a  blackbird.  And  as  to  the
slave-girl,  I  killed  her.  But  now  I  cannot  bear  to  be  absent  from
him  one  hour ;  and  whenever  I  desire  to  visit  him,  I  transform  my-
self by  enchantment  into  a  bird,  and  go  to  him.  Art  thou  not  on
this  account  incensed  against  me,  although  I,  by  the  fire  and  the  light
and  the  shade  and  the  heat,  have  increased  in  love  for  thee,  and  made
thee  my  worldly  portion  ? — So  he  said,  being  intoxicated,  Verily  what
thou  hast  understood,  as  to  my  anger  being  on  that  account,  is  true ;
and  there  is  no  cause  for  my  anger  except  that.  And  she  embraced
him  and  kissed  him,  and  made  a  show  of  love  to  him ;  after  which  she
slept,  and  he  slept  by  her  side.  And  when  it  was  midnight,  she  rose
from  the  bed  ;  and  the  King  Bedr  Basim  was  awake  ;  but  he  pretended
that  he  was  asleep,  and  kept  stealing  looks,  and  observing  what  she
did ;  and  he  found  that  she  had  taken  forth,  from  a  red  bag,  some-
thing red,  which  she  planted  in  the  midst  of  the  palace ;  and,  lo,  it
became  a  stream  running  like  a  large  river.  She  then  took  a  handful
of  barley,  scattered  it  upon  the  dust,  and  watered  it  with  this  water ;
whereupon  it  became  eared  corn :  and  she  took  it  and  ground  it  into
fine  flour,  after  which  she  put  it  in  a  place,  and  returned  and  slept  by
Bedr  Basim  until  the  morning.

So  when  the  morning  came,  the  King  Bedr  Basim  arose,  and,
having  washed  his  face,  asked  permission  of  the  Queen  to  go  to  the
skeykh  ;  and  she  gave  him  permission.  He  therefore  repaired  to  the
sheykh,  and  acquainted  him  with  that  which  she  had  done,  and  what
he  had  beheld  ;  and  when  the  sheykh  heard  his  words,  he  laughed,
and  said,  By  Allah,  this  infidel  enchantress  hath  formed  a  mischievous
scheme  against  thee  ;  but  never  care  thou  for  her.  He  then  produced
to  him  as  much  as  a  pound  of  saweek,23  and  said  to  him,  Take  this
with  thee,  and  know  that  when  she  seeth  it  she  will  say  to  thee,  What
is  this,  and  what  wilt  thou  do  with  it  ?  Answer  her,  A  superfluity  of
good  things  is  good : — and  do  thou  eat  of  it.  And  when  she  pro-
duceth  her  saweek,  and  saith  to  thee,  Eat  of  this  saweek — pretend  to
her  that  thou  eatest  of  it,  but  eat  of  this,  and  beware  of  eating  aught


of  her  saweek,  even  one  grain ;  for  if  thou  eat  of  it  even  one  grain,
her  enchantment  will  have  power  over  thee,  and  she  will  enchant  thee,
saying  to  thee,  Quit  this  human  form.  So  thou  wilt  quit  thy  form,
and  assume  whatsoever  form  she  desireth.  But  if  thou  eat  not  of  it,
her  enchantment  will  be  frustrated,  and  no  harm  will  result  to  thee
from  it ;  wherefore  she  will  become  in  a  state  of  the  utmost  abashment,
and  will  say  to  thee,  I  am  only  jesting  with  thee.  And  she  will  make
profession  of  love  and  affection  to  thee  ;  but  all  that  will  be  hypocrisy
and  artifice  in  her.  Do  thou,  however,  make  a  show  of  love  to  her,
and  say  to  her,  0  my  mistress,  and  light  of  mine  eye,  eat  of  this  saweek,
and  see  how  delicious  it  is.  And  when  she  hath  eaten  of  it,  if  only
one  grain,  take  some  water  in  thy  hand,  and  throw  it  in  her  face,  and
say  to  her,  Quit  this  human  form — and  tell  her  to  assume  whatsoever
form  thou  desirest.  Thereupon,  leave  her,  and  come  to  me,  that  I
may  contrive  for  thee  a  mode  of  proceeding.

Bedr  Basim  then  bade  him  farewell,  and  pursued  his  way  until  he
went  up  into  the  palace  and  entered  into  her  presence  ;  and  when  she


276  THE  STOUY  OF  BEDR  BASIM  AND  JOHARAH.

saw  him,  she  said  to  him,  A  friendly  and  free  and  an  ample  welcome  !
She  rose  to  him  and  kissed  him,  and  said  to  him,  Thou  hast  wearied
me  by  thy  delay,  O  my  master.  He  replied,  I  was  with  my  uncle.
And  he  saw  with  her  some  saweek,  and  said  to  her,  And  my  uncle
hath  given  me  to  eat  of  this  saweek,  and  we  have  saweek  better  than
it.  Then  she  put  his  saweek  into  a  dish,  and  hers  into  another,  and
said  to  him,  Eat  of  this,  for  it  is  nicer  than  thy  saweek.  So  he  pre-
tended to  her  that  he  ate  of  it ;  and  when  she  believed  that  he  had
eaten  of  it,  she  took  in  her  hand  some  water,  and  sprinkled  him  with
it,  and  said  to  him,  Quit  this  form,  0  young  wretch,  O  villain,  and
assume  the  form  of  a  one-eyed  mule  of  hideous  appearance  !  But  he
changed  not.  So  when  she  saw  him  in  his  proper  state,  unchanged,
she  rose  to  him,  and  kissed  him  between  the  eyes,  and  said  to  him.
O  my  beloved,  I  was  only  jesting  with  thee;  therefore  be  not  changed
in  mind  towards  me  on  that  account.  And  he  replied,  By  Allah,
O  my  mistress,  I  am  not  at  all  changed  towards  thee ;  but  I  am  con-
vinced that  thou  lo^st  me :  eat  then  of  this  my  saweek.  She  there-
fore took  a  morsel  of  it,  and  ate  it ;  and  when  it  had  settled  in  her
stomach,  she  was  agitated ;  and  the  King  Bedr  Basim,  having  taken
some  water  in  his  hand,  sprinkled  her  with  it  upon  her  face,  saying  to
her,  Quit  this  human  form,  and  assume  the  form  of  a  dapple  mule.
And  she  saw  not  herself  save  in  that  form ;  whereupon  her  tears  began
to  run  down  upon  her  cheeks,  and  she  rubbed  her  cheeks  upon  his
feet.  He  then  betook  himself  to  bridle  her ;  but  she  allowed  not  the
bridle  to  be  put.  He  therefore  left  her,  and  repaired  to  the  sheykh,
and  acquainted  him  with  what  had  happened  ;  upon  which  the  sheykh
rose  and  produced  to  him  a  bridle,  and  said  to  him,  Take  this  bridle,
and  bridle  her  with  it.  So  he  took  it  and  went  to  her  ;  and  when  she
saw  him,  she  advanced  to  him,  and  he  put  the  bit  in  her  mouth,  and,
having  mounted  her,  went  forth  from  the  palace,  and  repaired  to  the
sheykh  'Abd- Allah,  who,  on  seeing  her,  rose  to  her,  and  said  to  her,
May  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !)  abase  thee  by  affliction,  O  accursed
woman  !  Then  the  sheykh  said  to  Bedr  Basim,  O  my  son,  thou  hast
no  longer  an  abode  in  this  city  ;  so  mount  her,  and  proceed  with  her
to  whatsoever  place  thou  wilt,  and  beware  of  giving  up  the  bridle  to
any  one.  The  King  Bedr  Basim  therefore  thanked  him,  and  bade
him  farewell,  and  departed.

He  ceased  not  in  his  journey  for  three  days  ;  after  which  he  came
in  sight  of  a  city,  and  there  met  him  a  sheykh,  of  comely  hoariness,
who  said  to  him,  0  my  son,  whence  art  thou  come?  He  answered,


THE  STORY  OF  BKDR  BA"SIM  AND  JOHAKAH.  277

From  the  city  of  this  enchantress.  The  sheykh  then  said  to  him,  Thou
art  my  guest  this  night.  And  he  consented,  and  proceeded  with  him
along  the  way.  And,  lo,  there  was  an  old  woman,  who,  when  she  saw
the  mule,  wept,  and  said,  There  is  no  deity  but  God  I  Verily  this
mule  resembleth  the  mule  of  my  son,  which  hath  died,  and  my  heart
is  troubled  for  her.  I  conjure  thee  by  Allah,  then,  O  my  master,  that
thou  sell  her  to  me. — He  replied,  By  Allah,  O  my  mother,  1  cannot
sell  her.  But  she  rejoined,  I  conjure  thee  by  Allah,  that  thou  reject
not  my  petition  ;  for  my  son,  if  I  buy  not  for  him  this  mule,  will  in-
evitably die.  Then  she  urged  her  request  in  many  words ;  whereupon
he  said,  I  will  not  sell  her  but  for  a  thousand  pieces  of  gold.  And
Bedr  Btisitn  said  within  himself,  How  can  this  old  woman  procure  a
thousand  pieces  of  gold  ?  But  upon  this  she  took  forth  from  her
girdle  a  thousand  pieces  of  gold.  So  when  the  King  Bedr  Basim  saw
this,  he  said  to  her,  0  my  mother,  I  am  only  jesting  with  thee,  and  I
cannot  sell  her.  The  sheykh,  however,  looked  at  him  and  said  to
him,  O  my  son,  no  one  may  utter  a  falsehood  in  this  city  ;  for  every
one  who  uttereth  a  falsehood  in  this  city  they  slay.  The  King  Bedr
Basim  therefore  alighted  from  the  mule,  and  delivered  her  to  the  old
woman  ;  and  she  drew  forth  the  bit  from  from  her  mouth,  and,  having
taken  some  water  in  her  hand,  sprinkled  her  with  it,  and  said,  O  my
daughter,  quit  this  form,  and  return  to  the  form  in  which  thou
wast ! 24  And  she  was  transformed  immediately,  and  returned  to  her
first  shape ;  and  each  of  the  two  women  approached  the  other,  and
they  embraced  each  other.

So  the  King  Bedr  Basim  knew  that  this  old  women  was  the  mother
of  the  Queen,  and  that  the  stratagem  had  been  accomplished  against
him,  and  he  desired  to  flee.  But,  lo,  the  old  woman  uttered  a  loud
whistle ;  whereupon  there  presented  himself  before  her  an  'Efreet  like
a  great  mountain  ;  and  the  King  Bedr  Basim  feared,  and  stood  still.
The  old  woman  mounted  upon  his  back,  took  her  daughter  behind
her,  and  the  King  Bedr  Basim  before  her,  and  the  'Efreet  flew  away
with  them,  and  there  elapsed  but  a  short  time  before  they  arrived  at
the  palace  of  the  Queen  Lab ;  after  which,  when  she  had  seated  her-
self upon  the  throne  of  her  kingdom,  she  looked  at  the  King  Bedr
Basim,  and  said  to  him,  O  young  wretch,  I  have  arrived  at  this  place,
and  attained  what  I  desired,  and  I  will  shew  thee  what  I  will  do  with
thee  and  with  this  sheykh,  the  grocer.  How  many  benefits  have  I
conferred  upon  him,  and  he  doth  evil  unto  me !  And  thou  hadst  not
attained  thy  desire  but  by  his  means. — Then  she  took  some  water,  and


278  THE  STORY  OF  BEDR  BASIM  AND  JOHARAH.

sprinkled  him  with  it,  saying  to  him,  Quit  this  form  in  which  thou
now  art,  and  assume  the  form  of  a  bird  of  hideous  appearance,  the
most  hideous  of  birds  !  And  he  was  transformed  immediately,  and
became  a  bird  of  hideous  appearance;  upon  which  she  put  him  into  a
cage,  and  withheld  from  him  food  and  drink.

But  a  slave-girl  looked  at  him,  and  had  compassion  on  him,  and
she  fed  him,  and  gave  him  to  drink,  without  the  knowledge  of  the
Queen.  Then  the  slave-girl  found  her  mistress  inadvertent  one  day,
and  she  went  forth  and  repaired  to  the  sheykh,  the  grocer,  and
acquainted  him  with  the  case,  saying  to  him,  The  Queen  Lab  is  re-
solved upon  the  destruction  of  the  son  of  thy  brother.  So  the  sheykh
thanked  her,  and  said  to  her,  I  must  surely  take  the  city  from  her,
and  make  thee  Queen  in  her  stead.  He  then  uttered  a  loud  whistle,
and  there  came  forth  to  him  an  'Efreet  who  had  four  wings,  and  he
said  to  him,  Take  this  slave-girl,  and  convey  her  to  the  city  of  Jullanar
of  the  Sea,  and  to  her  mother  Farasheh  j25  for  they  two  are  the  most
skilful  in  enchantment  of  all  existing  upon  the  face  of  the  earth.  And
he  said  to  the  slave-girl,  When  thou  hast  arrived  there,  inform  them
that  the  King  Bedr  Basim  is  a  captive  in  the  hands  of  the  Queen  Lab.
The  'Efreet  therefore  took  her  up,  and  flew  away  with  her,  and  but  a
short  time  had  elapsed  when  he  alighted  with  her  upon  the  palace  of
the  Queen  Jullanar  of  the  Sea.  So  the  slave-girl  descended  from  the
roof  of  the  palace,  and,  going  in  to  the  Queen  Jullanar,  kissed  the
ground,  and  acquainted  her  with  the  events  that  had  happened  to  her
son  from  first  to  last ;  upon  which,  Jullanar  rose  to  her,  and  treated
her  with  honour,  and  thanked  her.  The  drums  were  beaten  in  the
city  to  announce  the  good  tidings,  and  she  informed  her  people,  and
the  great  men  of  her  empire,  that  the  King  Bedr  Basini  had  been
found.

After  this  Jullanar  01  the  Sea,  and  her  mother  Farasheh,  and  her
brother  Saleh,  summoned  all  the  tribes  of  the  Jann,  and  the  troops  of
the  sea  ;  for  the  Kings  of  the  Jann  had  obeyed  them  after  the  captivity
of  the  King  Es-Semendel.  Then  they  flew  through  the  air,  and
alighted  upon  the  city  of  the  enchantress,  and  they  plundered  the
palace,  and  slew  all  who  were  in  it.  They  also  plundered  the  city,
and  slew  all  the  infidels  who  were  in  it  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye.
And  Jullanar  said  to  the  slave-girl,  Where  is  my  son  ?  The  slave-
girl  therefore  took  the  cage,  and  brought  it  before  her,  and,  pointing
to  the  bird  that  was  within  it,  said,  This  is  thy  son.  So  the  Queen
Jullanar  took  him  forth  from  the  cage,  and  she  took  in  her  hand  some


THE  STORY  OF  BKDR  BA"SIM  AND  JOHARAH.  279

water,  with  which  she  sprinkled  him,  saying  to  him,  Quit  this  form,
and  assume  the  form  in  which  thou  wast !  And  her'words  were  not
ended  when  he  shook,  and  became  a  man  as  he  was  before  ;  and  when
his  mother  beheld  him  in  his  original  form,  she  rose  to  him  and  em-
braced him,  and  he  wept  violently,  as  did  also  his  maternal  uncle
Saleh,  and  his  grandmother  Farasheh,  and  the  daughters  of  his  uncle  ;
and  they  began  to  kiss  his  hands  and  his  feet.  Then  Jullanar  sent
for  the  sheykh  'Abd- Allah,  and  thanked  him  for  his  kind  conduct  to
her  son ;  and  she  married  him  (the  sheykh)  to  the  slave-girl  whom  he
had  sent  to  her  with  the  news  of  her  son.  So  he  took  her  as  his
wife ;  and  Jullanar  made  him  King  of  that  city.  And  she  summoned
those  Muslims  who  remained  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  city,  and  made
them  vow  allegiance  to  the  sheykh  'Abd- Allah,  covenanting  with  them,
and  making  them  swear,  that  they  would  obey  and  serve  him ;  and
they  said,  We  hear  and  obey.26

They  then  bade  farewell  to  the  sheykh  'Abd- Allah,  and  departed
to  their  city ;  and  when  they  entered  their  palace,  the  people  of  their
city  met  them  with  the  drums  to  celebrate  the  good  news,  and  with
rejoicing.  They  decorated  the  city  for  three  days,  on  account  of  their
exceeding  joy  at  the  arrival  of  their  King  Bedr  Basim,  rejoicing  greatly
at  his  return.  And  after  that,  the  King  Bedr  Basiin  said  to  his  mother,
0  my  mother,  it  remaineth  only  that  I  marry,  and  that  we  all  be
united.  So  she  replied,  0  my  son,  excellent  is  the  idea  that  thou
hast  formed ;  but  wait  until  we  inquire  for  a  person  suitable  to  thee
among  the  daughters  of  the  Kings.  And  his  grandmother  Farasheh,
and  the  daughters  of  his  uncle,  and  his  maternal  uncle,  said,  We,
0  Bedr  Basim,  will  all  immediately  assist  thee  to  attain  what  thou
desirest.  Then  each  of  those  females  arose,  and  went  to  search
through  the  countries,  and  Jullanar  of  the  Sea  also  sent  her  female
slaves  upon  the  necks  of  the  'Efreets,  saying  to  them,  Leave  not  a
city,  nor  one  of  the  palaces  of  the  Kings,  without  attentively  viewing
all  who  are  in  it  of  the  beautiful  damsels.  But  when  the  King  Bedr
Basim  saw  the  pains  that  they  were  taking  in  this  affair,  he  said  to  his
mother  Jullauar,  0  my  mother,  leave  this  affair,  for  none  will  con-
tent me  save  Joharah  the  daughter  of  the  King  Es-Semendel,  since
she  is  a  jewel  as  her  name  importeth.  So  his  mother  replied,  I  know
thy  desire.  She  then  sent  immediately  persons  to  bring  to  her  the
King  Es-Semendel,  and  forthwith  they  brought  him  before  her;
whereupon  she  sent  to  Bedr  Basim,  and  when  he  came,  she  acquainted
him  with  the  arrival  of  the  King  Es-Semendel.  He  therefore  went  in


280  THE  STOKY  OF  BEDR  BASIM  AND  JOHARAH.

to  him ;  and  as  soon  as  the  King  Es-Semeudel  saw  him  approaching
he  rose  to  him  and  saluted  him  and  welcomed  him.  Then  the  King
Bedr  Basim  demanded  of  him  in  marriage  his  daughter  Joharah  ;  and
he  replied,  She  is  at  thy  service,  and  she  is  thy  slave-girl,  and  at  thy
disposal.  And  the  King  Es-Semendel  sent  some  of  his  companions
to  his  country,  commanding  them  to  bring  his  daughter  Joharah,  and
to  inform  her  that  her  father  was  with  the  King  Bedr  Basim,  the  son
of  Jullanar  of  the  Sea.  So  they  flew  through  the  air,  and  were  absent
a  while ;  after  which  they  came  back  accompanied  by  the  Queen
Joharah  ;  who,  when  she  beheld  her  father,  advanced  to  him  and
embraced  him.  And  he  looked  at  her  and  said,  0  my  daughter,
Know  that  I  have  married  thee  to  this  magnanimous  King,  and  bold
lion,  the  King  Bedr  Basim,  the  son  of  the  Queen  Jullanar,  and  that
he  is  the  handsomest  of  the  people  of  his  age,  and  the  most  lovely  of
them,  and  the  most  exalted  of  them  in  dignity,  and  the  most  noble  of
them  in  rank  :  he  is  not  suitable  to  any  but  thee,  nor  art  thou  suitable
to  any  but  him.  And  she  replied,  0  my  father,  I  cannot  oppose  thy
wish  :  therefore  do  what  thou  wilt ;  for  anxiety  and  distress  have
ceased,  and  I  am  unto  him  of  the  number  of  servants.

So  thereupon  they  summoned  the  Kadees  and  the  witnesses,  and
they  performed  the  ceremony  of  the  contract  of  the  marriage  of  the
King  Bedr  Basim,  the  son  of  the  Queen  Jullanar  of  the  Sea,  to
the  Queen  Joharah.  The  people  of  the  city  decorated  it,  sent  forth
the  announcers  of  the  glad  tidings,  and  released  all  who  were  in  the
prisons ;  and  the  King  clothed  the  widows  and  the  orphans,  and  con-
ferred robes  of  honour  upon  the  lords  of  the  empire  and  the  emeers
and  other  great  men.  Then  they  celebrated  a  grand  festivity,  made
banquets,  and  continued  the  festivities  evening  and  morning  for  a
period  of  ten  days  ;  and  they  displayed  her  to  the  King  Bedr  Basim
in  nine  different  dresses.  After  this,  the  King  Bedr  Basim  conferred
a  dress  of  honour  upon  the  King  Es-Semendel,  and  restored  him  to
his  country  and  his  family  and  his  relations ;  and  they  ceased  not  to
pass  the  most  delightful  life,  and  the  most  agreeable  days,  eating  and
drinking,  and  enjoying  themselves,  until  they  were  visited  by  the  ter-
minator of  delights  and  the  separator  of  companions.

This  is  the  end  of  their  story. — The  mercy  of  God  be  on  them  all !


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-THIRD.


NOTE  1 .  HEKE,  as  in  other  instances,  I  have  substituted  "  Shah-Zeinan "  for
"  Shahraman."

NOTE  2.  "  Rudeynee  "  is  a  relative  adjective  from  "  Rudeyneh,"  the  name  of  a
woman  of  Khatt  Hejer,1  who,  as  well  as  her  husband  Semher,  practised,  and  excelled
in,  the  art  of  straightening  spear-shafts.  Hence  the  terms  "  Rudeynee  "  and  "  Seni-
heree  "  are  often  applied  to  a  straight  spear.

NOTE  3.  I  suppose  the  city  here  mentioned  to  be  imaginary ;  and  perhaps  the  sea
may  be  imaginary  also.  The  latter,  however,  may  be  the  Caspian.  [The  "White
Country  "  is  mentioned  in  the  Story  of  Taj-el-Mulook  and  the  Lady  Dunya.  See  Note  1
to  that  chapter. — ED.]

NOTE  4.  "  Jullanar  "  (vulgarly  pronounced  "  Julnar  ")  is  from  the  Persian  "  gulnar,"
and  signifies  "  Pomegranate-flower."  In  my  original,  by  the  erroneous  addition  of  a
point,  the  last  letter  is  converted  into  z.

NOTE  5. "  Saleh  "  signifies  "  good,"  "just,"  "  virtuous,"  &c.

NOTE  6.  These  people  of  the  sea  appear  to  me  to  be  an  inferior  class  of  the  Jinn
germed  "  El-Ghowwasah,"  that  is,  the  Divers,  or  Plungers,  in  the  seas.  They  fly
through  the  air ;  and  fire,  the  element  of  which  the  Jinn  were  created,  is  said  to  have
issued  from  the  mouth  of  Jullanar's  relations.2  Her  people  are  often  spoken  of  as
men ;  but  it  does  not  appear  that  the  author  meant  them  to  be  considered  as  human
beings  in  the  literal  sense  of  the  term.  Jullanar's  son,  however,  evidently  partook
more  of  his  father's  than  of  his  mother's  nature.  [Jullanar  is  anxious  that  her  family
should  know  that  she  was  "  bought  with  money ;"  that  fact  constituting  her  a  legal
concubine. — ED.]

NOTE  7. See  Note  12  to  Chapter  xx.

NOTE  8. These  cressets  are  described  in  Note  2  to  Chapter  xiii.

NOTE  9. "  Bedr  Basim  "  signifies  "  Smiling  Full  Moon."

NOTE  1 0. See  Note  4  to  Chapter  xiii.

NOTE  11. "  Jdharah"  signifies  "a  Jewel."

NOTE  1 2.  "  Semendel "  is  a  name  of  the  salamander,  and  also  of  a  bird  of  India  and
China,  of  which  it  is  said,  as  of  the  salamander,  that  it  is  not  burned  by  fire.


See  Note  2  to  Chapter  vi.
III.


2  See  Note  21  to  the  Introduction,  and  Note  28  to  Chapter  x.— ED.

2  o


282  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-THIRD.

NOTE  13.  This  comparison  has  been  made  before,  with  respect  to  the  hair  of  Saleb.
On  this  second  occurrence  of  the  expression,  my  sheykh  haa  stated,  in  the  margin,  his
disapprobation  of  it.

NOTE  14.  Four  different  kinds  of  antelopes  are  thus  called.  The  distinctive  name,
in  Arabic,  of  the  kind  here  mentioned  is  "  mahah."

NOTE  15.  These  words,  "God  imposeth  not,"  &c.,  are  from  the  Kur-an,  ch.  ii.
v.  286.

NOTE  16.  The  "keerat,"  or  carat  (Gr.  Kcpdriov),  is  the  weight  of  a  bean,  equal  to
four  kamhahs  (or  wheat-grains),  or  very  nearly  three  English  grains.  It  is  the  twenty-
fourth  part  of  a  mithkal,  and  hence  is  a  term  used  to  signify  the  twenty-fourth  part
of  any  thing.  Thus  the  Arabs  say  of  a  person  in  whom  they  see  no  fault,  "  He  is  a
perfect  man,  of  four  and  twenty  keerats; "  as  we  say  of  gold,  that  it  is  so  many  carats
fine.

NOTE  17. "  Marseeneh  "  signifies  "  a  myrtle."

NOTE  18.  It  appears  that  the  ring  which  before  preserved  him  from  drowning  he
lost  when  he  was  transformed  into  a  bird.

NOTE  19.  In  the  original,  the  name  "  Lab  "  is  interpreted  as  meaning  in  Arabic
"  Takweem  esh-Shems ;"  but  "  Lab,"  which  is  a  Persian  word,  signifies  in  Arabic  simply
"esh-Shems;"  in  English,  "the  Sun;"  "Takweem  esh-Shems,"  as  a  proper  name,
appears  to  me  to  be  nonsense.  The  meaning  of  "takweem"  is  "rectification,"  "  cor-
rection," &c. ;  "evaluation-;"  "an  almanac;"  "an  astrological  calculation,"  &c.

NOTE  20.  The  word  here  rendered  "  forms  "  also  signifies  "  colours,"  and  "  species,"
or  •'  kinds."

NOTE  21.  The  Queen  Lab  was  an  infidel,  a  worshipper  of  fire,  as  the  tale  afterwards
shews.

NOTE  22. "  'Abd- Allah  "  signifies  "  the  Servant  of  God."

NOTE  23.  "Saweek"  is  the  meal  of  parched  barley.  It  is  made  into  a  kind  of
gruel,  or  thick  ptisan,  but  not  too  thick  to  be  drunk.

NOTE  24.  Mr.  Keightley  mentions3  a  tale  in  the  Pleasant  Nights  of  Straparola,
and  also  a  popular  story  in  Germany,  having  some  resemblance  to  this  incident,  and
likewise  points  of  resemblance  to  the  story  of  the  Second  Royal  Mendicant.  With
respect  to  the  incident  in  the  story  of  Bedr  Basim,  he  observes,  "  There  is  nothing  said
about  the  bridle  in  the  account  of  the  sale;  but  1  am  sure  that,  in  the  original  tale.
Beder's  misfortune  must  have  been  owing  to  his  having  parted  with  it.  In  Chaucer's
Squier's  Tale,  the  bridle  would  also  appear  to  have  been  of  some  importance. '  He
likewise  observes,  that  "  Queen  Lahe,  with  her  lovers  turned  into  various  animals,
reminds  one  strongly  of  the  Homeric  Circe;"  and  adds,  that  he  thinks  it  "  not  at  all
impossible  that  the  Grecian  fable  may  have  penetrated  into  "Persia."  He  had  before
remarked  *  upon  the  great  differences  between  this  tale  and  that  of  the  Magic  Horse  ;
shewing  the  superior  claims  of  the  latter  to  be  regarded  as  a  Persian  composition  ;  but
stating  his  opinion  that  the  former  "  is  possibly  an  ancient  Persian  tale  also,  though  the
Arabian  narrator  may  have  taken  greater  liberties  with  it. '

NOTE  25.  "Farasheh"  signifies  "a  moth,"  and  "a  butterfly,"  and,  according  to
my  sheykh,  "  a  locust."

NOTE  26.  In  the  old  version,  it  is  said  that  "  all  the  lovers  of  the  magic  queen
resumed  their  pristine  forms  as  soon  as  she  ceased  to  live ;"  and  that  "  they  were  all
sons  ol  kings,  princes,  or  persons  of  high  rank."

"Tales  and  Popular  Fictions,"  pp.  122—121.  4  In  page  72.


CHAPTER XXIV.


COMMENCING  WITH  PART  OF  THE  SEVEN  HUNDRED  AND  FIFTY-SIXTH
NIGHT,  AND  ENDING  WITH  PART  OF  THE  SEVEN  HUNDRED
AND  SEVENTY-EIGHTH.


THE  STORY  OF  SEYF-EL-MULOOK  AND  BEDEEA-EL-JEMlL.1

THERE  was,  in  olden  times,  and  in  an  ancient  age  and  period,  in
Egypt,  a  King  named  'Asitn  the  son  of  Safwan.2  He  was  a  liberal,
munificent  King,  reverend  and  dignified :  he  possessed  many  coun-
tries, and  castles  and  fortresses,  and  troops  and  soldiers,  and  he  had
a  Wezeer  named  Faris  the  son  of  Saleh  ;3  and  they  all  worshipped
the  sun  and  fire  instead  of  the  Almighty  King,  the  Glorious,  the
Mighty  in  dominion.  Now  this  King  became  a  very  old  man  :  old


284,  THE  STORY  OF  SEYF-EL-MULOOI

age,  and  sickness  and  decrepitude,  had  rendered  him  infirm ;  for  he
had  lived  a  hundred  and  eighty  years ;  and  he  had  not  a  male  child
nor  a  female ;  on  account  of  which  he  was  in  a  state  of  anxiety  and
grief  night  and  day.  And  it  happened  that  he  was  sitting  one  day
upon  the  throne  of  his  kingdom,  with  the  emeers  and  wezeers  and  the
chief  officers  and  the  lords  of  the  empire  serving  him  according  to
their  custom  and  according  to  their  ranks;  and  whosoever  of  the
emeers  came  in  to  him  having  with  him  a  son,  or  two  sons,  the  King
envied  him,  and  he  said  within  himself,  Every  one  is  happy  and
rejoicing  in  his  children;  but  I  have  not  a  son,  and  to-morrow  I
shall  die,  and  leave  my  kingdom  and  my  throne  and  my  lands
and  my  treasures  and  my  riches,  and  the  strangers  will  take  them,
and  no  one  will  ever  remember  me :  there  will  not  remain  any
memory  of  me  in  the  world.  Then  the  King  'Asim  became  drowned
in  the  sea  of  solicitude ;  and  in  consequence  of  the  rapid  succession  of
griefs  and  solicitudes  in  his  heart,  he  wept,  and  descended-from  his
throne,  and  sat  upon  the  floor,  weeping  and  humbling  himself.  So
when  the  Wezeer  and  the  assembly  of  the  great  men  of  the  empire
who  were  present  saw  him  do  thus  with  himself,  they  called  out  to
the  people  and  said  to  them,  Go  ye  to  your  abodes  and  rest  until  the
King  recover  from  the  state  in  which  he  is.

They  therefore  departed,  and  there  remained  not  any  except  the
King  and  the  Wezeer;  and  when  the  King  recovered,  the  Wezeer
kissed  the  ground  before  him  and  said  to  him,  O  King  of  the  age,
\vhat  is  the  cause  of  this  weeping  ?  Inform  me  who  of  the  Kings,
and  the  lords  of  the  castles,  or  of  the  emeers  and  the  lords  of  the
empire,  hath  become  thine  enemy,  and  inform  me  who  opposeth
thee,  O  King,  that  we  may  all  attack  him,  and  take  his  soul  from
between  his  sides. — But  the  King  spoke  not,  nor  raised  his  head.
Then  the  Wezeer  kissed  the  ground  before  him  a  second  time,  and
said  to  him,  0  King  of  the  age,  I  am  like  thy  son  and  thy  slave ;
nay,  I  have  reared  thee ;  and  I  know  not  the  cause  of  thy  grief  and
thine  anxiety  and  thy  distress  and  the  state  in  which  thou  art.  Who
then  beside  me  can  know,  and  stand  in  my  stead  before  thee  ?  Ac-
quaint me  therefore  with  the  cause  of  this  weeping  and  mourning. —
Yet  he  spoke  not,  nor  opened  his  mouth,  nor  raised  his  head ;  but
ceased  not  to  weep,  and  he  cried  out  with  a  loud  voice,  and  wailed
exceedingly,  and  cried,  Ah ! — while  the  Wezeer  regarded  him  pa-
tiently. And  after  that,  the  Wezeer  said  to  him,  If  thou  tell  me  not
the  cause  of  this,  I  will  kill  myself  before  thee  immediately  while  thou


AND  IJEDEEA-EL-JEMAL.  285

lookest  on,  rather  than  see  thee  in  anxiety.  So  the  King  'Asim  there-
upon raised  his  head,  and  wiped  away  his  tears,  and  said,  O  faithful
Wezeer,  leave  me  in  my  anxiety  and  my  grief;  for  the  sorrows  in  my
heart  are  sufficient  for  me.  But  the  Wezeer  replied,  Tell  me,  O  King,
what  is  the  cause  of  this  weeping :  perhaps  God  may  give  thee  relief
by  my  means.  And  the  King  said  to  him,  O  Wezeer,  my  weeping  is
not  on  account  of  wealth  nor  on  account  of  horses  nor  on  account  of
any  thing  but  this,  that  I  have  become  an  old  man,  and  my  age  is
about  a  hundred  and  eighty  years,  and  I  have  not  been  blest  with  a
male  child  nor  a  female ;  so  when  I  die,  they  will  bury  me ;  then  will
eveiy  trace  of  me  be  obliterated,  and  my  name  will  become  extinct,
and  strangers  will  take  my  throne  and  my  kingdom,  and  no  one  will
ever  remember  me.  To  this  the  Wezeer  replied,  0  King  of  the  age,
I  am  older  than  thou  by  a  hundred  years,  and  have  never  been  blest
with  a  child,  and  I  cease  not  to  suffer  anxiety  and  grief  night  and
day  ;  and  what  shall  we  do,  I  and  thou  ?  But  I  have  heard  of  the
fame  of  Suleyman  the  son  of  Daood  (on  both  of  whom  be  peace  !),
and  that  he  hath  a  mighty  Lord,  able  to  accomplish  every  thing.  It
is  meet  therefore  that  I  repair  unto  him  with  a  present,  and  have
recourse  to  him,  that  he  may  petition  his  Lord :  perhaps  He  may
bless  each  of  us  with  a  child. — The  Wezeer  then  prepared  for  the
journey,  took  a  magnificent  present,  and  repaired  with  it  to  Suleyman
the  son  of  Daood,  on  both  of  whom  be  peace ! — Such  was  the  case  of
the  Wezeer.

Now  as  to  Suleyman  the  son  of  Daood  (on  both  of  whom  be
peace !),  God  (whose  perfection  be  extolled,  and  whose  name  be  ex-
alted !)  spoke  in  revelation  unto  him,  and  said,  0  Suleyman,  verily
the  King  of  Egypt  hath  sent  to  thee  his  chief  Wezeer,  with  presents
and  rarities,  which  are  such  and  such  things.  Send  thou  therefore
unto  him  thy  Wezeer  Asaf  the  son  of  Barkhiya  to  meet  him  with
honour  and  with  provisions  at  the  halting-places ;  and  when  he  pre-
seuteth  himself  before  thee,  say  to  him,  Verily  the  King  hath  sent
thee  to  demand  such  and  such  things,  and  thine  affair  is  so  and  so.
Then  propose  to  him  the  faith. — So  upon  this  Suleyman  ordered
his  Wezeer  Asaf  to  take  with  him  a  company  of  his  dependants,  to
meet  them  with  honour  and  with  sumptuous  provisions  at  the  halt-
ing places.  Accordingly,  Asaf  went  forth,  after  he  had  prepared  all
things  necessary,  to  meet  them,  and  he  proceeded  until  he  came  to
Faris,  the  Wezeer  of  the  King  of  Egypt.  He  met  him  and  saluted
him,  and  treated  him  and  those  who  accompanied  him  with  exceeding


286  THE  STORY  OF  SEYF-EL-MULOOK

honour,  and  proceeded  to  present  to
them  the  provisions  and  the  provender
at  the  halting-places;  and  he  said  to
him,  A  friendly  and  free  and  an  ample
welcome  to  the  coming  guests  !  Rejoice
ye  at  the  information  of  the  accomplish-
ment of  your  affair,  and  let  your  hearts  be  glad
and  your  eyes  be  cheerful  and  your  bosoms  be
dilated ! — So  the  Wezeer  said  within  himself,
Who  acquainted  them  with  this?  Then  he  said  to  Asaf  the  son
of  Barkhiya,  And  who  informed  you  of  us
and  of  our  desires,  O  my  lord  ?  Asaf  answered
him,  Verily  Suleyman  the  son  of  Daood  (on
both  of  whom  be  peace!),  he  it  was  who  in-
formed us  of  this. — And  who,  said  the  Wezeer
Faris,  informed  our  lord  Suleyman  ?  He  an-
swered him,  The  Lord  of  the  heavens  and  the
earth,  and  the  God  of  all  creatures,  informed
him.  And  the  Wezeer  Faris  replied,  This  is
none  other  than  a  mighty  God !  So  Asaf
the  son  of  Barkhiya  said  to  him,  And  do
ye  not  worship  Him  ?  Faris  the  Wezeer
of  the  King  of  Egypt  answered,  We
worship  the  sun,  and  prostrate  our-
selves to  it.  Asaf  therefore  replied,  |
0  Wezeer  Faris,  verily  the  sun  is  a  ^
star,  of  the  number  of  the  stars  cre-
ated by  God  (whose  perfection  be
extolled,  and  whose  name  be  exalt-
ed !),  and  far  be  it  from  bein
Lord !  for  the  sun
appeareth  at  times,
and  is  absent  at
times,  and  our  Lord
is  always  present,
never  absent,  and
He  is  able  to  effect
every  thing.

They  then  jour-
neyed on a little


AND  BEDEEA-EL-JEMAL.  287

until  they  came  near  to  the  seat  of  government 4  of  Suleyman  the  son
of  Daood  (on  both  of  whom  be  peace !),  when  Suleyman  ordered  his
troops  of  mankind  and  of  the  Jinn  and  other  creatures  to  range  them-
selves in  their  way  in  ranks.  So  the  wild  creatures  of  the  sea,  and
the  elephants  and  the  leopards  and  the  lynxes,  all  stationed  them-
selves, and  ranged  themselves  in  the  way  in. two  ranks.  The  species
of  each  kind  collected  themselves  into  separate  bodies,  and  in  like
manner  did  the  Jann  ;  each  of  which  appeared  to  the  eyes  unhidden,
in  a  terrible  form ;  and  they  were  of  various  descriptions.  They  all
stood  in  two  ranks ;  and  the  birds  spread  their  wings  over  the  other
creatures  to  shade  them,  warbling  one  to  another  with  all  tongues
and  with  all  notes.  Therefore  when  the  people  of  Egypt  came  to
them,  they  dreaded  them,  and  dared  not  to  proceed :  but  Asaf  said
to  them,  Enter  amid  them  and  pass  on,  and  fear  them  not ;  for  they
are  the  subjects  of  Suleyman  the  son  of  Daood,  and  none  of  them
will  hurt  you.  Then  Xsaf  entered  among  them,  and  all  the  people
entered  behind  him,  the  party  of  the  Wezeer  of  the  King  of  Egypt
being  among  them ;  but  they  were  in  fear.  They  ceased  not  to
proceed  until  they  arrived  at  the  city,  when  they  lodged  them  in  the
mansion  of  entertainment,  treated  them  with  the  utmost  honour,  and
brought  to  them  sumptuous  banquets  during  a  period  of  three  days.

After  this,  they  brought  them  before  Suleyman,  the  Prophet  of
God  (peace  be  on  him  !) ;  and  when  they  went  in  to  him,  they  desired
to  kiss  the  ground  before  him ;  but  he  prevented  their  doing  so,  and
said,  It  is  not  meet  that  a  man  prostrate  himself  upon  the  ground  *
save  unto  God  (to  whom  be  ascribed  might  and  glory  !),  the  Creator
of  the  earth  and  the  heavens  and  all  other  things;  and  whoever  among
you  desireth  to  stand  let  him  stand ;  but  none  of  you  shall  stand  in
attendance  upon  me.  They  therefore  complied,  and  the  Wezeer  Faris
sat,  and  some  of  his  servants  ;  but  some  of  the  inferiors  stood  waiting
upon  him ;  and  when  they  had  sat  a  while,  the  servants  spread  for
them  the  tables,  and  the  people  all  ate  of  the  repast  until  they  were
satisfied.6  Then  Suleyman  commanded  the  Wezeer  of  Egypt  to  men-
tion his  affair,  that  it  might  be  accomplished,  and  said  to  him,  Speak,
and  conceal  not  aught  of  that  on  account  of  which  thou  hast  come;
for  thou  hast  not  come  save  for  the  accomplishment  of  an  affair,  and
I  will  inform  thee  thereof.  It  is  thus  and  thus :  the  King  of  Egypt
who  sent  thee  is  named  'Asim,  and  he  hath  become  a  very  old  man,
decrepit,  infirm  ;  and  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !)  hath  not  blessed
him  with  a  male  child  nor  a  female.  He  hath  therefore  been  in  a


288  THE  STORY  OP  SEYF-EL-MULOOK.

state  of  grief  and  anxiety  and  solicitude  night  and  day,  until  it  hap-
pened to  him  that  he  was  sitting  upon  the  throne  of  his  kingdom  one
day,  and  the  emeers  and  wezeers,  and  the  great  men  of  his  empire,
came  in  to  him,  and  he  saw  some  of  them  having  two  sons  each,  and
some  having  one  son,  and  some  of  them  having  three  sons,  and  they
came  in  accompanied  by  their  sons,  and  stood  in  attendance  upon
him.  So  he  meditated  in  himself,  and  said,  by  reason  of  the  excess
of  his  sorrow,  Who  will  take  my  kingdom  after  my  death  ?  And  will
any  but  a  stranger  take  it  ?  Thus  I  shall  be  as  though  I  had  never
been. — He  became  drowned  in  the  sea  of  solicitude  on  account  of  this,
and  ceased  not  to  remain  in  solicitude  and  sorrow  until  his  eyes  over-
flowed with  tears,  and  he  covered  his  face  with  the  handkerchief,
and  wept  violently.  Then  he  rose  from  his  throne  and  sat  upon  the
floor,  weeping  and  lamenting,  and  none  knew  what  was  in  his  heart
except  God  (whose  name  be  exalted!),  while  he  thus  sat  upon  the
floor. — And  when  the  Prophet  of  God,  Suleyman  the  son  of  Daood
(on  both  of  whom  be  peace !),  had  informed  the  Wezeer  Faris  of  the
sorrow  and  weeping  of  the  King,  and  what  had  happened  between
him  and  his  Wezeer  from  first  to  last,  he  said  after  that  to  the  Wezeer
Faris,  Is  this  which  I  have  told  thee,  O  Wezeer,  true  ?  So  the  Wezeer
Faris  answered,  O  Prophet  of  God,  verily  that  which  thou  hast  said  is
true  and  correct ;  but,  O  Prophet  of  God,  when  I  was  conversing  with
the  King  respecting  this  matter,  there  was  not  with  us  any  one,  and
not  one  of  the  people  knew  our  case.  Who  then  informed  thee  of  all
these  things  ? — He  replied,  My  Lord,  who  knoweth  the  furtive  glance
and  what  the  bosoms  conceal,  informed  me.  So  thereupon  the  Wezeer
Faris  said,  O  Prophet  of  God,  this  is  none  other  than  an  excellent,
mighty  Lord,  able  to  accomplish  every  thing.  And  the  Wezeer  Faris
embraced  El-Islam,  he  and  they  who  were  with  him/

The  Prophet  of  God,  Suleyman,  then  said  to  the  Wezeer,  Verily
thou  hast  with  thee  such  and  such  rarities  and  presents.  The  Wezeer
replied,  Yes.  And  Suleyman  said  to  him,  I  accept  from  thee  all  of
them ;  but  I  give  them  unto  thee :  and  rest  thou,  and  those  who  are
with  thee,  in  the  place  where  ye  took  up  your  quarters,  that  the
fatigue  of  the  journey  may  quit  you,  and  to-morrow,  if  it  be  the  will
of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !),  thine  affair  shall  be  accomplished
in  the  most  complete  manner,  by  the  will  of  God,  the  Lord  of  the
earth  and  the  heaven,  and  the  Creator  of  all  creatures.  Then  the
Wezeer  Faris  went  to  his  place ;  and  he  repaired  to  the  Lord  Suleyman
on  the  following  day ;  whereupon  the  Prophet  of  God,  Suleyman,  said


AND  BEDEEA-EL-.TEMAL


289


to  hirri,  When  thou  hast  come  unto  the
King  'Asim  the  son  of  Safwan,  and  hast
an  interview  with  him,  do  ye  both  ascend
such  a  tree,  and  sit  silent ;  and  when  it
is  the  period  between  the  two  prayers,8
and  the  mid-day  heat  hath  become  as-
suaged, descend  ye  to  the  foot  of  the  tree,
and  look  ye  there  :  ye  will  find  two  large
serpents  coming  forth  ;  the  head  of  one
being  like  the  head  of  the  ape,  and  the
head  of  the  other  like  the  head  of  an
'Efreet.  When  ye  see  them,  smite  ye
them  with  arrows,  and  kill  them ;  then
[cut  off  and]  throw  away,  from  the  head-
part  of  each  of  them,  as  much  as  one  span's  length,  and  of  the  tail-
part  of  each  of  them  likewise  :  so  their  flesh  will  remain,  and  do  ye
cook  it,  and  cook  it  well,,  and  feed  your  two  wives  with  it,  and  ye  will
obtain  by  them,  by  the  permission  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !),
male  children. — Then  Suleymaii  (on  whom  be  peace !)  caused  to  be
brought  a  seal-ring  and  a  sword,  and  a  wrapper  containing  a  tunic  9
ornamented  with  jewels,  and  he  said,  O  Wezeer  Faris,  when  the  two
sons  of  you  twain  shall  have  grown  up,
and  attained  to  manhood,  give  ye  to
each  one  of  them  one  of  these  things.
And  after  this,  he  said
to  the  Wezeer,  In  the
name  of  God  !  May  God
(whose  name  be  exalted  !)
accomplish  thine  affair  !
And  now  there  remaineth
not  aught  for  thee  to  do
but  that  thou  set  forth
on  thy  journey,  relying
upon  the  blessing  of
God  (whose  name  be
exalted  !)  ;  for  the  King
is  night  and  day  expect-
ing thine  arrival,  and  his
eye  is  constantly  gazing


upon  the  '.vay.

HI.


-So  upon


290  THE  STORY  OF  SEYF-EL-MULOOK

this  the  Wezeer  Faris  advanced '  to  the  Prophet  of  God,  Suleyman
the  son  of  Daood  (on  both  of  whom  be  peace !),  and  bade  him  fare-
well, and  went  forth  from  him,  after  he  had  kissed  his  hands.

He  journeyed  on  during  the  rest  of  that  day,  full  of  joy  on  account
of  the  accomplishment  of  his  affair,  and  he  prosecuted  his  journey
with  diligence  night  and  day,  and  ceased  not  to  travel  on  until  he  came
near  to  Egypt,  when  he  sent  one  of  his  servants  to  acquaint  the  King
'Asim  therewith.  So  when  the  King  'Asim  heard  of  his  arrival  and
of  the  accomplishment  of  his  affair,  he  rejoiced  exceedingly,  he  and
his  chief  officers,  and  the  lords  of  his  kingdom  and  all  his  troops,  and
especially  at  the  safety  of  the  Wezeer  Fans.  And  when  the  King  and
the  Wezeer  met  each  other,  the  Wezeer  alighted,  and  kissed  the  ground
before  him,  and  gave  the  King  the  glad  tidings  of  the  accomplish-
ment of  his  affair  in  the  most  complete  manner;  after  which  he  pro-
posed to  him  the  true  faith  and  El-Islam ;  whereupon  the  King  'Asim
embraced  El-Islam,  with  all  his  subjects,10  and  said  to  the  Wezeer
Faris,  Go  to  thy  house  and  rest  thyself  this  night,  and  rest  thyself
also  for  a  week,  and  enter  the  bath  :  after  that  come  to  me,  that  1
may  inform  thee  of  a  thing  respecting  which  we  must  deliberate.  So
the  Wezeer  kissed  the  ground  and  departed,  he  and  his  dependants
and  his  young  men  and  his  servants,  to  his  house,  and  he  rested  eight
days :  after  which  he  repaired  to  the  King,  and  related  to  him  all  that
had  occurred  between  him  and  Suleyman  the  son  of  Diiood,  on  both
of  whom  be  peace!  He  then  said  to  the  King,  Arise  thou  alone,  and
come  with  me.  He  therefore  arose  with  the  Wezeer,  and  they  took
two  bows  and  two  arrows,  ascended  the  tree,  and  sat  silent  until  the
period  of  mid-day  had  passed,  and  ceased  not  to  remain  so  until  near
the  time  of  afternoon-prayers,  when  they  descended,  and  looked,  and
saw  two  large  serpents  come  forth  from  the  foot  of  the  tree.  The
King  looked  at  them,  and  liked  them  ;  for  they  excited  his  admira-
tion when  he  saw  them  with  collars  of  gold ;  and  he  said,  O  Wezeer,
verily  these  two  serpents  are  adorned  with  collars  of  gold  !  By  Allah,
this  is  a  wonderful  thing!  Let  us  take  them  and  put  them  into  a
cage,  and  divert  ourselves  with  the  sight  of  them. — But  the  Wezeer
replied,  These  hath  God  created  for  their  use  :  so  smite  thou  one  with
an  arrow,  and  I  will  smite  one  with  an  arrow.  Accordingly  they  both
shot  at  them  with  the  arrows,  and  slew  them  ;  and  they  cut  off  from
the  head-part  of  each  of  them  a  span,  and  from  the  tail-part  of  each  a
span,  and  threw  away  these  pieces.  They  then  went  with  the  rest  to
the  King's  palace,  demanded  the  cook,  and  gave  him  that  meat,  saying


AND  BEDEEA-EL-JEMAL.  291

to  him,  Cook  this  meat  nicely,  with  onion-sauce11  and  spices,  and
ladle  it  out  into  two  saucers,  and  bring  them  hither  at  such  a  time
and  at  such  an  hour,  and  delay  not.  So  the  cook  took  the  meat,
and  went  with  it  to  the  kitchen,  and  he  cooked  it  well,  with  excel-
lent onion-sauce;  after  which  he  ladled  it  out  into  two  saucers,  and
brought  them  before  the  King  and  the  Wezeer.  The  King  therefore
took  a  saucer,  and  the  Wezeer  a  saucer,  and  they  fed  with  them  their
two  wives ;  and  by  the  good  pleasure  of  God  (whose  perfection  be
extolled,  and  whose  name  be  exalted  !),  and  his  power  and  will,  it
happened,  that  night,  as  the  Prophet  of  God,  Suleyman,  had  said.

The  King  remained,  after  that,  three  months  disturbed  in  heart,
saying  within  himself,  I  wonder  whether  this  thing  be  true  or  not  true.
Then  his  wife  was  sitting  one  day,  and  she  felt  symptoms  of  becoming
a  mother,  and  she  was  pained,  and  her  complexion  changed.  So  she
summoned  one  of  the  eunuchs  who  were  with  her,  and  he  was  one  of
the  chief  of  them,  and  she  said,  Go  to  the  King,  wherever  he  is,  and
say  to  him,  O  King  of  the  age,  I  give  thee  the  glad  tidings  that  our
mistress  hath  felt  symptoms  of  her  becoming  a  mother.  The  eunuch
therefore  went  forth  quickly,  full  of  joy,  and  he  saw  the  King  alone,
with  his  hand  upon  his  cheek,  meditating  on  this  subject;  so  the
eunuch  approached  him,  and  kissed  the  ground  before  him,  and  in-
formed him  of  this  fact.  And  when  he  heard  the  words  of  the  eunuch,
be  rose  upon  his  feet,  and,  in  the  excess  of  his  joy,  he  kissed  the  hand
of  the  eunuch,  and  his  head,  and,  having  pulled  off  the  apparel  that
was  on  himself,  gave  it  to  him  ;  and  he  said  to  those  who  were  present
in  his  hall  of  assembly,  Whosoever  loveth  me,  let  him  bestow  favours
upon  him.  They  therefore  gave  him,  of  riches  and  jewels  and  jacinths
and  horses  and  mules  and  gardens,  what  could  not  be  numbered  nor
calculated.  Then  the  Wezeer  came  in  at  that  time  to  the  King,  and
said,  0  King  of  the  age,  I  was  just  now  sitting  alone  in  the  house,
troubled  in  heart,  meditating  upon  the  state  of  my  wife,  and  saying
within  myself,  I  wonder  whether  it  be  true,  and  whether  Khatoon12
will  bear  me  a  child  or  not — when,  lo,  the  eunuch  came  in  to  me,  and
gave  me  the  glad  tidings  that  my  wife  Khatoon  had  felt  symptoms  of
becoming  a  mother,  and  that  her  complexion  was  changed ;  whereupon,
in  my  joy,  I  pulled  off  all  the  apparel  that  was  upon  me,  and  gave  it
to  the  eunuch  ;  and  I  gave  him  a  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  and  made
him  the  chief  of  the  eunuchs.  Then  the  King  'Asim  said.  O  Wezeer,
verily  God  (blessed  be  He,  and  exalted  be  his  name  !)  hath  favoured
us,  in  his  bounty  and  goodness  and  liberality  and  beneficence,  with


292


THE  STORY  OF  SEYF-EL-MULOOK


the  right  religion,  and  ho-
noured us  in  his  graciousness
and  bounty,  and  brought  us
out  from  darkness  into  light;
and  I  desire  to  relieve  the
people,  and  to  rejoice  them.
So  the  Wezeer  replied,  Do
what  thou  desirest.  And  he
said,  0  Wezeer,  go  down  im-
mediately, and  take  forth
every  one  who  is  in  the  prison,
of  the  criminals  and  debtors  ;
and  whosoever  shall  be  guilty
of  an  offence  after  that,  we
will  requite  him  with  that
which  he  shall  deserve.  We
will  also  take  off  from  the
people  the  taxes  for  three
years,  and  do  thou  set  up,
around  this  city,  kitchens,
around  the  walls,  and  order
the  cooks  to  suspend  there  all
kinds  of  cooking-pots,  to  cook
all  kinds  of  viands,  and  to  con-
tinue the  cooking  night  and  day  ;  and  all  who  are  in  this  city,  and  in
the  surrounding  tracts,  near  and  distant,  shall  eat  and  drink  and  carry
to  their  houses.  Order  them  also  to  make  merry,  and  to  decorate  the
city  seven  days,  and  not  to  shut  their  shops  night  nor  day.13

So  the  Wezeer  went  forth  immediately,  and  did  as  the  King  'Asim
had  commanded  him.  They  decorated  the  city  and  the  castle  and  the
towers  in  the  most  beautiful  manner,  and  clad  themselves  in  the  best
of  apparel ;  and  the  people  passed  their  time  in  eating  and  drinking
and  play  and  merriment  until  the  period  of  the  delivery  of  the  King's
wife,  after  the  fulfilment  of  her  days,  when  she  gave  birth  to  a  male
child  like  the  moon  in  the  night  of  its  fulness,  and  the  King  named
him  Seyf-el-Mulook.14  Likewise  the  wife  of  the  Wezeer  gave  birth  to
a  boy  like  a  lamp,  and  he  named  him  Sa'ed.15  When  they  had  attained
to  years  of  discretion,16  the  King  'Asim,  whenever  he  beheld  them,
rejoiced  in  them  exceedingly;  and  when  their  age  had  become  twenty
years,  the  King  summoned  his  Wezeer  Furis  to  a  private  interview,


AND  BEDEEA-EL-JEMAL.  293

and  said  to  him,  O  Wezeer,  a  thing  hath  occurred  to  my  mind,  and  I
desire  to  do  it ;  but  I  will  consult  thee  respecting  it.  The  Wezeer
replied,  Whatever  hath  occurred  to  thy  mind,  do  it;  for  thy  judgment
is  blessed.  And  the  King  'Asim  said,  0  Wezeer,  I  have  become  a
very  old,  decrepit  man ;  for  I  am  far  advanced  in  years ;  and  I  desire
to  reside  in  a  Zawiyeh,17  to  worship  God  (whose  name  be  exalted!),
and  give  my  kingdom  and  my  empire  to  my  son  Seyf-el-Mulook  ;
since  he  is  now  a  comely  young  man,  perfect  in  horsemanship  and
intellect,  and  polite  literature,  and  gravity,  and  the  art  of  govern-
ment. What  then  sayest  thou,  O  Wezeer,  of  this  idea  ? — The  Wezeer
answered,  Excellent  is  the  idea  that  thou  hast  formed.  It  is  a  blessed
and  fortunate  idea ;  and  if  thou  do  this,  I  also  will  do  like  thee,  and
my  son  Sa'ed  shall  be  Wezeer  unto  him ;  for  he  is  a  comely  young
man,  a  person  of ,  knowledge  and  judgment.  Thus  the  two  shall
be  together,  and  we  will  arrange  their  affair,  and  will  not  be  negligent
respecting  their  case,  but  guide  them  to  the  right  way. — Then  the
King  'Asim  said  to  his  Wezeer,  Write  the  letters,  and  send  them  by
the  couriers  to  all  the  provinces  and  districts  and  fortresses  and  castles
that  are  under  our  authority,  and  order  their  chiefs  to  be  present  in
such  a  month  in  the  Horse-course  of  the  Elephant.18  The  Wezeer
Faris  therefore  went  forth  immediately,  and  wrote  to  all  the  governors
and  the  commanders  of  the  castles,  and  others  who  were  under  the
authority  of  the  King  'Asim,  commanding  them  all  to  be  present  in
that  month  ;  and  he  ordered  that  every  one  who  was  in  the  city  should
be  present,  the  distant  and  the  near.

Then  the  King  'Asim,  after  the  expiration  of  the  greater  part  of
the  interval,  commanded  the  fan-ashes  to  pitch  the  tents  in  the
midst  of  the  horse-course,  and  to  decorate  them  in  the  most  sumptu-
ous manner,  and  to  set  the  great  throne  upon  which  the  King  sat  not
save  on  the  occasions  of  festivals.  So  they  did  immediately  all  that
he  commanded  them  :  they  set  the  throne,  and  the  lieutenants  and
chamberlains  and  emeers  went  forth.  The  King  also  went  forth,  and
commanded  to  proclaim  among  the  people,  In  the  name  of  God !
Come  forth  to  the  horse-course  ! — Accordingly  the  emeers  and  we-
zeers,  and  the  governors  of  the  provinces  and  the  cultivated  tracts,
came  forth  to  that  horse-course,  and  betook  themselves  to  the  ser-
vice of  the  King  as  was  their  custom,  and  they  all  remained  in  their
several  places  :  some  of  them  sat,  and  some  stood,  until  all  the  people
had  collected,  when  the  King  gave  orders  to  spread  the  table.19  They
therefore  spread  it,  and  they  ate  and  drank,  and  prayed  for  the  King.


294  THE  STORY  OF  SEYF-EL-MULOOK,  &c.

Then  the  King  commanded  the  chamberlains  to  proclaim  among  the
people  that  they  should  not  depart.  So  they  proclaimed,  and  said  in
their  proclamation,  Not  one  of  you  shall  go  until  he  heareth  the
words  of  the  King!  They  then  raised  the  curtains,20  and  the  King
said,  Whoso  loveth  me,  let  him  remain  until  he  heareth  my  words.
Wherefore  all  the  people  sat  with  tranquil  souls,  after  they  had  been
fearful.  And  the  King  rose  upon  his  feet,  and  made  them  swear
that  none  of  them  would  rise  from  his  place ;  and  he  said  to  them,
O  emeers  and  wezeers  and  lords  of  the  empire,  great  and  small,  and
whosoever  is  present  of  all  the  people,  do  ye  know  that  this  kingdom
was  an  heritage  unto  me  from  my  fathers  and  forefathers  ?  They
answered  him,  Yes,  O  King:  all  of  us  know  that.  And  he  said  to
them,  I  and  ye  all  worshipped  the  sun  and  the  moon,  and  God  (whose
name  be  exalted  !)  blessed  us  with  the  true  faith,  and  delivered  us
from  darkness  into  light,  and  God  (whose  perfection  be  extolled,  and
whose  name  be  exalted  t)  guided  us  unto  the  religion  of  El-Islam.
Know  also  that  I  have  now  become  a  very  old  man,  decrepit,  feeble ;
and  I  desire  to  sit  in  a  Zawiyeh,  there  to  worship  God  (whose  name
be  exalted !),  and  to  beg  his  forgiveness  of  past  offences  ;  and  this  my
son,  Seyf-el-Mulook,  shall  be  ruler.  Ye  know  that  he  is  a  comely  young
man,  eloquent,  acquainted  with  the  affairs  of  the  world,  intelligent,
excelling  in  science,  just.  I  therefore  desire  at  this  present  time  to
give  him  my  kingdom,  and  to  make  him  King  over  you  in  my  stead,
and  seat  him  as  Sultan  in  my  place.  So  I  will  retire  to  worship  God
(whose  name  be  exalted !)  in  a  Zawiyeh,  and  my  son  Seyf-el-Mulook
will  be  invested  with  the  sovereignty,  and  judge  between  you.  What
then  do  ye  all  say  ? — And  upon  this,  they  all  rose,  and,  having  kissed
the  ground  before  him,  answered,  We  hear  and  obey.  And  they  said*
0  our  King  and  our  defender,  shouldst  thou  set  over  us  one  of  thy
slaves,  we  would  obey  him,  and  attend  to  thy  words,  and  comply  with
thy  command  :  how  then  in  the  case  of  thy  son  Seyf-el-Mulook  ?  We
accept  him  and  approve  of  him,  on  the  eye  and  the  head.

So  thereupon  the  King  'Asim  the  son  of  Safwan  arose,  and  de-
scended from  his  throne,  and,  having  seated  his  son  on  the  great  throne,
took  the  crown  from  his  own  head,  and  put  it  on  the  head  of  his  son,
and  he  girded  his  waist  with  the  royal  girdle.21  The  King  'Asim
seated  himself  upon  the  throne  of  his  kingdom,  by  the  side  of  his  son ;
and  the  emeers  and  wezeers,  and  the  great  men  of  the  empire,  and  all
the  people,  arose  and  kissed  the  ground  before  him,  and  stood  saying  one
to  another,  He  is  worthy  of  the  sovereignty,  and  he  is  more  worthy  of


it  than  any  other.  They  made  proclamation  of  safety,  and  offered  up
prayers  in  his  favour  for  victory  and  good  fortune  ;  and  Seyf-el-Mulook
scattered  gold  and  silver  over  the  heads  of  all  the  people,  conferred
robes  of  honour,  and  gave  and  bestowed.  Then,  after  a  moment,  the
Wezeer  Faris  arose,  and  kissed  the  ground,  and  said,  O  emeers,  O
lords  of  the  empire,  do  ye  know  that  I  am  Wezeer,  and  that  my  office
of  Wezeer  commenced  of  old,  before  the  King  'Asim  the  son  of  Safvvan
was  invested  with  the  sovereignty,  who  hath  now  divested  himself
of  the  sovereignty  and  Invested  his  son  in  his  stead  ?  They  answered,
Yes :  we  know  that  thou  hast  inherited  thine  office  of  Wezeer  from
father  after  grandfather.  And  he  said,  And  now  I  divest  myself,  and
invest  this  my  son  Sa'ed ;  for  he  is  intelligent,  sagacious,  knowing.
What  then  say  ye  all  ? — And  they  answered,  None  is  fit  to  be
Wezeer  to  the  King  Seyf-el-Mulook  except  thy  son  S£'ed ;  for  they
are  suited,  each  to  the  other.  So  thereupon  the  Wezeer  Faris  arose,
and  took  off  his  Wezeer's  turban,  and  put  it  on  the  head  of  his  son
Sa'ed,  and  he  put  the  Wezeer's  inkhorn  before  him  also.  And  the
chamberlains  and  emeers  said,  Verily  he  deserveth  the  office  of  We-
zeer! Then  the  King  'Asim  and  the  Wezeer  Faris  arose,  and  opened


29C  THE  STORY  OF  SEVF-EL-MULOOK

the  treasuries,  and  conferred  sumptuous  robes  of  honour  upon  the
kings  and  emeers  and  wezeers,  and  the  great  men  of  the  empire,  and
all  the  people ;  gave  salaries  and  benefactions,  and  wrote  for  them
new  diplomas  and  mandates  with  the  signature  of  Seyf-el-Mulook
and  the  signature  of  the  Wezeer  Sa'ed  the  son  of  the  Wezeer  Fans  ;
and  the  people  [of  the  provinces]  remained  in  the  city  for  a  week,
after  which  each  of  them  journeyed  to  his  district  and  his  place.

The  King  'AVnn  then  took  his  son  Seyf-el-Mulook,  and  Sa'ed
the  son  of  the  old  Wezeer,  and  they  entered  the  city,  went  up  to
the  palace,  and,  having  summoned  the  Treasurer,  ordered  him  to  bring
the  seal-ring  and  the  sword  and  the  wrapper;  and  the  King  'Asim
said,  0  my  sons,  coine  :  each  of  you  shall  choose  something  from
this  present  and  take  it.  And  the  first  who  put  forth  his  hand  was
Seyf-el-Mulook,  who  took  the  wrapper  and  the  seal-ring ;  and  Sa'ed
put  forth  his  hand,  and  took  the  sword  j22  after  which  they  kissed  the
hands  of  the  old  King,  and  departed  to  their  dwelling-places.  Now
when  Seyf-el-Mulook  took  the  wrapper,  he  did  not  open  it,  nor  look
at  what  was  in  it,  but  he  threw  it  upon  the  couch  on  which  he  slept
at  night  together  with  his  Wezeer  Sa'ed  ;  for  it  was  their  custom  to
sleep  together.  They  spread  their  bed,  and  the  two  lay  down  together
upon  it,  the  candles  shedding  their  light  upon  them  ;  and  they  re-
mained until  midnight.  Then  Seyf-el-Mulook  awoke  from  his  sleep,
and,  seeing  the  wrapper  at  his  head,  he  said  within  himself,  I  wonder
what  is  in  this  wrapper  which  the  King  hath  given  us  among  the
rarities.  So  he  took  it,  and  took  a  candle,  and  descended  from  the
couch,  leaving  Sa'ed  asleep  ;  and  he  entered  a  closet,  and  opened  the
wrapper ;  whereupon  he  saw  in  it  a  tunic  of  the  fabric  of  the  Jann.
He  then  opened  the  tunic,  and  spread  it  out,  and  found  upon  the
lining  of  the  back  part  of  it  the  portrait  of  a  damsel,  delineated  in
gold  ;  but  her  loveliness  was  wonderful.  When  he  saw  this  portrait,
his  reason  fled  from  his  head :  he  became  mad  with  love  of  it,  and
fell  upon  the  floor  in  a  fit,  and  began  to  weep  and  wail,  and  to  slap
his  face  and  his  bosom,  and  to  kiss  the  portrait.  Then  he  recited
these  two  verses : —

Love,  at  its  commencement,  is  like  running saliva Destiny  bringeth it  and

exciteth  it.
But  when  the  youth  plungeth  into  the  abysses  of  love,  events  occur  too  great

for  him  to  bear.

He  ceased  not  to  wail  and  weep,  and  to  slap  his  face  and  his
bosom,  until  the  Wezeer  Sa'ed  awoke,  and  looked  at  the  bed,  and


AND  BEDEEA-EL-JEMAL.  297

saw  not  Seyf-el-Mulook;  but  he  saw  a  candle;  and  he  said  within
himself,  Whither  is  Seyf-el-Mulook  gone  ?  He  then  took  the  candle,
and  proceeded  to  search  through  all  the  palace  until  he  came  to  the
closet  in  which  Seyf-el-Mulook  was,  when  he  saw  him  weeping  vio-
lently and  wailing.  So  he  said  to  him,  0  my  brother,  for  what
reason  is  this  weeping  ?  What  hath  happened  to  thee  ?  Tell  me,  and
acquaint  me  with  the  cause  of  this. — But  Seyf-el-Mulook  spoke  not
to  him,  nor  raised  his  head :  he  still  wept  and  wailed,  and  struck  his
hand  upon  his  bosom.  Therefore  when  Sa'ed  saw  him  in  this  state,
he  said,  I  am  thy  Wezeer  and  thy  brother,  and  I  was  reared  with
thee ;  and  if  thou  do  not  discover  to  me  thine  affairs,  and  make  me
acquainted  with  thy  secret,  to  whom  wilt  thou  reveal  thy  secret,  and
whom  wilt  thou  make  acquainted  with  it  ?  And  Sa'ed  ceased  not  to
humble  himself  and  to  kiss  the  ground  for  some  time,  while  Seyf-el-
Mulook  looked  not  towards  him,  nor  spoke  to  him  a  single  word ;
but  continued  weeping.  And  when  his  state  alarmed  Sa'ed,  and  his
case  wearied  him,  he  went  forth  from  him,  and,  taking  a  sword,
entered  the  closet  in  which  was  Seyf-el-Mulook,  and  put  the  point
of  the  sword  to  his  own  bosom,  and  said  to  Seyf-el-Mulook,  Rouse
thyself,  O  my  brother !  If  thou  tell  me  not  what  hath  happened  to
thee,  I  will  slay  myself,  rather  than  see  thee  in  this  state. — So  upon
this,  Seyf-el-Mulook  raised  his  head  towards  his  Wezeer  Sa'ed,  and
said  to  him,  0  my  brother,  I  was  ashamed  to  tell  thee,  and  to  acquaint
thee  with  that  which  hath  happened  to  me.  But  Sa'ed  replied,  I  con-
jure thee  by  Allah,  the  Lord  of  lords,  and  the  Liberator  of  necks,  and
the  Cause  of  causes,  the  One,  the  Gracious,  the  Bountiful,  the  Liberal,
that  thou  tell  me  what  it  is  that  hath  happened  to  thee,  and  be  not
abashed  at  me ;  for  I  am  thy  slave  and  thy  Wezeer  and  thy  coun-
sellor in  all  affairs.  And  Seyf-el-Mulook  said,  Come,  look  at  this
portrait.  And  when  Sa'ed  saw  that  portrait,  he  contemplated  it  for
some  time,  and  saw  inscribed  upon  the  head  of  it,  in  pearls  arranged,
This  is  the  portrait  of  Bedeea-el-Jemal  the  daughter  of  Shahyiil23  the
son  of  Sharookh,  one  of  the  Kings  of  the  believing  Jann,  who  sojourn
in  the  city  of  Babil,  and  dwell  in  the  Garden  of  Irem  of  the  son  of
'Ad  the  Greater.24 — Upon  this,  the  Wezeer  Sa'ed  said  to  the  King
Seyf-el-Mulook,  0  my  brother,  knowest  thou  who  among  women  is
the  original  of  this  portrait,  that  we  may  search  for  her  ?  Seyf-el-
Mulook  answered,  No,  by  Allah,  O  my  brother :  I  know  not  the
original  of  this  portrait.  And  Sa'ed  replied,  Come,  read  this  inscrip-
tion. So  Seyf-el-Mulook  advanced,  and  read  the  inscription  that  was

IIL  2 Q


298  THE  STORY  OF  SEYF-EL-MULOOK

upon  the  crown,  and  knew  its  purport ;  and  thereupon  he  uttered  a
loud  cry  from  the  bottom  of  his  bosom,  and  said,  Ah  !  Ah !  All ! —
But  Sa'ed  said  to  him,  O  my  brother,  if  the  original  of  this  portrait
be  in  existence,  and  her  name  be  Bedeea-el-Jemal,  and  she  be  in  the
world,  I  will  hasten  to  seek  her,  without  delay,  that  thou  mayest  attain
thy  desire.  I  conjure  thee  then  by  Allah,  0  my  brother,  that  thou
relinquish  weeping,  in  order  that  thou  mayest  introduce  the  people
of  the  empire  to  wait  upon  thee;  and  when  the  morning  cometh,
summon  the  merchants  and  the  poor  devotees  and  the  travellers  and
the  needy,  and  inquire  of  them  respecting  the  particulars  of  this  city.
Perhaps  some  one,  by  the  blessing  of  God  (whose  perfection  be  ex-
tolled, and  whose  name  be  exalted !),  and  by  his  aid,  may  direct  us  to
it,  and  to  the  Garden  of  Irem.

Accordingly,  when  the  morning  came,  Seyf-el-Mulook  rose,  and
ascended  the  throne,  hugging  the  tunic ;  for  from  this  time  he  neither
rose  nor  sat  down,  nor  would  sleep  come  to  him,  unless  it  were  with
him.  So  the  emeers  and  wezeers,  and  the  troops,  and  the  lords  of
the  empire,  came  in  to  him;  but  when  the  court  was  fully  attended,
and  the  assembly  was  ranged  in  order,  the  King  Seyf-el-Mulook  said
to  his  Wezeer  Sa'ed,  Go  forth  to  them  and  say  to  them,  that  the
King  hath  experienced  an  indisposition,  and  that  he  passed  not  last
night  save  in  a  state  of  illness.  The  Wezeer  Sa'ed  therefore  went
forth,  and  acquainted  the  people  with  that  which  the  King  had  said.
And  when  the  King  'Asim  heard  that,  the  case  of  his  son  was  not  a
light  matter  to  him  ;  wherefore,  upon  this,  he  summoned  the  sages
and  the  astrologers,  and  went  in  with  them  to  his  son  Seyf-el-Mulook ;
and  they  looked  at  him,  and  prescribed  for  him  a  beverage,  and  he
remained  in  his  place  during  a  period  of  three  months.  So  the  King
'Asim  said  to  the  sages  who  were  present,  being  enraged  against
them,  Wo  to  you,  O  dogs !  Are  ye  all  unable  to  cure  my  son  ?
Now  if  ye  cure  him  not  immediately,  I  will  slay  you  all ! — Their
chief  replied,  O  King  of  the  age,  we  know  that  this  is  thy  son,  and
thou  knowest  that  we  are  not  neglectful  in  the  cure  of  the  stranger :
how  then  should  we  be  so  with  respect  to  the  cure  of  thy  son  ?  But
thy  son  hath  a  difficult  disease  :  if  thou  desire  to  know  it,  we  will
mention  it  to  thee,  and  inform  thee  of  it.  The  King  'Asim  said,
What  hath  appeared  to  you  in  the  disease  of  my  son  ?  So  the  chief
sage  answered  him,  O  King  of  the  age,  verily  thy  son  is  now  en-
amoured, and  loveth  a  person  with  whom  there  is  no  way  of  effecting
a  union.  And  upon  this,  the  King  'Asim  was  enraged,  and  said,


AND  BEDEEA-EL-JEMAL.  299

How  learned  ye  that  rny  son  is  enamoured,  and  how  came  love  unto
my  son  ?  They  therefore  answered  him,  Ask  his  brother  and  his
Wezeer  Sa'ed :  for  he  is  the  person  who  knoweth  his  state.  And
the  King  'Asim  arose,  and,  having  entered  a  closet  alone,  summoned
Sa'ed,  and  said  to  him,  Tell  me  the  true  nature  of  the  disease  of  my
son.  But  he  replied,  I  know  not  its  true  nature.  And  the  King
said  to  the  executioner,  Take  Sa'ed,  bind  his  eyes,  and  smite  off  his
head.  So  Sa'ed  feared  for  himself,  and  said,  O  King  of  the  age,
give  me  promise  of  indemnity.  And  he  replied,  Tell  me,  and  thou
shalt  be  safe.  Then  Sa'ed  said  to  him,  Verily  thy  son  is  enamoured.
— And  who,  asked  the  King,  is  the  object  of  his  passion  ?  Sa'ed  an-
swered, The  daughter  of  one  of  the  Kings  of  the  Jann  :  for  he  saw
her  portrait  upon  a  tunic  in  the  wrapper  which  Suleyman  the  Prophet
of  God  gave  you.

And  thereupon  the  King 'Asim  arose  and  went  in  to  his  son  Seyf-
el-Mulook,  and  said  to  him,  0  my  sou,  what  hath  afflicted  thee,  and
what  is  this  portrait  of  which  thou  hast  become  enamoured,  and  why
didst  thou  not  inform  me  ?  Seyf-el-Mulook  answered,  0  my  father,
I  was  abashed  at  thee,  and  I  was  not  able  to  mention  to  thee  that
matter,  nor  could  I  acquaint  any  one  with  aught  of  it :  but  now  thou
knowest  my  state ;  see  then  how  thou  wilt  act  to  effect  my  cure.  His
father  said  to  him,  What  expedient  shall  be  employed  ?  Were  this  of
the  daughters  of  mankind,  we  would  contrive  an  expedient  to  obtain
access  to  her ;  but  she  is  of  the  daughters  of  the  Kings  of  the  Jann ;
and  who  is  able  to  gain  possession  of  her,  unless  it  be  Suleyman  the
son  of  Daood  ?  for  he  is  the  person  who  can  effect  that.  But,  0  my
son,  arise  immediately,  and  strengthen  thyself,  and  mount,  and  go  to
the  chase,  and  to  the  games  in  the  horse-course ;  employ  thyself  also
in  eating  and  drinking,  and  dismiss  anxiety  and  grief  from  thy  heart.
I  will  bring  thee  a  hundred  damsels  of  the  daughters  of  Kings,  and
thou  hast  no  need  of  the  daughters  of  the  Jann,  over  whom  we  have
no  power,  and  who  are  not  of  our  species. — But  he  replied,  I  will  not
relinquish  her,  nor  will  I  seek  any  other  than  her.  So  his  father  said
to  him,  How  shall  this  be  done,  O  my  son  ?  And  he  answered  him,
Bring  to  us  all  the  merchants  and  the  travellers  and  wanderers
throughout  the  countries,  that  we  may  inquire  of  them  respecting
this.  Perhaps  God  will  direct  us  to  the  Garden  of  Irem  and  to  the
city  of  Babil. — The  King  'Asim  therefore  commanded  that  every
merchant  in  the  city  should  present  himself,  and  every  stranger  in
it,  and  every  sea-captain  ;  and  when  they  came,  he  asked  them  re-


specting  the  city  of  Babil  aud  its  country,  and  respecting  the  Garden
of  Irem.  Not  one  of  them,  however,  knew  these  places,  or  gave  any
information  of  them.  But  on  the  breaking  up  of  the  assembly,  one
of  them  said,  O  King  of  the  age,  if  thou  desire  to  know  that,  inquire
in  the  country  of  China;  for  it  hath  a  great  city,  and  perhaps  some
one  of  that  place  may  direct  thee  to  the  object  of  thy  desire.  And
upon  this,  Seyf-el-Mulook  said,  0  my  father,  fit  out  for  me  a  ship  for
the  voyage  to  the  land  of  China.  His  father  replied,  O  my  son,  sit
thou  upon  the  throne  of  thy  kingdom,  and  rule  the  people,  aud  I  will
make  the  voyage  to  the  land  of  China,  and  go  myself  on  this  business.
But  Seyf-el-Mulook  said,  0  my  father,  this  affair  concerneth  me,  and
no  one  can  seek  to  accomplish  it  like  myself;  and  whatever  may
happen,  if  thou  give  me  permission  to  make  the  voyage,  I  will  do  so,
and  be  absent  for  a  period  of  time.  If  I  find  any  tidings  of  her,  my
desire  is  attained ;  and  if  I  find  no  tidings  of  her,  by  the  voyage  I
shall  experience  dilatation  of  my  bosom,  and  enlivenment  of  my  heart :
thus  my  case  will  become  easy ;  and  if  I  live,  I  shall  return  to  thee
safe. — And  the  King  looked  at  his  son,  and  saw  for  himself  no  re-
source but  doing  for  him  that  which  would  content  him.  So  he
gave  him  permission  to  make  the  voyage,  and  fitted  out  for  him  forty
ships,  and  a  thousand 25  memlooks,  besides  servants,  and  gave  him
wealth  and  treasures,  with  every  thing  that  he  required  of  implements
of  war ;  and  he  said  to  them,  Set  forth  on  thy  voyage,  O  my  son,  in


THE  STORY  OF  SEYF-EL-MULOOK,  &c.  301

prosperity  and  health  and  safety. I  commit  thee  unto Him  with
whom  deposites  are  not  lost

Then  his  father  and  his  mother  bade  him  farewell,  the  ships  were
laden  with  water  and  provisions  and  arms  and  soldiers,  and  they  com-
menced the  voyage.  They  ceased  not  to  pursue  their  course  until
they  arrived  at  the  capital  of  China ;  and  when  the  people  of  China
heard  that  there  had  come  to  them  forty  ships  filled  with  men  and
equipages  and  arms  and  stores,  they  made  sure  that  they  were  enemies
who  had  come  to  attack  them  and  besiege  them  ;  wherefore  they  closed
the  gates  of  the  city,  and  prepared  the  catapults.  So  when  the  King
Seyf-el-Mulook  heard  of  this,  he  sent  to  them  two  of  his  favourite
inemlooks,  and  said  to  them,  Go  ye  to  the  King  of  China,  and  say  to
him,  This  is  Seyf-el-Mulook,  the  son  of  the  King  'Asim :  he  hath
come  unto  thy  city  as  a  guest,  to  divert  himself  in  thy  country  for  a
period  of  time,  and  not  to  fight,  nor  to  contend :  so  if  thou  wilt
receive  him,  he  will  land  to  visit  thee  ;  and  if  thou  wilt  not  receive
him,  he  will  return,  and  not  trouble  thee  nor  the  people  of  thy  city.
— Accordingly  the  memlooks,  on  their  arriving  at  the  city,  said  to  its
inhabitants,  We  are  envoys  of  the  King  Seyf-el-Mulook.  They  there-
fore opened  to  them  the  gate,  and  went  with  them,  and  presented
them  before  their  King.  His  name  was Faghfoor 2G  Shah;  and  there
had  existed  between  h,im  and  the  King  'Asim,  before  that  period,  an
acquaintance.  So  when  he  heard  that  the  King  who  had  come  to
him  was  Seyf-el-Mulook,  the  son  of  the  King  'Asim,  he  bestowed
robes  of  honour  upon  the  envoys,  and  gave  orders  to  open  the  gates.
He  also  prepared  the  gifts  of  hospitality,  and  went  forth  himself,  with
the  favourite  officers  of  his  empire,  and  came  to  Seyf-el-Mulook;  and
they  embraced  each  other.  He  said  to  him,  A  friendly  and  free  and
an  ample  welcome  to  him  who  hath  come  unto  us  !  I  am  thy  mem-
look,  and  the  memlook  of  thy  father;  my  city  is  at  thy  disposal,  and
every  thing  that  thou  demandest  shall  be  brought  unto  thee. — And
he  presented  to  him  the  gifts  of  hospitality,  and  provisions  [for  him
and  his  people],  at  their  stations.  Then  the  King  Seyf-el-Mulook
mounted,  and  Sa'ed  his  Weezeer,  and  with  them  their  favourite  officers
and  the  rest  of  the  soldiers,  and  they  proceeded  along  the  sea-shore
until  they  entered  the  city  ;  when  the  cymbals  were  beaten,  and  the
drums  to  announce  the  happy  event ;  and  they  remained  there  for  a
period  of  forty  days,  well  entertained.

After  this,  the  King  of  China  said  to  Seyf-el-Mulook,  0  son  of
my  brother,  how  art  thou  ?  Hath  my  country  pleased  thee  ? —


302  THE  STORY  OF  SEYF-EL-MULOOK,  &c.

Seyf-el-Mulook  answered  him,  May  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !)
make  it  ever  to  be  honoured  by  thy  rule,  O  King !  And  the  King
Faghfoor  Shah  said,  Nought  hath  brought  thee  hither  save  some
affair  that  hath  occurred  to  thee ;  and  whatever  thing  thou  desirest
to  obtain  from  my  country,  I  will  accomplish  it  for  thee.  So  Seyf-el-
Mulook  replied,  O  King,  verily  my  case  is  wonderful ;  and  it  is  this :
I  have  become  enamoured  of  a  portrait  of  Bedeea-el-Jejml.  And
upon  this  the  King  of  China  wept  in  pity  and  compassion  for  him,
and  said  to  him,  And  what  desirest  thou  now,  O  Seyf-el-Mulook  ?
He  answered  him,  I  desire  of  thee  that  thou  bring  unto  me  all  the
wanderers  and  travellers,  and  those  who  are  accustomed  to  journeys,
that  I  may  inquire  of  them  respecting  the  original  of  this  portrait.
Perhaps  some  one  of  them  may  give  me  information  respecting  her.
— The  King  Faghfoor  Shah  therefore  sent  the  lieutenants  and  cham-
berlains and  guards,  and  commanded  them  to  bring  all  the  wanderers
and  travellers  who  were  in  the  country.  So  they  brought  them  ;  and
they  were  a  numerous  company ;  and  they  assembled  before  the  King
Faghfoor  Shah.  Then  the  King  Seyf-el-Mulook  inquired  respecting
the  city  of  Babil  and  the  Garden  of  Irem  :  but  none  of  them  returned
him  an  answer ;  wherefore  the  King  Seyf-el-Mulook  was  perplexed  at
his  case.  After  that,  however,  one  of  the  sea-captains  said,  0  King,
if  thou  desire  to  know  this  city  and  that  garden,. inquire  in  the  islands
that  appertain  to  India.

So  thereupon,  Seyf-el-Mulook  commanded  that  they  should  bring
the  ships  ;  and  they  did  so,  and  stored  them  with  water  and  provisions
and  all  that  they  required ;  after  which,  Seyf-el-Mulook  embarked,
with  Sa'ed  his  Wezeer,  having  bidden  farewell  to  the  King  Faghfoor
Shah,  and  they  continued  their  course  over  the  sea  for  a  period  of  four
months,  with  a  fair  wind,  safe  and  secure.  But  it  happened  that
there  rose  against  them  a  wind  one  day,  the  billows  came  upon  them
from  every  quarter,  the  rain  descended  upon  them,  and  the  sea  became
changed  by  the  violence  of  the  wind.  The  ships  dashed  one  against
another  by  reason  of  the  force  of  the  wind,  and  all  fell  to  pieces,  as
also  did  the  small  boats,  [except  one,]  and  they  were  all  submerged
but  Seyf-el-Mulook  with  a  party  of  his  memlooks  who  remained  in  a
small  boat.  Then  the  wind  became  stilled  and  calmed  by  the  power
of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !),  and  the  sun  rose,  and  Seyf-el-
Mulook,  opening  his  eyes,  saw  not  any  of  the  ships,  nor  saw  he  aught
save  the  sky  and  the  water  and  himself  and  those  who  were  witli  him
in  the  little  boat.  So  he  said  to  the  memlooks  who  were  with  him,


-


Where  are  the  ships  and  the  small  boats,  and  where  is  my  brother
Sii'ed  ?  They  answered  him,  O  King  of  the  age,  there  remain  not
ships  nor  boats  nor  those  who  were  in  them ;  for  they  are  all  sub-
merged, and  have  become  food  for  the  fishes.  And  thereupon,  Seyf-
el-Mulook  called  out,  and  repeated  a  sentence  the  utterer  of  which  is
secure  from  confusion ;  that  is,  There  is  no  strength  nor  power  but
in  God,  the  High,  the  Great!  Then  he  began  to  slap  his  face,  and
desired  to  cast  himself  into  the  sea ;  but  the  memlooks  prevented  him,
and  said  to  him,  O  King,  what  advantage  would  arise  to  thee  from
this  ?  Thou  hast  done  with  thyself  thus,  and  hadst  thou  attended  to
the  words  of  thy  father,  nought  of  this  had  happened  to  thee.  But
all  this  was  written  from  eternity  by  the  will  of  the  Creator  of  souls,
and  the  servant  must  experience  the  accomplishment  of  that  which
God  hath  decreed  to  befall  him.  The  astrologers  said  to  thy  father,
at  thy  birth,  Verily  all  these  difficulties  will  befall  this  thy  son.  And
in  this  case  we  have  no  resource  but  to  be  patient  until  God  shall
dispel  from  us  the  affliction  in  which  we  are  involved. — And  Seyf-el-
Mulook  said,  There  is  no  strength  nor  power  but  in  God,  the  High,
the  Great !  There  is  no  place  of  refuge  from  that  which  God  (whose
name  be  exalted !)  decreeth,  nor  any  flight  therefrom ! — Then  he
sighed,  and  recited  these  verses : —


304  THE  STORY  OF  SEYF-EL-MULOOK

I am  perplexed,  by  the  Compassionate! without  doubt, in  my  case; and  trouble

hath  befallen  me  from  sources  unknown  to  me.
I  will  be  patient,  that  mankind  may  know  uae  to  have  borne  with  patience  that

which  is  more  bitter  than  aloes.27
The  taste  of  bitter  aloes  is  not  like  my  patience;  for  I  have  borne  with  patience

what  is  hotter  than  live  coals.
J  have  no  resource  in  my  present  case ;  but  I  commit  my  affairs  to  the  Disposer  of

events.


He  was  drowned  in  the  sea  of  solicitudes,  and  his  tears  ran  down
his  cheek  like  a  copious  rain ;  and  he  slept  for  a  period  of  the  day,
after  which  he  awoke,  and  demanded  some  food.  So  he  ate  until  he
was  satisfied,  and  they  removed  the  provision  from  before  him.  The
boat  proceeded  with  them,  and  they  knew  not  whither  it  was  convey-
ing them  ;  and  it  ceased  not  to  bear  them  along  with  the  waves  and
the  winds  night  and  day  for  a  long  period  of  time,  until  their  provision
was  exhausted,  and  they  were  confounded,  and  became  in  a  state  of
the  most  violent  hunger  and  thirst  and  agitation.  But,  lo,  an  island
appeared  to  them  in  the  distance,  and  the  winds  drove  them  on  until
they  arrived  at  it;  whereupon  they  made  fast  their  boat  to  it,  and
landed,  leaving  one  in  the  boat.  They  went  on  upon  that  island,  and
saw  upon  it  many  fruits  of  all  kinds,  and  ate  of  them  until  they  were
satisfied.  And,  lo,  there  was  a  person  sitting  among  the  trees,  long-
faced,  of  strange  appearance,  with  white  beard  and  skin ;  and  he  called
to  one  of  the  memlooks  by  his  name,  and  said  to  him,  Eat  not  of  these
fruits,  for  they  are  not  ripe :  but  come  to  me,  that  I  may  give  thee
to  eat  of  these  ripe  fruits.  And  the  memlook  looked  at  him,  and
imagined  that  he  was  of  the  number  of  those  who  were  submerged,
and  that  he  had  landed  upon  this  island.  So  he  rejoiced  extremely  at
the  sight  of  him,  and  walked  on  until  he  came  near  to  him ;  this
memlook  not  knowing  what  was  secretly  ordained  to  befall  him,  and
what  was  written  upon  his  forehead.28  And  when  he  came  near  to
him,  that  person  leaped  upon  him ;  for  he  was  a  Marid  j29  and  mount-
ing upon  his  shoulders,  he  wound  one  of  his  legs  round  his  neck,  and
hung  the  other  down  his  back,  and  said  to  him,  Walk  on:  there
remaineth  for  thee  no  escape  from  me,  and  thou  hast  become  my  ass.
The  memlook  thereupon  called  out  to  his  companions,  and  began  to
weep,  and  to  say,  Alas,  my  master !  Go  ye  forth  and  save  yourselves
from  this  wood,  and  flee  ye  j  for  one  of  its  inhabitants  hath  mounted
upon  my  shoulders,  and  the  rest  seek  you,  and  desire  to  mount  you
like  me. — So  when  they  heard  these  words  which  the  memlook  uttered,


AND  BEfcEEA-ELrJEMAL.  806

they  all  fled,  and  embarked  in  the  boat;  and  the  inhabitants  of  the
island  followed  them  into  the  sea,  saying  to  them,  Whither  go  ye  ?
Come  and  remain  with  us,  that  we  may  ride  upon  your  backs,  and  we
will  give  you  food  and  drink,  and  ye  shall  be  our  asses. — Therefore  on
their  hearing  from  them  these  words,  they  hastened  in  their  course
upon  the  sea  until  they  were  far  from  them ;  and  they  proceeded
relying  upon  God,  whose  name  be  exalted  !

They  ceased  not  to  proceed  in  this  manner  for  the  space  of  a  month,
till  another  island  appeared  to  them  ;  and  they  landed  upon  that
island,  and  saw  there  fruits  of  various  kinds.  So  they  busied  them-
selves with  eating  the  fruits ;  and,  lo,  they  saw  something  in  the  way,
appearing  in  the  distance  ;  and  when  they  drew  near  to  it,  they  looked
at  it,  and  saw  it  to  be  a  creature  of  hideous  appearance,  lying  down,
like  a  column  of  silver.  And  a  meinlook  struck  it  with  his  foot;  and,
behold,  it  was  a  person  with  long  eyes  and  cloven  head,  and  he  was
hidden  beneath  one  of  his  ears;  for  it  was  his  habit,  when  he  slept,  to
put  one  of  his  ears  beneath  his  head,  and  to  cover  himself  with  the
other  ear.30  He  then  seized  the  memlook  who  struck  him,  and  went
with  him  into  the  midst  of  the  island  ;  and,  lo,  it  was  all  occupied  by
Ghools,  who  ate  the  sons  of  Adam.  And  thereupon  that  memlook
called  out  to  his  companions  and  said  to  them,  Save  yourselves ;  for
this  island  is  the  island  of  the  Ghools  who  eat  the  sons  of  Adam,  and
they  desire  to  cut  me  up  and  eat  me.  So  when  they  heard  these
words,  they  turned  back  in  flight,  and  descended  from  the  shore  into
the  boat,  without  having  collected  aught  of  the  fruits.

They  proceeded  for  some  days,  and  it  happened  that  there  appeared
to  them,  one  day,  another  island;  and  when  they  arrived  at  it,  they
found  upon  it  a  high  mountain,  which  they  ascended,  and  they  found
upon  the  mountain  a  wood  of  many  trees;  and  they  were  hungry;
wherefore  they  busied  themselves  with  eating  of  the  fruits.  But  they
were  not  aware  when  there  came  forth  to  them,  from  among  the  trees,
persons  of  horrible  aspect,  and  tall  :  the  height  of  each  of  them  was
fifty  cubits  and  his  dog-teeth  protruded  from  his  mouth  like  the  tusks
of  the  elephant.  And,  lo,  they  found  a  person  sitting  upon  a  piece  of
black  felt  on  a  rock,  and  around  him  were  the  Ethiopians,  a  numerous
company,  standing  in  attendance  upon  him.  Then  these  Ethiopians
came  and  took  Seyf-el-Mulook  and  his  memlooks,  and,  having  sta-
tioned them  before  their  King,  said,  We  found  these  birds  among  the
trees.  And  the  King  was  hungry  :  so  he  took  two  of  the  memlooks,
and  slaughtered  them  and  ate  them.  Therefore  when  Seyf-el-Mulook

III.  '2 K


306  THE  STORY  OF  SEYF-EL-MULOOK,  &c.

beheld  this  thing,  he  feared  for  himself, and  wept ;  and  he  recited
these  two  verses  : —

Calamities  have  become  familiar  with  my  heart,  and  I  with  them,  after  shunning

them  ;  for  the  generous  is  habitually  familiar.
The  anxieties  that  I  suffer  are  not  ot  one  description :  I  have  (praise  be  to  God  !)

thousands  of  them.01

Then  he  sighed,  and  recited  also  this  couplet : —

Fortune  hath  smitten  me  so  with  disasters,  that  iny  heart  is  covered  with its

arrows  ;
And  now,  when  other  arrows  strike  me.  their  points  break  against  the  points  in

my  heart.

And  when  the  King  heard  his  weeping  and  lamentation,  he  said,
Verily  these  birds  have  an  agreeable  voice  and  modulation,  and  their
voices  have  pleased  me  :  so  put  ye  each  one  of  them  into  a  cage.
Accordingly  they  put  each  of  them  into  a  cage,  and  they  hung  them
over  the  head  of  the  King,  that  he  might  hear  their  voices.  Thus
Seyf-el-Mulook  and  his  memlooks  became  imprisoned  in  the  cages,
and  the  Ethiopians  gave  them  food  and  drink  ;  and  at  times  they  wept
and  at  times  laughed,  and  at  times  they  talked  and  at  times  were
silent ;  the  King  of  the  Ethiopians  all  the  while  delighting  in  their
voices ;  and  they  ceased  not  to  remain  in  this  state  for  a  length  of  time.
Now  the  King  had  a  married  daughter  in  another  island;,  and  she
heard  that  her  father  had  birds  of  agreeable  voices;  so  she  sent  a
party  of  her  people  to  her  father  to  request  of  him  some  of  these
birds.  Her  father  therefore  sent  to  her  Seyf-el-Mulook,  and  three
memlooks,  in  four  cages,  with  the  envoy  who  came  to  request  them ;
and  when  they  were  brought  to  her,  and  she  beheld  them,  they
pleased  her,  and  she  ordered  her  attendants  to  put  them  up  in  a
place  over  her  head.  So  Seyf-el-Mulook  wondered  at  the  events
that  had  befallen  him,  and  he  reflected  upon  the  glorious  state  in
which  he  had  been  living,  and  began  to  weep  for  himself,  while  the
three  memlooks  also  wept  for  themselves ;  and  all  the  time  the  King's
daughter  believed  that  they  were  singing.  It  was  the  custom  of  the
King's  daughter,  when  any  one  of  the  land  of  Egypt  or  any  other
country  fell  into  her  possession,  and  pleased  her,  to  hold  him  in  high
estimation;  and  it  happened,  by  the  decree  of  God  (whose  name  be
exalted  !)  and  his  predestination,  that  when  she  saw  Seyf-el-Mulook,
his  beauty  and  loveliness  pleased  her,  and  his  stature,  and  justness  of
form.  She  therefore  gave  orders  to  treat  him  and  his  companions
with  honour,  and  caressed  him ;  but  he  shewed  a  dislike  to  her  ;  and


upon  this  she  was  incensed  against  him  and  his  memlooks,  and  com-
manded them  to  serve  her,  and  to  convey  to  her  the  water  and  the
firewood.  They  continued  to  do  thus  for  four  years,  and  this  state
wearied  Seyf-el-Mulook  :  so  he  sent  to  intercede  with  the  Queen,
hoping  that  she  would  liberate  them,  and  that  they  might  go  their
way  and  be  relieved  from  their  present  state  ;  but  she  refused ;  and
Seyf-el-Mulook  and  the  memlooks  remained  with  her  upon  the  island
in  the  same  condition.  The  inhabitants  of  the  island  knew  that  they
were' the  birds  of  the  King's  daughter;  wherefore  none  of  the  people
of  the  city  dared  to  hurt  them  in  any  way  ;  and  the  heart  of  the
King's  daughter  was  at  ease  respecting  them,  and  she  felt  certain
that  there  was  no  escape  for  them  from  this  island.  So  they  used
to  absent  themselves  from  her  for  two  days,  and  three,  and  to  go
about  the  desert  to  collect  firewood  from  the  different  tracts  of  the


308  THE  STORY  OF  SEYF-EL-MULOOK

island and  to  bring  it  to  the  kitchen  of  the  King's  daughter ;  and
they  continued  in  this  state  five  years.

After  this,  it  happened  that  Seyf-el-Mulook  sat  with  his  mem-
looks,  one  day,  upon  the  shore  of  the  sea,  conversing  upon  the  events
that  had  occurred,  and  Seyf-el-Mulook,  looking  aside,  and  seeing  him-
self in  this  place  with  his  memlooks,  thought  upon  his  mother  and
his  father  and  his  brother  Sa'ed,  and  upon  the  state  of  glory  in  which
he  had  lived,  and  he  wept  and  lamented  and  wailed  exceedingly,  as
did  also  the  memlooks.  Then  the  memlooks  said  to  him,  O  King  of
the  age,  how  long  shall  we  weep?  Weeping  will  not  profit.  This  is
an  event  written  upon  our  foreheads  by  the  predetermination  of  God
(to  whom  be  ascribed  might  and  glory  !),  and  the  pen  hath  written
what  He  hath  appointed,  and  nought  will  profit  us  but  patience.
Perhaps  God  (whose  perfection  be  extolled,  and  whose  name  be
exalted !),  who  hath  afflicted  us  by  this  calamity,  will  dispel  it  from
us. — And  Seyf-el-Mulook  said  to  them,  O  my  brothers,  how  shall  we
contrive  our  escape  from  this  accursed  woman  ?  I  see  no  way  of
escape  for  us  unless  God  deliver  us  from  her  by  his  favour.  But  it
hath  occurred  to  my  mind  that  we  may  flee  and  be  at  ease  from  this
fatigue. — They  said  to  him,  O  King  of  the  age,  whither  can  \ve  go
from  this  island,  which  is  all  occupied  by  Ghools  who  eat  the  sons  of
Adam  ?  In  every  place  to  which  we  might  go  they  would  find  us>
and  they  would  either  eat  us  or  take  us  prisoners  and  bring  us  back  to
our  place,  and  the  King's  daughter  would  be  incensed  against  us. —
But  Seyf-el-Mulook  replied,  I  will  do  for  you  something,  and  perhaps
God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !)  will  aid  us  thereby  to  effect  our  deliver-
ance, and  we  shall  escape  from  this  island.  So  they  said  to  him,
How  wilt  thou  act  ?  And  he  answered,  \Ve  will  cut  some  of  these
long  pieces  of  wood,  and  twist  ropes  of  their  bark,  and  bind  one  to
another,  and  make  them  a  raft,32  which  we  will  launch  into  the  sea,
and  lade  with  these  fruits;  and  we  will  make  for  it  oars,  and  embark
upou  it.  Perhaps  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !)  will  give  us  relief
by  means  of  it ;  for  He  is  able  to  accomplish  every  thing;  and  per-
haps God  will  bless  us  with  a  fair  wind,  that  will  convey  us  to  the
land  of  India,  and  we  shall  escape  from  this  accursed  woman.  —And
they  replied,  This  is  a  good  idea.  And  they  rejoiced  at  it  exceedingly.

They  began  immediately  to  cut  the  pieces  of  wrood  for  making  the
raft.  Then  they  twisted  the  ropes  to  bind  the  pieces  of  wood  together,
and  they  persevered  in  this  work  for  the  space  of  a  month.  Every
day,  in  the  evening,  they  took  some  firewood,  and  carried  it  to  the


AND  BEDEEA-EL-JEMAL.  309

kitchen  of  the  King's  daughter,  and  they  devoted  the  rest  of  the  day
to  their  work  in  making  the  raft,  until  they  completed  it.  So  when
they  had  finished  making  it,  they  launched  it  upon  the  sea,  and  laded
it  with  fruits  gathered  from  the  trees  of  the  island,  and  prepared
themselves  at  the  close  of  the  day,  not  having  acquainted  any  one
with  that  which  they  had  done.  Then  they  embarked  upon  the  raft,
and  proceeded  over  the  sea  for  a  period  of  four  months,  not  knowing
whither  they  were  borne.  Their  provisions  were  exhausted,  and  they
had  become  in  a  state  of  the  most  violent  hunger  and  thirst,  when,  lo,
the  sea  frothed  and  foamed,  and  rose  in  high  waves,  and  there  came  to
them  a  horrible  crocodile,  which  put  forth  its  fore  paw,  and  seized  one
of  the  memlooks,  and  swallowed  him.  Therefore  when  Seyf-el-Mulook
saw  that  crocodile  do  thus  with  the  memlook,  he  wept  violently.  He
remained  upon  the  raft  with  the  two  other  memlooks35  alone,  and
they  passed  on  to  a  distance  from  the  place  of  the  crocodile,  in  a  state
of  fear.  They  ceased  not  to  remain  in  this  state  until  there  appeared
to  them,  one  day,  a  great  mountain,  terrible,  lofty,  rising  high  into
the  air ;  and  they  were  glad  at  the  sight  of  it ;  and  after  that,  there
appeared  to  them  an  island  :  so  they  pursued  their  course  to  it  with
diligence,  rejoicing  at  their  arriving  there.  But  while  they  were  in
this  condition,  lo,  the  sea  became  agitated,  and  its  waves  rose  high,
and  its  state  became  changed.  Then  again  a  crocodile  raised  its  head,
stretched  forth  its  paw,  and  took  the  two  remaining  memlooks  of
Seyf-el-Mulook,  and  swallowed  them.

So  Seyf-el-Mulook  remained  alone  until  he  arrived  at  the  island ;
whereupon  he  laboured  till  he  had  ascended  the  mountain,  and  he
looked,  and  saw  a  wood,  which  he  entered,  and  he  walked  among  the
trees,  and  began  to  eat  of  the  fruits ;  but  he  saw  that  more  than
twenty  great  apes  had  ascended  some  of  the  trees ;  each  of  them
larger  than  a  mule.  Therefore  when  Seyf-el-Mulook  beheld  these  apes,
violent  fear  came  upon  him.  Then  the  apes  descended,  and  surrounded
him  on  every  side;  and  after  that,  they  walked  before  him,  making  a
sign  to  him  that  he  should  follow  them,  and  went  on.  So  Seyf-el-
Mulook  walked  after  them ;  and  they  ceased  not  to  proceed,  with
him  following  them,  until  they  came  to  a  castle  of  high  structure,
with  lofty  angles.  They  entered  this  castle,  and  Seyf-el-Mulook
entered  behind  them,  and  he  beheld  in  it,  of  all  kinds  of  rarities
and  jewels  and  minerals,  what  the  tongue  cannot  describe.  He  saw
also  in  this  castle  a  young  man,  upon  the  sides  of  whose  face  hairs
had  not  begun  to  grow  ;  but  he  was  tall,  exceedingly  tall ;  and  when


Seyf-el-Mulook  saw  this  young  man,  he  was  cheered  by  his  company ;
and  there  was  not  in  that  castle  any  one  of  mankind  besides  this
young  man.  The  young  man,  on  seeing  Seyf-el-Mulook,  was  pleased
with  him  extremely ;  and  he  said  to  him,  What  is  thy  name,  and
from  what  country  art  thou,  and  how  earnest  thou  hither  ?  Acquaint
me  with  thy  story,  and  conceal  not  of  it  aught. — Therefore  Seyf-el-
Mulook  replied,  I,  by  Allah,  came  not  hither  by  my  own  choice,  nor
was  this  place  the  object  of  my  desire,  nor  can  I  remain  in  a  place34
until  I  attain  what  1  seek. — And  what  is  it,  said  the  young  man,  that
thou  seekest  ?  Seyf-el-Mulook  answered  him,  I  am  of  the  land  of
Egypt,  and  my  name  is  Seyf-el-Mulook,  and  my  father  is  named  the
King  'Asim  the  son  of  Safwan.  He  then  related  to  him  the  events
that  had  happened  to  him  from  the  first  of  the  case  to  the  last;  and
thereupon  that  young  man  arose  and  betook  himself  to  the  service  of
Seyf-el-Mulook,  and  said,  O  King  of  the  age,  I  was  in  Egypt,  and
heard  that  thou  hadst  gone  to  the  land  of  China  ;  and  how  far  is  this
land  from  the  land  of  China  !  Verily  this  is  a  wonderful  thing,  and
an  extraordinary  case! — Seyf-el-Mulook  replied,  Thy  words  are  true;
but  after  that,  I  proceeded  from  the  land  of  China  to  the  land  of  India,
and  a  wind  rose  against  us,  and  the  sea  became  agitated,  and  all  the


THE  STORY  OF  SEYF-EL-MULOOK,  &c.  311

ships  that  were  with  me  went  to  pieces.  And  he  told  him  all  that  had
happened  to  him,  until  he  said,  And  I  have  come  unto  thee  in  this  place.
The  young  man  then  said  to  him,  0  son  of  the  King,  what  thou  hast
experienced  in  this  absence  from  thy  country,  and  in  the  difficulties
that  have  attended  it,  is  sufficient  for  thee,  and  praise  be  to  God  who
hath  brought  thee  to  this  place !  Reside  then  with  me,  that  I  may
be  cheered  by  thy  society  until  I  die,  and  thou  shalt  be  King  over
this  region ;  for  it  compriseth  this  island,  of  which  no  limit  is  known.
Moreover  these  apes  are  skilled  in  arts,  and  every  thing  that  thou
shalt  demand  thou  wilt  find  here. — But  Seyf-el-Mulook  replied,  O
my  brother,  I  cannot  remain  in  any  place  until  my  affair  be  accom-
plished, though  I  should  go  round  about  the  whole  world  inquiring
respecting  the  object  of  my  desire.  Perhaps  God  v/ill  cause  me  to
attain  my  wish,  or  my  course  may  lead  me  to  a  place  wherein  my
appointed  term  shall  end,  and  I  shall  die.

The  young  man  then  looked  towards  an  ape,  and  made  a  sign  to
him  ;  whereupon  the  ape  absented  himself  for  a  while;  after  which  he
came  back,  accompanied  by  apes  with  silken  napkins  tied  to  their
waists ;  and  they  brought  forward  a  table,  and  put  upon  it  about  a
hundred  dishes  of  gold  and  silver,  containing  all  kinds  of  viands,  and
the  apes  stood  in  the  manner  of  servants  before  Kings.  Next  he
made  a  sign  to  the  chamberlains  to  seat  themselves  :  so  they  sat;  and
he  whose  custom  it  was  to  serve  stood.  Then  they  ate  until  they  were
satisfied,  when  they  removed  the  table,  and  brought  basins  and  ewers
of  gold,  and  they  washed  their  hands.  And  after  that,  they  brought
wine-vessels,  about  forty  vessels,  each  containing  a  particular  kind  of
wine ;  and  they  drank,  and  enjoyed  themselves,  and  were  merry,  and
their  time  was  pleasant;  all  the  apes  dancing  and  playing,  while  the
eaters  were  occupied  in  eating.  So  when  Seyf-el-Mulook  beheld  this>
he  wondered  at  them,  and  forgot  the  difficulties  that  had  happened  to
him.  And  when  night  came,  they  lighted  the  candles,  and  put  them
in  candlesticks  of  gold  and  silver.  Then  they  brought  vessels  of  dried
and  fresh  fruits,  and  they  ate ;  and  when  the  time  for  sleep  came,
they  spread  for  them  the  beds,  and  they  slept.  And  in  the  morning,
the  young  man  arose  as  he  was  wont,  and  he  woke  Seyf-el-Mulook,
and  said  to  him,  Put  forth  thy  head  from  this  window,  and  see  what
is  standing  beneath  the  window.  He  therefore  looked,  and  he  saw
apes  that  filled  the  wide  waste  and  all  the  desert  tract,  and  none  knew
the  number  of  those  apes  but  God,  whose  name  be  exalted  !  So  Seyf-
cl-Mulook  said,  These  are  numerous  apes,  that  have  filled  the  open


312  THE  STORY  OF  SEYF-KL-MULOOK

country,  and  wherefore  have  they  assembled  at  this  time  ?  And  the
young  man  answered  him,  This  is  their  custom  :  all  who  arc  in  the
island  have  come,  and  some  of  them  have  come  from  a  distance  of  two
days'  journey,  or  three  days' ;  for  they  come  every  Saturday/5  and
stand  here  until  I  awake  from  my  sleep  and  put  my  head  forth  from
this  window  ;  and  when  they  see  me,  they  kiss  the  ground  before  me ;
after  which  they  depart  to  their  occupations.  And  he  put  forth  his
head  from  the  window  so  that  they  saw  him ;  and  when  they  beheld
him,  they  kissed  the  ground  before  him,  and  departed.

Seyf-el-Mulook  remained  with  the  young  man  during  the  space  of
a  whole  month;  and  after  that,  he  bade  him  farewell,  and  departed.
The  young  man  ordered  a  party  of  the  apes,  about  a  hundred,  to
journey  with  him ;  and  they  journeyed  in  attendance  upon  Seyf-el-
Mulook  for  a  period  of  seven  days,  until  they  had  conducted  him  to
the  extremity  of  their  country/6  when  they  bade  him  farewell,  and
returned  to  their  places.  Seyf-el-Mulook  then  journeyed  alone  over
the  mountains  and  hills  and  the  deserts  and  wastes  for  the  space  of
four  months,  one  day  hungry  and  another  day  satiated,  one  day  eating
of  the  herbage  and  another  day  eating  of  the  fruits  of  the  trees.  He
began  to  repent  of  that  which  he  had  done  with  himself,  and  of  his
going  forth  from  that  young  man,  and  he  desired  to  retrace  his  steps
to  him.  But  he  saw  an  indistinct  black  object  appearing  in  the
distance ;  so  he  said  within  himself,  Is  this  a  black  city,  or  how  is  the
case  ?  But  I  will  not  return  until  I  see  what  this  indistinct  object  is.
— And  when  he  came  near  to  it,  he  saw  it  to  be  a  palace  of  lofty
structure.  He  who  built  it  was  Yafith  the  son  of  Nooh  (on  whom  be
peace !),  and  it  was  the  palace  which  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !)
hath  mentioned  in  his  Excellent  Book,  in  his  words,  And  an  abandoned
well,  and  a  lofty  palace.37  Seyf-el-Mulook  seated  himself  at  the
door  of  the  palace,  and  said  within  himself,  I  wonder  what  is  the  state
of  the  interior  of  this  palace,  and  who  of  the  Kings  is  within  it.  Who
now  will  acquaint  me  with  the  truth  of  the  case,  and  are  its  inhabit-
ants of  mankind  or  of  the  Jinn  ? — He  sat  meditating  for  some  time,
and  found  not  any  one  entering  it,  nor  any  coming  forth  from  it.  So
he  arose  and  walked  forward,  relying  upon  God,  until  he  entered  the
palace;  and  he  counted  in  his  way  seven  entrance-passages;  but  saw
no  one.  He  beheld,  however,  on  his  right  hand,  three  doors,  and
before  him  a  door  over  which  hung  a  curtain.  He  therefore  advanced
to  that  door,  and  lifted  the  curtain  with  his  hand,  and  walked  on
within  the  door ;  and,  lo,  he  found  a  great  lcesv;in:i"  spread  with  silken


AND  BEDEEA-EL-JEMAL.  313

carpets,  and  at  the  upper  end  of  the  leewan  was  a  couch  of  gold,
whereon  sat  a  damsel  whose  face  was  like  the  inoon  :  upon  her  was
the  apparel  of  Kings,  and  she  resembled  a  bride  on  the  night  of  her
display.  And  at  the  feet  of  the  couch  were  forty  tables,  upon  which
were  dishes  of  gold  and  silver,  all  of  them  filled  with  rich  viands.
When  Seyf-el-Mulook  beheld  her,  he  approached  her  and  saluted ;
and  she  returned  his  salutation,  and  said  to  him,  Art  thou  of  mankind
or  of  the  Jinn  ?  He  answered,  I  am  of  the  best  of  mankind;  for  I
am  a  King,  the  son  of  a  King.  And  she  said  to  him,  What  dost  thou
desire  ?  Avail  thyself  of  this  food,  and  after  that  relate  to  me  thy
story  from  first  to  last,  and  tell  me  how  thou  earnest  to  this  place. —
Seyf-el-Mulook  therefore  seated  himself  at  a  table,  and  removed  the
cover  from  it,  and,  being  hungry,  he  ate  of  those  dishes  until  he  was
satiated,  and  washed  his  hands;  after  which  he  ascended  the  couch,
and  seated  himself  by  the  damsel,  who  thereupon  said  to  him,  Who
art  thou,  and  what  is  thy  name,  and  whence  hast  thou  come,  and  who
brought  thee  hither  ?  Seyf-el-Mulook  replied,  As  to  me,  my  story
is  long.  And  she  said  to  him,  Tell  me  whence  thou  art,  and  what  is  the
cause  of  thy  coming  hither,  and  what  is  thy  desire.  But  he  replied,
Inform  thou  me  what  is  thy  state,  and  what  is  thy  name,  and  who
brought  thee  hither,  and  wherefore  thou  art  residing  in  this  place  alone.
And  the  damsel  said  to  him, —

My  name  is  Dolet-Khatoon  : 89  I  am  daughter  of  the  King  of
India,  and  my  father  dwelleth  in  the  city  of  Sarandeeb.40  He  hath  a
beautiful,  large  garden  :  there  is  not  in  the  land  of  India  and  its  dis-
tricts any  superior  to  it ;  and  in  it  is  a  large  tank  ;  and  I  entered  that
garden  one  day  with  my  female  slaves,  and  I  and  my  female  slaves
approached  and  descended  into  the  tank,  and  we  proceeded  to  play
and  to  amuse  ourselves.  But  I  was  not  aware  when  a  thing  like  a
cloud  came  down  upon  me,  and  having  snatched  me  away  from  among
rny  female  slaves,  flew  with  me  between  heaven  and  earth,  saying,  O
Dolet-Khatoon,  fear  not,  but  be  of  tranquil  heart.  Then  he  flew  on
with  me  for  a  short  time ;  after  which  he  put  me  down  in  this  palace,
and  immediately  became  transformed,  and,  lo,  he  was  a  comely  young
man,  of  youthful  beauty,  and  clean  in  apparel ;  and  he  said  to  me,
Dost  thou  know  me  ?  I  answered,  No,  O  my  master.  And  he  said,
I  am  son  of  the  Blue  King,  King  of  the  Jann,  and  my  father  dwelleth
in  the  Castle  of  El-Kulzum, 41  and  hath  under  his  authority  six  hundred
thousand  of  the  flying  and  the  diving  Jinn.42  It  happened  to  me  that
I  was  on  a  journey,  going  on  my  way,  and  I  saw  thee  and  became
in.  2  s


enamoured  of  thee,  and,  descending  upon  thee  ;  seized  thee  from  among
the  female  slaves,  and  brought  thee  to  this  lofty  palace,  which  is  my
place  and  my  abode.  No  one  ever  conieth  to  it ;  neither  any  of  the
Jinn  nor  any  of  mankind  ;  and  from  India  to  this  place  is  a  journey
of  a  hundred  and  twenty  years  :4a  so  be  sure  that  thou  wilt  never  sec
again  the  country  of  thy  father  and  thy  mother.  Reside  then  with
me  in  this  place  with  tranquil  heart  and  mind,  and  I  will  bring  before
thee  whatever  thou  shalt  desire. — And  after  that,  he  em  braced  me  and
kissed  me,  and  said  to  me,  Reside  here,  and  fear  not  aught.  Then  he
left  me,  and  was  absent  from  me  a  while ;  after  which  he  came  bring-
ing these  tables  and  the  furniture  and  carpets.  But  he  cometh  to  me
every  Tuesday  and  remaineth  with  me  three  days;  and  on  Friday  he
remaineth  till  the  middle  of  the  afternoon,  when  he  departeth,  and  he
is  absent  until  the  Tuesday :  then  again  he  remaineth  with  me44  in
the  same  manner.  When  he  cometh,  he  eateth  and  drinketh  with  me,
and  embraceth  me  and  kisseth  me ;  but  he  hath  not  induced  me  to
become  his  wife.  My  father  is  named  Taj-el-Mulook  ;  and  he  know-
eth  no  tidings  of  me,  nor  hath  he  discovered  any  trace  of  me. — This
is  my  story  :  now  tell  me  thy  story.

Upon  this,  Seyf-el-Mulook  said  to  her,  Verily  my  story  is  long,
and  I  fear  that,  if  I  tell  it  thee,  the  time  which  it  will  require  will  be
too  long  for  us,  and  the  'Efreet  will  come.  But  she  replied,  He  did


THE  STORY  OP  SEYF-EL-MULOOK,  &c.  315

not  depart  from  me  more  than  a  little  while  before  thine  entrance,  and
he  cometh  not  save  on  Tuesday :  therefore  remain  and  be  at  ease,  and
gladden  thy  heart,  and  relate  to  me  what  hath  happened  to  thee  from
first  to  last.  So  Seyf-el-Mulook  said,  I  hear  and  obey.  And  he  com-
menced his  story,  and  proceeded  with  it  until  he  had  related  the  whole
of  it  from  beginning  to  end;  and  when  he  came  to  the  mention  of
Bedeea-el-Jemal,  her  eyes  filled  with  copious  tears,  and  she  said,  It  is
not  as  I  imagined  of  thee,  0  Bedeea-el-Jemal !  Alas,  for  the  conduct
of  fortune!  0  Bedeea-el-Jemal,  dost  thou  not  remember  me,  nor  say,
My  sister  Dolet-Khatoon,  whither  hath  she  gone? — Then  she  wept
exceedingly,  and  lamented  that  Bedeea-el-Jemal  had  not  remembered
her.45  Seyf-el-Mulook  therefore  said  to  her,  O  Dolet-Khatoon,  thou
art  a  human  being,  and  she  is  a  Jinneeyeh :  how  then  can  this  be  thy
sister?  She  replied,  She  is  my  foster-sister;  and  the  cause  was  this  :
my  mother  went  down  to  divert  herself  in  the  garden,  and,  her  time
coming,  she  gave  birth  to  me  in  the  garden  :  and  the  mother  of
Bedeea-el-Jemal  was  in  the  garden,  she  and  her  'Ons,  and  her  time
came ;  so  she  sojourned  in  a  tract  of  the  garden,  and  she  gave  birth  to
Bedeea-el-JeniJil.  Then  she  sent  one  of  her  female  slaves  to  my
mother  to  demand  of  her  some  food  and  necessary  clothing,  and  my
mother  sent  to  her  what  she  demanded,  and  invited  her.  She  there-
fore arose,  and,  taking  Bedeea-el-Jemal  with  her,  came  to  my  mother,
and  my  mother  suckled  Bedeea-el-Jemal ;  and  her  mother  and  she
remained  with  us  in  the  garden  for  the  space  of  two  months ,  after
which  she  journeyed  to  her  country ;  and  she  gave  to  my  mother  a
thing,  saying  to  her,  When  thou  wantest  me,  I  will  come  to  thee  in
the  midst  of  the  garden.  Bedeea-el-Jemal  used  to  come  with  her
mother  every  year,  and  they  used  to  remain  with  us  some  time,  and
then  to  return  to  their  country ;  and  if  I  were  with  my  mother,  O
Seyf-el-Mulook,  and  beheld  thee  with  us  in  our  country,  and  we  were
united  as  usual,  I  would  employ  some  stratagem  against  Bedeea-el-
Jemal  so  as  to  make  thee  attain  thy  desire ;  but  I  am  in  this  place,
and  they  know  not  my  case.  If  they  were  acquainted  with  my  case,
and  knew  me  to  be  here,  they  could  effect  my  deliverance  from  this
place ;  but  the  affair  is  God's  (whose  perfection  be  extolled,  and  whose
name  be  exalted !),  and  what  can  I  do  ?

Seyf-el-Mulook  then  said  to  her,  Arise,  and  come  with  me  :  we
will  flee,  and  go  whither  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !)  pleaseth.
But  she  replied,  We  cannot  do  that.  By  Allah,  if  we  fled  to  the  dis-
tance of  a  year's  journey,  this  accursed  wretch  would  bring  us  back


316  THE  STORY  OF  SEYF-EL-MULOOK

immediately,  and  he  would  destroy  us.  So  Seyf-el-Mulook  said,  I
will  hide  myself  in  a  place ;  and  when  he  passeth  by  me,  I  will  smite
him  with  the  sword,  and  slay  him.  But  she  replied,  Thou  canst  not
slay  him  unless  thou  kill  his  soul. — And  in  what  place,  said  he,  is  his
soul  ?  She  answered,  I  asked  him  respecting  it  many  times ;  but  he
would  not  confess  to  me  its  place.  It  happened,  however,  that  I
urged  him,  one  day,  and  he  was  enraged  against  me,  and  said  to  me,
How  often  wilt  thou  ask  me  respecting  my  soul  ?  What  is  the  reason
of  thy  question  respecting  my  soul  ? — So  I  answered  him,  0  Hatim/6
there  remaineth  to  me  no  one  but  thee,  except  God ;  and  I,  as  long  as
I  live,  would  not  cease  to  hold  thy  soul  in  my  embrace  ;  and  if  I  do
not  take  care  of  thy  soul  and  put  it  in  the  midst  of  my  eye,  how  can
I  live  after  thee  ?  If  I  knew  thy  soul,  I  would  take  care  of  it  as  of
my  right  eye. — And  thereupon  he  said  to  me,  When  I  was  born,  the
astrologers  declared  that  the  destruction  of  my  soul  would  be  effected
by  the  hand  of  one  of  the  sons  of  the  human  Kings.  I  therefore  took
my  soul,  and  put  it  into  the  crop  of  a  sparrow,  and  I  imprisoned  the
sparrow  in  a  little  box,  and  put  this  into  another  small  box,  and  this
I  put  within  seven  other  small  boxes,  and  I  put  these  within  seven
chests,  and  the  chests  I  put  into  a  coffer47  of  marble  within  the  verge
of  this  circumambient  ocean ;  for  this  part  is  remote  from  the  countries
of  mankind,  and  none  of  mankind  can  gain  access  to  it.  Now  I  have
told  thee  ;  and  tell  not  thou  any  one  of  this  ;  for  it  is  a  secret  between


AND  BEDEEA-EL-JEMAL.  317

me  and  thee. — So  I  said  to  him,  To  whom  should  I  relate  it  ?  None
but  thou  cometh  unto  me,  that  I  should  tell  him. — Then  I  said  to
him,  By  Allah,  thou  hast  put  thy  soul  in  a  most  strongly  secured
place,  to  which  no  being  can  gain  access.  How  then  should  any  one
of  mankind  gain  access  to  it,  unless  what  is  [seemingly]  impossible
be  ordained,  and  God  have  predetermined  like  as  the  astrologers  have
said  ?  How  can  one  of  mankind  gain  access  to  this  [place]  ? — But
he  replied,  Perhaps  one  of  them  may  have  upon  his  finger  the  seal-
ring  of  Suleyman  the  son  of  Daood  (on  both  of  whom  be  peace  !),  and
he  may  come  hither,  and  put  his  hand  with  this  seal-ring  upon  the
face  of  the  water,  and  say,  By  virtue  of  these  names,  let  the  soul  of
such-a-one  come  up  !  Thereupon  the  coffer  will  come  up,  and  he  will
break  it,  and  the  chests  in  like  manner,  and  the  small  boxes ;  and  the
sparrow  will  come  forth  from  the  little  box,  and  he  will  strangle  it,
and  I  shall  die.

So  thereupon  Seyf-el-Mulook  said,  That  King's  son  is  myself,  and
this  is  the  ring  of  Suleyman  the  son  of  Daood  (on  both  of  whom  be
peace !)  upon  my  finger.  Arise  then  and  come  with  us  to  the  shore
of  this  sea,  that  we  may  see  whether  these  his  words  be  false  or  true.
— The  two,  therefore,  arose,  and  walked  on  until  they  came  to  the
sea,  when  Dolet-Khatoon  stood  upon  the  sea-shore,  and  Seyf-el-
Mulook  entered  the  water  to  his  waist,  and  said,  By  virtue  of  the
names  and  talismans  that  are  upon  this  seal-ring,  and  by  the  influence
of  Suleyman  (on  whom  be  peace !),  let  the  soul  of  such-a-one,  the
son  of  the  Blue  King,  the  Jinnee,  come  forth  !  And  immediately  the
sea  became  agitated,  and  the  coffer  came  up.  So  Seyf-el-Mulook
took  it,  and  struck  it  against  the  rock,  and  broke  it,  and  he  broke  the
chests  and  the  small  boxes,  and  took  forth  the  sparrow  from  the  little
box.  They  then  returned  to  the  palace,  and  ascended  the  couch ;
and,  lo,  a  horrible  dust  arose,  and  a  huge  thing  came  flying,  and
saying,  Spare  me,  0  son  of  the  King,  and  slay  me  not,  but  make  me
thy  emancipated  slave,  and  I  will  cause  thee  to  attain  thy  desire.  But
Dolet-Khiitoon  said  to  him,  The  Jinnee  hath  come :  therefore  kill  the
sparrow,  lest  this  accursed  wretch  enter  the  palace,  and  take  the
sparrow  from  thee,  and  slay  thee,  and  slay  me  after  thee.  So  upon
this  he  strangled  the  sparrow,  and  it  died,  and  the  Jinnee  fell  upon
the  ground,  a  heap  of  black  ashes.

Then  Dolet-Khatoon  said,  We  have  escaped  from  the  hand  of  this
accursed  wretch,  and  how  shall  we  now  act  ?  Seyf-el-Mulook
answered,  We  must  seek  aid  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !),  who


318  THE  STORY  OF  SEYF-EL-MULOOK,  &c.

hath  afflicted  us ;  for  He  will  order  our  affair,  and  will  aid  us  to  effect
our  deliverance  from  our  present  state.  And  he  arose  and  pulled  off,
of  the  doors  of  the  palace,  about  ten  doors.  These  were  of  sandal-
wood  and  aloes-wood,  and  their  nails  were  of  gold  and  silver.  And
he  took  some  ropes  which  were  there,  of  common  silk  and  floss-silk,
and  bound  the  doors  together ;  after  which,  he  and  Dolet-Khatoon
helped  each  other  so  that  they  conveyed  them  to  the  sea  and  cast
them  into  it ;  they  having  become  a  raft  ;*"  and  they  tied  it  to  the
shore.  They  then  returned  to  the  palace,  and  carried  off  the  dishes
of  gold  and  silver,  and  likewise  the  jewels  and  jacinths  and  precious
minerals.  They  transported  all  that  was  in  the  palace  of  such  things
as  were  light  to  cany  and  of  high  price,  and  put  them  upon  that  raft,
and  they  embarked  upon  it,  placing  their  reliance  upon  God  (whose
name  be  exalted  !),  who  satisfieth,  and  doth  not  disappoint,  him  who
relieth  upon  Him.  They  also  made  for  themselves  two  pieces  of  wood
as  oars ;  and  they  loosed  the  ropes,  and  let  the  raft  take  its  course
with  them  over  the  sea.  They  ceased  not  to  proceed  in  this  manner
for  a  period  of  four  months,  until  their  provisions  were  exhausted,  and
their  affliction  became  violent,  and  their  spirits  were  oppressed  :  so
they  begged  of  God  to  grant  them  deliverance  from  the  state  in  which
they  were.  Seyf-el-Mulook,  during  the  course  of  their  voyage,  used,
when  he  slept,  to  put  Dolet-Khatoon  behind  his  back ;  and  when  he
turned  over,  the  sword  was  between  them.49  And  while  they  were  in
this  state,  one  night,  it  happened  that  Seyf-el-Mulook  was  asleep,  and
Dolet-Khatoon  awake,  and,  lo,  che  raft  inclined  to  the  shore,  and
came  to  a  harbour  in  which  were  ships.  So  Dolet-Khatoon  saw  the
ships,  and  she  heard  a  man  talking  with  the  sailors,  and  the  man  who
was  talking  was  the  chief  captain.  Therefore,  when  she  heard  the
voice  of  the  captain,  she  knew  that  this  was  the  harbour  of  some  city,
and  that  they  had  arrived  at  the  habitations  of  men ;  and  she  rejoiced
greatly,  and,  having  roused  Seyf-el-Mulook  from  his  sleep,  she  said
to  him,  Arise,  and  ask  this  captain  respecting  the  name  of  this  city,
and  respecting  this  harbour.  And  thereupon,  Seyf-el-Mulook  arose,
joyful,  and  said  to  him,  O  my  brother,  what  is  the  name  of  this  city,
and  what  is  this  harbour  called,  and  what  is  the  name  of  its  King  ?
But  the  captain  replied,  O  lying- faced!50  0  silly-bearded !  if  thou
know  not  this  harbour  nor  this  city,  how  earnest  thou  hither  ?  Seyf-
cl-Mulook  said,  I  am  a  stranger,  and  I  was  in  a  vessel,  one  of  the
merchant-vessels,  and  it  was  wrecked,  and  sank  with  all  that  was  in
it;  but  I  got  upon  a  plank,  and  have  arrived  here,  and  I  asked  thee


a  question,  which  is  not  disgraceful.  So  the  captain  said,  This  is  the
city  called  'Emareeyeh,  and  this  harbour  is  called  the  harbour
Kemeen  el-Bahreyn.51

Now  when  D61et-Khatoon  heard  these  words,  she  rejoiced  ex-
ceedingly, and  said,  Praise  be  to  God!  So  Seyf-el-Mulook  said,
What  is  the  news  ?  And  she  answered,  0  Seyf-el-Mulook,  rejoice
at  the  announcement  of  speedy  relief;  for  the  King  of  this  city  is  my
uncle,  the  brother  of  my  father,  and  his  name  is  'Ali-1-Mulook.52
Then  she  said  to  him,  Ask  him,  and  say  to  him,  Is  the  Sultan  of  this
city,  'Ali-1-Mulook,  well  ?  He  therefore  asked  him  that  question  ;
and  the  captain,  enraged  at  him,  replied,  Thou  sayest,  In  my  life  I
never  came  hither ;  but  am  a  stranger : — who  then  acquainted  thee
with  the  name  of  the  lord  of  this  city  ? — And  Dolet-Khatoon  was
glad,  and  she  knew  the  captain ;  his  name  was  Mo'een-ed-Deen,51-
and  he  was  one  of  her  father's  captains :  he  had  come  forth  to  search
for  her,  when  she  was  lost,  and  found  her  not,  and  he  ceased  not  to
search  about  until  he  came  to  the  city  of  her  uncle.  Then  she  said  to
Seyf-el-Mulook,  Say  to  him,  O  captain  Mo'een-ed-Deen,  come  and
answer  the  summons  of  thy  mistress.  So  he  called  to  him  in  the
words  which  she  had  said ;  and  when  the  captain  heard  his  words,  he


320  THE  STORY  OF  SEYF-EL-MULOOK

was  violently  enraged,  and  said  to  him,  O  dog,  who  art  thou,  and
how  knewest  thou  me  ?  And  he  said  to  some  of  the  sailors,  Hand
me  a  staff  of  shoom,54  that  I  may  go  to  this  unlucky  fellow  and  break
his  head.  He  then  took  the  staff,  and  went  towards  Seyf-el-Mulook;
and  he  saw  the  raft,  and  saw  upon  it  an  object  wonderful  and  beauti-
ful, whereat  his  mind  was  amazed ;  and  looking,  and  taking  a  sure
view,  he  beheld  Dolet-Khatoon  sitting,  like  a  piece  of  the  moon.  He
therefore  said,  What  is  with  thee?  And  Seyf-el-Mulook  answered
him,  With  me  is  a  damsel  named  Dolet-Khatoon.  And  when  the
captain  heard  these  words  he  fell  down  in  a  fit,  on  his  hearing  her  name,
and  knowing  that  she  was  his  mistress,  and  the  daughter  of  his  King.
Then,  as  soon  as  he  recovered,  he  left  the  raft  with  what  was  upon  it,
and  repaired  to  the  city,  went  up  to  the  palace  of  the  King,  and  asked
permission  to  go  in  to  him.  So  the  chamberlain  went  in  to  the  King,
and  said,  The  captain  Mo'een  hath  come  to  thee  to  give  thee  good
news.  Wherefore  he  gave  him  permission  to  enter,  and  he  went  in  to
the  King,  and  kissed  the  ground  before  him,  and  said  to  him,  O
King,  thou  hast  to  give  a  present  for  good  news ;  for  the  daughter  of
thy  brother,  Dolet-Khatoon,  hath  arrived  at  the  city,  in  good  health
and  prosperity,  and  she  is  upon  a  raft,  accompanied  by  a  young  man
like  the  moon  in  the  night  of  its  fulness.  And  when  the  King  heard
the  tidings  of  the  daughter  of  his  brother,  he  rejoiced,  and  conferred
a  sumptuous  robe  of  honour  upon  the  captain.  He  also  ordered
immediately  that  they  should  decorate  the  city  for  the  safety  of  the
daughter  of  his  brother,  and  sent  to  her,  and  caused  her  to  be  brought
to  him,  together  with  Seyf-el-Mulook,  and  saluted  them,  and  con-
gratulated them  on  their  safety.  He  then  sent  to  his  brother  to
inform  him  that  his  daughter  had  been  found  and  that  she  was  with
him ;  and  when  the  messenger  came  to  him,  he  prepared  himself,  and
the  troops  assembled,  and  Taj-el-Mulook,  the  father  of  Dolet-Khfvtoou,
set  forth,  and  proceeded  until  he  came  to  his  brother  'Ali-1-Mulook,
when  he  met  his  daughter,  and  they  rejoiced  exceedingly.

Taj-el-Mulook  remained  with  his  brother  a  week ;  after  which  he
took  his  daughter,  and  likewise  Seyf-el-Mulook,  and  they  proceeded
until  they  came  to  Sarandeeb,  her  father's  country,  when  Dolet-
Khatoon  met  her  mother,  and  they  rejoiced  at  her  safety,  and  cele-
brated festivities ;  and  it  .was  a  great  day,  the  like  of  which  is  not
seen.  As  to  the  King,  he  treated  Seyf-el-Mulook  with  honour,  and
said  to  him,  0  Seyf-el-Mulook,  thou  hast  done  unto  me  and  my
daughter  all  this  benefit,  and  I  am  not  able  to  requite  thee  for  it,  nor


AND  BEDEEA-EL-JEMAL.  321

can  any  one  requite  thee  save  the  Lord  of  all  creatures :  but  I  desire
of  thee  that  thou  sit  upon  the  throne  in  my  place,  and  govern  in  the
land  of  India ;  for  I  have  given  to  thee  my  kingdom  and  my  throne
and  my  treasures  and  my  servants,  and  all  this  is  a  present  from  me
unto  thee.  So  thereupon  Seyf-el-Mulook  arose,  and  kissed  the  ground
before  the  King,  and  thanked  him,  and  said  unto  him,  O  King  of  the
age,  I  have  accepted  all  that  thou  hast  given  to  me,  and  it  is  returned
from  me  unto  thee  as  a  present  also;  for  I/O  King  of  the  age,  desire
not  kingdom  nor  empire,  nor  desire  1  aught  but  that  God  (whose
name  be  exalted!)  may  cause  me  to  attain  my  desire.  The  King  then
said  to  him,  These  my  treasures  are  at  thy  disposal,  O  Seyf-el-Mulook :
whatsoever  thou  desire  of  them,  take  it,  and  consult  me  not  respecting
it,  and  may  God  recompense  thee  for  me  with  every  thing  good  !  But
Seyf-el-Mulook  replied,  May  God  strengthen  the  King !  There  is  no
delight  for  me  in  sovereignty  nor  in  wealth  until  I  attain  my  wish;
but  I  desire  now  to  divert  myself  in  this  city,  and  to  see  its  great
thoroughfare-streets  and  its  markets. — So  Taj-el-Mulook  ordered  that
they  should  bring  him  a  horse  of  excellent  breed;  and  accordingly
they  brought  him  a  horse  saddled  and  bridled,  of  excellent  breed,  and
he  mounted  it,  and  went  forth  into  the  market,  and  rode  through  the
great  thoroughfare-streets  of  the  city.  And  while  he  was  looking  to
the  right  and  left,  he  saw  a  young  man,  with  a  tunic,  crying  it  at  the
price  of  fifteen  pieces  of  gold ;  and,  looking  attentively  at  him,  he
found  him  to  resemble  his  brother  Sa'ed ;  and,  in  truth,  he  was  Sa'ed
himself;  but  his  complexion  and  condition  were  changed  by  pro-
tracted estrangement  and  the  difficulties  of  travel ;  so  he  did  not  know
him.  He  then  said  to  those  who  were  around  him,  Bring  this  young
man,  that  I  may  interrogate  him.  And  they  brought  him  to  him,
and  he  said,  Take  him  and  convey  him  to  the  palace  in  which  I  am
staying,  and  let  him  remain  with  you  until  I  return  from  diverting
myself.  But  they  imagined  that  he  said  to  them,  Take  him  and
convey  him  to  the  prison.  And  they  said,  Perhaps  this  is  one  of  his
memlooks,  who  hath  fled  from  him.

Accordingly  they  took  him  and  conveyed  him  to  the  prison,  and
shackled  him,  and  left  him  sitting  there.  Then  Seyf-el-Mulook  re-
turned from  diverting  himself,  and  went  up  into  the  palace ;  but  he
forgot  his  brother  Sa'ed,  and  no  one  mentioned  him  to  him.  So
Sa'ed  remained  in  the  prison;  and  when  they  went  forth  with  the
prisoners  to  employ  them  in  constructions  and  repairs  and  similar
works,  they  took  Sa'ed  with  them,  and  he  worked  with  the  prisoners,

III.  2 T


322  THE  STORY  OF  SEYF-EL-MULOOK

and  dirt  increased  upon  him.  He  remained  in  this  state  for  the  space
of  a  month,  reflecting  upon  his  circumstances,  and  saying  within  him-
self, What  is  the  cause  of  my  imprisonment  ?  And  Seyf-el-Mulook
was  occupied  by  his  joys  and  other  things.  But  it  happened  that  he
was  sitting  one  day,  and  remembered  his  brother  Sa'ed :  so  he  said  to
the  memlooks  who  were  with  him,  Where  is  the  memlook  who  was
with  you  on  such  a  day  ?  They  replied,  Didst  thou  not  say  to  us,
Convey  him  to  the  prison  ?  He  said,  I  did  not  say  to  you  these
words;  but  I  said  to  you,  Convey  him  to  the  palace  in  which  I  am
staying.  Then  he  sent  the  chamberlains  to  Sa'ed:  so  they  brought
him  to  him,  shackled ;  and  they  loosed  him  from  his  shackles,  and
stationed  him  before  Seyf-ei-Mulook,  who  said  to  him,  O  young  man,
from  what  country  art  thou  ?  And  he  answered  him,  I  am  from
Egypt,  and  my  name  is  Sa'ed,  the  son  of  the  Wezeer  Faris.  When
Seyf-el-Mulook,  therefore,  heard  his  words,  he  rose  from  the  throne,
threw  himself  upon  him,  and  clung  to  his  neck ;  and  by  reason  of  his
joy,  he  wept  violently,  and  he  said,  O  my  brother,  0  Sa'ed,  praise  be
to  God  that  thou  art  living,  and  that  I  have  seen  thee ;  for  I  am  thy
brother  Seyf-el-Mulook,  the  son  of  the  King  'Asim.  So  when  Sa'ed
heard  the  words  of  his  brother,  and  knew  him,  they  embraced  each
other,  and  wept  together;  and  the  persons  who  were  present  won-
dered at  them.  Then  Seyf-el-Mulook  ordered  that  they  should  take
Sa'ed  and  conduct  him  to  the  bath.  Accordingly  they  conducted
him  thither ;  and  on  his  coming  forth  from  the  bath,  they  clad  him  in
sumptuous  apparel,  and  brought  him  back  to  the  chamber  of  Seyf-el-
Mulook,  who  seated  him  with  him  on  the  throne.  And  when  Taj-el-
Mulook  knew  of  this,  he  rejoiced  greatly  at  the  meeting  of  Seyf-el-
Mulook  with  his  brother  Sa'ed;  and  he  came,  and  the  three  sat
conversing  upon  the  events  that  had  happened  to  them  from  first
to  last.

Then  Sa'ed  said,  0  my  orother,  O  Seyf-el-Mulook,  when  the  ship
was  submerged  and  the  memlooks  also  were  submerged,  I  and  a  party
of  memlooks  got  upon  a  plank,  and  it  proceeded  with  us  over  the  sea
for  a  period  of  a  whole  month  ;  after  which,  the  wind  cast  us,  by  the
decree  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted!),  upon  an  island.  So  we
landed  upon  it ;  and  we  were  hungry ;  wherefore  we  went  in  among
the  trees  and  ate  of  the  fruits,  and  were  busied  with  eating;  and  we
were  not  aware  when  there  came  forth  upon  us  people  like  'Efreets,
who  sprang  upon  us,  and  mounted  upon  our  shoulders,  saying  to  us,
Go  on  with  us ;  for  ye  have  become  our  asses.  I  therefore  said  to


AND  BEDEEA-EL-JEMAL.


him  who  had  mounted  me,
What  art  thou,  and  why
hast  thou  mounted  me?
And  when  he  heard  from
me  these  words,  he  wound
his  leg  round  my  neck  in
such  a  manner  that  I
nearly  died,  and  he  beat
me  upon  my  back  with  his
other  leg  so  that  I  thought
he  had  broken  my  back.
I  then  fell  upon  the
ground,  on  my  face,  and
no  strength  remained  in
me  by  reason  of  my  hunger
and  thirst.  So  when  I  fell,
he  knew  that  I  was  hungry,
and,  taking  me  by  my
hand,  he  brought  me  to  a
tree  abounding  with  fruit,
and  it  was  a  pear-tree;
and  he  said  to  me,  Eat
from  this  tree  until  thou
art  satiated.  I  therefore  ate  from  that  tree  until


I  was  satiated,  and


I  arose  to  walk,  without  desiring  to  do  so ;  but  I  had  not  gone  more
than  a  little  way  before  that  person  turned  back  and  mounted  again
upon  my  shoulders.  A  while  I  walked,  a  while  I  ran,  and  a  while  I
trotted ;  and  he,  riding  upon  me,  laughed,  and  said,  In  my  life  I  have
never  seen  an  ass  like  thee.

Now  it  happened  that  we  gathered  some  bunches  of  grapes  one
day,  and  put  them  into  a  trench,  and  trod  them  with  our  feet,  and
that  trench  became  a  great  pool.  Then  we  waited  some  time,  and,
coming  again  to  the  trench,  we  found  that  the  sun  had  heated  that
juice,  and  that  it  had  become  wine.  So  after  that,  we  used  to  drink
of  it,  and  intoxicate  ourselves,  and  our  faces  became  red,  and  we  used
to  sing  and  dance,  by  reason  of  the  exhilaration  produced  by  intoxica-
tion ;  whereupon  they  said,  What  is  it  that  reddeneth  your  faces,  and
maketh  you  dance  and  sing  ?  We  replied,  Ask  ye  not  respecting  this.
And  what  desire  ye  by  asking  respecting  it  ? — They  said,  Inform  us,
that  we  may  know  the  truth  of  the  case.  And  we  replied,  [It  is]


324  THE  STORY  OF.SEYF-EL-MULOOK

the  expressed  juice  of  grapes.  And  upon  this  they  took  us  to  a
valley,  of  which  we  knew  not  the  length  nor  the  breadth,  and  in  that
valley  were  grape-vines  of  which  neither  the  beginning  nor  the  end
was  known :  every  one  of  the  bunches  that  were  upon  them  was  as
much  as  twenty  pounds  in  weight,  and  every  one  was  within  easy
reach ;  and  they  said  to  us,  Gather  of  these.  We  therefore  gathered
of  them  a  great  quantity ;  and  I  saw  there  a  large  trench,  larger  than
a  great  tank,  which  we  filled  with  grapes,  and  we  trod  them  with  our
feet,  and  did  as  we  had  done  the  first  time :  so  it  became  wine,  and
we  said  to  them,  It  hath  come  to  perfection.  With  what  then  will  ye
drink  ? — Whereupon  they  answered  us,  There  were  in  our  possession
some  asses  like  you,  and  we  ate  them,  and  their  heads  remain :  there-
fore give  us  to  drink  in  their  skulls.  And  we  gave  them  to  drink,
and  they  became  intoxicated;  after  which  they  lay  down :  and  they
were  about  two  hundred.  Upon  this  we  said,  one  to  another,  Is  it
not  enough  for  these  to  ride  us,  but  will  they  eat  us  also  ?  There  is
no  strength  nor  power  but  in  God,  the  High,  the  Great !  But  we
will  make  intoxication  to  overcome  them,  and  then  we  will  kill  them,
and  be  secure  from  them,  and  escape  from  their  hands. — Accordingly
we  roused  them,  and  proceeded  to  fill  for  them  those  skulls,  and  to
give  them  to  drink;  but  they  said,  This  is  bitter.  So  we  said  to
them,  Wherefore  do  ye  say  that  this  is  bitter  ?  Every  one  who  saith
that,  if  he  drink  not  of  it  ten  times  he  will  die  the  same  day. — They
therefore  feared  death,  and  said  to  us,  Give  us  to  drink  all  the  ten
times.  And  when  they  had  drunk  what  remained  of  the  ten  draughts,
they  were  intoxicated,  and  their  intoxication  was  excessive,  and  their
strength  entirely  failed :  so  we  dragged  them  by  their  hands,  and
collected  a  great  quantity  of  the  sticks  of  those  vines  and  put  them
around  them  and  upon  them ;  after  which  we  set  fire  to  the  sticks,  and
stood  at  a  distance,  to  see  what  would  become  of  them.  We  then
approached  them,  after  the  fire  had  become  low,  and  we  saw  that  they
were  reduced  to  a  heap  of  ashes.

We  therefore  praised  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !)  who  had
saved  us  from  them,  and,  going  forth  from  the  midst  of  that  island,
we  sought  the  shore  of  the  sea.  Then  we  parted.  But  as  to  me  and
two  of  the  memlooks,  we  walked  until  we  came  to  a  great  wood,
abounding  with  trees,  where  we  busied  ourselves  with  eating.  And,
lo,  a  person  of  tall  stature,  with  a  long  beard,  with  long  ears,  and
with  two  eyes  like  two  cressets,  before  whom  were  many  sheep  which
he  was  tending,  and  with  him  was  a  party  of  persons  like  himself.


AND  BEDEEA-EL-JEMXL.  323

And  when  he  saw  us,  he  rejoiced  at  our  coming,  and  was  glad  ;  and
he  welcomed  us,  saying,  A  friendly  and  free  welcome !  Come  to  my
abode,  that  I  may  slaughter  for  you  one  of  these  sheep,  and  roast  it,
and  feed  you. — So  we  said  to  him,  And  where  is  thy  place  ?  And  he
answered,  Near  to  this  mountain :  go  ye  then  in  this  direction  until
ye  see  a  cave,  which  enter  ye  ;  for  in  it  are  many  guests  like  you.  Go
and  sit  with  them  until  we  prepare  for  you  the  entertainment. — And
we  felt  sure  that  his  words  were  true,  and  went  in  that  direction,  and
entered  that  cave ;  but  we  saw  the  guests  that  were  in  it  all  of  them
blind ;  and  when  we  went  into  them,  one  of  them  said,  I  am  sick : —
and  another  said,  I  am  infirm.  So  we  said  to  them,  What  are  these
words  that  ye  utter  ?  What  is  the  cause  of  your  infirmity  and  your
disease  ? — And  they  asked  us,  saying,  Who  are  ye  ?  We  answered
them,  We  are  guests.  And  they  said  to  us,  What  hath  thrown  you
into  the  hand  of  this  accursed  wretch  ?  There  13  no  strength  nor
power  but  in  God,  the  High,  the  Great !  This  is  a  Ghool,  that  eateth
the  sons  of  Adam,  and  he  hath  blinded  us,  and  desireth  to  eat  us. —
We  therefore  said  to  them,  How  hath  this  Ghool  blinded  you  ?  They
replied,  Verily  forthwith  he  will  blind  you  like  us. — But  how,  said
we,  will  he  blind  us  ?  They  answered  us,  He  will  bring  you  cups  of
milk,  and  will  say  to  you,  Ye  are  wearied  by  your  journey  :  therefore
take  this  milk,  and  drink  of  it.  And  when  ye  drink  of  it,  ye  will
become  like  us. — So  I  said  within  myself,  There  remaineth  for  us  no
escape  save  by  stratagem.  And  I  dug  a  hole  in  the  ground,  and  sat  over
it.  Then,  after  a  while,  the  accursed  Ghool  came  in  to  us,  bringing
cups  of  milk,  and  he  handed  to  me  a  cup,  and  handed  a  cup  to  each
of  those  who  were  with  me,  saying  to  us,  Ye  have  come  from  the
desert  thirsty ;  therefore  take  this  milk,  and  drink  of  it,  while  I  roast
for  you  the  meat.  Now  as  to  myself,  I  took  the  cup,  and  put  it  near
to  my  mouth,  and  emptied  it  into  the  hole ;  after  which  I  cried  out,
Ah  !  my  sight  is  gone,  and  I  have  become  blind !  And  I  held  my
eyes  with  my  hand,  and  began  to  weep  and  cry  out,  while  he  laughed,
and  said,  Fear  not.  But  as  to  the  two  who  were  my  companions,
they  drank  the  milk,  and  became  blind.  And  thereupon  the  accursed
arose  immediately,  and,  having  closed  the  entrance  of  the  cave,  drew
near  to  me,  and  felt  my  ribs,  and  he  found  me  lean,  having  no  meat
upon  me ;  wherefore  he  felt  another,  and  he  saw  that  he  was  fat,  and
rejoiced  thereat.  He  then  slaughtered  three  sheep,  and  skinned  them,
and  he  brought  some  spits  of  iron,  upon  which  he  put  the  flesh  of  the
sheep,  and  he  put  them  over  a  fire,  and  roasted  the  meat ;  after  which


326  THE  STORY  OF  SEYF-EL-MULOOK,  &c.

he  brought  it  to  my  two  companions,  who  ate,  and  he  ate  with  them.
He  next  brought  a  leathern  bottle  full  of  wine,  and  drank  it,  and  laid
himself  down  upon  his  face  and  snored.

So  upon  this  I  said  within  myself,  Verily  he  is  immersed  in  sleep,
and  how  shall  I  slay  him  ?  Then  I  remembered  the  spits ;  and  I
took  two  of  them,  and  put  them  into  the  fire,  and  waited  until  they
had  become  like  red-hot  coals;  whereupon  I  girded  myself,  and,
having  risen  upon  my  feet,  took  the  two  iron  spits  in  my  hand,  and
drew  near  to  the  accursed,  and  thrust  them  into  his  eyes,  pressing
upon  them  with  all  my  strength.  So  by  reason  of  the  sweetness  of
life  he  rose  erect  upon  his  feet  and  desired  to  lay  hold  upon  me,  after
he  had  become  blind.  But  I  fled  from  him  into  the  inner  part  of  the
cave,  while  he  pursued  me  ;  and  I  said  to  the  blind  men  who  were
with  him,  What  is  to  be  done  with  this  accursed  ?  Upon  which  one
of  them  said,  0  Sa'ed,  arise  and  ascend  to  this  aperture :  thou  wilt
find  in  it  a  polished  sword ;  and  do  thou  take  it,  and  come  to  me,
that  I  may  tell  thee  what  thou  shalt  do.  Accordingly  I  ascended  to
the  aperture,  and  took  the  sword,  and  came  to  that  man  ;  and  he
said  to  me,  Take  it,  and  smite  him  upon  his  waist,  and  he  will  die
instantly.  I  therefore  arose  and  ran  after  him,  and  he  was  tired  with
running,  and  he  came  to  the  blind  men  to  kill  them  :  so  I  came  to
him,  and  smote  him  with  the  sword  upon  his  waist,  and  he  became
divided  in  twain ;  upon  which  he  cried  out  to  me,  saying,  0  man,
since  thou  desirest  my  slaughter,  smite  me  a  second  time.  Wherefore
I  resolved  to  smite  him  a  second  time ;  but  he  who  directed  me  to  the
sword  said,  Smite  him  not  a  second  time ;  for  in  that  case  he  will  not
die,  but  will  live,  and  will  destroy  us.  So  I  complied  with  the  direc-
tion of  that  man,  and  smote  him  not ;  and  the  accursed  died.  The
man  then  said  to  me,  Arise ;  open  the  cave,  and  let  us  go  forth  from
it.  Perhaps  God  will  aid  us,  and  we  shall  be  safe  from  this  place. —
But  I  replied,  No  harm  remaineth  for  us.  We  will  rather  rest,  and
slaughter  some  of  these  sheep,  and  drink  of  this  wine ;  for  the  land
is  far-extending. — And  we  remained  in  this  place  for  a  period  of  two
months,  eating  of  these  sheep  and  of  the  fruits.

After  this,  it  happened  that  we  were  sitting  upon  the  shore  of  the
sea,  one  day,  and  I  saw  a  large  ship  appearing  upon  the  sea  in  the
distance :  so  we  made  a  sign  to  the  persons  on  board  of  it,  and  called
out  to  them.  But  they  feared  that  Ghool ;  for  they  knew  that  upon
this  island  was  a  Ghool  that  ate  human  beings :  wherefore  they
desired  to  escape.55  We  however  made  signs  to  them  with  the  ends


of  our  turbans,  and  drew  nearer  to  them,  and  proceeded  to  call  out  to
them ;  and  thereupon  one  of  the  passengers,  who  was  sharp-sighted,
said,  0  company  of  passengers,  verily  I  see  these  indistinct  objects  to
be  human  beings  like  us,  and  they  have  not  the  form  of  Ghools.
Then  they  came  towards  us  by  little  and  little  until  they  drew  near
to  us ;  and  when  they  were  convinced  that  we  were  human  beings,
they  saluted  us,  and  we  returned  their  salutation,  and  gave  them  the
good  news  of  the  slaughter  of  the  accursed  Ghool ;  whereupon  they
thanked  us.  We  then  provided  ourselves  from  the  island  with  some
of  the  fruits  that  were  upon  it,  and  embarked  on  board  the  ship,  and
it  bore  us  along  with  a  fair  wind  for  the  space  of  three  days.  But
after  that,  a  wind  rose  against  us,  and  the  darkness  of  the  sky  be-
came excessive,  and  not  more  than  one  hour  had  elapsed  when  the
wind  bore  the  ship  to  a  mountain,  and  it  was  wrecked,  and  its  planks
were  rent  asunder.56  However,  God,  the  Great,  decreed  that  I  should
lay  hold  of  one  of  its  planks,  and  I  got  upon  it,  and  it  bore  me  along
for  two  days.  A  fair  wind  had  then  come,  and  I,  sitting  upon  the
plank,  proceeded  to  row  with  my  feet  for  some  time,  until  God  (whose
name  be  exalted !)  caused  me  to  reach  the  shore  in  safety,  and  I
landed  at  this  city.  But  I  had  become  a  stranger,  alone,  solitary,  not


328  THE  STORY  OF  SEYF-EL-MULOOK

knowing  what  to  do,  and  hunger  had  tormented  me,  and  extreme
trouble  had  befallen  me.  I  therefore  came  to  the  market  of  the  city,
after  I  had  hidden  myself  and  pulled  off  this  tunic,  saying  within
myself,  I  will  sell  it,  and  sustain  myself  with  its  price  until  God  shall
accomplish  what  He  will  accomplish.  Then,  O  my  brother,  I  took
the  tunic  in  my  hand,  and  the  people  were  looking  at  it,  and  bidding
up  for  its  price,  until  thou  earnest  and  sawest  me,  and  gavest  orders
to  convey  me  to  the  palace ;  whereupon  the  young  men  took  me  and
imprisoned  me ;  and  after  this  period  thou  rememberedst  me,  and
causedst  me  to  be  brought  to  thee.  Thus  I  have  acquainted  thee
with  the  events  that  have  happened  to  me ;  and  praise  be  to  God  for
the  meeting !

And  when  Seyf-el-Mulook,  and  Taj-el-Mulook  the  father  of
Dolet-Khatoon,  heard  the  story  of  the  Wezeer  Sa'ed,  they  wondered
at  it  greatly.  Taj-el-Mulook  had  prepared  a  pleasant  place  for
Seyf-el-Mulook  and  his  brother  Sa'ed ;  and  Dolet-Khatoon  used  to
come  to  Seyf-el-Mulook,  and  to  thank  him,  and  converse  with  him
respecting  his  kind  conduct.  Then  the  Wezeer  Sa'ed  said,  O  Queen,
I  desire  thine  aid  to  accomplish  his  wish.  And  she  replied,  Yes ;  I
will  exert  myself  in  his  favour  so  that  he  shall  attain  his  wish,  if  it  be
the  will  of  God,  whose  name  be  exalted !  And  looking  towards  Seyf-
el-Mulook,  she  said  to  him,  Be  of  good  heart,  and  cheerful  eye. — Thus
was  the  case  of  Seyf-el-Mulook  and  his  Wezeer  Sa'ed.  And  now,  as
to  the  Queen  Bedeea-el-Jemal,  information  was  brought  to  her  of  the
return  of  her  sister  Dolet-Khatoon  to  her  father  and  her  country;
and  she  said,  I  must  visit  her  and  salute  her  in  beautiful  trim  and
ornaments  and  apparel.  So  she  repaired  to  her;  and  when  she  drew
near  to  her  abode,  the  Queen  Dolet-Khatoon  met  her,  and  saluted
her  and  embraced  her,  and  kissed  her  between  her  eyes ;  and  the
Queen  Bedeea-el-Jemal  congratulated  her  on  her  safety.  Then  they
sat  conversing,  and  Bedeea-el-Jemal  said  to  Dolet-Khatoon,  What
happened  to  thee  during  thine  absence  from  thy  country  ? — 0  my
sister,  replied  Dolet-Khatoon,  ask  me  not  respecting  the  things  that
befell  me.  Oh,  what  difficulties  do  human  creatures  endui-e ! — And
how  so  ?  asked  Bedeea-el-Jemal.  She  answered,  0  my  sister,  I  was
in  the  Lofty  Palace,  and  in  it  the  son  of  the  Blue  King  had  possession
of  me.  And  she  related  to  her  the  rest  of  the  story  from  first  to  last,
and  the  story  of  Seyf-el-Mulook,  and  what  happened  to  him  in  the
palace,  and  the  difficulties  and  horrors  that  he  had  endured  until  he
came  to  the  Lofty  Palace :  also  how  he  had  killed  the  son  of  the  Blue


AND  BEDEEA-EL-JEMAL.  32!i

King,  and  how  he  had  pulled  off  the  doors,  and  made  them  into  a
raft,  and  made  for  it  oars  ;  and  how  he  came  hither ;  whereat  Bedeea-
el-Jemal  wondered.  Then  she  said,  By  Allah,  0  my  sister,  verily  this
was  one  of  the  most  extraordinary  of  wonderful  cases,  and  I  desire  to
acquaint  thee  with  the  origin  of  his  tale;  but  bashfulness  preventeth
my  doing  so.  Bedeea-el-Jemal  therefore  said  to  her,  What  is  the
cause  of  thy  bashfulness,  when  thou  art  my  sister  and  my  companion,
and  we  have  much  between  us,  and  I  know  that  thou  desirest  not  for
me  aught  save  what  is  good  ?  Wherefore  then  shouldst  thou  be
abashed  at  me  ?  Acquaint  me  with  that  which  thou  hast  to  say,  and
be  not  abashed  at  me,  nor  conceal  from  me  aught  of  the  matter.

So  Dolet-Khatoon  replied,  Verily  he  saw  thy  portrait  on  the  tunic
which  thy  father  sent  to  Suleyman  the  son  of  Daood,  on  both  of  whom
be  peace !  Suleyman  opened  it  not,  nor  saw  what  was  on  it,  but  sent
it  to  the  King  'Asim  the  son  of  Safwan,  the  King  of  Egypt,  among
other  presents  and  rarities  which  he  sent  to  him ;  and  the  King  'Asim
gave  it  to  his  son  Seyf-el-Mulook  before  he  opened  it.  And  when
Seyf-el-Mulook  took  it,  he  opened  it,  desiring  to  put  it  on  himself,
and  he  saw  on  it  thy  portrait,  and  became  enamoured  of  it ;  wherefore
he  came  forth  to  seek  thee,  and  he  endured  all  these  difficulties  on
thine  account. — But  Bedeea-el-Jemal  said  (and  her  face  had  become
red,  and  she  was  abashed  at  Dolet-Khatoon),  Verily  this  is  a  thing
that  can  never  be ;  for  mankind  agree  not  with  the  Jann.  So  D61et-
Khatoon  proceeded  to  describe  to  her  Seyf-el-Mulook,  and  the  excel-
lence of  his  form  and  his  conduct  and  his  horsemanship  ;  and  she
ceased  not  to  praise  him  and  to  mention  to  her  his  qualities  until  she
said,  0  my  sister,  for  the  sake  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !)  and
for  my  sake,  come  and  converse  with  him,  though  thou  speak  but  a
single  word.  But  Bedeea-el-Jemal  replied,  Verily  these  words  that
thou  utterest  I  will  not  hear,  nor  will  I  yield  to  thy  wish  expressed  in
them.  And  she  seemed  as  though  she  heard  not  of  them  aught,  and
as  though  no  love  for  Seyf-el-Mulook  and  the  excellence  of  his  form
and  his  conduct  and  his  horsemanship  entered  her  heart.  Then  Dolet-
Khatoon  humbled  herself  to  her,  and  kissed  her  feet,  and  said,  O
Bedeea-el-Jemal,  by  the  milk  that  we  have  sucked,  I  and  thou,  and
by  the  characters  engraved  upon  the  seal  of  Suleyman  (on  whom  be
peace!),  hear  these  my  words;  for  I  pledged  myself  to  him  in  the
Lofty  Palace  that  I  would  shew  him  thy  face.  I  conjure  thee  then
by  Allah  to  shew  him  thy  form  once,  for  my  sake,  and  that  thou  also
see  him. — And  she  proceeded  to  weep  to  her,  and  to  humble  herself
in.  2  u


330  THE  STORY  OF  SEYF-EL-MULOOK,  &c.

to  her,  and  to  kiss  her  hands  and  her  feet,  until  she  consented,  and
said,  For  thy  sake  I  will  shew  him  my  face  once.

Upon  this,  therefore,  the  heart  of  Dolet-Khatoon  was  comforted.
She  kissed  her  hands  and  her  feet,  and  went  forth,  and  came  to  the
largest  palace,  which  was  in  the  garden ;  and  she  ordered  the  female
slaves  to  spread  the  furniture  in  it,  to  set  in  it  a  couch  of  gold,  and  to
place  the  wine-vessels  in  order.  She  then  arose,  and  went  in  to  Seyf-
el-Mulook  and  Sa'ed  his  Wezeer,  who  were  sitting  in  their  place,  and
gave  to  Seyf-el-Mulook  the  good  news  of  the  attainment  of  his  desire,
and  the  accomplishment  of  his  wish  ;  and  she  said  to  him,  Repair  to
the  garden,  thou  and  thy  brother,  and  enter  the  palace,  and  conceal
yourselves  from  the  eyes  of  the  people,  so  that  no  one  of  those  who
are  in  the  palace  may  see  you,  until  I  and  Bedeea-el-Jemal  come.  So
Seyf-el-Mulook  and  Sa'ed  arose,  and  repaired  to  the  place  to  which
Dolet-Khatoon  had  directed  them;  and  when  they  entered  it,  they
saw  a  couch  of  gold  set,  with  the  cushions  upon  it,  and  there  were
viands  and  wine.  And  they  sat  a  while.  Then  Seyf-el-Mulook
thought  upon  his  beloved,  and  his  bosom  thereupon  became  contracted,
and  love  and  desire  assailed  him :  he  therefore  arose  and  walked  on
until  he  went  forth  from  the  entrance-passage  of  the  palace.  His
brother  Sa'ed  followed  him;  but  he  said  to  him,  O  my  brother,  sit
thou  in  thy  place,  and  follow  me  not,  until  I  return  to  thee.  So  Sa'ed
sat,  and  Seyf-el-Mulook  descended,  and  entered  the  garden,  intoxicated
by  the  wine  of  desire,  perplexed  by  excess  of  passion  and  distraction  ;
love  had  agitated  him,  and  ecstasy  had  overcome  him,  and  he  recited
these  verses : —

O  Bedeea-el-Jemal,  I  have  none  beside  thee ;  have  mercy  on  me  then,  for  I  am

the  captive  of  thy  love :
Thou  art  the  object  of  my  search,  and  my  desire  and  my  joy. My  heart  hath

refused  to  love  any  beside  thee.
Would  T  were  informed  if  thou  knewest  of  my  weeping  all  the  night  long  with

sleepless  eye.
Command  sleep  to  sojourn  in  my  eyelid,  and  then  perhaps  I  shall  behold  thee  in  a

dream.
Be  favourable  to  one  who  is  distracted  by  love. Save  him  from  the  destructive

effects  of  thy  cruelty.
May  God  increase  thy  beauty  and  thy  happiness,  and  may  all  thine  enemies  be  a

ransom  for  thee.
The  lovers  shall  be  ranged,  on  the  day  of  resurrection,  beneath  my  banner,  and  all

the  beauties  beneath  thine.

Then  he  wept  again,  and  recited  other  verses ;  and  thus  he  continued
to  do,  now  weeping,  and  now  reciting,  till  Sa'ed,  thinking  him  slow


to  return,  went  forth  from  the  palace  to  search  for  him  in  the  garden,
and  saw  him  walking  there,  perplexed,  and  reciting  verses.  Thereupon
Seyf-el-Mulook  and  Sa'ed  his  brother  met,  and  they  proceeded  to
divert  themselves  in  the  garden,  and  to  eat  of  the  fruits.

But  as  to  Dolet-Khatoon,  when  she  and  Bedeea-el-Jemal  came  to
the  palace,  they  entered  it,  after  the  eunuchs  had  decorated  it  with
varieties  of  ornaments,  and  done  in  it  all  that  Dolet-Khatoon  had
ordered  them,  having  prepared  for  Bedeea-el-Jemal  a  couch  of  gold
that  she  might  sit  upon  it.  So  when  Bedeea-el-Jemal  saw  that
couch,  she  seated  herself  upon  it ;  and  there  was  by  her  side  a  window
overlooking  the  garden.  The  eunuchs  had  brought  varieties  of
exquisite  viands,  and  Bedeea-el-Jemal  and  Dolet-Khatoon  ate,  the
latter  putting  morsels  into  the  mouth  of  the  former  until  she  was
satisfied;  when  she  called  for  various  sweetmeats,  and  the  eunuchs
brought  them,  and  the  two  ladies  ate  of  them  as  much  as  sufficed
them,  and  washed  their  hands.  Next,  Dolet-Khatoon  prepared  the
wine  and  the  wine-vessels,  arranged  the  ewers  and  the  cups,  and
proceeded  to  fill  and  to  hand  to  Bedeea-el-Jemal;  after  which  she
filled  the  cup  and  drank.  Then  Bcdeea-el-Jemal  looked  from  the
window  that  was  by  her  side  into  that  garden,  and  saw  its  fruits  and
branches ;  and  happening  to  turn  her  eyes  in  the  direction  of  Seyf-cl-


332  THE  STORY  OF  BEYF-EL-MULOOK.

Mulook,  she  beheld  him  wandering  about  in  the  garden,  with  the
Wezeer  Sa'ed  behind  him,  and  heard  Seyf-el-Mulook  reciting  verses,
while  he  poured  forth  copious  tears ;  and  when  she  beheld  him,  the
sight  occasioned  her  a  thousand  sighs.  She  therefore  looked  towards
Dolet-Khatoon  (and  the  wine  had  made  sport  with  her  affections^,
and  she  said  to  her,  O  my  sister,  who  is  this  young  man  that  I
see  in  the  garden,  perplexed,  distracted,  melancholy,  sighing  ?  So
Dolet-Khatoon  said  to  her,  Wilt  thou  permit  his  presence  with  us  that
we  may  see  him  ?  She  answered,  if  thou  canst  bring  him,  do  so.
And  upon  this  Dolet-Khatoon  called  him,  saying  to  him,  O  son  of
the  King,  come  up  to  us,  and  approach  us  with  thy  beauty  and  love-
liness. Wherefore  Seyf-el-Mulook,  knowing  the  voice  of  Dolet-
Khatoon,  went  up  into  the  palace;  and  when  his  eye  fell  upon  Bedeea-
el-Jemal,  he  fell  down  in  a  fit:  so  Dolet-Khatoon  sprinkled  upon  him
a  little  rose-water,  and  he  recovered  from  his  fit.  He  then  arose,
and  kissed  the  ground  before  Bedeea-el-Jemal,  who  was  confounded  by
his  beauty  and  loveliness ;  and  Dolet-Khatoon  said,  Know,  0  Queen,
that  this  is  Seyf-el-Mulook,  through  whose  means  my  deliverance
was  effected,  by  the  decree  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted!),  and
he  is  the  person  whom  all  kinds  of  difficulties  have  befallen  on  thine
account ;  wherefore  I  desire  that  thou  regard  him  favourably.  Upon
this,  Bedeea-el-Jemal,  after  laughing,  said,  And  who  fulfilleth  vows,
that  this  young  man  should  fulfil  them  ?  For  mankind  are  destitute
of  affection. — So  Seyf-el-Mulook  replied,  O  Queen,  verily  faithless-
ness will  never  be  in  me :  and  all  people  are  not  alike.  And  he  wept
before  her  and  recited  these  verses  : —

O  Bedeea-el-Jemal,  be  propitious to  one sorrowful,  worn  and afflicted by  an

enchanting,  cruel  eye  ! 5'
By  the  beauteous  colours  combined  in  thy  cheeks,  the  white  and  deep  red  like

that  of  the  anemone,
Punish  not  with  abandonment  one  in  constant  suffering;  for  my  body  is  wasting

through  protracted  estrangement !
This  is  my  wish,  and  the  utmost  that  1  hope  for ;  and  union  is  my  desire,  if  this

be  possible.

Then  he  wept  violently,  and  recited  other  verses;  and  when  he
had  ended  them,  he  wept  again  violently ;  whereupon  Bedeea-el-
Jemal  said  to  him,  O  son  of  the  King,  verily  I  fear  to  give  myself  up
to  thee  entirely,  lest  I  should  not  experience  from  thee  affection  nor
love ;  for  often  the  good  qualities  of  mankind  are  found  to  be  few,
and  their  perfidy  is  great.  And  know  that  the  lord  Suleyman  the


ANT)  HEDEEA-EL-JEMAL.  333

son  of  Dsiood  (on  both  of  whom  be  peace  !)  took  Bilkees  M  lovingly  ;
and  when  he  saw  another  more  beautiful  than  she,  he  turned  from  her
to  that  other  person. — But  Seyf-el-Mulook  replied,  O  my  eye  and  my
soul,  God  hath  not  created  all  mankind  alike,  and  I,  if  it  be  the  will
of  God,  will  fulfil  my  vow,  and  will  die  beneath  thy  feet.  Thou  shalt
see  what  I  will  do  agreeably  with  that  which  I  say,  and  on  God  I
depend  for  my  doing  as  I  say. — So  upon  this,  Bedeea-el-Jemal  said  to
him,  Sit,  and  be  at  ease,  and  swear  to  me  by  thy  religion,  and  let  us
covenant  with  each  other,  that  neither  of  us  will  be  treacherous  to
the  other ;  and  may  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !)  execute  vengeance
on  the  one  who  is  treacherous  to  the  other!  And  when  Seyf-el-
Mulook  heard  from  her  these  words,  he  sat;  and,  with  the  hand  of
each  in  the  hand  of  the  other,  they  swore  that  neither  of  them  would
prefer  to  the  other  any  person,  whether  of  mankind  or  of  the  Jinn.
Then  they  remained  a  while  embracing  one  another,  and  weeping  by
reason  of  the  violence  of  their  joy.  And  after  Bedeea-el-Jemal  and
Seyf-el-Mulook  had  sworn,  each  to  the  other,  Seyf-el-Mulook  arose  to
walk,  and  Bedeea-el-Jemal  arose  also  to  walk,  attended  by  a  slave-girl
carrying  some  food,  and  carrying  likewise  a  bottle  full  of  wine.  And
Bedeea-el-Jem;il  sat,  and  the  slave-girl  put  before  her  the  food  and
the  wine ;  but  they  had  not  remained  more  than  a  short  time  when
Seyf-el-Mulook  approached;  whereupon  she  met  him  with  salutation,
and  they  embraced  each  other.

After  this,  they  sat  a  while  eating  and  drinking ;  and  Bedeea-el-
Jemal  said,  O  son  of  the  King,  when  thou  enterest  the  Garden  of
Irem,  thou  wilt  see  a  large  tent  pitched,  of  red  satin,  and  its  lining
of  green  silk.  Enter  the  tent,  and  fortify  thy  heart.  Thou  wilt
there  see  an  old  woman  sitting  upon  a  couch  of  red  gold  set  with
large  pearls  and  with  jewels ;  and  when  thou  enterest,  salute  her  with
politeness  and  reverence  ;  and  look  towards  the  couch ;  thou  wilt
find  beneath  it  a  pair  of  slippers  interwoven  with  gold  and  adorned
with  minerals.  Take  those  slippers  and  kiss  them,  and  put  them
upon  thy  head  :59  then  put  them  beneath  thy  right  arm-pit,  and  stand
before  the  old  woman,  silent,  and  hanging  down  thy  head.  And
when  she  asketh  thee  and  saith  to  thee,  Whence  hast  thou  come,  and
how  arrivedst  thou  here,  and  who  made  known  to  thee  this  place,  and
for  what  reason  tookest  thou  these  slippers  ? — be  thou  silent  until
this  my  slave-girl  entereth  and  converseth  with  her,  and  endeavoureth
to  render  her  favourable  to  thcc,  and  striveth  to  content  her  mind  by
words.  Perhaps  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !)  may  incline  her  heart


to  thee,  and  she  may  consent  to  that  which  thou  desirest. — She  then
called  that  slave-girl ;  and  her  name  was  Marjaneh ;  and  she  said  to
her,  By  thy  love  of  me,  accomplish  this  affair  this  day,  and  be  not
slothful  in  doing  it.  If  thou  accomplish  it  this  day,  thou  shalt  be
free  for  the  sake  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !),  and  thou  shalt
receive  generous  treatment,  and  there  shall  not  be  any  dearer  in  my
estimation  than  thou,  nor  will  I  reveal  my  secret  to  any  but  thee. —
So  she  replied,  0  my  mistress,  and  light  of  mine  eye,  tell  me  what
is  thiue  affair,  that  I  may  accomplish  it  for  thee  on  my  head  and
mine  eye.  And  she  said  to  her,  It  is,  that  thon  carry  this  human
being  upon  thy  shoulders,  and  convey  him  to  the  Garden  of  Irem,
to  the  presence  of  my  grandmother,  the  mother  of  my  father ;  that
thou  convey  him  to  her  tent,  and  take  care  of  him.  And  when  thou
enterest  the  tent,  thou  with  him,  and  seest  him  take  the  slippers,  and
pay  homage  to  them,  and  she  saith  to  him,  Whence  art  thou,  and  by
what  way  earnest  thou,  and  who  brought  thee  to  this  place,  and  for
what  reason  tookest  thou  these  slippers,  and  what  is  thine  affair  that


THE  STORY  OF  SEYF-EL-MULOOK,  &c.  335

I  may  accomplish  it  for  thee? — thereupon  enter  thou  quickly,  and
salute  her  and  say  to  her,  0  my  mistress,  I  am  the  person  who
brought  him  hither,  and  he  is  the  son  of  the  King  of  Egypt,  and  he
is  the  person  who  went  to  the  Lofty  Palace,  and  killed  the  son  of
the  Blue  King,  and  delivered  the  Queen  Dolet-Khatoon,  and  con-
veyed her  to  her  father  safe ;  and  I  have  brought  him  to  thee  that  he
may  inform  thee  and  give  thee  the  glad  tidings  of  her  safety :  there-
fore be  gracious  unto  him. — Then,  after  that,  say  to  her,  By  Allah  I
conjure  thee  tell  me,  is  not  this  young  man  comely,  0  my  mistress  ?
And  she  will  answer  thee,  Yes.  And  thereupon  say  to  her,  O  my
mistress,  verily  he  is  perfect  in  honour  and  generosity  and  courage,
and  he  is  the  lord  of  Egypt,  and  its  King,  and  he  compriseth  all
praiseworthy  qualities.  And  when  she  saith  to  thee,  What  is  his
affair  ? — reply,  My  mistress  saluteth  thee,  and  asketh  thee,  how  long
shall  she  remain  in  the  house  a  maiden,  unmarried  ?  For  the  time
hath  become  tedious  to  her.  What  then  is  thy  desire  in  not  marry-
ing her,  and  wherefore  dost  thou  not  marry  her  during  thy  life  and
the  life  of  her  mother,  like  other  damsels  ? — And  if  she  say  to  thee,
How  shall  we  act  to  marry  her  ?  If  she  know  any  one,  or  if  any  one
have  occurred  to  her  mind,  let  her  inform  us  respecting  him,  and  we
will  do  for  her  as  she  wisheth  as  far  as  may  be  possible : — then  do  thou
reply,  O  my  mistress,  thy  daughter  saith  to  thee,  Ye  were  desirous
of  marrying  me  to  Suleyinan  (on  whom  be  peace !),  and  ye  designed
for  him  my  portrait  on  the  tunic.  But  he  had  no  lot  in  me  ;  and  he
sent  the  tunic  to  the  King  of  Egypt,  who  gave  it  to  his  son,  and  he
saw  my  portrait  delineated  upon  it,  and  became  enamoured  of  me ;
wherefore  he  abandoned  the  kingdom  of  his  father  and  his  mother,
turning  from  the  world  and  what  it  containeth,  and  came  forth  wan-
dering over  the  earth  without  regard  to  any  thing,  and  endured  the
greatest  of  troubles  and  horrors  on  my  account.

The  slave-girl  then  took  up  Seyf-el-Mulook,  and  said  to  him,
Close  thine  eyes.  He  therefore  did  so;  and  she  flew  up  with  him
to  the  sky ;  and  after  a  while,  she  said  to  him,  O  son  of  the  King,
open  thine  eyes.  So  he  opened  his  eyes,  and  beheld  the  garden,  the
Garden  of  Irem  ;  and  the  slave-girl  Marjaneh  said  to  him,  Enter,  O
Seyf-el-Mulook,  this  tent.  Upon  this,  Seyf-el-Mulook  uttered  the
name  of  God,  and  entered,  and,  casting  a  look  in  the  garden,  he  saw
the  old  woman  sitting  upon  the  couch,  with  the  female  slaves  in
attendance  upon  her ;  wherefore  he  approached  her  with  politeness
and  reverence,  took  the  slippers  and  kissed  them,  and  did  as  Bedeea-


036  THE  STORY  OF  SEYF-EL-MULOOK,  &c.

el-Jemal  had  directed  him.  The  old  woman  then  said  to  him,  Who
art  thou,  and  whence  hast  thou  come,  and  from  what  country  art
thou,  and  who  brought  thee  to  this  place,  and  for  what  reason
tookest  thou  these  slippers  and  kissedst  them,  and  when  didst  thou
tell  me  of  a  want,  and  I  did  not  perform  it  for  thee  ?  So  upon  this
the  slave-girl  Marjaneh  entered,  and  saluted  her  with  politeness  and
reverence ;  after  which  she  repeated  what  Bedeea-el-Jemal  had  told
her.  But  when  the  old  woman  heard  these  words,  she  cried  out
at  her,  and  was  incensed  against  her,  and  said,  How  can  there  be
agreement  between  mankind  and  the  Jinn  ?  Seyf-el-Mulook  there-
fore replied,  I  will  agree  with  thee,  and  be  thy  page,  and  die  loving
thee,  and  keep  thy  covenant,  and  see  none  but  thee,  and  thou  shait  see
my  veracity  and  my  freedom  from  falsehood,  and  the  excellence  of  my
generosity  towards  thee,  if  it  be  the  will  of  God,  whose  name  be
exalted !  Then  the  old  woman  reflected  for  some  time,  with  her
head  hung  down ;  and  after  that,  she  raised  her  head,  and  said,  O
comely  young  man,  wilt  thou  keep  the  covenant  and  the  compact  ?
He  -answered  her,  Yes,  by  Him  who  raised  the  heaven  and  spread
out  the  earth  upon  the  water,  verily  I  will  keep  the  covenant.  And
upon  this  the  old  woman  said,  I  will  accomplish  for  thee  thine  affair,
if  it  be  the  will  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !) ;  but  go  now  into
the  garden,  and  divert  thyself  in  it,  and  eat  of  the  fruits  of  which  the
equals  exist  not,  and  of  which  there  are  not  in  the  world  the  like,
while  I  send  to  my  son  Shahyal,  who  will  come,  and  I  will  talk  with
him  on  that  affair,  and  nought  but  good  will  happen,  if  it  be  the  will
of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !) ;  for  he  will  not  oppose  me,  nor
disobey  my  command.  I  will  marry  to  thee  his  daughter  Bedeea-el-
Jemal  :  so  be  of  good  heart ;  for  she  shall  be  thy  wife,  O  Seyf-el-
Mulook. — And  when  Seyf-el-Mulook  heard  from  her  these  words,
he  thanked  her,  and  kissed  her  hands  and  her  feet,  and  went  forth
from  her  into  the  garden.  The  old  woman  then  looked  towards  that
slave-girl,  and  said  to  her,  Go  forth  and  search  for  my  son  Shahyal,  see'
for  him  in  whatsoever  quarter  and  place  he  is,  and  bring  him  unto  me.
So  the  slave-girl  went  and  searched  for  the  King  Shahyal,  and  she
met  with  him,  and  brought  him  to  his  mother.

Meanwhile,  Seyf-el-Mulook  was  diverting  himself  in  the  garden,
when  five  of  the  Jann,  who  were  of  the  subjects  of  the  Blue  King,
saw  him  ;  and  they  said,  Whence  is  this  man,  and  who  brought  him
to  this  place?  Perhaps  he  is  the  person  who  killed  the  son  of  the
Blue  King. — Then  they  said,  one  to  another,  We  will  employ  a


stratagem  against  him,  and  interrogate  him,  and  ask  information  ot
him.  So  they  walked  on  by  little  and  little  until  they  came  to  Seyf-
el-Molook  in  a  side  of  the  garden,  when  they  seated  themselves  by
him,  and  said  to  him,  O  comely  young  man,  thou  failedst  not  in  kill-
ing the  son  of  the  Blue  King,  and  delivering  Dolet-Khatoon  from  him.
He  was  a  perfidious  dog,  and  had  circumvented  her;  and  had  not
God  sent  thee  to  her  for  that  purpose,  she  had  never  escaped.  But
"bow  didst  thou  kill  him  ? — And  Seyf-el  Mulook  looked  at  them  and
answered  them,  I  killed  him  by  means  of  this  seal-ring  that  is  upon
my  finger.  So  it  was  evident  to  them  that  he  was  the  person  who
killed  him  :  therefore  two  of  them  seized  his  hands,  and  two  his  feet,
and  the  other  held  his  mouth,  lest  he  should  call  out,  and  the  people
of  the  King  Shahyal  should  hear  him  and  deliver  him  from  their
hands.  Then  they  took  him  up  and  flew  away  with  him,  and  they
ceased  not  in  their  flight,  until  they  alighted  in  the  presence  of  their
in.  2  x


338  THE  STORY  OF  SEYF-EL-MULOOK

King,  when  they  stationed  him  before  him,  and  said,  0  King  of  the
age,  we  have  brought  thee  him  who  killed  thy  son. — And  where  is
he?  said  the  King.  They  answered,  This  is  he.  And  the  Blue
King  said  to  him,  Didst  thou  kill  my  son,  and  the  vital  spark  of  my
heart,  and  the  light  of  mine  eye,  without  right,  and  without  any  offence
that  he  had  committed  against  thee?  Seyf-el-Mulook  answered  him,
Yes,  I  killed  him ;  but  on  account  of  his  tyranny  and  his  iniquity ;
for  he  took  the  children  of  the  Kings,  and  conveyed  them  to  the
Abandoned  Well  and  the  Lofty  Palace,  and  separated  them  from
their  families,  and  acted  impudently  towards  them.  I  killed  him  by
means  of  this  ring  that  is  upon  my  finger,  and  God  hurried  his  soul
to  the  fire,  and  miserable  is  the  abode  to  which  he  hath  gone. — So  it
was  evident  to  the  Blue  King  that  this  was  the  person  who  killed  his
son,  without  doubt;  and  thereupon  he  called  for  his  Wezeer,  and  said
to  him,  This  is  the  person  who  killed  my  son,  without  any  uncertainty
or  doubt.  What  then  dost  thou  counsel  me  to  do  in  his  case  ?  Shall
I  slay  him  in  the  most  abominable  manner,  or  torture  him  with  the
most  grievous  torture,  or  how  shall  I  act  ? — The  chief  Wezeer
answered,  Cut  off  one  of  his  limbs.  Another  said,  Inflict  upon  him
every  day  a  severe  beating.  Another  said,  Cut  him  through  the
middle.  Another  said,  Cut  off  all  his  fingers,  and  burn  them  with  fire.
Another  said,  Crucify  him.  And  every  one  of  them  proceeded  to
speak  according  to  his  judgment.

But  there  was  with  the  Blue  King  a  great  Emeer,  acquainted  with
affairs  and  with  the  circumstances  of  the  times,  and  he  said  to  the
King,  0  King  of  the  age,  I  will  say  to  thee  some  words,  and  it  is
thine  to  judge  whether  thou  wilt  attend  to  that  which  I  counsel  thee
to  do.  He  was  the  counsellor  of  his  kingdom,  and  the  chief  officer  of
his  empire,  and  the  King  used  to  attend  to  his  words,  and  act  accord-
ing to  his  judgment,  and  not  oppose  him  in  aught.  Now  he  rose
upon  his  feet,  kissed  the  ground  before  him,  and  said  to  him,  0  King
of  the  age,  if  I  give  thee  advice  in  this  affair,  wilt  thou  follow  it,  and
wilt  thou  grant  me  indemnity  ?  And  the  King  answered  him,  Shew
thine  opinion,  and  thou  shalt  be  safe.  Then  said  he,  O  King,  if  thou
kill  this  man,  and  receive  not  my  advice,  nor  consider  my  words,  the
slaughter  of  him  at  this  time  will  not  be  right;  for  he  is  in  thy  hand
and  in  thine  asylum,  and  he  is  thy  captive,  and  when  thou  desirest
him  thou  findest  him,  and  mayest  do  with  him  as  thou  wilt.  Be
patient  then,  0  King,  of  the  age ;  for  this  man  hath  entered  the


AND  BEDEEA-EL-JEMAL.  339

Garden  of  Irem,  and  married  Bedeea-el-Jemal,  the  daughter  of  the
King  Shahyal,  and  become  one  of  them,  and  thy  people  seized  him
and  brought  him  unto  thee,  and  he  hath  not  concealed  his  case  from
them  nor  from  thee.  So  if  thou  slay  him,  the  King  Shahyal  will
demand  of  thee  his  blood-revenge,  and  will  act  hostilely  to  thee,  and
come  to  thee  with  forces  on  account  of  his  daughter,  and  thou  art  not
able  to  prevail  against  his  forces,  nor  hast  thou  power  to  contend
with  him. — The  King  therefore  attended  to  this  his  advice,  and  gave
orders  to  imprison  Seyf-el-Mulook. — Thus  did  it  happen  unto  him.

Now  the  lady  Bedeea-el-Jemal,  having  met  with  her  father
Shahyal,  sent  the  slave-girl  to  search  for  Seyf-el-Mulook ;  and  she
found  him  not ;  wherefore  she  returned  to  her  mistress,  and  said,  I
have  not  found  him  in  the  garden.  And  she  sent  to  the  gardeners,
and  asked  them  respecting  Seyf-el-Mulook ;  and  they  answered,  We
saw  him  sitting  beneath  a  tree,  and  lo,  five  persons,  of  the  people  of
the  Blue  King,  alighted  by  him,  and  conversed  with  him :  then  they
took  him  up,  and  stopped  his  mouth,  and  flew  with  him,  and  departed.
So  when  the  lady  Bedeea-el-Jemal  heard  these  words,  the  affair  was
not  a  light  matter  to  her.  She  was  violently  enraged,  and,  rising
upon  her  feet,  she  said  to  her  father  the  King  Shahyal,  How  is  it
that  thou  art  King,  and  the  people  of  the  Blue  King  come  to  our
garden  and  take  our  guest  and  depart  with  him  in  safety  while  thou
art  living  ?  In  like  manner  his  mother  also  began  to  provoke  him,
and  to  say,  It  is  not  fit  that  any  one  should  transgress  against  us
while  thou  art  living.  But  he  replied,  0  my  mother,  this  human
being  killed  the  son  of  the  Blue  King,  a  Jinnee;  so  God  cast  him
into  his  hand  :  how  then  should  I  go  to  him  and  act  hostilely  towards
him  on  account  of  the  human  being?  His  mother  however  said  to
him,  Go  to  him,  and  demand  of  him  our  guest ;  and  if  he  be  living,
and  he  deliver  him  to  thee,  take  him,  and  come  back ;  but  if  he  have
slain  him,  seize  the  Blue  King  alive,  him  and  his  children  and  his
hareem,  and  every  one  who  hath  his  protection  among  his  dependants,
and  bring  them  alive  unto  me,  that  I  may  slaughter  them  with  mine
own  hand,  and  devastate  his  dwellings.  If  thou  do  not  that  which  I
have  commanded  thee,  I  will  not  hold  thee  lawfully  acquitted  of  the
obligation  that  thou  owest  me  for  my  milk,  and  my  rearing  of  thee
shall  be  as  though  it  were  to  thee  unlawful. — So  upon  this  the  King
Shahyal  arose,  and  commanded  his  troops  to  go  forth,  and  repaired
unto  hinij  in  honour  of  his  mother,  and  from  a  regard  to  the  feelings


340  THE  STORY  OF  SEYF-EL-MULOOK

of  herself  and  of  those  who  were  beloved  of  her,  and  in  order  to  the
accomplishment  of  a  thing  that  had  been  decreed  from  eternity.

Shahyal  set  forth  with  his  troops,  and  they  ceased  not  to  pursue
their  way  until  they  came  to  the  Blue  King,  and  the  two  armies  met ;
whereupon  the  Blue  King  was  defeated  with  his  army,  and  the  victors
seized  his  children,  great  and  small,  and  the  lords  of  his  empire  and
its  great  men,  and  bound  them,  and  brought  them  before  the  King
Shahyal,  who  said  to  the  Blue  King,  0  Blue,  where  is  Seyf-el-Mulook,
the  human  being,,  who  was  my  guest  ?  The  Blue  King  said  to  him,
O  Shahyal,  tho-u  art  a  Jinnee  and  I  am  a  Jinnee,  and  on  account  of  a
human  being  who  hath  killed  my  son  dost  thou  do  these  deeds  ?  He
is  the  destroyer  of  my  son,  the  vital  spark  of  my  heart  and  the
ease  of  my  soul,  and  how  hast  thou  done  all  these  deeds,  and  spilt
the  blood  of  so  many  thousand  Jinnees  ? — But  Shahyal  replied,60
Desist  from  these  words ;  and  if  he  be  living,  bring  him,  and  I  will
liberate  thee,  and  will  liberate  every  one  of  thy  children  whom  I  have
seized :  but  if  thou  have  slain  him,  I  will  slaughter  thee  and  thy
children.  The  Blue  King  said  to  him,  0  King,  is  this  more  dear
unto  thee  than  my  son  ?  The  King  Shahyal  answered  him,  Verily
thy  son  was  a  tyrant;  for  he  carried  off  the  children  of  men,  and  the
daughters  of  Kings,  and  put  them  in  the  Lofty  Palace  and  the  Aban-
doned Well,  and  acted  impudently  towards  them.  And  the  Blue
King  said  to  him,  He  is  with  me;  but  make  thou  reconciliation  be-
tween us  and  him.  So  he  reconciled  them,  and  conferred  upon  them
robes  of  honour,  and  he  wrote  a  voucher  agreed  upon  between  the
Blue  King  and  Seyf-el-Mulook  respecting  the  slaughter  of  the  son  of
the  former;  after  which,  the  King  Shahyal  received  Seyf-el-Mulook,
and  entertained  them  handsomely ;  and  the  Blue  King  remained  with
him,  he  and  his  army,  three  days.  Then  Shahyal  took  Seyf-el-
Mulook,  and  brought  him  to  his  mother,  who  rejoiced  exceedingly  at
seeing  him,  and  Shahyal  wondered  at  the  beauty  of  Seyf-el-Mulook,
and  his  perfection  and  loveliness ;  and  Seyf-el-Mulook  related  to  him
his  story  from  beginning  to  end,  telling  him  what  had  befallen  him
with  Bedeea-el-Jemal.

The  King  Shahyul  then  said,  0  my  mother,  since  thou  hast  con-
sented to  this,  I  hear  and  obey  all  that  thou  desirest :  so  take  him  and
go  with  him  to  Sarandeeb,  and  celebrate  there  a  magnificent  festivity ;
for  he  is  a  comely  young  man,  and  hath  endured  horrors  on  her
account.  Accordingly  she  proceeded  with  her  female  slaves  until


AND  BEDEEA-EL-JEMAL  341

they  arrived  at  Sarandeeb,  and  entered  the  garden  belonging  to  the
mother  of  Dolet-Khatoon.  Bedeea-el-Jemal  saw  Seyf-el-Mulook,
after  they  had  gone  to  the  tent  and  met  one  another,  and  the  old
woman  related  to  them  what  he  had  experienced  from  the  Blue  King,  and
how  he  had  been  at  the  point  of  death  in  the  prison  of  the  Blue  King.
Then61  the  King  Taj-el-Mulook,  the  father  of  Dolet-Khatoon,  sum-
moned the  great  men  of  his  empire,  and  they  performed  the  ceremony
of  the  contract  of  the  marriage  of  Bedeea-el-Jemal  to  Seyf-el-Mulook^
and  married  her  to  him;  and  when  the  ceremony  of  the  contract  was
performed,  the  ushers  of  the  court  cried  out,  May  it  be  blessed !  He
deserveth  ! — and  they  scattered  the  gold  and  the  silver  upon  the  head  of
Seyf-el-Mulook,  conferred  costly  robes  of  honour,  and  made  banquets.
Seyf-el-Mulook  then  said  to  Taj-el-Mulook,  0  King,  pardon!  I
would  ask  of  thee  a  thing,  and  I  fear  that  thou  mayest  refuse  it  me
and  disappoint  me.  But  Taj-el-Mulook  replied,  By  Allah,  wert  thou
to  demand  my  soul,  I  would  not  withhold  it  from  thee,  on  account  of
the  kind  actions  that  thou  hast  done.  So  Seyf-el-Mulook  said,  I
desire  that  thou  marry  Dolet-Khatoon  to  my  brother  Sa'ed,  that  we
may  both  be  thy  pages.  And  Taj-el-Mulook  replied,  I  hear  and  obey.
He  forthwith  assembled  the  great  men  of  his  enpire  a  second  time,
and  performed  the  ceremony  of  the  contract  of  the  marriage  of  his
daughter  Dolet-Khatoon  to  Sa'ed ;  and  when  they  had  finished  the
ceremony  of  the  contract,  they  scattered  the  gold  and  the  silver,  and
the  King  commanded  that  they  should  decorate  the  city.  They  then
celebrated  the  festivity,  and  Seyf-el-Mulook  took  Bedeea-el-Jemal  as
his  wife,  and  Sa'ed  took  Dolet-Khatoon  as  his  wife  the  same  night.
Seyf-el-Mulook  ceased  not  to  remain  in  retirement  with  Bedeea-el-
Jemal  for  forty  days;  and  she  said  to  him  one  day,  0  son  of  the
King,  doth  there  remain  in  thy  heart  a  regret  for  any  thing  ?  Seyf-
el-Mulook  answered,  God  forbid  !  I  have  accomplished  my  want,
and  no  regret  remaineth  in  my  heart ;  but  I  desire  to  meet  my  father
and  mother  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  to  see  if  they  have  continued
well  or  not. — So  she  ordered  a  party  of  her  servants  to  convey  him  and
Sa'ed  to  the  land  of  Egypt ;  and  they  conveyed  them  to  their  families
in  Egypt;  and  Seyf-el-Mulook  met  his  father  and  his  mother,  as  also
did  Sa'ed,  and  they  remained  with  them  a  week.  Then  each  of  them
bade  farewell  to  his  father  and  his  mother,  and  they  departed  to  the
city  of  Sarandeeb ;  and  whenever  they  desired  to  see  their  families,
they  used  to  go  and  return.  Thus  Seyf-el-Mulook  lived  with  Bedeea-el-


342


THE  STORY  OF  SEYF-EL-MULOOK,  &c.


Jemal  a  most  pleasant  and  most  agreeable  life,  and  in  like  manner  did
Sa'ed  with  Dolet-Khatoon,  until  they  were  visited  by  the  terminator
of  delights  and  the  separator  of  companions. — Extolled  be  the  perfec-
tion of  the  Living  who  dieth  not,  who  created  the  creatures,  and
sentenced  them  to  death,  and  who  is  the  First,  without  beginning,  and
the  Last,  without  end !


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-FOURTH.


NOTE  1.  IN  the  original,  this  story  has  the  following  introduction,  which  I  have
transferred  to  this  place  because  it  seems  to  me  to  be  of  little  interest,  and  calculated
to  induce  expectations  that  will  not  be  fully  realized.  The  Breslau  edition  does  not
contain  it.

"  There  was,  in  ancient  times,  a  King,  of  the  Kings  of  the  Persians,  whose  name
was  Mohammad  the  son  of  Sebaik.  and  who  ruled  over  the  countries  of  Khurasan,  and
every  year  he  used  to  invade  the  countries  of  the  infidels,  in  El-Hind1  and  Es-Sind2
and  China,  and  the  regions  that  are  beyond  the  River  [Oxus],  and  other  countries
besides  these,  of  the  Persians  and  other  nations.  He  was  a  just,  brave,  generous,
liberal  King.  And  this  King  was  fond  of  conversations  over  the  cup,  and  traditions
and  verses,  and  histories  and  tales,  and  night -discourses,  and  the  lives  of  the  ancients.
Whoever  preserved  in  his  memory  an  extraordinary  tale,  and  related  it  to  him,  he  used
to  confer  favours  upon  him.  It  is  said  that  if  a  stranger  came  to  him  with  an  extra-
ordinary night-discourse,  and  recited  before  him,  and  he  approved  of  his  tale,  and  his
words  pleased  him,  he  used  to  bestow  upon  him  a  sumptuous  robe  of  honour,  give  him
a  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  mount  him  upon  a  horse  saddled  and  bridled,  clothe  him
from  head  to  foot,  and  give  him  magnificent  gifts ;  and  the  man  would  take  the
things  and  go  his  way.

"  Now  it  happened  that  an  old  man  came  to  him  with  an  extraordinary  night-tale,
which  he  related  before  him,  and  he  approved  of  it,  and  his  words  pleased  him  ;  so  he
gave  orders  to  present  to  him  a  sumptuous  gift,  comprising  a  thousand  pieces  of  gold
of  Khurasan,  and  a  horse  completely  equipped.  Then,  after  this,  the  news  of  these
actions  of  the  King  spread  abroad  throughout  all  the  cities,  and  a  man  named  the
merchant  Hasan,  who  was  generous,  liberal,  learned,  a  poet,  excelling  in  science,  heard
of  him.  And  there  was,  with  that  King,  an  envious  Wezeer,  of  inauspicious  aspect,
who  loved  not  any  one  among  all  the  people,  neither  the  rich  nor  the  poor;  and  when-
ever any  one  came  to  that  King  and  he  gave  him  aught,  he  envied  him,  and  said,  Verily
this  practice  consumeth  the  wealth  and  ruineth  the  country;  and  this  is  the  custom  of
the  King : — these  words  proceeding  not  save  from  envy  and  hatred  in  that  Wezeer.
Then  the  King  heard  of  the  merchant  Hasan  ;  so  he  sent  to  him,  and  caused  him  to  be
brought ;  and  when  he  came  before  him,  he  said  to  him,  O  merchant  Hasan,  the
Wezeer  hath  acted  with  opposition  and  enmity  towards  me  on  account  of  the  wealth


1  Or  Hindoostan.


2  Western  India


344  NOTES  TO  CHAPTE1!  TWENTY-FOURTH.

that  I  give  to  the  poets  and  the  boon-companions,  and  the  reciters  of  tales  and  versos.
Now  I  desire  of  thee  that  thou  relate  to  me  a  pleasant  tale  and  an  extraordinary  story,
such  that  I  have  never  heard  the  like  of  it.  And  if  thy  story  please  me,  I  will  give
thee  many  tracts  of  land  with  their  castles,  and  I  will  make  them  additional  to  thy
fief:3 1  will  also  place  all  my  kingdom  at  thy  disposal,  and  make  thee  the  chief  of  my
wezeers  :  thou  shall  sit  on  my  right  hand,  and  govern  my  subjects.  But  if  thou  bring
me  not  that  of  which  I  have  told  thee,  I  will  take  all  that  is  in  thy  hand,  and  banish
thee  from  my  country. — To  this  the  merchant  Hasan  replied,  I  hear  and  obey  our  lord
the  King.  But  the  menilook  desireth  of  thee  that  thou  have  patience  with  him  for  a
year ;  then  I  will  relate  to  thee  a  story  the  like  of  which  thou  hast  not  heard  in  thy
life,  neither  hath  any  one  beside  thee  heard  the  like  of  it,  nor  any  story  better  than  it.
— And  the  King  said,  I  grant  thee  a  delay  of  a  whole  year.  Then  he  called  for  a
sumptuous  robe  of  honour,  and  clad  him  with  it,  and  said  to  him,  Confine  thyself  to  thy
house,  and  mount  not,  nor  go  nor  come,  during  the  period  of  a  whole  year,  until  thou
presentest  thyself  with  that  which  I  have  demanded  of  thee.  If  thou  bring  that,  thou
shalt  receive  special  favour ;  and  rejoice  thou  in  the  prospect  of  that  which  I  have  pro-
mised thee.  But  if  thou  bring  it  not,  thou  shalt  not  be  of  us,  nor  will  we  be  of  thee. —
And  the  merchant  Hasan  kissed  the  ground  before  him,  and  went  forth.

"  He  then  chose,  of  his  memlooks,  five  persons,  all  of  whom  wrote  and  read ;
and  they  were  excellent  in  science,  intelligent,  versed  in  polite  literature,  of  the
choicest  of  his  memlooks.  He  gave  to  each  of  them  five  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  and
said  to  them,  I  reared  you  not  but  for  such  a  day  as  this  :  aid  me  then  to  accomplish
the  desire  of  the  King,  and  save  me  from  his  hand.  They  said  to  him,  And  what  de-
sirest  thou  to  do  ?  For  our  souls  shall  be  thy  ransom. — -He  answered  them,  I  desire  that
each  of  you  journey  unto  some  region,  and  that  ye  use  your  utmost  endeavours  to  gain
access  to  the  learned,  and  the  accomplished  in  polite  literature,  and  the  excellent  in
science,  and  the  relaters  of  extraordinary  talks  and  wonderful  histories ;  and  search  ye
for  me  to  procure  the  story  of  Seyf-el-Mulook,  and  bring  it  to  me.  If  ye  find  it  with
any  one,  excite  his  desire  for  its  price,  and  whatsoever  he  deniandeth  of  gold  and  silver
give  him  it ;  even  if  he  demand  of  you  a  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  give  him  what  ye  have
ready  and  promise  him  the  remainder,  and  bring  it  to  me.  Whichever  of  you  tindeth
this  story  and  bringeth  it  to  me,  I  will  bestow  upon  him  sumptuous  robes  of  honour
and  abundant  favours,  and  there  shall  be  unto  me  none  dearer  than  he. — Then  the
merchant  Hasan  said  to  one  of  them,  Go  thou  to-  the  countries  of  El-Hind  and  Es-Sind,
and  their  provinces  and  districts.  And  he  said  to  another,  Go  thou  to  the  countries  of
Persia  and  China,  and  their  districts.  And  to  another  he  said,  Go  thou  to  the  countries
of  Khurasan,  and  its  provinces  and  districts.  To  another  he  said,  Go  thou  to  the
countries  of  the  West,4  and  its  regions  and  its  districts  and  its  provinces  and  all  its
quarters.  And  he  said  to  the  other,  the  fifth,  Go  thou  to  the  countries  of  Syria  and
Egypt,  and  their  provinces  and  districts.  The  merchant  then  chose  for  them  an
auspicious  day,  and  said  to  them,  Set  forth  on  your  journeys  this  day,  and  strive  dili-
gently to  accomplish  my  affair,  and  be  not  slothful  though  the  case  should  require  the
sacrifice  of  your  lives.  So  they  bade  him  farewell,  and  set  forth,  and  each  of  them  went
to  the  quarter  to  which  he  had  commanded  him  to  go.  Four  of  them,  however,  were
absent  four  months,  and  searched,  arid  found  not  aught.  Therefore  the  bosom  of  the
merchant  Hasan  was  contracted  when  the  four  memlooks  returned  to  him,  and  in-
formed him  that  they  had  searched  the  cities  and  the  countries  and  the  districts  for
the  objects  of  their  master's  desire,  and  found  not  of  it  aught.

"But  as  to  the  fifth  memlook,  he  journeyed  until  he  entered  Syria  and  arrived  at
the  city  of  Damascus,  and  he  found  it  to  be  a  pleasant,  secure  city,  with  trees  and
rivers  and  fruits,  and  birds  that  proclaimed  the  perfection  of  God,  the  One,  the  Omni-
potent, who  created  the  night  and  the  day.  He  remained  in  it  some  days,  inquiring


3  Untaxcd  land.  «  Northern  Africa,  west  of  Egypt.


for  that  which  his  master  wanted ;  but  no  one  gave  him  information  of  it.  He  then
desired  to  depart  thence,  and  to  journey  to  another  place  ;  and,  lo,  he  saw  a  young  man
running, and  stumbling  upon  his  skirts:  so  the  memlook  said  to  him,  Wherefore  dost
thou  run,  and  art  thou  distressed,  and  whither  repairest  thou  ?  And  he  answered  him,
Here  is  an  excellent  sheykh  who  every  day  seateth  himself  upon  a  stool5  at  this  time,
and  relateth  pleasant  tales  and  histories  and  night-stories,  the  like  of  which  no  one  hath
heard ;  and  I  am  running  that  I  may  find  for  myself  a  place  near  unto  him,  and  fear
that  I  shall  not  obtain  a  place  on  account  of  the  crowd.  The  memlook  therefore  said
to  him,  Take  me  with  thee.  And  the  young  man  replied,  Hasten  in  thy  pace.  So  he
closed  his  door,  and  hastened  with  him  until  he  arrived  at  the  place  in  which  the
sheykh  recited  amid  the  people,  when  he  saw  that  sheykh  to  be  a  person  of  comely  face,
and  sitting  upon  a  stool  reciting  to  the  people.  He  seated  himself  near  to  him,  and
listened  to  hear  his  story ;  and  when  the  time  of  sunset  came,  the  sheykh  ended  the
story,  and  the  people,  having  heard  what  he  had  recited,  dispersed  from  around  him.
And  thereupon  the  memlook  advanced  to  him  and  saluted  him,  and  he  returned  his
salutation  with  exceeding  greeting  and  honour.  The  memlook  then  said  to  him,  Verily,
O  my  master  the  sheykh,  thou  art  a  comely,  reverend  man,  and  thy  recitation  is

5  The  word  rendered  "stool"  also  signifies  "  chair,"  &c. ;  but  the  seat  of  the  public  reciter  of  talus
is  generally  a  square  stool,  made  of  palm-sticks,  and  resembling  a  small  crate.

III.  2 Y


346  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-FOURTH.

pleasant,  and  I  desire  to  inquire  of  thee  respecting  a  thing,  and  the  sheykh  replied,
Inquire  respecting  what  thou  wilt.  So  the  memlook  said  to  him,  Hast  thou  the  night-
story  of  Seyf-el-Mulook  and  Bedeea-el- Jemal  ?  The  sheykh  said  to  him,  And  from
whom  heardest  thou  these  words,  and  who  is  he  who  informed  thee  of  this  ?  Tht>
memlook  answered,  I  heard  not  this  from  any  one ;  but  I  am  from  a  distant  country,
and  have  come  seeking  for  this  story,  and  whatsoever  thou  demandest  as  its  price,  1
will  give  it  thee,  if  thou  have  it  and  wilt  bestow  it  as  a  favour  and  charity  upon  me.
and  in  the  generosity  of  thy  nature  wilt  give  it  as  an  alms  from  thee.  If  my  soul  were
at  my  disposal  and  I  sacrificed  it  to  thee  for  it,  my  heart  would  be  pleased  by  doing
so. — And  the  sheykh  replied,  Be  of  good  heart  and  cheerful  eye  ;  for  it  shall  be  produced
to  thee;  but  this  is  a  story  which  none  relateth  in  the  beaten  way,  nor  would  I  give
this  story  to  every  one.  The  memlook  therefore  said  to  him,  By  Allah,  O  my  master,
do  not  covetously  withhold  it  from  me;  but  demand  of  me  whatever  thou  wilt.  And
the  sheykh  replied,  If  thou  desire  this  story,  give  me  a  hundred  pieces  of  gold,  and  1
will  give  it  thee ;  but  on  five  conditions.

"  So  when  he  knew  that  it  was  in  the  possession  of  the  sheykh,  and  that  he  con-
sented to  give  it  him,  he  rejoiced  exceedingly,  and  said  to  him,  1  will  give  thee  a  hun-
dred pieces  of  gold  as  its  price,  and  ten  as  a  gratuity,  and  receive  it  on  the  conditions
that  thou  hast  mentioned.  And  the  sheykh  replied,  Go,  bring  the  gold  and  receive
what  thou  wantest.  Wherefore  the  memlook  arose,  and  kissed  the  hands  of  the
sheykh,  and  went  to  his  lodging  joyful  and  happy.  He  took  in  his  hand  a  hundred
pieces  of  gold  and  ten,  and  put  them  into  a  purse  that  he  had  with  him  ;  and  when  the
morning  came,  he  arose  and  put  on  his  clothes,  and,  taking  the  pieces  of  gold,  went
with  them  to  the  sheykh.  He  saw  him  sitting  at  the  door  of  his  house,  and  saluted
him ;  and  he  returned  his  salutation.  He  then  gave  him  the  hundred  pieces  of  gold
and  ten,  and  the  sheykh,  having  received  them  from  him,  arose,  and  entered  his  house,
taking  the  memlook  in ;  and  he  seated  him  in  a  place,  and  brought  to  him  an  inkhorn
and  a  pen  and  some  paper ;  and  he  brought  to  him  also  a  book,  and  said  to  him,  Tran-
scribe what  thou  seekest  from  this  book  of  the  night-story  of  Seyf-el-Mulook.  The
memlook  therefore  sat  writing  this  story  until  he  had  finished  the  transcription  of  it,
when  he  read  it  to  the  sheykh,  and  ho  corrected  it ;  and  after  that,  the  sheykh  said  to
him,  Know,  O  my  son,  that  the  first  condition  is,  that  thou  relate  not  this  story  in  the
beaten  way ;  nor  shalt  thou  relate  it  among  women  and  slave-girls,  nor  among  male
black  slaves  and  stupid  persons,  nor  among  boys ;  but  thou  shalt  only  recite  it  among
emeers  and  kings  and  wezeers,  and  persons  of  knowledge,  such  as  expositors  and  others
And  the  memlook  assented  to  the  conditions,  kissed  the  hands  of  the  sheykh,  bade  him
farewell,  and  departed  from  him.  He  set  forth  on  his  journey  that  day  jo\  ful  and  happy,
and  ceased  not  to  prosecute  his  journey  with  diligence,  by  reason  of  the  great  joy  that
he  experienced  on  account  of  his  acquisition  of  the  story  of  Seyf-el-Miilook,  until  he
came  to  his  country ;  and  he  sent  his  servant  to  convey  the  good  news  to  the  merchant,
and  to  say  to  him.  Thy  memlook  hath  arrived  safely,  and  attained  his  wish  and  desire.
And  when  the  memlook  arrived  at  the  city  of  his  master,  and  sent  to  him  the  messenger
of  good  news,  there  remained  not  of  the  period  agreed  upon  between  the  King  and  the
merchant  Hasan  more  than  ten  days.  He  then  went  in  to  his  master  the  merchant,
and  acquainted  him  with  that  which  had  happened  to  him  ;  whereat  he  rejoiced  greatly.
The  memlook  rested  in  his  private  apartment,  and  gave  to  his  master  the  book  con-
taining the  story  of  Seyf-el-Mulook  and  Bedeea-el- Jemal ;  and  when  his  master  saw
that,  he  bestowed  on  the  memlook  all  the  clothes  that  were  upon  him,  and  gave  him
ten  excellent  horses,  and  ten  camels,  and  ten  mules,  and  three  black  slaves,  and  two
memlooks.

"The  merchant  then  took  the  story,  wrote  it  plainly  in  his  own  hand,  and  went  up
to  the  King,  and  said  to  him,  O  fortunate  King,  I  have  brought  a  night-story,  and  a
pleasant,  rare  tale,  the  like  of  which  no  one  hath  ever  heard.  And  when  the  King


heard  the  words  of  the  merchant  Hasan,  he  ordered  immediately  that  every  intelligent
emeer  should  come,  and  every  learned  man  who  excelled  in  science,  and  every  one
versed  in  polite  literature,  and  each  poet  and  sagacious  person.  Then  the  merchant
Hasan  sat  and  read  this  story  before  the  King ;  and  when  the  King  and  every  one  who
was  present  heard  it,  they  all  wondered  and  approved  of  it.  All  who  were  present
approved  of  it,  and  they  showered  upon  him  gold  and  silver  and  jewels ;  and  the  King
gave  orders  to  present  to  the  merchant  Hasan  a  sumptuous  robe  of  honour  of  the  most
magnificent  of  his  apparel,  gave  him  a  great  city  with  its  castles  and  its  fields,  made
him  one  of  the  greatest  of  his  wezeers,  and  seated  him  on  his  right  hand.  He  then
ordered  the  scribes  to  write  this  story  in  letters  of  gold,  and  to  place  it  in  his  private
repositories ;  and  the  King  used,  whenever  his  bosom  was  contracted,  to  summon  the
merchant  Hasan,  and  he  read  it."

NOTE  2.  These  names  are  Arabic  ("'As'im''  signifying  "defending,"  &c. ;  and
"  Safwan,"  "  clear  and  cold,"  applied  to  a  day);  and  (notwithstanding  the  pretended
scenes  and  age  of  the  story)  the  manners  and  customs  which  it  describes,  and  the
dresses,  when  any  kind  is  specified,  are  Arabian.  The  author  evidently  seems  to  have
intended  Cairo  as  the  capital  of  the  King.  (See  Note  18  below.)

NOTE  3. "Faris  "  signifies  "  a  horseman,"'  &c. ;  and  "  Saleh,"  "  good,"  "just,"  &c.

NOTE  4.  In  the  Bieslau  edition,  and  in  Trebutien's  version,  the  place  of  Suley-
man's  abode  at  this  time  is  said  to  have  been  Seba,  of  El- Yemen,  the  seat  of  government
of  Bilkees,  "  the  Queen  of  Sheba "  mentioned  in  the  Bible.  [Seba,  or  Ma-rib,  the


348  NOTES  TO  CHAFfER  TWEXTY-FOUHTH.

Mariaba  of  the  Greek  Geographers,  was  one  of  the  Himyerite  capitals,  and  near  it  was
the  famous  Dyke  of  El-'Ariui. — ED.]

NOTE  5.  Here  it  appears  that  the  phrase  "  to  kiss  the  ground  "  is  to  be  understood
in  its  literal  sense;  but  I  believe  that  this  is  never  the  case  when  the  act  is  said,  in  this
work,  to  be  performed  by  a  Muslim. — See  Note  to  Chapter  vi.

NOTE  6.  "  The  same  ceremony  is  still  observed  at  the  audiences  which  the  Porte
gives  to  Ambassadors.  Oriental  politeness  requires  that  refreshments  be  presented  to
guests  before  inquiring  the  motive  of  their  visit."  (Note  by  Von  Hammer,  in  Trebu-
tien's  version.)

NOTE  7.  Mohammad  did  not  profess  to  teach  a  new  religion,  but  to  restore  the  only
true  religion ;  and  this  is  called  "  El-Islam,"  which  signifies  "  resignation  [to  God]."
[See  a  foot-note  (No.  33)  in  p.  456  of  vol.  ii. — ED.]

NOTE  8.  By  the  "  two  prayers,"  it  appears  from  what  follow*,  that  the  prayers  of
noon  and  afternoon  are  meant.

NOTE  9.  So  in  the  Breslau  edition :  of  the  edition  of  Cairo,  "  two  tunics  j"  but
only  one  is  mentioned  afterwards.

NOTE  10.  The  words  "  with  all  his  subjects  "  I  have  inserted  on  the  authority  of
the  Breslau  edition.

NOTE  11.  The  word  rendered  "  onion-sauce  "  is  "  takleeyeh."  My  sheykh  explains
it  as  "  onions  cooked  in  clarified  butter,  after  which  they  are  put  upon  other  cooked
food."

NOTE  12. See  Note  67  to  Chapter  xi.

NOTE  1 3.  "  Such  rejoicings  are  still  usual  at  Constantinople,  under  the  name  of
'  ddnanmah,'  not  only  when  the  Sultanas6  are  enceintes,  but  also  when  they  are  brought
to  bed.  In  1803,  the  rumour  of  the  pregnancy  of  a  Sultana,  being  falsely  spread,
involved  all  the  ministers  at  Constantinople  in  useless  expenses,  to  prepare  for  a
ddnanmah  which  did  not  take  place."  (Note  by  Von  Hammer,  in  Trebutien's  version.)

NOTE  14.  "  Seyf-el-Mulook  "  signifies  "the  Sword  of  the  Kings.''  In  the  Breslau
edition  and  in  Trebutien's  version,  the  astrologers  are  here  said  to  have  east  the
Prince's  nativity,  and  to  have  foreseen  various  events  which  the  tale  afterwards  relates.
The  prediction  of  one  of  these  events  is  alluded  to  in  page  303.

NOTE  15.  '•  Sa'ed  "  signifies  "  fore  arm  ;"  and  hence  it  is  applied  to  "  a  chief,  upon
whom  people  rely."

NOTE  16. In  the  Breslau  edition,  they  are  said  to  have  been  taught  the  Kur-

an,  <fcc.

•

NOTE  17.  "  Zawiyeh  "  has  before  been  explained,  as  a  name  given  in  Egypt  to  a
small  mosque.

NOTE  18.  "The  Horse-course  of  the  Elephant  '*  here  mentioned  seems  to  be  that
of  the  Lake  of  the  Elephant,7  which,  according  to  El-Makreezee  (as  stated  in  his  "  Khi-
tat "),  was  made  towards  the  close  of  the  seventh  century  of  the  Flight,  and  afterwards,
in  the  seventeenth  year  of  the  next  century,  became  the  site  of  stables.  In  the  Breslau


6  The  title  of  "Sultana"  is  used  by  Europeans  as  a  feminine  of  "Sulti'ui,"  which  is  given  by  the
Turks  to  a  female  as  well  as  to  a  male,  with  no  difference  but  this,  that  it  precedes  the  proper  name  of
a  male,  and  follows  that  of  a  female.

7  Birket  el-Feel,  mentioned  in  Note  23  to  Chapter  v.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-FOURTH.  349

edition,  the  Horse-course  is  called  "  el-Meydan  el-'Adl :"  this  I  suppose  to  be  a  mistake
for  "  Meydan  El-'Adil ''  (or  the  Horse-course  of  El-'Adil) ;  as  El-'Adil  was  the  surname
of  the  King  who  made  the  Horse-course  of  the  Lake  of  the  Elephant.  If  so,  we  must
infer  (as  I  have  observed  in  the  second  of  these  notes)  that  Cairo  is  intended  as  the
capital  of  the  King  '  Asiin,  notwithstanding  the  anachronism  thus  implied.

NOTE  19.  A  description  of  banquets  of  the  kind  here  mentioned  has  been  given
in  Note  7  to  Chapter  viii.

NOTE  20.  I  suppose  either  the  outer  curtains  of  the  King's  pavilion  to  be  here
meant,  or  the  inner  curtains  of  its  vestibule.

NOTE  21,  Von  Hammer,  in  illustration  of  this  passage,  mentions  the  custom,  still
existing,  of  girding  the  sabre  on  the  side  of  an  eastern  sovereign  when  he  mounts
the  throne ;  and  adds,  that  the  girdle  is  found,  upon  their  monuments,  as  one  of  the
insignia  of  the  ancient  Kings  of  Egypt.  Being  adorned  with  most  valuable  jewels,
like  the  crown,  the  girdle  is  still  one  of  the  insignia  of  many  Eastern  Kings.

NOTE  22.  In  my  original  is  here  added  "  and  the  signet "  (muhr) ;  and  in  the
Breslau  edition,  "  and  the  bow ;"  but  neither  of  these  things  is  mentioned  before  or
after.

NOTE  23.  In  my  original,  the  name  of  the  father  of  Bedeea-el-Jemal  is  here
written  "  Shemmakh,"  or  "  Shemakh,"  as  in  Trebutien's  version ;  but  he  is  often
mentioned  afterwards  and  always  called  "Shahyal."

NOTE  24.  Respecting  Babil,  and  the  Garden  of  Irein,  see  Note  14  to  Chapter  iii.,
and  the  anecdote  commencing  in  page  303  of  Volume  ii.

NOTE  25.  So  in  the  Breslau  edition  and  in  Trebutien's  version  :  in  my  original,
twenty  thousand.

NOTE  26.  "Faghfoor"is  a  common  title  given  by  the  Muslims  to  Emperors  of
China.  In  my  original,  by  the  misplacing  of  a  diacritical  point  and  the  omission  of  a
letter,  it  is  converted  into  "  Kaafoo."

NOTE-  27.  In  the  original  there  is  a  play  upon  words ;  "  sabr,"  the  name  of  the
aloe,  signifying  "  patience."  So  also  in  the  next  verse.  See  a  foot-note  in  page  548
of  Volume  i.

NOTE  28. See  the  last  paragraph  of  Note  5  to  Chapter  i.

NOTE  29.  Here  we  have  again  "  the  Old  Man  of  the  Sea,"  whose  nature  and
country  (supposed  to  be  Sumatra)  have  been  considered  in  Note  64  to  Chapter  xx. ;
but  in  this  instance  we  find  him  considered  as  a  Marid,  which  is  properly  an  evil
Jinnee  of  the  most  powerful  class.  Some  other  incidents  in  the  present  tale  will  be
found  to  be  nearly  the  same  as  certain  events  in  the  Voyages  of  Es-Sindibad  of  the
Sea ;  but  it  is  inferior  to  those  tales,  and  apparently  in  some  measure  copied  from
them,  and  from  the  romance  of  Seyf  Zu-1-Yezen.  I  have,  therefore,  not  referred  to
these  coincidences  in  my  notes  to  the  Voyages  of  Es-Sindibad.

NOTE  30. See  Note  39  to  Chapter  xx.

NOTE  31.  These  verses,  I  suspect,  are  by  some  Soofee  poet.  See  Note  102  to
Chapter  x.

NOTE  32.  Here,  and  afterwards,  I  read  "  kelek  "  (a  raft),  as  in  the  Breslau  edition,
instead  of  "  fulk,"  which  signifies  "  a  ship  "  or  other  vessel.

NOTE  33. In  my  original, "  with  the remaining  memlook." I  have  corrected


350  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-FOURTH.

this  passage,  and  another  afterwards  in  the  same manner,  on  the authority  of  the
Breslau  edition

NOTE  34. Here  again  I  adopt  a  reading  of  the  Breslau  edition.

NOTE  35.  On  this  passage,  my  sheykh  has  written  upon  the  margin  of  my
originul,  "  Were  they  Jews  ?  If  this  were  not  in  the  time  of  Snleyman,  it  might  be
said  that  these  apes  were  the  Jews  who  were  transformed  on  the  day  of  their  trans-
gression with  respect  to  the  Sabbath."  These  are  mentioned  in  the  sixty-first  verse
of  the  second  chapter  of  the  Kur-an,  and,  as  stated  by  Sale,  were  some  dwellers  at
Eyleh  (or  Elath),  on  the  Red  Sea,  who  lived  in  the  time  of  David,  and  were  trans-
formed into  apes  for  catching  fish  on  the  Sabbath.  After  remaining  in  this  condition
three  days,  they  were  destroyed  by  a  wind  which  swept  them  all  into  the  sea. — But
it  appears  from  what  is  afterwards  stated  in  Trebutien's  version,  that  by  these  apes
are  meant  the  descendants  of  a  remnant  of  the  tribe  of  'Ad.  At  the  time  of  the
general  destruction  of  this  tribe  (mentioned  in  Note '37  to  Chapter  ii.),  a  company
belonging  to  it  had  gone  to  Mekkeh  to  pray  for  rain  ;  and  the  persons  composing  this
company,  or  their  descendants,  were  afterwards  transformed  by  God  into  apes.  (See
Pocock's  Spec.  Hist.  Arab.,  ed.  1806,  pp.  36  and  37^

NOTE  36. In  my  original  "  their  islands."

NOTE  37.  The  words  rendered  "  And  an  abandoned  well,  and  a  lofty  palace,''  are
from  the  forty-fourth  verse  of  the  twenty-second  chapter  of  the  Kur-an.  They  are
either  misunderstood  or  purposely  misapplied,  in  the  tale ;  the  true  meaning  being,
"And  [how  many]  a  well  [hath  been]  abandoned,  and  [how  many]  a  lofty  palace  !"
Others,  however,  have  misunderstood  them,  and  given  to  them  a  particular  applica-
tion." The  Oriental  geographers,"  observes  Von  Hammer,8  "state  these  places
[called  in  Arabic  'el-Beer  el-Mo'attalah '  and  ' el  Kasr  el-Mesheed ' 9]  to  be  in  the
province  of  Hadramot,  and  we  wait  for  a  new  Niebuhr  to  inform  us  what  are  the
monuments  or  the  ruins  thus  called." — "  Yafith  "  and  "  Nooh  "  are  the  names  which
we  write  "  Japheth  "  and  "  Noah."

NOTE  38.  The  word  in  my  original  is  "eewan;"  but  this  means  here,  as  my
sheykh  has  noted,  what  is  now  commonly  called  a  "leewan."  It  has  been  described
in  Note  12  to  Chapter  iii.

NOTE  39.  "  Dolet,"  which  signifies  "  fortune,"  "  empire,"  &c.,  I  suppose  to  be
here  the  proper  name  ;  and  "  Khatoon  "  (i,  e.  Lady),  a  title  subjoined  in  the  Turkish
manner.

NOTE  40.  By  "  the  city  of  Sarandeeb "  we  must  understand  the  capital  of  the
island  of  Ceylon.

No"TE  41.  "  El-Kulzum"  is  the  ancient  "Glysma,"  whence  the  Red  Sea  is  called
"  the  Sea  of  El-Kulzum."

NOTE  42. See  Note  28  to  Chapter  x.,  and  Note  6  to  Chapter  xxiii.

NOTE  43.  From  the  sequel,  as  well  as  from  what  has  been  said  above  in  Note  37,
it  appears  that  this  is  meant  as  a  falsehood  of  the  Jinnee,  to  deceive  the  lady.

NOTE  44.  The  words  "  and  remaineth  with  me  three  days,"  &c.,  are  omitted  in
the  Cairo  edition.  I  have  supplied  them  from  the  edition  of  Breslau.


8  Note  in  Trebutien's  version,  vol.  ii.  p.  154.  it  is synonymous  with  " musheiyad,"  signifying

9  "  Mesheed "  generally  signifies  "  plastered  ;" "  lofty." In  the  Commentary  of  the  Jelaleyn,  it
but  in  the  above-mentioned  verse  of  the  Kuran, is  explained  by  the  synonym  "rafeea."


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-FOURTH.  351

45. "For,  had  she  remembered  her,  probably  she  had  come  to  her,  as  she
was  a  Jinneeyeh."10

NOTE  46.  "  Hatim "  I  suppose  to  be  the  name  of  the  'Efreet.  In  the  Breslau
edition  it  is  written  "Khatim."

NOTE  47.  The  word  for  which  I  write  "  coffer  "  is  here,  in  my  original,  "  tabak  "
or  "  tabik ;"  but  afterwards,  "  taboot."

NOTE  48.  Here  again,"  as  in  the  instances  mentioned  above,  in  Note  32,  "  fulk  "
is  put  in  my  original  for  "  kelek."

NOTE  49.  He  put  the  sword  between  himself  and  the  lady  from  a  motive  of
modesty  and  respect.

NOTE  50.  The  word  rendered  "lying"  is  "sake'."  Mysheykh  supposes  it  to  be
a  vulgar  word  derived  from  "sakeea,"  for  "  sakeea,"  which  signifies  "hoar-frost :"  but
I  imagine  that  the  word  "  sake',"  »'.  e.  "lying,"  or  "a  liar,"  had  escaped  his  memory
at  tho  time  of  his  reading  this  passage.

NOTE  51.  This  city  and  harbour  I  suppose  to  be  imaginary.  The  name  of  the
former  is  derived  from  "  'emareh,"  which  signifies  "  the  being  inhabited,"  &c. :  that
of  the  latter  may  be  rendered  "the  lurking-place  of  the  two  seas,"  or  "—of  the  pro-
vince [of  Arabia]  called  El-Bahreyn."  In  the  Breslau  edition,  the  city  is  called
"  'Amar ;"  and  the  harbour,  "  Beyn  el-Bahreyn."

NOTE  52.  This  name,  I  rather  think,  should  be  " "Ali-1-Mulk,"  or  "the  High  in
Dominion."

NOTE  53. "  Mo'een-ed-Decn  "  signifies  "  the  Aider  of  the  Religion."

NOTE  54.  " '  Shoom  '  is  a  kind  of  tough  wood  of  which  are  made  small  staves
wherewith  asses  are  driven.''11  Sir  Gardner  Wilkinson  informs  me  that  it  is  ash.

NOTE  55.  In  Trebutien's  version,  this  cannibal  is  here  called  (vol.  ii.  p.  168)
"  Goid-Eli-Fenioun ;"  and  the  following  note  by  Von  Hammer  is  subjoined.  "  There
was  no  need  of  this  similitude  of  name  to  prove  that  all  this  episode  is  a  manifest
imitation  of  the  adventures  of  Ulysses  in  the  cave  of  Polyphemus,  and  that  this  latter
is  the  same  as  Goul-Eli-Fenioun :  which  induces  the  belief  that  the  Arabs  have  been
acquainted  with  the  poems  of  Homer."  But  may  not  the  story  of  Ulysses  and  Poly-
phemus have  been  of  Eastern  origin  ?  See  some  remarks  on  the  knowledge  that  the
Arabs  had  of  Homer,  in  the  Review  subjoined  to  this  work. — Notes  39  and  52  to
Chapter  xx.  will  serve  to  illustrate  the  account  of  the  Ghool  in  the  present  tale.

NOTE  56.  In  the  Breslau  edition,  the  ship  is  not  wrecked,  but  conveys  Sa'ed,
with  the  other  passengers,  safely  to  the  city  where  Seyf-el-Mulook  finds  him.

NOTE  57.  Instead  of  "  enchanting,  cruel  eye,"  we  may,  as  my  sheykh  observes,
read,  "  enchanting  eye  of  a  Jinneeyeh."

NOTE  58.  For  the  story  of  Suleyman  and  Bilkees  (whom  I  have  mentioned  above,
in  Note  4),  see  the  twenty-seventh  chapter  of  the  Kur-an,  and  Sale's  notes.

NOTE  59. The  action  here  described  is  one  indicative  of  extreme  submission.

NOTE  60.  In  the  Breslau  edition,  Shahyal  is  here  very  properly  made  to  say,
"  Dost  thou  not  know  that  a  single  human  being  is,  with  God,  better  than  a  thousand
Jinnees  ?"

NOTE  61. This  sentence  is  from  the  Breslau  edition.


10  Marginal  note  by  my  slieykh.  n  Idem.


CHAPTER  XXV.


COMMENCING  WITH  PART  OP  THE  SEVEN  HUNDRED  AND  SEVENTY-
EIGHTH  NIGHT,  AND  ENDING  WITH  PART  OP  THE
EIGHT  HUNDRED  AND  THIRTY-FIRST.


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.1

THERE  was,  in  ancient  times,  a  certain  merchant  residing  in  El-
Basrah,  and  that  merchant  had  two  male  children,  and  great  wealth.
And  it  happened,  as  God,  who  heareth  and  knoweth,  decreed,  that  the
merchant  was  admitted  to  the  mercy  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !),
and  left  that  wealth.  So  his  two  sons  betook  themselves  to  prepare
him  for  the  grave,  and  to  bury  him  ;  after  which  they  divided  the
wealth  between  them  equally,  and  each  of  them  took  his  portion,  and
they  opened  for  themselves  two  shops.  One  of  them  was  a  dealer  in
copper-wares,  and  the  other  was  a  goldsmith.

Now  while  the  goldsmith  was  sitting  in  his  shop,  one  day,  lo,  a
Persian  walked  along  the  market-street  among  the  people  until  he


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  353

came  to  the  shop  of  the  young  goldsmith,  when  he  looked  at  his
work,  and  examined  it  knowingly,  and  it  pleased  him.  And  the  name
of  the  young  goldsmith  was  Hasan.  Then  the  Persian  shook  his
head,  and  said,  By  Allah,  thou  art  an  excellent  goldsmith !  And  he
proceeded  to  look  at  his  work,  while  he  (the  young  man)  was  looking
at  an  old  book  that  was  in  his  hand,  and  the  people  were  occupied
with  the  contemplation  of  his  beauty  and  loveliness  and  his  stature
and  justness  of  form.  And  when  the  time  of  afternoon-prayers  arrived,
the  shop  was  quitted  by  the  people,  and  thereupon  the  Persian  accosted
Hasan,  and  said  to  him,  O  my  son,  thou  art  a  comely  young  man.
What  is  this  book  ?  I  have  not  a  son,  and  I  know  an  art  than  which
there  is  none  better  that  is  practised  in  the  world.  Numbers  of  people
have  asked  me  to  teach  it  them,  and  I  would  not  teach  it  to  any  one
of  them ;  but  my  soul  hath  consented  that  I  should  teach  it  to  thee,
and  make  thee  my  son,  and  put  a  barrier  between  thee  and  poverty ;
so  thou  shalt  rest  from  this  work  and  labouring  with  the  hammer  and
the  charcoal  and  the  fire. — Hasan  therefore  said  to  him,  O  my  master,
and  when  wilt  thou  teach  me  ?  He  replied,  To-morrow  I  will  come  to
thee,  and  will  make  for  thee,  of  copper,  pure  gold  in  thy  presence.

Upon  this,  Hasan  rejoiced,  and  he  bade  farewell  to  the  Persian,
and  went  to  his  mother.  He  entered,  and  saluted  her,  and  ate  with
her;  but  he  was  stupified,  without  memory  or  intellect.  So  his
mother  said  to  him,  What  is  the  matter  with  thee,  O  my  son  ?  Be-
ware of  listening  to  the  words  of  the  people ;  especially  the  Persians ;
and  comply  not  with  their  counsel  in  aught ;  for  these  people  are
great  deceivers,  who  know  the  art  of  alchemy,  and  trick  people,  and
take  their  wealth  and  devour  it  by  means  of  false  pretences. — But  he
replied,  0  my  mother,  we  are  poor  people,2  and  we  have  nothing  to  be
coveted,  that  any  one  should  trick  us.  A  Persian  hath  come  to  me ;
but  he  is  a  virtuous  sheykh,  bearing  marks  of  virtue,  and  God  hath
inclined  him  towards  me. — And  thereupon  his  mother  kept  silence
in  her  anger ;  and  her  son  became  busied  in  heart :  sleep  visited  him
not  that  night  by  reason  of  the  violence  of  his  joy  at  what  the  Persian
had  said  to  him.  And  when  the  morning  came,  he  rose,  took  the  keys,
and  opened  the  shop  ;  and,  lo,  the  Persian  approached  him.  So  he
rose  to  him,  and  desired  to  kiss  his  hands:  but  the  Persian  refused,
and  would  not  consent  to  his  doing  that ;  and  said,  O  Hasan,  prepare
the  crucible,  and  place  the  bellows.  He  therefore  did  as  the  Persian
ordered  him,  and  lighted  the  charcoal;  after  which  the  Persian  said
to  him,  O  my  son,  hast  thou  by  thee  any  copper  ?  He  answered,  I
in.  2  z


354


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OP  EL-BASRAH.


have  a  broken  plate.  And  he  ordered  him  to  press  upon  it  with  the
shears,  and  to  cut  it  into  small  pieces;  and  he  did  as  he  told  him.
He  cut  it  into  small  pieces,  and  threw  it  into  the  crucible,  and  blew
upon  it  with  the  bellows  until  it  became  liquid  ;  when  the  Persian
put  his  hand  to  his  turban,  and  took  forth  from  it  a  paper  folded  up,
which  he  opened,  and  he  sprinkled  some  of  its  contents  into  the  cru-
cible, as  much  as  half  a  drachm.  That  thing  resembled  yellow  kohl  :3
and  he  ordered  Hasan  to  blow  upon  it  with  the  bellows ;  and  he  did
as  he  ordered  him  until  the  contents  of  the  crucible  became  a  lump  of
gold.  So  when  Hasan  beheld  this,  he  was  stupified,  and  his  mind
was  confounded  by  reason  of  the  joy  that  he  experienced.  He  took
the  lump  and  turned  it  over,  and  he  took  the  file  and  filed  it,  and
saw  it  to  be  pure  gold, of  the  very  best  quality.  His  reason  fled,  and
he  was  stupified  in  consequence  of  the  violence  of  his  joy.  Then  he  bent
down  over  the  hand  of  the  Persian  to  kiss  it ;  and  the  Persian  said  to
him,  Take  this  lump,  and  go  down  with  it  into  the  market,  and  sell
it,  and  take  its  price  quickly,  without  speaking.  Accordingly  Hasan
went  down  into  the  market,  and  gave  the  lump  to  the  broker,  who
took  it  of  him,  andl-ubbed  it  [on  the  touchstone],  and  found  it  to  be
pure  gold.  They  opened  the  bidding  for  it  at  the  sum  of  ten  thousand

pieces  of  silver,  and
the  merchants  in-
creased their  offers
for  it  so  that  he  sold
it  for  fifteen  thou-
sand pieces  of  silver.
He  received  its
price,  and  went
home,  and  related
to  his  mother  all
that  he  had  done,
saying  to  her,  0  my
mother,  I  have  learnt
this  art.  But  she
laughed  at  him,  and
said,  There  is  no
strength  nor  power
but  in  God,  the  High,
the  Great !  And  she
kept  silence  in  her


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OB1  EL-BASRAH  355

anger.  Then  Hasan,  in  his  ignorance,  took  a  brass  mortar,  and  went
with  it  to  the  Persian,  who  was  sitting  in  the  shop,  and  put  it  before
him.  So  he  said  to  him,  0  my  son,  what  desirest  thou  to  do  with
this  mortar  ?  He  answered,  We  will  put  it  into  the  fire,  and  make  it
into  lumps  of  gold.  And  the  Persian  laughed,  and  said  to  him,  O  my
son,  art  thou  rnad,  that  thou  wouldst  go  down  into  the  market  with
two  lumps  in  one  day  ?  Knowest  thou  not  that  the  people  would
suspect  us,  and  that  our  lives  would  be  lost  ?  But,  O  my  son,  when
I  have  taught  thee  this  art,  do  not  thou  practise  it  in  a  year  more
than  once;  for  that  will  suffice  thee  from  year  to  year. — And  Hasan
replied,  Thou  hast  spoken  truth,  0  my  master.  Then  he  sat  in  the
shop,  and  put  on  the  crucible,  and  threw  the  charcoal  into  the  fire.
The  Persian  therefore  said  to  him,  0  my  son,  what  dost  thou  desire  ?
He  answered,  Teach  me  this  art.  But  the  Persian  laughed,  and
said,  There  is  no  strength  nor  power  but  in  God,  the  High,  the  Great !
Thou,  O  my  son,  art  of  little  sense.  Thou  art  not  suited  for  this
art  at  all.  Doth  any  one  in  his  life  learn  this  art  in  the  beaten  way,
or  in  the  markets  ?  For  if  we  occupy  ourselves  with  it  in  this  place,
the  people  will  say  of  us,  Verily  these  are  practising  alchemy  : — and
the  magistrates  will  hear  of  us,  and  our  lives  will  be  lost.  If  therefore,
O  my  son,  thou  desirest  to  learn  this  art,  repair  with  me  to  my  house.
— So  Hasan  arose,  and  closed  his  shop,  and  went  with  the  Persian.
But  while  he  was  on  the  way,  he  remembered  the  words  of  his  mother,
and  revolved  in  his  mind  a  thousand  thoughts;  and  he  stopped,
hanging  down  his  head  towards  the  ground  for  sometime;  where-
upon the  Persian  looked  aside,  and,  seeing  him  stopping,  laughed,
and  said  to  him,  Art  thou  mad  ?  How  is  it  that  I  purpose  in  my
heart  to  do  thee  good,  and  thou  imaginest  that  I  will  injure  thee  ?—
Then  the  Persian  said  to  him,  If  thou  be  afraid  to  go  with  me  to  my
house,  I  will  go  with  thee  to  thy  house,  and  will  teach  thee  there.
So  Hasan  replied,  Be  it  so,  0  uncle.  And  the  Persian  said  to  him,
Walk  before  me.

Hasan  therefore  went  on  before  him  to  his  abode,  and  the  Persian
followed  him  until  he  arrived  there,  when  Hasan  entered  his  house,
and  found  his  mother,  and  informed  her  of  the  Persian's  arrival  with
him,  while  the  Persian  stood  at  the  door.  So  she  furnished  for  them
the  chamber,  and  put  it  in  order,  and  when  she  had  finished  her  affair,
she  went  away.  Then  Hasan  gave  pel-mission  to  the  Persian  to  enter?
and  he  entered ;  and  Hasan,  having  taken  in  his  hand  a  plate,  went
with  it  to  the  market  to  bring  in  it  something  to  eat.  He  went  forth,


356  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OP  EL-BASRAH.

and  brought  some  food,  and  put  it  before  him,  saying  to  him,  Eat,  O
my  master,  that  the  bond  of  bread  and  salt  may  be  established  between
us ;  and  may  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !)  execute  vengeance  upon
him  who  is  unfaithful  to  the  bond  of  bread  and  salt !  And  the  Persian
said  to  him,  Thou  hast  spoken  truth,  O  my  son.  Then  he  smiled,
and  said,  O  my  son,  who  knoweth  the  due  estimation  of  bread  and
salt  ?4  And  the  Persian  advanced,  and  ate  with  Hasan  until  they
were  satisfied;  when  he  said  to  him,  O  my  son,  O  Hasan,  bring  for
us  some  sweetmeat.  Hasan  therefore  went  to  the  market,  and  brought
ten  cups 5  of  sweetmeat ;  and  he  was  rejoiced  at  the  words  of  the
Persian.  And  when  he  presented  to  him  the  sweetmeat,  he  ate  of  it,
and  Hasan  ate  with  him.  The  Persian  then  said  to  him,  May  God
recompense  thee  well,  O  my  son !  With  such  a  one  as  thou  art  should
men  associate,  and  him  should  they  acquaint  with  their  secrets,  and
teach  what  will  profit  him. — And  he  said,  0  Hasan,  bring  the  appa-
ratus. And  Hasan  scarcely  believed  these  words,  when  he  went  forth
like  the  colt  dismissed  to  the  spring-pasturage,  and  proceeded  until
he  arrived  at  the  shop,  and  he  took  the  apparatus  and  returned,  and
placed  it  before  him.  The  Persian  thereupon  took  forth  a  piece  of
paper,  and  said,  0  Hasan,  by  the  bread  and  salt,  wert  thou  not  dearer
than  my  son,  I  would  not  acquaint  thee  with  this  art.  There  re-
maineth  not  in  my  possession  aught  of  this  elixir  save  the  contents  of
this  paper.  But  observe  when  I  compound- the  simples  and  put  them
before  thee ;  and  know,  0  my  son,  O  Hasan,  that  thou  must  put,  to
every  ten  pounds  of  copper,  half  a  drachm  of  this  which  is  in  the
paper,  and  the  ten  pounds  will  become  pure,  unalloyed  gold. — Then
he  said  to  him,  0  my  son,  O  Hasan,  in  this  paper  are  three  ounces,
of  Egyptian  weight ;  and  after  the  contents  of  this  paper  are  exhausted,
I  will  make  for  thee  more.  And  Hasan  took  the  paper,  and  saw  in  it
something  yellow,  finer  than  the  first ;  and  he  said,  0  my  master,
what  is  the  name  of  this,  and  where  is  it  found,  and  in  what  is  it
made?  Upon  this,  the  Persian  laughed,  and  longed  to  get  possession
of  Hasan,  and  said  to  him,  Respecting  what  dost  thou  ask  ?  Do  the
work  and  be  silent. — And  he  took  forth  a  cup  belonging  to  the  house,
cut  it  up,  and  threw  it  into  the  crucible,  and  threw  upon  it  a  little  of
what  was  in  the  paper,  whereupon  it  became  a  lump  of  pure  gold.
So  when  Hasan  beheld  this,  he  rejoiced  exceedingly,  and  became  per-
plexed in  his  mind,  entirely  occupied  by  meditation  upon  that  lump
of  gold.

The  Persian  then  hastily  took  forth  a  packet  from  his  turban,  cut


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.

it  open,  and  put  it  into
a  piece  of  the  sweet-
meat, and  said  to  him,
O  Hasan,  thou  hast
become  my  son,  and
hast  become  dearer  to
me  than  my  soul  and
my  wealth,  and  I  have
a  daughter  to  whom  I
will  marry  thee.  Hasan
replied,  I  am  thy  page,
and  whatsoever  thou
dost  with  me,  it  will
be  a  deposit  with
God,  whose  name  be
exalted !  And  the
Persian  said,  0  my
son,  have  patience,
and  restrain  thyself,
and  good  fortune  will
betide  thee.  Then  he
handed  to  him  the  piece  of  sweetmeat,  and  he  took  it,  and  kissed  his
hand,  and  put  it  into  his  mouth,  not  knowing  what  was  secretly
decreed  to  befall  him.  He  swallowed  the  piece  of  sweetmeat,  and  his
head  sunk  down  before  his  feet,  and  he  became  lost  to  the  world;
and  when  the  Persian  saw  that  the  calamity  had  come  upon  him,
he  rejoiced  exceedingly.  Rising  upon  his  feet,  he  said  to  him,  Thou
hast  fallen  into  the  snare,  O  young  wretch  !  0  dog  of  the  Arabs !
For  many  years  have  I  been  searching  for  thee,  until  I  got  thee,  O
Hasan ! — He  then  girded  himself,  and  tied  Hasan's  hands  behind  his
back,  and  bound  his  feet  to  his  hands ;  after  which  he  took  a  chest,
emptied  it  of  the  things  that  were  in  it,  put  Hasan  into  it,  and  locked
it  upon  him.  He  emptied  also  another  chest,  and  put  into  it  all  the
wealth  that  was  in  Hasan's  abode,  with  the  lump  of  gold  that  he  had
made,  and,  having  locked  it,  he  went  forth  running  to  the  market,  and
brought  a  porter,  carried  off  the  two  chests,  and  drew  near  to  a  moored
vessel.  That  vessel  was  fitted  out  for  the  Persian,  and  her  master  was
expecting  him :  so  when  her  crew  saw  him,  they  came  to  him,  and
carried  the  two  chests,  and  put  them  on  board  the  ship.  The  Persian
then  cried  out  to  the  master  and  to  all  the  sailors,  saying  to  them


358  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.

Rise  ye !  The  affair  is  accomplished,  and  we  have  attained  our  .desire.
— The  master  therefore  cried  out  to  the  sailors,  and  said  to  them,  Pull
up  the  anchors,  and  loose  the  sails !  And  the  ship  proceeded  with  a
fair  wind. — Such  was  the  case  with  the  Persian  and  Hasan.

But  as  to  the  mother  of  Hasan,  she  remained  expecting  him  until
nightfall,  and  heard  no  sound  of  him  nor  any  tidings  whatever.  Then
she  came  to  the  house,  [which  she  had  quitted  after  the  Persian  had
come,]  and  saw  it  open,  and  beheld  not  in  it  any  one,  nor  found  the
chests  nor  the  wealth.  She  therefore  knew  that  her  son  was  lost,  and
that  fate  had  taken  effect  upon  him ;  and  she  slapped  her  face,  and
rent  her  garments,  cried  out  and  wailed,  and  began  to  say,  Oh,  my
son !  Oh,  the  delight  of  my  heart ! — And  she  recited  these  verses  : —

My  patience  hath  failed,  and  my  disquietude  is  excessive,  and  excessive  is  uiy  wail-
ing since  your  absence,  and  my  disease !

No  patience  is  left  to  me,  by  Allah,  since  you  quitted  me !  How  can  I  bear  the
loss  of  the  object  of  my  hope  ?

After  the  loss  of  my  beloved,  how  can  I  delight  in  sleep  ?  And  who  is  he  that  can
enjoy  a  life  of  abasement  ?

Thou  hast  gone,  and  made  the  house  and  its  family  desolate,  and  my  clear  draughts
thou  hast  rendered  turbid.

Thou  wast  mine  aid  in  every  adversity,  and  my  glory  and  my  honour  among  man-
kind, and  my  reliance.

Cancelled  be  the  day  whereon  thou  wast  taken  away  from  my  sight,  until  I  see
thee  return  to  me !

She  continued  to  weep  and  wail  till  the  morning,  when  the  neighbours
came  in  to  her,  and  asked  her  respecting  her  son,  and  she  informed
them  of  that  which  had  happened  to  him  with  the  Persian.  She  felt
certain  that  she  should  never  see  him  after  that,  and  went  about  the
house  weeping ;  and  while  she  thus  went  about,  lo,  she  saw  t\vo  lines
written  upon  the  wall :  wherefore  she  brought  a  Fakeeh,  who  read
them  to  her :  and  they  were  these  : —

Leyla's  phantom  came  by  night,  when  drowsiness  had  overcome  me,  towards
morning,  while  my  companions  were  sleeping  in  the  desert :

But  when  we  awoke  to  behold  the  nightly  phantom,  I  saw  the  air  vacant,  and  the
place  of  visitation  was  distant.6

So  when  the  mother  of  Hasan  heard  these  verses,  she  called  out  and
said,  Yes,  0  my  son  !  Verily  the  house  is  desolate,  and  the  place  of
visitation  is  distant ! — Then  the  neighbours  bade  her  farewell,  after
they  had  prayed  for  her  that  she  might  have  patience,  and  that  she
might  soon  experience  a  reunion,  and  departed.  But  the  mother  of
Hasan  ceased  not  to  weep  during  the  hours  of  the  night  and  the


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  359

periods  of  the  day ;  and  she  built  in  the  midst  of  the  house  a  tomb,
on  which  she  inscribed  the  name  of  Hasan,  with  the  date  of  his  loss.
She  quitted  not  that  tomb ;  and  such  was  her  habit  incessantly  from
the  time  that  her  son  was  separated  from  her.

Now  again  as  to  her  son  Hasan  with  the  Persian. — This  Persian
was  a  Magian :  he  hated  the  Muslims  greatly,  and  whenever  he  got
power  over  any  one  of  them,  he  destroyed  him.  He  was  a  wicked,
vile  alchemist,  such  as  the  poet  hath  thus  described : —

He  is  a  dog,  a  dog's  son,  and  a  dog  was  his  grandsire ;  and  no  good  is  in  a  dog,  the
issue  of  a  dog.

The  name  of  that  accursed  wretch  was  Bahram  the  Magian,  and  he
used  every  year  to  take  a  Muslim  and  to  slaughter  him  over  a  hidden
treasure.7  And  when  his  stratagem  was  accomplished  against  Hasan
the  goldsmith,  and  he  had  proceeded  with  him  from  the  commence-
ment of  day  until  night,  the  ship  moored  on  the  shore  till  morning ;
and  at  sunrise,  when  the  ship  continued  her  course,  the  Persian
ordered  his  black  slaves  and  his  pages  to  bring  to  him  the  chest  in
which  was  Hasan.  So  they  brought  it  to  him,  and  he  opened  it,  and
took  him  forth  from  it.  He  then  poured  some  vinegar  into  his  nostrils,
and  blew  a  powder  into  his  nose ;  whereupon  he  sneezed,  and  vomited
the  benj,  and,  opening  his  eyes,  he  looked  to  the  right  and  left,  and
found  himself  in  the  midst  of  the  sea,  the  ship  in  its  course,  and  the
Persian  sitting  by  him.  He  therefore  knew  that  it  was  a  stratagem
practised  against  him,  that  the  accursed  Magian  had  done  it,  and  that
he  had  fallen  into  the  calamity  against  which  his  mother  had  cautioned
him.  So  he  pronounced  the  words  of  which  the  utterer  is  secure
from  confusion,  and  which  are  these : — There  is  no  strength  nor
power  but  in  God,  the  High,  the  Great !  Verily  to  God  we  belong,
and  verily  unto  Him  we  return  !  0  Allah,  act  graciously  with  me  in
thine  appointment,  and  make  me  to  endure  with  patience  thine  afflic-
tion, 0  Lord  of  all  creatures ! — Then  looking  towards  the  Persian,  he
spoke  to  him  with  soft  words,  and  said  to  him,  O  my  father,  what  are
these  deeds,  and  where  is  thy  respect  for  the  bread  and  salt  and  for
the  oath  that  thou  sworest  to  me?  But  he  looked  at  him,  and  said
to  him,  0  dog,  doth  such  a  one  as  myself  know  an  obligation  imposed
by  bread  and  salt  ?  I  have  slain  a  thousand  youths  like  thee,  save
one  youth,  and  thou  shalt  complete  the  thousand. — And  he  cried  out
at  him  ;  so  he  was  silent,  and  ho  knew  that  the  arrow  of  fate  had
pierced  him.


360  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.

The  accursed  then  gave  orders  to  loose  his  bonds;  after  which
they  gave  him  to  drink  a  little  water,  while  the  Magian  laughed,  and
said,  By  the  fire  and  the  light  and  the  shade  and  the  heat,  I  did  not
imagine  that  thou  wouldest  fall  into  my  net ;  but  the  fire  strengthened
me  against  thee,  and  aided  me  to  seize  thee,  that  I  might  accomplish
my  affair,  and  return,  and  make  thee  a  sacrifice  to  it,  that  it  might
be  pleased  with  me.  So  Hasan  replied,  Thou  hast  been  unfaithful  to
the  bond  of  bread  and  salt.  And  upon  this  the  Magian  raised  his
hand  and  gave  him  a  blow,  arid  he  fell,  and  bit  the  deck  with  his
teeth,  and  fainted,  his  tears  running  down  his  cheek.  The  Magian
then  ordered  that  they  should  light  for  him  a  fire;  therefore  Hasan
said  to  him,  What  wilt  thou  do  with  it  ?  He  answered  him,  This  is
the  fire,  that  emitteth  light  and  sparks,  and  it  is  what  I  worship ;
and  if  thou  wilt  worship  it  as  I  do^I  will  give  thee  half  my  wealth,
and  many  to  thee  my  daughter.  But  Hasan  cried  out  at  him,  and
said  to  him,  Wo  to  thee  !  Thou  art  surely  an  infidel  Magian  :  thou
worshippest  the  fire  instead  of  the  Almighty  King,  the  Creator  of  the
night  and  the  day  ;  and  this  is  nought  but  an  evil  among  religions. —
And  thereupon  the  Magian  was  enraged,  and  said,  Wilt  thou  not
agree  with  me,  O  dog  of  the  Arabs,  and  embrace  my  religion  ?  But
Hasan  agreed  not  with  him  therein.  And  the  accursed  Magian  arose,
and  prostrated  himself  to  the  fire,  and  ordered  his  young  men  to
throw  Hasan  down  upon  his  face.  So  they  threw  him  down  upon
his  face,  and  the  Magian  proceeded  to  beat  him  with  a  whip  of  plaited
thongs  until  he  lacerated  his  sides,  while  he  cried  for  aid,  but  was  not
aided,  and  implored  protection,  but  none  protected  him ;  and  he
raised  his  eye  to  the  Avenging  King,  and  endeavoured  to  propitiate
Him  by  appealing  to  the  Chosen  Prophet.  He  had  lost  patience,  his
tears  ran  down  upon  his  cheeks  like  rain,  and  he  recited  these  two
verses  : —

I  will  endure  with  patience,  O  my  Lord,  what  Thou  hast  ordered. I  will  be

patient,  if  so  I  may  obtain  thine  approval.
They  have  tyrannized  over  us,  and  transgressed,  and  commanded. Perhaps,  in

thy  benificence,  Thou  wilt  pardon  what  is  past.

Then  the  Magian  ordered  the  slaves  to  make  him  sit,  and  to  bring
him  some  food  and  drink.  So  they  brought  it ;  but  he  would  not
eat  nor  drink.  The  Magian  proceeded  to  torture  him  night  and  day
during  the  voyage,  while  he  endured  with  patience,  and  humbled
himself  to  God  (to  whom  be  ascribed  might  and  glory  !) ;  and  the
heart  of  the  Magian  was  hardened  against  him.


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  361

They  ceased  not  to  pursue  their  voyage  over  the  sea  for  a  period
of  three  months,  during  which  Hasan  continued  to  suffer  torture  from
the  Magian  ;  but  when  the  three  months  were  completed,  God  (whose
name  be  exalted !)  sent  against  the  ship  a  wind,  and  the  sea  became
black,  and  tossed  the  ship  with  violence  by  reason  of  the  greatness  of
the  wind.  And  thereupon  the  master  and  the  sailors  said,  This,  by
Allah,  is  all  occasioned  by  the  crime  committed  against  this  young
man,  who  hath  been  for  three  months  Buffering  torment  from  this
Magian,  and  this  is  not  allowed  by  God,  whose  name  be  exalted!
Then  they  rose  against  the  Magian,  and  slew  his  young  men  and  all
who  were  with  him.  So  when  the  Magian  saw  that  they  had  slain  the
young  men,  he  made  sure  of  destruction,  and  feared  for  himself;
wherefore  he  loosed  Hasan  from  his  bonds,  pulled  off  from  him  the
tattered  garments  that  were  upon  him,  and  clad  him  with  others ;
and  he  made  peace  with  him,  promising  that  he  would  teach  him  the
art,  and  restore  him  to  his  country,  and  said  to  him,  0  my  son,  blame
me  not  for  that  which  I  have  done  unto  thee.  But  Hasan  said  to
him,  How  can  I  any  longer  rely  upon  thee  ?  He  rejoined,  O  my  son,
were  it  not  for  offence,  there  were  no  such  thing  as  pardon;  and  I
did  not  unto  thee  these  deeds  save  for  the  purpose  of  my  seeing  thy
patience ;  and  thou  knowest  that  the  case  is  wholly  in  the  hand  of
God.  The  sailors,  therefore,  and  the  master,  rejoiced  at  his  release,
and  Hasan  prayed  for  them,  and  praised  God  (whose  name  be
exalted  !),  and  thanked  him.  Then  the  winds  became  stilled,  the
darkness  was  withdrawn,  and  the  wind  and  the  voyage  became
pleasant.  And  Hasan  said  to  the  Magian,  0  Persian,  whither
repairest  thou  ?  He  answered,  0  my  son,  I  am  going  to  the  Moun-
tain of  the  Clouds,  on  which  is  the  elixir  wherewith  we  practise
alchemy.  And  the  Magian  swore  to  him  by  the  fire  and  the  light
that  he  no  longer  meditated  to  do  to  Hasan  aught  that  might  frighten
him.  So  the  heart  of  Hasan  was  comforted ;  he  was  rejoiced  at  the
words  of  the  Magian,  and  proceeded  to  eat  with  him,  and  drink  and
sleep ;  and  the  Magian  clad  him  with  his  own  apparel.

They  continued  their  voyage  for  three  months  more  ;  after  which,
the  vessel  moored  on  a  long  coast,  all  of  it  composed  of  pebbles,
white  and  yellow  and  blue  and  black  and  of  every  other  colour.  And
when  the  vessel  moored,  the  Persian  arose,  and  said,  0  Hasan,  arise
and  land ;  for  we  have  arrived  at  the  place  of  our  desire  and  our  wish.
So  Hasan  arose  and  landed  with  the  Persian,  and  the  Magian  charged
the  master  to  attend  to  his  affairs.  Then  Hasan  walked  on  with  the
in.  3  A


3B2


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.


Magian  until  they  were  far' from
the  ship,  and  had  disappeared  from
before  the  eyes  of  the  crew ;  where-
upon the  Magian  seated  himself,
and  took  forth  from  his  pocket  a
drum  of  copper,  and  a  plectrum 8  of
silk  worked  with  gold  and  bearing
talismans,  and  he  beat  the  drum ;
and  when  he  beat  it,  there  appeared
a  dust  from  the  further  part  of  the
desert.  Hasan  therefore  wondered
at  his  action,  and  feared  him  ;  and
he  repented  of  his  having  landed
with  him,  and  his  complexion
changed.  So  upon  this  the  Ma-
gian looked  at  him  and  said  to
him,  What  aileth  thee,  0  my  son  ?
By  the  fire  and  the  light,  thou
hast  nothing  to  fear  from  me;  and
were  it  not  that  my  affair  cannot  be
accomplished  save  by  thy  means,  I
had  not  brought  thee  out  from  the
ship.  Rejoice  at  the  prospect  of
every  thing  good.  This  dust  is  the
dust  occasioned  by  a  thing  that  we
shall  mount,  and  it  will  aid  us  to
cross  this  desert,  and  will  render  easy
unto  us  the  inconvenience  thereof. —
And  but  a  little  while  had  elapsed
when  the  dust  dispersed,  and  dis-
covered three  excellent  she-camels.
Then  the  Persian  mounted  one  of
them,  and  Hasan  mounted  one,
and  they  put  their  provisions  on
the  third ;  and  they  proceeded  for
seven  days,  after  which  they  came
to  an  extensive  tract ;  and  when  they  alighted  at  that  tract,  they
beheld  a  cupola  constructed  upon  four  columns  of  red  gold.  They
alighted  from  the  she-camels,  and,  having  entered  beneath  the  cupola,
ate  and  drank  and  rested :  and  Hasan  happened  to  look  aside,  and  he


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  363

saw  something  lofty  :  so  he  said  to  the  Magian,  What  is  this,  O  uncle  ?
The  Magian  answered,  This  is  a  palace.  And  Hasan  said  to  him,
Wilt  thou  not  arise  that  we  may  enter  it  to  rest  ourselves  in  it  and
to  divert  ourselves  with  the  sight  of  it  ?  But  the  Magian  upon  this
went  away,  saying  to  him,  Mention  not  to  me  this  palace ;  for  in  it  is
my  enemy,  and  with  him  there  happened  to  me  an  event  of  which  this
is  not  the  time  to  inform  thee.

Then  he  beat  the  drum,  and  the  she-camels  approached :  so  they
mounted ;  and  they  proceeded  for  seven  days  more ;  and  when  the
eighth  day  arrived,  the  Magian  said,  O  Hasan,  what  is  it  that  thou
seest  ?  Hasan  answered,  I  see  clouds  and  mists  between  the  east  and
the  west.  And  the  Magian  replied,  This  is  not  clouds  nor  mists ;  but
it  is  a  great,  lofty  mountain,  whereon  the  clouds  divide,  and  there  are
not  any  clouds  above  it,  on  account  of  its  excessive  height,  and  vast
elevation.  This  mountain  is  the  object  of  my  desire,  and  upon  it  is
that  which  we  want.  For  the  sake  of  this  I  brought  thee  with  me,  and
my  affair  will  be  accomplished  by  thy  means. — So  thereupon  Hasan
despaired  of  life.  He  then  said  to  the  Magian,  By  the  object  of  thy
worship,  and  by  what  thou  believest  in  thy  religion,  what  is  the  thing
on  account  of  which  thou  hast  brought  me  ?  And  he  answered  him,
The  art  of  alchemy  will  not  succeed  save  by  means  of  an  herb  that
groweth  in  the  place  where  the  clouds  pass,  and  on  which  they  are
separated ;  and  it  is  this  mountain  :  the  herb  is  upon  it ;  and  when
we  have  obtained  the  herb,  I  will  shew  thee  what  is  this  art.  And
Hasan  replied,  by  reason  of  his  fear,  Yes,  0  my  master.  He  had
despaired  of  life,  and  he  wept  on  account  of  his  separation  from  his
mother  and  his  family  and  his  home,  repenting  of  his  having  opposed
his  mother,  and  recited  these  two  verses : —

Consider  the  doings  of  thy  Lord,  how  happiness  cometh  unto  thee,  with  speedy

relief;
And  despair  not  when  thou  sufferest  affliction ;  for  how  many  wondrous  mercies

attend  affliction !

They  ceased  not  to  proceed  until  they  arrived  at  that  mountain,
and  stopped  beneath  it,  when  Hasan  saw  upon  that  mountain  a  palace :
so  he  said  to  the  Magian,  What  is  this  palace  ?  And  the  Magian
answered,  This  is  the  abode  of  the  Jann  and  the  Ghools  and  the
Devils.9  Then  the  Magian  alighted  from  his  camel,  and  ordered
Hasan  to  alight  also ;  and  he  came  to  him  and  kissed  his  head,  and
said  to  him,  Blame  me  not  for  that  which  'I  did  to  thee.  I  will


364  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.

preserve  thee  when  thou  ascendest  to  the  palace,  and  it  behooveth  thee
that  thou  be  not  dishonest  to  me  in  aught  of  that  which  thou  wilt
bring  thence :  I  will  share  it  with  thee  equally. — And  he  replied,  I
hear  and  obey.  The  Persian  then  opened  a  leathern  bag,  and  took  forth
from  it  a  mill,  and  he  also  took  forth  from  it  a  quantity  of  wheat,  and
ground  it  with  that  mill;  after  which  he  kneaded  the  flour,  and  made
of  it  three  round  cakes,  and  lighted  a  fire,  and  baked  the  cakes.  He
next  took  forth  the  copper  drum  and  the  figured  plectrum,  and  beat
the  drum;  whereupon  the  camels  came;  and  he  chose  one  of
them,  and  slaughtered  it,  and  stripped  off  its  skin.  Then  looking
towards  Hasan,  he  said  to  him,  Hear,  0  my  son,  0  Hasan,  what
I  charge  thee  to  do.  He  replied,  Well.  And  the  Magian  said,
Enter  this  skin,  and  I  will  sew  it  up  over  thee,  and  will  lay  thee
upon  the  ground;  thereupon  the  Rukh's10  will  come,  and  carry
thee  off,  and  fly  with  thee  to  the  summit  of  the  mountain.  And  take
thou  this  knife  with  thee,  and  when  the  birds  have  finished  their
flight,  and  thou  knowest  that  they  have  put  thee  upon  the  mountain,
cut  open  with  it  the  skin,  and  go  forth ;  for  the  birds  will  fear  thee
and  will  fly  away  from  thee ;  and  do  thou  look  down  to  me  from  the
summit  of  the  mountain,  and  speak  to  me,  that  I  may  inform  thee  of
that  which  thou  shalt  do. — He  then  prepared  for  him  the  three  cakes,
and  a  leathern  bottle  containing  water,  and  put  them  with  him  into
the  skin ;  after  which  he  sewed  it  up  over  him,  and  went  to  a  distance
from  him.  And  the  Rukh's  came,  and  carried  him  off,  flew  with  him
to  the  summit  of  the  mountain,  and  there  put  him  down.  So  when
Hasan  knew  that  they  had  put  him  upon  the  mountain,  he  cut  open  the
skin  and  came  forth  from  it,  and  spoke  to  the  Magian,  who,  on  hear-
ing his  words,  rejoiced,  and  danced  by  reason  of  the  violence  of  his
joy;  and  he  said  to  him,  Go  in  the  direction  to  which  thy  back  is
turned,  and  tell  me  what  thou  seest.  Hasan  therefore  went,  and  he
beheld  many  rotten  bones,  by  which  was  much  wood,  and  he  informed
him  of  all  that  he  saw  ;  upon  which  the  Magian  said,  This  is  the
object  of  desire  and  search.  Take  then,  of  the  wood,  six  bundles,
and  throw  them  down  to  me ;  for  this  wood  is  the  material  with
which  we  shall  perform  the  alchemical  process. — So  he  threw  down
to  him  the  six  bundles ;  and  when  the  Magian  saw  that  those
bundles  had  come  down  to  him,  he  said  to  Hasan,  O  young  wretch,
the  thing  that  I  desired  of  thee  hath  been  accomplished  ;  and  if  thou
wilt,  remain  upon  this  mountain,  or  cast  thyself  down  upon  the
ground  that  thou  mayest  perish.  Then  the  Magian  departed.11


Upon  this,  Hasan  exclaimed,  There  is  no  strength  nor  power  but
in  God,  the  High,  the  Great  !  This  dog  hath  circumvented  me ! — •
He  sat  wailing  for  himself,  and  recited  these  verses : —

When  God  willeth  an  event  to  befall  a  man  who  is  endowed  with  reason  and  hear-
ing and  sight,

He  deafeneth  his  ears,  and  blindeth  his  heart,  and  draweth  his  reason  from  him  as
a  hair,

Fill,  having  fulfilled  his  purpose  against  him,  He  restoreth  him  his  reason  that  he
may  be  admonished.

Then  say  not  of  an  event,  How  did  it  happen  ? — for  every  thing  happeneth  by  fate
and  destiny.12

He  then  stood  upon  his  feet,  and  looked  to  the  right  and  left,  and
walked  along  the  summit  of  the  mountain.  He  made  sure  of  his
death,  and  he  proceeded  to  walk  along  until  he  came  to  the  other  side
of  the  mountain,  when  he  saw,  by  the  side  of  the  mountain,  a  blue
sea,  agitated  with  waves ;  and  it  was  foamy,  and  every  wave  of  it  was
like  a  great  mountain.  Thereupon  he  sat,  and  recited  an  easy  portion
of  the  Kur-an,  and  begged  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !)  to  alleviate
his  trouble,  either  by  death,  or  by  deliverance  from  these  difficulties ;
after  which  he  recited  for  himself  the  funeral- praver.13  and  cast  him-


366  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.

self  into  the  sea.  The  waves,  however,  bore  him  along  safely,  by  the
will  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !),  until  he  came  forth  from  the
sea  safe,  by  the  decree  of  God.  So  he  rejoiced,  and  praised  God
(exalted  be  his  name !),  and  thanked  Him.

He  then  arose  and  walked  along  searching  for  something  to  eat ;
and  while  he  was  doing  thus,  lo,  he  came  to  the  place  where  he  was
with  Bahrain  the  Magian.  And  he  walked  on  a  while,  and  saw  a
great  palace,  rising  high  into  the  air.  He  therefore  went  to  it ;  and,
behold,  it  was  the  palace  respecting  which  he  asked  the  Magian,  and
of  which  he  said  to  him,  In  this  palace  is  my  enemy.  And  upon  this,
Hasan  said,  By  Allah,  I  must  enter  this  palace.  Perhaps  I  may
experience  relief  in  it. — And  when  he  came  to  it,  he  saw  its  door  open.
So  he  entered  the  door-way ;  and  he  saw  a  mastabah  in  the  entrance-
passage,  and  on  the  mastabah  two  damsels  like  two  moons,  with  a
chess-table  before  them,  and  they  were  playing ;  and  one  of  them,
raising  her  head  towards  him,  cried  out  by  reason  of  her  joy,  and  said,
By  Allah,  this  is  a  human  being,  and  I  imagine  that  he  is  the  person
whom  Bahrain  the  Magian  brought  this  year.  Therefore  when  Hasan
heard  her  words,  he  cast  himself  down  before  them,  and  wept  violently,
and  said,  O  my  mistresses,  I  am  that  poor  person.  And  upon  this
the  younger  damsel  said  to  her  sister  the  elder,  Bear  witness  against
me,  O  my  sister,  that  this  is  my  brother  by  a  covenant  and  compact
before  God,  and  that  I  will  die  for  his  death  and  live  for  his  life,  and
rejoice  for  his  joy  and  mourn  for  his  mourning.  Then  she  rose  to  him,
and  embraced  and  kissed  him,  and,  taking  him  by  his  hand,  led  him
into  the  palace,  her  sister  accompanying  her ;  and  she  pulled  off  from
him  the  tattered  clothing  that  was  upon  him,  and  brought  him  a  suit
of  royal  apparel,  with  which  she  clad  him.  She  also  prepared  for  him
viands  of  every  kind,  and  presented  them  to  him,  and  she  and  her
sister  sat  and  ate  with  him  ;  and  they  said  to  him,  Relate  to  us  thine
adventure  with  the  wicked  dog,  the  enchanter,  from  the  time  of  thy
falling  into  his  hands  to  the  time  of  thine  escape  from  him,  and  we  will
relate  to  thee  what  hath  happened  to  us  with  him  from  the  first  of  the
case  to  the  last,  that  thou  mayest  be  on  thy  guard  if  thou  see  him
again.  And  when  Hasan  heard  from  them  these  words,  and  saw  their
kind  reception  of  him,  his  soul  was  tranquillized,  and  his  reason  re-
turned to  him,  and  he  proceeded  to  relate  to  them  what  had  happened
to  him  with  the  Magian  from  first  to  last ;  whereupon  they  said  to  him,
Didst  thou  ask  him  respecting  this  palace  ?  He  answered,  Yes,  I  asked
him,  and  he  said  to  me,  I  like  not  the  mention  of  it ;  for  this- palace  be-


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  367

longeth  to  the  Devils  and  Demons.  So  the  two  damsels  were  violently
enraged,  and  said,  Did  this  infidel  call  us  Devils  and  Demons  ?  He
answered  them.  Yes.  And  the  younger,  the  sister  of  Hasan,  said,  By
Allah,  I  will  surely  slay  him  in  the  most  abominable  manner,  and  I
will  surely  deprive  him  of  the  air  of  the  world  ! — And  how,  said
Hasan,  wilt  thou  get  to  him  and  slay  him  ?  She  answered,  He  is  in
a  garden  called  El-Mesh eed,14  and  I  must  without  fail  slay  him  soon.
And  her  sister  said  to  her,  Hasan  hath  spoken  truth,  and  all  that
he  hath  said  of  this  dog  is  true  :  but  relate  to  him  our  whole  story,
that  it  may  remain  in  his  memory.  So  the  young  damsel  said, —

Know,  0  my  brother,  that  we  are  of  the  daughters  of  the  Kings.
Our  father  is  one  of  the  Kings  of  the  Jaun,  of  great  dignity,  and  he
hath  troops  and  guards  and  servants,  consisting  of  Marids;  and
God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !)  hath  blessed  him  with  seven  daughters
by  one  wife ;  but  such  folly  and  jealousy  and  pride  as  cannot  be  sur-
passed affected  him,  so  that  he  married  us  not  to  any  one.  Then  he
summoned  his  wezeers  and  his  companions,  and  said  to  them,  Do  ye
know  any  place  for  me  that  no  one  can  invade,  neither  any  of  mankind
nor  any  of  the  Jinn,  and  that  aboundeth  with  trees  and  fruits  and
rivers  ?  So  they  said  to  him,  What  wouldst  thou  do  there,  O'King  of
the  age  ?  He  answered,  I  desire  to  place  in  it  my  seven  daughters.
And  thereupon  they  said  to  him,  0  King,  the  Palace  of  the  Mountain
of  the  Clouds,  which  an  'Efreet  of  the  refractory  Jinn  who  stubbornly
disobeyed  the  vow  exacted  by  Suleyman  (on  whom  be  peace  !)  founded,
and  which  palace,  after  that  'Efreet  perished,  none  inhabited  after
him,  neither  any  of  the  Jinn  nor  any  of  mankind,  will  be  suitable  for
them ;  for  it  is  separated  from  the  rest  of  the  world.  None  gaineth
access  to  it;  and  around  it  are  trees  and  fruits  and  rivers,  and  around
it  is  running  water  sweeter  than  honey  and  colder  than  snow  :  no  one
having  the  leprosy  or  elephantiasis  or  other  diseases  ever  drank  of  it
without  being  cured  immediately. — So  when  our  father  heard  of  this,
he  sent  us  to  this  palace,  and  sent  with  us  soldiers  and  troops,  and
collected  for  us  what  we  require  in  it.  He  used,  when  he  desired  to
ride,  to  beat  the  drum ;  whereupon  all  the  troops  presented  themselves
to  him,  and  he  chose  whom  of  them  he  would  mount,  and  the  rest
departed.  And  when  our  father  desireth  that  we  should  visit  him,  he
ordereth  the  enchanters  his  dependants  to  bring  us,  and  they  come  to
us  and  take  us  and  convey  us  to  his  presence,  that  he  may  cheer  him-
self by  our  society,  and  that  we  may  accomplish  our  desires  by  seeing
him  :  then  he  sendeth  us  back  to  our  place.  We  have  five  sisters,  who


368  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASK  AH.

have  gone  to  hunt  in  this  adjacent  desert ;  for  in  it  are  wild  beasts
that  cannot  be  numbered  nor  calculated.  Each  two  of  us  have  their
turn  to  remain  at  home  for  the  purpose  of  cooking  the  food,  and  the
turn  came  to  us,  me  and  this  my  sister;  therefore  we  remained  to
cook  for  them  the  food  ;  and  we  were  begging  God  (whose  perfection
be  extolled,  and  whose  name  be  exalted !)  that  He  would  bless  us  with
a  human  being  to  cheer  us  by  his  company.  Then  praise  be  to  God
who  hath  brought  thee  unto  us  !  And  do  thou  be  of  good  heart  and
cheerful  eye.  No  harm  shall  befall  thee.

So  Hasan  rejoiced,  and  said,  Praise  be  to  God  who  hath  guided
us  to  the  way  of  deliverance,  and  hath  moved  hearts  with  affection  and
compassion  for  us !  Then  his  sister  arose,  and  took  him  by  his  hand,
led  him  into  a  private  chamber,  and  brought  out  from  it  linen  and
furniture  such  as  no  creature  could  procure.  And  after  a  while,  their
sisters  returned  from  the  chase,  and  they  acquainted  them  with  the
case  of  Hasan  ;  whereupon  they  rejoiced  at  his  arrival,  and,  coming  in
to  him  in  the  private  chamber,  they  saluted  him,  and  congratulated
him  on  his  safety.  He  remained  with  them,  passing  the  most  plea-
sant life,  and  enjoying  the  most  agreeable  happiness ;  and  he  used  to
go  forth  with  them  to  the  chase,  and  slaughter  the  game.  Thus
Hasan  became  familiar  with  them,  and  he  ceased  not  to  reside  with
them  in  this  condition  until  his  body  became  healthy,  and  he  recovered
from  the  state  in  which  he  was ;  his  frame  was  invigorated,  and  he
became  stout  and  fat,  by  reason  of  the  generous  treatment  that  he
enjoyed,  and  his  residence  with  them  in  that  place.  He  amused  and
diverted  himself  with  them  in  that  decorated  palace,  and  in  all  the
gardens  and  among  the  flowers,  while  they  treated  him  with  courtesy,
and  cheered  him  with  discourse,  and  his  sadness  ceased.  The  damsels
became  exceedingly  joyful  and  happy  in  his  society,  and  he  rejoiced
in  their  society  more  than  they  rejoiced  in  him.  And  afterwards,  his
sister,  the  young  damsel,  related  to  her  sisters  the  story  of  Bahram
the  Magian,  telling  them  that  he  had  called  them  Devils  and  Demons
and  Ghools ;  whereupon  they  swore  to  her  that  he  should  surely  be
slain.

Then,  in  the  following  year,  the  accursed  came,  having  with  him
a  comely  young  man,  a  Muslim,  resembling  the  moon,  shackled,  and
tortured  in  the  most  cruel  manner ;  and  he  alighted  with  him  beneath
the  palace  where  Hasan  introduced  himself  to  the  damsels.  Now
Hasan  was  sitting  by  the  river,  beneath  the  trees ;  and  when  he
beheld  the  Magian,  his  heart  palpitated,  his  complexion  changed,  and


THE  STORY  OP  HASAN  OP  EL-BASRAH.


369


he  struck  his  hands  together,  and  said  to  the  damsels,  By  Allah,  O
my  sisters,  aid  me  to  slay  this  accursed  wretch  ;  for  here  he  hath  come,
and  lie  hath  fallen  into  your  hands,  and  with  him  is  a  young  Muslim,
a  captive,  of  the  sons  of  the  great,  whom  he  is  torturing  with  varieties
of  painful  torture.  I  desire  to  slay  him,  that  I  may  heal  my  soul  by
taking  vengeance  upon  him,  that  I  may  also  release  this  young  man
from  his  torture,  and  gain  the  recompense  thereof  [from  God],  and
that  the  young  Muslim  may  return  to  his  home,  and  be  reunited  to
his  brethren  and  his  family  and  friends.  That  action  will  be  as  an
alms  proceeding  from  you,  and  he  will  acquire  the  reward  thereof  from
God,  whose  name  be  exalted! — And  the  damsels  replied,  We  hear  and
obey  God  and  thee,  O  Hasan.  They  then  threw  lithams  over  their
faces,  equipped  themselves  with  the  implements  of  war,  and  slung  on
the  swords ;  and  they  brought  to  Hasan  a  courser  of  the  best  breed,
furnished  him  with  complete  accoutrements,  and  armed  him  with
beautiful  weapons.  Having  done  this,  they  proceeded  all  together;
and  they  found  that  the  Magian  had  slaughtered  a  camel  and  skinned
it,  and  was  tormenting  the  young  man,  and  saying  to  him,  Enter  this
skin.  So  Hasan  came  behind  him,  while  the  Magian  knew  not  of
his  presence,  and  cried  out  at  him,  so  that  he  stupified  and  con-
founded him.  Then,  advancing  to  him,  he  said  to  him,  Withhold  thy
hand,  0  accursed  !  O  enemy  of  God,  and  enemy  of  the  Muslims !  O
dog !  O  perfidious  wretch !  O  worshipper  of  fire !  0  pursuer  of  the
way  of  the  wicked,  who  worshippest  the  fire  and  the  light,  and  swearest
by  the  shade  and  the  heat ! — The  Magian  therefore  looked  aside,  and,
seeing  Hasan,  he  said  to  him,  0  my  son,  how  didst  thou  escape,  and
who  brought  thee  down  to  the  ground  ?  Hasan  answered  him,  God


3  B


370  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.

delivered  me  :  He  who  hath  caused  thy  life  to  be  taken  by  the  hands
of  thine  enemies.  As  thou  torturedst  me  all  the  way,  O  infidel !  O
impious  wretch !  thou  hast  fallen  into  affliction,  and  turned  aside  from
the  way ;  and  neither  mother  shall  profit  thee,  nor  brother  nor  friend,
nor  firm  covenant ;  for  thou  saidst,  Whoso  shall  be  unfaithful  to  the
bond  of  bread  and  salt,  may  God  execute  vengeance  upon  him  ! — and
thou  hast  been  unfaithful  to  the  bond  of  bread  and  salt;  wherefore
God  hath  thrown  thee  into  my  power,  and  thy  deliverance  from  me
hath  become  remote. — Upon  this,  the  Magian  said  to  him,  By  Allah,
O  my  son,  thou  Art  dearer  in  my  estimation  than  my  soul  and  than
the  light  of  mine  eye !  But  Hasan  advanced  to  him,  and  quickly
smote  him  upon  his  shoulders  so  that  the  sword  came  forth  glittering
from  his  vitals,  and  God  hurried  his  soul  to  the  fire;  a  miserable
abode!  Then  Hasan  took  the  leathern  bag  that  was  with  him,  and
opened  it,  and  having  taken  forth  from  it  the  drum  and  the  plectrum,
beat  with  this  the  drum;  whereupon  the  camels  came  to  him  like
lightning;  and  he  loosed  the  young  man  from  his  bonds,  mounted
him  upon  a  camel,  on  which  he  put  for  him  the  remaining  food  and
water,  and  said  to  him,  Repair  to  the  place  of  thy  desire.  He  there-
fore departed,  after  God  had  thus  delivered  him  from  his  affliction  by
the  hand  of  Hasan.  Then  the  damsels,  when  they  had  seen  Hasan
smite  the  neck  of  the  Magian,  rejoiced  in  him  greatly ;  and  they  came
round  him,  wondering  at  his  courage  and  his  exceeding  intrepidity,
and  thanked  him  for  that  which  he  had  done,  congratulated  him  on
his  safety,  and  said  to  him,  0  Hasan,  thou  hast  done  a  deed  by  which
thou  hast  healed  the  sick,  and  pleased  the  Glorious  King.  And  he
and  the  damsels  returned  to  the  palace.

He  remained  with  them,  eating  and  drinking,  and  sporting  and
laughing.  His  residence  with  them  was  pleasant  to  him,  and  he  forgot
his  mother.  But  while  he  was  with  them,  passing  the  most  delightful
life,  there  came  towards  them  a  great  dust  from  the  further  part  of  the
desert,  whereby  the  sky  was  darkened.  So  the  damsels  said  to  him,
Arise,  0  Hasan,  and  enter  thy  private  chamber,  and  conceal  thyself;
or,  if  thou  wilt,  enter  the  garden,  and  hide  thyself  among  the  trees
and  the  grape-vines ;  and  no  harm  shall  befall  thee.  And  he  arose  and
went  in  and  concealed  himself  in  his  private  chamber,  having  closed
the  door  upon  him,  within  the  palace.  And  after  a  while,  the  dust
dispersed,  and  there  appeared  beneath  it  numerous  encumbered  troops,
like  the  roaring  sea,  approaching  from  the  King  the  father  of  the
damsels.  When  the  troops  arrived,  the  damsels  lodged  them  in  the


THE  STORY  OP  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  371

best  manner,  and  entertained  them  during  three  days ;  after  which  the
damsels  asked  them  respecting  their  state  and  their  tidings ;  and  they
replied,  We  have  come  from  the  King  to  summon  you.  So  the
damsels  said  to  them,  And  what  doth  the  King  desire  of  us  ?  One
of  them  answered,  One  of  the  Kings  celebrateth  a  marriage-festivity,
and  he  desireth  that  ye  should  be  present  at  that  festivity,  that  ye
may  divert  yourselves. — And  how  long,  said  the  damsels,  shall  we  be
absent  from  our  place  ?  They  answered,  The  time  of  going  and
coming,  and  a  residence  of  two  months.  The  damsels  therefore  arose,
and,  entering  the  palace,  went  in  to  Hasan,  and  acquainted  him  with
the  case,  and  they  said  to  him,  Verily  this  place  is  thy  place,  and  our
house  is  thy  house ;  so  be  of  good  heart  and  cheerful  eye,  and  fear  not
nor  grieve ;  for  no  one  can  gain  access  to  us  in  this  place.  Then  be
of  tranquil  heart  and  joyful  mind  until  we  come  to  thee  again.  These
keys  of  our  private  chambers  we  leave  with  thee;  but,  0  our  brother,
we  beg  thee  by  the  bond  of  brotherhood  that  thou  open  not  this
door,  [pointing  to  one  of  the  doors,]  for  thou  hast  no  need  of  opening
it. — Then  they  bade  him  farewell,  and  departed  in  company  with  the
troops.

So  Hasan  remained  in  the  palace  alone.  His  bosom  was  con-
tracted, and  his  patience  became  exhausted,  his  affliction  was  excessive,
and  he  was  sad,  mourning  for  their  separation  greatly ;  the  palace,
notwithstanding,  its  amplitude,  was  strait  unto  him,  and  when  he  found
himself  solitary  and  sad,  he  reflected  upon  the  damsels,  and  recited
these  verses : —

The  whole  plain  hath  become  contracted  in  mine  eye,  and  my  heart  altogether

is  troubled  by  the  view  of  it.
Since  the  objects  of  my  love  departed,  my  joy  hath  been  disturbed,  and  the  tears

have  overflowed  from  mine  eyes,
And  sleep  hath  quitted  mine  eye  on  account  of  their  separation,  and  my  whole

mind  hath  been  perturbed.
Will  fortune  reunite  us,  and  shall  I  again  enjoy  intimacy  with  them,  and  nightly

conversation  ?

He  used  to  go  alone  to  hunt  in  the  deserts,  and  bring  back  the  game
and  slaughter  it,  and  eat  alone.  His  gloominess  and  disquietude,  on
account  of  his  solitariness,  became  excessive.  So  he  arose  and  went
about  through  the  palace,  examined  every  part  of  it,  and  opened  the
private  chambers  of  the  damsels,  and  he  saw  in  them  riches  such  as
would  ravish  the  minds  of  beholders.  But  he  delighted  not  in  aught
thereof,  by  reason  of  the  absence  of  the  damsels ;  and  a  fire  burned  in


372  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.

his  heart  on  account  of  the  door  which  his  sister  had  charged  him  not
to  open,  and  respecting  which  she  commanded  him  that  lie  should  not
go  near  to  it,  nor  ever  open  it.  He  said  within  himself,  My  sister  did
not  charge  me  not  to  open  this  door  save  because  within  it  is  a  thing
with  which  she  desireth  that  no  one  should  become  acquainted.  By
Allah,  I  will  arise  and  open  it,  and  see  what  is  within  it,  though
within  may  be  death. — Accordingly,  he  took  the  key,  and  opened  it,
and  he  saw  in  it  no  riches ;  but  he  saw  in  it  a  flight  of  stairs  at  the
upper  end  of  the  place,  vaulted  with  stones  of  the  onyx  of  El- Yemen ;
and  he  ascended  those  atairs,  and  went  up  until  he  arrived  at  the  roof
of  the  palace,  saying  within  himself,  This  is  what  she  forbade  me  to
visit.15  He  then  went  about  the  top  of  the  palace,  and  he  looked  down
upon  a  place  beneath  it  entirely  occupied  by  sown  fields,  and  gardens
and  trees  and  flowers,  and  wild  beasts,  and  birds  which  were  warbling
and  proclaiming  the  perfection  of  God,  the  One,  the  Omnipotent.  He
gazed  upon  those  places  of  diversion,  and  saw  a  roaring  sea,  agitated
with  waves ;  and  he  ceased  not  to  go  round  about  the  palace,  on  the
right  and  left,  until  he  came  to  a  pavilion  upon  four  columns,  in  which
he  saw  a  mak'ad  decorated  with  all  kinds  of  stones,  such  as  the  jacinth
and  the  emerald  and  the  balass-ruby,  and  various  other  jewels.  It
was  built  with  one  brick  of  gold  and  another  brick  of  silver  and  another
brick  of  jacinth  and  another  brick  of  emerald;  and  in  the  midst
of  that  pavilion  was  a  pool  full  of  water,  over  which  was  a  trellis  of
sandal-wood  and  aloes-wood,  reticulated  with  bars  of  red  gold  and
oblong  emeralds,  and  adorned  with  varieties  of  jewels  and  pearls,
every  bead  of  which  was  of  the  size  of  a  pigeon's  egg.  Also  by  the
side  of  the  pool  was  a  couch  of  aloes-wood  adorned  with  large  pearls
and  with  jewels,  reticulated  with  red  gold,  and  comprising  all  kinds  of
coloured  gems  and  precious  minerals,  set  so  as  to  correspond,  one  with
another.  Around  it  the  birds  warbled  with  various  tongues,  pro-
claiming the  perfection  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !)  by  the
sweetness  of  their  notes  and  the  diversity  of  their  tongues ;  and  the
like  of  this  palace  neither  a  Kisra.  nor  a  Caesar  ever  possessed.  So
Hasan  was  amazed  when  he  beheld  it,  and  he  sat  in  it,  looking  at
what  was  around  it.

And  while  he  sat  in  it,  wondering  at  the  beauty  of  its  construction,
and  at  the  lustre  of  the  large  pearls  and  the  jacinths  that  it  comprised,
and  at  all  the  artificial  works  that  it  contained,  wondering  also  at  those
sown  fields,  and  at  the  birds  that  proclaimed  the  perfection  of  God,
the  One,  the  Omnipotent,  and  contemplating  the  memorials  of  him


THE  STOUY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  373

whom  God  (exalted  be  his  name !)  enabled  to  construct  this  pavilion
(for  he  was  of  mighty  condition),  lo,  he  beheld  ten  birds,  which
approached  from  the  direction  of  the  desert,  coming  to  that  pavilion
and  that  pool.  Hasan  therefore  knew  that  they  sought  the  pool  to  drink
of  its  water :  so  he  concealed  himself  from  them,  fearing  that  they
would  see  him  and  fly  from  him.  They  then  alighted  upon  a  great,
beautiful  tree,  and  they  went  around  it:  and  he  saw  among  them  a
great  and  beautiful  bird,  the  handsomest  among  them  ;  and  the  rest
encompassed  it  and  attended  it  as  servants;  whereat  Hasan  \vondered.
That  bird  began  to  peck  the  nine  others  with  its  bill,  and  to  behave
proudly  towards  them,  and  they  fled  from  it,  while  Hasan  stood  divert-
ing himself  with  the  sight  of  them  from  a  distance.  Then  they  seated
themselves  upon  the  couch,  and  each  of  them  rent  open  its  skin  with
its  talons,  and  came  forth  from  it ;  and,  lo,  it  was  a  dress  of  feathers.
There  came  forth  from  the  dresses  ten  damsels,  virgins,  who  shamed  by
their  beauty  the  lustre  of  the  moon  j  and  when  they  had  divested  them-
selves, they  all  descended  into  the  pool,  and  washed,  and  proceeded
to  play  and  to  jest  together ;  the  bird  who  surpassed  the  others  throw-
ing them  down  and  plunging  them,  and  they  fleeing  from  her,  and
unable  to  put  forth  their  hands  to  her.  When  Hasan  beheld  her,  he
lost  his  reason,  and  his  mind  was  captivated,  and  he  knew  that  the
damsels  forbade  him  not  to  open  the  door  save  on  this  account.  He
became  violently  enamoured  of  her  by  reason  of  what  he  beheld  of  her
beauty  and  loveliness  and  her  stature  and  justness  of  form,  while  she
was  sporting  and  jesting,  and  they  were  sprinkling  one  another  with
the  water.  Hasan  stood  looking  at  them,  sighing  that  he  was  not
with  them ;  his  mind  was  perplexed  by  the  beauty  of  the  young
damsel,  his  heart  was  entangled  in  the  snare  of  her  love,  and  he  had
fallen  into  the  snare :  the  eye  was  looking,  and  in  the  heart  a  fire  was
burning ;  for  the  soul  is  prone  to  evil.  He  wept  with  desire  by  reason
of  her  beauty  and  loveliness,  fires  were  shot  into  his  heart  on  her  ac-
count, a  flame  of  which  the  sparks  could  not  be  extinguished  increased
in  him,  and  a  desire  of  which  the  signs  could  not  be  hidden.16

Then,  after  that,  the  damsels  came  up  from  the  pool,  while  Hasan
stood  looking  at  them  ;  but  they  saw  him  not ;  and  he  was  wondering
at  their  beauty  and  loveliness  and  gracefulness  and  elegance.  And
when  they  came  foj-th  from  the  water,  each  of  them  put  on  her  dress
and  ornaments.  The  chief  damsel  put  on  a  green  dress,  and  surpassed
in  her  loveliness  the  beauties  of  the  world,  and  the  lustre  of  her  face
outshone  the  bright  full  moon  :  she  surpassed  the  branches  in  the


beauty  of  her  bending  motions,  and  confounded  the  minds  with  appre-
hension of  incurring  calumny.  The  damsels  then  sat  conversing  and
laughing  together,  while  Hasan  still  stood  looking  at  them,  drowned
in  the  sea  of  his  passion,  and  bewildered  in  the  valley  of  his  solicitude,
and  he  said  within  himself,  By  Allah,  my  sister  said  not  to  me,  Open
not  this  door — save  on  account  of  these  damsels,  and  in  fear  of  my
becoming  enamoured  of  one  of  them.  He  continued  to  gaze  at  the
beauties  of  the  chief  damsel,  who  was  the  most  lovely  person  that  God
had  created  in  her  time,  surpassing  in  her  beauty  all  human  beings.
She  had  a  mouth  like  the  seal  of  Suleyman,17  and  hair  blacker  than
the  night  of  estrangement  is  to  the  afflicted  and  distracted  lover,  and
a  forehead  like  the  new  moon  of  the  Festival  of  Ramadan,18  and  eyes
resembling  the  eyes  of  the  gazelles,  and  an  aquiline  nose  brightly
shining,  and  cheeks  like  anemones,  and  lips  like  coral,  and  teeth  like
pearls  strung  on  necklaces  of  native  gold,  and  a  neck  like  molten
silver,  above  a  figure  like  a  willow-branch. — The  damsels  ceased  not
to  laugh  and  sport,  while  he  stood  upon  his  feet  looking  at  them,  and


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  KL-BASRAH.  375

forgot  food  and  drink,  until  the  time  of  afternoon-prayer  drew  near,
when  the  chief  damsel  said  to  her  companions,  O  daughters  of  Kings,
the  time  hath  become  late  to  us,  and  our  country  is  distant,  and  we
are  tired  of  staying  here.  Arise,  therefore,  that  we  may  depart  to
our  place. — Accordingly  each  of  them  arose,  and  put  on  her  dress  of
feathers ;  and  when  they  were  enveloped  in  their  dresses,  they  became
birds  as  they  were  at  first,  and  all  flew  away  together,  the  chief  damsel
being  in  the  midst  of  them.

Hasan  therefore  despaired  of  them,  and  he  desired  to  rise  and
descend  from  his  place ;  but  he  could  not  rise.  His  tears  ran  down
upon  his  cheek,  and  his  desire  became  violent,  and  he  recited  these
verses : — -

May  Allah  deny  me  the  accomplishment  of  my  vow,  if  after  your  absence  I  know

pleasant  sleep,
Anil  may  my  eyes  not  be  closed  after  your  separation,  nor  rest  delight  me  after

your  departure !
It  would  seem  to  me  as  though  I  saw  you  in  sleep :  and  would  that  the  visions

of  sleep  might  be  real !
I  love  sleep,  though  without  requiring  it ;  for  perhaps  a  sight  of  you  might  be

granted  in  a  dream.

Then  he  walked  a  little,  but  without  being  led  aright,  until  he  de-
scended to  the  lower  part  of  the  palace ;  and  he  ceased  not  to  drag
himself  along  in  a  sitting  posture  till  he  came  to  the  door  of  the
private  chamber ;  whereupon  he  passed  through,  and  locked  it  after
him ;  and  he  lay  upon  his  side,  sick,  neither  eating  nor  drinking.  He
was  drowned  in  the  sea  of  his  solicitudes,  and  he  wept  and  lamented
for  himself  until  the  morning,  when  he  recited  these  verses : —

As  birds  they  flew  away  in  the  evening,  and  cried  out. And  he  who  dieth  of

love  is  not  culpable.19
• I  will  keep  my  passion  secret  while  I  can ;  but  if  violent  desire  overcome  me,  it

will  appear.
The  phantom  of  her  whose  face  is  like  the  morning  came  at  night ;  and  the  night

of  my  desire  hath  no  dawn.
I  bemoan  her,  while  they  sleep  who  are  free  from  love  ;  and  the  winds  of  desire

have  made  sport  with  me.
I  have  been  liberal  of  my  tears  and  my  wealth  and  my  heart  and  my  reason  and"

my  soul;  and  liberality  is  gain.
The  worst  of  all  kinds  of  evil  and  vexation  is  hostility  experienced  from  beautiful

damsels.
They  say  it  is  forbidden  for  the  beauties  to  shew  favour,  and  that  the  shedding

of  the  blood  of  lovers  is  lawful,
And  that  the  love-sick  can  do  nought  but  sacrifice  his  soul,  and  liberally  forfeit

it  in  love,  which  is  a  game.20
I  cry  out  in  my  longing  and  ardour  for  the  beloved ;  and  all  that  the  distracted

can  do  is  to  moan.


And  when  the  sun  rose,  he  opened  the  door  of  the  private  chamber,
and  ascended  to  the  place  in  which  he  was  before,  and  sat  before  the
mak'ad21  until  the  approach  of  night ;  but  not  one  of  the  birds  came
while  he  sat  expecting  them.  So  he  wept  violently,  till  he  fainted,  and
fell  prostrate  upon  the  ground ;  and  when  he  recovered  from  his  fit,
he  dragged  himself  along  in  a  sitting  posture,  and  descended  to  the
lower  part  of  the  palace.  The  night  had  come,  and  the  whole  world
was  strait  unto  him,  and  he  ceased  not  to  weep  and  lament  for  himself
all  the  night  until  the  morning  came  and  the  sun  rose  over  the  hills
and  the  lowlands.  He  ate  not  nor  drank  nor  slept,  nor  had  he  any
rest :  during  the  day  he  was  perplexed,  and  during  the  night  sleepless,
confounded,  intoxicated  by  his  solicitude,  expressing  the  violence  of
his  desire  in  some  verses  of  a  distracted  poet.

Now  while  he  was  in  this  violent  state  of  distraction  by  reason  of
his  passion,  lo,  a  dust  rose  from  the  desert;  whereupon  he  arose  and
ran  down  and  hid  himself.  He  knew  that  the  mistresses  of  the  palace
had  come,  and  but  a  little  while  had  elapsed  when  the  troops  alighted,
and  encompassed  the  palace.  The  seven  damsels  also  alighted,  and
they  entered  the  palace,  and  took  off  their  arms  and  all  the  implements
of  war  that  were  upon  them,  except  the  youngest  damsel,  his  sister,
who  took  not  off  the  implements  of  war  that  were  upon  her,  but  came
to  the  private  chamber  of  Hasan ;  and  she  saw  him  not.  So  she
searched  for  him,  and  found  him  in.  one  of  the  closets,  infirm  and  lean ;
Jiis  body  had  become  languid  and  his  bones  were  wasted,  his  com-
plexion had  become  sallow  and  his  eyes  were  sunk  in  his  face,  in  con-
sequence of  the  little  food  and  drink  that  he  had  taken,  and  the
abundance  of  his  tears  by  reason  of  his  attachment  to  the  damsel,  and
his  passion  for  her.  Therefore  when  his  sister  the  Jinneeyeh  saw  him
in  this  state,  she  was  confounded,  and  her  reason  quitted  her,  and  she
asked  him  respecting  his  condition,  and  the  state  in  which  he  was,
and  what  had  befallen  him,  saying  to  him,  Inform  me,  O  my  brother,


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OP  EL-BASRAH.  377

that  I  may  devise  some  stratagem  for  thce  to  remove  thine  affliction,
and  I  will  be  thy  ransom.  And  upon  this,  he  wept  violently,  and
recited  thus : —

The  lover,  when  his  beloved  is  separated  from  him,  hath  nothing  except  sorrow

and  affliction :
Within  him  is  disease,  and  without  is  burning:  the  beginning  is  remembrance,

and  the  end  is  solicitude.

So  when  his  sister  heard  these  his  words,  she  wondered  at  his  eloquence
and  his  fluency  of  speech,  and  at  his  beauty  of  expression  and  his
replying  to  her  in  verse ;  and  she  said  to  him,  O  my  brother,  when
didst  thou  fall  into  this  predicament  in  which  thou  art,  and  when  did
this  happen  to  thee  ?  For  I  see  thee  speak  in  verses,  and  shed  copious
tears.  I  conjure  thee  by  Allah,  0  my  brother,  and  by  the  sacred
nature  of  the  love  that  existeth  between  us,  that  thou  inform  me  of
thy  state,  and  acquaint  me  with  thy  secret,  and  conceal  not  from  me
aught  of  that  which  hath  befallen  thee  during  our  absence  ;  for  my
bosom  hath  become  contracted,  and  my  life  is  perturbed  on  thine
account.  — •  And  thereupon  he  sighed,  and  shed  tears  like  rain,
and  replied,  I  fear,  O  my  sister,  if  I  inform  thee,  that  thou  wilt  not
aid  me  to  attain  my  desire,  but  wilt  leave  ine  to  die  sorrowing,  in
my  anguish.  And  she  said,  No,  by  Allah,  0  my  brother,  I  will
not  abandon  thee,  though  my  life  should  be  lost  in  consequence
thereof.

So  he  told  her  what  had  befallen  him,  and  what  he  beheld  when
he  had  opened  the  door,  and  informed  her  that  the  cause  of  his
affliction  and  distress  was  his  passion  for  the  damsel  whom  he  had
seen,  and  his  affection  for  her,  and  that  for  ten  days  he  had  not
desired  food  nor  drink.  Then  he  wept  violently,  and  recited  these
two  verses : —

Restore  my  heart  as  it  was  to  my  breast,  and  let  mine  eyes  sleep  again then

forsake  me.
Do  you  think  that  the  nights  have  changed  the  vow  of  love  ? May  he  ceasa  to

live  who  cnangeth !

And  his  sister  wept  at  his  weeping :  she  was  moved  with  compassion
for  his  case,  and  pitied  him  for  his  distance  from  home;  and  she  said
to  him,  0  my  brother,  be  of  good  heart  and  cheerful  eye ;  for  I  will
expose  myself  to  peril  with  thee,  and  give  my  life  to  content  thee,  and
contrive  for  thee  a  stratagem  even  if  it  occasion  the  loss  of  my  precious
things  and  my  soul,  that  I  my  accomplish  thy  desire,  if  it  be  the  will
in.  3  c


378  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.

of  God,  whose  name  be  exalted  !  But  I  charge  thee,  O  my  brother,
to  conceal  the  secret  from  my  sisters.  Therefore  reveal  not  thy  state
to  any  one  of  them,  lest  my  life  and  thine  be  lost ;  and  if  they  ask
thee  respecting  the  opening  of  the  door,  answer  them,  I  never  opened
it ;  but  I  was  troubled  in  heart  on  account  of  your  absence  from  me,
and  my  sadness  for  your  loss,  and  my  residence  in  the  palace  by  my-
self.— And  he  replied,  Yes  :  this  is  the  right  course.  He  kissed  her
head,  and  his  heart  was  comforted,  and  his  bosom  became  dilated.
He  had  been  in  fear  of  his  sister  on  account  of  his  having  opened  the
door ;  so  now  his  soul  was  restored  to  him,  after  he  had  thought
himself  at  the  point  of  destruction  by  reason  of  the  violence  of  his
fear.

He  then  demanded  of  his  sister  something  to  eat ;  whereupon  she
arose  and  went  forth  from  him ;  and  afterwards  she  went  in  to  her
sisters,  mourning  and  weeping  for  him.  So  they  asked  her  respecting
her  state,  and  she  informed  them  that  her  heart  was  troubled  for  her
brother,  and  that  he  was  sick,  and  for  ten  days  no  food  had  entered
his  stomach.  They  therefore  asked  her  respecting  the  cause  of  his
sickness ;  and  she  answered  them,  Its  cause  was  our  absence  from  him,
and  our  leaving  him  desolate ;  for  these  days  during  which  we  were
absent  from  him  were  to  him  longer  than  a  thousand  years,  and  he  is
excusable,  seeing  that  he  is  a  stranger  and  alone,  and  we  left  him
solitary,  without  any  one  to  cheer  him  by  society,  or  any  one  to  com-
fort his  heart.  Besides  he  is,  at  all  events,  but  a  youth,  and  probably
he  remembered  his  family  and  his  mother,  who  is  an  old  woman,  and
he  imagined  that  she  was  weeping  for  him  during  the  hours  of  the
night  and  the  periods  of  the  day,  and  that  she  ceased  not  to  mourn
for  him  :  but  we  used  to  console  him  by  our  society. — And  when  her
sisters  heard  her  words,  they  wept  by  reason  of  the  violence  of  their
sorrow  for  him,  and  said  to  her,  By  Allah,  he  is  excusable.  Then  they
went  forth  to  the  troops  and  dismissed  them;  after  which  they  went
in  to  Hasan  and  saluted  him;  and  they  saw  that  his  charms  had
become  altered,  and  his  complexion  had  become  sallow,  and  his  body
had  become  lean  ;  wherefore  they  wept  in  pity  for  him,  and  they  sat
with  him  and  cheered  him  and  comforted  his  heart  by  conversation,
relating  to  him  all  that  they  had  seen  of  wonders  and  strange
things,  and  what  happened  to  the  bridegroom  with  the  bride.  The
damsels  remained  with  him  during  the  period  of  a  whole  month,
cheering  him  by  their  society,  and  caressing  him ;  but  every  day  he
became  more  ill ;  and  whenever  they  beheld  him  in  this  state,  they  wept


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.


379


for  him  violently,  the  youngest  damsel  being  the  one  of  them  who
wept  the  most.

Then,  after  the  month,  the  damsels  were  desirous  of  riding  forth
to  hunt,  and  they  resolved  to  do  so,  and  asked  their  youngest  sister
to  mount  with  them ;  but  she  said  to  them,  By  Allah,  O  my  sisters,
I  cannot  go  forth  with  you  while  my  brother  is  in  this  state,  until
he  is  restored  to  health,  and  the  affliction  that  he  sufFereth  quitteth
him.  I  will  rather  sit  with  him  to  soothe  him. — And  when  they
heard  her  words,  they  thanked  her  for  her  kindness,  and  said  to  her,
Whatever  thou  dost  with  this  stranger,  thou  wilt  be  recompensed  for
it.  Then  they  left  her  with  him  in  the  palace,  and  mounted,  taking
with  them  provisions  for  twenty  days.  ^^
And-  when  they  were  far  from  the  palace,
their  sister  knew  that  they  had  traversed
a  wide  space  :  so  she  came  to  her  brother,
and  said  to  him,  O  my  brother,  arise;
shew  me  this  place  in  which  thou  sawest
the  damsels.  And  he  replied,  In  the
name  of  Allah  i22  on  the  head : — rejoic-
ing at  her  words,  and  feeling  sure  of  the
attainment  of  his  desire.  He  then  de-
sired to  arise  and  go  with  her,  and  to
shew  her  the  place;  but  he  was  unable
to  walk ;  wherefore  she  carried  him  in
her  bosom,  and  conveyed  him  to  the
[top  of  the]  palace;  and  when  he  was
upon  it,  he  shewed  her  the  place  in
which  he  had  seen  the  damsels,  and  he
shewed  her  the  mak'ad  and  the  pool.
And  his  sister  said  to  him,  Describe  to
me,  0  my  brother,  their  state,  and  how
they  came.  He  therefore  described  to
her  what  he  had  observed  of  them,  and
especially  the  damsel  of  whom  he  had  be-
come enamoured;  and  when  she  heard
the  description  of  her,  she  knew  her,
and  her  countenance  became  sallow,  and  her  state  became  changed.
So  he  said  to  her,  0  my  sister,  thy  countenance  hath  become  sallow,
and  thy  state  is  changed ;  and  she  replied, —

O  my  brother,  know  that  this damsel  is  the  daughter  of  one  of


380  THE  STORY  OF  HASAX  OF  KL-P.ASHAH.

the  Kings  of  the  Jann,  of  great  dignity.  Her  father  hath  obtained
dominion  over  men  and  Jann,  and  enchanters  and  diviners,  and  tribes
and  guards,  and  regions  and  cities  in  great  numbers,  and  hath  vast
riches.  Our  father  is  one  of  his  viceroys,  and  no  one  is  able  to  pre-
vail against  him,  on  account  of  the  abundance  of  his  troops,  and  the
extent  of  his  dominions,  and  the  greatness  of  his  wealth.  He  hath
assigned  to  his  children,  the  damsels  whom  thou  sawest,  a  tract  of  a
whole  year's  journey  in  length  and  breadth,  and  to  that  tract  is  added
a  great  river  encompassing  it,  and  no  one  can  gain  access  to  that  place,
neither  any  of  mankind  nor  any  of  the  Jann.  He  hath  an  army23  of
damsels  who  smite  with  swords  and  thrust  with  spears,  five  and  twenty
thousand  in  number,  every  one  of  whom,  when  she  mounteth  her
courser  and  equippeth  herself  with  her  implements  of  war,  will  with-
stand a  thousand  brave  horsemen ;  and  he  hath  seven  daughters  who
in  bravery  and  horsemanship  equal  their  sisters,  and  excel  them.  He
hath  set  over  this  tract,  of  which  I  have  informed  thee,  his  eldest
daughter,  the  chief  of  her  sisters;  and  she  is  distinguished  by  bravery
and  horsemanship,  and  guile  and  artifice  and  enchantment,  by  which
she  can  overcome  all  the  people  of  her  dominions.  But  as  to  the
damsels  who  were  with  her,  they  are  the  chief  ladies  of  her  empire,
and  her  guards,  and  her  favourites  among  the  people  of  her  dominions ;
and  these  feathered  skins  wherewith  thy  fly  are  the  work  of  the
enchanters  among  the  Janu.  Now  if  thou  desire  to  possess  this
damsel,  and  to  marry  her,  sit  here  and  wait  for  her :  for  they  come  on
the  first  day  of  every  month  to  this  place;  and  when  thou  seest  that
they  have  come,  conceal  thyself,  and  beware  of  appearing;  for  the
lives  of  all  of  us  would  be  lost.  Know  then  what  I  tell  thee,  and  keep
it  in  thy  memory.  Sit  in  a  place  that  shall  be  near  unto  them,  so
that  thou  shalt  see  them  and  they  shall  not  see  thee :  and  when  they
take  off  their  dresses,  cast  thine  eye  upon  the  dress  of  feathers  belong-
ing to  the  chief  damsel,  who  is  the  object  of  thy  desire,  and  take  it ;
but  take  not  aught  beside  it ;  for  it  is  the  thing  that  conveyeth  her
to  her  country.'24  So  if  thou  possess  it,  thou  wilt  possess  her;  and
beware  of  her  beguiling  thee,  and  saying,  O  thou  who  hast  stolen  my
dress,  restore  it  to  me,  and  here  am  I  with  thee  and  before  thee  and
in  thy  possession  : — for,  if  thou  give  it  her,  she  will  slay  thee,  and  will
demolish  the  pavilions  over  us,  and  slay  our  father.  Know  therefore
thy  case,  and  how  thou  shalt  act.  When  her  sisters  see  that  her  dress
hath  been  stolen,  they  will  fly  away,  and  leave  her  sitting  alone :  so
thereupon  go  thou  to  her,  and  seize  her  by  her  hair  and  drag  her


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-IiASKAH.  3S1

along;  and  when  thou  shalt  have  dragged  her  to  thee,  thou  wilt  have
obtained  her,  and  she  will  be  in  thy  possession.  Then,  after  this,
take  care  of  the  dress  of  feathers ;  for  as  long  as  it  remaineth  with
thee,  she  is  in  thy  power,  and  in  captivity  to  thee;  since  she  cannot
fly  away  to  her  country  save  with  it.  And  when  thou  hast  taken  her,
carry  her  and  descend  with  her  to  thy  private  chamber,  and  reveal  not
to  her  that  thou  hast  taken  the  dress.

So  when  Hasan  heard  the  words  of  his  sister,  his  heart  was  tran-
quillized, and  his  terror  was  quieted,  and  the  pain  that  he  suffered
ceased.  He  then  rose  erect  upon  his  feet,  and  kissed  the  head  of  his
sister ;  after  which  he  descended  from  the  top  of  the  palace,  he  and
his  sister,  and  they  slept  that  night.  He  studied  to  restore  himself
until  the  morning  came;  and  when  the  sun  rose,  he  arose  and  opened
the  door  and  ascended  to  the  top.  He  sat  there,  and  ceased  not  to
sit  until  nightfall,  when  his  sister  came  up  to  him  with  some  food  and
drink,  and  changed  his  clothes,  and  he  slept.  She  continued  to  do
thus  with  him  every  day  until  the  next  month  commenced.  So  when
he  saw  the  new  moon,  he  watched  for  them  ;  and  while  he  was  doing
thus,  lo,  they  approached  him,  like  lightning.  On  his  seeing  them,
therefore,  he  concealed  himself  in  a  place  so  that  he  could  see  them
and  they  could  not  see  him.  The  birds  alighted,  each  bird  of  them
seating  herself  in  a  place,  and  they  rent  open  their  dresses,  and  the
damsel  of  whom  he  was  enamoured  did  the  same  as  the  rest.  This
was  done  in  a  place  near  unto  Hasan.  She  then  descended  into  the
pool  with  her  sisters ;  and  thereupon  Hasan  arose  and  walked  forward
a  little,  still  concealing  himself;  and  God  veiled  him  :  so  he  took  the
dress,  and  not  one  of  them  saw  him  ;  for  they  were  playing  together.
And  when  they  had  ended,  they  carne  forth,  and  each  of  them  put  on
her  dress  of  feathers,  except  his  beloved,  who  came  to  put  on  her
dress  and  found  it  not.  Upon  this  she  cried  out,  and  slapped  her
face,  and  tore  her  clothes.  Her  sisters  therefore  came  to  her,  and
asked  her  respecting  her  state,  and  she  informed  them  that  her  dress
of  feathers  had  been  lost ;  whereupon  they  wept  and  cried  out,  and
slapped  their  faces.  And  when  the  night  overtook  them,  they  could
not  remain  with  her  :  so  they  left  her  upon  the  top  of  the  palace
alone.  Then,  when  Hasan  saw  that  they  had  flown  away  and  were
absent  from  her,  he  listened  to  her,  and  he  heard  her  say,  0  thou  who
hast  taken  my  dress,  and  stripped  rne,  I  beg  thee  to  restore  it  to  me,
and  may  God  never  make  thee  to  taste  my  grief!  And  on  his  hear-
ing these  her  words,  his  reason  was  captivated  by  his  passion  for  her


s


his  love  for  her  increased,  and  he  could  not  withhold  himself  from
her.  He  therefore  arose  from  his  place,  and  ran  forward  until  he
rushed  upon  her  and  laid  hold  of  her.  Then  he  dragged  her  to  him,
and  descended  with  her  to  the  lower  part  of  the  palace,  and,  having
taken  her  into  his  private  chamber,  threw  over  her  his  'abaah,85  while
she  wept,  and  bit  her  hands.  He  locked  the  door  upon  her,  and
went  to  his  sister,  and  told  her  that  he  had  got  her  and  obtained
possession  of  her,  and  had  brought  her  down  to  his  private  chamber;
and  he  said  to  her,  She  is  now  sitting  weeping,  and  biting  her  hands.
His  sister  therefore,  when  she  heard  his  words,  arose  and  repaired
to  the  private  chamber,  and,  going  in  to  her,  she  saw  her  weeping
and  mourning.  She  kissed  the  ground  before  her,  and  then  saluted
her ;  and  the  damsel  said  to  her,  0  daughter  of  the  King,  do  people
such  as  ye  are  do  these  vile  deeds  with  the  daughters  of  Kings  ?
Thou  knowest  that  my  father  is  a  great  King,  and  that  all  the  Kings
of  the  Jaun  are  terrified  at  him,  and  fear  his  awful  power ;  and  that
he  hath,  of  enchanters  and  sages  and  diviners  and  devils  and  Marids,


THE  STORY  OF  flASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  383

those  against  whom  none  can  prevail ;  and  that  under  his  authority
are  people  whose  number  none  knoweth  but  God.  How  then  can  it
be  right  for  you,  O  daughters  of  Kings,  to  lodge  men  of  human  kind
with  you,  and  to  acquaint  them  with  our  circumstances  and  yours  ?
If  ye  did  not  so,  how  could  this  man  gain  access  to  us  ? — So  the
sister  of  Hasan  answered  her,  0  daughter  of  the  King,  verily  this
human  being  is  perfect  in  kindness  of  disposition,  and  his  desire  is
not  to  do  any  shameful  action  :  he  only  loveth  thee  ;  and  women  were
not  created  save  for  men.  Were  it  not  that  he  loveth  thee,  he  had
not  fallen  sick  on  thine  account,  and  his  soul  had  not  almost  departed
by  reason  of  his  love  of  thee. — And  she  related  to  her  all  that  Hasan
had  told  her,  with  respect  to  his  passion  for  her,  and  how  the  damsels
had  acted  in  their  flight  and  their  washing  themselves;  and  told  her
that  none  of  them  all  had  pleased  him  except  her;  for  all  of  them
were  her  slave-girls ;  and  that  she  was  plunging  them  into  the  pool,
and  not  one  of  them  could  stretch  forth  her  hand  to  her. — And
when  she  heard  her  words,  she  despaired  of  escape.  Then  the  sister  of
Hasan  arose  and  went  forth  from  her,  and  brought  to  her  a  sumptuous
dress,  with  which  she  clad  her.  She  also  brought  to  her  some  food
and  drink,  and  ate  with  her,  and  comforted  her  heart  and  appeased
her  terror.  She  ceased  not  to  caress  her  with  gentleness  and  kindness,
and  said  to  her,  Have  compassion  upon  him  who  saw  thee  once  and
became  a  victim  of  thy  love.  Thus  she  continued  to  caress  her  and
gratify  her,  and  to  address  her  with  pleasing  words  and  expressions ;
but  she  wept  until  daybreak  came,  when  her  heart  was  comforted  and
she  abstained  from  weeping,  knowing  that  she  had  fallen  into  the
snare,  and  that  her  escape  was  impossible.  So  she  said  to  the  sister
of  Hasan,  O  daughter  of  the  King,  thus  hath  God  appointed  [and
written]  upon  my  forehead,  with  respect  to  my  estrangement  and  my
disjunction  from  my  country  and  my  family  and  my  sisters  ;  therefore
I  must  endure  with  becoming  patience  what  my  Lord  hath  decreed.
Then  the  sister  of  Hasan  appropriated  to  her  alone  a  private  chamber
in  the  palace,  than  which  chamber  there  was  none  handsomer  there ;
and  she  ceased  not  to  sit  with  her  and  console  her,  and  to  comfort  her
heart,  until  she  was  content,  and  her  bosom  became  dilated,  and  she
laughed,  and  her  trouble  and  contraction  of  the  bosom  on  account  of
her  separation  from  her  family  and  home,  and  her  separation  from  her
sisters  and  her  parents  and  her  dominions,  ceased.

The  sister  of  Hasan  then  went  forth  to  him,  and  said  to  hirn,
Arise,  gn  in  to  her  in  her  private  chamber,  and  kiss  her  hands  and


384  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.

her  feet.  He  therefore  entered,  and  did  so ;  and  he  kissed  her  be-
tween her  eyes,  and  said  to  her,  O  mistress  of  beauties,  and  life  of
souls,  and  delight  of  beholders,  be  tranquil  in  heart.  I  have  not
taken  thee  but  that  I  may  be  thy  slave  till  the  day  of  resurrection,
and  this  my  sister  will  be  thy  slave-girl.  I,  0  my  mistress,  desire
not  aught  save  to  marry  thee,  agreeably  with  the  ordinance  of  God
and  his  Apostle,  and  to  journey  to  my  country,  and  I  will  reside  with
thee  in  the  city  of  Baghdad.  I  will  purchase  for  thee  female  slaves,
and  male  slaves ;  and  I  have  a  mother,  of  the  best  of  women,  who
will  be  thy  servant.  There  is  not  a  country  there  better  than  our
country :  every  thing  that  is  in  it  is  better  than  what  is  in  any  other
of  all  the  countries,  and  its  inhabitants  and  its  people  are  good  people,
with  comely  faces.

But  while  he  was  addressing  her,  and  cheering  her  by  conversation,
and  she  addressed  him  not  with  a  single  letter,  some  one  knocked  at
the  door  of  the  palace.  So  Hasan  went  forth  to  see  who  was  at  the
door ;  and,  lo,  there  were  the  damsels,  who  had  returned  from  the
chase.  He  rejoiced  at  their  corning,  and  met  and  saluted  them ;
whereupon  they  offered  up  prayers  in  his  favour  for  safety  and  health,
and  he  prayed  for  them  also.  They  then  alighted  from  their  horses,
and  entered  the  palace,  and  each  of  them  went  into  her  private
chamber,  where  she  pulled  off  the  worn  clothes  that  were  upon  her,
and  put  on  comely  apparel,  after  which  they  came  forth,  and  demanded
the  game;  and  they  brought26  an  abundance  of  gazelles  and  wild
oxen,  and  hares  and  lions  and  hyenas,  and  other  beasts,  some  of  which
they  brought  forward  for  slaughter,  and  they  left  the  rest  with  them
in  the  palace.  Hasan  stood  among  them  with  girded  waist,  slaughter-
ing for  them,  while  they  sported  and  amused  themselves,  rejoicing
exceedingly  at  his  doing  thus.  And  when  they  had  finished  the
slaughter,  they  sat  preparing  something  whereof  to  make  their  dinner.
Then  Hasan  advanced  to  the  eldest  damsel,  and  kissed  her  head ;  and
he  proceeded  to  kiss  all  their  heads,  one  after  another.  So  they  said
to  him,  Thou  hast  greatly  humbled  thyself  to  us,  0  our  brother,  and
we  wonder  at  the  excess  of  thine  affection  for  us,  thou  being  a  man  of
the  sons  of  Adam,  and  we  being  of  the  Jinn.  And  thereupon  his  eyes
shed  tears,  and  he  wept  violently ;  wherefore  they  said,  What  is  the
news,  and  what  causeth  thee  to  weep  ?  Thou  hast  troubled  our  life
by  thy  weeping  this  day.  It  seemeth  that  thou  hast  conceived  a
longing  to  see  thy  mother  and  thy  country ;  and  if  the  case  be  so,
we  will  equip  thee,  and  will  journey  with  thee  to  thy  home  and  thy


THE  STORY  OP  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  385

friends. — He  replied,  By  Allah,  my  desire  is  not  to  be  separated  from
you.  They  therefore  said  to  him,  Then  who  of  us  hath  disturbed
thee,  that  thou  art  thus  troubled  ?  And  he  was  ashamed  to  say,
Nought  hath  disturbed  me  but  love  of  the  damsel — fearing  that  they
would  deny  him  their  approval :  wherefore  he  was  silent,  and  did  not
acquaint  them  with  aught  of  his  case.  So  his  sister  arose  and  said  to
them,  He  hath  caught  a  bird  from  the  air,  and  he  desireth  of  you  that
ye  aid  him  to  make  her  his  wife.  And  they  all  looked  at  him,  and
said  to  him,  We  are  all  before  thee,  and  whatsoever  thou  demandest,
we  will  do  it.  But  tell  us  thy  tale,  and  conceal  not  from  us  aught
of  thy  state. — He  therefore  said  to  his  sister,  Tell  thou  my  tale  to
them ;  for  I  am  abashed  at  them,  and  I  cannot  face  them  with  these
words.

Accordingly,  his  sister  said  to  them,  0  my  sisters,  when  we  departed
on  our  journey  and  left  this  poor  young  man  alone,  the  palace  became
strait  unto  him,  and  he  feared  that  some  one  might  come  in  to  him ;
and  ye  know  that  the  intellects  of  the  sons  of  Adam  are  weak.  So  he
opened  the  door  that  leadeth  to  the  roof  of  the  palace,  when  his  bosom
was  contracted  and  he  had  become  solitary  and  lone,  and  he  ascended
upon  it,  and  sat  there,  looking  down  upon  the  valley,  and  looking
down  also  towards  the  door,  fearing  lest  some  one  should  come  to  the
palace.  And  while  he  was  sitting  one  day,  lo,  ten  birds  approached
him,  coming  to  the  palace :  and  they  ceased  not  to  pursue  their  course
until  they  seated  themselves  upon  the  margin  of  the  pool  that  is  above
the  mandharah ;  whereupon  he  looked  at  the  bird  that  was  the  most
beautiful  of  them,  and  she  was  pecking  the  others,  among  which  there
was  not  one  that  could  stretch  forth  her  claw  to  her.  Then  they  put
their  talons  to  their  necks,  rent  open  their  dresses  of  feathers,  and
came  forth  from  them,  and  each  of  them  became  a  damsel  like  the
moon  in  the  night  of  its  fulness.  After  that,  they  disrobed  them-
selves, while  Hasan  stood  looking  at  them,  and  they  descended  into
the  water,  and  proceeded  to  sport ;  the  chief  damsel  plunging  the
others,  among  whom  there  was  not  one  who  could  put  forth  her  hand
to  her ;  and  she  was  the  most  beautiful  of  them  in  face,  and  the  most
just  of  them  in  stature,  and  the  most  clean  of  them  in  apparel.
They  ceased  not  to  do  thus  until  the  time  of  afternoon-prayers  drew
near,  when  they  came  forth  from  the  pool,  put  on  their  garments,  and
entered  the  apparel  of  feathers,  in  which  they  wrapped  themselves,  and
they  flew  away.  Thereupon  his  mind  was  troubled,  and  his  heart  was
inflamed  with  fire,  on  account  of  the  chief  bird,  and  he  repented  that

in.  3  D


386  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.

he  had  not  stolen  her  apparel  of  feathers.  He  became  sick,  and  re-
mained upon  the  palace  expecting  her  return,  and  he  abstained  from
food  and  drink  and  sleep.  He  continued  in  that  state  until  the  new
moon  appeared ;  and  while  he  was  sitting,  lo,  they  approached  accord-
ing to  their  custom,  and  pulled  off  their  garments,  and  descended  into
the  pool.  So  he  stole  the  dress  of  the  chief  damsel,  and,  knowing
that  she  could  not  fly  save  with  it,  he  took  it  and  hid  it,  fearing  that
they  would  discover  it  and  slay  him.  Then  he  waited  until  the  others
had  flown  away ;  when  he  arose  and  seized  her,  and  brought  her  down
from  the  top  of  the  palace. — Upon  this,  her  sisters  said  to  her,  And
where  is  she  ?  She  answered  them,  She  is  in  his  possession,  in  such
a  closet.  And  they  said,  Describe  her  to  us.  O  our  sister.  She  there-
fore said,  She  is  more  beautiful  than  the  moon  in  the  night  of  its
fulness,  and  her  face  is  more  splendid  than  the  sun,  and  the  moisture
of  her  mouth  is  sweeter  than  wine,  and  her  figure  is  more  elegant
than  the  slender  branch.  She  hath  black  eyes,  and  brilliant  face,  and
bright  forehead,  and  a  bosom  like  pearl,  in  which  are  seen  the  forms
of  two  pomegranates;  and  she  hath  cheeks  like  two  apples.  She
captivateth  the  hearts  by  her  eyes  bordered  with  kohl,  and  by  the
slenderness  of  her  delicate  waist,  and  by  her  heavy  hips,  and  speech
that  cureth  the  sick.  She  is  comely  in  shape,  beautiful  in  her  smile,
like  the  full  moon.

And  when  the  damsels  heard  these  descriptions,  they  looked
towards  Hasan  and  said  to  him,  Shew  her  to  us.  So  he  arose  with
them,  distracted  with  love,  and  proceeded  until  he  had  conducted
them  to  the  closet  in  which  was  the  King's  daughter ;  whereupon  he
opened  it  and  entered,  and  they  entered  behind  him ;  and  when  they
saw  her,  and  beheld  her  loveliness,  they  kissed  the  ground  before  her,
wondering  at  the  beauty  of  her  form,  and  at  her  elegance.  They  then
saluted  her,  and  said  to  her,  By  Allah,  O  daughter  of  the  supreme
King,  this  is  an  egregious  thing ;  but  haclst  thou  heard  the  description
of  this  human  being  among  the  women,  thou  wouldst  have  wondered
at  him  all  thy  life.  He  is  enamoured  -)f  thee  r.o  the  itmost  degree ;
yet,  O  daughter  of  the  King,  he  desireth  not  aught  that  is  dishonest.
He  desireth  thee  not  save  as  his  lawful  wife ;  and  if  we  knew  that
damsels  were  content  without  husbands,  we  would  have  prevented  him
from  attaining  the  object  of  his  desire,  though  he  sent  not  to  thee  a
messenger,  but  came  to  thee  himself;  and  he  hath  informed  us  that
he  hath  burnt  the  dress  of  feathers :  otherwise  we  would  have  taken
it  from  him. — Then  one  of  the  damsels  agreed  with  her  and  became


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OP  EL-BASllAH.


387


her  deputy  for  the  performance  of  the  ceremony  of  the  marriage-con-
tract. She  performed  the  ceremony  of  the  contract  of  her  marriage
to  Hasan,  who  took  her  hand,27  putting  his  hand  in  hers,  and  she
married  her  to  him  with  her  permission ;  after  which  they  celebrated
her  marriage-festivity  in  the  manner  befitting  the  daughters  of  Kings,
and  introduced  him  to  her;  and  he  congratulated  himself  thereupon,
and  recited  these  verses : —

Thy  shape  is  enticing,  and  thiuo  eye  like  the  gazelle's,  and  thy  face  drippeth
with  the  water  of  beauty.

Thou  appearest  in  mine  eye  most  gloriously  pictured,  half  of  thee  of  ruby,  and  a
third  of  pearl,

And  a  fifth  of  musk,  and  a  sixth  of  ambergris  :  thou  resemblest  fine  pearl :  nay,
thou  art  more  splendid.

Eve  hath  not  borne  like  thee  any  one,  nor  in  the  Gardens  of  Eternity  is  another
like  thee.

Then  if  thou  wish  my  torment,  it  will  proceed  from  love's  laws ;  and  if  thou  wilt
pardon,  thou  hast  the  choice  to  do  so.

O  ornament  of  the  world,  and  utmost  object  of  desire,  who  can  keep  from  enjoy-
ing the  beauty  of  thy  face  ?

The  damsels  were  standing  at  the  door,  and  when  they  heard  the
verses,  they  said  to  her,  0  daughter  of  the  King,  hast  thou  heard  the
words  of  this  human  being?  How  canst  thou  blame  us,  when  he
hath  recited  these  verses  on  the  subject  of  his  love  for  thee  ? — And  on
her  hearing  that,  she  was  happy  and  cheerful  and  glad.  Then  Hasan


388  THE  STOKY  OF  HASAN  OP  EL-BASRAH.

remained  with  her  for  a  period  of  forty  days,  in  pleasure  and  happiness
and  delight  and  joy,  the  damsels  renewing  for  him,  every  day,  festivity
and  beneficence  and  presents  and  rarities,  and  he  passing  his  time
among  them  in  happiness  and  cheerfulness ;  and  the  residence  of  the
King's  daughter  among  them  became  pleasant  to  her,  so  that  she
forgot  her  family.

But  after  the  forty  days,  Hasan  was  sleeping,  and  he  saw  his
mother  mourning  for  him :  her  bones  had  wasted,  and  her  body  had
become  emaciated,  and  her  complexion  had  become  sallow,  and  her
state  was  altered,  while  he  was  in  good  condition.  And  when  she
beheld  him  in  this  state,  [as  he  thought,]  she  said  to  him,  0  my  son,
0  Hasan,  how  is  it  that  thou  livest  in  the  world,  blest  with  a  pleasant
life,  and  forgettest  me  ?  Look  at  the  state  in  which  I  have  been  since
thy  departure.  I  will  not  forget  thee,  nor  will  my  tongue  cease  to
mention  thee  until  I  die ;  and  I  have  made  for  thee  a  tomb  in  my
house,  that  I  may  never  forget  thee.  Shall  I  live,  O  my  son,  and  see
thee  with  me,  and  shall  we  again  be  united  as  we  were  ? — So  Hasan
awoke  from  his  sleep  weeping  and  lamenting ;  his  tears  ran  down
upon  his  cheeks  like  rain,  and  he  became  sorrowful  and  afflicted ;  his
tears  ceased  not,  nor  did  sleep  visit  him,  nor  had  he  any  rest,  nor  did
any  patience  remain  to  him.  And  when  he  arose,  the  damsels  came
in  to  him,  and  wished  him  good  morning,  and  were  cheerful  with  him
as  they  were  wont :  but  he  looked  not  towards  them.  They  therefore
asked  his  wife  respecting  his  state ;  and  she  answered  them,  I  know
not.  So  they  said  to  her,  Ask  thou  him  respecting  his  state.  Accord-
ingly she  advanced  to  him,  and  said  to  him,  What  is  the  matter,  O
my  master?  And  thereupon  he  sighed  and  was  oppressed,  and
acquainted  her  with  that  which  he  had  seen  in  his  sleep.  Then  he
recited  these  two  verses : —

We  have  become  distracted  in  mind,  perplexed,  seeking  to  draw  near,  without
means  of  doing  it.

The  calamities  of  love  increase  npou  us,  and  the  endurance  of  love  is  burden-
some to  us.

His  wife  therefore  acquainted  them  with  that  which  he  had  said  to
her ;  and  when  the  damsels  heard  the  verses,  they  were  moved  with
pity  for  his  state,  and  said  to  him,  Favour  us  [by  doing  as  thou
desirest]  :  in  the  name  of  Allah.  We  cannot  prevent  thee  from  visit-
ing her :  we  will  rather  aid  thee  to  do  so  by  every  means  in  our
power.  But  it  behooveth  thee  to  visit  us,  and  not  sever  thyself  from


us,  though  in  every  year  thou  come  but
once. — And  he  replied,  I  hear  and  obey.
Then  the  damsels  arose  immediately,
prepared  for  him  the  provisions,  and
equipped  for  him  the  bride  with  orna-
ments and  apparel  and  every  thing
costly,  such  as  language  would  fail  to
describe ;  and  they  also  prepared  for  him  rarities  which  pens  cannot
enumerate.  After  that,  they  beat  the  drum,  and  thereupon  the  she-
camels  came  to  them  from  every  quarter,  and  they  chose  of  them  such
as  should  carry  all  that  they  had  prepared.  They  mounted  the  damsel
and  Hasan,  and  put  upon  the  camels,  and  brought  to  them,  five  and
twenty  chests  full  of  gold,  and  fifty  of  silver.  Then  they  proceeded
with  them  for  three  days,  during  which  they  traversed  a  space  of  three
months'  journey  ;  and  having  done  so,  they  bade  him  farewell,  and
desired  to  return  from  them.  Upon  this,  Hasan's  sister,  the  youngest
damsel,  embraced  him,  and  wept  until  she  fainted;  and  when  she
recovered,  she  recited  these  two  verses  : —

Would  that  the  day  of  separation  had  ne'er  been  ! No  sleep  remaineth  in  mine

eyes.
The  union of  us and thee  is  broken,  and  our  strength  and  our  body  are

enfeebled.

Then,  having  finished  her  verses,  she  bade  him  farewell,  and  strictly
charged  him  that,  when  he  had  arrived  at  his  city  and  met  his  mother,
and  his  heart  was  tranquillized,  he  should  not  fail  to  visit  her  once  in
every  six  months;  and  she  said  to  him,  When  an  affair  rendereth
thee  anxious,  or  thou  fearest  any  thing  disagreeable,  beat  the  drum  of
the  Magian  :  thereupon  the  she-camels  will  come  to  thee,  and  do  thou
mount,  and  return  to  us,  and  remain  not  away  from  us.  And  he
swore  to  her  that  he  would  do  so;  after  which  he  conjured  them  to
return.  So  they  returned,'  after  they  had  bidden  him  farewell,  and


390


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.


mourned  for  his  separation ;  and  she
who  mourned  most  was  his  sister,  the
youngest  damsel;  for  she  found  no
rest,  nor  did  patience  o.bey  her :  she
wept  night  and  day.

Ilasan  proceeded  all  the
night  and  day,  traversing
with  his  wife  the  deserts
and  wastes  and  the  valleys
and  rugged  tracts,  during
the  midday -heat  and  the
early  dawn,  and  God  de-
creed them  safety.  So  they  were  safe,  and  arrived  at  the  city  of
.El-Basrah ;  and  they  ceased  not  to  pursue  their  way  until  they  made
their  camels  kneel  down  at  the  door  of  his  house.  He  then  dismissed
.the  camels,  and  advanced  to  the  door  to  open  it ;  and  he  heard  his
mother  weeping  with  a  soft  voice,  that  proceeded  from  a  bosom  which
had  experienced  the  torture  of  fire,  while  she  recited  these  verses : —

How  can  she  taste  sleep  who  hath  lost  somnolency,  and  is  wakeful  at  night  while

others  repose  ?
She  possessed  riches  and  family  and  glory;  hut  hath  become  a  stranger  and

solitary.
Fire  and  groaning are  in  her  bosom,  and  violent  longing  that cannot be

exceeded.
Passion  hath  gained  dominion  over  her. She  moaneth  for  her  sufferings ;  but

is  firm.
Her  state  under  the  influence  of  love  telleth  that  she  is  mourning  and  afflicted,

and  her  tears  are  witnesses.

And  Hasan  wept  when  he  heard  his  mother  weeping  and  lamenting ;
and  he  knocked  at  the  door  with  alarming  violence.  So  his  mother
said,  Who  is  at  the  door  ?  And  he  replied,  Open : — wherefore  she
opened  the  door,  and  looked  at  him  ;  and  when  she  knew  him,  she
fell  down  in  a  fit;  and  he  ceased  not  to  caress  her  until  she  re-
covered, when  he  embraced  her,  and  she  embraced  him  and  kissed
him.  He  then  conveyed  his  goods  and  property  into  the  house,
while  the  damsel  looked  at  hi-m  and  at  his  mother ;  and  the  mother
of  Hasan  when  her  heart  was  tranquillized,  and  God  had  reunited  her
to  her  son,  recited  these  verses  : —

Fortune  hath  compassionated  my  case,  and  felt,  pity  for  the  length  of  my  torment,
And  granted  me  what  I  desired,  and  removed  that  which  I  dreaded.
I  will  therefore  forgive  its  offences  committed  in  former  times ;
Even  the  injustice  it  hath  shewn  in  the  turning  of  my  hair  gray.


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  391

+*

Hasan  and  his  mother  then  sat  conversing  together,  and  she  said
to  him,  How  was  thy  state,  0  my  son,  with  the  Persian  ?  He
answered  her,  O  my  mother,  he  was  not  [only]  a  Persian,  but  he  was
a  Magian,  who  worshipped  fire  instead  of  the  Almighty  King.  And
he  informed  her  of  what  he  had  done  with  him ;  that  he  had
travelled  with  him,  and  put  him  into  the  skin  of  the  camel  and  sewed
it  up  over  him,  and  that  the  birds  had  carried  him  off,  and  put  him
down  upon  the  top  of  the  mountain.  He  told  her  too  what  he  had
seen  upon  the  mountain,  namely  the  dead  men,  whom  the  Magian
had  deluded  and  left  upon  the  mountain  after  they  had  accomplished
his  affair ;  and  how  he  cast  himself  into  the  sea  from  the  top  of  the
mountain,  and  God,  (whose  name  be  exalted ! )  preserved  him,  and
conducted  him  to  the  palace  of  the  damsels ;  and  of  the  sisterly  love
of  the  youngest  damsel  for  him,  and  his  residence  with  the  damsels ;
and  how  God  had  conducted  the  Magian  to  the  place  in  which  he  was
residing.  He  also  told  her  of  his  passion  for  the  damsel  whom  he  had
married,  and  how  he  caught  her,  and  her  whole  story,  [and  the  sub-
sequent events]  until  God  reunited  them.  And  when  his  mother
heard  his  story,  she  wondered,  and  praised  God  (whose  name  be
exalted!)  for  his  health  and  safety.  She  then  arose  and  went  to
those  packages,  and  looked  at  them,  and  asked  him  respecting  them ;
and  he  acquainted  her  with  their  contents ;  whereat  she  rejoiced
exceedingly.  And  after  that,  she  advanced  to  the  damsel,  to  converse
with  her  and  to  cheer  her  by  her  company ;  and  when  her  eye  fell
upon  her,  her  mind  was  stupified  by  her  comeliness,  and  she  rejoiced
and  wondered  at  her  beauty  and  loveliness  and  her  stature  and  justness
of  form.  Then  she  said  to  Hasan,  O  my  son,  praise  be  to  God  for
thy  safety,  and  for  thy  safe  return  !  And  she  sat  by  -the  side  of
the  damsel,  cheering  her  by  her  company,  and  comforting  her  heart;
after  which,  early  the  next  day,  she  went  down  into  the  market,
and  bought  ten  suits,  the  most  sumptuous  garments  that  were  in  the
city.  She  also  brought  for  her  magnificent  furniture,  and  clad
the  damsel,  and  adorned  her  with  every  thing  beautiful.  Then  she
accosted  her  son,  and  said,  O  my  son,  with  this  wealth  we  cannot
live  in  this  city ;  for  thou  knowcst  that  we  were  poor,  and  the  people
will  accuse  us  of  practising  alchemy.  Therefore  arise  with  us,  and  let
us  go  to  the  city  of  Baghdad,  the  Abode  of  Peace,  that  we  may
reside  in  the  sacred  asylum  of  the  Khaleefeh,  and  thou  shalt  sit  in
a  shop  and  sell  and  buy,  and  fear  God  (to  whom  be  ascribed  might
and  glory !) :  then  will  God  open  to  thee  the  doors  of  prosperity  by


392  THE  STORY  OF  IJASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.

means  of  this  wealth. — And  when  ]Jasan  heard  her  words,  he  approved

them.

He  arose  immediately,  and  went  forth  from  her,  sold  the  house,
and  summoned  the  she-carnels ;  and  he  put  upon  them  all  his  riches
and  goods,  together  with  his  mother  and  his  wife.  He  set  forth,  and
ceased  not  to  pursue  his  journey  until  he  arrived  at  the  Tigris ;  when
he  hired  a  vessel  to  convey  them  to  Baghdad,  embarked  in  it  all  his
wealth  and  effects,  and  his  mother  and  his  wife,  and  every  thing  that
was  with  him,  and  went  on  board  the  vessel,  which  conveyed  them
with  a  fair  wind  for  a  period  of  ten  days,  until  they  came  in  sight  of
Baghdad ;  and  when  they  came  in  sight  of  it,  they  rejoiced.  The
vessel  brought  them  into  the  city,  and  Hasan  landed  there  forthwith,
and  hired  a  magazine  in  one  of  the  Khans.  He  then  removed  his
goods  from  the  vessel  to  the  magazine,  and  went  up,  and  remained
one  night  in  the  Khan ;  and  when  he  arose  in  the  morning,  he
changed  his  clothes ;  and  the  broker  seeing  him,  asked  him  respect-
ing his  affair,  and  what  he  desired  :  so  he  said  to  him,  I  desire  a
house,  handsome  and  ample.  And  the  broker  shewed  him  the
houses  that  he  had  to  let,  and  a  house  that  had  belonged  to  one
of  the  wezeers  pleased  him;  wherefore  he  bought  it  of  him  for  a
hundred  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  and  gave  him  the  price.  Then  he
returned  to  the  Khan  in  which  he  had  taken  lodging,  and  removed
thence  all  his  wealth  and  his  goods  to  the  house ;  after  which  he  went
forth  into  the  market,  and  bought  what  was  requisite  for  the  house,  of
utensils  and  furniture  and  other  things.  He  purchased  also  eunuchs,
and  among  them  was  a  young  black  slave,  for  the  house.  And  he
resided  in  ease  with  his  wife,  enjoying  the  most  delightful  life  and  happi-
ness, for  the  space  of  three  years,  during  which  he  was  blessed  by  her
with  two  boys,  one  of  whom  he  named  Nasir,  and  the  other  Mansoor.

Then,  after  this  period,  he  remembered  his  sisters,  the  damsels
before  mentioned,  and  he  remembered  their  kindness  to  him,  and  how
they  had  aided  him  to  attain  his  desire.  So  he  longed  to  see  them ;
and,  having  gone  forth  to  the  markets  of  the  city,  he  bought  there
some  ornaments,  and  costly  stuffs,  and  dried  fruits,  the  like  of  which
they  had  never  seen  nor  known.  His  mother  therefore  asked  him
the  reason  of  his  buying  those  rarities,  and  he  answered  her,  I  have
determined  to  repair  to  my  sisters,  who  treated  me  with  all  kindness,
and  from  whose  goodness  and  beneficence  to  me  my  present  good
fortune  proceeded ;  for  I  desire  to  go  to  them  and  to  see  them,  and
I  will  return  soon,  if  it  be  the  will  of  God,  whose  name  be  exalted !


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH


393


So  she  replied,  O  my  son,
be  not  long  absent  from
me.  And  he  said  to  her,
Know,  0  my  mother,  how
thou  shalt  manage  with  my
wife.  Here  is  her  dress  of
feathers,  in  a  chest  buried
iu  the  earth :  then  be  care-
ful of  it,  lest  she  light  upon
it  and  take  it,  and  fly  away
with  her  children,  and  de-
part, and  I  shall  not  find
any  tidings  of  her ;  so  I
shall  die  in  sorrow  on  ac-
count of  them.  Know  also,
O  my  mother,  that  I  caution
thee  not  to  mention  this  to
her.  And  know  that  she  is  the  daughter  of
the  King  of  the  Jann,  and  there  is  not  among
the  Kings  of  the  Jann  any  greater  than  her  father,  nor
any  that  hath  more  numerous  troops,  or  more  wealth
than  he.  Know  likewise  that  she  is  the  mistress  of  her  people,  and
the  dearest  of  the  things  that  her  father  hath.  Moreover,  she  is  exces-
sively high-minded :  therefore  do  thou  thyself  serve  her ;  and  allow
her  not  to  go  forth  from  the  door,  nor  to  look  from  the  window,  or
from  over  a  wall ;  for  I  fear  on  her  account  the  wind  when  it  bloweth  ;23
and  if  any  event  of  the  events  of  the  world  befall  her,  I  shall  slay
myself  on  her  account. — And  his  mother  replied,  Allah  preserve  me
from  disobeying  thee,  O  my  son !  Am  I  mad,  that  when  thou  givest
me  this  charge  I  should  disobey  thee  with  respect  to  it  ?  Set  forth,,
0  my  son,  and  be  of  good  heart,  and  thou  shalt  come  back  happily,
and  see  her,  if  it  be  the  will  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !),  and  she
shall  acquaint  thee  with  rny  conduct  to  her.  But,  0  my  son,  remain
not  away  more  than  the  time  required  for  going  and  returning. — And
his  wife,  as  was  decreed,  heard  his  words  to  his  mother  ;  and  they
knew  it  not.

Hasan  then  arose  and  went  forth  from  the  city,  and  beat  the  drum ;

so  thereupon  the  she-camels  came  to  him,  and  he  laded  twenty  with

the  rarities  of  El-'Erak ;  after  which  he  bade  farewell  to  his  mother

and  his  wife  and  his  children. The  age  of  one  of  his  two  children

in.  3  E


394  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OP  EL-BASRAH.

was  a  year,  and  the  age  of  the  other  was  two  years.  Then  he  returned
to  his  mother,  and  charged  her  a  second  time ;  and  having  done  this,
he  mounted  and  journeyed  to  his  sisters.  He  ceased  not  to  pursue
his  journey  night  and  day,  traversing  the  valleys  and  the  mountains,
and  the  plains  and  the  rugged  tracts,  for  the  space  of  ten  days ;  and
on  the  eleventh  day  he  arrived  at  the  palace  and  went  in  to  his  sisters,
having  with  him  the  things  that  he  had  brought  for  them.  And  when
they  saw  him,  they  rejoiced  at  his  arrival,  and  congratulated  him  on
his  safety;  and  as  to  his  sister,  the  youngest  damsel,  she  decorated
the  palace  without  and  within.  They  took  the  present,  and  lodged
Hasan  in  a  private  chamber  as  before,  and  asked  him  respecting  his
mother  and  his  wife.  So  he  informed  them  that  his  wife  had  borne
him  two  sons.  Then  his  sister,  the  youngest  damsel,  when  she  saw
him  in  health  and  prosperity,  rejoiced  exceedingly,  and  recited  this
verse : — •

1  ask  the  wind  respecting  you  whenever  it  bloweth,  and  none  but  you  ever
occurreth  to  my  mind.

He  remained  with  them,  entertained  and  treated  with  honour,  for  a
period  of  three  months,  and  he  passed  his  time  in  joy  and  happiness
and  comfort  and  cheerfulness,  and4n  hunting.

But  as  to  his  mother  and  his  wife,  when  Hasan  had  set  forth  on
his  journey,  his  wife  remained  a  day  and  a  second  day  with  his  mother,
and  she  said  to  her  on  the  third  day,  Extolied  be  the  perfection  of
God !  Do  I  reside  with  him  three  years  and  not  enter  the  bath  ? —
And  she  wept.  So  his  mother  compassionated  her  state,  and  said  to
her,  O  my  daughter,  we  are  here  strangers,  and  my  husband  is  not  in
the  city.  If  he  were  present,  he  would  take  upon  himself  to  serve
thee  ;  but  as  for  me,  I  know  not  any  one.  However,  O  my  daughter,
I  will  heat  for  thee  the  water,  and  will  wash  thy  head  in  the  bath  that
is  in  the  house. — To  this  the  damsel  replied,  O  my  mistress,  hadst
thou  said  these  words  to  one  of  the  female  slaves,  she  would  have
demanded  to  be  sold  in  the  market,  and  would  not  have  remained  with
you.  But,  0  my  mistress,  men  are  excusable;  for  they  are  jealous,
and  their  minds  say  to  them,  that  the  woman,  if  she  go  forth  from
her  house,  will  perhaps  commit  a  dishonest  action  ;  and  women,  0  my
mistress,  are  not  all  alike.  Thou  knowest  too  that  a  woman,  if  she
have  a  desire  for  a  thing,  no  one  can  overcome  her,  nor  can  any  one
set  a  guard  over  her  or  preserve  her,  or  debar  her  from  the  bath  or
any  thing  else,  or  from  doing  all  that  she  desireth. — Then  she  wept,


THE  STORY  OP  IJASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  395

and  cursed  herself,  and  began  to  bewail  for  herself,  and  for  her  absence
from  her  native  country.  So  the  mother  of  her  husband  pitied  her
state,  and  knew  that  all  which  she  said  must  be  done.  Wherefore  she
arose,  and  prepared  the  things  that  they  required  for  the  bath,  and
took  her  and  went  to  the  bath.  And  when  they  entered  it,  they
pulled  off  their  clothes,  and  all  the  women  began  to  look  at  her  and
to  extol  the  perfection  of  God  (to  whom  be  ascribed  might  and  glory !),
contemplating  the  beautiful  form  that  He  had  created.  Every  woman
who  passed  by  the  bath  entered  and  diverted  herself  by  viewing  her.
The  fame  of  her  spread  through  the  city,  and  the  women  crowded
upon  her,  and  the  bath  could  not  be  passed  through  by  reason  of  the
number  of  women  who  were  in  it.  Now  it  happened  in  consequence
of  this  wonderful  event,  that  there  came  to  the  bath  that  day  one  of
the  slave-girls  of  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful,  Haroon  Er-Rasheed,
called  Tohfeh29  the  lute-player;  and  seeing  the  women  crowding  to-
gether, and  the  bath  not  to  be  passed  through- by  reason  of  the  number
of  the  women  and  girls,  she  asked  what  was  the  matter,  and  they
informed  her  of  the  damsel.  So  she  came  in  to  her  and  looked  at  her
and  viewed  her  attentively,  and  her  mind  was  confounded  by  her
beauty  and  loveliness.  She  extolled  the  perfection  of  God  (greatly  be
He  glorified !)  for  the  beautiful  forms  that  He  had  created,  and  she
entered  not  [the  inner  apartment]  nor  washed ;  but  sat  confounded
at  the  sight  of  the  damsel  until  the  damsel  had  made  an  end  of  wash-
ing, and  come  forth  and  put  on  her  clothes,  when  she  appeared  still
more  beautiful.  And  when  she  came  forth  from  the  hararah,80  she
sat  upon  the  carpet  and  the  cushions,  the  women  gazing  at  her;  and
she  looked  at  them  and  went  forth.

Tohfeh  the  lute-player,  the  slave-girl  of  the  Khaleefeh,  arose  and
went  forth  with  her,  and  proceeded  with  her  until  she  knew  her  house,
when  she  bade  her  farewell,  and  she  returned  to  the  palace  of  the
Khaleefeh.  She  ceased  not  to  pass  on  until  she  came  before  the  lady
Zubeydeh,  and  kissed  the  ground  before  her;  whereupon  the  lady
Zubeydeh  said,  0  Tohfeh,  what  is  the  reason  of  t-hy  loitering  in  the
bath  ?  So  she  answered,  0  my  mistress,  I  saw  a  wonder,  the  like  of
which  I  have  not  seen  among  men  nor  among  women,  and  that  was
the  thing  which  diverted  my  attention  and  amazed  my  mind  and  con-
founded me  so  that  I  did  not  wash  my  head.  And  the  lady  Zubeydeh
said,  And  what  was  it,  0  Tohfeh  ?  She  answered,  0  my  mistress,  I  saw
a  damsel  in  the  bath,  having  with  her  two  young  children,  like  two
moons,  and  none  hath  beheld  the  like  of  her,  neither  before  her  not


396  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASKAH.

after  her,  nor  doth  there  exist  the  like  of  her  form  in  the  whole  world.
By  thy  beneficence,  O  my  mistress,  if  thou  acquaintedst  the  Prince  of
the  Faithful  with  her,  he  would  slay  her  husband,  and  take  her  from
him ;  for  there  existeth  not  one  like  her  among  women.  I  inquired
respecting  her  husband,  and  they  said  that  her  husband  is  a  merchant,
whose  name  is  Hasan  of  El-Basrah.  And  I  followed  her  when  she
went  forth  from  the  bath  until  she  entered  her  house,  whereupon  I
saw  it  to  be  the  house  of  the  Wezeer,  that  hath  two  entrances,  an
entrance  on  the  side  of  the  river,  and  an  entrance  on  the  side  of  the
laud.  I  fear,  0  my  mistress,  that  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful  may
hear  of  her,  and  that  he  will  disobey  the  law,  and  slay  her  husband,
and  marry  her. — Upon  this,  the  lady  Zubeydeh  said,  Wo  to  thee,  O
Tohfeh  !  Is  this  damsel  endowed  with  such  beauty  and  loveliness
that  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful  would  sell  his  religion  for  his  worldly
enjoyments,  and  disobey  the  law  on  her  account?  By  Allah,  I  must
have  a  sight  of  this  damsel ;  and  if  she  be  not  as  thou  hast  described,
I  will  give  orders  to  strike  off  thy  head,  0  wicked  woman !  In  the
palace  of  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful  are  three  hundred  and  sixty  slave-
girls,  according  to  the  number  of  the  days  of  the  year,  among  whom
there  is  not  one  such  as  thou  hast  described. — And  she  replied,  O
my  mistress,  no,  by  Allah ;  nor  is  there  in  all  Baghdad  the  like  of
her;  nay,  neither  among  the  foreigners  nor  among  the  Arabs,  nor
hath  God  (to  whom  be  ascribed  might  and  glory  ! )  created  the  like
of  her.

So  upon  this  the  lady  Zubeydeh  summoned  Mesroor,  who  came
and  kissed  the  ground  before  her ;  and  she  said  to  him,  O  Mesroor,
go  to  the  house  of  the  Wezeer,  that  hath  two  entrances,  an  entrance
towards  the  river,  -and  an  entrance  towards  the  land,  and  bring  to  me
the  damsel  who  is  there,  together  with  her  children,  and  the  old
woman  who  is  with  her,  quickly,  and  loiter  not.  And  Mesroor  re-
plied, I  hear  and  obey.  He  went  forth  from  before  her,  and  pro-
ceeded until  he  arrived  at  the  door  of  the  house,  whereupon  he
knocked  at  the  dodr,  and  the  old  woman,  the  mother  of  Hasan,  came
forth  to  him,  saying,  Who  is  at  the  door  ?  He  answered  her,  Mesroor,
the  eunuch  of  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful.  So  she  opened  the  door,
and  he  entered,  and  saluted  her,  and  she  saluted  him,  and  asked  him
respecting  his  business.  He  therefore  said  to  her,  The  lady  Zubeydeh
the  daughter  of  El-Kasim,  the  wife  of  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful,
Ilaroon  Er-Rasheed,  the  fifth31  of  the  sons  of  El-' Abbas  the  uncle  of
the  Prophet  (whom  may  God  bless  and  save !),  summoneth  thce  to


THE  STORY  OF  HASAX  OF  EL-BASRAH.  397

her,  thee  and  the  wife  of  thy  son,  and  her  children ;  for  the  women
have  informed  her  respecting  her  and  respecting  her  beauty.  Upon
this,  the  mother  of  Hasan  said,  O  Mesroor,  we  are  strangers,  and  the
damsel's  husband,  my  son,  is  not  in  the  city,  and  he  did  not  order  me
to  go  forth,  neither  me  nor  her,  to  any  one  of  the  creatures  of  God
(whose  name  be  exalted !) ;  and  I  fear,  if  any  thing  happen  and  my
son  come,  he  will  slay  himself.  I  beg  then,  of  thy  kindness,  0
Mesroor,  that  thou  impose  not  upon  us  a  command  which  we  are
unable  to  perform. — But  Mesroor  replied,  O  my  mistress,  if  I  knew
that  in  this  were  aught  to  be  feared  on  your  account,  I  would  not
require  you  to  go.  The  desire  of  the  lady  Zubeydeh  is  only  to  see
her,  and  she  shall  return :  therefore  disobey  not ;  for  thou  wouldst
repent ;  and  like  as  I  take  you  I  will  bring  you  back  hither  safe,  if  it
be  the  will  of  God,  whose  name  be  exalted ! — So  the  mother  of  Hasan
could  not  disobey  him  ;  wherefore  she  entered,  and  made  ready  the
damsel,  and  took  her  forth,  together  with  her  children.  They  fol-
lowed Mesroor,  who  preceded  them  to  the  palace  of  the  Khaleefeh,
and  led  them  up  and  stationed  them  before  the  lady  Zubeydeh,  where-
upon they  kissed  the  ground  before  her,  and  prayed  for  her.  The
damsel  had  her  face  covered :  so  the  lady  Zubeydeh  said  to  her,  Wilt
thou  not  uncover  thy  face,  that  I  may  see  it  ?  The  damsel  therefore
kissed  the  ground  before  her,  and  displayed  a  face  that  put  to  shame
the  full  moon  in  the  horizon  of  the  sky  ;  and  when  the  lady  Zubeydeh
beheld  her,  she  fixed  her  eyes  in  astonishment  upon  her,  and  let  them
wander  over  her,  and  the  palace  was  illumined  by  her  splendour
and  by  the  light  of  her  countenance.  Zubeydeh  was  amazed  at  her
beauty,  and  so  also  was  every  one  in  the  palace,  and  every  one  who
beheld  her  became  insane,  unable  to  speak  to  another.  The  lady
Zubeydeh  then  arose,  and  made  the  damsel  stand,  and  she  pressed
her  to  her  bosom,  seated  her  with  herself  upon  the  couch,  and  com-
manded that  they  should  decorate  the  palace  ;  after  which  she  gave
orders  to  bring  for  her  a  suit  of  the  most  magnificent  apparel,  and  a
necklace  of  the  most  precious  jewels,  and  decked  the  damsel  with
them,  and  said  to  her,  0  mistress  of  beauties,  verily  thou  hast  pleased
me,  and  filled  my  eye  with  delight.  What  hast  thou  among  thy
treasures  ? — So  the  damsel  answered,  O  my  mistress,  I  have  a  dress  of
feathers :  if  I  were  to  put  it  on  before  thee,  thou  wouldst  see  a  thing
of  the  most  beautiful  make,  that  thou  wouldst  wonder  at,  and  every
one  who  would  see  it  would  talk  of  its  beauty,  generation  after  genera-
tion.— And  where,  said  Zubeydeh,  is  this  thy  dress  ?  She  answered,


398


THE  STORY  OP  HASAN  OF  EL-BASKAH


-  It  is  in  the  possession  of  the
mother  of  my  husband  :  so
demand  it  for  me  of  her.

The  lady  Zubeydeh  there-
fore said,  O  my  mother,  by
my  life  I  conjure  thee  that
thou  go  down  and  bring  to
her  her  dress  of  feathers,
that  she  may  amuse  us  with
the  sight  of  that  which  she
will  do,  and  take  thou  it
again.  The  old  woman  re-
plied, O  my  mistress,  this
damsel  is  a  liar.  Have  we
seen  any  woman  possessing  a
dress  of  feathers  ?  This  is  a
thing  that  pertaineth  not  to
any  but  birds. — The  damsel
however  said  to  the  lady  Zu-
beydeh, By  thy  life,  0  my
mistress,  I  have  in  her  pos-
session a  dress  of  feathers,
and  it  is  in  a  chest  buried  in
the  closet  that  is  in  the  house.
So  the  lady  Zubeydeh  pulled
off  from  her  neck  a  necklace
of  jewels  worth  the  treasures
of  a  Kisra  and  a  Csesar,  and
said  to  her,  0  my  mother,
receive  this  necklace.  And

she  handed  it  to  her,  saying  to  her,  By  my  life  I  conjure  thee  that
thou  go  down  and  bring  that  dress,  that  we  may  divert  ourselves  with
the  sight  of  it,  and  take  thou  it  again  after  that.  But  she  swore  to
her  that  she  had  not  seen  this  dress,  and  that  she  knew  not  where  to
find  it.  And  upon  this,  the  lady  Zubeydeh  cried  out  at  the  old
woman,  and,  having  taken  from  her  the  key,  called  Mesroor,  who
came,  and  she  said  to  him,  Take  this  key,  and  go  to  the  house,  and
open  it,  and  enter  the  closet  of  which  the  door  is  of  such  and  such  a
description  :  in  the  midst  of  it  is  a  chest,  which  take  thou  up,  and
break  it,  and  bring  the  dress  of  feathers  that  is  in  it  before  me.  So


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  399

he  replied,  I  hear  and  obey.  He  took  the  key  from  the  hand  of  the
lady  Zubeydeh,  and  went ;  and  the  old  woman,  the  mother  of  Hasan,
arose,  with  weeping  eye,  repenting  of  her  compliance  with  the  desire
of  the  damsel,  and  of  having  gone  to  the  bath  with  her ;  for  the
damsel  had  not  desired  to  go  to  the  bath  save  for  the  purpose  of
practising  a  stratagem.  Then  the  old  woman  entered  the  house  with
Mesroor,  and  she  opened  the  door  of  the  closet :  so  he  entered,  and
raised  forth  the  chest,  took  from  it  the  dress  of  feathers,  and,  having
wrapped  it  in  a  napkin  that  he  had  with  him,  brought  it  to  the  lady
Zubeydeh,  who  took  it  and  turned  it  over,  wondering  at  the  beauty  of
its  make.  She  then  handed  it  to  the  damsel,  saying  to  her,  Is  this
thy  dress  of  feathers  ?  She  answered,  Yes,  0  my  mistress.  And
she  stretched  forth  her  hand  to  it  and  took  it  from  her,  full  of  joy.

The  damsel  examined  it,  and  saw  that  it  was  perfect  as  it  was
when  upon  her,  not  a  single  feather  of  it  being  lost.  She  was  there-
fore delighted  with  it,  and  rose  from  the  side  of  the  lady  Zubeydeh,
took  the  dress  and  opened  it,  and  took  her  children  in  her  bosom  ;
after  which  she  wrapped  herself  in  it,  and  became  a  bird,  by  the  power
of  God,  to  whom  be  ascribed  might  and  glory !  So  the  lady  Zubeydeh
wondered  at  that,  as  also  did  every  one  who  was  present ;  all  of  them
wondering  at  that  which  she  did.  The  damsel  leant  from  side  to  side,
and  walked  about,  and  danced  and  played ;  and  the  persons  present
had  fixed  their  eyes  in  astonishment  upon  her,  wondering  at  her
actions.  She  then  said  to  them,  with  an  eloquent  tongue,  0  my
mistresses,  is  this  beautiful  ?  The  persons  present  answered  her,  Yes,
O  mistress  of  beauties :  all  that  thou  hast  done  is  beautiful.  And
she  said  to  them,  And  this  that  I  am  about  to  do  will  be  more
beautiful,  O  my  mistresses.  And  she  expanded  her  wings,  and  flew
up  with  her  children  above  the  cupola,  and  stood  upon  the  roof  of  the
saloon.  So  they  looked  at  her  and  said  to  her,  By  Allah,  this  is  an
extraordinary  and  a  beautiful  art,  that  we  have  never  before  beheld!
Then  the  damsel,  when  she  desired  to  fly  away  to  her  country,
remembered  Hasan,  and  said,  Hear,  O  my  mistresses  !  And  she
recited  these  verses  : —

O  thou  who  hast  quitted  these  mansions  and  departed  to  the  objects  of  thy  love

with  rapid  flight !
Dost  thou  think  that  I  continue  in  comfort  among  you,  and  that  your  life  hath

not  become  a  life  of  troubles  ?
When  I  was  taken  captive  in  the  snare  of  love,  he  made  love  my  prison,  and

went  far  awuv.


400  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OP  EL-BASRAH.

When  my  dress  was  hidden,  he  felt  sure  that  I  should  not  implore  the  One,  the
Omnipotent,  to  restore  it.

He  charged  his  mother  to  keep  it  carefully  in  a  closet,  and  transgressed  against
me,  and  oppressed :

But  I  heard  their  words  ana  keot  them  in  my  memory,  and  conceived  hopes  of
abundant  good  fortune.

My  going  to  the  bath  was  the  means  of  making  the  minds  of  people  to  be  con-
founded at  the  sight  of  me ;

And  the  spouse  of  Er-Rasheed  wondered  at  my  beauty,  when  she  beheld  me  on
the  right  and  left.

Then  I  said,  0  wife  of  the  Khaleefeh,  I  possess  a  dress  of  feathers  of  great
magnificence.

If  it  were  upon  me,  thou  wouldst  see  wonders  that  would  efface  sorrow  and  dis-
perse troubles.

So  the  spouse  of  the  Khaleefeh  asked,  Where  is  it  ?  And  I  answered,  In  the
house  of  him  who  hath  hidden  it.

And  Mesroor  pounced  down  and  brought  it  to  her;  and,  lo,  it  was  here,  beam-
ing with  light.

Thereupon  I  took  it  from  his  hand  and  opened  it,  and  I  saw  its  bosom  and  its
buttons.

Then  I  entered  it,  having  my  children  with  me,  and  expanded  my  wings,  and
flew  away.

O  mother  of  my  husband,  tell  him  when  he  cometh,  if  he  wish  to  meet  me,  he
must  leave  his  home.

And  when  she  had  ended  her  verses,  the  lady  Zubeydeh  said  to  her,
Wilt  thou  not  descend  to  us,  that  we  may  continue  to  enjoy  thy
beauty,  0  mistress  of  the  comely  ?  Extolled  be  the  perfection  of  Him
who  hath  endowed  thee  with  eloquence  and  beauty ! — But  she  replied,
Far  from  returning  be  that  which  hath  passed !  She  then  said  to  the
mother  of  Hasan,  the  mourning,  the  wretched,  By  Allah,  0  my
mistress,  0  mother  of  Hasan,  thou  wilt  render  me  desolate  by  thine
absence ;  but  when  thy  son  hath  come,  and  the  days  of  separation
have  become  tedious  to  him,  and  he  desireth  approach  and  meeting,
and  the  winds  of  love  and  longing  desire  agitate  him,  let  him  come
to  me  in  the  Islands  of  Wak-Wak.32 — And  she  flew  away  with  her
children,  and  sought  her  country.

When  the  mother  of  Hasan  beheld  this,  she  wept,  and  slapped
her  face,  and  wailed  until  she  fainted ;  and  when  she  recovered,  the
lady  Zubeydeh  said  to  her,  0  my  mistress  the  pilgrim,33  I  did  not
know  that  this  would  happen ;  and  if  thou  hadst  acquainted  me  with
it,  I  would  not  have  opposed  thee.  I  knew  not  that  she  was  of  the
Flying  Jinn  before  the  present  time;  and  had  I  known  that  she  was
of  this  nature,  I  would  not  have  allowed  her  to  put  on  the  dress,  nor
would  I  have  suffered  her  to  take  her  children.  But,  0  my  mistress,
absolve  me. — And  the  old  woman  replied,  having  no  way  of  avoiding


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.


401


it,  Thou  art  absolved.  She  then  went  forth  from  the  palace  of  the
Khaleefeh,  and  ceased  not  to  pursue  her  way  until  she  entered  her
house,  when  she  proceeded  to  slap  her  face  until  she  fainted  again ;
and  when  she  recovered  from  her  fit,  she  sorrowfully  longed  for  the
damsel  and  for  her  children,  and  for  the  sight  of  her  son,  and  recited
these  verses : —

On  the  day  of  separation,  your  removal  made  me  weep,  lamenting  on  account  of

your  absence  from  home.
I  cried  out,  from  the  pain  of  parting,  in  anguish,  and  tears  had  made  my  eyelids

sore,
This  is  separation ! Shall  we  enjoy  your return  ? For  your  departure  hath

deprived  me  of  the  power  of  concealment.
Would  they  had  returned,  and  observed  good  faith  ! If  they  do  so,  perhaps  my

former  times  may  return.

Then  she  arose,  and  dug  in  the  house  three  graves;34  and  she  betook
herself  to  them,  weeping  night  and  day.  And  when  the  absence  of
her  son  became  tedious  to  her,  and  her  disquietude  and  longing
and  mourning  became  excessive,  she  recited  these  verses : —

Thine  image  is  within  mine  eyelids,  and  I  think  of  thee  when  my  heart  is

throbbing  and  when  it  is  quiet,
And  love  of  thee  hath  circulated  in  my  bones,  as  circulates  the  juice  in  the  fruits

upon  the  branches :
And  when  I  see  thee  not,  my  bosom  is  contracted,  and  the  censurers  excuse  me

for  my  sorrows.
O  thou  whose  love  hath  got  possession  of  me,  and  for  whom  my  distraction  ex-

ceedeth  my  affection,
Fear  the  Compassionate,  with  respect  to  me,  and  be  merciful ! Love  of  thee

hath  made  me  to  taste  of  death.


III.


402  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.

But  as  to  her  son  Hasan,  when  he  came  to  the  damsels,  they
conjured  him  to  stay  with  them  for  three  months.  And  after  that
period,  they  prepared  for  him  the  wealth,  and  made  ready  for  him
ten  loads,  five  of  gold  and  five  of  silver,  and  also  of  provisions  one
load;  after  which  they  bade  him  commence  his  journey,  and  went
forth  with  him  ;  but  he  conjured  them  to  return.  So  they  advanced
to  embrace  him,  for  the  purpose  of  bidding  him  farewell.  The
youngest  damsel  first  advanced  to  him,  and  she  embraced  him,  and
wept  until  she  fainted.  Then  she  recited  these  two  verses  :—

When  shall  the  fire  now  kindled  by  separation  be  quenched  by  your  approach,
and  my  desire  be  accomplished  by  your  presence,  and  when  shall  we  be  as
formerly  ?  .

The  day  of  parting  hath  filled  me  with  terror,  and  hath  afflicted  me ;  and  the
act  of  bidding  thee  farewell,  O  my  master,  hath  increased  my  infirmity.

The  second  damsel  next ' approached,  and  embraced  him,  and  recited
this  couplet : —

Bidding  thee  farewell  is  like  bidding  life  farewell ;  and  the  loss  of  thee  is  like

the  loss  of  the  zephyr.35
Thine  absence  is  like  a  "fire  that  burneth  my  heart,  and  in  thy  presence  I  enjoy

the  Gardens  of  Delight.

In  like  manner  also  did  the  other  damsels  ;  each  embracing  him  and
reciting  a  couplet.  Then  Hasan  bade  them  farewell.  He  wept  until
he  fainted,  on  account  of  his  separation  from  them,  and  recited  these
verses : —

My  tears  flowed,  on  the  day  of  separation,  like  pearls,  and  I  made  of  them,  as  it

were,  a.  necklace.
The  camel-driver  urged  on  the  beasts  with  singing,  and  I  found  not  strength

nor  patience,  nor  was  my  heart  with  me.
I  bade  them  farewell :  then  retired  in  grief,  and  quitted  the  society  of  the  places

I  had  frequented.
I  returned — evil  was  the  way ! — and  my  soul  was  not  comforted  save  by  hoping

to  come  again  and  see  thee.
O  my  friend,  listen  to  the  words  of  love ! God  forbid  that  I  should  speak  and

thy  heart  should  not  remember !
O  my  soul,  when  thou  partest  with  them,  also  part  with  the  delight  of  life,  and

wish  not  to  survive !

He  then  pursued  his  journey  with  assiduity,  night  and  day,  until
he  arrived  at  Baghdad,  the  Abode  of  Peace,  and  the  sacred  asylum
of  the  'Abbasee  Khaleefehs;  and  he  knew  not  what  had  happened
after  his  departure.


THE  STORY  OF  tfASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  403

He  entered  the  house,  and  went  in  to  his  mother  to  salute  her ;
but  he  saw  that  her  body  was  emaciated,  and  her  bones  were  wasted,
by  reason  of  exceeding  lamentation  and  sleeplessness,  and  weeping  and
groaning,  so  that  she  had  become  like  a  toothpick ;  and  she  was
unable  to  reply.  He  dismissed  the  she-camels,  and  advanced  to  her ;
and  when  he  beheld  her  in  this  state,  he  went  about  the  house  search-
ing for  his  wife  and  children ;  and  found  not  any  trace  of  them.
Then  he  looked  into  the  closet,  and  he  found  it  open,  and  the  chest
also  open,  and  he  found  not  in  it  the  dress.  So  upon  this  he  knew
that  she  had  got  possession  of  the  dress  of  feathers,  and  taken  it,  and
flown  away,  taking  her  children  with  her.  He  therefore  returned  to
his  mother,  and,  seeing  that  she  had  recovered  from  her  fit,  he  asked
her  respecting  his  wife  and  his  children ;  and  she  wept,  and  said,  O
my  son,  may  God  compensate  thee  greatly  for  the  loss  of  them !
These  are  their  three  tombs. — And  when  he  heard  the  words  of  his
mother,  he  uttered  a  great  cry,  and  fell  down  in  a  fit,  and  thus  he
remained  from  the  commencement  of  the  day  until  noon.  The  grief
of  his  mother  therefore  increased,  and  she  despaired  of  his  life.  And
when  he  recovered,  he  wept  and  slapped  his  face,  and  rent  his
clothes,  and  went  about  the  house  confounded.  Then  he  recited  these
two  verses : —

Persons  before  me  have  bemoaned  the  pain  of  absence,  and  living  and  dead  have

been  terrified  by  estrangement ;
But  an  instance  of  feelings  like  those  in  my  bosom  I  have  never  hearu  of  nor

beheld.

And  after  he  had  concluded  his  verses,  he  took  his  sword  and  drew
it,  and  coming  to  his  mother,  he  said  to  her,  If  thou  acquaint  me  not
with  the  truth  of  the  case,  I  will  strike  off  thy  head,  and  slay  myself.
So  she  said  to  him,  O  my  son,  do  not  that,  and  I  will  inform  thee.
Then  she  said  to  him,  Sheathe  thy  sword,  and  sit,  that  I  may  tell
thee  what  happened.  And  when  he  had  sheathed  his  sword  and
seated  himself  by  her  side,  she  repeated  to  him  the  story  from  begin-
ning to  end,  and  said  to  him,  0  my  son,  if  I  had  not  seen  her  weep
to  go  to  the  bath,  and  feared  thee,  that  thou  wouldst  come  and  that
she  would  complain  to  thee,  and  thou  wouldst  be  incensed  against
me,  I  had  not  gone  with  her  thither.  And  if  the  lady  Zubeydeh  had
not  been  incensed  against  me,  and  taken  from  me  the  key  by  force,  I
had  not  taken  forth  the  dress,  though  I  should  have  died ;  and,  0
my  son,  thou  knowest  that  no  one  can  contend  for  superiority  in


4<H


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASUAH.


power  with  the  Khaleefeh.  Then,  when  they  brought  the  dress  to
her,  she  took  it  and  turned  it  over,  imagining  that  some  part  of  it
might  be  lost;  but  she  found  that  no  injury  had  happened  to  it.
She  therefore  rejoiced,  and,  having  taken  her  children,  she  bound
them  to  her  waist,  and  put  on  the  dress  of  feathers,  after  the  lady
Zubeydeh  had  pulled  off  and  given  to  her  all  that  was  upon  her,  in
honour  of  her,  and  for  her  loveliness..  And  when  she  had  put  on  the
dress  of  feathers,  she  shook,  and  became  a  bird ;  and  she  walked
about  the  palace,  while  they  looked  at  her  and  wondered  at  her  beauty
and  loveliness.  She  then  tlew  up,  and  perched  upon  the  palace  ;  and
after  that,  she  looked  at  me  and  said  to  me,  When  thy  son  hath
come,  and  the  nights  of  separation  have  become  tedious  to  him,  and
he  desireth  to  approach  and  meet  me,  and  the  winds  of  love  and
longing  desire  agitate  him,  he  must  leave  his  home,  and  repair  to  the
Islands  of  Wak-Wak.  Thus  did  she  during  thine  absence.

Now  when  Hasan  heard  the  words  of  his  mother,  he  uttered  a  great
cry,  and  fell  down  in  a  fit.  He  ceased  not  to  lie  in  this  state  until
the  close  of  the  day  ;  and  when  he  recovered,  he  slapped  his  face,  and
rolled  about  on  the  floor  like  a  serpent.  His  mother  sat  weeping  at
his  head  until  midnight ;  and  after  he  had  recovered  from  his  n't,  he
wept  vehemently,  and  recited  these  verses  : —


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  405

Pause,  and  see  the  condition  of  him  whom  you  abandon  :  perhaps  you  will  pity

him  after  your  cruelty ;
For  if  you  see  him,  you  will  doubt  of  him,  by  reason  of  his  sickness,  as  though,

by  Allah,  you  knew  him  not.
He  is  dying  in  consequence  of  his  passion  for  you,  and  would  be  numbered  among

the  dead,  but  for  his  groaning.
Do  not  imagine  your  separation  to  be  light :  it  is  grievous  to  the  lover,  and  death

would  be  easier.

•  •

And  when  he  had  ended  his  verses,  he  arose,  and  continued  going
about  the  house,  moaning  and  weeping  and  wailing,  for  a  period  of
five  days,  during  which  he  tasted  not  food  nor  drink.  So  his  mother
went  to  him  and  conjured  him  with  oaths  to  abstain  from  weeping ;
but  he  yielded  not  to  her  words,  and  ceased  not  to  weep  and  wail.
His  mother  still  attempted  to  console  him,  but  he  would  not  attend
to  aught  that  she  said.  He  continued  in  this  state,  weeping  until  the
next  morning.  Then  his  eyes  slumbered,  and  he  saw  his  wife  mourn-
ing and  weeping  :  whereupon  he  arose  from  his  sleep,  crying  out,  and
recited  these  two  verses  : —

Thine  image  is  with  me,  and  never  quitteth  rne. I  have  given  it  the  most

honourable  place  in  my  heart.
But  for  the  hope  of  reunion,  I  could  not  live  a  moment ;  and  but  for  the  phantom

of  thy  form,  I  would  not  sleep.

And  in  the  morning  his  wailing  and  weeping  increased.  He  remained
with  weeping  eye  and  mourning  heart,  sleepless  during  the  night,  and
eating  little  ;  and  he  continued  in  this  state  for  the  space  of  a  whole
month.

But  when  that  month  had  passed,  it  occurred  to  his  mind  that  he
should  journey  to  his  sisters,  in  order  that  they  might  assist  him  to
attain  his  desire  of  regaining  his  wife.  So  he  summoned  the  excel-
lent she-camels,  loaded  fifty  with  rarities  of  El-'Erak,  and  mounted
one  of  them.  He  then  charged  his  mother  with  the  care  of  the  house,
and  committed  all  his  goods  [to  the  custody  of  persons  of  his  ac-
quaintance], except  a  few  things  that  he  left  in  the  house;  after
which  he  set  forth  on  his  journey  to  his  sisters,  hoping  that  he  might
obtain  their  aid  to  effect  his  reunion  with  his  wife.  He  ceased  not  to
pursue  his  way  until  he  arrived  at  the  palace  of  the  damsels  by  the
Mountain  of  Clouds ;  and  when  he  went  in  to  them,  he  presented  to
them  the  gifts,  with  which  they  were  delighted ;  and  they  congra-
tulated him  on  his  safety,  and  said  to  him,  0  our  brother,  what  is  the
-reason  of  thy  coming  so  quickly,  when  thou  hast  not  been  absent


from  us  more  than  two  months  ?  And  upon  this  he  wept,  and  recited
these  verses  :  —

I  find  my  soul  solicitous  on  account  of  the  loss  of  its  beloved,  enjoying  not  life

nor  its  delights.
My  disease  is  one  of  which  the  cure  is  unknown. And  can  any  one  cure  diseases

but  their  pnysiciaii  ?
O  thou  who  hast  debarred  me  from  the  delight  of  sleep !  thou  hast  left  me  to

inquire  for  thee  of  the  wind  when  it  bloweth,
If  it  be  near  to  the  place  of  the  beloved,  who  conipriseth  those  charms  that  excite

mine  eye  to  weep,
O  thou  who  alightest  in  her  country  !  perhaps  thy  breath  may  revive  my  heart

by  its  fragrance.

And  when  he  had  ended  his  verses,  he  uttered  a  great  cry,  and  fell
down  in  a  fit ;  and  the  damsels  seated  themselves  around  him,  weep-
ing for  him  until  he  recovered  from  his  fit ;  whereupon  he  recited  this
couplet : —

Probably  fortune  will  turn  its  rein,  and  bring  my  beloved ;  for  time  is  change-
able i3*

And  my  fortune  may  prosper  me,  and  my  wants  be  performed,  and  happy
events  may  follow  adverse.


THE  STORY  OP  HASAN  OP  EL-BASRAH.  407

He  continued  for  some  time  weeping  and  fainting,  and  reciting  verses;
and  the  damsels  had  retired  ;  but  when  his  sister  heard  his  words,  she
came  forth  to  him,  and  saw  him  lying  in  a  fit ;  upon  which  she  cried
out,  and  slapped  her  face ;  and  her  sisters,  hearing  her,  came  forth  to
her,  and  beheld  Hasan  lying  in  a  fit.  They  surrounded  him,  and  wept
for  him  ;  and  when  they  saw  him  in  this  state,  the  ecstasy  and  distrac-
tion of  love,  and  longing  desire,  that  affected  him  no  longer  remained
concealed  from  them.

They  then  asked  him  respecting  his  condition,  and  he  wept,  and
acquainted  them  with  that  which  had  befallen  him  during  his  absence
from  home,  telling  them  that  his  wife  had  flown  away,  and  taken  her
children  with  her.  So  they  mourned  for  him,  and  asked  him  what
she  said  when  she  departed  ;  and  he  answered,  0  my  sisters,  she  said
to  my  mother,  Tell  thy  son,  when  he  hath  come,  and  the  nights  of
separation  have  become  tedious  to  him,  and  he  desireth  to  approach
and  meet  me,  and  the  winds  of  love  and  longing  desire  agitate  him,
he  must  come  to  me  in  the  Islands  of  Wak-Wak. — And  when  they
heard  his  words,  they  winked  to  each  other,  and  reflected ;  and  each
of  them  looked  at  her  sister,  while  Hasan  looked  at  them.  Then  they
hung  down  their  heads  towards  the  ground  a  while ;  and  after  that,
they  raised  their  heads,  and  said,  There  is  no  strength  nor  power  but
in  God,  the  High,  the  Great !  And  they  said  to  him,  Stretch  forth
thy  hand  to  heaven,  and  if  thou  canst  rea^h  to  heaven,  thou  mayest
reach  to  thy  wife  and  thy  children.  And  thereupon  his  tears  ran
down  upon  his  cheeks  like  rain,  so  that  they  wetted  his  clothes ;  and
he  recited  these  verses  : —

The  red  cheeks  and  the  pupils  of  the  eyes  have  disturbed  me,  and  patience  aban-
doned me  when  sleeplessness  approached.

Fair,  sleek  damsels  have  by  cruelty  emaciated  my  body  :  to  men's  eyes  it  seemeth
not  to  retain  the  last  breath.

With  black  eyes,  and  proud  gait,  like  the  gazelles  of  the  sand-hill,  they  shewed
beauty  of  which  the  saints,  if  they  saw  it,  would  be  enamoured.

They  walk  like  the  zephyr  of  the  gardens  towards  daybreak.37  Through  love  of
them,  anxiety  and  disquietude  have  come  upon  me.

I  have  attached  my  hopes  to  a  lovely  damsel  among  them.  My  heart  burneth
with  naming  fire  on  her  account.

Gazelle-like,  sleek -limbed,  walking  with  proud  gait;  her  face  is  like  the  morn-
ing ;  but  her  hair  is  dark  as  night.

She  hath  disturbed  me.  But  how  many  heroes  have  the  eyelids  and  the  eyes  of
the  fair  ones  disturbed  with  love !

And  when  he  had  concluded  his  verses,  he  wept,  and  the  damsels
wept  at  his  weeping ;  compassion  and  zeal  for  him  affecting  them.


408  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.

They  betook  themselves  to  soothing  him,  and  exhorting  him  to
have  patience,  and  praying  for  his  reunion  to  his  wife ;  and  his  sister
accosted  him  and  said  to  him,  0  my  brother,  be  of  good  heart  and
cheerful  eye,  and  be  patient :  then  wilt  thou  attain  thy  desire ;  for  he
who  is  patient,  and  waiteth,  obtaineth  what  he  wisheth;  and  patience
is  the  key  of  relief.  The  poet  hath  said, —

Let  destiny  run  with  slackened  reins,  and  pass  not  the  night  but  with  careless

mind ;
For  between  the  closing  of  an  eye  and  its  opening,  God  effecteth  a  change  in  the

state  of  affairs.

She  then  said  to  him,  Strengthen  thy  heart,  and  confirm  thy  resolu-
tion ;  for  he  whose  life  is  to  be  ten  years  will  not  die  when  he  is  but
nine  ;  and  weeping  and  grief  and  mourning  occasion  disease  and  sick-
ness. Remain  with  us  until  thou  shalt  have  taken  rest,  and  I  will
contrive  means  of  thy  gaining  access  to  thy  wife  and  thy  children,  if
it  be  the  will  of  God,  whose  name  be  exalted  ! — But  he  wept  violently,
and  recited  this  couplet : —

If  I  he  cured  of  a  disease  in  my  body,  I  am  not  cured  of  a  disease  in  my  heart.
There  is  no  other  cure  for  the  diseases  of  love  than  union  of  the  beloved  with  the
lover.

Then  he  sat  by  the  side  of  his  sister,  who  proceeded  to  converse  with
him  and  to  console  him,  and  asked  him  what  was  the  cause  of  his  wife's
departure.  So  he  informed  her  of  the  cause  of  that  event ;  and  she
said  to  him,  By  Allah,  0  my. brother,  I  desired  to  say  to  thee,  Burn
the  dress  of  feathers  : — but  the  Devil  made  me  forget  that.  And  she
continued  to  converse  with  him  and  to  soothe  him.  But  when  the
case  became  tedious  to  him,  and  his  disquietude  increased,  he  recited
these  verses  : —

A  beloved,  with  whom  I  was  familiar,  hath  got  possession  of  my  neart :  and
God's  decree  cannot  be  prevented.

She  hath  all  the  united  beauty  of  the  Arabs.  She  is  a  gazelle;  but  freely
pastureth  on  my  heart.

Though  my  patience  and  contrivance  in  my  love  of  her  are  little,  I  weep,  not-
withstanding weeping  availeth  not.

She  is  lovely,  and  hath  twice  seven  years,  as  though  she  were  a  moon  of  five
nights  and  five  and  four.38

So  when  his  sister  saw  how  he  suffered  from  ecstasy  and  distraction
of  love,  and  the  afflictions  of  passion  and  desire,  she  went  to  her  sisters,
with  weeping  eye  and  mourning  heart,  and  she  wept  before  them,


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  409

threw  herself  upon  them,  kissed  their  feet,  and  begged  them  to  aid  her
brother  in  the  accomplishment  of  his  affair,  and  in  effecting  his  meet-
ing with  his  children  and  his  wife.  She  conjured  them  to  contrive
means  of  procuring  him  access  to  the  Islands  of  Wak-Wak,  and  ceased
not  to  weep  before  her  sisters  until  she  made  them  also  weep,  and
they  said  to  her,  Comfort  thy  heart ;  for  we  will  strive  to  accomplish
his  meeting  with  his  family,  if  it  be  the  will  of  God,  whose  name  be
exalted !  He  then  remained  with  them  a  whole  year ;  but  his  eye
abstained  not  from  shedding  tears.

Now  the  sisters  of  the  youngest  damsel  had  a  paternal  uncle,  the
brother  of  their  father  by  the  same  father  and  mother,  and  his  name
was  'Abd-El-Kuddoos.39  He  loved  the  eldest  damsel  with  a  great
affection,  and  every  year  he  used  to  visit  her  once,  and  perform  her
affairs.  The  damsels  also  had  related  to  him  the  story  of  Hasan,  and
the  events  that  befell  him  with  the  Magian,  and  how  he  was  enabled
to  slay  him  ;  whereat  their  uncle  rejoiced ;  and  he  gave  to  the  eldest
damsel  a  purse  containing  some  incense,  and  said  to  her,  0  daughter
of  my  brother,  if  any  thing  render  thee  anxious,  and  any  thing  dis-
agreeable happen  to  thee,  or  any  want  occur  to  thee,  throw  this  incense
into  the  fire,  and  mention  me  ;  and  I  will  come  to  thee  quickly,  and
will  perform  thy  want.  This  he  said  on  the  first  day  of  the  year.
And  that  damsel  said  to  one  of  her  sisters,  Verily  the  year  hath
entirely  passed,  and  my  uncle  hath  not  come.  Arise,  strike  the  steel
upon  the  flint,  and  bring  me  the  box  of  incense. — So  the  damsel  arose
joyful,  and  brought  the  box  of  incense ;  and  she  opened  it,  and,
having  taken  from  it  a  small  quantity,  handed  it  to  her  sister,  who
took  it  and  threw  it  into  the  fire,  mentioning  her  uncle ;  and  the  fumes
of  the  incense  had  not  ceased  before  a  dust  appeared  advancing  from
the  further  extremity  of  the  valley.  Then,  after  a  while,  the  dust
dispersed,  and  there  appeared  beneath  it  a  sheykh  riding  upon  an
elephant,  which  was  crying  out  beneath  him.  And  when  the  damsels
beheld  him,  he  began  to  make  signs  to  them  with  his  hands  and  his
feet.  Soon  after,  he  came  to  them,  and  alighted  from  the  elephant,
and  came  in  to  them ;  whereupon  they  embraced  him,  and  kissed  his
hands,  and  saluted  him.  He  then  sat,  and  the  damsels  proceeded  to
converse  with  him,  and  to  ask  him  the  cause  of  his  absence.  And  he
said,  I  was  just  now  sitting  with  the  wife  of  your  uncle,  and  I  smelt
the  incense;  so  I  came  to  you  upon  this  elephant.  What  then  dost
thou  desire,  0  daughter  of  my  brother  ? — She  answered,  0  my  uncle,
we  were  longing  to  see  thee,  the  year  having  passed,  and  it  is  not  thy

III.  3 G


custom  to  remain  absent  from  us  more  than  a  year.  And  he  replied,
I  was  occupied,  and  I  had  determined  to  come  to  you  to-morrow.
They  therefore  thanked  him  and  prayed  for  him.

After  that,  they  sat  conversing  with  him,  and  the  eldest  damsel
said  to  him,  0  my  uncle,  we  related  to  thee  the  story  of  Hasan  of  El-
Basrah,  whom  Bahrain  the  Magian  brought,  and  how  he  slew  him,
and  we,  informed  thee  of  the  damsel,  the  daughter  of  the  supreme  King,
whom  he  took,  and  of  the  difficulties  and  horrors  he  endured,  and  how
he  caught  the  King's  daughter  and  married  her,  and  how  he  journeyed
with  her  to  his  country.  He  replied,  Yes.  And  what,  he  asked,
happened  to  him  after  this? — She  answered  him,  She  acted  per-
fidiously to  him,  after  he  had  been  blest  with  two  sons  by  her ;  she
took  them  and  departed  with  them  to  her  country,  while  he  was  absent ;
and  she  said  to  his  mother,  When  thy  son  hath  come,  and  the  nights
of  separation  have  become  tedious  to  him,  and  he  desireth  to  approach
and  meet  me,  and  the  winds  of  love  and  longing  desire  agitate  him,
he  must  come  to  me  in  the  Islands  of  Wak-Wak. — And  upon  this  he


THE  STORY  OP  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  411

shook  his  head,  and  bit  his  finger.  Then  he  hung  down  his  head
towards  the  ground,  and  began  to  make  marks  upon  the  ground  with
the  end  of  his  finger;40  after  which  he  looked  to  the  right  and  left,
and  shook  his  head  again,  while  Hasan  looked  at  him,  but  was  con-
cealed from  him.  So  the  damsels  said  to  their  uncle,  Reply  to  us ;
for  our  livers  are  broken  in  pieces.  And  he  shook  his  head  at  them
and  said  to  them,  0  my  daughters,  this  man  hath  wearied  himself,
and  cast  himself  into  a  most  terrible  predicament  and  great  peril;  for
lie  cannot  gain  access  to  the  Islands  of  Wak-Wak.  Upon  this  the
damsels  called  Hasan,  and  he  came  forth  to  them,  and,  advancing  to
the  sheykh  'Abd-El-Kuddoos,  he  kissed  his  hand  and  saluted  him  ;
and  the  sheykh  was  pleased  with  him,  and  seated  him  by  his  side.
The  damsels  then  said  to  their  uncle,  O  uncle,  shew  our  brother  the
truth  of  that  which  thou  hast  said.  He  therefore  said  to  him,  0  my
son,  relinquish  this  most  vexatious  affair ;  for  thou  couldst  not  gain
access  to  the  Islands  of  Wak-Wak  even  if  the  Flying  Jinn  and  the
wandering  stars  assisted  thee,  since  between  thee  and  those  Islands
are  seven  valleys  and  seven  seas  and  seven  mountains  of  vast  magni-
tude. How  then  canst  thou  gain  access  to  this  place,  and  who  will
convey  thee  to  it  ?  By  Allah  I  conjure  thee  that  tbou  return  soon,
and  weary  not  thy  heart. — And  when  Hasan  heard  the  words  of  the
sheykh  'Abd-El-Kuddoos,  he  wept  until  he  fainted,  and  the  damsels
sat  around  him  weeping  for  his  weeping.  But  as  to  the  youngest
damsel,  she  rent  her  clothes  and  slapped  her  face  until  she  also  fainted.
So  when  the  sheykh  'Abd-El-Kuddoos  saw  them  in  this  state  of
anxiety  and  ecstasy  of  grief,  and  mourning,  he  pitied  them.,  and  was
affected  with  commiseration  for  them,  and  he  said,  Be  ye  silent.  Then
he  said  to  Hasan,  Comfort  thy  heart,  and  rejoice  at  the  prospect  of
the  accomplishment  of  thine  affair  if  it  be  the  will  of  God,  whose  name
be  exalted  !  And  after  that,  he  said  to  him,  0  my  son,  arise,  and
brace  up  thy  nerves,  and  follow  me.  So  Hasan  stood  up,  after  he  had
bidden  the  damsels  farewell ;  and  he  followed  him,  rejoicing  in  ex-
pectation of  the  accomplishment  of  his  affair.  The  sheykh  'Abd-El-
Kuddoos  then  called  the  elephant,  and  he  came,  and  he  mounted  him,
putting  Hasan  behind  him,  and  proceeded  with  him  for  the  space  of
three  days  with  their  nights,  like  the  blinding  lightning,  until  he
came  to  a  vast,  blue  mountain,  all  the  stones  of  which  were  blue  ;  and
in  that  mountain  was  a  cavern,  which  had  a  door  of  iron  of  China.
Upon  this  the  sheykh  took  the  hand  of  Hasan,  and  put  him  down  ;
after  which  the  sheykh  himself  alighted,  and  dismissed  the  elephant.


412


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.


He  then  advanced  to  the  door  of
the  cavern,  and  knocked  it;  where-
upon the  door  opened,  and  there
came  forth  to  him  a  black  slave,
beardless,  resembling  an  'Efreet,
and  having  in  his  right  hand  a
sword,  and  in  the  other  a  shield  of
steel.  But  when  he  saw  the  sheykh
'Abd-El-Kuddoos,  he  threw  down
the  -sword  and  shield  from  his
hands,  and  advanced  to  the  sheykh,
and  kissed  his  hand.  Then  the
sheykh  took  the  hand  of  Hasan,
and  entered  with  him,  and  the  slave
shut  the  door  behind  them.  Hasan
saw  that  the  cavern  was  very  large
and  wide,  and  that  it  had  a  passage

vaulted  over ;  and  they  ceased  not  to  go  on  for  the  space  of  a  mile,
after  which  their  course  brought  them  at  last  to  a  vast  desert.  They
repaired  to  an  angle  in  which  were  two  great  doors,  of  cast  brass,  and
the  sheykh  'Abd-El-Kuddoos  opened  one  of  them,  and  entered,  and
closed  it,  having  said  to  Hasan,  Sit  at  this  door,  and  beware  of
opening  it  and  entering  until  I  shall  have  entered  and  returned  to
thee  quickly.  And  when  the  sheykh  had  entered,  he  remained  absent
for  the  space  of  an  astronomical  hour.

He  then  came  forth,  having  with  him  a  horse  saddled  and  bridled,
which,  when  he  went  along,  flew ;  and  when  he  flew,  the  dust  over-
took him  not.  The  sheykh  led  him  forward  to  Hasan,  and  said,
Mount.  And  the  sheykh  opened  the  other  door ;  whereupon  there
appeared  within  it  an  extensive  desert.  So  Hasan  mounted  the  horse,
and  the  two  passed  through  the  door,  and  were  in  that  desert.  And
the  sheykh  said  to  Hasan,  0  my  son,  take  this  letter,  and  proceed
upon  this  horse  to  the  place  to  which  he  will  convey  thee ;  and  when
thou  seest  him  stop  at  the  door  of  a  cavern  like  this,  descend  from  his
back,  and  put  his  rein  upon  the  pommel,  and  dismiss  him,  and  he
will  enter  the  cavern ;  but  enter  not  thou  with  him.  Stay  at  the  door
of  the  cavern  for  the  space  of  five  days,  and  be  not  weary  ;  for  on  the
sixth  day  there  will  come  forth  to  thee  a  black  sheykh,  clad  in  black
apparel,  and  with  a  board  white  and  long,  descending  to  his  waist ;
and  when  thou  seest  him,  kiss  his  hands,  and  lay  hold  of  his  skirt,


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  413

and  put  it  on  thy  head,  and  weep  before  him,  that  he  may  have  pity
on  thee.  He  will  thereupon  ask  thee  respecting  thine  affair;  and
when  he  saith  to  thee,  What  is  thine  affair  ? — give  him  this  letter,  and
he  will  take  it  of  thee  and  will  not  speak  to  thee,  but  will  enter
and  leave  thee.  Stay  in  thy  place  five  days  more,  and  be  not  weary,
and  on  the  sixth  day  expect  him ;  [for  perhaps]  he  will  come  forth  to
thee;  and  if  he  himself  come  forth  to  thee,  know  that  thine  affair
will 'be  accomplished;  but  if  one  of  his  young  men  come  forth  to
thee,  know  that  he  who  hath  come  forth  to  thee  desireth  to  slay  thee.
And  peace  be  on  thee !  But  know,  O  my  son,  that  every  one  who
exposeth  himself  to  peril  destroyeth  himself:  therefore  if  thou  fear
for  thy  soul,  cast  it  not  into  destruction  :  if  however  thou  fear  not,  do
as  thou  desirest.  I  have  shewn  thee  the  circumstances  of  the  case ;
and  if  thou  desire  to  return  to  thy  companions,  this  elephant  is  ready,
and  he  will  convey  thee  to  the  daughters  of  my  brother,  who  will
send  thee  to  thy  country  and  restore  thee  to  thy  home,  and  God
will  bless  thee  with  one  better  than  this  damsel  to  whom  thou  art
attached.

But  Hasan  said  to  the  sheykh,  How  can  life  be  pleasant  to  me,
without  my  attaining  my  desire  ?  By  Allah,  I  will  never  return  until
I  find  rny  beloved,  or  my  death  overtake  me ! — Then  he  wept,  and
recited  some  verses,  commencing  thus  : —

For  the  loss  of  my  beloved,  and  the  excess  of  my  passion,  I  stood  and  cried  out

in  my  despondency  and  abjection  ;
And  I  kissed  the  dust  of  the  house,  in  my  longing  for  her ;  but  it  only  served  to

augment  my  sorrow.

And  when  the  sheykh  'Abd-El-Kuddoos  heard  his  recitation  and  his
words,  he  knew  that  he  would  not  relinquish  the  object  of  his  desire,
and  that  words  would  make  no  impression  upon  him,  and  he  was
convinced  that  he  must  expose  himself  to  peril,  though  his  life  should
be  sacrificed.  But  he  said,  Know,  O  my  son,  that  the  Islands  of
Wiik-Wak  are  seven  islands,  in  which  is  a  great  army,  entirely  com-
posed of  damsels,  virgins  ;  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  Interior  Islands
are  Devils  and  Marids  and  enchanters  and  various  tribes.  Whosoever
entereth  their  country  returneth  not,  and  no  one  ever  went  to  them
and  returned.  I  conjure  thee  therefore  by  Allah  that  thou  return  to
thy  family  soon.  Know  moreover  that  the  damsel  whom  thou  seekest
is  the  daughter  of  the  King  of  all  these  islands;  and  how  canst  thou
gain  access  to  her  ?  Hear  then  my  words,  0  my  son  ;  and  perhaps


414  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.

God  will  give  thee  in  her  stead  one  better  than  she. — But  Hasan
replied,  By  Allah,  0  my  master,  were  I  cut  piecemeal  for  my  love  of
her,  I  should  only  increase  in  fondness  and  desire.  I  must  see  my  wife
and  my  children,  and  enter  the  Islands  of  Wak-Wak ;  and  if  it  be
the  will  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !),  I  will  not  return  save  with
her  and  with  my  children. — So  the  sheykh.  x'Abd-El-Kuddoos  said  to
him,  Then  thou  must  perform  the  journey.  He  replied,  Yes  ;  and  I
only  desire  of  thee  thy  prayers  for  help  and  aid.  Perhaps  God  will
reunite  me  to  my  wife  and  my  children  soon. — Then  he  wept  by
reason  of  the  greatness  of  his  desire,  and  recited  these  verses  : —

You  are  my  desire,  and  the  best  of  creatures. I  hold  you  to  he  as  dear  as  my

hearing  and  my  sight.
You  have  possessed  my  heart,  and  it  hath  become  your  abode,  and  since  you  left

me,  0  my  mistress,  I  have  been  in  trouble.
Then  think  not  that  I  have  relinquished  the  love  of  you ; for  it  hath  put  the

wretched  being  in  fear.
You  have  gone,  and  my  happiness  went  when  you  departed,  and  what  was  bright

became  to  me  obscure  in  the  extreme.
You  have  left  me  to  contemplate  the  stars  in  my  anguish,  weeping  with  tears

like  a  pouring  rain.
O  night,  thou  art  tedious  to  him  who  is  disquieted,  in  the  violence  of  his  passion

gazing  at  the  moon !
O  wind,  if  thou  pass  by  the  tribe  that  she  sojourneth  with,  give  my  salutation

to  her ;  for  my  life  is  short ;
And  describe  to  her  somewhat  of  the  anguish  I  experience ;  for  the  beloved  is

not  acquainted  with  my  state !

And  when  he  had  ended  his  verses,  he  wept  so  violently  that  he
fainted ;  and  on  his  recovery  the  sheykh  'Abd-El-Kuddoos  said  to  him,
0  my  son,  thou  hast  a  mother :  then  make  her  not  to  taste  the  pain
of  thy  loss.  But  Hasan  replied,  By  Allah,  O  my  master,  I  will  not  re-
turn, save  with  my  wife,  or  my  death  shall  overtake  me.  Then  he  wept
and  moaned,  and  again  recited  some  verses ;  and  when  he  had  ended
them,  the  sheykh  knew  that  he  would  not  draw  back  from  his  present
purpose  though  his  life  should  be  sacrificed;  wherefore  he  handed  to
him  the  letter,  prayed  for  him,  and  directed  him  how  he  should  act,
and  said  to  him,  I  have  given  a  strict  charge  for  thee,  in  the  letter,  to
Abu-r-Ruweysh  the  son  of  Balkees  the  daughter  of  the  accursed
Iblees  ;41  for  he  is  my  sheykh  and  my  preceptor,  and  all  mankind  and
the  Jinn  humble  themselves  to  him,  and  fear  him.  He  then  said  to
him,  Go,  in  reliance  upon  the  blessing  of  God.

He  therefore  departed,  giving  the  rein  to  the  horse,  which  fled
with  him  more  rapidly  than  lightning. Hasan  ceased  not  to  speed


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.


415


along  on  the  horse  for  a  period  of  ten  days,  until  he  beheld  before
him  a  huge  indistinct  object,  blacker  than  night,  obstructing  the  space
between  the  east  and  the  west ;  and  when  he  drew  near  to  it,  the  horse
neighed  beneath  him;  whereupon  there  came  together  horses  nume-
rous as  the  drops  of  rain,  the  number  of  which  could  not  be  calculated,
nor  was  any  help  for  them  known  ;  and  they  began  to  rub  against
Hasan's  horse.  So  Hasan  feared  them  and  was  terrified;  and  he
ceased  not  to  proceed,  with  the  horses  around  him,  until  he  arrived  at
the  cavern  which  the  sheykh  'Abd-El-Kuddoos  had  described  to  him,
when  the  horse  stopped  at  its  entrance,  and  Hasan  alighted  from  him,
and  put  his  rein  upon  his  saddle.  The  horse  then  entered  the  cavern,
and  Hasan  stopped  at  the  entrance,  as  the  sheykh  'Abd-El-Kuddoos
had  ordered  him.  He  meditated  upon  the  result  of  his  case,  how  it
would  be,  perplexed,  distracted,  not  knowing  what  would  happen  to
him.  He  continued  at  the  entrance  of  the  cavern  five  days  with  their
nights,  sleepless,  mournful,  perplexed,  meditating  upon  his  having
parted  from  his  family  and  home  and  companions  and  friends,  with
weeping  eye  and  mourning  heart.  Then  he  remembered  his  mother,
and  thought  upon  what  might  happen  to  him,  and  upon  the  separation
of  his  wife  and  his  children,  and  the  troubles  he  had  suffered,  and
recited  some  verses,  which  he  had  not  ended  when  the  sheykh  Abu-r-


416  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASKAH.

Ruweysh  came  forth  to  him.  He  was  black,  and  clad  in  black  ap-
parel ;  and  when  Hasan  beheld  him,  he  knew  him  by  the  descriptions
which  the  sheykh  'Abd-El-Kuddoos  had  given  of  him.  So  he  threw
himself  upon  him,  and  rubbed  his  cheeks  upon  his  feet,  and,  taking
his  foot,  he  put  it  upon  his  head,  and  wept  before  him.  The  sheykh
Abu-r-Ruweysh  therefore  said  to  him,  What  is  thine  affair,  0  my
son  ?  And  Hasan  stretched  forth  his  hand  with  the  letter,  and
handed  it  to  the  sheykh,  who  received  it  from  him,  and  entered  the
cavern,  without  returning  him  a  reply;  and  Hasan  remained  in  his
place  at  the  entrance,  as  the  sheykh  'Abd-El-Kuddoos  had  desired
him,  weeping.  He  ceased  not  to  stay  in  his  place  for  the  space  of  five
days  more.  His  disquietude  was  excessive,  and  his  fear  was  violent,
and  his  sleeplessness  was  constant.  He  wept  and  was  oppressed  in
mind  by  the  pain  of  estrangement  and  excessive  wakefulnees,  and
recited  some  plaintive  verses.

He  ceased  not  to  weep  until  the  dawn  appeared,  when,  lo,  the
sheykh  Abu-r-Ruweysh  came  forth  to  him,  clad  in  white  apparel,  and
made  a  sign  to  him  with  his  hand,  that  he  should  enter.  So  Hasan
entered,  and  the  sheykh,  taking  him  by  the  hand,  led  him  into  the
cavern ;  and  he  rejoiced,  and  felt  sure  that  his  affair  would  be  accom-
plished. The  sheykh  continued  to  proceed,  and  Hasan  with  him,  for
the  space  of  half  a  day ;  after  which  they  arrived  at  an  arched  doorway
with  a  door  of  steel,  which  the  sheykh  opened,  and  he  and  Hasan
entered  a  passage  vaulted  over  with  variegated  stones  decorated  with
gold.  They  ceased  not  to  go  on  till  they  came  to  a  great  saloon  con-
structed with  marble,  and  spacious,  in  the  midst  of  which  was  a  garden
containing  all  kinds  of  trees  and  flowers  and  fruits,  and  birds  upon  the
trees  warbling,  and  proclaiming  the  perfection  of  God,  the  Omnipotent
King.  In  the  saloon  were  four  leewans,  facing  one  another,  each
leewan  having  a  sitting-place  with  a  fountain,  and  at  each  of  the  cor-
ners of  each  fountain  was  a  figure  of  a  lion  of  gold. — In  each  sitting-
place  also  was  a  chair,  upon  which  was  sitting  a  person  with  a  great
number  of  books  before  him,  and  before  them  were  perfuming- vessels
of  gold,  containing  fire  and  incense.  Every  one  of  these  sheykhs
likewise  had  before  him  students,  reading  to  him  the  books.  And
when  the  two  went  in  to  them,  they  rose  to  them  and  treated  them
with  honour ;  and  the  sheykh  Abu-r-Ruweysh  accosted  them  and
made  a  sign  to  those  four  sheykhs  that  they  should  dismiss  the  other
persons  who  were  present.  So  they  dismissed  them,  and  the  four
sheykhs  arose  and  seated  themselves  before  the  sheykh  Abu-r-Ruweysh,


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  417

and  asked  him  respecting  the  case  of  Hasan ;  whereupon  the  sheykh
Abu-r-Ruwcysh  made  a  sign  to  Hasan,  and  said  to  him,  Tell  the  com-
pany thy  story  and  all  that  hath  happened  to  thee  from  the  first  of  the
case  to  the  last.  And  Hasan  wept  violently,  and  related  to  them  his
story;  and  when  he  had  finished  it  all  the  sheykhs  cried  out  and  said,
Is  this  he  whom  the  Magian  caused  to  ascend  to  the  top  of  the  Moun-
tain of  the  Clouds  by  means  of  the  birds,42  he  being  in  the  skin  of  the
camel  ?  So  Hasan  answered  them,  Yes,  And  they  accosted  the
sheykh  Abu-r-Ruweysh  and  said  to  him,  0  our  sheykh,  Bah  ram
practised  a  stratagem  to  effect  his  ascent  to  the  top  of  the  mountain,
and  how  did  he  descend,  and  what  wonders  did  he  see  upon  the
mountain  ?  The  sheykh  Abu-r-Ruweysh  therefore  said,  O  Hasan,  tell
them  how  thou  descendedst,  and  acquaint  them  with  the  wonders  that
thou  sawest.  Accordingly  he  repeated  to  them  the  account  of  the
events  that  had  happened  to  him  from  beginning  to  end,  and  told  them
how  he  got  the  Magian  into  his  power  and  slew  him,  and  how  his
wife  had  acted  perfidiously  to  him  and  taken  his  children  and  flown
away,  and  of  all  the  horrors  and  difficulties  that  he  had  suffered.
And  the  persons  present  wondered  at  the  things  that  had  happened
to  him.

They  then  accosted  the  sheykh  Aou-r-Ruweysn  and  said  to  him,
O  sheykh  of  the  sheykhs,  by  Allah,  this  young  man  is  a  pitiable  per-
son ;  and  perhaps  thou  wilt  assist  him  to  deliver  his  wife  and  his
children.  The  sheykh  Abu-r-Ruweysh  replied,  0  my  brothers,  verily
this  is  a  great  and  perilous  affair,  and  I  have  not  seen  any  one  hate
life  except  this  young  man.  Ye  know  that  the  Islands  of  Wak-Wak
are  difficult  of  access  :  no  one  ever  arrived  at  them  without  exposing
himself  to  peril ;  and  ye  know  the  strength  of  their  inhabitants,  and
their  guards.  I  have  sworn  that  I  will  not  tread  their  country,  nor
oppose  myself  to  them  in  aught ;  and  how  can  this  person  gain  access
to  the  daughter  of  the  supreme  King,  and  who  can  convey  him  to  her,
or  assist  him  to  attain  this  object  ? — Upon  this  they  said,  O  sheykh
of  the  sheykhs,  verily  desire  hath  almost  consumed  this  man,  and  he
hath  exposed  himself  to  peril,  and  brought  to  thee  the  letter  of  thy
brother,  the  sheykh  'Abd-El-Kuddoos :  therefore  it  is  incumbent  on
thee  to  assist  him.  Then  Hasan  arose  and  kissed  the  foot  of  Abu-r-
Ruweysh,  and,  lifting  up  his  skirt,  put  it  on  his  head,  and  wept,  and
said  to  him,  I  conjure  thee  by  Allah  that  thou  unite  me  with  my
children  and  my  wife,  though  the  doing  so  occasion  the  loss  of  my
life  and  soul  !  And  the  persons  present  wept  at  his  weeping,  and

IIL  3 H


418  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.

said  to  the  sheykh  Abu-r-Ruweysh,  Acquire  the  recompense  that  will
be  granted  for  this  poor  man,  and  act  kindly  with  him  for  the  sake  of
thy  brother  the  sheykh  'Abd-El-Kuddoos.  So  he  replied,  Verily  this
young  man  is  a  pitiable  person,  and  he  knoweth  not  what,  he  is  under-
taking ;  but  we  will  assist  him  as  far  as  possible.  Hasan  therefore
rejoiced  when  he  heard  his  words,  and  kissed  his  hands.  He  kissed
also  the  hands  of  the  other  persons  who  were  present,  one  after  another,
and  begged' their  aid.  And  thereupon  Abu-r-Ruweysh  took  a  paper
and  an  inkhorn,  and  wrote  a  letter,  and  sealed  it,  and  gave  it  to  Hasan.
He  likewise  gave  him  a  small  bag  of  leather,  containing  incense  and
instruments  for  striking  fire,  consisting  of  a  steel  and  other  things ;
and  said  to  him,  Take  care  of  this  bag ;  and  when  thou  fullest  into  a
difficulty,  burn  a  little  of  the  incense  that  it  containeth,  and  mention
me ;  and  I  will  be  present  with  thee,  and  deliver  thee  from  the  diffi-
culty. Then  he  ordered  one  of  those  who  were  present  to  summon  to
him  an  'Efreet  of  the  Flying  Jinn  immediately;  and  he  came;  and
the  sheykh  said  to  him,  What  is  thy  name  ?  He  answered,  Thy  slave
is  Dahnash  the  son  of  Faktash.  And  Abu-r-Ruweysh  said  to  him,
Draw  near  to  me.  So  he  drew  near  to  him  ;  and  the  sheykh  Abu-r-
Ruweysh  put  his  mouth  to  the  ear  of  the  'Efreet,  and  said  to  him  some
words ;  whereat  the  'Efreet  shook  his  head.  The  sheykh  then  said  to
Hasan,  O  my  SOD,  arise,  mount  upon  the  shoulders  of  this  'Efreet,
Dahnash  the  Flyer;  but  when  he  hath  taken  thee  up  to  heaven,  and
thou  nearest  the  praises  of  the  Angels  in  the  sky,  utter  not  thou  any
words  of  praise  ;  for  if  thou  do,  thou  wilt  perish,  and  so  will  he.  And
Hasan  replied,  I  will  never  speak.  Then  the  sheykh  said  to  him,  O
Hasan,  when  he  hath  gone  with  thee,  he  will  put  thee  down  on  the
next  day,  a  little  before  daybreak,  upon  a  white,  clean  land,  like
camphor  ;  and  when  he  hath  put  thee  there,  walk  on  ten  days  by  thy-
self, until  thou  arrivest  at  the  gate  of  the  city.  On  thine  arrival  at  it,
enter,  and  ask  for  its  King ;  and  when  thou  hast  an  interview  with
him,  salute  him,  and  kiss  his  hand,  and  give  him  this  letter ;  and
whatsoever  he  directeth  thee  to  do,  understand  it. — So  Hasan  replied,
I  hear  and  obey.  He  arose  with  the  'Efreet,  and  the  sheykhs  arose
and  prayed  for  him,  and  gave  the  'Efreet  a  charge  respecting  him.

Now  when  the  'Efreet  had  taken  him  upon  his  shoulders,  he  rose
with  him  to  the  clouds  of  heaven,  and  proceeded  with  him  a  day  and
a  night,  until  he  heard  the  praises  of  the  Angels  in  heaven  ;  and  when
the  dawn  came,  he  put  him  down  upon  a  land  white  like  camphor,
and  left  him  and  departed.  So  when  Hasan  saw  that  he  was  upon


the  earth,  and  that  no  one  was  with  him,  he  went  on  night  and  day
for  the  space  of  ten  days,  until  be  arrived  at  the  gate  of  the  city  :
whereupon  he  entered  it,  and  inquired  for  the  King.  They  therefore
guided  him  to  him,  and  said  that  his  name  was  the  King  Hasoon,
King  of  the  Land  of  Camphor,  and  that  he  had,  of  soldiers  and  troops,
what  would  fill  the  earth  in  its  length  and  breadth.  He  asked  per-
mission to  go  in  to  him,  and  permission  was  given  him  ;  and  when  he
went  in  to  him,  he  found  him  to  be  a  magnificent  King;  and  he  kissed
the  ground  be-fore  him.  So  the  King  said  to  him,  What  is  thine
affair  ?  And  Hasan  kissed  the  letter,  and  handed  it  to  him  ;  and  he
took  it  and  read  it.  Then  he  shook  his  head  a  while  ;  after  which  he
said  to  one  of  his  chief  officers,  Take  this  young  man,  and  lodge  him
in  the  mansion  of  entertainment.  Accordingly  he  took  him  and  pro-
ceeded with  him,  until  he  had  lodged  him  there,  and  he  remained  in


420  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.

it  for  a  period  of  three  clays,  eating  and  drinking,  having  no  one  with
him  but  the  eunuch  who  attended  him  ;  and  that  eunuch  conversed
with  him  and  cheered  him,  and  asked  him  respecting  his  story,  and
how  he  had  come  to  this  country  ;  wherefore  he  acquainted  him  with
all  that  had  happened  to  him,  and  all  his  state.  After  that,  on  the
fourth  day,  the  young  man  took  him  and  brought  him  before  the
King ;  and  he  said  to  him,  O  Hasan,  thou  hast  come  unto  me,  desiring
to  enter  the  Islands  of  Wak-Wak,  as  the  sheykh  of  the  sheykhs  hath
mentioned  to  us.  O  my  son,  I  will  send  thee  during  these  days;  but
in  thy  way  are  many  dangerous  places,  and  thirsty  deserts  abounding
with  fearful  spots.  Be  patient,  however,  and  nought  but  good  will
happen.  I  must  employ  a  stratagem,  and  cause  thee  to  attain  thy
wish,  if  it  be  the  will  of  God,  whose  name  be  exalted  !  Know,  O  my
sou,  that  here  are  soldiers  of  Ed-Deylem  43  desiring  to  enter  the  Islands
of  Wak-Wak,  fitted  out  with  arms  and  horses  and  accoutrements,  and
they  have  not  been  able  to  enter.  But,  O  my  son,  for  the  sake  of  the
sheykh  of  the  sheykhs,  Abu-r-Ruweysh  the  son  of  the  daughter  of  the
accursed  Iblees,  I  cannot  send  thee  back  to  him  without  thy  having
accomplished  thine  affair.  Soon  there  will  come  to  us  ships  from  the
Islands  of  Wak-Wak  :  there  remaineth  not  before  their  arrival  more
than  a  short  time  :  and  when  one  of  them  hath  come,  I  will  embark
thee  in  it,  and  will  charge  the  sailors  respecting  thee,  that  they
may  take  care  of  thee  and  convey  thee  to  the  Islands  of  Wak-Wak.
Whosoever  asketh  thee  respecting  thy  condition  and  thy  story,
answer  him,  I  am  a  relation  of  the  King  Hasoon,  lord  of  the  Land  of
Camphor.  And  when  the  vessel  mooreth  at  the  Islands  of  Wjik-Wak,
and  the  master  saith  to  thee,  Land — do  thou  land.  Thou  wilt  see
many  settees  in  all  the  quarters  of  the  shore ;  and  do  thou  choose  for
thyself  one  of  them,  and  sit  beneath  it,  and  move  not.  And  when
the  night  becometh  dark,  and  thou  seest  that  the  army  of  women  hath
surrounded  the  merchandise,  stretch  forth  thy  hand  and  lay  hold  upon
the  owner  of  this  settee  beneath  which  thou  hast  placed  thyself,  and
beg  her  protection  ;  and  know,  0  my  son,  that  if  she  protect  thee,
thou  wilt  accomplish  thine  affair,  and  wilt  gain  access  to  thy  wife
and  thy  children.  But  if  she  protect  thee  not,  mourn  for  thyself,
and  despair  of  life,  and  be  sure  of  thy  destruction.  Know,  O  my
son,  that  thou  art  exposing  thyself  to  peril ;  and  I  cannot  do  for
thee  aught  but  this.  And  peace  be  on  thee !  Know  also,  that  if
aid  had  not  been  granted  thee  by  the  Lord  of  Heaven,  thou  hadst
not  gained  access  hither.


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.


421


When  Hasan  heard  these  words  of  the  King  Hasoon,  he  wept
until  he  fainted ;  and  on  his  recovering,  he  recited  these  two
verses  : —

A  decreed  term  is  my  certain  lot ;  and  when  its  days  have  ended,  I  die.
If  the  lions  contended  with  me  in  their  forests,  I  should  vanquish  them  if  aught
of  my  term  remained.

And  after  he  had  ended  his  verses,  he  kissed  the  ground  before  the
King,  and  said  to  him,  0  great  King,  how  many  days  remain  to  the
time  when  the  ships  will  come  ?  He  answered,  The  period  of  a
month  ;  and  they  will  remain  here  for  the  sale  of  their  cargoes  a'
period  of  two  months :  then  they  will  return  to  their  country :  so
hope  not  to  make  thy  voyage  in  the  ship  save  after  three  whole
months.  The  King  then  commanded  Hasan  to  return  to  the  mansion
of  entertainment,  and  gave  orders  to  carry  to  him  all  that  he  required,
of  food  and  drink  and  apparel,  such  as  was  fit  for  Kings.  He  re-
mained in  the  mansion  of  entertainment  a  month  ;  and  after  the
month,  the  ships  came.  The  King  and  the  merchants  therefore
went  forth,  and  he  took  Hasan  with  him  to  the  ships.  And  he  saw
a  ship  in  which  were  many  people,  like  the  pebbles :  none  knew  their
number  but  He  who  created  them.  That  ship  was  in  the  midst  of


422  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.

the  sea,  and  had  small  boats  transporting  the  goods  that  it  contained
to  the  shore.  Hasan  stayed  with  them  until  the  crew  had  removed
the  goods  from  it  to  the  shore,  and  sold  and  bought,  and  there
remained  not  to  the  time  of  departure  more  than  three  days;  where-
upon the  King  summoned  IJasan  before  him,  prepared  for  him  what
he  required,  and  conferred  upon  him  great  favours.  Then,  after  that,
he  called  for  the  master  of  that  ship,  and  said  to  him,  Take  this  young
man  with  thee  in  the  ship,  and  acquaint  no  one  with  him;  convey
him  to  the  Islands  of  Wak-Wak,  and  leave  him  there,  and  bring  him
not  back.  And  the  master  replied,  I  hear  and  obey.  The  King  then
charged  Hasan,  and  said  to  him,  Acquaint  not  any  one  of  the  persons
with  thee  in  the  ship  with  aught  of  thy  case,  nor  let  any  one  know
thy  story ;  for  if  thou  do,  thou  wilt  perish.  And  he  replied,  I  hear
and  obey.  And  he  bade  him  farewell,  after  he  had  offered  up  prayers
in  his  favour  for  length  of  life,  and  victory  over  all  the  enviers  and
enemies ;  and  the  King  thanked  him  for  that,  and  prayed  for  his
safety  and  for  the  accomplishment  of  his  affair.  He  then  committed
him  to  the  master,  who  took  him  and  put  him  into  a  chest,  and
embarked  him  in  a  boat;  and  he  took  him  not  forth  in  the  ship  but
when  the  people  were  occupied  in  removing  the  goods.

After  that,  the  ships  departed,  and  they  ceased  not  to  pursue  their
course  for  the  space  of  ten  days;  and  on  the  eleventh  day,  they
reached  the  shore.  The  master  thereupon  landed  him  from  the  ship ;
and  when  he  went  up  on  the  shore,  he  saw  there  settees,  the  number
of  which  none  knew  but  God.  So  he  walked  on  until  he  came  to  a
settee  of  which  there  was  not  the  like,  and  he  hid  himself  beneath  it.
And  when  the  night  approaehed,  there  came  a  numerous  crowd  of
women,  like  scattered  locusts,  advancing  on  foot,  with  their  swords
drawn  in  their  hands ;  but  they  were  enveloped  in  coats  of  mail ;  and
on  their  seeing  the  goods,  they  busied  themselves  with  them.  Then,
after  that,  they  sat  to  take  rest,  and  one  of  them  seated  herself  upon
the  settee  beneath  which  was  Hasan.  He  therefore  laid  hold  of  the
edge  of  her  skirt,  put  it  upon  his  head,  and,  throwing  himself  upon
her,  began  to  kiss  her  hands  and  her  feet,  weeping.  So  she  said  to
him,  O  thou,  arise  and  stand  up  before  any  one  see  thee  and  slay  thee.
And  thereupon  he  came  forth  from  beneath  the  settee  [where  he  had
hidden  himself  again],  and  rose  upon  his  feet,  kissed  her  hands,  and
said  to  her,  O  my  mistress,  I  throw  myself  upon  thy  protection !
Then  he  wept  again,  and  said  to  her,  Have  mercy  upon  him  who  is
parted  from  his  family  and  his  wife  and  his  children,  and  hath


THE  STORY  OP  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.

hastened  to  effect  his  reunion  with  them,  and
exposed  his  life  and  soul  to  peril !  Have  mercy
upon  me,  and  be  sure  that  thou  wilt  be  recom-
pensed for  that  with  Paradise.  Or,  if  thou  wilt
not  receive  me,  I  conjure  thee  by  Allah,  the  Great,
the  Excellent  Protector,  that  thou  conceal  my
case ! — And  the  merchants  fixed  their  eyes  upon
him,  while  he  spoke  to  her ;  and  when  she  heard
his  words,  and  saw  his  humiliation,  she  had
compassion  upon  him,  her  heart  was  moved
with  pity  for  him,  and  she  knew  that  he  had
not  exposed  himself  to  peril  and  come  to  this
place  save  for  a  great  affair.  So  thereupon  she
said  to  Hasan,  0  rny  son,  be  of  good  heart  and
cheerful  eye,  comfort  thy  heart  and  thy  soul,  and
return  to  thy  place,  and  hide  thyself  beneath  the
settee  as  thou  wast  at  first  until  the  next  night,
and  God  will  do  what  He  desireth.  Then  she
bade  him  farewell,  and  Hasan  entered  beneath
the  settee  as  before.  The  army  passed  the  night,
having  lighted  candles  composed  with  an  admix-
ture of  aloes-wood  and  crude  ambergris,  until  the
morning.  And  when  daylight  came,  the  ships
returned  to  the  shore,  and  the  merchants  oc-
cupied themselves  with  conveying  the  goods  and
effects  till  night  approached,  while  Hasan  remained  hidden  beneath
the  settee,  with  weeping  eye  and  mourning  heart,  not  knowing  what
was  secretly  decreed  to  happen  unto  him.

Now  while  he  was  in  this  state,  lo,  the  female  merchant  whose
protection  he  had  begged  approached  him,  and  handed  to  him  a  coat
of  mail  and  a  sword  and  a  gilt  girdle  and  a  lance ;  after  which  she
departed  from  him,  fearing  the  troops.  So  when  he  saw  that,  he
knew  that  the  female  merchant  had  not  brought  him  these  accoutre-
ments save  in  order  that  he  should  put  them  on  ;  wherefore  he  arose
and  put  on  the  coat  of  mail,  put  the  girdle  round  his  waist,  hung  on
the  sword  beneath  his  arm-pit,  took  the  lance  in  his  hand,  and  seated
himself  upon  that  settee.  His  tongue  neglected  not  to  repeat  the
praises  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !),  and  he  begged  his  protec-
tion ;  and  while  he  sat,  lo,  the  cressets  and  the  lanterns  and  the
candles  approached,  and  the  army  of  women.  Hasan  therefore  arose


424  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OP  EL-BASRAH.

and  mixed  among  the  troops,  having  become  like  one  of  them ;  and
at  the  approach  of  daybreak,  the  troops  proceeded,  and  Hasan  with
them,  until  they  came  to  their  tents,  when  each  of  them  entered  her
tent.  IJasan  also  entered  the  tent  of  one  of  them,  and,  lo,  it  was  the
tent  of  his  companion,  whose  protection  he  had  begged.  And  when
she  entered  her  tent,  she  threw  down  her  arms,  and  pulled  off  the
coat  of  mail  and  the  veil ;  and  Hasan,  having  thrown  down  his  arms,
looked  at  his  companion,  and  found  her  to  be  blue-eyed,  with  a  large
nose ;  she  was  a  calamity  among  calamities,  of  the  most  hideous  form,
with  a  face  marked  with  small-pox,  and  hairless  eyebrows,  and  broken
teeth,  and  puffed  cheeks,  and  gray  hair,  and  a  mouth  running  with
saliva :  her  hair  was  falling  off,  and  she  was  like  the  speckled,  black
and  white,  serpent.  Now  when  she  looked  at  Hasan,  she  wondered,
and  said,  How  could  this  person  gain  access  to  this  country,  and  in
which  of  the  ships  came  he,  and  how  did  he  arrive  safely  ?  And  she
*  proceeded  to  ask  him  respecting  his  case,  and  wondered  at  his  arrival ;
and  upon  this,  Hasan  fell  upon  her  feet,  rubbing  his  face  upon  them,
and  wept  until  he  fainted  :  and  when  he  recovered,  he  recited  these
verses : —

When  will  time  grant  us  our  meeting,  and  when  shall  we  be  reunited  after  our

separation,
And  when  shall  I  enjoy  the  object  of  my  choice,  and  see  reproach  ended,  and  love

remain  ?
If  the  Nile  were  to  flow  as  copiously  as  my  tears,  it  would  leave  in  the  world  no

land  unwatered :

It  would  overflow  the  Hejaz  and  Egypt,  and  Syria  likewise  with  El-'Erak.
This  is  caused  by  thine  estrangement,  O  my  beloved !  Be  kind  to  me,  and  promise

a  meeting.

And  after  he  had  ended  his  verses,  he  took  the  skirt  of  the  old  woman,
and  put  it  upon  his  head,  and  proceeded  to  weep  and  to  beg  her  pro-
tection. So  when  the  old  woman  saw  his  ardour  and  affliction  and
pain  and  distress,  her  heart  was  moved  with  sympathy  for  him,  and
she  granted  him  protection  and  said  to  him,  Fear  not  at  all.  Then
she  asked  him  respecting  his  case,  and  he  related  to  her  all  that  had
happened  to  him  from  beginning  to  end  ;  and  the  old  woman  won-
dered at  his  tale,  and  said  to  him,  Comfort  thy  heart  and  comfort  thy
soul.  There  remaineth  nothing  for  thee  to  fear.  Thou  hast  attained
thy  desire  and  the  accomplishment  of  thine  affair,  if  it  be  the  will  of
God,  whose  name  be  exalted  ! — Therefore  Hasan  rejoiced  at  that  ex-
ceedingly.


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  425

The  old  woman  then  sent  to  the  leaders  of  the  army,  commanding
them  to  come  before  her.  This  was  on  the  last  day  of  the  month.
And  when  they  presented  themselves  before  her,  she  said  to  them,'  Go
forth,  and  proclaim  among  all  the  troops  that  they  shall  go  forth  to-
morrow, in  the  morning,  and  that  none  of  them  shall  remain  behind  ;
and  if  any  one  remain  behind,  that  person's  life  shall  be  taken.  And
they  replied,  We  hear  and  obey.  They  went  forth,  and  proclaimed
among  all  the  troops  that  they  should  march  on  the  morrow,  in  the
morning ;  after  which  they  returned,  and  acquainted  her  therewith.
So  Hasan  knew  that  she  was  the  chief  of  the  troops,  and  the  person
of  authority  among  them,  and  their  leader.  Then  Hasan  took  not  off
the  arms  from  his  body  that  day.  The  name  of  that  old  woman  with
whom  he  had  placed  himself  was  Shawahee,  and  she  was  surnamed
Umm-ed-Dawzihee.44  And  the  old  woman  had  not  made  an  end  of
her  commanding  and  forbidding  until  the  daybreak  came,  when  all
the  troops  went  forth  from  their  places ;  but  the  old  woman  went  not
forth  with  them.  And  when  the  army  had  gone,  and  the  places  were
devoid  of  their  presence,  Shawahee  said  to  Hasan,  Draw  near  to  me,
O  my  son.  So  he  drew  near  to  her,  and  stood  before  her ;  and  she
accosted  him  and  said  to  him,  What  is  the  cause  of  thine  exposure  of
thyself  to  peril,  and  thine  entering  this  country,  and  bow  was  it  that
thy  soul  consented  to  its  own  destruction  ?  Acquaint  me  with  the
truth  of  thy  whole  affair,  and  conceal  not  from  me  aught  of  it,  nor
fear  thou ;  for  thou  hast  become  one  to  whom  I  have  plighted  my
faith,  and  I  have  granted  thee  protection,  and  had  compassion  upon
thee,  and  pitied  thy  state.  If  thou  inform  me  truly,  I  will  aid  thee
to  accomplish  thine  affair,  even  if  the  consequence  be  the  loss  of  lives,
and  the  destruction  of  the  sheykhs.  Now  that  thou  hast  come  unto
me,  no  harm  shall  befall  thee,  nor  will  I  suffer  any  one,  of  all  who
are  in  the  Islands  of  Wak-Wak,  to  do  thee  any  injury. — He  therefore
repeated  to  her  his  story  from  first  to  last,  telling  her  of  the  affair  of
his  wife,  and  the  birds,  and  how  he  caught  her  from  among  the  ten,
and  how  he  married  her,  and  then  resided  with  her  until  he  was
blest  with  two  sons  by  her,  and  how  she  took  her  children  and  flew
away  when  she  knew  the  means  of  obtaining  the  dress  of  feathers ;
and  he  concealed  not  aught  of  his  story,  from  the  commencement  to
that  day.

So  when  the  old  woman  heard  his  words,  she  shook  her  head,  and
said  to  him,  Extolled  be  the  perfection  of  God  who  preserved  thee
and  brought  thee  hither  and  caused  thee  to  light  on  me ! Hadst
m.  3  i


426  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.

thou  lighted  on  any  except  me,  thy  life  had  been  lost,  and  thine  affair
had  not  been  accomplished.  But  the  honesty  of  thine  intention,  and
thy  love  and  the  excess  of  thy  desire  for  thy  wife  and  thy  children,
were  the  means  of  enabling  thee  to  attain  the  object  of  thy  search.
Were  it  not  that  thou  lovest  her,  and  art  distracted  by  thy  passion  for
her,  thou  hadst  not  thus  exposed  thyself  to  peril ;  and  praise  be  to
God  for  thy  safety !  It  is  therefore  incumbent  on  us  to  accomplish
for  thee  thine  affair,  and  to  aid  thee  to  attain  the  object  of  thy  desire,
that  thou  mayest  obtain  what  thou  seekest  soon,  if  it  be  the  will  of
God,  whose  name  be  exalted !  But  know,  0  my  son,  that  thy  wife  is
in  the  seventh  island  of  the  Islands  of  Wak-Wak,  and  the  distance
between  us  and  it  is  seven  months'  journey,  night  and  day.  For  we
proceed  hence  until  we  arrive  at  a  land  called  the  Land  of  the  Birds  ;
and  by  reason  of  the  vehemence  of  the  cries  of  the  birds,  and  the
flapping  of  their  wings,  one  of  them  heareth  not  what  another  uttereth.
Then  we  proceed  over  that  land  for  a  period  of  eleven  days,  night  and
day;  after  which  we  pass  forth  from  it  to  a  land  called  the  Land  of
the  Wild  Beasts ;  and  by  reason  of  the  vehemence  of  the  cries  of  the
beasts  of  prey  and  the  hyenas  and  other  wild  beasts,  and  the  howling
of  the  wolves  and  the  roaring  of  the  lions,  we  shall  hear  nothing  else.

We  journey  over  that  land  for  the  space
of  twenty  days,  and  then  pass  forth  from
it  to  a  land  called  the  Land  of  the  Jinn,
where,  by  reason  of  the  vehemence  of  the
cries  of  the  Jann,  and  the  rising  of  the


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  427

flames  and  the  flying  about  of  the  sparks  and  the  smoke  from  their
mouths,  and  the  harsh  sounds  from  their  throats,  and  their  insolence,
they  will  obstruct  the  way  before  us,  and  our  ears  will  be  deafened,  and
our  eyes  will  be  covered  with  darkness,  so  that  we  shall  neither  hear  nor
see,  nor  will  any  one  of  us  be  able  to  look  behind  him ;  for  by  doing
so  he  would  perish.  In  that  place,  the  horseman  will  put  his  head
upon  the  pommel  of  his  saddle,  and  not  raise  it  for  a  period  of  three
days.  After  that,  there  will  be  before  us  a  vast  mountain  and  a
running  river,  which  extend  to  the  Islands  of  Wak-Wak.  Know  also,

0  my  son,  that  all  this  army  consisteth  of  damsels,  virgins  ;  and  the
sovereign  who  ruleth  over  us  is  a  woman  of  the  Seven Islands  of
Wak-Wak. The  extent  of  those  seven islands is a whole year's
journey  to  the  rider  who  travelleth  with  diligence.45 On  the  bank  of
this  river  [that  I  have  mentioned]  is  another  mountain,  called  the
Mountain  of  Wak-Wak ;  and  this  name  is  the  proper  appellation  of
a  tree  whose  branches  resemble  the  heads  of  the  sons  of  Adam ;  and
when  the  sun  riseth  upon  it,  those  heads  all  cry  out,  saying  in  their  cry,
Wak  !  Wsik ! Extolled  be  the  perfection  of  the  King,  the  Excellent
Creator ! — So  when  we  hear  their  cry,  we  know  that  the  sun  hath
risen. In  like  manner  also  when  the  sun  setteth,  those  heads  cry  out
and  say  in  their  cry  the  same  words,  and  we  know  thereupon  that  the
sun  hath  set. No  man  can  reside  with  us,  nor  gain  access  to  us,  nor
tread  our  land ;  and  between  us  and  the  residence  of  the  Queen  who
ruleth  over  this  land  is  a  journey  of  a  month,  from  this  shore. Also,
all  the  subjects  upon  that  shore  are under the  authority  of  that
Queen  ;  and  under  her  authority  likewise  are  the  tribes  of  the  Jann,
M;irids  and  Devils,  and  under  her  authority  are  enchanters,  the  number
of  whom  none  knoweth  but  He  who  created  them. Now  if  thou  fear,

1  will  send  with  thee  one  who  will  convey  thee  to  the  coast,  and  I  will
bring  one  who  will  transport  thee  with  him  in  a  vessel  and  convey
thee  to  thy  country. But  if  it  be  agreeable  to  thy  heart  to  remain
with  us,  I  will  not  prevent  thee  : thou  shalt  be  with  me  as  though
thou  wert  in  mine  eye,  until  thou  shalt  accomplish  thine  affair,  if  it
be  the  will  of  God,  whose  name  be  exalted  !

Upon  this  he  said  to  her,  O  my  mistress,  I  will  not  quit  thee  until
I  meet  with  my  wife,  or  my  life  shall  be  lost.  And  she  replied,  This
will  be  an  easy  affair :  so  comfort  thy  heart,  and  thou  shalt  attain  thy
desire  if  it  be  the  will  of  God,  whose  name  be  exalted!  1  must
acquaint  the  Queen  with  thee,  that  she  may  aid  thee  to  attain  thy
wish. — Hasan  therefore  prayed  for  her,  and  kissed  her  hands  and


428  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.

her  head,  and  thanked  her  for  that  which  she  had  done,  and  for  her
exceeding  kindness.  He  proceeded  with  her,  meditating  upon  what
might  be  the  result  of  his  case,  and  upon  the  horrors  of  his  estrange-
ment ;  and  he  began  to  weep  and  wail,  and  recited  these  verses : —

From  the  place  of  the  beloved  a  zephyr  hath  hlown,  and  thou  seest  me,  from  the

excess  of  my  ecstasy,  distracted.
The  night  of  union  is  like  a  brilliant  morning,  and  the  day  of  separation  like  a

black  night.
Takhig  leave  of  the  beloved  is  severely  distressing,  and  the  separation  of  the

companion  is  a  heavy  calamity.
I  will  not  complain  of  her  cruelty  save  to  her. I  have  not  among  mankind  a

friendly  relation.
My  becoming  indifferent  to  you  is  impossible; for  the  despised  censurer  doth

not  make  my  heart  indifferent.
O  unparalleled  in  loveliness ! iny  love  is  unparalleled. O  thou  whose  equal

existeth  not  !  my  heart  existeth  not.
Whosoever  pretendeth  that  he  loveth  you,  and  dreadeth  reprehension,  he  is

reprehensible.

The  old  woman  then  gave  orders  to  beat  the  drum  for  departure,
and  the  army  proceeded,  Hasan  proceeding  also,  in  company  with  the
old  woman.  Being  drowned  in  the  sea  of  solicitudes,  he  was  oppressed
in  mind,  and  recited  verses,  while  the  old  woman  exhorted  him  to  be
patient,  and  consoled  him  ;  but  he  recovered  not,  nor  attended  to  that
which  she  proposed  to  him.  They  ceased  not  to  journey  on  until
they  arrived  at  the  first  of  the  seven  islands,  which  was  the  Island  of
the  Birds ;  and  when  they  entered  it,  Hasan  imagined  that  the  world
was  overturned,  in  consequence  of  the  vehemence  of  the  cries.  His
head  ached  and  his  mind  was  bewildered,  his  eyes  were  blinded  and
his  ears  were  stopped,  and  he  feared  violently  and  made  sure  of  death,
saying  within  himself,  If  this  is  the  Land  of  the  Birds,  how  will  be
the  Land  of  the  Wild  Beasts?  So  when  the  old  woman  named
Sbawahee  saw  him  in  this  state,  she  laughed  at  him,  and  said  to  him,
O  my  son,  if  this  is  thy  state  in  the  first  island,  how  will  it  be  with
thee  when  thou  comest  to  the  remaining  islands  ?  He  therefore
supplicated  God,  and  humbled  himself  to  Him,  and  begged  of  Him
that  He  would  aid  him  to  bear  up  against  the  affliction  with  which
He  had  visited  him,  and  that  He  would  cause  him  to  attain  his  desires.
They  continued  their  journey  until  they  had  traversed  the  Land  of  the
Birds,  and  passed  forth  from  it,  and  entered  the  Land  of  the  Jann ;
and  when  Hasan  beheld  it,  he  feared,  and  repented  of  his  having
entered  it  with  them.  Then  he  begged  aid  of  God  (whose  name  be


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  429

exalted !),  and  proceeded  with  them.  And  they  escaped  from  the
Land  of  the  Jann,  and  arrived  at  the  river,  and,  alighting  beneath  a
vast,  lofty  mountain,  they  pitched  their  tents  upon  the  bank  of  the
river.  The  old  woman  placed  for  Hasan  a  couch  of  alabaster,  set
with  fine  pearls,  and  jewels,  and  bars  of  red  gold,  by  the  side  of  the
river.  So  he  seated  himself  upon  it ;  and  the  troops  advanced,  and
she  displayed  them  to  him.  After  that  they  pitched  their  tents  around
him,  and  rested  a  while.  Then  they  ate  and  drank  and  slept  in
security  ;  for  they  had  arrived  at  their  country.

Now  Hasan  had  put  over  his  face  a  litham,  so  that  nought  of  him
appeared  save  his  eyes.  And,  lo,  a  company  of  the  damsels  walked
near  to  the  tent  of  Hasan,  and,  having  pulled  off  their  outer  garments,
descended  into  the  river.  So  Hasan  kept  looking  at  them  while  they
washed,  and' they  proceeded  to  play  and  divert  themselves,  not  know-
ing that  he  was  looking  at  them ;  for  they  imagined  that  he  was  of
the  daughters  of  the  Kings.48  Thus  the  whole  army  assembled  before
Hasan;  for  the  old  woman  gave  orders  to  proclaim  among  all  the
troops  that  they  should  assemble  before  his  tent,  and  display  them-
selves and  descend  into  the  river,  thinking  that  perhaps  his  wife  might
be  among  them,  and  he  would  know  her.  She  proceeded  to  ask  him
respecting  them,  company  after  company ;  and  he  replied,  She  is  not
among  these,  O  my  mistress.  So  the  old  woman  said,  Describe  her
to  me,  and  acquaint  me  with  all  her  characteristics,  that  she  may  be
in  my  mind ;  for  I  know  every  damsel  in  the  Islands  of  Wak-Wak,
as  I  am  the  leader  of  the  army  of  damsels,  and  their  commander;  and
if  thou  describe  her  to  me,  I  shall  know  her,  and  will  contrive  means
for  thy  taking  her.  Accordingly,  he  described  her  to  her.  And
thereupon  the  old  woman  hung  down  her  head  towards  the  ground
for  some  time ;  after  which  she  raised  her  head  towards  Hasan,  and
said,  Extolled  be  the  perfection  of  God,  the  Great  in  dignity  !  Verily
I  am  afflicted  in  thee,  0  Hasan ;  and  I  would  that  I  had  not  known
thee  ! — For  the  woman  whom  thou  hast  described  to  me,  she  is  thy
wife  indeed  :  I  have  known  her  by  her  characteristics,  and  she  is  the
daughter  of  the  supreme  King,  his  eldest47  daughter,  who  ruleth  over
all  the  Islands  of  Wak-Wak.  Therefore  open  thine  eyes,  and  consider
thine  affair ;  and  if  thou  be  asleep,  awake ;  for  it  is  impossible  for
thee  ever  to  gain  access  to  her ;  and  if  thou  gainedst  access  to  her,
thou  couldst  not  get  possession  of  her ;  since  between  thee  and  her  is
like  as  is  between  heaven  and  earth.  Return  therefore,  0  my  son,
soon,  and  cast  not  thyself  into  destruction,  and  me  with  thee ;  for  I


430


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH,


imagine  that  thou  hast  no
lot  in  her.  Return  to
the  place  whence  thou
hast  come,  lest  our  lives
be  lost. — And  she  feared
for  herself  and  for  him.

When  Hasan,  there-
fore, heard  the  words  of
the  old  woman,  he  wept
violently,  so  that  he  faint-
ed; and  the  old  woman
ceased  not  to  sprinkle
water  upon  his  face  until
he  recovered  from  his  fit.
He  continued  to  weep  so
that  he  wetted  his  clothes
with  his  tears,  by  reason
of  the  excessive  anxiety
and  grief  that  had  come
upon  him  in  consequence
of  the  words  of  the  old
woman,  and  he  despaired  of  life.  Then  he  s
to  the  old  woman,  O  my  mistress,  and  how  <
I  return  after  I  have  got  hither?  I  did  i
imagine  in  my  mind  that  thou  wast  unable
accomplish  my  desire,  especially  because  tl
art  the  leader  of  the  army  of  damsels,  and  tl
commander. — To  this  she  replied.  I  conjure
thee,  by  Allah,  0  my  son,  that  thou  choose  for  thyself  a  damsel
from  among  these  damsels,  and  I  will  give  her  to  thee  instead  of
thy  wife,  lest  thou  fall  into  the  hand  of  the  Kings,  and  I  shall  have
no  means  of  releasing  thee.  By  Allah,  I  conjure  thee  that  thou
hear  my  words,  and  choose  for  thyself  one  of  these  damsels,  instead
of  that  damsel,  and  return  to  thy  country  soon  in  safety,  and  make
me  not  to  drink  thine  anguish  [by  witnessing  thy  death].  By
Allah,  thou  hast  cast  thyself  into  a  severe  calamity  and  great  peril,
from  which  no  one  can  deliver  thee. — So  thereupon  Hasan  hung  down
his  head  and  wept  violently,  and  he  recited  some  verses,  commencing
thus : —


THE  STORY  OF  IJASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  431

I  said  to  my  censurers,  Do  not  censure  me :  for  nought  but  tears  were  mine  eye-
lids created.

The  tears  of  mine  eye  have  overflowed  and  inundated  my  cheek,  and  my  beloved
hath  treated  nie  with  cruelty.

And  when  he  had  ended  his  verses,  he  wept  again  until  he  fainted,
and  the  old  woman  ceased  not  to  sprinkle  water  upon  his  face  till  he
recovered  from  his  fit ;  when  she  addressed  him  and  said,  O  my
master,  return  to  thy  country  :  for  if  I  go  with  thee  to  the  city,  thy
life  and  mine  will  be  lost ;  as  the  Queen,  when  she  knoweth  thereof,
will  blame  me  for  corning  with  thee  into  her  country  and  her  islands,
to  which  no  one  of  the  sons  of  Adam  coineth,  and  she  will  slay  me
because  of  my  having  brought  thee  with  me  and  given  thee  a  sight  of
these  virgins  whom  thou  hast  seen  in  the  river,  although  no  male
hath  touched  them,  nor  a  husband  approached  them.  So  Hasan  swore
that  he  had  never  looked  at  them  with  an  evil  glance.  But  she
rejoined,  O  my  son,  return  to  thy  country,  and  I  will  give  thee  wealth
and  treasures  and  rarities  on  account  of  which  thou  shalt  become  in-
diiferent  to  all  women.  Hear  then  my  words,  and  return  soon,  and
expose  not  thyself  to  peril ;  for  I  have  given  thee  good  advice. — When
Hasan,  however,  heard  her  words,  he  wept,  and  rubbed  his  cheeks
upon  her  feet,  and  said,  O  my  mistress  and  my  lady,  and  delight  of
mine  eye,  how  can  I  return  after  I  have  come  to  this  place  without
seeing  her  whom  I  desire,  and  have  approached  the-  abode  of  the
beloved,  and  hoped  to  meet  her  soon,  and  when  perhaps  I  may  have
the  good  fortune  to  be  reunited  with  her  ?  Then  he  recited  some
verses;  and  when  he  had  ended  them,  the  old  woman  pitied  him
and  had  compassion  on  him,  and,  addressing  him  kindly,  she  com-
forted his  heart,  and  said  to  him,  Let  thy  soul  be  happy  and  thine
eye  be  cheerful,  and  let  thy  mind  be  free  from  anxiety.  By  Allah,  I
will  expose  my  soul  to  peril  with  thee  until  thou  shalt  attain  thy
desire  or  my  death  shall  overtake  me !

So  the  heart  of  Hasan  was  comforted,  his  bosom  became  dilated,
and  he  sat  conversing  with  the  old  woman  until  the  close  of  the  day;
and  when  the  night  approached,  all  the  damsels  became  dispersed ;
some  of  them  entered  their  palaces  in  the  city,  and  some  passed  the
night  in  the  tents.  The  old  woman  then  took  Hasan  with  her,  and
conducted  him  into  the  city,  and  she  appropriated  to  him  a  place  for
himself  alone,  lest  any  one  should  become  acquainted  with  hjm  and
inform  the  Queen  of  him,  and  she  should  slay  him  and  the  bringer
of  him.  She  served  him  herself,  and  inspired  him  with  fear  of  the


432  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.

authority  of  the  supreme  King,  the  father  of  his  wife ;  and  he  wept
before  her,  and  said,  O  my  mistress,  I  choose  death  for  myself,  and
hate  the  world,  if  I  be  not  reunited  with  my  wife  and  my  children  :  so
I  will  expose  my  life  to  peril,  and  either  I  shall  attain  my  desire,  or
else  I  shall  die.  And  the  old  woman  proceeded  to  meditate  upon  the
mode  of  effecting  his  union  and  interview  with  his  wife,  and  what
stratagem  should  be  employed  in  the  case  of  this  poor  man,  who  had
cast  his  soul  into  destruction,  and  would  not  be  restrained  from  pur-
suing the  object  of  his  desire  by  fear  nor  by  any  thing  else.  He  had
become  indifferent  to  himself;  and  the  author  of  the  proverb  saith,
The  enamoured  heareth  not  the  words  of  one  who  is  free  from  love.
The  damsel  above  mentioned  was  Queen  of  the  island  in  which  they
then  were,  and  her  name  was  Noor-el-Huda.48  This  Queen  had  six49
sisters,  virgins,  residing  with  their  father,  the  supreme  King,  who  was
ruler  of  the  seven  islands  and  the  districts  of  W&k-Wdk ;  and  the
seat  of  government  of  that  King  was  in  the  greatest  of  the  cities  of
that  country.  His  eldest  daughter,  Noor-el-Huda,  was  ruler  over  that
city  in  which  Hasan  was,  and  over  all  its  districts.

Now  the  old  woman,  when  she  saw  Hasan  burning  with  desire  to
meet  with  his  wife  and  his  children,  arose  and  repaired  to  the  palace
of  the  Queen  Noor-el-Huda,  and  went  in  to  her,  and  kissed  the
ground  before  her.  The  old  woman  had  a  claim  upon  her  for  favour,
because  she  had  reared  all  the  daughters  of  the  King,  and  she  had
authority  over  them  all,  and  was  held  in  honour  by  them,  and  was
dear  unto  the  King.  So  when  she  went  in  to  the  Queen  Noor-el-
Huda,  the  Queen  rose  to  her  and  embraced  her,  seated  her  by  her
side,  and  asked  her  respecting  her  journey.  She  therefore  answered
her,  By  Allah,  0  my  mistress,  it  was  a  blessed  journey,  and  I  have
brought  for  thee  with  me  a  present  which  I  will  place  before  thee.
Then  she  said  to  her,  O  my  daughter,  0  Queen  of  the  age  and  time,
I  have  brought  with  me  a  wonderful  thing,  and  I  desire  to  shew  it  to
thee,  in  order  that  thou  mayest  aid  me  to  accomplish  what  it  re-
quireth. — And  what  is  it  ?  said  the  Queen.  So  she  acquainted  her
with  the  story  of  Hasan  from  its  beginning  to  its  end.  She  trembled
like  the  reed  in  the  day  of  the  stormy  wind,  until  she  fell  down  before
the  daughter  of  the  King,  and  said  to  her,  O  my  mistress,  a  person
implored  my  protection  upon  the  coast,  and  he  was  hidden  beneath
the  settee,  and  I  granted  him  protection,  and  brought  him  with  me
among  the  army  of  damsels,  he  being  armed  that  no  one  might  know
him,  and  I  conducted  him  into  the  city.  Then  she  said  to  her,  And


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OP  EL-BASRAH.  433

I  inspired  him  with  fear  of  thy  authority,  and  acquainted  him  with
thy  valour  and  thy  power;  but  as  often  as  I  threatened  him,  he  wept,
and  recited  verses,  and  he  said  to  me,  I  must  regain  my  wife  and  my
children,  or  I  will  die,  and  I  will  not  return  to  my  country  without
them.  He  hath  exposed  himself  to  peril,  and  come  to  the  Islands  of
Wak-Wak ;  and  I  have  not  seen  in  my  life  a  human  being  more
strong  of  heart  than  he,  nor  any  of  greater  valour ;  but  love  hath
gained  the  utmost  ascendancy  over  him. — When  the  Queen,  however,
heard  her  words,  and  understood  the  case  of  Hasan,  she  was  violently
enraged,  and  hung  down  her  head  for  a  while  towards  the  ground.
Then  she  raised  her  head,  and,  looking  at  the  old  woman,  said  to  her,
O  ill-omened  old  woman,  hath  thy  wickedness  occasioned  thee  to
convey  males,  and  conduct  them  to  the  Islands  of  Wak-Wak,  and
bring  them  in  unto  me,  without  fearing  my  authority  ?  By  the  head
of  the  King,  were  it  not  for  the  claim  thou  hast  upon  me  on  account
of  thy  having  reared  me,  I  would  slay  thee  and  him  this  instant  in
the  most  abominable  manner,  that  the  travellers  might  be  admonished
by  thine  example,  O  accursed  woman,  lest  any  one  else  should  do  the
like  of  this  egregious  deed  which  thou  hast  done,  and  which  none  was
able  to  do  before  !  But  go  forth  and  bring  him  this  instant,  that  I
may  see  him.

The  old  woman  therefore  went  forth  from  before  her,  confounded,
not  knowing  whither  to  go,  and  saying,  All  this  calamity  hath  God
sent  upon  me  from  this  Queen  by  means  of  Hasan  !  She  proceeded
until  she  went  in  to  Hasan,  when  she  said  to  him,  Arise :  answer  the
summons  of  the  Queen,  0  thou  whose  last  day  hath  drawn  near!  So
he  arose  with  her,  his  tongue  ceasing  not  to  utter  the  name  of  God
(extolled  be  it !),  saying,  0  Allah,  act  graciously  with  me  in  thine
appointment,  and  deliver  me  from  the  calamity  which  Thou  hast  sent
upon  me ! — She  went  on  with  him  until  she  stationed  him  before  the
Queen  Noor-el-Huda,  and  the  old  woman  directed  him  on  the  way  as
to  what  he  should  say  with  her.  And  when  he  presented  himself
before  Noor-el-Huda,  he  saw  her  with  a  litham  over  her  face  j  and  he
kissed  the  ground  before  her,  saluted  her,  and  recited  these  two
verses : —

May  God  perpetuate  thy  glory,  with  happiness,  and  enrich  thee  above  others

with  his  gifts,
And  may  our  Lord  increase  thy  glory  and  grandeur,  and  the  Mighty  aid  thee

against  thine  enemies !

Then,  when  he  had  ended  his  verses,  the  Queen  commanded  the  old

III.  3 K


434  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OP  EL-BASRAH.

M'oman  to  talk  with  him  before  her,  that  she  might  hear  his  answers.
The  old  woman  therefore  said,  The  Queen  returneth  thy  salutation,
and  saith  to  thee,  What  is  thy  name,  and  from  what  country  art  thou,
and  what  are  the  names  of  thy  wife  and  thy  children  on  account  of
whom  thou  hast  come,  and  what  is  the  name  of  thy  country  ?  So  he
answered  her  (and  he  had  fortified  his  heart,  and  destiny  aided  him),
0  Queen  of  the  age  and  period,  and  peerless  one  of  the  time,  as  to
me,  my  name  is  Hasan,  the  very  mournful,  and  my  city  is  El-Basrah ;
but  as  to  my  wife,  I  know  not  her  name :  as  to  my  children,  however,
one  is  named  Nasir,  and  the  other  is  named  Mansoor.  And  when  the
Queen  heard  his  words,  she  said,  And  whence  took  she  her  children  ?
He  answered  her,  0  Queen,  from  the  city  of  Baghdad,  from  the
palace  of  the  Khaleefeh.  She  then  said  to  him,  And  did  she  say  to
you  aught  at  the  time  of  her  flying  away  ?  He  answered,  She  said  to
my  mother,  When  thy  son  cometh,  and  the  days  of  separation  have
become  tedious  to  him,  and  he  desireth  nearness  and  meeting,  and
the  winds  of  longing  desire  agitate  him,  let  him  come  to  me  in  the
Islands  of  Wak-Wak. — And  thereupon  the  Queen  Noor-el-Huda  shook
her  head.  Then  she  said  to  him,  If  she  desired  thee  not,  she  had  not
said  to  thy  mother  these  words  ;  and  if  she  did  not  desire  thee  and
long  for  thine  approach,  she  had  not  acquainted  thee  with  the  place
of  her  abode,  nor  summoned  thee  to  her  country.  And  Hasan  said,
0  mistress  of  Kings,  and  ruler  over  every  King  and  pauper,  I  have
acquainted  thee  with  what  hath  happened,  and  I  have  not  concealed
of  it  aught.  I  implore  protection  of  God  and  of  thee,  begging  thee
not  to  oppress  me.  Have  compassion  upon  me,  and  gain  the  recom-
pense and  reward  that  will  be  given  for  me,  and  aid  me  to  accomplish
my  reunion  with  my  wife  and  my  children ;  dispel  my  sorrow  and
cheer  mine  eye  by  the  restoration  of  my  children,  and  help  me  with  a
sight  of  them. — Then  he  wept  and  yearned  and  lamented,  and  recited
some  verses.

Upon  this,  the  Queen  Noor-el-Hucla  hung  down  her  head  towards
the  ground  and  shook  it  for  a  long  time ;  after  which,  she  raised  it
and  said  to  him,  I  have  compassionated  thee  and  pitied  thee,  and  I
have  determined  that  I  will  display  to  thee  every  damsel  in  the  city
and  in  the  districts  of  my  island ;  and  if  thou  know  thy  wife,  I  will
deliver  her  to  thee ;  but  if  thou  know  her  not,  I  will  slay  thee,  and
crucify  thee  upon  the  door  of  the  house  of  the  old  woman.  And
Hasan  replied,  I  accept  this  proposal  from  thee,  0  Queen  of  the  age.
He  then  recited  these  verses  : —


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  435

You  have  roused  my  desire,  and  remained  at  ease: and  made  my  wounded

eyelid  to  be  wakeful,  and  slept :
A  nd  you  made  a  vow  to  me  that  you  would  not  be  backward ;  but  when  you  had

enchained  me,  you  acted  perfidiously.
I  loved  you  when  a  child,  not  knowing  what  was  love. Then  slay  me  not ;  for  I

complain  of  oppression.
Fear  you  not  God,  in  slaying  a  lover  who  watcheth  the  stars  while  others  are

asleep  ?
By  Allah,  O  my  people,  if  I  die,  write  ye  on  my  tombstone,  This  was  a  slave  of

love.
Perhaps  a  man  like  me,  whom  love  hath  afflicted,  when  he  seeth  my  grave,  may

give  me  his  salutation.

And  when  he  had  ended  his  verses,  he  said,  I  consent  to  the  condition"
which  thou  hast  imposed,  and  there  is  no  strength  nor  power  but  in
God,  the  High,  the  Great ! — The  Queen  Noor-el-Huda  then  gave
orders  that  no  damsel  in  the  city  should  remain  without  corning  up
to  the  palace  and  passing  before  him,  and  she  ordered  the  old  woman
Shawahee  herself  to  go  down  into  the  city  and  to  bring  every  damsel
therein  to  the  Queen  in  her  palace.  The  Queen  proceeded  to  introduce
the  damsels,  to  Hasan,  a  hundred  after  a  hundred,  until  there  remained
not  in  the  city  a  damsel  whom  she  did  not  display  to  him.  But  he
saw  not  his  wife  among  them.  The  Queen  asked  him  and  said  to  him,
Hast  thou  seen  her  among  these  ?  And  he  answered  her,  By  thy  life,
0  Queen,  she  is  not  among  them.  And  thereupon  the  rage  of  the
Queen  became  violent  against  him,  and  she  said  to  the  old  woman,
Enter,  and  bring  out  every  one  who  is  in  the  palace  and  display  them
to  him.  But  when  she  displayed  to  him  every  one  in  the  palace,  he
saw  not  his  wife  among  them  ;  and  he  said  to  the  Queen,  By  thy
head,  0  Queen,  she  is  not  among  them.  So  she  was  enraged,  and
she  cried  out  to  those  who  were  around  her,  saying,  Take  him  and
drag  him  upon  his  face  on  the  ground,  and  smite  off  his  head,  lest
any  one  after  him  expose  himself  to  peril  and  become  acquainted  with
our  condition,  and  come  unto  us  in  our  country,  and  tread  our  land
and  our  islands.

Accordingly  they  dragged  him  along  upon  his  face,  threw  his
skirt  over  him,  bound  his  eyes,  and  stood  with  the  swords  over  his
head,  waiting  for  permission.  And  upon  this,  Shawahee  advanced  to
the  Queen,  kissed  the  ground  before  her,  and,  taking  hold  of  her
skirt,  raised  it  over  her  head,  and  said  to  her,  0  Queen,  by  the  claim
that  I  have  upon  thee  for  rearing  thee,  hasten  not  to  punish  him,
especially  since  thou  k  no  west  that  this  poor  man  is  a  stranger,  who
hath  exposed  himself  to  peril,  and  endured  events  that  none  hath  en-


436


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.


dured  before  him,  and  God  (to  whom
be  ascribed  might  and  glory  !)  hath
saved  him  from  death  on  account  of
the  predestined  length  of  his  life.
He  had  heard  of  thy  justice,  and
entered  thy  country  and  thine  asylum  ;
therefore,  if  thou  slay  him,  the  news
will  be  spread  abroad  by  the  travellers,
respecting  thee,  that  thou  hatest  the
strangers,  and  slayest  them.  He  is
at  all  events  in  thy  power,  and  the
victim  of  thy  sword  if  his  wife  appear
not  in  thy  country ;  and  at  whatever
time  thou  shalt  desire  his  presence,
I  shall  be  able  to  bring  him  back
unto  thee.  Moreover,  I  granted  him
not  protection  save  with  the  desire  of
thy  generosity,  on  account  of  the
claim  that  I  have  upon  thee  for  having
reared  thee :  so  I  pledged  myself  to  him  that
thou  wouldst  enable  him  to  attain  the  object  of  his  search,
because  I  knew  thy  justice  and  thy  clemency.  Had  1  not
known  this  of  thee,  I  had  not  brought  him  into  thy  country,  and  said
within  myself,  The  Queen  will  divert  herself  by  seeing  him,  and  by
hearing  the  verses  and  the  charming  and  eloquent  words  which  he
will  utter,  and  which  will  be  like  strung  pearls.  This  man  hath
entered  our  country  and  eaten  our  food  :  so  it  is  expedient  that  we
give  him  his  due,  especially  since  I  promised  him  an  interview  with
thee;  and  thou  knowest  that  separation  is  hard  to  endure,  and
knowest  that  separation  is  slaughter,  especially  separation  from  one's
children.  Now  there  remaineth  not  any  one  of  the  women  for  us  to
display  except  thee  :  therefore  shew  him  thy  face.

At  this  the  Queen  smiled,  and  she  said,  How  can  he  be  my
husband,  and  have  had  children  by  me,  that  I  should  shew  him  my
face  ?  Then  she  gave  orders  to  bring  him  ;  wherefore  they  brought
him  in  to  her,  and  stationed  him  before  her,  and  she  uncovered  her
face ;  and  when  Hasan  beheld  it,  he  uttered  a  great  cry,  and  fell
down  in  a  fit.  So  the  old  woman  ceased  not  to  soothe  him  until  he
recovered;  and  when  he  recovered  from  his  fit,  he  recited  these
verses  : —


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  437

O  zephyr  that  liust  blown  from  the  land  of  El-'Erak  upon  the  tracts  of  the  country

of  VVak-Wak  !
Convey  to  the  heloved  the  information,  for  me,  that  I  die  of  the  bitter  taste  of

love.

0  object  of  my  love,  be  kind  and  propitious ! My  heart  is  dissolved  by  the  afflic-

tions of  separation.

And  when  he  had  ended  his  verses,  he  arose  and  looked  at  the  Queen,
and  again  uttered  a  great  cry,  whereat  the  palace  almost  fell  upon
those  who  were  in  it.  Then  a  second  time  he  fell  down  in  a  fit,  and
the  old  woman,  as  before,  ceased  not  to  soothe  him  until  he  recovered,
when  she  asked  him  respecting  his  state,  and  he  replied,  Verily  this
Queen  is  either  my  wife,  or  she  is  the  most  like,  of  all  persons,  to  my
wife.  So  the  Queen  said  to  the  old  woman,  Wo  to  thee,  O  nurse  !
Verily  this  stranger  is  mad,  or  disordered  in  mind ;  for  he  looketh  in
my  face  and  stareth. — The  old  woman  replied,  0  Queen,  this  man  is
excusable ;  therefore  blame  him  not,  since  it  is  said  in  the  proverb,
For  the  sick  of  love  there  is  no  remedy,  and  he  and  the  mad  are  alike.
— Then  Hasan  wept  violently,  and  recited  these  two  verses  : —

1  behold  their  footsteps,  and  melt  with  desire,  pouring  forth  my  tears  in  the

places  of  their  abode,

And  begging  of  Him  who  hath  afflicted  me  by  their  separation  that  He  will
graciously  vouchsafe  me  their  return.

— after  which  he  said  to  the  Queen,  By  Allah,  thou  art  not  my  wife ;
but,  of  all  persons,  thou  art  the  most  like  to  her.  And  the  Queen
Noor-el-Huda  laughed  until  she  fell  backwards  and  turned  upon  her
side.  She  then  said,  0  rny  friend,  act  leisurely,  and  observe  me  dis-
tinctly, and  answer  me  respecting  that  of  which  I  shall  ask  thee,  and
dismiss  from  thy  mind  insanity  and  perplexity  and  confusion ;  for
relief  hath  approached  thee.  So  Hasan  replied,  0  mistress  of  Kings,
and  refuge  of  every  rich  person  and  pauper,  when  I  beheld  thee,  I
became  mad,  seeing  thee  to  be  either  my  wife,  or,  of  all  persons,  the
most  like  to  my  wife  ;  and  now  ask  me  concerning  what  thou  wilt.
And  she  said,  What  is  there  in  thy  wife  that  resembleth  me  ?  He
answered,  0  my  mistress,  all  that  thou  hast,  of  beauty  and  loveliness,
and  elegance  and  amorous  manner  (as  the  justness  of  thy  shape,  and
the  sweetness  of  thy  speech,  and  the  redness  of  thy  cheeks,  and  other
things),  resembleth  her.  Then  the  Queen  looked  towards  Shawahee
Umm-ed-Dawahet-,  and  said  to  her,  0  my  mother,  take  him  back  to
his  place  where  he  was  with  thee,  and  do  thou  thyself  serve  him  until
I  investigate  his  case ;  and  if  this  man  be  a  person  of  generosity,  so
that  he  retain  the  feelings  of  companionship  and  friendship  and  affec-


438  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.

tion,  it  will  be  incumbent  on  us  to  aid  him  in  the  accomplishment  of
his  affair,  especially  since  he  hath  sojourned  in  our  country  and  eaten
our  food,  and  endured  the  difficulties  of  travel,  and  undergone  horrors
and  perils.  But  when  thou  hast  conveyed  him  to  thy  house,  give  a
charge  respecting  him  to  thy  servants,  and  return  to  me  speedily  ;
and  if  it  be  the  will  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !),  nought  but
good  shall  happen.

So  thereupon  the  old  woman  went  forth,  and  took  Hasan,  and,
having  gone  with  him  to  her  house,  she  ordered  her  female  slaves  and
her  servants  and  other  dependants  to  serve  him,  commanding  them
to  bring  to  him  all  that  he  required,  and  not  to  fail  in  doing  what
was  proper  for  him.  She  then  returned  to  the  Queen  with  speed,
and  the  Queen  ordered  her  to  arm  herself,  and  to  take  with  her  a
thousand  brave  horsemen.  And  the  old  woman  Shawahee  obeyed
her  command.  She  put  on  her  coats  of  mail,  and  summoned  the
thousand  horsemen ;  and  when  she  stood  before  the  Queen,  and  in-
formed her  that  the  thousand  horsemen  were  ready,  the  Queen  com-
manded her  to  go  to  the  city  of  the  supreme  King,  her  father,  and  to
alight  at  the  abode  of  his  daughter  Menar-es-Sena,30  her  sister,  and  to
say  to  her,  Clothe  thy  two  sons  with  the  two  coats  of  mail  which  I
have  made  for  them,  and  send  them  to  their  aunt ;  for  she  is  desirous
of  seeing  them.  And  she  said  to  her  also,  I  charge  thee,  0  my
mother,  to  conceal  the  affair  of  Hasan ;  and  when  thou  hast  received
the  two  children  from  her,  say  to  her,  Thy  sister  iuviteth  thee  to  visit
her.  Then,  when  she  hath  given  thee  her  two  children,  and  come
forth  with  them  to  visit  me,  bring  thou  the  two  children  speedily,  and
let  her  come  at  her  leisure.  Come  thou  by  a  way  different  from  that
by  which  she  shall  come,  and  let  thy  journey  be  continued  night  and
day,  and  beware  that  no  one  become  acquainted  with  this  affair.
Then  I  will  swear  by  all  oaths,  that  if  my  sister  prove  to  be  his  wife,
and  it  appear  that  her  children  are  his  children,  I  will  not  prevent  his
taking  her,  nor  her  journeying  with  him  and  with  her  children  to  his
country. — And  the  old  woman  confided  in  her  words,  not  knowing
what  she  purposed  in  her  mind ;  for  the  wicked  woman  had  purposed
in  her  mind,  that  if  she  were  not  his  wife,  and  if  her  children  did  not
resemble  him,  she  would  slay  him.  The  Queen  then  said  to  the  old
woman,  0  my  mother,  if  my  imagination  tell  truth,  my  sister  Menar-
es-Sena  is  his  wife  (but  God  is  all-knowing)  ;  for  these  characteristics
are  hers,  and  all  the  qualities  that  he  hath  mentioned,  her  surpassing
loveliness  and  exceeding  beauty,  arc  not  found  in  any  one  except  my


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  439

sisters ;  and  especially  are  they  found  in  the  youngest. — Then  the  old
woman  kissed  her  hand,  and  returned  to  Hasan,  and  acquainted  him
with  that  which  the  Queen  had  said ;  on  his  hearing  which,  his  reason
fled  in  consequence  of  his  joy,  and  he  arose  and  advanced  to  the  old
woman  and  kissed  her  head.  But  she  said  to  him,  O  my  son,  kiss
not  rny  head :  kiss  me  on  my  mouth,  and  let  this  kiss  be  a  gratuity
for  thy  safety.  Be  of  good  heart  and  cheerful  eye,  and  let  not  thy
bosom  be  otherwise  than  dilated  ;  and  dislike  not  kissing  me  on  my
mouth,  for  I  have  been  the  cause  of  thine  interview  with  her.  Comfort
thy  heart  and  thy  mind,  and  be  not  otherwise  than  with  dilated  bosom,
cheerful  eye,  and  tranquil  soul. — She  then  bade  him  farewell,  and
departed.

The  old  woman  equipped  herself  with  her  arms,  and,  taking  with
her  a  thousand  armed  horsemen,  repaired  to  that  island  in  which  was
the  sister  of  the  Queen ;  and  she  proceeded  until  she  came  to  the
Queen's  sister.  Between  the  city  of  Noor-el-Huda  and  that  of  her
sister  was  a  space  of  three  days'  journey.  And  when  Shawahee
arrived  at  the  city,  and  went  up  to  the  Queen's  sister,  Menar-es-Sena,
she  saluted  her,  and  gave  her  the  salutation  of  her  sister  Noor-el-
Huda,  acquainted  her  with  her  sister's  desire  to  see  her  and  her
children,  and  informed  her  that  the  Queen  Noor-el-Huda  reproved
her  for  not  visiting  her.  So  the  Queen  Menar-es-Sena  replied,
Verily  I  am  indebted  to  my  sister,  and  I  have  been  deficient  in  the
duty  I  owe  her,  in  my  not  visiting  her ;  but  I  will  visit  her  now.
She  then  gave  orders  to  take  forth  her  tents  to  the  outside  of  the  city,
and  took  with  her  for  her  sister  a  present  and  rarities  suitable  to  her.
And  her  father  the  King,  looking  from  the  windows  of  the  palace,
saw  the  tents  pitched.  He  therefore  asked  respecting  them ;  and
they  answered  him,  The  Queen  Menar-es-Sena  hath  pitched  her  tents
in  that  route ;  for  she  desireth  to  visit  her  sister  Noor-el-Huda.
And  when  the  King  heard  thereof,  he  prepared  for  her  some  troops
to  conduct  her  to  her  sister,  and  took  forth  from  his  treasuries,  of
riches,  and  of  food  and  drink,  and  of  rarities  and  jewels,  what  words
would  fail  to  describe.  The  seven  daughters  of  the  King  were  of  one
father  and  one  mother,  except  the  youngest :  the  eldest  was  named
Noor-el-Huda;  the  second,  Nejm-es-Sabah;  the  third,  Shems-ed-
Doha,;  the  fourth,  Shejeret-ed-Durr;  the  fifth,  Koot-el-Kuloob ;  the
sixth,  Sharaf-el-Bemit ;  and  the  seventh,  Menar-es-Sena;51  and  she
was  the  youngest  of  them,  and  was  the  wife  of  Hasan,  and  she  was
their  sister  by  the  father's  side  only.  Then  the  old  woman  came  and


440


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH


kissed  the  ground  before  Menar-es-Sena.
So  Menar-es-Sena  said  to  her,  Hast  thou
any  want,  0  my  mother?  And  she  an-
swered her,  The  Queen  Noor-el-Huda,  thy
sister,  desireth  thee  to  change  the  apparel
of  thy  two  sons,  and  to  clothe  them  with
the  two  coats  of  mail  which  she  hath  made
for  them,  and  to  send  them  with  me  unto
her,  and  I  will  take  them  and  go  on  before
with  them,  and  will  be  the  announcer  of
the  glad  tidings  of  thy  coming  to  her.
But  when  Menar-es-Sena  heard  the  words
of  the  old  woman,  she  hung  down  her  head
towards  the  ground,  and  her  complexion
had  changed ;  and  she  ceased  not  to  hang
down  her  head  for  a  long  time.  Then  she
shook  her  head,  and  raising  it  towards  the
old  woman,  said  to  her,  O  my  mother,  my  mind  was
violently  agitated,  and  my  heart  throbbed,  when  thou
mentionest  my  children;  for  from  the  time  of  their
birth  none  of  the  Jinn  nor  any  of  mankind  hath  seen  their  faces,
neither  female  nor  male,  and  I  am  jealous,  for  them,  of  the  zephyr
when  it  bloweth  in  the  night.  So  the  old  woman  said  to  her,  What
are  these  words,  O  my  mistress  ?  Dost  thou  fear,  on  their  account,
thy  sister  ?  Allah  preserve  thy  reason !  If  thou  wouldst  disobey  the
Queen  in  this  thing,  thou  couldst  not  disobey;  for  she  would  reprove
thee.  However,  0  my  mistress,  thy  children  are  young,  and  thou
art  excusable  in  fearing  for  them,  and  the  loving  is  addicted  to  evil
imagination.  But,  O  my  daughter,  thou  knowest  my  kindness  and
my  love  for  thee  and  for  thy  children,  and  I  reared  you  before  them.
I  will  receive  them  and  take  them,  and  spread  for  them  my  cheek  as
a  carpet,  and  open  my  heart  and  put  them  within  it,  and  I  require  no
charge  respecting  them  in  such  a  case  as  this.  Therefore  be  of  good
heart  and  cheerful  eye,  and  send  them  to  her,  and  at  most  I  shall  be
before  thee  one  day  or  two. — She  ceased  not  to  urge  her  until  her  temper
was  softened,  and  she  feared  the  anger  of  her  sister,  and  knew  not  what
was  concealed  from  her  in  the  secret  purpose  of  God.  So  she  consented
to  send  them  with  the  old  woman,  and,  having  called  for  them,  she
bathed  them  and  made  them  ready,  changed  their  apparel,  clad  them
with  the  two  coats  of  mail,  and  delivered  them  to  the  old  woman.


THE  STORY  OP  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH  441

She  therefore  took  them  and  proceeded  with  them  like  a  bird,  by
a  different  way  from  that  by  which  their  mother  was  going,  as  the
Queen  Noor-el-IIuda  had  charged  her.  She  ceased  not  to  prosecute
her  journey  with  diligence,  fearing  for  them,  until  she  arrived  with
them  at  the  city  of  the  Queen  Noor-el-Huda.  She  crossed  the  river
with  them,  entered  the  city,  and  went  with  them  to  the  Queen  their
aunt ;  and  when  the  Queen  saw  them,  she  rejoiced  at  their  arrival,
embraced  them,  and  pressed  them  to  her  bosom,  and  seated  one  upon
her  right  thigh,  and  the  other  upon  her  left  thigh.  Then  she  looked
towards  the  old  woman,  and  said  to  her,  Bring  now  Hasan  ;  for  I
have  given  him  my  protection,  and  granted  him  deliverance  from  my
sword,  and  he  hath  sought  defence  in  my  mansion,  and  alighted  in
my  abode,  after  having  endured  horrors  and  difficulties,  and  escaped
the  causes  of  death  that  were  attended  by  increasing  anxiety,  yet  to
the  present  time  hath  not  become  secure  from  drinking  the  cup  of
death,  and  from  the  stopping  of  his  breath.  The  old  woman  therefore
said  to  her,  If  I  bring  him  before  thee,  wilt  thou  reunite  him  and
them  ;  and  if  it  appear  not  that  they  are  his  children,  wilt  thou  pardon
him,  and  send  him  back  to  his  country  ?  But  when  the  Queen  heard
her  words,  she  was  violently  enraged,  and  said,  Wo  to  thee,  0  ill-
omened  old  woman  !  How  long  shall  continue  this  guile  in  the  affair
of  this  stranger,  who  hath  emboldened  himself  against  us,  and  re-
moved our  veil,  and  become  acquainted  with  our  circumstances  ?
Doth  he  imagine  that  he  can  come  to  our  country,  and  see  our  faces,
and  soil  our  reputations,  and  return  to  his  country  in  safety,  and  dis-
grace us  in  his  country  and  among  his  people,  and  that  our  story
shall  reach  all  the  Kings  in  the  regions  of  the  earth,  and  the  merchants
travel  about  relating  our  story  in  every  quarter,  and  saying,  A  human
being  hath  entered  the  Islands  of  Wak-Wak,  and  crossed  the  countries
of  the  enchanters  and  sorcerers,  and  trod  the  Land  of  the  Jann  and
the  Lauds  of  the  Wild  Beasts  and  the  Birds,  and  returned  in  safety  ?
This  shall  never  be.  I  swear  by  the  Creator  of  Heaven,  and  its
Architect,  and  the  Expander  of  the  Earth,  and  its  Spreader,  and  the
Creator  of  the  Creatures,  and  their  Numberer,  if  they  be  not  his
children,  I  will  surely  slay  him,  and  I  will  be  the  smiter  off  of  his
head  with  mine  own  hand  ! — She  then  cried  out  at  the  old  woman,
who  thereupon  fell  down  through  fear;  and  she  set  upon  her  the
chamberlain  and  twenty  memlooks,  and  said  to  them,  Go  with  this
old  woman,  and  bring  me  the  young  man  who  is  in  her  house,  with
speed.

III.  3 L


4-12


TIIK  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASK  AH.


So  the  old  woman  went  forth,  dragged  along,  with  the  chamber-
lain and  the  memlooks ;  and  her  complexion  had  turned  sallow,  and
the  muscles  of  her  side  quivered.  She  proceeded  to  her  abode,  and
went  into  Hasan ;  and  when  she  went  in  to  him,  he  rose  to  her  and
kissed  her  hands  and  saluted  her.  She,  however,  saluted  not  him  ;
but  said  to  him,  Arise,  and  answer  the  summons  of  the  Queen.  Did
I  not  say  to  thee,  Return  to  thy  country — and  did  I  not  forbid  thy
doing  all  this  ?  But  thou  heardest  not  my  words.  And  did  I  not
say  to  thee,  I  will  give  thee  what  none  is  able  to  procure,  and  return
thou  to  thy  country  soon  ?  But  thou  obeyedst  me  not,  nor  heardest
my  words,  but  actedst  contrary  to  my  advice,  and  chosest  destruction
for  me  and  for  thyself.  Take  then  what  thou  hast  chosen ;  for  death
is  near.  Arise ;  answer  the  summons  of  this  wicked,  sinful,  oppres-
sive, tyrannical  woman. — So  Hasan  arose,  'broken-spirited,  with
mourning  heart,  fearing,  and  saying,  0  God  of  peace,  preserre  me!
O  Allah,  act  graciously  with  me  in  the  trial  which  Thou  hast  decreed
to  fall  upon  me,  and  protect  me,  0  most  merciful  of  those  who  shew
mercy  !  And  he  had  despaired  of  life.  He  repaired  with  the  twenty
memlooks  and  the  chamberlain  and  the  old  woman,  and  they  went  in
to  the  Queen  with  Hasan,  who  found  his  two  sons  Nasir  and  Mansoor
sitting  in  her  lap,  and  she  was  playing  with  them,  and  cheering  them

by  conversation.  When  his  eye  fell
upon  them,  he  knew  them,  and,  utter-
ing a  great  cry,  fell  upon  the  floor  in
a  fit  by  reason  of  the  violence  of  his
joy  at  seeing  his  two  children ;  and
I  when  he  recovered,  he  knew  his  chil-
dren, and  they  knew  him,  and  natural
affection  moved  them  so  that  they
extricated  themselves  from  the  lap  of
the  Queen,  and  stood  by  Hasan ;  and
God  (to  whom  be  ascribed  might  and
glory  !)  caused  them  to  utter  the  ex-
clamation, 0  our  father  !  Upon  this,
the  old  woman  and  the  rest  who  were
present  wept  in  compassion  and  pity
for  them,  and  said,  Praise  be  to  God,
who  hath  reunited  you  to  your  father!
And  when  Hasan  recovered  from  his
fit,  he  embraced  his  children.  Then


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  KL-UASUAH.  443

he  wept  until  he  fainted  again ;  and  having  recovered  from  his  fit,  he
recited  these  verses  : —

By  your  existence,  my  heart  would  be  unable  to  endure  separation  even  if  union

were  perdition !
Your  phantom  saith  to  me,  We  shall  meet  to-morrow. Shall  I  live,  in  spite  of

the  enemies,  till  the  morrow  ?
By  your  existence,  O  my  mistress,  since  the  day  of  your  separation,  the  sweets  of

life  have  never  delighted  me  !
If  God  decree  my  death  on  account  of  my  love  of  you,  I  will  die  loving  you

among  the  greatest  of  martyrs.52
Oft  doth  a  gazelle  make  my  heart  her  pasturage  ;  but  her  person,  like  sleep,  hath

fled  from  mine  eye.
If  she  deny,  in  the  battle-field  of  law,  the  fact  of  her  shedding  my  blood,  on  her

cheeks  it  beareth  witness.

But  when  the  Queen  had  certified  herself  that  the  little-ones  were
the  children  of  Hasan,  and  that  her  sister,  the  lady  Menar-es-Sena,
was  his  wife,  in  search  of  whom  he  had  come,  she  was  enraged  against
her  with  a  violent  rage,  not  to  be  exceeded;  and  she  cried  out  in  the
face  of  Hasan,  who  fainted  thereupon  ;  and  when  he  recovered  from
.his  fit,  he  recited  these  verses  : —

You  are  distant ;  but  to  my  mind  you  are  the  nearest  of  people :  and  you  are

absent ;  but  in  my  heart  you  are  still  present.
By  Allah,  I  have  not  turned  from  you  to  another ;  but  I  bear  with  patience  the

tyranny  of  fortune.
Nights  pass  and  end  while  I  still  love  you,  and  in  my  heart  is  a  flame,  and  a

raging  fire.
I  was  one  who  consented  not  to  an  hour's  estrangement. How  then  must  be

my  case  when  months  have  passed  over  me  ?
I  am  jealous  when  a  zephyr  bloweth  upon  you. Verily  I  am  jealous  for  the

beautiful,  soft  damsel.

Then,  having  ended  his  verses,  he  fell  down  again  m  a  fit ;  and  when
he  recovered,  he  saw  that  they  had  taken  him  forth,  dragged  along
upon  his  face.  So  he  rose  and  walked,  stumbling  upon  his  skirts,
and  not  believing  in  his  escape  from  that  which  he  had  suffered  from
her ;  and  this  was  grievous  to  the  old  woman  Shawahee ;  but  she
could  not  address  the  Queen  on  the  subject  of  his  case  by  reason  of
the  violence  of  her  anger.  Now  when  Hasan  went  forth  from  the
palace,  he  became  perplexed,  not  knowing  whither  to  go,  nor  to  what
place  to  come,  nor  whither  to  repair.  The  world,  with  its  amplitude,
became  strait  unto  him,  and  he  found  not  any  one  to  converse  with
him  and  cheer  him  by  his  company,  nor  any  one  to  comfort  him,  nor
any  one  of  whom  to  ask  advice,  nor  any  one  to  whom  to  resort  and
to  whom  to  apply  for  refuge.  He  therefore  made  sure  of  destruction ;


444  THE  STORY  OP  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.

for  he  was  unable  to  travel,  and  knew  not  any  one  with  whom  to
travel,  nor  knew  he  the  way,  nor  was  he  able  to  traverse  the  Valley  of
the  Jann,  and  the  Land  of  the  Wild  Beasts,  and  the  Islands  of  the
Birds  :  therefore  he  despaired  of  life.  Then  he  wept  for  himself  until
he  fainted ;  and  when  he  recovered,  he  thought  upon  his  children  and
his  wife,  and  her  coming  to  her  sister,  and  thought  upon  what  might
happen  to  her  with  the  Queen,  her  sister.  He  repented  of  his  having
come  to  this  country,  and  of  his  not  having  attended  to  the  words  of
any  one ;  and  he  recited  some  mournful  verses ;  after  which  he  ceased
not  to  walk  on  until  he  went  forth  to  the  outside  of  the  city,  when  he
found  the  river,  and  he  proceeded  along  its  bank,  not  knowing  whither
to  repair.

But  as  to  his  wife,  Menar-es-Sena,  she  desired  to  set  forth  on  her
journey  on  the  second  day  after  that  on  which  the  old  woman  set
forth.  While,  however,  she  was  meditating  to  depart,  lo,  the  cham-
berlain of  the  King  her  father  came  in  to  her,  and  kissed  the  ground
before  her,  and  said  to  her,  O  Queen,  thy  father  the  supreme  King
saluteth  thee  and  calleth  thee  to  him.  So  she  arose  and  repaired
with  the  chamberlain  to  her  father  to  see  what  he  wanted.  And
when  her  father  saw  her,  he  seated  her  by  his  side  upon  the  couch,
and  said  to  her,  O  my  daughter,  know  that  I  have  seen  this  last
night  a  vision,  and  I  fear  for  thee  in  consequence  thereof,  and  fear
that  there  will  occur  to  thee,  from  this  thy  journey,  long-continued
anxiety.  She  therefore  said  to  him,  Wherefore,  O  my  father;  and
what  didst  thou  see  in  thy  sleep  ?  And  he  answered,  I  beheld  as
though  I  entered  a  repository  of  treasure,  and  saw  in  it  great  riches,
and  jewels  and  jacinths  in  abundance,  and  as  though  there  pleased
me  not  in  all  that  treasure,  nor  among  all  those  jewels,  aught  save
seven  beads,  which  were  the  most  beautiful  of  the  things  there.  And
I  chose,  of  the  seven  jewels,  one,  which  was  the  smallest  of  them,  and
the  most  beautiful  of  them,  and  the  most  excellent  of  them  in
brilliancy ;  and  it  seemed  as  though  I  took  it  in  my  hand,  when  its
beauty  pleased  me,  and  went  forth  with  it  from  the  repository  of
treasure.  But  when  I  went  forth  from  its  door,  I  opened  my  hand,
being  joyful,  and  turned  over  the  jewel ;  and,  lo,  a  strange  bird  had
approached  from  a  distant  country — it  was  not  of  the  birds  of  our
country — and  it  pounced  down  upon  me  from  the  sky,  seized  the
jewel  from  my  hand,  and  returned  with  it  to  the  place  whence  it  had
come.53  So  anxiety  and  sorrow  and  vexation  came  upon  me,  and  I
was  affected  with  exceeding  terror,  which  roused  me  from  my  sleep,


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  445

and  I  awoke  mournful,  lamenting  the  loss  of  that  jewel.  Therefore
when  I  awoke,  I  summoned  the  interpreters  and  expounders,  and
related  to  them  my  dream ;  and  they  said  to  me,  Thou  hast  seven
daughters,  the  youngest  of  whom  thou  wilt  lose,  and  she  will  be  taken
from  thee  forcibly,  without  thy  consent.  Now  thou,  O  my  daughter,
art  the  youngest  of  my  daughters,  and  the  dearest  of  them  in  my
estimation,  and  the  most  generous  of  them  to  me ;  and  now  thou  art
about  to  journey  to  thy  sister,  and  I  know  not  what  will  befall  thee
from  her  :  therefore  go  not ;  but  return  to  thy  palace. — And  when
Memir-es-Sena  heard  the  words  of  her  father,  her  heart  throbbed,
and  she  feared  for  her  children,  and  hung  down  her  head  for  a  while
towards  the  ground.  Then  she  raised  her  head  towards  her  father,
and  said  to  him,  0  King,  verily  the  Queen  Noor-el-Huda  hath  pre-
pared for  me  an  entertainment,  and  she  is  expecting  my  coming  to
her  hour  after  hour.  For  four  years  she  hath  not  seen  me,  and  if  I
delay  visiting  her,  she  will  be  incensed  against  me ;  and  the  utmost
period  of  my  stay  with  her  will  be  a  month,  after  which  I  shall  be
with  thee  again.  Besides,  who  is  this  person  who  can  invade  our
country  and  gain  access  to  the  Islands  of  Wak-Wak  ?  And  who
can  gain  access  to  the  White  Land,  and  the  Black  Mountain,  and
come  to  the  Island  of  Camphor,  and  the  Castle  of  Crystal  ;54  and  how
can  he  traverse  the  Valley  of  the  Birds ;  then  the  Valley  of  the  Wild
Beasts ;  then  the  Valley  of  the  Jann ;  and  then  enter  our  Islands  ?
If  any  stranger  came  in  to  them,  he  would  be  drowned  in  the  seas  of
destructions.  Therefore  let  thy  soul  be  happy  and  thine  eye  be
cheerful  with  regard  to  my  journey ;  for  no  one  hath  power  to  tread
our  land. — And  she  ceased  not  to  persuade  him  until  he  granted  her
permission  to  go.  He  then  ordered  a  thousand  horsemen  to  journey
with  her,  to  conduct  her  to  the  river,  and  there  to  remain  until  she
should  arrive  at  the  city  of  her  sister  and  enter  her  sister's  palace.
He  also  ordered  them  to  remain  with  her  till  they  should  take  her
and  bring  her  back  to  her  father  ;  and  her  father  charged  her  that
she  should  remain  with  her  sister  two  days  only,  and  then  return
speedily.  So  she  said,  I  hear  and  obey.

She  then  arose  and  went  forth,  and  her  father  went  forth  with
her,  and  bade  her  farewell.  The  words  of  her  father  had  made  an
impression  upon  her  heart,  and  she  feared  for  her  children  ;  but  forti-
fying oneself  by  caution  against  the  assault  of  destiny  is  of  no  avail.
She  prosecuted  her  journey  with  diligence  for  three  days  with  their
nights,  until  she  arrived  at  the  river,  and  pitched  her  tents  on  its


440  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.

bank.  Then  she  crossed  the  river,  having  with  her  some  of  her  pages
and  other  followers,  and  her  wezeers ;  and  when  she  arrived  at  the
city  of  the  Queen  Noor-el-Huda,  she  ascended  to  the  palace,  and
went  in  to  her ;  and  she  saw  her  children  weeping  by  her,  and  crying
out,  O  our  father  !  So  the  tears  flowed  from  her  eyes,  and  she  wept,
and  pressing  her  children  to  her  bosom,  she  said  to  them,  Have  ye
seen  your  father?  Would  that  the  hour  had  never  been  when  I
parted  from  him  !  And  if  I  knew  that  he  were  in  the  abode  of  the
world,  I  would  convey  you  to  him. — She  then  lamented  for  herself
and  for  her  husband  and  for  the  weeping  of  her  children,  and  recited
these  verses : —

My  beloved,  notwithstanding  distance  and  cruelty,  I  desire  you  and  incline  to

you,  wherever  you  are,
And  mine  eye  looketh  towards  your  home,  and  my  heart  lamenteth  that  the  days

when  you  were  with  me  are  past.
How  many  nights  have  we  passed  without  suspicion,  loving  one  another,  fidelity

and  kindness  rejoicing  us !

But  when  her  sister  saw  that  she  pressed  her  children  to  her  bosom,
and  said,  I  have  occasioned  this  to  befall  myself  and  my  children,  and
have  made  my  house  desolate — she  saluted  her  not :  on  the  contrary,
she  said  to  her,  0  wicked  woman,  how  hadst  thou  these  children  ?
Hast  thou  married  without  the  knowledge  of  thy  father,  or  hast  thou
formed  an  unlawful  connection  ?  If  thou  have  done  this,  thou  must
be  severely  punished ;  and  if  thou  have  married  without  our  know-
ledge, wherefore  didst  thou  quit  thy  husband  and  take  thy  children,
separating  them  from  their  father,  and  come  to  our  country  ?  More-
over thou  hast  concealed  thy  children  from  us.  Dost  thou  imagine
that  we  knew  not  that  ?  By  Allah  (whose  name  be  exalted !),  who
knoweth  all  secrets,  thy  case  hath  been  made  manifest  to  us,  and  thy
state  hath  been  revealed,  and  thy  shameful  secrets  have  been  exposed.
— Then,  after  that,  she  ordered  her  guards  to  lay  hold  upon  her.  So
they  seized  her,  and  she  bound  her  hands  behind  her,  shackled  her
with  shackles  of  iron,  and  inflicted  upon  her  a  painful  beating,  so
that  she  lacerated  her  skin  ;  and  she  suspended  her  by  her  hair,  put
her  into  a  prison,  and  wrote  a  letter  to  the  supreme  King,  her  father,
informing  him  of  her  story,  and  saying  to  him, —

There  hath  appeared  in  our  country  a  man  of  the  human  race,  and
my  sister,  Menar-es-Sena,  asserteth  that  she  hath  married  him  law-
fully and  had  by  him  two  sons,  whom  she  hath  concealed  from  us
and  from  thec ;  but  she  revealed  not  aught  respecting  herself  until


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH


447


that  man,  who  is  of  the  human  race,  came  to  us.  His  name  is  Hasan,
and  he  hath  informed  us  that  he  married  her,  and  that  she  resided
with  him  a  long  time ;  after  which  she  took  her  children  and  departed
without  his  knowledge,  having  told  his  mother,  at  her  departure,  and
said  to  her,  Say  to  thy  son,  when  he  hath  a  longing  to  see  me,  that
he  must  come  to  the  Islands  of  Wak-Wak.  So  we  seized  the  man
in  our  abode,  and  I  sent  to  her  the  old  woman  Shawahee  to  bring
her  to  me,  together  with  her  children;  wherefore  she  fitted  herself
out  and  came.  And  I  had  ordered  the  old  woman  to  bring  to  me
her  children  first,  and  to  come  on  in  advance  to  me  with  them,
before  the  arrival  of  their  mother.  Accordingly  the  old  woman  came
with  the  children  before  her  arrival.  Then  I  sent  to  the  man  who
asserted  her  to  be  his  wife ;  and  when  he  came  in  to  me,  and  saw  the
children,  he  knew  them.  So  I  was  certified  that  they  were  his
children  and  that  she  was  his  wife,  and  I  knew  that  the  saying  of  the
man  was  true,  that  there  was  no  disgracefulness  in  him,  and  I  saw
that  the  turpitude  and  disgracefulness  were  in  my  sister.  I  therefore


448  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  KL-BASHAII.

feared  that  we  should  be  dishonoured  in  the  opinion  of  the  people  of
our  islands ;  and  when  this  wicked,  deceitful  woman  came  in  to  me,
I  was  incensed  against  her,  and  inflicted  upon  her  a  painful  beating,
and  suspended  her  by  her  hair.  Now  I  have  acquainted  thee  with
her  story ;  and  it  is  thine  to  command  :  whatever  thou  shalt  order  us
to  do,  we  will  do  it.  Thou  knowest  that  this  thing  is  attended  with
dishonour  to  us,  and  with  disgrace  to  us  and  to  thee;  for  probably
the  people  of  the  islands  will  hear  thereof,  and  we  shall  become
among  them  an  example ;  wherefore  it  is  expedient  that  thou  return
us  a  reply  speedily.

She  gave  the  letter  to  the  messenger,  who  went  with  it  to  the
King ;  and  when  the  supreme  King  read  it,  he  was  violently  enraged
against  his  daughter  Menar-es-Sena,  and  wrote  to  his  daughter  Noor-
el-Huda  a  letter,  in  which  he  said  to  her,  I  have  committed  her  case
unto  thee,  and  given  thee  power  over  her  life ;  and  if  the  thing  be  as
thou  hast  said,  slay  her,  and  consult  me  not  respecting  her  case.  So
when  the  letter  of  her  father  came  to  her,  and  she  read  it,  she  sent  to
Menar-es-Sena,  and  caused  her  to  be  brought  before  her.  She  was
drowned  in  her  blood,  having  her  hands  bound  behind  her  with  her
hair,  shackled  with  heavy  shackles  of  iron,  and  upon  her  was  apparel
of  hair-cloth.  They  stationed  her  before  the  Queen,  and  she  stood
abject  and  abased ;  and  when  she  beheld  herself  in  this  state  of  great
abasement,  and  excessive  contempt,  she  reflected  upon  her  former
glory,  and  wept  violently,  and  recited  these  two  verses  :  —

0  my  Lord,  the  enemies  are  attempting  to  destroy  me,  and  imagine  that  I  cannot

escape  from  them.

1  have  recourse  to  Thee  to  annul  what  they  have  done ! O  my  Lord,  Thou  art

the  refuge  of  the  fearful,  the  suppliant !

And  again  she  wept  violently,  until  she  fell  down  in  a  fit ;  and  when
she  recovered,  she  recited  some  other  verses.

Her  sister  then  caused  a  ladder  of  wood  to  be  brought  to  her,  and
extended  her  upon  it,  and  ordered  the  servants  to  bind  her  upon  her
back  on  the  ladder,  stretched  forth  her  arms  and  tied  them  with  cords,
uncovered  her  head,  and  wound  her  hair  upon  the  ladder ;  and  pity
for  her  had  been  eradicated  from  her  heart.  So  when  Menar-es-Sena
beheld  herself  in  this  state  of  abasement  and  contempt,  she  cried  out
and  wept :  but  no  one  aided  her.  She  said  to  the  Queen,  0  my
sister,  how  is  it  that  thy  heart  is  hardened  against  rne,  and  thou  hast
no  mercy  on  me,  nor  hast  mercy  on  these  little  infants?  But  when
she  heard  these  words,  her  hardness  of  heart  increased,  and  she  reviled


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  449

her,  and  said  to  her,  0  wanton !  O  wicked  woman !  may  God  shew
no  mercy  to  the  person  who  sheweth  mercy  to  thee!  How  can  I
have  pity  on  thee,  O  deceitful  woman  ? — So  Menar-es-Sena,  lying
stretched  (as  above  described),  said  to  her,  I  appeal  against  thee  to
the  Lord  of  Heaven  with  regard  to  that  wherewith  thou  reproachest
me,  and  I  am  innocent  of  it.  By  Allah,  I  have  not  formed  an  un-
lawful connection  ;  but  I  married  him  legally ;  and  my  Lord  knoweth
whether  my  words  be  true  or  not.  My  heart  is  incensed  against
thee  on  account  of  the  excessive  hardness  of  thy  heart  towards  me.
How  is  it  that  thou  accusest  me  of  dishonesty  without  knowledge
thereof?  But  my  Lord  will  deliver  me  from  thee;  and  if  the  accu-
sation of  dishonesty  that  thou  hast  brought  against  me  be  true,  God
will  punish  me  for  it. — And  her  sister  meditated  in  her  mind  when
she  heard  her  words,  and  said  to  her,  How  is  it  that  thou  addressest
me  with  these  words  ?  Then  she  arose  and  advanced  to  her,  and
beat  her  until  she  fainted ;  and  they  sprinkled  water  upon  her  face
till  she  recovered.  Her  charms  had  become  changed  by  reason  of
the  violence  of  the  beating,  and  the  tightness  of  the  bonds,  and  the
excessive  insult  that  she  had  experienced ;  and  she  recited  these  two
verses : —

If  I  have  committed  a  crhr.s,  and  done  an  iniquitous  deed,

I  repent  of  What  hath  passed,  and  have  come  to  you  begging  pardon.

But  when  Xoor-el-Huda  heard  her  verses,  she  was  violently  incensed,
and  said  to  her,  Dost  thou  speak,  O  wicked  woman,  before  me  in  verse,
and  seek  to  excuse  thyself  for  the  heinous  sins  that  thou  hast  com-
mitted ?  It  was  my  desire  that  thou  shouldst  return  to  thy  husband,
in  order  that  I  might  witness  thy  wickedness  and  thy  turpitude ;  for
thou  gloriest  in  the  wickedness  and  shameful  conduct  and  heinous
sins  that  have  proceeded  from  -thee. — She  then  ordered  the  pages  to
bring  her  the  palm-stick  :  so  they  brought  it ;  and  she  arose  and
tucked  up  the  sleeves  from  her  arms,  and  fell  to  beating  her  from
her  head  to  her  feet ;  after  which  she  called  for  a  plaited  whip,  such
that  if  an  elephant  were  beaten  with  it  he  would  trot  with  speed;
and  she  fell  to  beating  her  with  that  whip  upon  her  back  and  her
stomach  and  all  her  limbs  until  she  fainted. — Now  when  the  old
woman  Shawahee  saw  this  that  the  Queen  did,  she  went  forth  fleeing
from  before  her,  and  weeping  and  cursing  her.  But  the  Queen  cried
out  to  the  servants,  and  said  to  them,  Bring  her  to  me  !  So  they
ran  together  after  her,  and  laid  hold  upon  her,  and  brought  her

III.  3 M


450


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.


before  the  Queen,  who  gave  orders  to  throw  her  upon  the  ground,
and  said  to  the  female  slaves,  Drag  her  along  on  her  face,  and  turn
her  out.  Accordingly  they  dragged  her  and  turned  her  out  from
before  the  Queen.

As  to  Hasan,  however,  he  arose  with  firmness,  and  walked  along
the  bank  of  the  river,  and  turned  his  face  towards  the  desert.  He
was  perplexed,  anxious,  despairing  of  life,  and  he  had  become  con-
founded, not  knowing  night  from  day,  by  reason  of  the  violence  of
the  afflictions  that  had  befallen  him.  He  ceased  not  to  walk  on  until
he  came  to  a  tree,  and  he  found  upon  it  a  paper  suspended.  So  he
took  it  with  his  hand,  and  looked  at  it;  and,  lo,  on  it  were  written
these  verses  : —

I  disposed  thine  affair  at  the  time  when  thou  wast  in  thy  mother's  womb,
And  inclined  her  heart  to  thee  so  that  she  fostered  thee  in  her  bosom.
We  will  suffice  thee  in  matters  that  occasion  thee  anxiety  and  sorrow.
So  submit  to  us,  and  arise. We  will  aid  thee  in  thine  enterprise.

And  when  he  had  finished  reading  the  paper,  he  felt  sure  of  escape
from  trouble,  and  of  effecting  his  reunion.  Then  he  went  on  two
steps,  and  found  himself  alone  in  a  desert  and  perilous  place,  without
any  one  by  whose  society  to  cheer  himself ;  wherefore  his  reason  fled


THE  STORY  OP  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  451

in  consequence  of  his  solitude  and  fear,  the  muscles  of  his  side  quivered
on  account  of  this  fearful  place,  and  he  recited  some  verses.

After  that,  he  proceeded  along  the  bank  of  the  river  two  steps
further,  and  he  found  two  young  boys,  of  the  sons  of  the  enchanters
and  sorcerers.  Before  them  was  a  rod  of  brass,  engraved  with  talis-
mans, and  by  the  side  of  the  rod  was  a  cap55  of  leather,  the  crown  of
which  was  composed  ot  three  triangular  pieces,  whereon  were  worked,
in  steel,  names,  and  characters  of  seals.  The  rod  and  the  cap  were
thrown  upon  the  ground,  and  the  two  boys  were  disputing  and  beat-
ing each  other  on  account  of  them,  so  that  blood  flowed  from  them,
while  this  said,  None  shall  take  the  rod  but  I — and  the  other  said,
None  shall  take  the  rod  but  I.  So  Hasan  interposed  'between  them,
and  disengaged  them,  each  from  the  other,  and  said  to  them,  What
is  the  cause  of  this  contention?  And  they  answered  him,  0  uncle,
judge  between  us ;  for  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !)  hath  sent  thee
to  us  in  order  that  thou  shouldst  decide  between  us  justly.  He
therefore  said,  Relate  to  me  your  story,  and  I  will  judge  between
you.  And  one  of  them  said  to  him,  We  are  two  brothers  by  the
same  father  and  mother,  and  our  father  was  one  of  the  great  en-
chanters. He  resided  in  a  cavern  in  this  mountain,  and  he  died,
leaving  to  us  this  cap  and  this  rod ;  and  my  brother  saith,  None
shall  take  the  rod  but  I — and  I  say,  None  shall  take  it  but  I.  So
judge  between  us,  and  deliver  us,  each  from  the  other. — Therefore
when  Hasan  heard  their  words,  he  said  to  them,  What  is  the  differ-
ence between  the  rod  and  the  cap,  and  what  is  their  value  ?  For  the
rod,  in  appearance,  is  worth  six  jedeeds,58  and  the  cap  is  worth  three
jedeeds. — They  replied,  Thou  knowest  not  their  virtues.  And  he
said  to  them,  What  are  their  virtues  ?  They  answered  him,  In  each
of  them  is  a  wonderful  secret  property ;  for  the  rod  is  worth  the
revenue  of  the  Islands  of  Wak-Wak  with  their  districts,  and  the  cap
in  like  manner.  So  Hasan  said  to  one  of  them,  0  my  son,  By  Allah,
discover  to  me  their  secret  properties.  And  he  replied,  0  uncle,
verily  their  secret  properties  are  extraordinary ;  for  our  father  lived  a
hundred  and  thirty-five  years  applying  himself  to  the  contrivance  of
them  until  he  finished  them  in  the  most  perfect  manner,  ingrafted  in
them  the  secret  virtues,  made  use  of  them  for  extraordiijary  services,
designed  upon  them  the  similitude  of  the  revolving  firmament,  and
dissolved,  by  their  means,  all  talisinanic  charms ;  and  when  he  had
finished  the  contrivance  of  them,  death,  which  every  one  must  expe-
rience, overtook  him.  Now  as  to  the  cap,  its  secret  property  is  this:


that  whosoever  putteth  it  on  his  head,  he  is  concealed  from  the  eyes
of  all  people,  and  no  one  seeth  him  as  long  as  it  remaineth  on  his
head.  And  as  to  the  rod,  this  is  its  secret  property :  that  whosoever
possesseth  it,  he  hath  authority  over  seven  tribes  of  the  Jinn,  and  all  of
them  will  serve  that  rod  :  all  of  them  will  be  under  his  command  and
authority;  and  every  one  who  possesseth  it,  and  in  whose  hand  it  is,
when  he  smiteth  with  it  the  ground,  its  Kings  will  humble  themselves
to  him,  and  all  the  Jinn  will  be  at  his  service.

When  Hasan  heard  these  words,  he  hung  down  his  head  for  a
while  towards  the  ground.  Then  he  said  within  himself,  By  Allah,
I  shall  surely  be  rendered  triumphant  by  means  of  this  rod  and  this
cap,  if  it  be  the  will  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !),  and  I  am  more
worthy  of  them  than  they.  So  I  will  immediately  employ  a  stratagem
to  take  them  from  them,  that  I  may  have  recourse  to  their  aid  for  my
deliverance  and  the  deliverance  of  my  wife  and  my  children  from  this
tyrannical  Queen,  and  we  will  journey  from  this  dismal  place,  from
which  there  is  [otherwise]  no  deliverance  nor  flight  for  any  one  of
mankind.  Probably  God  sent  me  not  to  these  two  youths  save  for
the  purpose  of  my  getting  from  them  the  rod  and  the  cap. — He  then


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASKAH.  453

raised  his  head  towards  the  two  youths,  and  said  to  them,  If  ye
desire  the  decision  of  the  case,  I  will  make  trial  of  you,  and  he  who
overcometh  his  companion  shall  take  the  rod,  and  he  who  faileth  shall
take  the  cap ;  for  if  I  make  trial  of  you  and  discern  between  you,  I
shall  know  what  each  of  you  deserveth.  And  they  replied,  0  uncle,
we  depute  thee  to  make  trial  of  us,  and  to  judge  between  us  as
thou  choosest.  Hasan  said  to  them,  Will  ye  attend  to  rny  words,
and  have  regard  to  what  I  shall  say  ?  They  answered  him,  Yes.
And  Hasan  said  to  them,  I  will  take  a  stone  and  throw  it,  and  the
one  of  you  who  getteth  first  to  it,  and  taketh  it  before  his  companion,
shall  take  the  rod ;  and  he  who  is  last,  and  reacheth  it  not,  shall  take
the  cap.  And  they  replied,  We  accept  from  thee  this  proposal,  and
we  are  content  with  it.  Then  Hasan  took  a  stone  and  threw  it  with
all  his  force  and  it  went  out  of  sight.  The  two  youths  therefore
hastened  together  after  it ;  and  when  they  were  at  a  distance,  Hasan
took  the  cap  and  put  it  on,  and  he  took  the  rod  in  his  hand,  and
removed  from  his  place  to  see  the  truth  of  that  which  they  had  said
with  respect  to  the  secret  of  their  father.  And  the  younger  boy  got
first  to  the  stone  and  took  it,  and  he  returned  with  it  to  the  place  in
which  was  Hasan,  and  saw  no  trace  of  him.  So  he  called  out  to  his
brother,  and  said  to  him,  Where  is  the  man  who  judgeth  between
us  ?  Arid  he  answered,  I  see  him  not,  nor  know  I  whether  he  hath
ascended  to  the  highest  heaven,  or  descended  to  the  lowest  earth.
They  searched  for  him,  and  saw  him  not ;  and  Hasan  was  standing
in  his  place.  Therefore  they  reviled  one  another,  and  said,  The  rod
and  the  cap  are  gone  :  they  are  neither  mine  nor  thine ;  and  our  father
said  to  us  these  very  words  ;  but  we  forgot  what  he  told  us.

Then  they  retraced  their  steps,  and  Hasan  entered  the  city,  wear-
ing the  cap,  and  having  in  his  hand  the  rod,  and  none  of  the  people
saw  him.  He  entered  the  palace,  ascended  to  the  place  in  which
was  Shawahee  Zat-ed-Dawahee,57  and  went  in  to  her,  still  wearing
the  cap,  and  she  saw  him  not.  Then  he  walked  on  until  he  drew
near  to  a  shelf  which  was  over  her  head,  and  on  which  were  vessels  of
glass  and  China-ware;  and  he  shook  it  with  his  hand  so  that  the
things  that  were  upon  it  fell  on  the  floor.  So  Shawahee  Zat-ed-
Dawahee  cried  out,  and  slapped  her  face  ;  and  she  rose  and  restored
what  had  fallen  to  their  places,58  saying  within  herself,  By  Allah,
I  imagine  not  aught  but  that  the  Queen  Noor-el-Huda  hath  sent  to
me  a  devil,  and  that  he  hath  done  to  me  this  deed.  I  therefore  beg
God  (whose  name  be  exalted !)  to  deliver  me  from  her,  and  to  preserve


me  from  her  anger.  O  my  Lord,  if  this  is  her  abominable  conduct  to
her  sister,  beating  and  suspending  her,  when  she  is  dear  in  the  esti-
mation of  her  father,  how  will  she  act  with  the  stranger  like  myself,
when  she  is  incensed  against  her  ? — Then  she  said,  I  conjure  thee,
O  devil,  by  the  Most  Compassionate,  the  Beneficent,  the  Great  in
dignity,  the  Mighty  in  dominion,  the  Creator  of  mankind  and  the
Jann,  and  by  the  characters  upon  the  seal  of  Suleyman  the  son  of
Daood  (on  both  of  whom  be  peace !),  that  thou  speak  to  me  and
reply  to  me !  So  Hasan  replied  to  her  and  said  to  her,  I  am  not  a
devil :  I  am  Hasan  the  distracted,  the  confounded,  the  perplexed.
He  then  pulled  off  the  cap  from  his  head ;  whereupon  lie  appeared  to
the  old  woman,  and  she  knew  him,  and,  having  taken  him  into  a
private  place,  she  said  to  him,  What  hath  happened  to  thy  reason,
that  thou  hast  come  hither?  Go;  hide  thyself;  for  this  iniquitous
woman  hath  inflicted  tortures  upon  thy  wife,  though  she  is  her
sister :  how  then  will  she  act  if  she  light  upon  thee  ? — And  she
related  to  him  all  that  had  befallen  his  wife,  describing  to  him  her
present  state  of  distress  and  punishment  and  torture;  and  in  like
manner  she  described  to  him  the  torture  that  had  befallen  herself;


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  455

after  which  she  said  to  him,  Verily  the  Queen  repented  of  her  having
liberated  thee,  and  hath  sent  to  thee  one  to  bring  thee  to  her,  pro-
mising that  she  will  give  him  a  hundredweight  of  gold,  and  place  him
in  my  post  in  her  service.  She  hath  also  sworn  that  if  they  bring
thee  back,  she  will  slay  thee,  and  slay  thy  wife  and  thy  children. —
Then  the  old  woman  wept,  and  discovered  to  Hasan  what  the  Queen
had  done  to  her;  whereupon  Hasan  also  wept,  and  he  said,  O  my
mistress,  how  is  it  possible  to  escape  from  this  country  and  from  this
tyrannical  Queen ;  and  what  is  the  stratagem  that  will  enable  me  to
deliver  my  wife  and  my  children,  and  to  return  with  them  to  my
country  ?  The  old  woman  replied,  Wo  to  thee  !  Save  thyself !
—But  he  said,  I  must  deliver  her,  and  deliver  my  children  from  the
Queen  by  force. —  How,  said  the  old  woman,  wilt  thou  deliver  them
from  her  by  force?  Go  and  hide  thyself,  O  my  son,  until  God
(whose  name  be  exalted  !)  shall  permit.

Hasan  therefore  shewed  her  the  rod  of  brass  and  the  cap ; .  and
when  the  old  woman  saw  them,  she  rejoiced  in  them  exceedingly,  and
said  to  him,  Extolled  be  the  perfection  of  Him  who  reanimateth  the
bones  when  they  are  rotten!  By  Allah,  O  my  son,  thou  and  thy
wife  were  nought  but  of  the  number  of  the  perishing,  and  now,  0  my
son,  thou  and  thy  wife  and  thy  children  are  saved  ;  for  I  know  the  rod,
and  know  who  was  its  owner ;  he  having  been  my  sheykh,  who  taught
me  enchantment.  He  was  an  egregious  enchanter :  he  persevered  a
hundred  and  thirty-five  years  until  he  skilfully  made  this  rod  and
this  cap ;  and  when  the  making  of  them  in  this  manner  was  finished,
death,  which  is  inevitable,  overtook  him.  And  I  heard  him  say  to
his  two  sons,  O  my  two  sons,  these  two  things  are  not  of  your  lot;
for  a  person,  a  stranger  to  the  country,  will  come  and  take  them  from
you  by  force,  and  ye  will  not  know  how  he  will  take  them.  So  they
said,  O  our  father,  inform  us  how  he  will  be  able  to  take  them.  But
he  replied,  I  know  not  that.  How  then  wast  thou  able,  O  my  son,
to  take  them  ? — He  therefore  told  her  how  he  took  them  from  the
two  boys ;  and  when  he  told  her,  she  rejoiced  thereat,  and  said  to
him,  O  my  son,  as  thou  hast  enabled  thyself  to  gain  possession  of
thy  wife  and  thy  children,  hear  what  I  will  say  to  thee.  I  can  no
longer  reside  in  the  abode  of  this  wicked  woman,  since  she  hath
assaulted  me  and  tormented  me.  I  am  about  to  depart  from  her  to
the  cavern  of  the  enchanters,  to  reside  with  them  and  to  live  with
them  until  I  die.  Now  do  thou,  O  my  son,  put  on  the  cap,  and
take  the  rod  in  thy  hand ;  then  go  in  to  thy  wife  and  thy  children,


450  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.-

in  the  place  in  which  they  are,  and  strike  the  ground  with  the  rod,
and  say,  0  servants  of  these  names !  Thereupon  their  servants  will
come  up  to  thee ;  and  if  one  of  the  chiefs  of  the  tribes  come  up  to
thee,  command  him  to  do  as  thou  shalt  desire  and  choose.

He  then  bade  her  farewell,  and  departed,  and,  having  put  on  the
cap,  and  taken  the  rod  with  him,  he  entered  the  place  in  which  was
his  wife.  He  saw  her  in  a  state  approaching  to  annihilation,  extended
upon  the  ladder,  with  her  hair  bound  to  it,  and  with  weeping  eye
and  mourning  heart,  in  the  most  evil  condition,  not  knowing  any
way  to  effect  her  deliverance.  Her  children  were  beneath  the  ladder
playing,  and  she  was  looking  at  them,  and  weeping  for  them  and  for
herself,  on  account  of  the  things  that  had  happened  "to  her  and
befallen  her,  and  the  torment  and  painful  beating  and  most  violent
punishment  that  she  suffered ;  and  when  he  saw  her  thus  in  the  most
evil  of  conditions,  he  heard  her  recite  these  verses  : —

There  remaineth  not  aught  save  a  flitting  breath,  and  an  eye  whose  pupil  is  con-
founded,59

And  a  desirous  lover  whose  bowels  are  burned  with  fire,  notwithstanding  which
she  is  silent.

The  exulting  foe  pitieth  her  at  the  sight  of  her.  Alas  for  her  whom  the  exulting
foe  pitieth !

When  Hasan  saw  the  torment  and  abasement  and  contempt  that
she  was  suffering,  he  wept  until  he  fainted ;  and  on  his  recovering,
and  seeing  his  children  playing,  and  their  mother  in  a  fit  of  in-
sensibility, by  reason  of  the  excess  of  her  pain,  he  removed  the  cap
from  his  head;  whereupon  they  cried  out,  O  our  father!  Then  he
covered  his  head  again,  and  their  mother  recovered  from  her  fit  on
hearing  their  cry,  and  saw  not  her  husband,  but  only  saw  her
children  weeping,  and  crying  out,  0  our  father !  So  she  wept  when
she  heard  them  mention  their  father  and  weep  :  her  heart  broke,  and
her  bowels  were  cut  in  pieces,  and  she  called  out,  with  a  liver  that
was  burst,  and  a  painful  heart,  Where  are  ye,  and  where  is  your
father  ?  Then  she  reflected  upon  the  times  of  her  union  with  him,
and  reflected  upon  the  events  that  had  befallen  her  since  his  separa-
tion, and  wept  violently,  so  that  her  tears  ulcerated  her  cheeks,  and
wetted  the  ground.  Her  cheeks  became  drowned  in  her  tears,  by
the  excess  of  her  weeping,  and  she  had  not  a  hand  at  liberty  that  she
might  wipe  away  her  tears  with  it  from  her  cheeks.  The  flies  were
satiated  with  feeding  upon  her  skin,  and  she  found  for  herself  no
aider  save  weeping,  and  consoling  herself  by  reciting  verses.  And


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  457

when  Hasan  heard  her  verses,  he  wept  until  he  fainted ;  his  tears  ran
down  upon  his  cheeks  like  rain,  and,  drawing  near  to  the  children,  he
removed  the  cap ;  and  when  they  saw  him,  they  knew  him,  and  cried
out  saying,  O  our  father !  So  their  mother  wept  again  on  hearing
them  mention  their  father,  and  said,  There  is  no  means  of  avoiding
what  God  hath  decreed.  And  she  said  within  herself,  O  wonderful !
What  is  the  cause  of  their  mention  of  their  father  at  this  time,  and
their  calling  to  him  ? — Then  she  wept,  and  recited  these  verses  : —

The  country  is  destitute  of  the  rising  moon !  O  mine  eye,  pour  forth  over-
flowing tears !

They  have  gone,  and  how  can  I  be  patient  after  their  departure  ?  I  swear  that
I  have  neither  heart  nor  patience.

0  ye  who  have  departed,  but  whose  abode  is  in  my  heart,  will  you,  after  this,

O  my  master,  return  ?
What  harm  if  they  return  and  I  enjoy  their  society,  and  they  feel  pity  for  the

overflowing  of  my  tears,  and  my  anguish  ?
They  made  mine  eyes  misty  on  the  day  of  departure  through  astonishment,  and

the  fire  of  my  bosom  is  not  extinguished.

1  desired  their  remaining ;  but  fortune  opposed  me  with  respect  to  them,  and

disappointed  my  desire  by  separation.

By  Allah,  O  object  of  our  love,  return  to  us;  for  my  tears  have  flowed  suffi-
ciently for  your  absence !

So  Hasan  could  no  longer  abstain  from  removing  the  cap  from
his  head,  and  his  wife  saw  him  ;  and  when  she  knew  him,  she
uttered  a  cry  that  alarmed  all  who  were  in  the  palace.  She  then,
said  to  him,  How  earnest  thou  hither?  Hast  thou  descended
from  the  sky,  or  risen  from  the  earth  ? — And  her  eyes  filled  with
tears:  therefore  Hasan  also  wept;  and  she  said  to  him,  O  man,
this  is  not  a  time  for  weeping,  nor  is  it  a  time  for  reproach.  Fate
hath  had  its  course,  and  the  sight  was  blinded,  and  the  pen  hath
written  what  God  decreed  from  eternity.  I  conjure  thee  by  Allah  to
tell  me  whence  thou  hast  come.  Go  and  hide  thyself,  lest  any  one
see  thee  and  inform  my  sister  thereof  and  she  slaughter  me  and
slaughter  thee  also. — Hasan  replied,  O  my  mistress,  and  mistress
of  every  Queen,  I  have  exposed  my  life  to  peril  and  come  hither,  and
either  I  will  die,  or  I  will  deliver  thee  from  the  predicament  in  which
thou  art,  and  I  and  thou  and  my  children  will  journey  to  my  country,
in  spite  of  this  wicked  woman,  thy  sister.  But  when  she  heard  his
words,  she  smiled  and  laughed,  and  shook  her  head  for  a  long  time,
and  said  to  him,  Far,  O  my  soul,  far  is  it  from  me  that  any  one
should  deliver  me  from  the  predicament  in  which  I  am,  except  God,
whose  name  be  exalted !  So  save  thyself,  and  depart,  and  cast  not
in.  3  N


458


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.


thyself  into  destruction ;  for
she  hath  numerous  and  hea-
vily-equipped troops  whom
no  one  can  confront.  And
suppose  thou  tookest  me  and
wentest  forth ;  how  canst
thou  make  thy  way  to  thy
country,  and  how  can  we
escape  from  these  islands,  and
the  difficulties  of  these  places  ?
Thou  hast  seen,  in  thy  way,
wonders  and  strange  things,
and  horrors  and  troubles,  such
as  scarcely  can  one  of  the
refractory  Jinn  escape.  Go
therefore  soon,  and  increase
not  my  anxiety  nor  my  sor-
row ;  and  pretend  not  that
thou  wilt  deliver  me  from  this
state ;  for  who  will  convey  me
to  thy  country  across  these
valleys  and  thirsty  lands  and
fatal  places? — Hasan  there-
upon said  to  her,  By  thy  life,

0  light  of  mine  eye,  I  will
not  go  forth  hence,  nor  will

1  journey  forth,  save  with  thee. She
rejoined,  0  man,  how  canst  thou  do  this
thing  ? What  is  thy  nature  ? For  thou
knowest  not  what  thou  sayest. If  thou
hadst  dominion  over  Jann  and  'Efreets,

and  enchanters  and  tribes  and  '6ns,  thou  couldst  not ;  for  no  one  is
able  to  escape  from  these  places.  Therefore  save  thyself,  and  leave
me.  Perhaps  God  will  bring  to  pass  other  events  after  these. — So
Hasan  said  to  her,  O  mistress  of  beauties,  I  came  not  save  to  deliver
thee  by  means  of  this  rod  and  by  means  of  this  cap.  And  he  related
to  her  what  had  happened  to  him  with  the  two  boys.

But  while  he  was  speaking,  lo,  the  Queen  came  in  to  them,  and
heard  their  conversation.  So  when  he  saw  the  Queen,  he  put  on  the
cap;  and  she  said  to  her  sister,  0  wicked  woman,  who  is  he  with


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  459

whom  thou  wast  conversing  ?  She  replied,  And  who  is  with  me  to
speak  to  me  except  these  infants  ?  And  the  Queen  took  the  whip,  and
proceeded  to  beat  her  with  it,  while  Hasan  stood  looking  on.  She
ceased  not  to  beat  her  until  she  fainted,  when  she  gave  orders  to
remove  her  from  that  place  to  another;  wherefore  they  loosed  her
and  went  forth  with  her  to  another  place,  and  Hasan  went  forth  with
them  to  the  place  to  which  they  conveyed  her.  Then  they  threw  her
down  senseless,  and  stood  looking  at  her;  and  when  she  recovered
from  her  fit,  she  recited  these  verses : —

I  have  sorrowed  on  account  of  our  disunion  with  a  sorrow  that  made  the  tears

to  overflow  from  my  eyelids  ;
And  I  vowed  that  if  fortune  should  reunite  us,  I  would  never  again  mention  our

separation ;
And  I  would  say  to  the  enviers,  Die  ye  with  regret ;  by  Allah,  I  have  now

attained  my  desire !
Joy  hath  overwhelmed  me  to  such  a  degree  that  by  its  excess  it  hath  made  me

weep.
O  eye,  how  hath  weeping  become  thy  habit  ? Thou  weepest  in  joy  as  well  as  in

sorrows.

And  when  she  had  ended  her  "verses,  the  female  slaves  went  forth
from  her.

So  thereupon  Hasan  pulled  off  the  cap ;  and  his  wife  said  to  him,
See,  O  man :  all  this  hath  not  befallen  me  save  on  account  of  my
having  disobeyed  thee,  and  acted  in  opposition  to  thy  command,  and
gone  forth  without  thy  permission.  But  I  conjure  thee  by  Allah,  O
man,  blame  me  not  for  my  misconduct.  Know  that  a  woman  is  not
sensible  of  the  value  of  a  man  until  she  is  separated  from  him.  I
have  done  wrong  and  sinned;  but  I  beg  God,  the  Great,  to  pardon
the  actions  committed  by  me;  and  if  God  reunite  us,  I  will  never
disobey  thy  command  after  that. — Hasan  replied  (and  his  heart  pained
him  for  her),  Thou  sinnedst  not,  and  none  sinned  but  I ;  for  I  went
away  on  a  journey  and  left  thee  with  one  who  knoweth  not  thy
dignity  nor  knoweth  thy  value  nor  thy  rank.  And  know  thou,  O
beloved  of  my  heart,  and  delight  of  my  soul,  and  light  of  mine  eye,
that  God  (whose  perfection  be  extolled !)  hath  empowered  me  to
deliver  thee.  Besirest  thou,  then,  that  I  convey  thee  to  the  abode  of
thy  father,  and  that  thou  shouldst  experience,  with  him,  the  accom-
plishment of  all  that  God  hath  appointed  for  thee,  or  wilt  tbou
journey  to  our  country  soon,  seeing  that  relief  hath  come  to  thee  ? —
But  she  said  to  him,  And  who  is  able  to  deliver  me,  except  the  Lord
of  Heaven  ?  Go  thou  therefore  to  thy  country,  and  dismiss  from  thy


460  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.

mind  desire ;  for  thou  knowest  not  the  dangers  of  this  country ;  and
if  thou  comply  not  with  my  advice,  thou  wilt  see. — Then  she  recited
some  verses,  and  wept  with  her  children,  and  the  female  slaves  heard
their  weeping;  so  they  came  in  to  them,  and  found  the  Queen  Menar-
es-Sena  and  her  children  weeping;  but  they  saw  not  Hasan  with
them;  and  the  female  slaves  wept  in  compassion  for  them,  and
cursed  the  Queen  Noor-el-Huda.

Then  Hasan  waited  until  night  approached  and  the  guards  who
were  deputed  to  watch  her  went  to  their  sleeping-places ;  after  which
he  arose  and  girded  his  waist,  and,  coming  to  his  wife,  loosed  her,
and  kissed  her  head,  pressed  her  to  his  bosom,  kissed  her  between  her
eyes,  and  said  to  her,  How  great  is  our  desire  for  our  country  and
for  our  reunion  there !  Is  this  our  meeting  in  sleep  or  in  a  time
when  we  are  awake? — He  then  took  up  his  elder  child,  and  she
took  up  the  younger  child,  and  they  went  forth  from  the  palace.
God  had  let  down  the  veil  of  his  protection  over  them,  and  they
proceeded;  and  on  their  arrival  at  the  outside  of  the  palace,  they
stopped  at  the  door  that  was  locked  to  close  the  entrance  to  the
palace  of  the  Queen ;  but  when  they  were  there,  they  saw  it  locked.
So  Hasan  said,  There  is  no  strength  nor  power  but  in  God,  the  High,
the  Great !  Verily  to  God  we  belong,  and  verily  unto  Him  we  return !
— Upon  this  they  despaired  of  escape,  and  Hasan  said,  O  Dispeller  of
griefs ! — and  struck  hand  upon  hand,  and  said,  I  had  calculated  upon
every  thing,  and  considered  its  result,  except  this;  and  now,  when
the  day  cometh  upon  us,  they  will  take  us ;  and  how  shall  we  contrive
in  this  case  ?  And  he  recited  these  two  verses  : —

Thou  thoughtest  well  of  the  days  when  they  went  well  with  thee,  and  fearedst

not  the  evil  that  destiny  was  bringing.
Thy  nights  were  peaceful,  and  thou  wast  deceived  by  them : in  the  midst  of

their  brightness,  there  cometh  gloom.

Then  he  wept,  and  his  wife  wept  at  his  weeping,  and  on  account  of
the  contempt  and  misfortunes  that  she  suffered ;  and  Hasan,  looking
towards  her,  recited  this  couplet : —

My  fortune  opposeth  me  as  though  I  were  its  enemy,  and  every  day  meeteth

me  with  calamity.
When  I  seek  prosperity,  it  bringeth  the  reverse  of  it; and  if  one  day  it  is

bright  to  me,  the  next  day  it  is  turbid.

And  his  wife  said  to  him,  By  Allah,  there  is  no  relief  for  us,  unless
v/e  kill  ourselves,  and  so  be  at  rest  from  this  excessive  trouble.
Otherwise,  in  the  morning  we  shall  suffer  painful  torture.


THE  STORY  OF  tfASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  461

Now  while  they  were  talking,  a  speaker  said,  outside  the  door,  By
Allah,  I  will  not  open  to  thee,  0  my  mistress  Menar-es-Sena,  and  to
thy  husband  Hasan,  unless  ye  will  obey  me  in  that  which  I  shall  say
to  you.  And  when  they  heard  these  words  from  that  person,  they
were  silent,  and  desired  to  return  to  the  place  in  which  they  had  been.
But  a  speaker  said,  Wherefore  have  ye  kept  silence,  and  not  returned
me  a  reply  ?  And  thereupon  they  knew  the  person  who  spoke,  who
was  the  old  woman  Shawahee  Zat-ed-Dawiihee.  So  they  said  to  her,
Whatsoever  thou  shalt  command  us  to  do,  we  will  do  it.  But  open
to  us  the  door  first ;  for  this  time  is  not  a  time  for  talk. — She  how-
ever replied,  By  Allah  I  will  not  open  to  you  until  ye  swear  to  me
that  ye  will  take  me  with  you,  and  not  leave  me  with  this  profligate
woman ;  and  whatsoever  shall  befall  you  shall  befall  me :  if  ye  be
preserved,  I  shall  be  preserved ;  and  if  ye  perish,  I  shall  perish ;  for
this  wicked,  vitious  woman  despiseth  me,  and  constantly  tortureth  me
on  your  account :  and  thou,  O  my  daughter,  knowest  my  worth.
Therefore  when  they  knew  her,  they  confided  in  her,  and  swore  to
her  by  oaths  that  she  trusted  in ;  after  which,  she  opened  to  them
the  door,  and  they  went,  forth;  and  they  found  her  riding  upon  a
red  earthen  jar  of  Greek  manufacture,  upon  the  neck  of  which  was  a
rope  of  the  fibres  of  the  palm-tree,  and  it  was  turning  about  beneath
her,  and  moving  with  a  speed  greater  than  that  of  the  Nejdee60  colt.
She  then  came  before  them  and  said  to  them,  Follow  me,  and  be  not
terrified  at  aught ;  for  I  know  forty  modes  of  enchantment,  by  the
least  of  which  I  could  make  this  city  a  roaring  sea  agitated  with
waves,  and  enchant  every  damsel  in  it  so  that  she  would  become  a
fish.  All  that  could  I  do  before  the  morning;  but  I  was  unable  to
do  aught  of  that  mischief  by  reason  of  my  fear  of  the  King,  the  father
of  Noor-el-Huda,  and  from  regard  to  her  sisters;  for  they  derive
might  from  the  great  number  of  their  guards  and  tribes  and  servants.
However,  I  will  shew  you  the  wonders  of  my  enchantment.  Then
proceed  with  us,  relying  upon  the  blessing  of  God  (whose  name  be
exalted !)  and  his  aid. — So  thereupon  Hasan  and  his  wife  rejoiced,
and  felt  sure  of  escape.

They  went  forth  to  the  exterior  of  the  city,  and  Hasan,  taking  the
'  rod  in  his  hand,  struck  with  it  the  ground,  and  fortified  his  heart,  and
said,  O  servants  of  these  names,  present  yourselves  to  me,  and  acquaint
me  with  your  brethren !  And,  lo,  the  earth  clove  asunder,  and  there
came  forth  from  it  seven 61  'Efreets,  each  of  them  having  his  feet  in
the  lowest  limits  of  the  earth,  and  his  head  in  the  clouds.  They


kissed  the  ground  before  Hasan  three  times,  and  all  of  them  said,
with  one  voice,  At  thy  service,  O  our  master,  and  ruler  over  us !
What  dost  thou  command  us  to  do  ?  For  we  will  hear  and  obey
thy  command.  If  thou  desire,  we  will  dry  up  for  thee  the  seas,  and
remove  for  thee  the  mountains  from  their  places. — So  Hasan  was
rejoiced  at  their  words,  and  at  the  quickness  of  their  reply ;  and  he
encouraged  his  heart,  and  fortified  his  mind  and  resolution,  and  said
to  them,  Who  are  ye,  and  what  are  ye  called,  and  from  what  tribes
are  ye  derived,  and  of  what  race  are  ye,  and  of  what  tribe,  and  of


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASllAH.  463

what  company  ?  Upon  this,  they  kissed  the  ground  a  second  time,
and  answered  with  one  voice,  We  are  seven  Kings :  each  King  of  us
ruleth  over  seven  tribes  of  the  Jinn  and  the  Devils  and  the  Marids :
so  we  seven  Kings  rule  over  nine  and  forty  tribes  of  all  the  races  of
the  Jinn  and  the  Devils  and  the  Marids  and  the  companies  and  the
'Ons,  the  Flyers  and  the  Divers,  and  the  dwellers  in  the  mountains
and  the  deserts  and  the  wastes,  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  seas.  Order
us  to  do  what  tbou  wilt ;  for  we  are  thy  servants  and  slaves ;  and
whoever  possesseth  this  rod,  he  hath  authority  over  the  necks  of
us  all,  and  we  become  obedient  unto  him. — When  Hasan,  therefore,
heard  their  words,  he  rejoiced  greatly,  as  did  also  his  wife  and  the  old
woman ;  and  thereupon  Hasan  said  to  the  Jinn,  I  desire  of  you  that  ye
shew  me  your  company  and  your  troops  and  your  guards.  But  they
replied,  O  our  master,  if  we  shewed  thee  our  company,  we  should  fear
for  thee  and  for  those  who  are  with  thee;  for  it  consists  of  numerous
troops,  of  various  forms  and  make  and  kinds  and  faces  and  bodies.
Among  us  are  heads  without  bodies,  and  among  us  are  bodies  without
heads,  and  among  us  are  some  like  the  wild  beasts,  and  among  us  are
some  like  animals  of  prey.  However,  if  thou  desire  that,  we  must
exhibit  to  thee  first  those  who  are  like  the  wdd  beasts.  But,  O  our
master,  what  dost  thou  desire  of  us  at  this  present  time  ? — So  Hasan
said  to  them,  I  desire  of  you  that  ye  carry  me  and  my  wife  and  this
virtuous  woman  immediately  to  the  city  of  Baghdad.  But  when  they
heard  his  words,  they  hung  down  their  heads.  Therefore  Hasan  said
to  them,  Why  do  ye  not  reply  ?  And  they  said  with  one  voice,  O
master  and  ruler  over  us,  we  have  existed  from  the  time  of  the  lord
Suleyman  the  son  of  Daood  (on  both  of  whom  be  peace !),  and  he
made  us  swear  that  we  would  not  carry  any  one  of  the  sons  of  Adam
upon  our  backs :  so  from  that  time  we  have  not  carried  any  one  of  the
sons  of  Adam  upon  our  shoulders  nor  upon  our  backs ;  but  we  will
immediately  saddle  for  thee,  of  the  horses  of  the  Jinn,  such  as  will
convey  thee  to  thy  country,  thee  and  those  that  are  with  thee.

Upon  this,  Hasan  said  to  them,  And  what  distance  is  between  us
and  Baghdad  ?  They  answered  him,  A  distance  of  seven  years'  journey
to  the  horseman  who  travelleth  with  diligence.  And  Hasan  wondered
thereat,  and  said  to  them,  How  came  1  hither  in  less  than  a  year  ?
They  answered  him,  God  moved  the  hearts  of  his  virtuous  servants
with  compassion  for  thee ;  and  had  it  not  been  for  that,  thou  hadst
not  gained  access  to  this  country  and  region,  nor  ever  beheld  it  with
thine  eye.  For  the  sheykh  'Abd-El-Kuddoos,  who  mounted  thee  on


464  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.

the  elephant,  mounted  thee  also  on  the  fortunate  courser,  which
traversed  with  thee,  in  ten  62days,  a  space  of  three  years'  journey  to
the  horseman  who  proceedeth  with  diligence;  and  as  to  the  sheykh
Abu-r-Ruweysh,  he  committed  thee  to  Dahnash,  and  that  'Efreet
traversed  with  thee,  during  the  day  and  the  night,  a  space  of  three
years'  journey.  This  was  effected  through  the  blessing  of  God,  the
Great ;  for  the  sheykh  Abu-r-Ruweysh  is  of  the  posterity  of  Asaf  the
son  of  Barkhiya,63  and  he  knoweth  the  Most  Great  Name  of  God.
And  from  Baghdad  to  the  palace  of  the  damsels  is  a  year's  journey.
So  these  make  up  the  seven  years. — And  when  Hasan  heard  their
words,  he  wondered  greatly,  and  said,  Extolled  be  the  perfection  of
God,  who  rnaketh  easy  what  is  difficult,  and  repaireth  the  broken
heart,  and  bringeth  near  what  is  distant,  and  abaseth  every  obstinate
tyrant,  who  hath  rendered  every  thing  easy  to  us,  and  conveyed  me  to
this  country,  and  made  subservient  to  me  these  people,  and  reunited
me  to  my  wife  and  my  children  !  I  know  not  whether  I  be  sleeping
or  awake,  or  whether  I  be  in  my  senses  or  intoxicated. — He  then
looked  towards  them  and  said  to  them,  When  ye  have  mounted  me
upon  your  horses,  in  how  many  days  will  they  arrive  with  us  at
Baghdad  ?  They  answered,  They  will  arrive  with  thee  in  less  than  a
year,  after  thou  shalt  have  endured  difficulties  and  troubles  and  horrors,
and  traversed  thirsty  valleys  and  dismal  wastes,  and  deserts  and  danger-
ous places  great  in  number ;  and  we  shall  not  be  sure  of  thy  safety,
O  our  master,  from  the  people  of  these  islands,  nor  from  the  malice  of
the  supreme  King,  nor  from  these  enchanters  and  sorcerers.  Perhaps
they  will  overcome  us,  and  take  you  from  us,  and  we  shall  be  afflicted
by  them ;  and  every  one  whom  the  news  reacheth  after  that  will  say
to  us,  Ye  are  the  unjust.  How  did  ye  go  against  the  supreme  King,
and  convey  the  human  being  from  his  country,  and  convey  also  his
daughter  with  you  ?  Wert  thou  alone  with  us,  the  affair  were  easy
to  us ;  but  He  who  caused  thee  to  gain  access  to  these  islands  is  able
to  cause  thee  to  arrive  at  thy  country,  and  to  reunite  thee  to  thy
mother  soon,  at  no  distant  period.  Therefore  be  resolute,  and  depend
upon  God,  and  fear  not ;  for  we  are  at  thy  service  until  we  cause  thee
to  reach  thy  country. — So  Hasan  thanked  them  for  that,  and  said  to
them,  May  God  recompense  you  well !  Then  he  said  to  them,  Hasten
with  the  horses.  And  they  replied,  We  hear  and  obey.

They  then  struck  the  ground  with  their  feet ;  whereupon  it  clove
asunder,  and  they  were  absent  within  it  a  while  ;  after  which  they
presented  themselves,  and,  lo,  they  had  come  up  bringing  with  them


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.


465


three  horses,  saddled  and  bridled,  and  on  the  fore  part  of  each  saddle
was  a  pair  of  saddle-bags,  in  one  side  of  which  was  a  leathern  bottle
full  of  water,  and  the  other  side  was  full  of  food.  They  brought
forward  the  horses,  and  Hasan  mounted  a  courser,  taking  a  child
before  him;  and  his  wife  mounted  the  second  courser,  and  took  a
child  before  her.  Then  the  old  woman
alighted  from  the  jar,  and  mounted  the
third  courser.  And  they  departed,  and
ceased  not  to  proceed  all  the  night,  un-
til the  morning  came,  when  they  turned
aside  from  the  way,  arid  went  towards
the  mountain  ;  their  tongues  ceasing  not
from  the  mention  of  God.  They  pro-
ceeded all  the  day  beneath  the  mountain ;
and  while  they  were  journeying  on,  Hasan
beheld  a  phantom-like  form,  resembling
a  pillar,  and  it  was  lofty,  like  smoke
ascending  to  the  sky.  So  he  recited
somewhat  of  the  Kur-an,  and  begged  for
refuge  with  God  from  Satan  the  accursed.
Then  that  black  object  appeared  more
plainly  the  nearer  they  approached  to  it ;
and  when  they  came  near  to  it,  they
found  it  to  be  an  'Efreet,  whose  head
was  like  a  huge  dome,  and  his  dog-teeth
were  like  hooks,  and  his  nostrils  like
ewers,  and  his  ears  like  shields,  and  his
mouth  was  like  a  cavern,  and  his  teeth
were  like  pillars  of  stone,  and  his  hands
like  winnowing-forks,64  and  his  legs  like
masts :  his  head  was  amid  the  clouds,
and  his  feet  were  in  the  lowest
limits  of  the  earth,  beneath  the
dust.  And  when  Hasan  looked  at
the  'Efreet,  the  'Efreet  bowed  him-
self and  kissed  the  ground  before
him,  and  said  to  him,  O  Hasan,
fear  me  not.  I  am  chief  of  the  in-
habitants of  this  land,  and  this  is
the  first  island  of  the  Islands  of


in.


- ';•
•


-1G()  THE  STOUY  OF  HASAN  OF  KL-BASHAH.

Wak-Wak.  I  am  a  Muslim,  a  professor  of  the  unity  of  God  ;  and  I
heard  of  you,  and  knew  of  your  coming ;  and  when  I  became  acquainted
with  your  state,  I  desired  to  journey  from  the  country  of  the  enchanerts
to  another  land,  devoid  of  inhabitants,  remote  from  human  beings  and
the  Jann,  that  I  might  live  therein  solitary,  by  myself,  and  worship
God  until  my  appointed  term  overtake  me.  I  therefore  desired  to
accompany  you,  and  to  be  your  guide,  until  ye  go  forth  from  these
islands,  and  I  will  not  appear  save  by  night.  So  comfort  your  hearts
with  regard  to  me  ;  for  I  am  a  Muslim,  like  as  ye  are  Muslims. — And
when  Hasan  heard  the  words  of  the  'Efreet,  he  rejoiced  exceedingly,
and  felt  sure  of  escape.  Then  looking  towards  him,  he  said  to  him,
May  God  recompense  thee  well !  Proceed  with  us,  relying  upon  the
blessing  of  God. — Accordingly  the  'Efreet  went  before  them,  and  they
betook  themselves  to  conversing  and  sporting.  Their  hearts  had  be-
come happy,  and  their  bosoms  were  dilated ;  and  Hasan  proceeded  to
relate  to  his  wife  all  that  had  happened  to  him,  and  what  he  had
endured.  They  ceased  not  to  prosecute  their  journey  all  the  next
night,  until  the  morning,  the  horses  bearing  them  along  like  the
blinding  lightning ;  and  when  daylight  rose,  they  put  their  hands  to
their  several  saddle-bags,  and  each  took  forth  something  thence,  and
ate  it ;  and  took  forth  water,  and  drank  it.  Then  they  pursued  their
way  with  diligence,  and  continued  to  proceed,  with  the  'Efreet  before
them ;  but  he  had  turned  aside  with  them  from  the  way  to  another
way,  which  was  not  a  beaten  route,  along  the  shore  of  the  sea.

They  ceased  not  to  traverse  the  valleys  and  the  wastes  for  the
space  of  a  whole  month ;  and  on  the  thirty-first  day  there  arose
against  them  a  dust  that  obstructed  the  view  of  the  surrounding
tracts,  and  the  day  was  darkened  by  it.  So  when  Hasan  beheld  it,
paleness  came  upon  him  ;  and  they  beard  alarming  noises,  and  the
old  woman,  looking  towards  Hasan,  said  to  him,  0  my  son,  these  are
the  troops  of  the  Islands  of  Wak-Wak :  they  have  overtaken  us,  and
immediately  will  they  take  us  in  their  grasp.  Hasan  therefore  said
to  her,  What  shall  I  do,  0  my  mother?  And  she  answered  him,
Strike  the  earth  with  the  rod.  Wherefore  he  did  so  ;  and  the  seven
Kings  came  up  to  him  and  saluted  him,  and,  having  kissed  the
ground  before  him,  said  to  him,  Fear  not  nor  grieve.  So  Hasan
rejoiced  at  their  words,  and  said,  Ye  have  done  well,  O  lords  of  the
Jinn  and  'Efreets.  This  is  your  time. — And  they  said  to  him,
Ascend,  with  thy  wife  and  thy  children,  and  her  who  is  with  thee,
upon  the  mountain,  and  leave  us  with  them  ;  for  we  know  that  ye


are  in  the  right,  and  they  are  in  the  wrong,  and  God  will  defend  us
against  them.  Therefore  Hasan  and  his  wife  and  his  children
and  the  old  woman  alighted  from  the  backs  of  the  horses,  and,
having  dismissed  the  horses,  ascended  upon  the  side  of  the  moun-
tain. Then  the  Queen  Noor-el-Huda  approached,  with  troops  dis-
posed on  the  right  and  left,  and  the  chiefs  went  around  them,  and
ranged  them  company  by  company.  The  two  armies  met,  and  the
two  hosts  dashed  against  each  other,  and  the  fires  raged,  and  the
heroes  advanced  boldly,  and  the  coward  fled,  and  the  Jinn  cast  forth
from  their  mouths  burning  sparks,  until  the  thickly-dark  night
approached.  Thereupon  the  two  hosts  separated,  and  the  two  parties
retired  from  each  other ;  and  when  they  alighted  from  their  horses,
and  rested  upon  the  ground,  they  lighted  the  fires,  and  the  seven
Kings  went  up  to  Hasan,  and  kissed  the  ground  before  him.  So  he


468  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.

advanced  to  them  and  thanked  them,  and  prayed  for  them  that  they
might  be  rendered  victorious ;  and  he  asked  them  respecting  their
state  with  regard  to  the  army  of  the  Queen  Noor-el-Huda;  upon
which  they  said  to  him,  They  will  not  withstand  us  more  than  three
days;  for  we  were  to-day  about  to  overcome  them.  We  have
seized  of  them  as  many  as  two  thousand,  and  slain  of  them  a  great
multitude,  the  number  of  which  cannot  be  calculated.  Therefore  let
thy  soul  be  happy  and  thy  bosom  be  dilated. — They  then  bade  him
farewell,  and  descended  to  their  army,  to  guard  it.  They  ceased  not
to  light  the  fires  until  the  morning  rose,  and  diffused  its  light,  and
shone,  when  the  horsemen  mounted  the  five-year-old  horses,  and
smote  one  another  with  the  thin-edged  swords,  and  thrust  one  another
with  the  brown  spears,  and  they  passed  the  night  upon  the  backs  of
the  horses,  dashing  together  like  seas,  and  the  fire  of  war  raged
among  them.  They  ceased  not  to  fight  and  contend  until  the
troops  of  Wak-Wak  were  defeated,  and  their  power  was  broken,
and  their  resolution  fell,  and  their  feet  slipped;  and  whithersoever
they  fled,  defeat  was  before  them.  They  turned  their  backs,  and
placed  their  reliance  upon  flight.  The  greater  number  of  them  were
slain,  and  the  Queen  Noor-el-Huda  was  taken  captive,  together  with
the  grandees  of  her  kingdom,  and  her  chief  officers.

And  when  the  morning  came,  the  seven  Kings  presented  them-
selves before  Hasan,  and  set  for  him  a  couch  of  alabaster  ornamented
with  fine  pearls  and  with  jewels ;  and  he  seated  himself  upon  it.
They  also  set,  by  it,  another  couch,  for  the  lady  Menar-es-Sena,  his
wife,  and  that  couch  was  of  ivory  overlaid  with  brilliant  gold.  And
by  the  side  of  it  they  set  another  couch,  for  the  old  woman  Shawahee
Zat-ed-Dawahee.  Then  they  brought  forward  the  prisoners  before
Hasan,  and  among  them  the  Queen  Noor-el-Huda,  who  had  her
hands  bound  behind  her,  and  her  feet  shackled.  And  when  the  old
woman  saw  her,  she  said  to  her,  Thy  recompense,  0  wicked,  O  tyrannical
woman,  shall  be  none  other  than  this  :  that  one  shall  make  two  bitches
hungry,  and  tie  them  with  thee  to  the  tails  of  horses,  and  drive  them
to  the  sea,  that  thy  skin  may  be  lacerated ;  and  after  that,  some  of
thy  flesh  shall  be  cut  off  and  given  thee  to  eat.  How  didst  thou  do  to
thy  sister  these  deeds,  O  wicked  woman,  seeing  that  she  married  law-
fully, according  to  the  ordinance  of  God  and  his  Apostle  ?  For  there
is  no  monkery  in  El-Islam,  and  marriage  is  one  of  the  ordinances  of
the  Apostles  (on  whom  be  peace  !) ;  and  women  were  not  created  sa\ c
for  men. — And  thereupon  Hasan  gave  orders  to  slay  all  the  captives  ;


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  469

and  the  old  woman  cried  oat  and  said,  Slay  ye  them,  and  let  not  one
of  them  remain  !  But  when  the  Queen  Menar-es-Sena  saw  her
sister  in  this  state,  shackled,  and  in  captivity,  she  wept  for  her,  and
said  to  her,  O  my  sister,  and  who  is  this  who  hath  made  us  captives
in  our  country,  and  overcome  us  ?  She  answered  her,  This  is  a  mo-
mentous case.  Verily  this  man  whose  name  is  Hasan  hath  gained
possession  of  us,  and  God  hath  given  him  power  over  us  and  over  all
our  kingdom,  and  he  hath  subjugated  us  and  the  Kings  of  the  Jinn.
— And  her  sister  replied,  God  aided  him  not  against  you,  nor  did  he
subdue  you,  nor  did  he  make  you  prisoners,  save  by  means  of  this
cap  and  this  rod.  So  her  sister  was  convinced  of  that,  and  knew
that  he  had  delivered  her  by  these  means  ;  and  she  humbled  herself  to
her  sister  until  her  heart  was  affected  with  sympathy  for  her,  and  she
said  to  her  husband  Hasan,  What  dost  thou  desire  to  do  with  me
sister  ?  For  here  she  is  before  thee,  and  she  hath  not  committed  an
abominable  deed  that  thou  shouldst  punish  her  for  it. — He  replied.
Her  torture  of  thee  was  sufficiently  abominable.  But  she  said  to  him,
For  every  abominable  deed  that  she  did  to  me  she  was  excusable.
And  as  to  thee,  thou  hast  tortured  my  father's  heart  by  reason  of  the
loss  of  me,  and  how  will  be  his  state  after  the  death  of  my  sister  ? —
So  Hasan  said  to  her,  It  is  thine  to  determine.  Whatever  thou
desirest,  do  it. — And  thereupon  the  Queen  Menar-es-Sena  gave
orders  to  loose  all  the  prisoners ;  and  they  loosed  them  for  the  sake
of  her  sister,  and  loosed  her  sister  also ;  after  which,  Menar-es-Seua
advanced  to  her  sister  and  embraced  her.  She  began  to  weep  with
her,  and  they  ceased  not  to  do  so  for  some  time.  Then  the  Queen
Noor-el-Huda  said  to  her  sister,  0  my  sister,  blame  me  not  for  that
which  I  have  done  to  thee.  And  the  lady  Menar-es-Sena  replied,
O  my  sister,  this  was  decreed  to  befall  me.

She  and  her  sister  sat  upon  the  couch,  conversing  together ;  and
afterwards,  Menar-es-Sena  made  a  reconciliation  between  the  old
woman  and  her  sister  in  the  most  perfect  manner,  and  their  hearts
became  comforted.  Hasan  then  dismissed  the  troops  who  were  in
the  service  of  the  rod,  and  thanked  them  for  that  which  they  had
done  in  aiding  him  against  his  enemies;  after  which,  the  lady  Monar-
es-Sena  related  to  her  sister  all  that  had  happened  to  her  with  her
husband  Hasan,  and  all  that  had  happened  to  him,  and  what  he  had
endured  for  her  sake.  And  she  said  to  her,  O  my  sister,  it  is  incum-
bent upon  one  not  to  neglect  what  is  due  to  a  person  who  hath  done
these  deeds,  and  who  hath  this  power,  and  whom  God  (whose  name


470  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  KL-HASRAH.

be  exalted!)  hath  aided  by  such  exceeding  fortitude  that  he  hath
entered  our  country,  and  taken  thee  and  made  thee  a  prisoner,  and
defeated  thine  army,  and  subdued  thy  father  the  supreme  King,  who
ruleth  over  the  Kings  of  the  Jinn.  Her  sister  replied,  By  Allah,  O
my  sister,  thou  hast  spoken  truth  in  that  which  thou  hast  told  me,
respecting  the  wonderful  events  that  this  man  hath  endured.  And
was  all  this  for  thy  sake,  O  my  sister  ? — She  answered,  Yes.  Then
they  passed  the  night  conversing  together  till  the  morning ;  and
when  the  sun  rose,  they  desired  to  depart.  So  they  bade  one  another
farewell,  and  Menar-es-Sena  bade  farewell  to  the  old  woman,  having
made  a  reconciliation  between  her  and  her  sister  Noor-el-Huda.

Thereupon  Hasan  struck  the  earth  with  the  rod,  and  its  servants
came  up  to  him,  and  saluted  him,  and  said  to  him,  Praise  be  to  God
for  the  quiet  of  thy  soul !  Command  us  to  do  what  thou  desirest,
that  we  may  do  it  for  thee  in  less  time  than  the  twinkling  of  an  eye.
— He  therefore  thanked  them  for  their  words,  and  said  to  them,  May
God  recompense  you  well !  He  then  said  to  them,  Saddle  for  us  two
coursers,  of  the  best  of  horses.  And  they  did  as  he  commanded  them
immediately,  and  brought  forward  to  him  two  saddled  coursers.  So
Hasan  mounted  one  of  them,  taking  his  elder  son  before  him ;  and
his  wife  mounted  the  other,  taking  her  younger  son  before  her.  The
Queen  Noor-el-Huda  also  mounted  with  the  old  woman;  and  all
went  to  their  countries.  Hasan  with  his  wife  journeyed  to  the  right,
and  the  Queen  Noor-el-Huda  with  the  old  woman  journeyed  to  the
left ;  and  Hasan  ceased  not  to  proceed  with  his  wife  and  his  children
for  the  space  of  a  whole  month ;  after  which  they  came  in  sight  of  a
city,  around  which  they  found  fruits  and  rivers  ;  and  when  they
arrived  at  the  trees,  they  alighted  from  the  backs  of  the  horses,
desiring  to  rest.  Then  they  sat  conversing  together;  and,  lo,  many
horsemen  advanced  to  them.  So  when  Hasan  saw  them,  he  rose  upon
his  feet,  and  met  them  ;  and,  behold,  they  were  the  King  Hasoon,
the  lord  of  the  Land  of  Camphor  and  the  Castle  of  Crystal,65  with  his
attendants.  Thereupon  Hasan  advanced  to  the  King,  and  kissed  his
hands  and  saluted  him  ;  and  when  the  King  saw  him,  he  alighted
from  the  back  of  his  courser,  and  seated  himself  with  Hasan  upon
furniture  spread  beneath  the  trees,  after  he  had  saluted  him  and  con-
gratulated him  on  his  safety;  and  he  was  rejoiced  exceedingly  at  his
return,  and  said  to  him,  O  Hasan,  acquaint  me  with  the  events  that
have  happened  to  thee  from  beginning  to  end.  So  Hasan  acquainted
him  with  all  those  events ;  and  the  King  Hasoon  wondered  at  them,


and  said  to  him,  0  my  son,  no  one
ever  obtained  access  to  the  Islands  of
Wak-Wak  and  returned  from  them
except  thee,  and  thy  case  is  wonder-
ful. But  praise  be  to  God  for  thy
safety  ! — Then,  after  that,  the  King
arose  and  mounted,  ordering  Hasan
to  mount  and  accompany  him ;
whereforq  he  did  so,  and  they

ceased  not  to  proceed  until  they  came  to  the  city,  and  they  entered
the  King's  palace.  The  King  Hasoon  alighted,  and  Hasan  and  his
wife  and  his  children  alighted  at  the  mansion  of  entertainment;  and
when  they  had  alighted,  they  remained  with  the  King  three  days,
eating  and  drinking,  and  enjoying  sport  and  mirth.

Hasan  then  begged  permission  of  the  King  Hasoon  that  he  might
journey  to  his  country,  and  he  gave  him  permission.  So  he  mounted
with  his  wife  and  his  children,  and  the  King  mounted  with  them,
and  they  proceeded  ten  days  ;  and  when  the  King  desired  to  return,
he  bade  Hasan  farewell,  and  Hasan  continued  his  journey  with  his
wife  and  his  children.  They  ceased  not  to  journey  on  for  the  space
of  another  whole  month,  after  which  they  came  in  sight  of  a  great
cavern,  the  ground  of  which  was  of  brass ;  whereupon  Hasan  said  to
his  wife,  See  this  cavern.  Dost  thou  know  it? — She  answered,  Yes.


472  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.

And  he  said,  In  it  is  a  sheykh  named  Abu-r-Ruweysh,  to  whom  I  am
greatly  indebted;  for  he  was  the  cause  of  the  acquaintance  between
me  and  the  King  Hasoon.  And  he  proceeded  to  relate  to  his  wife
the  story  of  Abu-r-Ruweysh ;  and,  lo,  the  sheykh  Abu-r-Ruweysh
came  forth  from  the  entrance  of  the  cavern.  So  when  Hasan  saw
him,  he  alighted  from  his  courser  and  kissed  his  hands,  and  the
sheykh  Abu-r-Ruweysh  saluted  him,  and  congratulated  him  on  his
safety.  He  rejoiced  at  his  arrival,  and  took  him  and  conducted  him
into  the  cavern,  and  sat  with  him ;  and  IJasan  proceeded  to  tell  the
sheykh  Abu-r-Ruweysh  what  had  happened  to  him  in  the  Islands  of
Wak-Wak ;  whereat  the  sheykh  wondered  extremely ;  and  he  said,  O
Hasan,  how  didst  thou  deliver  thy  wife  and  thy  children  ?  Hasan
therefore  related  to  him  the  story  of  the  rod  and  the  cap ;  and  when
the  sheykh  Abu-r-Ruweysh  heard  that  story  he  wondered,  and  said,
O  Hasan,  0  my  son,  had  it  not  been  for  this  rod  and  this  cap,  thou
couldst  not  have  delivered  thy  wife  and  thy  children.  And  Hasan
replied,  Even  so,  O  my  master.

Now  while  they  were  speaking,  a  person  knocked  at  the  door  of
the  cavern :  so  the  sheykh  Abu-r-Ruweysh  went  forth  and  opened
the  door,  and  he  found  that  the  sheykh  'Abd-El-Kuddoos  had  come,
riding  upon  the  elephant.  The  sheykh  Abu-r-Ruweysh  therefore
advanced  and  saluted  and  embraced  him,  rejoicing  greatly  at  his  arrival,
and  congratulated  him  on  his  safety ;  after  which,  the  sheykh  Abu-r-
Ruweysh  said  to  Hasan,  Relate  to  the  sheykh  'Abd-El-Kuddoos  all
that  hath  happened  to  thee,  O  Hasan.  So  Hasan  proceeded  to  relate
to  the  sheykh  all  that  had  happened  to  him  from  first  to  last,  until  he
came  to  the  story  of  the  rod  and  the  cap ;  whereupon  the  sheykh
'Abd-El-Kuddoos  said  to  him,  0  my  son,  as  to  thee,  thou  hast
delivered  thy  wife  and  thy  children,  and  thou  hast  no  longer  any
need  of  the  rod  and  the  cap ;  but  as  to  us,  we  were  the  cause  of  thy
gaining  access  to  the  Islands  of  Wak-Wak,  and  I  have  acted  kindly
to  thee  for  the  sake  of  the  daughters  of  my  brother,  and  I  beg  thee,
of  thy  bounty  and  beneficence,  to  give  me  the  rod,  and  to  give  the
sheykh  Abu-r-Ruweysh  the  cap.  And  when  Hasan  heard  the  words
of  the  sheykh  'Abd-El-Kuddoos,  he  hung  down  his -head  towards  the
ground,  and  was  ashamed  to  say,  I  will  not  give  them  to  you.  Then
he  said  within  himself,  Verily  these  two  sheykhs  have  done  a  great
kindness  to  me,  and  they  were  the  cause  of  my  gaining  access  to  the
Islands  of  Wak-Wak,  and  but  for  them  I  had  not  arrived  at  these
places,  nor  had  I  delivered  my  wife  and  my  children,  nor  had  I  got


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  473

this  rod  and  this  cap.  And  he  raised  his  head,  and  said,  Yes-  I  will
give  them  to  you.  But,  0  my  masters,  verily  I  fear  the  supreme
King,  the  father  of  my  wife,  lest  he  come  to  me  with  troops  into  our
country  and  they  fight  against  me,  and  I  shall  not  be  able  to  repel
them  save  by  means  of  the  rod  and  the  cap. — The  sheykh  'Abd-El-
Kuddoos,  however,  replied,  O  my  son,  fear  not ;  for  we  will  be  to  thee
a  spy  and  a  helper  in  this  place,  and  whosoever  shall  come  to  thee
from  the  father  of  thy  wife,  we  will  repel  him  from  thee.  Fear  not
any  thing  whatever ;  but  be  of  good  heart  and  cheerful  eye  and  dilated
bosom.  No  harm  shall  befall  thee. — So  when  Hasan  heard  the  words
of  the  sheykh,  bashfulness  affected  him,  and  he  gave  the  cap  to  the
sheykh  Abu-r-Ruweysh,  and  said  to  the  sheykh  'Abd-El-Kuddoos,
Accompany  me  to  my  country,  and  I  will  give  thee  the  rod.  And  the
two  sheykhs  rejoiced  thereat  exceedingly,  and  prepared  for  Hasan  riches
and  treasures  that  cannot  be  described.

He  remained  with  them  three  days ;  and  after  that,  he  desired
to  continue  his  journey ;  wherefore  the  sheykh  'Abd-El-Kud-
doos  prepared  him-
self to  journey  with
him.  And  when  Hasan
had  mounted  a  beast,
and  mounted  his
wife  upon  another,  the
sheykh  'Abd-El-Kud-
doos  whistled,  and,  lo,
a  huge  elephant  ad-
vanced trotting  from
the  further  part  of
the  desert,  and  the
sheykh  'Abd-El-Kud-
doos  took  him  and
mounted  upon  him,
and  proceeded  with
Hasan  and  his  wife  and
his  children.  But  as
to  the  sheykh  Abu-r-
•lluweysh,  he  entered
the  cavern.  Hasan  and  his  wife  and  his  children,  and  the  sheykh  'Abd-
El-Kuddoos,  ceased  not  to  pursue  their  journey,  traversing  the  laud  in
its  length  and  breadth,  the  sheykh  guiding  them  by  an  easy  way  and
in.  3  P


474  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.

near  roads,  until  they  drew  near  to  the  country  that  they  sought ;  and
Hasan  rejoiced  at  his  approach  towards  the  country  of  his  mother,
and  at  the  return  of  his  wife  and  his  children  to  him.  On  his  arrival
at  the  country  [of  his  sisters],  after  these  arduous,  horrible  events,  he
praised  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !)  for  this,  and  thanked  Him  for
his  grace  and  bounty,  and  recited  these  verses  :66 —

Perhaps,  in  a  short  time,  God  will  unite  us,  and  we  shall  be  encircled  in  each

other's  arms,
And  I  shall  tell  you  the  most  wonderful  of  the  events  that  have  befallen  me,

and  what  I  have  suffered  from  the  pain  of  separation,
And  I  shall  cure  mine  eye  by  looking  at  you;  for  my  heart  is  in  a  state  of

longing  desire.
I  have  hidden  a  story  for  you  in  my  mind,  that  I  may  relate  it  to  you  when  we

meet.
' I  will  reproach  you  for  the  actions  that have proceeded from  you,  with a

reproach  that  shall  end ;  but  affection  will  remain.

And  when  he  had  ended  his  verses,  he  looked,  and,  lo,  the  green
cupola  appeared  to  them,  and  the  pool,  and  the  green  palace,  and  the
Mountain  of  the  Clouds  appeared  to  them  in  the  distance.  So  the
sheykh  'Abd-El-Kuddoos  said,  0  Hasan,  rejoice  at  the  prospect  of
good  fortune;  for  thou  wilt  this  night  be  a  guest  with  the  daughters
of  my  brother.  Therefore  Hasan  rejoiced  thereat  exceedingly,  and  so
did  his  wife.  Then  they  alighted  at  the  cupola,  and  rested  and  ate
and  drank  ;  after  which  they  mounted  again,  and  proceeded  until  they
drew  near  to  the  palace.

Upon  this,  the  daughters  of  the  brother  of  the  sheykh  'Abd-El-
Kuddoos  came  forth  to  them  and  met  them,  and  saluted  them  and
their  uncle,  and  their  uncle  saluted  them,  and  said  to  them,  O
daughters  of  my  brother,  see,  I  have  accomplished  the  affair  of  your
brother  Hasan,  and  aided  him  to  deliver  his  wife  and  his  children.
So  the  damsels  advanced  to  him  and  embraced  him,  rejoicing  at  his
return,  and  congratulated  him  on  his  safety  and  health,  and  his
reunion  to  his  wife  and  his  children  ;  and  it  was  to  them  a  festival-
day.  Then  the  sister  of  Hasan,  the  youngest  damsel,  advanced  and
embraced  him,  and  wept  violently.  Hasan  also  wept  with  her,  on
account  of  the  length  of  his  desolate  state ;  and  she  complained  to
him  of  the  pain  of  separation  that  she  had  experienced,  and  the
trouble  of  her  heart,  and  what  she  had  endured  in  consequence  of
his  absence,  and  recited  these  two  verses  : —

Mine eye  hath not looked,  since  thy  separation,  at any  one  but  thy  form

appeared  before  it :
Nor  hath  it  closed  without  my  seeing  thee  in  slumber,  as  though  thou  wast

dwelling  between  the  eyelid  and  the  eye.


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.  475

And  when  she  had  finished  her  verses,  she  rejoiced  exceedingly;  and
Hasan  said  to  her,  O  my  sister,  I  thank  none  for  this  affair  but  thee,
above  the  rest  of  my  sisters ;  and  may  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !)
be  thine  aider  and  assister !  He  then  related  to  her  all  that  had
befallen  him  in  his  travel  from  first  to  last,  and  what  he  had  endured,
and  what  had  happened  to  him  with  the  sister  of  his  wife,  and  how  he
had  delivered  his  wife  and  his  children.  He  told  her  also  of  the
wonders,  and  the  arduous  and  horrible  events,  that  he  had  witnessed,
that  the  sister  of  his  wife  had  desired  to  slaughter  him,  and  to  slaughter
her  and  her  children,  and  that  none  had  preserved  them  from  her  save
God,  whose  name  be  exalted !  After  that,  he  related  to  her  the  story
of  the  rod  and  the  cap,  telling  her  that  the  sheykh  Abu-r-Ruweysh
and  the  sheykh  'Abd-El-Kuddoos  had  demanded  those  two  things  of
him,  and  that  he  had  not  given  them  to  them  but  for  her  sake.  She
therefore  thanked  him  for  that,  and  prayed  for  long  life  for  him  ;  and
he  said,  By  Allah,  I  shall  not  forget  all  the  good  offices  that  thou  hast
done  me  from  the  beginning  of  the  affair  to  its  end  !  Then  his  sister
looked  towards  his  wife  Menar-es-Sena,  and  embraced  her,  and  pressed
her  children  to  her  bosom ;  after  which  she  said  to  her,  O  daughter
of  the  supreme  King,  was  there  no  mercy  in  thy  heart,  that  thou
separatedst  him  and  his  children,  and  torturedst  his  heart  for  them.
Didst  thou  desire  by  doing  thus  that  he  should  die  ? — And  she
laughed,  and  replied,  Thus  ordained  God  (whose  perfection  be  ex-
tolled, and  whose  name  be  exalted  !)  ;  and  he  who  deceiveth  men,  him
doth  God  deceive.  Then  they  brought  some  food  and  drink,  and
they  all  ate  and  drank  and  were  happy.  Hasan  remained  with  them  ten
days,  eating  and  drinking,  and  in  joy  and  happiness  ;  and  after  the  ten
days,  he  prepared  himself  for  his  journey.  His  sister  thereupon  arose,
and  prepared  for  him  wealth  and  rarities  that  cannot  be  described,  and
after  that,  she  pressed  him  to  her  bosom,  to  bid  him  farewell,  and
embraced  him;  and  Hasan,  alluding  to  her,  recited  these  verses  : —

The  relinquishment  of  lovers  is  nought  but  remote,  and  quitting  one's  beloved

is  nought  but  afflicting,
And  cruelty  and  absence  are  nought  but  trouble,  and  the  victim  of  love  is  nought

but  a  martyr.
How  tedious  is  the  night  to  the  enamoured,  who  is  parted  from  his  true  love,

and  hath  become  solitary !
His  tears  run  down  upon  his  cheek,  and  he  saith,  Are  there  yet  any  more  tears

to  flow  ?

Then  Hasan  gave the  sheykh  'Abd-El-Kuddoos  the rod,  and  he  re-


476  THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.

joiced  ill  it  exceedingly,  and  thanked  Hasan  for  it ;  and  after  he  had
received  it  from  him,  he  mounted,  and  returned  to  his  abode.

Hasan  then  mounted,  with  his  wife  and  his  children,  and  departed
from  the  palace  of  the  damsels;  and  they  went  forth  with  him,  and
bade  him  farewell,  after  which  they  returned.  Hasan  repaired  to  his
country,  proceeding  over  the  desert  tract  for  the  space  of  two  months
and  ten  days,  until  he  arrived  at  the  city  of  Baghdad,  the  Abode  of
Peace ;  and  he  came  to  his  house  by  the  way  of  the  private  door  which
opened  towards  the  plain  and  the  desert,  and  knocked  at  the  door.
His  mother,  on  account  of  the  length  of  his  absence,  had  relinquished
sleep,  and  given  herself  continually  to  mourning  and  weeping  and
wailing,  until  she  fell  sick,  and  ate  not  food,  nor  delighted  in  sleep,
but  wept  night  and  day,  and  ceased  not  to  mention  her  son.  She
had  despaired  of  his  return  to  her ;  and  when  he  stood  at  the  door,  he
heard  her  weeping,  and  reciting  these  verses  : —

By  Allah,  O  my  master,  cure  her  whom  you  have  made  sick  ;  for  her  body  is
emaciated  and  her  heart  is  broken !

If  you  grant  her  a  meeting,  in  your  generosity,  the  enamoured  will  be  over-
whelmed with  the  favours  of  the  beloved.

I  despair  not  of  your  approach ;  for  God  can  effect  it ;  and  in  the  midst  of  diffi-
culty, prosperity  surroundeth  one.

And  when  she  had  ended  her  verses,  she  heard  her  son  Hasan  calling
out  at  the  door,  O  my  mother,  verily  fortune  hath  granted  reunion  !
And  on  her  hearing  his  words,  she  knew  him.  She  came  to  the  door
in  a  state  between  that  of  believing  and  that  of  disbelieving;  and
when  she  opened  the  door,  she  saw  her  sou  standing  there  with  his
wife  and  his  children,  and  she  cried  out  by  reason  of  the  violence  of
her  joy,  and  fell  upon  the  ground  in  a  fit.  Hasan  therefore  ceased
not  to  soothe  her  until  she  recovered,  when  she  embraced  him,  and
then  she  wept,  after  which  she  called  his  pages  and  slaves,  and
ordered  them  to  bring  all  that  was  with  him  into  the  house.  Accord-
ingly they  brought  the  loads  into  the  house.  Then  his  wife  and  his
children  entered,  and  his  mother  went  to  her  and  embraced  her,  and
kissed  her  head  and  kissed  her  feet,  and  said  to  her,  O  daughter  of
the  supreme  King,  if  I  have  erred  in  not  doing  what  was  due  to  thee,
lo,  I  beg  forgiveness  of  God,  the  Great.  And  looking  towards  her
son,  she  said  to  him,  O  my  son,  what  was  the  cause  of  this  long
absence  ?  So  when  she  asked  him  respecting  that,  he  acquainted  her
with  all  that  had  happened  to  him  from  beginning  to  end ;  and  on
hearing  his  words,  she  uttered  a  great  cry,  and  again  fell  upon  the
ground  in  a  fit,  on  account  of  the  mention  of  the  events  that  had


THE  STORY  OF  HASAN  OF  EL-BASRAH.


477


happened  to  her  son.  He  ceased  not  to  soothe  her  until  she  recovered,
and  thereupon  she  said  to  him,  0  my  son,  by  Allah,  thou  hast
acted  negligently  with  respect  to  the  rod  and  the  cap  ;  for  if  thou
hadst  taken  care  of  them  and  preserved  them,  thou  hadst  possessed
the  earth  in  its  length  and  breadth ;  but  praise  be  to  God,  O  my
son,  for  thy  safety,  and  for  that  of  thy  wife  and  thy  children  !

They  passed  a  most  agreeable  and  most  pleasant  night;  and  when
the  morning  came,  Hasan  changed  his  clothes,  and  put  on  a  suit  of
the  most  beautiful  material.  He  then  went  forth  to  the  market,  and
bought  male  black  slaves  and  female  slaves,  and  stuffs  and  precious
things,  consisting  of  ornaments  and  apparel,  and  furniture  and  costly
vessels,  of  which  the  like  existed  not  in  the  possession  of  the  Kings.
He  bought  also  houses  and  gardens,  immoveable  estates,  and  other
things  ;  and  he  resided  with  his  children  and  his  wife  and  his  mother,
eating  and  drinking  and  delighting.  They  ceased  not  to  pass  the  most
comfortable  life,  and  the  most  agreeable,  until  they  were  visited  by
the  terminator  of  delights  and  the  separator  of  companions. — Ex-
tolled be  the  perfection  of  Him  who  possesseth  the  dominion  that
is  apparent  and  the  dominion  that  is  hidden,  and  who  is  the  Living,
the  Everlasting,  who  dieth  not  !


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-FIFTH.


NOTE  1.  The  hero  of  this  story  is  called  in  Dr.  Scott's  translation  "  Mazin  of
Khorassaun,"  or  Khurasan.  He  is  there  said,  in  the  commencement  of  the  tale,  to
have  "  resided  in  the  city  of  Khorassaun;"  but  afterwards,  in  "Bussorah,"  or  El-Bas-
rah. The  story  in  Dr.  Scott's  version  is  short  in  comparison  with  that  in  my  original ;
hut  in  other  respects,  for  the  most  part,  it  agrees  with  the  latter.  I  have  before  men-
tioned, that  another  tale  of  the  Thousand  and  One  Nights  (that  of  Janshah)  is  similar
to  this  in  its  general  character,  and  in  the  incidents  upon  which  it  is  chiefly  founded.

NOTE  2. In  the  Breslau  edition,  Hasan  is  said  to  have  squandered  away  his  wealth.

NOTE  3.  There  are  various  kinds  of  kohl,  as  mentioned  in  Note  34  to  Chapter  ii.
Those  which  are  used  merely  for  the  sake  of  ornament  are  black ;  but  there  are  many
other  kinds  of  different  colours  employed  for  medicinal  purposes.

NOTE  4.  "  That  is,"  as  my  sheykh  observes  in  a  marginal  note,  "  but  few  persons
know  it :  and  in  this  expression  is  a  double  meaning .  it  signifies  also  '  /  know  not
that.' "

NOTE  5.  I  read  "ke'ab"  (plural  of  "kaab,"  "a'cup,"}  for  a  word  written  in  my
original  "  kabbat,"  and  in  the  Breslau  edition  "  kaaban."

NOTE  6.  "  The  Persian  wrote  these  two  verses,  to  denote  that  he  had  taken  Hasan,
and  that  he  (the  latter)  would  not  return."

NOTE  7.  This  is  not  consistent  with  the  sequel.  The  passage  is  perhaps  corrupted
by  copyists.  It  should  rather  be  said,  "  he  used  every  year  to  take  a  Muslim  and  to
sacrifice  him  in  order  to  attain  an  object  of  his  desire."

NOTE  8.  The  drum  and  plectrum  here  mentioned  ^called,  respectively,  in  my
original,  "  tabl  '  and  "  zakhmeh  "  or  "  zukhmeh  ")  appear  to  be  similar  to  those  de-
scribed in  the  following  passage.  "  Darweeshes,  in  religious  processions,  &c.,  and  in
begging,  often  make  use  of  a  little  tabl,  or  kettle-drum,  called  '  baz,'  six  or  seven  inches
in  diameter  which  is  held  in  the  left  hand,  by  a  little  projection  in  the  centre  of  the
back  ;  and  beaten  by  the  right  hand,  with  a  short  leathern  strap,  or  a  stick."  -  The
term  which  designates  the  plectrum  in  my  original  is  also  applied  to  a  stirrup-leather,
or  strap.  The  drum  is  generally  of  tinned  copper,  with  a  parchment  face.

NOTE  9.  This  seems,  from  the  sequel,  to  be  the  same  palace  near  which  they
before  passed.  We  may  suppose  that  it  was  situate  a  little  above  the  foot  of  the
mountain,  and  that  the  Magian  had  pursued  a  very  circuitous  route  (along  a  winding
valley;  in  order  to  avoid  passing  close  beneath  it.


Marginal  note  by  my  sheykh.  2  "  Modern  Egyptians,"  vol.  ii.  ch.  v.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-FIFTH.  479

NOTE  10.  So  in  the  Breslau  edition  :  in  the  Cairo  edition,  "  rakhams,"  or  aquiline
vultures.

NOTE  11.  There  is  an  incident  similar  to  this  in  the  romance  of  Seyf  Zu-1-Yezen,
which  work  1  have  mentioned  before.  Misr,  the  son  of  Seyf  Zu-1-Yezen,  is  sewed  up
in  a  camel's  hide,  and  carried  by  a  rukh'  to  the  top  of  a  mountain,  to  obtain  a  treasure
for  a  treacherous  Magian,  named  Bahrain. — It  is  also  remarkable  that  the  story  of
Hasan  of  El-Basrah  presents  two  other  incidents  which  1  have  found  described  in  the
romance  above  mentioned.  See  Notes  15  and  16,  below.

NOTE  12.  These  verses,  except'the  last,  have  occurred  before,  in  volume  i.  page  307.
See  the  notes  there  referred  to.

NOTE  13.  The  form  of  this  prayer  I  have  given  in  my  work  on  the  Modern
Egyptians,  vol.  ii.  ch.  xv.

NOTE  14.  For  the  significations  of  "  mesheed,"  see  a  note  at  the  foot  of  page  350
in  this  volume.

NOTE  15.  This  is  one  of  the  incidents  alluded  to  above,  in  Note  11.  Seyf  Zu-1-
Yezen  enters  a  forbidden  closet  in  a  palace,  and  ascends  thence,  by  a  flight  of  steps,
to  the  roof.

NOTE  16.  This  is  the  last  of  the  incidents  that  I  have  to  notice  as  occurring  in  the
romance  of  Seyf  Zu-1-Yezen.  The  chief  hero  of  this  romance  (Seyf  himself)  sees  a
number  of  beautiful  damsels  with  clothing  and  wings  of  feathers,  who  fly  like  birds
and  come  to  a  pool  in  a  pavilion,  near  which  he  has  concealed  himself,  in  the  midst  of
a  garden.  There  they  divest  themselves  of  their  dresses  of  feathers,  and  bathe ;  and
Seyf,  like  Hasan  of  El- Basrah,  becoming  enamoured  of  the  chief  damsel,  adopts  the
same  plan  as  Hasan  with  the  view  of  capturing  her,  and  experiences  the  same  result. —
Trebutien  mentions  (vol.  ii.  p.  208)  a  similar  incident  in  a  German  tale.  "  II  est  assez
remarquable  qu'il  existe  en  Allemagne  une  tradition  &  peu  pres  semblable,  et  qui  a
fourni  le  sujet  d'un  des  contes  de  Musaros,  intitule  lo  Voile  enter  e" — I  also  find  that  in
the  first  volume  of  Mr.  Keightley's  "  Fairy  Mythology  "  is  a  Shetland  legend  of  the
same  kind ;  but  the  vehicle  is  a  seal-skin.

NOTE  17. See  Note  43  to  Chapter  x.

NOTK  18.  The  new  moon  of  the  Festival  of  Ramadan  (commonly  called  the  Minor
Festival)  is  anxiously  watched  for,  and  the  sight  of  it  gives  delight,  as  it  shews  that
the  month  of  abstinence  is  ended.  Hence  there  is  a  double  reason  for  the  comparison
in  the  text.

NOTE  19. See  Note  24  to  Chapter  xv.

NOTE  20.  In  the  latter  hemistich  of  this  verse;  in  my  original,  a  transposition  is
required  for  the  sake  both  of  the  sense  and  the  measure,  as  my  sheykh  has  observed.
For  "  wa-hwa  fi-1-hobbi "  we  must  read  "  fi-1-hobbi  wa-hwa."

NOTE  21. "  Mandharah  "  is  here  put  in  my  original  instead  of  "  mak'ad."
NOTE  22. See  Note  58  to  Chapter  ii.

NOTE  23.  The  words  "an  army"  I  have  inserted  on  the  authority  of  the  Breslau
edition. — Dr.  Scott,  in  his  sixty-eighth  note,  in  illustration  of  a  corresponding  passage
in  the  story  of  "Mazin  of  Khorassaun,"  gives  an  extract  from  Barrow's  Public  Life  of
Lord  Macartney  (vol.  ii.  p.  23),  in  which  his  lordship,  speaking  of  the  Cossac  soldiery,
says,  that  there  is  one  horde  of  them,  consisting  of  about  30,000  fighting  men,  called
the  Cossacs  of  Zaporavia,  whose  women  reside  in  certain  islands  of  the  Nieper  in  their


480  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-FIFTH.

neighbourhood,  and  arc;  only  visited  by  them  at  a  particular  season  of  the  year.  The
male  children,  at  a  certain  age,  are  delivered  to  the  fathers,  like  whom  they  become
hunters  and  warriours,  while  the  females  remain  with  their  mothers.

NOTE  24.  Thus  Seyf  Zu-1-Yezen,  in  the  case  above  alluded  to  (in  Note  16),  is
directed  by  a  friendly  Jinneeyeh  to  steal  the  feather-dress  of  his  beloved.

NOTE  25.  The  "  'abaah  "  (vulgarly  called  "  'abayeh  "}  is  a  kind  of  woollen  cloak,
generally  striped,  brown  and  white.  It  is  represented  in  several  of  the  engravings  in
this  work;  as,  for  instance,  in  page  389  of  volume  i.

NOTE  26.  These  words  "and  demanded,"  &c.,  are  from  the  Breslau  edition.  In
my  original,  the  damsels  are  here  said  to  have  gone  forth  again  to  the  chase,  and  to
have  caught  the  game  mentioned  immediately  after  in  my  translation.  Among  the
game  are  particularized  "wild  oxen;"  by  which  name,  four  different  kinds  of  antelopes
are  called,  by  some :  it  is  properly  applied  to  bovine  antelopes.

NOTE  27. That  is,  the  hand  of  the  deputy. See  Note  39  to  Chapter  iv.

NOTE  28. This  is  a  vulgar  proverb,  as  my  sheykh  has  observed  in  a  marginal  note.

NOTE  29.  "  Tohfeh  "  signifies  "  a  present,"  and  particularly  "  a  rare,"  or  "  pleasing,"
or  "  a  rare  and  pleasing,  present."

NOTE  30. See  Note  16  to  Chapter  ii.

NOTE  31.  In  my  original,  "  the  sixth,"  but  this  is  an  error,  which  my  sheykh  has
noted  in  the  margin ;  adding,  that  Er-Rasheed  occasioned  a  proverb,  which  is  applied
to  any  person  like  that  Khaleefeh  in  his  actions,  "  Is  he  the  fifth  of  the  sons  of  El-
'Abbas  ?" — meaning  Er-Rasheed ;  for  none  of  the  'Abbasees  did  like  him ;  neither  any
before  him  nor  any  after  him. — Is  not  this  proverb,  current  in  Egypt,  sufficient  to
account  for  the  frequent  mention  of  Er-Rasheed  in  many  of  the  tales  of  the  Thousand
and  One  Nights,  without  our  supposing  that  these  tales  were  written  by  a  native  of
Baghdad,  and  a  subject  of  the  'Abbasees  ?

NOTE  32 — On  the  Islands  of  Wak-Wak.  These  islands,  which  are  called  in  my
original  "  Wak,"  and  in  the  Breslau  edition  "  Wak  el-Wak,"  are  commonly  called

"The  Islands  of  Wak-Wak.'  or  '• of  El-Wak- Wak."  By  some  European  writers

they  are  supposed  to  be  the  Japan  Islands :  by  Langles,  the  Sunda  Islands.  But  I
rather  think  that  the  Arab  geographers  applied  the  name  of  Wak-Wak  to  all  the  islands
with  which  they  were  acquainted  on  the  east  and  south-east  of  Borneo.  The  following
particulars  respecting  the  islands  thus  called  by  them  are  derived  from  the  works  of
El-Kazweenee  and  Ibn-El-Wardee;  but  chiefly  from  the  latter  author.

These  islands  extend  (or  are  contiguous  to)  the  Islands  (or  Island)  of  Er-Raij  or
Ez-Zanij  (before  identified  with  Borneo3),  and  the  navigation  to  them  is  by  the  stars.
They  are  said  to  be  one  thousand  and  seven  hundred  in  number,  and  governed  by  a
woman,  named  Demharah,  who  wears  a  robe  woven  with  gold,  and  has  shoes  (or  sandals)
of  gold.  No  one  walks  in  all  these  islands  with  any  other  kind  of  shoe  :  if  he  wear  any
other  kind,  his  feet  are  cut.  The  Queen  rides  amid  her  slaves  and  troops  with  elephants
and  standards  and  drums  and  trumpets  and  beautiful  female  slaves.  The  place  of  her
abode  is  an  island  called  Amboobeh,  the  inhabitants  of  which  are  skilful  in  manufactures,
so  that  they  weave  shirts  of  one  piece  each,  sleeves  and  body  together,  and  make  great
ships  of  small  pieces  of  wood,  and  make  houses  of  wood  that  move  upon  the  face  of  the
water.  'Eesa4  for  Moosa5),  the  son  of  El-Mubarak,  Es-Seerafee,6  relates,  "  I  went  in


3  In  Note  12  to  Chapter  xx  *  So  in  Ibn-El-Wardee.  5  So  in  El-Kazweenee.

6  That  is,  of  the  town  of  Seeraf  (formerly  a  great  mercantile  town)  on  the  Persian  shore  of  the  Persian
Gulf. Here  most  of  the  Arab  ships  bound  for  India  and  China  took  in  their  cargoes.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-FIFTH.  481

to  this  Queen,  and  saw  her  sitting  naked  upon  a  couch  of  gold,  with  a  crown  of  gold
upon  her  head,  and  before  her  were  four  thousand  maid-servants,  beautiful  virgins.
They  were  of  the  Magian  religion,  with  uncovered  heads,  and  on  the  head  of  each  of
them  was  a  comh  of  ivory,  adorned  with  mother-of-pearl  (or  shells)  :  some  of  them  bad
two  combs,  or  three,  or  four,  or  more,  to  the  number  of  twenty."  The  people  ornament
themselves  with  cowries,  which  they  also  treasure  up.  Here  too  is  a  tree  that  bears
fruits  like  women,  with  bodies,  eyes,  limbs,  &c.,  like  those  of  women  :  they  have  beau-
tiful faces,  and  are  suspended  by  their  hair.  They  come  forth  from  integuments  like
large  leathern  bags;  and  when  they  feel  the  air  and  the  sun,  they  cry  out  "  Wak  [
Wak !"  until  their  hair  is  cut ;  and  when  it  is  cut,  they  die;  and  the  people  of  these
islands  understand  this  cry,  and  augur  ill  from  it.  The  land  where  these  fruits  grow
is  the  best  of  lands,  and  the  most  abundant  in  odours  and  perfumes;  and  in  it  are
rivers  sweeter  than  hydromel  and  dissolved  sugar ;  but  it  has  no  inhabitants  except  the
elephants,  some  of  which  attain  the  height  of  eleven  cubits ;  and  it  has  abundance  of
birds.  No  one  knoweth  what  is  beyond  it  save  God.  From  one  of  these  Islands  of
Wak -Wak  there  issueth  a  great  torrent  like  pitch,  which  floweth  into  the  sea,  and  the
fish  are  burnt  thereby,  and  float  upon  the  water. — The  Islands  of  Wak- Wak  contain
gold  in  such  abundance  that  the  inhabitants  make  the  chains  of  their  dogs  and  other
beasts,  and  the  collars  of  their  apes,  of  that  metal;  and  the  great  men  make  bricks  of
gold,  and  build  with  them  palaces  and  houses,  well  and  skilfully.  These  islands  also
contain  the  ebony-tree. — Ibn-El-Wardee  likewise  mentions,  among  the  islands  of  the
same  sea  (the  Sea  of  China),  the  Island  of  Women,  in  which  there  is  not  a  single  male
inhabitant.7

NOTE  33.  It  is  a  common  custom  of  the  Arabs  to  address  an  old  woman  by  the
appellation  of  "  pilgrim,"  in  Arabic  "hajjeh."  This  word,  in  my  original,  is  here
written  (as  it  is  usually  pronounced)  "  hajjeh."

NOTE  34.  These  were  to  be  shewn  to  Hasan,  on  his  return,  as  the  graves  of  his
wife  and  two  children,  as  afterwards  appears

NOTE  35.  I  here  read  (as  proposed  by  my  sheykh)  "  neseem  "  (zephyr)  instead  of
"  nedeem  "  (boon-companion).

NOTE  36.  The  word  which  I  have  rendered  "  changeable  "  (namely  "  ghayoor  ")
generally  signifies  "jealous :"  but  for  giving  it  the  former  signification  I  have  the
authority  of  my  sheykh,  in  a  marginal  note  in  volume  i.  page  360  of  my  original,  where
nearly  the  same  verse  occurs  :  see  volume  ii.  page  99  of  the  present  translation.

NOTE  37.  For  "  semerin,"  in  my  original,  my  sheykh  has  substituted  "  saharin,''
and  I  have  followed  his  reading.

NOTE  38. That  is,  she  is  like  the  full  moon,  which  is  fourteen  nights  old.
NOTE  39. "  'Abd-El-Kuddoos  "  signifies  "  the  Servant  of  the  Very  Holy."

NOTE  40.  An  Arab  often  does  thus  when  meditating;  and  thus,  while  He  was
sitting  in  the  Temple  (upon  the  floor),  when  the  woman  taken  in  adultery  was  brought
before  Him,  "  Jesus  stooped  down,  and  with  his  finger  wrote  on  the  ground."  (John
viii.  6.)

NOTE  41.  Here,  in  my  original,  for  the  words  signifying  "  the  'accursed  Ibices,''  is
put  "  Mo'een ;"  but  afterwards,  Abu-r-Kuweysh  is  called  "  son  of  the  daughter  of  the
accursed  Ibices."  He  appears,  however,  to  be  a  virtuous  person.


7  In  the  geographical  dictionary  entitled  "  JIa-  the  plural  of  "  Khurtlfeh;" and  it  is  worthy  of  re-

rasid  el-Ittilaa,"  &c.,  I  find  "  El-\Vakw:ik  "  as  the  mark  that  the  supposed  mode)  of  the  Thousand

name  of  a  country  or  countries  situate  above  China,  and  One  Nights  is  called  "  Elf-Khurafeh." See

mentioned  in  the  "  Khurufat." This  last  word  is  the  Review  at  the  end  of  this  work.— KD.

III.  3 Q


482  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-FIFTH.

NOTE  42. In  my  original,  the  birds  are  here  called  vultures  ("nusoor").

NOTE  43.  Ed-Deylem  is  a  large  province  of  Persia,  bounding  the  Caspian  Sea,  on
the  south. — In  the  Breslau  edition,  instead  of  "  here  are  soldiers  of  Ed-Deylem,"  we
read  "  here  is  a  great  army."

NOTE  44. "  Umm-ed-Dawahee  "  signifies  "  Mother  of  Calamities."

NOTE  45.  It  seems  that  by  the  term  ,"  islands  "  here  used,  we  are  to  understand
peninsulas,  which  is  often  the  case.  The  reader  will  observe,  in  the  account  of  the
Islands  of  Wak-Wak  here  given,  some  inconsistencies  which  I  cannot  pretend  to
reconcile.

NOTE  46.  I  omit  some  passages  &c.  of  my  original  in  the  paragraph  to  which  this
note  refers.

NOTE  47.  The  youngest  was  his  wife ;  but  it  appears  afterwards  that  the  eldest
daughter  bore  a  strong  resemblance  to  her.

NOTE  48. "  Noor-el-Huda  "  signifies  "  the  Light  of  Day."

NOTE  49. In  my  original,  they  are  here  said  to  be  seven.

NOTE  50. "  Menar-es-Sena.  "  may  be  rendered  "the  Pharos  of  Splendour."

NOTE  51.  The  first  and  last  of  these  names  have  been  explained.  The  second
signifies  "the  Star  of  the  Morning;"  the  third,  "the  Sun  of  the  Forenoon;"  the
fourth,  "  the  Tree  of  Pearls ;"  the  fifth,  "the  Food  of  Hearts;"  and  the  sixth,  "the
Glory  of  Damsels."

NOTE  52. See  Note  24  to  Chapter  xv.

NOTE  53.  So  in  the  Breslau  edition  :  in  the  edition  of  Cairo,  "  to  the  place  whence
I  had  brought  it."

NOTE  54.  Thus  in  the  Breslau  edition  :  in  the  Cairo  edition,  "  the  Castle  of  the
Birds."  "  The  Islands  of  Camphor  and  the  Castle  of  Crystal "  have  been  mentioned  in
a  former  tale:  see  volume  i.  of  this  translation,  page  511,  and  Note  1  to  Chapter  viii.

NOTE  55.  The  kind  of  cap  here  mentioned  (in  the  Arabic,  "  takeeyeh,")  is  a  close-
fitting  skull-cap,  which  is  worn  next  the  head.  It  is  generally  of  cotton.  Sometimes
the  crown  is  composed  of  four  or  three  triangular  pieces,  which  are  most  commonly  of
different-coloured  silks.

XOTE  56.  The  "  jedeed  "  is  a  copper  coin  which,  I  believe,  is  now  no  longer  current.8
My  sheykh  states,  in  a  marginal  note,  that  ten  jedeeds  were  equivalent  to  a  nusf  fad-
dah,  vulgarly  called  nuss,  respecting  which  see  Note  17  to  Chapter  iii.  The  plural  is
"jided."

NOTE  57.  "  Zat-ed-Dawabee  "  is  similar  in  import  to  "  Umm-ed-Dawdhee,"  which
has  been  explained  above.

NOTE  58.  We  must  suppose  (what  is  most  probable)  that  the  vessels  of  glass  and
China-ware  fell  upon  a  mattress  extending  along  the  side  of  the  room,  and  therefore
did  not  break.


8  This  name  is  also  given,  in  Egypt,  to  an  ancient  copper  coin  of  any  kind.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-FIFTH.


483


NOTE  59. This  verse,  and  others;  nearly  agreeing  with  those  which  here  follow  it,
have  occurred  before,  in  page  227  in  this  volume.

NOTE  60. "Nejdee"  signifies  "of  Nejd"  (the  central  and  largest  province of
Arabia),  which  is  famous  for  its  excellent  horses.

NOTE  61. In  my  original  they  are  here  said  to  be  ten ; but  afterwards,  whenever
they  are  mentioned,  seven.

NOTE  62. So  before ;  but  here,  in  my  original,  three.

NOTE  63. By  the  mother's  side,  as  before  stated,  Abu-r-Kuweysh  was  the  grandson
of  Iblees.

NOTE  64. See  Note  5  to  Chapter  ii.

NOTE  65. Here,  as  in  the  instance  pointed  out  in  Note  54,  I  read  "  Castle of
Crystal,"  agreeably  with  the  Breslau  edition,  instead  of  "Castle  of  the  Birds."

NOTE  66. These  verses  seem  to  be  addressed to his  mother : not  to  the  seven
damsels.


CHAPTER XXVI.


COMMENCING  WITH  PART  OF  THE  EIGHT  HUNDRED  AND  THIRTY-FIRST

NIGHT,  AND  ENDING  WITH  PART  OF  THE  EIGHT  HUNDRED

AND  FORTY-FIFTH.


THE  STORY  OF  KHALEEFEH  THE  FISHERMAN.

THERE  was,  in  ancient  times,  in  the  city  of  Baghdad,  a  fisherman
named  Khaleefeh,  who  was  a  man  in  needy  circumstances,  a  pauper  ;
and  he  had  never  in  his  life  married.  And  it  happened  one  day  that
he  took  his  net,  and  went  with  it  to  the  river,  as  it  was  his  custom  to
do,  that  he  might  catch  some  fish  before  the  other  fishermen.  When
he  arrived  at  the  river,  ho  girded  himself,  and  tucked  up  his  sleeves  :
then  advancing  to  the  river,  he  spread  his  net,  and  cast  it  the  first
time  and  the  second  time ;  but  there  came  not  up  in  it  aught.  He
ceased  not  to  cast  it  until  he  had  done  so  ten  times ;  but  nothing
whatever  came  up  in  it.  So  his  bosom  was  contracted,  and  his  mind


THE  STORY  OF  KHALEEFEH  THE  FISHERMAN.  485

was  perplexed  respecting  his  case,  and  he  said,  I  beg  forgiveness  of
God,  the  Great,  beside  whom  there  is  no  deity,  the  Living,  the  Ever-
lasting; and  I  turn  unto  Him  repentant!  There  is  no  strength  nor
power  but  in  God,  the  High,  the  Great  !  What  God  willeth  cometh
to  pass,  and  what  He  willeth  not  cometh  not  to  pass !  Subsistence
is  to  be  bestowed  by  God  (to  whom  be  ascribed  might  and  glory !) ;
and  when  God  bestoweth  upon  a  servant,  no  one  preventeth  him ;  and
when  He  preventeth  a  servant,  no  one  bestoweth  upon  him. — Then,
by  reason  of  the  abundant  grief  that  affected  him,  he  recited  this
couplet : —

When  fortune  afflicteth  thee  with  a  calamity,  prepare  patience  to  endure  it,

and  expand  thy  bosom ;
For  the  Lord  of  all  creatures,  in  his  beneficence  and  bounty,  will  cause  easy

circumstances  to  follow  difficult.

He  then  sat  a  while,  meditating  upon  his  case,  and  hanging  down  his
head  towards  the  ground ;  after  which  he  recited  some  other  verses,
and  said  within  himself,  I  will  cast  the  net  this  time  also,  and  rely
upon  God  :  perhaps  He  will  not  disappoint  my  hope.

Accordingly  he  advanced,  and  cast  the  net  as  far  as  he  could  into
the  river,  and  he  folded  its  cord,  and  waited  over  it  a  while.  .Then,
after  that,  he  drew  it,  and  found  it  heavy :  therefore  when  he  knew
that  it  was  heavy,  he  managed  it  gently,  and  drew  it  until  it  came  up
on  the  bank ;  and,  lo,  in  it  was  a  one-eyed,  lame  ape.  So  Khaleefeh,
on  beholding  him,  said,  There  is  no  strength  nor  power  but  in  God !
Verily  to  God  we  belong,  and  verily  unto  Him  we  return  !  What  is
this  deficient  fortune,  and  evil  luck  !  What  hath  happened  to  me  on
this  blessed  day !  But  all  this  is  by  the  predetermination  of  God,
whose  name  be  exalted ! — He  then  took  the  ape,  bound  him  with  a
rope,  and,  advancing  to- a  tree  growing  upon  the  bank  of  the  river,  he
tied  him  to  it.  And  he  had  with  him  a  whip,  and  he  took  it  in  his
hand,  and  raised  it  in  the  air,  desiring  to  beat  with  it  the  ape.  But
God  caused  this  ape  to  speak  with  an  eloquent  tongue,  and  he  said  to
him,  O  Khaleefeh,  restrain  thy  hand,  and  beat  me  not,  but  leave  me
tied  to  this  tree,  and  go  to  the  river,  and  cast  thy  net,  relying  upon
God ;  for  He  will  give  thee  thy  means  of  subsistence.  So  when
Khaleefeh  heard  the  words  of  the  ape,  he  took  the  net,  and  advanced
to  the  river,  and  cast  it,  and  slackened  its  cord.  Then  he  drew  it,  and
found  it  heavier  than  it  was  the  first  time ;  and  he  ceased  not  to  labour
at  it  until  it  came  up  to  the  bank,  when,  lo,  there  was  in  it  another
ape,  whose  front  teeth  were  far  apart,  his  eyes  adorned  with  kohl,  and


486  THE  STORY  OF  KHALEEFEH  THE  FISHERMAN.

his  hands  stained  with  henna ;  and  he  was  laughing,  and  had  around
his  waist  a  piece  of  ragged  stuff.  Upon  this,  Khaleefeh  said,  Praise
be  to  God  who  hath  substituted,  for  the  fish  of  the  river,  apes  !  He
then  came  to  the  ape  that  was  tied  to  the  tree,  and  said  to  him,  See,
O  unlucky,  how  abominable  was  that  which  thou  advisedst  me  to  do  !
For  none  caused  me  to  fall  in  with  the  second  ape  but  thpu  ;  because,
when  thou  preseutedst  thyself  to  me  in  the  morning,  lame  and  one-
eyed,  I  became  embarrassed,  weary,  not  possessing  a  piece  of  silver
nor  a  piece  of  gold.1 — And  he  took  in  his  hand  a  stick  for  driving
cattle,  and  whirled  it  round  in  the  air  three  times,  and  was  about  to
strike  with  it  the  ape,  when  he  prayed  for  aid  against  him,  and  said
to  him,  I  conjure  thee  by  Allah  to  pardon  me  for  the  sake  of  this  my
companion,  and  seek  thou  of  him  what  thou  wantest ;  for  he  will
guide  thee  to  that  which  thou  desirest.  Khaleefeh  therefore  threw
down  the  stick  and  pardoned  him.  He  then  came  to  the  second  ape,
and  stood  by  him ;  and  the  ape  said  to  him,  O  Khaleefeh,  these  words
will  not  profit  thee  at  all,  unless  thou  hear  what  I  shall  say  to  thee  ;
but  if  thou  hear  my  words  and  comply  with  my  advice,  and  oppose
me  not,  I  shall  be  the  means  of  thy  becoming  rich.  So  Khaleefeh
said  to  him,  What  wilt  thou  say  to  me,  that  I  may  obey  thee  respect-
ing it  ?  And  he  answered  him,  Leave  me  tied  here  in  my  place,  and
go  to  the  river  and  cast  thy  net,  and  I  will  tell  thee  what  thou  shalt
do  after  this.  Khaleefeh  accordingly  took  the  net  and  went  to  the
river,  and  cast  it  and  waited  over  it  a  while.  Then  he  drew  it,  and
found  it  heavy ;  and  he  ceased  not  to  labour  at  it  until  he  brought  it
up  to  the  bank  ;  and,  lo,  in  it  was  another  ape :  but  this  ape  was  red;
around  his  waist  were  blue  garments,  and  his  hands  and  feet  were
stained  with  henna,  and  his  eyes  adorned  with  kohl.

On  seeing  him,  Khaleefeh  said,  Extolled  be  the  perfection  of
God,  the  Great !  Extolled  be  the  perfection  of  the  Possessor  of
dominion  !  Verily  this  day  is  blessed  from  its  beginning  to  its  end  ;
for  its  luck  hath  been  shewn  to  be  fortunate  by  the  countenance  of
the  first  ape,  and  the  page  is  shewn  by  its  superscription  !  This  day
is  a  day  of  apes ;  there  remaineth  not  in  the  river  a  single  fish,  and
we  came  not  forth  to-day  save  to  catch  apes  !  Praise  be  to  God  who
hath  substituted,  for  the  fish,  apes ! — He  then  looked  towards  the
third  ape,  and  said  to  him,  What  art  thou  also,  O  unlucky  ?  The
ape  said  to  him,  Dost  thou  not  know  me,  O  Khaleefeh  ?  Khaleefeh
answered,  No.  And  he  replied,  I  am  the  ape  of  Abu-s-Sa'adsit.  the
Jew,  the  money-changer. — And  what  dost  thou  for  him  ?  said  Kha-


THE  STORY  OF  KHALEEFEH  THE  FISHERMAN.  487

leefeh.  He  answered  him,  I  present  myself  to  him  in  the  morning,
at  the  beginning  of  the  day,  and  he  gaineth  five  pieces  of  gold ;  and
I  present  myself  to  him  in  the  evening,  at  the  close  of  the  day,  and
he  gaineth  five  pieces  of  gold  again.  And  Khaleefeh  thereupon
looked  towards  the  first  ape,  and  said  to  him,  See,  0  unlucky,  how
excellent  are  the  apes  of  other  people  :  but  as  to  thee,  thou  presentest
thyself  to  me  in  the  morning  lame  and  one-eyed,  and  with  thine
unlucky  countenance,  and  I  become  a  pauper,  a  bankrupt,  hungry.
He  then  took  the  stick,  and  whirled  it  round  in  the  air  three  times,
and  was  about  to  strike  him  with  it.  But  the  ape  of  Abu-s-Sa'adat
said  to  him,  Leave  him,  O  Khaleefeh,  and  withdraw  thy  hand,  and
come  to  me,  that  I  may  tell  thee  what  thou  shalt  do.  So  Khaleefeh
threw  down  the  stick  from  his  hand,  and,  advancing  to  him,  said
to  him,  Of  what  wilt  thou  tell  me,  O  master  of  all  apes  ?  And
he  answered  him,  Take  the  net,  and  cast  it  in  the  river,  and  leave  me
and  these  apes  remaining  by  thee ;  and  whatever  cometh  up  to  thee
in  the  net,  bring  it  to  me,  and  I  will  acquaint  thee  with  that
which  will  rejoice  thee.  Khaleefeh  replied,  I  hear  and  obey.  And
lie  took  the  net  and  folded  it  upon  his  shoulder,  and  recited  these
verses  : —

When  my  bosom  is  contracted,  I  will  beg  aid  of  my  Creator,  who  is  able  to  make

easy  every  thing  that  is  difficult ;
For  before  the  eye  can  close,  by  the  grace  of  our  Lord  the  captive  is  liberated

and  the  broken  heart  made  whole.
Commit  then  to  God  all  thine  affairs ;  for  every  discerning  person  knowetli  his

beneficence.

Then  he  recited  also  these  two  verses : —

Thou  art  the  cause  of  men's  falling  into  trouble,  and  Thou  removest  anxieties

and  the  means  of  misfortunes.
Cause  me  not  to  covet  what  I  cannot  attain. How  many  who  have  coveted

have  failed  to  gain  their  wishes  !

And  when  he  had  ended  his  verses,  he  advanced  to  the  river,  and
cast  in  it  the  net,  and  waited  over  it  a  while  ;  after  which  he  drew  it,
and,  lo,  in  it  was  a  large  fish,  with  a  great  head,  and  its  tail  was  like
a  ladle,  and  its  eyes  were  like  two  pieces  of  gold.  So  when  Khaleefeh
saw  it,  he  was  rejoiced  at  it ;  for  he  had  not  caught  the  like  of  it
before  in  his  life.  He  took  it,  wondering  at  it,  and  brought  it  to  the
ape  of  Abu-s-Sa'adat  the  Jew ;  and  he  was  as  though  he  had  gained
possession  of  the  whole  world.  And  the  ape  said  to  him,  What  dost-
thou  desire  to  do  with  this,  O  Khaleefeh,  and  what  wilt  thou  do  to


488


THE  STORY  OF  KHALEEFEH  THE  FISHERMAN.


thine  ape  ?  Khaleefeh  answered  him,  I  will  inform  thee,  O  master
of  all  apes,  what  I  wjll  do.  Know  that  I  will,  before  every  thing  else,
contrive  means  of  destroying  this  accursed  one,  my  ape,  and  I  will
take  thee  in  his  stead,  and  feed  thee  every  day  with  what  thou  shalt
desire. — And  the  ape  said  to  him,  Since  thou  hast  informed  me,  I  will
tell  thee  how  thou  shalt  do ;  and  by  thy  so  doing,  thy  state  shall  be
amended,  if  it  be  the  will  of  God,  whose  name  be  exalted  !  Under-
stand then  what  I  say  to  thee  ;  and  it  is  this  :  that  thou  prepare  for
me  also  a  rope,  and  tie  me  with  it  to  a  tree  :  then  thou  shalt  leave  me,
and  go  to  the  middle  of  the  quay,  and  cast  thy  net  into  the  river
Tigris ;  and  when  thou  hast  cast  it,  wait  over  it  a  little,  and  draw  it,
and  thou  wilt  find  in  it  a  fish  than  which  thou  hast  not  seen  any  more
beautiful  in  thy  whole  life.  Bring  it  to  me,  and  I  will  tell  thee  how
thou  shalt  do  after  that. — So  thereupon  Khaleefeh  arose  immediately,
and  cast  the  net  in  the  river  Tigris,  and  drew  it,  and  he  saw  in  it  a
fish  of  the  kind  called  bayad,2  of  the  size  of  a  lamb.  He  had  not  seen
the  like  of  it  in  his  whole  life  ;  and  it  was  larger  than  the  first  fish.

He  took  it  and  went  with  it  to  the  ape  ;  and  the  ape  said  to  him,
Bring  for  thyself  some  green  gras&,  and  put  half  of  it  into  a  basket,
and  put  the  fish  upon  it,  and  cover  it  with  the  other  half,  and  leave
us  tied.  Then  carry  the  basket  upon  thy  shoulder,  and  go  with  it  into


THE  STORY  OF  KHALEEFEH  THE  FISHERMAN.  489

the  city  of  Baghdad  ;  and  whoever  speaketh  to  thee,  or  asketh  thee  a
question,  return  him  not  a  reply,  until  thou  enterest  the  market  of  the
money-changers.  Thou  wilt  find,  at  the  upper  end  of  the  market,  the
shop  of  the  Mo'allim3  Abu-s-Sa'adat  the  Jew,  the  Sheykh  of  the
money-changers,  and  thou  wilt  see  him  sitting  upon  a  mattress,  with
a  pillar  behind  him,  and  before  him  two  chests,  one  for  the  gold  and
the  other  for  the  silver,  and  with  him  memlooks,  and  black  slaves,  and
pages.  Advance  to  him,  and  put  the  basket  before  him,  and  say  to
him,  0  Abu-s-Sa'adat,  I  have  gone  forth  to-day  to  fish,  and  cast  the
net  in  thy  name,  and  God  (whose  name  be  exalted!)  sent  this  fish.
Thereupon  he  will  say,  Hast  thou  shewn  it  to  any  one  beside  me  ?4
And  do  thou  answer  him,  No,  by  Allah.  And  he  will  take  it  from
thee,  and  give  thee  a  piece  of  gold.  But  do  thou  return  it  to  him.
And  he  will  give  thee  two  pieces  of  gold.  But  return  them  to  him.
And  whenever  he  giveth  thee  aught,  return  it  to  him  ;  if  he  give  thee
its  weight  in  gold,  receive  not  from  him  aught.  So  he  will  say  to
thee,  Tell  me  what  thou  desirest.  And  say  thou  to  him,  By  Allah,  I
will  not  sell  it  save  for  two  sayings.  And  when  he  saith  to  thee,  And
what  are  those  two  sayings  ? — answer  him,  Rise  upon  thy  feet,  and
say,  Bear  witness,  0  ye  who  are  present  in  the  market,  that  I  have
exchanged,  for  the  ape  of  Khaleefeh  the  fisherman,  my  ape ;  and  have
exchanged,  for  his  lot,  my  lot ;  and  for  his  good  fortune,  my  good  for-
tune. This  is  the  price  of  the  fish,  and  I  have  no  need  of  the  gold. —
And  when  he  hath  done  with  thee  thus,  I  will  every  day  present  my-
self to  thee  in  the  morning  and  the  evening,  and  henceforth  thou  wilt
gain  every  day  ten  pieces  of  gold  ;  while  this  his  one-eyed,  lame  ape
will  present  himself  in  the  morning  to  Abu-s-Sa'adat  the  Jew,  and
God  will  afflict  him  every  day  with  an  exaction  which  he  will  be
obliged  to  pay,  and  he  will  not  cease  to  be  thus  afflicted  until  he
becometh  reduced  to  poverty,  and  is  possessed  of  nothing  whatever.
Hear  then  what  I  say  to  thee :  so  wilt  thou  become  prosperous  and
be  directed  aright. — And  when  Khaleefeh  the  fisherman  heard  the
words  of  the  ape,  he  replied,  I  accept  the  advice  which  thou  hast
given  me,  0  King  of  all  the  apes  !  But  as  to  this  unlucky  one,  may
God  not  bless  him !  I  know  not  what  to  do  with  him. — The  third
ape,  however,  said  to  him,  Let  him  go  into  the  water,  and  let  me  go
also.  And  Khaleefeh  replied,  I  hear  and  obey : — and  he  advanced  to
the  apes  and  loosed  them  and  left  them  ;  whereupon  they  descended
into  the  river.

He  then  approached  the  fish,  and  took  it  and  washed  it,  and  he

III.  3 R


4«JO  THE  STORY  OF  KHALEEFEH  THE  FISHERMAN.

put  beneath  it  some  green  grass  in  the  basket,  covered  it  also  with
grass,  and,  carrying  it  upon  his  shoulder,  proceeded,  singing  this
mowwal  :5 —

Commit  thine  ati'airs  to  the  Lord  of  Heaven,  and  thou  wilt  be  safe;
And  act  kindly  throughout  thy  life,  and  thou  wilt  not  repent ;
And  associate  not  with  the  suspected,  for  thou  wouldst  be  suspected ;
And  keep  thy  tongue  from  reviling,  for  thou  wouldst  be  reviled.

He  ceased  not  to  walk  on  until  he  entered  the  city  of  Baghdad;  and
when  he  entered  it,  the  people,  knowing  him,  wished  him  good  morn-
ing, and  said,  What  hast  thou  with  thee,  O  Khaleefeh  ?  But  he  paid
no  regard  to  any  one  among  them  until  he  came  to  the  market  of  the
money-changers,  and  passed  the  shops,  as  the  ape  directed  him.  Then
he  looked  at  that  Jew,  and  saw  him  sitting  in  the  shop,  with  the  pages
in  attendance  upon  him,  ana  he  was  like  one  of  the  Kings  of  Khura-
san. When  Khaleefeh  saw  him,  he  knew  him,  and  walked  on  until
he  stood  before  him ;  whereupon  the  Jew  raised  his  head  towards  him,
and  knew  him,  and  said  to  him,  Welcome  to  thee,  0  Khaleefeh  !
What  is  thine  affair,  and  what  is  it  that  thou  desirest  ?  For  if  any
one  have  spoken  to  thee  or  contended  with  thee,  tell  me,  that  I  may
go  with  thee  to  the  Walee,  and  he  will  exact  for  thee  thy  due  from
him. — So  he  replied,  No,  by  thy  head,  0  chief  of  the  Jews  !  No  one
hath  spoken  to  me.  But  I  went  forth  to-day  from  my  house  for  thy
luck,  and  repaired  to  the  river,  and  cast  my  net  in  the  Tigris,. and  there
came  up  this  fish. — He  then  opened  the  basket,  and  threw  down  the
fish  before  the  Jew ;  and  when  the  Jew  saw  it,  he  admired  it,  and  said,
By  the  Pentateuch  and  the  Ten  Commandments,6  I  was  sleeping
yesterday,  and  I  saw  in  my  sleep  as  though  I  were  before  a  person7
who  said  to  me,  Know,  O  Abu-s-Sa'adat,  that  I  have  sent  to  thee  a
beautiful  present.  So  probably  the  present  is  this  fish  :  without  doubt
it  is. — Then  he  looked  towards  Khaleefeh  and  said  to  him,  By  thy
religion,  hath  any  one  seen  it  beside  me  ?  Khaleefeh  answered  him,
No,  by  Allah  !  By  Aboo-Bekr  the  Very  Veracious,8  0  chief  of  the
Jews,  no  one  beside  thyself  hath  seen  it ! — And  upon  this  the  Jew
looked  towards  one  of  his  pages,  and  said  to  him,  Come  hither :  take
this  fish,  and  go  with  it  to  the  house,  and  let  Sa'adeh9  prepare  it,  and
fry  and  broil  against  the  time  when  I  shall  accomplish  my  business
and  come.  Khaleefeh  also  said  to  him,  Go,  O  page :  let  the  wife  of
the  Mo'allim  fry  some  of  it  and  broil  some  of  it.  And  the  page  replied,
I  hear  and  obey,  O  my  master.  And  he  took  the  fish  and  went  with


THE  STORY  OF  KHALEEFEH  THE  FISHERMAN.


491


it  to  the  house.  But  as  to  the  Jew,  he  stretched  forth  his  hand  with
a  piece  of  gold,  and  offered  it  to  Khaleefeh  the  fisherman,  saying
to  him,  Take  this  for  thyself,  O  Khaleefeh,  and  expend  it  upon  thy
family.

When  Khaleefeh  saw  it  in  his  hand,  he  said,  Extolled  be  the  per-
fection of  the  Possessor  of  dominion ! — and  seemed  as  though  he  had
not  seen  anything  of  gold  in  his  life.  He  took  the  piece  of  gold,  and
walked  away  a  little.  Then  he  remembered  the  charge  of  the  ape  :  so
he  returned,  and  threw  back  the  piece  of  gold  to  the  Jew,  saying  to
him,  Take  thy  gold,  and  give  me  people's  fish.  Are  people  to  thee
objects  of  ridicule  ? — And  when  the  Jew  heard  his  words,  he  imagined
that  he  was  jesting  with  him  ;  wherefore  he  handed  to  him  two  pieces
of  gold,  in  addition  to  the  first  piece.  But  Khaleefeh  said  to  him,
Give  me  the  fish


without  jesting.
Dost  thou  know
that  I  will  sell  the
fish  for  this  price?
— And  the  Jew  put
forth  his  hand  to
two  other  pieces,
and  said  to  him,
Take  these  five
pieces  of.  gold  as
the  value  of  the
fish,  and  relinquish
covetousness.  And
Khaleefeh  took
them  in  his  hand,
and  went  away  with
them,  joyful.  He
proceeded  to  look
at  the  gold,  and  to
wonder  at  it,  and
say,  Extolled  be  the
perfection  of  God !
There  is  not  in  the
possession  of  the
Khaleefeh  of  Bagh-
dad the  like  of


492  THE  STORY  OF  KHALEEFEH  THE  FISHERMAN.

what  is  in  my  possession  this  day ! — And  he  ceased  not  to  walk  on
until  he  came  to  the  end  of  the  market.  Then  he  remembered  the
words  of  the  ape,  and  the  charge  that  he  had  given  him.  So  he
returned  to  the  Jew,  and  threw  back  to  him  the  gold.  The  Jew  there-
fore said  to  him,  What  aileth  thee,  0  Khaleefeh  ?  What  dost  thou
desire  ?  Wilt  thou  take  pieces  of  silver  in  change  of  thy  gold  ? — And
he  answered  him,  I  desire  not  pieces  of  silver  nor  pieces  of  gold.  I
only  desire  that  thou  give  me  people's  fish. — And  upon  this  the  Jew
was  enraged,  and  cried  out  at  him,  and  said  to  him,  0  fisherman,  dost
thou  come  to  me  with  a  fish  that  is  not  worth  a  piece  of  gold,  and  do
I  give  thee  for  it  five  pieces  of  gold,  and  dost  thou  not  consent  ?  Art
thou  mad?  Tell  me  for  how  much  thou  wilt  sell  it. — Khaleefeh
answered  him,  I  will  not  sell  it  for  silver  nor  for  gold,  and  I  will  not
sell  it  save  for  two  sayings  that  thou  shalt  utter  to  me.  And  when
the  Jew  heard  his  mention  of  two  sayings,10  his  eyes  became  fixed  in
his  head,  and  his  breathing  became  difficult,  and  he  locked  his  teeth
together,  and  said  to  him,  0  recrement  of  the  Muslims,  dost  thou
desire  that  I  should  abandon  my  religion  for  the  sake  of  thy  fish,  and
wouldst  thou  alienate  from  me  my  faith  and  my  belief  which  I  found
my  fathers  to  have  held  before  me  ?  And  he  cried  out  to  his  pages,
who  came  before  him,  and  he  said  to  them,  Wo  to  you  !  Take  this
unlucky  fellow ;  mangle  with  blows  the  back  of  his  neck,  and  torture
him  with  abundant  beating. — They  therefore  fell  to  beating  him,  and
ceased  not  to  do  so  until  he  fell  down  beneath  the  shop,  when  the  Jew
said  to  them,  Leave  him,  that  he  may  rise.  And  Khaleefeh  rose
up  as  though  nought  ailed  him.11

The  Jew  then  said  to  him,  Tell  me  what  thou  desirest  as  the
price  of  this  fish,  and  I  will  give  it  thee ;  for  thou  hast  not  obtained
good  from  us  on  this  occasion.  But  Khaleefeh  replied,  Fear  not  for
rne,  O  Mo'allim,  on  account  of  the  beating ;  for  I  can  bear  as  much
beating  as  ten  asses.  And  the  Jew  laughed  at  his  words,  and  said  to
him,  by  Allah,  I  conjure  thee,  tell  me  what  thou  desirest,  and  I,  by
my  religion,  will  give  thee  it.  So  he  replied,  Nought  from  thee  will
content  me  as  the  price  of  this  fish  save  two  sayings.  The  Jew
therefore  said  to  him,  I  imagine  thou  desirest  of  me  that  I  should
become  a  Muslim.  Khaleefeh  replied,  By  Allah,  O  Jew,  if  thou
become  a  Muslim,  thy  becoming  so  will  not  profit  the  Muslims  nor
will  it  injure  the  Jews ;  and  if  thou  remain  in  thine  infidelity,  thine
infidelity  will  not  injure  the  Muslims  nor  will  it  profit  the  Jews.1'2
But  what  I  desire  of  thee  is  this :  that  thou  rise  upon  thy  feet,  and


THE  STORY  OF  KHALEEFEH  THE  FISHERMAN.  493

say,  Bear  witness  against  me,  O  people  of  the  market,  that  I  have
given  in  exchange  my  ape  for  the  ape  of  Khaleefeh  the  fisherman,  and
my  good  luck  in  the  world  for  his  good  luck,  and  my  good  fortune
for  his  good  fortune. — And  the  Jew  said,  If  this  thing  be  thy  desire,
it  is  to  me  easy.  Then  the  Jew  rose  immediately,  and  stood  upon
his  feet,  and  said  as  Khaleefeh  the  fisherman  had  told  him  ;  after
which  he  looked  towards  him,  and  said  to  him,  Hast  thou  aught
more  to  demand  of  me  ?  The  fisherman  answered,  No.  And  the
Jew  said  to  him,  Go  in  peace.  So  Khaleefeh  arose  immediately,  and,
having  taken  his  basket  and  his  net,  went  to  the  river  Tigris,  and  cast
the  net.  Then  he  drew  it,  and  found  it  heavy,  and  he  pulled  it  not
forth  save  after  laborious  exertion  ;  and  when  he  pulled  it  forth,  he
saw  it  full  of  fish  of  all  kinds.  And  there  came  to  him  a  woman,
having  with  her  a  plate,  and  she  gave  him  a  piece  of  gold,  for  which
he  gave  her  fish  ;  and  there  came  to  him  a  eunuch  also,  who  bought
of  him  for  a  piece  of  gold.  Thus  it  happened  until  he  had  sold  fish
for  ten  pieces  of  gold  ;  and  he  ceased  not  to  sell  every  day  for  ten
pieces  of  gold  till  the  end  of  ten  days,  so  that  he  amassed  a  hundred
pieces  of  gold.

Now  this  fisherman  had  a  chamber  within  a  place  through  which
the  merchants  passed.13  And  while  he  was  sleeping  in  his  chamber
one  night,  he  said  to  himself,  0  Khaleefeh,  verily  all  the  people  know
that  thou  art  a  poor  man,  a  fisherman,  and  there  have  come  into  thy
possession  a  hundred  pieces  of  gold  :  so,  inevitably,  the  Prince  of  the
Faithful,  Haroon  Er-Rasheed,  will  hear  of  thy  story  from  some  one  of
the  people ;  and  probably  he  will  be  in  need  of  wealth,  and  will  send
to  thee  and  say  to  thee,  I  am  in  want  of  a  certain  number  of  pieces  of
gold,  and  it  hath  been  told  me  that  thou  hast  a  hundred  pieces  of
gold ;  therefore  lend  them  to  me.  Then  I  will  say,  O  Prince  of  the
Faithful,  I  am  a  poor  man,  and  he  who  informed  thee  that  I  had  a
hundred  pieces  of  gold  lied  against  me :  they  are  not  in  my  posses-
sion, nor  have  I  aught  thereof.  And  he  will  deliver  me  to  the
Walee,  and  will  say  to  him,  Strip  him  of  his  clothing,  and  torture
him  with  beating,  that  he  may  confess,  and  may  bring  the  hundred
pieces  of  gold  that  are  in  his  possession.  Therefore  the  right  opinion,-
that  will  be  the  means  of  saving  me  from  this  embarrassing  predica-
ment, is  this :  that  I  arise  immediately,  and  torture  myself  with  the
whip,  that  I  may  be  accustomed  to  beating. — And  his  hasheesh14  said
to  him,  Arise  ;  strip  thyself  of  thy  clothes.  So  he  arose  forthwith,  and
stripped  himself  of  his  clothes,  and  took  in  his  hand  a  whip  that  he


4t)4  THE  STORY  OF  KHALEEFEH  THE  FISHERMAN.

had  by  him, — He  had  also  a  pillow  of  leather ;  and  he  proceeded  to
strike  one  blow  upon  that  pillow,  and  one  blow  upon  his  skin,  saying,
Ah  !  Ah !  By  Allah,  this  is  a  false  assertion,  O  my  lord,  and  they  utter
a  lie  against  me  :  I  am  a  poor  man,  a  fisherman,  and  have  not  in  rny
possession  aught  of  worldly  goods. — And  the  people  heard  Khaleefch
the  fisherman  torturing  himself,  and  beating  upon  the  pillow  with  the
whip,  the  falling  of  the  blows  upon  his  body  and  upon  the  pillow
making  a  noise  in  the  night ;  and  among  those  who  heard  him  were
the  merchants.  They  therefore  said,  What  can  be  the  matter  with
this  poor  man,  that  he  crieth,  and  that  we  hear  the  falling  of  the
blows  upon  him  ?  It  seemeth  that  the  robbers  have  come  down  upon
him,  and  they  are  the  persons  who  are  torturing  him. — So  thereupon
they  all  arose,  on  hearing  the  sounds  of  the  beating  and  crying,
and  came  forth  from  their  lodgings  to  the  chamber  of  Khaleefeh,
and,  seeing  its  door  locked,  they  said,  one  to  another,  Probably  the
robbers  have  descended  upon  him  from  behind  the  saloon*:15  there-
fore it  is  expedient  that  we  ascend  by  way  of  the  roofs.  Accordingly
they  ascended  to  the  roofs,  and  descended  through  the  memrak ; l6
and  they  saw  him  with  bare  back,  and  torturing  himself.  They
therefore  said  to  him,  What  aileth  thee,  O  Khaleefeh  ?  What  is  thy
story  ? — And  he  answered,  Know,  O  people,  that  I  have  acquired
some  pieces  of  gold,  and  I  fear  that  my  case  will  be  reported  to  the
Prince  of  the  Faithful,  Haroon  Er-Rasheed,  and  he  will  summon  me
before  him,  and  demand  of  me  those  pieces  of  gold.  Then  I  will
deny ;  and  when  I  deny,  I  fear  that  he  will  torture  me ;  wherefore  I
am  torturing  myself,  and  making  the  torture  habitual  to  me,  to
prepare  for  what  may  come. — And  the  merchants  laughed  at  him,
arid  said  to  him,  Leave  off  these  actions.  May  God  not  bless  thee,
nor  the  pieces  of  gold  that  have  come  to  thee  !  For  thou  hast  dis-
quieted us  this  night,  and  alarmed  our  hearts.

So  Khaleefeh  discontinued  the  beating  of  himself,  and  slept  until
the  morning ;  and  when  he  arose  from  sleep,  and  desired  to  depart  to
his  occupation,  he  reflected  upon  the  matter  of  the  hundred  pieces  of
gold  that  had  come  into  his  possession,  and  said  within  himself,  If  I
leave  them  in  the  chamber,  the  robbers  will  steal  them  ;  and  if  I  put
them  into  a  kamar"  around  my  waist,  probably  some  one  will  see
them,  and  lay  wait  for  me  until  I  am  alone,  in  a  place  devoid  of  other
persons,  and  he  will  slay  me,  and  take  them  from  me.  But  I  will
practise  a  stratagem,  one  that  will  be  good,  and  very  advantageous.—
He  then  arose  immediately,  and  sewed  for  himself  a  pocket  within  the


upper  border  of  his  vest,  and,  having  tied  up  the  hundred  pieces  of
gold  in  a  purse,  put  them  into  that  pocket  which  he  had  made  ;  after
which  he  arose  and  took  his  net  and  his  basket  and  his  staff,  and  pro-
ceeded until  he  came  to  the  river  Tigris,  and  cast  his  net  in  it.  Then
he  drew  it ;  but  there  came  not  up  for  him  anything.  He  therefore
removed  from  that  place  to  another  place,  and  there  he  cast  his  net ;
but  nothing  came  up  for  him.  And  he  ceased  not  to  remove  from
place  to  place  until  he  was  as  far  from  the  city  as  the  space  of  half  a
day's  journey,  casting  the  net  on  the  way;  but  still  there  came  not  up
for  him  aught.  And  he  said  within  himself,  By  Allah,  I  will  not  cast
my  net  again  into  the  water  save  this  time,  whatever  be  the  result!
So  he  cast  the  net  with  all  his  force,  by  reason  of  the  violence  of  his
rage,  and  the  purse  in  which  were  the  hundred  pieces  of  gold  flew
from  his  bosom,  fell  into  the  midst  of  the  river,  and  was  carried  away
with  the  force  of  the  current.  Upon  this  he  threw  down  the  net  from


496  THE  STORY  OF  KHALEEFEH  THE  FISHERMAN.

his  hand,  and  stripped  himself  of  his  clothes,  and  leaving  them  upon
the  bank,  descended  into  the  river,  and  dived  after  the  purse.  He
ceased  not  to  dive  and  come  up  about  a  hundred  times,  until  his
strength  became  impaired ;  but  he  found  not  that  purse ;  and  when
he  despaired  of  it,  he  came  up  on  the  bank,  and  found  not  aught  save
the  staff  and  the  net  and  the  basket.  He  sought  his  clothes ;  but
discovered  no  trace  of  them.  So  he  unfolded  the  net,  and  wrapped
himself  in  it,  and,  taking  the  staff  in  his  hand,  and  the  basket  upon
his  shoulder,  he  went  trotting  along  like  the  stray  camel,  running  to
the  right  and  left,  and  backwards  and  forwards,  with  dishevelled  hair,
and  dust-coloured,  like  the  refractory  'Efreet  when  let  loose  from
Suleyman's  prison.18 — Such  was  the  case  of  Khaleefeh  the  fisherman.
Now  the  Khaleefeh  Haroon  Er-Rasheed  had  a  companion,  a
jeweller,  named  Ibn-El-Kirnas;  and  all  the  people  and  the  mer-
chants and  the  brokers  and  the  bargain-makers  knew  that  Ibn-El-
Kirnas  was  the  merchant  of  the  Khaleefeh.  Nought  that  was  sold
in  the  city  of  Baghdad,  of  rarities  and  other  costly  things,  was  sold
until  it  was  shewn  to  him,  and  among  these  things  were  the  memlooks
and  the  female  slaves.  And  while  that  merchant,  Ibn-El-Kirnas,  was
sitting  in  his  shop  one  day,  lo,  the  sheykh  of  the  brokers  came  to
him,  having  with  him  a  female  slave,  the  like  of  whom  eyes  had  not
beheld.  She  was  endowed  with  the  utmost  beauty  and  loveliness,
and  fine  stature,  and  justness  of  form  ;  and  among  the  number  of  her
excellences  were  these :  that  she  knew  all  sciences  and  arts,  and  com-
posed verses,  and  played  upon  all  kinds  of  musical  instruments.  So
Ibn-El-Kirnas  the  jeweller  purchased  her  for  five  thousand  pieces  of
gold,  and  he  clad  her  at  the  cost  of  one  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  and
brought  her  to  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful,  who  tried  her  in  every
science  and  in  every  art,  and  found  her  to  be  acquainted  with  all
sciences  and  arts.  She  was  unequalled  in  her  age ;  and  her  name
was  Koot-el-Kuloob.  And  on  the  following  morning,  the  Khaleefeh
Haroon  Er-Rasheed  sent  to  Ibn-El-Kirnas  the  jeweller ;  and  when  he
came,  he  gave  orders  to  pay  him  ten  thousand  pieces  of  gold  as  the
price  of  that  slave-girl.  Then  the  heart  of  the  Khaleefeh  became
engrossed  by  that  slave-girl  named  Koot-el-Kuloob,  and  he  aban-
doned the  lady  Zubeydeh  the  daughter  of  El-Kasim,  though  she  was
the  daughter  of  his  paternal  uncle.  He  abandoned  also  all  the  con-
cubines, and  remained  a  whole  month  without  going  forth  from  that
slave-girl,  save  to  the  Friday-prayers,  after  which  he  returned  to  her
in  haste.  So  this  conduct  was  grievous  to  the  lords  of  the  empire ;


THE  STORY  OF  KHALEEFEH  THE  FISHERMAN.


497


wherefore  they  complained  thereof  to  the  Wezeer  Jaafar  El-Barmekee ;
and  the  Wezeer  waited  for  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful  until  the  next
Friday,  when  he  entered  the  mosque,  and  met  the  Prince  of  the  Faith-
ful, and  related  to  him  all  that  he  had  heard  of  stories  concerning
extraordinary  love,  in  order  that  he  might  draw  forth  the  statement  of
his  feelings.  And  upon  this  the  Khaleefeh  said  to  him,  O  Jaafar,  by
Allah,  that  thing  was  not  of  my  choice ;  but  my  heart  is  entangled  in
the  snare  of  love,  and  I  know  not  what  is  to  be  done.  The  Wezeer
Jaafar  therefore  replied,  Know,  0  Prince  of  the  Faithful,  that  this
concubine  Koot-el-Kuloob  hath  become  under  thine  authority,  and  of
the  number  of  thy  servants ;  and  what  the  hand  possesseth  the  soul
doth  not  covet.  I  will  also  acquaint  thee  with  another  thing,  which
is  this  :  that  the  best  of  what  the  Kings  and  the  sons  of  the  Kings
glory  in  are  hunting,  and  enjoying  sport  and  conveniences ;  and  if
thou  do  thus,  probably  thou  wilt  thereby  be  diverted  from  her,  and
probably  thou  wilt  forget  her. — And  the  Khaleefeh  said  to  him,
Excellent  is  that  which  thou  hast  said,  0  Jaafar.  Repair  then  with
us  hastily,  immediately,  to  hunt.

Accordingly,  when  the  Friday-prayers  were  ended,  they  both  went
forth  from  the  mosque,  and  mounted  immediately,  and  went  to  hunt.
They  proceeded  until  they  came  to  the  desert,  and  the  Prince  of  the
Faithful  and  the  Wezeer  Jaafar  were  riding  upon  two  mules  ;  and  as
they  occupied  each  other  by  conversation,  the  troops  outwent  them.
The  heat  had  become  oppressive  to  them  :  so  Er-Rasheed  said,  0


III.


3  s


his  THE  STORY  OF  KHALEEFEH  THE  FISHERMAN.

Jaafar,  violent  thirst  hath  affected  me.  Then  Er-Rasheed  cast  his
eyes,  and  saw  a  distant  object  faintly  appearing  upon  a  high  mound ;
and  he  said  to  the  Wezeer,  Dost  thou  see  what  I  see  ?  The  Wezeer
answered  him,  Yes,  O  Prince  of  the  Faithful :  I  see  a  distant  object
faintly  appearing  upon  a  high  mound,  and  it  is  either  the  keeper  of  a
garden  or  the  keeper  of  a  ground  for  melons  and  cucumbers;  and  in
either  case,  his  tract  is  not  without  water.  The  Wezeer  then  said,  I
will  go  to  him,  and  bring  thee  some  water  from  him.  But  Er-Rasheed
replied,  My  mule  is  more  swift  than  thine;  therefore  stay  thou  here,
on  account  of  the  troops,  and  I  will  myself  go  and  get  drink  from  the
station  of  this  person,  and  return.  And  he  urged  his  mule,  which
thereupon  went  forth  like  the  wind  in  its  pace,  or  as  water  poureth
into  a  pool,  and  ceased  not  to  bear  him  away  until  he  arrived  at  that
faint  object  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  when  be  found  not  that  object
to  be  any  one  but  Khaleefeh  the  fisherman.  Er-Rasheed  saw  him  with
his  naked  body  wrapped  in  the  net,  and  his  eyes,  by  reason  of  their
excessive  redness,  were  like  burning  cressets.  His  form  was  horrible,
and  his  figure  bending,  and,  with  dishevelled  hair,  and  dust-coloured,
he  resembled  an  'Efreet,  or  a  lion.

Er-Rasheed  saluted  him,  and  he  returned  his  salutation  in  a  state
of  rage,  and  his  breath  would  have  kindled  fires ;  and  Er-Rasheed  said
ta  him,  0  man,  hast  thou  by  thee  any  water  ?  Khaleefeh  replied,  O
thou,  art  thou  blind  or  mad  ?  Go  to  the  river  Tigris ;  for  it  is  behind
this  mound.19  So  Er-Rasheed  went  round  behind  the  mound,  and
descended  to  the  river  Tigris,  and  drank,  and  watered  his  mule.  Then
he  went  up  immediately,  and,  returning  to  Khaleefeh  the  fisherman,
said  to  him,  Wherefore,  O  man,  art  thou  standing  here,  and  what  is
thine  occupation?  Khaleefeh  replied,  Verily  this  question  is  more
wonderful  and  more  extraordinary  than  thy  question  respecting  the
water.  Dost  thou  not  see  the  apparatus  of  rny  occupation  upon  my
shoulder  ? — Er-Rasheed  therefore  said  to  him,  It  seemeththat  thou  art
a  fisherman.  He  replied,  Yes. — Where  then,  said  Er-Rasheed,  is  thy
jubbeh,  and  where  is  thy  shemleh,20  and  where  is  thy  heram,81  and
where  are  thy  clothes  ? — Now  the  things  that  had  gone  from  Khaleefeh
were  like  those  which  he  mentioned  to  him,  article  agreeing  with
article :  so  when  Khaleefeh  heard  those  words  of  the  Khaleefeh,  he
imagined  m  his  mind  that  he  was  the  person  who  had  taken  his
clothes  from  the  bank  of  the  river.  He  therefore  descended  imme-
diately from  the  top  of  the  mound,  more  swiftly  than  the  blinding
lightning,  and,  seizing  the  bridle  of  the  mule  of  the  Khaleefeh,  said  to


THE  STORY  OP  KHALEEFEH  THE  FISHERMAN.  499

him,  O  man,  give  me  my  things,  and  desist  from  sport  and  jesting.
So  the  Khaleefeh  replied,  I,  by  Allah,  have  not  seen  thy  clothes,  nor
do  I  know  them.  And  Er-Rasheed  had  large  cheeks,  and  a  small
mouth :  wherefore  Khaleefeh  said  to  him,  Probably  thine  occupation
is  that  of  a  singer,  or  a  piper  ?  But  give  me  my  clothes,  by  the  means
that  are  best,  or  else  I  will  beat  thee  with  this  staff  so  that  thou  shalt
find  thyself  in  an  evil  plight. — And  when  the  Khaleefeh  saw  the  staff
in  Khaleefeh's  hand,  he  said  within  himself,  By  Allah,  I  cannot  endure
from  this  pauper  half  a  blow  with  this  staff.  And  there  was  upon
Er-llasheed  a  long  vest  of  satin  :  so  he  pulled  it  off,  and  said  to  Kha-
leefeh, O  man,  take  this  vest  instead  of  thy  clothes.  Khaleefeh  there-
fore took  it,  and  turned  it  over,  and  said,  Verily  my  clothes  are  worth
ten  such  things  as  this  variegated  cloak.  Er-Rasheed  however  replied,
Wear  it  till  I  bring  thee  thine  own  clothes.  And  Khaleefeh  took  it
and  put  it  on ;  but  he  saw  it  to  be  too  long  for  him ;  and,  having  with
him  a  knife  tied  to  the  handle  of  the  basket,  he  took  it  and  cut  off
with  it  from  the  lower  part  of  the  vest  as  much  as  one  third  of  it,  so
that  it  reached  but  just  below  his  knees.

He  then  looked  towards  Er-Rasheed,  and  said  to  him,  By  Allah  I
conjure  thee,  O  piper,  that  thou  inform  me  what  is  the  amount  of  thy
wages  that  thou  receivest  every  month  from  thy  master,  for  the  art  of
piping.  The  Khaleefeh  replied,  My  wages  every  month  are  ten  pieces
of  gold.  And  upon  this,  Khaleefeh  said  to  him,  By  Allah,  0  poor
man,  thou  hast  made  me  to  partake  of  thine  anxiety !  By  Allah,  the
sum  of  ten  pieces  of  gold  1  gain  every  day  !  Dost  thou  desire,  then,
to  be  with  me  as  my  servant  ?  If  so,  I  will  teach  thee  the  art  of
fishing,  and  be  partner  with  thee  in  the  gain.  Thus  thou  wilt  work
every  day  at  the  rate  of  five  pieces  of  gold,  and  be  my  young  man,  and
I  will  protect  thee  from  thy  master  with  this  staff. — And  Er-Rasheed
answered  him,  I  consent  to  that.  So  Khaleefeh  said  to  him,  Alight
now  from  the  back  of  the  ass,  and  tie  it,  that  it  may  be  of  use  to  us
hereafter  in  carrying  the  fish ;  and  come,  that  I  may  teach  thee  the
art  of  fishing  immediately.  And  thereupon  Er-Rasheed  alighted  from
the  back  of  his  mule,  and  tied  it,  and  tucked  up  his  skirts  within  the
circle  of  his  girdle.  Khaleefeh  then  said  to  him,  O  piper,  hold  this
net  so,  and  put  it  upon  thine  arm  so,  and  cast  it  into  the  river  Tigris
so.  And  Er-Rasheed  fortified  his  heart,  and  did  as  Khaleefeh  shewed
him.  He  cast  the  net  in  the  river,  and  pulled  it ;  but  could  not
draw  it  up.  Khaleefeh  therefore  came  to  him,  and  pulled  it  with
him ;  but  they  could  not  draw  it  up  together.  So  Khaleefeh  said  to


500  THE  STORY  OF  KHALEEFEH  THE  FISHEHMAX.

him,  O  ill-omened  piper,  if  I  took  thy  cloak  instead  of  my  clothes  the
first  time,  this  time  I  will  take  thine  ass  for  my  net,  if  I  see  it  mangled,
and  I  will  beat  thee  until  thou  shalt  be  in  an  abominable  condition.
Er-Rasheed  replied,  Let  me  and  thee  pull  together.  And  the  two
together  pulled  the  net,  and  they  could  not  draw  up  that  net  save
with  difficulty ;  and  when  they  had  drawn  it  up,  they  looked  at  it,
and,  lo,  it  was  full  of  all  kinds  of  fish.  Upon  this,  Khaleefeh  said  to
Er-Rasheed,  By  Allah,  O  piper,  verily  thou  art  an  ugly  fellow  ;  but
when  thou  shalt  have  laboured  at  fishing,  thou  wilt  be  an  excellent
fisherman.  And  now,  the  right  opinion  is  this :  that  thou  mount
thine  ass,  and  go  to  the  market,  and  bring  two  great  baskets,  and  I
will  take  care  of  these  fish  until  thou  come  again,  when  I  and  thou
will  put  them  upon  the  back  of  thine  ass ;  and  I  have  the  pair  of
scales  and  the  pound-xveights  and  every  thing  that  we  require.  We
will  take  all  with  us,  and  thou  wilt  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  hold
the  pair  of  scales  and  to  receive  the  prices ;  for  we  have  with  us
fish  worth  twenty  pieces  of  gold.  Hasten  then  to  bring  the  two
great  baskets,  and  delay  not. — And  the  Khaleefeh  replied,  I  hear
and  obey.

He  left  him,  and  left  the  fish,  and  urged  on  his  mule,  being  in  a
state  of  the  utmost  joy.  He  ceased  not  to  laugh  at  what  had  happened
to  him  with  the  fisherman  until  he  came  to  Jaafar ;  and  when  Jaafar
saw  him,  he  said  to  him,  O  Prince  of  the  Faithful,  probably  when
thou  wentest  to  drink,  thou  foundest  a  pleasant  garden,  and  enteredst
it  and  divertedst  thyself  in  it  alone.  And  Er-Kasheed,  on  his  hearing
the  words  of  Jaafar,  laughed.  Then  all  the  Barmekees  kissed  the
ground  before  him,  and  said  to  him,  0  Prince  of  the  Faithful,  may
God  perpetuate  thy  joys,  and  dispel  from  thee  troubles !  What  was
the  cause  of  thy  delay  when  thou  wentest  to  drink,  and  what  happened
to  thee  ? — And  the  Khaleefeh  answered  them,  An  extraordinary  event,
and  a  mirth-exciting,  wonderful  thing  hath  happened  to  me.  Then
he  repeated  to  them  the  story  of  Khaleefeh  the  fisherman,  and  what
had  happened  to  him  with  him  ;  his  saying,  Thou  hast  stolen  my
clothes, — and  his  having  given  him  his  vest,  and  the  fisherman's
having  cut  off  a  part  of  the  vest  on  his  seeing  it  to  be  too  long  for
him.  And  Jaafar  said,  By  Allah,  0  Prince  of  the  Faithful,  it  was  my
wish  to  have  requested  of  thee  the  vest ;  -but  I  will  go  immediately
to  the  fisherman  and  purchase  it  of  him.  So  the  Khaleefeh  said  to
him,  By  Allah,  he  hath  cut  off  a  third  of  it.  from  its  lower  part,  and
hath  entirely  spoiled  it ;  but,  0  Jaafar,  I  am  fatigued  by  my  fishing


THE  STORY  OF  KHALEEFEH  THE  FISHEKMAX.  501

in  the  river ;  for  I  have  caught  a  great  quantity  of  fish,  and  they  are
upon  the  bank  of  the  river,  with  my  teacher  Khaleefeh.  He  is
standing  there  waiting  for  me  to  return  to  him,  and  to  take  to  him
two  great  baskets.  Then  I  and  he  are  to  go  to  the  market,  and  we
are  to  sell  the  fish,  and  divide  their  price. — Jaafar  replied,  0  Prince  of
the  Faithful,  I  will  bring  to  you  one  who  will  purchase  of  you.  And
the  Khaleefeh  said  to  him,  0  Jaafar,  by  my  pure  forefathers,  to  every
one  who  bringeth  me  a  fish  from  among  those  which  are  before
Khaleefeh,  who  taught  me  the  art  of  fishing,  I  will  give  for  it  a  piece
of  gold !  The  crier  therefore  proclaimed  among  the  troops,  Go  ye
forth  and  purchase  fish  for  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful !

Accordingly  the  memlooks  went  forth,  repairing  to  the  bank  of  the
river  ;  and  while  Khaleefeh  was  waiting  for  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful
to  bring  to  him  two  great  baskets,  lo,  the  memlooks  pounced  upon
him  like  eagles,  and  took  the  fish,  and  put  them  in  gold-embroidered
handkerchiefs,  and  proceeded  to  beat  each  other  to  get  at  him.  So
Khaleefeh  said,  No  doubt  these  fish  are  of  the  fish  of  Paradise  !
Then,  taking  two  fish  in  his  right  hand,  and  two  in  his  left  hand,  he
descended  into  the  water  to  his  throat,  and  began  to  say,  O  Allah,  by
these  fish,  let  thy  servant  the  piper,  my  partner,  come  immediately  !  ^
And,  lo,  a  black  slave  advanced  to  him,  and  that  slave  was  the  chief
over  all  the  black  slaves  that  were  in  the  palace  of  the  Khaleefeh.
The  cause  of  his  having  come  later  than  the  memlooks  was  an  im-
pediment that  occurred  to  him  on  the  way.  So  when  he  came  to


D02  THE  STORY  OF  KHALEEFEH  THE  FISHERMAN.

Khaleefeh,  he  found  that  there  remained  not  of  the  fish  little  nor
much ;  but  looking  to  the  right  and  left,  he  saw  Khaleefeh  the  fisher-
man standing  in  the  water  with  the  fish  in  his  hands ;  and  thereupon
he  said  to  him,  0  fisherman,  come  hither !  The  fisherman  replied,
Go,  without  impertinence.  The  eunuch  however  advanced  to  him,
and  said  to  him,  Give  me  these  fish,  and  I  will  give  thee  the  price.
Khaleefeh  the  fisherman  rejoined,  Art  thou  of  little  sense  ?  I  will
not  sell  them. — But  the  eunuch  drew  forth  against  him  the  mace  :  so
thereupon  Khaleefeh  said  to  him,  Strike  not,  0  wretch  :  for  the  con-
ferring of  a  favour  is  better  than  the  mace  !  Then  he  threw  to  him
the  fish,  and  the  eunuch  took  them,  and  placed  them  in  his  handker-
chief, and  put  his  hand  into  his  pocket ;  but  found  not  a  single  piece
of  silver.  He  therefore  said,  0  fisherman,  verily  thy  fortune  is  un-
lucky !  I,  by  Allah,  have  not  with  me  any  money.  But  to-morrow
come  thou  to  the  palace  of  the  Khaleefeh,  and  say,  Direct  me  to  the
eunuch  Sandal.  Thereupon  the  eunuchs  will  direct  thee  to  me ;  and
when  thou  hast  come  to  me  there,  thou  wilt  obtain  what  is  decreed
for  thee,  and  thou  shalt  receive  it  and  go  thy  way.

So  upon  this,  Khaleefeh  said,  Verily  this  day  is  blessed,  and  its
blessing  was  apparent  from  its  commencement !  ^  Then  he  took  his
net  upon  his  shoulder,  and  walked  on  until  he  entered  Baghdad,  and
he  walked  along  the  streets.  The  people  therefore  saw  the  garment  of
the  Khaleefeh  upon  him,  and  they  continued  looking  at  him  until  he
entered  the  quarter  [where  he  lived] .  And  the  shop  of  the  tailor  of
the  Prince  of  the  Faithful  was  by  the  gate  of  the  quarter :  so  the  tailor
saw  Khaleefeh  the  fisherman  having  upon  him  a  garment  worth  a
thousand  pieces  of  gold,  of  the  apparel  of  the  Khaleefeh  ;  and  he  said,
0  Khaleefeh,  whence  obtainedst  thou  this  farajeeyeh?  Khaleefeh
replied,  And  what  reason  hast  thou  to  be  impertinent  ?  I  received  it
from  him  whom  I  have  taught  the  art  of  fishing,  and  who  hath  become
my  young  man,  and  I  have  remitted  to  him  the  amputation  of  his
hand  •*  for  he  stole  my  clothes,  and  gave  me  this  cloak  instead  of
them. — The  tailor  therefore  knew  that  the  Khaleefeh  had  passed  by
him,  while  he  was  fishing,  and  had  jested  with  him,  and  given  him  the
farajeeyeh.  Then  the  fisherman  went  to  his  abode.

Now  the  Khaleefeh  Haroon  Er-Rasheed  had  not  gone  forth  to  the
chase  save  in  order  that  he  might  be  diverted  from  thinking  of  the
slave-girl  Koot-el-Kuloob.  And  when  Zubeydeh  heard  of  the  slave-
girl,  and  of  the  Khaleefeh's  devotion  to  her,  that  jealousy  which  seizes
women  so  seized  her  that  she  abstained  from  food  and  drink,  and


THE  STORY  OF  KHALKKFEH  THE  FISHERMAN  503

relinquished  the  delight  of  sleep ;  and  she  waited  for  the  absence  of
the  Khaleefeh,  and  his  going  forth  on  a  journey,  that  she  might  set,
for  Koot-el-Kuloob,  the  snare  of  stratagems.  Therefore  when  she
knew  that  the  Khaleefeh  had  gone  forth  to  hunt,  she  ordered  the
female  slaves  to  spread  the  furniture  in  the  palace,  and  she  made  a
profuse  display  of  decoration  and  magnificence,  caused  the  viands  and
the  sweetmeats  to  be  placed,  and  prepared,  among  these,  a  China  dish
containing  sweetmeat  of  the  most  dainty  kind,  in  which  she  put  some
benj,  infusing  it  therewith.  She  then  ordered  one  of  the  eunuchs  to
go  to  the  slave-girl  Koot-el-Kuloob,  to  invite  her  to  partake  of  the  food
of  the  lady  Zubeydeh  the  daughter  of  El-Kasim,  the  wife  of  the  Prince
of  the  Faithful,  and  to  say  to  her,  The  wife  of  the  Prince  of  the
Faithful  hath  drunk  to-day  some  medicine,  and  she  hath  heai-d  of  the
sweetness  of  thy  melody,  wherefore  she  desireth  to  divert  herself  by
hearing  somewhat  of  thy  performance. — And  she  replied,  I  hear  and
obey  God  and  the  lady  Zubeydeh.  She  arose  immediately,  not  know-
ing what  was  secretly  decreed  to  befall  her,  and,  taking  with  her  what
instruments  she  required,  she  accompanied  the  eunuch,  and  ceased  not
to  proceed  until  she  went  in  to  the  lady  Zubeydeh,  when  she  kissed
the  ground  before  her  many  times  ;  after  which  she  rose  upon  her  feet
and  said,  Peace  be  on  the  lady  of  the  highly-honoured  curtain  and  the
unappi'oachable  majesty,  the  descendant  of  El-' Abbas  and  the  member
of  the  family  of  the  Prophet !  May  God  cause  thee  to  obtain  pros-
perity and  peace  during  the  course  of  days  and  years ! — Then  she  stood
among  the  female  slaves  and  the  eunuchs ;  and  thereupon  the  lady
Zubeydeh  raised  her  head  towards  her,  and  contemplated  her  beauty
and  loveliness ;  and  she  saw  a  damsel  with  smooth  cheeks,  with  a
bosom  presenting  the  similitude  of  two  pomegranates,  and  a  brilliant
countenance  and  shining  forehead  and  large  black  eyes.  Her  eyelids
were  languishing,  and  her  face  was  beauteously  bright.  The  splendour
of  her  countenance  was  like  that  of  the  rising  sun ;  and  the  hair  over
her  forehead,  like  the  darkness  of  night ;  and  her  odour,  like  the
fragrance  diffused  by  musk ;  and  her  beauty,  like  charming  flowers ;
and  her  forehead,  like  the  moon  ;  and  her  figure,  like  the  waving
branch.  She  was  like  the  full  moon  shining  in  the  dark  night,  and
her  eyes  were  amorous,  and  her  eyebrows  were  arched,  and  her  lips
were  as  though  they  were  formed  of  coral.  She  amazed  by  her  beauty
every  one  who  beheld  her,  and  enchanted  with  her  eye  every  one  who
saw  her.  Glory  be  to  Him  who  created  her  and  perfected  her  and
completed  her !  She  was  like  her  of  whom  the  poet  hath  said, —


504  THE  STORY  OF  KHALEEFEH  THE  FISHERMAN.

When  she  is  incensed,  thou  seest  men  slain ; and  when  she  is  pleased,  their

souls  return.
She  hath  eyes  the  glances  of  which  are  enchanting  : with  them  she  killeth  and

reanimateth  whom  she  will.
She  captivateth  all  creatures  with  her  eyes ;  and  it  seemeth  as  though  they  were

her  slaves.

The  lady  Zubeydeh  said  to  her,  A  friendly  and  free  and  an  ample
welcome  to  thee,  0  Koot-el-Kuloob ! Sit,  that  thou  mayest  amuse
us  with  thy  performances  and  the  excellence  of  thine  art. — So she
replied,  I  hear  and  obey. And  she  sat,  and,  putting  forth  her  hand,
she  took  the  tambourine;  and  after  that,  the  shebbabeh;25  and  next,
the  lute ;  and  she  played  fourteen  tunes, and  sang  to  it  an  entire
piece  in  such  a  manner  that  she  amazed  the  beholders,  and  moved
with  delight  the  hearers. And  after  that,  she  exhibited  her  skill  in
juggling  and  sleights,  and  every  pleasing  art,  so  that  the  lady  Zubey-
deh almost  became  enamoured  of  her,  and  said  within  herself,  The
son  of  my  uncle,  Er-Rasheed,  is  not  to  be  blamed  for  his  passion  for
her. Then  the  damsel  kissed  the  ground  before  Zubeydeh,  and  sat
down  ;  and  they  presented  to  her  the  viands ;  and  afterwards,  the
sweetmeat ;  and  they  presented  the  dish  in  which  was  the  benj. So
she  ate  of  it ;  and  the  sweetmeat  had  not  settled  in  her  stomach
before  her  head  turned  over  and  she  fell  down  on  the  floor  asleep ;
whereupon  the  lady  Zubeydeh  said  to  the  female  slaves,  Take  her  up
to  one  of  the  private  chambers,  and  there  leave  her  until  I  require  her
to be  brought. And  they  replied, We  hear  and  obey. She  then
said  to  one  of  the  eunuchs,  Make  for  us  a  chest,  and  bring  it  to  me.
And  she  gave  orders  to  make  the  semblance  of  a  tomb,  and  to  spread
a  report  that  the  damsel  had  been  choked  and  had  died. She  also
warned  her  chief  attendants,  that  whoever  should  say  that  she  was
living,  that  person's  head  should  be  struck  off. — And,  lo,  the  Kha-
leefeh  then  came back  from the  chase,  and  his  first  inquiry  was
respecting  the  damsel. So  one  of  his  eunuchs  advanced  to  him  ;  and
the  lady  Zubeydeh  had  charged  him  that,  if  the  Khaleefeh  should
ask  him  respecting  her,  he  should  say  she  had  died  :  wherefore  he
kissed  the  ground  before  him,  and  said  to  him,  0  my  lord,  may  thy
head  long  survive ! Know  for  certain  that  Koot-el-Kuloob  hath  been
choked  with  food,  and  hath  died. — Upon  this,  the  Khaleefeh  said,
May  God  not  rejoice thee  with good  tidings,  O  wicked  slave ! He
then  arose  and  entered  the  palace,  and  heard  of  her  death  from  every
one in  it ;  and  he  said,  Where  is  her  tomb  ? They  therefore  con-
ducted him  thither,  and  shewed  him  the  tomb  that  had  been  made


THE  STORY  OF  KHALEEFEH  THE  FISHERMAN.  505

for  deception,  saying  to  him,  This  is  her  tomb.  And  when  he  saw
it,  he  cried  out,  and  embraced  the  tomb,  and  wept,  and  recited  some
verses.  He  wept  for  her  violently,  and  remained  there  some  time ;
after  which  he  arose  and  quitted  the  tomb,  in  a  state  of  the  utmost
grief.  So  the  lady  Zubeydeh  knew  that  her  stratagem  had  been
accomplished,  and  she  said  to  the  eurmch,  Bring  the  chest.  He
therefore  brought  it  before  her;  and  she  caused  the  damsel  to
be  brought,  and  put  her  in  it,  and  said  to  the  eunuch,  Endeavour
to  sell  the  chest,  make  it  a  condition  with  the  purchaser  that  he
shall  purchase  it  locked :  then  give  its  price  in  alms.  And  the
eunuch  took  it  and  went  forth  from  her,  and  complied  with  her
command.

But  as  to  Khaleefeh  the  fisherman,  when  the  morning  came  and
diffused  its  light  and  shone,  he  said,  I  have  no  occupation  to  follow
this  clay  better  than  my  going  to  the  eunuch  who  bought  of  me  the
fish ;  for  he  made  an  appointment  with  me  that  I  should  go  to  him
in  the  palace  of  the  Khaleefeh.  He  then  went  forth  from  his  abode
to  repair  to  the  palace  of  the  Khaleefeh ;  and  when  he  arrived  at  it,
he  found  the  memlooks  and  the  black  slaves  and  the  eunuchs  sitting
and  standing.  So  he  looked  attentively  at  them,  and,  lo,  the  eunuch
who  took  from  him  the  fish  was  sitting  there,  with  the  memlooks  in
attendance  upon  him.  And  one  of  the  memlooks  called  out  to  him  ;
whereupon  the  eunuch  looked  towards  him,  to  see  who  he  was  ;  and,
behold,  he  saw  the  fisherman.  Therefore  when  the  fisherman  knew
that  he  saw  him,  and  recognized  his  person  with  certainty,  he  said  to
him,  Thou  hast  not  failed  in  thy  duty,  0  Shukeyr!26  Thus  are
persons  of  fidelity  ! — And  the  eunuch,  on  hearing  his  words,  laughed
at  him,  and  replied,  By  Allah,  thou  hast  spoken  truth,  0  fisherman  !
Then  the  eunuch  Sandal  desired  to  give  him  something,  and  put  his
hand  to  his  pocket.  But  just  then  a  great  clamour  arose :  so  the
eunuch  raised  his  head,  to  see  what  had  happened ;  and,  lo,  the
Wezeer  Jaafar  El-Barmekee  was  coming  forth  from  the  Khaleefeh.
Therefore  when  the  eunuch  saw  him,  he  rose  to  him,  and  walked  be-
fore him,  and  they  both  proceeded  to  converse  together  as  they  walked
until  the  time  became  tedious.  Khaleefeh  the  fisherman  waited
a  considerable  while,  during  which  the  eunuch  looked  not  towards
him  ;  and  when  his  standing  was  tedious  to  him,  the  fisherman  placed
himself  opposite  to  him,  but  at  a  distance  from  him,  and,  making  a
sign  to  him  with  his  hand,  said,  O  my  master  Shukeyr,  let  me  go !
And  the  eunuch  heard  him,  but  was  ashamed  to  return  him  a  reply,

III.  3 T


on  account  of  the  presence  of  the  Wezeer  Jaafar.  He  continued  to
converse  with  the  Wezeer,  and  so  to  divert  himself  from  attending  to
the  fisherman.  So  Khaleefeh  said,  O  delayer  of  the  payment  of  thy
debt,  may  God  disgrace  every  sulky  person,  and  every  one  who  taketh
the  goods  of  others  and  acteth  sulkily  to  them  !  I  place  myself  under
thy  protection,  O  my  master  Kerish-en-Nukhal,27  begging  thee  to
give  me  what  is  my  due,  that  I  may  go !

The  eunuch  heard  him;  but  he  was  abashed  at  Jaafar;  and  Jaafar
also  saw  him  as  he  made  signs  with  his  hands  and  talked  to  the  eunuch,
though  he  knew  not  what  he  said  to  him ;  and  he  said  to  the  eunuch,
disapproving  of  his  conduct,  O  eunuch,  what  doth  this  poor  beggar
demand  of  thee  ?  Sandal  the  eunuch  therefore  said  to  him,  Dost  thou
not  know  this  man,  O  our  lord  the  Wezeer  ?  The  Wezeer  Jaafar
answered,  By  Allah,  I  do  not  know  him  !  And  how  (he  added)  should
I  know  this  man  when  I  have  not  seen  him  before  the  present  time  ?
— So  the  eunuch  replied,  0  our  lord,  this  is  the  fisherman  whose  fish
we  seized  from  the  bank  of  the  Tigris.  I  got  not  any,  and  was  ashamed
to  return  to  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful  without  aught,  all  the  mem-
looks  having  taken.  But  when  I  came  to  him,  I  found  him  standing
in  the  midst  of  the  river,  supplicating  God,  and  having  with  him  four
fish.  I  therefore  said  to  him,  Give  me  what  thou  hast  with  thee,  and
receive  their  price.  And  when  he  gave  me  the  fish,  I  put  my  hand
into  my  pocket,  desiring  to  give  him  something ,  but  found  not  in
it  aught :  wherefore  I  said  to  him,  Come  to  me  in  the  palace,  and  I
will  give  thee  something  by  means  of  which  thou  mayest  seek  aid
against  thy  poverty.  Accordingly  he  came  to  me  this  day,  and  I  put
forth  my  hand  with  the  desire  of  giving  him  something,  and  thou


THE  STORY  OF  KHALEEFEH  THE  FISHERMAN.  507

earnest :  so  I  arose  to  wait  upon  thee,  and  was  diverted  by  thee  from
attending  to  him,  and  the  case  became  tedious  to  him.  This  is  his
story,  and  this  is  the  reason  of  his  standing  here. — And  when  the
Wezeer  heard  the  words  of  the  eunuch,  he  smiled  at  them,  and  said,

0  eunuch,  how  is  it  that  this  fisherman  hath  come  in  the  time  of  his
need,  and  thou  hast  not  accomplished  his  affair? Dost  thou not
know  him,  0  chief  of  the  eunuchs  ?— He  answered,  No. And  Jaafar
said,  This  is  the  teacher  of  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful,  and  his  partner;
and  our  lord  the  Khaleefeh  hath  risen  this  day  with  contracted  bosom,
mourning  heart,  and  troubled  mind,  and  there  is  nothing  that  will
dilate  his  bosom  except  this  fisherman. So  let  him  not  go  until  I
consult  the  Khaleefeh  respecting  him,  and bring  him before  him.
Perhaps  God  will  dispel  his  grief,  and  console  him  for  the  loss  of
Koot-el-Kuloob,  by  means  of  his  presence,  and  he  will  give  him  some-
thing wherewith  to  seek  for  himself  aid ; and  thou  wilt  be  the  cause
of  that. — The  eunuch  therefore  replied,  O  my  lord,  do  what  thou
desirest ;  and  may  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !)  preserve  thee  as  a
pillar  of  the  dynasty  of  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful ! May  God  per-
petuate its  shadow,  and  keep  its  branch  and  its  root !

The  Wezeer  Jaafar  then  went  to  the  Khaleefeh,  and  the  eunuch
commanded  the  memlooks  that  they  should  not  quit  the  fisherman.
So  thereupon  Khaleefeh  the  fisherman  said,  How  excellent  is  thy
beneficence,  0  Shukeyr !  The  demander  hath  become  demanded ;  for

1  came  to  demand  my  money,  and  they  have  imprisoned  me  for  the
arrears ! ffi — And  when  Jaafar  went  in  to  the  Khaleefeh,  he  saw  him
sitting,  hanging  down  his  head  towards  the  ground,  with  contracted
bosom,  full  of  solicitude,  singing  some  plaintive  verses ;  and  Jaafar,
standing  before  him,  said,  Peace  be  on  thee,  O  Prince  of  the  Faithful,
and  defender  of  the  dignity  of  the  religion,  and  descendant  of  the
uncle  of  the  Chief  of  Apostles — may  God  bless  and  save  him  and
all  his  family ! — The  Khaleefeh  therefore  raised  his  head,  and  replied,
And  on  thee  be  peace,  and  the  mercy  of  God,  and  his  blessings !  And
Jaafar  said,  With  the  permission  of  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful,  may
his  servant  speak,  and  not  be  restrained  ? The  Khaleefeh  replied,
And  when  was  restraint  as  to  speech  put  upon  thee  ? Thou,  being
the  chief  of  the  Wezeers,  shalt  speak  what  thou  wilt. — So  the  Wezeer
Jaafar  said  to  him,  I  went  forth,  O  our  lord,  from  before  thee,  desiring
to  repair  to  my  house,  and  I  saw  thy  master  and  thy  teacher  and
thy  partner,  Khaleefeh the  fisherman,  standing  at  the gate,  and  he
was  displeased  with  thee,  and  was complaining  of  thee,  and  saying,


508  THE  STORY  OF  KHALEEFKH  THE  FISHERMAN.

Extolled  be  the  perfection  of  God  !  I  have  taught  him  the  art  of
fishing,  and  he  went  to  bring  me  two  great  baskets,  and  returned  not
to  me ;  and  this  is  not  consistent  with  the  condition  of  partnership
nor  the  condition  of  teachers. — Therefore  if  thou  desire  to  be  a  partner,
no  harm  :  but  if  not,  inform  him,  that  he  may  take  some  other  than
thyself  as  partner. — And  when  the  Khaleefeh  heard  his  words,  he
stniled,  and  the  contraction  of  the  bosom  that  he  suffered  ceased  ;  and
he  said  to  Jaafar,  By  my  life  I  conjure  thee  to  tell  me,  is  it  true  that
thou  sayest,  that  the  fisherman  is  standing  at  the  gate  ?  Jaafar
answered,  By  thy  life,  0  Prince  of  the  Faithful,  he  is  standing  at  the
gate.  And  thereupon  the  Khaleefeh  said,  0  Jaafar,  by  Allah,  I  will
assuredly  endeavour  to  accomplish  that  which  is  his  due;  and  if  God
send  him,  by  my  means,  misery,  he  obtaineth  it ;  and  if  He  send  him,
by  my  means,  prosperity,  he  obtaineth  it.  Then  the  Khaleefeh  took
a  piece  of  paper,  and  cut  it  in  pieces,  and  said,  O  Jaafar,  write  with
thine  own  hand  twenty  sums  of  money,  from  a  piece  of  gold  to  a
thousand  pieces  of  gold ;  and  the  posts  of  Walee  and  Emeers,  from  the
least  office  to  that  of  Wezeer;29  and  twenty  kinds  of  punishment,
from  the  slightest  chastisement  to  slaughter.  And  Jaafar  replied,  I
hear  and  obey,  0  Prince  of  the  Faithful.  He  wrote  the  papers  with
his  own  hand,  as  the  Khaleefeh  commanded  him ;  and  after  that,  the
Khaleefeh  said,  0  Jaafar,  I  swear  by  my  pure  forefathers,  and  my
connection  by  lineage  with  Hamzeh  and  'Akeel,30  that  I  desire  to  cause
Khaleefeh  the  fisherman  to  be  brought,  and  I  will  order  him  to  take
one  of  these  papers,  the  inscription  of  which  none  shall  know  except  me
and  thee ;  and  whatever  is  written  upon  it,  I  will  give  him  possession
thereof :  even  if  upon  it  be  written  the  office  of  Wezeer,  I  will  make
him  possessor  of  it ;  and  if  upon  it  be  written  hanging,  or  amputation,
or  slaughter,  I  will  do  unto  him  accordingly.  So  go,  and  bring  him
unto  me.

When  Jaafar,  therefore,  heard  these  words,  he  said  within  himself,
There  is  no  strength  nor  power  but  in  God,  the  High,  the  Great !
.  Perhaps  there  will  prove  to  be  the  lot  of  this  poor  man  something
that  will  occasion  his  destruction,  and  I  shall  be  the  cause.  But  the
Khaleefeh  hath  sworn  :  so  it  only  remaineth  for  him  to  enter ;  and
nought  will  happen  but  what  God  desireth. — He  then  went  to  Khaleefeh
the  fisherman,  and  laid  hold  of  his  hand,  desiring  to  enter  with  him  ;
and  upon  this,  the  reason  of  Khaleefeh  fled  from  his  head,  and  he
said  within  himself,  How  have  I  trifled,  that  I  have  come  to  this  ill-
omened  slave  Shukeyr,  and  he  hath  brought  me  into  the  company  of


Kerish-en-Nukhal !  Jaafar  ceased  not  to  proceed  with  him,  the
mernlooks  being  behind  him  and  before  him,  and  Khaleefeh  saying,
Is  not  imprisonment  enough,  that  these  are  behind  me  and  before
me,  preventing  my  fleeing  ? — Jaafar  still  went  on  with  him  until  he
had  passed  through  seven  antechambers,  when  he  said  to  Khaleefeh,
Wo  to  thee,  0  fisherman  !  Thou  wilt  stand  before  the  Prince  of  the
Faithful,  and  the  defender  of  the  dignity  of  the  religion. — Then  he
raised  the  grand  curtain,  and  the  eye  of  Khaleefeh  the  fisherman  fell
upon  the  Khaleefeh,  who  was  sitting  upon  his  couch,  with  the  lords
of  the  empire  standing  in  attendance  upon  him ;  and  when  he  knew
him,  he  advanced  to  him  and  said,  A  friendly  and  free  welcome  to
thee,  0  piper !  It  is  not  right  in  thee  to  become  a  fisherman,  and
leave  me  sitting  to  keep  watch  over  the  fish,  and  go,  and  not  return,
so  that  I  was  not  aware  when  the  memlooks  advanced,  upon  beasts  of
various  colours,  and  snatched  the  fish  from  me,  while  I  stood  alone.
All  this  was  occasioned  by  thee;  for  if  thou  hadst  come  with  the
great  baskets,  quickly,  we  should  have  sold  of  them  for  a  hundred


510  THE  STORY  OF  KHALEEFEH  THE  FISHERMAN.

pieces  of  gold.  But  I  came  to  demand  my  due,  and  they  imprisoned
me.  And  who  imprisoned  thee  also  in  this  place  ? — And  the  Khaleefeh
smiled,  and,  lifting  up  the  edge  of  the  curtain,  put  forth  his  head
from  beneath  it,  and  said  to  him,  Advance,  and  take  for  thee  one  of
these  papers.  So  Khaleefeh  the  fisherman  said  to  the  Prince  of  the
Faithful,  Thou  wast  a  fisherman,  and  I  see  thee  to-day  to  have  become
an  astrologer.  But  when  a  man's  trades  become  many,  his  poverty
becometh  great. — Upon  this,  Jaafar  said,  Take  the  paper  speedily,
without  talking,  and  do  as  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful  hath  commanded
thee.  Accordingly  Khaleefeh  the  fisherman  advanced,  and  put  forth
his  hand,  and  said,  Far  be  it  from  me  that  this  piper  should  be  again
my  young  man,  and  fish  with  me!  He  then  took  the  paper,  and
handed  it  to  the  Khaleefeh,  and  said,  0  piper,  what  hath  proved  to  be
written  upon  it  as  my  lot  ?  Conceal  not  of  it  aught. —  The  Khaleefeh
therefore  took  it  and  handed  it  to  the  Wezeer  Jaafar,  saying  to  him,
Read  what  is  upon  it.  And  Jaafar  looked  at  it,  and  said,  There  is  no
strength  nor  power  but  in  God,  the  High,  the  Great !  So  the  Khaleefeh
said,  Good  news,31  O  Jaafar !  What  hast  thou  seen  upon  it  ? — He
answered,  0  Prince  of  the  Faithful,  there  hath  proved  to  be  written
upon  the  paper,  The  fisherman  shall  receive  a  hundred  blows  with  a
staff.  And  thereupon  the  Khaleefeh  commanded  that  he  should  have
a  hundred  blows  with  a  staff  inflicted  upon  him ;  and  they  complied
with  his  command ;  and  when  they  had  done  so,  Khaleefeh  arose,
saying,  Accursed  be  this  game,  0  Kerish-en-Nukhal !  Are  imprison-
ment and  beating  among  the  conditions  of  the  game  ?

Upon  this,  Jaafar  said,  0  Prince  of  the  Faithful,  this  poor  man
hath  come  to  the  great  river,32  and  how  shall  he  return  thirsty  ?  We
hope  that  by  the  beneficence  of  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful  he  may  be
allowed  to  take  for  himself  another  paper,  and  perhaps  there  may
prove  to  be  written  upon  it  as  his  lot  something  good,  so  that  he  may
return  with  it,  to  have  recourse  to  it  for  aid  against  his  poverty. —
The  Khaleefeh  replied,  By  Allah,  O  Jaafar,  if  he  take  a  paper,  and
slaughter  prove  to  be  the  lot  written  for  him  upon  it,  I  will  assuredly
slay  him,  and  thou  wilt  be  the  cause.  Jaafar  rejoined,  If  he  die;  he
will  be  at  rest.  And  upon  this,  Khaleefeh  the  fisherman  said  to  him,
May  God  not  rejoice  thee  with  good  tidings !  Have  I  made  Baghdad
strait  unto  you,  that  ye  seek  my  slaughter  ? — But  Jaafar  replied,  Take
for  thyself  a  paper,  and  beg  success  of  God,  whose  name  be  exalted  !
And  he  put  forth  his  hand,  and  took  a  paper,  and  gave  it  to  Jaafar,
who  took  it  from  him,  and  read  it,  and  was  silent.  The  Khaleefeh


THE  STORY  OF  KHALEEFEH  THE  FISHERMAN.  511

therefore  said  to  him,  Why  art  thou  silent,  0  son  of  Yahya  ?  He
answered,  0  Prince  of  the  Faithful,  there  hath  proved  to  be  written
upon  the  paper,  The  fisherman  shall  not  be  given  any  thing.  And  the
Khaleefeh  said,  There  is  no  good  fortune  for  him  to  obtain  from  us.
Tell  him  to  depart  from  before  my  face. — But  Jaafar  said,  By  thy
pure  forefathers,  let  him  take  the  third  !  Perhaps  good  fortune  may
betide  him  by  it. — And  the  Khaleefeh  replied,  Let  him  take  for  him-
self one  paper  more,  and  nought  beside  it.  So  he  stretched  forth  his
hand,  and  took  the  third  paper;  and,  lo,  on  it  was  written,  The
fisherman  shall  be  given  a  piece  of  gold.  Jaafar  .therefore  said  to
Khaleefeh,  I  sought  for  thee  prosperity;  but  God  would  not  that
aught  should  fall  to  thy  lot  save  this  piece  of  gold.  Khaleefeh  replied,
Every  hundred  blows  with  a  staff  for  a  piece  of  gold  are  abundant
good  fortune.  May  God  not  make  thy  body  to  be  healthy ! — And
the  Khaleefeh  laughed  at  him.

Jaafar  then  took  the  hand  of  Khaleefeh,  and  went  forth  with
him  ;  and  when  he  came  to  the  gate,  Sandal  the  eunuch  saw  him,
and  said  to  him,  Come  hither,  O  fisherman!  Bestow  upon  us  a
present  from  that  which  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful  hath  given  thee
while  jesting  with  thee. — And  Khaleefeh  replied,  By  Allah,  thou  hast
spoken  truth,  0  Shukeyr !  And  dost  thou  desire  to  share  with  me,
0  black-skinned,  when  I  have  had  a  hundred  blows  with  a  staff  and
received  one  piece  of  gold  ?  Thou  art  absolved  of  responsibility  with
respect  to  it. — Then  he  threw  the  piece  of  gold  to  the  eunuch,  and
went  forth,  his  tears  running  down  upon  the  surface  of  his  cheek.
So  when  the  eunuch  saw  him  in  this  state,  he  knew  that  he  had
spoken  truth :  he  therefore  went  towards  him,  and  called  out  to  the
pages,  Bring  him  back  !  Accordingly  they  brought  him  back ;  and  the
eunuch  put  his  hand  to  his  pocket,  and  took  forth  from  it  a  red  purse,
which  he  opened  and  shook,  and,  lo,  in  it  were  a  hundred  pieces
of  gold  ;  and  he  said,  O  fisherman,  take  this  gold  as  the  price  of  thy
fish,  and  go  thy  way.  So  thereupon,  Khaleefeh  the  fisherman  rejoiced.

He  took  the  hundred  pieces  of  gold,  and  the  Khaleefeh's  piece  of
gold,  and  went  forth  ;  and  he  had  forgotten  the  beating.  And  as  God
(whose  name  be  exalted !)  desired  the  accomplishment  of  an  event
that  He  had  decreed,  Khaleefeh  the  fisherman  passed  through  the
market  for  female  slaves ;  and  he  saw  a  large  ring  of  persons,  com-
prising many  people  ;  upon  which  he  said  within  himself,  What  are
these  people  ?  Then  he  advanced  and  made  his  way  among  the
people,  who  consisted  of  merchants  and  others  ;  and  the  merchants


said,  Make  room  for  the  nakhoodah  Zuleyt !  s  So  they  made  room
for  him ;  and  Khaleefeh  looked,  and,  lo,  there  was  a  sheykh  upon  his
feet,  and  before  him  was  a  chest,  upon  which  was  sitting  a  eunuch  ;
and  the  sheykh  was  crying  and  saying,  0  merchants,  O  possessors  of
riches,  who  will  hazard  and  hasten  to  give  his  money  for  this  chest  of
which  the  contents  are  unknown,  from  the  palace  of  the  lady  Zubeydeh
the  daughter  of  El-Kasim,  the  wife  of  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful,  Er-
Rasheed  ?  At  what  sum  shall  it  be  announced  for  you  ?  May  God
bless  you  ! — Upon  this,  one  of  the  merchants  said,  By  Allah,  this  is  a
hazarding;  but  I  will  say  something  for  which  I  shall  not  be  blame-
able.  Be  it  mine  for  twenty  pieces  of  gold. — Another  said,  For  fifty
pieces  of  gold.  And  the  merchants  increased  their  biddings  for  it
until  the  sum  offered  amounted  to  a  hundred  pieces  of  gold ;  when
the  crier  said,  Have  ye  any  addition  to  make,  O  merchants-  ?  And
Khaleefeh  the  fisherman  said,  Be  it  mine  for  a  hundred  pieces  of  gold
and  one.  So  when  the  merchants  heard  the  words  of  Khaleefeb,  they
imagined  that  he  was  jesting;  and  they  laughed  at  him,  and  said,  O
eunuch,  sell  it  to  Khaleefeh  for  the  hundred  pieces  of  gold  and  one.
And  the  eunuch  replied,  By  Allah,  I  will  not  sell  it  save  to  him  !
Take  it,  0  fisherman.  May  God  bless  thee  in  it !  And  give  me  the


THE  STORY  OF  KHALEEFEH  THE  FISHERMAN.


513


gold. — Kb.  alec  fell  therefore  took  forth  the  gold,  and  delivered  it  to  the
eunuch,  and  the  contract  was  concluded.  The  eunuch  then  gave
away  the  gold  in  alms  in  the  place  where  he  stood,  and  returned  to
the  palace,  and  acquainted  the  lady  Zubcydeh  with  that  which  he  had
done;  whereat  she  rejoiced.  Khaleefeh  the  fisherman  took  the  chest
upon  his  shoulder  ;  but  he  could  not  carry  it  so,  on  account  of  the
greatness  of  its  weight ;  wherefore  he  carried  it  upon  his  head,  and
came  with  it  to  the  quarter  in  which  he  dwelt,  and  put  it  down  from
his  head.  He  had  become  fatigued  ;  and  he  sat  meditating  upon  the
events  that  had  happened  to  him,  and  began  to  say  within  himself,
Would  that  I  knew  what  is  in  this  chest !  Then  he  opened  the  door
of  his  abode,  and  laboured  to  remove  the  chest  until  he  had  brought
it  into  his  abode ;  after  which  he  laboured  to  open  it ;  but  was  not
able.  So  he  said  within  himself,  What  hath  happened  to  my  reason,
that  I  have  bought  this  chest  ?  I  must  break  it,  and  see  what  is  in
it. — And  he  applied  himself  to  open  the  lock ;  but  could  not ;  and
he  said  within  himself,  I  will  leave  it  till  the  morrow.

He  then  desired  to  sleep ;  but  found  not  a  place  in  which  to
sleep,  for  the  chest  was  just  of  the  size  of  the  chamber  in  length  and
breadth.  He  therefore  got  upon  it,  and  slept  on  it ;  and  after  he
had  remained  a  while,  something  moved ;  whereupon  Khaleefeh  was
frightened,  and  sleep  fled  from  him,  and  his  reason  also  took  flight.
He  arose  and  said,  It  seerneth  that  there  are  Jinn  in  it.  Praise  be  to


in.


3  r


514  THE  STORY  OF  KHALEEFEH  THE  FISHEItMAX.

God  who  caused  me  not  to  open  it! For  if  I  had  opened  it,  they
would  have  come  upon  me  in  the  dark  and  destroyed  me,  and  no
good  would  have  betided  me  from  them. — Then  he  returned  and  lay
down  again  ;  and,  lo,  the  chest  moved  a  second  time,  more  than  the
first  time. Khaleefeh  therefore  arose  and  stood  up,  and  said,  This  is
another  time  ;  but  it  is  alarming  ! And  he  hastened  to  get  a  lamp ;
but  found  it  not,  and  he  had  not  aught  wherewith  to  buy  a  lamp. So
he  went  forth  from  the  house,  and  called  out,  0  people  of  the  quarter !
And  most  of  the  people  of  the  quarter  were'  sleeping  , and they
awoke  at  his  cry,  and  said,  What  aileth  thee,  O Khaleefeh  ? He
answered,  Come  to  me  with  a  lamp ;  for  the  Jinn  have  come  forth
upon  me ! They  therefore  laughed  at  him,  and  gave  him  a  lamp,
and  he  took  it  and  went  with  it  into  his  abode. He  then  beat  the
lock  of  the  chest  with  a  stone,  and  broke  it,  and  opened  the  chest ;
and,  lo,  he  beheld  a  damsel  like  a  hooreeyeh,  lying  in  the  chest.
She  had  been  stupified  with  benj,  and  having  then  vomited  the  benj,
and  recovered  her  senses',  she  opened  her  eyes,  and  became  sensible  of
her  confinement,  and  moved. So  when  Khaleefeh  saw  her,  he  rose  to
her,  and  said,  By  Allah,  0  my  mistress,  whence  art  thou  ? And  she
opened  her  eyes,  and  said.  Bring  me  Yasemeen  and  Narjis.34 Kha-
leefeh replied,  There  is  nothing  here  but  temer-henna.84 And  upon
this  she  recovered  her  consciousness,  and,  seeing  Khaleefeh,  she  said
to  him,  What  art  thou  ? Then she  said,  And  where  am I  ? He
answered  her,  Thou  art  in  my  house. She  said,  Am  I  not  in  the
palace  of  the  Khaleefeh  Haroon  Er-Rasheed  ? He  replied,  What  is
Er-Rasheed,  0  mad  woman  ? Thou  art  nought but  my slave-girl,
and  this  day  I  bought  thee  for  a  hundred  pieces  of  gold  and  one,  and
brought  thee  to  my  house,  and  thou  wast  in  this  chest,  asleep. — And
when  the  damsel  heard  his words,  she  said  to  him,  What  is  thy
name  ? He  answered,  My  name  is  Khaleefeh. And  how  is  it  (he
added)  that  my  star  hath  become  fortunate,  when  I  know  that  my
star  was  not  so  ? — And  she  laughed  and  said,  Cease  to  trouble  me
with  these  words. Hast  thou  any  thing  to  be  eaten  ? — He  answered,
By  Allah,  I  have  not  even  any  thing  to  be  drunk  ;  and  I,  by  Allah,
have  passed  two  days  without  eating  aught,  and  I  am  now  in  want
of  a  morsel. So  she  said  to  him,  Hast  thou  not  any  money  ? He
replied,  Allah  preserve  this  chest  which  hath  reduced  me  to  poverty!
For  I  have  given  what  I  had  for  it,  and  become  a  bankrupt. — And
the  damsel  laughed  at  him,  and  said,  Arise,  seek  of  thy  neighbours
something  that  I  may  eat;  for  I  am  hungry.


THE  STORY  OF  KHALEEFEH  THE  FISHERMAN.  515

Khaleefeh  therefore  arose  and  went  forth  from  the  chamber,  and
cried  out,  O  people  of  the  quarter !  And  they  were  sleeping :  so
they  awoke  and  said,  What  aileth  thee,  O  Khaleefeh  ?  He  answered,

0  my  neighbours,  I  am  hungry,  and  I  have  not  any  thing  for  me  to
eat. And  upon  this,  one  came  down  to  him  with  a  cake  of  bread,
and  another  with  a  fragment  of  bread,  and  another  with  a  bit  of
cheese,  and  another  with  a  cucumber. Thus  his  lap  was  filled,  and
he  entered  the  chamber,  and  put  the  whole  before  her,  saying  to  her,
Eat. But  she  laughed  at  him,  and  said  to  him,  How  shall  I  eat  of
this,  when  I  have  not  a  mug  of  water  whereof  to  drink,  so  that  I  fear

1  may  be  choked  with  a  morsel,  and  die  ? Khaleefeh  therefore  said,
I  will  fill  for  thee  this  jar. And  he  took  the  jar,  and  went  forth  into
the  midst  of  the  quarter,  and  called  out,  O  people  of  the  quarter!
So  they  said  to  him,  What  is  thy  misfortune  this  night,  0  Khaleefeh  ?
And  he  answered  them,  Ye  gave  me,  and  I  have  eaten ;  but  I  am
thirsty : therefore  give  me  to  drink. And  this  one  came  down  to
him  with  a  mug,  and  this  with  a  ewer,  and  this  with  a  water-bottle ;
and  he  filled  the  jar,  went  with  it  into  the  chamber,  and  said  to  the
damsel, O  my  mistress,  there remaineth to thee no want. She
replied,  True :  there  remaineth  to  me  no  want  at  present. He  then
said  to  her,  Speak  to  me,  and  tell  me  thy  story. And  she  replied,
Wo  to  thee  ! If  thou  know  me  not,  I  will  acquaint  thee  with  myself.
I  am  Koot-el-Kuloob,  the  slave-girl  of  the  Khaleefeh  Haroon  Er-
Ilasheed. The lady Zubeydeh hath  become  jealous of  me, and
stupified  me  with  benj,  and  put  me  into  this  chest. — Then  she  said,
Praise  be  to  God  that  this  easy  event  happened,  and  that  another
event  happened  not ! But  this  happened  not  to  me  save  for  the  sake
of thy  good fortune ; for  thou  wilt  undoubtedly  receive  from  the
Khaleefeh  Er-Rasheed  a  large  sum  of  money,  that  will  be  the  cause
of  thy  becoming  rich. — Upon  this,  Khaleefeh  said  to  her,  Is  not  he
Er-llasheed  in  whose  palace  I  was  imprisoned  ? She  answered,  Yes.
And  he  said,  by  Allah,  I  have  not  beheld  any  one  more  avaricious
than  he,  that  piper  of  little  goodness  and-  intellect ! For  he  caused
me  to  receive,  yesterday,  a  hundred  blows  with  a  staff,  and  gave  me
one  piece  of  gold,  although I  had  taught  him  the  art  of  fishing,
and  made  him  my  partner;  and  he  acted  perfidiously  to  me. — So  she
said  to  him,  Abstain  from  this  foul  language,  and  open  thine  eyes,
and  behave  respectfully  when  thou  seest  him  after  this ; for  if  so,
thou  wilt  attain  thy  desire. And  when  he  heard  her  words,  he  was
as  though  he  had  been  sleeping,  and  awoke;  and  God  removed  the


516  THE  STORY  OF  KHALEEFEH  THE  FISHERMAN.

veil  from  his  judgment,  for  the  sake  of  his  good  fortune ;  wherefore
he  replied,  On  the  head  and  the  eye.  Then  he  said  to  her,  In  the
name  of  Allah,  sleep.

Accordingly  she  arose,  and  laid  herself  down  and  slept,  and  he
slept  at  a  distance  from  her  until  the  morning ;  and  when  she  arose
in  the  morning,  she  demanded  of  him  an  inkhorn  and  a  piece  of
paper.  So  he  brought  them  to  her ;  and  she  wrote  to  the  merchant
who  was  the  companion  of  the  Khaleefeh,  acquainting  him  with  her
case,  and  the  events  that  had  happened  to  her ;  that  she  was  in  the
abode  of  Khaleefeh  the  fisherman,  and  that  he  had  purchased  her.
Then  she  gave  to  him  the  paper,  and  said  to  him,  Take  this  paper,
and  go  with  it  to  the  jewel-market,  and  inquire  for  the  shop  of  Ibn-
El-Kirnas  the  jeweller,  and  give  him  this  paper  without  speaking.
Khaleefeh  therefore  replied,  I  hear  and  obey.  He  took  the  paper
from  her  hand,  and  went  with  it  to  the  jewel-market,  and  inquired
for  the  shop  of  Ibn-El-Kirnas.  So  they  directed  him  to  it,  and  he
came  to  him  and  saluted  him,  and  he  returned  his  salutation,  but
despised  him,  and  said  to  him,  What  dost  thou  want  ?  And  lie
handed  to  him  the  paper,  which  he  took ;  but  he  read  it  not,  ima-
gining that  he  was  a  pauper,  who  desired  of  him  an  alms ;  wherefore
he  said  to  one  of  his  pages,  Give  him  half  a  piece  of  silver.  So  Kha-
leefeh said  to  him,  I  have  no  need  of  alms  ;  but  read  thou  the  paper.
He  therefore  took  the  paper  and  read  it,  and  he  understood  its
contents ;  and  when  he  knew  what  it  contained,  he  kissed  it,  and  put
it  on  his  head,  and,  rising,  he  said  to  Khaleefeh,  0  my  brother,  where
is  thy  house?  Khaleefeh  said  to  him,  And  what  desirest  thou  with
regard  to  my  house  ?  Is  it  thy  desire  to  go  to  it  to  steal  my  slave-
girl  ? — He  answered  him,  No  :  but  I  will  buy  for  thee  something  that
thou  shalt  eat  with  her.  So  thereupon  Khaleefeh  replied,  My  abode
is  in  such  a  quarter.  And  the  jeweller  said  to  him,  Thou  hast  done
well.  May  God  not  give  thee  health,  O  unfortunate  !36 — Then  lie
cried  out  to  two  of  his  black  slaves,  and  said  to  them,  Go  with  this
man  to  the  shop  of  Mohsin  the  money-changer,  and  say  to  him,  0
Mohsin,  give  this  person  a  thousand  pieces  of  gold, — and  return  ye
with  him  to  me  speedily. — Accordingly  the  two  slaves  went  with
Khaleefeh  to  the  shop  of  the  money-changer,  and  said  to  him,  O
Mohsin,  give  this  man  a  thousand  pieces  of  gold.  He  therefore  gave
him  them,  and  Khaleefeh  took  them,  and  returned  with  the  two
slaves  to  the  shop  of  their  master;  whom  they  found  riding  upon  a
light-paced  mule  worth  a  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  with  the  memlooks


and  pages  around  him,  and  by  the  side  of  his  mule  was  a  mule  like
it,  saddled  and  bridled.  The  jeweller  then  said  to  Khaleefeh,  In
the  name  of  Allah,  mount  this  mule.  But  Khaleefeh  replied,  I  will
not  mount.  By  Allah,  I  fear  that  she  would  throw  me. — The  mer-
chant Ibn-El-Kirnas,  however,  said  to  him,  By  Allah,  thou  must
mount.  So  Khaleefeh  advanced  to  mount  her,  and  he  mounted
her  back-foremost,  arid  laid  hold  of  her  tail,  and  cried  out ;  where-
upon she  threw  him  on  the  ground,  and  the  people  laughed  at  him ;
and  he  rose  and  said,  Did  I  not  say  to  thee,  I  will  hot  mount  this
great  ass  ?

Then  Ibn-El-Kirmts  left  Khaleefeh  in  the  market,  and  went  to
the  Prince  of  the  Faithful,  and  gave  him  information  of  the  damsel ;
after  which  he  returned,  and  removed  her  to  his  own  house.  And
Khaleefeh  went  to  his  house  to  see  the  damsel,  and  beheld  the  people
of  the  quarter  assembled,  and  saying,  Verily  Khaleefeh  is  to-day
altogether  terrified  !37  Whence  can  this  damsel  have  come  into  his
possession  ? — And  one  of  them  said,  This  man  is  a  mad  rascal.
Probably  he  found  her  in  the  way,  intoxicated,  and  carried  her  and
brought  her  to  his  house,  and  hath  not  absented  himself  save
because  he  knew  his  crime. — And  while  they  were  talking,  lo,  Kha-
leefeh approached  them ;  and  they  said  to  him,  How  is  thy  condition,
O  poor  man  ?  Dost  thou  not  know  what  hath  happened  to  thee  ? —
He  answered,  No,  by  Allah.  And  they  said,  Just  now  some  inem-
looks  came  and  took  thy  slave-girl,  and  they  sought  thee,  but  found
thee  not.  So  Khaleefeh  said,  How  did  they  take  my  slave-girl  ?  And
one  said,  Had  he  fallen  in  their  way,  they  had  slain  him.  And  Kha-
leefeh paid  no  regard  to  them ;  but  returned  running  to  the  shop  of
Ibn-El-Kirnas ;  and  be  saw  him  riding,  and  said  to  him,  By  Allah,


518  THE  STOKY  OF  KHALEEFEH  THE  FISHERMAN.

it  is  not  right  in  thee;  for  thou  divertedst  my  attention,  and  sentest
thy  memlooks,  and  they  have  taken  my  slave-girl.  And  he  replied,
O  madman,  come  hither,  and  be  thou  silent !  Then  he  took  him  and
conducted  him  to  a  house  of  handsome  construction,  which  he  entered
with  him,  and  he  saw  the  damsel  sitting  in  it  upon  a  couch  of  gold,
surrounded  by  ten  slave-girls  resembling  moons.  And  when  Ibn-El-
Kirnas  saw  her,  he  kissed  the  ground  before  her;  and  she  said  to  him,
What  hast  thou  done  with  my  new  master,  who  purchased  me  with  all
that  he  possessed  ?  He  answered  her,  0  my  mistress,  I  have  given
him  a  thousand  pieces  of  gold.  And  he  related  to  her  the  story  of
Khaleefeh  from  its  beginning  to  its  end ;  whereupon  she  laughed,
and  said,  Blame  him  not ;  for  he  is  a  man  of  the  vulgar  class.  Then
she  said,  And  these  thousand  pieces  of  gold  besides  are  a  present  from
me  to  him ;  and  if  it  be  the  will  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !),  he
shall  receive  from  the  Khaleefeh  what  will  enrich  him.

Now  while  they  were  talking,  lo,  a  eunuch  from  the  palace  of  the
Khaleefeh  advanced,  demanding  Koot-el-Kuloob ;  for  the  Khaleefeh
knew  that  she  was  in  the  house  of  Ibn-El-Kirnas,  and  when  he  knew
that,  he  could  not  endure  her  absence,  wherefore  he  gave  orders  to
bring  her.  And  when  she  went  to  him,  she  took  Khaleefeh  with
her.  She  went  on  until  she  approached  the  Khaleefeh ;  and  on  her
coming  to  him,  she  kissed  the  ground  before  him  ;  and  he  rose  to  her
and  saluted  her  and  welcomed  her,  and  asked  her  how  had  been  her
state  with  him  who  had  purchased  her.  So  she  answered  him,  He  is
a  man  named  Khaleefeh  the  fisherman,  and  here  he  is,  standing  at
the  gate;  and  he  hath  mentioned  to  me  that  he  hath  a  reckoning
to  make  with  our  lord  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful,  on  account  of  the
partnership  that  was  between  him  and  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful  in
the  trade  of  fishing.  Upon  this  the  Khaleefeh  said,  Is  he  standing
there?  She  answered,  Yes.  And  he  gave  orders  to  bring  him.
Therefore  he  came ;  and  he  kissed  the  grouud  before  the  Khaleefeh,
and  prayed  for  the  continuance  of  his  glory  and  blessings ;  and  the
Khaleefeh  wondered  at  him,  and  laughed  at  him,  and  asked  him  how
he  had  conducted  himself  to  Koot-el-Kuloob.  So  he  told  him  that
he  had  treated  her  respectfully,  and  he  repeated  to  him  the  account
of  all  that  had  happened  to  him  from  first  to  last,  while  the  Khalee-
feh laughed  at  him.  He  told  him  the  story  of  the  eunuch,  and  what
happened  to  him  with  him,  and  how  he  gave  him  the  hundred  pieces
of  gold,  in  addition  to  the  piece  of  gold  that  he  had  received  from  the
Khaleefeh.  lie  told  him  also  of  his  entering  the  market,  and  his


buying  the  chest  for  the  hundred  pieces  of  gold  and  one,  not  know-
ing what  was  in  it ;  and  he  related  to  him  the  whole  story,  from  the
beginning  to  the  end.  And  the  Khaleefeh  laughed  at  him ;  his
bosom  became  dilated,  and  he  said  to  him,  We  will  do  as  thou
desirest,  0  thou  who  hast  conveyed  to  the  owner  his  rightful  pro-
perty !  Then  he  was  silent.  And  after  that,  the  Khaleefeh  gave
orders  to  present  him  with  fifty  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  and  a  sump-
tuous robe  of  honour,  of  the  apparel  of  the  great  Khaleefehs,  and  a
mule;  and  he  gave  to  him  black  slaves  to  serve  him.  Thus  he  be-
came as  though  he  were  one  of  the  Kings  of  that  age.  And  the
Khaleefeh  was  rejoiced  at  the  return  of  his  slave-girl,  and  knew  that
all  this  was  of  the  doings  of  the  lady  Zubeydeh,  the  daughter  of  his
uncle ;  wherefore  his  rage  against  her  was  excessive,  and  he  forsook
her  for  a  length  of  time,  and  visited  her  not,  nor  inclined  to  her.

So  when  she  was  certified  thereof,  she  was  affected  with  great
anxiety  on  account  of  his  wrath.  Her  complexion  became  sallow  after
redness ;  and  when  endurance  wearied  her,  she  sent  a  letter  to  the  son
of  her  uncle,  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful,  apologizing  to  him,  and  con-
fessing her  crime ;  and  she  recited  these  verses  : —


520  THE  STORY  OF  KHALEEFEH  THE  FISHERMAN.

I  long  to  experience  your  former  approbation,  that  I  may  quench  the  fire  of  my
grief  and  sorrow.

0  my  lord,  have  pity  for  the  excess  of  my  passion ;  for  this  that  I  have  suffered

from  you  is  sxifficient !

My  patience  hath  failed  since  your  estrangement,  O  my  beloved,  and  what  was
bright  in  my  life  you  have  rendered  turbid.

1  shall  live  if  you  fulfil  the  vows  that  you  made  me;  and  if  you  grant  me  not

fulfilment,  I  shall  die.

Suppose  I  have  committed  a  crime  :  forgive  it. For,  by  Allah,  how  sweet  is  the
beloved  when  he  pardoneth !

Therefore  when  the  letter  of  the  lady  Zubeydeh  came  to  the  Prince  of
the  Faithful,  and  he  read  it,  he  knew  that  she  had  acknowledged  her
crime,  and  sent  to  apologize  to  him  for  that  which  she  had  done.  So
he  said  within  himself,  Verily  God  forgiveth  all  sins  ;  for  He  is  the
Very  Forgiving,  the  Merciful.38  And  he  sent  to  her  a  reply  to  her
letter,  containing  the  expression  of  his  satisfaction  and  forgiveness,
and  pardon  of  what  was  past ;  whereupon  she  experienced  great  joy.

The  Khaleefeh  then  assigned  Khaleefeh  a  monthly  allowance  of  fifty
pieces  of  gold,  and  he  acquired,  in  the  estimation  of  the  Khaleefeh,
great  dignity  and  high  rank,  and  honour  and  respect.  Khaleefeh
kissed  the  ground  before  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful  on  his  going  forth,
and  went  forth  walking  with  stately  gait ;  and  when  he  came  to  the
entrance,  the  eunuch  who  had  given  him  the  hundred  pieces  of  gold
saw  him  and  knew  him,  and  said  to  him,  O  fisherman,  whence  came
to  thee  all  this  ?  So  he  told  him  what  had  happened  to  him  from
first  to  last.  And  the  eunuch  rejoiced  at  that,  seeing  that  he  had
been  the  cause  of  his  becoming  rich  ;  and  he  said  to  him,  Wilt  thou
not  give  me  a  present  from  this  wealth  that  hath  become  thine?
And  Khaleefeh  put  his  hand  to  his  pocket,  and  took  forth  from  it  a
purse  containing  a  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  which  he  handed  to  the
eunuch  :  but  the  eunuch  said  to  him,  Take  thy  wealth.  May  God
bless  thee  in  it ! — And  he  wondered  at  his  generosity,  and  the  liberality
of  his  mind,  considering  his  late  poverty.  Khaleefeh  then  went  forth
from  the  eunuch,  riding  upon  the  mule,  and  attended  by  the  servants
with  their  hands  upon  her  haunches.  Thus  he  proceeded  until  he
came  to  the  Khan,  the  people  diverting  themselves  with  gazing  at  him,
and  wondering  at  the  glory  that  had  betided  him,;  and  they  advanced
to  him  after  he  had  alighted  from  the  mule,  and  asked  him  respecting
the  cause  of  that  good  fortune.  He  therefore  acquainted  them  with
the  events  that  had  happened  to  him  from  first  to  last.  Then  he
purchased  a  house  of  handsome  structure,  and  expended  upon  it  a  large
sum  of  money,  so  that  it  became  perfect  in  beauty.  He  took  up  his


THE  STO11Y  OF  KHALEEFEH  THE  FISHERMAN.


521


abode  in  that  house  ;  and  when  he  had  settled  himself  in  it,  he
demanded  for  himself  in  marriage  one  of  the  daughters  of  the  chief
men  of  the  city,  of  the  beautiful  damsels,  and  took  her  as  his  wife ;
and  he  experienced  the  utmost  delight,  and  exceeding  pleasure,  and
happiness.  He  became  in  a  state  of  abundant  affluence  and  complete
prosperity  ;  and  when  he  beheld  himself  in  that  state  of  enjoyment,
he  thanked  God  (whose  perfection  be  extolled,  and  whose  name  be  ex-
alted !)  for  the  abundant  affluence  and  successive  favours  that  He  had
bestowed  upon  him,  praising  his  Lord  with  the  praise  of  the  grateful.
He  used  frequently  to  visit  the  Khaleefeh  Haroon  Er-Rasheed,
being  well  received  by  him,  and  Er-llasheed  used  to  cover  him  with
his  benefits  and  munificence.  So  Khaleefeh  ceased  not  to  live  in  a
state  of  the  most  perfect  affluence  and  happiness  and  glory  and  hilarity,
enjoying  abundant  wealth  and  rising  elevation,  and  a  pleasant,  agree-
able life,  and  pure,  grateful  delight,  until  he  was  visited  by  the  ter-
minator of  delights  and  the  separator  of  companions. — Extolled  be  the
perfection  of  Him  to  whom  belong  glory  and  permanence,  and  who  is
living,  everlasting,  who  will  never  die  !39


in.


3  x


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-SIXTH.


NOTE  1. THIS  is  explained  by  Note  81  to  Chapter  v.

NOTE  2. The  "  bayad  "  is  a  fish  of  the  genus  silurus. It  is  common  in  the  Nile.

NOTE  3.  "  Mo'allim  "  (vulgarly  pronounced  "  M'allim  '')  is  a  title  usually  given  in
Egypt  and  other  Arab  countries  to  any  Christian  or  Jew  ;  and  also  to  a  master  in  any
art  or  trade.  It  signifies  "  teacher."

NOTE  4.  The  Arabs  in  general  are  extremely  fearful  of  the  influence  of  the  evil
eye  upon  articles  of  food,  which,  by  many  persons  who  deal  in  them,  are  consequently
concealed  from  the  public  gaze.

NOTE  5.  What  is  commonly  called  a  "  mowwal,"  but  properly  "  mawaleeya  "
according  to  some,  or,  according  to  others,  "  mawaliya,"  is  a  kind  of  short  poem.  It
generally  consists  of  five  lines,  the  measure  of  which  is  like  a  species  of  the  "  besetet."


admitting,  however,  of  licences  not  allowed  by  the  strict  rules  of  prosody  ;  and  all
these  five  lines,  except  the  penultimate,  end  with  the  same  rhyme.  The  language  of
the  mowwal,  if  I  may  judge  from  all  the  poems  of  this  kind  that  1  have  seen  and  heard,
is  a  mixture  of  the  classical  aud  the  vulgar.

NOTE  6. My  original  here  presents  an  evident  error,  which  I  have  corrected

NOTE  7.  In  my  original,  this  person  is  said  to  be  '•  the  Virgin,"  as  though  the
dreamer  were  a  Christian.

NOTE  8.  Aboo-Bekr  received  from  Mohammad  the  surname  of  "  the  Very  Vera-
cious "  (es-Siddeek)  on  account  of  his  asserting  the  truth  of  the  Prophet's  miraculous
Night-Journey.

NoTEO.  Perhaps  "Sa'adch"  (which  signifies  "felicity,"  '•  prosperity,"  &c.,)  was
the  name  of  the  Jew's  daughter,  and  from  her  he  was  called  "  Abu-s-Sa'adat  ;"  though
Klmlecfeh  supposed  it  to  be  the  name  of  his  wife.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-SIXTH.  523

NOTE  10.  The  words  which  compose  the  profession  of  the  faith  of  El-Islam  ("  There
is  no  deity  but  God  :  Mohammad  is  God's  Apostle  ";  are  commonly  called  "  the  Two

Sayings."

NOTE  11.  Some  readers  may  imagine  that  a  Muslim,  in  his  own  country,  could  not
be  beaten  at  the  command  of  a  Jew  ;  but  Arabs  have  not  unfrequently  thus  suffered
both  from  Christians  and  Jews  under  the  domination  of  the  Memlooks  and  Turks.

NOTE  12.  The  Muslims  believe  that  the  number  of  the  faithful  is  decreed  by  God,
and  that  no  act  of  man  can  increase  or  diminish  it.

NOTE  13.  It  is  said,  at  the  close  of  the  story,  that  Khaleefeh  resided  in  a  Khan  ;
and  the  Breslau  edition  describes  him  as  dwelling  in  a  magazine  of  a  ruined  Khan.
According  to  my  original,  his  habitation  seems  to  have  been  a  closet  adjoining  a  ruined
saloon.  The  word  which  I  have  rendered  "  chamber  "  generally  signifies  "  house."

NOTE  14.  That  is,  his  mind,  under  the  influence  of  hasheesh,  suggested  to  him  the
idea  of  stripping  himself,  &c.  Most  of  Khaleefehjs  oddities  are  such  as  might  be  the
effect  of  hasheesh.  See  the  fourth  paragraph  of  Note  22  to  Chapter  iii.

NOTE  15. See  above,  Note  13.

NOTE  16.  A  "  memrak  "  is  generally  a  kind  of  small  lantern  for  the  admission  of
air,  in  the  roof  of  a  chamber :  its  form  is  octagonal ;  and  its  sides  are  of  wooden  lattice-
work, supporting  a  cupola.  But  this  term  is  also  applied  to  a  simple  aperture  in  the
roof,  made  for  the  same  purpose,  or  to  admit  light.

NOTE  17.  The  "  kamar  "  is  a  kind  of  belt  containing  a  purse  for  money.  [It  is
the  usual  belt  worn  by  grooms  in  Cairo,  and  is  commonly  used  by  all  classes  in  travelling,
under  the  shirt,  as  a  safe  receptacle  for  money. — ED.]

NOTE  18.  By  "  Suleyman's  prison  "  is  meant  one  of  the  bottles  of  brass  in  which
Suleyman  confined  the  refractory  Jinn,  as  mentioned  in  two  former  tales  in  this  work.

NOTE  19.  Here,  and  in  the  next  sentence,  I  read  "  kom  "  (a  mound)  instead  of
"  karm,"  which  signifies  "  a  grape-vine."

NOTE  20  The  "  shemleh  "  is  a  kind  of  cloak,  or  wrapper,  entirely  enveloping  the
person.

NOTE  21.  The  "heram"  (more  properly  "ehram")  is  a  kind  of  woollen  sheet,
mostly  used  by  the  western  Arabs,  both  to  envelop  the  body  by  day  and  as  a  night-
covering.  It  is  so  called  because  it  is  similar  to  the  covering  of  the  body  worn  during
the  performance  of  the  rites  of  pilgrimage.

NOTE  22.  Imagining  the  fish  to  be  from  Paradise,  he  thought  that  this  prayer
would  surely  be  answered.

NOTE  23.  This  is  said  ironically ;  for  the  commencement  of  the  day  was  unfor-
tunate, and  its  end  seemed  to  be  unfortunate  also.

NOTE  24. See  Note  32  to  Chapter  v.

NOTE  25. The  "  shebbabeh  "  is  a  kind  of  flageolet,  made  of  reed.

NOTE  26.  My  sheykh  states  that  "  shukcyr  "  is  a  diminutive  form  of  "  ashkar,"
which  signifies  "  of  a  ruddy  complexion,"  and  also  "  tawny."

NOTE  27.  "  Kerish-cn-Nukhal  "  may  lie  rendered  "  Paunch  of  Bran."  This  nick-
name is  applied  by  Khaleefeh  to  the  Wezeer  Jaat'ar.


524  NOTES  TO  CHAFfER  TWENTY-SIXTH.

NOTE  28.  His  case  was  like  that  of  a  peasant,  who,  on  liis  demanding  money  due
to  him  from  the  government  for  grain,  or  on  some  other  account,  is  imprisoned  for
arrears  of  taxes  due  from  his  fellow-villagers;  for  tyrannical  measures  of  this  kind
have  heen  often  practised..

NOTE  29.  In  my  original,  "that  of  Khaleefeh."  I  follow  the  reading  which  Tre'-
hutien's  version  shews  to  be  that  of  Von  Hammer's  manuscript.

NOTE  30.  Hamzeh  was  a  brother  of  El-' Abbas,  from  whom  the  Khaleefehs  of
Baghdad  derived  their  origin ;  and  'Akeel  was  a  son  of  Aboo-Talib,  another  brother  of
El-'Abbas.

NOTE  31.  The  meaning  of  this  expression  is,  "I  hope  that  thou  hast  good  news
to  tell.''

NOTE  32. That  is,  "  to  the  Prince  whose  munificence  is  as  a  great  river."

NOTE  33.  "  Nakboodah  "  is  a  title  of  a  master  of  a  ship,  and  "  zuleyt "  is  a  term
often  applied  to  a  low  fellow.

NOTE  34.  "  Yasemeeii "  and  •'  Narjis  "  (or  Jasmine  and  Narcissus)  are  to  be  under-
stood as  the  names  of  two  female  slaves,  or,  perhaps,  two  eunuchs,  attendants  of  Koot-
el-Kuloob.

NOTE  35. This  is  the  Lawsonia  inermis. See  Volume  i.  p.  199.
NOTE  36. This  is  to  be  understood  as  said  in  jest.

NOTE  37.  I  here  read  ''mar'oob"  (terrified)  instead  of  "  marhoob,"  which  signifies
"  terrible."

NOTE  38.  These  words,  "  Verily  God  forgiveth,"  &c.,  are  part  of  the  fifty-fourth
verse  of  the  thirty-ninth  chapter  of  the  Ktir-an.

NOTE  39.  The  next  two  stories  in  my  original  I  omit.  The  first  of  these,  which  is
"  Mesroor  and  Zeyn-el-Mawasif,"  is  a  tale  of  the  illicit  amours  of  a  Christian  and  a
Jewess,  who  dupes  her  husband  in  various  abominable  ways.  The  husband,  to  separate
her  from  her  paramour,  takes  her  with  him  on  a  journey ;  but  she  prefers  a  malicious
suit  against  him  to  four  judges,  professing  herself  a  Muslimeh,  denying  that  she  is  his
wife,  and  falsely  accusing  him  of  having  defrauded  her  of  fifteen  thousand  pieces  of
gold ;  and  all  the  four  judges,  captivated  by  her  beauty,  decide  in  her  favour.  She
receives  the  above-mentioned  sum,  and  with  other  valuables,  returns  to  her  lover,  who
embraces  El-Islam,  and  marries  her.  Her  former  husband  also  returns,  and,  by  her
direction,  one  of  her  female  slaves  informs  him  that  she  is  dead,  and  shews  him  her
pretended  tomb :  the  Jew  throws  himself  upon  the  tomb  and  faints,  and  while  he  is
insensible,  the  female  slave  puts  him  into  the  tomb  and  closes  it  over  him. — From  this
brief  statement  the  reader  will  see  that  it  is  not  a  story  fit  to  be  included  in  the
present  series.

The  other  story  is  that  of  "  Noor-ed-Deen  and  Maryani,'  which  I  omit  because  part
of  it  is  very  similar  to  the  story  of  "'Alee  Sher  and  Zumurrud,"  and  part  to  that  of
"  'Ala-ed-Deen  Abu-sh-Shamat/'  and  neither  of  these  two  tales  is  among  the  best  of  the
collection.

Then  follow  two  anecdotes,  of  the  latter  of  which  I  here  give  a  translation.  It
commences  with  part  of  the  Eight  Hundred  and  Ninety-sixth  Night,  and  ends  with
part  of  the  Eight  Hundred  and  Ninety-ninth.

Anecdote  of  a  Man  of  Baghdad  and  his  Slave-girl.

There  was  in  ancient  times,  a  man  in  Baghdad,  of  the  sons  of  the  people  of  affluence,
who  inherited  from  his  father  abundant  wealth,  and  he  was  enamoured  of  a  slave-girl ;
wherefore  ho  purchased  her.  Hie  loved  him  as  he  loved  her  ;  and  he  ceased  not  to


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-SIXTH.


D25


expend  upon  her  until  all  his  wealth  passed  away,  and  there  remained  not  of  it  aught.
He  sought  for  some  means  of  subsistence,  but  could  not  obtain  it.  And  this  young
man,  in  the  days  of  his  riches,  used  to  attend  the  assemblies  of  the  scientific  on  account
of  his  art  in  singing,  in  which  he  attained  tho  utmost  excellence ;  and  he  asked  advice
of  one  of  his  brethren,  who  said  to  him,  I  know  not  any  occupation  for  thee  better
than  thy  singing  with  thy  slave-girl  j  for  by  so  doing  thou  wilt  obtain  much  money,
and  oat  and  drink.  But  he  and  the  damsel  disliked  that ;  and  his  slave-girl  said  to
him,  I  have  devised  for  thee  a  plan.  And  what,  said  he,  is  it  ?  She  answered,  Thou
shall  sell  me,  and  we  shall  be  delivered  from  this  difficulty,  I  and  thou  .  and  I  shall  be
in  affluence,  for  none  will  buy  such  a  one  as  myself  but  a  person  of  affluence,  and  thus
1  may  be  a  means  of  my  return  to  thee.

He  therefore  took  her  forth  to  the  market,  and  the  first  person  who  saw  her  was  a
llashimee,1  of  the  people  of  El-Basrah,  who  was  a  well-bred  man,  polite,  generous  of
soul ;  and  he  bought  her  for  one  thousand  and  five  hundred  pieces  of  gold. — But,  says
the  young  man,  the  owner  of  the  slave-girl,  when  I  had  received  the  price,  I  repented
and  wept.  I  and  the  damsel,  and  I  requested  the  cancelling  of  the  sale.  The  Hashiuiee,


however,  would  not  consent.  So  I  put  the  pieces  of  gold  into  the  purse,  and  I  knew
not  whither  to  go ;  for  my  house  was  rendered  desolate  by  her  absence ;  and  I  wept
and  slapped  myself  and  wailed  as  I  had  never  done  before.  I  entered  one  of  the
mosques,  and  sat  weeping  in  it:  and  I  was  so  stupified  that  I  became  unconscious;  and
1  slept,  having  put  the  purse  beneath  my  head  as  a  pillow.  But  I  was  not  aware  of  it
when  a  man  pulled  it  from  beneath  my  head,  and  departed  with  rapid  pace.  Then  I
awoke,  alarmed  and  terrified,  and  found  not  the  purse.  1  therefore  ror,e  to  run  after
him ;  and,  lo,  my  feet  were  tied  by  a  rope :  so  I  fell  upon  my  face ;  and  I  proceeded  to
weej)  and  to  slap  myself,  saying  to  myself,  Thy  soul  hath  quitted  thee,  and  thy  wealth
is  lost !

My  affliction  was  excessive;  and  I  came  to  the  Tigris,  put  my  garment  over  my
face,  and  cast  myself  into  the  river.  But  the  persons  present,  perceiving  me,  said.
Verily. this  is  on  account  of  a  great  trouble  that  hath  befallen  him! — and  they  east
themselves  after  me,  and  took  me  forth,  and  asked  me  respecting  my  case.  1  therefore
informed  them  of  the  events  that  had  befallen  me,  and  they  grieved  thereat.  Then  a
sheykh  from  among  them  came  to  me,  and  said,  Thy  wealth  hath  gone,  and  how  would'st


1  That  is,  ;i  (losi'i'iHlant  ul'  lliisliiin,  the  I'rophrt's  greflt-gnndfbther,  from  whom  also  descended  the
Ahlnisec  Khalcclehs. The  lIushiiiiiTS  ill  general  wuro  famous  for  their  t>'<'iu.T».-tl\.


526  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-SIXTH.

thou  be  the  cause  of  the  loss  of  thy  soul,  and  become  one  of  the  people  of  the  fire  ?
Arise,  and  accompany  me,  that  I  may  see  thine  abode. — And  I  did  so ;  and  when  we
came  to  my  abode,  he  sat  with  me  a  while,  until  my  feelings  had  become  tranquil,  and
I  thanked  him  for  that.  He  then  departed ;  and  when  he  went  forth  from  me,  I  was
at  the  point  of  slaying  myself;  but  I  remembered  the  world  to  come,  and  the  fire ;  and
I  went  forth  from  my  house,  fleeing  to  one  of  my  friends,  and  informed  him  of  the
events  that  had  befallen  me ;  whereupon  he  wept  in  compassion  for  me,  and  gave  me
fifty  pieces  of  gold,  saying,  Accept  my  advice,  and  go  forth  immediately  from  Baghdad,
and  make  use  of  this  money  for  thy  maintenance  until  thy  heart  shall  be  diverted  from
the  love  of  her,  and  thou  shalt  cease  to  care  for  her.  Thou  art  of  the  sons  of  the
secretaries  and  writers,  and  thy  hand-writing  is  excellent,  and  thy  polite  attainments
are  surpassing,  seek  then  whom  thou  wilt  of  the  intendants,  and  throw  thyself  upon
his  generosity.  Perhaps  God  will  reunite  thee  with  thy  slave-girl. — And  I  attended
to  his  advice.  My  resolution  had  become  strengthened,  and  somewhat  of  my  trouble
of  mind  had  quitted  me;  and  I  determined  that  I  would  repair  to  the  province  of
Wasit  ;2  for  I  had  in  it  relations.

Accordingly  I  went  forth  to  the  bank  of  the  river,  and  I  saw  a  moored  vessel,  the
crew  of  which  were  transporting  to  it  goods  and  costly  stuns  :  so  I  asked  them  to  take
me  with  them ;  but  they  replied,  This  vessel  belongeth  to  a  Hashimee.  We  cannot
take  thee  in  this  garb. — I  however  excited  their  desire  for  recompense ;  and  thereupon
they  said,  If  it  must  be  so,  pull  off  these  costly  clothes  that  are  upon  thee,  and  put  on
the  clothes  of  the  sailors,  and  sit  with  us  as  though  thou  wert  one  of  us.  I  therefore
returned,  and  bought  some  sailors'  clothes,  and  put  them  on,  and  came  again  to  the
vessel,  which  was  going  to  El-Basrah.  I  embarked  with  the  crew ;  and  but  a  little
while  had  elapsed  when  I  saw  my  slave-girl  herself,  attended  by  two  slave-girls  to
serve  her.  So  the  rage  that  I  suffered  became  appeased,  and  I  said  within  myself,
Now  I  shall  see  her,  and  hear  her  singing,  until  we  arrive  at  El-Basrah.  And  very
soon  came  the  Hashimee,  riding,  and  with  him  a  party  of  people;  and  they  embarked
in  that  vessel.  I  proceeded  down  the  river  with  them,  and  he  caused  the  food  to  be
brought  forth,  and  ate  with  the  damsel,  while  the  rest  ate  in  the  midst  of  the  vessel.
The  Hashimee  then  said  to  the  damsel,  How  long  shall  continue  this  abstaining  from
singing,  and  this  constant  mourning  and  weeping  ?  Thou  art  not  the  first  who  hath
become  separated  from  the  object  of  love. — So  I  knew  what  she  felt  with  respect  to
her  love  of  me.  Then  he  put  a  curtain  before  the  damsel  at  the  side  of  the  vessel,
and,  having  called  those  who  were  by  me,  lie  sat  with  them,  outside  the  curtain ;  and
I  asked  respecting  them,  and,  lo,  they  were  his  brothers.  He  caused  the  servants  to
bring  out  to  them  what  they  required  of  wine  and  dried  fruits,  and  they  ceased  not  to
urge  the  damsel  to  sing  until  she  called  for  the  lute,  and  tuned  it,  and  began  to  sing;
and  she  sang  these  two  verses : —

The  company  went  away  with  my  beloved  at  night,  and  forbore  not  from  going  with  the  desire

of  my  heart ;
And  in  the  heart  of  the  enamoured,  since  their  camels  departed  a  fire  like  that  of  the  ghada:i

hath  raged.

Then  weeping  overpowered  her,  and  she  threw  down  the  lute  and  ceased  from  singing.
So  the  party  were  troubled,  and  I  fell  down  in  a  fit,  and  the  people  thought  that  I  had
become  possessed ;  *  wherefore  one  of  them  began  to  recite  some  words  in  my  ear ;  5


2  A  city  on  the  Tigris,  founded  by  El-Hajjaj  • 3  Sec  Note  2 1  to  Chapter  vi.
[According  to  Yakoot.in  his  homonymous  geogra-  4  In  the  original  "  sureatu." See  Note  107  to

pineal  Dictionary,  the  "Mushtarak,"  the  city  was  Chapter  xi
founded  in  the  year  of  the  Flight  48i,  and  \v;is  5  To  exorcise  the  Jinnee,

named  AVasit because it was situate midway
between  El-Basrah  and  El-Koofeh  — ED.]


NOTES  TO  CIIA1TKK  TWENTY-SIXTH.


527


and  they  ceased  not  to  soothe  the  damsel,  and  to  beg  her  to  sing,  until  she  tuned  the
lute  again,  and  began  to  sing;  and  she  sang  this  couplet: —

I  stood  and  bewailed  travellers  who  had  departed. They  are  in  my  heart  though  they  have  gone

far  away.
And  I  stood  by  the  ruins,  asking  respecting  them ;  and  the  house  was  desolate,  and  the  abodes

were  uninhabited.

She  then  fell  down  in  a  fit,  and  a  lamentation  arose  from  the  people.  I,  also,  cried  out.
and  fell  down  senseless ;  and  the  sailors  were  alarmed  at  me ;  and  one  of  the  pages  of
the  Hashimee  said,  How  is  it  that  ye  have  conveyed  with  you  this  madman  ?  One  of
them  therefore  said  to  the  others,  When  ye  have  arrived  at  one  of  the  villages,  turn
liim  out,  and  rid  us  of  him.

So  great  trouble  affected  me  thereat,  and  painful  torment  of  mind ;  but  I  hardened
myself  to  the  utmost,  and  said  within  myself,  I  have  no  resource  by  which  to  save
myself  from  their  hands  except  my  informing  her  of  my  situation  in  the  vessel,  that
she  may  not  allow  my  going  out.  We  then  proceeded  until  we  came  near  to  a  culti-
vated tract ;  whereupon  the  master  of  the  vessel  said,  Go  ye  up  with  us  to  the  bank.
Accordingly  the  party  landed;  and  it  was  even-tide.  I  therefore  arose  and  went
behind  the  curtain,  took  the  lute,  and  played  several  different  airs,  one  after  another,
and  I  played  an  air  that  she  had  learned  of  me :  then  I  returned  to  my  place  in  the
vessel.  And  after  that,  the  people  descended  from  the  bank,  and  returned  to  their
places  in  the  vessel ;  and  the  moon  shone  upon  the  shore  and  the  river :  so  the  Hashimee
said  to  the  damsel,  By  Allah  I  conjure  thee  that  thou  trouble  not  our  life.  She  there-
fore took  the  lute,  and  touched  it  with  her  hand,  and  uttered  a  groan,  whereat  they
imagined  that  her  soul  had  quitted  her.  Then  she  said,  By  Allah,  my  master  is  with
us  in  this  vessel !  The  Hashimee  replied,  By  Allah,  were  he  with  us,  I  would  not
debar  him  from  our  society ;  for  perhaps  he  might  alleviate  thy  sorrow,  and  we  should
enjoy  thy  singing;  but  his  being  in  the  vessel  is  a  thing  far  from  truth.  Upon  this


528  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-SIXTH.

she  said,  I  cannot  strike  the  lute  and  play  over  different  airs  when  my  master  is  \\-ith
ns.  The  Hashimce  said,  We  will  ask  the  sailors.  And  she  replied,  Do  so.  He  there-
fore asked  them,  and  said,  Have  ye  taken  any  one  with  you  as  a  passenger  ?  And  they
answered,  No : — and  I  feared  that  the  inquiry  would  stop  :  so  I  laughed,  and  said,  Yes  ;
I  was  her  master,  and  I  taught  her  when  I  was  her  lord.  And  she  said,  By  Allah,  this
is  the  speech  of  my  lord !  Therefore  the  pages  came  to  me  and  took  me  to  the  Hashimee ;
and  when  he  saw  me,  he  knew  me,  and  he  said,  Wo  to  thee !  What  is  this  condition
in  which  thou  art,  and  what  hath  befallen  thee  that  thou  hast  become  in  this  state  ? —
So  I  related  to  him  the  events  of  my  case,  and  wept,  and  the  wailing  of  the  damsel  was
loud  from  behind  the  curtain,  and  the  Hashimee  also  wept,  he  and  his  brothers,  with  a
violent  weeping,  in  pity  for  me.

He  then  said,  By  Allah,  I  have  not  drawn  near  to  this  damsel,  nor  have  I  heard
her  sing,  to  this  day  !  I  am  a  man  on  whom  God  hath  bestowed  ample  wealth,  and  I
only  came  to  Baghdad  to  hear  singing,  and  to  demand  my  pensions  of  the  Prince  ot
the  Faithful.  I  had  attained  both  objects;  and  when  I  desired  to  return  to  my  home,
I  said  within  myself,  I  will  hear  somewhat  [more]  of  the  singing  of  Baghdad.  I
therefore  purchased  this  damsel,  and  I  knew  not  that  ye  were  in  this  state.  So  I  call
God  to  witness  that,  when  I  arrive  at  El-Basrah,  I  will  emancipate  this  damsel,  and
marry  thee  to  her,  and  I  will  grant  you  allowances  sufficient  for  you,  and  more ;  but
on  the  condition  that,  when  I  desire  to  hear  her  sing,  a  curtain  shall  be  suspended  for
her,  and  she  shall  sing  behind  the  curtain ;  and  thou  shalt  be  of  the  number  of  my
brethren  and  my  boon-companions. — So  I  rejoiced  thereat.  Then  the  Hashimee  put
his  head  within  the  curtain,  and  said  to  her,  Will  that  content  thee  ?  And  she  betook
herself  to  praying  for  him  and  thanking  him.  He  then  called  for  a  page  belonging  to
him,  and  said  to  him,  Take  the  hand  of  this  young  man,  pull  off  his  clothes,  and  dress
him  in  costly  apparel,  and  perfume  him  with  incense,  and  bring  him  to  us.  Accordingly
the  page  took  me,  did  with  me  as  his  master  had  ordered  him,  and  brought  me  to  him  ;
and  he  put  before  me  wine,  like  as  he  had  put  before  them.  The  damsel  then  began
to  sing  with  the  sweetest  modulations,  singing  these  verses : —

They  reproached  me  for  having  shed  my  tears  when  the  beloved  came  to  bid  farewell.

They  have  not  experienced  the  taste  of  separation,  nor  the  fire  of  sorrow  that  burneth  my  bosom.

Only  the  afflicted  knowcth  what  is  love ;  he  whose  heart  is  lost  amid  those  dwellings.

— And  the  party  were  moved  thereby  with  exceeding  delight ;  and  the  joy  of  the  young
man  so  increased  thereat  that  he  took  the  lute  from  the  damsel,  played  with  it  the
sweetest  modulations,  and  sang  these  verses : —

If  thon  ask  a  favour,  ask  it  of  the  generous,  who  hath  known,  unceasingly,  riches  and  opulence ;
For  asking  of  the  generous  is  productive  of  honour,  and  asking  of  the  base  is  productive  of  dis-
grace.

When  abasement  is  a  thing  not  to  be  avoided,  meet  with  it  by  asking  of  the  great.
Thine  honouring  the  great  is  no  abasement  of  thyself :  it  is  only  abasement  to  honour  the  little.

And  the  people  (says  the  young  man)  rejoiced  in  me ;  their  joy  was  excessive,  and  they
ceased  not  to  be  in  a  state  of  joy  and  happiness,  I  singing  a  while,  and  the  damsel  a
while,  until  we  arrived  at  one  of  the  ports.

The  vessel  moored  there,  and  all  who  were  in  it  went  up  on  shore.  I,  also,  went
up;  and  I  was  intoxicated:  so  I  sat,  and  sleep  overcame  me,  and  I  slept ;  and  the
passengers  returned  to  the  vessel,  which  proceeded  down  the  river  with  them,  they  not
knowing  of  my  absence;  for  they  were  likewise  intoxicated;  and  I  had  given  the
money  for  my  maintenance  to  the  damsel,  and  there  remained  not  with  rue  aught.
They  arrived  at  El-Basrah ;  and  I  awoke  not  save  by  reason  of  the  heat  of  the  sun  :
and  thereupon  I  arose  and  looked ;  hut  saw  not  any  one ;  and  I  had  forgotten  to  ask
the  Hashimee  his  name,  and  where  was  his  house  at  El- Basrah,  and  how  he  was  known.
I  therefore  became  perplexed,  and  it  seemed  as  though  the  state  of  joy  in  which  I  had


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-SIXTH.  529

been  at  finding  the  damsel  had  Leon  a  dream.  I  ceased  not  to  remain  in  a  state  of
perplexity  until  a  great  vessel  passed  l»y  me,  and  I  embarked  in  it  and  entered  El-
Iiasrah.  I  knew  not  in  it  any  one,  nor  knew  I  the  house  of  the  Hashimee  ;  and  I  came
to  a  grocer,  procured  from  him  an  inkhorn  and  a  pieee  of  paper,  and  sat  writing ;  and
he  admired  my  hand-writing,  and,  seeing  my  dress  to  be  dirty,  asked  me  respecting  my
case.  So  I  informed  him  that  I  was  a  stranger,  a  poor  man  ;  whereupon  he  said,  Wilt
thou  reside  with  me,  and  receive  every  day  half  a  piece  of  silver,  and  thy  food  and  thy
•  •lothing,  and  manage  for  me  the  accounts  of  my  shop?  And  I  answered  him,  Yes  : — •
and  1  resided  with  him,  managed  his  a  flairs,  and  regulated  for  him  his  income  and  ex-
penditure ;  and  when  a  month  had  expired,  the  man  saw  his  income  to  be  increased
and  his  expenditure  diminished.  He  therefore  thanked  me  for  that,  and  assigned  me
every  day  a  piece  of  silver,  until  the  year  had  passed,  when  he  proposed  to  me  that  I
should  marry  his  daughter,  and  that  he  should  make  me  his  partner  in  the  shop.  And
I  gave  him  my  assent  thereto,  took  my  wife,  and  kept  to  the  shop.  But  I  was  broken
in  spirit  and  heart,  with  an  aspect  of  grief.  And  the  grocer  used  to  drink,  and  invite
me  to  do  so  ;  hut  I  refused  on  account  of  my  grief.

I  remained  in  that  state  for  a  period  of  two  years ;  and  while  I  was  in  the  shop,  lo,
there  was  a  company  having  with  them  food  and  drink,  and  I  asked  the  grocer  re-
spectino:  the  matter,  and  he  said,  This  is  the  day  of  the  men  of  pleasure,  when  the
people  of  mirth  and  sport,  and  the  young  men  of  affluence,  go  forth  to  the  bank  of  the
river,  to  eat  and  drink  among  the  trees  on  the  river  of  El-Ubulleh.8  And  thereupon
my  soul  invited  me  to  divert  myself  with  the  sight  of  this  thing,  and  I  said  within
myself,  Perhaps,  when  I  see  these  people,  I  shall  meet  her  whom  I  love.  So  I  said  to
the  grocer  that  I  desired  to  do  that ;  and  he  replied,  Go  forth  with  them  as  thou  de-
sirest.  He  then  prepared  for  me  some  food  and  wine,  and  I  proceeded  until  I  came  to
the  river  of  El-Ubulleh ;  but,  lo,  the  people  were  departing.  I  therefore  desired  to
depart  with  them ;  and,  behold,  there  was  the  captain  of  the  vessel  in  which  were  the
Hashimee  and  the  damsel,  he  himself;  and  he  was  proceeding  along  the  river  of  El-
Ubulleh.  So  I  cried  out  to  him  and  his  party ;  and  he  and  those  who  were  with  him
knew  me,  and  they  took  me  in  among  then*,  and  said  to  me,  Art  thou  living  ?  And
they  embraced  me,  and  asked  me  respecting  my  story;  -wherefore  I  acquainted  them
with  it ;  and  they  said  to  me,  We  imagined  that  intoxication  had  overpowered  thee,
and  that  thou  wast  drowned.  I  then  asked  them  respecting  the  state  of  the  damsel,
and  they  replied,  When  she  knew  of  thy  being  lost,  she  rent  her  clothes,  and  burned
the  lute,  and  betook  herself  to  slapping  and  wailiug;  and  when  we  returned  with  the
Hashimee  to  El-Basrah,  we  said  to  her,  Abstain  from  this  weeping  and  mourning.
But  she  replied,  I  will  put  mi  black  apparel,  and  make  me  a  tomb  in  the  side  of  this
house,  and  I  will  remain  by  that  tomb,  and  repent  of  singing.7  And  we  allowed  her
to  do  so,  and  she  hath  remained  in  that  state  until  now.

Then  they  took  me  with  them ;  and  on  my  arriving  at  the  house,  I  saw  her  in  that
state ;  and  when  she  saw  me,  she  uttered  a  great  groan,  so  that  I  imagined  she  had
died;  and  I  embraced  her  with  a  long  embrace.  The  Hashimee  then  said  to  me.  Take
her.  I  replied,  Yes;  but  emancipate  her  as  thou  promisedst  me, and  marry  me  to  her.
And  he  did  so,  and  gave  us  costly  goods,  and  abundance  of  apparel,  and  furniture,  and
five  hundred  pieces  of  gold,  saying.  This  is  the  amount  of  what  I  desire  to  allow  yon
two  every  mouth;  hut  on  the  condition  of  thy  being  my  boon-companion,  and  of  my


c  In  the  word  "Ubulleh,"  in  my  original,  y  is  pleasure-houses,  and  orchards  adjacent  one  to  an-

orroueously  put  for  b. — Among  the  innuwerable  other,  seeming  to  form  one  great  garden,  and  all

canals  of  Kl-I!asrah,  Kl-Idreesee  especially  dWin-  confined  within  one  wall. — See  Jaubcrt's  transla-

guishes  that  called "the  river  of  Kl-Ubullch  ;"  lion,  vol.  i.  ]>p.  3G8,  3C9.

stating its lenirth  to  !>e  twelve  miles,  and  this  "  Kor  music  was  condemned  by  the  Prophet. —

aJso  to  be  the  distance  between  Kl-Jfcisrah  and  the  See  vol.  i.  p.  200.
town  of  I'.M'IniU.'li. On  its  b;niks  were  numerous

III.  3 Y


530


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-SIXTH.


hearing  the  damsel  sing.  After  that,  lie  appropriated  to  us  exclusively  a  house,  and
gave  orders  to  convey  to  it  all  that  we  required;  and  when  I  went  to  that  hou^r,  1
found  it  covered  with  furniture  and  stuff's,  and  I  conveyed  to  it  the  damsel.  Then  I
came  to  the  grocer,  informed  him  of  all  that  had  happened  to  me,  and  begged  that  he
would  absolve  me  of  guilt  in  divorcing  his  daughter  without  her  having  committed  any
fault.  I  gave  her  her  dowry,  and  what  was  incumbent  on  me  ;8  and  I  have  remained
with  the  Hashimee  in  this  state  two  years,  and  become  a  person  of  great  affluence.
The  state  in  which  I  was  with  the  damsel  in  Baghdad  was  restored  to  me,  and  Clod,
the  Bountiful,  hath  dispelled  our  trouble,  loaded  us  with  abundant  benefits,  and  made
the  result  of  our  patience  to  he  the  attainment  of  our  desire.  To  Him  then  be  praise,
first  and  last ! — And  God  is  all-knowing.


Next  follows  the  Story  of  "  the  King  Jelee'ad  and  his  Son  and  the  Wezeer  Shemmas,"
which  ends  with  part  of  the  Nine  Hundred  and  Thirtieth  Night.  This  is  one  of  the
two  stories  which  El-Mes'oodee  mentions  as  being  similar  to  the  Hezar  Afsaneh.  Von
Hammer,  speaking  of  the  tales  which  he  regards  as  being  of  Indian  origin,  and  among
which  he  includes  this  story,  says,  "  Sous  le  rapport  de  leur  antiquite  et  do  la  morale
qu'elles  renferment,  elles  me'ritent  la  plus  grande  attention,  mais  d'un  autre  cote  elles
ne  sont  rien  moins  qu'amusantes ;"  9  and  as  I  fully  agree  with  him  that  the  story  of
Jelee'ad  is  far  from  being  amusing,  I  omit  it.  Much  of  it  appears  to  me  extremely
puerile ;  and  upon  the  whole  I  think  it  very  inferior  in  interest  to  most  of  the  tales  in
the  present  work.

8  That  is,  money  for  her  maintenance  until  the  expiration  of  the  period  during  which  she  could  not
contract  a  new  marriage.— See  the  fourth  paragraph  of  Note  39  to  Chapter  iv.

9  Preface,  in  Tre'butien's  version,  p.  xiv.


CHAPTER XXVII.


COMMENTING  WITH  PART  OK  THE  NINE  HUNDRED  AND  THIRTIETH

NIGHT,  AND  ENDING  WITH  PART  OF  THE  NINE

HUNDRED  AND  FORTIETH.


THE  STORY  OF  ABOO-SEER  AND  ABOO-KEER.

THERE  were,  in  the  city  of  Alexandria,  two  men,  one  of  whom  was
a  dyer,  and  his  name  was  Aboo-Keer ;;  and  the  other  was  a  barber,
and  his  name  was.  Aboo-Seer  : l  and  they  were  neighbours,  each  to  the
other,  in  the  market ;  the  shop  of  the  barber  being  by  the  side  of  the
shop  of  the  dyer.  The  dyer  was  a  swindler,  a  liar,  a  person  of
exceeding  wickedness :  he  was  as  though  the  temple  of  his  head
were  cut  out  of  rock,  or  made  from  the  threshold  of  the  synagogue
of  the.  Jews :  he  was  not  ashamed  of  any  disgraceful  action  that  he
committed  among  the  people.  It  was  his  custom,  when  any  one  gave
him  a  piece  of  stuff  to  dye,  to  demand  of  him  the  pay  first,  and  to
make  him  believe  that  he  would  buy  with  it  materials  wherewith  to
dye.  So  the  man  would  give  him  the  pay  in  advance  ;  and  when  he
had  received  it  of  him,  he  would  expend  it  for  food  and  drink.  Then


532  THE  STORY  OF  ABOO-SEEK  AND  ABOO-KEER.

he  would  sell  the  stuff  that  he  had  received,  after  its  owner  had  gone,
and  expend  its  price  for  food  and  drink  and  other  things.  He  ate
nothing  but  what  was  good,  of  the  most  excellent  of  food;  nor  did  he
drink  save  of  the  best  of  the  drinks  that  dispelled  the  reason.  And
when  the  owner  of  the  stuff  came  to  him,  he  would  say  to  him,  To-
morrow come  to  me  before  sunrise,  and  thou  wilt  find  thy  stuff  dyed.
Therefore  the  owner  would  go,  and  say  within  himself,  One  day  soon
followetk  another.  Then  he  would  come  to  him  the  next  day,  at  the
time  appointed ;  and  the  dyer  would  say  to  him,  Come  to-morrow  ;
for  yesterday  I  was  not  at  leisure,  having  with  me  guests ;  so  I  was
occupied  in  doing  what  was  expedient  for  them  until  they  went.  To-
morrow, before  sunrise,  come  and  receive  thy  stuff  dyed. — And  he  would
go,  and  come  to  him  again  on  the  third  day ;  when  the  dyer  would
say  to  him,  Verily  I  was  yesterday  excusable ;  for  my  wife  gave  birth
to  a  child  in  the  night,  and  all  the  day  I  was  engaged  in  transacting
affairs  ;  but  to-morrow,  without  fail,  come  and  receive  thy  stuff  dyed.
The  man  would  therefore  come  to  him  again  at  the  time  appointed,
and  the  dyer  would  practise  with  him  some  other  stratagem,  of  any
kind,  and  swear  to  him.  And  he  would  not  cease  to  promise  him  and
to  swear  when  he  came  to  him,  until  the  customer  would  become  im-
patient, and  say  to  him,  How  often  wilt  thou  say  to  me,  To-morrow  ?
Give  me  my  stuff;  for  I  do  not  desire  it  to  be  dyed. — And  thereupon
the  dyer  would  say,  By  Allah,  0  my  brother,  I  am  abashed  at  thce  :
but  I  will  tell  thee  the  truth  ;  and  may  God  harm  every  one  who
harmeth  men-  with  respect  to  their  goods !  So  the  man  would  say  to
him,  Tell  me  what  hath  happened.  And  he  would  reply,  As  to  thy
stdff,  I  dyed  it  in  a  manner  unequalled,  and  spread  it  upon  the  rope,
and  it  was  stolen,  and  I  know  not  who  stole  it.  Therefore  if  the
owner  of  the  stuff  were  of  the  people  of  kindness,  he  would  say  to  him,
God  will  compensate  me.  And  if  he  were  of  the  people  of  malevolence,
he  would  persevere  in  disgracing  and  insulting  him  ;  but  nothing
would  he  get  from  him,  even  if  he  complained  of  him  to  the  magis-
trate.

He  ceased  not  to  do  these  deeds  until  he  became  notorious  among
the  people,  and  they  used  to  caution  one  another  against  him,  and  to
make  him  a  subject  of  proverbs.  They  all  abstained  from  employing
him ;  and  none  used  to  fall  into  his  snare  save  he  who  was  ignorant  of
his  conduct ;  but  notwithstanding  this,  he  was  sure  to  experience,  every
day,  insult  and  disgrace  from  the  creatures  of  God.  So  his  trade
became  dull  in  consequence  thereof,  and  he  used  to  come  to  the  shop


THE  STORY  OF  ABOO-SEER  AND  ABOO-KEER


533


of  his  neighbour  the  barber  Aboo-Seer,  and  to  sit  in  it,  facing  the
dyeing-shop,  and  looking  at  its  door ;  and  if  he  saw  any  one  ignorant
of  his  conduct  standing  at  the  door  of  the  dyeing-shop,  and  having
with  him  something  which  he  desired  to  be  dyed,  he  would  rise  from
the  shop  of  the  barber,  and  say,  What  dost  thou  want,  0  man  ?  He
would  answer  him,  Take  and  dye  for  me  this  thing.  And  he  would
say,  What  colour  dost  thou  desire?  For,  with  all  these  bad  qualities,
he  was  able  to  dye  all  colours  ;  but  he  never  acted  honestly  with  any
one,  and  poverty  overcame  him.  Then  he  would  take  the  thing  of  the
man,  and  say  to  him,  Give  me  the  pay  in  advance,  and  to-morrow
come  and  take  the  thing.  And  the  man  would  give  him  the  pay,
and  depart ;  and  after  the  owner  of  the  thing  had  gone  his  way,  he
would  take  that  thing,  and  repair  to  the  market,  and  sell  it,  and  buy,
with  its  price,  meat  and  vegetables  and  tobacco  2  and  fruit,  and  what
else  he  required.  And  when  he  saw  standing  at  the  shop  any  one  of
those  who  had  given  him  things  to  dye,  he  would  not  appear  to  him,
nor  shew  himself  to  him.  Thus  he  continued  to  do  for  years  ;  but  it
happened  to  him,  one  day,  that  he  received  a  thing  of  a  violent  man,
and  sold  it,  and  expended  its  price  ;  and  its  owner  came  to  him  every
day ;  but  saw  him  not  in  the  shop ;  for  whenever  the  dyer  saw  any


534  THE  STORY  OF  ABOO-SEER  AND  ABOO-KEER.

one  who  had  aught  to  demand  of  him,  he  used  to  flee  from  him  into
the  shop  of  the  barber  Aboo-Seer.  And  when  that  violent  man  had
not  found  him  in  his  shop,  and  this  conduct  of  his  wearied  him,  he
repaired  to  the  Kadee,  and,  having  brought  one  of  his  sergeants  to
his  shop,  nailed  up  its  door  in  the  presence  of  a  company  of  the
Muslims,  and  sealed  it;  for  he  saw  not  in  it  aught  except  some
earthen  basins  broken  in  pieces,  and  found  not  in  it  any  thing  to  com-
pensate him  for  his  stuff.  Then  the  sergeant  took  the  key,  and  said
to  the  neighbours,  Tell  him  to  bring  the  property  of  this  man,  and
come  to  receive  the  key  of  his  shop.  And  the  man  and  the  sergeant
went  their  ways.

Aboo-Seer,  upon  this,  said  to  Aboo-Keer,  What  is  thy  misfortune  ?
For  every  one  who  bringeth  to  thee  a  thing  thou  makest  to  lose  it.
Whither  is  gone  the  property  of  this  violent  man  ? — 0  my  neighbour,
he  answered,  verily  it  was  stolen  from  me. — Wonderful !  replied  Aboo-
Seer.  Whenever  any  one  giveth  thee  a  thing,  doth  a  thief  steal  it
from  thee  ?  Art  thou  at  enmity  with  all  the  thieves  ?  But  I  imagine
that  thou  liest.  Acquaint  me  then  with  thy  case. — And  he  said,  0  my
neighbour,  no  one  has  stolen  from  me  aught. — Then  what  dost  thou,
asked  Aboo-Seer,  with  the  men's  goods?  He  answered  him,  When-
ever any  one  giveth  me  aught,  I  sell  it,  and  expend  its  price.  Aboo-
Seer  said  to  him,  Is  this  allowed  thee  by  God  ?  Aboo-Keer  replied,
I  do  this  only  in  consequence  of  poverty  ;  for  my  trade  is  unprofitable,
and  I  am  a  poor  man,  having  nothing  in  my  possession.  And  he
proceeded  to  talk  to  him  of  the  unprofitableness  of  his  trade,  and  the
littleness  of  his  business ;  and  Aboo-Seer  spoke  to  him  of  the  un-
profitableness of  his  trade  also,  and  said,  I  am  a  craftsmaster ;  I  have
no  equal  in  this  city ;  but  no  one  is  shaved  at  my  shop  because  I  am
a  poor  man,  and  I  have  conceived  a  hatred  for  this  art,  O  my  brother.
So  Aboo-Keer  the  dyer  said  to  him,  And  I  also  have  conceived  a
hatred  for  my  art  on  account  of  its  unprofitableness.  But,  0  my
brother,  what  is  the  inducement  for  our  residing  in  this  town  ?  Let
me  and  thee  journey  from  it,  and  divert  ourselves  in  other  countries,
and  our  arts,  which  we  shall  carry  with  us,  will  be  in  demand  in  all
countries ;  and  when  we  travel,  we  shall  enjoy  the  fresh  air,  and  be
relieved  from  this  excessive  anxiety. — And  Aboo-Keer  ceased  not  to
commend  travel  to  Aboo-Seer  until  the  latter  became  desirous  of
emigration.  So  they  both  agreed  to  travel,  and  Aboo-Keer  rejoiced
that  Aboo-Seer  was  desirous  of  doing  so;  and  he  recited  these


THE  STORY  OF  ABOO-SEER  AND  ABOO-KEER.  535

Transport  thyself  from  home  in  search  of  eminence,  and  travel ;  for  in  travels  are

five  advantages ;
The  dispelling  of  anxiety,  and  the  gaining  of  subsistence,  and  knowledge,  and

good  manners,  and  the  society  of  the  noble.
If  it  be  said  that  in  travels  are  grief  and  affliction,  and  the  disunion  of  friends,

and  the  incurring  of  difficulties,
The  death  of  a  man  is  better  than  his  living  in  the  abode  of  contempt  between  the

slanderer  and  the  envier.

And  when  they  determined  to  travel,  Aboo-Keer  said  to  Aboo-Seer,

0  my  neighbour,  we  have  become  brothers,  and  there  is  no  difference
between  us :  so  it  is  requisite  that  we  recite  the  Fatehah3  in  confirma-
tion of  our  agreement  that  he  of  us  who  is  occupied  shall  make  gain
and  feed  him  of  us  who  is  unoccupied,  and  whatever  remaineth  we
will  put  into  a  chest;  and  when  we  return to  Alexandria,  we  will
divide  it between us  truly  and  equally. Aboo-Seer  replied,  And  it
shall  be  so. And  they  recited  the  Fatehah  in  confirmation  of  their
agreement  that  the  occupied  should  make  gain  and  feed  the  unoccu-
pied.

Aboo-Seer  locked  his  shop,  and  gave  the  keys  to  its  owner;  and
Aboo-Keer  left  the  key  of  his  shop  with  the  sergeant  of  the  Kadee,
and  left  the  shop  closed  and  sealed.  Then  they  took  their  things,
and  iu  the  morning  they  set  forth,  embarking  in  a  galleon  upon  the
sea.  They  departed  that  day,  and  aid  attended  them ;  and  by  the
complete  good  fortune  of  the  barber,  it  happened  that  among  all  who
were  in  the  galleon  there  was  not  a  single  barber ;  and  there  were  in
it  a  hundred  and  twenty  men,  beside  the  captain  and  the  sailors.
And  when  they  loosed  the  sails  of  the  galleon,  the  barber  arose  and
said  to  the  dyer,  O  my  brother,  this  is  a  sea  :  we  stand  in  need  here
of  food  and  drink,  and  we  have  not  with  us  more  than  a  little  stock
of  provisions ;  but  probably  some  oue  will  say  to  me,  Come  hither,  O
barber:  shave  me  : — and  I  will  shave  him  for  a  cake  of  bread,  or  for
a  nusf  faddah,4  or  for  a  drink  of  water :  so  I  shall  profit  thereby ;  I
and  thou.  And  the  dyer  replied,  No  harm.  Then  he  laid  down  his
head;  and  slept,  while  the  barber  arose  and  took  his  apparatus,  together
with  the  cup,5  and,  having  put  upon  his  shoulder  a  piece  of  rag  to
serve  instead  of  the  towel  (for  he  was  a  poor  man),  passed  amid  the
passengers  ;  and  one  said  to  him,  Come  hither,  O  craftsmaster  •  shave
me.  So  he  shaved  him  ;  and  when  he  had  shaved  that  man,  he  gave
him  a  nusf  faddah  ;  whereupon  the  barber  said  to  him,  O  my  brother,

1  have  no  need  of  this  nusf  faddah ;  and  hadst  thou  given  me  a  cake
of  bread,  it  had  been  a  more  blessed  gift  to  me  on  this  sea  ;  for  I  have


a  companion,  and  our  provisions  are  but  little.  And  be  gave  him  a
cake  of  bread  and  a  piece  of  cheese,  and  filled  for  him  the  cup  with
fresh  water.  He  therefore  took  those  things,  and  came  to  Aboo-Keer,
and  said  to  him,  Take  this  cake  of  bread,  and  eat  it  with  the  cheese,
and  drink  what  is  in  the  cup.  And  he  took  them  of  him,  and  ate  and
drank.  Then  Aboo-Seer  the  barber,  after  that,  took  his  apparatus,
with  the  rag  upon  his  shoulder  and  the  cup  in  his  hand,  and  went
about  the  galleon,  among  the  passengers ;  and  he  shaved  one  man  for
two  cakes  of  bread,  and  another  for  a  piece  of  cheese.  Demands  were
made  for  his  services ;  and  whenever  any  one  said  to  him,  Shave  me,
0  craftsmaster, — he  bargained  with  him  for  two  cakes  of  bread  and  a
nusf  faddah  ;  and  there  being  in  the  galleon  no  barber  beside  him,
sunset  came  not  before  he  had  collected  thirty  cakes  of  bread  and
fifteen  c  nusf  faddahs ;  beside  which  he  got  cheese  and  olives  and
batarikh.7  Whenever  he  demanded  any  thing,  they  gave  it  him,  so
that  he  became  in  possession  of  an  abundance  of  things.  He  also
shaved  the  captain,  and  complained  to  him  of  the  smallncss  of  his


THE  STORY  OF  ABOO'SEER  AND  ABOO-KEER.  537

stock  ot  provisions  for  the  voyage;  and  the  captain  said  to  him,
Welcome  to  thee!  Bring  thy  companion  every  night,  and  sup  ye
with  me,  and  suffer  not  anxiety  as  long  as  ye  voyage  with  us.

He  then  returned  to  the  dyer,  and  saw  that  he  had  not  ceased  to
sleep :  so  he  woke  him ;  and  when  Aboo-Keer  awoke,  he  saw  at  his
head  an  abundance  of  bread  and  cheese  and  olives  and  batarikh  ;  and
he  said  to  Aboo-Seer,  Whence  gottest  thou  this  ?  Aboo-Seer  answered,
From  the  bounty  of  God,  whose  name  be  exalted !  And  Aboo-Keer
desired  to  eat ;  but  Aboo-Seer  said  to  him,  Eat  not,  O  my  brother,  of
this.  Leave  it  to  be  of  use  to  us  at  another  time.  For  know  that  I
have  shaved  the  captain,  and  I  complained  to  him  of  the  littleness  of
our  stock  of  provisions ;  whereupon  he  said  to  me,  Welcome  to  thee!
Bring  thy  companion  every  night,  and  sup  ye  with  me.  And  the  first
time  of  our  supping  with  the  captain  is  to  be  this  night. — Aboo-Keer
however  replied,  I  am  sea-sick,  and  cannot  rise  from  my  place :  there-
fore let  me  make  my  supper  of  these  things,  and  go  thou  alone  to  the
captain.  So  Aboo-Seer  said  to  him,  There  will  be  no  harm  in  that.
And  he  sat  diverting  himself  with  looking  at  him  while  he  ate,  and
saw  him  cut  off  the  mouthful  as  the  quarryrnan  cutteth  stone  from
the  mountain,  and  swallow  it  as  the  elephant  that  for  days  hath  not
eaten,  bolting  one  mouthful  before  he  had  quite  swallowed  the  pre-
ceding one,  and  staring  at  what  was  before  him  with  the  stare  of  the
ghool,  and  blowing  as  bloweth  the  hungry  bull  over  the  straw  and
the  beans.  And,  lo,  a  sailor  came  and  said,  0  craftsmaster,  the
captain  saith  to  thee,  Bring  thy  companion,  and  come  to  supper.  So
Aboo-Seer  said  to  Aboo-Keer,  Wilt  thou  arise  and  go  with  us  ?  But
he  answered  him,  I  am  not  able  to  walk.  The  barber  therefore  went
alone,  and  he  saw  the  captain  sitting  with  a  table  before  him  compris-
ing twenty  different  kinds  of  food,  or  more ;  and  he  and  his  party
were  waiting  for  the  barber  and  his  companion  :  so  when  the  captain
saw  him,  he  said  to  him,  Where  is  thy  companion  ?  He  answered
him,  0  my  master,  he  is  sea-sick.  And  the  captain  replied,  No  harm
will  befall  him.  His  sickness  will  leave  him.  Come  thou;  sup  with
us ;  for  I  was  waiting  for  thee. — Then  the  captain  set  apart  a  dish  of
kebab,  and  put  into  it  some  of  every  kind  of  food,  and  it  became
enough  for  ten ;  and  after  the  barber  had  supped,  the  captain  said  to
him,  Take  this  dish  with  thee  to  thy  companion.  Accordingly  Aboo-
Seer  took  it,  and  went  with  it  to  Aboo-Keer,  whom  he  saw  grinding
his  food  with  his  dog-teeth  like  the  camel,  and  adding  mouthful  to
mouthful  in  haste.  So  Aboo-Seer  said  to  him,  Did  I  not  say  to  thee,
iii.  3  z


538


THE  STORY  OF  ABOO-§EER  AND  ABOO-KEEH.


Eat  not ;  for  the  captain  hath  abundance  of  good  things  ?  See  then
what  he  hath  sent  thee,  when  I  informed  him  that  thou  wast  sick. —
Aboo-Keer  replied,  Give  it  me.  And  Aboo-Seer  handed  to  him  the
dish  ;  and  he  took  it  from  him,  greedy  for  it  and  for  other  food,  like
the  grinning  dog,  or  the  bone-breaking  lion,  or  the  rukh'  when  it
pounceth  upon  the  pigeon,  or  like  him  who  hath  almost  died  of
hunger;  and  Aboo-Keer,  seeing  some  viands,  proceeded  to  eat.
Aboo-Seer  then  left  him,  and  went  back  to  the  captain,  and  drank
coffee8  with  him  ;  after  which  he  returned  to  Aboo-Keer,  and  he  saw
that  he  had  eaten  all  that  was  in  the  dish,  and  thrown  it  aside  empty.
So  he  took  it  and  conveyed  it  to  one  of  the  servants  of  the  captain,
and  went  back  to  Aboo-Keer,  and  slept  until  the  morning.  And  on
the  following  day,  Aboo-Seer  proceeded  again  to  shave  ;  and  when-
ever any  thing  came  to  him,  he  gave  it  to  Aboo-Keer,  who  ate  and
drank  sitting  still,  not  rising  save  when  he  was  obliged  to  do  so;  and
every  night,  Aboo-Seer  brought  him  a  full  dish  from  the  captain.

They  continued  in  this  state  twenty  days,  until  the  galleon  moored
in  the  harbour  of  a  city;  whereupon they both landed  from the


THE  STORY  OF  ABOO-SEER  AND  ABOO-KEER.  539

galleon,  and  entered  the  city,  and  took  for  them  a  chamber  in  a
Khan.  Aboo-Seer  furnished  it/  and  bought  all  that  they  required,
and  brought  some  meat  and  cooked  it,  while  Aboo-Keer  slept  from
the  time  that  he  entered  the  chamber.  He  awoke  not  until  Aboo-
Seer  roused  him,  and  put  the  table  before  him  ;  and  when  he  awoke,
he  ate ;  and  after  that,  he  said  to  Aboo-Seer,  Blame  me  not ;  for  I  am
giddy.  Then  he  slept  again.  And  they  remained  in  this  state  forty
days.  Every  day  the  barber  took  his  apparatus,  and  went  about  the
city,  practised  his  art  for  such  remuneration  as  destiny  allotted  him,
and,  returning,  found  Aboo-Keer  sleeping.  So  he  would  wake  him ;
and  when  he  awoke,  he  would  betake  himself  to  eating  with  voracity,
eating  as  he  who  is  not  satiated  nor  contented;  after  which  he  would
sleep  again.  He  ceased  not  to  do  thus  for  forty  days  more;  and
every  time  that  Aboo-Seer  said  to  him,  Sit  and  rest  thyself,  and  go
forth  and  take  an  airing  in  the  city,  for  it  is  a  diverting  and  gay
place,  and  there  is  no  equal  to  it  among  the  cities, — Aboo-Keer  the
dyer  would  reply,  Blame  me  not ;  for  I  am  giddy.  And  Aboo-Seer  the
barber  did  not  like  to  trouble  his  heart,  nor  to  make  him  hear  a  word
that  would  vex  him.  But  on  the  forty -first  day,  the  barber  fell  sick,
and  \vas  unable  to  go  abroad ;  and  he  engaged  the  door-keeper  of  the
Khan  to  serve  him  gratuitously.  He  performed  for  them  their  affairs,
bringing  them  their  food  and  drink  ;  and  all  the  while  Aboo-Keer  ate
and  slept.  The  barber  ceased  not  to  employ  the  door-keep,er  of  the
Khiin  to  perform  gratuitously  his  affairs  for  the  space  of  four  days ;
and  after  that,  the  disease  of  Aboo-Seer  became  so  violent  that  he
was  unconscious  by  reason  of  its  severity.

But  as  to  Aboo-Keer,  hunger  tortured  him.  So  he  arose  and
searched  the  clothes  of  Aboo-Seer,  and  saw  in  his  possession  a  sum
of  money ;  and  he  took  it,  and  closed  the  door  of  the  chamber  upon
Aboo-Seer,  and  departed,  without  informing  any  one;  and  the  door-
keeper was  in  the  market ;  wherefore  he  saw  him  not  when  he  went
forth.  Aboo-Keer  then  betook  himself  to  the  market,  and  clad  him-
self in  costly  clothes,  and  proceeded  to  go  about  the  city,  and  to
divert  himself.  He  saw  it  to  be  a  city  of  which  he  had  not  found
the  like  among  cities ;  but  all  the  apparel  of  its  inhabitants  was  white
and  blue,  without  any  other  colour.  And  he  came  to  a  dyer,  and
sa\v  all  that  was  in  his  shop  to  be  blue;  and,  producing  to  him  a
handkerchief,  he  said  to  him,  0  master,  take  this  handkerchief,  and
dye  it,  and  receive  thy  pay.  The  dyer  replied,  The  pay  for  dyeing
this  will  be  twenty  pieces  of  silver.  So  Aboo-Keer  said  to  him,  ~\Ye


540  THE  STORY  OF  ABOO-SEEIl  AND  ABOO-KEER.

should  dye  this  in  our  country  for  two  pieces  of  silver.  The  man
rejoined,  Go,  dye  it  in  your  country ;  but  as  to  me,  I  will  not  dye  it
save  for  twenty  pieces  of  silver :  the  pay  will  not  fall  short  of  this
sum  in  the  least.  Upon  this,  Aboo-Keer  said  to  him,  What  colour
dost  thou  desire  to  dye  it  ?  The  dyer  answered  him,  I  will  dye  it
blue.  Aboo-Keer  said  to  him,  I  desire  that  thou  shouldst  dye  it  for
me  red.  The  man  however  replied,  I  know  not  how  to  dye  red.
Aboo-Keer  said,  Green.  The  dyer  replied,  I  know  not  how  to  dye
green.  Aboo-Keer  said,  Yellow.  The  dyer  replied,  I  know  not  how
to  dye  yellow.  And  Aboo-Keer  proceeded  to  enumerate  to  him  the
colours,  one  after  another ;  but  the  dyer  replied,  We,  in  our  country,
are  forty  masters,  not  one  more  nor  one  less ;  and  when  one  of  us
dieth,  we  teach  his  son  ;  and  if  he  leave  not  a  son,  we  are  deficient  by
one.  When  one  leaveth  two  sons,  we  teach  one  of  them ;  and  if  he
die,  we  teach  his  brother.  This  our  trade  is  strictly  regulated ;  and  we
know  not  how  to  dye  any  colour  except  blue  alone. — So  Aboo-Keer
the  dyer  said  to  him,  Know  that  I  am  a  dyer,  and  I  know  how  to  dye
all  colours.  I  desire  that  thou  wouldst  take  me  into  thy  service  for
pay,  and  I  will  teach  thee  the  art  of  dyeing  all  colours,  that  thou
mayest  glory  therein  over  all  the  company  of  dyers. — But  he  replied?
We  allow  not  a  stranger  to  enter  our  trade  ever.  Aboo-Keer  said  to
him,  And  if  I  open  for  myself  alone  a  dyeing-shop  ?  The  man
answered  him,  Thou  canst  not  do  that  ever.  And  thereupon  Aboo-
Keer  left  him,  and  went  to  the  second,  and  he  said  to  him  as  to  the  first
had  said ;  and  he  ceased  not  to  go  from  dyer  to  dyer  until  he  had  gone
round  to  the  forty  masters ;  but  they  would  not  admit  him  either  as  a
hired  servant  or  as  a  master.  He  went  also  to  the  Sheykh  of  the
dyers,  and  informed  him  ;  but  he  replied,  We  do  not  allow  a  stranger
to  enter  our  trade.

So  upon  this,  exceeding  rage  affected  Aboo-Keer,  and  he  went  up
to  complain  to  the  King  of  that  city,  and  said  to  him,  0  King  of  the
age,  I  am  a  stranger,  an,d  my  trade  is  that  of  dyeing,  and  there  have
happened  to  me,  with  the  dyers,  such  and  such  events.  I  dye  red  of
various  hues,  as  rose-colour  and  jujube-colour;  and  green  of  various
hues,  as  plant-green,  and  pistachio-green,  and  oil-green,  and  parrot's-
wing ;  and  black  of  various  hues,  as  coal-black  and  kohl-black  ;  and
yellow  of  various  hues,  as  orange-colour  and  lemon-colour  ; — and  he
proceeded  to  mention  to  him  all  the  colours.  Then  he  said,  0  King
of  the  age,  all  the  dyers  who  are  in  thy  city  are  unable  to  dye  any
of  these  colours,  and  they  know  not  how  to  dye  any  colour  but  blue  ;


THE  STORY  OF  ABOO-SEEIl  AND  ABOO-KEER.  541

yet  they  will  not  admit  me  among  them  as  a  master,  nor  as  a  hired
workman.  And  the  King  replied,  Thou  hast  spoken  truth  as  to
that  matter ;  but  I  will  open  for  thee  a  dyeing  shop,  and  give  thee
a  capital,  and  care  not  thou  for  them ;  for  whosoever  opposeth  thee,  I
will  hang  him  over  the  door  of  his  shop.  He  then  commanded  the
builders,  and  said  to  them,  Repair  ye  with  this  master;  go  about  the
city  with  him,  and  whatsoever  place  pleaseth  him,  turn  out  its  owner,
whether  it  be  occupied  by  a  shop  or  a  Khan  or  other  building,  and
build  for  him  a  dyeing-shop  agreeable  with  his  desire.  Whatever  he
commandeth  to  do,  do  it  and  oppose  him  not  with  respect  to  that
which  he  shall  say. — Then  the  King  clad  him  in  a  handsome  suit  of
apparel,  gave  him  a  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  and  said  to  him,  Expend
them  upon  thyself  until  the  building  shall  be  completed.  He  also
gave  him  two  memlooks  to  serve  him,  and  a
horse  with  embroidered  saddle  and  trappings  ;
and  Aboo-Keer  put  on  the  dress,  and  mounted
the  horse,  and  became  as  though  he  were  an
Emeer.  The  King,  moreover,  appropriated  to
him  exclusively  a  house,  and  gave  orders  to  fur-
nish it :  so  they  furnished  it  for  him,  and  he  took
up  his  abode  in  it.

Then,  on  the  following  day,  he  mounted,  and
went  about  through  the  city,  with  the  architects
before  him,  and  he  ceased  not  to  survey  until  a
place  pleased  him  ;  whereupon  he  said,  This  place
is  good. They  therefore  ejected  its  owner  from  it,
and  brought  him  to  the  King,  who gave  him,  as
the  price  of  his  place,  more  than  would  have  con-
tented him,  and  the  building  proceeded  there,  Aboo-
Keer saying to the builders,
Build  thus  and thus, and do
thus  and thus, — until  they  had
built  for  him a  dyeing-shop  of
which  the  equal  existed  not. He
then presented himself to the
King, and informed  him that
the  building  of  the dyeing-shop
was  completed,  and  that  only  the
price  of  the  materials  for  dyeing
was  requisite in  order  to  com-


542  THE  STORY  OF  ABOO-SEER  AND  ABOO-KEER.

mence  work;  upon  which  the  King  said  to  him,  Take  these  four  thou-
sand pieces  of  gold,  and  make  them  thy  capital,  and  shew  me  the  pro-
ducts of  thy  dyeing-shop.  So  he  took  them,  and  repaired  to  the  market,
and  he  saw  the  indigo  to  be  abundant,  and  [comparatively]  of  no  price.
He  bought  all  the  materials  for  dyeing  that  he  required;  after  which,
the  King  sent  to  him  five  hundred  pieces  of  stuff,  and  he  proceeded  to
dye  them,  and,  having  dyed  them  of  all  colours,  spread  them  [on
ropes]  before  the  door  of  the  dyeing-shop.  Therefore,  when  the  people
passed  by  the  shop,  they  saw  a  wonderful  sight,  the  like  of  which  they
had  not  seen  in  their  lives;  and  crowds  collected  at  the  door  of  the
dyeing-shop,  diverting  themselves,  and  asking  him  and  saying  to  him,
0  master,  what  are  the  names  of  these  colours  ?  So  he  answered  them,
This  is  red,  and  this  is  yellow,  and  this  is  green, — mentioning  to  them
the  names  of  all  the  colours ;  and  they  proceeded  to  bring  to  him  pieces
of  stuff,  and  to  say  to  him,  Dye  for  us  like  this  and  this,  and  receive
what  thou  shalt  demand.  And  when  he  had  finished  the  dyeing  of  the
stuffs  of  the  King,  he  took  them  and  went  up  with  them  to  the  court ;
and  on  the  King's  seeing  those  dyed  stuffs,  he  was  delighted  with
them,  and  conferred  upon  him  exceeding  favours.  All  the  troops  also
brought  to  him  stuffs,  saying  to  him,  Dye  for  us  thus.  And  he  dyed
for  them  according  to  their  desires,  and  they  threw  to  him  gold  and
silver.  Then  his  fame  spread  abroad,  and  his  dyeing-shop  was  named
the  dyeing-shop  of  the  Sultan.  Prosperity  came  in  upon  him  by
every  way ;  and  of  all  the  dyers,  not  one  could  speak  to  him,  save
only  that  they  used  to  come  to  him  and  kiss  his  hands,  and  apologize
to  him  for  their  past  injurious  conduct  to  him,  offering  themselves  to
him,  and  saying  to  him,  Make  us  servants  to  thee.  But  he  would
not  accept  one  of  them.  He  had  male  black  slaves,  and  female  slaves,
and  he  collected  abundant  wealth.

Now  as  to  Aboo-Seer,  when  Aboo-Keer  had  closed  the  door  of  the
chamber  upon  him,  after  he  had  taken  his  money,  and  gone,  and  left
him  sick,  in  a  state  of  unconsciousness,  he  lay  in  that  chamber,  with
the  door  closed  upon  him,  and  remained  so  three  days.  The  door-
keeper of  the  Khan  then  observed  the  door  of  the  chamber,  and  saw
it  closed,  and  he  saw  not  either  of  these  two  persons  until  sunset,  nor
knew  he  any  tidings  of  them.  So  he  said  within  himself,  Perhaps
they  have  travelled  away  without  paying  the  rent  of  the  chamber,  or
died ;  or  what  can  be  their  case  ?  And  he  came  to  the  door  of  the
chamber,  and  saw  it  closed,  and  he  heard  the  groaning  of  the  barber
within  it,  and  saw  the  key  in  the  wooden  lock.  He  therefore  opened


THE  STORY  OF  ABOO-SEER  AND  ABOO-KEER.


543


the  door  and  entered,  and  saw  the  barber  groaning :  so  he  said  to
him,  No  harm  shall  befall  thee.  Where  is  thy  companion  ? — And  the
barber  replied,  By  Allah,  I  have  not  recovered  from  the  stupifying
effects  of  my  disease  save  on  this  day ;  and  I  called  out ;  but  no  one
returned  me  a  reply.  I  conjure  thee  by  Allah,  O  my  brother,  that
thou  look  for  the  purse  beneath  my  head,  and  take  from  it  five  nusfs,
and  buy  for  me  with  them  something  wherewith  I  may  sustain  my-
self ;  for  I  am  in  a  state  of  extreme  hunger. — Accordingly,  the  door-
keeper stretched  forth  his  hand,  and  took  the  purse,  and  he  saw  it
empty ;  wherefore  he  said  to  the  barber,  Verily  the  purse  is  empty :
there  is  not  in  it  aught.  So  Aboo-Seer  the  barber  knew  that  Aboo-
Keer  had  taken  what  was  in  it,  and  fled;  and  he  said  to  the  door-
keeper, Hast  thou  not  seen  my  companion  ?  He  answered  him,  For
the  space  of  three  days  I  have  not  seen  him,  and  I  imagined  not  any
thing  but  that  thou  hadst  travelled  away  with  him.  And  the  barber
replied,  We  travelled  not ;  but  he  coveted  my  money,  and  he  took  it
and  fled,  when  he  saw  me  sick.  Then  he  wept  arid  wailed.  But  the
door-keeper  of  the  Khan  said  to  him,  No  harm  shall  befall  thee ;  and
he  will  receive  the  recompense  of  his  conduct  from  God.  The  door-
keeper then  went  and  cooked  for  him  some  broth,  and,  having  ladled
out  for  him  a  dishful,  gave  it  to  him ;  and  he  ceased  not  to  attend  to
him  for  the  space  of  two  months,  maintaining  him  from  his  own  purse,
until  he  perspired  profusely,  and  God  cured  him  of  the  disease  that  he
had  been  suffering.  After  this,  he  rose  upon  his  feet,  and  said  to  the
door-keeper  of  the  Khan,  If  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !)  enable  me,
I  will  recompense  thee  for  thy  good  actions  to  me ;  but  none,  save
God  in  his  bounty,  will  recompense.  The  door-keeper  however  replied,
Praise  be  to  God  for  thy  health !  I  did  not  unto  thee  that  service
save  from  a  desire  of  seeing  the  face  of  God,  the  Bountiful.


514  THE  STORY  OF  ABOO-SEER  AND  ABOO-KEER.

c  The  barber  then  went  forth  from  the  Khun,  and  passed  through
the  markets,  and  destiny  brought  him  to  the  market  in  which  was  the
dyeing-shop  of  Aboo-Keer.  There  he  saw  the  stuffs  dyed  of  various
colours,  spread  [upon  ropes]  at  the  entrance  of  the  dyeing-shop,  and
the  people  crowding  together,  diverting  themselves  with  the  sight  of
them.  So  he  asked  a  man  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  city,  and  said  to
him,  What  is  this  place,  and  wherefore  do  I  see  the  people  crowding
together?  And  the  person  whom  he  asked  answered  him,  This  is
the  Sultan's  dyeing-shop,  which  he  founded  for  a  stranger  named
Aboo-Keer ;  and  whenever  he  hath  dyed  a  piece  of  stuff,  we  assemble
around  it,  and  divert  ourselves  with  the  sight  of  his  dyeing;  for  there
are  not  in  our  country  dyers  who  know  how  to  dye  these  colours ;
and  such  and  such  events  happened  to  him  with  the  dyers  who  are  in
the  city.  He  told  him  what  had  occurred  between  Aboo-Keer  and
the  dyers,  and  that  he  had  complained  of  them  to  the  Sultan,  who
thereupon  had  aided  him,  and  built  for  him  this  dyeing- shop,  and
given  him  such  and  such  things :  and  he  acquainted  him  with  all  that
had  happened.

Upon  this,  Aboo-Seer  rejoiced,  and  said  to  himself,  Praise  be  to
God  who  hath  aided  him  so  that  he  hath  become  a  master-tradesman  !
And  the  man  is  excusable.  Probably  he  hath  been  diverted  from
thinking  of  thee  by  his  work,  and  forgotten  thee ;  but  thou  actedst
kindly  to  him,  and  treatedst  him  with  generosity,  when  he  was  un-
occupied ;  and  when  he  seeth  thee,  he  will  rejoice  in  thee,  and  treat
thee  with  generosity,  like  as  thou  hast  treated  him. — He  then  ad-
vanced towards  the  door  of  the  dyeing-shop,  and  saw  Aboo-Keer
sitting  upon  a  high  mattress  upon  a  uiastabah  at  the  door  of  the
dyeing-shop,  with  a  suit  of  the  apparel  of  Kings  upon  him,  and
before  him  four  black  slaves  and  four  white  memlooks  wearing  the
most  sumptuous  apparel.  He  also  saw  the  workmen,  ten  black
slaves,  standing  at  work ;  for  when  Aboo-Keer  bought  them,  he
taught  them  the  art  of  dyeing;  and  he  was  sitting  between  the
cushions,  as  though  he  were  a  grand  Wezeer,  or  a  most  magnificent
King,  not  doing  aught  with  his  own  hand,  but  only  saying  to  them,
Do  so  and  so.  Aboo-Seer  stood  before  him,  imagining  that,  when  he
should  see  him,  he  would  rejoice  in  him,  and  salute  him,  and  treat
him  with  generosity,  and  behave  courteously  to  him.  But  when  eye
met  eye,  Aboo-Keer  said  to  him,  0  scoundrel,  how  many  times  have
I  said  to  thee,  stand  not  at  the  door  of  this  workshop?  Dost  thou
desire  to  disgrace  me  with  the  people,  0  thief? — And  he  said,  Seize


THE  STORY  OF  ABOO-SEER  AND  ABOO-KEER,  545

ye  him !  So  the  slaves  ran  after  him,  and  seized  him,  and  Aboo-
Kecr,  rising  with  energy,  took  a  staff,  and  said,  Throw  him  down  !
Accordingly  they  threw  him  down;  and  he  gave  him  a  hundred
blo\vs  on  his  back ;  after  which  they  turned  him  round,  and  he  gave
him  a  hundred  blows  on  his  stomach,  and  said  to  him,  O  villain  !

0  deceiver  !  if  I  see  thee  after  this  day  standing  at  the  door  of  this
dyeing-shop,  I  will  send  thee  to  the  King  immediately,  and  he  will
deliver  thee  to  the  Walee,  that  he  may  strike  off  thy  head! Walk
away ! May  God  not  bless  thee  ! — So  he  departed  from him  with
broken  heart  by  reason  of  the  beating  and  the  contemptuous  treat-
ment that had  befallen  him ;  and  the  persons  present  said  to  Aboo-
Keer  the  dyer,  What  hath  this  man  done  ? Whereupon  he  answered
them, He  is  a  thief,  who  stealeth  the  stuffs  of  the  people;  for  he
hath  often  stolen  stuffs  from  me,  and  I  said  within  myself,  May  God
pardon  him !  for  he  is  a  poor  man.— And  I  would  jiot  trouble  him  ;
but  would  give  the  people  the  prices  of  their  stuffs,  and  forbid  him
gently ;  yet  he  would  not  abstain. So  if  he  return  again  after  this
time,  I  will  send  him  to  the King,  and  he  will  slay  him,  and  relieve
the  people  from  his  mischief. — The  people  therefore  reviled  him  after
his  departure.

Aboo-Seer  returned  to  the  Khan,  and  sat  reflecting  upon  that
which  Aboo-Keer  had  done  to  him ;  and  he  ceased  not  to  sit  until  the
pain  of  the  beating  became  alleviated,  when  he  went  forth  and  passed
through  the  markets  of  the  city,  and  it  occurred  to  his  mind  that  he
should  enter  the  bath.  So  he  asked  a  man  of  the  inhabitants  of  the
city,  and  said  to  him,  0  my  brother,  which  is  the  way  to  the  bath  ?
But  the  man  said  to  him,  And  what  is  the  bath  ?  He  replied,  A  place
in  which  people  wash  themselves,  to  remove  the  impurities  that  are
upon  them,  and  it  is  of  the  best  of  the  good  things  of  the  world.
Upon  this  the  man  said  to  him,  Betake  thyself  to  the  sea.  He  replied,

1  desire  the  bath. But  the  man  said  to  him,  We  know  not  what  kind
of  thing  the  bath  is :  we  all  of  us  go  to  the  sea :  even  the  King,  when
he  desireth  to  wash  himself,  gocth  to  the  sea. So  when  Aboo-Seer
knew  that  there  was  not  a  bath  in  the  city,  and  that  its  inhabitants
knew  not  the  bath,  nor  what  kind  of  thing  it  was,  he  repaired  to  the
council  of  the  King,  and  went  in  to  him,  and,  having  kissed  the  ground
before  him,  and  prayed  for  him,  said  to  him,  I  am  a  man  of  a  strange
country, and  my  trade  is  that  of  a  bath-keeper,  and  I  entered  thy
city,  and  desired  to  repair  to  the  bath,  but  saw  not  in  it  even  one
bath ;  and  how  is  it  that  the  city  which  is  of  this  beautiful  description

III.  4 A


516  THE  STORY  OF  ABOO-SEER  AXD  ABOO-KKKK.

is  without  a  bath,  which  is  one  of  the  best  of  the  delights  of  the
world  ?  So  the  King  said  to  him,  What  is  the  bath  ?  He  proceeded,
therefore,  to  describe  it  to  him,  and  said  to  him,  Thy  city  will  not  be  a
perfect  city  unless  there  be  in  it  a  bath.  And  upon  this  the  King
said  to  him,  Welcome  to  thee !  And  he  clad  him  in  a  suit  of  apparel
of  which  the  like  existed  not,  gave  him  a  horse  and  two  black  slaves,
and  bestowed  upon  him  four  female  slaves,  and  two  memlooks.  He
also  prepared  for  him  a  furnished  house,  and  treated  him  with  more
honour  than  the  dyer ;  and  he  sent  with  him  the  builders,  saying  to
them,  In  the  place  that  shall  please  him,  build  ye  for  him  a  bath.

So  he  took  them  and  went  with  them  through  the  midst  of  the
city,  until  a  place  pleased  him,  when  he  pointed  it  out  to  them,  and
they  commenced  the  building  there.  He  proceeded  to  direct  them  as
to  the  manner  of  its  construction  until  they  had  built  for  him  a  bath
of  which  there  existed  not  the  like ;  whereupon  he  ordered  them  to
paint  it ;  and  they  painted  it  in  an  admirable  mannei*,  so  that  it
became  a  delight  to  the  beholders.  He  then  went  up  to  the  King,
and  acquainted  him  with  the  completion  of  the  building  of  the  bath,
and  its  painting,  and  said  to  him,  There  is  nothing  wanting  but  the
furniture.  The  King  therefore  gave  him  ten  thousand  pieces  of  gold ;
and  he  took  them,  and  furnished  the  bath,  and  arranged  in  it  the
napkins  upon  the  ropes ;  and  every  one  who  passed  by  the  door  of
the  bath  gazed  at  it  in  astonishment,  and  his  mind  was  confounded  at
the  sight  of  its  painting.  The  people  crowded  about  that  thing  of
which  they  had  not  seen  the  like  in  their  lives,  and  they  proceeded  to
divert  themselves  with  the  sight  of  it,  saying,  What  is  this?  And
Aboo-Seer  answered  them,  This  is  a  bath.  And  they  wondered  at  it.
Then  he  heated  the  water,  and  set  the  bath  in  action.10  He  made  also
a  fountain  in  the  basin,  such  as  captivated  the  reason  of  every  one  of
the  inhabitants  of  the  city  who  beheld  it.  And  he  demanded  of  the
King  ten  memlooks  under  the  age  of  manhood ;  whereupon  the  King
gave  him  ten  memlooks  like  moons ;  and  Aboo-Seer  betook  himself  to
rubbing  them  with  the  bag,  and  said  to  them,  Do  writh  the  bathers
thus.  He  then  gave  vent  to  the  fumes  of  the  incense,  and  sent  a  crier
to  cry  in  the  city,  and  to  say,  O  creatures  of  God,  repair  to  the  bath,
which  is  named  the  bath  of  the  Sultan!  So  the  people  came  thither,
and  he  ordered  the  memlooks  to  wash  the  bathers.  The  people  de-
scended into  the  tank,  and  came  up ;  and  after  they  had  come  up,
they  sat  upon  the  leewan,  while  the  memlooks  rubbed  them  as  Aboo-
Seer  had  taught  them  ;  and  the  people  continued  to  enter  the  bath,


and  to  gratify  their  desire  thereby,  and  go  forth,  without  paying,  for
the  space  of  three  days.

After  that,  on  the  fourth  day,  Aboo-Seer  invited  the  King  to  the
bath.  So  he  mounted  with  the  great  men  of  his  empire,  and  they
went  thither.  He  pulled  off  his  clothes,  and  entered  [the  inner  apart-
ment], and  Aboo-Seer  entered,  and  rubbed  the  King  with  the  bag,
removing  from  his  person  the  impure  particles  like  twists  of  thread,
and  shewing  them  to  him ;  whereat  the  King  rejoiced.  The  putting
his  hand  upon  his  body  made  a  sound,  by  reason  of  its  smoothness
and  cleanness.  And  after  Aboo-Seer  had  washed  his  skin,  he  mixed
for  him  some  rose-water  with  the  water  of  the  tank,  and  the  King
descended  into  the  tank  and  came  forth,  and  his  skin  was  softened,
and  he  experienced  a  liveliness  which  in  his  life  he  had  never  known
before.  Then,  after  that,  Aboo-Seer  seated  him  upon  the  leewan,  and
ihe  memlooks  proceeded  to  perform  upon  him  the  operation  of  gently
rubbing  and  pressing  him,  while  the  perfuming-vessels  diffused  the
odour  of  aloes-wood.  And  the  King  said,  0  master,  is  this  the  bath  ?
Aboo-Seer  answered,  Yes.  And  the  King  said  to  him,  By  my  head,
my  city  hath  not  become  a  city  save  by  this  bath.  He  then  said  to


548  THE  STORY  OF  ABOO-SEER  AND  AI5OO  KKK];.

him,  What  wilt  thou  take  as  pay  for  each  person  ?  Aboo-Seer
answered,  What  thou  shalt  command  me  I  will  take.  And  he
ordered  him  to  take  a  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  saying  to  him,  From
every  one  who  washeth  in  thy  bath  take  a  thousand  pieces  of  gold.
But  Aboo-Seer  replied,  Pardon,  O  King  of  the  age  !  Verily  all  men
are  not  alike;  for  among  them  is  the  rich,  and  among  them  is  the
poor;  arid  if  I  took  from  every  one  a  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  the
bath  would  become  void,  since  the  poor  man  cannot  pay  the  thousand
pieces  of  gold. — So  the  King  said,  And  how  then  wilt  thou  act  with
respect  to  the  pay  ?  Aboo-Seer  answered,  I  will  regulate  the  pay
generously;  and  every  one  who  can  afford  a  thing,  his  soul  consent-
ing to  it,  shall  give  that  thing.  Thus  we  shall  take  from  every  man
according  to  his  condition ;  for  if  the  case  be  so,  the  people  will  come
to  us;  and  he  who  is  rich  will  give  according  to  his  rank,  while  he
who  is  poor  will  give  that  to  which  his  soul  consenteth.  If  the  case  be
thus,  the  bath  will  be  in  action,  and  it  will  be  in  excellent  condition ;
but  as  to  the  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  it  is  the  gift  of  the  King,  and
every  one  cannot  afford  it. — And  the  great  men  of  the  empire  pro-
nounced his  words  to  be  true,  and  said,  This  will  be  the  right  course,
0  King  of  the  age.  Dost  thou  imagine  that  the  people  are  all  like
thee,  O  glorious  King? — The  King  replied,  Verily  your  saying  is
true;  but  this  is  a  stranger,  a  poor  man,  and  to  treat  him  with  gene-
rosity is  incumbent  on  us;  for  he  hath  made  in  our  city  this  bath,
the  like  of  which  we  have  never  in  our  lives  seen,  and  our  city  had
not  been  adorned,  and  acquired  importance,  without  it :  so  if  we  shew
him  generosity  by  giving  him  excessive  pay,  it  will  not  be  much.
But  they  said,  If  thou  treat  him  with  generosity,  do  so  by  bestowing
upon  him  of  thine  own  wealth,  and  let  the  King's  generosity  be  shewn
to  the  poor  by  the  smallness  of  the  pay  for  bathing,  in  order  that  thy
subjects  may  pray  for  thee ;  but  as  to  the  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  we
are  the  great  men  of  thine  empire,  and  yet  our  souls  consent  not  to
give  it:  how  then,  can  the  souls  of  the  poor  consent  thereto?  The
King  therefore  said,  0  great  men  of  my  empire,  every  one  of  you  shall
give  him  this  time  a  hundred  pieces  of  gold,  and  a  memlook,  and  a
female  slave,  and  a  male  black  slave.  And  they  replied,  Yes ;  we  will
give  him  those  things ;  but  after  this  clay,  every  one  who  entereth
shall  only  give  him  what  his  soul  shall  consent  to.  And  he  said,
There  will  be  no  harm  in  that.

Accordingly  each  of  the  great  men  gave  him  a  hundred  pieces  of
gold,  and  a  female  slave,  and  a  memlook,  and  a  male  black  slave;  and


THE  STORY  OF  ABOO-SEER  AND  ABOO-KEER. r.i-.j

the  number  of  the  great  men  who  bathed  with  the  King  on  this  day
was  four  hundred  souls.  So  the  number  of  the  pieces  of  gold  that
they  gave  him  was  forty  thousand ;  and  of  the  memlooks,  four
hundred;  and  of  the  male  black  slaves,  four  hundred;  and  of  the
female  slaves,  four  hundred :  and  enough  was  this  gift !  The  King
also  gave  him  ten  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  and  ten  memlooks,  and
ten  female  slaves,  and  ten  male  black  slaves.  Aboo-Seer  therefore
advanced,  and  kissed  the  ground  before  the  King,  and  said  to  him,
O  fortunate  King,  endowed  with  right  judgment,  what  place  will
contain  me  with  these  memlooks,  and  female  slaves,  and  male  black
slaves  ?  The  King  replied,  I  ordered  not  my  grandees  to  do  this
save  in  order  that  we  might  collect  for  thee  a  great  quantity  of
wealth ;  for  perhaps  thou  hast  reflected  upon  thy  country  and  thy
household,  and  longed  to  see  them,  and  desired  to  voyage  to  thy
home,  and  thou  wilt  have  taken  from  our  country  a  large  quantity  of
wealth  to  which  thou  mayest  have  recourse  for  thy  subsistence  as  long
as  thou  shalt  live  in  thy  country.  But  Aboo-Seer  rejoined,  0  King
of  the  age  (may  God  strengthen  thee !),  verily  these  numerous  mem-
looks, and  female  slaves,  and  male  black  slaves,  are  proper  only  for
Kings ;  and  hadst  thou  given  orders  to  present  me  with  ready  money,
it  had  been  better  for  me  than  this  army;  for  they  will  eat,  and
drink,  and  dress,  and  whatever  wealth  I  acquire,  it  will  not  suffice
them  to  expend  for  their  support.  And  upon  this  the  King  laughed,
and  said,  By  Allah,  thou  hast  spoken  truth;  for  they  have  become
a  heavy  army,  and  thou  hast  not  ability  to  expend  what  will  be  suffi-
cient upon  them.  But  wilt  thou  sell  them  to  me,  each  one  for  a  hun-
dred pieces  of  gold  ? — He  answered,  I  sell  them  to  thee  for  this  price.
So  the  King  sent  to  the  treasurer,  desiring  him  to  bring  him  the
money  ;  and  he  brought  it,  and  the  King  gave  Aboo-Seer  the  price
of  the  whole,  complete  and  entire;  after  which  he  bestowed  them
upon  their  former  owners,  saying,  Every  one  who  knoweth  his  male
black  slave,  or  his  female  slave,  or  his  memlook,  let  him  take  such
slave;  for  they  are  a  gift  from  me  unto  you.  And  they  complied
with  the  command  of  the  King,  each  of  them  taking  what  appertained
to  him.  Aboo-Seer  then  said  to  the  King,  May  God  relieve  thee,
O  King  of  the  age,  as  thou  hast  relieved  me  from  these  ghools,  whom
none  but  God  can  satiate !  And  the  King  laughed  at  his  words,  and
said  that  he  had  spoken  truth,  and  he  took  the  great  men  of  his
empire,  and  returned  from  the  bath  to  his  palace.

Aboo-Seer passed the ensuing night counting the gold and


550


THE  STORY  OF  ABOO-SEER  AND  ABOO-KEER.


putting  it  into  the  bags  and  sealing  them.  And  he  had  with  him
twenty  male  black  slaves,  and  twenty  memlooks,  and  four  female
slaves  to  serve  him.  And  when  the  morning  came,  he  opened  the
bath,  and  sent  a  crier  to  cry  and  say,  Whosoever  entereth  the  bath
and  washeth,  he  shall  give  that  to  which  his  soul  shall  consent,  and
what  his  generosity  shall  require  him  to  give.  He  seated  himself  by
the  chest,11  and  those  who  desired  to  bathe  rushed  upon  him,  every
one  who  entered  putting  down  what  was  easy  to  him  to  give ;  and
evening  came  not  before  the  chest  was  filled  with  the  good  gifts  of
God,  whose  name  be  exalted !  Then  the  Queen  desired  to  enter  the
bath  :  so  when  this  was  made  known  to  Aboo-Seer,  he  divided  the
day  on  her  account  into  two  portions,  making  from  daybreak  to  noon
the  portion  of  the  men,  and  from  noon  to  sunset  the  portion  of  the
women.  And  when  the  Queen  came,  he  stationed  a  female  slave
behind  the  chest.  He  had  taught  four  female  slaves  the  arts  of
washing  women  and  plaiting  their  hair,  so  that  they  became  skilful
performers  of  these  arts ;  and  the  Queen,  on  her  entering,  was  pleased
by  what  she  saw,  her  bosom  became  dilated,  and  she  put  down  a
thousand  pieces  of  gold.  His  fame  spread  throughout  the  city,  and
every  one  who  entered  treated  him  with  honour,  whether  he  were  rich


THE  STORY  OF  ABOO-SEER  AND  ABOO-KEER.  551

or  poor,  and  good  fortune  came  in  to  him  by  every  way.  He  became
acquainted  with  the  King's  guards,  and  gained  companions  and
friends,  and  the  King  used  to  come  to  him  one  day  in  the  week,  when
he  gave  him  a  thousand  pieces  of  gold ;  the  other  days  of  the  week
being  for  the  great  men  and  the  poor ;  and  he  used  to  behave  kindly
to  the  people,  and  to  treat  them  with  the  utmost  courtesy.  It
happened  also  that  the'  King's  sea-captain  came  in  to  him  in  the
bath  one  day,  whereupon  Aboo-Seer  pulled  off  his  clothes,  and  en-
tered [the  inner  apartment]  with  him,  and  proceeded  to  rub  and  press
him,  treating  him  with  exceeding  courtesy.  And  when  he  came  forth
from  the  bath,  he  made  for  him  sherbet  and  coffee;  and  on  the
captain's  desiring  to  give  him  something,  he  swore  that  he  would  not
receive  from  him  aught.  So  the  captain  was  grateful  for  his  kindness,
on  account  of  the  exceeding  courtesy  that  he  had  experienced  from
him,  and  his  beneficence  to  him,  and  he  became  perplexed  respecting
what  he  should  give  to  that  bath-keeper  in  return  for  his  generous
conduct  to  him.

Meanwhile,  Aboo-Keer  heard  all  the  people  eagerly  talking  of  the
bath,  every  one  of  them  saying,  Verily  this  bath  is  the  delight  of  the
world,  without  doubt !  If  it  be  the  will  of  God,  0  such-a-one,  thou
shalt  go  with  us  to-morrow  into  this  delectable  bath. — So  Aboo-Keer
said  within  himself,  I  must  go  like  others,  and  see  this  bath  that  hath
captivated  the  minds  of  men.  Then  he  put  on  the  most  sumptuous
of  the  apparel  that  he  had,  mounted  a  mule,  took  with  him  four  black
slaves  and  four  inemlooks,  who  walked  behind  him  and  before  him,  and
repaired  to  the  bath.  He  alighted  at  the  door  of  the  bath  j  and  when
he  was  at  the  door,  he  smelt  the  odour  of  aloes-wood,  and  saw  men
entering  and  men  coming  forth,  and  he  saw  the  mastabahs  fully  occu-
pied by  great  and  small.  He  then  entered  the  vestibule,  and  saw
Aboo-Seer,  who  rose  to  him,  and  rejoiced  at  seeing  him ;  and  Aboo-
Keer  said  to  him,  Is  this  fulfilling  the  covenant  of  the  sons  of  the
ingenuous  ?  I  have  opened  for  myself  a  dyeing-shop,  and  become  the
master-dyer  of  the  city,  and  acquainted  with  the  King,  and  have
become  in  a  state  of  prosperity  and  authority,  yet  thou  comest  not  to
me,  nor  inquirest  respecting  me,  nor  sayest,  Where  is  my  companion  ?
I  have  been  unable  to  find  thee  while  searching  for  thee,  and  sending
my  black  slaves  and  my  memlooks  to  search  for  thee  in  the  Khans  and
in  all  other  places ;  for  they  knew  not  how  to  find  thee,  nor  did  any
one  give  them  tidings  of  thee. — So  Aboo-Seer  replied,  Did  I  not  come
to  thee,  and  didst  thou  not  call  me  a  thief,  and  beat  me,  and  disgrace


552  THE  STORY  OF  ABOO-SEER  AND  ABOO-KEER.

me  among  the  people  ?  And  thereupon  Aboo-Keer  was  grieved,  and
said,  What  are  these  words  ?  Art  thou  the  person  whom  I  beat  ? —
Aboo-Seer  answered  him,  Yes ;  that  person  was  myself.  And  Aboo-
Keer  swore  to  him  a  thousand  oaths  that  he  knew  him  not,  and  said,
One  resembling  thee  used  to  come  every  day  and  steal  people's  stuffs,
and  I  imagined  that  thou  wast  that  person.  And  he  proceeded  to
feign  repentance,  and  to  strike  hand  upon  hand,  and  say,  There  is  no
strength  nor  power  but  in  God,  the  Great !  We  have  acted  injuriously
to  thee ;  but  would  that  thou  hadst  acquainted  me  with  thyself,  and
said,  I  am  such-a-one.  The  fault  therefore  is  thine,  because  thou  didst
not  acquaint  me  with  thyself;  especially  as  I  was  confounded  by  the
multiplicity  of  my  occupations. — And  upon  this,  Aboo-Seer  said  to
him,  May  God  pardon  thee,  O  my  companion !  This  event  was
secretly  predestined,  and  reparation  is  God's  affair.  Enter ;  pull  off
thy  clothes,  and  bathe  and  enjoy  thyself. — Aboo-Keer  rejoined,  By
Allah  I  conjure  thee  that  thou  pardon  me,  0  my  brother!  And
Aboo-Seer  said  to  him,  May  God  acquit  thee  of  responsibility,  and
pardon  thee!  For  it  was  an  event  predestined  from  eternity  to
befall  me.

Aboo-Keer  then  said  to  him,  And  whence  obtainedst  thou  this
authority  ?  He  answered  him,  He  who  aided  thee  aided  me ;  for  I
went  up  to  the  King,  and  described  to  him  the  bath,  and  he  ordered
me  to  build  one.  So  Aboo-Keer  replied,  As  thou  art  an  acquaintance
of  the  King,  I  also  am  his  acquaintance ;  and  if  it  be  the  will  of  God
(whose  name  be  exalted !),  I  will  cause  him  to  love  thee  and  to  treat
thee  with  generosity  exceeding  this  generosity,  for  my  sake;  for  he
knew  not  that  thou  wast  my  companion ;  but  I  will  inform  him  that
thou  art  my  companion,  and  I  will  give  him  a  charge  respecting  thee.
Aboo-Seer,  however,  said  to  him,  I  require  not  any  charge  to  be  given
him ;  for  He  who  moveth  hearts  with  affection  existeth ;  and  the
King  hath  conceived  a  love  for  me,  he  and  all  his  court,  and  given
me  such  and  such  things.  He  told  him  the  story,  and  then  said  to
him,  Pull  off  thy  clothes  behind  the  chest,  and  enter  the  bath,  and  I
will  enter  with  thee,  that  I  may  rub  thee  with  the  bag.  So  he  pulled
off  the  clothes  that  were  upon  him,  and  entered  the  bath,  and  Aboo-
Seer  entered  with  him,  and  rubbed  him  with  the  bag,  washed  him
with  soap,  dressed  him,  and  occupied  himself  with  serving  him  until
he  came  forth  [from  the  inner  apartment]  ;  and  when  he  came  forth,
he  brought  him  dinner  and  sherbet ;  and  all  the  people  wondered  at
the  great  honour  that  he  shewed  him.  After  that,  Aboo-Keer  was  about


THE  STORY  OF  ABOO-SEEK  AND  ABOO-KEER.


553


to  give  him  something ;  but  he  swore  that  he  would  not  receive  from
him  aught,  and  said  to  him,  Be  ashamed  of  this  thing,  seeing  that
thou  art  my  companion,  and  there  is  no  difference  between  us.  Then
Aboo-Keer  said  to  Aboo-Seer,  O  my  companion,  by  Allah,  this  bath  is
excellent;  but  thine  art  in  it  is  deficient.  So  Aboo-Seer  said  to  him,
And  what  is  its  deficiency  ?  Aboo-Keer  answered  him,  The  remedy
that  is  a  composition  of  arsenic  and  lime,  which  removeth  the  hair  with
facility.12  Therefore  make  this  remedy;  and  when  the  King  cometh,
present  it  to  him,  and  teach  him  how  the  hair  falleth  off  by  its  means  ;
for  thereupon  he  will  love  thee  exceedingly,  and  will  treat  thee  with
honour. — And  Aboo-Seer  replied,  Thou  hast  spoken  truth.  If  it  be
the  will  of  God,  I  will  make  that.

Then  Aboo-Keer  went  forth,  and  mounted  his  mule,  repaired  to
the  King,  and  went  in  to  him,  and  said  to  him,  I  give  thee  a  precau-
tion, O  King  of  the  age.  So  the  King  said,  And  what  is  thy  pre-
caution ?  And  he  answered  him,  Information  hath  been  given  me
that  thou  hast  built  a  bath.  The  King  said,  Yes  :  a  stranger  hath
come  to  me,  and  I  have  founded  the  bath  for  him,  like  as  I  have
founded  for  thee  this  dyeing-shop;  and  it  is  an  excellent  bath;  my
city  hath  become  adorned  by  it.  And  he  proceeded  to  mention  to  him
the  excellences  of  the  bath.  Aboo-Keer  then  said  to  him,  And  hast
thou  entered  it  ?  He  answered,  Yes.  And  Aboo-Keer  said,  Praise
be  to  God  who  hath  saved  thee  from  the  wickedness  of  this  villain,
the  enemy  of  the  religion ;  and  he  is  the  bath-keeper.  The  King
therefore  said  to  him,  And  what  is  his  desire?  And  Aboo-Keer
answered,  Know,  O  King  of  the  age,  that  if  thou  enter  the  bath  after
this  day,  thou  wilt  perish. — Wherefore  ?  said  the  King.  He  answered
him,  Verily  the  bath-keeper  is  thine  enemy,  and  the  enemy  of  the
religion ;  for  he  induced  thee  not  to  found  this  bath  save  because  he
desireth  to  poison  thee  in  it.  He  hath  made  for  thee  a  thing ;  and
when  thou  enterest  the  bath,  he  will  bring  it  to  thee,  and  will  say  to
thee,  This  is  a  remedy :  whosoever  applieth  it  to  himself,  it  will  cause


in.


654 THE  STORY  OF  ABOO-SEER  AND  ABOO-KEER.

the  hair  to  fall  off  from  the  part  with  ease.  And  it  is  not  a  remedy :
on  the  contrary,  it  is  a  cause  of  terrible  disease,  and  a  deadly  poison.
The  Sultan  of  the  Christians  hath  promised  this  villain  that,  if  he  slay
thee,  he  will  liberate  his  wife  and  his  children  from  captivity ;  for  his
wife  and  his  children  are  in  captivity  in  the  land  of  the  Sultan  of  the
Christians.  I  also  was  in  captivity  with  him  in  their  country;  but  I
opened  a  dyeing-shop,  and  dyed  for  them  stuifs  of  various  colours/ in
consequence  of  which  they  inclined  the  heart  of  the  King  to  favour
me,  and  the  King  said  to  me,  What  dost  thou  desire  ?  So  I  desired
of  him  emancipation,  and  he  emancipated  me ;  and,  having  come  to
this  city,  I  saw  the  man  in  the  bath.  I  therefore  asked  him  and  said
to  him,  How  was  effected  thine  escape,  and  the  escape  of  thy  wife  and
thy  children  ?  And  he  answered,  I  and  my  wife  and  my  children
ceased  not  to  remain  in  captivity  until  the  King  of  the  Christians
held  a  court,  and  I  was  present  at  it  among  the  rest,  standing  among
the  people,  and  I  heard  them  enter  upon  the  mention  of  the  Kings,
and  proceed  until  they  mentioned  the  King  of  this  city;  whereupon
the  King  of  the  Christians  cried,  Ah ! — and  said,  No  one  in  the  world
hath  overcome  me  except  the  King  of  such  a  city ;  and  whosoever
will  contrive  means  for  me  to  slay  him,  I  will  give  him  every  thing
that  he  shall  desire.  So  I  advanced  to  him,  and  said  to  him,  If  I
contrive  means  for  thee  to  slay  him,  wilt  thou  emancipate  me  and  my
wife  and  my  children  ?  And  he  answered  me,  Yes :  I  will  emancipate
you,  and  I  will  give  thee  all  that  thou  shalt  desire.  I  then  agreed
with  him  to  do  this,  and  he  sent  me  in  a  galleon  to  this  city.  So  I
went  up  to  this  King,  and  he  built  for  me  this  bath,  and  there  re-
maineth  nothing  for  me  to  do  but  to  kill  him,  and  go  to  the  King  of
the  Christians,  redeem  my  children  and  my  wife,  and  demand  of  him
what  I  desire. — I  therefore  said,  And  what  is  the  stratagem  that  thou
hast  contrived  in  order  to  kill  him  ?  And  he  answered  me,  It  is  an
easy  stratagem ;  the  easiest  that  can  be :  for  he  will  come  to  me  in
this  bath,  and  I  have  made  for  him  something  wherein  is  poison;  and
when  he  cometh,  I  will  say  to  him,  Take  this  remedy,  and  apply  it  to
any  part  from  which  thou  wouldst  remove  hair;  for  the  hair  will  fall
off.  So  he  will  take  it  and  apply  it  to  himself,  and  the  poison  will
operate  within  him  a  day  and  a  night,  until  it  penetrateth  to  his  heart,
and  destroyeth  him,  and  there  will  be  an  end  of  the  affair. — Therefore,
on  ray  hearing  from  him  these  words,  I  feared  for  thee ;  because  thy
goodness  hath  imposed  an  obligation  on  me ;  and  I  have  informed
thee  of  this.


THE  STORY  OF  ABOO-SEER  AND  ABOO-KEER.  555

Sa  when  the  King  heard  these  words,  he  was  violently  enraged ;
and  he  said  to  the  dyer,  Conceal  this  secret.  He  then  desired  to  go
to  the  bath,  that  he  might  put  an  end  to  doubt  by  certain  assurance;
and  when  the  King  entered  the  bath,  Aboo-Seer  divested  himself  as
he  was  accustomed  to  do,  devoted  himself  to  the  service  of  the  King,
and  rubbed  him  with  the  bag;  after  which  he  said  to  him,  O  King
of  the  age,  I  have  made  a  remedy  for  clearing  away  the  hair.  So  he
said,  Bring  it  to  me.  And  he  brought  it  before  him  ;  and  the  King
perceived  its  smell  to  be  abominable.  It  appeared  sure  to  him,  there-
fore, that  it  was  poison ;  and  he  was  enraged,  and  called  out  to  the
guards,  saying,  Seize  him !  Accordingly,  the  guards  laid  hold  upon
him,  and  the  King  went  forth,  infused  with  rage,  no  one  knowing
the  cause  of  his  rage;  and  by  reason  of  the  violence  of  the  rage
of  the  King,  he  informed  not  any  one,  nor  did  any  one  dare  to
ask  him.  He  then  put  on  his  clothes,  and  went  up  to  the  council-
chamber,  and,  having  caused  Aboo-Seer  to  be  brought  before
him,  with  his  hands  bound  behind  him,  he  summoned  the  sea-
captain.  So  he  came;  and  when  the  captain  came,  the  King  said
to  him,  Take  this  villain,  and  put  him  into  a  sack,  and  put  into
the  sack  two  hundred-weights  of  unslaked  lime,  and  tie  up  its  mouth
over  him  and  the  lime :  then  put  it  into  a  boat,  and  come  beneath
my  palace.  Thou  wilt  see  me  sitting  at  its  window,  and  do  thou
say  to  me,  Shall  I  cast  it  in  ?  Thereupon  I  will  answer  thee,  Cast  it.
And  when  I  have  said  to  thee  that,  cast  it,  that  the  lime  may  be
slaked  upon  him,  and  he  may  die  drowned  and  burnt. — So  he  replied,
I  hear  and  obey.  He  then  took  him  from  before  the  King,  to  an
island  opposite  the  King's  palace,  and  said  to  Aboo-Seer,  O  thou,  I
came  to  thee  once  in  the  bath,  and  thou  treatedst  me  with  honour,
and  didst  what  was  requisite  for  me,  and  I  derived  great  pleasure
from  thee :  thou  sworest  also  that  thou  wouldst  not  receive  from  me
pay,  and  I  have  conceived  for  thee  a  violent  love.  Tell  me  then  what
was  thy  case  with  the  King,  and  what  abominable  action  hast  thou
done  to  him,  that  he  hath  become  enraged  against  thee,  and  com-
manded me  that  thou  shalt  die  this  evil  death. — So  he  replied,  By
Allah,  I  have  not  done  any  thing,  and  I  have  no  knowledge  of  any
crime  that  I  have  committed  against  him  requiring  this.

Upon  this,  the  captain  said  to  him,  Verily  thou  enjoyedst,  in  the
estimation  of  the  King,  great  dignity,  such  as  none  attained  before
thee  ;  and  every  one  who  is  possessed  of  good  things  is  envied.
Perhaps  then  some  one  hath  envied  thee  this  good  fortune,  and  said


5ob  THE  STORY  OF  ABOO-SEER  AND  ABOO-KEER.

some  words  injurious  to  thee  in  the  presence  of  the  King,  in  con-
sequence of  which  the  King  hath  been  thus  enraged  against  thee.
But  welcome  to  thee !  No  harm  awaiteth  thee.  For  as  thou  treatedst
me  with  honour  without  there  existing  any  acquaintance  between  me
and  thee,  I  will  liberate  thee.  But  when  I  liberate  thee,  thou  shalt
remain  with  me  on  this  island  until  a  galleon  shall  depart  from  this  city
towards  thy  country,  when  I  will  send  thee  in  it. — Aboo-Seer  therefore
kissed  the  hand  of  the  captain,  and  thanked  him  for  this.  Then  the
captain  brought  the  lime,  and  put  it  into  a  sack,  and  he  put  into  it  a
great  stone,  as  large  as  a  man,  and  said,  I  place  my  reliance  upon  God.
After  that,  he  gave  to  Aboo-Seer  a  net,  and  said  to  him,  Cast  this  net
in  the  sea.  Perhaps  thou  wilt  catch  some  fish.  For  the  fish  for  the
King's  kitchen  are  required  of  me  every  day,  and  I  have  been  diverted
from  fishing  by  this  calamity  that  hath  befallen  thee,  and  fear  that  the
cook's  young  men  may  come  to  demand  the  fish  and  not  find  it ;  but
if  thou  catch  any  thing,  they  will  find  it.  Do  so  while  I  go  and
practise  the  stratagem  that  I  have  devised  beneath  the  palace,  and  I
will  pretend  that  I  have  cast  thee  into  the  sea. — And  Aboo-Seer
replied,  I  will  fish,  and  go  thou,  and  may  God  aid  thee  !  The  captain
therefore  put  the  sack  into  the  boat,  and  proceeded  until  he  came


THE  STORY  OF  ABOO-SEER  AND  ABOO-KEER.


557


beneath  the  palace,  when  he  saw  the  King  sitting  at  the  window,  and
said,  O  King  of  the  age,  shall  I  cast  him  in  ?  And  he  answered,
Cast  him  : — and  he  made  a  sign  with  his  hand ;  and,  lo,  a  thing
gleamed :  then  dropped  into  the  sea :  and,  behold,  what  dropped  into
the  sea  was  the  King's  seal-ring.  This  ring  was  enchanted,  so  that,
when  the  King  was  enraged  against  any  one,  and  desired  to  slay  him,
he  would  make  a  sign  to  him  with  his  right  hand,  upon  which  was
the  seal-ring,  and  there  would  proceed,  from  the  ring,  lightning,
which  would  strike  the  person  to  whom  he  made  the  sign,  and  his
head  would  fall  from  between  his  shoulders.  And  the  troops  obeyed
him  not,  nor  did  he  subdue  the  mighty  men,  save  by  means  of  this
seal-ring.  So  when  the  ring  fell  from  his  finger,  he  concealed  the
matter,  being  unable  to  say,  My  ring  hath  fallen  into  the  sea, —
through  fear  of  the  troops,  lest  they  should  rise  against  him,  and  slay
him  :  wherefore  he  was  silent.

But  as  to  Aboo-Seer,  after  the  departure  of  the  captain,  he  took
the  net,  and  cast  it  in  the  sea,  and  drew  it ;  and  it  came  forth  full  of
fish.  Then  he  cast  it  a  second  time,  and  it  came  up  full  of  fish  again.
He  ceased  not  to  cast  it,  and  it  came  up  every  time  full  of  fish,
until  there  was  before  him  a  great  heap  of  fish ;  whereupon  he  said
within  himself,  By  Allah,  for  a  long  time  I  have  not  eaten  fish.  And
he  chose  for  himself  a  large,  fat  fish,  and  said,  When  the  captain
cometh,  I  will  tell  him  to  fry  for  me  this  fish,  that  I  may  make
my  dinner  of  it.  He  then  killed  it  with  a  knife  that  he  had  with
him,  and  the  knife  stuck  in  its  gill,  and  he  saw  the  King's  seal-ring
in  it ;  for  the  fish  had  swallowed  it,  and  destiny  had  driven  it  to  that
island,  and  it  had  fallen  into  the  net.  So  he  took  the  ring,  and  put
it  on  his  little  finger,  not  knowing  its  properties :  and,  lo,  two  young
men,  of  the  servants  of  the  cook,  came  to  demand  the  fish :  and  when
they  were  near  Aboo-Seer,  they  said,  O  man,  whither  is  gone  the


558  THE  STORY  OF  ABOO-SEER  AND  ABOO-KEER.

captain  ?  He  answered,  I  know  not : — and  made  a  sign  with  his
right  hand,  and,  behold,  the  heads  of  the  two  young  men  fell  from
between  their  shoulders  when  he  made  a  sign  to  them  and  said,  I
know  not.  Aboo-Seer  therefore  wondered  at  that,  and  said,  Who
can  have  slain  them  ?  Their  case  grieved  him,  and  he  was  reflecting
upon  this  event  when,  lo,  the  captain  approached,  and  saw  a  great
heap  of  fish,  and  saw  the  two  young  men  slain,  and  the  seal-ring
upon  the  finger  of  Aboo-Seer.  So  he  said  to  him,  0  my  brother,
move  not  thy  hand  upon  which  is  the  seal-ring ;  for  if  thou  move  it,
thou  wilt  slay  me.  And  he  wondered  at  his  saying,  Move  not  thy
hand  upon  which  is  the  seal-ring ;  for  if  thou  move  it,  thou  wilt  slay
me.  And  when  the  captain  came  to  him,  he  said,  Who  slew  these
two  young  men  ?  Aboo-Seer  answered  him,  By  Allah,  0  my  brother,
I  know  not.  And  the  captain  replied,  Thou  hast  spoken  truth ;  but
inform  me  respecting  this  seal-ring,  whence  it  came  to  thee.  He  said,
I  saw  it  in  the  gill  of  this  fish.  And  the  captain  rejoined,  Thou  hast
spoken  truth ;  for  I  saw  it  descending  gleaming  from  the  palace  of
the  King  till  it  dropped  into  the  sea,  when  he  made  a  sign  with
respect  to  thee,  and  said  to  me,  Cast  him.  And  when  he  made  the
sign,  I  cast  in  the  sack,  and  the  ring  had  dropped  from  his  finger,  and
fallen  into  the  sea.  Thereupon  this  fish  swallowed  it,  and  God  drove
the  fish  to  thee,  so  that  thou  caughtest  it :  therefore  this  is  thy  lot.
But  knowest  thou  the  properties  of  this  seal-ring  ? — Aboo-Seer
answered,  I  do  not  know  its  properties.  And  the  captain  said,  Know
that  the  troops  of  our  King  have  not  obeyed  him  save  from  fear  of
this  seal-ring;  because  it  is  enchanted;  and  when  the  King  was
enraged  against  any  one,  and  desired  his  slaughter,  he  used  to  make
a  sign  to  him  with  it,  and  his  head  would  fall  from  between  his
shoulders;  for  a  lightning  would  proceed  from  this  ring,  and  its  ray
would  reach  the  object  of  rage,  who  would  die  immediately. — So  when
Aboo-Seer  heard  these  words,  he  rejoiced  exceedingly,  and  said  to  the
captain,  Take  me  back  to  the  city.  And  the  captain  replied,  I  will
take  thee  back,  since  I  no  longer  fear  for  thee  with  respect  to  the
King;  for  when  thou  makest  a  sign  with  thy  hand,  and  hast  conceived
the  intention  of  slaying  him,  his  head  will  fall  down  before  thee;  and
if  thou  shouldst  desire  the  slaughter  of  the  King  and  all  the  troops,
thou  wouldst  kill  them  without  impediment.

He  then  embarked  in  the  boat,  and  repaired  with  him  to  the  city ;
and  when  he  arrived  there,  he  went  up  to  the  palace  of  the  King,  and
entered  the  council-chamber,  where  he  saw  the  King  sitting,  with


THE  STORY  OF  ABOO-SEER  AND  ABOO-KEER.  559

the  troops  before  him,  and  he  was  in  a  state  of  excessive  grief  on
account  of  the  seal-ring,  unable  to  inform  any  one  of  the  soldiers  of
the  loss  of  the  ring.  So  when  the  King  saw  him  he  said  to  him,  Did
we  not  cast  thee  into  the  sea  ?  How  hast  thou  contrived  that  thou
hast  come  forth  from  it  ? — And  he  answered  him,  O  King  of  the  age,
when  thou  gavest  orders  to  cast  me  into  the  sea,  thy  captain  took  me
and  proceeded  with  me  to  an  island,  and  asked  me  respecting  the
cause  of  thy  rage  against  me,  saying  to  me,  What  hast  thou  done
unto  the  King,  that  he  hath  given  orders  for  thy  death  ?  I  answered
him,  By  Allah,  I  know  not  that  I  have  done  unto  him  any  foul  action.
And  he  said  to  me,  Verily  thou  enjoyedst  great  dignity  in  the  estima-
tion of  the  King,  and  perhaps  some  one  hath  envied  thee,  and  said
some  words  injurious  to  thee  in  the  presence  of  the  King,  in  con-
sequence of  which  he  hath  become  enraged  against  thee.  But  I
came  to  thee  in  thy  bath,  and  thou  treatedst  me  with  honour ;  and  in
requital  of  the  honour  that  thou  shewedst  me  in  thy  bath,  I  will  save
thee,  and  will  send  thee  to  thy  country. — He  then  put  into  the  boat
a  stone  instead  of  me,  and  cast  it  into  the  sea.  But  when  thou
madest  a  sign  to  him  with  reference  to  me,  the  seal-ring  fell  from  thy
hand  into  the  sea,  and  a  fish  swallowed  it;  and  I  was  on  the  island,
fishing,  and  that  fish  came  up  in  the  net  among  others.  Thereupon
I  took  it,  desiring  to  broil  it ;  and  when  I  opened  its  body,  I  saw  the
seal-ring  in  it.  So  I  took  it,  and  put  it  on  my  finger;  and  there
came  to  me  two  of  the  servants  of  the  kitchen,  demanding  the  fish  ;
and  I  made  a  sign  to  them,  not  knowing  the  property  of  the  seal-ring,
and  their  heads  fell  off.  Then  the  captain  came,  and  he  knew  the
ring  which  was  upon  my  finger,  and  acquainted  me  with  its  magic
influence.  I  have  therefore  brought  it  to  thee ;  for  thou  hast  acted
kindly  to  me,  and  treated  me  with  the  utmost  generosity,  and  the
good  actions  that  thou  hast  done  me  have  not  been  lost  upon  me.
This  is  thy  seal-ring :  so  take  it ;  and  if  I  have  done  unto  thee  any
thing  requiring  my  slaughter,  acquaint  me  with  my  crime,  and  slay
me,  and  thou  shalt  be  absolved  of  sin  in  shedding  my  blood. — He
then  pulled  off  the  seal-ring  from  his  finger,  and  handed  it  to  the
King.

Therefore  when  the  King  saw  Aboo-Seer's  beneficent  conduct,  he
received  the  ring  from  him,  and  put  it  on  his  finger.  His  soul  was
restored  to  him,  and,  rising  upon  his  feet,  he  embraced  Aboo-Seer,  and
said,  0  man,  thou  art  of  the  most  excellent  of  the  sons  of  the  in-
genuous !  Blame  me  not ;  but  pardon  me  for  my  injurious  conduct  to


560  THE  STORY  OF  ABOO-SEER  AND  ABOO-KEER.

thee.  Had  any  one  but  thyself  got  possession  of  this  seal-ring,  he  had
not  given  it  to  me. — Aboo-Seer  replied,  O  king  of  the  age,  if  thou
desire  that  I  should  pardon  thee,  acquaint  me  with  my  crime  that
required  thee  to  be  enraged  against  me,  so  that  thou  gavest  orders
for  my  slaughter.  The  King  said  to  him,  By  Allah,  it  hath  become
manifest  to  me  that  thou  art  innocent,  and  that  thou  art  not  guilty  in
aught,  since  thou  hast  done  this  kind  action :  but  the  dyer  said  to  me
thus  and  thus.  And  he  acquainted  him  with  that  which  the  dyer  had
said;  whereupon  Aboo-Seer  said,  By  Allah,  O  King  of  the  age,  I
know  not  the  King  of  the  Christians,  nor  in  my  life  have  I  gone  to
the  country  of  the  Christians,  nor  did  it  enter  my  mind  to  kill  thee.
But  this  dyer  was  my  companion  and  my  neighbour  in  the  city  of
Alexandria,  and  our  life  there  became  difficult :  so  we  came  forth  from
it,  on  account  of  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  our  livelihood,  and  recited
together  the  Fatehah  in  confirmation  of  our  agreement  that  the  occupied
should  feed  the  unoccupied ;  and  such  and  such  events  happened  to
me  with  him. — He  acquainted  him  with  all  that  had  happened  to
him  with  Aboo-Keer  the  dyer,  and  how  he  had  taken  his  money,  and
abandoned  him  sick  in  the  chamber  that  was  in  the  Khsin,  and  that
the  door-keeper  of  the  Khan  used  to  expend  upon  him  while  he  was
sick,  until  God  restored  him.  Then  he  went  forth  and  walked  about
the  city  with  his  apparatus,  as  he  was  accustomed  to  do ;  and  while
he  was  in  the  way,  he  saw  a  dyeing-shop  before  which  the  people
were  crowding,  and,  looking  at  the  door  of  the  dyeing-shop,  he  saw
Aboo-Keer  sitting  upon  a  mastabah  there.  So  he  entered  to  salute
him,  and  he  experienced  from  him  that  beating  and  injurious  treat-
ment ;  Aboo-Keer  asserting  that  he  was  a  thief,  and  inflicting  upon
him  a  painful  beating.  And  he  acquainted  the  King  with  all  that
had  befallen  him  from  first  to  last.  Then  he  said,  0  King  of  the
age,  he  is  the  person  who  said  to  me,  Make  the  remedy,  and  present
it  to  the  King;  for  the  bath  is  perfect  in  all  things,  saving  that  this
remedy  is  wanting  in  it.  And  know,  O  King  of  the  age,  that  this
remedy  injureth  not :  we  make  it  in  our  country,  and  it  is  one  of  the
requisites  of  the  bath ;  but  I  had  forgotten  it ;  and  when  the  dyer
came  to  me,  and  I  treated  him  with  honour,  he  reminded  me  of  it,
and  said  to  me,  Make  the  remedy.  Now  send,  0  King  of  the  age,
and  bring  the  door-keeper  of  such  a  Khan,  and  the  workmen  of  the
dyeing-shop,  and  ask  them  all  respecting  the  things  with  which  I  have
acquainted  thee.

So  the  King sent  to  the door-keeper  of  the  Khan,  and  to  the


THE  STORY  OF  ABOO-SEER  AND  ABOO-KEER.  561

workmen  of  the  dyeing  shop ;  and  when  they  all  were  present,  he
asked  them,  and  they  acquainted  him  with  the  case.  He  therefore
sent. to  the  dyer,  and  said,  Bring  ye  him  barefooted,  with  his  head
uncovered,  and  with  his  hands  bound  behind  him.  Now  the  dyer  was
sitting  in  his  house,  happy  at  the  thought  of  the  slaughter  of  Aboo-
Seer,  and  he  was  not  aware  when  the  guards  of  the  King  rushed  upon
him,  and  blows  fell  upon  the  back  of  his  neck.  They  then  bound  his
hands  behind  his  back,  and  came  with  him  before  the  King;  where-
upon he  saw  Aboo-Seer  sitting  by  the  side  of  the  King,  and  the  door-
keeper of  the  Khan  and  the  workmen  of  the  dyeing-shop  standing
before  him.  So  the  door-keeper  of  the  Khan  said  to  him,  Is  not  this
thy  companion,  whose  money  thou  stolest,  and  whom  thou  leftest
with  me  in  the  chamber  sick,  and  to  whom  thou  didst  such  and  such
things  ?  And  the  workmen  of  the  dyeing-shop  said  to  him,  Is  not  this
he  whom  thou  commandedst  us. to  seize,  and  whom  we  beat?  The
baseness  of  Aboo-Keer,  therefore,  was  manifest  to  the  King,  and  his
deserving  more  severe  torture  than  that  which  is  inflicted  by  Munkar
and  Nekeer  :13  so  the  King  said,  Take  ye  him,  and  parade  him  as  an
example  through  the  city,  and  put  him  into  a  sack,  and  cast  him  into
the  sea.  Upon  this,  Aboo-Seer  said,  0  King  of-  the  age,  accept  my
intercession  for  him;  for  I  have  pardoned  him  all  that  he  hath  done
unto  me.  But  the  King  replied,  If  thou  hast  pardoned  him  for  his
injurious  conduct  to  thee,  I  cannot  pardon  him  for  his  injurious
conduct  to  me.  He  then  cried  out  and  said,  Take  ye  him !  They
therefore  took  him  and  paraded  him;  and  after  that,  they  put  him
into  a  sack,  and  put  with  him  the  lime,  and  cast  him  into  the  sea :  so
he  died  drowned  and  burnt.  Then  the  King  said,  0  AboorSeer,
demand  of  me  what  thou  wilt,  and  it  shall  be  given  thee.  And  he
replied,  I  demand  of  thee  that  thou  send  me  to  my  country ;  for  I  no
longer  desire  to  reside  here.

The  King  therefore  gave  him  an  abundance  of  things,  in  addition
to  his  former  wealth  and  portion  and  gifts,  and  bestowed  upon  him  a
galleon  laden  with  good  things,  the  sailors  of  which  were  memlooks,
whom,  also,  he  gave  to  him,  after  he  had  proposed  to  him  that  he
should  make  him  Wezeer,  and  he  consented  not.  Aboo-Seer  then
bade  the  King  farewell,  and  set  forth  on  his  voyage;  all  that  was  in
the  galleon  being  his  property  ;  even  the  sailors  being  his  memlooks  ;
and  he  ceased  not  to  pursue'his  voyage  until  he  arrived  at  the  district
of  Alexandria,  and  moored  by  the  shore  of  Alexandria.  Thereupon
they  landed ;  and  one  of  his  memlooks  saw  a  sack  by  the  shore :  so

ITT.  4 C


562  THE  STORY  OF  ABOO-SEER  AND  ABOO-KEER.

he  said,  O  my  master,  by  the  shore  of  the  sea  is  a  large,  heavy  sack,
the  mouth  of  which  is  tied,  and  I  know  not  what  is  in  it.  Aboo-Seer
therefore  came  and  opened  it,  and  he  saw  in  it  the  body  of  Aboo-
Keer;  the  sea  having  driven  it  towards  Alexandria.  And  he  took
the  body  forth  and  buried  it  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Alexandria,  and
made^br  it  a  tomb  for  visitation,  which  he  endowed  with  unalienable
legacies  ;  and  he  inscribed  over  the  door  of  the  building  which  enclosed
the  grave  these  verses  : — •

A  man  is  known  among  others  by  Lis  actions,14  and  the  deeds  of  the  ingenuous

and  generous  are  like  his  origin.
Backbite  not,  lest  thou  be  backbitten ;  for  probably,  of  him  who  saith  a  thing,

the  like  will  be  said :
And  abstain  from  shameful  words :  utter  them  not  when  thoa  speakest  seriously

or  when  thou  jestest ;
For  the  dog,  if  he  retain  good  qualities,  is  domesticated,  while  the  lion  is  chained

in  consequence  of  his  ignorance ;

And  the  carcasses  of  the  desert  float  upon  the  sea,  while  the  fine  pearl  lies  neg-
lected on  its  lowest  sands.
A  sparrow  would  not  offer  molestation  to  a  hawk,  were  it  not  for  its  folly,  and

the  weakness  of  its  sense.
In  the  sky  is  written,  upon  the  pages  of  the  air,  He  who  doth  kind  actions  will

experience  the  like.
Attempt  not  to  extract  sugar  from  the  colocynth ;  for  the  thing  will  prove  to

be,  in  taste,  like  its  origin.

Then  Aboo-Seer  remained  a  while,  after  which,  God  took  his  soul,
and  they  buried  him  near  the  sepulchre  of  his  companion  Aboo-Keer;
and  on  that  account,  this  place  was  called  Aboo-Keer  and  Aboo-Seer ;
but  it  is  commonly  known  now  by  the  name  of  Aboo-Keer.15 — This  is
what  hath  been  related  to  us  of  their  story. — Extolled  be  the  perfection
of  Him  who  endureth  for  ever,  and  by  whose  will  the  nights  and  days
interchange !


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-SEVENTH.


NOTE  1.  "  ABOO-SEEH"  is  a  modern  Arabic  corruption  of  the  Coptic  "  Bousiri"  or
"  Pousiri,''  the  "  Busiris"  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans  ;  but  it  is  more  properly  written
in  Arabic  "  Booseer."  It  is  the  name  of  several  villages  in  Egypt,  the  chief  of  which  is
in  the  Delta,  on  the  eastern  branch  of  the  Nile. — The  like  may  be  inferred  with  regard
to  "Aboo-Keer,''  commonly  written  by  the  French  and  English  "Ahoukir."  The
place  so  named  (well  known  to  my  countrymen)  marks  the  site  of  the  ancient  Canopus.

NOTE  2.  As  it  is  certain  that  most  of  the  stories  in  this  work  were  written  at  least
half  a  century  before  the  introduction  of  tobacco  into  the  East  (which  happened  about
the  close  of  the  sixteenth  century),  this  tale  must  have  been  altered  by  a  copyist,  or
added  to  the  original  series :  and  I  think  it  most  probable  that  the  latter  was  the  case.
[The  tale,  with  the  mention  of  tobacco,  is  contained  in  the  Calcutta  edition  of  the
complete  work,  and  in  the  Breslau  edition.  The  former  edition  seems  to  have  been
derived,  though  not  immediately,  from  the  same  source  as  Mr.  Lane's  original ;  but  the
Breslau  edition  differs  from  it  very  considerably  throughout. — ED.]

NOTE  3. See  Note  21  to  Chapter  xi.

NOTE  4. Also  called  simply  "  nusf." See  Note  1 7  to  Chapter  iii.

NOTE  5.  Many  a  poor  barber  has  a  small  cup  of  tinned  copper,  or  of  brass,  instead
of  the  large  basin  of  tinned  copper.

NOTE  6.  In  my  original,  the  number  of  nusf  faddahs  is  said  to  have  been  thirty  ;
but  this  is  at  variance  with  what  precedes.  [So  too  in  both  the  editions  mentioned
above. — ED.]

NOTE  7.  "Batarikh"  is  a  mess  composed  of  the  roe  of  small  salted  fish,  which  are
called  "feseekh."

NOTE  8.  After  what  I  have  observed  above,  in  Note  2,  it  is  perhaps  unnecessary
to  notice  the  mention  of  coffee,  which  began  to  become  a  common  beverage  throughout
Arabian  countries  about  a  century  before  the  introduction  of  tobacco  into  the  K;ist.
[This  mention  of  coffee  is  found  in  the  two  editions  referred  to  in  Note  2  of  the  present
series,  as  well  as  in  Mr.  Lane's  original. — ED.]

NOTE  9.  The  chambers  in  Khans  containing  no  furniture,  the  lodger  supplies  a
mat  or  two,  or  a  carpet,  and  perhaps  a  mattress  upon  which  to  sit  and  sleep,  with  a  few
other  portable  things.


564  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-SEVENTH.

NOTE  10.  That  is,  he  set  the  streams  of  hot  and  cold  water  in  motion. — A  de-
scription of  a  public  bath,  and  of  the  operations  performed  in  it,  has  been  given  in
Note  16  to  Chapter  ii.

NOTE  11.  The  bather,  on  entering  the  meslakh  (the  first  apartment,  or  disrobing-
room),  commits  his  purse,  and  any  other  valuables  that  he  has  about  him,  to  the  bath-
keeper,  who  locks  them  up  in  a  chest,  in  which  he  also  deposits  the  pay  that  he  receives.

NOTE  12.  The  depilatory  called  the  "  diiwa  "  (or  remedy),  which  is  employed  in  the
bath,  is  composed,  as  I  have  been  informed,  of  quick  lime  with  a  small  proportion
'about  an  eighth  part}  of  orpiment,  or  native  arsenic.  It  is  made  into  a  paste,  with
water,  before  application ;  and  loosens  the  hair  in  about  two  minutes,  when  it  is
washed  off.

NOTE  13. See  a  note  at  the  foot  of  page  534  in  Volume  ii.

NOTE  14.  "  If  a  man's  deeds  are  good,  he  is  of  good  origin  ;  but  otherwise,  he  is
not :  and  hence  it  is  said,  When  a  man's  origin  is  [otherwise]  unknown,  his  deeds
indicate  it."  l

NOTE  15. See  the  first  note  of  the  present  series.


Marginal  note  by  my  sheykh.


CHAPTER  XXVIII.

COMMENCING  WITH  PART  OF  THE  NINE  HUNDRED  AND  FORTIETH  NIGHT,  AND
ENDING  WITH  PART  OF  THE  NINE  HUNDRED  AND  FORTY-SIXTH.


THE  STOKY  OF  'ABD-ALLAH  OF  THE  LAND  AND  'ABD-ALLAH

OP  THE  SEA.

THERE  was  a  fisherman  named  'Abd-Allah,  who  had  a  numerous
family  :  he  had  nine  children  and  their  mother,  and  was  very  poor,
possessing  nothing  but  his  net.  He  used  to  go  every  day  to  the  sea
to  fish  ;  and  when  he  caught  little,  he  sold  it,  and  expended  its  price
upon  his  children,  according  as  God  supplied  him  ;  but  if  he  caught
much,  he  would  cook  a  good  dish,  and  buy  fruit,  and  cease  not  to
expend  until  there  remained  not  aught  in  his  possession  ;  whereupon


566  THE  STORY  OF  'ABD-ALLAH  OF  THE  LAND

he  would  say  within  himself,  The  supply  necessary  for  to-morrow  will
come  to-morrow.  Now  when  his  wife  gave  birth  to  another,  his
children  became  ten  persons ;  and  the  man  that  day  possessed  not
any  thing  whatever :  so  his  wife  said  to  him,  O  my  master,  see  for
me  something  wherewith  I  may  sustain  myself.  He  answered  her,
Lo,  I  am  going,  relying  upon  the  blessing  of  God  (whose  name  be
exalted !),  to  the  sea  this  day,  for  the  luck  of  this  new-born  child,
that  we  may  see  its  fortune.  And  she  replied,  Place  thy  dependence
upon  God.  Accordingly  he  took  the  net,  and  repaired  to  the  sea.
He  then  cast  the  net  for  the  luck  of  that  little  infant,  and  said,
O  Allah,  make  his  subsistence  easy,  not  difficult ;  and  abundant,  not
little!  He  waited  over  it  a  while,  and  then  drew  it,  and  it  came
forth  full  of  rubbish  and  sand  and  pebbles  and  grass;  and  he  saw
not  in  it  any  fish ;  neither  many  did  he  see,  nor  few.  So  he  cast  it  a
second  time,  and  waited  over  it,  and  then  drew  it ;  but  he  saw  not  in
it  fish.  And  he  cast  a  third  time,  and  a  fourth,  and  a  fifth  ;  but
there  came  not  up  in  it  any  fish.  He  therefore  removed  to  another
place,  and  begged  his  subsistence  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !),
and  ceased  not  to  do  thus  till  the  close  of  the  day ;  but  caught  not  a
single  minnow.1  And  he  wondered  in  his  mind,  and  said,  Hath  God
created  this  new-born  child  without  allotting  it  subsistence  ?  This
can  never  be :  for  He  who  hath  opened  the  jaws  hath  undertaken  to
provide  for  them  the  necessary  subsistence ;  and  God  (whose  name  be
exalted  !)  is  bountiful,  a  liberal  supplier  of  the  necessaries  of  life.

He  then  took  up  the  net,  and  returned  with  broken  spirit,  his
heart  being  occupied  with  care  for  his  family,  because  he  had  left
them  without  food,  especially  as  his  wife  had  just  given  birth  to  a
child.  He  ceased  not  to  walk  on,  saying  within  himself,  What  is  to
be  done  ;  and  what  shall  I  say  to  the  children  this  night  ?  Then  he
came  before  the  oven  of  a  baker,  and  saw  a  crowd  before  it.  The
time  was  a  time  of  dearness ;  and  in  those  days,  there  existed  not  in
the  possession  of  the  people  more  than  a  scanty  supply  of  provisions,
and  the  people  were  offering  money  to  the  baker,  but  he  paid  no
attention  to  any  one  of  them,  on  account  of  the  greatness  of  the
crowd.  The  fisherman  however  stood  looking,  and  smelling  the  smell
of  the  hot  bread,  and  his  soul  desired  it  by  reason  of  his  hunger ;
and  thereupon  the  baker  saw  him,  and  called  out  to  him,  saying,
Come  hither,  O  fisherman !  So  he  advanced  to  him  ;  and  the  baker
s:iul  to  him,  Dost  thou  desire  bread  ?  And  he  was  silent.  The
baker  said  to  him,  Speak,  and  be  not  abashed  :  for  God  is  bountiful.


AND  'ABD-ALLAH  OF  THE  SEA.  667

If  thou  have  not  with  thec  money,  I  will  give  thee,  and  will  have
patience  with  thee  until  good  shall  betide  thee. — The  fisherman
therefore  replied,  By  Allah,  0  master,  I  have  not  money :  but  give
me  bread  sufficient  for  my  family,  and  I  will  leave  this  net  in  pawn
with  thee  till  to-morrow.  But  the  baker  said  to  him,  0  poor  man,
verily  this  net  is  as  it  were  thy  shop,  and  the  door  of  thy  subsistence ;
mid  if  thou  give  it  in  pawn,  with  what  wilt  thou  fish  ?  Acquaint  me
then  with  the  quantity  that  will  suffice  thee. — He  replied,  For  ten
nusf  facldahs.  And  he  gave  him  bread  for  ten  nusfs ;  after  which  he
gave  him  also  ten  nusf  faddahs,  and  said  to  him,  Take  these  ten
nusfs,  and  cook  for  thee  by  their  means  a  dish  of  food ;  so  thou  wilt
owe  twenty  nusf  faddahs,  and  to-morrow  bring  me  their  value  in  fish,
or,  if  nought  betide  thee,  come,  receive  thy  bread  and  ten  nusfs,  and
I  will  have  patience  with  thee  until  good  shall  betide  thee ;  and  after
that,  bring  me  fish  to  the  value  of  that  which  I  shall  be  entitled  to
receive  from  thee. — So  the  fisherman  replied,  May  God  (whose  name
be  exalted!)  reward  thee,  and  recompense  thee  for  me  with  every
thing  good !  He  then  took  the  bread  and  the  ten  nusf  faddahs,  and
went  away  happy,  and,  having  purchased  for  him  what  he  easily
could,  went  in  to  his  wife  ;  and  he  saw  her  sitting,  soothing  the
children,  who  were  weeping  by  reason  of  their  hunger,  and  she  was
saying  to  them,  This  instant  your  father  will  bring  something  for  you
to  eat.  So  when  he  went  in  to  them,  he  put  down  for  them  the
bread,  and  they  ate ;  and  he  acquainted  his  wife  with  that  which  had
happened  to  him ;  whereupon  she  said  to  him,  God  is  bountiful.

And  on  the  following  day,  he  took  up  his  net,  and  went  forth  from
his  house,  saying,  I  beg  thee,  O  Lord,  to  supply  me,  this  day,  with
that  which  shall  whiten  my  face 2  in  the  eyes  of  the  baker !  And
when  he  came  to  the  sea,  he  proceeded  to  cast  the  net  and  draw  it ;
but  there  came  not  forth  in  it  any  fish.  He  ceased  not  to  do  so  until
the  close  of  the  day,  and  got  nothing.  So  he  returned  in  great  grief;
and  the  way  to  his  house  led  by  the  oven  of  the  baker.  He  therefore
said  within  himself,  By  what  way  can  I  go  to  my  house  ? 3  But  I
will  quicken  my  pace,  that  the  baker  may  not  see  me. — And  when  he
came  to  the  oven  of  the  baker,  he  saw  a  crowd  ;  and  he  hastened  in  his
pace,  by  reason  of  his  abashment  at  the  baker,  in  order  that  he  might
not  see  him  :  but,  lo,  the  baker  raised  his  eyes  towards  him,  and  cried
out,  saying,  0  fisherman,  come  hither ;  receive  thy  bread  and  the
money  for  thy  expenditure ;  for  thou  hast  forgotten  !  He  replied,
No,  by  Allah  ;  I  forgot  not ;  but  I  was  abashed  at  thee ;  for  I  have


568


THE  STORY  OF  'ABD-ALLAH  OF  THE  LAND


not  caught  any  fish  this  day.  The  baker  said  to  him,  Be  not  abashed.
Did  I  not  say  to  thee,  Take  thy  leisure,  until  good  shall  betide  thee  ?
— Then  he  gave  him  the  bread  and  the  ten  nusfs,  and  he  went  to  his
wife,  and  informed  her  of  the  news  ;  upon  which  she  said  to  him,  God
is  bountiful.  If  it  be  the  will  of  God,  good  will  betide  thee,  and  thou
shalt  pay  him  all  that  is  due  to  him. — And  he  ceased  not  to  continue
thus  for  the  space  of  forty  days,  every  day  going  to  the  sea,  and  re-
maining from  the  rising  of  the  sun  to  its  setting,  and  returning  with-
out fish,  and  receiving  bread,  and  money  for  his  expenditure,  from
the  baker,  who  mentioned  not  to  him  the  fish  any  day  of  those  clays,
nor  neglected  him  as  men  generally  would  have  done,  but  gave  him
the  ten  nusfs  and  the  bread;  and  every  time  that  the  fisherman  said
to  him,  0  rny  brother,  reckon  with  me, — he  would  reply,  Go  :  this  is
not  the  time  for  reckoning :  wait  until  good  shall  betide  thee,  and
then  I  will  reckon  with  thee.  So  he  would  pray  for  him,  and  depart
from  him  thanking  him.  And  on  the  one  and  fortieth  day,  he  said
to  his  wife,  I  desire  to  cut  up  this  net,  and  be  relieved  of  this  mode  of
life. — Wherefore  ?  said  she.  He  answered  her,  It  seemeth  that  my
supply  of  subsistence  from  the  sea  is  ended.  And  how  long,  he
added,  shall  this  state  continue  ?  By  Allah,  I  am  dissolved  by  abash-
ment at  the  baker,  and  I  will  no  more  go  to  the  sea,  that  I  may  not
pass  by  his  oven ;  for  there  is  no  way  for  me  save  by  his  oven ;  and
every  time  that  I  pass  by  it,  he  calleth  me,  and  giveth  me  the  bread
and  the  ten  nusfs.  How  long  then  shall  I  run  in  debt  to  him  ? — But
she  replied,  Praise  be  to  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !)  who  hath
moved  his  heart  to  favour  thee  so  that  he  giveth  thee  the  food !  And
what  dost  thou  dislike  in  this  ? — He  said,  I  now  owe  him  a  great  sum


AND  'ABD-ALLAH  OF  THE  SEA.  569

of  money,  and  inevitably  he  will  demand  his  due.  His  wife  said  to
him,  Hath  he  vexed  thee  with  words  ?  He  answered,  No ;  nor  would
he  reckon  with  me ;  but  would  say  to  me,  Wait  until  good  shall  betide
thee. — Then,  replied  his  wife,  when  he  demandeth  of  thee,  say  to
him,  Wait  until  the  good  that  I  and  thou  hope  for  shall  betide.
And  he  said  to  her,  When  will  the  good  that  we  hope  for  come  ?
She  answered  him,  God  is  bountiful.  And  he  replied,  Thou  hast
spoken  truth.

He  then  took  up  his  net,  and  repaired  to  the  sea,  saying,  0  Lord,
supply  rne,  if  only  with  one  fish,  that  I  may  give  it  to  the  baker !
Then  he  cast  the  net  in  the  sea,  and  drew  it,  and  found  it  heavy ;  and
he  ceased  not  to  labour  at  it  until  he  was  violently  fatigued ;  but
when  he  drew  it  forth,  he  saw  in  it  a  dead  ass,  swollen,  and  of  abomi-
nable odour :  so  his  soul  was  wearied.  He  extricated  it  from  the  net,
and  said,  There  is  no  strength  nor  power  but  in  God,  the  High,  the
Great !  I  have  been  tired  of  saying  to  this  woman,  There  remaineth
for  me  no  means  of  subsistence  in  the  sea :  let  me  abandon  this  occu-
pation : — and  of  her  replying,  God  is  bountiful :  good  will  betide
thee.  Is  then  this  dead  ass  that  good  ? — Exceeding  grief  affected
him,  and  he  went  to  another  place,  that  he  might  be  remote  from  the
smell  of  the  ass,  and  took  the  net,  and  cast  it,  and  waited  over  it
some  time.  Then  he  drew  it,  and  again  found  it  heavy ;  and  he
ceased  not  to  labour  at  it  until  blood  issued  from  the  palms  of  his
hands  ;  and  when  he  had  drawn  forth  the  net,  he  saw  in  it  a  human
being.*  So  he  imagined  that  he  was  an  'Efreet,  of  those  whom  the
lord  Suleyman  used  to  imprison  in  bottles  of  brass,  and  cast  into  the
sea,  and  that,  the  bottle  having  broken  by  reason  of  the  length  of
years,  that  'Efreet  had  issued  from  it,  and  come  up  in  the  net.  He
therefore  fled  from  him,  and  began  to  say,  Mercy !  Mercy !  0  'Efreet
of  Suleyman ! — But  the  human  being  cried  out  to  him  from  within
the  net,  saying,  Come  hither,  0  fisherman  !  Flee  not  from  me ;  for
I  am  a  human  being  like  thee.  Liberate  me  then,  that  thou  mayest
obtain  my  recompense. — So  when  the  fisherman  heard  his  words,  his
heart  became  tranquillized,  and  he  came  to  him  and  said  to  him,  Art
thou  not  an  'Efreet  of  the  Jinn?  He  answered,  No;  but  I  am  a
man,  a  believer  in  God  and  his  Apostle.  The  fisherman  said  to  him,
And  who  cast  thee  into  the  sea  ?  He  replied,  I  am  of  the  children  of
the  sea.  I  was  going  about,  and  thou  threwest  upon  me  the  net.
We  are  nations  obedient  to  the  ordinances  of  God,  and  we  are  com-
passionate to  the  creatures  of  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !) ;  and

III.  4 D


570  THE  STOIJY  OF  'AUD-ALLAH  OF  THE  LAND

were  it  not  that  I  fear  and  dread  being  of  the  disobedient,  I  should
have  rent  thy  net ;  bat  I  willingly  submit  to  that  which  God  hath
decreed  to  befall  me ;  and  thou,  if  thou  deliver  me,  wilt  become  my
owner,  and  I  shall  become  thy  captive.  Wilt  tbou  then  emancipate
me  with  the  desire  of  seeing  the  face  of  God5  (whose  name  be
exalted !),  and  make  a  covenant  with  me,  and  become  my  companion  ?
1  will  come  to  thee  every  day  in  this  place,  and  thou  shalt  come  to
me,  and  bring  for  me  a  present  of  the  fruits  of  the  land.  For  with
you  are  grapes  and  figs  and  water-melons  and  peaches  and  pomegra-
nates and  other  fruits,  and  every  thing  that  thou  wilt  bring  me  will
be  acceptable  from  thee.  And  with  us  are  coral  and  pearls  and
chrysolites  and  emeralds  and  jacinths  and  other  jewels.  So  I  will
fill  for  thee  the  basket  in  which  thou  wilt  bring  me  the  fruits  with
minerals  consisting  of  the  jewels  of  the  sea.  What  then  sayest  thou,

0  my  brother,  of  this  proposal  ? — The  fisherman  answered  him,  Let
the  Fatehah  be  recited  in  confirmation  of  the  agreement  between  me
;md  thee  as  to  this  proposal.

Accordingly  each  of  them  recited  the  Fatehah,  and  the  fisherman
liberated  him  from  the  net,  and  said  to  him,  What  is  thy  name  ?
He  answered,  My  name  is  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Sea;  and  if  thou  come
to  this  place,  and  see  me  not,  call  out  and  say,  Where  art  thou,  0
'Abd-Allah,  O  thou  of  the  Sea  ? — And  I  will  be  with  thee  instantly.
And  thou  (he  added),  what  is  thy  name  ?  The  fisherman  answered,
My  name  is  'Abd-Allah.  So  the  other  replied,  Thou  art  'Abd-Allah
of  the  Land,  and  I  am  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Sea.  Now  stay  here  while

1  go  and  bring  thee  a  present. — And  he  said,  I  hear  and  obey. Then
'Abd-Allah  of  the  Sea  went  into  the  sea; and  thereupon 'Abd-Allah
of  the  Land  repented  of  his  having  liberated  him  from  the  net ;  and
he  said  within  himself,  How  do  I  know  that  he  will  return  to  me?
He  only  laughed  at  me,  so  that  I  liberated  him ;  and  had  I  kept  him,
I  might  have  diverted  the  people  in  the  city  with  the  sight  of  him,
and  received  money  from  all  the  people  for  shewing  him,  and  entered
with  him  the  houses  of  the  great  men. — Therefore  he  repented  of  his
having  liberated  him,  and  said  to  himself,  Thy  prey  hath  gone  from
thy  hand. But  while  he  was  lamenting  his  escape  from  his  hand,  lo,
'Abd-Allah  of  the  Sea  returned  to  him,  with  his  hands  filled  with
pearls  and  coral  and  emeralds  and  jacinths  and  other  jewels,  and  said
to  him,  Receive,  O  my  brother,  and  blame  me  not ;  for  I  have  not  a
basket;  if  I  had,  I  would  have  filled  it  for  thee. So  thereupon  'Abd-
Allah  of  the  Land  rejoiced,  and  received  from  him  the  jewels ;  and


AND  'ABD-ALLAH  OF  THE  SEA.  571

'Abel-Allah  of  the  Sea  said  to  him,  Every  day  thou  shalt  come  to  this
place  before  sunrise.  He  then  bade  him  farewell,  and  departed,  and
entered  the  sea.

But  as  to  the  fisherman,  he  entered  the  city,  joyful,  and  ceased
not  to  walk  on  until  he  came  to  the  oven  of  the  baker,  when  he  said
to  him,  0  my  brother,  good  hath  betided  us :  therefore  reckon  with
me.  The  baker  replied,  No  reckoning  is  necessary.  If  thou  have
with  thee  any  thing,  give  me ;  and  if  thou  have  not  with  thee  any
thing,  receive  thy  bread,  and  the  money  for  thy  expenditure,  and  go,
and  wait  until  good  shall  betide  thee.  So  he  said  to  him,  0  my
companion,  good  hath  betided  me  from  the  bounty  of  God,  and  I  owe
thee  a  large  sum  ;  but,  receive  this.  And  he  took  for  him  a  handful
of  pearls  and  corals  and  jacinths  and  other  jewels,  that  handful
being  half  of  what  he  had  with  him ;  and  he  gave  it  to  the  baker,
and  said  to  him,  Give  me  some  money  that  I  may  expend  it  this  day,
until  I  shall  sell  these  minerals.  He  therefore  gave  him  all  the
money  that  he  had  at  his  command,  and  all  the  bread  that  was  in  the
basket  which  he  had  with  him  ;  and  the  baker  was  rejoiced  with  those
minerals,  and  said  to  the  fisherman,  I  am  thy  slave  and  thy  servant.
He  carried  all  the  bread  that  he  had  with  him  on  his  head,  and
walked  behind  him  to  the  house,  and  the  fisherman  gave  the  bread  to
his  wife  and  his  children.  The  baker  then  went  to  the  market,  and
brought  meat  and  vegetables  and  all  kinds  of  fruit.  He  abandoned
the  oven,  and  remained  all  that  day  occupying  himself  with  the
service  of  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land,  and  performing  for  him  his  affairs.
So  the  fisherman  said  to  him,  O  my  brother,  thou  hast  wearied  thy-
self. The  baker  replied,  This  is  incumbent  on  me;  for  I  have  become
thy  servant,  and  thy  beneficence  hath  inundated  me.  But  the  fisher-
man said  to  him,  Thou  wast  my  benefactor  in  the  time  of  distress  and
dearness.  And  the  baker  passed  the  ensuing  night  with  him,  enjoying
good  eating ;  and  he  became  a  faithful  friend  to  the  fisherman.  The
fisherman  informed  his  wife  of  his  adventure  with  'Abd-Allah  of  the
Sea,  whereat  she  rejoiced,  and  she  said  to  him,  Conceal  thy  secret,
lest  the  magistrates  tyrannize  over  thee.  But  he  replied,  If  I  conceal
my  secret  from  all  other  people,  I  will  not  conceal  it  from  the  baker.

He  arose  in  the  morning  of  the  following  day,  having  filled  a
basket  with  fruits  of  all  kinds  in  the  preceding  evening,  and  he  took
it  up  before  sunrise,  and  repaired  to  the  sea,  put  it  down  on  the
shore,  and  said,  Where  art  thou,  0  'Abd-Allah,  O  thou  of  the  Sea  '(
And  he  answered  him,  At  thy  service; — and  came  forth  to  him.  He


therefore  presented  to  him  the  fruit,  and  he  took  it  up,  and  descended
with  it,  diving  into  the  sea,  and  was  absent  a  while ;  after  which  he
came  forth,  having  with  him  the  basket  full  of  all  kinds  of  minerals
and  jewels.  So  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land  put  it  upon  his  head,  and
departed  with  it ;  and  when  he  came  to  the  oven  of  the  baker,  the
baker  said  to  him,  O  my  master,  I  have  baked  for  thee  forty  shureyks,6
and  sent  them  to  thy  house  j  and  now  I  will  bake  bread  of  the
finest  flour,  and  when  it  is  done,  I  will  convey  it  to  the  house,  and  go
to  bring  thee  the  vegetables  and  the  meat.  Upon  this,  'Abd-Allah
took  for  him,  from  the  basket,  three  handfuls,  and  gave  them  to  him,
and  went  to  the  house,  where  he  put  down  the  basket,  and  took,  of
each  kind  of  jewels,  one  jewel  of  great  value.  Then  he  repaired  to
the  jewel-market,  and,  stopping  at  the  shop  of  the  Sheykh  of  the
market,  said,  Purchase  of  me  these  jewels.  He  replied,  Shew  them
to  me.  So  he  shewed  them  to  him  ;  and  the  Sheykh  said  to  him,
Hast  thou  any  beside  these  ?  He  answered,  I  have  a  basket  full.


THE  STORY  OF  'ABD-ALLAH  OF  THE  LAND,  &c.  573

The  Sheykh  said  to  him,  Where  is  thy  house?  He  answered  him,
In  such  a  quarter.  And  the  Sheykh  took  from  him  the  jewels,  and
said  to  his  servants,  Lay  hold  of  him  ;  for  he  is  the  thief  who  stole
the  things  of  the  Queen,  the  wife  of  the  Sultan.  He  then  ordered
them  to  beat  him,  and  they  did  so,  and  bound  his  hands  behind  his
back  ;  and  the  Sheykh  arose,  with  all  the  people  of  the  jewel-market,
and  they  began  to  say,  We  have  taken  the  thief.  Some  of  them  said,
None  stole  the  goods  of  such  a  one  but  this  villain  : — and  others
said,  None  stole  all  that  was  in  the  house  of  such  a  one  but  he : — and
some  of  them  said  thus,  and  others  said  thus.  All  this  while,  he  was
silent ;  he  returned  not  to  any  one  of  them  a  reply,  nor  did  he  utter
to  him  a  sentence,  until  they  stationed  him  before  the  King ;  where-
upon the  Sheykh  said,  0  King  of  the  age,  when  the  necklace  of  the
Queen  was  stolen,  thou  sentest  and  acquaintedst  us,  and  requiredst
of  us  the  capture  of  the  offender;  and  I  strove  above  the  rest  of  the
people,  and  have  captured  for  thee  the  offender.  Lo,  here'he  is
before  thee,  and  these  jewels  we  have  rescued  from  his  hand. — The
King  therefore  said  to  the  eunuch,  Take  these  minerals,  and  shew
them  to  the  Queen,  and  say  to  her,  Are  these  thy  goods  that  thou
hast  lost  ?  Accordingly  the  eunuch  took  them,  and  went  in  with
them  before  the  Queen ;  and  when  she  saw  them,  she  wondered  at
them,  and  she  sent  to  say  to  the  King,  I  have  found  my  necklace  in
my  place,  and  these  are  not  my  property ;  but  these  jewels  are  better
than  the  jewels  of  my  necklace;  therefore  act  not  unjustly  to  the
man  ;  and  if  he  will  sell  them,  purchase  them  of  him  for  thy  daughter,
Umm-es-So'ood,7  that  we  may  put  them  for  her  upon  a  necklace.

So  when  the  eunuch  returned,  and  acquainted  the  King  with  that
which  the  Queen  had  said,  he  cursed  the  Sheykh  of  the  jewellers,  him
and  his  company,  with  the  curse  of  'Ad  and  Thamood  ;8  whereupon
they  said,  0  King  of  the  age,  we  knew  that  this  man  was  a  poor
fisherman ;  so  we  deemed  those  things  too  much  for  him  to  possess,
and  imagined  that  he  had  stolen  them.  But  he  replied,  O  base
wretches,  do  ye  deem  good  things  too  much  for  a  believer?  Where-
fore did  ye  not  ask  him?  Perhaps  God  (whose  name  be  exalted!)
hath  blessed  him  with  them  in  a  way  he  did  not  reckon  upon ;  and
wherefore  do  ye  assert  him  to  be  a  thief,  and  disgrace  him  among  the
people  ?  Go  forth  !  May  God  not  bless  you  ! — They  therefore  went
forth  in  a  state  of  fear.  The  King  then  said,  O  man,  may  God  bless
thee  in  that  which  He  hath  bestowed  on  thee !  And  thou  hast  promise
of  indemnity.  But  acquaint  me  with  the  truth.  Whence  came  to


571  THE  STORY  OF  'AUD-ALLAH  OF  THE  LAX!)

thee  these  jewels  ? For  I  am  a  King,  and  the  like  of  them  exist  not

in  my  possession. — So  he  answered,  0  King of  the  age,  I have  a

basket  full  of  them  ;  and  the  case  is  thus  and  thus. And  he  informed

him  of  his  companionship  with  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Sea,  and  said  to

him,  An  agreement  hath  been  made  between  me  and  him,  that  I  shall

every  day  fill  for  him  the  basket  with  fruits,  and  he  shall  fill  it  for  me

with  these  jewels. The  King  therefore  said  to  him,  0  man,  this  is

thy  lot ;  but  wealth  requireth  an  exalted  station,  and  I  will  prevent

men's  domineering  over  thee in these  days. Perhaps,  however,  I

may  be  deposed,  or  may  die,  and  another  may  be  appointed  in  my

stead,  and  may  slay  thee  on  account  of  his  love  of  worldly  goods,  and

covetousness. I  therefore  desire  to  marry  thee  to  my  daughter,  and

to  make  thee  my  Wezeer,  and  bequeath  to  thee  the  kingdom  after  me,

that  no  one  may  covet  thy  possessions  after  my  death. — Then  the

King  said,  Take  ye  this  man,  and  conduct  him  into  the  bath. So

they  took  him,  and  washed  him,  and  they  clad  him  in  apparel  of  the

apparel  of  Kings,  and  led  him  forth  into  the  presence  of  the  King,

who  thereupon  appointed  him  Wezeer  unto  him. He  sent  also  the

couriers,  and  the  soldiers  of  the  guard,  and  all  the  wives  of  the  gi-cat

men,  to  his  house  ;  and  they  clad  his  wife  in  the  apparel  of  the  wives

of  Kings,  clad  her  children  likewise,  and  mounted  her  in  a  litter;9

and  all  the  wives  of  the  great  men,  and  the  troops  and  the  couriers,

and  the  soldiers  of  the  guard,  walked  before  her,  and  conducted  her

to  the  King's  palace,  with  the  little  infant  in  her  bosom. They  brought

in  her  elder  children  to  the  King,  who  treated  them  with  honour,  took

them  upon  his  lap,  and  seated  them  by  his  side. And  they  were  nine

male  children  ; and  the  King  was destitute  of  male  offspring,  not

having  been  blessed  with  any  child  except  that  daughter,  whose  name

was  Urnm-es-So'ood. And  as  to  the  Queen,  she  treated  the  wife  of

'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land  with  honour,  and  bestowed  favours  upon  her,

and  made  her  Wezeereh  to  her. The  King  ga\re  orders  to  perform

the  ceremony  of  the  contract  of  the  marriage  of  'Abd-Allah  of  the

Land  to  his  daughter,  and  he  assigned  as  her  dowry  all  the' jewels  and

minerals  that  he  had,  and  they  commenced  the  festivity ;  the  King

commanding  that  a  proclamation  should  be  made  to  decorate  the  city

on  account  of  the  marriage-festivity  of  his  daughter.

Then,  on  the  following  day,  after  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land  had
introduced  himself  to  the  King's  daughter,  the  King  looked  from  the
window,  and  saw  'Abd-Allah  carrying  upon  his  head  a  basket  full  of
fruits.  So  he  said  to  him,  What  is  this  that  is  with  thee,  O  my  son-


AND  'AUD-ALLAH  OF  THE  SEA.  575

in-law,  and  whither  goest  thou  ?  He  answered,  To  my  companion,
'Abd-Allah  of  the  Sea.  The  King  said  to  him,  O  my  son-in-law,
this  is  not  the  time  to  go  to  thy  companion.  But  he  replied,  I  fear
to  be  unfaithful  to  him  with  respect  to  the  time  of  promise ;  for  he
would  reckon  me  a  liar,  and  say  to  me,  Worldly  matters  have  diverted
tlice  from  coming  to  me.  And  the  King  said,  Thou  hast  spoken
truth.  Go  to  thy  companion.  May  God  aid  thee ! lo — So  he  walked
through  the  city,  on  his  way  to  his  companion,  and,  the  people  having
become  acquainted  with  him,  he  heard  them  say,  This  is  the  son-in-law
of  the  King,  going  to  exchange  the  fruits  for  the  jewels.  And  he  who
was  ignorant  of  him,  and  knew  him  not,  would  say,  O  man,  for  how
much  is  the  pound  ?  Come  hither  :  sell  to  me. — Whereupon  he  would
answer  him,  Wait  for  me  until  I  return  to  thee.  And  he  would  not
vex  any  one.  Then  he  went,  and  met  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Sea,  and
gave  him  the  fruits ;  and  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Sea  gave  him  for  them
jewels  in  exchange. — He  ceased  not  to  do  thus,  and  every  day  he
passed  by  the  oven  of  the  baker,  and  saw  it  closed.  He  continued
thus  for  the  space  of  ten  days;  and  when  he  had  not  seen  the  baker,
and  saw  his  oven  closed,  he  said  within  himself,  Verily  this  is  a
wonderful  thing !  Whither  can  the  baker  have  gone  ? — He  then
asked  his  neighbour,  saying  to  him,  O  my  brother,  where  is  thy
neighbour  the  baker,  and  what  hath  God  done  with  him  ?  He  an-
swered, O  my  master,  he  is  sick :  he  doth  not  come  forth  from  his
house.  So  lie  said  to  him,  Where  is  his  house  ?  The  man  answered
him,  In  such  a  quarter.  He  therefore  repaired  thither,  and  inquired
for  him ;  and  when  he  knocked  at  the  door,  the  baker  looked  from
the  window,  and  saw  his  companion  the  fisherman  with  a  full  basket
upon  his  head.  So  he  descended  to  him,  and  opened  to  him  the  door;
and  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land  threw  himself  upon  him,  and  embraced
him,  and  said  to  him,  How  art  thou,  O  my  companion  ?  For  every
day  I  pass  by  the  oven  and  see  it  closed.  Then  I  asked  thy  neighbour,
and  he  informed  me  that  thou  wast  sick.  I  therefore  inquired  for  thy
house,  that  I  might  see  thee. — The  baker  replied,  May  God  recompense
thee  for  me  with  every  thmg  good !  I  have  no  disease ;  but  it  was
told  me  that  the  King  had  taken  thee,  because  some  of  the  people  lied
to  him,  and  asserted  that  thou  wast  a  thief:  so  I  feared,  and  closed
the  oven,  and  hid  myself. —  Abd-Allah  of  the  Land  said,  Thou  hast
spoken  truth.  And  he  informed  him  of  his  case,  and  of  the  events
that  had  happened  to  him  with  the  King  and  the  Sheykh  of  the  jewel-
market,  and  said  to  him,  The  King  hath  married  me  to  his  daughter,


and  made  me  his  Wezeer.  He  then  said  to  him,  Take  what  is  in  this
basket  as  thy  lot,  and  fear  not.

After  that,  he  went  forth  from  him,  having  dispelled  from  him  his
fear,  and  repaired  to  the  King  with  the  basket  empty.  So  the  King
said  to  him,  0  my  son-in-law,  it  seemeth  that  thou  hast  not  met  with
thy  companion  'Abd- Allah  of  the  Sea  this  day.  He  replied,  I  went  to
him,  and  what  he  gave  me  I  have  given  to  my  companion  the  baker;
for  I  owe  him  kindness.  The  King  said,  "Who  is  this  baker  ?  He
answered,  He  is  a  man  of  kind  disposition,  and  such  and  such  events
happened  to  me  with  him  in  the  days  of  poverty,  and  he  neglected  me
not  any  day,  nor  broke  my  heart.  The  King  said,  What  is  his  name  ?
He  answered,  His  name  is  'Abd-Allah  the  baker,  and  my  name  is
'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land,  and  my  other  companion's  name  is  'Abd-
Allah  of  the  Sea.  Upon  this,  the  King  said,  And  my  name  is  'Abd-
Allah,  and  the  servants  of  God11  are  all  brethren.  Send  therefore
to  thy  companion  the  baker:  bring  him  that  we  may  make  him
Wezeer  of  the  Left.  Accordingly  he  sent  to  him  ;  and  when  he  came
before  the  King,  the  King  invested  him  with  the  apparel  of  Wezeer,
and  appointed  him  Wezeer  of  the  Left,  appointing  'Abd-Allah  of  the
Land  Wezeer  of  the  Right.  Abd-Allah  of  the  Land  continued  in  this
state  a  whole  year,  every  day  taking  the  basket  full  of  fruits,  and  re-
turning with  it  full  of  jewels  and  minerals ;  and  when  the  fruits  were
exhausted  from  the  gardens,  he  used  to  take  raisins  and  almonds  and
hazel-nuts  and  walnuts  and  figs  and  other  things ;  and  all  that  he  took
to  him  he  accepted  from  him,  and  he  returned  to  him  the  basket  full
of  jewels  as  was  his  custom.

Now  it  happened,  one  day,  that  he  took  the  basket  full  of  dried
fruits,  according  to  his  custom,  and  his  companion  received  them  from
him  ;  after  which,  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land  sat  upon  the  shore,  and
'Abd-Allah  of  the  Sea  sat  in  the  water,  near  the  shore,  and  they  pro-


THE  STORY  OF  'MID-ALLAH  OF  THE  LAND.  &c.  577

ceeded  to  converse  together,  talking  alternately,  until  they  were  led  to
mention  the  tombs.  Thereupon  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Sea  said,  O  my
brother,  they  say  that  the  Prophet  (may  God  bless  and  save  him !)  is
buried  among  you  in  the  land.  Dost  thou  then  know  his  tomb  ? —
He  answered,  Yes.  He  asked,  In  what  place  ?  He  answered,  In  a
city  called  Teybeh.12  He  said,  And  do  men,  the  people  of  the  land,
visit  his  tomb  ?  He  answered,  Yes.  And  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Sea
said,  May  you  derive  enjoyment,  0  people  of  the  land,  from  visiting
this  generous,  benign,  merciful  Prophet,  whose  visitor  meriteth  his
intercession !  And  hast  thou  visited  him,  0  my  brother? — He
answered,  No ;  for  I  was  a  poor  man,  and  found  not  what  I  should
expend  on  the  way,  and  I  have  not  been  independent  save  from  the
time  when  I  first  knew  thee  and  thou  conferredst  upon  me  this  pros-
perity. But  the  visiting  him,  after  I  shall  have  performed  the  pil-
grimage to  the  Sacred  House  of  God,13  hath  become  incumbent  on
me ;  and  nothing  hath  prevented  my  doing  that  but  my  affection  for
thee ;  for  I  cannot  separate  myself  from  thee  for  one  day. — Upon
this,  he  of  the  Sea  said  to  him  of  the  Land,  And  dost  thou  prefer  thy
affection  for  me  above  visiting  the  tomb  of  Mohammad  (may  God
bless  and  save  him  !),  who  will  intercede  for  thee  on  the  day  of  appear-
ance before  God,  and  will  save  thee  from  the  fire,  and  by  means  of
whose  intercession  thou  wilt  enter  Paradise;  and  for  the  sake  of  the
love  of  the  world  dost  thou  neglect  to  visit  the  tomb  of  thy  Prophet
Mohammad,  may  God  bless  and  save  him  ?  He  answered,  No,  by
Allah  :  verily  the  visitation  of  him  is  preferred  by  me  above  everything
else ;  but  I  desire  of  thee  permission  that  I  may  visit  him  this  year.
He  replied,  I  give  thee  permission  to  visit  him  ;  and  when  thou
standest  by  his  tomb,  give  him  my  salutation.  I  have  also  a  depo-
site  :  so  enter  the  sea  with  me,  that  I  may  take  thee  to  my  city,  and
conduct  thee  into  my  house,  and  entertain  thee,  and  give  thee  the
deposite,  in  order  that  thou  mayest  put  it  upon  the  grave  of  the  Pro-
phet (may  God  bless  and  save  him !) ;  and  say  thou  to  him,  0  Apostle
of  God,  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Sea  saluteth  thee,  and  bath  given  to  thee
this  present,  and  he  beggeth  thine  intercession  to  save  him  from  the
fire. — So  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land  said  to  him,  0  my  brother,  thou
wast  created  in  the  water,  and  the  water  is  thine  abode,  and  itinjureth
thee  not :  then  if  thou  come  forth  from  it  to  the  land,  will  injury
betide  thee  ?  He  answered,  Yes ;  my  body  will  dry  up,  and  the
breezes  of  the  land  will  blow  upon  me,  and  I  shall  die. — And  I  in  like
wanner,  replied  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land,  was  created  on  the  land,  and
in.  4  E


578  THE  STORY  OF  'ABD-ALLAH  OF  THE  LAND

the  land  is  my  abode  ;  and  if  I  enter  the  sea,  the  water  will  enter  into
my  body,  and  suffocate  me,  and  I  shall  die.  But  the  other  said  to
him,  Fear  not  that ;  for  I  will  bring  thee  an  ointment,  with  which
thou  shalt  anoint  thy  body,  and  the  water  will  not  injure  thee,  even  if
thou  pass  the  remainder  of  thy  life  going  about  in  the  sea ;  and  thou
shalt  sleep  and  arise  in  the  sea,  and  nought  will  injure  thee.  So  he
replied,  If  the  case  be  so,  no  harm.  Bring  me  the  ointment,  that  I
may  try  it.

'Abd-Allah  of  the  Sea  said,  Be  it  so.  And  he  took  the  basket,
and  descended  into  the  sea,  and  was  absent  a  little  while.  He  then
returned,  having  with  him  some  fat  like  the  fat  of  beef,  the  colour  of
which  was  yellow,  like  gold,  and  its  scent  was  sweet ;  and  'Abd-Allah
of  the  Land  said  to  him,  What  is  this,  O  my  brother  ?  He  answered
him,  This  is  the  fat  of  the  liver  of  a  kind  of  fish,  called  the  dendan.1*
It  is  the  greatest  of  all  kinds  of  fish,  and  the  most  violent  of  our
enemies,  and  its  form  is  larger  than  that  of  any  beast  of  the  land
existing  among  you :  if  it  saw  the  camel  or  the  elephant,  it  would
swallow  it. — 'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land  said  to  him,  O  my  brother,  and
what  doth  this  unlucky  creature  eat  ?  He  answered  him,  It  eateth  of
the  beasts  of  the  sea.  Hast  thou  not  heard  that  it  is  said  in  the  pro-
verb, Like  the  fish  of  the  sea :  the  strong  eateth  the  weak  ?15 — He
replied,  Thou  hast  spoken  truth.  But  have  you  (he  added)  many
of  these  dendans  among  you  in  the  sea?  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Sea
answered,  Among  us  are  such  as  none  can  number  except  God,  whose
name  be  exalted !  Then  said  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land,  Verily  I  fear
that,  if  I  descend  with  thee,  this  kind  of  creature  may  meet  me  and
devour  me.  But  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Sea  replied,  Fear  not ;  for  when
it  seeth  thee,  it  will  know  that  thou  art  a  son  of  Adam,  and  it  will
fear  thee,  and  flee.  It  feareth  not  aught  in  the  sea  as  it  feareth  a  son
of  Adam ;  for  when  it  hath  eaten  a  son  of  Adam,  it  dieth  instantly,
because  the  fat  of  a  son  of  Adam  is  a  deadly  poison  to  this  kind  of
creature.  And  we  collect  not  the  fat  of  its  liver  save  in  consequence
of  a  son  of  Adam's  falling  into  the  sea  and  being  drowned  :  for  his
form  becometh  altered,  and  often  his  flesh  is  torn,-  and  the  dendan
eateth  it,  imagining  it  to  be  of  some  of  the  animals  of  the  sea,  and
dieth  :  then  we  happen  to  light  on  it  dead,  and  take  the  fat  of  its
liver,  with  which  we  anoint  our  bodies,  and  we  go  about  in  the
sea.  In  whatever  place  is  a  son  of  Adam,  if  there  be  in  that  place
a  hundred  or  two  hundred  or  a  thousand  or  more  of  that  kind  of
creature,  and  they  hear  the  cry  of  the  son  of  Adam,  all  of  them  die


AND  'ABU-ALLAH  OF  THE  SEA.


579


immediately  at  his  crying  once,  and  not  one  of  them  can  move  from
its  place.

Upon  this,  Abd- Allah  of  the  Land  said,  I  place  my  reliance  upon
.God.  He  then  pulled  off  the  clothes  that  were  upon  him,  and,
having  dug  a  hole  on  the  shore,  he  buried  his  clothes;  after  which,
he  anointed  his  person  from  the  parting  of  his  hair  to  his  feet  with
this  ointment.  Then  he  descended  into  the  water,  and  dived ;  and
he  opened  his  eyes,  and  the  water  injured  him  not.  He  walked  to
the  right  and  left ;  and  if  he  would,  he  ascended  ;  and  if  he  would,
he  descended  to  the  bottom.  He  saw  the  water  of  the  sea  forming
as  it  were  a  tent  over  him,  and  it  injured  him  not.  And  'Abd- Allah
of  the  Sea  said  to  him,  What  seest  thou,  0  my  brother  ?  He  an-
swered him,  I  see  what  is  good,  0  my  brother,  and  thou  hast  spoken
truth  in  that  which  thou  hast  said ;  for  the  water  doth  not  injure  me.
Then  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Sea  said  to  him,  Follow  me.  So  he  followed
him ;  and  they  ceased  not  to  walk  from  place  to  place,  while  he  saw
before  him,  and  on  his  right  and  on  his  left,  mountains  of  water,  and
he  diverted  himself  with  the  view  of  them  and  with  the  view  of  the
different  kinds  of  fish  that  were  sporting  in  the  sea,  some  great  and
some  small.  Among  them  were  some  resembling  buffaloes,  and  some
resembling  oxen,  and  some  resembling  dogs,  and  some  resembling


i


580  THE  STORY  OF  'ABD-ALLAH  OF  THE  LAND

human  beings;  and  every  kind  to  which  they  drew  near  fled  at
seeing  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land.  He  therefore  said  to  him  of  the
Sea,  0  my  brother,  wherefore  do  I  see  every  kind  to  which  we
draw  near  flee  from  us  ?  And  he  answered  him,  Through  fear  of.
thee ;  for  every  thing  that  God  hath  created  feareth  the  son  of  Adam.
He  ceased  not  to  divert  himself  with  the  sight  of  the  wonders  of  the
sea  until  they  came  to  a  high  mountain,  and  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land
walked  by  the  side  of  that  mountain,  and  suddenly  he  heard  a  great
cry  :  so  he  looked  aside,  and  he  saw  something  black  descending  upon
him  from  that  mountain,  and  it  was  as  large  as  a  camel,  or  larger,
and  cried  out.  He  therefore  said  to  his  companion,  What  is  this,
O  my  brother  ?  He  answered  him,  This  is  the  dendan  :  it  is
descending  in  pursuit  of  me,  desiring  to  devour  me :  so  cry  out  at  it,
O  my  brother,  before  it  reacheth  us ;  for  otherwise  it  will  seize  me
and  devour  me.  Accordingly,  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land  cried  out  at
it,  and,  lo,  it  fell  down  dead  ;  and  when  he  saw  it  dead,  he  said,
Extolled  be  the  perfection  of  God,  and  his  praise !  I  struck  it  not
with  a  sword,  nor  with  a  knife !  How  is  it  that,  with  the  enormity
of  this  creature,  it  could  not  bear  my  cry,  but  died  ? — But  'Abd-Allah
of  the  Sea  said  to  him,  Wonder  not :  for  by  Allah,  O  my  brother,
were  there  a  thousand  or  two  thousand  of  this  kind,  they  would  not
be  able  to  endure  the  cry  of  a  son  of  Adam.

They  then  walked  to  a  city,  and  they  saw  its  inhabitants  to  be  all
damsels,  no  males  being  among  them.  So  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land
said,  0  my  brother,  what  is  this  city,  and  what  are  these  damsels  ?
And  his  companion  answered  him,  This  is  the  city  of  the  damsels ;
for  its  inhabitants  are  of  the  damsels  of  the  Sea.16  The  King  of  the
Sea  banisheth  them  to  this  city.  Every  one  against  whom  he  is
incensed,  of  the  damsels  of  the  Sea,  he  sendeth  hither,  and  she
cannot  come  forth  from  it ;  for  if  she  came  forth  from  it,  any  of
the  beasts  of  the  sea  that  saw  her  would  devour  her.  But  in  other
cities  than  this,  there  are  men  and  women. — Then  'Abd-Allah  of  the
Land  proceeded  to  divert  himself  with  the  view  of  these  damsels,  and
saw  that  they  had  faces  like  moons,  and  hair  like  the  hair  of  women,
but  they  had  arms  and  legs  in  the  fore  part  of  the  body,  and  tails
like  the  tails  of  fishes.  His  companion,  having  diverted  him  with
the  view  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  city,  went  forth  with  him,  and
walked  before  him  to  another  city,  which  he  saw  to  be  filled  with
people,  females  and  males,  whose  forms  were  like  the  forms  of  the
damsels  before  mentioned  ;  and  they  had  tails  ;  but  they  had  no


AND  'ABD-ALLAH  OF  THE  SKA.  581

selling  nor  buying  like  the  people  of  the  land.  And  he  said,  0  my
brother,  how  do  they  manage  their  marriages  ?  His  companion
answered  him,  They  do  not  all  marry;  for  we  are  not  all  of  one
religion :  among  us  are  Muslims,  Unitarians ;  and  among  us  are
Christians  and  Jews  and  other  sects ;  and  those  of  us  who  marry  are
chiefly  the  Muslims.  Whoso  desireth  to  marry,  they  impose  upon
him,  as  a  dowry,  the  gift  of  a  certain  number  of  different  kinds  of
fish,  which  he  catcheth ;  as  many  as  a  thousand  or  two  thousand,  or
more  or  less,  according  to  the  agreement  made  between  him  and  the
father  of  the  wife.  And  when  he  bringeth  what  is  demanded,  the
family  of  the  bridegroom  and  the  family  of  the  bride  assemble  and
eat  the  banquet.  Then  they  introduce  him  to  his  wife.  And
after  that,  he  catcheth  fish,  and  feedeth  her ;  or,  if  he  be  unable,
she  catcheth  fish,  and  feedeth  him. — 'Abd-Allah  of  the  Sea  then
took  him  to  another  city,  and  after  that  to  another,  and  so  on,  until
he  had  diverted  him  with  the  sight  of  eighty  cities ;  and  he  saw  the
inhabitants  of  each  city  to  be  unlike  the  inhabitants  of  another  city ;
and  he  said,  0  rny  brother,  are  there  any  more  cities  in  the  sea?
His  companion  said,  And  what  hast  thou  seen  of  the  cities  of  the  sea,
and  its  wonders  ?  By  the  generous,  benign,  merciful  Prophet,  were
I  to  divert  thee  of  a  thousand  years,  every  day  with  the  sight  of  a
thousand  cities,  and  shew  thee  in  every  city  a  thousand  wonders,  I
should  not  shew  thee  a  twenty-fourth  part  of  the  cities  of  the  sea,  and
its  wonders.  I  have  only  diverted  thee  with  the  view  of  our  own
region  and  her  land,  and  nothing  more. — So  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land
said  to  him,  O  my  brother,  since  the  case  is  so,  enough  for  me  is  that
with  the  sight  of  which  I  have  diverted  myself;  for  I  have  become
weary  of  eating  fish,  and  have  spent  eighty  days  in  thy  company,
during  which  thou  hast  not  fed  me,  morning  and  evening,  with  aught
but  raw  fish,  neither  boiled  nor  cooked  in  any  way.  But  thou  hast
not  diverted  me  with  a  sight  of  thy  city. — He  replied,  As  to  my  city,
we  have  gone  a  considerable  distance  beyond  it,  and  it  is  near  the
shore  from  which  we  came.

Then  he  returned  with  him  to  his  city,  and  when  he  came  to  it,  he
said  to  him,  This  is  my  city.  And  he  saw  it  to  be  a  small  city  in
comparison  with  those  with  the  sight  of  which  he  had  diverted  himself.
He  entered  the  city,  accompanied  by  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Sea,  who
proceeded  until  he  came  to  a  cavern,  when  he  said  to  him,  This  is  my
house ;  and  all  the  houses  of  this  city  arc  likewise  caverns,  great  and
small,  in  the  mountains,  as  arc  also  ;ill  those  of  all  the  cities  of  the


582  THE  STORY  OF  'ABD-ALLAH  OF  THE  LAND,  &c.

sea.  For  every  one  who  desireth  to  make  for  himself  a  house  goeth
to  the  King,  and  saith  to  him,  I  desire  to  make  me  a  house  in  such  a
place.  Thereupon  the  King  sendeth  with  him  a  tribe  of  fish  called
the  peckers/7  assigning  as  their  wages  a  certain  quantity  of  fish ;  and
they  have  beaks  which  crumble  rock.  They  come  to  the  mountain
that  the  intended  owner  of  the  house  hath  chosen,  and  excavate  in  it
the  house  with  their  beaks ;  and  the  owner  of  the  house  catcheth  fish
for  them,  and  putteth  them  into  their  mouths,  until  the  cavern  is
completed,  when  they  depart,  and  the  owner  of  the  house  taketh  up
his  abode  in  it.  All  the  people  of  the  sea  are  in  this  state  :  they
transact  not  affairs  of  commerce,  one  with  another,  nor  do  they  serve
one  another,  save  by  means  of  fish ;  and  their  food  is  fish. — Then  he
said  to  him,  Enter.  So  he  entered.  And  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Sea  said,
0  my  daughter !  And,  lo,  his  daughter  advanced  to  him.  She  had
a  face  round  like  the  moon,  and  long  hair  and  heavy  lips,  and  black-
edged  eyes  and  a  slender  waist ;  but  she  had  a  tail.  And  when  she
saw  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land  with  her  father,  she  said  to  him,  0  my
father,  what  is  this  tail-less  creature  whom  thou  hast  brought  with
thee?  He  answered  her,  O  my  daughter,  this  is  my  companion  of
the  land,  from  whom  I  used  to  bring  thee  the  fruits  of  the  land.
Come  hither  :  salute  him. — She  therefore  advanced  and  saluted  him,
with  an  eloquent  tongue  and  fluent  speech ;  and  her  father  said  to
her,  Bring  some  food  for  our  guest,  by  whose  arrival  a  blessing  hath
betided  us.  And  she  brought  him  two  large  fishes,  each  of  them  like
a  lamb  ;  and  he  said  to  him,  Eat.  So  he  ate  in  spite  of  himself,  by
reason  of  his  hunger ;  for  he  was  weary  of  eating  fish,  and  they  had
nothing  else.  And  but  a  short  time  had  elapsed  when  the  wife  of
'Abd-Allah  of  the  Sea  approached.  She  was  of  beautiful  form,  and
with  her  were  two  children,  each  child  having  in  his  hand  a  young
fish,  of  which  he  was  craunching  bits  as  a  man  crauncheth  bits  of  a
cucumber.  And  when  she  saw  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land  with  her
husband,  she  said,  What  is  this  tail-less  creature  ?  The  two  children
also  advanced  with  their  sister  and  their  mother,  and  they  looked  at
'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land,  and  said,  Yea,  by  Allah :  verily  he  is  tail-
less! And  they  laughed  at  him.  So  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land  said
to  his  companion,  O  my  brother,  hast  thou  brought  me  to  make  me  a
laughing-stock  to  thy  children  and  thy  wife  ?  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Sea
answered  him,  Pardon,  0  my  brother :  for  he  who  hath  no  tail  existeth
not  among  us,  and  when  one  without  a  tail  is  found,  the  Sultan
taketh  him  to  laugh  at  him.  But,  0  my  brother,  be  not  displeased


with  these  young  children  and  the  woman,  since  their  intellects  are
defective. — Then  he  cried  out  at  his  family,  and  said  to  them,  Be  ye
silent !  So  they  feared,  and  were  silent ;  and  he  proceeded  to  appease
his  mind.

And  while  he  was  conversing  with  him,  lo,  ten  persons,  great,
strong,  and  stout,  advanced  to  him,  and  said,  O  'Abd-Allah,  it  hath
been  told  to  the  King  that  thou  hast  with  thee  a  tail-less  creature,  of
the  tail-less  creatures  of  the  land.  So  he  replied,  Yes  ;  and  he  is  this
man;  for  he  is  my  companion :  he  hath  come  to  me  as  a  guest,  and  I
desire  to  take  him  back  to  the  land.  But  they  said  to  him,  We
cannot  go  save  with  him ;  and  if  thou  desire  to  say  ought,  arise  and
take  him,  and  come  with  him  before  the  King,  and  what  thou  sayest
to  us,  say  to  the  King.  Therefore  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Sea  said  to  him,
O  my  brother,  the  excuse  is  manifest,  and  it  is  impossible  for  us  to
disobey  the  King  ;  but  go  with  me  to  the  King,  and  I  will  endeavour
to  liberate  thee  from  him,  if  it  be  the  will  of  God.  Fear  not ;  for
when  he  seeth  thee,  he  will  know  that  thou  art  of  the  children  of  the
land  ;  and  when  he  knoweth  that  thou  art  of  the  land,  he  will  without
doubt  treat  thee  with  honour,  and  restore  thee  to  the  land. — So  'Abd-


584  THK  STOKY  OF  'AP.D-ALLAIL  OF  TIIK  LAND

Allah  of  the  Land  replied,  It  is  thine  to  determine  ;  and  I  will  place
my  dependence  upon  God,  and  go  with  thee.  He  then  took  him  and
proceeded  with  him  until  he  came  to  the  King ;  und  when  the  King
saw  him,  he  laughed,  and  said,  Welcome  to  the  tail-less !  And  every
one  who  was  around  the  King  began  to  laugh  at  him,  and  to  say,  Yea,
by  Allah  :  verily  he  is  tail-less  !  Then  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Sea  ad-
vanced to  the  King,  and  acquainted  him  with  the  circumstances,  and
said  to  him,  This  is  of  the  children  of  the  land,  and  he  is  my  com-
panion, and  he  cannot  live  among  us ;  for  he  loveth  not  the  eating  of
fish  unless  it  be  fried  or  otherwise  cooked ;  and  I  desire  that  thou  give
me  permission  to  restore  him  to  the  land.  The  King  therefore  replied,
Since  the  case  is  so,  and  he  cannot  live  among  us,  I  give  thee  permis-
sion to  restore  him  to  his  place  after  entertainment.  Then  the  King
said,  Bring  to  him  the  banquet.  And  they  brought  him  fish  of
various  shapes  and  colours,  and  he  ate  in  obedience  to  the  command
of  the  King ;  after  which  the  King  said  to  him,  Demand  of  me  what
thou  wilt.  And  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land  replied,  I  demand  of  thee
that  thou  give  me  jewels.  So  he  said,  Take  ye  him  to  the  jewel-house,
and  let  him  select  what  he  requireth.  Accordingly  his  companion
took  him  to  the  jewel-house,  and  he  selected  as  many  as  he  desired.
He  then  returned  with  him  to  his  city,  and,  producing  to  him  a  purse,
he  said  to  him,  Take  this  as  a  deposite,  and  convey  it  to  the  tomb  of
the  Prophet,  may  God  bless  and  save  him  !  And  he  took  it,  not
knowing  what  was  in  it.

Then  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Sea  went  forth  with  him,  to  conduct  him
to  the  land ;  and  he  saw,  in  his  way,  people  engaged  in  singing  and
festivity,  and  a  table  of  fish  spread;  and  the  people  were  eating  and
singing,  and  in  a  state  of  great  rejoicing.  So  he  said  to  'Abd-Allah
of  the  Sea,  Wherefore  are  these  people  in  a  state  of  great  rejoicing  ?
Is  a  wedding  being  celebrated  among  them  ? — And  he  of  the  Sea  an-
swered, There  is  no  wedding  being  celebrated  among  them ;  but  a
person  among  them  is  dead.  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land  therefore  said
to  him,  Do  ye,  when  a  person  dieth  among  you,  rejoice  for  him,  and
sing  and  eat  ?  His  companion  answered,  Yes.  And  ye,  O  people  of
the  land,  he  added,  what  do  ye  ?  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land  answered,
When  a  person  among  us  dieth,  we  mourn  for  him,  and  weep,  and  the
women  slap  their  faces,  and  rend  the  bosoms  of  their  garments,  in
grief  for  him  who  is  dead.  And  upon  this,  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Sea
stared  at  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land,  and  said,  Give  me  the  deposite.
So  he  gave  it  to  him.  Then  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Sea  took  him  forth  to


AND  'ABD-ALLAH  OF  THE  SEA.  685

the  land,  and  said  to  him,  I  have  broken  off  my  companionship  with
thee,  and  my  friendship  for  thee,  and  after  this  day  thou  shalt  not  see
me,  nor  will  I  see  thee. — Wherefore,  said  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land,  are
these  words  ?  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Sea  said,  Are  ye  not,  O  people  of
the  Land,  a  deposite  of  God? — Yes,  answered  he  of  the  Land.  And
the  other  rejoined,  Then  how  is  it  that  it  is  not  agreeable  to  you  that
God  should  take  his  deposite,  but  on  the  contrary  ye  weep  for  it?
And  how  should  I  give  thee  the  deposite  for  the  Prophet  (may  God
bless  and  save  him !),  seeing  that  ye,  when  the  new-born  child  cometh
to  you,  rejoice  in  it,  though  God  (whose  name  be  exalted!)  putteth
into  it  the  soul  as  a  deposite  ?  Then,  when  He  taketh  that  soul,  how
is  it  that  it  grieveth  you,  and  ye  weep  and  mourn  ?  Such  being  the
case,  we  have  no  need  of  your  companionship. — He  then  left  him,  and
went  back  to  the  sea.

So  upon  this,  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land  put  on  his  clothes,  and  took
his  jewels,  and  repaired  to  the  King,  who  met  him  with  a  longing
desire  to  see  him,  and  rejoiced  at  his  return,  and  said  to  him,  How  art
thou,  O  my  son-in-law,  and  what  hath  been  the  cause  of  thine  absence
from  me  during  this  period?  He  therefore  told  him  his  story,  and
what  he.  had  seen  of  the  wonders  in  the  sea;  whereat  the  King
wondered.  He  acquainted  him  also  with  that  which  'Abd-Allah  of
the  Sea  had  said ;  arid  he  replied,  Thou  art  the  person  who  erred,  in
thy  giving  this  information.  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land  persevered  for
a  length  of  time  in  going  to  the  shore  of  the  sea,  and  calling  out  to
'Abd-Allah  of  the  Sea ;  but  he  answered  him  not,  nor  came  to  him.
So  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land  relinquished  the  hope  of  seeing  him  again,
and  he  and  the  King  his  father-in-law  and  their  family  resided  in  the
most  happy  state  and  in  the  practice  of  good  deeds  until  they  were
visited  by  the  terminator  of  delights  and  the  separator  of  companions,
and  they  all  died. — Extolled  be  the  perfection  of  the  Living  who  dieth
not,  and  to  whom  belongeth  the  dominion  that  is  apparent  and  the
dominion  that  is  hidden,  and  who  is  able  to  accomplish  every  thing,
and  is  gracious  and  knowing  with  respect  to  his  servants ! i3


ITT.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-EIGHTH.


NOTE  I. Tho  word  rendered  "  minnow  "  is  "  seereh." See  Note  8  to  Chapter  xxii.
NOTE  2. See  Note  24  to  Chapter  viii.

NOTE  3.  It  appears  that  the  fisherman  lived  in  a  quarter  which  had  but  one
entrance.

NOTE  4.  Though  the  man  of  the  sea  is  here  called  a  human  being  (in  the  original,
"adamee,"  a  word  derived  from  the  name  of  our  first  parent),  it  appears  afterwards
that  his  species  is  different  from  that  of  the  sons  of  Adam,  properly  so  called. — See  the
fourth  paragraph  of  Note  64  to  Chapter  xx.

NOTE  5.  That  is,  wilt  thou  emancipate  me  with  the  desire  of  no  other  recompense
than  that  of  beholding  the  face  of  God  ?  For  this  the  Muslim  holds  to  be  the  greatest
happiness  that  can  be  enjoyed  in  Paradise.  Hence  this  phrase  is  commonly  used  as
meaning — "  with  the  desire  of  God's  recompense."

NOTE  6.  The  "shureyk  "  is  a  kind  of  bunn.  A  single  bunn  of  this  kind  is  called
"  keff  shureyk."  It  is  about  the  size  of  a  man's  hand,  of  an  oblong  form,  with  two
longitudinal  cuts  along  the  top,  and  several  oblique,  cross  cuts.  It  is  composed  of
leavened  dough  and  clarified  butter  (in  the  proportion  of  about  two  pounds  of  the
latter  to  a  ruba  *  of  the  former),  with  a  little  sesame,  and  several  aromatic  and  other
substances,  which  are  commonly  called  "reehat  el-'ajeen;"  as  seed  of  the  nigella,  ani-
seed, cinnamon,  rose-buds,  absinthium  (or  artemisia  arborescens),  kafoorah,2  mahlab,3
and  curcuma.  Before  it  is  baked,  it  is  rubbed  over  with  egg.  The  shureyk  is  made
to  be  distributed  to  the  poor  at  the  periodical  visits  to  the  tombs,  and  is  also  made  on
various  occasions  of  festivity. — A  compound  called  reehat  el-'ajeen  is  often  added  to
bread.  It  generally  consists  of  mahlab,  kafoorah,  absinthium,  and  sometimes  seed  of
the  nigella.  This  last  is  likewise,  by  some  people,  sprinkled  upon  the  bread  before  it
is  baked  •  and  so  is  sesame.


1  The  ruba  is  the  twenty-fourth  part  of  the  ardcbb,  which  latter  is  very  nearly  equal  to  five  English
bushels

1  This,  I  believe,  is  the  same  plant,  or  neatly  the  same,  as  the  Camphorata  Monspeliensis.
3  Prunus  raahaleb  of  Linnaeus.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-EIGHTH.  587

NOTE  7. "  Umvn-es-So'ood  "  signifies  "  the  Mother  of  Prosperities."
NOTE  8. That  is,  he  imprecated  upon  them  a  fate  like  those  of  'Ad  and  Thamood
(two  tribes  of  ancient  Arabs,  mentioned  in  Note  76  to  Chapter  x.) ;  the  former  of  whom,
a  few  only  excepted,  were  destroyed  by  a  suffocating  wind,  and  the  latter,  also  with
the  exception  of  a  few  persons,  by  an  earthquake,  and  a  terrible  noise  from  heaven.

NOTE  9.  The  litter  here  mentioned  was  of  the  kind  called  "  takhtarawan,"  or
"  takht-rawan,"  described  in  Note  8  to  Chapter  viii.

NOTE  10.  Here  the  story  in  Trelmtien's  version  differs,  representing  'Abd-Allah
of  the  Land  as  being  induced  by  the  King  to  break  his  agreement  with  his  companion
of  the  Sea.  It  closes  by  stating  that  'Abd-Allah  of  the  Land,  "  preferring  to  retain
his  place  and  the  favour  of  the  King,  returned  no  more  to  the  shore  of  the  sea,  and
lived  happily  to  the  end  of  his  days."  Thus  it  wants  the  moral  which  is  conveyed  in
my  original.

NOTE  11. "  'Abd-Allah  "  signifies  "  the  Servant  of  God."

NOTE  12. "  Teybeh"  is  one  of  the  many  names  of  the  city  in  which  the  Prophet  is
buried,  commonly  called,  by  way  of  honour,  "  El-Medeeneh,"  «'.  e.  "  The  City."
NOTE  13. "  The  Sacred  House  of  God  "  is  the  Temple  of  Mekkeh.
NOTE  14. This  name  is  perhaps  imaginary. I  do  not  know  of  any  fish  so  called.

NOTE  15.  Thii  proverb  is  often  mentioned  by  Arab  peasants,  with  allusion  to
their  rulers  and  themselves.

NOTE  16.  From  this  point,  I  omit  several  passages  in  my  original  which  are  silly
and  tiresome,  or  otherwise  objectionable.

NOTE  17.  The  kind  of  fish  here  mentioned  (in  the  Arabic,  "  nakkar,")  I  suppose
to  be,  like  the  "dendan,"  purely  imaginary.

NOTE  18.  The  next  story  in  my  original,  that  of  "  the  Merchant  of  'Oman,"  which
ends  with  part  of  the  Nine  Hundred  and  Fifty-second  Night,  I  omit.  A  large  portion
of  it  is  extremely  objectionable,  and,  upon  the  whole,  it  is  of  little  merit.


COMMENCING  WITH  PART  OF  THE  NINE  ifUNDRED  AND  FIFTY-SECOND

NIGHT,  AND  ENDING  WITH  PART  OF  THE  NINE  HUNDRED

AND  FIFTY-NINTH.


THE  STORY  OF  IBRA.HEEM  AND  JEMEELEH.


,1  the  lord  of  Egypt,  had  a  son,  named  Ibraheem,  than
whom  there  was  none  more  beautiful  ;  and  by  reason  of  his  fear  for
him,  he  would  not  allow  him  to  go  out,  save  to  the  Friday-prayers.
Now  he  passed,  going  forth  from  the  Friday-prayers,  by  an  old  man,
with  whom  were  many  books,  and  he  alighted  from  his  horse,  and
seated  himself  by  him,  and,  turning  over  the  books  and  examining
them,  he  saw  in  one  of  them  a  picture  of  a  woman,  which  almost
spoke  :  none  more  beautiful  than  she  had  been  seen  upon  the  face  of


THE  STORY  OF  IBRAHEEM  AND  JEMEELEH.  589

the  earth.  Thereupon  his  reason  was  captivated,  and  his  mind  was
stupified,  and  be  said  to  the  man,  O  sheykh,  sell  me  this  picture.  And
he  kissed  the  ground  before  him,  and  replied,  O  my  lord,  without
pi-ice.  So  he  gave  him  a  hundred  pieces  of  gold,  and  took  the  book
in  which  was  this  picture;  and  he  occupied  himself  with  looking
at  it,  and  weeping,  night  and  day.  He  abstained  from  food  and
drink  and  sleep,  and  he  said  within  himself,  Had  I  asked  the  book-
seller respecting  the  painter  of  this  picture,  who  he  was,  probably  he
had  informed  me ;  and  if  the  original  of  it  be  living,  I  might  gain
access  to  her ;  and  if  it  be  a  picture  not  representing  any  particular
person,  I  would  cease  to  be  enamoured  of  it,  and  not  torment  myself
on  account  of  a  thing  that  hath  no  real  existence.  So  when  the  next
Friday  arrived,  he  passed  by  the  bookseller,  who  rose  up  to  him,  and
he  said  to  him,  0  uncle,  inform  me  who  painted  this  picture.  He  re-
plied, O  my  lord,  a  man  of  the  inhabitants  of  Baghdad,  named  Abu-1-
Kasim  Es-Sandalanee,  who  resideth  in  a  quarter  called  the  quarter  of
El-Karkh,  painted  it,  and  I  know  not  whose  portrait  it  is.  The  youth
therefore  arose  and  left  him,  and  he  acquainted  not  any  one  of  the
people  of  the  empire  with  his  state.

He  performed  the  Friday-prayers,  and  returned  to  the  palace,  and,
taking  a  leathern  bag,  he  filled  it  with  jewels  and  gold,  and  the  value
of  the  jewels  was  thirty  thousand  pieces  of  gold.  He  then  waited
until  the  morning,  and  went  forth,  not  having  informed  any  one ;  and
he  overtook  a  caravan,  and  saw  a  Bedawee,  and  said  to  him,  0  uncle,
what  distance  is  between  me  and  Baghdad  ?  He  replied,  0  my  son,
where  art  thou,  and  where  is  Baghdad  ?  Verily  between  thee  and  it
is  a  space  of  two  months'  journey. — -And  the  youth  said  to  him,  0
uncle,  if  thou  wilt  conduct  me  to  Baghdad,  I  will  give  thee  a  hundred
pieces  of  gold  and  this  mare  that  is  beneath  me,  the  value  of  which  is
a  thousand  pieces  of  gold.  Upon  this,  the  Bedawee  replied,  God  is
witness  of  what  we  say.  But  thou  shalt  not  lodge  this  night  save
with  me. — And  the  young  man  assented  to  that  which  he  said,  and
passed  the  night  with  him ;  and  when  daybreak  appeared,  the  Bedawee
took  him,  and  proceeded  with  him  quickly  by  a  near  way,  in  eagerness
for  that  mare  which  he  had  promised  to  give  him.  They  ceased  not
to  journey  on  until  they  arrived  at  the  walls  of  Baghdad,  when  the
Bedawee  said  to  him,  Praise  be  to  God  for  safety !  0  my  master,  this
is  Baghdad. — So  the  young  man  rejoiced  exceedingly,  and  he  alighted
from  the  mare,  and  gave  her  to  the  Bedawee,  her  and  the  hundred
pieces  of  gold.


5UO


THE  STORY  OF  1BRAHEEM  AND  JEMEELEH.


He  then  took  the  leathern  bag,  and  walked  on,  inquiring  for  the
quarter  of  El-Karkh,  and  for  the  place  of  abode  of  the  merchants,  and
destiny  drove  him  to  a  by-street  in  which  were  ten  chambers,  five
facing  five,  and  at  the  upper  end  of  the  street  was  an  entrance  with
two  folding  doors,  and  with  a  ring  of  silver.  At  this  entrance  were
two  mastabahs  of  marble,  spread  with  the  best  of  furniture,  and  upon
one  of  them  was  sitting  a  man  of  reverend  appearance,  of  handsome
form,  and  clad  in  sumptuous  apparel,  before  whom  were  five  memlooks,
like  moons.  When  the  young  man  saw  this,  he  knew  the  indication
which  the  bookseller  had  mentioned  to  him  ;  and  he  saluted  the  man,
who  returned  his  salutation,  and  welcomed  him,  and  seated  him,  and
asked  him  respecting  his  state.  So  the  young  man  said  to  him,  I  am
a  stranger,  and  I  desire  of  thy  beneficence  that  thou  wouldst  see  for
me,  in  this  street,  a  house  in  which  I  may  reside.  And  the  man
called  out,  saying,  0  Ghazaleh  ! 2 — whereupon  a  slave-girl  came  forth
to  him,  and  said,  At  thy  service,  O  my  master !  And  he  said,  Take
with  thee  some  servants,  and  go  ye  to  a  chamber,  and  clean  it,  and
spread  furniture  in  it,  and  put  in  it  all  that  is  requisite,  of  vessels  and
other  things,  for  the  sake  of  this  young  man,  the  beautiful  in  form.
Accordingly  the  slave-girl  went  forth,  and  did  as  he  had  ordered  her;
after  which,  the  sheykh  took  him  and  shewed  him  the  dwelling ;  and


THE  STORY  OF  IBRAHEEM  AND  JEMEELEH.  591

the  young  man  said  to  him,  O  my  master,  how  much  is  the  rent  of
this  dwelling  ?  He  answered  him,  0  comely-faced,  I  will  not  receive
from  thee  rent  as  long  as  thou  remainest  in  it.  The  young  man
therefore  thanked  him  for  that.  Then  the  sheykh  called  another
slave-girl,  and  there  came  forth  a  slave-girl  like  the  son,  and  he  said
to  her,  Bring  the  apparatus  for  chess.  So  she  brought  it,  and  a
memlook  spread  the  chess-table,  and  the  sheykh  said  to  the  young
man,  Wilt  thou  play  with  me  ?  He  answered,  Yes.  And  he  played
with  him  several  times,  and  the  young  man  beat  him.  He  therefore
said,  Thou  hast  done  well,  0  young  man,  and  thy  qualities  are  perfect.
By  Allah,  there  is  not  in  Baghdad  the  person  who  can  beat  rne,  and
thou  hast  beaten  me !

And  after  they  had  prepared  the  dwelling  with  the  furniture  and
every  thing  else  that  was  requisite,  the  sheykh  delivered  to  him  the
keys,  and  said  to  him,  0  my  master,  wilt  thou  not  enter  my  abode
and  eat  of  my  bread,  that  we  may  be  honoured  by  thee  ?  And  the
young  man  assented  to  this,  and  went  with  him ;  and  when  they  came
to  the  house,  he  beheld  a  handsome,  beautiful  house,  decorated  with
gold,  and  in  it  were  all  kinds  of  pictures,  and  varieties  of  furniture
and  other  things,  such  as  the  tongue  cannot  describe.  The  sheykh
then  complimented  him,  and  gave  orders  to  bring  the  food  ;  whereupon
they  brought  a  table  of  the  manufacture  of  San'a  of  El-Yemen,  and
it  was  put,  and  they  brought  extraordinary  dishes  of  food,  than  which
there  existed  none  more  excellent,  nor  any  more  delicious.  So  the
young  man  ate  until  he  was  satisfied,  and  washed  his  hands;  and  he
proceeded  to  look  at  the  house  and  the  furniture.  And  after  that,  he
looked  for  the  leathern  bag  that  was  with  him ;  and  saw  it  not.  So
he  said,  There  is  no  strength  nor  power  but  in  God,  the  High,  the.
Great !  I  have  eaten  a  morsel  worth  a  piece  of  silver  or  two  pieces  of
silver,  and  there  hath  gone  from  me  a  leathern  bag  containing  thirty
thousand  pieces  of  gold.  But  I  seek  aid  of  God. — Then  he  was  silent,
and  was  unable  to  speak;  and  the  sheykh  again  caused  the  apparatus
for  chess  to  be  brought  forward,  and  said  to  the  young  man,  Wilt
thou  play  with  me  ?  He  answered,  Yes : — and  played,  and  the  sheykh
beat  him  ;  whereupon  the  young  man  said,  Thou  hast  done  well : —
and  he  gave  over  playing,  and  arose.  So  the  sheykh  said  to  him,
What  aileth  thee,  0  young  man  ?  He  answered,  I  desire  the  leathern
bag.  And  upon  this  the  sheykh  arose  and  brought  it  out  to  him,
and  said,  Lo,  here  it  is,  0  my  master.  Wilt  thou  resume  the  playing
with  me  ? — He  answered,  Yes.  And  he  played  with  him,  and  the


592  THE  STORY  OF  IBRAHEEM  AND  JEMEELEH.

young  man  beat  him.  The  man  therefore  said,  When  thy  mind  was
occupied  with  thinking  of  the  leather  bag,  I  beat  thee;  and  when  I
had  brought  it  to  thee,  thou  beatest  me.  Then  he  said  to  him,  0  my
son,  inform  me  from  what  country  thou  art.  So  he  answered,  From
Egypt.  And  the  sheykh  said  to  him,  And  what  is  the  reason  of  thy
coming  to  Baghdad  ?  He  therefore  produced  to  him  the  picture,  and
said,  Know,  0  uncle,  that  I  am  the  son  of  El-Khaseeb,  the  lord  of
Egypt ;  and  I  saw  this  picture  in  the  possession  of  a  bookseller,  and
my  reason  was  captivated :  so  I  asked  respecting  the  painter  of  it,
and  it  was  told  me  that  the  painter  of  it  was  a  man  in  the  quarter  of
El-Karkh,  named  Abu-1-Kasim  Es-Sandalanee,  in  a  street  called  Darb
ez-Zaafaran.  I  therefore  took  with  me  some  wealth,  and  came  alone,
no  one  knowing  of  my  case ;  and  I  desire  of  thy  perfect  beneficence
that  thou  wouldst  direct  me  to  him,  in  order  that  I  may  ask  him  the
cause  of  his  painting  this  picture,  and  whose  portrait  it  is;  and
whatsoever  he  shall  desire  of  me,  I  will  give  him  it.

Upon  this,  the  sheykh  said,  By  Allah,  O  my  son,  I  am  Abu-1-
Kasim  Es-Sandalanee,  and  this  is  a  wonderful  thing.  How  is  it  that
destiny  hath  driven  thee  to  me  ? — And  when  the  young  man  heard
his  words,  he  rose  to  him  and  embraced  him,  and  kissed  his  head
and  his  hands,  and  said  to  him,  By  Allah  I  conjure  thee  that  thou
tell  me  whose  portrait  it  is.  And  he  replied,  I  hear  and  obey.  He
then  arose  and  opened  a  closet,  and  took  forth  from  it  a  number  of
books  in  which  he  had  painted  this  picture,  and  said,  Know,  0  my
son,  that  the  original  of  this  portrait  is  the  daugher  of  my  paternal
uncle.  She  is  in  El-Basrah,  and  her  father  is  Governor  of  El-Basrah.
He  is  named  Abu-1-Leys,  and  she  is  named  Jemeeleh;3  and  there  is
not  on  the  face  of  the  earth  a  person  more  beautiful  than  she ;  but
she  is  averse  from  men,  and  cannot  bear  the  mention  of  a  man  in  her
company.  1  went  to  my  uncle,  desiring  that  he  should  marry  me  to
her,  and  I  was  lavish  of  wealth  to  him  ;  but  he  consented  not  to  my
proposal ;  and  when  his  daughter  knew  thereof,  she  was  enraged,  and
sent  to  me  a  message,  saying  in  it,  If  thou  have  sense,  remain  not  in
this  city :  for  if  thou  do,  thou  wilt  perish,  and  thy  sin  will  be  on
thine  own  neck.  And  she  is  a  virago  among  viragos.  I  therefore
went  forth  from  El-Basrah  with  broken  heart,  and  I  painted  this
portrait  in  the  books,  and  dispersed  them  in  the  countries,  thinking
that  they  might  fall  into  the  hand  of  a  young  man  of  beautiful  form,
like  thee,  and  he  might  contrive  means  of  gaining  access  to  her ;  for
perhaps  she  would  become  enamoured  of  him  ;  and  I  would  previously


THK  STORY  OF  IBBAHEEM  AND  .1KMKKLEH.  593

exact  of  him  a  promise  that,  when  he  should  have  gained  possession
of  her,  he  should  shew  her  to  me,  if  he  only  granted  me  a  look  from
a  distance. — So  when  Ibniheem,  the  son  of  El-Khaseeb,  heard  his
words,  he  hung  down  his  head  a  while,  meditating.  And  Es-San-
dahlnee  said  to  him,  O  my  son,  I  have  not  seen  in  Baghdad  any  one
more  beautiful  than  thou ;  and  I  imagine  that  she,  if  she  see  thee,
will  love  thee.  Canst  tbou  then,  if  thou  obtain  an  interview  with
her,  and  get  possession  of  her,  shew  her  to  me,  and  grant  me  even  a
look  from  a  distance  ? — He  answered,  Yes.  And  the  sheykh  said,
Since  the  case  is  so,  reside  with  me  until  thou  shalt  set  forth.  But
the  young  man  replied,  I  cannot  remain  ;  for  an  exceeding  fire  is  in
my  heart  on  account  of  my  passion  for  her.  So  the  sheykh  said  to
him,  Wait  until  I  prepare  for  thee  a  vessel  in  the  course  of  three
days,  that  thou  mayest  go  in  it  to  El-Basrah.  He  therefore  waited
until  he  had  prepared  for  him  a  vessel,  and  put  in  it  all  that  he
required,  of  food  and  drink  and  other  things;  and  after  the  three
days  the  sheykh  said  to  the  young  man,  Prepare  for  the  voyage;  for
I  have  fitted  out  for  thee  a  vessel,  in  which  are  all  things  that  thou
requirest,  and  the  vessel  is  my  property,  and  the  boatmen  are  of  my
servants,  and  in  the  vessel  is  what  will  suffice  thee  until  thou  shalt
return ;  and  I  have  charged  the  boatmen  to  serve  thee  till  thou  shalt
return  in  safety.

So  the  young  man  arose,  and  embarked  in  the  vessel,  bade  fare-
well to  the  sheykh,  and  proceeded  until  he  arrived  at  El-Basrah,  when
he  took  forth  a  hundred  pieces  of  gold  for  the  boatmen ;  but  they
said  to  him,  We  have  received  the  pay  from  our  master.  He  however
replied,  Receive  it  as  a  present,  and  I  will  not  inform  him  of  it.  They
therefore  received  it  from  him,  and  prayed  for  him.  The  young  man
then  entered  El-Basrah,  and  asked  where  was  the  place  of  abode  of
the  merchants ;  whereupon  they  answered  him,  In  a  Khan  called
the  Khan  of  Ham  dan.  So  he  walked  on  until  he  came  to  the  market
in  which  was  the  Khzin  ;  and  the  eyes  of  the  people  were  cast  upon
him,  gazing  at  him,  on  account  of  his  excessive  beauty  and  loveliness.
Then  he  entered  the  Khan  with  a  boatman,  and  inquired  for  the
door-keeper.  They  therefore  directed  him  to  him ;  and  he  saw  him
to  be  an  old,  reverend  sheykh.  He  saluted  him,  and  the  door-keeper
returned  his  salutation ;  and  he  said,  0  uncle,  hast  thou  an  elegant
chamber  ?  He  answered,  Yes ; — and,  taking  him,  together  with  the
boatman,  he  opened  for  them  an  elegant  chamber,  decorated  witli
gold,  and  said,  O  young  man,  this  chamber  is  suitable  to  thee.  And

III.  4 G


thereupon  the  young  man  took  forth  two  pieces  of  gold,  and  said  to
him,  Receive  these  two  as  the  gratuity  for  the  key.4  So  he  took
them,  and  prayed  for  him.  And  the  young  man  ordered  the  boatman
to  return  to  the  vessel.  He  then  entered  the  chamber,  and  the
door-keeper  of  the  Khan  remained  with  him,  and  served  him,  and
'said  to  him,  O  my  master,  happiness  hath  betided  us  by  thy  coining.
And  the  young  man  gave  him  a  piece  of  gold,  saying  to  him,  Buy  for
us  with  it  some  bread  and  meat  and  sweetmeat  and  wine.  Accord-
ingly he  took  it,  and  repaired  to  the  market,  and  returned  to  him,
having  bought  those  things  for  ten  pieces  of  silver,  and  gave  him  the
remainder.  But  the  young  man  said  to  him,  Expend  it  upon  thyself.
And  the  door-keeper  of  the  Khun  rejoiced  thereat  exceedingly.  Then
the  young  man  ate,  of  the  things  that  he  had  demanded,  one  cake  of
bread  with  a  little  savoury  food,  and  said  to  the  door-keeper  of  the
Khan,  Take  this  to  the  people  of  thy  dwelling.  He  therefore  took  it,
and  went  with  it  to  the  people  of  his  dwelling,  and  said  to  them,  I
imagine  not  that  any  one  on  the  face  of  the  earth  is  more  generous
than  the  young  man  who  hath  taken  up  his  abode  with  us  this  day,
or  more  sweet  than  he;  and  if  he  remain  with  us,  richness  will
betide  us.

Then  the  door-keeper  of  the  Khan  went  in  to  Ibraheem,  and  sa\v
him  weeping :  so  he  sat,  and  began  to  rub  and  press  gently  his  feet ;
after  which  he  kissed  them,  and  said,  0  my  master,  wherefore  dost
thou  weep  ?  May  God  not  cause  thee  to  weep ! — And  the  young
man  said,  O  uncle,  I  desire  to  drink  with  thee  this  night.  The  door-


THE  STORY  OF  IBRAHEEM  AND  JEMEELEH.  595

keeper  therefore  replied,  I  hear  and  obey.  And  the  young  man  took
forth  and  gave  him  five  pieces  of  gold,  saying  to  him,  Buy  for  us,
with  them,  fruits  and  wine.  He  then  gave  him  five  other  pieces  of
gold,  and  said  to  him,  Buy  for  us,  with  these,  dried  fruits  and  perfumes
and  live  fat  fowls,  and  bring  me  a  lute.  So  he  went  forth  and
bought  for  him  what  he  had  ordered  him  to  get,  and  said  to  his  wife,
Prepare  this  food,  and  strain  for  us  this  wine,  and  let  that  which  thou
shalt  prepare  be  excellent ;  for  this  young  man  hath  extended  to  all
of  us  his  beneficence.  His  wife  therefore  did  as  he  commanded  her
to  the  utmost  of  his  desire,  and  he  took  the  provisions  and  went  in
with  them  to-  Ibraheem  the  son  of  the  Sultan.  So  they  ate  and
drank  and  were  merry;  and  afterwards  the  young  man  wept  and
recited  these  two  verses  : —

O  my  friend,  if  I  gave  ray  life  in  my  endeavour,  and  all  my  wealth,  and  the  world

with  what,  is  in  it,
And  the  Garden  of  Eternity,  and  Paradise,5  altogether,  for  the  hour  of  union,  my

heart  would  purchase  it.

Then  he  uttered  a  great  groan,  and  fell  down  in  a  fit ;  whereat  the
door-keeper  of  the  Khan  sighed  ;  and  when  he  recovered,  he  said  to
him,  0  my  master,  what  causeth  thee  to  weep,  and  who  is  she  to  whom
thou  alludest  in  these  verses ;  for  she  cannot  be  aught  but  as  dust  to
thy  feet?  And  the  young  man  arose,  and,  taking  forth  a  wrapper  con-
taining some  of  the  most  beautiful  of  women's  apparel,  said  to  him,
Take  this  to  thy  hareem.  So  he  received  it  from  him,  and  gave  it  to
his  wife,  who  thereupon  came  with  him,  and  went  in  to  the  young
man  ;  and,  lo,  he  was  weeping.  She  therefore  said  to  him,  Thou  hast
crumbled  our  livers.  Tell  us  then  what  beautiful  woman  thou  desirest,
and  she  shall  not  be  aught  but  a  slave  in  thine  abode. — And  he  said
(addressing  the  door-keeper),  0  uncle,  know  that  I.am.  the  son  of
El-Khaseeb,  the  lord  of  Egypt,  and  that  I  am  enamoured  of  Jemeeleh,
the  daughter  of  Abu-1-Leys,  the  chief.  So  the  wife  of  the  door-
keeper of  the  Khan  said,  Allah  !  Allah  !  O  my  brother,  abstain  from
uttering  these  words,  lest  any  one  hear  of  us,  and  wre  perish;  for
there  is  not  upon  the  face  of  the  earth  any  one  more  violent  than  she,
and  no  one  can  mention  to  her  the  name  of  a  man,  since  she  is  averse
from  men.  Then,  O  my  son,  turn  from  her  to  another. — And  when
he  heard  her  words,  he  wept  violently.  The  door-keeper  of  the  Khan
therefore  said  to  him,  I  have  nought  but  my  life  to  give,  and  I  will
expose  it  to  peril  for  love  of  thee,  and  contrive  for  thee  a  plan  by


596


THE  STORY  OF  1BKAHEEM  AND  JEMEELEH.


which  thy  desire  may  be  attained.  Then  they  both  went  forth  from
him.  And  when  the  morning  came,  the  young  man  entered  the  bath,
and  put  on  a  suit  of  the  apparel  of  Kings;  and,  lo,  the  door-keeper  of
the  Khan,  with  his  wife,  advanced  to  him,  and  said  to  him,  0  my
master,  know  that  here  is  a  tailor,  who  is  humpbacked,  and  he  is  the
tailor  of  the  lady  Jemeeleh.  So  repair  to  him,  and  acquaint  him  witli
thy  state,  and  perhaps  he  will  direct  thee  to  a  means  of  thine  attaining
thy  desires.

The  youth  therefore  arose  and  went  to  the  shop  of  the  humpbacked
tailor;  and  he  went  in  to  him,  and  found  with  him  ten  memlooks,  like
moons.  He  saluted  them,  and  they  returned  his  salutation,  and  were
delighted  with  him,  and  they  seated  him,  and  were  confounded  at  the
sight  of  his  charms  and  his  loveliness.  And  when  the  humpback  saw


T1IK  STORY  OF  1BRAHEEM  AND  JEMEELEH.  597

him,  his  mind  was  amazed  at  the  beauty  of  his  form.  The  young
man  then  said  to  him,  I  desire  of  thee  that  thou  sew  for  me  my
pocket.  So  the  tailor  advanced,  and  took  a  needleful  of  silk,  and
sewed  it.  And  the  young  man  had  torn  his  pocket  purposely.  And
when  the  tailor  had  sewed  it,  he  took  forth  for  him  five  pieces  of  gold,
and  gave  them  to  him ;  after  which,  he  departed  to  his  chamber.  The
tailor  therefore  said,  \Vhat  have  I  done  for  this  young  man,  that  he
hath  given  me  the  five  pieces  of  gold  ?  Then  he  passed  the  night
thinking  upon  his  beauty  and  his  generosity.  And  when  the  morning
came,  the  young  man  repaired  again  to  the  shop  of  the  humpbacked
tailor.  He  entered  and  saluted  him,  and  he  returned  his  salutation,
treated  him  with  honour,  and  welcomed  him;  and  when  the  young
man  sat,  he  said  to  the  humpback,  O  uncle,  sew  for  me  my  pocket;
for  it  hath  been  torn  a  second  time.  So  he  replied,  O  my  sou,  on  the
head  and  the  eye.  And  he  advanced  and  sewed  it ;  and  the  young
man  gave  him  ten  pieces  of  gold.  The  tailor  therefore  took  them,  and
became  amazed  at  his  beauty  and  generosity,  and  said,  By  Allah,  O
young  man,  there  must  be  some  reason  for  this  conduct  of  thine,  and
this  is  not  for  the  sewing  of  a  pocket.  But  inform  me  of  the  truth  of
thy  case. — And  he  replied,  0  uncle,  this  is  not  the  place  for  talking  ;
for  my  story  is  wonderful,  and  my  case  is  extraordinary.  Upon  this,
the  tailor  said,  Since  the  case  is  so,  arise  and  come  with  us  into  a
private  place.  Then  the  tailor  arose,  and,  taking  his  hand,  entered
with  him  a  chamber  within  the  shop,  and  said  to  him,  O  young  man,
tell  me.  So  he  related  to  him  his  case  from  first  to  last ;  and  he  was
amazed  at  his  words,  and  said,  0  young  man,  fear  God  with  respect
to  thy  case;  for  she  whom  thou  hast  mentioned  is  a  virago,  averse
from  men.  Therefore  guard,  0  my  brother,  thy  tongue;  otherwise
thou  wilt  destroy  thyself. — And  when  the  young  man  heard  his  words,
he  wept  violently,  and,  keeping  hold  of  the  skirt  of  the  tailor,  he
said,  Protect  me,  O  uncle;  for  I  am  perishing;  and  I  have  left  my
kingdom  and  the  kingdom  of  my  father  and  my  grandfather,  and
become  in  the  land  a  stranger,  solitary ;  and  I  have  not  patience  to
remain  absent  from  her.

So  when  the  tailor  saw  what  had  betided  him,  he  pitied  him,  and
said,  O  my  son,  I  have  nought  but  my  life  to  give,  and  I  will  expose
it  to  peril  for  love  of  thee ;  for  thou  hast  wounded  my  heart ;  but
to-morrow  I  will  contrive  for  thee  a  plan  by  which  thy  heart  shall  be
comforted. — He  therefore  prayed  for  him,  and  departed  to  the  Khan  ;
and  he  told  the  door-keeper  of  the  Khan  what  the  tailor  had  said ;


598  THE  STORY  OF  1BRAHEEM  AND  JEMEELEH.

whereupon  he  replied,  He  hath  acted  with  thee  kindly.  And  when
the  next  morning  came,  the  young  man  attired  himself  in  the  most
sumptuous  of  his  apparel,  and,  taking  with  him  a  purse  containing
some  pieces  of  gold,  came  to  the  humpback,  and  saluted  him,  and  sat
down.  Then  he  said  to  him,  O  uncle,  fulfil  thy  promise  to  me.  And
he  replied,  Arise  immediately,  and  take  three  fat  fowls,  and  three
ounces  of  sugar-candy,  and  two  small  jugs,  which  fill  thou  with  wine,
and  take  a  cup.  Put  these  things  into  a  small  bag,  and  embark,  after
the  morning-prayers,  in  a  small  boat,  with  a  boatman,  and  say  to  him,
I  desire  that  thou  go  with  me  to  the  country  below  El-Basrah.  And
if  he  reply,  I  cannot  go  further  than  a  league, — say  thou  to  him,
Thou  shalt  do  as  thou  pleasest.  But  when  he  goeth,  excite  him  with
money,  until  he  conveyeth  thee  further ;  and  when  thou  hast  arrived,
the  first  garden  that  thou  wilt  see  is  the  garden  of  the  lady  Jemeeleh.
When  thou  seest  it,  go  to  its  gate.  Thou  wilt  see  two  high  steps,  on
which  is  furniture  of  brocade ;  and  a  humpbacked  man,  like  myself,
sitting.  Complain  to  him  of  thy  state,  and  solicit  his  favour,  and  per-
haps he  will  feel  pity  for  thy  state,  and  enable  thee  to  see  her,  at  least
to  obtain  a  sight  from  a  distance.  I  have  no  expedient  within  my
power  but  this;  and  if  he  be  not  moved  with  pity  for  thy  state,  I
perish,  and  so  dost  thou.  This  is  what  I  think  advisable,  and  the
affair  must  be  committed  to  God,  whose  name  be  exalted! — So  the
young  man  said,  I  seek  aid  of  God.  What  God  willeth  must  come  to
pass ;  and  there  is  no  strength  nor  power  but  in  God. — He  then  arose
and  departed  from  the  humpbacked  tailor,  and  repaired  to  his  chamber,
took  the  things  that  he  had  directed  him  to  procure,  and  put  them
into  a  neat,  small  bag.  And  when  he  arose  in  the  following  morning,
he  came  to  the  bank  of  the  Tigris,  and,  lo,  he  saw  a  boatman  lying
asleep.  So  he  woke  him,  and  gave  him  ten  pieces  of  gold,  saying  to
him,  Convey  me  to  the  country  below  El-Basrah.  The  man  replied,  0
my  master,  on  the  condition  that  I  go  not  further  than  a  league ;  for
if  I  go  a  span  beyond  that  distance,  we  both  perish.  And  he  said  to
him,  As  thou  pleasest.  He  therefore  took  him,  and  proceeded  with
him  down  the  river;  and  when  he  came  near  to  the  garden,  he  said,

0  my  son,  beyond  this  point  I  cannot  go  ;  for  if  I  pass  this  limit,  we
both  perish. So  he  took  forth  and  gave  him  ten  other  pieces  of  gold,
and  said  to  him,  Receive  this  money,  that  thou  mayest  have  recourse
to  it  to  amend  thy  state. And  the  man  was  abashed  at  him,  and  said,

1  commit  the  affair  to  God,  whose  name  be  exalted ! And he  pro-
ceeded down  the  river  with  him  ;  and  when  he  arrived  at  the  garden,


the  young  man  arose  in  his  joy,  leapt  from  the  boat  as  far  as  a
spear's  throw,  and  threw  himself  down ;  and  the  boatman  returned,
fleeing.

The  young  man  then  advanced,  and  he  saw  all  that  the  hump-
back had  described  to  him  with  respect  to  the  garden.  He  saw  its
gate  open,  and  in  the  vestibule  was  a  couch  of  ivory,  on  which  was
sitting  a  humpbacked  man  of  comely  countenance,  clad  in  apparel
ornamented  with  gold,  and  having  in  his  hand  a  mace  of  gilt  silver.
So  the  young  man  went  quickly  and  threw  himself  on  his  hand  and
kissed  it  ;  whereupon  he  said  to  him,  Who  art  thou,  and  whence  hast
thou  come,  and  who  brought  thee  hither,  0  my  son  ?  And  that  man,
when  he  saw  Ibraheem  the  son  of  El-Khaseeb,  was  amazed  at  his  love-
liness. Then  Ibraheem  said  to  him,  O  uncle,  I'  am  an  ignorant,
strange  youth.  And  he  wept ;  and  the  man  was  moved  with  pity  for
him,  and  took  him  up  on  the  couch,  wiped  away  his  teat's,  and  said  to
him,  No  harm  shall  befall  thee.  If  thou  be  in  debt,  may  God  discharge
thy  debt ;  and  if  thou  be  in  fear,  may  God  appease  thy  fear  ! — So  he
replied,  O  uncle/  I  have  no  fear,  nor  am  I  in  debt  ;  but  have  with  me


600  THE  STORY  OF  IBRiHEKM  AND  JKMKKLEH.

abundant  wealth,  by  the  good  pleasure  of  God,  and  his  aid.  The  man
therefore  said  to  him,  O  my  son,  what  is  thine  affair,  that  thou  hast
exposed  thy  life  and  thy  beauty  to  peril  by  coming  to  a  place  of
destruction?  And  the  young  man  related  to  him  his  story,  and
explained  to  him  his  case  ;  and  when  the  humpback  heard  his  words,
he  hung  down  his  head  a  while  towards  the  ground,  and  said,  Is  the
humpbacked  tailor  the  person  who  directed  thee  to  me  ?  He  answered
him,  Yes.  And  he  rejoined,  This  is  my  brother,  and  he  is  a  blessed
man.  Then  he  said,  O  my  son,  if  affection  for  thee  had  not  entered
into  my  heart,  and  if  I  had  not  pitied  thee,  thou  hadst  perished,  thou
and  my  brother  and  the  door-keeper  of  the  Khun  and  his  wife.  And
he  said,  Know  that  there  is  not  on  the  face  of  the  earth  the  like  of  this
garden,  and  it  is  called  the  Garden  of  the  Pearl.6  No  one  hath
entered  it,  during  the  period  of  my  life,  except  the  Sultan  and  myself
and  its  owner  Jerneeleh  [and  her  attendants] ;  and  I  have  resided  in
it  twenty  years,  and  have  not  seen  any  man  [except  .the  Sultan]  come
to  this  place.  In  the  course  of  every  forty  days,  the  lady  Jemeeleh
cometh  hither  in  the  vessel,  and  ascendeth  amid  her  female  slaves,  in
a  canopy  of  satin,  the  borders  of  which,  ten  female  slaves  hold  up  with
hooks  of  gold,  till  she  entereth  :  so  I  have  not  seen  of  her  aught.  But
I  have  nothing  save  my  life  to  give,  and  I  will  expose  it  to  peril  for
thy  sake. — And  thereupon  the  young  man  kissed  his  hand ;  and  the
humpback  said  to  him,  Sit  with  me  until  I  contrive  for  thee  a  mode
of  proceeding.

After  that,  he  took  the  hand  of  the  young  man  and  conducted  him
into  the  garden  ;  and  when  Ibraheem  saw  that  garden,  he  imagined
that  it  was  Paradise.  He  beheld  the  trees  to  be  entangled,  and  the
palm-trees  tall,  and  the  waters  pouring,  and  the  birds  warbling  with
various  notes.  Then  the  humpback  went  with  him  to  a  dome-crowned
pavilion,  and  said  to  him,  This  is  the  place  in  which  the  lady  Jemeeleh
sitteth.  And  he  examined  that  pavilion,  and  found  it  to  be  one  of
the  most  wonderful  of  pleasure-houses.  In  it  were  all  kinds  of  pictures
in  gold  and  ultramarine,  and  it  had  four  doors,  to  which  one  ascended
by  five  steps  ;  and  in  the  midst  of  it  was  a  pool,  to  which  one  descended
by  steps  of  gold,  those  steps  being  set  with  minerals.  In  the  midst
of  the  pool  was  a  fountain  of  gold,  with  images,  large  and  small,  from
the  mouths  of  which  the  water  issued ;  and  when  the  images  produced
various  sounds  at  the  issuing  of  the  water,  it  seemed  to  the  hearer
that  he  was  in  Paradise.  By7  the  dome-crowned  pavilion  was  a  water-
wheel,  the  pots  of  which  were  of  silver;  and  it  was  covered  with


THE  STORY  OF  IBRAHEEM  AND  JEMEELEH


601


brocade.  And  on  the  left  of  the  water-wheel  was  a  lattice-window  of
silver,  looking  upon  a  green  meadow,8  in  which  were  all  kinds  of  wild
beasts,  and  gazelles,  and  hares ;  and  on  its  right  was  a  lattice-window
looking  upon  a  field  in  which  were  all  kinds  of  birds,  all  of  them
warbling  with  various  notes,  amazing  the  hearer.  When  the  young
man  beheld  this,  he  was  moved  with  delight.  He  seated  himself  at  the
gate  of  the  garden,  and  the  gardener  sat  by  his  side,  and  said,  How
dost  thou  regard  my  garden  ?  The  young  man  answered  him,  It  is
the  Paradise  of  the  World.  And  the  gardener  laughed.  Then  he
arose,  and  was  absent  from  him  a  while,  after  which  he  returned,
having  with  him  a  tray  containing  fowls  and  quails,  and  nice  food,
and  sweetmeat  of  sugar ;  and  he  put  it  before  the  young  man,  and
said  to  him,  Eat  until  thou  shalt  be  satiated.  So  I  ate,  says  Ibraheem,
until  I  was  satisfied ;  and  when  he  saw  that  I  ate,  he  rejoiced,  and
said,  By  Allah,  this  is  the  manner  of  Kings,  the  sons  of  Kings  !  And
he  said,  0  Ibraheem,  what  is  with  thee  in  this  small  bag  ?  I  there-
fore opened  it  before  him  ;  and  he  said,  Carry  it  with  thee ;  for  it  will
be  of  use  to  thee  when  the  lady  Jemeeleh  cometh,  since,  when  she
cometh,  I  shall  not  be  able  to  come  in  to  thee  with  aught  for  thee  to
eat. — Then  he  arose  and  took  my  hand  and  brought  me  to  a  place
opposite  the  dome-crowned  pavilion  of  Jemeeleh  ;  and  he  made  an
arbour  amid  the  trees,  and  said,  Ascend  into  this ;  and  when  she


--« •».»*


III.


4  H


602  THE  STORY  OF  IBRAHEEM  AM)  JEMEELEH.

cometh,  thou  wilt  see  her,  and  she  will  not  see  thee.  This  is  the
utmost  stratagem  that  I  can  employ,  and  upon  God  be  our  dependence.
When  she  singeth,  drink  to  her  singing,  and  when  she  departeth,
return  to  the  place  whence  thou  earnest,  if  it  be  the  will  of  God,  with
safety. — So  the  young  man  thanked  him,  and  desired  to  kiss  his
hand;  but  he  prevented  him.  Then  the  young  man  put  the  small
bag  into  the  arbour  which  the  humpback  had  made  for  him ;  after
which  the  gardener  said  to  him,  O  Ibraheem,  divert  thyself  in  the
garden,  and  eat  of  its  fruits;  for  the  appointed  time  of  the  coming  of
thy  beloved  is  to-morrow.  Ibraheem  therefore  proceeded  to  amuse
himself  in  the  garden,  and  to  eat  of  its  fruits.

He  passed  the  night  with  the  gardener,  and  when  the  morning
came,  and  diffused  its  light  and  shone,  Ibraheem  recited  the  morning-
prayers,  and,  lo,  the  gardener  came  to  him,  with  sallow  complexion,
and  said  to  him,  Arise,  0  my  son,  and  ascend  to  the  arbour ;  for  the
female  slaves  have  come  to  spread  the  furniture  in  the  place,  and  she
will  come  after  them;  and 'beware  thou  of  spitting,  or  blowing  thy
nose,  or  sneezing ;  for  if  thou  do,  we  shall  both  perish.  The  young
man  therefore  arose  and  ascended  to  the  arbour,  and  the  gardener
departed,  saying,  God  grant  thee  safety,  O  my  son !  And  while  the
young  man  was  sitting,  lo,  there  approached  five  slave-girls,  the  like
of  whom  no  one  had  beheld.  They  entered  the  dome-crowned  pavilion,
pulled  off  their  outer  garments,  and  washed  the  place,  sprinkled  it  with
rose-water,  gave  vent  to  the  fumes  of  aloes-wood  and  ambergris,  and
spread  the  brocade.  And  there  approached  after  them  fifty  female
slaves,  with  musical  instruments,  and  Jemeeleh  was  amid  them,  within
a  red  canopy  of  brocade,  and  the  female  slaves  held  up  the  skirts  of
the  canopy  with  hooks  of  gold  until  she  entered  the  pavilion.  So  the
young  man  saw  not  of  her,  nor  of  her  apparel,  aught ;  and  he  said
within  himself,  By  Allah,  all  my  labour  is  lost ;  but  I  must  wait
until  1  see  how  the  case  will  be.  The  female  slaves  brought  forward
the  food  and  drink  ;  so  they  ate,  and  washed  their  hands,  and  set  for
Jemeeleh  a  throne,  on  which  she  seated  herself.  Then  they  all  played
on  the  musical  instruments,  and  sang  with  mirth-exciting  voices,  of
which  there  was  not  the  like ;  after  which  an  old  woman,  a  kahramaneh,
came  forth,  and  clapped  her  hands,  and  danced ;  and  the  female  slaves
pulled  her  along.  And,  lo,  the  curtain  was  raised,  and  Jemeeleh
came  forth,  laughing :  and  Ibraheem  saw  her.  Upon  her  were  orna-
ments and  apparel,  and  on  her  head  was  a  crown  set  with  fine  pearls
and  with  jewels,  and  on  her  neck  a  necklace  of  pearls,  and  around  her


THE  STORY  OF  IBRAHEEM  AND  JEMEELEH.  603

waist  a  girdle  of  oblong  chrysolites,  the  strings  of  which  were  of  jacinths
and  pearls.  And  thereupon  the  female  slaves  arose,  and  kissed  the
ground  before  her,  while  she  laughed.

When  I  beheld  her,  says  Ibraheem  the  son  of  El-Khaseeb,  I
became  unconscious  of  my  existence,  and  my  reason  was  confounded,
and  my  mind  was  perplexed,  in  consequence  of*my  amazement  at
loveliness  the  like  of  which  was  not  seen  upon  the  face  of  the  earth.
I  fell  down  in  a  fit,  and  recovered  with  weeping  eyes,  and  recited  these
two  verses  : —

I  see  thee,  and  close  not  mine  eye,  that  mine  eyelids  may  not  prevent  my  behold-
ing thee.
If  I  gazed  at  thee  with  every  glance,  mine  eyes  would  not  see  all  thy  charms.

— The  old  woman  then  said  to  the  female  slaves,  Let  ten  of  you  arise
and  dance  and  sing.  And  when  Ibraheem  saw  them,  he  said  within
himself,  I  wish  that  the  lady  Jemeeleh  would  dance.  And  after  the
dancing  of  the  ten  slave-girls  was  ended,  they  went  around  her,
and  said,  O  our  mistress,  we  wish  that  thou  wouldst  dance  amid  this
assembly,  that  our  happiness  might  be  rendered  complete  thereby;
for  we  have  not  seen  a  more  delightful  day  than  this.  So  Ibraheem
said  within  himself,  No  doubt  the  gates  of  heaven  have  been  opened,9
and  God  hath  answered  my  prayer.  Then  the  female  slaves  kissed
her  feet,  and  said  to  her,  By  Allah,  we  have  not  seen  thy  bosom
dilated  as  it  is  this  day.  And  they  ceased  not  to  excite  her  until  she
pulled  off  her  outer  clothing,  and  became  only  clad  in  a  shirt  woven
with  gold,  embroidered  with  varieties  of  jewels,  shewing  the  forms  of
a  bosom  like  two  pomegranates,  and  displaying  a  face  like' the  moon
in  the  night  of  its  fulness.  Ibraheem  beheld  motions  the  like  of
which  he  had  not  seen  before  in  his  life.  And  when  she  exhibited,  in
her  dancing,  an  extraordinary  mode,  and  wonderful  invention,  her
performance  was  such  (says  Ibraheem)  that  she  made  us  forget  the
dancing  of  the  bubbles  in  the  cups,  and  occasioned  our  thinking"  of
the  inclining  of  the  turbans  from  the  heads.10  She  was  such  as  the
poet  hath  thus  described : —

A  dancer  whose  figure  is  like  a  willow-branch  :  my  soul  almost  quitteth  me  at  the

sight  of  her  movements.
No  foot  can  remain  stationary  at  her  dancing. She  is  as  though  the  fire  of  my

heart  were  beneath  her  feet.

Now,  while  I  was  looking  at  her,  says  Ibraheem,  lo,  a  glance  of
her  eve  was  directed  towards  me,  and  she  saw  me  ;  and  when  she


beheld  me,  her  countenance  changed,  and  she  said  to  her  female
slaves,  Sing  ye  until  I  return  to  you.  Then  she  took  a  knife  half  a
cubit  in  length,  and  came  towards  me,  saying,  There  is  no  strength
nor  power  but  in  God,  the  High,  the  Great !  And  when  she  drew
near  to  me,  I  became  unconscious  of  my  existence ;  but  when  she
saw  me,  and  her  face  met  mine,  the  knife  fell  from  her  hand,  and  she
said,  Extolled  be  the  perfection  of  the  Changer  of  hearts !  She  then
said  to  me,  0  young  man,  be  of  good  heart :  thou  art  secure  from
that  which  thou  fearest.  And  I  began  to  weep,  and  she  wiped  away
my  tears  with  her  hand,  and  said,  0  young  man,  inform  me  who  thou
art,  and  what  brought  thee  to  this  place.  So  I  kissed  the  ground
before  her,  and  kept  hold  of  her  skirt ;  and  she  said,  No  harm  shall
befall  thee ;  for,  by  Allah,  mine  eye  hath  not  been  delighted  with  any
male  but  thyself.  Then  tell  me  who  thou  art. — I  therefore  related
to  her  my  story  from  beginning  to  end ;  and  she  wondered  thereat,
and  said  to  me,  0  my  master,  I  conjure  thee  by  Allah  to  tell  me,  art
thou  Ibraheem  the  son  of  El-Khaseeb  ?  I  answered,  Yes.  And  she
threw  herself  upon  me,  and  said,  0  my  master,  thou  art  the  person
who  made  me  averse  from  men ;  for  when  I  heard  that  there  existed
in  Egypt  a  young  man  than  whom  there  was  not  upon  the  face  of


THE  STORY  OF  IBRAHEEM  AND  JEMEELEH.  605

the  earth  any  one  more  beautiful,  I  loved  thee  from  the  description,
and  my  heart  became  fondly  attached  to  thee,  by  reason  of  that  which
was  told  me  of  thee,  concerning  thy  surpassing  loveliness,  and  I
became,  with  regard  to  thee,  in  the  case  thus  expressed  by  the  poet: —

Mine  ear  became  enamoured  of  him  before  mine  eye;  for  the  ear  is  enamoured
before  the  eye  sometimes.

Therefore  praise  be  to  God  who  hath  shown  me  thy  face  !  By  Allah,
had  it  been  any  but  thee,  I  had  crucified  the  gardener,  and  the  door-
keeper of  the  Khan,  and  the  tailor,  and  him  who  had  had  recourse  to
them  ! — Then  she  said  to  me,  How  shall  I  contrive  means  of  pro-
curing something  for  thee  to  eat  without  the  knowledge  of  my  female
slaves  ?  So  I  answered  her,  I  have  with  me  what  we  may  eat  and
what  we  may  drink.  And  I  opened  the  small  bag  before  her,  and
took  a  fowl,  and  she  proceeded  to  feed  me  with  morsels,  I  feeding  her
in  like  manner.  And  when  I  saw  this  conduct  of  hers,  I  imagined  that
the  event  was  a  dream.  Then  I  brought  forward  the  wine,  and  we
drank.  All  that  time,  while  she  was  with  me,  the  female  slaves  were
singing;  and  we  ceased  not  to  remain  in  this  state  from  morn  to
noon,  when  she  arose,  and  said,  Arise  nqw ;  prepare  for  thee  a  vessel,
and  wait  for  me  in  such  a  place  until  I  come  to  thee ;  for  there
remaineth  to  me  no  patience  to  endure  thy  separation.  So  I  replied,
O  my  mistress,  I  have  with  me  a  vessel,  which  is  my  property,  and
the  boatmen  are  hired  by  me,  and  they  are  expecting  me.  And  she
said,  This  is  what  we  desire.

She  then  went  to  the  female  slaves,  and  said  to  them,  Arise  with
us,  that  we  may  go  to  our  palace.  They  therefore  said  to  her,  Why
should  we  arise  now,  when  it  is  our  custom  to  remain  three  days  ?
And  sha  replied,  Verily  I  experience  in  myself  a  great  heaviness.  It
seemeth  that  I  am  sick,  and  I  fear  that  this  illness  may  become  more
heavy  upon  me. — So  they  said  to  her,  We  hear  and  obey.  Accord-
ingly they  put  on  their  apparel,  went  to  the  bank  of  the  river,  and
embarked  in  the  boat.  And,  lo,  the  gardener  approached  Ibraheem,
having  no  knowledge  of  that  which  had  happened  to  him,  and  said,
0  Ibniheem,  thou  hast  not  had  the  good  fortune  to  delight  thyself
with  beholding  her;  for  it  is  her  custom  to  remain  here  three  days,
and  I  fear  that  she  hath  seen  thee.  But  Ibraheem  replied,  She  saw  me
not,  nor  did  I  see  her,  nor  did  she  come  forth  from  the  pavilion.  And
he  said,  Thou  hast  spoken  truth,  0  my  son ;  for  had  she  seen  thee,
we  had  perished  :  but  remain  with  me  until  she  corne  next  week,


60G  THE  STORY  OF  IBKAIIKKM  AND  .1  KMKKl.KIL

and  thou  shalt  see  her,  and  satiate  thyself  with  gazing  at  her.  Ibra-
hecm,  however,  replied,  0  my  master,  I  have  with  me  wealth,  and  I
fear  for  it.  I  have  also  left  behind  me  men,  and  I  fear  that  they  will
think  me  too  long  absent. — And  the  gardener  said,  O  my  son,  verily
thy  separation  will  be  grievous  to  me.  Then  he  embraced  him,  and
bade  him  farewell ;  and  Ibraheem  repaired  to  the  Khan  in  which  he
was  lodging,  met  the  door-keeper  of  the  Khan,  and  took  his  wealth.
And  the  door-keeper  said  to  him,  Good  news,  if  it  be  the  will  of  God.
But  Ibraheem  replied,  I  found  no  way  of  accomplishing  my  affair,
and  I  desire  to  return  to  my  family.  So  the  door-keeper  of  the  Khan
wept,  and  bade  him  farewell,  carried  his  goods,  and  conducted  him  to
the  vessel.

After  that,  Ibraheem  repaired  to  the  place  of  which  Jemeeleh  had
told  him,  and  there  waited  for  her;  and  when  the  night  became  dark,
lo,  she  approached  him,  in  the  garb  of  a  valiant  man,  with  a  round
beard,  and  her  waist  bound  with  a  girdle,  and  in  one  of  her  hands
were  a  bow  and  arrows,  and  in  the  other  was  a  drawn  sword ;  and
she  said  to  him,  Art  thou  the  son  of  El-Khaseeb,  the  lord  of  Egypt  ?
So  Ibraheem  answered  her,  I  am  he.  And  she  said  to  him,  And
what  young  wretch  art  thou,  that  thou  hast  come  to  corrupt  the
daughters  of  the  Kings  ?  Arise;  answer  the  summons  of  the  Sultan.
— Upon  this,  says  Ibraheem,  I  fell  down  in  a  fit ;  and  as  to  the
boatmen,  they  almost  died  in  their  skins  from  fear.  Therefore,  when
she  saw  what  had  happened  to  me,  she  pulled  off  that  beard,  threw
down  the  sword,  and  loosed  the  girdle  ;  and  I  saw  that  she  was  the
lady  Jemeeleh,  and  said  to  her,  By  Allah,  thou  hast  mangled  rny
heart !  Then  I  said  to  the  boatmen,  Hasten  the  course  of  the  vessel.
Accordingly  they  loosed  the  sail,  and  hastened  in  their  course,  and
only  a  few  days  had  elapsed  before  we  arrived  at  Baghdad.  And,  lo,
there  was  a  vessel  lying  stationary  by  the  bank  of  the  river;  and
when  the  boatmen  who  were  in  it  saw  us,  they  called  out  to  the
boatmen  who  were  with  us,  and  proceeded  to  say,  O  such-a-one !
and  O  such-a-one !  we  congratulate  you  on  your  safety  !  They  then
drove  their  vessel  against  ours  ;  and  we  looked,  and,  behold,  in  it
was  Abu-1-Kasim  Es-Sandalanee,  who,  when  he  saw  us,  said,  Verily
this  is  the  object  of  my  search.  Go  ye,  in  the  keeping  of  God.  I
desire  to  repair  to  accomplish  an  affair. — And  there  was  before  him  a
candle.  Then  he  said  to  me,  Praise  be  to  God  for  thy  safety !  Hast
thou  accomplished  thine  affair? — I  answered,  Yes.  And  thereupon
he  put  the  candle  near  to  us,  and  when  Jemeeleh  saw  him,  her  state


TIIK  STORY  OF  IBRAHEEM  AND  JEMEELEH.  607

became  changed,  and  her  complexion  became  sallow ;  and  when  Es-
Sandahinee  saw  her,  he  said,  Depart  ye  in  the  safe  keeping  of  God.
I  am  going  to  El-Basrah,  on  business  for  the  Sultan  :  but  the  gift
is  for  him  who  is  present. — He  then  produced  a  small  box  of  sweet-
meats, and  threw  it  into  our  vessel,  and  there  was  in  them  benj.  So
Ibniheem  said,  O  delight  of  mine  eye,  eat  of  this.  But  she  wept,
and  said,  0  Ibraheem,  knowest  thou  who  this  is  ? — I  answered  (says
Ibraheem),  Yes :  this  is  such-a-one.  And  she  rejoined,  He  is  the
son  of  my  paternal  uncle,  and  formerly  he  demanded  me  in  marriage
of  my  father,  and  I  did  not  accept  him ;  and  he  is  repairing  to  El-
Basrah  ;  so  probably  he  will  inform  my  father  of  us.  But  I  said,
O  my  mistress,  He  will  not  arrive  at  El-Brsrah  until  we  arrive  at
El-M6sil. — And  they  knew  not  what  was  concealed  from  them  in  the
secret  purpose  of  God.

Then  I  ate  (says  Ibraheem)  somewhat  of  the  sweetmeat,  and  it
had  not  descended  into  my  stomach  before  I  struck  the  floor  with  my
head.  And  when  it  was  near  daybreak  I  sneezed ;  whereupon  the
benj  issued  from  my  nostril,  and  I  opened  my  eye,  and  beheld  myself
stripped  of  my  outer  clothing,  and  thrown  amid  ruins.  I  therefore
slapped  my  face,  and  said  within  myself,  Verily  this  is  a  stratagem
practised  upon  me  by  Es-Sandahinee.  I  knew  not  whither  to  repair,
and  had  nothing  upon  me  but  a  pair  of  trousers;  and  I  arose  and
walked  about  a  little ;  and,  lo,  the  Walee  approached  me,  accom-
panied by  a  party  of  men  with  swords  and  leathern  shields.  So  I
feared,  and,  seeing  a  ruined  bath,  I  hid  myself  in  it.  But  my  foot
stumbled  upon  something ;  wherefore  I  put  my  hand  upon  it,  and  it
became  befouled  with  blood.  I  therefore  wiped  it  upon  my  trousers,
not  knowing  what  it  was,  and  stretched  forth  my  hand  to  the  thing  a
second  time ;  whereupon  it  fell  on  a  slain  person,  and  the  head  came
up  in  my  hand.  So  I  threw  it  down,  and  said,  There  is  no  strength
nor  power  but  in  God,  the  High,  the  Great !  I  then  entered  one  of
the  retired  corners  of  the  bath ;  and,  behold,  the  Walee  stopped  at  the
door  of  the  bath,  and  said,  Enter  ye  this  place,  and  search.  And  ten
of  them  entered  with  cressets;  and  by  reason  of  my  fear,  I  retired
behind  a  wall,  and,  taking  a  view  of  that  slain  person,  I  saw  it  to  be  a
damsel,  whose  face  was  like  the  full  moon ;  her  head  lying  on  one
side,  and  her  body  on  another;  and  upon  her  was  costly  apparel.
Therefore,  when  I  beheld  her,  a  violent  trembling  affected  my  heart.
And  the  Walee  entered,  and  said,  Search  throughout  the  bath.  And
they  entered  the  place  in  which  I  was,  and  a  man  of  them  saw  me,


and  came  to  me,  having  in  his  hand  a  knife  half  a  cubit  long ;  and
when  he  drew  near  to  me  he  said,  Extolled  be  the  perfection  of  God,
the  Creator  of  this  beautiful  face  !  O  young  man,  whence  art  thou  ?
— Then  he  took  my  hand,  and  said,  O  young  man,  wherefore  didst
thou  slay  this  murdered  female  ?  So  I  answered,  By  Allah,  I  did
not  slay  her,  nor  do  I  know  who  slew  her,  and  I  entered  not  this
place  save  through  fear  of  you.  And  I  acquainted  him  with  my  case,
and  said  to  him,  By  Allah  I  conjure  thee  that  thou  wrong  me  not,  for
I  arn  in  anxiety  for  myself.  And  he  took  me  and  led  me  forward
to  the  Walee :  and  when  he  saw  upon  my  hands  the  marks  of  blood,
he  said,  This  requireth  not  proof:  therefore  strike  off  his  head.  So
when  I  heard  these  words,  I  wept  violently :  the  tears  of  my  eyes
flowed,  and  I  recited  these  two  verses : —

We  trod  the  steps  appointed  for  us :  and  he  whose  steps  are  appointed  must  tread

them.
He  whose  death  is  decreed  to  take  place  in  one  land  will  not  die  in  any  land  hut  that-


THE  STORY  OF  IBRAHEEM  AND  JEMEELEH.  609

Then  I  uttered  a  groan,  and  fell  down  in  a  fit ;  whereupon  the  heart
of  the  executioner  was  moved  with  pity  for  me,  and  he  said,  By  Allah,
this  is  not  the  face  of  him  who  hath  committed  a  murder  !  But  the
Walee  said,  Strike  off  his  head !  They  therefore  seated  me  upon  the
skin  of  blood,11  and  bound  over  my  eyes  a  covering,  and  the  swords-
man took  his  sword,  asked  permission  of  the  Walee,  and  was  about
to  strike  off  my  head.  So  I  cried  out,  Alas  for  my  distance  from
my  home !

But,  lo,  a  company  of  horsemen  approached,  and  a  speaker  said,
Leave  ye  him !  Restrain  thy  hand,  O  swordsman ! — And  this  was
occasioned  by  a  wonderful  cause  and  an  extraordinary  circumstance,
which  was  this.  E  Khaseeb  the  lord  of  Egypt  had  sent  his  Chamber-
lain to  the  Khaleefeh  Haroon  Er-Rasheed,  and  with  him  presents  and
rarities,  and  also  a  letter,  in  which  he  wrote  to  him,  My  son  hath  been
lost  a  year  since,  and  I  have  heard  that  he  is  in  Baghdad ;  and  my
desire  of  the  beneficence  of  the  Khaleefeh  of  God  is  that  he  would
search  for  tidings  of  him,  and  strive  in  seeking  him,  and  send  him  to
me  with  the  Chamberlain.  So  when  the  Khaleefeh  read  the  letter,
he  oi'dered  the  Walee  to  investigate  the  truth  of  his  story ;  and  the
Walee  and  the  Khaleefeh  ceased  not  to  inquire  for  him,  until  it  was
told  the  \Valee  that  he  was  at  El-Basrah.  He  therefore  informed  the
Khaleefeh  of  that,  and  the  Khaleefeh  wrote  a  letter,  and  gave  it  to  the
Egyptian  Chamberlain,  ordering  him  to  journey  to  El-Basrah,  and  to
take  with  him  a  party  of  the  dependents  of  the  Wezeer.  And  by
reason  of  the  eagerness  of  the  Chamberlain  to  find  the  son  of  his
lord,  he  went  forth  immediately,  and  he  found  the  young  man  upon
the  skin  of  blood,  with  the  Walee.  And  when  the  Walee  saw  the
Chamberlain,  and  knew  him,  he  dismounted  to  him ;  and  the  Cham-
berlain said  to  him,  Who  is  this  young  man,  and  what  is  his  case  ?
So  he  acquainted  him  with  the  matter;  and  the  Chamberlain  said,
not  knowing  that  he  was  the  son  of  the  Sultan,  Verily  the  face  of
this  young  man  is  the  face  of  one  that  doth  not  murder.  And  he
ordered  the  Walee  to  loose  his  bonds ;  wherefore  he  loosed  them  ;
and  he  said,  Bring  him  forward  to  me.  Accordingly  he  led  him
forward  to  him.  And  his  loveliness  had  departed  in  consequence  of
the  severity  of  the  horrors  that  he  had  endured.  The  Chamberlain
therefore  said  to  him,  Acquaint  me  with  thy  history,  O  young  man,
and  tell  me  wherefore  this  slain  female  is  with  thee.  And  when
Ibniheem  looked  at  the  Chamberlain,  he  knew  him  :  so  he  said  to
him,  Wo  to  thee !  Dost  thou  not  know  me  ?  Am  I  not  Ibraheem,
in.  4  i


610  THE  STORY  OF  IBRAHEEM  AXD  JEMEELEH.

the  son  of  thy  lord  ?  Probably  thou  hast  come  to  seek  for  me. — Upon
this,  the  Chamberlain  fixed  his  eyes  intently  upon  him,  and  knew
him  perfectly  :  therefore,  when  he  knew  him,  he  threw  himself  upon
his  feet.  And  when  the  Walee  saw  what  the  Chamberlain  did,  his
complexion  became  sallow.  The  Chamberlain  then  said  to  him,  Wo
to  thee,  O  oppressor  !  Was  it  thy  desire  to  slay  the  son  of  my
master  El-Khaseeb  the  lord  of  Egypt  ?  So  the  Walee  kissed  the
skirt  of  the  Chamberlain,  and  said  to  him,  0  my  lord,  how  could  I
know  him  ?  Verily  we  saw  him  in  this  plight,  and  we  saw  the
damsel  slain  by  his  side. — But  he  replied,  Wo  to  thee  !  Verily  thou
art  not  fit  for  the  office  of  Walee.  This  is  a  young  man,  fifteen  years
of  age,  and  he  hath  not  killed  a  sparrow.  How  then  should  he  murder
a  human  being  ?  Didst  thou  not  grant  him  any  delay,  and  ask  him
respecting  his  state  ? — Then  the  Chamberlain  and  the  Walee  said,
Search  ye  for  the  murderer  of  the  damsel.  They  therefore  entered  the
bath  a  second  time,  and  they  saw  her  murderer  :  so  they  took  him,
and  brought  him  to  the  Walee,  who  took  him  and  repaired  with  him
to  the  palace  of  the  Khaleefeh,  and  acquainted  the  Khaleefeh  with  the
events  that  had  happened.

Upon  this,  Er-Raslieed  gave  orders  to  slay  the  murderer  of  the
damsel ;  after  which  he  commanded  to  bring  the  son  of  El-Khaseeb.
And  when  he  presented  himself  before  him,  Er-Rasheed  smiled  in  his
face,  and  said  to  him,  Acquaint  me  with  thy  history,  and  the  events
that  have  happened  to  thee.  So  he  related  to  him  his  story  from  the
beginning  to  the  end :  and  it  excited  his  wonder.  He  then  called
Mesroor  the  executioner,  and  said,  Go  this  instant  and  assail  the  house
of  Abu-1-Kasim  Es-Sandalanee,  and  bring  him  and  the  damsel  to  me.
Accordingly  he  went  immediately,  and  assailed  his  house,  and  he  saw
the  damsel  bound  with  her  hair,  and  at  the  point  of  destruction.
Mesroor  therefore  loosed  her,  and  brought  her  with  Es-Sandalanee ;
and  when  Er-Rasheed  beheld  her,  he  wondered  at  her  loveliness.
Then  he  looked  towards  Es-Sandalanee,  and  said,  Take  ye  him,  and
cut  off  his  hands  with  which  he  smote  this  damsel,  and  crucify  him,
and  deliver  his  riches  and  his  possessions  to  Ibraheem.  And  they  did
so.  And  while  they  were  thus  employed,  lo,  Abu-1-Leys,  the  Governor
of  El-Basrah,  the  father  of  the  lady  Jemeeleh,  approached  them,  to
demand  aid  of  the  Khaleefeh  against  Ibraheem  the  son  of  El  Khaseeb
the  lord  of  Egypt,  and  to  complain  to  him  that  he  had  taken  his
daughter.  But  Er-Rasheed  said  to  him,  He  was  the  cause  of  her
deliverance  from  torture  and  slaughter.  And  he  c;ave  orders  to  brintr


THE  STORY  OF  IBRAHEEM  AND  JEMEELEH.


611


the  son  of  El-Khaseeb ;  and  when  he  came,  he  said  to  Abu-1-Leys,
Wilt  thou  not  consent  that  this  young  man,  the  son  of  the  Sultan  of
Egypt,  shall  be  a  husband  to  thy  daughter?  And  he  answered,  I
hear  and  obey  God  and  thee,  0  Prince  of  the  Faithful !  So  the
Khaleefeh  summoned  the  Kadee  and  the  witnesses,  and  married  the
damsel  to  Ibniheem  the  son  of  El-Khaseeb.  He  also  presented  to
him  all  the  riches  of  Es-Sandalanee,  and  fitted  him  out  for  his  return
to  his  country.  And  he  lived  with  her  in  the  most  perfect  happiness
and  the  most  complete  joy  until  they  were  visited  by  the  terminator
of  delights  and  the  separator  of  companions. — Extolled  be  the  perfec-
tion of  the  Living  who  dieth  not ! 12


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-NINTH.


NOTE  1.  This  tale  relates  to  the  times  of  Haroon  Er-Rasheed ;  and  may  perhaps
be  founded  on  fact ;  for  there  was,  in  the  reign  of  that  Khaleefeh,  an  intendant  of  the
tribute  of  Egypt  named  El-Khaseeb,  the  son  of  'Abd-El-Haineed.  Aboo-Xmvas  has
made  honourable  mention  of  him  in  the  following  verses  : — l

If  our  camels  visit  not  the  land  of  El-Khaseeb,2  what  man  after  El-Khaseeb  shall  they  vi-it  ?
For  liberality  hath  not  passed  beyond  him,  nor  hath  it  alighted  behind  him ;  but  liberality  goeth

whithersoever  he  goeth.
He  is  a  man  who  purehaseth  eulogy  with  his  wealth,  and  who  knoweth  that  the  periods  of  fortune

revolve.

In  our  tale,  El-Khaseeb  is  improperly  called  Lord,  and  Sultan,  of  Egypt.
NOTE  2.  "Ghazaleh"  is  "a  gazelle;"  but  here  it  is  a  proper  name.
NOTE  3.  "  Jemeeleh  "  signifies  "  beautiful,''  "  lovely,"  "  good,"  &c.

NOTE  4.  "The  gratuity  for  the  key"  (hulwan  el-miftah)  is  a  fee  which  is  still
commonly  given  on  hiring  a  house  or  chamber.

NOTE  5.  See  the  fifth  paragraph  of  Note  2  to  the  Introduction.

NOTE  6.  The  word  rendered  "Pearl"  (namely  "lu-lu-ah")  also  signifies  "a  wild
cow,"  a  species  of  bovine  antelope.  Each  sense  is  appropriate  if  it  be  meant  (as  I
suppose  it  is)  to  convey  an  allusion  to  the  lady  Jemeeleh.

NOTE  7.  Literally  "  around."  I  suspect  that  a  copyist  has  altered  this  passage,
imagining  the  word  "  sakiyeh  "  to  signify  here  "  a  water-wheel  for  irrigation  "  when  it
was  used  in  the  sense  of  "  a  rivulet,"  and  has  therefore  spoken  of  its  "  pots."

NOTE  8.  I  here  read  "marj"  (a  meadow)  for  "  burj  "  (a  tower),  and  am  justified
in  doing  so  by  Trebutien's  version.


1  I  translate  these  verses  from  the  printed  edi-
tion  of  El-Mekeen  ("  Elmaciui  Historia  Sara-
c-enica"),  page  119,  in  which  they  are  given  both
in  the  Arabic  and  in  Latin  ;  but  with  unaccount-


able  errors  in  the  -original and  the  translation.
In  the  Arabic  is  an  error  which  corrupts  the  first
verse  in  measure,  rhyme,  and  sense.
2  Khaseeb  irisruifies  "  fruitful,''  &c.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  TWENTY-NINTH.


613


NOTE  9.  When  the  gates  of  heaven  are  opened,  prayer  is  sure  to  be  answered.
Tliis  is  said  to  be  the  case  on  the  night  called  Leylet  el-Kadr,  which  is  generally
believed  to  be  the  night  of  the  twenty-seventh  of  Ramadan ;  that  is,  the  night  preceding
the  twenty-seventh  day.

NOTE  10.  In  this  sentence,  in  my  original,  there  seems  to  be  an  omission,  which
I  have  supplied  by  inserting  the  words  "  her  performance  was  such  (says  Ibraheem)."
The  meaning  I  suppose  to  be  this  :  she  made  my  state  to  be  like  that  of  a  man  who
ceases  to  be  merry  with  intoxication,  and  begins  to  be  careful  lest  his  turban  should
full  from  his  head.

NOTE  11.  See  Note  71  to  Chapter  viii.

NOTE  12.  The  next  three  stories  in  my  original  I  omit. — The  first  of  these,  which
is  that  of  "  Abu-1-Hasan  of  Khurasan,"  is  very  similar,  but  inferior  in  interest,  to  "  the
Story  told  by  the  Sultan's  Steward,"  in  the  fifth  Chapter  of  my  translation. — The
second  is  "  the  Story  of  Kaniar-ez-Zeman  and  the  Wife  of  the  Jeweller."  This  is
extremely  objectionable ;  far  more  so*than  the  title  might  lead  one  to  suspect.  But
one  of  the  marginal  notes  with  which  my  sheykh  has  illustrated  it  is  too  interesting
to  be  omitted  here  with  the  story,  especially  as  it  confutes  an  opinion  generally  pre-
vailing among  my  countrymen  with  respect  to  the  morality  of  Arab  women.  The
following  is  a  translation  of  it.  "  Many  persons  reckon  marrying  a  second  time  among
the  greatest  of  disgraceful  actions.  This  opinion  is  most  common  in  the  country-towns
and  villages ;  and  the  relations  of  my  mother  are  thus  characterized,  so  that  a  woman
of  them,  when  her  husband  dieth  while  she  is  young,  or  divorceth  her  while  she  is
young,  passeth  her  life,  however  long  it  may  be,  in  widowhood,  and  never  marrieth  a
second  time." — The  third  story  is  that  of  "  'Abd-Allah  the  sou  of  Fadil,"  which  is  one
of  the  most  entertaining  tales  in  the  work ;  but  its  chief  and  best  portion  is  essentially
the  same  as  "  the  Story  of  the  First  of  the  Three  Ladies  of  Baghdad."  Instead  of  the
three  sisters,  we  have  here  three  brothers ;  and  instead  of  the  young  man,  in  the  city
of  the  petrified  idolaters,  a  beautiful  damsel.  The  story  of  'Abd-  Allah  the  son  of  Fadil
therefore  agrees  also,  in  several  points,  with  that  of  "  the  Second  Sheykh  and  the  Two
Black  Hounds,"  in  the  first  Chapter  of  the  present  translation,  repeating  the  chief
incidents  of  the  latter  with  slight  variations. — Then  follows  "the  Story  of  Maaroof,
the  last  in  the  work


COMMENCING WITH PART OP THE NINE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-
NINTH NIGHT, AND ENDING WITH THE THOUSAND
AND FIRST.


THE  STOEY  OP  MAAROOF.

THERE  was,  in  the  guarded  city  of  Cairo/  a  cobbler  who  mended
old  shoes.  His  name  was  Maaroof,2  and  he  had  a  wife  whose  name
was  Fatimeh,  and  whose  nickname  was  El-'Orrah  ;3  and  they  gave  her
not  that  nickname  save  because  she  was  a  wicked,  evil  woman,  of
little  modesty,  a  great  mischief-maker.  She  ruled  her  husband,  and
every  day  used  to  revile  him  and  curse  him  a  thousand  times ;  and  he
dreaded  her  malice,  and  feared  her  oppression ;  for  he  was  a  sensible


THE  STORY  OF  MA  A  ROOF  615

man,  who  felt  shame  for  his  reputation  :  but  he  was  poor  in  circum-
stances. "NY hen  he  worked  for  much,  he  expended  his  gains  upon
her;  and  when  he  worked  for  little,  she  revenged  herself  upon  his
body  during  the  ensuing  night,  and  deprived  him  of  health,  making
his  night  like  the  record  of  his  own  actions.4  She  was  such  a  person
as  her  in  dispraise  of  whom  the  poet  hath  said, —

How  many  nights have I passed  with  my  wife  in  the  most unfortunate  of

conditions !
Would  that,  at  the  time  of  my  first  visit  to  her,  I  had  produced  some  poison  and

poisoned  her !

Now,  among  the  events  that  happened  to  this  man,  proceeding
from  his  wife,  it  chanced  that  she  said  to  him,  0  Maaroof,  I  desire  of
thee  to-night  that  thou  bring  me  some  kunafeh  with  bees'  honey  upon
it.  And  he  replied,  May  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !)  make  easy  to
me  the  means  of  obtaining  its  price,  and  I  will  bring  it  to  thee  to-
night. By  Allah,  I  have  had  no  money  this  day;  but  our  Lord  may
render  the  affair  easy. — She,  however,  said  to  him,  I  know  not  these
words.  AYhether  He  render  it  easy  or  do  not  render  it  easy,  come
not  to  me  save  with  the  kunafeh  with  bees'  honey;  and  if  thou  come
without  kunafeh,  I  will  make  thy  night  like  thy  fortune  when  thou
marriedst  me  and  fellest  into  my  hand. — So  he  replied,  God  is  bountiful.
Then  that  man  went  forth,  with  grief  displaying  itself  in  his  person ;
and  after  he  had  performed  the  morning-prayers,  he  opened  the  shop,
and  said,  I  pray  thee,  0  Lord,  to  supply  me  with  the  price  of  this
kunafeh,  and  to  save  me  from  the  mischief  of  this  wicked  woman  to-
night !  And  he  sat  in  the  shop  until  mid-day,  but  no  work  betided
him  ;  wherefore  his  fear  of  his  wife  became  violent,  and  he  rose  and
closed  the  shop,  and  became  perplexed  respecting  his  case,  on  account
of  the  kunafeh,  not  having  even  any  portion  of  the  price  of  the  bread.
He  then  passed  by  the  shop  of  the  seller  of  kunafeh,  and  stopped  in
a  state  of  stupefaction,  and  his  eyes  filled  with  tears.  And  the  seller
of  kumifeh,  casting  at  him  a  sidelong  glance,  said,  O  master  Maaroof,
wherefore  dost  thou  weep  ?  Tell  me  what  hath  befallen  thee. — He
therefore  told  him  his  tale,  and  said  to  him,  My  wife  is  a  virago,  arid
she  hath  demanded  of  me  kunafeh,  and  I  have  sat  in  the  shop  until
half  the  day  hath  passed,  but  not  even  the  price  of  bread  hath  betided
me,  and  I  am  in  fear  of  her.  And  upon  this,  the  seller  of  kunafeh
laughed,  and  said,  No  harm  shall  befall  thee.  How  many  pounds
dost  thou  desire  ? — He  answered,  Five  pounds.  And  he  weighed  for
him  five  pounds,  and  said  to  him,  I  have  the  clarified  butter;  but  I


616


THE  STORY  OF  MAAROOF.


have  not  bees'  honey  :  I  have,  however,  drip-honey,5  better  than  bees'
honey ;  and  what  will  be  the  harm  if  it  be  with  drip-honey  ?  And
Maaroof  was  abashed  at  him,  because  he  was  to  wait  for  his  paying
the  price.  He  therefore  said  to  him,  Give  it  me  with  drip-honey.
And  he  fried  for  him  the  kunafeh  with  the  clarified  butter,  and  satu-
rated it  with  drip-honey,  and  it  became  fit  to  be  presented  to  Kings.
Then  he  said  to  him,  Dost  thou  want  bread  and  cheese  ?  He  answered,
Yes.  So  he  took  for  him  four  nusfs-worth  of  bread,  and  a  nusf-worth
of  cheese,  and  the  kunafeh  was  for  ten  nusfs ;  and  he  said  to  him,
Know,  0  Maaroof,  that  thy  debt  hath  become  fifteen  nusfs.  Go  to
thy  wife,  and  make  merry,  and  take  this  nusf  to  serve  as  payment
for  the  bath.  Thou  shalt  have  a  delay  of  a  day,  or  two  days,  or  three,
until  God  shall  supply  thee  ;  and  distress  not  thy  wife ;  for  I  will
have  patience  with  thee  until  thou  shalt  have  money  exceeding  what
will  be  requisite  for  thy  expenditure.

So  he  took  the  kunafeh  and  the  bread  and  the  cheese,  and  de-
parted praying  for  him,  and  went  with  comforted  heart,  saying,  Ex-
tolled be  thy  perfection,  0  my  Lord !  How  beautiful  art  Thou  ! —
Then  he  went  into  her,  and  she  said  to  him,  Hast  thou  brought  the
kunafeh  ?  He  answered,  Yes.  And  he  placed  it  before  her.  So  she
looked  at  it,  and  saw  it  to  be  with  honey  of  the  sugar-cane ;  and  upon
this  she  said  to  him,  Did  I  not  say  to  thee,  Bring  it  with  bees'  honey  ?
Dost  thou  act  contrary  to  my  desire,  and  make  it  with  honey  of  the
sugar-cane  ? — He  therefore  apologized  to  her,  and  said  to  her,  I


THE  STORY  OF  MAAROOF.  617

bought  it  not  save  upon  credit.  But  she  replied,  These  are  vain
words.  I  will  not  eat  kunafeh  save  with  bees'  honey. — And  she  was
angry  with  it,  and  threw  it  in  his  face,  saying  to  him,  Arise,  you
rascal :  bring  me  some  other  kunafeh !  She  then  struck  him  with
her  fist  upon  the  side  of  his  face,  knocking  out  one  of  his  teeth,  and
the  blood  flowed  down  upon  his  bosom  ;  and  by  reason  of  the  violence
of  his  rage,  he  struck  her  one  slight  blow  upon  her  head ;  whereat  she
seized  his  beard,  and  began  to  cry  out  and  to  say,  O  Muslims  !6  The
neighbours  therefore  entered,  and  extricated  his  beard  from  her  hand ;
and  they  beset  her  with  reproofs,  and  reproached  her,  and  said,  We  all
like  to  cat  kunafeh  that  is  with  honey  of  the  sugar-cane.  What  is  this
oppressive  conduct  towards  this  poor  man  !  Verily  this  is  disgraceful
to  thee ! — And  they  ceased  not  to  soothe  her  until  they  effected  a
reconciliation  between  her  and  him.  But  after  the  departure  of  the
people,  she  swore  that  she  would  not  eat  aught  of  the  kunafeh ;  and
hunger  tormented  Maaroof:  so  he  said  within  himself,  She  hath
sworn  that  she  will  not  eat :  therefore  I  will  eat.  Then  he  ate ;  and
when  she  saw  him  do  so,  she  began  to  say  to  him,  If  it  be  the  will  of
God,  may  it  be  a  poison  that  shall  destroy  the  body  of  the  remote ! 7
But  he  replied,  It  is  not  as  thou  sayest.  And  he  proceeded  to  eat,
and  to  laugh,  and  say,  Thou  hast  sworn  that  thou  wilt  not  eat  of  this.
But  God  is  bountiful ;  and  if  it  be  the  will  of  God,  to-morrow  night  I
will  bring  thee  kunafeh  that  shall  be  with  bees'  honey,  and  thou  shalt
eat  it  by  thyself. — And  he  proceeded  to  appease  her,  while  she  cursed
him.  She  ceased  not  to  revile  him  and  abuse  him  until  the  morning;
and  when  the  morning  came,  she  tucked  up  the  sleeve  from  her  arm
to  beat  him :  so  he  said  to  her,  Grant  me  a  delay,  and  I  will  bring
thee  some  other  kunafeh.

He  then  went  forth  to  the  mosque,  and  said  his  prayers,  and  went
to  the  shop,  and  opened  it  and  sat.  But  he  had  not  sat  long  when
two  officers  from  the  Kaclee  came  to  him,  and  said,  to  him,  Rise ;
answer  the  summons  of  the  Kadee ;  for  thy  wife  hath  complained
of  thee  to  him,  and  her  appearance  is  so  and  so.  And  he  knew  her
[by  the  description],  and  said,  May  God  (whose  name  be  exalted!)
send  trouble  upon  her  !  Then  he  arose  and  walked  with  them  until
he  went  in  to  the  Kadee,  when  he  saw  his  wife  with  her  arm  bound,
and  her  face-veil  befouled  with  blood,  and  she  was  standing  weeping,
and  wiping  away  her  tears.  So  the  Kaclee  said  to  him,  0  man,  dost
thou  not  fear  God,  whose  name  be  exalted  ?  How  is  it  that  thou
beatest  this  wife,  and  breakest  her  arm,  and  knockest  out  her  tooth,

III.  4 K


618  THE  STORY  OF  MAAROOF.

arid  dost  these  deeds  unto  her? — And  he  replied,  If  I  have  beaten
her,  or  knocked  out  her  tooth,  sentence  me  to  what  punishment  thou
choosest.  Verily  the  case  was  so  and  so,  and  the  neighbours  made
peace  between  me  and  her. — And  he  acquainted  him  with  the  case
from  beginning  to  end.  And  that  Kadee  was  of  the  people  of  bene-
ficence; so  he  took  forth  for  him  a  quarter  of  a  piece  of  gold,  and
said  to  him,  O  man,  take  this,  and  prepare  for  her  with  it  some
kunafeh  with  bees'  honey,  and  be  thou  reconciled  to  her.  And  he
replied,  Give  it  to  her.  She  therefore  took  it ;  and  the  Kadee  made
peace  between  them,  and  said,  O  wife,  obey  thy  husband ;  and  thou
O  man,  act  kindly  to  her.  And  they  went  forth  reconciled  by  moans
of  the  Kadee.  The  woman  went  one  way,  and  her  husband  went
another  way,  to  his  shop,  and  sat  down.  And,  lo,  the  sergeants  came
to  him  and  said,  give  us  our  fee.  So  he  said  to  them,  The  Kadee
took  not  from  me  aught :  on  the  contrary,  he  gave  me  a  quarter  of  a
piece  of  gold.  But  they  replied,  We  have  no  concern  with  the
Kadee's  giving  to  thee  or  taking  from  thee ;  and  if  thou  give  us  not
our  fee,  we  will  take  it  by  force  from  thee.  And  they  proceeded  to
drag  him  along  through  the  market.  He  therefore  sold  his  imple-
ments, and  gave  them  half  a  piece  of  gold,  and  they  went  away  from
him.  He  then  put  his  hand  upon  his  cheek,  and  sat  sorrowful,  because
he  had  not  implements  with  which  to  work.  And  while  he  was  sitting,
lo,  two  men  of  hideous  aspect  advanced  to  him  and  said  to  him,  Rise,
0  man;  answer  the  summons  of  the  Kadee;  for  thy  wife  hath  com-
plained of  thee  to  him.  He  therefore  replied,  He  hath  made  peace
between  me  and  her.  But  they  said  to  him,  We  are  from  another
Kadee ;  for  thy  wife  hath  complained  of  thee  to  our  Kadee.  So  he
arose  and  went  with  them,  praying  for  aid  against  her  by  ejaculating,
God  is  our  sufficiency,  and  excellent  is  the  Protector  !  And  when  he
saw  her,  he  said  to  her,  Have  we  not  made  peace  with  each  other,  0
ingenuous  woman?  But  she  replied,  There  remaineth  no  longer  peace
between  me  and  thee.  And  he  advanced  and  related  to  the  Kstdee
his  story,  saying  to  him,  The  Kadee  such-a-one  made  peace  between
us  just  now.  So  the  Kadee  said  to  her,  O  impudent  woman,  since
ye  have  made  peace  with  each  other,  wherefore  hast  thou  come  com-
plaining to  me  ?  She  answered,  He  beat  me  after  that.  And  the
Kadee  said  to  them,  Make  peace  with  each  other, — and,  addressing
the  man,  he  added, — and  beat  her  not  again,  and  she  will  not  again
oppose  thee.  They  therefore  made  peace  with  each  other,  and  the
Kaclee  said  to  him,  Give  the  sergeants  their  fee.  Accordingly  he


THE  STORY  OF  MAAROOF.


619


gave  them  their  fee,  and  he  went  to  the  shop  and  opened  it,  and  sat
in  it,  like  one  intoxicated,  by  reason  of  the  anxiety  that  had  befallen
him.

And  while  he  was  sitting,  lo,  a  man  advanced  to  him  and  said  to
him,  O  Maaroof,  rise ;  hide  thyself ;  for  thy  wife  hath  complained  of
thee  to  the  Sublime  Court,8  and  Aboo-Tabak9  is  coming  down  upon
thee.  So  he  rose  and  closed  the  shop,  and  he  fled  in  the  direction  of
the  Bab  en-Nasr.  And  there  had  remained  in  his  possession,  five
nusf  faddahs,  of  the  price  of  the  lasts  and  the  other  implements.  He
therefore  bought  for  four  nusfs  bread,  and  for  one  nusf  cheese,  as  he
fled  from  her.  And  this  happened  in  the  winter-quarter,  at  the  time
of  afternoon-prayers ;  and  when  he  went  forth  among  the  mounds,
the  rain  descended  upon  him  like  streams  pouring  from  the  mouths  of
water-skins,  and  his  clothes  were  wetted.  So  he  entered  the  'Adileeyeh,10
and,  seeing  a  ruined  place,  in  which  was  a  deserted  cell,  without  a


620  THE  STORY  OF  MAAROOF.

door,  he  entered  to  shelter  himself  in  it  from  the  rain ;  his  clothes
being  wetted.  Then  tears  descended  from  his  eyelids,  and  he  became
oppressed  in  mind  by  his  affliction,  and  said,  Whither  shall  I  flee
from  this  vile  woman  ?  I  pray  thee,  O  Lord,  to  send  to  me  some
person  who  shall  convey  me  to  a  distant  country,  whither  she  shall
not  know  the  way  by  which  to  reach  me. — And  while  he  was  sitting
weeping,  lo,  the  wall  clove  asunder,  and  there  came  forth  to  him  from
it  a  person  of  tall  stature,  at  the  sight  of  whom  the  flesh  quaked,  and
he  said  to  him,  0  man,  what  aileth  thee  that  thou  hast  disquieted  me
this  night  ?  I  have  been  residing  in  this  place  for  two  hundred
years,  and  have  not  seen  any  one  enter  it  and  do  as  thou  hast  done.
Acquaint  me  then  with  thy  desire,  and  I  will  accomplish  thine  affair;
for  compassion  for  thee  hath  affected  my  heart. — Upon  this  he  said  to
him,  Who  art  thou,  and  what  mayest  thou  be  ?  And  he  answered
him,  I  am  the  haunter  of  this  place.  So  he  acquainted  him  with  all
that  had  happened  to  him  with  his  wife ;  whereupon  the  Jinnee  said
to  him,  Dost  thou  desire  that  I  should  convey  thee  to  a  country
whither  thy  wife  shall  know  no  way  by  which  to  reach  thee  ?  He
answered,  Yes.  And  the  Jinnee  said  to  him,  Mount  upon  my  back.
Accordingly  he  mounted ;  and  the  Jinnee  bore  him  and  flew  with  him
from  after  nightfall  until  the  rising  of  the  dawn,  when  he  set  him
down  upon  the  summit  of  a  high  mountain,  and  said,  0  human  being,
descend  from  the  top  of  this  mountain :  thou  wilt  see  the  threshold
of  a  city,  and  do  thou  enter  it ;  for  thy  wife  will  not  know  any  way
by  which  to  reach  thee,  nor  will  it  be  possible  for  her  to  gain  access
to  thee.  Then  he  left  him,  and  departed.

Maaroof  was  in  a  state  of  confusion,  perplexed  in  his  mind,  until
the  sun  rose;  whereupon  he  said  within  himself,  I  will  arise,  and
descend  from  this  mountain  to  the  city ;  for  in  my  sitting  here  is  no
advantage.  So  he  descended  to  the  foot  of  the  mountain,  and  he  saw
a  city  with  high  walls,  and  lofty  pavilions,  and  decorated  buildings,
and  it  was  a  delight  to  the  beholders.  He  entered  the  gate  of  the
city,  and  saw  that  it  dilated  the  sorrowful  heart ;  and  when  he  walked
through  the  market,  the  people  of  the  city  looked  at  him,  diverting
themselves  with  the  sight  of  him,  and  they  assembled  around  him,  and
wondered  at  his  apparel ;  for  his  apparel  resembled  not  theirs.  And
a  man  of  the  people  of  the  city  said  to  him,  0  man,  art  thou  a
stranger  ?  He  answered,  Yes.  He  said  to  him,  From  what  country  ?
He  answered,  From  the  fortunate  city  of  Cairo.  He  said  to  him,
Hast  thou  long  quitted  it  ?  He  answered  him,  Yesterday  in  the  after-


THE  STORY  OF  MAAROOF


621


noon.  And  thereupon  he  laughed  at  him,  and  said,  O  people,  come
hither;  see  this  man,  and  hear  what  he  saith  !  So  they  said,  What
saich  he  ?  He  answered,  He  asserteth  that  he  is  from  Cairo,  and  that
he  came  forth  from  it  yesterday  in  the  afternoon.  And  they  all
laughed,  and  the  people  assembled  around  him  and  said,  O  man,  art
thou  mad  that  thou  sayest  these  words  ?  How  is  it  thou  assertest
that  thou  quittedst  Cairo  yesterday  in  the  afternoon,  and  foundest
thyself  in  the  morning  here,  when  between  our  city  and  Cairo  is
a  space  of  a  whole  year's  journey  ? — But  he  replied,  None  are  mad
but  you :  and  as  to  me,  I  am  veracious  in  my  saying,  and  this  is
bread  of  Cairo :  it  hath  not  ceased  to  remain  with  me  moist.  And
he  shewed  them  the  bread,  and  they  diverted  themselves  with  looking
at  it,  and  wondered  at  it ;  for  it  resembled  not  the  bread  of  their
country.  The  crowd  became  numerous  around  him,  and  they  said
one  to  another,  This  is  bread  of  Cairo.  Divert  yourselves  with  the
sight  of  it.

He  became  notorious  in  that  city ;  and  among  the  people,  some
believed  him,  and  some  belied  and  derided  him  ;  and  while  they  were
in  this  state,  lo,  a  merchant  advanced  to  them,  riding  upon  a  mule,
and  behind  him  were  t\vo  black  slaves.  Thereupon  the  people  became
dispersed,  and  he  said,  0  people,  are  ye  not  ashamed  of  collecting
around  this  stranger  and  ridiculing  him  and  laughing  at  him  ?  What
concern  have  ye  with  him  ? — And  he  ceased  not  to  revile  them  until
he  drove  them  away  from  him,  no  one  being  able  to  return  him  a
reply.  He  then  said  to  Maaroof,  Come  hither,  O  my  brother.  No
harm  shall  befall  thee  from  these.  Verily  they  have  no  shame. — He
took  him  and  proceeded  with  him  until  he  conducted  him  into  a


P--22  THE  STORY  OF  MAAROOF.

spacious,  decorated  mansion,  and  he  seated  him  in  a  royal  chamber,
and  gave  orders  to  the  slaves,  who  thereupon  opened  for  him  a  chest,
and  took  forth  for  him  a  dress  fit  for  a  merchant  possessing  a  thousand
purses,  and  he  clad  him  with  it ;  and  Maaroof  was  a  comely  person ;
so  he  became  as  though  he  were  Shah-Bandar  of  the  merchants.
Then  that  merchant  demanded  the  table ;  and  they  put  before  them
a  table  containing  every  description  of  exquisite  viands,  of  all  kinds ;
and  they  ate  and  drank;  after  which  the  merchant  said  to  Maaroof,  0
my  brother,  What  is  thy  name  ?  He  answered,  My  name  is  Maaroof ;
and  my  trade  is  that  of  a  cobbler  :  I  mend  old  shoes.  He  said  to
him,  From  what  country  art  thou  ?  He  answered,  From  Cairo.  He
said,  From  what  quarter  ?  Maaroof  said  to  him,  Dost  thou  know
Cairo  ?  The  merchant  answered  him,  I  am  of  its  sons.  So  Maaroof
replied,  I  am  from  the  Darb  el-Ahmar.11  The  merchant  said  to  him,
Whom  dost  thou  know  of  the  Darb  el-Ahmar?  He  answered  him,
Such-a-one  and  such-a-one.  And  he  enumerated  to  him  many  persons.
The  merchant  said  to  him,  Dost  thou  know  the  sheykh  Ahmad  the
druggist  ?12  He  answered  him,  He  was  my  neighbour,  wall  adjoining
wall.  He  said  to  him,  Is  he  well  ?  He  answered,  Yes.  He  said  to
him,  How  many  children  hath  he  ?  He  answered,  Three  :  Mustafa
and  Mohammad  and  'Alee.  He  said  to  him,  What  hath  God  done
with  his  children  ?  He  answered,  As  to  Mustafa,  he  is  well,  and  he
is  a  learned  man,  a  professor  : l3  and  as  to  Mohammad,  he  is  a  druggist :
he  hath  opened  for  himself  a  shop  by  the  side  of  the  shop  of  his  father,
after  having  married,  and  his  wife  hath  borne  him  a  son  whose  name
is  Hasan.  And  the  merchant  said,  May  God  rejoice  thee  with  good
tidings  !  Maaroof  then  said,  And  as  to  'Alee,  he  was  my  companion
when  we  were  little  children,  and  I  used  always  to  play  with  him,
and  we  used  to  go,  in  the  garb  of  the  sons  of  the  Christians,  and
enter  the  church,  and  steal  the  books  of  the  Christians,  and  sell
them,  and  buy,  with  their  price,  food.  But  it  happened  once  that
the  Christians  saw  us,  and  laid  hold  of  us  with  a  book :  so  they  com-
plained of  us  to  our  families,  and  said  to  his  father,  If  thou  prevent
not  thy  son  from  troubling  us,  we  will  complain  of  thee  to  the  King.
And  he  appeased  them,  and  gave  him  a  beating ;  and  for  this  reason,
he  fled  immediately,  and  no  way  of  finding  him  was  known.  He  hath
been  absent  twenty  years,  and  no  one  hath  given  any  tidings  of  him.
Upon  this,  the  merchant  said  to  him,  He  is  myself,  'Alee  the  son
of  the  sheykh  Ahmad  the  druggist,  and  thou  art  my  companion,
O  Maaroof.  They  saluted  each  other,  and  after  the  salutation,  the


merchant  said  to  him,  O  Maaroof,  acquaint  me  with  the  reason  of
thy  coming  from  Cairo  to  this  city.  So  he  acquainted  him  with  the
history  of  his  wife  Fatimeh  El-'Orrah,  and  what  she  had  done  with
him,  and  said  to  him,  When  her  injurious  conduct  to  me  became  ex-
cessive, I  fled  from  her,  in  the  direction  of  the  Bab  en-Nasr :  and  the
rain  descended  upon  me;  wherefore  I  entered  a  ruined  cell  in  the
'Adileeyeh,  and  sat  weeping,  and  there  came  forth  to  me  the  haunter
of  the  place,  who  is  an  'Efreet  of  the  Jinn,  and  he  questioned  me.  I
therefore  acquainted  him  with  my  state,  and  he  mounted  me  upon  his
back,  and  flew  with  me  all  the  night  between  heaven  and  earth  :  then
he  put  me  down  upon  the  mountain,  and  informed  me  of  the  city :
so  I  descended  from  the  mountain,  and  entered  the  city,  and  the
people  collected  around  me,  questioning  me :  and  I  said  to  them,  I
came  forth  yesterday  from  Cairo.  But  they  believed  me  not.  And
thou  earnest,  and  repelledst  the  people  from  me,  and  broughtest  me
to  this  house.  This  was  the  cause  of  my  coming  forth  from  Cairo.
And  what  was  the  cause  of  thy  coming  hither  ? — He  answered  him,
Folly  overcame  me  when  my  age  was  seven  years,  and  from  that  time
I  have  been  going  about  from  country  to  country  and  from  city  to
city  until  I  entered  this  city,  the  name  of  which  is  Ikhtiyan  of  El-
Khutan ; 14  whereupon  I  saw  its  inhabitants  to  be  generous  people,
endued  with  compassion,  and  I  saw  that  they  confided  in  the  poor
man,  and  sold  to  him  on  credit,  and  whatever  he  said  they  believed
him  respecting  it.  I  therefore  said  to  them,  I  am  a  merchant,  and  I
have  come  on  before  my  merchandise,  and  I  desire  a  place  in  which


624  THE  STORY OF  MAAROOF.

to  deposit  it.  And  they  believed  me,  and  appropriated  a  place  to  my
exclusive  use.  Then  I  said  to  them,  Is  there  among  you  one  who  will
lend  me  a  thousand  pieces  of  gold  until  my  merchandise  shall  arrive,
when  I  will  return  to  him  what  I  receive  from  him  ?  For  I  am  in
need  of  some  commodities  before  my  merchandise  will  enter  the  city.
— And  they  gave  me  what  I  desired.  I  then  repaired  to  the  market
of  the  merchants,  and,  seeing  some  goods,  I  bought  them ;  and  on
the  following  day  I  sold  them,  and  gained  by  them  fifty  pieces  of
gold,  and  bought  other  goods.  I  proceeded  to  associate  with  the
people,  and  to  treat  them  with  generosity;  and  they  loved  me;  and
I  betook  myself  to  selling  and  buying,  and  my  wealth  became  great.
And  know,  O  my  brother,  that  the  author  of  the  proverb  saith,  The
world  is  full  of  idle  boasting,  and  artifice.  And  in  the  country  in
which  no  one  knoweth  thee,  do  whatsoever  thou  wilt.  But  if  thou
say  to  every  one  who  asketh  thee,  I  am,  by  trade,  a  cobbler,  and  a
poor  man,  and  I  fled  from  my  wife,  and  yesterday  I  came  forth  from
Cairo, — they  will  not  believe  thee,  and  thou  wilt  become  among  them
a  laughingstock  as  long  as  .thou  shalt  remain  in  this  city.  And  if
thou  say,  An  'Efreet  conveyed  me, — they  will  run  away  from  thee  in
fear,  and  no  one  will  come  near  thee ;  and  they  will  say,  This  is  a  man
possessed  by  an  'Efreet,  and  whosoever  goeth  near  him,  injury  will
happen  to  him.  And  this  notoriety  will  be  disgraceful  to  me  and  to
thee ;  for  they  know  that  I  am  from  Cairo.

Maaroof  then  said,  And  how  shall  I  act  ?  He  answered,  I  will
teach  thee  how  thou  shalt  act.  If  it  be  the  will  of  God  (whose  name
be  exalted  !),  I  will  give  thee  to-morrow  a  thousand  pieces  of  gold,
and  a  mule  which  thou  shalt  ride,  and  a  black  slave  who  shall  walk
before  thee  until  he  shall  conduct  thee  to  the  gate  of  the  market  of
the  merchants.  Then  go  in  to  them  ;  and  I  will  be  sitting  among
the  merchants ;  and  when  I  see  thee,  I  will  rise  to  thee  and  salute  thee,
and  I  will  kiss  thy  hand  and  honour  thy  station ;  and  whenever  I  ask
thee  respecting  any  kind  of  stuff,  saying  to  thee,  Hast  thou  brought
with  thee  any  of  such  a  kind  ? — answer,  Abundance : — and  if  they
ask  me  respecting  thee,  I  will  praise  thee  and  magnify  thee  in  their
eyes.  I  will  then  say  to  them,  Provide  ye  for  him  a  magazine  and  a
shop.  And  I  will  describe  thee  as  a  person  of  abundant  wealth  and
generosity ;  and  if  a  beggar  come  to  thee,  give  him  what  thou  canst
easily  afford :  thereupon  they  will  confide  in  my  words,  and  believe  in
thy  greatness  and  thy  generosity,  and  they  will  love  thee.  After  that
I  will  invite  thee,  and  I  will  invite  all  the  merchants  on  thine  account,


THE  STORY  OF  MAAROOF.  Oi^

and  bring  you  and  them  together,  that  all  of  them  may  know  thee,
and  that  thou  niaycst  know  them,  in  order  that  thou  mayest  sell  and
buy  and  take  and  give  with  them  ;  and  no  long  period  will  pass  over
thee  before  thou  wilt  become  a  person  of  wealth. — Accordingly,  when
the  morning  came,  he  gave  him  a  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  clad  him
in  a  suit  of  apparel,  mounted  him  upon  a  mule,  and  gave  him  a  black
slave,  saying,  God  acquit  thee  of  responsibility  with  respect  to  the
whole ;  for  thou  art  my  companion  ;  so  to  treat  thee  with  generosity
is  incumbent  on  me.  Suffer  not  anxiety  ;  but  dismiss  from  thy  mind
the  subject  of  thy  wife,  and  mention  her  not  to  any  one.

Maaroof  therefore  said  to  him,  May  God  recompense  thee  well !
He  then  mounted  the  mule,  and  the  slave  walked  before  him  until  he
had  conducted  him  to  the  gate  of  the  market  of  the  merchants,  who
were  all  sitting  there,  and  the  merchant  'Alee  was  sitting  among  them  :
so  when  he  saw  him,  he  rose  and  threw  himself  upon  him,  saying  to
him,  A  blessed  day,  O  merchant  Maaroof,  0  man  of  good  works  and
of  kindness !  Then  he  kissed  his'Tiand  before  the  merchants,  and
said,  O  our  brothers,  the  merchant  Maaroof  hath  delighted  you  by  his
arrival.  They  therefore  saluted  him,  and  the  merchant  'Alee  made
signs  to  them  that  they  should  shew  him  honour :  so  he  was  magnified
in  their  eyes.  His  companion  set  him  down  from  the  back  of  the
mule,  and  they  saluted  him  again  ;  and  the  merchant  'Alee  proceeded
to  go  apart  with  one  of  them  after  another,  and  to  praise  Maaroof  to
him;  and  they  said  to  him,  Is  this  a  merchant?  He  answered  them,
Yes :  indeed  he  is  the  greatest  of  merchants,  and  there  existeth  not
any  one  more  wealthy  than  he ;  for  his  wealth  and  the  wealth  of  his
father  and  his  forefathers  are  notorious  among  the  merchants  of
Cairo  ;  and  he  hath  partners  in  El-Hind  and  Es-Sind  and  El-Yemen  ;
and  for  generosity,  his  fame  resteth  on  an  excellent  foundation.
Therefore  know  his  dignity,  and  extol  his  rank,  and  serve  him ;  and
know  that  his  coming  to  this  city  is  not  for  the  sake  of  traffic ;  for
his  desire  is  for  nothing  but  to  divert  himself  with  the  sight  of  the
countries  of  the  world  ;  because  he  is  not  in  need  of  travelling  to
foreign  parts  for  the  sake  of  gain  and  profits,  having  wealth  which
fires  cannot  consume,  and  I  am  of  the  number  of  his  servants. — He
ceased  not  to  praise  him  until  they  raised  him  above  their  heads,  and
they  proceeded  to  acquaint  one  another  with  his  qualities.  Then  they
came  together  to  him,  and  presented  him  with  food  for  breakfast,  and
sherbet.  Even  the  Shah-Bandar  of  the  merchants  came  to  him,  and
saluted  him ;  and  the  merchant  'Alec  said  to  him,  in  the  presence  of
in.  4  L


626


THE  STORY  OF  MAAROOF.


the  other  merchants,  O  my  master,  probably  thou  hast  brought  with
thee  some  of  such  a  kind  of  stuff.  So  he  answered  him,  Abundance.
And  on  that  day  the  merchant  'Alee  had  shewn  him  the  various  kinds
of  costly  stuffs,  and  taught  him  the  names  of  the  stuffs,  the  dear  and
the  cheap.  Then  one  of  the  merchants  said  to  him,  O  my  master,
hast  thou  brought  with  thee  yellow  cloth  ?  He  answered,  Abundance.
He  said,  And  red,  of  gazelle's  blood  ? 15  He  answered,  Abundance.
And  every  time  that  he  asked  him  respecting  any  thing,  he  answered,
him,  Abundance.  So  thereupon  he  said,  0  merchant  'Alee,  verily
thy  countryman,  if  he  desired  to  transport  a  thousand  loads  of  costly
stuffs,  could  transport  them.  And  he  replied,  He  would  do  so  from
one  of  his  magazines,  and  nought  of  its  contents  would  be  missing.

And  while  they  were  sitting,  lo,  a  beggar  came  round  to  the
merchants,  and  some  of  them  gave  him  a  nusf  faddah,  and  some  of
them  gave  him  a  jedeed,  and  most  of  them  gave  him  not  aught,  until


T1IK  STORY  OF  MAAROOF.  627

he  came  to  Maaroof,  who  took  for  him  a  handful  of  gold,  and  gave
him  it.  So  he  prayed  for  him,  and  departed;  and  the  merchants
wondered  thereat,  and  said,  Verily  this  is  the  gift  of  kings ;  for  he
gave  the  beggar  gold  without  counting  it;  and  were  he  not  of  the
persons  of  great  riches,  and  possessing  abundance,  he  had  not  given
the  beggar  a  handful  of  gold.  And  after  a  while  there  came  to  him
a  poor  woman ;  whereupon  he  took  another  handful,  and  gave  it  to
her,  and  she  departed,  praying  for  him,  and  told  the  other  poor
persons.  So  they  advanced  to  him,  one  after  another,  and  for  every
one  who  came  to  him  he  proceeded  to  take  a  handful  and  to  give  it
him  until  he  had  disbursed  the  thousand  pieces  of  gold ;  after  which
he  struck  hand  upon  hand,  and  said,  God  is  our  sufficiency,  and  excel-
lent is  the  Protector  !  So  the  Shah-Bandar  of  the  merchants  said  to
him,  What  aileth  thee,  O  merchant  Maaroof?  He  answered,  It
seemeth  that  most  of  the  people  of  this  city  are  poor  and  needy ;  and
if  I  had  known  that  they  were  so,  I  had  brought  with  me  in  the
saddle-bags  a  large  sum  of  money  and  given  it  in  alms  to  the  poor.
I  fear  that  my  absence  from  my  country  may  be  long,  and  it  is  a
habit  of  my  nature  not  to  reject  the  beggar ;  but  I  have  with  me  no
gold  remaining  ;  therefore  when  a  poor  man  cometh  to  me,  what  shall
I  say  to  him  ? — He  answered  him,  Say  to  him,  God  sustain  thee.
— But  he  replied,  It  is  not  my  custom,  and  anxiety  hath  come  upon
me  on  account  of  this.  Would  that  I  had  a  thousand  pieces  of  gold
more,  that  I  might  give  them  in  alms  until  my  merchandise  come ! —
So  he  said,  No  harm.  And  he  sent  one  of  his  dependants,  who
brought  him  a  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  and  he  gave  them  to  him.
Maaroof  then  proceeded  to  give  to  every  one  of  the  poor  who  passed
by  him  until  the  call  to  noon-prayers  was  chanted ;  whereupon  they
entered  the  mosque,  and  performed  the  noon-prayers,  and  what
remained  with  him  of  the  thousand  pieces  of  gold  he  scattered  over
the  heads  of  the  worshippers.  The  attention  of  the  people  was  there-
fore drawn  to  him,  and  they  prayed  for  him,  and  the  merchants
wondered  at  the  abundance  of  his  generosity  and  his  munificence.
He  then  inclined  to  another  merchant,  and  obtained  from  him  a
thousand  pieces  of  gold,  and  distributed  them;  and  the  merchant
'Alee  was  observing  his  actions,  but  could  not  speak.  He  ceased  not
to  do  thus  until  the  call  to  afternoon-prayers  was  chanted,  when  he
entered  the  mosque  and  prayed,  and  distributed  the  remainder.  And
they  closed  not  the  gate  of  the  market  until  he  had  received  five
thousand  pieces  of  gold  and  distributed  them ;  and  to  every  one  of


6-28  THE  STORY  OF  MAAROOF.

whom  he  had  received  aught,  he  said,  Wait  until  the  merchandise
shall  arrive,  when,  if  thou  desire  gold,  I  will  give  it  thee,  and  if  thou
desire  stuffs,  I  will  give  them  thee ;  for  I  have  abundance,  And  in
the  evening  the  merchant  'Alee  invited  him,  and  he  invited  with  him
all  the  merchants.  He  seated  him  at  the  upper  end  of  the  apartment,
and  he  talked  not  of  aught  but  of  stuffs  and  jewels ;  and  whenever
they  mentioned  to  him  any  thing,  he  said,  I  have  abundance  of  it.
And  on  the  following  day  he  repaired  again  to  the  market,  and  pro-
ceeded to  incline  to  the  merchants,  obtain  from  them  money,  and
distribute  it  to  the  poor.

He  ceased  not  to  do  thus  for  the  space  of  twenty  days,  until  he
had  received  from  the  people  sixty  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  and  there
came  not  to  him  merchandise  nor  a  burning  plague.16  So  the
people  were  clamorous  for  their  money,  and  said,  The  merchandise  of
the  merchant  Maaroof  hath  not  arrived,  and  how  long  shall  he  take
people's  money  and  give  it  to  the  poor?  And  one  of  them  said,  My
opinion  is,  that  we  should  speak  with  his  countryman,  the  merchant
'Alee.  Accordingly  they  came  to  him  and  said  to  him,  0  merchant
'Alee,  the  merchandise  of  the  merchant  Maaroof  hath  not  arrived.
And  he  replied,  Be  ye  patient ;  for  it  must  arrive  soon.  Then  he  had
a  private  interview  with  him,  and  said  to  him,  0  Maaroof,  what  are
these  deeds  ?  Did  I  say  unto  thee,  Toast  the  bread — or  Bum  it  ?
Verily  the  merchants  have  become  clamorous  for  their  money,  and  have
informed  me  that  they  have  become  creditors  to  "thee  for  sixty  thousand
pieces  of  gold,  which  thou  hast  received,  and  hast  distributed  to  the  poor.
And  how  wilt  thou  pay  thy  debt  to  the  people,  when  thou  neither  scllest
nor  buyest  ? — But  he  replied,  What  will  be  the  consequence,  and  what
are  the  sixty  thousand  pieces  of  gold  ?  When  the  merchandise  arriveth,
I  will  give  them,  if  they  will,  stuffs,  and  if  they  will,  gold  and  silver. — ••
Upon  this,  the  merchant  'Alee  said  to  him,  God  is  most  great !  And
hast  thou  merchandise  ?  He  answered,  Abundance.  And  he  said  to
him,  Allah  and  the  llijal17  requite  thee  and  thy  turpitude!  Did  I
teach  thee  this  saying  in  order  that  thou  shouldst  utter  it  to  rne  ?
Now  will  I  inform  the  people  of  thee. — Maaroof  replied,  Go,  without
loquacity.  Am  I  a  poor  man  ?  Verily  my  merchandise  comprised)
an  abundance  of  things ;  and  when  it  arriveth  they  shall  receive
double  the  value  of  their  property.  I  am  in  no  need  of  them. — So
thereupon  the  merchant  'Alee  was  enraged,  and  said  to  him,  O  thou
of  little  good-breeding,  I  will  without  fail  shew  thee.  How  is  it  that
thou  liest  to  me  and  art  not  ashamed  ? — But  he  replied,  What  thou


THE  STORY  OP  MAAROOF.  629

hast  in  thy  power,  do ;  and  they  shall  wait  until  my  merchandise
arrive,  and  shall  receive  their  property  with  addition.  He  therefore
left  him,  and  departed,  and  he  said  within  himself,  I  praised  him
before ;  and  if  I  censure  him  now,  I  become  a  liar,  and  include  my-
self among  those  to  whom  applieth  the  saying  of  him  who  said,  He
who  praiseth  and  censureth,  lieth  twice.18  And  he  became  perplexed
respecting  his  case.  Then  the  merchants  came  to  him  again,  and
said,  0  merchant  'Alee,  hast  thou  spoken  to  him  ?  He  answered
them,  O  people,  I  am  abashed  at  him,  and  he  oweth  me  a  thousand
pieces  of  gold,  but  I  have  not  been  able  to  speak  to  him  respecting
them.  When  ye  gave  him,  ye  consulted  me  not,  and  ye  have  nought
to  say  to  me.  So  demand  of  him  by  an  application  from  yourselves
to  him  ;  and  if  he  give  you  not,  complain  of  him  to  the  King  of  the
city,  and  say  to  him,  He  is  an  impostor,  who  hath  imposed  upon  us.
For  the  King  will  save  you  from  being  injured  by  him.

Accordingly  they  went  to  the  King,  and  acquainted  him  with  what
had  happened,  and  said,  O  King  of  the  age,  we  are  perplexed  respect-
ing our  case  with  this  merchant  whose  generosity  is  excessive ;  for  he
doth  so  and  so,  and  every  thing  that  he  receiveth  he  distributeth  to
the  poor  by  the  handful.  Now  if  he  possessed  little,  his  soul  would
not  consent  to  his  taking  gold  by  the  handful  and  giving  it  to  the
poor :  yet  were  he  of  the  people  of  affluence,  his  veracity  had  appeared
to  us  by  the  arrival  of  his  merchandise,  and  we  see  no  merchandise
belonging  to  him,  though  he  asserteth  that  he  hath  merchandise,  and
that  he  hath  come  on  before  it ;  and  whenever  we  mentioned  to  him
any  kind  of  stuff,  he  would  say,  I  have  abundance  of  it.  A  considei1-
able  period  hath  elapsed;  but  nc  tidings, of  his"  merchandise  have
come;  and  he  hath  become  indebted  to  us  to  the  amount  of  sixty
thousand  pieces  of  gold,  all  of  which  he  hath  distributed  to  the  poor.
— And  they  proceeded  to  eulogize  him  and  to  praise  his  generosity.
And  that  King  was  covetous ;  more  covetous  than  Ash/ab  : 19  so  when
he  heard  of  his  generosity  and  munificence,  covetousness  overcame
him,  and  he  said  to  his  \Vezeer,  If  this  merchant  did  not  possess
abundant  riches,  all  this  generous  conduct  would  not  proceed  from
him ;  his  merchandise  will  without  fail  arrive,  and  these  merchants
will  come  together  to  him,  and  he  will  disperse  among  them  abundant
riches.  But  I  am  more  worthy  of  this  wealth  than  they :  therefore  I
desire  to  contract  friendship  with  hirn,  and  to  shew  an  affection  for
him,  before  his  merchandise  arriveth ;  and  what  these  merchants  will
receive  from  him,  I  shall  receive,  and  I  will  marry  to  him  my  daughter,


630  TIIK  STOKY  OF  MAAKOOF.

and  join  his  wealth  with  mine. — But  the  Wezeer  replied,  O  King  of
the  age,  I  imagine  him  not  to  be  aught  but  an  impostor;  and  the
impostor  hath  ruined  the  house  of  the  covetous.  The  King,  however,
said  to  him,  O  Wezeer,  I  will  try  him,  and  know  whether  he  be  an
impostor  or  veracious,  and  whether  he  have  been  reared  in  affluence
or  not.  The  Wezeer  said,  With  what  wilt  thou  try  him  ?  The  King
answered,  I  have  a  jewel,  and  I  will  send  for  him  and  cause  him  to  be
brought  to  me;  and  when  he  hath  seated  himself  I  will  treat  him
with  honour,  and  give  him  the  jewel ;  and  if  he  know  it,  and  know
its  price,  he  will  be  proved  to  be  a  person  of  riches  and  affluence ;  but
if  he  know  it  not,  he  will  be  proved  to  be  an  impostor,  an  upstart,
and  1  will  slay  him  in  the  most  abominable  manner.

Then  the  King  sent  to  him,  and  caused  him  to  be  brought ;  and
when  he  came  in  to  him,  he  saluted  him,  and  the  King  returned  his
salutation,  and  seated  him  by  his  side,  and  said  to  him,  Art  thou  the
merchant  Maaroof?  He  answered,  Yes.  And  the  King  said  to  him,
The  merchants  assert  that  thou  owest  them  sixty  thousand  pieces  of
gold.  Now  is  that  which  they  say  true  ? — He  answered,  Yes.  The
King  said  to  him,  Wherefore  hast  thou  not  given  to  them  their  money  ?
He  answered,  Let  them  watt  until  my  merchandise  arriveth,  and  I  will
give  them  double  of  what  I  have  received ;  and  if  they  desire  gold,  I
will  give  it  them,  and  if  they  desire  silver,  I  will  give  it  them,  and  if
they  desire  merchandise,  I  will  give  it  them ;  and  to  him  whom  I  owe
a  thousand  I  will  give  two  thousand  in  return  for  that  wherewith  he
hath  veiled  my  face  before  the  poor;  for  I  have  abundance.  The
King  then  said  to  him,  0  merchant,  take  this,  and  see  what  is  its
kind,  and  what  is  its  value.  And  he  gave  him  a  jewel  of  the  size  of  a
hazel-nut,  which  the  King  had  purchased  for  a  thousand  pieces  of
gold,  and  he  had  not  another,  and  held  it  dear.  So  Maaroof  took  it
in  his  hand,  and  he  pressed  upon  it  with  his  thumb  and  fore-finger,
and  broke  it ;  for  the  jewel  was  frail,  and  would  not  bear  the  pressure.
The  King  therefore  said  to  him,  Wherefore  hast  thou  broken  the
jewel  ?  And  he  laughed,  and  answered,  0  King  of  the  age,  this  is
not  a  jewel.  This  is  a  piece  of  mineral  worth  a  thousand  pieces  of
gold.  How  is  it  that  thou  sayest  of  it  that  it  is  a  jewel  ?  Verily  the
jewel  is  of  the  price  of  seventy  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  and  this  is
only  called  a  piece  of  mineral ;  and  the  jewel  that  is  not  of  the  size  of
a  hazel-nut  hath  no  value  in  my  estimation,  nor  do  I  care  for  it.  How
is  it  that  thou  art  a  King,  and  callest  this  a  jewel,  when  it  is  a  piece
of  mineral,  the  value  of  which  is  a  thousand  pieces  of  gold  ?  But  ye


are  excusable,  because  ye  are  poor,  and  have  not  in  your  possession
treasures  that  are  of  value. — So  the  King  said  to  him,  O  merchant,
hast  thou  jewels  of  the  kind  that  thou  mentionest  ?  He  answered,
Abundance.  And  thereupon  covetousness  overcame  the  King,  and
he  said  to  him,  Wilt  thou  give  me  perfect  jewels  ?  He  answered  him,
When  the  merchandise  cometh,  I  will  give  thee  abundance ;  whatsoever
thou  desirest  I  have  abundance  thereof,  and  I  will  give  thee  without
price.  So  the  King  rejoiced,  and  said  to  the  merchants,  Go  your
way,  and  be  patient  with  him  until  the  merchandise  arriveth  :  then
come,  receive  your  money  from  me.  And  they  departed. — Such  was
the  case  of  Maaroof  and  the  merchants.

But  as  to  the  King,  he  addressed  the  Wezeer,  and  said  to  him,
Treat  the  merchant  Maaroof  with  courtesy,  and  take  and  give  with
him  in  talk,  and  mention  to  him  my  daughter,  in  order  that  he  may
marry  her,  and  we  may  gain  these  riches  that  are  in  his  possession.
But  the  Wezeer  replied,  O  King  of  the  age,  verily  the  state  of  this


<;;{;>  THE  STOHY  OF  MAAROOF.

man  hath  not  pleased  rne,  and  I  imagine  that  lie  is  an  impostor  and  a
liar.  Therefore  desist  from  these  words,  lest  thou  lose  thy  daughter
for  nought. — And  the  Wezeer  had  before  solicited  the  King  to  marry
to  him  the  damsel,  and  he  desired  to  marry  her  to  him  ;  but  when
this  was  told  her,  she  consented  not. — So  thereupon  the  King  said  to
him,  O  deceiver,  thou  dost  not  desire  for  me  good  fortune,  because
thou  demandedst  my  daughter  in  marriage  before,  but  she  consented
not  to  rnarry  thee.  So  now  thou  interceptest  the  way  of  her  marriage,
and  desirest  that  my  daughter  should  remain  as  a  waste  land,  in  order
that  thou  mayest  take  her.  But  hear  from  me  this  saying :  Thou  hast
no  concern  with  these  words.  How  can  he  be  an  impostor,  a  liar,
when  he  knew  the  price  of  the  jewel,  the  price  at  which  I  purchased  it,
and  broke  it  because  it  did  not  please  him  ?  He  hath  many  jewels;
and  when  he  introduceth  himself  to  my  daughter,  he  will  see  her  to
be  beautiful,  and  she  will  captivate  his  reason,  and  he  will  love  her,
and  will  give  her  jewels  and  treasures.  But  thou  desirest  to  prevent
my  daughter  and  to  prevent  me  from  obtaining  these  riches. — So  the
Wezeer  was  silent,  and  feared  the  King's  rage  against  him,  and  he
said  to  himself,  Set  the  dogs  upon  the  [wild]  oxen.  Then  he  inclined
to  the  merchant  Maaroof  and  said  to  him,  His  Majesty  the  King
loveth  thee,  and  he  hath  a  daughter  endowed  with  beauty  and  loveli-
ness, whom  he  desireth  to  marry  to  thee.  What  then  sayest  thou  ?—
And  he  answered  him,  No  harm.  But  let  him  wait  until  my  merchan-
dise arriveth  ;  for  the  dowry  of  the  daughters  of  the  Kings  is  large,
and  their  rank  requireth  that  they  should  not  be  endowed  save  with  a
dowry  befitting  their  condition  ;  and  at  this  present  time  I  have  not
with  me  wealth.  Therefore  let  him  have  patience  with  me  until  the
merchandise  arriveth ;  for  I  have  abundant  riches,  and  I  must  give  as
her  dowry  five  thousand  purses.  I  shall  also  require  a  thousand  purses
to  distribute  to  the  poor  and  needy  on  the  night  of  my  introduction  to
the  bride,  and  a  thousand  purses  to  give  to  those  who  shall  walk  in
the  marriage-procession,  and  a  thousand  purses  wherewith  to  prepare
the  viands  for  the  soldiers  and  others ;  and  I  shall  require  a  hundred
jewels  to  give  to  the  Queen20  on  the  morning  of  the  wedding,  and  a
hundred  jewels  to  distribute  among  the  female  slaves  and  the  eunuchs,
giving  each  a  jewel  in  honour  of  the  rank  of  the  bride.  I  shall  require
moreover  to  clothe  a  thousand  naked  persons  among  the  poor,  and
alms  will  be  indispensable ;  and  this  is  a  thing  that  will  be  impossible
until  the  merchandise  arriveth.  But  I  have  abundance ;  and  when  the
merchandise  cometh,  I  care  not  for  all  these  expenses.


THE  STORY  OF  MAAROOF.  633

The  Wezeer  therefore  went  and  acquainted  the  King  with  that
which  he  had  said,  and  the  King  said,  When  this  is  his  desire,  how
is  it  that  thou  assertest  of  him  that  he  is  an  impostor,~  a  liar  ?  The
Wezeer  replied,  And  I  cease  not  to  say  so.  But  the  King  chid  him
angrily,  and  threatened  him,  and  said  to  him,  By  my  head,  if  thou
desist  not  from  these  words,  I  will  slay  thee !  Return  then  to  him,
and  bring  him  to  me,  and  I  will  arrange  with  him. — So  the  Wezeer
went  to  him,  and  said  to  him,  Come  hither :  answer  the  summons  of
the  King.  And  he  replied,  I  hear  and  obey.  Then  he  came  to  him,
and  the  King  said  to  him,  Apologize  not  with  these  excuses ;  for  my
treasury  is  full  :  therefore  take  the  keys  into  thy  possession,  and  expend
all  that  thou  rcquirest,  and  give  what  thou  wilt,  and  clothe  the  poor,
and  do  what  thou  desirest,  and  mind  not  for  the  damsel  and  the  female
slaves.  But  when  thy  merchandise  arriveth,  shew  what  generosity
thou  wilt  to  thy  wife,  and  we  will  have  patience  with  thee  for  her
dowry  until  the  merchandise  arriveth,  and  there  shall  never  be  any
difference  between  me  and  thee. — He  then  ordered  the  Sheykh  el-
Islam  21  to  perform  the  ceremony  of  the  marriage-contract.  So  he
performed  the  ceremony  of  the  contract  of  the  marriage  of  the  King's
daughter  to  the  merchant  Maaroof.  The  King  commenced  the  cele-
bration of  the  festivity,  and  gave  orders  to  decorate  the  city,  and  the
drums  were  beaten,  and  the  tables  of  viands  were  spread  with  all  kinds
of  dishes,  and  the  performers  of  sports  came.  The  merchant  Maaroof
sat  upon  a  throne  in  a  mak'ad,  and  the  performers  of  sports,  and  the
exhibitors  of  cunning  tricks,  and  the  Jink,22  and  the  performers  of
extraordinary  arts  and  wonderful  games,  were  disposed  in  order  before
him,  and  he  proceeded  to  order  the  Treasurer,  and  to  say  to  him,
Bring  the  gold  and  the  silver.  Accordingly  he  brought  him  the  gold
and  the  silver,  and  Maaroof  went  round  among  the  people  who  were
diverting  themselves,  and  gave  to  every  one  who  played  by  the  handful,
and  bestowed  alms  on  the  poor  and  needy,  and  clad  the  naked,  and
it  was  a  noisy  festivity.  The  Treasurer  had  not  time  to  bring  the
money  from  the  treasury,  and  the  heart  of  the  Wezeer  almost  burst
with  rage ;  but  he  could  not  speak.  The  merchant  'Alee  also  wondered
at  the  squandering  of  this  wealth,  and  said  to  the  merchant  Maaroof,
May  Allah  and  the  Rijal  retaliate  upon  thy  temple !  Hath  it  not
sufficed  thee  that  thou  hast  wasted  the  money  of  the  merchants,  but
thou  wilt  also  waste  the  money  of  the  King  ? — But  the  merchant
Maaroof  answered  him,  Thou  hast  no  concern  with  it;  and  when  the
merchandise  arriveth,  I  will  compensate  the  King  for  this  with  double
in.  4  M


its  value. — And  he  proceeded  to  scatter  the  money,  and  to  say  within
himself,  A  burning  plague !  What  will  happen  will  happen  ;  and
from  that  which  is  predestined  there  is  no  escape.

The  festivity  ceased  not  for  the  space  of  forty  days ;  and  on  the
one-and-fortieth  day  they  made  the  procession  for  the  bride.  All  the
emeers  and  the  soldiers  walked  before  her ;  and  when  they  entered
with  her,  Maaroof  scattered  gold  over  the  heads  of  the  people.  They
made  for  her  a  magnificent  procession,  and  Maaroof  expended  a  vast
quantity  of  wealth.  They  introduced  him  to  the  Queen,  and  he  sat
upon  the  high  mattress,  and  they  let  down  the  curtains,  and  closed
the  doors,  and  went  forth,  leaving  him  with  the  bride.  And  thereupon
he  smote  hand  upon  hand,  and  sat  sorrowful  for  some  time,  striking
palm  upon  palm,  and  saying,  There  is  no  strength  nor  power  but  in
God,  the  High,  the  Great !  So  the  Queen  said  to  him,  O  my  lord,
Allah  preserve  thee !  What  aileth  thce  that  thou  art  sorrowful  ? — And


THE  STORY  OF  MAAROOF.  635

he  replied,  How  can  I  be  otherwise  than  sorrowful  when  thy  father
hath  disquieted  me,  and  done  to  me  a  deed  like  the  burning  of  the
green  corn  ?  She  said,  And  what  hath  my  father  done  to  thee  ?  Tell
me. — He  answered,  He  hath  introduced  me  to  thee  before  my  merchan-
dise hath  arrived,  and  I  desired  at  least  a  hundred  jewels  to  distribute
among  thy  female  slaves,  to  each  one  a  jewel,  that  she  might  rejoice
in  it,  and  say,  My  lord  gave  me  a  jewel  on  the  night  of  his  introduction
to  my  lady ; — and  this  good  deed  would  have  been  an  act  of  honour
to  thy  rank,  and  have  increased  thy  glory ;  for  I  am  not  deficient  in
lavishing  jewels,  having  of  them  an  abundance. — But  she  said  to  him,
Be  not  anxious  for  that,  nor  grieve  thyself  for  this  reason.  As  to
myself,  thou  hast  no  blame  to  fear  from  me ;  for  I  will  have  patience
with  thee  until  the  merchandise  arriveth  ;  and  as  to  the  female  slaves,
thou  hast  nought  to  care  for  on  their  account. — So  he  was  appeased.
And  on  the  following  morning  he  entered  the  bath,  and  put  on  a  suit
of  the  apparel  of  Kings,  and,  having  gone  forth  from  the  bath,  entered
the  King's  council-chamber :  whereupon  those  who  were  in  it  rose  to
him  upon  their  feet,  and  received  him  with  respect  and  honour,  and
congratulated  him  and  blessed  him.  He  sat  by  the  side  of  the  King,
and  said,  Where  is  the  Treasurer  ?  They  answered,  Lo,  he  is  here
before  thee.  And  he  said,  Bring  the  robes  of  honour,  and  invest  all
the  wezeers  and  the  emeers,  and  the  men  of  office.  Accordingly  he
brought  him  all  that  he  demanded,  and  he  sat  giving  to  every  one
who  came  to  him,  and  presenting  to  every  man  according  to  his  rank.
He  continued  in  this  state  for  the  space  of  twenty  days,  and  there
appeared  not  any  merchandise  belonging  to  him,  nor  aught  else.  Then
the  Treasurer  became  straitened  by  him  to  the  utmost  degree,  and  he
went  in  to  the  King  in  the  absence  of  Maaroof,  when  the  King  was
sitting  with  the  Wezeer,  and  no  one  beside,  and  he  kissed  the  ground
before  him,  and  said,  0  King  of  the  age,  I  will  acquaint  thee  with  a
thing  -,  for  perhaps  thou  wouldst  blame  me  for  not  acquainting  thee
therewith.  Know  that  the  treasury  hath  become  almost  empty ;  there
remaineth  not  in  it  any  money,  except  a  small  quantity,  and  after  ten
days  we  shall  close  it  empty. — So  the  King  said,  0  Wezeer,  verily  the
merchandise  of  my  son-in-law  hath  been  backward  in  coming,  and  no
tidings  of  it  have  appeared.  And  the  Wezeer  laughed,  and  said  to  him,
May  God  be  gracious  to  thee,  O  King  of  the  age !  Thou  art  none
other  than  a  careless  person,  with  respect  to  the  conduct  of  this  im-
postor and  liar.  By  thy  head,  there  is  no  merchandise  belonging  to  him,
nor  a  plague  to  relieve  us  of  him ;  but  he  hath  only  incessantly  im-


(130  THE  STORY  OF  MAAKOOF.

posed  upon  thee  until  he  hath  consumed  thy  wealth,  and  married  thy
daughter  for  nothing.  And  how  long  wilt  thou  be  heedless  of  this
liar  ? — The  King  thereupon  said  to  him,  O  Wezeer,  how  shall  we  act,
that  we  may  know  the  truth  of  his  state  ?  And  he  answered,  0  King
of  the  age,  no  one  will  become  acquainted  with  the  man's  secret  ex-
cept his  wife.  Therefore  send  to  thy  daughter,  desiring  that  she  may
come  behind  the  curtain,  in  order  that  I  may  ask  her  respecting  the
truth  of  his  state,  so  that  she  may  examine  him  and  acquaint  us  with
his  state. — And  he  replied,  There  will  be  no  harm  in  that.  By  my
head,  if  it  be  proved  that  he  is  an  impostor,  a  liar,  I  will  surely  slay
him  in  the  most  unfortunate  manner ! — He  then  took  the  Wezeer,  and
entered  with  him  into  the  sitting-chamber,  and  sent  to  his  daughter.
So  she  came  behind  the  curtain  •  and  this  was  during  the  absence  of
her  husband;  and  when  she  came,  she  said,  O  my  father,  what
dost  thou  desire  ?  He  answered,  Speak  to  the  Wezeer.  Accordingly
she  said,  O  Wezeer,  what  wouldst  thou  ?  He  answered,  0  my  mistress,
know  that  thy  husband  hath  consumed  the  wealth  of  thy  father,  and
he  hath  married  thee  without  giving  a  dowry,  and  hath  not  ceased  to
promise  us  and  to  break  his  promise  :  no  tidings  of  his  merchan-
dise have  appeared ;  and,  in  short,  we  desire  that  thou  wouldst
inform  us  respecting  him.  She  replied,  Verily,  his  words  are
many,  and  he  is  constantly  coming  and  promising  me  jewels  and
treasures  and  costly  stuffs;  but  I  have  seen  nothing.  And  he
said,  O  my  mistress,  canst  thou  this  night  take  and  give  with  him  in
talk,  and  say  to  him,  Acquaint  me  with  the  truth,  and  fear  nothing ;
for  thou  hast  become  my  husband,  and  I  will  not  be  neglectful  of
thee :  so  acquaint  me  with  the  truth  of  the  case,  and  I  will  contrive
for  thee  a  plan  by  which  thou  shalt  be  made  happy  ?  After  that,  use
nearness  and  remoteness  of  speech  to  him,  and  make  a  show  of  affec-
tion to  him,  and  induce  him  to  confess  ;  and  then  acquaint  us  with
the  truth  of  his  case. — And  she  said,  O  my  father,  I  know  how  to
examine  him.

She  then  departed ;  and  after  nightfall,  her  husband  Maaroof  came
in  to  her  according  to  his  custom.  So  she  rose  to  him,  and  took  him
with  her  hand  beneath  his  armpit,  and  beguiled  him  with  excessive
guile.  (And  sufficient  is  the  guile  of  women  when  they  have  to
request  of  men  any  thing  of  which  they  desire  the  accomplishment.)
She  ceased  not  to  beguile  him  and  to  coax  him  with  speech  sweeter
than  honey  until  she  stole  his  reason ;  and  when  she  saw  that  he  had
inclined  to  her  entirely,  she  said  to  him,  O  my  beloved,  O  delight  of


mine  eye,  0  joy  of  rny  heart,  may  God  not  make  me  desolate  by  thine
absence,  nor  time  make  a  separation  between  me  and  thee !  for  affec-
tion for  thee  hath  taken  up  its  abode  in  my  heart,  and  the  fire  of
desire  for  thee  hath  burned  my  liver,  and  there  can  be  no  neglect  of
thee  ever.  But  I  desire  that  thou  wouldst  acquaint  me  with  the  truth  ;
for  the  stratagems  of  falsehood  are  not  profitable,  nor  do  they  gain
credit  on  all  occasions.  How  long  wilt  thou  impose,  and  lie  to  my
father  ?  I  fear  that  thy  case  will  be  exposed  to  my  father  before  we
contrive  a  stratagem  to  avoid  it,  and  that  he  will  lay  violent  hands
upon  thee.  Acquaint  me  then  with  the  truth,  and  thou  shalt  ex-
perience nought  but  what  will  rejoice  thee.  When  thou  shalt  have
acquainted  me  with  the  truth  of  the  case,  thou  shalt  fear  nothing  that
would  injure  thee.  How  often  wilt  thou  assert  that  thou  art  a  mer-
chant, and  a  person  of  riches,  and  that  thou  hast  merchandise  ?  A
long  period  hath  passed  during  which  thou  hast  been  saying,  My
merchandise :  my  merchandise  : — but  no  tidings  of  thy  merchandise
have  appeared ;  and  anxiety  is  manifest  in  thy  countenance  on  this
account.  Now,  if  thy  words  have  no  truth,  inform  me,  and  I  will
contrive  for  thee  a  plan  by  means  of  which  thou  shalt  be  safe,  if  it  be
the  will  of  God. — And  he  replied  O  my  mistress,  I  will  acquaint  thee


638  THE  STORY  OF  MAAUOOF.

with  the  truth,  and  whatever  thou  wilt,  do.  So  she  rejoined,  Say,  and
take  care  to  be  veracious ;  for  veracity  is  the  ship  of  safety ;  and
beware  of  falsehood ;  for  it  disgraceth  its  speaker.  Divinely  gifted
was  he  who  said, —

Take  care  to  be  veracious,  even  though  veracity  should  cause  thee  to  be  burned

with  the  threatened  fire ;
And  seek  God's  approval ;  for  the  silliest  of  men  is  he  who  angereth  the  Lord

and  pleaseth  his  servants.

— And  he  said,  0  my  mistress,  know  that  I  am  not  a  merchant,  and  I
have  neither  merchandise  nor  a  burning  plague.  But  in  my  country
I  was  only  a  cobbler,  and  I  have  a  wife  whose  name  is  Fatimeh  El-
'Orrah,  and  such  and  such  things  happened  to  me  with  her. — And  he
acquainted  her  with  the  story  from  its  commencement  to  its  end.

Upon  this,  she  laughed,  and  said,  Verily  thou  art  skilful  in  the
art  of  lying  and  imposition !  He  replied,  O  my  mistress,  may  God
(whose  name  be  exalted !)  preserve  thee  to  veil  faults  and  dissolve
griefs  !  And  she  said,  Know  that  thou  hast  imposed  upon  my  father,
and  deceived  him  by  the  abundance  of  thine  idle  boasting,  so  that  he
hath  married  me  to  thee  by  reason  of  his  covetousness.  Then  thou
consumedst  his  wealth;  and  the  Wezeer  suspecteth  thee  for  this
conduct;  and  how  often  doth  he  speak  of  thee  before  my  father,
saying  to  him,  Verily  he  is  an  impostor,  a  liar  !  But  my  father
hath  not  complied  with  that  which  he  had  said,  because  he  had
demanded  me  in  marriage,  and  I  consented  not  that  he  should  be  to
me  a  husband,  and  that  I  should  be  to  him  a  wife.  Then  the  time
became  tedious,  and  my  father  had  become  straitened,  and  he  said
to  me,  Make  him  confess.  And  I  have  made  thee  confess,  and  what
was  covered  hath  become  exposed.  Now  my  father  is  purposing
mischief  to  thee  on  this  account ;  but  thou  hast  become  my  husband,
and  I  will  not  neglect  thee.  For  if  I  informed  my  father  of  this
news,  it  would  be  proved  to  him  that  thou  art  an  imposter,  a  liar,
and  that  thou  hast  imposed  upon  the  daughters  of  Kings,  and  squan-
dered away  their  riches;  and  thine  offence  would  not  be  forgiven
by  him,  but  he  would  slay  thee  without  doubt,  and  it  would  become
published  among  the  people  that  I  had  married  a  man  who  was  an
impostor,  a  liar,  and  thou  wouldst  be  a  cause  of  disgrace  to  me.  More-
over, if  my  father  slew  thee,  probably  he  would  desire  to  marry  me  to
another,  and  this  is  a  thing  to  which  I  would  not  consent  even  if  I
were  to  die  for  refusing.  But  arise  now,  and  put  on  the  dress  of  a


memlook,  and  take  with  thee  fifty  thousand  pieces  of  gold  of  my
wealth;  then  mount  upon  a  courser,  and  journey  to  a  country  to
which  the  rule  of  my  father  doth  not  reach.  There  trade  as  a  mer-
chant, and  write  to  me  a  letter,  and  send  it  by  a  courier  who  will
bring  it  to  me  privately,  that  I  may  know  in  what  country  thou  art,
in  order  that  I  may  send  to  thee  all  that  my  hand  can  procure.  Thus
thy  wealth  will  become  abundant ;  and  if  my  father  die,  I  will  send
to  thee,  and  thou  shalt  come  with  respect  and  honour ;  and  if  thou
die,  or  I  die,  departing  to  receive  the  mercy  of  God  (whose  name  be
exalted !),  the  day  of  resurrection  will  unite  us.  This  is  the  right
plan  ;  and  as  long  as  thou  coutinuest  well,  and  I  continue  well,  I  will
not  cease  to  send  thee  letters  and  riches.  Arise  before  the  daylight
cometh  upon  thee,  and  thou  art  perplexed,  and  destruction  environeth
thee. — So  he  said  to  her,  O  my  mistress,  I  throw  myself  upon  thy  gene-
rosity, begging  thee  to  bid  me  farewell  with  an  embrace.  And  she
replied,  No  harm.  He  then  embraced  her,  and  put  on  the  dress  of  a
memlook,  and  ordered  the  grooms  to  saddle  for  him  a  swift  courser.


640  THE  STOI!V OF MAAKOOF.

They  therefore  saddled  for  him  a  courser,  and  he  bade  farewell  to  his
wife,  and  went  forth  from  the  city  at  the  close  of  the  night,  and
departed,  every  one  who  saw  him  imagining  that  he  was  one  of  the
memlooks  of  the  Sultan  going  on  a  journey  for  the  accomplishment  of
some  affair.

And  when  the  morning  arrived,  her  father  came  with  the  Wezeer
to  the  sitting-chamber,  and  her  father  sent  to  her.  So  she  came
behind  the  curtain,  and  her  father  said  to  her,  0  my  daughter,  what
sayest  thou  ?  She  answered,  I  say,  May  God  blacken  the  face  of  thy
Wezeer!  For  he  desired  to  blacken  my  face  in  the  eyes  of  my  hus-
band.— And  how  so  ?  said  the  King.  She  answered,  He  came  in  to
me  yesterday,  before  I  mentioned  to  him  these  words,  and,  lo,  Faraj,
the  eunuch,  came  in  to  me  with  a  letter  in  his  hand,  and  he  said,  Ten
memlooks  are  standing  beneath  the  window  of  the  palace,  and  they
gave  me  this  letter,  and  said  to  me,  Kiss  for  us  the  hands  of  our
master  Maaroof  the  merchant,  and  give  him  this  letter ;  for  we  are  of
his  memlooks  who  are  with  the  merchandise,  and  it  hath  been  told  us
that  he  hath  married  the  daughter  of  the  King ;  so  we  have  come  to
him  to  acquaint  him  with  the  events  that  have  happened  to  us  on
the  way. — And  I  took  the  letter  and  read  it,  and  saw  in  it, — From  the
five  hundred  memlooks,  to  the  possessor  of  dignity,  our  master,  the
merchant  Maaroof. — To  proceed. — The  news  wherewith  we  acquaint
thee  is  this.  After  thou  leftest  us,  the  Arabs  came  forth  against  us,
and  fought  with  us,  and  they  were  two  hundred  horsemen,  while  we
were  five  hundred  memlooks ;  and  a  severe  contest  ensued  between  us
and  the  Arabs.  They  prevented  our  pursuing  the  w:ay,  and  thirty  days
elapsed  while  we  were  contending  with  them,  and  this  was  the  cause
of  our  being  behind  the  time  in  coming  to  thee.  They  have  taken
from  us  two  hundred  loads  of  stuffs,  forming  part  of  the  merchandise,
and  killed  of  us  fifty  memlooks. —And  when  the  news  came  to  him,
he  said,  May  Allah  disappoint  them  !  Wherefore  should  they  contend
with  the  Arabs  for  the  sake  of  two  hundred  loads  of  merchandise  ?
And  what  are  two  hundred  loads  ?  It  was  not  expedient  for  them  to
delay  on  that  account ;  for  the  value  of  the  two  hundred  loads  is  but
seven  thousand  pieces  of  gold.  But  it  is  requisite  that  I  go  to  them
and  hasten  them  ;  and  as  to  what  the  Arabs  have  taken,  the  merchan-
dise wrill  not  be  the  less  for  it,  nor  will  it  make  any  impression  upon
me,  and  I  will  reckon  as  though  I  had  bestowed  it  in  alms  upon
them.  Then  he  descended  from  me,  laughing,  and  grieved  not  for
what  was  lost  of  his  wealth,  nor  for  the  slaughter  of  his  memlooks  ;


THE  STORY  OF  MAAROOF.


641


and  when  he  descended,  I  looked  from  the  window  of  the  palace,  and
saw  that  the  ten  memlooks,  who  brought  him  the  letter,  were  like
moons,  each  one  of  them  wearing  a  suit  of  apparel  worth  two  thousand
pieces  of  gold,  and  that  there  was  not  in  the  possession  of  my  father
a  memlook  resembling  one  of  them.  He  then  repaired  with  the
memlooks  who  brought  him  the  letter,  in  order  that  he  might  bring
his  merchandise.  And  praise  be  to  God  who  prevented  me  from
mentioning  to  him  aught  of  the  words  which  thou  orderedst  me  to
say !  For  he  would  have  derided  me  and  thee,  and  probably  he
would  have  looked  upon  me  with  the  eye  of  disparagement,  and  would
have  hated  me.  But  the  fault  is  wholly  in  thy  Wezeer,  who  speaketh
against  my  husband  words  not  suitable  to  him. — So  the  King  said,  0
my  daughter,  verily  the  wealth  of  thy  husband  is  abundant,  and  he
thinketh  not  of  it;  and  from  the  day  that  he  entered  our  country  he
hath  been  constantly  bestowing  alms  on  the  poor.  If  it  be  the  will
of  God,  he  will  soon  come  with  the  merchandise,  and  abundant  good
fortune  will  betide  us  from  him. — He  proceeded  to  appease  her  mind,
and  to  threaten  the  Wezeer,  and  the  stratagem  deceived  him.

But  as  to  the  merchant  Maaroof,  he  mounted  the  courser,  and
proceeded  over  the  desert  tract,  perplexed,  not  knowing  to  what  country
to  go ;  and  by  reason  of  the  pain  of  separation,  he  moaned,  and  he
suffered  ecstasy  and  afflictions,  and  recited  some  verses;  after  which,
he  wept  violently.  The  ways  were  obstructed  in  his  face,  and  he
preferred  death  above  life.  Then  he  went  like  one  intoxicated,  through
the  violence  of  his  perplexity,  and  ceased  not  to  proceed  until  the  hour
of  noon,  when  he  approached  a  village,  and  saw  a  ploughman  near  it,
ploughing  with  a  yoke  of  bulls  ;  and  hunger  had  violently  affected


ill.


4  N


(;i-j  THE  STORY  OF  MAAROOF.

him  ;  so  he  went  to  the  ploughman  and  said  to  him,  Peace  be  on
thee !  And  he  returned  his  salutation,  and  said,  Welcome  to  thee,  O
my  master  !  Art  thou  of  the  memlooks  of  the  Sultan  ? — He  answered,
Yes.  And  he  said,  Alight  here  with  me  for  entertainment.  He
therefore  knew  that  he  was  of  the  liberal,  but  he  said  to  him,  0  my
brother,  I  see  not  with  thee  any  thing  wherewith  thou  canst  feed  me.
How  is  it  then  that  thou  invitest  me  ? — The  ploughman  answered,  0
my  master,  good  things  are  at  hand.  Alight  thou  ;  and,  behold,  the
village  is  near;  so  I  will  go  and  bring  thee  dinner,  and  fodder  for  thy
horse. — Maaroof  replied,  Since  the  villiage  is  near,  I  shall  arrive  at  it
in  the  same  time  in  which  thou  wouldst  arrive  there,  and  I  will  buy
what  I  desire  from  the  market,  and  eat.  But  he  said  to  him,  O  my
master,  verily  the  village  is  a  hamlet,  and  there  is  not  in  it  a  market,
nor  selling  nor  buying.  I  conjure  thee  by  Allah  that  thou  alight  here
with  me,  and  comfort  my  heart;  and  I  will  go  thither,  and  will  return
to  thee  quickly. — So  he  alighted ;  and  the  peasant  left  him,  and  went
to  the  villiage  to  bring  him  the  dinner.  Maaroof  therefore  sat  waiting
for  him.  Then  he  said  within  himself,  Verily  we  have  diverted  this
poor  man  from  his  work ;  but  I  will  arise  and  plough  in  his  stead,
until  he  come,  to  compensate  for  my  having  hindered  him  from
his  work.

Accordingly  he  took  the  plough,  and  drove  on  the  bulls,  and
ploughed  a  little ;  and  the  plough  struck  against  something,  whereupon
the  beasts  stopped.  So  he  urged  them  ;  but  they  could  not  proceed ;
and  he  looked  at  the  plough,  and  saw  that  it  was  caught  in  a  ring  of
gold.  He  therefore  removed  from  it  the  earth,  and  he  found  that  ring
to  be  in  the  middle  of  a  stone  of  alabaster,  of  the  size  of  the  nether
mill-stone ;  and  he  laboured  at  it  until  he  pulled  it  up  from  its  place,
when  there  appeared  beneath  it  a  subterranean  place  with  stairs ;  and
he  descended  those  stairs,  and  saw  a  place  like  a  bath,  with  four  leewans.
The  first  leewan  was  full  of  gold,  from  the  floor  to  the  roof;  and  the
second  leewan  was  full  of  emeralds  and  pearls  and  coral,  from  the  floor
to  the  roof ;  and  the  third  leewan  was  full  of  jacinths  and  balass-rubies
and  turquoises;  and  the  fourth  leewan  was  full  of  diamonds  and
precious  minerals  of  all  kinds  of  jewels.  Also,  at  the  upper  end  of
that  place  was  a  chest  of  clear  crystal,  full  of  incomparable  jewels,
each  jewel  of  them  being  of  the  size  of  a  hazel-nut ;  and  upon  that
chest  was  a  little  box,  of  the  size  of  a  lemon,  and  it  was  of  gold.  So
when  he  beheld  this,  he  wondered,  and  rejoiced  exceedingly  ;  and  he
said,  What  can  be  in  this  little  box  ?  Then  he  opened  it,  and  he  saw


in  it  a  seal-ring  of  gold,  on  which  were  engraved  names  and  talismans,
like  the  marks  made  by  the  creeping  of  ants.  And  he  rubbed  the
seal-ring ;  and,  lo,  a  speaker  said,  At  thy  service  !  At  thy  service !
O  my  master!  Demand  then,  and  thou  shalt  receive.  Dost  thou
desire  to  build  a  town,  or  to  ruin  a  city,  or  to  slay  a  King,  or  to  dig  a
river,  or  any  thing  of  that  kind  ?  For  whatsoever  thou  demandest,  it
will  happen,  by  permission  of  the  Almighty  King,  the  Creator  of  the
night  and  the  day. — So  he  said  to  him,  O  creature  of  my  Lord,  who
art  thou,  and  what  mayest  thou  be  ?  He  answered,  I  am  the  servant
of  this  seal-ring,  acting  in  the  service  of  its  possessor ;  and  whatever
object  of  desire  he  demandeth,  I  accomplish  it  for  him  ;  and  there  is
no  excuse  for  my  neglecting  what  he  comrnandeth  me  to  do ;  for  I  am
Sultan  over  Ons  of  the  Jann,  and  the  number  of  my  troops  is  two
and  seventy  tribes.  The  number  of  each  tribe  is  two  and  seventy
thousand,  and  every  one  of  the  thousand  ruleth  over  a  thousand
Miirids,  and  each  Miirid  ruleth  over  a  thousand  'Ons,  and  every


644  THE  STORY  OF  MAAROOF.

'On  ruleth  over  a  thousand  Devils,  and  every  Devil  ruleth  over  a
thousand  Jinnees,  and  all  of  them  are  under  my  authority,  and  they
are  unable  to  disobey  me.  But  I  am  bound  by  enchantment  to  this
seal-ring,  and  I  cannot  disobey  him  who  possesseth  it.  Lo,  thou  hast
possessed  it,  and  I  have  become  thy  servant.  Demand  then  what
thou  wilt ;  for  I  will  hear  thy  saying  and  obey  thy  command  ;  and
when  thou  requirest  me  at  any  time,  on  land  or  on  the  sea,  rub  the
seal-ring,  and  thou  wilt  find  me  with  thee.  But  beware  of  rubbing
it  twice  successively ;  for  thou  wouldst  burn  me  with  the  fire  of  the
names  [engraved  thereon],  and  lose  me,  and  repent  for  me  after
that.  Now  I  have  acquainted  thee  with  my  state;  and  peace  be
on  thee !

Upon  this,  Maaroof  said  to  him,  What  is  thy  name  ?  He  an-
swered, My  name  is  Abu-s-Sa'adat.23  And  he  said  to  him,  0  Abu-s-
Sa'adat,  what  is  this  place,  and  who  enchanted  thee  in  this  little  box  ?
He  answered,  O  my  master,  this  place  is  a  treasure,  called  the  treasure
of  Sheddad  the  son  of  'Ad,  who  constructed  Irem  Zat  el-'Emad,  the
like  of  which  hath  not  been  made  in  the  countries  of  the  earth.  I  was
his  servant  during  his  life,  and  this  was  his  seal-ring,  and  he  deposited
it  in  his  treasure ;  but  it  is  thy  lot. — Maaroof  then  said  to  him,  Canst
thou  take  forth  what  is  in  this  treasure  and  place  it  on  the  face  of  the
earth  ?  He  answered,  Yes ;  it  will  be  the  easiest  of  actions.  And
Maaroof  said,  Take  forth  all  that  is  in  it,  and  leave  not  of  it  aught.
And  he  made  a  sign  with  his  hand  towards  the  ground,  whereupon  it
clove  asunder.  Then  he  descended,  and  was  absent  a  little  while;
and,  lo,  young,  elegant  boys,  with  beautiful  faces,  came  forth  carrying
baskets  of  gold,  and  those  baskets  were  full  of  gold,  and  they  emptied
them  ;  after  which  they  went  and  brought  more ;  and  they  ceased  not
to  transport  the  gold  and  jewels,  and  not  more  than  a  short  time  had
elapsed  when  they  said,  There  remaineth  not  in  the  treasure  aught.
Upon  this,  Abu-s-Sa'adat  came  up  to  him,  and  said  to  him,  O  my
master,  thou  hast  seen  that  we  have  transported  all  that  was  in  the
treasure.  And  he  said  to  him,  Who  are  these  beautiful  boys  ?  He
answered,  These  are  my  children  ;  for  this  work  deserved  not  that  I
should  collect  for  it  the  'Ons,  and  my  children  have  accomplished  thine
affair,  and  have  been  honoured  by  serving  thee.  Now  demand  what
thou  desirest  beside  this. — So  he  said  to  him,  Canst  thou  bring  me
mules  and  chests,  and  put  these  riches  into  the  chests,  and  place  the
chests  upon  the  mules  ?  He  answered,  This  will  be  the  easiest  affair
that  can  be.  Then  he  uttered  a  great  cry,  whereupon  his  children


THE  STORY  OF  MAAROOF.  645

presented  themselves  before  him ;  and  they  were  eight  hundred.  And
he  said  to  them,  Let  some  of  you  become  transformed  into  the  sem-
blance of  mules,  and  some  of  you  into  the  semblance  of  beautiful
memlooks,  such  that  the  like  of  the  least  of  them  existeth  not  in  the
possession  of  any  of  the  Kings,  and  some  of  you  into  the  semblance  of
those  who  let  out  beasts  of  burden,  and  some  of  you  into  the  semblance
of  servants.  And  they  did  as  he  had  commanded  them  ;  after  which
he  called  out  to  the  'Ons,  who  presented  themselves  before  him,  and
he  ordered  them  that  some  of  them  should  become  transformed  into
the  semblance  of  horses  saddled  with  saddles  of  gold  set  with  jewels.
And  when  Maaroof  beheld  this,  he  said,  Where  are  the  chests  ?  They
therefore  brought  them  before  him.  And  he  said,  Pack  the  gold  and
the  minerals,  each  kind  by  itself.  So  they  packed  them,  and  put  them
upon  three  hundred  mules.  And  Maaroof  said,  O  Abu-s-Sa'adat,
canst  thou  bring  me  loads  of  precious  stuffs  ?  He  asked,  Dost  thou
desire  Egyptian  stuffs,  or  Syrian,  or  Persian,  or  Indian,  or  Greek  ?
He  answered,  Bring  of  the  stuffs  of  each  country  a  hundred  loads  upon
a  hundred  mules.  He  replied,  O  my  master,  grant  me  a  delay,  until
I  arrange  my  'Ons  for  that  purpose,  and  order  each  company  to  go  to
a  country  in  order  to  bring  a  hundred  loads  of  its  stuffs,  and  the
'Ons  shall  become  transformed  into  the  semblance  of  mules,  and  come
carrying  the  goods.  Maaroof  said,  What  shall  be  the  period  of  delay  ?
He  answered,  The  period  of  the  blackness  of  the  night ;  for  the  day-
light shall  not  arise  without  thy  having  with  thee  all  that  thou
desirest.  And  he  said,  I  grant  thee  this  period  of  delay.

He  then  commanded  them  to  pitch  for  him  a  tent.  So  they  pitched
it,  and  he  seated  himself,  and  they  brought  him  a  table  of  viands ;
and  Abu-s-Sa'adat  said  to  him,  0  my  master,  sit  in  the  tent,  and  these
my  children  are  before  thee  to  guard  thee;  therefore  fear  not  aught ;
and  I  am  going  to  collect  my  'Ons,  and  send  them  to  accomplish  thine
affair.  Then  Abu-s-Sa'adat  went  his  way,  and  Maaroof  sat  in  the
tent,  with  the  table  before  him,  and  the  children  of  Abu-s-Sa'adat
before  him  in  the  semblance  of  memlooks  and  servants  and  other
dependants.  And  while  he  was  sitting  in  this  state,  lo,  the  peasant
approached,  carrying  a  large  wooden  bowl  of  lentils,  and  a  fodder-bag
full  of  barley.  So  he  saw  the  tent  pitched,  and  the  memlooks  stand-
ing with  their  hands  upon  their  bosoms;  and  he  imagined  that
Maaroof  was  the  Sultan,  who  had  come  and  alighted  in  that  place.
He  therefore  stood  in  a  state  of  confusion,  and  said  within  himself,
Would  that  I  had  killed  two  chickens,  and  fried  them  red  with  clarified


cows'  butter  for  the  sake  of  the  Sultan  !  And  he  desired  to  return,
to  kill  two  chickens  wherewith  to  entertain  the  Sultan.  But  Maaroof
saw  him,  and  cried  out  to  him,  and  said  to  the  memlooks,  Bring  him.
They  therefore  carried  him  with  the  wooden  bowl  of  lentils,  and
brought  both  before  Maaroof,  who  said  to  him,  What  is  this  ?  He
answered,  This  is  thy  dinner,  and  the  fodder  for  thy  horse  ;  but  blame
me  not ;  for  I  did  not  imagine  that  the  Sultan  would  come  to  this
place ;  and  had  I  known  that,  I  would  have  killed  for  him  two
chickens,  and  entertained  him  in  a  goodly  manner.  So  Maaroof
replied,  The  Sultan  hath  not  come ;  but  I  an>  his  son-in-law,  and  I
was  displeased  with  him,  and  he  hath  sent  to  me  his  memlooks,  who
have  reconciled  me,  and  I  now  desire  to  return  to  the  city.  However,
thou  hast  prepared  for  me  this  entertainment  without  being  acquainted
with  me,  and  thine  entertainment  is  accepted,  though  it  is  of  lentils,
and  I  will  not  eat  save  of  thy  cheer. — He  then  ordered  him  to  put  the
wooden  bowl  in  the  middle  of  the  table,  and  ate  from  it  until  he  was
satisfied ;  but  as  to  the  peasant,  he  filled  his  stomach  with  food  from
those  dishes  of  various  exquisite  viands.  After  that,  Maaroof  washed


THE  STORY  OF  MAAROOF.  647

his  hands,  and  gave  permission  to  the  memlooks  to  eat.  So  they  fell
upon  the  remains  of  the  repast,  and  ate ;  and  when  the  wooden  bowl
was  emptied,  Maaroof  filled  it  for  the  peasant  with  gold,  and  said  to
him,  Convey  it  to  thy  dwelling,  and  come  to  me  in  the  city,  and  I
will  treat  thee  with  generosity.  He  therefore  took  the  wooden  bowl
full  of  gold,  and  drove  the  bulls,  and  went  to  his  village,  imagining
that  he  [himself]  was  a  relation  of  the  king.

Maaroof  passed  that  night  in  delight  and  joy,  and  they  brought
him  damsels,  of  the  brides  of  the  treasures,24  who  played  upon  the
instruments  of  music  and  danced  before  him.  Thus  he  passed  his
night,  and  it  was  not  to  be  reckoned  among  lives.  And  when  the
morning  came,  he  was  not  aware  when  the  dust  rose  and  flew,  and
dispersed  exposing  to  view  mules  bearing  loads.  They  were  seven
hundred  mules,  carrying  stuffs,  and  around  them  were  young  men  like
those  who  let  out  beasts  of  burden,  and  'akkams,  and  light-bearers ;
and  Abu-s-Sa'adat  was  riding  upon  a  mule,  being  in  the  semblance
of  leader  of  the  caravan,  and  before  him  was  a  takht-rawan25  upon
which  were  four  ornaments26  of  brilliant  red  gold,  set  with  jewels.
When  he  arrived  at  the  tent,  he  alighted  from  the  back  of  the  mule,
and  kissed  the  ground,  and  said,  O  my  master,  verily  the  affair  is
accomplished  completely  and  perfectly,  and  in  this  takht-rawan  is  a
suit  of  apparel  from  the  treasures,  of  which  there  is  not  the  like
among  the  apparel  of  Kings :  therefore  put  it  on,  and  ride  in  the
takht-rawfin,  and  command  us  to  do  what  thou  desirest.  And  he
replied,  O  Abu-s-Sa'adat,  I  desire  to  write  for  thee  a  letter,  with  which
thou  shalt  repair  to  the  city  of  Ikhtiyan27  of  El-Khutan,  and  go  in  to
my  uncle  the  King ;  and  go  not  in  to  him  save  in  the  semblance  of  a
human28  courier.  So  he  said  to  him,  I  hear  and  obey.  He  then
wrote  a  letter  and  sealed  it,  and  Abu-s-Sa'adat  took  it,  and  proceeded
with  it  until  he  wem\  in  to  the  King,  when  he  saw  him  saying,  O
Wezeer,  verily  my  heart  is  anxious  for  my  son-in-law,  and  I  fear  that
the  Arabs  may  slay  him.  Would  that  I  knew  whither  he  is  going,
that  I  might  follow  him  with  the  troops,  and  would  that  he  had
informed  me  thereof  before  his  departure ! — Upon  this  the  Wezeer
replied,  May  God  be  gracious  to  thee  with  respect  to  this  state  of
heedlessness  in  which  thou  art !  By  thy  head,  the  man  hath  known
that  we  had  become  excited  to  suspect  him,  and  he  feared  disgrace,
and  fled ;  and  he  is  none  other  than  an  impostor,  a  liar. — And,  lo,
the  courier  entered,  and  he  kissed  the  ground  before  the  King,  and
offered  up  a  prayer  in  his  favour  for  the  continuance  of  his  glory  and


648  THE  STORY  OF  MAAROOF.

blessings,  and  fur  length  of  life.  So  the  King  said  to  him,  Who  art
thou,  and  what  is  thine  affair  ?  And  he  answered  him,  I  am  a  courier.
Thy  son-in-law  hath  sent  me  to  thee,  and  he  is  approaching  with  the
merchandise,  and  he  hath  sent  thee  by  me  a  letter.  Lo,  here  it  is. —
He  therefore  took  it  and  read  it,  and  saw  in  it, — After  exceeding
salutation  to  our  uncle,  the  glorious  King,  I  inform  thee  that  1  have
come  with  the  merchandise ;  so  come  forth  and  meet  me  with  the
troops. — And  thereupon  the  King  said,  May  Allah  blacken  thy  face,
0  Wezeer !  How  often  wilt  thou  speak  against  the  reputation  of  my
son-in-law,  and  assert  him  to  be  a  liar  and  an  impostor  ?  He  bath
come  with  the  merchandise,  and  thou  art  none  other  than  a  traitor. —
So  the  Wezeer  hung  down  his  head  towards  the  ground,  in  shame  and
confusion,  and  replied,  0  King  of  the  age,  I  said  not  these  words  save
on  account  of  the  long  delay  of  the  merchandise,  and  I  was  fearing
the  loss  of  the  wrealth  that  he  hath  expended.  But  the  King  said,  O
traitor,  what  are  my  riches  !  Since  his  merchandise  hath  come,  he
will  give  me  instead  of  them  an  abundance  of  things.

Then  the  King  gave  orders  to  decorate  the  city,  and  went  in  to  his
daughter,  and  said  to  her,  Good  news  for  thee  !  Verily  thy  husband
will  soon  come  with  his  merchandise ;  and  he  hath  sent  to  me  a  letter
informing  me  of  that  event ;  and,  lo,  I  am  going  forth  to  meet  him.
— The  damsel  therefore  wondered  at  this  circumstance,  and  said
within  herself,  Verily  this  is  a  wonderful  thing !  Was  he  deriding
me,  and  making  game  of  me,  or  wras  he  proving  me,  when  he  informed
me  that  he  was  a  poor  man  ?  But  praise  be  to  God  that  nothing
injurious  to  him  proceeded  from  me ! — And  as  to  the  merchant  'Alee
of  Cairo,  when  he  saw  the  decoration  of  the  city,  he  inquired  respect-
ing the  cause  of  it,  and  they  said  to  him,  The  merchandise  of  the
merchant  Maaroof,  the  son-in-law  of  the  King,  hath  arrived.  So  he
said,  God  is  most  great !  WThat  is  this  calamity !  Verily  he  came  to
me  fleeing  from  his  wife,  and  he  was  a  poor  man.  Whence  then  came
to  him  merchandise  ?  But  probably  the  daughter  of  the  King  hath
contrived  for  him  a  stratagem,  in  fear  of  disgrace,  and  Kings  are  not
unable  to  accomplish  any  thing.  However,  may  God  (whose  name
be  exalted !)  protect  him,  and  not  disgrace  him  ! — And  all  the  other
merchants  rejoiced  and  were  glad  because  they  would  receive  their
money.  The  King  then  assembled  the  troops  and  went  forth ;  and
Abu-s-Sa'adat  had  returned  to  Maaroof,  and  informed  him  that  he
had  delivered  the  letter ;  whereupon  Maaroof  said,  Put  ye  on  the  loads.
Accordingly  they  put  them  on  ;  and  he  clad  himself  in  the  suit  of  the


1'HK  STORY  OF  MAAKOOF.  643

apparel  of  the  treasures,  and  got  up  into  the  takht-rawan,  and  became
a  thousand  times  greater  and  more  majestic  than  the  King.  He  pro-
ceeded as  far  as  half  the  way,  and,  lo,  the  King  met  him  with  the
troops ;  and  when  he  came  to  him,  he  saw  him  wearing  that  dress,  and
riding  in  the  takht-rawan,  and  he  threw  himself  upon  him,  saluted
him,  and  congratulated  him  on  his  safety.  All  the  great  men  of  the
empire  also  saluted  him,  and  it  appeared  that  Maaroof  was  veracious,
and  that  there  was  no  falsehood  in  him.

He  entered  the  city  in  a  stately  procession  that  would  have  made
the  gall-bladder  of  the  lion  to  burst,  and  the  merchants  came  to
him  and  kissed  the  ground  before  him.  Then  the  merchant  'Alee
said  to  him,  Thou  hast  done  this  deed,  and  it  hath  been  successfully
accomplished  by  thee,  O  sheykh  of  the  impostors  !  But  thou  art
deserving :  therefore  may  God  (whose  name  be  exalted !)  increase  to
thee  his  bounty  ! — And  Maaroof  laughed.  And  when  he  entered  the
palace,  he  seated  himself  upon  the  throne,  and  said,  Put  ye  the  loads
of  gold  into  the  treasury  of  my  uncle  the  King,  and  bring  ye  the
loads  of  stuffs.  So  they  brought  them  forward  to  him,  and  proceeded
to  open  them,  load  after  load,  and  to  take  forth  their  contents,  until
they  had  opened  the  seven  hundred  loads;  whereupon  he  selected  the
best  of  them,  and  said,  Take  them  in  to  the  Queen,  that  she  may  dis-
tribute them  among  her  female  slaves ;  and  take  ye  this  chest  of  jewels,
and  carry  it  in  to  her,  that  she  may  distribute  the  jewels  among  the
female  slaves  and  the  eunuchs.  Next  he  proceeded  to  give  to  the
merchants  to  whom  he  was  indebted,  stuffs  in  payment  of  the  debts ;
and  to  whom  he  owed  a  thousand,  he  gave  stuffs  worth  two  thousand,
or  more ;  after  which,  he  distributed  to  the  poor  and  needy,  while  the
King  looked  on,  and  was  unable  to  prevent  him.  He  ceased  not  to
give  and  bestow  until  he  had  distributed  the  seven  hundred  loads;
when  he  looked  towards  the  soldiers,  and  betook  himself  to  distributing
among  them  minerals  and  emeralds  and  jacinths  and  pearls  and  coral
and  other  things,  not  giving  the  jewels  save  by  handfuls,  without
numbering.  So  the  King  said  to  him,  0  my  son,  these  gifts  are  suffi-
cient ;  for  there  remaineth  not  of  the  merchandise  more  than  a  small
quantity.  But  he  replied,  I  have  abundance.  And  his  veracity  had
become  publicly  manifest,  and  no  one  could  any  longer  belie  him.  He
became  careless  as  to  giving ;  for  the  servant  of  the  seal-ring  brought
him  whatever  he  demanded.  Then  the  Treasurer  came  to  the  King,
and  said,  O  King  of  the  age,  verily  the  treasury  is  filled,  and  will  not
hold  the  rest  of  the  loads,  and  where  shall  we  put  what  remaineth  of
in.  4  o


the  gold  and  minerals  ?  So  he  pointed  out  to  him  another  place.
And  when  his  wife  beheld  this  thing,  her  joy  was  excessive,  and  she
wondered,  and  said  within  herself,  Whence  can  all  this  wealth  have
come  to  him  ?  In  like  manner  also  the  merchants  rejoiced  at  the
things  that  he  had  given  them,  and  they  prayed  for  him.  And  as  to
the  merchant  'Alee,  he  wondered  too,  and  said  within  himself,  How  is
it  that  he  hath  imposed  and  lied  so  that  he  hath  gained  possession  of
all  these  treasures  ?  For  if  they  were  from  the  daughter  of  the  King,
he  would  not  have  distributed  them  to  the  poor.  But  how  excellent
is  the  saying  of  him  who  said, —

When  the  King  of  Kings  hestoweth,  inquire  not  respecting  the  cause.

God  will  give  to  whom  he  pleaseth :  so  keep  within  the  bounds  of  reverence.

— But  as  to  the  King,  he  wondered  extremely  at  what  he  beheld  of


THE  STORY  OF  MAAROOF.  651

the  actions  of  Maaroof,  and  his  generosity  and  munificence  in  lavishing
the  wealth.

After  that,  Maaroof  went  in  to  his  wife,  who  met  him  smiling,
laughing,  and  joyful,  and  kissed  his  hand,  and  said,  Wast  thou  making
game  of  me,  or  didst  thou  try  me  by  thy  saying,  I  am  a  poor  man,  and
fleeing  from  rny  wife?  Praise  be  to  God  that  nothing  injurious  to
thee  proceeded  from  me  !  Thou  art  my  beloved,  and  there  is  none  more
dear  in  my  estimation,  whether  thou  be  rich  or  poor;  and  I  wish  that
thou  wouldst  inform  me  what  thou  desiredst  by  these  words. — He  re-
plied, I  desired  to  try  thee,  that  I  might  see  whether  thine  affection  were
sincere,  or  on  account  of  wealth,  and  covetousness  of  worldly  goods ;
and  it  hath  become  manifest  to  me  that  thine  affection  is  sincere ;  and
since  thou  art  true  in  affection,  welcome  to  thee !  I  have  known  thy
value. — Then  he  went  into  a  place  by  himself,  and  rubbed  the  seal-
ring.  So  Abu-s-Sa'iidat  presented  himself  to  him,  and  said  to  him,
At  thy  service  !  Demand  then  what  thou  wilt. — He  replied,  I  desire  of
thee  a  suit  of  the  apparel  of  the  treasures  for  my  wife,  and  ornaments
of  the  treasures,  comprising  a  necklace  of  forty  incomparable  jewels.
And  he  said,  I  hear  and  obey.  Then  he  brought  to  him  what  he  had
commanded  him  to  procure,  and  Maaroof  took  the  suit  of  apparel  and
the  ornaments,  after  he  had  dismissed  the  servant,  and,  going  in  to  his
wife,  he  put  them  before  her,  and  said  to  her,  Take  and  put  them  on ;
and  welcome  to  thee!  And  when  she  looked  at  those  things,  her
reason  fled  in  consequence  of  her  joy  ;  and  she  saw,  among  the  orna-
ments, two  anklets  of  gold  set  with  jewels,  the  work  of  the  magicians,
and  bracelets  and  ear-rings  and  a  nose-ring,29  which  no  riches  would
suffice  to  purchase.  She  put  on  the  suit  of  apparel  and  the  orna-
ments, and  said,  0  my  master,  I  desire  to  treasure  them  up  for  festi-
vals and  holidays.  But  he  replied,  Wear  them  always ;  for  I  have
abundance  beside  them.  And  when  she  put  them  on,  and  the  female
slaves  beheld  her,  they  rejoiced,  and  kissed  her  hands.  He  then  left
them,  and  went  apart  by  himself,  and  again  rubbed  the  seal-ring.
The  servant  therefore  presented  himself  to  him,  and  he  said  to  him,
Bring  me  a  hundred  suits  of  apparel,  with  the  ornaments  of  gold
appropriate  to  them.  And  he  replied,  I  hear  and  obey, — and  brought
him  the  suits  of  apparel,  each  suit  having  its  ornaments  of  gold  within
it;  and  Maaroof  took  them,  and  called  out  to  the  female  slaves.  So
they  came  to  him,  and  he  gave  to  each  of  them  a  suit ;  and  they  put
on  the  suits,  and  became  like  the  Hooreeyehs,  the  Queen  being  among
them  like  the  moon  among  the  stars.  And  one  of  the  female  slaves


652  THE  STORY  OF  MAAROOF.

informed  the  King  thereof;  wherefore  the  King  came  in  to  his
daughter,  and  saw  that  she  and  her  female  slaves  amazed  the  be-
holder ;  and  he  wondered  at  this  extremely.

He  then  went  forth  and  summoned  his  Wezeer,  and  said  to  him,
O  Wezeer,  such  and  such  things  have  happened,  and  what  sayest  thou
of  this  case  ?  He  answered,  O  King  of  the  age,  verily  this  conduct
proceedeth  not  from  merchants;  for  pieces  of  linen  remain  in  the
possession  of  the  merchant  for  years,  and  he  selleth  them  not  save  for
gain.  How  should  merchants  have  generosity  like  this  generosity,
and  how  can  they  accumulate  the  like  of  these  riches  and  jewels  such
as  exist  not  in  the  possession  of  Kings,  save  in  small  quantities  ?  How
then  can  loads  of  them  exist  in  the  possession  of  merchants  ?  There
must  be  a  cause  for  this.  But,  if  thou  wilt  comply  with  my  advice,  1
will  make  manifest  to  thee  the  truth  of  the  case. — And  he  replied,  I
will  comply  with  thy  advice,  O  "Wezeer.  So  the  Wezeer  said  to  him,
Have  an  interview  with  him,  and  shew  affection  for  him,  and  converse
with  him,  and  say  to  him,  O  my  son-in-law,  I  have  it  in  my  heart  to
go  with  thee  and  the  Wezeer,  and  none  else,  to  a  garden,  for  the  sake
of  diversion.  And  when  we  have  gone  forth  to  the  garden,  we  will
put  the  wine-table,  and  I  will  constrain  him,  and  give  him  to  drink ;
and  when  he  hath  drunk  the  wine,  his  reason  will  be  lost,  and  his  right
judgment  will  quit  him,  and  we  will  ask  him  respecting  the  truth  of
his  case  ;  for  he  will  acquaint  us  with  his  secrets.  Wine  is  a  betrayer ;
and  divinely  gifted  was  he  who  said, —

When  we  had  drunk  it,  and  it  had  crept  as  far  as  the  place  of  secrets,  I  said  "to

it,  Stop ; —
Fearing  lest  its  influence  should  overcome  me,  and  my  companions  discover  my

hidden  secret.

Then,  when  he  hath  informed  us  of  the  truth  of  the  case,  we  shall
know  his  state,  and  may  do  with  him  as  we  like  and  choose;  for  I
fear  for  thee  the  results  of  this  state  in  which  he  is.  Probably  his
soul  may  be  ambitious  of  obtaining  the  kingdom,  and  the  troops  may
be  collected  by  means  of  generosity  and  the  lavishing  of  wealth,  and
he  may  depose  thee,  and  take  the  kingdom  from  thee. — And  the  King
replied,  Thou  hast  spoken  truth.

They  passed  the  night  agreeing  as  to  this  plan;  and  when  the
morning  came,  the  King  went  forth  to  the  mak'ad,  and  seated  himself;
and,  lo,  the  servants  and  grooms  came  in  to  him  in  affliction.  So  he
said  to  them,  What  hath  befallen  you  ?  And  they  answered,  O  King
of  the  age,  the  grooms  curried  the  horses,  and  gave  fodder  to  them


THE  STORY  OF  MAAKOOF.


653


and  to  the  mules  that  brought  the  merchandise ;  and  when  we  arose
in  the  morning,  we  found  that  the  memlooks  had  stolen  the  horses
and  mules,  and  we  searched  the  stables,  but  saw  not  horses  nor  mules ;
and  we  entered  the  place  of  the  memlooks,  but  saw  not  in  it  any
one ;  and  we  know  not  how  they  fled.  The  King  therefore  wondered
at  that ;  for  he  imagined  that  the  'Uns  were  horses  and  mules  and
memlooks,  and  knew  not  that  they  were  the  'Ons  of  the  servant  of  the
talisman.  And  he  said  to  them,  0  ye  accursed !  How  is  it  that  a
thousand  beasts,  and  five  hundred  memlooks,  and  servants  besides,
fled,  and  ye  perceived  them  not  ? — 'They  replied,  We  know  not  how  it
happened  to  us  that  they  fled.  •  And  he  "said,  Depart,  and  wait  until
your  master  cometh  forth  from  the  Hareem,  and  acquaint  him  with
the  news.  So  they  departed  from  before  the  King,  and  sat  perplexed
respecting  this  matter;  and  while  they  were  sitting  in  this  state,  lo,
Maaroof  came  forth  from  the  Hareem,  and  saw  them  sorrowful,  and


654  THE  STORY  OF  MAAROOF.

he  s,iid  to  them,  What  is  the  news  ?  They  therefore  acquainted  him
with  that  which  had  happened.  But  he  said,  And  what  is  their  value,
that  ye  are  sorrowful  on  account  of  them  ?  Go  your  way. — And  he
sat  laughing,  and  was  neither  angry  nor  sorrowful  on  account  of  this
event.  And  the  King  looked  in  the  face  of  the  Wezeer,  and  said,
What  is  this  man,  in  whose  estimation  wealth  is  of  no  value  ?  There
must  be  a  cause  for  this. — Then  they  conversed  with  him  a  while,  and
the  King  said,  O  my  son-in-law,  I  desire  to  go  with  thee  and  the
Wezeer  to  a  garden,  for  the  sake  of  diversion.  What  then  sayest
thou  ? — And  he  replied,  No  harm.

So  thereupon  they  departed,  and  repaired  to  a  garden  containing
two  kinds  of  every  fruit,  and  its  rivers  were  flowing,  and  its  trees  were
tall,  and  its  birds  were  warbling.  They  entered,  within  it,  a  pavilion,
that  would  dispel  grief  from  hearts,  and  sat  conversing,  the  Wezeer
relating  extraordinary  tales,  and  introducing  ludicrous  witticisms,  and
mirth-exciting  sayings,  and  Maaroof  listening  to  the  conversation,
until  the  dinner  came  up.  They  placed  the  table  of  viands,  and  the
jar  of  wine ;  and  after  they  had  eaten,  and  washed  their  hands,  the
Wezeer  filled  the  cup,  and  gave  it  to  the  King,  who  drank  it ;  and  he
filled  the  second,  and  said  to  Maaroof,  Take  the  cup  of  the  beverage
in  reverence  of  which  the  understanding  bows  the  neck.  So  Maaroof
said,  What  is  this,  O  Wezeer  ?  The  Wezeer  answered,  This  is  the  old
maid,  and  the  virgin  long  kept  in  her  home,  and  the  imparter  of  joy
to  hearts,  of  which  the  poet  hath  said, —

The  stout,  foreign  infidels'  feet  went  round  treading  her,  and  she  hath  avenged

herself  upon  the  heads  of  the  Arahs.
One  of  the  daughters  of  the  infidels,  like  the  full  moon  amid  darkness,  whose

eyes  are  the  strongest  cause  of  temptation,  presenteth  her.30

And  among  other  pieces  of  poetry,  he  recited  this  verse  : —

I  wonder  at  the  pressers  of  it,  how  they  have  died,  and  have  left  to  us  the  water
of  life.

And  this  couplet : —

By  Allah,  there  is  no  other  alchemy  than  this;  and  all  is  false  that  is  said  of

the  modes  of  other  kinds.
Pour  a  carat's  weight  of  wine  upon  a  hundred-weight  of  grief,  and  the  latter  is

instantly  converted  into  joys.

He  ceased  not  to  excite  his  desire  for  the  wine,  mentioning  to  him  such
of  its  good  qualities  as  he  relished,  and  reciting  to  him  what  occurred
to  his  mind  of  verses  on  the  subject  of  it,  and  pleasant  stories,  until
he  inclined  to  put  his  lips  to  the  mouth  of  the  cup,  and  had  no  longer


THE  STORY  OF  MAAKOOF.  C!.-,r,

a  desire  for  any  thing  else.  And  the  Wezeer  continued  to  fill  for  him,
and  he  drank  and  delighted  and  was  merry,  till  he  lost  his  reason,  and
distinguished  not  his  wrong  conduct  from  his  right.  So  when  he
knew  that  his  intoxication  had  become  extreme,  and  exceeded  the
utmost  point  that  was  required,  he  said  to  him,  0  merchant  Maaroof,
by  Allah,  I  wonder  whence  came  to  thee  these  jewels  of  which  the
like  exist  not  in  the  possession  of  the  royal  Kisras ;  and  in  our  lives
we  have  never  seen  a  merchant  who  hath  accumulated  riches  like  thee,
nor  anyone  more  generous  than thou;  for  thine  actions  are  the  actions
of  Kings,  and  they  are  not  the  actions  of  merchants.  I  conjure  thee
then  by  Allah  that  thou  inform  me,  in  order  that  I  may  know  thy
rank  and  thy  station. — And  he  proceeded  to  ply  him  and  beguile  him
while  he  was  bereft  of  reason.  Maaroof  therefore  said  to  him,  I  am
not  a  merchant,  nor  one  of  the  Kings.  And  he  acquainted  him  with
his  story  from  beginning  to  end.  So  the  Wezeer  said  to  him,  I  conjure
thee  by  Allah,  0  my  master  Maaroof,  to  divert  us  with  a  sight  of  this
seal-ring,  that  we  may  see  of  what  kind  is  its  make.  And  he  pulled
off  the  ring,  in  his  intoxication,  and  said,  Take  it,  and  divert  yourselves
with  the  sight  of  it.  And  the  Wezeer  took  it,  and  turned  it  over,  and
said,  If  I  rub  it,  will  the  servant  present  himself?  Maaroof  answered,
Yes  :  rub  it :  he  will  present  himself  to  thee  ;  and  divert  thou  thyself
by  beholding  him.

The  Wezeer  therefore  rubbed  it ;  and,  lo,  a  speaker  said,  At  thy
service,  0  my  master !  Demand :  thou  shalt  receive !  Wilt  thou  ruin
a  city,  or  build  a  city,  or  slay  a  King  ?  For  whatever  thou  desirest,
I  will  do  it  for  thee,  without  disobedience. — And  the  Wezeer  made
a  sign  to  Maaroof,  and  said  to  the  servant,  Take  up  this  erring
man  :  then  cast  him  down  in  the  most  desolate  of  deserted  lands,
so  that  he  may  not  find  in  it  what  he  may  eat  nor  what  he  may
drink,  and  may  perish  of  hunger,  and  die  in  sorrow,  no  one  knowing
of  him.  So  the  servant  seized  him,  and  flew  with  him  between  heaven
and  earth.  And  when  Maaroof  beheld  this,  he  felt  sure  of  destruction,
and  grievous  embarrassment;  and  he  wept,  and  said,  O  Abu-s-Sa'adat,
whither  art  thou  going  with  me?  He  answered  him,  I  am  going  to
cast  thee  down  in  the  deserted  quarter31  of  the  earth,  0  thou  of  little
good-breeding  !  Who  possesseth  a  talisman  like  this  and  givcth  it  to
people  that  they  may  divert  themselves  with  the  sight  of  it  ?  But
thou  deservest  what  hath  befallen  thee ;  and,  but  that  I  fear  God,  I
would  cast  thee  down  from  the  distance  of  a  thousand  fathoms,  and
thou  wouldst  not  reach  the  earth  until  the  winds  should  have  torn


65G  THE  STORY  OP  MAAROOF.

thee  in  pieces. — So  he  was  silent,  and  spoke  not  to  him  until  he
arrived  with  him  at  the  deserted  quarter;  whereupon  he  threw  him
down  there ;  and  he  returned,  and  left  him  in  the  desolate  land. —
Meanwhile,  the  Wezeer,  having  possessed  the  seal-ring,  said  to  the
King,  How  thinkest  thou  now?  Did  I  not  say  to  thee  that  this  man
was  a  liar,  an  impostor  ?  But  thou  didst  not  believe  me. — And  he
replied,  Thou  art  right,  0  my  Wezeer  !  God  give  thee  health !  Give
me  this  seal-ring,  that  I  may  divert  myself  with  a  sight  of  it.— But
the  Wezeer  looked  at  him  angrily,  and  spat  in  his  face,  and  said  to
him,  0  thou  of  little  sense,  how  should  I  give  it  to  thee,  and  become
thy  servant,  after  I  have  become  thy  master  ?  But  I  will  no  longer
suffer  thee  to  exist. — Then  he  rubbed  the  seal-ring,  and  the  servant
presented  himself,  and  he  said  to  him,  Take  up  this  person  of  little
good-breeding,  and  throw  him  down  in  the  place  where  thou  hast  cast
his  son-in-law,  the  impostor.  So  he  took  him  up,  and  flew  away  with
him,  and  the  King  said  to  him,  0  creature  of  my  Lord,  what  is  my
offence  ?  The  servant  answered  him,  I  know  not :  but  my  master
hath  commanded  me  to  do  this,  and  I  cannot  disobey  him  who  pos-
sesseth  the  seal-ring  containing  this  talisman.  He  ceased  not  to  fly
on  with  him  until  he  threw  him  down  in  the  place  in  which  was
Maaroof.  He  then  returned,  and  left  him  there.  And  the  King
heard  Maaroof  weeping :  wherefore  he  came  to  him  and  informed
him  of  his  case,  and  they  sat  weeping  for  that  which  had  befallen
them,  and  found  neither  food  nor  drink.

But  as  to  the  Wezeer,  after  he  had  separated  Maaroof  and  the
King  from  their  home,  he  arose  and  went  forth  from  the  garden,  and,
having  sent  to  all  the  soldiers,  held  a  court,  and  acquainted  them  with
what  he  had  done  with  Maaroof  and  the  King.  He  told  them  also
the  story  of  the  seal-ring,  and  said  to  them,  If  ye  make  me  not  Sultan


^"-,^-"x"
^"/Sf- ' ;1 .„  -


THE  STORY  OF  MAAROOF.  657

over  you,  I  will  command  the  servant  of  the  seal-ring  to  carry  you  all
off  and  cast  you  down  in  the  deserted  quarter,  and  ye  will  die  of  hunger
and  thirst.  So  they  replied,  Do  us  no  injury ;  for  we  consent  to  thy
being  Sultan  over  us,  and  we  will  not  disobey  thy  command.  They
agreed,  against  their  wish,  to  his  being  Sultan  over  them,  and  he
conferred  upon  them  robes  of  honour,  and  proceeded  to  demand  all
that  he  desired  of  Abu-s-Sa'adat,  who  presented  it  before  him  im-
mediately. He  seated  himself  upon  the  throne,  and  the  troops  obeyed
him  ;  and  he  sent  to  the  daughter  of  the  King,  saying  to  her,  Prepare
thyself ;  for  I  am  coming  to  take  thee  as  my  wife  this  night,  being
full  of  desire  to  be  with  thee.  Upon  this,  she  wept ;  and  the  case  of
her  father  and  her  husband  grieved  her ;  and  she  sent  to  say  to  him,
Let  me  remain  until  the  period  of  widowhood32  shall  have  been  com-
pleted :  then  perform  the  ceremony  of  the  contract  of  my  marriage,
and  take  me  as  thy  wife  legally.  But  he  sent  to  say  to  her,  I  know
no  period  of  widowhood  nor  length  of  time,  nor  do  I  require  a  contract
of  marriage,  nor  do  I  know  lawful  from  unlawful.  I  must  without
fail  take  thee  as  my  wife  this  night. — And  she  sent  to  say  to  him,
Welcome  to  thee !  And  there  will  be  no  harm  in  that. — But  this
proceeding  was  a  stratagem  of  hers.  And  when  the  reply  was  brought
to  him,  he  rejoiced,  and  his  bosom  became  dilated ;  for  he  was  pas-
sionately enamoured  of  her.  He  then  gave  orders  to  place  the  viands
among  all  the  people,  and  said,  Eat  ye  this  food,  as  it  is  the  banquet
of  the  wedding-festivity ;  for  I  purpose  to  take  the  Queen  as  my  wife
this  night.  The  Sheykh  El-Islam  therefore  said,  It  is  not  lawful  for
thee  to  take  her  as  thy  wife  until  her  period  of  widowhood  shall  have
been  completed  and  thou  shalt  have  performed  the  ceremony  of  the
contract  of  thy  marriage  to  her.  But  he  replied,  I  know  not  a  period
of  widowhood  nor  any  other  period :  therefore  multiply  not  thy  words
to  me.  So  the  Sheykh  El-Islam  was  silent,  and  feared  his  malice,  and
said  to  the  soldiers,  Verily  this  is  an  infidel,  and  he  hath  no  religion
nor  religious  opinion.

Then,  when  the  evening  came,  lie  went  in  to  her,  and  saw  her
wearing  the  most  magnificent  of  the  apparel  that  she  possessed,  and
adorned  with  the  most  beautiful  of  ornaments ;  and  when  she  beheld
him,  she  received  him  laughing,  and  said  to  him,  A  blessed  night !
But  hadst  thou  slain  my  father  and  my  husband,  it  had  been  better
in  my  opinion  ! — So  lie  replied,  I  must  without  fail  slay  them.  And
she  seated  him,  and  proceeded  to  jest  with  him,  and  to  make  a  show
of  affection  for  him  ;  and  when  she  caressed  him,  and  smiled  in  his  face,
in.  4  P


his  reason  fled.  But  she  only  beguiled  him  by  caresses  in  order  that
she  might  get  possession  of  the  seal-ring,  and  convert  his  joy  into
calamity  upon  his  head ;  and  she  did  not  with  him  these  deeds  save
in  accordance  with  the  idea  of  him  who  said, — ^

I  have  attained  by  means  of  my  stratagem  what  could  not  be  attained  by  the

swords.
Then  1  returned  with  plunder  of  which  the  plucked  fruits  were  sweet.

Then  suddenly  she  retired  to  a  distance  from  him,  and  wept,  and  said,
0  my  lord,  dost  thou  not  see  the  man  that  is  looking  at  us  ?  I  conjure
thee  by  Allah  to  veil  me  from  his  eye ! — And  thereupon  he  was  enraged,
and  said,  Where  is  the  man  ?  She  answered,  Lo,  he  is  in  the  stone
of  the  seal-ring,  putting  forth  his  head,  and  looking  at  us.  He  there-
fore imagined  that  the  servant  of  the  seal-ring  was  looking  at  them ;  and
he  laughed,  and  said,  Fear  not.  This  is  the  servant  of  the  seal-ring,
and  he  is  under  my  authority. — She  replied,  I  am  afraid  of  'Efreets  :
so  pull  it  off,  and  throw  it  to  a  distance  from  me.  Accordingly  he
pulled  it  off,  and  put  it  on  the  cushion,  and  drew  near  to  her.  But
she  kicked  him  with  her  foot  upon  his  stomach,  so  that  he  fell  upon
his  back  senseless ;  and  she  called  out  to  her  dependants,  who  came
to  her  quickly,  and  she  said  to  them,  Lay  hold  upon  him !  So  forty
female  slaves  seized  him,  and  she  hastily  took  the  seal-ring  from  the
fellow,  and  rubbed  it ;  and,  lo,  Abu-s-Sa'adat  approached,  saying,  At


THE  STORY  OF  MAAROOF.  659

thy  service,  O  my  mistress !  And  she  said,  Take  up  this  infidel,  and
put  him  into  the  prison,  and  make  his  shackles  heavy.

He  therefore  took  him,  and  confined  him  in  the  Prison  of  Anger,
and  returned  and  said  to  her,  I  have  imprisoned  him.  She  then  said
to  him,  Whither  conveyedst  thou  my  father  and  my  husband  ?  He
answered,  I  threw  them  down  in  the  deserted  quarter.  And  she  said,
I  command  thee  to  bring  them  to  me  this  instant.  So  he  replied,  I
hear  and  obey.  And  he  flew  from  before  her,  and  ceased  not  to  fly
on  until  he  arrived  at  the  deserted  quarter,  and  descended  upon  them,
when  he  beheld  them  sitting  weeping,  and  complaining,  each  to  the
other ;  and  he  said  to  them,  Fear  ye  not.  Relief  hath  come  to  you. —
He  acquainted  them  with  that  which  the  Wezeer  had  done,  and  said
to  them,  I  have  imprisoned  him  with  mine  own  hand,  in  obedience  to
her;  and  she  commanded  me  to  bring  you  back.  They  therefore
rejoiced  at  the  news  that  he  told  them.  Then  he  took  them  up,  and
flew  away  with  them,  and  not  more  than  a  little  while  had  elapsed
before  he  went  in  with  them  to  the  King's  daughter,  who  arose  and
saluted  her  father  and  her  husband,  and  seated  them,  and  presented
to  them  the  viands  and  the  sweetmeat.  They  passed  the  remainder
of  the  night;  and  on  the  following  day,  she  clad  her  father  in  a
magnificent  suit  of  apparel,  and  clad  her  husband  in  like  manner,  and
said,  O  my  father,  sit  thou  upon  thy  throne,  a  King  as  thou  wast  at
first,  and  make  my  husband  thy  Wezeer  of  the  right  hand;  then
acquaint  thy  troops  with  the  events  that  have  happened,  and  bring
the  Wezeer  from  the  prison,  and  slay  him,  and  after  that,  burn  him ;
for  he  is  an  infidel,  and  he  desired  to  take  me  as  his  wife  unlawfully,
without  the  rite  of  marriage.  He  hath  avowed  of  himself  that  he  is
an  infidel,  and  that  he  hath  no  religion  which  he  holdeth.  And  do
thou  act  well  to  thy  son-in-law,  whom  thou  hast  appointed  thy  Wezeer
of  the  right  hand. — He  replied,  I  hear  and  obey,  O  my  daughter :
but  give  me  the  seal-ring,  or  give  it  to  thy  husband.  But  she  said,
Verily  it  befitteth  not  thee  nor  him.  The  seal-ring  shall  remain  only
in  my  possession,  and  probably  I  shall  take  more  care  of  it  than  ye
would.  Whatever  ye  desire,  demand  it  of  me,  and  I  will  demand  for
you  of  the  servant  of  the  seal-ring.  Fear  ye  not  any  harm  as  long  as
I  live;  and  after  my  death,  do  as  ye  will  with  the  seal-ring. — And
her  father  replied,  This  is  the  right  plan,  0  my  daughter.  Then  he
took  his  son-in-law,  and  went  up  to  the  council-chamber.

Now  the  troops  had  passed  the  night  in  excessive  affliction,  on
account  of  the  King's  daughter,  and  what  the  Wezeer  had  [as  they


660  THE  STORY  OF  MAAROOF.

imagined]  done  with  her,  taking  her  as  his  wife  unlawfully,,  without
the  rite  of  marriage,  and  his  ill-treatment  of  the  King  and  his  son-in-
law  ;  and  they  feared  that  the  law  of  El-Islam  would  be  dishonoured ;
for  it  had  become  manifest  to  them  that  he  was  an  infidel.  Then  they
assembled  in  the  council-chamber,  and  began  to  reproach  the  Sheykh
El-Islam,  saying  to  him,  Wherefore  didst  thou  not  prevent  him  from
taking  the  Queen  as  his  wife  unlawfully  ?  So  he  answered  them,  0
people,  verily  the  man  is  an  infidel,  and  he  hath  become  possessor  of
the  seal-ring,  and  I  and  ye  are  unable  to  do  aught  against  him.  But
God  (whose  name  be  exalted !)  will  recompense  him  for  his  conduct ;
and  be  ye  silent,  lest  he  slay  you. — And  while  the  soldiers  were
assembled  in  the  council-chamber,  conversing  on  this  subject,  lo,  the
King  came  in  to  them  in  the  council-chamber,  and  with  him  his  son-
in-law  Maaroof.  So  when  the  soldiers  beheld  him,  they  rejoiced  at
his  coming,  and  rose  to  him  upon  their  feet,  and  kissed  the  ground
before  him.  He  then  seated  himself  upon  the  throne,  and  acquainted
them  with  the  story.  Therefore  their  grief  quitted  them.  And  he
gave  orders  to  decorate  the  city,  and  caused  the  Wezeer  to  be  brought
•from  the  prison ;  and  as  he  passed  by  the  soldiers,  they  cursed  him
and  reviled  him  and  threatened  him  until  he  came  to  the  King ;  and
when  he  stood  before  him,  he  gave  orders  to  slay  him  in  the  most
abominable  manner.  So  they  slew  him  :  then  they  burned  him  ;  and
he  went  to  Hell  iu  the  most  evil  of  conditions  :  and  well  did  one  say
erf  him, —

May  the  Compassionate  shew  no  mercy  to  the  tomb  where  his  bones  will  lie,  and
may  Munkar  and  Nekeer  incessantly  remain  in  it !

Then  the  King  appointed  Maaroof  his  Wezeer  of  the  right  hand,  and
the  times  were  pleasant  to  them,  and  their  joys  were  unsullied.

They  remained  thus  five  years;  and  in  the  sixth  year  the  King
died ;  and  thereupon  the  King's  daughter  made  Maaroof  Sultan  in
the  place  of  her  father ;  but  she  gave  him  not  the  seal-ring.  And
during  this  period,  she  had  borne  him  a  boy,  of  surprising  loveliness,
of  surpassing  beauty  and  perfection  ;  and  he  ceased  not  to  remain  in
the  laps  of  the  nurses  until  he  had  attained  the  age  of  five  years.
Then  his  mother  fell  into  a  fatal  sickness:  so  she  summoned  Maaroof,
and  said  to  him,  I  am  sick.  He  replied,  God  preserve  thee,  0  beloved
of  my  heart !  But  she  rejoined,  Probably  I  shall  die,  and  thou
rcquirest  not  that  I  should  charge  thee  respecting  thy  son.  I  only
charge  thee  to  take  care  of  the  seal-ring,  from  fear  for  thee  and  for


THE  STORY  OF  MAAROOF.  6C1

this  boy. — He  said,  No  harm  will  befall  him  whom  God  preserveth.
And  she  pulled  off  the  ring,  and  gave  it  to  him  ;  aud  on  the  follow-
ing day,  she  was  admitted  to  the  mercy  of  God,  whose  name  be
exalted !

Maaroof  still  remained  King,  and  applied  himself  to  the  affairs  of
government.  And  it  happened  one  day  that  he  shook  the  handker-
chief, and  the  soldiers  dispersed  themselves  from  before  him  to  their
abodes,  and  he  entered  the  sitting-chamber,  and  sat  there  until  the  day
had  passed,  and  the  night  came  with  its  thick  darkness.  Then  the
great  men  who  were  his  boon-companions  came  in  to  him,  according
to  their  custom,  and  sat  up  with  him  for  the  sake  of  enjoyment  and
amusement  until  midnight,  when  they  asked  permission  to  depart,  and
he  gave  them  permission,  and  they  went  forth  from  him  to  their  houses.
After  that,  there  came  in  to  him  a  slave-girl,  who  was  employed  to
attend  to  his  bed,  and  she  spread  for  him  the  mattress,  pulled  off  his
clothes,  and  clad  him  in  the  apparel  of  sleep,  and  he  laid  himself  down.
The  damsel  then  proceeded  to  rub  and  press  gently  the  soles  of  his
feet  until  sleep  overcame  him ;  whereupon  she  went  forth  from  him  to
her  sleeping-place,  and  slept.  And  the  King  Maaroof  was  sleeping,
and  suddenly  he  found  something  by  his  side  in  the  bed.  So  he  awoke
terrified,  and  said,  I  seek  refuge  with  God  from  Satan  the  accursed !
Then  he  opened  his  eyes,  and  saw  by  his  side  a  woman  of  hideous
aspect ;  and  he  said  to  her,  Who  art  thou  ?  She  answered,  Fear  not.
I  arn  thy  wife,  Fatimeh  El-'Orrah.

Upon  this,  he  looked  in  her  face,  and  knew  her  by  the  hideousness
of  her  shape,  aud  the  length  of  her  dog-teeth  ;  and  he  said,  How  earnest
thou  in  to  me,  and  who  brought  thee  to  this  country  ?  She  said  to
him,  In  what  country  art  thou  at  present  ?  He  answered,  In  the  city
of  Ikhtiyan  of  El-Khutan.  And  thou  (he  added),  when  didst  thou
quit  Cairo  ?  She  answered,  Just  now.  He  said  to  her,  And  how  so  ?
She  answered,  Know  that  when  I  wrangled. with  thee,  and  the  Devil


662  THE  STORY  OF  MAAROOF.

had  incited  me  to  do  thee  mischief,  and  I  complained  of  thee  to  the
magistrates,  they  searched  for  thee,  and  found  thee  not;  and  the
Kadees  inquired  respecting  thee ;  but  they  saw  thee  not.  Then,  after
two  days  had  passed,  repentence  seized  me,  and  I  knew  that  the  fault
was  mine ;  but  repentance  did  not  profit  me.  I  remained  for  a  period
of  days  weeping  for  thy  separation,  and  my  means  became  diminished,
so  that  it  was  necessary  for  me  to  beg  for  the  sake  of  food.  I  pro-
ceeded to  beg  of  every  emulated  man  of  wealth  and  every  detested
pauper ;  and  from  the  time  when  thou  quittedst  me,  I  have  been  eating
the  food  obtained  by  ignominious  begging.  I  became  in  the  most  evil
of  conditions,  and  every  night  [  sat  weeping  for  thy  separation,  and
for  what  I  had  endured  since  thy  departure,  of  ignominy  and  contempt
and  disappointment  and  injury. — She  continued  to  relate  to  him  what
had  happened  to  her,  while  he  was  in  amazement  at  her,  until  she
said,  And  yesterday  I  went  about  all  the  day  begging ;  but  no  one
gave  me  aught.  Every  time  that  I  accosted  any  one,  and  begged  him
for  a  bit  of  bread,  he  reviled  me,  and  gave  me  not  aught.  So  when
the  night  came,  I  passed  it  without  supper,  and  hunger  tormented
me ;  what  I  endured  was  grievous  to  me,  and  I  sat  weeping.  And,
lo,  a  person  appeared  before  me,  and  said  to  me,  O  woman,  wherefore
dost  thou  weep  ?  I  therefore  answered,  I  had  a  husband  who  expended
upon  me  and  accomplished  my  desires,  and  he  hath  been  lost  to  me,
and  I  know  not  whither  he  hath  gone,  and  I  have  endured  embarrass-
ment since  his  departure.  Thereupon  he  said,  What  is  the  name  of
thy  husband?  'I  answered,  His  name  is  Maaroof.  And  he  said,  I
am  acquainted  with  him.  Know  that  thy  husband  is  now  Sultan  in
a  city ;  and  if  thou  desire  that  I  should  convey  thee  to  him,  I  will  do
so. — I  therefore  said  to  him,  I  throw  myself  upon  thy  generosity,
begging  thee  to  convey  me  to  him  !  And  he  took  me  up,  and  flew
with  me  between  heaven  and  earth  until  he  conveyed  me  to  this  palace,
when  he  said,  Enter  this  chamber.  Thou  wilt  see  thy  husband  sleep-
ing upon  the  couch. — So  I  entered,  and  saw  thee  in  this  state  of
sovereignty.  Now  it  was  not  my  wish  that  thou  shouldst  forsake  me.
I  am  thy  companion  ;  and  praise  be  to  God  who  hath  united  me  with
thee ! — Upon  this  he  said  to  her,  Did  I  forsake  thee,  or  didst  thou
forsake  me  ?  ^  Thou  complainedst  of  me  to  Kiidee  after  Kiidee,  and
finishedst  by  complaining  of  me  to  the  Sublime  Court,  so  that  thou
causedst  Aboo-Tabak  to  come  down  upon  me  from  the  Citadel.  There-
fore I  fled  in  spite  of  myself. — And  he  proceeded  to  relate  to  her  what
had  happened  to  him  until  he  became  Sultan  and  married  the  King's


daughter.  He  told  her  also  that  she  had  died,  and  that  he  had  by
her  a  son,  whose  age  was  seven  years.  And  she  said  to  him,  What
hath  happened  was  predestined  by  God  (whose  name  be  exalted  !),
and  I  have  repented.  I  throw  myself  upon  thy  generosity,  entreating
thee  not  to  forsake  me ;  but  let  me  eat  bread  in  thine  abode  as  alms.

She  ceased  not  to  humble  herself  to  him  until  his  heart  was  moved
with  compassion  for  her,  and  he  said  to  her,  Repent  of  evil  conduct,
and  reside  with  me,  and  thou  shalt  experience  nothing  but  what  will
rejoice  thee.  But  if  thou  do  any  evil  act,  I  will  slay  thee,  and  will
not  fear  any  one ;  so  let  it  not  occur  to  thy  mind  that  thou  mayest
complain  of  me  to  the  Sublime  Court,  and  that  Aboo-Tabak  will  come
down  to  me  from  the  Citadel ;  for  I  have  become  a  Sultan,  and  the
people  fear  me ;  but  I  fear  not  any  one  except  God  (whose  name  be
exaUed  !),  since  I  have  a  seal-ring  that  hath  a  servant  in  subjection  to
it.  When  I  rub  it,  the  servant  of  the  ring  appeareth  to  me  :  his  name
is  Abu-s-Sa'adat ;  and  whatever  I  demand  of  him,  he  bringeth  it  to
me.  Now  if  thou  desire  to  return  to  thy  country,  I  will  give  thee
what  will  suffice  thee  all  thy  life,  and  send  thee  to  thy  country  speedily.
And  if  thou  desire  to  reside  with  me,  I  will  appropriate  to  thee  ex-
clusively a  pavilion,  and  furnish  it  for  thee  with  the  best  of  silks,
appoint  for  thee  twenty  female  slaves  to  serve  thee,  and  assign  for
thee  good  food  and  magnificent  apparel,  so  that  thou  shalt  become  a
Queen,  and  live  in  exceeding  affluence  until  thou  shalt  die,  or  I  die.
What  then  sayest  thou  respecting  this  proposal  ? — She  answered,  I
desire  to  remain  with  thee.  Then  she  kissed  his  hand,  and  vowed
repentance  of  evil  conduct.  He  therefore  appropriated  to  her  a  pavilion
for  herself  alone,  and  bestowed  upon  her  female  slaves  and  eunuchs,
and  she  became  a  Queen.  And  the  boy  used  to  repair  to  her  and  to
his  father ;  but  she  hated  the  boy  because  he  was  not  her  son  ;  and
when  the  boy  saw  that  she  looked  upon  him  with  the  eye  of  anger  and


664  THE  STORY  OF  MAAROOF.

hatred,  he  shunned  her  and  hated  her.  Maaroof  then  became  occupied
with  love  of  the  beautiful  slave-girls,  and  thought  not  of  his  wife
Fatimeh  El-'Orrah,  because  she  had  become  a  half-gray  old  woman,
with  hideous  form,  and  a  person  whose  hair  was  falling  off,  more  ugly
than  the  speckled,  black  and  white,  serpent;  but  especially  because
she  had  ill-treated  him  in  a  manner  that  could  not  be  exceeded ;  and
the  author  of  the  proverb  saith,  Ill-treatment  eradicateth  desire,  and
soweth  fierce  hatred  in  the  soil  of  hearts.  Divinely  gifted  was  he  who
said, —

Beware  of  losing  hearts  in  consequence  of  injury,  for  the  bringing  them  back

after  flight,  is  difficult.
Verily  hearts,  when  affection  hath  fled  from  them,  are  like  glass,  which,  when

broken,  cannot  be  made  whole  again.

Maaroof  did  not  receive  her  to  reside  in  his  abode  on  account  of
any  praiseworthy  quality  that  she  possessed ;  but  he  treated  her  in
this  generous  manner  only  from  a  desire  of  obtaining  the  approval  of
God,  whose  name  be  exalted !  And  when  she  saw  that  he  withheld
himself  from  her,  and  became  occupied  with  others,  she  hated  him,
and  jealousy  overcame  her,  and  Iblees  suggested  to  her  that  she  should
take  the  seal-ring  from  him,  and  slay  him,  and  make  herself  Queen  in
his  place.  Then  she  went  forth  one  night,  and  walked  from  her
pavilion  to  the  pavilion  in  which  was  her  husband,  the  King  Maaroof.
Now  it  was  his  custom,  when  he  slept,  to  take  off  the  seal-ring  and
conceal  it;  and  she  knew  this  :  so  she  went  forth  by  night  to  go  in  to
him  in  the  pavilion  when  he  was  drowned  in  sleep,  and  to  steal  this
ring  in  such  a  manner  that  he  should  not  see  her.  But  the  King's
son,  at  that  time,  was  awake,  in  a  private  chamber  with  the  door  open  ;
and  when  she  came  forth  from  her  pavilion,  he  saw  her  carefully  walk-
ing towards  the  pavilion  of  his  father,  and  he  said  within  himself,
Wherefore  hath  this  sorceress  come  forth  from  her  pavilion  in  the
hour  of  darkness,  and  wherefore  do  I  see  her  repairing  to  the  pavilion
of  my  father  ?  There  must  be  a  cause  for  this  event. — He  then  went
forth  behind  her,  and  followed  her  steps  without  her  seeing  him.  And
he  had  a  short,  jewelled  sword  ;35  and  he  used  not  to  go  forth  to  the
council-chamber  of  his  father  without  having  this  sword  hung  by  his
side,  because  he  prized  it  highly ;  and  when  his  father  saw  him,  he
used  to  laugh  at  him,  and  say,  God's  will !  Verily  thy  sword  is
excellent,  O  my  son  !  But  thou  hast  not  gone  down  with  it  to  battle,
nor  cut  off  with  it  a  head. — And  thereupon  he  used  to  reply,  I  shall
not  fail  to  cut  with  it  a  neck  that  shall  be  deserving  of  the  cutting.


THE  STORY  OF  MAAROOF.


665


And  his  father  would  laugh  at  his  words. — Now  when  he  walked
behind  his  father's  wife,  he  drew  the  sword  from  its  scabbard  and
followed  her  until  she  entered  the  pavilion  of  his  father,  when  he  stood
watching  her  at  the  door  of  the  pavilion  ;  and  as  he  continued  looking
at  her,  he  saw  her  searching,  and  saying,  Where  hath  he  put  the  seal-
ring?  He  therefore  understood  that  she  was  looking  about  for  the
ring ;  and  he  ceased  not  to  wait,  observing  her,  until  she  found  it,
when  she  said,  Lo,  here  it  is.  And  she  picked  it  up,  and  was  about
to  come  forth.  So  he  hid  himself  behind  the  door;  and  when  she
came  forth  from  the  door,  she  looked  at  the  ring,  and  turned  it  over  in
her  hand,  and  was  about  to  rub  it.  But  he  raised  his  hand  with  the
sword,  and  struck  her  upon  her  back,  and  she  uttered  one  cry :  then
fell  down  slain.

Upon  this,  Maaroof  awoke,  and  beheld  his  wife  laid  prostrate,  and
her  blood  flowing,  and  his  son  with  the  sword  drawn  in  his  hand. So


in.


4  Q


666  THE  STORY  OF  MA  A  ROOF.

he  said  to  him,  What  is  this,  O  my  son  ?  He  replied,  O  my  father,
how  often  hast  thou  said  to  me,  Verily  thy  sword  is  excellent ;  but
thou  hast  not  gone  down  with  it  to  battle,  nor  cut  off  with  it  a  head  ?
and  I  answered  thee,  I  shall  not  fail  to  cut  with  it  a  neck  deserving  of
the  cutting  !  Lo,  now  I  have  cut  for  thee  with  it  a  neck  deserving
of  the  cutting. — And  he  acquainted  him  with  her  case.  Then  he
searched  for  the  seal-ring  ;  but  he  saw  it  not.  And  he  ceased  not  to
search  her  person  until  he  saw  her  hand  closed  upon  it.  Maaroof
therefore  took  it  from  her  hand,  and  said  to  the  boy,  Thou  art  my  sou
without  doubt  or  uncertainty.  May  God  relieve  thee  from  trouble  in
this  world  and  in  the  next,  as  thou  hast  relieved  me  from  this  base
woman  !  Her  course  only  led  her  to  her  own  destruction  ;  and  divinely
gifted  was  he  who  said, —

When  God's  aid  promoteth  the  business  of  a  man,  his  wish,  in  every  case,  is

easily  accomplished :
But  if  the  aid  of  God  be  not  granted  to  a  man,  the  first  thing  that  harineth  him

is  his  own  endeavour.

Then  the  King  Maaroof  called  out  to  some  of  his  dependants,  who
came  to  him  quickly,  and  he  acquainted  them  with  that  which  his  wife
Fatimeh  El-'Orrah  had  done,  and  commanded  them  to  take  her  and
put  her  in  a  place  until  the  morning.  So  they  did  as  he  commanded
them ;  after  which  he  appointed  a  number  of  the  eunuchs  to  take
charge  of  her ;  and  they  washed  her  and  shrouded  her,  made  for
her  a  funeral-procession,  and  buried  her.  Thus  her  coming  from
Cairo  was  only  a  journey  to  her  grave.  Divinely  gifted  was  he  who
said, —

We  trod  the  steps  appointed  for  us :  and  he  whose  steps  are  appointed  must  tread

them.

He  whose  death  is  decreed  to  take  place  in  one  land  will  not  die  in  any  land  but
that.

And  how  excellent  is  this  saying  of  the  poet : —

I  know  not,  when  I  journey  to  a  land,  desiring  good  fortune,  whether  will  be-
tide me
The  good  fortune  of  which  I  am  in  pursuit,  or  the  misfortune  that  pursueth  me.

The  King  Maaroof  then  sent  to  summon  the  ploughman  who  had
entertained  him  when  he  was  a  fugitive ;  and  when  he  came,  he
appointed  him  his  Wezeer  of  the  right  hand,  and  his  counsellor.36
And  he  learned  that  he  had  a  daughter  of  surprising  beauty  and  loveli-
ness, of  generous  qualities,  of  noble  race,  of  high  dignity  :  so  he  took


THE  STORY  OF  .MAAKOOF.


067


her  to  wife.  And  after  a  period  of  time,  he  married  his  son.  And
they  remained  a  long  time  enjoying  the  most  comfortable  life;  their
times  were  unsullied,  and  their  joys  were  sweet,  until  they  were  visited
by  the  terminator  of  delights  and  the  separator  of  companions,  and  the
ruiner  of  flourishing  houses,  and  him  who  inaketh  sons  and  daughters
orphans. — Extolled  be  the  perfection  of  the  Living  who  dieth  not,  and
in  whose  hands  are  the  keys  of  the  dominion  that  is  apparent  and  the
dominion  that  is  hidden  !


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  THIRTIETH.


NOTE  1.  Cairo  is  generally  called,  as  it  is  here  in  my  original,  "  Misr  [vulg.  Masr]
el-Mahrooseh;"  i.  e.  "  the  Guarded  [City  of]  Misr,  or  Masr."  [This  story  is  contained
in  the  Calcutta  edition  of  the  complete  work,  but  not  in  that  of  Bresluu. — ED.]

NOTE  2 Maaroof  signifies  "  kindness,"

NOTE  3.  "'Orrah  "  is  a  vulgar  word,  signifying  "a  wicked,  mischievous  shrew."

NOTE  4.  Literally  "  like  her  [own]  book,  or  page."  Her  actions  being  bad.  the
record  of  them  was,  figuratively  speaking,  black.

NOTE  5.  Drip -honey  ('asal  katr)  is  a  "fine  kind  of  black  honey,"1  or  treacle.

NOTE  6.  See  Note  78  to  Chapter  v.

NOTE  7.  See  Note  8  to  Chapter  ii.

NOTE  8.  Literally,  "  the  Sublime  Gate  "  or  "  Porte."

NOTE  9.  "  Aboo-Tabak  "  is  a  vulgar  appellation  of  a  sergeant  who  arrests  by  order
of  a  magistrate,  because  he  often  executes  his  commission  with  violence.  It  is  derived
from  a  verb  vulgarly  used  in  the  sense  of  assailing  with  violence.

NOTE  10.  "The  '&dileeyeh"  is  the  name  of  a  mosque  founded  by  El-Melik  el-'Adil
Tooman  Bey,  in  the  year  of  the  Flight  906  (A.D.  1501),  outside  the  wall  of  Cairo,  near
the  great  gate  called  Bab  en-Nasr;  and  the  neighbourhood  of  that  mosque  is  also
called  by  the  same  name.  This  late  date  is  worthy  of  remark  ;  and  it  should  also  be
observed,  that  the  story  of  Maaroof  is  not  related  as  one  of  ancient  times.

NOTE  11.  The  Darb  el-Ahmar  is  a  street  outside  the  gate  called  Bab  Zuweyleh.


Marginal  note  hy  my  shcykh.


NOTES  TO  CHAFFER  THIRTIETH.  669

NOTE  12.  The  word  here  rendered  "druggist"  is  '"attar."  See  Note  2  to
Chapter  ix.

NOTE  13.  That  is,  a  professor  in  a  Collegiate  Mosque.

NOTE  14.  "  Ikhtiyan,"  or,  as  it  is  afterwards  written  in  my  original,  "  Kheetan,"
appears  to  be  a  fictitious  name;  and  so,  perhaps,  is  the  name  which  follows  it,  as  my
sheykh  supposes ;  but,  as  we  are  left  to  supply  the  short  vowels,  I  rather  think  that
the  latter  is  "  El-Khutan"  or  "  Khutan  "  (without  the  article),  the  name  of  a  district
of  Tartary.  It  is  more  consistent,  however,  with  the  character  of  the  story  to  regard
this  city  as  an  imaginary  place,  the  inhabitants  of  which  agree,  in  every  thing  but
dress,  with  the  Arabs.  In  Trebutien's  version,  it  is  called  "  Kha'itan,  the  capital  of
the  kingdom  of  Sohatan."

NOTE  15.  This  is  the  name  of  a  deep  red  dye.*

NOTE  16.  This  is  a  vulgar  form  of  speech,  and  signifies,  "  there  came  not  to  him
what  would  profit  him,  nor  what  would  rid  others  of  him."

NOTE  17.  By  "  the  Rijal "  are  meant  the  Welees,  or  Saints  ;3  and  probably  that
order  of  the  Welees  called  "  Rijal  el-Gheyb,"  who,  according  to  the  Arabs,  appear  not
to  other  men.  In  an  account  of  the  Muslims  of  India,  the  Rijal  el-Gheyb  are  described
as  "  a  class  of  people  who  are  mounted  on  clouds,  and  remain  together  each  day  in  a
different  part  of  the  hemisphere  ;"4  and  they  are  said  to  have  much  influence  upon  the
fortune  of  travellers.

NOTE  18.  That  is,  he  is  suspected  of  lying  in  both  cases.

NOTE  19.  "  Ash'ab  was  a  very  covetous  man :  so  covetous  that  he  said  to  a  man
who  was  making  a  dish,  Enlarge  it : — whereupon  the  man  said  to  him,  Wherefore  ? —
and  he  answered,  Perhaps  something  may  be  given  in  it  to  me."5

NOTE  20.  By  "  the  Queen  "  is  here  meant  the  bride,  as  is  afterwards  shewn  in  the
story.

NOTE  21.  The  mention  of  this  title  I  regard  as  another  evidence  of  the  late  date  of
this  tale.  See  Note  43  to  Chapter  xxii.

NOTE  22.  The  Jink  are  a  class  of  public  dancers,  young  men  and  boys,  generally
.lows,  Armenians,  Greeks,  and  Turks.  Their  dress  is  partly  male  and  partly  female,
and  they  wear  long  hair,  which  they  plait,  and  in  other  respects  also  they  assimilate
their  appearance  to  that  of  women.6

NOTE  23.  "  Abu-s-Sa'adat "  signifies  "  the  Father  of  Prosperities."

NOTE  24.  By  "brides"  are  often  meant,  as  in  this  case,  young  and  beautiful  dam-
sels; and  by  "the  brides  of  the  treasures,"  those  enchanting  females  who  are  said  to
serve  as  guardians  of  some  hidden  treasures.  Such  were  the  ten  damsels  in  the  City  of
Brass.  See  page  130  in  this  volume.

NOTE  25.  See  Note  8  to  Chapter  viii.


2  Marginal  note  by  my  shcykh.  '  JIurpinal  note  bv  my  sheykh.

3  Idem.  fi  For  a  more  full  description  of  the  male  public

4  Hcrklots' translation  of  the  Qanoon-e-Islam,  dancers,  see  my  work  on  the  Modern  Ejryptians,
p.  395.  vol.  ii.  ch  vi.


670  NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  THIRTIETH.

NOTE  26.  The  ornaments  here  mentioned  (called  in  Arabic  "  'asakir  ")  are  of  vari-
ous shapes.  The  most  common  kind  is  a  ball  with  a  pointed  head  rising  from  it ;  the
latter  being  with  or  without  a  crescent,  and  tapering  either  uniformly  or  otherwise.

NOTE  27.  Here  called,  in  my  original,  "  Kheetan."

NOTE  28.  Here,  in  my  original,  the  word  "atyas"  (which  signifies  "stupid")  is
the  epithet  used;  but  this  is  evidently  a  mistake  for  "insee"  ("human,"  or  "a  human
being").  I  suspected  this  to  be  the  case  before  I  referred  to  Trebutien's  version,
which  has  confirmed  my  conjecture.  In  the  Arabic  characters,  "  insee,"  if  not  plainly
written,  might  easily  be  mistaken  for  "  atyas."

NOTE  29.  The  word  which  I  have  rendered  "  nose-ring  "  is  "  khizam."  My  sheykh
has  stated  in  the  margin  that  it  is  for  the  ear ;  but  I  believe  that  he  has  made  this
remark  inadvertently,  for  I  have  never  heard  the  term  "khizain"  applied  to  any
thing  but  a  nose-ring.  This  ornament,  however,  I  have  seen  worn  by  few  but  women
of  the  lower  orders.  Specimens  of  the  khizam  and  other  ornaments  here  mentioned
are  figured  in  my  work  on  the  Modern  Egyptians,  in  Appendix  A.

NOTE  30.  The  cup-bearer  is  generally  a  slave,  and  slaves  are  mostly  of  infidel
parents.

NOTE  31.  According  to  a  map  of  the  world,  in  a  copy  of  Ibn-El-Wardee's  geo-
graphy in  my  possession,  "  the  deserted  quarter  "  (in  Arabic  "  er-ruba  el-kharab '')  is
a  large  portion  of  Africa,  immediately  on  the  south  of  the  sources  of  the  Nile.

NOTE  32.  This  she  says  assuming  her  husband  to  be  dead  ;  for  otherwise,  if  he  did
not  divorce  her,  she  could  not  lawfully  marry  another.  The  period  of  widowhood  is
four  months  and  ten  days.

NOTE  33.  These  two  verses  are  from  El-Hareeree  (29th  Makameh) ;  but  transposed,
and  slightly  altered.

NOTE  34.  "  That  is  to  say,  Thou  wast  the  cause  for  my  forsaking  thee :  so  it  was  a>
though  thou  forsookest  me.  Otherwise,  it  was  he  who  forsook  her.  But  she  was  tin-
cause.  And  this  is  like  the  saying  of  El-Mutanebbee, —

When  thou  departcst  from  a  people  who  are  able  to  induce  thee  not  to  quit  them,  they  are  tin-
departers."7

NOTE  35.  Literally,  "a  short  sword  of  jewel."  But  the  word  here  rendered
"jewel"  (namely  "  jdhar  ")  has  another  sense,  peculiarly  applied  to  a  weapon  of  steel :
it  signifies  the  wavy  appearance  seen  in  fine  Eastern  swords  and  daggers,  and  perhaps
the  steel  itself  that  has  that  appearance.

NOTE  36.  Elevations  of  this  kind,  in  the  East,  have  been  innumerable ;  for,  among
the  Muslims,  there  are  few  persons,  even  if  they  can  neither  read  nor  write,  who  can
be  truly  called  uneducated, — few  who,  from  their  infancy,  have  not  received  a  moral
education  which  (simple  as  it  is)  is  equal  to  that  of  many  of  their  compatriots  holding
high  civil  employments.


7  Marginal  note  by  my  sheykh.


CONCLUSION.

SHAHRAZAD,  during  this  period,  had  borne  the  King  three  male
children ;  and  when  she  had  ended  these  tales,  she  rose  upon  her  feet,
and  kissed  the  ground  before  the  King,  and  said  to  him,  O  King  of
the  time,  and  incomparable  one  of  the  age  and  period,  verily  I  am  thy
slave,  and  during  a  thousand  and  one  nights  I  have  related  to  thee
the  history  of  the  preceding  generations,  and  the  admonitions  of  the
people  of  former  times  :  then  have  I  any  claim  upon  thy  majesty,  so
that  I  may  request  of  thee  to  grant  me  a  wish  ?  And  the  King
answered  her,  Request :  thou  shalt  receive,  0  Shahrazad.  So  there-
upon she  called  out  to  the  nurses  and  the  eunuchs,  and  said  to  them,
Bring  ye  my  children.  Accordingly  they  brought  them  to  her
quickly  ;  and  they  were  three  male  children  :  one  of  them  walked,  and
one  crawled,  and  one  was  at  the  breast.  And  when  they  brought
them,  she  took  them  and  placed  them  before  the  King,  and,  having
kissed  the  ground,  said,  0  King  of  the  age,  these  are  thy  children,


672  CONCLUSION.

and  I  request  of  thee  that  thou  exempt  me  from  slaughter,  as  a  favour
to  these  infants ;  for  if  thou  slay  me,  these  infants  will  become  without
a  mother,  and  will  not  find  among  women  one  who  will  rear  them  well.
And  thereupon  the  King  wept,  and  pressed  his  children  to  his  bosom,
and  said,  O  Shahrazad,  by  Allah,  I  pardoned  thee  before  the  coming
of  these  children,  because  I  saw  thee  to  be  chaste,  pure,  ingenuous,
pious.  May  God  bless  thee,  and  thy  father  and  thy  mother,  and  thy
root  and  thy  branch !  I  call  God  to  witness  against  me  that  I  have
exempted  thee  from  every  thing  that  might  injure  thee. — So  she
kissed  his  hands  and  his  feet,  and  rejoiced  with  exceeding  joy;  and
she  said  to  him,  May  God  prolong  thy  life,  and  increase  thy  dignity
and  majesty !

Joy  spread  through  the  palace  of  the  King  until  it  became  diffused
throughout  the  city,  and  it  was  a  night  not  to  be  reckoned  among
lives :  its  colour  was  whiter  than  the  face  of  day.  The  King  rose  in
the  morning  happy,  and  with  prosperity  inundated ;  and  he  sent  to  all
the  soldiers,  who  came  ;  and  he  conferred  upon  his  Wezeer,  the  father
of  Shahrazad,  a  sumptuous  and  magnificent  robe  of  honour,  saying  to
him,  May  God  protect  thee,  since  thou  hast  married  to  me  thy  generous
daughter,  who  hath  been  the  cause  of  my  repenting  of  slaying  the
daughters  of  the  people,  and  I  have  seen  her  to  be  ingenuous,  pure,
chaste,  virtuous.  Moreover,  God  hath  blessed  me  by  her  with  three
male  children ;  and  praise  be  to  God  for  this  abundant  favour ! — Then
he  conferred  robes  of  honour  upon  all  the  wezeers  and  emeers  and  lords
of  the  empire,  and  gave  orders  to  decorate  the  city  thirty  days ;  and
he  caused  not  any  one  of  the  people  of  the  city  to  expend  aught  of  his
wealth ;  for  all  the  expense  and  disbursements  were  from  the  King's
treasury.  So  they  decorated  the  city  in  a  magnificent  manner,  the
like  of  which  had  not  been  seen  before,  and  the  drums  were  beaten
and  the  pipes  were  sounded,  and  all  the  performers  of  sports  exhibited
their  arts,  and  the  King  rewarded  them  munificently  with  gifts  and
presents.  He  bestowed  alms  also  upon  the  poor  and  needy,  and
extended  his  generosity  to  all  his  subjects,  and  all  the  people  of  his
dominions.  And  he  and  the  people  of  his  empire  continued  in  pros-
perity and  joy  and  delight  and  happiness  until  they  were  visited  by
the  terminator  of  delights  and  the  separator  of  companions.


CONCLUSION


(-.7:1


Extolled  be  the  perfection  of  Him  whom  the  vicissitudes  of  times
do  not  destroy,  and  to  whom  no  change  happeneth,  whom  no  circum-
stance diverteth  from  another  circumstance,  and  who  is  alone  dis-
tinguished by  the  attributes  of  perfection  !  And  blessing  and  peace  be
on  the  Imam  of  his  Majesty,  and  the  elect  from  among  his  creatures,
our  lord  Mohammad,  the  lord  among  mankind,  through  whom  we
supplicate  God  for  a  happy  end !


THE  literary  history  of  the  1001  Nights  was  involved  in  the  utmost  obscurity  until
the  celebrated  Von  Hammer  pointed  out  an  important  passage,  to  which  I  have  often
alluded,  in  the  Golden  Meadows  of  El-Mes'oodee,  written  about  the  middle  of  the
tenth  century  of  our  era,  or  the  year  of  the  Flight  333  (A.D.  914-5).  The  Arab  historian,
after  mentioning  some  stories  current  among  his  countrymen,  states  that  many  learned
men  regarded  the  said  stories  as  forgeries,  "like  the  book  entitled  '  Hezar  Afsaneh,'
which  means  in  Arabic  '  Elf  Khurafeh '  (/.  e.  the  Thousand  Fanciful,  or  Extravagant,
Tales l) ;  a  '  khurafeh  '  being  termed  in  Persian  '  afsaneh.'  This  book  (he  adds)  people
call  the  1000  Nights  (or,  as  in  some  copies,  the  1001  Nights);  and  it  is  the  history  of
the  King  and  the  Wezeer,  and  his  (the  Wezeer's)  daughter  and  her  nurse  (or,  in  some
copies,  sister),  whose  names  were  Sheer-zad  (or  Sheerazad)  and  Dunyazad  (or  I)een;ir-
z;id,  or  Deenazad).  They  are  also  (he  proceeds  to  say)  held  to  be  like  [the  story  of]
Jeelkand  (or  VVezreh,  or  Warden,)  and  Shemmas,  and  what  it  contains  of  the  history
of  the  King  of  India  and  the  Wezeers ;  and  the  Book  of  Sindibad,  and  others  of  this
kind." — De  Sacy  thought  that  the  words  "  this  book  people  call  the  1000  Nights  "  might
be  an  interpolation :  but,  if  not,  he  regarded  it  as  certain  that  El-Mes'oodee  wrote
"  the  1000  Nights,"  and  not  "  the  1001  Nights  :"  that  copyists  added  the  one  night,
thinking  that  this  passage  applied  to  the  1001  Nights  with  which  they  were  acquainted  :
and  for  the  same  reason  he  thought  that  they  substituted  "  the  two  daughters  of  the
Wezeer"  for  what  El-Mes'oodee  said  :  "the  daughter  of  the  Wezeer  and  her  nurse."
We  are  now,  however,  in  possession  of  evidence  which  renders  conjecture  as  to  tlie.se
points  superfluous.2

1  "  Afsaneh  "  is  interpreted  by  the  the  Arabic  word  "  Khurafeh,"  the  name  of  an  Arab  of  the  tribe  of
'Odhrah,  who  was  possessed  by  Genii,  and  consequently  talked  nonsense:  whence  the  term  "hadeeth
Khurafeh,"  aivi  afterwards  the  word  "  khurafeh,"  alone,  became  commonly  applied  to  any  incredible
tale.— See  Kanv>os,  voce  "kharafa."

2  Von  Hammer  induced  me  to  suspect  that  the  passage  in  the  Golden  Meadows  relating  to  the  I  !ez;ir
Afsaneh  might  be  an  interpolation  (though  not  one  of  very  late  date)  by  his  adducing  a  statement  attri-
buting the  composition  of  the  latter  work  to  a  poet  who  lived  a  century  later  than  Kl-Mi-s'oodee  (see
the  preface  to  Trt5butien's  version,  page  xxi.) ;  but  I  have  only  heard  of  one  copy  of  the  Golden  Meadows
in  which  it  is  wanting. De  Sacy  thought  it  wholly,  or  in  part,  an  interpolation. He  has  given  the
passage  from  three  different  MSS. Mr.  Salami  favoured  me  with  a  copy  of  it  from  a  MS.  of  the  Golden
Meadows  in  his  possession:  and  a  writer  in  the  AtheiuTum,  Xo.  572,  states  that  he  has  compared  the
passage  in  a  copy  of  that  work  in  his  possession  with  several  ancient  copies  of  the  same  work,  and  is
fully  convinced  of  its  authenticity.


REVIEW.  675

The  same  eminent  orientalist  to  whom  we  are  indebted  for  our  knowledge  of  the
above  passage  in  the  Golden  Meadows  brought  to  light,  last  year  (1839),  a  far  more  im-
portant and  decisive  testimony  respecting  the  Hczar  Afsaneh,  shewing  it,  beyond  all
doubt,  to  have  been  the  archetype  of  the  1001  Nights.  This  testimony  is  conveyed  by
•  a  passage  in  the  "  Fihrist,"  which  he  has  communicated,  with  a  translation,  to  the
Journal  Asiatique,  introducing  it  by  some  remarks  commencing  thus  : — "  L'opinion
que  j'ai  emise  il  y  a  douze  ans  dans  le  Journal  Asiatique  (t.  x.  p.  253),  que  les  Mille  et  Uno
Nuits  etaient  probablement  d'origine  Persane,  vient  d'etre  victorieusement  confirmee
par  If  passage  suivant  de  1'histoire  la  plus  ancienne  de  la  litterature  Arabe,  ecrite  1'an
377  (987)  par  Mohammed-ben- Ishak  en-Nedini  connu  sous  le  nom  d'Ebou-Yacoub-el-
Werrek.3  C'est  la  meillure  reponse  aux  doutes  mal  fondcs  enonces  par  M.  Lane,  dans  sa
nouvelle  edition  des  Mille  et  Une  Nuits." — This  last  sentence  I  read  with  surprise,  for
the  doubts  to  which  he  alludes  were  first  expressed  by  De  >Sacy  ;  and  though  they  ap-
peared to  me  to  be  generally  well  founded,  I  thought  them  carried  too  far.  The  work
from  which  my  translation  is  made  I  conceived  to  be  extremely  different  from  that
which  Von  Hammer  regarded  as  its  basis ;  and  accordingly  I  pointed  out  several  pas-
sages in  my  original  which  seemed  to  indicate  the  date  of  its  composition.  Some  of
my  readers,  however,  imagined  that  these  remarks  were  meant  to  relate  to  the  orijin
of  the  work ;  4  and  therefore,  in  the  first  edition,  I  availed  myself  of  the  earliest  oppor-
tunity (my  translation  being  published  in  monthly  parts)  to  insert  these  words :  "  I
speak  of  the  composition  of  this  work  without  considering  at  present  its  probable  basis,
or  arclietype :  for  I  neither  believe  it  to  be  a  mere  compilation,  nor  do  I,  on  the  other
hand,  regard  it  as  the  first  work  of  its  kind."  5 — The  antiquity  of  the  Hezar  Afsaneh,
and  its  similarity  to  the  modern  1001  Nights,  being  now  proved,  I  confidently  adopt
the  opinion,  to  which  I  clearly  shewed  an  inclination  in  my  preface,  that  the  former
work  served  as  the  archetype  of  the  latter. — I  now  revert  to  the  passage  in  the  Fihrist,
of  which  I  here  subjoin  a  translation.6

"  The  Eighth  Discourse,  which  consists  of  three  parts  (funoon). — The  First  Part  on
the  history  of  the  relaters  of  night-stories,  and  the  tellers  of  fanciful  tales,  and  the
names  of  the  books  composed  on  the  subject  of  night-stories  and  fanciful  tales. —
Mohammad  Ibn-Is-haic  says,  The  first  who  composed  fanciful  tales,  and  made  books  o!'
them,  and  consigned  them  to  depositories  [of  books],  and  made  some  of  them  as  though
they  were  related  by  the  tongues  of  [brute]  animals,'  were  the  first  Persians.  Then
the  Ashghanian  (or  Ashkanian)  Kings,  who  were  the  third  dynasty  of  the  Kings  of  the
Persians,  added8  to  them.  Then  these  tales  were  augmented  and  amplified  in  the
days  of  the  Sasanian  Kings.  The  Arabs  also  translated  them  into  the  Arabic  language,
and  the  eloquent  and  fluent  took  them  and  trimmed  and  embellished  them,  and  coin-

3  According  to  De  Sacy  (see  his  direst.  Ar.,  2nd  ed.,  vol  i.  p.  353),  the  name  of  this  author  is  Abu-1-
Faraj  Mohammad  Ibn-ls-hak  El-Warrak,  and  he  was  known  by  the  appellation  of  Ibu-Abee-Yaakoob
Kn-Nedeem.

4  In  an  important  contribution  to  the  history  of  Eastern  fiction,  in  No.  21  of  the  British  and  Foreign
Review,  I  find  these  words :— "  It  is  clear  therefore  that  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Lane  in  denying  the  1'ersian
origin  of  the  Arabian  Nights,  as  far  at  least  as  their  plan  and  principal  performers  are  concerned,  is
wholly  untenable." (Page  241.) I  did  not  deny  this;  but,  on  the  contrary,  said  in  my  preface,  that I
thought  the  general  plan  of  the  1001  Xights  was  probably  borrowed  from  a  translation  of  the  Hezar
Afsunch.

5  These  words  were  subjoined  to  Xote  23  to  Chapter  v.

6  The  original  contains  several  errors,  some  of  whieh  appear  to  be  typographical ;  and  my  translation
differs  in  some  points  from  that  of  Von  Hammer ;  but  it  will  be  seen  that,  in  readings  which  I  have
given  as  emendations  of  a  text  that  he  states  to  be  "not  very  correct,"  I  have  no*  made  alterations  to
suit  my  own  views.— The  original  is  in  the  number  of  the  Journal  Asiatique  for  August  1839.

"  I  read  "ja'ala  barida  dhalika  'ala  alsineti-l-hiiyawan,"  agreeably  with  a  common  phrase :  seethe
Introduction  to  "  Kelccleh  and  Dimneh."  In  the  original,  the  first  two  letters  of  "  alsineti "  are
wanting.

8  The  word  "aaraka  "  (composed  of  the  letters  alif,  'eyn,  r<!.  kaf),  in  the  original,  I  render  "added  "
conjee turally.  It  seems,  as  Von  llamni:  '  '>e  a  mistake  »l'a  eopyUt.


G76  HE  VIEW.

posed  others  like  them.  The  first  book  of  this  kind  that  was  made  is  the  lxx>k  f  entitled
'  Hezar  Afsan,'  which  signifies  '  Elt  Khurafeh  '  (the  '  Thousand  Fanciful  Tales  ')  ;  and
the  cause  thereof  was  this:  —  One  of  their  Kings  used,  when  he  married  a  woman,  and
had  passed  one  night  with  her,  to  kill  her  9  on  the  morrow.  And  he  married  a  damsel
of  the  daughters  of  the  Kings,  of  those  endowed  with  intellect  and  knowledge,  who
was  called  Shahrazad;  and  when  she  was  with  him,  she  began  to  tell  him  fanciful  tales,
and  used  to  connect  the  story,  at  the  expiration  of  the  night,  with  that  which  would
induce  the  King  to  come  to  her  10  and  ask  her,  in  the  following  night,  respecting  the
conclusion  of  the  story,  until  a  thousand  nights  had  passed  over  her.  He,  meanwhile,
treated  her  as  his  wife  until  she  was  blest  with  a  child  by  him,  [when]  she  shewed  him,
and  made  him  acquainted  with,11  the  stratagem  that  she  had  practised  upon  him,  and
he  thereupon  admired  her  intelligence,  and  inclined  to  her,  and  preserved  her  alive.
And  the  King  had  a  kahramaneh,1-  called  Deenarzad,  who  agreed  with  her  as  to  this
[proceeding].  It  has  been  said  that  this  book  was  composed  for  Humay  13  the  daughter
of  Bahman.  Mohammad  Ibn-Is-hak  says,  And  the  truth,  if  it  be  the  will  of  God,  is,
that  the  first  who  amused  himself  with  the  recitation  of  tales  by  night  was  El-Iskender
(Alexander)  ;  and  he  had  a  number  of  men  who  used  to  make  him  laugh,  and  tell  him
fanciful  tales  :  he  however  desired  not  thereby  to  please  himself;  but  he  only  desired
that  he  might  be  watchful  and  cautious.14  And  after  him,  the  Kings  in  like  manner15
made  use  of  the  book  [entitled]  '  Hezar  Afsau.'  It  comprises  a  thousand  nights,  but
less  than  two  hundred  night-stories  ;  for  a  night-story  often  was  related  16  in  a  number
of  nights.  I  have  seen  it  complete  several  times  ;  and  it  is,  in  truth,  a  corrupted  book
of  silly  '7  narratives."

Hence  it  is  most  probable  that  the  translation  of  this  work  was  entitled,  as  De  Sacy
supposed,  the  "  1000  Nights."  An  Arabic  collection  of  tales  called  the  "  1001  Nights  "
is  stated  to  have  been  known  in  Egypt  in  the  twelfth  or  thirteenth  century  of  our  urn  :  1S
but  in  this  instance  again  I  think  it  most  probable  that  the  addition  of  one  night  has
been  made  by  transcribers  for  the  same  reason  that  some  copyists  are  supposed  to  have
added  the  one  night  in  El-Mes'oodee's  work.  Hajjee  Khaleefeh,  as  it  appears  from  the
printed  edition  of  his  great  bibliographical  work  now  in  the  course  of  publication,  men-
tions the  "  1000  Nights,"  without  giving  any  account  of  it  ;  but  not  the  1001  :  whence


9  The  word  "kabalaha"  is  put,  evidently  by  mistake,  for  "katalalia."


cept

baliha"  (

and  I  have  no  doubt  of  his  being  right.

11  In  the  original,  "  owkafethu  'ala." This  and  several  other  expressions  in  the  extract  here  translated
shew  the  importance  of  an  acquaintance  with  modem  Arabic  for  the  understanding  of  old  Arabic  works.

12  See  note  35  to  the  tenth  Chapter  of  my  translation.

13  In  the  original,  "  ullifa  li-Humay." As  Von  Hammer  has  rendered  these  words  "  a  et<$  compose"
par  Houmai,"  I  have  diligently  searched  for  some  example  of  the  preposition  "  li,"  preceded  by  "ullifa,"
signifying  "by;"  but  without  success,  though  I  have  found  many  instances  of  its  occurrence  after  the
same  verb  hi  the  active  voice,  in  all  of  which  it  signifies  "  for." It  may  suffice  to  refer  to  pages  20:!,  2i  >:i,
20  i,  and  205,  of  vol.  i.  of  the  printed  edition  of  Hajjee  Khaleefeh.

14  El-Makreezee,  in  his  Khitat,  tells  exactly  the  same  story  respecting  El-Iskender.  —  ED.

15  I  read  "kedhalika"  for  "dhalika."

15  I  read  "  li-anna-s-semera  rubbama  hodditha  bihi,"  &c.  ;  for  it  is  evident  that  a  copyist  has  put  a
wa'w  by  mistake  for  the  re  of  "  semera,"  and  that  the  re1  which  follows  his  wii'w  belongs  to  the  next
word.  .i

17  In  the  original,  "birid:"  literally,  "cold;"  but  often  signifying  ''silly,"  like  our  word  "frigid,"
and  the  French  "  froid."

13  See  the  Athseneum,  No.  622.  It  has  been  shewn  that  there  existed  in  Egypt  an  Arabic  collection
of  tales  called  "The  Thousand  and  One  Xights,"  and  other  tales  of  the  same  kind,  from  the  time  of  an
Arab  historian  named  El-Kurtubee  (the  Cordovan),  the  12th  or  13th  century  of  our  era.  This  fact  was
pointed  out  by  a  writer  in  the  Athcnseum,  who  quoted  from  El-Makreezee.  [The  passage,  in  the  Khitat,
is  found  in  the  account  of  the  palace  of  the  Fatimee  KhaleetVhb,  called  the  Hodaj,  in  the  Island  of  Er-
Kodah,  and  occurs  in  two  places  in  the  work.  —  ED.]


REVIKW.  t;77

I  infer  that  he  hud  not  met  with  the  latter  title  in  any  work  that  he  had  read  ;  and  that,
at  the  time  when  he  wrote  (ahout  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century),  the  l>c><>k  so
called  w:is  not  commonly  known.  l)e  Sacy  perhaps  attached  too  muclTiinportaiico  to
the  question,  whether  the  "  1000  Nights  "  or  the  "  1001  Nights  "  was  the  title  of  the
Arabic  translation  of  the  Hezar  Afsaneh,  in  consequence  of  his  firm  conviction  that  the
said  translation  must  have  been  almost  totally  different  from  the  1001  Nights  now
existing,  and  that  the  latter  was  composed  at  a  very  late  period.  But  after  reading
the  statement  in  the  Fihrist,  I  can  scarcely  entertain  the  slightest  doubt  of  the  correct-
ness of  his  opinion,  as  far  as  the  titles  are  concerned;  an'd  in  the  following  remarks,  I
shall  distinguish  the  work  mentioned  in  the  Golden  Meadows  and  the  Fihrist  by  calling
it  the  1000  Nights,  and  by  the  title  of  the  1001  Nights  I  shall  designate  only  the  great
work  now  generally  known  by  this  title.18

The  1000  Nights  must  have  been  composed  some  centuries  before  the  age  of  the
author  of  the  Fihrist,  or  he  would  not  have  mentioned,  without  positively  denying  its
truth,  the  assertion  which  referred  it  to  the  time  of  Queen  Humay,  who  was  the
daughter  of  Artaxerxes  Longimanus.  Perhaps  an  Arab  translator  converted  a  Kayanian
King  into  a  Sasanian;  for  in  almost  all  the  copies  of  the  1001  Nights,  the  father  of
Shahriyar  is  called  a  Sasanian,  and  the  most  probable  way  of  accounting  for  this  is  by
supposing  that  he  was  so  called  in  the  1000  Nights.  But  I  suspect  that  the  composi-
tion of  the  1000  Nights  may  have  been  attributed  to  Queen  Humay  herself,  and  merely
because  she  was  called  "  Chehr-a/,ad ;"  ^  that  the  tradition  referring  it  to  the  age  of  that
Queen  is  worthy  of  very  little  dependance,  and  that  the  work  may  have  been  composed
during  the  times  of  the  Sasanians.  The  assertion  respecting  its  supposed  age  is,  how-
ever, of  little  importance  in  comparison  with  the  statement  regarding  the  nature  of  its
contents.  From  this  it  is  evident  that  the  1001  Nights  was  formed  on  the  model,  and
partly  of  the  contents,  of  the  1000  Nights ;  but  it  is  also  evident  that  most  of  its  best
tales,  and  those  which  constitute  its  chief  portion,  are  Arab  compositions  (though  not
all  entirely  the  offsprings  of  Arab  invention) ;  and  as  the  introduction  has  been  greatly
altered,  it  is  most  probable  that  other  portions  which  were  derived,  as  far  as  their
general  plans  and  main  incidents  are  concerned,  from  the  1000  Nights  were  altered  in
a  similar  manner.  If  we  are  justified  in  calling  the  jEneid  the  coipposition  of  Virgil,
though  so  much  of  it  is  borrowed  from  the  Odyssey,  much  more,  hi  my  opinion,  are  we
justified  in  calling  the  1001  Nights  the  composition  of  an  Arab.  It  mentions  incidents
founded  upon  Muslim  customs,  and  describes  Muslim  manners,  religion,  and  super-
stitions.— The  title  of  the  "1001  Nights"  I  suppose  to  have  been  adopted  partly  i'or
the  purpose  of  distinguishing  this  work  from  the  "  1000  Nights ;"  but  not  solely  with
this  view ;  for  even  numbers  are  deemed  by  the  Arabs  unlucky.

That  tales  of  Arab  composition  form  the  chief  portion  of  the  1001  Nights  is,  I  be-
lieve, admitted  by  all  critics  who  have  considered  the  subject.  Respecting  such  tales.  i(
is  my  intention  to  offer  some  observations;  but  tirst  I  shall  attempt  to  answer  this  ques-
tion : — Has  the  1000  Nights  been  gradually  augmented  and  otherwise  altered  during
several  successive  ages,  and  thus  become  what  we  now  find  entitled  the  1001  Nights  ? —
That  this  has  been  done  is  the  opinion  of  Von  Hammer,  and  I  thought  the  same  until
I  had  read  a  considerable  portion  of  the  work  which  I  have  translated,  when  1  began
to  doubt;  and  ultimately  I  was  led  to  adopt  nearly  the  opposite  opinion  of  I)e  Sacy.
seeing  what  appeared  to  me  to  be  very  strong  objections  to  the  judgment  pronounced
by  the  former.  The  differences  that  are  found  in  various  manuscripts  bearing  the  title
of  the  "  1001  Nights  "  have  been  considered  as  strongly  favouring  the  opinion  that  the

15  The  Arabic  edition  of  the  latter  work  published  at  Calcutta  is  called,  in  its  English  till. -p:iirr.
"The  Alif  Laila,"  by  which  is  meant  "The  Thousand  Nights;"  but  the  title  should  not  Imvc  been  thus
abbreviated,  nor  should  the  "i"'  in  the  word  "Alif  have  been  inserted.  I  have  never  heard  the  title
curtailed  by  an  Arab,  and  it  is  generally  pronounced  "Klf  I.eyleh  wa-Leyleh,"  or  "Alt  Leyleh  wa
Leykh."

-'  ".Chehr-azad  "  signifies  "  of  free,  or  ingenuous,  countenance."


678  REVIEW.

modern  works  thus  entitled  are  little  more  than  editions  of  the  1000  Nights  augmented
by  different  persons  and  in  different  ages ;  new  tales  having  been  evidently  added  at
different  periods  to  complete  certain  copies  of  which  some  portions  hail  been  lost :  but
it  is  important  to  mention  certain  facts  which  I  think  fully  sufficient  to  account  for  these
differences  without  such  a  supposition.  I  see  no  differences  in  the  copies  now  known
that  are  not  to  be  easily  accounted  for  in  the  same  manner  as  the  discrepancies  existing
in  two  or  more  copies  of  the  Romance  of  Aboo  Zeyd,  or  that  of  Ez-Zahir,  and  other
similar  works,  which  are  committed  to  memory  by  the  public  reciters.  I  have  been
informed  that  these  persons  'are  often  employed  to  dictate  the  contents  of  the  above-
mentioned  works  to  those  who  desire  to  restore  them  to  writing;  and  frequently
copies  are  made  from  a  number  of  fragments,  and  the  lacunae,  filled  up  by  the  assistance
of  the  public  reciter,  or  by  the  invention  or  choice  of  the  copyist.  A  bookseller  in
Cairo,  when  I  was  in  that  city,  was  busily  employed  for  several  months  iu  endeavouring
to  make  up  a  copy  of  "  The  Thousand  and  One  Nights  "  in  this  manner,  which  he
would  have  fbund  an  easy  task  some' years  before,  when  the  tales  which  compost1  it
were  publicly  recited  in  the  streets  of  that  city.  Hence  I  think  it  probable  that,  in
many  an  instance,  an  imperfect  copy  of  this  work  was  transcribed,  and  the  numbers  and
divisions  of  the  Nights  altered  so  as  to  form  an  uninterrupted  series ;  and  that  the  re-
mainder was  made  up  from  other  copies  afterwards  found,  or  dictated  by  memory,  or
partly  taken  from  traditions  or  books  of  anecdotes,  and  when  all  these  sources  failed,
that  parts  were  supplied  by  the  copyist's  invention.  This  is  rendered  more  likely  by
the  fact  that  books  in  Egypt  are  generally  left  unsewed ;  five  sheets,  or  double  leaves,
being  usually  placed  together,  one  within  another,  composing  what  is  called  a  "  karras ;"
a  very  common  consequence  of  which  is,  that  a  karras  here  and  there  is  lost.  Thus  we
may  account  for  transpositions,  for  differences  in  the  divisions  of  the  Nights,  and  for
the  introduction  of  new  stories.  Indeed,  in  no  other  way  can  I  explain  the  fact  that,
in  two  or  more  copies,  the  tales  which  in  all  the  copies  are  placed  in  the  early  part,  as
well  as  others,  present  the  most  remarkable  agreements  both  in  their  incidents  and  in
particular  phrases,  and,  at  the  same  time,  disagreements  equally  or  more  remarkable,
not  only  in  arrangement,  but  in  many  other  respects,  and  evidently  not  the  effects  of  any
attempt  at  improvement.  1  cannot  find  that  there  exist  any  complete  copies  essentially
and  mainly  differing,  one  from  another,21  or  any  copy  which  does  not  present  certain
evidence  of  its  having  been  originally  written,  or  altered,  within  the  last  three  or  four
centuries  ;  and  the  rare  fragments  bearing  the  same  title,  but  very  considerably  differing
from  the  more  common  work,  I  regard  as  partly  copies,  and  partly  imitations,  of  the
latter.  The  composition  of  this  work  may  have  occupied  many  years,  and  have  been
published  in  separate  portions ;  and  its  success  may  have  induced  persons  to  copy  and
imitate  it.  Now  the  reader  may  say,  If  this  work  have  been  thus  imitated  in  late  times,
we  may  infer  that  the  1000  Nights  may  have  been  imitated  by  various  persons  in  dif-
ferent ages  and  countries.22  I  see  nothing  improbable  in  such  an  inference,  nor  in  the

21  An  erroneous  idea  on  this  subject  seems  to  prevail.  The  Cairo  edition,  that  published  at  Calcutta
(judging  from  the  three  quarters  which  had  reached  this  country  when  this  note  was  written,  [and  the
remark  may  be  extended  to  the  fourth  and  last  volume,  which  was  afterwards  issued, — ED.]),  and  Von
Hammer's  MS.,  appear  to  agree  almost  exactly  throughout ;  and  nearly  the  same  may  be  said  of  the
Breslau  edition  though  it  differs  greatly  in  the  order  of  the  stories ;  for  the  703  Nights  completed  when
this  translation  was  published  contain,  besides  a  few  anecdotes,  only  two  tales  which  are  not  included  in
the  Cairo  edition;  these  being  "the  Sleeper  Awakened"  and  "the  Ten  AVezeers."  The  latter  is  similar
in  its  plan  to  the  story  of  "  the  King  and  his  Son  and  the  Damsel  and  the  Seven  'Wezeers  ;"  and  one  of
these  has  probably  been  substituted  by  a  copyist  for  the  other.  It  must  be  added,  that  in  its  language,
the  Breslau  edition  is  more  corrupt  than  any  other  copy  that  I  have  seen,  and  agrees  more  nearly  with
the  common  dialect  of  Egypt.  A  false  judgment  has  also  been  formed  from  the  differing  of  complete
copies  in  the  conclusion.  The  Cairo  edition  and  Von  Hammer's  MS.  thus  differ  ;  though  otherwise  they
a;_rrre  almost  entirely,  and  even  in  the  order  of  the  tales.

23  A  writer  who  has  considerably  aided  to  elucidate  the  literary  history  nf  the  1001  Nights  has  thus
arirued,  in  No.  tj^2  of  the  Athenaeum,  page  711.


RKVIKW.  67y

supposition  ih:it  an  altered  :ind  augmented  edition  of  the  1000  Xight*  may  have  served
as  tin-  immediate  model,  and  in  some  degree  as  the  ground-work,  of  the  1001;  but  I
cannot  think  that  the  latter  work  is  merely  the  last  of  several  editions  of  the  former,
augmented  in  successive  ages.  In  submitting  the  following  observations  to  the  judg-
ment of  the  reader,  1  must  remind  him  that  1  nse  the  term  composition,  as  applied  to
this  work,  in  the  same  slightly  restricted  sense  in  which  it  is  employed  in  speaking  of
a  modern  history  or  a  historical  romance.

In  the  notes  to  my  translation,  I  have  remarked  upon  many  passages  which  I  held
to  shew  that  the  original  work  was  either  composed  or  modernized  at  a  late  period,
which  I  believed  to  have  been  shortly  before  or  after  the  commencement  of  the  six-
teenth  century.  Perhaps  this  period  is  somewhat  too  recent:  but  I  think  that  we
should  refer  the  work  to  as  late  a  date  as  extrinsic  evidence  will  admit:  and  that  it  was
at  a  late  period  composed,  and  not  merely  modernized,  I  infer  from  certain  considera-
tions suggested  by  the  state  of  society  exhibited'in  most  of  the  tales  (including  almost
all  those  that  are  generally  regarded  as  the  best  in  the  series),  the  style  of  the  language
in  which  they  are  written,'23  their  close  agreement  in  these  and  other  respects,  and  the
frequent  allusions  and  references,  in  many  of  these  tales,  to  customs,  buildings,  &c.,  of
late  ages.  I  allow  it  to  ho  most  probable  that  a  person  composing  such  a  work  as  the
one  in  question  would  largely  avail  himself  of  tales  of  different  ages  already  existing,
and  adapt  them  in  some  measure,  more  especially  those  of  foreign  countries,  to  the  state
of  society  in  which  he  lived.  This  has  been  done  in  the  cases  of  tales  which,  as  will
hereafter  be  shewn,  are  of  old  dates,  and  borrowed  from  Persia  and  India.  But  if  we
suppose  the  main  portion  of  the  work  to  have  been  modernized  in  this  manner,  and  in
a  much  greater  degree,  by  successive  transcribers,  how  is  it  that  we  do  not  find  any
copy  of  it  that  has  been  so  modernized  within  the  last  three  centuries  ?  We  have  also
similar  works,  which,  like  the  1001  Nights,  have  been  recited  by  the  public  story-tellers
of  Cairo  within  the  last  half-century,  such  as  'Antar,  Delhemeh,  Seyf  Zu-1-Yezen,  Aboo-
Xeyd,  and  Ez-Ziihir ;  and  these  have  been  repeatedly  transcribed  at  various  periods;
but  the  manners  and  customs  which  the  early  copies  exhibit  have  remained  in  the  later
unchanged. — Further,  if  the  work  under  our  consideration  be  little  more  than  an  old
and  a  well-written  composition  modernized  in  style,  by  which  I  mean,  rendered  like  un-
classic  works  of  late  ages,  the  case  is,  as  far  as  I  know,  without  a  parallel  in  the  litera-
ture of  the  Arabs.  It  has  undergone  certain  alterations  in  style  under  the  hands  of
copyists;  but  I  find  no  instance  of  such  alteration  of  a  work  originally  well  written,44
as  all  old  works  are;  and  if  this  were  so  written,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  some
correct  copy  of  it  would  have  been  preserved  ;  for  learned  sheykhs  (as  the  editors  of  the
Cairo  edition  and  the  Calcutta  edition  of  the  first  two  hundred  Nights)25  have  taken
pains  to  ini/>r<ir<'  the  style.  I  therefore  believe  that  all  the  copies  of  it  are  from  manu-
scripts which,  with  respect  to  language,  were  unworthy  of  being  faithfully  transcribed.
We  cannot  suppose  the  style  to  have  been  altered  in  order  to  render  the  work  intel-

-*  Most  of  the  best  stories  exhibit  a  similarity  in  style  which  is  the  more  remarkable  considering  the
sur]>risin_'  versatility  that  is  displayed  by  many  Arab  story-tellers.

24  It  has  been  said  that  the  romance  of  'Antar  has  been  thus  corrupted  from  a  classical  composition ;
bur  this,  the  learned  in  Cairo  unanimously  deny  ;  and  if  they  be  wrone,  the  corruption  has  evidently
been  occasioned  by  the  mere  ignorance  of  transcribers,  and  not  by  any  attempt  to  simplify  and  modernize
the  style,  liesides.  what  are  said  to  be  correct  copies  of  it  still  exist,  or  at  least  oue  such  copy  ii
Hammer's.  Sir  William  Jones  alludes  to  another.  Mere  differences  of  style  are  easily  explained  by  tin-
necessity  of  adapting  the  language  to  the  dialect  of  a  particular  country;  but  it  is  worthy  of  remark,  in
this  place,  that  such  differences  are  evidences  of  the  late  date  of  this  work  ;  for  it  is  not  the  custom  of
the  Arabs  (as  I  have  mentioned  above)  thus  to  corrupt  their  classical  works,  among:  which  no  sheykh
includes  -'The  Thousand  and  One  Xights:"  its  style  is  neither  classical,  as  some  Europeans  have  sup-
posed, nor  is  it,  as  others  have  imagined,  that  of  familiar  conversation:  I  believe  that  the  language  of
every  copy  of  it  now  known,  except  those  improved  by  modern  sheykhs,  is  almost  as  different  from  the
former  style  as  it  is  from  the  latter.

S5  The  Calcutta  edition  of  the  complete  work  has  also  been  considerably  improved  in  style. This  is
evident  from  a  specimen  which  was  circulated  lon^  before  the  publication  ot  the  first  volume.


list)  KKVIEW.

ligible  to  the  illiterate,  since  we  find  no  copy  that  in  so  altered.  The  illiterate  imper-
fectly understand  the  most  corrupted  copies ;  for  the  language  of  every  copy  is  a
lame  imitation  of  that  dialect  which  is  confined  to  literary  compositions,  and  which,
though  it  long  lingered  in  the  deserts,  began  to  he  gradually  superseded  by  a  more
simple  language  in  the  Arab  towns  and  villages  in  the  first  century  of  the  Flight.2"

Another  question  may  here  be  considered,  before  I  attempt  to  shew  in  how  great  a
degree  the  1001  Nights  consists  of  Arab  tales.— With  respect  to  the  country  in  which
it  was  composed,  I  have  before  stated  my  opinion  that  it  was  Egypt,  and  I  still  hold
that  opinion.  All  the  complete  copies  (printed  and  manuscript)  of  which  I  have  any
knowledge  describe  Cairo  far  more  minutely  and  accurately  than  any  other  place  ;  and
the  language,  manners,  customs,  &c.,  which  they  exhibit  agree  most  closely  with  those
of  Egypt.  This  is  also  evidently  the  case  with  Galland's  very  imperfect  MS.,  which
existed  A.D.  1548;  and  we  have  no  reason  to  refer  the  date  of  any  other  copy  to  so
early  a  period.  Here,  moreover,  I  may  adduce,  as  confirming  my  own  views,  the
opinion  of  Von  Hammer,  who  thus  writes: — "Si,  done,  on  ne  saurait  ddterminer  que
d'une  maniere  vague  la  date  de  la  redaction  arabe  des  Mille  et  Une  Nuits,  on  peut  in-
diquer  avec  bien  plus  de  precision  1'Egypte  coinme  la  patrie  de  cette  edition  augmentee
et  retouche'e,  car  les  mceurs,  les  usages,  les  circonstances  locales,  la  langue,  tout,  en  un
mot,  d'vin  bout  a  1'autre  de  1'ouvrage,  porte  1'empreinte  de  ce  pays."2?  The  frequent
mention  of  Haroon  Er-Rasheed  might  .seem  to  render  probable  the  idea  that  the  tales
in  which  he  figures  were  composed  by  a  native  of  Baghdad,  and  a  subject  of  the
'Abbasees.  But  the  fame  of  that  Khaleefeh,  as  stated  in  one  of  my  notes,  has  occa-
sioned a  proverb  still  current  in  Egypt ;  and  I  see  nothing  unreasonable  in  the  opinion
that  a  late  Egyptian  writer  of  tales  should  have  made  him  the  performer  of  extraordi-
nary actions,  and  his  celebrated  capital  the  scene  of  wonders  and  magnificence.  Von
Hammer,  speaking  of  the  tales  which  he  regards  as  the  most  recent,  and  of  purely
Egyptian  origin,  says,  "  La  scene  de  ces  contes  est  place'e  ordinairement  au  terns  du
khalife  Haroun-al-Kaschid."29

It  is  not  easy  to  point  out  all  the  stories  in  the  1001  Nights  which  are  Arab  com-
positions ;  but,  as  I  have  before  observed,  that  such  stories  constitute  the  chief  portion
of  the  work  I  believe  all  critics  have  admitted.  According  to  Von  Hammer,  as  De
Sacy  states,29  the  old  groundwork  of  the  1001  Nights  is  found  to  have  become,  by  the
addition  of  tales  of  Arab  origin,  the  least  portion  of  the  collection ;  old  Persian  or
Indian  tales  have  also  been  introduced ;  but  the  materials  of  later  dates  and  of  purely
Arab  origin  form  incomparably  the  greater  portion.  If  so,  the  chief  part  of  the  1000
Nights  must  have  been  excluded  from  the  1001;  and  the  latter  is  far  more  an  Arab
than  a  Persian  composition.  I  do  not,  however,  consider  all  the  tales  of  Arab  composi-
tion as  of  purely  Arab  origin.  All  the  stories  of  which  the  scenes  are  laid  in  Persia  or
India  may  be  more  or  less  founded  on  tales  formerly  current  in  those  countries;  but  I
think  that  there  are  few  of  these  which  are  not  Arab  compositions.  When  we  compare
the  generality  of  these  stories  with  that  of  the  Magic  Horse,  which  appears  to  be  scarcely
more  than  a  translation  of  a  Persian  tale,  or  with  that  of  Jelee'ad  and  his  Son  and  the
Wezeer  Shemmas,  clearly  an  Indian  tale  30  (to  which  I  shall  have  occasion  to  revert),
how  great  a  difference  is  observed !  Most  of  the  former  closely  agree  with  the  tales
which  are  undoubtedly  of  Arab  composition  ;  and  with  these  I  do  not  scruple  to  class
all  the  tales  professedly  relating  to  the  times  of  Haroon  Er-Uasheed  and  other  Muslim
princes.  So  do  I  all  those  that  contain  many  pieces  of  poetry.  Here  it  may  be  ob-

26  See  Note  IS  to  Chapter  i.  of  my  translation.

27  Quoted  by  De  Sacy,  in  his  Dissertation  prefixed  to  a  late  edition  of  Galland's  version  of  the
1001  Nights.

28  See  his  Preface  prefixed  to  Tre'btitien's  version,  page  xxvi.

29  In  his  Dissertation  above  mentioned.

30  This  I  have  not  included  in  my  translation,  but  it  is  in  Tre'butien's,  and  in  the  English  version  of
select  tales  by  the  Rev.  G.  Lamb.


REVIEW.  68!

served,  that  the  story  of  Jelee'ad  contains  no  poetry ;  that  of  the  King  and  his  Son
and  the  Damsel  and  the  Seven  Wezeers,  which,  as  will  be  presently  shewn,  is  a  Persian
or  Indian  tale,  contains  but  one  verse;  and  the  Magic  Horse,  only  one  piece,  of  four
verses,  in  my  original,  and  only  one  couplet  in  the  Breslau  edition.  Another  story,
that  of  Hasib,  or  Jamasp,3i  bears  strong  evidences,  I  think,  of  its  being  a  Persian  or
Indian  composition,  little  altered  by  the  Arab  translator  except  in  the  parts  which
narrate  the  adventures  of  Bulookiya  and  those  of  Janshah ;  and  only  the  portion
relating  to  Janshah  contains  any  verses.  But  the  want  or  scarcity  of  verses  in  these
tales  affords  no  reason  for  regarding  others  in  the  like  case  as  mere  translations.  There
are  several  tales  clearly  of  Arab  composition  containing  very  little  poetry.  It  is  evident
that  the  composer  or  composers  of  the  1001  Nights  possessed  no  great  skill  in  the  art
of  poetry,  but  an  ability  to  adapt  to  particular  purposes  the  poetry  of  various  authors,
altering  it  when  necessary,  and  to  compose  verses  not  atrictly  according  to  the  rules  of
prosody ;  for  in  all  the  copies  of  the  1001  Nights  that  I  have  seen,  except  those  cor-
rected by  learned  sheykhs,  the  poetry  abounds  with  false  metres  and  other  errors.

Hence  those  stories  that  contain  many  pieces  of  poetry  which  are  not  quotations,
but  written  expressly  to  suit  the  incidents  described,  as  is  the  case  in  the  story  of  Uns-
el-Wujood,  and  some  others,  I  am  inclined  to  regard  as  borrowed,  like  most,  if  not  all,
of  the  anecdotes.  It  would  be  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  none  of  the  Arab  tales  in
the  work  were  merely  borrowed ;  for  we  find  that  tales  of  Persia  and  India,  little
altered,  have  been  inserted  in  it ;  and  it  is  remarkable  that  the  only  two  stories  which
El-Mes'oodee  mentions  (by  their  titles)  in  such  a  manner  as  to  shew  that  they  did  not
belong  to  the  1000  Nights  are  included  in  the  1001 ;  and  that  one  of  them  is  Indian  :
and  the  other,  Persian  or  Indian.  One  of  these,  the  story  called  in  his  work  that  of
"  Jeelkand  (or  Wezreh,  or  Wardeh,  according  to  some  copies,)  and  Shemmas,"  is  that
called  in  my  original  "  Jelee'ad  and  his  Son  and  the  Wezeer  Shemmas,"  the  history  of
the  Indian  King  Jelee'ad,  his  son  Ward  Khan,  and  the  Wezeer  Shemmas,  the  chief  of
seventy  Wezeers.  The  other,  "the  Book  of  Sindibad, '  is  the  story  of  "the  King  and
his  Son  and  the  Damsel  and  the  Seven  Wezeers,"  of  which  I  have  given  an  abstract.
This  I  have  learned  from  the  subjoined  very  interesting  letter,  with  which  I  have  been
favoured  by  William  H.  Morley,  Esq.32 — It  is  evident  that  both  these  stories  have
undergone  alterations  under  the  hands  of  the  Muslim  translators ;  but  they  do  not

31  See  pages  577  and  578  of  the  second  volume  of  this  work.

;2  "My  dear  Sir,

"  Some  time  since,  the  Oriental  Translation  Committee  were  kind  enough  to  lend  me  a  MS.
from  their  library,  comprising  four  volumes,  and  containing  a  collection  of  tales  in  the  Persian  language.
Many  of  these  I  translated  with  a  view  to  publication,  but  one  story  (occurring  in  the  fourth  volume),
which  is  similar  in  its  construction  to  the  Bakhtyar  Namah  and  is  preceded  by  a  very  curious  preface,  I
reserved  for  more  particular  consideration  at  a  future  period.  On  reading  the  twenty-third  number  of
your  excellent  translation  of  the  Alf  Lailah  wa  Lailah  I  was  struck  by  finding  in  the  '  Abstract  of  tho
Story  of  the  King  and  his  Son  and  the  Damsel  and  the  Seven  Wezeers,'  that  the  name  of  the  safce  Al
Sindibdd,  and  the  circumstances  related  in  the  introduttion,  coincided  with  those  in  the  Persian  story
above  alluded  to.  I  suspected  that  they  must  be  identical,  and  was  fully  satisfied  that  they  were  so,
when  on  referring  to  the  MS.  I  found  that  the  same  tales  occurred  in  both.  In  your  notes  you  refer  to
an  article  in  the  30th  volume  of  the  Asiatic  Journal,  which  mentions  that  the  game  story  exists  in  a  MS.
of  tho  Alf  Lailah  wa  Lailah  preserved  in  the  library  of  the  British  Museum,  and  it  is  probably  contained
in  most  of  the  editions  extant :  but  the  great  importance  of  the  Persian  version  consists  in  its  preface,
which  is  omitted  both  in  your  edition  and  the  MS.  of  the  British  Museum,  and  whieh  is  exceedingly
valuable  as  an  evidence  of  the  antiquity  and  Persian  origin  of  this  story.  The  Preface  states  that  the
book  is  named  the  Kitabi  Sindibad,  and  that  it  was  collected  from  the  sages  of  Ajam :  it  then  says, —
'This  book  was  originally  in  the  Pahlavl  tongue,  and  till  the  time  of  the  Amir  Xasir  Al  Daulah  Abu
Muhammad  Xuh  Bin  Mansur  Sim.-ini  it  had  not  been  translated  by  any  person,  the  Amir  N'uh  com-
manded that  the  Kh'ajah  Amid  Abu  Al  Fowaris  FatAdzari  should  translate  it,  and  set  right  the  discre-
pancies and  errors  he  might  find  therein.  In  the  year  33$  the  aforesaid  Kh'ajah  undertook  the  task,
and  converted  it  into  the  Dari  language.'  1  he  author  of  the  preface,  Muhammad  Bin  AH  Bin  Muham-
mad Bin  Hosain  Al  Zahir  Al  Katib  Al  Samarkand!,  then  mentions  that  he  has  rendered  the  Dari  trans-
lation into  modern  Persian,  and  dedicates  his  work  to  Abu  Al  Muzaffir  Kilij  TamghAh  Khikan.  I  can-

III,  4 8


682  REVIEW.

exhibit  those  characteristics  which  I  regard  as  evidences  of  Arab  composition ;  and  from
the  style  of  their  language,  I  think  it  most  probable  that  they  were  not  copied  from
manuscripts,  but  taken  down  from  the  months  of  public  reciters  who  unavoidably
corrupted  the  style  in  narration. — There  is  also,  as  I  have  since  been  informed  by
Mr.  Morley,  another  old  story,  apparantly  an  Arab  composition,  but  of  doubtful  origin,
in  the  1001  Nights,  namely,  that  of  Seyf-el -Mulook  and  Bedeea-el-Jemal.  This  he  has
found  in  the  same  volumes  that  contain  the  Book  of  Sindibad,  and  also  in  a  Persian
MS.  lent  him  some  time  since  by  the  Rev.  William  Cureton.  The  two  Persian  MSS.

not  find  any  positive  evidence  of  the  date  of  this  last  version,  inasmuch  as  I  have  sought  in  vain  for  the
name  of  Kilij  Tamghah  amongst  the  monarchs  of  Asia :  his  name  proves  him  to  have  been  a  Tatar  and
a  Muhammadan,  but  he  is  not  mentioned  by  D'Herbelot,  or  Von  Hammer.  In  the  R6zat  Al  Safa,  how-
ever, I  find  that  Mirkh'ond  relates  that  when  Tagash  Khan  of  Kh'arizm  seized  upon  Eai  and  the  fortress
of  Tabrak,  he  left  there  some  of  his  troops  under  the  command  of  Tamghaj ;  one  of  the  principal  Amirs  :
the  name  of  Tamghfih  in  our  preface  being  spelt  with  a  Ha  requires  merely  the  insertion  of  a  diacritical
point  in  order  to  make  it  identical  with  that  in  Mirkh'ond,  and  though  the  Persian  translator  gives  him
the  titles  of  royalty,  these  may  be  accounted  for  by  the  fact,  stated  by  Mirkh'ond,  that  Tag-ash  Khan
granted  him  the  viceroyalty  of  the  conquered  country  when  he  himself  returned  to  Kh'arizm.  Should
this  Tamghaj  be  the  same  with  the  personage  to  whom  our  author  dedicates  his  work,  and  there  seems
no  reason  to  doubt  the  fact,  it  will  fix  the  period  of  the  Persian  version  about  the  year  of  the  Flight  590.
The  story  hi  the  Persian  MS.  comprises  117  folia,  and  is  written  in  three  different  hands  :  the  first  part
is  in  a  very  illegible  Shikastah,  and  has  been  apparently  added  since  the  cxaration  of  the  other  two,
which  are  in  the  Xastalik  character :  the  latter  portion  has  been  taken  from  a  smaller  volume,  and  inlaid
to  make  it  conform  in  size  with  the  rest,  and  the  other  volumes  of  the  collection. — I  think  that  the
existence  of  this  preface  must  be  most  interesting  to  the  oriental  world,  and  to  you  in  particular,  at  the
present  moment,  when  the  subject  of  the  origin  of  the  Alf  Lailah  wa  Lailah  occupies  so  much  attention ;
as  it  offers  a  proof  that  several  nights  were  extant  about  850  years  ago,  that  they  were  then  written  in
one  of  the  most  ancient  languages  of  Persia,  and  even  at  that  remote  epoch  bore  the  stamp  of  being
traditionary  tales  :  this  it  must  be  observed  is  not  mentioned  casually,  but  we  have  the  history  of  the
work  circumstantially  related  from  the  time  of  the  Samuni  kings  to  the  period  when  the  present  trans-
lation was  executed.  I  know  but  of  two  Eastern  works  similarly  circumstanced,  the  Anvari  Sohaili
and  the  Marzaban  XiSmah,  the  antiquity  of  which  has  never  been  questioned.  The  fact  also  of  several
of  these  tales  being  identical  with  others  contained  in  the  Hitopadesa  and  the  Tuti  X.-imah  argues  the
intimate  connection  of  the  fiction  of  India  and  Persia. — But  I  need  not  dilate  upon  this  part  of  the  sub-
ject to  yon  who  have  considered  the  matter  so  much  more  fully  than  I  myself  have  done,  and  I  can  only
add  that  if  I  have  contributed  one  fact  towards  the  elucidation  of  this  interesting  question  I  shall  be
most  highly  gratified

"  Believe  me,  my  dear  Sir,
15,  Serle  Street,  Lincoln's  Inn.  "  Most  sincerely  yours,

Aug.  10,  1840  "  WILLIAM  II.  MOBLEY."

"  P.S.  The  name  of  the  Sama'ni  monarch  at  whose  command  the  Dari  translation  is  stated  to  have
been  made,  seems  to  have  been  erroneously  transcribed :  it  should  most  probably  be  written  Xuh  Bin
Nasr,  and  not  Xuh  Bin  Mansur,  as  the  latter  (who  was  called  Abu  Al  Kasim,  and  not  Abu  Muhammad)
did  not  begin  to  reign  till  the  year  of  the  Flight,  365.  The  date  given  in  the  text,  viz.  A.  F.  338,  may
however  possibly  be  an  error  for  383,  as  it  is  very  carelessly  written,  and  this  would  bring  it  under  the
reign  of  Nuh  Bin  Mansur.  Xuh  Bui  Nasr  began  his  reign  about  the  year  of  the  Flight,  332. — I  may
mention  that  I  have  been  informed  there  exists  in  the  library  of  the  British  Museum  a  MS.  collection  of
tales  in  the  Hebrew  language,  which  bears  the  title  of  '  The  Book  of  Sindibad.'  I  have  not  been  able  to
find  this  volume,  but  there  is  every  likelihood  that  it  is  a  translation  of  the  present  work. — W.  H.  M."

The  above  letter  appeared  to  me  quite  sufficient  to  settle  the  question  of  the  origin  of  the  Book  of
£indibad;  but  I  have  lately  found  that  Eastern  writers  differ  on  this  point.  The  following  extract  from
an  article  hi  the  British  and  Foreign  Review,  before  referred  to,  gives  a  further  account  of  this  book. —
<•  The  Book  of  Sendebad,  according  to  M.  Des  Longchamps,  is  an  oriental  romance,  of  which  translations
or  imitations  exist  in  various  European  and  Asiatic  languages.  Of  these  he  specifies  three  as  likely  to
be  in  an  especial  degree  derived  from  the  original.  The  Arabic  story  of  a  king,  his  son,  his  favourite,
and  seven  vizirs ;  the  Hebrew  romance  of  the  Parables  of  Scndebar ;  and  the  Greek  romance  of  Syntipas ;
and  from  one  of  the  two  last,  but  more  particularly  from  the  Hebrew,  M.  Des  Longchamps  derives  the
History  of  the  Seven  Sages  of  Rome,  llistoria  Septem  tfapientum  Roma,  which  was  composed  by  Dam
Jehans,  a  monk  of  the  abbey  of  Haute  Selve,  about  the  beginning  of  the  thirteenth  century,  and  enjoyed
extensive  popularity  in  Europe  for  three  centuries  afterwards.  In  confirmation  of  his  view  it  may  be
remarked,  that  in  a  MS.  of  the  Parables  of  Sendebar,  which  exists  in  the  British  Museum,  it  is  repeatedly
asserted  in  anonymous  Latin  notes,  that  the  work  was  translated  out  of  the  Indian  language  into  Persian
and  Arabic,  and  from  one  of  them  into  Hebrew.  Sendebar  is  also  described  as  a  chief  of  Indian  Brah-
mans,  and  Biehar,  the  king,  as  a  king  of  In  lia. — Ellis,  Metrical  Romances,  wl.  iii."  (Pp.  233  et  s*q.)  The


KM  VIEW.  683

(which  difter  considerably  in  style,  though  not  in  substance,)  contain  an  introduction
agreeing  pretty  closely  with  that  which  I  have  translated,  but  differing  slightly  from
that  and  from  each  other ;  and  in  both  of  them,  the  King  described  in  the  Arabic  as
one  of  the  Kings  of  the  Persians  is  mentioned  as  the  Sultan  Mahmood  of  Ghazneh,  and
the  person  employed  by  him  to  search  for  the  story  of  Seyf-el-Mulook  is  said  to  have
been  the  famous  Hasan  Meymundee,  his  Wezeer.33  Mr.  Morley  also  states,  that  "  in
Mr.  Cureton's  MS.,  the  city  whence  the  story  was  procured  is  called  Anvam;  but  the
other  MS.  agrees  with  the  Arabic  version  in  fixing  upon  Damascus."— Some  other  tales,
as  that  of  'Omar  En-Noaman,  and  that  of  Taweddud,  have  probably  been  merely  bor-
rowed; and  most  of  the  complete  copies  of  the  work,  if  not  all,  contain  a  few  tales
which  have  apparently  been  composed  late  in  the  sixteenth,  or  even  in  the  seventeenth,
century,  and  inserted  to  supply  lost  portions,  or  to  augment  the  original  series.  Among
these  I  do  not  hesitate  to  inchide  the  story  of  Aboo-Seer  and  Aboo-Keer.

To  discover  the  origins  of  the  tales  of  the  1001  Nights  is  in  most  cases  impossible.84
I  believe  that  these  tales  are,  as  to  their  origins,  of  various  countries ;  and  hence  I  have
seldom  endeavoured  to  discover  any  thing  more  than  the  probable  immediate  sources
from  which  the  incidents  that  they  describe  have  been  borrowed.  It  is  only  when  a
fiction  is  based  on  a  historical  fact  of  a  singular  nature  (as  is  the  case  with  the  Barber's
story  of  himself,  in  the  tale  of  the  Humpback35),  and  not  on  an  action  likely  to  have
been  imitated,  that  we  can  feel  satisfied  of  our  having  discovered  its  origin.  Von
Hammer  includes  the  works  of  Homer  among  the  sources  from  which  incidents  related
in  the  1001  Nights  have  been  borrowed.36  On  the  other  hand,  a  very  able  critic  has
remarked,  "  In  the  story  of  Sindbad,  many  of  the  incidents  which  are  attributed  to  the
Greeks  were  undoubtedly  borrowed  by  them  from  Persia;"37  and  I  incline  to  his
opinion.  But  that  many  learned  men  among  the  Arabs  were  acquainted  with  the
poems  of  Homer  has  been  proved  to  me  by  a  letter  which  I  have  had  the  pleasure
of  receiving  from  the  Rev.  William  Cureton.  After  directing  my  notice  to  the  well-
known  fact  that  the  works  of  that  great  poet  were  translated  into  Syriac  by  Theophilus
of  Edessa,  chief  astronomer  at  the  court  of  El-Mahdee,  and  mentioning  several  other
circumstances  which  render  it  extremely  improbable  that  Homer's  poems  should  not
have  been  known  to  many  Arabian  scholars,  Mr.  Cureton  has  added  a  passage  cited  by
Ibn-Abee-Useybe'ah,  in  his  Lives  of  the  Physicians,  from  Yoosuf  the  son  of  Ibraheem,
a  freedman  of  Ibraheem  the  son  of  El-Mahdee,  which  is  highly  interesting,  and  perfectly
decisive  as  to  this  question.  The  said  Yoosuf  states,  that,  visiting  a  sick  friend,  he  saw,
while  in  the  house  of  that  person,  a  man  with  his  face  covered,  "  walking  to  and  fro,
and  singing  some  verses,  in  Greek,  by  Homer,  the  chief  of  the  Greek  poets :"  and  this
man  proved  to  be  Honeyn,  the  celebrated  translator  of  many  works  on  philosophy  and

same  writer  shortly  afterwards  states  that  El-Mes'oodee,  in  his  Golden  Meadows,  in  the  chapter  on  the
ancient  Kings  of  India,  "  speaks  of  an  Indian  philosopher  named  Sendebad,  who  was  contemporary  with
King  Kuru,  and  was  the  author  of  a  work  entitled, '  The  story  of  the  seven  vizirs,  the  tutor,  the  young
man,  and  the  wife  of  the  king.'  'This  is  the  work,'  he  adds,  'which  is  called  the  Book  of  Sendebad.'  "
The  reviewer  however  observes,  that  "  the  Book  of  Sendebad,  according  to  a  more  modern  Persian
writer,  the  author  of  the  'Majmu  al  Tawarikh,'  as  quoted  by  M.  Langles,  was  written  in  Persia  under
the  Arsaeidan  kings,  and  his  account  is  confirmed  by  an  Arabic  historian,  Hamza  Isfahan!."  He  thinks
that  these  two  authors  may  allude  to  ''The  Adventures  of  Wndbad,"  i.  e.  Ks-Simlibud  of  the  Sea;  but  I
oannot  agree  with  him  in  this  opinion.

33  According  to  this  statement,  the  story  must  have  been  composed  some  time  before  the  year  1030
of  our  era.

34  The  reader  who  desires  to  see  how  far  the  attempts  to  do  so  have  been  successful  will  be  much
gratified  by  the  perusal  of  two  learned  disquisitions  to  which  I  have  before  referred j  one  in  No.  47  of
the  Foreign  Quarterly  Review,  and  the  other  in  No.  21  of  the  l!ritisb  and  Foreign  Review.  To  do  justice
to  the  subject  of  which  they  treat  would  require  a  volume,  and  would  demand  qualifications  which  I  do
not  possess.

35  See  a  foot-note  (No.  28)  in  page  152  of  Vol.  ii.  of  this  work.

36  See  his  Preface  prefixed  to  Tivhuticn'«  versinn,  page  nil.
s"  See  page  98  in  this  volume.


684  REVIEW.

medicine  from  the  Greek  into  Arabic.  Mr.  Cureton  has  examined  this  passage  in  four
MSS.,  and  found  110  important  variation.

In  my  endeavours  to  ascertain  the  period  and  the  country  in  which  this  work  was
composed,  I  have  not  merely  considered  its  internal  evidences  of  the  time  and  place.
The  earliest  period  at  which  any  portion  of  it  has  been  incoiitestably  proved  to  have
existed  is  the  year  955  of  the  Flight  (A.  D.  1548).  This  date  occurs  in  a  marginal  note
written  by  a  Christian  reader  of  Tripoli  in  Syria,  expressing  a  prayer  for  the  long  life
of  the  owner  of  the  book  (li-malikihi),  in  a  volume  of  the  incomplete  MS.  which
Galland  procured  from  Syria :  and  in  another  volume  of  the  same  is  a  similar  note  by
the  same  person,  dated  973.  We  do  not  find  that  Eastern  authors  have  made  any  un-
mistakeable  mention  of  this  work,  as  now  known  to  us.  They  may  have  been  silent  re-
specting it,  because  it  is  not  written  in  the  usual  literary  style,  and  because  to  them  it
wants  the  strange  charms  which  so  powerfully  recommend  it  to  the  natives  of  the
West,  and  which  have  led  such  eminent  scholars  as  De  Sacy  and  Von  Hammer  to
discuss  its  literary  history.  I  regret  that  the  opinions  of  these  two  celebrated  Orien-
talists, on  this  subject,  disagree;  but  as  I  am  placed  in  the  unpleasant  predicament  of
being  obliged  to  differ  from  one  of  them,  I  am  glad  that  I  have  been  led  to  accord  with
the  former  in  some  points,  and  in  others  with  the  latter.  Respecting  the  date  of  the
work,  my  opinion  nearly  coincides  with  that  of  De  Sacy  :  he  concluded  that  it  existed
about  the  middle  of  the  ninth  century  of  the  Might  because  he  did  not  find  coffee
mentioned  in  it :  but  on  the  same  ground  he  might  have  assigned  to  it  a  somewhat
later  date;  as  the  custom  of  drinking  coffee  did  not  become  common  even  in  the
Yemen  until  the  latter  part  of  that  century,  and  coffee  was  first  imported  into  Ku'yi't
within  the  first  ten  years  of  the  next  century  :  some  years  more  elapsed  before  it  began
to  be  a  common  beverage  there;  and  thence  it  passed,  probably  through  Syria,  to  Con-
stantinople. Here  I  must  also  mention,  that  I  have  observed  several  probable  evi-
dences of  the  age  of  this  work  not  noticed  by  De  Sacy,  and  some  of  them  appear  to  me
more  definite  than  those  which  he  has  adduced.  He  has  mentioned,  as  deserving  of
considerable  deference,  an  assertion  of  the  sheykh  Ahmad  Esh-Shirwanee,  in  a  short
notice  in  Persian,  prefixed  to  his  edition  of  the  first  two  hundred  Nights  printed  at
Calcutta, — that  the  author  of  "  The  Thousand  and  One  Nights  "  was  an  inhabitant  of
Syria,  whose  native  language  was  Arabic,  and  whose  object  in  writing  the  work  was  to
afford  facilities  to  those  who  desired  to  learn  the  Arabic  language:— but  the  learned
sheykh  gives  no  authority,  nor  any  reason  whatever,  for  this  assertion,  which  I  there-
fore think  of  little  weight  against  the  evidences  which  favour  a  different  opinion  as  to
the  country  in  which  the  work  was  written :  of  its  date  he  says  nothing.

Some  stories  which  occur  in  the  earlier  portion,  or  first  quarter,  of  the  work,  so
placed  in  every  copy  now  known,  bear  strong  evidences  of  their  having  been  written  at
least  as  late  as  the  latter  half  of  the  ninth  century  of  the  Flight,  or,  which  is  nearly
the  same,  the  latter  half  of  the  fifteenth  of  our  era  :  in  the  remaining  portion,  there
are  indications  of  a  later  date :  and  coffee  is  mentioned  in  a  manner  not  to  be  mis-
taken;33 but  had  coffee  long  been  a  common  beverage  it  would  doubtless  have  been
mentioned  frequently,  from  the  general  disregard  of  historical  accuracy  manifested
throughout  the  work ;  and  as  I  have  noticed  nothing  indicating  a  later  date  than  is
thus  implied,  I  infer  that  the  work  must  have  been  completed  before  the  middle  of  the
tenth  century  of  the  Flight,  whether  the  mention  of  the  coffee  be  attributable  to  a
copyist  or  not.

Whatever  may  be  the  opinions  of  others  respecting  the  literary  history  of  the  1001

38  It  is  thus  mentioned  in  the  editions  of  Cairo  and  Breslau,  in  the  Calcutta  edition  of  the  first  two
hundred  Nights,  in  the  MS.  of  Mr.  Wortley  Montagu,  and  in  that  of  Von  Hammer:  I  think  it  probable
therefore,  that  I  might  find  the  same  to  be  the  case  with  all  the  complete  copies  of  the  work,  if  I  had  it
in  my  power  to  examine  them.  [This  opinion  holds  good  with  regard  to  the  Calcutta  edition  of  the
complete  work,  as  I  have  ascertained  by  comparing  the  passages  to  which  reference  is  here  made.— ED.]


REVIEW.  685

Nights,  I  think  they  will  agree  with  me  on  one  point,  the  most  important  point  to
decide  in  these  remarks  regarding  them  as  relating  to  my  own  translation,  the  period
of  the  manners,  &c.,  which  it  generally  describes.  To  determine  this  has  been  my
chief  object  in  some  of  the  illustrations  in  notes  inserted  in  my  translation.

When  I  first  announced  my  intention  of  translating  the  1001  Nights,  I  had  formed
my  opinion  of  its  general  merits  from  the  Breslau  edition,  not  having  then  seen  the
edition  of  Cairo,  of  which  I  judged  from  the  reports  of  Arabian  friends,  and  hence  I
conceived  an  erroneous  idea  of  the  poetry  that  is  comprised  in  the  latter.  The  verses
contained  in  the  Breslau  edition  so  abound  with  gross  errors,  that  I  generally  passed
them  over  in  perusing  the  tales  ;S9  but  in  the  Cairo  edition  I  was  gratified  by  finding  a
fair  selection  from  the  compositions  of  poets  of  various  ages,  given  with  comparatively
very  few  errors,  and  including  a  large  number  of  admirable  pieces.  With  respect  to
many  of  these,  however,  I  must  state  my  belief,  grounded  upon  the  great  difficulty  that
I  have  often  experienced  in  attempting  to  translate  verses  which  I  have  perfectly  un-
derstood, that,  partly  on  account  of  the  rhetorical  figures  (especially  paronomasia)  with
which  they  abound,  and  partly  from  other  causes,  arising  from  the  wide  difference  of
Eastern  and  Western  minds,  and  modes  of  life,  they  cannot  be  exactly  translated  into
our  language.  I  must  also  say,  that  I  think  a  very  large  proportion  of  the  poetry  of
the  1001  Nights  possesses  so  litttle  merit  that,  if  faithfully  rendered  into  English  prose,
it  would  be  intolerable  to  a  reader  of  good  taste ;  and  that  I  doubt  whether  I  should  have
obtained  general  approval  if  I  had  greatly  enlarged  the  selection  that  I  have  made.

As  I  have  been  blamed  for  omitting  some  remarks  which  I  might  have  made,  both
upon  the  objections  and  encouragements  of  my  critics,  I  must  here  state  that  the  com-
mendations which  they  have  bestowed  upon  me  have  been  far  greater  than  I  had  even
hoped  to  obtain.  Several  of  their  objections  (I  might  say  most  of  them  were  I  certain
of  my  having  been  acquainted  with  all  that  have  been  urged)  I  have  already  considered,
and,  to  the  best  of  my  ability,  answered,  either  directly  or  indirectly.'40  But  some  of
the  more  important  ones  remain  to  be  noticed ;  and  one  of  these  affects  the  whole  of
my  translation. — Among  those  critics  whose  observations  have  afforded  me  most  grati-
fication, one  remarks,  "  Whatever  be  the  exact  nature  of  the  style  of  his  Arabic  copy,
whether  more  or  less  a  'classical,'  a  vulgar,  or  some  middle  style  (as  we  understand  him
to  contend),  it  is  impossible  that  the  impression  made  upon  the  audience  of  the  native
story-tellers  can  be  of  the  same  uncolloquial  and  semi-scriptural  sort,  apart  from  their
every-day  experience,  as  that  which  the  English  reader  receives  from  the  unfamiliar
style  of  Mr.  Lane.  It  must  be  far  more  easy,  natural,  impulsive,  and  unobstructed  by
a  constant  sense  of  strangeness.  In  this  respect,  therefore,  he  has  missed  even  the
Arab  peculiarity ;  at  least,  he  has  sacrificed  Arab  spirit  to  Arab  letter,  and  consequently
the  greater  peculiarity  to  the  less,  and  so  become  the  victim  of  his  own  '  excessive  ex-
actitude.'

'Strange !  by  the  means  defeated  of  the  ends.'

This  fault  excepted,  together  with  some  less  obvious  and  important  ones  which  will  bo
noticed  hereafter  (and  the  fault  in  question  has  not  hindered  him  from  writing  a  good,

39  Afterwards  I  examined  many  pieces  of  poetry  in  various  parts  of  the  work,  and  those  npon  which
I  chanced  to  open  led  me  to  express  an  opinion  which  a  further  examination  proved  to  be  incorrect,  that
the  usual  chief  merit  of  the  poetry  consisted  in  rhetorical  figures  which  rendered  it  untranslatable.  This
opinion  I  mention  here  because  it  has  been  represented  as  relating,  not  to  a  miscellany  of  poetry  that  has
l>cen  greatly  corrupted  in  almost  all  copies,  but  to  Arabic  poetry  in  general,  by  an  Orientalist  who  has
given  convincing  evidence  of  his  having  no  inclination  to  misinterpret  my  words,  and  whose  talents  and
attainments  are  such  that  I  am  very  far  from  regarding  with  indifference  his  unintentional  exaggeration
of  my  error.  I  allude  to  the  lato  Mr.  Torr?ns.  I  regret  that  he  did  not  complete  his  translation  of  the
1001  Nights;  for  the  portion  published  by  him  is,  in  my  opinion,  characterized  by  many  exrdlmt
qualities

«"  Many  objections  have  been  made  under  (ho  mistaken  impression  tlr.it  I  supposed  the  1001  Nights
to  be  wholly  of  Arabian  origin.  These,  therefore,  it  is  unnecessary  for  me  here  to  mention.


686  REVIEW.

solid,  and  flexible  style  too  after  its  fashion,  and  is  a  guarantee  meanwhile  for  closeness
and  fidelity  in  particulars  more  to  be  commended),  Mr.  Lane's  version  is  beyond  all  doubt
a  most  valuable,  praiseworthy,  painstaking,  learned,  and  delightful  work."41 — The  high
commendation  expressed  in  the  last  sentence  must  not  prevent  my  denying  the  correct-
ness of  the  opinion  conveyed  by  the  preceding  portion  of  the  above  extract.  I  there-
fore reply,  that  it  was  impossible  for  me  to  adopt  a  style  as  different  from  our  modern
familiar  dialect  as  the  language  of  my  original  is  from  the  Arabic  now  used  in  common
conversation. — As  the  same  critic  has  in  a  manner  called  upon  me  to  notice  his  objec-
tions, I  may  add,  that  I  regret  his  having  judged  of  the  fidelity  of  my  translation  by
comparing  it,  not  with  its  original,  but,  with  a  translation  of  another  original ;  for
although  a  general  inference  which  he  has  thns  drawn  has  been  favourable  to  me,  he
has,  by  so  doing,  been  unavoidably  led  into  errors.  As  to  my  remarks  on  Galland's
version,  which  have  induced  him  to  fear  that  I  am  not  dxily  sensible  of  the  beauties  of
my  original,  nor  quite  so  much  in  love  with  the  spirit  of  ingenuousness  as  with  a  certain
literality,  I  can  only  reply,  that  those  remarks  were  not  merely  made  in  a  spirit  of  sin-
cerity,*2 but  solely  from  a  regard  to  truth,  and  that  I  am  an  ardent  admirer  of  all  that
he  admires  in  my  original  j  but  still  I  think  that  its  chief  value  consists  in  the  fulness
and  fidelity  with  which  it  describes  the  character,  manners,  and  customs  of  the  Arabs,4*
though  its  enchantment  is  doubtless  mainly  owing  to  other  qualities.44 — Another  objec-
tion urged  by  the  same  writer  I  must  here  notice.  It  respects  the  dotted  letters  which
I  have  used,  imitating  in  this  particular  a  plan  adopted  by  the  Royal  Geographical
Society.  I  thought  that  my  distinguishing  certain  letters  in  this  manner  could  not
annoy  any  reader,  while  it  would  render  the  work  more  agreeable,  and  in  many  instances
more  useful,  to  the  orientalist.  But  I  have  not  considered  the  latter  so  far  as  to  use  a
uniform  system  of  transcription ;  for  I  have  often  expressed  the  same  Arabic  letter,  in
different  cases,  by  different  English  letters,  to  adapt  my  orthography  to  the  pronuncia-
tion most  generally  prevailing  among  the  Arabs.  And  here  I  may  add,  that  I  have
always  written  the  proper  names  agreeably  with  the  orthographical  signs  supplied  by
my  sheykh,  except  in  a  few  instances,  where  my  original  was  evidently  wrong,  or  differ-
ing from  most  other  copies.

41  London  and  Westminster  Review,  No.  Ixiv.,  page  113.

44  Had  they  not  been  made  in  that  spirit,  I  should  hardly  have  stated,  on  the  same  occasion,  that
several  persons,  and  among  them  some  of  high  and  deserved  reputation  as  Arabic  scholars,  had  pro-
nounced an  opinion  that  his  version  was  an  improvement  upon  the  original.

43  I  do  not  mean  to  assert  that  it  always  conveys  fair  notions  of  the  general  manners  and  character
of  particular  classes;  as  it  often  represents  Arab  ladies  as  acting  like  Arab  courtesans.  But  respecting
the  women  of  Egypt  about  the  time  when  I  suppose  the  1001  Nights  to  have  been  composed,  see  a
paragraph  in  pages  203  and  204  of  the  first  volume  of  this  work.

**  If  Galland  had  not  professed  that  he  had  faithfully  rendered  his  original,  except  when  decency
required  him  to  do  otherwise,  I  should  certainly  have  mentioned  his  version  in  terms  which  would  have
given  no  offence  to  the  most  enthusiastic  of  his  admirers.


INDEX


OP  THE  PRINCIPAL  MATTERS  AND  WORDS  ILLUSTRATED  AND  EXPLAINED  IN

THE  NOTES.


The  Roman  numerals  denote  the  Chapter ;  the  Arabic,  the  number  of  the  Note,  unlew
otherwise  expressed.


AASHA (E1-),  his  fondness  for  wine, iii.;

22

Aawar  (E1-),  son  of  Iblees,  Intr.,  21
'Abaah,  or  'abayeh,  xxv.,  25
'Abbas  (E1-),  xiii.,  14 ;  v.,  56  ;  vii.,  20
'Abd-El-Kadir  El-Geelanee,  xi.,  31
'Abd-El-Melik  the  son  of  Marwan,  i.,  18;

iii.,  22  j  xxi.,  2
Abdal,  iii.,  63
Ablutions,  Intr.,  1,  40;  xviii.,  page  535

of  Friday,  xi.,  4

Aboo-Keer,  xxvii.,  1

•  Hurrah,  Intr.,  21

Nuwas,  xi.,  53

Seer,  xxvii.,  1


Aboo-Shihab,  iv.,  47

Sirhan,  5x.,  page  62

Tabak,  xxx.,  9

Abousir. See  "  Aboo-Seer."
Abu-i-Ghimr,  Intr.,  21

Harith,  xviii.,  12

•  Hoseyn,  ix.,  page  56

Kasha  of  Geelan,  iii.,  63

Action, a  virtuous, made  to assume  the

form  of  a  man who  cheers  the  dead

in  his  grave,  xvi.,  page  456
'A"d,  tribe  of,  ii.,  37 ;  x.,  76;  xxiv..  35
Adan,  or  adhan,  Intr.,  1 ;  iv.,  '.'4
'Adileeyeh  (E1-),  xxx.,  10
Adoption  of  sons,  iv.,  51


688


INDEX.


Adultery,  punishment  of,  Infer.,  1  ;  iii.,  94 ;
iv.,  8

Aerial  voyage,  performed  by  a  man  cling-
ing to  the  leg  of  a  bird,  xx.,  23

'Afeef,  ix.,  9

Agathodaemon,  Intr.,  21

Ahmad  El-Bedawee,  the  saint,  iii.,  63

Air-bed,  xvi.,1

'Aisheh,  anecdote  of,  Intr.,  21

'Ajain,  ix.,  3

'Ajameeyeh,  i.,  16
Ajeeb,  iii.,  77

'Ajweh,  iii.,  22

'Akeekah,  iv.,  24

'Akhyar,  iii.,  63

'Akkam,  xi.,  28

'Akool,  vi.,  19

'Ala-ed-Deen,  xi.,  12

'Alee  El-Bekree,  a  saint,  iii.,  63

El-Leysee,  a  saint,  iii.,  63

son  of  El-Ma-moon,  iii.,  63

Alif,  the  letter,  a  symbol  of  a  graceful  fe-
male form,  iii.,  1 5  •

'Ali-1-Mulk,  xxiv.,  52

'Aliin. See  "  'Ulama."

Allah  preserve  thy  youth  !  x.,  45

Alms-giving,  Intr.,  I

Aloe,  viii.,  page  548

Aloes- wood,  xx.,  12

Ambar  (E1-),  xviii.,  page  541

Amb^gris,  xx.,  76,  77,  78

Amjad  (E1-),  x.,  85

Anjmooriyeh  (Amorium),  xviii.,  page  541

'Amoodeyn  (E1-),  viii.,  1

Andalus  (E1-),  xxi.,  28

'Andam,  x.,  56

Andaman  Islands,  inhabitants  of,  xx.,  52

Anemone,  iii.,  22

Angels,  their  nature,  &c.,  Intr.,  1,  21 :  i.,  15

Anger,  apparel  of,  xi.,  78

'Anka,  an  enormous  bird,  xx.,  22

Anooshirwan,  xviii.,  page  523

Ansarees,  xxii.,  page  219

Apes, island  and mountain and city of,
xx.,  38,  65

employed  like  slaves  to  guard  shops,

xx.,  38

made  to  pick  fruit,  xx.,  66

Jews and Arabs transformed into,

xxiv.,  35

Apostacy,  punishment  of,  Intr.,  1

Apostles,  Intr.,  1

'Arab, modern application of the term,
v.,  102


Arabs,  sons  of  the,  xi.,  1 8

Arabic  language,  when  simplified,  i.,  18

Arba'een  (E1-),  xix.,  3

Ai-d  el-Beydd,  (E1-),  viii.,  1

el-Khadra  (E1-),  viii.,  1

Ardebb,  nearly  five  English  bushels,  v.,  lu

Armour  worn  by  the  Arabs,  viii.,  5

'Arsh  Iblees,  Intr.,  2

As'ad  (E1-),  x.,  86

Asaf  son  of  Barkhiya,  Intr.,  21  ;  i.,  15

'Asafeeree  olives,  x.,  78

'Asakir,  xxx.,  26

'Asal  katr,  xxx.,  5

'Aseedeh,  xi.,  23

Ash'ab,  a  man  proverbial  for  covetousness,

xxx.,  19

As-hab  ed-Darak,  iii.,  63
Asian,  xi.,  91

Asina'ee  (El-\  anecdote  of,  ii.,  15
'Asr,  Intr.,  1

Ass,  reason  of  its  braying,  ix.,  page  5u
Assassins,  derivation  of  the  term,  ii.,  46
Astrolabe,  v.,  57
Astrology,  i.,  15;  ii.,  17;  iii.,  49; v.,  74;

x.,  147

Atonements  for  sins  of  the  dead,  v.,  40
'Attar,  ix.,  2
Auctions,  iv.,  7
Augurations with respect to marriage,

v.,  74 ;  x.,  147. See  "  Omens."
Autumnal  equinox,  festival  of  the,  xvii.,  2
Ayas,  xi..  86
'Azazeel,  Intr.,  21
'Azeez  and  'Azeezeh,  viii.,  15
'Azraeel,  Intr.,  21

Bab  en-Nasr,  v.,  12

Zuweyleh,  v.,  26

Babil,  or  Babel,  iii.,  14

Bahadir,  x.,  116

Bahr  el-Moheet  (E1-),  Intr.,  2

ez-Zulumat, or ez-Zulmeh, or  '

el-Bahr  el-Muzlim,  Intr.,  2
Bahrain,  x.,  118
Bakheet,  vii.,  10
Bakkam,  x.,  56
Baklaweh,  viii.,  22
Ban,  or  Oriental  willow  Intr.,  19;  iii.,  7,

22

or  ben,  xvii.,  2

Banana,  iii.,  22
Barahoot,  the  well  of,  ix.,  27
Bareh,  i.,  15
Barmekees,  i.,  18  ;  y.,  97


IXDKX.


088


Bartail,  Island  of,  xx.,  17,  59

Basl'mading,  iv.,  tj ;  v.,  79,  95

Batarikh,  xxvii.,  7

Bath, and mode  of  bathing,  &c.,  ii., 10  ;

xi.,  5;  xxvii.,  11
Batiyeh,  iii.,  22 '
Batreek,  or  bitreek,  xix.,  page  574
Battah,  iii.,  22
Bayad,  xxvi.,  2

Biiz,  a  little  kettle-drum,  xxv.,  8
Beads  used  by  devotees,  x.,  142
Beard,  respect  paid  to  the,  iii.,  47
Beasts,  language  of,  Intr.,  30 ;  ix.,  1
Beauty,  characteristics  of,  Intr.,  19
Bedawee  and  his  wife,  anecdote  of  a,  vii.,  34
Bedr-ed-Deen,  iv.,  26
Bedreh,  xvi.,  page  454
Beer  el-Mo'attalah (E1-), and el-R'asr el-

Mesheed,  xxiv.,  37
Bell,  Island  of  the,  xx.,  59
Bflhineh,  iv.,  37
Benj,  or  beng,  ii.,  46  ;  xi.,  76
Bey n  L'1-Kasreyn,  v.,  17
Beyt-owwal,  ii.,  16
Bier  of  the  Bedawees,  xi.,  62
Birds,  language  of,  Intr.,  30 ;  ix.,  1

artificial  singing,  iii.,  91

Birkeh,  xx.,  72
Birket  el-Feel,  v.,  23

Horse-course  of,  xxiv.,  18

Black  faces  of  the  wicked  on  the  day  of  the

resurrection,  viii.,  24
Blessing,  its  meaning  when  employed  with

reference  to  a  saint,  xi.,  35
Blessings  of  the  just,  vi.,  28
Blind,  impudence  of  the,  v.,  77
Blood,  price  of,  vi.,  8

place  of,  vi.,  39

Boats  on  rivers,  how  moored,  vi.,  20

Bones  used  in  playing,  viii.,  26

Boolak,  the  principal  port  of  Cairo,  xix.,  7

Boozah,  or  boozeh,  a  kind  of  beer,  ii.,  51

Borneo,  xx.,  12

Brahmans,  xx.,  14

Brasil-wood,  xx.,  12

Bread,  xxviii.,  6

and  salt,  obligation  imposed  by  eating,

xv.,  21  ;  xxii.,  35
Bribery  in  courts  of  law,  xxii.,  3
Bridegroom,  procession  of  a,  ix.,  12. See

"  Marriage."

Brides  of  the  treasures,  xxx.,  -24
Brother  of  the  Arabs,  &c\,  x.,  Us
Budoor,  x.,  34
III.


Buffaloes  without  tails,  xx.,  12
Btnidukaneeyeen  (E1-),  xxii.,  44
Burd,  and  burden,  xxii.,  page  221
Burial,  customs  observed before,  at,  am'

after,  iii.,  79;  vi.,  11. See  "Death."

of  amputated  limbs,  &c.,  v.,  .!.".

of  the  living  spouse  with  the  dead,

xx.,  55

,  self-,  xx.,  79

-grounds,  iii.,  44  ;  x.,  126


Burko',  or  face-veil,  iii.,  2  ;  xxi.,  38
Burnus,  or  burnoos,  xxi.,  46
Bursh,  vi.,  18
Bustan,  x.,  127

Cala,  or  Kulleh,  Island  of,  xx.,  12,  60

Caliph. See  "  Khaleefeh."

Camphor-tree,  xx.,  12,  28

Cannibals,  vii.,  1 1 ;  xx.,  39,  52  ;  xxiv.,  55

Cannons  mentioned,  xi.,  100

Cats,  abundance  of,  in  Arab  cities,  v.,  4

Ceylon,  its  jewels,  &c.,  xx.,  75,  87

Chair  for  the  turban,  iv.,  52

Chang. See  "Junk/

Character  of  the  Arabs  and  other  Easterns.

ii.,  20

Charitable  disposition  of  the  Arabs,  vii.<  30
Charms,  i.,  5,  15;  iv.,  24 ;  x.,  18,  66
Chess,  iii.,  67
Children. See  "  Infants."
China,  its inhabitants here  described as

similar  to  the  Arabs  in  religion,  &c.,

and  the  country  itself  incorrectly  >lo-

scribed,  x.,  30

,  voyage  from  Arabia  to,  xx.,  12

Chinese  shadows,  xv.,  13

Chiromancy,  i.,  15

Circumcision,  Intr.,  I ;  iv.,  24

Clapping  the  hands, the usual mode of

suimnoning  a  servant,  &c.,  ix.,  16  ;  xx.,

27

Cleomades  and  Claremond,  xvii.,  6,  20
Cloves,  xx.,  17
Coffee,  when  first  commonly  drank,  iii.,  2'.' ;

iv.,  13

mentioned in this work,  ix.,  22 ;

xix.,  4;  xxvii.,  8

Colours  significant  of  joy,  mourning,  anger,

&c.,  xi.,  78 ;  xxii.,  39
Compliment  to  a  person  eating,  Intr.,  34

to  a  person  who  has  been  in

the  bath,  or  has  had  his  head  shaven,


on letting a shop or house,
4 T


690


INDEX.


and  on  selling  an  article  of  dress,  &c.,

viii.,  54
Compliment  to  a  person  on  announcing  to

him  a  death,  xi.,  59
Concuhines,  Intr.,  1. See  "Slaves."
Consul,  xi.,  95
Contagion,  i.,  5

Cosmography,  Arabian  system  of,  Intr.,  2
Costumes,  brilliant  effects  of  Eastern,  ii.,

29

Cousin  often  preferred  as  a  wife,  i.,  11,  14
Cressets,  xiii.,  2
Cries  for  aid,  v.,  78
Crocodile,  fable  of  a,  ii.,  28
Crowns  worn  by  Arab  ladies,  v.,  29
Cupboards,  iii.,  12

Danik,  xviii.,  page  534
Daood,  David ;  which  see
Dar  es-Selam,  iii.,  71
Darb  el-Ahmar  (Ed-),  xxx.,  11

el-Asfar  (Ed-),  xi.,  116

Darb  el-Mendel,  i.,  15

er-ltaml,  i.,  15 ;  x.,  63

Darrah  and  Durrah,  x.,  84
Darweeshes,  iii.,  63
Dasim,  son  of  Iblees,  Tntr.,  21
Dates,  i.,  3 ;  iii.,  22

,  a  pretended  effect  of,  viii.,  28

Datura used  to  induce  intoxication, xx.,

52
David,  effects  of  his  reciting  of  the  Psalms,

i.,  18
his  skill  in  making  coats  of  mail,

viii.,  5

Dawa,  a  depilatory,  xxvii.,  12
Days,  fortunate  and  unfortunate,  i.,  15
Day's  journey,  length  of  a,  ii.,  39
Dead,  washing, shrouding,  and  burial,  of

the,  vi.,  11;  xv.,  10;  xviii.,  page  534

xix.,  2
services  for  the,  iv.,  15;  v.,  40;  vi.,

11
Death,  customs  observed  after  a,  iv.,  15;

viii.,  37  ;  xix.,  3

manner  of  announcing  a,  xi.,  59

Debtors,  heavy  responsibility  of,  v.,  40
Decoration  of  a  city,  Intr.,  17

of  a  saloon,  iv.,  21

Deenar,  or  piece  of  gold,  about  ten  shillings,

or  half  a  guinea,  i.,  21
Deewan,  or  divan,  iii.,  12
Degree  of  time  (four  minutes),  v.,  60
Dejjal  (Ed-),  or  Antichrist,  xx.,  17


Dekkoojeh,  xvi.,  13

Delhan,  Intr.,  21

Denn,  a  wine-vessel,  iii.,  22

Depilatory  used  in  the  bath,  xxvii.,  12

Deputations  sent to meet distinguished

visiters,  Intr.,  12
DervSses. See  "  Darweeshes."
Devils,  their  nature,  &c.,  Intr.,  1.,  'Jl
Deylem  (Ed-),  xxv.,  43
Dhimmee,  xv.,  20
Diamonds,  valley  of,  &c.,  xx.,  26
Dilk,  iii.,  63
Dimyat,  xix.,  8
Dirbas,  xviii.,  20
Dirhem,  or  piece  of  silver,  about  sixpence,

i.,  21

a  weight,  viii.,  30

Dish,  an  enormous  one  described,  viii.,  7

Dispositions,  innate,  v.,  55

Divan. See  "  Deewan."

Divination,  i.,  15

Divorce,  Intr.,  1 ;  iv.,  39 ;  x.,  84 ;  xi.,  40

Dodk  (Ed-),  Island  of,  xx.,  90

Dogs  in  Arab  towns,  abundance  of,  v.,  5

Ddnanmah,  xxiv.,  13

Doors,  viii.,  69

to  be  closed  at  night,  xii.,  13

Ddrak,  a  kind  of  water-bottle,  xi.,  9

Dowries,  iv.,  39

Dreams,  interpretation  of,  i.,  15

anecdote illustrating the belief

in  the  truth  of,  iii.,  76
Dress,  iv.,  22 ;  v.,  15 ;  xi.,  78
Dresses  of  honour,  ii.,  1 5

&c.,  of  kings,  iii.,  91

Drum  and  pipe,  x.,  125

Drunkenness,  punishment  of,  Intr.,  1  ;  iii.,

22

Dukak,  xii.,  4
Dunya,  viii.,  52
Durka'ah,  iii.,  12
Durrah. See  "  Darrah."
Dye-women,  iv.,  36
Dyer's  shop,  viii.,  19

Early  rising,  Intr.,  41

Earths,  the  Seven,  and  particularly  our
earth,  described,  Intr.,  2

Earthquakes,  how  caused,  Intr.,  2

Eating,  manner  of,  ii.,  17

Eating,  instances  of  enormous  excess  in,
viii.,  7

in  streets  and  other  much-fre-
quented places  forbidden,  x.,  104


INDKX.


691


Education,  iv.,  24

'Eeds. See  "  Festivals."

Ei-wan,  iii.,  1 2

Ke/.ar. See  "  Iziir."

Efcndee,  xi.,  49

'Efreet,  a  powerful  evil  Jinnee,  Intr.,  21

Eiyoob, vii., 2 (the Patriarch Job) ;  his

affliction,  how  caused,  x.,  59
'Ekd,  a  miscellany  so  called,  xvi.,  20
Elders,  respect  paid  to,  xi.,  26
Elephants,  xx.,  89,  95
Elias. See  "  Ilyas."
Enchantment. See  "  Magic.''
Enees-el-Jelees,  vi.,  1
Envious  disposition  of  the  Arabs,  ii.,  20
Epilepsy,  xi.,  107
'Erk-soos,  iii.,  22
'Eshe,  Intr.,  1
Eunuchs,  i.,  13
Expiation  of  oaths,  iv.,  68
'Eyafeh  (E1-),  i.,  15
Eye,  evil,  iv.,  24,  44 ; viii., 58 ;  xi.,  5,  9,

14  ;  xxvi.,  4

Eyes,  blue,  disliked,  xv.,  9
Eyebrows,  clipping  of,  iii.,  10
Ezra  and  his  ass,  story  of,  v.,  3

Fadl  (E1-),  and  Fadl-ed-Deen,  vi.,  4
Faghfoor,  a  title  of  the  Emperors  of  China,

xxiv.,  26
Faghiyeh,  iii.,  22

Fakeeh,  and  fikee,  v.,  38 ;  xviii.,  page  538
Fakeer,  iii.,  61
Falakah,  iv.,  6
Falsehood in some cases commended,

iii.,  57
Fans,  ii.,  43
Farajeeyeh,  iv.,  41
Famish,  x.,  16

Fasting,  Intr.,  1 ;  xix,  page  573
Fate  and  destiny,  i.,  5  ;  ii.,  27
Fatehah,  or  fat  'hah,  opening  chapter  of

the  Kur-an,  5.,  16

recited  on  various  occasions,  xi.,  2 1

Fatimee  Khaleefehs,  viii.,  7

Feasts,  public  royal,  viii.,  7

Feet,  custom  of  rubbing  the,  iii.,  55

Feseekh,  xxvii.,  7

Festivals,  Minor  and  Great,  Intr.,  1  ;  i.,  1 6

Fikee,  xviii.,  page  538

Fines  for  murder  and  homicide,  vi.,  8

for  wounds  and  mutilations,  v.,  53

Fish,  miraculous,  ii.,  36

one  mistaken  for  an  island,  xx.,  8


Fish,  other  monstrous,  xx.,  19,  20,  49,  50

Fitneh,  vii.,  3

Five  Elders  or  Sheykhs,  viii.,  <53

Flowers,  iii.,  22

Fly-whisks,  ii.,  43

Fodder,  Intr.,  33

Food  of  the  Arabs,  ii.,  17

Fool  el-harr  (E1-),  xiii.,  page  360

Foreign  soldiers  employed  in  Arab  coun-
tries, ix.,  23

Fornication,  punishment  of,  Intr.,  1

Fountain  of  life,  Intr.,  2

Fountains,  iii.,  12

Fowls  of  Egypt,  v.,  19

Fresnel's  Letters  on  the  Early  Arabs,  i.,  18

Fruits  and  fruit-trees,  iii.,  22

Funerals,  merit  of  attending,  vii.,  6.  See
"  Burial."

Furkan,  an  appellation  of  the  Kur-an,  xi.,
112

Fustat  (E1-),  x.,  page  214

Gaming  forbidden,  Intr.,  1

Generosity,  death  occasioned  by,  vi.,  13

Genii. See  "  Jinn."

Geography. See  "  Cosmography."

Geomancy,  i.,  15  ;  x.,  63

Ghada,  a  tree,  vi.,  24

Ghadban,  x.,  99

Ghaddar,  or  gharrar,  Intr.,  21

Ghaniin,  vii.,  2

Gharam,  ix.,  13

Ghashiyeh,  an  embroidered  saddle-cover,
xiii.,  4

Ghayoor  (E1-),  x.,  31

Ghools,  Intr.,  21

Ghds  (E1-),  iii.,  63

Ghowwasah,  a  class  of  Jinn,  xxiii.,  6

Ghuzz,  v.,  95

Giants  who  eat  men,  xx.,  39  ;  xxiv.,  55

Gilliflower,  iii.,  22

Girdle,  royal,  xxiv.,  21

God,  his  nature,  Intr.,  1

custom  of  writing  his name  at the

commencement  of  a  book,  and  pro-
nouncing it on commencing every
lawful  act  of  any  importance,  Intr.,  1,
21;  i.,  17  ;  ii.,  58

.  is all-knowing,  use  of  this phrase,

Intr.,  3

is  most  great !  xxi.,  33

have  mercy  upon  him  !  iv.,  58

,  extolled  be  the  perfection  of,  nu-an-

iug  of  this  ejaculation,  iii.,  I'1"


fi92


INDEX.


(I old,  piece  of. See  "Deenar."

and silver ornaments forbidden to

men,  Intr.,  1
utensils condemned,

Intr.,  1

Gourds,  stuffed,  xxii.,  25
Grave-linen  often  kept  prepared,  i.,  7
Guests, perfuming of, iii., 8, 22. See

"  Visiters."
Gypsum,  royal,  v.,  27

Habarah,  iii.,  2

Habbaneeyeh,  garden  and  quarter  of  the,

v.,  23
Hair, manner  in which the Arab  ladies

dress  their,  x.,  8

• ,  dyeing  it  black  forbidden,  xv.,  12

,  singular  use  made  of  it,  x.,  88

Haisheh,  xx.,  77

Hajj,  or  pilgrimage,  Intr.,  1

Hajj,  or  pilgrim,  xv.,  34

Hajjaj  (E1-),  and  his  character,  x.,  140

Hakim  bi-amri-llah  (E1-),  xviii.,  page  523

Halab,  iv.,  19

Halawet  es-selameh,  xi.,  57

Halbet  el-Kumeyt,  iii.,  22

Haifa,  or  halfeh,  vi.,  19

Hambelees,  Intr.,  1

I.I  an  m  i:'u  I  Er-Rawiyeh,  ii.,  15

Hammam,  or  bath,  ii.,  16

Hanafees,  Intr.,  1

Hand,  biting  the,  in  grief  or  rage,  ix.,  page

61

Handkerchief,  viii.,  16
,  shaking  it,  a  signal  for  the

dispersion  of  an  assembly,  xi.,  61

of  indemnity,  v.,  95

Hand-mill,  Intr.,  35

Hararah,  ii.,  16

Hareem,  the  apartment  or  apartments of

the  women,  or  the  women  themselves.

— See  "  Women."

,  occupations  of  the,  xv.,  19

Harith  (E1-),  Intr.,  2 1

Harkend  (E1-),  Sea  of,  xx.,  12

Haroon  Er-Rasheed,  i.,  18; ii., lo; xxv.,

31

Haroot  and  Maroot,  iii.,  14
Harp. See  "Junk."
Hasan,  iv.,  23
Hasheesh, hasheesheh, and hashshash.

See  "  Hemp."
Hashimees,  xxvi.,  page  525
Hashimee  vein  between  the  eyes,  xii.,  21


Hatif,  Intr.,  21

Hatim  Et-Taee,  xi.,  page  295

Hawee,  ix.,  page  62

Hawking. See  "  Hunting."

Hayat-en-Nufoos,  x.,  74

Heavens,  the  Seven,  described,  Intr.,  2

Hebereh,  xxii.,  page  221

Hejaz,  the,  xxii.,  page  222

Hell,  Intr.,  2

Hellebore  used  to  induce  intoxication,  xx.,

52
Hemp  used  for  the  same  purpose,  ii.,  4(3 ;

iii.,  22  ;  xv.,  29  ;  xx.,  52
Henad,  xiv.,  10

Henbane  used  to  induce  intoxication,  xx.,  52
Henna^  Intr.,  19  ;  iv.,  36
Heram,  xxvi.,  21

Hezar,  a  species  of  nightingale,  xviii.,  19
Hezb,  v.,  38

Hiding  money,  custom  of,  i.,  23
Hippopotamus,  xx.,  10,  49
Hodaj,  viii.,  8
Holy  places,  x.,  145
Homicide,  fine  for,  vi.,  8
Hooreeyeh,  a  virgin  of  paradise,  iv.,  43
Horses,  lucky and unlucky colours and

marks  of,  ix.,  page  50
Horse-course  of  the  Elephant,  xxiv.,  1 8
Hosh,  xix.,  6
Hosn  et-taaleel,  vi.,  2

Maryam,  xi.,  104

el-Wujood,  xix.,  13

Hospital  of  Damascus,  &c.,  v.,  47

Hospitality,  Intr.,  I  :> ;  v.,  97

Hour,  cursing  the,  xii.,  20

House,  a  term  used  to  signify  "  wife,"  &c.,

ix.,  19
Houses,  i.,  28  ;  ii.,  39;  iii.,  12

for  mourning,  i.,  1 6

Howwa  (Eve),  xviii.,  602

Hulwan  el-miftah,  xxix.,  4

Hulweh,  vii.,  18

Hunting  and  Hawking,  ii.,  24;  viii.,  12

Hyperbole,  ii.,  4

Iblees,  Intr.,  1,  21
Ibn  (son),  xvi.,  2

'Abbas,  v.,  56

Khallikan,  v.,  18

Seensl,  viii.,  04

El-Wardee,  xx.,  1

Ibraheem (Abraham) thrown into a tire

by  order  of  Numrood  (or  Nimrod),  x.,

152


1NDKX.


693


Ibraheem,  his  offering  of  his  son,  xi.,  83

the  son  of  El-Mahdee,  iii.,  22  ;

xi.,  page  298

El-Mosilee,  iii.,  22

— El-Khowwas,  iii.,  63

Ibreek,  iii.,  22

Ikaiueh,  iv.,  24

Ikhsheedeeyeh,  548

'Ilwee  magic,  i.,  15

Ilyas,  or  Elias,  Intr.,  2  ;  iii.,  63

Images  and  pictures  of  living  creatures  con-
demned, Intr.,  1

Imam,  Intr.,  I  ;  v.,  69

Infants,  customs  relating  to  their  education,
&c.,  iv.,  24;  v.,  64;  xi.,  7,  8,  9,  11,  14,
15

Inheritance,  laws  of,  Intr.,  1 ;  iii.,  89 ;  xxii.,  2

Insanity,  a  qualification  of  a  saint,  iii.,  63

Intercession  of  saints,  ii.,  56  ;  iii.,  63

Irem  Zat  el  'Emad,  xi.,  page  305

Irmeeneeyeh,  xiv.,  page  383

!s-luik  Ei-Mosilee,  iii.,  22

Islam  (E1-),  Intr.,  1  ;  x.,  69  ;  xxiv.,  7

Ism  el-Aazam  (E1-),  i.,  15

Israel,  children  of,  persons  so  called,  xvi.,
page  456

Israfeel,  Intr.,  21

Izar,  or  eezar,  described,  iii.,  -

Jaafar  El-Barmekee,  ii.,  15 ;  iii.,  -8

Jabeh,  Island  of,  xx.,  12

Jaharkas,  Keysareeyeh  of,  v.,  18

Jahennem,  or  Hell,  Intr.,  2

Jann,  Intr.,  21  ;  x.,  24. See  "  Jinn."

Jandjir,  or  Jendar,  x.,  91

.lava,  xx.,  12

Jawalee  (E1-),  Khan  of,  v.,  1 1

Jawan,  xv.,  27

Jebraeel,  or  Jibreel  (Gabriel),  Intr.,  Jl

Jedeed,  a  copper  coin,  xxv.,  56

Jereeds,  uses  of,  in  manufactures,  Hi.,  1

Jesus,  notions  of  the  Muslims  respecting,

Intr.,  1

Jeyhoon  (River  Oxus),  xviii.,  13
Jink  (male  public  dancers),  xxx.,  22
Jinn  (or  Genii)  and  Jinnee,  their  nature,

&c.,  Intr.,  1,  21  ;  i.,  15;  x.,  28
Jinneeyeh,  story  of  a  man  married  to  a,  i..

25

Job. See  "  Eiyoob  "
Joodareeyeh  (E1-),  quarter  of,  xxii.,  45
Jubbeh,  vi.,  29
Judges,  Muslim,  general  corruptness  of,  v.,

80


Junk,  or  harp,  iii.,  26
Juz,  v.,  38


Kaab the  son  of  Mameh, killed  by  his

generosity,  vi.,  13

• el-Ahbar,  xi.,  page  305

Kaabeh,  its  covering,  xi.,  31

,  compassing  of  the,  xxii.,  33

Ka'ah,  iii.,  12;  v.,  24

Kaak,  viii.,  47

Kadk  wa-1-Kadar  (E1-),  i.,  5

Kadah,  iii.,  22

Kadee,  office  of,  Intr.,  38

Kadees,  the  four,  vi.,  36

Kadeeb,  vii.,  23

el-Ban,  xii.,  10

Kaf,  mountains  of,  Intr.,  2.  21  ;  ii.,  49

Kafoor,  vii.,  9

Kafoor  El-Ikhsheedee,  548

Kafoorah,  xxviii.,  6

Kahk,  i.,  10;  viii.,  47

Kahramaneh,  x.,  35

Kahweh,  iii.,  22 ;  ix.,  22

Kahwejee  and  kahvejee,  xix.,  4

Kalauibak  and  kalambak,  xx.,  12

Kalenderees,  iii.,  24

Kalensuweh,  iii.,  22

Kali,  xii.,  4

Kamar,  xviii.,  page  538

Kamar,  and  the  Kamaree  aloes-wood,  xx.,

12,69

Kamar-ez-Zeman,  x.,  7
Kamsheh,  viii.,  70
Kanoon,  ix.,  26
Karadh,  xxii.,  page  219
Karameh,  iii.,  63
Karawan,  or  keerawan,  xx.,  5
Karendelee,  iii.,  24
Karoon,  xxi.,  40

,  Lake  of,  xxii.,  9

Kas,  iii.,  22

Kasabeh,  a  measure,  viii.,  41

K.i-il,  I>lanil  of,  xx.,  17

Ka<r,  xi.,  25

Katd,  a  kind  of  grouse,  occasion  of  a  proverb,

Intr.,  3>» ;  xi.,  page  302
Kataif,  v.,  99  ;  viii.,  "J:;
Kazweenee  (E1-),  xx.,  1
Kebab,  ii.,  17
Kcenit.  xxiii.,  16
Keerawan. Set  "Karawan."
Keys  the  son  of'Asim.  anecdote  of,  iii.,  -J
l\.  \<  ami  Yfinen,  xxi.,  page  1-48
K.-x-an  oyeh,  v.,  18


INDEX.


Keytoon,  xi.,  99

Khaleea,  xii.,  2

Khaleefeh,  or  Caliph,  iii.,  27

Khaleefehs,  'Abbasee,  iii.,  27

Khaleelee  (E1-),  Khan  of,  ix.,  page  64

Khalid  son  of  'Abd-Allah  El-Kasree,  xiii.,
page  357

Khalidan (E1-), and El-Khalidat or El-
Khalidetan,  Islands  of,  x.,  3,  4

Khamaseen,  period  so  called,  xvi.,  1 9

Khans,  iii.,  31

Khaseeb,  iii.,  74

Khateeb,  Intr.,  1 ;  v.,  69

Khatmeh,  v.,  38

Khatoon,  xi.,  67

Khatteeyeh,  vi.,  2

Khawee,  an  animal  of  the  skin  of  which  is
made  a  kind  of  parchment,  xx.,  88

Kheyzuran,  vii.,  23

Khidr  (E1-),  Intr.,  2 ;  iii.,  63

Khilaf  or  khalaf. See  "  Ban."

Khitat,  El-Makreezee's,  date  of  its  composi-
tion, v.,  23

Khizam,  a  nose-ring,  xxx.,  29

Khoolenj,  xvi.,  12

Khuff,  xi.,  page  300

Khumaraweyh,  xvi.,  1

Khusrow  and  Sheereen,  xviii.,  page  525

Khutbeh,  \.,  16 ;  v.,  69

Kihaneh  (E1-),  i.,  15

Kiuaa,  iii.,  2

Kinneeneh,  iii.,  22

Kishk,  or  keshik,  xv.,  30

Kisra,  x.,  50

Kissing  the  ground,  vi.,  15 ;  xxiv.,  5

•  money,  vi.,  34

Kiyafeh  (E1-),  i.,  15

Kizil-Basb,  x.,  98

Kohl  (black  powder  applied  to  the  edges
of  the  eyelids,  and  other  powders  so i
applied),  Intr.,  19  ;  ii.,  34  ;  xxv.,  3

Koobeh.  iii.,  22

Koofee  character,  x.,  151

Koofeeyeh, a  head-kerchief, ii.,  35; viii.,
40

Koofeh  (E1-),  x.,  131

Koot-el-Kuloob,  vii.,  21

Kowwas  or  kowwas,  xxii.,  30

Kshatriyas,  xx.,  13

Kubbeh,  meanings  of,  ii.,  48 ;  iii.,  53

Kuds  (E1-),  or  Jerusalem,  iv.,  18

Kulleh,  or  Cala,  Island  of,  xx.,  12,  6"

Kulleh,  iii.,  22  ;  vi.,  41

Kulzuin  (E1-),  xxiv.,  41


Kumajeh,  xiL,  3

Kumkum,  ii.,  2 ;  iii.,  8

Kunafeh,  iii.,  66  ;  viii.,  23  ;  xxx.,  5

Kunooz,  a  people  of  Nubia,  xviii.,  10

Kur-an,  Intr.,  1

,  seven  editions  of  the,  iii.,  48

,  recitations  of  the,  v.,  38  ;  x.,  1 7

Kurbaj,  a  kind  of  whip,  iv.,  6

Kurd,  and  Kurdee,  xv.,  27

Kurs,  v.,  29

Kutb,  iii.,  63

Kuteyt,  vi.,  38

Kutrub,  Intr.,  21  ;  x.,  39

Labourers  in  gardens  and  fields,  remunera-
tion of,  x.,  71

Ladies,  Arab,  gait  of,  viii ,  65

Lam  and  Alif,  xvi.,  1 7

Lamb,  stuffed,  xxii.,  25

Language,  its  effect  upon  the  Arabs,  i.,  18

Laws,  Intr.,  1

Lead-stone,  xx.,  24

Learning,  respect  paid  to,  ii.,  1 5

Leef,  or  fibres  of  the  palm-tree,  xviii.,  15

Leewan,  iii..  1 2

Letters  (or  epistles),  Intr.,  11

Leylet  el-Kadr,  xxix.,  9

Literary  men,  rewards  of,  i.,  18;  ii.,  15

Literature  of  the  Arabs,  5.,  1 8

Litham,  vi.,  32

Litters  for  travelling,  viii.,  8

Load  of  a  camel,  usual  weight  of,  vii.,  4

Loadstone,  mountain  of,  iii.,  72

Lock,  wooden,  x.,  Ill

Locust-fruit,  a  symbol  of  the  heart,  viii.,
•29

Longevity,  instances  of,  Intr.,  39

Looking-glass,  custom  observed  on  looking
at  one's  face  in  a,  xi.,  5

Love,  remarks  on  the  passion  of,  among  the
Arabs,  vii.,  ;54

,  death  occasioned  by,  i.,  13 ;  vii.,  34

Loyalty  of  Muslims,  xxi..  page  165

Lukman,  x.,  59

Lute,  iii.,  22

Lutf,  xvi.,  6

Lynxes  employed  in  hunting,  viii.,  12

Maadinee,  x ,  19

Maan  the  son  of  Zaideh,  xi.,  page  '297

Mace  (weapon),  v.,  31

Maghrib  (E1-),  and  Maghrabee,  xviii.,  page

538
Magians,  x.,  98


INDEX.


T.95


Magians,  their  festivals  of  fire,  x.,  lol

Magic,  Intr.,  21  ;  i.,  15  ;  iii.,  14

Magnificence  of  Aral)  palaces,  iii.,  91

Mahboobeb,  xvi.,  page  4(31

Malular  kheyr,  vi.,  5

Mali  raj  an,  xvii.,  2

Mail,  coats  of,  viii.,  5

Mak'ad,  viii.,  20

Makreezee  (E1-). See  Khitat

Malikees,  Intr.,  1

Ma-moon  (E1-),  his  marriage  with  Booran,

xi.,  page  311

Man,  creation  of,  viii.,  GO
Mandharah,  xxi.,  page  174
Maniacs  in  the  madhouse  of  Cairo,  x.,  5:?
supposed  to be possessed, xvii.,

18
Marid,  a  most  powerful  evil  Jinnee,  Intr.,

21

Marjaneh,  x.,  120
Marriage,  Intr.,  1

— ,  age  of  a  girl  for,  i.,  12

— .prohibited degrees of, iii., 45;

iv.,  39

-,  augurations  with  respect  to,  v.,


74 ;  x.,  147
— ,  how  conducted,  &c.,  i.,  24  ;  iv.,

39  ;  v.,  94 ;  xviii.,  28
Martyrs,  iii.,  88

Masculine  used  for  feminine,  viii.,  36
Ma  shaa-llah,  xi.,  81
Mashitah,  a  tire-woman,  iv.,  37
Maskhoot,  xxi.,  1
Masr,  or  Misr,  a  name  of  Cairo,  &c.,  iv.,

1 2  ;  xxx.,  1
el-'Ateekah,  or  el-Kadeemeh,

xvi.,  page  449
Mastabah,  a  bench  of  stone  or  brick,  5.,  22,

iv.,  38

Mawaleeya  or  mawaliya,  xxvi.,  5
Meals  of  the  Arabs,  ii.,  17
Meats,  clean  and  unclean,  Intr.,  1  ;  5.,  17  ;

ii.,  17

Medecneh  (E1-),  xvi.,  page  459
Medicines,  i.,  5

Meekaeel,  or  Meekal  (Michael1,  Intr.,  21
Meezer,  or  mi-zer,  xiii.,  3
Mejd-ed-Deen,  xv.,  2
Mekmarah,  xviii.,  page  538
Meleehah  (El-\  v.,  92
Mellootah. See  "Melwatah."
Melon,  water-,  iii.,  22
Melwatah,  vi.,  30
Memlooks,  or  male  white  slaves,  i.,  13


Memrak,  xxvi.,  In

Mcnareh,  iii.,  18

Menu,  a  weight,  xi.,  page  312

Mensej,  xv.,  19

Mercy,  dress  given  in  token  of,  xxii.,  41

Mesh'al,  xiii.,  2

Mesjid  el-Ahzab,  or el-Fet-h,  or

el-Aala,  xxii.,  page  219
Meslakh,  ii.,  16
Mes'ood,  Intr.,  20
Mes'oodeh,  ii.,  44
Mesroor  the  eunuch,  iii.,  29

,  Khan  of  v.,  16

Metropolis  of  the  World,  v.,  49
Meydan  El-'Adil,  xxiv.,  18
Meymooneh,  x.,  23
Mibkharah,  iii.,  8
Mihaffeh,  viii.,  8
Mihraj,  (E1-),  xx.,  9

,  his  kingdom,  &c.,  xx.,  12

Mikashsheh,  xv.,  25

Mikna',  x.,  20

Mikra'ah,  the  thick  end of  a  palm-stick,

used  for  beating,  iii.,  63
Milk,  day  like,  xiii.,  16
Mineeneh,  xi.,  102
Miracles,  iii.,  63
Mirashsh,  iii.,  8
Misr. See  "  Masr."
Mithkal,  a  weight,  v.,  100
Moajizeh,  iii.,  63
Mo'allak,  vi.,  23
Mo'allhn,  xxvi.,  3
Mo'een  (E1-),  vi.,  3
Mo'een-ed-Deen,  xxiv.,  53
Mohallil,  xi.,  40
Mohammad,  the  Prophet,  orthography  and

meaning  of  his  name,  xi.,  112

— ,  different  appellations  of,  vi.,  12

,  his  dignity,  Intr.,  1

,  said  to  have  been  foretold  in

theSS.,  xi.,  112

-,  form  of  blessing  on,  i.,  2<5 ; v.,


66,  69


-,  invoked  as  an  intercessor,  ii.,  56
,  seen  in  dreams,  xvi.,  page  458

Mohammar,  xvi.,  13

Mohtesib,  inspector  of  the  markets,  &c.,
iii.,  22

Mole  on  the  face,  greatly  admired,  Intr.,  1 9

Money-changers,  v.,  41

Monopoly  condemned,  Intr.,  1

Months,  Mohammadan,  x.,  49

Moolids  of  Saints,  iii.,  63


696


INDEX


Moon  (new)  of  Ramadan,  eyebrow  compared

to,  iii.  10
of  the  Festival  of  Ramadan,

forehead  compared  to,  xxv.,  18
Moosa  (Moses)  and  a  blind  man,  story  of,

v.,  77

M<5?il  (E1-),  iii.,  3
Mdsilee,  iii.,  3  ;  iv.,  53
Mosques,  v.,  42
Mounds  of  rubbish round  eastern cities,

ii.,  47
Mourning  apparel,  &c.,  of,  ii.,  52  ; iv.,  15;

vii.,  22

Mowwal,  xxvi.,  5
Mubarrad  (E1-),  xviii.,  page  540
Mud  used  in  building,  vi.,  16
Mudd,  a  measure  for  corn,  &c.,  xxi.,  p.  178
Mudowwarah,  xiii.,  10
Mueddin,  or  muedhdhin,  Intr.,  1
Muftee,  Intr.,  38
Mujawireen (sing, mujawir), xviii.,  page

537

Mukaddam,  xi.,  30,  60
Mukharik  the  musician,  iii.,  22
Muktedir  (E1-),  magnificence  of,  iii.,  91
Mulakkin,  xviii.,  page  534
Munakkisheh,  iv.,  36
Munkar and Nekeer, Intr., 21  ; xviii.i

page  534

Muntasir  bi-llah  (E1-),  v.,  70
Murder,  punishment  of,  Intr.,  1 ;  vi.,  8
Murders  by  means  of  a  trap-door,  v.,  93
Murjis,  sect  of  the,  x.,  124
Musakah  and  Muzara'ah,  x.,  71
Musattah,  viii.,  8
Mushriks,  iii.,  97
Music,  iii.,  22 ;  xi.,  51

condemned,  Intr.,  1 ;  iii.,  22

Musicians,  iii.,  22

Muslin,  the  word  whence  derived,  iii.,  3
Mustafa.  (E1-),  a  name  of  Mohammad,  xix.,  1
Mustahall  or  mustahill,  xi.,  40
Mutanebbee  (E1-),  anecdote  of,  viii.,  18
Mutawekkil  (E1-),  his  passion  for  the  rose,

iii.,  22

Mutawellee,  v.,  9

Muwelled,  and  muwelledeh,  xvi.,  page  461
Muweshshah,  xi.,  52
Myrtle,  iii.,  22

Nabighab  Edh-Dhubyanee  (En-),  xxi.,  7
Na'ib  (or  Viceroy),  Intr.,  8
Nakeeb,  v.,  25 ;  xi.,  20
Nakir. £<,-<.>"  Munkar."


s

Nakoos,  xx.,  59

Name,  the  Most  Great,  Intr.,  iii  ;  1.,  15

Names  to  be  respected,  iv.,  24

Naming  of  children,  iv.,  24 ; x.,  140; xi.,

11

Narah,  Intr.,  21
Narcissus,  iii.,  22
Nata,  Intr.,  37

Neamet- Allah,  and  Neameh,  x.,  132,  136
Nebeedh,  a  kind  of  wine,  &c.,  iii.,  22
Neck,  the  part  usually  slapped,  xv.,  1 1
Nedd,  v.,  67
Nedeem,  xi.,  59
Nefeeseh,  the  seyyideh,  xi.,  37
Nejmet-es-Subh,  vii.,  18
Nekeer. See  "  Munkar."
Nepenthe,  xi.  76
Nesnas,  Intr.,  21

New-year's -days,  festival  of  the,  xvi.,  19
Niche  marking  the  direction  of  Mekkch  in

a  private  house,  x.,  143
Nilometer  of  Er-ltddah,  xix.,  5
Nirnsheh,  viii.,  70
Noam,  x.,  135
Noaman  Ibn-El-Mundhir, his passion  for

the  anemone,  iii.,  22
Noon,  a  letter  of  the  Arabic  alphabet,  to

which  a  beautiful  eyebrow  is  compared,

xviii.,  8

Noor-ed-Deen,  iv.,  14
—  el-Huda,  vii.,  18

Nooree  (En-),  a  saint,  anecdote  of,  iii.,  22
Nujaba,  iii.,  63
Nukaba,  iii.,  63
Nukl,  iii.,  22
Nukuldan  iii.,  22
Nusf (or nusf  faddah), a  coin, iii., 17;

xxii.,  14
Nuzheh,  vii.,  18
Nuzhet-el-Fuad,  xii.,  18

Oaths,  viii.,  48  ;  x.,  83

,  expiation  of,  iv.,  68

Obeisance,  modes  of,  Intr.,  14;  vi.,  15
Ocean,  Circumambient,  Intr.,  2
'Oka?,  or  'Okadh,  fair  of,  i.,  18
Omens,  i.f  15  ;  v.,  81
'Oinud,  iii.,  63

'On  (same  as  Marid),  xi.,  106
'Ood  (or  lute),  iii.,  22
'Oodeeyeh,  xi.,  39
Opium,  iii.,  22

Oratories  by  the  side  of  springs,  wells,  &c.,
x.,  97


INDEX.


697


Ornament of  the Good (or  Comely), an

appellation  of  Mohammad,  ii.,  14
'Orrah,  xxx.,  3
Owtad,  iii.,  63
Oxen,  wild,  xxv.,  26

Palm-tree,  iii.,  22

,  fibres  of  the,  xviii.,  15

sticks,  baskets,  &c.,  of,  iii.,  1

Papers of  importance wrapped in  waxed

cloth,  iv.,  29
Paradise,  Intr.,  2
Parents,  duties  and  responsibilities  of,  iv.,

24

,  respect  paid  to,  xi.,  26

Parrots,  miraculously  gifted,  ii.,  22
Pavilion,  senses  in  which  the  term  is  used  in

this  work,  xi.,  25
Pen  with  which  the  divine  decrees are

written,  iii.,  85
Pepper,  xx.,  53,  68.
Peree,  Intr.,  21
Perfumes,  iii.,  8 ;  x.,  38
Persia,  ancient  dynasties  of,  x.,  50
Perspiration,  odour  of,  x.,  38
Peter  of  Provence,  and  the  Fair  Maguelone,

x.,  67,  79

Petrified  human  beings,  xxL,  1
Philae,  Island  of,  xviii.,  10
Pie,  an  enormous  one  described,  ii.,  1 7
Pigmies,  xx.,  12,  38
Pilgrim,  an  appellation  often  given  to  an

old  woman,  xxv.,  33
Pilgrimage,  Intr.,  1 ;  iii.,  33
Pitch  or  bitumen,  springs  of,  xx.,  76
Poets,  intemperance  of,  iii.,  22
Polygamy,  x.,  84
Pomegranate,  Hi.,  22
Poor  often  raised  to  high  rank,  v.,  84
Postures  indicative  of  respect,  x.,  13
Prayer,  Intr.,  1 ;  i.,  16  ;  x.,  18,  44; xii.,  7,

8 ;  xxix.,  9

,  call  to,  iv.,  24

,  congregational,  of  Friday,  v.f  69

carpet,  iv.,  1 7

rosary,  x.,  44

for  the  dead,  iii.,  96

for  right  direction,  xviii.,  9

Predestination,  Intr.,  1 . See  "  Fate."
Presents,  Intr.,  10; i.,  16;  v.,  30,  88,  94  ;

xi.,  9,  26
to  men  of  learning,  etc.,  i.,  18;


n.,


for  good  tidings,  i.,  19  ;  iv.  61


Presents  offered  but  not  meant  to  be  ac-
cepted (when  the  price  of  a  thing  is
asked),  vi.f  6

Pressing  the  limbs  to  induce  sleep,  vu'i.,  33

Preventives,  the  two,  x.,  18

Professions  of  the  faith,  the  two,  vi.,  9

Prophets  and  Apostles,  Intr.,  1

Punishments,  future,  Intr.,  1

Purse,  sum  so  called.,  xi.,  111

Quinary  stature,  x.,  42

Raba,  xiv.,  6

Rabab,  a  kind  of  viol,  iii.,  22

(Er-),  a  woman's  name,  x.,  55

Races  es-Sitteen,  xi.,  60

Rafidees,  xi.,  33,  90

Rahmanee  magic,  i.,  15

Ramadan,  month  of  abstinence,  Intr.,  1  ;

iii.,  10
Ramin,  Rarninee,  Ramee,  &c. (Sumatra),

xx.,  12
Raml or ramal (Er-). See  "Darb er-

Raml."

Ranij,  Ralij,  Ranch,  &c., See  "  Zanij."
Rasheed-ed-Deen,  xv.,  8
Rats,  abundant  in  Egypt,  and  eaten  by  some

of  the  peasants  there,  ii.,  50
Raven,  miraculously  gifted,  ii.,  22

an  omen  of  separation,  xi.,  46

Rawook,  iii.,  22

Reehat  el-'ajeen,  xxviii.,  6

Rei  (Er-),  xi.,  page  298

Rejoicings,  public,  Intr.,  17;  xxiv.,  13

Rek'ah,  Intr.,  1

Religion,  general dogmas, rites,  &c., ot,

Intr.,  1
Remote,  use  'of  this  term,  ii.,  8 ;  xv.,  32,

33

Rend  (a  tree)  ix.,  15
Resurrection,  general,  Intr.,  1 ;  iv.,  9
Retaliation on  the day of resurrection,

iv.,  9

—  for  wounds  and -mutilations,  v.,

53

for  murder  and  homicide,  vi.,  8

Rewards,  future,  Intr.,  1

Reydaneeyeh  (Er-),  iv.,  63

Koyhan,  iv.,  10

Rhinoceros,  and  properties  of  its  horn,  xx.,  32

Rid  wan,  guardian  of  paradise,  viii.,  53

Ri,j:H,  anil  Rijal  el-Gheyb,  xxx.,  17

River,  subterranean,  xx.,  83

Roclah  (Er-),  xix.,  5

I D


CHS


INDEX.


Rddah  in  the  great  mosque  of  El-Medeeneh,

xxii.,  page  218
Roohanee  magic,  i.,  15
Room, Rooman, and Roomanee, x., 22;

xvii.,  15
Rose,  iii.,  22

Rowh  Ibn-Hatim,  anecdote  of,  iii.,  22
Ruba,  v.,  38

Ruba  el-Kharab  (Er-),  xxx.,  81
Rudeynee,  xxiii.,  2
Rukh',  or  rukbkh,  an  enormous  bird,  iii.,

80 ;  xx.,  22,  62

RusaTeh,  a  quarter  in  Baghdad,  iii.,  22
Rustum  or  Rustam,  xv.,  39

Saa,  a  measure,  xxi.,  page  163
Saad,  iii.,  95;  x.,  134

and  Haram,  xxi.,  page  148

Sabeehah,  vii.,  18

Sacrifices  on  the  Great  Festival,  Intr.,  1;

i.,  16

at  the  tombs  of  saints,  iii.,  63

for  children,  iv.,  24

for  the  dead,  v.,  40;  vi.,  11

Sad,  a  letter  of  the  Arabic  alphabet, to

which  a  beautiful  eye is  compared,

xviii.,  8

Saddle-bags,  i.,  2
Sadoomeh  the  magician,  i.,  15
Sadr,  iii.,  12
Safa>  x.,  8
Saheb,  a  title  of  Wezeers,  Intr.,  8

esh-Shurtah,  v.,  9

Saints,  iii.,  63

,  tombs  of,  and  visits  to  them,  iii.,  63  ;

xi.,  31 ;  xxii.,  page  222

,  festivals  of,  iii.,  63

,  intercession of,  implored, ii., 56;

iii.,  63

Saint  George,  Intr.,  2
Saj,  a  kind  of  tree,  xiii.,  7
Sakhr  the  Jinnee,  ii.,  9
Sakka,  xi.,  34
Salah,  Intr.,  1

Salt. See  "Bread  and  Salt."
Salutations,  iii.,  99 ;  v.,  86.  See  "  Obeisance."
Samaritans,  their  tenets,  x.,  98
Samit,  v.,  61

San 'a,  capital  of  El- Yemen,  xvii.,  13
Sandal-wood,  xx.,  1 2,  45
Saneh,  i.,  15

Sanf,  and  the  Saufee  aloes-wood,  xx.,  12
Sant,  xxii.,  page  '219
Sarab,  x.,  95


Sarandeeb. See  "  Ceylon."

Satan,  Intr.,  1

Sawab,  vii.,  8

Saweek,  xxiii.,  23

Scriptures,  Intr.,  1

Sea,  Old  Man  of  the,  xx.,  64;  xxiv.,  29

Sea-horse,  xx.,  10

Seals, or signets, Intr., 11. See also

"  Signet."

Sealing  doors,  iii.,  19
Sealab,  or  Saalah,  Intr.,  21
Seba,  xxiv.,  4
Sebeels,  vii.,  30
Sects  of  Muslims,  Intr.,  1
Seemiya.  (Es-),  i.,  15
Seemurgh,  an  enormous  bird,  xx.,  22
Seen  (Es-),  or  China,  Intr.,  2
Seeraf,  xxv.,  32
Seereh,  xxii.,  8
Sehr/(Es-),S.,  15
Seksar,  Island  of,  xx.,  52
Selahit  (Es-),  Island  of,  xx,  44
Selam  of  Friday,  VM  69
Seleem,  xi.,  55
Selem,  xxii.,  page  219
Selsebeel,  xv.,  15
Semaweh  (Es-),  xxii.,  page  220
Semheree,  xxiii.,  2

Serpents  believed  to  be  Genii,  Intr.,  21
that swallow the elephant, xx.,

12,43
Serpent's  skin,  sanative  properties  of a,

xx.,  90

Servants,  xi.,  26  ;  xxii.,  36
Seyd,  or  Seyyid,  xiv.,  7
Seyf  Zu-1-Yezen,  romance  of,  iii.,  83  ;  x.\.,

64,  83;  xxv.,  11,  15,  16

el-Mulook,  xxiv.,  14

Seyhoon  (river  Jaxartes),  xviii.,  13
Shadharwan,  xiii.,  8
Shafe'ees,  Intr.,  1
Shah-Bandar,  xi.,  3

El-Karmanee,  iii.,  63

Zeman,  Intr.,  6

Shahids  of  a  Kadee's  court,  xi,,  48
Shahriyar,  Intr.,  5
Shakireeyeh,  xx.,  13
Sham,  (Esh-)  xxi.,  19
Shamikh,  xviii.,  21
Shaving  the  head,  vi.,  25
Shebbabeh,  xxvi.,  25
Shee'ees. Sec  "  Shiya'ees."
Shejeret-ed-Durr,  vii.,  18
Shemhoorish,  or  Shembaroosh,  x.,  29


INDEX.


699


Shcmleh,  xxvi.,  20
Shemm  en-Neseem,  xvi.,  19
Shems-ed-Deen,  iv.,  14

eu-Xahar,  ix.,  15

Sherbet,  ii.,  17  ;  iii.,  54

-cups,  iii.,  54

Shereef,  xiv.,  7

Sheykh,  its  meaning  and  applications,  i.,  9

el-Islam,  xxii.,  32

Sheykhs,  the  two,  xi.,  90

Sheytan,  Intr.,  21

Sheytanee  magic,  i.,  15

Shiblee  (Esh-),  his  charity,  &c..  iii.,  63

Shibreeyeh,  viii.,  8

Shihab.'lntr.,  21

Shikk,  Intr.,  21

Shinf,  xviii.,  16

Shiya'ees,  or  Shee'ees,  Intr.,  1 ;  xi.,  33

Shoom,  xxiv.,  54

Shops  described,  i.,  22 ;  xi.,  97

frequented  for  amusement,  ix.,  4

Shureyk,  xxviii.,  6

Shurrafeh,  xiv,,  3

Sidilleh,  x.,  113

Signet  of  indemnity,  v.,  95

Signs,  emblems,  &c.,  conversation  by  means

of,  viii.,  18
Sijjeen,  ix.,  27
Sikbaj,  v.,  98;  xvi.,  13
Silk  clothes  forbidden  to  men,  Intr.,  1
Silver,  piece  of. See  "  Dirhem."
Sind  (Es-),  Western  India,  xx.,  48
Sirat,  the  bridge  over  the midst  of  hell,

xv.,  41

Sitt-el-Hosn,  iv.,  48
Siyain,  Intr.,  1
Skin  of  blood,  viii.,  71
Slaughtering  animals  for  food,  i.,  1 7
Slaves,  their  condition,  &c.,  Intr.,  1 ;  i.,  13  ;

ix.,  28

,  anecdote  of  one,  iii.,  22

,  anecdote  of  a  free-woman  sold  as  a

slave,  i.,  13
Slave-markets,  vi.,  14
Sleeve,  things  often  carried  in  the,  xi.,  page

300

Soada,  xvi.,  page  440
Society,  Muslim,  remarks  on  the  constitution

of,  Sx.,  4;  x.,84
Sohbeh,  x.,  110

Solomon. See  "Suleyman  Ibn-Daood.''
Soodiin,  country  of  the,  Intr.,  2
Soofees,  x.,  102
Sooks,  or  market- streets,  i.,  22


Soul,  its  state  between  death  and  judgment,
ix.,  27

Sprinkling  the  ground,  Intr.,  32 ;  xi.,  page
300

visitors,  with  rose-water,  iii.,  8

bottles,  iii.,  8

Spunging,  custom  of,  v.,  71

Stars,  shooting,  Intr.,  21 ;  L,  15

Streets  described,  i.,  22  ;  iii.,  93

Suffeh,  xvi.,  page  454

Suflee  magic,  i.,  15

Sufreh,  x.,  115

Suha  (Es-),  viii.,  62

Sukatee,  xi.,  88

Sukroojeh,  xvi.,  1 3

Suleyma,  x.,  55

Suleyman  Ibn-Daood  (Solomon  the  son  of
David),  his  power  over  the  Jinn,  &c.,
Intr.,  21  ;  i.,  15

,  his  seal,  Intr.,  21 ;  i.,  15;  xx.,  93

,  a  pretty  mouth  com-
pared to  it,  iii.,  1 1  {  x.,  43

-,  his  mode  of  travelling  through


the  air,  xi.,  115
,  his  table,  xx.,  93


-,  his  tomb,  xx.,  96
-  the  son  of  Aboo-  Jaafar,  vii.,  34
Agha,  the  Silahdar,  Intr.,  41


Suleymans,  praeadamite,  Intr.,  21

Sultan,  ii.,  33;  iv.,  13;  xxiv.,  13

an  appellation  sometimes  given  to  a

Khaleefeh,  v.,  95

Sumatra,  xx.,  12,  28,  38,  52

Sunnees,  Intr.,  1

Surnames,  iv.,  24 ;  v.,  20,  84

Suweys  (Es-),  or  Suez,  xx.,  92

Swords,  &c.,  worn  by  merchants  and  shop-
keepers, ii.,  23

,  carried  on  the  pulpit,  v.,  69

Taabeer  el-Menamat,  i.,  15

Tab,  game  of,  viii.,  26

Tabareeyeh,  -iii.,  20

Taghoot  fEt-),  x.,  1 1

Taj-el-Mulook,  viii.,  1 1

Takeeyeh,  xxv.,  55

Takht-rawan,  viii.,  8

Takleeyeh,  xxiv.,  1 1

Tales,  their  effects  upon  the  Arabs,  i.,  18

Talismans,  x.,  27  ;  xi.,  93

Talsam,  x.,  27

Tamarind,  x.,  82

Tarboosh,  iv.,  40

Tt-dmur,  xxi.,  4'_'


INDEX


Teer,  son  of  Ibices,  Intr.,  21
Tefa-ul  (Et-),  i.,  15
Teiyarah,  xviii.,  page  543
Temer  el-henna,  iii.,  22
Ten'om,  x.,  55
Teybeh,  xxviii.,  12
Teylesan,  xvi.,  page  458
Thaalab,  ix.,  page  56
Thamood,  tribe  of,  x.,  76  ;  xxviii.,  8
Theft,  punishment  of,  Intr.,  1 ;  v.,  32,  52
Thereed,  xviii.,  page  544
Thousand  and  One  Nights,  remarks  on  the
age  and  country  in  which  it  was  written,
the  state  of  manners  which  it  describes,
&c.,  ii.,  55; iii.,  22,  83;  iv.,  12,  13;
v.,  16,  23,  49;  x.,  1,  8,  67,  68,  87,  91,
98,  116;  xi.,  117;  xv.,  31;  xvi.,  page
452; xvii.,  20: xx.,  1,  26; xxii.,  14,
43; xxiii., 24; xxv., 31; xxvii., 2;
xxx.,  10,  21
Throne-Verse,  x.,  44
Thureiyk,  a  kind  of -lantern,  i.,  15
Tides,  theory  of  the,  Intr.,  2
Tire-women,  iv.,  37

Tobacco,  when  introduced  into  the  East,
iii.,  22  ;  iv.,  13

,  mentioned  in  this  work,  xxvii.,  2

Tombs  described,  vi.,  11;  viii.,  38

,  visits  to,  i.,  16

Tooloon,  the  Benee-,  xvi.,  1

Tortoise  mistaken  for  an  island,  xx.,  8

,  another  large  kind  of,  xx.,  49

Towfeek,  x.,  133
Trades,  &c.,  iii.,  51
Trap-doors  in  private  house,  xi.,  13
Travelling,  Intr.,  16 ;  i.,  2
Tree,  artificial,  iii.,  91
Truth,  the,  an  epithet  of  God,  iii.,  46
Turban,  Muslims  distinguished  by  the,  ii.,
55;  x.,  105

,  green,  xiv.,  7

of  professors  of  religion  and  law,

xviii.,  page  537

Turbans,  blue  and  yellow  and  red,  when
first  worn  'by  Christians  and  Jews  and
Samaritans,  ii.,  55 ;  x.,  98

: ,  snatching  of,  v.,  6

Tyranny  of  Eastern  Kings  and  Governors,
iv.,  33

Ubulleh  (E1-),  river  of,  xxvi.,  page  520
'Ulama  (men  of  science),  xix.,  14
Unlucky,  an  epithet  applied  to  an  'Efrort ,
iv.,  46


Uns-el-Wujood,  xviii.,  6
Usury  forbidden,  Intr.,  1

Veils,  iii.,  2

,  fumigation  of,  xxi.,  page  162

Veiling  the  face,  obligation  of,  i.,  20;  iv.,
39

,  frequently  neglected,  iii.,


22  ;  iv.,  39 ;  vii.,  14

the  head,  obligation  of,  vii.,  14


Verses  of  Safety,  xxi.,  31
Violet,  iii.,  22
Visiting  the  sick,  v.,  46
Visiters,  customs  observed  by  and  to,  ii.,  39  j
iii.,  8,  12,  32,  65;  xxiv.,  6

Wak-Wak,  Islands  of,  xx.,  19,  96 ;  xxv.,  32
Walee,  title  and  office  of,  v.,  9
Ward  fi-1-Akmam  (E1-),  xviii.,  2
Wars,  a  kind  of  saffron,  xxii.,  page  219
Waseef,  ix.,  1 1
Wasit,  xxvi.,  page  596
Watchmen  in  Arab  towns,  v.,  7
Water -horse,  xx.,  10

man,  xx.,  64

wheels  for  irrigation,  iv.,  25

Weaver,  anecdote  of  one  passionately  fond

of  the  rose,  iii.,  22

Weeping  not  considered  effeminate,  ii.,  41
Wekalehs,  iii.,  31

Welees,  or  saints,  iii.,  63 ;  xxx.,  1 7
Weleed  (E1-)  the  son  of  'Abd-El-Melik,  i.,

18

Weleeds,  viii.,  53
Weybeh,  xi.,  103
Wezeer,  or  Vizier,  etymology  of  the  word,

and  account  of  the  office,  Intr.,  8
Whips,  v.,  45

Whirlpool  of  the  Sea  of  Persia,  xx.,  23
Whirlwinds  caused  by  the  passage  of  Genii,

Intr.,  21
White  ensign,  xxi.,  10

face,  viii.,  -4

Widow,  period  during  which  she  must  wait

before  contracting a new marriage,

xxii.,  46

Wildan,  viii.,  53
Willow-flower-water,  iii.,  7
Windows,  iii.,  12;  xviii.,  4
Wine,  &c.,  forbidden,  Intr.,  1  ;  iii.,  '22
,  custom of  drinking, among  Arabs,

iii.,  22

Winnowing -fork,  ii.,  -r>
Wives,  lawful  number  of,  Intr.,  1


INDEX.


701


Wives, duty of opposing  the advice  of,

Intr.,  7
. See  "  Marriage,"  "  Women," and

"  Polygamy."

Women,  who  are  the  best  of,  ii.,  20 ;  iv.,  39
,  who  are  the  worst  of,  ii.,  20

—  of  Egypt,  v.,  54
whom  a  man  may  see  unveiled,  iv.,

39
— ,  occupations  of,  xv.,  19-

,  wickedness  of,  Intr.,  27 ;  iti.,  22, 59

of  wealth,  indolence  of,  v.,  89

,  gait  of  Arab,  viii.,  65

• ,  difficulties  attending  their  visiting

men,  ix.,  25

,  2660,  starved  to  death,  Intr.,  28

,  a  race  of,  dwelling  apart  from  men,

xxv.,  23
-,  Island  of,  xxv.,  32


Wool  worn  by  devotees,  ix.,  page  59
Wounds  and  mutilations,  punishments  for,

v.,  53
Writing,  different  styles  of,  xv.,  18

tablets,  xviii.,  page  520

Wudoo,  or  ablution  for  prayer,  Intr.,  I

Yajooj and Majooj (Gog and Magog),

Intr.,  2

Yasemeen,  xi.,  70
Yezeed  the  son  of  'Abd-El-Melik,  vii.,  34


Ydm  es-Subooa  after  child-birth,  iv.,  24
Yoohanna,  xi.,  105

Yoosuf (Joseph), his beauty proverbial,
x.,  59

,  his  miraculous  shirt,  x.,  152

and  Zeleekha,  viii.,  56

Zahir  (Ez-),  Khaleefeh  of  Egypt,  his  horrible

cruelty,  Intr.,  28
Zahr-el-Bustan,  vii.,  18
Zakhmeh,  or  zukhmeh,  xxv.,  8
Zanij,  Zalij,  Ranij,  &c.,  island  of,  xx.,  12
Zaranga?,  etymology  of  the  name,  xx.,  64
Zardakhanah,  x.,  91
Zardeh,  viii.,  25
Zareefeh,  vii.,  18
Zawiyeh,  xxii.,  29
Zebeeb,  iii.,  22
Zekah,  Intr.,  1

Zelemboor,  son  of  Iblees,  Intr.,  21
Zembeel,  or  zimbeel,  xi.,  page  308
Zemzem,  virtues  of  the  water  of,  v.,  44
Zijr(Ez-),  i.,  15
Zikrs,  iii.,  63 ;  viii.,  37
Zinj,  Zenj,  and  Zuuooj,  Intr.,  2 ;  xiv.,  5
Zirbajeh,  v.,  39
Zoba'ah,  Intr.,  21
Zu-1-Karneyn,  Intr.,  2
Zulumat  (Ez-),  Intr.,  2
Zumurrud,  xv<,  7


I \


1.ONDOM  . PRINTED  BY WIU.IAM <I."\VKS AM) ,«OXS, STAMFORD
AND  CHAUINC, CROSS,


University  of  California

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY

405  Hilgard  Avenue,  Los  Angeles,  CA  90024-1388

•\f Return  this  material  to  the  library

from  which  it  was  borrowed.


QLAPR15


MAY  0  ?  2002


US 6t»


•.,. -«,v.
V* ."S"  ,

• ,T  "'•'•?•

-


UC  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY


A 000  542  308 2


#-


m&i
