The Book of the Thousand Nights and One Night, Vol. 7 (Anonymous (trans. John Payne), 1884)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1884 Villon Society edition (https://archive.org/details/JohnPayneVolume7.AlfLaylahWaLaylah.TheBookOfTheThousandNights). The first complete English translation (1882-84), from the Calcutta Arabic edition.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

i


THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND
NIGHTS AND ONE NIGHT: now

FIRST COMPLETELY DONE INTO ENGLISH
PROSE AND VERSE, FROM THE ORIGINAL
ARABIC, BY JOHN PA YNE (A UTHOR
OF "THE MASQUE OF SHADOWS," 11 IN-
TAGLIOS," u SONGS OF LIFE AND DEATH,"
st LAUTREC" "THE POEMS OF MASTER
FRANCIS VILLON OF PARIS," "NEW
POEMS,' 3 ETC. ETC). IN NINE VOLUMES;

VOLUME THE SEVENTH.


LONDON-
PRINTED FOR SUBSCRIBERS ONLY
igoi


KIRMAN EDITION
Limited to Five Hundred Copies
No*. .3 32


CONTENTS OF THE SEVENTH VOLUME.


PAGE

S. JULNAR OF THE SEA AND HER SON KING

BEDR BASIM OF PERSIA . . . . s

2. KING MOHAMMED BEN SEBAIK AND THE

MERCHANT HASSAN ...... 49

a. STORY OF PRINCE SEIF EL MULOUK AND THE PRINCESS

BEDIYA EL JEMAL ....... 55

3. HASSAN OF BASSORA AND THE KING'S

DAUGHTER OF THE JINN . .... 121

4. KHELIFEH THE FISHERMAN OF BAGHDAD . 265
APPENDIX .......... 307


THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND NIGHTS
AND ONE NIGHT.


J ULNAE OF THE SEA AND HER SON KING
BEDR BASIM OF PERSIA.

There was once of old days and in bygone ages and
times, in the land of the Persians, a king called Shehri-
man, whose abiding-place was Khorassan. He had a
hundred concubines, but by none of them had he been
vouchsafed a child, male or female, all the days of his
life. One day, he bethought him of this and fell a-lament-
ing for that the most part of his life was past and he had
not been blessed with a son, to inherit the kingdom aftei
him, even as he had inherited it from his fathers and
forefathers; by reason whereof there betided him sore
chagrin and the extreme of care and despite. As he sat
thus [absorbed in melancholy thought], one of his officers
came in to him and said, ' my lord, at the door is
a merchant, with a slave-girl, than whom a fairer was
never seen.' ' Bring them to me,' answered the king, and
the merchant and the damsel came in to him.

When Shehriman beheld the latter, he saw that she was
like a Rudeini lance, 1 and she was wrapped in a veil oi
gold-embroidered silk. The merchant uncovered her face,

1 i.e. a lance of the manufacture of Rudeineh, a renowned female
spear-maker of Khett Hejer in Arabia.

VOL. VII. E


2


whereupon the place was illumined by her beauty and her
hair hung down to her anklets, in seven tresses, like
horse's tails. She had liquid black eyes, heavy buttocks
and slender waist ; [the sight of her] healed the sickness
of the ailing and quenched the fire of the thirsting, for she
was even as saith the poet :

I dote on her j for, lo, in beauty she's complete > Yea, staidness crowns

her charms and gravity sedate.
Nor tall nor short is she, but of the hinder parts So big, her trousers

still therefor are all too strait.
Nor tallness to be blamed nor shortness is in her ; Her shape's the

golden mean betwixten small and great.
Her tresses overfall her anklets, [black as night,] But still her face is

day no darkness may abate.

The king marvelled at her beauty and grace and
symmetry and said to the merchant, ' O elder, what is
the price of this damsel?' 'O my lord,' answered the
merchant, 'I bought her for two thousand dinars of the
merchant who owned her before myself, since when I
have travelled with her three years and she hath cost
me, up to the time of my coming hither, [other] three
thousand dinars : but she is a gift from me to thee.'
The king bestowed on him a splendid dress of honour and
ordered him ten thousand dinars, whereupon he kissed
his hands, thanking him for his bounty and beneficence,
and departed. Then the king committed the damsel to
the tire-women, saying, 'Amend ye the case of this
damsel 1 and adorn her and furnish her an apartment
and set her therein.' And he bade his chamberlains
carry her all that she needed and shut all the doors
upon her.

Now his capital city, wherein he dwelt, was called the

1 i.e. do away from her the traces of travel, etc., by means of baths
sad cosmetics.


3


White City and was seated on the sea-shore. So they
lodged her in an apartment, whose windows overlooked ^Ttg|)t
the sea, and Shehriman went in to her ; but she rose not fcCCXXXfx.
to him neither took any note of him. Quoth he, 'It
would seem she hath been with folk who have not taught
her manners.' Then he looked at her and saw her sur-
passing in grace and beauty and symmetry, with a face
like the round of the moon at its full or the sun shining
in the cloudless sky. So he marvelled at her beauty and
symmetry and extolled the perfection of God the Creator
(magnified be His power !), after which he pressed her to
his bosom and seating her on his knees, sucked the dew
of her lips, which he found sweeter than honey. Then
he called for trays of all kinds of the richest meats and
ate and fed her by mouthfuls, till she had enough ; but
she spoke not one word. The king began to talk to her
and asked her of her name; but she abode still silent
and spoke not a word nor made him any answer, neither
ceased to hang down her head towards the ground; and
it was but the excess of her beauty and loveliness and the
amorous grace that distinguished her that saved her from
his wrath. Quoth he, 'Glory be to God, the Creator of
this damsel ! How charming she is, save that she speaks;
not ! But perfection belongs [only] to God the Most
High.' And he asked the slave-girls whether she had
spoken, and they said, ' From the time of her coming till:
now, we have not heard her say a word.'

Then he summoned some of his women and bade them
sing to her and make merry with her, so haply she might
speak. So they played before her all manner of instru-
ments of music and sports and what not and sang, till all
who were present were moved to mirth, except the damsel,,
who looked at them in silence, but neither laughed nor
spoke, and the king's breast was straitened. Then he
dismissed the women and abode alone with the damsels


after which he put off his clothes and disrobing her with
his own hand, looked upon her body and saw it as it were
an ingot of silver. So he loved her with an exceeding
love and falling upon her, took her maidenhead and found
her a clean maid; whereat he rejoiced exceedingly and
said, ' By Allah, it is a wonder that the merchants should
have suffered a girl so fair of form and face to abide
a maid ! '

Then he devoted himself altogether to her, heeding
none other and forsaking all his [other] concubines and
favourites, and abode with her a whole year, as it were
one day. Still she spoke not, till, one day, he said to
her [and indeed the love of her and passion waxed upon
him], ' O desire of souls, verily the love of thee is great
with me, and for thy sake I have forsaken all my slave-
girls and concubines and women and favourites and have
made thee my portion of the world and had patience with
thee a whole year; and now I beseech God the Most
High, of His favour^ to soften thy heart to me, so thou
mayst speak to me. Or, if thou be dumb, tell me by
a sign, that I may give up hope of thy speech. I pray
God (extolled be His perfection S) to vouchsafe me by
thee a male child, who shall inherit the kingdom after
me; for I am old and lonely and have none to be my
heir. Wherefore, I conjure thee, by Allah, if thou love
me, return me an answer.'

She bowed her head awhile, [as if] in thought, and
presently raising it, smiled in his face; whereat it seemed
to him as if lightning filled the room. Then she said,
4 O magnanimous king and valorous lion, God hath an-
swered thy prayer, for I am with child by thee and the
time of my delivery is at hand, though I know not if the
child be male or female. But, had I not conceived bj
thee, I had not spoken one word to thee. 3 When the
feing heard her speech, his face shone with joy and happi-


5


ness and he kissed her head and hands for excess of
gladness, saying, ' Praised be God who hath vouchsafed
me the things I desire ! First, thy speech, and secondly,
thy tidings that thou art with child by me.'

Then he went forth from her and seating himself on
the throne of his kingship, in an ecstacy of happiness,
bade his vizier distribute to the poor and needy and
widows and others a hundred thousand dinars, by way of
alms on his account and thank-offering to God the Mow
High. The vizier did as the king bade him, and the
latter, returning to the damsel, sat with her and pressed
her to his bosom, saying, ' O my lady, O thou whose slave
I am, thou hast been with me a whole year, night and
day, waking and sleeping, yet hast not spoken to me till
this day. What was the cause of this thy silence?'
8 Hearken, O king of the age,' answered she, ' and know
that I am a wretched exile, broken-hearted and parted
from my mother and my family and my brother/ When
the king heard her words, he knew her desire and said, 4 As
for thy saying that thou art wretched, there is no ground
for such a speech, for my kingdom and all that I possess
are at thy service and I also am become thy bondman \
but, as for thy saying, " I am parted from my mother and
brother and family," tell me where they are and I will send
and fetch them to thee.'

4 Know then, O august king,' answered she, 'that I am
called Julnar of the Sea and that my father was of the
kings of the sea. He died and left us his kingdom, but
one of the other kings arose against us and took it from
our hands. My mother also is a woman of the sea and
I have a brother called Salih, with whom I fell out and
swore that I would throw myself into the hands of a man
of the folk of the land. So I came forth of the sea and
sat down on the shore of an island in the moon, where
a passer-by found me and carrying me to his house, be-


6


sought me of love; but I smote him on the head,* that
he all but died ; whereupon he carried me forth and sold
me to the merchant from whom thou hadst me, and he was
a good and virtuous man, pious and loyal and generous.
Were it not that thy heart loved me and that thou pre-
ferredst me over all thy concubines, I had not remained
with thee an hour, but had cast myself from the window
into the sea and gone to my mother and kindred ; but I
was ashamed to go to them, being with child by thee ;
for they would have deemed ill of me and would not have
credited me, though I swore to them, if I told them that
a king had bought me with his monies and made me his
portion of the world and preferred me over all his wives
and all that his right hand possessed. This then is my
Hfght story and peace be on thee.'

fcCD.1, The king thanked her and kissed her between the eyes,
saying, 'By Allah, O my lady and light of mine eyes s
I cannot endure to be parted from thee one hour ; and
if thou leave me, I shall die forthright. What then is
to be done ? ' 'O my lord,' replied she, 4 the time of my
delivery is at hand and my family must be present, that
they may tend me ; for the daughters of the land know
not the fashion of child-bearing of the daughters of the
sea, nor do the daughters of the sea know the fashion
of the daughters of the land ; and when my people come,
I shall be reconciled to them and they to me and I will
tell them that thou boughtest me with thy money and hast
used me with kindness and beneficence. And it behoves
that thou confirm my speech to them and that they see
thine estate with their own eyes and know that thou art
a king, the son of a king.'

< O my lady,' rejoined the king, ' do what seemeth good
to thee and that -which liketh thee, for I consent to thee
in all thou wouldst do. But how do the people of the
sea walk therein, without being wetted ? ! 'O king of


7


the age,' answered Julnar, 'we walk in the sea with our

eyes open, as do ye on the land, by the blessing of the
names engraved upon the seal of Solomon son of David
(on whom be peace) and see what is therein and behold
the sun and moon and stars and sky, as it were on the
face of the earth ; and this irketh us nought. Know, also,
that in the sea are many peoples and various forms and
creatures of all the kinds that be in the land, and that all
that is on the land is but a very small matter, compared
with that which is in the sea.' And the king marvelled at
her words.

Then she pulled out from her bosom two pieces of
Comorin aloes-wood and kindling fire in a chafing dish,
threw in somewhat thereof, then gave a loud whistle and
spoke words which none understood ; whereupon there
arose a great smoke and she said to the king, who was
looking on, ' O my lord, arise and hide thyself in a closetj
that I may show thee my mother and brother and family s
whilst they see thee not; for I design to bring them
hither, and thou shalt presently see a wonderful thing
and marvel at the various creatures and strange shapes
that God the Most High hath created.' So he arose
straightway and entering a closet, fell a-watching what
she should do. She continued her fumigations and con-
jurations till the sea foamed and became troubled and
there rose from it a handsome young man of a bright
countenance, as he were the moon at its full, with flower-
white forehead, red cheeks and teeth like pearls and
jewels. He was the likest of all creatures to his sister
[the damsel Julnar], and the tongue of the case spoke
these verses in his praise :

The full moon growth perfect once monthly ; but thy face Each day

anew's perfected in loveliness and grace.
Yea, and the full moon's dwelling is but in one sign's heart : To thes

all hearts,, O fair one, are as a dwelling-place.


8


After him there came forth of the sea a gray-haired old
woman and five damsels, as they were moons, bearing
a likeness to the damsel Julnar. They all walked upon
the surface of the water, till they drew near the window
and saw Julnar, whereupon they knew her and went in
to her. She rose to them and received them with joy
and gladness, and they embraced her and wept sore.
Then said they to her, ' O Julnar, how couldst thou leave
us four years, and we unknowing of thine abiding-place?
By Allah, the world has been straitened upon us, for stress
of severance from thee, and we have had no delight of
food or drink, no, not for one day, but have wept day
and night for the excess of our longing after thee S ' Then
she fell to kissing the hands of her brother and mother
and cousins, and they sat with her awhile, questioning
her of her case, and of what had befallen her, as well as
of her present estate. ' Know,' replied she, ' that when
I left you, I -issued from the sea and sat down on the
shore of an island, where a man found me and sold me
to a merchant, who brought me to this city and sold me
to the king of the country for ten thousand dinars. The
latter entreated me with honour and left all his concubines
and women and favourites on my account and was dis-
tracted by me from all he had and all that was in his
city.' 'Praised be God,' said her brother, 'who hath
reunited us with thee S But now, O my sister, it is my
purpose that thou arise and go with us to our country
and people.'

When the king heard this, he was transported for fear
lest she should accept her brother's words and he himself
avail not to stay her, passionately as he loved her, and
he became distracted with fear of losing her. But Julnar
answered her brother, saying, £ By Allah, O my brother^
he who bought me is lord of this city and he is a mighty
king and a wise, good and generous in the extreme


9


Moreover, he is a man of great wor.h and wealth and
hath neither son nor daughter. He hath entreated me
with honour and done me all manner of favour and kind-
ness ; nor, from the day of his buying me, have I heard
from him an ill word, to grieve my heart ; but he hath
never ceased to use me courteously, doing nothing with-
out my counsel, and I am in the best of case with him
and the perfection of fair fortune. Were I to leave him,
he would perish ; for he cannot endure to be parted from
me an hour ; and I, also, if I left him, I should die, for
the excess of the love I bear him, by reason of his great
goodness to me during the time of my sojourn with him :
for, were my father alive, my estate with him would not be
like that I enjoy with this great and glorious and puissant
king. Moreover, ye see me with child by him and I pray
God the Most High to vouchsafe me a son who may
inherit of this mighty king that which He hath bestowed
upon him of lands and palaces and possessions. Verily,
God hath not cut me off, but hath abundantly com-
pensated me [that which I lost], and praised be He for ^Tftrjji
that He hath made me daughter of a king of the sea and tfCCXU.
my husband. the greatest of the kings of the land ! '

When her brother and cousins heard this her speech,
their eyes were solaced thereby and they said, 4 O Julnar,
thou knowest thy value in our eyes and the affection we
bear thee and art certified that thou art to us the dearest
of all creatures and that we seek but ease for thee, with-
out travail or weariness. Wherefore, if thou be in unease,
arise and go with us to our land and people ; but, if thou
be at thine ease here, in honour and happiness, this is
our wish and our aim ; for we desire only thy happiness
in any case.' Quoth she, 4 By Allah, I am here in the
utmost ease and comfort and honour and have all that
I desire S ' When the king heard what she said, his heart
was set at rest and he rejoiced and thanked her [inwardly]


IO

for this [her speech]. Moreover, the love of hei re-
doubled on him and entered his inmost heart, and he
knew that she loved him as he loved her and desired to
abide with him, that she might see his child by her.

Then Julnar called for food and the waiting women
laid the tables and set on all kinds of viands, which had
been dressed in the kitchen under her own eyes, and
fruits and sweetmeats, of which she ate, she and her
kinsfolk. But, presently, they said to her, ' O Julnar, thy
lord is a stranger to us, and we have entered his house,
without his leave or knowledge. Thou hast extolled to
us his excellence and hast set before us of his victual
and we have eaten; yet have we not companied with
him nor seen him, neither hath he seen us nor come to
our presence and eaten with us, so bread and salt might
be between us.' And they all left eating and were wroth
with her, and fire issued from their mouths, as from
cressets; which when the king saw, he was transported
for excess of fear of them. But Julnar soothed them
and going to the closet where was the king her lord,
said to him, ' O my lord, hast thou seen and heard how
I praised thee and extolled thee to my people and what
they said to me of their desire to carry me away with
them ? ' ' I both heard and saw,' answered he. £ May God
abundantly requite thee for me ! By Allah, I knew not
the measure of thine affection for me until this blessed
hour and I doubted not of thy love of me ! '

*0 my lord,' rejoined she, ' is the reward of kindness
aught but kindness? Verily, thou hast dealt generously
with me and hast entreated me with worship and done me
all manner of honour and kindness and preferred me
above all thou lovest and desirest, and I have seen that
thou lovest me with the utmost love. So how should mv
heart be content to leave thee and depart from thee, after
ail thy goodness to me ? But now I desire of thy courtesy


II


that thou come and salute my family, so thou may&t see
them and they thee and love and friendship may be be-
tween you ; for know, O king of the age, that my mother
and brother and cousins love thee with an exceeding love,
by reason of my praises of thee to them, and say, " By
Allah, we will not depart from thee nor go to our country
till we have foregathered with the king and saluted him.'*
For they desire to see thee and make acquaintance with
thee.' ' I hear and obey/ said the king ; * for this is my
own wish.' So saying, he rose and went in to them and
saluted them after the goodliest fashion ; and they sprang
up to him and received him with the utmost honour, after
which he sat down and ate with them ; and he enter-
tained them thus for the space of thirty days. Then they
took -leave of the king and queen and departed to their
own land, after he had done them all possible honour.

Awhile after this, Julnar accomplished the days of her
pregnancy and the time of her delivery being come, she
bore a boy, as he were the moon at its full, whereat the
utmost joy betided the king, for that he had never in his
life [till then] been vouchsafed son or daughter. So they
held high festival and decorated the city seven days, in
the extreme of joy and happiness ; and on the seventh
day came Julnar's mother and brother and cousins, whenas Nfgfjf
they knew of her delivery. The king received them with fcccxtti
joy and said to them, ' I said that I would not give my
son a name till you should come and name him of your
knowledge.' So they named him Bedr Basim, 1 and all
agreed upon this name. Then they showed the child to
his uncle Salih, who took him in his arms and began to
walk about the chamber with him. Presently he carried
him forth of the palace and going down to the salt sea g
fared on with him, till he was hidden from the king'g
sight,

a Smiling full mooa.


12


When Shehriman saw him take his son and disappear
with him in the abysses of the sea, he gave the child up
for lost and fell to weeping and wailing; but Julnar said
to him, ' king of the age, fear not neither grieve fo?
thy son, for I love my child more than thou and he is
with my brother ; so reck thou not of the sea neither
fear drowning for him. Except my brother knew that
no harm would betide the little one, he had not done
this ; and he will presently bring thee thy son safe, if it
please God the Most High.' Nor was an hour past before
the sea became troubled and King Salih came forth, with
the little one safe in his arms, quiet and with a face like
the moon on the night of her full, and [rising into the
air] flew till he reached the palace and came in to them.
Then said he to the king, ' Belike thou fearedst harm for
thy son, whenas I plunged into the sea with him ? ' ' Yes,
O my lord,' replied the king; 'I did indeed fear for him
and thought he would never be saved therefrom.' { O
king of the land,' rejoined Salih, 4 we pencilled his eyes
with an eye-powder we know of and recited over him the
names engraven upon the seal of Solomon son of David
(on whom be peace !), for this is what we use to do with
children born among us ; and now thou needst not fear
for him drowning or suffocation in all the waters of the
world, if he should go down into them ; for 5 even as ye
walk on the land, so walk we in the sea.'

Then he pulled out of his pocket a casket, graven and
sealed, and breaking open the seals, emptied it ; where-
upon there fell from it strings of all manner jacinths and
other jewels, besides three hundred bugles of emerald
and other three hundred hollow jewels, as big as ostrich-
eggs, whose light outshone that of sun and moon. Quoth
Salih, 'O king of the age, these jewels and jacinths are
a present from me to thee. We never yet brought thee
a present, for that we knew not Julnar's abiding-place


53


neither had we any tidings of her ; but now that we see
thee to be united with her and we are all become as one
thing, we have brought thee this present ; and every little
while, God willing, we will bring thee the like thereof;
for that these jewels and ' jacinths are more plentiful with
us than pebbles on the earth and we know the good and
bad of them and their whereabouts and ttae way to them,
and they are easy to us.'

When the king saw the jewels, his reason was con-
founded and his mind bewildered and he said, s By Allah,,
one of these jewels is worth my kingdom S ' Then he
thanked Salih for his bounty and said to Julnar, ' I am
abashed before thy brother, for that he hath dealt munifi-
cently by me and bestowed on me this splendid present,
whereto the folk of the land may not avail/ So she
thanked her brother for his deed and he said, ' O king
of the age, thou hast the prior claim on us and it behoves
us to thank thee, for thou hast entreated our sister with
kindness and we have entered thy dwelling and eaten oi
thy victual ; and the poet says :

Had I, or ever Suada did, to weep for love been fain, I should, befos^

repentance came, have solaced heart and brain.
But she before my weeping wept ; her tears drew mine, and so QuofcJb

I, "Unto the precedent the merit doth pertain."

" And if we stood in thy service, O king of the age, a
thousand years, yet might we not avail to requite thee s
and this were but a scantling of thy due.'

The king thanked him with effusion and they all abode
with him forty days' space, at the end of which time
Salih arose and kissed the earth before his brother-in-law.
Quoth the latter, ' What wantest thou, O Salih ? ' And he
answered, saying, s O king of the age s indeed thou hast
done us [many] favours, and we crave of thy bounties that
thou deal charitably with us and give us leave [to depart] ;


14


for we yearn after our people and country and kinsfolk
and our homes ; so will we never forsake thy service nor
that of my sister and her son ; and by Allah, O king of
the age, it is not pleasant to my heart to part from thee j
but how shall we do, seeing that we have been reared in
the sea and that [the sojourn of] the land liketh us not?'
When the king heard this, he rose to his feet and took
leave of Salih of the sea and his mother and cousins, and
they all wept, because of parting, and said to him, ' We
will be with thee again anon, nor will we forsake thee,
but will visit thee every few days.' Then they flew off
and descending into the sea, disappeared from sight.
Mfgi)t After this, King Shehriman redoubled in honour and
bccxltll. kindness to Julnar, and the little one grew up and
flourished, whilst his uncle and grandmother and cousins
visited the king every few days and abode with him a
month or two months [at a time]. The boy ceased not
to increase in beauty and grace, with increase of years,
till he attained the age of fifteen and was unique in his
perfection and symmetry. He learnt reading and writing
and history and syntax and lexicography and archery and
spearplay and horsemanship and what not else behoveth
the sons of kings ; nor was there one of the children of
the folk of the city, men or women, but would talk of the
youth's charms, for he was of surpassing beauty and per-
fection, even such an one as is described in the saying of
the poet :

The whiskers write upon his cheek, with ambergris on pearl, Two lines ?

as 'twere with jet upon an apple, line for line.
Death harbours in his languid eye and slays with every glance J And in

his cheeks is drunkenness, and not in any wine.

And in that of another :

Upon the table of his cheek, a fringe of jet, I wis, The whiskers grow s

and sore thereat my soul's amazement is ;
As if his visage were a lamp that burns all night, hung up, Beneath the

darkness of his hair, with chains of ambergris.


H

And indeed the king loved him with an exceeding greal
love and summoning his vizier and amirs and the chief
officers of state and grandees of his realm, required of
them a binding oath that they would make Bedr Basim
king over them after himself] and they took the oath
gladly, for the king was beneficent to the people, pleasant
in speech and saying nought but that wherein was ad-
vantage for them, brief, a very compend of goodness.

On the morrow Shehriman mounted, with all his troops
and amirs and grandees, and went forth into the city and
returned. When they drew near the palace, the king dis-
mounted, to wait upon his son, whilst the latter abode on
horseback, and he and all the amirs and grandees bore
the saddle-cloth of honour before him, each in his turn,
till they came to the vestibule of the palace, where the
prince alighted and his father and the amirs embraced
him and seated him on the throne of kingship, whilst they
all stood before him. Then Bedr judged the people,
deposing the unjust and appointing the just, till near
upon midday, when he descended from the throne and
went in to his mother, Julnar of the Sea, with the crown
on his head, as he were the moon. When she saw him,
with the king before him, she rose and kissing him, gave
him joy of the sultanate and wished him and his father
length of life and victory over their enemies. He sat
with her and rested till the hour of afternoon-prayer,
when he took horse and repaired, with the amirs before
him, to the tilting-ground, where he played at arms with
his father and his grandees, till night-fall, when he re-
turned to the palace, preceded by all the folk.

He rode forth thus every day to the tilting-ground,
returning to sit and judge the people and do justice be-
tween amir and poor man ; and thus he did a whole year,
at the end of which time he began to ride out a-hunting
and to go round about in the cities and countries undei


16

fiis ruie, proclaiming peace and security and doing after
the fashion of kings; and he was unique among the
people of his day for glory and valour and just dealing
among the folk.

One day, the old king fell sick and his heart forebode
him of translation to the mansion of eternity. His sick-
ness increased on him till he was nigh upon death, when
he called his son and commended his mother and subjects
to his care and caused all the amirs and grandees once
more swear allegiance to the prince and assured himself
of them by oaths ; after which he lingered a few days and
was admitted to the mercy of God the Most High. His
son and widow and all the grandees and amirs and viziers
mourned over him, and they built him a tomb and buried
him therein.

They ceased not to mourn for him a whole month, till
Salih and his mother and cousins arrived and condoled
with them for the king and said, s O Julnar, though the
king is dead, yet hath he left this noble and peerless
youth, the fierce lion and the shining moon; and whoso
leaveth the like of him is not dead.' Moreover, the
grandees and notables of the empire went in to Bedr
and said to him, 'O king, there is no harm in mourning
^jf{j^|for the king: but [continuance of] mourning beseemeth
$j£txftb* none save women ; wherefore occupy thou not thy heart
and ours with mourning' for thy father; for he hath left
thee behind him, and whoso leaveth the like of thee is
not dead.' Then they comforted him and diverted him
and carried him to the bath. When he came out thence,
he donned a rich robe, wroughten with gold and em-
broidered with jewels and jacinths, and setting the royal
crown on his head, sat down on his throne of kingship
and ordered the affairs of the folk, doing equal justice
between the weak and the strong and exacting from the
amir the poor man's due ; wherefore the people loved him


17


with an exceeding love. Thus he abode a great while,
whilst, every now and then, his kinsfolk of the sea visited
him, and his life was pleasant and his eye unheated
[by tears].

It chanced that his uncle Salih went in one night to
Julnar and saluted her; whereupon she rose and em-
bracing him, made him sit by her side and asked him
how he did, he and his mother and cousins. ' O my
sister,' answered he, 'they are well and in great good
case, lacking nought save the sight of thy face.' Then
she set food before him and he ate, after which talk
ensued between them and they spoke of Bedr Basim and
his beauty and grace and symmetry and skill in horseman-
ship and his wit and good breeding. Now Bedr was
reclining [upon a day-bed within ear-shot], and hearing
his mother and uncle speak of him, iie feigned sleep
and listened to their talk. Presently Salih said to his
sister, ' Thy son is now seventeen years old and is un-
married, and I fear lest aught befall him and he have no
son ; wherefore it is my wish to marry him to a princess
of the princesses of the sea, who shall be a match for
him in beauty and grace.' Quoth Julnar, 'Name them
to me, for I know them all.'

So Salih proceeded to name them to her, one by one,
but to each she said, ' This one liketh me not for my son ;
I will not marry him but to one who is his like in beauty
and grace and wit and piety and good breeding and worth
and dominion and rank and lineage.' Quoth Salih, ' I
know none other of the daughters of the kings of the
sea ; for I have enumerated to thee more than an hundred
girls and none of them pleaseth thee : but see, O my
sister, whether thy son be asleep or no,' So she felt Bedr
and finding on him the signs of sleep, said to Salih, 6 He
is asleep ; what hast thou to say and what is thine object
in [assuring thyself of] his sleeping?' ' O my sister/

VOL. VII. 2


i8

replied Salih, 'know that I have bethought me of a girl of
the girls of the sea who befitteth thy son; but I fear to
name her, lest he be awake and his heart be taken with
her love and maybe we shall not avail to win to her ; so
should he and we and the grandees of the realm be
wearied [in vain] and trouble betide us through this;
for, as saith the poet :

Love, at the first, is as a drip of water, verily ; But, when the mastery
it gains, 'tis as a spreading sea.'

'Tell me the name and condition of this girl,' rejoined
Julnar; 'for I know all the damsels of the sea, kings'
daughters and others ; and if I judge her worthy of him,
I will demand her in marriage for him of her father,
though I spend on her all that my hand possesseth. So
tell me who and what she is and fear nought, for my son
is asleep.' Quoth Salih, £ I fear lest he be awake; and
the poet says :

I fell in love with him, what time his charms described heard I j For
whiles it chances that the ear doth love before the eye.'

But Julnar said, ' Speak and be brief and fear nothing,
O my brother.' So he said, ' O my sister, none is worthy
of thy son save the princess Jauhereh, daughter of King
Es Semendel, for that she is like unto him in beauty and
grace and brightness and perfection; nor is there, in the
sea or on the land, a sweeter or pleasanter of parts than
she; for she is fair and graceful and shapely, with red
cheeks and flower- white brows, teeth like jewels and great
black eyes, heavy buttocks and slender waist and a lovely
face. When she turns, she shames the wild cattle and
the gazelles, and when she walks, the willow branch is
jealous of her. When she unveils, her face outshines the
sun and the moon and she enslaves all that look on her ;
and she is sweet-lipped and soft-sided,'


19


When Julnar heard what Salih said, she answered, ' Thou
sayst sooth, O my brother! By Allah, I have seen her
many a time and she was my companion, when we were
little; but now I have not set eyes on her for eighteen
years and we have no knowledge of each other, for con-
straint of distance. By Allah, none but she is worthy of
my son ! ' Now Bedr heard all they said and fell in love
with the princess on report, wherefore fire was kindled
in his heart on her account and he was drowned in a sea
without shore or bottom. Then said Salih, ' By Allah, ^r((r]jg
O my sister, there is no greater fool among the kings of fotcflb,
the sea than her father nor one more violent of temper I
So name not thou the girl to thy son, till we demand her
in marriage of her father. If he favour us with his assent,
we will praise God the Most High; and if he refuse to
give her to thy son to wife, we will say no more about it
and seek another in marriage.' 'It is well judged of thee,'
answered Julnar, and they said no more ; but Bedr passed
the night with a heart on fire with passion for the princess
Jauhereh. However, he concealed his case and spoke not
of her to his mother or his uncle, albeit he was on coals
of fire for love of her.

Next morning, the king and his uncle went to the bath
and washed, after which they came forth and drank wine
and the servants set food before them, of which they and
Julnar ate, till they were satisfied, and washed their hands.
Then Salih rose and said to his nephew and sister, ' With
your leave, I would fain go to my mother [and kindred],
for I have been with you some days and they await me
and their hearts are troubled concerning me.' But Bedr
said to him, 'Abide with us this day;' and he consented-
Then said the king, ' Come, O my uncle, let us go forth
to the garden.' So they sallied forth to the garden and
walked about and took their pleasure awhile, after which
Bedr lay down under a shady tree, thinking to rest and


20


sleep ; but he called to mind his uncle's description of
the princess and her beauty and grace and shed copious
tears, reciting the following verses :

If, whilst within mine entrails the fires of hell did stir And flames raged

high about me, 'twere spoken in mine ear,
"Which wilt thou have the rather, a draught of water cold Or sight of

her thou lovest?" I'd say f u The sight of hen"

Then he sighed and wept and lamented, reciting these
verses also :

Ah, who shall be my helper in love of a gazelle, Even as the sua iss

visage, but fairer, sooth to tell ?
My heart was free and careless j but now 'tis all on fire With passion for

the daughter of King Es Semendel.

When Salih heard what his nephew said, he smote
hand upon hand and said, ' There is no god but God I
Mohammed is the apostle of God and there is no power
and no virtue save in God the Most High, the Supreme 3
O my son, didst thou hear what passed between' thy
mother and myself respecting the princess Jauhereh.?*
'Yes, O my uncle,' answered Bedr. 'And I fell in love
with her by report, through what I heard you say. Indeed,
my heart cleaves to her and I cannot live without her. 8
'O king,' rejoined his uncle, let us return to thy mother
and tell her how the case stands and ask her leave that I
may take thee with me and seek the princess in marriage
of her father; for I fear to take thee without her leave,
lest she be wroth with me ; and indeed the right would be
on her side, for I should be the cause of her separation
from thee, even as I was that of her separation from us.
Moreover, the [people of the] city would be left without
a king and there would be none to govern them and look
to their affairs ; so should the realm be disordered against
thee and the kingship depart from thy hands/' But Bedr
said, ( my uncle 8 if I return to my mother and consult


her, she will not suffer me to do this ; wherefore i will not
return to her nor consult her, but will go with thee and
tell her not and after return.' And he wept before him.

When Salih heard what his nephew said, he was be-
wildered concerning his case and said, 4 1 crave help of
God the most High in any event.' Then, seeing that
Bedr was resolved to go with him, without consulting his
mother, he drew from his finger a seal-ring, whereon were
graven certain of the names of God the Most High, and
gave it to him, saying, ' Put this on thy finger, and thou
wilt be safe from drowning and other [the perils of the
sea] and from the mischief of its beasts and its great
fishes.' So Bedr took the ring and put it on his finger.
Then they plunged into the sea and fared on till they ftf{crf)t
came to Salih's palace, where they found Bedr's grand- frtcxlbi
mother, the mother of his mother, seated with her kins-
folk, and going in to them, kissed their hands. When the
old queen saw Bedr, she rose to him and embracing him,
kissed him between the eyes and said to him, ' A blessed
coming, O my son! How didst thou leave thy mother
Julnar ? ' ' She is well in health and fortune,' answered
he, ' and salutes thee and her cousins.'

Then Salih told his mother how Bedr had fallen in love
with the princess Jauhereh by report and was come, pur-
posing to demand her in marriage of her father; which
when the old queen heard, she was exceeding wroth with
her son and sore troubled and concerned and said to
Salih, 'O my son, of a truth thou didst wrong to name
the princess Jauhereh before thy nephew, knowing, as
thou dost, that her father is stupid and arrogant, little of
wit and exceeding violent of temper, grudging his daughter
to those who demand her in marriage ; for all the kings of
the sea have sought her hand, but he would none of them
and rejected them all, saying, " Ye are no match for her
in beauty nor grace nor aught else." Wherefore we fear to


22


demand her in marriage of him, lest he reject us, even as
he hath rejected others ; and we are people of spirit and
should return broken-hearted.'

'O my mother,' answered Salih, 'What is to do? For
King Bedr says, " Needs must I seek her in marriage of
her father, though it cost me my whole kingdom," and
avouches that he will die of love and longing for her, if
he have her not to wife. Moreover, he is handsomer and
goodlier than she ; his father was king of all the Persians,
whose king he now is, and none but he is worthy of
Jauhereh. Wherefore I purpose to carry her father a
present of jacinths and jewels, befitting his dignity, and
demand her of him in marriage. If he object that he is
a king, behold, Bedr also is a king and the son of a king ;
or, if he object her beauty, behold, Bedr is handsomer
than she ; or, again, if he object the extent of his
dominion, behold, Bedr's dominion is vaster than hers
and her father's and he hath greater plenty of troops and
guards, for that his kingdom is greater than that of Es
Semendei. Needs must I do my endeavour to further the
desire of my sister's son, though it cost me my life ;
because I was the cause of what has happened ; and even
as I plunged him into the ocean of her love, so will I go
about to marry him to her, and may God the Most High
help me thereto ! ' ' Do as thou wilt,' rejoined his mother;
" but beware of giving her father rough words, whenas thou
speakest with him ; for thou knowest his folly and violence
and I fear lest he do thee a mischief, for he knoweth not
respect for any.' And Salih answered, * I hear and obey.'

Then he took two bags full of emeralds and rubies and
other jewels and giving them to his servants to carry, set
out with Bedr for the palace of Es Semendei. When they
came thither, he sought an audience of the king and being
admitted to his presence, kissed the earth before him and
saluted him after the goodliest fashion. The king rose to


23


him and receiving him with the utmost honour, bade him
be seated. So he sat down and presently the king said
to him, 'A blessed coming, O Salih ! Indeed, thou hast
desolated us [by thine absence]. But what brings thee
to us? Tell me thine errand, that we may fulfil it to thee.'
Whereupon Salih arose and kissing the earth a second
time, said, 'O king of the age, my errand is to God and
the magnanimous king and the valiant lion, the report
of whose good qualities the caravans have spread far and
near and whose renown for goodness and beneficence and
clemency and graciousness and liberality is bruited abroad
in all climes and countries.'

Then he opened the two bags and displaying their con-
tents before the king, said to him, ' O king of the age,
belike thou wilt show favour to me and heal my heart
by accepting my present' Quoth the king, * With what $Tfc$t
intent dost thou make me this gift? Tell me thy case and fecnlblt
acquaint me with thy need. If it be in my power, I will
straightway accomplish it to thee and spare thee toil and
trouble ; and if I be unable thereunto, God imposeth not
upon a soul aught but that whereto it may avail.' 1 So
Salih rose and kissing the earth three times, said, ' O king
of the age, thou art indeed able to that which I desire ;
it is in thy power and thou art master thereof ; and I
impose not on the king a dilemma, nor am I mad, that
I should ask of the king a thing whereto he availeth not ;
for the sage saith, "If thou wouldst be obeyed, ask that
which is possible." Wherefore, that of which I am come
in quest, the king (whom God preserve ! ) is able to grant.'
' Ask what thou wouldst have,' replied the king, i and ex-
pound thy case and seek thy desire.' Then said Salih,
' O king of the age, know that I come as a suitor, seeking
the unique pearl and the treasured jewels the princess


J Kora?i ii. 286.


24


Jauhereh, daughter of our lord the king ; wherefore, ©
king, disappoint thou not thy suitor.'

When the king heard this, he laughed till he fell back-
ward, in derision of him, and said, ' O Salih, I had thought
thee a man of worth and sense, seeking nought but what
was reasonable and speaking not but advisedly. What
then hath befallen thy reason and urged thee to this
monstrous matter and mighty hazard, that thou seekest
in marriage the daughters of kings, lords of cities and
countries? Art thou of a rank to aspire to this great
eminence and hath thy wit failed thee to this pass that
thou affrontest me with this demand ? '

' God amend the king 1 ' replied Salih. ' I seek her not
for myself (albeit, an I did, I am her match and more
than her match, for thou knowest that my father was king
of the kings of the sea, for all thou art now our king), but
for King Bedr Basim, lord of the lands of the Persians
and son of King Shehriman, whose puissance thou knowest
If thou object that thou art a great king, King Bedr is
a greater ; and if thou object thy daughter's beauty, he is
handsomer than she and fairer of form and niore excellent
of rank and lineage ; and he is the champion of the people
of his day. Wherefore, O king of the age, if thou grant
my request, thou wilt have set the thing in its place • but,
if thou deal arrogantly with us, thou wilt not use us justly
nor travel the right road with us. Moreover, O king,
thou knowest that the princess Jauhereh, the daughter of
our lord the king, must needs be married, for the sage
saith, " Needs must for a girl marriage or the grave." So,
if thou mean to marry her, my sister's son is worthier of
her than any other man.'

When King Es Semendel heard Salih's words, he was
exceeding wroth ; his reason fled and his soul was like to
depart his body for rage, and he said. ' O dog, shall the
like of thee dare to bespeak me thus and name my


2 5


daughter in the assemblies, 1 saying that the son of thy
sister Julnar is a match for her? Who art thou and who
are thy sister and her son and who was his father, that
thou shouldst dare to say these things to me? What are
ye all, in comparison with my daughter, but dogs ? ' And
he cried out to his servants, saying, ' Take yonder good-
for-nought's head ! ' So they drew their swords and fell
upon Salih, but he fled and made for the palace gate,
where he found more than a thousand horse of his cousins
and kinsfolk and servants, armed cap-a-pie in iron and
strait-knit coats of mail, with spears and naked swords
in their hands, whom his mother had despatched to his
succour.

When they saw Salih come running out of the palace,
they questioned him and he told them what was to do ;
whereupon they knew that the king was a violent-tempered
fool. So they alighted and drawing their swords, went
in to King Es Semendel, whom they found seated upon
the throne of his kingship, unaware of their coming and
violently enraged against Salih ; and they saw his guards
and servants and officers unprepared. When the king saw
them enter, sword in hand, he cried out to his people,
saying, ' Out on you ! Take me these dogs' heads 3 ' But,
before long, Es Semendel's party were put to the rout and
addressed themselves to flight, and Salih and his kinsfolk
seized upon the king and bound his hands behind him.
When Jauhereh awoke and knew that her father was 3CtGT)t
a captive and his guards slain, she fled forth the palace uXCXlbttf
to a certain island and climbing up into a high tree, hid
herself therein.

1 It is a breach of good manners to name to or before an Arab the
women of his family in so many words. When it is desired to enquire
after their health, the proper form of question is not, s< How is thy wife,,
thy daughter, etc. ? " but (< How is thy house? " {Keif hal ahluk) or
some aimilar periphrasis.


26


Now, when the two parties ^ame to blows, some of
King Es Seraendel's servants fled and Bedr, meeting
them, questioned them and they told him what had
happened, adding that the king was a prisoner, where-
upon Bedr feared for himself and said in his heart,
'Verily, all this turmoil is on my account and none is
sought for but I.' So he sought safety in flight, know-
ing not whither he went ; but fate fore-ordained from all
eternity drove him to the island where the princess had
taken refuge, and he came to the very tree on which she
sat and cast himself down, like a dead man, thinking to
lie and rest and knowing not that there is no rest for the
pursued, for none knoweth what destiny hides for him in
the future. As he lay down, he raised his eyes to the
tree and they met those of the princess. So he looked
at her and seeing her to be like the shining moon, said,
'Glory to Him who created yonder perfect form, Him
who is the Creator of all things and Almighty! Glory to
the Great God, the Creator, the Shaper and Fashioner !
By Allah, except my presentiments deceive me, this is
Jauhereh, daughter of King Es Semendel ! Methinks
that, when she heard of our coming to blows with her
father, she fled to this island and hid herself in this
tree ; but, if this be not the princess herself, it is one yet
goodlier than she.'

Then he bethought himself and said, ' 1 will arise and
lay hands on her and question her of her case ; and if she
be indeed Jauhereh, I will demand her in marriage of
herself and so accomplish my desire.' So he stood up
and said to her, ' O end of all desire, who art thou and
who brought thee hither?' She looked at him and seeing
him to be as the full moon, when it breaks from under
the black clouds, slender of shape and sweet of smile,
answered, saying, 5 O fair of fashion, I am the princess
Jauhereh, (laughter of King Es Semendel, and I took


27


refuge in this place, because Salih and his men made war
on my father and slew his troops and took him prisoner,
with some of his men ; wherefore I fled, fearing for my
life, and know not what fortune hath done with my father.'

When Bedr heard this, he marvelled exceedingly at the
strange chance and said in himself, 'Doubtless I have
come to my desire by the taking of her father.' Then he
looked at Jauhereh and said to her, 'Come down, Q my
lady ; for I am one slain for love of thee and thine eyes
have captived me. Know that all these broils and troubles
are on thine account and mine ; for I am Bedr Basim,
King of the Persians, and Salih is my uncle, and he it is
who came to thy father to demand thee in marriage. As
for me, I have left my kingdom for thy sake, and our
meeting here is a rare coincidence. So come down to
me and let us go to thy father's palace, that I may beseech
my uncle Salih to release him and take thee to wife
according to the law.' When Jauhereh heard his words,
she said in herself, 'It was on this vile wretch's account,
then, that all this hath befallen and that my father hath
been made a prisoner and his guards and chamberlains
slain and I constrained to flee far away from my palace
and seek refuge in this island, a miserable exile. But,
an I go not about with him, to defend myself against
him, he will possess himself of me and take his will of
me ; for he is in love and a lover is not blamed for aught
that he doth.'

Then she beguiled him with [fair] words and soft
speeches, whilst he knew not the perfidy she purposed
against him, and said to him, * O my lord and light of my
eyes, art thou indeed King Bedr Basim, son of Queen
Julnar ? ' And he answered, ' Yes, O my lady.' 8 May God ^Ttqfjt
cut off my father,' rejoined she, 8 and make his kingdom to tiCCXltX
cease from him and heal not his heart neither avert from
him strangerhood, if he could desire a comelier than thou or


28


aught goodlier than these fair fashions of thine ! By Allah,
he is little of wit and judgment ! But, king of the age,
be thou not wroth with him for that which he hath done ;
for, if thou love me a span, verily I love thee a cubit.
Indeed, I have fallen into the snare of thy love and am
beeome of the number of those thou hast slain. The
love that was with thee hath transferred itself to me and
there is left thereof with thee but a tithe of that which
is with me.'

So saying, she came down from the tree and strained
him to her bosom and fell to kissing him ; whereat passion
and desire for her waxed on him and he doubted not but
she loved him and trusted in her. So he returned her
caresses and said to her, ' By Allah, O princess, my uncle
Salih set forth to me not a fortieth part of thy charms, no,
nor a quarter of a carat 1 thereof! ' Jauhereh pressed him
to her bosom and pronounced some unintelligible words ;
then spat in his face, saying, ' Quit this shape of a man
and take that of a bird, the handsomest of birds, white
of plumage, with red bill and feet.' Hardly had she
spoken, when Bedr found himself transformed into a
bird, the handsomest of birds, which shook itself and
stood, looking at her.

Now Jauhereh had with her one of her slave-girls, by
name Mersineh; so she called her and said to her, 'By
Allah, but that I fear for my father, who is his uncle's
prisoner, I would kill him ! May God not requite him
with good I How unlucky was his coming to us ; for all
this trouble is due to him ! But do thou carry him to the
Thirsty Island and leave him there to die of thirst' So
Mersineh carried him to the island in question and would
have returned and left him there ; but she said in herself,
1 By Allah, one of such beauty and grace deserveth not
to die of thirst 1 ' So she brought him to another island,
1 A carat is a twenty-fourth part of anything.


29


abounding in trees and fruits and streams, and leaving him
there, returned to her mistress and told her that she had
set him on the Thirsty Island,

Meanwhile, King Salih sought for Jauhereh, but, finding
her not, returned to his palace and said to his mother,
' Where is my sister's son, King Bedr ? ' 'By Allah, O
my son,' replied she, ' I know nothing of him ! For, when
he heard that you and King Es Semendel had come to
blows and that strife and slaughter had betided between
you, he took fright and fled.' When Salih heard this, he
grieved for his nephew and said, ' By Allah, O my mother,
we have dealt negligently by King Bedr and I fear lest he
perish or lest one of King Es Semendel's soldiers or his
daughter Jauhereh fall in with him. So should we come
to shame with his mother and no good betide us from
her, for that I took him without her leave.' Then he
despatched guards and scouts throughout the sea and
elsewhere to seek for Bedr; but they could learn nothing
of him : so they returned and told King Salih, wherefore
grief and concern redoubled on him and his breast was
straitened for King Bedr.

Meanwhile, Julnar abode many days in expectation of
her son's return ; but he came not and she heard no news
of him. So, when she was weary of waiting, she arose
and going down into the sea, repaired to her mother,
who rose to her and embraced her and kissed her, as did
her cousins. Then she questioned her mother of King
Bedr and she answered, saying, ' O my daughter, he came
hither with his uncle, who took jacinths and jewels and
carrying them to King Es Semendel, demanded his
daughter in marriage for thy son ; but he consented not
and offended against thy brother in words. Now I had
sent Salih nigh upon a thousand horse and there befell
strife between him and King Es Semendel ; but God
aided thy brother against him, and he slew his troops


SO

and took himself prisoner. Meanwhile, tidings of this
reached thy son, and it would seem as if he feared for
himself; wherefore he fled forth from us, without our
will, and returned not, nor have we heard any news of
him.' Then Julnar enquired for King Salih and his
mother said, 4 He is seated on the throne of kingship, in
the stead of King Es Semendel, and hath sent in all
directions to seek thy son and the princess Jauhereh.'

When Julnar heard this, she mourned sore for her son
and was sore incensed against her brother Salih for that
he had taken him and gone down with him into the sea,
without her leave; and she said, 'O my mother, I fear to
tarry with thee, lest the state fall into disorder and the
kingdom pass from our hands ; for I came to thee without
letting any know. Wherefore I deem well to return and
govern the realm, till it please God to order our son's
affair for us. But look ye forget him not neither neglect
his case ; for, should he come to any harm, it would
infallibly be the death of me, since I see the world only
in him and delight but in his life.' * With all my heart,
O my daughter,' replied the old queen. ' Ask not what
we suffer by reason of his loss and absence.' Then
she sent to seek for Bedr, whilst Julnar returned to
her kingdom, weeping-eyed and mournful-hearted, and
Htg!)t indeed the world was straitened upon her and she was in
C£CL evil case.

To return to King Bedr. He abode days and nights in
the semblance of a bird, in the island where Mersineh
had left him, eating of its fruits and drinking of its waters
and knowing not whither to go nor how to fly ; till, one
day, there came a fowler to the island to catch somewhat
wherewithal to get his living. He espied King Bedr in
his form of a white bird, with red bill and feet, captivating
the sight and bewildering the thought [with his beauty] s
and said in himself, ' Verily, yonder is a handsome bird ;


35


never saw I its like in make or beauty.' So he cast his
net over Bedr and taking him, carried him to the town,
to sell him. On his way, one of the townsfolk accosted,
him and asked the price of the bird. Quoth the fowler,
* What wilt thou do with him?' 'I will kill him and eat
him,' answered the other; whereupon said the fowler,
' Who could have the heart to kill this bird and eat him ?
I mean to present him to the king, who will give me more
than thou and will not kill him, but will divert himself by
gazing on his beauty and grace, for in all my life, since I
have been a fowler, I never saw his like among land or
water fowl. The utmost thou wouldst give me for him
would be a dirhem, and by the Great God, I will not
sell him ! '

Then he carried the bird up to the king's palace, and
when the latter saw it, its beauty pleased him and the
red colour of its feet and beak. So he sent an eunuch
to buy it, who accosted the fowler and said to him, ' Wilt
thou sell this bird ? ' 1 No,' answered he ; ' it is a gift
from me to the king.' So the eunuch carried the bird
to the king and told him what the man had said ; and
he took it and gave the fowler ten dinars, whereupon
he kissed the earth and went away. Then the eunuch
carried the bird to the king's palace and placing him in
a handsome cage, set meat and drink by him and hung
him up.

When the king came down [from the throne], he said
to the eunuch, ' Where is the bird ? Bring it to me, that
I may look upon it, for, by Allah, it is handsome ! ' So
the eunuch brought the cage and set it before the king,
who looked and seeing the food untouched, said, ' By
Allah, I know not what it will eat, that I may feed it ! '
Then he called for food and they laid the tables and the
king ate. When the bird saw the meat and fruits and
sweetmeats and what not, he ate of all that was before


32


the king, whereat the latter and all the bystanders mar-
velled and the king said to his attendants, * In all my life
I never saw a bird eat as doth this!' Then he sent an
eunuch to fetch his wife, that she might look upon the
bird, and he went in to her and said, ' O my lady, the
king desireth thy presence, that thou mayst divert thyself
with the sight of a bird he hath bought. It is goodly of
aspect and is a wonder of the wonders of the age ; for,
when we set on the food, it flew down from its cage and
perching on the table, ate of all that was thereon.'

So she came in haste ; but, when she saw the bird, she
veiled her face and turned to go away. The king followed
her and said to her, ' Why dost thou veil thy face, when
there is none in presence save the eunuchs and women
that wait on thee and thy husband ? ' ' O king/ answered
she, 'this is no bird, but a man like thyself.' 'Thou liest,'
rejoined he. 'This is too much of a jest. How should he
be other than a bird?' { By Allah,' replied she, 'I do not
jest with thee nor do I tell thee aught but the truth; for
this bird is King Bedr Basim, son of King Shehriman,
jbCuxfjt lord of the land of the Persians, and his mother is Julnar
tKtlu of the Sea.' And how came he in this shape?' asked the
king; and she said, 'The princess Jauhereh, daughter of
King Es Semendel, hath enchanted him : ' and told him
all that had befallen King Bedr from first to last ; for this
queen was the greatest enchantress of her day.

The king marvelled exceedingly at his wife's words and
conjured her, on his life, to free Bedr from his enchant-
ment and not leave him in torment, saying, ' May God
the Most High cut off Jauhereh's hand, for a foul witch
as she is i How little is her piety and how great her craft
and perfidy ! ' Quoth the queen, ' Do thou say to him,
«< O Bedr Basim, enter yonder closet l " 5 So the king bade
him enter the closet and he did so.

Then the queen veiled her face and taking in her hand


33


a bowl of water, entered the closet, where she pronounced
over the water certain words, that might not be under-
stood, and sprinkling the bird therewith, said to him, ' By
the virtue of these mighty names and holy verses and of
the Most High God, Creator of heaven and earth, the
Quickener of the dead and Appointer of the means of
livelihood and the terms of existence, quit this thy present
form and return to that in which God created thee ! '
Hardly had she made an end of these words, when the
bird trembled and became a man ; and the king saw be-
fore him a handsome youth, than whom there was none
goodlier on the face of the earth.

When Bedr found himself thus restored to his own
shape, he said, ' There is no god but God and Mohammed
is the apostle of God ! Glory be to the Creator and Pro-
vider of all creatures and the Ordainer of their terms of
life 1 ' Then he kissed the king's hand and wished him
long life, and the king kissed his hand and said to him,
*0 Bedr, tell me thy history from beginning to end.' So
he told him his whole story, concealing nought: and the
king marvelled thereat and said to him, 'O Bedr, God
hath delivered thee from the enchantment : but what hath
thy judgment decided and what thinkest thou to do?'
'O king of the age,' answered Bedr, 'I desire of thy
bounty that thou equip me a ship with a company of thy
servants and all that is needful; for I have been long
absent and fear lest the kingdom depart from me. And
I misdoubt me my mother is dead of grief for my loss ;
for she knows not what is come of me nor whether I am
alive or dead. Wherefore, I beseech thee, O king, to
crown thy favours to me by granting me what I seek.'

The king was moved by Bedr's beauty and sweet speech
and said, { I hear and obey.' So he fitted him out a ship,
which he furnished with all that was needful and manned
with a company of his servants; and Bedr set sail in it,
vol. vn. 3


34


after having taken leave of the king. They sailed tea
days with a favouring wind; but, on the eleventh day,
the sea became exceeding troubled, the ship rose and fell
and the sailors availed not to govern her. So they drifted
at the mercy of the waves, till the ship drove upon a rock
and broke up and all on board were drowned, except Bedr,
who got astride one of the planks of the vessel, after having
been nigh upon death. The sea and the wind carried the
plank along for three days, whilst he knew not whither he
went and had no means of directing its motion ; till, on
the fourth day, the plank grounded with him on the sea-
shore in sight of a white city, as it were a passing white
dove, goodly of ordinance, with high towers and lofty
walls, builded upon a tongue of land that jutted out into
the sea and the waves beating against its walls.

When Bedr saw this, he rejoiced with an exceeding joy,
for he was well-nigh dead with hunger and thirst, and
dismounting from the plank, would have gone up the
beach to the city ; but there came down to him mules and
asses and horses, in number as the sands [of the sea] and
fell a-striking at him and hindering him from landing.
So he swam round to the back of the city, where he
landed and entering the place, found none therein and
marvelled at this, saying, 'I wonder to whom does this
city belong, wherein is no king nor any inhabitant, and
whence came the mules and asses and horses that hindered
me from landing ? '

Then he fared on at hazard, musing on his case, till he
espied an old man, a grocer, [sitting at the door of his
shop]. So he saluted him and the other returned his
greeting and seeing him to be a handsome young man,
said to him, 'O youth, whence comest thou and what
brings thee to this city?' Bedr told him his story; at
which the old man marvelled and said, < O my son, didst
thou see any in thy way?' 'Indeed, O my father/ an-


35


swered Bedr, *I wondered to see the city void of people.'
Quoth the grocer, ' O my son, come up into the shop,
lest thou perish.' So Bedr went up into the shop and
sat down ; whereupon the old man set food before
him, saying, ' O my son, come within the shop ; glory
be to Him who hath preserved thee from yonder she-
devil ! '

Bedr was sore affrighted at the grocer's words ; but he
ate his fill and washed his hands; then turned to his host
and said to him, ' O my lord, what is the meaning of thy
words? Verily, thou hast made me fearful of this city
and its people.' ' Know, O my son,' replied the old man,
'that this is the City of the Magicians and its queen is
a sorceress and a mighty enchantress, as she were a she-
devil, crafty and perfidious exceedingly. All the horses
and mules and asses thou sawest were once men and
strangers, like unto thee ; for whoever enters the city,
being a young man like thyself, this misbelieving witch
takes him and abides with him forty days, after which she
enchants him, and he becomes a horse or a mule or an tNlgfjt
ass, of those thou sawest on the sea-shore. So, when &tcU£«>
they saw thee about to land, they feared lest she should
enchant thee, even as she had enchanted them, and
signed to thee, as who should say, "Do not land, — " of
their solicitude for thee, lest she should do with thee like
as she had done with them. She possessed herself of
this city [and took it] from its people by sorcery and her
name is Queen Lab, which, being interpreted, meaneth
in Arabic, " The Sun." '

When Bedr heard what the old man said, he was sore
affrighted and trembled like a wind-shaken reed, saying
in himself, ' Hardly am I delivered from the affliction
wherein I was by reason of sorcery, when fate casts me
into yet sorrier case ! ' And he fell a-musing over his
case and that which had betided him. When the grocer


36


saw the violence of his fear, he said to him, * O my son,
come, sit at the threshold of the shop and look upon
yonder creatures and upon their dress and favour and
that wherein they are by reason of enchantment, and
fear not ; for the queen and all in the city love and
tender me and will not [do aught to] vex my heart or
trouble my mind.' So Bedr came out and sat at the
shop-door, looking out upon the folk; and there passed
by him creatures without number.

When the people saw him, they accosted the grocer
and said to him, ' O elder, is this thy captive and thy
prey that [thou hast gotten] in these [latter] days ? ' { He
is my brother's son,' answered the old man. ' I heard
that his father was dead ; so I sent for him, that I might
quench with him the fire of my longing." Quoth they,
€ Indeed he is a comely youth ; but we fear for him from
Queen Lab, lest she turn on thee with treachery and take
him from thee, for she loves handsome young men.' i The
queen will not gainsay my commandment,' answered the
grocer, 1 for she loves and tenders me ; and when she
knows that he is my brother's son, she will not molest
him nor afflict me in him, neither trouble my heart on
his account.' Then Bedr abode some months with the
grocer, eating and drinking, and the old man loved him
with an exceeding love.

One day, as he sat in the shop, as of his wont, there
came up a thousand eunuchs, with drawn swords, mounted
upon Arabian horses and clad in various kinds of raiment
and girt with jewelled girdles and Indian swords. They
saluted the grocer, as they passed, and were followed by
a thousand damsels like moons, clad in various raiment
of silks and satin, laced with gold and embroidered with
jewels, and armed with spears. In their midst rode a
young lady, mounted on an Arabian mare, saddled with
& saddle of gold, set with various kinds of jewels and


37


jacinths. The damsels saluted the grocer and passed on,
till up came Queen Lab, in great state, and seeing Bedr
sitting in the shop, as he were the moon at its full, was
amazed at his beauty and grace and became passionately
enamoured of him.

So she alighted and sitting down by King Bedr, said
to the old man, ' Whence hadst thou this fair one ? ' ' He
is my brother's son/ answered the grocer, 'and is [but]
lately come to me.' Quoth Lab, 'Let him be with me
this night, that I may talk with him.' And the old man
said, ' Wilt thou take him from me and not enchant him ? *
' Yes,' answered she, and he said, ' Swear to me.' So she
swore to him that she would not enchant Bedr nor do
him any hurt, and bidding bring him a handsome horse,
saddled and bridled with a bridle of gold and decked with
trappings all of gold, set with jewels, gave the old man
a thousand dinars, saying, ' Use this for thine occasions.'
Then she took Bedr and carried him off, as he were the
full moon on its fourteenth night, whilst all the folk,
seeing his beauty, were grieved for him and said, ' By
Allah, this youth deserves better than to be bewitched
by yonder accursed sorceress ! '

Bedr heard all they said, but ^as silent, committing
his case to God the Most High, till they came to the
gate of Queen Lab's palace, where the amirs and eunuchs
and notables of the realm dismounted and she bade tfcC{($t
the chamberlains dismiss her officers and grandees, who IJCcfiU.
kissed the earth and went away, while she entered the
palace with Bedr and her eunuchs and women. Here he
found a palace, whose like he had never seen, for in its
midst was a great basin full of water, amiddleward a vast
garden. He looked at the garden and saw it full of birds
of various kinds and colours, warbling in all manner
tongues and voices, joyous and plaintive. Brief, [every-
where] he beheld great state and dominion and sai<L


38


* Glory be to God, who of His bounty and clemency

provided those who worship other than Himself ! '

The queen sat down at a lattice-window overlooking
the garden, on a couch of ivory, whereon was a high bed,
and 'Bedr seated himself by her side. She kissed him and
pressing him to her bosom, bade her women bring a table
of food. So they brought a table of red gold, inlaid with
pearls and jewels and spread with all manner meats, and
the queen and Bedr ate, till they were satisfied, and washed
their hands ; after which the waiting-women set on flagons
of gold and silver and crystal, together with all kinds of
flowers and dishes of fruits and confections. Then the
queen called for the singing-women, and there came ten
damsels, as they were moons, with all manner of musical
instruments in their hands. The queen filled a cup and
drinking it off, filled another and gave it to Bedr, who
took it and drank ; and they ceased not to drink till they
had enough. Then she bade the damsels sing, and they
sang all manner airs, till it seemed to Bedr as if the
palace danced with him for delight. His sense was
ravished [with the music] and his breast expanded, and
he forgot his strangerhood and said in himself, ' Verily,
this queen is a handsome young woman, and I will never
leave her ; for her kingdom is vaster than mine and she
is fairer than the princess Jauhereh.'

He ceased not to drink with her till nightfall, when
they lighted the lamps and candles and diffused perfumes
[from the censers] ; nor did they leave drinking, till they
were both drunken, and the singing-women sang the
while. Then the queen lay down on a bed and dis-
missing her women, called to Bedr to come and lie with
her. So he lay with her, in all delight of life, till the
WfClfSt morning, when they entered the bath, that was in the
tjccltb. palace, and washed ; after which she clad him in the finest
of raiment and called for wine* So the waiting- women


39


brought the drinldng-vessels and they drank. Presently,
the queen arose and taking Bedr by the hand, sat down
with him on chairs and commanded to bring food, of
which they ate and washed their hands. Then the damsels
brought the drinldng-vessels and fruits and flowers and
confections, and they ceased not to eat and drink, whilst
the singing-girls sang various airs, till the evening.

They gave not over eating and drinking and merry-
making forty days, at the end of which time the queen
said to him, ' O Bedr, whether is the pleasanter, this place
or the shop of thine uncle the grocer?' 'By Allah, O
queen,' answered he, 1 this is the pleasanter, for my uncle
is but a poor man, who sells pot-herbs.' She laughed at
his words, and they lay together in the pleasantest of case
till the morning, when Bedr awoke and not finding Queen
Lab by his side, was troubled at her absence and perplexed
and said, ' Where can she have gone ? ' And indeed she
was absent from him a great while and did not return j
so he donned his clothes and went in search of her, but
found her not and said in himself, ' Haply, she is gone to
the garden.'

So he went out into the garden and came to a running
stream, beside which he saw a white she-bird and on the
bank a tree full of birds of various colours, and stood and
watched the birds, without their seeing him. Presently,
a black bird flew down upon the white bird and fell to
billing her, after the manner of doves ; then he leapt on
her and trod her three times, after which she changed
and became a woman. Bedr looked at her and behold,
it was Queen Lab. So he knew that the black bird was
a man enchanted and that she was enamoured of him and
had transformed herself into a bird, that he might lie with
her; wherefore jealousy got hold upon him and he was
wroth with the queen because of the black bird.

Then he returned to his place and lay down on the bed,


40


and presently she came back and fell to kissing him and
jesting with him ; but he answered her not a word, being
sore incensed against her. She saw what was to do with
him and was assured that he had seen what befell between
her and the black bird ; yet she discovered to him nothing,
but concealed that which ailed her. When he had done
her occasion, he said to her, ' O queen, give me leave to
go to my uncle's shop, for I long after him and have not
seen him these forty days.' 4 Go/ answered she, ' but do
not tarry from me, for I cannot brook to be parted from
thee, nor can I endure without thee an hour.' ' I hear and
obey,' said he and mounting, rode to the shop of the
grocerj who received him with open arms and said to him,
4 How hast thou fared with yonder idolatress ? ' 'I was
well, in health and prosperity,' answered Bedr, 'till this
last night,' — and told him what had passed in the garden.

When the old man heard mis, he said, ' Beware of her,
for know that the birds upon the tree were all young men
and strangers, whom she loved and enchanted and turned
into birds. The black bird thou sawest was one of her
officers, whom she loved with an exceeding love, till he
^{(jfit cast his eyes upon one of her women, wherefore she
ftfXuJ. changed him into a black bird ; and whenas she longs
after him, she transforms herself into a she-bird, that he
may swive her, for she still loves him passionately. When
she found that thou knewest of her case, she plotted evil
against thee, for she loves thee not truly. But no harm
shall betide thee from her, whilst I protect thee ; so fear
nothing ; for I am a Muslim, by name Abdallah, and there
is none in my day better skilled in magic than I ; yet do I
not make use of the art except upon constraint Many a
time have I put to nought the sorceries of yonder accursed
witch and delivered folk from her, and I care not for her 2
for she can do me no hurt : nay, she fears me with an
exceeding fear, as do all in the city who, like her, are


41


magicians and serve the fire, not the Omnipotent King.
So, to-morrow, come thou to me and tell me what she
doth with thee ; for this very night she will cast about to
destroy thee, and I will tell thee how thou shalt do with
her, that thou mayst save thyself from her malice.'

Then Bedr took leave of the old man and returned to
the palace, where he found the queen seated, awaiting
him. When she saw him, she rose to welcome him and
making him sit down, brought him meat and drink, and
they ate till they had enough and washed their hands;
after which she called for wine and they drank till the
night was half spent, when she plied him with wine, till
he was drunken and lost sense and wit. When she saw
him thus, she said to him, ' I conjure thee by Allah and
by that thou worshippest, if I ask thee a question, wilt
thou answer me truly ? ' And he, being drunken, answered,
' Yes, O my lady.' ' O my lord and light of mine eyes/
said she, * when thou awokest last night and foundest
me not, thou soughtest me, till thou foundest me in the
garden, in the guise of a white she-bird, and sawest a
black bird leap on me and tread me. Now I will tell the
truth of this matter. That black bird was one of my
servants and I loved him with an exceeding love ; but
one day he cast his eyes on one of my women, wherefore
jealousy gat hold upon me and I transformed him by my
spells into a black bird and the woman I put to death.
Now I cannot endure without him an hour ; so, whenever
I lust after him, I change myself into a bird and go to
him, that he may leap me and possess me, even as thou
hast seen. Art thou not therefore incensed against me,
because of this, albeit, by the virtue of the fire and the
light and the shade and the heat, I love thee more than
ever and have made thee my portion of the world ? ' He
answered, being drunken, 6 Thy conjecture of the cause of
my anger is correct, and it had no cause other than this.'


42


With this, she embraced him and kissed him and made
a show of love to him ; then she lay down to sleep and
he by her side. Presently she rose from the bed, and Bedr
was awake ; but he feigned sleep and watched stealthily,
to see what she would do. She took out of a red bag
somewhat red, which she planted in the midst of the
chamber, and it became a stream, running like the sea ;
after which she took a handful of barley and strewing it
on the ground, watered it with water from the stream,
whereupon it became corn in the ear, and she gathered
it and ground it into meal. Then she laid it by and
returning to bed, lay down by Bedr till morning, when he
arose and washed his face and asked her leave to visit
his uncle. She gave him leave and he repaired to Abdallah
and told him what had passed. The old man laughed and
said, ' By Allah, the misbelieving witch plotteth mischief
against thee ; but reck thou never of her.'

Then he gave him a pound of parched barley 1 and said
to him, ' Take this with thee and know that, when she
sees it, she will say to thee, " What is this and what wilt
thou do with it ? " Do thou answer, " Abundance of good
things is good ; " and eat of it. Then will she bring forth
to thee parched grain of her own and bid thee eat of it \
and do thou feign to her that thou eatest thereof, but eat
of this instead and have a care lest thou eat of hers ; for,
if thou eat so much as a grain thereof, her spells will
have power over thee and she will enchant thee and say
to thee, " Leave this form of a man." Whereupon thou
wilt quit thine own shape for what shape she will. But,
if thou eat not thereof, her enchantments will be avoided
and no harm will betide thee therefrom ; whereat she will
be abashed to the utmost and say to thee, " I did but jest
with thee." Then will she make a show of love and
affection to thee ; but this will all be but hypocrisy and
1 Sawic, green grain toasted and sweetened.


43


craft in her. And do thou also make a show of love to
her and say to her, " O my lady and light of mine eyes,
eat of this parched barley and see how delicious it is.''
And if she eat thereof, though it be but a grain, take
water in thy hand and cast it in her face, saying, " Quit
this human form for — " what form soever thou wilt have
her take. Then leave her and come to me and I will
counsel thee what to do.'

Bedr took leave of him and returning to the palace,
went in to the queen, who said to him, 'Welcome and
fair welcome to thee ! ' And she rose and kissed him,
saying, 4 Thou hast tarried long from me, O my lord.' ' I
have been with my uncle,' answered he, ' and he gave
me to eat of this parched barley.' Quoth she, 'We have
better than that.' Then she laid his parched grain in
one dish and hers in another and said to him, ' Eat of
this, for it is better than thine.' So he feigned to eat of
it, and when she thought he had done so, she took water
in her hand and sprinkled him therewith, saying, 4 Quit
this form, vile wretch that thou art, and take that of a
one-eyed mule, foul of favour!' But he changed not;
which when she saw, she went up to him and kissed him
between the eyes, saying, ' O my beloved, I did but jest
with thee ; bear me no malice because of this.'

' O my lady ,' answered he, ' I bear thee no whit of
malice ; nay, I am assured that thou lovest me : but eat
of this my parched barley.' So she took a mouthful of
Abdallah's barley- and ate it; but no sooner had she
swallowed it than she was convulsed ; and Bedr took
water in his hand and cast it in her face, saying, ' Quit
this human form and take that of a dapple mule.' No
sooner had he spoken than she found herself changed
into a mule, whereupon the tears rolled down her cheeks
and she fell to rubbing her muzzle against his feet. Then
he would have bridled her, but she would not take the


44


bit ; so he left her and going to the grocer, told him what
had passed. Abdallah gave him a bridle and bade him
bridle her therewith. So he returned to the palace, and
when she saw him, she came up to him and he set the
bit in her mouth and mounting her, rode to the grocer's
shop.

When the old man saw her, he rose and said to her,
' God the Most High confound thee, O accursed woman ! '
Then said he to Bedr, ' O my son, there is no more
abiding for thee in this city; so ride her and fare with
her whither thou wilt and beware lest, thou commit the
bridle to any.' Bedr thanked him and taking leave of
him, fared on three days, without ceasing, till he drew
near another city and there met him an old man, gray-
headed and comely, who said to him, ' Whence comest
thou, O my son ? ' ' From the city of yonder enchantress,'
answered Bedr ; and the old man said, * Thou art my guest
this night.'

Bedr consented and went with him ; but by the way
they met an old woman, who wept, when she saw the
mule, and said, ' There is no god but God ! Verily, this
mule resembles my son's mule, which is dead, and my
heart aches for her ; so, God upon thee, O my lord, do
thou sell her to me ! ' 'By Allah, O my mother,' an-
swered he, ' I cannot sell her.' But she said, ' God on
thee, do not refuse me, for my son will surely die, except
I buy him this mule.' And she importuned him, till he
said, ' I will not sell her save for a thousand dinars,' saying
in himself, ' Whence should this old woman get a thousand
dinars ? ' Thereupon she brought out from her girdle a
purse, containing a thousand dinars, which when Bedr saw,
he said, ' O my mother, I did but jest with thee ; I cannot
sell her.' But the old man looked at him and said, 'O my
son, none may lie in this city, for whoso lieth they put to
death.'


45


So Bedr lighted down from the mule and delivered her T*iTt<jf)t
to the old woman, who drew the bit from her mouth and iJCClbt*
taking water in her hand, sprinkled the mule therewith,
saying, ' O my daughter, quit this form and return to that
wherein thou wast aforetime j ' Whereupon she was
straightway restored to her original shape and the two
women embraced and kissed each other. So Bedr knew
that the old woman was Queen Lab's mother and that he
had been tricked and would have fled ; but the old woman
gave a loud whistle and there appeared before her an Afrit,
as he were a great mountain, whereat Bedr was affrighted
and stood still. Then the old woman mounted on the
Afrit's back, taking her daughter behind her and Bedr
before her, and the Afrit flew off with them ; nor was it
long before they were in the palace of Queen Lab, who
sat down on the throne of kingship and said to Bedr,
' Knave that thou art, now am I come hither and have
attained to that I desired, and I will show thee how I
will do with thee and with yonder old man the grocer !
How many favours have I done him ! Yet he doth me
ill ; for thou hadst not attained thine end but by his
intervention.' Then she took water and sprinkled him
therewith, saying, 'Quit the form wherein thou art for
that of a foul-favoured bird, the foulest of all birds ! ' And
immediately he became a foul-favoured bird ; and she set
him in a cage and cut off from him meat and drink ; but
one of her women took compassion on him and gave him
to eat and drink, without her knowledge.

One day, the damsel took her mistress at unawares and
going forth the palace, repaired to the old grocer, to
whom she told the whole case, saying, 'The queen is
purposed to make an end of thy brother's son.' He
thanked her and said, ' Needs must I take the city from
her and make thee queen thereof in her stead.' Then he
gave a loud whistle and there came forth to him an Afrit


4 6


with four wings, to whom said he, Carry this damsel to
the city of Julnar of the Sea and her mother Ferasheh, for
they two are the most powerful magicians on the face
of the earth.' And he said to the damsel, 'When thou
comest thither, tell them that King Bedr Basim is Queen
Lab's captive.'

Then the Afrit took her up and flying off with her, set
her down, in a little while, upon the roof of Queen
Julnar's palace. So she descended and going in to the
queen, kissed the earth and told her what had befallen her
son, whereupon Julnar rose to her and thanked her and
entreated her with honour. Then she let beat the drums
in the city and acquainted her people and the grandees of
her realm with the good news that King Bedr was found ;
after which she and her mother Ferasheh and her brother
Salih assembled the tribes of the Jinn and the warriors
of the sea; for the kings of the Jinn obeyed them, since
the taking of King Es Semendel. Then they all flew
up into the air and lighting down on the city of the
sorceress, sacked the town and the palace and slew all
the misbelievers therein in the twinkling of an eye.

Then said Julnar to the damsel, ' Where is my son ? '
And the girl brought her the cage and showing her the
bird within, said, 'This is thy son.' So Julnar took him
forth of the cage and sprinkled him with water, saying,
' Quit this form for that wherein thou wast aforetime.'
Nor had she made an end of her speech ere he shook
and became a man as before; whereupon his mother
embraced him and he wept sore. On like wise did his
uncle Salih and his grandmother and the daughters of
his uncle and fell to kissing his hands and feet. Then
Julnar sent for Abdallah and thanking him for his kind
dealing with her son, married him to the damsel, whom
he had despatched to her with news of him, and made
him king of the city. Moreover, she summoned those


47


who survived of the inhabitants of the city, (and they were
Muslims), and made them swear fealty to him j after which
she and her company took leave of him and returned to
their own city. .The townsfolk came out to meet them,
with drums beating, and decorated the city three days
and held high festival, of the greatness of their joy for
the return of their king.

After this Bedr said to his mother, ' O my mother, there
remains but that I marry and we be all united.' ' Thou
sayst well, O my son/ answered she ; ' but wait till we
enquire who befitteth thee among the daughters of the
kings.' And his grandmother and the daughters of his
uncle all said, ' O Bedr, we will help thee to thy wish
forthright.' Then each of them arose and went forth
a-questing in the lands, whilst Julnar sent out her waiting-
women on the backs of Afrits, bidding them leave not a
city nor a king's palace, without noting all the handsome
girls that were therein. But, when Bedr saw their en-
deavour in the matter, he said to Julnar, ' O my mother,
leave this thing, for none will content me but Jauhereh,
daughter of King Es Semendel; for that she is indeed
a jewel, according to her name.' 1 'I know that which
thou seekest,' replied Julnar and sent forthright to fetch
King Es Semendel. As soon as he was present, she sent
for Bedr and acquainted him with the king's coming,
whereupon he went in to him.

When Es Semendel was aware of his presence, he rose
tc him and saluted him and bade him welcome ; and Bedr
demanded of him his daughter in marriage. 4 She is thine
handmaid and at thy service and disposition/ replied the
king and despatched some of his officers to fetch her. So
they flew up into the air and returned, after awhile, with
the princess, who, as soon as she saw her father, went up
to him and embraced him. Then said he to her, ' Know,
1 Jaufiereh means " a jeweL"


48


O my daughter, that I have given thee in marriage to this
magnanimous king and valiant lion, Bedr Basim, son of
Queen Julnar, for that he is the goodliest and most power-
ful of the folk of his day and the most exalted of them in
degree and the noblest in rank ; he befitteth none but thee
and thou none but him.' 'O my father,' answered she,
' I may not gainsay thee ; do as thou wilt, for indeed
chagrin and despite are at an end and I am one of his
handmaids.'

So they summoned the Cadis and the witnesses, who
drew up the marriage contract between King Bedr and
the princess Jauhereh, and the townsfolk decorated the
city and beat the drums in token of rejoicing. Moreover,
they released all who were in the prisons, whilst the king
clothed the widows and the orphans and bestowed dresses
of honour upon the grandees and amirs and notables ; and
they made bride-feasts and held high festival night and
morn ten days, at the end of which time they unveiled
the bride, in nine different dresses, before Bedr, who
bestowed a dress of honour upon King Es Semendel and
sent him back to his country and people and kinsfolk.
And they ceased not from the most delightsome of life
and the most solaceful of days till there came to them
the Destroyer of Delights and the Sunderer of Companies ;
and this is the end of their story, may God have mercy on
them all!


49


KING MOHAMMED BEN SEBAIK AND THE
MERCHANT HASSAN.

There was once, of old days and in bygone ages and
times, a king of the kings of the Persians, by name
Mohammed ben Sebaik, who ruled over the land of
Khorassan and used every year to go a-raiding into the
countries of the unbelievers in Hind and Sind and China
and the lands beyond the river [Oxus] and other the
lands of the barbarians and others. He was a just, valiant
and generous king and loved table-talk and recitals and
verses and anecdotes and tales and entertaining stories
and traditions of the ancients. Whoso knew a rare story
and related it to him, he would bestow on him a sumptuous
dress of honour and clothe him from head to foot and
mount him on a horse saddled and bridled and give him
a thousand dinars, besides other great gifts ; and the man
would take all this and go his way.

One day there came an old man before him and related
to him a rare story, which pleased the king and he
ordered him a magnificent present, amongst other things
a thousand dinars of Khorassan and a horse with all its
trappings. After this, the report of the king's munificence
was blazed abroad in ail countries and there heard of him
a man by name Hassan the Merchant, who was generous,
open-handed and learned and an accomplished poet and
scholar. Now the king had an envious vizier, a compend
of ill, loving none, rich nor poor, and whoso came before
the king and he gave him aught, he envied him and said,
'This fashion wasteth wealth and ruineth the country;
and this is the king's wont.' But this was nought but
envy and despite in this vizier.

vol. vii. 4


go

Presently, the king heard of Hassan and sending for
him, said to him, 'O Hassan, this vizier of mine vexeth
and thwarteth me concerning the money I give to poets
and story-tellers and glee-men, and I would have thee tell
me a goodly history and a rare story, such as I have never
heard. If it please me, I will give thee lands galore, with
their strong places, in free tenure, in addition to thy fiefs j
besides which I will make thee my chief vizier and put
my whole kingdom in thy hands ; so shalt thou sit on my
right hand and rule my people. But, if thou bring me not
that which I desire, I will take all that is in thy hand and
banish thee my kingdom/ ' Hearkening and obedience
[are due] to our lord the king,' replied Hassan. ' But thy
slave beseecheth thee to have patience with him a year ;
then will he tell thee a story, such as thou hast never in
thy life heard, neither hath other than thou heard its like
nor a better than it.' Quoth the king, * I grant thee a
whole year's delay.' And he called for a splendid dress
of honour, in which he clad Hassan, saying, * Keep thy
house and mount not to horse, neither go nor come for
a year's time, till thou bring me that I seek of thee. If
thou bring it, thou shalt have especial favour and mayst
count on that which I have promised thee ; but, an thou
Mtg|)t bring it not, thou art not of us nor we of thee.' And
fecdbtt. Hassan kissed the ground before the king and went out
from the presence.

Then he chose out five of the best of his servants, who
could all write and .read and were learned, intelligent and
accomplished, and gave each of them five thousand dinars,
saying, ' I reared you but against the like of this day : so
do ye help me to accomplish the king's desire and deliver
me from his hand.' ' What wilt thou [have us] do ? ' said
they. 'Our lives be thy ransom ! ' Quoth he, ' I wish you
to go each to a different country and seek out diligently
the learned and erudite and accomplished and the tellers


5i


of rare stories and marvellous histories and do your en-
deavour to procure me the story of Seif el Mulouk. If ye
find it with any one, pay him what price soever he asks for
it, though he seek a thousand dinars : give him what ye
may and promise him the rest and bring me the story;
for whoso happens on it and brings it to me, I will bestow
on him a sumptuous dress of honour and largesse galore,
and there shall be to me none dearer than he.'

Then said he to one of them, 4 Go thou to Hind and Sind
and all their provinces and dependencies.' To another,
'Go thou to the land of the Persians and to China.' To
the third, 'Go thou to the land of Khorassan.' To the
fourth, ' Go thou to Northern Africa and all its coasts and
districts.' And to the fifth, * Go thou to Egypt and Syria.'
Moreover, he chose them out an auspicious day and said
to them, 'Set forth this day and be diligent in the ac-
complishment of my errand and be not slothful, though
the quest cost you your lives.' So they took leave of him
and departed, each taking the direction prescribed to
him. At the end of four months, four of them returned
and told their master that they had searched towns and
cities and countries for the thing he sought, but had found
nought thereof, wherefore his breast was straitened.

Meanwhile, the fifth servant journeyed till he came to
the land of Syria and entered Damascus, which he found
a pleasant and safe city, abounding in trees and streams
and fruits and birds chanting the praises of God the One,
the All-powerful, Creator of Night and Day. Here he
abode some days, enquiring for his master's desire, but
none answered him and he was on the point of depart-
ing thence to another place, when he met a young man
running and stumbling in his skirts. So he said to him s
1 Whither runnest thou in such haste ? ' And he answered,
saying, ' There is an elder here, a man of learning, who
every day at this time takes his seat on a stool and relates


52


tales and anecdotes and entertaining stories, whereof never
heard any the like ; and I am running to get a place near
him and fear I shall find no room, because of the much
people.' Quoth the stranger, 'Take me with thee.' And
the young man said, ' Make haste.'

So he shut his door and hastened with him to the
place of recitation, where he saw an old man of a bright
countenance seated on a stool, holding forth to the people.
He sat down near him and addressed himself to listen to
his story, till the going down of the sun, when the old
man made an end of his tale and the people dispersed
from about him ; whereupon the messenger accosted him
and saluted him, and he returned his salutation and greeted
him with the utmost honour and courtesy. Then said the
messenger to him, ' O my lord sheikh, thou art a comely
and reverend man, and thy discourse is goodly ; but I
would fain ask thee of somewhat.' 'Ask of what thou
wilt,' replied the old man. Then said the other, ' Hast
thou the story of Seif el Mulouk and Bediya el Jemal?'
'And who told thee of this story?' asked the old man.
' None told me of it,' answered the messenger ; ' but I am
come from a far country, in quest of this story, and if
thou have it and wilt, of thy bounty and charity, impart
it to me and make it an alms to me, of the generosity of
thy nature, I will pay thee whatever thou askest for its
price ; for, had I my life in my hand and sacrificed it to
thee for this thing, yet were it pleasing to my heart.' ' Be
of good cheer,' replied the old man ; ' thou shalt have it 3
but this is no story that one telleth in the beaten way,
nor do I give it to every one.' ' By Allah, O my lord/
cried the other, 4 do not grudge it me, but ask of me what
price thou wilt.' { If thou wish for the story,' replied the
old man, 'give me a hundred dinars and thou shalt have
it ; but upon live conditions.'

When the messenger knew that the old man had the


53


story and was willing to sell it to him, he rejoiced with as
exceeding joy and said, ' I will give thee the hundred
dinars and ten to boot and take it on the conditions of
which thou speakest.' 'Then go and fetch the money/
said the old man, ' and take that thou seekest/ So the
messenger kissed his hands and returned, joyful and
happy, to his lodging, where he laid a hundred and ten
dinars in a purse he had by him. As soon as it was
morning, he put on his clothes and taking the dinars,
repaired to the story-teller, whom he found seated at the
door of his house. So he saluted him and the other
returned his salute. Then he gave him the money and
the old man took it and carrying the messenger into
his house, made him sit down. Then he set before him
inkhorn and pen and paper and giving him a book, said
to him, 'Write out what thou seekest of the story of Seif
el Mulouk from this book.' So the man fell to work and
wrote till he had made an end of his copy, when he read
it to the old man, and he corrected it and said to him,
'Know, O my son, that my conditions are that thou tell
not this story in the beaten road nor before women and
girls nor to black slaves nor feather-heads nor boys ; but
read it only before kings and amirs and viziers and men of
learning, such as expounders [of the Koran] and others.'
The messenger accepted the conditions and kissing the
old man's hand, took leave of him.

Then he set out the same day, glad and joyful, and ^Fta!)t
fared on diligently, of the excess of his contentment, for tjcclbii^
that he had gotten the story of Seif el Mulouk, till he
came to his own country, when he despatched his servant
to carry the good news to his master and say to him,
' Thy servant is come back in safety and hath attained his
desire and his aim.' (Now there wanted but ten days
of the term appointed between Hassan and the king.)
Then he himself went in to him and told him all that had


54


befallen him and gave him the book containing the story
of Seif el Mulouk and Bediya el Jemal, whereat Hassan
rejoiced with an exceeding joy and bestowed on him all
the clothes he had on and gave him ten thoroughbred
horses and the like number of camels and mules and three
black and ten white slaves.

Then the messenger rested in his privy chamber, whilst
Hassan took the book and copied out the story plainly in
his own hand ; after which he presented himself before
the king and said to him, ' O king, I have brought thee a
story and a rare and pleasant relation, whose like none
ever heard.' When the king heard this, he sent forthright
for all the amirs, who were men of understanding, and
all the learned doctors and folk of erudition and culture
and poets and wits, and Hassan sat down and read the
story before the king, who marvelled thereat and approved
it, as did all who were present, and they showered gold
and silver and jewels upon Hassan. Moreover, the king
bestowed on him a sumptuous dress of honour of the
richest of his raiment and gave him a great city with its
castles and suburbs ; and he appointed him one of his
chief viziers and seated him on his right hand. Then
he caused the scribes write the story in letters of gold and
lay it up in his privy treasuries ; and whenever, there-
afterward, his breast was straitened, he would summon
Hassan and he would read him the story, which was as
follows :


55


STORY OF PRINCE SEIF EL MULOUK AND
THE PRINCESS BEDIYA EL JEMAL.

There was once, of old days and in bygone ages and
times, a king in Egypt called Aasim ben Sefwan, a liberal
and beneficent prince, venerable and majestic. He owned
many cities and strengths and fortresses and troops and
warriors and had a vizier named Faris ben Salih, and he
and all his subjects worshipped the sun and the fire, instead
of the All-powerful King, the Glorious, the Victorious.
Now this king was become a very old man, wasted with
age and sickness and decrepitude ; for he had lived a
hundred and fourscore years and had no child, male or
female, by reason whereof he was ever in care and concern
night and day.

One day, he was sitting on the throne of his kingship,
with his amirs and viziers and captains and grandees in
attendance on him, according to their wont, in their
several stations, and whenever there came in an amir,
who had with him a son or two sons, the king envied him
and said in himself, ' Every one of these is happy and
rejoiceth in his children, whilst I, I have no child, and
to-morrow I shall die and leave my kingdom and throne
and lands and treasures, and strangers will take them and
none will bear me in memory nor will there abide any
remembrance of me in the world.' Then he became
drowned in the sea of melancholy thought and for the
much thronging of sorrows and anxieties upon his heart,
he shed tears and descending from his throne, sat down
upon the ground, weeping and humbling himself [in sup-
plication to Godj.

When the vizier saw him do thus, he cried out to the
notables of the realm and others who were present in the


56


assembly, saying, ' Go to your houses and rest till the king
recover from that which aileth him.' So they went away,
leaving none in the presence save the vizier, who, as soon
as the king came to himself, kissed the earth before him
and said, ' O king of the age, what meaneth this weeping ?
Tell me who hath transgressed against thee or thwarted
thee of the kings or castellans or amirs or grandees, that
we may all fall on him and tear his soul from his body.'
But he spoke not neither raised his head; whereupon the
vizier kissed the earth before him a second time and said
to him, ' O king of the age, I am even as thy son and thy
slave, and indeed I have reared thee on my shoulders;
yet know I not the cause of thy grief and chagrin and
distress and of this thy case ; and who should know but
I or who should stand in my stead before thee ? Tell me
therefore the cause of this thy weeping and affliction.'
Nevertheless, the king spoke not neither opened his mouth
nor raised his head, but ceased not to weep and cry aloud
and lament with an exceeding lamentation and say, ' Alas ! '

The vizier took patience with him awhile, after which
he said to him, ( Except thou tell me the cause of this
thine affliction, I will slay myself before thine eyes, rather
than see thee thus distressed.' Then King Aasim raised
his head and wiping away his tears, said, ' O vizier of
good counsel, leave me to my grief and my affliction, for
that which is in my heart of sorrow sufhceth me.' But
Faris said, 'O king, tell me the cause of thy weeping.
Hl'rjfjt It may be God will appoint thee relief at thy hands.' ' O
tiCtltX. vizier,' replied the king, 'I weep not for treasure nor
horses nor aught else, but that I am become an old man,
nigh upon a hundred and fourscore years of age, and
have not been blessed with a child, male or female : so,
when I die, they will bury me and my trace will be blotted
out and my name cut off and strangers will take my throne
and kingship and none will have me in remembrance.'


57


4 king of the age,* rejoined the vizier, 4 1 am oidcs
than thou by a hundred years, yet have I never been blest
with a child and cease not day and night from care and
concern ; so how shall we do, I and thou ? ' And Aasira
said, ' O vizier, hast thou no device or shift in this matter ? *
Quoth the vizier, ' Know, O king, that I have heard of
a king in the land of Seba 1 by name Solomon son of
David, who pretendeth to prophetship and [avoucheth
that he] hath a mighty Lord who can do all things and
whose kingdom is in the heavens and [who hath dominion]
over all mankind and birds and beasts and over the wind
and the Jinn. Moreover, he knoweth the language of all
birds and of all [other] created things; and withal, he
calleth all creatures to the worship of his Lord and dis-
coursed to them of their service. So let us send him &
messenger in the king's name and seek of him our desire,
beseeching him to make petition to his Lord, that He
vouchsafe each of us a child. If his faith be true and his
Lord avail to do all things, He will assuredly bless each of
us with a child, male or female, and if the thing betide
thus, we will enter his faith and worship his Lord ; else
will we take patience and devise us another shift.'

Quoth the king, 'This is well seen, and my heart is
lightened by this thy speech; but where shall we find
a messenger befitting this grave matter, for that this
Solomon is no little king and the approaching him is no
light matter? Indeed, I will send him none, on the like
of this affair, but thyself, for thou art old and versed in all
manner of affairs and the like of thee is the like of myself ;
wherefore I desire that thou weary thyself and journey to
him and occupy thyself diligently with [the accomplish-
ment of] this matter, so haply solace may be at thy hand.'
* I hear and obey/ answered the vizier ; ' but rise thou
forthright and seat thyself upon the throne, so the amirs
1 Sheba.


58


and grandees of the realm and officers and [other] the
folk may enter [and apply themselves] to thy service, as of
their wont ; for they all went forth from thee ? troubled at
heart on thine account Then will I go out and set forth
on the king's errand.'

So the king arose forthright and sat down on the throne
of his kingship, whilst the vizier went forth and said to the
chief chamberlain, ' Bid the folk proceed to their service,
as of their wont.' So the troops and captains and notables
of the kingdom entered, after they had spread the tables,
and ate and drank and withdrew, according to their wont,
after which the vizier went out from King Aasim and
repairing to his own house, equipped himself for travel
and returned to the king, who opened to him the treasuries
and provided him with rarities and things of price and
rich stuffs and gear without a match, such as nor amir nor
vizier could avail to possess. Moreover, he charged him
to accost Solomon with reverence, foregoing him with the
salutation ; ' then,' continued he, 4 do thou ask of him thy
need, and if he assent, return to us in haste, for I shall be
awaiting thee.' Accordingly, the vizier took the presents
and setting out, fared on night and day, till he came
within fifteen days' journey of Seba.

Meanwhile God (blessed and exalted be He !) spoke
unto Solomon and said to him, 1 O Solomon, the King of
Egypt sendeth unto thee his chief vizier, with a present
of such and such rarities and things of price; so do
thou despatch thy vizier Asef ben Berkhiya to him, to
receive him with honour and meet him at the halting-
places with victual ; and when he cometh to thy presence,
say to him, " The king [thy master] hath sent thee in quest
of this and that and thy business is thus and thus." Then
do thou propound to him the faith.' Whereupon Solomon
bade his vizier take a company of his retainers [and go
forth] to meet the Vizier of Egypt with honour and


59


sumptuous provision at the halting-places. So Asef made
ready all that was needed for their entertainment and
setting out, fared on till he fell in with Faris and saluted
him, entreating him and his company with exceeding
honour. Moreover, he brought them victual and pro-
vender at the halting-places and said to them, 'Welcome
and fair welcome to the coming guests ! Rejoice in the
certain accomplishment of your desire ! Be your souls
glad and your eyes solaced and your breasts expanded !'

Quoth Faris in himself, 'Who acquainted him with
this ? ' And he said to Asef, ' O my lord, and who gave
thee to know of us and our errand ? ' 'It was Solomon,
son of David (on whom be peace !), told us of this,'
answered Asef. ' And who,' asked Faris, ' told our lord
Solomon ? ' ' The Lord of the heaven and the earth
told him, the God of all creatures,' replied Asef. Quoth
Faris, 'This is none other than a mighty God;' and
Asef said, ' And do ye not worship Him ? ' ' We worship
the sun,' answered Faris, * and prostrate ourselves thereto.'
* O Vizier Faris,' said Asef, * the sun is but a star of the
stars created by God (blessed and exalted be He !). And
God forbid that it should be a Lord ! For that whiles it
appeareth and whiles is absent, but our Lord is [ever]
present and never absent and He can do all things.'

Then they journeyed on awhile till they came to the
land of Seba and drew near the throne of Solomon son
of David, who commanded his hosts of men and Jinn
and beasts to rank themselves in their road. So the
beasts of the sea and the elephants and leopards and
lynxes [and other beasts of the land] ranged themselves
on either side of the way, after their several kinds, whilst
the Jinn drew out in two ranks in like manner, appearing
all to [mortal] sight, without concealment, in divers grue-
some forms. So they lined the road on either hand, and
the birds spread out their wings over them, to shade


6o


them, warbling one to the other in all manner voices and
notes.

When the people of Egypt came to this terrible array,
they were adread of them and dared not proceed ; but
Asef said to them, ' Pass on amidst them and fear them
not: for they are subjects of Solomon son of David, and
none of them will harm you.' So saying, he entered
between the ranks, followed by all the folk and amongst
them the Vizier of Egypt and his company, fearful : and
they ceased not to fare on till they reached the city, where
they lodged the embassy in the guest-house and enter-
tained them sumptuously, entreating them with the utmost
honour, for the space of three days.

Then they carried them before Solomon, prophet of
God (on whom be peace !), and they would have kissed the
earth before him ; but he forbade them, saying, ' It befits
not that a man prostrate himself save to God (to whom
belong might and majesty !), Creator of heaven and earth
and all other things ; wherefore, whosoever of you hath
& mind to stand, let him stand, but let none stand to do
me worship.' So they obeyed him and the Vizier Faris
and some of his servants sat down, whilst certain of the
lesser sort stood to wait on him. When they had sat
awhile, the servants spread the tables and they all, men
and beasts, ate till they had enough.

Then Solomon bade Faris expound his errand, that
it might be accomplished, saying, ' Speak and conceal
nothing of that on account whereof thou art come; for
I know wherefore ye come and what is your errand. It is
WtgfH thus and thus.' And he told him that which had passed
Xiltlx. between himself and his master, King Aasim ; after which
he said to him, 8 Is this that I have told thee the truths
O vizier? 'O prophet of God/ replied Faris, 5 this thou
hast said is indeed truth and verity ; but none was with
the king aid myself, when we discoursed of this matter


6i


nor was any ware of our case ; who then told thee of all

these things?' 'My Lord told me,' answered Solomon,
'He who knoweth the perfidy of the eye and what is
hidden in the breasts.' Quoth Faris, ' O prophet of God,
verily this is none other than a noble and mighty Lord,
able unto all things.' And he and his company embraced
the faith of Islam.

Then said Solomon to him, ' Thou hast with thee such
and such presents and rarities.' And Faris answered.
'Yes.' Quoth the prophet, 'I accept them all and give
them unto thee. So do ye rest, thou and thy company, in
the place where you have been lodging, so the fatigue
of the journey may cease from you ; and to-morrow, thine
errand shall be accomplished to the uttermost, if it be the
will of God the Most High, Lord of heaven and earth and
Creator of all creatures.'

So Faris returned to his lodging and on the morrow
presented himself before the lord Solomon, who said to
him, ' When thou retnrnest to King Aasim, do ye both
go forth to such a place, where ye will find a tree. Mount
upon it and sit silent until the mid-hour between the
prayer of noon and that of the afternoon, when the mid-
day heat hath subsided; then descend and look at the
foot of the tree, whence ye will see two serpents issue,
one with an ape's head and the other with a head like
that of an Afrit. Shoot them with arrows and kill them ;
then cut off a span's length from their heads and the like
from their tails and throw it away. The rest of the flesh
cook and cook well and give it to your wives to eat :
then lie with them that night and by God's leave, they
will conceive and bear male children.' Moreover, he
gave him a ring and a signet and a sword and a wrapper
containing a tunic embroidered with gold and jewels,
saying, ( O Vizier Faris, when your sons grow up to man's
estate, give them each two of these things.' Then said


62


he, * In the name of God ! May the Most High accom-
plish your desire ! And now nothing remaineth for you
but to depart, [relying] on the blessing of God the Most
High, for the king looketh for thy return night and day
and his eye is ever on the road.'

So Faris took leave of the prophet and kissing his
hands, set forth at once on his homeward journey, re-
joicing in the accomplishment of his errand. He travelled
on with all diligence till he drew near to Cairo, when he
despatched one of his servants to acquaint King Aasim
with his return and the successful issue of his journey }
which when the king heard, he rejoiced with an exceeding
joy, he and his grandees and officers, especially in the
vizier's safe return. When they met, the vizier dismounted
and kissing the earth before the king, gave him the glad
news of the complete achievement of his wish; after
which he expounded the true faith to him, and the king
and all his people embraced Islam.

Then said Aasim to his vizier, ' Go home and rest this
night and a week to boot ; then go to the bath and come
to me, that I may take counsel with thee of what we shall
do.' So Faris kissed the earth and withdrew, with his
servants and attendants, to his house, where he rested
eight days ; after which he repaired to the king and
related to him all that had passed between Solomon and
himself, adding, ' Do thou rise and go forth with me
alone.' So the king and the vizier took two bows and two
arrows and repairing to the tree indicated by Solomon,
climbed up into it and sat there, without speaking, till
near upon the hour of afternoon prayer, when they de-
scended and looking upon the roots of the tree saw two
serpents issue thence. The king looked at them and
admired them, marvelling to see them ringed with collars
of gold about their necks, and said to Faris, 1 O vizier,
these snakes have golden collars ! By Allah, this is a rare


■


63

thing f Let us take them and set them in a cage and keep
them to look upon.' But the vizier said, ' These hath God
created for their use ; 1 so do thou shoot one and I will
shoot the other.'

Accordingly, they shot at them with arrows and killed
them ; after which they cut off a span's length of their
heads and tails and threw it away. Then they carried the
rest to the king's palace, where they called the cook and
said to him, ' Dress this meat daintily, with onion-sauce
and spices, and ladle it out into two platters and bring
them hither at such an hour, without fail.' So the cook
took the meat and went with it to the kitchen, where fcfxU(
he cooked it and dressed it in skilful fashion with fine
onion-sauce ; after which he ladled it out into two
platters and set them before the king and the vizier,
who took each a dish and gave their wives to eat of
the meat. Then they lay that night with them, and by
the good pleasure of God (blessed and exalted be He !)
and His will and ordinance, they both conceived forth-
right

The king abode three months, troubled in mind and
saying in himself, ' I wonder whether this thing will prove
true or not ; ' till one day, as the queen was sitting, the
child stirred in her belly and she felt a pain and her colour
changed. So she knew that she was with child and calling
the chief of her eunuchs, bade him ' Go to the king,
wherever he may be, and say to him, " O king of the age,
I bring thee the glad tidings that our lady's pregnancy is
become manifest, for the child stirs in her belly." ' So the
eunuch went out in haste, rejoicing, and finding the king
alone, with his head on his hand, pondering this thing,
kissed the earth before him and acquainted him with his
wife's pregnancy. When the king heard this, he sprang
to his feet and in the excess of his joy, he kissed the
1 i.e. that indicated by Solomon.


64


eunuch's head and hands and pulling off the clothes be
had on, gave them to him. Moreover, he said to those
who were present in his assembly, ' Whoso loveth me,
let him bestow largesse upon this man.' And they
gave him of money and jewels and jacinths and
horses and mules and gardens what was beyond count or
reckoning.

At that moment, in came the Vizier Faris and said to
Aasim, ' O king of the age, I was sitting at home alone
but now, absorbed in thought, pondering the matter of
the pregnancy and saying in myself, "I wonder if this
thing be true and whether Khatoun 1 have conceived or
not ! " when, behold, an eunuch came in to me and
brought me the glad news that my wife was indeed
pregnant, for that her colour was changed and the child
stirred in her belly : whereupon, in my joy, I pulled oft
all my clothes and gave them to him, together with a
thousand dinars, and made him chief of the eunuchs,'
'0 vizier,' rejoined the king, * God (blessed and exalted
be He !) hath, of His grace and bounty and goodness,
made gift to us of the true faith and brought us out of
darkness into light and hath been bountiful to us, of His
favour and beneficence ; wherefore I am minded to solace
the folk and cause them to rejoice.' Quoth Faris, 1 Do
what thou wilt.'

Then said the king, * vizier, go down forthright and
set free all who are in ■ the prisons, both debtors and
criminals, and whoso transgresseth after this, we will re-
quite according to his desert. Moreover, we forgive the
people three years' taxes, and do thou set up kitchens all
round about the city walls and bid the cooks hang over
the fire all kinds of cooking pots and cook all manner
meats nor leave cooking night or day, and let all comers,
both of the people of the city and of the neighbouring
1 His wife's nams.


65


countries, far and near, eat and drink and carry to their
houses. And do thou command the people to hold
holiday and decorate the city seven days and shut not
the taverns night nor day.'

The vizier did as the king bade him and the folk donned
their richest apparel and decorated the city and citadel and
fortifications, after the goodliest fashion, and passed their
time in feasting and sporting and making merry, till the
days of the queen's pregnancy were accomplished and she
was taken, one night, with the pains of labour hard before
dawn. Then the king bade summon all the astrologers
and mathematicians and men of learning in the town, and
they assembled and sat awaiting the throwing of a bead
in at the window, which was to be a signal to them, as
well as to the nurses and attendants, that the child was
born. Presently, the queen gave birth to a boy like a piece
of the full moon, and the astrologers took his altitude and
made their calculations and drew his horoscope.

Then they rose and kissing the earth before the king,
gave him the joyful tidings that the new-born child was of
happy augury and born under a fortunate aspect, 'but,'
added they, ' in the first of his life there will befall him
a thing that we fear to name to the king.' Quoth Aasim,
4 Speak and fear not ; ' so they said, ' O king, this boy will
leave this [his native] land and journey in strange coun-
tries and suffer shipwreck and hardship and captivity and
distress, and indeed he hath before him many perils
and stresses ; but, in the end, he shall win free of them
and attain to his desire and live the happiest of lives the
rest of his days, ruling over subjects and countries and
having dominion in the land, in despite of enemies and
enviers.'

When the king heard the astrologers' words, he said,
6 The matter is obscure j but all that God the Most High
decreeth unto the creature of good and bad cometh to

VOL. VII. $


66


pass and needs must a thousand solaces betide him from
this day to that.' So he paid no heed to their words, but
bestowed on them dresses of honour, as well upon all who
were present, and dismissed them j when, behold, in came
the vizier, rejoicing, and kissed the earth before the king,
saying, ' Good tidings, O king ! My wife hath but now
given birth to a son, as he were a piece of the moon.'
' O vizier,' replied Aasim, ' go, bring thy wife and child
hither, that she may abide with my wife, and they shall
bring up the two boys together in my palace.' So Faris
fetched his wife and son and they committed the two
children to the nurses.

After seven days had passed over them, they brought
them before the king and said to him, ' What wilt thou
name them ? ' Quoth he, ' Do ye name them.' But they
replied, ' None nameth a boy but his father.' So he said,
' Name my son Seif el Mulouk, after my grandfather, and
the vizier's son Said.' Then he bestowed dresses of
honour on the nurses and said to them, ' Be ye tender over
them and rear them after the goodliest fashion.' So they
reared the two boys diligently till they reached the age of
five, when the king committed them to a schoolmaster,
who taught them to read the Koran and write. When
they were ten years old, King Aasim gave them in charge
to masters, who taught them horsemanship and archery
and spear and ball play and the like, till, by the time they
were fifteen years old, they were proficient in all manner
of martial exercises, nor was there one to vie with them
in horsemanship, for each of them would do battle with
a thousand men and make head against them alone.

So, when they came to years of discretion, whenever
King Aasim looked on them, he rejoiced in them with an
exceeding joy ; and when they had attained their twentieth
year, he took his vizier apart one day and said to him,
' O vizier, I wish to take counsel with thee concerning


6 7


a thing I have a mind to do.' ' Whatever thou hast a mind
to do,' replied Faris, 'do it ; for thy judgment is blessed.'
So the king said, ' O vizier, I am become a very old and
decrepit man, sore stricken in years, and I am minded to
take up my abode in an oratory, that I may worship God
the Most High, and give my kingdom and sultanate to my
son Seif el Mulouk, for that he is grown a goodly youth,
accomplished in martial exercises and polite letters and
the art of government and full of wit and dignity. What
sayst thou of this project?'

* It is well seen of thee,' answered the vizier. * The
idea is a blessed and fortunate one, and if thou do this,
I will do the like and my son Said shall be the prince's
vizier, for he is a comely young man and full of know-
ledge and judgment. Thus will the two be together, and
we will order their affair and neglect not their case, but
guide them in the way of righteousness.' Quoth the king,
'Write letters and send them by runners to all the cities
and provinces and strengths and fortresses, that be under
our hands, bidding their chiefs be present on such a
day at the Horse-course of the Elephant.' So the vizier
went out forthright and despatched letters to this purport
to all the deputies and governors of fortresses and others
[in authority] under King Aasim ; and he commanded
also that all in the city should be present, great and small.

When the appointed time drew near, King Aasim let
pitch pavilions in the midst of the Horse-course and
decorate them after the most sumptuous fashion and set
up [therein] the great throne whereon he sat not but on
festivals. Then he and all his deputies and chamberlains
and amirs sallied forth, and he commanded proclamation
to be made to the people, saying, ' In the name of God,
come forth to the Horse-course ! ' So all the amirs and
viziers and governors of provinces and feudatories came
forth to the place of assembly and entering the roya.1


68


pavilion, addressed themselves to the service of the king,
according to their wont, and abode in their several stations,
some standing and others sitting, till all the people were
gathered together, when the king commanded to spread
the tables and they ate and drank and prayed for him.

Then he commanded the chamberlains to proclaim to
the people that they should not depart: so they made
proclamation to them, saying, 'Let none of you depart
hence till he have heard the king's words ! ' So they drew
the curtains [of the royal pavilion] and the king said,
s Whoso loveth me, let him remain till he have heard my
words ! ' Whereupon the folk all sat down, reassured,
after they had been fearfuL Then the king rose to his
feet and conjuring them all to remain seated, said to
them, * O amirs and viziers and grandees, great and small,
and all ye who are present of the people, know ye not
that this kingdom was an inheritance to me from my
fathers and forefathers ? ' 4 Yes, O king,' answered they,
' we all know that' And he continued, saying, 1 I and you,
we all worshipped the sun and moon, till God (blessed
and exalted be He !) vouchsafed us the knowledge of the
true faith and brought us out of darkness into light,
guiding us to the religion of Islam. Know that I am
become a very old man, decrepit and feeble, and I desire
to take up my abode in an oratory, there to worship God
the Most High and crave His pardon for past offences and
make this my son Seif el Mulouk ruler. Ye know that he
is a goodly youth, eloquent, just and intelligent, learned
and versed in affairs ; wherefore I am minded presently to
resign my kingdom to him and to make him king and
sultan over you in my stead, whilst I give myself to the
worship of God in an oratory. What say ye theUj all
of you ? 5

Thereupon they all rose and kissing the ground before
him, made answer with ' Hearing and obedience/ saying,


6g


'O our king and our protector, if thou shouldst set over
us one of thy slaves, we would hearken to thy word and
obey him : how much more then with thy son Seif e!
Mulouk? Indeed, we accept of him and approve him, on
our heads and eyes ! ' So the king came down from his
seat and seating his son on the great throne, took the
crown from his own head and set it on that of Seif el
Mulouk and girt his middle with the royal girdle. Then
he sat down beside him on the throne of his kingship,
whilst the amirs and viziers and notables and all the rest
of the folk rose and kissed the earth before him, saying,
'Indeed, he is worthy of the kingship and hath better
right to it than another.' Then the ushers made procla-
mation of safety and offered up prayers for his victory and
prosperity. And Seif el Mulouk scattered gold and silver
on the heads of the people and conferred dresses of honour jNftgfH
and gave gifts and largesse. fotCuli

Then, after a moment, the Vizier Faris arose and kissing
the earth, said, ' O amirs and grandees, ye know that I am
vizier and that my vizierate dated from of old, before the
accession of King Aasim ben Sefwan, who hath now
divested himself of the sovereignty and made his son king
in his stead ? ' ' Yes,' answered they, ' we know that thy
vizierate is from father after grandfather.' 'And now,'
continued he, ' I put off my office, in favour of this my son
Said, for he is intelligent, quick-witted and sagacious.
What say ye all?' And they answered, saying, ' None is
worthy to be vizier to King Seif el Mulouk but thy. son
Said, and they befit one another.' With this Faris arose
and taking off his vizier's turban, set it on his son's head
and laid his inkhorn of office before him, whilst the amirs
and chamberlains said, 'Indeed, he is deserving of the
viziership.' After this, King Aasim and Faris the vizier
arose and opening the royal treasuries, conferred magni-
ficent dresses of honour on all the viceroys and amirs


and viziers and grandees and other the folk and wrote
them new mandates and patents of office in the name of
King Seif el Mulouk and his Vizier Said. Moreover, he
made distribution of money [to the troops] and gave
guerdons, and they 1 abode in the city a week and
departed each to his own country and place.

Then King Aasim carried his son and his Vizier Said
back to the palace and commanded the treasurer to
bring the ring and signet and sword and wrapper; which
being done, he said to the two young men, ' O my sons,
let each of you choose two of these things and take them.'
The first to make choice was Seif el Mulouk, who put
out his hand and took the ring and the wrapper, whilst
Said took the sword and the signet ; after which they both
kissed the king's hands and went away to their lodging.
Seif opened not the wrapper, but threw it on the couch
where he and Said slept by night, for it was their wont to
lie together.

Presently they spread them the bed and the two lay
down, with candles burning over them, and slept till mid-
night, when Seif awoke and seeing the wrapper at his
head, said in himself, ' I wonder what thing of price is in
this wrapper that my father gave me ! ' So he rose and
leaving Said sleeping, took a candle and carried the
wrapper into a closet, where he opened it and found
within a tunic of the fashion of the Jinn. He spread it
open and saw, wroughten in gold on the lining of the
back, the portraiture of a girl of marvellous loveliness,
whereon no sooner had he set eyes than his reason fled
from his head and he became mad for love thereof, so
that he fell down in a swoon and [presently coming to
himself], began to weep and lament, beating his face and
breast and kissing the portrait. And he recited the follow-
ing verses :

x i.e. the notables of the provinces.


7i


Love, at the first, a dribble is of water, that the Fates Bring and impel

'gainst him on whom it falleth to his share ;
Till, when the youth into the sea of passion plungeth full, Come great

and grievous things, indeed, impossible to bear.

And also these :

Had I but known how Jove men's hearts doth take and rack, I'd been

upon my guard against its first attack ;
But I myself undid, of purpose, knowing not The things of love nor

what its issues are, alack !

And he ceased not to weep and lament and buffet his
face and breast, till Said awoke and missing him from the
bed and seeing [but] one candle, said in himself, 'Where
is Seif el Mulouk gone?' Then he took the candle and
went round about the palace, till he came upon the closet
in question, where he saw the prince lying, weeping and
lamenting passing sore. So he said to him, 'O my
brother, what ails thee to weep ? Speak to me and tell
me what hath befallen thee.' But Seif spoke not neither
raised his head and continued to weep and smite upon
his breast. Quoth Said, ' I am thy vizier and thy brother,
and we were reared together, thou and I ; so to whom
wilt thou unburden thy breast and discover thy secret, if
not to me ? ' And he went on to humble himself and kiss
the earth before him a great while, whilst Seif el Mulouk
paid no heed to him nor answered him a word, but gave
not over weeping.

At last, being affrighted at his case and weary of striving
with him, he went out and fetched a sword, with which he
returned to the closet, and setting the point to his own
breast, said to the prince, ' Awake, O my brother ! An
thou tell me not what ails thee, I will slay myself and see
thee no longer in this plight.' Whereupon Seif raised his
head and answered him, saying, £ my brother, I am
ashamed to tell thee what ails me : ' but Said sai a, ' I con-


72


jure thee by Allah, the Lord of Lords, the Liberator of
those that are in bondage, the Causer of causes, the One,
the Clement, the Bountiful, the Giver of gifts, that thou
tell me what ails thee and be not abashed at me, for I am
thy slave and thy vizier and counsellor in all things ! '
Quoth Seif, 4 Come and look at this portrait.' So Said
looked at it awhile and considering it straitly, saw written,
at its head, in letters of pearl, these words, 'This is the
presentment of Bediya el Jemal, daughter of Shehyal ben
Sharoukh, a king of the kings of the true-believing Jinn
who have taken up their abode in the city of Babel and
sojourn in the garden of Irem.' 1
!bsT!C$t So he said to the king, 'O my brother, knowest thou
bctlxut. of what woman this is the portraiture, that we may seek
for her?' 'Not I, by Allah, O my brother/ answered
Seif: and Said said, 'Come and read this writing.' So
Seif read it and cried out from his inmost heart, saying,
' Alas ! Alas ! Alas ! ' Quoth Said, 4 O my brother, if the
original of the portrait exist and her name be Bediya el
Jemal and she be in the world, I will make haste to seek
her, that thou mayst without delay attain thy desire. But,
God on thee, O my brother, leave this weeping, ihat the
officers of the state may come in, to do their service to
thee, and in the forenoon, do thou summon the merchants
and fakirs and travellers and pilgrims and enquire of them
concerning this city and the garden of Irem ; it may be,
b,y the help and blessing of God (extolled and exalted be
He !), some one of them will direct us thither.'

So, when it was day, Seif el Mulouk went forth and
mounted the throne, hugging the tunic in his arms, for
he could neither stand nor sit without it, nor would sleep
wisit him, except it were with him; and the amirs aad

1 The text adds here, " of the son of Aad the Greater 5 " but this is
evidently a mistake. See post


73


viziers and grandees and officers came in to him. When
they were all assembled in their places and the Divan was
complete, he said to his vizier, ' Go to them and tell them
that the king is sick and hath passed the night in ill case.'
So Said went forth and told the folk what he said ; which
when the old king heard, he was concerned for his son
and summoning the physicians and astrologers, carried
them in to Seif el Mulouk.

They looked at him and prescribed him draughts and
simples and medicinal waters and wrote him charms and
incensed him with aloes-wood and ambergris three days'
space; but his malady persisted three months, till King
Aasim was wroth with the physicians and said to them,
* Out on you, O dogs ! Can none of you cure my son ?
Except ye heal him forthright, I will put you all to death.'
' O king of the age,' replied the chief physician, * we know
that this is thy son and thou knowest that we fail not of
diligence in tending a stranger ; so how much more with
thy son ? But thy son is afflicted with & grievous malady,
which if thou desire to know, we will discover it to thee.'"'
Quoth Aasim, ' What find ye then to be my son's malady ? '
4 O king of the age,' answered the physician, ' thy son is
in love and with one to whose enjoyment he hath no way
of access.' At this the king was wroth and said, ' How
know ye that my son is in love and how came love to
him ? ' * Ask his vizier and brother Said/ answered they ;
*for he knoweth his case.'

So the king called Sai'd into his privy closet and said
to him, * Tell me the truth of my son's malady.' But Sa'id
replied, 6 1 know it not.' Then King Aasim said to the
headsman, 'Take Said and bind his eyes and strike of!
his head.' Whereupon Sa'id feared for himself and said;
s O king of the age, grant me immunity.' 'Speak/ an-
swered the king ; ' and thou shalt have it/ Then said
Said, ' Thy son is in love/ 'With whom is he in love ?'


74


asked the old king : and Said replied, * With a king's
slaughter of the Jinn, whose portait he saw wroughten
on the tunic that was in the wrapper given thee by
Solomon, prophet of God/

When the king heard this, he rose, and going in to his
son, said to him, ' O my son, what is this portrait whereof
thou art enamoured and why didst thou not tell me ? ' * O
my father,' answered Seif el Mulouk, ' I was ashamed to
name this to thee and could not bring myself to discover
aught thereof to any; but now thou knowest my case,
look how thou mayest do to cure me.' ' What is to be
done? 5 rejoined his father. 'Were she of the daughters
of men, we might find a means of coming at her ; but
she is a king's daughter of the Jinn and who can avail to
her, except it be Solomon son of David, and hardly he?
Wherefore, O my son, do thou arise forthright and take
heart and mount and ride out a-hunting or to the games
in the tilting-ground. Divert thyself with eating and
drinking and put away grief and concern from thy heart,
and I will bring thee a hundred kings' daughters ; for
thou hast no call to the daughters of the Jinn, over whom
we have no power and who are not of our kind.' But
Seif said, ' I cannot renounce her nor will I seek another
than her.' ( How then shall we do, O my son ? ' asked
King Aasim ; and Seif said, ' Bring us all the merchants
and travellers and pilgrims in the city, that we may
question them of the city of Babel and the garden of
Irem. Perad venture, God will guide us thereto.'

So King Aasim summoned all the merchants and
strangers and sea-captains in the city and enquired of
them for the city of Babel and its peninsula and the
garden of Irem ; but none of them knew these places
nor could any give him tidings thereof. However, when
the session broke up, one of them said to the king, 8 O
king of the age, if thou hast a mind to know this thing,


75


get thee to the land of China; for it is a vast and safe
country, wherein are store of rarities and things of price
and folk of all kinds [and nations] and thou shalt not
come to the knowledge of this city and garden but from
its people ; it may be one of them will direct thee to that
thou seekest.' Whereupon quoth Seif el Mulouk, ' O my
father, equip me a ship, that I may journey to the land
of China.'

•' O my son,' replied the old king, ' abide thou on the
throne of thy kingship and rule thy subjects, and I myself
will make the voyage to China and enquire for thee of
the city of Babel and the garden of Irem.' But Seif
rejoined, saying, 4 O my father, this affair concerneth me
and none can prosecute the search after it like myself : so,
come what will, if thou give me leave to make the voyage,
I will depart and travel in foreign countries awhile. If
I find tidings of her, my desire will be attained, and if not,
belike the voyage will dilate my breast and recruit my
spirits ; and peradventure by foreign travel my case will
be made easy to me, and if I live, I shall return to thee tbCfgf)!
whole and sound.' ftcclxife

The old king looked at his son and saw nothing for it
but to do what he wished ; so he fitted him out forty ships,
manned with twenty thousand men, besides servants, and
gave him great plenty of treasures and necessaries and
warlike gear, as much as he required. When the ships
were laden with water and victual and arms and troops,
Seif s father and mother bade him farewell and the former
said, 'Depart, O my son, and travel in health and weal
and safety. I commend thee to Him who disappointeth
not those that put their trust in Him.' So the prince
embarked, with his brother Said,, and they weighed anchor
and sailed till they came to the City of China.

When the people heard of the coming of forty ships,
full of armed men and stores, they doubted not but the|


7 6


were enemies come to make war on them and beleaguer
them ; so they shut the gates of the town and made ready
the mangonels. But Seif, hearing of this, despatched two
of his chief officers to the King of China, bidding them
say to him, ' This is Seif el Mulouk, son of King Aasim
of Egypt, who is come to thy city as a guest, to divert
himself by viewing thy country awhile, and not for battle
or contention ; so, an thou wilt receive him, he will come
ashore to thee : else he will return and will not disquiet
thee nor the people of thy city.' So they presented them-
selves at the gates cf the city and said, ' We bear a message
from King Seif el Mulouk.' Whereupon the townsfolk
opened the gates and carried them to their king, whose
name was Feghfour Shah and between whom and King
Aasim there had been acquaintance erewhen. So, when he
heard that the new-comer was the son of King Aasim, he
bestowed dresses of honour on the messengers and bidding
open the gates, made ready guest-gifts and went forth, with
ihe chief officers of his realm, to meet Seif el Mulouk.

The two kings embraced and Feghfour said to Seif,
4 Welcome and fair welcome to him who cometh to us I
I am thy servant and thy father's servant : my city is at
thy disposal and whatsoever thou seekest shall be brought
to thee.' Then he presented him with the guest-gifts and
victual, and they took horse, with the Vizier Said and the
chiefs of their officers and the rest of their troops, and
rode from the sea-shore to the city, which they entered
with drums beating and cymbals clashing, in token of re-
joicing. There they abode forty days, in the enjoyment
of fair hospitality, at the end of which time the King of
China said to Seif el Mulouk, £ O son of my brother, how
is it with thee ? Doth my country please thee ? ' Quoth
Seif, 1 May God the Most High long honour it with thee s
O King ! ' And Feghfour said, ' Nought hath brought
thee hither save some need that hath betided thee; [so-


77


tell me] what thou desirest of my country, and I will
accomplish it to thee.' ' O king,' answered Seif, 1 my case
is a rare one,' and told him how he had fallen in love with
the portrait of Bediya el Jemal.

When the King of China heard his story, he wept for
pity and solicitude for him and said, ' And what wouldst
thou have now, O Self el Mulouk ? ' Quoth Seif, ' I would
have thee bring me all the pilgrims and travellers and
seafarers in the country, that I may question them of the
original of this portrait ; belike one of them may give me
tidings of her/ So Feghfour Shah sent out his lieutenants
and officers and chamberlains, to fetch all the pilgrims
and travellers in the land, and they brought them before
the two kings, and they were a numerous company. Then
Seif el Mulouk questioned them of the City of Babel and
the Garden of Irem, but none of them returned him an
answer, wherefore he was confounded and knew not what
to do ; but one of the sea-captains said to him, ( O king,
if thou wouldst know of this city and garden, get thee to
the Islands of the Indian Sea.'

So Seif bade repair the ships ; which being done, they
launched them on the sea and freighted them with victual
and water and all that they needed, and Seif el Mulouk
and his Vizier Sai'd re-embarked, with all their men, after
they had taken leave of King Feghfour Shah, They
sailed the seas with a fair wind, in safety and security,
four months, till, one day, there came out upon them a
wind and the waves smote on them from all sides. The
rain and hail descended on them and the sea was troubled
for the violence of the wind; by reason whereof the
ships drove one against another and broke up, as did the
boats, and all on board were drowned, except Seif el
Mulouk and some of his servants, who saved themselves
in a little boat. Then, by the decree of God the Most
High, the wind fell and the sun shone out; whereupon


78


Seif opened his eyes and seeing no sign of the ships nor
aught but sky and water, said to those who were with him
in the boat, ' Where are the ships and boats and where is my
brother Said ? ' ' O king of the age,' answered they, ' there
remain nor ships nor boats nor those who were therein ;
for they are all drowned and become food for fishes.'

When he heard this, he cried aloud and repeated the
words which whoso saith shall not be confounded, and
they are, ' There is no power and no virtue save in God
the Most High, the Supreme ! ' Then he fell to buffeting
his face and would have cast himself into the sea, but his
men withheld him, saying, ' O king, what will this profit
thee? Thou hast brought all this on thyself; for, hadst
thou hearkened to thy father's words, nought thereof had
befallen thee. But this was fore- ordained from all eternity
by the will of the Creator of Souls, that the creature might
fedxb. accomplish that which God hath decreed unto him. And
indeed, at the time of thy birth, the astrologers predicted
to thy father that all manner of troubles should befall thee.
So there is nothing for it but patience till God the Most
High deliver us from this our strait.' ' There is no power
and no virtue save in God the Most High, the Supreme !'
replied the prince. ' Neither is there refuge nor fleeing
from that which He decreeth 1 ' And he sighed and
recited the following verses :

By the Compassionate, I'm dazed about my case, for lo 1 Troubles and

griefs beset me sore ; I know not whence they grow.
I will be patient, so the folk, that I against a thing, Bitt'rer than very

aloes' self, 1 endured have, may know.
Less bitter than my patience is the taste of aloes-juice ; 1 I've bome

with patience what's more hot than coals with fire aglow.
In this my trouble what resource have I, save to commit My case to

Him who orders all that is, for weal or woe ?

Then he became drowned in the sea of melancholy
1 See note, Vol. I. p. E20.


79


thought and his tears ran down upon his cheeks, like
a great rain. He slept awhile of the day, after which he
awoke and sought food. So they set food before him
and he ate till he had enough whilst the boat drove on
with them they knew not whither. It drifted with them,
night and day, at the winds' and waves' will, a great
while, till their victual was spent and they knew not what
to do and were reduced to the last extremity for hunger
and thirst and weariness. At last they sighted an island
afar off and the breezes drove them on, till they came
thither and making the boat fast to the shore, landed.
They left one in the boat, to guard it, and fared on into
the island, where they found abundance of fruits of all
kinds and ate of them, till they were satisfied.

Presently, they saw a man sitting among the trees, and
he was of strange aspect, long-faced and white of beard
and body. He called to one of the servants by his name,
saying, ' Eat not of those fruits, for they are not ripe ;
but come hither to me, that I may give thee to eat of
these that are ripe.' The man looked at him and thought
that he was one of the shipwrecked folk, who had made
his way to the island ; so he rejoiced greatly at sight of
him and went up to him, knowing not what was decreed
to him in the secret purpose of God nor what was written
on his forehead. But, when he drew near the stranger,
he leapt upon his shoulders 1 and twisting one of his legs
about his neck, let the other hang down upon his bacl^
saying, 'Go on ; for there is no escape for thee from me
and thou art become my ass.' Thereupon the man fell
a-weeping and cried out to his fellows, saying, 'Alas, my
lord ! Flee forth of this wood and save yourselves, for

1 The Boulac and Calcutta Editions add here, " For he was a Marid."
But this is a manifest error, as the fabulous creature here introduced is
evidently identical with the Old Man of the Sea (see Vol. V. The Fifth

Voyage of Sindbad thr Sailor).


So

one of the dwellers therein hath mounted on my shoulders s
and the rest seek you, that they may ride you likewise.'

When they heard this, they all fled down to the boat
and pushed off to sea ; whilst the islanders followed them
into the water, saying, ' Whither go ye ? Come, bide
with us and we will ride on your backs and give you
meat and drink, and you shall be our asses.' With this,
they redoubled their efforts, till they left them in the
distance and fared on, trusting in God the Most High ;
nor did they leave going a whole month, till they came
to another island and landed. Here they found fruits of
various kinds and busied themselves with eating of them.
Presently, they saw, afar off, somewhat lying in the road,
as it were a column of silver. So they went up to it and
one of the men gave it a push with his foot, when, lo, it
was a creature of hideous aspect, long-eyed, cleft-headed
and hidden under one of his ears, for he was used, whenas
he lay down to sleep, to spread one ear under his head
and cover himself with the other. He snatched up the
man who had kicked him and carried him off into the
inward of the island, and behold, it was all full of ghouls
who eat men. So the man cried out to his fellows, say-
ing, ' Flee and save yourselves, for this is the island of the
man-eating ghouls, and they mean to tear me in pieces
and eat me.'

When they heard this, they fled back to the boat, with-
out gathering any store of the fruits, and putting out to
sea, fared on some days till they came to another island,
where they found a high mountain. So they climbed to
the top and found there a thick wood. Now they were
anhungred ; so they fell to eating of the fruits ; but,
before they aware, there came upon them from among
the trees black men of terrible aspect, each fifty cubits
high, with teeth like elephants' tusks protruding from
their mouths, and laying hands on Seif el Mulouk and his


8l


company, carried them to their king, whom they found
seated on a piece of black felt laid on a rock, and about
him a great company of blacks, standing in his service.
Quoth the blacks to him, ' We found these birds among
the trees ; ' and he was anhungred ; so he took two of the
servants and killed them and ate them; which when Seif IbCtgflt
saw, he feared for himself and wept and repeated these ilCuXtjt
verses :

Troubles familiar with my heart are grown and I with them, Erst

shunning ; for the generous are sociable still.
Not one mere kind of woe alone doth lieger with me lie; Praised b®

God ! there are with me thousands of kinds of ill.

Then he sighed and repeated these also :

Fate with afflictions still hath so beshotten me, With shafts, as with, a

sheath, my entrails are o'erlaid ;
And thus in such a case am I become that, when An arrow striketh mCj

blade breaketh upon blade.

When the king heard his weeping and wailing, he said,
'Verily, these birds have sweet voices and their song
pleaseth me : put them in cages.' So they set them each
in a cage and hung them up at the king's head, that he
might hear their song. On this wise Seif and his men
abode a great while, and the blacks gave them to eat and
drink: and now they wept and now laughed, now spoke
and now were silent, whilst the king of the blacks de-
lighted in the sound of their voices.

Now this king had a daughter married in another island,
who, hearing that her father had birds with sweet voices,
sent to him to seek of him some of them. So he sent her,
by her messenger, Seif el Mulouk and three of his men
in four cages; and when she saw them, they pleased her
and she commanded to hang them up in a place ovei
tier head. Then Seif fell to marvelling at that which
had befallen him and calling to mind his former high

VOL. VII. 6


82


estate and weeping for himself ; and the three servants
wept for themselves, whilst the king's daughter deemed
that they sang. Now it was her wont, whenever any one
from the land of Egypt or elsewhere fell into her hands
and he pleased her, to advance him to high estate with
her j and by the ordinance of God the Most High, it
befell that, when she saw Seif el Mulouk, his beauty and
grace and symmetry pleased her, and she commanded to
loose him and his companions from their cages and bade
entreat them with honour.

One day she took Seif apart and would have him lie
with her; but he refused, saying, 'O my lady, I am an
exile and distraught with passion for a beloved one, nor
will I consent to love-delight with other than her.' Then
she coaxed him and importuned him, but he held aloof
from her, and she could not anywise approach him nor
get her desire of him. At last, when she was weary of
courting him in vain, she waxed wroth with him and his
men and commanded that they should serve her and fetch
her wood and water.

They abode thus four years, till Seif el Mulouk became
weary of this life and sent to intercede with the princess,
so haply she might release them and let them go their
ways and be at rest from that their travail. So she sent
for him and said to him, ' If thou wilt fall in with my
desire, I will set thee free from this thy duresse and
thou shalt go to thy country, safe and sound.' And she
went on to humble herself to him and wheedle him, but
he would not consent to do her will; whereupon she
turned from him, in anger, and he and his companions
abode in the same plight. The people of the island knew
them for the princess's birds and dared not do them any
hurt ; and she herself was at ease concerning them, being
assured that they could not escape from the island. So
they used to absent themselves from her two and three


83


days [at a time] and go round about the island in all
directions, gathering firewood, which they brought to the
princess's kitchen ; and thus they abode five years.

One day, it chanced that the prince and his men were
sitting on the sea- shore, devising of what had befallen,
and Seif bethought him of his father and mother and his
brother Said and calling to mind his former high estate,
fell a-weeping and lamenting passing sore, whilst his
servants wept likewise. Then said they to him, ' O king
of the age, how long shall we weep? Weeping availeth
not; for this thing was wriitten on our foreheads by the
ordinance of God, to whom belong might and majesty.
Indeed, the pen runneth with that which He decreeth
and nought will serve us but patience. Peradventure God
(blessed and exalted be He !), who hath afflicted us with
this calamity, will deliver us therefrom.' ' O my brothers/
said Seif, 'how shall we win free from this accursed
woman ? I see no way of escape for us, except God of
His favour deliver us from her ; but methinks we may
flee and be at rest from this travail.'

'Q king of the age,' answered they, 'whither shall we
flee? For the whole island is full of man-eating ghouls,
and whithersoever we 'go, they will find us there and either
eat us or carry us back to the king's daughter, who will
be wroth with us.' Quoth Seif, * I will contrive you some-
what, whereby it may be God the Most High will help us
to escape from this island.' 'And how wilt thou do?'
asked they. ' Let us cut some of these long pieces of
wood,' answered he, 'and twist ropes of their bark and
bind them one with another, and make of them a raft,
which we will cast into the sea and load with these fruits.
Then will we fashion us oars and embark on the raft ;
peradventure God the Most High will make it the means
of our deliverance from this accursed woman and vouch-
safe us a fair wind to bring us to the land of Hind, for


84


He can do all things.' ' This is well seen/ said they and
were mightily rejoiced thereat.

So they arose and fell to work forthright to cut wood
for the raft and twist ropes to bind the logs together,
and at this they wrought a whole month. Every evening,
they gathered somewhat of firewood and carried it to the
3Ctgf)t princess's kitchen, and the rest of the day they busied
uTClxbtf. themselves with working at the raft. When they had
made an end of it, they cast it into the sea and loading
it with the fruits of the island, embarked at close of day s
having told none of their intent. They put out to sea
and fared on four months, knowing not whither the raft
carried them, till their victual failed them and they were
reduced to the utmost extreme of hunger and thirst.

[One day, as they drifted along,] the sea became
troubled and foamed and rose in great waves, and there
came forth upon them a frightful crocodile, which put out
its claw and snatching up one of the servants, swallowed
him. At this sight Seif el Mulouk wept sore and he and
the two men that remained to him pushed off from the
place where they had seen the monster, sore affrighted.
After this, they drifted on till one day they espied a
terrible great mountain, rising high into the air, whereat
they rejoiced and made towards it with all their mights
glad in the prospect of reaching land ; but hardly had
they sighted the island [on which was the mountain],
when the sea boiled and rose in huge waves and a second
crocodile raised its head and putting out its claw, took
the two remaining servants and swallowed them.

So - Seif abode alone and making his way to the island,
laboured till he reached the mountain-top, where he found
a wood and walking among the trees, fell to eating of the
fruits. Presently, he saw among the branches more than
twenty great apes, each bigger than a mule, whereat he
was seized with exceeding fear. The apes came down


85


and surrounded him; then they went on before him>
signing to him to follow them, and he did so, till he
came to a lofty and strong- builded castle, the ordinance
whereof was one brick of gold and one of silver. The
apes entered and he after them, and he saw in the castle
all manner of jewels and precious metals and things of
price, such as the tongue fails to describe. Here also
he found a young man, exceeding tall of stature, with
no hair on his cheeks, and there was no human being
but he in the castle.

The two young men greeted each other with delight,
and the stranger marvelled exceedingly at sight of Seif
el Mulouk and said to him, ' What is thy name and what
countryman art thou and how earnest thou hither? Tell
me thy story and conceal from me nought thereof.' ' By
Allah/ answered the prince, ' I came not hither of my own
intent nor is this place that which I seek ; but I cannot
but go from place to place till I compass my desire." ' And
what is it thou seekest ? ' asked the youth. ' I am of the
land of Egypt,' replied Seif, 'and my name is Seif el
Mulouk, son of King Aasim ben Sefwan ; ' and told him all
that had befallen him, from first to last, [up to his coming
to the land of China]. Whereupon the youth arose and
stood in his service, saying, ' O king of the age, I was in
Egypt [awhile since] and heard that thou hadst gone to
the land of China ; but it is a far cry from China hither.
Verily, this is a strange thing and a rare case ! '

' True,' answered the prince ; ' but, when I left China,
I set out, intending for the land of Hind ; 5 and he told
him all that had befallen him till he came thither ; where-
upon quoth the other, ' O king's son, thou hast had enough
of strangerhood and its hardships ; praised be God who
hath brought thee hither ! So now do thou abide with
me, that I may enjoy thy company till I die, when thou
shalt become king over this island, to which no bound is


86


known, and these apes thou seest, which are skilled in
all manner crafts; and all thou seekest thou wilt find
here.' 4 O my brother/ replied Seif el Mulouk, ' I may
not abide in any place till my quest be accomplished,
though I compass the whole world in pursuit thereof, so
haply God may bring me to my desire or my course lead
me to the place, wherein is the appointed term of my
days, and I shall die.'

Then the youth signed to one of the apes, and he went
out and was absent awhile, after which he returned with
other apes, girt with napkins of silk. They laid the table
and set on near a hundred dishes of gold and silver, con-
taining all kinds of meats. Then they stood, after the
manner of servants before kings, till the youth signed to
the chamberlains, who sat down, and he whose wont it
was to serve stood, whilst the two princes ate, till they had
enough. Then the apes cleared the table and brought
basins and ewers of gold, and they washed their hands ;
after which they set on nigh forty flagons, in each a
different kind of wine, and they drank and took their
pleasure and made merry ; and all the apes danced and
gambolled before them, what while they sat at meat ;
which when Seif saw, he marvelled at them and forgot
Wgfjt that which had befallen him of strangerhood and its hard-
tSCdxfotU. ships. At nightfall, they lighted candles in candlesticks
of gold and silver and set on dishes of fruits and con-
fections. So they ate ; and when the hour of rest was
come, the apes spread them beds and they slept.

Next morning, the young man arose, according to his
wont, and waking Seif, said to him, ' Put thy head forth
of this lattice and see what stands beneath.' So he put
out his head and saw the wide waste and all the desert
filled with apes, whose number none knew save God the
Most High. Quoth he, 'Here is great plenty of apes,
for they fill the whole country ; but why are they as<


8 7


sembled at this hour ? ' ' This is their custom,' answered
the youth. 'Every Saturday, all the apes in the island
come hither, some from two and three days' distance,
and stand here till I awake from sleep and put forth my
head from this window, when they kiss the ground before
me and go about their affairs.' So saying, he put his
head out of the window ; and when the apes saw him f
they kissed the earth before him and went away.

Seif el Mulouk abode with the young man a whole
month, at the end of which time he bade him farewell
and departed, escorted by a company of nigh a hundred
apes, which their king sent with him. They journeyed
with him seven days, till they came to the limits of their
island, when they took leave of him and returned to
their places, while Seif fared on alone over hill and moun-
tain and desert and plain, four months' journey, one day
anhungred and the next full of meat, now eating of the
herbs of the earth and now of the fruits of the trees,
till he repented him of having quitted the young man
and was about to retrace his steps to him, when he saw
somewhat black afar off and said in himself, ' Is this a
city or trees ? I will not turn back till I see what it is.'
So he made towards it and when he drew near, he saw
that it was a lofty palace. Now he who built it was Japhet
son of Noah (on whom be peace !) and it is of this palace
that God the Most High speaketh in His precious Book,
whenas He saith, ' And an abandoned well and a high-
builded palace.' 1

Seif el Mulouk sat down at the gate and said in him-

1 Koran xxii. 44. This absurd addition is probably due to some
copyist, who thought to show his knowledge of the Koran, but did not
understand the meaning of the verse from which the quotation is taken
and which runs thus, " How many a city we have destroyed, whilst
yet it transgressed, and it was smitten down upon its foundations,, and!
how many an abandoned well and a high-builded palace 1"


88


self, ' I wonder what is within this palace and what king
dwelleth there and whether its inhabitants are men or
Jinn ? Who will tell me the truth of the case ? ' He sat
awhile, considering, but, seeing none go in or out, he
rose and committing himself to God the Most High,
entered the palace and walked on, till he had counted
seven vestibules ; but saw no one. Presently he espied,
on his right hand, three doors, and before him, a fourth,
over which hung a curtain. So he went up to the fourth,
door and raising the curtain, found himself in a great
saloon, spread with silken carpets. At the upper end
stood a golden throne, on which sat a young lady, whose
face was like the moon, arrayed in kings' raiment and
adorned as she were a bride on her wedding-night; and
before the throne stood a table, whereon were forty trays
spread with dishes of gold and silver, full of rich meats.

The prince went up to the lady and saluted her, and
she returned his greeting, saying, ' Art thou of mankind
or of the Jinn ?' 'I am a man of the best of mankind,'
replied he ; ' for I am a king, son of a king.' Quoth she,
' What seekest thou ? Up and eat of yonder food, and
after tell me thy story from first to last and how thou
earnest hither.' So he sat down at the table and uncover-
ing a tray of meats, ate (for he was hungry) till he had
enough ; then washed his hands and going up to the
throne, sat down by the young lady who said to him,
* Who art thou and what is thy name and whence comest
thou and who brought thee hither ? ' ' My story is a long
one,' replied he; 'but do thou first tell me who and what
thou art and why thou dwellest in this place alone.'

Quoth she. ' My name is Dauleh Khatoun and I am the
daughter of the King of Hind. My father dwells in the
city of Serendib and has a great and goodly garden, there
is no goodlier in all the land of Hind ; and in this garden
is a great tank. One day, I went out into the garden with


89


my waiting-women and we stripped and entering the tank,
fell to sporting and taking our pleasure therein. Presently,,
before I could be ware, there swooped down on me some-
what, as it were a cloud, and snatching me from amongst
my maids, flew up with me betwixt heaven and earthy
saying, " Fear not, O Dauleh Khatoun, but be of good
heart." Then he flew on with me a little while, after
which he set me down in this palace and straightway
became a handsome young man, elegantly clad, who said
to me, " Dost thou know me ? " " N o, my lord," an-
swered I ; and he said, " I am the Blue King, son of the
Jinn ; my father dwelleth in the Castle of El Culzum and
hath under his hand six hundred thousand Jinn, flyers
and divers. I chanced to see thee, as I was passing, and
fell in love with thee; so I snatched thee up from among
the slave-girls and brought thee to this strong castle, which
is my dwelling-place. None may win hither, whether he
be man or genie, and from Hind hither is a hundred and
twenty years' journey : wherefore be thou assured that
thou wilt never again see the land of thy father and thy
mother; but abide with me here, in content and peace,
and I will bring thee whatsoever thou seekest." tNTfttlSt
Then he embraced me and kissed me, saying, " Abide foccufc,
here and fear nothing," after which he went away and
presently returned with these tables and carpets and fur-
niture. He comes to me every Tuesday and abides with
me three days, and on Friday, at the time of afternoon
prayer, he departs and is absent till the following Tuesday.
When he is here, he eats and drinks and kisses and
embraces me, but does nought [else] with me, and I am
a clean maid, even as God the Most High created me.
My father's name is Taj el Mulouk, and he knows not
what is come of me. This is my story : now tell me
thine.'

4 My story is a long one,' answered the prince, and I


90


fear lest the Afrit come, whilst I am telling it to thee."
Quoth she, ' He went out from me but an hour before thy
coming and will not return till Tuesday : so sit and take
thine ease and be thy heart at rest and tell me what hath
betided thee, from first to last.' And he answered, 'I
hear and obey.' So he told her all that had befallen him
from first to last, but, when she heard speak of Bediya el
Jemal, her eyes ran over with streaming tears and she
exclaimed, ' O Bediya el Jemal, I had not thought this of
thee ! Out upon fortune ! O Bediya el Jemal, dost thou
not remember me nor say, "Where is my sister Dauleh
Khatoun gone ? " ' And she wept passing sore, lamenting
Bediya el Jemal's forgetfulness of her.

Then said Seif, ' O Dauleh Khatoun, thou art a mortal
and she is a genie: how then can she be thy sister?'
* She is my foster-sister,' replied the princess, ' and this is
how it came about. My mother went out to take her
pleasure in the garden, when the pangs of labour seized
her and she gave birth to me. As fate would have it, the
mother of Bediya el Jemal chanced to be passing with her
guards, when she also was taken with the pains of travail ;
so she alighted in a part of the garden and was there
delivered of Bediya el Jemal. She despatched one of her
women to seek food and childbirth-gear of my mother,
who sent her what she sought and invited her to visit her.
So she came to her with her child and my mother suckled
Bediya el Jemal; after which the latter and her mother
abode with us in the garden two months.

Then Bediya's mother gave my mother somewhat, 1
saying, " When thou hast need of me, I will come to thee
in the midst of the garden," and departed to her own

1 This appears by the sequel (according to the Breslau Edition) to
have been certain perfumes 9 by burning which she could summon the
Queen of the Jinn.


91


country ; but she and her daughter used to visit us every
year and abide with us awhile. Wherefore, O Seif el
Mulouk, if thou wert with me in my own country and
Bediya and I were together as of wont, I would go about
with her to bring thee to thy desire of her : but I am here
and they know not what is become of me, else could they
deliver me from this place ; but the matter is in God's
hands (blessed and exalted be He I) and what can I do ? '
' Come,' said Seif, ' let us flee and go whither God wills.'
But she answered, ' We cannot do that : for, by Allah,
though we fled hence a year's journey, yonder accursed
wretch would overtake us in an hour and make en end
of us.'

Then said the prince, * I will hide myself in his way,
and when he passes, I will smite him with the sword and
slay him.' Quoth Dauleh Khatoun, 'Thou canst not avail
to slay him, except thou slay his soul.' 'And where is
his soul ? ' asked he. ' Many a time have I questioned
him thereof,' answered she ; ' but he would not tell me,
till one day I was instant with him and he waxed wroth
with me and said to me, " How often wilt thou ask me
of my soul ? What hast thou to do with my soul ? " " O
Hatim," answered I, " there remaineth none to me but
thou, except God ; and my life dependeth on thine, and
whilst thou livest, all is well for me ; so, except I care
for thy soul and set it in the apple of mine eye, how shall
I live in thine absence ? If I knew where thy soul is, I
would, never whilst I live, cease to hold it embraced and
would keep it as my right eye."

Whereupon he said to me, "When I was born, the
astrologers predicted that I should lose my soul at the
hands of the son of a king of mankind. So I took it
and put it in the crop of a sparrow, which I shut up in
a box. The box I set in a casket, and enclosing this in
seven other caskets and seven chests, laid the whole in a


92


marble coffer, which I buried within the marge of yonder
ocean, that encompasseth the earth ; for that these parts
are far from the world of men and none of them can win
thither. So now I have told thee what thou wouldst
j^fg|)t know, and do thou tell none thereof, for it is a secret
Ucclxx. between me and thee." " To whom should I tell it,'*
rejoined I, " seeing that none but thou cometh hither
with whom I may talk thereof? By Allah, thou hast
indeed set thy soul in a right impregnable stronghold, to
which none may gain access ! How should a man win
to it, even if the impossible be ordained and God decree
like as the astrologers predicted?"

Quoth the genie, " Peradventure one may come, having
on his finger the ring of Solomon, son of David (on whom
be peace !) and lay his hand with the ring on the surface
of the water, saying, ' By the virtue of the names engraven
upon this ring, let the soul of such an one come forth ! '
Whereupon the coffer will rise to the surface and he will
break it open and do the like with the chests and caskets,
till he come to the little box, when he will take out the
sparrow and strangle it, and I shall die." ' Then said Seif
el Mulouk, ' I am the king's son of whom he spoke, and
this is the ring of Solomon son of David on my finger.
Come, let us go down to the sea-shore and see if his words
be truth or leasing.'

So the two went down to the sea-shore and Dauleh
Khatoun stood on the beach, whilst the prince entered
the water to his middle, and laying his hand with the ring
on the surface of the sea, said, ' By the virtue of the names
and talismans engraven on this ring and of Solomon son
of David (on whom be peace !), let the soul of Hatim the
genie, son of the Blue King, come forth 1 ' Whereupon
the sea became troubled and the marble coffer rose to the
surface. Seif took it and shattered it against the rock and
broke open the chests and caskets, till he came to the


93


little box and took thereout the sparrow. Then he and
the princess returned to the castle and sat down on the
throne. Hardly had they done this, when there arose a
terrible great cloud of dust and some huge thing came
flying and saying, ' Spare me, O king's son, and slay me
not; but make me thy freedman, and I will bring thee to
thy desire ! ' Quoth Dauleh Khatoun, ' The genie cometh ;
kill the sparrow, lest the accursed wretch enter the palace
and take it from thee and slay thee and me after thee.
So the prince wrung the sparrow's neck and it died,
whereupon the genie fell down at the door of the palace
and became a heap of black ashes.

Then said the princess, 'We are delivered from the
hand of yonder accursed wretch ; what shall we do now ? '
' It behoves us to ask aid of God the Most High, who hath
afflicted us,' answered Seif; 'belike He will direct us and
help us to escape from this our strait.' So saying, he
arose and pulling down half a score of the doors of the
palace, which were wroughten of sandal and aloes-wood,
with nails of gold and silver, bound them together with
ropes of silk and sendal, which were there, and wrought
of them a raft, which he made shift, he and the princess,
to drag down to the sea-shore. They cast it into the
water and making it fast to the beach, returned to the
palace, whence they removed all the dishes of gold and
silver and jewels and precious stones and metals and what
not else was light of carriage and heavy of worth and
freighted the raft therewith. Then they fashioned two
pieces of wood into the likeness of oars, with which they
embarked on the raft and casting off the moorings, let it
drift out to sea with them, committing themselves to God
the Most High, who contenteth those that put their trust
in Him and disappointed them not.

They fared on thus four months, and when they la.y
down to sleep, the prince set Dauleh Khatoun behind him


94


end laid a naked sword at his back, so that, when he
turned, the sword was between them. At last, then
victual came to an end and they were reduced to sorf
distress ; their souls were straitened and they besought
God the Most High to vouchsafe them deliverance from
their strait. It chanced, one night, when Seif was asleep
and the princess awake, that the raft fell off towards the
land and entered a harbour wherein were ships. The
princess saw the ships and heard a man (who was none
other than the chief and head of the captains) talking
with the sailors ; whereby she knew that this was the port
of some city and that they were come to an inhabited
country. So she rejoiced mightily and waking Seif el
Mulouk, bade him ask the captain the name of the city
and harbour.

Accordingly Seif arose, rejoicing, and said to the captain,
' O my brother, how is this harbour called and what are
the names of yonder city and its king ? ' 'O fool's face !
O frosty beard!' 1 replied the captain, 'if thou knewest
not the name of this port and city, how earnest thou
hither ? ' Quoth Seif, ' I am a stranger and had taken
passage in a merchant ship, which was wrecked and sank
with all on board ; but I saved myself on a plank and
made my way hither; wherefore I asked thee the name of
the place, and there is no harm in asking.' Then said
the captain, 'This is the city of Amariyeh and this
harbour is called Kemin el Behrein.' When the prin-
cess heard this, she rejoiced with an exceeding joy and
said, 'Praised be God V 'What is to do?' asked Seif.
And she answered, saying, ' O Seif el Mulouk, rejoice in
3£{(d)t succour near at hand; for the king of this city is my
ftCClXXt father's brother and his name is Aali el Mulouk. Say
to the captain, 11 Is the Sultan of the city, Aali el Mulouk,
well?'"

1 Le. simpleton.


95


The prince put the question to the captain, who was
wroth with hitn and said, ' Thou sayst, "I am a stranger
and never in my life came hither." Who then told thee
the name of the lord of the city ? ' When Dauleh Khatoun
heard this, she rejoiced and knew him for one of her
father's captains, Muineddin by name. Now he had come
out in search of her, after her disappearance, and finding
her not, had continued his cruise till he came to her
uncle's city. Then she bade Seif say to him, ' O Captain
Muineddin, come and speak with thy mistress ! ' So he
called out to him as she bade, whereat he was exceeding
angry and answered, saying, ' O dog, who art thou and
how knowest thou me ? ' Then he said to one of the
sailors, 'Give me an ash-stick, that I may go to yonder
pestilent fellow and break his head.'

So he took the stick and made for Seif el Mulouk, but,
when he came to the raft, he saw Dauleh Khatoun sitting
there, as she were a piece of the moon ; whereat he was
confounded and said to the prince, ' Who is that with
thee?' 'A damsel by name Dauleh Khatoun,' replied
Seif. When the captain heard the princess's name and
knew that she was his mistress and the daughter of his
king, he fell down in a swoon, and when he came to
himself, he left the raft and those that were thereon and
going up to the palace, craved an audience of the king ;
whereupon the chamberlain went in to the latter and said,
'Captain Muineddin is come to bring thee good news.'
The king bade admit him : so he entered and kissing the
earth, said to him, 4 O king, thou owest me a gift for glad
tidings ; for thy brother's daughter Dauleh Khatoun hath
arrived here, safe and sound, and is now on a raft in the
harbour, in company with a young man like the moon on
the night of its full.'

When the king heard this, he rejoiced and conferred
i sumptuous dress of honour on the captain. Then he


g6

straightway commanded to decorate the city in honour of
the safe return of his brother's daughter, and sending for
her and Seif el Mulouk, saluted them and gave them joy
of their safety ; after which he despatched a messenger to
his brother, to let him know that his daughter was found
and was with him. As soon as the news reached Taj el
Mulouk, he assembled his troops and set out for his
brother's capital, where he found his daughter and they
rejoiced with an exceeding joy. He sojourned with his
brother a week, after which he took his daughter and Seif
el Mulouk and returned to Serendib, where the princess
foregathered with her mother and they rejoiced and held
high festival in honour of her safe return ; and it was a
great day, never was seen its like.

As for Seif el Mulouk, the king entreated him with
honour and said to him, ' O Seif el Mulouk, thou hast
done me and my daughter all this good and I cannot
requite thee therefor, nor can any requite thee, save the
Lord of all creatures ; but I wish thee to sit upon the
throne in my stead and rule the land of Hind, for I make
gift to thee of my throne and kingdom and treasures
and servants.' Whereupon Seif rose and kissing the earth
before the king, thanked him and answered, saying, ' O
King of the age, I accept all thou givest me and return it
to thee in free gift : for I covet not kingship nor sultanate
noi desire aught but that God the Most High bring me to
my desire.' ' O Seif el Mulouk/ rejoined the king, ' these
my treasures are at thy disposal : take of them what thou
wilt, without consulting me, and God requite thee for me
with all good ! ' Quoth the prince, ' God advance the
king! Indeed, there is no delight for me in treasure or
dominion, till I attain my desire : but now I have a mind
to take my pleasure in the city and view its streets and
markets.'

So the king commanded to bring him a horse of the


97


thoroughbred horses, saddled and bridled; and Seif
mounted and rode through the streets and markets of
the town. As he looked about him, his eyes fell on a
young man, who was crying a tunic for sale at fifteen
dinars: so he considered him and saw him to belike his
brother Sa'fd ; and indeed it was his very self, but he was
pale and changed for long strangerhood and the hardships
of travel, so that he knew him not. However, he said to
his attendants, 'Take yonder youth and carry him to the
palace where I lodge, and keep him with you till my
return, that I may question him.' But they understood
him to say, ' Carry him to the prison/ and said in them-
selves, ' Doubtless this is some runaway slave of his.' So
they took him and carried him to the prison, where they
laid him in irons and left him.

Presently Seif returned to the palace, but he forgot
his brother Said, and none made mention of him to
him. So he abode in prison, and when they brought
out the prisoners, to labour upon the public works, they
took Sa'id with them, and he wrought with the rest
In this plight he abode a month's space, in squalor and
misery, pondering his case and saying in himself, 'What
is the cause of my imprisonment?' Meanwhile, Seif el
Mulouk's mind was diverted from him by rejoicing and
other things ; but one day, as he sat, he bethought him
of Said and said to his attendants, ' Where is the young
man I gave into your charge on such a day?' 'Didst
thou not bid us carry him to the prison?' said they.
'Nay,' answered he; 'I bade you carry him to my
palace.' Then he sent his chamberlains for Said and
they fetched him in irons, and loosing him from his
fetters, set him before the prince, who said to him, 'O
young man, what countryman art thou?' Quoth he„
' I am from Egypt and my name is Sa'id, son of the
Vizier Faris.'

VOL. VII. 7


98


When Seif heard this, he rose and throwing himself
upon him, hung on his neck, weeping for very joy and
saying, ' O Said, O my brother, praised be God that
I see thee alive ! I am thy brother Seif el Mulouk,
son of King Aasim.' Then they embraced and wept
together and all who were present marvelled at them.
After this, Seif commanded his people to carry Said to
the bath : and they did so. When he came out, they
clad him in sumptuous apparel and carried him back
to Seif, who seated him on the couch beside himself.
When King Taj el Mulouk heard of the reunion of Seif
and his brother Said, he was mightily rejoiced and came
to them, and the three sat devising of all that had
befallen them.

Then said Said, ' O my brother Seif el Mulouk, when
the ship sank and all on board were cast into the sea, I
saved myself on a plank with a company of servants, and
it drifted with us a whole month, at the end of which time
the wind cast us, by the ordinance of God the Most
High, upon an island. So we landed and entering
among the trees, fell to eating of the fruits, for we were
anhungred. Whilst we were busy eating, there fell on
us, at unawares, folk like Afrits and springing on our
shoulders, said to us, " Go on with us ; for ye are become
our asses." So I said to him who had mounted me,
"What art thou and why dost thou mount me?" But
he twisted one of his legs about my neck, till I was all but
dead, and beat upon my back the while with the other leg,
till I thought he had broken it. So I fell to the ground
on my face, having no strength left in me for hunger and
thirst. When he saw this, he knew that I was hungry and
taking me by the hand, led me to a pear-tree laden with
fruit and said to me, " Eat thy fill of this tree." So I ate
till I had enough and rose, against my will, to walk ; but,
before I had gone far, the creature turned and leaping on


99


my shoulders again, drove me on, now walking, now run-
ning and now trotting, and he the while mounted on me,
laughing and saying, " Never in my life saw I an ass like
unto thee 1 "

We abode thus awhile, till, one day, it chanced that we
came upon great plenty of vines, covered with ripe fruit ;
so we gathered a quantity of bunches of grapes and
throwing them into a pit, trod them with our feet, till
the pit became a great pool. Then we waited awhile
and presently returning thither, found that the sun had
smitten the grape-juice and it was become wine. So we
used to drink of it, till we were drunken and our faces
flushed and we fell to singing and dancing, for the hilarity
of drunkenness ; whereupon our masters said to us, " What
is it that reddens your faces and makes you dance and
sing?" "Ask us not," answered we. "What is your
intent in questioning us of this ? " But they insisted, till
we told them how we had pressed grapes and made wine.
Quoth they, "Give us to drink thereof; " but we said,
" The grapes are spent."

So they brought us to a valley, whose length we knew
not from its breadth, wherein were vines without begin-
ning or end, each bunch of grapes on them twenty pounds
in weight and all within easy reach, and said, " Gather of
these." So we gathered great store of grapes and filling
therewith a great trench that we found there, bigger than
the great tank [in the king's garden], trod them with our
feet and did with the juice as before, till it became wine,
whereupon we said to them, " It is come to perfection ;
but in what will ye drink it ? " And they answered, saying,
"We had asses like unto you ; but we ate them and kept
their heads : so give us to drink in their skulls." So we
gave them to drink, and they became drunken and lay
down, nigh two hundred of them.

Then said we to one another, " Is it not enough that


I GO


they should ride u£, but they must eat us also ? There is
no power and no virtue save in God the Most High, the
Supreme ! But we will ply them with wine, till they are
overcome with drunkenness, when we will kill them and
be at rest from them." So we awoke them and proceeded
to fill the skulls and gave them to drink, but they said,
4< This is bitter." "Why say ye it is bitter?" answered
we. " Whoso saith this, except he drink of it ten times,
he dieth the same day." When they heard this, they
feared death and said to us, " Give us to drink the whole
ten times." So we gave them to drink, and when they
had drunken the rest of the ten draughts, their senses
failed them and they became helplessly drunk. So we
dragged them [together] by the hands and laying them
one upon another, collected great plenty of dry vine-stalks
and branches and heaped it upon and about them : then
Wlct&t set fire to the pile and stood afar off, to see what came
6C£totL of them. When the fire was burnt down, we came back
and found them a heap of ashes, wherefore we praised
God the Most High, who had delivered us from them.
*Then we sought the sea-shore, where we parted and I
and two of the men fared on till we came to a great
and thick wood and there busied ourselves with eating
fruit.

Presently, up came a man of high stature, long-bearded
and flap-eared, with eyes like cressets, driving before him
a great flock of sheep. 1 When he saw us, he rejoiced and
said to us, " Welcome and fair welcome to you ! Come
with me, that I may slaughter you one of these sheep and
roast it and give you to eat." Quoth we, " Where is thine
abode ? " And he said, " Hard by yonder mountain : go

1 The Boulac and Calcutta Editions add here, " and with him a
company of others of his fashion." The Breslau Edition omits these
words and it would seem, by what follows, that the ghoul was the only
one of his kind on the island.


IOI


on towards it till ye come to a cave, where are many
guests like yourselves. Enter and sit with them, whilst we
make ready for you the guest-meal." We doubted not but
he spoke the truth, so fared on, as he bade us, till we
came to the cavern, where we found many guests, men
like ourselves, but they were all blind; and when we
entered, one said, " I am sick ; " and another, " I am
weak."

So we said to them, " What is this you say and what
is the cause of your sickness and weakness ? " " Who
are ye?" asked they; and we answered, " We are guests."
Then said they, " What hath made you fall into the hands
of yonder accursed wretch? But there is no power and
no virtue but in God the Most High, the Supreme ! This
is a ghoul who eats men and he hath blinded us and
meaneth to eat us." "And how did he blind you?" asked
we. " Like as he will blind yourselves even now," replied
they. Quoth we, "And how so?" And they answered,
" He will bring you cups of milk and will say to you, ' Ye
are weary with travel : take this milk and drink it.' And
when ye have drunken thereof, ye will become blind like
unto us." Quoth I to myself, "There is no escape for
us but by stratagem." So I dug a hole in the earth and
sat over it.

Presently in came the accursed ghoul, with cups of
milk, of which he gave one to each of us, saying, "Ye
come from the desert and are athirst : so take this milk
and drink it, whilst I roast you the meat." I took the
cup and carrying it to my mouth, [made a show of drink-
ing, but] emptied it into the hole; then I cried out,
" Alas ! my sight is gone and I am blind ! " and clapping
my hand to my eyes, fell a-weeping and lamenting, whilst
he laughed and said, " Fear not." But, as for my two
comrades, they drank the milk and became blind. Then
the ghoul arose and stopping up the mouth of the cavern.


102


came to me and felt my ribs, but found me lean and with
no flesh on my bones : so he felt another and finding
him fat, rejoiced. Then he slaughtered three sheep and
skinned them and fetching iron spits, spitted the flesh
thereon and set them over the fire to roast. When the
meat was done, he set it before my comrades, who ate and
he with them ; after which he brought a skin full of wine
and drank thereof and lay down on his face and snored.

Quoth I in myself, ' e He is drowned in sleep : how shall
I slay him?" Then I bethought me of the spits and
laying two of them in the fire, waited till they were red-
hot : whereupon I girded myself and taking a spit in each
hand, went up to the ghoul and thrust them into his eyes,
pressing upon them with all my might. He sprang to his
feet for dear life and would have laid hold of me ; but he
was blind. So I fled from him into the inner cavern,
whilst he ran after me ; but I found no place of refuge from
him nor whence I might escape into the open country, for
the cave was stopped up with stone ; wherefore I was
bewildered and said to the blind men, " How shall I do
with this accursed wretch?" "O Said," answered one of
them, " climb up to yonder niche and thou wilt find there
a sharpened sword : bring it to me and I will tell thee
what to do."

So I climbed up to the niche and taking the sword,
returned to the blind man, who said to me, " Smite him
with the sword in his middle, and he will die forthright."
So I ran after the ghoul, who was weary with running after
me and felt for the blind men, that he might kill them,
and coming behind him, smote him with the sword in his
middle and he fell in twain. Then he cried out to me,
saying, " O man, an thou desire to kill me, smite me a
second time." Accordingly, I was about to deal him
another blow ; but he who had directed me to the sword


ioa

said to me, " Smite him not a second time, for he will not
die, but will live and destroy us." So I held my hand, as Nfgf}!
he bade me, and the ghoul died. Then said the blind fccclxxui
man to me, " Open the mouth of the cave and let us go
out; so haply God may help us and deliver us from this
place." Quoth I, " No harm can come to us now ; let us
rather abide here and rest and eat of these sheep and
drink of this wine, for the land 1 is long."

So we abode there two months, eating of the sheep and
of the fruits of the island, till, one day, as we sat upon the
beach, we caught sight of a great ship in the distance ; so
we cried out and made signs to the crew. They feared
to draw near, knowing that the island was inhabited by a
ghoul who ate men, and would have sheered off ; but we
ran down to the marge of the sea and made signs to them
with the floating ends of our turbans and shouted to them,
whereupon one of the sailors, who was sharp of sight, said
to the rest, " Harkye, comrades, these seem men like our-
selves, for they have not the fashion of ghouls." So they
made for us, little by little, till they drew near us and were
certified that we were indeed human beings, when they
saluted us and we returned their greeting and gave them
the glad tidings of the death of the accursed ghoul, where-
fore they thanked us.

Then we transported to the ship all that was in the
cavern of stuffs and sheep and treasure, together with
provision of the fruits of the island, such as should serve
us days and months, and embarking, sailed on with a fair
wind three days ; at the end of which time the wind veered
round against us and the sky became exceeding dark, nor
had an hour passed, before the wind drove the vessel on
to a rock, where it broke up and its planks were rent
asunder. However., God the Most High decreed that I
1 i.e. The way out of it.


104


should lay hold of one of the planks, which I bestrode,
and it bore me along two days, for the wind had fallen
fair again, and I paddled with my feet awhile, till God
the Most High brought me safe to shore and I landed
and came to this city, where I found myself a stranger,
alone and friendless. And indeed I knew not what to
do ; for hunger was sore upon me and I was in great
straits.

So I hid myself and pulling off my tunic, carried it to
the market, saying in myself, u I will sell it and live on
its price, till God accomplish His will of me." Then I
took the tunic in my hand and cried it for sale, and the
folk were looking at it and bidding for it, when, O my
brother, thou earnest up and seeing me, commandest
me to the palace ; but thine attendants took me and
carried me to prison, where I abode till thou bethoughtest
thee of me and badst bring me before thee. So now I
have told thee what befell me, and praised be God for
reunion ! '

The two kings marvelled exceedingly at Said's story
and Taj el Mulouk made ready a goodly dwelling for Seif
el Mulouk and his vizier. [So they took up their abode
therein] and Dauleh Khatoun used to visit Seif el Mulouk
there and thank him for his favours and talk with him.
One day, he foregathered with her and said to her, 'O
my lady, where is the promise thou madest me, in the
palace of Japhet son of Noah, saying, " Were I with my
people, I would make shift to bring thee to thy desire ? " '
And Said said to her, ' O princess, I crave thine aid to
enable him to compass his desire.' ' It is well,' answered
she. ' I will do my endeavour for him, that he may attain
his wish, if it please God the Most High.' And she
turned to Seif el Mulouk and said to him, 'Take comfort
and be of good courage/ Then she rose and going in to
her mother, said to her, ' Arise with me forthright and let


i os

us purify ourselves and make fumigations, to the intent
that Bediya el Jemal and her mother may come and see
me and rejoice in me.' ' With all my heart/ answered the
queen and rising, betook herself to the garden and burnt
of the perfumes [which Bediya's mother had given her to
that intent] ; nor was it long before Bediya el Jemal and
her mother made their appearance.

The Queen of Hind foregathered with the other queen
and acquainted her with her daughter's safe return, whereat
she rejoiced; and Bediya el Jemal and Dauleh Khatoun
foregathered likewise and rejoiced in each other. Then
they pitched the pavilions and dressed rich meats and
made ready the place of entertainment ; whilst the two
princesses withdrew to a tent apart and ate and drank
and made merry together ; after which they sat down to
converse, and Bediya said, ' What hath befallen thee
in thy strangerhood ? ' * O my sister,' replied Dauleh
Khatoun, ' ask me not what hath befallen me. Alas,- what
hardships mortals suffer ! ' ' How so ? ' asked Bediya, So
she told her how the son of the Blue King had carried
her off to the Castle of Japhet son of Noah and how Seif
el Mulouk had slain the genie and brought her back to
her father; and she told her also all that the prince had
undergone of hardships and terrors, before he came to
the castle.

Bediya marvelled at her story and said, ' O my sister,
this is a wonder of wonders! By Allah, this Seif el
Mulouk is indeed a man ! But why did he leave his
father and mother and betake himself to travel and ex-
pose himself to these perils ? ' Quoth Dauleh Khatoun,
* I have a mind to tell thee the first part of his story ; but
shame of thee hinders me therefrom/ Quoth Bediya 3
4 Why shouldst thou have shame of me, seeing that thou
art my sister and my friend and there is much between
thee and me and I know thou seekest me nought but


io6


good ? Tell me then what thou hast to say and be not
abashed at me and conceal nothing from me.' ' By Allah,'
answered Dauleh Khatoun, ' all the calamities that have
betided this poor fellow have been on thine account and
because of thee I ' ' How so, O my sister ? ' asked Bediya ;
and the other said, 'Know that he saw thy portrait
wroughten on a tunic that thy father sent to Solomon
son of David (on whom be peace !) and he opened it
not neither looked at it, but despatched it, with other
presents, to Aasim ben Sefwan, King of Egypt, who gave
it, still unopened, to his son Seif el Mulouk. The latter
unfolded the tunic, thinking to put it on, and seeing thy
portrait, became enamoured thereof; wherefore he came
forth, love-distraught, in quest of thee, and left his people
'N'H&t an< ^ kingdom and suffered all these perils and hardships

Isttlxxlb on tn * ne acc ount.'

When Bediya heard this, she blushed and was con-
founded at Dauleh Khatoun and said, * This may never
be ; for mankind accord not with the Jinn.' Then Dauleh
Khatoun went on to praise Seif el Mulouk and extol his
beauty and fashion and prowess and qualities, saying,
* For God's sake and mine, O my sister, come and speak
with him, though but one word ! ' But Bediya el Jemal
said, ' This that thou sayest I will not hear, neither will I
assent to thee therein ; ' and it was as if she heard nought
of what the other said and as if no love of Seif el Mulouk
and his beauty and fashion and prowess had gotten hold
upon her heart. Then said Dauleh Khatoun, ' O Bediya
el Jemal, by the milk we have sucked, I and thou, and
by that which is graven on the seal of Solomon (on whom
be peace !), hearken to these my words ; for I pledged
myself, in the Castle of Japhet, to show him thy face.
So, God on thee, show thyself to him once, for the love
of me, and look thyself on him ! ' And she ceased not
to weep and implore her and kiss her hands and feet, till


io7

she consented and said, ' For thy sake, I will show him
my face once.'

With that Dauleh Khatoun's heart was glad and she
kissed her hands and feet. Then she went to the great
pavilion in the garden and bade her women spread it with
carpets and set up a couch of gold and place the wine-
vessels in order; after which she went in to Seif and
Said, whom she found seated in their lodging, and gave
the former the glad tidings of the accomplishment of his
wish, saying, i Go to the pavilion in the garden, thou and
thy brother, and hide yourselves there, so none in the
palace may see you, till I come to you with Bediya el
Jemal.' So they rose and repaired to the pavilion, where
they found the couch of gold set and furnished with
cushions, and meat and wine set ready. So they sat
awhile, whilst Seif bethought him of his beloved and his
breast was straitened and love and longing beset him i
wherefore he rose and went forth from the vestibule of
the pavilion. Said would have followed him, but he said
to him, 'O my brother, follow me not, but abide in thy
place, till I return to thee.' So Said abode seated, whilst
Seif went down into the graden, drunken with the wine
of desire and distracted for excess of passion and love-
longing : yearning agitated him and transport overcame
him and he recited the following verses :


O thou gloriously fair, 1 I have no one but thee ; I'm the thrall of thy
love. Oh, have pity on me !

Thou'rt all that I seek, my desire and my joy, And mine entrails refuse
to love other than thee.

Would I knew if thou knowst of my night-long lament, Sleepless-
lidded and weeping with tears like a sea.

Bid slumber alight on my lids 8 so perchance In the visions of dreams I
thine image may see.


Bediya el "Jemal.


io8


Oh, show favour to one, who's distracted for love, And his life from the

deaths of thy cruelty free !
So may Allah increase thee in beauty and joy And grant that all creatures

thy ransom may be !
At the last, neath my banner all lovers shall rise And all fair ones to

gather neath thine shall agree.

Then he wept and recited these also :

All my desire is for a maid, who passeth all in charms ; Within mf
inmost soul she dwells, my heart's most secret core.

Lo, if I speak, my speech is of her charms, and if I'm dumb, She is
the cynosure of all my thoughts for evermore.

Then he wept sore and recited the following :

A flame is in my liver, that rages ever higher ; My wish art thou of

wishes, and longsome is desire.
To thee and to none other I bend and crave thy grace, (For lovers are

long-suffering, ) so thou mayst turn from ire
And rigour and take pity on one whose body love Hath worn and

racked, whose entrails with passion are on fire.
Relent, then ; yea, be gracious, show favour and be kind j Ne'er, ne'er

will I renounce thee nor of thy service tire.

And also these :

Cares on me came, what time there came the love of thee, And sleep as

cruel is as thou thyself to me.
The messenger brings news to me that thou art wroth : Now God

forfend the ill whereof he tells should be !

Presently Said grew weary of awaiting him and going
forth in quest of him, found him walking in the garden, in
a state of distraction, reciting the following verses :

By Allah, by Allah the Great and eke by His virtue, the wight 1 The
chapter 2 who chanteth aloud of the Koran, " Creator " that hight,

The eyes of me range not at will o'er the beauties of those that I see,
But thine image, Bediya, alone, is my bosom-companion by night S

a Qucere Mohammed.

8 Koran xxxv., better known as the Chapter of the Angels,


109


So he joined him and they walked about the gardes
together and ate of its fruits.

Meanwhile, the two princesses came to the pavilion
and entering, sat down on the couch of gold, beside
which was a window that gave upon the garden. The
eunuchs set before them all manner rich meats and
they ate, Dauleh Khatoun feeding her foster-sister by
mouthfuls, till they were satisfied ; when the former
called for divers kinds of sweetmeats, and they ate what
they would of them and washed their hands. After
this, Dauleh Khatoun made ready wine and set on the
drinking- vessels and flagons and proceeded to fill and
give Bediya to drink, filling for herself and drinking
in turn. Then Bediya looked from the window into
the garden and gazed upon the fruits and branches
that were therein, till her eyes fell on Seif el Mulouk,
as he wandered about the garden, followed by Said, and
she heard him recite verses, pouring forth copious tears
the while.

The sight cost her a thousand sighs and she turned INTi'crljt
to Dauleh Khatoun and said to her (and indeed the wine &lTiXX&
sported with her senses), ' O my sister, who is that young
man I see in the garden, distraught, love-lorn, melancholy,
sighing ? ' Quoth Dauleh Khatoun, ' Dost thou give me
leave to bring him hither, that we may look on him?*
And Bediya answered, 'If thou canst avail to bring him,
do so.' So Dauleh Khatoun called to him, saying, 'O
king's son, come up hither and bring us thy beauty and
thy grace ! ' Seif knew her voice and came up into the
pavilion ; but no sooner had he set eyes on Bediya el
Jemal, than he fell down in a swoon ; whereupon Dauleh
Khatoun sprinkled a little rose-water on him and he came
to himself.

Then he rose and kissed the earth before Bediya, who
was amazed at his beauty and loveliness ; and Dauleh


no


Khatoun said to her, ' Know, O princess, that this is Sei£
el Muiouk, to whom, by the ordinance of God the Most
High, I owe my deliverance, and he it is who hath
endured all manner of afflictions on thine account : where-
fore I would have thee look on him with favour. 5 With
this Bediya laughed and said, ' And who keeps faith, that
this youth should do so? For there is no [true] love in
men.' £ princess,' answered Seif, 'never shall lack of
faith be in me, and all men are not created alike.' And
he wept before her and recited these verses :

Harkye, Bediya el Jemal, have ruth upon a wight, Whom thine enchant-
ing, wicked eye hath brought to parlous plight.

By the fair colours in thy cheeks so featly that combine, The colour of
the anemone, rose-ruddy, ay, and white,

Afflict not with abandonment one who is sick to death ; For long
estrangement, see, my frame is worn away outright.

This is the utmost of my wish, the end of my desire, Though unto
union should I strive to win, if but I might

Then he wept sore and love and longing got the
mastery over him and he greeted her with the following
verses :

Peace from a lover be on thee, a slave of love in vain, Still do the

generous the approof of [God] the Generous gain.
Peace be upon thee ! Never fail thine image to my dreams Nor hall nor

chamber ever cease thy presence to contain !
Indeed, I'm jealous over thee ; I may not name thy name. Surely

beloved, come what may, to lover should be fain.
Cut thou not off thy kindnesses from him who loves thee dear ; For grief

destroys him ; yea, he is for suffering all forslain.
I watch the shining stars, and they affright me ; ay, my night, For stress

of yearning and desire, is long on heart and brain.
What words of asking shall I speak, to help me to my wish ? Resource

nor patience any dele doth unto me remain.
Upon thee be the peace of God, in time of rigour ; peace Be on thee

from t le lover sad, long-suffering, 'spite his pain i


Ill


Then, for the stress of his passion and desir^ he re
peated these verses also :

If any other be my aim, my lords, but you, Ne'er may I gain of you the

grace for which I sue I
Who is there but yourselves doth loveliness comprise ? Who else could

, e'er stir up my soul to love anew ?
How should I be consoled for passion, I, indeed, Who've wasted all my

life and all my breath for you ?

When he had made an end of his verses, he wept sore
and she said to him, ' O prince, I fear to grant thee entire
acceptance, lest I find in thee neither love nor affection ;
for oftentimes men's virtues are few and their perfidy great
and thou knowest how the lord Solomon, son of David
(on whom be peace !), took Belkis to his love, but forsook
her whenas he saw another fairer than she.' ' O my eye
and my soul,' replied Seif, ' God hath not made all men
alike, and I, if it be His will, will keep my troth and die
at thy feet. Thou shalt see what I will do in accordance
with my words and God is my warrant for that I say.'
Quoth Bediya, ' Sit and be of good heart and swear to me
by thy religion and let us covenant together that we will
not be false to each other ; and may God the Most High
punish whichever of us breaketh faith ! '

So he sat down and laid his hand in hers and they
swore to each other that neither of them would ever
prefer to the other any one, either of mankind or of the
Jinn. Then they embraced awhile and wept for excess of
joy, whilst passion overcame Seif el Mulouk and he recited
the following verses :

I weep for passion and for love and longing passing sore ; Ay, and desire

of her my heart and soul do weary for.
Sore is my suffering for the length of severance from thee And all too

short my arm and weak to reach my wishes' shore.
Yea, and my grief for that whereby my fortitude's made strait, Unto the

railer doth reveal my bosom's secret sore.


112

The compass of my patience, once so wide, is narrow grown, Nor n
there left me any strength with trouble to wage war.

I wonder, will God e'er reknit our sundered lives and heal My heart of
all the pain and care that rankle at its core !

Then Seif el Mulouk arose and walked in the garden
and Bediya el Jemal arose also and went forth a-walking,
followed by a slave-girl bearing food and a flask of wine.
The princess sat down and the damsel set the food and
wine before her : nor was it long before they were joined
jNFlglji by Seif el Mulouk, whom Bediya received with open arms
^fxhxbi. and they sat awhile, eating and drinking. Then said she
to him, * O king's son, [thou must now go to the garden
of Irem, where dwells my grandmother, and seek her con-
sent to our marriage. My slave-girl Merjaneh will convey
thee thither and there] thou wilt see a great pavilion of
red satin, lined with green silk. Take courage and enter
the pavilion boldly and thou wilt see therein an old
woman sitting on a couch of red gold set with pearls and
jewels. Salute her with courtesy and worship ; then look
at the foot of the couch, where thou wilt see a pair of
sandals of cloth of gold, embroidered with jewels. Take
them and kiss them and lay them on thy head ; then put
them under thy right armpit and stand before the old
woman, in silence and with thy head bowed down. If she
ask thee who thou art and how thou earnest thither, make
her no answer, but abide silent till Merjaneh enter, when
she will speak with her and seek to win her approof for
thee and cause her look on thee with favour; so haply
God the Most High may incline her heart to thee and she
may grant thee thy wish.'

Then she called Merjaneh and said to her, 'As thou
lovest me, do my errand this day and be not slothful
therein ! If thou accomplish it, thou shalt be free, for the
sake of God the Most High, and I will deal bounteously
by thee and there shall be none dearer to me than thoUf,


ii3


nor will I discover my secrets to any but thee. So, by my
love for thee, do this my occasion and be not slothful
therein.' 'O my lady and light of mine eyes,' replied
Merjaneh, ' tell me what is it thou requirest of me, that I
may accomplish it on my head and eyes.' Quoth Bediya,
' Take this mortal on thy shoulders and carry him to the
garden of Irem and the pavilion of my grandmother,
my father's mother, and be careful of him. When thou
hast brought him into her presence and seest him take the
slippers and do them worship, and hearest her ask him
who he is and how and why he came thither, do thou
come forward in haste and salute her and say to her, " O
my lady, I am she who brought him hither and he is the
king's son of Egypt. It is he who slew the son of the
Blue King and delivered the princess Dauleh Khatoun
from the Castle of Japhet son of Noah and brought her
back safe to her father : and I have brought him to thee,
that he may give thee the glad news of her safety : so be
thou gracious to him."

Then do thou say to her, " God on thee, O my lady, is
not this young man handsome ? " She will reply, " Yes : "
and do thou rejoin, " O my lady, indeed he is accom-
plished in honour and manhood and valour and he is
lord and King of Egypt and possesseth all praiseworthy
qualities." If she say to thee, "What is his occasion?"
do thou make answer, " My lady saluteth thee and saith
to thee, how long shall she abide at home, a maid and
unmarried? Indeed, the time is long upon her. What
then is thine intent in leaving her without a husband and
why dost thou not many her in thy lifetime and that of
her mother, like other girls ? " If she say, " How shall
we do to marry her? An she have any one in mind, let
her tell us of him, and we will do her will as far as may
be," do thou answer, '* O my lady, thy daughter saith to
thee, ' Ye were minded aforetime to marry me to Solomon

VOL. VII. 8


H4


(on whom be peace ! ) and wrought him my portrait on
a tunic. But he had no lot in me ; so he sent the tunic
to the King of Egypt and he gave it to his son, who saw
my portrait wroughten thereon and fell in love with me ;
wherefore he left kingdom and father and mother and
turning his back on the world and all that is therein, went
forth at a venture, a wanderer, love-distraught, and hath
siiuered the . utmost perils and hardships for my sake.'
Now thou seest his beauty and grace, and her heart is
enamoured of him ; so, if ye have a mind to marry her,
marry her to this young man and forbid her not from him,
for he is a passing goodly youth and King of Egypt, nor
wilt thou find a comelier than he ; and if ye will not give
her to him, she will slay herself and marry none, neither
man nor genie." And look, O my minnie Merjaheh,
continued Bediya el Jemal, 'how thou mayst do with my
grandmother, to win her consent, and beguile her with
soft words, so haply she may do my desire.' Quoth the
damsel, ' O my lady, upon my head and eyes, I will serve
thee and do what shall content thee.'

Then she took Seif el Mulouk on her shoulders and
said to him, ' Shut thine eyes.' He did so and she flew
up with him into the sky ; and after awhile she said to him,
'O king's son, open thine eyes.' He opened them and
found himself in a garden, which was none other than the
garden of Irem ; and she showed him the pavilion and
bade him enter ; whereupon he pronounced the name of
God and entering, saw the old queen sitting on the couch,
attended by her waiting-women. So he drew near her
with courtesy and reverence and taking the sandals, did as
Bediya had enjoined him. Quoth the old woman, ' Who
art thou and whence comest thou and who brought thee
hither? Wherefore dost thou take the sandals and kiss
them and when didst thou ask a favour of me and I did
not grant "it thee ? s


us

With this in came Merjaneh and saluting her reverently,
repeated to her what Bediya el Jemal had told her ; which
when the old queen heard, she cried out at her and was
wroth with her and said, ' How shall there be accord be-
tween mankind and the Jinn ? ' But Seif answered her, Mt§f)t
saying, 'Indeed, I will conform to thy will and be thy fcCCbPCbtt*
servant and die in thy love and will keep faith with thee
and regard none but thee : so shalt thou see my truth and
lack of falsehood and the excellence of my honourable
dealing with thee, if it be the will of God the Most
High!' The old woman bowed her head and pondered
awhile; after which she raised her head and said to him,
' O fair youth, wilt thou indeed keep faith and troth ? '
' Yes,' answered he ; 4 by Him who raised the heavens
and spread out the earth upon the water, I will indeed
keep faith ! '

Quoth she, ' God willing, I will accomplish thee thy
desire : but now go thou into the garden and take thy
pleasure therein and eat of its fruits, that have neither
like nor equal in the world, whilst I send for my son
Shehyal and talk with him of the matter. Nothing but
good shall come of it, so God please, for he will not cross
me nor depart from my commandment and I will marry
thee with his daughter Bediya el Jemal. So be of good
heart, O Seif el Mulouk, for she shall assuredly be thy
wife.' The prince thanked her and kissing her hands
and feet, went forth from her into the garden ; whilst she
turned to Merjaneh and said to her, ' Go and find my son
Shehyal and bring him to me, wherever he is.' So
Merjaneh went out in quest of King Shehyal and found
him and brought him to his mother.

Meanwhile, as Seif el Mulouk walked in the garden,
five jinn of the people of the Blue King espied him and
said to each other, 'Whence cometh yonder fellow and
who brought him hither? Belike it is he who slew the


1 16

Blue King's son : but we will go about with him and
question him and find out who he is.' So they came
softly up to him, as he sat in a corner of the garden, and
sitting down by him, said to him, 'O fair youth, thou
didst rarely in killing the son of the Blue King and
delivering Dauleh Khatoun from him ; for he was a per-
fidious dog and had played the traitor with her, and had
not God appointed thee to her, she had never won free.
But how didst thou slay him ? ' Seif looked at them and
deeming them of the folk of the garden, answered, 4 1
slew him by means of this ring on my finger.' There-
with they were assured that it was he who had slain him ;
so they seized on him, two of them holding his hands,
whilst other two held his feet and the fifth his mouth,
lest he should cry out and King Shehyal's people should
hear him and rescue him.

Then they lifted him up and flying away with him,
stayed not in their flight till they set him down before
their king and said to him, ' O king of the age, we bring
thee the murderer of thy son.' ' Where is he ? ' asked the
king : and they replied, ' This is he.' So the Blue King
said to Seif, ' How slewest thou my son, the darling of my
heart and the light of my eyes, and why didst thou slay
hirn without right, for all he had done thee no injury?'
Quoth the prince, 'I slew him, because of his wrong-
doing and frowardness, in that he used to seize kings'
daughters and sever them from their families and carry
them to the Castle of Japhet son of Noah and transgress
against them. I slew him by means of this ring on my
finger, and God hurried his soul to the fire and ill is the
abiding-place [to which he went].'

Therewithal the king was certified that this was indeed
he who slew his son ; so he called his viziers and said to
them, ' Without doubt, this is the murderer of my son : so
how do you counsel me to deal with him ? Shall I slay


ii7


him after the foulest fashion or torture him with the most
grievous torments or how ? ' Quoth the chief vizier, 4 Cut
off his limbs, one a day.' And another said, ' Beat him
grievously every day [till he die].' And a third, ' Cut
him in half.' A fourth, ' Cut off all his fingers and burn
him with fire.' And a fifth, ' Crucify him.' And so on.
each speaking according to his judgment.

Now there was with the Blue King an old amir, versed
in affairs and experienced in the circumstance of the
times, and he said, ' O king of the age, I have somewhat
to say to thee, and it is for thee to judge whether thou
wilt hearken to me or not.' Now he was the king's privy
counsellor and the chief officer of his empire, and he was
wont to give ear to his word and act by his counsel and
gainsay him not in aught. So he rose and kissing the
ground before the king, said to him, 'O king of the
age, if I counsel thee in this matter, wilt thou follow
my counsel and grant me indemnity?' 'Set forth thine
opinion,' answered the king, 'and thou shalt have in-
demnity.' Then said he, ' O king of the age, if thou
wilt accept my advice and hearken to my word, to slay
this young man now is inexpedient, for that he is thy
prisoner and in thy power, and whenas thou wilt, thou
mayst lay thy hand on him and do with him as thou wilt,
Have patience, then, O king of the age, for he hath
entered the garden of Irem and is become the [affianced]
husband of Bediya el Jemal, daughter of King Shehyal,
and one of them. Thy people seized him there and
brought him hither and he did not hide his case from
them or from thee. So, if thou kill him, King Shehyal
will seek to avenge him of thee and wage war on thee for
his daughter's sake, and thou canst not avail to cope with
him nor make head against his power.' So the king
hearkened to his counsel and commanded to imprison Seif
el Mulouk.


1 18

Meanwhile, Bediya's grandmother, her son Shehyal
being come to her, despatched Merjaneh in quest of Seif
el Mulouk; but she found him not and returning to her
mistress, said, 4 1 found him not in the garden.' So the
old queen sent for the gardeners and questioned them of
the prince. Quoth they, ' We saw him sitting under a
tree, and five of the Blue King's people alighted by him
and spoke with him awhile, after which they took him up
and stopping his mouth, flew away with him.' When the
old queen heard this, it was no light matter to her and she
was exceeding wroth : so she rose to her feet and said to
her son, King Shehyal, ' Art thou a king and shall the
Blue King's people come to our garden and carry off our
guests unhindered, and thou alive ? ' And she proceeded
to provoke him, saying, ' It behoves not that any trans-
gress against us in thy lifetime.' ' O my mother,' answered
he, c this man slew the Blue King's son, who was a genie,
and God threw him into his hand. He is a genie and I
am a genie : how then shall I go to him and make war on
him for the sake of a mortal? ' But she answered, saying,
' Go to him and demand our guest of him, and if he be
still alive and the Blue King deliver him to thee, take him
and return ; but if he have slain him, take the king alive
and all his household and family and bring them to me,
that I may slaughter them with my own hand and lay
waste his dominions. Except thou do what I bid thee, I
will not. hold thee quit of my milk and my bringing up of
thee shall be counted unlawful.'
tbCigllt So Shehyal rose and assembling his troops, set out, in
CtlXXbtU. deference to his mother, desiring to content her and her
friends, and in accordance with that which had been fore-
ordained from all eternity ; nor did they leave journeying
till they came to the country of the Blue King, who met
them with his army and gave them battle. The Blue
King's host was put to the rout and he and all his sons s


ri9


great and small, and grandees and officers taken and
bound and brought before King Shehyal, who said to
the captive monarch, ' O Azrec, 1 where is my guest, the
mortal Seif el Mulouk ? ' ' O Shehyal,' answered the
Blue King, 'thou art a genie and I am a genie, and
is it on account of a mortal, who slew ray son, the
darling of my heart and the delight of my soul, that thou
hast done all this and spilt the blood of so many thousand
Jinn ? '

* Leave this talk,' rejoined Shehyal ; ' knowest thou not
that a single mortal is better, in God's sight, than a
thousand Jinn? If he be alive, bring him to me, and
I will set thee free and all whom I have taken of thy sons
and people; but if thou have slain him, I will slaughter
thee and thy sons.' ' O king,' said Azrec, ' is this fellow
of more account with thee than my son ? ' Quoth Shehyal,
' Thy son was an evildoer, who carried off kings' daughters
and shut them up in the Castle of Japhet son of Noah and
evil entreated t^em.' Then said the Blue King, ' He is
with me ; but make thou peace between us.' So he de-
livered the prince to Shehyal, who made peace between
him and the Blue King, and the latter gave him a writ of
absolution for the death of his son. Then Shehyal con-
ferred robes of honour on them and entertained the Blue
King and his troops hospitably for three days, after which
he took the prince and carried him back to the old queen,
who rejoiced in him with an exceeding joy, and Shehyal
marvelled at the beauty of Seti el Mulouk and his grace
and perfection.

Then Seif related to him his story from beginning
to end and Shehyal said, * O my mother, since it is thy
pleasure that this should be, I hearken and obey all that
it pleaseth thee to command; wherefore do thou carry
him to Serendib and there celebrate his wedding and
1 Blue.


120


marry him to her in all state, for he is a goodly youth
and hath endured horrors for her sake.' So she and her
maidens set out with Seif el Mulouk for Serendib and
foregathered with Dauleh Khatoun and Bediya el Jemal
in the Queen of Hind's garden. The old queen ac-
quainted the two princesses with all that had passed
between Seif el Mulouk and the Blue King ; after which
King Taj el Mulouk assembled the grandees of his realm
and drew up the contract of marriage between Seif el
Mulouk and Bediya el Jemal ; and he conferred splendid
robes of honour and gave banquets to the people.

Then Seif el Mulouk rose, and kissing the earth before
the king, said to him, * Pardon, O king ! I would fain ask
somewhat of thee, but fear lest thou refuse it to me and
disappoint my expectation.' 4 By Allah,' answered Taj el
Mulouk, 4 though thou soughtest my soul of me, I would
not refuse it to thee, after all the kindness thou hast done
me ! ' Quoth Seif, ' I wish thee to marry the princess
Dauleh Khatoun to my brother Said, avt we will both
be thy servants.' 4 1 hear and obey,' answered Taj el
Mulouk, and assembling his grandees a second time, let
draw up the contract of marriage between his daughter
and Said; after which they scattered gold and silver
[among the people] and the king bade decorate the city.
So they held high festival and Seif and Said went in to
their brides on the same night.

As for Seif el Mulouk, he abode forty days with Bediya
el Jemal, at the end of which time she said to him, 'O
king's son, is there any regret for aught left in thy heart?'
' God forbid 1 ' answered he. 4 1 have accomplished my
quest and there abideth no regret in my heart : but I
would fain visit my father and mother in Egypt and see
if they continue well or not.' So Bediya commanded &
company of her people to convey them to Egypt, and they
carried them to Cairo, where Seif and Said foregathered


I


121


with their parents and abode with them a week ; aftei
which they took leave of them and returned to Serendib ;
and after this, whenever they longed for their people, they
used to go to them and return. Then Seif el Mulouk and
Bediya el Jemal abode in all delight and solace of life, as
did Said and Dauleh Khatoun, till there came to them
the Destroyer of Delights and Sunderer of Companies.
So glory be to the Living One who dieth not, who createth
all creatures and decreeth to them death and who is the
First, without beginning, and the Last, without end ! This
is all that hath come down to us of the story of Seif el
Mulouk and Bediya el Jemah


HASSAN OF BASS OR A AND THE KING'S
DAUGHTER OF THE JINN.

There was once, of old days and in bygone ages and
times, a rich merchant, who dwelt in the land of Bassora.
[In due time] God the all-hearing and knowing decreed
that he should be admitted to the mercy of the Most
High; so he died, leaving a. widow and a son, 1 by name
Hassan, a youth of surpassing beauty and grace, to inherit
his wealth. They laid him out and buried him, aftei
which Hassan betook himself to the company of folk [of
lewd life], women and boys, consorting with them in
gardens and making them [banquets of] meat and wine
for months together and occupying himself not with traffic,

1 In the Calcutta (Macnaghten) Edition the merchant is described as
having two sons, one a brazier and the other a goldsmith, but, as the
brazier does not again make his appearance in the story, I have
followed the Breslau text, which mentions one son only, the goldsmith
HassaB.


122


like as his father had done, for that he exulted in [the
assured possession of] abundant wealth.

After he had led this life for some time and had wasted
all his ready money, he sold all his father's lands and
houses and [spent their price in riotous living, till] there
remained in his hand nothing, neither little nor much, nor
was one of his friends left who knew him. He abode
thus, anhungred, he and his mother, three days, and on
the fourth day, as he went along, unknowing whither, there
met him a man of his father's friends, who questioned him
of his case. So he told him what had befallen him and
the other said, 1 my son, I have a brother, a goldsmith j
if thou wilt, thou shalt be with him and learn his craft
and become skilled therein.' Hassan consented and
accompanied him to his brother, to whom he commended
him, saying, ' This is my son ; do thou teach him for my
sake.' So Hassan abode with the goldsmith and busied
himself with the craft ; and God prospered him, [so that
he became proficient therein] and [in due course] opened
a shop for himself.

One day, as he sat in his shop in the bazaar, there came
up to him a Persian, with a great white beard and a white 1
turban on his head, having the appearance of a merchant,
who looked at his handiwork and examined it knowingly.
It pleased him and he shook his head, saying, ' By Allah,
thou art a cunning goldsmith ! ' And he continued to
look at his wares, whilst Hassan read in an old book he
had in his hand and the folk were taken up with his
beauty and grace and symmetry, till the hour of afternoon
prayer, when the shop became clear of people and the
Persian accosted the young man, saying, ' O my son, thou

1 The white turban is the distinctive sign of the true-believer and was
adopted by the Persian to conceal his true character he being (as
appears from the sequel) a Magian or fire-worshipper.


123


art a goodly youth! What book is that? Thou hast no
father and I have no son, and I know an art, than which
there is no goodlier in the world. Many have sought of^g^ f
me instruction therein, but I consented not to teach it to tltclXIlX-
any of them; yet will I gladly teach it to thee, for the
love of thee hath gotten hold upon ray heart and I will
make thee my son and set up a barrier between thee and
poverty, so shalt thou be quit of this handicraft [and toil]
with hammer and charcoal and fire.'

' O my lord,' said Hassan, ' and when wilt thou teach me
this?' 'To-morrow,' answered the Persian, 'if it please
God the Most High, I will come to thee and make thee
fine gold of copper in thy presence.' Whereupon Hassan
rejoiced and sat talking with the Persian till nightfall,
when he took leave of him and going in to his mother,
saluted her and ate with her; but he was dazed, without
thought or reason, by reason of the hold that the stranger's
words had gotten upon his heart. So she questioned him
and he told her what had passed between himself and the
Persian, which when she heard, her heart fluttered and
she strained him to her breast, saying, ' O my son, beware
of hearkening to the talk of the folk, and especially of
the Persians, and obey them not in aught; for they are
sharpers and tricksters, who profess the art of alchemy
and swindle people and take their good and devour it in
vain.' ' O my mother,' answered Hassan, ' we are poor
folk and have nothing he may covet, that he should put a
cheat on us. Indeed, this Persian is an old man of worth
and the signs of virtue are manifest on him; God hath
inclined his heart to me and he hath adopted me to son.'
She was silent for chagrin, and he passed the night with a
heart full of what the Persian had said to him s nor did
sleep visit him, for the excess of his joy therein.

On the morrow, he rose and taking the keys, opened
the shop, nor was it long before the Persian made his


124


appearance. Hassan rose to him and would have kissed
his hands; but he forbade him from this and said to him,
* O Hassan, set on the melting-pot and mount the bellows.'
So he did as the stranger bade him and lighted the char-
coal. Then said the other, 'O my son, hast thou any
copper ? ' And he answered, ' I have a broken dish.' So
he caused him cut it into small pieces with the shears
and cast it into the crucible and blow up the fire with
the bellows, till the copper became liquid, when he took
from his turban a folded paper and opening it, sprinkled
thereout into the pot about half a drachm of somewhat
like eye-powder. Then he bade Hassan blow the bellows,
and he did so, till the contents of the crucible became
a lump of gold.

When he saw this, he was at his wits' end for joy and
taking the ingot [forth of the melting-pot), handled it
and tried it with the file and found it pure gold of the
finest quality: whereupon his reason fled and he was
dazed with excess of delight and bent over the Persian's
hand to kiss it. But he forbade him, saying, e Carry the
ingot to the market and sell it and take the price in haste
and speak not.' So Hassan went down into the market
and gave the ingot to the broker, who took it and rubbed
it [with the touchstone] and found it pure gold. So they
opened the biddings at ten thousand dirhems and the
merchants bid against one another for it up to fifteen
thousand dirhems, at which price he sold it and taking
the money, went home and told his mother what had
passed, saying, 'O my mother, I have learnt this art'
ftcrht. ^ Ut S ^ C * au £>k e ^ at him, sa y m g» 'There is no power and
IXXX n0 v * rtue k ut m God the Most High, the Supreme 1 ' And
* she was silent for vexation.

Then, of his ignorance, he took a [brass] mortar and
returning to the shop, laid it before the Persian, who was
still sitting there and who said to him, ' O my son, what


125


wilt thou do with this mortar?' 'Let us put it in the
fire,' answered Hassan, 'and make of it ingots of gold.'
The Persian laughed and said ; ' O my son, art thou mad
that thou wouldst go down into the market with two
ingots of gold in one day? Knowst thou not that the
folk would suspect us and we should lose our lives? If
I teach thee this craft, thou must practise it but once a
year; for that will suffice thee from year to year.' ' True,
O my lord,' answered Hassan, and sitting down, threw
charcoal on the fire and set on the melting-pot. Quoth
the Persian, 'What wilt thou, O my son?' And Hassan'
replied, ' Teach me this craft.' ' There is no power and
no virtue but in God the Most High, the Supreme ! ' cried
the Persian, laughing. ' Verily, O my son, thou art little
of wit and in nowise fitted for this noble craft. Did ever
any in his life learn this art in the beaten way or in the
markets ? If we busy ourselves with it here, the folk
will say, " These practise alchemy ; " and the magistrates
will hear of us, and we shall lose our lives. Wherefore,

my son, if thou desire this forthright, come with me to
my house. 81

So Hassan closed his shop and went with him ; but
by the way he bethought him of his mother's words
and stood still, with bowed head, thinking in himself a
thousand thoughts. The Persian turned and seeing him
thus, laughed and said to him, ' Art thou mad ? What !

1 purpose thee good in my heart and thou misdoubtest
I will harm thee ! But, if thou fear to go with me to
my house, I will go with thee to thine and teach thee
theie.' 'It is well, O uncle,' answered Hassan, and the
Persian said, ' Go thou before me.' So Hassan led the
way to his own house, where he left the Persian standing
at the door, and going in, told his mother of his coming.
She set the house in order for them and when she had
made an end of furnishing and adorning it, her son bade


126


her go to one of the neighbours' houses. So she left
the house to them and went her way, whereupon Hassan
brought in the Persian.

Then he took a dish and going to the market, returned
with food, which he set before the Persian, saying, 'Eat,
O my lord, that there may be bread and salt between us,
and may God the Most High do vengeance upon him
who is unfaithful to the bond of bread and salt!' The
Persian smiled and answered, 'True, O my son! Who
knoweth the virtue of bread and salt?' Then he came
forward and ate with Hassan, till they were satisfied ; after
which, ' O my son Hassan,' said he, ' bring us some sweet-
meats.' So Hassan went to the market, rejoicing in his
words, and returned with ten saucers of sweetmeats, of
which they both ate and the Persain said, ' May God
abundantly requite thee, O my son ! It is the like of
thee with whom folk company and to whom they discover
their secrets and teach what may profit him ! ' Then said
he, ' O Hassan, bring the gear.'

No sooner did Hassan hear this than he went forth,
like a colt let out to grass in the Spring, and hastening to
the shop, fetched the gear and set it before the Persian,
who pulled out a paper and said, ' O Hassan, wert thou
not dearer to me than my son, I would not let thee into
this mystery, for I have none of the elixir left save what is
in this paper ; but by and by I will bring the ingredients
whereof it is composed and make it before thee and teach
thee its fashion ; and do thou observe, when I compound
the simples and lay them before thee. Know, O my son
Hassan, that thou must lay to every ten pounds of copper
half a drachm of that which is in this paper, and the
whole will presently become virgin gold without alloy.
There are in this paper three ounces, Egyptian measure,,
and when it is spent, I will make thee more. 5 Hassan
took the packet and finding therein a yellow powder, finer


127


than before, said to the Persian, ' O my lord, what is the
name of this substance and where is it found and how is
it made ? ' But he laughed and said, ' Of what dost thou
question? Indeed, thou art an impertinent boy ! Do
and hold thy peace.'

So Hassan arose and fetching a [brass] bowl from the
house, cut it up and threw it into the melting-pot; then
he scattered on it a little of the powder and it became
a lump of pure gold. When he saw this, he rejoiced
mightily and was filled with amazement and could think
of nothing but the gold ; but, whilst he was occupied with
taking up the ingot from the melting-pot, the Persian
pulled out of his turban in haste a packet of Cretan
henbane, which if an elephant smelt, he would sleep from
night to night, and cutting off a little thereof, put it in a
piece of sweetmeat. Then said he to Hassan, i O Hassan s
thou art become my very son and dearer to me than my
soul and my wealth and I have a daughter whose like never
have eyes beheld for beauty and grace and symmetry.
Now I see that thou befittest none but her and she none
but thee ; wherefore, if it be the will of God, I will marry
thee to her.' ' I am thy servant,' replied Hassan ; ' and
whatsoever thou dost with me [of good] will be [credited
to thee] with God the Most High.' * O my son/ rejoined
the Persian, ' have patience and good shall betide thee.'

Therewithal he gave him the piece of sweetmeat and he
took it and kissed his hand, knowing not what was hidden
for him in the future. Then he put it in his mouth, but
hardly had he swallowed it, when he fell down, head
foremost, and was lost to the world ; whereupon the
Persian rejoiced exceedingly and said, ' Thou hast fallen
into my snare, O good-for-nothing dog of the Arabs S
This many a year have I sought thee, O Hassan, and now
I have got thee ! ' Then he girt himself and binding tNTftrrjf
Hassan hand and foot, laid him in a chest, which he tscdXXX!-


128


emptied for the purpose, and locked it upon him. More-
over, he emptied another chest and laying therein all
Hassan's valuables, together with the ingot of gold [and
the price of that which he had sold], locked it.

Then he ran to the market and fetching a porter, took
up the two chests and made off with them without the
city, where he set them down on the sea-shore, hard by
a vessel at anchor there. Now this vessel was freighted
by the Persian and her captain was awaiting him ; so P
when the sailors saw him, they came to him and carried
the chests on board. Then the Persian called out to the
captain, saying, 'Up and let us begone, for I have done
my errand and compassed my desire.' So the captain
cried out to the crew, saying, 'Weigh anchor and set
sail S ' And the ship put out to sea with a fair wind.

Meanwhile, Hassan's mother awaited him till nightfall,
but heard neither sound nor news of him ; so she went
to the house and finding it open, entered and saw none
therein and missed the chests and valuables ; wherefore
she knew that her son was lost and that destiny had
overtaken him and buffeted her face and tore her clothes,
crying out and lamenting and saying, ' Alas, my son ! Alas }
the fruit of my entrails P And she recited the following
verses :

My patience fails me and unrest is sore upon me } yea, Lament and

sickness, after you, redouble on me aye.
Bv God. no fortitude have I to bear the loss of you ! How should I

patience have, when all my hopes are fled away?
Since he I love is gone, in sleep how should I have delight? Who can

take pleasure in a life of misery and dismay ?
Thou'rt gone and hast made desolate both house and folk and eke

Troubled the limpid streams whereat I did my thirst allay.
Thou wast mine aid in all distress ; my glory and my pride Among

mankind, in every need my comfort and my stay.
N->»r hast thou ever, until now, been absent from niy sight s But unto me

thou didst return again, ere ended day I


129

And she ceased not to weep and bemoan herself till
the morning, when the neighbours came in to her and
questioned her of her son, and she told them what had
befallen him with the Persian, assured that she should
never see him again. Then she went round about the
house weeping, till she espied two lines written upon the
wall ; so she sent for a learned man, who read them to
her ; and they were as follows :

The phantom of Leila came to me in dreams, tow'rds the break of day.
When slumber ruled and my comrades all in the desert sleeping lay;

But, when I awoke to the dream of the night, that came to visit me, I
found the air void and the wonted place of our rendezvous far away.

When she heard this, she cried out and said, ' Yes, O
my son 1 Indeed, the house is desolate and distant the
place of visitation!' Then the neighbours took leave of
her and went away, after they had prayed that she might
be vouchsafed patience and speedy reunion with her son ;
but she ceased not to weep all tides of the day and watches
of the night and built a tomb amiddleward the house, on
which she let write Hassan's name and the date of his
loss, and thenceforward she quitted it not, but sojourned
by it night and day.

Now this Persian was a Magian, who hated Muslims
with an exceeding hatred and destroyed all who fell into
his power. He was a lewd and filthy villain, an alchemist,
an astrologer and a seeker after hidden treasures, such an
one as he of whom quoth the poet :

A dog, the son of a dog, is he and his grandfather, too, was one ; And
when was there ever aught of good in a dog, of a dog the son?

The name of this accursed wretch was Behram the
Magian, and he was wont, every year, to take a Muslim
and slaughter him for a purpose of his own. So, when
he had carried out his plot against Hassan the goldsmith

VOL. VII. 9


130


they sailed on till dark, when the ship made fast to the
shore for the night, and at sunrise, when they set sail
again, Behram bade his slaves and servants bring him the
chest in which was Hassan. They did so and he opened
it and taking out the young man, made him smell to
vinegar and blew a powder into his nostrils. Hassan
sneezed and cast up the henbane ; then, opening his eyes,
he looked about him and found himself on board a ship
In full sail, amiddleward the sea, and saw the Persian
sitting by him ; wherefore he knew that the accursed
Magian had put a cheat on him and that he had fallen
into the very peril of which his mother had bidden him
beware. So he spoke the words, which whoso uttereth
shall not be confounded, that is to say, ' There is no
power and no virtue save in God the Most High, the
Supreme ! Verily, we are God's and to Him we return !
O my God, be. Thou gracious to me in Thine ordinance
and give me patience to endure this Thine affliction, O
Lord of all creatures I '

Then he turned to the Persian and bespoke him softly,
saying, ' O my father, what fashion is this and where is
[the bond of] bread and salt and the oath thou sworest to
me? ' But Behram looked at him and answered, 1 O dog,
knoweth the like of me [the bond of] bread and salt ? I
have slain a thousand youths like thee, save one, and thou
shalt make up the thousand.' And he cried out at him
and Hassan was silent, knowing that the arrow of fate had
!N"t($lt overtaken him.
Ottixxxu. Then the accursed wretch commanded to loose his
bonds and they gave him a little water, whilst the Magian
laughed and said, 'By the Fire and the Light and the
Shade and the Heat, methought not thou wouldst fal
into my toils S But the Fire gave me the victory over
thee and helped me to lay hold upon thee, that I might
accomplish my need and return and make thee a sacrifice


*3*

to it, so it may accept of me.' Quoth Hassan, Thou
hast betrayed [the bond of] bread and salt.' Whereupon
the Magian raised his hand and dealt him a buffet, that
he fell and biting the deck, swooned away, whilst the
tears streamed down his cheeks. Then Behram bade his
servants light him a fire and Hassan said, ' What wilt
thou do with it?' 'This is the Fire, giver of light and
sparks,' replied the Magian. 'This it is I worship, and
if thou wilt worship it even as I, I will give thee half
my wealth and marry thee to my daughter.' ' Out on
thee! 5 cried Hassan. 'Thou art an infidel Magian, that
worshippeth the Fire, instead of the All-powerful King,
Creator of Night and Day ; and this is nought but a
calamity among faiths ! '

At this the Magian was wroth and said to him, 'Wilt
thou not then fall in with me, O dog of the Arabs, and
enter my faith ? ' But Hassan consented not to this : so
the accursed Magian arose and prostrating himself to the
fire, bade his servants throw him down on his face. They
did so, and he beat him with a whip of plaited hide,
till his flanks were laid open, whilst he cried aloud for
succour, but none succoured him, and besought protec-
tion, but none protected him. Then he raised his eyes to
the All-powerful King and sought aid of Him, in the name
of the Chosen Prophet. And indeed patience failed him ;
his tears ran down his cheeks, like rain, and he repeated
the following verses :

Lord, I submit myself to Thee and eke to Fate, Content, if so Thou

please, to suffer and to wait.
Unjustly have they dealt by me and sore oppressed : Belike Thou wilt

the past with favours compensate.

Then the Magian commanded his slaves to raise him to
a. sitting posture and bring him meat and drink. So they
set food before him ; but he refused to eat or drink ; and


132


Behram's heart was hardened against him and he ceased
not to torment him day and night during the voyage,,
whilst Hassan took patience and humbled himself in
supplication to God the Most High, to whom belong
might and majesty.

They sailed the sea three months, till God the Most
High sent forth upon them a contrary wind and the sea
grew black and rose against the ship, by reason of the
much wind ; whereupon quoth the captain and the sailors,
' By Allah, this is all on account of yonder youth, who
hath been these three months in torment with this Magian.
Indeed, this is unlawful in the sight of God the Most
High.' Then they rose against the Magian and slew his
servants and all who were with him ; which when he saw,
he made sure of death and feared for himself. So he
loosed Hassan from his bonds and pulling off the ragged
clothes he had on, clad him in others. Moreover, he
made his excuses to him and promised to teach him the
craft and restore him to his native land, saying, 'O my
son, bear me not malice for that I have done with thee.'
Quoth Hassan, 'How can I ever again put faith in thee?'
But Behram said, ' O my son, but for offence, there were
no pardon. Indeed, I did all this with thee, but to try
thy patience, and thou knowest that the case is altogether
in God's hands.'

The sailors and 'the captain rejoiced in Hassan's release,
and he called down blessings on them and praised God
the Most High and thanked Him. With this the wind
fell and the sky cleared, and they continued their voyage
with a fair breeze. Then said Hassan to Behram, ' O
Persian, whither goest thou?' 'O my son,' answered
the Magian, ' I am bound for the Mountain of Clouds,
where is the elixir which we use in alchemy/ And he
swore to him by the Fire and the Light that he 'aad
mo longer any cause to fear him. So Hassan's heart was


133


set at ease and he continued to eat and" drink and
sleep with the Magian, whilst the latter clad him in his
own raiment.

Then they sailed on other three months, at the end
of which time the ship came to an anchor off a long
beach of pebbles of all colours, white and yellow and
blue and black and what not, and the Magian rose
and said to Hassan, ' Come, let us go ashore : for we
have reached our destination.' So Hassan rose and
landed with Behram, after the latter had commended his
goods to the captain's care. They walked on inland, till
they were out of sight of the ship, when Behram sat
down and taking from his pocket a little drum of copper
and a silken strap, wroughten in gold with talismanic
characters, beat the drum with the strap, whereupon
there arose a cloud of dust from the further side of the
desert.

Hassan marvelled at the Magian's doings and was afraid
of him : and he repented of having come ashore with him,
and his colour changed. But Behram looked at him and
said, 'What ails thee, O my son? By the fire and the
light, thou hast nought to fear from me ; and were it not
that my occasion may not be accomplished save by thy
means, I had not brought thee ashore. So rejoice in ail
good ; for yonder cloud of dust is the dust of somewhat
we will mount and which will aid us to traverse this desert
and make the passage thereof easy to us.' Presently, the ^T{(r])t
dust lifted and discovered three dromedaries, one of which &CClxXXf&i
Behram mounted and Hassan another. Then they loaded
their victual on the third and fared on seven days, till
they came to a wide champaign, in whose midst they saw
a pavilion vaulted upon four columns of red gold ; so they
alighted and entering therein, ate and drank and rested
there.

Presently, Hassan chanced to look aside and seeing


'34

something lofty [in the distance], said to the Magian, 1
uncle, what is that?' 'It is a palace,' answered Behram.
Quoth Hassan, 'Wilt thou not go thither, that we may
enter and rest ourselves there and divert ourselves with
viewing it ? ' But the Persian was wroth and said, ' Name
not yonder palace to me ; for therein dwells an enemy of
mine, with whom there befell me somewhat whereof this
is no time to tell thee.' Then he beat the drum and up
came the dromedaries, and they mounted and fared on
other seven days.

On the eighth day, the Magian said, 4 O Hassan, what
seest thou ? ' Quoth Hassan, ' I see clouds and mists
between the east and the west.' { That is neither clouds nor
mists/ answered Behram, ' but a vast and lofty mountain,
on which the clouds divide, and there are no clouds above
it, for the excess of its height and the greatness of its
elevation, Yonder mountain is the goal of my journey
and thereon is what we seek. It is for that I brought
the hither, for my occasion may not be accomplished
save at thy hands.' When Hassan heard this, he gave
himself up for lost and said to the Magian, ' By the virtue
of that thou worshippest and the faith in which thou be-
lievest, I conjure thee to tell me what is the occasion on
which thou hast brought me!' Quoth Behram, 'The art
of alchemy may not be successfully practised save by
means of a herb, that grows in the place where the clouds
pass and whereon they divide. Such a place is yonder
mountain ; the herb grows there and I purpose to send
thee up thither [to gather it] ; and when we have it, I will
show thee the secret of this craft that thou desirest to
learn.' Hassan answered, in his fear, 'It is well, O my
master.' And indeed he despaired of life and wept for
his separation from his mother and people and country^
repenting him of having gainsaid her and reciting the
following verses :


135


Consiier but thy Lord His doings and how what Thou wouldst of

quick relief He brings ; nor at thy lot
Fret, nor despair, if thou affliction must endure ; For in affliction's self

what mercies are there not.

They fared on till they came to the foot of the moun-
tain, where they halted and Hassan saw thereon a palace
and said to Behram, ' What is yonder palace ? ' And he
answered, 4 It is the abode of Jinn and ghouls and devils.'
Then the Magian alighted and making Hassan dismount
also, kissed his head and said to him, ' Bear me not malice
for that I did with thee, for I will keep guard over thee
in thine ascent to the palace ; and I conjure thee not to
wrong me of aught thou shalt bring therefrom, and I and
thou will share therein equally.' And Hassan answered,
' I hear and obey.' Then Behram opened a bag and
taking out a handmill and a quantity of wheat, ground
the latter in the mill and kneaded three cakes of the flour;
after which he lighted a fire and baked them.

Then he took out the drum and beat it with the strap,
whereupon up came the dromedaries. He chose out one
of them and slew and skinned it ; then turned to Hassan
and said to him, ' Give ear, Q my son Hassan, to what I
am about to enjoin on thee.' And Hassan replied, ' It is
well.' 1 Lie down on this skin,' said Behram, ' and I will
sew thee up therein and lay thee on the ground ; where-
upon the rocs will come to thee and carry thee up to the
mountain-top. Take this knife with thee, and when thou
feelest that the birds have set thee down, slit open the
skin with the knife and come forth. They will take fright
at thee &nd fly away ; whereupon do thou look down and
speak ft* me, and I will tell thee what to do.' So saying,
he sewed him up in the skin, with the three cakes and a
leathern bottle full of water, and withdrew to a distance.

Presently a roc pounced upon him and taking him up,
Sew away with him to the mountain-top and there set him


13^

down. As soon as Hassan felt himself on the ground, he
slit the skin and coming forth, called out to the Magian,
who rejoiced at hearing his speech and danced for excess
of joy, saying to him, 4 Look behind thee and tell me
what thou seest.' Hassan looked and seeing great stoie
of rotten bones and wood, told Behram, who said to hirn
*This is what we seek. Make six bundles of the wood
and throw them down to me, for this is wherewithal we do
alchemy.' So he threw him the six bundles and when he
had gotten them, he said to Hassan, 4 O good-for-nought,
I have accomplished my need of thee ; and now, if thou
wilt, thou mayst abide on this mountain,, or cast thyself
down to the earth and perish/ So saying, he left him and
went away, and Hassan exclaimed, ' There is no power
and no virtue save in God the Most High, the Supreme !
This accursed dog hath played the traitor with me!
And he sat bemoaning himself and reciting the following
verses :

When God upon a man possessed of reasoning, Hearing ana sight His

will in aught to pass would bring,
He stops his ears and blinds his eyes and draws his wit From him s as

one draws out the hairs to paste that cling ;
Till, His decrees fulfilled, He gives him back his wit, That therewithal

he may receive admonishing.
So say thou not of aught that haps, 44 How happened it ? " For fete

and fortune fixed do order everything

jNTf^fH Then he rose to his feet and looked right and left, after
iKtlxXXtb. which he walked on along the mountain-top, making sure
of death. He fared on thus till he came to the other
brow of the mountain, under which he saw a dark-blue
foaming sea, swollen with clashing billows, each as it
were a great mountain. So he sat down and repeated
what he might of the Koran and besought God the Most
High to ease him of his troubles, either by death or de-
liverance from that his strait. Then he recited for himself


*37

the funeral-prayer and cast himself down into the sea ; but,
by God's grace, the winds bore him up, so that he readied
the water unhurt, and the angel to whose charge the sea
is committed watched over him, so that, by the decree of
the Most High, the waves carried him safe to land. So
he rejoiced and praised God the Most High and thanked
Him ; after which he walked on in quest of somewhat to
eat, for stress of hunger, and came presently to the place
where he had halted with the Magian.

Then he fared on awhile, till he caught sight of a great
palace, rising high into the air, and knew it for that of
which he had questioned Behram and he had replied, £ An
enemy of mine dwelleth there.' ' By Allah,' said Hassan
in himself, ' needs must I enter yonder palace ; per-
adventure relief awaits me there.' So he went up to it
and finding the gate open, entered the vestibule, where he
saw two girls, like moons, seated on a bench, with a table
before them, playing at chess. One of them raised her
eyes and seeing him, cried out for joy and said, ' By Allah,
here is a mortal, and methinks it is he whom Behram the
Magian brought hither this year ! ' Whereupon Hassan
cast himself at their feet and wept sore, saying, 'Yes, by
Allah, O my ladies, I am indeed that unhappy wretch ! '

Then said the younger to the elder damsel, ' Bear
witness against me, O my sister, that this is my brother
before God and that I will die for his death and live for
his life and rejoice for his joy and mourn for his mourn-
ing.' So saying, she embraced him and kissed him and
taking him by the hand, led him, and her sister with her,
into the palace, where she did off his ragged clothes and
brought him a suit of kings' raiment, in which she clothed
him. Moreover, she made ready all manner viands and
set them before him, and sat and ate with him, she and her
sister. Then said they to him, 'Tell us thine adventure
with yonder wicked dog of a sorcerer, from the time of


138

thy falling into his hands to that of thine escape from
him ; and after we will tell thee all that has passed
between us and him, so thou mayst be on thy guard
against him, if thou see him again.'

Hassan, finding himself thus kindly received, took heart
of grace and his reason returned to him and he related to
them all that had befallen him with the Magian from first
to last. ' Didst thou ask him of this palace ? ' asked they.
' Yes,' answered Hassan. ' But he said, " Name it not to
me ; for it belongs to devils and demons." ' At this, the two
damsels were mightily enraged and said, ' Did the infidel
style us devils and demons ? ' And Hassan answered,
' Yes.' * By Allah,' cried the younger sister, ' I will as-
suredly put him to death after the foulest fashion and
make him to lack the wind of the world ! ' ' And how,'
asked Hassan, ' wilt thou get at him, to kill him, for he is
a crafty magician ? ' Quoth she, ' He is in a garden by
name El Meshid, and needs must I slay him before long.'

Then said her sister, ' All that Hassan hath told us of
this dog is true • but now tell him our history, that it
may abide in his memory.' So the younger said to him,
' Know, O my brother, that we are the daughters of a
king of the mightiest kings of the Jinn, having Marids to
troops and guards and servants, and God the Most High
blessed him with seven daughters by one wife ; but such
stiffneckedness got hold upon him and such jealousy
and pride beyond compare that he would not give us
in marriage to any one and summoning his viziers and
officers, said to them, " Can ye tell me of any place in-
accessible to men and Jinn and abounding in trees and
fruits and streams?" And they said, "What wilt thou
therewith^ O king of the age?" Quoth he, "I desire to
lodge my seven daughters there." " O king," answered
they, " the place for them is the Castle of the Mountain of
Clouds, built by one of the rebellious Jinn, who revolted


139


from the covenant of cur lord Solomon, on whom be
peace. Since his destruction, none hath dwelt there, man
nor genie, for it is cut off [from the rest of the world] and
none may win to it. It is compassed about with trees
and fruits and streams, and around it is running water,
sweeter than honey and colder than snow, whereof none
drinketh, who is afflicted with leprosy or elephantiasis or
what not else, but he is healed forthright."

So our father sent us hither, with an escort of his troops,
and provided us with all that we need here. When he is
minded to ride [to us], he beats a drum, whereupon all
his guards present themselves before him and he chooses
whom he shall ride and dismisses the rest ; but, when he
desireth that we shall visit him, he commandeth the
enchanters, his followers, to fetch us, whereupon they
come to us and carry us to him, so he may solace himself
with our company and we accomplish our desire of him ;
after which they carry us back again. Our five sisters are
gone a-hunting in the desert, wherein are wild beasts past
count or reckoning, and we two abode at home, to make
them ready food, it being our turn to do this. Indeed,
we had besought God (blessed and glorified be He !) to
vouchsafe us a man to cheer us with his company and
praised be He who hath brought thee to us ! So take
heart and be of good cheer, for no harm shall befall
thee.'

Hassan rejoiced and said, ' Praised be God who guideth
us into the way of deliverance and inclineth hearts to us ! '
Then his [adopted] sister rose and taking him by the
hand, led him into a private chamber, where she brought
out to him linen and furniture such as no mortal can avail
unto. Presently, the other damsels returned from the
chase and their sisters acquainted them with Hassan's
case; whereupon they rejoiced in him and going in to
Mm in his chamber^ saluted him and gave him joy of his


140


deliverance. Then he abode in familiar intercourse with
them, riding out with them to the chase and taking his
pleasure with them in that fair palace with its gardens
and flowers, whilst they entreated him courteously and
cheered him with discourse, till his sadness ceased from
him and he recovered health and strength and waxed
stout and fat, by dint of fair treatment and pleasant life ;
for indeed he led the goodliest of lives with the damsels,
who delighted in him and he yet more in them. More-
over, the youngest princess told her sisters how the
Magian had styled them ghouls and demons, and they
swore that they would surely slay him.

Next year, the accursed Magian again made his appear-
ance, having with him a handsome young Muslim, as
he were the moon, bound hand and foot and suffering
grievous tortures, and alighted with him in view of the
palace. Now Hassan was sitting under the trees by the
side of the stream ; and when he espied Behram, his heart
tbCfght fluttered and he changed colour and smote hand upon
tJtdxXXb. hand. Then he said to the princesses, ' O my sisters,
help me to slay yonder accursed wretch, for he is come
back and in your grasp, and he hath with him, captive,
a young Muslim of the sons of the notables, whom he is
torturing with all manner of grievous torment. Fain would
I slay him and solace my heart of him and earn God's
favour by delivering the young Muslim from his mischief
and restoring him to his country and friends. This will
be an almsdeed from you and ye will reap the reward
thereof from God the Most High ! '

' We hear and obey God and thee, O Hassan/ replied
they and binding chinbands about their faces, armed
themselves and girt on their swords : after which they
brought Hassan a charger of the best and equipped him
in complete armour and armed him with goodly weapons.
Then they all sallied out and found the Magian ill-using


141

the young Muslim, to make him enter the hide of a camel
that he had killed and skinned. Hassan came behind
him, without his knowledge, and cried out at him, saying,
' Hold thy hand, O accursed ! O enemy of God and of
the Muslims ! O dog ! O traitor ! O thou that servest
the fire and walkest in the way of the wicked, worshipping
the fire and the light and swearing by the shade and the
heat ! '

When the Magian heard this, he was startled and dis-
concerted ; so he turned and seeing Hassan, thought to
wheedle him and said to him, ' O my son, how madest
thou thine escape and who brought thee down to earth ? '
' God the Most High delivered me,' answered Hassan,
1 He who hath appointed the taking of thy life to be at my
hand, and I will torture thee even as thou torturedst me
the whole way long. O misbeliever, O heretic, thou hast
fallen into perdition and hast wandered from the way ; and
neither mother nor brother shall avail thee, nor friend nor
solemn covenant ; for thou saidst, " Whoso is faithless to
bread and salt, may God do vengeance upon him!" And
thou hast broken the bond of bread and salt; wherefore
God hath delivered thee into my hands, and small chance
hast thou of escape from me.' ' By Allah, O my son,'
rejoined Behram, ' thou art dearer to me than my soul
and the light of mine eyes ! ' But Hassan stepped up to
him and smote him hastily between the shoulders, that the
sword issued gleaming from the tendons of his throat and
God hurried his soul to the fire, and evil is the abiding-
place [to which he went].

Then Hassan took the Magian's bag and opening it,
took out the drum and beat it with the strap, whereupon
up came the dromedaries like lightning. So he loosed
the young man from his bonds and setting him on one
of the camels, loaded him another with victual and water.
Then he bade him go whither he would and he departed,


142

after God the Most High had thus delivered him from his
strait at the hands of Hassan. When the princesses saw
Hassan slay the Magian, they rejoiced in him with an
exceeding joy and encompassed him, marvelling at his
valour and prowess. Moreover, they thanked him for his
deed and gave him joy of his safety, saying, 4 O Hassan,
thou hast done a deed, whereby thou hast healed the
burning of him that thirsted [for vengeance] and pleased
the Glorious King.'

Then they returned to the palace, and he abode with
them, eating and drinking and laughing and making
merry; and indeed his sojourn with them was pleasant
to him and he forgot his mother ; nor did he cease to lead
this goodly life with them, till, one day, there arose a
great cloud of dust, that darkened the sky, and made
towards them from the further side of the desert. When
the princesses saw this, they said to him, ' Rise, O Hassan,
and hide thyself in thy chamber ; or, if thou wilt, enter
the garden and conceal thyself among the trees and vines j
[but fear not,] for no harm shall befall thee.' So he arose
and entering his chamber, locked the door upon himself.
Presently the dust lifted and discovered a great host, as it
were the swollen sea, coming from the king, the father of
the damsels.

When they reached the castle, the princesses received
them with all honour and entertained them three days ;
after which they questioned them of their case and errand,
and they answered, saying, 'We come in quest of you
from the king.' * And what would the king with us ? '
asked the princesses. 'One of the kings celebrateth a
marriage festival,' answered the envoys, ' and your father
would have you be present thereat and divert yourselves
therewith.' ' And how long shall we be absent from our
place ? ' asked the damsels. { The time to come and go/
answered they, 'and to sojourn two months.' So the


143


princesses arose and going in to Hassan, acquainted him
with the case and said to him, * Verily this place is thy
place and our house is thy house; so be of good cheer
and fear not nor grieve, for none can come at thee here ;
but keep a good heart and a cheerful mind, till we return
to thee. The keys of our chambers we leave with thee j
but, O our brother, we beseech thee, by the due of
brotherhood, not to open such a door, for thou hast no
call thereto.' Then they took leave of him and went
away with the troops, leaving him alone in the palace.

It was not long before his breast grew straitened and
his patience came to an end : solitude and sadness were
heavy on him and he grieved for his separation from them
with an exceeding grief. The palace, for all its vastness,
was straitened upon him and finding himself sad and
solitary, he bethought him of the damsels and recited the
following verses :

The spreading plain all straitened is, for longing s on my sight And all
my thoughts are troubled grown, that erst were calm and bright.

Since those I love have fared away, my joy is turned to grief And eke
mine eyes with bitter tears brim over day and night.

Sleep hath departed from my lids, for severance from them ; Yea, parting-
saddened, eke, is grown my heart and all my spright.

I wonder will Fate e'er reknit our loves and Time restore To me, with
their companionship, my solace and delight !


He used to go a-hunting by himself in the desert and
bring back the game and eat thereof done : but melan- bcclxxxfai
choly and unease redoubled on him, by reason of his
loneliness. So he arose and went round about the palace
and explored its every part. Morever, he opened the
princesses' apartments and found therein riches and
treasures, fit to do away the beholder's wits ; but he
delighted not in aught thereof, by reason of their absence.
His heart was on fire with solicitude respecting the door


144


they had charged him not to approach or open, and he
said in himself, ' My sister had not forbidden me to open
this door, except there were behind it somewhat, whereof
she would have none to know ; but, by Allah, I will arise
and open it and see what is within, were death behind it ! '

Then he took the key and opening the door, saw
nothing therein but a winding stair of Yemen onyx at
the upper end of the chamber. So he mounted the
stair, which brought him out upon the terraced roof of
the palace, whence he looked down upon gardens and
orchards, full of trees and fruits and beasts and birds
warbling the praises of God the One, the All-powerful,
and said in himself, ' This is that wherefrom they forbade
me.' Beyond these pleasaunces he saw a surging sea,
swollen with clashing billows, and he ceased not to ex-
plore the [terraces of the] palace right and left, till he
came to a pavilion such as neither Ceesar nor Chosroes
ever possessed, builded with alternate courses of gold and
silver and jacinth and emerald and supported by four
columns.

The interior was paved and lined with a mosaic of
jacinths and emeralds and balass-rubies and all manner
other jewels, and in its midst was a basin of water, over
which was a trellis of sandal and aloes-wood, netted with
red gold and wands of emerald and set with various kinds
of jewels and fine pearls, each the bigness of a pigeon's
egg. The trellis was covered with a climbing vine,
bearing grapes like rubies, and beside the pool stood a
couch of aloes-wood, trellised with red gold and inlaid
with great pearls and all manner vari-coloured gems and
precious stones, symmetrically disposed. About it the
birds warbled, celebrating the praises of God the Most
High with sweet and various voices ; but, save them,
Hassan saw therein none of the creatures of God, whereat
he marvelled and said in himself, 6 I wonder to which of


145


the kings this place pertaineth, or is it Many-Columned
Irem, 1 whereof they tell, for who [among mortals] can
avail to the like of this ? ' And indeed he was amazed
and sat down in the pavilion, marvelling at the beauty of
its ordinance and at the lustre of the pearls and jewels
and the curious works that were therein, no less than at
the gardens and orchards aforesaid and at the birds that
sang the praises ol God the One, the Almighty, and
pondering the traces of him whom God the Most High
had enabled to rear that structure, for indeed He is mickle
of might.

Presently, he espied ten birds making for the pavilion
from the direction of the desert, and knew that they were
bound for the pool, to drink of its waters : so he hid
himself, lest they should see him and fly from him. They
lighted on a great and goodly tree and circled round
about it; and he saw amongst them an exceeding great
and beautiful bird, the goodliest of them all, and the rest
encompassed it and did it worship ; whilst it pecked them
with its bill and flouted them, and they fled from it. Then
they entered the pavilion and perched on the couch ; after
which each bird rent open its skin with its claws and
came forth therefrom ; and behold, it was but a garment
of feathers, and there came forth therefrom ten maidens,
whose beauty shamed the lustre of the moon. They all
put off their clothes and plunging into the pool, washed
and fell to playing and sporting with one another ; whilst
the chief of them threw the others down and ducked
them, and they fled from her and dared not put out then-
hands to her.

When Hassan beheld her thus, he took leave of his
wits and his reason was enslaved, and he knew that the

princess had not forbidden him to open the door ? save by


s See ante, Vol. III. p. 334.

VOL. VII.


146


reason of this ; for he fell passionately in love with her 9
for what he saw of her beauty and grace and symmetry, as
she played and sported and splashed the others with the
water. His mind was amazed at her beauty and his heart
taken in the snare of her love ; fires were loosed in his
heart for her sake and there waxed on him a flame, whose
raging might not be quenched, and desire, whose signs
might not be hidden. So he stood, looking upon them,
whilst they saw him not, with eye gazing and heart burn-
ing and soul prompting to evil ; and he sighed to be with
them and wept for longing, because of the beauty and
grace of the chief damsel.

Presently, they came up out of the pool, whilst Hassan
marvelled at their beauty and loveliness and the grace and
elegance of their movements. Then he cast a glance at
the chief damsel and there was manifest to him what was
between her thighs, a goodly rounded dome, like a bowl
of silver or crystal, which recalled to him the saying of
the poet :

When I took up her shift and discovered the terrace-roof of her kazej I
found it as strait as my humour or eke my worldly ways :
I thrust it, incontinent, in, halfway, and she heaved a sigh. " For
what dost thou sigh ?" quoth I. " For the rest of it sure," she says,

Then they all put on their dresses and ornaments, and
the chief maiden donned a green dress, wherein she ex-
celled all the fair ones of the world for loveliness and the
lustre of her face outshone the resplendent full moons :
she outdid the branches with the grace of her swaying
gait and confounded the wit with apprehension of disdain \
and indeed she was as saith the poet :

A damsel lithe and slim and full of agile grace ; Thou'dst deem the very

sun had borrowed from her face.
She came in robes of green, the likeness of the leaf That the pom&s

granate's flower doth ia the bud encase.


147


"How call'st tliou this thy dress?" asked we, and she replied A word

therein the wise a lesson well might trace.
" Breaker of Hearts," quoth she, " I call it ; for therewith I've broken

many a heart among the amorous race."

Then they sat talking and laughing, whilst he stood tNTtG;!)!
gazing on them, drowned in the sea of passion and bcclxxi'fa
wandering in the valley of melancholy thought. And he
said in himself, 'By Allah, my sister forbade me not to
open the door, but because of these maidens and lest I
should fall in love with one of them ! ' And he continued
to gaze on the charms of the chief damsel, who was the
loveliest creature God had made in her time, and indeed
she outdid all mortals in beauty. She had a mouth
like Solomon's seal and hair blacker than the night of
estrangement to the despairing lover ; her forehead was
as the new moon of the Feast of Ramazan 1 and her eyes
were like unto gazelles' eyes. She had a polished aquiline
nose and cheeks like blood-red anemones, lips like coral
and teeth like strung pearls in carcanets of virgin gold
and a neck like an ingot of silver, above a shape like a
willow-wand. Her belly was full of folds and dimples,
such as enforce the distracted lover to magnify God and
extol Him therefor, and her navel held an ounce of musk, 8
most sweet of savour. She had thighs great and plump,
like columns of marble or bolsters stuffed with ostrich-
down, and between them somewhat as it were a great
hummock or a. hare with ears laid back; and indeed she
surpassed the willow-wand and the bamboo-cane with her

1 The appearance of which ends the fast- Being anxiously looked
for, it may naturally be supposed to wear a brighter aspect than usual
in the eyes of the devout Muslim, exhausted with long fasting. Hence
the comparison.

8 See note. Vol. III. p. 156. A large navel, deep and round like &
cup, is considered by the Arabs a beauty in women.


148


beauty and symmetry, for she was even as saith the poet
of her: ,

There came a lovely maid, whose mouth did dews like honey bear, Yea,

and her glances keener far than Indian sabres were.
She put the willow-wand to shame with graceful swaying gait ; The

lightning from her teeth did flash, whenas she smiled, my fair.
Her cheeks I likened to the rose in blossom ; but she laughed In score

and answered, " He who to the rose doth me compare
And eke pomegranates with my breasts likeneth, hath he no shame?

How should pomegranates branches have, my breasts for fruits

that wear?

Now, by my grace, my eyes, my soul, ay, and the paradise Of my

possession and the hell of my disdain, I swear,
If he to these comparisons return, I will my grace To him deny, not

with my scorn to blast him will I spare 1
They say, • A rose in garth a-bloom [is she ;] ! but, nay, its flower Is

not my cheek nor yet its branch my shape so straight and rare.
If in the gardens of his land the like of me there be, Why then, in quest

thereof, forsooth, doth he to me repair ? "

They ceased not to laugh and play, whilst Hassan stood
watching them, forgetting meat and drink, till near the
hour of afternoon-prayer, when the chief damsel said to
her mates, l O kings' daughters, it grows late and our
country is distant and we have had enough of this place.
Come, therefore, let us depart to our own place.' So they
put on their feather vests, and becoming birds as before,
flew away all together, with the chief damsel in their
midst Then Hassan, despairing of their return, would
have arisen and gone away, but could not move; where-
fore the tears ran down his cheeks and passion was sore
on him and he recited the following verses :

May I be denied the fulfilment o' the troth that to me thou didst plight^
If, since you departed and left me, I've tasted of slumber's delight 1

Mine eyes, since the days of your parting, have never been shut in repose,
Nor, since you forsook me, hath slumber been pleasant or sweet te
say spright.


149


%l sseemeth, indeed, that I see you, bytimes, In illusions of sleep : Ah
would that the visions were real we see in the dreams of the night !

Indeed, I'm desirous of slumber, I crave after sleep, without need, So
haply, therein, with the loved one a dream may the lover unite.

Then he walked on, little by little, heeding not how
he went, till he reached the foot of the stairs, whence he
dragged himself to his own chamber and shutting the
door, lay there, sick and drowned in the sea of his
solicitude, eating not nor drinking. He passed the night
thus, weeping and bemoaning himself, till the morning,
when he repeated the following verses :

The birds took wing at nightfall and far away did fly. And whoso dies

of passion, no blame on him may lie.
I'll keep love's tidings secret, what while I keep it may ; But, if fierce

longing conquer, 'twill out unto the spy.
A loved one's image haunts me, whose face is like the moon, Anights:,

there comes no morning, for passion, in my sky.
1 mourn for my beloved, what while the heart-free sleep, And all the

winds of passion their sports upon me ply.
I lavish tears and riches and soul and wit and life ; For lavishness is

profit in love, as well know I.
The foulest of all evils and woes that may betide Is when a man dis-
favour from fair ones must aby.
They say that to show favour's forbidden to the fair And that their

blood 'tis lawful to shed for love that sigh ;
And so unto the lovesick, for all resource, remains His life for love

to lavish, in jest, and jesting die.
I cry aloud, distracted with longing for my love ; For all the lover's

effort is weeping and outcry.

When the sun rose, he went forth of the chamber and
ascending to the roof, sat down before the pavilion and
awaited the return of the birds, till nightfall ; but they
came not ; wherefore he wept till he fell down in a swoon.
When he came to himself, he dragged himself down the
stairs to his chamber; and indeed s the night was come


150

and the whole world was straitened upon him and he
ceased not to weep and bemoan himself, till the day broke
and the sun rose over hill and plain. He ate not nor
drank nor slept, nor was there any rest for him ; but by
day he was distracted and by night wakeful, delirious and
drunken with melancholy and excess of passion. And he
repeated the verses of the poet El Welhan :

Thou that confoundest outright the sun of the morning, heigho ! That

puttest the branches to shame, though wherefore thou dost not know,
I wonder if fortune and time will ever vouchsafe thy return And will the

fires ever be quenched for aye in my bosom that glow ?
And will the days ever on me, to hold thee embraced in mine arms,

Cheek to cheek, breast to breast, at the hour of meeting and union,

bestow ?

Who saith there is sweetness in Love ? I warrant, he lieth, for lo 1 la
I Love there are bitterer days, believe me, than aloes 1 can show.

As he abode thus in the stress of his love-distraction,
* alone and finding none to cheer him with company, there
arose a cloud of dust from the desert, wherefore he knew
that the princesses had returned and ran down and hid
himself. Before long, the troops halted round the palace
and the seven princesses alighted and entering, put off
their arms and harness. As for the youngest, she stayed
not to doff her armour, but went straight to Hassan's
chamber, where rinding him not, she sought for him till
she lighted on him in one of the cabinets, thin and feeble,
with wasted bones and emaciated body ; and indeed his
colour was changed and his eyes sunken for lack of food
and much weeping, by reason of his love and longing for
the damsel. When she saw him in this plight, she was
confounded and [well-nigh] lost her wits [for amazement] ;
and she questioned him of his case and what had befallen
him, saying? ' Tell me what ails thee, O my brother, that I
1 Syn. patience {sebr).


J5i

may cast about to do away thine affliction, and I will be
thy ransom.' Whereupon he wept sore and answered her
with these verses :

Whenas a lover from his love to sever Fate hath wrought % For him save

weariness and woe and misery there's nought.
Within him sickness is, without is burning fire of love; His first is

memory, his last is melancholy thought.

When she heard this, she marvelled at his eloquence
and ready wit and goodliness of speech and at his answer-
ing her in verse and said to him, ( my brother, when
didst thou fall into this case and what hath befallen thee,
that I find thee speaking in verse and shedding plenteous
tears? I conjure thee by Allah, O my brother, by the
love that is between us, tell me what ails thee and
discover thy secret to me, nor hide from me aught of
that which hath befallen thee in our absence ; for my
breast is straitened and my life troubled on thine account*
He sighed and shed tears like rain, after which he said,
' O my sister, I fear, if I tell thee, that thou will not help
me to my desire, but wilt leave me to perish miserably in
my anguish.' ' No, by Allah, O my brother,' answered
she, ' I will not abandon thee, though it cost me my life ! '

So he told her all that had befallen him in her absence
and that the cause of his distress and affliction was the
passion he had conceived for the damsel whom he had
seen, when he opened the forbidden door, and how he
had not tasted meat nor drink for ten days past. Then
he wept sore and recited the following verses :

Restore the heart as it used to be to the bosom and the lids Give back

again to sleep and then forsake me, an ye list.
Do ye pretend that the nights have changed the covenant of love ? May

he [or she] who would change be held unworthy to exist !

The princess wept for his weeping and was moved to


152


compassion for him; so she said to him, *0 my brother,
take comfort and be of good cheer, for I will venture my
life to content thee and contrive thee a device wherewith
thou mayst get possession of her and accomplish thy
desire, if it be the will of God, though it cost me my life
and all I hold dear. But I charge thee keep the matter
secret and discover not thy case to any of my sisters, lest
we both lose our lives. If they question thee of the
forbidden door, answer them, "I opened it not, being
troubled at heart for your absence and my loneliness here
and yearning for you." ' And he replied, ' Yes : this is the
right course.' So he kissed her head and his heart was
comforted and his bosom dilated, and his life returned to .
him, after he had been nigh upon death for excess of
affright, for he had gone in fear of her by reason of his
having opened the forbidden door.

Then he sought food of her [and she set it before him] ;
after which she left him and went in to her sisters, weeping
and mourning for him. They questioned her of her case
and she told them how she was heavy at heart for her
brother, for that he was sick and for ten days no food had
entered his stomach. So they enquired the cause of his
sickness and she said, 'The cause was our absence from
him and our leaving him desolate ; for these days we have
been absent from him were longer to him than a thousand
years, and no wonder, seeing he is a stranger, and solitary
and we left him alone, with none to company with him or
cheer his heart ; more by token that he is but a youth and
it is like he called to mind his family and his mother, who
is an old woman, and bethought him that she weeps for
him all tides of the day and watches of the night j and we
used to solace him with our society and divert him from
thinking of her/

When her sisters heard this, they wept in the excess
of their sorrow for him and said ' 'Fore Allah, he is


153


excusable!' Then they went out to the troops and dis-
missed them, after which they went in to Hassan and
saluted him. When they saw him in sorry case, with his
colour paled and his body wasted, they wept for very pity
and sat with him and comforted him and cheered him
with discourse, relating to him all the wonders and rarities
they had seen by the way and what had befallen the bride-
groom with the bride. They abode with him thus a whole
month, soothing and caressing him ; but every day sick-
ness was added to his sickness, which when they saw, they
wept sore for him, and the youngest more than' any of
them.

At the end of this time, the princesses were minded to
ride forth a-hunting and invited their sister to accompany
them ; but she said, ' By Allah, O my sisters, I cannot go
forth with you, whilst my brother is in this plight. Rather
will I sit with him and comfort him, till he be restored to
health and there cease from him that which is with him of
affliction.' They thanked her for her humanity and said
to her, ' God will requite thee all thou dost with this
stranger/ Then they rode forth, taking with them twenty 3Ct(rj)t
days' victual ; and as soon as the youngest princess knew tmlxxiW.
that they were far from the palace, she went in to Hassan
and said to him, ' Come, show me where thou sawest the
maidens.' He rejoiced in her words, making sure of
attaining his desire, and answered, ' In the name of God !
On my head ! ' Then he essayed to rise and show her the
place, but could not walk ; so she took him in her arms,
and opening the staircase door, carried him up to the top
of the palace, and he showed her the pavilion and the
pool of water, where he had seen the girls.

Then she said to him, ' O my brother, set forth to me
their case and how they came.' So he described them to
her and especially the damsel of whom he was enamoured %
whereupon she knew her and her colour changed and she


IS4

was troubled. 4 my sister,' quoth he, * what ails thee to
change colour and be troubled ? ' And she answered s
' Know, O my brother, that this damsel is the daughter
of one of the most puissant kings of the Jinn, and her
father hath dominion over men and Jinn and wizards
and diviners and tribesmen and guards and countries and
islands and cities galore and hath wealth in plenty. Our
father is one of his vassals and none can avail against
him, for the multitude of his troops and the vastness of
his empire and his much wealth. He hath assigned to
his daughters a tract of country, a whole year's journey
in length and breadth, compassed about with a great
river; and thereto none may win, nor man nor genie.
He hath an army of women, smiters with swords and
thrusters with spears, five-and-twenty thousand in number,
each of whom, whenas she mounteth her charger and
donneth her battle-harness, is a match for a thousand
stout horsemen. Moreover, he hath seven daughters, who
equal and even excel their sisters 1 in valour and prowess,
and the eldest of them, the damsel whom thou sawest, 8
he hath made queen over the country aforesaid. She is
the wisest of her sisters and excels all the folk of her
dominions in valour and horsemanship and craft and skill
in magic. The damsels thou sawest with her are her
guards and favourites and the grandees of her empire,
and the feathered skins wherewith they fly are the handi-
work of enchanters of the Jinn.

Now they resort to this place on the first day of each

1 i.e. the five-and-twenty thousand Amazons aforesaid who, by the
way, are stated in the Boulac edition (which omits the word " army ")
to have been also daughters of the king. I have adopted the less
extravagant statement of the Calcutta and Breslau texts.

2 This is a mistake on the part of Hassan's adopted sister. The damsel
he saw and fell in love with was (as appears by the sequel, see post,,
p. 224) not the eldest, but the youngest daughter of the Supreme King


i5S


month ; so, if thou wouldst get possession of this princess
and unique jewel and enjoy her beauty and grace, do thou
pay heed to my words and keep them in thy memory.
Thou must sit here and watch for them ; and when thou
seest them coming, do thou hide near the pavilion, whereas
thou mayst see them, without being seen of them, and
beware lest thou show thyself, or we shall all lose our
lives. When they put off their clothes, note which is
the feather-suit of the princess, her of whom thou art
enamoured, and take it, and it only, for this it is that
carries her to her country, and when thou hast it, thou
hast her. And beware lest she beguile thee, saying, "O
thou who hast stolen my dress, restore it to me, for I am
here in thine hands and at thy mercy ! " For, if thou give
it her, she will kill thee and break down the palace over
our heads and slay our father. Know then thy case and
how thou shalt do. When her companions see that her
feather-suit is stolen, they will leave her and fly away, and
beware lest thou show thyself to them, but wait till they
have flown away and she despaireth of them : whereupon
do thou go in to her and seize her by the hair of her head
and drag her to thee; which being done, she will be at
thy mercy. Then carry her down to thy chamber and I
rede thee discover not to her that thou hast taken the
feather-suit, but keep it with care ; for s so long as thou
hast it, she is thy prisoner and in thy power, seeing that
she cannot fly to her country save with it.'

When Hassan heard her words, trouble and affliction
ceased from him and his heart became at ease ; so he rose
to his feet and kissing his sister's hand, went down with
her into the palace, where they slept that night. He
tended himself till the morning ; and when the sun rose,
he opened the staircase door and ascending to the terrace,
sat there till nightfall, when his sister brought him meat
and drink and a change of clothes and he slept ; and thus


156

they did till the end of the month. When he saw the new

moon, he rejoiced and began to watch for the birds, and
by and by up they came, like lightning. As soon as he
saw them, he hid himself where he could watch them,
ttnseen of them, and they lighted down, near the place
where he was hidden, and putting off their clothes,
descended into the pool. Thereupon Hassan arose and
crept, little by little, towards the dresses, and God covered
him, so that he possessed himself of the feather-suit, and
none of them saw him, for they were laughing and playing
with each other.

When they had made an end of their diversion, they
came forth of the pool and each of them donned her suit
of feathers, except the princess, who sought her suit, that
she might put it on, but found it not; whereupon she
shrieked and buffeted her face and rent her clothes. Her
companions came to her and enquired what ailed her, and
she told them that her feather-suit was missing ; wherefore
they wept and cried out and buffeted their faces : and they
were confounded, knowing not the cause of this, and knew
not what to do. Presently the night overtook them and
NfQfjt tne y feared to abide with her lest that which had befallen
iJCCXC. her should befall them also ; so they took leave of her and
flying away, left her alone. When they were out of sight,
Hassan hearkened and heard her say, 'O thou who hast
taken my dress and stripped me, I beseech thee to restore
it to me and cover my nakedness, so may God not make
thee taste my sorrow ! '

When Hassan heard her speak thus, with speech sweeter
than syrup, his love for her redoubled, passion got the
mastery of his reason and he could not endure from her.
So he rushed upon her and laying hold of her by the hair,
dragged her to him and carried her down to his own
chamber, where he threw over her a coverlet of silk and
left her weeping and biting her hands. Then he shut


mn


157

the door on her and going to his sister, told her how he
had made prize of the princess and carried her to his
chamber, where she was now sitting, weeping and biting
her hands. When she heard this, she rose forthright and
betook herself to the chamber, where she found the
captive princess weeping and mourning.

So she. kissed the earth before her and saluted her, and
the princess said to her, ' O king's daughter, do folk like
you deal thus foully with kings' daughters ? Thou knowest
that my father is a mighty king and that all the kings of
the Jinn stand in awe of him and fear his mischief; for
that there are with him magicians and sages and diviners
and devils and Marids, such as none may cope withal, and
under his hand are folk whose tale none knoweth save
God. How then doth it beseem you, O daughters of
kings, to harbour mortals with you and discover to them
our circumstance and yours? Else how should this man
come at us ? ' 'O king's daughter,' answered the other,
'this man is perfect in nobleness and purposeth thee no
lewdness; but he loves thee, and women were made for
men. Did he not love thee, he had not fallen sick and
well-nigh given up the ghost on thine account.' And she
told her how Hassan had seen her bathing in the pool,
with her attendants, and fallen in love with her, and none
had pleased him but she, for the rest were all her hand-
maids.

When the princess heard this, she despaired of deliver-
ance and Hassan's sister fetched her a sumptuous dress,
in which she clad her. Then she set before her meat and
drink and ate with her and comforted her heart and
appeased her fears. And she ceased not to speak her
fair and caress her, soothing her with soft and pleasant
words and instances and saying, 1 Have pity on him who
saw thee once and became the victim of thy love : ' but
she wept till daybreak, when her trouble subsided and she


158


left weeping, knowing that she had fallen [into the snare]
and that there was no escape for her. Then she said to
Hassan's sister, ' O king's daughter, this my strangerhood
and severance from my country and family was ordained
of God [and written] upon my forehead, and it becomes
me to support with patience what my Lord hath decreed.'
Therewith the youngest princess assigned her a chamber,
than which there was no goodlier in the palace, and
ceased not to sit with her and cheer her and solace her
heart, till she took comfort and her bosom dilated and
she laughed and there ceased from her the trouble and
oppression that possessed her, by reason of her separation
from her people and family and country.

Then the youngest princess repaired to Hassan and said
to him, ' Arise, go in to her in her chamber and kiss her
hands and feet.' So he went in to her and did this and
kissed her between the eyes, saying, 'O princess of fair
ones and life of souls and delight of beholders, be easy of
heart, for I took thee but that I might be thy slave till the
Day of Resurrection, and this my sister will be thy hand-
maid. O my lady, I desire nought but to take thee to
wife, after the law of God and His Apostle, and if thou
wilt, I will journey with thee to my country and carry thee
to the city of Baghdad and abide with thee there. More-
over, I will buy thee slaves, male and female, and I have
a mother, of the best of women, who will be thine hand-
maid. There is no goodlier land than ours ; everything
there is better than elsewhere and its folk are pleasant and
bright of face.'

As he bespoke her thus and strove to comfort her, what
while she answered him not a syllable, there came a
knocking at the palace-gate. So Hassan went out to
see who was at the gate and found there the six
princesses, who had returned from hunting, bringing
with them great plenty of gazelles and wild oxen and


3S9

hares and lions and hysenas and other game s whereat he
rejoiced and went to meet them and saluted them. They
wished him health and safety and he wished them the
like; after which they alighted and going each to her
chamber, put off their soiled clothes and donned fair
linen. Then they came forth and demanded the game :
so they 1 brought out some thereof for slaughter, keeping
the rest by them in the palace, and Hassan girt himself
and fell to slaughtering for them, whilst they sported and
made merry, mightily rejoiced to see him standing amongst
them [restored to health and spirits].

When they had made an end of slaughtering, they
addressed themselves to make ready somewhat for their
morning meal, and Hassan, coming up to the eldest
princess, kissed her head and on like wise did he with the
rest, one after another. Whereupon said they to him,
' Indeed, O our brother, thou humblest thyself to us pass-
ing measure and we marvel at the excess of the affection
thou showest us. But God forbid that thou shouldst
do this thing, which it behoves us rather to do with
thee, seeing thou art a man and insomuch worthier than
we, who are of the Jinn.' 2 Thereupon his eyes ran over
with tears and he wept sore ; so they said to him, ' What
ails thee to weep ? Indeed, thou troublest our lives with

1 Quare the servants.

8 In the mythology of the Muslims, the Jinn are always subordinated
to mankind, in the matter of abstract worthiness, although practically so
much more powerful. See ante, p. 119. According to the Koran, when
God made Adam, he commanded the angels to prostrate themselves to
him, in token of worship, and they all did so, except Iblis, whose dis-
obedience was punished by expulsion from heaven. " And when we
said to the angels, ' Prostrate yourselves to Adam,' they prostrated
themselves, save only Iblis, who refused and magnified himself and
became of the misbelievers." — Koran ii. 32. Hence mankind are held
to be worthier in God's sight even than the angels and. (a fortiori) thaa
the j ran.


i6o

thy weeping this day. It would seem thou longest after
thy mother and country. If so, we will equip thee and
carry thee to thy home and thy friends.' 'By Allah,'
answered he, 'I desire not to part from you!' 'Then
which of us hath vexed thee,' asked they, 'that thou art
thus troubled ? ' But he was ashamed to say, ' Nought
troubleth me save love of the damsel/ lest they should
disavow him : so he was silent and would tell them nought
of his case.

Then his sister came forward and said to them, ' He
hath caught a bird from the air and would have you help
him tame her.' Whereupon they all turned to him and
said, ' We are all at thy service and whatsoever thon
seekest, we will do : but tell us thy story and conceal from
us nought of thy case.' But he said to his sister, ' Do
!K"tgf)t thou tell them, for I am ashamed to face them with these
bttXCt. words.' So she said to them, ' O my sisters, when we
went away and left this poor fellow alone, the palace was
straitened upon him and he feared lest some one should
come in to him, for ye know that the sons of Adam are
light-witted. So, of his loneliness and trouble, he opened
the door of the staircase leading to the roof and sat there 5
looking upon the valley and watching the gate, in his fear
lest any should come thither. One day, as he sat thus,
he saw ten birds making for the palace, and they lighted
down on the brink of the pool in the pavilion. He
watched them and saw, amongst them, one goodlier than
the rest, which pecked the others and flouted them, whilst
they dared not put out a claw to it.

Presently, they put their claws to their necks and rend-
ing their feathers, came forth therefrom and became
damsels like the moon at its full, whereof one was fairer
of face than the rest and goodlier of shape and more
elegant of apparel. Then they put off their clothes and
plunging into the water, fell to playing with one. another,


i6i


whilst the chief damsel ducked the others, who dared not
lay a finger on her. They ceased not to do thus till near
the hour of afternoon prayer, when they came forth of
the pool and donning their feather-dresses, flew way,
leaving Hassan distracted, with a heart on fire for love
of the chief damsel and repenting him that he had not
stolen her feather-dress. Wherefore he fell sick and
abode on the roof, expecting her return and abstaining
from meat and drink and sleep, till the new moon, when
they again made their appearance and putting off their
clothes, went down into the pool. So he stole the chief
damsel's feather-suit, knowing that she could not fly with-
out it, and hid it, lest they should discover him and slay him.
Then he waited till the rest had flown away, when he arose
and seizing the damsel, carried her down into the castle.'

' Where is she ? ' asked her sisters ; and she answered,
'She is with him in such a chamber.' Quoth they s
'Describe her to us, O our sister.' So she said, 'She is
fairer than the moon on the night of its full and her face
is brighter than the sun ; the water of her mouth is
sweeter than honey and her shape more slender than the
cane. She hath black eyes and flower-white forehead ; a
bosom like a jewel, breasts like twin pomegranates and
cheeks like apples, a belly covered with dimples, with a
navel like a casket of ivory full of musk, and legs like
columns of alabaster. She ravishes all hearts with liquid
black eyes and the fineness of a slender waist and heavy
buttocks and speech that heals the sick. She is goodly
of shape and sweet of smile, as she were the full moon/
When the princesses heard this, they turned to Hassan
and said to him, 'Show her to us.' So he arose, love-
distraught, and carrying them to the chamber in which
was the captive damsel, opened the door and entered,
followed by the seven princesses.

When they saw her and noted her loveliness, they kissed

VOL VU. II


1 62

the earth before her, marvelling at the fairness of her
favour and the elegance of her shape, and said to her,
'O daughter of the Supreme King, this is indeed a parlous
thing: and hadst thou heard tell among women of this
mortal, thou hadst marvelled at him all thy days. Indeed,
he is passionately enamoured of thee ; yet, O king's
daughter, he seeketh not lewdness, but desireth thee only
in the way of lawful marriage. But that we know maids
cannot do without men, we had hindered him from his
intent, albeit he sent thee no messenger, but came to thee
himself ; and he tells us he hath burnt the feather-dress ;
else had we taken it from him.' Then one of them agreed
with the princess and becoming her deputy in the matter
of the marriage contract, performed the marriage cere-
mony between them, whilst Hassan clapped hands with
her, laying his hand in hers, and she wedded him to
the damsel with the latter's consent ; after which they
celebrated her marriage-festival, as beseemeth kings'
daughters, and brought Hassan in to his bride. So he
rose and opened the door and did away the barrier ana
broke her seal, whereupon the love of her waxed in him
and he redoubled in passion and affection for her. Then,
since he had gotten that which he sought, he gave himself
joy and repeated these verses :

Thy shape a tempter is, thine eyes, gazelle-like, black and white ; Thy

face with beauty's water drips, with every charm bedight.
Lo, in mine eyes most gloriously thou'rt pictured, jacinth half And

jewels rare another third, thou seemest to my spright.
Yea, and a fifth of thee is musk, a sixth pure ambergris, And like unto

the pearl thou art, indeed, but far more bright.
Ne'er gave our mother Eva birth unto the like of thee, Nor is there

other like to thee in Heaven's realms of light.
An if my punishment thou will, 'tis of love's usances, And of thy favour,

if thou choose to pardon my unright.
O thou adornment of the world, O end of all desire, Who may with

patience brook the lack of thy fair face's sight ?


i63


Now the princesses were standing at the door and jbCfg^t
when they heard his verses, they said to her, ' O king's tJCCXCtl
daughter, hearest thou what this mortal says ? How canst
thou blame us, seeing that he makes verses for love of
thee?' When she heard this, she rejoiced and was glad,
and Hassan abode with her forty days in all delight and
solace and contentment and cheer, whilst the damsels
made him new festivities every day and overwhelmed him
with bounty and gifts and presents ; and the princess be-
came reconciled to her sojourn amongst them and forgot
her people and friends. At the end of this time, Hassan
saw in a dream, one night, his mother mourning for him
and indeed her bones were wasted and her body emaciated
and she was pale and wan, whilst he was in good case.
When she saw him thus, she said to him, 4 O my son
Hassan, how is it that thou livest at thine ease and for-
gettest me? See my plight since thy loss. I do not
forget thee, nor will my tongue leave to name thee till
I die ; and I have made thee a tomb in my house, that
I may never forget thee. I wonder, O my son, if I shall
live to see thee with me and if we shall ever again be
united as we were.'

Hassan awoke from sleep, weeping and lamenting;
the tears ran down his cheeks like rain and he became
mournful and troubled ; his tears ceased not nor did
sleep visit him, but he had no rest, and no patience was
left to him. When he arose, the princesses came in to
him and gave him good-morrow and made merry with
him, as of their wont ; but he paid no heed to them.
So they asked his wife what ailed him and she said, ' I
know not' Quoth they, 'Ask him of his case.' So she
went up to him and said, 1 What ails thee, O my lord ? ?
Whereupon he sighea and groaned and told her what he
had seen in his dream. Then he repeated the following
verses :


164


Afflicted sore am I, distraught with love and dole ; Union I seek, yet

know no way unto my goal.
The stresses of desire redouble upon me And even the light of love is

heavy on my soul.

His wife repeated what he had said to the princesses,
who, hearing the verses, took pity on him and said to him,
'In God's name, do as thou wilt, for we may not hinder
thee from visiting thy mother, but will rather help thee
thereto by all means in our power. But it behoves that
thou desert us not, but visit us, though it be but once a
year.' And he answered, ' I hear and obey.' Then they
arose forthright and making him ready victual [for the
journey], equipped the bride for him with clothes and orna-
ments and everything of price, such as beggar description.
Moreover, they bestowed on him gifts and presents, such
as the pen availeth not to set forth, amongst the rest five-
and-twenty chests of gold and fifty of silver. Then they
beat the drum and up came dromedaries from all sides.
They chose of them such as availed to carry all the gear
they had prepared and mounting Hassan and his bride
on others, rode with them three days, wherein they ac-
complished three months' journey.

Then they bade them farewell and addressed them-
selves to return; whereupon the youngest threw herself
on Hassan's neck and wept till she fainted. When she
came to herself, she repeated the following verses :

Would God the day of parting ne'er might be 1 It leaves no sleep unto
the eyes of me.

It hath dissolved our loves and broken down Our strength in soul and
body utterly.

Then she bade him farewell, straitly charging him,
whenas he should have come to his native land and
foregathered with his mother and set his heart at ease,
so fail not of paying her a visit once in every six months


:6s


mt& saying, 'If aught trouble thee or thou be in fear o£
S3iy vexation, beat the Magian's drum, whereupon the
dromedaries will come to thee; and do thou mount and
i'Cturn to us.' He swore to do her bidding and conjured
them to return. So they returned to the palace, mourning
for their separation from him, especially the youngest, to
whom no rest was left nor would patience come at her
Call, but she wept night and day.

Meanwhile, Hassan and his wife fared on night and day,
laitough noontide heats and early dawns, over plains and
deserts and valleys and stony wastes; and God decreed
them safety, so that they reached Bassora without hindrance
and made their camels kneel at the door of his house.
Hassan then dismissed the dromedaries and going up to
the door, to open it, heard his mother weeping and reciting
the following verses, in a faint voice, from a heart worn
[with sorrow] and on fire with consuming affliction :

How shall she taste, forsooth, of sleep, who lacks of all repose, Who

wakes anights, when every eye in slumber else doth close ?
Honour and wealth and family he had and yet became A lonelj exile

from his home in lands that no man knows.
Groaning and longing on her press, the utmost that can be, And like a

brazier, 'twixt her ribs the fire of yearning glows.
Passion the mastery o'er her hath got and ruleth her: For suffering she

moans, yet still is constant 'neath her woes.
Her case for love proclaims that she afflicted is and sad : Yea,, and her

tears are witnesses to that she undergoes.

When Hassan heard his mother weeping and lamenting,
he wept also and knocked loudly at the door. Quoth she,
1 Who is at the door ? ' And he said, ' Open.' Whereupon
she opened the door and knowing him, fell down in a
swoon : but he tended her till she came to herself, when
he embraced her and she embraced him and kissed him,
whilst his wife looked on. Then he carried his goods
and gear into the house, whilst his mother repeated the


1 66

following verses, for that her heart was comforted and God
had reunited her with her son :

Fortune hath taken ruth on my case ; Yea, she hath pitied my long
despair,

Granting me that whereafter I longed And doing away from me dread
and care.

So I will pardon her all the past And the sins that she sinned 'gainst
me whilere j

*^ T , . Ev'n to the wrong wherewith she wrought To whiten the parting-place
of my hair.

tact tl.

Then they sat talking and his mother said to him, 'O
my son, how faredst thou with the Persian?' 'O my
mother/ answered Hassan, ' he was no Persian, but a
Magian, who worshipped the fire, not the All-powerful
King.' Then he told her how he had dealt with him, in
that he had journeyed with him [to the Mountain of
Clouds] and sewed him in the camel's skin, and how
the rocs had taken him up and set him down on the
mountain-top and what he had seen there of dead folk,
whom the Magian had deluded and left [to perish] on
the mountain, after they had done his occasion. And he
told her how he had cast himself from the mountain-top
into the sea and God the Most High had preserved him
and brought him to the palace of the [seven] damsels
and how the youngest of them had taken him to brother
and he had sojourned with them, till God brought the
Magian to the place where he was and he slew him.
Moreover, he told her of his passion for the damsel and
how he had made prize of her and of his seeing her [his
mother] in sleep and all else that had befallen him up to
the time when God reunited them.

She marvelled at his story and praised God who had
restored him to her in health and safety. Then she arose
and examined the baggage and loads and questioned him
of them. So he told her what was in them, whereat she


1 67


was mightily rejoiced. Then she went up to the princess,
to talk with her and bear her company ; but, when her
eyes fell on- her, she was confounded at her loveliness
and rejoiced and marvelled at her beauty and grace and
symmetry : and she sat down beside her, cheering her
and comforting her heart. Next morning, early, she went
down into the market and bought magnificent furniture
and ten suits of the richest raiment in the city, and clad
the princess and adorned her with every thing costly.
Then said she to Hassan, ' O my son, we cannot abide
in this city with all this wealth ; for thou knowest that we
are poor folk and the people will suspect us of practising
alchemy. So come, let us depart to Baghdad, the Abode
of Peace, where we may dwell in the Khalif's Sanctuary,
and thou shalt sit in a shop to buy and sell, in the fear of
God (to whom belong might and majesty) and He shall
prosper thee with this wealth.'

Hassan fell in with her counsel and going forth straight-
way, sold the house and summoned the dromedaries, which
he loaded with all his goods and gear, together with his
mother and wife. Then he went down to the Tigris,
where he hired a vessel to carry them to Baghdad and
embarked therein with his mother and wife and all his
possessions. They sailed up the river ten days, with a
fair wind, till they came in sight of Baghdad, at which
they rejoiced, and the ship landed them in the city, where
Hassan hired a storehouse in one of the khans and trans-
ported his goods thither. He lodged in the khan that
night and on the morrow, he changed his clothes and
going down into the city, enquired for a broker. The
folk directed him to one, and when the broker saw him,
he asked him what he lacked. Quoth he, i I want a house,
a handsome and spacious one.' So the broker showed
him the houses at his disposal and he chose one that
belonged to one of the viziers and buying it of him for


168


a hundred thousand dinars, gave him the price. Then
he returned to the khan and removed all his goods to
the house; after which he went down to the market and
bought all that was needed therefor of vessels and carpets
and other household stuff, besides servants and a little
black slave for the house.

He abode with his wife in all solace and delight of life
three years, during which time he was vouchsafed by her
two sons, one of whom he named Nasir and the other
Mensour : but s at the end of this time, he bethought him
of his sisters, the princesses, and called to mind all their
goodness to him and how they had helped him to his
desire. So he longed after them and going out to the
markets of the city, bought trinkets and costly stuffs and
confections, such as they had never seen nor known. His
mother asked him why he bought these rarities and he
answered, ' I purpose to visit my sisters, who entreated
me with all kindness and to whose goodness and munifi-
cence I owe all that I at present enjoy : wherefore I will
journey to them and return soon, so God please.' Quoth
she, ' O my son, be not [long] absent from me.'

Then said he, ' Know, O my mother, how thou shalt do
with my wife. Here is her feather-dress in a chest, buried
in the earth in such a place ; do thou watch over it, lest
she light on it and take it, for she would fly away, she and
her children, and I should never hear of them again and
should die of grief ; wherefore I warn thee, O my mother,
that thou name this not to her. Thou must know that she
is the daughter of a king of the Jinn, than whom there is
not a greater among the kings of the Jinn nor a richer in
troops and treasure, and she is mistress of her people and
dearest to her father of all he hath. Moreover, she is
exceeding high-spirited, so do thou serve her thyself and
suffer her not to go forth the door neither look out of
window nor over the wall, for I fear the air for her, when


169


it blows, and if augnx r>efell her, I should slay myself for
her sake.' ' O my son,' replied she, ' God forbid that I
should gainsay thee ! Am I mad that thou shouldst lay
this injunction on me and I disobey thee therein ? Depart,
O my son, with a heart at ease, and God willing, thou
shalt return in safety and see her and she shall tell thee
how I have dealt with her : but tarry not beyond the time
to come and go.' t^Tt'^Iji
Now, as fate would have it, his wife heard what he said uTCXOfe
to his mother and they knew it not. Then Hassan went
without the city and beat the drum, whereupon up came
the dromedaries and he loaded twenty of them with
rarities of Irak ; after which he returned to his mother
and repeated his injunctions to her and took leave of her
and his wife and children, one of whom was a yearling
babe and the other two years old. Then he mounted and
fared on ten days, without stopping night or day, over
hills and valleys and plains and wastes, till, on the
eleventh day, he reached the palace and went in to his
sisters, with the presents he had brought them. The
princesses rejoiced at his sight and gave him joy of his
safety, whilst the youngest decorated the palace within
End without. Then they took the presents and lodging
him in a chamber as of old, enquired at him of his wife
and mother and he told them that his wife had borne him
two sons. And the youngest princess, seeing him well
and in good case, rejoiced with an exceeding joy and
repeated the following verse :

For news of thee, whene'er it blew, the wind I have besought, And
never any but thyself occurreth to my thought.

Then he abode with them, an honoured guest, three
months, passing his time in hunting and merrymaking and
Joy and delight.

To return to his wife. She abode with his mother two


170


days after her husband's departure, and on the third day,
she said to her, ' Glory be to God ! Have I lived with
him three years and shall I never go to the bath ? ' Then
she wept and Hassan's mother took pity on her and said
to her, ' O my daughter, we are strangers here and my
husband is abroad. Were he at home, he would serve
thee himself, but, as for me, I know no one. However,
O my daughter, I will heat thee water and wash thy head
in the bath that is in the house.' ' O my lady,' answered
the princess, ' haclst thou spoken thus to one of the slave-
girls, she had demanded to be sold in the open market
and had not abode with thee. Men are excusable, for
they are jealous and their reason tells them that, if a
woman go forth the house, belike she will do lewdness.
But, O my lady, women are not all alike and thou knowest
that, if a woman have a mind to aught, whether it be the
bath or what not else, none may avail against her, to
guard her or keep her or debar her from her desire ; and
nought restraineth her but her reason and her religion.'

Then she wept and cursed and bemoaned herself and
her strangerhoocl, till Hassan's mother was moved to pity
for her case and knew that all she said was true and that
there was nothing for it but to let her have her will. So
she committed the affair to. God (extolled and exalted be
He !) and making ready all that they needed for the bath,
took her and went with her thither. She carried her two
little sons with her, and when they entered, they put off
their clothes and all the women fell to gazing on the
princess and glorifying God (to whom belong might and
majesty) for that He had created so glorious a form. The
report of her was noised abroad in Baghdad and the
women of the city flocked to gaze upon her, till the bath
was so crowded that there was no passing through it.

Now, as destiny would have it, there was present that
day, with the rest of the women in the bath, one of the


I7i


slave-girls of the Khauf Haroun er Reshid, by name
Tuhfeh the Lutanist, and she, finding the bath crowded
and no passing for the multitude of women and girls,
asked what was to do ; and they told her of the [strange]
damsel. So she went up to her and considering her
straitly, was amazed at her grace and beauty and glorified
God (magnified be His majesty) for the fair forms He
hath created. The sight of her diverted her from her
bath, so that she went not [farther] in nor washed, \mt
sat staring at the princess, till she had made an end of
washing and coming forth [of the hot room], put on her
olothes, whereupon beauty was added to her beauty. She
sat down on the divan, whilst the women gazed upon her ;
then she looked at them and veiling herself, went out.

Tuhfeh went out with her and followed her, till she saw
where she dwelt, when she left her and returned to the
Khalifs palace. Then she went in to the lady Zubeideh
and kissed the earth before her ; and the princess said to
her, 4 O Tuhfeh, why hast thou tarried in the bath ? ' 'O
my lady/ answered she, ' I have seen a marvel, nevei
beheld I its like amongst men or women, and this it was
that distracted me and confounded my wit and amazed
me, so that I forgot to wash my head.' 1 And what was
that?' asked Zubeideh. 'O my lady,' replied Tuhfeh,
saw a damsel in the bath, having with her two little boys
like moons, never saw any her like, before nor after her,
nor is there the like of her form in the whole world. By
thy munificence, O my lady, if thou toldest the Com-
mander of the Faithful of her, he would slay her husband
and take her from him, for she hath not her like among
women. I asked of her husband and they told me that
he is a merchant called Hassan of Bassora. Moreover, J
followed her from the bath to her own house and found
it to be that of the vizier, with the two gates, one giving
on the river and the other on the street Indeed, O m$


172


lady, I fear lest the Khalif hear of her and break the law
jNffght and put her husband to death and take her to wife.'
tad). 'Out on thee, O Tuhfeh!' rejoined Zubeideh. 'Is
this damsel endowed with such extraordinary grace and
beauty that the Commander of the Faithful should, on
her accouut, barter his soul's good for his worldly pleasure
and trangress the law I By Allah, I must needs look on
her, and if she be not as thou sayest, I will strike off thy
head! O baggage, there are in the Khalif s harem three
hundred and threescore slave-girls, after the number of
the days of the year, yet is there none amongst them such
as thou describest ! ' 4 No, by Allah, O my lady ! ' answered
Tuhfeh. 'Nor is there her like in all Baghdad; no, nor
amongst the Arabs or the barbarians, nor hath God (to
whom belong might and majesty) created the like of her !'

Therewith Zubeideh called for Mesrour, who came and
kissed the earth before her, and she said to him, 'O
Mesrour, go to the vizier's house, that with the two gates,
one giving on the street and the other on the river, and
bring me in haste the damsel who dwells there, with her
two children and the old woman who is with her, and
tarry not.' ' I hear and obey,' answered Mesrour and re-
pairing to Hassan's house, knocked at the door. Quoth
the old woman, ' Who is at the door ? ' 8 Mesrour/ an-
swered he, 4 the eunuch of the Commander of the Faithful.'
So she opened the door and he entered and saluted her j
whereupon she returned his salute and asked his errand*
Quoth he, 'The lady Zubeideh, daughter of El Casim
and wife of the Commander of the Faithful Haroun er
Reshid, fifth of the sons of Abbas, uncle of the Prophet
(whom God bless and preserve !), bids thee to her, thee
and thy son's wife and her children ; for the women have
told her of her and her beauty.' 1 O Mesrour,' answered
the old woman, ' we are strangers and my son, the girl's
husband, is abroad and hath straitly charged me not to


173


go forth nor let her go forth, in his absence, neither show
her to any of the creatures of God the Most High; and
I fear me, if aught befall her and he come back, he will
slay himself; wherefore I beseech thee, of thy favour, O
Mesrour, require us not of that whereto we are unable.'
'O my lady,' rejoined Mesrour, 'if I knew aught to be
feared for you in this, I would not require you to go ; the
lady Zubeideh desireth but to see her and [then] she may
return. So disobey not, or thou wilt repent ; and like as
I take you, I will bring you both back in safety, so it
please God the Most High.'

The old woman could not gainsay him; so she went
in and making the damsel ready, brought her and her
children forth and followed Mesrour to the Khalif s palace,
where he carried them in and set them before the lady
Zubeideh. They kissed the earth before her and called
down blessings upon her ; and Zubeideh said to the
damsel, who was veiled, ' Wilt thou not uncover thy face,
that I may look on it ? ' So she kissed the ground before
her and unveiling, discovered a face that put to shame the
full moon in the height of heaven. Zubeideh fixed her
eyes on her and let them travel over her, whilst the palace
was illuminated by the light of her countenance.

The princess and all who were present were amazed at
her beauty and all who looked on her became mad and
could speak to none. As for Zubeideh, she rose and
making the damsel stand up, 1 strained her to her bosom
and seated her by -herself on the couch. Moreover, she
commanded to decorate the palace [in her honour] and
calling for a suit of the richest raiment and a necklace of
the most precious jewels, put them upon her. Then said
she to her, ' O princess of fair ones, verily thou astoundest
me and fillest mine eyes [with delight]. What arts

1 It would seem she had been seated on her heels, isa the proper
attitude of a slave before her mistress.


174


knowest thou?' 'O my lady,' answered she, 'I have a
dress of feathers, which if I put on before thee, thou
wouidst see one of the fairest of fashions and marvel
thereat, and all who saw it would talk of its goodliness,
generation after generation.' ' And where is this dress
of thine ? ' asked Zubeideh. ' It is with my husband's
mother/ replied the damsel. ' Do thou seek it of her
for me.'

So Zubeideh said to the old woman, ' My life on thee,
O my mother, go and fetch us her feather-dress, that we
may divert ourselves by looking on what she will do, and
after take it again.' ' O my lady,' replied the old woman,
'this damsel is a liar. Hast thou ever seen a woman with
a dress of feathers ? Indeed, this pertaineth but to birds.'
But the damsel said to Zubeideh, ' As I live, O my lady,
she hath a feather-dress of mine and it is in a chest,
which is buried in such a store-closet in the house.' So
Zubeideh took from her neck a necklace of jewels, worth
all the treasures of Chosroes and Caesar, and gave it to the
old woman, saying, ' O my mother, I conjure thee by my
life, take this necklace and go and fetch us this dress, that
we may divert ourselves with the sight thereof, and after
take it again ! ' But she swore to her that she had never
seen the dress and knew not what the damsel meant by
her speech.

Then Zubeideh cried out at her and taking the key
from her, called Mesrour and said to him, ' Take this key
and go to the house and enter such a store-closet there,
amiddleward which thou wilt find a chest buried. Take
"Nitifyt an< ^ break it open and bring me the feather-dress that
&£CXri)L is therein.' ' I hear and obey,' answered he and went forth,
whereupon the old woman arose and followed him, weep-
ing and repenting her of having given ear to the damsel
and gone to the bath with her, for her desire to go thither
was but a trick. So she went with him to the house and


175


opened the door of the closet, and he entered and brought
out the chest. Then he took therefrom the feather-
dress and wrapping it in a handkerchief, carried it to
the princess Zubeideh, who took it and turned it about,
marvelling at the beauty of its fashion ; after which she
gave it to the damsel, saying, 'Is this thy dress of
feathers?' 'Yes, O my lady,' answered she, and took it
joyfully. Then she examined it and rejoiced to find it
whole as it was, not a feather missing. So she came down
from beside the lady Zubeideh and taking her sons in her
bosom, wrapped herself in the feather-dress and became
a bird, by the ordinance of God (to whom belong might
and majesty), whereat Zubeideh and all who were present
marvelled. Then she walked with a proud and graceful
gait and danced and sported and flapped her wings,
whilst all eyes were fixed on her and all marvelled at
what she did.

Then said she with fluent tongue, 4 Is this goodly, O
my ladies ? ' And they answered, ' Yes, O princess of the
fair ! All that thou dost is goodly.' ' And this,' said she,
* that I am about to do is goodlier yet.' Then she spread
her wings and flying up with her children to the dome of
the palace, perched on the cornice of the saloon, whilst
they all looked at her, wide-eyed and said, ' By Allah, this
is indeed a rare and goodly fashion ! Never saw we its
like.' Then, as she was about to take flight for her own
land, she bethought her of Hassan and said, ' Hark ye, my
mistresses 1 ' and she recited the following verses :

Thou that hast left these lands and tow'rds the countries, where Thy
loved ones 1 dwell, with swift and fleeting feet dost fare,

Think'st thou that I 'midst you abided in content And deem'st thos
that my days by you untroubled were ?

When in Love's snare I fell, Love's self my gaol he made And did nuts
*&e place of rendezvous repair.

a the seven princesses.


176


He hid my vest and deemed that love had mastered Hie And that I of

the One to seek it would forbear.
He wronged me, for my vest he to his mother gave And in a closet

charged her keep it with all care :
But I heard what they said and stored it in my mind And much therein

rejoiced and hoped for fortune fair.
My going to the bath, indeed, was but a trick, That I to wonderment

might move the people there.
The Khalif s bride no less did marvel at my charms, When she on everf

side had viewed my shape and air.
' O wife of Er Reshid,' then said I, e thou must know, I have a feather-
dress, right splendid, rich and rare.
Were it on me, thou shouldst see wonders such as blot Affliction from

the spright and charm away despair.'
Where is it? ' deigned to ask the Khalif s wife s and I Made answer,

' In his house who caught me in his snare.'
So Mesrour went in haste and brought the dress to her, And lo, its lustre

lit the palace everywhere.
I took it from his hand and opening, viewed it all, To see 'twas whole

and fit to wing withal the air.
Then, with my babes, therein I entered and my wings Spreading, up to

the roof I flew and perching there,
Said, ' Husband's mother mine, tell him, if he would meet With me

again, he must to leave his home prepare,'

When she had made an end of her verses, the lady
Zubeideh said to her, 'Wilt thou not come down to us,
that we may take our fill of thy beauty, O fairest of the
fair? Glory be to Him who hath given thee eloquence
and beauty ! ' But she said, ' God forbid that what is
past should return ! ' Then to the mother of the wretched
Hassan, ' By Allah, O my lady,' said she, s it irketh me to
part from thee ; but, when thy son cometh and the days of
separation are long upon him and he craveth reunion with
me and meeting and the winds of love and longing agitate
him, let him come to me in the Islands of Wac.' Then
she took flight with her children and sought her own
country, whilst the old woman wept and buffeted her face


177


aad lamented till she swooned away. When she came to
herself, she said to the lady Zubeideh, ' O my lady, what is
this thou hast done ? ' And Zubeideh said to her, 1 O my
lady the pilgrim, I knew net that this would happen and
hadst thou told me of the case and acquainted me with
her condition, I had not gainsaid thee. Nor did I know
that she was of the Flying Jinn ; else had I not suffered
her to don the dress nor take her children : but now words
profit nothing ; so do thou acquit me of offence against
thee.' And the old woman could do no otherwise than
answer, ' Thou art acquitted.'

Then she went forth the palace and returning to her
own house, buffeted her face till she swooned away.
When she came to herself, she wearied after her daughter-
in-law and her childien and for the sight of her son and
repeated the following verses :

Ycrar absence, on the day of parting, when you went From home,

enforced me weep for grief and dreariment.
I cry out, for the smart of separation's pains. What while mine eyelids

still with scalding tears are brent,
"Parting this is: shall aye returning be for us? Concealment's done

away by your abandonment.'
Would God they would return and keep their troth ! Ah, then. Time

would belike restore the days of my content.

Then she dug three graves in the house and betook her-
self to them with weeping all tides of the day and watches
of the night ; and when her son's absence was long upon
her and grief and longing and unquiet waxed upon her,
she recited these verses :

Thine image 'twixt mine eyelids still harbours, when they close, As in

my heart thy memory in throbbing and repose-
Yea, and thy love for ever runs in the bones of me, As in the fruited

branches the sap in summer flows.
Indeed, my breast is straitened, the day I see thee not, And e'en my

censors hold me excused for my woes,
VOL. VII. £8


i;8

O thou, for whom love-longing hath gotten hold of me, For love of
whom distraction for ever on me grows,
tNTlgfjt Have mercy, as thou fearest the Merciful, on me : The love of thee hath
tlCtttbU. made me to taste of death, God knows.

Meanwhile, when Hassan came to the princesses, they
conjured him to tarry with them three months [and he
consented and sojourned with them for that time], after
which they gave him five loads of gold and the like of
silver and one load of victual and accompanied him on
his homeward way, till he conjured them to return, where-
upon the youngest came up to him, to bid him farewell,
and embracing him, v/ept till she fainted. Then she
recited the following verses :

Ah, when shall parting's fire be quenched by thy return once more ?

When shall I have my wish of thee and we be as of yore ?
Indeed, the day of severance affrights and troubles me, And languish-

merit for love-takmg on me is passing sore.

Then came forward the second princess and embraced
him and recited these verses :

Like the parting from life is the parting from thee And thy loss as the

loss of heaven's rains is to me.
Thy departure's a heart-searing fire, for, indeed, In thy presence the

gardens of Paradise be.

Then came forward the third and embraced him and
recited these verses :

We left not to take leave, upon our parting day, For weariness or aught

of ill intention ; nay,
My very soul thou art, and how unto my soul Should I, of my free
will, I prithee, farewell say?

Then came forward the fourth and embraced him and
recited these verses :

Mought made me weep, save only when he, in parting guise, Did me of

his departure so cruelly apprise.
Behold this precious union I've hung upon mine ear s ? Twas of my tears

I wrought it, fast dropping from mine eyes.


179


Then came forward the fifth and embraced him and
recited these verses :

Depart thou not ; for I've no strength without thee to endure Nor unto

a departing one courage to say farewell ;
Nor any patience, severance to encounter ; no, nor tears To shed upon

the ruined house wherein we twain did dwell.

Then came forward the sixth and embraced him and
recited these verses :

I said, when the camels away with them fared And longing mine entrails

did ravage, ' Ah me !
If there were but a king over whom I had power, I would seize, by

main force, on each ship on the sea.'

Then came forward the seventh and embraced him and
recited these verses :

Indeed, the severance from thee hath made my heart to ache : I have no

bowels of the like of thee farewell to take.
God knows I did not leave to speak the parting word to thee, Save of

the fear that in the act thy very heart would break.

Hassan also wept for parting from them s till he swooned,
and repeated the following verses :

Indeed, upon the parting day, my eyes with pearls did rain Of dropping

tears, whose necklaces I strung in many a skein.
The cameleer urged on his beasts with them, what while nor strength

Nor fortitude I found, nor did my heart with me remain.
I took my leave of them and turned away in grief, and eke To quit the

encampment and the place of meeting I was fain.
Yea, I turned back, unknowing of the road and comforting My soul

but with the thought that I should meet thee yet again.
List, O my friend, unto the tale of love, and God forbid That I should

speak and that thy heart to hearken should not deign !
Since thou hast lost them, O my soul, forswear the sweet of life Not

covet its continuance, for, wanting them, 'twere vain.

Then he bade them farewell and fared on diligently night
and day, till he came to Baghdad, the Abode of Peace and
Sanctuary of the Abbaside Khalifs, unknowing what had


i8o

passed in his absence. Here he dismissed the dromedaries
and entering his house, went in to his mother, to salute
her, but found her worn of body and wasted of bones, for
much mourning and watching and weeping and lamenta-
tion, till she was grown like a skewer and could make him
no answer. He asked her of his wife and children and
she wept till she swooned away, whereupon he searched
the house for them, but found no trace of them. So he
went to the store-closet and finding it open and the chest
broken and the feather-dress missing, knew that his wife
had possessed herself thereof and flown away with her
children. Then he returned with his mother and finding
her recovered from her swoon, questioned her of his wife
and children, whereupon she wept and said, * O my son,
may God amply requite thee their loss ! These are their
three tombs.'

When Hassan heard these words of his mother, he gave
a great cry and fell down in a swoon, in which he lay from
the first of the day till noon ; wherefore anguish was added
to his mother's anguish and she despaired of his life.
However, after awhile, he came to himself and wept
and buffeted his face and rent his clothes and went about
the house in a state of distraction, reciting the following
verses :

Folk have made moan of passion before me, of past yearSj And. live and

dead for absence have suffered pains and fears ;
But that within my bosom I harbour, with mine eyes I've never seen the

like of nor heard it with mine ears.

Then he drew his sword, and coming up to his mother,
said to her, ' Except thou tell me the truth of the case, I
will strike off thy head and [after] kill myself.' 'O my
son,' answered she, ' put up thy sword and sit down, till I
tell thee what hath passed.' So he sheathed his sword
and sat by her side, whilst she recounted to him all that
had passed in his absence, adding, ' O nay son, but that 1


I8i

saw her weep to go to the bath and feared that she would
complain to thee, on thy return, and thou wouldst be
wroth with me, I had not carried her thither; nor had I
brought out the feather-dress, though I died for it, were
it not that the princess Zubeideh was wroth with me and
took the key from me by force : and thou knowest, O my
son, that no hand may measure length with that of the
Khalifate. 1 When they brought her the dress, she took it
and turned it over, fearing lest somewhat might be lost
thereof, but found it whole, wherefore she rejoiced and
making her children fast to her middle, donned the
feather-vest, after the lady Zubeideh had pulled off to
her all that was upon her and clad her therein, in honour
of her and because of her beauty. No sooner had she
done this than she shook and becoming a bird, walked
about the palace, whilst all who were present gazed at her
and marvelled at her beauty and grace. Then she flew up
to the roof and perching on the cornice, looked at me and
said, " When thy son cometh and the nights of separation
are long on him and he craveth reunion with me and meet-
ing and the winds of love and longing agitate him, let him
leave his native land and journey to the Islands of Wac." tNTfgfjt
This, then, is her story and what befell in thine absence.' tfCQXfeifi

When she had made an end of her story, Hassan gave a
great cry and fell down in a swoon, from which he ceased
not till nightfall, when he revived and fell to buffeting his
face and writhing on the floor like a wounded snake. His
mother sat by his head, weeping, till midnight, when h&
came to himself and wept sore and recited the following
verses :

Pause and behold his sorry state whom ye have left to mourn, So haply

you will pity him, after despite and scorn.
For, if ye look on him, 'fore God, the man you will deny, As 'twere yoss

knew him not, so sick he is and passion-worn.

1 i.e. none may contend against the power of the Khalifata


1 82

Forslain of love -longing for you he is, and of the dead He'd reckoned
be, but for the groans wherewith his breast is torn.

Think not that separation's light to him ; nay, grievous 'tis Unto the
longing j death itself were easier to be borne.

Then he rose and went round about the house, weeping
and lamenting and bemoaning himself, five days, without
tasting meat or drink. His mother came to him and
conjured him 7 till he broke his fast, and besought him to
leave weeping ; but he hearkened not to her and continued
to weep and lament, whilst she strove to comfort him and
he heeded her not. Then he recited the following verses :

My soul for love a burden bears, so great. All strength that is would

fail beneath its weight.
I'm all amazed and sore my languor is ; Alike are night and morn to this

my strait.

Indeed, till now I went in fear of death, But death to-day a remedy
I rate.

He abode thus till daybreak, when his eyes closed and
he [fell asleep, for sheer weariness, and] saw [in a dream]
his wife weeping and repentant for that which she had
done. So he started up from sleep, crying out and re-
citing the following verses :

Their image is never absent a breathing- while from my breast : I have
made it within my bosom the place of the honoured guest.

But that I hope for reunion, no instant more would I live, And but that
I see them in slumber, I would not lie down to rest.

He abode thus a whole month, weeping-eyed and
mournful-hearted, wakeful by night and eating little, till
he bethought him to repair to his sisters and take counsel
with them in the matter of his wife, so haply they might-
help him to regain her. So he summoned the dromedaries
and loading fifty of them with rarities of Irak, committed
the house to his mother's care and deposited all his goods
in safe keeping, except some few he left with her. Then


1 83

he set out on his journey and stayed not till he reached
the palace of the Mountain of Clouds, when he went in to
the princesses and gave them the presents, in which they
rejoiced. Then they gave him joy of his safety and said
to him, 'O our brother, what ails thee to come [again so
soon], seeing thou wast with us but two months since ? '
Whereupon he wept and repeated the following verses :

I see my soul all pined for loss of her it held so dear j It hath no ease 9

in any wise, of life and all its cheer.
My malady is one of those whose remedy's unknown ; And shall a

malady be cured, except its leach be here ?
Thou that forbidd'st me the delight of sleep, thou hast me left The wind

to question after thee, whenas its wafts draw near,
From my love's land but lately borne, my love who doth comprise

Beauties that make mine eyes to rain with many a bloody tear.
O wind, that visitest her land, haply a waft of air The hearts with

somewhat of her scent may quicken yet and cheer.

Then he gave a great cry and swooned away. The
princesses sat round him, weeping over him, till he came
to himself and repeated these verses :

It may be Fate at last shall turn its bridle-rein And bring me her I love,

for Fortune changeth still j
And things shall yet betide, despite the things fordone, To farther forth

my hopes and bring me to my will.

Then he wept, till he fainted again, and presently
coming to himself, recited the following :

O term of all my pains and all my langaishment, Art thou content ?

Indeed, in passion I'm content.
Dost thou forsake me thus, without or fault or cause ? Turn back to

me, I pray, from rigour and relent.

Then he wept -till he swooned away once more and when
he came to himself, he repeated these verses :


1 84

Sleep hath my lids departed, but wake is ever nigh And ot the hoarded!

teardrops still lavish is mine eye.
It weepeth tears like rubies, for love, and evermore With growing

distance waxeth the tide of tears more high.
Longing within my bosom, beloved mine, hath lit A fire that rageth

ever and will not cease or die.
Ho tear, when I recall ihee, I shed, but still therein Is lightning, ay,

and thunder of many a groan and sigh.

Then he wept till he fainted away a fourth time, and
presently recovering, recited the following lines :

Do ye for passion and distress e'en suffer as we do ? And is the love of

us with you, like to our love for you ?
May Allah love-liking confound ! How bitter 'tis, indeed ! What is it

love would have of us ? Ah, would to God I knew !
Your lovely faces, far and wide though distance 'twixt us stretch, Still

in our eyes, where'er we are, are mirrored, clear and true.
With memories of your dwelling-place my heart is occupied And still

the turtle, when she sings, my trouble doth renew.
O dove, that callest all the night upon thy mate, with me Thou mak'st

grief company and add'st longing my longing to.
Thou leav'st my lids unsatisfied with weeping and lament For dear ones

gone and far away, departed from our view.
Yea ? every time and tide for them I yearn and am consumed With

longing, when on me the night falls with its darkling hue.

When his sisters heard this and saw his condition, the
transport of love and longing and the passion and dis-
traction that possessed him were manifest to them and
they questioned him of his case. He wept and told them
what had befallen in his absence and how his wife had
taken flight with her children, wherefore they grieved for
him and asked him what she said at leave-taking. ' O my
sisters,' answered he, ' she said to my mother, " Tell thy
son, when he cometh and the nights of separation are
long upon him and he craveth reunion with me and
meeting and the winds of love and longing agitate him ?


iSs

let him join me in the Islands of Wac." * When they heard
this, they signed to one another with their eyes and shook
their heads, and each looked at her sister, whilst Hassan
looked at them. Then they bowed their heads and be-
thought themselves awhile; after which they raised then-
heads and said, ' There is no power and no virtue save in
God the Most High, the Supreme ! Put forth thy hand
to heaven and if thou win thither, then shalt thou win to ^TtfrTjt
thy wife and children.' tftCXCtX

When he heard this, the tears ran down his cheeks like
rain and wet his clothes, and he recited the following
verses :

Red cheeks and eyes of melting black have charmed my wit away ; And

still, when cometh sleeplessness, patience farewell doth say.
The fair with inhumanity have worn my body sore ; No breath of life

abideth there that folk discover may.
Houris, as graceful in their gait as desert antelopes, Whose unveiled

beauties if saints saw, they'd doat thereon straightway ;
Faring as fares the garden breeze that blows before the dawn, Trouble

and restlessness for love of these on me do prey ;
I hung my hopes upon a maid of them, a loveling fair, For whom my

heart is all consumed with fire that rageth aye ;
A loveling soft of sides and proud and graceful in her gait, The darkness

dwelleth in her hair, but in her face is day.
She troubleth me, and champions stout how many have the eyes And

cheeks of lovely women stirred to trouble and dismay !

Then he wept, whilst the princesses wept for his weep-
ing, and they were moved to compassion and jealous)' for
him. So they fell to comforting him and exhorting him
to patience and offering up prayers for his reunion with
his wife; whilst his sister [the youngest] said to him, 'O
my brother, take heart and be of good courage and have
patience ; so shalt thou come to thy desire ; for whoso is
patient and waiteth, attaineth that he seeketh. Patience
is the key of relief and indeed the poet saith :


1 86

Let destiny with slackened rein its course appointed fare And lie thou
down to sleep by night, with heart devoid of care ;
'twixt the closing of an eye and th' opening thereof, God hath it in
His power to change a case from foul to fair.

So take heart and brace up thy resolution, for one
who is to live ten years dieth not when he is but nine.
Weeping and grief and mourning engender sickness and
disease ; wherefore do thou abide with us till thou be
rested, and I will cast about how thou raayst win to thy
wife and children, so it please God the Most High.' And
he wept sore and recited these verses :

An if of its disease my body be made whole, I'm still unhealed of that

which harbours in my soul.
Except a lover be united with his love, No cure for love's disease there

is nor lovers' dole.

Then he sat down beside her and she proceeded to
talk with him and comfort him and question him of the
manner of his wife's departure. So he. told her and she
said, ' By Allah, O my brother, I had it in mind to bid
thee burn the feather-dress, but Satan made me forget it.'
She ceased not to talk with him and caress him and
company with him other ten days, whilst sleep visited him
not and he delighted not in food ; and when the case was
long upon him and unrest waxed in him, he recited the
following verses :

A loved one owns my heart, with whom I companied of yore : There is

no creature save herself I wish or weary for.
All that the Arabs boast of charms in her united are ; She's a gazelle,

but on my heart she feedeth evermore.
Because my patience and resource do fail for love of her, I weep, though

weeping profits not to salve my secret sore.
A fair one, seven [years of age] she hath and seven thereto, As she a

moon of five nights were and five thereto and four. 1

1 A rounadbout way, much in favour with Arab poets, of stating a
girl's age, fourteen, and at the same time introducing the never-failing
comparison to the full moon. See ante, Vol. IV, p. 327.


187


Wken the youngest princess saw him thus distracted (ot
passion and love-longing and the fever of desire, she went
in to her sisters, tearful-eyed and mournful-hearted, and
throwing herself upon them, kissed their feet, weeping,
and besought them to devise some means of bringing
Hassan to the Wac Islands and effecting his reunion with
his wife and children. She ceased not to conjure them to
further her brother in the accomplishment of his desire
and to weep before them s till she made them weep and
they said to her, ' Be of good cheer : we will do our
endeavour to bring about his reunion with his family, if
it be the will of God the Most High.' And he abode
with them a whole year, during which his eyes ceased
never from tears.

Now the princesses had an uncle, their father's brother-
german, whose name was Abdulcuddous, and he loved the
eldest with an exceeding love and was wont to visit her
once a year and do her desires. They had told him of
Hassan's adventure with the Magian and how he had
availed to slay him ; whereat he rejoiced and gave the
eldest princess perfumes, saying, ' O daughter of my
brother, if thou be in concern for aught or stand in any
need or if aught irk thee, cast of these perfumes upon fire,
naming me, and I will be with thee presently and will do
thy desire.' This was said on the first day of the year
that was now at an end; and the eldest princess said to
her youngest sister, 'Lo, the year is wholly past and my
uncle is not come. Rise, bring me somewhat of fire and
the box of perfumes.' So the damsel arose, rejoicing, and
fetching what she sought, laid it before her sister, who
opened the box and taking thence a little of the perfume,
cast it into the fire, naming her uncle ; nor was it
burnt out ere a cloud of dust appeared at the farther end
of the valley and presently lifting, discovered an old man
riding on an elephant, which trumpeted as it came.


1 88

As soon as he came within sight of the princesses, he
fell to making signs to them with his hands and feet ; nor
was it long ere he reached the castle and alighting from
the elephant, came in to them, whereupon they embraced
him and kissed his hands and saluted him. Then he sat
down, whilst the girls talked with him and questioned him
of his absence. Quoth he, { I was sitting but now with
your aunt, when I smelt the perfumes and hastened to you
on this elephant. What wouldst thou, O daughter of my
brother?' 'O uncle,' answered she, 'indeed we longed
for thee, for the year is past and it is not thy wont to be
absent from us more than a year.' ' I was busy,' answered
he, ' but I purposed to come to you to-morrow.' Where-
fore they thanked him and blessed him and sat talking
NtC$t with him.

&£C£. Presently the eldest said to him, ' O my uncle, we told
thee the story of Hassan of Bassora, whom Behram the
Magian brought and how he slew the latter and after
made prize of the Supreme King's daughter and took her
to wife and journeyed with her to his native land ? ' 1 Yes,'
answered he ; ' and what befell him after that ? ' ' He was
blest with two sons by her,' said the princess ; ' but she
played him false ; for she took them in his absence and
fled with them to her own country, saying to his mother,
" When thy son returneth and asketh for me and the
nights of separation are long upon him and he craveth
reunion with me and meeting and the winds of love and
longing agitate him, let him come to me in the Islands
of Wac " '

When Abdulcuddous heard this, he shook his head and
bit his hands ; then, bowing his head, he fell a-drumming
on the earth with his fingers ; after which he shook his
head and looked right and left and shook his head again,
whilst Hassan watched him from a place where he was
hidden from him. Then said the princesses to theif


1 89

uncle, ' Vouchsafe us an answer, for our hearts are rent in
sunder.' But he shook his head at them, saying, 'O ray-
daughters, this man hath wearied himself [in vain] and
cast himself into grievous stress and sore peril ; for he
may not win to the Wac Islands.'

With this the princesses called Hassan, who came forth
and kissed Abdulcuddous's hand and saluted him. The
old man rejoiced in him and seated him by his side ;
whereupon quoth the damsels, 'O uncle, acquaint our
brother Hassan with that which thou hast told us.' So he
said to Hassan, ' O my son, put away from thee this sore
torment; for thou canst never win to the Wac Islands,
though the Flying Jinn and the wandering stars were with
thee ; for that betwixt thee and these islands are seven
valleys and seven seas and seven mighty mountains.
How then canst thou come at this place and who shall
bring thee thither? Wherefore I conjure thee by Allah,
O my son, do thou reckon them 1 as dead and turn back
forthright and weary not thy soul ! Indeed, I give thee
good counsel, an thou wilt but accept it' At these
words Hassan wept till he fainted, and the princesses
sat round him, weeping for his weeping, whilst the
youngest rent her clothes and buffeted her face, till she
swooned away.

When the old man saw them in this transport of grief
and trouble and mourning, he was moved to pity for them
and bidding them be silent, said to Hassan, ' O my son,
be of good comfort and rejoice in the accomplishment of
thy desire, if it be the will of God the Most High. Rise,
O my son, take courage and follow me.' So Hassan arose
and followed him, rejoicing in the fulfilment of his wish,
after he had taken leave of the princesses. Then the old
man called the elephant and mounting, took Hassan up
Behind him and fared on three days and nights, like the

1 i.e. his wife and children.


190


blinding lightning, till he came to a vast blue mountain,
whose stones were all blue and amiddleward which was a
cavern, with a door of Chinese iron. Here he set Hassan
down and alighting, dismissed the elephant Then he
went up to the door and knocked, whereupon it opened
and there came out to him a black slave, hairless, as he
were an Afrit, with a sword in his right hand and a target
of steel in the other. When he saw Abdulcuddous, he
threw his sword and buckler from his hand and coming up
to him, kissed his hand.

Abdulcuddous took Hassan by the hand and entered
with him, whilst the slave shut the door after them ;
whereupon Hassan found himself in a vast and spacious
cavern, through which ran a vaulted passage, and they
fared on therein a mile's space, till they came forth upon
a great open space and made for an angle [of the moun-
tain] wherein were two great doors of solid brass. The
old man opened- one of the doors and said to Hassan, ' Sit
at the door, whilst I enter and return to thee in haste,
and beware lest thou open it and enter.' Then he entered
and shutting the door after him, was absent an hour, after
which he returned, leading a horse saddled and bridled,
which, when it ran, flew, and when it flew, the very dust
overtook it not, and brought it to Hassan, saying, ' Mount/
So he mounted and Abdulcuddous opened the second door,
beyond which appeared a vast desert.

They passed through the door into the desert and the
old man said to him, ' O my son, take this letter and go
whither this horse will carry thee. When thou seest him
stop at the door of a cavern like this, dismount and throw
the bridle over the saddle-bow and let him go. He will
enter the cavern, which do thou not enter with him, but
abide at the door five days, without losing patience.
On the sixth day there will come forth to thee a black
elder, clad all in black, with a long white beard, flowing


191


down to his navel. Kiss his hands and take his skirt and
lay it on thy head and weep before him, till he take com-
passion on thee and ask thee what thou wouldst have.
Then give him the letter, which he will take and go in
and leave thee, without speaking. Wait at the door other
five days, without wearying, and on the sixth day expect
him ; and if he come out to thee himself, know that thy
need will be accomplished, but, if one of his servants
come forth to thee, know that he who cometh forth
to thee purposeth to kill thee ; and peace be on thee !
For know, O my son, that whoso imperilleth himself
is his own unioer ; wherefore, if thou fear for thy "Jf
life, cast it not into [peril of] destruction ; but, if thou ftacL
fear not, up and do thy will, for I have expounded the
case to thee. Yet, if thou be minded, to return to thy
friends, let me mount thee on the elephant ; it will carry
thee to the daughters of my brother, who will restore
thee to thy country and thy home, and [belike] God
will vouchsafe thee a better than this girl, of whom
thou art enamoured.' Quoth Hassan, ' And how shall life
be sweet to me, except I attain my desire ? By Allah, I
will never turn back, till I regain my beloved or my death
overtake me ! ' And he wept and recited the following
verses :


For the loss of my beloved and the passion that for e'er On me grows,

I stand proclaiming my abjection and despair.
Of my longing for my loved one, the encampment's dust I kiss s Though

it serve but to redouble my distraction and my care.
Allah watch o'er those who're absent, though their memory's in my

heart 1 Ever present are my sorrows and my joys are fled for e'er.
Quoth my censors to me, 'Patience!' But therewith they've fared

away : Lamentation but and burning have they left me to my share.
'Twas her taking leave affrayed me and her saying, ' When I'm gone E

Look my memory thou forget not and our loves in mind thou bear/
Unto whom shall I for succour turn, in whom hope after them ? For m

good and evil fortune stili my hope and trust they were.


192


Ah, the anguish of returning, after having said farewell ! How mf

rancorous foes exulted, when they saw me backward fare !
O ye naming fires of passion, still redouble on my heart ! This it is

against whose danger, I, alas ! had fain been ware.
If my loves are fled for ever, after them I will not live | Yet, if they

return to glad me, ho for joy and fortune fair !
Never shall mine eyes, by Allah, stint from weeping for their loss!

Stream on stream, my tears shall witness to the stress of my despair.

When Abdulcuddous heard this, he knew that he would
not turn back from his desire nor would words have effect
on him, and was certified that nothing would serve him
but he must adventure himself, though it cost him his
life. So he said to him, ' Know, O my son, that the
Islands of Wac are seven islands, wherein are great plenty
of troops, all virgin girls, and the inner isles are peopled
by Satans and Marids and warlocks and tribesmen of the
Jinn, whose land none ever entered and returned thence.
So, God on thee, return presently to thy people ; for know
that she whom thou seekest is the king's daughter of all
these islands ; and how canst thou win to her ? Hearken
to me, O my son, and belike God will vouchsafe thee
a better than she in her stead.' ' O my lord,' answered
Hassan, ' though for the love of her I were torn limb from
limb, yet should I but redouble in love and transport !
Needs must I enter the Wac Islands and come to the
sight of my wife and children ; and God willing, I will not
return save with her and them.' ' Then,' said the sheikh,
'nothing will serve thee but thou must make the journey?'
' Nothing,' answered Hassan : * and I only ask of thee thy
prayers for aid and furtherance ; so haply God will presently
reunite me with my wife and children.' Then he wept
for stress of longing and recited these verses %

Ye are my wish, the fairest fair of any mortal wight | Indeed, I've

lodged you in the stead of hearing and of sight.
Upon my heart you've gotten hold ; it is your dwelling-place 8 And aftes

you 1 am become in torment day and night.


193

Think not in anywise I've ceased from loving you ; indeed, The love c£
you hath brought the wretch to sick and sorry plight.

Ye went away and with you went my gladness, and for me Serenity
became the worst of trouble and despite.

Yea, ye have left me here alone, to watch the stars for pain And weep
with tears that pour and pour, like rain from heaven's height.

night, thou'rt long, indeed, on him who passes thee on wake,

Watching the visage of the moon, a love-distracted wight.
Wind, if thou pass the camp where they have lighted down, to them My

farewell greeting bear, for life is spent and ended quite ;
And tell them somewhat of the pangs I suffer ; for indeed They know

not what's to do with me nor that which ails my spright

Then he wept till he swooned away ; and when he came
to himself, Abdulcuddous said to him, ' O my son, thou
hast a mother ; make her not taste [the bitterness of] thy
loss.' 'By Allah, O my lord,' replied he, * I will never
return except with my wife or my death overtake me.'
And he wept and lamented and recited the following
verses :

1 swear by Love's virtue, my faith tow'rds thee hath not changed for

a day For absence; I am not, indeed, of those that their troth-
plight betray.

Such longing is in me that, if to the folk I discovered my case, ' Sure
madness hath gotten a hold of the man,' without doubt they would
say.

Love-longing and mourning and woe, the transport and pangs of desire,
When this is the case of a wight, how fares it with him, wellaway ?

With this the old man knew that he would not turn from
his purpose, though it cost him his life : so he gave him the
letter and prayed for him and enjoined him how he should
do, saying, ' I have in this letter given a strait charge con-
cerning thee to Abourraweish, son of Belkis, daughter of
Mum, for he is my master and teacher, and all, men and
Jinn, humble themselves to him and stand in awe of him,,
Now go with the blessing of God.'

VOL. VII. 1$


194


Hassan gave the horse the rein, and it flew off with-
him, swiftlier than lightning, and stayed not in its course
ten days, when he saw before him a vast mountain,
blacker than night, that walled the world from East to
West. As he neared it, his horse neighed under him,
whereupon there flocked to it horses in number as the
drops of rain, none could tell their tale, and fell to
rubbing themselves against it. Hassan was affrighted at
them and rode on, surrounded by the horses, till he came
to the cavern which Abdulcuddous had described to him.
The steed stood still at the door and Hassan alighted and
threw the rein over the saddle-bow; whereupon the horse
entered the cavern, whilst he abode without, as the old
man had charged him, pondering the issue of his case

^Ctgfjt an d knowing not what would befall him.

tSCCCU. He abode thus, at the mouth of the cavern, five days
and nights, sleepless, mournful, distracted and perplexed,
pondering his severance from home and friends and
family, with tearful eye and mournful heart. Then he
bethought him of his mother and of what might yet
happen to him and of his separation from his wife and
children and all that he had suffered and recited the
following verses :

The med'cine of my heart's with you : indeed, my heart doth fail And

from my lids' hill-foot run tears, like rillets to the vale.
Yearning and dole and severance, desire and strangerhood, And distance 1

from my native land against me do prevail.
Nought but a lover for her loss he loves distraught am I j Calamities

have smitten me and made my spirit quail.
And if my love on me have brought affliction, where is he, The noble,

whom vicissitudes affect not nor assail ?

Hardly had he made an end of his verses, when out
came the Sheikh Abourruweish, black and clad in black
raiment, and he knew him by the description that Abdul-


195


cuddous had given him. So he threw himself at his feet
and rubbed his cheeks on them and taking his skirt, laid
it on his head and wept before him. Quoth the old man,
' What wantest thou, O my son ? ' Whereupon he put out
his hand to him with the letter, and he took it and re-
entered the cavern, without making him any answer.
Hassan remained in his place other five days, whilst fear
and concern redoubled on him and restlessness clave fast
to him, and he abode weeping and bemoaning himself for
the anguish of estrangement and much watching. And
he recited the following verses :

Glory to Him who rules the skies ! The lover in affliction lies.
Who hath not tasted passion's food Knows not what misery can devise.
Rivers of blood, if I restrained My tears, would ripple from mine eyes.
How many a friend is hard of heart And us with sore affliction tries !
An she with me would but keep faith, I'd call a truce with tears and sighs.
I'm overthrown and ruin's eye Hath smitten me on woful wise.
Beasts weep to see my dreariment And everything in air that flies.

He ceased not to weep till dawn of the sixth day, when
Abourruweish came forth to him, clad in white raiments,
and beckoned to him to enter. So he went in, rejoicing
and assured of the accomplishment of his desire, and
the old man took him by the hand and leading him into
the cavern, fared, on with him half a day's journey, till
they came to a vaulted gateway with a door of steel.
Abourruweish opened the door and they entered a vesti-
bule vaulted with onyx stones, inlaid with arabesques of
gold, which led them to a great hall, wide and lined with
marble. In its midst was a garden containing all manner
trees and flowers and fruits, with birds warbling on the
branches and singing the praises of God, the Almighty
King ; and there were four estrades, each facing other, and
in each estrade a fountain, at whose corners stood lions of
red gold, spouting water from their mouths into the basin.


196

On each estrade stood a chair, whereon sat an elder, with
great store of books before him and censers of gold, con-
taining fire and perfumes, and before each elder were
students, who read the books to him.

When the two entered, the elders rose and did them
honour; whereupon Abourruweish signed to them to dis-
miss their scholars and they did so. Then the four arose
and seating themselves before Abourruweish, asked him of
Hassan's case, and he said to the latter, ' Tell the company
thy story and all that hath betided thee, first and last.'
So Hassan wept sore and related to them his adventures
[up to the time when Behram sewed him in the camel's
skin and caused the rocs carry him up to the mountain-
top]; whereupon all the sheikhs cried out and said, 'Is
this indeed he whom the Magian caused ascend the
Mountain of Clouds by means of the rocs, sewn up in the
skin of a camel ? ' And he said, ' Yes.' So they turned
to the Sheikh Abourruweish and said to him, ' O our
sheikh, Behram contrived his ascent to the top of the
mountain ; but how did he descend thence and what
wonders saw he there ? ' And Abourruweish said, ' O
Hassan, tell them how thou earnest down and what thou
sawest of marvels.'

So he told them all that had befallen him, first and last,
and how he had gotten the Magian into his power and
slain him and delivered the youth from him and sent him
back to his own country and how he had taken the king's
daughter of the Jinn and married her and she had borne
him two children, yet had played him false and taken them
and flown away, and related to them all the perils and hard-
ships he had undergone; whereat they all marvelled and
said to Abourruweish, <0 elder of elders, by Allah, this
jNTtCti)t youth is to be pitied ! But belike thou wilt aid him to
fedlL regain his wife and children.' ' O my brothers,' answered
he, ' this is a grave and perilous matter ; and never saw I any


197


loathe life but this youth. You know that the Wac Islands
are hard of access and that none may come to them but
at the peril of his life ; and ye know also the strength of
their people and their guards. Moreover, I have sworn
an oath not to tread their soil nor transgress against them
in aught : so how shall this man win to the daughter of
the Great King and who can avail to bring him to her or
help him in this matter ? '

4 O elder of elders,' replied the others, ' verily this man
is consumed with desire and he hath adventured himself
to bring thee thy brother Abdulcuddous's letter ; wherefore
it behoves thee to help him.' And Hassan arose and
kissed Abourruweish's feet and raising his skirt, laid it on
his head, weeping and saying, * I beseech thee, by Allah,
to reunite me with my wife and children, though it cost
me my life and soul ! ' The four elders all wept for his
weeping and said to Abourruweish, ' Deal kindly with this
poor fellow for the sake of thy brother Abdulcuddous and
profit by this occasion to earn the reward of [God for]
him.' Quoth he, ' This unhappy youth knoweth not what
he undertaketh ; but we will help him after the measure
of our power.' When Hassan heard the sheikh's words,
he rejoiced and kissed the hands of the five elders, one
after another, imploring their aid.

Then Abourruweish took inkhorn and paper and wrote
a letter, which he sealed and gave to Hassan, together
with a leathern pouch, containing perfumes and flint and
steel, and said to him, ' Take care of this pouch, and
when thou fallest into any strait, burn a little of the per
fumes therein and name me, whereupon I will be with thee
presently and deliver thee from thy stress.' Moreover, he
bade one of those present fetch him an Afrit of the Flying
Jinn; and he did so forthright ; whereupon quoth Abour-
ruweish to the genie, ' What is thy name ? ' ' Thy slave is
[called] Dehnesh ben Fectesh,' replied the Afrit. And


198


the sheikh said, ' Draw near to me.' So Dehnesh drew
near to him and he put his mouth to his ear and said
somewhat to him, whereat the Afrit shook his head and
answered, ' I accept, sheikh of sheikhs.'

Then said Abourruweish to Hassan, 'Arise, O my son,
mount the shoulders of this Afrit, Dehnesh the Flyer;
but, when he soareth with thee to heaven and thou hearest
the angels glorifying God in the air, have a care lest thou
do the like ; else wilt thou perish and he also.' ' 1 will
not say a word,' replied he, and the old man continued :
* O Hassan, to-morrow at peep of day he will set thee
down in a land of pure white, like unto camphor, where-
upon do thou fare on ten days by thyself, till thou come to
the gate of a city. Enter and enquire for the king of the
city; and when thou comest to his presence, salute him
and kiss his hand : then give him this letter and heed well
that which he shall counsel thee.' ' I hear and obey,'
replied Hassan and mounted the Afrit's shoulders, whilst
the elders rose and offered up prayers for him and com-
mended him to Dehnesh's care.

Then the Afrit soared with him to the very confines of
the sky, till he heard the angels glorifying God in heaven,
and flew on with him a day and a night, till he set him
down, at dawn of the next day, in a land, white as cam-
phor, and went his way, leaving him there. When Hassan
found himself alone in the land aforesaid, he fared on day
and night for ten days, till he came to the gate of the city
in question and entering, enquired for the king. They
directed him to him and told him that his name was
Hessoun, King of the Land of Camphor, and that he had
troops and soldiers, enough to fill the earth, in its length
and breadth. So he sought an audience of him and being
admitted to his presence, found him a mighty king and
kissed the earth before him. Quoth the king, 4 What is
thine occasion?' Whereupon Hassan kissed the letter and


199


t •••

i ;

j

i
j

i


gave it to him. The king read it and shook his head, then
said to one of his officers, ' Take this youth and lodge him
in the guest-house.' So he took him and lodged him in
the guest-house, where he abode three days, eating and
drinking and seeing none but the servant who waited on
him and who entertained him with discourse and cheered
him with his company, questioning him of his case and
how he came thither; whereupon he told him his whole
story.

On the fourth day, his attendant carried him before the
king, who said to him, l O Hassan, the sheikh of sheikhs
adviseth me that thou comest to me, seeking to enter the
Wac Islands. O my son, I would send thee thither forth-
right, but that by the way are many perils and thirsty
deserts, full of terrors ; but have patience and all will be
well, for needs must I make shift to bring thee to thy
desire, so it please God the Most High. Know, O my
son, that here is a great army, equipped with arms and
horses and gear, who desire to enter the Wac Islands and
cannot avail thereto. But, for the sake of the Sheikh
Abourruweish, I may not send thee back to him unfulfilled
of thy desire. There will presently come to us ships from
the Wac Islands, and I will set thee on board the first
that arrives and give thee in charge to the sailors, so they
may take care of thee and carry thee to the Islands. If
any question thee of thy case and condition, answer him,
"I am kinsman to King Hessoun, lord of the Land of
Camphor;" and when the ship makes fast to the shore
of the Wac Islands and the master bids thee land, do thou
land.

When thou comest ashore, thou wilt see a multitude of
settles all about the beach, of which do thou choose one
and crouch under it and stir not. As soon as it is dark
night, thou wilt see an army of women appear and flock
about the merchandise [landed from the ship], and one


200


of them will sit down on the settle, under which thou hast
hidden thyself, whereupon do thou put forth thy hand to
her and take hold of her and implore her protection. If
she accord it thee, thou wilt accomplish thy desire and
win to thy wife and children ; but, if she refuse thee, make
thy moan for thyself and give up all hope of life, for thou
art a dead man. For know, O my son, that thou ad-
ventures t thy life and except the Lord of Heaven had
succoured thee, thou hadst not won hither. This is all
t&Cl'gfjt I can do for thee, and peace be on theej' When Hassan
&£CCtb. heard the king's words, he wept till he swooned away, and
when he came to himself, he recited the following verses :

A term's decreed to me, which I must needs fulfil, And when its days

are spent, I die, will I or nilh
Though lions in their woods beset me, whilst a breath Is left me. I shall

get the better of them still.

Then he kissed the earth before the king and said to
him, ' O mighty king, how many days remain till the
coming of the ships ? ' 'In a month's time,' answered
Hessoun, 'they will come and will tarry here other two
months, to sell their cargo, after which they will return
to their own country : so thou must not look to set out
save after three whole months.' Then he bade him return
to the guest-house and commanded to supply him with all
that he needed of meat and drink and raiment fit for kings.
Hassan abode there a month, at the end of which time the
ships arrived and the king and the merchants went forth to
them, taking Hassan with them. Amongst them he saw
a ship, with much people therein, like the pebbles [of the
beach] for number; none knew their tale save He who
created them. She was anchored in mid-harbour and had
small boats, which transported her lading to the shore.

Hassan abode till the crew had carried all the goods
ashore and sold and bought and there wanted but three


201


days of the day of departure ; whereupon the king sent
for him and equipped him with all that he required and
gave him great gifts : after which he summoned the
captain of the great ship and said to him, { Take this
youth with thee in the ship, so none may know of him
but thou, and carry him to the Wac Islands and leave him
there; and tell none of him.' And the captain said, 'I
hear and obey.' Then said the king to Hassan, 'Look
thou tell none of those who are with thee in the ships
thine errand nor discover to them aught of thy case ; else
thou art a lost man.' He answered, 'I hear and obey,'
and took leave of the king, after he had wished him long
life and victory over his enemies and enviers ; wherefore
the king thanked him and wished him safety and the
accomplishment of his desire. Then he committed him
to the captain, who laid him in a chest and taking boat
therewith, carried him aboard, whilst the folk were busy
transporting the goods and doubted not but the chest
contained somewhat of merchandise.

After this, the ships set sail and fared on without
ceasing ten days, and on the eleventh day they reached
land. So the captain set Hassan ashore and there he saw
settles without number, none knew their count save God,
even as the king had told him. He went on, till he came
to one that had no fellow and hid under it till nightfall,
when there came up a great host of women on foot, as
they were a swarm of locusts, armed cap-a-pie in hauberks
and strait-knit coats of mail and bearing drawn swords in
their hands, who, seeing the merchandise landed from the
ships, busied themselves therewith.

Presently they sat down, to rest themselves, and one of
them seated herself on the settle under which Hassan was
hidden : whereupon he took hold of the hem of her skirt
and laid it on his head and throwing himself before her,
fell to kissing her hands and feet and weeping. i Harkye,


202


sirrah ! ' said she. * Arise and stand up, ere any see thee
and slay thee.' So he came forth and standing up, kissed
her hands and wept and said to her, ' O my lady, I cast
myself on thy protection ! Have ruth on one who is parted
from his people and wife and children, one who hath haste
to rejoin them and adventure th his life and soul [for their
sake !]. Take pity on me and be assured that Paradise
will be thy reward; or, if thou wilt not receive me, I be-
seech thee, by God the Great, the Concealer, to conceal
my case!' The merchants, seeing him talking with her,
stared at him ; and she, seeing his humility and hearing
his speech, was moved to compassion for him ; her heart
inclined to him and she knew that he had not ventured
himself and come to that place, save for a grave matter.
So she said to him, 4 O my son, take heart and be of good
courage and return to thy hiding-place till the coming
night, and God shall do as He will.'

Then she took leave of him and he crept under the
settle as before, whilst the troops lighted flambeaux com-
pounded of aloes-wood and crude ambergris and passed
the night in sport and delight till the morning. At day-
break, the boats returned to the shore and the merchants
busied themselves with buying and selling and the trans-
port of the goods and gear till nightfall, whilst Hassan
abode hidden beneath the settle, tearful-eyed and mourn-
ful-hearted, knowing not what was decreed to him in the
secret purpose of God. As he was thus, the woman with
whom he had taken refuge came up to him and giving
him a shirt of mail and a helmet and spear and sword
and a gilded girdle, bade him don them and seat himself
on the settle and let none know his case, after which she
left him, for fear of the troops. So he arose and donned
the coat of mail and helmet and clasped the girdle about
his middle. Then he slung the sword over his shoulder
and taking the spear in his hand, sat down on the settle,


203


whilst Ms tongue forgot not to name God the Most Higfi
and call on Him for protection.

Presently, there appeared cressets and flambeaux and tbCtgff!
lanterns and up came the army of women. So he arose &CCCfci.
and mingling with them, became as one of them. A little
before daybreak, they set out, and Hassan with them, and
fared on till they came to their encampment, where they
dispersed, each to her tent, and Hassan followed his
protectress into hers. When she entered, she threw down
her arms and put off her hauberk and veil. So Hassan
did the like and looking at her, saw her to be a grizzled
old woman, blue-eyed 1 and big-nosed, a calamity of
calamities. Indeed, she was the foulest of ail created
things, with pock-marked face and bald eyebrows, gap-
toothed and chapfalien, with hoary hair, running nose and
slavering mouth ; even as saith of the like of her the poet :

Within the corners of her face afflictions nine do dwell $ Each, when

she lays her veil aside, discovers very hell.
A hideous face and favour foul, as a pig's snout it were ; A voiding-plaes

thou'dst deem it nor deem otherwise than well.

And indeed she was like a pied snake or a bald she-wolf.
When she looked at Hassan, she marvelled and said, ' How
won this man to these lands and in which of the ships was
he and how came he hither in safety ? ' And she fell to
questioning him of his case and wondering at his coming,
whereupon he fell at her feet and rubbed his face on them
and wept till he swooned away; and when he came t©
himself, he recited the following verses :

When will the days vouchsafe reunion to us twain And our long-severed

loves reknit into one skein ?
When shall I win of them the long-desired delight, Reproach that hath

an end and love that doth remain ?
If Nile ran like my tears, 'twould leave no barren plage Unwatered m

Iks world nor any desert plain 5

1 Le. ailing-eyed.


204


Egypt and Syria all and Irak 'twould o'erflow and o'er the Hejaz poiiS

its fertilizing rain :
And this, my love, because of thine abandonment Be kind, then, and

vouchsafe me union again.

Then he took the old woman's skirt and laid it on his
head and fell to weeping and craving her protection.
When she saw his passion and transport and anguish
and distress, her heart inclined to him and she promised
him her protection, saying, ' Have no fear.' Then she
questioned him of his case and he told her the manner
of his coming thither, whereat she wondered and said,
' This that hath betided thee, methinks, never betided any
but thyself and except thou hadst been vouchsafed the
[especial] protection of God the Most High, thou hadst
not been saved : but now, O my son, take comfort and be
of good courage ; thou hast nothing more to fear, for
indeed thou hast reached thy goal and attained thy desire,
if it please God the Most High ! '

Thereat Hassan rejoiced with an exceeding joy and she
sent to summon the captains of the army to her presence,
and it was the last day of the month. So they presented
themselves and the old woman said to them, ' Go out and
proclaim to the troops that they come forth, all, to-morrow
at daybreak and let none tarry behind, on pain of death.'
< We hear and obey/ answered they and going forth, made
proclamation as she bade them, after which they returned
and told her of this ; wherefore Hassan knew that she was
the commander of the army and the chief in authority
over them ; and she was called Shewahi, hight Mother of
Calamities. 1 She ceased not to command and forbid and
Hassan put not off his arms from his body that day.

1 A common name for an ugly old woman. It will be remembered
that the same name and nickname are attributed to the old woman in the
story of iving Omar ben Ennuman and his sons Sherkan and Zoulmekaa
(see Vol. II.), a typical beldam of Arab legend.


205


When the day broke, all the troops came forth from
their places, but the old woman came not forth with them,
and as soon as they were gone and the camp was clear of
them, she said to Hassan, ' Draw near unto me, O my son/
So he drew near unto her and stood before her. Quoth
she, 'Why hast thou adventured thyself hither and how
came thy soul to consent to its own destruction? Tell me
the truth and fear not, for thou hast my plighted word and
I am moved to compassion for thy case and pity thee and
have taken thee under my protection. So, if thou tell me
the truth, I will help thee to accomplish thy desire, though
it involve the loss of souls and the destruction of bodies ;
and since thou hast won to me, no hurt shall betide thee
from me, nor will I suffer any to come at thee with harm
of all that be in the Wac Islands.' So he related to her
his story from first to last, acquainting her with the matter
of his wife and of the birds, how he had taken her from
amongst the ten and married her and abode with her, till
she had borne him two sons, and how she had taken her
children and flown away with them, whenas she knew the
way to the feather-dress : brief, he concealed from her no
whit of his case.

When Shewahi heard his relation, she shook her head
and said to him, ' Glory be to God who hath brought thee
hither in safety and made thee to happen upon me ! For,
hadst thou lighted on any but me, thou hadst lost thy life,
without attaining thy desire : but the truth of thine intent
and thy love and the excess of thy longing for thy wife
and children, these it was that have brought thee to the
attainment of thy wish. Didst thou not love her to dis-
traction, thou hadst not thus adventured thyself, and
praised be God for thy safety ! Wherefore it behoves us
to further thy desire and help thee to thy quest, so thou
may st presently attain that thou seekest, if it be the will
of God the Most High. But know, O my son, that thy


2o6


wife is not here, but in the seventh of the Wac Islands,
and between us and it is seven months' journey, night and
day. From here we go to an island called the Land of
Birds, wherein, for the loud clamour of the birds and the

Mt£if)t flapping of their wings, one cannot hear other speak.

fclCCCbf. Therein we journey, night and day, eleven days, after
which we come to another land, called the Land of Wild
Beasts, where, for the roaring of the lions and howling of
wolves and the screaming of hyaenas and other beasts of
prey, we shall hear nothing ; and therein we travel twenty
days' journey. Then we come to a third country, called
the Land of Jinn, where, for the greatness of the crying
of the Jinn and the noise of their groaning and the
flaming of fires and the flight of sparks and smoke from
their mouths and their arrogance in blocking up the road
before us, our ears will be deafened and our eyes blinded,
so that we shall neither hear nor see, nor dare any look
behind him, or he perishes : but there the horseman bows
his head on his saddle-bow and raises it not for three days.
After this, we come to a vast mountain and a running river,
bordering on the Wac Islands, which are seven in number
and the extent whereof is a whole year's journey for a
diligent horseman. And thou must know, O my son, that
the ruler over us is a woman of these islands and that these
troops are all virgin girls.

On the bank of the river aforesaid is another mountain,
called Wac, and it is thus named by reason of a tree
[which grows there and] which bears fruits like human
heads. When the sun rises on them, the heads cry out all,
saying, "Wac! Wac! Glory be to the Creating King!"
And when we hear their crying, we know that the sun is
risen. In like manner, at sundown, the heads set up the
same cry, and so we know that the sun hath set. No man
may abide with us or win to us or tread our earth. More-
over, betwixt us and the abiding-place of the queen who


207


ruleth over us is a month's journey from this shore, all the
people whereof are under her hand, as are also the tribes
of the Jinn, Marids and Satans and warlocks, whose
number none knoweth save He who created them. Where-
fore, if thou be afraid, I will send with thee one who will
bring thee to the coast and embark thee on board a ship
that shall carry thee to thine own country. But if thou
be content to abide with us, I will not forbid thee and
thou shalt be with me [as thou wert] in mine eye, till thou
accomplish thy desire, so it please God the Most High.'

' O my lady,' answered Hassan, ' I will never leave thee
till I foregather with my wife or lose my life ! ' ' This is
a light matter,' rejoined she; 'be of good heart, for thou
shalt come to thy desire, God willing ; and needs must
I let the queen know of thee, that she may help thee to
attain thine object.' Hassan blessed her and kissed her
head and hands, thanking her for her exceeding kindness.
Then he set out with her, pondering the issue of his case
and the horrors of his strangerhood ; wherefore he fell
a-weeping and groaning and recited the following verses :

From out my loved one's land a zephyr blows ; for stress Of love thon

seest me dazed and passion's sheer excess.
The night of love-delight is as a brilliant moon And separation's day a

sombre night no less.
The parting from the loved a heavy sorrow is And eke the taking leave

of friends a sore distress.
There's not a faithful friend 'mongst men ; I'll not complain To any but

herself of her unrighteousness.
I cannot be consoled for you ; no censor base To solace can enforce my

heart itself address.
O thou unique in charms, my love's unique : O thou That fail'st of

match, my heart fails also for duresse.
Whoso pretends to love of thee and feareth blame, Blameworthy sure is

he and merits not success.

Then the old woman bade beat the drums for departure


208


and the army set out Hassan accompanied her, drowned
in the sea of solicitude and reciting verses, whilst she
strove to comfort him and exhorted him to patience ; but
he awoke not [from his melancholy] and paid no heed to
her exhortations. They fared on thus till they came to
the Land of Birds, and when they entered it, it seemed
to Hassan as if the world were overturned, for the exceed-
ing clamour. His head ached and his mind was dazed,
his eyes were blinded and his ears deaved, and he feared
with an exceeding fear and looked for nothing but death,
saying in himself, ' If this be the Land of Birds, how will
the Land of Beasts be ? ' But, when Shewahi saw him in
this plight, she laughed at him, saying, 4 O my son, if this
be thy case in the first island, how will it fare with thee,
when thou comest to the others ? '

So he humbled himself in prayer to God, beseeching
Him to succour him against that wherewithal He had
afflicted him and bring him to his wishes ; and they ceased
not going till they passed out of the Land of Birds and
traversing the Land of Beasts, came to the Land of Jinn,
which when Hassan saw, he was sore affrighted and
repented him of having entered it with them. But he
sought aid of God the Most High and fared on with them j
till they were quit of the Land of Jinn and came to the
river, on whose banks they halted and pitched their tents
at the foot of a vast and lofty mountain. Then they rested
and ate and drank and slept in security, for they were
come to their own country.

On the morrow the old woman set Hassan a settle of
alabaster, inlaid with pearls and jewels and nuggets of red
gold, by the river-side, and he sat down thereon, having
first bound his face with a chinband, that discovered
nought of him but his eyes. Then she let proclaim
among the troops that they should all assemble before her
tent and put off their clothes and go down into the stream


209


and wash ; and this she did to the intent that she might
show him all the girls, so haply his wife should be amongst
them and he know her. So the whole army assembled
before her and putting off their clothes, went down into
the stream, [company after company;] and Hassan
watched them washing and frolicking and making merry,
whilst they took no heed of him, deeming him to be of
the daughters of the kings. When he beheld them stripped
of their clothes, his yard rose on end, for that he saw
what was between their thighs, and that of all kinds, soft
and domed, plump and cushioned, large-lipped, perfects,
redundant and ample, 1 and their faces were as moons and
their hair as night upon day, for that they were of the
daughters of the kings.

When they were clean, they came up out of the water,
naked, as the moon on the night of her full, and the old
woman questioned Hassan of them, company by company,
if his wife were among them ; but, as often as she asked
him, he made answer, i She is not among these, O my ^Tt($)t
lady.' Last of all, there came up a damsel, attended OCtCbti
by half a score slave-girls and thirty waiting-women,
all high-bosomed maids. They all put off their clothes
and went down into the river, where the damsel fell to
carrying it with a high hand over her women, throwing
them down and ducking them. Presently, she came up
out of the water and sat down and they brought her
napkins of silk, embroidered with gold, with which she
dried herself. Then they brought her clothes and jewels
and ornaments of the handiwork of the Jinn, and she
donned them and rose and walked among the troops, she
and her maids. When Hassan saw her, his heart fluttered
and he said, ' Verily this girl is the likest of all folk to the
bird I saw in the lake atop of the palace of my sisters the

1 Perfect, redundant and ample, the names of three common Arabic
metres.

VOL. VII. 54


2IO


princesses, and she lorded it over her attendants even as
doth this one.' ' O Hassan/ said the old woman, ' is this
thy wife ? ' ' No, by thy life, O my lady,' replied he, ' this
is not my wife, nor ever in my life have I set eyes on her ;
neither among all the girls I have seen in these islands is
there the like of my wife nor her match for beauty and
grace and symmetry ! '

Then said Shewahi, ' Describe her to me and acquaint
me with all her attributes, that I may have her in my mind ;
for I know every girl in the islands, being commander of
the army of maids and governor over them ; wherefore,
if thou describe her to me, I shall know her and will con-
trive for thee to take her.' Quoth he, ' My wife is of
surpassing beauty, dulcet of speech and sweet of fashion,
as she were a bending branch. She hath a fair face, a
slender shape, smooth cheeks, high breasts, great liquid
black eyes, white teeth and soft red lips like coral. On
her right cheek is a mole and on her belly, under her
navel, is a sign ; her face shines as the round of the
moon, her waist is slight, her buttocks heavy, and the
water of her mouth healeth the sick, as it were . Kauther
or Selsebil.' 1 ' Give me some plainer account of her,'
said the old v/oman, 1 may God increase thee of passion
for her ! ' Quoth he, ' My wife hath a lovely face, oval
cheeks like twin roses, long neck and melting black eyes,
mouth like a seal of cornelian and flashing teeth, that
stand one in stead of cup and ewer. She is cast in the
mould of pleasantness and between her thighs is the
throne of the Khalifate, there is no such sanctuary among
the holy places ; as saith in its praise the poet :
The letters of that which hath made Me distraught are renowned among
men:

They are four, multiplied into five, Thereafter and six into tea, 8 8
1 Fountains of Paradise.

a Theclueto this logogriphliesinthe numerical value of the letters form-
ing the key- word ; ue.^x 5 = 20= <*3 and 6 x I o = 60 ■=*. (cunnus).


211


Then wept Hassan and chanted the following couplet :

O heart, if the beloved should play thee false in aught, Renounce Iciet

not, I rede thee, nor be thy love forgot.
Be patient ; thou shalt bury thine enemies ; God wot, He who makes

use of patience, it disappoints him not.

And this also :

It all thy days thou wouldst be safe from trouble and dismay, Despair

thou never neither be discouraged nor [too] gay.
Be patient and rejoice thou not nor mourn ; but, if by day Thou art

afflicted, " Have we not expanded ..,...?" look thou say. 1

Thereupon the old woman bowed her head awhile, then,
raising it, said, ' Glory be to God, the Mighty of Estate !
Indeed I am afflicted with thee, O Hassan ! Would I had
never known thee ! This woman, whom thou describest
to me as thy very wife, I know by thy description to be
none other than the eldest daughter of the Supreme King,
she who ruleth over all the Wac Islands. 2 So open thine
eyes and consider thine affair ; and if thou be asleep,
awake ; for, if this woman be indeed thy wife, it is im-
possible for thee ever to win to her, and though thou
wonnest to her, yet couldst thou not avail to her pos-
session, since the* distance between thee and her is as
that between earth and heaven. Wherefore, O my son,
return presently and cast not thyself into destruction and
me with thee ; for meseemeth thou hast no lot in her ;
so return whence thou earnest, lest our lives be lost' And
she feared for herself and for him.

1 i.e. repeat the chapter of the Koran commencing with these words,
"Have we not expanded unto thee thy breast and eased thee of thy

burden which galled thy back ? Verily, with difficulty is ease ! "

—Koran xciv. I, etc.

s The old woman seems to have made the same mistake as Hassan's
adopted sister (see supra, p. 1 54) in supposing his wife to have been the
eldest daughter of the Supreme King, when, in fact, she was the youngest
daughter, as appears by the sequel.


212

When he heard her words, he wept till he swooned
away and she sprinkled water on his face, till he came
to himself, when he continued to weep, so that he wet his
clothes with his tears, for the much trouble and chagrin
that betided him by reason of her words. And indeed he
despaired of life and said to the old woman, ' O my lady,
and how shall I turn back, after having won hither?
Verily, I thought not thou wouldst forsake me nor fail
of the accomplishment of my desire, especially as thou
art the chief of the army of girls.' * O my son,' answered
Shewahi, ' I doubted not but thy wife was a maid of the
maids, and had I known that she was the king's daughter,
I had not suffered thee to come hither nor had I shown
thee [the girls], for all the love I bear thee. But now,

my son, thou hast seen all the girls naked ; so tell me
which of them pleaseth thee and I will give her to thee, in
lieu of thy wife, and do thou put it that thy wife and
children are dead and take her and return to thine own
country in safety, ere thou fall into the king's hand and

1 have, no means of delivering thee. I conjure thee 5
by Allah, hearken to me. Choose thyself one of these
damsels, in the stead of yonder woman, and return pre-
sently to thy country in safety and cause me not quaff the
cup of thine anguish. For, by Allah, thou hast cast thy-
self into sore affliction and grievous peril, wherefrom none
may avail to deliver thee ! ' But Hassan bowed his head
and wept sore and recited these verses :

( Reproach me not, ' to those who censured me I gaid | ' For sure my lids

for tears and nought but tears were made.'
They fill my eyes and thence o'erflow my cheeks, for those I cherish have

my love with cruelty repaid.
My body's wasted sore, yet I my madness love : Leave me to love and

cease my passion to upbraid.
Beloved mine, desire is sore on me for you. : Will ye not pity one for love

of you decayed ?


213


Ye swore me constancy and truth, yet cruelly Forsook me and our lows

and friendship thus betrayed.
When on the parting day ye went, abjection's cup, For rigour and

despite, unto my lips was laid.
Wherefore, my heart, dissolve with longing for their sight And, O mine

eyes, rain tears, unsparing and unstayed ! "Jg { jrfjj

tab til

Then he wept till he swooned away and the old woman
sprinkled water on him till he revived, when she said to
him, 6 O my son, I have no shift left ; for, if I carry thee
to the city, thy life is lost and mine also ; for, when the
queen cometh to know of this, she will blame me for
admitting thee into her islands, to which none of the
sons of Adam hath access, and will slay me for bringing
thee with me and for suffering thee to look upon these
virgins, whom no male hath touched, neither hath husband
come near them.' And Hassan swore that he had never
looked on them with an evil eye. ' O my son,' continued
she, ' hearken to me and return to thy country and I will
give thee a girl of the best of them, beside wealth and
treasures and things of price, such as shall suffice thee
for all the women in the world. Give ear, then, to my
words and return presently and imperil not thyself; in-
deed, I give thee good counsel.' But he wept and rubbed
his cheeks against her feet, saying, ' O my lady and
mistress and solace of mine eyes, how can I turn back
without the sight of those I desire, now that I have
made my way hither and come near to the abode of the
beloved, hoping presently for meeting, so haply there may
be for me a portion in reunion?' And he recited the
following verses :

Be kind, O kings of grace, to one who's thrali to eyes And eyelids thai

have ta'en Chosioes' realm to prize.
Ye overpass the scent of musk in fragrancy And eke your beauty bright

the full-blown rose outvies.


214


A Eephyi of delight breathes round your camping-place And scattering
perfume thence, abroad the East wind hies.

censor, cease to blame and counsel me ; indeed, Thou profferest advice

on right unwelcome wise.
What ails thee to upbraid my passion, seeing thou No knowledge hast

thereof nor whence it doth arise ?
Eyes languorous and soft have captivated me And cast me into love,

perforce and by surprise.

1 pour forth tears galore what while I string my rhymes ; Ye are the

theme whereon I prose and poetise.
Red cheeks have all consumed my entrails, and my heart Bums, as on

blazing coals, with fire that never dies.
If this my speech I leave, tell me, with what discourse Shall I my breast

dilate and stay my tears and sighs ?
I'm weary of my life for passion for the fair ; But God belike shall bring

relief, with Whom it lies.

Then the old woman was moved to pity for him and
coming up to him, comforted him, saying, 1 Be of good
heart and cheerful eye and put away trouble from thy
thought, for, by Allah, I will venture myself with thee,
till thou attain thy desire or death overtake me ! ' With
this, Hassan's heart was comforted and his bosom dilated
and he sat talking with the old woman till the end of the
day, when the girls dispersed, some entering their man-
sions in the city and others passing the night in the
tents.

Then the old woman carried him into the city and
lodged him in a place apart, lest any should come to
know of him and tell the queen of him and she should
kill him and her who had brought him thither. More-
over, she served him herself and strove to put him in fear
of the mischief of the Supreme King, his wife's father ;
whilst he wept before her and said, ' O my lady, I choose
death for myself and loathe the world, if I foregather not
with my wife and children : I have set my life on the
venture and will either attain my wish or die.' So the
•old woman fell to pondering the means of bringing him


215


and his wife together and casting about how to do in this
poor wretch's case, who had cast himself into destruction
and would not be diverted from his purpose by fear or
aught else ; for, indeed, he recked not of his life and the
byword saith, 'A man in love hcarkeneth not to the
speech of him who is heart-free.'

Now the name of the queen of the island in which they
were was Nour el Huda, eldest daughter of the Supreme
King, ruler over the islands and all the lands of Wac, and
she had six virgin sisters, abiding with their father, whose
court was in the chief city of the land of Wac. The old
woman had a claim on her for favour, for that she had
reared all the king's daughters and had authority over
them all and was high in honour and consideration with
them and with the king. So, when she saw Hassan on
fire with yearning after his wife and children, she betook
herself to the palace and going in to the queen, kissed the
earth before her ; whereupon Nour el Huda rose to her
and embracing her, seated her by her side and asked her
of her journey. ' By Allah, O my lady,' answered she, 'it
was a blessed journey and I have brought thee a present,
which I will lay before thee. Moreover, O my daughter,
O queen of the age and the time, I have an occasion to
thee and I would fain discover it to thee, that thou mayst
help me to accomplish it, and but for my confidence that
thou wilt not gainsay me therein, I would not expose it to
thee.' 'And what is thine occasion?' asked the queen.
' Expound it to me, and I will accomplish it to thee, for I
and my kingdom and troops are all at thy commandment
and disposition.'

Therewithal the old woman shook, as the reed shakes
on a day of stormy wind, and saying in herself, ' O
Protector, protect me from the queen's mischief!' fell
down before her and acquainted her with Hassan's case,
saying, s Q my lady, a man, who had hidden himself undej


2l6


my settle on the sea-shore, besought me of protection ; so
I took him under my safeguard and carried him with rne
among the army of women, armed and accoutred so that
none might know him, and brought him into the city ; and
indeed I have striven to fear him with thy mischief, giving
him to know of thy prowess and power ; but, as often as
I threaten him, he weeps and recites verses and says,
*' Needs must I regain my wife and children or die, and
I will not return to my country without them." And
indeed he hath adventured himself and won to the Islands
of Wac, and never in my life saw I mortal stouter of heart

^ftC$)t than he or doughtier of courage, save that passion hath

btCCtX. gotten the mastery of him to the utmost.'

When Nour el Huda heard this, she was exceeding
wroth with her and bowed her head awhile. Then,
raising it, she looked at Shewahi and said to her, ' O
ill-omened old woman, art thou come to such a pass of
lewdness that thou earnest males with thee into the Wac
Islands and bringest them in to me, unfearing of my
danger? Who hath foregone thee with this fashion, that
thou shouldst do thus? By the head of the king, but for
thy claim on me for fosterage and service, I would forth-
with put both him and thee to the foulest of deaths, that
travellers might take warning by thee, O accursed woman,
lest any other do the like of this outrageous deed of thine,
whereunto none hath dared hitherto ! But go and bring
him hither forthright, that I may see him j or I will strike
off thy head, O accursed one.'

So the old woman went out from her, confounded, know-
ing not whither she went and saying, { All this calamity
hath God caused betide me from this queen because of
Hassan ! ' and going in to the latter, said to him, ' Come,
speak with the queen, O thou whose last hour is at hand S !
So he rose and went with her, whilst his tongue ceased
not to call upon God the Most High and say, 6 O my God s


21/


be gracious to me in Thy judgments and deliver me from
[this] Thine affliction ! ' And Shewahi charged him by
the way how he should speak with the queen. When he
stood before Nour el Huda, he found her veiled with the
chinband; so he kissed the earth before her and saluted
her, reciting the following verses :

May f k>d thy glory cause in gladness to endure And that which unto thee

He gives to thee secure !
In glory and in power th' Almighty thee increase And with His aid

against thine enemies ensure !

Then Nour el Huda bade the old woman question hira
before her, that she might hear his answers : so she said
to him, 'The queen returns thy greeting and asks thee
what is thy name and that of thy country, and what are
the names of thy wife and children, on whose account
thou art come hither ? ' 1 queen of the age and the
day and peerless jewel of the epoch and the time,' an-
swered he, (and indeed he had made firm his heart and
providence aided him,) 'my name is Hassan, the fulfilled
of sorrow, and my native city is Bassora. I know not the
name of my wife, but my children's names are Mensour and
Nasir.'

When the queen heard his reply, she bespoke him
herself and said, 'And whence took she her children?'
' O queen,' answered he, ' she took them from the city of
Baghdad and the palace of the Khalifate.' Quoth Nour
el Huda, 'And did she say nought to thee, whenas she
flew away?' And he replied, ' Yes ; she said to my mother,
" When thy son cometh and the days of separation are
long upon him and he craveth meeting with me and re-
union and the winds of love and longing agitate him, let
him come to me in the Islands of Wac." ' Whereupon
the queen shook her head and said to him, 'Except she
desired thee and yearned for reunion with thee, she had


215


not said this to thy mother, neither had she bidden thee
to her country nor acquainted thee with her abiding-place. 1
'O mistress of kings and asylum of rich and poor,' rejoined
Hassan, ' I have told thee what happened and have con-
cealed nought thereof, and I appeal to God and to thee
for succour; wherefore oppress me not, but have com-
passion on me and earn recompense and requital for me
[from God] by aiding me to regain my wife and children.
Grant me my urgent need and solace mine eyes with my
children and help me to the sight of them.' Then he wept
and lamented and recited the following verses :

What while the turtle-dove complains, I'll praise thee with my might,
Albeit I should fail of that which is thy due and right.

For, lo, I wallowed not in joys of old, but now I find Thee to have been
the cause and spring of all my past delight.

The queen shook her head and bowed it in thought a
great while ; then, raising it, she said to Hassan (and
indeed she was wroth), ' 1 have compassion on thee and
am resolved to show thee all the girls in the city and in
the provinces of my island ; and if thou know thy wife, I
will deliver her to thee ; but, if thou know her not and
know not her place, I will put thee to death and crucify
thee over the old woman's door.' ' I accept this from
thee, O queen of the age,' answered Hassan, 'and am
content to submit to this thy condition. There is no
power and no virtue but in God the Most High, the
Supreme i ' And he recited the following verses :

Ye've roused my heart to love and yet unmoved yourselves remain ; Ye've

doomed my wounded lids to wake and sleep, whilst I complain.
Ye swore to me that ye would keep your plighted faith with me ; But s

when my heart was yours, you broke the oath that you had ta'en.
I loved you as a child, indeed, unknowing what love was ; Wherefore

'twere surely foul unright, if I of you be slain.
Fear ye not God and will ye slay a lover who anights Watches the star%

whilst all but he are bound in slumber's chain ?


219


When I am dead, I prithee write, 'fore Allah, on my tomb, 4 A slave c!

passion lieth here, who died of love in vain.'
It may be one, whom love like me hath smitten, passing by, Shall see

my tomb and to salute and pity me be fain.

Then Queen Nour el Huda commanded that all the
girls in the city should come up to the palace and pass
in review before Hassan and bade Shewahi go down and
bring them up herself. So all the maidens in the city
presented themselves before the queen, who caused them
go in to Hassan, hundred by hundred, till there was no
girl left in the place, but she had shown her to him ; but
he saw not his wife amongst them. Then said she to
him, ' Seest thou her amongst these ? ' And he answered s
saying, ' By thy life, O queen, she is not amongst them.'

With this she was sore enraged against him and said
to the old woman, f Go in and bring out all who are in
the palace and show them to him.' So she showed him
all the girls in the palace, but he saw not his wife among
them and said to the queen, ' As thy head liveth, O queen,
she is not among these.' Whereat the queen was wroth
and cried out to those about her, saying, ' Take him and
drag him along, face to ground, and cut off his head, lest
any adventure himself after him and intrude upon us in
our country and tread the soil of our islands and spy out
our estate.' So they threw him down on his face and
covering his eyes with his skirt, stood at his head with
drawn swords, awaiting permission [to strike].

But Shewahi came forward and kissing the earth before
the queen, took her skirt and laid it on her head, saying,
'O queen, by the claim I have on thee for fosterage, be
not hasty with him, more by token of thy knowledge
that this poor wretch is a stranger, who hath adventured
himself and suffered perils and hardships, such as none
ever suffered before him, and God preserved him from
death s for that his life was ordained to be long. He


220


heard of thy justice and entered thy city and sanctuary;
wherefore, if thou put him to death, the report- will be
noised abroad of thee, by means of the travellers, that
thou hatest strangers and slayest them. la any case he
is at thy mercy and the slain of thy sword, if his wife be
not found in thy dominions ; and whensoever thou desirest
his presence, I can bring him back to thee. And indeed
I took him not under my protection but of my confidence
in thy generosity, through my claim on thee for fosterage,
so that I engaged to him that thou wouldst bring him to
his desire, of my knowledge of thy justice and kindness
of heart. But for this, I had not brought him into thy
kingdom; for I said to myself, "The queen will take
pleasure in looking upon him and hearing his verses and
his sweet and eloquent discourse, like strung pearls."
Moreover, he hath entered our land and eaten of our
INflC^t y i ctua l '} wherefore it behoveth us to give him his due,
t3££CX. the more that I promised to bring him in company with
thee; and thou knowest that parting is grievous and
separation slaughter, especially separation from children.
Now he hath seen all our women, save only thyself; so
do thou show him thy face.'

The queen smiled and said, 'How can he be my
husband and have had children by me, that I should
show him my face ? ' Then she made them bring Hassan
before her and unveiled her face, which when he saw, he
gave a great cry and fell down in a swoon. The old
woman ceased not to tend him, till he came to himself
and recited the following verses :

O zephyr from the land of Irak that dost stray And blowest to the land

of those ' Wac ! Wac ! ' that say,
Carry my loved ones news of me and say I die Of passion's bitter food.

that's sour of savour aye.
© darlings of my love, show favour and relent ! My heart for parting';.

pains is melted all away„


221


Then he rose and looking on the queen's face, cried oat
with a great cry, for stress whereof the palace was like to
fall on those who were therein. Then he swooned away
again and the old woman tended him till he revived, when
she asked him what ailed him and he said, ' This queen is
either my wife or else the likest of all folk to her.' Quoth tNftght
Nour el Huda to the old woman, 1 Out on the, O nurse ! oTECXi
This stranger is either mad or disordered in mind, for he
stareth me in the face with wide eyes and saith I am his
wife.' * O queen,' answered Shewahi, ' indeed he is ex-
cusable ; so blame him not, for the proverb says, "There
is no remedy for the sick of love, and he and the madman
are alike." And Hassan wept sore and recited the
following veses :

I see their traces and pine for longing pain $ My tears rain down on thg

empty dwelling-place ;
And I pray to God, who willed that we should part, Once more to grant

us reunion of His grace.

Then said he to the queen, ' By Allah, thou art not my
wife, but thou art the likest of all folks to her ! '

Nour el Huda laughed till she fell backward and turned
over on her side. Then said she to him, ' O my friend,
take thy time and observe me attentively : answer me at
thy leisure what I shall ask thee and put away from thee
madness and confusion and perplexity, for relief is at
hand.' 1 O mistress of kings and refuge of all, rich and
poor,' answered Hassan, ' when I looked on thee, I was
distracted, seeing thee to be either my wife or the likest
of all folk to her ; but now ask me what thou wilt.' Quoth
she 8 ' What is it in thy wife that resembles me ? ' 1 O my
lady s ' replied he, 1 all that is in thee of beauty and elegance
and amorous grace, such as the symmetry of thy shape and
the sweetness of thy speech and the redness of thy cheeks
and thy swelling breasts and so forth, resembleth her and


222


thou art her very self in thy speech and the fairness of thy
favour and the brilliancy of thy forehead.'

When the queen heard this, she smiled and gloried in
her beauty and grace and her cheeks reddened and hei
eyes wantoned; then she turned to Shewahi and said to
her, ' O my mother, carry him back to the place where
he was with thee and tend him thyself, till I examine into
his affair ; for, if he be indeed a man of worth and mindful
of friendship and love and affection, it behoveth us to help
him to his desire, more by token that he hath taken up
his abode in our country and eaten of our victual, to say
nought of the hardships of travel he hath suffered and the
horrors and perils he hath undergone. But, when thou
hast brought him to thy house, commend him to thy
servants' care and return to me in all haste; and God
willing, all shall be well.'

So Shewahi carried him back to her lodging and charged
her servants and women wait upon him and bring him all
he needed nor fail in that which was his due. Then she
returned to Nour el Huda, who bade her don her arms
and set out, taking with her a thousand stout horsemen,
for the city of the Supreme King, her father, there to
alight at the abode of her youngest sister, Menar es Sena,
and say to her, ' Clothe thy two sons in the coats of mail
that their aunt hath made them and send them to her;
for she longeth for them.' Moreover the queen charged
her keep Hassan's affair secret and say to Meriar es Sena,
4 Thy sister inviteth thee to visit her.'

' Then/ continued she, ' take the children and bring
them to me in haste and let her follow at her leisure.
Do thou come by a road other than hers and journey
night and day and beware of discovering this matter to any.
And I swear by all possible oaths that, if my sister prove
to be his wife and it appear that her children are his, I will
HfCl!}t not hinder him from taking her and them and departing


223

with them to his own country, but will aid him thereto
If she be not his wife, I will slay him ; but it the children
resemble him, we will believe him. For, my mother,
if my thought tell me true, my sister Menar es Sena is
his wife, seeing that these traits are her traits and the attri-
butes of surpassing beauty and excelling grace, of which he
spoke, are found in none except my sisters and especially
the youngest ; but God alone is All- knowing ! '

The old woman put faith in her words, knowing not
what she purposed in herself; so she kissed her hand and
returning to Hassan, told him what the queen had said,
whereat he was transported for joy and coming up to her,
kissed her head. ' O my son,' said she, ' kiss not my head,
but my mouth, and be it by way of guerdon for thy
salvation. Be of good heart and cheerful eye and grudge
not to kiss my mouth, for I was the means of thy fore-
gathering with her. So take comfort and be of good
cheer nor be thy heart other than light, for, God willing,
thy desire shall be accomplished at my hand.' So saying,
she bade him farewell and departed, whilst he recited the
following verses :

My witnesses unto the love of thee are four ; Two witnesses each case

requireth, and no more.
A fluttering heart they are and limbs for aye a-quake, Tongue knotted

in its speech and body wasted sore.

And these also :

Two things there are, whereover if eyes wept tear on tear Of blood, till

they for weeping were like to disappear,
They never could fulfil them the tithe of all their due, The prime of

youth and sev'rance from friends and lovers dear.

Then the old woman armed herself and taking with her
a thousand armed horsemen, set out and journeyed till she
came to the island and the city where dwelt the princess
Menar es Sena and between which and that of her sister


224


Nour el Huda was three days' journey. Now the king had
seven daughters, all sisters-gerraan by one mother and
father except the youngest: the eldest was called Nour el
Huda, the second Nejra es Sebah, the third Shems ez Zuha,
the fourth Shejeret et Durr, the fifth Cout el Culoub, the
sixth Sheref el Benat and the youngest Menar es Sena,
Hassan's wife, who was their sister by the father's side
only. When Shewahi reached the city, she went in to
the princess Menar es Sena and saluting her, gave her
her sister's greeting and acquainted her with the latter's
longing for her and her children and that she reproached
her lor not visiting her. Quoth Menar es Sena, 'Verily, I
am beholden to my sister and have failed of my duty to
her in not visiting her, but I will do so now.' Then she
bade pitch her tents without the city and took with her a
suitable present for her sister.

Presently, the king her father looked out of the window
of his palace, and seeing the tents pitched by the road,
enquired of them, and they said to him, 4 The princess
Menar es Sena hath pitched her tents there, being minded
to visit her sister Queen Nour el Huda.' When the king
heard this, he equipped troops to escort her to her sister
and brought out to her from his treasuries meat and drink
and treasure and jewels and rarities, that beggar descrip-
tion. Presently the old woman again presented herself
and kissed the earth before the princess, who said to her,
' Hast thou any need, O my mother ? ' Quoth Shewahi,
' Thy sister, Queen Nour el Huda, biddeth thee clothe
thy sons in the two coats of mail which she made for
them and send them to her by me, and I will take them
and forego thee with them and be the harbinger of thy
coming to her.'

When the princess heard these her words, her colour
changed and she bowed her head a long while, aftei
which she shook it and looking up, said to the old


225


woman, ' O my mother, when thou namest my children,

my mind is troubled and my heart fluttereth; for, from

the time of their birth, none, neither genie nor man, male

nor female, hath looked on their faces, and I am jealous

for them of the soft-blowing zephyr.' 'What words are

these, O my lady ? ' replied the old woman. 1 Dost thou

fear for them from thy sister? God keep thy reason ! jWft$)t

Thou mayst not cross the queen in this thing, for she tttCOCtti

would be wroth with thee. Indeed, O my lady, the

children are young, and thou art excusable in fearing for

them, for those that love are apt to deem evil : but, O my

daughter, thou knowest my tenderness and solicitude over

thee and thy children, for indeed I reared thee before

them. I will take them and make my cheek their pillow

and open my heart and set them within, nor is it needful

to commend them to my care in the like of this case ; so

be of good heart and cheerful eye and send them to her,

for, at the most, I shall but forego thee with them a day or

two.' And she went on to urge her, till she gave way,

fearing her sister's anger and knowing not what lurked for

her in the future, and consented to send them with the

old woman.

So she called them and bathed them and equipped them
and changed their apparel. Then she clad them in the
two coats of mail and delivered them to Shewahi, who
took them and sped on with them like a bird, by another
road than that by which their mother should travel, even
as the queen had charged her ; nor did she cease to fare
on with all diligence, being fearful for them, till she came
in sight of their aunt's city, when she crossed the river
and entering the town, carried them in to Nour el Huda.
The queen rejoiced at their sight and embraced them and
pressed them to her bosom ; after which she seated them,
one on each knee, and said to the old woman, ' Now fetch
me Hassan, for I have granted him my safeguard and

VOL. VII. 15


226


have spared him from my sabre and he hath sought refuge
in my house and taken up his abode in my courts, after
having endured hardships and horrors and come through
all manner of mortal perils, each more terrible than the
other ; yet hitherto is he not safe from drinking the cup
Might of death and from the cutting off of his breath.' ' If I
ofXCX'ib. bring him to thee,' replied Shewahi, 4 wilt thou reunite
him with these his children ? Or, if they prove not his,
wilt thou pardon him and restore him to his own country?'

The queen was exceeding wroth at her words and said
to her, 'Out on thee, O ill-omened old woman! How
long wilt thou play us false in the matter of this stranger,
who hath dared [to intrude] upon us and hath lifted our
veil and pried into our conditions ? Thinkest thou that
he shall come to our land and look upon our faces and
soil our honours and after return in safety to his own
country and expose our affairs to his people, wherefore
our report will be bruited abroad among all the kings of
the quarters of the earth and the merchants will bear
tidings of us in every direction, saying, " A mortal entered
the Wac Islands and traversed the land of the Jinn and
the lands of the Wild Beasts and the Birds and set foot
in the country of the warlocks and the enchanters and
returned in safety ? " This shall never be ; and I swear by
Him who created the heavens and builded them, Him
who spread out the earth and levelled it, who made all
creatures and numbered them, that, if they be not his
children, I will assuredly slay him and strike off his head
with my own hand 1 '

Then she cried out at the old woman, who fell down
for fear ; and she said to the chamberlain, ' Take twenty
slaves and go with this old woman and fetch me in haste
the youth who is in her house.' So they dragged Shewahi
along, pale and trembling in every nerve, till they came
I© her house, where she went in to Hassan, who rose to


227


her and kissed her hands and saluted her. She returned
nut his greeting, but said to him, ' Corne ; speak with
the queen. Did I not forbid thee from all this, saying,
" Return presently to thine own country and I will give thee
that to which no mortal may avail ? " But thou wouldst
not obey me nor hearken to my words, but rejectedst my
counsel and chosest to bring destruction on thyself and
me. Up, then, and take that which thou hast chosen;
for death is at hand. Arise : speak with yonder wicked
tyrannical baggage.' So Hassan arose, broken-spirited,
mournful-hearted and fearful, despairing of life and saying,
' O Preserver, preserve Thou me ! O my God, be gracious
to me in that which Thou hast decreed to me of Thine
affliction and protect me, O Thou the most merciful of
those that show mercy ! ' Then he followed the old
woman and the chamberlain and the guards to the queen's
presence, where he found his two sons Nasir and Mensour
sitting in her lap, whilst she played and made merry with
them. As soon as his eyes fell on them, he knew them
and giving a great cry, fell down in a swoon for excess
of joy at their sight. They also knew him and natural !Kfa$t
affection moved them, so that they freed themselves from ilCCCCfc
the queen's lap and fell upon Hassan, and God (to whom
belong might and majesty) made them speak and say to
him, ' O our father 1 ' Whereupon the old woman and all
who were present wept for pity and tenderness over them
and said, ' Praised be God, who hath reunited you with
your father ! ' Presently, Hassan came to himself and
embracing his children, wept till he fainted again, and
when he revived, he recited the following verses :

Now, by your life, my heart may not 'gainst severance endure, Though

certain ruin union were and sure discomfiture S
* To-morrow,' quoth your wraith to me, 'reunion shall betide And

who to-morrow, 'spite the foe 5 shall life to me ensure?


22§


Nay, since your parting-day, my lords, I swear it by your life, No sweet

of life delighteth me ; all pleasance I abjure ;
And if God order that I die for love of you, I die Chiefest of all the

martyrs slain of love unblent and pure.
Within my heart a fawn hath made her grazing-stead, whose form,

Like sleep, hath fled mine eyes and nought can back to me allure.
If she in lists of law deny the shedding of my blood, Lo, in her cheeks

against herself it beareth witness sure.

When Nour el Huda was certified that the little ones
were indeed Hassan's children and that her sister, the
princess Menar es Sena, was his wife, of whom he was
come in quest, she was beyond measure enraged against
Mfoht her and railed at Hassan and reviled him and kicked him
§££CXbf. in the breast, so that he fell on his back in a swoon.
Then she cried out at him, saying, ' Arise, fly for thy life J
But that I swore no evil should betide thee from me, if
thy story proved true, I would slay thee with mine own
hand forthright ! ' And she cried out at the old woman,
who fell on her face for fear, and said to her, ' By Allah,
but that I am loath to break the oath that I swore, I
would put both thee and him to death after the foulest
fashion ! ' [Then, turning to Hassan,] ' Arise,' [added
she,] 'go out from before me in safety and return to
thine own country, for I swear by my fortune, if evef
mine eye behold thee or if any bring thee in to me after
this, I will smite off thy head and that of whoso bringeth
thee ! ' Then she cried out to her officers, saying, ' Put
him out from before me ! ' So they put him out ; and
when he came to himself, he recited the following verses :

You're far away, yet to my thought you're nearest of all folk { Yau'ws
absent, yet within my heart for evermore you dwell.

By Allah, ne'er have I inclined to other than to you S I've borne with
patience the unright oi fortune foul and fell.

My nights in love-longing for you for ever pass and end, And m ifflf
heart a flame there is and raging fires of hell


229


Ueve^anL-e I ne'er could brook an hour ; so how, now months have
passed O'er me estranged from her I love, can I my sufferings tell?

Jealous of every lightest breeze that blew on thee was I, Exceeding
jealous, yea, of aught the tender fair befell.

Then he once more fell down in a swoon, and when he
came, to himself, he found himself without the palace,
whither they had dragged him on his face. (Now this
was grievous to Shewahi ; but she dared not remonstrate
with the queen by reason of the violence of her wrath.)
So he rose, stumbling in his skirts and hardly crediting
his escape from Nour el Huda, and went forth, distracted
and knowing not whither to go. The world, for all its
wideness, was straitened upon him and he found none to
comfort him nor any to whom he might resort for counsel
or refuge ; wherefore he gave himself up for lost, for that
he availed not to journey [to his own country] and knew
none to travel with him, neither knew he the way [thither]
nor might pass through the Valley of Jinn and the Land
of Beasts and the Island of Birds. So he bewept himself,
till he fainted, and when he revived, he bethought him of
his children and his wife and of that which might befall
her with her sister, repenting him of having come to those
parts and hearkened to none, and recited the following
verses :

Let mine eyes weep for loss of her I love, with tears like rain : Rare s$

my solace and my woes increase on me amain.
The cup of severance unmixt I've drunken to the dregs. Who shaiS

avail the loss of friends and dear ones to sustain ?
Ye spread the carpet of reproach 'twixt me and you j ah when, Q carpet

of reproach, wilt thou be folded up again ?
I wake ; ye sleep. If ye pretend that I've forgot your love, Lo, I've

forgotten to forget, and solace all is vain.
Indeed, my heart is racked with love and longing for your sight And

you the only leaches are can heal me of my pain.
See ye not what is fall'n on me through your abandonment ? I am abases!

to high and low, because of your disdain.


230


Fain would I hide my love for you: longing discovers it, For burnt and

seared with passion's fires are all my heart and brain.
Have ruth on me, compassionate my case, for still to keep Our plighted

faith in secrecy and trust I have been fain.
Will fortune reunite me aye with you, my heart's desire, You unto whom

my soul cleaves still, bound fast with many a chain ?
Mr entrails ulcerated are with separation's pangs: Would God with

tidings from your camp to favour us you'd deign !

Then he went on, till he came without the city, where
he found the river and fared on along its bank, knowing
not whither he went

To return to his wife, Menar es Sena. As she was about
to set out, on the second day after the departure of the
old woman with her children, there came in to her one of
tH"fght the king her father's chamberlains and kissed the earth
tttCCXbu. before her, saying, ' O princess, the king thy father salutes
thee and bids thee to him.' So she rose and accompanied
the chamberlain to her father, who made her sit by his
side on the couch, and said to her, ' O my daughter, know
that I have had a dream this night, which maketh me fear
for thee and that long sorrow will betide thee from this
thy journey.' 'How so, O my father,' asked she, 'and
what didst thou see in thy dream ? ' Quoth he, ' I dreamt
that I entered a hidden treasure, wherein was great store
of jewels and jacinths and other riches ; but meseemed
nought pleased of all this me save seven beazels, which
were the finest things there. I chose out one of the seven
jewels, for it was the smallest and finest and most lustrous
of them and its beauty pleased me; so I took it in my
hand and went forth. When I came without the door of
the treasure, I opened my hand and turned over the jewel,
rejoicing, when, behold, there swooped down on me out
of the sky a strange bird from a far land (for it was not
of the birds of our country), and snatching it from my
hand, returned with it whence it came. Whereupon grief


231


and concern and vexation overcame me and exceeding
chagrin, which troubled me so that I awoke, mourning
and lamenting for the loss of the jewel. So I summoned
the interpreters and expounders of dreams and related to
them my dream, and they said to me, " Thou hast seven
daughters, the youngest of whom thou wilt lose, and she
will be taken from thee perforce, without thy consent."
Now thou art the youngest and dearest of my daughters
and the most loving of them to me, and thou art about
to journey to thy sister, and I know not what may befall
thee from her; so go thou not, but return to thy palace."

When the princess heard her father's words, her heart
fluttered and she feared for her children and bent her
head awhile. Then she raised it and said to him, 1
King, Queen Nour el Huda hath made ready for me an
entertainment and looks for my coming to her, hour by hour.
She hath not seen me these four years and if I delay to
visit her, she will be wroth with me. The most of my
stay with her will be a month and then I will return to
thee. Besides, who is there can travel our land and
make his way to the Wac Islands ? Who can avail to
reach the White Country and the Black Mountain and
come to the Land of Camphor and the Castle of Crystal,
and how shall he traverse the Island of Birds and the
Land of Beasts and the Valley of Jinn and enter our
islands? If any stranger came hither, he would be
drowned in the seas of destruction : so be of good heart
and cheerful eye concerning my journey ; for- none may
avail to tread our earth.' And she ceased not to
persuade him, till he gave her leave to go and bade a^(gf^|
thousand horse escort her to the river and abide there, t!C££Xfa£ti
till she entered her sister's city and palace [and returned
to them], when they should take her and carry her back
to him. Moreover, he charged her sojourn with her
sister two days [only] and return to him in haste ; and


232


ahe answered, 'I hear and obey.' Then she went forth
and he with her and bade her farewell.

Now his words had sunken deep into her heart and she
feared for her children ; but it availeth not to fortify one-
self by caretaking against the assaults of destiny. So she
set out and fared on diligently three days, till she came
to the river and pitched her tents on its banks. Then she
crossed the stream, with some of her officers and attend-
ants, and going up to the city and the palace, went in to
Queen Nour el Huda, with whom she found her children,
and they were weeping and crying out, ' O our father ! '
At this, the tears ran from her eyes and she wept and
strained them to her bosom, saying, ' What put you in
mind of your father at this time? Would the hour had
never been, in which I left him ! If I knew him to be
in the house of the world, I would carry you to him.'
Then she bemoaned herself and her husband and her
children's weeping and recited these verses :

Distance despite, beloved mine, and inhumanity, I turn to you with

yearning love, wherever you may be.
Mine eyes towards your country turn and all my heart bewails The days

of union, when in love and peace foregathered we.
How many a night in mutual love, unstirred by doubt, we spent, What

while caresses and fair faith delighted you and me !

When her sister saw her press her children to her
bosom, saying, 'It is I who have wrought thus with
myself and my children and have ruined my own house ! '
she saluted her not, but said to her, 'O harlot, whence
hadst thou these children? Hast thou married without
thy father's knowledge or hast thou committed fornica-
tion? If thou have played the whore, it behoves that
thou be exemplarily punished ; and if thou have married
without our knowledge, why didst thou leave thy husband
■JCtCrfjt and sever thy children from their father and bring them
iJCCCXtX. hither? Thou hast hidden thy children from us. Thinkesl


233


thou we know not of this ? God the Most High, He who
knoweth the secret things, hath made known to us thy
case and discovered thy shame.'

Then she bade her guards seize her and bind her hands
behind her and shackle her with shackles of iron. So
they did as she commanded and she beat her grievously,
that her skin was torn, and crucified her by the hair ; after
which she cast her in prison and wrote the king her father
a letter acquainting him with her case and saying, ' There
hath appeared in our country a man, a mortal, by name
Hassan, and our sister Menar es Sena avoucheth that she
is lawfully married to him and hath by him two sons,
whom she hath hidden from us and thee; nor did she
discover aught of herself till there came to us this man
and informed us that he married her and she abode with
him a long while; after which she took her children and
departed, without his knowledge, after bidding his mother
tell her son, whenas longing betided him, to come to her
in the Wac Islands. So we laid hands on the man and
sent the old woman Shewahi to fetch her and her children,
enjoining her to bring us the children in advance of her.
And she did so, whilst Menar es Sena equipped herself,
and set out to visit me.

When the children were come, I sent for Hassan, and
he knew them and they him ; wherefore I was certified
that they were indeed his children and that she was his
wife and that his story was true and he was not to blame,
but that the blame and disgrace rested with my sister.
Now I feared the soiling of our honour before the people
of our islands ; so, when this lewd traitress came in to me,
I was incensed against her and beat her grievously and
crucified her by the hair and cast her into prison. Be-
hold, I have acquainted thee with her case and it is thine
to command, and that thou orderest us, we will do. Thou
knowest that in this affair is dishonour and disgrace to us


234


and to thee, and belike the people of the islands will
hear of it, and we shall become a byword amongst them ;
wherefore it befits that thou return us an answer with
speed.'

Then she delivered the letter to a courier and he carried
it to the king, who, when he read it, was exceeding wroth
with his daughter Menar es Sena and wrote to Nour el
Huda, saying, 'I commit her case to thee and give thee
power over her life ; so, if the thing be as thou sayest, put
her to death, without consulting me.' When the queen
received her father's letter, she sent for Menar es Sena
and they brought her, drowned in her blood and pinioned
with her hair, fettered with heavy shackles of iron and
clad in hair-cloth; and she stood before her, abject and
cast down. When she saw herself in this condition of
humiliation and exceeding abasement, she called to mind
her former high estate and wept sore and recited the
following verses :

O Lord, my foes do cast about to slay me and conceive I cannot anywise

escape from out the snares they weave.
But, lo, in Thee I put my trust, their works to bring to nought ; For

Thou the fearful's refuge art, the hope of those that grieve.

Then she wept, till she fell down in a swoon, and
presently coming to herself, repeated the following verses :

Troubles familiar with my heart are grown and I with them, Erst

shunning ; for the generous are sociable still.
Not one mere kind alone of woe doth lieger with me lie j Praised be

God 1 There are with me thousands of kinds of ill.

^Cttrht And also these :

'num.

Full many a sony chance doth light upon a man and fill His life with

trouble ; yet with God the ssue bideth still.
His case is sore on him ; but, when its meshes straitened are To utt'rest,

they relax, although he deem they never will.


235


Then the queen sent for a ladder of wood and made
the eunuchs bind her with cords thereto, on her back,
with her arms spread out; after which she uncovered her
head and wound her hair about the ladder; for pity for
her was rooted out from her heart. When Menar es Sena
saw herself in this state of abjection and humiliation,
she cried out and wept ; but none succoured her. Then
said she to the queen, 'O my sister, how is thy heart
hardened against me? Hast thou no mercy on me nor
on these little children?' But her words only hardened
her sister's heart and she reviled her, saying, 'O wanton!
O harlot ! May God have no mercy on whoso hath mercy
on thee ! How should I have pity on thee, O traitress ? '
* I appeal to the Lord of the Heavens,' replied Menar es
Sena, 'concerning that wherewith thou reproached me
and whereof I am innocent ! By Allah, I have done no
whoredom, but am lawfully married to him, and my Lord
knoweth if I speak truth or not 1 Indeed, my heart is wroth
with thee, by reason of thine excessive hard-heartedness
against me ! How canst thou accuse me of harlotry, with-
out knowledge? But my Lord will deliver me from thee
and if that whereof thou accusest me be true, may He
punish me for it 1 ' Quoth Nour el Huda, ' How darest
thou bespeak me thus?' and beat her till she swooned
away; whereupon they sprinkled water on her till she
revived; and indeed her charms were wasted for excess
of beating and humiliation and the straitness of her bonds.
Then she recited these verses :

If I've in aught offended against you Or anywise done that I should
not do,

To you, repentant for what's past, I come And as a suppliant, for forgive-
ness sue.

When Nour el Huda heard this, her wrath redoubled
and she said to her, i O harlot, wilt thou speak before me


236


in verse and seek to excuse thyself for the heinous sins
thou hast done? It was my desire that thou shouldst
return to thy husband, that I might witness thy depravity
and assurance ; for thou gloriest in thy lewdness aud pro-
fligacy and the heinousness of thy conduct.' Then she
called for a palm-stick and tucking up her sleeves, beat
her from head to foot ; after which she called for a whip
of plaited thongs, wherewith if one smote an elephant, he
would start off at speed, and beat her on her back and
stomach and every part of her body, till she swooned
away.

When the old woman Shewahi saw this, she fled forth
from the queen's presence, weeping and cursing her;
but Nour el Huda cried out to her guards, saying, ' Fetch
her to me ! ' So they ran after her and seizing her,
brought her back to the queen, who caused throw her on
the ground and bidding them lay hold of her, rose and
took the whip, with which she beat her, till she fainted,
when she said to her waiting-women, ' Drag this ill-
omened old woman forth on her face and put her out.'
And they did as she bade them.

Meanwhile, Hassan walked on beside the river, in the
direction of the desert, distracted, troubled and despairing
of life ; and indeed he was dazed and knew not night
from day, for stress of affliction. He fared on thus, till
he came to a tree, to which he saw a scroll hanging , so
he took it and found these verses written thereon :

I ordered thy case, without hindrance or let, Whilst thou in the womb

of thy mother wast yet.
I made her heart yearn to thee, so she was fain To tend thee and Jiee to

her bosom to set.

We will compensate thee and requite thee for all That hath wrought t©

afflict thee of trouble and fret. ;
So up and submit thee to Us, for indeed We will md thee to that thoa

desirest to get,


237


When he read this, he made sure of deliverance from
trouble and reunion with those he loved. Then he went
on a few steps and found himself alone in a wild and
perilous desert, in which there was none to company with
him; whereupon his heart sank within him for fear and
loneliness and he trembled in every nsrve, for that frightful
place, and recited the following verses :

O East wind, if thou passest by my loved ones' dwelling-place, Abundant

greeting bear to them from me and full of grace,
And tell them I the hostage am of passion, verily, And that my longing

for their sight all longing doth outpace.
Happily, for sympathy, a wind shall blow on me from them And the

corruption of my bones relive thereto, percase.

Then he walked on a few steps farther beside the river, ^f^fjj
till he came upon two little boys of the sons of the ft££o;xl
magicians, beside whom lay a wand of brass, graven with
talismans, and a skull-cap of leather, made in three pieces
and wroughten in steel with names and figures. The
boys were disputing and beating one another, till the blood
ran down between them ; whilst each said, < None shall
take the wand but I.' Hassan interposed and parted them,
saying, ' What is the cause of this your contention ? ' ' O
uncle,' answered they, 'be thou judge of our case, for
God the Most High hath surely sent thee to do justice
between us.' * Tell me your case,' said Hassan ; * and I
will judge between you.' So one of them said to him,
'We are brothers-german and our father was a mighty
magician, who dwelt in a cavern in yonder mountain. He
died and left us this cap and wand ; and my brother says,
" None shall have the wand but I," whilst I say the like ;
so be thou judge between us and deliver us from each
other.' Quoth Hassan, 'What is the difference between
the wand and the cap and what is their value? The
wand appears to be worth six farthings and the cap three,®


2 3 8


But they answered, 'Thou knowest not their properties. 1
' And what are their properties ? ' asked Hassan. ' Each
of them hath a wonderful secret virtue,' replied they,
' wherefore the wand is worth the revenue of all the Wac
Islands and their provinces and dependencies, and the
cap the like.' And Hassan said, ' By Allah, O my sons,
discover to me their secret virtues.'

' O uncle,' answered they, ' they are extraordinary ; for
our father wrought at their contrivance a hundred and
thirty and five years, till he brought them to perfection
and informed them with secret properties and engraved
them after the likeness of the revolving sphere, so that he
made them serve him extraordinary services and by their
aid he dissolved all enchantments ; and when he had
made an end of their fashion, death, which needs must
all suffer, overtook him. Now the virtue of the cap is,
that whoso sets it on his head is hidden from all folk's
eyes, nor can any see him, whilst it abideth on his head ;
and that of the wand is, that whoso possesseth it hath
command and authority over seven tribes of the Jinn,
who all serve the wand ; and whenever he smiteth there-
with on the ground, their kings [appear before him and]
do him homage, and all the Jinn are at his service.'

When Hassan heard this, he bowed his head and said
in himself, ' By Allah, I have need of this wand and cap,
and I am worthier of them than these boys. So I will go
about to get them from them by craft, that I may use
them to free myself and my wife and children from yonder
tyrannical queen, and then will we depart from this dismal
place, whence there is no deliverance nor flight for mortal
man. Doubtless, God caused me not to fall in with these
two boys, but that I might get the wand and cap from them.'
Then he raised his head and said to the boys, ' If ye would
have me decide the case, I will make trial of you and see
what each of you deserveth. He who overcometh his


239


brother shall have the wand and he who faileth shall have
the cap.' ' O uncle,' answered they, ' we depute thee tG
make trial of us and do thou decide between us as thou
seest fit.' Quoth Hassan, ' Will ye hearken to me and
have regard to my words?' And they said, 'Yes.' Then
said he, ' I will take a stone and throw it and he who
foregoeth his brother thereto and taketh it shall have the
wand, and the other shall have the cap.' And they said,
' We consent to this.'

Then he took a. stone and threw it with his might,
that it disappeared from sight. The two boys ran after
it and when they were at a distance, Hassan donned the
cap and taking the wand in his hand, removed from his
place, that he might prove the truth of that which the
boys had said, with regard to their properties. The
younger outran the elder and coming first to the stone,
took it and returned with it to the place where they had
left Hassan, but found no signs of him. So he called to
his brother, saying, ' Where is the man who was to judge
between us ?' Quoth the other, ' I see him not nor know
I whether he hath flown up to the height of heaven or
sunk into the nether earth.' Then they sought for him,
but saw him not, though all the while he was standing
by them. So they reviled each other, saying, ' The wand
and the cap are both gone ; they are neither mine nor
thine : and indeed our father warned us of this very thing ;
but we forgot what he said.' Then they retraced their
steps and entered the city.

When Hassan was thus certified of the truth of their
speech, he rejoiced with an exceeding joy and returned
to the city, with the cap on his head and the wand in his
hand. None saw him and he entered the palace and went
up into the lodging of Shewahi, who saw him not, because
of the cap. Then he went up to a shelf over her he&u, on
which were vessels of glass and chinawere, and shook it


240


with his hand, so that what was thereon fell to the ground.
The old woman cried out and buffeted her face ; then she
rose and restored the fallen things to their places, saying
in herself, ' By Allah, methinks Queen Nour el Huda hath
sent a devil to torment me, and he hath played me this
trick ! I beg God the Most High to deliver me from her
and ensure me against her wrath, for, O Lord, if she deal
thus abominably with her sister, beating and crucifying
her, dear as she is to her father, how will she do with a
]^tO;!}t stranger like myself, against whom she is incensed?'
tHXaxU. Then said she, ' I conjure thee, O devil, by the Most
Merciful God, the Bountiful, the High of Estate, the
Mighty of Dominion, Creator of men and Jinn, and by
the writing upon the seal of Solomon son of David (on
whom be peace!), speak to me and answer me!' Quoth
Hassan, ' I am no devil ; I am Hassan, the afflicted, the
distracted lover.' Then he took the cap from his head
and appeared to the old woman, who knew him and
taking him apart, said to him, 'What is come to thy
wit, that thou returnest hither? Go and hide; for, if
this wicked woman have tormented thy wife thus, and she
her sister, how will she do, if she light on thee ? '

Then she told him all that had befallen his wife and
that wherein she was of duresse and misery and torment,
adding, ' And indeed the queen repents her of having
let thee go and hath sent one after thee, promising him
a quintal of gold and my post in her service ; and she
hath sworn that, if he bring thee back, she will put thee
and thy wife and children to death.' And she wept and
discovered to Hassan what the queen had done with her
self, whereat he wept and said, ' O my lady, how shall
I do to deliver myself and my wife and children from
this tyrannical queen and return with them in safety to
my own country ? ' 4 Out on thee ! ' replied the old
woman, 1 Save thyself.' Quoth he, ' Needs must I deliver


241


her and my children from the queen in her despite.* * How
canst thou rescue them from her?' said Shewahi. 'Go and
hide thyself, O my son, till God the Most High permit.'

Then Hassan showed her the wand and the cap, whereat
she rejoiced with an exceeding joy and said, 1 Glory be to
Him who quickeneth the bones, though they be rotten I
By Allah, O my son, thou and thy wife were but lost folk,
but now thou art saved, thou and thy wife and children !
For I know the wand and I know its maker, who was
my master in magic. He was a mighty magician and
wrought a hundred and thirty and five years at this wand
and cap, till he brought them to perfection, when death
the inevitable overtook him. And I have heard him say
to his two sons, " O my sons, these things are none of
your lot, for there will come a stranger from a far country,
who will take them from you perforce, and ye shall not
know how he takes them." " O our father," said they,
" tell us how he will win to take them." But he answered,
" I know not." And how/ added she, ' availedst thou to
take them, O my son ? '

So he told her how he had taken them from the two
boys, whereat she rejoiced and said, ' O my son, since
thou hast gotten [the means of freeing] thy wife and
children, give ear to what I shall say to thee. There is
no abiding for me with this wicked woman, after the
fashion in which she hath dared to use me ; wherefore
I am minded to depart from her to the caves of the
Magicians and abide with them there till I die. But do
thou, O my son, don the cap and take the wand in thy
hand and enter the place where thy wife and children
are. Loose her bonds and smite the earth with the wand,
saying, " Be present, O servants of these names ! " where-
upon the servants of the wand will appear ; and if there
present himself one of the heads of the tribes, command
him what thou wilt 8

vol. vn. 16


242

So he bade her farewell and donning the cap, went
forth and entered the place where his wife was. He
found her bound to the ladder by her hair, well-nigh
lifeless, weeping-eyed and mourning-hearted, in the sorriest
of plights, knowing no way to deliver herself. Her
children were playing under the ladder, whilst she looked
at them and wept for them and herself ; and he heard her
repeat the following verses :

Nothing is left her but a fluttering spright, Ay, and. an eye bereaved of
its light.

A longing one, her entrails are a-fire, Yet still she's silent in her woes 5
despite.

Her foes weep, pitying her ; alas for those Who pity in the exultant foe
excite !

When Hassan saw her in this state of torment and
misery and abjection, he wept till he swooned away; and
when he revived, he saw his children playing and their
mother aswoon for excess of pain ; so he took the cap
from his head and the children saw him and cried out,
saying, ' O our father ! ' Then he covered his head again
and the princess came to herself, hearing their cry, but
only saw her children weeping and crying out, 1 O our
father ! ' When she heard them name their father and
weep, her heart was broken and her entrails rent in
sunder and she said to them, ' What makes you in mind
of your father at this time?' And she wept sore and
cried out, from a bleeding heart and an aching bosom,
' Where are ye and where is your father? '

Then she recalled the days of her union with Hassan
and what had befallen her since her desertion of him and
wept till her face was drowned in tears and her cheeks
were furrowed with much weeping. Her tears ran down
and wet the ground and she had not a hand loose to
wipe them from her cheeks, whilst the flies fed their fill
on her skin, and she found no helper but weeping and


243


no solace but repeating verses. Then she recited the
following :

I call to mind the parting-day that rent our loves in twain, When, as I

turned away, the tears in very streams did rain.
The cameleer urged on his beasts with them, what while I found Nor

strength nor fortitude, nor did my heart with me remain.
Yea, back I turned, unknowing of the road, nor might shake off The

trance of grief and longing love that numbed my heart and brain;
And worst of all betided me, on my return, was one Who came to me,

in lowly guise, to glory in my pain.
Since the beloved's gone, O soul, forswear the sweet of life Nor covet

its continuance, for, wanting him, 'twere vain.
List, O my friend, unto the tale of love, and God forbid That I should

speak and that thy heart to hearken should not deign !
As 'twere El Asma'f himself, of passion I discourse With fancies rare and

marvellous, linked in an endless chain. tNTfgfjt

Then she turned right and left, seeking the cause of
her children's crying out, ' O our father ! ' but saw no one
and marvelled that they should name him at that time
and call upon him. When Hassan heard her verses, he
wept till he swooned away and the tears ran down upon
his cheeks like rain. Then he drew near the children
and uncovered his head to them, [unseen of his wife,]
whereupon they saw him and knowing him, cried out,
saying, ' O our father ! ' Their mother fell a-weeping
again, when she heard them name their father and said,
' There is no resource against the ordinance of God the
Most High ! Strange ! What makes them bethink them
of their father at this time and call upon him, albeit it ,
is not of their wont?' Then she wept and recited the
following verses :

The land is empty of the moon that shone so bright whilere : Be lavish

of your tears s mine eyes | I charge you, do not spare 1
They have departed : how shall I be patient of their loss ? Nor heaEf

nox patience, after them s is left with me, I swear.


244


Lords, who are absent, but whose place is in the heart of me, Will you

return to me again and be as once you were ?
What were the harm if they returned and I their company Enjoyed and

they had ruth upon my tears and my despair ?
They made mine eyes rain wonder-fast upon the parting-day : There's

nought may quench the raging fire that 'twixt my ribs doth flare.
I would have had them stay, but Fate was contrary to me And did with

sev'rance disappoint my longing for the fair.
By Allah, O beloved mine, return to me 1 Enough Of tears, indeed, I've

shed to win ill-fortune to forbear.

With this, Hassan could no longer contain himself but
took the cap from his head ; whereupon his wife saw him
and recognising him, gave a scream that startled all in
the place. Then she said to him, ' How earnest thou
hither ? Hast thou dropped from the sky or come up
through the earth ? ' And her eyes filled with tears and
Hassan also wept. * O man/ quoth she, ' this is no time
for tears or reproaches. Fate hath had its course and the
sight was blinded and the pen hath run with what was
ordained of God from all eternity : so, God on thee,
whencesoever thou comest, go and hide, lest any see thee
and tell my sister and she slaughter thee and me I ' ' Q
my lady and lady of all queens,' answered he, 'I have
ventured myself and come hither, and either I will die or
I will deliver thee from this thy strait and return with thee
and my children to my country, in despite of thy shrew of
a sister.'

But she smiled and shook her head, saying, ( Far, O my
life, far is it from the power of any save God the Most
High to deliver me from this my stress ! Save thyself by
flight and cast not thyself into destruction ; for she hath
troops without number, that none may withstand. Grant
that thou tookest me and wentest forth with me, how
canst thou win to thy country and escape from these
islands and the perils of these dreadful places ? Verily,
in thy way hither, thou hast seen the wonders and dangers


245


and terrors of the road, such as none may escape, not
even one of the rebellious Jinn. Depart, therefore, forth-
right and add not anguish to my anguish and trouble to
my trouble, neither do thou pretend to rescue me from
this my plight; for who shall bring me to thy country,
through all these valleys and thirsty deserts and fatal
places ? ' 'By thy life, O light of mine eyes,' rejoined
Hassan, ' I will not depart this place but with thee ! ' 'O
man,' quoth she, ' thou knowest not what thou sayst !
How canst thou avail unto this thing and what manner
of man art thou ? None can escape from these realms,
even had he command over Jinn and Afrits and war-
locks. So fly and leave me ; peradventure God will bring
about a change.' ' O lady of fair ones,' answered Hassan,
' I came but to deliver thee with this wand and cap.' And
he told her what had befallen him with the two boys ; but,
whilst he was speaking, up came the queen and heard
them talking.

When he was ware of her, he put on the cap and was
hidden from sight, and she entered and said to the
princess, ' O harlot, who is he with whom thou wast
talking?' 'Who is with me that should talk with me/
answered Menar es Sena, 'except these little ones?''
Then the queen took the whip and beat her, whilst
Hassan stood by, nor did she leave beating her till she
fainted ; whereupon she bade remove her to another place.
So they loosed her and carried her to another chamber,
whilst Hassan followed [unseen]. There they cast her
down, senseless, and stood looking upon her, till she
revived and recited the following verses :

Long, long have I bewailed the sev'rance of our loves, With tears that

from my lids streamed down like burning rain,
And vowed that, if the days should reunite us two, My lips should

never speak of seveiance again,


246


And to the enviers, c Die of sheer despite ! ' I'd say ; ' By Allah, 1 have

won my wishes to attain ! '
Joy hath o'ercome me so, that, for the very stress Of that which gladdens

me, to weeping I am fain.
Tears are become to you a habit, O mine eyes, So that ye weei> as well

for gladness as for pain.

Then the slave-girls went out from her and Hassan took
off the cap ; whereupon his wife said to him, ' See, O
man, all this hath befallen me by reason of my having
gainsaid thee and transgressed thy commandment and
gone forth without thy leave. But, I conjure thee by Allah,
reproach me not for mine offence and know that women
know not a man's worth till they have lost him. Indeed,
I have sinned and done evil ; but I crave pardon of God
the Great for that I did, and if He reunite us, I will never
!€tg!)l again disobey thee in aught/ Quoth Hassan (and indeed
tSCCCXXlb. his heart ached for her), ' It was not thou that sinnedst,
but I, for I departed and left thee with one who knew not
thy rank nor thy worth. But know, O beloved of my
heart and fruit of mine entrails and light of mine eyes, that
God (blessed be He !) hath given me power to release
thee ; so wouldst thou have me carry thee to thy father,
there to accomplish what God decreeth unto thee, or
wilt thou presently depart with me to my country, now
that relief is come to thee ? ' ' Who can deliver me save
the Lord of the skies ? ' answered she. 1 Go to thine own
country and put away from thee false hope; for thou
knowest not the perils of these parts : but, if thou obey me
not, thou wilt see.' And she recited the following verses :

What thou wouldst have is law to me and pleasing in my sight ! What
ails thee, then, to look on me with anger and despite ?

Whate'er befell, now God forbid the love that was of old 'Twixt us
should e'er forgotten be, forspent and ended quite !

For from our side the spy ceased not, estrangement till he saw Betvreee
us, when he cast about our loves to disunite.


247

Yea, I was constant in fair thought of thee, for all the spy Dealt ill and

did with evil words to evil thoughts excite.
We'll keep the secret of our loves and guard it from the folk, Albeit

with reproach the sword of blame be bared to smite.
My days in longing do I pass, so may a messenger With tidings of

acceptance come from thee and heal my spright.

Then she wept and her children wept also and the
slave-girls heard them : so they came in to them and found
them weeping, but saw not Hassan with them ; wherefore
they wept for pity of them and cursed Queen Nour el
Huda. Then Hassan took patience till it was night and
her guards had gone to their sleeping-places, when he
went up to her and loosing her, pressed her to his bosom
and kissed her on the head and between the eyes, saying,
£ How long have we wearied for our country and for
reunion there ! Is this our meeting in sleep, or on wake ? '
Then he took up the elder boy and she took up the
younger and they went forth. God covered them with
the veil of His protection, so that they came safe to the
outer door of the palace, but found it locked from without,
and Hassan said, 'There is no power and no virtue but
in God the Most High, the Supreme ! We are God's and
to Him we return ! ' With this they despaired of escape
and Hassan beat hand upon hand, saying, ' O Thou that
dispellest troubles ! Verily, I had bethought me of every
thing and considered its issue but this ; and now, when
it is day, they will take us, and what resource have we in
this case ? ' And he recited the following verses :

Thou madest fair thy thought of Fate, whenas the days were fair, And
fearedst not the unknown ills that they to thee might bring.

The nights were fair and calm to thee ; thou wast deceived by them,
For in the peace of night is born full many a troublous thing.

Then he wept and she wept for his weeping and fo?
the abasement she had suffered and the cruelties of


248

fortune : and he turned to her and recited the following
verses :

Fortune is vehement on me, as if I were its foe ; Yea, day by day, she

meeteth me with this or the other woe.
If aught of good I wish, Fate brings the contrary thereof, And if 'tis

bright for me one day, the next it foul doth show.

And also these :

My fate doth irk and baffle me, unknowing that I am Most worthy and

that Fortune's shifts are little worth, ywis.
It spends the night in showing me th' injustice of events And I in

showing forth to it what very patience is.

Then she said to him, ' By Allah, there is no relief for
us but to kill ourselves and be at rest from this great
weariness ; else we shall suffer grievous torment on the
morrow.' At this moment, they heard a voice from without
the door say, 1 By Allah, O my lady Menar es Sena, I will
not open to thee and thy husband Hassan, except ye
obey me in what I shall say to you ! ' When they heard
this, they were silent for excess of fear and would have
returned whence they came ; when behold, the voice
spoke again, saying, 1 What ails you to be silent and
answer me not?' Therewith they knew the speaker for
the old woman Shewahi and said to her, ' Whatsoever
thou biddest us, that will we do ; but first open the door
to us, for this is no time for talk.' 'By Allah/ replied
she, ' I will not open to you, except ye swear to me that
you will take me with you and not leave me with yonder
harlot: so, whatever befalls you shall befall me and if
ye escape, I shall escape, and if ye perish, I shall perish :
for. yonder lewd minion entreats me with indignity and
still torments me on your account; and thou, O my
daughter, knowest my worth.'

So they trusted in her and swore to her such an oath
as contented her, whereupon she opened the door t©


249


them and they came out and found her riding on a
Greek jar of red earthenware with a rope of palm fibres
about its neck [by way of halter], which turned under
her and ran faster than a Nejd colt, and she said to them,
'Follow me and fear nothing, for I know forty magical
formulas, by the least of which I could make this city
a surging sea, swollen with clashing billows, and turn
each damsel therein into a fish, and all before dawn.
But I was not able to work aught of magic, for fear of
the king her father and of regard for her sisters, for
that they are redoubtable, by reason of their many guards
and servants and tribesmen. However, I will yet show
you wonders of my skill and magic; and now let us on,
with God's help and blessing.'

Hassan and his wife rejoiced in this, making sure ofJCurljf
escape, and they left the palace and went forth, till they uTCQCXfe
came without the city, when he fortified his heart and
smiting the earth with the wand, said, ' Ho, servants of
these names, appear to me and discover to me your
estates ! ' Thereupon the earth clove in sunder and out
came seven Afrits, with their feet in the bowels of the
earth and their heads in the clouds. They kissed the
earth three times before Hassan and said with one voice,
'Here are we at thy service, O our lord and ruler over
us ! What dost thou bid us do ? For we hear and obey
thy commandment. An thou wilt, we will dry thee up
seas and remove mountains from their places.' Hassan
rejoiced in their words and at their speedy answer [to his
summons], so he took courage and bracing up his reso-
lution, said to them, ' Who are ye and what are your
names and races? And to what tribes and companies
do ye belong?' They kissed the earth once more and
answered with one voice, saying, ' We are seven kings,
each ruling over seven tribes of the Jinn of all conditions,
Marids and devils, flyers and divers, dwellers in mountains


2$Q

and wastes and deserts and haunters of the seas : so com-
mand us what thou wilt ; for we are thy servants and slaves,
and whoso possesseth this wand hath dominion over all
our necks and we owe him obedience.'

When Hassan heard this, he rejoiced with an exceeding
joy, he and his wife and the old woman, and he said to
the Kings of the Jinn, *I desire of you that ye show me
your tribes and hosts and armies.' 4 O our lord,' answered
they, ' if we show thee our hosts, we fear for thee and
these who are with thee, for they are many in number
and various in form and fashion and favour. Some of us
are heads without bodies and others bodies without heads,
and others again are in the likeness of wild animals and
beasts of prey. However, if this be thy will, needs must
we first show thee those of us who are like unto wild
beasts. But, O our lord, what wouldst thou of us at this
present ? ' Quoth Hassan, ' I would have you carry me
forthwith to the city of Baghdad, me and my wife and this
good woman.'

But they hung down their heads and were silent, where-
upon quoth Hassan, 1 Why do ye not reply ? ' And they
said with one voice, ' O our lord and ruler over us, we are
of the covenant of Solomon son of David (on whom be
peace ! ) and he made us swear that we would carry none
of the sons of Adam on our backs ; since which time we
have carried no mortal on our backs or shoulders : but
we will straightway harness the horses of the Jinn, that
shall carry thee and thy company to thy country.' 'And
how far are we from Baghdad ? ' asked Hassan. Quoth
they, e Seven years' journey for a diligent horseman*'
Hassan marvelled at this and said to them, 'Then how
came I hither in less than a year?' They answered,
4 God inclined the hearts of His pious servants to thee,
else hadst thou never won hither nor set eyes on these
regions. For the Sheikh Abdulcuddous, who mounted


2$I


thee on the elephant and the enchanted horse, traversed
with thee, in ten days, three years' journey for a diligent
horseman, and the Afrit Dehnesh, to whom the Sheikh
Abourruweish committed thee, carried thee a like distance
in a day and a night; all which was of the blessing of
God the Most High, for that the Sheikh Abourruweish
is of the lineage of Asef ben Berkhiya 1 and knoweth the
Most Great name of God. s Moreover, from Baghdad to
the Palace of the Mountain of Clouds is a year's journey,
and this makes the seven years.'

When Hassan heard this, he marvelled exceedingly
and said, ' Glory be to God, who maketh the difficult easy
and healeth the broken, who bringeth near the distant
and humbleth every froward tyrant, who hath eased us of
every stress and brought me hither and subjected these
creatures to me and reunited me with my wife and
children ! I know not whether I sleep or wake or if I be
sober or drunken ! ' Then he turned to the Jinn and
said, 'In how many days will your horses bring us to
Baghdad?' 'They will carry you thither in less than a
year,' answered they, 'but not till after ye have endured
terrible perils and hardships and traversed thirsty valleys
and frightful wastes and terrors without number; and we
cannot warrant thee, O our lord, from the people of these ^{gfjg;
islands nor from the mischief of the Supreme King and fc^rjQ-fj
his enchanters and warlocks. It may be they will force
us and take you from us and we fall into affliction with
them, and all to whom the news shall come after this
will say to us, " Ye are evil-doers. How could ye affront
the Supreme King and carry a mortal out of his dominions,
and the king's daughter with him ? " Wert thou alone with

1 Vizier of Solomon.

8 i.e. the secret name of God, which is fabled by the Muslims to have
been engraven on the seal-ring of Solomon and to confer on him wh©
knows it dominion over all the powers of the earth and the air„


252


us/ continued they, 'the thing were easy; but He who
brought thee hither is able to cany thee back to thy country
and reunite thee presently with thy people. So take heart
and put thy trust in God and fear not ; for we are at thy
service, to convey thee to thy country.'

Hassan thanked them and said, 1 God requite you
with good. But now make haste with the horses.' 'We
hear and obey,' answered they and struck the ground
with their feet, whereupon it opened and they disappeared
within it and were absent awhile, after which they re-
appeared with three horses, . saddled and bridled, and on
each saddle-bow a pair of saddle-bags, with a leathern
bottle of water in one pocket and the other full of victual.
Hassan mounted one horse and took a child before him,
whilst his wife mounted a second and took the other child
before her. Then the old woman alighted from the jar
and mounted the third horse and they rode on, without
ceasing, all night. At break of day, they turned aside
from the road and made for the mountain, whilst their
tongues ceased not to name God.

They fared on under the mountain all that day, till
Hassan caught sight of a black object in the distance,
.as it were a tall column of smoke ascending to the sky ;
so he recited somewhat of the Koran and sought refuge
with God from Satan the Stoned. The black thing grew
plainer, as they approached, and when they drew near
to it, they saw that it was an Afrit, with a head like a
huge dome and tusks like grapnels and jaws like a street
and nostrils like ewers and ears like leathern bucklers
and mouth like a cavern and teeth like pillars of stone and
hands like winnowing forks and legs like masts : his head
was in the clouds and his feet in the bowels of the earth.
When he saw Hassan, he bowed himself and kissed the
earth before him, saying, ' O Hassan, have no fear of me ;
for I am the chief of the dwellers in this land, which is


253


the first of the Wac Islands, and I am a Muslim and &
believer in the unity of God. I have heard of you and
your coming and when I knew of your case, I desired to
depart from the land of the magicians to another land,
void of inhabitants, and far from men and Jinn, that I
might dwell there alone and serve God till my end came
upon me. Wherefore I wish to company with you and
be your guide, till ye win forth of the Wac Islands. I
will appear only at night : so comfort your hearts on my
account ; for I am a Muslim, even as ye are Muslims.'

When Hassan heard the Afrit's words, he was mightily
rejoiced and made sure of deliverance; and he said to
him, ' God amply requite thee ! Go with us, with the
blessing of Allah ! ' So the Afrit went before them and
they followed, talking and making merry, for their hearts
were at ease and their breasts relieved, and Hassan fell
to telling his wife all that had befallen him and all the
stresses he had undergone, whilst she excused herself to
him and told him, in turn, all she had seen and suffered.
The horses bore them on all night, like the blinding tbfa'gf)t
lightning, and when the day rose, they put their hands fclCCCXXbt'L
to the saddle-bags and took forth victual and water and ate
and drank.

Then they sped on their way, preceded by the Afrit,
who turned aside with them from the beaten track into
another road, till then untrodden, along the sea-shore,
and they fared on, without stopping, across valleys and
deserts, a whole month, till on the one-and-thirtieth day
there arose before them a cloud of dust, that walled
the world and darkened the day, and they heard a
frightful noise of crying and clamour. When Hassan
saw and heard this, he was confused and turned pale ;
and the old woman said to him, i O my son, this is the
army of the Wac Islands, that hath overtaken us ; and
presently they will lay hands on us,' 1 What shall I do*


254


O my mother ? ' asked he. And she answered, * Strike
the earth with the wand.' He did so and immediately the
seven kings presented themselves and saluted him, kissing
the ground before him and saying, * Fear not neither
grieve.' Hassan rejoiced at their words and answered
them, saying, 'Well said, O princes of the Jinn and the
Afrits ! This is your time.' Quoth they, ' Get ye up to
the mountain-top, thou and thy company, and leave us
to deal with them, for we know that you are in the right
and they in the wrong and God will aid us against them.'
So Hassan and his wife and children and the old woman
J^t^ftt dismounted and dismissing the horses, ascended the flank
tJfCU'XbtlU of the mountain.

Presently up came Queen Nour el Huda, with troops
right and left, and the captains went round about among
the troops and ranged them in battle array. Then the
two hosts charged down upon one another and clashed
together with a mighty shock, the brave pressed forward
and the coward fled and the Jinn cast flames of fire from
their mouths, whilst the smoke of them rose up to the
confines of the sky and the two armies appeared and dis-
appeared. The champions fought and heads flew from
bodies and the blood ran in streams, nor 'did the sword
leave to play and the blood to flow and the fire of the
battle to rage, till the dark night came, when the two
armies drew apart and alighting, kindled fires and rested
upon the field.

Therewith the seven kings went up to Hassan and
kissed the ground before him. He thanked them and
prayed God to give them the victory and asked them
how they had fared with the queen's troops. Quoth
they, 'They will withstand us but three days, for we had
the better of them to-day, taking two thousand of them
prisoners and slaying of them much people, whose numbef
may not be told-. So take comfort and be of good cheer.*


255


Then they took leave of him and went down to their
troops, to hearten them. They kept up the fires till the
day rose with its light and shone, when the fighting-men
mounted their stout horses and smote each other with the
edge of the sword and thrust with the brown of the lance |
nor did they cease from the battle that day. Moreover,
they passed the night on horseback, clashing together like
seas ; the fires of war raged among them and they stinted
not from battle aDd strife, till the army of Wac was de-
feated and their power broken and their courage quelled ;
their feet slipped and whithersoever they fled, defeat was
before them ; wherefore they turned their backs and be-
took themselves to flight : but the most part of them were
slain and their queen and her chief officers and the
grandees of her realm taken prisoners.

On the morrow, the seven kings set Hassan a throne
of alabaster inlaid with pearls and jewels, and he sat down
thereon. Moreover, they set thereby a throne of ivory,
plated with glittering gold, for the princess Menar es
Sena and another for the old woman Shewahi. Then
they brought before them the captives and among the
rest, Queen Nour el Huda bound and shackled, whom
when Shewahi saw, she said to her, t O harlot, O wicked
wretch, thy recompense shall be that two bitches be
starved and two horses stinted of water, till they be
athirst : then shalt thou be bound, with the bitches after
thee, to the horses' tails and the latter driven to the river,
that the bitches may rend thy skin ; and after, thy flesh
shall be cut off and given them to eat. How couldst thou
deal thus with thy sister, O vile woman, seeing that she
was lawfully married, after the law of God and of His
Apostle ? For there is no monkery in Islam and marriage
is of the ordinances of the Apostles (on whom be peace 1)
nor were women created but for men.'

Then Hassan commanded to put all the captives to


256


death and the old woman cried out, saying, * Slay them
all and spare none ! ' But, when Menar es Sena saw her
sister in this plight, a prisoner and in fetters, she wept
over her and said, * O my sister, who is this hath con-
quered us and made us captives in our own land ? ' Quoth
Nour el Huda, 'Verily, this is a grave matter. Indeed
this man Hassan hath gotten the mastery over us and
God hath given him dominion over us and over all our
realm and he hath overcome us, us and the Kings of the
Jinn.' And her sister answered her, saying, ' Indeed, God
aided him not against you nor did he overcome you nor
make you prisoners, save by means of this cap and wand.'
So Nour el Huda was assured that he had conquered her
by means thereof and humbled herself to her sister, till
she was moved to pity for her and said to Hassan, ' What
wilt thou do with my sister ? Behold, she is in thy hands
and she hath done thee no offence that thou shouldst
punish her.' Quoth Hassan, ' Her torturing of thee was
offence enough/ But she answered, saying, 'She hath
excuse for all she did with me. As for thee, thou hast
set my father's heart on fire for the loss of me, and how
will it be with him, if he lose my sister also ? ' And he
said to her, ' It is thine to decide ; do what thou wilt.'

So she commanded to loose her sister and the rest of
the captives, and they did her bidding. Then she went
up to Queen Nour el Huda and embraced her, and they
wept together awhile ; after which quoth the queen, ' O
my sister, bear me not malice for that I did with thee.'
* O my sister,' replied Menar es Sena, ' this was decreed
to me.' Then they sat on the couch talking and Menar
es Senar made peace between the old woman and her
sister, after the goodliest fashion, and their hearts were
set at ease. After this Hassan dismissed the servants of
the wand, thanking them for the succour which they had
afforded him against his enemies, and Menar es Sena


257


related to her sister all that had befallen her with Hassan
and all he had suffered for her sake, saying, ' O my sister s
it behoves us to fail not of what is due to him who hath
done these deeds and is possessed of this might and
whom God the Most High hath gifted with such ex-
ceeding prowess, that he hath won to our country and
beaten thine army and taken thee prisoner and defied our
father, the Supreme King, who hath dominion over all
the princes of the Jinn.' ' By Allah, O my sister,' replied
Nour .el Huda, ' thou sayst sooth ! What this man hath
undergone is something marvellous and none may fail of
respect to him, more by token of his generosity. But
was all this on thine account ? ' ' Yes,' answered Menar ^r{g|jt
es Sena, and they passed the night in converse till the foment*
morning.

When the sun rose, they were minded to depart ; so
Hassan smote the earth with the wand and the Jinn
appeared and saluted him, saying, ' Praised be God who
hath set thy heart at ease 1 Command us what thou wilt,
and we will do it for thee in less than the twinkling of an
eye.' He thanked them and said to them, 'God requite
you with good ! Saddle me two horses of the best.' So
they brought him forthwith two saddled horses, one of
which he mounted, taking his elder son before him, and
his wife mounted the other, taking the younger son before
her. Then the queen and the old woman also took horse
and they bade each other farewell and departed, Hassan
and his wife taking the right and the queen and Shewahi
the left-hand road. The former fared on with their
children, without stopping, for a whole month, till they
came in sight of a city, compassed about with trees and
streams, and alighted among the trees, thinking to rest
there, As they sat talking, they saw many horsemen
coming towards them, whereupon Hassan rose and going
to meet them, found that it was King Hessoun, lord of

VOL. VII. 11


258


the Land of Camphor and Castle of Crystal, with his
attendants.

So he went up to the king and kissed his hands and
saluted him ; and when the latter saw him, he returned
his salute and gave him joy of his safety and rejoiced in
him with an exceeding joy. Then he dismounted and
seating himself with Hassan upon carpets under the trees,
said to him, '0 Hassan, tell me all that hath befallen
thee, first and last.' So he told him all that had passed
and the king marvelled thereat and said to him, ' O my
son, none ever won to the Wac Islands and returned
thence but thou, and indeed thy case is wonderful; but
praised be God for safety ! ' Then he mounted and carried
Hassan and his wife and children into the city, where he
lodged them in the guest-house of his palace ; and they
abode with him three days, feasting and making merry,
after which Hassan sought his leave to depart to his own
country and he granted it. So they took horse and the
king rode with them ten days, after which he took leave
of them and turned back, whilst Hassan and his wife and
children fared on a whole month, till they came to a great
cavern, whose floor was of brass. Quoth Hassan to his
wife, ' Knowest thou yonder cavern ? ' And she answered,
' No.' Said he, ' Therein dwells a Sheikh named Abourru-
v/eish, to whom I am greatly beholden, for that he was the
means of my knowing King Hessoun.'

Then he went on to tell her all that had passed between
him and Abourruweish, and as he was thus engaged,
behold, the Sheikh himself issued from the cavern.
When Hassan saw him, he dismounted and kissed his
hands, and the Sheikh saluted him and gave him joy of
his safety and rejoiced in him. Then he carried him
into the cavern and sat down with him, whilst Hassan
told him what had befallen him in the Wac Islands;
whereat the Sheikh marvelled exceedingly and said, *0


259


Hassan, how didst thou deliver thy wife and children?'
So he told him the story of the cap and the wand, at
which he marvelled and said, ' O Hassan, O my son,
* but for this wand and cap, thou hadst never delivered
thy wife and children.' And he replied, ' Even so, O
my lord.'

As they were talking, there came a knocking at the door
and Abourruweish went out and found Abdulcuddous
mounted on his elephant. So he saluted him and brought
him into the cavern, where he embraced Hassan and gave
him joy of his safety, rejoicing greatly in his return. Then
said Abourruweish to Hassan, 'Tell the Sheikh Abdul-
cuddous all that hath befallen thee, O Hassan.' So he
repeated to him all that had passed, till he came to the
story of the wand and cap, whereupon quoth Abdul- ^{gj»j
cuddous, 1 O my son, thou hast delivered thy wife and thy Jj^^j^
children and hast no further need of the wand and the
cap. Now we were the means of thy winning to the Wac
Islands and I have done thee kindness for the sake of the
daughters of my brother ; wherefore I beg thee, of thy
bounty and favour, to give me the wand and the Sheikh
Abourruweish the cap.'

When Hassan heard this, he hung down his head, being
ashamed to reply, ' I will not give them to you,' and said
in himself, ' Indeed, these two elders have done me great
kindness and but for them, I had never won to the Wac
Islands and delivered my children, nor had I gotten me
this wand and cap.' So he raised his head and answered,
4 Yes, I will give them to you : but, O my lords, I fear
lest the Supreme King, my wife's father, come upon me
with his hosts and beset me in my own country, and
I be enable to repel them, for want of the wand and the
cap.' ' Fear not, O my son/ answered Abdulcuddous ;
'we will succour thee and keep watch for thee in this place
and fend off from thee whosoever shall come against the©


26o


from thy wife's father or any other ; wherefore be thou
of good cheer and comfort and fear nothing, for no harm
shall come to thee.' When Hassan heard this, he was
abashed and gave the cap to Abourruweish, saying to
Abdulcuddous, ' Bear me company to my own land and
I will give thee the wand.' At this the two elders rejoiced
exceedingly and made him ready riches and treasures past
description.

He abode with them three days, at the end of which
time he set out again and the Sheikh Abdulcuddous made
ready to depart with him. So he and his wife mounted
their beasts and Abdulcuddous whistled, whereupon a great
elephant came running up from the heart of the desert
and he mounted it. Then they took leave of Abourru-
weish and fared on across country, whilst Abdulcuddous
guided them by a short and easy way, till they drew near
the princesses' country ; whereupon Hassan rejoiced and
praised God for his safe return and reunion with his wife
and children after so many hardships and perils and
thanked Him for His favours, and bounties, reciting the
following verses :

Sure God will soon for us cause union to betide And in your arms locked

fast, I shall to you confide
The wonders that have chanced to me and all I've felt Of anguish since

the day that did our loves divide ;
And I shall heal mine eyes with looking on your sight, For long my

heart for you with yearning hath been wried.
I've hidden you a tale within my heart, that I Will tell you, when we

meet : indeed, I shall you chide
For what you wrought of wrong aforetime ; but reproach Shall end and

pass away and only love abide.

Hardly had he made an end of these verses, when they
came in sight of the green pavilion 1 and the pool and the

1 Apparently that wherein he had alighted to rest on his journey wit's
the Magian (see supra, p. 133), although the passage referred to makes
so mention of the pool and palace.


26l


green palace, and the Mountain of Clouds appeared to
them afar off; whereupon quoth Abdulcuddous, 'Rejoice,
O Hassan, in good news ! For to-night shalt thou be the
guest of my nieces.' At this he rejoiced with an exceed-
ing joy, he and his wife, and they alighted at the pavilion,
where they ate and drank and rested ; after which they
took horse again and rode on till they came in sight of
the palace.

As they drew near, the p-incesses came forth to meet
them and saluted them ; and their uncle said to them,
' O daughters of my brother, behold, I have accomplished
your brother Hassan's occasion and have helped him to
regain his wife and children.' So they embraced him
and gave him joy of his return in health and safety and
of his reunion with his wife and children, and it was a
day of festival with them. Then came forward his sister,
the youngest princess, and embraced him, weeping sore,
whilst he also wept for his long estrangement : after which
she complained to him of that which she had suffered
for the pangs of separation and weariness of heart in his
absence and recited these verses :

Mine eyes, since thou departedst hence, ne'er on a creature fell, But
straight thine image mirrored rose before it, sooth to tell ;

Nor have I ever closed my lids in slumber, but in dreams I saw thee, as
it were 'twixt eye and eyelid thou didst dwell.

Wixn she had made an end of her verses, she rejoiced
with an exceeding joy and Hassan said to her, 4 O my
sister, I have thee to thank in this matter, over all thy
sisters, add may God the Most High vouchsafe thee aid
and countenance 1 ' Then he related to her all that had
befallen him in his journey, first and last, and all that he
had undergone, telling her what had betided him with his
wife's sister and h'«w he had delivered his wife and
children and all thai he had seen of marvels and grievous


262


perils, even to how Queen Nour el Huda would have slain
him and his wife and children and none saved them from
her but God the Most High. Moreover, he related to her
the adventure of the cap and the wand and how Abdul-
cuddous and Abourruweish had sought them of him and
he had not agreed to give them to them but for her sake ;
wherefore she thanked him and wished him long life ; and
he said, ' By Allah, I shall never forget all the kindness
thou hast done me, first and last ! '
NtgfU Then she turned to his wife Menar es Sena and era-
)£CCXXXL braced her and pressed her children to her bosom, saying
to her, ' O daughter of the Supreme King, was there no
pity in thy heart, that thou partedst him and his children
and set his heart on fire for them? Didst thou desire
by this that he should die ? ' The princess laughed and
answered, ' Thus was it ordained of God (blessed and
exalted be He !) and whoso beguileth folk, may God
beguile him S ' 1 Then they set on meat and drink, and
they all ate and drank and made merry. They abode
thus ten days Feasting and merry-making, at the end of
which time Hassan prepared to continue his journey. So
his sister rose and made him ready riches and rarities,
such as beggar description. Then she strained him to
her bosom, because of leave-taking, and embraced him,
whilst he recited the following verses on her account :

Solace from those who love far distant is, heigho 1 And severance of

friends is nought but grievous woe.
Estrangement and disdain a sore affliction are And he who's slain of love

a martyr is, I trow.
How long is night on him who's parted from his love, A lover left

forlorn, how weariful and slow !
His tears upon his cheeks course down, what while he earth, ' Ah woe is

me for tears ! Can more be yet to flow ? '

1 Apparently in allusion to the trick played her by Hassan in taking
her feather-dress and so contriving to get her to wife«


263

With this he gave the wand to the Sheikh Abdulcuddous,
who rejoiced therein with an exceeding joy and thanking
him, mounted and returned to his own place. Then
Hassan took horse with his wife and children and de-
parted from the palace of the princesses, who went forth
with him, to bid him farewell. Then they turned back
and Hassan fared on, over hill and dale, two months and
ten days, till he came to the city of Baghdad, the Abode
of Peace, and repairing to his house by the private way
that gave upon the open country, knocked at the door.

Now his mother, for long absence, had forsworn re-
pose and given herself to mourning and weeping and
lamentation, till she fell sick and ate not, neither took
delight in sleep, but shed tears night and day. Her son's
name was never from her mouth, albeit she despaired of
his return; and as he stood at the door, he heard her
weeping and reciting the following verses :

By Allah, med'cine, O my lords, one sick for love of you, Whose heart
is broken and her frame all wasted and unsound !

Vet, of your bounty, if ye would but union her vouchsafe, Sure in her
loved ones' favours, then, her sorrows would be drowned.

She doth not of your sight despair, for God almightly is And in the
midmost stress of woe, the prosperous times come round.

When she had made an end of these verses, she heard
her son's voice at the door, calling out and saying, ' O
mother mine, fortune hath been kind and vouchsafeth [us]
reunion ! ' She knew his voice and went to the door,
between belief and doubt; but, when she opened it and
saw him standing there and with him his wife and children,
she cried out, for excess of joy, and fell to the earth in
a swoon. Hassan tended her, till she revived and em-
braced him, weeping; after which she called his slaves
and servants and bade them carry his baggage into the
house. So they brought in all the loads, and his wife


264


and children entered also, whereupon Hassan's mother
went up to the princess and kissed her head and feet,
saying, ' O daughter of the Supreme King, if I have failed
of thy due, behold, I crave pardon of God the Great.'

Then she turned to Hassan and said to him, 'O my
son, what was the cause of this long absence?' So he
related to her all his adventures from beginning to end;
and when she heard tell of all that had befallen him, she
gave a great cry and fell down in a swoon. He tended
her, till she came to herself and said to him, ' By Allah,
O my son, thou hast erred in parting with the wand and
the cap, for, hadst thou kept them, thou wert master of
the whole earth, in its breadth and length; but praised
be God for thy safety and that of thy wife and children ! '
They passed the night in all pleasance and happiness, and
on the morrow Hassan changed his clothes and donning
a suit of the richest apparel, went down into the bazaar
and bought slaves and slave-girls and stuffs and ornaments
and raiment and carpets and costly vessels and all manner
other precious things, whose like is not found with kings.
Moreover, be bought houses and gardens and lands and
so forth and abode with his wife and children and mother,
eating and drinking and taking their pleasure : nor did
they cease from all delight and solace of life till there
came to them the Destroyer of Delights and Sunderer
of Companies. And Glory be to Him who hath dominion
over the Seen and the Unseen, the Living, the Eternal,
who diett not 1


265


KHELIFEH THE FISHERMAN OF BAGHDAD,

There was once, of old days and in bygone ages and
times, in the city of Baghdad, a fisherman called Khelifeh,
a very poor man, who had never been married. It chanced,
one day, that he took his net and went forth, according
to his wont, to fish before the others came. When he
reached the river, he girt himself and tucked up his skirts j
then, stepping into the water, he spread his net and cast
it once and again, but brought up nothing. He ceased
not to throw it, till he had made ten casts, and still
nothing came up in it ; wherefore his breast was straitened
and his mind perplexed concerning his case and he said,
4 1 crave pardon of God the Great, there is no god but
He, the Living, the Eternal, and I repent unto Him.
There is no power and no virtue save in God, the Most
High, the Supreme ! What He wills, is, and what He
wills not, is not ! Upon God (to whom belong might
and majesty) dependeth provision! When He giveth to
a creature, none denieth him, and when He denieth a,
creature, none giveth to him.' And of the excess of his
chagrin, he recited the following couplet :

If Fate with a calamity afflict thee, thou wert best Meet it with patience

and oppose thereto an open breast ;
For God, the Lord of all that be, shall, of His power and grace, Cause

ease to follow after stress, and after travail, rest.

Then he sat awhile, with his head bowed down, ponder-
ing his case, and recited these verses also :

I rede thee, the sweet and the bitter of fortune with fortitude bear, Affidl
know, whatsoever betideth, that God of His purpose fails ne'er.


266


A night often acts upon troubles, as whiles on an abscess it acts, Whereon,
till it ripen, it worketh and doth it for bursting prepare.

And so with the shiftings of fortune, they pass o'er a man and then
cease And after no longer they irk him nor come to his memorj
fore'er.

Then he said to himself, ' I will make this one more
cast, trusting in God, so haply He may not disappoint my
expectation.' So saying, he rose and casting the net as
far as he could into the river, gathered the cords in his
"Mt^fjt hands and waited awhile. Then he pulled at it and finding
&CCCAXXU. it heavy, handled it gently and drew it in, little by little,
till he got it ashore, when he found in it a one-eyed, lame
ape. Quoth Khelifeh, ' There is no power and no virtue
but in God ! Verily, we are God's and to Him we return !
What miserable ill-luck and sorry fortune is this ! What
is come to me this blessed day? But all this is of the
ordinance of God the Most High ! ' Then he bound the
ape with a cord to a tree that grew on the river-bank,
and taking a whip he had with him, raised it in the air,
thinking to bring it down upon him, when God made the
ape speak with a fluent tongue, saying, ' O Khelifeh, hold
thy hand and beat me not, but leave me bounden to this
tree and go down to the river and cast thy net, confiding
in God, for He will give thee thy daily bread.'

So he went down to the river and casting his net, let
the cords run out. Then he pulled it in and found it
heavier than before ; so he tugged at it, till he brought
it to land, when, behold, there was another ape in it, with
front teeth wide apart, 1 eyes pencilled with kohl and hands
stained with henna ; and he was laughing and wore a
tattered waistcloth about his middle. Quoth Khelifeh,
' Praised be God who hath changed the fish of the river
into apes ! 5 Then, going up to the first ape, he said to
liim, ' See 8 © unlucky wretch, how foul was the counsel
1 Esteemed a beauty by the Arabs.


26/


thou gavest me ! None but thou made me light oa
this second ape : and for that thou gavest me good-
morrow with thy one eye and thy lameness,* I am become
distressed and weary, without dirhem or dinar.' So say-
ing, he took a stick and flourishing it thrice in the air,
was about to bring it down upon the lame ape, when it
cried out for mercy and said to him, ' I conjure thee, by
Allah, spare me for this my fellow's sake and seek of him
thy need ; for he will guide thee to thy desire ! '

So he held his hand from him and throwing down the
stick, went up to the second ape, who said to him, ' O
Khelifeh, this [my] speech 3 will profit thee nothing, ex-
cept thou hearken to what I say to thee ; but, if thou do
my bidding and cross me not, I will be the means of thine
enrichment/ 'And what hast thou to say to me,' asked
Khelifeh, 4 that I may obey thee therein ? ' 'Go and cast
thy net a third time/ replied the ape ; 1 and after I will
tell thee what to do.' So he took his net and going down
to the river, cast it once more and waited awhile. Then
he drew it in and finding it heavy, laboured at it till he
got it ashore, when he found in it yet another ape ; but
this one was red, with a blue waistcloth about his middle ;
his hands and feet were stained with henna and his eyes
blackened with kohl.

When Khelifeh saw this, he exclaimed, ' Glory to God
the Great ! Extolled be the perfection of the Lord of
Dominion ! This is indeed a blessed day from first to
last: its ascendant was fortunate in the countenance of

s All semi-civilized nations, and particularly those of the East, attach
great importance to omens of this kind, and few superstitions are more
widely prevalent than the belief that the first object seen in the morning
governs the fortunes of the day for good or evil. The Arabs consider
it especially unlucky to meet a one-eyed person or cripple ©a mch
occasions.

8 s.e. that which I am about to tell thee.


268


the first ape, and the book is known by its superscription S
Verily, this is a day of apes : there is not a fish left in the
river, and we are come out to-day but to catch apes ! '
Then he turned to the third ape and said, 'And what art
thou for another unlucky wretch ? ' Quoth the ape, ' Dost
thou not know me, O Khelifeh ? ' 1 Not I,' answered the
fisherman ; and the ape said, ' I am the ape of Abous-
saadat the Jew money-changer.' ' And what dost thou
for him ? ' asked Khelifeh. Quoth the ape, ' I give him
good-morrow every morning, and he gains five dinars ;
and again at the end of the day, I give him good-even
and he gains other five dinars.' Whereupon Khelifeh
turned to the first ape and said to him, ' See, O unlucky
wretch, what fine apes other folk have ! As for thee, thou
givest me good-morrow with thy one eye and thy lame-
ness and thine unlucky visnomy and I become poor and
bankrupt and hungry ! '

So saying, he took the stick and flourishing it thrice in
the air, was about to come down with it on the first ape,
when Aboussaadat's ape said to him, 'Hold thy hand
from him, O Khelifeh, and come hither to me, that I
may tell thee what to do.' So Khelifeh threw down the
stick and said, ' And what hast thou to say to me, O
prince of all apes ? ' ' Leave me and the other two apes
here,' answered the ape, ' and take thy net and cast it into
the river ; and whatever comes up, bring it to me, and I
itflflht will tell thee what shall pleasure thee.' ' I hear and obey/
tlCCfJDCXttt. answered the fisherman and took the net and gathered it
on his shoulder, reciting the following verses :

Whene'er my breast is straitened, for aid I supplicate A Maker wlnr

availeth to save from every strait ;
For, ere the glance returneth, the captive is set free From bonds and

healed the broken, , by grace of God the Great.
All thine affairs to Him, then, commit ; for every man Of understanding

knoweth His bounties without date.


I


269


And also these :

Thou'rt He who dost the folk, indeed, cast into weariness And cares
and woes, effect and cause, dispellest none the less.

Cause me not Thou to covet aught that is beyond my reach. How
many a man hath failed to win his wish, for all his stress 1

Then he went down to the river and casting his net,
waited awhile; after which he drew it up and found
therein a fine perch, with a big head, a tale like a ladle
and eyes like dinars. When Khelifeh saw this fish, he
rejoiced, for he had never in his life caught its like, so he
took it, marvelling, and carried it to the ape of Abous-
saadat the Jew, as 'twere he had gotten possession of the
whole world. Quoth the ape, 'O Khelifeh, what wilt
thou do with this and with thine ape?' 'I will tell thee,
O prince of apes,' answered the fisherman. 'First, I will
cast about to make away with yonder accursed one, my
ape, and take thee in his stead and give thee every day to
eat of what thou wilt.' ' Since thou hast made choice
of me,' rejoined the ape, 4 1 will tell thee how thou shalt
do, wherein, if it please God the Most High, shall be the
mending of thy fortune. Take another cord and tie me
also to a tree, where leave me and go to the midst of the
dyke and cast thy net into the Tigris. Then draw it up,
after waiting awhile, and thou shalt find therein a fish,
than which thou never sawest a finer in thy life. Bring
it to me and I will tell thee how thou shalt do after this.'

So he rose forthright and casting his net into the
Tigris, drew up a great shad, the bigness of a lamb;
never had he set eyes on its like, for it was larger than
the first fish. He carried it to the ape, who said to him,
4 Gather some green grass and put half of it in a basket ;
lay the fish on it and cover it with the other half. Then
shoulder the basket and leave us here tied and betake
thee to Baghdad. If any bespeak thee or question thee


270


by the way, answer him not, but fare on till thou comest
to the market of the money-changers, at the upper end
whereof thou wilt find the shop of Master Aboussaadat the
Jew, Sheikh of the money-changers, and wilt see him
sitting on a divan amiddleward his slaves and servants,
black and white, with a cushion behind him and two
coffers, one for gold and one for silver, before him.

Go up to him and set the basket before him, saying,
" O Aboussaadat, I went out to-day to fish and cast my net
in thy name, and God the Most High sent me this fish."
He will say, u Hast thou shown it to any but me ? " And
do thou answer, " No, by Allah ! " Then will he take it of
thee and give thee a dinar. Give it him back and he will
give thee two dinars; but do thou return them also and
take nothing from him, though he give thee the fish's
weight in gold. Then will he say to thee, " Tell me what
thou wouldst have." And do thou reply, " By Allah, I will
not sell the fish save for two words ! " He will ask, " What
are they?" And do thou answer, "Stand up and say,
'Bear witness, O ye who are present in the market, that
I give Khelifeh the fisherman my ape in exchange for his
ape and that I barter my lot for his lot and my luck for
his luck.' This is the price of the fish, and I have no need
of gold." If he do this, I will every day give thee good-
morrow and good-even, and thou shalt gain ten dinars
a day; whilst this one-eyed, lame ape shall daily give the
Jew good-morrow, and God shall afflict him every day
with an exaction, which he must needs pay, nor will he
cease to be thus afflicted till he is reduced to beggary and
hath nought. Hearken then to my words ; so shalt thou
prosper and be guided aright'

Quoth Khelifeh, 'I accept thy counsel, O king of all
apes ! But, as for this unlucky wretch, may God not bless
him ! I know not what to do with him.' ' Let him go
into the water,' said the ape, 4 and let me go also.' ' I


271


heat and obey,* answered Khelifeh as d unbound the
[three] apes, which went down into the river. Then he
washed the shad and wrapping it in grass, laid it in the
basket, and shouldering the latter, set out for Baghdad,
chanting the following quatrain :

Commit thy case to God and tliou shalt have security : Do kindness

ever, so thou shalt be from repentance free.
Consort not with suspected folk, lest doubt should fall on thee, And

guard thy tongue, reviling not, lest thou reviled be.

When he came to the city, the people knew him and cried -j^r(^ j
out to him, saying, 4 What hast thou there, O Khelifeh ? ' v 0CCCXJC«ft<
But he paid no heed to them and went on till he came .
to the money-changers' bazaar and passing between the
shops, found the Jew seated at the upper end, with his
servants in attendance upon him, as he were a king of
the kings of Khorassan. So he went up to him and stood
before him, whereupon Aboussaadat raised his eyes and
knowing him, said, ' Welcome, O Khelifeh ! What wantest
thou ? If any have missaid thee or picked a quarrel with
thee, tell me and I will go with thee to the Master of
Police, who shall do thee justice on him.' ' Nay, as thy
head liveth, Q chief of the Jews,' replied Khelifeh, 'none
hath missaid me. But I went forth this morning and
casting my net into the Tigris, in thy name, brought up
this fish.'

Therewith he opened the basket and threw the fish be-
fore the Jew, who admired it and said, 4 By the Pentateuch
and the Ten Commandments, I dreamt last night that the
Virgin 1 came to me and said, " Know, O Aboussaadat,
that I have sent thee a fine present I " And doubtless it

5 A characteristic trait of ignorance in the story-teller, arising out of
the sublime indifference and contempt with which the ordinary Muslim
regards the religion, manners and customs of the 48 Barbarians," as (iis
common with the Chinese) he styles all peoples not of his own race.


272

is this fish.' Then he turned to Kbelifeh and said to him,
' Tell me, on thy faith, hath any seen it but I ? ' ' No,
by Allah and by Abou Bekr the Truth-teller,' 1 answered
Khelifeh, 'none hath seen it but thou, O chief of the
Jews ! ' Whereupon the Jew turned to one of his servants
and said to him, 'Carry this fish to my house and bid
Saadeh dress it and fry and broil it, against I make an
end of my business and come home.' And Khelifeh
said, ' Go, boy ; let the master's wife fry some of it
and broil the rest.' ' I hear and obey, O my lord, 9
answered the boy, and taking the fish, went away with it
to the house.

Then the Jew put out his hand and gave the fisherman
a dinar, saying, 'Take this for thyself, O Khelifeh, and
spend it on thy family.' When Khelifeh saw the dinar
in his hand, he took it, saying, 'Glory to the Lord of
Dominion ! ' as if he had never seen aught of gold in
his life, and went away ; but before he had gone far, he
bethought him of the ape's injunction and turning back,
threw the dinar to the Jew, saying, 'Take thy gold and
give folk back their fish. Are folk a laughing-stock to
thee?' The Jew thought he was jesting and offered him
other two dinars, but he said, 'Without a joke, give me
the fish. How knewst thou I would sell it at this price ? 9
Whereupon the Jew gave him two more dinars and said,
'Take these five dinars for thy fish and leave covetise.'
So Khelifeh took the five dinars and went away, rejoicing,
looking and marvelling at the gold and saying, ' Glory be
to God ! There is not with the Khalif of Baghdad what
is with me this day ! '

Then he went on till he came to the end of the market,
when he remembered the ape's words and returning to the
Jew, threw him back the gold. Quoth he, 'What ails
thee, O Khelifeh ? Dost thou want change for thy dinars
1 The first Khalif, so called.


273


in dirhems?' 'I want nor dirhems nor dinars,' answered
the fisherman. ' I only want thee to give me back folk's
fish.' With this the Jew was enraged and cried out at
him, saying, 'O fisherman, thou bringest me a fish, that
is not worth a dinar, and I give thee five for it; yet art
thou not content ! Art thou mad ? Tell me for how much
thou wilt sell it.' ' I will not sell it for silver nor gold, 5
answered Khelifeh, ' only for two words that thou shalt
say to me.'

When the Jew heard this, he rolled his eyes and
breathed hard and ground his teeth for rage 1 and said to
him, ' O scum of the Muslims, wilt thou have me forswear
my faith for the sake of thy fish, and wilt thou debauch me
from my religion and my belief that I inherited from my
forefathers ? ' Then he cried out to his servants, sayingi
' Out on you ! Baste me this unlucky rogue's back and
drub him soundly ! ' So they fell on him and beat him
till he fell down beneath the shop, and the Jew said to
them, £ Leave him and let him rise.' Whereupon Khelifeh
sprang up, as if nothing ailed him, and the Jew said to
him, 'Tell me what price thou askest for the fish and I
will give it thee ; for thou hast gotten but scurvy fare of
us this day.' ' Have no fear for me, O master,' answered
the fisherman, ' because of the beating ; for I can eat ten
asses' allowance of stick.'

The Jew laughed at his words and said, ' God on thee,
tell me what thou wilt have and by the virtue of my faith,
I will give it thee ! ' Quoth the fisherman, ' I will take
nothing of thee save the two words I spoke of.' And the

1 Thinking that by "two words" Khelifeh meant that he should
pronounce the double profession (commonly known as "The Two
Words") of the Mohammedan Faith, i.e. " I testify that there is no god
but God !" and "I testify that Mohammed is the Apostle of God I"
tad so become a Muslim.


VOL. VII.


1.8


274

Jew said, ' Meseemeth thou wouldst have me become a
Muslim.' ' By Allah, O Jew,' replied Khelifeh, ' if thou
become a Muslim, it will neither advantage the Muslims
nor hurt the Jews ; and in like manner, if thou hold to
thy heresy, it will neither damage the Muslims nor profit
the Jews. But what I desire of thee is that thou rise to
thy feet and say, " Bear witness against me, O people of
the market, that I barter my ape for that of Khelifeh the
fisherman and my lot in the world for his lot and my luck
3£"l(rfu for his luck." ' ' If that be all thou desires t,' said the Jew,
GCCCXXXb. 'it is lightly done.' So he rose forthright and standing
on his feet, repeated the required words ; after which he
turned to the fisherman and said to him, ' Hast thou aught
else to ask of me?' 'No,' answered he, and the Jew
said, ' Go in peace.'

So Khelifeh took up his net and basket and returned
straight to the Tigris, where he threw his net and pulled
it in. He found it heavy and brought it not ashore but
with difficulty, when he found it full of fish of all kinds.
Presently, up came a woman with a dish, who gave him a
dinar, and he gave her fish for it ; and after her an eunuch,
who also bought a dinar's worth of fish, and another and
another, till he had sold ten dinars' worth. And he
continued to sell ten dinars' worth of fish daily for ten
days, till he had gotten a hundred dinars.

Now he dwelt in the Passage of the Merchants, and as
he lay one night in his lodging, [drunken with hashish,]
he said to himself, ' O Khelifeh, the folk all know thee for
a poor fisherman, and now thou hast gotten a hundred
dinars. The Commander of the Faithful will assuredly
hear of this from some one, and mayhap he will be in
need of money and will send for thee and say to thee,
" I have occasion for a sum of money and I have been told
that thou hast a hundred dinars : so do thou lend them to
me." u O Commander of the Faithful," shall I answer, " I


275


am a poor man, and whoever told thee that I had a hundred
dinars lied against me; for I have nought of this." There-
upon he will commit me to the chief of the police, saying,
" Strip him of his clothes and torment him with beating, till
he confesses and gives up the hundred dinars in his posses-
sion." Wherefore meseems the best thing I can do, to
provide against this predicament, is to rise forthright and
baste myself with the whip, so to use myself to beating.'
And the fumes of the hashish [he had eaten] said to him,
* Rise, put off thy clothes.'

So he arose and putting off his clothes, proceeded to
belabour himself with a whip, laying every other blow
upon a leathern pillow he had by him and roaring out the
while, ' Alas ! Alas S By Allah, O my lord, it is a false
saying and they have lied against me ; for I am a poor
fisherman and have nought of the goods of the world !
The noise of the blows falling on the cushion and on his
body resounded in the night and the folk heard it, and
amongst others the merchants, and said, ' What can ail
yonder poor fellow, that he crieth and we hear the noise
of blows falling on him ? It would seem robbers have
broken in upon him and are tormenting him.' So they
all came forth of their lodgings, at the noise of the blows
and the crying, and repaired to Khelifeh's door, but found
it locked and said to each other, 6 Belike the robbers have
come in upon him from the back of the [adjoining] saloon.
It behoves us to climb over by the roofs.'

So they climbed over the roofs and coming down
through the ventilator, saw him naked and flogging him-
self and said to him, * What ails thee, O Khelifeh ? '
1 Know, O folk,' answered he, ' that I have gotten some
dinars and fear lest my case be reported to the Com-
mander of the Faithful and he send for me and demand
them of me ; whereupon I should deny, and I fear thatj
if I deny, he will torture me : so I am torturing myself, b|


276


way of using myself to what may come.* The merchants
laughed at him and said, ' Leave this foolery, may God not
bless thee and the dinars thou hast gotten ! For thou
hast disturbed us this night and troubled our hearts.'

So Khelifeh left flogging himself and slept till the
morning, when he arose and would have gone about his
business, but bethought him of his hundred dinars and
said in himself, ' If I leave them at home, thieves will
steal thern, and if I put them in a belt about my waist,
belike some one will see me and lay in wait for me in
some lonely place and slay me and take the money from
me : but I have a device that should serve me right well/
So he made him a pocket in the collar of his gown and
tying the hundred dinars up in a purse, laid them therein.
"MlCjfjt Then he took his net and basket and staff and went
feCQXJtUu down to the Tigris, where he cast his net, but brought
up nothing. So he removed to another place and cast
again, but still the net came up empty ; and he went on
removing from place to place and casting the net without
better success, till he had gone half a day's journey from
the city. So he said in himself, ' By Allah, I will cast but
this once more, whatever come of it ! '

Then he cast the net with all his foree, of the excess
of his vexation, and the purse flew out of his pocket and
lighting in the middle of the stream, was carried away
by the current; whereupon he threw down the net and
pulling off his clothes, left them on the bank and plunged
into the water after the purse. He dived for it nigh a
hundred times, without chancing on it, till his strength
was exhausted and he came up for sheer fatigue. When
he despaired of finding the purse, he returned to the
shore, where he saw nothing but his net and basket and
staff and sought for his clothes, but could light on no
trace of them : so he said to himself, ( O vilest of those
whereon was made the byword, " The pilgrimage is not


277


perfected but by swiving the camel 1 " 1 Then he wrapped
the net about him and taking the staff in one hand and
the basket in the other, went trotting about like a camel
in heat, running right and left and backward and forward,
dishevelled and covered with dust, as he were a refractory-
Afrit let loose from Solomon's prison. 3

Now the Khalif Haroun er Reshid had a friend, a
jeweller called Ibn el Kirnas, and all the merchants and
brokers and middle-men and other the folk knew him for
the Khalifs merchant, wherefore there was nought sold
in Baghdad, by way of rarities and things of price or
slaves, male or female, but was first shown to him. As
he sat one day in his shop, there came up to him the
chief of the brokers, with a slave-girl, whose like eyes
never saw, for she was of the utmost beauty and grace
and symmetry, and among her excellences was that she
knew all arts and sciences and could make verses and
play upon all manner of instruments of music. So he
bought her for five thousand dinars and clothed her with
other thousand ; after which he carried her to the Khalif,
with whom she lay the night and who made trial of her
in every kind of knowledge and accomplishment and found
her versed in all manner arts and sciences, having no equal
in her time. Her name was Cout el Culoub and she was
even as saith the poet :

I gaze on her, when she unveils, again and yet again : In her refusal of

herself to sight are woes and bane.
She doth the slender-necked gazelle resemble, when she turns ; And to

gazelles, 'tis said, doth grace of movements appertain.

1 i,e. "O vilest of sinners !" meaning the thie£ Pilgrimage wipes
away all sins and the ignorant Muslim regards the completion of the
rite and the consequent possession of a clean bill of moral health as an
excuse for beginning again without delay. Hence the saying.

% i.e. from one of the vessels of brass wherein Solomon was fabled to
ha.ve confined those of the Jinn who refused to obey him. See supra,,
VoL I. The Fisherman and the Genie ; also Vol. V. The City of Brass,


2/8


And what is this beside the saying of another ?

Give me brunettes ; the Syrian spears, so limber and so straight, Tell
of the slender dusky maids, so lithe and proud of gait.

Languid of eyelids, with a down like silk upon her cheek, Within her
wasting lover's heart she queens it still in state.

On the morrow, the Khalif sent for Ibn el Kirnas and
ordered him ten thousand dinars to her price. And his
heart was taken up with her and he forsook the princess
Zubeideh bint 1 el Casim, for all she was his father's
brother's daughter, 2 and all his favourites and abode a
whole month without stirring from Cout el Culoub's side,
save to go to the Friday prayers and return to her in
haste. This was grievous to the grandees of the realm
and they made their complaint thereof to the Vizier Jaafer
the Barmecide, who waited till the next Friday, when he
entered the congregational mosque and foregathering with
the Khalif, related to him all that occurred to him of
extraordinary stories concerning love, with intent to draw
out what was in his mind. ' By Allah, O Jaafer,' said
Haroun, ' this is not of my choice ; but my heart is caught
in the snare of love and I know not what is to be done ! '
'O Commander of the Faithful,' replied Jaafer, 'this girl
Cout el Culoub is become at thy disposal and of the
number of thy servants, and that which the hand pos-
sesseth the soul coveteth not. Moreover, I will tell thee
another thing and it is that the greatest glory of kings
and princes is in hunting and the pursuit of sport and
victory; and if thou apply thyself to this, belike it will
divert thee from her, and it may be thou wilt forget her.'
' Thou sayest well, O Jaafer,' rejoined the Khalif. * Come,
let us go a-hunting forthright/

1 i.e. daughter of,

2 She was the daughter of Jaafer, son 'of El Mensour, second Khalif
ot the Abbaside dynasty, I do not know why she is called daughter of
El Casim.


279


Accordingly, as soon as the Friday prayers were over,
they left the mosque and mounting their mules, rode forth tNTtCflpt
to the chase. They fared on into the open country, uTCOCXXbit
engaged in talk, and their attendants outwent them. Pre-
sently the heat became oppressive and the Khalif said to
his vizier, ' O Jaafer, I am sore athirst' Then he looked
round and espying a figure in the distance on a high
mound, said to Jaafer, ' Seest thou what I see ? ' ' Yes, O
Commander of the Faithful,' answered the vizier ; ' I see
a dim figure on a high mound ; belike he is the keeper
of a garden or of a cucumber-plot, and in either case s
water will not be lacking in his neighbourhood. I will
go to him and fetch thee some.' But Er Reshid said,
' My mule is swifter than thine ; so do thou abide here,
on account of the troops, whilst I go myself to him and
get of him drink and return.'

So saying, he spurred his mule, which started off like
fleeting wind or lapsing water and brought him, in the
twinkling of an eye, to the mound, when he found the
figure he had seen to be none other than Khelifeh the
fisherman, naked and wrapped in the net ; and indeed he
was horrible to look upon, as he swayed to and fro, with
eyes like flaming cressets for very redness and dishevelled
hair, covered with dust, as he were an Afrit or a lion.
The Khalif saluted him and he returned his salutation;
and he was angry and fires might have been kindled at
his breath. Quoth Er Reshid, ' O man, hast thou any
water ? ' And Khelifeh answered, ' O fellow, art thou
blind or mad? Get thee to the river Tigris, for it is
behind this mound.'

So the Khalif turned the mound and going down to the
river, drank and watered his mule : then he returned to
Khelifeh and said to him, 1 Harkye, sirrah, what ails thee
to stand here, and what is thy calling ? 5 Quoth the
fisherman, i This is a stranger question than that about


280


the water. Seest thou not the tools of my craft on ray
shoulder?' 'Belike thou art a fisherman?' said the
Khalif, and he answered, ' Yes.' ' Where is thy gown ? '
asked Er Reshid. ' And where are thy waistcloth and
girdle and [the rest of] thy clothes ?' Now these were
the very things that Khelifeh had lost, like for like ; so,
when he heard the Khalif name them, he took it into
his head that it was he who had stolen his clothes from
the river bank and coming down from the top of the
mound, swiftlier than the blinding lightning, laid hold
of the mule's bridle, saying, ' Harkye, sirrah, give me
back my things and leave jesting.' 'By Allah,' replied
Er Reshid, 'I have not seen thy clothes, nor know I
aught of them ! '

Now the Khalif had large cheeks and a small mouth;
so Khelifeh said to him, ' Belike, thou art a singer or a
piper by trade ? But give me back my clothes, without
more ado, or I will belabour thee with this staff till thou
bepiss thyself and foul thy hose.' When Er Reshid saw
the staff in the fisherman's hand and that he had the
vantage of him, he said in himself, ' By Allah, I cannot
brook half a blow of that staff from this mad beggar ! '
Now he had on a satin gown; so he pulled it off and
gave it to Khelifeh, saying, 'Take this in place of thy
clothes.' The fisherman took it and turned it about and
said, ' My clothes are worth ten of this painted clout'
4 Put it on, till I bring thee thy clothes,' rejoined the
Khalif. So Khelifeh donned the gown, but finding it
too long for him, took a knife he had with him, tied to
the handle of his basket, and cut off nigh a third of the
skirt, so that it [but] fell beneath his knees.

Then he turned to Er Reshid and said to him, ' God on
thee, O piper, tell me what wage thou gettest every month
from thy master, for thy craft of piping.' ' My wage is
ten dinars a month/ replied the Khalif. And Khelifeh


28l


said, 'By Allah, my poor fellow, I am sorry for thee!

Why, I make thy ten dinars every day 1 Hast thou &
mind to take service with me and I will teach thee the art
of fishing and share my gain with thee ? So shalt thou
earn five dinars a day and be my knave and I will protect
thee against thy master with this staff.' ' I will well,'
answered Er Reshid ; and Khelifeh said, ' Then get off thy
she-ass and tie her up, so she may serve us to carry the
fish hereafter, and come hither, that I may teach thee to
fish forthright.'

So the Khalif alighted and hobbling his mule, tucked his
skirts into his girdle, and Khelifeh said to him, ' Harkye,
piper, lay hold of the net thus and put it over thine
arm thus and cast it into the Tigris thus.' Accordingly,
Er Reshid took heart of grace and casting the net, as the
fisherman showed him, pulled at it, but could not draw
it up. So Khelifeh came to his aid and tugged at it
with him ; but the two together could not pull it up j
whereupon, ' O piper of ill omen,' said the fisherman, ' I
took thy gown in place of my clothes ; but, if I find my
net torn, I will have thine ass for it and will beat thee to
boot, till thou bepiss and bemire thyself!' Quoth Er
Reshid, ' Let us both pull at once.'

So they both pulled at once and succeeded with difficulty
in dragging the net ashore, when they found it full of fish
of all kinds and colours ; and Khelifeh said to Er Reshid, ftTt<$$
1 By Allah, O piper, thou art an ugly fellow ; but, if thou i^tt
apply thyself to fishing, thou wilt make a fine fisherman. XXXbtfi
But now thou wert better mount thine ass and go to the
market and fetch me a pair of frails, and I will take care
of the fish, till thou return, when we will load it on thine
ass's back. I have scales and weights and all we require,,
and thou wilt have nothing to do but to hold the scales
and take the money ; for we have here twenty dinars'
worth of fish. So be quick with the frails and loiter not'


282


8 1 hear and obey,' answered the Khalif and mounting,
left him with the fish.

Then he spurred his mule, in great good humour, and
ceased not laughing over his adventure with the fisherman,
till he came up to Jaafer, who said to him, ' O Commander
of the Faithful, belike, when thou wentest to drink, thou
foundest a pleasant garden and enteredst and tookst thy
pleasure therein alone?' At this Er Reshid fell a-laughing
again and all the Barmecides rose and kissed the ground
before him, saying, ' O Commander of the Faithful, may
God make joys to endure for thee and do away troubles
from thee ! What was the cause of thy tarrying and what
hath befallen thee ? ' ' Verily,' answered the Khalif, * a
right rare and pleasant thing hath befallen me.' And he
told them what had passed between himself and the fisher-
man, how he had accused him of stealing his clothes and
he had given him his gown and how he had cut off a part
of it, finding it too long for him. 'By Allah, O Com-
mander of the Faithful/ said Jaafer, 1 1 had it in mind to
beg the gown of thee : but now I will go straight to the
fisherman and buy it of him.' ' By Allah,' answered the
Khalif, ' he hath cut off a third part of the skirt and spoilt
it ! But, O Jaafer, I am tired with fishing in the river,
for I have caught great store of fish, and my master
Khelifeh is waiting with them on the river-bank for me to
return to him with a couple of frails and a cleaver. 1 Then
we are to go, he and I, to the market and sell the fish and
share the price.'

' O Commander of the Faithful,' said Jaafer, ' I will bring
you a purchaser for your fish.' And Er Reshid rejoined,
e O Jaafer, by the virtue of my holy forefathers, whoso
bringeth me one of the fish that are before Khelifeh, who

1 Apparently for the purpose of spotting and cleaning the fish and
scraping off their scales.


283

taught me to fish, I will give him a gold dinar for it ! ' So
the crier proclaimed among the troops that they should go
forth and buy fish for the Khalif, and they all arose and
made for the river-side. So, while Khelifeh was awaiting
for the Khalifs return with the two frails, the guards
swooped down upon him like vultures and took the fish
and wrapped them in gold-embroidered handkerchiefs,
beating one another in their eagerness. Whereupon quoth
Khelifeh, ' Doubtless these are of the fish of Paradise ! '
and taking two fish in each hand, plunged into the water
up to his neck and fell a-saying, ' O God, by the virtue of
these fish, let Thy servant the piper, my partner, come to
me forthwith ! '

At this moment up came the chief of the Khalifs
black slaves, who had tarried behind the rest, by reason
of his horse having stopped to stale by the way, and
finding all the fish gone, looked right and left, till he
espied Khelifeh standing in the water, with the fish in his
hands, and said to him, 'Come hither, O fisherman !'
But Khelifeh answered, ' Begone and meddle not with
what doth not concern thee ! ' So the eunuch went up
to him and said, ' Give me the fish and I will pay thee
their price.' ' Art thou little of wit ? ' replied the fisher-
man. ' I will not sell them.' Therewith the eunuch drew
his mace upon him, and Khelifeh cried out, saying, ' Hold
thy hand, wretch that thou art i Better largesse than the
mace.' 1 So saying, he threw the fish to the eunuch, who
took them and laid them in his handkerchief. Then he
put his hand in his pocket, but found not a single dirhem
and said to Khelifeh, * O fisherman, verily, thou art out
of luck ; for, by Allah, I have not a rap about me ! But
come to-morrow to the palace of the Khalifate and ask

1 i.e. better make thee a present of the fish than have my crows
sracked with the mace.


284


for the eunuch Sendel ; whereupon the slaves will direct
thee to me and thou shalt get what falleth to thy lot and
go thy ways therewith.' Quoth Khelifeh, * Indeed, this is
a blessed day and its blessedness was manifest from the
first of it ! '

Then he shouldered his net and returned to Baghdad •
and as he passed through the streets, the people saw the
Khalif's gown on him and stared at him ; [but he paid no
heed to them and fared on] till he came to the gate of
his quarter, by which was the shop of the Khalifs tailor.
When the latter saw him wearing a dress of the apparel
of the Khalif, worth a thousand dinars, he said to him,
4 O Khelifeh, whence hadst thou that gown ? ' 4 What ails
thee to meddle ? ' replied the fisherman. ' [An thou must
know,] I had it of one whom I taught to fish and who
is become my apprentice. Moreover, I forgave him the
cutting-off of his hand, 1 for that he stole my clothes and
gave me this clout in their place.' So the tailor knew
that the Khalif had come upon him, as he was fishing,
tNTfafjt and jested with him and given him the gown ; and Khelifeh
toenXtX, went to his house.

Meanwhile, when the lady Zubeideh heard of the Khalifs
devotion to Cout el Culoub, there took hold upon her the
jealousy proper to women, so that she refused meat and
drink and forswore the delight of sleep and awaited the
Khalifs going forth on a journey or what not, that she
might set a snare for the damsel in his absence. So,
when she learnt that he was gone ,a-hunting, she caused
her women furnish the palace and decorate it after the
most magnificent manner and serve up viands and con-
fections ; and amongst the rest she made a china dish of
the daintiest sweetmeats, in which she had put henbane.

1 The punishment decreed by Muslim law against him who steak
more than the value of a quarter dinar.


285


Then she bade one of her eunuchs go to the damsel and
bid her to eat with her, saying, ' The lady Zubeideh bint
el Casim, the wife of the Commander of the Faithful, hath
drunken medicine to-day and having heard tell of the
sweetness of thy singing, is minded to divert herself with
somewhat of thy fashion.' Cout el Culoub answered,
'Hearing and obedience [are due] to God and the lady
Zubeideh,' and rose forthright, knowing not what was
nidden for her in the secret purpose of God. Then she
took with her what instruments she needed and accom-
panied the eunuch to the presence of the princess.

When she entered, she kissed the ground before her
again and again, then rising to her feet, said, ' Peace be
on the lady of the lofty curtain and the inaccessible
majesty, the daughter of the house of Abbas and scion of
the family of the Prophet ! May God fulfil thee of peace
and prosperity in the days and the years ! ' Then she
stood with the rest of the women and eunuchs, and the
lady Zubeideh looked at her and saw a damsel with
smooth cheeks and breasts like pomegranates, moon-
bright face, flower-white forehead and great black eyes.
Languor sat on her eyelids and her face beamed with
light. It seemed as if the sun rose from her forehead
and the darkness of the night from her brow-locks. The
fragrance of musk exhaled from her breath and flowers
bloomed from her lovely face; the moon beamed from
her forehead and the branches waved in her slender
shape. She was like the full moon shining in the
darkness of the night; her eyes wantoned, her eyebrows
were arched like a bow and her lips moulded of coral
Her beauty amazed all who saw her and her glances
dispelled all who looked on her. Glory be to Him
who created and fashioned her and wrought her to per-
fection ! Brief 5 she was even as saith the poet of one
who favoured her t


286


When she is wroth, I trow, thou seest folk slain and sped, And whets

she's pleased, their souls return unto their stead.
Eyes hath she, whence proceed bewitching looks, wherewith She slayetlt

whom she will and raiseth from the dead.
All creatures with her glance she captivates ; it seems As if all folk to

her were servants, born and bred.

* Welcome and fair welcome to thee, O Cout el Culoub i *
said Zubeideh. ' Sit and divert us with thine accomplish-
ments and the goodliness of thy fashion.' * I hear and
obey,' answered the damsel and putting out her hand,
took the tambourine, whereof one of its praisers speaks
in the following, verses :

© thou o' the tabret, my heart for longing flies And whilst thou smitest,

aloud for passion cries.
Blame not, my fairest, a wounded heart, a wight Who for thine answer

to his petition sighs.
So say, — or weighty or light, — a word and sing Whate'er thou pleasest:

thou charmest anywise.
Be kind ; discover thy face, my love ; arise And dance and gambol and

please all ears and eyes.

Then she smote the tambourine briskly and sang
thereto, that she arrested the birds in the air and the
place danced with them ; after which she laid down the
tambourine and took the flageolet, whereof it is said :

Eyes hath she and the pupils thereunto that belong Are governed by the
fingers to undiscordant song.

And as the poet also says :

"When it bringeth with fluting the songs to the goal, The time, for sheer
gladness, yields solace of soul.

Then she laid down the flageolet, after she had charmed
therewith all who were present, and took up the lute,
whereof saith the poet :

How many a tender branch a lute for singing-girl becomes, Whereto the

hearts of erudite and generous are fain !
She sweeps it with her finger-tips, of her vivacity Tormenting it, whafc

while she binds it fast with many a chain.


287


Then she turned its pegs and tuned its strings and
laying it in her lap, bent over it as the mother bends over
her child; and it seemed as it were of her and her lute
that the poet spoke in the following verses :

Featly she discourseth on the Persian string, Sense in him, who senseless
was, awakening.

Yea, she tells that passion deadly is and plays Havoc with the Muslims'

wit and reasoning.
Loj a maid, by Allah, in whose hand, in lieu Of a mouth-possessor s

speaks a painted thing.
As a skilled physician stops the flux of blood, With the lute she staunches

passion's running spring.

Then she preluded in fourteen different modes and sang
an entire piece to the lute, so as to confound the lookers-
on and delight her hearers. After which she recited this
couplet :

Blest is the coming unto thee : New joys therein for ever be.
Delights sans cease to it pertain And never-ending jubilee.

Then she rose and exhibited tricks of sleight of hand
and legerdemain and all manner of pleasing arts, till the
lady Zubeideh came near to fall in love with her and said
in herself, ' Verily, my cousin Er Reshid is not to blame
for loving her!' Then Cout el Culoub kissed the earth
before Zubeideh and sat down, whereupon they set food
before her. Then they brought her the drugged dish of
sweetmeats and she ate thereof ; and hardly had it settled
in her stomach when her head fell backward and she sank
on the ground, asleep. With this, Zubeideh said to her
women, ' Carry her up to one of the chambers, till I call
for her.' And they answered, ' We hear and obey.' Then
she bade one of her eunuchs fashion her a chest and com-
manded to make the semblance of a tomb and to spread
the report that Cout el Culoub had choked and died.


288


warning her attendants that she would strike off the head
of whoever should say, ' She is alive.'

Presently, the Khalif returned from the chase, and his
first enquiry was for the damsel. So there came to him
one of his eunuchs, whom Zubeideh had charged to say
she was dead, if the Khalif should ask for her, and kissing
the ground before him, said, ' May thy head live, O my
lord ! Know that Cout el Culoub choked in eating and
is dead.' Whereupon, ' May God never gladden thee with
good news, O wicked slave ! ' cried Er Reshid, and entered
the palace, where he heard of her death from every one
and said, 'Where is her tomb?' So they brought him
to the burial-place and showed him the pretended tomb,
saying, 'This is it.' When he saw it, he cried out and
wept and embraced it, reciting the following verses :

By Allah. O tomb, have her beauties ceased and disappeared from sight
And is the countenance changed and wan, that shone so wonder-
bright ?

O tomb, O tomb, thou art neither heaven nor garden, verily : How
comes it then that swaying branch and moon in thee unite ?

He abode awhile by the tomb, weeping sore for her,
after which he arose and went away, in the utmost

distress.

Meanwhile, Zubeideh, seeing that her plot had suc-
ceeded, sent for the damsel and locking her up in the
chest, said to the eunuch, ' Make shift to sell this chest
and make it a condition with the purchaser that he buy
it locked ; then give alms with the price.' So he took it
and went forth, to do her bidding.

To return to Khelifeh the fisherman. When the morning
arose an lighted [all things] with its radiance, he said to
himself, 4 1 cannot do better to-day than visit the eunuch
who bought the fish of me, for he appointed me to come
to him in the palace of the Khalifate.' So he went forth


289


of his lodging, intending for the palace, and when he
came thither, he found eunuchs and slaves and servants,
black and white, sitting and standing, and looking at
them, saw, seated amongst them, the eunuch who had
bought the fish of him, with the others waiting on him.
Presently, one of the servants called out to him j where-
upon the eunuch turned to see who he was and knew
him for the fisherman.

When Khelifeh was ware that he saw him and recog-
nized him, he said to him, c I have not failed [of my
appointment], O Rosy-cheeks ! 1 On this wise are men
of their word.' ' By Allah, thou art right, O fisherman/
replied the eunuch, laughing, and put his hand to his
pouch, to give him somewhat ; but at that moment
there arose a great clamour. So he raised his head
to see what was to do and finding that it was the
Vizier Jaafer the Barmecide coming forth from the
Khalifs presence, rose and went before him, and they
walked about, conversing, a long while. Khelifeh waited
awhile ; then, growing weary of standing and finding
that the eunuch took no heed of him, he set himself
in his way and beckoned to him from afar, saying,
'O my lord Rosy-cheeks, [give me my due and] let
me go ! '

The eunuch saw him, but was ashamed to answer him,
because of the vizier's presence ; so he went on talking
with Jaafer and took no notice of the fisherman. Where-
upon quoth Khelifeh, £ O tardy paymaster ! May God
put to shame all curmudgeons and all who take people's
goods and bafne them! I appeal to thee, O my lord


s An ironical nickname, bestowed by Khelifeh on the eunuch, in
allusion to his black colour, much after the same fashion as in America
and the West Indies, where it is common to call a particularly black
negro " Snowball."

VOL. VII.


2Cp

Paunch o bran, 1 to give me my due and let me go P
The eunuch heard him, but was ashamed to answer him
before Jaafer ; and the latter saw the fisherman beckon-
ing and talking to him, though he knew not what he
said ; so he said to Sendel, misliking his behaviour,
* O eunuch, what would yonder poor fellow with thee ? '
5 Dost thou not know him, Q my lord the vizier ? '
asked Sendel ; and Jaafer answered, 1 By Allah, I know
him not i How should I know a man I have never
seen before ? ' ' O my lord,' rejoined the eunuch, ' this
is the fisherman whose fish we seized on the banks of
the Tigris. I came too late to get any and was ashamed
to return to the Commander of the Faithful, empty-
handed, when all the rest had some. Presently I espied
the fisherman standing in mid-stream, calling on God,
with four fish in his hands, and said to him, "Give me
what thou hast there and take their price." So he
gave me the fish and I put my hand into my pocket, to
give him somewhat, but found it empty and said, " Come
to me in the palace, and I will give thee wherewithal
to succour thy poverty." Accordingly, he came to me
to-day and I was putting my hand to my pouch, to
give him somewhat, when thou earnest forth and I rose
to wait on thee and was diverted with thee from him, till
he grew tired of waiting ; and this is how he comes to be
standing here.'

!Rtg|)t When the vizier heard this, he smiled and said, *0

\tm\l

1 It is not on record, as might be supposed from the speech of Khelifeh,
that Jaafer was stout or (to borrow a Rabelaisian word) ventripotent ; on
the contrary,, he appears to have been a man of unusual elegance and
distinction, and it would seem, therefore, that the fisherman who is
represented as a blundering fool, without perception or knowledge
to temper his ignorant assurance) bestowed on him the nickname o£
ss Paunch o' bran " at random, after the manner of his class ia every
&ge and country „


291

eunuch, how is it that this fisherman cometh in his hout
of need and thou fulfillest not his desire ? Dost thou not
know him, O chief of the eunuchs ? ' ' No,' answered
Sendel, and Jaafer said, 'This is the master and partner
of the Commander of the Faithful, and our lord the Khalif
hath arisen this morning, strait of breast and heavy of
heart, nor is there aught will lighten his breast like this
fisherman. So let him not go, till I take the Khalif's
pleasure concerning him and bring him before him ;
peradventure God will relieve him of his oppression
and distract him from the loss of Cout el Culoub, by
means of the fisherman's presence, and he will give him
wherewithal to better himself; and thou wilt be the
cause of this.' ' O my lord,' replied Sendel, ' do as thou
wilt, and may God the Most High long continue thee
a pillar of the dynasty of the Commander of the Faith-
ful, whose shadow God perpetuate and prosper it, root
and branch ! '

Then the vizier went in to the Khalif and Sendel
ordered the attendants not to leave the fisherman j where-
upon, ( How goodly is thy bounty, O Rosy-cheeks ! ' cried
Khelifeh. ' The seeker is become the sought. I come to
seek my due, and they imprison me for arrears S ' When
Jaafer came in to the presence of the Khalif, he found
him sitting with his head bowed down, sick at heart and
absorbed in melancholy thought, chanting the verses of
the poet :

My censors bid me be consoled for her : what power, I pray, Over my

heart have I, if it my hest will not obey ?
How from a tender maiden's love shall one endure ? In me My love's

estrangement to support I find no patience aye.
I can't forget her nor the time the cup 'twixtus went round And for her

glances' wine, o'er me did drunkenness hold sway.


Quoth Jaafer, 6 Peace be upon thee, O Commander of


292


the Faithful and Defender of the Faith and descendant
of the uncle of the prince of Apostles, God bless him and
save him and all his family ! ' The Khalif raised his head
and answered, * And on thee be peace and the mercy of
God and His blessings ! ' Quoth Jaafer ; * If it like the
Commander of the Faithful, his servant will speak without
restraint.' ' And when was restraint put upon thee in
speech/ asked the Khalif, * and thou the Prince of
Viziers ? Say what thou wilt.' ' O my lord/ answered
Jaafer, ' when I went out from before thee, intending for
my house, I saw thy master and teacher and partner,
Khelifeh the fisherman, standing at the door, and he was
aggrieved at thee and complaining of thee and saying,
" Glory be to God ! I taught him to fish and he went
away to fetch me a pair of frails, but returned not: and
this is not the way a partner should use his partner nor
an apprentice his master." So, if thou hast a mind to
partnership, well and good; and if not, tell him, that he
may take another to partner.'

When the Khalif heard this, he smiled and his heart
was lightened and he said, ' My life on thee, is this the
truth thou sayest, that the fisherman standeth at the
door ? ' { By thy life, O Commander of the Faithful/
answered Jaafer, ' he standeth at the door.' Quoth the
Khalif, i O Jaafer, by Allah, I will do my best to give him
his due 1 If God send him, at my hands, misery, he shall
have it; and if fortune, he shall have it' Then he took
a piece of paper and cutting it in pieces, said to the
Vizier, ' O Jaafer, write down twenty sums of money,
from one dinar to a thousand, and the names of all
kinds of offices and dignities from the least employ to
the Khalifate, also twenty kinds of punishment from the
lightest beating to death.' ' I hear and obey, Q Com-
mander of the Faithful,' answered Jaafer and did as ise
was bidden.


293


Then said the Khalif, ' O Jaafer, I mean to summon
the fisherman and bid him take one of these papers, whose
contents none knoweth save thou and I ; and I swear,
by my holy forefathers and by my kinship to Hemzeh 1
and Akil, s that whatsoever is written in the paper he shall
choose, I will give -it to him ; though it be the Khalifate,
I will divest myself thereof and invest him therewith and
grudge it not to him ; and on the other hand, if there
be written therein hanging or mutilation or death, I will
execute it upon him. Now go and fetch him to me/
When Jaafer heard this, he said in himself, ' There is no
power and no virtue save in God the Most High, the
Supreme! It may be somewhat will fall to this poor
wretch's lot that will bring about his destruction, and I
shall be the cause. But the Khalif hath sworn ; so there
is nothing for it but to bring him in, and nought will
happen save what God willeth.' So he went out to
Khelifeh and laid hold of his hand, to carry him in to
the Khalif, whereupon his reason fled and he said in
himself, 'What a fool I was to come after yonder ill-
omened slave, Rosy-cheeks, whereby he hath brought
me in company with Bran-belly ! '

Jaafer fared on with him, with guards before and behind
him, whilst he said, ' Doth not arrest suffice, but these
fellows must go before and behind me, to prevent my
making off?' till they had traversed seven vestibules,
when the vizier said to him, * Harkye, fisherman ! Thou
standest before the Commander of the Faithful and
Defender of the Faith ! ' Then he raised the great
curtain and Khelifeh's eyes fell on the Khalif, who was
seated on his couch, with the grandees of the realm
standing in attendance upon him. As soon as he knew
him, he went up to him and said, ' Welcome to thee, O
piper S It was not well done of thee to make thyself a
1 Uncle of the Prophet. 2 First cousin of the Prophet,


Hi
if

[ti fisherman and go away, leaving me sitting guarding the


i


fish, and never return ! For, before I was aware, there
came up slaves, on beasts of all manner colours,
and snatched away the fish from me; and this was
all of thy fault; for, hadst thou returned presently
with the frails, we had sold a hundred dinars' worth of
fish. And now I come to seek my due, and they have
arrested me. But who hath imprisoned thee also in this
place ? '

The Khalif smiled and raising a corner of the curtain,
said to the fisherman, ' Come hither and take one of these
papers.' Quoth Khelifeh, 'Yesterday thou wast a fisher-
man, and now I find thee an astrologer : but the more
trades a man hath, the poorer he is.' But Jaafer said,
'Do as the Commander of the Faithful bids thee and
take the paper at once, without prating.' So he came
forward, saying, ' God forbid that this piper should ever
again be my journeyman and fish with me ! ' Then he
put out his hand and taking a paper, handed it to the
Khalif f saying, ' O piper, what hath come up for me
therein. Hide nought thereof.' Er Reshid gave the paper
to Jaafer and said to him, 1 Read what is therein.' So he
"Nffiijt looked at it and said, ' There is no power and no virtue
&C£OuU save in God the Most High, the Supreme!' '[God grant
thou hast] good news, O Jaafer ! 5 said the Khalif. ' What
seest thou therein?' 'Q Commander of the Faithful, 3
answered the vizier, , ' there appeareth on the paper*
"Let the fisherman receive a hundred blows with a
stick." '

So the Khalif commanded to beat the fisherman and
they gave him a hundred blows with a stick ; after which
he rose, saying, 1 Confound this play s Q Bran-belly 1 Are
imprisonment and beating part of the game?' Then
said Jaafer, ' Q Commander of the Faithful, this poor
wretch is come to the river, and how shall he go away


!


295


thirsting? We hope of the charity of the Commandei
of the Faithful that he may have leave to take another
paper, so haply he may happen upon somewhat where-
withal he may succour his poverty.' "By Allah, O Jaafer,'
said the Khalif, ' if he take another paper and " death "
be written therein, I will assuredly kill him, and thou wilt
be the cause.' 'If he die,' answered Jaafer, 'he will be
at rest.' But Khelifeh said to him, ' May God never
gladden thee with good news ! Have I made Baghdad
strait upon you, that you seek to kill me?' Quoth
Jaafer, 'Take a paper and crave the blessing of God
the Most High ! '

So he put out his hand and taking a paper, gave it to
Jaafer, who read it and was silent. * Why art thou silent,
O son of Yehya ? ' asked the Khalif And he answered,
'O Commander of the Faithful, there is written on this
paper 5 "The fisherman shall not be given aught."' Then
said the Khalif, 'Bid him depart our presence, for there
is no good fortune appointed to him from us.' 'By thy
pious forefathers,' quoth Jaafer, 'let him take a third
paper; it may be it will bring him good fortune.' 'Let
him take one, then, and no more,' replied the Khalif. So
he put out his hand and took a third paper, and behold,
therein was written, 'Let the fisherman receive one
dinar.' Quoth Jaafer to him, 'I sought good fortune
for thee, but God willed to thee nought but this dinar/
And Khelifeh answered, ' Verily, a dinar for every hundred
stripes were rare good luck, may God not send thy body
health!'

The Khalif laughed at him and Jaafer took him bj
the hand and led him out. When he reached the door,
Sendel the eunuch saw him and said to him, * Hither,

O fisherman! Give us largesse of that which the Com-
mander of the Faithful hath bestowed on thee, whilsl
jesting with thee/ 'By Allah, O Rosy-cheeks,' replied


2g5


Khelifeh, * thou art right ! Wilt thou share with me,
blackskin? Indeed, I have eaten stick to the tune of
a hundred blows and gotten one dinar, and thou art
welcome to it.' So saying, he threw him the dinar and
went out, with the tears running down his cheeks.
When the eunuch saw him in this plight, he knew
that he had spoken truth and called to the attendants
to fetch him back : so they brought him back and SendeL,
putting his hand to his pouch, pulled out a red purse,
whence he emptied a hundred dinars into the fisher-
man's hand, saying, 'Take this in payment of thy fish
and go thy ways.'

So Khelifeh took the hundred dinars and the Khalifs
one dinar and went his way, rejoicing, and forgot the
beating. Now, as God willed it for the accomplishment
of that which He had decreed, he passed by the slave-
girls' market and seeing there a great crowd of people
assembled in a ring, said to himself, ' What is this crowd ? '
So he elbowed his way through the merchants and others,
who said, ' Make way for Captain Cullion ! ' and let him
pass. Then he looked and saw a chest, with an eunuch
seated thereon, and behind it an old man standing up
and crying, ' O merchants, O men of wealth, who will
venture his money for this chest [of] unknown [content,]
from the palace of the Lady Zubeideh bint el Casim, wife
of the Commander of the Faithful ? What shall I say for
you, may God bless you ? '

' By Allah,' quoth one of the merchants, 1 this is a risk \
But I will say one word and no blame to me. Be it mine
for twenty dinars.' Quoth another, * Fifty,' and they went
on bidding, one against the other, till the price reached
a hundred dinars. Then said the crier, 'O merchants,
will any of you bid more ? ' And Khelifeh said, 6 Be it
mine for a hundred dinars and one.' The merchants
thought he was jesting and laughed at him, saying, ' O


297


eunuch, sell it to Khelifeh for a hundred and one dinars t*
Quoth the eunuch, ' By Allah, I will sell it to none but
him ! Take it, O fisherman, God bless thee in it, and
hand over the money.' So Khelifeh pulled out the money
and gave it to the eunuch, who delivered him the chest
and bestowed the price in alms on the spot; after which
he returned to the palace and told Zubeideh what he had
done, whereat she rejoiced.

Meanwhile the fisherman shouldered the chest, but
could not carry it [so,] of the excess of its weight; so
he lifted it on to his head and carried it thus to the place
where be lived. Here he set it down and being weary,
sat awhile, considering what had befallen him and saying
in himself, 4 Would I knew what is in this chest 3 ' Then
he opened the door of his lodging and tugged at the
chest, till he got it into his chamber ; after which he
strove to open it, but without success. Quoth he, 'What
possessed me to buy this chest ? There is nothing for it
but to break it open and see what is therein.' So he
applied himself to the lock, but could not open it, and
said in himself, ' I will leave it till to-morrow.'

Then he would have lain down to sleep, but could find,
no room; for the chest filled the whole chamber. So
he climbed up on to it and lay down to sleep ; but,
when he had lain awhile, he felt something stir in the
chest, whereat he was affrighted and sleep forsook him
and his reason fled. So he arose and said, ' Meseems _
there are Jinn in the chest. Praised be God who hin- (
dered me from opening it ! For, had I done so, they
had come upon me in the dark and made an end of
me, and no good would have betided me from them/
Then he lay down again, when, behold, the chest
moved a second time, more than before ; whereupon
he sprang up and said, s There it is again : but this is
terrible 1 ' And he hastened to look for the lamp, but


298


could not find it and had no money to buy another. So
he went forth and cried out, saying, ' Ho, people of the
quarter ! '

Now the most part of the folk were asleep; but they
awoke at his crying and said, ' What ails thee, O Khelifeh ? '
4 Bring me a lamp,' answered he ; ' for the Jinn are upon
me.' They laughed at him and gave him a lamp, with
which he returned to his chamber. Then he beat upon
the lock of the chest with a stone and broke it and
opening it, saw a damsel like a houri lying asleep within.
Now she had been drugged with henbane, but at that
moment she threw up the henbane and awoke. Then
she opened her eyes and feeling herself cramped, moved :
whereupon quoth Khelifeh, ' By Allah, O my lady, whence
art thou ? ' Quoth she, ' Bring me Jessamine and Nar-
cissus/ 1 And Khelifeh answered, 'There is nought here
but henna-flowers.' Thereupon she came to herself and
looking at Khelifeh, said to him, ' What art thou and
where am I?' He answered, 'Thou art in my lodging.'
Quoth she, ' Am I not in the palace of the Khalif Haroun
er Reshid ? ' 'O madwoman,' replied he, ( what manner
of thing is Er Reshid? Thou art nought but my slave-
girl : I bought thee this very day for a hundred dinars
and one and brought thee home, and thou wast asleep in
this chest'

When she heard this, she said to him, ' What is thy
name ? ' ' My name is Khelifeh,' answered he. ' How
comes my star to have grown propitious, when I know it
to have been otherwise ? ' She laughed and said, ' Spare
me this talk. Hast thou anything to eat?' 'No, by
Allah,' answered he, ' nor yet to drink ! I have not eaten
these two days and am now in want of a morsel.' ( Hast
thou no money ? ' asked she ; and he said, ' God keep this
chest that hath beggared me S I gave all I had for it and
1 Names of her slave -girls.


299


am become bankrupt.' She laughed at him and said,

* Go and seek of thy neighbours somewhat for me to eat,
for I am hungry.' So he went forth and cried out, saying,
4 Ho, people of the quarter ! '

Now they were asleep ; but they awoke and said, 4 What
ails thee, O Khelifeh ? ' ' O my neighbours,' answered he,
4 1 am hungry and have nothing to eat.' So one came
down to him with a cake of bread and another with
broken meats and a third with a piece of cheese and
a fourth with a cucumber, and so on till his lap was full
and he returned to his chamber and laid the whole before
her, saying, ' Eat.' But she laughed at him, saying, 4 How
can I eat of this, when I have not a drop of water to
drink? I fear to choke with a mouthful and die.' Quoth
he, 4 1 will fill thee this pitcher.' So he took the pitcher
and going forth, stood in the midst of the street and cried
out, saying, ' Ho, people of the quarter ! ' Quoth they,

* What a pest thou art to-night, O Khelifeh ! ' And he
said, ' Ye gave me food and I ate ; but now I am athirst ;
so give me to drink.'

So one came down to him with a jug and another with
an ewer and a third with a gugglet; and he filled his
pitcher and carrying it back to the damsel, said to her,

* O my lady, thou lackest nothing now.' 4 True,' answered
she ; 4 1 want nothing more at present.' Quoth he, 4 Speak
to me and tell me thy story.' And she said, 4 Harkye !
If thou knowest me not, I will tell thee who I am. I arn
Cout el Culoub, the Khalifs slave-girl, and the lady
Zubeideh was jealous of me; so she drugged me and
put me in this chest. Praised be God for that the matter
hath come to no worse issue! But this befell me not
save for thy good luck, for thou wilt certainly get of the
Khalif Er Reshid money galore, that will be the means of
thine enrichment' Quoth Khelifeh, 4 Is not the Khalif
he in whose palace I was imprisoned ? ' 4 Yes,' answered


30o


she ; and he said, ' By Allah, I never saw a stingier than
he, that piper little of good and wit ! He gave me a
hundred blows with a stick yesterday and one poor dinar,
for all I taught him to fish and made him my partner ; but
he played me false.' 'Leave this unseemly talk,' replied
she, 'and open thine eyes and look thou bear thyself
respectfully, whenas thou seest him after this, and thou
shalt attain thy desire.'

When he heard her words, it was as if he had been
asleep and awoke ; and God removed the veil from his
judgment, because of his good luck, and he answered,

* On my head and eyes ! ' Then said he to her, ' Sleep, in
the name of God.' So she lay down and fell asleep, and
he slept at a distance from her, till the morning, when she
sought of him inkhorn and paper and wrote to Ibn el
Kirnas, acquainting , him with her case and how she
was with Khelifeh the fisherman, who had bought her.
Then she gave him the letter, saying, ' Go to the jewel-
market and enquire for the shop of Ibn el Kirnas the
jeweller and give him this letter and speak not.' * I hear
and obey,' answered Khelifeh and going to the market,
enquired for the shop of Ibn el Kirnas. They directed
him thither and he saluted the merchant, who returned his
greeting with an air of disdain and said to him, 'What
dost thou want ? '

So he gave him the letter and he took it, but read it
not, thinking the fisherman a beggar, who sought an alms
of him, and said to one of his servants, ' Give him half a
dirhem.' Quoth Khelifeh, 4 1 want no alms ; read the
letter.' So Ibn el Kirnas read the letter and no sooner
3€lQf)t knew its import than he rose and kissing it, laid it on his
&CCOdlfa..head and said to Khelifeh, ' O my brother, where is thy
house?' 'What wantest thou with my house?' asked
Khelifeh. ' Wilt thou go thither and steal my slave-girl ? '

* Not so,' answered Ibn el Kirnas; 4 on the contrary, I


3or


will buy somewhat whereof you may eat, thou and she.'
So he said, 'My house is in such a quarter.' And the
merchant rejoined, ' Thou hast done well. May God not
give thee health, O unlucky one ! ' 1

Then he called two of his slaves and said to them,
' Carry this man to the shop of Muhsin the money-changer
and bid him give him a thousand dinars and bring him
back to me in haste.' So they carried him to the money-
changer, who gave him the money, and returned with him
to their master, whom they found mounted on a dapple
mule, with slaves and servants about him, and by his side
another mule like his own, saddled and bridled. Quoth
the jeweller to Khelifeh, ' In the name of God, mount this
mule.' ' Nay,' replied he ; 'I fear lest she throw me.'
' By Allah,' said Ibn el Kimas, ' but thou must mount S '
So he came up and mounting her, face to crupper, caught
hold of her tail and cried out ; whereupon she threw
him on the ground and they laughed at him : but he
rose and said, ' Did I not tell thee T would not mount
this great ass?' Ibn el Kirnas left him in the market
and repairing to the Khalif, told him of the damsel;
after which he returned and removed her to his own
house.

Meanwhile, Khelifeh went home to look after the damsel
and found the people of the quarter assembled together,
saying, ' Verily, Khelifeh is to-day altogether undone !
Where can he have gotten this damsel ? ' Quoth one of
them, ' He is a mad pimp : belike he found her by the
way, drunk, and carried her to his own house, and his
absence shows that he knows his crime.' As they were
talking, up came Khelifeh, and they said to him, e What a
plight is thine, O unhappy wretch ! Knowest thou not
what is come to thee?' 'No, by Allah!' answered he.
And they srid, ' But now there came slaves and took
1 Ironical.


302


away thy slave-girl, whom thou stolest, and sought fat
thee, but found thee not.' 'And how came they to take
my slave-girl ? ' asked Khelifeh. And one said, ' Had he
fallen in their way, they had slain him.' But he paid no
heed to them and returned, running, to the shop of Ibn
el Kirnas, whom he met riding, and said to him, 'By
Allah, it was a scurvy trick of thee to amuse me and
send thy servants meanwhile to take my slave-girl ! ' ' O
madman,' replied the jeweller, 'hold thy peace and come
with me.'

So he took him and carried him into a handsome
house, where he found the damsel seated on a couch
of gold, with ten slave-girls like moons round her. Ibn
el Kirnas kissed the ground before her and she said,
' What hast thou done with my new master, who bought
me with all he had ? ' ' O my lady, ' answered he, ' I gave
him a thousand dinars,' and related to her Khelifeh's
history from first to last, at which she laughed and said,
'Blame him not; for he is but a common man. These
other thousand dinars are a present from me to him
and God willing, he shall get of the Khalif what shall
enrich him.'

As they were talking, there came an eunuch from the
Khalif, in quest of Cout el Culoub, for, when he knew
that she was in Ibn el Kirnas's house, he could not
restrain his impatience, but sent forthwith to fetch her.
So she repaired to the palace, taking Khelifeh with her,
and going in to the presence, kissed the ground before
the Khalif, who rose to her, saluting and welcoming
her, and asked her how she had fared with him who
had bought her. 'He is a man named Khelifeh the
fisherman,' answered she, 'and standeth presently at
the door. He tells me that he hath an account to
settle with the Commander of the Faithful, by reason
of a partnership between him and the Khalif in fishing/


3°3


'Is he at the door?' asked Er Reshid; and she
answered,, 'Yes.'

So the Khalif sent for him and he kissed the ground
before him and wished him continuance of glory and
prosperity. The Khalif marvelled at him and laughed
at him and said to him, 'O fisherman, wast thou in
very earnest my partner yesterday ? ' 1 Khelifeh took his
meaning and summoning courage, replied, ' By Him who
bestowed upon thee the succession to thine uncle's
son, 2 I know her not in anywise and have had no com-
merce with her save by way of looking and talking S '
Then he told him all that had befallen him, since he last
saw him, whereat the Khalif laughed and his breast
dilated and he said to Khelifeh, ' Ask of us what thou
wilt, O thou that bringest folk their own ! ' But he was
silent ; so the Khalif ordered him fifty thousand dinars
and a sumptuous dress of honour from the royal wardrobe
and a mule, and gave him black slaves to wait on him, so
that he became as he were one of the kings of the time,

The Khalif was rejoiced at the recovery of his favourite Ni'gfK
and knew that this was of the doing of his wife Zubeideh, htttxlk
wherefore he was sore enraged against her and held aloof
from her a great while, visiting her not neither relenting
to her. When she was certified of this, she was sore con-
cerned for his anger and her face paled, that was wont to
be rosy, till, when her patience was exhausted, she sent
a letter to her cousin, the Commander of the Faithful,
making her excuses to him 'and confessing her offences,
aaid ending with these verses :

I long once more thy sometime love and favour 10 regain, That there-
withal I may assuage my sorrow and my pain.

Pity the transport of my love and passion, O my lords ! S&re I have
suffered at your hands enough of dole and bane.

1 i.e. in Cout el Culouo. s i.e. MohammecL


304

My patience all, beloved mine, for your estrangement's spent j You've
troubled all my life serene with rigour and disdain.

Txs life to me, if you fulfil the vows you swore to me, And very death
if you to me fulfilment will not deign.

Grant that I've sinned, be bountiful ; forgive me, for, by God, How
sweet the loved one is, when be forgives and takes again J

When the Khalif read her letter and saw that she
acknowledged her offence and sent to make her excuses
to him therefor, he said, ' Verily, God pardoneth all
offences; for He is the Forgiving, the Merciful' 1 And
he returned her an answer, containing [assurance of]
satisfaction and pardon and forgiveness for what was past,
whereat she rejoiced greatly.

As for Khelifeh, the Khalif assigned him a monthly
allowance of fifty dinars, by way of recompense, and took
him into his especial favour. Then he kissed the earth
before the Commander of the Faithful and went forth
with stately gait. When he came to the door, the eunuch
Sendel saw him and knowing him, said to him, ' O fisher-
man, how earnest thou by all this?' So he told him all
that had befallen him, first and last, whereat Sendel
rejoiced, in that he had been the cause of his enrich-
ment, and said to him, ' Wilt thou not give me largesse
of this wealth that is become thine?' So Khelifeh put
his hand to his pouch and taking out a purse containing
a thousand dinars, gave it to the eunuch, who said, ' Keep
thy money and God bless thee in it ! ' and marvelled at
his generosity and at the liberality of his soul, for all his
[late] poverty.

Then he mounted his mule and rode, with the slaves'
hands on her crupper, till he came to his lodging, whilst
the folk stared at him and marvelled at that which
had bedded, him of advancement. When he alighted^

1 Koran xxxis. 5^


3°5


they accosted him and enquired the cause of his change
of fortune, and he told them all that had happened to
him, from first to last. Then he bought a fine house and
laid out much money thereon, till it was perfect in all
respects. And he took up his abode therein and was
wont to recite the following verses thereon :

Behold a house that's like the Dwelling of Delight 1 1 Its aspect heals

the sick and banishes despite.
Its sojourn for the great and wise appointed is, And fortune fair therein

abideth day and night

As soon as he was settled in his house, he sought in
marriage a handsome girl, daughter of one of the chief
men of the city, and went in to her and led a life of all
delight and happiness and prosperity. So, when he found
himself in this fortunate condition, he offered up thanks
to God (blessed and glorified be He !) for the abounding
wealth He had bestowed on him and for His continual
favours, praising his Lord with the praise of the grateful
and chanting the words of the poet :

To Thee the praise, O Thou whose grace doth no remission know,
Whose bounties all-embracing are and all things overflow !

To Thee be praise from me 1 Accept my homage, for indeed, I'm mind-
full of Thy bounties all and all to Thee I owe.

Thou hast indeed with benefits and favours and largesse O'erwhelmed
me ; so I turn to Thee, my gratitude to show.

Out of the ocean of Thy grace and goodness all men drink And Thou
doth succour them in time of trouble and of woe.

O Thou that pardonest my sins, Thou, O my Lord, on us Heap'st
favours, crowning aye with new those that did them forego,

Still for the sake of him who came, in mercy to mankind, A prophet,
noble, true of speech and clean and pure as snow ;

God's blessing and His peace, so long as men his tomb do seek, On him
and on his helpers be and lineage, high and low !

And eke on his companions all, th' illustrious, the wise, The noblej,
whilst within the brake the bird doth singing go I


1 Name of one of the seven stages of the Muslim heaven.
VOL. VII. 20


306


He continued to pay frequent visits to the Khalif,
with whom he found acceptance and who ceased not to
overwhelm him with favours and bounty : and he abode
in the enjoyment of the utmost honour and happiness
and prosperity and of all the delights and comforts of
life, till there came to him the Destroyer of Delights
and the Sunderer of Companies ; and extolled be the
perfection of Him to whom belong glory and perma-
nence, the Living, the Eternal, who shall never die !


APPENDIX


NOTE.


The Breslau version of the story of Khelifeh differs so
widely from the foregoing, in which I have, as usual,
followed Sir William Macnaghten's Edition of the Arabic
Text, that I have thought it well to translate it en bloc by
way of supplement, instead of contenting myself, as in
cases where the Breslau Edition presents but occasional
variations from my standard text, with amending and
correcting the latter by its light


KHELIF THE FISHERMAN OF BAGHDAD.


There was once, of old days and in bygone ages and
times, in the city of Baghdad, a fisherman, by name
Khelif, a man of many words and little luck. One day,
as he sat in his lodging, he bethought himself and said,
' There is no power and no virtue save in God the Most
High, the Supreme ! I wonder what is my offence in the
sight of my Lord and [the cause of] the blackness of my
fortune and my little luck among the fishermen, albeit I
dare say there is not in the city of Baghdad a fisherman
like myself.' Now he lodged in a ruined place called a
khan, to wit, an inn, without a door, and when he went
forth to fish, he would shoulder the net, without basket or
knife, 1 and the folk would look at him and say to him, ' O
Khelif, why dost thou not take with thee a basket, to hold
the fish thou catchest ? ' Quoth he, ' Even as it went
forth empty, so would it come, back, for I never take
aught.'

One night he arose, in the darkness before dawn, and
taking his net on his shoulder, raised his eyes to heaven
and said, 'O my God, O Thou who subjectedst the sea to
Moses son of Amran, provide Thou me, for Thou art the
best of providers!' Then he [went down to the Tigris
and] spreading his net, cast it into the river and waited
till it had settled down, when he pulled it in and drawing
k ashore., found in it a dead dog. So he freed the net
1 For scraping and cleaning the fish.


312


from the carcase and threw it away, saying, ' O morning of
ill luck ! What a sorry handsel is this dead dog, after I
had rejoiced in its weight ! ' 1 Then he mended the rents
in the net, saying, 'Needs must there be fish in plenty,
after this carrion, attracted by the smell,' and made a
second cast.

After awhile, he drew up and found in the net a dead
camel, that had caught in the meshes and rent them right
and left. When he saw his net in this plight, he wept and
said, ' There is no power and no virtue but in God the
Most High, the Supreme ! I wonder what is my offence
and [the reason of] the blackness of my fortune and the
scantiness of my luck, of all folk, so that I catch neither
carplet nor barbel, that I may broil in the sand and eat,
for all I dare say there is not a fisherman like me in the
city of Baghdad.'

Then he pronounced the name of God and casting his
net a third time, drew it ashore and found in it a scurvy,
one-eyed, mangy, lame ape, with a rod of ivory in his
hand. When he saw this, he said, 'This is indeed a
blessed handsel ! What art thou, O ape ? ' ' Dost thou
not know me ? ' answered the ape, and Khelif said, ' No,
by Allah, I have no knowledge of thee ! ' Quoth the ape,
' I am thine ape ; ' and Khelif said, ' What use is there in
thee, my ape?' 'Every day,' replied the ape, 'I give
thee good-morrow, so God the Most High may not
vouchsafe thee provision.'

Quoth Khelif, thou failest not [of this], O one-eye of
ill-omen ! May God not bless thee 1 Needs must I put
out thy sound eye and break thy sound leg, so thou mayst
become a blind cripple and I be quit of thee. But what
is the use of that rod thou hast in thy hand? ' ' O Khelif,'
answered the ape, ' I scare the fish therewith, so they may
not enter thy net' 1 Is it so?' rejoined Khelif. 'Then
1 Which led him to suppose that the net was full of fish.


313


this very day will I appoint to thee a grievous punishment
and devise thee all manner torments and strip thy flesh
from thy bones and be at rest from thee, sorry bargain
that thou art 1 '

So saying, he unwound from his middle a piece of
rope and binding him to a tree by his side, said to
him, ' Harkye, O dog of an ape ! I mean to cast the
net again and if aught come up therein, well and good ;
but, if it come up empty, I will make an end of thee,
by dint of beating, and be quit of thee.' So he cast the
net and -drawing it ashore, found in it another ape and
said, ' Glory be to God ! I was wont to pull nought but
fish out of this Tigris, but now it yields nothing but apes.'

Then he looked at the second ape and saw him round-
faced and fair of fashion, with pendants of gold in his
ears and a blue waistcloth about his middle, and he was
like unto a lighted flambeau. So he said to him, 'What
art thou, thou also, O ape ? ' And he answered, saying,
'O Khelif, I am the ape of Aboussaadat the Jew, the
Khalifs money-changer. Every day, I give him good-
morrow, and he makes a profit of ten dinars.' ' By Allah,'
cried the fisherman, ' thou art a fine ape, not like this
unlucky wretch of mine ! '

So saying, he took a stick and came down upon the
one-eyed ape's flanks, till he broke his ribs and he jumped
up and down. And the other ape answered him, saying,
'O Khelif, what will it profit thee to beat him, though
thou belabour him till he die ? ' Quoth Khelif, ' How
shall I do ? Shall I let him go, that he may scare me the
fish with his hang-dog favour and give me good-morrow
and good-even every day, so God may not provide me ?
Nay, I will kill him and be quit of him and thou shalt
give me good-morrow [in his stead] ; so shall I gain ten
dinars a day.'

i 1 will tell thee a better way than that,' answered the


314


second ape, 'and if thou hearken to me, thou shalt be
at rest and I will become thine ape in his stead.' ' And
what dost thou counsel me ? ' asked the fisherman ; and
the ape said, ' Cast thy net and thou shalt bring up a
noble fish, never saw any its like, and I will tell thee
how thou shalt do with it.' ' Harkye, thou also !' replied
Khelif. ' If I throw my net and there come up therein
a third ape, I will cut the three of you into six pieces.'
And the second ape answered, 4 So be it, O Khelif. I
agree to this condition.'

Then Khelif took the net and cast it and drew it up,
when behold in it a fine young carp, with a round head,
as it were a milking-pail, which when he saw, his reason
fled for joy and he said, ' Glory be to God ! What is this
noble creature ? Were yonder apes in the river, I had
not brought up this fish.' Quoth the second ape, ' Harkye,
Khelif! If thou give ear to my rede, it will bring thee
good fortune.' ; May God curse him who would gainsay
thee henceforth ! ' replied the fisherman, and the ape
said, ' O Khelif, take some grass and lay the fish thereon
in the basket and cover it with more grass and take
somewhat of basil from the greengrocer's and set it in
the fish's mouth. Cover it with a napkin and get thee
to the .bazaar of Baghdad. Whoever bespeaks thee of
selling it, sell it not [but fare on] till thou come to the
market of the jewellers and money-changers.

Count five shops on the right-hand side and the sixth
shop is that of Aboussaadat the Jew, the Khalifs money-
changer. When thou standest before him, he will say
to thee, "What seekest thou?" And do thou answer,
" I am a fisherman. I cast my net in thy name and took
this noble carp, which I have brought thee as a present."
If he give thee aught of money, take it not, be it little
or much, for it will put to nought that which thou wouldsi
do, but say to him, " I want of thee but one word, that


315

thou say to me, * I sell thee my ape for thine ape and my
luck for thy luck.' " If he say this, give him the fish
and I shall become thine ape and this mangy, one-eyed
cripple will be his ape.'

' Good, O ape,' replied Khelif, [and shouldering his
basket, made for Baghdad], nor did he cease going and
observing that which the ape had said to him, till he
came to the Jew's shop and saw him seated, with slaves
and servants about him, commanding and forbidding and
giving and taking. So he said to him, ' O Sultan of the
Jews, I am a fisherman and went forth to-day to the
Tigris and cast my net in thy name, saying, " This is for
the luck of Aboussaadat ; " and there came up to me this
carp, which I have brought thee by way of present.'

So saying, he lifted the grass and discovered the fish
to the Jew, who marvelled at its fashion and said, ' Ex-
tolled be the perfection of the Most Excellent Creator I '
Then he gave the fisherman a dinar, but he refused it
and he gave him two. This also he refused and the Jew
went on adding to his offer, till he made it ten dinars;
but he still refused and Aboussaadat said to him, £ By
Allah, thou art covetous, O Muslim ! Tell me what thou
wouldst have.' Quoth Khelif, 4 1 want of thee but a
single word.'

When the Jew heard this, he changed colour and said,
'Wouldst thou have me forsake my faith? 1 Go thy ways.'
But Khelif said to him, ' By Allah, O Jew, it is nought to
me if thou become a Muslim or a Christian ! ' ' Then
what wouldst thou have me say ? ' asked the Jew, and the
fisherman answered, ' Say, " I sell thee my ape for thy ape
and my luck for thy luck." ' The Jew laughed, deeming
him little of wit, and said by way of jest, c I sell thee
my ape for thy ape and my luck for thy luck. Bear

1 Thinking that by requiring of him "a single word," he meant him
to say, "I testify that there is no god, etc. s " and so become a Muslim.


316


witness against him, [O merchants !] By Allah, O
unhappy wretch, thou art debarred [from making any
further claim on me] ! '

So Khelif turned back, blaming himself and saying,
« There is no power and no virtue but in God the Most
High, the Supreme ! Alas, that I had taken the gold ! '
and fared on till he came to the Tigris, but found not the
two apes, whereupon he wept and buffeted his face and
strewed dust on his head, saying, ' But that the second
ape deluded me and put a cheat on me, the one-eyed ape
had not made his escape.' And he gave not over weeping
and crying out, till heat and hunger grew sore on him,
when he took the net, saying, ' Come, let us make a cast,
trusting in the blessing of God; belike I may catch a
barbel or a carplet, that I may broil and eat.'

So he cast the net [and waiting] till it had settled
down, drew it ashore, and found it full of fish, whereat
he rejoiced and busied himself with killing the fish and
casting them on the earth. Presently, up came a woman
seeking fish and crying out and saying, 4 There is no fish
in the town.' She caught sight of Khelif and said to him,
' Wilt thou sell this fish, master ? ' 1 1 am going to turn
it into clothes,' answered Khelif ; 'it is all for sale, even
to my beard. Take what thou wilt.' So she gave him a
dinar and he filled her a basket.

Then she went away and up came another servant,
seeking a dinar's worth of fish ; nor did the folk leave
coming till it was the hour of afternoon prayer and Khelif
had sold ten dinars' worth of fish. Then, being faint with
hunger, he shouldered his net and repairing to the market,
bought himself a woollen gown, a skull-cup with a plaited
border and a yellow turban for a dinar, receiving two
dirhems change, with which he bought fried cheese and
a fat sheep's tail and honey and setting them in the
oilman's platter, ate till he was fulL


317

Then he betook himself to his lodging, clad in the
gown and the yellow turban and with the nine dinars in
his mouth, rejoicing in what he had never in his life
seen. He entered and lay down, but could not sleep for
the trouble of his spirits and abode playing with the
money half the night. Then said he in himself, ' Belike,
the Khalif may hear that I have gold and say to Jaafer,
" Go to Khelif the fisherman and borrow us some money
of him." If I give it him, it will be no light matter to
me, and if I give it not, he will torment me ; but torture
is easier to me than the giving up of the cash. However,
I will arise and make trial of myself, if I have a skin proof
against beating or not.'

So he put off his clothes and taking a sailor's plaited
whip, of a hundred and sixty strands, fell a-beating
himself, till his sides and body were all bloody, crying
out at every stroke he dealt himself and saying v ' [Help,]
O Muslims ! I am a poor man ! O Muslims, I am a poor
man ! O Muslims, whence should I have gold, whence
should I have money ? ' till the neighbours who dwelt with
him in that place, hearing him [roaring out thus and]
saying, ' Go to men of wealth and take of them,' doubted
not but that thieves were torturing him, to get money
from him, and that he was crying out for succour.

So they flocked to him, arms in " hand, and finding the
door of his lodging locked and hearing him roaring out
for help, thought that the thieves had come down upon
him from the roof; so they fell upon the door and burst it
open. Then they entered and found him naked and bare-
headed, with body dripping blood, and altogether in a
piteous plight; so they said to him, 'What is this case in
which we find thee ? Hast thou taken leave of thy wits
and hath madness betided thee this night?' And he
answered them, saying, ' Nay ; but I have gold with me
and I feared lest the Khalif send to borrow of me and it


3i«

were grievous to me to give him aught ; yet, if I gave not
to him, he would assuredly put me to the torture ; where-
fore I arose to see if my skin were beating-proof or not.'

When they heard this, they said to him, ' May God not
assain thy body, unlucky madman that thou art! Of a
surety thou art fallen mad to-night ! Lie down [and go
to sleep], may God not bless thee ! How many thousand
dinars hast thou, that the Khalif should come and borrow
of thee ? ' Quoth he, 4 By Allah, I have nought but nine
dinars.' And they all said, ' By Allah, he is indeed rich.'

Then they left him, marvelling at his lack of wit, and
he took his money and wrapped it in a rag, saying in
himself, ' Where shall I hide this gold ? If I bury it, they
will take it, and if I put it out on deposit, they will deny
[having received] it, and if I carry it on my head, 1 they
will snatch it, and if I tie it to my sleeve, they will cut it
away.' Presently, he espied a little pocket in the breast
[of the gown] and said, ' By Allah, this is fine ! It is
under my gullet and hard by my mouth ; so if any put out
his hand to take it, I can come down on it with my mouth
and hide it in my throttle.' So he put the rag containing
the gold in the pocket [and lay down], but slept not that
night for inquietude and care and restlessness.

On the morrow, he went forth of his lodging, on fishing
intent, and betaking himself to the river, went down into
the water, up to his knees. Then he cast the net and
shook it mightily; whereupon the purse [flew out of his
pocket] and fell into the stream. So he tore off gown
and turban and plunged in after it, saying, 'There is no
power and no virtue save in God the Most High, the
Supreme ! ' Nor did he give over diving, till the day was
half spent, but found not the purse.

Now one saw him diving and plunging and his gown

V i.e. in the folds of his turban, a common substitute for a purse witfe
the lower classes in the East.


3*9


and turban lying in the sun at a distance from him, with
no one by them ; so he watched him, till he dived again,
when he pounced down upon the clothes and made off
with them. Presently, Khelif came ashore and missing
his gown and turban, was mightily chagrined for their loss
and ascended a high mound, to look for some passer-by, of
whom he might enquire [concerning them], but found none.

Now the Khalif [Haroun er Reshid] had gone a-hunting
that day and returning at the season of the [noontide]
heat, was oppressed thereby and thirsted ; so he looked
from afar off [seeking water] and seeing a naked man
standing on the mound aforesaid, said to Jaafer, 4 Seest
thou what I see ? ' ' Yes, O Commander of the Faithful,'
answered the Vizier ; ' I see a man standing on a knoll."
'What is he?' asked Er Reshid, and Jaafer said, 'Belike
he is the guardian of a cucumber-plot.' Quoth the Khalif,
1 Belike he is a pious man ; 1 I would fain go to him, alone,
and desire him of his prayers ; and abide ye in your stead.'
So he went up to Khelif and saluting him, said to him,
' What art thou, man ? ' Quoth the fisherman, ' Dost
thou not know me? I am Khelif the fisherman.' And
the Khalif said, ' [What ?] The fisherman with the woollen
gown and the [yellow] turban ? ' 2

When Khelif heard him name the clothes he had lost,
he said in himself, ' This is he who took my gear : belike
he did but jest with me. 5 So he came down from the
knoll and said, ' Can I not take a noonday nap but thou
must play me this trick ? I saw thee take my clothes and
knew that thou wast jesting with me.' At this, laughter
got the better of the Khalif and he said, 'What clothes
hast thou lost? I know nothing of that whereof thou
speakest, O Khelif.'

1 i.e. a naked dervish.

2 Khelif seems to have been a well-known figure in Baghdad, being
probably rendered conspicuous by his eccentricities.


320


'By God the Great,' cried Khelif, 'except thou bring
me back the gear, I will break thy ribs with this staff!'
For he still carried a quarterstaff. Quoth the Khalif, ' By-
Allah, I have not seen the things whereof thou speakest ! '
But Khelif said, * I will go with thee and take note of thy
dwelling-place and complain of thee to the chief of the
police, so thou mayst not play me this trick again. By
Allah, none took my gown and turban but thou, and
except thou give them back to me forthright, I will throw
thee off the back of that she-ass of thine and come down
on thy pate with this staff, till thou canst not stir ! '

So saying, he tugged at the mule's bridle, so that she
reared up on her [hind] legs and the Khalif said in
himself, 'What predicament is this I have fallen into
with this madman ? ' Then he pulled off a gown he had
on, worth a hundred dinars, and said to Khelif, 'Take
this gown in lieu of thine own.' He took it and donning
it, judged it too long; so he cut it short at the knees and
winding the cut-off piece about his head, turban-wisej
said to the Khalif, ' What art thou and what is thy craft ?
But [there needs no asking] : thou art none other than a
trumpeter.' Quoth Er Reshid, 'What discovered to thee
that I was a trumpeter by trade ? ' And Khelif answered,
'Thy big nostrils and small mouth.' 'Well done!' cried
the Khalif. ' Yes, I am a trumpeter.'

Then said Khelif, ' If thou wilt hearken to me, I will
teach thee the art of fishing : it will be better for thee
than trumpeting and thou wilt eat lawfully [earned bread].'
'Teach it me,' replied Er Reshid, 'so I may see whether
it will suit me or no.' And Khelif said, ' Come with me,
O trumpeter.' So the Khalif followed him down to the
river and took the net from him, whilst he taught him
how to cast it. So he cast it [and drew it up], when,
behold, it was heavy, and the fisherman said, ' O trumpeter,
if the net be caught on one of the rocks, beware lest thou


321


tug hard at it, or it will break and by Allah, I will take
thy she-ass in payment of it ! '

The Khalif laughed at his words and drew up the net,
little by little, till he brought it ashore and found it full
of fish ; which when Khelif saw, his reason fled for joy
and he said, ' By Allah, O trumpeter, thy luck is good in
fishing ! Never in my life will I part with thee ! But
now I mean to send thee to the fish market, where do
thou enquire for the shop of Ahmed the fisherman and
say to him, " My master Khelif salutes thee and bids thee
send him a pair of frails and a knife, so he may bring
thee fish more than yesterday." Run and return to me
in haste.'

'On my head, O master !' replied Er Reshid, laughing^
and mounting his mule, rode back to Jaafer, who said to
him, ' Tell me what hath befallen thee.' So the Khalif
told him all that had passed between the fisherman and
himself, from first to last, and added, ' I left him awaiting
my return to him with the baskets and I am resolved
that he shall teach me how to scale fish and clean them.'
' And I,' said Jaafer, ' will go with thee, to sweep up
the scales and clean out the shop.' And the affair abode
thus.

Then said Er Reshid to his vizier, 1 O Jaafer, I desire
of thee that thou despatch the young slaves, saying to
them, "Whoso bringeth me a fish from before yonder
fisherman, I will give him a dinar ; " for I love to eat
of my own catching.' Accordingly Jaafer repeated to the
slaves what the Khalif had said and directed them where
to find the fisherman. So they came down upon Khelif
and snatched the fish from him ; and when he saw them
and noted their goodliness, he doubted not but that they
were of the black-eyed boys of Paradise ; so he caught
up a couple of fish and plunging into the river, said, ' O my
God, by the secret [virtue] of these fish, forgive me i *

VOL. VII. 21


3 22


Presently, up came the chief eunuch, in quest of fish,
but found none and seeing Khelif ducking and rising in
the water, with the two fish in his hands, called out to
him, saying, ' Harkye, Khelif, what hast thou there ? '
* Two fish,' answered the fisherman, and the eunuch said,
' Give them to me and take a hundred dinars for them.'
When Khelif heard speak of a hundred dinars, he came
up out of the water and said, ' Hand over the hundred
dinars.' Quoth the eunuch, ' Follow me to the house of
Er Reshid and take the money, O Khelif,' and taking the
fish, made off to the Khalif's palace.

Meanwhile Khelif betook himself to Baghdad, clad as
he was in the Khalifs gown, which barely reached to his
knees, turbaned with the piece which he had cut off there-
from and girt about the middle with a rope, and passed
through the midst of the city. The folk fell a-laughing
and marvelling at him and saying, ' Whence hadst thou
that gown ? ' And he went on, saying, ' Where is the
house of Er ReshadV Quoth they, 'Say, "The house of
Er Reshid;" ' and he answered, 'It is all one,' and fared
on, till he came to the palace of the Khalifate.

Now the tailor, who had made the gown, was standing
at the door, and when he saw it upon the fisherman, he
said to him, ' How many years hast thou had [admission
to the palace] ? ' ' Ever since I was a boy,' answered
Khelif, and the tailor said, ' Whence hadst thou that gown,
that thou hast ruined thus ? ' Quoth Khelif, ' I had it of
my apprentice the trumpeter.' Then he went up to the
door, where he found the chief eunuch sitting and seeing
him exceeding black of hue, said to him, 'Wilt thou not
bring the hundred dinars, O uncle Rosy-cheeks ? ' 1 Quoth
he, 'On my head, O Khelif;' when, behold, out came
Jaafer from the presence of the Khalif and seeing the
fisherman talking with the eunuch and saying to himj
1 See supra, note, p. 289.


323


'This is the reward of goodness, O Rosy-cheeks,' went
in to Er Reshid and said to him, ' O Commander of
the Faithful, thy master the fisherman is with the chief
eunuch, dunning him for a hundred dinars.' Quoth the
Khalif, ' Bring him to me, O Jaafer.' And the vizier
answered, ' I hear and obey.'

So he went out to the fisherman and said to him, ' O
Khelif, thine apprentice the trumpeter bids thee to him.'
So he followed Jaafer into the presence-chamber, where
he saw the Khalif seated, with a canopy over his head
When he entered, Er Reshid wrote three scrolls and laid
them before him, and the fisherman said to him, ' [It
would seem] thou hast given up the trumpeting trade and
turned astrologer.' Quoth the Khalif to him, 'Take a
scroll.'

Now in one he had written, ' Let him be given a dinar/
and in another, ' A hundred dinars,' and in the third, ' Let
him be given a hundred blows with a whip.' So Khelif
put out his hand and as fate would have it, it lighted on
the scroll wherein was written, ' Let him receive a hundred
lashes,' and kings, whenas they ordain aught, go not back
therefrom. So they threw him down and gave him a
hundred lashes, whilst he roared for succour, but none
succoured him, and said, 'By Allah, this is a fine thing,
O trumpeter 1 I teach thee fishing and thou turnest
astrologer and drawest me an unlucky lot ! '

When the Khalif heard his speech, he swooned away for
laughter and said, ' O Khelif, no harm shall betide thee :
fear not. Give him a hundred dinars.' So they gave him
a hundred dinars, and he went out and fared on, till he
came to the trunk-market, where he found the folk
assembled in a ring about a broker, who was crying out
and saying, * At a hundred dinars, less one I A locked
chest ! '

So Khelif pushed through the crowd and said to the


3 2 4


broker, ' Mine for a hundred dinars.' The broker ad-
judged him the chest and took the money of him, where-
upon there was left him neither little nor much. The
porters disputed [awhile] about [who should carry] the
chest and [presently] said all, 1 By Allah, none shall carry
this chest but Zureic!" And the folk said, 'Zureic hath
the best right to it.'

So he shouldered the chest, after the goodliest fashion,
and followed Khelif. As they went along, the fisherman
said [in himself], * I have nothing left to give the porter ;
how shall I rid myself of him? I will traverse the streets
with him and lead him about, till he is weary and [sets
the chest down and] leaves it, when I will take it up and
carry it to my lodging.' Accordingly, he went round
about [Baghdad] with the porter from noontide to sun-
down, till the man began to grumble and said, 'O ray
lord, where is thy house?' Quoth Khelif, 'Yesterday I
knew it, but to-day I have forgotten it.' And the porter
said, 1 Give me my hire and take thy chest.' But Khelif
said, 'Go on at thy leisure, till I bethink me where my
house is. I have no money with me. It is all in my
house and I have forgotten where it is.'

As they were talking, there passed by them one who
knew the fisherman and said to him, 1 Khelif, what
brings thee hither ? ' Quoth the porter, ' Q uncle, where
is Khelif 's house ? ' And he answered, < It is in the ruined
khan in the Rewasin.' 1 Then said Zureic [to Khelif],
' Go to ; wouldst thou had never lived nor been ! ' And
the fisherman went on, followed by the porter, till they
came to the place and Zureic said, ' O thou whose worldly
provision God cut off, we have passed this place a score of
times! Hadst thou said to me, "It is in such a place,' 5
thou hadst spared me this great toil ; but now give me my
hk& mid let me go my way/ Quoth Khelif, e Thou shall
1 A quarter of Baghdad,


325


have silver s if not gold. Stay here, till I bring thee the
money.' So he entered his lodging and talcing a maul he
had there, set with forty nails, — wherewith if he smote a
camel, he made an end of him, — made for the porter and
raised his hand to strike him therewith ; but Zureic cried
out at him, saying, ' Hold thy hand I I have no claim on
thee,' [and made off].

Then Khelif carried the chest into the khan, whereupon
the neighbours flocked about him, saying, <Q Khelif,
whence hadst thou this gown and chest ? ' Quoth he,
' My apprentice Er Reshid gave them to me/ and they
said, ' The knave is mad ! Er Reshid will surely hear of
his talk and hang him over the door of his lodging and
hang all in the khan on his account. This is a [fine]
farce ! ' Then they helped him to carry the chest into
his lodging and it filled the whole chamber/

So much for Khelif and now for the history of the
chest. The Khalif had a Turkish slave-girl, by name
Cout el Culoub, whom he loved with an exceeding love,
and the Lady Zubeideh came to know of this and was
exceeding jealous of her and plotted mischief against her.
So, whilst the Commander of the Faithful was, absent
a-hunting, she sent for Cout el Culoub and inviting her
[to eat with her], set before her meat and wine, and she
ate and drank. Now the wine was drugged with henbane ;
so she slept and Zubeideh sent for her chief eunuch and
putting her in a chest, locked it and gave it to him^
saying, ' Take this chest and cast it into the river/

So he took it up before him on a mule and set out
with it for the sea, but found it uneath to carry; so,
seeing the sheikh of the brokers, as he passed by the
trunk-market, he said to him, ' Wilt thou sell me this
chest, O uncle ? "' 6 Yes/ answered the broker, [and the

1 The chamber is described as a hasil, i.e. a small storehouse or cell in
a khan for the storage of goods,


326


eunuch said], ' But look thou sell it not except locked.'
' It is well,' replied the other ; * we will do that.' So he
set down the chest, and they cried it for sale, saying,
' Who will buy this chest for a hundred dinars ? ' At this
moment, up came Khelif and bought the chest and there
passed between him and the porter that which hath been
before set out

To return to Khelif. He lay down on the chest, to
sleep, and presently Cout el Culoub awoke from the
effects of the drug and finding herself in the chest, cried
out and said, 'Alas! ' Whereupon Khelif sprang off the chest
and cried out and said, ' Ho, Muslims i Come to my help !
There are Afrits in the chest.' So the neighbours awoke
from sleep and said to him, ' What ails thee, O madman ? '
Quoth he, 4 The chest is full of Afrits.' And they said,
' Go to sleep ; thou hast troubled our rest this night, may
Allah not bless thee ! Go in and sleep, without madness.'
1 1 cannot sleep,' answered he ; but they railed at him and
he went in [and lay down again].

Presently, Cout el Culoub spoke and said, 'Where am
I?' whereupon Khelif fled forth the chamber and said s
'0 neighbours of the inn, come to me!' Quoth they ?
' What hath befallen thee ? Thou troublest the neighbours 5
rest.' And he said, * O folk, there are Afrits in the chest,
moving and speaking.' ' Thou liest/ answered they. 'What
do they say?' And he, 'They say, "Where am I?"*
'Would thou wert in hell!' rejoined they. 'Thou dis-
turbest the neighbours and hinderest them of sleep. Go to
sleep, would thou hadst never lived nor been!' So Khelif
went in, fearful [and knowing not what to do], for he had
no place wherein to sleep save on the top of the chest,
when, behold, as he stood, with ears listening for speech.
Cout el Culoub spoke again and said, ' I am hungry/

So he fled forth in affright and cried out, saying, ' Ho,
neighbours, ho, dwellers in the khan, come to me ! ' Said


327


tliey, ' What is to do with thee now ? ' And he answered,
'The Afrits in the chest say, "We are hungry.'" Quoth the
neighbours to each other, ' It would seem Khelif is hungry ;
let us feed him and give him of what is left from the
evening meal ; else he will not let us sleep to-night' So
they brought him bread and meat and dates and radishes
and gave him a basket full of all kinds of things, saying,
'Eat thy fill and go to sleep and talk not, else will we
break thy ribs and beat thee to death.' So he took the
basket and entering his lodging, sat down on the chest
and fell to eating of the food with both hands.

Now it was a moonlight night and the moon shone full
upon the chest and lit up the chamber. Presently Cout
el Culoub spoke again and said, ' Have pity on me, O
Muslims, and open to me ! ' So Khelif arose and taking
a stone he had with him, broke open the chest and beheld
therein a young lady as she were the shining sun, with
flower-white forehead, moon-bright face, red cheeks and
speech sweeter than sugar, clad in a dress worth a thousand
dinars and more. At this sight he was transported for joy
and said, ' By Allah, thou art of the fair ! ' Quoth she,
'What art thou, O fellow?' and he answered, 'I am
Khelif the fisherman.' 'Who brought me hither?' asked
she, and he said, ' I bought thee, and thou art my slave-
girl.' Quoth she, ' I see on thee a gown of the raiment of
the Khalif. [Whence hadst thou it ?] 5

So he told her all that had betided him, from first to last,
and how he had bought the chest; wherefore she knew
that the Lady Zubeideh had played her false; and she
ceased not to talk with him till the morning, when she
said to him, 'O Khelif, look [thou get] me from some
one inkhorn and pen and paper and bring them to me.
So he found what she sought with one of the neighbours
and brought it to her, whereupon she wrote a letter and
folded it and gave it to him, saying, ' O Khelif, take this


328


letter and carry it to the jewel-market, where do thou
enquire for the shop of Aboulhusn the jeweller and give
it to him.' 'O my lady/ answered the fisherman, 'this
name is difficult to me; I cannot remember it' And she
said, £ Then ask for the shop of Ibn el Ucab.' 1 'O my
lady,' asked he, ' what is an ucab 1 ' And she said, 1 It is
a bird that folk carry on their fists, with its eyes hooded.*
Quoth he, ' O my lady, I know it.'

Then he went forth from her and fared on, repeating
the name, lest it pass his memory ; but, by the time he
reached the jewel-market, he had forgotten it. So he
accosted one of the merchants and said to him, 'Is there
any here named after a bird ? ' ' Yes,' answered the
merchant ; ' thou meanest Ibn el Ucab.' Quoth Khelif,
'That's the man I want,' and making his way to him,
gave him the letter, which when he read and knew the
purport thereof, he fell to kissing it and laying it on his
head ; for it is said that Aboulhusn was the agent of the
Lady Cout el Culoub and her intendant over all her
property in lands and houses.

Now she had written to him, saying, 1 From Her High-
ness the Lady Cout el Culoub to Master Aboulhusn the
jeweller. As soon as this letter reacheth thee, set apart
for us a saloon completely equipped with furniture and
vessels and slaves and slave-girls and what not else is
needful and seemly, and take the bearer hereof and carry
him to the bath. Then clothe him in costly apparel and
do with him thus and thus.'

So he said, ' I hear and obey,' and locking up his shop,
took the fisherman and carried him to the bath, where he
committed him to one of the bathmen, that he might
serve him, as of wont. Then he went forth to carry out

1 i.e. Son of the falcon. The common meaning of ucab is " eagle. ' s
The name should probably be read Abou-l-Ucab, he {lit. father) of the
falcon, i.e. he who carries or owns a falcon.


3^9


the Lady Coafe el Culoub's orders. As for Khelif, he
concluded; of his lack of wit, that the bath was a prison
and said to the bathmen, 8 What have I done,, that ye
should imprison me? s They laughed at him and made
him sit on the edge of the tank, whilst the bath man took
hold of his legs, that he might nib them. Khelif thought
he meant to wrestle with him and said in himself, & This is
a wrestling-place and I knew not of It 5 Then he arose
and seizing the foathm&r/s legs, lifted him up and threw
him oa the ground and broke his ribs. The . man cried
out for help, whereupon the other bathmen fell upon
Khelif and overcoming him by dint of numbers, delivered
their comrade from his clutches [and tended him], till be-
came to himself.

Then they knew that the fisherman was a simpleton and
served him, till Aboulhusn came back with a dress of rich
stuff and clad him therein; after which he brought him
a handsome mule, ready saddled, and taking him by the
hand, carried him forth of the bath and bade him mount.
Quoth he s 8 How shall I mount? I fear lest she throw me
and break my ribs in my body s1 Nor did he mount the
mule, save after much pressure and trouble, and they fared
on, till they came to the place which Aboulhusn had set
apart for the Lady Cout el Culoub.

Khelif entered and found her sitting, with slaves and
servants about her and the porter at the door s staff in
hand. When the latter saw the fisherman., he sprang up
and kissing his hand, went before him, till he brought
him within the saloon, where he saw what amazed his
wit, and his eyes were dazzled by that which he beheld
of riches past count and slaves and servants, who kissed
his hand and said, '[God grant thee] solace of 'b . 3

When he entered the saloon and drew near unto Cout
el Culoub, she sprang np to him and taking him by the
hand, seated him on a high divan. Then she brought him


330

a vase of sherbet of sugar, mingled with rose-water^ and he
took it and drank it off and left not a single drop* More-
over, he passed his finger round the inside of the vessel
and would have licked it, but she forbade him, saying,
s That is ill." Quoth he s 6 Hold thy peace : this is nought
but good honey ; 3 and she laughed at him and set before
him a tray of meats s whereof he ate his fill Then they
brought an ewer and basin of gold, and he washed hif
hands and abode in all delight of life and -worship.

Meanwhile, whea the Commander of the Faithful came
back from his journey and found not Cout el Cuioub, he
questioned the Lady Zubeideh of her and she said;, £ She is
dead,, may thy head live, O Commander of the Faithful I s
Now she had iet dig s grave amiddleward the palace and
built over it a mock tomb, of her knowledge of the love
the Khalif bore to Cout el Cuioub. So she said to him, 4
Commander of the Faithful, I made her a tomb amiddle-
ward the palace and buried her there.' Then she donned
black s leasing-wise, and feigned mourning a great while.

Now Cout el Cuioub knew that the Khalif was come
back from his journey ; so she turned to Khelif and said
to him, s Arise ; go to the bath and come back. 8 So he
arose and went to the bath, and when he returned, she
clad him in a dress worth a thousand dinars and taught
him manners and the rules of good breeding. Then said
she to him, 6 Go hence to the Khalif and say to him,
" O Commander of the Faithful, it Is my desire that thou
be my guest this night" 9

So Khelif arose and mounting his mule, rode, with
slaves and servants before him, till he came to the palace
of the Khalifate. Quoth the wise, « Clothe a stick with
' generosity [and it will beconoa generous]/ 1 And indeed

>"h~ t..:, >'■ ,.v v appear more cle. by :.v ■-•fcr'isci

with the cogaat. - yi'i^, " Clothe the reed and it will become a bride."
Qt also the common English guovexb, " Fine featherr ™~ ?v n fine birds."


33i


Ms comeliness was manifest and the goodllness of his
fashion, and the folk marvelled at this. Presently, the
eunuch saw him, who had given him the hundred dinars,
that had been the cause of his good fortune ; so lie went
in to the Khalif and said to him, s O Commander of the
Faithful, Khelif the fisherman is become a king, and
on him is a dress worth a thousand dinars/ The Khalif
bade admit him ; so he entered and said, s Peace be oa
thee, O Commander of the Faithful and Vicar off the
Lord of the Worlds and Protector of the people of the
Faith S May God the Most High prolong thy days and
advance thy dominion and exalt thy station to the loftiest ! '

The Khalif looked at him and marvelled at him and
ho¥/ fortune had come to him at unawares ; then he said
to him, £ Khelif, whence hadst thou that dress., that
is upon thee ? 1 ' O Commander of the Faithful/ answered
he, 6 it comes from my house/ Quoth the Khalif, 4 Hast
thou then a house?' "Yes/ replied Khelif, 'and thou,
O Commander of the Faithful, art my guest this day/
And Er Reshid said, 5 1 alone, O Khelif, or I and those
who are with me ? 5 And he answered, saying, ( Thou
and whom thou wilt/ So Jaafer turned to him and said.
' We will be thy guests this night ; ' whereupon he kissed
the earth again and withdrawing, mounted his mule and
rode off, attended by his servants, leaving the Khalif
marvelling at this and saying to jaafer, * Sawst thou
Khelif, with his mule and dress and servants, and his
dignity ? But yesterday I knew him for a buffoon and a
laughing-stock.' And they marvelled at this.

[Then they mounted and rode, till they drew j near
Khelif s house, when the latter alighted and taking a
parcel from one of bis attendants, opened it and nulled,
out therefrom a piece of-tabbj silk and spre ide*
the hoofs of the Khalif s mule; then he brought o*U a
piece of velvet md another of cloth of gold and a third o>"


332


fine satin and did with them likewise ; and thus he spread
nigh a score pieces of rich stuffs, till they reached the
house; when he came forward and said, '[Enter,] in the
name of God, O Commander of the Faithful ! ? Quoth Er
Reshid to Jaafer, < I wonder to whom this house belongs/
and he said, 5 It belongs to a man bight Ibn e! Ucafo 9
Syndic of the Jewellers/

So the Khalif alighted and entering, with his company;,
saw a high-builded saloon and a spacious,, with couches
raised [on daises] and carpets and divans laid. So he
went up to the couch that was set for him on four pillars
of ivory, plated with glittering gold and covered with,
seven carpets- This pleased him and behold, up came
Khelif, with servants and little slaves, bearing all manner
sherbets, compounded with sugar and lemon and perfumed
with rose and willowflower-water and odoriferous musk.

The fisherman advanced and drank and gave the Khalif
to drink, and the cup-bearers came forward and served the
rest of the company. Then Khelif brought a table spread
with meats of various colours and geese and fowls and
other birds, saying, • ' In the name of God ! ' So they ate
their fill • after which he let remove the tables and kissing
the earth three times before the Khalif, craved his leave
to bring wine and music. He gave him leave for this and
turning to Jaafer, said to him, s As my head liveth p the
house and that which is therein is Khelif s ; for that he is
ruler over it and I am wondered at him, whence there
came to him this great good fortune and exceeding
affluence ! However, this is no great matter to Him who
saith to a thing, " Be ! " and it is ; what 1 [most] wonder at
is his understanding, how it hath increased, and whence
lie hath gotten this lordliness and dignity • but, when God
wilteth good unto a man, He amendefch his wit before his
fortune.'

As they were talking, up came Khelif, followed by cup-


3 <u$

bearers like moons, girt with zones of gold, who spread
a cloth of siglaton 1 and set thereon flagons of chinaware
and tall flasks of glass and cups of crystal and bottles and.
hanaps of all colours ; and the flagons they filled with
pure clear old wine, whose scent was as the fragrance of
virgin musk and it was even as saith the .poet t

Ply me and ply this mate of mine With cups of the first-pressed Gre

wine.

Daughter of aoble% s ! I _ -be? display 8 In raiment of goblets clear C

fine.

They girdle her round with gems, 4 and pearls Of finest water therewith
entwine i

So by these tokens in hgT s I trow s - "The bride" 6 they style the juies ©f
the vin&>

And found about these vessels were sweetmeats and.
flowers, such as may not be surpassed. "When Er Reshid
saw this from Khelif, he showed favour to him and smiled
upon him and invested him [with an office] ; whereupon
Khelif wished him long life and abiding glory and said s
5 Will the Commander of the Faithful give me leave to
bring him a singing-girl, a lutanist, never was heard heir
like among mortals ? ! Quoth the Khalif, 4 So be it-.'

So he kissed the earth before him and going to a c!oset s
called Cout el Cuioub, who came, shuffling in her robes
and trinkets, after she had veiled herself from head to
foot s and kissed the earth before the Commander of the
Faithful. Then she sat down and tuning the iut^, swept

s A :ich kind of brocade.

2 A play is here intended upon the words fc&wm, nobles, and kexrum.
lilies, which are derived from the same root
G a* a bride is dispkj d. c. weddiir >■
a Syn. berries {imimi}

8 £1 Arous y one of tbo tonxnuraibla tropic-., nana* gi^en to wine by
the Arabs. Cl Gnngtrat da la Grange. Authologja Arabs, p. igo.


334


its strings and played upon it, till ail present were trans-
ported for excess of delight ; after which she improvised
and sang the following verses »

X wonder, will our time with those we love come back again. ? Will fate

reunion and its sweets s I wonder, aye ordain
To one who yearns for those that dwelt once in the ruined steads ? Shall

we find peace and will time's shifts no longer work as bane ?
How bitter life is since their loss and ah, how dearly sweet The nights

of union, when our loves one dwelling did contain I
Draw near to me, beloved mine, vouchsafe to me the grace 01 netting %

else my life, indeed, is frustrate all and vain„

When the Khalif heard this, he could not contain him-
self, but rent his clothes and fell down in a swoon • where-
upon all who were present hastened to pull off their apparel
and throw it over him, whilst Cout el Culoub beckoned to
Khelif and said to him, 6 Go to yonder chest and bring
what is therein ; 5 for she had made ready therein a suit
of the Khalif s apparel against the like of this time. So
Khelif brought it to her and she threw It over the Com-
mander of the Faithfid who came to himself and knowing


her for Cout el Culoub, said, 5 is tnis the day of Resurrec-
tion and hath God called up those who are in the tombs ;
or am 1 asleep and is this an illusion of dreams ? ' Quoth
Cout el Culoub, ( We are awake, not asleep, and I am
alive, nor have I tasted the cup of death.'

Then she told him all that had befallen her, and In-
deed, since he lost her, life had not been easy to him not
sleep sweet, and he abode now wondering, now weeping
and anon afire for longing. When she had made an end
of her story, the Khalif rose and took her by the hand s
intending for her palace, after he h?.d kissed her Hps and
■jt. her to his ;3;"- v ; lyoc"" TT : "" r.sc

jaid / : - i Allah, it is ^ ;c- Q ~:-j-:< , j j" T. teiir.iu
Thou hast aiready wronged me <


335


wrongest me again.' Quoth Er Reshid, 'Indeed, thou
sayst sooth, O Khelif,' and bade the Vizier Jaafer give him
what should content him. So he straightway gave him all
he desired and assigned him a village, the yearly revenue
whereof was twenty thousand dinars.

Moreover, Cout el Culoub made gift to him of the house
and all that was therein of furniture and hangings and
slaves and servants and slave-girls, great and small. So
Khelif became possessed of this great affluence and ex -
ceeding wealth and took him a wife, and good fortune
taught him gravity and dignity and prosperity overwhelmed
him. The Khalif enrolled him among his boon -com-
panions and he abode in all delight and solace of life, till
he was admitted to the mercy of God.


END OF VOl* Vtt.
