The Book of the Thousand Nights and One Night, Vol. 8 (Anonymous (trans. John Payne), 1884)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1884 Villon Society edition (https://archive.org/details/JohnPayneVolume8.AlfLaylahWaLaylah.TheBookOfTheThousandNights). The first complete English translation (1882-84), from the Calcutta Arabic edition.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

I
!


y


:):! -

I |
'(

it '


■

|
|


THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND
NIGHTS AND ONE NIGHT: now

FIRST COMPLETELY DONE INTO ENGLISH
PROSE AND VERSE, FROM THE ORIGINAL
ARABIC, BY yOHN PA YNE (A UTHOR
OF "THE MASQUE OF SHADOWS," "IN-
TAGLIOS," "SONGS OF LIFE AND DEATH,"
"LAUTREC," "THE POEMS OF MASTER
FRANCIS VILLON OF PARIS, " "NEW
POEMS," ETC. ETC.). IN NINE VOLUMES.-

VOLUME THE EIGHTH


LONDON

PRINTED FOR SUBSCRIBERS ONLY
igoi


KIRMAN EDITION,
Limited to Five Hundred Copies
No... 332


CONTENTS OF THE EIGHTH VOLUME.


PAGE

MESROUR AND ZEIN EL MEWASIF i

A LI NOUREDDIN AND THE FRANK KING'S

DAUGHTER „ . . . ... .63

THE MAN OF UPPER EGYPT AND HIS FRANK

WIFE 169

THE RUINED MAN OF BAGHDAD AND HIS

SLAVE GIRL 175

KING JELYAAD OF HIND AND HIS VIZIER
SHIMAS: WHEREAFTER ENSUETH THE
HISTORY OF KING WIRD KHAN, SON OF
KING JELYAAD, WITH HIS WOMEN AND
VIZIERS 185

a. THE CAT AND THE MOUSE l88

b. THE FAKIR AND HIS POT OF BUTTER .... 193
C. THE FISHES AND THE CRAB ...... I97

d. THE CROW AND THE SERPENT ..... I99

e. THE FOX AND THE WILD ASS ..... 201

f. THE UNJUST KING AND THE PILGRIM PRINCE . . 204

g. THE CROWS AND THE HAWK ...... 207


vm


PAGE


h.


THE


SERPENT-CHARMER AND HIS WIFE


2IO


?*.


THE


SPIDER AND THE WIND


, 213


J-


THE


TWO KINGS ...„„*


220


k.


THE


BLIND MAN AND THE CRIPPLE ,


222


L


THE


FOOLISH FISHERMAN »


„ 250


m.


THE


BOY AND THE THIEVES


- 2 5 2


n.


THE


MAN AND HIS WILFUL WIFE


- 255


G*


THE


MERCHANT AND THE THIEVES


■■ z 57


P°


THE


FOXES AND THE WOLF


. 26c


q.


THE


SHEPHERD AND THE THIEF .


• 264


r.


THE


HEATHCOCK AND THE TORTOISES


.. 29 a


ABOUKIR THE DYER AND ABOUSIR THE

BARBER ......... 29^

ABDALLAH THE FISHERMAN AND ABBALLAH

THE MERMAN ........ 339


THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND NIGHTS
AND ONE NIGHT.


MESROUR AND ZEIN EL MEWASIF,

There was once, of old days and in bygone ages and
times, a merchant named Mesrour, who was of the good-
liest of the folk of his day, and he had wealth galore and
was in easy case, but loved to take his pleasure in gardens
and orchards and to divert himself with the love of fair
women. One night, as he lay asleep, he dreamt that he
was in a most lovely garden, wherein were four birds, and
amongst them a dove, white as polished silver. The dove
pleased him and an exceeding love for her grew up in his
heart. Presently a great bird swooped down on him and
snatched the dove from his hand, and this was grievous
to him. Then he awoke and strove with his yearnings till
the morning, when he said in himself, ' Needs must I go
to-day to some one who will expound to me this dream.'
So he went forth and fared right and left, till he was far j^igi)t
from his dwelling-place, but found none to interpret the ulCCXlbt
dream to him. Then he set out to return, but on his way
the fancy took him to turn aside to the house of a certain
rich merchant, and when he drew near to it, he heard
from within a plaintive voice, reciting the following verses
from a sorrowful heart :

The East wind from her traces blows to-us-ward, fragrance-fraughtj

With perfume such as heals the sick and soothes the love-distraught,
By the deserted steads I stand and question ; but my tears Nought
answers save the witness mute, the ruin time hath wrought.
VOL. VIII. 1


2


Breath of the breeze, I prithee tell, quoth I, shall its delight To this

abiding-place return, by fairer fortune brought?
And shall I yet a fawn enjoy, whose shape hath ravished me, Yea, and

whose languor-drooping lids have wasted me to nought ?

When he heard this, he looked in at the door and saw a
garden of the goodliest of gardens, and at its farther end
a curtain of red brocade, embroidered with pearls and
jewels, behind which sat four damsels, and amongst them
a young lady over four and under five feet in height, as
she were the round of the moon and the shining full
moon. She had great liquid black eyes and joined eye-
brows, a mouth as it were Solomon's seal and lips and
teeth like pearls and coral ; and indeed she ravished all
wits with her beauty and grace and symmetry. When
Mesrour saw her, he entered the garden and went on, till
he came to the curtain : whereupon she raised her head
and saw him. So he saluted her and she returned his
greeting with dulcet speech ; and when he beheld her
more closely, his reason was confounded and his heart
transported. Then he looked at the garden and saw that
it was full of jessamine and gillyflowers and violets and
roses and orange blossoms and all manner sweet-scented
flowers. All the trees were laden with fruits and there
ran down water from four estrades, which occupied the
four angles of the garden. He looked at the first estrade
and found the following verses written around it with
vermilion :

May grief ne'er enter thee nor yet dismay, O house, nor fortune e'er
thy lord bewray !

Fair fall the house that harbours every guest, When straitened upon hins
is place and way I

Then he looked at the second estrade and found
following written thereon in red gold i


3


The garment of fair fortune shine on thee, dwelling, still, Whilst on the

garden-branches the song-birds pipe and trill !
May fragrant odours harbour in every part of thee And lovers in thy

precincts their hearts' desire fulfil !
In glory and in pleasance still may thy dwellers live, What while a

wandering planet shines out on heaven's hill 1

Then he looked at the third, on which he found these
verses written in ultramarine :

Still mayst thou last in glory and prosper, house of mine, As long as

night shall darken, as long as lights shall shine 1
All at thy gates who enter good luck embrace and good From thee

betide each comer in one unbroken line 1

And on the fourth was painted in yellow characters the
following verse :

This garden and this lake, a pleasant sitting-place, These, by the clement
Lord, are all I ask of grace.

Moreover, in that garden were birds of all kinds, turtle
and cushat and culver and nightingale, each carolling his
several song, and amongst them the lady, swaying grace-
fully to and fro and ravishing all who saw her with her
beauty and grace and symmetry. ' O man,' said she to
Mesrour, 'what brings thee into a house other than thy
house and wherefore comest thou in unto women other
than thy women, without leave of their owner ? ' ' O my
lady,' answered he, ' I saw this garden, and the goodliness
of its verdure pleased me and the fragrance of its flowers
and the singing of its birds ; so I entered, thinking to gaze
on it awhile and go my way.' ' With all my heart,' said she.
Mesrour was amazed at the sweetness of her speech and
the amorous languor of her glances and the elegance of
her shape, and transported by her beauty and grace and
the pleasantness of the garden and the birds. 3o> ha
recited the following verses :


4


She shone, a moon, amongst the ways, midmost a garden fair, Whereifl
sweet jessamine and rose and fragrant basil were,

And myrtle and anemones blood-red and eglantine And violets, com-
passing about the cassia-tree, blew there.

The zephyr steals from it the scents, wherewith it laden is ; Its perfume,
from the boughs exhaled, breathes fragrance everywhere.

Hail, O thou garden, that all flowers and sweets doth comprehend, That
perfect art in every grace and fashion of the fair !

Under the shadow of thy boughs the full moon 1 shineth bright And
with the sweetest melodies the song-birds fill thine air.

Thy ringdove and thy mocking-bird, yea, and thy turtle-dove And
nightingales stir up my soul to longing and despair ;

And yearning harbours in my heart : dazed at thy goodliness Am I, aad
as one stupefied for drunkenness, I fare.

Then she said to hin, ' Harkye, sirrah S Begone about
thy business, for we are none of the women who are
neither thine nor another's.' 3 And he answered, ' O my
lady, I said nothing ill.' Quoth she, 'Thou soughtest to
divert thyself with the sight [of the garden] and thou
hast looked on it ; so go thy ways.' ' O my lady,'
said he, 'belike [thou wilt give me] a draught of water,
for I am athirst.' Quoth she, ' How canst thou drink
of a Jew's water, and thou a Nazarene?' But he re-
plied, ' O my lady, your water is not forbidden to us
nor ours to you, for we are all [as] one creature.' So
she said to her slave-girl, ' Give him to drink.' And
she did so. Then she called for the table of food, and
there came four damsels, high-bosomed maids, bearing
four trays [of meats] and four flagons full of old wine,
as it were the tears of a slave of love for clearness, and
[set them down before him on] a table around whose
marge were graven the following verses :

1 i.e. the face of the garden's fair mistre9i.
8 I am no common woman.


5


They set a table down before the boon companions' eyne, For eating,

borne on wroughten feet of gold and silver fine ;
The Garden of Eternity 1 it seemed, the which unites All that the eool

can weary for of costly meat and wine.

Quoth she, ' Thou soughtest to drink of our drink ; so
up and at our meat and drink ! ' He could hardly credit
his ears and set down forthright at the table ; whereupon
she bade her nurse 2 give him a cup, that he might drink.
Now her slave-girls were called, one Huboub, another
Khutoub and the third Sukoub, and she who gave him
the cup was Huboub. Presently, the breeze blew [on the
lady] and the scarf 3 fell from her head and discovered
a fillet of glittering gold, set with pearls and jewels and
jacinths ; and on her breast was a necklace of all manner
gems and precious stones, to which hung a sparrow of red
gold, with feet of red coral and bill of white silver and
[body] full of aloes and ambergris and odoriferous musk.
Then he looked at the breast of her shift and saw thereon
the following verse wroughten in red gold :

The fragrance of musk, that breathes from the breasts of the fair, The
zephyr borrows, to sweeten the morning air.

Mesrour marvelled at this with an exceeding wonder
and was confounded at her charms and amazement got
hold upon him. Then said she to him, ' Begone from us
and go about thy business, lest the neighbours hear of
us and even us with the lewd.' 'By Allah, O my lady,'
replied he, ' suffer me to enjoy the sight of thy beauty and
grace.' With this she was wroth with him and leaving
him, walked in the garden, followed by her maids [Khutoub
and Sukoub], whilst Huboub abode by the curtain with

1 One of the seven divisions or gardens of the Mohammedan. Paradise.,
* Or confidential waiting- woman,
s Qi qucere mantilla A l'Espagnole,


6


Mesrour, who entered into discourse with her and presently
said to her, ' O Huboub, hath thy mistress a husband or
not? ' ' She hath a husband,' answered the damsel; ' but he
is presently abroad on a journey with merchandise of his.'

When he heard that her husband was abroad on a
journey, his heart lusted after her and he said, ' O Huboub,
extolled be the perfection of Him who created this damsel
and fashioned her ! How sweet is her beauty and her
grace and her shape and symmetry 1 Verily, my heart is
m sore travail for her. O Huboub, [look] how I may
come to enjoy her, and thou shalt have of me what thou
wilt of money and what not else.' ' O Nazarene/ answered
Huboub, ' if she heard thee speak thus, she would kill
thee, or else she would kill herself, for she is the daughter
of a champion 1 of the Jews nor^is there her like amongst
them. Moreover, she hath no need of money and keepeth
herself still cloistered, discovering not her case to any.'
Quoth Mesrour, ' O Huboub, an thou wilt but bring me
to enjoy her, I will be thy slave and thy servant and will
serve thee all my life and give thee whatsoever thou
seekest of me.'

But she said, 4 O Mesrour, this woman hath no desire
for money nor yet for men, for my lady Zein el Mewasif
is straitly cloistered, going not forth of the door of her
house, lest the folk see her ; and but that she forbore
thee by reason of thy strangerhood, she had not suffered
thee to pass her threshold ; no, not though thou wert her
brother.' ' O Huboub,' rejoined he, ' be thou our go-
between and thou shalt have of me an hundred gold
dinars and a dress worth as much more, for that the love
of her hath gotten possession of my heart.' And she said*
' O man, let me go about with her in talk and I will return
thee an answer and acquaint thee with what she saith,
1 or aealot (gha»i).


7


Indeed, she loves those who berhyme her and set forth
her charms and her grace and beauty in verse, and we may
not avail against her save by beguilement and soft speech
and craft'

Then she rose and going up to her mistress, talked with
her privily of this and that and presently said to her, '
my lady, look at yonder young man, the Nazarene ; how-
sweet is his discourse and how elegant his shape ! ' When
Zein el Mewasif heard this, she turned to her and said,
'An his comeliness like thee, love him thyself. Art thou
not ashamed to bespeak the like of me with these words ?
Go, bid him begone about his business ; or it shall be the
worse for him.' So Huboub returned to Mesrour, but
acquainted him not with that which her mistress had said.
Then the latter bade her go to the door and look if she
saw any of the folk, lest foul befall them. So she went
and returning, said, ' O my lady, there are folk in plenty
without and we cannot let him go forth to-night.' Quoth
Zein el Mewasif, ' I am troubled because of a dream I
have had and am fearful by reason thereof.' And Mesrour
said, ' What sawest thou [in thy dream ?] May God not
trouble thy heart ! ' ' I was asleep in the middle of the
night,' answered she, ' and behold an eagle swooped
down upon me from the highest of the clouds and would
have carried me off from behind the curtain, wherefore
I was affrighted at him. Then I awoke from sleep and
bade my women bring me meat and drink, so haply,
when I had drunken, the terror of the dream would cease
from me.'

When he heard this, he smiled and told her his dream
and how he had caught the dove, whereat she marvelled
exceedingly. Then he went on to talk with her and said,
'Now am I certified of the truth of my dream, for thou art
the dove and I the eagle, and needs must this be, for,,


rhenas I set eyes on thee, thou tookest possession of my
vitals and settest ray heart on fire for love of thee ! '
Thereupon Zein el Mewasif became exceeding wroth and
said to him, 'God forfend that this should be! God on
thee, begone about thy business, ere the neighbours see
thee and there betide us sore reproach,' Then, ' Harkye,
fellow ! ' added she. ' Let not thy soul covet that it
shall not attain to. Thou weariest thyself [in vain] ; for
I am a merchant's wife and a merchant's daughter and
thou art a druggist ; and when sawst thou a druggist
and a merchant's daughter on this wise ? ' * O my
lady,' answered he, ' never lacked love between folk
[of different condition] ; so cut thou not off from me
hope of this and whatsoever thou seekest of me of
money and raiment and trinkets and what not else, I will
give thee.'

Then he abode with her in discourse and chiding,
whilst she still redoubled in anger, till nightfall, when
he said to her, ' O my lady, take this dinar and fetch me
a little wine, for I am athirst and heavy at heart.' So
she said to Huboub, e Fetch him wine and take nought
from him, for we have no need of his dinar.' [So she
went to fetch the wine, whilst] Mesrour held his peace
and bespoke not Zein el Mewasif, who improvised the
following verses :

Harkye, O man ! Desist from this thou dost design Nor to the crooked

ways of frowardness incline.
Love is a net, and if thou fall into its snare. The day thereafterward for

weariness thou'lt pine
Occasion to our spy thou'lt give for talk and all The people will reproach

me with this love of thine.
Small marvel 'tis if thou a fair one love : gazelles Thou seest lions chas®

and in their snares entwine.


And he answered her with these 5


9


O cassia-branch, delight of garth and knoll, Spare thou my heart, who

dost possess my soul.
The cup of death for love thou'st made me drain, Clad me in wede of

abjectness and dole.
How shall I be consoled, since thou hast ta'en My heart, for love of thee

a red-hot coal ?


' Away from me ! ' cried she. ' Quoth the adage, " He
who giveth loose to his eyes wearieth his heart." By
Allah, I am tired of discourse with thee and chiding, and
indeed thy soul coveteth that which shall never be thine ;
nay, though thou gavest me my weight in gold, thou
shouldst not get thy wish of me ; for, by the bounty of
God the Most High, I know nought of the things of the
world, save pleasant life.' 'O my lady Zein el Mewasif/
answered he, 'ask of me what thou wilt of the goods of
the world.' Quoth she, 'What shall I ask of thee? For
sure thou wilt go out into the highway [and discover my
case to the folk] and I shall become a laughing-stock
among them and they will make a byword of me in
verse, me who am the daughter of the chief of the mer-
chants and whose father is known of the notables of the
people. I have no need of money or raiment and this
love will not be hidden from the folk and I shall be
brought to shame, I and my family.'

With this Mesrour was confounded and could make
her no answer ; but presently she said, * Indeed, the skil-
ful thief, if he steal, stealeth not but what is worth [the
adventuring of] his neck, and every woman who doth
lewdness with other than her husband is styled a thief;
so, if it must be thus and no help, thou shalt give me
whatsoever my heart desireth of money and raiment and
trinkets and what not.' Quoth he, 'An thou soughtest
of me the world and all that is therein, from East to West,
it were but a little thing, compared with thy favour.' And
she said, * I will have of thee three suits, each worth &


IO


thousand dinars, and pearls and jewels and jacinths, and
I require of thee, to boot, that thou swear to me that thou
wilt keep my secret nor discover it to any and that thou
wilt company with none but me ; and I in turn will swear
to thee a true oath that I will never play thee false.'

So he swore to her the oath she required and she swore
to him, and they agreed upon this ; after which she said to
her nurse Huboub, ' To-morrow go thou with Mesrour to
his lodging and seek somewhat of musk and ambergris
and aloes and rose-water and see what he hath. If he be
a man of condition, we will take him into favour; else
will we leave him.' Then said she to him, ' O Mesrour,
I desire somewhat of musk and ambergris and aloes-wood ;
so do thou send it me by Huboub.' And he answered,
'I hear and obey; my shop is at thy commandment.'
Then the wine went round between them and their session
was pleasant ; but Mesrour's heart was troubled for the
passion and longing that possessed him ; and when Zein
el Mewasif saw him in this plight, she said to her slave-
girl Sukoub, ' Arouse Mesrour from his stupor ; mayhap he
will awake.' ' Willingly,' answered Sukoub and sang the
following verses :


An if thou be in love, bring gold and gear and in thy lays Set forth thy

love, so thou mayst win the aim of thine essays
And taste the favours of a fawn, soft-eyed and smiling-lipped, Whose

shape is as the cassia-branch, when to the breeze it sways.
Look on her ; in her charms thou'lt see matter for wonderment And

pour thy life out, ere the term appointed to thy days.
These be the attributes of love, an thou but knewst thereof; But, if

the gold delude thee, leave the gold and go thy ways.

Mesrour apprehended [her meaning] and said, ' I hear
and understand. Never was stress but after came relief,
and He who afflicteth will order [the issue]/ Whereupon
Zein el Mewasif recited the following ;


II


Awake, O Mesrour, from love's stupor ; for lo, I fear lest oui love bring

thee travail and woe.
Sure proverbs on us East and West shall be made And the folk our

report for a wonder shall know.
Leave loving my like, or for sure thou'lt have blame. — Why cleav'st thou

to me of all women ? I trow,
One well-born shouldst thou love. — Thou'lt a byword become And find

not a pitying friend high or low
I'm a Pharisee's child and the folk fear my wrath : Would the term of

my life were accomplished, heigho !

And Mesrour answered her with these verses .


Leave me to my affliction ; to love thee I'm content ; And blame me

not, for censure my passion doth augment.
Over my heart ye lord it in tyrant- wise, whilst I Fare westward neither

eastward for very languishment.
Forbidden 'tis to slay me of passion's law ; they say, ' The slain of love's

a victim, oppressed and innocent.'
Were there a judge in passion, to him I'd make my moan, Mayhap he'd

do me justice in his arbitrament.

They ceased not from chiding and discourse till the
morning beamed, when Zein el Mewasif said to him, 'O
Mesrour, it is time for thee to depart, lest one of the
folk see thee and foul befall us.' So he arose and going
forth, fared on, accompanied by Huboub, till they came
to his lodging, where he talked with her and said to her,
' All thou seekest of me thou shalt presently have, so but
thou wilt bring me to her enjoyment.' Quoth Huboub,
'Comfort thy heart;' whereupon he rose and gave her a
hundred dinars, saying, ' O Huboub, I have by me a dress
worth a hundred dinars.' 'O Mesrour,' answered she,
• make haste with the dresses and what not else thou didst
promise her, ere she change her mind, for we may not
avail to take her save with craft and beguilement, and she
loveth the recitation of verses.' Quoth he, C I hear and
obey/ and bringing her the musk and ambergris and


12


aloes-wood and rose-water, returned with her to Zein el
Mewasif and saluted her. She returned his greeting with
the sweetest of speech, and he was confounded at her
beauty and improvised the following verses :

O sun, midmost the dark that shinest in the skies, O thou that hast

benumbed my wit with great black eyes,
O loveling sweet, that com'st with neck surpassing fair, Whose cheek

the garden-rose eclipses and outvies,
Blind not with thy disdain our sights, for thy disdain A grievous matter

is, the heart that terrifies.
Passion took up its stead with me, and 'tis forbid To it to carry off the

life's last lingering sighs.
Indeed, the love of you doth lord it in my heart, And save to you, I

find no issue anywise.
Yet haply thou'lt relent towards a lover sad ; So shall his darkness flee

and morning bright arise.

When she heard his verses, she cast at him a look, that
bequeathed him a thousand regrets and his heart and soul
were ravished thereby, and answered him as follows :

Think not from her, of whom thou art enamoured, aye To win delight j

so put desire from thee away.
Leave that thou hop'st, for 'gainst her rigours whom thou lov'st Among

the fair, in vain is all thou canst essay.
My looks to lovers bring discomfiture and woe : Indeed, I make no

count of that which thou dost say.

When he heard this, he dissembled and took patience,
saying in himself, £ There is nothing for it but patience
against calamity ; ' and on this wise they abode till night-
fall, when she called for food and they set before her
a tray, wherein were all manner meats, quails and pigeons
and mutton and so forth, of which they ate till they had
enough. Then she bade take away the tables and they
did so and brought washing gear. So they washed their
hands, after which she ordered her women to bring the


*3


candlesticks, and they set on candlesticks and candles
therein of camphorated wax.

Then said she, 'By Allah, my breast is straitened to
night and I am fevered.' Quoth Mesrour, ' May God
dilate thy breast and do away thy trouble ! ' And she
said, ' O Mesrour, I am used to play at chess : knowest
thou aught of the game?' 'Yes/ answered he, C I am
skilled therein;' whereupon she bade her maid Huboub
fetch her the chessboard. So she went away and presently
returning with the board, set it before her, and behold, it
was of ebony inlaid with ivory, with squares traced out in
glittering gold, and its pieces were of pearl and ruby.
Mesrour was amazed at this and she said to him, ' Wilt ^Tf^t
thou have red or white?' 'O princess of fair ones and {ICCCClbff,
adornment of the morning,' answered he, ' do thou
take the red, for they are handsome and fitter for the
like of thee, and leave me the white.' 'So be it/ an-
swered she and taking the red pieces, ranged them
opposite the white, then put out her hand to make the first
move.

He looked at her fingers, which were white as paste,
and was confounded at their beauty and elegant shape j
whereupon she turned to him and said, ' O Mesrour, be
not bewildered, but take patience and calm thyself.' ' O
thou whose beauty puts the moons to shame/ answered
he, 'how shall a lover look on thee and have patience?'
'Checkmate!' 1 said she and beat him; wherefore she
knew that he was mad for love of her and said to him,
' O Mesrour, I will not play with thee save for a set stake/
4 1 hear and obey/ answered he and she said, 'Swear to
me and I will swear to thee that neither of us will cheat
the other." So they swore this and she said, 1 O Mesrour 3
if I beat thee, I will have ten dinars of thee, and if thou
beat me s I will give thee nothing.' ' O my lady/ rejoined

1 Es shah mat, the king is dead, origin of our word " checkmate.' 5


14


he, ' be not false to thine oath, for I see thou art an over

match for me at this game ! ' ' Agreed,' said she and they
ranged their men and fell again to playing.

Now she had on her head a kerchief of blue brocade;
so she laid it aside and tucking up her sleeve, showed a
wrist like a shaft of light and passed her hand over the
red pieces, saying to him, ' Look to thyself.' But he was
dazzled at her beauty and the sight of her charms bereft
him of reason, so that he became dazed and stupefied
and put out his hand to the white men, but it lit upon
the red. 'O Mesrour,' said she, ' where are thy senses?
The red are mine and the white thine.' And he replied,
* Who can look on thee, without losing his senses ?,
Then, seeing how it was with him, she took the white
from him and gave him the red, and they played and she
beat him.

He ceased not to play with her and she to beat him,
whilst he paid her each time ten dinars, till, seeing him to
be distracted for love of her, she said to him, ' O Mesrour,
thou wilt never come to thy desire, except thou beat me ;
and henceforth, I will not play with thee save for a stake
of a hundred dinars a game.' 'With all my heart,'
answered he and they went on playing, whilst she still
beat him and he won not a single game, but paid
her a hundred dinars each time ; and on this wise they
abode till the morning, when he rose. Quoth she, ' What
wilt thou, O Mesrour?' And he replied, 'I mean to go
to my lodging and fetch somewhat of money : it may be
I shall attain my desire.' ' Do as seemeth good to thee,'
said she. So he went home and taking all the money he
had, returned to her, reciting the following verses :

Me thought I caught a bird in sleep, as I did deem, All in a garden fair

with smiling flowers agleam.
That I shall get of thee the amorous delight, Th' interpretation is, me>

seems, of this my dream.


is

Then they fell a-playing again; but she still beat him
and he could not beat her once ; and on this wise they
abode three days, till she had gotten of him all his
money: whereupon, 'O Mesrour,' said she, 'what wilt
thou do now?' And he answered, 'I will stake thee a
druggist's shop.' ' What is its worth ? ' asked she ; and he
replied, ' Five hundred dinars.' So they played and she
won the shop of him in five bouts. Then he staked slave-
girls and lands and houses and gardens, and she won
them all, till she had gotten of him all he had ; where-
upon she turned to him and said, ' Hast thou aught left to
stake ? *' 'By Him who made me fall into the snare of thy
love,' answered he, 'I have neither money nor aught else
left, little or much!' 'O Mesrour,' said she, 'the end
of that whose beginning was contentment shall not be
repentance ; wherefore, if thou repent thee,,, take back thy
good and begone from us, and I will hold thee quit towards
me.' ' By Him who decreed these things to us,' replied
Mesrour, 'though thou soughtest to take my life, it were
a little thing, compared to thine approof, for I love none
but thee ! '

Then said she, ' Go and fetch the Cadi and the witnesses
and make over to me by deed all thy lands and posses-
sions.' 'Willingly/ replied he and going out forthright,
returned with the Cadi and the witnesses. When the
magistrate saw her, his reason fled and his mind was
troubled by reason of the beauty of her fingers, and he
said to her, ' O my lady, I will not draw up the deed of
conveyance, save upon condition that thou purchase the
lands and houses and slave-girls and that they all pass
under thy control and into thy possession.' 4 We are
agreed upon that,' replied she ; ' write me a deed, whereby
all Mesrour's houses and lands and slave-girls and all his
hand possesseth shall pass to Zein el Mewasif and become
her property at such a price.' So he wrote out the deed


i6


and the witnesses set their hands thereto; whereupon she
tKTtg!)t took it from the Cadi and said to Mesrour, c Now go thy
feCfXX'IbtU. ways.' But her slave-girl Huboub turned to him and said,
'Recite us some verses.' So he improvised the following
verses upon [his own case and] the game of chess :

Of Fate I plain me and for that which hath befall'n me sigh And make
my moan of loss by chess and by the [evil] eye,

For love of one, a damsel fair, slender and delicate ; Female or male,
there's not her like of all beneath the sky.

Arrows upon me from her looks she launched and 'gainst me brought
Troops that would conquer all the world and all men, far and nigh ;

Red men and white men, ay, and knights for shock of battle ranged;
Then came she forth to me and did to single fight defy.

"Look to thyself,' quoth she ; but, when she put her fingers out, Mid-
most a pitch-black night, most like her sable hair in dye,

I had no power to move the white, to rescue them from her And passion
caused the tide of tears in me run fierce and high.

On, with the queens, fall pawns and rooks ; they charge the host of
white, And these give way, discomfited, and turn their backs to fly ;

Yea, and she launched at me, to boot, an arrow of her looks. And to
the kernel of my heart the quivering shaft did hie.

*Twixt the two hosts she gave me choice, and I chose that which white
Was with the whiteness of the moon that shineth in the sky.

* The white, indeed, are those which best beseem to me and they Are

what I fain would have ; so take the red to thee,' quoth I.
Then played she with me for a stake agreed 'twixt us ; but Fate did

unto me the wished-for boon of her consent deny.
Alas, the misery of my heart ! Alas, my longing sore For the enjoyment

of a maid who with the moon doth vie !
It is not for my goods and lands my heart is all a-fire But that, alack S

familiar 'tis grown with the [evil] eye.
Distraught I'm grown and stupefied for dreariment, and Fate, For what's

betided me, I chide with many a tear and cry.

* What ails thee to be dazed ? ' asked she, and I, ' Shall wine-bibbers Be

whole of wit, when drunkenness their sense doth stupefy?'
A mortal maid hath ta'en my wit with her fair shape % if if Bg soft, hes
bowels are like rock,, uneath to mollify.


Myself Bheartened, saying, ' Her to-day I shalt possess Upon th© wager,
fearing not defeat I should aby.

My heart ceased not to covet her, till I to poverty Became reduced, and
beggared now in goods and hope am I.

Will he who is in love forswear a love that irketh him, Though in the
oceans of desire he struggle like to die ?

So is the slave grown penniless, to love and longing thrall, All un-
accomplished yet the hope he staked his all to buy.

Zein el Mewasif marvelled at the eloquence of his
tongue and said to him, 'O Mesrour, leave this madness
and return to thy senses and go thy ways ; for thou hast
wasted all thy substance at the game of chess, yet hast
not attained to thy desire, nor hast thou any resource
whereby thou mayst accomplish it.' But he turned to
her and said, ' O my lady, ask of me what thou wilt and
I will bring it to thee and lay it at thy feet.' 1 Mesrour,'
answered she, s thou hast no money left.' 4 goal of all
hopes/ rejoined he, 'if I have no money, the folk will
help me.' Quoth she, 'Shall the giver turn asker?' And
he said, ' I have friends and kinsfolk, and whatsoever I
seek of them, they will give me.' Then said she, i O
Mesrour, I will have of thee four bladders of musk and
four vases of civet and four pounds of ambergris and
four thousand dinars and four hundred pieces of coloured
brocade, wroughten with gold. Bring me these things,
and I will grant thee my favours.' ' This is a light matter
to me, O thou that puttest the moons to shame,' replied
he and went forth to fetch her what she sought.

She sent Huboub after him, to see what interest he had
with the folk of whom he had spoken to her ; but, as he
went along the streets, he turned and seeing her afar off,
waited till she came up to him and said to her, 1 Whither
away, O Huboub?' So she told him what her mistress
had said to her and he said> s By Allah, O Huboub, I have
nothing! 5 e Then why didst thou promise her? 5 asked

VOL. VOL S


18

she ; and he answered, * How many a promise is unkept
of its maker ! Fine words needs must be in love-matters.'
When she heard this, she said to him, ' O Mesrour, be of
good heart and cheerful eye, for, by Allah, I will be the
means of thy coming to enjoy her 1 ' Then she left him
and returned, weeping sore, to her mistress, to whom
said she, 1 O my lady, indeed he is a man of great con-
sideration, well-reputed among the folk.' Quoth Zein el
Mewasif, 'There is no resource against the ordinance of
the Most High 1 Verily, this man found not in me a com-
passionate heart, for that I spoiled him of his substance
and he got of me neither affection nor complaisance in
granting him the amorous mercy ; but, if I incline to his
desire, I fear lest the thing be bruited abroad.' 'O my
lady,' answered Huboub, 'verily, his present plight and
the loss of his good is grievous upon us, and thou hast
with thee none but myself and thy slave-girl Sukoub ; so
which of us two would dare prate of thee, and we thy
hand-maids ? '

With this, she bowed her head and the damsels said to
her, ' O my lady, it is our counsel that thou send after him
and show him favour and suffer him not ask of the sordid ;
for how bitter is asking ! ' So she accepted their counsel
and calling for inkhorn and paper, wrote him the follow-
ing verses :

Fulfilment draws near, O Mesrour : rejoice in fair presage and true, For,
to-night, when the darkness falls down, the deed without fail thou
shalt do ;

And ask not the sordid, O youth, for money to mend thine estate : In-

deed, I was drunken, but now my wit is restored me anew.
Moreover, thy good that I took shall all unto thee be restored, And to

crown, O Mesrour, my rargesse, I'll add thee my favours thereto %
Since patience thou hadst and in the long-suffering and sweetness there

was With a loved one's unkindness to bear, who wronged thee with

rigours undue.


iq


So hasten forthright to enjoy my possession, fair fall thee thereof ! And
tarry not neither neglect, lest my folk come to know of us two.

Then come to us quickly, I pray, and loiter not neither delay, And eat
of the fruits of delight, whilst my husband is absent, the Jew.

Then she folded the letter and gave it to Huboub, who
carried it to Mesrour and found him weeping and reciting
the following verses, in a transport of passion and love-
longing :

There blew upon my heart a breeze of love and wantonness, And all my
entrails crumbled were with passion pitiless.

My longing, since my loved one's loss, is passing sore on me And still
mine eyelids overflow for very tears' excess.

My heart with doubts and fears is racked, which did I but reveal Unto
hard rocks and stones, forthright they'd soften for distress.

Ah, would I knew if I shall live to win to my delight, if, in th' enjoy-
ment of my wish, my hope I shall possess !

Shall parting's nights, the wide outspread, be folded up atgain And shall
I e'er of that be healed which doth my heart oppress

As he was repeating these verses, Huboub knocked at
the door; so he rose and opened to her, and she entered
and gave him the letter. He read it and said to her, ' O
Huboub, what news bringest thou of thy mistress ? ' 1 O
my lord,' answered she, ' in this letter is what dispenses
me from answering, for thou art of the folk of under-
standing.' And he rejoiced with an exceeding joy and
repeated the following verses :

The letter came, and its contents rejoiced us, heart and brain, And in

my very heart of hearts to keep it I were fain.
Yea, I redouble in desire, whene'er the writ I kiss ; For 'tis as if 't the

very pearl of passion did contain.

Then he wrote a letter in answer and gave it to Huboub^
who returned with it to her mistress and fell to extolling
his charms to her and expatiating on his generosity and
good qualities ; for she was become a helper to him, to


20


bring about his union with her. ' O Huboub/ said Zein ei
Mewasif, ' indeed he tarrieth to come to us.' And Huboub
answered, i He will certainly come speedily.' Hardly had
she made an end of speaking when he knocked at the
door, and she opened to him and brought him in to her
mistress, who saluted him and bade him welcome and
seated him by her side.

Then she said to Huboub, ' Bring me a suit of the
goodliest of apparel - } " so she brought a dress embroidered
with gold and Zein el Mewasif threw it over him, whilst
she herself donned one of the richest of dresses and
covered her head with a net of pearls of the finest water.
About this she bound a fillet of brocade, embroidered with
pearls and rubies and other jewels, from beneath which
fell down two tresses [of plaited silk], each looped with
a pendant of ruby, charactered with glittering gold, and
she let down her hair, as it were the sombre night. More-
over she incensed herself with aloes-wood and scented
herself with musk and ambergris, and Huboub said to her,
' God guard thee from the [evil] eye ! ' Then she began
to walk, with a graceful swimming gait, whilst Huboub,
who excelled in verse-making, recited the following in her
honour :

She shames the cassia-branches with every step she tries And sore besets

her lovers with glances from her eyes.
A moon from out the darkness appearing of her hair s It is as from her

browlocks the very sun did rise.
Happy by whom the night long with all her charms she lies And happy

he who, swearing by her life, for her dies !

Zein el Mewasif thanked her and went up to Mesrour,
as she were the full moon all displayed. When he saw
her s he rose to his feet and exclaimed, 1 Except, my
thought deceive me, she is no mortal, but one of the
brides of Paradise ! Then she called for food and they


brought s. table, about whose marge were written the
following verses :


Dip thou with spoons in saucers four and gladden heart and eye With

many a various kind of stew and fricassee and fry.
Thereon fat quails (ne'er shall I cease to love and tender them) And

rails and fowls and dainty birds of all the kinds that fly.
Glory to God for the kabobs, for redness all aglow, And potherbs,

steeped in vinegar, in porringers thereby !
Fair fall the rice with sweet milk dressed, wherein the hands did plunge

And eke the forearms of the fair were buried, bracelet-high I
How my heart yeameth with regret over two plates of fish That by two

manchet-cakes of bread of Tewarij 1 did lie !

Then they ate and drank and made merry, after which
the servants removed the table of food and set on the
wine service. The cup and the bowl passed round be-
tween them and their hearts were gladdened. Then
Mesrour filled the cup and saying, 'To her whose I am
and who is my mistress ! ' chanted the following verses :

I marvel at mine eyes that feed their fill upon the charms Of a fair maid

whose beauty bright enlightens every place.
In all her time she hath no like nor any may compare With her for very

goodliness and sweet harmonious grace.
The willow sapling envies her the slimness of her shape, When, in her

symmetry arrayed, she fares with stately pace.
The crown of her, for radiance, is as the crescent moon, Ay, and the full

moon of the dark she shames with shining face.
Whenas she walks upon the earth, her fragrance wafts abroad A breeze

that scents her every hill and every level space.

1 Mesrour,' said she, ' whoso keepeth his faith and
hath eaten our bread and salt, it behoveth us to give him
i his due ; so put away from thee the thought of what hath
passed and I will restore thee thy lands and houses and

1 Apparently some place celebrated for its fine bread 9 as Gonesse ie
seventeenth-century France.


22


all I have taken from thee.' 'O my lady,' answered he,
* I acquit thee of that whereof thou speakest, though thou
hadst been false to the oath we swore to each other, thou
and 1; for I will go and become a Muslim.' 1 Then said
Huboub to her, ' O my lady, thou art young of years and
knowest many things, and I claim the intercession of God
the Most High with thee, for, except thou do my bidding
and heal my heart, I will not lie the night with thee in the
house.'' ' O Huboub,' replied her mistress, 1 it shall be as
thou wilt : so rise and make us ready another room.'

So she rose and made ready another room and adorned
and perfumed it after the goodliest fashion, on such wise
as her mistress loved and preferred, after which she set on
fresh food and wine, and the cup went round between
^iftgt)t them and their hearts were glad. Presently quoth Zein el
iJCcrf. Mewasif to Mesrour, ' O Mesrour, the time of union and
favour is come ; so, as thou studiest for my love, recite us
some verses, surpassing of fashion.' So he recited the
following ode :

I am ta'en captive ; in my heart a fire flames up amain, Over a bond of

love-delight by sev'rance shorn in twain ;
Ay, and for love of a fair maid, whose shape hath rent my heart, "Whose

cheeks so soft and delicate my reason do enchain,
joined brows and arched and melting eyes of liquid black hath she And

teeth that like the lightning flash, when she to smile doth deign.
Her years of life are ten and four ; my tears, for love of her, Resemble

drops of dragon's blood, as from mine eyes they rain.
'Twixt stream and garden first mine eyes beheld her, as she sat, With

face the full moon that outshone in heaven's high domain.
I stood to her, on captive wise, for awe, and said, ' The peace Of God

for ever light on thee, O dweller in the fane ! '
Then she, with sweet and dulcet speech, like pearls in order strung, My

salutation graciously returned to me again ;

1 Sic in all three texts. The Breslau Edition adds here, 48 And Zeia
<d Mewasif followed him." The meaning of the passage is doubtfuL


23


And when she heard my speech to her, she knew for sure what I De-
sired, and therewithal her heart was hardened 'gainst her swain.
* Is not this idle talk ? ' quoth she, and I made answer, ' Spare the

longing lover to upbraid, who doth of love complain. '
If thou vouchsafe me thy consent this day, the thing were light ; Thy

like beloved is and mine still slaves of love in vain.'
And when she knew my wish, she smiled and answered, ' By the Lord

Him who created heaven and earth and all that they contain,
[I am] a Jewess, born and bred in Jewry's straitest sect And thou unto

the Nazarenes as surely doth pertain.
How think'st thou to enjoy me, then, and art not of my faith? To-
morrow, sure, thou wilt repent, if thou this thing obtain.
Is 't lawful with two faiths to jest in love ? The like of me Were blamed

of all and looked upon with flouting and disdain.
Wilt thou thus mock at all belief and all religious rites And doubly

guilty, this my faith and eke thine own profane ?
An if thou lov'dst me, thou'dst become a Jew for love of me, And, save

my favours, all to thee forbidden would remain,
And by th' Evangel thou wouldst swear a strait and biriding oath To

keep the secret of the love that is betwixt us twain.'
So by the Pentateuch I swear, a true and certain oath, That, in the time

that's past and gone and ne'er will be again,
I swore to her upon my faith, upon my law and creed, And her unto a

solemn oath on like wise did constrain.
Quoth I, 'O term of all desire, what is thy name?' And she, 'Zein el

Mewasif am I called in this my own demesne.'
'Zein el Mewasif,' then cried I, ' my entrails are enthralled For love of

thee ; thou hast indeed enslaved me, heart and brain.'
I saw her beauty underneath the chin -veil and became Afflicted sore at

heart, distraught for love and longing pain ;
Nor neath the curtain did I cease to humble me and eke Of the much

passion to make moan that in my heart did reign ;
Till, when she saw my plight and all the transport of my love, A smiling

visage she unveiled, that did me straight assain.
The wind of amorous delight blew full on us and she Scented of musk

her neck and wrists, till all the house had ta'en
Perfume from her and every place, whilst I her lips did kiss And from

her sweet and smiling mouth its wine of balm did drain.
Under her robes she swayed, as sways the willow, and delight And union

did permit, till then forbidden to the swain.


24


We lay the night together and with many a clip and kiss And seckisag

lips, was union perfected for us twain.
There's no adornment of the world, excepting she thou lov st Be nea?

thee, so thou mayst of her the wished delight obtain.
Whenas day broke, she rose to say farewell, with lovely face Excelling

far the moon that shines in heaven's spreading plain ;
And at her leave-taking, this verse she chanted, whilst the tears Raa

down her cheeks, now one by one, now linked in many a chain,
•' By the Great Oath and by the nights so fair, I'll ne'er forget The pact

of Allah 'twixt us two, whilst I on life remain {'


Zein el Mewasif was charmed with these verses and
said to him, ' O Mesrour, how goodly are thy parts ! May
he live not who would harm thee ! ' Then she entered
a privy chamber and called him. So he went in to her
and taking her in his arms, embraced her and kissed her
and got of her that which he had deemed impossible
and rejoiced in the attainment of the sweet of amorous
delight. Then said she, £ O Mesrour, now we are
become lovers, thy good is forbidden to me and is law-
fully thine again.' So she restored to him all she had
won of him and said to him, ' Hast thou a garden,
whither we may go and take our pleasure therein ? '
' Yes, O my lady,' answered he, ' I have a garden that
hath not its like.'

Then he returned to his house and bade his slave-girls
make ready a handsome room and provide a splendid
banquet ; after which he summoned Zein el Mewasif, who
came with her damsels, and they ate and drank and made
merry, whilst the cup passed round between them and
their hearts were glad. Then the lovers withdrew to &
privy chamber and Zein el Mewasif said to Mesrour, 'I
have bethought me of some pleasant verses, which I would
fain sing to the lute.' And he answered, i Do so/ So
she took the lute and tuning it, sang the following to
g, pleasant air :


25


Mirth from the smitten strings o'ercometh me and cheer ; Sweet is am

morning-draught, when daybreak draweth near.
Love still its bondman's heart uncovereth and in The tearing down of

veils doth love-longing appear ;
With wine strained bright, so pure and goodly that it seems The sun m

hands of moons 1 unveiled and shining clear.
It bringeth us anights its gladness and with joy Obliterates the stains of

dreariment and fear.

Then said she to him, * O Mesrour, recite us somewhat
of thy verse and favour us with the fruit of thy wit.' So he
recited the following :

In a full moon we do rejoice, that carries round its wine, And ia the

sweet strains of the lute in gardens fair and fine,
Whose turtles in the dawning-hour sing and whose branches sway And

eke their paths the uttermost of all desire enshrine.

When he had finished, she said to him, 'If thou he
occupied with love of me, make us some verses on that j^tgfjt
which hath passed between us.' ' With all my heart/ bctctt-
answered he and recited the following ode :

Stay thou and hear what me befell For love of yonder fair gazelle,
A white doe shot me with a shaft And fierce her glances on me fell.
Ravished with love, my every shift Straitened on me for passion's spell,
I pined for a coquette, enclosed With spear-points inexpugnable.
I saw her midst a garden fair : In symmetry she did excel.
4 Peace be on thee 1 ' quoth I to her : She answered, ' And on thee m
well.'

* What is thy name ?' asked I ; and she, * My name my qualities dotli
tell

Zein el Mewasif 3 am I called.' 4 Pity my case deplorable,'
Quoth I, 4 such longing with me is, No lover is my parallel.'
e An if thou love and wouldst my charms Enjoy,' said she, ' 1 wiH
not sell

My favours save for wealth galore. Past count and unattaiij&bls.

1 i.e. moon-faced cupbearers^
§ i.e. adornment of qualities.


26


Raiment of silk I'll have of thee And costly damasks, many an ell.
And musk four quintals, pearls of price, Cornelians uncountable,
Silver and gold and trinkets fine And jewelled gauds I'll have as well J
One night of my possession these Shall buy : I'll bate no particle. '
I showed fair patience, though, God wot, For fires of love I was in helh
And she to bless me deigned one night The new moon's radiance on
us fell.

If th' envious blame me, 'List, O folk,' Quoth I, 'to that I have to tell.
Long locks hath she, as black as night, And in her cheeks a rose doth
dwell,

As red as very flames of fire : Her looks are arrows sharp and sneli,
And in her lashes is a sword That serves her lovers to repel.
Wine in her mouth is and her lips With dews like limpid water well.
Her teeth are like a necklace strung With pearls of price, fresh from
the shell.

Her neck, perfected in all grace, Is as the neck of a gazelle.
As marble white her bosom is, Wherein, like towers, her breasts do
swell.

Her belly hath a fold perfumed With essences invaluable ;
And underneath it lies a thing, That is my wishes' pinnacle 5
Fat, plump, high-cushioned, O my lords, As 'twere a king's throne,
sooth to tell,

To whom I plain me of the woes My soul to madness that enspell.
Betwixten columns twain thou'lt find High benches set before the cell.
It hath such attributes as daze Men's wits and wonderment compel ;
Wide lips it hath and mouth, to boot, As 'twere a mouth of mule or
well ;

An eye of red it shows and lips Like camel's lips : its face doth swell,
For very redness, still with wrath. So look, Q man, thou guard thee
welL

If thou come to it with intent To do, thou'lt find it hot as helL
Ardent of meeting and endowed With strength to battle fierce and fell}
And well I wot, each champion, eased Of lust of battle, 'twill repel.
Bytimes thou'lt find it with a beard, As 'twere a man's ; another spell
Thou'lt find it beardless, hot with lust Of battle 'gainst the infidel.
One who is great of grace and sheen To thee of this doth tidings tell,
One from whom Zein herself alone For all perfection bears the belL
I came to her by night and got That which was sweet as cenomel ;
Yea, and tke night 1 lay with her Did all mine other nights excel


27


When daybreak came, with new-moon face She rose and shape as

flexible

As swaying boughs or slender spears, And turned to me to say farewell.
Quoth she, ' When shall the nights return Wherein such joyance us
befell?'

And I, ' O lustre of mine eyes, Come,' answered, ' when it likes thee
well.'

Zein el Mewasif was charmed with these verses and
the utmost gladness possessed her. Then said she, ' O
Mesrour, the day is at hand and there is nothing for it
but to depart, for fear of scandal.' 'I hear and obey,'
answered he and rising, carried her to her house, after
which he returned home and passed the rest of the night
meditating on her charms. When the morning appeared
and gave forth its light and shone, he made ready a
sumptuous present and carried it to her and sat with her.

They abode thus awhile, in all delight -and solace of
life, till one day there came to Zein el Mewasif a letter
from her husband, advising her of his speedy return.
' May God not preserve him nor quicken him ! ' exclaimed
she. 1 If he come hither, our life will be troubled. Would
I might despair of him ! ' Presently came Mesrour and sat
talking with her, as of wont, and she said to him, 4 Q
Mesrour, I have received a letter from my husband, an-
nouncing his speedy return from his travels. What is to
be done, since neither of us can live without the other?'
' I know not,' answered he ; ' but thou art better able to
judge, being acquainted with thy husband's ways, more by
token that thou art one of the keenest-witted of women
and mistress of devices such as contrive that whereof men
fail.' Quoth she, ( He is a hard man and jealous of the
people of his household : but, when thou hearest of his
coming, do thou repair to him and salute him and sit
down by his side, saying, " O my brother, I am a druggist"
Then buy of him various kinds of drugs and spices and


28


pa)' him frequent visits and talk long with him and gain*
say him not in whatsoever he shall bid thee; so haply
that may betide, [as] of chance, for which I would fain
contrive.' ' I hear and obey,' answered Mesrour and went
out from her, with a heart on fire for love.

When her husband came home, she rejoiced in him
and bade him welcome; but he looked in her face and
seeing it pale and sallow, (for she had washed it with
saffron, making usage therein of one of women's arts,)
asked her how she did. She replied that she had been
sick, she and her women, from the time of his setting out
on his journey, and said, 'Verily, our hearts have been
troubled for thee by reason of the length of thine absence.'
And she went on to complain to him of the misery of
separation and to weep copious tears, saying, ' Hadst thou
but a companion with thee, my heart had not suffered all
this anxiety for thee. So, God upon thee* O my lord,
travel not again without a companion and keep me not
^{(rfn without news of thee, that my heart and mind may be at
uXCCil'i rest concerning thee ! ' ' With all my heart,' answered he.
' Thy counsel is good, and by thy life, it shall be as thou
wishest'

Then he took some of his goods and carrying them to
his shop, opened it and sat down to sell in the bazaar.
Presently up came Mesrour and saluting him, sat down
by his side and talked with him awhile. Then he pulled
out a purse and taking forth gold, handed it to the Jew
and said, 'Give me the worth of this money in various
kinds of drugs and spices, that 1 may sell them in my
shop.' ' I hear and obey,' answered he and gave him what
he sought. Mesrour continued to pay him frequent visits,
till, one day, the merchant said to him, ' I have a mind
to take me a man to partner in trade.' And 1 also/ re-
plied Mesrour, 'desire to take a partner; for my father
eyas a merchant in the land of Yemen and left rne great


29


wealth and I fear lest it go from me.' Quoth the Jew,
4 Wilt thou be my partner, and I will be thine and a true
friend and comrade to thee at home and abroad, and
I will teach thee to sell and buy and give and take?'
And Mesrour said, 'With all my heart'

So the merchant carried him to his house and seated
him in the vestibule, whilst he went in to his wife and
said to her s * I have taken me a partner and have bidden
him hither as a guest ; so do thou prepare us a handsome
entertainment.' When she heard this, she rejoiced, doubt-
ing not but this was Mesrour, and made ready a magnificent
banquet, of her joy in the success of her device. Then
said her husband to her, ' Come out with me to him and
bid him welcome and say, u Thou gladdenest us [with thy
company]." ' But she made a show of anger, saying, ( Wilt
thou have me discover myself to a strange man? God
forbid ! Though thou cut me in pieces, I will not appear
before him!' 4 Why shouldst thou be abashed at him,'
rejoined he, * seeing that he is a Nazarene and we are
Jews and we are become associates, he and I?' Quoth
she, 'It liketh me not to present myself before a
strange man, on whom I have never set eyes and whom
I know not.'

He thought she spoke sooth and ceased not to importune
her, till she rose and veiling herself, took the food and
went out to Mesrour and bade him welcome; whereupon
he bowed his head, as he were ashamed, and the Jew,
seeing this, said in himself, ' Doubtless, this man is a
devotee.' They ate their fill and the table being removed,
wine was set on. As for Zein el Mewasif, she sat over
against her lover and gazed on him and he on her till
ended day, when Mesrour went home, with a heart on
fire and the Jew abode pondering the grace and. goodliness
of his new partner. As soon as it was night, his wife
brought hira the evening meal and they sat down to eat


30


Now he had a mocking-bird, that was used, whenas
he sat down to meat, to come and eat with him and
hover about his head ; but in his absence it was grown
familiar with Mesrour and used to eat with him and hover
about him. When its master returned, it knew him
not and would not draw near him, and this made him
thoughtful. As for Zein el Mewasif, she could not sleep
for thinking of Mesrour, and thus it was with her three
nights, till the Jew became aware of her distraction and
watching her, began to suspect something wrong. On
the fourth night, he awoke in the middle of the night and
heard his wife talking in her sleep and calling upon
Mesrour, what while she lay in her husband's arms,
wherefore he misdoubted of her; but he dissembled his
suspicions and on the morrow betook himself to his shop
and sat there. Presently, up came Mesrour and saluted
him. He returned his greeting and said to him, ' Welcome,
O my brother ! I have wished for thee ; ' and he sat
talking with him awhile, after which he said to him, ' O
my brother, come with me to my house, that we may
enter into the pact of brotherhood.' 1 'With all my heart,'
replied Mesrour and they went to the Jew's house, where
the latter went in and told his wife of Mesrour's coming,
saying, ' Make us ready a goodly entertainment, and needs
must thou be present and witness our brotherhood.' But
she answered, ' God on thee, cause me not show myself
to this strange man, for I have no mind to company
with him.' So he forbore to press her and bade the
waiting-women bring meat and drink. Then he called
the mocking-bird, but it knew him not and settled in
Mesrour's lap ; and the Jew said to him, ' my lord,
what is thy name?' and he answered, 'Mesrour.' Where-
upon the Jew remembered that this was the name which
his wife had repeated all night long in her sleep.

1 i.e. enter into a formal agreement for partnership.


3*

Presently, he raised his head and saw her making signs
co Mesrour and motioning to him with her eyebrows l
wherefore he knew that he had been tricked and said,
O my lord, excuse me awhile, till I fetch my kinsmen,
£0 they may be present at our treaty of brotherhood.'
' Do what seemeth good to thee,' answered Mesrour ;
whereupon the Jew went forth the house and returning
privily by a back way, betook himself to a window that T^tgt)t
gave upon the saloon and whence he could watch them, uTCdlft
unseen of them. Quoth Zein el Mewasif to her maid
Sukoub, ' Whither is thy master gone ? ' And she said,
' He is gone without the house.' ' Lock the door,' said
Zein, 'and bar it with iron and open not till he knock,
after thou hast told me.' ' So be it,' answered Sukoub.

Then she rose and filling a cup with wine, flavoured
with powdered musk and rose-water, went Aip to Mesrour,
who rose to meet her, saying, ' By Allah, the water of thy
mouth is sweeter than this wine ! ' ' Here it is for thee,'
quoth she and filling her mouth with wine, gave him to
drink thereof, whilst he did the like with her ; after which
she sprinkled him with rose-water from head to foot, till
he scented the whole place. All this while, the Jew was
looking on and marvelling at the greatness of the love
that was between them, and his heart was filled with rage
for what he saw and he was jealous with an exceeding
jealousy. Then he went out again and coming to the
door, found it locked and knocked loudly, of the excess
of his anger ; whereupon quoth Sukoub, ' O my lady, here
is my master.' ' Open to him,' replied Zein el Mewasif ;
' would God had not brought him back in safety ! '

So she went and opened the door to the Jew, who said
to her, ' What ailed thee to lock the door ? ' Quoth she,
' It hath never ceased to be locked thus during thine
absence ; nor hath it been opened night nor day.' ' Thou
hast done well,' answered he; 'this pleases me.' Then


33


he went in to Mesrour, laughing and dissembling Ms
chagrin, and said to him, 'O Mesrour, let us put off the
conclusion of our treaty of brotherhood till another day.
'As thou wilt,' replied Mesrour and went away, leaving
the Jew pondering his case and knowing not what to do j
for his heart was sore troubled and he said in himself,
'Even the mocking-bird disavows me and the slave-
girls shut the door in my face and favour another.'
And of the excess of his chagrin, he fell to reciting the
following verses :


A life made fair with all delight of days and solacement Mesrour dotb.

live, what while my life is severed and forspent.
Fortune hath played the knave with me in her whom I adore And ali

my heart's on flames of fire, that rage without relent
Once with the fair a time was bright for thee ; 'tis past and gone ; Yet

art thou ever love-distraught that lovely one anent.
Mine eyes her goodly beauty saw and in the love of her, My heart to

passion thrall became, for very ravishment.
Of the sweet water of her lips she poured me out, fine wine On thirst,,

whilst yet the time endured of favour and content.
What ails thee, O my mocking-bird, that thou forsakest me And to

another than myself in love dost yield consent ?
Strange things, indeed, mine eyes have seen, that from my lids, if they

Were ever drowsed with slumber, sleep would chase incontinent
I see my loved one hath forsworn the love of me and eke My mocking-
bird round me no more hovers with blandishment.
By the worlds' Lord, who, when upon His creatures He'd fulfil His

ordinance, affiicteth them with many a dour event,
The evil-doer I'll requite with that which he deserves Who frowardly to

her draws near, on her enjoyment bent ]


When Zein el Mewasif heard this, she trembled in ever}?
nerve and said to her handmaid, * Heardest thou that? 5
Quoth she, 1 1 never heard him recite the like of these
verses ; but. let him say what he will.,'" Then the Jew,
having assured himself of the truth of his suspicions.


33


began to sell all his property, saying in himself, ' Except
I remove her from her native land [and separate them],
they will never turn back from this that they are engaged
in.' So, when he had turned all his possessions into
money, he forged a letter, purporting to come from his
kinsmen and inviting him to visit them, him and his wife,
and read it to her. ' How long shall we tarry with them ? '
asked she, and he replied, ' Twelve days.' So she con-
sented to this and said, 4 Shall I take any of my maids
with me ? ' ' Take Huboub and Sukoub,' answered he,,
'-and leave Khutoub here.'

Then he made ready a handsome camel litter for his
wife and her women and prepared to set out with them ;
whilst she sent to Mesrour, telling him what had happened
and saying, ' If the trysting-time 1 that is between us pass
and I come not [back], know that he hath put„a cheat on
us and laid a plot to separate us from each other • so
forget thou not the plighted faith betwixt us, for I fear his
craft and perfidy.' Then she fell a-weeping and lament-
ing and no peace was left her, night or day. Her husband
saw this, but took no note thereof ; and when she saw
there was no help for it, she gathered together her clothes
and gear and deposited them with her sister, telling her
what had befallen her. Then she took leave of her and
going out from her, weeping, returned to her own house ?
where she found her husband had brought the camels
and was busy loading them, having set apart the hand-
somest for her riding; and when she saw this and knew
that needs must she be separated from Mesrour, she was
distracted.

Now it chanced that the Jew went out on some occasion
of his; so she went forth to the outer door and wrote
thereon the following verses :

1 i.e, the twelve days aforesaid
VOL. VIII. *


34


O dove of this our dwelling-place, our parting greeting bear From loves
to beloved one and tell him I shall ne'er

Cease to regret the past delight and all its ravishments And all tise
sweetness of the days for us whilom that were ;

And bid him also never leave to be the slave of love, Fulfilled of grief
for our content that's past and gone for e'er.

Indeed, we passed our time awhile in solace and in cheer And love-
delight both night and day we did enjoy whilere ;

But, when we woke, the raven gave us morrow 1 with his croak And
did against us twain the doom of severance declare.

Now must we journey far away and leave the dwellings void : Would we
might ne'er depart the lands nor breathe a foreign air S

Then she went to the second door and wrote thereon
the following verses :

O thou to this door that comest, by Allah, watch for the grace Of my

loved one midmost the darkness "and tell him I weep apace,
When I think of the time of union with him, and the tears that come

Of my weeping for him cease never to ripple adown my face ;
And say to him, ' If no patience for what is fallen on me Thou findest,

I rede thee sprinkle thy head with the dust of the place
And travel the lands to Eastward and Westward and look thou live Is

patience, for God hath ordered and yet will order the case.'

Then she went to the third door and wept sore and
wrote thereon these verses :

Harkye, Mesrour, an if thou come to this her dwelling, see Thou read

upon the doors the lines that she hath writ for thee.
How oft thou'st tasted of the sweet and bitter of the nights I Forget

thou not the pact of love, if thou a true man be.
By Allah, do not thou forget her neighbourhood, Mesrour ; For in

thyself her solace all and gladness leaveth she !
Weep for the days of love-delight and all their sweets and all The

goodly nights that with their shade encurtained thee and me j
And to the farthest of the lands, for my sake, journey thou; Search all

Its deserts after us and plunge into its sea.


* See note, Vol. VII. p. z6f,


35

The nights of our delight are gone from us ; estrangement's dark Hath

quenched theii radiance and made an end of all our glee.
God's blessing on the bygone days 1 How glad indeed they were s

When in the gardens of desire their blossoms gathered we !
We would have had them stay ; but God denied the wished-for boon ;

Only their rose and our true hearts to last permitted He.
"Will the returning days renew our union ? An they do, Their every

vow unto my Lord accomplished then shall be.
Think, in His hand, who writes upon the table of the brows Theii

lines, 1 are all things, and submit to that He doth decree.

Then she wept sore and returned to the house, lament-
ing and recalling what had passed and saying, 1 Glory be
to God who hath decreed this to us ! ' And her affliction
redoubled for the loss of her beloved and her departure
from the lands, and she recited these verses :

Upon thee be the peace of God, O empty house ! Ah me, The days

indeed have made an end of all their cheer in thee !
Dove of the house, ne'er mayst thou leave to mourn for her who from

Her moons and her full moons 2 is torn by Fate's unkind decree !
Harkye, Mesrour ! Make thou thy moan for loss of us ; indeed Mine

eyes in losing thee have lost their lustre, verily.
Would God thine eyes our parting day and eke the flaming fire, That in

my heart redoubles still unquenchably, might see !
Forget not thou our plighted troth within the garden's shade, That held

our loves and with its veils encurtained thee and me.

Then she presented herself before her husband, who
set her in the litter he had let make for her ; and when
ihe found herself on the camel's back, she recited the
following verses :

God's peace on thee, O lonely house, for evermore alight, Wherein

whilere we fed our fill of solace and delight !
Would that my time within thy shade its nights accomplished had, So

I for passion had been slain, a martyr in Love's right !

1 The Arabs believe that each man's destiny is written in the sutures
©f his skull, could we but read it.
s ue. her moon-faced beloved ones.


3$


For parting I am sore concerned and longing for the heme I loves i
knew not what should hap nor looked for Fate's despite.

Would God I knew if I shall e'er return to it again, And will it ever, as
of yore, be pleasant to our spright !

' O Zein el Mewasif,' said her husband, * grieve not for
thy departure from thy dwelling; for, God willing, thou
shalt return to it before long,' And he went on to
comfort her heart and soothe her. Then they set out
and fared on till they came without the town and struck
into the high road, whereupon she knew that separation
was assured, and this was grievous to her.

Meanwhile, Mesrour sat in his house, pondering his
case and that of his mistress, and his heart forewarned
him of separation. So he rose forthright and repairing
to her house, found the outer door shut and read the
verses she had written thereon ; whereupon he fell down
in a swoon. When he came to himself, he opened die
door and entering, read what was written upon the two
other doors ; whereupon passion and love-longing and
distraction waxed on him. So he went forth and hastened
in her track, till he came up with the caravan and found
her at the rear, whilst her husband rode in the van, because
of his goods. When he saw her, he clung to the litter,
weeping and lamenting for the anguish of separation, and
recited the following verses :

Would I knew for what crime we are shot, wellaway ! With the shafts
of estrangement for ever and aye !

O desire of the heart, to thy dwelling I came, When distress for thy lovs
sorely irked me, one day,

And I found the house empty, laid waste, and complained Of estrange-
ment and groaned, in my spirit's dismay,

Then I questioned the walls of my loves that are gone And have taken
my heart as a pledge, ' Where are they ? '

And they said, ' They made passion in ambush to lie In the entrails and
fared from the dwellings away.'

They wrote for me lines an the portals, the deed Of the folk that keeg
fgith nor their troth-plight betray.


37


When Zein el Mewasif heard this, she knew that it was 33"tgf^
Mesrour and wept, she and her maidens, and said to him, iJCCClb
4 1 conjure thee by Allah, O Mesrour, turn back, lest my
husband see us ! ' At these words he swooned away ; and
when he revived, they took leave of each other and he
recited the following verses :

The chief of the caravan to depart calls loud and high, In the darkness

ere the dawn, and the zephyr wafts the cry.
They gird their burdens on and hasten to depart, And on, at the leadei-'g

voice, the caravan doth hie.
They perfume the lands, through which they journey, on every side.

And still through the valley's midst their travel in haste they ply.
Possession they took of my soul in passion and fared away And left me

to toil in vain in the track of their passing by.
Beloved, I purposed indeed to part with you never in life And the earth

is drenched with the tears that flow from the wanderer's eye.
Alack ! How hath parting's hand with mine entrails wroughten ! Woe's

me For my heart ! Since my loves are gone, it irketh me like to die.

Then he clung to the litter, weeping and lamenting,
whilst she besought him to turn back ere morning, for
fear of discovery. So he came up to her and bidding
her farewell a second time, fell down in a swoon. He
lay a great while without life, and when he came to
himself, he found the caravan oat of sight. So he
turned in the direction of their travel and inhaled the
breeze that blew from their quarter, chanting the fol-
lowing verses :

No wind of nearness to the lover's blown But of the pains of longing he
makes moan.

The breeze of dawning blows on him ; he wakes And in the world he

finds himself alone.
Blood, mingled with his streaming tears, he weeps, For languor on the

bed of sickness prone ;
For loved ones lost he weeps ; his heart with them Fares midst the

camels over sand and stone


38


No breeze blows from their quarter but I stand, With eyes attent aad

nostrils open thrown,
And on the South wind snuff their musky gale, Whose scent is grateful

to the lover lone.

Then he returned, mad with love-longing, to her house,
and finding it empty and deserted, wept till he wet his
clothes ; after which he swooned away and his soul was
like to depart his body. When he revived, he recited the
following couplet i

O house, on my abjection have ruth and on my plight, My tears for ever

flowing and body wasted quite,
And waft me the aroma of their sweet-scented breeze, So haply with its

fragrance it heal my anguished spright.

Then he returned to his own house and abode there,
confounded and tearful-eyed, for the space often days.

Meanwhile, the Jew journeyed on with Zein el Mewasif
half a score days, at the end of which time he halted at
a certain city and she wrote to Mesrour a letter and gave
it to Huboub, saying,, 'Send this to Mesrour, so he may
know how we have been tricked and how the Jew hath
cheated us.' So Huboub despatched it to Mesrour, whom
when it reached, its news was grievous to him and he
wept till he wet the ground. Then he wrote a reply and
sent it to his mistress, subscribing it with the following
couplets :

Where is the road unto the doors of solace ? How shall he, Who's all

for love-longing on flames of fire consoled be ?
How pleasant were the days of yore, that now are past away ! Ah would

some scantling of their times were yet with thee and me 1

When the letter reached Zein el Mewasif, she read it
and gave it to her maid Huboub, bidding her keep it
secret. However, the Jew came to know of their corre-
spondence and removed with her to another city, at a
distance of twenty days' journey.


39


As for Mesrour, sleep was not sweet to him nor waa
peace or patience left unto him, and he ceased not to be
thus till, one night, his eyes closed for weariness and he
dreamt that he saw Zein el Mewasif come to him in the
garden and embrace him; but presently he awoke and
found her not: whereupon he fell into a passion of grief.
His reason fled and his eyes ran over with tears ; love-
longing to the utterest possessed his heart and he recited
these verses :

Peace be on her, whose image came to visit me by night And passiaw

straight in me renewed and longings did excite !
Indeed, from that my dream I rose, distracted with desire, Fulfilled of

love and longing pain for that fair vision's sight.
Do the imbroglios of sleep say sooth of her I love? Will she yet

quench my thirst and heal the sickness of my spright ?
Anon she spoke with me, anon she strained me to her breast And now

with pleasant speech she soothed my pain and my -affright ;
And when our lovers' chiding was accomplished in the dream And in

unceasing floods, the tears streamed from mine eyes contrite.
From out her damask lips, for me, as 'twere the best of wine, Whose

scent was as the scent of musk, she poured, that lady bright.
I marvel at what chanced 'twixt us in dreams ; for lo ! I got My wish oi

her and that I sought of solace and delight ;
But, when from sleep I woke, no whit of that fair dream found I Save

love-longing and pain ; the rest had fled with morning-light.
And since I've looked on her, I'm grown, by day, as I were mad 5

Anights I'm drunken without wine, a love-distracted wight
O waf tings of the zephyr, go, to them I prithee bear The salutation of

my love and longing for their sight,
And say to them, ' Him, whom ye knew, the shifts of sorry Fate Have

given to drink the cup of death, of destiny's despite.'

Then he went out and ceased not to weep till he came
to her house and looking on it, saw it deserted. Presently^
it seemed to him he saw her image before him, whereupon
fires flamed in him and Ms sorrows redoubled and h@ fell


J^tgfjf down in a swoon. When he came to himself, he recited
tJCCClbt. the following verses :

I snuff the scent of balm from them, wherewith the air is fraught And
fare away, with heart fulfilled of passion, love-distraught.

A miserable slave of love, my longings with the sight Of dwellings, void
of all their charms, to salve in vain I've sought.

It doth but sicken me for woe and severance and desire And all the
past-time with my friends recalleth to my thought.

When he had made an end of these verses s he heard
a raven croak beside the house and wept, saying, ' Glory
be to God ! The raven croaks not save over a ruined
house.' Then he sighed and groaned and recited the
following verses :

What aileth the raven to croon o'er the house of my love ? As I hear,

The fires in my bosom rage high ; their burning my entrails doth sear,
For regret for the days of their love, bygone ; my heart wanders, for wosj

In the mountains of misery lost, distracted with passion and fear.
I die of love-longing ; the flames of desire in my liver still rage, And

letters I write, which, alas ! I have none to convey to my dear.
Alas for my body worn waste and my sorrow ! My loved one is gone.

Will they ever, I wonder, return, her nights, with their solace and

cheer ?

O breeze of the East, in the dawn if thou visit the camp of her tribe.
Salute her, I prithee, for me, and stay by her stead thy career.

Now Zein el Mewasif had a sister, by name Nesim,*
who was looking on him from a high place; and when
she saw him in this plight, she wept and sighed and recited
these verses :

Harkye ! How oft, bewailing the steads, wilt come and go ? Indeed,

the house its builder bemoaneth, of its woe.
Gladness, ere they departed who did inhabit here, Was rife within the

dwelling and suns 3 in it did glow.
Where are the full moons 3 vanished, that shone so bright? The shifts

Of fate their lucent beauties have blotted out, I trow


i.e. breeze,


ix. fair-faced womea.


41


Leave whaf is past of fair ones, with whom thou didst consort : Mayhap,

the days, returning, them forth again will show :
Except for thee, its dwellers had not departed hence Nor thou ill its

high places hadst seen the corby-crow.

When Mesrour heard these verses and apprehended
their meaning, he wept sore. Now Nesira knew that
which was between him and her sister of love and longing
and passion ; so she said to him, 4 God on thee, O Mesrour,
forbear this house, lest any see thee and deem thou
comest on my account ! Thou hast caused my sister
depart and now thou wouldst drive me also away. Thou
knowest that, but for thee, the house would not now be
void of its inhabitants : so be consoled for her and leave
her; for what is past is past.' When he heard this, he
said to her, ' O Nesim, if I could, I should fly for longing
after her; so how can I be comforted for her?' Quoth
she, 'Thou hast nothing for it but patience.' And he
said, ' I beseech thee, for God's sake, write me a letter to
her, as from thyself, and get me an answer from her,
to comfort my heart and quench the fire that rages in
my vitals.'

'With all my heart,' answered she and took inkhorn
and paper, whilst Mesrour began to set out to her the
violence ot his longing and what he suffered for the
anguish of separation, saying, 'This letter is from the
despairing and sorrowful lover, the wretched bereaved
one, with whom no peace abides, night nor day, but he
still weeps copious tears. Indeed, tears have ulcerated
his eyelids and his sorrows have kindled a fire in his
liver. His lamentation is prolonged and restlessness is
sore on him, as he were a bird that hath lost its mate,
and his death is at hand. Alas, . my desolation for the
loss of thee and my yearning affliction for thy companion-
ship ! Indeed, emaciation hath wasted my body and my
Sears are become a torrent ; mountains and plains are


42


straitened upon me, and of the excess of my passion, I go^

saying :

My yearning o'er this stead's eternal and my pain, And longings for its
folk still wax on me amain.

I send to you my tale of love ; the cupbearer Still giveth me the cup of
love for you to drain.

And for your faring hence and absence from the lands, With ever-
streaming tears my wounded eyelids rain.

litter-leader, stay ; turn back with the belov'd ; For all my heart's

afire with flames that never wane,
My greeting to my love bear thou and say to her, " There's nought but

damask lips his sorrows can assain.
Time bore him off and rent his loves apart and cleft His entrails with a

shaft of severance in twain."
Give them to know of all my transport for their loss And what I bea?

for love and longing all in vain.
Yea, by the love of you, I swear I will fulfil The covenant of lovej

whatever Fate ordain.
I'll never change nor yet forget your love: how shall Forgatfulness

betide the wistful, longing swain ?
Peace, salutation-wise, from me, with musk commixt In letters s be oa

you again and yet again ! '

Nesim marvelled at his eloquence and the goodliness of
his speech and the elegance of his verses and was moved
to compassion for him. Then she sealed the letter with
virgin mask and incensed it with aloes-wood and ambergris,
after which she committed it to a merchant, bidding him
deliver it not save to Zein el Mewasif or her maid
Huboub.

When the letter reached her sister, she knew it for

Mesrour's inditing and recognized himself in the grace
of its expression. So she kissed it and laid it on her
eyes, whilst the tears streamed from her lids and she
gave not over weeping, till she fainted. When she came

1 to herself, she called for pen and paper and wrote him
the following answer ; * This letter is to my lord and


43


master, the king of my heart and my secret soul. Indeed^
wakefulness agitateth me and melancholy increaseth on
me and I have no patience to endure thine absence, O
thou whose beauty excels the sun and moon ! Desire
deprives me of rest and passion destroys me ; and how
should it be otherwise with me, seeing' that I am of the
number of the perishing? O glory of the world and
ornament of life, shall her cup be sweet, whose vital
spirits are cut off? For that she is neither with the
quick nor with the dead.' And she added these verses :

Thy letter, O Mesrour, hath stirred affliction up in me ; I have no

patience for thy loss nor solaceinent, perdie.
My bowels, when I read the script, yearn and the desert herbs I water

with my tears that flow for ever like a sea.
Were I a bird, I'd fly to thee, upon the wings of night : I know not,

after thee, if wine or sweet or bitter be.
Forbidden unto me is life, since thy departure hence t I have no power

to brook the fire of severance from thee.

Then she sprinkled the letter with powdered musk and
ambergris and committed it to a merchant, bidding him
deliver it to none save her sister Nesim. When it reached
the latter, she sent it to Mesrour, who kissed it and laid it
on his eyes and wept till he fainted.

Presently, the Jew heard of their correspondence and
began again to travel from place to place with Zein el
Mewasif and her damsels, till she said to him, ' Glory to
God ! How long wilt thou journey with us and carry us
afar from our homes ? ' Quoth he, * I will fare on with
you a year's journey, so no more letters may reach you
from Mesrour. I see how you take all my good and give
it to him ■ so all that I miss I shall take from you : and
I shall see if Mesrour will profit you or avail to deliver
you from my hand.' Then he stripped her and hei'
damsels of their silken apparel and clad them in raiment
of hair-cloth ; after which he repaired to a blacksmith anci


44


bade him make three pairs of iron shackles. When they
were ready, he brought the smith in to his wife and said
to him, 'Put the shackles on the legs of these three
damsels.'

The first that came forward was Zein el Mewasif^ and
when the blacksmith saw her, his reason forsook him and
he bit his fingers and his wit fled forth his head and sore
was his transport. So he said to the Jew, 'What is these
women's crime?' 'They are my slave-girls,' answered
the other, 'and have stolen my good and fled from me.'
' May God disappoint thine expectation J ' cried the smith.
' Were this girl before the Chief Cadi, he would not reprove
her, though she committed a hundred offences a day.
Indeed, she hath no thief s favour and she may not brook
the laying of irons on her legs.' And he went on to
intercede with him, beseeching him not to fetter her.
When she saw this, she said to her husband, 'I conjure
thee by Allah, bring me not forth before yonder strange
man ! ' Quoth he, ' Why then earnest thou out before
Mesrour ?' And she made him no reply. Then he ac-
cepted the blacksmith's intercession, so far as to allow
him to put a light pair of shackles on her legs, for
that she had a delicate body, which might not brook
harshness, whilst he laid her handmaids in heavy irons,
and they ceased not, all three, to wear hair-cloth day
and night, till their bodies became wasted and their colour
changed.

As for the blacksmith, he returned home in great con
cern, for that exceeding love was fallen on his heart for
Zein el Mewasif; and he fell to reciting the following
verses :

Blacksmith, may thy right hand wither, in that it did ill entreat Yon faiz
maid by clapping fetters on her ankles and her feet.

Thou hast chained a lovely lady, gentle, soft and delicate? Of the
wonderful'st of wonders was she fashioned and complete,,


45


Hot of iron were her anklets, were she justly used, I trow : Gold, indeecS,
alone were worthy of that loveling fair and sweet.

If the Cadi of the Cadis saw her charms, he'd pity her And upon the
highest places in her glory would her seat

Now it chanced that the Chief Cadi passed by the
smith's house and heard him repeat these lines ; so he
sent for him and said to him, ' O blacksmith, who is she
on whom thou callest so instantly and with, whose love
thy heart is occupied? 5 The smith rose to his feet and
kissing the Cadi's hand, answered, ' May God prolong the
days of our lord the Cadi and give him ease of his life ! 7
Then he set forth to him Zein el Mewasifs beauty and
grace and symmetry and elegance and perfection and how
she had s lovely face and a slender waist and heavy
buttocks and acquainted him with the sorry plight in
which she was for abasement and duresse'' and lack of
victual.

When the Cadi heard this, he said, 'O blacksmith, send
her to us, that we may do her justice, for thou art become
accountable for her, and except thou guide her to us, God
will punish thee at the Day of Resurrection.' 'I hear and
obey/ replied the smith and betook himself forthright to
Zein el Mewasifs lodging, but found the door locked and
heard her reciting the following verses, m a plaintive
voice, that came from a sorrowful heart :

In mine own land I was, conjoined with those I hold most dear, And

my beloved filled me cups of gladness bright and clear.
They passed >'twixt us with what we would of solace and of mirth ; Nos

knew we, morn or even, aught of dreariment or fear.
Indeed, a time we did fulfil, that gladdened us whilere With cup and lute

and dulcimer and festival and cheer,
TOi fortune and its shifts dissolved our fellowship ; my love Departed

and the time of peace with him evanished sheer.
Would that the crow of parting might be caused forbear our stead Aai

mndd the dawn of my delight in passion might appear !


46


When he heard this, he wept like the downpouring of
fee clouds. Then he knocked at the door and the women
said, 'Who is at the door?' 'It is I, the blacksmith/
answered he and told them what the Cadi had said and
how he would have them appear before him and make
tNTtgfit their plaint to him, that he might do them justice on
tSCtdbUL their adversary. 'How can we go to him,' replied Zein el
Mewasif, 'seeing the door is locked on us and our feet
shackled and the Jew hath the keys ? ' Quoth the smith,
4 1 will make keys for the locks and open the door and
the shackles therewith/ * But who will show us the Cadi's
house?' asked she; and he said s 'I will describe it to
you.' 'But how,' continued she, 'can we appear before
him, clad as we are in hair-cloth, smoked with sulphur?'
And he answered, 1 He will not reproach this to you,
considering your case.' So saying, -he went forthright and
made keys for the locks, wherewith he opened the door
and the shackles, and loosing the latter from their legs,
carried them forth and directed them to the Cadi's house.
Then Huboub did off the hair-cloth garments from her
mistress's body and carried her to the bath, where she
washed her and clad her in silken raiment, and her colour
returned to her.

Now, as luck would have it, her husband was abroad at
a bride-feast in the house of one of the merchants; so
she adorned herself after the fairest fashion and betook
herself to the Cadi, who rose to receive her. She saluted
him with dulcet speech and sweet words, transfixing him
the while with the arrows of her glances, and said, ' May
God prolong the life of our lord the Cadi and strengthen
him to do justice ! ' Then she acquainted him with the
affair of the blacksmith and that which he had done them
of kindness and with the heart-confounding torments that
the Jew had inflicted on her and her women and how
they had been like to perish, nor was there any deliverance


47


found for them [till the smith set them free]. 'O damsel,, *
said the Cadi, ' what is thy name ? ' ' My name is Zeita
el Mewasif,' answered she, 'and this my maid's name is
Huboub.' Quoth he, 4 Thy name accordeth with its owner
and its words conform to its meaning.' Whereupon she
smiled and veiled her face, and he said to her, 'O Zeis
el Mewasif, hast thou a husband or not ? ' 4 1 have no
husband, 5 answered she. 'And what is thy faith? 1 ' asked
he. ' That of Islam,' replied she, ' and the religion of the
best of men.' Quoth he, 'Swear to me by the Law, full
of instances and admonitions, that thou art a Muslim.*
So she swore to him and pronounced the profession of
the faith.

Then said he,* 'How comes it that thou wastest thy
youth with this Jew ? ' And she answered, ' Know, O Cadi
(may God prolong thy days in contentment and bring thee
to thy hopes and seal thine acts with benefits!), that my
father left me, after his death, fifteen thousand dinars,
which he put into the hands of this Jew, that he might
trade therewith and share the profit with me, the capital
being secured by acknowledgment according to law.
When my father died, the Jew coveted me and sought me
in marriage of my mother, who said, " How shall I cause
her leave her faith and become a Jewess? By Allah, I
will denounce thee to the authorities ! " He was affrighted
at her words and taking the money, fled to the town of
Aden. When we heard where he was, we came to Aden
in search of him, and when we foregathered with him, he
told us that he was trading in stuffs [with the money] and
buying goods upon goods. So we believed him and he
ceased not to beguile us till he cast us into prison and
fettered us and tortured us exceeding sore; and we are
strangers and have no helper save God the Most High
and our lord the Cadi.'

When the Cadi heard this, he said to Huboub, t Is this


4-5


Indeed thy mistress and are ye strangers and is she
unmarried?' And she answered, 'Yes.' Quoth he,
* Marry her to me and be manumission [of my slaves]
and fasting and pilgrimage and almsgiving [of all my
estate] incumbent on me, if I do you not justice on this
dog and punish him for that which he hath done ! ' And
Bhe answered, 'I hear and obey.' Then said he, * Go,
comfort thy heart and that of thy lady ; and to-morrow, if
it please God the Most High, I will send for this infidel
and do you justice on him and ye shall see wonders of
his punishment,' So Huboub called down blessings upon
him and went forth from him, [she and her mistress,]
leaving him distracted with passion and love-longing and
desire. Then they enquired for the house of the second
Cadi and presenting themselves before him, told him the
same story. On likewise did she with the third and the
fourtn, till she had made her complaint to all the four
Cadis, each of whom lusted after her and besought her
to marry him, to which she consented; nor knew any
one of the four that which had happened to the others.
All this passed without the knowledge of the Jew, who
spent the night in the house of the bride-feast.

On the morrow, Huboub clad her mistress in her richest
raiment and presented herself with her before the four
Cadis in the hall of justice. As soon as she entered, she
uncovered her face and saluted the magistrates, who re-
turned her salutation and every one of them knew her. One
was writing, and the pen dropped from his hand, another
was talking, and his tongue became embarrassed, and a
third was reckoning and blundered in his reckoning ; and
they said to her, ' O delightsome of attributes and sur-
passing of loveliness, be not thy heart other than easy,
for we will assuredly do thee justice and bring thee to
\ thy desire.' So she called down blessings on them and
« going forth,, proceeded to beseech the notaries and scribes


49


io succour her against that unbelieving miscreant and
deliver her from the torment she suffered from him.
Then she wrote a letter to Mesrour, setting forth to him
all that the Jew had done with her from first to last and
ending with the following verses :

Rain down tears, O mine eyes, as the deluge they were, So perchance

in their flood may be quenched my despair.
Once I clad me in raiment of gold-wroughten silk : Now the raiment of

monks and of friars I wear ;
Yea, and sulphur's the scent of my clothes ; betwixt that And sweet

basil and musk what a difference is there !
Thou wouldst never permit my abasement, Mesrour, Nor my bondage,

if but of my case thou wert ware ;
And Huboub too 's in fetters with one who denies The One, the Re-

quiter of foul and of fair.
Lo, the ways of the Jews and their faith I've renounced And my faith is

the noblest of faiths hence fore'er. ^
To the Clement a Muslim's prostration I make And to follow the law

of Mohammed I swear.
Forget not our loves of old time, O Mesrour, And keep thou our vows

and our troth plight with care e
My faith for thy love and thy sake I have changed And my secret for

passion I'll never declare ;
So, if, like to the noble, our love thou've preserved, Be no laggard, but

hasten to us to repair.

Then she folded the letter and gave it to her maid
Huboub, saying, 4 Keep it in thy pocket, till we send it to
Mesrour.'

Presently in came the Jew and seeing them joyous,
said to them, ' How comes it that I find you merry ?
Hath a letter reached you from your friend Mesrour?'
' We have no helper against thee save God, blessed and
exalted be He S ' replied Zein el Mewasif. < He will
deliver us from thy tyranny, and except thou restore
to us our country and home, we will complain of thee
to-morrow to the Cadi and governor of this town. ' Quoth

VOL, VII L 4


50


he, ' Who did off the shackles from you? !eg$? But
needs must I let make each of you shackles ten pounds
in weight and go round about the city with you.' ' All
that thou purposest against us/ replied Huboub, 'thou
shalt fall into thyself, so it please God the Most High,
by token that thou hast exiled us from our homes, and
to-morrow we shall stand, we and thou, before the
governor of the city.'

On this wise they passed tfie night and the next
morning the Jew went out to order fresh shackles, where-
upon Zein el Mewasif rose and repaired with her women
to the court-house, where she found the four Cadis and
saluted them. They all returned her salutation and the
Chief Cadi said to those about him, ' Verily this damsel
is lovely as Ez Zehra 1 and all who see her love her and
prostrate themselves to her J^eauty and grace.' Then he
despatched four sergeants, who were sherifs, 2 to fetch the
Jew after the most abject fashion : so, when he returned
with the shackles and found none in the house, he was
confounded; but, as he abode in perplexity, up came the
officers and laying hold of him, beat him soundly and
dragged him face, downward, before the Cadi. When the
latter saw him, he cried out in his face and said to him,
' Out on thee, O enemy of God, is it come to such a pass
with thee that thou dost thus and bringest these women
far from their country and stealest their good and wouldst
make them Jews? How darest thou seek to pervert
Muslims ? ' ' O my lord,' answered the Jew, ' this woman
is my wife.'

When the Cadis heard this, they all cried out, saying,

1 A name given to the Prophet's daughter Fatimeh, in commemoration
of her supposed exemption from the periodical infirmity peculiar to
women. It is also the Arabic name of Venus.

2 Strictly descendants of the Prophet's grandson Hassan ; but the
title is commonly (though erroneously) applied to an? descendant o4
Mohammed.


5i


Cast this dog on the ground and smite him on the face
with your sandals and beat him soundly, for his offence is
unpardonable.' So they pulled off his silken clothes and
clad him in his wife's raiment of hair-cloth, after which
they threw him down and plucked out his beard and
belaboured him about the face with sandals. Then they
set him on an ass, face to crupper, and causing him
take its tail in his hand, paraded him round about the
town, after which they brought him back to the Cadis,
who all condemned him to have his feet and hands cut off
and after be crucified. When the accursed wretch heard
this, his wit forsook him and he was confounded and said,
1 O my lords the Cadis, what would ye of me ?' ' Say/
answered they, ' " This damsel is not my wife and the
money is her money, and I have transgressed against her
and brought her far from her country.'" So he confessed
to this and the Cadis recorded his confessi6n in legal
form and taking the money from him, gave it to Zein el
Mewasif, together with their voucher. Then she went
away and all who saw her were confounded at her beauty
and grace, whilst each of the Cadis looked for her to fall
to his share. But, when she came to her lodging, she
made ready all that she needed and waited till night,
Then she took what was light of carriage and heavy of
worth, and setting out with her maids, under cover of the
darkness, fared on three days and three nights without
stopping.

Meanwhile, the Cadis ordered the Jew to prison and on ^tg^t
the morrow they looked for her coming to them s they and &CCClX>
their assessors ; but she presented herself not to any of
them. Then said the Chief Cadi, 'I wish to-day to go
a-pleasuring without the town on an occasion I have.'
So he mounted his mule and taking his servant with hira,
went coasting about the streets of the town, searching
high and .low for Zein ei Mewasif, but to no effect.


52


Presently he came upon the other three Cadis, going about
on the same errand, each deeming himself the only one
to whom she had pledged herself. He asked them what
they did there and they told him their business, where-
by he saw that their plight was as his plight and their
quest as his quest. So they all four went round about the
city, seeking her, but could light on no trace of her and
returned to their houses, sick for love, and lay down on
the bed of languor. Presently the Chief Cadi bethought
himself of the blacksmith ; so he sent for him and said to
him, * O blacksmith, knowest thou what is come of the
damsel whom thou didst direct to me? By Allah, an
thou discover her not to me, I will beat thee with whips.'
When the smith heard this, he recited the following verses :

Her, that possesseth me in love, kind Fortune did endow With beauty

all nor aught thereof to others dicf allow.
The eye of a gazelle she hath ; her scent is ambergris ; She shines, a sun,,

and undulates, a lake, and sways, a bough.

Then said he, ' By Allah, O my lord, since she went out
from thy worshipful presence, I have not set eyes on her S
Indeed, she took possession of my heart and senses and
all my talk and thought is of her. I went to her house,
but found her not, nor found I any who could give me
news of her, and it is as if she had plunged into the
abysses of the sea or been caught up into the sky. s

When the Cadi heard this, he gave a groan, that his
soul was like to depart therefor, and said, ' By Allah, it
would have been well, had we never seen her!' Then
the smith went away, whilst the Cadi fell down on his bed
and became sick of languor for her sake, and on like wise
fared it with' the other three Cadis and the assessors. The
physicians paid them frequent visits 5 but found in there ho
ailment requiring a leach : so the chief men of the city
went in to the Chief Cadi and saluting him, questioned


53


him of his case; whereupon he sighed and discovered to
them that which was in his heart, reciting the following
verses :

Spare me your blame, for sickness' pains enough on me are keen, And

hold excused the Cadi who doth judge the folk between.
Let him who blameth me for love excuse me and not blame, For still

unblameworthy the slain of passion are, I ween.
Cadi was I and fortune fair raised me to high estate, By script and pen^

and life to me was pleasant and serene,
Till from a girl's looks, who to shed my blood came, with a shaft I waa

transfixed, whose deadly stroke no leach might countervene.
A Muslim maid, she came to me, complaining of unright ; Her mouth

with teeth like strings of pearls unvalued was beseen.
Under her veil I looked and she a full moon straight displayed That

through the middle dark of night breaks out in all its sheen.
A lustrous visage, sugared lips and smiling, wonder-sweet, Beauty in«

deed enveloped her from head to foot, my queen. ✓
'Midst Arabs and barbarians, by Allah, to mine eyes, To see the like of

her fair face hath ne'er vouchsafed been !
Sweet, what didst promise me and saidst, ' O Cadi of the folk, Whenas

I promise, I perform, and what I say I mean.'
This is my case and that wherewith I have afflicted been ; So question
me no more, good folk, of this my dole and teen.

Then he wept sore and gave one sob and his soul
departed his body. When they saw this, they washed him
and shrouded him and prayed over him and buried him,
graving the following verses on his tomb :

The traits of lovers were fulfilled in him who comes, by her He loved

and by her rigours slain, unto the sepulchre.
Cadi above the folk was he and him it did rejoice The swcrd of justice

in its sheath to keep a prisoner.
But Fate against him did decree, nor e'er before his time Saw we the

lord unto his slave abase him and defer.

Then they committed him to the mercy oi God and
went away to the second Cadi, in company with the
physician s but found in him no hurt or ailment requiring


54


a leach. So they questioned him of his case and he told
them what ailed him, whereupon they blamed him and
chid him for his folly, and he answered them with these
verses :

I'm cursed with her, — my like was blameless aye, — and dead I'm shotten

with a shaft from hand of archer sped.
A woman unto me there came, Huboub by name, Complaining of un-

right and Fortune's drearihead ;
And with her came a girl, who showed a face that passed The full

moon's light athwart the middle darkness spread.
Her beauties she displayed and her complaint preferred What while in

floods there ran the tears her eyelids shed.
2 hearkened to her speech and looked upon her face And sore she made

me pine with smiling lips and red.
Then with my heart away she fared and left me here, The hostage of

desire. Ah, whither hath she fled ?
This then is all my case ; have ruth upon my plight And take my servant

here to Cadi in my stead.

Then he gave one sob and his soul departed his body ;
whereupon they buried him and commending him to the
mercy of God, repaired to the third Cadi and the fourth,
and there befell them the like of what befell their brethren.
Moreover, they found the assessors also sick for love oi
her, and indeed all who saw her died of her love, or, if
3NTfg!)t they died not, lived, afflicted with the agonies of passion
&££Ctxt. [in vain], may God have mercy on them all 1

Meanwhile Zein el Mewasif and her women fared on
with all diligence till they came to a convent by the way,
in which dwelt a prior called Danis and forty monks.
When the prior saw her beauty, he went out to her and
invited her to alight, saying, ' Rest with us ten days and
after go your ways.' So she and her damsels alighted
and entered the convent ; and when Danis saw her beauty
and grace, she debauched his faith and he was seduced
by her : wherefore he fell to sending her love-messages by


5S


the monks, one after another, till he had sent all the
forty i but each who saw her fell in love with her and
plied her with blandishments galore and sought her
favours for himself, without naming Danis, whilst she
denied herself to them and rebuffed them all with harsh
answers.

When Danis's patience was at an end and his passion
was sore on him, he said in himself, 'Verily, the proverb
says, " Nothing scratches my body but my own nail and
nought runs my errands like my own feet." ' So he rose
and made ready rich meats, and it was the ninth day of
her sojourn in the convent. Then he carried them in to
her and set them before her, saying, ' In the name of God,
favour us [by partaking] of the best of the food at our
command.' So she put out her hand, saying, ' In the
name of God the Compassionate, the Merciful,!-' and ate,
she and her maidens. When she had made an end of
eating, he said to her, £ O my lady, I wish to recite to you
some verses.' ' Say on,' quoth she ; and he recited the
following :

Thou hast made conquest of my heart by dint of cheek and eye 5 In love

of thee my prose and verse with one another vie.
Wilt thou forsake a lover sick with passion and desire ? E'en in my

dreams 'gainst love I strive, with many a tear and sigh.
With my delights, I have th' affairs of this my convent left : Leave me

not prostrate, iove-distraught, to languish and to die.
© lovely one, that holdest right the shedding of my blood In love, have

pity on my case, give ear unto my cry.

When she heard this, she answered him with these
verses :

O thou that seek'st of me delight, let not vain hope thy wit Delude ; of

thy soliciting I prithee hold me quit.
Let not thy spirit covet that which it may not possess : Disquietude wi&

eovetise was ever straitly knit.


Thereupon he returned to his place, pondering in
himself and knowing not how he should do in her affair,
and passed the night in very sorry case. But, as soon as
it was dark night, Zein el Mewasif arose and said to her
maids, ' Come, [let us depart hence], for we cannot avail
against forty men, monks, each of whom requireth me of
himself.' ' Willingly,' answered they. So they mounted
"KTight their beasts and issuing forth of the convent gate, under
ifCfXlxtt. favour of the night, rode on till they overtook a caravan,
with which they mingled and found it came from the city
of Aden. Presently, Zein el Mewasif heard the people of
the caravan discoursing of her own case and telling how
the Cadis and assessors were dead of love for her and how
the townsfolk had appointed others in their stead and
released her husband from prison. Whereupon she turned
to her maids and said to them, 'Heard ye that?' And
Huboub answered, ' If the monks were ravished with love
of thee, whose belief it is that to abstain from women is
to do God worship, how should it be with the Cadis, who
hold that there is no monkery in Islam ? But let us make
our way to our own country, whilst our affair is yet undis-
covered.' So they journeyed on with all diligence.

On the morrow, as soon as it was day, the monks re-
paired to Zein el Mewasif's lodging, to salute her, but
found the place empty, and their hearts sank within
them. So the first monk rent his clothes and recited
these verses :

Give ear, companions dear, to that I shall to you impart ; For I must

say farewell to you full shortly and depart.
The pangs of passion and desire within mine entrails rage And eke a

slayer from the flame of love is in my heart,
By reason of a lovely maid, who came into our land i The full moon in

the height of heaven is as her counterpart.
She went and left me by her charms cast down and done to death, Slaia

of a shaft that from her lids death-dealing she did dart.


S7


Then another monk recited the following verses ;

O ye that with my soul have fled, on your unhappy swain Have pity and

to his despair your blest returning deign.
They fared away and my repose departed after them ; But still the

sweetness of their speech doth in mine ears remain.
They're distant, yea, and distant is their visitation-place : Would they'd

vouchsafe, though but in dreams, their sight to us again !
When they departed hence, they took my heart with them and left Ma

all dissolved in floods of tears, that from mine eyes did rain.

A third monk followed with these lines :

Heart, eyes and ears to set thee in the highest room agree 5 For,lo, ray

heart and all of me's a dwelling-place for thee.
Sweeter than honey in my mouth thy name is and thy thought Runs, as

the vital spirit runs, in every rib of me.
Lean as a skewer hast thou made my frame for languishment ; Yea, and

thou'st drowned me with my tears in very passion's sea.
Let me but look on thee in sleep ; mayhap thy lovely sight Shall from

the torment of my tears avail my cheeks to free.

Then a fourth recited the following verses :

Dumb is my tongue for sorrow ; my speech of thee doth fail ; Of passion
comes my anguish, my sickness and my bale.

thou full moon, whose place is in heaven, sore for thee Love-longing

and distraction my spirit do assaiL

And a fifth these :

1 love a moon, shapely and slim and well-grown ; Her waist of the

weight of her buttocks makes moan.
Like the first pressed-out wine are the dews of her mouth And her lips

to mankind for distraction are known.
My heart burns with passion ; the lover lies slain, Midst the dark,

whence the moon and its lustre are flown,
And his tears like the rains flow, nor ever run dry, For a cheek that is

red as cornelian-stone.


S3

And a sixth these :

Thou, whose exceeding rigour hath slain me for desire, O cassia-brandy

whose planet mounts ever high and higher,
To thee of my affliction, my passion, I complain, O thou whose cheeks

consume me with roses red as fire 1
Is there his like for lover, who damns his soul for thee 9 Prayers and

prostrations leaving, for all he is a friar ?

And a seventh these :

My heart she prisoned and the tears from out mine eyes set free, My
patience rent and love-longing she fortified in me.

Sweet are her attributes, but, ah, how sour her rigour is ! The hearts
of all, who light on her, with arrows shooteth she.

thou who blamest me, desist ; repent thee for the past j For, in the
case of passion, thou mayst not believed be.

And on like wise all the rest of the monks repeated
verses and wept. As for Danis, lamentation and weeping
redoubled on him, for that he found no way to her enjoy-
ment, and he chanted the following verses :

My patience failed me, when my loves took leave and fared away, When

they, my wish and my desire, forsook me, sooth to say.
Soft with their camels, O thou guide o' the litters ! Haply yet They to

my dwelling to return may deign some blessed day.
Slumber forsook my lids the day we parted ; my delight Departed with

them and my woes waxed on me for dismay.
To God I make my moan of that I suffer for her love ; My body's wasted

sore and she hath caused my strength decay.

Then, despairing of her, they took counsel together and
agreed to fashion her image [and set it up] with them,
and applied themselves to this till there came to them the
Destroyer of Delights and Sunderer of Companies.

Meanwhile, Zein el Mewasif fared on, without ceasing s
till she reached her own house and opened the doors.
Then she entered and sent to her sister Nesim, who
rejoiced exceedingly at the news of her return and brought


59


her the furniture and precious stuffs [she had left in her
charge]. So she furnished the house and hung up the
curtains over the doors and burnt aloes-wood and musk
and ambergris and other perfumes, till the whole house
reeked with the most delightful fragrance : after which
she donned her finest clothes and ornaments and sat
talking with her maids, whom she had left behind, and &£CdXH
relating to them all that had befallen her. Then she
turned to Huboub and giving her money, bade her fetch
them something to eat. So she brought meat and drink
and when they had made an end of eating and drinking,
Zein el Mewasif bade Huboub go and see where Mesrour
was and how it fared with him.

Now Mesrour knew not of her return, but abode ia
sore concern and sorrow that might not be overpast ; no
peace remained to him nor was patience possible to him.
Whenas love and passion and yearning- and distraction,
waxed on him, he would solace himself by reciting verses
and go to the house and kiss its walls. It chanced that
he went out that day to the place where he had parted
from his mistress and repeated the following verses :

That which for thee I suffer I would have hid ; but, nay, 'Twould out p

and sleep for waking mine eyes have bartered aye.
Since that wanhope doth canker my heart both night and day, I cry

aloud, ' O Fortune, hold back thy hand, I pray,

For lo, my soul is straitened 'twixt peril and dismay.
If but the Lord of passion were just, indeed, to me, Sure slumber from

mine eyelids he had not bidden flee.
Have ruth upon a lover, who languishes for thee, The great one of a

people, cast down by Love's decree,

The rich, whom love hath beggared and brought him to decay.
The censors still revile thee ; I heed them not, not I, But stop mine ears

against them and give them back the lie.
Still will I keep my troth-plight with her I love. They cry, 'Thou

lovest one departed and gone 5 ' and I reply,

5 Enough ; when Fate descended!, the sight is blinded aye,'


Then he returned to his lodging and sat there weeping,
till sleep overcame him, when he saw in a dream as if
Zein el Mewasif were come to the house, and awoke,
weeping. So he set off to go thither, repeating the
following verses :

rfow shall I be consoled for her whose am I, every jot, When all raj
heart's aglow with flames than coals of fire more hot ?

To Allah of the shifts of Fate, the nights' vicissitudes And of her absence
I complain, whom well I love, God wot.

When shall we meet, O term of heart's desire ? O full-moon face, When
shall the favouring Fa tes to me reunion allot ?

As he made an end of his recitation, he found himself
in Zein el Mewasif s street and smelt the sweet savour of
the perfumes with which she had incensed the house ;
wherefore his heart fluttered and was like to leave his
breast and desire flamed up in him and distraction re-
doubled upon him, when, behold^ up came Huboub, on
her way to do her mistress's errand. When she saw him,
she went up to him and saluting him, gave him the glad
news of her miptress's return, saying, ' She hath sent me to
bid thee to her/ Whereat he rejoiced with an exceeding
joy and she took him and returned with him to the house.

When Zein el Mewasif saw him, she came down to him
from the couch and kissed him and embraced him and he
her ; nor did they leave kissing and embracing till they
swooned away for stress of love and separation. They lay
a long while senseless, and when they revived, Zein el
Mewasif bade Huboub fetch her a gugglet of sherbet of
sugar and another of sherbet of lemons. So she brought
what she desired and they sat eating and drinking till
nightfall, when they fell to recalling all that had befallen
them, first and last Then she acquainted him with her
conversion to Islam, whereat he rejoiced and became
a Muslim. On like wise did her women, and they ali
repented to God the Most High [of their infidelity]. On


6i


ihe morrow she sent for the Cadi and the witnesses and
told them that she was a widow and had completed the
period of purification and was minded to marry Mesrour.
So they drew up the marriage-contract between them and
they abode in all delight of life.

Meanwhile, the Jew, when the people of Aden released
him from prison, set out homeward and fared on, without
stopping, till he came within three days' journey of the
city, when Zein el Mevvasif heard of his coming and
calling Huboub, said to her, 4 Go to the Jews' burial-place
and there dig a grave and plant on it sweet basil and
jessamine and sprinkle water thereabout. If the Jew come
and ask thee of me, answer, " My mistress died twenty days
ago of chagrin on thine account." If he say, "Show
me her tomb," take him to the [mock] grave and weep
over it and make moan and lament before him.' 1 And
Huboub answered, ' I hear and obey.' Then they laid up
the furniture in the store-closets, and Zein el Mewasif
removed to Mesrour's lodging, where he and she abode
eating and drinking, till the three days were past ; at the
end of which time the Jew arrived and knocked at the
door of his house. Quoth Huboub, ' Who is at the door ? f
And he answered, ' Thy master.' So she opened to him
and he saw the tears coursing down her cheeks and said
to her, * What ails thee to weep and where is thy mistress ? "
Quoth she, 'My mistress is dead of chagrin on thine
account.' When he heard this, he wept sore and was
confounded and said, 'O Huboub, where is her tomb?'
So she carried him to the Jews' burial-ground and showed
him the grave she had dug | and he wept sore and recited
the following verses :

1 The Calcutta sad Boulac Editions add here,, * And contrive to bury
him therein alive,* I have followed the less extravagant reading of the
Breslau test.


62


Two things there are, for which if eyes wept tear on tear Of blood, till

they were like, indeed, to disappear,
They never could fulfil the tithe of all their due ; And these are prims

of youth and loss of lovelings dear.

Then he wept again and recited these also :

Alas my grief ! My fortitude bewrays me for my fair : Since she I love

is gone, I die of misery and despair.
Woe's me for my beloved's loss ! How sore it is on me ! And O the

rending of my heart for that I did whilere !
Would I my secret in my time had not revealed and eke The passion in

my heart that seethed had still kept hidden there !
I was in all delight of life and solace ; now she's gone, To misery and

abjectness, alack ! I'm vowed fore'er.
Huboub, thou stirred me to lament with tidings of her death Who of

all creatures was my stay and solace against care.
Zein el Mewasif, would to God that severance had not been ! Would

he, 1 through whom my soul forsook my body, had been ne'er !
I do repent me of the breach of vows and blame myself For my neglect

of her on whom my hopes still builded were.

When he had made an end of saying this, he wept and
groaned and lamented till he fell down in a swoon, where-
upon Huboub made haste to drag him to the grave and
throw him in, whilst he was yet insensible. Then she
stopped up the grave on him and returning to her mistress,
told her what had passed, whereat she rejoiced with an
exceeding joy and recited the following verses :

Fate swore 'twould plague me without cease nor leave to make me rues
Thine oath is broken, Fate ; so look thou fitting penance do.

The censor's dead and he I love conjoined is with me ; Up then unto
the summoner of joys, and quickly too I

Then she and Mesrour abode with each other in eating
and drinking and sport and pleasure and good cheer, till
there came to them the Destroyer of Delights and Sundere<;
of Companies and Slayer of sons and daughters*
1 i.e. Mesrour.


63


ALI NOUREDDIN AND THE FRANK KING'S
DAUGHTER.

There was once, of old days and in bygone ages and
times, in the parts of Cairo, a merchant named Tajeddin,
who was of the most considerable of the merchants and of
the chiefs of the freeborn [of the city]. He was given to
travelling to all parts and loved to fare over desert and
down and stony waste and to journey to the islands of the
seas, in quest of dirhems and dinars : wherefore he had in
his time encountered dangers and suffered hardships of
travel, such as would make little children gray. He was
possessed of slaves and servants, white and black and
maie and female, and was the wealthiest ot the merchants
of his time and the goodliest of them in speech, owning
horses and mules and Bactrian and other camels and
sacks, great and small, and goods and merchandise and
stuffs beyond compare, such as Hems muslins and Baalbek
silks and brocades and Merv cottons and Indian stuffs
and Baghdad gauzes and Moorish burnouses and Turkish
white slaves and Abyssinian eunuchs and Greek slave-girls
&nd Egyptian boys ; and the coverings of his bales were
of gold-embroidered silk, for he was abundantly wealthy.
Moreover he was accomplished in goodliness, stately of
port and pleasant of composition, even as saith of him
one of his describers :

A certain merchant once I did espy, Between whose lovers war raged
fierce and high.

Quoth he, ' What ails the folk to clamour thus ?' * "Tis for thy sake, O
merchant,' answered I.

And saith another in his praise and saith well and
accomplished! the wish of him :


A merchant came to visit us, whose ey& Did with its glance my heart
still stupefy.

Quoth he, ' What ails thee to be thus amazed f '" 8 On thine account, ©
merchant,' answered I.

He had a son called Ali Noureddin, as he were the full
moon whenas it waxeth on its fourteenth night, a marvel
of beauty and grace, elegant of shape and accomplished
in symmetry, who was sitting one day in his father's shop,
selling and buying and giving and taking, as was his wontj
when the sons of the merchants encompassed him about
and he was amongst them as the moon among stars,
with flower-white forehead and rosy cheeks, covered with
tender down, and body like alabaster, even as saith of him
the poet :

A fair one said, ' Describe me well ; ' And I, ' In grace thou dost excei
Yea, speaking briefly, all in thee Is lovely and acceptable.'

And as saith of him one of his describers :

A mole on 's cheek he hath, as 'twere a grain Of ambergris on alabastss
plate,

And swordlike glances that proclaim aloud Against Love's rebels,
« Allah is Most Great ! ' 1

The young merchants invited him [to go with them] s
saying, 'O my lord Noureddin, we wish thee to go this
day a-pleasuring with us in such a garden.' And he
answered, '[Wait] till I consult my father, for I cannot
go without his consent.' As they were talking, up came
Tajeddin, and his son turned to him and said, 'O my
father, the sons of the merchants have invited me to go
a-pleasuring with them in such a garden. Dost thou give
me leave to go?' 'Yes, O my son,' answered his father;
' go with them ; ' and gave him money.

1 Allah akber I &e well-known war-crj of the Muslim agains* the
Infidel.


6 S


So he mounted a mule and the other young me®
mounted mules and asses, and they all rode till they came
to a garden, wherein was all the soul desireth and that
charmeth the eye. It was high walled and had a vaulted
gateway, with a portico like a saloon and a sky-blue door,
as it were one of the gates of Paradise. Moreover, the
name of the door-keeper was Rizwan, 1 and over the gate
were trained a hundred trellises of grapes of various
colours, the red like coral, the black like negroes' faces
and the white like pigeons' eggs, growing in clusters and t&ffgfU
singly, even as saith of them the poet : frccdltfe

Grapes, as the taste of wine their savour i% I trow : The black thereof

in hue are as the corby-crow,
And shining midst the leaves, like women's fingers dipped In henna or

the like of dye, the white grapes show.

And as saith another j

Grape-clusters, that show, on their stalks as they sway, Like my body

for languishment wasted away.
Like honey and water in vases are they And their juice becomes wines

after sourness, one day.

Then they entered the arbour [that led into the garden]
and saw there the gate-keeper sitting, as he were Rizwan,
guardian of Paradise, and on the door were written these
verses :

A garden watered was of God, until its clusters leant And dangled all

and for excess of drink, its branches bent.
When in the Eastern zephyr's hand its saplings dance and sway, The

clouds with fresh pearls handsel 2 them for very ravishment.

1 The name of the gate-keeper of Paradise.

3 A play upon the double meaning- to spot and to handsel) of tli©
Arabic word neket. In its second sense, it is almost exclusively used to
signify the giving of money to dancing and singing women on festive
occasions and in this acceptation is practically equivalent to the English
phrase " to mark (or cross) the palm with silver/ 8

VOL. VIII. I


66


And within the arbour were written the following verses 2

Enter with us, O friend, this garden fair, That cleanses from the heart
its rust of care.

Its zephyrs stumble in their skirts [for haste] And in their sleeve 1 its
flowers laugh everywhere.

So they entered and found within fruits of all kinds and
birds of all sorts and colours, such as the ringdove and
the nightingale and the curlew and the turtle and the
cushat, carolling on the branches. Therein were streams
that ran with limpid water and delightsome flowers, and
it was even as saith of it the poet :

The zephyr o'er its branches breathes and sways them to and fro, As
they were girls that in their skirts still stumble as they go ;

And like to swords, whenas the hands of horsemen draw them forth
From out their scabbards' envelope, its silver channels show.

And again :

The river passes by and laves the branches with its flood And still it

mirrors in its heart the younglings of the wood ;
Which when the zephyr notes, it hastes to them for jealousy And forces

them to bend away from out its neighbourhood.

On the trees of the garden were all manner fruits, each
in two kinds, and amongst them the pomegranate, as it
were a ball of silver dross, whereof saith the poet and
saith well :

Pomegranates, fine-skinned, like the breasts of a maid, Whenas, rounded

and firm, to the sight they're displayed.
When I peel them, appear to us rubies galore, Such as well may the wit

with amazement invade.

And as quoth another :

To him, who seeks to come at its inside, there are displayed Rubies

together pressed and clad in raiment of brocade.
I Jiken the pomegranate, when I look on it, to domes Of alabaster m M
breasts of unpolluted maid.

1 Syn, bud or petals (kumm\


6;


Therein is healing for the sick and thereanent to us A saying 1 of the

Prophet pure tradition hath conveyed.
Yea, and a word most eloquent, written in the Book, 2 thereof God (may

His majesty fore'er be magnified ]) hath said. 8

There were apples, sugar and musk and Damani, amazing
the beholder, whereof saith the poet :

The apple in itself two hues, that image to the sight The cheeks of lover

and belov'd foregathering, doth unite ;
Upon the boughs like two extremes of wonder they appear, This dark

and swarthy 4 to behold, and ruddy that and bright.
Whenas they clipped, a spy appeared and frighted them ; so this Flushed

for confusion and that paled for passion and despite.

There also were apricots of various kinds, almond and
camphor and Jilani and Antabi, whereof says the poet :

The almond-apricot most like a lover is, To whom his loved one came

and dazed his wit and will.
The traits of passion's slave that mark it are enough ; Its outward's

yellow, 6 and its heart is broken still. 6

And saith another and saith well:

In the apricot's flowerage whole gardens there be : Consider them straitly ,

their brightness thou'lt see.
When the boughs bloom in spring-time, it blossoms with them, Like

the soft-shining stars, midst the leaves on the tree.

1 Mohammed is fabled, in a tradition of doubtful authenticity, not
found in the Mishcat el Mesabih, to have said that every pomegranate
contains a seed from Paradise.

s i.e. the Koran.

s " And the pomegranate, alike and unlike, consider its fruit, when it
fruit eth, and the ripening thereof : verily, therein ye have signs for a
people that believe." — Koran vi. 99.

4 Lit. black (aswea), but the Arabs constantly use this word in the
sense of green and vice versa.

5 Syn. pale.

@ i.e. Every one who eats an almond- apricot (see note, Vol. \ T L p. 6f
sracks the stone, to get at the sweet kernel.


68


There likewise were plums and cherries and grapes,
that heal the sick of [all] diseases and do away giddiness
and bile from the head; and figs on the branches, parcel
red and green^ amazing sight and sense, even as saith
the poet:

'Tis as the fig, whose whiteness, with mingling green bedight, Amongst

the tree-leaves fruited, appeareth to the sight,
Where Greeks 1 on palace-turrets that keep the ward : the shades. Ciams

o'er them and in darkness they watch the livelong night.

And saith another and saith well :

Hail to the fig ! It comes to us On dishes in fair order lai&s

As 'twere a table-cloth, 2 drawn up Into a bag, without string's aid,

And saith a third alike well :

Give me the fig, with beauty that's clad and good to eat * its outward

with its inward accordeth, as is meet.
It fruiteth and thou pluckst it, and when thou eatst thereof, As camomiles

its smell is, its taste as sugar sweet ;
And when into its platters 'tis poured, it seemeth balls Made of green

silk and fashioned in goodliness complete.

And how excellent is the saying of one of them !

Quoth they (and I on the fig, forsooth, was wont my fill to feed Andt
made no count of the other fruits to which they gave the meed,)

* Why dost thou love the fig ? ' And I, ' The fig hath its folk,' replied j
* And the sycamore fruit hath folk and folk thereto, in very deed.' 8

And still goodlier that of another :

The fig to me is pleasing above all fruits that be, Whenas it's ripe and

dangles upon its shining tree.
What while the clouds are raining, for fear of God Most High, Fuli

many a tear it sheddeth, as 'twere a devotee.

* i.e. Greeks of the Lower Empire (Routn), much sought after for
slaves by the Arab conquerors of Syria, etc.,, on account of their beauty.
8 Sufreh. See note, Vol. IV. p. 150.

8 Double-entendre. See notes, Vol. III. p„ 179 and Vol. VI. p. 243


6 9


There were also pears of various kinds, Sinai, Aleppo ^ffn
and Greek, growing singly and in clusters, parcel green ijtccl
and parcel yellow, amazing the beholder, as saith of them
the poet:

Fair fall thee of a pear, whose hue is grown Even as a lover pale 1 for
love and moan ;

Like to a virgin in her harem shut, Her face by curtains half concealed 8
half shown.

And Sultani 2 peaches of various shades of red and
yellow, whereof saith the poet :

'Tis as the peach, i' the gardens, when with red, like unto dragon's

blood, 'tis all o'erspread,
Were very balls of yellow gold, whose cheeks Are dyed with gouts of

blood upon them shed.

And green almonds of exceeding sweetness, resembling
the heart 8 of the palm-tree, with their kernels hidden
within three tunics of the handiwork of the Munificent
King, even as is said of them :

A tender body, various of attributes and pent In tunics three, the

handiwork of God Omnipotent.
Duresse envelopes it both night and day and therewithin It doth, though

guiltlesss of offence, endure imprisonment.

And as well saith another :

Dost thou not see the almonds, when from the parent stem The gentl®

hand of a plucker pulls and detaches them ?
The peeling of them shows us the kernels therewithin, As when from OHfe

an oyster one pulls the hidden gem.

And as saith a third better than he :

How goodly is the almond green ! The smallest fills the hand, I weea.
Its nap is as the down upon A minion's cheeks of satin sheen.
Double and single, as may chance, Its kernels in the husk are seen,
As pearls they were of lucent white, That cased and lapped in beryfc
been.

1 Syn. yellow. s Qucsre from Sultaniyeh, a town near Baghdad.

8 Eaten by the Arabs with honey.


And as saith yet another and saith well i

Mine eyes have not looked on the like of the almond For beauty, with

blossoms in spring-time bedight.
Whilst the down on its cheek in the leaf-time yet sprouteth, Its head is

already for hoariness white.

And jujube-plums of various colours, growing singly
and in clusters, whereof saith one, describing them :

Look at the jujube-plums, upon the branches all arrayed, Like wonder-
goodly apricots [to dry] on osiers laid. 1

Such is their brightness that they seem, to the beholders* eyes, As
cascabels of gold they were, of purest bullion made.

And as saith another and saith well :

The lote-tree doth itself array In some fresh beauty every day.
'Tis as the fruit upon it were (And th' eye so deems it, sooth to say,)
Hawks' bells of vegetable gold That _swing from every branch and
spray.

And [blood] oranges, as they were galingale, 2 whereof
quoth the poet El Welhan :

Red oranges, that fill the hand, upon the boughs arow, Shining with
loveliness ; without they're fire, within they're snow.

Snow, for a marvel, melting not, though joined with fire it be, And fire
that burns not, strange to say, for all its ruddy glow.

And quoth another and quoth well :

Trees of blood oranges, whose fruit, in beauty manifold, Unto his eye

who draweth near, its brightness to behold,
Like unto women's cheeks appears, who have adorned themselves And

decked them out for festival in robes of cloth of gold.

1 "La ville [El Aghouat] dort au-dessous de moi, avec ses terrasses
vides, oil le soleil eclaire une multitude de claies pleines de petits
abricots roses, exposes la pour secher." — Eugene Fromentin, Un fLt6
dans le Sahara, Paris, 1857, p. 194.

8 Khuknjan. Sic all editions ; but Khelenj, a dark sweet-scented
wood, to which a blood-orange might fairly be likened, is probably
Intended as the object of comparison.


ft

And yet another*

The hills of oranges, what time the zephyrs o'er them glide And to
their touch the branches bend and sway from side to side,

Are like to cheeks, wherein there glows the light of loveliness And to
meet which come other cheeks at salutation-tide.

And a fourth :

One day of a young gazelle that he should praise Our garden and oranges
we did require.

Quoth he, ' Your garden to me is as my face, And whoso gathers
its oranges gathers fire.'

And citrons, in colour as virgin gold, dropping from
on high and dangling among the branches, as they were
ingots of vegetable gold, as saith thereof the poet El
Welhan :

Hast thou not seen a fruited wood of citrons, laden all So heavily that,
when they bend, one feareth lest they fall ? '

When the breeze passed o'er them, as 'twere with ingots of pure gold It
seemed the boughs w>ere laden, cast in many a gleaming ball.

And shaddocks, that hung among their boughs, as they
were the breasts of gazelle-like virgins, contenting the
utmost of desire, as saith of them the poet and saith well :

A shaddock, midst the garden ways, I saw, its leaves between, Osa e
fresh branch, as a maid's shape with symmetry beseen.

When the wind bent it here and there, its fruits all rolled about, As balls
of gold they were, at end of malls of beryl green.

And the lemon, sweet of savour, which resembles a hen's
egg, but yellowness is the ornament of its ripe fruit, and
its fragrance heartens him who plucks it, as saith the poet
of it :

Beholdst not the lemon, that s whenas on high It shinethj im brifliaarp
dazzles the eye ?

Meseemeth as if 'twere a hen's egg s indeed,, That the hand of the huckster
with saffron doth dye.


72


Moreover in this garden were all manner sweet-scented
herbs and plants and fragrant flowers, such as jessamine
and henna and water-lilies 1 and spikenard and roses of all
kinds and plaintain and myrtle and so forth : and indeed
it was without parallel, seeming as it were a piece of
Paradise to him who beheld it. If a sick man entered it,
he came forth from it like a raging lion, and the tongue
availeth not to its description, by reason of that which was
therein of wonders and rarities that are not found but in
Paradise : and how should it not be thus, when its door-
keeper's name was Rizwan? Though widely different
were their stations.

When the sons of the merchants had walked about the
garden and taken their pleasure therein [awhile], they sat
down in one of its pavilions and seated Noureddin in their
Wght midst on a rug of leather of Et Taif, 2 embroidered with
fttCtlxbu gold, leaning on a round cushion of minever, stuffed with
ostrich down. And they gave him a fan of ostrich feathery
whereon were written the following verses :

A fan, whose breath is fragrant ; it calleth aye to mind The days of joy

and solace, when fortune still was kind,
And to the face of noble and freeborn youths restores Their sweetness

at all seasons, with its perfumed wind.

Then they laid by their turbans and [upper] clothes and
sat talking and contending with one another in discourse,
while they all kept their eyes fixed on Noureddin and
gazed on his beauty. Presently, up came a slave with a
tray on his head, wherein were dishes of china and crystal
containing meats of all sorts, whatever walks [the earth]
or wings the air or swims the waters, such as grouse and

1 Ful, sic Breslau Edition. Syn. Arabian jessamine. The Boulacand

Macnaghten Editions read filfil, pepper, which is a manifest error.

s A town near Mecca, renowned for the manulacture of scented goats 8
leather.


73


quaiis and pigeons and mutton and chickens and the
most delicate of fish, for one of the young men had given
the people of his house a charge of this, before coming
forth to the garden. So, the tray being set before them,
they fell to and ate their fill; and when they had made
an end of eating, they rose from meat and washed their
hands with pure water and soap scented with musk, and
dried them with napkins embroidered with silk and
bugles; but to Noureddin they brought a napkin laced
with red gold, on which he wiped his hands.

Then coffee was served up and each drank what he
would, after which they sat talking, till presently the
keeper of the garden went away and returning with a
basket full of roses, said to them, ' What say ye to flowers,
O my masters ? ' Quoth one of them, ' They are welcome, 1
especially roses, which are not to be refused.' £ it is well,'
answered the gardener : £ but it is of our wont not to give
roses but in exchange for some contribution to the general
amusement; so whoso would have aught thereof, let him
recite some apposite verses.' Now they were ten in
number; so one of them said, 'Agreed: give me [of
them], and I will recite thee somewhat of verse apt to
the case.' So the gardener gave him a bunch of roses
and he recited these verses :

The rose I honour over all, Because its beauties never pall.
All fragrant flowers are troops and it Their Amir most majestical.
When it's away, they're proud ; but if It come, straightway they own
them thrall,

Then he gave another a bunch and he recited the
following verses :

Glory to thee my lord the rose 1 The scent Of musk recalls the fragrance
thou dost shed.

Thou'rt like a maid, on whom her lover looks And with her sleeves 2 she
covers up her head,

1 Lit. there is no harm in them. 8 Syn. petals (akmam).


74


Then he gave a third a bunch and he recited these

verses :

A precious rose, the heart of man it gladdeneth with its sight ; Its scent:

the best of ambergris recalleth to the spright.
The branches strain it in its leaves for joyance, e'en as one Kisseth s

mouth that knoweth nought of rigour or despite.

Then he gave a fourth a bunch and he recited these

verses :

Seest not the rose-bush in blossom? Each mounted on its cane, Full
many a marvel it holdeth, that ravish heart and brain.

As they were rubies with beryl encompassed about, they show, And
each in the midst of its calyx doth somewhat of gold contain.

Then he gave a bunch to a fifth and he recited these

verses :

Wands of green beryl fruit did bear, and when 'twas ripe, behold, As

ingots to the sight it was of vegetable gold.
Ay, and the crystal drops that fell from out the tender leaves, Meseemesi,
were like to very tears from languorous eyelids rolled.

Then he gave a sixth a bunch and he recited the
following verses :

O rose, thou dost all charms comprise, that may amaze the wit. And

God to thee the pleasantest of secrets doth commit.
Meseems as if a loved one's cheek it were and eke as if A longing lovef
with a piece of gold had handselled it. 1

Then he gave a bunch to a seventh and he recited these

verses :

1 A metaphor taken from the Eastern practice of showing approbation
of the performance of a female singer or dancer by sticking small pieces
of money on her face and cheeks, whilst still wet with perspiration.
The same practice obtains at weddings, where one method of giving
presents is to stick money ©a the bride's cheeks,, freshly plastered with
cosmetics.


1 said tmto the rose, 'What ails thy thorns to be So swift to wound and

hurt all those that touch thy charms ? '
li answered, ' All the flowers my soldiers are, in sooth, And I their

Sultan am and these my thorns my arms.'

And he gave an eighth a bunch and he recited the
following :

God watch o'er a rose that's grown yellow and bright, Resplendent, pure

gold as it were to the sight,
And guard the fair boughs that have borne it, to boot, With the mock

yellow suns of its flowerage bediyht !

Then he gave a bunch to a ninth and he recited these
verses :

The yellow roses stir to gladness uncontrolled The heart of every slave

of passion, young or old.
A shrub that, strange to say, is water given to drink Of silver and for

fruit, bears vegetable gold !

Then he gave a bunch of roses to the tenth and last and
he recited the following verses :

Seest not the hosts of the rose, in raiment red And yellow that glitter

from out their blossoming-stead ?
I liken the yellow rose, with its thorn therein, To an emerald lance,

through a golden target sped.

Then the gardener brought $ie wine-service and setting
it before them, on a tray of porcelain sprayed with red
gold, recited the following verses :

Dawn heraldeth the light ; so pour me out, I pray, Of wine, such wine

as makes the faintest-hearted gay.
So pure and bright it is, that whether wine in cup Or cup in wine be

held, i' faith, 'tis hard to say.

Then he tilled and drank and the cup went round, till it

■came to Noureddin's turn, whereupon the gardener filled
the cup and handed it to him ; but he said, £ I know not
this thing nor have I ever drunken thereof for therein


j6


is a great sin and the Almighty Lord hath forbidden it
in His Book.' '0 my lord Noureddin,' answered the
gardener, ' if thou forbear to drink only by reason of the
sin, verily God (blessed and exalted be He !) is bountiful,
mild, forgiving and compassionate and pardoneth the
greatest sins. His mercy embraceth all things and be it
upon the poet who says :

Be as thou wilt and banish dread and care, For God is bountiful and

debonair ;

So of two things, the doing hurt to men And giving God a partner, thou
beware."

Then said one of the sons of the merchants, ' My life
on thee, O my lord Noureddin, drink of this cup!' And
another conjured him by the oath of divorce and yet
another stood before him, till he was ashamed and taking
the cup from the gardener, drank a mouthful, but spat it
out again, saying, 'It is bitter.' 'O my lord Noureddin,'
said the gardener, 'knowest thou not that the sweetest
things, when taken by way of medicine, are bitter? Were
this not bitter, it would lack of the [many] virtues it
possesseth ; amongst which are that it digesteth food and
doth away care and anxiety and dispelleth vapours and
clarifieth the blood and cleareth the complexion and
enliveneth the body and hearteneth the poltroon and
fortifieth the sexual power; but to name all its virtues
would be tedious. Quoth one of the poets :

We'll drink, for God His clemency encompasseth the soul On every

side : I medicine my ailments with the bowl ;
And nought (for well I know its sin) save God His saw, 'Therein Are

for the folk advantages,' 1 doth me thereto cajole.

Then he opened one of the cupboards there and taking

1 <s They will ask thee of wine and casting of lots ; say, "In them
both are great sin and advantages to mankind ; but the sin of them both
is greater than the advantage thereof.' " — Koran ii. 2l6.


77


out a loaf of refined sugar, broke off a great piece, which
he put in Noureddin's cup, saying, ' O my lord, if thou
fear to drink wine, because of its bitterness, drink now,
for it is sweet. ' So he took the cup and emptied it :
whereupon one of his comrades rilled him another, saying,
4 1 am thy slave,' and another [did the like], saying, 1 1 am
one of thy servants/ and a third said, ' For my sake ! 5 and
a fourth, ' God on thee, O my lord Noureddin, heal my
heart ! ' And so they plied him with wine, till they had
made him drink ten cups.

Now Noureddin's body was virgin [of wine-bibbing],
nor all his life had he drunken wine till then, wherefore
its fumes mounted to his brain and drunkenness was stark
upon him and he stood up (and indeed his tongue was
embarrassed and his speech thick) and said, ' O company,
by Allah, ye are fair and your speech and place are goodly,
but there needs the hearing of sweet music; for drink
without music lacks the chief of its essentials, even as
saith the poet :

Pass round the cup to the old and the young man, too, And take the

bowl from the hand of the shining moon, 1
But without music, I charge you, forbear to drink ; I see even horses

drink to a whistled tune. ' s

Therewith up rose the gardener and mounting one of
the young men's mules, was absent awhile, after which he
returned with a girl of Cairo, as she were a delicate fat
sheep's tail or pure silver or a dinar in a porcelain dish or
a gazelle in the desert. She had a face that put to shame
the shining sun and bewitching eyes 8 and brows like

1 i^. a fair-faced cup-bearer.

s It is the custom of the Arabs to call their cattle to water by whistling,
s Lit Babylonian eyes. According to Arab tradition, Babylon (Babel)
Is the metropolis of sorcery, the two offending angels, Harout aad
Marout (who teach men witchcraft), being suspended in s well there=
See ante, note s Vol, III. p. 104.


78


bended bows and rosy cheeks and pearly teeth and sugared
lips and languishing glances and ivory breasts and slender
body, full of folds and dimples, and buttocks like stuffed
pillows and thighs like columns of Syrian marble, and
between them what was like a sachet [of spices] folded iss
a wrapper. Quoth the poet of her :

A fair one, to idolaters if she herself should show, They'd leave their

idols and her face for only Lord would know.
If in the Eastward she appeared unto a monk, for sure He'd cease from

turning to the West 1 and to the East bend low ;
And if into the briny sea one day she chanced to spit, Assuredly the salt

sea's floods straight fresh and sweet would grow.

And quoth another :

More brilliant than the moon at full, with liquid languorous eyes, She

seems an antelope that takes the lion-whelps to prize.
The midnight of her locks lets fall o'er her a tent of hair, 2 Unfixed of

tent-pegs, that protects her beauty from the spies.
The fire, that in th' unfading rose still burnetii of her cheek, Is fed with

entrails that consume and hearts and lovers' sighs.
An if the beauties of the time beheld her, unto her, Saying, 'Unto the

precedent the palm,' they would arise.

And how well saith a third :

Three things for ever hinder her to visit us, for fear Of the intriguing

spy and eke the rancorous envier ;
Her forehead's lustre and the sound of all her ornaments And the sweet

scent her creases hold of ambergris and myrrh.
Grant with the border of her sleeve she hide her brow and doff H.<gF

ornaments, how shall she do her scent 3 away from her ?

1 The Syrian and Mesopotamian Christian, in turning towards
Jerusalem, would naturally face the West, instead of the East, as with
his European brethren.

2 beit skar, lit. a house of hair, the distinctive name of the Bedouin
tent, which is made of camels' hair. Syn. a line of verse.

8 The bodies of Eastern women of the higher classes by dint of con-
tinual maceration, Esther-fashion, in aromatic oils and essences, would
maturally become impregnated with the sweet scent of the cosmetics used-


79


She was like the moon, -when it appears on its fourteenth
night, and was clad in a garment of blue, with a veil of
green, over a flower-white forehead, that amazed all wits j^Ttgljt
and confounded those of understanding. And indeed she t!£cclxt)fi
was possessed of the utmost grace and beauty and sym-
metry, as it were she of whom the poet would speak when
he saith :

She comes in a robe the colonr of ultramarine, Blue as the stainless sky

unflecked with white.
I view her with yearning eyes and she seems to me A moon of the

summer set in a winter's night.

And how goodly is the saying of another and how
excellent !

She came unto me, straitly veiled, and I to her did say, ' Thy face, the

bright, resplendent moon, uncover and display.'
Quoth she, 'I fear reproach,' and I, 'Forbear this idle talk: Let not

the shifts of time and fate affright thee or dismay.'
So from her face she raised the veil that hid her charms and tears Upon,

the jewels of her cheeks fell, like a crystal spray.
Indeed, I thought to kiss her cheek, that thereanent to God She might

make moan of me upon the Resurrection Day ;
So were we twain the first to plead of lovers, each 'gainst each, Whenas

the dead shall rise, before the Lord whom all obey ;
And I, ' Prolong our standing-up and reckoning,' would say, ' That se

mine eyes may feed their fill upon my loved one aye.'

Then said the gardener to her, 4 O lady of fair ones and
mistress of every shining star, know that we sought not, in
bringing thee hither, but that thou shouldst entertain this
comely youth here, my lord Noureddin, for he hath only
come to this place this day.' And she answered, saying,
* Would thou hadst told me, that I might have brought
what I have with me ! ' 4 O my lady,' rejoined the
gardener, 5 1 will go and fetch it to thee.' ' As thou wilt/
replied she : and he said, ( Give me a token.' So she
gave him a handkerchief and he went away in haste and


8©


returned after awhile, bearing a bag of green satin, with
cords of gold. She took the bag from him and opening
it, shook it, whereupon there fell thereout two-and-thirty
pieces of wood, which she fitted, one into another s till
they became a polished lute of Indian workmanship.

Then she uncovered her wrist and laying the lute in her
lap, bent over it, as the mother bends over her child, and
swept the strings with the tips of her fingers ; whereupon
it moaned and resounded and yearned after its former
habitations; and it remembered the waters that gave it
to drink, [whilst yet in the tree,] and the earth whence
it sprang and wherein it grew up and the carpenters who
cut it and the polishers who polished it and the merchants
who exported it and the ships that carried it; and it cried
out and wailed and lamented ; and it was as if she
questioned it of all these things and it answered her
with the tongue of the case, reciting ^the following verses :

Whilom I was a tree, wherein the nightingales did nest ; Whilst green

my head, I swayed for them with longing and unrest.
They made melodious moan on me, and I their plaining learnt, And so

my secret was by this lament made manifest.
The woodman felled me to the earth, though guiltless of offence, And

wrought of me a slender lute, by singers' hands carest ;
But, when their fingers sweep my strings, they tell that I am slain, One

with duresse amongst mankind afflicted and opprest ;
Wherefore each boon-companion, when he heareth my lament, Grows

mad with love and drunkenness o'ermasters every guest,
And God inclineth unto me their hearts and I indeed Am to the highest

place advanced in every noble breast.
All who in loveliness excel do clip my waist and in The arms of every

languorous-eyed gazelle my form is prest
May God the Lord ne'er sever us, nor live the loved one aye Who with

estrangement and disdain her lover would molest !

Then she was silent awhile, but presently taking the
lute in her lap, bent over it, as the mother bends over her


8i


child, and preluded in many different modes ; then, return-
ing to the first, she sang the following verses :

An they'd unto the lover incline or visit pay, From off his back the

burden of longing he might lay.
A nightingale o' the branches vies with him, as she were A lover whose

beloved hath lighted far away.
Up and awake I The midnights of love-delight are clear And bright,

with union's splendour, as very break of day.
Behold, to love and joyance the lute-strings summon us And eke to-day

our enviers are heedless of our play.
Seest not that unto pleasance four several things, to wit, Rose, gilly-
flower and myrtle and lights 1 unite alway?
And here to-day assemble four things, by favouring fate, Lover, beloved,

money and wine, to make us gay.
So seize upon thy fortune i' the world ; for its delights Pass by aad but

traditions and chronicles do stay.

When Noureddin heard this, he looked on her with
eyes of love and could scarce contain himself for the
violence of his inclination to her ; and on like wise was it
with her, because she looked at the company who were
present of the sons of the merchants and at Noureddin
and saw that he was amongst the rest as the moon among
stars ; for that he was sweet of speech and full of amorous
grace, perfect in beauty and brightness and loveliness and
accomplished in symmetry, pure of all defect, blander than
the zephyr and more delicate than Tesnim/ as saith of
him the poet :

By his cheeks' unfading damask and his smiling teeth I swear, By the
arrows that he feathers with the witchery of his air,

By his sides so soft and tender and his glances bright and keen, By the
whiteness of his forehead and the blackness of his hair,

By his arched imperious eyebrows, chasing slumber from my lids Witfe
their yeas and noes that hold me 'twixt rejoicing aad despair*


1 Syn. any yellow flower, particularly orange-blossoms (anw&f^>
s Name of a fountain of Paradise.

VOL. VIIL §


82


By the scorpions that he launches from his ringlet-clustered brows,

Seeking still to slay his lovers with his rigours unaware,
By the myrtle of his whiskers and the roses of his cheek, By his lips'

incarnate rubies and his teeth's fine pearls and rare,
By the straight and tender sapling of his shape, which for its fruit Doth

the twin pomegranates, shining in his snowy bosom, wear,
By his heavy hips that tremble, both in motion and repose, And the

slender waist above them, all too slight their weight to bear,
By the silk of his apparel and his quick and sprightly wit, By all

attributes of beauty that are fallen to his share ;
Lo, the musk exhales its fragrance from his breath, and eke the breeze

From his scent the perfume borrows, that it scatters everywhere.
Yea, the sun in all his splendour cannot with his brightness vie And the

crescent moon's a fragment that he from his nails doth pare.

j^Tftrfji Her verses pleased him and he swayed from side to side
frCCClxbtU. for drunkenness and fell a-praising her and saying :

A luting maiden stole away Our wits for drunkenness one day.
*'Twas God the Lord that gifted us With speech,' her strings to us
did say.

- When she heard this, she looked at him with eyes of
love and redoubled in passion and desire for him in-
creased upon her, and indeed she marvelled at his beauty
and grace and symmetry, so that she could not contain
herself, but took the lute again and sang the following :

He chides me, if I look on him, and with disdain Entreats me, though

my life is his for weal and bane ;
Yea, he repelleth me ; yet what is in my heart He knows, as if God's

self to him had made it plain.
His likeness have I drawn midmost my palm and charged Mine eyes

make moan for him and over him complain.
Mine eyes will look on none save him, nor will my heart Aid me his

cruelty with patience to sustain.
Wherefore, O thou my heart, I'll tear thee from my breast, For that

thou art of those that envy me the swain.
Whenas I say, 6 O heart, be comforted/ 'tis vain j To turn to any else

than him it will not deign.


83


Noureddin wondered at the beauty of her song and the
sweetness of her voice and the eloquence of her speech
and his wit fled for stress of love and longing and dis-
traction, so that he could not refrain from her a moment,
but bent to her and strained her to his bosom ; and she in
like manner abandoned herself to his caresses and kissed
him between the eyes. Then he kissed her on the mouth
and they played at kisses with one another, after the
manner of the billing of doves, till the others were dis-
tracted and rose to their feet ; whereupon Noureddin was
abashed and held his hand from her. Then she took her
lute and preluding thereon in many different modes, re-
turned to the first and sang the following verses :

A moon, he draws from out his lids, whenas he turns and sways, A sword

and puts gazelles to shame, whenas he stands at gaze.
A king, his all-surpassing charms his troops are, and for aims, His shape

is like the spear of cane, whose straightness all men praise.
An if his heart were but as soft as is his waist, no more Would he

against his lovers sin nor fright them with affrays.
Alas the hardness of his heart and softness of his waist 1 Why is not

this to that transferred ? Is there no way of ways ?
O thou that blam'st me for his love, excuse me rather thou : Thine be

his beauty's part etern and mine that which decays 1 1

When Noureddin heard the sweetness of her voice and
the beauty of her verses, he inclined to her for delight and
could not contain himself for excess of wonderment ; so
he recited these lines :

Methought she was the very sun of morning's self, until She veiled her s

but the fire she lit flames in my entrails still.
What had it irked her, had she signed and with her finger-tips A friendly

salutation waved to us ? Where were the ill ?

z i.e. Thou mayst have his company in the life to come, provided I
enjoy it in this life.


§4-

The railer saw her face and said (what while her charms thst pass All
other beauty did his wit with stupefaction fill,)

' Is this then she for whom thou rav'st with longing for her love ? Indeed,
thou hast excuse.' And I, ' 'Tis she who doth me thrill

With arrows of her looks, nor can my abject, broken case Of stranger-
hood to pity move her unrelenting will.'

I am become a slave of love, with heart enchained ; I groan Day long
and night long, ay, and weep with tears, as 'twere a rilL

She marvelled at his eloquence and grace and taking
her lute, smote thereon after the goodliest of fashions,
repeating all the melodies, and sang the following verses :

As thy face liveth, O thou the life of my spirit, I swear, I canaot remove

from thy love, if I do or I do not despair.
If, indeed, thou be cruel, in dreams thy phantom is favouring and kind,

And if thou be absent, thy thought is my cheering companion fore'er.
O thou that hast saddened my sight, though thou knowst that I seek not

for aught To cheer me, nor aught but thy love I long for, to solace

my care,

Thy cheeks are twin roses, the dews of thy mouth are as wine to the
taste ; Wilt thou not then vouchsafe us thereof to drink in this
pleasaunce so fair?

Her song moved Noureddin to the utmost wonder and
delight and he answered her as follows :

The face o' the sun is not unveiled in the darkness of the night, But m

the far horizon's marge the full moon hides its light,
Nor doth her forehead meet the eye o' the morning, but, outfaced By

contrast, to the break of day for refuge it takes flight. 1
Take of the currents of my tears, as, chain on chain, they fall, And on

the readiest way of ways, the tale of love recite.
Oft unto her, who shoots at me her arrows, have I saids * Hold thou thf

hand ; indeed my heart is cleft in sunder quite,

1 Queer e an allusion to the 113th Chapter (knowa as the Chapter oS
the Daybreak) of the Koran, " I take refuge with the Lord of th© Say-
break from the evil of that which He hath created, set©/"


8s


An if unto the River Nile my tears may likened be, Meseems the love 1

bear to thee El Melee 1 should be hight.'
Quoth she, 'Then bring me all thy good.' * Take it,' said I and she,

'And thy sleep.' '[Take it] from mine eyes,' I answered he?

forthright

When she heard Noureddin's words and noted the
beauty of his eloquence, she was transported and her wit
was dazed and love of him got hold upon her whole heart.
So she pressed him to her bosom and fell to kissing him
after the manner of doves billing, whilst he returned her
caresses ; but the vantage is to the first comer. When she
had made an end of kissing, she took the lute and recited
the following verses :

All, woe's us for a blamer, to censure ever prone, Wheihen on ho o£
passion to him I make my moan !

thou that dost reject me, I had not thought that I Shqjild in thy lov@

abasement meet with, and thou mine own.

1 used to rail at lovers for love, and now to those, Who blame thee, my

abasement for thee I have made known.
The votaries of passion whilom I blamed ; but now I do excuse all

lovers for passion overthrown ;
And if, for thkie estrangement, distress be sore on me, Go<i in thy namSg

O Ali, I'll pray and thine alone.

And also these :

Quoth his lovers, ' Except of the nectar so rare Of his month he tfoncI*=

safe us to drink, debonair,
To the Lord of all creatures we'll make our complaint And * s O Ali ! *

we'll say with one voice in our prayer.'

Noureddin marvelled at the fluency of her tongue and
praised her grace and exceeding seductiveness ; whereupon
she rose and putting off all that was upon her of [outer]
clothes and trinkets, sat down on his knees and kissed

1 Melee means level ground j but quart some place os tract oa t&s
banks of the Nile meant.


85


him between the eyes and on the mole of his cheek.
TXigpt Then she gave him all she had put off, saying, ' O beloved
tJCCClxtX. f m y heart, the gift is after the measure of the giver's
capacity.' So he accepted this from her and gave it
back to her and kissed her on the mouth and cheeks
and eyes.

When this was done, (for nought endureth save God,
the Living, the Eternal, Provider of the peacock and the
owl), Noureddin rose from the place of session and stood
upon his feet, for the darkness was now fallen and the
stars shone out ; whereupon quoth the damsel to him,
'Whither away, O my lord?' And he said, 'To my
father's house.' Then the sons of the merchants conjured
him to pass the night with them, but he refused and
mounting his mule, rode, without stopping, till he reached
his father's house, where his mother met him and said to
him, 'O my son, what hath kept thee abroad till this
hour ? By Allah, thou hast troubled thy father and my-
self by thine absence from us, and our hearts have been
occupied with thee.' Then she came up to him, to kiss
him on his mouth, and smelling the fumes of the wine,
said, ' O my son, how is this ? Art thou, after prayer and
worship, become a wine-bibber and a transgressor of His
word to whom belong creation and commandment ? ' But
Noureddin threw himself down on the bed and lay there.

Presently in came his father and said, ' What ails
Noureddin to lie thus ? ' And his mother answered,
saying, 'It would seem his head irketh him for the air
of the garden.' So Tajeddin went up to his son, to
question him of his ailment and salute him, and smelt
the wine he had drunk. Now he loved not wine-drinkers;
so he said to Noureddin, 4 Out on thee, O my son ! Is
folly come to such a pass with thee, that thou drinkest
wine?' When Noureddin heard this, he raised his hand,
being yet in his drunkenness, and dealt him a buffet As


8;


fate would have it, the blow lit on his fathers right eye
[and struck it out] and it ran down on his cheek ; where-
upon he fell down in a swoon and lay therein awhile.
They sprinkled rose-water on him till he came to himself,
when he would have beaten Noureddin; but his wife
withheld him, and he swore, by the oath of divorcement
from her, that, as soon as it was day, he would assuredly
cut off his son's right hand. When she heard her husband's
words, her breast was straitened and she feared for her son
and ceased not to soothe and appease Tajeddin, till sleep
overcame him.

Then she waited till the moon was risen, when she
went in to her son, whose drunkenness had now ceased
from him, and said to him, 'O Noureddin, what is this
foul thing thou hast done with thy father?' 'And what
did I with him?' asked he. Quoth she, 'Thou dealtest
him a buffet on the right eye and struckest it out ; and he
hath sworn by the oath of divorcement that, as soon
as it is day, he will without fail cut off thy right hand.'
Noureddin repented him of that which he had done,
whenas repentance profited him nothing, and his mother
said to him, 'O my son, this repentance will not profit
thee; nor will aught serve thee but that thou arise forth-
right and seek safety in flight. Go forth the house privily
and take refuge with one of thy friends and there await
what God shall do, for He changeth case after case.'

Then she opened a chest and taking out a purse of a
hundred dinars, said to Noureddin, ' O my son, take these
dinars and provide thyself therewith, and when they are at
an end, send and give me to know thereof, that I may
send thee other than these, and at the same time send me
news of thyself privily. It may be God will decree thee
relief and thou shalt return to thy dwelling.' And she
bade him farewell and wept passing sore. Noureddin
took the purse and was about to go forth, when he espied


a great purse containing a thousand dinars, which Ma
mother had forgotten beside the chest. So he took this
also and tying the two purses about his middle, set out
before dawn in the direction of Boulac, where he arrived
whenas the day broke and all creatures arose, attesting
the unity of God the Opener [of the gates of sustenance
and mercy] and went forth each upon his several business,
to suffer that which God had allotted to him.

He walked on along the river-bank till he saw a ship
with her gangway out and her four grapnels made fast to
the land. The folk were going up into her and coming
down from her, and Noureddin, seeing some sailors
standing there, asked them whither they were bound.
' To the city of Rosetta,' answered they ; and he said,
*Take me with you.' Quoth they, 'Welcome and fair
welcome to thee, O goodly youth ! ' So he betook himself
forthright to the market and buying what he needed of
victual and bedding and covering [for the voyage], returned
to the port and went on board the ship, which was ready
to sail and tarried with him but a little while before it
weighed anchor and fared on, without stopping, till it
reached Rosetta, where Noureddin saw a small boat going
to Alexandria. So he embarked in it and traversing the
[Mehmoudiyeh] canal, fared on till he came to a bridge
called El Jami, where he landed and entered Alexandria
by the gate called the Gate of the Lote-tree.

God protected him, so that none of those who stood at
tNtOjt the gate saw him, and he entered the city, which he found
tJCCfixx. a strongly fortified city, goodly of pleasaunces, delightful
to its inhabitants and inviting to abide therein. The
season of winter had departed from it with its cold and
the season of spring was come to it with its roses : its
flowers were in blossom and its trees in full leaf} its fruits
were ripe and its waters welled forth. Indeed, it was
a city goodly of ordinance and construction ; its folk were


8 9


of the best of men, and when the gates thereof were shut,
its people were in safety. And it was even as is said of it
in the following verses :

'Describe Alexandria, I pray,' Quoth I to a comrade one day,
A man of glib speech and quick wit. ' 'Tis a fair frontier town/ 1
did he say.

Quoth I, 'Is there living therein?' And he, 'If the wind blow that way. 5

Or as saith one of the poets :

Alexandria's a frontier seat ; 1 The water of its lips is sweet.
How fair the coming to it is, So one therein no raven meet !

Noureddin walked about the city till he came to the mer-
chants' bazaar, whence he passed on to the bazaar of the
money-changers and so on in turn to those of the confec-
tioners and fruiterers and druggists, marvelling, as he went s
at the city, for that its qualities accorded with its name. 8 As
he walked in the druggists' bazaar, an old man came down
from his shop and saluting him, took him by the hand
and carried him to a fair by-street, swept and sprinkled,
whereon the zephyr blew and was pleasant and the leaves
of the trees overshaded it. Therein stood three houses
and at the upper end a mansion, whose foundations were
stablished in the water and its roofs rose up to the con-
fines of the sky. The space before it was paved with
marble, swept and sprinkled, and those who approached
it smelt the fragrance of flowers, borne on the zephyr,
which breathed upon the place, as it were one of the
gardens of Paradise.

The old man carried Noureddin into the house and set
food before him, whereof he ate with him. When they
had made an end of eating, the druggist said to him,
'When earnest thou hither from Cairo ? ' And Noureddin
answered, 'This very night, O my father/ Quoth the

1 Syn. the opening of the lips showing the teeth {theghr'),

8 i.e. Iskenderiyeh, the city of Iskender or Alexander the Great


90


old man, 'What is thy name?' And he replied, 'Ali
Noureddin.' ' O my son, Noureddin,' said the druggist,
* be the triple divorcement incumbent on me, if thou leave
me so long as thou abidest in this town ; and I will set
thee apart a place wherein to dwell.' Quoth Noureddin,
' O my lord, let me know more of thee.' And the othes
answered, ' Know, O my son, that years ago I came to
Cairo with merchandise, which I sold there and bought
other, and I had occasion for a thousand dinars. So thy
father paid them down for me, for all he had no know-
ledge of me, and would take no security of me, but had
patience with me till I returned hither and sent him the
amount by one of my servants, together with a present.
I saw thee, whilst thou wast little, and if it please God
the Most High, I will repay thee somewhat of the kind-
ness thy father did me.' When Noureddin heard the old
man's story, he smiled and showed joy and pulling out
the purse of a thousand dinars, gave it to his host and
said to him, ' Take charge of this for me, against I buy me
therewith somewhat of merchandise whereon to trade.'

Then he abode some days in Alexandria, eating and
drinking and making merry and taking his pleasure in
its thoroughfares, till he had made an end of the hundred
dinars he had kept by way of spending-money ; where-
upon he repaired to the old druggist, to take of him
somewhat of the thousand dinars to spend, but found
him not in his shop and sat down there, to await his
return. As he sat thus, gazing right and left and amusing
himself with watching the merchants and passers-by, there
came into the bazaar a Persian riding on a mule and
having behind him a damsel, as she were virgin silver
or a turbot in a tank or a gazelle in the desert. Her face
outvied the shining sun and she had bewitching eyes
and breasts of ivory, teeth of pearl, slender body and
dimpled sides and legs like fat sheep's tails'; and indeed


9i


she was perfect in beauty and grace and symmetry, even
as saith one, describing her :

As she wished, she was created, after such a wise thatlo, She in beauty's

mould was fashioned, perfect, neither less nor mo'.
In her cheeks the roses redden for confusion and the fruit 1 On the sapling

of her figure makes a fair and stately show.
In her face the full moon glitters and the branch is as her shape : Musk

her breath is, nor midst mortals is her equal, high or low.
Tis as if she had been moulded out of water of pure pearls : In each

member of her beauty is a very moon, I trow.

The Persian lighted down from his mule and making
the damsel alight also, called the broker and said to him,
' Take this damsel and cry her for sale in the market.' So
he fetched a stool of ebony, inlaid with ivory, and setting
it amiddleward the bazaar, seated her thereon. Then he
raised her veil and discovered a face as it were a Median
targe 2 or a sparkling star : and indeed she was like the full
moon, when it appears on its fourteenth night, accomplished,
to the utmost in surpassing beauty. As saith the poet :

The full moon ignorantly vied in beauty with her face, But was eclipsed

and split in twain for wrath at its disgrace ;
And if the willow-wand be fit to even with her shape, Perish her hands

who is become o' the faggot-bearing race 1 8

And how well saith another :

Say to the fair in the muffler laced and wrought with gold, ' Hark ye !

What hast thou done with a pious man was like a monk to be ? '
The gleam of the veil and the brilliancy of thy visage under it The hosts

of the darkness put to rout and cause them turn and flee ;
And when my glance cometh to steal a look at thy cheek so fresh and fair,

Its guardian sprites with a shooting star still cast at them and me. 4

1 i.e. her breasts. * Presumably of silver.

8 Alluding to the curse denounced by Mohammed against his recalci-
trant uncle, Abou Leheb. " May Abou Leheb's hands perish .... and
his wife [be] a bearer of faggots ! " — Koran cxi. 184.

4 Likening her eyes to the angels who (according to the Muslim
legend) are appointed to watch for the Jinn that listen by stealth te
what is said m heaven and drive them off with shooting stars.


92


Then said the broker to the merchants, * How much
do ye bid for the pearl of the diver and prize of the
fowler?' Quoth one, 'She is mine for a hundred dinars.'
And another said, ' Two hundred,' and a third, ' Three
hundred;' and they ceased not to bid, one against
another, till they made her price nine hundred and fifty
^TiCtfjt dinars, and there the biddings stopped. Then the broker
bCEClXXl. went up to the Persian and said to him, ' The biddings
for this thy slave-girl have reached nine hundred and
fifty dinars : wilt thou sell her at that price and take the
money ? ' * Doth she consent to this ? ' asked the Persian.
4 1 desire to consult her wishes, for I fell sick on my
journey hither and she tended me with all possible care,
wherefore I swore not to sell her but to him of whom she
should approve, and I have put her sale in her own hand.
So do thou consult her and if she say, " I consent," sell
her to whom thou wilt : but if she say " No," sell her not'

So the broker went up to her and said to her, ' Know,
O princess of fair ones, that thy master putteth thy sale in
thine own hands, and thy price hath reached nine hundred
and fifty dinars ; dost thou give me leave to sell thee ? '
* Show me him who is minded to buy me,' answered she,
'before thou clinch the bargain.' So he brought her up
to one of the merchants, a very old and decrepit man, and
she looked at him awhile, then turned to the broker and
said to him, ' O broker, art thou mad or afflicted in thy
wit?' 'Why dost thou ask me this, O princess of fair
ones ? ' said he. And she answered, 5 Is it permitted of
God to sell the like of me to yonder decrepit old man,
who saith of his wife's case the following verses :

Quoth she to me, — and sore enraged for wounded pride was she, For she
in sooth had bidden me to that which might not be, —

*' An if thou swive me not forthright, as one should swive his wife. If
thou be made a cuckold straight, reproach it not to me.

Meseems thy yard is made of wax, for very flaccidness j For when 1 rub
it with my hand, it softens instantly."


93


And quoth he likewise of his yard :

I have a yard that sleeps on base and shameful wise, Whenever on© I

love with my desire complies ;
But, when I'm by myself, at home, it's all agog To thrust and ply its

lone the amorous exercise.

And again quoth he thereof :

I have an ill yard, passing froward, to wit : Him who honoureth it, with

reproach it doth quit.
If I sleep, it stands up ; if I rise, it lies down ; God no ruth have on

him who hath ruth upon it ! *

When the old merchant heard this scurvy gibing from
the damsel, he was exceeding wroth and said to the
broker, ' O unluckiest of brokers, thou hast not brought
this ill-conditioned wench into the market but to flout me
and make mock of me before the merchants.' Then the
broker took her aside and said to her, ' O my lady, be not
lacking in manners. The old man whom thou didst mock
at is the syndic of the bazaar and inspector of weights and
measures thereof and one of the council of the merchants.'
But she laughed and said :

' It belioveth the folk that bear rule in our time, Yea, 'tis one of the

duties of magistrateship,
To hang up the chief of police o'er his door And beat the inspector of

weights with a whip.

By Allah, O my lord,' added she, ' I will not be sold to
yonder old man ; so sell me to , other than him, for belike
he will be abashed at me and sell me again and I shall
become a servant and it beseems not that I sully myself
with menial service; and indeed thou knowest that the
matter of my sale is committed to myself/ 4 1 hear and
obey/ answered he and carried her to one of the chief
merchants, '° How sayst thou, O my lady ? ! asked he.
'Shall I sell thee to my lord Sherifeddin here for nine


94


hundred and fifty dinars?' She looked at him and seeing
him to be an old man, with a dyed beard, said to the
broker, ' Art thou mad, that thou wouldst sell me to this
worn-out old man ? Am I cotton refuse or threadbare
tags that thou marchest me about from graybeard to gray-
beard, each like a wall ready to fall or an Afrit smitten
down of a [shooting] star? As for the first, the poet had
him in mind when he said :

' I sought of a fair maid to kiss her lips of coral red, But, " No, by
Him who fashioned things from nothingness !" she said.

"Unto the white of hoary hairs I never had a mind, And shall my
mouth be stuffed, forsooth, with cotton, ere I'm dead?" 1

And how goodly is the saying of the poet :

They say that hoary hair is as a shining light, The face with venerance

and lustre that doth dight ;
Yet, till the writ of eld appear upon my crown, I hope I may not lack

o' the colour of the night.
Although the beard of him, who's hoary grown, should be His book E

i' the world to come, I would not choose it white.

And yet goodlier is the saying of another :

A guest unhonoured on my head hath stolen by surprise, With my side-
locks the sword than he had dealt on milder wise.

Begone from me, O whiteness foul, wherein no whiteness 8 is ! Indeed,
than very darkness' self thou'rt blacker in mine eyes.

As for the other, he is a reprobate and & lewd fellow

1 Alluding to the Muslim custom of closing the apertures of the body
with cotton wool, before buriaL

2 The Muslims believe that to each man will be given, on the Day of
Judgment, a book containing a record of all the actions of his life.
The book of the righteous will be white, and they will receive it in their
right hands ; but the wicked man's book will be black and he will
receive it in his left hand.

8 A play on the double meaning ("whiteness" and "lustre") of the
word bey ads.


95


and a blaclcener of the face of hoariness ] he acts the
foulest of lies ; and the tongue of his case reciteth the
following verses :

Quoth she to me, "I see thou dy'st thy hoariness ;" and I, "I do but
hide it from thy sight, O thou mine ear and eye ! "

She laughed out mockingly and said, "A wonder 'tis indeed ! Thou so
aboundest in deceit that even thy hair's a lie."

And how excellent is the saying of the poet :

© thou with black that dyest thy hoariness, that so Lost youth with

thee may tarry or come to thee once mo',
Of old my worldly portion was dyed in grain with black ; 'Twill never

fade, believe me, nor other-coloured grow.'

When the old man with the dyed beard heard this, he
was exceeding wroth and said to the broker, ' O most
ill-omened of brokers, what aileth thee to bring this crack-
brained wench into our market, to gibe at all who are
therein, one after other, and flout them with mocking
verses and idle jests?' And he came down from his shop
and smote the broker on the face. So he took her and
carried her away, in a rage, saying to her, ' By Allah,
never in my life saw I a more impudent wench than
thyself! Thou hast spoilt my trade and thine own this
day and all the merchants will bear me a grudge on thine
account.'

Then they saw in the way a merchant called Shihab-
eddin, who bid ten dinars more for her, and the broker
asked her leave to sell her to him. Quoth she, ' Let me
see him and question him of a certain thing, which if he
have in his house, I will be sold to him ; and if not, not.'
So the broker left her standing there and going up to
Shihabeddin, said to him, ( my lord, know that yonder
damsel tells me she hath a mind to ask thee of somewhat,
which if thou have in thy house, she will be sold to thee.
Now thou hast heard what she said to thy fellows the


!KF{Q|)t [other] merchants, and by Allah, I fear to bring her to
Uztxhxu. thee, lest she do with thee like as she did with thy neigh-
bours and so I fall into disgrace with thee : but, if thou
bid me bring her to thee, I will do so.' Quoth the
merchant, ' Bring her to me.' ' I hear and obey,' answered
the broker and fetched the damsel, who looked at him
and said, ' O my lord Shihabeddin, hast thou in thy house
cushions stuffed with minever parings?' 6 Yes, O princess
oi fair ones,' replied Shihabeddin, 'I have half a score
such cushions at home j but I conjure thee by Allah, tell
me, what wilt thou do with them ? ' Quoth she, 4 1 will
wait till thou be asleep, when I will lay them on thy mouth
and nose [and press on them] till thou die.*

Then she turned to the broker and said to him, 8 O
filthiest of brokers, meseemeth thou art mad, for that, this
hour past, thou showest me, first to a pair of graybeards,
in each of whom are two faults,,, and then to my lord
Shihabeddin here, in whom are three defects ; first, he is
short of stature ; secondly, he hath a big nose, and thirdly,
he hath a long beard. Of him quoth one of the poets :

Ne'er saw we in our lives nor heard of such a wight, Of all that live and

be beneath the sun his light :
A beard a cubit long and nose a span he hath, Whilst he himself is but

& finger's breadth in height.

And quoth another poet ;

The mosque's minaret from his visage doth spring, As the ring-fmgei

juts from the round of the ring.
If all it could house were to enter his nose, The world were soon void oi

each creature and thing.*

When Shihabeddin heard this, he came down from hm
ghop and seized the broker by the collar, saying, ' O
scurviest of brokers, what ails thee to bring us a damsel
to flout and make mock of us, one after other, with idle
talk and verses? 5 So the broker took her and carried


97


her away from before him, saying, 1 By Allah, all my life
long, since I have plied this craft, I never set eyes on the
like of thee for unmannerliness nor aught more curst to me
than thy star, for thou hast cut off my livelihood this day
and I have gained nought by thee save cuffs on the neck
and taking by the collar!' Then he brought her to the
shop of another merchant, owner of slaves and servants,
and stationing her before him, said to her, 'Wilt thou be
sold to this my lord Alaeddin ? ' She looked at him and
seeing him to be humpbacked, said, 'This fellow is a
hunchback, and quoth the poet of him :

Shoulders drawn in and spine thrust out, 'twould seem as if to find A

star that Satan promised him, indeed, he had a mind j
Or as the first stroke of a whip he'd tasted of and stood Still for amaze,
whilst of the stroke to come he felt the wind*

And saith another :

Whene'er a hunchback mounts a mule, straightway A laughing-stock to

all mankind are they.
Is he not laughable ? So marvel not li she take fright with him and

run away.

And another %

A hunchback often foulness adds to his deformity, And ail men's eyes

upon the wight look with antipathy ;
As 'twere a dry distorted branch, whose citrons, perched upon Its back,

have bowed it to the ground, for length of days, is he.'

With this the broker hurried up to her and carrying her
to another merchant, said to her, f Wilt thou be sold to
this man ? ' She looked at him and said, ' This man is
blue-eyed ; how wilt thou sell me to him ? Quoth one
of the poets of him :

Ophthalmia's disorders him ply ; They have broken his strength dc*
well nigh.

O people, I rede yon arise And look at the mote in his eye/

VOL. VIII. f


98


Then the broker carried her to another and she looked
at him and seeing that he had a long beard, said to the
broker, ' Out on thee ! This is a ram, whose tail has
sprouted from his gullet. Wilt thou sell me to him, O
unluckiest of brokers? Hast thou not heard that all
long-bearded men are little of wit ? Indeed, after the
measure of the length of the beard is the lack of
understanding; and this is a well-known thing among
men of sense. As saith one of the poets :

No man, whose beard is long, although he gain some whit In gravity of

mien and dignity by it,
There lives, but every inch that's added to his beard In length the like

thereof is taken from his wit.

And quoth another :

I have a friend, who hath a beard that God Caused flourish without

profit, till, behold, '
"Tis, as it were, to look upon, a night Of middle winter, long and dark

and cold.'

With this the broker took her and turned away with
her, and she said to him, ' Whither goest thou with me ? '
' Back to thy master the Persian,' answered he ; ' it suffices
me what hath befallen me because of thee this day ; for
thou hast spoilt both my trade and his by thine un-
mannerliness.' Then she looked about the market right
and left and front and rear, till, as fate would have it,
her eyes fell on Ali Noureddin. So she looked at him
and saw him to be a comely youth, fourteen years old,
like the moon on the night of its full, surpassing in beauty
and loveliness and elegance and amorous grace, smooth-
faced and slender-shaped, with flower-white forehead and
rosy cheeks, neck like alabaster and teeth like jewels *«id
spittle sweeter than sugar s even as saith of him one of
his describers; :


99


Full moons and fawns with him conclusions came to try In beauty and

in grace ; but 4 Soft ! ' to them quoth I.
' Forbear, gazelles ; indeed, ye are no match for him ; And sp&Je your

pains, O moons, 'tis vain with him to vie.

And how well saith another :

A slender one, from his brows and the night of his jetty hair, Mankind

in alternate gloom and splendour of light do fare.
Blame not the mole on his cheek ; is an anemone's cup Perfect, except

in its midst an eyelet of black it bear?

When she saw him he interposed between her and her tNHQfjt
wit ; the love of him gat stark hold upon her soul and her foCCCfocfCf
heart was taken with passion for him ; so she turned to
the broker and said to him, 'Will not yonder young
merchant in the striped gown bid for me?' 'O lady of
fair ones,' replied the broker, ' yonder young man is a
stranger from Cairo, where his father is chief of the
merchants and hath the pass over all the merchants and
notables of the place. He is but lately come to our city
and lodgeth with one of his father's friends; but he hath
made no bid for thee, more nor less.'

When she heard this, she drew from her finger a ruby
ring of price and said to the broker, ' Carry me to yonder
youth, and if he buy me, this ring shall be thine, in re-
quital of thy toil with me this day.' The broker rejoiced
at this and brought her up to Noureddin, and she con-
sidered him straitly and found him like the full moon,
accomplished in grace and elegance and symmetry, even
as saith of him one of his describers :

The waters of grace in his visage run clear And his glances cast arrows

at all who draw near :
Sweet his favours, but lovers still choke, if he give Them to drink of

the gall of his rigours austere.
His brow is perfection, perfection his shape. And my love is perfection,,

so true and sincere.


IOO


The folds of his raiment the new moon 1 enclose ; From his collars she

rises, as if from a sphere.
His eyes and his moles and my tears are as nights Upon nights upon

nights, full of blackness and fear ;
And his eyebrows and face and my body 2 new moon On new moon oa

new moon to the aspect appear.
His eyes fill his lovers a goblet of wise, Which, though bitter, is sweet

to my sorrowful cheer.
With a smile of his mouth, on the day of delight, My thirst he allayed

with sweet water and clear.
My slaughter's with him ; ay, the shedding my blood Is thrice lawful

to him whom I tender so dear.


Then said she to Noureddin, ' God on thee, O my lord,
am I not handsome?' And he answered, *0 princess of
fair ones, is there in the world a goodlier than thou ? "
'Then why,' rejoined she, 'seest thou the other merchants
bid for me and art silent nor sayest a word neither addest
one dinar to my price? It would seem I please thee not,
O my lord ! ' Quoth he, ' O my lady, were I in mine own
land, I had bought thee with all that my hand possesseth
of good.' ' O my lord,' replied she, ' I would not have
thee buy me against thy will ; yet, didst thou but add some-
what to my price, it would comfort my heart, though thou
buy me not, so the merchants may say, "Were not this
girl handsome, yonder merchant of Cairo had not bidden
for her, for the people of Cairo are connoisseurs in slave-
girls.'"

Her words abashed Noureddin and he blushed and
said to the broker, 'How stand the biddings for her?'
'Her price hath reached nine hundred and sixty dinars/
answered he, ' besides brokerage. As for the Sultan's
dues, they fall on the seller.' Quoth Noureddin, 4 Let me
have her for a thousand dinars, price and brokerage/
And the damsel hastened to leave the broker, saying,


Le. his face.


s By reason of its leanness.


IOI


' I sell myself to this handsome young man for a thousand
dinars.' Quoth one, 'We sell to him;' and another, 'He
deserves her ; ' and a third, * Accursed, son of accursed, is
he who bids and does not buy 1 ' and a fourth, ' By Allah,
they befit one another!' Then, before Noureddin could
think, the broker fetched cadis and witnesses, who drew
up a contract of sale and purchase, which the broker
handed to Noureddin, saying, ' Take thy slave-girl and
may God make her a blessing to thee, for she beseemeth
none but thee and none but thou beseemeth her.' And
he recited the following verses :

Unto htm fair fortune all unbidden hies, Drags her skirts 1 to-him-ward

on obsequious wise.
None but she befitteth him and none but he Of the maid is worthy,

underneath the skies.

Noureddin was abashed before the merchants; so he
paid down the thousand dinars, that he had left with his
friend the druggist, and taking the girl, carried her to the
house in which the latter had lodged him. When she
entered and saw nothing but patched carpets and worn-
out rugs, she said to him, ' O my lord, have I no value in
thine eyes and am I not worthy that thou shouldst carry
me to thine own house wherein are thy goods, that thou
bringest me into thy servant's lodging? Why dost thou
not carry me to thy father's dwelling ? ' 'By Allah, O
princess of fair ones,' answered he, 'this is my house
wherein I dwell ; but it belongs to an old man, a druggist
of this city, who hath set it apart for me and lodged me
therein. I told thee that I was a stranger and that I am
of the people of Cairo.' ' O my lord,' rejoined she, ' the
least of houses will serve till thy return to thy native
place ; but, God on thee, O my lord, go now and fetch

1 i.e. in the dejected humble manner of a slave. " To drag the skirts B
is an Arab phrase practically equivalent to our 44 to hang the head."


102


us somewhat of roast meat and wine and fruit and dessert'
* By Allah, princess of fair ones,' answered he, ' I had
no money with me but the thousand dinars I paid down
to thy price f The few dirhems I had I spent yesterday.'
Quoth she, ' Hast thou no friend in the town, of whom
thou mayst borrow fifty dirhems and bring them to me,
that I may tell thee what thou shalt do therewith ? ' And
he said, £ I have no friend but the druggist/

Then he betook himself forthright to the druggist and
said to hirn, ' Peace be on thee, O uncle ! ' He returned
his salutation and said to him, ' O my son, what hast thou
bought for a thousand dinars this day ? ' 'I have bought
a slave-girl,' answered Noureddin. 'O my son,' rejoined
the old man, 'art thou mad that thou givest a thousand
dinars for one slave-girl ? What kind of slave-girl is she ? '
^Tffljjt ' She is a damsel of the children of the Franks,' replied
uTCClxXtb. Noureddin and the druggist said, my son, the best of
the girls of the Franks are to be had in this town for
a hundred dinars, and by Allah, they have put a cheat
on thee in the matter of this damsel ! However, if thou
hast a mind to her, lie with her this night and do thy will
of her and to-morrow morning go down with her to the
market and sell her, though thou lose two hundred dinars
by her, and put it that thou hast been robbed of them or
lost them by shipwreck.' 'Thou sayst well, O uncle,'
replied Noureddin ; ' but thou knowest that I had but the
thousand dinars wherewith I bought the damsel, and now
I have not a single dirhem left to spend ; so I desire of
thy favour and goodness that thou lend me fifty dirhems,
to provide me withal, till to-morrow, when I will sell her
and repay thee out of her price.' ' Willingly, O my son,'
said the old man and counted out to him the fifty dirhems.

Then he said to him, ' O my son, thou art young and
the damsel is fair, and belike thy heart will be taken with
her and it will be grievous to thee to part from her. Now


thou hast nothing to live on and the fifty dirhems will
[soon] be spent and thou wilt come to me and I shall
lend thee once or twice and thrice and so on up to ten
times ; but, if thou come to me after this, I will not return
thee the legal salutation 1 and our friendship with thy
father will come to nought.' Noureddin took the fifty
dirhems and returned with them to the damsel, who said
to him, 'O my lord, go straight to the market and fetch
me twenty dirhems' worth of silk of five colours and with
the other thirty buy meat and bread and wine and fruit
and flowers.' So he went to the market and buying her
all she sought, returned to her therewith, whereupon she
rose and tucking up her sleeves, cooked food after the
most skilful fashion, and set it before him. He ate and
she ate with him, till they had enough, after which she
set on the wine, and they drank, and she ceased not to ply
him with drink and entertain him with talk, till "lie became
drunken and fell asleep : whereupon she arose and taking
out of her budget a sachet of Taift leather, 2 opened it and
brought out a pair of knitting-pins, with which she fell to
work and stinted not, till she had made a beautiful girdle.
She cleaned it and ironed it and folding it in a piece of
rag, laid it under the pillow.

Then she put off her clothes and lying down beside
Noureddin, kneaded him till he awoke and found by his
side a girl like virgin silver, softer than silk and more
delicate than a fat sheep's tail, more conspicuous than
a standard 3 and goodlier than the red camels, 1 low of
stature, with swelling breasts, eyes like gazelles' eyes
and brows like bended bows and cheeks like blood-red
anemones, slender belly, full of dimples, and a navel

1 i.e. the greeting of " Peace be on thee ! " due from one Muslim to

another.

2 i.e. scented leather of Et Taif. See supra, note, p. 72.

8 Syn. waymark. * 8 e. the best kind of camels,


104

holding an ounce of benzoin ointment, thighs like bolsters
stuffed with ostrich down, and between them what the
tongue fails to describe and at mention whereof the tears
pour forth. Indeed it seemed as it were she to whom the
poet alludes in the following verses :

Her hair is night, her forehead day, her cheeks a blossomed rose And
wine the honeyed dews wherewith her mouth for ever flows.

Heaven in her favours is and hell in her disdain ; her teeth Are very
pearls and in her face the moon at full doth glow.

And how excellent is another's saying :

She shineth forth, a moon, and bends, a willow-wand, And breathes out

ambergris and gazes, a gazelle.
Meseems as if grief loved my heart and when from her Estrangement I

abide, possession to it felL
She hath a face outshines the very Pleiades And brows whose lustre

doth the crescent moon exceL

And quoth a third :

Unveiled, new moons they shine, and all displayed, like moons at full,
They burn : like boughs they sway, and eke like antelopes they turn :

And in their midst's a black-eyed maid, for whose sweet beauty's sake,
To be the earth whereon she treads the Pleiades would yearn.

So he turned to her and pressing her to his bosom,
sucked first her under lip and then her upper lip and slid
his tongue into her mouth. Then he rose to her and
found her an unpierced pearl and a filly that none but
he had mounted. So he did away her maidenhead and
had of her the amorous delight and there was contracted
between them love that might never know breach nor
severance. He rained down kisses upon her cheeks, like
the falling of pebbles into water, and beset her with stroke
upon stroke, like the thrusting of spears in the mellay ; for
that Noureddin still yearned after clipping of necks and
sucking of lips and letting down of tresses and pressing
of waists and biting of cheeks and pinching of breasts s


with Cairene motitations and Yemani wrigglings and
Abyssinian sobbings and Hindi torsions and Nubian
lasciviousness and Rifi 1 leg-liftings and Damiettan grunt-
ings and Upper Egyptian heat and Alexandrian languor,
and this damsel united in herself all these attributes,
together with excess of beauty and amorous grace ; and
indeed she was even as saith of her the poet :

By Allah, I will never all my life long forget her, my dear, And thosa

only will I tender who shall bring her to me to draw near 1
Now glory to her Maker and Creator be given evermore ! As the full

moon of the heavens in her aspect and her gait she doth appear.
Though my sin, indeed, be sore and my offending in loving her be great,

I know repentance not, whilst of her favours a hope to me be clear.
She, indeed, hath made me weariful and wakeful, full of sorrow, sick

for love : Yea, my heart is all confounded at her beauty, dazed for

trouble and for fear;
And I go a line of verse for e'er repeating that none knoweth 'mongsfc

the folk Save the man who rhymes and verses hath recited and

studied many a year.
"None knoweth of love-longing save he only who hath its pains endured

And none but he can tell the taste of passion, who's proved its woe

and cheer.

So Noureddin lay with the damsel in solace and delight, 2Cf($t
clad in the strait-linked garments of embracement, secure tfCCClxxfe,
against the accidents of night and day, and they passed
the night after the goodliest fashion, fearing not, in love-
delight, abundance of talk and prate. As says of them
the right excellent poet :

Cleave fast to her thou lov'st and let the envious rail amain ; For calumny

and envy ne'er to favour love were fain.
LOj the Compassionate hath made no fairer thing to see Than when one

couch in its embrace enfoldeth lovers twain,
Each to the other's bosom clasped, clad in their own delight, Whilst

hand with hand and arm with arm about their necks enchain.

1 The Rif is the north-west coast of Morocco, formerly celebrated s&
the habitat of the famous Rif pirates. According to D'Herbelot, Lower
Egypt also bears the name of Er Rif


io6

Lo, when two hearts are straitly knit in passion and desire, But on cold

iron smite the folk that chide at them in vain.
Thou that for loving censurest the votaries of love, Canst thou assain a

mind diseased or heal a cankered brain ?
If in thy time thou find but one to love thee and be true, I rede thee

cast the world away and with that one remain.

When the morning appeared and gave forth its light
and shone, Noureddin awoke from sleep and found that
she had brought water: 1 so they washed, he and she, and
he acquitted that which behoved him of prayer to his
Lord, after which she brought him meat and drink, and
he ate and drank. Then she put her hand under her
pillow and pulling out the girdle, gave it to Noureddin,
who said, 'Whence cometh this girdle?' 'O my lord/
answered she, 'it is the silk thou boughtest yesterday
for twenty dirhems. Rise now and go to the Persian
bazaar and give it to the broker, to cry for sale, and sell
it not for less than twenty dinars, money down.' ' O
princess of fair ones,' said Noureddin, ' how can a thing,
that cost twenty dirhems and will sell for as many dinars,
be made in a single night ? ' ' O my lord,' replied she,
' thou knowest not its value ; but go to the market and
give it to the broker, and when he cries it, its worth will
appear to thee.'

So he carried the girdle to the market and gave it to
the broker, bidding him cry it, whilst he himself sat down
on a bench before a shop. After awhile, the broker
returned and said to him, ' O my lord, rise and take the
price of thy girdle, for it hath fetched twenty dinars.'
When Noureddin heard this, he marvelled exceedingly
and shook with delight. Then he rose, between belief and
disbelief, to take the money and when he had received it,
he spent it all on silk of various colours and returning
Some, gave the silk to the damsel, saying, 8 Make this a!!
1 For the complete ablution obligatory after copulation*


io7

into girdles and teach me likewise how to make them,
that I may work with thee ; for never in my life saw I a
goodlier craft than this nor a more abounding in profit.
By Allah, it is a thousand times better than the trade of
a merchant!' She laughed and said, 'Go to thy friend
the druggist and borrow other thirty dirhems of him, and
to-morrow pay him the whole eighty from the price of
the girdle.'

So he repaired to the druggist and sak. to him, ' O
uncle, lend me other thirty dirhems, and to-morrow, God
willing, I will repay thee the whole fourscore.' The old
man counted him out thirty dirhems, with which he went
to the market and buying meat and bread and dessert and
fruit and flowers as before, carried them home to the
damsel, whose name was Meryem, the girdle-maker. She
rose forthright and making ready rich meats, set them
before Noureddin ; after which she brought -wine, and they
drank and plied each other with liquor. When the wine
began to sport with their senses, his beauty and grace
pleased her and the elegance of his manners, and she
recited the following verses :

Unto a slender one, who with a goblet came With musk from out his

breath perfumed, to give it zest,
Quoth I, ' Was't not exprest from out thy cheeks ? ' But 8 Nay,' He

answered ; ' when was wine from roses yet exprest ? '

And she ceased not to carouse with him and ply him
with wine and require of him that he should fill to her and
give her to drink of that which sweetens the spirits, and
whenever he laid his hand on her, she drew back from
him, out of coquetry. The wine added to her beauty and
grace, and Noureddin recited these verses :

A slender one, desiring wine, unto her lover said, In an assembly, whenas

he did sickness for her dread,
' An if thou give me not to drink, I'll banish thee my bed This night s "

wherefore he feared and filled to her the vine-juice recL


io8

They gave not over drinking till drunkenness got the
mastery of Noureddin and he slept ; whereupon she rose
and fell to work upon a girdle, according to her wont.
When she had wrought it to end, she wrapped it in paper
3$ (ijfjt and putting off her clothes, lay down by his side, and they
SCCClxffat. passed the night in dalliance and delight.

On the morrow, she gave him the girdle and bade him
carry it to the market and sell it for twenty dinars, like as
he had sold its fellow the day before. So he went to the
market and sold the girdle for twenty dinars, after which
he repaired to the druggist and paid him back the four-
score dirhems, thanking him for his bounties and calling
down blessings upon him. ' O my son,' said he, ' hast
thou sold the damsel?' 'Wouldst thou have me sell the
soul out of my body?' answered Noureddin and told him
all that had passed, whereat the druggist was mightily
pleased and said to him, ' By Allah, O my son, thou
rejoicest me i So God please, mayst thou still abide in
prosperity ! Indeed I wish thee well by reason of my
affection for thy father and the continuance of our friend-
ship.' Then he took leave of him and going to the
market, bought meat and fruit and wine and all that he
needed, as of wont, and returned therewith to Meryem.

They abode thus a whole year in eating and drinking
and sport and merriment and love and good cheer, and
every night she made a girdle and he sold it on the
morrow for twenty dinars, wherewith he bought what
they needed and gave the rest to her, to keep against a
time of need. After this, she said to him one day, ' O
my lord, when thou sellest the girdle to-morrow, buy me
silk of six colours with its price, for I have a mind to
make thee a kerchief, to wear on thy shoulders, such as
never son of merchant, no, nor king's son, ever rejoiced
in its fellow.' So next day he brought her what she
sought and she wrought at the kerchief a whole week ;


109


for, every night, when she had made an end of the girdle,
she would work awhile at the kerchief. When it was
finished, she gave it to Noureddin, who put it on his
shoulders and went out to walk in the market, whilst all
the merchants and people and notables of the town
crowded about him, to gaze on his beauty and that of
the kerchief.

One night, after this, he awoke from sleep and found
Meryem weeping passing sore and reciting the following
verses :

The severance of friends draws near and nearer aye: Alas for severance !

Alas, the parting day !
My heart is rent in twain, and O ray grief for those The nights of our

delight that now are past away !
Needs must the envier look on us with evil eye And come to his desire

of that he doth essay ;
For nought can irk us more than envy and the eyes Qf backbiters and

spies, nor work us more dismay.

4 O my lady Meryem,' said he, ' what ails thee to weep ? '
' I weep for the anguish of parting/ answered she ; ' for
my heart forebodes me thereof.' Quoth he, 'O lady of
fair ones, and who shall part us, seeing that I love and
tender thee above all creatures ? ' And she replied, ' And
I love thee twice as well as thou me ; but [blind] con-
fidence in fortune still causes folk fall into affliction, and
right well saith the poet :

Thou thoughtest well of Fate, whilst yet the days for thee were fair,

And fearedst riot the unknown ills that destiny might bring.
The nights were calm and safe for thee ; thou wast deceived by them ;

For in the peace of night betides full many a troublous thing.
Lo, in the skies are many stars, no one can tell their tale ; But to the

sun and moon alone eclipse brings darkening.
The earth bears many a pleasant herb and many a plant and tree ; But

none is stoned save only that to which the fair fruits cling.
Seest not the sea and how the waifs float up upon the foam ? But in its

deepest depths of blue the pearls have sojourning.


no


my lord Noureddin,' added she, ' if thou desire to
avert separation, be on thy guard against a swart-visaged,
bushy-bearded old Frank, blind of the right eye and lame
of the left leg ; for he it is who will be the cause of our
separation. I saw him enter the city [to-day] and me-
thinks he is come hither in quest of me.' ' O lady of fair
ones,' replied Noureddin, 1 if my eyes light on him, I will
slay him and make an example of him.' 'O my lord,'
rejoined she, ' slay him not ; but talk not nor trade with
him, neither buy nor sell with him nor sit nor walk with
him nor speak one word to him, no, not even to make the
prescribed answer, 1 and I pray God to keep us from his
craft and mischief ! '

Next mourning, Noureddin carried the girdle to the
market, where he sat down on a bench before a shop and
talked with the young merchants, till drowsiness overcame
him and he lay down on the bench and fell asleep. Pre-
sently, up came the Frank whom the damsel had described
to him, in company of seven others, and seeing Noureddin
lying asleep on the bench, with his head wrapped in the
kerchief which Meryem had made him and the end thereof
in his hand, sat down by him and took the end of the
kerchief in his hand and examined it This disturbed
Noureddin and he awoke and seeing the very man sitting
by him of whom Meryem had warned him, cried out at
him with a great cry, that startled him. Quoth the Frank,
'What ails thee to cry out thus at us? Have we taken
aught from thee ? ' 'By Allah, O accursed one,' replied
Noureddin, ' hadst thou taken aught from me, I would hale
thee before the master of police S '

Then said the Frank, ' O Muslim, I conjure thee by thy
faith and by that in which thou believest, tell me whence

1 i.e. to the salutation obligator}' between Muslims. 59 And on ik&&
be peace and the mercy of God and His blessings ! "


Ill

thou hadst that kerchief.' And Noureddin answered, ' It "Kftgijt
is the handiwork of my mother, who made it for me with tiCCChdbu.
her own hand.' 'Wilt thou sell it to me?' asked the
Frank. ' By Allah, O accursed one,' replied Noureddin,
1 1 will not sell it to thee nor to any other, for she made
none other than it.' ' Sell it to me,' repeated the Frank,
'and I will give thee to its price five hundred dinars ready
money; and let her who made it make thee another and
a handsomer.' But Noureddin said, ' I will not sell it at
all, for there is not the like of it in this city.' ' O my
lord,' insisted the Frank, 'wilt thou sell it for six hundred
dinars of fine gold ? ' And he went on to add to his offer
hundred by hundred, till he bid nine hundred dinars ; but
Noureddin said, ' God will provide me otherwise than by
my selling it. I will never sell it, no, not for two thousand
dinars nor more than that'

Then the Frank went on to tempt him with money, till
he bid him a thousand dinars, and the merchants present
said, : We sell thee the kerchief at that price : pay down
the money.* Quoth Noureddin, ' By Allah, I will not sell
it!' But one of the merchants said to him, ' O my son,
the worth of this kerchief is a hundred dinars at most and
that to an eager purchaser, and if this Frank pay thee
down a thousand for it, thy profit will be nine hundred
dinars, and what profit canst thou desire greater than
that ? Wherefore it is my counsel that thou sell him the
kerchief at that price and gain nine hundred dinars by
this accursed Frank, the enemy of God and of the faith,
and bid her who wrought it make thee other or handsomer
than it.'

Noureddin was abashed at the merchants and sold the
kerchief to the Frank, who, in their presence, paid him
down the thousand dinars, with which he would have
returned to Meryem, to tell her what had passed ; but
the stranger saicL, ' Harkye, O company of merchants, stop


212


my lord Noureddin, for you and he are my guests this
night. I have a pitcher of old Greek wine and a. fat
lamb and fruit and flowers and confections ; wherefore
needs must ye all cheer me with your company to-night
and not one of you tarry behind.' So the merchants said
to Noureddin, ' O my lord Noureddin, we desire that thou
be with us on the like of this night, so we may talk
together, we and thou, and we pray thee, of thy favour, to
bear us company, so we may be, we and thou, the guests
of this Frank, for he is a hospitable man.' And they
conjured him by the oath of divorce and hindered him by
force from going home.

Then they rose forthright and shutting up their shops,
took Noureddin and went with the Frank, who brought
them to a goodly and spacious saloon, wherein were two
estrades. Here he made them sit and laid before them
[a tray covered with] a scarlet clgth of rare and goodly
workmanship, wroughten in gold with figures of breaker
and broken, lover and beloved, asker and asked, whereon
he set precious vessels of porcelain and crystal, full of the
costliest fruits and flowers and confections, and brought
them a pitcher of old Greek wine. Then he commanded
to slaughter a fat lamb and kindling fire, proceeded to
roast of its flesh and feed the merchants therewith and
give them to drink of the wine, winking them the while
to ply Noureddin with liquor. So they plied him with
wine till he became drunken and took leave of his wits,
which when the Frank saw, he said to him, 'O my lord
Noureddin, thou gladdenest us with thy company to-night s
welcome, a thousand times welcome to thee ! '

Then he drew near unto him and dissembled with him
awhile in talk, till he [found his opportunity and] said to
him, ' O my lord, wilt thou sell me thy slave-girl, whom
thou boughtest a year ago for a thousand dinars, in pre-
sence of these merchants ? i will give thee five thousand


s 1 3 .

dinars for her and thou wilt thus make four thousand
dinars profit. Noureddin refused, but the Frank ceased
not to ply him with meat and drink and tempt him with
money, still adding to his offers, till he bid him ten
thousand dinars for her; whereupon Noureddin, in his
drunkenness, said, in the presence of the merchants, 4 1
sell her to thee for ten thousand dinars : hand over the
money.' At this the Frank rejoiced mightily and took the
merchants to witness of the sale.

They passed the night in eating and drinking and
making merry, till the morning, when the Frank cried
out to his servants, saying, * Bring me the money.' So
they brought it to him and he counted out ten thousand
dinars to Noureddin, saying, ' O my lord, take the price
of thy slave-girl, whom thou soldest to me last night, in
the presence of these Muslim merchants.' 'Thou liest,
O accursed one/ replied Noureddin. *A sold thee
nothing and have no slave-girls.' Quoth the Frank,
'Verily thou didst sell her to me and these merchants
were witnesses to the bargain' ' Yes,' said they all,
'thou soldest him thy slave-girl before us for ten thousand
dinars, O Noureddin. and we will all bear witness against
thee of the sale. Come, take the money and deliver him
the girl, and God will give thee a better than she in her
stead. Doth it mislike thee, Noureddin, that thou
boughtest the girl for a thousand dinars and hast enjoyed
her beauty and grace and taken thy fill of her company
and converse night and day for a year and a half, wherein
thou hast gained half a score thousand dinars by the sale
of the girdle which she made thee every day and thou
soldest for twenty dinars, and after all this thou hast sold
her again at a profit of nine thousand dinars over and
above her original price ? And withal thou deniest the
sale and belittlest the profit ! What gain is greater than
this gain and what profit wouldst thou have greater than
VOL. vm. 8


114


this? If thou love her, thou hast had thy fill of her all
this time : so take the money and buy another handsomer
than she ; or we will marry thee to one of our daughters,
lovelier than she, at a dowry of less than half this price,
and the rest of the money will remain in thy hand as
capital' And they ceased not to ply him with per-
suasion and argument till he took the ten thousand
dinars, the price of the damsel, and the Frank straight-
way fetched Cadis and witnesses, who drew up the contract
of sale.

Meanwhile, Meryem sat awaiting Noureddin from morn-
ing till sundown and from sundown till midnight ; and
when he returned not, she was troubled and wept sore.
The druggist heard her weeping and sent his wife to her 5
who went in to her and finding her in tears, said to her s
' O my lady, what ails thee to weep ? ' ' O my mother,'
answered she, ' I have sat awaiting my lord Noureddin all
day ; but he cometh not, and I fear lest some one have
put a cheat on him, to make him sell me, and he havf
XtcdK fallen into the snare and sold me.' ' O my lady Meryem,
toclxxbtl't, rejoined the druggist's wife, 'were they to give thy lord
this room full of gold to thy price, yet would he not sell
thee, for what I know of his love to thee. Belike there
be folk come from his parents at Cairo and he hath made
them an entertainment in their lodging, being ashamed
to bring them hither, for that the place is overstrait for
them or maybe their condition is less than that he should
bring them to his own house; or belike he preferred to
conceal thine affair from them, so passed the night with
them ; and if it be the will of God the Most High,
to-morrow he will come to thee, safe and well. So
burden not thy soul with care nor anxiety, O my lady s
for of a certainty this is the cause of his absence from
thee and I will abide with thee this night and comfoi',
thee, till thy lord return.'


U5


So she abode with her and cheered her with talk till the
morning, when Meryera saw Noureddin enter the street,
followed by the Frank and a company of merchants,
whereupon she trembled in every nerve and her colour
changed and she fell a-shaking, as the ship shakes in
mid-ocean for the violence of the wind. When the
druggist's wife saw this, she said to her, 1 Q my lady
Meryem, what ails thee that I see thy case changed and
thy face grown pale and disfeatured?' ' By Allah, O my
mother,' replied she, ' my heart forebodeth me of parting
and severance of union ! ' And she bemoaned herself
and sighed heavily, reciting the following verses :

Incline not to parting, I pray ; For bitter its savour is aye.
E'en the sun at his setting turns pale, To think he must part from the
day ;

And so, at his rising, for joy Of reunion, he's radiant and gay.

Then she wept passing sore, making sure of separation,
and said to the druggist's wife, ' O my mother, said I not
to thee that my lord Noureddin had been tricked into
selling me ? I doubt not but he hath sold me this night
to yonder Frank, albeit I bade him beware of him ; but
precaution availeth not against destiny. So the truth of
my words is made manifest to thee.' Whilst they were
talking, in came Noureddin, and she looked at him and
saw that his colour was changed and that he trembled
and there appeared on his face signs of grief and repent-
ance : so she said to him, ' O my lord Noureddin,
meseemeth thou hast sold me.' Whereupon he wept
sore and groaned and lamented and recited the following
verses :

Twas Fate, and talcing thought avails not anything ; If thou en', it «rrs

not in its foreordering.
When God upon a man endowed with hearing, sight And reasoning.

His will in aught to pass would bring,


n6

He stops his ears and blinds his eyes and draws his wit From hiirt, as

one draws out the hairs to paste that cling,
Till, His decrees fulfilled, He gives him back his wit, That therewithal

he may receive admonishing.
Say not of aught that haps, ' How happened it?' For fate And fortune

fore-ordained do order everything.

Then he began to excuse himself to her, saying, * O my
lady Meryem, verily the pen runneth with what God hath
decreed. The folk put a cheat on me, to make me sell
thee, and I fell into the snare and sold thee. Indeed, I
have sorely failed of my duty to thee ; but perad venture
He who decreed our parting will vouchsafe us reunion. 1 '
Quoth she, ' I warned thee against this, for this it was I
feared.' Then she strained him to her bosom and kissed
him between the eyes, reciting the following verses :

Nay, by your love, I'll ne'er forget the troth betwixt us plight, Though
my life perish for desire and yearning for your sight.

E'en as the ringdove doth lament upon the sandhills' trees, So will 1
weep for you and wail all tides of day and night.

My life is troubled after you, beloved : since from me You're gone, eo
meeting-place have I nor sojourn of delight.

At this juncture, the Frank came in to them and weat
up to Meryem, to kiss her hands ; but she dealt him a
buffet on the cheek, saying, * Avaunt, O accursed one !
Thou hast followed after me without cease, till thou hast
tricked my lord into selling me ! But please God, all
shall yet be well.' The Frank laughed at her speech and
wondered at her deed and excused himself to her, saying,
4 O my lady Meryem, what is my offence ? Thy lord
Noureddin here sold thee of his full consent and of his
free will. Had he loved thee, by the virtue of the
Messiah., he had not transgressed against thee ! And
had he not accomplished his desire of thee, he had not
sold thee. Quoth one of the poets %


Whoso of me is weary, my presence let him flee: If e'er Again I nam®

him, to call me fool thou'rt free.
The world in all its wideness on me is not so strait That thorn shouldst

see me languish for who rejecteth me,'

Now this damsel was the daughter of the King of
France, the which is a wide and spacious city, 1 abound-
ing in arts and manufactures and rarities and trees and
flowers and other plants, and resembleth the city of
Constantinople: and for her going forth of her father's
city there was an extraordinary cause and thereby hangs
a rare story, that we will set out in due order, to divert INFtgfjt
and delight the reader. She was reared with her father t3£CCiJQCfX»
and mother in honour and indulgence and learnt rhetoric
and penmanship and arithmetic and martial exercises
and all manner crafts both of men and women, such as
broidery and sewing and weaving and girdle-making and
silk-cord making and enamelling gold on silver and silver
on gold, till she became the pearl of her time and the
unique [jewel] of her age and her day. Moreover, God
(to whom belong might and majesty) had endowed her
with such beauty and grace and elegance and perfection
that she excelled therein all the folk of her time, and the
kings of the isles sought her in marriage of her father, but
he refused to give her to wife to any of her suitors, for
that he loved her with an exceeding love and could not
brook to be parted from her an hour. Moreover, he had
no other daughter than herself, albeit he had many sons s
but she was dearer to him than they.

It chanced one year that she fell sick of an exceeding
sickness and came nigh upon death, wherefore she made
a vow that, if she recovered from her sickness, she would
make the pilgrimage to a certain monastery, situate in
such an island, which was high in repute among the
Franks, who used to make vows to it and look for &

1 Marseilles probably meant.


Ii8

blessing therefrom. When she was whole of her sickness,
she wished to accomplish her vow and her father de-
spatched her to the convent in a little ship, with sundry
knights and daughters of the chief men of the city to
wait upon her. As they drew near the island, there
came out upon them a ship of the ships of the Muslims,
champions of the faith, warring in the way of God, who
boarded the vessel and making prize of all who were
therein, sold their booty in the city of Cairawan. Meryem
herself fell into the hands of a Persian merchant, who was
impotent and for whom no woman had ever discovered
her nakedness; and he, set her to serve him.

Presently, he fell ill and sickened well-nigh unto death,
and the sickness abode with him two months, during
which time she tended him after the goodliest fashion,
till God made him whole of his malady, when he recalled
her loving-kindness to him and the zeal with which she
had tended him and being minded to requite her the good
offices she had done him, bade her ask a boon of him.
' O my lord,' said she, ' I ask of thee that thou sell me
not but to the man of my choice.' 'So be it,' answered
he, ' I grant thee this. By Allah, O Meryem, I will not
sell thee but to him of whom thou shalt approve, and
I put thy sale in thine own hand ! ' And she rejoiced
mightily in this. Now the Persian had expounded Islam
to her and she became a Muslim and learnt of him the
tenets and observances of the faith. Moreover, he made
her get the Koran by heart and taught her somewhat
of the theological sciences and the traditions of the
Prophet ; after which, he brought her to Alexandria and
sold her to Noureddin, as hath been before set out.

Meanwhile, when her father, the King of France, heard
what had befallen his daughter and her company, he was
sore concerned and despatched after her ships full of
knights and champions, horsemen and footmen : but they


ii9


all returned to him, crying out and saying, 'Alas!" and
1 Ruin ! ' and ' Woe worth the day : ' after having searched
the islands of the Muslims and come on no tidings of her.
The king grieved for her with an exceeding grief and sent
after her that one-eyed lameter, for that he was his chief
vizier, a stubborn tyrant and a froward devil, 1 full of craft
and guile, bidding him make search for her in all the
lands of the Muslims and buy her, though with a ship-
load of gold. So the accursed wretch sought her in all
the lands of the seas and all the cities of the Muslims,
but found no sign of her till he came to Alexandria, when
he discovered that she was with Noureddin Ali of Cairo,
being directed to the trace of her by the kerchief afore-
said, [in which he recognized her handiwork,] for that
none could have wrought it on such goodly wise but she.
Then he bribed the merchants to help him in getting her
from Noureddin and beguiled the latter into selling her,
as hath been already related.

When he had her in his possession, she ceased not to
weep and lament : so he said to her, ' O my lady Meryem,
put away from thee this mourning and weeping and return
with me to thy father's city, the seat of thy royalty and
the place of thy power and thy home, so thou mayst be
among thy servants and attendants and be quit of this
abasement and strangerhood. Enough hath betided me
of travel and weariness and expense on thine account, for
thy father bade me buy thee back, though with a shipload
of gold ; and now I have spent nigh a year and a half in
travel and toil and lavishment of wealth.' And he fell to
kissing her feet and hands and humbling himself to her ;
but she only redoubled in wrath against him, for all he

1 As has been before observed, these and the like epithets are used by
the Arabs in a complimentary sense, to denote a man who is a terror
and calamity to his enemies, by reason of Ms prowess and skill in war
and counsel.


120


could do to appease her, and said to him, * O accursed one,
may God the Most High not bring thee to thy desire ! '

Then his servants brought her a mule with gold-
embroidered housings and mounting her thereon, raised
over her head a silken canopy, with staves of gold and
silver, and the Franks walked about her, till they brought
her forth the city by the sea-gate, where they took boat
with her and rowing out to a great ship [that lay in the
harbour], embarked her therein. Then the vizier cried
out to the sailors, saying, ' Up with the mast ! ' So they
set up the mast and spreading the sails and the pendants,
manned the sweeps and put out to sea. Meryem con-
tinued to gaze upon Alexandria, till it disappeared from
!R(ctfH her eyes, when she fell a- weeping and lamenting passing
bCCdXAX sore and recited the following verses :

dwelling of the loved, shall there returning ever be To thee ? But

what know I of that which Allah shall decree ?
The ships of separation fare with us in haste away: Mine eyes are

blotted out with tears that flow unceasingly,
For severance from a friend, who was the end of my desire, With whom

my sicknesses were healed and pains effaced from me.
Be thou my substitute with him, O God ; for that which is Committed to

Thy charge one day shall not be lost with Thee.

The knights came up to her and would have comforted
her, but she heeded them not, being distracted with
passion and love-longing. And she wept and moaned and
complained and recited the following verses :

The tongue of passion in my heart bespeaketh thee of me And giveth
thee to know that I enamoured am of thee.

1 have a liver all consumed with passion's coals of fire, A heart, sore

wounded by thy loss, that throbs incessantly.
How shall I hide the love that burns my life away ? My lids Are ulcered
and my tears adown my cheeks for ever flee.

In this plight she abode during all the voyage; u&
peace was left her nor would patience come at her call.


121


Meanwhile, when the ship had sailed with Meiyem, the
world was straitened upon Noureddin and he had neither
peace nor patience. He returned to the lodging where
they had dwelt, he and she, and it appeared black and
gloomy in his sight. Then he saw the pins and silk with
which she had been wont to make the girdles and her
clothes that had been upon her body : so he pressed them
to his breast, whilst the tears streamed from his eyes and
he recited the following verses :

Will union after severance return to me some day, After my long-continued

tale of sorrow and dismay ?
Shall I with my love's company be ever blest again ? Now God forfend

that what is past should ne'er return I I say.
I wonder will He yet reknit our separated loves And will my dear ones

keep the troth we plighted, I and they ?
And will she yet preserve my love, whom of my ignorance I lost, and

guard our plighted troth and friendship from decay?
Since they departed, as one dead am I : will my belov'd Consent that

he who loves them dear should fall to death a prey ?
Alas, my sorrow 1 But lament the mourner profits not. For stress of

yearning and regret I'm melted all away.
Lost are the days of my delight : will Fortune e'er vouchsafe To me, I

wonder, my desire and so my pains allay ?

heart, redouble in desire and O mine eyes, o'erfiow With tears, till no t

a tear to weep within mine eyelids stay.
Alas for loved ones far away and patience lost to me ! My helpers fail

me and my woes full sorely on me weigh.
To God the Lord of all, that He vouchsafe me the return Of my belov'd

and our delight, as of old time, I pray.

Then he wept passing sore and looking about the place,
recited these verses also :

1 see their traces and pine for longing pain ; My tears rain down on the

empty dwelling-place ;
And I pray to God, who willed that we should part, One day to grant
us reunion, of His grace.

Then he rose and locking the door of the house, went


122


out, running, to the shore of the sea, where he fixed his
eyes on the place of the ship that had carried her off,
whilst sighs burst from his breast and he recited the
following verses :

Peace be upon thee ! Nought to me can compensate for thee : I'm in

two cases, near in thought, yet distant verily.
I long for thee each time and tide, even as a man athirst Longs for the

distant watering-place, that still from him doth flee.
With thee my hearing and my sight, my heart and spirit are : Thy

memory than honey's self is sweeter far to me.
O my despair, whenas your train departed and your ship Fared from the

vision of mine eyes with thee across the sea.

And he wept and wailed and bemoaned himself, crying
out and saying, 'O Meryem ! O Meryem ! Was it but
in sleep I saw thee or in the illusions of dreams ? ' And
by reason of that which waxed on him of regrets, he
recited these verses :

Shall mine eyes ever look on thee, after this parting's pain, And shall I

ever hear thy call by house and camp again?
And shall the house our presence cheered once more unite us two ? Shall

it my heart's desire and thine be given us to attain?
Take my bones with thee by the way and where thou lightest down, Bury

them near thee, so they may with thee for aye l'emain.
Had I a pair of hearts, with one I'd make a shift to live And leave the

other to consume for love of thee in vain ;
And if, ' What wouldst thou have of God ? ' 'twere asked of me, I'd say,

' Th' Almighty's favours first, then hers, my prayer to seek were fain.'

As he was in this case, weeping and crying out, ( O
Meryem ! ' an old man landed from a vessel and coming up
to him, saw him weeping and heard him recite these verses :

O Meryem of loveliness, 1 return to me again ; My eyeballs are as clouds

that pour with never-ceasing rain.
Do thou but ask, concerning me, of those at me that rail ; They'll tell

thee that my lids lie drowned within their fountains twain.

1 Meryem el Hum. This would appear to have been the girl's full
name, though elsewhere in the story she is called 6< Meryem " only


123


<0 my son,' said the old man, ' meseems thou weepes|
for the damsel who sailed yesterday with the Frank ? '
When Noureddin heard his words, he fell down in a
swoon and lay awhile without life; then, coining to
himself, he wept passing sore and recited the following
verses ;

Is union after severance with her past hoping for And will the perfect-

ness of cheer return to me no more ?
Anguish and love have taken up their lodging in my heart : The prate

and gabble of the spies and railers irks me sore.
I pass the day long; in amaze, confounded, and anights To visit me its

dreams of sleep her image I implore.
Never, by God, a moment's space am I for love consoled 1 How should

it be so, when my heart the envious doth abhor ?
A loveling, soft and delicate of sides and slim ol waist, She hath &

beaming eye, whose shafts are lodged in my heart's core.
Her shape is as the willow-wand i' the gardens and her grace For good-

liness outshames the sun and shines his splendour o'er.
Feared I not God (extolled be His majesty !) I'd say, ' Extolled be Her

majesty, the fair whom I adore !

The old man looked at him and noting his beauty
and grace and symmetry and the eloquence of his tongue
and the seductiveness of his charms, took compassion on
him and his heart mourned for his case. Now he was
the captain of a ship, bound to the damsel's city, and in
this ship were a hundred Muslim merchants: so he said
to Noureddin, ' Have patience and all shall yet be well ;
God willing, I will bring thee to her.' ' When shall we set 3Cf(r])t
out?' asked Noureddin, and the other said, 'Come butuXCClxnt
three days more and we will depart in peace and prosperity.'
Noureddin was mightily rejoiced at the captain's words

The usual form of the name (see Vol. III. p. 309) is Husn Meryem, i.e
the beauty of Mary. It would seem to have been manufactured by the
Arab story-tellers after the pattern of their own names {e.g. Noureddir%
light of the faith, Tajeddin, crown of the faith, etc.), for the use of their
Imaginary Christian female characters.


124


and thanked him for his bounty and kindness. Then he
recalled the days of love-delight and union with his slave-
girl without peer, and he wept sore and recited the

following verses :

Will the Compassionate, indeed, unite tts, me and thee, And shall I wic

to my desire by favouring Fate's decree?
And shall time's shifts vouchsafe me yet a visit from my fair And shall

mine eyelids seize upon thine image greedily ?
Were thine enjoyment to be bought, I'd buy it with my life. But thy

possession is, alack S too dear for me, I see.

Then he went to the market and bought what he needed
of victual and other necessaries for the voyage and re-
turned to the captain, who said to him, 'O my son, what
is that thou hast with thee ? ' 1 My provisions and that
whereof I have need for the voyage,' answered Noureddin.
' O my son,' said the old man, laughing, £ art thou going
a-pleasuring to Pompey s Pillar ? „ Verily, between thee
and that thou seekest is two months' journey, if the wind
be favourable aud the weather fair.' Then he took of
him somewhat of money and going to the market, bought
him all that he needed for the voyage and filled him a
cask with fresh water. Noureddin abode in the ship three
days, till the merchants had made an end of their prepara-
tions and embarked, when they set sail and putting out
to sea, fared on one-and-flfty days. After this, there came
out upon them corsairs, who sacked the ship and taking
Noureddin and the rest prisoners, carried them to the
city of France and showed them to the king, who bade
cast them into prison.

At this moment the galleon arrived with the Princess
Meryem and the one-eyed vizier, and when it reached
the harbour, the latter landed and going up to the king,
gave him the glad news of his daughter's safe return ;
whereupon they beat the drams for good tidings and
decorated the city after the goodliest fashion. Then the


king took horse, with all his guards and nobles, and rode
down to the sea to meet her. Presently, she landed and
the king embraced her and mounting her on a horse,
carried her to the palace., where her mother received her
with open arms and asked her how she did and whether
she was yet a maid. s O my mother/ replied Meryero,
1 how should a girl, who has been sold from merchant
to merchant in the land of the Muslims, [a slave] com-
manded, abide a maid? The merchant who bought me
threatened me with beating and forced me and did away
my maidenhead, after which he sold me to another and he
again to a third.'

When the queen heard this, the light in her eyes
became darkness and she repeated her words to the king,
who was sore chagrined thereat and his affair was grievous
to him. So he expounded her case to his grandees and
patriarchs/ who said to him, ' O king, she hath been
defiled by the Muslims, and nothing will purify her save
the striking off of a hundred of their heads.' Whereupon
the king sent for the prisoners and commanded to strike
off their heads. So they beheaded them, one after another,
beginning with the captain, till there was none left but
Noureddin. They tore off a strip of his skirt and binding
his eyes therewith, set him on the carpet of blood and
were about to cut off his head, when an old woman
came up to the king and said, *0 my lord, thou didst
vow to bestow upon the church five Muslim captives, to
help us in the service thereof, so God would restore
thee thy daughter the Princess Meryero; and now she

1 Bitarikeh (plural of bitric^ Gr. varpiKios, Lat. pairicius % there is
no p in the Arabic alphabet and in borrowing from foreign languages a
word containing that letter, the Arabs substitute either h or ffoi it) is
the Arab name for the priests of the Christians and was evidently adopted
from their experience of the Templars aad other semi-ecciesiastic J
military orders, as the same word signifies "Knights."


126


is restored to thee, so do thou fulfil thy vow.' 'O m|
mother,' replied the king, ' by the virtue of the Messiah
and the True Faith, there remaineth to me but this one
captive, whom they are about to put to death : so take
him to help thee in the service of the church, till there
come to me [other] prisoners of the Muslims, when I
will send thee other four. Hadst thou come earlier,
before they cut off the heads of these, I had given thee
as many as thou wouldst'

The old woman thanked him and wished him con-
tinuance of life and glory and prosperity. Then she
went up to Noureddin and seeing him to be a comely
and elegant youth, with a delicate skin and a face like
the moon at her full, carried him to the church, where
she said to him, ' O my son, put off these clothes that
are upon thee, for they are fit only for the king's
service.' So saying, she brought him a gown and cowl
of black wool and a broad girdle, in which she clad him,
and bade him do the service of the church. Accordingly,
he tended the church seven days, at the end of which
time the old woman came up to him and said, ' O Muslim,
don thy silken clothes and take these ten dirhems and go
out forthright and divert thyself abroad this day, and tarry-
not here a moment, lest thou lose thy life.' Quoth he,
' What is to do, O my mother ? ' And she answered,
' Know, O my son, that the king's daughter, the Princess
Meryem, hath a mind to visit the church to-day, to seek
a blessing thereof and to make oblation thereto, by way
of thank-offering for her deliverance from the land of
the Muslims and in fulfilment of the vows she made to
the Messiah, so he would deliver her. With her are
four hundred damsels, not one of whom but is perfect
in beauty and grace, and they will be here forthwith,,
and if their eyes fall on thee, they will hew thee la
pieces with swords.'


127


So Noureddin took the ten dirhems and donning his
own clothes, went out to the market and walked about
the city, till he knew its highways and gates ; after which
he returned to the church and saw the Princess Meryem tlCCClJCXXff
come up, attended by four hundred damsels, high-bosomed
maids like moons, amongst whom was the daughter of the
one-eyed vizier and those of the amirs and grandees of
the realm; and she walked in their midst as she were the
moon among the stars. When he saw her, he could not
contain himself, but cried out from the bottom of his
heart, saying, ' O Meryem ! O Meryem ! ' Which when
the damsels heard, they ran at him with shining swords,
like flashes of lightning and would have killed him forth-
right. But the princess turned and looking on him, knew
him but too well and said to her maidens, ' Leave this
youth ; doubtless he is mad, for the signs of madness
appear on his face.'

When Noureddin heard this, he uncovered his head and
made signs with his hands and twisted his legs, rolling his
eyes and foaming at the mouth. ' Did I not tell you he
was mad ? ' said the princess. ' Bring him to me and
stand off from him, that I may hear what he saith ; for I
know the speech of the Arabs and will look into his case
and see if his madness be curable or not.' So they laid
hold of him and brought him to her; after which they
withdrew to a distance and she said to him, ' Hast thou
come hither on my account and ventured thy life and
feignest thyself mad?' 'O my lady,' answered he, 'hast
thou not heard the saying of the poet :

Quoth they, "Thou'rt surely raving mad for her thou lov'st ; " and
I, "There is no pleasantness in life but for the mad," reply.

M Compare my madness with herself for whom I rave ; if she Accord
therewith, then blame me not for that which I aby."'

'By Allah, O Noureddin/ rejoined she, 6 thou hast
sinned against thyself, for I warned thee of this before


128


St fell out; yet wouldst thou not hearken to me, but
followedst thine own inclinations ; albeit that whereof 1
gave thee to know I learnt not by means of divination nor
augury nor dreams, but by eye-witness and very sight ; for
I saw the one-eyed vizier and knew that he was not come
to Alexandria but in quest of me.' 4 O my lady Meryem, 5
replied he, ' we seek refuge with God from the error of the
intelligent S ' 1 Then his affliction redoubled on him and
he recited these verses :

Pardon his fault whose slipping feet caused him in error fall, And let th<;

master's clemency embrace his erring thrall.
All that an evildoer can is to repent his fault, Although too late

repentance come to profit him at all.
Lo, by confession I have done what courtesy requires : Where then is

that for which good grace and generous mercy call ?

And they ceased not from lovers' chiding, which to set
out would be tedious, relating to each other that which
had befallen them and reciting verses and making moan,
one to the other, of the violence of passion and the pangs
of longing and desire, whilst the tears ran down their
cheeks like rivers, till there was left them no strength to
say a word. Now the princess was clad in a green dress,
inwoven with red gold and broidered with pearls and
jewels, which added to her beauty and grace ; and right
well saith the poet of her :

Like the full moon she shineth in garments all of green, With loosened

vest and collars and flowing hair beseen.
4 What is thy name ? ' I asked her, and she replied, ' I'm she Who

roasts the hearts of lovers on coals of love and teen.
I am the pure white silver, ay, and the gold wherewith The bondmen

from strait prison and dour released been. '
Quoth I, ' I'm all with rigours consumed ; ' but ' On a rock,' Said she,

'such as my heart is, thy plaints are wasted clean.'
'Even if thy heart,' I answered, 'be rock in very deed, Yet hath God

caused fair water well from the rock, I ween,, 5

& A saying of Mohamra-c? .


129


They abode thus till the day departed and night darkened
on them, when Meryem went up to her women and said to
them, ' Have ye locked the door ? ' And they answered,
'We have locked it.' So she took them and went with
them to a place called the Chapel of the Lady Mary the
Virgin, Mother of Light, because the Christians pretend
that her heart and soul are there. The girls betook them-
selves to prayer and worship and made the round of all
the church ; and when they had made an end of their
visitation, the princess said to them, ' I desire to pass the
night alone in the Virgin's chapel and seek a blessing
thereof, for that yearning thereafter hath betided me, by
reason of my long absence in the land of the Muslims :
and as for you, when ye have made an end of your
visitation, do ye sleep where ye will.' ' Be it as thou wilt,'
replied they, and leaving her alone in the chapel, dispersed
about the church and slept.

The lady Meryem waited till they were out of sight and
hearing, then went in search of Noureddin, whom she
found sitting on coals of fire in a corner, awaiting her.
He rose and kissed her hands and she sat down and made
him sit by her side. Then she pulled off all that was upon
her of clothes and ornaments and fine linen and taking
Noureddin in her arms, strained him to her bosom. And
they ceased not from kissing and clipping and cli eke ting
to the tune of ' In and out,' saying the while, ' How
short are the nights of union and how long the nights of
separation ! ' and reciting the following cinquains :

O aight of delight and first fruits of fair fate, Forefront of white nights,

with glad fortune elate,
Thou brought'st me the morn 1 in the afternoon late. Thee as kobJ tes

the eyes of the dawn shall we rate

Or as slumber on eyes of ophthalmiac shed 'i


1 i.e. the fair face of the beloved,,
VOL. VIII. 9


ISO


The night of estrangement, how longsome was it J Its first and its last,

one with other, were knit,
As a ring, sans beginning or ending to wit, And the Day of Uprising

broke, ere it would flit ;

For estrangement, thereafter, 1 the lover is dead.

As they were in this great delight and engrossing joy,
they heard one of the servants of the Saint 2 smite the
gong 3 upon the roof, to call the folk to the rites of their
worship, and he was even as saith the poet :

I saw him smite upon the gong and unto him did say, ' Who taught the

antelope* to smite upon the gong, . I pray ?'
And to my soul, s Which irks thee most, the smiting of the gongs Of
!N"tQif)t signal for departure given ? 8 Decide betwixt the tway.'

face

IxXXUt Then she rose forthwith and donned her clothes and
ornaments : but this was grievous to Noureddin, and his
gladness was troubled ; the tears streamed from his eyes
and he recited the following verses :

The rose of a soft cheek, all through the livelong night, I stinted not

to kiss and bite with many a bite,
Till, in our middle tide of pleasure, when our spy Lay down to rest,

with eyes in slumber closed outright,
They smote the gongs, as they who smote upon them were Muezzins that

to prayer the faithful do invite.
She rose from me in haste and donned her clothes, for fear Our watcher's

darted star 6 should on our heads alight,

1 i.e. after the rising up of the dead. s i.e. the Virgin.

8 Nacous, a rude kind of wooden gong used by Eastern Christians
to summon the congregation to divine service, the use of bells being
forbidden in Muslim countries.

* i.e. a graceful, slender youth.

B A play upon words, the phrase Dsereb en nawakisi, "the smiting of
the gongs," by cutting the last word in two, becoming Dsereb en nawax
kisi, " the giving of the signal for departure : decide thou."

6 Likening the spy to the angel guardians of heaven, whose missiles,
launched at the Jinn who seek to pry into the secret counsels of heave©,;
the Muslims suppose the shooting-stars to be.


*3*

And said, ' O thou my wish and term of all desire, Behold, the morn te

come with visage wan and white.'
I swear, if but a day were given to me of power And I became a king

of puissance and of might,
I'd break the corners down o' the churches, all of them, And every

priest on earth with slaughter I'd requite.

Then she pressed him to her bosom and kissed his cheek
and said to him, ' O Noureddin, how long hast thou been
in the town?' 'Seven days,' answered he. 'Hast thou
walked about in it,' asked she, 'and dost thou know its
ways and issues and its sea-gates and land-gates ? ' And
he said, ' Yes.' Quoth she, ' Knowest thou the way to the
offertory-chest of the church?' 'Yes,' replied he; and
she said, ' Since thou knowest all this, as soon as the first
watch of the coming night is over, go to the offertory-
chest and take thence what thou wilt. Then open the
door, that gives upon the passage leading to the sea, and
go down to the harbour, where thou wilt find a little ship
and ten men therein, and when the captain sees thee, he
will put out his hand to thee. Give him thy hand and
he will take thee up into the ship, and do thou wait there
till I come to thee. But have a care lest sleep overtake
thee this night, or thou wilt repent whenas repentance
shall avail thee nothing.'

Then she took leave of him and going forth from him,
aroused her women and the rest of the damsels, with
whom she betook herself to the church door and knocked ;
whereupon the old woman opened to her and she went
forth and found the knights and serving-men standing
without. They brought her a dapple mule and she
mounted : whereupon they raised over her head a canopy
with curtains of silk, and the knights took hold of the
mule's halter. Then the guards encompassed her about
with drawn swords in their hands and fared on with her 9
followed by her maidens, till they brought her to the
palace of the king her father.


132


Meanwhile, Noureddin abode concealed behind the
curtain, under cover of which Meryem and he had passed
the night, till it was high day, when the [great] door was
opened and the church became full of people. Then he
mingled with the folk and accosted the old woman, who
said to him, 6 Where didst thou lie last night?' 'In the
town,' answered he, 'as thou badest me.' 'O my son,'
answered she, 'thou didst well; for, hadst thou passed
the night in the church, she had slain thee on the foulest
wise.' And he said, ' Praised be God who hath delivered
me from the peril of this night !' Then he busied himself
with the service of the church, till the day departed and
the night came with the darkness, when he opened the
offertory-chest and took thence of jewels what was light
of weight and great of worth.

Then he waited till the first watch of the night was
past, when he made his way to the postern and opening it,
went forth, calling on God for protection, and fared on,
till he came to the sea. Here he found the vessel moored
to the shore, near the gate, with her captain, a tall old
man of comely aspect, with a long beard, standing in the
waist, surrounded by his ten men. Noureddin gave him
his hand, as Meryem had bidden him, and the captain
took it and pulling him on board, cried out to his crew,
saying. 'Cast off the moorings and put out to sea with
us, ere the day break.' ' O my lord the captain,' said one
of the sailors, ' how shall we put out now, when the king
hath notified us that to-morrow he will embark in this
ship and go round about this sea, being fearful for his
daughter Meryem from the Muslim thieves?' But the
captain cried out at them, saying, ' Woe to you, O accursed
ones! Dare ye gainsay me and bandy words with me?'
So saying, he drew his sword and dealt the sailor who had
spoken a thrust in the throat, that the steel came out
gleaming from his nape, and quoth another of the sailor^


133


"What crime hath our comrade committed, that thoii
shouldst cut off his head?' The captain replied by-
putting his hand to his sword and striking off the speaker's
head, nor did he leave smiting the rest of the sailors, till
he had slain them all and cast their bodies ashore.

Then he turned to Noureddin and cried out at him
with a terrible great cry, that made him tremble, saying,
4 Go down and pull up the mooring-stake.' Noureddin
feared lest he should strike him also with the sword; so
he leapt ashore and pulling up the stake, sprang aboard
again, swiftlier than the dazzling lightning. The captain
ceased not to bid him do this and do that and tack and
wear and look at the stars, and Noureddin did all that
he bade him, with heart a-tremble for fear; whilst he
himself spread the sails and the ship stretched out with
them with a fair wind into the surging sea, swollen with 3C%fjt
clashing billows. Noureddin held on to the tackle, fcCCClXXJCffe
drowned in the sea of solicitude and knowing not what
was hidden for him in the future; and whenever he
looked at the captain, his heart quaked and he knew not
whither he went with him.

He abode thus, distraught with concern and inquietude,
till it was broad day, when he looked at the captain and
saw him take hold of his beard and pull at it, whereupon
it came off in his hand and Noureddin, examining it, saw
that it was but a false beard stuck on. So he considered
the captain straitiy, and behold, it was the Princess
Meryem, his mistress and the beloved of his heart, who
had waylaid the captain and killed him and skinned off his
beard, which she had clapped on to her own face. At
this Noureddin was transported for joy and his breast
dilated and he marvelled at her valour and prowess and
the stoutness of her heart and said to her, 4 Welcome,
O thou my hope and my desire and the end of all
my wishes S* Then desire and gladness agitated him


134


and he made sure of attaining his hope and his wish 3
wherefore he broke out into carol and sang the following
verses :

Say to those who know nought of my transport and heat For a loved

one, whose favours they never may meet,
" Ask my folk of my passion : my verses are sweet And dainty the ditties
of love I repeat

On a people whose thought in my heart hath its seat. 3
Their mention with me chaseth sickness away From my bosom and heals

me of pain and dismay ;
My love and my longing increase on me aye And my heart is distracted
with ecstasy ; yea,

I'm a byword become 'mongst the folk in the street.
I will not accept aught of blame on their part Nor seek solace in other

than them for love's smart.
Love hath pierced me, for grief and regret, with a dart And hath
kindled a brazier therefrom in my heart ;

Yea, still in my liver there ragetrrits heat.
My sickness the folk for a wonderment cite And my wakefulness all

through the darkness of night
What ailed them my weakness with rigours to smite ? In passion the
shedding my blood they deem right ;

Yet justly they me with injustice entreat.
I wonder who charged you to drive to despair A youth who still loves

and will love you fore'er ?
By my life and by Him your Creator I swear, If a saying of you should
the backbiters bear,

By Allah, they lie in the tale they repeat !
May God not dispel from me sickness and pain Nor my heart of its

thirst and its longing assain,
Of your love for satiety when I complain ! Indeed, to none other than
you am I fain.

Wring my heart or show favour, as seems to you meet
My heart to your mem'ry shall ever be true, Though your rigours should

rack it and cause it to rue ;
Rejection abides and acceptance with you : So whatever you will with
jour bondman, that do ;

He'll grudge not his life to lay down at your feet.


135


The princess marvelled at his song and thanked him
therefor, saying, ' Him whose case is thus it behovelh to
walk the ways of men and eschew the fashion of losels
and poltroons.' Now she was stout of heart and versed
in the sailing of ships over the salt sea, and she knew all
the winds and their changes and all the courses of the sea.
' O my lady/ said Noureddin, ' hadst thou prolonged this
case on me, 1 I had surely died for excess of fear and
chagrin, more by token of the fire of passion and love-
longing and the cruel anguish of separation.' She laughed
at his speech and presently rising, brought out somewhat
of meat and drink ; and they ate and drank and made
merry. Then she brought out rubies and other gems and
precious stones and trinkets of gold and silver and all
manner things of price, light of carriage and great of
worth, that she had taken from the palace Df her father
and his treasuries, and showed them to Noiireddin, who
rejoiced therein with an exceeding joy.

Meanwhile the wind blew fair for them and they sailed
on, without hindrance, till they drew near the city of
Alexandria and sighted its landmarks, old and new, and
-Pompey's Pillar. When they reached the port, Noureddin
landed and making the ship fast to one of the Fulling-
Stones, took somewhat of the treasures that Meryem had
brought with her, and said to her, 4 O my lady, abide in
the ship against I [return and] carry thee up into the city
on such wise as I should wish.' Quoth she, 'It behoves
that this be done quickly, for tardiness in affairs engenders
repentance.' 'There is no tardiness in me,' answered he
and leaving her in the ship, went up into the city to the
druggist's house, to borrow of his wife for Meryem veil
and muffler and mantle and walking boots, after the usage
of the women of Alexandria, knowing not that there wai
1 ue. hadst thou maintained this deception longer,.


136


appointed to betide him of the vicissitudes of time, the
father of wonders, that which was not in his reckoning.

Meanwhile, when the King of France arose in the
morning, he missed his daughter and questioned her
eunuchs and women of her. ' O our lord/ answered they,
'she went out last night, to go to the church, and after
that we know nothing of her.' But, as the king talked
with them, there arose a great clamour of cries without
the palace, that the place rang thereto, and he said, ' What
is to do?' 'O king,' answered the folk, 'we have found
ten men slain on the sea-shore, and thy ship is missing.
Moreover, we found the postern of the church, that gives
upon the alley leading to the sea, open and the Muslim
prisoner, who serves in the church, missing.' Quoth the
°N"t(rj)t king, ' If my ship be missing, without doubt my daughter
fcfCCClXJCXb. is in it.' So he summoned the captain of the port and
cried out at him, saying, ' By the virtue of the Messiah
and the True Faith, except thou overtake my ship forth-
right with troops and bring it back to me, with those
who are therein, I will put thee to death after the foulest
fashion and make an example of thee ! '

The captain went out from before him, trembling, and
betook himself to the old woman of the church, to whom
said he, ' Heardest thou aught from the captive, that was
with thee, concerning his native land and what countryman
he was?' And she answered, 'He used to say, "I come
from the town of Alexandria." ' When the captain heard
this, he returned forthright to the port and cried out to
the sailors to make sail. So they did his bidding and
straightway putting out to sea, sailed night and day till
they came in sight of the city of Alexandria, what time
Noureddin landed, leaving the princess in the ship. They
soon espied the king's bark and knew it; so they moored
their own vessel at a distance therefrom and putting off in
& little ship they had with them, which drew but three feet


137


of water and in which were a hundred fighting -men,
amongst them the one-eyed vizier (for that he was &
stubborn tyrant and a froward devil and a wily thief, none
could avail against his craft, as he were Abou Mohammed
el Bettal, 1 ) rowed up to the bark and boarding her, all at
once, found none therein save the Princess Meryem. So
they took her and the ship, and returning to their own
vessel, after they had landed and waited a long while, 8 set
sail forthright for the land of the Franks, having accom-
plished their errand, without drawing sword.

The wind blew fair for them and they sailed on, without
hindrance, till they reached the city of France and landing
with the princess, carried her to her father, who received
her, seated on the throne of his kingship. As soon as he
saw her, he said to her, ' Out on thee, O traitress ! Wha?
ailed thee to leave the faith of thy forefathers and the
safeguard of the Messiah, on whom is our reliance, and
follow after the faith of the vagabonds, 8 to wit, the faith
of Islam, the which arose with the sword against the
Cross and the Images?' 'I am not at fault,' replied
Meryem. 'I went out by night to the church, to visit
the Lady Mary and seek a blessing of her, when there
fell upon me, at unawares, a band of Muslim robbers s
who gagged me and bound me fast and carrying me on
board the bark, set sail with me for their own country.
However, I beguiled them and talked with them of their
religion, till they loosed my bonds ; and before I knew
what was toward, thy men overtook me and delivered me.
And by the virtue of the Messiah and the True Faith and
the Cross and Him who was crucified thereon, I rejoiced
with an exceeding joy in my release from them and my

1 Apparently some famous brigand of the time.
8 In the hope of catching Noureddin.

s £,(. the wandering Arabs. The Mohammedan religion was so styled
ay its opponents.


i 3 8


bosom expanded and I was glad for my deliverance from
the bondage of the Muslims ! ' ' Thou liest, O shameless
baggage!' rejoined the king. 'By the virtue of that
which is revealed of prohibition and allowance in the
manifest Evangel, 1 I will assuredly slay thee after the foulest
fashion and make of thee the vilest of examples ! Did it
not suffice thee to do as thou didst the first time and put
off thy lies upon us, but thou must return upon us with thy
falsehoods? '

Then he commanded to slay her and crucify her over
the gate of the palace : but the one-eyed vizier, who had
long been enamoured of the princess, came in to him and
said, ' Slay her not, but give her to me to wife, and I will
watch over her with the utmost vigilance, nor will I go
in to her, till I have built her a palace of solid stone,
exceeding high of fashion, so no thieves may avail to
climb up to its roof ; and when I -have made an end of
building it, I will sacrifice thirty Muslims before the gate
thereof, as an expiatory offering to the Messiah for her
and for myself.' The king granted his request and bade
the priests and monks and patriarchs marry the princess
to him ; so they did his bidding, whereupon he gave com-
mandment to set about building a strong and lofty palace,
befitting her, and the workmen fell to work upon it.

To return to Noureddin. When he came back with the
veils and what not else he had borrowed of the druggist's
tNTtClfjt wife, he 'found the air empty and the place of visitation
tlCtClnxbt. distant;' whereupon his heart sank within him and he
wept floods of tears and recited the following verses :

The phantom of Saada came to me by night, near the break of day,
And roused me, whenas my comrades all in the desert sleeping lay:

But, when I awoke to the dream of the night, that came to visit me, I
found the air void and the wonted place of our rendezvous far away.

4 i.e. in that portion thereof whose meaning is unequivocally apparent
and which is unabrogated by any other portion.


*39

Then he walked on along the beach and turned right
and left, till he saw people gathered together on the
beach and heard them say, ' O Muslims, there abideth
no sanctity in the city of Alexandria, since the Franks
enter it and snatch away those who are therein and return
to their own land at their leisure, unpursued of any of the
Muslims or men-of-war ! ' Quoth Noureddin to them,
' What is to do ? ' And they answered, ' O my son, one
of the ships of the Franks, full of armed men, came down
but now upon the harbour and carried off a ship that was
moored here, with her who was therein, and made for
their own land unhindered.' Noureddin fell down in a
swoon, on hearing these words ; and when he came to
himself, they questioned him of his case and he told
them all that had befallen him ; whereupon they all fell
to blaming him and railing at him, saying, ' Why couldst
thou not bring her up into the town without veil and
muffler?' And each gave him some grievous word-,
berating him with sharp speech, and shot at him each
his shaft of reproach, albeit some said, 'Let him be;
that which hath befallen him sufficeth him,' till he again
fell down in a swoon.

At this moment, up came the old druggist, who, seeing
the folk gathered together, drew near to learn what was
the matter and found Noureddin lying aswoon in their
midst. So he sat down at his head and arousing him,
said to him, ' O my son, what is this case in which I see
thee?' 'O uncle,' replied Noureddin, 'I had brought
back my slave-girl, whom I lost, from her father's city,
after suffering all manner of perils and hardships;
and when I came hither with her, I made the vessel
fast to the shore and leaving her therein, repaired to
thy dwelling and took of thy wife what was needful
for her, that I might bring her up into the city ; but
the Franks came and taking the ship and the damsel


140

rheiein, made off, unhindered, and returned to their own
land.'

When the druggist heard this, the light in his eyes
became darkness and he grieved sore for Noureddin and
said to him, ' O my son, why didst thou not bring her
out of the ship into the city without a veil? But talk
availeth not at this season ; so rise, O my son, and come
up with me to the city; it may be God will vouchsafe
thee a girl fairer than she, who shall console thee for her.
Praised be God who hath not made thee lose aught by
her! Nay, thou hast gained by her. And bethink thee,
O my son, that union and separation are in the hands
of the Most High King.' 'By Allah, O uncle,' replied
Noureddin, ' I can never be consoled for her loss nor
will I ever leave seeking her, though I drink the cup of
death on her account ! ' 'O my son,' rejoined the druggist,
'and what dost thou purpose to do?' Quoth Noureddin,
4 1 purpose to return to the land of the Franks and enter
the city of France and venture myself there, come what
may.' ' O my son,' said the druggist, ' quoth the current
byword, "Not always comes the pitcher off unbroken j"
and if they did thee no hurt before, belike they will slay
thee this time, more by token that they know thee now
but too well.' ' O my uncle,' replied Noureddin, ' let me
set out and be slain presently for the love of her, and not
die slowly of despair for her loss.'

Now, as fate would have it, there was then a ship in the
port ready to sail, for its passengers had made an end of
their affairs and the sailors had pulled up the mooring-
stakes, when Noureddin embarked in her. So they put
out to sea and sailed many days, with fair wind and
weather, till they fell in with certain of the Frank cruisers s
that were scouring those waters and seizing upon all ships
they saw, in their fear for the king's daughter from the
Muslim corsairs : and as often as they made prize of a


Muslim ship, they carried all her people to the King ol
France, who put them to death in accomplishment of the
vow he had made on account of his daughter Meryem.
So they boarded the ship in which was Noureddin and
taking him and the rest of the company prisoners, to the
number of a hundred Muslims, carried them to the king,
who bade cut their throats. So they slaughtered them all,
one after another, till there was none left but Noureddin,
whom the headsman had left till the last, in pity of his
tender age and slender shape.

When the king saw him, he knew him right well and
said to him, 'Art thou not Noureddin, that was with us
before ? ' i I was never with thee,' answered he ; 1 and my
name is not Noureddin, but Ibrahim.' ' Thou liest/ re-
joined the king ; ' thou art Noureddin, he whom I gave
to the old woman, the prioress, to help herein the service
of the church.' But Noureddin said, ' O my lord, my
name is Ibrahim.' Quoth the king, ' Wait awhile,' and
bade his knights fetch the old woman forthright, saying,
s When she comes and sees thee, she will know if thou be
Noureddin or not.' At this juncture, in came the one-
eyed vizier and kissing the earth before the king, said to
him, 1 Know, O king, that the palace is finished ; and thou
knowest that I vowed to the Messiah that, when I had
made an end of building it, I would slaughter thirty
Muslims before its gate; wherefore I am come to get
them of thee, that I may sacrifice them and so fulfil my
vow to the Messiah. They shall be at my charge, by way
of loan, and whenas there come prisoners to my hands,
I will give thee other thirty in their stead.' 1 By the virtue
of the Messiah and the True Faith/ replied the king,
4 1 have but this one captive left ! ' And he pointed to
Noureddin. * Take him and slaughter him now, and the
rest I will send thee, whenas there come to my hands
[other] prisoners of the Muslims/


142


So the vizier took Noureddin and carried him to his
palace, thinking to slaughter him on the threshold of the
gate ; but the painters said to him, ' O my lord, we have
two days' painting yet to do ; so have patience with us
and delay to slaughter this captive, till we have made an
end of our work ; belike by that time the rest of the thirty
will come, so thou mayst despatch them all at one bout
and accomplish thy vow in one day.' So the vizier bade
Might imprison him and they carried him to the stables and left
tftCC him there in chains, hungering and thirsting and making
taxbi't. moan for himself ; for indeed he saw death face to face.

Now it chanced, by the ordinance of destiny and
fore- ordered fate, that the king had two chargers, own
brothers, 1 such as the kings of the Chosroe's might sigh
in vain to possess themselves of one of them ; they were
called Sabic 2 and Lahic 8 and one of them was pure white
and the other black as the darksome night. And all the
kings of the isles had said, ' Whoso stealeth us one of
these horses, we will give him all he seeketh of red gold
and pearls and jewels;' but none could avail unto this.
Now one of them fell sick of a jaundice and there came
a whiteness over his eyes; 4 whereupon the king sent for
all the farriers in the city to treat him ; but they all failed
of his cure. Presently the vizier came in to the king and
finding him troubled, because of the horse, thought to do
away his concern and said to him, 'O king, give me the
horse and I will cure him.' The king consented and
caused carry the horse to the stable wherein was Noured-
din; but, when he missed his brother, he cried out with
an exceeding great cry and neighed, so that he affrighted
all the folk. The vizier, seeing that he did thus but

1 i.e. bom of one father and mother.

2 i.e. the fore-runner. 8 i.e. the overtaker,

4 Apparently the affection of the eyes in horses, known as " the w©b
and pin."


H3


because of his separation from his brother, sent to tell
the king, who said, ' If this, which is but a beast, cannot
brook to be parted from his brother, how should it be
with those that have reason?' And he bade his grooms
take 'he other horse and put him with his brother in the
vizier's stable, saying, 4 Tell the vizier that the two horses
are a present from me to him, for the sake of my daughter
Meryem.'

Noureddin was lying in the stable, chained and shackled,
when they brought the horses, and saw that one of them
had a web in his eyes. Now he had some knowledge of
horses and of the treatment of their diseases; so he said
in himself, ' By Allah, this is my opportunity 1 I will go
to the vizier and lie to him, saying, " I will cure thee this
horse : " then will I do with him somewhat that will
destroy his eyes, and he will kill me and I shall be at
rest from this wretched life.' So he waited till the vizier
entered the stable, to look upon the horse, and said to
him, ' O my lord, what wilt thou give me, if I cure this
horse, and make his eyes whole again ? ' 'As my head
liveth,' replied the vizier, ' an thou cure him, I will spare
thy life and give thee leave to ask a boon of me ! ' And
Noureddin said, 'O my lord, command my hands to be
unbound.' So the vizier bade unbind him and he rose
and taking virgin glass, 1 brayed it and mixed it with
unslaked lime and onion-juice. Then he applied the
whole to the horse's eyes and bound them up, saying in
himself, ' Now will his eyes be put out and they will kill

1 What virgin glass may be I cannot undertake to say : a remote

sense of the word (zejaf) translated " glass " is " clove-berries," and
this, though rarely used, would seem the more probable reading, were
it not that Noureddin's avowed object (sufficiently attested, indeed, by
the nature of the other ingredients of the mixture) was to destroy the
horse's eyes, a purpose which pounded glass would certainly seem well
calculated to effect.


m

me and I shall be at rest from this wretched life.* And
he passed the night with a heart free of care and trouble,
humbling himself to God the Most High and saying, ' O
Lord, in Thy knowledge is that which dispenseth with
asking ! 5

When the day came and the sun shone out upon the
hills and valleys, the vizier came to the stable and loosing
the bandage from the horse's eyes, found them [altogether
cured and] handsomer than ever, by the ordinance of
the King who openeth [unto His servants the gates of
sustenance and mercy] . So he said to Noureddin, 4 O
Muslim, never in the world saw I the like of thee for the
excellence of thy skill. By the virtue of the Messiah and
the True Faith, thou fillest me with wonder, for all the
farriers of our land have failed to heal this horse's eyes ! '
Then he did off his shackles with his own hand and clad
him in a costly dress and made him his master of the horse.
Moreover, he appointed him stipends and allowances and
lodged him in an apartment over the stables. So Noureddin
abode awhile, eating and drinking and making merry and
commanding and forbidding those who tended the horses ;
and whoso neglected them or failed to fodder those tied
up in the stable wherein was his service, he would throw
down and beat grievously and lay him by the legs in
shackles of iron. Moreover, he used every day to go
down to the two chargers and rub them down with his
own hand, by reason of that which he knew of their
value in the vizier's eyes and his love for them ; wherefore
the latter rejoiced in him with an exceeding joy and his
breast dilated and he was glad, unknowing what was to
be the issue of his affair.

Now in the new palace, that he had built for the
Princess Meryern, was a lattice window overlooking his
old house and Noureddin's lodging. The vizier had a
daughter s a virgin of extreme beauty, as she were a fleeing


145


gazelle 1 or a bending branch, and it chanced that she sat
one day at the lattice aforesaid and heard Noureddin
singing and solaung himself under his afflictions by re-
citing the following verses :

censor of love, thou that wast fortunate aye, Bright with the sheen of

thy joys as the blossomed spray,
If Fate with its plagues should bite on thee one day, Then of the taste

of its bitter cup thou'lt say,
* Alas for Love and out on his whole array J My heart with his flaming

fires is burnt away.'

But to-day thou art safe as yet from his cruel spite And his perfidy irks

thee not and his fell unright ;
Yet blame not, I prithee, the love-distracted wight Who cries, for the

stress of the passion to which he's prey,
' Alas for Love and out on his whole array ! My heart with his flaming

fires is burnt away.'

Be not of those that look on love with disdain, But rather excuse and

pity the lovers' pain,
Lest thou one day be bound in the self-same chain And drink of the

self-same bitter draught as they.
Alas for Love and out on his whole array 1 My heart with his flaming

fires is burnt away.

1 too of old was empty of heart like thee And lay down to rest in peace

and passion free ;

The taste of the sleepless nights was strange to me Until he called me

to dwell beneath his sway.
Alas for Love and out on his whole array ! My heart with his flaming

fires is burnt away.

Yea, none can tell of Love and its sore duresse But he who is sick and

weak for its longsomeness,
He who hath lost his reason for love-distress, Whose drink is the bitter

dregs of his own dismay.
Alas for Love and out on his whole array i My heart with his flaming

fires is burnt away.


1 The gist oi this favourite comparison lies in the hunted gfZfUWs
graceful habit of turning its slender neck to look at its pursuers.
VOL. VIII. S©


146


How many a lover watches the darksome night, His eyes forbidden th«

taste of sleep's delight !
How many, whose tears like rivers adown a height Course down their

cheeks for passion both night and day !
Alas for Love and out on his whole array 1 My heart with his flaming

fires is burnt away. I

How many a mortal is maddened for love-despair, Wakeful, for void of ;

sleep is the dusky air !
Languor and pain are the weeds that he doth wear And even his dreams

from him are banished aye.
Alas for Love and out on his whole array 1 My heart with his flaming

fires is burnt away.

How often my patience fails and my bones do waste And my tears, like

a fount of blood, stream down in haste !
For my life, that of old was pleasant and sweet of taste, A slender

maiden hath bittered this many a day.
Alas for Love and out on his whole array I My heart with his flaming

fires is burnt away.

Alack for the man among men who loves like me, Whose eyes through

the hours of the darkness sleepless be,
Who drowns in his own despair, as it were a sea, And cries, for the

stress of an anguish without allay,
4 Alas for Love and out on his whole array ! My heart with his flaming

fires is burnt away.'

Whom hath not Love stricken and wounded indeed ? Who was there aye

from his easy springes freed ?
Whose life is empty of him and who succeed In winning to his delights

without affray ?

Alas for Love and out on his whole array 1 My heart with his flaming
fires is burnt away.

Be Thou his helper, O Lord, who's sick at heart ; Protect him, Thoa

that the best protector art-
To him fair patience to bear his woes impart ; In all his troubles be

Thou his help and stay.
Mas for Love and out or his whole array I My heart with his flaming

fires is burnt away.


147


Quoth the vizier's daughter to herself, 1 By the virtue

of the Messiah and the True Faith, but this Muslim is &
handsome youth ! Doubtless, he is a lover separated from
his mistress. I wonder if his beloved is fair like unto
him and if she pines for him as he for her ! If she be
comely as he is, it behoveth him to pour forth tears and
make moan of passion ; but, if she be other than fair, his
life is wasted in vain regrets and he is denied the taste of 3$"{($,t
delights.' S3CCC

Now the Princess Meryem had removed to the [new] IxXXblU
palace the day before and the vizier's daughter knew that
she was heavy at heart ; so she bethought herself to go to
her and talk with her and tell her of the young man and
the verses she had heard him recite ; but, before she could
do this, the princess sent for her to cheer her with her
converse. So she went to her and found her breast
straitened and her tears coursing down her cheeks ; and
she was weeping sore and reciting the following verses :

My life is spent ; but love lives yet, that nought may kill, And for my

longing's stress my breast is straitened still.
My heart is all consumed for separation's ill, Yet hopes that after all the

days of union will

Return and love-delight its ordered course fulfil.
Be sparing of your blame to one enslaved of heart, Whose body's worn

with love and disappointment's smart,
Nor at his passion launch reproach's poisoned dart, For none more

wretched is than lovers torn apart.

Yet is love's bitter sweet of savour, will or nill.

Quoth the vizier's daughter to her, 'What ails thee, O
princess, to be sick at heart and melancholy?' Where-
upon Meryem recalled the greatness of the delights that
were past and recited the following verses :

I will th' estrangement of my love with fortitude abide, Whilst down mj

cheeks the pearls of tears in chains unending glide •
So haply God shall succour me with solace ; for indeed He doth &ll

solace neath the ribs of difficulty hide.


1 48

4 O princess/ said the vizier's daughter, * let not thy
breast be straitened, but come with me straightway to the
lattice ; for there is with us in the stable a comely young
man, slender of shape and sweet of speech, and me-
seemeth he is a lover separated [from his beloved].' 'And
by what sign knowest thou that he is a separated lover ? '
asked Meryem. And she answered, ' O queen, I know it
by his reciting odes and verses all tides of the day and
watches of the night.' Quoth the princess in herself, ' If
what the vizier's daughter says be true, these are the
traits of the wretched, the afflicted All Noureddin. Can
it indeed be he of whom she speaketh ? ' At this thought,,
love-longing and distraction redoubled on her and she
rose at once and going with the maiden to the lattice,
looked down upon the stables, where she saw her love
and lord Noureddin and fixing her eyes on him, knew
him but too well, albeit he was sick, of the greatness of
his love for her and of the fire of passion and the anguish
of separation and yearning and distraction. Emaciation
was sore upon him and he was reciting and saying as
follows ;

My heart a bondslave is ; mine eyes rain tears for e'er ; With then% i®

pouring forth, no rain- cloud can compare.
My weeping's manifest, my passion and lament, My wakefulness and v?<m

and mourning for my fair.
Alas, my raging heat, my transport and regret I Eight plagues beset mj

heart and have their lodging there,
And five and five to boot thereafter follow on : Tarry and list s whilst I

their names to thee declare.
Memory, solicitude, sighing and Ianguishment, Love-longing in excess

and all-engrossing care,
Affliction, strangerhood and passion and lament And griefs that never

cease to stir me to despair.
Patience and fortitude desert me for desire 9 Whose hosts, whes. patience

fails, beset me everywhere.
Yea, passion's troubles wax for ever on my heart, O than that mk%i

what is the fire at heart I bear s


H9

What ails my tears a flame to kindle in my blood ? The fires within my

heart still burn and never spare.
Drowned am 1 in the flood of my unceasing tears And in hell-fire I fiaiae

with love-longing fore'er.

When the Princess Meryem heard the eloquence of his
verses and the excellence of his speech, she was assured
that it was indeed her lord Noureddin; but she dis-
sembled with the vizier's daughter and said to her, 'By
the virtue of the Messiah and the True Faithj I thought
not thoti knewest of my sadness ! ' Then she withdrew
from the window and returned to her own place, whilst the
vizier's daughter went about her occasions. The princess
waited awhile, then returned to the window and sat there,
gazing upon her beloved Noureddin and feasting her eyes
on his beauty and grace. And indeed, she saw that he
was like unto the moon at its full ; but he was ever
sighing and pouring forth tears, for that he recalled what
was past Then he recited the following verses :

Union with my beloved for ever I awaitj But gain not ; whilst life's

bitter for ever is my mate.
My tears are like the ocean in their unending flow 5 But, when I meet

my censors, I force them 1 still abate.
Out upon him who cursed us with parting by his spells l a Could I but

win to meet him, I'd tear his tongue out straight.
To blame the days availeth no whit, for that they've wrought : With

bitterness unmingled they've blent my cup of fate.
To whom shall I address me but you s to whom repair s Since in your

courts, a hostage, I left my heart of late ?
Who'll quit me of a despot, a tyrant, in unright Who waxes, when I

plain me for justice at his 8 gate ?

1 ix. my tears.

% lit. Out on a prayer who imprecated our parting !

2 It need hardly be noted that the feminine must here (as "m the rest
of the piece) be understood for the masculine pronoun. The Arabs
consider it indelicate directly to speak of women in the language of
passion, and therefore very commonly (though by no means invariably!


i $©

King o'er my soul I made him, his realm to keep ; but me He ruined

and his kingdom laid waste and desolate.
My life I have expended for love of him, alas ! Would God I were

requited for that my spent estate 1

fawn that in my bosom hast made thy nest, let that I've tasted of

estrangement suffice thy wrath to sate.
Thou'rt he whose face uniteth all charms, on whose account I've parted

with my patience and am disconsolate.
Within my heart I lodged him ; woe on it fell, and I To that which

I permitted submit without debate.
My tears flow on for ever, like to a swollen sea : Knew I the road to

solace, I would ensue it straight

1 fear to die of sorrow, for he still 'scapes from me, Oft as I think to

reach him, ah me unfortunate !

When Meryem heard her lover's verses, they kindled
a fire in her entrails and she recited the following, whilst
her eyes ran over with tears :

I longed for him I love ; but when I saw him, for surprise I was

amazed and had no power to move or tongue or eyes.
Volumes of chiding and reproach I had prepared ; but when We met,
no syllable thereof unto my lips would rise.

When Noureddin heard her voice, he knew it and wept
sore, saying, 'By Allah, this is assuredly the voice of the
tNTtttf) t Princess Meryem ! I wonder if my thought be true and
IJCCtlxXXlX if it be indeed she herself or another ! ' And regrets
redoubled upon him and he bemoaned himself and recited
the following verses :

adopt the (to Western notions of delicacy) far more objectionable

expedient of nominally addressing their amorous effusions to one of
their own sex, whilst a female is well understood to be the object of
love. To avoid mystification and confusion, I have, without remark,
in most instances where this curious substitution of sex occurs in the
verse-part of the present work, rendered the passage according to the
understood sense, except in cases where (as in the text) it seems im-
possible to do so without altering the general construction.


551

When my blamer foi love saw me meet with my dear In a place wide

and open to eye and to ear
And I said not at meeting a word of reproach, Though reproach to the

sad oft brings solace and cheer,
' What manner of silence is this that prevents Thee from making due

answer ? ' he said with a sneer.
' Misbeliever,' quoth I, ' that ignorest the case Of the people of passion,

a word in thine ear ;
The sign of the lover whose love is sincere Is his silence when she

whom he Ioveth draws near.'

When he had made an end of these verses, the princess
fetched inkhorn and paper and wrote the following letter.
' In the name of God the Compassionate, the Merciful !
The peace of God be upon thee and His mercy and
blessings 1 Thy slave-girl Meryem salutes thee, who
longeth sore for thee ; and this is her message to thee.
As soon as this letter falls into thy hands, do thou arise
and apply thyself with all diligence to that she would
have of thee, and beware with all wariness of transgressing
her commandment and of sleeping. When the first watch
of the night is past, (for that hour is of the most favour-
able of times,) saddle the two horses [that the vizier had
of the king] and go forth with them to the Sultan's Gate,
[where do thou await me]. If any ask thee whither thou
goest, answer, " I am going to exercise them/' 1 and none
will hinder thee ; for the folk of this city trust to the
locking of the gates.'

Then she folded the letter in a silken handkerchief and
threw it out of the window to Noureddin, who took it
and reading it, knew it for the handwriting of the Lady
Meryem. So he kissed the letter and laid it between
his eyes ; then, calling to mind that which had betided
him with her of the sweets of love-delight, he recited the
following verses, whilst the tears streamed from his eyes ;
1 i.e* the horses,,


152

A letter came to me from thee by favour of the night : At once it healed

me and in me love-longing did excite.
It minds me of the life I lived with thee in days of yore. Glory to Him

who did us twain with separation smite J

As soon as it was dark, he busied himself with making
ready the horses and waited till the first watch of the
night was past, when he saddled them with saddles ol
the goodliest, and leading them forth of the stable, locked
the door after him and repaired with them to the city-gate,
where he sat down to await the princess's coming.

Meanwhile, Meryem returned to her apartment, where
she found the one-eyed vizier seated, leaning upon a
cushion stuffed with ostrich-down ; but he was ashamed
to put out his hand to her or bespeak her. When she
saw him, she appealed to God in her heart, saying, ' Q my
God, bring him not to his will of-me neither decree Thou
to me defilement after purity 1 ' Then she went up to
him and made a show of affection for him and sat down
by his side and caressed him, saying, ' O my lord, what
is this aversion thou discoverest to me? Is it pride or
coquetry on thy part ? But the current byword saith,
"If the salutation be little in demand, the sitters salute
the standers." So if, O my lord, thou come not to me
neither accost me, I will go to thee and accost thee.' { To
thee belong favour and kindness, O queen of the earth in
its length and breadth,' answered he, ' nor am I but one
of thy slaves and the least of thy servants. Indeed, I
was ashamed to intrude upon thine illustrious presence,
O unique pearl, and my face is in the dust at thy feet.
' Leave this talk,' rejoined she, 4 and bring us to eat and
drink.'

So he called to his eunuchs and women to bring food,
and they set before them a fray containing birds of all
kinds that walk and fly and couple in the nests, such as
grouse and quails and pigeons and lambs and fat geese


153

and fricasseed fowls and other dishes of all sorts asul
colours, The princess put out her hand to the tray and
began to eat and feed the vizier and kiss him on the
mouth. They ate till they had enough and washed their
hands, after which the servants' removed the table of food
and set on the table of wine. So the princess filled the
cup and drank and gave the vizier to drink and served
him with the utmost assiduity, so that he was transported
for joy and his breast expanded and he was glad.

When she saw that the wine had gotten the mastery
of his senses, she brought out of her bosom a pastille of
Moorish henbane, which she had provided against this
occasion, whereof if an elephant smelt the least whiff, he
would sleep from year to year. She took him at unawares
and crumbled the henbane into the cup, then, filling it up 8
handed it to the vizier, who could hardly credit his senses
for joy. So he took it and kissing her hand, drank it
off, but hardly had it reached his stomach when he fell
prostrate on the earth. Then she rose and filling two
great pairs of saddle-bags with what was light of carriage
and great of price of jewels and jacinths and precious
stones, together with somewhat of meat and drink, donned
harness of war and armed herself for battle. Moreover,
she took with her for Noureddin what should rejoice him
of rich and royal apparel and splendid arms and armour,
and shouldering the bags, (for indeed she was both strong
and valiant), went forth of the palace to join her lover. !Ml'gf}t

Meanwhile, the latter sat at the city-gate, with the tJCCfJCC,
horses' halters in his hand, till God (to whom belong
might and majesty) sent a sleep upon him and he slept,
glory be to Him who sleepeth not ! Now, in those days,
the Kings of the Islands had spent much treasure ia
bribing folk to steal the two horses or one of them :
and there was a black slave s who had been reared in
the islands and was skilled in horse-stealing } wherefore the


154


kings of the Franks bribed him with v/ealth galore to steal
one of the chargers and promised him, if he could avail to
steal the two, that they would give him a whole island
and invest him with a splendid dress of honour. He
had long gone about the city of France in disguise, but
availed not to take the horses, whilst they were with the
king ; but, when he gave them to the vizier and the latter
carried them to his own stable, the thief rejoiced with
an exceeding joy and made sure of success, saying in
himself, ' By the virtue of the Messiah and the True Faith,
I will certainly steal them ! '

Now he had gone out that very night, intending for the
stable, to steal them, but, as he went along, he came upon
Noureddin lying asleep, with the halters in his hands. So
he went up to the horses and loosing the halters from
their heads, was about to mount one of them and drive
the other before him, when up came "the Princess Meryem,
carrying the two pairs of saddle-bags. She took the black
for Noureddin and handed him one pair of bags, which
he laid on one of the horses : after which she gave him
the other pair and he laid it on the other horse, without
word said. Then they mounted and rode out of the gate 1
in silence. 'O my lord Noureddin,' quoth she, 'what
aileth thee to be silent ? ' Whereupon the black turned
to her and said angrily, ' What sayst thou, O damsel ? '
When she heard his outlandish speech, she knew that he
was not Noureddin : so she looked at him and saw that
he was a black slave, snub-nosed and wide-mouthed,
with nostrils like ewers ; whereupon the light in her
eyes became darkness and she said to him, 'Who art
thou, O sheikh of the sons of Ham and what is thy
name among men?' 'O daughter of the base,' replied

1 We must suppose the princess to have taken the keys from the
dragged vizier or otherwise procured them, as it is stated above that the
people of the city trusted to the gates being locked.


*55

he, ' my name is Mesoud, and I steal horses, when folk
are asleep.' She made him no answer, but drawing her
sabre forthright, smote him on the nape and the blade
came out, gleaming, from the tendons of his throat,
whereupon he fell to the ground, weltering in his blood,
and God hurried his soul to the fire and ill is the abiding-
place [to which he went].

Then she took the other horse by the bridle and
retraced her steps in search of Noureddin, whom she
found lying, asleep and snoring, in the place where she
had appointed him to meet her, with the halters in his
hand and knowing not his hands from his feet. So she
dismounted and gave him a cuff, whereupon he awoke in
affright and said to her, 1 O my lady, praised be God for
thy safe coming I ' ' Rise,' answered she, ' and mount
this steed and speak not.' So he rose and mounted one
of the horses, whilst she bestrode the other, and they
went forth the city and rode on awhile in silence. Then
said she to him, ' Did I not bid thee beware of sleeping ?
Verily, he prospers not who sleeps.' ' O my lady,' answered
he, ' I slept not but because of the solacement of my heart
by reason of thy promise. But what hath happened, O
my lady ? ' So she told him her adventure with the black,
and he said, ' Praised be God for safety ! '

Then they fared on at full speed, committing their
affair to the Subtle, the All- wise and conversing as they
went, till they came to the place where the black lay
prostrate in the dust, as he were an Afrit, and Meryem
said to Noureddin, ' Dismount; strip him of his clothes
and take his arms.' 'By Allah, O my lady,' answered he,
' I dare not dismount nor approach him.' And indeed he
marvelled at the black's stature and at the valour and
stout-heartedness of the princess and praised her for her
deed. They fared on lustily all that night and halted not
till the day broke and the sun shone out upon the hills


5 $6


and plains, when they came to a wide champaign, abound-
ing in herbs and fruits of all kinds. Therein were gazelles
frisking and birds singing lustily on the branches : its
slopes for flowers were like serpents' bellies and many and
various were its channels of running water. And indeed
it was as saith the poet and saith well and accomplisheth
desire :

As 'twere a sun-scorched tract, a valley ruddy-red, With twice the com-
mon tale of herbs and flowers o'erspread.

We halted midst its groves, and it above us bent, As o'er a weanling
child the nurses bend the head ;

And limpid waters sweet, more pleasant than old wine To boon-
companion is, to quench our thirst it shed.

It still shut out the sun, from whatsoever side It smote us, but let in the
breeze to cool our bed.

Its pebbles fragrant were as maids with trinkets decked And seemed
unto the touch like heaps of pearls a-thread.

And as saith another :

When its birds sing in the dawn o'er its limpid lake, El Welhan longs

for its sight ere morning break ;
For as it were Paradise 'tis with its fragrant gales And its fruits and its

streams that run through its shady brake.

^Tffrljt Here the two lovers alighted to rest and turning the
bCCCXCt. horses loose to pasture in the valley, ate of its fruits and
drank of its streams; after which they sat talking and
recalling all that had befallen them and complaining one
to the other of the anguish of separation and of that
which they had suffered for estrangement and love-long-
ing. As they were thus engaged, there arose in the
distance a cloud of dust, which spread till it walled the
world, and they heard the neighing of horses and clank
of arms.

Now the reason of this was, that the king had gone
forth at daybreak, to give the vizier and his daughter good


157


morrow, after the custom of kings with their daughters
[on the morrow of their wedding-night,] taking with him
silken stuffs [as a present] and scattering gold and silver
among the eunuchs and tire-women, that they might
scramble for it : but when he came to the new palace,
he and one of his pages, he found the vizier prostrate
on the carpet, knowing not his head from his feet, and
searched the palace right and left for his daughter, but
found her not; whereat he was sore troubled and con-
cerned and his wit forsook him.

Then he called for hot water and frankincense and
virgin vinegar and mingling them together, blew the
mixture into the vizier's nostrils and shook him, where-
upon he cast the henbane forth of his stomach, as it were
a piece of cheese. He repeated the injection, whereupon
the vizier came to himself and the king ^questioned him
of his case and that of his daughter. ' O mighty king,'
answered the vizier, 'I have no knowledge of her save
that she poured me out a cup of wine with her own hand ;
and from that moment to this I have no recollection of
aught nor know I what is come of her.' When the king
heard this, the light in his eyes became darkness, and he
drew his sword and smote the vizier on the head, that the
steel came out gleaming from between his teeth. Then
he called the grooms and stable-men and demanded the
two horses of them ; but they said, ' O king, when we
awoke in the morning, we found all the doors open and
the two chargers missing j and our chief, the master of
the horse, is also missing.' Quoth the king, ' By my
faith and all wherein my belief is stablished, none but
my daughter hath taken the horses, she and the Muslim
captive that used to tend the church and who took her
aforetime ! Indeed I knew him right well and none de-
livered him from my hand save this one-eyed vizier ; but
now is he requited his deed. 8


158


Then he called his three sons, who were three doughty
champions, each of whom could cope with a thousand
horse in the field and the stead of strife, and bade them
mount. So they took horse forthwith and the King and
the flower of his knights and nobles and officers mounted
with them and followed in the track of the fugitives till
they came up with them in the valley aforesaid. When
Meryem saw them, she mounted her horse and girt on her
sword and took her arms. Then she said to Noureddin,
' How is it with thee and how is thy stomach for battle
and strife and contention?' Quoth he, 'Verily, my stead-
fastness in battle is as the steadfastness of the stake in
bran.' And he recited the following verses :

I prithee, Meryem, spare me reproaches and despite And do not thou

my slaughter or torment long invite.
I whom a raven's croaking affeareth passing sore, How should I be

a warrior or have a mind to fight?
Lo, if I but set eyes on a mouse, I quake for fear ; Yea, I bepiss my

hosen for terror and affright.
Indeed, I love not thrusting except in bed it be: The kaze my pintle's

prowess ignoreth not by night.
This is the way of thinking of every prudent man, And who deems not

as I do deems otherwise than right.

When she heard his speech and his verses, she laughed
and said, ' O my lord Noureddin, abide in thy place and
I will keep thee from their mischief, though they be as
the sands of the sea in number. But mount and be behind
me, and if we be defeated and put to flight, beware of
falling, for none can overtake thy charger.' So saying,
she couched her lance and gave her horse the rein, where-
upon he darted off with her, like the storm wind or like
water poured forth of the straitness of the pipes. Now
Meryem was the doughtiest of the folk of her time and
the unique pearl of her age : for her father had taught
her, whilst she was yet little, to ride on horseback and


159


plunge into the ocean of battle in the darkness of the
night.

When the King saw her pricking towards them, he
knew her but too well and said to his eldest son, ' O
Bertaut, thou who art surnamed Ras el Killaut, 1 this is
certainly thy sister Merytm who charges upon us, and she
seeks to do battle and wage war with us. So go thou out
to her and give her battle : and I charge thee by the
Messiah and the True Faith, if thou get the better of her,
kill her not till thou have propounded to her the Nazarene
faith. If she return to her old faith, bring her to me
prisoner, but, if she refuse, slay her after the foulest
fashion and make of her the vilest of examples, as well
as of the accursed wretch who is with her.' ' I hear and
obey,' replied Bertaut and pricking out forthright to meet
his sister, said to her, ' O Meryem, doth not what hath
already befallen on thine account suffice thee, but thou
must leave the faith of thy fathers and forefathers and
follow after the faith of the rovers in the lands, that is to
say, the faith of Islam ? By the virtue of the Messiah and
the True Faith, except thou return to the faith of the
kings thy forefathers and walk therein after the goodliest
wise, I will put thee to an ill death and make of thee the
most shameful of examples ! '

She laughed at his speech and replied, ' Avaunt ! God
forbid that the past should return or that he who is dead
should live again ! I will make thee drink the sorest of re-
grets ! By Allah, I will not forsake the faith of Mohammed
the son of Abdallah, who directed all peoples into the
right road, for it is the true faith ; nor will I leave the
way of righteousness, though I drink the cup of perdition ! ' ^fjjftt
When the accursed Bertaut heard this, the light in his Ifttrjdi

1 i.e. Head of Killaut. According to the Muhit el Muhit (as quoted
by Dozy) Killaut is *' the name of a son of the sons of the Jinn and ih&
Satans."


I&O

eyes became darkness and there befell a sore battle
between them. They swayed to and fro, fighting, through-
out the length and breadth of the valley, whilst all eyes
were fixed upon them in admiration : after which they
wheeled about and foined and feinted a great wlile,
and as often as Bertaut opened on his sister a gate of
war, 1 she parried his attack and put it to nought, of the
goodliness of her fashion and her strength and skill in
horsemanship and the use of arms.

They abode on this wise till the dust hung vaulted over
their heads and they were hidden from men's eyes ; and
she ceased not to baffle Bertaut and stop the way upon
him, till he was weary and his courage ebbed and his
resolution was broken and his strength weakened ; where-
upon she smote him on the nape, that the sword came
out gleaming from the tendons of his throat and God
hurried his soul to the fire and ill is the abiding-place
[to which he went]. Then Meryem wheeled about in the
mid-field and the stead of strife and offered battle, crying
out and saying, ' Who is for fighting ? Who is for
jousting? Let no sluggard or weakling come forth to
me to-day ; ay, let none come forth to me but the
champions of the enemies of the Faith, that I may give
them to drink the cup of ignominious punishment. O
worshippers of idols, O misbelievers, O froward folk,
verily this day shall the faces of the people of the True
Faith be whitened and theirs be blackened who deny the
Compassionate One 1 '

When the king saw his eldest son slain, he smote his
face and rent his clothes and called out to his second son,
saying, ' Bertous, thou who art surnamed Khura es
Sous, 2 go forth, O my son, in haste and do battle with
thy sister Meryem ; avenge me thy brother's death on her

1 i.e. attacked her after a new fashion,
8 i.e. Weevils' dung.


i6i

and bring her to me a prisoner, abject and humiliated ! '
' I hear and obey, my father,' answered he and setting
spurs to his horse, drove at his sister, who met him in
mid-career, and they fought, he and she, a sore battle,
yet sorer than the first. Bertous soon found himself
unable to cope with her and would have sought safety
in flight, but could not avail unto this, of the greatness
of her prowess • for, as often as he turned to flee, she
drove after him and still clave to him and pressed him
hard, till presently she smote him with the sword in his
throat, that it issued gleaming from his nape, and sent
him after his brother. Then she wheeled about in the
mid-field, crying out and saying, ' Where are the horse-
men ? Where are the braves ? Where is the one-eyed
vizier, the cripple, the man of the crooked 1 faith?'

Thereupon the king her father cried out with a bleeding
heart and eyes ulcerated with tears, saying, ' By the virtue
of the Messiah and the true faith, she hath killed my
second son ! ' And he cried put to his youngest son,
saying, ' O Fusyan, surnamed Selh es Subyan, 2 go forth,
O my son, to do battle with thy sister and take of her
the blood-revenge for thy brothers and fall on her, come
what may; and if thou conquer her, kill her without
mercy ! ' So he pricked out to Meryem, who ran at
him with the best of her skill and courage and prowess
and said to him, ' O accursed one, O enemy of God and
the Muslims, I will assuredly send thee after thy brothers,
and woeful is the abiding-place of the unbelievers I ' So
saying, she drew her sword and smote him and cut off his
head and arms and sent him after his brothers and God
hurried his soul to the fire and ill is the abiding-place,
[to which he went].

1 i.e. the false or perverted faith. The Muslims look upon Christianity
gs a corrupt and obsolete form of Mohamraedanisna,
a i e. Fasces puerorum.

VOL. VIII. O


1 62

When the knights and horsemen who rode with hex
father saw his three sons slain, who were the doughtiest
of the folk of their day, there fell on their hearts terror of
the Princess Meryem and they bowed their heads in
affright and confusion and made sure of destruction.
So they turned their backs and addressed themselves to
flight. When the king saw his sons slain and his troops
in full flight, there fell on him dismay and bewilderment
and his heart was on fire. ' Verily,' quoth he, ' the
Princess Meryem hath the better of us ; and if I venture
myself and go out against her alone, most like she will
overcome me and slay me without pity, even as she slew
her brothers, and make of me the foulest of examples ;
for she hath no longer any desire for us nor have we
any hope of her return. Wherefore, meseemeth I were
better guard my honour and return to my capital city. 8
So he gave reins to his horse and returned to the city.

When he found himself in his palace, fire was loosed
in his heart for rage and chagrin for the death of his
sons and the defeat of his troops and the violation of
his honour; nor did he abide half an hour before he
summoned his grandees and officers of state and com-
plained to them of that which his daughter had done
with him of the slaughter of her brothers and all he
suffered of grief and chagrin therefrom, and sought
counsel of them. They all counselled him to write to
the Vicar of God in His earth, the Commander of the
Faithful, Haroun er Reshid, and acquaint him with
the case. So he wrote a letter to the Khalif, con-
taining, after the usual salutations, the following words :
'Know that we have a daughter called Meryem, and a
Muslim captive, by name Noureddin Ali, son of the
merchant Tajeddin of Cairo, hath debauched her from
us and taken her by night and gone forth with her to
his own country : wherefore I beg of the favour of our


i63

lord the Commander of the Faithful that he write to all

the lands of the Muslims to seize her and send her back

to us by a trusty messenger of the servants of His ^Tfgfjt

Highness. And in requital of thy help in this matter, IJCCCXCtiia

we will appoint to thee half of the city of Rome the

Great, that thou mayst build therein mosques for the

Muslims, and the tribute thereof shall be sent to thee.'

Then he folded the letter and calling his vizier, whom
he had appointed in the stead of the one-eyed vizier, bade
him seal it with the seal of the kingdom, and the officers
of state also set their hands and seals thereto ; after which
the king bade the vizier carry the letter to Baghdad, the
abode of peace, and deliver it into the Khalif's own hand,
saying, 'If thou bring her back, thou shalt have of me the
fiefs of two Amirs and I will bestow on thee a robe of
honom with fringes [of gold].' The vizier set out with
the letter and fared on over hill and dale, till he came to
the city of Baghdad, where he abode three days, till he
was rested, when he sought out the palace of the Com-
mander of the Faithful and craved an audience of him„
The Khalif bade admit him ; so he entered and kissing
the ground before him,- presented him with the letter of
the King of Fance, together with rich and rare gifts,
beseeming the Commander of the Faithful.

When the Khalif read the letter and apprehended its
purport, he commanded his viziers to write despatches
to all the lands of the Muslims, setting out the name and
favour of Noureddin and the princess and bidding all who
found them lay hands on them and send them to the
Commander of the Faithful, and warning them to use no
delay or neglect in that manner. So the viziers wrote
the letters and sealing them, despatched them by couriers
to the different governors, who hastened to obey the
Khalifs commandment and addressed themselves to make
search in all the lands for the persons in question.


1 64

Meanwhile, Noureddin and Meiyem fared on and [God]
the Protector protected them, till they came to the land of
Syria and entered the city of Damascus. Now the Khalifs
messengers had foregone them thither by a day and the
governor of Damascus knew that he was commanded to
lay hands on them; so, when they entered the city 5 the
police accosted them and asked them their names. They
told them the truth and acquainted them with their story,
whereupon they knew them for those of whom they were
in search and seizing them, carried them before the
governor of the city. He despatched them to the city of
Baghdad [under escort of some of his officers], who, when
they came thither, sought an audience of the Khalif and
kissing the earth before him, said, ' O Commander of the
Faithful, this is Meryem, daughter of the King of France,
and this is the captive Noureddin, son of the merchant
Tajeddin of Cairo, who debauched her from her father
and fled with her to Damascus, where we came upon them,
as they entered the city, and questioned them. They told
us the truth of their case : so we laid hands on them and
brought them to thee.'

The Khalif looked at Meryem and saw that she was
slender and elegant of form and figure, the handsomest of
the folk of her day and the unique pearl of her age and
her time. Moreover, [he spoke with her and found her]
sweet of speech and fluent of tongue, stable of soul and
stout of heart. So she kissed the earth before him and
wished him continuance of glory and prosperity and cease
of evil and enmity. He was charmed with the beauty of
her shape and the sweetness of her voice and the quick-
ness of her answers and said to her, ' Art thou Meryem,
daughter of the King of France?' s Yes,' answered she,
s O Commander of the Faithful and High Priest of those
that believe in the Unity of God and Defender of the
Faith and Cousin of the Prince of Apostles ! 8


i6$


Then the Khalif turned to Noureddin and seeing him to
be a comely youth, as he were the shining full moon on
its fourteenth night, said to him, ' And thou, art thou Ali
Noureddin, son of the merchant Tajeddin of Cairo?'
' Yes, O Commander of the Faithful and stay of those who
seek [after righteousness] ! ' replied he. ( How comes it,'
asked the Khalif, 1 that thou hast taken this young lady
and fled forth with her of her father's kingdom?' So
Noureddin proceeded to relate to the Commander of the
Faithful all that had befallen him, first and last; whereat
the latter was beyond measure astonished and diverted and
exclaimed, ' How manifold are the things that men suffer ! ' ^NTfgfjt

Then he turned to the princess and said to her, ' Know, fclCCCXCCfe,

Meryem, that thy father, the King of France, hath
written to me, concerning thee. What sayst thou ? ' 4 O
Vicar of God in His earth,' replied she, 'and- Executor of
His ordinances and the precepts of His prophet, may He
vouchsafe thee eternal happiness and preserve thee from
evil and enmity! Thou art Vicar of God in His earth
and I have entered thy faith, for that it is the true and
righteous one, and have left the religion of the infidels,
who make the Messiah a liar, 1 and I am become a true
believer in God the Bountiful and in the revelation of His
compassionate Apostle. I serve God (blessed and exalted
be He !) and acknowledge Him to be the One God and
prostrate myself humbly before Him and glorify Him ; and

1 say before the Khalif, " Verily, I testify that there is no
god but God and I testify that Mohammed is the apostle
of God, whom He sent with guidance [into the right way]
and the true faith, that he might cause it to prevail over
faiths, all of them, in despite of the idolaters."* Is it,

1 By claiming godhead for him. As has been before observed, ths
Muslims accuse the Christians of having garbled the teachings of JesuSj
for the purpose of suppressing all mention of Mohammed.

8 Koran ix. 33.


1 66

therefore, permitted to thee, O Commander of the Faithful,
to comply with the letter of the king of the heretics and
send me back to the land of those who deny the Faith
and give partners to the All-wise King, who magnify the
Cross and believe in the divinity of Jesus, for all he was
[but] a creature ? If thou deal thus with me, O Vicegerent
of God, I will lay hold upon thy skirts on the day of
appearing before God and make my complaint of thee to
thy cousin the Apostle of Allah (whom God bless and
preserve !) on the day when wealth availeth not neither
children [nor aught], except one come unto God with
a whole heart' 1

1 O Meryem,' answered the Khalif, ' God forbid that I
should do this ever ! How can I send back a Muslim
woman and a true believer in the unity of God and in
His Apostle to that which they- have forbidden?' Quoth
she, ' I testify that there is no god but God and that
Mohammed is His Apostle!' 'O Meryem,' rejoined the
Khalif, 'may God bless and stablish thee in the way of
righteousness ! Since thou art a Muslim and a believer
in the unity of God, I owe thee an imperative duty, and it
is that I should never transgress against thee nor forsake
thee, though the world full of gold and jewels be lavished
unto me on thine account. So be of good heart and
cheerful eye and be thy breast dilated and thy mind at
ease. Art thou willing that this youth Ali of Cairo should
be thy husband and thou his wife ? ' ' How should I be
other than willing/ replied Meryem, ' seeing that he
bought me with his money and hath entreated me with
the utmost kindness and for crown of his good offices, he
hath ventured his life many times for my sake ? '

So the Khalif summoned the Cadi and the witnesses
and married her to him. Moreover, he assigned her a
dowry and caused the grandees of his realm be present at
1 Koran xxvi. 88, 89.


\6y

their marriage, and it was a notable day. Then he turned
to the French king's vizier, who was present, and said to
him, ' Hast thou heard her words ? How can I send her
back to her father the infidel, seeing that she is a Muslim
and a believer in the Unity of God ? Belike he will evil
entreat her and deal harshly with her, more by token that
she hath slain his sons, and I shall be accountable to her
therefor on the Day of Resurrection. And indeed quoth
God the Most High, " God shall in nowise give the
infidels power over the true-believers." 1 So return to thy
king and say to him, " Turn from this thing and hope not
to come at thy desire thereof." '

Now this vizier was a fool : so he said to the Khalif, ' O
Commander of the Faithful, by the virtue of the Messiah
and the true faith, were she forty times a Muslim and
forty times thereto, I may not depart from thee without
Meryem ! And if thou send her not back with me of free
will, I will return to her father and cause him despatch
thee an army, wherewith I will come upon you from the
landward and the seaward and the van whereof shall be at
your capital city, whilst the rear is yet on the Euphrates,
and they shall lay waste thy dominions.' When the Khalif
heard these words from the vizier of the King of France,
the light in his face became darkness and he was ex-
ceeding wroth at his speech and said to him, ' O accursed
one, O dog of the Nazarenes, who art thou that thou
shouldst dare to come out against me with the King of
the Franks?' [Then to his guards,] 'Take this accursed
fellow and put him to death j' and he repeated the
following verse :

This is the recompense of those Who their superiors' will oppose.

Then he commanded to cut off the vizier's head and
burn his body,* but Meryem said, O Commander of the

1 Koran iv. 14a


i68


Faithful, defile not thy sword with the blood of this
accursed wretch.' So saying, she drew her sword and
smote him and made his head fly from his body, and he
went to the house of perdition ; his abode was Gehenna
and evil is the abiding-place [to which he went]. The
Khalif marvelled at the power of her arm and the strength
of her mind, and they carried the dead vizier forth of
the palace and burnt him. Then the Commander of the
Faithful bestowed upon Noureddin a splendid dress oi
honour and assigned them a lodging in his palace.
Moreover, he appointed them stipends and allowances
and commanded to supply them with all that they needed
of raiment and furniture and vessels of price.

They sojourned awhile in Baghdad in all delight and
solace of life, till Noureddin longed for his mother and
father. So he expounded the matter to the Khalif
and sought his permission to repair to his native land
and visit his kinsfolk, and he granted him the leave
he sought and calling for Meryem, commended them
to each other. Moreover, he loaded them with costly
presents and rarities and bade write letters to the amirs
and scribes and notables of Cairo the [God-]guarded,
commending Noureddin and his wife and parents to
their care and charging them entreat them with the
utmost honour.

When the news reached Cairo, the merchant Tajeddin
rejoiced in the return of his son and Noureddin's mother
likewise rejoiced therein with an exceeding joy. The
amirs and notables of the city went forth to meet him,
in obedience to the Khalif s injunction, and indeed it
was for them a notable day, wherein the lover and the
beloved foregathered and the seeker attained the sought.
Moreover, all the amirs made them bride-feasts, each on
his own day, and rejoiced in them with an exceeding joy
and vied with each other in doing them honour. When


169


Noureddin foregathered with his father and mother, they
rejoiced in each other with the utmost joy and care and
affliction ceased from them, whilst his parents rejoiced no
less in the Princess Meryem and entreated her with the
utmost honour. Every day, there came to them presents
from all the amirs and great merchants, and they were
daily in new delight and gladness exceeding the gladness
of festival. Then they abode in joy and pleasance and
good cheer and abounding prosperity, eating and drinking
and making merry, till there came to them the Destroyer
of Delights and Sunderer of Companies, he who layeth
waste houses and palaces and peopleth the bellies of the
tombs. So they were removed from the world and became
of the number of the dead ; and glory be to the Living
One, who dieth not and in whose hand are the keys of the
Seen and the Unseen !


THE MAN OF UPPER EGYPT AND HIS FRANK
WIFE.

(Quoth the Amir Shijaeddin, Prefect of New Cairo) We
lay one night in the house of a man of Upper Egypt,
and he entertained us and entreated us with the utmost
hospitality. Now he was an old man, exceeding swarthy
of favour, and he had little children, who were white, of
a white mingled with red. So we said to him, 'Harkye,
such an one, how comes it that these thy children are
white, whilst thou thyself art exceeding swarthy ? ' Quoth
he, * Their mother was a Frank woman, whom I took in
the days of El Melik en Nasir Selahecldin, 1 after the battle
1 ut* Saladia. See note, VoL IV. p. 116.


of Hitting when I was a young man.' 'And how gottest
thou her?' asked we, and he said, 'I had a rare ad-
venture with her.' Quoth we, 1 Favour us with it ; ' and
he answered, ' With all my heart.

Know that I once sowed a crop of flax in these parts
and pulled it and scutched it and spent five hundred
dinars on it ; after which I would have sold it, but could
get no more than this [that I had spent] for it, and the
folk said to me, " Carry it to Acre : for there thou wilt
assuredly make a good profit by it." Now Acre was then
in the hands of the Franks ; 2 so I carried my flax thither
and sold part of it at six months' credit. One day, as
I was selling, there came up a Frankish woman, (now it
is the custom of the women of the Franks to go about
the market-place [and the streets] with unveiled faces,)
to buy flax of me, and I saw of her beauty what dazzled
my wit. So I sold her somewhat of flax and was easy
with her concerning the price ; and she took it and went
away. Some days after, she returned and bought more
flax of me and I was yet easier with her about the price ;
and she repeated her visits to me, seeing that I was in
love with her.

Now she was used to go in company of an old woman ;
bo I said to the latter, "I am sore enamoured of thy mistress.
Canst thou contrive to bring me to enjoy her?" Quoth
she, " I will contrive this for thee ; but the secret must not

1 Or Tiberias, 23rd June, 1187, the famous battle which led to the
downfall of the Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem and in which the King,
Gui de Lusignan and his brother Geoffrey, with Renaud de Chatillon
and the Grand Masters of the Templars and Hospitallers, were utterly
routed and taken prisoners by Saladin.

2 It was taken from them by Saladin 29th July, 1 187. The story-
teller states farther on that three years intervened between his visit to
Acre and the battle of Hittin, thus fixing the date of the former at
(circa) June, 1184.


I7i

go beyond us three, and needs must thou be iavish with
money, to boot." And I answered, " Though rny life were *M"tC|!)t
the price of her favours, it were no great matter." So it &CC£XCb a
was agreed that I should pay her fifty dinars and that she
should come to me ; whereupon I procured the money and
gave it to the old woman. She took it and said, " Make
ready a place for her in thy house, and she will come to
thee this night." So I went home and made ready what
I could of meat and drink and wax candles and sweet-
meats. Now my house overlooked the sea and it was the
season of summer ; so I spread the bed on the roof of the
house.

Presently, the Frank woman came and we ate and drank
and the night fell down. We lay down under the sky,
with the moon shining on us, and fell to watching the
reflection of the stars in the sea : and I said to myself,
"Art thou not ashamed before God (to ''whom belong
might and majesty !) and thou a stranger, under the
heavens and in presence of the sea, to disobey Him with
a Nazarene woman and merit the fiery torment ? " Then
said I, " O my God, I call thee to witness that I abstain
from this Christian woman this night, of shamefastness
before Thee and fear of Thy wrath ! " So I slept till the
morning, and she arose at peep of day and went away,
full of anger. I went to my shop and sat there ; and
presently she passed, as she were the moon, followed by
the old woman, who was angry; whereat my heart sank
within me and I said to myself, " Who art thou that thou
shouldst forbear yonder damsel? Art thou Seri es Seketi
or Bishr Barefoot or Junaid of Baghdad or Fuzail ben
lyaz?" 1

Then I ran after the old woman and said to her,

s Celebrated Soufi devotees and ascetics of the second and third
centuries of the Hegira. For Bishr Barefoot, see Vol. II. p. izj. Es
Seketi means "the old-clothes-man."


172


" Bring her to me again." " By the virtue of the Messiah,"
answered she, " she will not return to thee but for a
hundred dinars ! " Quoth I, " I will give thee a hundred
dinars." So I paid her the money and the damsel came
to me a second time ; but no sooner was she with me than
I returned to my former way of thinking and abstained
from her and forbore her for the sake of God the Most
High. So she went away and I betook me to my shop,
and presently the old woman came up, in a rage. Quoth
I to her, " Bring her to me again." And she answered,
" By the virtue of the Messiah, thou shalt never again
rejoice in her presence with thee, except for five hundred
dinars, and thou shalt perish miserably ! " At this I
trembled and resolved to sacrifice the whole price of my
flax and ransom myself therewith. But, before I could
think, I heard the crier proclaiming and saying, " Ho, all
ye Muslims, the truce that was -between us and you is
expired, and we give all of you who are here a week from
this time to make an end of your business and depart to
your own country."

So her visits were cut off from me and I betook myself
to getting in the price of my flax, that I had sold upon
credit, and bartering what remained in my hands for
other commodities. Then I took with me goodly mer-
chandise and departing Acre, full of love and longing for
the Frankish woman, for that she had taken my heart
and my money, repaired to Damascus, where I sold my
merchandise, that I had brought from Acre, at a great
price, because of the cutting off of communication by
reason of the expiry of the truce ; and God (blessed and
exalted be He !) vouchsafed me a good profit. Then I
fell to trafficking in captive slave-girls, thinking thus to
ease my heart of its longing for the Frankish woman, and
on this wise I abode three years, till there befell between
El Melik en Nasir and the Franks what befell of the


173


battle of Hittin and other encounters and God gave him
the victory over them, so that he took all their kings
prisoners and opened 1 the cities of the coast 2 by His
leave.

One day, after this, there came a man to me and sought
of me a slave-girl for El Melik en Nasir. Now I had a
handsome girl; so I showed her to him and he bought
her of me for a hundred dinars and gave me ninety
thereof, leaving ten still due to me, for that there was
no more found with the king that day, because he had
expended all his treasures in waging war against the
Franks. So they took counsel with him and he said,
" Carry him to the tent s where are the captives and give
him his choice among the damsels of the Franks, so he
may take one of them for the ten dinars that are due to
him." So they brought me to the prisoners' lodging and tbCf gftt
showed me all who were therein, and I saw amongst them 0£C£X*CfoL
the Frank damsel with whom I had fallen in love at Acre
and knew her right well.

Now she was the wife of one of the cavaliers of the
Franks. So I said, " Give me this one," and carrying
her to my tent, said to her, " Dost thou know me ? "
She answered " No ; " and I said, " I am the flax-
merchant with whom thou hadst to do at Acre. Thou
tookst money of me and saidst, ' Thou shalt never again
see me but for five hundred dinars.' And now thou art
become my property for ten dinars." Quoth she, "This
is a mystery. Thy faith is the true one, and I testify that
there is no god but God and that Mohammed is the

1 i.e. captured.

3 Es Sahil, i.e. the seaboard (ant. Phoenicia) of Palestine, a name
sometimes given by the Arabs to the whole province.

8 Sic Breslau. Saladin seems to have been encamped without
Damascus and the slave-merchant had apparently come out and pitched
his tent near the camp, for the purposes of his trade.


174


Apostle of God ! " And she made hearty profession of
Islam. Then said I to myself, " By Allah, I will not go
in to her till I have set her free and acquainted the
Cadi, [so he may marry us !] " So I betook myself to
Ibn Sheddad 1 and told him what had passed and he
married me to her. Then I lay with her that night and
she conceived ; after which the troops departed and we
returned to Damascus.

Presently there came an ambassador from the king of
the Franks, to seek the prisoners, according to the treaty
between the kings. So El Melik en Nasir restored all the
men and women he held in captivity, till there remained
but the woman who was with me and the Franks said,
" The wife of such an one the knight is not here." So
they enquired after her and making instant search for her,
found that she was with me ; whereupon they demanded
her of me and I went in to her, pale' and sore concerned ;
and she said to me, " What ails thee and what hath
befallen thee?" Quoth I, "A messenger is come from
the king to take all the captives, and they demand thee
of me." " Have no fear," answered she ; " bring me to
the king and I know what to say to him." So I carried
her before the Sultan El Melik en Nasir, who was seated,
with the ambassador of the king of the Franks on his
right hand, and said to him, " This is the woman that is
with me."

Then said the king and the ambassador to her, "Wilt
thou go to thy country or to a thy husband? For God
hatti loosed thy bonds and those of thy fellows in cap-
tivity." Quoth she, "I am become a Muslim and am
great with child, as ye may see, and the Franks shall

1 Behaeddin ibn Sheddad, a well-known legist of the time, after Cadi
of Aleppo. He was then Cadi of the army (Judge-Advocate-General)
lo Saladin.

8 Quaere read (instead of " to s, | " abide with v thy husband.


i75


have no more profit of me." " Whether is dearer to
thee," asked the ambassador, " this Muslim or thy husband
the knight such an one?" And she answered him even
as she had answered the Sultan. Then said he to the
Franks with him, " Heard ye her words ? " They answered,
"Yes." And he said to me, "Take thy wife and depart
with her." So I took her and went away ; but the am-
bassador sent after me in haste and said, " Her mother
sent her a charge by me, saying, ' My daughter is a captive
and naked : and I would have thee carry her this chest. '
So take it thou and deliver it to her."

Accordingly I carried the chest home and gave it to her.
She opened it and found in it all her clothes, and therein
I saw the two purses of fifty and a hundred dinars, that I
had given her, untouched and tied up with my own tying,
wherefore I praised God the Most High. These are my
children by her and she is yet alive and it was she dressed
you this food.' And we marvelled at his story and at that
which had befallen him of good fortune, and God [alone]
is [All-]knowing.

THE RUINED MAN OF BAGHDAD AND HIS
SLAVE- GIRL.

There was once at Baghdad, of old time, a man of
condition, who had inherited wealth galore from his
father. He fell in love with a slave-girl ; so he bought
her and she loved him as he loved her; and he ceased
not to spend upon her, till all his wealth was gone and
nought remained thereof; wherefore he sought a means
of getting his livelihood, but availed not thereunto. Now
he had been used, in the days of his wealth, to frequent
the assemblies of those who were versed in the art of
singing and had thus attained to the utmost skill therein


176


So he took counsel with one of his friends, who said to
him, ' Meseems thou canst not do better than sing, thou
and thy slave-girl, [for your living] ; for on this wise thou
wilt get money in plenty and wilt eat and drink.,' But he
misliked this, he and the damsel, and she said to him,
' I have bethought me of a means of relief for thee.'
6 What is it ? * asked he and she said, ' Do thou sell me ;
so shall we win quit of this strait, thou and I, and I shall
be in affluence; for none will buy the like of me save
& man of fortune, and with this I will contrive for my
return to thee.'

So he carried her to the market and the first who saw
her was a Hashimi 1 of Bassora, a man of taste and breed-
ing and generosity, who bought her for fifteen hundred
dinars. (Quoth the young man, the girl's owner), When
I had received the price, I repented me and wept, I and
the damsel; and I sought to cancel the sale; but the
purchaser would not consent. So I took the money in
a bag, knowing not whither I should go, now my house
was desolate of her, and buffeted my face and wept and
wailed as I had never done. Then I entered a mosque
and sat weeping, till I was stupefied and losing my senses,
fell asleep, with the bag of money under my head for
a pillow. Presently, before I could be ware, a man pulled
the bag from under my head and ran off with it : where-
upon I started up in affright and would have run after
him ; but lo, my feet were bound with a rope and I fell
on my face. So I fell a-weeping and buffeting myself.
^Mfght saying, * Thy soul a hath left thee and thy wealth is lost!'

CtX 1 A descendant of Hashim, great-grandfather of Mohammed, and

therefore a kinsman of the Abbaside Khalifs, who were directly
descended from him. The Khalifs of the Ommiade dynasty were
somewhat less directly akin to the Prophet, being the descendants oS
Hashim's brother, Abdusshems.
s i.e. beloved one,.


177


Then, of the excess of my chagrin, I betook myself to the
Tigris and wrapping my face in my gown, cast myself into
the river.

The bystanders saw me and said, 1 Sure, [he hath done]
this because of some great trouble that hath bedded him.'
So they cast themselves in after me and bringing me
ashore, questioned me of my case. I told them what had
befallen me and they condoled with me. Then an old
man of them came to me and said, 'Thou hast lost thy
money, but why goest thou about to do away thy life
and become of the people of the fire? 1 Arise, come with
me, that I may see thine abode.' So I went with him to
my house and he sat with me awhile, till I became calmer,
when I thanked him and he went away. When he was
gone, I was like to kill myself, but bethought me of the
life to come and the fire ; so I fled forth my house to one
of my friends and told him what had befallen me. He
wept for pity of me and gave me fifty dinars, saying, ' Taks
my advice and go out forthright from Baghdad and let
this provide thee till thy heart be diverted from the love
of her and thou forget her. Thou art a man of letters and
clerkship and thy handwriting is good and thy breeding
excellent : seek out, then, whom thou wilt of the viceroys 8
and throw thyself on his bounty. It may be God will
reunite thee with thy slave-girl.'

I hearkened to his words (and indeed my mind was
fortified and I was somewhat comforted) and resolved to
betake myself to Wasit, 8 where I had kinsfolk. So I went
down to the riverside, where I saw a ship moored and the
sailors carrying goods and rich stuffs on board. I asked
them to take me with them and carry me to Wasit ; but
they replied, ' We cannot do that, for the ship belongs to

1 i.e. of those destined to hell,
8 Or governors of provinces.

s A town of Irak Arabi, between Baghdad and Basso?&-
VOL. Vin. IS


178


a Hashimi.' However, I tempted tnem with [promise
of] reward, and they said, ' We cannot take thee on this
fashion; 1 if it must be, put off those fine clothes of thine
and don sailors' clothes and sit with us, as thou wert one
of us.' So I went away and buying sailors' clothes, put
them on ; after which I bought me somewhat of victual
[for the voyage] and returning to the vessel, which was
bound for Bassora, embarked with the crew.

Before long I saw my slave-girl herself [come on board],
attended by two waiting-women; whereupon my chagrin
subsided and I said in myself, ' Now shall I see her and
hear her singing, till we come to Bassora.' Soon after, up
rode the Hashimi, with a party of folk, and they embarked
in the ship, which dropped down the river with them.
Presently the Hashimi brought out food and ate with the
damsel, whilst the rest ate amidships. Then said he to
her, ' How long wilt thou abstain from singing and persist
in this mourning and weeping? Thou art not the first
that hath been parted from a beloved one.' Wherefore
I knew what she suffered for love of me. Then he hung
a curtain before her in the side of the ship and calling
those who ate apart, sat down with them without the
curtain ; and I enquired concerning them and behold,
they were his brethren. 2 Then he set before them what
they needed of wine and dessert, and they ceased not to
press the damsel to sing, till she called for the lute and
tuning it, sang the following verses :

The company have passed away with those whom I adore ; By night

they went nor to depart with my desire forbore.
And since their caravan fared hence, live coals of tamarisk-wood Within

the lover's heart rage high and higher evermore.

Then weeping overpowered her and she threw down the

! ije. clad as thou art.

8 Le. his kinsfolk of the Hashimi family or perhaps his clients.


179


lute and left singing ; whereat the folk were troubled and
I fell down in a swoon. They thought I was possessed 1
and one of them fell to reciting exorcisms in my ear ; nor
did they cease to comfort her and beseech her to sing, till
she tuned the lute again and sang these verses :

I stand lamenting travellers who bound their burdens on ; Within my
heart their dwelling is, though far away they're gone.

Hard by the ruined camp I stand and question it of them : Waste is the
camping-place and void the dwellings thereupon.

Then she fell down in a swoon and weeping arose
amongst the folk ; and I also cried out and fainted away.
The sailors were vexed with me and one of the Hashimi's
servants said to them, ' How came ye to take this madman
on board ? ' So they said to each other, ' When we come
to the next village, we will put him ashore and rid us
of him/ When I heard this, I was sore troubled and
summoned up all my courage, saying to myself, 'Nothing
will serve me to deliver myself from their hands, except
I make shift to acquaint her with my presence in the ship,
so she may prevent my putting out.'

Then we sailed on till eventide, when we came to a
hamlet 2 and the captain said, ' Come, let us go ashore.'
So they all landed, [leaving me in the ship] : whereupon
I rose and going behind the curtain took the lute and
changed its accord, course 3 by course, and tuning it after
& fashion of my own, 4 that she had learnt of me, returned

1 Of a genie, the common Eastern explanation of an epileptic fit.

8 Or farm. 8 Or perhaps " mode " {terikeh).

4 Most of the great Arab musicians had their own peculiar fashion of
taning the lute, for the purpose of extending its register or facilitating
the accompaniment of songs composed in uncommon keys and rhyihms
or possibly of increasing its sonority, and it appears to have been a
common test of the skill of a great musician, such as Ishac el Mausili
or his father Ibrahim, to require him to accompany a difficult song on a


i8o

$iF(crf)t to my place in the ship. Presently, they came on board
&£££XCbItX again and the moon shone out upon the river and bank.

Then said the Hashimi to the damsel, 4 God upon thee,
trouble not our lives 1 ' So she took the lute, and touching
it with her hand, gave a sob, that they thought her soul
had departed [her body], and said, 1 By Allah, my master
Is with us in the ship ! ' s By Allah,' answered the Hashimi,
2 were this so, I would not forbid him our company !
Haply he would lighten thy chagrin, so we might enjoy
thy singing : but it cannot be that he is on board.' But
she said, ' I cannot sing nor play whilst my lord is with
us.' Quoth the Hashimi, 'Let us ask the sailors.' And
she said, 4 Do so.' So he questioned them, saying, ' Have
ye carried any one with you?' And they said, ' No.'

Then I feared lest the enquiry should end there; so
I laughed and said, £ Yes ; I am her master and taught
her. when I was her lord.' ' By Allah,' said she, * that is
my lord's voice ! ' So the servants carried me to the
Hashimi, who knew me at once and said to me, * Out on
thee 1 What plight is this in which I see thee and what
has brought thee to this pass ? ' So I told him all that had
befallen of my affair, weeping the while, and the damsel
wailed aloud from behind the curtain. The Hashimi wept
eore, he and his brethren, for pity of me, and he said, 4 By
Allah, I have not drawn near the damsel nor lain with her s
nor have I even heard her sing till this day ! I am a man
to whom God hath been bountiful and I came to Baghdad
but to hear singing and seek my allowances of the Coni-

lute purposely untuned. As a (partial) modern instance of the practice
referred to in the text, may be cited Paganini's custom of lowering or
raising the G string of the violin in playing certain of his own composi-
tions. According to the Kitab el Aghani, Ishac el Mausili is said to
have familiarised himself, by incessant practice, with the exact sounds
produced by each division of the strings of the four-course 3ste of his
day; under every imaginable circumstance of tuning.


mander of the Faithful, I accomplished both my occa-
sions and being about to return home, said to myself, " Let
us hear somewhat of the singing of Baghdad." Wherefore
I bought this damsel, knowing not how it was with you
both ; and I take God to witness that, when I reach
Bassora, I will free her and marry her to thee and assign,
you what shall suffice you, and more : but on condition
that, whenever I have a mind to hear music, a curtain
shall be hung for her and she shall sing to me from
behind it, and thou shalt be of the number of my brethren
and boon-companions.'

At this I rejoiced and he put his head within the curtain
and said to her, ' Will that content thee ? ' Whereupon
she fell to blessing and thanking him. Then he called
a servant and said to him, 4 Take this young man and do
off his clothes and clothe him in costly raiment and in-
cense him 1 and bring him back to us.' So„ the servant
did with me as his master bade him and brought me back
to him, and he set wine before me, even as before the
rest of the company. Then the damsel fell to singing
after the goodliest fashion and chanted these verses :

They rail at me because, upon the parting day, I wept, when my belov'd

farewell to me did say.
They never knew the taste of severance nor felt The fire that in my

breast for sorrow rageth aye.
Only th' afflicted one of passion knoweth, he Whose heart amongst thes<8

steads is lost and gone astray.

The folk rejoiced in her song with an exceeding joy and
my gladness redoubled, so that I took the lute from her
and preluding after the most melodious fashion, sang
the following verses :

1 Le. perfume his clothes and person with the fragrant smoke of burn-
ing aloes-wood or ambergris, a common practice among the Arabs,


182


Ask favours, if thou needs must ask, of generous men, Who affluence

all their lives have known and happy fate.
O' the generous to ask brings honour, but upon The asking from a churl

blame and dishonour wait.
When thou must needs abase thyself, if thou must ask, I rede thee still

abase thyself unto the great 1
The generous to exalt no true abasement is j To magnify the mean doth

men humiliate.


The company rejoiced in me with an exceeding joy and
they ceased not from pleasure and delight, whilst anon
I sang and anon the damsel, till we came to one of the
landing-places, where the vessel moored and all on board
went ashore and I with them. Now I was drunken with
wine and squatted down to make water ; but drowsiness
overcame me and I slept, and the folk returned to the
ship, without missing me, for that they also were drunken,
and continued their voyage till they reached Bassora. As
for me, I slept on till the heat of the sun aroused me,
when I arose and looked about me, but saw no one.
Now I had given my spending-money to the damsel and
had not a rap left. Moreover, I had forgotten to ask
the Hashimi his name and titles and where his house
was at Bassora; so I was confounded and it was as if
my joy at meeting the damsel had been but a dream ;
and I abode in perplexity till there came up a great vessel,
in which I embarked and she carried me to Bassora.

Now I had never entered the place and knew none
t^{gf)t there ; so I accosted a grocer and taking of him inkhorn
iJCCCXri.X. and paper, sat down to write. He admired my hand-
writing and seeing my dress soiled, questioned me of my
case, to which I replied that I was a stranger and poor.
Quoth he, ' Wilt thou abide with me and order the accounts
of my shop and I will give thee thy food and clothing and
half a dirhem a day? ' 6 It is well,' answered I and abode
a Le, not unto the mean.


i8 3


with him and kept his accounts and ordered his incomings
and outgoings for a month, at the end of which time he
found his receipts increased and his expenses lessened j
v/herefore he thanked me and made my wage a dirhem
a day. When the year was out, he proposed to me to
marry his daughter and become his partner in the shop.
I agreed to this and went in to my wife and applied me to
the shop. But I was broken in heart and spirit, and grief
was apparent upon me ; and the grocer used to drink and
invite me thereto, but I refused for melancholy.

On this wise I abode two years, till, one day, as I sat in
the shop, there passed by a company of people with meat
and drink, and I asked the grocer what was to do. Quoth
he, ' This is the day of the pleasure-makers, when all the
musicians and dancers of the town go forth with the young
men of fortune to the banks of the Ubulleh river 1 and eat
and drink among the trees there. My heart prompted me
to divert myself with the sight of this thing and I said in
myself, ' Belike, I may foregather with her I love among
these people.' So I told the grocer that I had a mind to
this and he said, ' Up and go with them.' And he made
me ready meat and drink and I went till I came to the
Ubulleh river, when, behold, the folk were going away.

I was about to follow, when I espied the very bark in
which the Hashimi had been with the damsel going along
the river and the captain in her. So I cried out to him
and he and his company knew me and took me on bo„rd
with them and said to me, ' Art thou yet alive ? ' And
they embraced me and questioned me of my case. So I
told them my story and they said, ' Indeed, we thought

1 A canal so called, branching off from the Tigris and leading from
Bassora to an adjacent town of the same name. Its banks are a favourite
pleasure-resort of the townsfolk, and it is said by the Arabs to be one of
the four most delightful places in the world, the three others being situate
at Damascus, Shiraz and Samarcand respectively.


184


that drunkenness had gotten the mastery of thee and that
thou [hadst fallen into the water and] wast drowned.'
Then I asked them of the damsel, and they answered,
1 When she came to know of thy loss, she rent her clothes
and burnt the lute and fell to buffeting herself and lament-
ing, till we reached Bassora, when we said to her, s Leave
this weeping and sorrowing. 5 Quoth she, ' I will don
black and make me a tomb beside the house and abide
thereby and repent from singing.' So we suffered her to
do this and on this wise she abideth to this day.'

Then they carried me to the Hashimi's house, where
I saw the damsel as they had said. When she saw me,
she gave a great cry, methought she had died, and
I embraced her with a long embrace. Then said the
Hashimi to me, ' Take her.' And I answered, ' It is well *
but do thou free her and marry her to me, according to
thy promise.' So he did this and gave us costly goods and
store of raiment and furniture and five hundred dinars,
saying, 'This is the amount of that which I purpose to
allow you monthly, but on condition that thou be my
boon-companion and that I hear the girl sing [when I
will].' Moreover, he assigned us a house and bade trans-
port thither all that we needed ; so, when I went to the
house, I found it full of furniture and stuffs and carried
the damsel thither. Then I betook me to the grocer and
told him all that had befallen me, begging him to hold
me excused for putting away his daughter, without offence
on her part; and I paid her her dowry 1 and what else
behoved me. 8 I abode with the Hashimi on this wise

1 i.e. the contingent dowry. The dowry agreed for on an Arab
marriage consists of two parts, one paid down on consummation and
the other agreed to be paid to the wife, contingently upon her being
divorced by her husband.

2 i.e. the cost of her maintenance during the four months which must,
according to Muslim law, elapse before she could marry again.


185


two years and became a man of great wealth and was
restored well-nigh to the former estate of prosperity
wherein I had been at Baghdad, I and the damsel. And
indeed God the Bountiful put an end to our troubles
and vouchsafed us abundant good fortune and caused our
patience to issue in the attainment of our desire : where-
fore to Him be the praise in this world and the next


KING JELYAAD OF HIND AND HIS VIZIER
SHIMAS; WHEREAFTER ENSUETH THE HIS-
TORY OF KING WIRD KHAN, SON OF KING
JELYAAD, WITH HIS WOMEN AND VIZIERS.

There was once, of old days and in bygone ages and
times, in the land of Hind, a mighty king, tall and goodly
of parts and presence, noble and generous of nature,
beneficent to the poor and loving the tillers of the soil
and all the people of his kingdom. His name was Jelyaad
and under his hand were two-and-seventy [vassal] kings
and in his cities three hundred and fifty Cadis. He had
threescore and ten viziers and over every ten of them he
set a chief. The chiefest of all his viziers was a man
called Shimas, who was then 1 two-and-twenty years old,
a man of comely presence and noble nature, pleasant, of
speech and quick in reply. Moreover, he was shrewd and
skilful in all manner of business, for all his tender age,
sagacious, a man of good counsel and government, versed
in all arts and sciences and accomplishments ; and the
king loved him with an exceeding love and cherished him
by reason of his proficiency in eloquence and rhetoric and
the art of government and for that which God had given
1 it. at the time of commencement of the story.


1 86

him of compassion and tender solicitude for the people j
for he was a king just in his governance and a protector
of his subjects, constant in beneficence to great and small
and giving them that which befitted them of good govern-
ance and bounty and protection and security and a
lightener of their burdens. And indeed he was loving to
them all, high and low, entreating them with kindness
and clemency and governing them on such goodly wise
as none had done before him. But, with all this, God
the Most High had not blessed him with a child, and this
was grievous to him and to the people of his kingdom.

It chanced, one night, as the king lay in his bed, occu-
pied with anxious thought of the issue of the affair of his
kingdom, that sleep overcame him and he dreamt that he
!N"tg!)t poured water upon the roots of a tree, about which were
many other trees ; and behold there came fire out of this
tree and burnt up all that encompassed it; whereupon
Jelyaad awoke, affrighted and trembling, and calling one
of his servants, bade him fetch the Vizier Shimas in all
haste. So he betook himself to Shimas and said to him,
* The king calls for thee, for he hath awoke from his sleep
in affright and hath sent me to bring thee to him in haste.'

When Shimas heard this, he arose forthright and going
in to the king, found him seated on his bed. So he
prostrated himself before him, wishing him continuance
of glory and prosperity, and said, ' May God not cause
thee grieve, O king ! What hath troubled thee this night,
and what is the cause of thy seeking me thus in haste?'
The king bade him be seated and said to him, ' I have
dreamt this night t a dream that terrified me, and it was,
that methought I poured water upon the roots of a tree
and as I was thus engaged, behold, fire issued therefrom
and burnt up all the trees that were about it ; wherefore
I was affrighted and fear took me. Then I awoke and
sent to bid thee to me, because of thy much knowledge


1 87

and skill in the interpretation of dreams and of that which
I know of the extent of thy wisdom and the greatness
of thine understanding.'

The vizier bowed his head awhile and presently raising
it, smiled ; whereupon the king said to him, 'What deemest
thou, O Shimas ? Tell me the truth of the matter and hide
nothing from me.' 'O king,' answered Shimas, 'veriiy
God the Most High granteth thee thy wish and solace th
thine eyes ; for the matter of this dream presageth all
good, to wit, that God will bless thee with a son, who
shall inherit the kingdom from thee, after thy long life.
But there is somewhat else that I desire not to expound
at this present, seeing that the time is not favourable for
its exposition/ The king rejoiced in this with an exceed-
ing joy and great was his contentment ; his trouble ceased
from him and he said, ' If the case be thus of the happy
presage of my dream, do thou complete "to me its in-
terpretation, when the fitting time cometh : for that which
it behoveth not to expound to me now, it behoveth that
thou expound to me, when its time cometh, so my joy may
be fulfilled, because I seek nought in this but the approof
of God, blessed and exalted be He ! '

When the vizier saw that the king was urgent to have
the rest of the exposition, he put him off with a pretext ;
but Jelyaad assembled all the astrologers and interpreters
of dreams of his realm and related to them his dream,
saying, 'I desire you to tell me the true interpretation of
this.' Whereupon one of them came forward and craved
the king's leave to speak, which being granted, he said,
' Know, O king, that thy Vizier Shimas is nowise unable
to the interpretation of this thy dream ; but he shrank
from troubling thy repose: wherefore he expounded not
unto thee the whole thereof: but, if thou bid me speak,
I will acquaint thee with that which he hid from thee.
* Speak without fear, O interpreter,' replied Jelyaad, 'and


188


be truthful in thy speech.' ' Know then, O king,' said
the interpreter, 'that there will be born to thee a son
who shall inherit the kingship from thee, after thy long
life; but he shall not order himself towards the folk after
thy fashion, but shall transgress thine ordinances and
oppress thy subjects, and there shall befall him what
befell the mouse with the cat' 1 'I seek refuge with
God the Most High ! ' exclaimed the king. ' But what
is the story of the cat and the mouse ? ' ' May God
prolong the king's life ! ' replied the interpreter. 4 It is
related that

THE CAT AND THE MOUSE.

A grimalkin, that is to say, a cat, went out one night
to a certain garden, in quest of what she might devour,
but found nothing and became weak for the excess of
cold and rain that prevailed that night. As she prowled
about in search of prey, she espied a nest at the foot
of a tree, and drawing near unto it, sniffed and purred
about it till she scented a mouse within and went
round about it, seeking to enter and take the mouse.
When the latter smelt the cat, it turned its back to her
and scraped up the earth with its paws, to stop the door
against her; whereupon she counterfeited a weak voice
and said, "Why dost thou thus, O my brother? I come
to seek refuge with thee, hoping that thou wilt take pity
on me and shelter me in thy nest this night; for I am
weak, because of the greatness of my age and the loss
of my strength, and can hardly move. I have ventured
into this garden to-night, and how many a time have I

1 Sic in all three texts j but the passage should read, " what befell
the cat with the mouse," i.e. the reward of tyranny. See post, sequel
of the story of the Cat and the Mouse.


1 89

prayed for death, that I might be at rest from this misery!
Behold, here am I at thy door, prostrate for cold and
wet, and I beseech thee, by Allah,, take my hand of thy
charity and bring me in with thee and give me shelter
in the vestibule of thy nest; for I am a stranger and
wretched and it is said, ' Whoso shelters a stranger
and a wretched one in his dwelling, his shelter shall
be Paradise on the Day of Reckoning.' And thou, O
my brother, it behoves thee to earn a recompense [from
God] by succouring me and suffering me abide with thee
this night till the morning, when I will go my way." UCtCffjt
" How shall I suffer thee enter my nest/' answered the &£C£cL
mouse, "seeing that thou art my natural enemy and
thy food is of my flesh? Indeed I fear lest thou play
me false, for that is of thy nature and there is no faith
in thee, and the byword says, ' It befits not to entrust
a whoremonger with a fair woman nor a needy man with
money nor fire with firewood.' Neither doth it behove
me to entrust myself to thee; and it is said, 'Enmity
of kind grows stronger, as the enemy himself grows
weaker.' "

The cat made answer in a very faint voice, as she were
in the most piteous case, saying, " What thou sayest of
admonitory instances is the truth and I deny not my
offences against thee; but I beseech thee to forgive that
which is past of the enmity of kind between thee and me ;
for it is said, 'Whoso forgiveth a creature like himself,
his Creator will forgive him his sins.' It is true that I was
thy sometime enemy, but to-day I am a suitor for thy
friendship, and it is said, s If thou wilt have thine enemy
be thy friend, do with him good.' O my brother, I swear
to thee by Allah and make a binding covenant with thee
that I will never do thee hurt, more by token that I have
no power unto this; wherefore do thou trust in God and
do good and accept my oath and covenant.'" u How cm


190


I accept the covenant of one between whom and me there
is a rooted enmity," rejoined the mouse, "and whose
wont it is to deal treacherously by me? Were the feud
between us aught but one of blood, this were easy to me ;
but it is an enmity of kind between souls, and it is said,
4 He who trusts himself to his enemy is as one who puts
his hand into a viper's mouth.' " Quoth the cat, full of
wrath, " My breast is straitened and my soul faints within
me : indeed I am in extremity and ere long I shall die at
thy door and my blood will be on thy head, for that thou
hadst it in thy power to save me : and this is my last word
to thee."

With this the fear of God the Most High overcame the
mouse and pity took hold upon his heart and he said in
himself, "Whoso would have the succour of God the
Most High against his enemy, let him entreat him with
compassion and kindness. I commit myself to God in
this matter and will deliver this cat from this her strait
and earn the reward [of God] for her." So he went forth
and dragged the cat into his nest, where she abode till
she was rested and somewhat restored, when she began
to bewail her weakness and loss of strength and lack of
friends. The mouse entreated her friendly and comforted
her and busied himself with her service ; but she crept
along till she got command of the issue of the nest, lest
the mouse should escape. So, when the latter would have
gone out, after his wont, he drew near the cat ; whereupon
she seized him and taking him in her claws, began to
bite him and shake him and take him in her mouth and
lift him up and throw him down and run after him and
crunch him and torture him.

The mouse cried out for help, beseeching God of
deliverance, and began to upbraid the cat, saying, " Where
is the covenant thou madest with me and where are the
oaths thou sworest to me? Is this my reward from thee?


191

I brought thee into my nest and trusted myself to thee :
but he speaks sooth who says, ' He who relies on his
enemy's promise desireth not salvation for himself.' And
again, ' Whoso trusts himself to his enemy merits his own
destruction.' Yet do I put my trust in my Creator, for He
will deliver me from thee." The cat was about to pounce
on him and devour him, when up came a huntsman, with
hunting dogs trained to the chase. One of the dogs
passed by the mouth of the nest and hearing a great
scuffling within, thought there was a fox there, tearing
somewhat ; so he thrust into the hole, to get at him, and
coming upon the cat, seized on her. When she found
herself in the dog's clutches, she was forced to take
thought to herself and loosed the mouse alive and whole
of wound. Then the dog broke her neck and dragging
her forth of the hole, threw her down dead : and thus
was exemplified the truth of the saying, " He who hath
compassion, compassion shall be shown him at the last ;
and he who oppresseth shall presently be oppressed."

This, then, O king,' added the interpreter, ' is what
befell the cat and the mouse and teaches that none should
break faith with those who put trust in him; for whoso
doth perfidy and treason, there shall befall him the like of
that which befell the cat. As a man meteth, so shall it
be meted unto him, and he who betaketh himself unto
good shall gain his reward [in the world to come]. But
grieve thou not, neither let this trouble thee, O king, for
that most like thy son, after his tyranny and oppression,
will return to the goodliness of thy policy. And I would
that learned man, thy Vizier Shimas, had concealed from
thee nought in that which he expounded unto thee ; and
this had been well-advised of him, for it is said, " Those
of the folk who most abound in fear are the amplest of
them in knowledge and the most emulous of good." '

The king received the interpreters speech with sub-


192


mission and dismissing him and his fellows with rich
presentSj withdrew to his own apartments and fell to
musing over the issue of his affair. When the night
came, he went in to one of his women, who was most
in favour with him and dearest to him of them all, and
lay with her : and before four months had passed over
her, the child stirred in her belly, whereat she rejoiced
with an exceeding joy and told the king. Quoth he, ' My
dream said sooth, by God the Helper 1 ' And he lodged
her in the goodliest of lodgings and bestowed on her
store of rich gifts and entreated her with all honour.
Then he sent for his Vizier Shimas and told him what
had betided, rejoicing and saying, ' My dream is come
true and I have attained my hope. It may be this child
will be a son and inherit the kingship after me ; what
sayst thou of this, O Shimas ? ' But he was silent and
made no reply. Quoth the king, 'What ails thee that
thou rejoicest not in my joy and returnest me no answer ?
Doth the thing mislike thee, O Shimas ? '

Thereupon the vizier prostrated himself before him and
said, ' O king, may God prolong thy life ! What availeth
it to sit under the shade of a tree, if there issue fire there-
from, and what is the delight of one who drinketh pure
wine, if he be choked withal, and what doth it profit to
quench one's thirst with sweet cool water, if one be
drowned therein ? I am God's servant and thine, O king ;
but there are three things whereof it befits not the under-
standing to speak, till they be accomplished; to wit, the
traveller, till he return from his journey, the man who is
^NiQfjt at war > till he have overcome his enemy, and the pregnant
&C££fit. woman, till she have cast her burden. For know, O king,
that he, who speaks of aught before it be accomplished,
is like the fakir and the pot of butter/ 'What is the
§tory of the fakir, 5 asked the king, ^and what happened
to him V £ king,' answered the vizier.,


*93


THE FAKIR AND HIS POT OF BUTTER,

' A fakir abode once with one of the nobles of a certain
town, who made him a daily allowance of three cakes of
bread and a little butter and honey. Now butter was dear
in those parts and the fakir laid all that came to him
together in a pot he had, till he filled it and hung it up
over his head for safe keeping. One night, as he sat
on his bed, with his staff in his hand, he fell a-musing
upon the butter and the greatness of its price and said in
himself, " Needs must I sell all this butter I have and
buy an ewe with the price and take to partner therein a
husbandman who has a ram. The first year she will bear
a male lamb and a female and the second the like, and
these in their turn will bear others, nor will they give
over bearing males and females, till they become a great
matter. The males I will sell and buy with them bulls and
cows, which will also engender and multiply and become
many.

Then will I take my share and sell thereof what I will
and buy such a piece of land and plant a garden therein
and build thereon a great palace. Moreover, I will get
me clothes and raiment and slaves and slave-girls and
take me to wife the daughter of such a merchant and
hold a wedding the like whereof was never seen. I will
slaughter cattle and make rich meats and sweetmeats and
confections and provide flowers and perfumes and all
manner sweet herbs and assemble all the musicians and
mimes and mountebanks and player-folk. Then will I
bid rich and poor and the learned and captains and
grandees, and whoso asks for aught, I will cause it to
be brought him. Moreover, I will make ready all manner
of meat and drink and send out a crier to cry aloud and

VOL. VIII. J$


194


say, 'Whoso seeketh aught, let him [come] and get it. 6
Then will I go in to my bride, after they have unveiled
her before me, and enjoy her beauty and grace ; and I
will eat and drink and make merry and say to myself,
' Now hast thou attained thy desire,' and will rest from
devotion and asceticism.

In due time my wife will bear me a boy, and I shall
rejoice in him and make banquets in his honour and rear
him delicately and teach him philosophy and mathematics
and polite letters. 1 So shall I make his name renowned
among the folk and glory in him among the assemblies
of the learned. I will enjoin him to do good and he shall
not gainsay me, and I will forbid him from lewdness and
iniquity and exhort him to the fear of God and the
practice of righteousness. Moreover, I will bestow on
him rich and goodly gifts, and if I see him assiduous in
obedience, I will redouble in my bounties towards him :
but, if I see him incline unto disobedience, I will come
down on him with his staff," So saying, he raised his
dand, to beat his son, but the staff struck the pot of
butter, that hung over his head, and broke it ; whereupon
the potsherds fell upon him and the butter ran down upon
his head and beard. So his clothes and bed were spoiled
and he became an admonition to whoso will profit by
admonition. Wherefore, O king,' added the vizier, ( it
behoves not a man to speak of aught ere it come to pass.'
' Thou sayst sooth,' answered the king, ' fair fall thee for
a vizier ! For thou speakest the truth and counsellest
righteousness. Verily, thy rank with me is such as thou
couldst wish 3 and thou shalt never cease to have acceptance
with me.'

The vizier prostrated himself before the king and wished
him continuance of prosperity, saying, 1 May God prolong

1 Syn. good breeding or manners adeb).

8 Le. I hold thee in such esteem as thou deservest,


thy days and exalt thy dignity! Know that I conceal
from thee nought, neither in private nor in public; thy
pleasure is my pleasure, and thy wrath my wrath. There
is no joy for me but in thy joyance and I cannot sleep, if
thou be angered against me, for that God the Most High
hath vouchsafed me all good through thy bounties to me ;
wherefore I beseech Him to guard thee with His angels
and make fair thy reward, whenas thou meetest Him.' The
king rejoiced in this, and Shimas arose and went out from
before him.

In due time the king's wife gave birth to a male child,
and the messengers hastened to bear the glad tidings to
the king, who rejoiced therein with an exceeding joy and
offered up abundant thanks to God, saying, 1 Praised be
God who hath vouchsafed me a son, after I had despaired I
For He is pitiful and tenderly solicitous over His servants."
Then he wrote to all the people of his dominions, ac-
quainting them with the good news and bidding them to
his capital • and great were the rejoicings and festivities
in all the kingdom. So there came amirs and captains
and grandees and sages and men of learning and philo-
sophers from all quarters to the palace and presenting
themselves before the king, company after company,
according to their several ranks, gave him joy, and he
bestowed largesse upon them. Then he signed to the
seven chief viziers, whose head was Shimas, to speak,
each after the measure of his knowledge, upon the matter
in question.

So the Grand Vizier Shimas began and sought leave
of the king to speak, which being granted, he spoke as
follows. ' Praised be God who brought us forth of
nothingness into being and who favoureth His servants
with kings who observe justice and equity in that where-
with He hath invested thern of dominion and deal
righteously with that which He appointeth at their hands


of provision for their subjects ; and especially our king,
by whom He hath quickened the deadness of our land,
with that which He hath conferred upon us of bounties,
and hath blessed us, of His protection, with ease of life
and tranquillity and justice 1 What king did ever with his
people that which this king hath done with us in making
provision for our needs and giving us our dues and doing
us justice, each of the other, and in unfailing carefulness
over us and redress of our grievances ? Indeed, it is
of the bounty of God to the people that their king be
assiduous in ordering their affairs and in defending them
from their enemies ; for the end of the enemy's intent is
to subdue his enemy and hold him in his hand ; and many
peoples 1 bring their sons unto kings, servant-wise, and
they become with them in the stead of slaves, to the intent
that they may repel enemies from them. 3 As for us, no
enemy hath trodden our soil in our king's time, by reason
of this great good fortune and exceeding happiness, that
none may avail to describe, for indeed it passeth descrip-
tion. And verily, O king, thou art worthy of this exceeding
happiness, and we are under thy safeguard and in the
shadow of thy wings, may God make fair thy reward and
prolong thy life !

Indeed, we have long been diligent in supplication to
God the Most High that He would vouchsafe an answer
to our prayers and continue thee to us and grant thee
a virtuous son, to be the solace of thine eyes: and now
^NTujfjt God (blessed and exalted be He !) hath accepted of us
DCCCCttl. an d answered our prayer and brought us speedy relief,
even as He did to the fishes in the pond of water.' 'And
how was that? ' asked the king. ' Know, O king,' answered
Shimas, 1 that

1 The Breslau edition read* ** Turk* " in Lieu of 44 aoaay topics/ 5
8 Le. the parents.


297


THE FISHES AND THE CRAB.

There was once a pond of water, wherein dwelt a number
of fish, and it befell that the water of the pond dwindled
and shrank away, till there remained barely enough to
suffice them and they were nigh upon death and said,
" What will become of us ? How shall we do and of
whom shall we seek counsel for our deliverance ? " Quoth
one of them, who was the chiefest of them in wit and age,
" There is nothing will serve us but that we seek deliverance
of God ; but, come, let us go to the crab and seek his
counsel, for indeed he is the chiefest and wisest of us all."
They all approved of the fish's advice and betook them-
selves to the crab, whom they found squatted his hole,
without news or knowledge of their strait. So they
saluted him and said to him, " O our lord, doth not our
affair concern thee, who art our ruler and our chief? "
The crab returned their salutation, saying, "And on you
be peace ! What aileth you and what is your want ? "
So they told him the strait in which they were by reason
of the shrinking of the water, and that, when it should
be altogether dried up, destruction would betide them.
"Wherefore," added they, "we come to thee, expecting
thy counsel, so haply deliverance may be therein, for thou
art the chiefest and most experienced of us."

The crab bowed his head awhile and said, "Doubtless
ye lack understanding, in that ye despair of the mercy
of God the Most High and His care for the provision of
all His creatures. Know ye not that God (blessed and
exalted be He !) provideth all his creatures without stint
and that He fore-ordained their means of livelihood ere
He created aught and appointed to each of His creatures
a fixed term of life and an allotted provision, of His


iq8


divine providence ? How then shall we burden ourselves
with concern for a thing that is written in His secret
purpose ? Wherefore, it is my judgment that ye can do
no better than to seek aid of God the Most High, and it
behoveth each of us to make clean his conscience with
his Lord, both in public and private, and pray Him to
succour us and deliver us from our strait ; for God the
Most High disappointeth not the expectation of those
who put their trust in Him and rejecteth not the suit
of those who supplicate Him. When we have mended
our ways, our affairs will prosper and all will be well with
us, and when the winter cometh and our land is deluged,
by means of our effectual prayer, He will not undo the
good He hath built up. So it is my counsel that we
take patience and await what God shall do with us. If
death come to us, we shall be at rest, and if there befall
us aught that calleth for flight, we will flee and depart our
land whither God will."

" Thou sayst sooth, O our lord," answered all the fish
with one voice. " May God requite thee for us with
good ! " Then each returned to his place, and in a few
days, God sent them a violent rain and the place of the
pond was filled fuller than before. On like wise, O king,'
continued Shimas, 'we despaired of a child being born
to thee, and now that God hath vouchsafed unto us and
unto thee this blessed son, we implore Him to make him
indeed blessed and render him the solace of thine eyes
and a worthy successor to thee and grant us of him the
like of that which He hath granted us of thee; for God
the Most High disappointeth not those that seek Him
and it behoveth none to despair of His mercy.'

Then the second vizier rose and saluting the king,
spoke as follows : 4 Verily, a king is not called a king
save he give gifts and do justice and rule with equity and
munificence and govern his subjects wisely, maintaining


199


che established laws and usages among them and justify-
ing them, one against another, and sparing their blood
and warding off hurt from them ; and of his qualities
should be that he be never unmindful of the poor and
that he succour the highest and lowest of them and give
them each his due, so that they all bless him and are
obedient to his commandment. Without doubt, a king
who is after this wise is beloved of his people and gaineth
of this world eminence and of the next glory and the
favour of the Creator of both worlds. And we thy subjects
acknowledge in thee, O king, all the attributes of kingship
I have set out, even as it is said, "The best of things is
that the king of a people be just and their physician
skilful and their teacher experienced, doing according to
his knowledge." Now we enjoy this happiness, after we
had despaired of the birth of a son to thee, to inherit thy
crown ; but God (magnified be His name !) hath not dis-
appointed thine expectation, but hath granted thy prayer,
by reason of the goodliness of thy trust in Him and thy
submission of thine affairs to Him, and there hath betided
thee that which betided the crow with the serpent.'
'What was that?' asked the king. 'Know, O king/
replied the vizier, ' that


THE CROW AND THE SERPENT.

A crow and his wife once dwelt in a tree, in all delight
of life, till they came to the time of the hatching of their
young, to wit, the season of midsummer, when a serpent"
issued from his hole and crawled up the tree, till it
came to the crows' nest, where it coiled itself up and
there abode all the days of the summer, whilst the crow
was driven away and found no place wherein to lie.
When the days of heat were past, the serpent went away


200


to its own place and the crow said to his wife, "Let us
thank God the Most High, who hath preserved us and
delivered us from this serpent, albeit we are forbidden
from increase this year. Yet God will not cut off out
hope; so let us thank Him for having vouchsafed us
safety and bodily weal, for we have none other in whom
to trust, and if He will and we live till next year, He
will give us other young in the stead of those we have
lost this year."

Next year the serpent again sallied forth from its place
at the same time and made for the crows' nest : but, as it
climbed up the tree, a kite swooped down on it and struck
his claws into its head and tore it, whereupon it fell to
the ground, senseless, and the ants came out upon it
and devoured it. So the crow and his wife abode in
peace and quiet and reared,, a numerous brood and
thanked God for their safety and for the young that
were born to them. In like manner, O king,' continued
the vizier, 'it behoveth us to thank God for that where-
with He hath favoured us and thee in vouchsafing us
this happy and blessed child, after despair and hope cut
'Mfgfjt off. May He make fair thy reward and the issue of thine
tlCCCCtrj. affair ! '

Then rose the third vizier and said, ' Rejoice, O just
king, in the assurance of present prosperity and future
felicity ; 1 for him, whom the people of the earth love, the
people of heaven love also ; and indeed God the Most
High hath made love to be thy portion and hath stablished
it in the hearts of the people of thy kingdom ; wherefore
to Him be thanks and praise from us and from thee, so
He may redouble in His bounty to thee and to us in
thee ! For know, O king, that man can nought but by
commandment of God the Most High and that He is
the Giver and all good that befall eth a creature hath its
1 Lit. ultimate reward, z'.<?. in the world to come.


201


[origin and] issue in Him. He allotteth His favours
to His creatures, as it liketh Him; to some He giveth
store of gifts and others may hardly get their daily
bread. Some He maketh lords and captains, and others
recluses, who abstain from the world and aspire but to
Hirn, for He it is who saith, " I am He who harmeth
and who ad vantageth ; I make whole and make sick, I
enrich and impoverish, I slay and quicken ; in my hand
is everything and all things have their issue in Me."
Wherefore it behoveth all folk to praise Him.

Thou, king, art of the fortunate pious men of whom
it is said, "The happiest of the just is he for whom God
uniteth the goods of this world and the next, who is
content with that which God allotteth to him and giveth
Him thanks for that which He hath established." And
indeed he who is froward and seeketh other than that
which God hath decreed unto him and for him resembleth
the fox [and shall fare as he did] with the wild ass.' ' And
what is the story of the fox and the wild ass ? ' asked the
king. ' Know, O king,' replied the vizier, ' that


THE FOX AND THE WILD ASS.

A certain fox was wont every day to leave his earth and
go forth in quest of prey. One day, as he was in a certain
mountain, the night overtook him and he set out to return.
On his way, he fell in with another fox, and each began to
tell the other of the prey he had gotten. Quoth the new-
comer, "The other day I chanced upon a wild ass and
rejoiced in this and thanked God the Most High for
bringing him into my power, for that I was anhungred
and it was three days since I had eaten. So I tore oui
his heart and ate it and was full and returned to my earth.
That was three days ago and since then I have found


202


nothing to eat, yet am I still full of meat." When the

other fox heard his fellow's story, he envied him his
fulness and said in himself, "Needs must I eat a wild
ass's heart." So he left eating some days, till he became
emaciated and nigh upon death and bestirred not himself
neither did his endeavour [to get food], but lay coiled up
in his earth.

One day there came out two hunters in quest of prey
and started a wild ass. They followed in his track all day,
till at last one of them shot at him a barbed arrow, which
pierced his heart and killed him, and he fell down before
the fox's hole. Then the hunters came up and finding
him dead, pulled out the arrow from his heart, but only
the shaft came away and the barbed head abode in the
wound. So they left him where he lay, expecting that
others of the wild beasts would fipek to him ; but, when
it was night and nothing fell to them, they returned to
their abiding-places. The fox, hearing the commotion
at the mouth of his hole, lay quiet till nightfall, when
he came forth of his earth, groaning for weakness and
hunger, and seeing the dead ass lying at his door, was
like to fly for joy and said, " Praised be God who hath
made my desire easy to me without toil ! Verily, I had
lost hope of coming at a wild ass or aught else; anc*
assuredly God hath sent him to me and made him fall in
my place."

Then he sprang on the dead ass and tearing open its
belly, thrust in his head and routed about in its guts, till
he found the heart and tearing it out, swallowed it : but
the barbed head of the arrow stuck in his gullet and he
could neither get it down into his belly nor bring it forth
of his throat. So he made sure of destruction and said,
"Of a truth it beseemetn not the creature to seek [aught]
over and above that which God hath allotted to him.
Had I been content with what He allotted me, I had


203


not come to destruction." Wherefore, O king,' added
the vizier, ' it behoveth man to be content with that
which God hath allotted him and thank Him for His
bounties to him and despair not of his Lord. And be-
hold, king because of the purity of thine intent and
the multitude of thy good works, God hath blessed thee
with a son, after despair : wherefore we pray the Most
High to vouchsafe him long life and abiding happiness and
make him a blessed successor, faithful in the observance of
thy covenant, after thy long life.'

Then arose the fourth vizier and said, 'Verily, if the
king be a man of understanding, versed in the canons of jbCtfliji
science and government and policy, upright in purpose tlCCCCb
and just to his subjects, honouring and revering those to
whom honour and veneration are due, using clemency,
whenas it behoveth, in the exercise of his power and pro-
tecting both governors and governed, lightening their
burdens and bestowing largesse on them, sparing their
blood and covering their nakedness and fulfilling his
covenant with them, he is worthy of felicity both in this
world and the next : and this is of that which protecteth
him from them 1 and helpeth him to the stablishing of
his kingdom and the victory over his enemies and the
accomplishment of his desire, together with increase of
God's bounty to him and His favouring him for his praise
of Him and the attainment of His protection. But the king
who is the contrary of this ceaseth never from misfortunes
and calamities, he and the people of his realm ; for that
his oppression embraceth both stranger and kinsman*
and there cometh to pass with him that which befell the
unjust king with the pilgrim prince.' 'And how was
that ? ' asked King Jelyaad. ' Know, O king,' answered
the vizier, 'that

4 iu. preserves him from the ill-will of his subjects*


204


THE UNJUST KING AND THE PILGRIM PRINCE.

There was once, in the land of the West, 1 a king who
was unjust in his rule, tyrannous, violent and capricious,
having no regard to the welfare or protection of his subjects
nor of those who entered his kingdom ; and from every-
one who came within his realm his officers took four-fifths
of his good and left him one-fifth, and no more. God
the Most High decreed that he should have a son, who
was fortunate 3 and favoured 8 and seeing the things of the
world to be unrighteous, renounced them in his youth
and put away from him the world and that which is
therein and went forth, a pilgrim, serving God the Most
High, wandering over deserts and wastes and [bytimes]
entering cities.

One day, he came to his father's capital and the guards
laid hands on him and searched him, but found nothing
upon him but two gowns, one old and the other new.
So they stripped the new one from him and left him
the old, after they had passing scurvily entreated him;
whereat he complained and said, " Out on you, O oppres-
sors ! I am a poor man and a pilgrim, and what shall
this gown profit you? Except ye restore it to me, I will
go to the king and complain to him of you." "We do
this by the king's commandment," answered they. "So
do what seemeth good to thee."

So he betook himself to the king's palace ; but the
chamberlains denied him admittance, and he turned away,

1 Generally Africa, but occasionally Spain or Portugal, one province
of which latter country still retains this name, i.e. Algarve, corrupted

form of El Gherb, the West.

8 i.e. one of those for whom eternal felicity is prepared*
8 i.c. of God


205


saying in himself, " There is nothing for me but to watch
for his coming out and complain to him of my case and
that which hath betided me." Accordingly, he waited till
he heard one of the guards announce the king's coming
forth ; whereupon he crept up, little by little, till he stood
before the gate ; and when the king came out, he threw
himself in his way and made his complaint to him, giving
him to know that he was a man of the people of God, 1
who had renounced the world and went wandering over
the earth, seeking acceptance of God and entering every
city and hamlet, whilst all the folk he met gave him alms
according to their power. " I entered this thy city," con-
tinued he, "hoping that the folk would deal with me as
with others of my condition ; but thy men stopped me
and stripped me of one of my gowns and loaded me with
blows. Wherefore do thou look into my^ease and take
me by the hand and get me back my gown and I will not
abide in thy city an hour." Quoth the unjust king, "Who
counselled thee to enter this city, unknowing the custom
of its king?" And the pilgrim answered, "Give me back
my gown and do with me what thou wilt."

When the king heard this, he fell into a rage and said,
u O fooL we stripped thee of thy gown, so thou mightest
humble thyself [to us] ; but since thou troublest us with
this clamour, we will strip thy soul from thee." Then he
commanded to cast him into prison, where he began to
repent of having answered the king and reproached him-
self for not having left him the gown and made off with
his life. When it was the middle of the night, he rose to
his feet and prayed long and fervently, saying, "Q God,
Thou art the Righteous Judge; Thou knowest my case
and that which hath befallen me with this unjust king, and
I, Thine oppressed servant, beseech Thee, of the fulness
of Thy mercy, to deliver me from the hand of this unjust

a devotee.


206


king and send down on him Thy vengeance ; for Thou art
not unmindful of the unright of every oppressor Where-
fore, if Thou know that he hath oppressed me, loose on
him Thy vengeance this night and send down on him Thy
punishment ; for Thy rale is just and Thou art the Helper
of every afflicted one, O Thou to whom belong the power
and the glory to the end of time ! "

When the gaoler heard the prisoner's prayer, he trembled
in every limb, and behold, a fire broke out in the king's
palace and consumed the city and all that were therein,
even to the door of the prison, and none was spared save
the gaoler and the pilgrim. When the gaoler saw this, he
knew that it had not befallen save because of the pilgrim's
prayer ; so he loosed him and fleeing with him forth of
the burning, betook himself, he and the prince, to another
city. So was the unjust king consumed, he and his city,
by reason of his injustice, and he lost the goods both of
this world and the next.

As for us, O august king,' continued the vizier, ' we
neither lie down nor rise up without praying for thee and
thanking God the Most High for His goodness in giving
thee to us, tranquil in reliance on thy justice and the
excellence of thy governance ; and indeed we were sore
concerned for thy lack of a son to inherit thy kingdom,
fearing lest there betide us, after thee, a king unlike thee ;
but now God hath bestowed His favours upon us and done
away our concern and brought us gladness in the birth of
this blessed child; wherefore we beseech the Most High
to make him a worthy successor [to thee] and endow him
with eternal glory and felicity and abiding good.'
Tsitin Then rose the fifth vizier and said, ' Blessed be the
uTCCCUt. Most High God, Giver of [all] good gifts ! We are well
assured that God favours those who are grateful to Him
and mindful of His faith ; and thou, O august king, art
renowned for these illustrious virtues and for just dealing


20/


and equity among thy subjects, in that which is acceptable
to God the Most High. By reason of this hath God
exalted thy dignity and made thy days happy and bestowed
on thee the good gift of this happy child, after thou hadst
despaired, wherefrom there hath betided us abiding glad-
ness and joyance that may not be cut off ; for before this
we were in exceeding anxiety and sore concern, because
of thy lack of issue, and full of care, bethinking us of
all thy justice and gentle dealing with us and fearful lest
God decree death to thee and there be none to succeed
thee and inherit the kingdom after thee, and so we be
divided in our counsels and dissensions arise between
us and there befall us what befell the crows.' ' And what
befell the crows ? ' asked the king. ' Know, O august
king,' replied the vizier, ' that

THE CROWS AND THE HAWK

There was once, in a certain desert, a spacious valley,
full of strearns and trees and fruits and birds singing the
praises of God, the One, the All-powerful, Creator of day
and night ; and among them was a troop of crows, which
led the goodliest of lives under the governance of one
of their number, who ruled them with mildness and
benignity, so that they were with him in peace and
security ; and by reason of their wise ordinance of their
affairs, none of the other birds could avail against them.
In course of time there befell their chief that which is
irrevocably appointed to all creatures and he died ; where-
upon the others mourned sore for him, and what added to
their grief was that there was not amongst them one like
unto him, who should fill his place. So they all assembled
and took counsel together of whom it befitted to set over
them : and some of them chose one crow, saying, " It


208


beseemeth that this one be king over usj" whilst others
objected to him and would none of him ; and thus there
arose division and dissension among them and the strife
waxed hot between them.

At last they agreed to sleep the night upon it and that
none should go forth at peep of dawn next morning to
seek his living, [as of wont], but that all should wait till
daybreak, when they should meet all in one place,
" Then," said they, " we will all take flight at once and
whichsoever soars above the rest in his flying, we will
make king over us." So they did as they had agreed and
took flight all, but each of them deemed himself higher
than his fellow ; wherefore quoth this one, " I am highest,''
and that, " Nay ; that am I." Then said the lowest of
them , £< Look up, all of you, and whomsoever ye find the
highest of you, let him be your chief." So they raised
their eyes and seeing the hawk soaring over them, said
to each other, " We agreed that which bird soever should
be the highest of us should be king over us, and behold,
the hawk is the highest of us: what say ye to him?"
And they all cried out, saying, " We accept of him."

So they called the hawk and said to him, " O father of
good, we have chosen thee governor over us, that thou
mayst look into our affair." The hawk consented, saying,
" God willing, ye shall have of me great good." But,
after awhile, he fell to taking a company of them and
betaking himself with them afar off to one of the caves,
where he struck them down and eating their eyes and
brains, threw their bodies into the river. Thus he did
every day, it being his intent to destroy them all, [one
after another], till, seeing that their number diminished
daily, the crows flocked to him and said, " O our king,
we complain to thee for that, since the day we made thee
king and ruler over us, we are in the sorriest, case and
every day a company of us is missing and we know not


209


the cause of this, more by token that the most part thereof

are of those in attendance on thee."

Thereupon the hawk waxed wroth with them and said
to them, " Verily it is ye who have slain them, and ye
forestall me [with accusation]." So saying, he pounced
upon them and tearing half a score of their chiefs [in
pieces] before the rest, threatened them and drove them
out from before him with blows and buffets. So they
repented them of that which they had done and said,
" We have known no good since the death of our first
king, especially in the deed of this stranger in kind; but
we deserve [all we suffer], even had he destroyed us to
the last of us, and there is exemplified in us the saying
of Him who saith. 4 He who submitteth not himself to the
rule of his own people, the enemy hath dominion over
him, of his ignorance.' And now there is nothing for it
but to flee for our lives, else shall we perish." So they
look flight and dispersed to various places.

And we, O king,' continued the vizier, 8 we feared lest
the like of this befall us and a king become ruler over us,
other than thyself; but God hath vouchsafed us this boon
and hath sent us this blessed child, and now we are
assured of peace and union and security and prosperity
in the land. So blessed be God the Great and to Him be
thanks and praise and fair honour ! And may He bless the
king and us all his subjects and vouchsafe unto us and
him the utmost felicity and make his life happy and his
fortune constant ! '

Then arose the sixth vizier and said, 'God grant thee
all felicity, O king, in this world and the next! Verily,
the ancients say, e( He who prayeth and fasteth and giveth
parents their due and is just in his rule meeteth his Lord
and He is well pleased with him." Thou hast been set
over us and hast ruled us justly and thine endeavour in
this hath been blessed j wherefore we beseech God the
vol- vni. 14


210


Most High to make great thy reward and requite thee th} ;
goodness. I have heard what this wise man hath said
respecting our fear for the loss of our prosperity, by reason
of the death of the king or the advent of another who
should not be like him, and how after him dissensions
would be rife among us and calamity betide thereupon,
and how it behoved us therefore to be instant in prayer
to God the Most High, so haply He might vouchsafe the
king a happy son, to inherit the kingship after him. But,
after all, the issue of that which man desireth of the goods
of the world and after which he lusteth is unknown unto
him, and it behoveth him to ask not of his Lord a thing
whose issue he knoweth not ; for that belike the hurt of
the thing is nearer to him than its profit and his destruc-
tion may be in that he seeketh and there may befall him
3Cfgf)t what befell the serpent-charmer's wife and children and
tJCCCtfciu. the people of his house.' ' What was that ? ' asked the
king. ' Know, O king,' replied the vkier, ' that


THE SERPENT-CHARMER AND HIS WIFE.

There was once a man, a serpent-charmer, who used to
[catch and] train serpents, and this was his trade ; and he
had a great basket, in which were three snakes ; but the
people of his house knew this not. Every day he used to
take the basket and go round about the town with it,
gaining his living and that of his family [by exhibiting
the snakes], and at eventide he returned to his house and
clapped them back into the basket privily. One day,
when he came home, as of wont, his wife asked him what
was in the basket and he said, u What wouldst thou with
it? Is not victual plentiful with you? Be content with
that which God hath allotted to thee and enquire not
of aught else." With this she held her peace \ but she


211


said in herself, "Needs must I search the basket and
know what is therein." So she egged on her children to
ask him of the basket and importune him, till he should
tell them what was therein. They concluded that it con-
tained something to eat and sought every day of their
father that he should show them what was in it; and he
still put them off and forbade them from asking this.

On this wise they abode awhile, till they agreed with
their mother that they would neither eat nor drink with
their father, till he granted them their prayer and opened
the basket to them. One night, the serpent-charmer came
home with great plenty of meat and drink and called them
to eat with him ; but they refused and showed him anger ;
whereupon he began to coax them with fair words, saying,
" Tell me what you would have, that I may bring it you,
be it meat or drink or clothes." " O our father," answered
they, "we want nothing of thee but that thou open this
basket and show us what is therein : else we will kill
ourselves." H O my children," rejoined he, "there is
nothing good for you therein and indeed the opening of
it will be hurtful to you." They only redoubled in despite
for all he could say, which when he saw, he began to
berate them and threaten them with beating, except they
left this ; but they redoubled in anger and persistence in
asking, till at last he waxed wroth and took a stick to beat
them, and they fled from him within the house.

Now the basket was present and he had not hidden it
anywhere; so his wife left him occupied with the children
and opened the basket in haste, that she might see what
was therein; whereupon the serpents came out and bit
her and killed her. Then they went round about the
house and killed all, great and small, who were therein,
except the serpent-charmer, who left the place and went
away. If then s O august king,' continued the vizier, ; thou
consider this, thou wilt know that it is not for a man to


desire aught but that which God the Most High refuseth
not to him; nay, he should be content with what He
willeth. And thou, O king, for the abundance of thy
wisdom and the excellence of thine understanding, God
hath solaced thine eyes with the advent of this thy son,
after despair, and hath comforted thine heart ; wherefore
we pray God to make him of the just kings, acceptable to
Himself and to his subjects.'

Then rose the seventh vizier and said, 1 king, I know
and endorse all that my brethren, these wise and learned
viziers, have said of thy justice and the goodness of thy
policy and how thou art distinguished in this from all
other kings ; wherefore they gave thee the preference
over them. Indeed, this is of that which is incumbent
on us, O king, and I say, " Praised be God for that He
hath guerdoned thee with His bounty and vouchsafed thee,
of His mercy, the welfare of the realm and succoured us
and thee, on condition that we abound in gratitude to
Him ; and all this no otherwise than by thine existence ! *
What while thou remainest to us, we fear not oppression
neither dread unright, nor can any take advantage of our
weakness ; and indeed it is said, " The greatest good of
a people is a just king and their greatest evil an unjust
one ; " and again, " Better dwell with devouring lions than
with an unjust Sultan." So praised be God the Most
High with eternal praise for that He hath blessed us with
thy life and vouchsafed thee this blessed child, whenas
thou wast stricken in years and hadst despaired of issue !
For the goodliest of the gifts of the world is a virtuous
child, and it is said, u He who hath no child, [his life] is
without result and he hath no remembrance." 1

As for thee, because of the righteousness of thy justice
and thy pious confidence in God the Most High, thou
hast been vouchsafed this happy son. ; yea, this blessed
child cometh as a gift from the Most High God to us


213


and to thee, for the excellence of thy governance and the

goodliness of thy patience; and in this thou hast fared

even as fared the spider with the wind.' 'And what is

the story of the spider and the wind?" asked the king. l^t<yf)t

' Know, O king,' answered the vizier, ' that tiCCCdrfft

THE SPIDER AND THE WIND.

A spider once took up her abode on a high retired
gate and span her web there and dwelt therein in peace,
giving thanks to God the Most High, who had made this
dwelling-place easy to her and had set her in safety from
noxious reptiles. On this wise she abode awhile, still
giving thanks to God for her ease and sustenance, till the
Creator bethought Him to try her and make essay of her
gratitude and patience. So he sent upon her a strong
north-east wind, which carried her away, web and all, and
cast her into the sea. The waves bore her ashore and
she thanked God for safety and began to upbraid the wind,
saying, " O wind, why hast thou dealt thus with me and
what good hast thou gotten by carrying me hither from
my abiding-place, where indeed I was in safety, secure in
my house on the top of the gate ? " " Leave thy chiding,"
replied the wind, " for I will carry thee back and restore
thee to thy place, as thou wast aforetime."

So the spider waited patiently, till the north-east wind
left blowing and there arose a south-west wind, which
caught her up and flew with her towards her dwelling-
place ; and when she came to her abode, she knew it and
clung to it. And we/ continued the vizier, 'beseech God
(who hath rewarded the king for his singleness of heart
and patience and hath taken pity on his subjects and
blessed them with His favour and hath vouchsafed the
king this son in his old age, after he had despaired [of


214


issue] and removed him not from the world, till He had
granted him the solace of his eyes and bestowed on him
what he hath bestowed of kingship and empire), to vouch-
safe unto thy son that which He hath vouchsafed unto
thee of kingship and dominion and glory ! Amen/

Then said the king, 8 Praised be God over all praise and
thanks be to Him over all thanks ! There is no god but
He, the Creator of all things, by the light of whose signs
we know the glory of His greatness and who giveth king-
ship and dominion over his own country to whom He
willeth of His servants ! He chooseth of them whom He
will to make him His vicegerent and steward over His
creatures and commandeth him to just and equal dealing
with them and the maintenance of laws and observances
and the practice of right and constancy in ordering their
affairs to that which is most ''acceptable to Him and to
them. He who doth thus and obeyeth the commandment
of his Lord, attaineth his desire, and God preserveth
him from the perils of this world and maketh fair his
recompense in the world to come ; for indeed He neglecteth
not the reward of the just : and whoso doth otherwise than
as God biddeth him sinneth grievously and disobeyeth
his Lord, preferring his temporal above his spiritual weal
He hath no trace in this world and no part in the next :
for God spareth not the unjust and the corrupt, nor doth
He forsake any of His servants.

These our viziers have set forth how, by reason of our
just dealing with our subjects and our wise governance of
their affairs, God hath vouchsafed us and them His grace,
for which it behoveth us to thank Him, because of the
abundance of His mercies. Moreover, each of them hath
spoken that wherewith God inspired him concerning this
matter, and they have vied with each other in rendering
thanks to God the Most High and praising Him for His
favours and bounties. 1 also render thanks to God, for


215


that I am but a slave commanded ; my heart is in His hand
and my tongue obedient to Him, accepting that which He
adjudge th to me and to them, come what may.

Each one of them hath said what came to his thought
on the subject of this boy and hath set forth that which
was of the renewal of [God's] favour to us, after I had
reached the age when despair is uppermost and hope
faileth. So praised be God who hath saved us from dis-
appointment and from the alternation of rulers, like to
the alternation of night and day ! For verily, this was
a great boon both to us and to them ; wherefore we praise
God the Most High who hath given a ready answer to
our prayer and hath blessed us with this boy and set him
in high place, as the inheritor of the kingship. And we
entreat Him, of His bounty and clemency, to make him
happy in his actions, apt to good works, so he may
become a king and a sultan governing his people with
justice and equity, guarding them from the perils of error
and frowardness of His bounty and grace and goodness ! '

When the king had made an end of his speech, the
sages and learned men rose and prostrated themselves
before God and thanked the king, after which they kissed
his hands and departed, each to his own house, whilst the
king withdrew into his palace, where he looked upon the
new-born child and offered up prayers for him and named
him Wird Khan. The boy grew up till he attained the
age of twelve, 1 when the king, being minded to have him
taught the various branches of knowledge, built him a
palace amiddleward the city, wherein were three hundred
and threescore rooms, and lodged him therein. Then he

1 Sic in all the texts ; but this is an evident error, as twelve is the age
at which the prince is afterwards (see post, p. 21 6) stated to have com-
pleted his education. We should probably here read "seven/ that
being the age at which most of the royal children in tales of this kind
we stated to have commenced the serkus work of education.


2ib


assigned him three learned men and bade them relax not
from teaching him day and night and look that there was
no kind of knowledge but they instructed him therein, so
he might become versed in all sciences. Moreover, he
commanded them to sit with him one day in each of the
rooms in turn and write on the door thereof that which
they had taught him therein of various kinds of knowledge
and report to himself every seven days what he had learnt.
So they went in to the prince and stinted not from teach-
ing him day nor night, withholding from him nought of
that which they knew; and there was manifest in him
quickness of wit and excellence of apprehension and
aptness to receive instruction such as none had shown
before him. Every seventh day his governors reported to
the king what his son had learnt and mastered, whereby
Jelyaad became proficient in goodly learning and fair
culture; and they said to him, "'Never saw we one so
richly gifted with understanding as is this boy, may God
bless thee in him and give thee joy of his life ! '

When the prince had completed his twelfth 1 year, he
knew the better part of all sciences and excelled all the
sages and learned men of his day. So his governors
brought him to his father and said to him, 'God solace
thine eyes, O king, with this happy youth 1 We bring
him to thee, after he hath learnt all manner of knowledge,
and there is not one of the learned men of the time
who hath attained to that whereto he hath attained [of
proficiency].' The king rejoiced in this with an exceeding
joy and prostrated himself in gratitude to God (to whom
belong might and majesty), saying, 'Praised be God for
His mercies that may not be told ! ' Then he called his
chief vizier and said to him, ' Know, O Shimas, that the
governors of my son are come to tell me that he hath
mastered all kinds of knowledge and there is nothing but
1 See ante, note, p. 215.


217


they have instructed him therein, so that he surpasseth
all who have foregone him in this. What sayst thou, O
Shimas ? '

The vizier prostrated himself before God (to whom
belong might and majesty) and kissed the king's hand,
saying, *The ruby, though it be embedded in the solid
rock, cannot but shine as a lamp, and this thy son is
such a jewel ; his tender age hath not hindered him from
becoming a sage and praised be God for that which He
hath bestowed on him ! But to-morrow I will call an
assembly of the flower of the amirs and men of learning
and examine the prince and cause him speak forth that 'Nigijl
which is with him in their presence.' t5C£CCf3'

So the king commanded the attendance of the keenest-
witted and most accomplished of the erudite and learned
and sages of his dominions, and they all presented them,
selves on the morrow at the door of the palace, whereupon
the king bade admit them. Then entered Shimas and
kissed the hands of the prince, who rose and prostrated
himself to him : but Shimas said, ' It behoveth not the
lion-whelp to prostrate himself to any of the beasts, nor
is it seemly that light prostrate itself to darkness.' Quoth
the prince, 'When the lion- whelp sees the leopard, he
prostrates himself to him, because of his wisdom, and
light prostrates itself to darkness for the purpose of
showing forth that which is therewithin.' Quoth Shimas,
' True, O my lord ; but I would have thee answer me that
whereof I shall ask thee, by leave of his highness and his
folk.' And the youth said, ' With [my father's] permission,
I will answer thee.'

So Shimas began and said, 'What is the Eternal, the
Absolute, and what are the two essences 1 thereof and
whether of the two is the abiding one ? ' e God,' answered
the prince s s (to whom belong might and majesty,) is the
4 ue. manifestations or incarnations.


218


Eternal, the Absolute, for that He is the first, without
beginning, and the last, without end. His two essences
are this world and the next; and the abiding one of the
two is the world to come.' (Q.) 'Thou sayst truly: but
tell me, how knowest thou that one of God's essences is
this world and the other the world to come?' (A.) '[I
know this] because this world was created from nothing-
ness and had not its being from any existing thing;
wherefore its affair is referable to the first essence.
Moreover, it is a commodity swift of ceasing, the works
whereof call for requital, and this presumes the repro-
duction 1 of that which passes away: so the next world
is the second essence.' (Q.) ' How knowest thou that the
world to come is the abiding one of the two states ? ' (A.)
' Because it is the stead of requital for deeds done in this
world, prepared by the Eternal without cease. (Q.) 'Who
are the people of this world most to be praised for their
practice?' (A.) 'Those who prefer their weal in the
world to come to their weal in this world.' (Q.) 'And
who is he that prefers his future to his present weal?'
(A.) ' He who knows that he dwells in a perishing house,
that he was created but to pass away and that, after
passing away, he will be called to account; and indeed,
were there in this world one abiding for ever, he would
not prefer it to the next world.' (Q.) ' Can the future
life subsist without the present ? ' (A.) ' He who hath
no present life hath no future life : and indeed I liken the
people of this world and the goal to which they fare to
certain handicraftsmen, for whom an amir builds a narrow
house and lodges them therein, commanding each of them
to do a certain work and assigning to him a set term and
appointing one to act as steward over them. Whoso doth
the work appointed unto him, the steward brings him forth
©f that straitness ; but whoso doth it not. is punished.
1 For the purpose of requit&L


219


After awhile, they find honey exuding from the chinks
of the house, and when they have eaten thereof and tasted
its sweetness, they slacken in their appointed task and cast
it behind their backs. So they endure the straitness and
anxiety in which they are, with what they know of the
punishment to which they are going, and are content
with this trifling sweetness : and the steward leaves not
to fetch every one of them forth of the house, [for punish-
ment or reward,] when his appointed term is expired.
Now we know the world to be a dwelling, wherein all
eyes are dazed, and that each of its folk hath his appointed
term ; and he who finds the little sweetness that is in the
world and occupies himself therewith is of the number of
the lost, since he prefers the things of this world to those
of the next : but he who pays no heed to this paltry sweet-
ness and prefers the things of the world to come to those
of this world, is of those who are saved.' (Q.) ' I accept
what thou sayest of this world and the next : but 1 see
they are as two set in authority over man ; needs must he
content them both, and they are contrary to one another.
So, if the creature set himself to seek his livelihood, it is
harmful to his soul in the world to come ; and if he devote
himself to [preparation for] the next world, it is hurtful to
his body; and there is no way for him of pleasing both
these contraries at once.' (A.) 'Indeed, the quest of one's
worldly livelihood with a [pure] intent and on lawful wise
is a provision for the quest of the [goods of the] world to
come, if a man spend a part of his day in seeking his
livelihood in this world, for the sustenance of his body,
and devote the rest of his day to seeking [the goods of]
the next world, for the repose of his soul and the warding
off of hurt therefrom ; and indeed I see this world and the
next as they were two kings, a just and an unjust.' 8 How
so?' asked Shimas, and the youth said,


220


THE TWO KINGS.

* There were once two kings, a just and an unjust. The
Matter's country abounded in trees and fruits and herbs ;
but he let no merchant pass without robbing him of his
goods and his merchandise, and the merchants endured
this with patience, by reason of their gain from the
fatness of the land in the means of life and its pleasant-
ness, more by token that it was renowned for its richness
in precious stones and jewels. Now the just king, who
loved jewels, heard of this land and sent one of his
subjects thither, giving him much money and bidding
him. buy jewels therewith from that country. So he went
thither and it being told to the unjust^, king that a merchant
was come to his realm, with much money to buy jewels
withal, he sent for him and asked him whence and what
he was and what was his errand. Quoth the merchant,
"I am of such a country, and the king of the land gave
me money and bade me buy therewith jewels from this
country ; so I obeyed him and came." " Out on thee ! "
cried the unjust king. " Knowst thou not my fashion of
dealing with the people of my realm and how each day I
take their good? How then comest thou to my country?
And behold, thou hast been a sojourner here since such a
time ! " " The money is not mine," answered the stranger ;
" not a doit of it ; nay, it is a trust in my hands, till I
bring it 1 to its owner." But the king said, "I will not
let thee take thy livelihood of my country or go out there-
from, except thou ransom thyself with this money, all ol
Mfgfjt it ; else shalt thou die."

IftCCSX So the man said in himself, " I am fallen between two
kings, and 1 know that the oppression of this one em-
i.e„ that which he was charged to buy with it.


221


braceth all who abide in his dominions : and if I content
him not, I shall lose both life and money and shall fail oi
my errand ; whilst, on the other hand, if I give him all
the money, it will assuredly prove my ruin with the other
king, its owner : wherefore nothing will serve me but that
I give this one a small part thereof and content him
therewith and avert perdition from myself and from the
money. Thus shall I get my livelihood of the fatness
of this land, till I buy that which I desire of jewels and
return to the owner of the money with his need, trusting
in his justice and indulgence and fearing not that he will
punish me for that which this unjust king taketh of the
money, especially if it be but a little."

Then he called down blessings on the unjust king and
said to him, 4t O king, I will ransom myself and this
money with a small portion thereof, from the time of my
entering thy country to that of my going forth therefrom. 8
The king agreed to this and left him at peace for a year,
till he bought jewels with all [the rest of] the money and
returned therewith to his master, to whom he made his
excuses, confessing to having rescued himself from the
unjust king as before related. The just king accepted
his excuse and praised him for his wise ordinance and
set him on his right hand in his divan and appointed him
in his kingdom an abiding inheritance and a happy life.

Now the just king is the similitude of the next world
and the unjust king that of this world ; the jewels that be
in the latter's dominions are good deeds and pious works.
The merchant is man and the money he hath with him is
the provision appointed him of God. When I consider
this, I know that it behoves him who seeks his livelihood
In this world to leave not a day without seeking the goods
of the world to come, so shall he content this world with
that which he gains of the fatness of the earth and the
next with that which he spends of his life in seeking after


222


it.' (Q.) ' Are the soul and the body alike in reward and
punishment, or is the [body, as the] luster of lusts and
doer of sins, alone affected with punishment?' (A.) 'The
inclination unto lusts and sins may be the cause of earning
reward by the withholding of the soul therefrom and the
repenting thereof ; but the affair 1 is in the hand of Him
who doth what He will, and by their contraries are things
distinguished, Thus subsistence is necessary to the body,
but there is no body without soul; and the purification
of the soul is in making clean the intent in this world and
taking thought to that which shall profit in the world to
come. Indeed, soul and body are like two horses running
for a wager or two foster-brothers or two partners in
affairs. By the intent are good deeds distinguished and
thus the body and soul are partners in actions and in
reward and punishment, and in this they are like the blind
man and the cripple with the overseer of the garden.'
' How so ? ' asked Shimas, and the prince said,


THE BLIND MAN AND THE CRIPPLE

'A blind man and a cripple were travelling-companions
and used to beg in company. One day they sought
admission into the garden of some one of the benevolent,
and a kind-hearted man hearing their talk, took com-
passion on them and carried them into his garden, where
he left them and went away, bidding them do no waste
nor damage therein. When the fruits became ripe, the
cripple said to the blind man, " Harkye, I see ripe fruits
and long for them ; but I cannot rise to them, to eat
thereof; so go thou, for thou art sound of limb, and fetch
m thereof, that we may eat." "Out on thee!" replied

1 Syn. commandment {el amr).


223


the blind man. "I had no thought of them, but now that
thou callest them to my mind, I long to eat of them and
I cannot avail unto this, being unable to see them; so
how shall we do to get at them?" At this moment, up
came the overseer of the garden, who was a man of under-
standing, and the cripple said to him, " Harkye, overseer !
I long for some of those fruits ; but we are as thou seest ;
I am a cripple and my mate here is stone-blind : so what
shall we do ? " " Out on ye ! " replied the overseer. " Have
ye forgotten that the master of the garden stipulated with
you that ye should do no waste nor damage therein?
Take warning then and abstain from this." But they
answered, "Needs must we get at these fruits, that we
may eat thereof: so tell us how we shall contrive this."

When the overseer saw that they were not to be turned
from their purpose, he said, " O cripple, let the blind
man take thee on his back and carry thee to the tree
whose fruit pleaseth thee, so thou mayst pluck what thou
canst reach thereof." So the blind man took the cripple
on his back and the latter guided him, till he brought him
to a tree, and he fell to plucking from it what he would
and tearing at its branches, till he had despoiled it ; after
which they went round about the garden and wasted it
with their hands and feet ; nor did they cease from this
fashion, till they had stripped all the trees in the garden.

Then they returned to their place and presently up
came the master of the garden, who, seeing it in this
plight, was sore angered and said to them, " Out on ye !
What fashion is this? Did I not stipulate with you that
ye should do no waste in the garden?" Quoth they,
" Thou knowest that we cannot avail to come at any of
the fruit, for that one of us is a cripple and cannot rise
and the other is blind and cannot see that which is before
him: so what is our offence?" But the master answered
saying, "Think ye I know not how ye wrought and how


224


ye have gone about to do waste in my garden? I know,
as if I had been with thee, blind man, that thou
tookest the cripple on thy back and he guided thee, till
thou borest him to the trees." Then he punished them
grievously and put them out of the garden. Now the blind
man is the similitude of the body, and the cripple that of
the soul, for that it hath no power of motion but by the
body ; the garden is the works, for which the creature is
rewarded or punished, and the overseer is the reason, which
commandeth to good and forbiddeth from evil Thus the
body and the soul are partners in reward and punishment'
(Q.) ' Which of the learned men is most worthy of praise,
according to thee?' (A.) 'He who is learned in the
knowledge of God and whose knowledge profiteth him.'
(Q.) 'And who is this?' (A.) 'He who is instant in
seeking to please his Lord and avoid His wrath.' (Q.)
'And which of them is the mosf excellent ?' (A.) 'He
who is most learned in the knowledge of God.' (Q.) 'And
which is the most experienced of them?' (A.) 'He who
is most constant in doing according to his knowledge.'
(Q.) ' And which is the purest-hearted of them ? ' (A.) ' He
who is most assiduous in preparing for death and praising
God and least of them in hope, and indeed he who
familiarizes his soul with the terrors of death is as one
who looks into a clear mirror, for that he knows the truth,
and the mirror still increases in clearness and brilliance. 1
(Q.) 'What are the goodliest of treasures?' (A.) 'The
treasures of heaven.' (Q.) ' Which is the goodliest of the
treasures of heaven?' (A.) 'The praise and magnification
of God.' (Q.) 'Which is the most excellent of the
treasures of earth?' (A.) 'The practice of kindness.'
tNTt'gljt (Q.) ' Tell me of three different things, knowledge and
0£££CXI, judgment and wit, and of that which unites them.' (A.)
1 Knowledge comes of learning, judgment of experience
and wit of reflection, and they are all stablished and united


in reason, He in whom these three qualities combine
is perfect, and he who adds thereto the fear of God is
in the right course. 5 (Q.) ' Tell me, is it possible, in the
case of a man of learning and wisdom, endowed with
sound judgment, lucid intelligence and keen and excelling
wit, for desire and lust to change these his qualities?'
(A.) ' [Yes] ; for these passions, when they enter into a
man, affect his wisdom and understanding and judgment
and wit, and he is like the eagle, which abode in the
upper air, of the excess of his subtlety and precaution
against the hunters ; but, as he was thus, he saw a fowler
set up his nets and bait them with a piece of meat ; which
when he beheld, desire and lust thereof overcame him and
he forgot that which he had seen of nets and of the sorry
case of all birds that fell into them. So he swooped down
from the sky and pouncing upon the piece of meat, was
caught in the same snare and could not win free. When
the fowler came up and saw the eagle taken in his net,
he marvelled exceedingly and said, " I set up my nets,
thinking to take therein pigeons and the like of small
birds j how came this eagle to fall into it ? " It is said
that when desire and lust incite a man of understanding
to aught, he considers the issue thereof and refrains from
that which they make fair and overcomes his passions
with his reason ; for, when they urge him to aught, it
behoves him to make his reason like unto a skilled horse-
man, who, mounting a skittish horse, curbs him with a
sharp bit, so that he goes aright with him and carries
him whither he will. As for the ignorant man, who has
neither knowledge nor judgment and things are obscure
to him and desire and lust lord it over him, verily he does
according to his desire and his lust and is of the number
of those that perish ; nor is there among men one in
sorrier case than he.' (Q.) 'When is knowledge profitable
and when availeth reason to ward off the ill effects of

VOL. VIII. IS


226


desire and lust?' (A.) 'When their possessor uses them
in quest of the goods of the next world, for reason and
knowledge are altogether profitable ; but it behoves their
owner to expend them not in the quest of the goods of
this world, save in so far as may be needful for gaining
his livelihood and defending himself from its mischief/
(Q.) ' What is most worthy that a man should apply him-
self thereto and occupy his heart withal?' (A.) 'Good
works.' (Q.) ' If a man do this, it diverts him from gaining
his living : how then shall he do for his livelihood, which
he cannot dispense withal?' (A.) 'A man's day is four-
and-twenty hours, and it behoves him to employ one
[third] part thereof in seeking his living, another in prayer
and rest and the remainder in the pursuit of knowledge ;
for a reasonable man without knowledge is as a barren
land, wherein is place for neither tillage nor tree-planting
nor grass. Except it be prepared for tillage and planted,
no fruit will profit therein ; but, if it be tilled and planted,
it brings forth goodly fruits. So with the ignorant man :
there is no profit in him till knowledge be planted in
him: then doth he bear fruit.' (Q.) 'Whatsayst thou of
knowledge without understanding ? ' (A.) ' It is as the
knowledge of a brute, which hath learnt the hours of its
feeding and watering and waking, but hath no reason. 5
(Q.) 'Thou hast been brief in thine answer concerning
this ; but I accept thy reply. Tell me, how shall I guard
myself against the Sultan ? ' (A.) ' By giving him no hold
over thee.' (Q.) 'And how can I but give him hold ovej
me, seeing that he is set in dominion over me and that
the rein of my affair is in his hand?' (A.) ' His dominion
over thee lies in the duties thou owest him ; so, if thou give
him his due, he hath no [farther] dominion over thee.
(Q.) 'What are a vizier's duties to his king?' (A.) 'Good
counsel and zealous service both in public and private,
right judgment, the keeping of his secrets and that he


227


conceal from him nought of that which he hath a right
to know, lack of neglect of aught of his occasions, with
whose accomplishment he charges him, the seeking his
approof on every wise and the avoidance of his wrath.'
(Q.) 'How should the vizier do with the king?' (A.)
' If thou be vizier to the king and wouldst be safe from
him, let thy hearing and thy speech to him overpass his
expectation of thee and be thy seeking of thy need from
him after the measure of thy rank in his esteem, and
beware lest thou advance thyself to a dignity whereof he
shall not judge thee worthy, for this would be like to
presumption in thee against him. So, if thou presume
upon his mildness and assume a rank beyond that which
he deemeth thy due, thou wilt be like the hunter, who
used to trap wild beasts for their skins and throw the flesh
away. Now a lion used to come to the place [where the
hunter skinned his prey] and eat of the carrion ; and in
course of time, he clapped up an acquaintance with the
hunter, who would throw [meat] to him and wipe his
hands on his back, whilst the lion wagged his tail. When
the hunter saw his tameness and gentleness and sub-
missiveness to him, he said in himself, "Verily this lion
humbleth himself to me and I am master of him, and
I see not why I should not mount him and strip off his
hide, as with the other wild beasts." So he sprang on
the lion's back, presuming on his mildness and deeming
himself sure of him ; which when the lion saw, he was
exceeding wroth and raising his paw, smote the hunter,
that he drove his claws into his guts ; after which he cast
him under his feet and tore him in pieces and devoured
him. By this thou mayst know that it behoves the vizier
to bear himself towards the king according to that which
he seeth of his condition and not to presume upon the
superiority of his own judgment, lest the king become 'Mfg^t
jealous of him.' (Q.) 'How shall the vizier grace himself uXCCOCii


228


in the king's sight?' (A.) 'By the performance of the trust
of loyal counsel and sound judgment committed to him and
the execution of his commandments.' (Q.) 'As for that
which thou sayst of the vizier's duty to avoid the king's
wrath and perform his wishes and apply himself diligently
to the due execution of that wherewith he charges him,
that is a matter of course : but how, if the king's whole
pleasure be in tyranny and the practice of oppression and
extortion, and what shall the vizier do, if he be afflicted
with the frequentation of this unjust king ? If he strive
to turn him from his lust and his desire, he cannot avail
unto this, and if he follow him in his lusts and flatter
him with false counsel, he assumes the responsibility of
this and becomes an enemy to the people. What sayst
thou of this?' (A.) 'What thou sayst, O vizier, of his
responsibility and sin, arises only in the case of his
abetting the king in his wrong-doing; but it behoves the
vizier, when the king takes counsel with him of the like
of this, to show forth to him the way of justice and
equity and caution him against tyranny and oppression
and expound to him the principles of good government,
alluring him with the reward that pertains to this and
restraining him with warning of the punishment that he
incurs [in following his perverse inclinations]. If the
king incline to his words, his end is gained, and if not,
there is nothing for it but that he depart from him on
courteous wise, for that in separation is ease for each of
them.' (Q.) 'What are the duties of the king to his
subjects and of the latter to the king?' (A.) 'They shall
do what he orders them with a pure intent and obey him
in that which pleases him and pleases God and His
apostle. It is the king's duty to protect their possessions
and guard their women, even as it is their duty to hearken
unto him and obey him and expend their lives freely in
his defence and give him his lawful due and praise him


229


duly for that which he bestoweth upon them of his justice
and beneficence.' (Q.) 'Have his subjects any claim
upon the king other than that which thou hast said?'
(A.) 'Yes : the king's duty to his subjects is more impera-
tive than their duty to him; for that the breach of his
duty towards them is more harmful than that of theirs
towards him ; because the ruin of the king and the loss
of his kingdom and fortune betide not but by the breach
of his duty to his subjects: wherefore it behoves him who
is invested with the kingship to be assiduous in ensuing
three things, to wit, the furtherance of the faith, the
welfare of his subjects and the due administration of
government ; for by the assiduous observance of these
three things, his kingdom shall endure.' (Q.) ' How doth
it behove him to do for his subjects' weal?' (A.) *By
giving them their due and maintaining their laws and
usages and employing wise and learned men to teach
them and justifying them, one of the other, and sparing
their blood and defending their goods and lightening their
burdens and strengthening their armies.' (Q.) ' What is
the king's duty to his vizier ? ' (A.) ' None hath a more
imperative claim on the king than the vizier, for three
reasons : firstly, because of that which betides him with
him, in case of error in judgment, and because of the
common profit to king and people in case of sound judg-
ment : secondly, that the folk may know the goodliness
of the rank which the vizier holds in the king's estimation
and so look on him with eyes of veneration and respect
and submission ; and thirdly, that the vizier, seeing this
from king and people, may ward off from them that which
they mislike and fulfil to them that which they love.'
(Q.) 'I have heard all thou hast said of the attributes of
king and vizier and people and approve thereof : but now
tell me what is incumbent in the matter of keeping the
tongue from lying and foliy and slander and excess in


230


speech.' (A.) 'It behoves a man to speak nought but
good and kindness and to talk not of that which concerns
him not ; to leave detraction nor carry talk he hath heard
from one man to his enemy, neither seek to harm his
friend nor his enemy with his sultan and reck not of any,
neither of him from whom he hopes for good nor of him
whose mischief he fears, save of God the Most High ■ for,
in truth, He is the [only] one who harmeth or profiteth.
Let him not impute default unto any nor talk ignorantly,
iest he incur the burden and the sin thereof before God
and earn hatred among men ; for know that speech is
like an arrow, which, once discharged, none can avail to
recall. Moreover, let him beware of confiding his secret
to one who shall discover it, lest he fall into mischief
by reason of its disclosure, after having relied upon its
concealment ; -ind let him be .more careful to keep his
secret from his friend than from his enemy ; for the
keeping a secret with all folk is of the performance of
trust.' (Q.) 'Tell me how a man should bear himself
with his family and friends.' (A.) ' There is no ease foi
a son of Adam save in good conduct ; he should render
to his family that which they deserve and to his brethren
that which is their due.' (Q.) 'What should one render
to one's kinsfolk?' (A.) 'To one's parents, submission
and soft speech and affability and honour and reverence.
To one's brethren, loyal counsel and readiness to expend
one's good for them and assistance in their undertakings
and grieving for their grief and joyance in their joy
and closing of the eyes toward the errors that they may
commit; for s when they experience this from a man,
they requite him with the best they can command of
good counsel and expend their lives in his defence ;
so, if thou know thy brother to be trusty, be lavish to
"Nfftfjl n ' m °f tnv ^ ove an d helpful to him in all his a flairs.*
tKCCCxIti (Q-) 4 1 see that brethren are of two kinds, brethren of


oust 1 and brethren of society. 5 As for the first, there
is due to them that which thou hast set forth ; but now
tell me of the others.' (A.) £ As for brethren of society s
thou gettest of them pleasance and goodly usance and
fair speech and company ; so be thou not sparing to
them of thy delights, but be lavish to them, like as they
are lavish thereof to thee, and render to them that which
they render to thee of affability and an open favour and
sweet speech ; so shall thy life be pleasant and thy
speech have acceptance with them.' (Q.) 'Tell me now
of the provision decreed by the Creator to all creatures.
Hath He allotted to men and beasts each his several pro-
vision, to the completion of his appointed term ; and if
this be so, what maketh him who seeketh his livelihood
to incur hardship and toil in the quest of that which he
knows he cannot fail of obtaining, if it be decreed to him,
though he incur not the misery of endeavour ; whilst, if it
be not decreed to him, he shall not win thereto, though he
strive after it with his utmost endeavour? Shall he there-
fore leave striving and put his trust in his Lord and rest
his body and his soul?' (A.) 'Indeed, we see that to
each there is a provision allotted and a term prescribed ;
but to each provision is a way and means, and he who
seeketh would get ease of his seeking by leaving to seek ;
yet needs must he seek his fortune. Moreover, the seeker
is in two cases ; either he gains his fortune or fails thereof.
In the first case, his pleasure consists, first, in the having
gained his fortune, and secondly, in the satisfactory 3 issue
of his quest ; and in the other case, his pleasure consists,
first, in his readiness to seek his living, secondly, in his
abstaining from being a burden to the folk, and thirdly,
in his freedom from liability to reproach.' (Q.) 'What
sayst thou of the means of seeking one's fortune?' (A.)
' A man shall hold lawful that which God (to whom belong
1 i.e. friends. % i.e. acquaintances. 8 Or praiseworthy.


232

might and majesty) permitteth and unlawful that which He
forbiddeth.'

With this the discourse between them came to an end
and Shimas and all the learned men, who were present,
rose and prostrating themselves before the prince, magni-
fied and extolled him, whilst his father pressed him to
his bosom and seating him on the throne of kingship,
said, ' Praised be God who hath blessed me with a son to
be the solace of mine eyes in my lifetime ! ' Then said the
prince to Shimas, 4 O sage that art versed in metaphysical
questions, albeit God hath vouchsafed me but little know-
ledge, yet do I apprehend thine intent in accepting from
me what I proffered in answer concerning that whereof
thou hast asked me, whether I hit or missed the mark
therein, and belike thou forgavest my errors ; but now I
wish to question thee of a thing, whereof my judgment
fails and whereto my capacity is unequal and which my
tongue availeth not to set forth, for that it is obscure
to me, with the obscurity of limpid water in a black
vessel; wherefore I would have thee expound it to me,
so no whit thereof may remain doubtful to the like of me,
to whom its obscurity may present itself in the future,
even as it hath presented itself to me in the past ; since
God, even as He hath made life to be in water 1 and
sustenance in food and the healing of the sick in the
physician's skill, so hath He appointed the cure of the
ignorant to be in the learning of the wise. Give ear,
therefore, to my speech.' ' Q luminous of wit and master of
apt questions,' replied the vizier, ' thou whose superiority
all the learned men attest, by reason of the goodliness of
thy discrimination of things and thy departition 3 thereof
and the justness of thine answers to the questions I have
put to thee, thou knowest that thou canst ask me of
nought but thou art better able [than I] to form a just

1 i.e. sperma hormnis. 8 Or analysis.


233


Judgment thereon and expound it truly ; ior that God hath
vouchsafed unto thee such wisdom as He hath bestowed
on none other : but tell me of what thou wouldst question
me.' Quoth the prince, 'Tell me from what did the
Creator (magnified be His power !) create the world,
albeit there was before it nought and there is nought
seen in this world but it is created from something ; and
the Divine Creator (blessed and exalted be He !) is able
to create things from nothing, yet hath His will decreed,
for all the perfection of [His] power and grandeur, that
He shall create nought but from something.' ' As for those,'
answered the vizier, 'who fashion vessels of potters' clay,
and other handicraftsmen, who cannot produce one thing
except from another, they are themselves but created
things : but, as for the Creator, who hath wrought the
world after this wondrous fashion, if thou wouldst know
His power (blessed and exalted be He !) of "calling things
into existence, consider the various kinds of created things,
and thou wilt find signs and tokens, denoting the perfec-
tion of His omnipotence and that He is able to create
things out of nothing: nay, He called them into being,
after absolute nonentity, for the elements that are the
matter of created things were sheer nothingness. I will
expound this .to thee, so thou mayst be in no doubt
thereof, and this the phenomenon of the alternation of
night and day shall make clear to thee. When the day
departs and the night comes, the day is hidden from us
and we know not where it abideth ; and when the night
passes away with its darkness and its terror, the day comes
and we know not the abiding-place of the night. In like
manner, when the sun rises upon us, we know not where
it has laid up its light, and when it sets, we know not the
abiding-place of its setting : and the examples of this
among the works of the Creator (magnified be His name
and exalted be His power !) abound in what confounds


234


the thought of the keenest-witted of human beings.' s O
gage,' rejoined the prince, 'thou hast set before me of
the power of the Creator what may not be denied ; but
tell me how He called His creatures into existence. 1
'[He created them] by [the sole power of] His Word,' 1
answered Shimas, ' which existed before time, and with
it He created all things.' ' Then,' said the prince, 1 God
(be His name magnified and His power exalted !) only
willed the existence of created things, before they came
into being?' 'And of His will,' replied Shimas, 4 He
created them with His Word and but for His speech and
tNTfc^t Manifest Word, the creation had not come into existence.
fcCCCCJCtl), And, O my son, there is no man can tell thee other than
this that I have said, except he pervert the words handed
down to us of the law of God and turn the truths thereof
from their evident meaning. And such a perversion is
their saying that the Word hath'' power [of itself] and I
take refuge with God from such a conclusion. Nay, the
meaning of our saying that God (to whom belong might
and majesty) created the world with His Word is that He
(exalted be His name !) is One in His essence and His
attributes and not that His Word hath power [of itself].
On the contrary, power is one of God's attributes, even as
speech and other attributes of perfection are attributes
of God (exalted be His dignity and magnified be His
dominion !) ; wherefore He may not be conceived without
His Word, nor may His Word be conceived without Him ;
for, with His Word, God (extolled be His praise !) created
all His creatures, and without His Word, he created
aought. Indeed, He created all things but by His Word

1 The famous X070S of the New Testament and the Alexandrian
theologians. The writer of this and the following passages was evidently
Well acquainted with the Gospel of St. John and other parts of the New
Testament, though probably only in the garbled versions that circulated
among the Syrian and Arab Christians of his time.


235


of Truth, and by Truth are we created.' Quoth the prince,
'I apprehend that which thou hast said on the subject of
the Creator and accept this from thee with understanding ;
but I hear thee say that He created the world by His
Word of Truth. Now Truth is the opposite of Falsehood ;
whence then arose Falsehood and its opposition unto
Truth, and how comes it to be possible that it should be
confounded therewith and be obscure 1 to human beings,
so that they need . to distinguish between them ? And
doth the Creator (to whom belong might and majesty i)
love Falsehood or hate it ? If thou say He loves the Truth
and by it created all things and hates Falsehood, how
came the latter, which the Creator hates, to invade the
Truth, which He loves ? ' Quoth Shimas, ' Verily God the
Most High created man after His own image and likened
him to Himself, all of him truth, without falsehood ; then
He gave him dominion over himself a"hd ordered him
and forbade him, and it was man who transgressed His
commandment and erred in his disobedience and brought
falsehood upon himself of his own will. When God
created man with Truth, he had no need of repentance,
till Falsehood invaded the Truth by which he was created,
by means of the ableness a that God had placed in him,
being the will and the inclination called acquisitiveness. 3
When Falsehood invaded Truth on this wise, it became
confounded therewith, by reason of the will of man and
his ableness and acquisitiveness, which is the voluntary
part, together with the weakness of human nature : where-

1 Or doubtfuL s Or capability {istitaah).

8 Or [the lust of] gain. This is the common meaning of the word
kesb, but the scholastic writers of the Arabs use it to express the act by
which a man seeks to win advantage or avert ill from himself. The
Arab casuist of the present tale evidently intended to formulate the
Christian dogma of freewill, although his meaning is much obscured by
the imperfection of his expression and (in all probability, also) by his
defective apprehension of the knotty point of doctrine involved.


236

fore God created repentance for man, to turn away from him
falsehood and stablish him in truth ; and He created for
him also punishment, if he should abide in the obscurity
of falsehood.' Quoth the prince, 'Tell me how came
falsehood to invade truth, so as to be confounded there-
with and how became man liable to punishment and so
stood in need of repentance.' ' When God created man
with truth/ replied Shimas, ' He made him loving to
Himself and there was for him neither repentance nor
punishment; but he abode thus till God put in him the
soul, which is of the perfection of humanity, with the
inclination to lusts which is inherent therein. From this
sprang the growth of falsehood and its confusion with
the truth, wherewith man was created and with the love
whereof he had been informed; and when man came to
this pass, he swerved from the truth with disobedience,
and whoso swerves from the truth falls into falsehood.'
' Then,' said the prince, ' falsehood invaded truth only
by reason of disobedience and transgression ? ' ' Yes,'
answered Shimas ; ' and it is thus because God loves man,
and of the abundance of His love to him, He created
him having need of Himself, that is to say, of the very
Truth : but oftentimes man falls away from this by reason
of the inclination of the soul to lusts and turns unto
frowardness, wherefore he falls into falsehood by the
very act of disobeying his Lord and thus renders himself
liable to punishment; and by the putting away from
himself of falsehood with repentance and the returning
to the love of the truth, he merits reward.' Quoth the
prince, 'Tell me the origin of frowardness. We see that
all mankind trace their being to Adam, and how comes
it that 'ne, being created of God with truth, drew dis-
obedience on himself: then was his disobedience coupled
with repentance, after the soul had been set in him, that
his issue might be reward or punishment? Indeed, we


237


see some men constant in frowardness, inclining to that
which God loves not and transgressing in this the original
exigence of their creation, which is the love of the Truth
and drawing on themselves the wrath of their Lord,
whilst others are constant in seeking to please their
Creator and obeying Him and meriting mercy and
recompense. Whence comes this difference between
them?' 'The origin of disobedience in mankind,'
replied Shimas, ' is attributable to Iblis, who was the
noblest of all that God (magnified be His name !) created
of angels and men and Jinn, and the love [of the Truth]
was inherent in him, for he knew nought but this ; but,
for that he saw himself unique in this, there entered into
him conceit and vainglory and arrogance and he revolted
from loyalty and obedience to the commandment of his
Creator ; wherefore God made him inferior to all creatures
and cast him out from love, making his abiding-place to
be in disobedience. So, when he knew that God (glorified
be His name !) loved not disobedience and saw Adam and
the case wherein he was of truth and love anu obedience
to his Creator, envy entered into him and he cast about to
pervert Adam from the truth, that he might be a partaker
with himself in falsehood ; and by this, Adam incurred
chastisement, through his inclining to disobedience, which
his enemy made fair to him, and his subjection to
his lusts, whenas he transgressed the injunction of his
Ix>rd, by reason of the appearance of falsehood. When
the Creator (magnified be His praises and hallowed be
His names!) saw the weakness of man and the swiftness
of his inclining to his enemy and leaving the truth, He
appointed to him, of His mercy, repentance, that there-
with he might arise from the morass of inclination to
disobedience and taking the arms of repentance, overcome
therewith his enemy Iblis and his hosts and return to the
truth, wherein he was created. When Iblis saw that God


238


had appointed him a protracted term, 1 he hastened to
wage war upon man and to beset him with wiles, to the
intent that he might oust him from his Lord's favour and
make him a partaker with himself in the curse which he
and his hosts had incurred; wherefore God (extolled be
His praises !) appointed unto man the power of repentance
and commanded him to apply himself to the truth and
persevere therein. Moreover, he forbade him from dis-
obedience and frowardness and revealed to him that he
had an enemy on the earth warring against him and
relaxing not from him night nor day. Thus hath man
a right to reward, if he adhere to the truth, in the love
of which his essence was created ; but he becomes liable
to punishment, if his soul master him and drag him into
HtgfH lusts.' * But tell me/ rejoined the prince, 'by what power
&CCCCX'fc>. is the creature able to transgress against his Creator,
seeing that His power is without bounds, even as thou
hast set forth, and that nothing can overcome Him nor
depart from His will ? Deemst thou not that He is able
to turn His creatures from disobedience and compel them
to adhere eternally to the truth ? ' ' Verily,' answered
Shimas, ' God the Most High (honoured be His name !)
is just and equitable and tenderly solicitous over the
people of His love. 2 He created His creatures with
justice and equity and of the inspiration of His justice
and the abundance of His mercy, He gave them dominion
over themselves, that they should do whatever they would.
He shows them the way of righteousness and bestows on
them the power and ability of doing what they will of
good : and if they do the opposite thereof, they fall into
destruction and disobedience.' (Q.) 'If the Creator, as
thou sayest, hath granted men power and ability 8 and

1 i.e. had deferred his final punishment and definitive confinement ia
Hell till the Day of Resurrection.
8 Syn. those who are deserving of His love. • i.e, freewill.


239


they by reason thereof avail to do what they will, why
then doth He not come between them and that which they
desire of error and turn them to the truth?' (A.) 'This
is of the greatness of His mercy and the excellence of
His wisdom ; for, even as aforetime He showed wrath to
Iblis and had no mercy on him, so He showed Adam
mercy, by means 1 of repentance, and accepted of him,
after He had been wroth with him.' (Q.) ' He is indeed
the very Truth, for He it is who requiteth every one
according to his works, and there is no Creator but God,
to whom belongeth power over all things. But tell me,
hath He created that which He loveth and that which He
loveth not or only that which He loveth?' (A.) ' He
created all things, but favours only that which He loveth.'
(Q.) ' What hast thou to say of two things, one whereof
is pleasing to God and earns reward for him who practises
it ? ' (A.) ' Expound to me these two things and make
me to apprehend them, that I may speak concerning
them.' (Q.) 'They are good and evil, the two things
innate in the body and the soul.' (A.) ' O wise youth,
I see that thou knowest good and evil to be of the works
that the soul and the body do [in conjunction]. Good
is named good, because in it is the favour of God, and
evil evil, for that in it is His wrath. Indeed, it behoveth
thee to know God and to please Him by the practice of
good, for that He hath commanded us to this and for-
bidden us to do evil.' (Q.) ' I see these two things, that
is, good and evil, to be wrought only by the five senses
known in the body of man, to wit, the seat of taste,
whence proceed speech, hearing, sight, smell and touch.
Tell me whether these five senses were created for good
altogether or for evil' (A.) ' Hear, O man, the exposition
of that whereof thou askest and lay it up in thy memory
and notify thy heart thereof, for it is a manifest proof.
1 Or, perhaps s " on account"


240


Know that the Creator (blessed and exalted be He !) created
man with truth and informed him with the love thereof and
there proceedeth from it no created thing save by the Most
High decree, whose impress is on every phenomenon. It 1
is not apt but to the ordering of justice and equity and
beneficence and created man for the love of itself and
informed him with a soul, wherein the inclination to lusts
was innate and assigned him ableness and appointed the
five senses aforesaid to be to him a means of winning
Paradise or Hell.'' (Q.) ' How so ? ' (A.) ' In that He created
the tongue for speech and the hands for doing and the feet
for walking and the eyes for seeing and the ears for hearing
and gave them power and incited them to exercise and
motion, bidding each of them do that only which pleaseth
Him. Now what pleaseth Him in speech is truthfulness
and abstaining from its opposite, which is falsehood, and
what pleases Him in sight is turnfng it unto that which He
loveth and leaving the contrary, which is turning it unto
that which He abhorreth, such as looking unto lusts : and
what pleaseth Him in hearing is hearkening to nought but
that which is truth, such as admonition and that which
is in the scriptures of God, and leaving the contrary,
which is hearkening to that which incurreth the wrath of
God ; and what pleaseth Him in the hands is not hoard-
ing up that which He entrusteth to them, but spending
it on such wise as shall please Him and leaving the
contrary, which is avarice or spending that which He hath
committed to them in disobedience; and what pleaseth
Him in the feet is that they be instant in the pursuit of
good, such as the quest of instruction, and leave its
contrary, which is the walking in other than the way of
God. As for the other lusts that man practises, they
proceed from the body by commandment of the soul


241


The lusts that proceed from the body are of two kinds,
that of reproduction and that of the belly. As for the
first, that which pleaseth God thereof is that it be not
except in the way of law, and if it be in the way of sin,
He is displeased with it. As for the lust of the belly,
eating and drinking, what pleaseth God thereof is that
each take nought but that which God hath appointed him
thereof, be it little or much, and praise God and thank
Him : and what angereth Him thereof is that a man take
that which is not his by right. All precepts other than these
are false, and thou knowest that God created all things and
delighteth only in good and commandeth each member
of the body to do that which He hath made incumbent
thereon, for that He is the all-wise, the all-knowing.'
(Q.) 'Was it foreknown unto God (exalted be His power !)
that Adam would eat of the tree from which. He forbade
him and so leave obedience for disobedience?' (A.) i Yes,
O sage. This was foreknown unto God the Most High,
before He created Adam ; and the proof and manifestation
thereof is the warning He gave him against eating of the
tree and His giving him to know that, if he ate thereof, he
would be disobedient. And this was in the way of justice
and equity, lest Adam should have an argument wherewith
he might excuse himself against his Lord. When, there-
fore, he fell into error and calamity and reproach and dis-
grace were sore upon him, this passed to his posterity after
him; wherefore God sent prophets and apostles and gave
them scriptures and they taught us the divine ordinances
and expounded to us what was therein of admonitions and
precepts and made clear to us the way of righteousness
und what it behoved us to do and what to leave undone.
Now we are endowed with ableness 1 and he who acts
within these limits 8 attains [felicity] and prospers,, whilst
1 i.e. freewill: s Or who practises these laws.

VOL. VIII. 16


342

he who transgresses them and does other than that which
these precepts enjoin, sins and is rained in both worlds
This then is the road of good and evil. Thou knowesi
that God can all things and created not lusts for us but of
His pleasure and will, and He commanded us to use them
in the way of lawfulness, so they might be a good to us;
but, when we use them in the way of sin, they are an evil
to us. So what of good we compass is from God the
Most High and what of evil from ourselves 1 His creatures,
not from the Creator, exalted be He for this with great
tRl'gfrt exaltation ! ' (Q.) * I understand that which thou hast
fotCtttbh expounded to me concerning God and His creatures ;

but tell me of one thing, concerning which my mind is
perplexed with extreme wonderment, and that is that I
marvel at the sons of Adam, how careless they are of the
life to come and at their lack ,-of taking thought thereto
and their love of this world, albeit they know that they
must needs leave it and depart from it, whilst they are yet
young in years.' (A.) 'Yes, verily; and that which thou
seest of its changefulness and perfidious dealing with its
children is a sign that fortune will not endure to the
fortunate, neither affliction to the afflicted ; for none of
its people is secure from its changefulness and even if one
have power over it and be content therewith, yet needs
must his estate change and removal 2 hasten unto him.
Wherefore man can put no trust therein nor profit by that
which he enjoy eth of its painted gauds ; and knowing this,
we know that the sorriest of men in case are those who
are deluded by this world and are unmindful of the world
to come ; for that this present ease they enjoy will not
compensate the fear and misery and horrors that will
befall them after their removal therefrom. Thus are we
certified that, if the creature knew that which will betide
1 Koran hr, 8g. s Le. from the workL


243


him with the coming of death and his severance from that
which he presently enjoyeth of delight and pleas ance, he
would cast away the world and that which is therein ; for
we are assured that the next life is better for us and more
profitable.' ' O sage,' said the prince, ' thou hast with
thy shining lamp dispelled the darkness that was upon my
heart and hast directed me into the road I must travel
in the ensuing of the truth and hast given me a lantern
whereby I may see.'

Then rose one of the learned men who were present
and said, ' When the season of Spring cometh, needs must
the hare seek the pasture as well as the elephant ; and
indeed I have heard from you both such questions and
solutions as I never before heard; but now let me ask
you of somewhat. What is the best of the goods of the
world ? ' ' ' Health of body,' replied the prince, ' lawful
provision and a virtuous son.' (Q.) 'What is"the greater
and what the less?' (A.) 'The greater is that to which
a lesser than itself submitteth and the less that which
submitteth to a greater than itself.' (Q.) 'What are the
four things in which all creatures concur ? ' (A.) ' Meat
and drink, the delight of sleep, the lust of women and
the agonies of death.' (Q.) 'What are the three things
whose foulness none can do away ? ' (A.) ' Folly, mean-
ness of nature and lying.' (Q.) ' What is the best kind of lie,
though all kinds are foul?' (A.) ' That which averteth harm
from its utterer and bringeth profit.' (Q.) 'What kind of
truthfulness is foul, though all kinds are fair?' (A.) 'That
of a man glorying in that which he hath 1 and boasting
himself thereof.' (Q.) ' What is the foulest of foulnesses ? '
(A.) ' When a man boasteth himself of that which he hath
not.' 2 (Q.) 'Who is the most foolish of men?' (A.) ' He
who hath no thought but of what he shall put in his belly/
* Or what is in him, 3 Or what is not ia him.


244


Then said Shimas, 'O king, verily thou art our king,
but we desire that thou assign the kingdom to thy son
after thee, and we will be thy servants and subjects.' So
the king exhorted the learned men and others who were
present to remember that which they had heard and do
according thereto and enjoined them to obey his son's
commandment, for that he made him his heir-apparent,
so he should be the successor of the king his father ; and
he took an oath of all the people of his empire, doctors
and braves and old men and boys, that they would not
oppose him [in the succession] nor transgress against Iris
commandment

When the prince was seventeen years old, the king
sickened of a sore sickness and came nigh unto death,
so, being certified that his last hour was at hand, he said
to the people of his household, ' This is a mortal sickness
that is upon me ; wherefore do ye summon the grandees
and notables of my empire, so not one of them may
remain except he be present.' Accordingly, they made
proclamation to those who were near and made known
the summons to those who were afar off, and they all
assembled and went in to the king. Then said they to
him, ' How is it with thee, O king, and how deemest thou
for thyself of this thy sickness?' Quoth Jelyaad, 'Verily,
this my sickness is mortal and the arrow [of death] hath
executed that which God the Most High decreed against
me : this is the last of my days in this world and the first
of my days in the world to come.' Then said he to his
son, 1 Draw near unto me.' So he drew near, weeping
sore, that he came nigh to wet the bed, whilst the king's
eyes brimmed over with tears and all who were present
wept. Quoth Jelyaad, 'Weep not, O my son ; I am not
the first whom this inevitable thing betideth ; nay 5 it is
common to all that God hath created. But fear thou God
and do good, that shall forego thee to the place whither


245


all creatures tend. Obey not thy lusts, but occupy thyself

with the praises of God in thy standing up and thy sitting

down and in thy sleep and *hy wake. Make the truth the

aim of thine eyes ; this is the last of my speech with thee j^ffgfjt

and peace be on thee.' tfCCCCXfoft

Then he bequeathed him the kingdom and the prince
said, ' O my father, thou knowest that I have never ceased
from obedience unto thee and mindfulness of thine in-
junctions, still carrying out thy commandment and seeking
thine approof ; for thou hast been to rne the best of fathers.
How, then, after thy death, shall I depart from that whereof
thou appro vest? After having fairly ordered my bringing
up, thou art now about to depart from me and I have no
power to bring thee back to me ; but, if I be mindful of
thine injunctions, I shall be blessed therein and great good
hap will betide me.' Quoth the king, and indeed he was
in the last agony, 'Dear my son, cleave fast unto ten pre-
cepts, which if thou observe, God shall profit thee here-
with in this world and the next, and they are as follows.
When thou art angered, curb thy wrath ; when thou art
afflicted, be patient ; when thou speakest, be truthful ; when
thou promisest, perform ; when thou judgest, do justice ;
when thou hast power, be merciful ; deal generously by thy
governors and lieutenants ; forgive those that transgress
against thee; be lavish of good offices to thine enemy
and withhold thy mischief from him. Observe also other
seven precepts, wherewith God shall profit thee among the
people of thy realm, to wit, when thou dividest, be just ;
when thou punishest, oppress not ; when thou makest an
engagement, fulfil thine engagement; hearken to those
tnat give thee loyal counsel ; abstain from contention ;
enjoin thy subjects to the observance of the divine laws
and of praiseworthy usages; do equal justice between the
folk, so they may love thee, great and small, and the
froward and corrupt of them may fear thee.'


246


Then he addressed himself to the amirs and doctors,
who were present when he appointed his son to be his
successor, saying, ' Beware of transgressing the command-
ment of your king and neglecting to hearken to your chief,
for in this lies ruin for your country and sundering for
your union and hurt for your bodies and perdition for
your goods, and your enemies would exult over you. Ye
know the covenant ye made with me, and even thus shall
be your covenant with this youth, and the pact that is
between you and me shall be also between you and him-;
wherefore it behoveth you to give ear unto his command-
ment and obey him, for that in this is the well-being of
your estates. So be ye constant with him unto that
wherein ye were with me and your affair shall prosper
and your case be good ; for, behold, he hath the kingship
over you and is the lord of your fortune, and so peace
be on you ! ' Then the death-agony seized him and his
tongue was bridled : so he pressed his son to his bosom
and kissed him and gave thanks unto God ; after which
his hour came and his soul departed [his body].

All his subjects and the people of his court mourned
over him and they shrouded him and buried him with
pomp and honour and reverence ; after which they returned
with the prince and seating him on the throne of kingship,
clad him in the royal robes and crowned him with his
father's crown and put the seal-ring on his finger. He
ordered himself towards them, a little while, after his
father's fashion of mildness and justice and benevolence,
till the world waylaid him and tempted him with its lusts,
whereupon he seized on its pleasures and turned to its
vain delights, forsaking the engagements which his father
had commended to him and casting off his obedience to
him, neglecting the affairs of his kingdom and walking
in a road wherein was his own destruction. In particular,
the love of women was stark in him and came to such 3


247


pass that, whenever he heard tell of a fair woman, he
would send and take her to wife. After this wise, he
collected women more in number than ever had Solomon,
son of David, King of the children of Israel, and would
shut himself up with a company of them for a month
at a time, during which he went not forth neither
enquired of his kingdom or its governance nor looked
into the grievances of such of his subjects as complained
to him; and if they wrote to him, he returned them no
answer.

When they saw his neglect of their affairs and interests
and those of the state, they were assured that ere long
some calamity would betide them and this was grievous
to them. So they foregathered privily and took counsel
together, and one of them said to the rest, ' Let us go to
Shimas, chief of the viziers, and set forth to him our case
and acquaint him with the strait wherein we are by reason
of this king, so he may admonish him ; else, in a little,
calamity will betide us, for the world hath intoxicated the
king with its delights and beguiled him with its snares.'
Accordingly, they repaired to Shimas and said to him,
'O wise and prudent man, the world hath dazed the king
with its delights and taken him in its snares, so that he
turneth unto vanity and worketh for the disordering of
the state. Now with the disordering of the state the
commons will be corrupted and our affairs will come to
ruin. Months and days we see him not nor cometh there
forth from him any commandment to us or to the vizier
or whom else. We cannot refer aught to him and he
looketh not to the administration of justice nor taketh
thought to the case of any of his subjects, in his heedless-
ness of them. And behold we are come to acquaint thee
with the truth of the affair, for that thou art the chiefest
and most accomplished of us and it behoveth not that
calamity befall a land wherein thou dwellest, seeing that


248


thou art most able of any to amend this thing. Wherefore
go thou and speak with him: belike he will hearken to
thy word and return unto God.'

So Shimas arose forthright and repairing to the palace,
foregathered with the first of the king's officers to whom
he might win and said to him, ' Good my son, I beseech
thee ask leave for me to go in to the king, for I have an
affair, concerning which I would fain see his face and
acquaint him therewith and hear what he shall answer me
thereon.' 'O my lord,' answered the officer, 'by Allah,*
this month past hath he given none leave to come in to
him, nor all this time have I looked upon his face; but I
will direct thee to one who shall crave admission for thee.
Do thou lay hold of such a black, who standeth at his
head and bringeth him food from the kitchen. When he
cometh forth, to go to the kitchen, ask him what seemeth
good to thee; for he will do for thee that which thou
desirest.' So the vizier repaired to the door of the kitchen
and sat there a little while, till up came the black and
would have entered the kitchen ; but Shimas [caught hold
of him] and said to him, ' my son, I would fain see the
king and speak with him of somewhat that nearly con-
cerned! him ; so prithee, of thy kindness, when he hath
made an end of his morning-meal and his soul is re-
freshed, speak thou for me to him and get leave for me to
come in to him, so I may bespeak him of that which shall
please him.' ' I hear and obey,' answered the black and
taking the food, carried it to the king, who ate thereof
and his soul was refreshed.

Then said the black to him, 'Shimas standeth at the
door and craveth admission, so he may acquaint thee with
matters that particularly concern thee.' At this the king
3CtC$)t was alarmed and disquieted and commanded to admit the
iJCCCCXbltt. vizier. So the black went forth to Shimas and bade him
enter ; whereupon he went in and prostrating himself before


249


God, kissed the king's hands and called down blessings
upon him. Then said the king, 'O Shimas, what hath
betided thee that thou seekest admission unto me ? ' And
lie answered, saying, ' This long while have I not looked
upon the face of my lord the king and indeed I longed
sore for thee. So, behold, I have seen thy countenance
and come to thee with a word which I would fain say
to thee, O king stablished in all prosperity.' Quoth the
king, 1 Say what seemeth good to thee ; ' and Shimas said,
'O king, verily God the Most High hath endowed thee,
for all the tenderness of thy years, with knowledge and
wisdom such as He never vouchsafed unto any of the
kings before thee, and hath fulfilled the measure of His
bounties to thee with the kingship ; and He loveth not
that thou depart from that wherewith He hath endowed
thee unto other than it, by means of thy disobedience
to Him ; wherefore it behoveth thee not to wage war
upon 1 Him with thy treasures, but to be mindful of His
injunctions and obedient unto His commandments. This
I say because I have seen thee, this while past, forget thy
father and his injunctions and forswear his covenant and
neglect his admonition and renounce his justice and wise
governance, remembering not God's bounty to thee neither
requiting it with gratitude to Him.'

'How so?' asked the king. 'And what is the manner
of this?' 'The manner of it,' replied Shimas, 'is that
thou neglectest to attend to the affairs of the state and
that which God hath committed unto thee of the interests
of thy subjects and surrenderest thyself to thine own
inclinations, in that which they make fair to thee of the
paltry lusts of the world. Verily it is said that the welfare
of the state and the faith and the people is of the things
over which it behoveth the king to keep watch ; wherefore
it is my counsel, O king, that thou look well to the issue
1 Syn. (rare) disobey.


250


of thine affair, for thus wilt thou find the manifest road
wherein is salvation, and give not thyself up to a trifling
evanescent delight that leadeth to the abyss of destruction,
lest there befall thee that which befell the fisherman.'
' What was that ? ' asked the king, and Shimas said, * I
have heard tell that


THE FOOLISH FISHERMAN.

A fisherman went forth one day to a certain river, to
fish there, as of his wont ; and when he came thither and
walked upon the bridge, he saw a great fish in the water
and said to himself, " It will not serve me to abide here,
but I will follow yonder fish whithersoever it goeth, till
I take it, for it will dispense me from fishing days and
days." So he put off his clothes and plunged into the
river after the fish. The current bore him along till he
overtook it and laid hold of it, when he turned and found
himself far from land. However, he would not loose the
fish and return, but ventured himself and gripping it fast
with both hands, let his body float with the current, which
carried him on till it cast him into a whirlpool which none
might enter and be saved therefrom. With this he fell to
crying out and saying, " Save a drowning man ! " And
there came to him folk of the keepers of the river and
said to him, "What ailed thee to cast thyself into this
grievous peril ? " Quoth he, " It was I myself who forsook
the plain way wherein was salvation and gave myself over
to covetise and perdition." " O fellow," said they, " why
didst thou leave the way of safety and cast thyself into
this destruction, knowing from of old that none may enter
herein and be saved? What hindered thee from throwing
away what was in thy hand and saving thyself? So hadst


251


thou escaped with thy life and not fallen into this perdition,
from which there is no deliverance; and now not one of
us can rescue thee from this strait." So the man gave up
hope of life and lost that which was in his hand and for
which his soul had prompted him to venture himself and
perish miserably. And I tell thee not this parable, O
king,' added Shimas, ' but that thou mayst leave this con-
temptible thing that diverteth thee from thy duties and
look to that which is committed to thee of the governance
of thy people and the maintenance of the order of thy
kingdom, so that none may see fault in thee.'

'What wouldst thou have me do?' asked the king, and
Shimas said, ' To-morrow, if thou be in good health and
case, give the folk leave to come in to thee and look into
their affairs and excuse thyself to them and promise them
good governance and prosperity.' ' O Shimas/ answered
the king, ' thou hast spoken advisedly ; and to-morrow, ii
it be the will of God the Most High, I will do that which
thou counsellest me.' So the vizier went out from him
and told the folk what he had said to him ; and on the
morrow the king came forth of his seclusion and bade
admit the people, to whom he excused himself, promising
them that thenceforward he would deal with them as they
wished, wherewith they were content and departed each to
his dwelling.

Then one of the king's women, who was his best-
beloved of them and most in honour with him, went in to
him and seeing him pale and thoughtful over his affairs,
by reason of that which he had heard from his chief
vizier, said to him, ' O king, how comes it that I see thee
troubled in mind ? Doth aught ail thee? ' ' No,' answered
he ; 1 but my pleasures have distracted me from my duties
and I know not what hath possessed me to be thus
negligent of my affairs and those of my subjects. If I
continue on this wise, ere long the kingdom will pass out


252


of my hand.' 4 O king,' rejoined she, 4 1 see that thou
hast been duped by thy viziers and ministers, who wish
but to torment and spite thee, so thou mayst have no
pleasure of this thy kingship neither enjoy ease nor
delight, and would have thee consume thy life in ward-
ing off trouble from them, till thy days be wasted in
toil and weariness and thou be as one who slayeth
himself for another's benefit or like the boy and the
thieves.' 'How was that?' asked the king, and she
answered, ' It is said that


THE BOY AND THE THIEVES.

Seven thieves once went out to steal, according to their
wont, and fell in with a poor orphan boy, who besought
them for somewhat to eat. Quoth one of them to him,
"Wilt go with us, O boy, and we will feed thee and
clothe thee and entreat thee kindly ? " And he answered,
saying, " Needs must I go with you whithersoever ye
will and ye are as my own people." So they took him
and fared on with him till they came to a garden, and
entering, went round about therein, till they found a
tKTu$t walnut-tree laden with ripe fruit and said one to another,
iJCCCCXl.T. <l Look which is the lightest and smallest of us and make
him climb the tree." And they said, " None of us is
smaller than this boy." So they sent him up into the
tree and said to him, "O boy, touch not aught of the
fruit, lest some one see thee and do thee a mischief."
"How then shall I do?" asked he, and they said, "Sit
among the boughs and shake them with thy might, so
that which is thereon may fall, and we will pick it up.
Then, when thou hast made an end of shaking down the
fruit, come down and take thy share of that which we
have gathered." So he began to shake every branch ai


253


which he could come, so that the nuts fell and the thieves
picked them up and ate [some] and hid [other some] till
they were all full, except the boy, who had eaten nought.

As they were thus engaged, up came the owner of the
garden and said to them, "What do ye with this tree?"
" We have taken nought thereof," answered they ; " but
we were passing by and seeing yonder boy on the tree,
concluded that he was the owner thereof and besought
him to give us to eat of the fruit. So he fell to shaking
the branches, that the nuts dropped down, and we are
not at fault." Quoth the master to the boy, " What sayst
thou?" And he answered, "These men lie; but I will
tell thee the truth. It is that we all came hither together
and they bade me climb the tree and shake its branches,
that the nuts might fall down to them, and I obeyed
them." "Verily," said the master, "thou^ hast brought
thyself into parlous case ; but hast thou profited to eat
aught of the fruit ? " And he said, " I have eaten nought
thereof." " Now know I thy stupidity and folly," rejoined
the 1 owner of the garden, "in that thou hast wroughten to
ruin thyself and advantage others." Then said he to the
thieves, " Go your ways : I have no resort against you."
But he laid hands on the boy and punished him. On
like wise,' added the favourite, ' thy viziers and officers of
state would sacrifice thee to their interests and do with
thee as did the thieves with the boy.' 'Thou sayst sooth/
answered the king, ' and I will not go forth to them nor
leave my pleasures.'

Then he passed the night with his wife in all delight till
the morning, when the chief vizier arose and assembling
the officers of state, together with those of the folk who
were present with them, repaired with them to the palace,
glad and rejoicing [in the anticipation of good]. But
the door opened not nor did the king come forth unto
them nor give them leave to go in to him. So, when the?


2S4


despaired of him, they said to Shimas, ' O excellent vizier
and accomplished sage, seest thou not the behaviour of
this boy, young of years and little of wit, how he addeth
falsehood to his offences ? See how he hath broken his
promise to us and hath failed of that for which he engaged
unto us, and this it behoveth thee join to his other sins ;
but we beseech thee go in to him yet again and see what
is the cause of his holding back and refusal to come forth ;
for we doubt not but that the like of this fashion cometh
of his depraved nature, and indeed he hath reached the
utmost pitch of stiffneckedness.'

Accordingly, Shimas went in to the king and bespoke
him, saying, ' Peace be upon thee, O king ! How cometh
it that I see thee give thyself up to paltry pleasures and
neglect the great affair whereto it behoveth thee apply
thyself? Thou art like unto a man, who had a milch-
camel and coming one day to milk- her, the goodness of
her milk caused him forget to hold fast her halter ; which
whenas she felt, she pulled herself free and made off into
the desert. Thus he lost both milk and camel and the
mischief that betided him overpassed his profit. Where-
fore do thou look unto that wherein is thy welfare and
that of thy subjects; for, even as it behoveth not a man
to sit for ever at the kitchen door, because he needeth
food, so should he not company overmuch with women,
by reason of his inclination to them. A man should eat
but as much food as will stay his hunger and drink but
what will ward off the pangs of thirst ; and in like manner
it behoveth the man of understanding to content himself
with passing two of the four and- twenty hours of his day
with women and spend the rest in ordering his own affairs
and those of his people. For to be longer than this in
company with women is hurtful both to mind and body,
seeing that they command not unto good neither direct
thereto : wherefore it behoveth a man to accept from them


255


neither speech nor deed, for indeed I have heard tell that
many men have come to ruin through their women, and
amongst others [I have heard tell of] a certain man who
perished, for that he obeyed his wife's commandment and
had to do with her [at an unseasonable time].' 'How
was that?' asked the king, and Shimas answered, saying,
' They tell that *


THE MAN AND HIS WILFUL WIFE.

A certain man had a wife whom he loved and honoured^
giving ear to her speech and doing according to her counsel.
Moreover, he had a garden, which he had newly planted
with his own hand, and was wont to go thither every day
to tend and water it. One day his wife said to him, " What
hast thou planted in thy garden ? " And he answered,
" All that thou lovest and desirest, and I am assiduous in
tending and watering it." Quoth she, "Wilt thou not
carry me thither and show it to me, so I may see it and
offer thee up a prayer [for its prosperity], for that my
prayers are effectual?" "I will well," answered he; "but
have patience with me till the morrow, when I will come
and take thee." So, on the morrow, he carried her to
the garden and entered with her therein.

Now two young men saw them enter from afar and said
to each other, "Yonder man is an adulterer and yonder
woman an adulteress, and they have not entered this
garden but to do adultery therein." So they followed
them, to see what they would do, and hid themselves in
a corner of the garden. The man and his wife abode
awhile therein, and presently he said to her, " Pray me
the prayer thou didst promise me ; " but she answered,
saying, " I will not pray for thee, until thou fulfil my
desire of that which women seek from men." "Out on


thee, O woman ! " cried he. " Hast thou not thy fill of
me in the house ? Here 1' fear scandal, more by token
that thou divertest me from my affairs. Fearest thou not
that some one will see us ? " Quoth she, " We need
have no care for that, seeing that we do neither sin nor
lewdness ; and as for the watering of the garden, that may
wait, for that thou canst water it whenas thou wilt." And
she would take neither excuse nor reason from him, but
was instant with him m seeking dalliance.

So he arose and lay with her, which when the young
men aforesaid saw, they ran upon them and seized them,
saying, " We will not let you go, for ye are adulterers, and
except we lie with the woman, we will denounce you to
the police." " Out on you ! " answered the man. " This
is my wife and I am the master of the garden." They
paid no heed to him, but fell upon the woman, who cried
out to him for succour, saying, "Suffer them not to defile
me ! " So he came up to them, calling out for help ,
but one of them turned on him and smote him with his
dagger and slew him. Then they returned to the woman
t^Ttflu)! and ravished her. This I tell thee, O king/ continued
fcfCCCCXX. the vizier, ' but that thou mayst know that it behove th not
men to give ear unto a woman's talk neither obey her in
aught nor accept her judgment in counsel. Beware, then,
lest thou don the garment of ignorance, after that of
knowledge and wisdom, and follow perverse counsel, after
knowing that which is true and profitable. Wherefore
ensue thou not a paltry pleasure, whose end is corruption
and whose inclining is unto sore and uttermost perdition.'

When the king heard this, he said to Shimas, 'To-
morrow I will come forth to them, if it he the will of God
the Most High.' So Shimas returned to the grandees and
notables who were present and told them what the king
had said. But this came to the ears of the favourite ; so
she went in to the king and said to him, 'A king's subjects


257


should be his slaves ; but thou art become a slave to thy

subjects, for that thou standest in awe of them and fearest
their mischief. They do but seek to make proof of thy
temper; and if they find thee weak, they will disdain thee;
but, if they find thee stout and brave, they will stand in
awe of thee. On this wise do ill viziers with their king,
for that their wiles are many ; but I will make manifest
unto thee the truth of their malice. If thou fall in with
their demands, they will cause thee leave thy command-
ment and do their will ; nor will they cease to lead thee
on from affair to affair, till they cast thee into destruction ;
and thy case will be as that of the merchant and the
thieves.' 'How was that?' asked the king,; and she
answered, ' I have heard tell that


THE MERCHANT AND THE THIEVES.

There was once a wealthy merchant, who set out for
a certain city with merchandise, purposing to sell it there,
and when he came thither, he hired a lodging there and
took up his abode therein. Now certain thieves saw him,
who were wont to lie in wait for merchants, that they
might steal their goods ; so they went to his house and
cast about to enter in, but could find no way thereto, and
their captain said, "I will accomplish you his affair."
Then he went away and donning a physician's habit,
threw over his shoulder a bag containing medicines, with
which he set out, crying, "Who lacks a doctor?" and
fared on till he came to the merchant's lodging and saw
him sitting eating the morning meal. So he said to him,
" Dost thou want a physician ? " " Not I," answered the
merchant ; " but sit and eat with me." So the thief sat
down over against him and began to eat.

VOL. VIII. if


253

Now this merchant was a great eater; and the thief^
seeing this, said to himself, " I have found my opportunity."
So he turned to his host and said to him, " It behoveth
me to give thee an admonition ; and after thy kindness to
me, I cannot hide it from thee. I see thee to be a great
eater and the cause of this is a disorder in thy stomach ;
so hasten to take order for thy cure, or thine affair will
end in perdition." Quoth the merchant, " My body is
sound and my stomach quick of digestion, and though
I be a hearty eater, yet is there no disease in me, to God
be the praise and the thanks ! " " It may so appear unto
thee," rejoined the thief; "but I know thou hast a latent
disorder in thy vitals and if thou hearken to me, thou wilt
medicine thyself." " And where shall I find him who
knoweth my remedy ? " asked the merchant. " God is
the Healer/' answered the robber; "but a physician like
myself tendeth the sick to the best of his power." And
the other said, " Show me my remedy and give me thereof."
So he gave him a powder, wherein was great plenty of
aloes, saying, "Use this to-night."

When the night came, the merchant tasted the powder
and found it nauseous of taste ; nevertheless he misdoubted
not of it, but swallowed it all and found ease therefrom
that night. Next night the thief brought him another
powder, wherein was yet more aloes, and he took it. It
purged him that night, but he bore with this and rejected
it not. When the thief saw that he gave ear unto his
word and put trust in him, he brought him a deadly drug
and gave it to him. The merchant swallowed it and no
sooner had he done this than that which was in his belly
fell down and his guts were rent in sunder, and by the
morrow he was a dead man ; whereupon the thieves came
and took all that belonged to him. This/ added the
favourite, £ I tell thee, O king, but that thou mayst not
give ear to these deluders ; else will there befall thee that


259


whereby thou wilt destroy thyself.' 'Thou sayst sooth, 8
replied the king ; ' I will not go forth to them.'

On the morrow, the folk assembled together and repair-
ing to the king's door, sat there the most part of the day,
till they despaired of his coming forth, when they returned
to Shimas and said to him, 'O sage philosopher and
learned master, seest thou not that this ignorant boy doth
but redouble in falsehood to us ? "Verily it were of reason
to take the kingdom from him and give it to another, so
our affairs may be set in order and our estates maintained j
but go thou in to him a third time and tell him that nought
hindereth us from rising against him and taking the
kingship from him but [the remembrance] of his father's
goodness to us and that which he required from us of
oaths and engagements [with respect to him]. However,
to-morrow, we will all, to the last of us, assemble here
with our arms and break down the gate of the palace ;
and if he come forth to us and do that which we wish,
well and good ; else will we go in to him and slay him
and put the kingdom in another's hand.'

So Shimas went in to him and said, 1 O king, that
wallowest in thy lusts and thy pleasures, what is this thou
dost with thyself and who prompteth thee thereunto ?
Indeed, thou sinnest against thyself and there hath ceased
from thee that which we knew in thee aforetime of integrity
and wisdom and eloquence. Would I knew who hath
thus changed thee and turned thee from wisdom to folly
and from fidelity to iniquity and from complaisance to
sttffneckedness and from acceptance of me to aversion
from me ! How comes it that I admonish thee thrice and
thou neglectest my admonition and that I counsel thee
justly and thou still gainsayest my counsel? Tell me,
what is this heedlessness and folly and who is it prompteth
thee thereunto? Know that the people of thy kingdom
have agreed together to come in to thee and slay thee and


260


give thy kingdom to another. Art thou able to cope with
them all and save thyself from their hands or canst thou
quicken thyself after slaughter? If, indeed, thou availest
to do all this, thou art safe and hast no occasion for my
rede ; but, if thou have any concern for thy life and thy
kingship, return to thy senses and hold fast thy kingdom
and show forth to the people the power of thy prowess
and acquaint the folk with thine excuse, for they are
minded to tear away that which is in thy hand and commit
it unto another, being resolved upon revolt and rebellion,
impelled thereto by that which they know of thy youth
and thy surrender of thyself to lusts and voluptuousness;
for that stones, albeit they lie long in water, if thou take
them out therefrom and smite one upon another, fire will
be struck from them. Now thy subjects are many in
number and they have taken counsel together against
thee, to transfer the kingship from thee to another and
accomplish upon thee that which they desire of thy
destruction. So shalt thou fare as did the wolf with the
2?fgf)t foxes and the lion.' 'How was that?' asked the king,
iKCCCXXK and the vizier answered, ' They say that


THE FOXES AND THE WOLF.

A troop of foxes went out one day to seek food, and as
they coasted about in quest of this, they happened upon
a dead camel and said to each other, "Verily we have
found wherewithal we may live a great while ; but we fear
lest one of us oppress other and the strong overbear the
weak with his strength, and so the weak of us perish ;
wherefore it behoveth us seek one who shall judge between
us and appoint unto each his part, so the strong may not
lord it over the weak." As they consulted together, up
came a wolf, and some of the foxes said to the others s


26 1

"Your counsel is just; let us make this wolf judge between

us, for he is the strongest of beasts and his father was
sultan over us aforetime ; wherefore we hope in God that
he will do justice between us." So they accosted the wolf
and acquainting him with their determination, said to him,
"We make thee judge between us, so thou mayst allot
unto each of us his day's meat, after the measure of his
need, lest the strong of us overbear the weak and some of
us destroy other some."

The wolf consented to take the governance of their
affairs and allotted unto each of them what sufficed him
that day ; but on the morrow he said in himself, " If I
divide this camel amongst these weaklings, no part thereof
will come to me, save that which they assign to me, and
if I eat it alone, they can do me no hurt, seeing that they
are a prey to me and to the people of my bouse. Who
shall hinder me from taking it for myself? Surely, it is
God who hath bestowed it on me, by way of provision, and
no thanks to them. It were best that I keep it for myself,
and henceforth I will give them nought." Accordingly,
when the foxes came to him, as of wont, and sought of
him their food, saying, " O Abou Sirhan, 1 give us our day's
provender," he answered, " I have nothing left to give
you." Whereupon they went away in the sorriest case,
saying, "Verily, God hath cast us into grievous trouble
with this vile traitor, that feareth not God neither re-
specteth Him; but we have neither power nor resource."
But one of them said, " Belike it was but stress of hunger
that moved him to this ; so let him eat his fill to-day, and
to-morrow we will go to him again."

So, on the morrow, they again betook themselves to the
wolf and said to him, " O Abou Sirhan, we set thee in
authority over us, that thou mightest allot unto each of us
his day's meat and do the weak justice against the strong

1 Arab popular name for the wolf, answering to our Isengrirn.


262


of us, and that, when this 1 is finished, thou shouldst do
thine endeavour to get us other and so we be still under
thy safeguard and protection. Now hunger is sore upon
us, for that we have not eaten these two days ; so do thou
give us our day's meat and thou shalt be free to dispose
of the rest as thou wilt." But the wolf returned them
no answer and redoubled in his stiffneckedness. So they
strove to turn him from his purpose ; but he would not be
turned. Then said one of the foxes to the rest, £l Nothing
will serve us but that we go to the lion and cast ourselves
on his protection and assign the camel unto him. If he
vouchsafe us aught thereof, it will be of his bounty, and if
not, he is worthier of it than this filthy fellow."

So they betook themselves to the lion and acquainted
him with that which had betided them with the wolf, say-
ing, 44 We are thy servants and'' come to thee, imploring
thy protection, so thou mayst deliver us from this wolf,
and we will be thy slaves." When the lion heard their
story, he was jealous for God the Most High and went
with them in quest of the wolf, who, seeing him making
for him, addressed himself to flight ; but the lion ran after
him and seizing him, rent him in pieces and restored
their prey to the foxes. This shows,' added Shimas, 'that
it behove th no king to neglect the affairs of his subjects ;
wherefore do thou hearken to my counsel and give credit
to that which I say to thee ; for thou knowest that thy
father, before his decease, charged thee give ear unto
loyal counsel. This is the last of my speech with thee
and peace be on thee.' Quoth the king, 1 1 will hearken
to thee and to-morrow, God willing, I will go forth
' to them.'

So Shimas went forth from him and returning to the
folk, told them that the king had accepted his counsel
1 ue. the dead camel.


263


and promised to come out unto them on the morrow.
But, when the favourite heard this saying reported of
Shimas and knew that needs must the king go forth to
his subjects, she betook herself to him and said to him,
' How great is my wonderment at thy submissiveness and
obedience to thy slaves ! Knowst thou not that these
viziers are thy servants ? Why then dost thou exalt them
to such a pitch of importance that they conceit them it
was they gave thee this kingship and advanced thee to
this height and that it is they who confer favours on thee,
albeit they have no power to do thee the least hurt ? In-
deed, it is they who owe thee submission, not thou who
owest it unto them, and it is their duty to carry out
thine orders ; so how cometh it that thou art so mightily
affrighted at them ? It is said, " Except thy heart be
like iron, thou art not fit to be a king." But thy mildness
hath deluded these men, so that they presume upon thee
and cast off their allegiance to thee, albeit it behoveth
that they be constrained unto obedience and enforced to
submissiveness unto thee. If, therefore, thou hasten to
accept their words and leave them in their present case
and fulfil to them the least thing against thy will, they
will importune thee and presume upon thee, and this will
become their wont. But, if thou hearken to me, thou
wilt not advance any one of them to power neither wilt
thou accept his word nor encourage him to presume upon
thee; else wilt thou fare with them as did the shepherd
with the robber/ 'How was that?' asked the king, and
she answered, * They say that


264


THE SHEPHERD AND THE THIEF.

There was once a shepherd, who fed a flock of sheep
in the desert and kept strait watch over them. One night,
there came to him a thief, thinking to steal some of his
flock and finding him assiduous in guarding them, sleep-
ing not by night neither relaxing in his vigilance by day,
prowled about him all night, but could get nothing of
him. So, when he was weary of striving, he betook him-
self to [another part of] the desert and trapping a lion,
skinned him and stuffed his hide with straw ; after which
he carried it to a high place, where the shepherd might
see it and be assured thereof, and set it up there. Then
he went up to the shepherd and said to him, "Yonder
lion hath sent me to demand his supper of these sheep."
"Where is the lion?" asked the shepherd; and the thief
answered, "Lift thine eyes : there he stands."
jNTfgJ)t The shepherd raised his eyes and seeing the stuffed
tSCCCHXtf. hide, deemed it a very lion and was mightily affrighted ; so
he said to the thief, " O my brother, take what thou wilt.
I will not anywise gainsay thee." So the thief took what
he would of the sheep and redoubled in avidity by reason
of the excess of the shepherd's affright. Accordingly,
every little while, he would go to him and frighten him,
saying, "The lion hath need of this and that, and his
intent is to do thus and thus," and take what he would of
the sheep; and he stinted not to do thus with him, till
he had wasted the most part of his flock. This, O king/
added the favourite, ' I tell thee but that thou suffer not
the grandees of thy realm to be deluded by thy mildness
and easiness of temper and presume on thee; and in
sound judgment their death were better than that they
deal thus with thee.' Quoth the king, 1 1 accept this thine


265


admonition and will not hearken to their counsel neither
go out unto them.'

On the morrow the viziers and officers of state and
heads of the people assembled and taking each his arms,
repaired to the palace of the king, so they might break
in upon him and slay him and make another king in his
stead. When they came to the door, they required the
doorkeeper to open to them ; but he refused, whereupon
they sent to fetch fire, wherewith to burn down the doors
and enter. The doorkeeper, hearing what was toward
amongst them, went in to the king in haste and told him
that the folk were gathered together at the gate. ' And,'
quoth he, 'they required me to open to them, but I
refused and they have sent to fetch fire to burn down the
doors withal, so they may come in to thee and slay thee.
What dost thou bid me do ? 5 Quoth the king in himself,
4 Verily, I am fallen into sheer perdition.'

Then he sent for the favourite and said to her, ' Indeed,
Shimas never told me aught but I found it true, and now
the folk are come, great and small, purposing to slay me
and thee ; and for that the doorkeeper would not open
to them, they have sent to fetch fire, to burn the doors
withal : so will the house be burnt and we therein. What
dost thou counsel me to do?' 'Let not thine affair affright
thee,' answered she ; 'no harm shall betide thee. This
is a time in which crackbrains rise against their kings.'
'But what/ asked he, 'dost thou counsel me and how
shall I do in this matter ? ' Quoth she, ' My advice is that
thou bind thy head with a fillet and feign thyself sick :
then send for the vizier Shimas, who will come and see
the case wherein thou art ; and do thou say to him, " Verily
I purposed to go forth to the folk this day ; but this sick-
ness hindered me. So go thou out to them and acquaint
them with my case and tell them that to-morrow I will
without fail come forth to them and do their occasions


266


and look into their affairs, so they may be reassured and
their anger may subside." Then do thou summon ten of
thy father's stoutest slaves, men of strength and prowess,
to whom thou canst entrust thyself, giving ear to thy word
and obedient to thy commandment, keeping thy secret and
devoted to thy love, and bid them on the morrow stand at
thy head nor suffer any of the folk to enter, save one by one ;
and all who enter do thou bid them put to death. If they
agree with thee upon this, do thou to-morrow set up thy
throne in the audience-chamber and open thy doors.

When the folk see that thou hast opened thy doors,
their minds will be set at ease and they will come to thee
with a whole heart, [thinking no evil], and seek admission
to thee. Then do thou bid admit them, one by one, even as
I said to thee, and do thy will with them ; but it behoveth
thee begin by putting Shimas, their chief and leader, to
death ; for he is the Grand Vizier £hd head of the matter.
So slay him first and after put all the rest to death, one
after another, and spare none whom thou knowest to have
broken his covenant with thee ; and on like wise slay all
whose violence thou fearest. If thou deal thus with them,
there will be left them no power to make head against
thee ; so shalt thou be altogether at rest from them and
shalt enjoy thy kingship in peace and do what thou wilt ;
and know that there is no device that will advantage thee
more than this.' ' Verily,' said the king, ' this thy counsel
is just and that which thou biddest me well-advised, and
I will assuredly do as thou sayest.'

So he called for a fillet and bound his head therewith
and feigned sickness. Then he sent for Shimas and said
to him, ' O Shimas, thou knowest that I love thee and
hearken to thy counsel and thou art to me as brother and
father both in one. Moreover, thou knowest that I do
all thou biddest me and indeed thou badest me go forth
to the folk and sit to judge between them. Now I was


certified that this was loyal counsel on thy part and
purposed to go forth to them yesterday ; but this sickness
betided me and I cannot sit up. I hear that the folk are
incensed at my failure to come forth to them and are
minded of their malice to do with me that which is not
seemly, for that they know not what aileth me. So go thou
forth to them and acquaint them with my case and excuse
me to them, for I am obedient to their bidding and will do
according to their desire ; wherefore do thou order this affair
and engage thyself to them for me of this, for that thou hast
been a ioyai counsellor to me and to my father before me,
and it is of thy wont to make peace between the folk. To-
morrow, if it be the will of God the Most High, I will
without fail come forth to them, and peradventure my sick-
ness will cease from me this night, by the blessing of the
purity of my intent and the good I purpose them in my heart.'

Shimas prostrated himself to God and called down
blessings on the king and kissed his hand, rejoicing.
Then he went forth to the folk and told them what he
had heard from the king and forbade them from that
which they had a mind to do, acquainting them with the
king's excuse for his absence and that he had promised to
come forth to them on the morrow and deal with them
according to their wishes ; whereupon they dispersed and
returned to their houses.

Meanwhile the king sent for ten slaves of gigantic "Jsjfjgf) j
stature, men of stout heart and great prowess, whom he £j£C£OXfti.
had chosen from amongst his father's body-guards, and
said to them, ' Ye know the favour and esteem in which
my father held you and all the bounties and honours he
bestowed on you, and I will advance you to yet higher
rank with me than this. Now I will tell you the reason
thereof and ye are under God's safeguard from me. But
[first] 1 will ask you of somewhat, wherein if ye do my
bidding, obeying me in that which I shall command you


268


and keeping my secret from all men, ye shall have of me
largesse and favour overpassing your desire.''

The slaves answered him with one voice, saying, ' All
that thou biddest us ; O our lord, will we do, nor will we
anywise depart from thy commandment, for thou art our
lord and master.' ' God be good to you ! ' said the king.
' Now will I tell you why I have chosen you out for
increase of honour with me. Ye know how generously
my father dealt with the people of his dominions and the
oath he took from them on my behalf and how they
promised him that they would not break faith with me
nor gainsay my commandment ; and ye saw how they did
yesterday, whenas they came all together about me and
would have slain me. Now I am minded to do with
them somewhat, to wit, I have considered their fashion of
yesterday and see that nought but exemplary chastisement
will restrain them from the like of this ; wherefore I charge
you privily to put to death whom I shall point out to you,
to the intent that, by slaying their leaders and chiefs, I may
ward off evil and calamity from my realm ; and the manner
thereof shall be on this wise. To-morrow I will sit in
this chair in this chamber and give them leave to enter,
one by one, coming in at one door and going out at
another ; and do ye stand, all ten, before me and be
attentive to my signs ; and whoso enters singly, take him
and drag him into yonder chamber and slay him and hide
his body.' The slaves answered, ' We hearken to thy word
and obey thy commandment.' Whereupon he gave them
largesse and dismissed them.

On the morrow he summoned the slaves and bade set up
the throne. Then he donned his royal robes and taking the
book of the law 1 in his hands, posted the ten slaves before

1 Lit. the book of judgment or jurisdiction (kitab el kedsaa). Quczre
the list of cases to be decided or business to be transacted by the king
and his divan in public session-


269


him and commanded to open the doors. So they opened
the doors and the herald proclaimed aloud, saying, ' Whoso
hath authority, let him come to the king's carpet ! ' 1 Where-
upon up came the viziers and prefects and chamberlains
and stood, each in his rank. Then the king bade admit
them ; one by one, and the first to enter was Shimas, after
the wont of the chief vizier ; but no sooner had he pre-
sented himself before the king than the ten slaves set
upon him, ere he could be ware, and dragging him into
the adjoining chamber, despatched him. On like wise did
they with the rest of the viziers and doctors and notables,
slaying them, one after another, till they made an end of
them all. Then the king called the headsmen and bade
them put to the sword all who remained of the folk of valour
and prowess. So they fell on them and left none whom
they knew for a man of mettle but they slew him, sparing
only the dregs and refuse of the people. These latter they
drove away and they returned each to his folk, whilst the
king secluded himself with his pleasures and surrendered
his soul to its lusts, ensuing tyranny and oppression and
unright, till he outwent all the men of evil who had fore-
gone him.

Now this king's realm was a mine of gold and silver
and jacinths and jewels and the neighbouring kings envied
him this empire and looked for calamity to betide him.
Moreover, one of them [to wit, the King of Farther India]
said in himself, ' Now have I gotten my desire of wresting
the realm from the hand of yonder crackbrained boy, by
reason of that which hath betided of his slaughter of
the chiefs of his state and of all the men of valour and
mettle that were in his dominions. Now is my occasion
to snatch away that which is in his hand, seeing he hath
no knowledge of war nor judgment thereto, nor is there
any left to counsel him aright or succour him. Wherefore
1 i.e. court


2/0


this very day will I open on him the door of mischief by
writing him a letter wherein I will flout him and reproach
him with that which he hath done and see what he will
answer.'

So he wrote him a letter to the following effecr : * In
the name of God the Compassionate, the Merciful! I
have heard tell of that which thou hast done with thy
viziers and doctors and men of war and that whereinto
thou hast cast thyself of calamity, so that there is neither
power nor strength left in thee to repel whoso shall assail
thee, more by token that thou transgressest and orderest
thyself tyrannously and profligately. Now God hath given
me the mastery over thee and hath delivered thee into
my hand ; wherefore do thou give ear to my word and
obey my commandment and build me an impregnable
castle amiddleward the sea. If thou canst not do this,
depart thy realm and begone with thy life ; for I will send
unto thee, from the farthest parts of Hind, twelve squadrons
of horse, each twelve thousand fighting-men strong, who
shall enter thy land and spoil thy goods and slay thy men
and take thy women prisoners. Moreover, I will make my
Vizier Bediya captain over them and bid him lay strait
siege [to thy capital city] till he master it ; and I have
commanded the bearer of this letter that he tarry with
thee but three days. So, if thou do my bidding, thou
shalt be saved ; else will I send unto thee that which
I have said.'

Then he sealed the letter and gave it to a messenger^
who journeyed with it till he came to Wird Khan's capital
and delivered it to him. When the young king read it,
his heart sank within him and his breast was straitened
and he made sure of destruction, having none to whom
he might resort for counsel or succour. So he rose and
went in to his favourite, who, seeing him changed of
colour, said to him, * What ails thee, king?' Quoth


271

he, 'Today I am no king, but slave to the king.' And
lie opened the letter and read it to her, whereupon she
fell to weeping and lamenting and tearing her clothes.
Then said he to her, ' Hast thou aught of counsel or
resource in this grievous state ? ' But she answered,
' Women have no resource in time of war, nor have they
strength or judgment. It is men alone who have strength
and judgment and resource in the like of this affair.'

When the king heard this, there befell him the utmost
grief and repentance and remorse for that wherein he had
transgressed against his viziers and officers and the nobles
of his people and the chiefs of his state, and he would ^{gftj
that he had died ere there came to him the like of this ftcrCCXX{b*
shameful news. Then he said to his women, ' Verily,
there hath betided me from you that which befell the
heathcock with the tortoises.' 'What was that?' asked
they, and he answered, ' It is said that


THE HEATHCOCK AND THE TORTOISES.

A number of tortoises dwelt once in a certain island,
abounding in trees and fruits and streams, and it chanced,
one day, that a heathcock, passing over the island, was
overcome with heat and weariness and stayed his flight
there. Presently, looking about for a cool place, he espied
the resort of the tortoises and lighted down therein. Now
they were then abroad in quest of food, and when they
returned from their feeding-places to their dwelling, they
found the heathcock there. His beauty pleased them and
God made him fair in their eyes, so that they extolled
their Creator and loved the heathcock with an exceeding
love and rejoiced in him, saying one to another, u Assuredly
this is of the goodliest of the birds." And they began to
caress him and entreat him with kindness. When he saw


2/2


that they looked on him with eyes of affection, he inclined
to them and made friends with them and took up his
abode with them, flying away in the morning whither he
would and returning at eventide to pass the night with
them.

After awhile, the tortoises, seeing that his [daylong!
absence from them desolated them and finding that they
saw him not but by night, (for at break of day he still
took flight in haste and they knew not what came of him,
for all their love to him,) said to each other, " Indeed, we
love this heathcock and he is become our friend and we
cannot brook parting from him ; so how shall we do to
make him abide with us always? For he flies away at
daybreak and is absent from us all day and we see him
not save by night." Quoth one of them, Be easy, O my
sisters. I will bring him not to leave- us for the twinkling
of an eye." And the rest answered, saying, " An thou do
this, we will all be thy slaves."

So, when the heathcock came back from his feeding-
place and sat down amongst them, the wily tortoise drew
near unto him and called down blessings on him, giving
him joy of his safe return and saying, "O my lord, know
that God hath vouchsafed thee our love and hath in like
manner set in thy heart the love of us, so that thou art
become to us a familiar friend and a comrade in this
desert place. Now the goodliest of times for those who
love each other is when they are in company and the
sorest of afflictions for them is absence and separation.
But thou leavest us at peep of day and returnest not to us
till sundown, wherefore there betideth us sore desolation.
Indeed this is exceeding grievous unto us and we abide
in sore longing by reason thereof."

" Indeed," answered the bird, " I love you also and
yearn for you yet more than you for me, nor is it easy for
me to leave you ; but I have no help for this, seeing


273

that I am a bird with wings and may not abide with yoa
always, because that is not of my nature. For a bird,
being a winged creature, may not remain still, except it
be for the sake of sleep at night; but, as soon as it is
day, he flies away and seeks his food in what place soever
pleases him." "True," answered the tortoise. "Never-
theless he who hath wings hath no repose at most seasons,
for that the good he getteth is not a fourth part of the
trouble that betideth him, and the best of all the things
for which one striveth is ease of life and contentment-
Now God hath appointed love and fellowship between us
and thee and we fear for thee, lest some of thine enemies
catch thee and thou perish and we be denied the sight of
thy face." "Thou sayst sooth," rejoined the heathcock;
"but how dost thou counsel me to do?" Quoth the
tortoise, " My advice is that thou pluck out thy wing-
feathers, wherewith thou speedest thy flight, and abide
with us in peace, eating of our meat and drinking of our
drink in this pasturage, that aboundeth in trees laden with
ripe fruits, and thou and we, we will sojourn in this fruitful
place and enjoy each other's company."

The heathcock inclined to her speech, seeking ease for
himself, and plucked out his wing-feathers, one by one, in
accordance with the tortoise's counsel ; then he took up
his abode with them and contented himself with the little
ease and passing pleasure he enjoyed. Presently up came
a weasel and looking at the heathcock, saw that his wings
were plucked, so that he could not fly, whereat he was
mightily rejoiced and said in himself, 11 Verily yonder
heathcock is fat and scant of feather." So he went up to
him and seized him, whereupon the heathcock called out
to the tortoises for help; but, when they saw the weasel
seize him, they drew apart from him and huddled together,
choked with weeping for him, for they saw the beast:
torture him. Quoth the heathcock, "Is there aught but
VOL. vm. 1 8


274

weeping with you ? " And they answered, saying, " O our
brother, we have neither strength nor power nor resource
against a weasel." At this the heathcock was grieved and
gave up hope of life ; and he said to them, " The fault is
not yours, but mine own, in that I hearkened to you and
plucked out my wing-feathers, wherewith I used to fly.
Indeed, I deserve death for having hearkened to you, and
I blame you not in aught."

On like wise/ continued the king, * I do not blame you,
O women ; but I blame and reproach myself for that I
remembered not that ye were the cause of the transgression
of our father Adam, by reason whereof he was cast out
from Paradise, but forgot that ye are the root of all evil
and hearkened to you, of my ignorance and folly and lack
of sense and judgment, and slew my viziers and the
governors of my state, who were my loyal counsellors in
all things and my glory and rrry strength against whatso-
ever troubled me. Now find I not one to replace them
and see none who shall stand me in their stead ; and
except God succour me with one of sound judgment, who
Ntgf)t shall guide me to that wherein is my deliverance, I am
fttCCCXXb. fallen into sheer perdition.' Then he arose and withdrew
into his bedchamber, bemoaning his viziers and governors
and saying, 'Would God those lions were with me, though
but for an hour, so I might excuse myself unto them and
look on them and make my moan to them of my case and
that which hath bedded me after them ! ' And he abode
all that day sunken in the sea of troublous thought, eating
not neither drinking.

When the night came, he arose and changing his
raiment, donned old clothes and disguised himself and
went forth at a venture to walk about the city, so haply
he might hear some comfortable word. As he wandered
about the streets, he chanced upon two boys of equal
age. each about twelve years old, who sat talking under


275

a wall : so he drew near them whereas he might hear and
apprehend what they said, unseen of them, and heard one
say to the other, ' O my brother, hear what my father told
me yesternight of the calamity that hath betided him in
the withering of his crops, before their time, by reason of
the lack of rain and the great affliction that is fallen on
this city.' Quoth the other, ' Knowst thou not the cause
of this affliction ? ' ' Not I,' answered the first. ' 1 prithee,
tell it me, if thou know it' ' Yes,' rejoined the second ;
* I know it and will tell it thee. Know that I have heard
from one of my father's friends that our king put his
viziers and ministers to death, without offence done of
them, by reason of his love for women and inclination to
them; for that his viziers forbade him from -this, but he
would not be forbidden and commanded to slay them,
in obedience to his women. Thus he killed^ Shimas my
father, who was his vizier and the vizier of his father before
him and the chief of his council; but thou shalt see how
God will do with him by reason of his sins against them
and how He shall avenge them of him.' ' How so ? '
asked the first boy.

' Know,' replied his fellow, ' that the King of Farther
India maketh light of our king and hath sent him a
letter, rating him and saying to him, u Build me a caslle
amiddleward the sea, or I will send unto thee Bediya
my vizier, with twelve squadrons of horse, each twelve
thousand strong, to seize upon thy kingdom and slay thy
men and take thee and thy women prisoners." And he
hath given him three days' time to answer. Now thou
must know, O my brother, that this King of Farther
India is a masterful tyrant, a man of might and exceeding
prowess, and in his realm are much people ; wherefore,
except our king make shift to fend him off from himself
he will fall into perdition, whilst the King of Hind will
seize on our possessions and slay our men and make


2J6


prize of our women." When the king heard this talk, his
agitation redoubled and he inclined to the boys; saying,
1 Surely, this boy is a wizard, in that he is acquainted with
this thing ; for the letter is with me and the secret also
and none hath knowledge of this matter but myself. How
then knoweth this boy of it ? I will resort unto him and
talk with him and I pray God that our deliverance may be
at his hand/

Then he approached the boy softly and said to him 8
( O dear boy, what is this thou say est of our king, that
he did ill to the utterest in- slaying his viziers and the
chiefs of his state? Indeed, he sinned against himself
and his people and thou art right in that which thou
sayest. But tell me, O my son, whence knowest thou
that the King of Farther India hath written him a letter,
berating him and bespeaking him with the grievous speech
whereof thou tellest ? ' ' O brother/ answered the boy, ' I
know this from the sand 1 wherewith I tell the tale of
night and day and from the saying of the ancients, " No
mystery is hidden from God ; " for the sons of Adam have
in them a spiritual virtue which discovers to them hidden
secrets.' 'True, O my son,' answered Wird Khan; 'but
whence learn edst thou the [art of divination by] sand,
and thou young of years ? ' Quoth the boy, * My father
taught it me;' and the king said, ' Is thy father alive Of
dead?' ' He is dead/ answered the boy.

Then said Wird Khan, ' Is there any resource or device
for our king, whereby he may ward off this sore calamity
from himself and his kingdom ? ' And the boy answered,
4 It befits not that I speak with thee [of this] ; but, if the
king send for me and ask me how he shall do to baffle
his enemy and win free of his snares, I will acquaint him
with that wherein, by the power of God the Most High 3
1 i.g. by means of geomancy or divination by sand,


277

shall be his deliverance/ 4 But who shall tell the king of
this,' asked Wird Khan, * that he may send for the ? '
Quoth the boy, ' If I hear that he seeketh men of ex-
perience and good counsel, I will go up with them to
him and tell him that wherein shall be his welfare and
the warding off of this affliction from him ; but, if he
neglect this pressing matter and busy himself with his
pleasures among his women and I go to him of my own
motion, purposing to acquaint him with the means of
deliverance, he will assuredly give orders to slay me, even
as he slew those his viziers, and my courtesy to him will
be the cause of my destruction ; wherefore the folk will
think meanly of me and belittle my wit and I shall be of
those of whom it is said, u He whose learning exceeds
his wit perishes by his ignorance."'

When the king heard the boy's speech, he was assured
of his sagacity and the excellence of his merit was manifest
unto him. So he was certified that deliverance would
betide him and his subjects at the boy's hands and said
to him, ' Whence art thou and where is thy house ? ' ' This
is the wall of our house/ answered he. The king took note
of the place and leaving the boy, returned to his palace,
rejoicing. There he changed his clothes and called for
meat and drink, forbidding his women access to him.
Then he ate and drank and returned thanks to God the
Most High and besought Him of succour and deliverance.
Moreover he craved His pardon and forgiveness for that
?vhich he had done with his counsellors of state and
ministers and turned to Him with sincere repentance,
imposing on himself prayer and fasting galore, by way
of votive offering.

On the morrow, he called one of his chief officers and
describing to him the boy's abiding-place, bade him go
thither and bring him to his presence with all gentleness,


278


So the officer sought out the boy and said to him, 'The
king bids thee to him, that good may betide thee from
him and that he may ask thee a question ; then shalt thou
return in peace to thy dwelling.' 'What is the king's
occasion with me?' asked the boy, and the officer said,
* My lord's occasion with thee is question and answer.'
' A thousand times hearkening and a thousand times
obedience to the commandment of the king ! ' answered
the boy and accompanied the officer to the palace. When
he came into the presence, he prostrated himself before
God and saluting the king, called down blessings on him.
j^tgf)t Wird Khan returned his salutation and bade him sit. So
tJCCCCXXbl. he sat down and the king said to him, ' Knowst thou who
talked with thee yesternight?' 'Yes,' answered the boy,
and the king said, ' And where is he ? ' ' It is he who
speaketh with me at this present,' ^replied the boy. ' Thou
sayst sooth, O friend,' rejoined the king and bade set him
a chair beside his own, whereon he made him sit and
called for meat and drink.

Then they talked awhile and the king said, ' O vizier, 1
thou toldest me yesternight that thou hadst a device
wherewith thou couldst fend off from us the malice of
the King of Hind. What is this device and how shall
we contrive to ward off his mischief from us? Tell me,
that I may make thee chief of those who speak with me
in the realm and choose thee to be my vizier and do
according to thy judgment in all thou counsellest me and
assign thee a splendid recompense.' ' O king,' answered
the boy, ' keep thy recompense to thyself and seek counsel
and policy of thy women, who counselled thee to slay my
father Shimas and the rest of the viziers.' When the king
heard this, he was confounded and sighed and said, ' O
dear boy, was Shimas indeed thy father? ' ' Yes,' answered
the boy ; ' Shimas was indeed my father and I am in truth
1 A courtesy title, to which the boy was entitled as a vizier's son.


279


his son.' Whereupon the king bowed his head, whilst the
tears ran from his eyes, and he craved pardon of God.

Then said he, ' O boy, indeed I did this of my ignorance
and by the evil counsel of the women and of the greatness
of their malice; but I beseech thee to forgive me and
I will set thee in thy father's stead and make thy rank
higher than his. Moreover, if thou do away this retri-
bution from us, I will encircle thy neck with a collar of
gold and mount thee on the goodliest of steeds and bid
the crier make proclamation before thee, saying, "This is
the glorious boy, he who sitteth in the second seat after
the king ! " As for the women, I have it in mind to do
vengeance on them at such time as God the Most High
shall will it. But tell me now what thou hast with thee
of counsel and contrivance, that my heart may be at ease.'
Quoth the boy, 'Swear to me that thou wilt not gainsay
me in that which I shall say to thee and that I shall be
in safety from that which I fear.' And the king answered,
' This is the covenant of God between thee and me, that
I will not go from thy word and that thou shalt be my
chief counsellor and whatsoever thou biddest me, that
will I do ; and God the Most High is witness betwixt us
of what I say.'

Therewith the boy's breast dilated and the field of
speech was opened to him wide and he said, ' O king,
my counsel to thee is that thou wait till the expiration of
the delay appointed by thee for returning an answer to
the courier of the King of Hind ; and when he cometh to
thee, seeking the answer, do thou put him off to another
day. With this he will excuse himself to thee, on the
score of his master having appointed him certain fixed
days, and press thee for an answer ; but do thou rebut
him and put him off to another day, without specifying
it. Then will he go forth from thee, angry, and betake
himself into the midst of the city and speak openly among


280


the folk, saying, " O people of the city, I am a courier of
the King of Farther India, who is a king of great might
and of determination such as softeneth iron. He sent
me with a letter to the king of this city and limited unto
me certain days, saying, ' An thou be not with me by the
time appointed, my vengeance shall fall on thee.' Now,
behold, I went in to the king of this city and gave him
the letter, which when he had read, he sought of me
a delay of three days, after which he should return me
an answer thereto, and I agreed to this of courtesy and
consideration for him. When the three days were past,
I went to seek the answer of him, but he put me off to
another day ; and now I have no patience to wait longer j
so I am about to return to my lord the King of Farther
India and acquaint him with that which hath befallen me ;
and ye, O folk, are witnesses between me and him."

This will be reported to thee and do thou send for him
and bespeak him gently and say to him, " O thou that
strivest for thine own destruction, what moveth thee to
blame us among our subjects? Verily, thou deservest
present death at our hands ; but the ancients say,
' Clemency is of the attributes of the noble.' Know that
our delay in answering thy master's letter arose not from
neglect on our part, but from our much business and lack
of leisure to look into thine affair and write a reply to thy
king." Then call for the letter and read it again and
laugh immoderately and say to the courier, " Hast thou
a letter other than this? If so, we will write thee an
answer to that also." He will say, "I have none other
than this letter ; " but do thou repeat thy question to him
a second and a third time, and he will reply, " I have
none other at all." Then say to him, "Verily, this thy
king lacketh wit in that he writeth us the like of this
letter, seeking to arouse our anger against him, so that
ue shall go forth to him with our troops and invade his


28 1

dominions and take his realm. But we will not punish
him this time for the vileness of his breeding, [as shown]
in this letter, for that he is scant of wit and weak of
judgment, and it beseemeth our dignity that we first
admonish him and warn him not to repeat the like of
these extravagances j and if he again adventure himself
and return to the like of this, he will merit present
destruction. Indeed, methinks this king of thine must
be an ignorant fool, taking no thought to the issue [of
that he doth] and having no vizier of sense and good
counsel, with whom he may advise. Were he a man of
sense, he had taken counsel with a vizier, before sending
us the like of this ridiculous letter. But he shall have an
answer like unto his letter and overpassing it; for I will
give it to one of the boys of the school to answer." Then
send for me, and when I come, bid me read„ the letter and
answer it/

When the king heard the boy's speech, his breast
expanded and he approved his counsel and his device
pleased him. So he conferred largesse upon him and
instating him in his father's office, sent him away, rejoicing.
When the three days of delay were expired, that he had
appointed unto the courier, the latter presented himself
and going in to the king, demanded the answer ; but he
put him off to another day; whereupon he went to the
end of the throne-room and spake unseemly, even as the
boy had foresaid. Then he betook himself to the bazaar
and said, ' Ho, people of this city, I came with a message
from the King of Farther India to your king, and still he
putteth me off from an answer. Now the term is past
which my master limited unto me and your king hath no
excuse, and ye are witnesses unto this.'

When this speech was reported to the king, he sent
for the courier and said to him, 'O thou that seekest
thine own destruction, art thou not the bearer of a letter


282


from king to king, between whom are secrets, and how
cometh it that thou goest forth among the folk and pub-
lishest kings' secrets to the common people? Verily, thou
meritest punishment from us ; but this we will forbear, for
the sake of returning an answer by thee to this fool of a
king of thine : and it befitteth not that any return him an
answer but the least of the boys of the school.' Then
he sent for the vizier's son, who came and prostrating
himself to God, offered up prayers for the king's abiding
glory and long life ; whereupon Wird Khan threw him the
letter, saying, 'Read that letter and write me a reply
thereto in haste.'

The boy took the letter and reading it, smiled ; then he
laughed aloud and said to the king, ' Didst thou send for
me to answer this letter?' 'Yes,' answered Wird Khan,
and the boy said, ' O king, methought thou hadst sent for
me on some grave matter; indeed a lesser than I had
availed to the answering of this letter ; but it is thine to
command, O puissant king.' Quoth the king, ' Write the
answer forthright, on account of the courier, for that he
is appointed a term and we have delayed him another
day.' ' I hear and obey,' answered the boy and pulling
out paper and inkhorn, wrote the following answer,
j^TCcrf) t ' In the name of God the Merciful, the Compassionate !
KCCCCXXbtt. Peace be upon him who hath gotten pardon and deliver-
ance and the mercy of the Compassionate One ! To
proceed. O thou that pretendest thyself a mighty king
[and art but a king] in word and not in deed, we give
thee to know that thy letter hath reached us and we
have read it and have taken note of that which is therein
of absurdities and rare extravagances, whereby we are
certified of thine ignorance and ill-will unto us. Verily,
thou hast put out thy hand to that whereunto thou availest
not, and but that we have compassion on God's creatures
and the people, we had not held back [our hand] from


283

thee. As for thy messenger, lie went forth to the bazaat
and published the news of thy letter to great and small,
whereby he merited punishment from us ; but we spared
him and remitted his offence, not of respect for thee,
but of pity for him, seeing that he is excusable with
thee.

As for that whereof thou makest mention in thy letter
of the slaughter of my viziers and wise men and grandees,
this is the truth and [this I did] for a reason that availed
with rne, and I slew not one man of learning but there are
with me a thousand of his kind, wiser than he and more
of sense and learning, nor is there with me a child but
is filled with knowledge and wisdom, and I have, in the
stead of each of the slain, of those who surpass in his
kind, what is beyond count. Moreover, each of my troops
can cope with a battalion of thine, whilst, as for treasure,
I have a manufactory that makes every day a thousand
pounds of silver, besides gold, and precious stones are
with me as pebbles ; and as for the people of my kingdom,
I cannot set forth to thee their wealth and beauty and
goodliness. How darest thou, therefore, presume upon
us and say to us, " Build me a castle amiddleward the
sea ? " Verily, this is a marvellous thing, and doubtless
it arises from the slenderness of thy wit; for, hadst thou
aught of sense, thou hadst enquired of the beatings of
the waves and the movements of the winds. But fend
thou off therefrom the waves and the surges of the sea
and still the winds, and we will build thee the castle.

As for thy pretension that thou wilt vanquish me, God
forfend that the like of thee should lord it over us and
conquer our realm! Nay, God the Most High hath given
me the mastery over thee, for that thou hast transgressed
against me and provoked me without due cause. Know,
therefore, that thou hast merited chastisement from God
and from me ; but I fear God in respect of thee and thy


284


subjects 1 and will not take horse against thee but aftet
warning. Wherefore, if thou fear God, hasten to send me
this year's tribute ; else will I not leave to ride forth against
thee with a thousand thousand and a hundred thousand
fighting-men, all giants on elephants, and I will range
them round about my vizier and bid him beleaguer thee
three years, in place of the three days' delay thou ap-
pointedst to thy messenger, and I will make myself master
of thy kingdom, except that I will slay none but thyself
alone and make prisoners therefrom none but thy harem.'

Then the boy drew his own portrait in the margin of
the letter and wrote thereunder the words : 4 This answer
was written by the least of the boys of the school ; ' after
which he sealed it and handed it to the king. The latter
gave it to the courier, who took it and kissing the king's
hands, went forth from him, rendering thanks to God and
the king for the latter's clemency to him and marvelling
at the boy's intelligence. He arrived at the court of the
king, his master, three days after the expiration of the
term appointed to hirn, and found that he had called
a meeting of his council, by reason of the failure of the
courier to return at the appointed time. So he went in to
the king and prostrating himself before him, gave him the
letter. The king took it and questioned him of the cause
of his tarrying and how it was with King Wird Khan.
So he recounted to him all that he had seen with his eye*?
and heard with his ears ; whereat the king's wit was con
founded and he said, ' Out on thee ! What tale is this
thou tellest me of the like of this king?' 'O mighty
king,' answered the courier, ' I am here before thee, 2 but
open the letter and read it, and the truth of my speech
will appear to thee.'

1 i. e. I am governed by the fear of God in my conduct towards theg
and thy subjects.
* i.e. I am thy slave ; do with me what thou wilt.


So the king opened the letter and read it and seeing
the portrait of the boy who had written it, made sure of
the loss of his kingdom and was perplexed concerning
the issue of his affair. Then, turning to his viziers and
grandees, he acquainted them with the case and read
them the letter, whereat they were mightily affrighted
and sought to calm the king's terror with words that
were only from the tongue, whilst their hearts were torn
with alarm and anxiety ; but Bediya, the chief vizier, said,
'Know, O king, that there is no avail in that which my
brother viziers have said, and it is my counsel that thou
write this king a letter and excuse thyself to him therein,
saying, " I love thee and loved thy father before thee and
sent thee this letter by the courier only to prove thee and
try thy constancy and see what was in thee of stoutness
and thy proficiency in matters practical and theoretical
and skill in enigmas and that wherewith thou art endowed
of all perfections. Wherefore we pray God the Most High
to bless thee in thy kingdom and strengthen the defences
of thy [capital] city and add to thy dominion, since thou
art mindful of thyself and accomplishest the needs of thy
subjects." And send it to him by another courier.' 'By
the Great God,' exclaimed the king, 'it is a wonder of
wonders that this man should be a mighty king and
prepared for war, after his slaughter of all the wise men
of his kingdom and his counsellors and the captains of
his host and that his realm should prosper after this and
there should issue therefrom this vast strength ! But the
most wonderful of all is that the little ones of its schools
should return the like of this answer for its king. Verily,
of my ill-omened presumption, I have kindled this fire
upon myself, and I know not how I shall quench it, save
[by acting on] the advice of this my vizier.'

Accordingly he made ready a rich present, with slaves
and attendants galore, and wrote the following letter [in


286


answer to that of Wird Khan]. 'In the name of God,

the Compassionate, the Merciful ! To proceed. O glorious
King Wird Khan, son of my dear brother Jelyaad, may
God have mercy on thee and continue thee [on life !]
Thine answer to our letter hath reached us and we have
read it and apprehended its meaning and see therein
that which rejoiceth us, and this is the utmost of that
which we sought of God for thee ; wherefore we beseech
Him to exalt thy dignity and stablish the pillars of thy
state and give thee the victory over thy foes and those
who purpose thee ill. Know, O king, that thy father
was my brother and that there were between us in his
lifetime pacts and covenants of friendship, and never had
he of me nor I of him other than good ; and when he was
translated [to the mercy of God] and thou sattest upon
the throne of his kingship, there betided us the utmost
joy and contentment; but, when the- news reached us of
that which thou didst with thy viziers and the notables
of thy state, we feared lest the report of thee should
come to the ears of some king other than ourselves and
he should presume against thee., for that we deemed thee
neglectful of thine affairs and of the maintenance of thy
defences and careless of the interests of thy kingdom ;
so we wrote unto thee what should arouse thee [from
thy torpor]. But, when we saw that thou returnest us
the like of this answer, our heart was set at ease for
thee, may God give thee enjoyment of thy kingdom and
stablish thee in thy dignity ! And so peace be on thee.'
Then he despatched the letter and the presents to
INTtpbt Wird Khan with an escort of a hundred horse, who
tJCCCC fare d on till they came to his court and saluting him,
CTbut. presented him with the letter and the gifts. The king
read the letter and accepted the presents, lodging the
captain of the escort in a befitting place and entreating
him with honour. So the news of this was bruited


28/


abroad among the people and the king rejoiced therein
with an exceeding joy. Then he sent for the boy, the
son of Shimas, and the captain of the hundred horse,
and entreating the young vizier with honour, gave him
the letter to read ; whilst he himself upbraided the captain
concerning the king's conduct, and the latter kissed his
hand and made his excuses to him, offering up prayers
for the continuance of his life and the eternity of his
fortune. The king thanked him for his good wishes and
bestowed upon him honours and largesse galore. More-
over, he gave his men what befitted them and made ready
presents to send by them- and bade the young vizier write
an answer to their king's letter.

So the boy wrote an answer, wherein, after an elegant
exordium, he touched briefly on the question of reconcilia-
tion and praised the good breeding of the envoy and of
his men, and showed it to the king, who- said to hiirij
1 Read it, dear boy, that we may know what is written
therein.' So the boy read the letter in the presence of
the hundred horse, and the king and all present marvelled
at the excellence of its style and sense. Then the king
sealed the letter and delivering it to the captain of the
hundred horse, dismissed him with an escort of his own
troops, to bring him to the frontier of his country. So
the captain returned, confounded at that which he had
seen of the boy's knowledge and sagacity and thank-
ing God for the speedy accomplishment of his errand
and the acceptance of [the proffered] peace, to the King
of Farther India, to whom he delivered the presents and
the letter, telling him what he had seen and heard, whereat
the king was mightily rejoiced and returned thanks to God
the Most High and honoured the envoy, lauding his care
and zeal and advancing him in rank : and he was thence-
forth in peace and tranquillity and all contentment

As for King Wird Khan, he returned to the way of


28S


righteousness, abandoning his evil courses and turning
to God with sincere repentance ; and he altogether for-
swore women and devoted himself to the ordering of the
affairs of his realm and the governance of his people in
the fear of God. Moreover, he made the son of Shimas
vizier in his father's room and the chief of his counsellors
and keeper of his secrets and commanded to decorate his
capital and the other cities of his kingdom seven days.
At this the subjects rejoiced, glad in the prospect of
justice and equity, and fear and alarm ceased from them
and they were instant in prayer for the king and for the
vizier who had done away this trouble from him and them.

Then said the. king to the vizier, 'What is thy counsel
for the proper ordering of the state and the prospering
of the people and the furnishing of the realm anew with
captains and counsellors as before ? ' 4 O king of high
estate/ answered the boy, ' in my judgment, it behoves,
before all, that thou begin by tearing out from thy heart
the root of frowardness and leave thy debauchery and
tyranny and devotion to women ; for, if thou return to the
root of transgression, the second backsliding will be worse
than the first.' ' And what,' asked the king, ' is the root
of frowardness that it behoves me to tear out from my
heart?' 'O mighty king,' answered the vizier, little of
years but great of wit, 'the root of frowardness is the
ensuing the desire of women and inclining to them and
following their counsel and policy ; for the love of them
troubles the soundest wit and corrupts the most upright
nature, and manifest proofs bear witness to my saying,
wherein, if thou meditate them and consider their actions
and the consequences thereof with eyes intent, thou wilt
find a loyal counsellor against thine own soul and wilt
stand in no need of my advice.

Look, then, thou occupy not thy heart with the thought
of women and do away the trace of them from thy mind,


289


for that God the Most High hath forbidden the excessive
use of them by the mouth of His prophet Moses, so that
quoth a certain wise king to his son, " O my son, when
thou succeedest to the throne after me, spare to frequent
women overmuch, lest thy heart be led astray and thy
judgment corrupted; for that their much frequentation
leadeth to love of them, and love of them to corruption
of judgment." And the proof of this is what befell our
lord Solomon, son of David (peace be upon them both !)
whom God endowed with knowledge and wisdom and
supreme dominion above all men, nor vouchsafed He to
any of the kings of old time the like of that which He
gave him; and women were the cause of his father's
offending.

The examples of this are many, O king, and I do
but make mention of Solomon to thee for that thou
knowest that to none was given the like of the dominion
wherewith he was invested, so that all the kings of the
earth obeyed him. Know then, O king, that the love of
women is the root of all evil and none of them hath any
judgment : wherefore it behoveth a man to confine his use
of them within the limits of necessity and not incline to
them altogether, for that will cause him fall into cor-
ruption and perdition. If thou hearken to my rede, all
thine affairs will prosper ; but, if thou neglect it, thou wilt
repent, whenas repentance will not avail thee.'

' Indeed,' answered the king, ' I have left my sometime ^!gf)t
inclination to women and have altogether renounced my ?JtCC£XCtX
infatuation for them ; but how shall I do to punish them
for that which they have done? For the slaying of thy
father Shimas was of their malice and not of my own will,
and I know not what ailed my reason that I feil in with
their proposal to kill him.'

Then he cried out and groaned and lamented, saying s
'Alas for the loss of my vizier and his just judgment and
vol. vni. 19


290


wise ordinance and for the loss of his like of the viziers
and notables of the state and of the goodliness of their
apt and sagacious counsels ! ' 'O king,' said the young
vizier, ' know that the fault is not with women alone, for
that they are like unto a pleasing commodity, whereto
the desires of the beholders incline. To whosoever
desireth and buyeth, they sell it, but whoso buyeth not,
none forceth him thereto ; so that the fault is his who
buyeth, especially if he know the harmfulness of the
commodity. Now, I warn thee, as did my father before
me, but thou hearkenedst not to his counsel.' ' O vizier,'
answered the king, ' indeed thou hast fixed this fault
upon me, even as thou hast said, and I have no excuse
except the Divine ordinances.' ' O king,' rejoined the
vizier, ' know that God hath created us and endowed us
with ableness 1 and appointed to us will and choice; so,
if we will, we do, and if we wiH, we do not God com-
mandeth us not to do harm, lest sin attach to us;
wherefore it behoveth us to consider that which it is
right to do, for that the Most High commandeth us
nought but good in all cases and forbiddeth us only
from evil ; but what we do, we do of our free will, be
it right or wrong.'

Quoth the king, 'Thou sayst truly, and indeed my
fault arose from my surrendering myself to my lusts,
albeit many a time my reason warned me from this and
thy father Shimas often warned me likewise ; but my
lusts carried it over my reason. Hast thou then with
thee aught that may [in the future] withhold me from
committing this error and whereby my reason may be
victorious over the lusts of my soul ? ' 4 Yes,' answered
the vizier, 'I can tell thee what will restrain thee from
committing this error, and it is that thou put off the
garment of ignorance and don that of understanding,
1 i.e- freewill.


29*

disobeying thy passions and obeying thy Lord and
reverting to the policy of the just king thy father,
fulfilling thy duties to God the Most High and to thy
people, applying thyself to the defence of thy faith and
the promotion of thy subjects' welfare, governing thyself
aright and forbearing the slaughter of thy people.

Look to the issues of things and sever thyself from
tyranny and oppression and arrogance and lewdness,
practising justice and equity and humility and obeying the
commandments of God the Most High, applying thyself
to gentle dealing with those of His creatures whom He
hath committed to thy governance and being assiduous in
fulfilling their prayers unto thee, in accordance with that
which is incumbent on thee. If thou be constant in the
practice of these virtues, may thy days be serene and may
God of His mercy spare thee and make thee revered of
all who look on thee ; so shall thine enemies be brought
to nought, for God the Most High shall put their hosts to
the rout, and thou shalt have acceptance with Him and be
loved and reverenced of His creatures.'

'Verily,' said the king, 'thou hast quickened mine
entrails and enlightened my heart with thy sweet speech
and hast opened the eyes of mine understanding, after
blindness ; and I am resolved to do all thou hast set forth
to me, with the help of God the Most High, leaving my
former estate of lust and frowardness and bringing forth
my soul from duresse into freedom and from fear into
safety. It behoveth thee, then, to be joyful and contented,
for that I, for all my greater age, am become to thee as
a son, and thou to me as a dear father, for all thy tender-
ness of years, and it is grown incumbent on me to do my
utmost endeavour in that thou commandest me.

Wherefore I thank the bounty of God the Most High
and thy bounty for that He hath vouchsafed me, by thee,
fair fortune and good guidance and just judgment to fend


292


off my trouble and anxiety ; and the deliverance of ray
people hath been brought about by means of the ex-
cellence of thy skill and the goodliness of thine ordinance.
Henceforward, thou shalt be the governor of my kingdom
and equal to myself in all but sitting upon the throne;
and all that thou dost shall be law to me and none shall
gainsay thy word, young in years though thou be ? for that
thou art old in wit and knowledge. So I thank God who
hath vouchsafed thee to me, that thou mayst guide me
out of the crooked paths of perdition into the way of
righteousness.'

Quoth the vizier, 'O august king, know that no merit
is due to me for giving thee loyal counsel; for that to
succour thee by deed and word is of that which is incum-
bent on me, seeing that I am but a plant of thy bounty ;
nor I alone, but my father before me was overwhelmed
with thy favours; so that we are both alike partakers in
thy munificence, and how shall we not acknowledge this ?
Moreover thou, O king, art our shepherd and ruler and
he who wards off our enemies from us and to whom is
committed our protection and our guardian, instant in
endeavour for our safety. Indeed, though we lavished
our lives in thy service, yet should we not fulfil that which
behoveth us of gratitude to thee ; but we supplicate God
the Most High, who hath set thee in dominion over us and
made thee our ruler, and beseech Him to vouchsafe thee
long life and success in all thine enterprises and not to
try thee with afflictions in thy time, but bring thee to thy
desire and make thee to be reverenced till the day of
thy death and lengthen thine arms in beneficence and
generosity, so thou mayst have commandment over every
wise man and subdue every froward one and all men of
wisdom and mettle be found with thee in thy realm and
all the ignorant and faint-hearted be plucked out there-
from; and we pray Him to withhold from thy people


293


scarcity and misfortune and sow among them love and
good fellowship and cause them to enjoy of this world its
prosperity and of the next its felicity, of His grace and
bounty and hidden mercies. Amen. For He can all
things and there is nought difficult unto Him, in whom
all things have their goal and place of returning.'

When the king heard the vizier's prayer, he was mightily
rejoiced thereat and inclined to him with his whole heart,
saying, 5 Henceforth, O vizier, thou art to me in the stead
of brother and son and father, and nought but death shall
sever me from thee. Thou shalt have the disposal of all
that my hand possesses, and if I have no child to succeed
me, thou shalt sit on my throne in my stead ; for thou
art the worthiest of all the people of my realm, and 1 will
invest thee with my kingship and appoint thee my heir
presumptive to inherit the kingdom after me, if it be the
will of God the Most High, in the presence of the
grandees of my state, and call them to witness thereof.'

Then he called his secretary and bade him write to ^ftrjjf
all the notables of his kingdom, summoning them to his fttCCCXJCX.
court, and caused proclamation to be made in his city
unto all the townsfolk great and small, bidding all the
amirs and governors and chamberlains and other officers
and dignitaries, as well as the sages and doctors of the
law, to his presence. Moreover he held a grand divan
and made a banquet, never was its like, and bade all
the folk, high and low, thereto. So they all assembled
and abode in eating and drinking and delight a month's
space ; after which the king clothed all his household and
the poor of his kingdom and bestowed abundant largesse
on the men of learning.

Then he chose out a number of the sages and wise men ?
by counsel of the son of Shimas, and caused them go in
to him, bidding him choose out six of them, that he might
make them viziers under his commandment. So he chose


294


out six of the oldest of them in years and the most
accomplished of them in understanding and knowledge
and the speediest of memory and judgment, and presented
them to the king, who clad them in the vizier's habit and
said to them, ' Ye are become my viziers, under the com-
mandment of this my chief vizier, the son of Shimas.
Whatsoever he saith to you or biddeth you thereto, ye
shall not in anywise depart from it, albeit he is the
youngest of you in years; for he is the eldest of you
in wit'

Then he seated them upon chairs, adorned with gold,
after the usage of viziers, and appointed unto them
stipends and allowances, bidding them choose out such
of the notables of the kingdom and officers of the troops
present at the banquet as were most fit for the service
of the state, that he might make them captains of tens
and hundreds and thousands and appoint to them dig-
nities and assign them provision, after the manner of
grandees. This they did with all diligence and he bade
them also handsel all who were present with largesse
galore and dismiss them each to his country with honour
and worship. Moreover he charged his governors rule
the people with justice and enjoined them to be tenderly
solicitous for rich and poor and bade succour them from
the treasury, according to their several degrees. So the
viziers wished him continuance of glory and long life,
and he commanded to decorate the city three days, in
gratitude to God the Most High for His mercies.

When the court was dissolved and all the people had
departed, each to his own place, after their affairs had
been set in order, the king summoned the son of Shimas
and the other six viziers and taking them apart privily,
said to them, 5 Know, O viziers, that I have been a
wanderer from the right way, drowned in ignorance,
setting my face against admonition, a breaker of pacts


295


and promises and a gainsayer of folk of good counsel ;
and the cause of all this was my befoolment by these
women and the wiles with which they beset me and the
seeming fairness of their speech, wherewith they beguiled
me, and my acceptance of this, for that I deemed their
words true and loyal counsel, by reason of the sweetness
and softness thereof ; but behold, they were deadly poison.
And now I am certified that they sought but to ruin and
destroy me, wherefore they deserve punishment and
requital from me, for the sake of justice, that I may make
them an admonition to all who will be admonished. But
what deem ye advisedly of putting them to death?'

( O mighty king,' answered the young vizier, ' I have
already told thee that women are not alone to blame, but
that the fault is shared between them and the men who
hearken to them ; but they deserve punishment for two
reasons : first, for the fulfilment of thy word, because thou
art the supreme king ; and secondly, by reason of theii
presumption against thee and their beguilement of thee
and their intermeddling with that which concerns them
not and whereof it befits them not to speak. Wherefore
they have right well deserved death; yet let that which
hath befallen them suffice them, and do thou henceforth
reduce them to servants' estate. But it is thine to com-
mand in this and other than this.'

Some of the viziers seconded Ibn Shimas's advice ; but
one of them prostrated himself before the king and said
to him, ' May God prolong the king's days ! If thou be
indeed resolved to put them to death, do with them as
I shall say to thee.' 'And what is that?' asked Wird
Khan. Quoth the vizier, ' It were best that thou bid some
of thy female slaves carry the women who played thee
false to the apartment, wherein befell the slaughter of thy
viziers and sages, and imprison them there , and do thou
assign to them a little meat and drink, enough to keep


296


life in them [and no more]. Let them never be suffered
to go forth of that place, and whenever one of them dies,
let her abide among them, as she is, till they die all, even
to the last of them. This is the least of their desert, for
that they were the cause of this great wickedness, ay, and
the origin of all the troubles and calamities that have
befallen in our time; so shall there be verified in them
the words of him who said, " He who diggeth a pit for
his brother shall surely himself fall therein, though he go
long in safety." !

The king accepted the vizier's counsel and sending for
four stalwart female slaves, committed the offending women
to them, bidding them carry them to the place of slaughter
and imprison them there and allow them every day a
little coarse food and a little troubled water. They did
with them as he bade ; wherefore the women mourned
sore, repenting them of that which they had done and
lamenting grievously. Thus God gave them their reward
of abjection in this world and prepared for them torment
in the world to come ; nor did they cease to abide in
that dark and noisome place, whilst every day one or
other of them died, till they all perished, even to the
last of them ; and the report of this event was bruited
abroad in all lands and countries. This is the end of
the story of the king and his viziers and subjects, and
praise be to God who causeth peoples to pass away
and quickeneth the rotten bones, Him who [alone] is
worthy to be glorified and magnified and hallowed for
ever and ever I


297


&BOUKIR THE DYER AND ABOUSIR THE

BARBER.

There dwelt once, in the city of Alexandria, two men,
one of whom was a dyer, by name Aboukir, and the
other a barber called Abousir ; and they were neighbours
in the market, where their shops were side by side. The
dyer was a swindler and a liar, an exceeding wicked
man, as if indeed his temples were hewn out of the rock
or fashioned of the threshold of a Jewish synagogue, nor
was he ashamed of any knavery he wrought amongst the
folk. It was his wont, when any brought him stuffs to
dye, to require of him present payment, on pretence of
buying dyestuffs withal. So the man would give him the
hire in advance and go away, and he would spend it on
meat and drink ; after which he would sell the stuff itself
and spend its price in eating and drinking and what not
else, for he ate not but of the choicest and most delicate
meats nor drank but of the best of that which doth away
the wit.

When the owner of the stuff came to him, he would say
to him, 'Come to me to-morrow before sunrise and thou
shalt find thy stuff dyed.' So the man would go away,
saying in himself, 'One day is near another,' and return
next day at the appointed time, when the dyer would say
to him, 'Come to-morrow; yesterday I was not at work,
for I had with me guests and was occupied with their
service till they went : but come to-morrow before 1 sunrise
and take thy stuff dyed.' So he would go away and
return on the third day, when Aboukir would say to him,
£ Indeed yesterday I was excusable, for my wife was
brought to bed in the night and all day I was busy with


298


one thing and another ; but to-morrow, without fail, come

and take thy stuff dyed.'

When the man came again at the appointed time, he
HtGi)t would put him off with some other tale, it mattered little
JCCCCXXXt. what, and would swear to him ; nor would he cease to
promise and swear to him, as often as he came, till the
customer lost patience and said, ' How often wilt thou
say to me, " To-morrow ? " Give me my stuff : I will not
have it dyed.' Whereupon the dyer would make answer,
s By Allah, O my brother, I am abashed at thee; but
I will tell the truth and may God harm all who do folk
hurt in their goods ! ' The other would say, * Tell me
what hath happened ; ' and Aboukir would answer, ' In-
deed I dyed thy stuff on matchless wise and hung it on
the rope [to dry ;] but it was stolen and I know not who
took it.' If the owner of the sjuff were a good-natured
man, he would say, ' God will recoup me ; " and if he were
ill-conditioned, he would pursue him with exposure and
insult, but would get nothing of him ? though he com-
plained of him to the judge.

He ceased not to do thus till his report was noised
abroad among the folk and they used to warn one another
against him and he became a byword amongst them. So
they all held aloof from him and none had to do with
him save those who knew not his character ; but, for all
this, he failed not daily to suffer insult and disgrace from
God's creatures. By reason of this his trade became slack,
and he used to go to the shop of his neighbour the barber
and sit there, with his eyes on the door of the dyery.
Whenever he espied any one who knew him not standing
at the dyery-door, with a piece of stuff in his hand, he
would go up to him and say, 'What seekest thou, O man?"
And the man would answer, £ Take and dye me this thing. 5 '
So the dyer would say, 4 What colour wilt thou have it ? ;
For, with all his knavery, he could dye all manner of


299

colours ; but he never kept faith with any one ; so poverty

had gotten the better of him. Then he would take the
stuff and say, ' Give me my hire in advance and come to-
morrow and take the stuff.' So the stranger would give
him the money and go his way; whereupon Aboukir
would carry the stuff to the market and sell it and buy
meat and vegetables and tobacco and fruit and what not
else he needed with the price ; but, whenever he saw any
one who had given him stuff to dye standing at the door
of his shop, he would not show himself to him.

On this wise he abode years and years, till it chanced
one day that he received stuff to dye from a masterful
man and sold it and spent the price. The owner came
to him every day, but found him not in his shop ; for,
whenever he espied any one who had a claim against
him, he would dee from him into the shop^of the barber
Abousir. At last, the angry man, finding that he was not
to be seen and growing weary of coming, repaired to the
Cadi and bringing one of the latter's Serjeants to the
shop, nailed up the door, in presence of a number of
Muslims, and sealed it, for that he found therein nothing
but some broken pans, to stand him instead of his stuff ;
after which the serjeant took the key, saying to the neigh-
bours, ' Tell him to bring back this man's goods and take
the key of his shop,' and went his way, he and the man.

Then said Abousir to Aboukir, ' What aileth thee ?
Whoever brings thee aught, thou losest it for him. What
is gone of this angry man's stuff?' 'O my neighbour,'
answered the dyer, 'it was stolen from me.' 'Wonderful!'
exclaimed the barber. * Whenever any one gives thee aught,
a thief steals it from thee! Art thou then the resort of
the whole college of thieves? But I doubt me thou liest ;
so tell me the truth/ * O my neighbour,' replied Aboukir,
' none hath stolen aught from me." 5 What then dost thou
with the people's goods? 5 asked Abousir. And the dyef


3oo


said, e Whenever any one giveth me aught to dye, I sell

it and spend the price.' Quoth Abousir, ' Is this permitted
thee of God ? ' 'I only do this out of poverty,' answered
Aboukir, 'because trade is dull with me and I am poor
and have nothing.' And he went on to complain to him
of the slackness of his trade and his lack of means.

Abousir in like manner lamented the slackness of his
own trade, saying, 'I am a master of my craft and have
, not my equal in this city ; but no one is shaved at my
shop, because I am a poor man ; and I loathe this craft,

my brother.' 4 And I also,' answered Aboukir, ' loathe
my own craft, by reason of its slackness; but, O my
brother, what call is there for our abiding in this city?
Let us depart from it and divert ourselves with foreign
travel, carrying our crafts in our hands, the which are in
demand in all countries ; so shall, we breathe the air and
be rid of this grievous trouble.' And he ceased not to

ICtght commend travel to Abousir, till the latter became wishful
tSCECQ'XXU. to set out, whereat Aboukir rejoiced and recited the
following verses :

Forsake thy native land, if thou advancement seek, and hie Abroad

for five advantages in foreign travel lie.
The putting off of care, the gain of livelihood and lore And manners

and the company of noble folk and high.
If it be said, 'Distress and woe and severance of loves And hardships

still in travel be beneath a foreign sky,'

1 trow 'twere better for a man that he should die than live Still in

humiliation's house, 'twist envier and spy.

Then they agreed to travel together and Aboukir said
to Abousir, ' O my neighbour, we are become brethren
and there is no difference between us, so it behoves us to
recite the first chapter of the Koran [in token of agree-
ment] that he of us who gets work shall of his profit
feed him who is out of work, and whatever is left, we will


30i


lay ill a chest; and when we come back to Alexandria
we will divide it fairly and equally.' ' So be it,' answered
Abousir, and they repeated the first chapter of the Koran
on this understanding. Then Abousir locked up his
shop and gave the keys to the landlord, whilst Aboukir
left his shop locked and sealed and let the key lie
with the Cadi's serjeant; after which they took their gear
and embarked on the morrow in a galleon upon the salt
sea. They set sail the same day and fortune attended
them, for, of Abousir's great good luck, of all that were
in the ship (and there were therein an hundred and twenty
men, besides the captain and the crew,) there was not a
single barber. So, when they spread the sails, the barber
said to the dyer, i O my brother, this is the sea and we
shall need meat and drink, and we have but little victual
with us and it may be the voyage will be long upon us;
wherefore methinks I will shoulder my gear and pass
among the passengers, and belike some one will say to
me, "Come hither, O barber, and shave me," and I will
shave him for a cake of bread or a para or a draught of
water: so shall we both profit by this.'

'There is no harm in that/ replied the dyer and laid
down his head and slept, whilst the barber took his razor
and shaving-tackle and throwing over his shoulder a rag,
to serve as napkin (for that he was poor), passed among
the passengers. Quoth one of them, ' Ho, master, come
and shave me.' So he shaved him, and the man gave him
a para. 4 O my brother/ said Abousir, ' I have no use
for this para; hadst thou given me a cake of bread, it
were more blessed to me in this sea, for I have a shipmate
and we are short of victual. 8 So he gave him a cake of
bread and a piece of cheese and filled him the basin with
sweet water. The barber carried all this to Aboukir and
bade him eat the bread and cheese and drink the water.
So he ate and drank, whilst Abousir again took up his


302


shaving-gear and went round about the deck among the
passengers. One man he shaved for two cakes of bread
and another for a piece of cheese, and he was in demand,
because there was no other barber on board. So he
bargained with every one who said to him, ' Ho, master,
shave me ! ' for two cakes of bread and a para, and they
gave him whatever he sought, so that, by sundown, he
had gotten thirty cakes of bread and thirty paras, besides
store of cheese and olives and botargoes.

Amongst the rest he shaved the captain, to whom he
complained of his lack of victual for the voyage, and the
captain said to him, ' Have no care for that, so long as
ye sail with us ; for thou art welcome to bring thy comrade
every night and sup with me.' Then he returned to the
dyer, whom he found still asleep ; so he aroused him ; and
when Aboukir awoke, he found at his head bread and
cheese and olives and botargoes galore and said, ' Whence
gottest thou all this ? ' ' From the bounty of God the
Most High,' replied Abousir. Then Aboukir would have
eaten ; but the barber said to him, ' Eat not of this, O my
brother ; but leave it to serve us another time ; for know
that I shaved the captain and complained to him of our
lack of victual : whereupon quoth he, " Bring thy comrade
and sup both of ye with me every night and welcome."
And this night we sup with him for the first time.' But
Aboukir replied, ' I am sea-sick and cannot rise from my
place ; so let me sup off these things and go thou alone
to the captain/ ' So be it,' said Abousir and sat looking
at the other, as he ate, and saw him hew off gobbets, as
the quarryman hews stone from the mountain, and gulp
them down with the gulp of an elephant that has not
eaten for days, bolting one mouthful before he was rid of
the previous one and glaring the while at that which was
before him with the glower of a ghoul and blowing as the
hungry bull blows over his beans and straw.


303


Presently up came a sailor and said to the barber, 'O
master, the captain bids thee come to supper and bring
thy comrade.' Quoth the barber to the dyer, 'Wilt thou
come with us?' But he answered, £ I cannot walk.' So
the barber went by himself and found the captain and his
company sitting awaiting him, with a tray before them,
wherein were a score or more of dishes. When the captain
saw him, he said, 'Where is thy friend?' And Abousir
answered, 1 my lord, he is sea-sick.' ' That will do him
no harm,' answered the captain; 'his sickness will pass
off; but do thou carry him his supper and come back, for
we await thee.' Then he set apart a dish of kabobs and
putting therein some of each dish, till there was enough,
for ten, gave it to Abousir, who took it and carried it to
the dyer, whom he found grinding away with his dog-
teeth at that which was before him, as he were a camel,
and heaping mouthful on mouthful in his baste. Quoth
Abousir, 'Did I not say to thee, "Eat not [of this]?"
Indeed the captain is a man of exceeding kindness. See
what he hath sent thee, for that I told him thou wast
sick.' 'Give it here,' answered the dyer. So the barber
gave it to him and he snatched it from him and fell upon
it, like a ravening dog or a raging lion or a roc pouncing
on a pigeon or one who is well-nigh dead for hunger and
seeing victual, falls to eating thereof.

Then Abousir left him and going back to the captain,
supped and enjoyed himself and drank coffee with him ;
after which he returned to Aboukir and found that
he had eaten all that was in the platter and thrown it
aside, empty. So he took the empty dish and gave it
to one of the captain's servants, then went back to
Aboukir and slept till the morning. On the morrow he
continued to shave, and all he got by way of meat and "Mtgjfjt
drink he gave to Aboukir, who ate and drank and sat uCCCC
still, rising not save to do his natural occasions, and XX^tll


304


every night the barber brought him a full dish from the
captain's table.

They fared thus twenty days, at the end of which time
the galleon cast anchor in the harbour of a city ; where-
upon they took leave of the captain and landing, entered
the town and took them a lodging in a khan. Abousir
furnished the room and buying a cooking pot and a platter
and spoons and what else they needed, fetched meat and
cooked it ; but Aboukir fell asleep the moment he entered
the khan and awoke not till his companion aroused him
and set the tray of food before him. When he awoke, he
ate and saying to Abousir, 'Blame me not, for I am
giddy,' fell asleep again. Thus he did forty days, whilst,
every day, the barber took his tools and making the round
of the city, wrought for that which fell to his lot, and
returning, found the dyer asleep and aroused him. No
sooner did he wake than he fell ravenously upon the food,
eating as one who cannot have his fill nor be content;
after which he went to sleep again.

On this wise he passed other forty days, and whenever
the barber said to him, 'Sit up and shake off this torpor
and go forth and take an airing in the city, for it is a.
bright and pleasant place and hath not its equal among
the cities,' he would answer, saying, 'Blame me not, for
I am [still] giddy.' Abousir cared not to vex him nor
give him hard words ; but, on the forty-first day, he him-
self fell sick and could not go abroad; so he pressed the
porter of the khan into his service, and he did their occa-
sions and brought them meat and drink four days, whilst
Aboukir did nothing but eat and sleep. At the end of
this time, the barber's sickness redoubled on him, till he
lost his senses for stress thereof; and Aboukir, feeling
the pangs of hunger, arose and sought in his comrade's
clothes, where he found a thousand paras. So he took
them and shutting the door of the chamber upon Abousir,


305


went out, without telling any; and the doorkeeper of the
inn was then at market and thus saw him not go out.

Aboukir betook himself to the bazaar and clad himself
in rich apparel, at a cost of five hundred paras ; then he
proceeded to walk about and divert himself by viewing
the place, which he found a city whose like was not
among cities ; but he noted that all its people were
clad in clothes of white and blue, without other colour.
Presently he came to a dyer's and seeing nought but blue
in his shop, pulled out to him a kerchief and said, l O
master, take this kerchief and dye it and take thy hire. 5
Quoth the dyer, 1 The cost of dying this will be twenty
dirhems.' ' In our country,' said Aboukir, * we dye it for
two.' ' Then go and dye it in your own country/ answered
the dyer. 'As for me, my price is twenty dirhems and
I will not bate a tittle thereof.' 'What colour wilt thou
dye it?' asked Aboukir; and the dyer said, will dye it
blue.' Quoth Aboukir, 'But I want it dyed red.' 'I know
not how to dye red,' answered the dyer. 'Then dye it
green,' rejoined Aboukir. But the dyer said, ' I know not
how to dye green.' 'Yellow,' said Aboukir. 'Nor yet
yellow,' answered the dyer ; and Aboukir went on to name
the different colours to him, one after another, till the
dyer said, 'We are here in this city forty master-dyers,
neither more nor less ; and when one of us dies, we teach
his son the craft. If he leave no son, we abide wanting
one. and if he leave two sons, we teach one of them the
craft, and if he die, we teach his brother. This our craft
is straitly ordered and we know not how to dye aught
but blue.'

Then said Aboukir, ' Know that I also am a dyer and
know how to dye all colours ; and I would have thee take
me into thy service on hire, and I will teach thee my
art, so thou mayst glory therein over all the company
of dyers.' But the dyer answered, £ We never admit a
vol. vin. ao


306


itranger into our craft/ ' And what if I open a dyery for
myself? ' asked Aboukir. ' We will not suffer thee to do
that/ replied the other; whereupon he left him and going
to a second dyer, made him the like proposal; but he
returned him the same answer as the first; and he ceased
not to go from one to another, till he had made the round
of the whole forty; but they would not accept of him
either to master or journeyman. Then he repaired to the
Syndic of the Dyers and told him what had passed, and he
said, 'We admit no stranger into our craft'

With this Aboukir became exceeding wroth and going
up to the king of the city, made complaint to him, saying,
4 O king of the age, I am a stranger and a dyer by trade ; 5
and he told him what had passed between himself and
the dyers of the town, adding, 'I can dye various kinds
of red, such as rose-colour and carnation, 1 and various
kinds of green, such as grass-green and pistachio-green
and olive and parrot's wing, and various kinds of black,
such as coal-black and blue-black, and various shades of
yellow, such as orange and lemon-colour,' and went on to
name to him the rest of the colours. Then said he, 'O
king of the age, there is not a dyer in thy city who can
avail to any one of these colours, for they know not
how to dye aught but blue; yet will they not admit me
amongst them, either as master or journeyman.' 'Thou
sayst sooth for that matter,' answered the king; 'but
I will open thee a dyery and give thee capital and
have thou no care for them ; for whoso offereth to
do thee hindrance, I will hang him over the door of his
shop.'

Then he sent for builders and said to them, ' Go round
about the city with this master, and whatsoever place
pleases him, be it shop or khan or what not, turn out its
occupier and build him a dyery after his wish. What so-

A Or jujube-plum colour (unnabiy).


307


ever he bids you, that do ye and gainsay him not in aught'

And he clad him in a handsome suit and gave him two

white slaves, to serve him, and a horse with housings of

brocade and a thousand dinars, saying, 'Provide thyself

with this, against the building be completed.' So Aboukir

donned the dress and mounting the horse, became as he

were av amir. Moreover the king assigned him a house 'NtglH

and bade furnish it ; so they furnished it for him and he OlCCCXnfb

took up his abode therein.

On the morrow he mounted and rode through the city,
looking about him, whilst the architects went before him,
till he saw a place that pleased him and said, ' This place
is good;' whereupon they turned out the owner thereof and
carried him to the king, who gave him, to the price of his
holding, what more than contented him. Then the builders
fell to work, whilst Aboukir said to them, ' Build thus and
thus and do this and that,' till they built him a dyery that
had not its like; whereupon he presented himself before
the king and informed him that they had made an end
of building the dyery and that there needed but the price
of the dye-stuffs and gear to set it a-work. Quoth the
king, ' Take these four thousand dinars to thy capital and
let me see the outcome of thy dyery.' So he took the
money and went to the market, where, finding dye-stuffs 1
plentiful and [well-nigh] valueless, he bought all that he
needed of materials for dyeing ; and the king sent him five
hundred pieces of stuff, which he proceeded to dye of all
colours 3 od spread them before the door of his dyery.

When the folk passed by the shop, they saw this wonder-
ful sight, whose like they had never in their lives seen ; so
they crowded about the door, staring and questioning the

1 Literally, indigo [nileh) % but the word is evidently used here to

express dye-stuffs in general, as it stands to reason that, in a town where

dyeing was confined to blue, indigo would be much in demand and high

in price, whilst the other colours would be valueless.
w


dyer and saying, 'Q master, what are the names of these
colours ? ' Quoth he, ' This is red and that yellow and the
other green,' and so on with the rest of the colours. And
they fell to bringing him stuffs and saying to him, ' Dye
this for us like this and that and take what thou seekest
[to thy hire].' When he had made an end of dyeing the
king's stuffs, he took them and went up with them to the
divan ; and when the king saw them he rejoiced in them
and bestowed abundant largesse on the dyer. Moreover,
all the troops brought him stuffs, saying, ' Dye for us thus
and thus ; ' and he dyed for them to their wish, and they
threw him gold and silver. On this wise his fame spread
abroad and his shop was called the Sultan's dyery. Good
came in to him at every door and he became the owner of
slaves, male and female, and amassed store of wealth.
None of the other dyers dared say a word to him, but
they used to come to him, kissing his hands and excusing
themselves to him for the affronts they had done him
aforetime and offering themselves to him as journeymen ;
but he would none of them.

Meanwhile Abousir abode three days, prostrate and
unconscious, in the chamber where Aboukir had left him,
at the end of which time the doorkeeper of the khan,
chancing to look at the chamber-door, observed that it
was shut and bethought himself that he had seen and
heard nothing of the two companions [for some time].
So he said to himself, ' Belike they have made off, without
paying the rent of the chamber, or perhaps they are dead,
or what is to do with them ? ' And he waited till sunset,
when he went up to the chamber-door and heard the
barber groaning within. He saw the key ki the lock; so
he opened the door and entering, found Abousir lying,
groaning, and said to him, ' No harm to thee : where is
thy friend? 5 ' By Allah/ answered Abousir, 'I only came
to my senses this day and called out ; but none answered


309


me. God on thee, O my brother, look for the purse undei
my head and take five paras from it and buy me some-
thing to eat, for I am sore anhungred/

The porter put out his hand and taking the purse, found
it empty and said to the barber, ' The purse is empty ;
there is nothing in it.' Whereupon Abousir knew that
the dyer had taken that which was therein and fled and
said to the porter, ' Hast thou not seen my friend ? ' 'I
have not seen him these three days,' answered the porter,
'and indeed methought you had departed, thou and he.'
' Not i;o,' said Abousir ; ' but he coveted my money and
seeing me sick, took it and fled.' Then he fell a-weeplng
and lamenting, but the porter said to him, 'No harm shall
come to thee, and God will requite him his deed.' So
saying, he went away and cooked him a mess of broth,
whereof he ladled out a platterful and brought it to him ;
nor did he cease to tend him and maintain him with his
own monies for two months' space, at the end of which
time he sweated and God made him whole of his sickness.
Then he stood up and said to the porter, ' So God the
Most High enable me, I will surely requite thee thy kind-
ness to me ; but none requiteth save God of His bounty ! '
1 Praised be He for thy recovery ! ' answered the porter.
* I dealt not thus with thee but of desire for the favour of
God the Bountiful.'

Then the barber went forth of the khan and walked
about the markets of the town, till chance brought him
to that wherein was Aboukir's dyery, and he saw the vari-
coloured stuffs spread before the shop and the people
crowding to look upon them. So he questioned one of
the townsmen and said to him, 'What place is this and
how comes it that I see the folk crowding together? 5 And
the man answered, saying, 5 This is the Sultan's dyery,
which he set up for a foreigner, by name Aboukir ; and
whenever he dyes a [new] piece of stuff, we all flock to


3*o

him and divert ourselves by gazing upon his handiwork,
for that we have no dyers in our land who know how to
dye these colours; and indeed there befell him with the
dyers who are in the city thus and thus.' And he went
on to tell him all that had passed between Aboukir and
the dyers and how he had complained of them to the
sultan and he had taken him by the hand and built him
that dyery and given him this and that ; brief, he told
him all that had passed.

At this the barber rejoiced and said to himself, 'Praised
be God who hath prospered him, so that he is become
a master of his craft ! Indeed, the man is excusable, for
of a surety he hath been diverted from thee by his work
and hath forgotten thee ; but thou didst him kindness and
entreatedst him generously, what time he was out of work ;
so, when he seeth thee, he will rejoice in thee and entreat
thee generously, even as thou entreatedst him.' So he
made for the door of the dyery and saw Aboukir seated
on a high divan in the doorway, clad in royal apparel
and attended by four black and four white slaves all
dressed in the richest of clothes. Moreover, he saw the
workmen, ten black slaves, standing at work ; for, when
Aboukir bought them, he taught them the craft of dyeing,
and he himself sat amongst his cushions, as he were a
grand vizier or a most mighty king, putting his hand to
nought, but only saying to the men, ' Do this and do that'

The barber went up to him and stood before him,
doubting not but that, when he saw him, he would rejoice
in him and salute him and entreat him with honour and
make much of him ; but, when eye met eye, the dyer said
to him, 'O rascal, how many a time have I bidden thee
stand not at the door of this workshop? Hast thou a
mind to disgrace me with the folk, knave that thou art? 5
[And he cried out, saying], 1 Seize him S ' So the slaves
ran at him and laid hold of him ; and the dyer said,


3ii

1 Throw him down.' So they threw him down and Aboukir
rose and taking a stick, dealt him a hundred blows on the
back ; after which they turned him over and he dealt him
other hundred on his belly. Then he said to him, ' Hark
ye, scurril knave that thou art! If ever again I see thee
standing at the door of this dyery, I will forthwith send
thee to the king, and he will commit thee to the master
of police, that he may strike off thy head. Begone, may
God not bless thee ! '

So Abousir [arose and] departed from him, broken-
hearted by reason of the beating and humiliation that
had betided him ; whilst the bystanders said to Aboukir,
' What hath this man done ? ' Quoth he, ' He is a thief,
who steals the people's goods: he hath robbed me ofMt'ghi
stuffs, how many a time ! and I still said in myself, " God fKUCXXXiX
forgive him ! He is a poor man," and cared^ not to deal
harshly with him ; so I used to give the folk the worth of
their goods and forbid him gently ; but he would not be
forbidden ; and if he come again, I will send him to the
king, who will put him to death and rid the folk of his
mischief.' And the bystanders fell to reviling the barber
in his absence.

Meanwhile, the latter returned to the khan, where he
sat pondering that which Aboukir had done with him,
till the pain of the beating subsided, when he went out
and walked about the markets of the city. Presently, he
bethought him to go to the bath; so he said to one of
the townsfolk, 'O my brother, which is the way to the
bath ? ' * And what manner of thing is the bath ? ' asked
the other. Quoth Abousir, 'It is a place where people
wash themselves and do away their defilements, and it is
of the best of the good things of the world.' ' Get thee
to the sea/ replied the townsman ; but the barber replied;,
4 1 want the bath.' Quoth the other, 6 We know not what
manner of thing is the bath, for we all resort to the sea;


312


even the king, when he would wash, betaketh himself to
the sea.'

When Abousir was certified that there was no bath in
the city and that the people knew not the bath nor the
fashion thereof, he betook himself to the king's divan and
kissing the earth before him, called down blessings on
him and said, ' I am a stranger and a bath-keeper by
trade, aru I entered thy city and thought to go to the
bath ; but found not one therein. How cometh a city of
this comely fashion to lack a bath, seeing that the bath is of
the goodliest of the delights of this world?' Quoth the
king, 'What manner of thing is the bath?* So Abousir
proceeded to set forth to him the attributes of the bath ?
saying, 'Thy city will not be complete till there be a bath
in it.' ' Welcome to thee ! ' said the king and clad him in
a dress that had not its like and gave him a horse and two
black and two white slaves and four slave-girls. Moreover
he appointed him a furnished house and honoured him yet
more abundantly than he had honoured the dyer.

Then he sent builders with him and bade them build
him a bath in what place soever should please him. So he
took them and went with them through the midst of the
city, till he saw a place that pleased him. He pointed
it out to the builders and they set to work, under his
direction, and wrought till they built him a bath that
had not its like. Then he made them paint it, and they
painted it on rare wise, so that it was a delight to the
beholders ; after which Abousir went up to the king and
told him that they had made an end of building and
decorating the bath, adding, ' There lacks nought but the
furniture.' The king gave him ten thousand dinars, with
which he furnished the bath and ranged the napkins on
the cords ; and all who passed by the door stared at it
and their mind was confounded at its decorations. So
the people crowded to this thing, whose like they had


3^3

never in their lives seen, and stood staring st&it and"
saying, 'What is this thing?' To which Abousir replied,
'This is a bath;' and they marvelled thereat.

Then he heated water and set the bath a-work ; and he
made a fountain in the [central] basin, which ravished
the wit of all who saw it of the people of the city. More-
over he sought of the king ten white slaves not yet come
to manhood, and he gave him ten boys like moons :
whereupon Abousir proceeded to shampoo them, saying,
'Do thus and thus with the customers,' [till they were
perfect in the bathman's craft]. Then he burnt per-
fumes and sent out a crier to cry aloud in the city,
saying, ' O creatures of God, get ye to the bath, for it
is called the Sultan's Bath ! ' So the people came to
the bath and Abousir bade the slave-boys wash their
bodies. The folk went down into the bath,* and coming
forth, seated themselves on the estrade, whilst the boys
shampooed them, even as Abousir had taught them; and
they ceased not to enter the bath and do their occasion
thereof and go out, without paying, for the space of
three days.

Then the barber invited the king, who took horse
with his grandees and rode to the bath, where he put. off
his clothes and entered; whereupon Abousir came in to
him and rubbed his body with the bath-gloves, peeling
the dirt from his skin [in rolls] like lamp-wicks and
showing them to the king, who rejoiced therein, till his
body shone for very smoothness and purity; after which
Abousir mingled rose-water with the water of the tank
and the king went down therein. When he came forth,
his body was refreshed and he felt a lightness and liveli-
ness such as he had never in his life known. Then the
barber made him sit on the estrade and the boys pro-
ceeded to shampoo him, whilst the censers smoked with
the finest aloes-wood.


3H

Then said the king, ' O master, is this the bath ? ' And
Abousir answered, 'Yes.' 'As my head liveth,' quoth the
king, £ my city is not become a city indeed but by this
bath ! But what pay takest thou for each person ? ' * That
which thou biddest me will I take,' replied Abousir ; and
the king said, 'Take a thousand dinars for every one
who washeth in thy bath/ But Abousir said, ' Pardon,
O king of the age ! All men are not alike, but there are
amongst them rich and poor, and if I take of each a
thousand dinars, the bath will stand empty, for the poor
man cannot avail to this price.' 1 How then wilt thou
do for the price?' asked the king. 'I will leave it to
the generosity [of the customers]/ answered the barber.
' Each who can afford aught shall pay that which his soul
grudgeth not to give, and we will take from every man,
after the measure of his condition.,. So will the folk come
to us and he who is rich shall give according to his station
and he who is poor shall give what he can afford. On
this wise the bath will still be at work and prosper ; but
a thousand dinars is a king's gift, and not every man can
avail thereto.'

The grandees of the kingdom confirmed Abousir's words,
saying, ' This is the truth, O king of the age ! Thinkest
thou that all folk are like unto thee, O glorious king?'
'You say sooth,' answered the king; 'but this man is a
stranger and poor and it behoveth us to deal generously
with him, for that he hath made in our city this bath,
whose like we have never in our lives seen and without
which our city were not adorned nor had gotten im-
portance; wherefore, if we guerdon him with increase of
pay, it will not be much.' But the grandees said, ' If thou
wilt guerdon him, let it be of thine own monies, and be
the king's bounty extended to the poor by means of the
low price of the bath, so the folk may bless thee ; but,
as for the thousand dinars, we are the grandees of thine


3iS


empire, yet do our souls grudge to pay it; and how then
should the poor afford it ? ' Quoth the king, ' O my
grandees, for this time let each of you give him a hundred
dinars and a white slave and a black and a slave-girl.' £ It
is well,' answered they ; ' but after to-day each who enters
shall give him only what he can afford, without grudging/
' So be it,' said the king ; and they gave him each as he
had said.

Now the number of the nobles who were washed with
the king that day was four hundred souls ; so that the sum t^T £0.1) t
of that which they gave him was forty thousand dinars, &CCCC
besides four hundred black and four hundred white slaves XXXbL
and a like number of slave-girls. Moreover, the king
gave him ten thousand dinars, besides ten white slaves
and ten black and a like number of slave-girls ; whereupon
Abousir kissed the earth before him and said, 'O august
king, lord of just judgment, what place will suffice me for
all these slaves and women?' Quoth the king, 'O lack-
wit, I bade not my nobles deal thus with thee but that we
might gather together unto thee great plenty of wealth ;
for maybe thou wilt bethink thee of thy country and
family and yearn unto Lhem and be minded to return to
thy native place; so shalt thou take from our country
store of wealth, to maintain thyself withal, what while
thou livest in thine own land.' 'O king of the age,'
replied Abousir, (may God advance thee !) these many
slaves and women are a king's behoof, and hadst thou
ordered me ready money, it were more profitable to me
than this army; for they must eat and drink and be
clothed, and whatever betideth me of wealth, it will not
suffice to their support.'

The king laughed and said, ( By Allah, thou sayst sooth !
They are indeed a mighty host, and thou mayst not avail
unto their maintenance ; but wilt thou sell them to me for
a hundred dinars each ? ' Quoth Abousir, e 1 sell them t©


$i6

thee at that price.' So the king sent to his treasurer foi

the money and he brought it and gave Abousir the whole
of the price, in full ; after which the king restored the
slaves to their former owners, saying, 'Let each of you
who knoweth his slaves take them ; for they are a gift
from me to you.' So they obeyed his commandment and
took each his own; whilst the barber said to the king,
£ God ease thee, O king of the age, even as thou hast
eased me of these ghouls, whom none may fill save God ! '
The king laughed, and gave him reason ; then, taking the
grandees of his realm, returned to his palace ; but Abousir
passed the night in counting his money and laying it up
in bags and sealing them ; and he had with him twenty
black slaves and a like number of white and four slave-
girls to serve him.

On the morrow, as soon as it was day, he opened the
bath and sent out a crier to make proclamation, saying,
' Whoso entereth the bath and washeth shall give that
which he can afford and which his generosity deemeth
fit.' Then he seated himself by the chest and customers
flocked in upon him, each putting down that which was
easy to him, nor was eventide cerue before the chest was
full of the good gifts of God the Most High. Presently
the queen desired to go to the bath, and when this came
to Abousir's knowledge, he divided the day, on her
account, into two parts, appointing the time between day-
break and noon to the men and that between noon and
sundown to the women. When the queen came, he
stationed a female slave behind the pay-chest; for he had
taught four slave-girls the service of the bath, so that they
were become expert bathwomen. So, when the queen
entered, this pleased her and her breast dilated and she
laid down a thousand dinars.

On this wise his report was noised abroad in the city,
and all who entered the bath he entreated with honour.


317


were they rich or poor, and good came in upon him at
every door. Moreover he made acquaintance with the
king's officers and got him friends and companions. The
king himself used to come to him one day in every week,
and the other days of the week were for rich and poor
alike ; and he was wont to deal courteously with the
folk and use them with the utmost of consideration. It
chanced that the king's sea-captain came in to him one
day in the bath ; so Abousir put off his clothes and going
in with him, proceeded to shampoo him and entreated
him with the utmost courtesy. When he came forth, he
made him sherbet and coffee; and when he would have
given him somewhat, he swore that he would accept
nothing from him. So the captain abode under obligation
to him, by reason of his exceeding kindness and courtesy
to him, and knew not how to requite him his generous
dealing with him.

Meanwhile Aboukir, hearing all the people talking
rapturously of the bath and saying, ' Verily, this bath is
the Paradise of this world ! God willing, O such an one,
thou shalt go with us to-morrow to this delectable bath,'
said to himself, 'Needs must I go like [the rest of the]
folk and see this bath that hath taken their wits.' So he
donned his richest clothes and mounting a mule, rode to
the bath, attended by four white slaves and four black,
walking before and behind him. When he alighted at the
door, he smelt the fragrance of burning aloes-wood and
saw people going in and out and the benches full of great
and small. So he entered the vestibule and saw Abousir,
who rose to him and rejoiced in him : but the dyer said to
him, ' Is this the fashion of men of honour ? I have
opened me a dyery and am become master-dyer of the
city and acquainted with the king and have risers to
fortune and lordship ; yet earnest thou not to me nor
askedst of me nor saidst, li Where is my comrade ? n For


3i8


my part, I sought thee in vain and sent my slaves and
servants to make search for thee in all the inns and other
places ; but they knew not whither thou hadst gone, nor
could any give me news of thee.' Quoth Abousix, ' Did I
not come to thee and didst thou not make me out a thief
and beat me and disgrace me before the folk?'

At this Aboukir made a show of concern and said,
*What manner of talk is this? Was it thou whom I
beat?' 'Yes,' answered Abousir, 'it was I.' Whereupon
Aboukir swore to him a thousand oaths that he knew him
not and said, 'There was a fellow like unto thee, who
used to come every day and steal the people's stuff, and
I took thee for him.' And he went on to feign repentance,
beating hand upon hand and saying, ' There is no power
and no virtue save in God the Most High, the Supreme !
Indeed, I have sinned against thee ; but would that thou
hadst made thyself known to me and said, " I am such
an one!" Indeed the fault is with thee, for that thou
madest not thyself known unto me, more by token that
I was distraught for much business.' ' God pardon thee,
O my comrade ! ' replied Abousir. ' This was fore-ordained,
and reparation is with God. Enter and put off thy clothes
and bathe at thine ease.' 'I conjure thee by Allah, O my
brother,' said the dyer, ' forgive me!' And Abousir said,
*God acquit thee of blame and forgive thee! Indeed this
thing was decreed to me from all eternity.'

Then said Aboukir, 'Whence gottest thou this lordship?'
* He who prospered thee prospered me,' answered Abousir.
' For I went up to the king and set forth to him the fashion
of the bath, and he bade me build one.' And the dyer
said, 'Even as thou art an acquaintance of the king, so

j^f{g|)t also am I ; and God willing, I will make him love and
tJCCCC tender thee more than ever, for my sake ; for he knows

XXlbtt. not that thou art my comrade ; but I will tell him of this
and commend thee to him.' 'There needs no com-


319


mendation,' answered Abousir; 'for He who inclineth

[men's hearts unto love] is [everl-present ; and indeed
the king and all his court love me [already] and have
given me this and that.' And he told him the whole
story and said to him, 'Put off thy clothes behind the
chest and enter the bath, and I will go in with thee and
shampoo thee.' So he put off his clothes and Abousir,
entering the bath with him, soaped him and shampooed
him and busied himself with his service till he came forth,
when he brought him the morning meal and sherbets,
whilst all the folk marvelled at the honour he did him.

Then Aboukir would have given him somewhat; but
he swore that he would take nothing from him and said
to him, ' Shame upon thee ! Thou art my comrade, and
there is no difference between us.' * By Allah, O my
comrade,' said Aboukir, 'this is a fine bath of thine, but
there lacks one thing to thy fashion therein.' 'And what
is that?' asked Abousir. 'It is the depilatory, to wit, the
paste compounded of orpiment and quicklime,' answered
the dyer, 'that removes the hair with ease. Do thou pre-
pare it and next time the king comes, present it to him,
teaching him how he shall cause the hair fall off by means
thereof, and he will love thee with an exceeding love and
honour thee.' Quoth Abousir, ' Thou sayst sooth, and if
it be the will of God the Most High, I will do this.'

Then Aboukir mounted his mule and riding to the
palace, went in to the king and said to him, ' O king of
the age, I have a warning to give thee.' 'And what is
thy warning ? ' asked the king. Quoth Aboukir, ' I hear
that thou hast built a bath.' 'Yes/ answered the king;
' there came to me a stranger and I founded the bath for
him, even as I founded the dyery for thee ; and indeed it
is a magnificent bath and an ornament to my city.' And he
went on to set forth to him the virtues of the bath. ' Hast
thou entered therein?' asked the dyer. And the king


answered, 'Yes.' 'Praised be God,' exclaimed Aboukir,
'who hath preserved thee from the mischief of yonder
villain and enemy of the faith, to wit, the bath-keeper ! '
' And what of him ? ' asked the king. ' Know, O king
of the age,' replied Aboukir, 'that, if thou enter the
bath again, after this day, thou wilt surely perish.' 'How
ao?' inquired the king; and the dyer answered, 'This
bath-keeper is thine enemy and the enemy of the faith,
and he induced thee not to set up this bath but because
he designed to poison thee therein. He hath made for
thee somewhat which, when thou enterest the bath, he
will present to thee, saying, "This is an unguent, which
if one apply to his privy parts, it will remove the hair
with ease."

Now it is no unguent, but a deadly drug and a violent
poison ; for the Sultan of the Christians hath promised
this filthy fellow to release to him his wife and children,
if he will kill thee ; for they are captives in the hands of
the Sukan in question. I myself was captive with him
in their land, but I opened a dyery and dyed for them
various colours, so that they inclined the king's heart unto
me and he bade me ask a boon of him. I sought of him
freedom and he set me free, whereupon I made my way
hither, and seeing yonder man in the bath, asked him
how he had effected his escape and that of his wife and
children. Quoth he, "We ceased not to be in captivity,
I and my wife and children, till one day the King of the
Christians held a court, at which I was present, amongst
a number of other people. Presently, I heard them dis-
course of the kings and name them, one after another,
till they came to the name of the king of this city, where-
upon the King of the Christians cried out, 'Alas ! ' and
said, ' None irketh me 1 in the world, but the king of
such a city I s Whosoever will contrive me his slaughter

1 Syn, none overcometh me. s Breslau, The King of Isbaniyelx,


321


I will give him all he asks.' So I went up to him and

said, 'If I contrive thee his slaughter, wilt thou set me
free, me and my wife and children?' 'Yes, 1 answered
the king, ' and I will give thee [to boot] whatsoever thou
shalt desire.'

So we agreed upon this and he sent me in a galleon to
this city, where I presented myself to the king and he
built me this bath. So now I have nought to do but to
slay him and return to the King of the Christians, that
1 may redeem my wife and children and ask a boon of
him." Quoth I, "And how wilt thou go about to kill
him?" "By the simplest of all devices," answered he;
"for I have compounded him somewhat wherein is poison;
so, when he comes to the bath, I shall say to him, { Take
this unguent and anoint thy privy parts therewith, for it
will cause the hair to drop off.' So he will take it and
anoint himself therewith, and the poison will work in
him a day and a night, till it reaches his heart and
destroys him ; and meanwhile I shall have made off and
none will know that it was I slew him." When I heard
this,' added Aboukir, 4 1 feared for thee, being beholden to
thee for thy goodness, wherefore I have told thee thereof.*

When the king heard the dyer's story, he was exceeding
wroth and said to him, < Keep this secret.' Then he betook
himself to the bath, that he might dispel doubt with
assurance; and when he entered, Abousir put off his
clothes and betaking himself [as of wont] to the service
of the king, proceeded to shampoo him ; after which he
said to him, ' O king of the age, I have made an unguent
for removing the hair from the privy parts.' ' Bring it
to me,' said the king. So the barber brought it to him
and the king, finding it nauseous of smell, was assured
that it was poison ; wherefore he was incensed and called
out to his guards, saying, 5 Seize him! 3 So they seized
him and the king donned his clothes and returned to his

VOL. VIII. 21


322


palace, boiling with rage, whilst none knew the cause
of his anger; for, of the excess of his wrath, he had
acquainted no one therewith and none dared ask him.
Then he repaired to the audience-chamber and causing
Abousir to be brought before him, with his hands bound
behind his back, sent for his sea-captain and said to him,
'Take this villain and tie him in a sack with two quintals
of quicklime. Then lay him in a boat and row out with
him in front of my palace, where thou wilt see me sitting
at the lattice. Do thou say to me, "Shall I cast him in?"
and if I answer, " Cast," throw him into the sea, so the
lime may be slaked on him, to the intent that he shall die
drowned and burnt.'

' I hear and obey,' answered the captain and taking
Abousir, carried him to an island, that lay over against
the king's palace, where he said to him, ' Harkye, I once
visited thy bath and thou entrektedst me with honour and
accomplishedst all my wants and I had great pleasure of
thee : moreover, thou sworest that thou wouldst take no
pay of me, and I love thee with a great love. So tell me
how the case stands between thee and the king and what
abomination thou hast done with him that he is wroth
with thee and hath commanded me that thou shouldst die
this horrid death.' 'By Allah, O my brother,' answered
Abousir, ' I have done nothing, nor do I know of any

ttffflitt crime I have committed against him that merits this!'
fat£Ct 'Verily,' rejoined the captain, 1 thou wast in high favour

XXXbttt. with the king, such as none ever enjoyed before thee,
and all who are prosperous are envied. Belike some one
envied thee thy good fortune and missaid of thee to the
king, by reason whereof he is become thus enraged
against thee: but be of good cheer; no harm shall befall
thee : for, even as thou entreatedst me generously, without
knowledge of me, so now I will deliver thee. But, if I


323


release thee, thou must abide with me in this island till
some galleon set sail from the city to thy native land, when
I will send thee thither therein.'

Abousir kissed his hand and thanked him for this ; after
which the captain fetched the lime and laid it in a sack,
together with a great stone, the bigness of a man, saying,
'I put my trust in God.' Then he gave the barber a net,
saying, ' Cast this net into the sea, so haply thou mayst
take somewhat of fish. For I am bounden to furnish the
king's kitchen with fish every day ; but to-day I have been
distracted from fishing by this calamity that hath befallen
thee, and I fear lest the cook's servants come to me in
quest of fish and find none. So, if thou take aught, they
will find it and thou wilt veil my face, 1 whilst I go and
play off my device in front of the palace and feign to cast
thee into the sea.' 'Go,' answered Abousir; 'and God be
thy helper. I will fish the while.'

So the captain laid the sack in the boat and rowed till
he came under the palace, where he saw the king seated
at the lattice and said to him, ' O king of the age, shall
I cast him in?' 'Cast,' answered the king and signed
to him with . his hand, whereupon something flashed and
fell into the sea. Now this that had fallen into the sea
was the king's seal-ring, which was enchanted on such
wise that, when the king was wroth with any one and
was minded to slay him, he had but to sign to him with
his right hand, whereon was the ring, and there issued
lightning therefrom, which smote the offender, and there-
upon his head fell from his shoulders. It was this ring
that gave him authority over the troops, nor did he over-
come the mighty save by means thereof ; so, when it
dropped from his finger, he concealed the matter and
kept silence, for that he dared not say, ' My ring is fallen
1 i.e. save me from disgrace.


324

into the sea,' for fear of the troops, lest they should rise
against him and slay him.

Meanwhile, Abousir cast the net into the sea and drew
it up full of fish. Then he cast it again and it came up
full of fish ; nor did he cease to cast it and pull it up full,
till there was a great heap oi fish before him. So he said
to himself, 'By Allah, I have not eaten fish this long
while ! ' And chose himself a large fat fish, saying, ' When
the captain comes back, I will bid him fry it for me, so
I may make the morning meal of it.' Then he cut its
throat with a knife he had with him ; but the knife stuck
in its gills and there he saw the king's seal-ring; for the
fish had swallowed it and destiny had driven it to the
island, where it had fallen into the net. So he took the
ring and put it on his little finger, not knowing its pro-
perties. Presently, up came two of the cook's underlings
in quest of fish and seeing Abousir, said to him, ' O man,
whither is the captain gone ? ' ( I know not, 5 answered he
and signed to them with his right hand; when, behold,
their heads dropped from their shoulders.

At this Abousir was amazed and said, * I wonder who
slew them ! ' And their case was grievous to him and he
was still musing upon it, when the captain returned and
seeing the two men lying dead and the ring on Abousir's
finger, said to him, ' O my brother, move not thy hand
whereon is the ring; else thou wilt slay me.' Abousir
wondered at this speech and the captain coming up to
him, said, ' Who slew these two men ? ' f By Allah, O my
brother,' answered the barber, 'I know not ! ' * Thou
sayst sooth,' rejoined the captain; 'but tell me whence
hadst thou that ring ? ' Quoth Abousir, * I found it in
this fish's gills.' 'True,' said the captain, 'for I saw it
fall flashing from the king's palace and disappear in the
sea, what time he signed toward [the sack in which he
deemed] thee [to be], saying, " Cast him in." So I cast


325

the sack into the water, and it was then that the ring
slipped from his finger and fell into the sea, where the
fish swallowed it, and God drove it to thee, so that thou
tookest it, for this ring was thy lot; but knowest thou
its property?' 'I knew not that it had any properties,'
answered Abousir, and the captain said, ' Know, then,
that the king's troops obey him not save for fear of thi3
ring, for it is enchanted, and when he was wroth with any
one and had a mind to put him to death, he would sign at
him therewith and his head would drop from his shoulders;
for there issued a lightning from the ring and its ray smote
the object of his wrath, who died forthright.'

At this, Abousir rejoiced with an exceeding joy and said
to the captain, ' Garry me back to the city.' ' That will 1/
answered he, ' now that I no longer fear for thee from the
king ; for, wert thou to sign at him with thy hand, pur-
posing to kill him, his head would fall down before thee ;
and if thou be minded to slay him and all his troops, thou
mayst do so without hindrance.' So saying, he embarked
with him in the boat and rowed him back to the city, ^{gftt
where Abousir landed and going up to the palace, entered tjccCCXXXiX
the council-chamber, where he found the king seated in
the midst of his officers, sore concerned by reason of the
ring and daring not tell any of its loss.

When he saw Abousir, he said to him, ' Did we not cast
thee into the sea ? How hast thou made shift to come
forth therefrom ? ' ' O king of the age,' answered Abousir,
'whenas thou badst throw me into the sea, thy captain
carried me to an island and questioned me of the cause
of thy wrath against me, saying, "What hast thou done
with the king, that he should decree thy death ? " " By
Allah," answered I, "I know not that I have offended
against him in aught ! " Quoth he, " Thou wast in high
favour with the king, and most like some one envied thee
and slandered thee to him, so that he is become incensed


326


against thee. But, when I visited thee in thy bath, thou
entreatedst me hospitably, and I will requite thee thy
hospitality by setting thee free and sending thee back to
thine own country." Then he laid a great stone in the
sack and cast it into the sea in my stead ; but, when thou
signedst to him to throw me in, thy seal-ring dropped
from thy finger into the sea, and a fish swallowed it.

Now I was on the island, fishing, and this fish came
up [in the net] with others ; whereupon I took it, think-
ing to broil it; but, when I opened its maw, I found
the ring therein ; so I took it and put it on my finger.
Presently, up came two of the servants of the kitchen,
in quest of fish, and I signed to them with my hand,
knowing not the property of the ring, and their heads fell
off. Then the captain came back and seeing the ring
on my finger, acquainted me with its enchantment ; and
behold, I have brought it back to thee, for that thou
dealtest bounteously by me and entreatedst me with the
utmost generosity, nor is that which thou hast done me of
kindness lost upon me. Here is thy ring; take it; and
if I have done with thee aught deserving of death, tell me
my crime and slay me and thou shalt be quit of my blood.'
So saying, he pulled the ring from his finger and gave it
to the king, who put it on and his life returned to him.

Then he rose to his feet and embracing Abousir, said to
him, ' O man, thou art indeed of the flower of the noble 1
Bear me not malice, but forgive me the wrong I have
done thee. Had any but thou come by this ring, he had
never restored it to me.' 'O king of the age,' answered
Abousir, ' if thou wouldst have me forgive thee, tell me
what was my offence that drew down thine anger upon
me, so that thou commandedst to put me to death.' ' By
Allah,' rejoined the king, ' it is clear to me that thou art
altogether guiltless of offence, since thou hast done this
good deed ; only the dyer denounced thee to me ; ' and


327

he told him all that Aboukir had said. ' By Allah, O king
of the age,' replied Abousir, ' I know not the King of the
Christians and have never journeyed to their country, nor
did it ever enter my thought to kill thee; but this dyer
was my comrade and neighbour in the city of Alexandria,
and life was straitened upon us there ; wherefore we
departed thence, to seek our fortunes, by reason of the
straitness of our livelihood there, after we had recited the
first chapter of the Koran together [in token of our agree-
ment] that he who got work should feed him who lacked
thereof ; and there befell me with him such and such
things.'

Then he went on to relate to the king all that had
befallen him with the dyer ; how he had robbed him and
left him alone and sick in the khan and how the porter
had fed him of his own monies till God recovered him of
his sickness, when he went forth and walked about the
city with his shaving gear, as of his wont, till he espied
a dyery, about which the folk were crowding ; so he
looked at the door and seeing Aboukir seated on a bench
there, went in to salute him, whereupon he accused him
of being a thief and beat him grievously ; brief, he told
him his whole story, from first to last, and added, ' O king
of the age, it was he who counselled me to make the
depilatory and present it to thee, saying, "The bath is
perfect in all things but that it lacketh this;" and know,

king, that this unguent is harmless and we use it in our
country, where it is one of the requisites of the bath ;
but I had forgotten it: so, when he visited the bath, I
entreated him with honour and he reminded me thereof.
But do thou send after the porter of such a khan and the
workmen of the dyery and question them all of that winch

1 have told thee.'

So the king sent for them and questioned them and
they acquainted him with the truth of the matter. Then


3 28


he sent to fetch the dyer, bidding bring him barefoot and
bareheaded, with his hands bound behind him. Now he
was sitting in his house, rejoicing in Abousir's [supposed]
death, when, before he could be ware, the king's guards
rushed in upon him and cuffed him on the nape oi the
neck ; after which they bound him and carried him into
the royal presence, where he saw Abousir seated by the
king's side and the porter and workmen of the dyery
standing before him. Quoth the porter to him, 4 Is not this
thy comrade whom thou robbedst of his money and leftest
with me sick in the khan ? ' And the workmen said to him 8
£ Is not this he whom thou badest us seize and beat? '

Therewith Aboukir's baseness was made manifest to the
king and he was certified that he merited a punishment
yet sorer than that which Munker and Nekir 1 deal [to the
wicked after death]. So he upbraided him and said to
his guards, ' Take him and parade him about the city and
^Tfflj^t the markets ; then lay him in a sack and cast him into the
SJCCCOl. S ea.' Whereupon quoth Abousir, 'O king of the age,
accept my intercession for him ; for I pardon him all he
hath done with me.' 'If thou pardon him his offences
against thee/ answered the king, 'I cannot pardon him
his offences against me.' And he cried out, saying, ' Take
him.' So they took him and paraded him about the city,
after which they laid him in a sack with quicklime and
cast him into the sea, and he died, drowned and burnt.
Then said the king to the barber, f O Abousir, ask of

* "Munkir [Munker] and Nakir [Nekir] are the two angels that
preside at the ' examination of the tomb.' They visit a man in his
grave directly after he has been buried and examine him concerning his
faith : if he acknowledge that there is but one God and that Mohammed
is His prophet [apostle], they suffer him to rest in peace ; otherwise they
beat him with iron maces, till he roars so loud[ly] that he is heard by
all from east to west,, except by men and Ginns [Jiim]."—I } aiw* J s ICoran^
Introduction.


329


me what thou wilt and it shall be given thee.' And he

answered, saying, ' I ask of thee to send me back to my
own country, for I care no longer to abide here.' Then
the king offered to make him his vizier ; but he consented
not ; so he gave him great store of gifts, over and above
that which he had bestowed on him aforetime; and
amongst the rest a galleon laden with goods ; and the
crew of this galleon were slaves; so he gave him these
also. Then he took leave of the king and set sail ; nor
did he cast anchor till he reached Alexandria and made
fast to the shore there. Then they landed and one of his
servants, seeing a sack on the beach, said to Abousir, ' O
my lord, there is a great heavy sack on the sea-shore, with
the mouth tied up and I know not what therein.' So
Abousir came up and opening the sack, found therein the
dead body of Aboukir, which the sea had borne thither.
He took it forth and burying it near Alexandria, built over
the grave a place of visitation and endowed it for pious
uses, writing over the door the following verses :

A man is by his actions known among his fellows aye : The actions of

the freeborn man his generous birth betray.
Backbite not any, lest thyself backbitten be in turn. Whoso saith aught,

his fellow-men the like of him will say.
Abstain from lewd and ribald words : I rede thee speak them not At

any time, or if it be in earnest or in play.
The dog, good manners if he use, is suffered in the house } The lionj

of his ignorance, is fettered night and day.
The carrion of the waste floats up upon the topmost sea, Whilst on the

lowest of its sands the pearls neglected stay.
But for its feather- headedness and levity of wit, The sparrow never with

the hawk to jostle would essay.
Lo, on the pages of the air is written, in the sky, 'Whoso doth good,

the like thereof his actions shall repay.'
Beware of gathering sugar, then, from out the colocyntli I Still in the

tasting will the thing its origin bewray.

After this Abousir abode awhile, till God took him to


33°

Himself, and they buried him hard by the tomb of his
comrade Aboukir ; wherefore the place was called Aboukir
and Abousir; but it is now known as Aboukir [only].
This, then, is that which hath reached us of their history,
and glory be to Him who endureth for ever and by whose
will the days and nights succeed each other I


ABDALLAH THE FISHERMAN AND ABD ALLAH
THE MERMAN.

There was once a fisherman named Abdallah, who had
a wife and nine children and was very poor, owning
nothing but his net. Every day he used to go to the sea
to fish, and if he caught little, he sold it and spent the
price on his children, after the measure of that which God
vouchsafed him of provision ; but, if he caught much, he
would cook a good mess of meat and buy fruit and spend
without stint till nothing was left him, saying in himself,
'To-morrow's provision will come to-morrow.' Presently,
his wife gave birth to another child, making ten in all, and
it chanced that day that he had nothing at all ; so she said
to him, 'O my master, see [and get] me wherewithal
I may sustain myself.' Quoth he, 'Under favour of God
the Most High, I am going to-day to the sea, to fish in
the name of this new-born child, that we may see its luck.'
And she answered, ' Put thy trust in God.'

So he took his net and went down to the sea-shore,
where he cast it in the name of the little child, saying,
' O my God, make his living easy, not hard, and abundant,
not scant ! ' Then he waited awhile and drew in the net,
which came up full of rubbish and sand and pebbles and
weeds, and he found therein no fish, neither much nor
little. He cast it again and waited, then drew it in, but


33i


found no fish in it, and threw it a third and a fourth and
a fifth time, with no better success. So he removed to
another place, beseeching God the Most High to. grant
him his daily bread, and thus he did till the end of the
day, but caught not so much as a sprat; whereat he fell
a-marvelling in himself and said, ' Hath God then created
this new-born child, without [an appointed] provision ?
This may never be ; He who slits the corners of the
mouth hath engaged for its provision, for He is the
Bountiful, the Provider!' So saying, he shouldered his
net and turned homeward, broken-spirited and heavy at
heart for his family, for that he had left them without
food, more by token that his wife was in the straw.

As he trudged along, saying in himself, ' How shall I do
and what shall I say to the children to-night ? ' he came
to a baker's oven and saw a crowd about --it ; for it was
a time of dearth and food was scant with the folk ; so
they were proffering the baker money, but he paid no
heed to any of them, by reason of the much crowd. The
fisherman stood looking and snuffing the smell of the hot
bread, — and indeed his soul longed for it, by reason of his
hunger, — till the baker caught sight of him and cried out
to him, saying, 4 Come hither, O fisherman ! ' So he went
up to him, and the baker said to him, e Dost thou want
bread ?' But he was silent. ' Speak,' said the baker, ' and
be not ashamed, for God is bountiful. If thou have no
money, I will give thee [bread] and have patience with
thee till good [fortune] betide thee.' *By Allah, Q
master,' replied Abdallah, *I have indeed no money!
But give me bread enough for my family, and I will leave
thee this net in pawn till the morrow.' ' Nay, good fellow/
rejoined the baker, 'this net is [as it were] thy shop and
the means of thy livelihood; 1 so, if thou pawn it, where-
withal wilt thou fish? Teil me how much [bread]
1 Lit. the door of thy provision.


332


will suffice thee ? * ' Ten paras' worth,' replied the fisher-
man.

So he gave him ten paras' worth of bread and ten paras
in money, saying, 'Take these ten paras and cook thyself
a mess of meat therewith; so wilt thou owe me twenty
paras, for which bring me fish to-morrow; but, if thou
catch nothing again, come and take thy bread and thy
^TtC$t ten P aras > an d I will have patience with thee till better
bcCCt.xtt. luck betide thee, when thou shalt bring me fish for all
thou owest me.' ' May God the Most High reward thee,"
said the fisherman, 'and requite thee for me with all
good ! ' Then he took the bread and the money and
went away, glad at heart, and buying what he could [of
meat and vegetables], returned to his wife, whom he
found sitting up, soothing the children, who were weeping
for hunger, and saying to them, ' Your father will be here
anon with what ye may eat.' So he set the bread before
them and they ate, whilst he told his wife what had
befallen him, and she said, ' God is bountiful'

On the morrow, he shouldered his net and went forth o£
his house, saying, ' I beseech thee, O Lord, to vouchsafe
me this day what shall whiten my face with the baker ! '
When he came to the sea-shore, he proceeded to cast his
net and pull it in; but there came up no fish therein;
and he 'toiled thus till ended day and caught nothing.
Then he set out homeward, in sore concern, and the way
to his house lay past the baker's shop; so he said in
himself, 'How shall I go home? But I will hasten past
that the baker may not see me.' When he reached the
shop, he saw a crowd about it and quickened his pace,
being ashamed to face the baker; but the latter raised
his eyes to him and cried out to him, saying, 4 Ho, fisher-
man ! Come and take thy bread and spending-money.
Meseems thou forgettest' 'By Allah,' answered Abdallahj,
5 1 had not forgotten; but I was ashamed to face thee,


333


because I have caught no fish to-day.' * Be not ashamed,
answered the baker. 1 Said I not to thee, " At thy leisure t
till good hap betide thee? " '

Then he gave him the bread and the ten paras and he
returned and told his wife, who said, ' God is bountiful.
If it please the Most High, good luck shall yet betide
thee and thou shalt give the baker his due.' On this wise
he did forty days, betaking himself daily to the sea, from
the rising of the sun to. the going down thereof, and
returning [at nightfall], without fish ; and still he took
bread and spending-money of the baker, who never named
the fish to him nor neglected him nor kept him waiting,
like the folk, 1 but gave him the bread and the ten paras
[forthright]. Whenever the fisherman said to him, '° O my
brother, reckon with me,' he would say, ' Go thy ways ;
this is no time for reckoning. [Wait] Jill good luck
betide thee, and then I will reckon with thee.' And the
fisherman would go away, blessing and thanking him.

On the one-and-fortieth day, he said to his wife, 'I
have a mind to tear up the net and be quit of this life.'
'Why wilt thou do this?' asked she. And he said,
' Meseems there is an end of my getting my living from
the sea. How long shall this last? By Allah, I am
consumed with shame before the baker and I will go
no more to the sea, so I may not pass by his shop, for
I have no other way home; and every time I pass, he
calls me and gives me the bread and the ten paras.
How much longer shall I run in debt to him ? '
'Praised be God the Most High,' replied his wife,
'who hath inclined his heart to thee, so that he giveth
thee our daily bread ! What mislikest thou in this ? '
Quoth he, ' I owe him now a great sum of money, and

1 It seems doubtful whether this phrase means, " He did not neglect
him, as most folk would have done." or 56 He did not keep him waiting,
as he did the rest of the folk."


334


he will without tail demand his due/ 'Hath he vexed
thee with words?' asked his wife. 'Nay/ answered
Abdallah ; 'on the contrary, he still refuses to reckon
with me, saying, "[Wait] till good luck betide thee."'
And his wife said, ' If he press thee, say to him, " [Wait]
till there come the good luck for which we hope, thou
and I/" 'And when will the good luck come that we
hope for?' asked the fisherman. 'God is bountiful,*
answered she; and he said, 'Thou sayst sooth/

Then he shouldered his net and went down to the
sea-side, saying, ' O Lord, provide Thou me, though but
with one fish, that I may give it to the baker ! ' And he
cast his net into the sea and pulling it in, found it heavy ;
so he tugged at it till, after sore travail, he got it ashore
and found in it a dead ass, swollen and stinking; whereat
his soul sickened and he freed it from the net, saying s
' There is no power and no virtue save in God the Most
High, the Supreme ! Verily, I can no more ! I say to
yonder woman, 1 u There is no more provision for me
in the sea; let me leave this craft." And she still
answers me, "God is bountiful: good will betide thee."
Is this dead ass the good of which she speaks?' And he
was sore chagrined.

Then he removed to another place, so he might be quit
of the stench of the dead ass, and cast his net there.
He waited awhile, then drew it in and found it heavy ;
whereupon quoth he, ' Good ; we are hauling up all the
dead asses in the sea and ridding it of its rubbish.' How-
ever he gave not over tugging at the net, till the blood
streamed • from the palms of his hands, and when he got
it ashore, he saw a man in it and took him for one of the
Afrits of the lord Solomon, whom he was wont to imprison
in vessels of brass and cast into the sea, supposing that
the vessel had burst for length of years and that the Air it
1 i.e. his wife.


335


had come forth and fallen into the net ; wherefore he fled
from him, crying out and saying, ' Mercy, mercy, O Afrit
of Solomon ! ' But the creature called out to him from
within the net and said, 'Come hither, O fisherman, and
flee not from me; for I am a human being like thyself.
Release me, so thou mayst get a recompense for mt
[of God].'

So the fisherman took heart and coming up to him, said
to him, 'Art thou not an Afrit of the Jinn?' 'Nay,'
replied the other, 'I am a mortal and a believer in God
and His Apostle.' 'Who threw thee into the sea?' asked
the fisherman ; and he answered, ' I am of the children
of the sea and was going about therein, when thou castest
the net over me. We are people who obey God's com-
mandments and show loving-kindness unto the creatures
of the Most High, and but that I fear and dread to be of
the disobedient, I had rent thy net ; but I accept that
which God hath decreed unto me; wherefore thou art
become my owner and I thy captive. Wilt thou then
set me free for the love of God the Most High and make
a covenant with me and become my friend? I will come
to thee every day in this place, and do thou come to me
and bring me a gift of the fruits ol the land. For with
you are grapes and figs and melons and peaches and
pomegranates and what not else, and all thou bringest
me will be acceptable unto me. Moreover, with us are
coral and pearls and chrysolites and emeralds and rubies
and other precious stones, and I will fill thee the basket,
wherein thou bringest me the fruit, with precious stones
of the jewels of the sea. What sayst thou to this,
O my brother ? '

Quoth the fisherman, ' Be the first chapter of the Koran
between thee and me upon this.' So they recited the
Fatiheh, 1 [in token of their agreement], and the fisherman
1 ie. the nrst chapter of the Koran. See note. Vol. VI. p. 6.


33$


loosed the merman from the net and said to him, £ What is
thy name ? ' ' My name is Abdallah of the sea,' answered
he ; ' and if thou come hither and see me not, do thou call
out and say, "Where art thou, O Abdallah, O merman?"
^Ci(d)t And I will be with thee presently. But thou, what is
tS£CCCxlH< thy name?' 'My name also is Abdallah,' answered the
fisherman. Quoth the other, ' Thou art Abdallah of the
land and I am Abdallah of the sea; but abide here till
I go and fetch thee a present.' And the fisherman said,
4 1 hear and obey.'

Then the merman went down into the sea [and dis-
appeared] ; whereupon the fisherman repented him of
having released him and said in himself, ' How know I
that he will come back to me? Indeed, he beguiled me,
so that I released him, and now he will laugh at me.
Had I kept him, I might have made a show of him for
the diversion of the people of the city and taken money
from all the folk and entered with him the houses of the
great' And he repented him of having let him go and
said, ' Thou hast let thy prey go from thy hand.' But, as
he was thus bemoaning his credulity, behold, the merman
returned to him, with his hands full of pearls and coral
and emeralds and rubies and other jewels, and said to
him, ' Take these, O my brother, and excuse me, for I had
no basket that I might fill it for thee.'

The fisherman rejoiced and took the jewels from the
merman, who said to him, ' Come hither every day, before
sunrise,' and taking leave of him, went down into the sea ;
whilst the other returned to the city, rejoicing, and stayed
not till he came to the baker's shop and said to him, ' O
my brother, good luck is come to us [at last] ; so do thou
reckon with me/ 1 There needs no reckoning,' answered
the baker. ' If thou have aught, give it me; and if not,
take thy bread and spending-money and begone, against
good betide thee. 5 ' O my friend.' rejoined the fisherman,


337


'indeed good hath betided me of God's bounty, and I owe
thee much money ; but take this.' So saying, he took up,
at a handful, half of the pearls and coral and rubies and
other jewels he had with him, and gave them to the baker,
saying, ' Give me some ready money to spend this day, till
I sell these jewels.'

So the baker gave him all the money he had by him and
all the bread in his basket and rejoiced in the jewels he
had given him, saying, 'I am thy slave and thy servant.'
Then he set all the bread on his head and following the
fisherman home, gave it to his wife and children, after
which he repaired to the market and fetched meat and
vegetables and all kinds of fruit. Moreover, he left his
shop and abode with Abdallah all that day, busying
himself in his service and doing all his occasions. 'O
my brother,' said the fisherman, c thou weariest thyself.'
' This is my duty,' answered the baker ; 4 for I am become
thy servant and thou hast overwhelmed me with thy
bounties.' ' Not so,' rejoined the fisherman ; 4 it is thou
who wast my benefactor in the days of dearth and
straitness.' And the baker passed the night in feasting
with him and became a faithful friend to him. Then the
fisherman told his wife what had befallen him with the
merman, whereat she rejoiced and said, ' Keep thy secret,
lest the magistrates come down upon thee.' But he said,
1 Though I keep my secret from all the folk, yet will I not
hide it from the baker.'

On the morrow, he rose before the sun and shouldering
a basket, which he had filled overnight with all manner
fruits, repaired to the sea-shore, where he set down the
basket and called out, saying, ' Where art thou, O
Abdallah, O merman ? ' And he answered, saying, ' Here
am I, at thy service ; ' and came forth to him. The
fisherman gave him the fruit and he took it and plunging
into the sea with it, was absent awhile, after which he

VOL. VIII. 22


33§


came up, with the basket full of all kinds of precioua
stones and jewels. The fisherman set it on his head
and went away ; and when he came to the baker's shop,
the latter said to him, 'O my lord, I have baked thee
forty brioshes and have sent them to thy house ; and
now I will bake wastel-bread, and as soon as it is done,
I will bring it to the house and go and fetch thee meat
and vegetables.'

Abdallah gave him three handsful of jewels out of the
basket and going home, set it down there. Then he
took a jewel of price of each sort and going to the
jewel-bazaar, stopped at the Syndic's shop and said to
him, 'Buy these jewels of me.' 'Show them to me,'
said the Syndic. So he showed them to him and the
jeweller said, ' Hast thou other than these ? ' ' Yes,'
answered Abdallah, £ I have a basketful at home.' 'And
where is thy house ? ' asked' the Syndic. ' In such a
quarter,' replied the fisherman ; whereupon the Syndic
took the jewels from him and said to his servants, ' Lay-
hold of him, for he is the thief who stole the queen's
jewels.' And he bade beat him. So they beat him and
bound his hands behind him ; after which the Syndic
and all the people of the jewel-market arose and set
out [to carry him to the king], saying, ' We have gotten
the thief.' Quoth one, 'None robbed such an one but
this knave,' and another, ' It was none but he stole all
that was in such an one's house ; ' and some said this
and some that.

But he was silent and spoke not a word nor answered
any of them, till they brought him before the king, to
whom said the Syndic, 'O king of the age, when the
queen's necklace was stolen, thou sentest to acquaint us
therewith, requiring of us the discovery of the culprit-
wherefore I strove beyond the rest of the folk and have
taken the thief for thee. Here he is before thee, and


339


these jewels we have recovered from him.' Thereupon

the king said to the eunuch, 'Carry these jewels to the

queen and say to her, ''Are these thy jewels that thou hast

lost?"' So the eunuch carried the jewels to the queen,

who marvelled at them and sent to the king to say, 'I

have found my necklace in my own place and these jewels

are not my property ; nay, they are finer than those of

my necklace. Wherefore oppress thou not the man ; but, iJCtC^Jt

if he will sell them, buy them of him for thy daughter uTCCCxttfi

Umra es Suwood, that we may string them on a necklace

for her.'

When the eunuch returned and told the king what the
queen said, he cursed the Syndic of the jewellers and his
company with the curse of Aad and Themoud, 1 and they
said to him, ' O king of the age, we knew this man for
a poor fisherman and deemed these jewels too^ much for
him [to come by honestly], so made sure that he had
stolen them.' 1 Wretches that ye are ! ' cried the king.
' Do ye begrudge a true-believer good fortune ? Why
did ye not question him ? Peradventure God the Most
High hath vouchsafed him these things from a source
on which he did not reckon. Why did ye make him out
a thief and dishonour him amongst the folk ? Begone,
and may God not bless you ! '

So they went out in affright and the king said to
Abdallah, ' O man, (may God bless thee in that He hath
bestowed on thee!) no harm shall befall thee; but tell
me truly, whence gottest thou these jewels ; for I am a
king and have not the iike of them.' ' O king of the age,'
answered the fisherman, ' I have a basketful of them at
home.' And he told him of his friendship with the
merman, adding, ' We have made a covenant together

1 Two fabulous tribes of idolaters, repeatedly mentioned in the Koran
as having been destroyed by thunder from heaven, for refusing to
hearken to the prophets Houd and Salsh.


340


that I shall bring him every day a basketful of fruit and
that he shall fill me the basket with these jewels/ ' O
man/ said the king, ' this is thy lot ; but wealth hath need
of station. 1 I will protect thee for the nonce against men's
usurpations; but it may be I shall be deposed or die and
another be made king in my stead, and he shall put thee
to death, because of his love of the things of this world
and his covetousness. Wherefore I am minded to marry
thee to my daughter and make thee my vizier and be-
queath thee the kingdom after me, so none may oppress
thee after my death.'

Then said he to his officers, 'Carry this man to the
bath.' So they carried him to the bath and washed his
body and clad him in royal apparel, after which they
brought him back to the king, and he made him his
vizier and sent to his house couriers and the soldiers of
his guard and all the wives of the notables, who clad his
children in royal apparel and mounting the former in a
horse-litter, with the little child in her lap, carried her
to the palace, whilst the guards and couriers and Cadis
walked before her. Moreover, they brought her elder
children in to the king, who made much of them, taking
them in his lap and seating them by his side ; for they
were nine male children and the king had no [male]
offspring, nor had he been blessed with any child, save
this one daughter, Umm es Suwood- Meanwhile the
queen entreated Abdallah's wife with honour and bestowed
favours on her and made her her vizieress. Then the king
commanded to draw up the contract of marriage between
his daughter and the fisherman, who assigned to her, as
her dower, all the precious stones and jewels in his
possession, and they opened the chapter of festivity.
Moreover, the king made proclamation, commanding to

1 i,e. for the purpose of protecting its possessor from the greed aad
oppression of his fellows.


341


decorate the city, in honour of his daughter's wedding,
and Abdallah went in to the princess and did away her
maidenhead.

Next morning, the king looked out of window atx? law
Abdallah carrying on his head a basket full of fruit. So
he said to him, 'What hast thou there, O my son-in-law,
and whither goest thou?' 'I go to my friend Abdallah
the merman,' answered the fisherman ; and the king said,
'O my son-in-law, this is no time to go to thy friend.'
Quoth Abdallah, ' Indeed, I fear to break tryst with him,
lest he reckon me a liar and say, "The things of the
world have distracted thee from me."' 'True,' rejoined
the king. 4 Go to thy friend and God help thee ! ' So he
passed through the city on his way to the sea-shore, and
as he went, he heard those who knew him say, 'There
goes the king's son-in-law to exchange fruit for jewels ■ '
whilst those who knew him not said, ' Harkye,*now much
a pound? Come, sell to me.' And he answered, saying,
'Wait till 1 come back to thee,' for that he would not
vex any.

Then he fared on till he came to the sea-shore and
foregathered with his friend the merman, to whom he
delivered the fruit, receiving jewels in return. As he
passed by the shop of the baker, on his return, he saw it
closed; and thus he did ten days, during which time the
shop abode shut and he saw nothing of the baker. So
he said in himself, ' This is a strange thing ! I wonder
what is come of the baker ! ' Then he enquired of his
neighbour, saying, ' O my brother, where is thy neighbour
the baker and what hath God done with him?' 'O my
lord,' answered he, ' he is sick and cometh not forth of his
house/ ' Where is his house ? ' asked Abdallah ; and the
other replied, 6 In such a quarter. 5

So he went thither and enquired of him ; but, when he
knocked at the door, the baker looked out of window and


342


seeing his friend the fisherman, with a full basket on his
head, came down and opened the door to him. Abdallah
entered and throwing himself on the baker, embraced him
and wept, saying, 'How dost thou, O my friend? Every
day, I pass by thy shop and see it closed ; so I asked
thy neighbour, who told me that thou wast sick; and I
enquired for thy house, that I might see thee.' 'God
requite thee for me with all good ! ' answered the baker.
'Nothing ails me; but it was told me that the king had
taken thee, for that certain of the folk had lied against
thee and accused thee of being a thief ; wherefore I
feared and shut my shop and hid myself.' ' It is well,
said Abdallah and told him all that had befallen him with
the king and the Syndic of the jewellers, adding, 'More-
over, the king hath given me his daughter to wife and
made me his vizier : so do thou t^ke what is in this basket
to thy share and fear nothing.'

Then he left him, after having done away his fear from
him, and returned with the empty basket to the king, who
said to him, ' O my son-in-law, it would seem thou hast
not foregathered with thy friend the merman to-day.' ' I
went to him,' replied Abdallah ; ' but that which I got of
him I gave to my friend the baker, to whom I owe kind-
ness.' ' Who is this baker ? ' asked the king ; and the
fisherman answered, 'He is a benevolent man, who did
with me thus and thus in the days of my poverty and
never neglected me a single day nor vexed my spirit.'
Quoth the king, ' What is his name ? ' ' His name is
Abdallah the baker,' replied the fisherman ; ' and my
name is Abdallah of the land and that of my friend the
merman Abdallah of the sea.' ' And my name, also, is
Abdallah,' rejoined the king; 'and the servants of God 1
are all brethren. So send and fetch thy friend the baker,,
that 1 may make him my vizier of the left.'

1 Abdallah means "servant of God/"


343


So he sent for the baker and the king invested him with
the vizier's habit and made him vizier of the left, making
Abdallah of the land his vizier of the right. On this
wise the fisherman abode a whole year, every day carrying ■JCtCrM
the merman the basket full of fruit and receiving it back, fccCCCA'Ufe.
full of jewels; and when fruit failed from the gardens,
he carried him raisins and almonds and hazel-nuts
and walnuts and figs and so forth ; and all that he brought
him the merman accepted and returned him the basket
full of jewels, as of wont.

It chanced one day that he carried him the basket, full
of dry 1 fruits, according to custom, and his friend took
them from him. Then they sat down to converse, the
fisherman on the beach and the merman in the water,
near the shore, and conversed ; and the talk went round
between them, till it fell upon the subject of tombs;
whereupon quoth the merman, ' O my brother, they say
that the Prophet (whom God bless and preserve !) is
buried with you on the land. Knowest thou his tomb?'
' Yes,' answered Abdallah. ' It lies in a city called
Yethrib.' 2 ' And do the people of the land visit it? s
asked the merman. ' Yes,' replied the fisherman, and the
other said, ' I give you joy, O people of the land, of visit-
ing [the tomb of] that noble and compassionate prophet,
which whoso visits merits his intercession ! Hast thou

1 Lit. " dessert " {nud) ; but this latter word properly includes dried
{as well as dry) fruits and confections. The Arabs divide fruits into wet
or fresh {i.e. soft-skinned or pulped, such as cherries and peaches) and
dry {i.e. hard-skinned or shelled, such as nuts and almonds).

2 The ancient name of the city of Medina, which latter name (abridged
form of that of Medinet en Nebi, the city of the Prophet) was not given to
it till after the Hegira. Thus the Ereslau edition ; but the Boulac and
Calcutta texts read, "in a city called Teibeh." Teibeh or Teyyibeb
(the excellent) is one of the many names of honour of the Holy Citj
and is rarely used, Yethrib being the common ancient and Medina the
common modern name.


344


visited it, O my brother?' ' No,' answered the fisherman - t
1 for I was poor and had not what to spend by the way,
nor have I been at my ease but since I knew thee and thou
bestowedst on me this good fortune. But it behoves me
to visit it, after I have made the pilgrimage to the Holy
House of God, 1 and nought withholds me therefrom but
my love for theej for I cannot leave thee for one day.'

' And dost thou set the love of me/ rejoined the merman 4
' before the visitation of the tomb of Mohammed (whom
God bless and preserve !), who shall intercede for thee
on the day of appearance before God and shall save
thee from the fire and through whose intercession thou
shalt enter Paradise ? And dost thou, for the love of the
world, leave to visit the tomb of thy Prophet Mohammed,
whom God bless and preserve?' ' No, by Allah,' replied
Abdallah. ' I set the visitation of the Prophet's tomb
above all else, and I crave thy -leave to visit it this year.'
' I grant thee leave,' answered the merman ; ' but I have
a trust to give thee ; so come thou with me into the sea,
that I may carry thee to my city and my house and enter-
tain thee there and give thee a deposit ; and when thou
standest by the Prophet's tomb, do thou lay it thereon,
saying, u O apostle of God, Abdallah the merman salutes
thee and sends thee this present, imploring thine inter-
cession to save him from the fire." '

'O my brother,' said the fisherman, 'thou wast created
in the water and it is thine abiding-place and doth thee
no hurt; but, if thou shouldst come forth to the land,
would any harm betide thee?' 'Yes,' answered the
merman ; 4 my body would dry up and the breezes of
the land would blow upon me and I should die.' 'And
I, in like manner,' rejoined the fisherman, ' was created
on the land and it is my abiding-place ; but, if I went
down into the sea, the water would entei my belly and
1 At Mecca.


345


cftoke me and I should die.' 'Have no fear for that,'
replied the other ; ' for I will bring thee an ointment,
wherewith when thou hast anointed thy body, the water
will do thee no hurt, though thou shouldst pass the rest
of thy life going about in the sea; and thou shalt lie
down and rise up in the sea and nought shall harm thee.'
' If the case be so/ said the fisherman, ' well and good ;
but bring me the ointment, so I may make proof of it.'
'So be it,' answered the merman and taking the basket,
disappeared in the sea.

After awhile, he returned with an ointment, as it were
the fat of oxen, yellow as gold and sweet of savour.
'What is this, O my brother?' asked the fisherman. 'It
is the liver-fat of a kind of fish called the dendan,' 1
answered the merman, 'which is the biggest of ail fish
and the fellest of our foes. Its bulk is greater than that
of any beast of the land, and were it to meet a camel or
an elephant, it would swallow it at one mouthful.' ' O
my brother,' asked Abdallah, 'what eateth this baleful
[beast] ? ' 'It eateth of the beasts of the sea,' replied
the merman. ' Hast thou not heard the byword, " Like the
fishes of the sea : the strong eateth the weak ? " '

'True,' answered the fisherman ; 'but have you many
of these dendans in the sea ? ' And the other said, ' Yes,
there be many of them with us. None can tell their tale
save God the Most High.' Quoth Abdallah, 'Verily, I
fear lest, if I go down with thee into the sea, one of these
beasts fall in with me and devour me.' ' Have no fear,'
replied the merman. 'When it sees thee, it will know
thee for a son of Adam and will fear thee and flee. It
feareth none in the sea as it feareth a son of Adam ; for
that, if it eat hira, it dieth forthright, because his flesh is

1 The dictionaries are silent as to this fish, which appears to be
» fabulous monster, partaking of the attributes of the shark and the
cachalot or sperm-whale.


346


a deadly poison to this kind of creature; nor do we
gather its liver-fat save by means of a man, when he
falleth into the sea and is drowned ; for that his favour
becometh changed and ofttimes his flesh is torn ; so the
dendan eateth him, deeming him of the beasts of the sea,
and dieth. Then we light upon it dead and take the fat
of its liver. Moreover, wherever there is a son of Adam,
though there be in that place a hundred or two hundred or
a thousand or more of these beasts, if they but hear him
Ht(}f)t cry once, they all die forthwith and not one of them can
QCCCC.xib. avail to remove from its place ; wherefore, whenas a son
of Adam falleth into the sea, we take him [ere he can
drown] and anoint him with this fat and go round about
the sea with him, and whenever we see a dendan or two or
three or more, we bid him cry out and they all die forth-
right for his once crying.'

Quoth the fisherman, 'I put my trust in God/ and
putting off his clothes, buried them in a hole, which he
dug in the beach ; after which he rubbed his body from
top to toe with the ointment. Then he descended into
the water and diving, opened his eyes and the water did
him no hurt. So he walked right and left, and if he
would, he rose [to the surface] and if he would, he sank
to the bottom. And he saw the water of the sea vaulted
over him, as it were a tent ; yet it did him no hurt. Then
said the merman to him, 1 What seest thou, O my brother?'
' O my brother,' answered Abdallah, ' I see [that which is]
good ; and indeed thou spokest truth in that which thou
saidst to me ; for the water doth me no hurt.' Quoth the
merman, ' Follow me.'

So he followed him and they fared on from place to
place, whilst Abdallah saw mountains of water before
him and on his right and left and diverted himself by
gazing thereon and on the various kinds of fish, some
great and some small, that sported in the sea. Some of


347


them were like unto buffaloes, others to oxen and others
to dogs and yet others unto human beings ; but all to
which they drew near fled, whenas they saw the fisherman,
who said to the merman, £ O my brother, how is it that
I see all the fish, to which we draw near, flee from us ? '
' Because they fear thee,' answered the other ; * for all
things that God hath made fear the son of Adam.'

The fisherman ceased not to gaze upon the marvels of
the sea s till they came to a high mountain and fared on
beside it. Presently, he heard a great cry and turnings
sow some black thing, the bigness of a camel or bigger,
coming down upon him from the mountain and crying
out. So he said to his friend, 'What is this, O my
brother?' 'This is the den dan,' answered the merman.
•It cometh down in quest of me, seeking to devour me j
so cry thou out at it, O my brother, ere it win to us ; else
will it snatch me up and devour me.' So Abdallah cried
out at it and it fell down dead ; which when he saw, he
said, ' Extolled be the perfection of God and His praise j
I smote it not with sword nor knife; how comes it, then,
that, for all the vastness of the creature's bulk, it could
not endure my cry, but died?' 'Marvel not,' replied the
merman ; ' for, by Allah, O my brother, were there a
thousand or two thousand of these creatures, yet could
they not endure the cry of a son of Adam.'

Then they fared on, till they came to a city, whose
inhabitants the fisherman saw to be all women, there
being no male among them ; so he said to his companion,
"' O my brother, what city is this and what are these
women?' 'This is the city of women,' answered the
merman, ' for its inhabitants are of the women of the sea.'
• Are there any males among them ? ' asked the fisherman ;
and the merman said, ' No,' 1 Then how,' said Abdallah,
4 do they conceive and bear young, without males ? ' Quoth
the other, 6 The king of the sea banishes them hither and


343


they conceive not neither bear children. All the women
of the sea, with whom he is wroth, he sends to this city
and they cannot leave it ; for, should one of them come
forth therefrom, any of the beasts of the sea that saw her
would devour her. But in the other cities of the sea there
are both males and females.'

'Are there then other cities than this in the sea?' asked
the fisherman, and the merman said, ' There are many.'
' And is there a Sultan over you in the sea ? ' asked the
fisherman. ' Yes,' answered the merman. Then said
Abdallah, ' O my brother, I have indeed seen many
marvels in the sea ! ' ' And what hast thou seen of the
marvels [of the sea] ? ' quoth the merman. ' Hast thou
not heard the saying, "The marvels of the sea are more
in number than the marvels of the land ? " ' ' True,'
answered the fisherman and fell to gazing upon the
women, whom he saw having faces like moons and hair
like women's hair, but their hands and feet were in their
bellies and they had tails like fishes' tails.

When the merman had shown him the people of the
city, he carried him forth therefrom and forewent him to
another city, which he found full of folk, both males and
females, after the fashion of the women aforesaid and
having tails ; but there was neither selling nor buying
amongst them, as with the people of the land, nor were
they clothed, but went all naked and with their privities
uncovered. ' O my brother,' said Abdallah; ' I see males
and females alike with their privities exposed.' And the
other said, 'This is because the folk of the sea have no
clothes.' 'And how do they, when they marry?' asked
the fisherman. 'They do not marry,' answered the mer-
man ; ' but every one who hath a mind to a female doth
his will of her.' Quoth Abdallah, 1 This is unlawful. Why
doth he not ask her in marriage and dower her and make
her a wedding-festival and marry her, in accordance with


349


that which is pleasing to God and His Apostle ? ' ' We
are not all of one religion,' answered his companion.
4 Some of us are Muslims, believers in the unity of God,
others Jews and Christians and what not else ; and each
marries in accordance with the ordinances of his religion j
but those of us who marry are mostly Muslims.'

Quoth the fisherman, 'Ye are naked and have neither
buying nor selling among you : of what then is your
wives' dowry? Do ye give them jewels and precious
stones?' 'Jewels with us are but stones without value/
answered the merman : ' but upon him who is minded to
marry they impose a dowry of a certain number of fish
of various kinds, that he must catch, a thousand or two
thousand, more or less, according to the agreement
between himself and the bride's father. As soon as he
brings the required amount, the families of the bride and
bridegroom assemble and eat the marriage-banquet ; after
which they bring him in to his bride, and he catches fish
and feeds her ; or, if he be unable, she catches fish and
feeds him.' 6 And how if a woman commit adultery ? '
asked the fisherman. ' If a woman be convicted of this
case,' answered the merman, ' they banish her to the City
of Women ; and if she be with child, they leave her till
she be delivered, when, if she give birth to a girl, they
banish her with her, naming her adulteress, daughter of
adulteress, and she abideth a maid till she die ; but, if she
give birth to a male child, they carry it to the Sultan of
the Sea, who puts it to death.'

Abdallah marvelled at this and the merman carried him
to another city and thence to another and another, till he
had shown him fourscore cities, and he saw the people of
each city to be different from those of every other. Then
said he to the merman, £ O my brother, are there yet other
cities in the sea?' i And what hast thou seen of the cities
of the sea and its wonders ? ' replied the other. 1 By the


35©

virtue of the noble prophet, the benign, the compassionate,
were I to show thee a thousand cities a day for a thousand
years, and in each city a thousand marvels, I should not
have shown thee one carat of the four-and-twenty carats of
the cities of the sea and its wonders ! I have but shown
thee our own province and country, nothing more.'

' O my brother,' said the fisherman, ' since this is the
case, what I have seen sufhceth me, for I am sick of
eating fish, and these fourscore days I have been in thy
company, thou hast fed me morning and night upon
nothing but raw fish, neither broiled nor boiled.' ' And
what is broiled and boiled?' asked the merman. Quoth
Abdallah, ' We broil fish with fire and boil it [in water]
and dress it in various ways and make many dishes of it.'
'And how should we come by fire in the sea?' rejoined
the other. ' We know not broiled nor boiled nor aught
else of the kind.' Quoth the fisherman, 'We also fry it in
olive-oil and oil of sesame,' and the merman said, ' How
should we come by olive-oil and oil of sesame in the sea?
Verily we know nothing of that thou namest'

' True,' said Abdallah, ' but, O my brother, thou hast
shown me many cities; yet hast thou not shown me thine
own city.' Quoth the merman. * As for mine own city,
we passed it long since, for it is near the land whence
we came, and I only left it and came with thee hither,
thinking to divert thee with the sight of the [greater]
cities of the sea.' 'That which I have seen of them
sufhceth me,' replied Abdallah : ' and now I would have
thee show me thine own city.' ' So be it,' answered the
other and returning on his traces, carried him back thither
and said to him, 'This is my city.'

Abdallah looked and saw a city small by comparison
with those he had seen; then he entered with, his com-
panion and they fared on till they came to a cavern.
Quoth the merman, i This is my house and all the houses


I ■

I


35i


in the city are on this wise, caverns, great and small, in
the mountains ; as likewise are those of all the other
cities of the sea. For every one who is minded to make
him a house repairs to the king and says to him, ' I wish
to make me a house in such a place.' Whereupon the
king sends with him a band of the fish called peckers,
which have beaks that crumble the hardest rock, appointing
a certain dole of fish to their wage. They betake them-
selves to the mountain chosen by the owner of the house
and hew therein the house, whilst the owner catches fish
for them and feeds them, till the cavern is finished, when
they depart and the owner of the house takes up his
abode therein. After this wise do all the people of the
sea ; they traffic not with one another nor serve each other
save by means of fish; and their food is fish and they
themselves are a kind of fish.' s

Then he said to him, 'Enter.' So Abdallah entered
and the merman cried out, saying, ' Ho, daughter mine ! '
whereupon there came to him a damsel with a face like
the round of the moon and long hair, heavy buttocks,
languishing black eyes and slender waist; but she was
naked and had a tail. When she saw the fisherman, she
said to her father, ' O my father, what is this lacktail thou
hast brought with thee?' 'O my daughter,' answered he,
' this is my friend of the land, from whom I use to bring
thee the fruits of the earth. Come hither and salute him.'
So she came forward and saluted the fisherman with
eloquent tongue and fluent speech ; and her father said
to her, 'Bring victual for our guest, by whose coming
a blessing hath betided us : ' whereupon she brought him
two great fishes, each the bigness of a lamb, and the
merman said to him, ( Eat.' So he ate, in his own despite,
for stress of hunger ; because he was weary of eating fish
and they had nothing else.

Before long, in came the merman's wife, who was fait


352


to look upon, and with her two children,, each having in
his hand a young fish, which he munched as a man would
munch a cucumber. When she saw the fisherman with
her husband, she said, ' What is this lacktail ? ' And she
and her sons and daughter came up to him and fell to
examining his breech and saying, 'Yea, by Allah, he is
tailless ! ' And they laughed at him. So he said to the
merman, ' O my brother, hast thou brought me hither to
£sFtg!)t make me a laughing-stock for thy wife and children ? '
&£C££Xl5i. ' Pardon, O my brother/ answered the merman. ' Those
who have no tails are rare among us, and whenever one
such is found, the Sultan taketh him, to make him sport,
and he abideth a marvel amongst us, and all who see him
laugh at him. But, O my brother, excuse these young
children and this woman, for they lack understanding.'
Then he cried out to his family, saying, ' Hold your
peace ! ' So they were afraid and kept silence ; whilst he
went on to soothe Abdallah ; s mind.

Presently, as they were talking, in came half a score
mermen, tall and strong and stout, and said to him, 'O
Abdallah, it hath reached the king that thou hast with
thee a lacktail.' ' Yes,' answered the merman, 4 and this is
he 5 but he is not of us nor of the children of the sea.
He is my friend of the land and hath come to me as
a guest and I purpose to carry him back to the land.'
Quoth they, 'We cannot depart without him; so, if thou
have aught to say, arise and come with him to the king;
and whatsoever thou wouldst say to us, that say thou to
the king.' Then said the merman to the fisherman, 1 Q
my brother, my excuse is manifest, and we may not gain-
say the king : but go thou with me to him and I will do
my endeavour to deliver thee from him, if it please God.
Fear not, for he deemeth thee of the children of the sea ;
but, when he seeth thee, he will know thee to be of the
children of the land, whereupon he will surely entreat


353


thee with honour and restore thee to the land/ * It is
thine to decide,' replied Abdallah. * I will put my trust in
God and go with thee.'

So he took him and carried him to the king, who, when
he saw him, laughed at him and said, 'Welcome to the
lacktail ! ' And all who were about the king fell to laugh-
ing at him and saying, ' Yea, by Allah, he is tailless ! '
Then Abdallah of the sea came forward and acquainted
the king with the fisherman's case, saying, 4 This man is of
the children of the land and he is my friend and cannot live
amongst us, for that he loves not the eating of fish, except
it be fried or boiled ; wherefore I desire that thou give me
leave to restore him to the land.' 'Since the case is so,'
answered the king, 5 1 give thee leave to restore him to his
place, after due entertainment. Bring him the guest- meal'

So they brought him fish of various kinds and colours
and he ate, in obedience to the king's commandment ;
after which the latter said to him, 'Ask a boon of me.'
Quoth he, ' I ask of thee that thou give me jewels ; ' and
the king said, 4 Carry him to the jewel-house and let him
choose that whereof he hath need.' So his friend carried
him to the jewel-house and he chose out what he would,
after which the merman brought him back to his own
city and pulling out a purse, said to him, ' Take this
deposit and lay it on the tomb of the Prophet, whom
God bless and preserve ! ' And he took it, knowing not
what was therein.

Then the merman went forth with him, to bring him
back to land, and by the way he heard singing and merry-
making and saw a table spread with fish and folk eating
and singing and holding high festival. So he said to his
friend, ' What ails these people to rejoice thus ? Is there
a wedding toward amongst them ? ' s Nay,' answered
Abdallah of the sea ; 4 only one of them is dead.' ' Do ye
then,' asked the fisherman, ' when one dieth amongst you ;
vol. vin. 23


354


rejoice for him and sing and feast?' 'Yes,' replied the
merman ; ' and ye of the land, what do ye ! ' ' When one
dieth amongst us,' said Abdallah, ' we weep and mourn
for him and the women buffet their faces and rend the
bosoms of their garments, in token of mourning for the
dead.' The merman stared at him with wide eyes and
said to him, ' Give me the deposit.' So he gave it to him.

Then he set him ashore and said to him, ' Henceforward
our love and our friendship are at an end, and thou shalt
no more see me, nor I thee.' 'Why sayst thou this?'
asked the fisherman ; and the other said, ' Are ye not, O
folk of the land, a deposit of God?' 1 'Yes,' answered
Abdallah. ' Why then,' asked the merman, ' is it grievous
to you that God should take back His deposit and where-
fore weep ye over it? How can I entrust thee with a
deposit for the Prophet, whom God bless and preserve,
seeing that, when a child is born to you, ye rejoice in it,
albeit God the Most High setteth the soul therein as
a deposit ; and yet, when He taketh it again, it is grievous
to you and ye weep and mourn? Since it is uneath to
thee to give up the deposit of God, how shall it be easy
to thee to give up the deposit of the Prophet? 3 Where-
fore we reck not ot your companionship.' So saying, he
left him and disappeared in the sea.

The fisherman donned his clothes and taking the jewels,
went up to the king, who received him with open arms
and rejoiced at his return, saying, ' How dost thou, O my
son-in-law, and what is the cause of thine absence from
me this while ? ' So he told him his story and acquainted
him with that which he had seen of marvels in the sea,
whereat the king wondered. Moreover, he told him what

* i.e. is not the life 'or soul) in you a deposit, etc.

s i.e. how shall I trust thee to deposit on the Prophet's tomb the
purse which I committed to thee, and how can I be sure that thou wilt
not keep it for thyself?


355


the merman had said [anent the mourning for the dead] ;
and the king replied, 1 Indeed thou wast at fault to tell
him this.' Nevertheless, he continued for some time to go
down to the sea-shore and call upon the merman ; but he
answered him not nor came to him ; so, at last, he gave up
hope of him and abode, he and the king his father-in-law
and their families, in the happiest of case and the practice
of righteousness, till there came to them the Destroyer of
Delights and the Sunderer of Companies and they died all.
And glory be to the [Ever-]Living One, who dieth not,
whose is the empire of the Seen and the Unseen, who can
all things and is gracious to His servants and knoweth all
that pertaineth to them 1


SHD OF VOL. Vllt,
