PO¢2¢TeO T9421


‘Win Wl


9371109 S,1JSVHOIW “1S 30 ALIS


a


ἂν


CTION
Fick ini did of |
‘Dorfald-Stewart Foundation
and


» μ Ay Ὑ Ἢ] :
πε everest |
Carte ΝΠ fect |
: ΕΙΣ Ὁ
ἡ πτπτ ΠΗ erty
ME ey fait
a awe ce at
¢ ᾿ ta yi ἣν ;
aU itt
᾿ ΠΤ:
πὸ Ρ ΠΥΓΕῚ
sa ἐδ ὲ 115 i +f
AARC EL? oo r9 | ὰ
ROP TPES » *
oh: ie ΕΠ. ἢ
ke ᾿
Tie


igitized by the Internet Archive
‘in 2007 with funding from
, Microsoft Corporation


ἐπ


ἘΠ


Ἰ
et
a

“mei


Ween Ta =
Ὁ at ΣΙ
ν᾽ ἮΝ ὧλ Wy a
ἦν ;
ΑΙ.


a re τ


oe


THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY


EDITED BY
E. CAPPS, PH.D., LL.D. T.E. PAGE, Litt.D. W.H.D. ROUSE, Lirt.D


CALLIMACHUS


LYCOPHRON
ARATUS


@ YADA IAAS
*O aster writ
ATED HE.


CALLIMACHUS


AND


LYCOPHRON


WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY
A. W. MAIR, D.Lrrr.


PROFESSOR OF GREEK, EDINBURGH UNIVERSITY


ARATUS


WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY
G. R. MAIR, M.A.


HEADMASTER OF SPIER’S SCHOOL, BEITH


LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN |


NEW YORK: G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS
MOMXXI


*


as
5
.


wt emer a


PREFACE


Tuis volume was intended to appear in 1914. The
delay occasioned by the war, while it has doubtless
enabled improvements to be made in detail, has at
the same time made it hard to observe a meticulous
consistency.

Such as it is, the hope may be permitted that the
book will be found helpful as an introduction to the
Alexandrine literature. The scholar will readily
understand that the limitations of this series com-
pelled us to partial statement where full discussion
was desirable ; he will understand, too, that to secure
even such statement as we could attempt, we had to
study the severest compression. In particular, it may
be explained that, to satisfy the limits required for
publication, a very considerable amount of work had
to be ruthlessly jettisoned. At the same time the
translators most cordially and gratefully acknowledge
that the Editors of the series have done their utmost,
by an unusual concession in the matter of notes, to
render the volume useful.

To enumerate the names of the scholars who have
at one time or another given us advice on special

v


vi _ PREFACE


points might seem to exaggerate the importance of
the book. But, while the translators are alone
responsible for their final decisions, they gratefully
remember among those who have aided them:
the Astronomer Royal, Sir Frank Dyson; Mr. W. T.
Vesey ; Mr. E. W. Maunder; the Astronomer Royal
for Scotland, Professor Sampson; Professor Cossar
Ewart; Professor E. T. Whittaker; Mr. F. J. M.
Stratton, D.S.O.; Dr. T. G. Smyly; Professor A. S.
Hunt; Professor Burnet; Professor Arthur Platt ;
Professor Phillimore ; and among the younger men
qui olim memorabuntur, Mr. EK. P. Dickie, M.C., and
Messrs. A. and N. Porteous for help in revising the
proofs.

To the firm of Messrs. R. & R. Clark we owe
our cordial thanks. Mr. William Maxwell has shown
a warm personal interest in the progress of the work
which is in accordance with the best traditions of
Scottish printing. To Messrs. Clark’s accomplished
Reader we desire to offer no merely formal acknow-
ledgement of the vigilance and scholarship by which
the book has been materially improved.

A, W. M.
G. R. M.


CONTENTS


I. CALLIMACHUS—


INTRODUCTION :

1. The Life of Callimachus ‘

2. Callimachus and the Alexandrine

Library

3. Works

4. The Maniseripts δῇ the ΒΤ
BIBLIOGRAPHY . ς Mes tis bas
INTRODUCTION TO δαί δήθ Hymns .
Tur Hymns
Tue EpigraMs
Tue FRAGMENTs:

Aitia ,

The Lock of yaa

Branchus . ,

Epigrams

Galateia .

Grapheum

Hecale

lami .

Fragments of Wheeriain ‘Laestion

Vii


PAGE


136


183
224
230
232
238
238
240
270
800


Viii CONTENTS
Il. ARATUS—


INTRODUCTION :

1. The Life of Aratus

2. The Manuscripts .

3. The Scholia .

4, Bibliography
INTRODUCTION TO THE Pi mnow ns
Tue PHAENOMENA


Ill. LYCOPHRON—


INTRODUCTION :
1. The Life of Bias :
2. Works ; ‘
. The Manuscripts .
. The Paraphrases
The Scholia .
Bibliography
ALEXANDRA


D Or ye oo


InpEx oF Proper NAMES


Maps oF THE STARS


ADDENDUM


Bibliography of Lycophron p. 492:


PAGE
359
364
366
366
369
380


ATT
480
488
490
490
492
404.


619
At end


Add Viscount Royston, translation and notes, Cam-


bridge, at the University Press, 1806.


INTRODUCTION


1. Tue Lire or CALLIMmacuus


Our authorities for the life of Callimachus are a
notice in Suidas s.v. Καλλίμαχος and various refer-
ences in other authors.

Suidas says: “Callimachus, son of Battus and
Mesatma, of Cyrene, grammarian, pupil of Hermo-
crates of Iasos, the grammarian [an authority upon
accents, Gr. Lat. iv. 530 f. Keil], married the
daughter of Euphrates of Syracuse. His sister’s son
was Callimachus the younger, who wrote an epic, On
Islands. So diligent was he that he wrote poems in
every metre and also wrote a great number of works
in prose. The books written by him amount in all to
more than eight hundred. He lived in the times of
Ptolemy Philadelphus [reigned 285-247 5.0.1. Before
his introduction to that king he taught grammar in
Eleusis, a hamlet of Alexandria. He survived to the
time of Ptolemy, surnamed Euergetes, and Olympiad
127 [an error, see below], in the second year of which
Ptolemy Euergetes began to reign.’

Suidas gives also a notice of his nephew: “ Calli-
machus of Cyrene, epic poet, nephew of the preceding
son of Stasenor and Megatima, sister of Callimachus.”
From this Hemsterhys conjectured that in the first
notice also Megatima should be read for Mesatma.


B 1


INTRODUCTION TO CALLIMACHUS


The most probable date on the whole for the birth
of Callimachus is czrc. 310 B.c. We learn from Vit.
Arat. i. that Callimachus, both in his epigrams and
also ev τοῖς πρὸς Πραξιφάνην, referred to Aratus as
older than himself. But as they were fellow-students
at Athens the difference of age is not likely to have
been considerable: we may put the birth of Aratus
in 315, that of Callimachus in 310.

Callimachus claimed to be descended from Battus,
the founder of Cyrene (Pind. P. iv., v., Hdt. iv.
155 ff.): Strabo xvii. 837 λέγεται δὲ ἡ Κυρήνη
κτίσμα Βάττου: πρόγονον δὲ τοῦτον ἑαυτοῦ φάσκει
Καλλίμαχος. In any case he belonged to a family
of some eminence, and we learn from himself that
his grandfather had distinguished himself in military
affairs (Epigr. xxiii).

While still a young man he was, along with Aratus,
a pupil of Praxiphanes the Peripatetic philosopher
(author of treatises On Poetry, On History, ete.), in
Athens (Vit. Arat. i., iv., and the Latin Vit, Arat.)
probably circ. 287-281.

Subsequently, as Suidas tells us, he was a teacher
in Eleusis, a suburb of Alexandria; afterwards he
was introduced to the court of Ptolemy Philadelphus,
in whose service he continued—apart from occasional
excursions—till his death circ. 235 8.6.

The statement in Suidas that Callimachus παρέτεινε
μέχρι τοῦ Evepyérov κληθέντος Πτολεμαίου [came to
the throne in 247], ὀλυμπιάδος δὲ px’, ἧς κατὰ τὸ
δεύτερον ἔτος [271 B.c.] 6 Εὐεργέτης. Πτολεμαῖος ἤρξατο
τῆς βασιλείας is manifestly wrong. Merkel proposed
to read pA7, ἐ.6. 247. Kaibel makes a more elaborate
conjecture, reading «ἤκμασε δὲ ἐπὶ τῆς ὀλυμπιάδος px('>
καὶ παρέτεινε. . ὀλυμπιάδος δὲ ρλγ΄, ἧς KTA., i.e. his


2


2 gees 1.5.1...


INTRODUCTION TO CALLIMACHUS


“ floruit ἡ was in Ol. 127 and he survived to the time
of Ptolemy Euergetes, Ol. 133. No passage in his
works implying a later date than Ol. 133, that was
assumed as the date of his death.

But we read in Suidas s.v. ᾿Αριστοφάνης Βυζάντιος
εὐνὴν μαθητὴς Καλλιμάχου καὶ Ζηνοδότου: ἀλλὰ τοῦ μὲν
νέος, τοῦ δὲ παῖς ἤκουσε. The natural interpretation
here (though some would take the last sentence as a
chiasmus) is to understand the first τοῦ as Callimachus,
the second as Zenodotus; and hence it is sought to
be inferred that Callimachus survived Zenodotus,
whose death is put circ. 245-235.

Among the more distinguished pupils of Calli-
machus were Eratosthenes of Cyrene, Aristophanes
of Byzantium, and Apollonius, a native of Alexandria
or of Naucratis, but from his sojourn in Rhodes
called “the Rhodian.’’ With the last named Calli-
machus had a quarrel which, purely literary in its
origin, developed into a bitter personal feud, and
led to Apollonius withdrawing from Alexandria to
Rhodes. In the view of Callimachus the day of the
Homeric type of epic was past. That spacious type
of poetry must now give place to a poetry more
expressive of the genius of the age, the short and
highly polished poem, in which the recondite learn-
ing of the time should find expression. Apollonius,
on the other hand, in his Argonautica sought to con-
tinue the Homeric tradition. We are not concerned
here to decide the dispute, but we can appreciate
the two points of view. To Callimachus it may well
have seemed that the long epic, written in the
traditional epic language with its set phrases and
formulae, could hardly be other than a weak and
artificial echo of Homer: it could be no expression

3


INTRODUCTION TO CALLIMACHUS


of the living culture of Alexandria: it could have
no originality, nothing individual (Callim. Ep. xxx.).
To Apollonius, on the other hand, it might seem
that for Callimachus romance was dead; and to him,
who deserves to be called the first of the romantics,
Callimachus might appear even more truly


The idle singer of an empty day,


lifeless and “wooden” and uninspired: cf. A.P.
xi. 275.

The true inwardness of the quarrel may not have
been apparent to their. contemporaries or even.to
themselves, and it may have seemed to be merely a
question of the Small Book v. the Big Book. Athen.
ii. 72 a tells us ὅτι Καλλίμαχος 6 γραμματικὸς τὸ μέγα
βιβλίον ἴσον ἔλεγεν εἶναι TH μεγάλῳ κακῷ, “that a
big book is a big evil.” Even if we accept the
modern explanation that this refers merely to a
papyrus-roll (βιβλίον) of inconvenient size we have
the evidence of Callimachus himself in Hymn. Apoll. '
105 ff.: “Spake Envy privily in the ear of Apollo:
“1 admire not the poet who singeth not songs in
number as the sea.’ Apollo spurned Envy with his
foot, and spake thus: ‘ Great is the stream of the
Assyrian river, but much filth of earth and much
refuse it carries on its waters. And not of every
water do the Melissae carry to Deo, but of the
trickling stream that springs from a holy fountain,
pure and undefiled, the very crown of waters.’” It
might be fanciful to equate the λύματα (schol. Hymn
i. 17 λύματα: καθάρματα) and καθαρή of this passage
with the κάθαρμα of Apollonius’ epigram ; but in any
cease the schol. on this passage says expressly: ἐγκαλεῖ
διὰ τούτων τοὺς σκώπτοντας αὐτὸν μὴ δύνασθαι ποιῆσαι


4.


INTRODUCTION TO CALLIMACHUS


μέγα ποίημα, ὅθεν ἠναγκάσθη ποιῆσαι τὴν Ἑ κάλην.
Some have supposed that Apollon. Argon. iii. 932 ff.
ἀκλειὴς ὅδε μάντις ὃς οὐδ᾽ ὅσα παῖδες ἴσασιν οἶδε
νόῳ φράσσασθαι κτλ. was a second edition insertion
intended to refer to those words of Callimachus, the
erow being Callimachus, Mopsus being Apollonius
himself.

Doubtless Callimachus attributed the attitude of
Apollonius to envy; he says of himself: ὁ δ᾽ jewev
κρέσσονα Backavins, Epigr. xxiii. 4, ef. Hymn. Apoll.
105; and he wrote a poem called Jdis, “of studied
obscurity and abuse on one Ibis, an enemy of Calli-
machus: this was Apollonius, who wrote the
Argonautica”’ (Suidas s.v. Καλλίμαχος), which served
as the model for Ovid’s poem of the same name:
Ovid, Jbis, 53 ff. “ Postmodo, si perges, in te mihi
liber iambus Tincta Lycambeo sanguine tela dabit. ᾿
Nunc, quo Battiades inimicum devovet Ibin, Hoc
ego devoveo teque tuosque modo. Utque ille,
historiis involvam carmina caecis: Non soleam
quamvis hoc genus ipse sequi. Illius ambages
imitatus in Ibide dicar Oblitus moris iudiciique mei.”

To understand the allusion in applying the name
Ibis to Apollonius we have only to read the descrip-
tion of the bird in Strabo xvii. 823, where he is
speaking of the botany and zoology of Egypt:
“'Tamest of all is the Ibis, which is like a stork in
shape and size, and is of two colours, one storklike
[the white or Sacred Ibis], the other all black [the
Glossy Ibis]. Every crossing (τρίοδος) in Alexandria
is full of them, in some respects usefully, in others
not usefully. Usefully, because they pick up all
sorts of vermin and the offal (ἀποκαθάρματαλ) in the
butchers’ shops and fish-shops (cYorwAra). They


5


INTRODUCTION TO CALLIMACHUS


are detrimental, because they are omnivorous and
unclean (παμφάγον καὶ ἀκάθαρτον) and are with
difficulty prevented from polluting in every way
what is clean and what is not theirs (τῶν ἀλλοτρίων).

Callimachus, as we have seen, abhorred the
common path (ΠΕ. xxx. 1f.), and loved the pure
spring (H. Apoll. 110f.). So his professed disciple
Propertius iii. 1. 1 ff. says: “ Callimachi Manes...
Primus ego ingredior puro de fonte sacerdos Itala
per graios orgia ferre choros. ... Non datur ad
Musas currere lata via... opus hoe de monte
Sororum Detulit intacta pagina nostra via.” To
Callimachus Apollonius was a treader in the beaten
track, a feeder upon the unclean. Himself he would
not have poetry to be .


« Like a broad highway or a populous street


‘Or like some roadside pool, which no nice art
Has guarded that the cattle may not beat
And foul it with a multitude of feet.”


2. CALLIMACHUS AND THE ALEXANDRINE LIBRARY


The statement, so unreservedly made inmany works
on Greek literature, that Callimachus succeeded
Zenodotus as librarian of the Alexandrian library,
would scarcely concern us here were it not that one
observes in some recent writing remarks on the
position of Callimachus among his contemporaries
which proceed on the assumption that the librarian-
ship of Callimachus is an ascertained fact.


6


INTRODUCTION TO CALLIMACHUS


The genesis of the statement is briefly this. In
1819 F. Osann discovered in a Plautine MS. in Rome
a scholium which professed to be based on a note by
one Caecius on the Plutus of Aristophanes. Osann
communicated the beginning of this scholium to
Meineke, who published it in his Quaest. Scen.
Spec. iii. p. 3.

A complete copy of the scholium was published
by F. Ritschl in his Die alexandrinischen Bibliotheken,
Breslau, 1838, pp. 3-4. The MS. in which it occurs
is in the library of the Collegio Romano and is a
fifteenth-century parchment codex of Plautus in 4to,
designated 4.C.39, containing fifteen plays. The
scholium occurs on the page where the Poenulus
ends and the Mostellaria begins. It runs thus:

“Ex Caecio in commento comoediarum Aristo-
phanis poetae in pluto quam possumus opulentiam
nuncupare. Alexander aetolus et Lycophron chal-
cidensis et Zenodotus ephestius impulsu Regis —
ptolemaei philadelphi cognomento, qui mirum in
modum favebat ingeniis et famae doctorum hominum,
graecae artis poeticos libros in unum collegerunt et
in ordinem redegerunt ; Alexander tragoedias, Lyco-
phron comoedias, Zenodotus vero Homeri poemata
et reliquorum illustrium poetarum. Nam Rex ille
philosophis affertissimus et caeteris omnibus autoribus
claris disquisitis impensa regiae munificentiae ubique
terrarum quantum valuit voluminibus opera demetrii
phalerii phzxa senum duas bibliothecas fecit, alteram
extra Regiam, alteram autem in Regia. In exteriore
autem fuerunt milia voluminum quadraginta duo et
octingenta. In Regia autem bibliotheca voluminum
quidem commixtorum volumina quadringenta milia,
simplicium autem et digestorum milia nonaginta,


7


INTRODUCTION TO CALLIMACHUS


sicuti refert Callimacus aulicus Regius bibliothecarius
qui etiam singulis voluminibus titulos_ inscripsit.
Fuit praeterea qui idem asseveret eratosthenes non
ita multo post eiusdem custos bibliothecae. hee
autem fuerunt omnium gentium ac linguarum quae
habere potuit docta volumina quae summa diligentia
Rex ille in suam linguam fecit ab optimis interpre-
tibus converti. Ceterum pisistratus sparsam prius
homeri poesim ante ptolemaeum philadelphum annis
ducentis et eo etiam amplius sollerti cura in ea quae
nunc extant redegit volumina usus ad hoc opus
divinum industria quattuor celeberrimorum et erudi-
tissimorum hominum videlicet Concyli Onomacriti
atheniei, Zopyri heracleotae et Orphei crotoniatae.
Nam carptim prius Homerus et non nisi difficillime
legebatur. Quum etiam post pisistrati curam et
ptolemaei diligentiam aristarchus adhuc exactius in
homeri elimandam collectionem vigilavit. Helio-
dorus multa aliter nugatur quae longo convitio
cecius reprehendit... Nam ol’ LXXII duobus doctis
viris a_pisistrato huic negotio praepositis dicit
homerum ita fuisse compositum. Qui quidem zeno-
doti et aristarchi industria omnibus praelatam com-
probarint, quod constat fuisse falsissimum. Quippe
cum inter pisistratum et Zenodotum fuerint anni
supra ducentos. Aristarchus autem quattuor annis
minor fuerit ipso et Zenodoto atque ptolemaeo.”

The unknown Caecius or Cecius W. Dindorf
(Rhein. Mus., 1830, iv. p. 232) proposed to identify
with John Tzetzes,

In 1839 J. A. Cramer published at Oxford. his
Anecdota graeca e codd. manuscriplis Bibliothecae Regiae
Parisiensis. The first of the Anecdota (vol. i. p.
3 ff.) is a short anonymous treatise [epi κωμῳδίας


8


INTRODUCTION TO CALLIMACHUS


from cod. 2677, “ written apparently in the sixteenth
century” according to the Paris catalogue: but
Cramer. notes that “Catalogi autem confector
indicare neglexit, interesse quaedam vacua folia inter
caetera quae Codice insunt et opusculum nostrum,
quod diversa prorsus manu scriptum videtur et
aliquantum recentiori: ut aliunde crediderim in
unum volumen cum prioribus coaluisse.”” Cramer
does not quite accept the identification of Cecius =
Tzetzes.

The relative portion of this treatise is as follows:
ἰστέον ὅτι ᾿Αλέξανδρος ὁ Αἰτωλὸς καὶ Λυκόφρων ὁ
Χαλκιδεὺς ὑπὸ Πτολεμαίου τοῦ Φιλαδέλφου προτρα-
πέντες τὰς σκηνικὰς διώρθωσαν βίβλους. Λυκόφρων
μὲν τὰς τῆς κωμῳδίας, ᾿Αλέξανδρος δὲ τὰς τῆς τραγῳδίας,
ἀλλὰ δὴ καὶ τὰς σατυρικάς..- ὁ γὰρ Ἡτολεμαῖος,
φιλολογώτατος ὦν, διὰ Δημητρίου τοῦ Φαληρέως καὶ
ἑτέρων ἐλλογίμων ἀνδρῶν; δαπάναις βασιλικαῖς ἅπαντα-
χόθεν τὰς βίβλους εἰς ᾿Αλεξανδρείαν συνήθροισεν, καὶ
δυσὶ βιβλιοθήκαις ταύτας ἐπέθετο. ὧν τῆς ἐκτὸς μὲν
ἀριθμὸς τετρακισμύριαι δισχίλιαι ὀκτακόσιαι, τῆς δὲ
τῶν ἀνακτόρων ἐντὸς συμμιγῶν μὲν βίβλων ἀριθμὸς
τεσσαράκοντα μυριάδες, ἀμιγῶν δὲ και ἁπλῶν μυριάδες
ἐννέα" ὧν τοὺς πίνακας ὕστερον Καλλίμαχος ἐπεγρά-
ψατο. ᾿Ερατοσθένει δὲ ἡλικιώτῃ Καλλιμάχου παρὰ τοῦ
βασιλέως τὸ τοιοῦτον ἐνεπιστεύθη βιβλιοφυλάκιον.
(An edition of this anonymous treatise correct from
various MSS. was published by Studemund, Philologus,
xlvi. (1886).)

Next in the Rhein. Mus. vi. (1847) H. Keil
published from a MS. at Milan, “cod. Ambrosianus
C 222 sup. 4. mai. bombycinus, saec. xiii, qui
olim Georgii Merulae fuit’’ the Prolegomena to
Aristophanes of John Tzetzes. The superscription


9


΄


INTRODUCTION TO CALLIMACHUS


βίβλος ᾿Αριστοφάνους Τζέτζην φορέουσ' ὑποφήτην is


followed by two versions of the Prolegomena, the
similarity of which to the scholium Plautinum com-
pletely confirms Dindorf’s conjecture. The relative
passages in the two versions are as follows :


I. “ Alexander the Aetolian and Lycophron the
Chalcidian encouraged by royal bounties
revised (διωρθώσαντο) for Ptolemy Phila-
delphus the scenic books—I mean the books
of Comedy, Tragedy, and Satyric dramas—
there being with them and helping in the
correction such a librarian of so great a
library — Eratosthenes, ὧν βίβλων τοὺς
πίνακας Καλλίμαχος ἀπεγράψατο. Alexander
corrected the Tragics, Lycophron the
Comics. νεανίαι ἦσαν Καλλίμαχος kat’ Epato-
σθένης. These revised the scenic books, as
the Aristarchuses and Zenodotuses looked
over those of the poets.”

II. The second version, after a similar reference to
the founding of the library, proceeds to
mention the number of books in the two
libraries, “ whereof the number in the out-
side library was 42,800; in that within the
Court and Palace the number of ‘mixed’

* books was 400,000, οἵ simple and unmixed’
books 90,000, ds 6 Καλλίμαχος νεανίσκος ov
τῆς αὐλῆς ὑστέρως μετὰ τὴν ἀνόρθωσιν τοὺς
πίνακας αὐτῶν ἀπεγράψατο. Eratosthenes,
his contemporary, was entrusted by the king
with sucha great library. ἀλλὰ τὰ Καλλιμά-
χου καὶ τοῦ ᾿Ερατοσθένους μετὰ βραχύν τινα
χρόνον ἐγένετο τῆς συναγωγῆς τῶν βίβλων, ὡς

10


Ve Ste ae


<=...


INTRODUCTION TO CALLIMACHUS


μη ἈΝ ΄ Ν ye 3 a ral
ἔφην, και διορθώσεως, καὶ ἐπ αὐτου του


Πτολεμαίου τοῦ Φιλαδέλφου.᾽᾿


Thus the Plautine scholium alone names Calli-
machus as librarian, and even the phrase “aulicus
Regius bibliothecarius’’ does not necessarily imply
that he was Chief Librarian. The words, in fact
seem rather to be merely a loose translations of the
statement in the second version of Tzetzes.

The Prolegomena of Tzetzes can be consulted
conveniently in the Appendix to Nauck’s edition of
the Lexicon Vindobonense, St. Petersburg, 1867, or in
Kaibel, Comicorum Gr. Frag. (Berlin 1899), p. 18 ff.


3. Works


It will be convenient to divide these into two
groups.
A. Works mentioned by Suidas s.v. Καλλίμαχος.


His list does not profess to be complete: “ among
his books are also these.’’ The list runs as follows :
1. The Coming of Io. 2. Semele. 3. Settlements
of Argos. 4. Arcadia. 5. Glaucus. 6. Hopes
(Ἐλπίδες). Nothing is known of any of these.
They may not have been independent works at all,
but merely subsections of the Aztia or other works
mentioned below.


Suidas then mentions 7. Satyric dramas. 8.
Tragedies. 9. Comedies. 10. Lyrics (μέλη). 11. Ibis
(see above).


ς Then follows a list of works presumably in prose :
12. Museum. This, of which nothing is known,
11


INTRODUCTION TO CALLIMACHUS


may have been a sub-title of the Pinaces. 13. Tables
of all those who were eminent in any kind of litera-
ture and of their writings (Ilivaxes τῶν ἐν πάσῃ
παιδείᾳ διαλαμψάντων καὶ dv συνέγραψαν) in 120
books. 14. Table and register of dramatic poets
chronologically, from the earliest times (Πίναξ καὶ
ἀναγραφὴ τῶν κατὰ χρόνους Kal dx ἀρχῆς γενομένων
διδασκάλων).

No. 14 is doubtless only a sub-title of No. 13.
These tables were a catalogue of the books in the
larger Alexandrian Library, z.e. part of the Brycheion
near the Museum. — Besides giving a list of an
author’s works, this catalogue contained a_bio-
graphical sketch of each author. It would seem
that the authors were distributed in at least eight
classes: Epic and other non-dramatie poets;
Dramatic poets; Legislation (this was Pinax No. 3;
Athen. 585 Β, νόμον συσσιτικόν... ἀνέγραψε δ᾽ αὐτὸν
Καλλίμαχος ἐν τῷ τρίτῳ πίνακι τῶν Νόμων) ; Philosophy
(Diog. Laert. viii. 86; Athen. 9562 9); History (Athen.
ii. 708); Oratory (Athen. 669 κ Καλλίμαχος ἐν τῇ τῶν
“Ῥητορικῶν ἀναγραφῇ); Miscellaneous (τῶν παντοδαπῶν,
Athen. 244). The Pinaces gave also the opening
words of each book and the number of lines it con-
tained (Athen. 2444, 5858; Harpocrat. 5.0. Ἴων).

15. Table of the Glosses and Compositions of
Democritus (Πίναξ τῶν Δημοκρίτου γλωσσῶν καὶ
συνταγμάτων). 16. Local Month-names (Μηνῶν προσ-
ηγορίαι κατὰ ἔθνος καὶ πόλεις). 17. Foundations of
Islands and Cities and changes of name (Κτίσεις
νήσων Kat πόλεων καὶ μετονομασίαι)δ. Known only
from Suidas. 18. On the Riversin Europe. A sub-
title of No. 23. 19. On strange and marvellous
things in Peloponnesus and Italy. A sub-title ‘of
12


INTRODUCTION TO CALLIMACHUS


No. 24, 20. Ilept μετονομασίας ἰχθύων. 921. Περὶ
ἀνέμων. Probably sub-titles of the ᾽Εθ. ’Ovop. (see
below). 22. On Birds (IIepi ὀρνέων). This, cited by
Athen. 388 p as Ilepi ὀρνίθων, may have been a sub-
title of the “E@. Ὄνομ. (see below). 23. On the
Rivers of the World (Περὶ τῶν ἐν τῇ οἰκουμένῃ ποτα-
μῶν). 24. Collection of marvels in all the earth
according to localities (Oavpdtwv τῶν εἰς ἅπασαν τὴν
γῆν κατὰ τόπους συναγωγή). This was used by Anti-
gonus of Carystus.


B. Works not mentioned in Suidas’ list but known
of from other sources.


25. Aetia. 26. Hecale. 27. On Games (Περὶ
ἀγώνων). 28. Galatea. 29. Iambi. 30. I'padeiov.
31. Epigrams. 32. The Lock of Berenice (Βερενίκης
πλόκαμος) = Catullus Ixvi. 33. Six Hymns. 34.
Elegy on Sosibios. 35. ᾿Αρσινόης γάμος, inferred
from fr. 196. 36. Branchos. 37. Περὶ λογάδων.
38. Customs of Barbarians.. 39. On the Nymphs.
40. ᾿Εθνικαὶ ᾿Ονομασίαι, or local nomenclature,
Athen. 3294 (= fr. 38). To this belonged probably
not only the epi μετονομασίας (κατονομασίας ?) ἰχθύων
(Νο. 20), but also the Περὶ ἀνέμων (No. 21), the Περὶ
ὀρνέων, No. 22 A and the Μηνῶν προσηγορίαι,
No. 16 above. On the Rivers of Asia (schol.
Ap. Rh. i. 1165). er sub-title of No. 23 above. 42.
Πρὸς Πραξιφάνη, Vit. Αγαίΐ i. 48. ὝὙπομνήματα


ἱστορικά,


4. THe mss. oF THE Hymns


All the extant MSS. descend from a Byzantine
sylloge which contained the Hymns of Homer,


13


INTRODUCTION TO CALLIMACHUS


Callimachus, Orpheus, and Proclus.. A MS. con-
taining this collection was brought from Constan-
tinople to Venice in 1423 by Ioannes Aurispa
(Sandys, Hist. Class. Schol. ii. 36). Neither this MS.
nor any immediate copy of it survives, but from it
are derived all existing MSS. of the Hymns of


Callimachus.


These MSS. are now divided into three families: -


E, best represented by


m (Schneider S)=Matritensis Bibl. Nat. N 24,
written by Constantine Lascaris at Milan in
1464(1454 Schn.), containing Musaeus’ Hero
and Leander, Orpheus’ Argonautica and
Hymns, the Hymns of Homer and Calli-
machus, and a collection of ancient epigrams.

q (Schneider Q)=Mutinensis Bibl. Estensis iii.
E 11, written by Georgius Valla of Piacenza,
who died in 1499 (Sandys ii. 133). Of this
MS. Schneider had only an imperfect colla-
tion, which he regrets, “nam codex inter
meliores est et proxime accedere videtur ad
codicis E [i.e. Parisinus 2763] bonitatem.”’

p= Parisinus suppl. Gr. 1095 (page lost which
contained iii. 66-145) olim S. Petri Perusinus
(library of S. Pierre de Pérouse (Perugia)).

d (Schneider D)=Laurentianus 32, 45. The
part of this MS. which contained Calli-
machus is now lost, having been torn out to
be printed in the editio princeps of Janus
Lascaris, Florence 1494, which now repre-
sents the lost MS.

Other MSS. of the E-family are Schneider’s V,

i.e. the MS. from which in 1489 Angelus Politianus
14


INTRODUCTION TO CALLIMACHUS


published his Latin version of the Bath of Pallas
(Hymn v.).

Also Schneider's Εἰ, 2.6. Parisinus 2763, written
in the fifteenth century, and containing Orpheus’
Argonautica and Hymns, the Hymns of Callimachus
with marginal scholia, .Homerizc Hymns, Moschus’
Amor Fugitivus (Ἔρως Δραπέτης), Musaeus’ Hero
and Leander, Hesiod’s Works and Days, Shield, and
Theogony, Theocritus’ Idylls. This is the only MS.
which places the Bath of Pallas after the Hymn to
Demeter.


A, best represented by


a(Schneider A) = Vaticanus 1691, fifteenth century,
containing Apollonius Rhodius’ Argonautica
with scholia, Orpheus’ Argonautica and
Hymns, and the Hymns of Callimachus ;


also by Vaticanus 36 (Schneider B), fifteenth century ;
Venetus Marcianus 480 (Schneider C), which be-
longed to Cardinal Bessarion and was written by
Joannes Rhosus; Urbinas 145 (Schneider K), end
of fifteenth century.


F, represented by


r=Athous Laurae 587 (in the Laura monastery
on M. Athos), fourteenth century.

f (Schneider F)=Ambrosianus B 98, fifteenth
century, containing Apollonius’ Argonautica
with scholl., Homer’s Batrachom., Herodotus’
Life of Homer, Hom. Hymns, and. Calli-
machus’ Hymns, ete.


15


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Editio princeps: Joannes Lascaris, Florence, 1494 (with


scholia). Aldina, Venice, 1513. Frobeniana, Basel,
1532.  Vascosiana, Paris, 1549. Robortelli (Ὁ),
Venice, 1555. H. Stephanus in Poet. Gr. principes
heroici carminis, Paris, 1566 (with the Epigrams).
Benenatus, Paris, 1574. H. Stephanus, Paris, 1577
(with Frischlin’s translation). Bonaventura Vul-
canius, Antwerp, 1584. Anna Dacier (Faber) ; ΄
Paris, 1675.

J. G. Graevius, Utrecht, 1697 (with Bentley’s
collection of fragments, and Spanheim’s commentary).
Thomas Bentley (?), London, 1741.  Stubelius,
Leipzig, 1741. Bandinius, Florence, 1763-1764 (with
versions in Latin and Italian). J. A. Ernesti, Ley-
den, 1761 (with the fragments and Spanheim’s com-
mentary). Loesner, Leipzig, 1774. de la Porte du
Theil, Paris, 1775. Petrucci, Rome, 1795, 1818.
W. Bilderdijk, Amsterdam, 1808. C. J. Blomfield,
London, 1815 (an abbreviated Ernesti). Volger,
Leipzig, 1817. Boissonade, Paris, 1824. August
Meineke, Berlin, 1861, ‘‘ omnes longo post se inter-
vallo reliquit” (Schneider). O. Schneider, Leipzig,
1870-1873.

Hymns and Epigrams, .Wilamowitz-Moellendorf,
Berlin, 1882!, 18967, 1907%, Inni di Callimaco su
Diana e sui Lavacri, di Pallade, Recensione,
Traduzione e commento, C. Nigra, Turin, 1892.


Translations : German—Ahlwardt, Berlin, 1794 ; Schwenk,


16


Bonn, 1821, Stuttgart, 1833.
Italian—Hymns iii. and v., C. Nigra (see above).


BIBLIOGRAPHY |


The Lock of Berenice, O. Nigra, Milan, 1879, S.
Scalzi, Bergamo, 1895.

English—J. Banks (verse by Tytler), London, 2
1879.

Trans. of the epigrams by A. Hauvette (see below).
Scholia: G. Reinecke, De scholiis Callimacheis, Diss.
Halenses ix. 1-65 (1888).

Other Literature: A. F. Naeke, De Call. Hecale, Bonn,
1829. M. Haupt, Emendationes Callimacheae, Berlin,
1859.

Dilthey, Analecta Callimachea, Bonn, 1865.

W. Weinberger, Kallim. Studien, Vienna, 1895.

K. Kuiper, Studia Callimachea, Leyden, 1896,
1898.

** Kallimachos und Kyrene,” E. Maass in Hermes
25 (1890), Studniczka in Hermes, 28 (1899).

Aug. Rostagni, Poeti Alessandrini, Turin, 1916,
pp. 253-327.

“‘ Die Locke der Berenike,” Wilamowitz-Moellen-
dorff, Reden τι. Vortriige, Berlin, 1901, p. 195 ff.

Ph. E. Legrand, ‘‘ Pourquoi furent composés les
Hymnes de Callimaque,” Rev. d. Et. ane. 1901. C.
Caesi, “Stud. Callimachei,” in Studi ital. di Filol.
class. vii. p. 301 ff., Florence, 1902.

A. Ludwich, Callimachea, Konigsberg, 1907.

A. Hauvette, ‘‘ Les Epigrammes de Callimaque.”
Etude critique et, litteraire accompagnée d'une
traduction, Rev. d. Et. gr. 1907, and Paris, 1907.

New Fragments: 1. Gomperz, Aus der Hekale d. Kallim.,
Vienna, 1893; I. Nicole, Rev. d. Et. gr. 1904; A.
Puech, ibid. 1910; K. Kuiper, ibid. 1912 and 1916;
P. Graindor, Musée Belge, 1911.


INTRODUCTION TO CALLIMACHUS’S
HYMNS


I


As a literary form the Callimachean Hymn is the
descendant of the Homeric. That Callimachus wrote
his Hymns with a practical purpose, to be recited on real
occasions of public or semi-public ceremony, is a very
general assumption of modern scholarship. Thus Suse-
mihl, Geschichte d. griech. Litt. in d. Alexandrinerzeit,
i. 358: ‘Sie waren ohne Zweifel bestimmt bei festlichen
Gelegenheiten declamirt zu werden”; and to the same
effect Couat, La Poésie alexandrine, p. 198: ‘* Les allusions
directes quis’y trouvent prouvent qu’ils étaient composés
pour une récitation publique, en vue de circonstances
déterminéges. Ils ont le plus souvent pour objet de
célébrer dans une féte religieuse, sous le nom d'une
divinité, la grandeur du prince et la gloire de son régne.”
As to the truth of the assumption one may be permitted
to be sceptical, and our scepticism is rather increased by
the poverty of the arguments adduced in its favour, and
the diversity of the theories advanced as to the particular
festival contemplated in a given Hymn. It is, moreover,
to be remembered that a poem not intended for ceremonial
performance may be none the less alive and pertinent to
real events. It is difficult to see how Tennyson’s Ode on
the Death of the Duke of Wellington would gain either in
poetic merit or in historical value if we knew it to have
been actually performed in the Abbey ; and it would be
a matter rather of personal curiosity than of literary


18


INTRODUCTION TO THE HYMNS


interest to discover that Mr. Bridges’ Elegy on a Lady
was sung by a choir of maidens at a real funeral.


Il.—Hymwn I. To Zeus


After announcing his theme—the praise of Zeus—the
poet refers to the rival claims of Crete and Arcadia to be
the birthplace of Zeus. The Arcadian claim is preferred
—Cretans are always liars (1-9). Zeus was born in
Arcadia (10-33), thence he was conveyed by Neda to the
Cretan cave, where he was cradled by Adrasteia, attended
by the Dictaean Meliae, suckled by the she-goat Amaltheia,
and fed on honey by the Panacrian bees, while the Curetes
danced round him to protect him from Cronus (33-53).
The mention of the Dictaean Meliae implies that the cave
is on Dicte (cf. Arat. 33), not on Ida. The cult of the
Idaean cave seems to have superseded that of Dicte, from
perhaps 800 B.c. (ef. A. B. Cook, Zeus, i. 150). Zeus
speedily exhibits precocious powers, and his elder brothers
ungrudgingly yield to him the sovereignty of Heaven
(53-59). His supremacy is due to his own prowess, not,
as the old poets fabled, to the casting of lots (60-67).
Zeus has all the attributes of the supreme king. The
king of birds is his messenger, the kings of men derive
their power from him, ἐκ δὲ Διὸς βασιλῆες = Hesiod, Th. 96,
they are his peculiar care, above all Ptolemy (67-91).
The Hymn ends with the χαιρέτισμα, which is the Prayer
proper (92-97).

As to the date and destination of the poem, the idea
of Richter that it was written for the accession of Ptolemy
Philadelphus in 285 8.0. is rejected on the ground that
the poem in no way suggests a coronation hymn. A
conjecture which finds more favour is that lines 58f.,
which tell of the elevation of Zeus over his older brothers,
allude to the circumstances of Ptolemy’s accession,
Ptolemy Soter left five sons of whom Philadelphus was
the youngest (Justin. xvi. 2. 7). There is no reason to
suppose that they accepted Ptolemy’s elevation with
equanimity, nor was their fate such as to make any reference


19


INTRODUCTION TO THE HYMNS


to them a happy one. Recovery of the Egyptian throne
was doubtless the ultimate objective of the stormy career
of Ptolemy Ceraunus, who left Egypt for the court of
Lysimachus of Thrace, where with Arsinoé II. he
compassed the death of the crown prince Agathocles ;
went thence to Seleucus whom he accompanied to
Corupedion (281 8.0.) where Lysimachus fell; next
assassinated Seleucus and became king of Thrace, but
shortly after (280 8.0.) fell in a battle with the Gauls
(Justin. xxiv. 3. 4. His brother Meleagrus who
succeeded him was almost immediately deposed. As for
the remaining brothers, Pausan. i. 7. 1, after mentioning
the marriage of Philadelphus to Arsinoé 11., says: δεύτερα
δὲ ἀδελφὸν ἀπέκτεινεν Apyatov ἐπιβουλεύοντα ws λέγεται. ..
ἀπέκτεινε δὲ καὶ ἄλλον. ἀδελφὸν γεγονότα ἐξ Εὐρυδίκης, Κυπρίους
ἀφιστάντα αἰσθόμενος. It is argued, then, that the Hymn
belongs to a time when his brothers had not yet made any
move against Philadelphus. But it is difficult to assert
that there was any time after the elevation of Ptolemy
when their hostility was not obvious. Clearly, too, the
reference, if reference there be, may just as well be an
admonition, reproving their hostile attitude by appealing
to the example of Zeus and his brothers. Wilamowitz,
Textgeschichte d. griech. Bukol. p. 55, who thinks it un-
deniable that lines 58f. allude to Ptolemy’s succession,
considers that the poem is dated by the absence of any
reference to the marriage of Ptolemy and Arsinoé II.
Couat dated it 280-275. Kaibel on certain metrical
grounds put it later than III., V., VI., but earlier than
If. and IV.

The preference given to the Arcadian tradition regard-
ing Zeus is made by E. Maass, Hermes xxv. (1890), the
basis of a theory of the destination of the poem. We
have to do, he says, with a contamination of an originally
purely Arcadian (Peloponnesian) saga with an originally
purely Cretan saga in such manner that the Arcadian
(Peloponnesian) is preferred. Now in the time of Battus
II., circ. 570, we hear of a large accession of colonists from
all parts of Greece to Cyrene (Herod. iv. 159), and in the


20


INTRODUCTION TO THE HYMNS


time of Battus III. troubles, doubtless due to this immigra-
tion, caused the Cyreneans to apply to Delphi. On the
advice of the oracle they asked Mantinea in Arcadia for a
commissioner to arrange their affairs. The Mantineans
sent Demonax as καταρτιστήρ, who distributed the popula-
tion in three phylae: 1. Theraeans and perioeci. 2.
Peloponnesians and Cretans.- 3. All islanders (νησιῶται)
(Herod iv. 161). _Maass argues that the Peloponnesian-
Cretan contamination of the Zeus tradition arose in the
2nd Cyrenean phyle, and for a symposium of private
Bey belonging to that phy/e the Hymn was written.

aass theory is entirely unnecessary. Everything points
to the original Greek settlers of Cyrene having come
from the Peloponnesus (Arcadia-Taenarus), partly direct,
partly by way of Crete. Thus from the first the Cyrenean
settlement would have been precisely of the type which
Maass desiderates and finds in the later 2nd phy/e.


Ill.—Hymwn II. To Apotto


As to the destination of this Hymn, Couat, p. 235,
Susemihl i. p. 361, Maass, Hermes xxv. (1890), agree that it
was written for the Carnean festival of Apollo at Cyrene.
Maass, it is true, is somewhat troubled by the ‘‘ Delian”
palm. But he gravely conjectures that a scion of the
Delian tree was grown in Cyrene and he appeals to Hehn,
Kulturpflanzen, p. 224, to show that the palm is easily
transplanted. Most readers will probably feel with
Malten (Kyrene, p. 52, n. 1) that the conjecture is “zu
gesucht!” We entirely agree with Malten—though not
quite on the same grounds—that’‘‘ obwohl er also von
den kyrendischen Karneen handelt, hat Kallimachos
seinen Hymnus so wenig als ein sacrales Gedicht fiir
Kyrene gedichtet wie Goethe die Walpurgisnacht fiir den
Brocken.”

The speaker throughout is the poet, and the occasion
imagined is the epiphany of the God. ‘To-day Apollo is
to visit his temple. Ere yet the God veritably comes, we
perceive the signs of his approach in the quivering of the


21


INTRODUCTION TO THE HYMNS


holy laurel, in the trembling of the shrine. It is time
for the profane to withdraw. Apollo is at the gate—the
Delian palm bows to do him homage, the ery of the swan,
Apollo’s sacred bird, is heard on high. Let the doors of
themselves roll back! Let the young men declare his
praise with voice and harp! To see Apollo is not given
unto all: it is the proof and promise of the Elect. That
proof and that promise shall be ours. Now Apollo is
present in his temple—let the youths sing his praise: so
shall their days be long in the land which Apollo gave
unto their fathers (1-15). Now the youths raise their song
in honour of Apollo. Be silent, all ye faithful, and hearken
to that Paean which wins Thetis from her mourning and
stays the tears of Niobe—whose monumental grief still pro-
claims the sorrow and the sin of euvy, of war with Heaven.
Against Heaven, against my king: against my king,
against Apollo! But they who sing the praise of Apollo
shall have their reward (16-29). Rich in gold is Apollo,
ever beautiful and ever young, his unshorn locks shed
dews of healing wheresoever he goes. He is the pattern
and patron of the Archer, the Poet, the Prophet, the
Physician, nay he is the Pastoral God (Nomios) as well,
ever since upon earth he did such service for Admetus.
Lastly, he is the Founder of Cities, ever since as a child
of four years he built the Altar of Horns in Delos (29-64).
Under his guidance was Cyrene founded (65 ff.). Lines
65-96 are occupied with the story of Cyrene, 97-104 with
the origin of the cry Hié Paean. Finally 105-113 contain
the remarkable parable of Envy.

The schol. on v. 106 says: “ In these words he rebukes
those who jeered at him as not being able to write a big
poem: which taunt drove him to write the Hecale.” It
is generally assumed that Phthonos represents Apollonius
Rhodius and Apollo perhaps Ptolemy. There isa striking
parallel to v. 106 in Apoll. Rh. iii. 932 f. ἀκλειὴς ὅδε μάντις,
ὃς οὐδ᾽ ὅσα παῖδες ἴσασιν | olde νόῳ φράσσασθαι. But into the
thorny chronology of the quarrel of Callimachus and
Apollonius we cannot here enter. We can only say
dogmatically that there is no real difficulty in the syntax


22


INTRODUCTION TO THE HYMNS |


of οὐδ᾽ ὅσα : that the construction intended is ὅσα πόντος
ἀείδει, not ἐστί or the like: that πόντος is the sea, not the
Euxine, as Mr. Smiley, Hermathena xxxix. (1913), following
Voss, conjectures: and the ‘ Assyrian river” is, as the
schol. says, the Euphrates, not a river—Halys or Iris—in
Leucosyria (Smiley, /.c.).

For the student who is interested in the relations of
Callimachus and Apollonius we append a list of passages
in which he may find, as he 5 et coincidence or
“versteckte Kritik”: Call. H. i. 15=A. i. 129; A. ii.
79=A. i. 481; H. ii. 96=A. ii. 711 f.; HA. ii. 106=A.
iii. 9382 f.; H. iii. 45=A. iii. 881; H. iii. 108=A. i. 997;
H. iii. 176=A. iii. 1344; H. τ}. 182=A. iv. 961; Call.
Hee. i. 1. 12=A. iv. 2173 Hec. i. 2. 11=A. i. 1773 Hee.
4—A. 1.972; Hee. 5=A. i. 1116; Hee. G=A. iii. 277;
Hec. 19=A. iii. 1226; Call. fr. incert. 9(a)=A. iv. 1717;
9(b)=A. ii. 1094; 21=A. iv. 1823; 64=A. i. 798 ; 65=
A. i. 1309; 112=A. iv. 1614.

As to the date of the poem it is agreed that it must
belong to a period when Egypt and Cyrene were friendly,
say 258-247 B.c. — In vv. 26 and 27 Callimachus speaks
of “τὴν king” in the singular. Now we know from
official documents that from 267/6 to 260/259 Ptolemy
had as co-regent a son named Ptolemy. It is pretty
generally agreed that this son was none other than the
future Euergetes (Ptolemy III.), the reason for the dis-
appearance of his name from 260/259 being that by his
betrothal to Berenice, daughter of Magas, he became
virtual king of Cyrene (see introd. and notes to the Lock
of Berenice), If this is right, then the Hymn cannot be
earlier than 258 p.c. Malten (Kyrene, p. 51) says that if
the war between Ptolemy and Cyrene, of which Polyaen.
viii. 70 speaks, is rightly placed by Niese in 250-247, then
the poem cannot be later than 250. The words ἡμετέροις
βασιλεῦσι v. 68 are much disputed. Who are “‘ our kings”?
It seems natural to understand the Battiadae, to whom as
a matter of fact the promise was made (oracles in Herod.
iv. 155, 157 and Diodor. viii. 29), and so the words are
understood by Maass and Studniczka. On the other


23


INTRODUCTION TO THE HYMNS


hand it is pointed out that the Battiad rule came to an
end with the fall of Arcesilas IV. somewhat between 460
and 450 s.c. Hence it is more usually supposed that the
reference is to the Ptolemies generally or more particularly
to Philadelphus as king of Egypt and Euergetes as king
in Cyrene. hte

The schol. on v. 26 has βασιλῆι] τῷ Πτολεμαίῳ τῷ
Ἐῤεργέτῃ" διὰ δὲ τὸ φιλόλογον αὐτὸν εἶναι ὡς θεὸν τιμᾷ. This
is accepted by Studniczka who, proceeding on the
equation Apollo= Ptolemy, thinks the king referred to
must be young, i.e. not Philadelphus but Euergetes.
But Studniczka goes farther. He holds that the scene
of Cyrene’s lion-slaying was originally Thessaly and that
tradition was accepted by Callimachus in the Hymn to
Artemis 206-8: between that Hymn-.and the Hymn to
Apollo a new version arose which transferred the scene
to Libya: this was an invention of Callimachus intended
to represent Cyrene as Berenice, daughter of Magas: the
lion is Demetrius ὁ καλός whom Berenice slew: and the
date of the poem is 247 when Cyrene was united to Egypt
by the marriage of Euergetes and Berenice.


IV.—CyRENE


1. The legend of the nymph Cyrene was told in the
Eoeae of Hesiod (schol. Pind. P. ix. 6=Hes. fr. 149)
from whom Pindar tells the story in P. ix. Cyrene,
daughter of Hypseus, is seen by Apollo struggling with
a lion near Mount Pelion. In accordance with the
prophecy of Cheiron Apollo carries her to Libya where
she becomes mother of Aristaeus and eponym of the
city of Cyrene. According to Acesandrus of Cyrene
the king of Libya at the time was Eurypylus, whose land
was being ravaged by a lion. LEurypylus offered his
kingdom as a reward for slaying the lion. Cyrene,
having performed the feat, received the kingdom. She
bare two sons, Autuchus and Aristaeus (schol. Apoll. Rh.
ii, 498). According to Phylarchus she came to Libya
μετὰ πλειόνων. When her company were sent out to
94.


INTRODUCTION TO THE HYMNS


hunt she went with them, slew the lion and received the
kingdom. She bare to Apollo two sons, Autuchus and
Aristaeus. Autuchus remained in Libya, Aristaeus went
to Ceos (schol. Apoll. Rh. 1.4.) Apollonius’s account in
ii. 500 ff. does not mention the slaying of the lion. To
Nonnus she. is essentially the lion-slayer (λεοντοφόνος)
27, 263; 25, 181}; 45, 21; 46, 238, ete:

2. The story of the foundation of Cyrene is. told in
Pindar, P. iv., Herod. iv. 145 ff., Lycophron 886 ff., Apoll.
Rh. iv. 1232 ff. The Argonauts on their way home were
driven by the wind into the Syrtes, from which they
carried their ship overland for twelve days and nights to
Lake Tritonis. From this they found no outlet to the sea,
till Triton appeared to them, in guise of Eurypylus, son
of Poseidon, who, in return for the gift-of a tripod,
presented Euphemus with a clod of earth and showed
them the way out. The clod, which was the earnest of
the possession of Libya, fell overboard and. landed at
Thera. Medea declared that (1) had Euphemus taken
the clod home to Taenarus in Laconia, then, in the course
of the great migrations from the Peloponnesus in the
fourth generation, his descendants would have colonized
Libya ; (2) as it is, Euphemus will go with the Argonauts
to Lemnus where in wedlock with a Lemnian wife he will
wag descendants who will come to Thera, whence Battus
will lead a colony to Libya and so in the seventeenth
generation fulfil Medea’s prophecy.

The fulfilment came about in this way. The descend-
ants of Euphemus were driven from Lemnos by the
Pelasgians, and came to Laconia where they settled on
Taygetus. On the ground of their ancestry they were
admitted to citizenship at Sparta, but when they aspired
to the kingship they were thrown into prison, from which
they escaped again to Taygetus. At this time Theras (see
Η. ii. 74n.) was preparing to lead a colony to Calliste
(Thera), and he took with him a party of the Euphemid
refugees. Finally, by order of the Delphic oracle (for
details see Herod. iv. 150 ff.), Battus sets out for Libya
with a party of colonists. They reach Plateia, an island


25


INTRODUCTION TO THE HYMNS


off the coast of Cyrenaica, where they stay for two years.
Things going badly with them, they consult Delphi and
learn that they must proceed to Libya itself. They cross
to the mainland and settle for six years in Aziris (Azilis),
τὸν νάπαι κάλλισται συγκληίουσι (Herod. iv. 157, ef. Callim.
H. ii, 89). In the seventh year the Libyans conduct them
westward, passing Irasa by night, until they reach the
κρήνη ’Amé\Xwvos where they settle.

Here was the ‘ Hill of Myrtles,” from which Apollo
and Cyrene watched the Theraeans dancing with the
Libyan women—the Myrtussa of Callimachus ii. 91, the
Μυρτώσιον αἷπος of Apoll. Rh. ii. 505. Smith and Porcher,
Discoveries at Cyrene (1864), record an inscription (No. 13)
found near the temple of Apollo at Cyrene which is
dedicated ᾿Απόλλωνι Μυρτώῳ, and they remark (p. 27) on
the abundance of myrtles in the place at the present day.
Here, too, was the imagined scene of the slaying of the
lion by Cyrene (ef. Malten, Kyrene, p. 56).


V.—Hvymn III. - To Artemis


. According to Susemihl (i. 360) the one thing certain

about the date of this Hymn is that it was written after
277 B.c., because lines 251-258 presuppose the invasion of
Asia Minor by the Gauls in 278/7 B.c., and their raid
upon the Ionian towns (Pausan. x. 32. 4), when according
to the dubious story of the Rhodian Cleitophon Ephesus
was betrayed to them (Plut. Paradl. 15, Miller, #. H.G.
iv. 967). The assumption is a common one, but without
the slightest foundation. Callimachus refers to the
burning of the temple of Artemis at Ephesus by the
Cimmerians under Lygdamis in the seventh century
(Strabo i. 61, Herod. i. 15). To see in this a covert
allusion to the Celts as Couat and others do is a perfectly
gratuitous extravagance.

Gercke, Rhein. Mus. xlii. (1887), p. 273 ff., sees in v. 130 ff.
an allusion to the two Arsinoés who are the elvdrepes and
γαλόῳ : elvdrepes because Philadelphus, the husband of
Arsinoé I., and Ceraunus, the husband of Arsinoé II.,


26


INTRODUCTION TO THE HYMNS


were (half) brothers, and γαλόῳ because Arsinoé I. was
the wife while Arsinoé II. was the sister of Philadelphus.
This would date the Hymn previous to the repudiation of
Arsinoé I. and Philadelphus’s marriage to Arsinoé II.
Couat, on the other hand, holding that it was written for
the festival of Artemis at Ephesus, dates it between 258
and 248 B.c.

E. Maass, Hermes xxv. (1890), propounds a theory for
which there is absolutely nothing to be said, namely, that
it was written for-the Artemis festival of the Third Phyle
at Cyrene, which, as we have seen, was made up of the
Νησιῶται. It is enough to say here that there is not an
atom of evidence that the Third Phyle had anything to do
with Artemis, and the “ surprising fact” from which his
theory starts, namely, that Artemis is attended by a choir
of Ocean nymphs, is of all things the least surprising. In
Homer, Od. vi. 105, Artemis is attended by the nymphs,
and though they are there said to be daughters of Zeus,
the far more fundamental doctrine is that the nymphs are
daughters of Ocean. They are the female counterpart of
the Rivers (Ilorauol)—see Hesiod, Theog. 337 ff., whose
doctrine is followed by Callimachus in Hymn i. 35f. And
if the choir of Artemis here needs such a desperate
apology, how shall we apologize for Apollonius who (iii.
881 ff.) like Callimachus makes her attended by the
nymphs of Amnisus, who are at any rate grand-daughters
of Oceanus ?

Maass holds that the poem must belong to a time when
Alexandria and Cyrene were friendly, thus at earliest
circ. 260 B.c. Kaibel on metrical grounds would put it
earlier than any of the Hymns except vi. The early date
for which Gercke argued is accepted by Studniczka, who
thinks the humble role assigned to Cyrene in this Hymn
implies a time when Alexandria and Cyrene were on such
unfriendly terms that a court poet could not well occupy
himself with the latter.

The lines referring to Cyrene have been the subject of
much dispute: καὶ μὴν Κυρήνην éraplocao, τῇ ποτ᾽ ἔδωκας | αὐτὴ.
θηρητῆρε δύω κύνε, τοῖς ἔνι κούρη | Ὑψηὶς παρὰ τύμβον ᾿Τώλκιον


27


INTRODUCTION TO THE HYMNS


ἔμμορ᾽ ἀέθλου (206-8). The “ Iolcian tomb,” according to
the schol., is the tomb of Pelias. Studniczka follows
Spanheim in thinking that ἔμμορ᾽ ἀέθλου refers to Cyrene’s
slaying of the lion. Meineke thought the reference was
to a hunting contest at the funeral games of Pelias.
Malten, Kyrene, p. 53, says, ‘‘ DaB der τύμβος ᾿Ιώλκιος, wo
Kyrene an Wettspielen teilnimmt (ἔμμορε, sie ist also nicht
die einzige, die dort wettkimpft!), ein Hinweis auf die
Grabspiele zu Ehren des Pelias sei, ist eine aus der Natur
der Sache ergebende Folgerung Meinekes und Vahlens.
Da8 in Wettspielen, an denen mehrere beteiligt sind, kein
Léwenkampf figurieren kann, ist ebenso natiirlich. Also
besteht Kyrenes Kunst hier in einem Wettlauf inbinnen
(rots ἔνι) ihrer Hunde. Dariiber kann man sich wundern,
- aber dié Worte besagen dies und nichts anderes.” But,
apart from the fact that the freak race suggested receives
no sort of support from such expressions as Hor. Ep.
i. 18. 50 f. cum valeas et vel cursu superare canem, not
even Malten’s authority can compel us to assign an im-
possible meaning (1) to τοῖς ἔνι, (2) to ἔμμορε, and (3) to
ἀέθλου. ἔμμορ᾽ ἀέθλου means “* won the prize,” and only on
that assumption is τοῖς ἔνι, ‘* with which,” perfectly natural
Greek. Whether the contest was part of the funeral
games of Pelias is of course a totally different question.


VI.—Hymn IV. To Detos


._ For dating this Hymn we have the references in the
prophecy of Apollo to the extent of the dominion of
Ptolemy Philadelphus (165-170) and to the Gauls (171-
188). |
Apollo, prophesying of Philadelphus, says, ‘‘ beneath
whose crown shall. come—not loth to be ruled by a
Macedonian—both continents and the lands which are set
in the sea, far as where the limit of the earth is and again
whence his swift horses carry the sun.” We are immedi-
ately reminded of the more detailed account of Ptolemy’s
dominion in the xviith Idyll of Theocritus, the Ε γκώμιον
els Ἰ]τολεμαῖον, where we read, 86 ff. :
28


INTRODUCTION TO THE HYMNS


καὶ μὴν Φοινίκας ἀποτέμνεται ᾿Αρραβίας τε
καὶ Συρίας Λιβύας τε κελαινῶν 7’ Αἰθιοπήων.
Παμφύλοισί τε πᾶσι καὶ αἰχμηταῖς Κιλίκεσσι
σαμαίνει, Λυκίοις τε φιλοπτολέμοισί τε Kapeol,
καὶ νάσοις Κυκλάδεσσιν, ἐπεί οἱ νᾶες ἄρισται
πόντον ἐπιπλώοντι, θάλασσα δὲ πᾶσα καὶ αἷα,
καὶ ποταμοὶ κελάδοντες ἀνάσσονται ἹΤτολεμαίῳ.


Into the question of the mutual relations of Theocritus
and Callimachus we cannot here enter. Theocritus in his
Encomium speaks of Arsinoé II. as still alive, which dates
the poem before 270 B.c. Wilamowitz puts it during the
First Syrian War—“ als der Krieg gegen Syrien, der 274
begonnen hat, guten Fortgang nahm, aber noch im Gange
war” (Textgeschichte d. gr. Bukol. p. 152). If we assume
the year 271 B.c., the year in which that war ended, as
the date of the Hymn to Delos, the dominion of Phil-
adelphus at that date would sufficiently justify the words of
Callimachus. It included, outside Egypt, Coele Syria
(recovered about 280), Lycia, Caria, Miletus, the island of
Cyprus, and the Cyclades.

The reference to the Gallic invasion (see notes on the
passage) would suit the supposed date very well. The
schol. on v. 175 says: “‘ Brennus, the king of the Gauls,
gathered together the Celts and went against Pytho,
wishing to plunder the treasures of the god. But when
they approached, Apollo destroyed most of them by hail.
A few survived, and one Antigonus, a friend of Ptolemy
Philadelphus, procured them to serve him as mercenaries,
Ptolemy wanting such an army at the moment. But they
were equally eager to plunder his treasures. Knowing
this he arrested them and brought them to the so-called
Sebennytic mouth of the Nile where he drowned them.
This is the ‘common struggle’ which he prophesies.”
Some regard the Antigonus mentioned above as the king -
of Macedon, others as merely a recruiting agent. The
account of the incident in Paus. i. 7. 2 is: ‘* When
Ptolemy was preparing to repel the aggression of Magas
he procured mercenaries, among them four thousand
Gauls. Finding that these were plotting to seize Egypt,


29


INTRODUCTION TO THE HYMNS


he conducted them over the river to a desert island, where
they perished by each other’s hands and by hunger.”

It should be remembered, further, that from 308 B.c.
there existed the Confederation of the Islanders — Τὸ
Κοινὸν τῶν Νησιωτῶν --- under the hak tae of Egypt
and having its headquarters at Delos. See Dittenberger, |
Orient. gr. Inser. Nos. 25, 40, 67, Syll.2 Nos. 202, 209,
223, 224, 471, 588. The president of the Confederation
(vnciapxos) was nominated not by the Islands but by
Egypt.

VII.—V. Tue Bars or Patnas

No one has detected in this poem any reference to con-
temporary events. It shares with Hymn vi. the peculiarity
of being written in the Doric dialect, while it alone
forsakes the heroic for the elegiac metre. On Kaibel’s
metrical theory it would come third in date, after vi. and
iii. As to its destination, Susemihl holds that it was
written to the order of the Argives for a festival of Pallas
in that city. That is the view also of F. Spiro, ‘‘ Prolog
und Epilog in Lykophrons Alexandra,” Hermes xxiii. (1888)
Ρ. 194 #f., who holds further that it belongs to a period when
such commissions were necessary for Callimachus, the
period which he pictures in Epigrams xxviii., xxxiv., xlvii.,
when he was living as a poor schoolmaster in Eleusis,
before his introduction to the Alexandrian court. He
regards v. 56, μῦθος δ᾽ οὐκ ἐμὸς ἀλλ᾽ érépwy,” as the announce-
ment by the poet of an artistic dogma which. he was after-
wards to express in less simple language in the Aitia:
Bpovray δ᾽ οὐκ ἐμὸν ἀλλὰ Διός, frag. incert. 146 (490). In v.
140 ff. he detects a “‘ versteckte Kritik”’ of Lycophron,
Alex. 1474 σώζων παλαιὰν Βεβρύκων παγκληρίαν, which the
Hymn therefore according to Spiro presupposes.

It was the custom, we are told by the schol. on v. 1,
. for the women of Argos on an appointed day to carry the
image of Athena and the shield of Diomede to the river
Inachus and there to wash them. The image is the
Palladium carried off from Troy by Odysseus and Diomede

# «*T cannot tell how the truth may be; I say the tale as
‘twas said to me,” Scott, Lay of the Last Minstrel, ii. 22.

30


INTRODUCTION TO THE HYMNS


and by the latter brought to Argos. The shield of
Diomede was dedicated by him in Athena’s temple, ef.
Pausan. ii. 24. 2, who mentions a temple of Athena
Oxyderces on the Acropolis at Argos dedicated by
Diomede in memory of the day when Athena took the
mist from his eyes that he might discern God and man
(ii. v. 127 f.).

For the widespread custom of annually bathing the
holy image we have to compare the Athenian Plynteria
(Xen. Hell. i. 4. 12, Plut. Alc. 34), also Pausan. ii. 10. 4
where, speaking of the temple of Aphrodite at Sicyon, he
says ἐσίασι μὲν δὴ és αὐτὸ γυνή Te νεωκόρος. . . Kal παρθένος
ἱερωσύνην ἐπέτειον ἔχουσα" λουτροφόρον τὴν παρθένον ὀνομάζουσι.
See further Ovid, Fast. iv. 336 ff., Ammian. Mare. xxiii. 3,
Tac. Germ. 40, and for the significance of the practice
Mannhardt, Baumkultus chapter vii., Antike Wald τι.
Feldkulte, chapter v.


VIlIl.—Hymwn VI. To Demeter


Nothing can be determined as to the date of this Hymn.
On Kaibel’s metrical theory it is the oldest of all. The
schol. on v. 1 says: “ Ptolemy Philadelphus among other
imitations of Athenian customs which he established in
Alexandria, instituted the Procession of the Basket (τὴν
τοῦ καλάθου πρόοδον). For it was the custom in Athens that
on a fixed day a basket should be borne upon a carriage
in honour of Athena.” The details of this Athenian
celebration are entirely unknown, but it may be supposed
that it followed more or less closely the model of
the Athenian Thesmophoria. In that and in similar
festivals there are three essential moments: Anodos (or
Cathodos), Nesteia, Calligeneia, as they were called ix
the Thesmophoria. ΑἹ] that can be clearly distinguished
here is that the Basket with its mystic contents is
carried in procession to the temple of the goddess,
attended by women, some of whom being uninitiated—
these, if we may infer from the Athenian Thesmophoria,
include the unmarried women—go but part of the way,
while access to the temple, is confined to the initiated


31


INTRODUCTION TO THE HYMNS


(v. 118 #.); and, further, that the procession takes place
after sunset (v. 7).


B.C.
323.
323-321.
322.


321.
321-319.
320.


319-311.
318.
313.
311-305.
310-9.
308.


305-285.
285.


283.
280-79.


277.


IX.—Tastue or Dares.


Ptolemy satrap of Egypt.

Ptolemy under Perdiccas.

Cyrene conquered and attached to the satrapy of
Egypt.

Ptolemy marries Eurydice, daughter of Antipater.

Ptolemy under Antipater.

Ptolemy seizes Coele Syria; establishes protec-
torate of Cyprus.

Ptolemy under Polyperchon.

Ptolemy marries Berenice.

Cyrene under Ophellas revolts from Egypt.

Ptolemy independent satrap.

Birth of Ptolemy Philadelphus in Cos.

Establishment of Τὸ Κοινὸν τῶν Νησιωτῶν under
protectorate of Egypt.

Ptolemy recovers Cyrenaica :
Berenice, viceroy of Cyrene. ;

Ptolemy I. Soter, king of Egypt. .

Ptolemy II. Philadelphus associated with his
father as king; marries Arsinoé 1., daughter
of Lysimachus.

Death of Ptolemy I. Soter. |

Invasion of Gauls. Ptolemy recovers Coele
Syria.

Ptolemy repudiates Arsinoé I. and marries his
full sister Arsinoé IT.

Revolt of Magas of Cyrene, who marries
Apama, daughter of Antiochus.

First Syrian War; Lycia, Caria, etc., fall to
Egypt.

Death of Arsinoé II. Philadelphus.

Co-regency of Ptolemy III. Euergetes.

Chremonidean War.

Defeat of Egyptian fleet at Cos.


Magas, son of


INTRODUCTION TO THE HYMNS


258. Death of Magas of Cyrene, who had betrothed
his daughter Berenice to Ptolemy, afterwards
Ptolemy Euergetes.

257-6. The affair of Demetrius the Fair at Cyrene.

Ptolemy Euergetes king of Cyrene.
Second Syrian War.

247. Death of Ptolemy II. Philadelphus.

247. Ptolemy III, Euergetes. Cyrene united to Egypt
by marriage of Ptolemy III. to Berenice,
daughter of Magas.

Third Syrian War.

221. Death of Ptolemy III.


Ι 9orue10g7


soqosiongp 11 απ] ἃ


ΤΟ sy SAR (snqovursAry
“8 8 “IAXX © JO MOPIAL
‘arysne | θαθαλο | (‘012 perp ἽΙ θοῦιθαν τα)
‘Q0uIsIVy) jo snydjopenyd ‘246 Ὃ π) (Τ } Ἵ ‘sneg) Βη πη ΒαθῸ
eured y——sese]t Ἵ 90uIsIy—— "JT ae ἯΙ ee a his tora STLISKOLO YL pay δὲν
βιαίῳ 10 ΘΟΒαΙ 1,10
ΒΟ αν snyovursAry
Cot
*sneq που nor
5043 19% aoLomadn
89 Smyyp = ‘ap! (L118 Ῥω. "τὰ) (028 ‘920 "τα)
Soaogawny) snddiyiyg το sormer10g a94og Ἵ Δαϊοθ]οη eorpAIngy


|
| Joyed quy
/SODV'T


SHINATOLd FHL JO VNWALS—X


KAAAIMAXOY YTMNOI
I.—EIx AIA


A ΝΜ ’ LAA: A δῆ 3 (ὃ
Ζηνὸς ἔοι τί κεν ἄλλο παρὰ σπονδῇσιν ἀείδειν
a: oe
λώιον ἢ θεὸν αὐτόν, ἀεὶ μέγαν, αἰὲν ἄνακτα,
/ 1 2X ~ ὃ 5A b] ὃ
Πηλαγόνων  ἐλατῆρα, δικασπόλον οὐρανίδῃσι; -
“- a > τ΄ >A A

πῶς καί μιν, Δικταῖον ἀείσομεν ἠὲ Λυκαῖον;
3 “-“ / / > \ / > /
ev δοιῇ μάλα θυμός, ἐπεὶ γένος ἀμφήριστον.

A >
Ζεῦ, σὲ μὲν ᾿Ιδαίοισιν ἐν ovpeci φασι γενέσθαι,

A A ᾿ς Ὁ / / / > /
Ζεῦ, σὲ δ᾽ ἐν ᾿Αρκαδίῃ: πότεροι, πάτερ, ἐψεύσαντο;
ςς “ ES. “-- 99 \ \ / % »,

Κρῆτες ἀεὶ ψεῦσται" ᾽᾿ καὶ γὰρ τάφον, ὦ ἄνα,

σεῖο ;

“- > / \ > > / > A A ded
Κρῆτες ἐτεκτήναντο" σὺ δ᾽ οὐ θάνες, ἐσσὶ yap αἰεί.

1 πηλαγόνων ΚΕ. Μ΄ ; πηλογόνων. The reading of the mss.
Πηλογόνων (πηλογόνων᾽ τῶν γιγάντων παρὰ τὸ ἐκ πηλοῦ γενέσθαι,
τουτέστι τῆς γῆς schol.) was corrected by Salmasius and
others from E.M. s.v. Πηλαγόνες " of γίγαντες, Καλλίμαχος


““ Πηλαγόνων ἐλατῆρα." Cf. Hesych. s.v., Strabo vii. 331,
fr. 40.


# Mountain in Crete.

> Mountain in Arcadia.

¢ This proverbial saying, attributed to Epimenides, is
quoted by St. Paul, Ep. Tit. i. 12, ‘‘One of themselves, a
prophet of their own, said, The Cretans are always liars,
evil beasts, idle bellies” (κακὰ θηρία, γαστέρες ἀργαί), and
seems to be alluded to by Aratus, Phaen. 30 εἰ ἐτεὸν δή.


36


CALLIMACHUS’S HYMNS


I.—TO ZEUS


Art libations to Zeus what else should rather be sung
than the god himself, mighty for ever, king for ever-
more, router of the Pelagonians, dealer of justice to
the sons of Heaven?

How shall we sing of him—as lord of Dicte®% or
of Lycaeum?? My soul is all in doubt, since
debated is his birth. O Zeus, some say that thou
wert born on the hills of Ida%; others, O Zeus, say
in Arcadia; did these or those, O Father, lie?.
“ Cretans are ever liars.”* Yea, a tomb,? O Lord, for
thee the Cretans builded; but thou didst not die,
for thou art for ever.


The explanation given by Athenodorus of Eretria ap.
Ptolem. eece’ in Photit Bibl. p. 150 Bekk. is that
Thetis and Medea, having a dispute as to which of them
was the fairer, entrusted the decision to Idomeneus of
Crete. He decided in favour of Thetis, whereon Medea
said, ‘‘ Cretans are always liars”’ and cursed them that they
should never speak the truth. The schol. on the present
passage says that Idomeneus divided the spoils of Troy
unfairly.

4 The Cretan legend was that Zeus was a prince who was
slain by a wild boar and buried in Crete. His tomb was
variously localized and the tradition of ‘‘the tomb of Zeus ”’
attaches to several places even in modern times, especially
to Mount Iuktas. See A. B. Cook, Zeus, vol. i. p. 157 ff.


37


CALLIMACHUS


ἐν δέ σε Ilappacin! ‘Pein τέκεν, ἧχι μάλιστα 10
ἔσκεν ὄρος θάμνοισι περισκεπές- ἔνθεν 6 χῶρος
ε / > / / > /
ἱερός, οὐδέ Ti μιν κεχρημένον Ἐϊλειθυΐης
ς \ 2O\ \ > , > ' et ee 4 ,
ἑρπετὸν οὐδὲ γυνὴ ἐπιμίσγεται, ἀλλά € “Ῥείης
ὠγύγιον καλέουσι λεχώιον ᾿Απιδανῆες.
3 3 > \ / / > 7 ΤᾺ
ἔνθα σ᾽ ἐπεὶ μήτηρ μεγάλων ἀπεθήκατο κόλπων
ΠΝ, , 7 « a , 15
αὐτίκα δίζητο ῥόον ὕδατος, @ κε TOKOLO
λύματα χυτλώσαιτο, τεὸν δ᾽ evi χρῶτα λοέσσαι.
Λάδων ἀλλ᾽ οὔπω μέγας ἔρρεεν οὐδ᾽ ᾿Ἐρύ-
μανθος, ! :
λευκότατος ποταμῶν, ἔτι δ᾽ ἄβροχος ἦεν ἅπασα
᾿Αρκαδίη: μέλλεν δὲ μάλ᾽ εὔυδρος καλέεσθαι
5" > \ / « / 7 > > ᾽ὔ 7
αὖτις" ἐπεὶ τημόσδε, Ῥέη ὅτ᾽ ἐλύσατο μίτρην, 20
> AA \ > 7 / ε \ a | /
ἢ πολλὰς ἐφύπερθε σαρωνίδας ὑγρὸς ᾿Ιάων
3 \ \ / » ε 4
ἤειρεν, πολλὰς δὲ Μέλας ὦκχησεν ἁμάξας,
λλὰ \ K / > » “ “Ὁ . *
πολλὰ δὲ Kapviwvos? ἄνω διεροῦ περ ἐόντος atic ®
+ \ 207 ΄, ΄ 45. SEN wy we
ἰλυοὺς ἐβάλοντο κινώπετα, νίσσετο δ᾽ ἀνὴρ ὩΣ:
πεζὸς ὑπὲρ Kpably τε πολύστιόν ὃ τε Μετώπην
os ὑπὲρ Κρᾶθιν τε πολύστιόν " τε Μετώπη
διψαλέος: τὸ δὲ πολλὸν ὕδωρ ὑπὸ ποσσὶν ἔκειτο.
καί ῥ᾽ ὑπ’ ἀμηχανίης σχομένη φάτο πότνια
“Pein:
1 Tlappacly Lascaris ; Παρνασίῃ.
2 Kapviwvos Arnaldus, cf. Paus. viii. 34, Plin. iv. 6;
Kaplwvos Mss.


3 πολύστιον schol. Apoll. Rh. ii. 1172 ; πολύστειον mss. and
schol. Pind. O. vi. 146; ef. Nicand. 7. 792, 950, A. 466.


« Arcadia. > Cf Apoll. Rh. iv. 1240.

¢ Goddess of birth. 4 The ancient Arcadians (schol.).

ὁ River in Arcadia.

7 Melas] Dion. Per. 415 ff. ᾿Αρκάδες ᾿Απιδανῆες ὑπὸ σκοπιὴν
᾿Ερυμάνθου, ἔνθα Μέλας, ὅθι Kpadcs, iva ῥέει ὑγρὸς ᾿Τάων, ἧχι καὶ


98


"sie


HYMN I


In Parrhasia® it was that Rheia bare thee, where
was a hill sheltered with thickest brush. Thence
is the place holy, and no fourfooted ὃ thing that hath
need of Hileithyia® nor any woman approacheth


_ thereto, but the Apidanians®? call it the primeval:


childbed of Rheia. There when thy mother had
laid thee down from her mighty lap, straightway she
sought a stream of water, wherewith she might
purge her of the soilure of birth and wash thy body
therein.

But mighty Ladon® flowed not yet, nor Eryman-
thus,’ clearest of rivers; waterless was all Arcadia;
yet was it anon to be called well-watered. For at
that time when Rhea loosed her girdle, full many a
hollow oak did watery Iaon*’ bear aloft, and many
a wain did Melas/ carry and many a serpent above
Carnion,’ wet though it now be, cast its lair; .and a
man would fare on foot over Crathis* and many-
pebbled Metope,’ athirst : while that abundant water
lay beneath his feet.

And holden in distress the lady Rheia said, “ Dear


ὠγύγιος μηκύνεται ὕδασι Λάδων. Herodot. i. 145 has "Ὥλενος
ἐν τῷ Πεῖρος ποταμὸς μέγας ἐστί. Strabo 386 has Ὥλενος, παρ᾽
ὃν ποταμὸς μέγας Μέλας where it has been ἤτω osed to read
παρ᾽ ὃν <Iletpos> and to omit Μέλας. ; t. Smiley, in
Classical Qu. v. (1911) p. 89 f., suggests that the Styx is
meant, which supplies the waterfall near Nonacris in North
Arcadia and later becomes a tributary of the Crathis (Paus.
viii. 18. 4). When Leake discovered the waterfall in 1806
the natives did not know the name Styx for it but called it
the Black Water (Mavro nero) or the Dragon Water. The
name Ile?pos in any case suggests a connexion with the
underworld.

9 Carnion or Carion, river in Arcadia, Paus. viii. 34.

% Crathis, river in Arcadia (and Achaea), Paus. vii. 25. 11,
viii. 15. 5, viii. 18. 4.

* Metope, river in Arcadia.


39


CALLIMACHUS


“Γαῖα φίλη, τέκε καὶ σύ’ τεαὶ δ᾽ ὠδῖνες ἐλαφραί.᾽"
εἶπε καὶ ἀντανύσασα θεὴ μέγαν ὑψόθι πῆχυν 80
πλῆξεν ὄ ὄρος σκήπτρῳ" τὸ δέ οἱ ἱ δίχα πουλὺ διέστη,
ἐκ δ᾽ ἔχεεν μέγα χεῦμα: τόθι χρόα φαιδρύνασα,
ὦνα, τεὸν σπείρωσε, Νέδῃ δέ σε δῶκε κομίζειν]
κευθμὸν ἔσω Ke ρηταῖον, ἵνα κρύφα παιδεύοιο,
πρεσβυτάτῃ cal at μιν τότε μαιώσαντο, 35
πρωτίστῃ γενεῇ 5 μετά γε Στύγα τε Φιλύρην τε.
οὐδ᾽ ἁλίην ἀπέτεισε θεὴ χάριν, ἀλλὰ τὸ χεῦμα
κεῖνο Νέδην ὀνόμηνε" τὸ μέν ποθι πουλὺ κατ᾽ αὐτὸ
Καυκώνων πτολίεθρον, ὃ Λέπρειον 8 πεφάτισται,.
συμφέρεται Νηρῆι, παλαιότατον δέ μιν ὕδωρ 40
υἱωνοὶ ὁ πίνουσι Λυκαονίης ἄρκτοιο.

εὖτε Θενὰς ἀπέλειπεν ἐπὶ Κνωσοῖο φέρουσα,
Ζεῦ πάτερ, ἡ Νύμφη σε (Θεναὶ δ᾽ ἔσαν ἐγγύθι

Κνωσοῦ),
τουτάκι τοι πέσε, δαῖμον, am’ ὀμφαλός" ἔνθεν
ἐκεῖνο

᾿Ομφάλιον μετέπειτα πέδον καλέουσι Kidwres.
Ζεῦ, σὲ δὲ ΚΚυρβάντων ἕτάραι προσεπηχύναντο 45


1 κομίζειν A; κομίσσαι other mss,
2 πρωτίστη γενεὴ Schneider.
3 Λέπριον Mss.; corr. Wass,
4 yuwyol MSS.


« Of. Paus. iv. 33. 1, ‘*The Messenians say that Zeus
was reared among them and that his nurses were Ithome
er Neda, after whom the river got its name.” Cf. viii.

> Styx, daughter of Oceanus and Tethys, Hesiod, Th. 361.

¢ Philyra, daughter of Oceanus, mother of Cheiron by
Cronus.

@ Paus. iv. 20. 2, The river Neda rises in Mount
Lycaeon, flows into Messenia and forms the boundary
between Messenia and Elis. Cf. Strabo 348 who says it


40


HYMN I


Earth, give birth thou also! thy birthpangs are
light.’ So spake the goddess, and lifting her great
arm aloft she smote the mountain with her staff;
and it was greatly rent in twain for her and poured
forth a mighty flood. Therein, O Lord, she cleansed
thy body; and swaddled thee, and gave thee to
Neda“ to carry within the Cretan covert, that thou
mightst be reared secretly: Neda, eldest of the
nymphs who then were about her bed, earliest birth
after Styx? and Philyra.¢ And no idle favour did
the goddess repay her, but named that stream
Neda?; which, I ween, in great flood by the very city
of the Cauconians,’ which is called Lepreion,’ mingles
its stream with Nereus,’ and its primeval water do the
son’s sons of the Bear,’ Lycaon’s daughter, drink.
When the nymph, carrying thee, O Father Zeus,
toward Cnosus,’ was leaving Thenae'—for Thenae
was nigh to Cnosus—even then, O God, thy navel
fell away: hence that plain the Cydonians/ call the
Plain of the Navel.* But thee, O Zeus, the com-
panions of the Cyrbantes’ took to their arms, even


rises in Lycaeon from a spring which Rheia caused to flow
in order to wash the infant Zeus.

¢ A people of Triphylia, Hom. Od. iii. 366.

7 Herod. iv. 148 says that Lepreon in Triphylia was
founded by the Minyae after driving out the Cauconians.

I i.e, the sea,

r Arcas, the ancestor of the Arcadians, was the son
of Zeus and Lycaon’s daughter Callisto who was changed
into a bear.

‘ Town in Crete.

7 Cydonia, town in Crete.

* Schol. Nicand. Alex. 7 Ομφαλὸς yap τόπος ἐν Κρήτῃ. ws καὶ
Καλλίμαχος" πέσε... Κύδωνες. Diodor. v. 70 tells the story
(he says Zeus was carried by the Curetes) and gives the
name of the place as Omphalos and of the plain around as
Omphaleion. ? Corybantes,


41


CALLIMACHUS


Δικταῖαι Μελίαι, σὲ δ᾽ ἐκοίμισεν ᾿Αδρήστεια
λίκνῳ ' ἐνὶ χρυσέῳ, σὺ δ᾽ ἐθήσαο πίονα μαζὸν
αἰγὸς ᾿Αμαλθείης, ἐπὶ δὲ γλυκὺ κηρίον ἔβρως.
γέντο γὰρ ἐξαπιναῖα Ἰ]ανακρίδος ἔργα μελίσσης
ISaious ἐν ὄρεσσι, τά τε κλείουσι Idvaxpa. δ0
. οὖλα δὲ Κούρητές σε περὶ πρύλιν ὠρχήσαντο
ἦς χεύχεα πεπλήγοντες,; ἵνα Kpovos οὔασιν ἠχὴν
». ἀσπίδος εἰσαΐοι καὶ μή σεο κουρίζοντος.
καλὰ μὲν ἠέξευ, καλὰ δ᾽ ἔτραφες, οὐράνιε Ζεῦ,
ὀξὺ δ᾽ ἀνήβησας, ταχινοὶ δέ τοι ἦλθον ἴουλοι. δδ
_ ἀλλ᾽ ἔτι παιδνὸς ἐὼν ἐφράσσαο πάντα. τέλεια °
\"~"7@ To καὶ γνωτοὶ προτερηγενέες περ ἐόντες
οὐρανὸν οὐκ ἐμέγηραν ἔχειν ἐπιδαίσιον οἶκον.
2 δηναιοὶ δ᾽ οὐ πάμπαν ἀληθέες ἦσαν ἀοιδοί:
Tl. φάντο πάλον ἸΚρονίδῃσι διάτριχα δώματα νεῖμαι: 60
{ι, τίς δέ κ᾿ ἐπ᾿ Οὐλύμπῳ τε καὶ “Awd. κλῆρον ἐρύσσαι,


Δ / \ / > eet Ae, / \ ”
swat), ὃς μάλα μὴ vevindos; ἐπ᾽ ἰσαίῃ yap ἔοικε
oye πήλασθαι: τὰ δὲ τόσσον ὅδον διὰ πλεῖστον ἔχουσι.
é 2 ᾿ αὶ Ψ ἂν - et, ve ~~ = δος st hy a τ Ψ,
ΠΤ ν΄ ψευδοίμην aiovtos ἅ κεν πεπίθοιεν ἀκουήν.
+ ~ > ~ / 4 μὴ A ~
οὔ σε θεῶν ἐσσῆνα πάλοι θέσαν, ἔργα δὲ χειρῶν, 65


pv Vs 1 λείκνῳ Mss. 2 v.l. πεπληγότες.


ἽΝ « The ash-tree nymphs, ¢f. Hesiod, Th. 187.
ἘΠ 3 > Of. Apoll. Rh, iii. 132 ff. Διὸς περικαλλὲς ἄθυρμα | κεῖνο,
2 py τό οἱ ποίησε φίλη τροφὸς ᾿Αδρήστεια | ἄντρῳ ἐν ᾿Ιδαίῳ ἔτι νήπια
κουρίζοντι | σφαῖραν ἐυτρόχαλον ; i.g. Nemesis, sister of the
οἱ aie Curetes (schol. ).

δ}, ὦ ¢ The nymph or she-goat who suckled Zeus ; Diodor. v.
(ἔν ' 70, Apollod. i. 5, schol. Arat. 161, Ovid, Fast. v. 115 ff.

1 4 Mountains in Crete (Steph. Byz. s.v. Ildvaxpa). Zeus
ἣν rewarded the bees by making them of a golden bronze
colour and rendering them insensible to the rigours of the
mountain climate (Diodor. v. 70).

ὁ Apollodor. i. 4, ‘* The Curetes in full armour, guarding


42


HYMN I


the Dictaean Meliae,* and Adrasteia? laid thee to
rest in a cradle of gold, and thou didst suck the rich
teat of the she-goat Amaltheia,° and thereto eat
the sweet honey-comb. For suddenly on the hills
of Ida, which men call Panacra,4 appeared the works
of the Panacrian bee. And lustily round thee
danced the Curetes*-a war-dance, beating their
armour, that Cronus might hear with his ears the
din of the shield, but not thine infant noise.

Fairly didst thou wax, O heavenly Zeus, and fairly
wert thou nurtured, and swiftly thou didst grow to
manhood, and speedily came the down upon thy
cheek. But, while yet a child, thou didst devise
all the deeds of perfect stature. Wherefore thy
kindred, though an earlier generation, grudged not
that thou shouldst have heaven for thine appointed
habitation. The ancient poets spake not altogether
truly. For they said that the lot assigned to the
sons of Cronus their three several abodes.* But who
would draw lots for Olympus and for Hades—save
a very fool? for equal chances should one cast
lots; but these are the wide world apart. When I
speak fiction, be it such fiction as persuades the
listener’s ear! Thou wert made sovereign of the
gods not by casting of lots but by the deeds of thy


the infant in the cave, beat their shields with their spears
that Cronus might not hear the child’s voice.”

7 πρύλις, the Cretan name for the πυρρίχη (Aristotle fr.
476, schol. Pind. P. ii. 127) or dance in armour (Pollux iv.
96 and 99).

9 This has been supposed to refer,to the fact that Ptolemy
Philadelphus was the youngest of the sons of Ptolemy Soter.
See Introduction.

» Homer, Jl, xv. 187 ff.; οὐ Apollodor. i. 7, Pind. O.
vii. 54 ff.

43


CALLIMACHUS


σή τε Bin τό τε κάρτος, ὃ καὶ πέλας εἵσαο δίφρου.
θήκαο δ᾽ οἰωνῶν μέγ᾽ ὑπείροχον ἀγγελιώτην
σῶν τεράων" ἅ τ᾽ ἐμοῖσι φίλοις ἐνδέξια φαίνοις.
εἵλεο δ᾽ αἰζηῶν 6 τι φέρτατον: οὐ σύ γε νηῶν
ἐμπεράμους, οὐκ ἄνδρα σακέσπαλον, οὐ μὲν ἀοιδόν" 0
ἀλλὰ τὰ μὲν μακάρεσσιν ὀλίζοσιν αὖθι παρῆκας
ἄλλα μέλειν ἑτέροισι, σὺ δ᾽ ἐξέ εο πτολιάρχους
αὐτούς, ὧν ὑπὸ χεῖρα γεωμόρος, ὧν ἴδρις αἰχμῆς,
ὧν ἐρέτης, ὧν πάντα" τί δ᾽ οὐ κρατέοντος ὗ ὑπ᾽ ἰσχύν;
αὐτίκα χαλκῆας μὲν ὑδείομεν ᾿Ηφαίστοιο, 75
\ > ν a \ /

τευχηστὰς δ᾽ “Apnos, ἐπακτῆρας δὲ Χιτώνης
᾿Αρτέμιδος, Φοίβου δὲ λύρης εὖ εἰδότας οἴμους"
> \ \ “ > \ \ 0." 3 7
ἐκ δὲ Διὸς βασιλῆες, ἐπεὶ Διὸς οὐδὲν ἀνάκτων
θειότερον: τῶ καί ode! τεὴν ἐκρίναο λάξιν.
δῶκας δὲ πτολίεθρα φυλασσέμεν, ἵζεο δ᾽ αὐτὸς 0
ἄκρῃσ' ἐν πολίεσσιν, ,ἐπόψιος οἵ τε δίκῃσι
λαὸν ὑπὸ σκολιῇσ᾽ οἵ T ἔμπα ιν ἰθύνουσιν"
ἐν δὲ ῥυηφενίην ἐβαλές σφισιν, ἐ ἐν δ᾽ ἅλις ὄλβον"
πᾶσι μέν, οὐ μάλα δ᾽ ἶσον. ἔοικε δὲ τεκμήρασθαι
ἡμετέρῳ μεδέοντι: περιπρὸ γὰρ εὐρὺ βέβηκεν. 85
ἑσπέριος κεῖνός γε τελεῖ τά κεν ἦρι γοήσῃ"
ἑσπέριος τὰ μέγιστα, τὰ μείονα δ᾽, εὖτε νοήσῃ.

ε \ \ \ ~ \ > > € Ψ ~ > > \
ot δὲ Ta μὲν πλειῶνι, TA δ᾽ οὐχ Evi, τῶν δ᾽ ἀπὸ

πάμπαν

Ae. ” Mere ceed f \ /

αὐτὸς ἄνην exdAovoas, ἐνέκλασσας δὲ μενοινήν.
A eee eae ~
χαῖρε μέγα, Kpovidn πανυπέρτατε, δῶτορ ἐάων, 90
* σῴε Bentley : σφι.

« Bia and Cratos appear as personifications of the might
and majesty of Zeus in Aeschylus, P. V., Hesiod, Th. 385, etc.

> The eagle.

¢ Artemis Chitone (Chitonea, Athen. 629 e), so called from


the tunic (chiton) in which as huntress she was represented ;
not, as the schol. says, from the Attic deme Chitone.


4


HYMN I

hands, thy might and that strength « which thou hast
set beside thy throne. And the most excellent of
birds ὃ didst thou make the messenger of thy signs ;
favourable to my friends be the signs thou showest !
And thou didst choose that which is most excellent
among men—not thou the skilled in ships, nor the
wielder of the shield, nor the minstrel: these didst
thou straightway renounce to lesser gods, other cares
to others. But thou didst choose the rulers of cities
themselves, beneath whose hand is the lord of the
soil, the skilled in spearmanship, the oarsman, yea,
all things that are: what is there that is not under
the ruler’s sway? Thus, smiths, we say, belong to
Hephaestus; to Ares, warriors; to Artemis of the
Tunic,’ huntsmen; to Phoebus they that know well
the strains ofthe lyre. But from Zeus come kings ; for
nothing is diviner than the kings of Zeus. Wherefore
thou didst choose them for thine own lot, and gavest
them cities to guard. And thou didst seat thyself
in the high places of the cities, watching who rule
their people with crooked judgements, and who rule
otherwise. And thou hast bestowed upon them
wealth and prosperity abundantly ; unto all, but not
in equal measure. One may well judge by our
Ruler,? for he hath clean outstripped all others. At
evening he accomplisheth that whereon he thinketh
in the morning; yea, at evening the greatest things,
but the lesser soon as he thinketh onthem. But the
others accomplish some things in a year, and some
things not in one; of others, again, thou thyself
dost utterly frustrate the accomplishing and thwartest
their desire.

Hail! greatly hail! most high Son of Cronus,


ἃ Ptolemy II. Philadelphus, 285-247 B.c.,
45


CALLIMACHUS
“
δῶτορ ἀπημονίης. τεὰ δ᾽ ἔῤγματα τίς κεν ἀείδοι;
” >
οὐ γένετ᾽, οὐκ ἔσται, Tis! Kev? Διὸς ἔργματ᾽ ἀείσαι.
a ΄, a? δι" 8é8 δ᾽ 3 ΄, 3.» ,
χαῖρε πάτερ, χαῖρ᾽ αὖθι: δίδου δ᾽ ἀρετήν τ᾽ ἄφενός
τε.

» 59 3 “- ΝΜ + - ὍΣ κα ᾿ ΝΜ 5.
οὔτ᾽ ἀρετῆς ἄτερ ὄλβος ἐπίσταται ἄνδρας ἀέξειν

oe ES A > / / + Ree / \ »
οὔτ᾽ ἀρετὴ ἀφένοιο' δίδου δ᾽ ἀρετήν τε καὶ ὄλβον. 95


8


1 ἔσται" τίς vulg. 2 κεν Mss.; καὶ Wilamow.
3 ἀείσαι Blomf. ; ἀείσοι or ἀείσει MSS.


46


HYMN I


giver of good things, giver of safety. Thy works
~who could sing? There hath not been, there shall
not .be, who shall sing the works of Zeus. Hail!
Father, hail again! and grant us goodness and pros-
perity. Without goodness wealth cannot bless men,
nor goodness without prosperity. Give us goodness
and weal,


Π.--ΕἸΣ AITOAAQNA


: © 92% Tes OF: , “
Οἷον ὁ τὠπόλλωνος ἐσείσατο δάφνινος ὅρπηξ,

φ- ee \ / ε ᾽ὔ | ee “ > /
ofa δ᾽ ὅλον τὸ μέλαθρον: ἑκάς, ἑκὰς ὅστις ἁλιτρός.

A / \ / ~ \ A > /
καὶ δή που τὰ θύρετρα καλῷ ποδὶ Φοῖβος ἀράσσει:

᾽ Lea > / ε / ¢ / ~
οὐχ ὁράᾳς; ἐπένευσεν ὁ Δήλιος ἡδύ τι φοῖνιξ
ἐξαπίνης, 6 δὲ κύκνος ἐν ἠέρι καλὸν ἀείδει. 5
αὐτοὶ νῦν κατοχῆες ἀνακλίνεσθε πυλάων,
αὐταὶ δὲ κληΐϊδες: ὁ γὰρ θεὸς οὐκέτι μακρήν"
οἱ δὲ νέοι μολπήν τε καὶ ἐς χορὸν ἐντύνεσθε.

e / >? \ ’ 3 > @ > /
ὡπόλλων οὐ παντὶ dacivetat, ἀλλ᾽ 6 τις ἐσθλός-"

- ΝΜ / x eA > wv τ 2 -
ὅς μιν ἴδῃ, μέγας οὗτος, ὃς οὐκ ἴδε, λιτὸς ἐκεῖνος. 10
> / > > ¢ / Pred / > ΝΜ /
ὀψόμεθ᾽, ὦ ‘Exdepye, καὶ ἐσσόμεθ᾽ οὔποτε λιτοί.
μήτε σιωπηλὴν κίθαριν μήτ᾽ ἄψοφον ἴχνος.
τοῦ Φοίβου τοὺς παῖδας ἔχειν ἐπιδημήσαντος,
εἰ τελέειν μέλλουσι γάμον πολιήν τε κερεῖσθαι,

ε 7 \ A aA 9.33 / / -
ἑστήξειν δὲ τὸ τεῖχος ἐπ᾽ ἀρχαίοισι θεμέθλοις. 15


« The palm-tree by which Leto supported herself when
she bare Apollo. Cf. H. Delos 210, Hom. H. Apoll. 117,
Od. vi. 162 f., Theogn. 5 f. The laurel and the palm
are coupled in Euripides, Hecuba, 458 ff.

> For the association of the swan with Apollo ef. Hymn to
Delos 249 ; Plato, Phaedo, 85; Manilius v. 381 ‘*ipse Deum
cygnus condit.”

¢ The schol. on v. 12 remarks that Callimachus emphasizes
the presence of the God because ‘‘ it is said in the case of
prophetic gods that the deities are sometimes present


48


II1.—TO APOLLO


How the laurel branch of Apollo trembles! how
trembles all the shrine! Away, away, he that is
sinful! Now surely Phoebus knocketh at the door
with his beautiful foot. See’st thou not? the Delian
palm @ nods pleasantly of a sudden and the swan? in
the air sings sweetly. Of yourselves now ye bolts be
pushed back, pushed back of yourselves; ye bars!
The god is no longer far away. And ye, young men,
prepare ye for song and for the dance.

Not unto everyone doth Apollo appear, but unto
him that is good. Whoso hath seen Apollo, he is
great ; whoso hath not seen him, he is of low estate.
We shall see thee, O Archer, and we shall never be
lowly. Let not the youths keep silent lyre or noise-
less step, when Apollo visits’ his shrine, if they
think to accomplish marriage and to cut the locks of
age,” and if the wall is to stand upon its old founda-


(ἐπιδημεῖν), sometimes absent (ἀποδημεῖν), and when they are
present the oracles are true, when absent false.” Cf. Pind.
P. iv. 5 οὐκ ἀποδάμου ᾿Απόλλωνος τυχόντος. The Delphians
celebrated the seventh day of the month Bysios—the birthday
of Apollo—when he was supposed to revisit his temple, and
the seventh of the holy month (Attic Anthesterion) was
celebrated by the Delians when Apollo was supposed to
return to Delos from the land of the Hyperboreans.
(W. Schmidt, Geburtstag im Altertum, p. 86.) Cf. Verg. A.
iii. 91.
4 i.e, if they are to live to old age.
E 49


“ὡς Yue


CALLIMACHUS


ἠγασάμην τοὺς παῖδας, ἐ ἐπεὶ χέλυς οὐκέτ᾽ ἀεργός.
εὐφημεῖτ᾽ ἀίοντες ἐπ᾽ ᾿Απόλλωνος ἀοιδῇ.
εὐφημεῖ καὶ πόντος, ὅτε κλείουσιν ἀοιδοὶ
ἢ κίθαριν ἢ τόξα, Λυκωρέος ἔντεα Φοίβου.
οὐδὲ Θέτις ᾿Αχιλῆα κινύρεται αἴλινα μήτηρ, 20
ὁππόθ᾽ i παιῆον i) παιῆον ἀκούσῃ.
καὶ μὲν ὁ δακρυόεις ἀναβάλλεται ἄλγεα πέτρος,
ὅστις ἐνὶ Φρυγίῃ διερὸς λίθος ἐστήρικται,
μάρμαρον ἀντὶ γυναικὸς ὀιζυρόν τι χανούσης.
in in φθέγγεσθε: κακὸν μακάρεσσιν ἐρίζειν. 25
Os μάχεται μακάρεσσιν, ἐμῷ βασιλῆι μάχοιτο"
σ΄ > ~ ~ a / /
ὅστις ἐμῷ βασιλῆι, καὶ ᾿Απόλλωνι μάχοιτο.
\ \ e / - ε A A 1 as .
τὸν χορὸν ὡπόλλων, 6 τι οἱ κατὰ θυμὸν ἀείδει,
\ «
τιμήσει: δύναται yap, ἐπεὶ Διὶ δεξιὸς ἧσται.
2.) ~OC¢ \ A A 4. Ὁ A / io ,
οὐδ᾽ ὁ χορὸς τὸν Φοῖβον ἐφ᾽ ἕν μόνον ἦμαρ ἀείσει, 30
” \ 4 / Ἃ > ef A es
ἔστι yap evupvos: Tis av οὐ ῥέα Φοῖβον ἀείδοι;
/ > / ld + 9 \ LA t pe | A
χρύσεα τὠπόλλωνι TO T. ἐνδυτὸν ἥ τ᾽ ἐπιπορπὶ
σ΄ / / > ν A / Ὁ
ἥ τε λύρη τό τ᾽ ἄεμμα τὸ Λύκτιον ἥ τε φαρέτρη,

/ \ A ε λ 4 Ν 7A. SAA
χρύσεα καὶ τὰ πέδιλα: πολύχρυσος yap ᾿Απόλλων.
καὶ δὲ πολυκτέανος: Πυθῶνί κε τεκμήραιο. 35

\ \ : ἢ S.A Ao » ΒΦ... / 5: 4 Φ /
καὶ μὲν: ἀεὶ καλὸς Kal ἀεὶ νέος: οὔποτε Φοίβου

1 καὶ μὲν e; other mss. καί κεν.


«αὶ, 6. the lyre, originally made by Hermes from the shell
of a tortoise. ἠγασάμην ΞΞ- Well done! -

δ᾽ Lycoreus, by-name of Apollo, from Lycoreia, town on
Parnassus above Delphi: Strabo 418. 3 ὑπέρκειται δ᾽ αὑτῆς ἡ
Λυκώρεια ἐφ᾽ οὗ τόπου πρότερον ἵδρυντο οἱ Δελφοὶ ὑπὲρ τοῦ ἱεροῦ.
Legends of its foundation in Pausanias x. 6, 2-3. Φ.
Λυκωρείοιο Apoll. Rh. iv. 1490,

¢ Though (7, not i, is the usual form, it is perhaps better
here to write the aspirated form to suit the suggested
etymology from te ‘* shoot.” See vv. 97-104 for the legend.

¢ Niobe, daughter of Tantalus, had, according to Hom.
Il. xxiv. 602 ff., six sons and six daughters, who were slain by


50


HYMN II


tions. Well done the youths, for that the shell is
‘no longer idle.

Be hushed, ye that hear, at the song to Apollo;
yea, hushed. is even the sea when the minstrels
celebrate the lyre or the bow, the weapons of
Lycoreian Phoebus.? Neither doth Thetis his mother
wail her dirge for Achilles, when she hears Hzé¢
Paeéon, Hié Paeéon.

Yea, the tearful rock defers its pain, the wet
_ stone that is set in Phrygia, a marble rock like a
woman ὦ open-mouthed in some sorrowful utterance.
Say ye Hie! Hié! an ill thing it is to strive with the
Blessed Ones. He who fights with the Blessed Ones
would fight with my King’; he who fights with my
King, would fight even with Apollo. Apollo will
honour the choir, since it sings according to his heart ;
for Apollo hath power, for that he sitteth on the right
hand of Zeus. Nor will the choir sing of Phoebus for
one day only. He is a copious theme of song; who
would not readily sing of Phoebus?

Golden is the tunic of Apollo and golden his
mantle, his lyre and his _Lyctian/ bow and _ his
quiver: golden too are his sandals; for rich in gold
is Apollo, rich also in possessions: by Pytho mightst
thou guess. And ever beautiful is he and ever


Apollo and Artemis respectively, because she boasted over
their mother Leto, who had but two children. Niobe was
turned into a stone, and this was identified with a rude rock
figure on Mount Sipylos near Smyrna which is still to be
seen. The water running down the face of the rock was
supposed to be Niobe’s tears—év@a λίθος περ ἐοῦσα θεῶν ἐκ
κήδεα rete Hom. l.c. 617, cf. ** Phrygium silicem,” Stat. 8.
v. 3.8

β Ptolemy III. Euergetes, according to the schol. But
see Introduction.

7 Lyctos, town in Crete.


51


CALLIMACHUS


θηλείῃσ᾽ οὐδ᾽ ὅσσον ἐπὶ χνόος ἦλθε παρειαῖς.
αἱ δὲ κόμαι θυόεντα πέδῳ λείβουσιν ἔλαια' ᾿
οὐ λίπος ᾿Απόλλωνος ἀποστάζουσιν ἔθειραι,
ἀλλ᾽ αὐτὴν πανάκειαν" ἐν ἄστεϊ δ᾽ ᾧ Kev ἐκεῖναι 40
πρῶκες ἔραζε πέσωσιν ἀκήρια πάντ᾽ ἐγένοντο.
τέχνῃ δ᾽ ἀμφιλαφὴς οὔ τις τόσον ὅσσον
᾿Απόλλων"
- > A μὰ > EEK ee ~ > 4
κεῖνος ὀιστευτὴν ἔλαχ᾽ ἀνέρα, κεῖνος ἀοιδὸν
/ A A / > / : eae /
(Φοίβῳ yap καὶ τόξον ἐπιτρέπεται καὶ ἀοιδή),
, A A \ 4 > ’ /
κείνου δὲ θριαὶ καὶ μάντιες: ἐκ δέ νυ Φοίβου 45
ἰητροὶ δεδάασιν ἀνάβλησιν θανάτοιο.

Φοῖβον καὶ Νόμιον κικλήσκομεν ἐξέτι. κείνου,
efor ἐπ᾽ ᾿Αμῴφρυσσῷ ζευγίτιδας ἔτρεφεν ἵππους
ἠιθέου ὑπ᾽ ἔρωτι κεκαυμένος ᾿Αδμήτοιο.
ῥεῖά κε βουβόσιον τελέθοι πλέον, οὐδέ κεν αἶγες δ0
δεύοιντο ρεφέων ἐπιμηλάδες  ἧσιν ᾿Απόλλων
βοσκομένῃσ᾽ ὀφθαλμὸν ἐπήγαγεν: οὐδ᾽ ἀγάλακτες
οἴιες οὐδ᾽ ἄκυθοι, πᾶσαι δέ Kev εἷεν ὕπαρνοι,

ἡ δέ κε μουνοτόκος διδυμητόκος αἷψα γένοιτο.

Φοίβῳ δ᾽ ἑσπόμενοι. πόλιας διεμετρήσαντο 55
3
ἄνθρωποι: Φοῖβος γὰρ ἀεὶ πολίεσσι φιληδεῖ

,ὔ 3 > ν᾿ \ / a ς /
κτιζομένῃσ᾽, αὐτὸς δὲ θεμείλια Φοῖβος vdaiver.
τετραέτης τὰ πρῶτα θεμείλια Φοῖβος ἔπηξε
καλῇ ἐν ᾿Ορτυγίῃ περιηγέος ἐγγύθι λίμνης.

ρτεμις ἀγρώσσουσα καρήατα συνεχὲς αἰγῶν 60


Κυνθιάδων φορέεσκεν, ὁ δ᾽ ἔπλεκε βωμὸν ᾿Απόλλων.


1 μενεμηλάδες v.l. in schol. ; ἐνιμηλάδες Schneider, ef.
Hesych. ἐμμηλάδας atyas.


“ As a personification Panaceia appears frequently as the
daughter of Asclepius. In the Hippocratean oath she is
named after Apollo, Asclepius, and Hygieia. Such “all-
healing” virtue was in” early times ascribed to various
plants (IIdvaxes Χειρώνειον, ᾿Ασκληπίειον, etc.).


52


HYMN II


young: never on the girl cheeks of Apollo hath
come so much as the down of manhood. His locks
distil fragrant oils upon the ground; not oil of fat
_ do the locks of Apollo distil but very Healing of
All.¢ And in whatsoever city those dews fall upon
the ground, in that city all things are free from harm.
None is so abundant in skill as Apollo. To him
belongs the archer, to. him the minstrel; for unto
Apollo is given in keeping alike archery and song.
His are the lots of the diviner and his the seers; and
from Phoebus do leeches know the deferring of death. .
Phoebus and Nomius? we call him, ever since the
time when by Amphrysus¢ he tended the yoke-
mares, fired with love of young Admetus.? Lightly
would the herd of cattle wax larger, nor would the |
she-goats of the flock lack young, whereon as they feed ~
Apollo casts his eye ; nor without milk would the ewes
be nor barren, but all would have lambs at foot; and
she that bare one would soon be the mother of twins.
And Phoebus it is that men follow when they map
out cities.° For Phoebus evermore delights in the
founding of cities, and Phoebus himself doth weave
their foundations. Four years of age was Phoebus
when he framed his first foundations in fair Ortygia/
near the round lake.9
Artemis hunted and brought continually the
heads of Cynthian goats and Phoebus plaited an


> Of. Pind. ix. 65.

¢ River in Thessaly where Apollo tended the flocks of
Admetus. Cy. Verg. G. iii. 2 ** pastor ab Amphryso.’

-@ King of Pherae in Thessaly.

¢ Hence Apollo’s titles ᾿Αρχηγέτης, Κτίστης, ete.

7 Delos.
- 9 A lake in Delos. Cf. H. iv. 261, Theognis vii, Apollo
is born ἐπὶ τροχοειδέι λίμνῃ, and Kur. LT. 1104.


53


CALLIMACHUS


δείματο μὲν κεράεσσιν ἐδέθλια, πῆξε δὲ βωμὸν
ἐκ κεράων, κεραοὺς δὲ πέριξ ὑπεβάλλετο τοίχους.
ὧδ᾽ ἔμαθεν τὰ πρῶτα θεμείλια Φοῖβος ἐγείρειν.
Φοῖβος καὶ Babvyevov ἐμὴν πόλιν ἔφρασε Βάττῳ
καὶ Λιβύην ἐσιόντι κόραξ ἡγήσατο λαῷ

δεξιὸς οἰκιστῆρι καὶ ὥμοσε τείχεα δώσειν

ε , a > 1 Qo ν» 9 ,
ἡμετέροις βασιλεῦσιν: ἀεὶ δ᾽ εὔορκος ᾿Απόλλων.
yA / / /

ὦπολλον, πολλοί σε Βοηδρόμιον καλέουσι,

\ \ / / / 3 ᾽ὔ
πολλοὶ δὲ Κλάριον, πάντη δέ τοι οὔνομα πουλύ:
αὐτὰρ ἐγὼ Kapvetov: ἐμοὶ πατρώιον οὕτω.
Σπάρτη τοι, Καρνεῖε, τὸ δὴ πρώτιστον ἔδεθλον,
δεύτερον αὖ Θήρη, τρίτατόν γε μὲν ἄστυ Κυρήνης.
ἐκ μέν σε Σπάρτης € ἕκτον γένος Οἰδιπόδαο
ἤγαγε Θηραίην ἐς ἀπόκτισιν: ἐκ δέ σε Θήρης
otros ᾿Αριστοτέλης ᾿Ασβυστίδι πάρθετο γαίῃ,
δεῖμε δέ τοι μάλα καλὸν ἀ ἀνάκτορον, ἐν δὲ πόληι
θῆκε τελεσφορίην ἐπετήσιον, ἣ evi “πολλοὶ
ὑστάτιον πίπτουσιν ἐπ᾽ ἰσχίον, ὦ ἄνα, ταῦροι.
in; e\

ἢ ἰὴ Καρνεῖε πολύλλιτε, σεῖο δὲ βωμοὶ
ἄνθεα μὲν φορέουσιν ἐν εἴαρι τόσσα περ ὯΩραι

1 οἰκιστῆρι Bentley ; οἰκιστήρ.

« The κερατών (Plut. Thes. 21, Dittenb. Syll.2 No. 588,
172), βωμὸς Kepdrwos (Plut. Sollert. animal. 35), made
entirely of horns, was one of the Seven Wonders of the
World. Cf. Anon. De ineredib. 2; Ovid, Her. 91. 99.


> Battus (Aristoteles), founder of Cyrene, birthplace of
Callimachus.

¢ The raven was one of the birds sacred to Apollo.

4 The Battiadae. See Introduction.

ὁ Boédromius: Fé. Mag. 8.0. Βοηδρομιών: ὅτι πολέμου
συστάντος ᾿Αθηναίοις καὶ ᾿Ελευσινίοις συμμαχήσαντος Ἴωνος...
ἐνίκησαν ᾿Αθηναῖοι. ἀπὸ οὖν τῆς τοῦ στρατεύματος βοῆς τῆς ἐπὶ τὸ
ἄστυ δραμούσης ὅ τε ᾿Απόλλων Βοηδρόμιος ἐκλήθη καὶ ἡ θυσία καὶ ὁ
μήν, καὶ τὰ Βοηδρόμια ἐτελεῖτο ἑορτή. According to schol. ἔχρησεν
αὐτοῖς ὁ θεὸς μετὰ βοῆς ἐπιθέσθαι τοῖς πολεμίοις. Doubtless the


δ4


65


70


75


80


HYMN II ©


altar.¢ With horns builded he the foundations, and
of horns framed he the altar, and of horns were the
walls he built around. Thus did Phoebus learn to
raise his first foundations. Phoebus, too, it was who
told Battus® of my own city of fertile soil, and in
guise of a raven °—auspicious to our founder—led his
people as they entered Libya and sware that he
would vouchsafe a walled city to our kings.¢ And
the oath of Apollo is ever sure. O Apollo! many
there be that call thee Boédromius,’ and many there
be that call thee Clarius/: everywhere is thy name
on the lips of many. But I call thee Carneius%; for
such is the manner of my fathers. Sparta, O
Carneius! was thy first foundation; and next
Thera; but third the city of Cyrene. From Sparta
the sixth” generation of the sons of Oedipus brought
thee to their colony of Thera; and from Thera lusty
Aristoteles‘ set thee by the Asbystian/ land, and
builded thee a shrine exceeding beautiful, and in the


city established a yearly festival wherein many a» “*


bull, O Lord, falls on his haunches for the last time.
Hié, Hié, Carneius! Lord of many prayers,—thine
altars wear flowers in spring, even all the pied
flowers which the Hours lead forth when Zephyrus


Athenians associated the name with help given them by
some superhuman champions (βοηδρόμοι-- βοαθόοι, Pind. LV.
vii. 31), Mommsen, Feste d. Stadt Athen, p. 171.

7 Clarius, by-name of Apollo, from Claros near Colophon.

9 Carneius, by-name of Apollo in many Dorian states, as
Sparta, Thera, Cyrene.

» The genealogy is. Oedipus—Polyneices—Thersander—
Tisamenus—Autesion—Theras, who led the colony to Thera
and who is sixth descendant of Oedipus according to the
Greek way of reckoning inclusively. Cf. Herod. iv. 147.

ὁ Battus.

4 The Asbystae were a people in the Cyrenaica.

55


: y neki fel


CALLIMACHUS


*\> > ~ / / -
ποικίλ᾽ ἀγινεῦσι ζεφύρου πνείοντος ἐέρσην,
χείματι δὲ κρόκον ἡδύν: ἀεὶ δέ τοι ἀέναον πῦρ,
οὐδέ ποτε χθιζὸν περιβόσκεται ἄνθρακα τέφρη.
oy ©> > / / A Lid ~ > ~
ἢ ῥ᾽ ἐχάρη μέγα Φοῖβος, ore ζωστῆρες “Evuods 85
ἀνέρες ὠρχήσαντο μετὰ ξανθῇσι Λιβύσσαις,
τέθμιαι εὖτέ σφιν Ἱζαρνειάδες ἤλυθον ὧραι.
ε δ᾽ »᾿ ~ 1 K / 25 4 Xr /
οἱ δ᾽ οὔπω mynyjott Κύρης ἐδύναντο πελάσσαι
/ \ \ , ” ”
Δωριέες, πυκινὴν δὲ νάπαις “AliAw ἔναιον.
A A » ” > / ta > > / ’ὔ
τοὺς μὲν ἀναξ ἴδεν αὐτός, ἕῇ δ᾽ ἐπεδείξατο νύμφῃ 90
στὰς ἐπὶ Μυρτούσσης κερατώδεος, ἧχι λέοντα
ε \ / ~ >? /
Ὑψηὶς κατέπεφνε βοῶν σίνιν EdpurvaAow.
οὐ κείνου χορὸν εἶδε 5. θεώτερον ἄλλον ᾿Απόλλων,
ἡδὲ λ , > 3 “λ K /
οὐδὲ πόλει τόσ᾽ ἔνειμεν ὀφέλσιμα, τόσσα Kupivy,
/ ¢ 4 \ A \
μνωόμενος προτέρης ἁρπακτύος. οὐδὲ μὲν αὐτοὶ 95


. Βαττιάδαι Φοίβοιο πλέον θεὸν ἄλλον ἔτεισαν.


- 3 / - ~
in) i παϊὴον ακοῦομεν, οὕνεκα τοῦτο


> / Γ > / Ὁ ,
Δελῴός τοι πρώτιστον ἐφύμνιον εὕρετο λαός,


ἦμος ἑκηβολίην χρυσέων ἐπεδείκνυσο τόξων.
Πυθώ τοι κατιόντι συνήντετο δαιμόνιος θήρ, 100
oR DAN 7 A \ \ / » , 3. 3,9 ν. Δ’
αἰνὸς ὄφις. τὸν μὲν σὺ κατήναρες ἄλλον ἐπ᾽ ἄλλῳ
7 > \ > . / > / \ /
βάλλων ὠκὺν ὀιστόν, ἐπηύτησε δὲ λαός,
ἐξ ἘΣ ἘῚῸ “ σ / ? 4 /
in) i) παιῆον, ἵει βέλος." εὐθύ σε μήτηρ
, 3 3 lon \ > 9 9 - > #
γείνατ᾽ ἀοσσητῆρα, τὸ δ᾽ ἐξέτι κεῖθεν ἀείδῃ.
ὁ Φθόνος ᾿Απόλλωνος ἐπ᾽ οὔατα λάθριος εἶπεν 105
1 πηγαῖσι schol. Pind. P. iv. 523 ; πηγῆς.
2 ἔνειμε A; ἔδειμε EF.


« Cyre: stream at Cyrene which after running some
distance under ground reappears at the Temple of Apollo as
the fountain of Apollo (Herod. iv. 158, Pind. P. iv. 294).

δ Azilis or Aziris where the Theraeans with Battus dwelt
for six years before they went to Cyrene (Herod. iv. 157 ff.).

¢ Cyrene.

@ i.e. ** Myrtle-hiil” in Cyrene. See Introduction, p. 26.

¢ Eurypylus: prehistoric king of Libya, who offered his


56 :


HYMN II


breathes dew, and in winter the sweet crocus.
Undying evermore is thy fire, nor ever doth the
ash feed about the coals of yester-even. Greatly,
indeed, did Phoebus rejoice as the belted warriors of
_ Enyo danced with the yellow-haired Libyan women,
when the appointed season of the Carnean feast came
round. But not yet could the Dorians approach
the fountains of Cyre,” but dwelt in Azilis ὃ thick with
wooded dells. These did the Lord himself behold and
showed them to his bride* as he stood on horned
Myrtussa? where the daughter of Hypseus. slew the
lion that harried the kine of Eurypylus.’ No other
dance more divine hath Apollo beheld, nor to any city
hath he given so many blessings as he hath given to
Cyrene, remembering his rape of old. Nor, again, is
there any other god whom the sons of Battus have
honoured above Phoebus.

Mié, Hié, Paeéon, we hear—since this refrain did
the Delphian folk first invent, what time thou didst
display the archery of thy golden bow. As thou
wert going down to Pytho, there met thee a beast
unearthly, a dread snake And him thou didst slay,
shooting swift arrows one upon the other; and the
folk cried “ Hié, Hié, Paeéon, shoot an arrow!” <A
helper? from the first thy mother bare thee, and ever
since that is thy praise.

Spake Envy” privily in the ear of Apollo: “I
kingdom to anyone who should slay the lion which was
ravaging his land. Cyrene slew the lion and so won the
kingdom (Acesandros of Cyrene in schol. Apoll. Rh. ii. 498).

7 In Strabo 422 Python is a man, surnamed Draco.
Pytho was popularly derived from the fact that the slain
snake rotted (πύθω) there.

9 Callimachus seems to adopt the old derivation of
ἀοσσητήρ from ὄσσα (voice). Thus ἀοσσητήρΞτεβοηθόος. For
ἐξέτι cf. H. iv. 275. » See Introduction, p. 22.


57


A Ge ¥


CALLIMACHUS


Pia SN 139 a a 299 ¢ , 5. ΣᾺ 39
οὐκ ἄγαμαι τὸν ἀοιδὸν ὃς οὐδ᾽ ὅσα πόντος ἀείδει.
\ ; 4-- ὁ ,» 105. ὧν το, 9 4
τὸν Φθόνον wrddrwv ποδί τ᾽ ἤλασεν ὧδέ τ᾽ ἔειπεν"
66> A ἢ a , ev 2>\)\\ \ λλὰ
σσυρίου ποταμοῖο μέγας ῥόος, ἀλλὰ τὰ πολλὰ
λύματα γῆς καὶ πολλὸν ἐφ᾽ ὕδατι συρφετὸν ἕλκει.
Δηοῖ δ᾽ οὐκ ἀπὸ παντὸς ὕδωρ φορέουσι Μέλισσαι, 110
GAN’ ἥτις καθαρή τε καὶ ἀχράαντος ἀνέρπει
᾽ > oe = es 2\/ \ 5 99
πίδακος ἐξ ἱερῆς ὀλίγη λιβὰς ἄκρον ἄωτον.
A A δ ε ὃ \ M ~ 7? 3 ¢ Φθ / 1 » θ
χαῖρε ἄναξ ὁ δὲ Μῶμος, ἵν᾿ ὁ Φθόνος,: ἔνθα
νέοιτο. *


1 φθόνος I (Vat. 1379), 1, (Mosquensis), schol. Gregor.
Naz. Catal. MSS. Clark. p. 35 ; φθόρος.


58


HYMN II


admire not the poet who singeth not things for
number as the 568. ὦ Apollo spurned Envy with his
foot and spake thus: “Great is the stream of the
Assyrian river,? but much filth of earth and much
refuse it carries on its waters. And not of every
water do the Melissae carry to Deo,’ but of the
trickling stream that springs from a holy fountain,
pure and undefiled, the very crown of waters.”’

Hail, O Lord, but Blame—let him go where Envy
dwells!


« Of. Apoll. Rhod. iii. 932. > Euphrates.

¢ Deo= Demeter, whose priestesses were called Melissae
(Bees): Porphyr. De antro nympharum 18 καὶ ras Δήμητρος
ἱερείας ws τῆς χθονίας θεᾶς μύστιδας Μελίσσας οἱ παλαιοὶ ἐκάλουν
αὐτήν τε τὴν Κόρην Μελιτώδη (Theocr. xv. 94).


ὅ9


11.--ΕἘἸΣ APTEMIN


/
"Ἄρτεμιν (od yap ἐλαφρὸν ἀειδόντεσσι λαθέσθαι)
ὑμνέομεν, τῇ τόξα λαγωβολίαι τε μέλονται
\ \ 3 gn ἃ τὰ » Ce τῷ θ
καὶ χορὸς ἀμφιλαφὴς καὶ ἐν οὔρεσιν ἑψιάασθαι,

+ /
ἄρχμενοι,: ws ὅτε πατρὸς ἐφεζομένη γονάτεσσι
παῖς ἔτι κουρίζουσα τάδε προσέειπε yovna δ
“ἐ δός μοι παρθενίην αἰώνιον, ἄππα, φυλάσσειν,
καὶ πολυωνυμίην, ἵνα μή μοι Φοῖβος ἐρίζῃ.
δὸς δ᾽ ἰοὺς καὶ τόξα--ἔα, πάτερ, οὔ σε φαρέτρην

2Q> y Sel 4 / > \ / > \
οὐδ᾽ aitéw μέγα τόξον: ἐμοὶ Κύκλωπες ὀιστοὺς
αὐτίκα τεχνήσονται, ἐμοὶ δ᾽ εὐκαμπὲς ἄεμμα" 10
ἐλλὰ 7 A 9 4 ’, _-~
ἀλλὰ φαεσφορίην τε Kal ἐς γόνυ μέχρι χιτῶνα
ζώννυσθαι λεγνωτόν, ἵν᾽ ἄγρια θηρία καίνω.
δὸς δέ μοι ἑξήκοντα χορίτιδας ᾿Ωκεανίνας,
πάσας εἰνέτεας, πάσας ἔτι παῖδας ἀμίτρους.
δὸς δέ Ἵ ὅλους ᾿Αμνισίδας εἴ j

os δέ μοι ἀμφιπόλους ᾿Αμνισίδας εἴκοσι νύμφας, 15
αἵ τέ μοι ἐνδρομίδας τε καὶ ὁππότε μηκέτι

λύγκας :

ΠΝ 2
μήτ᾽ ἐλάφους βάλλοιμι, θοοὺς κύνας εὖ κομέοιεν,
δὸς δέ μοι οὔρεα πάντα: πόλιν δέ μοι ἥντινα νεῖμον
ἥντινα λῇς" σπαρνὸν γὰρ ὅτ᾽ Αρτεμις ἄστυ κάτ-

εἰσιν"


1 ἄρχμενοι Blomfield; cf. ἔν. 9° and now Aitia iii. 1. 56,
Herodian i. p. 471, ii. p. 190 and p. 252 Lentz; ἀρχόμενοι
or ἀρχόμενος MSS.


60


ΠΙ|Ι.--Τὸ ARTEMIS


Artemis we hymn—no light thing is it for singers
to forget her—whose study is the bow and the
shooting of hares and the spacious dance and sport
upon the mountains; beginning with the time when
sitting on her father’s knees—still a little maid—
she spake these words to her sire: “Give me to
keep my maidenhood, Father, for ever: and give
me to be of many names, that Phoebus may not vie
with me. And give me arrows and a bow—stay,
Father, I ask thee not for quiver or for mighty
bow: for me the Cyclopes will straightway fashion
arrows and fashion for me a well-bent bow. But
give me to be the Bringer of Light and give me to
gird me in a tunic ὃ with embroidered border reaching
to the knee, that I may slay wild beasts. And
give me sixty daughters of Oceanus for my choir—
all nine years old, all maidens yet ungirdled ; and
give me for handmaidens twenty nymphs of Amnisus ¢
who shall tend well my buskins, and, when I shoot
no more at lynx or stag, shall tend my swift hounds.
And give to me all mountains; and for city, assign
me any, even whatsoever thou wilt: for seldom is
it that Artemis goes down to the town. On the


* φωσφόρος is one of the titles of Artemis; cf. v. 204,
Eur. Iph. in T. 91.

> See note on v. 225.

¢ Amnisus, ‘river in Crete. Cf. Apoll. Rhod. iii. 877 ff.


61


CALLIMACHUS


οὔρεσιν οἰκήσω, πόλεσιν δ᾽ ἐπιμείξομαι ἀνδροῶν 20
μοῦνον ὅτ᾽ ὀξείῃσιν ὑπ᾽ ὠδίνεσσι γυναῖκες
τειρόμεναι καλέουσι βοηθόον, ἧσί με Μοῖραι
γεινομένην τὸ “πρῶτον ἐπεκλήρωσαν ἀ ἀρήγειν,
ὅττι με καὶ τίκτουσα καὶ οὐκ ἤλγησε φέρουσα
μήτηρ, ἀλλ᾽ ἀμογητὶ φίλων ἀπεθήκατο γυίων." 2ὅ
ὡς ἡ παῖς εἰποῦσα γενειάδος ἤθελε πατρὸς
ἅψασθαι, πολλὰς δὲ μάτην ἐτανύσσατο χεῖρας,
μέχρις ἵνα ψαύσειε. πατὴρ δ᾽ ἐπένευσε γελάσσας,
φῆ δὲ καταρρέζων “" ὅτε μοι τοιαῦτα θέαιναι
τίκτοιεν, τυτθόν κεν ἐγὼ ζηλήμονος Ἥρης 80
᾿ χωομένης ἀλέγοιμι. φέρευ, τέκος, ὅσσ᾽ ἐθελημὸς
αἰτίζεις, καὶ 6 ἄλλα πατὴρ ἔτι μείζονα δώσει.
“τρὶς δέκα τοι πτολίεθρα καὶ οὐχ ἕνα πύργον ὀπάσσω,
‘ / / \ \ \ » 5ὕἷ]
- τρὶς δέκα τοι πτολίεθρα, τὰ μὴ θεὸν ἄλλον ἀέξειν
ak > \ , \ \ 3 , ͵
εἴσεται, ἀλλὰ μόνην σὲ καὶ ᾿Αρτέμιδος καλέεσθαι: 35
Ἁ \ a / - /
. πολλὰς δὲ ξυνῇ πόλιας διαμετρήσασθαι
μεσσόγεως νήσους TE’ καὶ ἐν πάσῃσιν ἔσονται
> / / Ve \ \ > -
Ἀρτέμιδος βωμοί τε καὶ ἄλσεα. καὶ μὲν ἀγυιαῖς
ἔσσῃ καὶ λιμένεσσιν ἐπίσκοπος.᾽ Ws ὁ μὲν εἰπὼν
μῦθον ἐπεκρήηνε καρήατι. βαῖνε δὲ κούρη 40
λευκὸν ἐπὶ Kpnraiov ὄρος κεκομημένον ὕλῃ"
Ν ΡΝ νὰ. / / 9. 3 7 /
ἔνθεν ἐπ᾿ ᾿Ωκεανόν: πολέας δ᾽ ἐπελέξατο νύμφας,
πάσας εἰνέτεας, πάσας ἔτι παῖδας ἀμίτρους.
χαῖρε δὲ Καίρατος ποταμὸς μέγα, χαῖρε δὲ Τηθύς,
οὕνεκα θυγατέρας Λητωίδι πέμπον  ἀμορβούς. — 45
1 πέμπον schol. Nicand. Th. 849 ; πέμπεν or πέμπειν.


« Artemis in one aspect is Eileithyia=Lucina. She is
said to have been born before Apollo and to have assisted
at his birth. Hence her birthday was put on the 6th of
Thargelion (Diog. L. ii. 44), while Apollo was born on the
7th. (W. Schmidt, Geburtstag im Altertum, p. 94.)

> Hence her title évodia, A. P. vi. 199.


62


HYMN III


mountains will 1 dwell and the cities of men | will
visit only when women vexed by the sharp pangs
of childbirth call me to their aid*—even in the
hour when I was born the Fates ordained that I
should be their helper, forasmuch as my mother
suffered no pain either when she gave me birth or
when she carried me in her womb, but. without
travail put me from her body.” So spake the child
and would have touched her father’s beard, but
many a hand did she reach forth in vain, that
she might touch it. And her father smiled and
bowed assent. And as he caressed her, he said:
“When goddesses bear me children like this, little
need I heed the wrath of jealous Hera. Take,
child, all that thou askest, heartily. Yea, and other
things therewith yet greater will thy father give
thee. Three times ten cities and towers more than
one will I vouchsafe thee—three times ten cities
that shall not know to glorify any other god but
to glorify thee only and be called of Artemis;
and many cities will I give thee to share with
others, both inland cities and islands; and in them
all shall be altars and groves of Artemis. And thou
shalt be Watcher over Streets® and Harbours.¢”’
So he spake and bent his head to confirm his words.
And the maiden fared unto the white mountain of
Crete leafy with woods; thence unto Oceanus; and
she chose many nymphs all nine years old, all
maidens yet ungirdled. And the river Caeratus@
was glad exceedingly, and glad was Tethys that
they were sending their daughters to be hand-
maidens to the daughter of Leto. .

_ © As goddess of mariners she is called Euporia, Limenitis


etc. So Νηοσσόος, Apoll. Rh. i. 570.
4 River near Cnossus in Crete, Strabo 476.


63


natrrté


--- ἘΦ ΑΡΝΝΝΝΝΝ


CALLIMACHUS


αὖθι δὲ Κύκλωπας μετεκίαθε: τοὺς μὲν ἔτετμε
νήσῳ ἐνὶ -Λιπάρῃ (Λιπάρη νέον, ἀλλὰ τότ᾽ ἔσκεν
οὔνομά οἱ Μελιγουνίς) ἐπ᾿ ἄκμοσιν ᾿Ἡφαίστοιο
ἑσταότας περὶ μύδρον: ἐπείγετο γὰρ μέγα ἔργον"
ἱππείην τετύκοντο Ποσειδάωνι ποτίστρην. ὅ0
at ἱ νύμφαι δ᾽ ἔδδεισαν, ὅπως ἴδον αἰνὰ πέλωρα
πρηόσιν ᾿Οσσαίοισιν * ἐ ἐοικότα, πᾶσι δ᾽ ὑπ᾽ ὀφρὺν
φάεα μουνόγληνα σάκει ἴσα τετραβοείῳ
δεινὸν ὑπογλαύσσοντα, καὶ ὅππότε δοῦπον ἄκουσαν
ἄκμονος ἠχήσαντος ἐπὶ 3 μέγα πουλύ τ᾽ ἄημα δῦ
φυσάων αὐτῶν τε βαρὺν στόνον" αὖε γὰρ Αἴτνη,
αὖε δὲ Τρινακίη, Σικανῶν ἕδος, αὖε δὲ γείτων
᾿Ιταλίη, μεγάλην. δὲ βοὴν ἐ ἐπὶ Κύρνος ἀ ἀύτει,
εὖθ᾽ οἵ γε ῥαιστῆρας ἀειράμενοι ὑπὲρ ὥμων
ἢ χαλκὸν Cetovra, καμίνδθεν ἢ ἠὲ σίδηρον 60
ἀμβολαδὶς τετυπόντες ἐπὶ ὃ μέγα μοχθήσειαν.
τῶ σφέας οὐκ ἐτάλασσαν ἀκηδέες ᾿᾽Ωκεανῖναι
οὔτ᾽ ἄντην ἰδέειν οὔτε ase οὔασι δέχθαι.
οὐ νέμεσις" κείνους γε" καὶ αἱ ἱ μάλα μηκέτι τυτθαὶ
οὐδέποτ ἀφρικτὶ μακάρων ὁρόωσι θύγατρες. 65
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε “κουράων τις ἀπειθέα μητέρι τεύχοι,
μήτηρ μὲν Κύκλωπας ἑ Κι ἐπὶ παιδὶ καλιστ, εῖ,
Ἄργην ἢ ἣ Στερόπην: ὁ δὲ δώματος st μυχάτοιο
ἔρχεται ᾿Ερμείης σποδιῇ κεχρημένος ὃ aiff:


1 ὀσσείοισιν (now) 3 corr. Meineke. 2 ἐπὶ Bentley ; ἐπεὶ.
ἐπὶ Stephanus, Bentley ; ἐπεὶ.
4 κείνους δὲ : corr. Meineke.
5 évos i els as . T(aurinensis).
κεχριμένος in marg. € κεχρειμένὸς in-marg. T(auri )


* Sicily. ὃ Corsica.

‘It is hard to determine the sense of ἀμβολαδίς. The
schol. says ἐκ διαδοχῆς, i.e. in succession or alternately.
The same difficulty attaches to ἀμβλήδην and ἀμβολάδην,


64


HYMN ΠῚ


And straightway she went to visit the Cyclopes.
Them she found in the isle of Lipara—Lipara in
later days, but at that time its name was Meligunis
—at the anvils of Hephaestus, standing round a
molten mass of iron. For a great work was being
hastened on: they fashioned a horse-trough for
Poseidon. And the nymphs were affrighted when
they saw the terrible monsters like unto the crags
of Ossa: all had single eyes beneath their brows,
like a shield of fourfold hide for size, glaring
terribly from under; and when they heard the din
of the anvil echoing loudly, and the great blast of
the bellows and the heavy groaning of the Cyclopes
themselves. For Aetna cried aloud, and Trinacia@
cried, the seat of the Sicanians, cried too their
neighbour Italy, and Cyrnos? therewithal uttered
a mighty noise, when they lifted their hammers
above their shoulders and smote with rhythmic
swing’ the bronze glowing from the furnace or
iron, labouring greatly. Wherefore the daughters
of Oceanus could not untroubled look upon them
face to face nor endure the din in their ears. No
shame to them! on those not even the daughters
of the Blessed look without shuddering, though
long past childhood’s years. But when any of the
maidens doth disobedience to her mother, the
mother calls the Cyclopes to her child—Arges or
Steropes; and from within the house comes Hermes,


which the scholiasts interpret usually as either = ἀπὸ προοιμίου
or 8.8 Ξε “" by spurts” (¢.g. Pind. NV. x. 62, where among other
explanations in the scholia one is οὐκ ἐφεξῆς, @.e. ποῖ ἡ
continuously). The combination of ἀμβολάδην with few ©


in Hom. Jl. xxi. 364, Herod. iv. 181 might suggest that ©


here too dp Boradls should be taken with felovra in the sense |
of ** sputtering,” but the order of words is against that.


F 65 τ


r
owt


CALLIMACHUS


ε 4
αὐτίκα τὴν κούρην μορμύσσεται, ἡ δὲ τεκούσης ΤῸ
Ἦν .Ἁ 7 a
δύνει ἔσω κόλπους θεμένη ἐπὶ φάεσι χεῖρας.
“ ” 2 A
κοῦρα, σὺ δὲ προτέρω περ, ETL τριέτηρος ἐοῦσα,
>; »ν 7 Ψ,...8 Aid /
εὖτ᾽ ἔμολεν Λητώ σε μετ᾽ ἀγκαλίδεσσι φέρουσα,
᾿Ηφαίστου καλέοντος ὅπως ὀπτήρια δοίη,
Βρόντεώ σε στιβαροῖσιν ἐφεσσαμένου γονάτεσσι, 75
3 / / > / /
στήθεος ἐκ μεγάλου λασίης ἐδράξαο χαίτης,
” \ , \ > ν ἀφ σὦ \ ~
λοψας δὲ βίηφι: τὸ δ᾽ ἄτριχον εἰσέτι Kat νῦν
μεσσάτιον στέρνοιο μένει μέρος, ὡς ὅτε κόρσην 1


\ > a / > / > > 7
᾿ φωτὸς ἐνιδρυθεῖσα κόμην ἐπενείματ᾽ ἀλώπηξ.


~ LA / / ~
τῶ μάλα θαρσαλέη σφε τάδε προσελέξαο τῆμος 80
ἐς Κύκλ > 19 Kyde ona 8 /
ύκλωπες, κήμοί3 τι ἸἹζΚυδώνιον εἰ δ᾽ ἄγε τόξον
ἠδ᾽ ἰοὺς κοίλην τε κατακληῖδα βελέμνων
uy) Ἶ ω μ
, y eh 2 Sane SA “ ον λλ
τεύξατε: καὶ γὰρ ἐγὼ Λητωιὰς ὥσπερ ᾿Απόλλων.
ai δέ κ᾿ ἐγὼ τόξοις μονιὸν δάκος ἤ τι πέλωρον
/


θηρίον aypevow, τὸ δέ Kev Κύκλωπες ἔδοιεν." — 85

μή ε > 3... “« : EA > ¢ / ἔλ es

ἔννεπες" οἱ δ᾽ €téAccoav’ adap δ᾽ ὡπλίσσαο, out-
μον,


αἶψα δ᾽ ἐπὶ σκύλακας πάλιν jes: ἵκεο δ᾽ αὖλιν

PA ὃ A Μ) Π ,ὔ « δὲ ᾽ὔ λ A 4
ρκαδικὴν ἔπι Πανός. ὁ δὲ κρέα AvyKos ἔταμνε

Μαιναλίης, ἵνα of τοκάδες κύνες εἶδαρ ἔδοιεν.


\ shee / / \ 4 bid Ἁ
τὶν δ᾽ ὃ γενειήτης δύο μὲν κύνας ἥμισυ πηγοὺς 90


~ 1 κόρσῃ Vindob. 318, Vossian. 59.
2 κἠμοί Meineke ; ἢ # mor. :


« κεχρημένος Of mss. is probably correct. This participle
in late poetry is used in the vaguest way to indicate any
sort of condition.

> ὀπτήρια, TA ὑπὲρ TOD ἰδεῖν δῶρα (schol.), were gifts given
on seeing for the first time a new-born child (schol. Aesch.
Eum. 7; Nonn. v. 139). Very similar is the birthday-gift
proper, the δόσις γενέθλιος or γενέθλια: τὰ ἐπὶ τῇ πρώτῃ ἡμέρᾳ
δῶρα (Hesych.). Phoebe gave the oracle at Delphi as a
birthday gift to Phoebus. More usually ὀπτήρια -- ἀνακα-
λυπτήρια, gifts given to the bride by the bridegroom on


66


HYMN III


stained* with burnt ashes. And straightway he
plays bogey to the child and she runs into her
mother’s lap, with her hands- upon her eyes. But
thou, Maiden, even earlier, while yet but three years
old, when Leto came bearing thee in her arms. at
the bidding of Hephaestus that he might give thee
handsel ὃ and Brontes° set thee on his stout knees—
thou didst pluck the shaggy hair of his great breast
and tear it out by force. And even unto this day
the mid part of his breast remains hairless, even as
when mange settles on a man’s temples and eats
away the hair.

Therefore right boldly didst thou address them
then: “Cyclopes, for me too fashion ye a Cydonian@
bow and arrows and a hollow casket for my shafts ;
for I also am a child of Leto, even as Apollo. And
if I with my bow shall slay some wild creature or
monstrous beast, that shall the Cyclopes eat.” So
didst thou speak and they fulfilled thy words.
Straightway didst thou array thee, O Goddess, and
speedily again thou didst go to get thee hounds;
and thou camest to the Arcadian fold of Pan. And
he was cutting up the flesh of a lynx of Maenalus “
that his bitches might eat it for food. And to
thee the Bearded’ God gave two dogs black-and-


seeing her for the first time; Pollux ii. 59 ὀπτήρια τὰ δῶρα τὰ
παρὰ τοῦ πρῶτον ἰδόντος τὴν νύμφην νυμφίου διδόμενα. Cf. iii.
36 τὰ δὲ παρὰ τοῦ ἀνδρὸς διδόμενα ἕδνα καὶ ὀπτήρια καὶ ἀνα-
καλυπτήρια. . . καὶ προσφθεγκτήρια ἐκάλουν. Moeris 205. 24
ὀπτήρια ᾿Αττικῶς, ἀνακαλυπτήρια ᾿ Ἑλληνικῶς.

¢The three Cyclopes, sons of Gaia, were Brontes,
Steropes, Arges (Hesiod, Th. 140).

4 i.e. Cretan, cf. Stat. Th. iv. 269 ** Cydonea harundine,”
vii. 339 ** Cydoneas sagittas.”

¢ Mountain in Arcadia.


7 Cf. Hom. ΗΠ. Pan 39.
67


ς ἃ, “νι


CALLIMACHUS


τρεῖς δὲ παρουαίους * ἐ ἕνα δ᾽ αἰόλον, οἵ ῥα λέοντας
αὐτοὺς αὖ ἐρύοντες, ὅτε δράξαιντο δεράων,
εἷλκον 3 ἔτι ζώοντας ἐπ᾽ αὐλίον, ἑπτὰ δ᾽ ἔδωκε
θάσσονας αὐράων Kuvocoupidas, αἵ ῥα διῶξαι
ὥκισται νεβρούς τε καὶ οὐ μύοντα λαγωόν, 95
\ , ἋᾺ 7 A ὦ ” \
καὶ κοίτην ἐλάφοιο καὶ ὕστριχος ἔνθα καλιαὶ
σημῆναι, καὶ ζορκὸς ἐπ᾽ ἴχνιον. ἡγήσασθαι.
ἔνθεν ἀπερχομένη [μετὰ καὶ κύνες ἐσσεύοντο)
εὗρες ἐπὶ προμολῇσ᾽ ὄρεος τοῦ Ἰ]αρρασίοιο
/ 9 7 / ? ε \ 7 > #
σκαιρούσας ἐλάφους, μέγα TL χρέος" at μὲν ἐπ᾽ ὄχθῃς 100
>\ > / / > ,
αἰὲν ἐβουκολέοντο μελαμψήφιδος ᾿Αναύρου,
μάσσονες ἢ ταῦροι, κεράων δ᾽ ἀπελάμπετο χρυσός"
3 ’ Diet / Ἦν a \ \ v
ἐξαπίνης δ᾽ ἔταφές τε Kat ὃν ποτὶ θυμὸν ἔειπες
ςς ὧς Ψ >A / 5 4 ΝΜ », 99
τοῦτό κεν ᾿Αρτέμιδος πρωτάγριον ἄξιον εἴη.
Pie δ. ow "pe , 2 ὦ > ,
πέντ᾽ ἔσαν αἱ πᾶσαι" πίσυρας δ᾽ ἕλες ὦκα θέουσα 105
νόσφι κυνοδρομίης, ἵνα τοι θοὸν ἅρμα φέρωσι.
τὴν δὲ μίαν Κελάδοντος ὑπὲρ ποταμοῖο φυγοῦσαν
Ἥρης ἐννεσίῃ σιν, ἀέθλιον “Ηρακλῆι
ὕστερον ὃ ὄφρα γένοιτο, πάγος Κερύνειος ἔδεκτο.
ἤΑρτεμι Ilapfevin Τυτυοκτόνε, χρύσεα μέν τοι 110
3 \ 4 / > > / /
ἔντεα Kal ζώνη, χρύσεον δ᾽ ἐζεύξαο δίφρον,
1 παρουαίους Schneider after M. Haupt who conjectured
mapwatous, ef. Hesych. s.vv. rapwds.and mdpwos, Arist. H.A.
ix. 45, etc. ; mapovarious.


2 εἷλκον e, cf. Nonn. 25, 188; εἷλον A.
3 ὕστερον schol. Apoll. Rh. i. 996; ὕστατον.


« The ancients differed as to whether πηγός meant black
or white (Hesych. s.vv. rnyés and πηγεσιμάλλῳ).

>It is by no means certain that the mss. παρουατίους is
wrong, ‘‘ with hanging ears.” παρουαίους is based upon
Hesych. s.vv. παρωάς, mdpwos; Aelian. H.A. viii. 12, ef.
Arist. H.A. ix. 45, Dem. De cor. 260. Should we read
Ilapavaious, i.e. Molossian ὃ,


68


HYMN ΠῚ


white,” three reddish,? and one spotted, which pulled
down” very lions when they clutched their throats
and haled them still living to the fold. And he gave
thee seven Cynosurian¢ bitches swifter than the winds
—that breed which is swiftest to pursue fawns and
the hare which closes not his eyes*; swiftest too
to mark the lair of the stag and where the porcupine /
hath his burrow, and to lead upon the track of the
gazelle.

Thence departing (and thy hounds sped with
thee) thou didst find by the base of the Parrhasian
hill deer gambolling—a mighty herd. They always
herded by the banks of the black-pebbled Anaurus—
larger than bulls, and from their horns shone gold.
And thou wert suddenly amazed and saidst to thine
own heart: “This would be a first capture worthy of
Artemis.’’ Five were they in all; and four thou
didst take by speed of foot—without chase of dogs—
to draw thy swift car. But one escaped over the
river Celadon, by devising of Hera, that it might be
in the after days a labour for Heracles,’ and the
Ceryneian hill received her.

Artemis, Lady of Maidenhood, Slayer of Tityus,
golden were thine arms and golden thy belt, and a

golden car didst thou yoke, and golden bridles,


ὁ αὖ épvovres, common in Oppian and Nonnus, is appar-
ently a misunderstanding of the Homeric aveptovres (=dva-
Fepvovres).

4 Arcadian, cf. Stat. Th. iv. 295 ‘‘ dives Cynosura ferarum.”

ὁ Oppian, Cyneg. iii. 511 f.

7 Oppian, ibid. 391 ff.

9 Apollodor. ii. 5. 3 ‘*The third labour which he
(Eurystheus) imposed on him (Heracles) was to bring the
Cerynean hind (Κερυνῖτιν ἔλαφον) to Mycenae alive. This
was a hind. . . with golden horns, sacred to Artemis.”
Cf. Pind. O. iii. 29.

69


CALLIMACHUS


ἐν δ᾽ ἐβάλευ χρύσεια, θεή, κεμάδεσσι χαλινά.
ποῦ δέ σε τὸ πρῶτον κερόεις ὄ ὄχος ἠρξατ᾽ ἀείρειν;
Αἵμῳ ἐπὶ Θρήικι, τόθεν Bopéao Karas
ἔρχεται ἀχλαίνοισι δυσαέα κρυμὸν ἄγουσα. 115
“Ἠ > ν / > A \ 2 \ Ld /
ποῦ δ᾽ ἔταμες πεύκην, ἀπὸ δὲ φλογὸς ἥψαο ποίης;
Μυσῷ ἐν Οὐλύμπῳ, φάεος δ᾽ ἐνέηκας ἀυτμὴν
ἀσβέστου, τό ῥα πατρὸς ἀποστάζουσι κεραυνοί.
ποσσάκι δ᾽ ἀργυρέοιο, θεή, πειρήσαο τόξου;
~ δὲ 4 / A \ 4 Od ~
πρῶτον ἐπὶ πτελέην, TO δὲ δεύτερον ἧκας ἐπὶ δρῦν, 120
τὸ τρίτον. αὖτ᾽ ἐπὶ θῆρα. τὸ τέτρατον οὐκέτ᾽ ἐπὶ
δὴν t
ἀλλά μιν εἰς ἀδίκων ἔβαλες πόλιν, οἵ τε περὶ σφέας
οἵ τε περὶ ξείνους ἀλιτήμονα πολλὰ τέλεσκον,
σχέτλιοι" οἷς τύνη χαλεπὴν ἐμμάξεαι ὀργήν"
κτήνεά φιν λοιμὸς " καταβόσκεται, ἔ ἔργα δὲ πάχνη, 125
κείρονται δὲ γέροντες ἐφ᾽ υἱάσιν, αἱ δὲ γυναῖκες
ἢ βληταὶ θρησμόθοι λεχωίδες ἠὲ φυγοῦσαι
πἰβτοσσῶ τῶν 3 οὐδὲν ἐπὶ σφυρὸν ὀρθὸν a ἀνέστη.
οἷς 4 δέ κεν εὐμειδής τε καὶ ἵλαος αὐγάσσηαι,
/ Ou A A / / > δὲ 46
κείνοις εὖ μὲν ἄρουρα φέρει στάχυν, εὖ δὲ γενέθλη 130
/ > 2 Νν >/ SOs 3. WV “
τετραπόδων, εὖ δ᾽ ὄλβος ἀέξεται: οὐδ᾽ ἐπὶ σῆμα
ἔρχονται πλὴν εὖτε πολυχρόνιόν τι φέρωσιν"
οὐδὲ διχοστασίη τρώει γένος, ἥ τε καὶ εὖ περ
οἴκους ἑστηῶτας ἐσίνατο: ταὶ δὲ θυωρὸν .
εἰνάτερες γαλόῳ τε μίαν περὶ δίφρα ais 135
/ ~ ” \ > \ Ul Ld > /
πότνια, τῶν εἴη μὲν ἐμοὶ φίλος ὅστις ἀληθής,
5 3 > / + / / A > /
εἴην δ᾽ αὐτός, ἄνασσα, μέλοι δέ μοι αἰὲν ἀοιδή"
1 δὴν Editor ; δρῦν. 2 λιμὸς A.
3 χῶν δ᾽ mss.; corr. Cobet. 4 ods ἃ and Paris. 456.


@ εἰνάτερες -- wives whose husbands are brothers ; γαλόῳ ΞΞ
wife and sister(s) of one man. (Hom. Jl, vi. 378.) Gercke,
Rh. Mus.


70


HYMN ΠῚ


goddess, didst thou put on thy deer. And where
first did thy horned team begin to carry thee? To
Thracian Haemus, whence comes the hurricane of
Boreas bringing evil breath of frost to cloakless men.
And where didst thou cut the pine and from what
flame didst thou kindle it? It was on Mysian
Olympus, and thou didst put in it the breath of
flame unquenchable, which thy Father's bolts distil.
And how often goddess, didst thou make trial of
thy silver bow? First at an elm, and next at an oak
didst thou shoot, and third again at a wild beast. But
the fourth time—not long was it ere thou didst
shoot ἰδῇ the city of unjust men, those who to one
another and those who towards strangers wrought
many deeds of sin, froward men, on whom thou wilt
impress thy grievous wrath. On their cattle plague
feeds, on their tilth feeds frost, and the old men cut
their hair in mourning over their sons, and their
wives either are smitten and die in childbirth, or, if
they escape, bear births whereof none stands on
upright ankle. But on whomsoever thou lookest
smiling and gracious, for them the tilth bears the
corn-ear abundantly, and abundantly prospers the
fourfooted breed, and abundant waxes their prosper-
ity: neither do they go to the tomb, save when they
carry thither the aged. Nor does faction wound their
race—faction which ravages even well-established
houses: but brother’s wife and husband’s sister set
their chairs around one board.“ Lady, of that
number be whosoever is a true friend of mine, and
of that number may I be myself, O Queen, and may
song be my study for ever. In that song shall be the


xlii. (1887), p. 273 ff., sees an allusion to Arsinoé I. and
Arsinoé 11.


71


‘
et κ᾿


CALLIMACHUS


τῇ ἔνι μὲν “Λητοῦς γάμος ἔσσεται, ἐν δὲ σὺ πολλή,

ἐν δὲ καὶ ᾿Απόλλων, ἐν δ᾽ οἵ σεο πάντες ἄεθλοι,

ἐν δὲ κύνες καὶ τόξα καὶ ἄντυγες, αἵ τέ σε ῥεῖα 140
θηητὴν φορέουσιν, ὅτ᾽ ἐς Διὸς οἶκον ἐλαύνεις.

ἔνθα τοι ἀντιόωντες ἐνὶ προμολῇσι δέχονται


ὅπλα μὲν ‘Eppeins ᾿Ακακήσιο ree ᾿Απόλλων
θηρίον ὅττι φέρῃσθα: π Zpoibe ye Je γέ," πρίν. περ ἱκέσθαι
καρτερὸν ᾿Αλκεΐδην᾽ ee οὐκέτι τοῦτον ἄεθλον 145
Φοῖβος ἔ ἔχει, τοῖος γὰρ ἀεὶ Τιρύνθιος ἄκμων

ἕστηκε πρὸ πυλέων ποτιδέγμενος, εἴ τι φέρουσα
νεῖαι πῖον ἔδεσμα: θεοὶ δ᾽ ἐπὶ πάντες ἐκείνῳ


ἄλληκτον γελόωσι, μάλιστα δὲ πενθερὴ αὐτί,


A ταῦραν ὅτ᾽ ἐκ δίφροιο μάλα μέγαν ἢ ὅ γε 2 χλούνην 150


κάπρον ὀπισθιδίοιο φέροι ποδὸς ἀσπαίροντα"
κερδαλέῳ μύθῳ σε σε, θεή, μάλα τῷδε πινύσκει

“ς βάλλε κακοὺς ἐπὶ θῆρας, ἵνα θνητοί σε βοηθὸν

ε > \ Xr / 3 ” / ἠδὲ λ Ἁ
OS ἐμὲ ἱξεκχήσικσίν ὑξα APORUs Woe λδοθξ

» / / / / 3 \ \
οὔρεα βόσκεσθαι" τί δέ κεν * πρόκες ἠδὲ Aaywot 15
ῥέξειαν; σύες ἔργα, σύες φυτὰ λυμαίνονται.
καὶ βόες ἀνθρώποισι κακὸν μέγα: βάλλ᾽ ἐπὶ καὶ

τούς."
a \ Ἃ , \ 422 a
ὡς ἔνεπεν, Taxwos δὲ μέγαν περὶ θῆρα πονεῖτο.
οὐ γὰρ ὅ γε Φρυγίῃ περ ὑπὸ δρυὶ γυῖα θεωθεὶς
1 ye Blomf. ; δέ. 7
2 6 yed; ὅτε.
3 κικλήσκωσιν F and Voss. 59; -ovow AE.
4 γί κεν.


« Cf. the Homeric epithet of Hermes, ᾿Ακάκητα, Il. xvi.
185, ete.

ὃ Heracles, as son of Amphitryon son of Alcaeus.
According to Apollodor. ii. 4. 12, Alcides was the original
name of Heracles, the latter name having been bestowed
upon him by the Pythian priestess when he consulted the
72


HYMN ΠῚ


Marriage of Leto; therein thy name shall often-times
be sung; therein shall Apollo be and therein all thy
labours, and. therein thy hounds and thy bow and thy
chariots, which lightly carry thee in thy splendour,
when thou drivest to the house of Zeus. There in
the entrance meet thee Hermes and Apollo: Hermes,
the Lord of Blessing,“ takes thy weapons, Apollo
takes whatsoever wild beast thou bringest. Yea, so
Apollo did before strong Alcides® came, but now
Phoebus hath this task no longer; in such wise the
Anvil of Tiryns¢ stands ever before the gates, waiting
to see if thou wilt come home with some fat morsel.
And all the gods laugh at*him with laughter unceas-
ing and most of all his own wife’s mother ὦ when he
‘brings from the car a great bull or a wild boar,
carrying it by the hind foot struggling. With this
cunning speech, goddess, doth he admonish thee:
“Shoot at the evil wild beasts that mortals may call
thee their helper even as they call me. Leave deer
and hares to feed upon the hills. What harm could
deer or hares do? It is boars which ravage the tilth
of men and boars which ravage the plants ; and oxen
are a great bane to men: shoot also at those.” So
he spake and swiftly busied him about the mighty
beast. For though beneath a Phrygian’ oak his


oracle after he had gone into exile for the murder of his
children. Heracles asked the oracle where he should dwell
and he was told to settle in Tiryns and serve Eurystheus
for twelve years.

¢ There is no reason whatever to suppose that ἄκμων here
has any other than its ordinary sense of anvil, used meta-
phorically, as in Aesch. Pers. 52. It has been sometimes
supposed to mean unwearied = ἀκάματος.

@ Hera, mother of Hebe.

ὁ ** Phrygia, a hill in Trachis where Heracles was burnt”
(schol.).


73


CALLIMACHUS


͵ 9 3 / 3 e / \ > /
παύσατ᾽ adypayins: ἔτι οἱ πάρα νηδὺς ἐκείνη, 160
τῇ ποτ᾽ ἀροτριόωντι συνήντετο Θειοδάμαντι.

σοὶ δ᾽ ᾿Αμνισιάδες μὲν ὑπὸ ζεύγληφι λυθείσας

7 / \ /, A: 7

ψήχουσιν κεμάδας, παρὰ δέ σφισι πουλὺ νέμεσθαι
Ἥρης ἐκ λειμῶνος ἀμησάμεναι φορέουσιν
ὠκύθοον + τριπέτηλον, ὃ καὶ Διὸς ἵπποι ἔδουσιν" 165


, 3 \ ’ ε , 2 ͵
ἐν καὶ χρυσείας ὑποληνίδας ἐπλήσαντο


“ Μ εν. 4 5 A / v7
ὕδατος, ὄφρ᾽ ἐλάφοισι ποτὸν θυμάρμενον εἴη.
> \ ἐδ, δ. \ / v ε / > 23> ὦ
αὐτὴ δ᾽ ἐς πατρὸς δόμον ἔρχεαι: οἱ δέ σ᾽ ἐφ᾽ ἕδρην
/ « ~ / \ > 3 / /
πάντες ὁμῶς καλέουσι: σὺ δ᾽ ᾿Απόλλωνι παρίζεις.
εἰν Der ἂν bed ~ , ;
“ἡνίκα δ᾽ at νύμφαι oe χορῷ ἔνι κυκλώσονται 170
ἀγχόθι πηγάων Αἰγυπτίου ᾿ΙΪνωποῖο
nv / \ A / / pe JS /
ἢ Πυτάνης (καὶ yap [Πιτάνη σέθεν) ἢ evi Λίμναις,
ἢ ἵνα, δαῖμον, ᾿Αλὰς ᾿Αραφηνίδας οἰκήσουσα
ἦλθες ἀπὸ Σκυθίης, ἀπὸ δ᾽ εἴπαο τέθμια Ταύρων,
\ A lan > \ / σ “A
μὴ VELOV τημουτος EMAL Boes εινεκα μισθοῦ 175
TeTpayvov τέμνοιεν ὑπ᾽ ἀλλοτρίῳ ἀροτῆρι"
ἢ γάρ κεν γυιαΐ τε καὶ αὐχένα κεκμηῦῖαι


1 ὠκύθοον e, cf. Hesych. s.v. ; ὠκύθεον.


« When Heracles was passing through the land of the
Dryopes, being in want of food for his young son Hyllus,
he unyoked and slaughtered one of the oxen of Theiodamas,
king of the Dryopes, whom he found at the plough. War
ensued between the Dryopes and Heracles, and the Dryopes
were defeated, and Hylas, son of Theiodamas, was taken as
a hostage by Heracles (Apollodor. ii. 7. 7, Apoll. Rh. i.
1211 ff., Ovid, 16. 488). Hence Heracles got the epithet
Bouthoinas, schol. Apoll. Rh. 1.6.. Gregor. Naz. Or. iv. 123.
The Lindian peasant who was similarly treated by Heracles,
and who, while Heracles feasted, stood apart and cursed
(hence curious rite at Lindos in Rhodes, where, when they


14


HYMN III


flesh was deified, yet hath he not ceased from
gluttony. Still hath he that belly wherewith he met
Theiodamas “% at the plough.

For thee the nymphs of Amnisus rub down the
hinds loosed from the yoke, and from the mead of
Hera they gather and carry for them to feed on
much swift-springing clover, which also the horses
of Zeus eat; and golden troughs they fill with water
to be for the deer a pleasant draught. And thyself
thou enterest thy Father’s house, and all alike bid
thee to a seat; but,thou sittest beside Apollo.

But when the nymphs encircle thee in the dance,
near the springs of Egyptian Inopus? or Pitane °—
for Pitane too is thine—or in Limnae#? or where,
goddess, thou camest from Scythia to dwell, in Alae
Araphenides,’ renouncing the rites of the Tauri,
then may not my kine cleave a four-acred 9 fallow
field for a wage at the hand of an alien ploughman ;
else surely lame and weary of neck would they come


sacrifice to Heracles, they do it with curses, Conon 11,
Apollod. ii. 5. 11. 8, Lactant. Inst. Div. i. 21) is identified
with Theiodamas by Philostr. Imag. ii. 24.. Cf. G. Knaack,
Hermes xxiii. (1888), p. 131 ff.

> Inopus in Delos was supposed to have a subterranean
connexion with the Nile.

¢ On the Eurotas with temple of Artemis.
᾿ς ὦ This may be the Athenian Limnae (so schol.) ; but there
was a Limnaeon also in Laconia with temple of Artemis and
an image supposed to be that carried off by Orestes and
Iphigeneia (Paus. iii. 7) from Taurica.

¢ Attic deme between Marathon and Brauron with temple
of Artemis (Eurip. [phig. in T. 1446 ff.).

7 In the Crimea, where Artemis was worshipped with
human sacrifice (Eurip. l.c., Ovid, Trist. iv. 4, Hx Ponto
iii. 2, Herod. iv. 103).

9 The typical heroic field (Hom. Od. xviii. 374, Apoll.
Rh, iii. 1344); οἵ, Od. vii. 113.


75


CALLIMACHUS


/ ” , \ > /
κόπρον ἔπι προγένοιντο, καὶ εἰ Στυμφαιίδες elev
εἰναετιζόμεναι κεραελκέες, αἵ μέγ᾽ ἄρισται
/ > a > \ A 3 > 5 a
τέμνειν ὦλκα βαθεῖαν: ἐπεὶ θεὸς οὔποτ᾽ ἐκεῖνον 180
ἦλθε παρ᾽ ᾿Πέλιος καλὸν χορόν, ἀλλὰ θεῆται
δίφρον ἐπιστήσας, τὰ δὲ φάεα μηκύνονται.
τίς δέ νύ τοι νήσων, ποῖον δ᾽ ὄρος εὔαδε πλεῖστον,
tis δὲ λιμήν, ποΐη δὲ πόλις; τίνα δ᾽ ἔξοχα νυμφέων
φίλαο, καὶ ποίας ἡρωίδας € ἐσχες ἑταίρας; 185
- εἰπέ, Gen, od μὲν ἄμμιν, ἐγὼ δ᾽ ἑτέροισιν ἀείσω.
/ \ 7 / ’ 4 /
νήσων μὲν Δολίχη, πολίων δέ τοι evade Ilépyn,
Τηύγετον δ᾽ ὀρέων, λιμένες γε μὲν Εὐρίποιο.
ἔξοχα δ᾽ ἀλλάων Dopruvida φίλαο νύμφην,
ἐλλοφόνον Βριτόμαρτιν ἐ ἐύσκοπον᾽" ἧς ποτε Μίνως 190
ἜΡΟΝ πτοιηθεὶς ὑπ᾽ ἔρωτι κατέδραμεν οὔρεα Κρήτης.
ΤῈ [ἀφ ε, ἡ δ᾽ ὁτὲ μὲν λασίῃσιν ὕ ὑπὸ δρυσὶ κρύπτετο νύμφη,
πο ἄλλοτε δ᾽ εἱαμενῇσιν" ὃ δ᾽ ἐννέα μῆνας ἐφοίτα


“γΆ eo , ἢ ΄
Bek, παίπαλά Te κρημνούς τε Kal οὐκ ἀνέπαυσε διωκτύν,
atte, ows -

ay peop ὅτε μαρπτομένη Kat δὴ σχεδὸν ἥλατο πόντον 195
~*~ πρηόνος ἐξ ὑπάτοιο καὶ ἔνθορεν εἰς ἁλιήων


δίκτυα, τά of ἐσάωσαν: ὅθεν μετέπειτα Kvdwves


νύμφην μὲν Δίκτυναν, ὄρος δ᾽ ὅθεν ἥλατο νύμφη


At. on
» | Δικταῖον καλέουσιν, ἀνεστήσαντο δὲ βωμοὺς
ν᾿ λέγ χα ery. \ \ / ᾽ , :
~ . . tepa τε ῥέζουσι: τὸ δὲ στέφος ἤματι κείνῳ 200
ΕΟ γος, ἢ πίτυς ἢ σχῖνος, μύρτοιο δὲ χεῖρες ἀθικτοι"
ῖ


*7.¢. from Epirus. For the great size of the ᾿Ηπειρωτικαὶ
βόες see Aristotle, H.A. iii. 21, who says that when milking
them the milker had to stand upright in order to reach the
udder. Both Stymphaea and Tymphaea seem to be attested,
though the latter seems to have the better authority (Steph.
Byz. s.v. Τύμφη).

ὃ Hesiod, W. 436.

¢ Doliche: either Euboea (E.M. s.v. Ἐὔβοια), E. Maass,

~ Hermes xxv. (1890), p. 404, or [caros (Steph. Byz. s.v.”Ikapos),


76


HYMN III


to the byre, yea even were they of Stymphaean @
breed, nine? years of age, drawing by the horns;
which kine are far the best for cleaving a deep
furrow ; for the god Helios never passes by that
beauteous dance, but stays his car to gaze upon the
sight, and the lights of day are lengthened.

Which now of islands, what hill finds most favour
with thee? What haven? .Whatcity? Which of the
nymphs dost thou love above the rest, and what
heroines hast thou taken for thy companions? Say,
goddess, thou to me, and I will sing thy saying to
others. Of islands Doliche ὁ hath found favour with
thee, of cities Perge,? of hills Taygeton,’ the havens
of Euripus. And beyond others thou lovest the
nymph of Gortyn, Britomartis, slayer of stags, the
goodly archer; for love of whom was Minos of old
distraught and roamed the hills of Crete. And the
nymph would hide herself now under the shaggy
oaks and anon in: the low meadows. And for nine
months he roamed over crag and cliff and made not
an end of pursuing, until, all but caught, she leapt
into the sea from the top of a cliff and fell into the
nets of fishermen which saved her. Whence in after
days the Cydonians call the nymph the Lady of the
Nets (Dictyna) and the hill whence the nymph
leaped they call the hill of Nets (Dictaeon), and
there they set up altars and do sacrifice. And the
garland on that day is pine or mastich, but the hands


or an island off Lycia (Steph. Byz. 5.0. Δολιχή" νῆσος πρὸς τῇ
Λυκίᾳ, ws Καλλίμαχο»).

4 In Pamphylia, with temple of Artemis, Strabo 667.

ὁ In Laconia.

7 Britomartis or Dictyna, a Cretan goddess sometimes
represented as an attendant of Artemis, sometimes regarded
as identical with her.

77


Vy


CALLIMACHUS


Ἁ / Ἁ / λ ER A / wv
δὴ τότε yap πέπλοισιν ἐνέσχετο μύρσινος ὄζος


ns κούρης, ὅτ᾽ ἔφευγεν: ὅθεν μέγα χώσατο μύρτῳ.
TY ρη ἑῷ μεγαχ μῦυρτᾳ


Οὖπι ἄνασσ᾽ εὐῶπι φαεσφόρε, καὶ δὲ σὲ κείνης
ταέες καλέουσιν ἐπωνυμίην ἀπὸ νύμφης.
v1 A / ε / B ah > in 7
καὶ μὴν Κυρήνην ἑταρίσσαο, τῇ ποτ ἔδωκας
᾽ ~ a
αὐτὴ θηρητῆρε δύω κύνε, τοῖς ἔνι κούρη
Yunis παρὰ τύμβον ᾿Ιώλκιον ἔμμορ᾽ ἀέθλου.
καὶ Κεφάλου ξανθὴν ἄλοχον Δηιονίδαο,
/ A ε ’ 7 > x 7 \ A A \
πότνια, σὴν ὁμόξηρον ἐθήκαο: καὶ δὲ σὲ φασὶ


. καλὴν ᾿Αντίκλειαν ἴσον φαέεσσι φιλῆσαι!
Ὰ a A A sé ak. ow ΄
at πρῶται θοὰ τόξα καὶ aud’ ὦμοισι φαρέτρας


ἰοδόκους ἐφόρησαν: ἀσίλλωτοι δέ dw ὦμοι
δεξιτεροὶ καὶ γυμνὸς ἀεὶ παρεφαίνετο μαζός.
4 δ᾽ + 7 ὃ χὰ" 2A. /
ἤνησας δ᾽ ἔτι πάγχυ ποδορρώρην ᾿Αταλάντην,
κούρην ᾿Ϊασίοιο συοκτόνον KocaotSao,

a , {9 / 90. " 3
καί € κυνηλασίην τε καὶ εὐστοχίην ἐδίδαξας.


πῶ οὔ μιν ἐπίκλητοι Καλυδωνίου ἀγρευτῆρες


μέμφονται κάπροιο: τὰ γὰρ σημήια νίκης


᾿Αρκαδίην εἰσῆλθεν, ἔχει δ᾽ ἔτι θηρὸς ὀδόντας"


οὐδὲ μὲν “YAatov τε καὶ ἄφρονα ἱῬοῖκον ἔολπα
> ’ 3 / 3 » ᾽

οὐδέ περ ἐχθαίροντας ἐν "Ads μωμήσασθαι

τοξότιν: οὐ γάρ σφιν λαγόνες συνεπιψεύσονται,
/ / “ / > /

τάων Mawadin vaev φόνῳ ἀκρώρεια.


205


215


220


πότνια πουλυμέλαθρε, πολύπτολι, χαῖρε Χιτώνη 225


Μιλήτῳ ἐπίδημε: σὲ γὰρ ποιήσατο Νηλεὺς


« Artemis in Ephesus, Sparta, etc. > Cyrene.


¢ «©The tomb of Pelias” (schol.). See Introduction.
@ Procris. ¢ Mother of Odysseus.


7 The ms. ἀσύλ(λγωτοι is quite unknown. The transla-


tion assumes a connexion with dow da. -


78


HYMN III


touch not the myrtle. For when she was in flight,
a myrtle branch became entangled in the maiden’s
robes; wherefore she was greatly angered against
the myrtle. Upis,¢ O Queen, fairfaced Bringer or
Light, thee too the Cretans name after that nymph.
Yea and Cyrene thou madest thy comrade, to whom
on a time thyself didst give two hunting dogs, with
whom the maiden daughter of Hypseus? beside the
Ioleian tomb*° won the prize. And the fair-haired
wife? of Cephalus, son of Deioneus, O Lady, thou
madest thy fellow in the chase; and fair Anticleia,’
they say, thou didst love even as thine own eyes.
These were the first who wore gallant bow and
arrow - holding quivers on their shoulders; their
right shoulders bore the quiver strap,’ and always
the right breast showed bare. Further thou didst
greatly commend swift-footed Atalanta,’ the slayer
of boars, daughter of Arcadian Iasius, and taught her
hunting with dogs and good archery. They that
were called to hunt the boar of Calydon find no
fault with her; for the tokens of victory came into
Arcadia which still holds the tusks of the beast.
Nor do I deem that Hylaeus” and foolish Rhoecus,
for all their hate, in Hades slight her archery. For
the loins, with whose blood the height of Maenalus
flowed, will not abet the falsehood.

Lady of many shrines, of many cities, hail! God-
dess of the Tunic,’ sojourner in Miletus; for thee


9. Atalanta took a prominent part in the hunt of the Caly-
donian boar, and received from Meleager the hide and head
of the boar as her prize (Ρααβ. viii. 45).

» Hylaeus and Rhoecus were two centaurs who insulted
Atalanta and were shot by her (Apollod. iii. 9. 2).

ὁ Chitone, by-name of Artemis as huntress, wearing a
sleeveless tunic (χιτών) reaching to the knees,

79


ΝΣ
“᾿
΄


Ua woth
op:
pv


at %
hae’ é ¢


haem es
ἊΨ » Fa
UPPLYY.


CALLIMACHUS


ἡγεμόνην, ὅτε νηυσὶν ἀνήγετο Κεκροπίηθεν.
Χησιὰς ᾿Ιμβρασίη πρωτόθρονε, σοὶ δ᾽ ᾿Αγαμέμνων
πηδάλιον νηὸς σφετέρης ἐγκάτθετο νηῷ
μείλιον ἀπλοΐης, ὅτε of κατέδησας ἀήτας, 230
Τευκρῶν ἡνίκα νῆες ᾿Αχαιίδες ἄστεα κήδειν
ἔπλεον ἀμφ᾽ “Ἑλένῃ “Ραμνουσίδι θυμωθεῖσαι.

ἢ μέν τοι IIpoirés γε δύω ἐκαθίσσατο νηούς,
ἄλλον μὲν Κορίης, ὅτι of συνελέξαο κούρας
οὔρεα πλαζομένας ᾿Αζήνια, τὸν δ᾽ ἐνὲ Λούσοις 235
Ἡμέρῃ, οὕνεκα θυμὸν ἀπ᾽ ἄγριον εἵλεο παίδων.


\ V-%9 / / > /
σοὶ καὶ ᾿Αμαζονίδες πολέμου ἐπιθυμήτειραι
3 / > / / é :
.{. ἔν ποτε παρραλίῃ ᾿Εφέσῳ βρέτας ἱδρύσαντο


φηγῷ ὑπὸ πρέμνῳ, τέλεσεν δέ τοι ἱερὸν ἱἱππώ:
αὐταὶ δ᾽, Οὖπι ἄνασσα, περὶ πρύλιν ὠρχήσαντο 240
πρῶτα μὲν ἐν σακέεσσιν ἐνόπλιον, αὖθι δὲ κύκλῳ
στησάμεναι χορὸν εὐρύν: ὑπήεισαν δὲ λίγειαι
λεπταλέον σύριγγες, ἵνα ῥήσσωσιν 5 ὁμαρτῇ"
οὐ γάρ πω νέβρεια du’ ὀστέα τετρήναντο,

ἔργον ᾿Αθηναίης ἐλάφῳ κακόν: ἔδραμε δ᾽ ἠχὼ 245
Σάρδιας ἔς τε νομὸν Βερεκύνθιον. at δὲ πόδεσσιν
οὖλα κατεκροτάλιζον, ἐπεψόφεον δὲ φαρέτραι.

1 ἀξείνια Mss. ; corr. Spanheim.
2 πλήσ(σ)γωσιν Mss, ; πλίσσωσιν Arnaldus ; ῥήσσωσιν de Jan.


« Neleus, son of Codrus, founder of Miletus (Strabo, 633).

> Artemis Hegemone as leader of colonists (Paus. viii. 37).

¢ 4.¢. Athens. @ Cape in Samos. 4 River in Samos.

7 Artemis was worshipped in Ephesus with the title
Πρωτοθρονίη (Paus. x. 38. 6). For rock-cut throne on Mount
Coressus at Ephesus cf. A. B. Cook, Zeus, i. p. 140 f.

9 The ἄπλοια is sometimes described as a storm, sometimes
as a dead calm.

» Epithet of Helen as daughter of Nemesis, who was
worshipped at Rhamnus in Attica.

* King of Argos.
80


ΕῚ


HYMN ΠῚ


did Neleus* make his Guide,’ when he put off with
his ships from the land of Cecrops.¢ Lady of
Chesion ὅ and of Imbrasus,’ throned/ in the highest,
to thee in thy shrine did Agamemnon dedicate the
rudder of his ship, a charm against ill weather,
when thou didst bind the winds for him, what time
the Achaean ships sailed to vex the cities of the
Teucri, wroth for Rhamnusian” Helen.

For thee surely Proetus* established two ‘shrines,
one of Artemis of Maidenhood for that thou didst
gather for him his maiden daughters/ when they
were wandering over the Azanian* hills; the other
he founded in Lusa’ to Artemis the Gentle,” because
thou tookest from his daughters the spirit of wildness.
For thee, too, the Amazons, whose mind is set on
war, in Ephesus beside the sea established an image
beneath an oak trunk, and Hippo” performed a holy
rite for thee, and they themselves, O Upis Queen,
around the image danced a war-dance —first in
shields and in armour, and again in a circle arraying
a spacious choir. And the loud pipes thereto piped
shrill accompaniment, that they might foot the dance
together (for not yet did they pierce the bones of
the fawn, Athene’s handiwork,° a bane to the deer).
And the echo reached unto Sardis and to the Bere-
cynthian? range. And they with their feet beat
loudly and therewith their quivers rattled.


J For their madness and cure cf. Paus. ii. 7. 8, viii. 18. 7 f.

* Azania in Arcadia. ? In Arcadia.

™ For the temple of Artemis Hemera or Hemerasia at
Lusa cf. Paus. viii. 18. 8.

π Queen of the Amazons, no doubt identical with
Hippolyte.

° The flute (αὐλός) invented by Athena (Pind. P. xii, 22)
was often made from fawn bones, Poll. iv. 71, Athen. 182 π,
Plut. Mor. 150 Ε. » In Phrygia.


G 81


CALLIMACHUS


κεῖνο δέ τοι μετέπειτα περὶ βρέτας εὐρὺ θέμειλον
δωμήθη, τοῦ δ᾽ οὔτε θεώτερον ὄψεται ἠὼς
οὐδ᾽ ἀφνειότερον: ῥέα κεν [Πυθῶνα παρέλθοι. 250
~ ε \ >? / > / > /
τῶ pa Kal ἠλαίνων ἀλαπαξέμεν ἠπείλησε
Λύγδαμις ὑβριστής" ἐπὶ δὲ στρατὸν ἱππημολγῶν
ἤγαγε + Κιμμερίων ψαμάθῳ ἴ ἴσον, οἵ pa παρ᾽ αὐτὸν
κεκλιμένοι ναίουσι βοὸς πόρον ᾿Ιναχιώνης.
ἃ δειλὸς. βασιλέων, ὅσον ἤλιτεν: οὐ γὰρ ἔμελλεν 26
” 3 > A / \ 4 ΝΜ
οὔτ᾽ αὐτὸς Σκυθίηνδε παλιμπετὲς οὔτε τις ἄλλος
ὅσσων ἐν λειμῶνι ζαῦστρίῳ ἔσταν ἅμαξαι
νοστήσειν: ᾿Εφέσου γὰρ ἀεὶ Tea τόξα πρόκειται.
πότνια Μουνιχίη λιμενοσκόπε, χαῖρε Φεραίη.


μή τις ἀτιμήσῃ τὴν "Αρτεμιν: οὐδὲ γὰρ Οἰνεῖ 260


βωμὸν ἀτιμήσαντι 3 καλοὶ πόλιν ἦλθον ἀγῶνες"
> > / > 3 “ > /
μηδ᾽ ἐλαφηβολίην μηδ᾽ εὐστοχίην ἐριδαίνειν"
0." \ > oh ΘᾺ» ” / ΄-“
οὐδὲ γὰρ ᾿Ατρεΐδης ὀλίγῳ ἔπι κόμπασε μισθῷ"
, ἊΝ \ , 2901 4
μηδέ τινα μνᾶσθαι τὴν παρθένον: οὐδὲ yap ὮΩτος,
20." \ > ’ 3 \ / > 7
οὐδὲ μεν Ὡαρίων ἀγαθὸν γαμον εμνήστευσαν" 265
μηδὲ χορὸν φεύγειν ἐνιαύσιον" οὐδὲ yap ‘Imma
ἀκλαυτεὶ περὶ βωμὸν ἀπείπατο κυκλώσασθαι:


᾿ - > ~
χαΐίρε μέγα κρείουσα καὶ εὐάντησον ἀοιδῇ.


ha ἤλασε Et, Gud. Et. M. s.v. ἴσος.


2 ἀτιμήσαντι 6 and Vindobon. 318; ἀτιμάσαντι Af; ἀτι-
μάσσαντι Schneider.


« A people living on the north of the Black Sea.

> The Cimmerian Bosporus, which was named after the
Cow (ois), i.e. Io, daughter of Inachus, king of Argos.

¢ The Cayster is a river in Lydia. .

ἃ Harbour of Athens, where Artemis had a temple
(Paus. i. 1. 4).

¢ Artemis Pheraia is Artemis as Hecate from, Pherae in
Thessaly (Paus. ii. 23. 5).


82


poe


HYMN III


And afterwards around that image was raised a
shrine of broad foundations. Than it shall Dawn
behold nothing more divine, naught richer. Easily
would it outdo Pytho. Wherefore in his madness


_ insolent Lygdamis threatened that he would lay it


waste, and brought against it a host of Cimmerians 4
which milk mares, in number as the sand; who
have their homes hard by the Straits? of the Cow,
daughter of Inachus. Ah! foolish among kings,
how greatly he sinned! For not destined to return
again to Scythia was either he or any other of those
whose wagons stood in the Caystrian®’ plain; for
thy shafts are ever more set as a defence before
Ephesus.

O Lady of Munychia,? Watcher of Harbours, hail,
Lady of Pherae®! Let none disparage Artemis.
For Oeneus/ dishonoured her altar and no pleasant
struggles came upon his city. Nor let any contend
with her in shooting of stags or in archery. For the
son of Atreus vaunted him not that he suffered
small requital. Neither let any woo the Maiden;
for not Otus, nor Orion wooed her to their own
good. Nor let any shun the yearly dance; for not
tearless to Hippo” was her refusal to dance around
the altar. Hail, great Queen, and graciously greet


my song.


7 King of Calydon in Aetolia, who neglected to sacrifice
to Artemis. In anger she sent the Calydonian boar to
ravage his land.

9 Agamemnon, who shot a stag which was sacred to
Artemis and boasted of the deed (Soph. Electr. 566 f.,
Hygin. Fab. 98). This led to the ἄπλοια at Aulis and the
sacrifice of Iphigeneia.

* Queen of the Amazons, who founded the temple of
Artemis at Ephesus.


83


IV.—EIX ΔΗ͂ΛΟΝ
Τὴν ἱερήν, ὦ θυμέ, τίνα χρόνον ἢ 767°} ἀείσεις
Δῆλον, ᾿Απόλλωνος κουροτρόφον; ἢ μὲν ἅπασαι
Κυκλάδες, at νήσων ἱερώταται εἰν ἁλὶ κεῖνται,
»” “ > 9.0 \ ~ /
εὔυμνοι: Δῆλος δ᾽ ἐθέλει τὰ πρῶτα φέρεσθαι
3 / Ψ aA > / /
ἐκ Μουσέων, ὅτι Φοῖβον ἀοιδάων μεδέοντα 5
λοῦσέ τε Kal σπείρωσε Kai ὡς θεὸν ἤἥνεσε πρώτη.
e A \ > ὃ \ Δ \ II / λ ee, 2
ws Μοῦσαι τὸν ἀοιδὸν ὃ μὴ Πίμπλειαν ἀείσῃ
ἔχθουσιν, τὼς Φοῖβος ὅτις Δήλοιο λάθηται.
δ ~ 3} > / ᾿ e ἍἋ 3 /
Δήλῳ viv οἴμης ἀποδάσσομαι, ws av ᾿Απόλλων
v4 ὌΝ / > / /
Κύνθιος αἰνήσῃ pe φίλης ἀλέγοντα τιθήνης. 10
κείνη δ᾽ ἠνεμόεσσα καὶ ἄτροπος οἷά θ᾽ ἁλιπλὴξ
> / \ ~ Leng 27 a
αἰθυίῃς καὶ μᾶλλον ἐπίδρομος ἠέπερ ἵπποις
7 > / ε CP yd δ A εχ,
πόντῳ ἐνεστήρικται" ὁ δ᾽ ἀμφί € πουλὺς ἑλίσσων
᾿Ικαρίου πολλὴν ἀπομάσσεται ὕδατος ἄχνην"
~ ἂν “ εχ 9 / “
τῶ σφε καὶ ἰχθυβολῆες ἁλίπλοοι ἐννάσσαντο. 1ὅ
ἀλλά οἱ οὐ νεμεσητὸν ἐνὶ πρώτῃσι λέγεσθαι,
« Dear ies | > / 4-3 / \
ὁππότ᾽ ἐς ᾿ΩὨκεανόν τε καὶ ἐς Τιτηνίδα ηθὺν
~ > / 53." 93»ϑ νΝ ¢ 4
νῆσοι ἀολλίζονται, ἀεὶ δ᾽ ἔξαρχος δδεύει.
ε a ἊΡ ,ὔ > "(ἢ ’ > A
ἡ δ᾽ ὄπιθεν Φοίνισσα μετ᾽ ἴχνια Kdpvos ὀπηδεῖ
1 εἴ ror’ Reiske. But the text is quite right.
* ἀείσῃ schol. Lycophr. 275; ἀείσει.


« Fountain in Pieria near Mt. Olympus, sacred to the
Muses. ὃ Cynthos, mountain in Delos.
¢ The Icarian sea, so called from Icarus, son of Daedalus,


84


IV.—TO DELOS


Wuart time or when, O my soul, wilt thou sing of
holy Delos, nurse of Apollo? Surely all the Cyclades,
most holy of the isles that lie in the sea, are goodly
theme of song. But Delos would win the foremost
guerdon from the Muses, since she it was that bathed
Apollo, the lord of minstrels, and swaddled him, and
was the first to accept him for a god. Even as the
Muses abhor him who sings not of Pimpleia® so
Phoebus abhors him who forgets Delos. To Delos
now will I give her share of song, so that Cynthian ὃ
Apollo may praise me for taking thought of his dear
nurse.

Wind-swept and stern is she set in the sea, and,
wave-beaten as she is, is fitter haunt for gulls than
course for horses. The sea, rolling greatly round
her, casts off on her much spindrift of the Icarian ¢
water. Wherefore also sea-roaming fishermen have
made her their home. But none need grudge that
she be named among the first, whensoever unto
Oceanus and unto Titan Tethys the islands gather
and she ever leads the way.4 Behind her footsteps
follow Phoenician Cyrnus,? no mean isle, and
who fell into it when his father and he attempted to fly from
Crete with artificial wings to escape the wrath of Minos.
(Strabo 639, Diodor. iv. 77.)


2 See Introduction.
ὁ Corsica, colonized by the Phoenicians,


85


PT a tt th αυφν


ree ne an ay ends


ἜΦΥ eS ey ae
7


i
dk easchys 1 ἢ.
τα Geeges Sheek. Hert
CALLIMACHUS Το.
ah Uvars.
οὐκ ὀνοτὴ | καὶ Μάκρις ᾿Αβαντιὰς ᾿Ελλοπιήων 20
Σαρδώ θ᾽ ἱμερόεσσα καὶ ἣν ἐπενήξατο Κύπρις
ἐξ ὕδατος τὰ πρῶτα, σαοῖ δέ μιν ἀντ᾽ ᾿ἐπιβάθρων.
κεῖναι μὲν πύργοισι π᾿ τερισκεπέεσσιν ἐρυμναί,
Δῆλος δ᾽ ᾿Απόλλωνι" σι δὲ 'σστιβαρώτερον ἕ ἕρκος;
τείχεα μὲν καὶ λᾶες ὑπαὶ ῥιπῆς κε πέσοιεν 25
Στρυμονίου βορέαο" θεὸς δ᾽ ἀεὶ ἀστυφέλικτος"
Δῆλε φίλη, τοῖός σε βοηθόος ἀμφιβέβηκεν.
τ δὲ λίην πολέες σε περιτροχόωσιν ἀοιδαΐ,
ποίῃ  ἐνιπλέξω σε; τί τοι θυμῆρες ἀκοῦσαι;
ἢ ws? τὰ πρώτιστα μέγας θεὸς οὔρεα θείνων 80
ἄορι τριγλώχινι, τό of TeAyives ἔτευξαν,
νήσους εἰναλίας εἰργάζετο, νέρθε δὲ πάσας 3
ἐκ νεάτων ὥχλισσε καὶ εἰσεκύλισε θαλάσσῃ;
καὶ τὰς μὲν κατὰ βυσσόν, ἵν᾽ ἠπείροιο λάθωνται,
πρυμνόθεν ἐρρίζωσε" σὲ δ᾽ οὐκ ἔθλιψεν ἀνάγκη, 35
ἀλλ᾽ ἄφετος πελάγεσσιν ἐπέπλεες, οὔνομα δ᾽ ἦν σοι
᾿Αστερίη τὸ παλαιόν, ἐπεὶ βαθὺν ἥλαο τάφρον
οὐρανόθεν φεύγουσα Διὸς γάμον ἀστέρι ἴση.
τόφρα μὲν οὔπω σοι χρυσέη ἐπεμίσγετο Λητώ,
τόφρα δ᾽ ἔτ᾽ ᾿Αστερίη σὺ καὶ οὐδέπω ἔκλεο Δῆλος" 40
πολλάκι σε Τροιζῆνος ἀπὸ ξανθοῖο πολίχνης


1 χοίη MSS. 2 χ᾽ ws Mss.


3 δὲ πάσας Mss. ; δ᾽ ἐλάσσας Meineke; δ᾽ ἐπάρας Schneider.
4 πολλάκι σ᾽ ἐκ marg. Taur., corr. Meineke ; πολλάκις ἐκ.


« Euboea, which was also called Ellopia from Ellops, son
of Ion (Strabo 445, Steph. B. s.v. ᾿Ελλοπία.)

> Sardinia. ¢ Cyprus (schol. ).

ὦ ἐπίβαθρον (Hom. Od. xiv, 449, Callim. Hee. 31, Apoll. Rh.
i, 421) is properly the fee for entering a ship; οὐ. Eustath.
on Hom. l.c., Hesych. 5.0. Ξξεκναῦλον. _Here= fee for setting
foot in Cyprus. Cf. Nonnus xiii. 457 Πάφον. . . ἐξ ὑδάτων
ἐπίβαθρον ἀνερχομένης ᾿Αφροδίτης.

ὁ Strymon, river in Thrace. (ἀφ᾽ οὗ ὁ βορᾶς" Στρυμονίου
ae Steph. B. s.v.) .
8


HYMN IV


Abantian Macris® of the Ellopians, and delectable
Sardo,’ and the isle “ whereto Cypris first swam from
the water and which for fee? of her landing she
keeps safe. . They are strong by reason of sheltering
towers, but Delos is strong by aid of Apollo. What
defence is there more steadfast? Walls and stones
may fall before the blast of Strymonian’ Boreas ;
but a god is unshaken for ever. Delos beloved, such
is the champion that encompasses thee about!

Now if songs full many circle about thee, with
what song shall I entwine thee? What is that
which is pleasing unto thee to hear? [5 it the tale
how at the very first the mighty god’ smote the
mountains with the three-forked sword which the
Telchines9 fashioned for him, and wrought the
islands in the sea, and from their lowest foundations
lifted them all as with a lever and rolled them into
the sea? And them in the depths he rooted from
their foundations that they might forget the main-
land. But no constraint afflicted thee, but free upon
the open sea thou didst float; and thy name of old
was Asteria,’ since like a star thou didst leap from
heaven into the deep moat, fleeing wedlock with
Zeus. Until then golden Leto consorted not with
thee: then thou wert still Asteria and wert not yet
called Delos. Oft-times did sailors coming from the
town of fair-haired Troezen* unto Ephyra/ within


7 Poseidon.
9 Mythical artificers, ‘*notique operum Telchines,” Stat. 7.


ii. 274; S. iv. 6. 47.
h As if from aster =star. Stat. A. i. 388 ‘‘ instabili Delo.”


‘ Troezen, son of Pelops, founder of Troezen in Argolis


(Strabo 374, ‘Paus. ii. 30. 8, Steph. B. s.v.)
j Ephyra, old name of Corinth (Paus. ii. 1. 1, Strabo 338,


Steph. Byz. s. ..0.)
87


CALLIMACHUS


4 a ΑᾺΘ' ὃ θ “λ
ἐρχόμενοι ᾿Εφύρηνδε Σαρωνικοῦ ἔνδοθι κόλπου
ναῦται ἐπεσκέψαντο, καὶ ἐξ ᾿Εφύρης ἀνιόντες
οἱ μὲν ἔτ᾽ οὐκ ἴδον αὖθι, σὺ δὲ στεινοῖο παρ᾽ ὀξὺν
ἔδραμες Ἐὐρίποιο πόρον καναχηδὰ ῥέοντος, 45
Χαλκιδικῆς δ᾽ αὐτῆμαρ ἀνηναμένη ἁλὸς ὕδωρ

/ > > > / / 4 +
μέσφ ἐς ᾿Αθηναίων προσενήξαο Σούνιον ἄκρον
ἢ Χίον ἢ νήσοιο διάβροχον ὕδατι μαστὸν
Παρθενίης (οὔπω γὰρ ἔην Σάμος), ἧχι σε νύμφαι
γείτονες ᾿Αγκαίου Μυκαλησσίδες 1 ἐξείνισσαν. 50
hie 6 > > / / > ¢ /
ἡνίκα δ Ἀπόλλωνι γενέθλιον οὖδας ὑπέσχες,
τοῦτό τοι ἀντημ, οιβὸν ἁλίπλοοι οὔὐὔνομ᾽ ἔθεντο,
οὕνεκεν οὐκ ὁ aos ἐπέπλεες, ἀλλ᾽ ἐνὶ πόντου
κύμασιν hake μας τὰ ἐνεθήκαο ῥίζας.
093 7 / ς / ¢ \ « /
οὐδ᾽ “Ἥρην κοτέουσαν ὑπέτρεσας" ἡ μὲν ἁπάσαις δὅ
δεινὸν ἐπεβρωμᾶτο λεχωίσιν at Διὲ παῖδας
ἐξέφερον, Λητοῖ. δὲ διακριδόν, οὕνεκα μούνη
Ζηνὶ τεκεῖν ἤμελλε φιλαίτερον ἼΑρεος via.
τῷ ῥα καὶ αὐτὴ μὲν σκοπιὴν ἔχεν αἰθέρος εἴσω


᾿ σπερχομένη μέγα δή τι καὶ οὐ φατόν, εἶργε δὲ
é a6


τὼ

πὐλ δὴν ὠδῖσι: δύω δέ οἱ εἵατο φρουροὶ

γαῖαν ἐποπτεύοντες, ὁ μὲν πέδον ἠπείροιο

ἥμενος ὑψηλῆς κορυφῆς ἔ ἔπι Θρήικος Aipou

θοῦρος "Apns ἐφύλασσε σὺν ἔντεσι, τὼ δέ οἱ ἵππω

ἑπτάμυχον βορέαο παρὰ σπέος ηὐλίζοντο: 65
1 Μυκαλησσίδες Blomf., cf. Steph. Byz. s.v.; Μυκαλησίδες.


« Parthenia, old name for Samos (Steph. Byz. s.v.).

δ᾽ Mycale lies on the mainland, opposite Samos, of which
Ancaeus, son of Zeus or Poseidon and Astypalaia, was the
mythical king. Steph. Byz., s.v. Μυκαλησσός, says ἔστι καὶ
ὄρος Μυκαλησσὸς ἐναντίον edu: καὶ Μυκαλησσὶς τὸ Θηλυκόν.

ὁ Stat. 7. viii. 197 ‘‘ partuque ligatam Delon.”

@ Apollo.


88 ; >


HYMN IV


the Saronic gulf descry thee, and on their way back
from Ephyra saw thee no more there, but thou hadst
run to the swift straits of the narrow Euripus with
its sounding stream. And the same day, turning
thy back on the waters of the sea of Chalcis, thou
didst swim to the Sunian headland of the Athenians
or to Chios or to the wave-washed breast of the
Maiden’s Isle,* now yet called Samos—where the
nymphs of Mycalessos,? neighbours of Ancaeus, enter-
tained thee.

But when thou gavest thy soil to be the birth-
place of Apollo, seafaring men gave thee this
name in exchange, since no more didst thou float ¢
obscure (ἄδηλος) upon the water, but amid the
waves of the Aegean sea didst plant the roots of thy
feet.

And thou didst not tremble before the anger of
Hera, who murmured terribly against all child-
bearing women that bare children to Zeus, but
especially against Leto, for that she only was to bear
to Zeus a son@ dearer even than Ares. Wherefore
also she herself kept watch within the sky, angered
in her heart greatly and beyond telling, and she
prevented Leto who was holden in the pangs of
child-birth. And she had two look-outs set to keep
watch upon the earth. The space of the continent
did bold Ares watch, sitting armed on the high top
of Thracian Haemus, and his horses were stalled by
the seven-chambered cave’ of Boreas. And the


¢ Cf. Stat. Th. vi. 100 ‘‘ Dat gemitum tellus: non sic
eversa feruntur Ismara, cum fracto Boreas caput extulit
antro.” The cave of Boreas lay in the far North-east (Plin.
NV.H. vii. 10; Soph. Ant. 983, schol. ; Apoll. Rh. i. 826 ; Sil.
It. Prin. viii. 513 ; Serv. Verg. A. χ. 880, xii. 366 ; [Plutarch],
De flur, 14. δ). :


89


CALLIMACHUS


ἡ δ᾽ ἐπὶ νησάων ἑτέρη σκοπὸς εὐρειάων
ἧστο κόρη Θαύμαντος ἐπαΐξασα Μίμαντι.
ἔνθ᾽ οἱ μὲν πολίεσσιν ὅσαις ἐπεβάλλετο Λητὼ
μίμνον ἀπειλητῆρες, ἀπετρώπων δὲ δέχεσθαι.
φεῦγε μὲν ᾿Αρκαδίη, φεῦγεν δ᾽ ὄρος ἱερὸν Αὔγης 70
Παρθένιον, φεῦγεν δ᾽ ὁ γέρων μετόπισθε Φενειός.3
φεῦγε δ᾽ ὅλη Πελοπηὶς 6 ὅση παρακέκλιται ᾿Ισθμῷ,
ἔμπλην Αἰγιαλοῦ τε καὶ "Apyeos” οὐ γὰρ ἐκείνας
ἀτραπιτοὺς ἐπάτησεν, ἐπεὶ λάχεν “Ivayov Ἥρη.
φεῦγε καὶ ᾿Αονίη τὸν ἕνα δρόμον, at δ᾽ ἐφέποντο 75
Δίρκη τε Στροφίη τέ μελαμψήφιδος ἐ ἔχουσαι

σμηνοῦ χέρα πατρός, ὁ δ᾽ εἵπετο πολλὸν ὄπισθεν
᾿Ασωπὸς βαρύγουνος, ἐπεὶ πεπάλακτο κεραυνῷ.


ἡ δ᾽ ὑποδινηθεῖσα χοροῦ ἀπεπαύσατο νύμφη


αὐτόχθων Μελίη καὶ ὑπόχοοον ἔ ἔσχε παρειὴν 80


ἥλικος ἀσθμαίνουσα περὶ δρυός, ὡς ἴδε χαίτην
σειομένην Ἑλικῶνος. “ἐμαὶ θεαί, εἴπατε Μοῦσαι,
ἦ ῥ᾽ ἐτεὸν ἐγένοντο τότε δρύες ἡνίκα Νύμφαι;
Νύμφαι Ἢ χαίρουσιν, ὅτε δρύας ὄμβρος ἀέξει,
Νύμφαι 3° αὖ κλαίουσιν, ὅτε δρυσὶν οὐκέτι φύλλα. 85
ταῖς μὲν ἔτ᾽ ᾿Απόλλων ὑποκόλπιος αἰνὰ χολώθη,

1 Φενειός Arnaldus ; Φεναιός.


* Iris (Stat. Th. x. 123).

>’ Mimas, mountain in Ionia opposite to Chios.

¢ Auge, daughter of Aleos, king of Tegea. Her father,
warned by an oracle that his sons would perish by a
descendant of his daughter, made her a priestess to Athena.
She became, however, mother of Telephus by Heracles and
gave birth to her son on the hill Parthenium in Arcadia
(Diodor. iv. 33. 7 ff.). Cf Paus. viii. 48. 7, who says at
Tegea Hileithyia was worshipped as Αὔγη ἐν γόνασι because
Auge bare her son there. But he mentions another story
which said Telephus was exposed on Parthenium.

4 The autochthonous founder of Pheneos, town in
Arcadia (Paus. viii. 14. 4).


90


HYMN IV


other kept watch over the far-flung islands, even
the daughter “ of Thaumas seated on Mimas,? whither
she had sped. There they sat and threatened all
the cities which Leto approached and prevented
_ them from receiving her. Fled Arcadia, fled Auge’s ὁ
holy hill Parthenium, fled after her aged Pheneius,?@
fled all the land of Pelops that lies beside the
Isthmus, save only Aegialos*’ and Argos. For on
those ways she set not her feet, since Inachus/
belonged unto Hera. Fled, too, Aonia% on the
same course, and Dirce” and Strophia,’ holding the
hands of their sire, dark-pebbled Ismenus/; far behind
followed Asopus,* heavy-kneed, for he was marred
by a thunderbolt. And the earth-born nymph
Melia’ wheeled about thereat and ceased from the
dance and her cheek paled as she panted for her
coeval oak, when she saw the locks of Helicon
tremble. Goddesses mine, ye Muses, say did the
oaks come into being at the same time as the
Nymphs? The nymphs rejoice when the rain
makes the oaks to grow; and again the Nymphs
weep when there are no longer leaves upon the
oaks. And Apollo, yet in his mother’s womb, was
¢ Aegialos sometimes denoted the whole district from
Sicyon to Buprasium (Steph. Byz. s.v.), i.¢. Achaia (Paus.
v. 1. 1, vii. 1. 1, Strabo 333), here more strictly the district of
Sicyon (which was also called Aegiale, Paus. ii. 6. 5).

7 Inachus, river in Argolis.

g Aonia= Boeotia.

% Dirce, river at Thebes.

ὁ Strophia, unknown river of Boeotia.

J Ismenos, river of Boeotia.

* River in Boeotia.

‘ The Meliae or Ash-nymphs were of the same class as
the Dryads or Hamadryads. The Melia referred to here
was the sister of Ismenus. For the general idea cf. Stat.
Silv. i. 3. 59 ff.


91


CALLIMACHUS


ap ch Ses δ᾽ οὐκ ἀτέλεστον ἀπειλήσας ἐ ἐπὶ Θήβῃ:


“s Θήβη, τίπτε τάλαινα τὸν αὐτίκα πότμον ἐλέγχεις;


h, μήπω μή μ᾽ ἀέκοντα βιάζεο μαντεύεσθαι."


οὔπω μοι Πυθῶνι μέλει τριποδήιος ἕδρη, 90

οὐδέ τί πω τέθνηκεν ὄφις μέγας, ἀλλ᾽ ἔτι κεῖνο

θηρίον αἰνογένειον ἀπὸ [Ϊλειστοῖο καθέρπον

Παρνησὸν νιφόεντα περιστέφει ἐννέα κύκλοις"

3 93.ϑ ΥΓκΚ = F 4 Ἃ 3 \ /

ἀλλ᾽ ἔμπης ἐρέω τι τομώτερον ἢ ἀπὸ δάφνης.

φεῦγε πρόσω: ταχινός σε κιχήσομαι αἵματι λούσων 9

τόξον ἐμόν: σὺ δὲ τέκνα κακογλώσσοιο γυναικὸς

ἔλλαχες. οὐ σύ γ᾽ ἐμεῖο φίλη τροφὸς οὐδὲ ΚΚιθαι-
ρὼν

μὴ > / \ \ > / ; / 99

ἔσσεται: εὐαγέων δὲ καὶ εὐαγέεσσι μελοίμην.

ὡς ap ἐφη. Λητὼ δὲ μετάτροπος αὖτις ἐχώρει.

> > 4

ἀλλ᾽ ὅτ᾽ ᾿Αχαιιάδες μιν ἀπηρνήσαντο πόληες 100

ἐρχομένην, ᾿ Ἑλίκη τε Ποσειδάωνος ἑταίρη

Βοῦρά τε Δεξαμενοῖο βοόστασις Οἰκιάδαο,

av > > σὰ / / 4 ~~ >

ἂψ δ᾽ ἐπὶ Θεσσαλίην πόδας ἔτρεπε, φεῦγε ὃ
Αναυρος

\ / / \ e / +
καὶ μεγάλη Λάρισα καὶ at Χειρωνίδες ἄκραι,
~ \ A \ ¢ / \ /

φεῦγε δὲ καὶ Πηνειὸς ἑλισσόμενος διὰ ; Τεμπέων. 105
Ἥρη, σοὶ δ᾽ ἔτι τῆμος ἀνηλέὲς ἦ ἦτορ ἔκειτο

οὐδὲ κατεκλάσθης τε καὶ ᾧκτισας, ἡνίκα πήχεις

ἀμφοτέρους ὀρέγουσα μάτην ἐφθέγξατο τοῖα


α The dragon which occupied « or watched Delphi and
which Apollo slew; cf. Hymn Apoll. 100 ff., Hom. Hymn
A; poll. 282 ff.

> River at Delphi.

¢ The laurel of ‘the Pythian priestess at Delphi.

“ Niobe, daughter of Tantalus and wife of Amphion of
Thebes, had twelve children—six sons and six daughters—
who were slain by Apollo and Artemis because Niobe


92


HYMN IV


sore angered against them and he uttered against
Thebe no ineffectual threat: “Thebe, wherefore,
wretched one, dost thou ask the doom that shall be
thine anon? Force me not yet to prophesy against
my will. Not yet is the tripod seat at Pytho my
care ; not yet is the great serpent” dead, but still that
beast of awful jaws, creeping down from Pleistus,?
wreathes snowy Parnassus with his.nine coils. Never-
theless I will speak unto thee a word more clear than
shall be spoken from the laurel’ branch. Flee on!
swiftly shall I overtake thee and wash my bow in blood.
Thou hast in thy keeping the children of a slanderous
woman.? Not thou shalt be my dear nurse, nor
Cithaeron.° Pure am I and may I be the care of them
that are pure.” So he spake. And Leto turned
and went back. But when the Achaean cities refused
her as she came—Helice,/ the companion of Poseidon,
and Bura,? the steading of Dexamenus, the son of
Oeceus—she turned her feet back to Thessaly.
And ensure fled and great Larisa and the cliffs
of Cheiron”; fled, too, Peneius, coiling through
Tempe.

But thy heart, Hera, was even then still pitiless
and thou wert not broken down nor didst have
compassion, when she stretched forth both her arms


boasted of the number of her children as compared with
Leto, who had but two.

ὁ Cithaeron, mountain in Boeotia.

7 Helice, town in Achaia with temple of Poseidon
Heliconios (Paus, vii. 24. 5, Strabo 384, ef. Hom. 11. xx. 404).
Helice was daughter of Selinus and by Ion mother of Bura
(Paus. vii. 1. 2, vii. 25. 5).

9 Bura, town in Achaia, where Dexamenos a Centaur had
great cattle-stalls (schol.). In #.M. s.v. Βοῦσα he is called
ἱἙξάδιος.

% Pelion in Thessaly, home of the Centaur Cheiron.


93°


CALLIMACHUS


“Νύμφαι Θεσσαλίδες, ποταμοῦ γένος, εἴπατε πατρὶ
κοιμῆσαι μέγα χεῦμα: περιπλέξασθε γενείῳ 110
λισσόμεναι τὰ Ζηνὸς ἐν ὕδατι τέκνα τεκέσθαι.
Πηνειὲ Φθιῶτα, τί νῦν ἀνέμοισιν ἐρίζεις;

> / > \ 7 35 > /
ὦ πάτερ, οὐ μὴν ἵππον ἀέθλιον ἀμφιβέβηκας.
> e 7 #Q? th \ / Ἃ > τ > -
ἢ ῥά τοι ὧδ᾽ αἰεὶ ταχινοὶ πόδες, ἢ ἐπ᾽ ἐμεῖο

~ 3λ / / de / θ 11 δ
μοῦνοι ἐλαφρίζουσι, πεποίησαι δὲ πέτεσθαι

/ > / 99. -Φ >” > 7 cc Om (D \ + θ
σήμερον ἐξαπίνης ;᾽᾽ 6 δ᾽ ἀνήκοος. ““ ὦ ἐμὸν ἄχθος,
ποῖ σε φέρω; μέλεοι γὰρ ἀπειρήκασι. τένοντες.
Πήλιον ὦ Φιλύρης νυμφήιον, ἀλλὰ σὺ μεῖνον,
μεῖνον, ἐπεὶ καὶ θῆρες ἐν οὔρεσι πολλάκι σεῖο
ὠμοτόκους ὠδῖνας. ἀπηρείσαντο A€éawar.” 120
τὴν δ᾽ ἄρα καὶ Πηνειὸς ἀμείβετο δάκρυα λείβων


᾿“ς Λητοῖ, ᾿Αναγκαίη μεγάλη θεός. οὐ γὰρ ἔγωγε


, \ 2 On ee vo»
πότνια σὰς ὠδῖνας ἀναίνομαι οἷδα Kai ἄλλας
λουσαμένας ἀπ᾽ ἐμεῖο λεχωίδας" «ἀλλά μοι Ἥρη
δαψιλὲς ἠπείλησεν. ἀπαύγασαι, οἷος ἔφεδρος 125
οὔρεος ἐξ ὑπάτου σκοπιὴν ἔχει, ὅς κέ με ῥεῖα
βυσσόθεν ἐξερύσειε. τί μήσομαι; ἢ ἀπολέσθαι
ἡδύ τί τοι Πηνειόν; ἴτω πεπρωμένον ἦμαρ:
τλήσομαι εἵνεκα σεῖο καὶ εἰ μέλλοιμι ῥοάων
διψαλέην ἄμπωτιν ἔχων αἰώνιον ἔρρειν 130
Kal μόνος ἐν ποταμοῖσιν ἀτιμότατος καλέεσθαι.
> 799 > 7 ; 4 / / 9Ὲ 7 99
ἠνίδ᾽ ἐγώ: τί περισσά; κάλει μόνον Εϊλήθυιαν.

Ss \ >? 7 / ε’ἤ 5 / ev
εἶπε Kal ἠρώησε μέγαν ῥόον. ἀλλά oi “Apns
Παγγαίου προθέλυμνα καρήατα μέλλεν ἀείρας
> λέ δί TEI IE 7 δὲ δέδθ 135
ἐμβαλέειν δίνῃσιν, ἀποκρύψαι δὲ ῥέεθρα"


« Among the daughters of Peneios are Iphis, Atrax,
Tricea, Menippe, Daphne, and, according to some, Cyrene.

δ Cheiron was the son of the union of Cronus and Philyra
on Mt. Pelion (Pind. P. iii. 1 f., ix. 30, etc.).

¢ The reference is to the helplessness and shapelessness
of the lion cub at birth. Of. Aristotle, De gen. animal. iv. 6


94


HYMN IV


and spake in vain: “ Ye nymphs of Thessaly, off-
spring of a river, tell your sire to hush his great
stream. Entwine your hands about his beard and
entreat him that the children of Zeus be born in his
waters. Phthiotian Peneius, why dost thou now vie
with the winds? O sire, thou dost not bestride a
racing horse. Are thy feet always thus swift, or are
they swift only for me, and hast thou to-day been
suddenly made to fly?” But he heard her not.
“0 burden mine, whither shall I carry thee? The
hapless sinews of my feet are outworn. O Pelion,
bridal chamber of Philyra,? do thou stay, O stay,
since on thy hills even the wild lionesses oftentimes
lay down their travailof-untimely=birth.”* Then
shedding tears, Peneius answered her: “Leto,
Necessity is a great goddess. It is not I who refuse,
O Lady, thy travail; for I know of others who have
washed the soilure of birth in me—but Hera hath
largely threatened me. Behold what manner of
watcher keeps vigil on the mountain top, who would
lightly drag me forth from the depths. What shall
I devise? Or is it a pleasant thing to thee that
Peneius should perish? Let my destined day take
its course. I will endure for thy sake, even if I
must wander evermore with ebbing flood and thirsty,
and alone be called of least honour among rivers.
Here am I! What needeth more? Do thou but call
upon Eileithyia.” He spake and stayed his great
stream. But Ares was about to lift the peaks of
Pangaeum®? from their base and huri them in his
eddying waters and hide his streams. And from on
Ta μὲν ἀδιάρθρωτα σχεδὸν γεννᾷ, καθάπερ ἀλώπηξ ἄρκτος λέων.
The sense of ὠμός is precisely that of crudus in Stat.


Th. iv. 280 ** quercus laurique ferebant Cruda puerperia.”
4 Mountain in Thrace.


95


CALLIMACHUS


e , > > / \ > / 4 > ~
ὑψόθε ὃ ἐσμαράγησε καὶ ἀσπίδα τύψεν ἀκωκῇ
δούρατος" ἡ δ᾽ ἐλέλιξεν ἐνόπλιον" ἔτρεμε δ᾽ "Οσσης
οὔρεα καὶ πεδίον Κραννώνιον « αἵ τε δυσαεῖς
ἐσχατιαὶ Πίνδοιο, φόβῳ δ᾽ ὠρχήσατο πᾶσα

λί a \ 3. 3 3 ὃ ες 1 >s
Θεσσαλίη: τοῖος yap ἀπ᾽ ἀσπίδος ἔβρεμεν 1 ἦχος. 140
ε > ¢e Ψ..Ὁ > / + \ /
ws δ᾽ ὁπότ᾽ Αἰτναίου ὄρεος πυρὶ τυφομένοιο
σείονται μυχὰ πάντα κατουδαίοιο γίγαντος
εἰς ἑτέρην Ἐριαρῆος ἐπωμίδα «κιψυμένοιο,
θερμάστραι" τε βρέμουσιν ὑφ᾽ ᾿Ηφαίστοιο πυράγρης
ἔργα θ᾽ ὁμοῦ, δεινὸν δὲ πυρίκ τοί τε λέβητες 14
καὶ τρίποδες πίπτοντες ἐπ ioc ἰαχεῦσι:"
τῆμος ἔγεντ᾽ ἄραβος σάκεος τόσος εὐκύκλοιο.
Πηνειὸς δ᾽ οὐκ αὖτις ἐχάζετο, μίμνε δ᾽ ὁμοίως
καρτερὸς ὡς τὰ πρῶτα, θοὰς δ᾽ ἐστήσατο δίνας,
εἰσόκε οἱ Koinis ἐκέκλετο ““ σῴζεο χαίρων, 150
σῴζεο' μὴ σύ γ᾽ ἐμεῖο πάθῃς κακὸν εἵνεκα τῆσδε
3 3 > 4 7 / μὲ > > lak |
avr’ ἐλεημοσύνης, χάριτος δέ τοι ἔσσετ᾽ ἀμοιβή.
ἢ καὶ πολλὰ πάροιθεν ἐπεὶ κάμεν ἔστιχε νήσους
εἰναλίας: at δ᾽ οὔ μιν ἐπερχομένην ἐδέχοντο,
οὐ λιπαρὸν νήεσσιν ᾿Εχινάδες ὅρμον ἔχουσαι, 155
0.) ζ« ’ / Ed
οὐδ ἥτις Κέρκυρα φιλοξεινωτάτη ἄλλων,
Ἶρις ἐπεὶ πάσῃσιν ἐφ᾽ ὑψηλοῖο Mipavros

> 3

σπερχομένη μάλα πολλὸν ἀπέτραπεν: αἱ δ᾽ ὑπ᾽.

ὁμοκλῆς

\ «4 ΄ “ἃ

πανσυδίῃ φοβέοντο κατὰ ῥόον ἥντινα τέτμοι.


1 ἔβρεμεν ©; ἔβῥαμεν A; ἔβραχεν other mss.
* θερμάστραι Hesychius ; θερμαύστραι.


« Of. Frazer, 6.8.8, Adonis, Attis, Osiris, i. p. 197: ‘‘The
people of Timor, in the East Indies, think that the earth
rests on the shoulder of a mighty giant, and that when he is
weary of bearing it on one shoulder he shifts it to the other
and so causes the ground to quake.” Jbid. p. 200: ‘* The


96


HYMN IV


high he made a din as of thunder and smote his
shield with the point of his spear, and it rang with a
warlike noise. And the hills of Ossa trembled and
the plain of Crannon, and the windswept skirts of
Pindus, and all Thessaly danced for fear: . such
echoing din rang from his shield. And even as
when the mount of Aetna smoulders with fire and all
its secret depths are shaken as the giant under earth,
even Briares, shifts to his other shoulder,” and with
the tongs of Hephaestus roar furnaces and handi-
work withal; and firewrought basins and tripods ring
terribly as they fall one upon the other: such in
that hour was the rattle of the fair-rounded shield.
But Peneius retired not back, but abode his ground,
steadfast even as before, and stayed his swift eddying
streams, until the daughter ὃ of Coeiis called to him:
“Save thyself, farewell! save thyself; do not for my
sake suffer evil for this thy compassion; thy favour
shall be rewarded.”

So she spake and after much toil came unto the
isles of the sea. But they received her not when


- she came—not the Echinades® with their smooth


anchorage for ships, nor Cercyra which is of all other
islands most hospitable; since Iris on lofty Mimas? was


wroth with them all and utterly prevented*them.


And at her rebuke they fled all together, every one
that she came to, along the waters. Then she came


Tongans think that the earth is supported on the prostrate
form of the god Mdéooi. When he is tired of lying in one
posture, he tries to turn himself about, and that causes an
- earthquake.”

τς Pate, daughter of Coeiis and Phoebe.

¢ At the mouth of the Achelous.

ὦ *«* Windy Mimas,”’ Od. iii, 172. Mountain in Erythraea
opposite Chios,

H 97


CALLIMACHUS


ὠγυγίην δἤπειτα Κόων, Mepornida νῆσον, 160

ἵκετο, Χαλκιόπης ἱερὸν μυχὸν ἡρωίνης.

ἀλλά ἑ παιδὸς ἔρυκεν ἔπος τόδε “μὴ σύ γε, μῆτερ,

τῇ με τέκοις. οὔτ᾽ οὖν ἐπιμέμφομαι οὐδὲ μεγαίρω

νῆσον, ἐπεὶ λιπαρή τε καὶ εὔβοτος, εἴ νύ τις ἄλλη"

ἀλλά οἱ ἐκ Μοιρέων τις ὀφειλόμενος θεὸς ἄλλος ~ 165

ἐστί, Σαωτήρων ὕπατον γένος: ᾧ ὑπὸ μίτρην

ἵξεται οὐκ ἀέκουσα Μακηδόνι κοιρανέεσθαι

ἀμφοτέρη μεσόγεια καὶ at πελάγεσσι κάθηνται,

μέχρις ὅπου περάτη τε καὶ ὁππόθεν ὠκέες ἵπποι

"Hédvov φορέουσιν: ὁ δ᾽ εἴσεται ἤθεα πατρός. 170

καί vd ποτε Evvds τις ἐλεύσεται ἄμμιν ἄεθλος
ὕστερον, ὁππότ᾽ ἂν οἱ μὲν ἐφ᾽ Ἑλλήνεσσι μάχαι-
ραν

βαρβαρικὴν καὶ KeAtov ἀναστήσαντες "Ἄρηα

ὀψίγονοι Τιτῆνες ἀφ᾽ ἑσπέρου ἐσχατόωντος

ῥώσωνται νιφάδεσσιν ἐοικότες ἢ ἰσάριθμοι 175

τείρεσιν, ἡνίκα πλεῖστα κατ᾽ ἠέρα βουκολέονται,

φροὕὔρια καὶ [κῶμαι Λοκρῶν καὶ Δελφίδες ἄκραι]

καὶ πεδία Ἰζρισσαῖα καὶ ἠπείροι[ο φάραγγες ἢ

ἀμφιπεριστείνωνται, ἴδωσι δὲ πίονα καπνὸν

γείτονος αἰθομένοιο, καὶ οὐκέτι μοῦνον ἀκουῇ, 180
1 The best mss. and the Aldine (1513) have only φρούρια

καὶ (177) and καὶ πεδία Κρισσαῖα καὶ ἤπειροι (178). The words

in brackets are a worthless attempt to supply the lacunae


and are found only in the late and inferior mss. (Schneider’s
LMNO).


2 καρπὸν Mss. ; corr. Reiske.


« King of Cos (Steph. Byz. s.vv. Kés and sree ;

> Daughter of Euryplos, king of Cos, mother of Thessalos
by Heracles (Apollod. ii. 7. 8).

¢ Ptolemy II. Philadelphus, son of Ptolemy I. Soter and
Berenice, was born in Cos in 310/9 z.c. The date of the


98


HYMN IV


unto primeval Cos, the isle of Merops,“ the holy
retreat of the heroine Chalciope,? but the word of
her son restrained her: “ Bear me not, mother, here.
I blame not the island nor have any grudge, since a
bright isle it is and rich in pasture as any other.
But there is due to her from the Fates another god,°
the most high lineage of the Saviours?; beneath
whose crown shall come—not loth to be ruled by a
Macedonian—both continents and the lands which |
are set in the sea, far as where thefend of the earth ὁ
is and again whence his swift horses carry the sun.
And he shall know the ways of his sire.

Yea and one day hereafter there shall come Get
us a common struggle, when the Titans of a later day
shall rouse up against the Hellenes barbarian sword
and Celtic war,’ and from the furthest West rush on
like snowflakes and in number as the stars when
they flock most thickly in the sky; forts too [and
villages of the Locrians and Delphian heights|/ and
Crisaean plains and [glens of the mainland] be
thronged about and around, and shall behold the
rich smoke of their burning neighbour, and no longer


birth of Philadelphus is now settled by the discovery of a
new fragment of the Marmor Parium (Athen. Mitth. xxii.
[1897]) which has: ἄρχοντος ᾿Αθήνησι [Ἱερομνήμονος (310/9 B.C. )
ΤΙτολεμαίου ὁ vids ἐν Kau ἐγένετο. Cf. Theocrit. xvii. 58 ff.

ἃ Soter, or Saviour, a title of the Ptolemies.

ὁ From 300 8.0. there was a great southward movement
of the Celts from the Balkan peninsula. In 280/279 they
invaded Greece, where they attacked Delphi, but were
miraculously routed by Apollo. It was shortly after this
that a body of them settled in the district of Asia after-
wards known as Galatia (circ. 240 B.c.).

7 The readings here translated are an attempt in the
inferior mss, to supply the lacunae. They have no intrinsic
value.

99


a


2 f if


A “a ἮΝ
iP"


CALLIMACHUS


ἀλλ᾽ ἤδη παρὰ νηὸν ἀπαυγάζοιντο φάλαγγας }
δυσμενέων, ἤδη δὲ παρὰ τριπόδεσσιν ἐμεῖο
φάσγανα καὶ ζωστῆρας ἀναιδέας ἐχθομένας τε
3 / a / \ eo \ Ed 4
ἀσπίδας, at Γαλάτησι κακὴν ὁδὸν ἄφρονι φύλῳ

/ / ε \ > \ Lae OAS. 37:4 /
στήσονται" τέων al μὲν ἐμοὶ γέρας, at δ᾽ ἐπὶ Νείλῳ 185
ἐν πυρὶ τοὺς φορέοντας ἀποπνεύσαντας ἰδοῦσαι

/ “ >7 \ /
κείσονται βασιλῆος ἀέθλια πολλὰ καμόντος.
ἐσσόμενε Πτολεμαῖε, τά τοι ,“μαντήια, φαίνω.
αἰνήσεις μέγα δή τι τὸν εἰσέτι γαστέρι μάντιν
ὕστερον ἤματα πάντα. σὺ δὲ ξυμβάλλεο, μῆτερ 190

ἔστι διειδομένη τις ἐν ὕδατι νήσος ἀραιή,

/ / / / ¢ > ex 4
πλαζομένη meAdyeoou πόδες δέ οἱ οὐχ ἑνὶ χώρῳ,
ἀλλὰ παλιρροίῃ ἐπινήχεται ἀνθέρικος ὥς,
ἔνθα νότος, ἔνθ᾽ εὖρος, ὅπη φορέῃσι. θάλασσα.
τῇ με φέροις" κείνην γὰρ ἐλεύσεαι εἰς ἐθέλουσαν."" 19ὅ

at μὲν τόσσα λέγοντος ἀ ἀπέτρεχον εἰν ἁλὶ νῆσοι"
᾿Αστερίη φιλόμολπε, σὺ δ᾽ _ EvBoinde κατήεις,
Κυκλάδας ὀψομένη περιηγέας, οὔ τι παλαιόν,
ἀλλ᾽ ἔτι τοι μετόπισθε 1" Prong εἵπετο SbioS-
. . . . . . . 900
sare ἀν δας Ὁ ἐπεὶ περικαίεο ἐπυρί 3
τλήμον᾽ ὑπ᾽ ὠδίνεσσι βαρυνομένην ὁρόωσα.

Ἥρη, τοῦτό με ῥέξον 6 τοι φίλον: οὐ γὰρ ἀπειλὰς
ε ’ὔ 3 ͵ὔ / / > > \ a9
ὑμετέρας ἐφύλαξα: πέρα, πέρα eis ἐμὲ Λητοῖ.

1 φάλαγγες Μ85. ; corr. Bentley.

2 The better mss. leave a vacant space for line 200 and of
line 201 have only φλέξας ἐπεὶ περικαίεο πυρί (κῆρι emend.
Bentley). Only the late and inferior mss. (Schneider’s
LMNO) supply ἔστης δ᾽ ἐν μέσσῃσι κατοικτείρασα δὲ Λητὼ | φῦκος


ἅπαν κατέφλεξας, or Similar words ; a very bad attempt to fill
the lacuna. Some verb of speaking seems necessary.


« In the course of the revolt of Magas of Cyrene Ptolemy
Philadelphus had enrolled a body of Gallic mercenaries.


100


HYMN IV


by hearsay only; but already beside the temple
behold the ranks of the foemen, and already beside
my tripods the swords and cruel belts and hateful
shields, which shall cause an evil journey to the
foolish tribe of the Galatians. Of these shields
some shall be my guerdon; others, when they have
seen the wearers perish amid fire, shall be set by
the banks of Nile” to be the prizes of a king who
laboured much. O Ptolemy who art to be, these
prophecies I declare for thee. Greatly shalt thou
praise in all the days to be him that prophesied
while yet in his mother’s womb. But mark thou,
mother: there is to be seen in the water a tiny
island, wandering over the seas. Her feet abide not
in one place, but on the tide she swims even as a stalk
of asphodel, where the South wind or the East wind
blows, whithersoever the sea carries her. Thither do
thou carry me. For she shall welcome thy coming.”

When he had spoken thus much, the other islands
in the sea ran away. But thou, Asteria, lover of
song, didst come down from Euboea to visit the
round Cyclades—not long ago, but still behind thee
trailed the sea-weed of Geraestus . . . since thy
heart ὃ was kindled, seeing the unhappy lady in the
grievous pangs of birth: “ Hera, do to me what thou
wilt. For I heed not thy threats. Cross, cross
over, Leto, unto me.”’


They became rebellious and attempted to make themselves
masters of Egypt. Ptolemy enticed them into a desert
island formed by the branches of the Nile, where he left
them to die by famine and mutual slaughter (Paus. i. 7. 2).
See Bouché-Leclercg, Histoire des Lagides, i. p. 167;
Mahaffy, The Empire of the Ptolemies, p. 124 ff. The date
of the revolt of Magas is round about 278 B.c., and thus
about the same date as the Gallic attack on Delphi.
> Translating κῆρι.
101


CALLIMACHUS


ἔννεπες" ἡ δ᾽ ἀρητὸν 1 ἄλης ἀπεπαύσατο λυγρῆς,

ἕζετο δ᾽ ᾿ΙΪνωποῖο παρὰ ῥόον, ὄντε βάθιστον
A AP SH) / Ὁ 7 CSF,

γαῖα τότ᾽ e€avinow, ὅτε πλήθοντι ῥεέθρῳ
Νεῖλος ἀπὸ κρημνοῖο κατέρχεται Αἰθιοπῆος"
λύσατο δὲ ζώνην, ἀπὸ δ᾽ ἐκλίθη ἔμπαλιν ὦμοις
φοίνικος ποτὶ πρέμνον ἀμηχανίης ὑπὸ λυγρῆς
τειρομένη" νότιος δὲ διὰ χροὸς ἔρρεεν ἱδρώς.
εἶπε δ᾽ ἀλυσθμαίνουσ a “τί μητέρα, κοῦρε, βαρύνεις;
αὕτη τοι, φίλε, νῆσος ἐπιπλώουσα θαλάσσῃ.
γείνεο, γείνεο, κοῦρε, καὶ ἤπιος ἔξιθι κόλπου.
νύμφα Διὸς βαρύθυμε, σὺ δ᾽ οὐκ ἄρ᾽ ἔμελλες ἄπυστος
δὴν ἔμεναι" τοίη σε προσέδραμεν ἀγγελιῶτις,
εἶπε δ᾽ ἔτ᾽ ἀσθμαίνουσα, φόβῳ δ᾽ ἀνεμίσγετο μῦθος,
“Ἥρη τιμηέσσα, πολὺ προὔχουσα θεάων
σὴ μὲν ἐγώ, σὰ δὲ πάντα, σὺ δὲ κρείουσα κάθησαι
γνησίη Οὐλύμποιο, καὶ οὐ χέρα δείδιμεν ἄλλην
θηλυτέρην, σὺ δ᾽, ἄνασσα, τὸν αἴτιον εἴσεαι ὀργῆς.
Λητώ τοι μίτρην ᾿ἀναλύεται ἔνδοθι νήσου.
ἄλλαι μὲν πᾶσαί μιν ἀπέστυγον οὐδ᾽ ἐδέχοντο"
᾿Αστερίη δ᾽ ὀνομαστὶ παρερχομένην ἐκάλεσσεν,
᾿Αστερίη, πόντοιο κακὸν σά ον" οἶσθα καὶ αὐτή.
ἀλλά, φίλη, δύνασαι γάρ, ἀμύνειν, πότνια, δούλοις
ὑμετέροις, ot σεῖο πέδον πατέουσιν ἐφετμῇ.᾽

ἢ καὶ ὑπὸ χρύσειον ἐδέθλιον ἷζε κύων ὥς,
᾿Αρτέμιδος ἥτις τε, θοῆς ὅτε παύσεται ἄγρης,
ἵζει θηρήτειρα παρ᾽ ἴχνεσιν, οὔατα δ᾽ αὐτῆς
ὀρθὰ μάλ᾽, αἰὲν ἑτοῖμα θεῆς ὑποδέχθαι ὀμοκλήν"
τῇ ἰκέλη Θαύμαντος ὑπὸ θρόνον ἵζετο κούρη.
κείνη. δ᾽ οὐδέποτε σφετέρης ἐπιλήθεται ἕδρης,
οὐδ᾽ ὅτε οἵ ληθαῖον ἐπὶ πτερὸν ὕπνος ἐρείσῃ,

1 ἀρητὸν Dilthey ; ἄρητον.


« See note on Hymn iii, 171. » See note on Hymn ii. 4.
102


205


210


215


220


225


230


= HYMN IV

So didst thou speak, and she gladly ceased from
her grievous wandering and sat by the stream of
Inopus,* which the earth sends forth in deepest
flood at the season when the Nile comes down in
full torrent from the Aethiopian steep. And she
loosed her girdle and leaned back her shoulders -
against the trunk of a palm-tree,’ oppressed by
grievous distress, and the sweat poured over her
flesh like rain. And she spake in her weakness:
“Why, child, dost thou weigh down thy mother?
There, dear child, is thine island floating on the sea.
Be born, be born, my child, and gently issue from
the womb.’ O Spouse of Zeus, Lady of heavy anger,
thou wert not to be for long without tidings thereof :
so swift a messenger hastened to thee. And, still
breathing heavily, she spake—and her speech was
mingled with fear: “ Honoured Hera, of goddesses
most excellent far, thine am I, all things are thine,
and thou sittest authentic queen of Olympus, and ©
we fear no other female hand; and thou, O Queen,
wilt know who is the cause of thine anger. Leto is
undoing her girdle within an island. All the others
spurned her and received her not; but Asteria
called her by name as she was passing by—Asteria,
that evil scum of the sea: thou knowest it thyself.
But, dear Lady,—for thou canst—defend thy servants,
who tread the earth at thy behest.”

So she spake and seated her beside the golden
throne, even as a hunting hound of Artemis, which,
when it hath ceased from the swift chase, sitteth by
her feet, and its ears are erect, ever ready to receive
the call of the goddess. Like thereto the daughter
of Thaumas sat beside the throne. And she never
forgetteth her seat, not even when sleep lays upon
her his forgetful wing, but there by the edge of the

103


CALLIMACHUS


e
ἀλλ᾽ αὐτοῦ μεγάλοιο ποτὶ γλωχῖνα θρόνοι 235
τυτθὸν ἀποκλίνασα καρήατα λέχριος εὕδει.
οὐδέ ποτε ζώνην ἀναλύεται οὐδὲ ταχείας
ἐνδρομίδας, μ μή͵ οἵ τι καὶ αἰφνίδιον ἔπος εἴπῃ
δεσπότις. ἡ δ᾽ ἀλεγεινὸν ἀλαστήσασα προσηύδα
“οὕτω νῦν, ὦ Ζηνὸς ὀνείδεα, καὶ γαμέοισθε 240


OS λάθρια καὶ τίκτοιτε κεκρυμμένα, μηδ᾽ ὅθι δειλαὶ


δυστοκέες μογέουσιν ἀλετρίδες, ἀλλ᾽ ὅθι φῶκαι
εἰνάλιαι τίκτουσιν, ἐνὶ σπιλάδεσσιν ἐρήμοις.
“ἊΝ, / δ᾽ ὃ / 4 7 “ ὃ

στερίῃ δ᾽ οὐδέν τι βαρύνομαι εἵνεκα τῆσδε
> λ / δ᾽ Ν i > θ 7 es ᾽ 945
ἀμπλακίης, οὐδ᾽ ἔστιν ὅπως ἀποθύμια ῥέξω,
τόσσα δέοι" μάλα γάρ τε κακῶς ἐχαρίσσατο Λητοῖ:
ἀλλά μιν ἔκπαγλόν τι σεβίζομαι, οὕνεκ᾽ ἐμεῖο

/ ᾽ > / A > > ᾽ὔ / 99
δέμνιον οὐκ ἐπάτησε, Διὸς δ᾽ ἀνθείλετο πόντον.

ε A ” A 7 δὲ 6 ~ “λ 3 ὃ \

ἡ μὲν ἔφη: κύκνοι δὲ θεοῦ μέλποντες ἀοιδοὶ
Μῃόνιον Πακτωλὸν ἐκυκλώσαντο λιπόντες 250
ε / \ “ > / \ /
ἑβδομάκις περὶ Δῆλον, ἐπήεισαν δὲ Aoxein
Μουσάων ὄρνιθες, ἀοιδότατοι πετεηνῶν"

3, ε a 4 7 > / A

ἔνθεν ὁ παῖς τοσσάσδε λύρῃ ἐνεδήσατο χορδὰς

ὕστερον, ὁσσάκι κύκνοι ἐπ᾽ ὠδίνεσσιν ἄεισαν.

» > 4 3 + e ΟΣ. ε > 4 |

ὄγδοον οὐκέτ᾽ ἄεισαν, ὁ δ᾽ ἔκθορεν, at δ᾽ ἐπὶ pa-

κρὸν 255

, / A 7 > ,

νύμφαι Δηλιάδες, ποταμοῦ γένος ἀρχαίοιο,
“5 3 / e \ / + Me > 52 ἃ

εἶπαν Ἐλειθυίης ἱερὸν μέλος, αὐτίκα δ᾽ αἰθὴρ

χάλκεος ἀντήχησε διαπρυσίην ὀλολυγήν,

οὐδ᾽ Ἥρη νεμέσησεν, ἐπεὶ χόλον ἐξέλετο Ζεύς.

χρύσεά τοι τότε πάντα θεμείλια γείνετο, Δῆλε, ο60

χρυσῷ δὲ τροχόεσσα πανήμερος ἔρρεε λίμνη,

χρύσειον δ᾽ ἐκόμησε γενέθλιον ἔ ἔρνος ἐλαίης,

χρυσῷ δὲ πλήμυρε βαθὺς ᾿Ϊνωπὸς ἐλιχθείς.


1 δέ οἱ mss. ; δέω Reiske.
104


HYMN IV


great throne with head a little bent aslant she sleeps.
Never does she unloose her girdle or her swift
hunting-boots lest her mistress give her some sudden
command. And Hera was grievously angered and
spake to her: “So now, O shameful creatures of
Zeus, may ye all wed in secret and bring forth in
darkness, not even where the poor mill-women bring
forth in difficult labour, but where the seals of the
sea bring forth, amid the desolate rocks. But against
Asteria am I no wise angered for this sin, nor can I
do to her so unkindly as I should—for very wrongly
has she done a favour to Leto.  Howbeit I honour
her exceedingly for that she did not desecrate my
bed, but instead of Zeus preferred the sea.”

She spake: and with music the swans,“ the gods’
own minstrels, left Maeonian Pactolus and circled
seven times round Delos, and sang over the bed of
child-birth, the Muses’ birds, most musical of all birds
that fly. Hence that child in after days strung the
lyre with just so many strings—seven strings, since
seven times the swans sang over the pangs of birth.
No eighth time sang they: ere that the child leapt
forth and the nymphs of Delos, offspring of an
ancient river, sang with far-sounding voice the holy
chant of Eileithyia. And straightway the brazen
sky echoed back the far-reaching chant and Hera
grudged it not, because Zeus had taken away her
anger. In that hour, O Delos, all thy foundations
became of gold: with gold thy round lake ὃ flowed all
day, and golden foliage thy natal olive-tree put forth
and with gold fiowed coiled Inopus in deep flood.


« Apoll. Rhod. iv. 1300 f. ὅτε καλὰ vdovros ἐπ᾽ ὀφρύσι
Πακτωλοῖο κύκνοι κινήσωσιν ἑὸν μέλος.
» See note on Hymn ii. 59.


105


CALLIMACHUS


3. \ / deat 2 2, σ a
αὐτὴ δὲ χρυσέοιο am’ ovdeos εἵλεο παῖδα,
ἐν δ᾽ ἐβάλευ κόλποισιν, ἔπος δ᾽ ἐφθέγξαο τοῖον: 265

“ὦ μεγάλη πολύβωμε πολύπτολι πολλὰ φέρουσα,
mioves ἤπειροί τε καὶ at περιναίετε νῆσοι.
αὐτὴ ἐγὼ τοιήδε, δυσήροτος, ἀλλ᾽ am’ ἐμεῖο
Δήλιος ᾿Απόλλων κεκλήσεται, οὐδέ τις ἄλλη
γαιάων τοσσόνδε θεῷ πεφιλήσεται ἄλλῳ, 270

3 K \ / Il ὃ / A / 4
ov Κερχνὶς κρείοντι Ποσειδάωνι Λεχαίῳ,
οὐ πάγος “Eppety Κυλλώνιος, οὐ Διὶ “Κρήτη,
ὡς ἐγὼ ᾿Απόλλωνι: καὶ ἔσσομαι οὐκέτι πλαγκτή.
ὧδε σὺ μὲν κατέλεξας" ὁ δὲ γλυκὺν ἔ ἔσπασε μαζόν.

τῷ καὶ νησάων ἁγιωτάτη ἐξέτι κείνου 275
κλήζῃ, ᾿Απόλλωνος κουροτρόφος: οὐδέ σ᾽ *Kvuw

0.39 9 / 9.39 = > / ”
οὐδ᾽ ᾿Αίδης οὐδ᾽ ἵπποι ἐπιστείβουσιν "Ἀρηος"

3 / > a 7 3A > \
ἀλλά τοι ἀμφιετεῖς δεκατηφόροι αἰὲν ἀπαρχαὶ
πέμπονται, πᾶσαι δὲ χοροὺς ἀνάγουσι πόληες,

- \ pees ¢gpye¢ PATH 3 5.8 / 80
at τε πρὸς ἠοίην αἵ θ᾽ ἕσπερον αἵ T ava μέσσην 2
κλήρους ἐστήσαντο, καὶ οἵ καθύπερθε βορείης
οἰκία θινὸς ἔχουσι, πολυχρονιώτατον αἷμα.
οἱ μέν τοι καλάμην τε καὶ ἱερὰ δράγματα πρῶτοι
3 4 LA = Δ / θ 8 Π λ A
ἀσταχύων popéovow: ἃ Δωδώνηθι" Πελασγοὶ


99


1 αὕτη Reiske. 2 Λεχαίου Hemsterhuis.
3 Δωδώνηθι marg. Taur.; Δωδώνηθε.


«ὦ, 6, Cenchreae, one of the harbours of Corinth (‘* bimaris
Corinthi”’), the other being Lechaeum.

> In Arcadia.

¢ The Hyperboreans, who suffered neither disease nor
age (Pind. P. x. 41, O. iii. 16; Hesiod fr. 209; Herod. iv.
32; Diodor. ii. 47; Strabo 341; Plin. V.H. iv. 89, vi. 34
and 55; Mela i. 12 f., iii. 36). There is a useful recent
discussion by Otto Schroeder in Archiv f. Religionswissen-
schaft, viii. (1904-5) p. 69 ff. The meaning of the name is
much disputed. Pindar, O. iii. 55, takes it to mean ‘‘ the
people behind Boreas,” the north wind. Modern sugges-


106


HYMN IV


And thou thyself didst take up the child from
the golden earth and lay him in thy lap and thou
spakest saying: “O mighty and of many altars and
many cities, bounteous Earth! rich continents and ye.
_ islands set around lo! I am as thou see’st—hard of
tillage; yet from me shall Apollo be called ‘of
Delos,’ and none other among all lands shall be so
beloved by any other god: not Cerchnis® so loved
by Poseidon, Lord of Lechaeum, not Cyllene’s hill?
by Hermes, not Crete by Zeus, as I by Apollo; and
I shall no more be a wandering isle.”” Thus didst
thou speak and the child drew the sweet breast.

Wherefore from that day thou art famed as the
most holy of islands, nurse of Apollo’s youth. On
thee treads not Enyo nor Hades nor the horses of
Ares ; but every year tithes of first-fruits are sent to
thee: to thee all cities lead up choirs, both those
cities which have cast their lots toward the East and
those toward the West and those in the South, and
the peoples which have their homes above the
Northern shore, a very long-lived race.¢ These @
first bring thee cornstalks and holy sheaves of
corn-ears, which the Pelasgians of Dodona, who
tions are ὑπέρ + Bdpa, hill, ‘*the people over the hills,”
or ae Ileppepées, Herod. iv. 33, cf. Hesych. περφερέες"
θεωροί.

4 The version of Callimachus is that the offerings come
from the Hyperboreans to Dodona, thence to Malis, then to
Euboea, then to Delos. Herodotus says the offerings came
from the Hyperboreans to Scythia, then from tribe to tribe
till they reached the head of the Adriatic, thence to Dodona,
then to Malis, to Carystus in Euboea, then to Andros, then
to Tenos, and thence to Delos. Pausanias, i. 31. 2, says the
Hyperboreans gave them to the Arimaspi, they to the
Issedones, then the Scythians carried them to Sinope, then


they passed through Greece to Prasiae in Attica, and were
then carried by the Athenians to Delos,


107


we


᾿ς
Aes


CALLIMACHUS


τηλόθεν ἐκβαίνοντα + πολὺ “πρώτιστα δέχονται,
γηλεχέες θεράποντες ἀσυγήτοιο λέβητος"
δεύτερον ‘Iepov ἄστυ καὶ οὔρεα Μηλίδος αἴης
ἔρχονται: κεῖθεν δὲ διαπλώουσιν ᾿Αβάντων

εἰς ἀγαθὸν πεδίον Ληλάντιον' οὐδ᾽ ἔτι μακρὸς

6 πλόος Ἐὐβοίηθεν, ἐπεὶ σέο γείτονες ὅρμοι.
πρῶταΐ τοι τάδ᾽ ἔνεικαν ἀπὸ ξανθῶν ᾿Αριμασπῶν
Οὐὖὐπίς τε Λοξώ τε καὶ εὐαίων “Exaepyn,
θυγατέρες Βορέαο, καὶ ἄρσενες οἱ TOT ἄριστοι
ἠιθέων" οὐδ᾽ οἵ γε παλιμπετὲς οἴκαδ᾽ ἵκοντο,
εὔμοιροι δ᾽ ἐγένοντο, καὶ ἀκλέες οὔποτ᾽ ἐκεῖνοι.
ἢ τοι Δηλιάδες μέν, ὅτ᾽ εὐἤχης ὑμέναιος

ἤθεα κουράων μο were, ἥλικα χαίτην
παρθενικαῖς," 7 atdes € BE Bepos τὸ τὸ πρῶτον ἰούλων
ἄρσενες Abdou ἀπαρχόμενοι φορέουσιν.


4 \ » 3 » Ss 3 /
οὔτε σιωπηλὴν οὔτ᾽ ἄψοῴφον οὖλος ἐθείραις
σ > > 9 / > /
Eozepos, ἀλλ᾽ αἰεί σε καταβλέπει ἀμφιβόητον.


7" € \ ς / , / /
τ" οὗ μὲν ὑπαείδουσι νόμον Λυκίοιο γέροντος,


« > Δ = 7 / Μ 3 ’ὔ
ὅν τοι ἀπὸ Ξάνθοιο θεοπρόπος ἤγαγεν ᾿Ωλήν"

ε 5
at δὲ ποδὶ πλήσσουσι χορίτιδες ἀσφαλὲς οὖδας.

\ \
δὴ τότε Kal στεφάνοισι βαρύνεται ἱρὸν ἄγαλμα

1 εἰσβαίνοντα Meineke.
2 παρθενικαῖς marg. €; παρθενικαί.
p g. p


« The famous Δωδωναῖον ce cee (Suid. s.v., Steph. Byz.
8.0. Δωδώνη, cf. Strabo, vii. fr. 3) is discussed by A. B. Cook,
‘© The Gong at Dodona”’ in 7... xxii. (1902) p. 5 ff., who
thinks the various allusions may be harmonized if we assume
that the original *‘ gong” was the row of resonant tripods
round the sacred enclosure, and that later (say 4th century
B.c.) these were replaced by a more elaborate gong consist-
ing of two pillars, on one of which was mounted the figure
of a boy holding a whip formed of three chains tipped


108


285


290


295


᾿Αστερίη θυόεσσα, σὲ μὲν περί T ἀμφί τε νῆσοι 300
. κύκλον ἐποιήσαντο καὶ ὡς χορὸν ἀμφεβάλοντο"


305


el le tld '


it bit Ὁ


HYMN IV


couch upon the ground, servants of the caldron 4%
which is never silent—far first receive, as these
offerings enter their country from afar. Next they
come to the Holy town and mountains of the Malian


land; and thence they sail across to the goodly


Lelantian plain? of the Abantes; and then not long
is the voyage from Euboea, since thy havens are nigh


thereto. The first to bring thee these offerings from


the fair-haired Arimaspi® were Upis and Loxo and
happy Hecaerge, daughters of Boreas, and those who
then were the best of the young men. And they
returned not home again, but a happy fate was theirs,
and they shall never be without their glory. Verily
the girls of Delos, when the sweet-sounding marriage
hymn affrights the maidens’ quarters, bring offerings
of their maiden hair to the maidens, while the boys
offer to the young men the first harvest of the down
upon their cheeks.

Asteria, island of incense, around and about thee
the isles have made a circle and set themselves about
thee as a choir. Not silent art thou nor noiseless
when Hesperus of the curling locks looks down on
thee, but ringing evermore with sound. The men
sing the song of the old man of Lycia—the very song
which the seer Olen? brought thee from Xanthos:
the maidens of the choir beat with their feet the
steadfast ground. Then, too, is the holy image laden


with buttons which, when moved by the wind, beat upon
a bronze λέβης mounted upon the other pillar. Cf. Callim.
fr. 111. > In Boeotia.

¢ For the Arimaspi see Herod. iv. 13 ff.

4 Prehistoric poet from Lycia (Xanthos is a river in
Lycia); Herod. iv. 35 says he wrote the hymn sung at
Delphi in honour of the Hyperborean maidens. Cf, Paus.
ix. 27. 2, Suid. s.v. Ὦλήν.

109


CALLIMACHUS


vfewe» Κύπριδος ἀρχαίης ἀριήκοον, ἥν ποτε Θησεὺς
WW Me" εἴσατο σὺν παίδεσσιν, ὅτε Ἰζρήτηθεν ἀνέπλει.

= . οὗ χαλεπὸν μύκημα καὶ ἄγριον υἷα φυγόντες 310
--heaw , Πασιφάης καὶ γναμπτὸν ἕδος σκολιοῦ λαβυρίνθου,
πότνια, σὸν περὶ βωμὸν ἐγειρομένου κιθαρισμοῦ
κύκλιον ὠρχήσαντο, χοροῦ δ᾽ ἡγήσατο Θησεύς.

ΝΜ 3 / / e \ /
ἔνθεν ἀειζώοντα θεωρίδος ἱερὰ Φοίβῳ


ν 1D - , ᾿ eS Lees
) Κεκροπίδαι πέμπουσι, τοπήια νηὸς ἐκείνης. 315
τ 62 >A , 7 : SAX , ? ,
Ὁ Σ στερίη πολύβωμε πολύλλιτε, τίς δέ σε ναύ-
ad ὰ TNS
anil


3 > / / \ /
ἔμπορος Αἰγαίοιο παρήλυθε νηὶ θεούσῃ;
οὐχ οὕτω μεγάλοι μιν ἐπιπνείουσιν ἀῆται,
‘ ΔΨ / ΝΜ 3 Ἁ A /
χρειὼ δ᾽ ὅττι τάχιστον ἄγει πλόον, ἀλλὰ τὰ λαίφη


/ ὠκέες ἐστείλαντο καὶ od πάλιν αὖτις ἔβησαν, 320
KTR Cw \ , Ay os ibaa aon ἐὰν
ee tune, πρὶν μέγαν 7)* σέο βωμὸν ὑπὸ πληγῇσιν ἑλίξαι
==" ῥησσόμενον καὶ πρέμνον ὀδακτάσαι ἁγνὸν ἐλαίης
- χεῖρας ἀποστρέψαντας- ἃ Δηλιὰς εὕρετο νύμφη

"Ἂ 7 " nas 7 7
es παίγνια κουρίζοντι καὶ ᾿Απόλλωνι γελαστύν.
μια» «οὐσλασαδν ne > 7 27 ᾿Ξ τι] eet? ;
εις: LOTLN ὦ νήσων εὕεστιε, χαῖρε μεν αὑτὴ, 920
ΚΑ. VY ᾿ > ἢ
δεστὼ χαίροι δ᾽ ᾿Απόλλων τε καὶ ἣν ἐλοχεύσατο 3 Λητώ.
ὥστυ


je 2 μέγαν ἢ (ἢ) Mss. ; μεγάλη Wilamowitz.
errs. __* 53. ἣν ἐλοχεύσατο Mss. ; ἣ ἐλ. Stephanus; ἥ σφ᾽ ἐλ. Meineke ;
πο ἣ ’vedX. Schneider ; ἣν ἐλοχεύσαο Wilamow.


« The Minotaur.

> Pasiphaé, daughter of Helios, wife of Minos, king of
Crete.

¢ The ship in which Theseus carried to Crete the seven
maidens and seven boys as an offering to the Minotaur.


110


HYMN IV


with garlands, the famous image of ancient Cypris,
whom of old Theseus with the youths established
when he was sailing back from Crete. Having
escaped the cruel bellowing and the wild son®@ of
Pasiphaé ὃ and the coiled habitation of the crooked
labyrinth, about thine altar, O lady, they raised the
music of the lute and danced the round dance, and
Theseus led the choir. Hence the ever-living offer-
ings of the Pilgrim Ship* do the sons? of Cecrops
send to Phoebus, the gear of that vessel.

Asteria of many altars and many prayers, what
merchant mariner of the Aegean passes by thee with
speeding ship? Never do such mighty winds as that
blow upon him, but though need urges the swiftest
voyage that may be, yet they speedily furl their sails
and go not on board again, ere they have circled thy
great altar buffeted with blows and bitten the sacred
trunk of the olive, their hands tied behind their
backs.’ These things did the nymph of Delos devise
for sport and laughter to young Apollo.

O happy hearth of islands, hail to thyself! Hail
also to Apollo and to her’ whom Leto bare !


With the help of Ariadne, Theseus slew the monster (Plato,
Phaedo, 58 b).

4 The Athenians, who vowed that if Theseus came safely
home they would send a θεωρία every year to Delos
(Plato, l.c.).

ὁ **In Delos it was the custom to run round the altar of
Apollo and to beat the altar and, their hands tied behind
their backs, to take a bite from the olive-tree ” (schol. ).

7 Artemis,


111


Υ.-- ΕἼΣ AOYTPA ΤῊΣ ΠΑΛΛΑΔΟΣ


Ὅσσαι λωτροχόοι τᾶς [[αλλάδος ἔξιτε πᾶσαι,
ἔξιτε: τᾶν ἵππων ἄρτι φρυασσομενᾶν
τᾶν ἱερᾶν ἐσάκουσα, καὶ a θεὸς εὔτυκος ἕρπειν 1"
~ / . ’ὔ “ /
σοῦσθέ νυν, ὦ Eavbal, σοῦσθε ΤΠ ελασγιάδες.
3 > > / / > / ᾽ὔ
οὔποκ᾽ ᾿Αθαναία μεγάλως ἀπενίψατο πάχεις δ
πρὶν κόνιν ἱππειᾶν ἐξελάσαι λαγόνων,
0959 ὦ \ / / 4 /
οὐδ᾽ ὅκα δὴ λύθρῳ πεπαλαγμένα πάντα φέροισα
τεύχεα τῶν ἀδίκων ἦνθ᾽ ἀπὸ γηγενέων,
5 \ \ / ej? ¢ > / σ
ἀλλὰ πολὺ πράτιστον ὑφ ἅρματος αὐχένας ἵππων
λυσαμένα παγαῖς ἔκλυσεν ᾿Ωκεανῷῶ 10
ἱδρῶ καὶ ῥαθάμιγγας, ἐφδίβασεν δὲ παγέντα
πάντα χαλινοφάγων ἀφρὸν ἀπὸ στομάτων.


53


ὦ ir’ ᾿Αχαιιάδες, καὶ μὴ μύρα μηδ᾽ ἀλαβάστρως
(συρίγγων ἀίω φθόγγον ὑπαξονίων 5),

μὴ μύρα λωτροχόοι τᾷ [[αλλάδι μηδ᾽ ἀλαβάστρως 15
(οὐ γὰρ ᾿Αθαναία χρίματα μεικτὰ φιλεῖ)

οἴσετε μηδὲ κάτοπτρον: ἀεὶ καλὸν ὄμμα τὸ τήνας
οὐδ᾽ ὅκα τὰν “Ida? Φρὺξ ἐδίκαζεν ἔριν,

οὔτ᾽ ἐς ὀρείχαλκον μεγάλα θεὸς. οὔτε“ Σιμοῦντος

ἔβλεψεν δίναν ἐς διαφαινομέναν" 20


1 ἕρπει MSS. 2 ὑπαξόνιον e; ὑπ᾽ ἀξονίων Schneider.
3 Ἴδαν mss. ; corr. Bentley.
4 οὐδ᾽. . . οὐδὲ mss. ; corr. Meineke,


112


V.—ON THE BATH OF PALLAS


Aut ye that are companions of the Bath of Pallas,
come forth, come forth! I heard but now the
snorting of the sacred steeds, and the goddess is
ready to go. Haste ye now, O fair-haired daughters
of Pelasgus, haste! Never did Athena wash her
mighty arms before she drave the dust from the flanks
of her horses—not even when, her armour all defiled
with filth, she returned from the battle of the
lawless Giants; but far first she loosed from the car
her horses’ necks, and in the springs of Oceanus
washed the flecks of sweat and from their mouths
that champed the bit cleansed the clotted foam.

O come, daughters of Achaea, and bring not
perfume nor alabasters (I hear the voice of the axle-
naves!); bring not, ye companions of the Bath, for
Pallas perfume nor alabasters* (for Athena loves not
mixed unguents), neither bring ye a mirror. Always
her face is fair, and, even when the Phrygian? judged
the strife on Ida, the great goddess looked not into
orichale* nor into the transparent eddy of Simois, nor

2 i.e. vessels made of alabaster, used especially to hold
perfumes, cf. ΜΝ... Matt. xxvi. 7, Mark xiv. 3, Luke
vii. 37; Theophrast. De odor. 41. > Paris.

.° First ‘mentioned Hesiod, Shield 122, Hom. H. Aphr. 9.
Already to Plato it is only a name (τὸ νῦν ὀνομαζόμενον. μόνον
Critias 114 ©, ef. schol. Apoll. Rh. iv. 973). Later it was


identified with the mixture of copper and zinc which the
Romans called aurichalcum, i.e. brass.


I 113


CALLIMACHUS


οὐδ᾽ Ἥρα' ΚΚύπρις δὲ διαυγέα χαλκὸν ἑλοῖσα
πολλάκι τὰν αὐτὰν δὶς μετέθηκε κόμαν"
ἁ δέ, δὶς ἑξήκοντα διαθρέξασα διαύλως,
PS > ψολν \ ,
οἷα map Εὐρώτᾳ τοὶ Λακεδαιμόνιοι
> / > / “a / 1 λ \ λ a 2
ἀστέρες, ἐμπεράμως ἐνετρίψατο ' λιτὰ λαβοῖσα
χρίματα, τᾶς ἰδίας ἔκγονα φυταλιᾶς"
ὦ κῶραι, τὸ δ᾽ ἔρευθος ἀνέδραμε, πρώιον οἵαν
ἢ ῥόδον ἢ 7 σίβδας κόκκος ἔχει xno tay,
τῶ καὶ νῦν ἄρσεν τι 8 “κομίξατε μῶνον * ἔλαιον,
ᾧ Κάστωρ, ᾧ καὶ χρίεται Ἡρακλέης"
οἴσετε καὶ κτένα οἱ παγχρύσεον, ὡς ἀπὸ χαίταν
πέ ται, λιπαρὸν σμασαμένα πλόκαμον.
ἔξιθ᾽ ᾿Αθαναία: πάρα τοι καταθύμιος ἴλα,
παρθενικαὶ μεγάλων παῖδες ᾿Ακεστοριδᾶν 5:
3 / / \ \ ε 7 3 /
ὠθάνα, φέρεται δὲ καὶ a Διομήδεος ἀσπίς,
ὡς ἔθος ᾿Αργείων τοῦτο παλαιότερον
Εὐμήδης ἐδίδαξε, τεὶν κεχαρισμένος ἱρεύς"
os ποκα βωλευτὸν ὃ γνοὺς ἐπί ot θάνατον
δᾶμον ἑτοιμάζοντα φυγᾷ τεὸν ἱρὸν ἄγαλμα
ᾧχετ᾽ ἔχων, ἸΚρεῖον δ᾽ εἰς ὄρος φκίσατο"
Kpetov ὄρος: σὲ δέ, δαῖμον, ἀπορρώγεσσιν ἔθηκεν
ἐν πέτραις, αἷς νῦν οὔνομα []αλλατίδες.


ἔξιθ᾽ ᾿Αθαναία περσέπτολι, χρυσεοπήληξ,


ἵππων καὶ σακέων ἁδομένα πατάγῳ.


1 ΡΎΞΡΩΣ mss.; corr. Meineke.
2 βαλοῖσα EF. 3 7 Bergk ; re
4 κομίξατε Schneider, μῶνον Ernesti; κομίσσατε μοῦνον.


5 "Αρεστοριδᾶν Valckenaer. δ ποτε βουλευτὸν Mss.


« Tibull. i. 8. 22 ‘*saepeque mutatas disposuisse comas,’
> Castor and Pollux, known as stars to Eurip. Hel. 138 Ἢ


114


25


30


35


40


HYMN V


did Hera. But Cypris took the shining bronze and
often altered and again altered the same lock. But
Pallas, after running twice sixty double courses, even
as beside the Eurotas the Lacedaemonian Stars,? took
and skilfully anointed her with simple unguents, the
birth of her own tree. And, O maidens, the red
blush arose on her, as the colour of the morning rose
or seed of pomegranate. Wherefore now also bring
ye only the manly olive oil, wherewith Castor and
wherewith Heracles anoint themselves. And bring
her a comb all of gold, that she may comb her hair,
when she hath anointed her glossy tresses.

Come forth, Athena! A company pleasing to
thy heart awaits thee, the maiden daughters of
Acestor’s mighty sons. And therewithal, O Athena,
is borne the shield of Diomedes, since this is the
Argive custom which in olden days Eumedes @ taught
them: a priest who found favour with thee: who
on a time, when he knew that the people were
plotting and planning death for him, fled with thy
holy image and dwelt on the Creion hill—dwelt on
the hill of Creion and established thee, O goddess,
on the rugged rocks, whose name is now the Pallatid
rocks.

Come forth, Athena, Sacker of Cities, golden-
helmeted, who rejoicest in the din of horse and


etc. ; their identification with the constellation Gemini was
comparatively late.

ὁ ’Axecropidavy has been unjustly suspected. It is quite
correct and is a mere etymological variant for ᾿Αρεστοριδᾶν,
since ἀκέσασθαι-Ξ- ἀρέσασθαι. See Hesych. s.vv.

@ «Once when the Heracleidae came against the Ores-
tiadae, Eumedes, priest of Athena, was suspected by the
Argives of wishing to betray the Palladium to the Hera-
cleidae. Eumedes, being afraid, took the Palladium and
came to the hill called Creion ” (schol.).


115


CALLIMACHUS


σάμερον ὑδροφόροι μὴ βάπτετε---σάμερον Ἄργος
πίνετ᾽ ἀπὸ κρανᾶν μηδ᾽ ἀπὸ τῶ ποταμῶ,
4
σάμερον αἱ δῶλαι τὰς κάλπιδας ἢ ᾽ς Φυσάδειαν
Ἅ > > ” A ~
ἢ ἐς ᾿Αμυμώναν οἴσετε τὰν Aavad.
\ \ \ “ \ »+ A /
καὶ yap δὴ χρυσῷ τε καὶ ἄνθεσιν ὕδατα μίξας
¢€ A / ΕΝ > > ,
ἡξεῖ φορβαίων “Ivayos ἐξ ὀρέων
3 ᾽ὔ \ \ » ὔ, 3 ᾽ὔ ὔ
τἀθάνᾳ τὸ λοετρὸν ἄγων καλόν. ἀλλά, Πελασγέ,
ξ / \ ᾽ 2 7 \ / ”
φράζεο μὴ οὐκ ἐθέλων τὰν βασίλειαν ἴδῃς.
σ δὴ Ἁ \ / \ ~
ὅς Kev ἴδῃ γυμνὰν τὰν Παλλάδα τὰν πολιοῦχον,
>? a ~ ὔ
Twpyos ἐσοψεῖται τοῦτο πανυστάτιον.
/ » EX. , λο \ ” / o> 2 7
πότνι᾽ ᾿Αθαναία τὺ 5 μὲν ἔξιθι: μέσφα δ᾽ ἐγώ τι
a ae foe ~ > > > / > > ADS, OA
ταῖσδ᾽ ἐρέω. μῦθος δ᾽ οὐκ ἐμός, ἀλλ᾽ ἑτέρων.


παῖδες, ᾿Αθαναία νύμφαν μίαν ἔν ποκα Θήβαις
πουλύ τι καὶ περὶ δὴ φίλατο τᾶν ἑταρᾶν,

ματέρα Τειρεσίαο, καὶ οὔποκα χωρὶς ἔγεντο"
ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀρχαίων εὖτ᾽. ἐπὶ Θεσπιέων

vy <P IN / av > « ’ > 4

ἢ 7 Κορωνείας ἢ εἰς “AXlaprov ἐλαύνοι
ἵππως, Βοιωτῶν ἔργα διερχομένα,

“δ, ον ἢ ’ ὃ σ ε / aA

ἢ πὶ Kopwretas,® ἵνα ot τεθυωμένον ἄλσος
καὶ βωμοὶ ποταμῷ κεῖντ᾽ ἐπὶ Kwpadiw:
/ ¢ / ta > 4 7

πολλάκις ἃ δαίμων νιν ἑῶ ἐπεβάσατο δίφρω,
οὐδ᾽ ὄαροι νυμφᾶν οὐδὲ χοροστασίαι

ἐδ λέθ CEE Be PATS Gi Wale * 3 Nhe

adetar τελέθεσκον, OK’ οὐχ ἁγεῖτο Χαρικλώ
3 δ᾿ a, \ / / / ΡΥ.
ἀλλ᾽ ἔτι καὶ τήναν δάκρυα πόλλ᾽ ἔμενεν,

καίπερ ᾿Αθαναίᾳ καταθύμιον ἔσσαν ἑταίραν.
δή ποκα γὰρ πέπλων λυσαμένα περόνας

σ ΦΚΑ, ᾽ὔ «ε / ‘ ε /

ἵππω ἐπὶ κράνᾳ “EAucwvids καλὰ ῥεοίσᾳ
λῶντο: μεσαμβρινὰ δ᾽ εἶχ᾽ ὄρος ἁσυχία.


1 γῶν ποταμῶν MSS. 2 σὺ MSS.


8. There is much uncertainty about the text here. We


assume a very bold epanaphora. 4 ποτε MSS.


116


45


50


55


60


65


70


HYMN V


shield. To-day, ye water-carriers, dip not your
pitchers—to-day, O Argos, drink ye from the foun-
tains and not from the river ; to-day, ye handmaidens,
carry your pitchers to Physadeia,t or Amymone,?
daughter of Danaus. For, mingling his waters with
gold and with flowers, Inachus will come from his
pastoral hills, bringing fair water for the Bath of
Athena. But beware, O Pelasgian, lest even un-
wittingly thou behold the Queen. Whoso shall
behold Pallas, Keeper of Cities, naked, shall look on
Argos for this the last time. Lady Athena, do thou
come forth, and meanwhile I shall say_somewhat
_ unto these. The story is not mine but told by
others.

Maidens, one nymph of old in Thebes did Athena
love much, yea beyond all her companions, even the |
mother of Teiresias, and was never apart from her.
But when she drave her steeds towards ancient
Thespiae or towards Coroneia or to Haliartus, pass-
ing through the tilled fields of the Boeotians—or
toward Coroneia where her fragrant grove and altars
are set by the river Curalius—often did the goddess
set the nymph upon her car and there was no dalli-
ance of nymphs nor ‘sweet ordering of dance, where
Chariclo¢ did not lead.

Yet even her did many tears await in the after
days, albeit she was a comrade pleasing to the heart
of Athena. One day those twain undid the buckles
of their robes beside the fair-flowing Fountain of the
Horse on Helicon and bathed; and noontide quiet


« Spring at Argos. Cf. Steph. Byz. 8.0. ᾿Ασβωτις.

> Spring at Argos. Cf. Apollod. ii. 1. 5, Strabo 368, Paus.
ii. 37, ete.

e Chariclo, wife of Eueres and mother of Teiresias.


117


. ἡ


CALLIMACHUS


> , 7 ν᾿ Q> » =
ἀμφότεραι λώοντο, μεσαμβριναὶ ὃ €oav ὠραι,


\ > , ~ a +
πολλὰ δ᾽ ἁσυχία τῆνο κατεῖχεν ὄρος.


sy ἢ δ᾽ ov A 1 ££ «A Liye ,
EtpEeolas ετί MWVOS” AUG κῦυσιν αρτι γενεῖα


/ e A ~ > /
περκάζων ἱερὸν χῶρον ἀνεστρέφετο"


διψάσας δ᾽ ἀφατόν τι ποτὶ ῥόον ἤλυθε κράνας,


\
TOV


=


ὦ Ednpeida, χαλεπὰν ὁδὸν ἄγαγε δαίμων;


σχέτλιος: οὐκ ἐθέλων δ᾽ εἶδε τὰ μὴ θεμιτά:
δὲ χολωσαμένα περ ὅμως προσέφασεν ᾿Αθάνα
“tis σε, τὸν ὀῤφθβαλμὼς οὐκέτ᾽ ἀποισόμενον,
99


ἁ μὲν ἔφα, παιδὸς δ᾽ ὄμματα νὺξ ἔλαβεν .3


ἑστάκη ὃ δ᾽ ἄφθογγος, ἐκόλλασαν γὰρ aviat


a νύμφα δ᾽ ἐβόασε


\ \ ” > /
γώνατα καὶ φωνὰν ἔσχεν ἀμηχανία.
/ \ ~ ”
“ἐ τί μοι TOV κῶρον ἔρεξας,
/ ~ / > \ /
πότνια; τοιαῦται δαίμονες ἐστὲ φίλαι;


ὄμματά μοι τῶ παιδὸς ἀφείλεο.. τέκνον ἄλαστε,


εἶδες ᾿Αθαναίας στήθεα καὶ λαγόνας,


ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ἀέλιον πάλιν ὄψεαι. ὦ ἐμὲ δειλάν,


5“. a ¢ \ 2 7 ,
ὦ ὄρος, ὦ Βλικὼν οὐκέτι μοι παριτέ,


ἢ μεγάλ᾽ ἀντ᾽ ὀλίγων ἐπράξαο: δόρκας ὀλέσσας


καὶ πρόκας οὐ πολλὰς φάεα παιδὸς ἔ ἔχεις.ἢ


ἃ καὶ ἅμ᾽ * ἀμφοτέραισι φίλον περὶ παῖδα λαβοῖσα


μάτηρ μὲν γοερᾶν οἶτον >. ἀηδονίδων


dye βαρὺ κλαίοισα, θεὰ ἐλέησεν ἑ ἑταίραν


“δῖα γύναι, μετὰ πάντα βαλεῦ πάλιν ὅσσα δι᾽


καΐ νιν ᾿Αθαναία πρὸς τόδ᾽ ἔλεξεν ἔπος


ὀργὰν


ιν > \ > + / » > > /
εἶπας - ἐγὼ δ᾽ ov τοι τέκνον ἔθηκ᾽ adadv.


οὐ γὰρ ᾿Αθαναίᾳ γλυκερὸν πέλει ὄμματα παίδων


ἁρπάζειν: Ἰζρόνιοι δ᾽ ὧδε λέγοντι νόμοι"


1 μοῦνος MSS.
2 ἔλαβεν Vindob. 318; ἔβαλεν other mss.
3 ἑστάκη Buttmann; ἐστάθη (ἐστάθη).


75


80


85


90


95


100


HYMN V


held all the hill. Those two were bathing and it
was the noontide hour and a great quiet held that
hill, Only Teiresias, on whose cheek the down was
just darkening, still ranged with his hounds the holy
place. And, athirst beyond telling, he came unto
the flowing fountain, wretched man! and unwillingly
saw that which is not lawful to be seen. And Athena
was angered, yet said to him: “ What god, O son of
Everes, led thee on this grievous way? hence shalt .
thou never more take back thine eyes!”

She spake and night seized the eyes of the youth.
And he stood speechless; for pain glued his knees
and helplessness stayed his voice. But the nymph
cried: “ What hast thou done to my boy, lady? [5
such the friendship of you goddesses? Thou hast
taken away the eyes of my son. Foolish child!
thou hast seen the breast and body of Athena, but
the sun thou shalt not see again. O me unhappy!
O hill, O Helicon, where I may no more come, surely
a great price for little hast thou exacted. Losing a


few gazelles and deer, thou hast taken the eyes of


my child.”

Therewith the mother clasped her beloved child
in both her arms and, wailing the heavy plaint of
the mournful nightingale, led him away. And the
goddess Athena pitied her comrade and spake to her
and said: “ Noble lady, take back all the words that
thou hast spoken in anger. It is not I that made
thy child blind. For no sweet thing is it for Athena
to snatch away the eyes of children. But the laws
of Cronus order thus: Whosoever shall behold any


4 ἃ καὶ ἅμ᾽ Editor; ἁ (ἡ) nev.
> οἶκτον Stephanus.


119


CALLIMACHUS


ω <p “i ¢ A 8 A 1 5. Er:
ὅς κε TW’ ἀθανάτων, ὅκα μὴ θεὸς αὐτὸς ἕληται,
ἀθρήσῃ, μισθῶ τοῦτον ἰδεῖν μεγάλω.
δῖα γύναι, τὸ μὲν οὐ παλινάγρετον αὖθι γένοιτο
» 2A a tei κι ὁ. ἢ 1 Aa. 25242)
ἔργον: ἐπεὶ μοιρᾶν ὧδ᾽ emevyce* λίνα,
ἁνίκα τὸ πρᾶτόν νιν ἐγείναο" νῦν δὲ κομίζευ,
ὦ Evnpeida, τέλθος ὀφειλό ενον.
ὐηρείδα, τέλθος ὀφειλόμ


πόσσα μὲν ἁ Kadpnis ἐς ὕστερον ἔμπυρα καυσεῖ,


πόσσα δ᾽ ᾿Αρισταῖος, τὸν μόνον εὐχόμενοι


᾿ παῖδα, τὸν ἁβατὰν ᾿Ακταίονα, τυφλὸν ἰδέσθαι.


καὶ τῆνος μεγάλας σύνδρομος ᾿Αρτέμιδος


> a> > > > > A Ὁ ,ὔ -“ io ae +
€ooeit: ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ αὐτὸν 6 Te δρόμος αἵ T ἐν ὄρεσσι


ε A A ~ ε ,ὔ
ῥυσεῦνται Evvai τᾶμος ἑκαβολίαι,
¢ f 3 2 nv > 30 “λ iO / r \
ὁππόκ᾽ * ἂν οὐκ ἐθέλων περ ἴδῃ χαρίεντα λοετρὰ
δαίμονος: ἀλλ᾽ αὐταὶ τὸν πρὶν ἄνακτα κύνες
τουτάκι δειπνησεῦντι: τὰ δ᾽ υἱέος ὀστέα μάτηρ
λεξεῖται δρυμὼς πάντας ἐπερχομένα"
ὀλβίσταν ἐρέει σε καὶ εὐαίωνα γενέσθαι,
> > / iA \ to e ὃ / 3
ἐξ ὀρέων ἀλαὸν παῖδ᾽ ὑποδεξαμέναν.
Se 7 ~ 7 ’ὔ “ \ +
ὦ érdpa, TO μή τι μινύρεο: τῷδε yap ἄλλα
τεῦ χάριν ἐξ ἐμέθεν πολλὰ μενεῦντι γέρα.
μάντιν ἐπεὶ θησῶ νιν ἀοίδιμον ἐ ἐσσομένοισιν,
ἦ μέγα τῶν ἄλλων. δή τι περισσότερον.
γνωσεῖται δ᾽ ὄρνιχας, ὃς αἴσιος οἵ τε πέτονται


ἤλιθα καὶ ποίων οὐκ ἀγαθαὶ πτέρυγες. :


πολλὰ δὲ Bo ιωτοῖσι θεοπρόπα, πολλὰ δὲ Κάδμῳ
χρησεῖ, καὶ μεγάλοις ὕ ὕστερα Λαβδακίδαις.


δωσῶ καὶ μέγα βάκτρον, 6 of πόδας ἐς δέον ἀξεῖ,


δωσῶ καὶ βιότω τέρμα πολυχρόνιον.


3
accepted by Wilamowitz and others.


1 ἐπένησε Spanheim, Bentley; ἐπένευσε. 5. ὁππόταν Mss.
ἀποδεξαμέναν Meineke; an absolute solecism, but


« Autonoé.


δ᾽ Actaeon, son of Aristaeus and Autonoé, was torn to


120


105


110


115


120


125


HYMN V


of the immortals, when the god himself chooses not,_
at a heavy price shall he behold. Noble lady, the
thing that is done can no more be taken back ; since
thus the thread of the Fates span when thou didst
bear him at the first; but now, O son of Everes,
take thou the issue which is due to thee. How
many burnt offerings shall the daughter of Cadmus @
burn in the days to come? how many Aristaeus P—
praying that they might see their only son, the young
Actaeon,’? blind. And yet he shall be companion
of the chase to great Artemis. But him neither the
chase nor comradeship in archery on the hills shall
save in that hour, when, albeit unwillingly, he shall
behold the beauteous bath of the goddess. Nay, his
own dogs shall then devour their former lord. And
his mother shall gather the bones of her son, ranging
over all the thickets. Happiest of women shall she
call thee and of happy fate, for that thou didst
receive thy son home from the hills—blind. ‘There-
fore, O comrade, lament not; for to this thy son—
for thy sake—shall remain many other honours from
me. For I will make him a seer to be sung of men
hereafter, yea, more excellent far than any other.
He shall know the birds— which is of good
omen among all the countless birds that fly and
what birds are of ill-omened flight. Many oracles
shall he utter to the Boeotians and many unto
Cadmus, and to the mighty sons of Labdacus in later
days. Also will I give him a great staff which shall
guide his feet as he hath need, and I will give him
a long term of life. And he only,’ when he dies,
pieces by his own dogs because he had seen Artemis

athing in Parthenius in the Gargaphian valley. Apollod.


iii. 4. 4, Nonn. v. 287 ff., Ovid, Met. iii. 131 ff.
¢ Hom. Od. x. 494 f.


‘121


CALLIMACHUS


> ΄
Kal μόνος, εὖτε θάνῃ, πεπνυμένος ἐν νεκύεσσι
A ε / 99
φοιτασεῖ, μεγάλωι τίμιος ᾿Αγεσίλᾳ. 180
3 e > /
ὡς φαμένα κατένευσε: τὸ δ᾽ ἐντελὲς ᾧ κ᾽ ἔπι νεύσῃ *
Παλλάς, ἐπεὶ μώνᾳ Ζεὺς τό γε θυγατέρων
~ > / / / /
δῶκεν ’Abavaia, πατρώια πάντα φέρεσθαι,
/ 4 > » ” 7
λωτροχόοι, μάτηρ δ᾽ οὔτις ἔτικτε θεάν,
ἀλλὰ Διὸς κορυφά. κορυφὰ Διὸς οὐκ ἐπινεύει 185


ψεύδεα «κοὐδὲ Διὸς ψεύδετ 3:αι <a> θυγάτηρ.


ἔρχετ᾽ ᾿Αθαναία νῦν ἀτρεκές: ἀλλὰ δέχεσθε
νὸς, Ocbi rad > 3 ¢ DN
τὰν θεόν, ὦ κῶραι τὦργον 8 ὅσαις μέλεται,
7 > > , 7 > 4 7 3 > A
σύν τ᾽ εὐαγορίᾳ σύν T εὔγμασι σύν τ᾽ ὀλολυγαῖς.
χαῖρε θεά, κάδευ δ᾽ “Apyeos ᾽Ϊναχίω. 140
a AZ 43 / Be / Ss > /
χαῖρε καὶ ἐξελάοισα, Kat ἐς πάλιν αὖτις ἐλάσσαις
σ A ~ - Ψ 7
ἵππως, καὶ Δαναῶν κλᾶρον ἅπαντα σάω.
1 ἔπι νεύσῃ Wilamowitz; ἐπινεύσῃ.


2 Jacuna supplied by the Editor.
3 r&pyov Boissonade; τῶργος.


122


HYMN V


shall walk among the dead having understanding,
honoured of the great Leader of the Peoples.¢”’

So she spake and bowed her head; and that
word is fulfilled over which Pallas bows; since to
_ Athena only among his daughters hath Zeus granted
that she should win all things that belong to her
sire, O companions of the Bath, and no mother bare
that goddess, but the head of Zeus. The head of
Zeus bows not in falsehood, and in falsehood his
daughter hath no part.

Now comes Athena in very deed. O maidens,
whose task it is, receive ye the goddess with pious
- greeting and with prayer, and with the voice of
thanksgiving. Hail, goddess, and have thou Inachian
Argos in thy keeping! Hail when thou drivest
forth thy steeds, and home again mayst thou drive
them with joy, and do thou preserve all the estate
of the Danaans,.


« Hades. The title ’Ayeci\aos, which was used of Hades by
Aeschylus also (Athen. iii. 99 8), refers to his character as host
of the dead (οἱ πολλοί, of πλείονες) and is to be compared with
his titles Ilo\vééyuwv (Hom. H. Dem. 17, 31, 430), Πολυδέκτης
(tb. 9), Πολυσημάντωρ (tb, 31), Πανδοκεύς (Lycophr. 655).


123


VI.—EIXZ AHMHTPA


Τῶ καλάθω κατιόντος ἐπιφθέγξασθε, γυναῖκες,
= Adparep μέγα χαῖρε πολυτρόφε ADE BOE


τὸν κάλαθον κατιόντα χαμαὶ θασεῖσθε βέβαλοι,1


μηδ᾽ ἀπὸ τῶ τέγεος μηδ᾽ ὑψόθεν αὐγάσσησθε
μὴ παῖς μηδὲ γυνὰ μηδ᾽ ἃ κατεχεύατο χαίταν, ὄ
μη OK ἀφ᾽ αὑαλέων στομάτων πτύωμες ἄπαστοι.
“Ἕσπερος ἐκ νεφέων ἐσκέψατο πανίκα νεῖται,
ἽἝσπερος, ὅ ὅστε πιεῖν Δαμάτερα μῶνος ἔπεισεν,
ἁρπαγίμας ὅκ OK ἄπυστα μετέστιχεν ἴχνια κώρας.
πότνια, πῶς σε δύναντο πόδες φέρεν ἔστ᾽ ἐπὶ
Sub ds, 10
ἔστ ἐπὶ τὼς μέλανας καὶ ὅπα τὰ χρύσεα μᾶλα;
οὐ πίες οὔτ᾽ ap ἔδες τῆνον χρόνον οὐδὲ λοέσσα.
τρὶς μὲν δὴ διέβας ᾿Αχελώιον ἀργυροδίναν,
τοσσάκι δ᾽ ἀενάων ποταμῶν ἐπέρασας ἕκαστον,

1 Schol. Pilato, Symp. 218 B καὶ εἴ τις ἄλλος ἐστὶ βέβηλός
τε καὶ ἄγροικος, πύλας παμμεγάλας τοῖς ὠσὶν ἐπίθεσθε] ἐντεῦθεν
παρῴδησε Καλλίμαχος ἐν ὕμνῳ Δήμητρος καλάθου τὸ θύρας δ᾽
ἐπίθεσθε βέβηλοι.


« κατιόντος might mean ** comes home” but probably it is
safer to take it as ‘*comes in procession.” Cf. κάθοδος
Herondas i. 56. Ἂ

δ i.e. dedicated on arriving at puberty. Or ‘‘hath her
hair unbound,” i.e. a maiden unwed. Cf. schol. μηδ᾽ ἥτις
ἄγαμός ἐστι. Scott, Heart of Midlothian chap. 22, says of
Effie Deans on her trial: “Her... tresses. . - which,


124


VI.—TO DEMETER


As the Basket comes,% greet jt, ye women, saying
“ Demeter, greatly hail! Lady of much bounty, of
many measures of corn.’’ As the Basket comes, from
the ground shall ye behold it, ye uninitiated, and
gaze not from the roof or from aloft—child nor wife
nor maid that hath shed her hair °—neither then
nor when we spit from parched mouths fasting.¢
Hesperus from the clouds marks the time of its
coming: Hesperus, who alone persuaded Demeter
to drink, what time she pursued the unknown tracks
of her stolen daughter.? ~

Lady, how were thy feet able to carry thee unto
the West, unto the black® men and where the
golden apples/ are? Thou didst not drink nor
didst thou eat during that time nor didst thou wash.
Thrice didst thou cross Achelous with his silver
eddies, and as often didst thou pass over each of the
ever-flowing rivers, and thrice didst thou seat thee on


according to the custom of the country, unmarried women
were not allowed to cover with any sort of cap, and which,
alas! Effie dared no longer confine with the snood or
riband which implied purity of maiden fame, now hung


~ unbound.”


is


¢ The second day of the Thesmophoria was a day of
fasting, Nesteia.

@ Persephone. ¢ The Aethiopians (schol. ).

7 The garden of the Hesperides.


125


CALLIMACHUS


τρὶς δ᾽ ἐπὶ Ἱζαλλιχόρῳ yapddus ἐκαθίσσαο φρητί 15
αὐσταλέα ἄποτός τε καὶ οὐ φάγες οὐδὲ λοέσσα.
μὴ μὴ ταῦτα λέγωμες ἃ δάκρυον ἄγαγε Δηοῖ:


κάλλιον, ὡς πολίεσσιν ἑαδότα " τέθμια δῶκε:


: κάλλιον, ὡς καλάμαν τε καὶ ἱερὰ δράγματα πράτα


ἀσταχύων ἀπέκοψε καὶ ἐν βόας ἧκε πατῆσαι, 20
eee ’ > A > / /
ἁνίκα Τριπτόλεμος ἀγαθὰν ἐδιδάσκετο Téxvav*
LAA e a / e / 3 LA 4
κάλλιον, ὡς, wa Kat Tis ὑπερβασίας ὃ ἀλέηται,
96. 7
Ravin abana wo leery ἐσαιοδέσθαμα
» \ / ” / ee | 4
οὔπω τὰν Kudiav, ἔτι Δώτιον ἱρὸν ἔναιον,
\ δ᾽ δ Ry a λ \ iA > / II r A
τιν αὕτᾳ καλον ἄλσος ἐποιήσαντο Ile. ἀὐσγοῦ 25


= δένδρεσιν ἀμφιλαφές- διά κεν “μόλις ἦνθεν ὀιστός"


ἐν πίτυς, ἐν μεγάλαι πτελέαι ἔ ἔσαν, ἐν δὲ καὶ ὄχναι,
ἐν δὲ καλὰ γλυκύμαλα" τὸ δ᾽ ὥστ᾽ ἀλέκτρινον ὕδωρ
> > “ 3 / \ > > / ’ὔ
ἐξ ἀμαρᾶν ἀνέθυε. θεὰ δ᾽ ἐπεμαίνετο χώρῳ
Ψ 3 aA / > bid ε / ”
ὅσσον ᾿Ελευσῖνι, Γριόπῳ θ᾽5 ὅσον, ὁκκόσον “Evva. 30
3 3 ὦ / « A » ,ὔ
ἀλλ᾽ ὅκα Τριοπίδαισιν ὁ δεξιὸς ἄχθετο δαίμων,
/ ε / > ’ “ 4
TouTaKis ἃ χείρων ᾿Βρυσίχθονος ἅψατο βωλά:
΄ te. Seer / + fee 7 > > a
σεύατ᾽ ἔχων θεράποντας ἐείκοσι, πάντας ἐν ἀκμᾷ,
/ > > / Ψ / > / oy
πάντας δ᾽ ἀνδρογίγαντας ὅλαν πόλιν apKios ἄραι,
> / / \ Cw odd ε /
ἀμφότερον πελέκεσσι Kal a€ivarow ὁπλίσσας, 8ὅ
> \ \ “ ’ὔ 3 / ” Ν
ἐς δὲ τὸ τᾶς Δάματρος ἀναιδέες ἔδραμον ἄλσος.
Ac? δέ ᾿ ΄ we θέ a
s’ δέ τις αἴγειρος, μέγα δένδρεον αἰθέρι κῦρον,
~ > ᾳΆ,»ν \ / A ” ¢ /
τῷ δ᾽ ἔπι ταὶ νύμφαι ποτὶ τὥνδιον ἑψιόωντο,
i το


1 τρὶς ὃ ἐπὶ καλλι. . . only is preserved in A; the lacuna
is supplied in F and late mss,

2 πτολίεσσιν éa . . . A; lacuna supplied in F.

a si il . . - As lacuna supplied in F ete.
4 _-A;... ἰδέσθαι pd.

5 a δ᾽ MSS. ; τεῖδ᾽ Schneider.

ὁ tpéry θ᾽ LM; Τριοπᾷδ᾽ Schneider; τριόπαιδ᾽ AF;
τριόπᾳ θ᾽ ἃ.

7 Asda: ἢν.
126


HYMN VI


the ground beside the fountain Callichorus,* parched
and without drinking, and didst not eat nor wash.

Nay, nay, let us not speak of that which brought
the tear to Deo®! Better to tell how she gave to
cities pleasing ordinances; better to tell how she
was the first to cut straw and holy sheaves of corn-
ears and put in oxen to tread them, what time
Triptolemus° was taught the good craft; better to
tell—a warning to men that they avoid transgression
—how [she made the son of Triopas hateful and
pitiful] ὦ to see.

Not yet in the land of Cnidus,’ but still in holy
Dotium’ dwelt the Pelasgians and unto thyself
they made a fair grove abounding in trees; hardly
would an arrow have passed through them. Therein
was pine, and therein were mighty elms, and therein
were pear-trees, and therein were fair sweet-apples ;
and from the ditches gushed up water as it were of
amber. And the goddess loved the place to madness,
even as Eleusis, as Triopum,’ as Enna.”

But when their favouring fortune became wroth
with the Triopidae, then the worse counsel took
hold of Erysichthon.’ He hastened with twenty
attendants, all in their prime, all men-giants able to
lift a whole city, arming them both with double
axes and with hatchets, and they rushed shameless
into the grove of Demeter. Now there was a/poplar,
a great tree reaching to the sky, and thereby the
nymphs were wont to sport at noontide. This poplar


# Callichorus, well (φρέαρ) at Eleusis, Paus. i. 38. 6.

> Demeter.

¢ Son of Celeus, was taught agriculture by Demeter.

4 The lacuna is supplied in LM: «θήκατο Τριοπίδην ἐχθρὸν
kal οἰκτρὸν. 6 © In Caria. 7 In Thessaly,

9 i.¢. Triopium in Caria. * In Sicily. ‘Son of Triopas.


127


MOP ere eter


CALLIMACHUS


Δ 4 a \ / ᾿ 5»,
ἃ πράτα πλαγεῖσα κακὸν μέλος ἴαχεν ἄλλαις.
ᾷσθετο Δαμά ὅτι οἱ ξύλον ἱερὸν ἄλγει
ἄσθετο Δαμάτηρ, ὅτι οἱ ξύλον ἱερὸν ἄλγει, ,, 40
εἶπε δὲ χωσαμένα “τίς μοι καλὰ δένδρεα κόπτει;
αὐτίκα Νικίππᾳ, τάν οἱ πόλις ἀράτειραν
\
δαμοσίαν ἔστασαν, ἐείσατο, γέντο δὲ χειρὶ
στέμματα καὶ μάκωνα, κατωμαδίαν δ᾽ ἔχε κλᾷδα.
pa δὲ παραψύχοισα κακὸν καὶ ἀναιδέα φῶτα 45
“τέκνον, ὅτις τὰ θεοῖσιν ἀνειμένα δένδρεα κόπτεις,
τέκνον ἐλίνυσον, τέκνον πολύθεστε τοκεῦσι,
9 Sercw—s
παύεο καὶ θεράποντας ἀπότρεπε, μή τι χαλεφθῇ
πότνια Δαμάτηρ, τᾶς ἱερὸν ἐκκεραΐζεις.᾽ἢ
\ > Suet, Ape! ς Φ / 7.4 \
τὰν δ᾽ ap ὑποβλέψας χαλεπώτερον ἠὲ κυναγὸν 50
” > / ¢ / /
wpeow ἐν Tuaplovow ὑποβλέπει ἄνδρα λέαινα
ὠμοτόκος, τᾶς φαντὶ πέλειν βλοσυρώτατον ὄμμα,
6¢ 4,4 79% 66 Af ΄, , 2 Ὁ...
χάζευ,᾽ ἔφα,“ μή τοι πέλεκυν μέγαν ἐν χροΐ πάξω.
ταῦτα δ᾽ ἐμὸν θησεῖ στεγανὸν δόμον, ᾧ ἔνι δαῖτας
αἰὲν ἐμοῖς ἑτάροισιν ἄδην θυμαρέας ἀξῶ.᾽" 55
> ¢ ~ / A \ 5 / /
εἶπεν 6 παῖς, Νέμεσις δὲ κακὰν ἐγράψατο φωνάν.
Δ / 5° » ’ / / 1 5° 126 7 A
αμάτηρ δ᾽ ἀφατόν τι κοτέσσατο, γείνατο" δ᾽ a? θεύς
δὴ \ / \ 4 > 3 4
ἴθματα μὲν χέρσω, κεφαλὰ δέ ot ἁψατ᾽ ᾿Ολύμπω.
οἱ μὲν ἄρ᾽ ἡμιθνῆτες, ἐπεὶ τὰν πότνιαν εἶδον,


> , > ’ > \ \ \ > rd ἃ
- ἐξαπίνας ἀπόρουσαν ἐνὶ δρυσὶ χαλκὸν ἀφέντες 60


a δ᾽ ἄλλως μὲν ἔασεν, avayKaia yap ἕποντο
δεσποτικὰν ὑπὸ χεῖρα, βαρὺν δ᾽ ἀπαμείψατ᾽ ἄνακτα
‘yal ναί, τεύχεο δῶμα, κύον, κύον, ᾧ ἔνι δαῖτας

1 γείνατο Mss. ; γείνετο Schneider. 2 ἁ μ88.; αὖ Bergk.


α΄ ἐς As priestess ” (schol.).

ὃ Tmarus, mountain near Dodona in Epirus.

¢ For strict sense of ὠμοτόκος see note on Hymn iv. 120.
Here it is no more than roxds ‘* with cubs ” as in Eur. Med.
187 roxddos δέργμα λέοντος.

“ Nemesis takes note of presumptuous acts and words,
Plato, Laws 717 p. Nonn. Dion. i. 481 imitates Callimachus.


128


HYMN VI


was smitten first and cried a woeful cry to the others.
Demeter marked that her holy tree was in pain, and
she was angered and said: “ Who cuts down my fair
trees?”’ Straightway she likened her to. Nicippe,
whom the city had appointed to be her public
priestess, and in her hand she grasped her fillets and
her poppy, and from her shoulder hung her key.

And she spake to soothe the wicked and shameless
man and said: “My child, who cuttest down the
trees which are dedicated to the gods, stay, my child,
child of thy parents’ many prayers, cease and turn
back thine attendants, lest the lady Demeter be
angered, whose holy place thou makest desolate.”
But with a look more fierce than that wherewith a
lioness looks on the hunter on the hills of Tmarus?
—a lioness with new-born cubs,’ whose eye they say
is of all most terrible—he said: “ Give back, lest I
fix my great axe in thy flesh! These trees shall
make my tight dwelling wherein evermore I shall
hold pleasing banquets enough for my companions.”
So spake the youth and Nemesis? recorded his evil
speech. And Demeter was angered beyond telling
and put on her goddess shape. Her steps touched
the earth, but her head reached unto Olympus.®
And they, half-dead when they beheld the lady
goddess, rushed suddenly away,-leaving the bronze
axes in the trees. And she left the others alone—
for they followed by constraint beneath their master’s
hand—but she answered their angry king: “ Yea,
yea, build thy house, dog, dog,’ that thou art, wherein


¢ From Hom. Il. iv. 443 “Epis οὐρανῷ ἐστήριξε κάρη καὶ
ἐπὶ χθονὶ βαίνε. Cf. Verg. A. iv. 177, x. 767, Nonn, xxix.
320.
7 Cf. Aitia iii. 1. 4.
K 129 -


CALLIMACHUS


ποιησεῖς" θαμιναὶ γὰρ ἐς ὕστερον εἰλαπίναι TOU.”
ἁ μὲν τόσσ᾽ εἰποῖσ᾽ ᾿Ερυσίχθονι τεῦχε πονηρά.
αὐτίκα οἱ χαλεπόν τε καὶ ἄγριον ἔμβαλε λιμὸν
αἴθωνα κρατερόν, μεγάλᾳ δ᾽ ἐστρεύ ετο νούσῳ.
σχέτλιος, ὅσσα πάσαιτο τόσων ἔχεν ἵμερος αὖτις.
εἴκατι δαῦτα πένοντο, δυώδεκα δ᾽ οἶνον ἀφυσσον᾽
τόσσα Διώνυσον γὰρ ἃ καὶ Δάματρα χαλέπτει-"


» \ \ ~ 4 / /
καὶ yap τᾷ Δάματρι συνωργίσθη Διόνυσος.


οὔτε νιν εἰς ἐράνως οὔτε ξυνδείπνια πέμπον
αἰδόμενοι γονέες, προχανὰ δ᾽ εὑρίσκετο πᾶσα.
,ὔ ‘ae. Μ
ἦνθον ᾿Ιτωνιάδος νιν RBavaias em ἄεθλα
᾿Ορμενίδαι καλέοντες" ἀπ᾽ ὧν ἀρνήσατο μάτηρ
“οὐκ ἔνδοι, χθιζὸς γὰρ ἐπὶ Κραννῶνα βέβακε
τέλθος ἀπαιτησῶν ἑκατὸν Beas.” ἦνθε ἸΠολυξώ,


᾿ μάτηρ ᾿Ακτορίωνος, ἐπεὶ γάμον ἄρτυε παιδί,


ἀμφότερον Τριόπαν τε καὶ υἱέα κικλήσκοισα.
A \ A / og / /

τὰν δὲ yuva βαρύθυμος ἀμείβετο δάκρυ χέοισα

ςς a , , > / > » /
νεῖταί τοι Τριόπας, ᾿Ερυσίχθονα δ᾽ ἤλασε κάπρος
’ > 3 77 ε 3 > ’ / - 99

Πίνδον ἀν᾽ εὐάγκειαν, 6 δ᾽ ἐννέα φάεα κεῖται.


“δειλαία φιλότεκνε, τί δ᾽ οὐκ ἐψεύσαο, μᾶτερ;


δαίνυεν εἰλαπίναν τις" ““ ἐν ἀλλοτρίοις ᾿Ερυσίχθων.᾽
»᾿ ᾽ὔ v4 ςς 3 / / ” 99
ἄγετό τις νύμφαν- “ 7] ρυσίχθονα δίσκος ἔτυψεν,


ἢ ““ἔπεο᾽ ἐξ ἵππων, ‘ev "Οθρυὶ ποίμνι᾽ ἀμιθρεῖ.3᾽"


; ἐνδόμυχος Li had ee πανάμερος εἰλαπιναστὰς


ἤσθιε μυρία πάντα" κακὰ δ᾽ ἐξάλλετο γαστὴρ


χὰ μᾶλλον ἔδοντι, τὰ δ᾽ ἐς βυθὸν οἷα θαλάσσας


ἀλεμάτως ἀχάριστα κατέρρεεν εἴδατα πάντα.
« Lo / 7 ¢ > 4 ee 7 7
ws δὲ Μίμαντι χιών, ὡς ἀελίῳ ἔνι πλαγγών,
1 ἀμιθρεὶ Ruhnken, Valckenaer; ἀμι- A, ἀμ’ E, ἀριθμεῖ d;
ἀμέλγει F. :


« Eponymous king of Ormenion in Thessaly.
> So called from her cult at Itone in Thessaly.


130


65


70


75


80


85


HYMN VI


thou shalt hold festival; for frequent banquets shall
be thine hereafter.” So much she said and devised
evil things for Erysichthon. Straightway she sent
on him a cruel and evil hunger—a burning hunger
and .a strong—and he was tormented by a grievous
disease. Wretched man, as much as he ate, so much
did he desire again. Twenty prepared the banquet
for him, and twelve drew wine. For whatsoever
things vex Demeter, vex also Dionysus; for Dionysus
shares the anger of Demeter. His parents for shame
sent him not to common feast or banquet, and all
manner of excuse was devised. The sons of
Ormenus” came to bid him to the games of Itonian
Athene.2. Then his mother refused the bidding:
“He is not at home; for yesterday he is gone unto
Crannon to demand a debt of a hundred oxen.”
Polyxo® came, mother of Actorion—for she was
preparing a marriage for her child—inviting both
Triopas-and his son. But the lady, heavy-hearted,
answered with tears: “Triopas will come, but
Erysichthon a boar wounded on Pindus of fair glens
and he hath lain abed for nine days.” Poor child-
loving mother, what falsehood didst thou not tell?
One was giving a feast: “Erysichthon is abroad.”
One was bringing home a bride: “A quoit hath
struck Erysichthon,” or “he hath had a fall from his
ear,’ or “he is counting his flocks on Othrys.¢”
Then he within the house, an all-day banqueter, ate
all things beyond reckoning. But his evil belly
leaped all the more as he ate, and all the eatables
poured, in vain and thanklessly, as it were into the
depths of the sea. And even as the snow upon
Mimas,’ as a wax doll in the sun, yea, even more


~ Ὁ Unknown. 4 Mountain in Thessaly.
ὁ Hymn iv. 67 τ.
131


a


CALLIMACHUS


\ / » A | rt / γι ἣ /
καὶ τούτων ἔτι μεῖζον ἐτάκετο μέσφ᾽ ἐπὶ νευράς"


δειλαίῳ ἢ ives τε καὶ ὀστέα μῶνον ἔλειφθεν.
κλαῖε μὲν ἁ μάτηρ, βαρὺ δ᾽ ἔστενον αἱ δύ᾽ ἀδελφαὶ
xo μαστὸς τὸν ἔπωνε καὶ αἱ δέκα πολλάκι δῶλαι. 95
pee
καὶ δ᾽ αὐτὸς Τριόπας πολιαῖς ἐπὶ χεῖρας ἔβαλλε,
τοῖα τὸν οὐκ ἀίοντα Ποσειδάωνα καλιστρέων"
7
τὐευροπάφωρ, ἰδὲ τόνδε τεοῦ τρίτον, εἴπερ ἐγὼ μὲν
σεῦ τε καὶ Αἰολίδος ΚΚανάκας γένος, αὐτὰρ ἐμεῖο
“-- \ / / / ” \ > A
τοῦτο τὸ δείλαιον γένετο βρέφος" αἴθε yap αὐτὸν 100
βλητὸν ὑπ᾽ ᾿Απόλλωνος ἐμαὶ χέρες ἐκτερέιξαν"
νῦν δὲ κακὰ βούβρωστις ἐν ὀφθαλμοῖσι κάθηται.
ἢ οἱ ἀπόστασον χαλεπὰν i νόσον ἠέ νιν αὐτὸς
βόσκε λαβών" ἁμαὶ γὰρ ἀπειρήκαντι τράπεζαι.
χῆραι μὲν μάνδραι, κενεαὶ δέ μοι αὔλιες ἤδη 105
τετραπόδων, ἤδη γὰρ ἀπαρνήσαντο μάγειροι."
ἀλλὰ καὶ οὐρῆας μεγαλᾶν ὑπέλυσαν ἁμαξᾶν,
\ \ ~ ΝΜ A a “ ” /
καὶ τὰν Pav ἔφαγεν, τὰν “Kotia ἔτρεφε μάτηρ,
καὶ τὸν ἀεθλοφόρον καὶ τὸν πολεμήιον ἵππον,
καὶ τὰν αἴλουρον, τὰν ἔτρεμε θηρία μικκά. 110
μέσφ᾽ ὅκα μὲν Τριόπαο δόμοις ἔνι χρήματα κεῖτο,
μῶνοι ἄρ᾽ οἰκεῖοι θάλαμοι κακὸν ἠπίσταντο.
ἰλλ᾽ Ὁ \ 6 \ εὺ 3 [ 1 ὃ /
ἀλλ᾽ ὅκα τὸν βαθὺν οἶκον ἀνεξήραναν 1 ὀδόντες,
καὶ τόχ᾽ ὁ τῶ βασιλῆος ἐνὶ τριόδοισι καθῆστο
> 8 > , ; ape ὁ /
αἰτίζων ἀκόλως τε καὶ ἔκβολα λύματα δαιτός. 11


1 ἀνεξήραναν Ernesti; ἀνεξήραινον Mss, -


« Canace, daughter of Realns and Enarete, mother by
Poseidon of Triopas (Diod. v. 61, Apollod. i. 7, iii. 4).

® This rendering, which takes βούβρωστις as abstract for
concrete, seems better than ‘ gluttony sits in his eyes.” \

¢ The Greek μάγειρος is butcher as well as cook.

“ At libations and sacrifices the first and last offerings
were made to Hestia, the goddess of the family hearth.


132


HYMN VI


than these he wasted to the very sinews: only
sinews and bones had the poor man left. His mother
wept, and greatly groaned his two sisters, and the
breast that suckled him and the ten handmaidens
over and over. And Triopas himself laid hands on
his grey hairs, calling on Poseidon, who heeded not,
with such words as these: “ False father, behold this
the third generation of thy sons—if I am son of thee
and of Canace,” daughter of Aeolus, and this hapless
child is mine. Would that he had been smitten by
Apollo and that my hands had buried him! But
now he sits an accursed glutton before mine eyes.?
Either do thou remove from him his cruel disease or
take and feed him thyself; for my tables are already
exhausted. Desolate are my folds and empty my
byres of four-footed beasts; for-already the cooks ὁ
have said me “ no.”

But even the mules they loosed from the great
wains and he ate the heifer that his mother was
feeding for Hestia ὦ and the racing horse and the war
charger, and the cat at which the little vermin
trembled.

So long as there were stores in the house of
Triopas, only the chambers of the house were aware
of the evil thing » but when his teeth dried up the
rich house, then the king’s son sat at the crossways,°
begging for crusts and the cast out refuse of the
Hence the proverb ἀφ᾽ ‘Eorlas ἄρχεσθαι, which sometimes
approaches the sense of τὴν ἀφ᾽ ἱερᾶς κινεῖν, indicating a last
desperate move, or something thorough-going (cf. Germ.
**von Hause aus.” Plato, Huthyphr. 3 a, etc.).

¢ There seems to be a reference to the disposal of rubbish
at the crossways, Aesch. Cho. 97 with schol., and offerings
made to Hecate there, Aristoph. Plut. 594 with schol.


Harpocr. 5.0. ὀξυθύμια. It seems possible that Hecate’s name
Eucoline is a euphemism for Acoline (ἄκολος).


133


CALLIMACHUS


Adparep, μὴ τῆνος ἐμὶν φίλος, ὅ ὅς τοι ἀπεχθής,
εἴη μηδ᾽ ὁμότοιχος" ἐμοὶ κακογείτονες ἐχθροί.
ᾷσατεϊ παρθενικαΐ, καὶ ἐπιφθέγξασθε τεκοῖσαι
“Δάματερ μέγα χαῖρε πολυτρόφε πουλυμέδιμνε.᾽
χὠς at? τὸν κάλαθον λευκότριχες ἵπποι ἄγοντι
τέσσαρες, ὡς ἁμὶν μεγάλα θεὸς εὐρυάνασσα
λευκὸν ἔαρ, λευκὸν δὲ θέρος καὶ χεῖμα φέροισα
ἡξεῖ καὶ φθινόπωρον, ἔτος δ᾽ εἰς ἄλλο φυλαξεῖ..
πε Ὸν Ὁ) ὡς δ᾽ ἀπεδίλωτοι καὶ ἀνάμπυκες ἄστυ πατεῦμες,
d ‘: ὡς πόδας, ὡς κεφαλὰς παναπηρέας ἕξομες αἰεί.
48}. (070) ὦ ὡς δ᾽ αἱ λικνοφόροι χρυσῶ πλέα λίκνα φέροντι,
w= ὧς Opes τὸν χρυσὸν ἀφειδέα πασαίμεσθα.
μέσφα τὰ τᾶς bears πρυτανήια τὰς ἀτελέστως, |
“fous Tas de τελεσφορέας 4 ποτὶ τὰν θεὸν ἄ ἄχρις ὁμαρτεῖν,
αἵτινες ἑξήκοντα κατώτεραι: αἱ de> βαρεῖαι
Χμ χἄτις ᾿Ἐλειθυίᾳ τείνει χέρα χἄτις ἐν ἄλγει,
a ws ἅλις, ὡς αὐτᾶν ἱκανὸν γόνυ" ταῖσι. δὲ Δηὼ
se δωσεῖ πάντ᾽ ἐπίμεστα καὶ ὡς ποτὶ ναὸν ἵκωνται.
χαῖρε θεὰ καὶ τάνδε σάω πόλιν ἔ ev θ᾽ ὁμονοίᾳ


—t, ἐν τ᾽ τὸ πελίᾳ, φέρε δ᾽ ἀγρόθι γόστιμα πάντα"
———" φέρβε oas, épe μᾶλα, φέρε στάχυν, οἶσε θερΐομόν,
fei
yee φέρβε καὶ εἰράναν, ἵν᾽ ὃς ἄροσε τῆνος auaon.®
woe {Xabi μοι τρίλλιστε μέγα κρείοισα θεάων.
er 1 ἄσατε F; om. AE.
Lie 2 yas ai Stephanus; χῶσαι.
rs Ὰ 3 ὡς ai Mss.; corr. Meineke.
on 4 τελεσφορίας MSS.; corr. T. Bentley.
. 5. ΤΕ Mss. ; corr. Ernesti.
ett 6


ἀμάσῃ Stephanus ; ἀμάσ(σγει mss., which may be right,
cf. fr. incert. 16.


134


120


125


130


135


HYMN VI


feast. O Demeter, never may that man be my
friend who is hateful to thee, nor ever may he share
party-wall with me; ill neighbours I abhor.

Sing, ye maidens, and ye mothers, say with them:
“ Demeter, greatly hail! Lady of much bounty, of
many measures of corn.’ And as the four white-
haired horses convey the Basket, so unto us will the
great goddess of wide dominion come bringing white
spring and white harvest and winter and autumn,
and keep us to another year. And as unsandalled
and with hair unbound we walk the city, so shall we
have foot and head unharmed for ever. And as the
van-bearers bear vans” full of gold, so may we get
gold unstinted. Far as the City Chambers let the
uninitiated follow, but the initiated even unto the
very shrine of the goddess—as many as are under
sixty years. But those that are heavy? and she that
stretches her hand to Eileithyia and she that is in
pain—sufficient it is that they go so far as their
knees are able. And to them Deo shall give all
things to overflowing, even as if they came unto her
temple.

Hail, goddess, and save this people in harmony
and in prosperity, and in the fields bring us all
pleasant things! Feed our kine, bring us flocks,
bring us the corn-ear, bring us’ harvest! and nurse
peace, that he who sows may also reap. Be gracious,
O thrice-prayed for, great Queen of goddesses !


« λίκνα, skull-shaped baskets, used for offering first-fruits
to the gods (οὐ Hesych. s.v. λεῖκνα), also for winnowing
corn and for cradles. Equivalent to Latin vannus, whence
our *‘ van” and ‘* fan.”

ὃ βαρεῖα has the ambiguous sense of heavy with age
(Soph. O.7. 17) or heavy with child—Lat. gravida.


135


ἘΠΙΓΡΑΜΜΑΤΑ
_— HA τ / > / \ a
Ξεῖνος ᾿Αταρνείτης tis aveipeto Ilitraxov οὕτω
tov Μυτιληναῖον, παῖδα τὸν “Υρράδιον 1"
ἐν» / ὃ / λ A 7 ¢ / \ ὃ \
ἄττα γέρον, dows με καλεῖ γάμος: ἡ μία μὲν δὴ
νύμφη καὶ πλούτῳ καὶ γενεῇ κατ᾽ ἐμέ,
ς A eee Ὁ / / 7 > > ΟΝ /
ἡ δ᾽ ἑτέρη προβέβηκε" τί λώιον; εἰ ὃ ἄγε σύμ μοι ὅ
βούλευσον, ποτέρην εἰς ὑμέναιον ἄγω.
εἶπεν: ὁ δὲ σκίπωνα, γεροντικὸν ὅπλον, ἀείρας,
““ἠἡνίδε, κεῖνοί σοι πᾶν ἐρέουσιν ἔπος.᾽᾽
ς τὰ. ὁ \ ~ A / ”
ot δ᾽ ap ὑπὸ πληγῇσι θοὰς βέμβικας ἔχοντες
” > ,ὔ a > \ /
ἔστρεφον εὐρείῃ παῖδες ἐνὶ τριόδῳ. 10
ἐς τ ” 39 t 6 39.» 39 ie ὑφ τὰ
κείνων ἔρχεο,᾽᾿ φησί, ‘pet ἴχνια.᾽᾽ yw μὲν ἐπέστη
λ / eq. Ν ςς \ \ \ ” 29
πλησίον" οἱ δ᾽ ἔλεγον" ““ τὴν κατὰ σαυτὸν ἔλα.
ταῦτ᾽ ἀίων ὁ ξεῖνος" ἐφείσατο μείζονος οἴκου
δράξασθ (ὃ ληδόνα 3. συνθέ,
ράξασθαι, παίδων κληδόνα 35 συνθέμενος,


1 Ῥρράδιον Schneider ; Ὑρραδίου.
2 κληδόνι Diog.


« In Mysia.

> One of the Seven Wise Men.

¢ The peculiar Aeolic form of ΕΞ ΦΉΣ, τ in -άδιος is
attested by the Greek grammarians (Bekker, Anecd. ii. 634,
Cramer, Anecd. Ox. iv. 326, etc.), who mention that Pittacus


136


EPIGRAMS
I,


A stranger from Atarneus“ thus asked Pittacus?
of Mytilene, the son of MHyrrhas*: “ Reverend
Father, two marriages invite me. One lady is my
equal in wealth and blood: the other is above my
station. Which is better? Come advise me whether
of those I should lead to the altar.”

So he spake: and Pittacus lifted up his staff, the
old man’s weapon, and said: “Lo! these yonder shall
tell thee all.” Now these were boys who at a wide
crossing were spinning their swift tops with blows of
the lash. <“‘ Follow their tracks,” saith he. And the
stranger stood by them: and they were saying:
* Keep your own rank!4”’’ When the stranger heard
the words, he laid to heart the saying of the boys
and spared to grasp at the greater estate. Now,


was called Hyrrhadius as son of Hyrrhas. But it is very
likely that ‘Yppadiov is right here.

@ The phrase τὴν κατὰ σαυτὸν ἔλα = ** drive your own line,”
or ‘* path” was a proverb. Suidas s.v., who gives not quite a
correct rendering (‘* Seem to be what you are”), says some
attributed it to the Pythian oracle, some-to Solon, some to
Chilon. It is hinted at by Aesch. Prom. v. 887 ff., where
schol. A attributes it to Pittacus. It is imitated Aristoph.
Clouds 25 ἔλαυνε τὸν σαυτοῦ δρόμον. A. Hauvette—** c’est-a-
dire pousse la toupie qui est ἃ ta portée, a ta hauteur ”’— quite
misunderstands the phrase.


137


CALLIMACHUS


τὴν δ᾽ ὀλίγην ὡς κεῖνος ἐς οἰκίον ἤγετο νύμφην. 1ὅ
οὕτω καὶ σύ γ᾽ ἰὼν! τὴν κατὰ σαυτὸν ἔλα.


A.P, vii. 89, Diog. Laert. i. 79 f.


1


Hite τις, Ἡράκλειτε, τεὸν μόρον, ἐς δέ με δάκρυ
ἤγαγεν, ἐμνήσθην δ᾽ ὁσσάκις ἀμφότεροι
- > / δ 3 \ \ /
ἥλιον ev λέσχῃ κατεδύσαμεν: ἀλλὰ od μέν που,
ξεῖν᾽ ᾿Αλικαρνησεῦ, τετράπαλαι σποδιή" 5
at δὲ Teal Cwovow ἀηδόνες, How ὃ πάντων
« Ἁ 3 / ᾽ : a | “- A
ἁρπακτὴς ᾿Αίδης οὐκ ἐπὶ χεῖρα βαλεῖ.
A.P. vii. 80, Diog. Laert. ix. 17.


iil?


> A / \ \ 4 9% ΝΜ ἶ
[Ὁ ξεῖαι πάντῃ περὶ τὸν τάφον εἰσὶν ἄκανθαι
\ / / A / a /
καὶ σκόλοπες" βλάψεις τοὺς πόδας, ἣν προσίῃς"
Τίμων μισάνθρωπος ἐνοικέω. ἀλλὰ πάρελθε
> 7 w / / /
οἰμώζειν εἴπας πολλά, πάρελθε μόνον.
A.P. vii. 320, where it is attributed to Hegesippus. Plut.


Ant. 70 quotes the last distich as τὸ περιφερόμενον Καλλι-
μάχειον.


1 ie My
Μὴ χαίρειν εἴπῃς με, κακὸν “κέαρ, ἀλλὰ πάρελθε:


ἶσον ἐμοὶ χαίρειν ἐστὶ τὸ μὴ σὲ γελᾶν.


A.P, vii. 318.
γ᾽ ἰὼν A.P.; Δίων Diog. ᾿
᾿ 2 Rejected by Wilamowitz. Other epigrams on Timon
A.P. vii..313 ff. 3 γελᾶν Mss. ; πελᾶν Jacobs.


138


EPIGRAMS


even as he led home the humble bride, so go thou
and keep thine own rank.


IT.


One told me, Heracleitus, of thy death and
brought me to tears, and I remembered how often
we two in talking put the sun to rest.2 Thou,
methinks, Halicarnasian friend, art ashes long and
long ago; but thy nightingales live still, whereon
Hades, snatcher of all things, shall not lay his hand.


ΠῚ.


{All about my grave are sharp thorns and stakes :
thou wilt hurt thy feet if thou comest nigh :]
_I, Timon,’ hater of men, inhabit here; but go
thou by; curse me as thou wilt, but go.


IV.


Bid me not “ farewell,” evil heart, but go by. It
is well with me if thou refrain from laughter.


« Quoted Diog. Laert. ix. 17, where he gives a list of
persons called Heracleitus: τρίτος ἐλεγείας ποιητὴς ᾿Αλικαρ-
νασσεύς, εἰς ὃν Καλλίμαχος πεποίηκεν οὕτως, Εἶπέ τις. . . βαλεῖ.
Strabo, xiv. 656, mentions among notable men of Hali-
carnassus Ἡράκλειτος ὁ ποιητὴς ὁ Καλλιμάχου éraipos. An
epitaph by him is 4.P. vii. 465 (imitated by Antip. Sid.
A.P. vii. 464). The epigram of Callimachus is translated in
Tonica (1858, rep. 1891) by Wm. Cory (Johnson).

δ Verg. Δ. ix. 51 f. **saepe ego longos Cantando puerum
memini me condere soles.”

¢ On Timon, the Athenian misanthrope, cf. Aristoph.
. Birds 1549, Lys. 809 ff. ; Lucian, Timon; Diog. Laert. ix.
112; Plut. Anton. 70. Schneider assigns the first distich to
Hegesippus, the second to Callimachus.


139


CALLIMACHUS
V.


; > \ » 9 Ii“ δ ὔ / Ἅ /
Τίμων, od yap ἔτ᾽ ἐσσί, τί τοι, σκότος ἢ φάος
,, ἐχθρόν;


“τὸ σκότος" ὑμέων γὰρ πλείονες εἰν ᾿Αίδῃ.᾽


A.P. vii. 317.
VI.


Koyxos ἐγώ, Ζεφυρῖτι, παλαίτερος 1" ἀλλὰ σὺ νῦν με,
Κύπρι, Σεληναίης ἄνθεμα πρῶτον ἔχεις,
ναυτίλος " ὃς “πελάγεσσιν ἐπέπλεον, εἰ μὲν ἀῆται,
τείνας οἰκείων λαῖφος ἀπὸ προτόνων,
εἰ δὲ Γαληναίη, λιπαρὴ θεός, οὖλος ἐρέσσων
ποσσί νιν8, ὥστ᾽ ἔργῳ τοὔνομα συμφέρεται,
ἔστ᾽ ἔπεσον παρὰ θῖνας ᾿Ιουλίδας, ὄφρα γένωμαι,
σοὶ τὸ περίσκεπτον παίγνιον, ᾿Αρσινόη,


1 πάλαι τέρας Schneider. 2 ναυτίλον ; corr. Kaibel.
3 ποσσὶν iv’; corr. Hermann.


@ of πλείονες, as we say The Great Majority =the Dead :
Aristoph. Heel. 1073; A.P. vii. 731, xi. 42; Suid. πλειόνων"
τῶν νεκρῶν.

> On a nautilus shell dedicated to Arsinoé Aphrodite of
Zephyrium (cf. epigr. of Poseidippus in Athen. vii. 318) by
Selenaea, daughter of Cleinias, πε τας we may suppose, on the
way from Smyrna to Egypt had obtained the shell at Iulis in
Ceos. For Zephyrium of. Steph. Byz. 8.0. ἔστι καὶ ἄκρα
τῆς Αἰγύπτου ad’ ἧς ἡ ᾿Αφροδίτη καὶ ᾿Αρσινόη Ζεφυρῖτις ὡς
Καλλίμαχος. See W. Deonna, Rev. Arch. 1917, Rev. de
Vhistoire d. relig. 80 (1919).

The epigram is quoted by Athenaeus apropos of Aristotle’s
description (fr. 316) of the nautilus: ‘‘ The so-called nautilus
(ὁ. 6. sailor) is not a polypus but resembles the polypus in the -
matter of tentacles. It hasa testaceous back. In emerging
from the water it keeps the shell atop so as not to carry


140


EPIGRAMS
Υ.


Timon (for thou art no more), which is hateful to
thee—Darkness or Light? “The Darkness, for there
are more ® of you in Hades.”


Vie


An old shell am I, O Lady of Zephyrium,¢ but now,
Cypris, I am thine, a first offering from Selenaea: I the
nautilus that used to sail upon the sea, if there were
wind, stretching my sail on my own forestays, if Calm,@
that bright goddess, prevailed, rowing strongly with
my feet—so that my name befits my deed !—till I
fell on the shores of Iulis, that I might become thy
admired toy, Arsinoé, and that in my chambers may


water. Then it turns over and floats on the surface, hold-
ing erect two tentacles which have a membrane between
them, similar to the skinny web seen between the toes of
fowls. Other two tentacles it lets down into the sea to
serve as rudders. When frightened by the approach of
anything it draws in its feet, fills itself with sea water and
submerges quickly.” This is the Argonaut or Paper
nautilus,

¢ Arsinoé II. Philadelphus, who died, as we now know
from a‘new fragment of the Mendes stele, in July 270 z.c.,
received divine honours and had, among others, a temple
at Zephyrium, a promontory between Alexandria and
the Canopic mouth of the Nile, dedicated by Callicrates
(Poseidippus ap. Athen. vii. 318) ὁ ναύαρχος, where she was
worshipped as Arsinoé Aphrodite (Strabo 800), i.e. Aphrodite
as patroness of sea-faring (Εὔπλοια, ΠΠελαγία).

4 Galenaia, or Galene, a Nereid (Hes. Th. 244), was
the goddess of Calm, cf. Eurip. Hel. 1457; Paus. ii. 1. 8.
But the word is frequently used in the sense of the ‘‘calm
sea,” ¢.g. Hom. Od. vii. 319 ἐλόωσι γαλήνην ; which justifies
us in taking vw here to be the sea; cf. νήεσσιν ἐρέσσεται

. ὕδωρ A.P. iv. 3°, 80.

141


CALLIMACHUS


μηδέ μοι ἐν θαλάμῃσιν ἔθ᾽ ὡς πάρος, εἰμὶ γὰρ
ἄπνους,
τίκτηται νοτερῆς + ὦεον ἁλκυόνης.
Κλεινίου ἀλλὰ θυγατρὶ δίδου χάριν. οἶδε γὰρ ἐσθλὰ
ῥέζειν καὶ Σμύρνης ἐστὶν ἀπ᾽ Αἰολίδος.


Athen. vii. 318.


VE,


Τοῦ Σαμίου 3 πόνος εἰμὶ δόμῳ ποτὲ θεῖον ἀοιδὸν 8
δεξαμένου, κλείω * δ᾽ Evputov, ὅσσ᾽ ἔπαθεν,
καὶ ξανθὴν ᾿Ιόλειαν, “Ομήρειον δὲ καλεῦμαι
7 ξ K 5A 7 “- i ~ /
γράμμα: KpewdtAw, Zed φίλε, τοῦτο μέγα.


Strabo xiv. 638, Sext. Emp. Adv. math. p. 609, schol.
Dion. Thrac. p. 163 (except the last four words).


Vill.


Στήλην μητρυιῆς, μικρὰν ὃ λίθον, ἔστεφε κοῦρος,
ὡς βίον ἠλλάχθαι καὶ τρόπον οἰόμενος"

ἡ δὲ τάφῳ κλινθέντα κατέκτανε παῖδα πεσοῦσα"
φεύγετε μητρυιῆς καὶ τάφον ot πρόγονοι:


A.P. ix. 67 anonym. but attributed to Callim. by Planud.


1 yorepyo’ . . . ἁλκυονίς Kaibel.
2 Tod Σαμίου Strabo; Κρεωφύλου schol. Dion. Thrac. and
Sext. Emp.


3 ἀοιδὸν Sext. Emp. ; Ὅμηρον Strabo.

4 κλείω Sext. Emp. ; κλαίω Strabo.

5 μιαρὰν Bentley, ‘but ef. Suid. s.v. Κυνήγιον᾽ 2. εἶδεν
ἐκεῖσε στήλην μικρὰν τῷ μήκει καὶ πλατεῖαν καὶ παχεῖαν πάνυ. ..
παρευθὺ πεσεῖν τὴν στήλην ἐκ τοῦ ἐκεῖσε ὕψους καὶ κροῦσαι τὸν
Ἵμέριον καὶ θανατῶσαί.


142


10


EPIGRAMS


no more be laid, as erstwhile—for I am dead—the
eggs of the water-haunting kingfisher. But give
thou grace to the Daughter of Cleinias; for she
knows to do good deeds and she is from Aeolian
_ Smyrna.


VIL.


I am the work of the Samian,* who once received
the divine singer in his house; and I celebrate the
sufferings of Eurytus? and of fair-haired Ioleia; but I
am called the writing of Homer. Dear Zeus, . for
Creophylus this is a great thing.


VILL."


A youth was garlanding the grave-pillar of his
step-mother, a short stone, thinking that with change
of life her nature too was changed. But as he bent
over the grave, the stone fell and killed the boy.
Ye step-sons, shun even the grave of a step-mother.


« Strabo xiv. 638 ““Τὸ Samos belonged also Creophylus
who is said to have entertained Homer and received from
him as a gift the inscription of the poem called ‘ The Taking
of Oichalia’ (Olyadlas “AXwors). But Callimachus in an
epigram asserts the contrary and implies that Creophylus
wrote the poem while Homer was reputed to be the author
on account of the alleged entertaining.” Then he quotes
the epigram. -

Ὁ Kurytus, king of Oechalia, variously localized in Thessaly
(/1. ii. 730), Messenia, and Euboea. He offered to wed his
daughter Iole, or Ioleia (Hesiod ap. schol. Soph. 77. 263),
to him who should defeat him in archery. Heracles defeated
him, but he refused to give Iole to Heracles, who thereupon
destroyed Oechalia, killed Eurytus, and carried off Iole.

¢ The unkindness of the step-mother to the first family
(πρόγονοι, so A.P. ix. 68) is proverbial in the Greek and
Latin poets, A.P. ix. 68 and 69.


143


CALLIMACHUS
IX.


*HAGe Θεαίτητος καθαρὴν ddov. εἰ δ᾽ ἐπὶ κισσὸν
τὸν τεὸν οὐχ αὕτη, Βάκχε, κέλευθος ἄγει,
ἄλλων μὲν κήρυκες ἐπὶ βραχὺν οὔνομα καιρὸν
φθέγξονται, κείνου δ᾽ “Ἑλλὰς ἀεὶ σοφίην.
A.P. ix. 565.


X. 4


Μικρή τις, Διόνυσε, καλὰ πρήσσοντι ποιητῇ
ῥῆσις" ὁ μὲν * “νικῶ φησὶ τὸ μακρότατον,
ᾧ δὲ σὺ μὴ πνεύσῃς ἐνδέξιος κ᾿ ἦν τις ἔρηται.
“πῶς ἔβαλες ᾿" ; φησί " ‘ σκληρὰ τὰ γιγνόμενα."
τῷ ἐπα Ἐρτοο: τὰ μὴ Ὕδικα τοῦτο γένοιτο


τοῦπος: ἐμοὶ δ᾽, ὦναξ, ἡ βραχυσυλλαβίη.
A.P. ix. 566.
XI.
Τῇδε Σάων ὁ Δίκωνος ᾿Ακάνθιος ἱερὸν ὕπνον
κοιμᾶται. θνήσκειν μὴ λέγε τοὺς ἀγαθούς.
A.P, vii. 451.


ΧΙ.


Ἢν δίζῃ Τίμαρχον ἐν ἴΑιδος, ὄφρα πύθηαι
ἢ τι περὶ ψυχῆς ἢ πάλι πῶς ἔσεαι,

δίζεσθαι φυλῆς Πτολεμαίδος υἱέα πατρὸς
Παυσανίου: δήεις δ᾽ αὐτὸν ἐν εὐσεβέων.


AP, vii. 520.
1 ἐπιδέξιος Kaibel.


« Theaetetus was the author of several extant epigrams,
Diog. Laert. iv. 25, viii. 48; A.P. vii. 444, 499, 727. We


144


EPIGRAMS


IX.


Theaetetus@ travelled a splendid path. If that
path, Bacchus, leads not to thine ivy wreath—other
men’s names the heralds will voice a little while, but
his skill Hellas will voice for ever.


Χ,


Short is the speech, Dionysus, of the successful
poet: “Won,” says he, at most. But if thou breathe
not favourably and one ask, “ What luck?” “’Tis a
hard business,” he says. Be these the words of him
who broods injustice; but mine, O Lord, the
monosyllable !


XI.


Here Saon of Acanthus, son of Dicon, sleeps the
holy sleep. Say not that the good die.?


XII.


If thou seekest Timarchus° in the house of Hades
to learn aught of the soul, or how it shall be with
thee hereafter, seek the son of Pausanias of the
Ptolemaic tribe,? and thou shalt find him in the abode
of the righteous.


may perhaps infer from 4.P. vii. 49, which is on Ariston of
Cyrene, that he belonged to that town. The reference of
καθαρὴν ὁδόν is obscure: cf. Pind. Isth. iv. (v.) 23, Ol. vi. 23
and 73. Hauvette has ‘*T. est entré dans une voie
nouvelle.”

> J. Montgomery: When the good man yields his breath
—for the good man never dies (Wanderer of Switz. v.).

¢ Diog. Laert. vi. 95 mentions a philosopher Timarchus
of Alexandria.

¢ This Athenian tribe was so named in honour of Ptolemy
Philadelphus, Paus. i. 6. 8.

L 145


CALLIMACHUS
XIII.


, Se e A ΤᾺΝ \ , > \ 7
Σύντομος Hv ὁ ξεῖνος" ὃ καὶ στίχος οὐ μακρὰ λέξων
cc Θ “-“ 2A / K Pi> 99 OU, 2 \ ὃ A /
npis Δρισταιου ρης ἐπ᾿ ἐμοι ὁολιχὸς.
A.P. vii. 447.


XIV.


Κύζικον ἣν ἔλθῃς, ὀλίγος πόνος Ἱππακὸν εὑρεῖν
καὶ Διδύμην" ἀφανὴς οὔ τι γὰρ ἡ γενεή.

Kai σφιν a ἀνιηρὸν μὲν ἐρεῖς ἔπος, ἔ ἔμπα δὲ λέξαι
τοῦθ᾽, ὅτι τὸν κείνων ὧδ᾽ ἐπέχω ἸΚριτίην.


A.P., vii. 521.


ΧΥ.


Ἦ ῥ᾽ ὑπὸ σοὶ Χαρίδας ἀναπαύεται; εἰ τὸν ᾿Αρίμμα
τοῦ Κυρηναίου παῖδα ere 3 ὑπ᾽ “ἐμοί.
ΑΒ ᾽9 ¢ >
ὦ Xapida, τί τὰ νέρθε; “πολὺ σκότος. ai ὃ
ἄνοδοι τί;
““ ψεῦδος. ὁ δὲ ἸΙλούτων; “ μῦθος." ἀπωλό-
μεθα.


α It seems ie to take σύντομος as short of stature, cf.
Ovid, Amor. ii. 7. 59 f. ‘‘Ossa tegit tumulus, tumulus pro
corpore magnus, Quo lapis exiguus par sibi carmen habet”’
but some understand it as short of speech or swift of foot.
The interpretations are various :

1. The deceased was small of stature, the monument was
small, so that the inscription, though of the shortest, was
yet too long to be written in one line (Wilamowitz).

2. The Planudean gives the epigram as one of several εἰς
ἀγωνιστάς. Hence Meineke reads tm’ ἐμοί, δόλιχον (i.e. the
long race) in the sense ‘** Theris lies under me (the tomb-
stone), <victor> in the long race,” Stadtmiiller reads ἐπόνει
δόλιχον.


146


EPIGRAMS
XIII.


Short* was the stranger: wherefore the line,
though brief its tale: “Theris, son of Aristaeus,
Cretan,” is long for [upon] me.


XIV.


4
If thou goest to Cyzicus, it will be small trouble
to find Hippacus? and Didyme: for not obscure is
their family. And a painful message thou wilt tell
them, yet tell them this, that I here cover Critias,
their son.


XV.¢


Doth Charidas rest under thee? “ If thou meanest
the son of Arimmas of Cyrene, under me.” O
Charidas, what of the world below? “Much dark-
ness.” And what of the upward way? “A lie.”
And Pluto? “A fable.” We are undone. “This


3. Others, taking σύντομος as concise in speech, read λέξω
and ὑπ᾽ ἐμοί, δολιχός. ‘* Th. was brief of speech: so shall the
verse be: I shall not say much: Th., etc., rests under me: ”
too long still!

> For the name Hippacus cf. Pittacus, Astacus, Buttacus,
Pyrrhacus. Ajax in his last words (Soph. 47. 846 ff.) appeals
to the Sun to carry the news of his death to his father and
mother. Epigrams in which this last appeal is made by the
epitaph on the tomb to the passenger are numerous in the
Anthology : 4.P. vii. 499, 500, 502, 540, 544, 569, 589, 631.
Hauvette refers to C.I.A. i. 463; iv. 4779, 4772.

¢ On Charidas, son of Arimmas of Cyrene. Arimmas is
a short form of ’Apiuaxyos and is found in Arr. Anab. iii.
6. 8 (Hoffmann, Die Makedonen, p. 193).


147


CALLIMACHUS


* oStos ἐμὸς λόγος ὕμμιν ἀληθινός: εἰ δὲ τὸν ἡδὺν ὅ
4 / “ / > > / >>
᾿ βούλει, ΠΠελλαίου βοῦς μέγας εἰν ᾿Αίδῃ. ᾿
AP. vii. 524.


XVI.


Aaipova tis δ᾽ εὖ οἷδε τὸν αὔριον; ἁνίκα καὶ σέ
Χάρμι, τὸν ὀφθαλμοῖς χθιζὸν ἐν ἁμετέροις
τᾷ ἑτέρᾷ κλαύσαντες ἐθάπτομεν" οὐδὲν ἐκείνου
εἶδε πατὴρ Διοφῶν χρῆμ᾽ ἀνιαρότερον.
4.}. vii. 519.


XVII.


“ Τιμονόη." τίς δ᾽ ἐσσί; μὰ δαίμονας, οὔ σ᾽ ἂν
“ἐπέγνων,
εἰ μὴ Τιμοθέου πατρὸς ἐπῆν ὄνομα
στήλῃ. καὶ Μήθυμνα, τεὴ πόλις. ἢ μέγα φημὶ
χῆρον ἀνιᾶσθαι σὸν πόσιν Εϊὐθυμένη.
AP, vii, 522.


XVIII.


Κρηθίδα τὴν πολύμυθον, ἐπισταμένην καλὰ παίζειν
δίζηνται Σαμίων πολλάκι θυγατέρες,

ἡδίστην συνέριθον ἀεὶ λάλον" ἡ δ᾽ ἀποβρίζει
ἐνθάδε τὸν πάσαις ὕπνον ὀφειλόμενον. —


«4... vii. 459.


α The cheapness of things in Hades seems to have
been proverbial. Cf. Callim. lamb. i. 2 ἐκ τῶν ὅκου βοῦν
κολλύβου πιπρήσκουσιν and Phot. ὀβολοῦ χίμαιρα" ἐν Αἵδου.
Coins of Pella had ox as type (Head, Hist. Numm. p. 212,
ef. schol. Ambros. Theocr. i, 26) and hence may have been


148


EPIGRAMS


that I say to you is the true tale, but if thou wouldst
have the pleasant tale, a great ox costs but a copper
in Hades.” @


XVI.


Who knows aright to-morrow’s? fortune? When
even thee, Charmis, whom we saw with our own
eyes yesterday, next day we laid in the grave with
tears. Than that thy father Diophon hath seen
nothing more painful.


XVIL.¢


“Timonoé.” Who art thou? By the gods I had
not known thee, were not the name of thy father
Timotheus on thy tombstone, and Methymna, thy
city. Great, methinks, is the sorrow of thy widowed
husband Euthymenes !


XVIII.


Crathis, of many tales, skilled in pretty jest, do
the daughters of the Samians oft-times seek—their
sweetest companion, always talking; but she sleeps
here the sleep that is due to all.


known as βόες Πελλαῖοι, as Attic drachmas were called γλαῦκες
Λαυρεωτικαί (Aristoph. Av. 1106) or Παλλάδες (Kubulus
ap. Poll. ix. 76), and the Corinthian coins with figure
of Pegasus were called πῶλοι (Kurip. fr. 675= Poll. ix. 75).
The meaning will then be that in Hades a real βοῦς μέγας
costs only a βοῦς Πελλαῖοςς Cf. Kaibel, Hermes xxxi. (1896).

> Wilamowitz’ τὸν Αὔριον is incredible. There is no such


eity

Ἑ ‘Kaibel (Hermes xxxi. (1896)) suggests that the epigram
implies an epitaph in the form Τιμονόα Τιμοθέου Μηθυμναίου,
γυνὰ δὲ Εὐθυμένεος.


149


CALLIMACHUS
XIX.


” ΣΕ: / \ / > \ va e A
Ὥφελε μηδ᾽ ἐγένοντο θοαὶ νέες" οὐ yap ἂν ἡμεῖς

aA / / > /
παῖδα Διοκλείδου Σώπολιν ἐστένομεν.

A > NR \ > ε ri ΄, ΄, δος ΤᾺ ἊΣ
νῦν δ᾽ ὁ μὲν εἰν ἁλί που φέρεται νέκυς, ἀντὶ
ἐκείνου

οὔνομα καὶ κενεὸν σῆμα παρερχόμεθα.

ALP. vii. 271.


XX.


Nagios οὐκ ἐπὶ γῆς ἔθανεν Λύκος, ἀλλ᾽ ἐνὶ πόντῳ
ναῦν ἅμα καὶ ψυχὴν εἶδεν ἀπολλυμένην,
a ee > 4 > \ > ς ~
ἔμπορος Αἰγίνηθεν ὅτ᾽ ἔπλεε. χὠ μὲν ev ὑγρῇ
/ > \ > » » / μι
νεκρός, ἐγὼ δ᾽ ἄλλως οὔνομα τύμβος ἔχων
κηρύσσω πανάληθες ἔπος τόδε “ φεῦγε θαλάσσῃ
συμμίσγειν ἐρίφων, ναυτίλε, δυομένων.᾽
A.P, vii. 272.


ΧΧΙ.


Δωδεκέτη τὸν παῖδα πατὴρ ἀπέθηκε Φίλιππος
ἐνθάδε, τὴν πολλὴν ἐλπίδα, Νικοτέλην.


A.P, vii, 453.


XXII.


> A / 52 7 > /
Ηῷοι Μελάνιππον ἐθάπτομεν, ἠελίου δὲ
/ \ / - \
δυομένου Βασιλὼ κάτθανε παρθενικὴ
> , 7 \ > \ > \ -
αὐτοχερί: ζώειν γὰρ ἀδελφεὸν ἐν πυρὶ θεῖσα
> ” , > ὦ $e \
οὐκ ἔτλη. δίδυμον δ᾽ οἶκος ἐσεῖδε κακὸν
180


EPIGRAMS


XIX.¢


Would that swift ships had never even been!
So should we not be mourning Sopolis, son of
Diocleides. But now he floats somewhere in the sea,
a corpse, and, in his stead, his name and empty tomb
we pass by.


XX.?


Not on land died Lycus of Naxos, but at sea
he saw ship and life perish together, when sailing as
a merchant from Aegina. And he in the wet sea is
a corpse, while I, the tomb that holds only his name,
proclaim this message of utter truth: Flee the
company of the sea, O mariner, when the Kids are
setting !


ΧΧΙ.


Here the father laid his twelve-year son: here
Philippus laid his great hope—Nicoteles.


XXII.


At morn we buried Melanippus: as the sun set
_the maiden Basilo died by her own hand; for she
could not endure to lay her brother on the pyre and
live; and the house of their father Aristippus


« Cp. A.P. vii. 496.

> For the cosmical setting of the Kids in December
bringing storm, as also their heliacal rising in May, cf. Plin.
N.H,. xviii. 69 ‘‘haec (tempestates) ab horridis sideribus
exeunt veluti Arcturo, Orione, haedis.” Hor. C. iii. 1. 28;
Verg. A. ix. 668. Similarly Capella, Ovid, Fast. v. 113,
M., iii. 594; Arat. Ph. 158 f. ; Theocr. vii. 53.


151


CALLIMACHUS


| πατρὸς ᾿Αριστίπποιο, κατήφησεν δὲ Κυρήνη


πᾶσα τὸν εὔτεκνον χῆρον ἰδοῦσα δόμον.


A.P. vii. 517.


XXII.
Ὅστις ἐμὸν παρὰ σῆμα φέρεις πόδα, Καλλιμάχου με


ἴσθι Ἱζυρηναίου παῖδά τε καὶ γενέτην.

εἰδείης δ᾽ ἄμφω κεν" ὁ μέν κοτε πατρίδος ὅπλων
ἦρξεν, ὁ δ᾽ ἤεισεν κρέσσονα βασκανίης"

οὐ νέμεσις" Μοῦσαι γὰρ ὅσους ἴδον ὄμματι παῖδας ὅ
μὴ λοξῷ, πολιοὺς οὐκ ἀπέθεντο φίλους.


A.P, vii. 525.


XXIV.


᾿Αστακίδην τὸν Κρῆτα τὸν αἰπόλον ἥρπασε Νύμφη
ἐξ ὄρεος, καὶ νῦν ἱερὸς ᾿Αστακίδης.
οὐκέτι Δικταίῃσιν ὑπὸ δρυσίν, οὐκέτι Δάφνιν
/ > / > A > ,
ποιμένες, ᾿Αστακίδην δ᾽ αἰὲν ἀεισόμεθα.


A.P. vii. 518.


XXYV.


Εἴπας “ Ἥλιε χαῖρε" Κλεόμβροτος “ΩὩμβρακιώτης
ἥλατ᾽ ἀφ᾽ ὑψηλοῦ τείχεος « εἰς “Aidnv,


α On Battus, son of Callimachus the General and father
of Callimachus the Poet.

> Cf. Hes. Th. 81 f.; Hor. Od. iv. 3. 1.

ο 7.¢. is become a hero. Cf. Wilamowitz, Die Texige-
schichte der griechischen Bukoliker, p. 176.


152


EPIGRAMS


beheld a twofold woe; and all Cyrene bowed her
head to see the home of happy children made
desolate.


XXIII.¢


Whosoever thou art who walkest past my tomb,
know that I am son and sire of Callimachus of Cyrene.
Thou wilt know them both. For the one once led
the arms of his fatherland, the other sang songs
beyond the reach of envy. Naught in this is there
to surprise; for on whom as children the Muses.
look ® with no sidelong glance, those they do not
reject as friends when their heads are grey.


XXIV.


Astacides, the Cretan, the goat-herd, a nymph
carried off from the hill, and now Astacides is made
holy. No more beneath the oaks of Dicte, no more
of Daphnis shall we shepherds sing, but always of
Astacides.


XXV.4


Farewell, O Sun, said Cleombrotus of Ambracia
and leapt from a lofty wall into Hades. No evil


@ A.P. vii. 471, of xi. 354. Cleombrotus of Ambracia was
a pupil of Plato. e was in Aegina at the time of Socrates’
death, Plato, Phaedo 59 c. For his suicide cf. Lucian,
Philopatr. i. ἀλλὰ κατὰ κρημνῶν ὠθούμην ἂν ἐπὶ κεφαλῆς
σκοτοδινήσας, εἰ μὴ ἐπέκραξάς μοι, ὦ τάν, καὶ τὸ τοῦ Κλεομβρότου
πήδημα τοῦ ᾿Αμβρακιώτου ἐμυθεύθη ἐπ’ ἐμοί. The work of
Plato is the Phaedo, or On the Soul. Cf. Th. Sinko in Hos
xi. (1905), pp. 1 f.

153


CALLIMACHUS


ἄξιον οὐδὲν ἰδὼν θανάτου κακόν, ἀλλὰ Πλάτωνος
ἕν τὸ περὶ ψυχῆς γράμμ᾽ ἀναλεξάμενος.


A.P. vii. 471; Sext. Emp. Adv. math. p. 690; schol.
Dion. Thrac. p. 160.


XXVI.


Ἥρως ᾿Ηετίωνος ἐπίσταθμος ᾿Αμφιπολίτεω
ἵδρυμαι μικρῷ μικρὸς ἐπὶ προθύρῳ

λοξὸν ὄφιν καὶ μοῦνον ἔχων ξίφος" ἀνδρὶ δ᾽ "Enea
θυμωθεὶς πεζὸν κἀμὲ παρῳκίσατο.


A.P. ix. 336.


XXVIT.


"Quoce Καλλίγνωτος ᾿Ιωνίδι μήποτ᾽ ἐκείνης
ἕξειν μήτε φίλον κρέσσονα μήτε φίλην.

ὥὦμοσεν" ἀλλὰ λέγουσιν ἀληθέα τοὺς ἐν ἔρωτι
ὅρκους μὴ δύνειν οὔατ᾽ ἐς ἀθανάτων.

~ eee \ > ~ / / ~ \ /
νῦν δ᾽ ὃ μὲν ἀρσενικῷ θέρεται πυρί: τῆς δὲ ταλαίνης
᾽ὔ ε / > / 29> > /

νύμφης ws Μεγαρέων οὐ λόγος οὐδ᾽ ἀριθμός.


A.P. v. 6.


« Heroes were characteristically represented armed and
on horseback and attended by a snake (indicating their
chthonian nature). Eétion isatypical Trojan (cf. Eétion father
of Andromache) who hates the idea of a horse in consequence
of the wooden horse made by Epeius (Od. viii. 493), and
so has a hero at his door who is represented on foot.
ἀνδρίγ( ἥρως is a mortal. Cf. Pind. ΟἹ. ii. 2 τίν᾽ ἥρωα, τίνα
δ᾽ ἄνδρα;

δ Instability of lovers’ vows ; cf. Ovid, Ars am. i. 633
‘* Tuppiter ex alto periuria ridet amantum.”

¢ The Megarians : the concluding words τῆς... ἀριθμός are


154


EPIGRAMS


had he seen worthy of death, but he had read one
writing of Plato’s, On the Soul.


XXVI.%


I, a Hero, am set by the doors of Hétion of
Amphipolis—a small statue by a small vestibule,
with coiling snake and a sword—no more: Wroth
with the man Epeius he has set me also by his
house on foot.


XXVIT.?,


Callignotus swore to Ionis that he would never
hold man or woman dearer than her. He sware:
but what they say is true—that lovers’ oaths enter
not the ears of the immortals. And now his flame
is a man, while of poor Ionis there is, as of the
Megarians,° “ nor count nor reckoning.”


quoted from ‘‘Callimachus in his Epigrams” by Suidas s.v.
ὑμεῖς ὦ Μεγαρεῖς, where the explanation of the proverb is
given: ‘*Mnaseas relates that the Aegians in Achaea,
having defeated the Aetolians at sea and captured from
them a penteconter, dedicated a tithe at Pytho and inquired
who were the best of the Greeks. The Pythian priestess
ave them the oracle quoted above. A Thessalian mare, a
᾿μλνοφρομαντῆνος τὸ woman, the men who drink the water of
fair Arethusa .. . ὑμεῖς δ᾽, Alyiées οὔτε τρίτοι οὔτε τέταρτοι,
οὔτε δυωδέκατοι, οὔτ᾽ ἐν λόγῳ οὔτ᾽ ἐν ἀριθμῷ. Ion also says
the oracle was given to the Aegians. But some think it
was spoken to the Megarians, and quote ὑμεῖς δ᾽ ὦ Μεγαρεῖς
κτλ., aS Callimachus in his Epigrams, etc.” Cf. Suid. s.vv.

Αἰγιεῖς and Μεγαρέων, Steph. Byz. 8.0. Αὔγιον, ete.
155


CALLIMACHUS
XXVIII.


s > \ A \7 , ” \
Εἶχον ἀπὸ σμικρῶν ὀλίγον βίον οὔτε τι δεινὸν

es 4 ἃ > A > / - /

ῥέζων οὔτ᾽ ἀδικῶν οὐδένα. Vata φίλη,
Μ 5A wv \ > ’ / A 7
Μικύλος εἴ τι πονηρὸν ἐπήνεσα, μήτε σὺ κούφη

/ 7, > ἈΚ / @ > ΚΝ
yiveo μήτ᾽ ἄλλοι δαίμονες οἵ μ᾽ ἔχετε.
A.P. vii. 460.


XXIX.


ε ’ Pirie Asie ΄ or A 3 \
Ησιόδου τό τ᾽ ἄεισμα καὶ 6 τρόπος" οὐ τὸν ἀοιδὸν
3 3 > > / \ A /
ἔσχατον, ἀλλ᾽ ὀκνέω μὴ TO μελιχρότατον
“"͵ > / ε \ > / / A
τῶν ἐπέων ὁ Σολεὺς ἀπεμάξατο: χαίρετε λεπταὶ
3
ῥήσιες, ᾿Αρήτου σύντονος ἀγρυπνίη.
A.P. ix. δ07. Arati Vit. iii. (West. p. 54).


XXX.


"ExGaipw τὸ ποίημα τὸ κυκλικόν, οὐδὲ κελεύθῳ
᾽ / \ Ko \ e /
χαίρω τίς πολλοὺς ὧδε καὶ ὧδε φέρει,
μισῶ καὶ περίφοιτον ἐρώμενον, οὐδ᾽ ἀπὸ κρήνης
πίνω: σικχαίνω πάντα τὰ δημόσια.
Λυσανίη, σὺ δὲ ναιχὶ καλὸς καλός---ἀλλὰ πρὶν εἰπεῖν 5:
τοῦτο σαφῶς Hyw, φησί τις “ ἄλλος ἔχει."
A.P. xii. 48.


α The name Micylus occurs as the name of a Macedonian
general im Diodor. xix. 88. 5. It is chosen here probably as
suiting the context (Micylus=small).

δ On the Phaenomena of Aratus. If ἀοιδόν of all ss.
is right, the interpretation adopted (Kaibel, Hermes xxix.
(1894), p. 120) seems best. It would be hazardous to take
τ. ἀ. cx. aS = τ. ἔσχ. ἀ., and in that sense it would be better
to read ἀοιδῶν.

¢ **Qdi profanum vulgus et arceo,” Hor. Od. iii. 1. 1.


156


EPIGRAMS


XXVIII.


With little means I led a humble life, doing no
dreadful deed nor injuring any. Dear Earth, if 1,
Micylus,* have praised any evil thing, be not thou
light to me, nor light ye other Spirits which have ©
me in your keeping.


XXIX.?


Hesiod’s is the theme and Hesiod’s the manner,
I misdoubt that not to the utter end but only the
most honeysweet of his verses has the poet of Soli
copied. Hail subtle discourses, the earnest vigil


of Axatus.
XX X.¢


I hate the cyclic poem, nor do I take pleasure in
the road which catries many to and fro. I abhor,
too, the roaming lover, and I drink not from every
well@; I loathe all common things. Lysanias, thou
art, yea, fair, fair: but ere Echo has quite said the
word, says someone, “ He is another’s.”’


Echo is the companion of Pan, Eros, etc. (Plut. Qu.
Symp. viii. 711 ΕἸ and mother of Lynx, the Love Charmer
(Caltim. ap. 5680]. Theocrit. ii, 17). Her function is
to repeat the last word or words of a sentence—here
καλός. Of. Ovid, Metam. iii. 368 ‘‘tamen haec in fine
loquendi Ingeminat voces auditaque verba reportat,” and ἐδ.
380 ‘‘dixerat, Ecquis adest, et Adest responderat Echo.”
The repeated καλός as part of the lover’s language occurs as
early as Pind. P. ii. 72 καλός τοι πίθων (pet name for πίθηκος)
παρὰ παισὶν ἀεὶ καλός, and Attic vases frequently exhibit
such forms as ὁ παῖς ναιχὶ καλός, καλὸς νεανίας, ὁ mats καλός,
ναιχὶ καλός, Δωρόθεος καλός, ναιχὶ καλός.

The punctuation after Ἤχώ was first proposed by E.
Petersen in 1875. The old punctuation, after σαφῶς, gave
the words ἄλλος ἔχει to Echo. 4 Cf. Theogn. 959 ff.


157


CALLIMACHUS
XXXI.


Ἔγχει καὶ πάλιν εἰπὲ ““ Διοκλέος.᾽ οὐδ᾽ ᾿Αχελῷος
κείνου τῶν ἱερῶν αἰσθάνεται κυάθων.

καλὸς ὁ παῖς, ᾿Ἄχελῷε, λίην καλός, εἰ ἰ δέ τις οὐχὶ
φησίν-- ἐπισταίμην μοῦνος ἐγὼ τὰ καλά.


A.P. xii. 51.


XXXIT.


Θεσσαλικὲ Κλεόνικε, τάλαν, τάλαν, οὐ μὰ τὸν ὀξὺν
ἥλιον, οὐκ ἔγνων" σχέτλιε, ποῦ γέγονας;
ὀστέα σοὶ καὶ μοῦνον ἔτι τρίχες" ἢ ῥά σε δαίμων
οὑμὸς ἔχει, χαλεπῇ δ᾽ ἤντεο θευμορίῃ;
ἔγνων" Εὐξίθεός σε συνήρπασε, καὶ σὺ γὰρ ἐλθὼν ὅ
τὸν καλόν, ὦ μοχθήρ᾽, ἔβλεπες ἀμφοτέροις.
Φ


ALP. 30s ἡ ἐς


ΧΧΧΠΗ͂Ι.


« / > , > + / κ
Ὠγρευτής, ᾿Επίκυδες, ἐν οὔρεσι πάντα λαγωὸν
dif καὶ πάσης ἴχνια δορκαλίδος
/ \ ~ / 1 Ἃ ὃ / μὴ
στείβῃ καὶ νιφετῷ κεχρημένος,; ἣν δέ τις εἴπῃ
“τῇ, τόδε βέβληται θηρίον," οὐκ ἔλαβεν.
χοὐμὸς ἔρως τοιόσδε: τὰ γὰρ φεύγοντα διώκειν ὅ
olde, τὰ δ᾽ ἐν μέσσῳ κείμενα παρπέτεται..
«4.:}. xii. 102.


1 xexapnuévos Bentley.


* For the custom of drinking to a person in unmixed
wine cf. A.P. ν. 136, 137. For Achelous= water cf. Verg.
Georg. i. 9 ‘‘ Poculaque inventis Acheloia miscuit uvis.


158


EPIGRAMS


ΧΧΧΙ.


Fill the cup and say again “To Diocles!”” And
Achelous® knows not of his sacred cups. . Fair is the
boy, O Achelous, and very fair: and if any denies it,
may I alone know how fair he is!


XXXII.


Cleonicus of Thessaly, poor youth! poor youth!
nay, by the scorching sun I knew thee not. Where,
poor wretch, hast thou been? Thou hast but bones
and hair.2 Hath then the same doom overtaken
thee as me, and hast thou met a hard dispensation
of the gods? I know—Euxitheus hath caught thee
too: for thou, too, didst come and gaze upon the
fair one, poor youth, with both thine eyes.


XXXITI.¢


The hunter on the hills, O Epicydes, searches out
every hare and the tracks of every roe, beset by
frost and snow. But if one say, “Lo! here is a
beast shot”’ he takes it not. Even such is my love:
it can pursue what flees from it, but what lies ready
it passes by.


> Of. Theocr. ii. 89.

¢ This epigram is paraphrased by Horace, Sat. i. 2. 106 ff.
***Teporem venator ut alta In nive sectatur, positum sic
tangere nolit,’ Cantat et apponit: ‘meus est amor huic
similis, nam Transvolat in medio posita et fugientia captat.’”
The sentiment is a common one, cf. Ovid, Amor. li. 9. 9
‘*Venator sequitur fugientia, capta relinquit Semper et
inventis ulteriora petit”; cf. ii. 19.35; Sappho, frag. 1. 21 καὶ
yap αἱ φεύγει ταχέως διώξει.


7


159


CALLIMACHUS
XXXIV.


Οἵδ᾽ ¢ ὅτι μοι πλούτου κενεαὶ χέρες, ἀλλά, Μένιππε,
μὴ λέγε πρὸς Χαρίτων τοὐμὸν ὄνειρον ἐμοί.

ἀλγέω τὴν διὰ παντὸς “ἔπος τόδε πικρὸν ἀκούων"
ναὶ φίλε, τῶν παρὰ σοῦ τοῦτ᾽ ἀνεραστότατον.


A.P. xii. 148.


XXXYV.


"Aprept, τὶν τόδ᾽ ἄγαλμα Φιληρατὶς eloaro τῇδε"
ἀλλὰ σὺ μὲν δέξαι, πότνια, τὴν δὲ σάω.


4... vi. 847.
XXXVI.
Tw pe, λεοντάγος, ὦνα συοκτόνε, φήγινον ὄζον
θῆκε “ Tis ᾿Αρχῖνος. ““ ποῖος ;” ὁ ἸΚρής.
δὲ δένόμον ἢ
“4.}. vi. 351.
XXXVITI.


Barriddew παρὰ σῆμα φέρεις πόδας εὖ μὲν ἀοιδὴν
εἰδότος, εὖ δ᾽ οἴνῳ καίρια συγγελάσαι.
‘ A.P, vii. 415.


XXXVIII.
‘O Λύκτιος Meviras
τὰ τόξα ταῦτ᾽ ἐπειπὼν
160


EPIGRAMS


XXXIV.


Empty of wealth, I know, are my hands. But,
for the Graces’ sake, Menippus, tell not “my own
dream to me.”* Pained through and through am I,
when I hear this bitter saying. Yes, my friend, of
all I have had from thee this is the most unloverlike.


XXXYV.


Artemis, to thee Phileratis set up this image Bites
Do thou accept it, Lady, and keep her safe.


XXXVI.


_ QTo thee, O Lord, Strangler of the Lion,’ Slayer of
the Boar, I, a branch of oak, am dedicated—“ By
whom?” Archinus. “Which?” The Cretan. “I
accept.”


XXXVIT.


"Tis the tomb of Battus’ son that thou art passing
—one who was well skilled in poesy and well skilled
in season to laugh over the wine.


XXXVITI.


Menitas of Lyctus dedicated this bow with these


@ Proverbial of what one knows well; ef. xlix. 6.

ὃ The Strangler of the Lion (λεοντάγχης : cf. κυνάγχης of
Hermes, Hippon. fr. 1) is Heracles strangling the Nemean
lion, a frequent type in art, ¢.g. on the throne at Amyclae
ἄγχων Ἡρακλῆς τὸν λέοντα (Paus. iii. 18. 15). Heis Slayer of
the Boar, i.e. the Erymanthian Boar (Paus. viii. 24. 5).


M 161


CALLIMACHUS


ἔθηκε “ τῆ, κέρας TOL
δίδωμι καὶ φαρέτρην,
Σάραπι:" τοὺς δ᾽ ὀιστοὺς
ἔχουσιν “Kozepirat.”


ΧΧΧΙΧ.


Τὰ δῶρα τἀφροδίτῃ

Σῖμον ἡ περίφοιτος, εἰκόν᾽ αὑτῆς,

ἔθηκε τήν τε μίτρην
Δ 4 93, / /
ἣ μαστοὺς ἐφίλησε τόν τε πανόν,

> Ἁ > Δ > / / 4 1
αὐτοὺς θ᾽ ots ἐφόρει τάλαινα θύρσους. 5

A.P, xiii. 24,
XL.


Δήμητρι τῇ I[vAain, ς
τῇ τοῦτον οὗκ Πελασγῶν

᾿Ακρίσιος τὸν νηὸν ἐδείματο, ταῦθ᾽ ὁ Ναυκρατίτης
καὶ τῇ κάτω θυγατρὶ


A.P. xiii. 7.


τὰ δῶρα Τιμόδημος 5
eloaro τῶν κερδέων δεκατεύματα" Kal γὰρ εὔξαθ᾽
οὕτως.
A.P. xiii. 25.
XLI.


Ἵερέη Δήμητρος ἐγώ ποτε καὶ πάλιν αβείρίν,
ὦνερ, καὶ μετέπειτα Δινδυμήνης


1 θύρσους Bentley ; αὐτοὺς. . . ἐφόρει Editor; καὶ τοὺς
αὐτοὺς ὁρῇ τάλαινα θάρσους A.P.


* Steph. Byz. 8.0. Ἕσπερίς᾽ πόλις Λιβύης, ἡ νῦν Βερονίκη.
ὁ πολίτης ‘Eorepirns. Καλλίμαχος ἐν τοῖς ᾿Επιγράμμασιν.

> Cf. Hephaest.

¢ Acrisius, son of Abas of Argos (οὐκ Πελασγῶν). The
shrine referred to seems to be implied to be at Ther-
mopylae, cf. Strabo ix, 420 ᾿Ακρίσιος δὲ τῶν μνημονευομένων


162


EPIGRAMS


words: “Lo! I give to thee horn and quiver,
Sarapis ; but the arrows the men of Hesperis α have.”


*  XXXIX.


These gifts to Aphrodite did Simon, the light ο᾽
love, dedicate: a portrait of herself and the girdle
that kissed her breasts, and her torch, yea, and the
wands which she, poor woman, used to carry.


XL.?
To Demeter of the Gates, to whom Pelasgian
Acrisius® builded this shrine, and to her daughter


under earth, Timodemus of Naucratis? dedicated
these gifts as a tithe of his gains. For so he vowed.


XLI.


Priestess, Sir, of old was I of Demeter and again
of the Cabeiri and afterward of Dindymene °—I the


πρῶτος διατάξαι δοκεῖ τὰ περὶ τοὺς ᾿Αμφικτύονας (the Delphic
Amphictyony) . ... τὴν δὲ σύνοδον Πυλαίαν ἐκάλουν. ..
ἐπειδὴ ἐν Πύλαις συνήγοντο, ἃς καὶ Θέρμοπύλας καλοῦσιν ἔθυον
δὲ τῇ Δήμητρι οἱ πυλαγόρο. As Πυλαῖος was an epithet of
Hermes as warder of the gates of Hades (schol. Hom. 77].
ii. 842, cf. πυληδόκον Hom. H. Merc. 15) and the leader of
the Pelasgians from Larissa was called Pylaeus (Hom. 7).
l.c.), the exact significance of the epithet is somewhat
difficult.

@ Naucratis, town in Egypt, founded by the Milesians,
Strabo xvi. 801.

ὁ Dindymene=Cybele, from Mt. Dindymus in Phrygia, at
the foot of which lay Pessinus, the early centre of her
worship, cf. Steph. Byz. s.v. Alvéuma . . . ἀφ᾽ ὧν Δινδυμήνη ἡ
‘Péa, and Catull, xiii, 13 ‘‘ Dindymenae dominae.”


163


CALLIMACHUS


ἡ γρῆυς γενόμην, ἡ νῦν κόνις, ἡ ᾽ν [ὄτλοις
ευθοῦς]} *

πολλῶν προστασίη νέων γυναικῶν.
καί μοι τέκν᾽ ἐγένοντο δύ᾽ Meee, κὐἠπέμυσ᾽
ἐκείνων ὄ

εὐγήρως ἐνὶ χερσίν: ἕρπε χαίρων.
A.P. vii, 728.

XLII.


ae pev ψυχῆς ἔτι TO πνέον, ἥμισυ δ᾽ οὐκ οἶδ᾽
τ᾽ ” WO > / “ \ > /
Epos εἴτ᾽ ᾿Αίδης ἥρπασε, πλὴν ἀφανές.

ἢ bd 7 Tw ἐς παίδων πάλιν ᾧιχετο; καὶ μὲν ἀπεῖπον


πολλάκι “τὴν δρῆστιν μὴ ὑποδέχεσθε νέοι."


οὗ τις συνδιφήσον: ἐκεῖσε γὰρ ἡ λιθόλευστος:. ὄ
κείνη καὶ δύσερως οἶδ᾽ ὅτι που στρέφεται.
A.P. xii. 73,
XLITI.?


Εἰ μὲν ἑκών, ᾿Αρχῖν᾽, ἐπεκώμασα, μυρία μέμφου,
εἰ δ᾽ ἄκων ἥκω, τὴν προπέτειαν ἔα.


1 Supplement by Editor.

* This epigram was found on a wall in a house on the
Esquiline in Rome (Katbel, Herm. x. 1 ff.); cf. Kaibel, Ep.
Gr. ὁ lap. conlect. p. 502.


« Aulus Gellius, VA. xix. 9, has preserved an imitation
of this by Ὁ. Catulus: ‘‘ Aufugit mi animus. credo, ut solet,
ad Theotimum Devenit. sic est: perfugium illud habet.
Qui, si non interdixem, ne illunc fugitivum Mitteret ad se
intro, sed magis eiceret? Ibimus quaesitum. verum, ne
ipsi teneamur, Formido. quid ago? da, Venus, consilium.”

> Cf. A.P. xii. 166.

¢ The language of this epigram is that of the Stoic logic.
προπέτεια, ** rashness,” is opposed to ἀπροπτωσία, ef. Diog. L.
vii. 46 τήν τε ἀπροπτωσίαν ἐπιστήμην τοῦ πότε δεῖ συγκατατίθεσθαι


164


EPIGRAMS


old woman who am now dust, I who in the travail
of Eleutho was the friend of many young wives.
And two male children were born to me and in a
ripe old age I closed my eyes in their arms. Go thy
way and farewell!


XLIL.@


Half of my soul still lives, but half I know not
whether Love or Death hath stolen: only it is
vanished.? Has it gone again to where the boys
are? and yet I forbade them often: “Ὁ youths,
receive not the runaway!’’ There help me, some
one, to search ; for there somewhere of a surety flits
that lovesick one, worthy to die by stoning.


XLIIL.¢


If of my free will, Archinus, I serenaded thee,
blame me ten thousand times; but if I came unwill-
ingly, away with rashness! Wine and Love con-


kal μή; ibid. 48 διατείνειν δὲ τὴν ἐν ταῖς ἀποφάσεσι προπέτειαν
καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ γινόμενα, ὥστε εἰς ἀκοσμίαν καὶ εἰκαιότητα τρέπεσθαι
τοὺς ἀγυμνάστους ἔχοντας τὰς φαντασίας. See von Arnim,
Hermes, xxv. p. 475 ἡ μὲν ἀπροπτωσία. .. ἄνελκτον (cf.
εἷλκεν 1. 4) παρεχομένη ταῖς μὴ καταληπτικαῖς (φαντασίαι).
For y. 6 cf. Propert. ii. 80. 24 ““Ηος si crimen erit, crimen
Amoris erit’’; and in general cf. Propert. i. 3. 13 ‘‘ et quamvis
duplici correptum ardore iuberent Hac Amor, hac Liber,
durus uterque deus”; Ovid, Amor. i. 6. 33 ‘‘ Ergo Amor et
modicum circum mea tempora vinum,”’ and ibid. v. 59 ‘‘ Nox
et Amor vinumque nihil moderabile suadent: Illa pudore
vacat, Liber Amorque metu.” Cf, Kaibel, Hermes xxxi.
(1896). The last two lines of the epigram are quoted by
Plutarch, De cohib. ira, ὃ.


165


CALLIMACHUS


"ΑἌκρητος καὶ Ἔρως μ᾽ ἠνάγκασαν, ὧν ὁ μὲν αὐτῶν
εἷλκεν, ὁ δ᾽ οὐκ εἴα τὴν ee ὁ ἐᾶν.
>
ἐλθὼν δ᾽ οὐκ ἐβόησα, τίς ἢ Tivos, ἀλλ᾽ ἐφίλησα ὅ
\ / > a > ¥ > 397 > > ’
τὴν prin: εἰ τοῦτ᾽ ἔστ᾽ ἀδίκημ᾽, ἀδικέω.
A.P. xii. 118; Cramer, Anec. Par. iv. 384.


XLIV.


Ἕλκος € ἔχων ὁ ξεῖνος ἐλάνθανεν" ὡς ἀνιηρὸν
πνεῦμα διὰ στηθέων (εἶδες ;) ἀνηγάγετο,
\
τὸ τρίτον ἡνίκ᾽ ἔπινε, τὰ δὲ ῥόδα φυλλοβολεῦντα
τὠνδρὸς ἀπὸ στεφάνων 3 πάντ᾽ ἐγένοντο χαμαί:
ὥπτηται μέγα δή Tu μὰ δαίμονας οὐκ ἀπὸ ῥυσμοῦ 5
εἰκάζω, φωρὸς δ᾽ ἴχνια φὼρ ἔμαθον.
A.P. xii. 184.
XLV.
Ἔστι τι vai τὸν Πᾶνα κεκρυμμένον, ἔστι τι ταύτῃ
ναὶ μὰ Διώνυσον πῦρ ὑπὸ τῇ σποδιῇ:"
/ /
ov θαρσέω" μὴ δή με περίπλεκε.. πολλάκι λήθει
τοῖχον ὑποτρώγων ἡσύχιος ποταμός"
τῶ καὶ νῦν δείδοικα, Μενέξενε, μή με παρεισδὺς ὅ
οὗτος ὁ Given 3 εἰς τὸν ἔρωτα βάλῃ.
“4... xii. 189.


1 σώφρονα θυμὸν ἔχειν A.P.

2 ἀπὸ στεφάνων Athen. xv. 669 who quotes τὰ δὲ ῥόδα. ..
χαμαί; ἀπὸ στομάτων 4. ἢ.

3 ὁ σιγέρπης Bentley ; ὁσειγαρνης.


« With this epigram ef. Asclepiades, A.P. xii. 135.
> Of. A.P. 135. 4 χὠ σφιγχθεὶς οὐκ ἔμενε στέφανος.
¢ The sense seems to be that the poet, for whom the fire


166


EPIGRAMS


strained me; whereof the one dragged me, the other
allowed me not to away with rashness. And when I
came, I did not shout thine or thy father’s name,
but kissed the doorpost. If this be wrong, then I
have done wrong.


XLIV.4


The stranger had a wound and we knew it not.
How painful a sigh, marked you? he heaved when
he drank his third cup, and the roses, shedding their
petals, fell from his garlands all upon the ground.?
He is badly burnt, by the gods, my guess is not
amiss—a thief myself I know the tracks of a thief.


XLV.¢


There is something hidden, by Pan, there is, yes,
by Dionysus, some hidden fire beneath these ashes.@
No confidence have I: embrace me not. Oft-times

‘the quiet river undermines the wall unmarked. So
now I fear, Menexenus, lest this fawning gypsy ° slip
in and whelm me in love.


of love has burnt out, misdoubts that ** still in the ashes live
the wonted fires,” and so rejects the advances of a flatterer.
The language of v. 3 is curiously like Pind. P. ii. 82 διαπλέκει.
of of μετέχω Opdceos.

@ Hor. Od. ii. 1. 7 ‘‘ignes suppositos cineri doloso.”

ὁ σιγέρπης Bentley from Hesych. σιγέρπης" λαθροδάκτης,
used of a dog which fawns only to bite. ‘Gypsy ” may
render the word, cf. Theocr. xv. 48.

167


CALLIMACHUS
XLVI.


“Ληφθήσει, περίφευγε, Μενέκρατες " εἶπα Πανήμου
εἰκάδι, καὶ Λώιου τῇ τίνι; τῇ δεκάτῃ
ἦλθεν ὁ βοῦς ὑπ᾽ ἄροτρον ἑκούσιος. εὖ γ᾽ ἐμὸς


Ἑρμῆς,
εὖ γ᾽ ἐμός: οὐ παρὰ τὰς εἴκοσι μεμφόμεθα.


A.P., xii. 149.


-XLVII.


‘Qs ἀγαθὰν Πολύφαμος ἀνεύρετο τὰν ἐπαοιδὰν
τὠραμένῳ" ναὶ Γᾶν, οὐκ ἀμαθὴς ὁ Κύκλωψ:
αἱ Μοῦσαι τὸν ἔρωτα κατισχναίνοντι, Φίλιππε:
ἢ πανακὲς πάντων φάρμακον ἃ σοφία.
τοῦτο, δοκέω, χά λιμὸς ἔχει μόνον ἐς τὰ πονηρὰ
τὠγαθόν" εξεύπτες τὰν φιλόπαιδα νόσον.
ἔσθ᾽ ἁμῖν χἄκαστά σ᾽ * ἀφειδέα ποττὸν Ἔρωτα"
“τουτί, παῖ,2 κείρευ τὰ πτερὰ παιδάριον,
οὐδ᾽ ὅσον ἀττάραγόν τυ δεδοίκαμες al γὰρ ἐπῳδαὶ
οἴκοι τῶ χαλεπῶ τραύματος ἀμφότεραι."
ΚΡ) xii. 150.


1 χἄκαστά o Editor: χἀκαστὰς.
2 ror εἶπαι Kaibel.


α Πάνημος-- Macedonian Πάναμος (Hoffmann, Die Make-
donen, p. 103) was originally the 9th month of the Macedonian
year which began with the autumnal equinox and in which
the months were: 1. Aios; 2. ᾿Απελλαῖος :; 3. Αὐδναῖος : 4.
Περίτιος ; 5. Avorpos; 6. Βα ϑδικδς: αν ὦἢ ᾿Αρτεμίσιος : 8. Δαίσιος ;
9. Πάναμος; 10. Adios; 11: Topmiatos; 12. Ὑπερβερεταῖος.


168


EPIGRAMS
XLVI


“Thou wilt be caught! flee and save thyself,
Menecrates!” said I on the 20th of Panemos,® and on
Loios the-—what?—the 10th, the ox came to the
plough unbidden. Well done, my Hermes,? well
done! with the twenty days’ interval I find no fault.


XLVII.¢


How excellent was the charm? that Polyphemus
discovered for the lover. By Earth, the Cyclops
was no fool! The Muses, O Philippus, reduce? the
swollen wound of love. Surely the poet’s skill is
sovereign remedy for all ill. Methinks hunger, too,
hath this good and this alone in regard to evil: it
drives away the disease of love. We have both
remedies against thee, remorseless Love: “There,
boy; have thy wings cut, little boy! We fear thee
not a jot; for we have in store both charms for thy
cruel hurt.”


Panemos occurs in the calendar. of Boeotia, Corinth,
Ephesus, etc., and Loios (Homoloios in Thessaly) is also
widely found. In the Alexandrian calendar in the time of
the Ptolemies Panemos=June, Loios= July, approximately.

> God of luck.

¢ For the love of Polyphemus see Theocr. xi. The ms.
reading in v. 7 seems merely to need right punctuation, o(e)
and "Ἔρωτα being in apposition and ἕκαστα being loosely used
for ἑκάτερα.

4 The Muse.

e Cf. Aesch. P. V. 380.


169


CALLIMACHUS


XLVIII.
Τὴν ἁλίην Evdnuos, ἐφ᾽ ἧς ἅλα λιτὸν ἐπέσθων
χειμῶνας μεγάλους ἐξέφυγεν δανέων,
θῆκε θεοῖς Σαμόθρᾳξι λέγων ὅτι τήνδε κατ᾽ εὐχήν,
ὦ λαοί, σωθεὶς ἐξ ἁλὸς ὧδ᾽ ἔθετο.
A.P. vi. 301.
XLIX.


Edpabinv ἠτεῖτο διδοὺς ἐμὲ Σῖμος 6 Μίκκου
1 ὑφ᾽ ἧς Bentley ; ἀφ᾽ ἧς Blomfield.


«α« With this epigram should be compared the inscription |
foundat Kuft in 1883, now in the Cairo museum (Dittenberger,
Orient. Graec. Inser. Select. No. 69): Θεοῖς μεγάλοις Σαμοθρᾷξι
᾿Απολλώνιος Σωσιβίου Onpaios ἡγεμὼν τῶν ἔξω τάξεων σωθεὶς ey
μεγάλων κινδύνων ἐκπλεύσας ἐκ τῆς ᾿Ερυθρᾶς θαλάσσης εὐχήν.

The epigram is a series of puns, based on the ambiguous
sense of &\s as meaning either ‘‘sea” or ‘‘salt.” As the
sailor saved from the sea and its storms would dedicate
an offering—a model perhaps of his ship—to the gods of
Samothrace, so Eudemos, having escaped the storms of debt
by frugal living, dedicates his salt-cellar because he is saved
from salt.

ὃ The Cabeiri, Herodot. ii. 51. Their worship reached
its highest point under the Diadochi, when Samothrace
became an asylum, e.g. for Arsinoé Philadelphos, for Perseus
of Macedon (Gnaeus Octavius προσορμισάμενος TH Σαμοθράκῃ
τὴν μὲν ἀσυλίαν παρεῖχε τῷ Περσεῖ διὰ τοὺς θεούς, Plut. Aemil.
26). Juv. iii. 144 **iures licet et Samothracum Et nostrorum
aras.” Hence ‘‘ pii Samothraces,” Statius, 4. i. 832. As gods
who protected sailors, Apoll. Rh. i. 915 ff., Theophr. Char. 25,
Diodor. iv. 43. 1.

σ (1) Bentley’s idea that v. 4 referred to the letter T, which
Pythagoras of Samos is said to have used to denote the
divergence of the paths of virtue and vice (Persius, Sat.
iii. 56), and that the mask of Dionysus was set up beside a
representation of that letter in a boys’ school, has long been
exploded. ;


170


EPIGRAMS


XLVIII.¢


The salt-cellar, whereon, by eating frugal salt
for relish, he escaped the mighty storms of debt,
Eudemus dedicated to the gods of Samothrace,?
saying, According to my vow, O people, saved from
salt, I dedicated this here.


’


XLIX.¢
Simus, son of Miccus, offered me to the Muses,


(2) Since Bernhardy (1822) compared Aelian, V.A. vii. 48
and Plin. V.H. viii. 58, it has been seen that the reference is
to the Samian Διόνυσος κεχηνώς or Gaping Dionysus. Pliny,
who gives the fuller account, says that one Elpis of Samos
landed in Africa and near the shore he saw a lion gaping
threateningly (hiatu minaci). Elpis got up a tree, mean-
while invoking father Liber (i.e. Dionysus). The lion made
no attempt to pursue, but lay down before the tree and
seemed to solicit pity. Elpis then discovered that the
threatening gape was due to a bone which had got stuck in
the beast’s jaws and that the poor animal was perishing of
hunger. At last he ventured to descend from the tree
and remove the bone. The lion showed its gratitude by
supplying him with game during his stay on the shore. For
which cause Elpis consecrated a temple in Samos to father
Liber, which from that circumstance the Greeks called the
temple of κεχηνὼς Διόνυσος. The epigram is now interpreted
to mean that a schoolboy, in fulfilment of a vow, set up.in
the school a mask or bust of Διόνυσος κεχηνώς, in which his
gape was so exaggerated, either intentionally (Bergk) or
through lack of skill on the part of the artist—‘‘ the best
he could make or pay for” (Kaibel)—as to be ‘* twice that
of the Samian A.x«.” Here Dionysus listens to the boys
repeating ad nauseam ἱερὸς ὁ πλόκαμος --- ἴ.6. reading the
Bacchae of Euripides, the quotation (Bacch. 494) being used
to denote the play as we might use ‘* Arma virumque” to
indicate the Aeneid.

(3) G. Kaibel in Hermes xxxi. (1896) disputes the use of
ὄνειαρ for ὄνειρον. Comparing (with Benndorf) the similar


171


CALLIMACHUS


A ~ ”
tats Μούσαις: ai δὲ Γλαῦκος ὅκως ἔδοσαν
3 + ee OE 4 ὃ “ > \ δ᾽ ΑΝ, nO 1 A
ἀντ᾽ ὀλίγου μέγα δῶρον. ἐγὼ δ᾽ ava τῇδε 1 κεχηνὼς
A “ A
κεῖμαι τοῦ Σαμίου διπλόον ὃ τραγικὸς
παιδαρίων Διόνυσος ἐπήκοος" ot δὲ λέγουσιν
᾿ Ν 3 7
“ἐ ἱερὸς 6 πλόκαμος ᾽᾽ τοὐμὸν ὄνειαρ ἐμοί.
A.P., vi. 310.


Τῆς ᾿Αγοράνακτός με λέγε, ξένε, κωμικὸν ὄντως
ἀγκεῖσθαι νίκης μάρτυρα τοῦ ‘Podiov

Πάμφιλον, οὐχ ἕν᾽ 5 ἔρωτι δεδαγμένον, ἥμισυ δ᾽ ὀπτῇ
ἰσχάδι καὶ λύχνοις "ΐσιδος εἰδόμενον.


A.P, vi. 311.
LI.
Τὴν Φρυγίην Αἴσχρην, ἀγαθὸν γάλα, πᾶσιν ἐν
ἐσθλοῖς
1 χήνδε ; corr. Bergk. 2 οὐκ ἐν : corr. Editor.


epigram of Asclepiades in 4.P. vi. 308, of which the last
distich is κἀμὲ χάριν Μούσαις τὸν κωμικὸν ὧδε Χάρητα | πρεσβύτην
θορύβῳ θήκατο παιδαρίων, he emends Χάρητα to χαρέντα and
thus makes the ‘*comic old man” enjoy the din of the
school. He thus reaches the conclusion that ὄνειαρ has
here its ordinary epic sense. Dionysus says he finds his
‘* pleasure” in the recitation of the line, whether it be in
the Bacchae as a whole or the particular scene from which
the line is taken or in the fact that the boys have still to
read the play.

(4) But in answer to Kaibel it has to be said: (1) The use
of dévecap=dream is sufficiently attested by A.P. vii. 42. 1
where it is probably intended to be a quotation of Suid. s.v.
ὄνειαρ, Kustath. Hom. Od. 1877. 64, etc. (2) If ὄνειαρ means


** pleasure” there is no point in τοὐμὸν. ... ἐμοί. The poet
must have written ἐμόν (or τοὐμόν) or ἐμοί but not both. On
the other hand the combination τοὐμὸν... ἐμοί is an essential


thing in the proverb; thus Plato, Rep. 563p, Callim. Ep.
172


EPIGRAMS


praying for ease of learning. And they, like Glaucus*
gave him a great gift for a small. And here I am
set, gaping twice as widely as the Samian (Dionysus),
the tragic Dionysus, hearkening to children as they
say “Sacred is the lock of hair,’’ repeating “my
own dream to me.”


L.


Say, Stranger, that I am set up as a witness of the
victory of Agoranax of Rhodes, a comic witness °¢
indeed—Pamphilus, not a single love-worn face but
half of it like roasted figs and the lamps of Isis.


1.11.4


Phrygian Aeschra, his good nurse, so long as she


84. 2, Suid. s.v. trap, Cic. Ad Attic. vi. 9. 3.. (3) But the
last objection is decisive. It is universally assumed that
the mask is a mask of a Διόνυσος κεχηνώς. But that would
be utterly out of place, and we are expressly told it was
ὁ τραγικὸς Διόνυσος. The mask was an ordinary mask of
Dionysus. What is meant is that he is so weary of the
‘* damnable iteration ” (Shakespeare) of the schoolroom that
he yawns more widely than the Gaping Dionysus himself.
It is needless to illustrate this use of κέχηνα (Latin oscito) to
express boredom, e.g. Aristoph. Ach. 30.

« Hom. Ii. vi. 234 ff. where Glaucus ‘‘ exchanged armour
with Diomedes, golden armour for armour of bronze, the
price of a hundred oxen for the price of nine.”

> Kurip. Bacch.

¢ For the proverbial ** comic witness” ef. Cic. Ad famil.
ii. 13 ‘‘ mea vero officia ei non defuisse tu es testis, cui iam
κωμικὸς μάρτυς, ut opinor, accedit Phania.”

Pamphilus appears as a character in the Andria and
Hecyra of Terence; Pamphila in Menander, Epitrep. 508 f.
and in Terence, Hunuchus and Adelphi.

For the mask with double face ef. Pollux iv. 141,
Quintilian xi. 3. 74.

@ Very similar to this is 4.P. vii. 663.


178


CALLIMACHUS


Μίκκος καὶ ζωὴν οὖσαν ἐγηροκόμει
καὶ φθιμένην ἀνέθηκεν ἐπεσσομένοισιν ὁρᾶσθαι,
ἡ γρῆυς μαστῶν ὡς ἀπέχει χάριτας.
A.P., vii. 458.


LIT.


/ A A 7
Τέσσαρες ai Χάριτες" ποτὶ yap μία ταῖς τρισὶ τήναις
» a
ἄρτι ποτεπλάσθη κῆτι μύροισι νοτεῖ.
/ Aa
εὐαίων ἐν πᾶσιν apilados Bepevixa,
ΝΜ 299 > \ \ / /
ds ἄτερ οὐδ᾽ αὐταὶ ταὶ Χάριτες Χάριτες.
4.Ρ. ν. 145.


1111.


Τὸν τὸ καλὸν μελανεῦντα Θεόκριτον, εἰ μὲν ἔμ᾽
ἔχθει,
τετράκι μισοίης, εἰ δὲ φιλεῖ, φιλέοις"
ναιχὶ πρὸς εὐχαίτεω Τ᾽ανυμήδεος, οὐράνιε Ζεῦ,
καὶ σύ ποτ᾽ ἠράσθης---οὐκέτι μακρὰ λέγω.
A.P, xii. 230,


LIV.
Kai πάλιν, Ἐϊλήθυια, Λυκαινίδος ἐλθὲ καλεύσης


+ > / - A > /
εὔλοχος ὠδίνων ὧδε οὗν εὐτοκίῃ,
ὡς τόδε νῦν μέν, ἄνασσα, κόρης ὕπερ, ἀντὶ δὲ παιδὸς
ὕστερον εὐώδης ἄλλο τι νηὸς ἔχοι.
A.P. vi. 146.
« Berenice, daughter of Magas of Cyrene, and Apame ;
she is the wife of Ptolemy III. Euergetes and the heroine
of the Rape of the Lock (Βερενίκης mdéxapyos). Cf. Wil.-
Moell. Die Textgeschichte d. gr. Bukoliker, p. 52 f.


> 'Theocr. xvii. 57.
¢ That the Theocritus of this epigram is the poet of the


174


EPIGRAMS


lived, Miccus cared for in her old age with all good
things, and when she died, he set up her statue for
future generations to see, so that the old woman has
received thanks for her nursing breasts.


LILI.


Four are the Graces; for beside those three
another has been fashioned lately and is yet wet
- with perfume. Happy Berenice ® and resplendent?
among all—without whom even the Graces them-
selves are not Graces.


LITI.


If Theocritus° with finely darkening cheek hates
me, four times as much mayst thou hate him, or
if he loves me, love. Yea, by Ganymede of the
fair locks, O Zeus in heaven, thou too hast loved.4@
I say no more.


LIV.


Even so again, Eilethyia, come thou when Lycaenis
calls, to bless her pains with easy birth; so may
thy fragrant shrine have, as now this offering for
a girl, some other offering hereafter for a boy.


Idylls is supported by what seem to’be echoes of his poetry.
(1) The adverbial use of τὸ καλόν is rare in pre-Christian
times, but occurs in Theocritus iii. 3 and 18, cf Herod. i.
54, A.P. vii. 219, ps.-Lucian, Amor. iii. 26. (2) v. 4 is an
echo of Theocr. Jdyl. viii. 59 f. ὦ πάτερ ὦ Zed, | οὐ μόνος
ἠράσθην᾽ καὶ τὺ γυναικοφίλας. Further μελανεῦντα would imply
that Theocritus was still young when he wrote Idylls iii.
and viii. and made the acquaintance of Callimachus.
ὦ Cf, AP. ν. 166.


175


CALLIMACHUS
LV.


Τὸ χρέος ὡς ἀπέχεις, ᾿Ασκληπιέ, τὸ πρὸ γυναικὸς
Δημοδίκης ᾿Ακέσων ὥφελεν εὐξάμενος,
γινώσκειν" ἣν δ᾽ ἄρα λάθῃ, « πάλι» καί μιν ἀπαιτῆς,
φησὶ παρέξεσθαι μαρτυρίην ὁ πίναξ.
A.P, vi. 147.


LVI.


Τῷ pe Κανωπίτᾳ Καλλίστιον εἴκοσι μύξαις
πλούσιον ἁ Κριτίου λύχνον ἔθηκε θεῷ
εὐξαμένα περὶ παιδὸς ᾿Απελλίδος" ἐς. δ᾽ ἐμὰ φέγγη
ἀθρήσας φάσεις “““Ἕσπερε πῶς ἔπεσες ;
*A.P. vi. 148.


LVII.


Φησὶν 6 με στήσας Edaivetos (οὐ yap ἔγωγε
γινώσκω) νίκης ἀντί με τῆς ἰδίης
3 A / > / /
ἀγκεῖσθαι χάλκειον ἀλέκτορα Τυνδαρίδῃσι"
πιστεύω Φαίδρου παιδὶ Φιλοξενίδεω.
A.P, vi. 149.


LVIII.


᾿Ιναχίης ἕστηκεν ἐν Ἴσιδος ἡ OdAew παῖς
Αἰσχυλὶς Εἰρήνης μητρὸς ὑποσχεσίῃ.
. A,P. vi, 150,
LIX.


Tis, E€vos ὦ ναυηγέ; Λεόντιχος ἐνθάδε νεκρὸν


«2,6. Sarapis, cf. Paus. ii. 4. 6 δύο (τεμένη) Σαράπιδος; ἐν
Κανώβῳ καλουμένου τὸ ἕτερον.
δ Identified here, as often, with Io, daughter of Inachus.


176


EPIGRAMS


LV.


Know, Asclepius, that thou hast received the debt
which Aceson owed thee by his vow for his wife
Demodice. But if thou dost forget and demand
payment again, the tablet says it will bear witness.


LVI.


To the god of Canopus did Callistion, daughter
of Critias, dedicate me—a lamp enriched with twenty
nozzles: a vow for her child Apellis. Looking on
my light thou wilt say, “ Hesperus, how art thou
fallen ?”’


LVII.


Evaenetus, who set me up, says—for I know not
—that in return for a victory of his I am offered—a
bronze cock—to the Tyndaridae: I believe the
son of Phaedrus, son of Philoxenides.


LVIII.


In the temple of Isis,? daughter of Inachus, is
set the statue of Aeschylis, daughter of Thales, in
fulfilment of the vow of her mother, Eirene.


LIX.


Who art thou, Ὁ shipwrecked stranger ὃ ὁ
Leontichus found thee here a corpse upon the
So she is called Inachis, Ovid, J. ix. 686, Propert. ii. 24.
4, etc.


¢ For the order of words cf. Hes. Sh. 78; A.P. vi.
267. 1.


N 177


CALLIMACHUS


5 ees > “-ς “- A “. /
εὗρεν ἐπ᾽ αἰγιαλοῦ, χῶσε δὲ τῷδε τάφῳ
4 ae 4 εν / OA A - ee
δακρύσας ἐπίκηρον ἑὸν βίον" οὐδὲ γὰρ αὐτὸς
ἥσυχον, ἀἰθυίῃ δ᾽ toa ᾿ θαλασσοπορεῖ.


A.P., vii. 277.


LX. μ᾿

Εὐδαίμων ὅτι τἄλλα μανεὶς ὡρχαῖος ᾿Ορέστας

Λευκαρέτα τὰν μὰν οὐκ ἐμάνη μανίαν
9.39 ΓΚ 3 3 / ~ / - 2\ 7

οὐδ ἔλαβ ἐξέτασιν τῶ Φωκέος ἅτις ἐλέγχει
τὸν φίλον" ἀλλ᾽ ai χὴν Spay? ἐδίδαξε μόνον,

ἢ τάχα κα τὸν ἑταϊρὸν ἀπώλεσε “Τοῦτο ποήσας---
κὐἠγὼ τὼς πολλὼς οὐκέτ᾽ ἔχω Πυλάδας.


1Χ1.


σ 3 / / A ’
Οἵτινες ᾿Αλείοιο παρέρπετε σῆμα Κίμωνος,
ἴστε τὸν ‘Immaiov παῖδα παρερχόμενοι.


" νὸν ἢ a , 3 2 ὁ Q

Aine καὶ od yap ὧδε Mevéxpates οὐκ ἐπὶ πουλὺ
ἦσθα: τί σε, ξείνων λῷστε, κατειργάσατο;

ἢ pa τὸ καὶ Ἱζένταυρον; ““ὅ μοι πεπρωμένος ὕπνος
ἦλθ ε δὲ λ ὔ > ” / 99
ἦλθεν, ὁ δὲ τλήμων οἶνος ἔχει πρόφασιν.

A.P. vii. 725.


A.P. xi. 362.


‘A.P. vii. 523.


LXIII.


Κυνθιάδες θαρσεῖτε, τὰ yap τοῦ Κρητὸς "Eyéupa
κεῖται ev ᾿Ορτυγίῃ τόξα παρ᾽ ᾿Αρτέμιδι,


« For the gull as typical of the seafarer cf. Callim. Aitia
i. 1. 34; A.P. vii. 295. 2; Arat. Ph. 296.

ὃ The reading and interpretation here given were proposed
to Dr. Rouse and others (Prof. Henry Jackson, Wilamowitz,
etc.) by the Editor in March 1913. Almost the same inter-
178


5


- EPIGRAMS


beach, and covered thee in this tomb, with tears
for his own hazardous life. For no quiet life is his
either, but restless as the gull he roams the sea.


ΙΧ.


Happy was Orestes of old who, mad in all else,
yet was not mad with the madness of Leucaretas,
nor tried the Phocian by the one test which proves
the friend; nay, had he produced but one drama,
soon would he by so doing have lost his comrade—
even as 1 have no more my many Pyladae.


LXI.


Whosoever ye be who pass the tomb of Cimon of
Elis, know that ye pass the son of Hippaeus.


LXIL¢


Menecrates of Aenus—for thou, it seems, wert
not to be here for long—what,-best of friends, made
an end of thee? Was it that which was the undoing
of the Centaur?? “’Twas the destined sleep that
came to me, but wretched wine has the blame.”


LXIII.


Ye goats of Cynthus, be of good cheer! for now
the bow of Cretan Echemmas is laid up in Ortygia
in the temple of Artemis,—that bow wherewith he


retation was given by Prof. G. A. Davies in Classical Rev.,
fisy 1913, p. 91. ¢ Similar is Athen. 436 p.

@ Hom. Od. xxi. 295 οἶνος καὶ Κένταυρον ἀγακλυτὸν Evputiwva
ἄασεν.


179


/


CALLIMACHUS-) -


οἷς ὑμέων ἐκένωσεν ὄρος μέγα" νῦν δὲ πέπαυται,
; αἶγες, ἐπεὶ σπονδὰς ἡ θεὸς εἰργάσατο.
A.P. vi. 121; vv. 1-2 Suidas s.v. Κυνθιάδες.


LXIV.


Οὕτως ὑπνώσαις, Κζωνώπιον, ws ἐμὲ ποιεῖς

κοιμᾶσθαι ψυχροῖς τοῖσδε παρὰ προθύροις.
οὕτως ὑπνώσαις, ἀδικωτάτη, ὡς τὸν ἐραστὴν

κοιμίζεις, ἐλέου δ᾽ οὐδ᾽ ὄναρ ἡντίασας.
γείτονες οἰκτείρουσι, σὺ δ᾽ οὐδ᾽ ὄναρ. ἡ πολιὴ δὲ 5

/ /
αὐτίκ᾽ ἀναμνήσει ταῦτά σε πάντα κόμη.
A.P. v. 23,


180


EPIGRAMS


made the great hill empty of you. But now he
hath ceased, ye goats, since the goddess hath wrought
a truce.


LXIV,¢


So mayst thou sleep, Conopion, as thou makest
thy lover lie by this cold porch ; so mayst thou sleep,
O most unkind, as thou makest thy lover lie; but
pity thou hast not met even ina dream. The neigh-
bours pity, but thou not even in adream. But the
gréy hair will presently remind thee of all these
things.?

α This is a παρακλαυσίθυρον or Lament at the door of the
beloved, cf. Plut. Mor. 7538 ris οὖν 6 κωλύων ἐστὶ κωμάζειν
ἐπὶ θύρας, ἄδειν τὸ παρακλαυσίθυρον, ἀναδεῖν τὰ εἰκόνια,
παγκρατιάζειν πρὸς τοὺς ἀντεραστάς ; ταῦτα γὰρ ἐρωτικά.


ὃ Cf. A.P. ν. 20; Hor. Od. iv. 10.


181


Bi Je aS


at ae


“ee


Sart


fi
ci
SAD


De


iA STS


BS πὰ


“¢€
>


THE FRAGMENTS
AITIA


INTRODUCTION


Tae Aitia was an elegiac poem in four books. The
title Aitia, i.e. Causes, corresponds to the Latin Origines,
the name of a work of M. Porcius Cato (‘‘ Senex historias
scribere instituit. Earum sunt libri septem. Primus
continet res gestas populi. Romani, secundus et tertius
unde quaeque civitas orta sit Italica. Ob quam rem omnes
Origines videtur appellasse’’ C. Nepos, Cato iii.). It is
probable that Cato modelled his work upon the Aitia of
Callimachus. Among the writings which Suidas ascribes
to Callimachus is one On the wonderful and paradoxical
things in the Peloponnesus and Italy. It cannot be a
coincidence that Cato ‘‘in iisdem exposuit quae in Italia
Hispaniisque aut fierent aut viderentur admiranda.”
Attempts, like that of O. Schneider, to reconstruct the
detailed plan of the work are rather futile. All that can
safely be said is that the Aitia treated in a series of elegiac
episodes all sorts of aetiological legends connected with
Greek history, customs, and rites. The setting of the
work was given in the form of a dream in which the poet
imagined himself to be carried by the Muses from Libya
to Helicon, where in answer to his questions they in-
structed him in all manner of legendary lore. The idea
is borrowed by the Roman Callimachus, Propertius iv. 3. 1
** Visus eram molli recubans Heliconis μὲ umbra,” ete. ; ef.
iii. 26. 31f. “Tu satius memorem Musis (Μούσαις μεμελημένον)
imitere Philetam Et non inflati somnia Callimachi.”


183


AITIA
TESTIMONIA


1. Apollonius (Rhodius), 4.P. xi. 275.
Καλλίμαχος τὸ κάθαρμα, τὸ παίγνιον, ὃ ξύλινος
vous,


αἴτιος ὁ γράψας Αἴτια Καλλιμάχου."
2. Diodorus, 4... vii. 42.


“5 ’ὔ / ~ / +
A μέγα Barriddao σοφοῦ περίπυστον ὄνειαρ,
Ἂχ © > \ / 0.9 ΝΡ ”
ἢ p ἐτεὸν κεράων οὐδ᾽ ἐλέφαντος ens.
τοῖα γὰρ ἄμμιν ἔφηνας, ἅτ᾽ οὐ πάρος ἀνέρες
ἴὸμεν,
3 / > / > / ε La
ἀμφί τε ἀθανάτους ἀμφί τε ἡμιθέους,
< ΚΝ 4 > / > / 5 «ς “.
εὖτέ μιν ἐκ Λιβύης ἀναείρας εἰς “Ἑλικῶνα
ἤγαγες ἐν μέσσαις Πιερίδεσσι «φέρων.
αἱ δέ οἱ εἰρομένῳ ἀμφ᾽ ὠγυγίων ἡρώων
Αἴτια καὶ μακάρων εἶρον ἀμειβόμεναι.
Vv. 1-2 Suidas s.v. ὄνειαρ.


=


3. Martial x. 4. 9 ff.


Non hic Centauros, non Gorgonas Harpyiasque
Invenies : hominem pagina nostra sapit.


1 * Καλλίμαχος Bentley.


« The punciainileks and consequently the meaning of this
distich is wholly uncertain.


184


AITIA
TESTIMONIES


1. Callimachus is the cause—the scapegoat, the
sport, the wooden mind—who wrote the Causes of
Callimachus.%

2. O greatly renowned Dream of the wise son of
Battos, surely thou wert of horn, not of ivory.? For
thou didst reveal to us such things as hitherto we
mortals have not known, both about the immortals
and about the demigods, what time thou didst carry
him away from Libya to Helicon and didst take and
set him in the midst of the Pierides. And they in
answer to his questions told him the Causes, both
touching the primeval heroes and touching the
blessed gods.

3. Here you will not find Centaurs nor Gorgons
and Harpies: our pages savour of humanity. But


* The reference is to the famous passage in Odyssey
xix. 562 ff. where Penelope says: ‘‘ Two Gates there be of
Phantom Dreams, these fashioned of horn and those of
ivory. Now the Dreams which come through sawn ivory
they deceive (ἐλεφαίρονται) men with words without fulfil-
ment; but those which come forth through the polished
horns. bring true fulfilment (κραίνουσι) for the mortal who
beholds them”; οὐ Verg. den. vi. 894 ff., Hor. Od. iii. 27.
41, Stat. Silv. v. 3. 288.


185


CALLIMACHUS


Sed non vis, Mamurra, tuos cognoscere mores
Nec te scire: legas Aetia Callimachi.


4, Clem. Alex. Strom. v. 511 c Eddopiwv ὃ
\ \ 4 > \ \ ” \
ποιητὴς Kat Καλλιμάχου Ἶβις καὶ τὰ Αἴτια καὶ
ς / > / \ \ /
ἡ Λυκόφρονος ᾿Αλεξάνδρα καὶ τὰ τούτοις παρα-
πλήσια γυμνάσιον εἰς ἐξήγησιν γραμματικῶν
ἔκκειται παισίν.


5. Epigr. Anonym. Bern. v. 7.
καὶ τῶν μεγίστων Aitiwy τὴν τετράδα.


* Kuphorion of Chalcis in Euboea, born 276 B.c., elegiac
and epic poet, some of whose poems were translated by
Cornelius Gallus. Cf. Verg. Hel. x. 50, Quintil. x. 1. 56.
His obscurity was notorious: ‘‘ [lle vero nimis etiam ob-
scurus Euphorion,” Cic. De divin. ii. 64.

> παισίν seems a certain correction of the ms. ἅπασιν.


1.4


Grenfell and Hunt, Oxyrhynchus Papyri xi. (1915), 1862,
cf. L. Malten, Hermes, liii. (1918), pp. 148-179. A. Korte,
‘‘Zu attischen Dionysosfesten,” Rhein. Mus. lxxi. (1916),
pp. 575-578. M. P. Nilsson, ‘‘ Die Anthesterien und die
Aiora,” Eranos, xv. (1916), pp. 181-200.

The identification of this fragment as the work of
Callimachus is established by the coincidences with extant
fragments, as noted below. From Athenaeus, xi. 477 ὁ
Καλλίμαχος δ᾽ ἔοικε διαμαρτάνειν ἐν TH συγχύσει τῶν ὀνομάτων
λέγων ἐπὶ τοῦ οἰκείου (Ἰκίου Grenfell and Hunt) ξένου τοῦ
παρὰ τῷ ᾿Αθηναίῳ Πόλλιδι συνεστιαθέντος αὐτῷ" καὶ γὰρ ὁ’
Θρηικίην . .. τὸ τρίτον (=frag. 109, vv. 11-12) and from
the poem itself we gather that Callimachus was the guest
in Egypt of Pollis, an Athenian who had settled in that


186


AITIA


you, Mamurra, do not wish to know your own
character nor to “know yourself’’: you should read
the Aztia of Callimachus. |


4, The poet Euphorion,* the Jbis and the Aitia
of Callimachus, the Alexandra of Lycophron, and
similar works are given as an exercise in exegesis
to the “sons of the grammarians.” ὃ


5. And the Four Books° of the greatest Aztia.


The phrase ‘* sons of the grammarians,” as a sort of slang
term for .‘* students,” ‘‘ scholars,” occurs in Athenaeus
359 Ὁ.

¢ What had been previously inferred from citations of
the Aitia—that it was in four books—is now proved by
Oxyrhynchus Papyrus 1011 which contains the conclusion of
the poem, followed by the inscription Καλλιμάχου [Δἰτί]ων δ.


country. In his new home Pollis scrupulously celebrated
the festivals of his native Athens. On this particular
occasion the festival celebrated was that of the Aiora,
which was instituted (Hygin. Astron. ii. 4) in connexion
with the epidemic of suicide among the women of Attica
after Erigone, daughter of Icarius, hanged herself: “‘ qualis
Marathonide silva Flebilis Erigone caesi prope funera
patris Questibus absumptis tristem iam solvere nodum
Coeperat et fortes ramos moritura ligabat,” Stat. Th. xi.
644 ff.; of. Silv. v. 3. 74 ff. Among the guests of Pollis
was a merchant Theogenes from the little island of Icos
(Strabo 436), one of the Magnesian islands. Him Calli-
machus questions about the cult of Peleus in Icos and the
relations of that island with Thessaly.


187


CALLIMACHUS


Fr. 1, col. 1.

ἠὼς οὐδὲ πιθοιγὶς ἐλάνθανεν οὐδ᾽ ὅτε δούλοις
pap ᾿Ορέστειοι 3 λευκὸν ὃ ἄγουσι χόες"

᾿Ικαρίου καὶ παιδὸς ὁ ἄγων ἐπέτειον ἁγιστύν,
3 / > / \ ae" > /
Ατθίσιν οἰκτίστη, cov φάος, ᾿Ηριγόνη

> / > / e / 3 / a

ἐς δαίτην ἐκάλεσσεν ὁμηθέας, ev δέ vu τοῖσι
ξεῖνον ὃς ᾿Α[ἐ]γύπτῳ καινὸς ἀνεστρέφετο

\ ww / \ / > \ /

μεμβλωκὼς ἴδιόν τι κατὰ χρέος" ἦν δὲ γενέθλην
Ἴκιος,Σ ᾧ ξυνὴν εἶχον ἐγὼ κλισίην

> > 4é6 9 δ᾽ δ δι < ,᾿ ἢ γὰ 7
οὐκ emita€,® ἀλλ᾽ αἶνος “Ομηρικός, αἰὲν ὅμοιον

ὡς θεός, οὐ ψευδής, ἐς Tov ὅμοιον ἄγει.
Ska γὰρ 6 Θρηικίην μὲν ἀπέστυγε χανδὸν ἄμυστιν ὃ

1 ἠὼς πιθοιγίς, i.e. the Pithoigia, first day of the
Anthesteria. For #s=day cf. Hom. Od. xix. 571, etc.

2 ᾽Ορέστειοι χόες, the Feast of Pitchers, second day of the
Anthesteria, which was celebrated on the 11th (Pithoigia),
12th (Choes), and 13th (Chytroi) of the month Anthesterion
(Harpocr. s.v.). At the Choes it was the custom that each
guest should drink by himself: καθάπερ ἐν rots Χουσίν"
εὐωχοῦνται μὲν yap κατ᾽ ἰδίαν, Athen. vii. 276c. The aetio-
logical legend was that, when the matricide Orestes came
to Athens during the celebration! of a public festival,
Demophon or Pandion, king of Athens, wishing to be
hospitable but unwilling for religious reasons that an
unpurified murderer should eat and drink with others,
ordered a pitcher (χοῦς) of wine to be given to each guest
separately. Hence was established the Choes or Feast of
Pitchers (Athen. x. 437 c, Suid. s.v. χόες, Eur. I. 7. 947 ff.).

3 δούλοις... λευκόν, because on the day of the Choes
slaves enjoyed great licence, Athen. x. 437 ©. For similar
occasions of licence for slaves cf. id. iv. 139 Ἐ, 149 c, xiv. 639.

4 Ἰκαρίου παιδός, t.¢. Erigone, daughter of Icarius. Icarius
was an Athenian who was taught the knowledge of the vine
by Dionysus. He was killed by some peasants to whom
he had given wine. His daughter Erigone or Aletis (i.¢.
wanderer), guided by her dog Maera, found his grave on
Hymettus. In her grief she hanged herself on a tree over
her father’s grave. Erigone became the constellation Virgo,


188


10


AITIA


ἘΣ


Nor did the morn of the Broaching of the Jars
pass unheeded, nor that whereon the Pitchers of
Orestes bring a white day for slaves. And when he
kept the yearly festival of Icarius’ child, thy day,
Erigone, lady most sorrowful for Attic women, he
invited to a banquet his familiars, and among them
a stranger who was newly visiting Egypt, whither
he had come on some private business. An Ician
he was by birth, and I shared one couch with him
—not by appointment, but not false is the saw of
Homer that God ever brings like to like; for he,
too, abhorred the wide-mouthed Thracian draught


her father became Arcturus or Bodtes, Maera became Sirius.
Dionysus caused a plague of madness to fall upon the
' Athenian women, who hanged themselves as Erigone had
_done.. To end the plague the festival of the Aiora (“‘ which
they call Eudeipnos,” H.M. s.v. aiwpa) was founded. A
song sung on these occasions was called ἀλῆτις, Athen. xiv.
618 £, Poll. iv. 55. Cf. Apollod. iii. 14. 7, and Hesych. s.vv.
αἰώρα and ddjris,*Aelian, V.A. vii. 28.

> Icos, an island off the coast of Thessalian Magnesia
(Strabo ix. 436) where Peleus died. Cf. A.P. vii. 2 κεύθει
καὶ Θέτιδος γαμέτην ἡ βραχύβωλος “Ixos. Ἴκῳ should be read
for Kg in schol. Pind. P. iii. 167, and schol. Eur. Tr. 1128,
and ᾿Ικίου for οἰκείου, Athen. xi. 477 c.

8 ἐπιτάξ : Callim. fr. 327 (H.M. s.v. émirdé* παρὰ Καλλιμάχῳ
érippnua, Hellad. Chrestom. ap. Phot. Bibl. p. 532. 364
Bekker), Arat. 380, and now Jambi i. 239.

7 alvos ‘Ounpixds: Hom. Od. xvii. 218 ὡς αἰεὶ τὸν ὁμοῖον ἄγει
θεὸς ws τὸν ὁμοῖον.

8 11-14=fr. 109, cited καὶ γὰρ... τὸ τρίτον, Athen. xi. 477 c
ἀνήνατο. .. ζωροποτεῖν : 11-12 cited Athen. x. 442 τ ἀπέστυγε

. oivororety, cf. Athen. xi. 781 ἢ (οἰνοποτεῖν), Macrob. Sat.
v. 21. 12 avjvaro. . . ζωροποτεῖν.

9 ἄμυστιν is the draught or custom of drinking ἀμυστί or
ἀπνευστί, cf. Eur. Rh. 419, 438, Poll. vi. 25, Anacr. fr. 64,
Cratin. fr. 291, Epicharm. fr. 34, etc. There is no clear
case of ἄμυστις = drinking-cup.


189


CALLIMACHUS


> a 2\7 > Ψ ἜΤΕΙ
οἰνοποτεῖν, ὀλίγῳ δ᾽ ἥδετο κισσυβίῳ.
τῷ μὲν ἐγὼ τάδ᾽ ἔλεξα περιστείχοντος ἀλείσου
τὸ τρίτον, εὖτ᾽ ἐδάην οὔνομα καὶ γενεήν"
σ
Ἢ pad’ ἔπος τόδ᾽ ἀληθὲς 6 τ᾽ οὐ μόνον ὕδατος
3 15
αἶσαν :
ἀλλ᾽ ἔτι καὶ λέσχης οἶνος ἔχειν ἐθέλει"
τὴν ἡμεῖς, οὐκ ἐν γ[ίὰ]ρ ἀρυστήρεσσι: φορεῖται
οὐδέ μιν εἰς ἀϊτενεῖς ] ὀφρύας οἰνοχόων
> / « / wy <9 > 4 > / 5 /
αἰτήσεις ὁρόων] or ἐλεύθερος ἀτμένα ὃ σαίνει,
4 ~ ’ὔ > /
,βάλλωμεν χαλεπῷ φάρμακον ἐν πόματι, 530
Θεύγενες, ὅσσ[α] δ᾽ ἐμεῖο σ[έ]θεν πάρα θυμὸς
3 “- 3
ἀκοῦσαι
gn τὰν 6 ΤΣ λ t 3 - .
ixyaiver,® τάδε μοι λ[έ]ξον [ἀνειρομέν |w
Μυρμιδόνων ἐσσῆνα ἢ cal πάτριον ὔμμι σέβεσθαι
Πηλέα, κῶς Ἴκῳ Evv[a τὰ Θεσσαλικά,8
τεῦ δ᾽ ἕνεκεν γήτειον3 id[..]ur[... ἄρτον" ἔχουσα 25


2


. ἢ ὀλίγῳ κισσυβίῳ : all sorts of cups might be provided and
the guest took his choice (Lucian, Cronosolon 18). It was
usual to proceed from smaller cups to larger, Diog. L. i.
104 Ἕλληνες ἀρχόμενοι μὲν ἐν μικροῖς πίνουσι, πλησθέντες δὲ
ἐν μεγάλοις, Cic. In Verr. ii. 1. 66 ‘fit sermo inter eos et
invitatio ut Graeco more biberetur. hortatur hospes,
poscunt maioribus poculis.” But the use of small cups was “
regarded as characteristically Greek, Athen. xi. 432 &,
cf. Xen. Symp. ii. 26, Athen. xi. 461 ff. For Thracian
rinking cf. Hor. C. i. 27. 1 ff.

* Different modes of circulating the cup in Athen. xi.
463 ὁ δ᾽ ᾿Αττικὸς ἐκ μικρῶν ἐπιδέξια, ὁ δὲ Θετταλικὸς ἐκπώματα
προπίνει ὅτῳ ἂν βούλωνται μεγάλα.

8. 15-16: cited anonymously, Athen. i. 32 5, with a line
of Simonides (hence the three lines appear as Simonides fr.
88.in Bergk P.L.G.). μάλ] Athen. γάρ. ἀλλ᾽ ἔτι) Athen.
ἀλλά τι. λέσχης] λεύχης Athen. (except L).

4 ἀρυστήρεσσι: ὅτῳ μὲν οὖν ὁ olvos ἀρύεται, ἀρυστήρ, Poll.
vi. 19; cf. x. 18. With it the cup-bearers fill the individual
cups from the κρατήρ.


190


AITIA


of wine and liked a little cup. To him I said, as
the beaker was going round for the third time,
when I had learnt his name and lineage: “ Verily
this is a true saying, that wine wants not only its
portion of water but also its portion of talk. So—
for talk is not handed round in ladles, nor shalt thou
have to ask for it, looking to the haughty brows of
the cup-bearers, on a day when the free man fawns
upon the slave—let us, Theogenes, put talk in the
cup to mend the tedious draught; and what my
heart yearns to hear from thee, do thou tell me in
answer to my question. Wherefore is it the
tradition of thy country to worship Peleus, king of
_ the Myrmidons? What has Thessaly to do with
Icos? And why with a leek and .. . loaf does a


5 druéva = δοῦλον. Et. Flor. p. 51 Miller ἀτμήν᾽ ὁ
δοῦλος᾽ Καλλίμαχος (fr. 538), cf. H.M. s.vv. ἀτμήν, ἀτμένες,
schol. Nicandr. Alex. 172 and 426. The form ἄτμενος
(cf. fr. 538) is recognized by Hesych. s.v. drwevov . . .
οἰκέτην, and Eustath. Od. 1750. 62 (Od. xiv. 63). Verb
ἀτμεύειν, Nicandr. Alex. 172; noun ἀτμενίη, Manetho vi. 59;
A.P. ix. 764; and obscure adjective, ἀτμένιος, Nicandr.
Alex. 178 and 426.

§ ἰχαίνει : only here,=iyavg, cf. ἰχανᾶσθ(ε)) Herondas
vii. 26.

7 Μυρμιδόνων ἐσσῆνα -- ἵν. 508 (Herodian. De monad. Ὁ. 17. 6
Dindorf) ἐσσήν. ὁ οἰκιστής, Μυρμιδόνων ἐσσῆνα, Καλλίμαχος.

8 Θεσσαλι]κά E. Lobel, cf. fr. 372 (Πηλεὺς ἐν K@ (leg.
Ἴκῳ) TH νήσῳ ἀτυχήσας τὸν βίον οἰκτρῶς καὶ ἐπωδύνως ἀπέθανεν,
ὡς καὶ Καλλίμαχος μαρτυρεῖ, schol. Pind. P. iii. 167), and
schol. Eurip. 77. 1128 καὶ προσελθεῖν (sc. τὸν Πηλέα) διὰ
χειμῶνα τῇ <IDKw τῇ νήσῳ καὶ ἕξενισθέντα ὑπὸ Μόλωνός τινος
“ABarros ἐκεῖ καταλῦσαι τὸν βίον.

9 γήτειον : Athen. 372 a mentions the leek at the Theoxenia
in Delphi.

10 78 [ἔλλ]υτιν &]prov Malten, cf. Hesych. ἔλλυτις" πλακοῦς
τις ; ef. ἐλλύτης, Cramer, Anecd. Gr. ii. 44, and J.G. xii. 3.
330 ἐλλύταν Kai ἄρτον.


191


CALLIMACHUS
col. ii.


ἥρωος κα[θ]όδου malts?
εἰδότες ὡς ἐνέπουϊσι
κείνην ἢ “περὶ σὴν [
οὔθ᾽ ἑτέρην ἔγνωκα" τ
οὔατα μυθεῖσθαι Bol 3
τ[αῦτ᾿] ἐμέθεν λέξαντος
τἰρισμάκαρ,5 7 παύρων ὄϊλβιός ἐσσι μέτα,
[ναυτιἸλίης εἰ νῆιν ἔΐχεις βίον: ἀλλ᾽ ἐμὸς αἰὼν
[κύμασιν αἰ]θυίης ὁ μᾶϊλλον ἐσῳκίσατο


90


1 96 6 The sense cannot be made out. κάθοδος may |


mean ‘ procession,’ as in Herond. i. 56, so 7p. κάθ., procession
in honour of a hero.
2 βο[ύλεο] Wilamowitz.


192


AITIA


girl . . . at the procession in honour of the hero?
As those who know say . .. that or about thine
. and I know no other... .’ When I had


said this [the stranger answered and said]: “ Thrice
blessed, verily thou art happy as few are, if thou
hast a life that is ignorant of sea-faring. But my
life is more at home among the waves than is the
sea-gull,”


3 32-34—fr. 111. 2-4, Stobaeus, Serm. lix. 10. 11. The
first line of fr. 111, which Stobaeus /.c. cited separately, is
now shown to have no connexion with lines 2-4. ἀλλ᾽ ἐμὸς
. . . ἐσῳκίσατο is quoted}as by Callimachus in schol. Arat.
294. ναυτιλίῃσιν ἥν, Stobaeus; Bentley corrected ναυτιλίης
ὃς νῆιν : Nauck εἰ for ὃς.

4 αἰθυίης : the gull is the type of the seafarer; Callim.
Ep. lix. αἰθυίῃ δ᾽ ἴσα θαλασσοπορεῖ, Aelian, Epp. Rust. 18
ἐπικυματίξζει καὶ λάρου βίον ζῇ ; cf. Aratus 296.


o 193


1.2


Tue subject of this fragment is the story of Linos.
According to Pausan. i, 43  Psamathe, daughter of
Crotopus, king of Argos, became mother of Linos by
Apollo. In fear of her father she exposed the child who
was killed by her father’s dogs. Apollo sent Poine to
punish the Argives. Poine carried away the children
from their mothers, until she was slain by Coroebus. A
second plague came upon Argos, and Coroebus went
voluntarily to Delphi to atone for the slaying of Poine.
The Pythia forbade him to return to Argos, and told him
to take a tripod from the temple, and, wherever he should
let it fall, there to build a temple to Apollo and to dwell
there. He dropped the tripod near Geraneia in the
Megarid, where he founded the town of Tripodisci. His
grave was in the agora at Megara, cf. A.P. vii. 154.

Conon 19 (Phot. Bibi. p. 133 f. Bekker) gives a some-
what different account, according to which Linos was
reared as his own child by the shepherd to whom he was
given. When he was torn to pieces by the dogs, the
secret of his birth became known to Crotopus, who con-
.demned his daughter to death. In anger Apollo sent a
plague upon Argos. When the Argives consulted the
Delphic oracle they were told that they must propitiate
Psamathe and Linos. So they honoured them in other
ways and sent women and maidens to lament (θρηνεῖν)
Linos. These mingling lamentations with prayers be-
wailed the fate of Psamathe and Linos and themselves.
Thus arose the Linos-song. ‘‘ And they named a month
Lamb-month (’Apvetos) because Linos had been reared with
the lambs (ἄρνες) and they hold a sacrifice and a Lamb-
194


AITIA


festival (ἑορτὴ dpvis), on which day they kill any dogs that
they find.” Of. Κυνοφόντιν ἑορτήν, Athen. iii. 99 = and
Clearchus ap. Aelian, N.A. xii. 34 ἐν δὲ ταῖς ἡμέραις ἃς
καλοῦσιν ἀρνηίδας οἱ αὐτοί, ἐὰν κύων és τὴν ἀγορὰν παραβάλῃ,
ἀναιροῦσιν αὐτόν, As the plague did not cease, Crotopus
in accordance with an oracle left Argos and founded a
city in the Megarid which he called Tripodiscion and
there dwelt. Cf. Ovid, Ibis, 573 ff. ; Stat. Theb. i. 562 ff.,
Stlv. v. 5. 55,


195


CALLIMACHUS


Papyrus Rylands13; οὐ Wilam. Hermes, xlvi. (1911),
471-3. Frag. 127 possibly belongs tothe same context.


apvetos M

ἀρνῆ «ι»δας

καὶ θάνε

τοῦ μὲν a

lkal τὸν ἐπί ῥάβδῳ μῦθον ὑφαινόμενον 5
ἀνέρες €

πλαγκτὺν

ἠνεκὲς ἀε [δω δειδεγμένος]

οὐδὲ μεὺ α

νύμφης at

παιδοφόνω

ἧκεν ἐπ᾽ ᾿Αρ[γείους]

ἢ σφεων

μητέρας [ἐξεκένωσεν ἐκούφισθεν δὲ τιθῆναι.5
οὐχ οὕτω 15


"Apyos ava.


10


γηράσκει δὲ γέρων κεῖνος ἐλαφρότερον,
κοῦροι τὸν φιλέουσιν, ἑὸν δέ μιν οἷα γονῆα

χειρὸς ἐπ᾽ οἰκείην ἄχρις ἄγουσι θύρην.

Stobaeus, Serm. οχν.; cf. Lucian, Amor. 48,
Apollon. De pron. p. 143 Bekker.


ἀπ᾽ ὀστλίγγων αἰὲν ἄλειφα ῥέει.
E.M. s.v. ὄστλιγγες, schol. Apoll. Rhod. i. 1297.


1 δ, 8=frag. 138, schol. Pind. WV. 2. 1 rods ῥαψῳδοὺς οἱ
μὲν ῥαβδῳδοὺς ἐτυμολογοῦσι διὰ τὸ μετὰ ῥάβδου δηλονότι τὰ
Ὁμήρου ἔπη διεξιέναι. Καλλίμαχος " καὶ τὸν ἐπὶ ῥάβδῳ μῦθον
ὑφαινόμενον ἠνεκὲς ἀείδω δεδεγμένος (corr. Bentley); f.
Eustath. Hom. Il. p. 6. 18 Καλλιμάχῳ εἰπόντι τὸν ἐπὶ ῥάβδῳ
μῦθον ὑφαινόμενον.


196


AITIA


i; 2


[There is a month named] Arneios [after him
and the days thereof are named] the Arneid days.
And [Linos].died [torn by dogs]: and his [untimely
fate as sung by minstrel] men and the wandering
[of Crotopus . . .] I sing right on as I received it.
Nor [did Apollo remain unheeding for ever] of his
bride [of hapless fate, but to expiate a child’s death]
by the death of children [Poine, an avenger of
grievous wrath] came against the Argives, who
[leapt upon their homes] and made empty-armed
the mothers and lightened the burden of the nurses.
Not so... in Argos. .


I. 3 (11)


That man finds old age lighter whom boys love
and, as if he were their father, lead by the hand
unto his own door.


I. 4 (12)
And from his (Apollo’s ?) locks unguent ever flows.


2 14=frag. 424, Gramm. De barbarismo in Valckenaer’s
Ammonius, p. 197 τῆς δὲ κακίας μέρος ἐστὶ καὶ ἡ ἀκυρολογία,
ὡς παρὰ τῷ Καλλιμάχῳ ἐπὶ τῶν ἀπολομένων νηπίων" μητέρας
ἐξεκένωσαν, ἐκούφισσαν δὲ τιθήνας. Greg. Cor. in Hermog.
Rhet. Gr. vii. 1183 Walz παρὰ τῷ Καλλιμάχῳ εὑρίσκεται ἐπὶ
τῶν ἀπολλυμένων νηπίων" ἐκουφίσθησαν δὲ τιθῆναι. The read-
ing in the text is Bergk’s.

197


CALLIMACHUS


οἵη τε Τρίτωνος ἐφ᾽ ὕδασι ᾿Ασβύσταο.
Steph. Byz. 5.υ. ᾿Ασβύστα.


τετράενον Δαμάσου παῖδα Tedeotopidny.
Is. Lydus, De mensibus, iv. 1, E.M. s.v. ἄφενος.


Schol. ADL I]. viii. 48 τρία δέ εἰσιν ἀκρωτήρια
τῆς Ἴδης, Aexroy, Γάργαρον, Φαλάκρη. τούτου
μνημονεύει Καλλίμαχος ἐν πρώτῳ Αἰτίων.


Schol. AD Ji. xiii. 66 ᾿Αθηνᾶ . . τοὺς Λοκροὺς
ἠνάγκασεν ἐπὶ χίλια ἔτη εἰς ἤΐλιον ἐκ κλήρου
παρθένους πέμπειν. ἡ ἱστορία παρὰ Καλλιμάχῳ
ἐν a’ Airiwv. . |


Schol. A.P. vii. 154 KoépotBov, οὗ μέμνηται Kad-
λίμαχος ἐν a’ Αἰὐἰτίων.


Steph. Byz. s.v. Τριποδίσκος . . . κώμη τῆς
Μεγαρίδος... Καλλίμαχος δ᾽ ἐν <a’> Airiwv


πόλιν αὐτὴν εἶναί φησι.


« Asbystian means African. Triton refers either to
Lake Tritonis, or more probably perhaps to the Nile; cf
Lycophron, Alexandra 516 Αἰγύπτιον Τρίτωνος ἕλκοντες ποτόν,
Apoll. Rhod. iv. 269 ποταμὸς Τρίτων. In Lycophr. 848 the
Nile is called ῥεῖθρον ᾿Ασβύσταο.

> The Locrian maiden-tribute, Lycophron 1141-1173.
‘“*A plague having come on Locris through the assault
of Aias upon Cassandra, the god (Apollo) told them
by an oracle that for a thousand years they must send


198


AITIA


I. 5 (18).
And as <she> by the waters of Asbystian“
Triton: ἡ


I, 6 (13a)
Telestorides, the four-year-old child of Damasus.


I. 7 (15c)


There are three peaks of Ida, Lectum, Gargarum.
Phalacra. The last Callimachus mentions in Aitza i.


I. 8 (134)


Athena . . . compelled the Locrians for a space
of a thousand years to send to Ilios maidens? selected
_ by lot. The story in Callimachus, A?tza i.


I. 9 (13e)


Coroebus, whom Callimachus mentions in Aztia i.°


I. 10 (4)


Tripodiscus . . . a village of the Megarid...
Callimachus calls it a city in Aita i.4


maidens every year to Troy for Athena. When they
arrived they were slain by the Trojans who met and stoned
them. Any who escaped made their way secretly to the
temple of Athena and became for the future her priestesses.
Those who were killed were burnt with fruitless and wild
wood. Their bones were thrown into the sea from Mount
Traron at Troy and the Locrians sent others in their stead”
(schol. Lycophr. 1141).

° This probably belongs to the Linos story, Ait. i. 2.

4 See Ait. i. 3 (Introduction).


199


CALLIMACHUS


Kal yap ἐγὼ τὰ μὲν ὅσσα καρήατι τῆμος ἔδωκα
θ \ A > "ὃ ¢ A At 4 A
ξανθὰ σὺν εὐόδμοις ἁβρὰ Aimy} στεφάνοις,
= a >
ἄπνοα πάντ᾽ ἐγένοντο παραχρῆμ᾽" ὅσσα τ᾽ ὀδόντων
ἔνδοθι νειαίρην τ᾽ εἰς ἀχάριστον ἔδυ,
“- > a
καὶ τῶν οὐδὲν ἔμεινεν ἐς αὔριον: ὅσσα δ᾽ ἀκουαῖς 5
εἰσεθέμην, ἔτι μοι μοῦνα πάρεστι τάδε.
Stob. Flor. Ἰχχχὶ. 8.


ε A > / , 4 « 7
ἡ μὲν ἀερτάζουσα μέγα τρύφος “ψιζώρου
ἄστυρον εἰσανέβαιν᾽.


Et. Mag. 5.υ. ἄστυρον.


ὥς τε Ζεὺς ἐράτιζε τριηκοσίους ἐνιαυτούς.
Schol. AD ἢ. i. 609.


Ψ > ’ > ; / /
οὕνεκεν οἰκτείρειν οἶδε μόνη πολίων.


Schol. Soph. O.C. 258 Καλλίμαχος . . ἐν τῷ


τέλει τοῦ β΄ τῶν Αἰτίων.


Τάμμεω θυγατέρος.
Schol. AD J/. ix. 193.


Tzetzes, Lycophr. 869 τὸ δρέπανον παρὰ Σικελοῖς
ζάγκλον καλεῖται. μέμνηται δὲ καὶ Καλλίμαχος
66 ἢ pet μεμνη Pax
ev δευτέρῳ Αἰτίων.

1 ἁβρὰ λίπη Bs; ἀκραλίπη A; ἀκραλιπῆ 5.

« Athena.

> Hypsizorus, mountain in Chalcidice (Plin. ΔΝ. H. iv. 86).

¢ The reference is to the ἱερὸς γάμος or secret marriage


of Zeus and Hera, first mentioned in Jliad xiv. 294 ff.,
346 ff. ; cf. Theocrit. xv. 64, Callim. AZ. iii, 1. 4.


200


AITIA


II. 1 (106)


For whatsoever I bestowed in that hour upon my
head, the delicate yellow unguents with the sweet-
smelling wreaths, all lost their fragrance straight-
way ; and whatsoever entered within my teeth and
- into the ungrateful belly, thereof naught remained
until the morrow; but what I laid within my
hearing ears, these things alone still abide for me.


II. 2 (19)
And she ¢ lifted the great fragment of Hypsizorus ὃ
and went up into the city.


II. 3 (20)
And how Zeus loved for three hundred years.°


II. 4 (21)
Since she? alone among cities knows to pity.


II. 5 (21a)
The daughter’ of Athamas.


Il. 6 (22)


The sickle is called among the Sicilians zanclonS
Callimachus mentions this in “τα ii.

ἃ The city of Athens. Paus. i. 17. 1 ‘*In the market-
place of Athens . . . is an altar of Pity to whom.. . alone
of the Hellenes the Athenians render honours.”

¢ Hella. The phrase is quoted to illustrate an Ionicism
whereby ‘‘ Athamas ” becomes ‘‘ Tammas.”

7 Thucyd. vi. 4 ** The original name given to Sicily by the
Sicels was Zancle, from its sickle-shape . . . the Sicels call
the sickle zanclon.”

201


CALLIMACHUS


Steph. Byz. frag. s.v. Δωδώνη" ὠνόμασται . . .,
ws ᾿Επαφρόδιτος ὑπομνηματίζων τὸ β΄ Aitiwv,
ἀπὸ Δωδώνης μιᾶς τῶν ᾿Ωκεανίδων νυμφῶν.


Ad , θ > 395 529 / , ’ a}
iyumtos προπάροιθεν ἐπ᾽ ἐννέα κάρφετο ποίας


Ἁ " , : / ; a > x λ / τ
τὴν κείνου Φάλαρις πρᾶξιν ἀπεπλάσατο,
A “ς \ 5,
πρῶτος ἐπεὶ τὸν ταῦρον ἐκαίνισεν ὃς τὸν ὄλεθρον
« “-
εὗρε τὸν ἐν χαλκῷ καὶ πυρὶ γιγνόμενον.


1 sv. roa... ποιά (50 ΚΕ. Μ. accents, cf. 8.0. ῥοιά" τὰ εἰς
ἃ λήγοντα θηλυκά, εἰ μὲν τῷ ὁ παραλήγεται, παροξύνεται, οἷον . ..
πόα, εἰ δὲ τῇ δὲ διφθόγγῳ ὀξύνεται οἷον. . . ποιά) ἐστιν ὁ
ἐνιαυτός " Καλλίμαχος" Αἴγυπτος... ποίας (ἔτ. 182 Schneid.); ef.
Suid. s.v. ποίη. Tzetz. Lycophr. 117 μέμνηται τοῦ Φαλήρου καὶ
Καλλίμαχος λέγων * τὴν ἐκείνου Φάληρος (810). .. ἀπεπλάσατο (fr.
194. Schneid.). Schol. Pind. P. i. 185 κατασκευάσαι δὲ αὐτόν
(sc. τὸν τοῦ Φαλάριδος ταῦρον) φασι Iepihaov καὶ πρῶτον ἐν αὐτῷ
κατακαῆναι. καὶ Καλλίμαχος" πρῶτος. .. γιγνόμενον (fr. 119
Schneid.). Plutarch, Parall. xxxix. p. 315 Πέριλλος. ..
δάμαλιν κατασκευάσας χαλκῆν ἔδωκε TH βασιλεῖ ws ἂν τοὺς ξένους
κατακαίῃ ζῶντας ἐν αὐτῇ " ὁ δὲ μόμον τότε γενόμενος δίκαιος αὐτὸν
ἐνέβαλεν. ἐδόκει δὲ μυκηθμὸν ἀναδιδόναι ἡ δάμαλις. ὡς ἐν δευτέρῳ
Αἰτίων (fr. 25 Schneid.).


« The combination of frags. 25, 119, 194, was first
made by Ruhnken; frag. 182 was added by Porson. The


202


AITIA
Il. 7 (24)


Dodona: it gets its name, according to Ep-
aphroditus in his commentary on Attia ii., from
Dodona, one of the Oceanid nymphs.


IL. 8 (25)4
Egypt formerly suffered drought for nine seasons :


His δου δὲ Phalaris ΗΘ hive he Νὰ ρυτΑξηιεες
the death by bronze and fire was the first to handsel
the bull.


story of Phalaris, tyrant of Agrigentum, and the brazen
bull invented by Perillus is familiar to everyone.  Calli-
machus represents Phalaris as imitating Busiris, king of
Egypt. The legend was that when Egypt had suffered
from drought for nine years, Thrasius of Cyprus, a seer,
told the king that the drought would cease if he would
sacrifice a stranger every year to Zeus. Busiris took his
advice and began the series by sacrificing Thrasius himself.
Ovid, Ars amat. i. 647 ff., follows Callimachus closely :
**Dicitur Aegyptos caruisse iuvantibus arva Imbribus atque
annos sicca fuisse novem, Cum Thrasius Busirin adit
monstratque piari Hospitis effuso sanguine posse lovem.
Illi Busiris : ‘ fies lovis hostia primus,’ Inquit, ‘et Aegypto
tu dabis hospes aquam.’ Et Phalaris tauro violenti membra
Perilli Torruit : infelix imbuit auctor opus. Iustus uterque
fuit, ete.” Cf. Trist. iii. 11. 39 ff., especially 48 : ““ Mugiet et
veri voxerit illa bovis ” (cf. Plutarch. l.c.) and 51 f. : **  poenae
mirande repertor, [pse tuum praesens imbue,’ dixit, ‘ opus.’”


203


CALLIMACHUS


Apart from Callimachus our authorities for the story
of Acontiusand Cydippe are first and foremost Aristaenetus,
Ep. i. 10, who closely follows Callimachus, Ovid, Heroides
20 and 21, Tristia iii. 10. 73 ff., Antoninus Liberalis i. where
the story of Hermochares and Ctesylla is a duplicate of
that of Acontius and Cydippe, Plutarch, Aet. Graec. 27.
Briefly the story is this. Acontius, a handsome youth
of Ceos, saw Cydippe with her nurse at the yearly festival
at Delos. Falling in love at sight, he followed her to
the temple of Artemis, where he threw in the way of


III. 1


A. 5. Hunt, Oxyrhynchus Papyri, vii. (1910), 1011.
A. Brinkmann, Rhein. Mus. lxxii. (1918), p. 473 ff.


fe) \ 4 θέ; > 4, 1
ἤδη καὶ κούρῳ παρῦενος εὔναάσατο,


7 e > / 7, 2 σ΄ 7 A
τέθμιον ws ἐκέλευε προνύμφιον 3 ὕπνον ἰαῦσαι
" \ a 3 δὲ ρὸν 22 Bare?.4
ἄρσενι τὴν TaAW*? παιδὶ σὺν ἀμφιθαλεῖ.
ὝἭ ’, / 4 / δὴ ὃ \
ρὴν yap κοτέ φασι --- κύον, κύον, ἴσχεο, λαιδρὲ
/ / > 2 ὙΡ A / 3 , Jeni?
θυμέ, σύ γ᾽ ἀείσῃ καὶ τά περ οὐχ ὁσίη" 5
” ' > @ > A ~ ” ¢ A “
wvao κάρ«θ»᾽ ἕνεκ᾽ οὔ τι θεῆς ies ἱερὰ φρικτῆς,
3 a” > \ \ ~ " ς /
ἐξ ἂν ἐπεὶ καὶ τῶν ἤρυγες ἱστορίην.


ς λ , \ ve 3 a6
πο υιδρεΐη χαλεπὸν κακον οστις AKAPTEL


11 ff. Cf. schol. Townl. Hom. Jl. xiv. 296 εἰς εὐνὴν
φοιτῶντε φίλους λήθοντε τοκῆας . . . διὸ Kal μέχρι viv
ὑπόμνημα φυλάσσεσθαι παρὰ Ναξίοις καὶ τὸν ἀμφιθαλῇ τῇ τάλι
συγκατατεθεῖσθαι' ἄλλοι τὸν Δία φασὶν ἐν Σάμῳ λάθρα τῶν
γονέων διαπαρθενεῦσαι τὴν Ἥραν" ὅθεν Σάμιοι ζήλῳ τῆς θεοῦ
μνηστεύοντες τὰς κόρας λάθρα συγκοιμίζουσιν, εἶτα παρρησίᾳ
τοὺς γάμους θύουσιν.


2 προνύμφιον only here.
3 =Callim. fr. 210=schol. Soph. Antig. 629 rads λέγεται


204


ΑἸΤΊΑ.


her attendant an apple inscribed with the words “1
swear by. Artemis to marry Acontius.”” The attendant
handed the apple to Cydippe who read the inscription and,
realizing the oath by which she was unintentionally binding
herself, threw it away. The father of Cydippe arranged
a different marriage for his daughter; but always when
the time for the marriage arrived, Cydippe was seized by
a mysterious illness. ‘Three times this happened, but the
fourth time the father went to Delphi to. consult Apollo,
and learnt that the whole mystery was due to the oath by
which his daughter had unwittingly bound herself. By
the advice of Apollo Cydippe’s father fulfilled her vow


III. 1


And already the maid had been bedded with the
boy, even as ritual ordered that the bride should
sleep her prenuptial sleep with a male child both
whose parents were alive. Yea, for they say that
once on a time Hera *—thou dog, thou dog, refrain,
my shameless soul! thou wouldst sing of that which
it is not lawful to tell. It is a good thing for thee
that thou hast not seen the rites of the dread goddess’:
else wouldst thou have uttered their story too. Surely
much knowledge is a grievous thing for him who


Of, :-Ate te Si. > The mysteries of Demeter.


map Αἰολεῦσιν ἡ ὀνομασθεῖσά (? μνηστευθεῖσά) Tin νύμφη.
Καλλίμαχος" αὐτίκα (sic) τὴν τᾶλιν κτλ.

4 παῖς ἀμφιθαλής is a boy or girl both of whose parents are
alive; cf. Pollux iii. 40, ete. Herwerden, Lew. Graec., adds
Dittenberger, Syll.? 353. 20, 21.

5 The reading is due to A, E. Housman, The papyrus
has efevérew, but the first hand wrote efavere.

6. ἀκαρτεῖΞΞ- ἀκρατεῖ only here.

205


CALLIMACHUS


γλώσσης" ὡς ἐτεὸν παῖς ὅδε μαῦλιν exer?
ἠῷοι μὲν ἔμελλον ἐν ὕδατι θυμὸν ἀμύξειν 1
οἱ βόες ὀξεῖαν δερκόμενοι δορίδα,
δειελινὴν τὴν δ᾽ εἷλε κακὸς χλόος, εἷλε δε νοῦσος,
αἶγας ἐς ἀγριάδας τὴν ἀποπεμπόμεθα,"
ψευδόμενοι δ᾽ ἱερὴν φημίζομεν * ἣ τότ᾽ ἀνιγρὴ
τὴν κούρην ᾿Α[(δΊεω μέχρις ἔτηξε δόμων. 15
δεύτερον ἐστόρνυντο τὰ KAtopia,* δεύτερον ἡ
πα[ϊ]ς
ἑπτὰ τεταρταΐῳ μῆνας ἔκαμνε πυρί.
τὸ τρίτον ἐμνήσαντο γάμου κοτέ, τὸ τρίτον αὖτ[ις
Κυδίππην ὀλοὸς κρυμὸς ἐσῳκίσατο.
τέτρατον [οὐκέτ᾽ ἔμεινε πατὴρ ἐς Δέλφιον ὃ ἄρας 20
Φοῖβον: ὁ δ᾽ ἐννύχιον © τοῦτ᾽ ἔπος ηὐδάσατο"
““᾿Αρτέμιδος τῇ παιδὶ γάμον βαρὺς ὅρκος ἐνικλᾷ,
Λύγδαμιν οὐ γὰρ ἐμὴ TH SOS? ἔκηδε Kdous,”
οὐδ᾽ ev ᾿Αμυκλαίῳ Op<d>rov® ἔπλεκεν οὐδ᾽ ἀπὸ
θήρης
ἔκλυζεν ποταμῷ λύματα ἸΠαρθενίῳ, 2ὅ


1 Cf. the proverb μὴ παιδὶ μάχαιραν, Paroem, Gr. Gaisford,

77, ete.
fi 2 Of. Hesych. s.v. κατ᾽ alyas dyplas* παροιμία λεγομένη
els ἀγρίας αἶγας τρέπειν τὰς νόσους, μάλιστα δὲ τὴν ἱεράν. Suid.
8.0. κατ᾽ alyas ἀγρίας, Paroem. Gr. Gaisford, p. 197 (ὁμοία τῇ
**és κόρακας Ἶ, Philostr. Her. p. 148.

3 ψευδόμενοι . . φημίζομεν = Callim. fr. 276, 2.6. schol.
Apoll. Rhod. i. 1019 τὰ μεγάλα τῶν παθῶν εὐφήμως ἱερὰ καὶ
καλά φαμεν ... καὶ τὴν λοιμικὴν νόσον ἱεράν, ὡς καὶ Καλλίμαχος "
ψευδόμενοι κτλ. '

4 κλισμία only here, Brinkmann suggests accenting
κλίσμια : of, θέσμια, μύχια, λόχμια, etc.

5 Δελφιζκοόν ἢ Aristaenet. i. 10 τρίτον ὁμοίως ταῦτα συμ-
βέβηκε τῇ παιδί, ὁ δὲ πατὴρ τετάρτην οὐκ ἀνέμεινε νόσον, ἀλλ’
ἐπύθετο τοῦ Πυθίου. τίς ἄρα θεῶν τὸν γάμον ἐμποδίζει τῇ κόρῃ.

ὁ δὲ ᾿Απόλλων πάντα σαφῶς τὸν πατέρα διδάσκει, τὸν νέον, τὸ


906


AITIA


controls not his tongue : aa this is a child with
a knife.

In the morning the oxen were to tear their
hearts in the water,” seeing before them the keen
blade. But in the afternoon an evil paleness seized
her: seized her the disease which we banish to the
goats of the wild and which we falsely call the holy
disease.? And then that ill sickness wasted the girl
even to the gates of death. A second time the
couches were spread: a second time the maid was
sick for seven months with a quartan fever.° A
third time they bethought them again of marriage:
a third time a deadly chill settled on Cydippe. A
fourth time her father abode it no more but set off
to Delphian Phoebus, who in the night spake and
said. “A grievous oath by Artemis. thwarts thy
child’s marriage. For my sister was not vexing
Lygdamis,? neither in Amyclae’s shrine® was she
weaving rushes, nor in the river Parthenius/ was she
washing her stains after the hunt: nay, she was at

“The oxen were to be bathed in the morning for the
paw sacrifice, but on the previous afternoon Cydippe
ell ill

» Epilepsy. We possess a Hippocratean treatise on it.

ὁ Plato, Zimaeus, 86a, Hippocrat. passim, ‘‘ quartana
febris”’ Plin. V.H. vii. 166, etc.

4 Lygdamis, a king of the Cimmerians who burnt the
tem le of Artemis at Ephesus, circ. 670 B.c.

aus, ili, 18. 9.


; River in Pontus, haunt of Artemis, Steph. Byz. s.v.,
Apoll, Rhod. ii. 938. .


μῆλον, τὸν ὅρκον, Kal τῆς ᾿Αρτέμιδος τὸν θυμόν καὶ παραινεῖ
θᾶττον εὔορκον ἀποφῆναι τὴν κόρην.

δ ἐμμύχιον ἵ ; Of. Hesych. 5.0. ἐννύχιον κρύπτεις. , τινὲς de
ἐμμύχιον, ἐν τῷ μυχῷ.

7 The punctuation is due to Prof. A. Platt. τῆμος Platt;
τῆνον Papyrus, 8 θρύον Hunt; θρίον Papyrus.


207


CALLIMACHUS


Aly Ae δ᾽ ἦν ἐπίδημος, ᾿Ακόντιον ὅππότε σὴ παῖς
ὥὦμοσεν, οὐκ ἄλλον, “νυμφίον ἑξέμεναι"
ἁ[κήρ]υξ᾽ adv ἦν μ᾽ ἐθέλ.ῃ»ς συμφράδμονα
έσθαι,
[πάντα τελευτήσεις ὅρκια. θυγατέρος.
ἄργυρον οὐ μολίβῳ. γὰρ 5 ᾿Ακόντιον ἀλλὰ φαεινῷ 30
ἤλεκτρον χρυσῷ φημί σε μιξέμεναι.
Kodpeidns σύ γ᾽ ἄνωθεν 6 πενθερός, αὐτὰρ ὁ
Κεῖος
γαμβρὸς ips PY [Zn |vos ἀφ᾽ tep<é>wv®
*Txpiov, οἷσι μέμ [ἡ ]λεν ἐπ᾽ οὔρεος ἀμβώνεσσιν *
πρηΐύνειν χαλ [ε]πὴν Maipay ἀνερχομένην, 8ὅ
αἰτεῖσθαι τὸ δ᾽ ἄημα παραὶ Διός, ᾧ τε θαμ «ι»νοὶ
πλήσσονται λινέαις ὄρτυγες ἐν ὃ νεφέλαις.
ἢ θεός: αὐτὰρ ὁ Νάξον ἔβη πάλιν, εἴρετο δ᾽ αὐτὴν
“κούρην, ἡ δ᾽ av<a> τῷ ᾿ πᾶν ἐκάλυψεν ἔπος.
κῆν αὖ σῶς"8 6 τε] λοιπόν, ᾿Ακόντιε, σεῖο μετελ-
θεῖν 40


ἡ ἁκήρυξ᾽, i.e. ἃ ἐκήρυξε. Callimachus affects such inverted
oraer,

2 ἀργύρῳ οὐ μόλιβον yap? Aristaenet. i. 10 ““ἄλλως Te,”
φησί, ** Κυδίππην ᾿Ακοντίῳ συνάπτων οὐ μόλιβδον ἂν συνεπιμίξειας
ἀργύρῳ, ἀλλ᾽ ἑκατέρωθεν ὁ γάμος ἔσται χρυσοῦς.

3. [Ζη]νὸὲ ἀφ᾽ ἱερζξων Housman; . . . τιοσαμφΐερων (μ
apparently deleted) Papyrus.
4 ἐπ’ οὔρεος duBadvecow=frag. anon. 70 Schneider, i.e.


ELM. s.v. &uBov . . . λέγονται δὲ καὶ of ὀρεινοὶ καὶ ὑψηλοὶ τόποι
οἷον ἐπ᾽. .. ἀμβώνεσσι.
5 πλήσσονται. . . ἐνΞτεἐμπλήσσονται, cf. Hom. Od. xxii.


468 f. ὡς δ᾽ ὅτ᾽’ av ἢ κίχλαι τανυσίπτεροι ἠὲ πέλειαι | ἕρκε᾽ ἐνι-
πλήξωσι, τό θ᾽ ἑστήκῃ ἐνὶ θάμνῳ, Oppian, Hal. iii. 117.

8 νεφέλαιςτε παῖδ. Hesych. νέφεα. . . καὶ λίνα! θηρατικά.
Suid. νεφέλη... εἶδος δικτύου θηρευτικοῦ. Arist. Birds, 194
μὰ παγίδας, μὰ νεφέλας, μὰ δίκτυα.

7 ἀνὰ τῷ Brinkmann ; averws Papyrus

8 xnvavows Papyrus. "The punctuation is due to Schwister.


208


AITIA


home in Delos when thy child sware α that she would
have Acontius, none other, for her bridegroom. But
if thou wilt take me for thy adviser, thou wilt fulfil
all the oath of thy daughter even as she announced.?
For I say that Acontius shall be no mingling of lead
with silver, but of electrum¢’ with: shining gold.
Thou, the father of the bride, art sprung from
Codrus%: the Cean bridegroom springs from the
priests of Zeus Aristaeus* the Lord of Moisture:
priests whose business it is upon the mountain-tops
to assuage stern Maera/ when she rises and to entreat
from Zeus the wind whereby many a quail is entangled
in the linen mesh.’”’ So spake the god. And her
father went back to Naxos and questioned the maiden
herself; and she revealed to him the whole matter.
And she was well again. For the rest, Acontius,


« Aristaenet. i. 10 says the inscription on the apple was
Μὰ τὴν “Apreuw ᾿Ακοντίῳ yauotuat. Note that the ancients
habitually read aloud.

> The reading of the beginning of the line is quite uncertain.

¢ Not amber here, but the metallic alloy of gold and silver.

@ The last king of Athens.

¢ Aristaeus, son of Apollo and Cyrene (Pind. P. ix. 64f.).
When Ceos was suffering from pestilence owing to the heat
of the dogstar, Aristaeus went there and built an altar to
Zeus Icmaeus or Icmius, i.e. Zeus as god of Moisture, and
established an annual sacrifice for him and Sirius on the
hills of the island. Ever after Zeus caused the Etesian
winds to blow for forty days after the rise of Sirius. Hence
Aristaeus was worshipped in Ceos as Zeus Aristaeus (Apoll.
Rhod. ii. 516 ff. ; Nonnus v. 269 ff.).

7 The hound of Erigone: as a star=Sirius (Hesych.
s.v., Lycophron 334) or Procyon (Hygin. Astr. ii. 4, etc.).


For the phrase οὐ. Lucian, Lexiphan. 12 ταύτῃ προσπεσόντες 8
τε Δαμασίας καὶ ἡ γυνὴ αὐτοῦ. . . ἱκέτευον ἐλεῆσαι σφᾶς" ἡ δὲ
αὐτίκα ἐπένευσε, καὶ σῶς ἦν. Hesych. 8.0. ὑγιής". . . σῶος.


~ P 209


CALLIMACHUS


ἔσται τὴν ἰδίην ἐς Διονυσιάδα.
> \ > A 1 \ ὅλ 2 FES EBC. ε
χὴ θεὸς εὐόρκεῦτο "καὶ ἤλειφε" αὐτο, "ἐταιῥῆς
«ἢ Sov 5 ὑμηναίους οὐκ ἀναβαλλομένους.
οὔ σε δοκέω τημοῦπϑει ᾿Ακόντιε, νυκτὸς ἐκείνης
ἀντί κε, τῇ μίτρης ἥψαο παρθενίης, 4ὅ
οὐ σφυρὸν ᾿Ιφίκλειον 4 ἐπιτρέχον ἀσταχύεσσιν
οὐδ᾽ ἃ Κελεαι»νίτης ἐκτεάτιστο Μίδης
δέξασθαι," ψήφου δ᾽ ἂν ἐμῆς ἐπιμάρτυρες elev
οἵτινες οὐ χαλεποῦ 'γήιδές εἰσι θεοῦ.
ἐκ δὲ γάμου κείνοιο μέγ᾽ οὔνομα μέλλε νέεσθαι: 50
δὴ γὰρ ἔθ᾽ ὑμέτερον φῦλον ᾿Ακοντιάδαι
λ ’ὔ Α / 6 τ Aid /
πουλύ τι καὶ περίτιμον ὃ ᾿Ιουλίδι ναιετάουσιν,
Κεῖε, τεὸν δ᾽ ἡμεῖς ἵμερον ἐκλύομεν
/ > > / — / Ὁ -
τόνδε παρ ἀρχαιου Ξενομήδεος Os <KD>DOTE πάσαν
“a 9." / / 6 θ λ 4 55
νῆσον ἐνὶ μνήμῃ κάτθετο μυθολόγῳ,
" Of ᾽ , ἢ
ἄρχμενος ws? νύμφῃσιΐν ἐ]ναίετο Κωρυκίῃσι,
\ > A ~ - 297 /
τὰς ἀπὸ Ilapynocod Ais ἐδίωξε μέγας,


ν εὐορκεῖτο. Hunt compares schol. Apoll. Rhod. ii. 257
ἐκείνους ἢν μὴ εὐορκῶμεν.
2 ζἧ»δον Wilamowitz; εἰδον Papyrus, cf. Aristaenet. i.
10 Rag Se ὑμέναιον ἦδον, οὐκ ἀναβαλλόμενον ἔτι.
τῇ Gilbert Murray; της Papyrus. Aristaenet. i. 10
has ra δ᾽ οὖν ὅμως βραδύνειν ἐδόκει τῷ ᾿Ακοντίῳ, καὶ οὔτε
ἡμέραν ἐκείνης ἐνόμισε μακροτέραν ἑορακέναι οὔτε νύκτα βραχυτέραν
τῆς νυκτὸς ἐκείνης, Hs οὐκ ἂν ἠλλάξατο τὸν Μίδου χρυσόν, οὐδὲ
τὰν, Ταντάλου πλοῦτον ἰσοόστάσιον ἡγεῖτο τῇ κόρῃ..

* σφυρὸν ᾿Ιφίκλειον = Callim. fr. 496, 1.6. Cramer, Anecd.
Oxon. iv. 329. 6 (Herodian ii. p. 861 Lentz) διὸ καὶ péu-
ῴονται τὸν Znvddorov ἐπειδὴ τὸ “ἀρνῶν ἐκ κεφαλέων κτητικὸν
ἔλεγε καὶ τὸν Καλλίμαχον “᾿ χεὶρ ἡ Πολυδ(εδυκείη ᾿ καὶ ‘‘ σφυρὸν
᾿Ιφίκλειον." Schneider wrongly combined the two phrases
as one quotation.


210 -


AITIA


it will be her business to go with thee to her own
Dionysias.%

So faith was kept with the goddess, and her fellows
straightway. sang their comrade’s marriage hymn,
deferred no longer. Then I deem, Acontius, that
for that night, wherein thou didst touch her maiden
girdle, thou wouldst not have accepted either the
ankle of Iphicles® who ran upon the corn-ears nor
the possessions of Midas*® of Celaenae. And my
verdict would be attested by all who are not ignorant
of the stern god. And from that marriage a great
name was destined to arise. For, O Cean, your clan,
the Acontiadae, still dwell, numerous and honoured,
at Iulis.¢ And this thy passion we heard from old
Xenomedes,’ who once enshrined all the island in a
mythological history : beginning with the tale of how
it was inhabited by the Corycian’ nymphs whom a
great lion drave from Parnassus: wherefore also they


«2,6. Naxos, Diodor. v. 52.

ὃ Iphiclus or Iphicles, son of Phylacus, father of Podarces
and Protesilaus, was proverbial for his speed of foot. He
could run over a cornfield without bending the ears (Hesiod
fr. 143 ap. Eustath. J]. ii. 693, Nonnus xxviii. 284 f., etc.).

¢ Midas of Celaenae in Phrygia, proverbial for his wealth.

4 In Ceos, birthplace of Simonides and Bacchylides.

ὁ Xenomedes is cited by various grammarians, schol.
Aristoph. Lys. 448; schol. Townl. J/. xvi. 328. Dion. Hal.
De Thucyd. v. calls him ὁ Χῖος (read Ketos).

7 Nymphs of the Corycian cave on Parnassus, οὐ. Ovid,
Her. xx. 221 f. (Acontius to Cydippe) ‘ Insula Coryciis

uondam celeberrima nymphis Cingitur Aegaeo, nomine
ea, mari.”


5 Aristaenetus i. 10 has καὶ σύμψηφοι πάντες ἐμοί, ὅσοι
μὴ καθάπαξ τῶν ἐρωτικῶν ἀμαθεῖς.

8 περίτιμον only here.

7 ἄρχμενος ws, Cf. Hymn Artem. 4 and fr. 9°.


211


CALLIMACHUS


‘Ydpotocav τῷ Kai μιν ἐφήμισαν, ὥ ὡς τε Kipw . . .
[Jo ἜΦΗΝ Oval: το... . ᾧκεεν ἐν Καρύαις"
[ὧἸς τέ μιν ἐννάσσαντο τέων ᾿Αλαλάξιος αἰεὶ 60

Ζεὺς ἐπὶ σαλπίγγων ἱρὰ βοῇ δέχεται
Κᾶρες ὁμοῦ Λελέγεσσι, μετ᾽ οὔνομα δ᾽ ἄλλο
βαλέσθαι
Φοίβου καὶ Μελίης tis ἔθηκε Kéws-
ev δ᾽ ὕβριν θάνατόν τε κεραύνιον, ἐν δὲ γόητας
Τελχῖνας μακάρων τ᾽ οὐκ ἀλέγοντα θεῶν θῦ
ἠλεὰ Δημώνακτα γέρων ἐνεθήκατο δέλτ[οις,
καὶ γρηῦν Μακελὼ μητέρα Δεξιθέης,
᾿ ἃς μούνας ὅτε νῆσον ἀνέτρεπον εἵνεκ᾽ ἀλ[ι)τ[ρῆς
ὕβριος ἀσκηθεῖς ἔλλιπον ἀθάνατοι"
τέσσαρας ὥς τε πόληας ὁ μὲν τείχισσε Μεγα-
κ[λ]ῆς 70
Καρθαίαν, Xp<v>co0ds* δ᾽ Ἐπυλος ἡμιθέης
εὔκρηνον πτολίεθρον ᾿Ιουλίδος, αὐτὰρ ᾽Ακαι. ..
Ποίησσαν Χαρίτων ἵδρυμ᾽ * ἐυπλοκάμων,
ἄστυρον ᾿Αφραστος δὲ Κα «ο»ρή [σιον, εἶπε δέ, ΚΚεῖε,
ξυγκραθέντ᾽ αὐταῖς ὀξὺν ἔρωτα σέθεν 75
πρέσβυς ἐτητυμίῃ μεμελημένος, ἔνθεν ὁ παιδὸς
μῦθος ἐς ἡμετέρην ἔδραμε Καλλιόπην.
οὐ γὰρ τὰς πολίων οἰκήσιας ᾷσομαι ἤδη"
ἔστι ye Πισαίου Ζηνὸς ὄπις π᾿. . . ιθην.
aA ou... VNO. κρουτονα.. ὦ... Ὁ τ s. 80


1 Kipw .. xrX. The reading is quite uncertain. No
connexion is known between Ceos and any of the towns
called Caryae (in Laconia, Arcadia, and Lycia).

® χρεισους, apparently, Papyrus.
3 ἕδρυμ. The reading is doubtful, the noun not being
found elsewhere with v short.

« Heraclid. Περὶ πολιτειῶν ix. (Miiller, #.H.G. ii. p. 214)
ἐκαλεῖτο μὲ ‘TSpotca ἡ νῆσος" λέγονται δὲ οἰκῆσαι Νύμφαι πρότερον
αὐτήν" φοβήσαντος δὲ αὐτὰς λέοντος εἰς Κάρυστον διαβῆναι. διὸ
212


AITIA


called it Hydrussa,* and how . . . dwelt in Caryae.
And how they dwelt in it whose offerings Zeus of
the War-Cry® evermore receives to the sound of
trumpets—Carians and Leleges together; and how
Ceos, son of Phoebus and Melia, caused it to take
another name. Withal the insolence and the light-
ning death and therewith the wizard Telchines¢ and
Demonax, who foolishly regarded not the blessed
gods, did the old man put in his tablets, and aged
Macelo, mother of Dexithea, whom alone the death-
less gods left scatheless, what time for sinful insolence
they overturned the island. And how of its four
cities? Megacles built Carthaea, and Eupylus, son of
the heroine Chryso, the fair-fountained city of Iulis,
and Acae . .. Poeéssa, seat of the fair-tressed
Charites, and how Aphrastus built the city of
Coresus. And blent therewith, O Cean, that old
man, lover of truth, told of thy fierce love: whence
came the maiden’s story to my muse. For now I
shall not sing of the foundations of cities . . .
kal ἀκρωτήριον τῆς Κέω Λέων καλεῖται. Kéws δ᾽ ἐκ Ναυπάκτου
διαβὰς ᾧκισε, καὶ ἀπ’ αὐτοῦ ταύτην ὠνόμασαν.

ὃ Herodot. v. 119 says ‘‘the Carians alone of all people
that we know offer sacrifice to Zeus Stratios.”

¢ Our chief authorities for the legend referred to here are
Pindar, Paeans, iv. 42 ff., Bacchylides i., Ovid, /bis and scholia.
The story in outline is that the Telchines, mythical crafts-
men and wizards, provoked the wrath of the gods. So Zeus
and Poseidon ‘‘sent the land and all the host of the people
into the depths of Tartarus ” (Pind. /.c.), but spared Dexithea
and her sisters, daughters of Damon (here called Demonax),
because they had entertained Zeus and Apollo. Macelo in
the Jbis scholia is called sister of Dexithea, not mother.
Dexithea became mother of Euxantius by Minos of Crete.
See Jebb, Bacchylides, pp. 443 ff.

4 The names of the founders of the cities of the Cean


tetrapolis are otherwise unknown. For the towns see
Steph. Byz. s.v.


213


CALLIMACHUS


μέμβλετο δ᾽ εἰσπνήλαις, ὅππότε κοῦρος ἴοι
φωλεὸν ἠὲ λοετρόν.

E.M. 5.υ. εἰσπνήλης. That this belongs to the
Cydippe episode may be inferred from Aristaenet. i. 10
οἱ δὲ φιλοθεάμονες τοῦ κάλλους εἰς διδασκάλου
προϊόντα περιεσκόπουν συνωθοῦντες ἀλλήλους.


πολλοὶ καὶ φιλέοντες ᾿Ακόντιον ἧκαν ἔραζε
οἰνοπόται Σικελὰς ἐκ κυλίκων λάταγας.
Athenaeus xv. 668 B; cf. 668 εκ.


dypade TH πάσῃσιν ἐπὶ mpoxavynow ἐφοίτα.

Schol. Soph. Antig. 80. Cf. Aristaenet: i. 10 Kal
els ἀγρὸν ἐπὶ πάσῃ προφάσει Tov πατέρα φεύγων
ἐφοίτα.


ἀλλ᾽ ἐνὶ δὴ φλοιοῖσι' κεκομμένα τόσσα φέροιτε
γράμματα ἸΚυδίππην ὅσσ᾽ ἐρέουσι καλήν.
Schol. Aristoph. Ach. 144. ἴδιον ἐραστῶν ἦν τὰ
τῶν ἐρωμένων ὀνόματα γράφειν ἐν τοῖς τοίχοις
nv / >! 7 Ὁ e a / \
ἢ δένδροις ἢ φύλλοις οὕτως: ὁ δεῖνα καλός" καὶ
παρὰ ζαλλιμάχῳ: ἀλλ᾽ κτλ.; of. Aristaenet. i. 10
” > , \ a ae , \ ,
εἴθε, ὦ δένδρα, Kat νοῦς ὑμῖν γένοιτο καὶ φωνή,


an“


σ a“ ” ςς ’ὔ ᾽ 99 ~ ~
ὅπως av εἴποιτε ““ Κυδίππη Kady,’ ἢ γοῦν τοσαῦτα


1 φλοιοῖσι Bentley ; φύλλοισι.


@ BLM. s.v. εἰσπνήλης. . . 6 ὑπὸ τοῦ ἔρωτος εἰσπνεόμενος.
Λακεδαιμόνιος yap εἰσπνεῖν φασι τὸ ἐρᾶν. Cf. H.M. 5.0. ἀΐτης ;
schol. Theocr. xii. 13 εἴσπνιλος ὁ ἐραστής, ἀΐτης ὁ ἐρώμενος.

> Hesych. 5.0. φωλεόν᾽ διδασκαλεῖον. Suid. 5.0. φωλεόν" τὸ
παιδευτήριον Ἴωνες. Cf. Ε΄... 5.0. ἀποφώλιος and Pollux iv. 19
and 41, ix. 41.


214


AITIA
IIL. 2 (169)


And the youth attracted lovers* whenever he
went to school? or bath.


III. 3 (102)


And many for love of Acontius when they drank
the wine poured from their cups upon the ground
Sicilian heel-taps.°


ΠῚ. 4 (26)


Wherefore upon every pretext? he went to the
country. Cf. Aristaenet. i. 10 and on every excuse
he went to the country.


III. 5 (101)


But graven on your bark’ may ye bear such writing
as shall declare “‘ Cydippe beautiful.”


Sehol. Aristoph. Ach. 144: It was the peculiar
custom of lovers to write the names of the beloved
upon walls, trees, leaves: ‘“ Beautiful So-and-so.”’
So in Callimachus: But ete.; οὐ, Aristaenet. : Would,
O trees, that you had understanding and voice, so
that you might say “ Beautiful Cydippe” ; or might


¢ The reference is to the game of cottabos (see Dict. of
Ant. for various ways of playing it), It is said to be a
Sicilian invention, Athen. xv. 668.
4 Hesych. 8.0. προχάνη, σκῆψις, πρόφασις, καὶ καλύπτρα,
Callim. Hymn vi. 74.
¢ For the custom of writing the name of the beloved upon
trees cf. Theocr. 18. 47, Verg. Hel. 10. 53, Propert. i. 18. 22,
Ovid, Her. 5. 21, ete.
215


CALLIMACHUS


N “- “- 3 / , ’ὔ
κατὰ τῶν φλοιῶν ἐγκεκολαμμένα φέροιτε γράμ-
ματα ὅσα τὴν Κἀυδίππην. ἐπονομάσει καλήν.


φΦ


λιρὸς ἐγώ, τί δέ σοι τόνδ᾽ ἐπέθηκα φόβον;

Hesych. s.v. λειριόεντα. “Probably from the
Cydippe episode, cf: Aristaenet. i. 10 τί δέ σοι
τοῦτον ἐπῆγον τὸν φόβον;


τὼς μὲν ὁ Μνησάρχειος ἔφη ἕένος, ὧδε συναινῶ.


Priscian, Inst. Gramm. ii. 12; cf. i. 11 and 30;
Hephaestion i. 8.


: /
E.M. s.v. βρέφος, τὸ νεογνὸν παιδίον. κυρίως
ee γος, / / > ’ “" > 7
ἐπὶ ἀνθρώπου. Ἰζαλλίμαχος ἐν τρίτῳ τῶν Aitiwv
καὶ ἐπὶ σκύμνου τίθησιν.


ΙΝ,


In the restoration given it isjassumed that the goddess
invoked is Aphradite who is closely associated with the
Graces. The ‘‘ queen” of ν. 2 is taken to, be Berenice,
wife of Ptolemy Euergetes, who was the ‘‘ fourth of the
Graces,” Callimach. Ep. δῶ. Αρην in ν. 1 may be a veiled
allusion to the Syrian war. Inv. 6 the allusion may be
to some lost passage of Hesiod in praise of Aphrodite.
For other restorations see Hunt and Platt, U/. ce.


Hunt, Oxyrhynch. Pap. vii. (1910). A. Platt, CZ.
Qu. Jan. 1911. As the subscription in the papyrus
shows, this is the conclusion of the fourth and last
book of the Aza. The restoration here given is
merely experimental.

216


AITIA


at least carry, graven on your bark, words to call
Cydippe beautiful. 7
ΠῚ. 6 (229)


Shameless me! why did I set such fear upon
thee ?¢


ΠΙ. 7 (27)


As the guest of Mnesarchus? said, so I agree.


III. 8 (28)


Βρέφος, the newly born child; properly of a
human being. Callimachus in Aza iii. applies it
also to a whelp.


# Acontius expresses remorse for having exposed Cydippe
to the anger of Artemis.

> The father of Pythagoras was called Mnesarchus, but the
reference here is unknown.


217


CALLIMACHUS


"Apnvi ὅτ᾽ ἐμὴ Μοῦσά [08 ἱλ]άσεται.
a \ / \ / nS >
[ἦ που καὶ Χαρίτων [σὺ λοχεύτ]ρια, μαῖα 3 ὃ
ἀνάσσης
[ἡμε]τέρης, οὔ σε ψευδον [ὑμῳ ὃ στό [ματι
πάντ᾽ ἀγαθὴν καὶ πάντα τ[ελ]εσφόρον εἶπε[ν
ἀοιδὸς
κεῖνος τῷ Μοῦσαι πολλὰ νέμοντι βοτὰ ὄ
Ἁ 7 > / θὲ Ἂν 9. 4 σ
σὺν μύθους ἐβάλοντο map’ ἴχν[ι7]ον ὀξέος ἵππου"
χαῖρε, σὺν εὐεστοῖ δ᾽ ἔρχεο λωιτέρῃ.
A ~ / \ / / > Ὁ >
χαῖρε, Zed, μέγα καὶ σύ, σάω δ᾽ [ὅλο]ν οἶκον
ἀνάκτων" :
8... οἷν > \ / \ ” /
αὐτὰρ ἐγὼ Μουσέων πεζὸς [ἔἼπειμι νομόν.


Steph. Byz. 8.0. Δειπνιάς, κώμη Θεσσαλίας περὶ
Λάρισσαν, ὅπου φασὶ τὸν ᾿Απόλλωνα δειπνῆσαι
πρῶτον ὅτε ἐκ τῶν Τέμπεων καθαρθεὶς ὑπέ-
στρεψεν" καὶ τῷ παιδὲ τῷ διακομιστῇ τῆς δάφνης


1 apv Papyrus. The letter following Μοῦσα is very
doubtful. unt takes it for 7. We might read τιν᾽.

2 μοῖα Hunt.

3 ψευδόνυμος with short antepenult does not seem to
occur, but cf. ψευδόνειρο. Cf. Hesych. ψευδώνυμοι ὄνειροι"
ψευδολόγοι.

4 Hunt gives κείνῳ, but there are signs of correction.
The reference is to Hesiod whom the Muses visited, Hes.
Theog. 22 f., Ovid, Fast. vi. 13. Cf. Fronto, Ep. ad Mare.
i. 2 * Hesiodum pastorem ... dormientem poetam ais
factum. At enim ego memini olim apud magistrum me
legere = ποιμένι μῆλα νέμοντι παρ᾽ ἴχνιον ὀξέος ἵππου | Ἡσιόδῳ,
Μουσέων ἑσμὸς ὅτ᾽ ἠντίασεν.ἢ


« Hippocrene, Hesiod, Th. 6, a spring on Helicon,
feigned to have been caused by the hoof of Pegasus, the
winged horse of Bellerophon: hence called IInyacls κρήνη,


218


AITIA
IV. 1


. .. When some day my Muse shall propitiate War.
Surely, O thou who didst assist at the birth of the
Graces and who didst bring to birth my Queen, not
with lying lips did the minstrel call thee of perfect
excellence and of perfect fulfilment; that minstrel
with whom as he herded many sheep the Muses
held converse beside the footprint of the swift
Horse. Hail to thee and do thou come with
prosperous? weal. Hail, greatly hail to thee also,
O Zeus! do thou save all the house of our kings!
and I will visit the haunt of the Muses on foot.°¢


IV. 2 (32)


Deipnias, a village of Thessaly near Larissa, where
Apollo is said to have dined first on his return from
Tempe after purification. And it was the custom


Mosch. iii. 78; ‘‘ Pegasis unda,’’ Martial ix. 59; ‘* fons
caballinus,” Pers. Prol. 1.

> λωιτέρῃ : the comparative is hardly to be rendered in
English. The phrase is a ritualistic one, e.g. we know from
extant tablets that a usual form of inquiry at the oracle at
Dodona was ‘** A. asks . . . whether if he do so and so, it
will be for him λώιον καὶ ἄμεινον." The antique nature of the
word is noticed by Lucian, Lexiphan. 21 7 δ᾽ ds καὶ ἁμηγέπη
καὶ λῷστε.

¢ Callimachus will henceforth devote himself to prose
writing.

@ After slaying the Python Apollo had to go into
banishment till he was purified of the murder. He went
to Tempe (Plut. det. Gr. 12) where he was purified -by
Carmanor of Crete (Paus. x. 7. 2). This was com-
memorated by a solemn pilgrimage to Tempe every ninth
year when a branch of laurel was carried home by a boy
called daphnephoros.


219


CALLIMACHUS


f ~
ἔθος εἰς τήνδε παραγενομένῳ δειπνεῖν" Καλλίμαχος
TETAPTW*
Δειπνιὰς ἔνθεν pw δειδέχαται.


Schol. Clem. Alex. Protrep. 35, Migne, Patrol. Gr.
viii. p. 124 τιμᾶται δέ τις Kat Φαληροῖ κατὰ
πρύμναν ἥρως) . . . ὃ δὲ κατὰ πρύμνας ἥρως
3 ͵ > ει / “ > 0 A
Avdpoyeds ἐστιν, υἱὸς Μίνωος, οὕτως ὀνομασθεὶς
ὅτι κατὰ πρύμνας τῶν νεῶν ἵδρυτο, ὡς Καλλίμαχος
ἐν δ΄ τῶν Αἰτίων μέμνηται.


Harpocration s.v. "Axria ἀγὼν παλαιὸς ἦν ὡς
δῆλον ποιεῖ Καλλίμαχος ἐν τῷ περὶ ἀγώνων.

Cf. Suid. s.v. "Axia, Bekker, Anecd. 373. 80. The
Περὶ ἀγώνων being otherwise unknown, this prob-
ably belongs to the Azza. |


Chronicon Paschale iii., Migne, Patrol. Gr. xcii.
\ εἶ ς \ > ~ €.°9 4 “
408 τὸν δὲ ἱππικὸν ἀγῶνα 6 ᾿Ἑνυάλιος ἅρμασι
διπώλοις ἐφεῦρε, καθὼς συνεγράψατο Καλλίμαχος
. ἐν τοῖς Αἰτίοις αὐτοῦ.


Clem. Alex. Protrep. ii. p. 32, Migne; Patrol. Gr.
viii. 117 Αρτεμιν ᾿Αρκάδες ᾿Απαγχομένην καλου-
μένην προστρέπονται, ὥς φησι Καλλίμαχος ἐν
Airiots.


« Paus. viii. 23. 6 ‘*About a furlong from Caphyae
(in Arcadia) is a place Condylea, where there is a grove
and temple of Artemis—anciently called ‘Artemis of
Condylea,’ but they say her name was changed for the
220


AITIA


for the boy who brought the laurel to dine when he
arrived at this village. _Callimachus [ Aztia] iv.


Whence Deipnias receives him.


IV. 3 (33b)
A certain Hero-at-the-stern is honoured at
Phalerum] . . . this is Androgeos, son of. Minos, so


named because he was set up on the sterns of ships, .
as Callimachus tells in Aztia iv.


From Uncertain Books
1


The Actia was an ancient games’ meeting, as
Callimachus shows in his work on Games.


2


The equestrian contest with two-horse cars was
invented by Enyalios, as Callimachus has written
. . inthe Aitia. ᾿


3


The Arcadians worship Artemis under the title
of Artemis Hung,” as Callimachus says in the Aétia.


following reason. Some children who were playing about
the temple—how many they do not say—found a rope,
which they tied round the throat of the image of the
goddess, saying ‘Artemis is being hung.” When the
people of Caphyae found out what the children had done,
they stoned them to death. Whereupon an epidemic of
miscarriage attacked their women, until the Pythian


221


᾿ς CALLIMACHUS


Schol. AD Hom. Jl. ii. 145 καταπεσόντος δὲ
τοῦ παιδὸς τὸ ὑποκείμενον πέλαγος ᾿Ϊκάριον
μετωνομάσθη . .. ἱστορεῖ. . . Καλλίμαχος ἐν
Αὐτίοις.


Probus on Vergil, Georg. iii. 19 Molorchi mentio
est apud Callimachum in Αὐτίων libris.


Servius on Vergil, 4. i. 408 Cur dextrae iungere
dextram Non datur] maiorum haec fuerat salutatio,
cuius rei TO αἴτιον, 1.6. causam, Varro Callimachum
sequutus exposuit, asserens omnem eorum honorem
dextrarum constitisse virtute. Ob quam rem hac se
venerabantur corporis parte.


Schol. Ovid, Ibis 475 sacerdos Apollinis Delii
Anius fuit, ad quem quum venisset per noctem
Thasus a canibus laniatus est, unde nullus canis Delon
accedit auctore Callimacho.


”


priestess told them to bury the children and make yearly
offerings to them (ἐναγίζειν αὐτοῖς κατὰ éros), as they had
been put to death unjustly. The Caphyans carry out the
injunction of that oracle to this day and—what was also
enjoined in the oracle—they have ever since called the
goddess at Condylea ‘ Artemis Hung.’”

# Icarus, son of Daedalus. ;

δ᾽ Molorchus (Molorcus), a peasant of Cleonae, ‘who
entertained Heracles when he came to slay the Nemean lion.
The story is connected with the foundation of the Nemean


222


AITIA


4 (5)
His boy “ having fallen, the underlying sea had its


name changed to the “ Icarian”’ sea, as Callimachus
tells in the Aziza.
5 (6)


Molorchus” is mentioned by Callimachus in the
Aitia.
6 (8)


Why. is it not granted me to join right hand to
right hand?| This was our ancestors’ manner of
salutation, the αἴτιον of which Varro has explained,
following Callimachus, asserting that all their
honour lay in the strength of their right hands;
wherefore they paid respect to one another with
that part. of the body.


7 (9)


Anius® was priest of Apollo at Delos. Thasus,
visiting him at night, was torn by dogs; hence no
dog has access to Delos, according to Callimachus.


gafnes. In many respects it is a close parallel to the story
of Hecale and Theseus. Cf. Nonnus xvii. 52 ff.; Steph.
Byz. s.v. Μολορκία ; Stat. S. iii. 1. 29, iv. 6. 51, Th. iv. 160
etc.; Tibull. iv. 1; E. Maass, ‘* Alexandrin. Fragm.” in
Hermes xxiv, (1889), p. 520 ff.
ὁ The reference of this to the Aitia is pure con-
jecture. For Anius cf. schol. Lycophr. 580, Thasus was
is son, Hygin. 247. A similar story of the exclusion of
horses from the temple of Artemis on account of the death
of Hippolytos is said, by Servius on Verg. Aen. vii. 778, to
have been mentioned by Callimachus in the Aitia (fr. 7
Schneider).


223


THE LOCK OF BERENICE


Our knowledge of this poem is derived mainly from
the translation by Catullus, who in his 65th poem tells
Ortalus that, his brother’s death having made it impossible
for him to write poetry, he is sending him a translation
from Callimachus :


Sed tamen in tantis maeroribus, Ortale, mitto
Haec expressa tibi carmina Battiadae.


The translation referred to may well be the 66th poem of
our editions, the Coma Berenices. We have small means
of judging whether the poem is a strict translation or
only a paraphrase.

Berenice was the daughter of Magas, King of Cyrene,
who was a son of Berenice I., wife of Ptolemy I. Though
long betrothed to Ptolemy III., she does not appear to
have actually become his wife till after his accession to
the throne of Egypt (which was at latest in 246 B.c.) 5%¢f.
Callim. Ixvi. 11 ‘novo auctus hymenaeo.” About the time
that. Ptolemy III. came to the throne his sister Berenice,
daughter of Ptolemy Philadelphus, who had become the wife
of Antiochus II. of Syria, was murdered, as was Antiochus
himself, by Laodice, the divorced wife of Antiochus, who
caused her own son Seleucus II. Callinicus to be pro-
claimed king. Thus broke out the Λαοδίκειος πόλεμος
(CIG. 2905) or Third Syrian War.

On the departure of her husband for the war Berenice
vowed to the geds for his safety a lock of her hair, which
upon his return was dedicated in the temple of Arsinoé
Aphrodite at Zephyrium. The lock mysteriously dis-
appeared. Thereupon Conon, the court astronomer, pre-


224


THE LOCK OF BERENICE


tended to identify it with the delicate group of stars,
thenceforth known as Coma Berenices, lying within the
circle formed by Ursa Major, Bodétes, Virgo, and Leo; ef.
Catuil. lxvi. 65 ff. “ Virginis et saevi contingens namque
Leonis Lumina, Callisto iuncta Lycaoniae, Vertor in
occasum, tardum dux ante Booten, qui vix sero alto
mergitur Oceano” ; ¢f: Hygin. Astron. ii. 24, Hesych. s.v.
Βερενίκης πλόκαμος. The title of the poem is conjectural
and the fragments are set to it on the evidence of
Catullus.


Q FS το 96


ΒΕΡΕΝΙΚΗΣ ΠΛΟΚΑΜΟΣ


ἠδὲ Κόνων μ᾽ ἔβλεψεν ἐν ἠέρι, τὸν Βερενίκης
βόστρυχον, ὃν κείνη πᾶσιν ἔθηκε θεοῖς.
Schol. Arat. 146 Κόνων 6 μαθηματικὸς [Π|τολε-
μαίῳ χαριζόμενος Βερενίκης πλόκαμον ἐξ αὐτοῦ
[sc. λέοντος] κατηστέρισε. τοῦτο καὶ Καλλίμαχός
πού φησιν. ἠδὲ Κόνων ἔβλεψεν... ὅν τ᾽
ἄρα... θεοῖσιν. The text is that of Muretus but
it is quite uncertain whether the words of the schol.
are a continuous quotation. Catullus lxvi. 7 ff. Idem
me ille Conon caelesti in lumine vidit E Bereniceo
vertice caesariem Fulgentem clare, quam cunctis
illa deorum Levia protendens bracchia pollicita est.


Catullus Ixvi. 25 f. at te ego certe Cognoram a ἡ
parva virgine magnanimam ; cf. Hygin. Astron. ii. 24.


« The epithet used by Callimachus was probably
μεγάθυμος, less likely μεγαλόψυχος. Hygin. Astron. ii. 24
says that Callimachus called her great-souled (magnanima)
because when her father Ptolemy (sic) was terrified by a
multitude of enemies and sought safety in flight, Berenice,
being accustomed to riding, mounted a horse, rallied the
rest of the army, slew several of the enemy, and put the
rest to flight. He mentions, too, Callimachus and others
as saying that she kept horses and sent them to the Olympic
games. But the epithet ‘‘great-souled” has _ reference


226


THE LOCK OF BERENICE
1 (34)


And Conon beheld me in the sky, me the curl of
Berenice which she dedicated to all the gods.


Schol. Arat..146 Conon the mathematician, to
please Ptolemy, made a constellation, “'The Lock of
Berenice,’ out of the Lion. That is what Callimachus
means: “ And Conon,” ete.


ῳ (85).


But thee certainly from a little maiden I knew
to be great-souled.”


rather to the episode of Demetrius the Beautiful (ὁ καλός),
brother of Antigonus Gonatas and son of Demetrius
Poliorcetes and, through his mother Ptolemais, grandson of
Ptolemy Soter. Apama (Asinoé according to Justin),
widow of Magas, wishing to break off the betrothal arranged
by Magas between Berenice and the future Ptolemy III.,
invited Demetrius to Cyrene with a view to his marriage ©
with Berenice. Unfortunately he bestowed his affections
rather on his prospective mother-in-law ; this coupled with
his haughty bearing offended both the soldiers and the
populace ; in the end he was slain in Apama’s room: ‘‘ quo


227


CALLIMACHUS


σήν τε κάρην ὦμοσα σόν τε βίον.
E.M. s.v. θηλαμών: . .. εἴρηται καὶ θηλυκῶς
/ e \ / - Ω
κάρη, ὡς παρὰ Καλλιμάχῳ:" ἣν (sic) τε κτλ.
Catullus lxvi. 89 f. Invita, O regina, tuo de vertice
cessi, Invita, adiuro teque tuumque caput.


XadvBwv ws ἀπόλοιτο γένος,

γειόθεν ἀντέλλοντα κακὸν φυτὸν οἵ μιν ἔφηναν.

Schol. Apoll. Rh, ii. 373 (cf. i. 1823) Χάλυβες
. 2. μέμνηται αὐτῶν καὶ Καλλίμαχος" Χαλύβων
κτλ.
Catullus lxvi. 48 ff. luppiter, ut Chalybon omne
genus pereat, Et qui principio sub terra quaerere
venas Institit ac ferri fingere duritiem !


πρὶν ἀστέρι τῷ Βερενίκης. .
Achilles, Εἰσαγωγ. Arat. p. 184 Petavius: ὁ
Καλλίμαχος ““ πρὶν κτλ. ἐπὶ τοῦ πλοκάμου φησίν.
Catullus lxvi. 80 ff. Non prius unanimis corpora
coniugibus Tradite . . . Quam iucunda mihi munera
libet onyx.


interfecto Beronice et stupra matris salva pietate ulta est
et in matrimonio sortiendo iudicium patris secuta” (Justin
xxvi. 3). This is strongly supported by the next words of
Catullus : ‘‘Anne bonum oblita est facinus, quo regium adepta
es Coniugium, quo non fortius ausit alis ?”

« The Lock protests that it was reluctant to leave
Berenice’s head.


228


THE LOCK OF BERENICE
8 (35b)
I swear by thy head“ and by thy life.


4 (88 ο)


Perish the race of the Chalybes who brought to
light that evil plant which springs ὃ from the earth!


5 (35d)


[Do not ye new-wed brides enter the bridal bed]
till to the star of Berenice [ye have offered perfumes °].


> With ἀντέλλοντα supply σίδηρον (iron). The~Lock
protests that it could not help itself against the iron shears :
** Quid facient crines cum ferro talia cedant?” Catull. Ixvi. 47,
cf. **Sed qui se ferro postulet esse parem?” Ixvi. 42, and
invokes a curse upon the Chalybes, the renowned iron-
workers in Pontus (Strabo 549 f., Xen. Anab. v. 5. 1,
- Dion. Per. 768, Apoll. Rh. ii. 1001 ff.).

¢ Athenaeus xv. 689 a speaks of Berenice’s fondness
for perfumes : ἤκμαζε δὲ καὶ ἐν ᾿Αλεξανδρείᾳ (μύρα) διὰ πλοῦτον
καὶ διὰ τὴν ᾿Αρσινόης καὶ Βερενίκης σπουδήν, ἐγίνετο δὲ καὶ ἐν
Κυρήνῃ ῥόδινον χρηστότατον καθ᾽ ὃν χρόνον ἔζη Βερενίκη ἡ μεγάλη.
Cf. Catull. lxvi. 77 f. ““ Quicum ego, dum virgo quondam fuit,
omnibus expers Unguentis, una milia multa bibi.”


229


CALLIMACHUS


ἐσχατιὴν ὑπὸ πέζαν ἐλειήταο λέοντος.

E.M. s.v. ἐλειήτης. 6 Λέων: ἐσχατιήν κτλ.
Hecker was probably right in referring this to the
Bep. IIA. of Callimachus; cf. Catullus, Ixvi. 65 ἢ


Virginis et saevi contingens namque Leonis Lumina.


« This describes the position in the sky of the Coma
Berenices.


ΒΡΑΓΧΟΣ


Brancuus, son οὗ ἃ Delphian Smicrus and a Milesian
mother, was beloved of Apollo (in one version he was
Apollo’s son) who gave him the gift of prophecy. He
founded at Didyma or Didymi near Miletus a temple of
Apollo with cult similar to that of the Delphic oracle.
Its oracle was consulted by Croesus (Herod. i. 46), who
dedicated offerings in the temple (Herod. i. 92, v. 36), by
the Cumaeans (Herod. i. 157), and Necos, king of Egypt,


Hephaest. p. 30. 19 Consbruch: (Περὲ χοριαμβι-
Kod). καὶ τῷ πενταμέτρῳ δὲ Καλλίμαχος ὅλον
ποίημα τὸν Βράγχον συνέθηκε.

Δαίμονες εὐυμνότατοι DoiBé! τε καὶ Ζεῦ, Διδύμων
yevapya.?

1H.M. s.v. Διδυμαῖος quotes the last six words; ef.
Terent. Maur. 1885 ff. ‘*‘ De choriambo : Nec non et memini
pedibus quater his repetitis Hymnum Battiadem Phoebo
cantasse lovique Pastorem Branchum: quem captus amore


pudico Fatidicas sortes docuit depromere Paian.”
2 γενάρχα ἢ. ΗΠ. : γενάρχαι Hephaest.


280 :


THE LOCK OF BERENICE


6 (fr. anon. 88)


By the utmost verge of the fervid Lion.“


The obscure word ἐλειήτης is derived according to_the
E.M. ‘‘ either from é\n=heat, which is called εἴλη, with
the addition of iota, or from ¢\os=marsh, because before
being made a constellation they dwelt in marshes.” The
reference, in any case, of ἐλειήταο and certainly of Catullus’s
**saevi” is to the heat at the time when the sun enters
Leo in July, cf. Arat. 150f.


BRANCHUS


dedicated there the dress in which he had won some
notable victories (Herod. ii. 159). See further Paus.
vii. 2. 4, Strabo 421, Conon ap. Phot. Bibi. pp. 136 and
140. The temple was pillaged and burnt by the
Persians in 494 sB.c. (Herod. vi. 19, Strabo 634), but was
rebuilt on a scale so huge that it remained unroofed
(Strabo /.c.). The remains have been excavated in
modern times by Haussoullier and later by Wiegand.


And Callimachus has composed a whole poem,
“ Branchus,” in the (choriambic)* pentameter: e.g.
“Géds who are wéll worthy of song, Phoébus and
Zeus, Didyma’s ancient founders.”’


« Hephaestion in this chapter explains that a chori-
ambic line may consist of pure choriambs or be com-
bined with iambi: as a general rule, when the line is
catalectic, it ends in an iambic clausula (κατάκλεις), ὁ.6. in an
amphibrach (ὦ -- Ο) or bacchius (ὦ -- -), the last syllable
being indifferent (ἀδιάφορος = anceps).

231


ENITPAMMATA


Tue following fragments are quoted by various writers
from the Epigrams of Callimachus. ‘There is some ground
for supposing that Callimachus published a separate
volume under this title. Thus Suidas s.vv. ᾿Αρχίβιος,
᾿Απολλωνίου, γραμματικός. Tov Καλλιμάχου ᾿Επιγραμμάτων
ἐξήγησιν seems to imply such a volume. (Gf. Plin. Ep.
iv. 3. And Suid. s.v. Μαριανός tells us that Marianus,
among other iambic paraphrases of the poets (Theocritus,
Apollonius, Aratus, etc.), wrote ‘“‘a paraphrase of Cal-
limachus’s Hecale, Hymns, Aitia, and Epigrams in 6810
iambics.” Incidentally it may be noted that Suidas says
the paraphrase of Aratus (our text, including the Dissemeiae,
gives 1154 lines) occupied 1140 iambics.


αὐτὸς ὁ Μῶμος
» > / cee / > A / ΕΣ]
ἔγραφεν ἐν τοίχοις “ ὁ Κρόνος ἐστὶ σοφός.
ἠνίδε κου κόρακες τεγέων ἔπι κοῖα συνῆπται
κρώζουσιν καὶ κῶς αὖθι γενησόμεθα.
Diog. Laert. ii. 111 Διόδωρος ᾿Αμεινίου ᾿Ϊασεύς,
\ > \ / (eee .
καὶ αὐτὸς Κρόνος ἐπίκλην [1.6. as well as Apol-
lonius], περὶ οὗ φησι Καλλίμαχος ἐν ἐπιγράμμασιν"
“αὐτὸς... σοφός. Sextus Empir. Adv. math. i. 309
ὅτε Kal TO τυχὸν ἐπιγραμμάτιον οὐχ οἷοί τέ εἰσι
νοῆσαι, καθάπερ καὶ τὸ ὑπὸ τοῦ Καλλιμάχου εἰς
Διόδωρον τὸν Kpdvov συγγραφέν, “' ἠνίδε... γενη-
σόμεθα.᾽᾽ Bentley was probably right in combining
the two fragments as one.
232


EPIGRAMS


1 (70)


Blame himself wrote upon the walls: “ Cronus ὦ is
wise.” Behold the crows upon the roof are croaking,
“What is a Co-nex Sentence?” and “What is the
proof of Immortality ?”


« The reference is to Diodorus of Iasos, one of the later
philosophers of the Megaric school. The nickname Cronus
—indicating an ‘‘old fogy ’—is said to have been applied
in the first instance to his teacher Apollonius of Cyrene
and from him applied to his pupil ; Strabo 658 and 638, ef.
Diog. Laert. /.c., who says that in the presence of Ptolemy
Soter certain dialectical questions were put to him by
Stilpon, and being unable to answer them offhand, ὑπὸ τοῦ
βασιλέως τά τε ἄλλα ἐπετιμήθη Kal δὴ καὶ Κρόνος ἤκουσεν ἐν
σκώμματος μέρει. His doctrines, the epigram implies, were
so current that the very crows upon the roof discussed
them. kota συνῆπται, 1.6. ποῖά ἐστιν ἀξιώματα συνημμένα,
refers to the classification of sentences or propositions
(* profata” or “ proloquia” (Varro), ‘‘ pronuntiata” (Cicero))
into simple (ἁπλᾶ), adjunct (συνημμένα), and complex
(συμπεπλεγμένα). If one says “ypade,” the absence of the
subject makes this what the Stoics called a κατηγόρημα; if one
says γράφει Σωκράτης, we have an ἀξίωμα because itis now com-
plete in itself (αὐτοτελές), Diog. Laert. vii. 63, cf. Aulus Gellius
xvi. 8. 4 **redimus igitur necessario ad Graecos libros. ex
quibus accepimus ἀξίωμα esse his verbis: λεκτὸν αὐτοτελὲς


233


CALLIMACHUS


οὐδὲ TO γράμμα
ἠδέσθη τὸ λέγον μ᾽ υἷα Λεοπρέπεος
κεῖσθαι Κήιον ἄνδ α . . .


/


οὐδ᾽ ὑμέας, Πολύδευκες, ὑπέτρεσεν, οἵ με μελάθρου ὃ


/ / > \ 3 /
μέλλοντος πίπτειν ἐκτὸς ἔθεσθέ ποτε
~ , A
δαιτυμόνων ἄπο μοῦνον, ὅτε Ἰζραννώνιος, αἰαῖ,
ὥὦλισθεν μεγάλους οἶκος ἐπὶ Σκοπάδας.


. ; a \
Suid. s.v. Σιμωνίδης" ᾿Ακραγαντῖνος στρατηγὸς
> ΜΝ A / X: .9 , e
ἦν ὄνομα Φοῖνιξ. Συρακοσίοις δὲ ἐπολέμουν οὗτοι"
~ a ~ /
οὐκοῦν ὅδε ὁ Φοῖνιξ διαλύει τὸν τάφον τοῦ Σιμωνί-
: ~ ~ bree’ 4
δου. . . καὶ ἐκ τῶν λίθων τῶνδε ἀνίστησι
7 ‘ A ~ ts e 7 ΝΜ
πύργον, καὶ κατὰ τοῦτον ἑάλω ἡ πόλις. ἔοικε
A A / 7 e - > /
δὲ καὶ Καλλίμαχος τούτοις ὁμολογεῖν: οἰκτίζεται
~ ’ὔ \ «
γοῦν τὸ ἄθεσμον ἔργον καὶ λέγοντά γε αὐτὸν ὁ
a \
Κυρηναῖος πεποίηκε τὸν γλυκὺν ποιητήν “ οὐδὲ
/ » Ἀκο ει ~
TO γράμμα δέσθη τὸ λεγόμενον υἱὸν Θεοπρεποῦς
- / Ν 3) Ss 3 > ‘ ΝΜ > 7
κεῖσθαι Ἰζήιον avipa’’: κᾷἄτ᾽ εἰπὼν ἄττα ἐπιλέγει"
ςς δ᾽ ε / I λ ὃ 4 ε / ν λ ’
οὐδ᾽ ἡμέας, ἸΠολύδευκες, ὑπέτρεσεν, οἵ με μελά-
,ὔ A A /
θρου μέλλοντος πίπτειν ἐκτὸς ἔσεσθαί ποτε δαιτυ-
~ /
μόνων amo μοῦνον, ὅτε Kpavwviwy αἴας ὦλισθε
/ Ss 3. is / . “Jy: .
μέγας οἶκος ἐπὶ σκοπάσας. Cf. Quintilian xi. 2. 11,
Cicero, De ογαί. ii. 86. Simonides, writing in
honour of the Scopadae, went out of his way to
praise the Dioscuri. As the banquet at Crannon
began, he was told that two strangers wished to


speak to him, but, going out, he saw no one.


Then the hall fell. ©


ἀπόφαντον ὅσον ἐφ᾽ αὑτῷ. . . . sed M. Varro. . ita finit:
Proloquium est sententia, in qua nihil desideratur.” Gellius
goes on to define and illustrate συνημμένον and συμπεπλεγμένον :
§ 9 f. “sed quod Graeci “συνημμένον ἀξίωμα dicunt, alii


234


᾿ς EPIGRAMS
2 (71)


And he (Phoenix) respected not the inscription
which declared that “I the son of Leoprepes* of
Ceos lie here,” neither did he tremble before you,?
Polydeuces [and thy brother Castor], who, when the
hall was about to fall, set me outside, alone of all the
banqueters, when the house at Crannon, ah! me,
tumbled on the mighty sons of Scopas.


~


nostrorum ‘adiunctum,’ alii ‘conexum’ dixerunt. [14
*conexum’ tale est: ‘si Plato ambulat, Plato movetur,’
‘si dies est, sol super terras est.’ item quod _ illi
“ συμπεπλεγμένον,᾽ nos vel ‘coniunctum’ vel ‘copulatum’
dicimus, quod est eiusdem modi: ‘P. Scipio, Pauli filius,
et bis consul fuit et triumphavit et censura functus est et
conlega in censura L. Mummi fuit.’” Cf Sext. Emp. Adv.
math. viii. 115 Διόδωρος δὲ ἀληθὲς εἶναί φησι συνημμένον ὅπερ
μήτε ἐνεδέχετο μήτε ἐνδέχεται ἀρχόμενον ἀπ’ ἀληθοῦς λήγειν
ἐπὶ ψεῦδος.

The argument for Immortality was connected with
Diodorus’ denial of the possibility of motion. ‘* That which
moves, moves either in the place where it is or in the place
where it is not. Neither of these is possible; therefore
nothing moves. But if nothing moves, it follows that
nothing perishes. For, by the same reasoning as before,
since a living creature does not die in the time in which:it
lives nor in the time in which it does not live, it does not
die at all. Therefore we shall always be alive and shall
be born again” (αὖθι γενησόμεθα). Sext. Empir. <dAdv.
math. i. 809.

« The restoration of this epigram is a good example
of Bentley’s genius. The Scopadae were a distinguished
Thessalian family who had their seat at Crannon and
Pharsalus. Scopas II. in whose honour Simonides of Ceos,
son of Leoprepes (Paus. vi. 9. 9), wrote an epinicion,
lost his life by the sudden fall of his house at Pharsalus or
Crannon during a banquet. Cf. Valer. Max. i. 8.

> ὑμέας, i.e. Castor and Polydeuces,

235


CALLIMACHUS


θεὸς δέ οἱ ἱερὸς ὕκης.
Athen. vii. 327 a. In 984 c Athen. quotes the
same fragment as ἱερὸς δέ τοι ἱερὸς ὕκης.


ἐς Δύμην ἀπιόντα τὴν ᾿Αχαί[ας.
Steph. Byz. frag. p- 240 f. Mein. Δύμη.


Λύδη καὶ παχὺ γράμμα καὶ οὐ τορόν.
Schol. Dion. Perieg. Bios Διονυσίου p. 317 Bern-
hardy; cf. schol. v. 3, 2bid. p. 977.


236


EPIGRAMS
3 (72)
A god to him is the holy hyces.*
4 (73)
Departing to Dyme in Achaia.
5 (740)


The Lyde® is a dull writing and not clear.


« Red mullet (Ὁ. But see Galateia (37 Schn.).

> The Lyde was an elegiac poem by Antimachus of
Colophon (contemporary with Plato), in which he sought
to console his grief for the death of his wife. Lyde by
writing of similar cases, ©


237


TAAATEIA


ἢ μᾶλλον χρύσειον ἐπ᾽ ὀφρύσιν ἱερὸν ἰχθύν,

ἢ πέρκας ὅσα τ᾽ ἄλλα φέρει βυθὸς ἄσπετος ἅλμης.
Athenaeus vii. 284 c Καλλίμαχος δ᾽ ἐν Γαλατείᾳ

τὸν χρύσοφρυν. ἢ μᾶλλον κτλ.


1. ἐπ’ Meineke, cf. Plutarch, Mor. 981 p; ἐν.


¢ Nothing is known of this beyond the one quotation in
Athenaeus. It is natural, especially in view of the nature
of the quotation, to think of the love-story of the Nereid
Galateia and the Cyclops Polyphemus, which was a


ΓΡΑΦΕΙ͂ΟΝ


σ \ 7 / Α > 7 ’
εἵλκυσε δὲ δριμύν τε χόλον κυνὸς ὀξύ τε κέντρον
σφηκός: ἀπ᾽ ἀμφοτέρων ἰὸν ἔχει στομάτων.
Grammaticus in cod. Ambros. 222 μαρτυρεῖ δὲ
... Kat... Καλλίμαχος: καὶ yap περὶ τοῦ
2A A / λ / > ~ τ / \ A Ξ
ρχιλόχου λέγων ἐν τῷ Tpadeitw φησὶν οὕτως
εἵλκυσε κτλ.


1 στομάτων] στόματος Schneider.


α The title of this poem is exceedingly obscure. It is
known to us by the following fragment only. Susemihl
thinks it was a series of ‘ Dichterportrite’’ or brief
op ὀελόῤἠρωρμ ρος of poets. Dilthey compared the /magines
of Varro.


238


‘ GALATEIA 4
(37 Schneider)


Or rather the gilthead, holy fish,’ or perches and
others that the infinite depth of the sea produces.


favourite theme of the Alexandrine poets and their
imitators. Theocrit. xi. etc.

ὃ The discussion in Athenaeus is about the identity of
the “holy fish.’> In this quotation it is identified with the
gilthead (Chrysophrys aurata), so named from the crescent-
shaped yellow mark between the eyes.


GRAPHEUM @
(37a Schneider)


And he? drank the bitter wrath of the dog and
the sharp sting of the wasp: he has venom from the
mouth of both.


ὃ Archilochus of Paros circ. 650 3B.c., famous for the
bitterness of his lampoons or iambi. The Ambrosian
grammarian derives iambus from iés=poison, hence the
quotation. There is a very similar anonymous epigram
A.P. ix, 185 ᾿Αρχιλόχου τάδε μέτρα καὶ ἠχήεντες tap Bor, θυμοῦ
καὶ φοβερῆς ἰὸς ἐπεσβολίης. The same comparison of Archi-
lochus to a mad dog underlies Hor, 4.P. 79 ‘* Archilochum
proprio rabies armavit iambo.”


239


HECALE


Tue story of Hecale is told by Plutarch, Theseus ch. 14:
‘Theseus, wishing to be actively employed, and at the
same time to win the favour of the people, went out
against the Marathonian bull, which was causing no small
annoyance to the inhabitants of the Tetrapolis, and he
overcame the bull and drove it through the city to exhibit
it, after which he sacrificed it to Apollo Delphinius.
Hecale and the legend of her reception and entertainment
(of Theseus) seem to be not quite without some portion
of truth. For the demes round about used to meet and
hold a Hecalesian festival in honour of Zeus Hecalus, and
honoured Hecale, whom they called by the pet name
Hecaline, because when she entertained Theseus, who at
the time was quite young, she addressed him as an old
woman would and greeted him with that sort of pet
names. When Theseus was setting out to the contest
she vowed in his behalf to offer a sacrifice to Zeus if he
came back safe. She died, however, before his return,
and received the above mentioned honours, in return
for her hospitality, by order of Theseus, as Philochorus
relates.” Cf. Steph. Byz. s.v. ‘Exddn* δῆμος τῆς Λεοντίδος
φυλῆς. ὁ δημότης Ἑκάλιος " τὰ τοπικὰ Ἑκάληθεν, Ἑκάληνδε " καὶ
ἱἙκάλιος Zevs. Hesych. 5.0. Ἑκάλειος Ζεύς" ὃν Ἑκάλη ἱδρύσατο.

It is obvious from the fragments that Hecale was
represented as very old and very poor, and in both
regards she became proverbial. Priapea, xii. 1 ff.
(Baehrens, Poet. Lat. Min. i. p. 61) ‘‘ quaedam annosior
Hectoris parente Cumaeae soror, ut puto, Sibyllae,
Aequalis tibi, quam domum revertens Theseus repperit
in rogo iacentem.” Ovid, Rem. Amor. 747 f. ‘Cur nemo


240


HECALE


est Hecalen, nulla est quae ceperit lron ἢ ? Nempe quod
alter egens, altera pauper erat.” Statius, Th. xii. 582 “* nec
fudit vanos anus hospita fletus.” Julian, Ep. 41 οὐδὲ τῆς
‘Exadns ὁ Θησεὺς τοῦ δείπνου τὸ λιτὸν ἀπηξίωσεν, ἀλλ᾽ der Kal
μικροῖς ἐς τὸ ἀναγκαῖον ἀρκεῖσθαι.

It may be inferred further that the poem contained
references to the birth of Theseus. The story was that
Aegeus, king of Athens, being childless, consulted the
oracle at Delphi. To interpret the oracle which he
received he went to consult Pittheus of Troezen. Here
he became father of Theseus by Aethra, daughter of
Pittheus. Leaving Troezen before the birth of Theseus,
Aegeus hid his sword and shoes under a rock, telling
Aethra that if and when their son was able to raise the
rock and remove the sword and shoes, she was to send
him to Athens with these tokens of recognition. This
duly took place and Theseus was recognized as the son
of Theseus (Plut. Thes. 3 ff.).


Tue Rainer FRAGMENTS OF THE HECALE


Turse important additions to our knowledge of the
Hecale are preserved on a piece of a wooden tablet now
in the papyri collection of the Archduke Rainer in the
Royal Library at Vienna, and were first published by Prof.
Theodor Gomperz in vol. vi. of the Mitteilungen aus d.
Sammlung d. Papyr. Erzherzog Rainer, Fseorem, May
1893 (printed separately).

On the reverse side of the tablet are written two
columns from the Phoenissae of Euripides. From the
amount of the Phoenissue which is missing between these
two columns it would seem that about three-fifths of the
board have been lost by the breakage. That nothing is
lost at the top is proved by the fact that the upper border
is marked by two indented lines. Traces of a similar
marking appear also at the side ends. The general
character of the tablet and its contents—‘‘a wooden
tablet inscribed with part of a messenger’s speech from


R 24)


CALLIMACHUS


one of the three most read dramas of Euripides and a
part, rich in mythological allusions, of one of the most
celebrated works of Callimachus’’—leaves no doubt that
it was intended for school use.

For these and other details the reader is referred to
T. Gomperz, Hellenica, vol. ii., Leipzig, 1912, p. 279 f.,
“¢ Aus der Hecale des Kallimachos,” where in an Excursus
J. Zingerle discusses palaeographical details. The
character of the writing, according to Wessely, assigns
the tablet to the 4th century a.p. Two different hands
are distinguished, one of which wrote Columns I. and IV.,
the other Columns II. and III. From the nature of the
subject matter, as well as certain palaeographical indica-
tions, Zingerle concludes that the columns were not
written in their present order. Thus Column I. was
written after Columns II. and III. and is a palimpsest.

The identification of the fragments was first made by
Dr. W. Weinberger, who was associated with Dr. Zingerle
in the examination of the tablet.

Clearest of all is the identification of Column IV. Of
this v, [2 was already known from schol. Aristoph. Frogs,
1297, where it is assigned to Callimachus, and Suidas’s.v.
ἱμαῖον, where it is assigned to the Hecale. Moreover γάλακι
τεγάλακτι V. 3, λύχνα V. 11, and a large part of v. 13
were already attested as belonging to Potinacheas (fr.
551, 255, 278) by Herodian, Hi. Magn., and schol. Apoll.
Rhod. respectively.

As to Column I., internal evidence alone would be
sufficient to refer it to the Hecale—the reference to
Theseus and the Marathonian bull, etc., but, further,
v. 6, apart from the first word, was “already known from
Suidas s.v: ἄστυρον, where it is assigned to Callimachus (fr.
288), and had already been referred to the Hecale. Also,
the end of v. 14 occurs, with the addition of two more
words, in Suidas 8.0. στόρνῃσι, and had already been
referred by Ruhnken and others to the Hecale (fr.
anon. 59).

The identification of Columns II. and III. does not
rest on any ancient citation. But the general character


242


HECALE


of the style, the nature of the contents—the story of
Erichthonius, which is the subject of Column II., is
known from a scholium on Jiiad ii. 547 to have been
treated in the Hecale, and in one form of the story a
crow played a prominent part, which apparently is the
theme of Col. I1J.—and the context in which they appear,
leave no doubt as to the source of the fragments.


BIBii0oGRAPHY


T. Gomperz, Mitteilungen aus der Sammlung der Papyrus


O.


Erzherzog Rainer VI., Vienna, 1893: revised ed.
1897, reprinted in T. Gomperz, Hellenica, vol. ii.,
Leipzig, 1912.

Crusius, Liter, Centralblatt, 1893, No. 32. F. G.
Kenyon, Class. Rey., Novemb., 1893. G. Knaack,
Berliner Wochenschr. fiir klassische Philologie, 1894,
No. 14. E. Maass, Deutsche Literaturzeitung, 1893,
No. 33. Th. Reinach, Revue des Etudes grecques,
vi. No, 22. E. dei Piccolomini, Nuova Antologia
italiana, 46. 3. 1893. H. J. Polack, Separatabdruck
aus Verslaagen en Meddeelingen d. kon. Academie
van Wetenschappen, Afdeeling Letterkunde, iii. 10,
1894. U. v. Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, Nachrichten
der Konigl. Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften, Gét-
tingen, 1893, No. 19. Robinson Ellis, Journ. of
Philology, xxiv. 48 ff.


243


EKAAH


TESTIMONIA


1. Crinagoras, A.P. ix. 545:
/ \ \ » , \ \
Καλλιμάχου τὸ τορευτὸν ἔπος τόδε: δὴ γὰρ
ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ
e) ἢ \ 7 / / Ν /
ὡνὴρ τοὺς Μουσέων πάντας ἔσεισε κάλως.
ἀείδει δ᾽ “Ἑκάλης τε φιλοξέίνοιο καλιὴν
\ A \ a“ > / 4
καὶ Θησεῖ Μαραθὼν ovs ἐπέθηκε πόνους"
τοῦ σοὶ καὶ νεαρῶν χειρῶν σθένος εἴη ἀρέσθαι, ὅ
Μάρκελλε, κλεινοῦ 7° αἷνον ἴσον βιότου.


2. Schol. Callim. Hymn. Apoll. 106 ἐγκαλεῖ διὰ
τούτων τοὺς σκώπτοντας αὐτὸν μὴ δύνασθαι
ποιῆσαι μέγα ποίημα, ὅθεν ἠναγκάσθη ποιῆσαι τὴν
κάλην.

8. E.M. s.v. “Ἑκάλη" ἡ ἡρωίς, εἰς ἣν καὶ ποίημα
ἔγραψε Καλλίμαχος" ἡ πρὸς ἑαυτὴν πάντας
καλοῦσα. ταύτην “ExdAnv (leg. “Εκαλίνην) ἔλε-


γον οἱ παλαιοὶ ὑποκοριζόμενοι. ἔθυον δὲ αὐτῇ


διὰ τὸ ξενίσαι Θησέα. Cf. Suid. s.v. “Exadn.


4. Petronius 135:
Qualis in Actaea quondam fuit hospita terra


« Crinagoras presents a copy of the Hecale to M. Claudius
Q4A ©


HECALE
‘TESTIMONIES


1. This®@ is the chiselled work of Callimachus ; for
on it, indeed, he shook out every reef of the Muses.
It sings the cabin of hospitable Hecale and the toils
that Marathon imposed on Theseus. His young
strength of hand may it be thine to win, Marcellus,
and equal praise of glorious life !


2. In these words? he rebukes those who jeered at "
him as not being able to write a big poem: which
taunt drove him to write the Hecale.


3. Hecale, the heroine, on whom also Callimachus
wrote a poem: she who called (καλεῖν) all to her.
The ancients called her by the pet name of Hecaline.
And they offered sacrifice to her on account of her
having entertained Theseus.


4. Such as the hospitable woman who was of old


Marcellus 43-23 3B.c., nephew of Augustus, whose early
death was much lamented ; Verg. Aen. vi. 884.
> οὐκ ἄγαμαι κτλ. : Words put ia the mouth of Envy.


245
é


CALLIMACHUS ©


Digna sacris Hecale, quam Musa loquentibus annis
Battiadae veteris mirando tradidit aevo.


--


5. Epigr. Anonym. Bern. 5 f.:
μέλπω δὲ γραὸς τῆς πολυξένου τρόπους 1
καὶ τὴν τελευτὴν Θησέως τε τὴν ἄγραν.


ΤΟΣ


[κουλεὸν εἰς] ἑτέρην 3 περίαπτε καὶ εἰν ἄορ ἧκεν"

e 3 a > 3 Ψ / : ε / 2Q3

ws ἴδον, o[t 8’]* ἅμα πάντες ὑπ[έτρ]εσ[α]ν ἠδ
[ἐλίασ θεν

ἄνδρα μέγαν καὶ θῆρα πελώριον ἀντία ἐ]δέσθαι,

,ὕ ᾿ς. A 2 3 , \ ”
peop ὅτε δὴ Θησεύς φιν ἀπόπροθι μακρὸν duce:
μίμνετε θαρσήεντες, ἐμῷ δέ [res Aiyéi πατρὶ ὅ
νεύμενος ὅς τ᾽ [w|KtoTos ἐς ἄστυρον ἀγγελιώτης *
ὡς ἐνέποι---πολέων “κεν τομαρύξενε μεριμνέων---
is Θησεὺς οὐχ ἑκὰς οὗτος,ὅ ἀπ ᾿εὐύδρου Μαραθῶνος
[ζωὸν ἄγων τὸν ταῦρον." 6 μὲν φάτο, τοὶ δ᾽

ἀΐοντες
[π͵άντες ““ [ἰ]ὴ παιῆον ᾿᾿᾽ ἀνέκλαγον, αὖθι δὲ ase
οὐχὶ νότος τόσσην ye χύσιν κατεχεύατο φύλλων,

> / 09 > A > 4 /
οὐ βορέης οὐδ᾽ αὐτὸς ὅτ᾽ ἔπλετο φυλλοχόος p[e lis,
[ὅσσα τότ᾽ [ἀ]γ[ρ]ῶσται περί [7] ἀμφί

᾽ὔ 4
ησέι βάλλον,

1 τρόπους Politian ; τρόπον.

2 κουλεὸν εἰς Editor: {οὗ σειρὴν» ἑτέρην Piccolomini, «ἂψ
τελαμῶν᾽» ἑτέρῃ or δεσμὴν ἑτέρην Polack. According to vase
representations Theseus had laid aside his sword and
fastened it to a tree.

3 ofl δ: ws :

4 ὅς τ, . . ἀγγελιώτης quoted by Suidas 5.0. ἄστυρον (fr.
246

=


HECALE


in the land of Acte (6. Attica), Hecale worthy of
worship, whose story and her marvellous age the
Muse of the ancient son of Battus told to the
eloquent years.”


5. And I sing the ways of the old woman of many
guests and her death, and Theseus’ capture.


fel?


On the other side [Theseus] fastened [the sheath]
and therein put his sword. -And when they beheld
it, they all trembled before him and shrank from
looking face to face on the great man and the
monstrous beast, until Theseus called to them from
afar: “ Have courage and abide, and let the swiftest
go unto the city to bear a message to my father
Aegeus—so shall he relieve him from many cares:
—‘Lo! Theseus is at hand, bringing alive the bull
from watery Marathon.’” So spake he, and, when
they heard, they all shouted “ Jé Pateon”’ and abode
there. Not the South wind sheds so great a fall of
leaves, not the North wind even in the month of
falling leaves, as those which in that hour the rustics
threw around and over Theseus—the rustics who


‘*@ There seems to be some corruption in this text of which
no solution has yet been found.


288), as from Callimachus. The fragment was assigned by
Naeke to the Hecale; ὅς τ᾽ Suidas; ὥστ᾽ Rainer tablet.
exTac

5 oux outoc Rainer tablet; Gomperz thinks τ in extac is
really A; οὖλος Polack.

§ εὐύδρου Μαραθῶνος] cf. Suid. s.v. Μαραθών".. .. τοῦτον
Καλλίμαχος ἐννότιον λέγει, τουτέστι δίυγρον ἢ ἔνυδρον (=fr. 114,
assigned by Naeke to the Hecale).


247


CALLIMACHUS


[οἵ μιν ἐκυκλώσαἾντο περιστα [δ |dv,1 at δὲ γυναῖκες


/
. στόρνῃσιν ἀνέστεφον." 1ὅ
δ φ͵
καί ῥ᾽ ὅτ᾽ ἐποῴ sea ἐφ᾽ ( ὃν ἄν τιν᾽ ἕκαστοι


Οὐρανίδαι ἐπάγοιεν ἐμῷ ἘΝ ρῷ, ἀλλά € Παλλὰς

τῆς μὲν ἔσω δηναι(ὸὴν (ἢ) ἀφῆ 4 δρ[ό Ἴσον ὅ
‘Hdaiorouo, |

μέσφ᾽ ὅτε Kexporidnow én’ ᾿Ακτῇ ® θήκατο λᾶαν,

λάθριον ἄρρητον, γενεῇ δ᾽ ὅθεν οὐδέ νιν ἔγνων Ἷ 5

οὔτ᾽ ἐδάην, φήμῃ ὃ δὲ κατ᾽ ὠγυγίους (7) ἔφαν
ἰαἸὐταὶ 9

οἰωνούς, ὡς δῆθεν og: ‘Hdaiorw τέκεν Aia.

T [ο]υτάκι 10 δ᾽ ἡ μὲν ἑῆς ἔρυμα χθονὸς ὄφρα βάλοιτο,

τήν ῥα νέον ψήφῳ [τ]ε Διὸς dv [o }xatdexa τ᾽ ἄλλων

ἀθανάτων ὄφιός τε κατέλλαβε μαρτυρίῃσιν, 10


1 Of. Quint. Smyrn. xii. 362 μέσσον ἐκυκλώσαντο περισταδόν.

2 14-15, Suid. 8.0. στόρνῃσι" ζώναις" ai δὲ γυναῖκες στόρνῃσιν
ἀνέστρεφον [ἀνέστεφον Toup]: περὶ Θησέως [=fr. anon. 59
Schneider].

3 δηναίων Rainer tablet.

4 ἀφῆ seems to be a hitherto unknown form of 3rd sing.
2nd aor. indic. of ἀφίημι. Polack proposes δὴ νάσσεν ἀφῆ
coll. Hesych. ἀφῆς᾽ ἀδύνατος, ἄλλος [leg. ddados].

5 δρόσον of. Aesch. Ag. 141, E.M. 8.0. ἔρσαι.

8 ’Axry Diels and others; ἀκτῇ.

7 Gomperz takes ἔγνων and éddnv as 3rd plurals. οὐδέ:
οὔτε ? 8 φήμῃ Rainer tablet ; φῆμαι Crusius.

9 ἔφαν αὐταὶ] πεφάτισται ? 10 ταυτακι R.t.


« The reference is to the birth of Erichthonius, son
of Athena and Hephaestus. Athena wished to rear him
secretly. She therefore ‘*shut him up in a chest (xécrn)
and gave him to the daughters of Cecrops, Agraulus,
Pandorus, and Herse, with orders not to open the chest
until she herself came. Having gone to Pellene she was
bringing a hill in order to make a bulwark (ἔρυμα) in front of


248


HECALE


~ encircled him about, while the women crowned him
with garlands.


But Pallas laid him, the ancient seed of Hephaestus
within the chest,“ until she set a rock in Acte (Attica)
for the sons of Cecrops: a birth mysterious and
secret, whose lineage I neither knew nor learnt, but
they themselves [%.e. the daughters of Cecrops}
declared, according to report among the primeval
birds, that Earth bare him to Hephaestus. Then
she, that she might lay a bulwark for the land which
she had newly obtained by vote of Zeus and the
twelve other immortals and the witness of the Snake,


the Acropolis, when two of Cecrops’ daughters opened the
chest and beheld two serpents with Erichthonius. As
Athena was bringing the hill which is now called Lycabettus,
a crow (κορώνη) met her and told her that Erichthonius was
discovered. Athena, when she heard it, threw down the
hill where it now is, and she told the crow that, for her bad
news, she must never enter the Acropolis ” (Amelesagoras
ap. Antig. Caryst. Hist. Mirab. ο. xii., ef. Apollodor. iii. 14,
Ovid, Met. ii. 551 ff., Hygin. Fab. 166). The reference in
v. 10 f. is to the story of the contest between Athena and
Poseidon for possession of Attica. Poseidon smote a rock
on the Acropolis and produced a salt pool (θάλασσα). Then
Athena, calling Cecrops to witness her possession (κατάληψις),
produced an olive. Finally Zeus appointed the twelve gods
as arbiters who decided in favour of Athena, Κέκροπος
μαρτυρήσαντος ὅτι πρώτη τὴν ἐλαίαν ἐφύτευσεν, Apollodor. iii.
14.1. Cecrops is called here the Snake, because he was
represented as having the lower part of his body in snake
form, in sign of his being earth-born: Κέκροψ αὐτόχθων,
συμφυὲς ἔχων σῶμα ἀνδρὸς καὶ δράκοντος, τῆς ᾿Αττικῆς ἐβασίλευσε
πρῶτος (Apollodor. /.c.). The speaker appears to be the
crow.

249


CALLIMACHUS


Πελλήνην ἐφίκανεν ᾿Αχαιΐδα: τόφρα δὲ κοῦραι
αἱ φυλακοὶ κακὸν ἔργον [ἐ]πεφράσσαντο τελέσσαι
ξείστηὶ a ss τς δεσμά τ᾽ ἀνεῖσαι! . ..


1. 3.
᾿Αθήνης
“Ἠ A / ~
. . . μοῦναι δὲ παραπτυ[ὄμεσθα] κορῶναι.
[δαίμοσιν: οὐ γὰρ ἔγωγε) τεόν ποτε, πότνια,
θυμόν,
+» + [ὅσα] πολλὰ παραίσια μήποτ᾽ ἐλαφροὶ
[ζή]σομεν οἰωνοί, τότε δ᾽ ὦφελον [εἶναι ἄναυδος" 5
οὕτως ἡμετέρην μὲν ἀπέπτυσεν, οὐδὲ γενέθλην
ε ,ὔ, ¢ a“ L\ 3-3 / > \ 7 \
ἡμετέρην ἑ καλεῖν [μάλ᾽ ἐπιτρέπει: ἀλλὰ πέσοις σὺ
μηδέποτ᾽ ἐκ θυϊμοῖ]ο: βαρὺς χόλος αἰὲν ᾿Αθήνης"
3 \ > \ \ / / > /
αὐτὰρ ἐγὼ τυτθὸς παρέ[ην ylovos: [6 ]yd{o]ar[n]
γὰρ
ἤδη μοι γενεὴ πέλ[εται, δεκάτη δὲ τοκεῦσι." 10
[δεί]ελος ἀλλ᾽ ἢ νύξ ἢ ἔνδιος 8 ἢ ἔσετ᾽ ἠώς,
εὖτε κόραξ, [δὴς νῦν γε καὶ ἂν κύκνοισιν ἐρίζοι


1 δεσμά τ᾽ ἀνεῖσαι or δέσματ᾽ ἀνεῖσαι) Wessely now thinks
he can read AAKA, in place of δεσμά, which he completes as
[πύν]δακα.

2 The text is so uncertain that any plausible restoration
seems hopeless. The supplements are mainly due to
Wessely. Inv. 7 μάλ᾽ ἐπιτρέπει is suggested by the present
editor, as also πέσοις od for Piccolomini’s πέσοιο which
is impossible.

ο 8. Cf. Hom. Jl. xxi. 111. @&dtos as in Hymn vi. 39, but
évdios fr. incert. 20 (124).


“ The subject of this fragment seems to be the banish-
ment of the crow from the Acropolis as a punishment


250


HECALE


came unto Pellene in Achaea. “Meanwhile the
maidens that watched the chest bethought them to
do an evil deed . . . and undoing the fastenings of
the chest... .


1. 3 col. iii.


. » » but we crows alone are rejected [of the gods:
for never did I (vex)] thy heart, O Lady .


. . . but I would that I had been [voiceless then].
So much she abhors our voice and Lratfens not] our
race to call upon her name.  [Mayst thou] never
[fall] from her favour: ever grievous is the anger of
Athene. But I was present only as a little child;
for this is my eighth generation [but the tenth for
my parents].


1. 4°


“But evening it shall be or night or noon or
morn when the raven,? which now might vie for


for bringing to Athena the news of the sin of Cecrops’
daughters. The speaker appears to be acrow. The refer-
ence in the last two lines will be to the longevity of the
‘*many-wintered” crow. Cf. Hesiod, fr. 171 (183), Ovid,
ΤΠ. vii. 274 **novem cornicis saecula passae.”

> The reference of the opening lines is to the turning of
the raven’s plumage from white to black as a punishment
for the news which it brought to Apollo regarding Coronis
who, being with child by Apollo, sinned with Ischys, son of
Elatos (Pind. P. iii. 8 ff.). For story of the raven bringing
the news to Apollo cf. Hesiod, fr. 123 (148)=schol. Pind.
P., iii. 48; Ovid, M. ii. 598.

In v. 10 στιβήεις must refer to the frost of early morning,
not, as Gomperz thinks, to the frost of age.


251


CALLIMACHUS


\ ‘ 1 ath \ , x > 7 2
καὶ ydAakul χροιὴν καὶ κύματος ἄκρῳ ἀώτῳ,

, X , 5:0 ἢ \ "χϑὸδν ὃ 8
κυάνεον φὴ πίσσαν ἐπὶ πτερὸν. οὐλοὸν ἕξει,
ἀγγελίης ἐπίχε[ι]ρα τά οἵ ποτε Φοῖβος ὀπάσσει, 5
ὁππότε [κ]εν Φλεγύαο Κορωνίδος eet θυγατρὸς
Ἴσχυι πληξίππῳ σπομένης μιερόν ἃ τι] πύθηται.

A \ xy > AM 4 σ΄ / \ δ᾽ >
τὴν μὲν ap ws φαμένην ὕπνος λάβε, THY δ᾽ ἀΐουσαν"
καδδραθέτην δ᾽ οὐ πολλὸν ἐπὶ χρόν[ον],5 αἶψα
γὰρ ἦλθεν
, 6 7 " 9 ΨῈ. a ” Me Pe
στιβήεις ὁ ἄγχουρος: ἴτ᾽, οὐκέτι χεῖρες ἔπαγροι 10
φιλητέων: ἤδη γὰρ ἑωθινὰ λύχνα φαείνει"
[ἀ]είδει καί πού τις ἀνὴρ ὑδατηγὸς ἱμαῖον"
Ψ ’ > A Ar / ee Μ 9
ἔγρει καί Tw’ ἔχοντα παρ[ ἃ] πλόον οἰκίον a€wv


8


\ ες. 2 + > / \ \
τετριγὼς ὑπ᾽ ἅμαξαν, ἀνιάζουσι δὲ πυκνοὶ
[δμ7ῶοι χαλκῆες κωφώμενοι 19 ἐν[ τὸς] 31 ἀκουήν. 15


τῖον δέ € πάντες ὁδῖται᾽
ἦρα pirokevins: ἔχε γὰρ τέγος 13 ἀκλήιστον.
Schol. Aristoph. Acharn. 127 Καλλίμαχος ἐν
‘ExdAn. Cf. Suid. s.v. “ExdAn, . . . ἔχε κτλ.


1 Of. grammarian in Cram. Anecd. Ox. 338. 5 τὸ γάλα
γάλακτος, γάλακτι [leg. γάλακος, γάλακι] παρὰ Καλλιμάχῳ ὡς
ἀ:ῦ εἰς ὃ ληγούσης εὐθείας.

* κύματος ἄ. ἀ. =frag. anon. Schneider 40, i.e. Suid. κύματος
expor ἄωτον" ὁ ἀφρός.

ὁ ἕξει ? ἕσσει, ἐ.6. ἐφέσσει Gomperz.

 Μιερόν Kaibel, Epigr. Gir. 386. 4.

> καδδραθέτην. . . χρόνον -- Hom. Od. xv. 4943 πολλὸν...
#\Ge= Hom. Od. xii, 407.


252


HECALE


colour with swans, or milk, or the foam that tips the
wave, shall put on a sad plumage black as pitch, the
guerdon that Phoebus shall one day give him for his
news, when he learns terrible tidings of Coronis,
daughter of Phlegyas, even that she has gone with
knightly Ischys.”’ . While'she spoke thus sleep seized
her and seized her hearer. They fell asleep but not
for long; for soon came a frosty neighbour: “Come,
no longer are the hands of thieves in quest of prey :
for already the lamps of morn are shining; many a
drawer of water is singing the Song of the Pump
and the axle creaking under the wagon wakes him
that hath his house beside the highway, while many
a thirled smith, with deafened hearing, torments
the ear.


2 (41)


And all wayfarers honoured her by reason of her
hospitality ; for she kept an unbarred house.


6 στιβήεις hitherto only in Suidas.
λύχνα paelver=frag, 255 (Schneid.), .9. H.M. s.v. λύχνος
. . λύχνα παρὰ Καλλιμάχῳ " λύχνα φανείη (sic).
8 =fr. 42, 7.e. schol. Aristoph. Ran. 1297, Suid. s.v. ἱμαῖον.
=fr. 278 (Schneid.), i.e. schol. Apoll. Rh. iii, 1150
περιπλομένας᾽ παριούσας, ἐπεὶ καὶ πλόος λέγεται ἡ ὁδός "
Καλλίμαχος " ἔγρει καί τιν’ ἔχοντα περὶ πλόον.
10 κωφώμενον Herwerden.
11 éy[rds] Wessely thinks a c is visible before ἀκουήν. ξ
12 τέγος Cram. Anecd. Ox. ii. p. 486. 10, εἴς. ; στέγος
schol, Arist. ; τεῖχος Suid.


~


©


253


CALLIMACHUS


atl” ὄφελες θανέειν ἢ votatov+ ὀρχήσασθαι.

Suid. s.v. (Gaisf. i. 1096) αἴθ᾽ κτλ." ἐπειδὴ τὴν
γλαῦκα ὅταν λάβωσι τὰ παιδία περιάγουσιν, ἡ
δὲ μὴ βλέπουσα δι᾿ ἡμέρας ὥσπερ ὀρχεῖται: ἢ
ὅταν πληγῇ, τελευτῶσα στρέφεται ὥσπερ ὀρχου-


μένη. Καλλίμαχος ἐν “ExdAn λέγει περὶ αὐτῆς.


ἁρμοῖ που κἀκείνῳ ἐπέτρεχεν ἁβρὸς 3 ἴουλος.
Suid. s.v. ἁρμοῖ που"... . Καλλίμαχος ἐν “ExdAn.
ἁρμοῖ κτλ. Cf. E.M. s.v. ἁρμῷ.


Νηπείης ἧ τ᾽ ὃ ἄργος, ἀοίδιμος ᾿Αδρήστεια.
Schol. Apoll. Rh. i. 1116.


/ Ψ ’ “- / > /
βουσσόον, ov τε μύωπα βοῶν καλέουσιν ἀμορβοί.
Suid. s.v. μύωψ, . .. λέγεται παρὰ ζαλλιμάχῳ
ἐν “ExdAn: βοῦς σῶος (sic) μύωψ, ὁ τὰς βοῦς
σοβῶν καὶ διώκων, but the whole line is quoted


more or less correctly schol. Odyss. xii. 299 and
elsewhere, where it is attributed to Callimachus.


1 πανύστατον (πανύχιον C) Suid. ; corr. Bentley.
2 ἁβρὸς Suid. ; λεπτὸς LH. M.; of. Apoll. Rh. i. 972.
3 ἥ τ᾽ schol, ; corr. Bentley.


« The reference is to the owl’s helplessness in the day-
time, when it becomes the prey of ‘hier birds, and hence
«was used by fowlers as a decoy, a practice known to
Aristotle, H.A. ix. 1, etc., and still employed, Aflalo, V.H.
of Brit. Isles, Ὁ. 206 ** The professional bird-catcher is .. .


254


HECALE


8 (48)


Would that thou hadst died or danced thy last
dance ! *

Suidas . . . “Since when boys catch an ow] they
lead it about, and it, being unable to see, dances—
so to say; or, when struck, as it is dying, it twists as
if dancing. Callimachus mentions it in the Hecale.


4 (44)


The soft down of manhood was just springing on
his cheek.?


5 (45)
Where is the plain of Nepeia, Adrasteia theme of
song.°
6 (46)
The ox-driving (gadfly) which herdsmen call the


goad of oxen.4


content to use the blinking bird, dead or alive, as a decoy.”
For its method of defence, Plin. W.H. x. 39 ‘*resupinae
pedibus repugnant.”” The crow, which is the natural enemy
of the owl (Aristot, l.c.), may here be the speaker. γλαύξ
was the name of a “funny” dance (Athenae. 629,
Hesych. s.v.).

> Reference is probably to Theseus. Cf. Paus. i. 19.
1 ἤροντο [Θησέα] σὺν χλευασίᾳ ὅ τι δὴ παρθένος ἐν ὥρᾳ γάμου
πλανᾶται μόνη.

ὁ ᾿Αδράστεια or "Adpacretas πεδίον was the name given to
the district about Cyzicus, Strabo 588. For a&pyos=plain
ef. Strabo 372 ἄργος δὲ καὶ τὸ πεδίον λέγεται παρὰ τοῖς νεωτέροις
. «+ μάλιστα δ᾽ οἴονται Μακεδονικὸν καὶ Θετταλικὸν εἶναι. Cf.
EKustath. on Dion. Perieg. 419, Apoll. Rh. 1.6.

@ Cf. Apoll. Rh. iii. 276 f. oforpos . . . ὅν τε μύωπα Body


κλείουσι νομῆες.


255


CALLIMACHUS


ὁππότε λύχνου
δαιομένου πυρόεντες ἄδην ἐγένοντο μύκητες.
Choerobose. in Theodos. (Bekker, Anecd. p. 1399); ef.
schol. Arat. 976, schol. Aristoph. Vesp. 262. !


ot νυ καὶ ᾿Απόλλωνα παναρκέος ᾿Ηελίοιο

χωρὶ " διατμήγουσι καὶ εὔποδα Δηωίνην

᾿Αρτέμιδος.

Schol. Pind. N. i. 3 Καλλίμαχος ἐν Αἰκάλῃ
(sic): οἵ νυ κτλ.

ναὶ μὰ τὸ ῥικνὸν

σῦφαρ ἐμόν, ναὶ τοῦτο τὸ δένδρεον αὖον ἐόν περ.

Suid. s.v. σῦφαρ. So sv, ναὶ μὰ τό. Schol.


Apoll. Rh. i. 669.


γεργέριμον mitupiv τε καὶ ἣν ἀπεθήκατο λευκὴν
εἰν ἁλὶ νήχεσθαι φθινοπωρίδα.
Athenaeus ii. 56 Καλλίμαχος δ᾽ ἐν τῇ Ἑκάλῃ
γένη ἐλαῶν καταλέγει: γεργέριμον πίτυρίν τε.
1 χωρὶ Herwerden, Lex. Gr. Suppl.; χῶρι Bentley (χῶρι


διατμήγουσι Apoll. Dysc. De adverb. p. 549, etc., without
name of author) ; χωρίον schol. Pind.


« A well-known sign of rain. Cf. Verg. Georg. i. 392.

> 4.e. Persephone, daughter of Deo= Demeter.

¢ The speaker is doubtless Hecale. The tree probably
is merely her staff. Cf. Hom. 1). i. 234 vai μὰ τόδε σκῆπτρον
τὸ μὲν οὔ ποτε φύλλα Kal ὄζους φύσει κτλ.

ὦ If this is a single quotation from the Hecale, it would
seem that we have three sorts of olive mentioned with which
Hecale entertained Theseus: (1) γεργέριμος, (2) πίτυρις, (3)
λευκὴ POworwpls. The first of these Suidas tells us was the
olive ripened on the tree; ¢f. Hesych. s.v. γεργέριμος, Athen.
l.c., Suid. s.v. δρυπεπής, ete. As to πίτυρις Athen. l.c. says
that according to Philemon the πίτυρις is the φαυλία olive ;
which, according to Hesych. s.v., is ‘*the κότινος (wild


256


HECALE
7 (47)


When on the burning lamp fiery snuff gathers
abundantly.” ‘
- 8 (48)


Who distinguish Apollo from all powerful Helios
and fair-footed Deoine ὃ from Artemis.


9 (49)


Nay, by my wrinkled hide, nay by this tree
withered as it is! ¢


10 (50)


The ripened olive and the wild olive ahd the
white olive which she put away to swim in brine in
autumn.?@

Athen. : Callimachus in the Hecale gives a list of
olives. “The ripened olive...” Suid. s.v. γεργέριμον,


olive), or simply a species of olive.” As to the λευκή and
its treatment, see Geopon. ix. 30, Cato, Agricult. 117, 118.
It is quite clear that Giese olives were crushed before being
pickled. On the other hand the κολυμβάς, which Suidas
says is the φθινοπωρίς, is not crushed, Geopon. ix. 33.
Pollux (vi. 45), too, enumerates four sorts, apparently,
δρυπετεῖς ἐλαῖαι, ἁλμάδες, νηκτίδες, κοτινάδες. It is tempting
to find four sorts corresponding to these in Callimachus, 7.e.
γεργέριμος = δρυπ., λευκή -- ἁλμ., POworwpls=vyxt., πίτυρις -- Kor.
It may or it may not (Maass, Hermes, xxiv. (1889), p. 523) be
significant that Nonnus connects the phrase εἰν ἁλὶ νήχ. φθιν.
with Molorcus, not Hecale. If, however, we do take
λευκὴ POw. together, should we compare Cato, Agricult. 118
*‘oleam albam quam secundum vindemiam uti voles, sic
condito ” ?


5 257


CALLIMACHUS


Suid. s.v. γεργέριμον, τὴν ἐν τῷ δένδρῳ πεπανθεῖσαν
ἐλαίαν, πίτυρίν τε καὶ ἣν ἀπεθήκατο λευκήν,
τουτέστι τὴν συνθλασθεῖσαν καὶ οὕτως ἀποτεθεῖσαν
ἐλαίαν, εἰν ἁλὶ δὲ νήχεσθαι φθινοπωρίδα, τὴν
κολυμβάδα λέγει. Cf. Nonnus: xvii. 54 f. χύδην δ᾽
ἐπέβαλλε τραπέζῃ | εἰν ἁλὲ νηχομένης φθινοπωρίδος
ἄνθος ἐλαίης [ Βρόγγος ἔχων μίμημα φιλοστόργοιο
νομῆος [1.6. Molorcus who entertained Heracles].


Plin. N.H. xxii. 88 Estur et sonchos—ut quem
Theseo apud Callimachum adponat Hecale—uterque,
albus et niger. |


Schol. Nicandr. Ther. 909 κρῆθμον - ἤτοι λάχανόν
ἐστι. Kal yap μέμνηται αὐτοῦ καὶ Καλλίμαχος
ἐν τῇ “Ἑκάλῃ.

Plin. N.H. xxvi. 82 eadem vis crethmo ab Hippo-
crate admodum laudato. est autem inter eas quae
eduntur silvestrium herbarum. . hane certe apud
Callimachum adponit rustica illa Hecale.!


δινομένην ὑπὸ βουσὶν ἐμὴν ἐφύλασσον dAwa.


Suid. s.v. δεινουμένην. E.M. sv. ἅλως. Cf.
Cramer, Anecd. Ox. ii. p. 376, Bekker, Anecd. p. 1440,
ete. |


1 ὑπὸ Suid. ; περὶ.


« Philemon Holland’s rendering of these words is worth
quoting as a specimen of how translation was done in the
spacious times of Elizabeth: ‘* Moreover, the Sowthistle is


258


HECALE


the olive ripened on the tree, “ the wild olive. . .” 2.6.
the olive bruised and so put away; “to swim...” he
means the κολυμβάς. Cf. Nonnus: “ And abundantly
did Brongus put on the table the flower of autumn
olive swimming in brine, imitating the kindly herds-
man (Molorcus).”


11 (63)


The sow-thistle is also eaten—seeing that in
Callimachus Hecale serves it to Theseus—both white
and black.@

12 (64) :


(a) Crethmon, ἃ vegetable; for Callimachus
mentions it in the Hecale.

(6) “Of the same power is Sampier? [marg. Or
Crestmarine|, so highly commended by Hippocrates:
now is this one of the wild woorts which are usually
eaten in salads: and certes, this is that very hearbe
which the good countrey wife Hecale forgat not to
set upon her bourd in a feast that she made (as we
may read in Callimachus the Poet).” (Holland.)


13 (51)
. watched my threshing-floor trodden by the


oxen.


an hearbe for to be eaten: for we read in the Poet Cal-
limachus, That the poore old woman Hecale, at what time as
prince Theseus fortuned upon necessitie to take his repast
in her simple cottage, made him a feast, and set before him
a principall dish of Sowthistles. Two kinds there bee of
them, the white, and the blacke.”
δ᾽ Samphire (i.e. (herbe de) Saint Pierre, St. Peter’s
herb) or sea-fennel is said to make an excellent pickle.
259


CALLIMACHUS


¢ 7 \ \ 3... / > /
ἡνίκα μὲν yap ταὐτὰ φαείνεται ἀνθρώποισιν,
> \ \ / > > \ / /
αὐτοὶ μὲν φιλέουσ᾽, αὐτοὶ δέ τε πεφρίκασιν"
ἑσπέριον φιλέουσιν, ἀτὰρ στυγέουσιν ἑῷον.
Olympiodorus in Meteor. Aristot. p. 12 ὅτι γὰρ 6
3 > me, vers ὌΝ, ‘oe A A
αὐτός ἐστι Kal E@os καὶ Eomrepios, δηλοῖ καὶ KaA-
/ / > > / . wor, \ \
λίμαχος λέγων ἐν Αἰκάλῃ [sic]’ ἡνίκα μὲν yap
φαίνεται τοῖς ἀνθρώποις ταὐτά [corr. Hecker] . . .
ἀποστυγέουσιν ἑῷον. Eustath. Ml. 1271. 35 ws Kal
Καλλιμάχῳ δοκεῖ ἔνθα φησὶν ὡς ἑσπέριον φιλέουσιν,


ἀτὰρ στυγέουσιν e@ov. So the last line is given
Tzetz. Chil. viii. 837, ‘Ep. xliii.


: ἡ δ᾽ ἐκόησεν
τοὔνεκεν Αἰγέος ἔσκε.
Ammonius, De simil. et diff: voc. p. 139 Valck.,
E.M. s.v. κοάλεμον. Cf. Hellad. Phot. Bibl. p. 531.


13, Suid. s.v. ἐκόησεν.


πολυπτῶκές τε Μέλαιναι.

Etym. Gud. 800. 11 παρὰ Καλλιμάχῳ πολυ. κτλ.
Steph. Byz. Μελαινεῖς, δῆμος τῆς ᾿Αντιοχίδος φυλῆς.
Καλλίμαχος δὲ Medawas φησὶ τὸν δῆμον ἐν
‘ExdAn.


Steph. Byz. s.v. Tpwepets, δῆμος τῆς Kexpomidos
φυλῆς. . . . Καλλίμαχος ‘ExdAn Τρινέμειαν.


α The reference is to the planet Venus, otherwise known
as the Evening or Morning Star, the identity of which is
said to have been first recognized by Pythagoras (Plin. V.H.
ii. 37), as it also was by Parmenides (Aét. Place. ii. 15. 4
Παρμενίδης πρῶτον μὲν τάττει τὸν ἑῷον τὸν αὐτὸν δὲ νομιζόμενον
ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ καὶ ἕσπερον). It is natural to connect this passage
with Hecale i. 4, and the reference will be to the workman


260


HECALE
14 (52)


For while it is the same thing that appears to
men, the selfsame people love and loathe: at even-
tide they love it, but in the morn abhor.“

Olympiodorus: The identity of the morning and
evening star is shown by Callimachus when he says
in the Hecale “ For while,’ ete.


15 (53)
But she knew that he was the son of Aegeus.?


16 (56 + 528)


And Melaenae abounding in hares.


17 (57)


Trinemeis, a deme of the Cecropid tribe. .. .
Callimachus in the Hecale calls it Trinemeia.


who welcomes the evening star and hates the morning star.
“gn = the thief, Catull. lxii. 34 f., of the bride [Verg.] Cir.
49 ff.

δ She” is probably Hecale and ‘‘he” is Theseus.
Ammonius notes the use of τοὔνεκεν -- ὅτι, which he says is
doubly wrong: (1) it should be οὕνεκα, (2) even if τοὔνεκα
could be used for οὕνεκα, rovvexev could not.


261


CALLIMACHUS


Hesych. συ. γηφάγοι: πένητες, ἄποροι, ὡς τὰς
ἐκ γῆς βοτάνας σιτιζόμενοι τροφῆς ἀμοιροῦντες.


Καλλίμαχος ἐν ‘Exadn.


στάδιον δ᾽ ὑφέεστο χιτῶνα.
Schol. Apoll. Rhod. iii. 1226 τινὲς δὲ στάδιον ὡς
εὐπαγῆ, ὃν καὶ Καλλίμαχος λέγει: στάδιον κτλ.
Suid. 5.0υ. στάδιον: . . . καὶ στάδιος χιτών, ὁ ποδή-


ρης, ὃ τέλειος, παρὰ ζαλλιμάχῳ ἐν “Ἑκάλῃ.


ἐν μὲν γὰρ Τροιζῆνι κολουραίῃ ὑπὸ πέτρῃ
θῆκε σὺν ἁρπίδεσσι.
Tzetz. Lycophr. 494, cf. id. 1822. ΕΜ. s.v. ἁρπίς.
Suid. s.v. koAovpaia πέτρα.


ge > A « a > \ A i / > /
εὖτ᾽ ἂν ὁ παῖς ἀπὸ μὲν γυαλὸν λίθον ἀγκάσσασθαι
» > Pe. > OM ae » 1
ἄρκιος ἢ χείρεσσιν ἑλὼν Αἰδήψιον ἄορ.


Λιμναίῳ δὲ χοροστάδας ἦγον ἑορτάς.
Schol. Aristoph. Ran. 216. Cf: Steph. Byz. s.v.
Λῴμναι.


1 Schol. A Hom. Jl. ν. 99 τὸ γυαλὸν ὅταν ἐπίθετον ἢ
ὀξύνεται᾽ εὖτ᾽ ἂν... ἀγκάσσασθαι. This anonymous fragment
should most probably be combined with Steph. Byz. s.v.
Aldnyos. . . καὶ Καλλίμαχος ‘ExdAn* ἄρκιος ἢ [816] χείρεσσιν ἑλὼν
Αἰδήψιον ἄορ (Schneider 61 a).


“It is clear that the meaning of στάδιος χιτών was
doubtful in antiquity. The explanation of the L.M. is
adopted in view of Paus. i. 19 ofa δὲ χιτῶνα ἔχοντος αὐτοῦ


262


HECALE
18 (58)


Earth-eaters: i.e. poor, needy; implying that
for lack of food they eat herbs from the earth.


19 (59)


And he had, underneath, a tunic reaching to his
feet.¢


Schol. Apoll. Rhod. ἀφ. : Some take στάδιος as
~ a well-compacted,’ as Callimachus says, ete. ;


40 (66)


For in Troezen under a hollow rock he put (his
sword) together with his shoes.?


21 (fr. anonym. 331 + fr. 51a)


When the boy should be able to lift with his hands
the hollow rock, taking the Aedepsian ὁ sword. . . .


22 (66 a)


And they held choral festivals in honour of the
god of the Marshes.¢


[t.e. Theseus] ποδήρη. In Apollonius the reference is to
the θώρηξ στάδιος, a breastplate of stiff plates of armour as
opposed to the θώρηξ ἁλυσιδωτός, a breastplate of chain
armour, lorica annulata. But the στάδιος (ὀρθοστάδιος) χιτών
is merely an ungirt tunic reaching to the feet.

> For the legend of Aegeus see Introduction.

¢ Aedepsus in Euboea, Strabo lx. 425, 455, notable
for its hot springs, cf. Plutarch, Mor. 667 c, 487 r, Aristot.
Meteor. 366 a 29, Plin. V.H. xxxi. 29. Euboea in general
was famous for iron work.

@ Dionysus.


«.


268


CALLIMACHUS


τοῦτο yap αὐτὴν
ἢ aA ες.
κωμῆται κάλεον περιηγέες.
Suid. s.v. κωμῆται: καὶ οἱ γείτονες. . . Καλ-
λίμαχος Ἑκάλῃ: τοῦτο κτλ.


παλαίθετα κᾶλα καθῇήρει.
Etym. Paris. 2720 (Cramer, Anec. Par. iv. 53) KaA-
Aipayos Ἕ κάλῃ: παλαίθετα κτλ. Cf. Suid. κυ.


κᾶλα παλαίθετα. 5:


val μὰ TOV.
. 1c / \
Suid. s.v. vai μὰ τό: . . . καὶ ‘ExdAn εἶπε “vat
\ / 9°? \ > / 3 / \ 0. / ¢ 6 / δὲ
μὰ Tov’ καὶ οὐκέτι ἐπάγει τὸν θεόν, ῥυθμίζει δὲ
ὁ λόγος πρὸς εὐσέβειαν.


οὐ γάρ. μοι πενίη πατρώϊος, οὐδ᾽ ἀπὸ πάππων
εἰμὶ λιπερνῆτις" βάλε μοι, βάλε τὸ τρίτον εἴη.

E.M. s.v. λιπερνῆτις (cod. Vossianus Gaisford).
Et. Flor. p. 207 Miiller. Schol. Dion. Thrac. p. 946.
15 βάλε μοι... εἴη, Καλλίμαχος.


Schol. Eurip. Hippol. 32 πέτραν δὲ Παλλάδος
φησὶ τὸ ἐν τῇ ᾿Αττικῇ Γλαυκώπιον, οὗ Καλλίμαχος
ἐν “Εκάλῃ μέμνηται.


1 αὐτῇ. .. περιαγέες Suid. ; corr. Toup.
« Cf. Plut. Thes. 14 οἱ πέριξ δῆμοι. . . τὴν Ἑκάλην
ἐτιμῶν ᾿Ἑκαλίνην ὑποκοριζόμενοι. For περιηγέες cf. Callim.
- Hymn. iv. 198.


ὁ Hecale entertaining Theseus takes down the fire-
264


HECALE
23. (66b)


For so the villagers round about called her.“


24 (66c)
(She) took down the long-stored logs.?


25 (66d)


Nay, by the (god).
Suid. : And Hecale said “nay by the . . .,” with-
out adding the name of the god, a form of speech
accommodated. to piety.


26 (66e)


I do not inherit poverty from my fathers nor am
I needy from my ancestors. I would, I would I had
the third !¢


27 (66)


By the Rock of Pallas he means the Glaucopion ὦ
in Attica which Callimachus mentions in the Hecale.


wood which had been laid up to dry above the chimney :
ὑπὲρ καπνοῦ Hesiod, W, 45.

¢ The natural sense seems to be that Hecale wishes
that she had a third of the wealth of her ancestors.
Schneider takes Hecale to wish that, in addition to good
birth and a reasonable competence, she had the third thing,
4.6. Children.

4 For the Glaucopion cf. Strabo vii. 299.


265


CALLIMACHUS


Suid. s.v. KwAds: ναός ἐστι τῆς ᾿Αφροδίτης οὕτω
καλούμενος. .. . μέμνηται καὶ Καλλίμαχος ἐν
ἱἙκάλῃ.


Schol. Euseb. Praep. Evang. iv. 16 οὐ τὴν πρὸς
ταῖς ᾿Αθήναις Σαλαμῖνα λέγει. αὕτη yap KovAov-
pis πάλαι ἐλέγετο, ὡς καὶ Καλλίμαχος ἐν “Exddn
φησίν, ἀλλὰ τὴν κατὰ Κύπρον Σαλαμῖνα λέγει.


ἴθι, πρηεῖα γυναικῶν,
A ea i a ee Ν / > 7
τὴν ὁδὸν ἣν ἀνίαι θυμαλγέες οὐ περόωσιν.
πολλάκι σεῖο <dé>,1 μαῖα, φιλοξείνοιο καλιῆς
μνησόμεθα: ξυνὸν γὰρ ἐπαύλιον ἔσκεν ἅπασιν.
Suid. s.v. ἐπαύλιον δὲ μονή. περὶ “ExdAns θανού-
σης" ἴθι κτλ. Cf. E.M. ξίυ. θάνατος. . .. te...
/ ,
περόωσι, Καλλίμαχος.


τοὔνεκα καὶ νέκυες πορθμήϊον οὔ τι φέῤονται
/ wv / Ψ / > / 3
μούνῃ ἔνι πτολίων, ὅ τε τέθμιον οἰσέμεν ἄλλους
3
ἐν στομάτεσσι νεὼς ᾿Αχεροντείας 5 ἐπίβαθρον
(δανάκην).
E.M. s.v. δανάκης νομίσματός ἐστιν ὄνομα βαρ-
βαρικόν, πλέον ὀβολοῦ, ὃ τοῖς νεκροῖς ἐν τοῖς
/ > 7 ld 3}
στόμασιν ἐτίθεσαν: Καλλίμαχος: τοὔνεκα κτλ.


1 «δέ» Editor ; πολλάκι σεῖο μαῖα Suidas.
2 ᾿Αχεροντείας Casaubon ; ᾿Αχερουσίας.


« Theseus addresses Hecale whom he finds dead on his
return from his capture of the Marathonian bull.

ὃ The reference is to Hermione. The district about
Hermione in Argolis was associated with the worship of
Demeter and Persephone and it was there that Demeter


266


HECALE


28 (66g)


Colias, name of a temple of Aphrodite . .
mentioned by Callimachus in the Hecale.


29. (66h)


He does not mean the Salamis off Athens, for
that was anciently called Culuris, as also Callimachus
says in the Hecale, but Salamis in Cyprus.


30 (131)


Go, kind among women, on that journey where
aching sorrows do not pass; but often, mother, shall
I remember thy hospitable cabin ; for it was an inn
open to all.@


31 (110)


Wherefore only in that city the dead carry not a
fee for the ferry, such as it is the custom for others
to carry in the mouth to pay their passage on the
ship of Acheron (a doit).?


E.M.: Danaces, a barbarous coin, more than an
obol, which used to be put in the mouth of the dead;
Callimachus: “ Wherefore, ete.” Cf. Suid. s.v. πορ-


first got news of her lost daughter. Here was the district

called Aegialus mentioned by Suidas, οὐ Paus. ii. 34. 9.

So Strabo viii. 373 παρ᾽ Ἑρμιονεῦσι δὲ τεθρύληται τὴν els Aidov

κατάβασιν σύντομον εἶναι" διόπερ οὐκ ἐντιθέασιν ἐνταῦθα τοῖς νεκροῖς

ναῦλον. As the same district—Hermione to Troezen—was

associated with the birth of Theseus and his recovery of the
morismata (Paus. ii. 34. 6), it seems that the passage may
e safely referred to the Hecale.


267


CALLIMACHUS


Cf. Suid. s.v. πορθμήϊον, ὁ μισθὸς τοῦ ναύτου.
Καλλίμαχος" τοὔνεκα dibs φέρονται. ἐν Αἰγιαλῷ
γὰρ καταβάσιόν ἐστιν ἽΑιδου, εἰς ὃ ἀπελθοῦσα ἣ
Δημήτηρ ἔμαθε παρὰ τῶν περιοίκων περὶ τῆς
κόρης. καὶ ἐδωρήσατο αὐτοῖς, ὡς λέγει, ἄφεσιν
τοῦ πορθμηΐου. Cf. Suid. s.vv. ᾿Αχερουσία and
δανάκη, Pollux ix. 6.


ἀλλὰ θεῆς, ἥτις με διάκτορον ἔλλαχε [laAAds.
E.M. s. v. διάκτορος" . . . τοῦ γὰρ Ἑρμοῦ ἐπίθε-
τον" παρὰ δὲ τοῖς ἄλλοις ποιηταῖς ἁπλῶς ἐπὶ


τοῦ διακόνου τίθεται. Καλλίμαχος ἐπὶ γλαυκὸς
τὸ ἐπίθετον: ἀλλὰ θεῆς κτλ.


ὁ μὲν εἷλκεν, ὁ δ᾽ εἵπετο νωθρὸς ὁδίτης.
Schol. Apoll. Rhod. i. 1162 καὶ Καλλίμαχος ἐπὶ
τοῦ ταύρου ἡττηθέντος φησίν: ὁ μὲν κτλ.


πέδιλα, τὰ μὴ πύσε νήχυτος εὐρώς..
Suid. s.v. εὐρώς" ὑγρότης σεσηπυῖα. Καλλίμαχος"
πέδιλα κτλ. Cf. id. s.v. νήχυτος ἔρως [sic].


ἐκ δ᾽ ἄρτους σιπύηθεν ἅλις REPEC ἑλοῦσα.


Zonaras, p. 1645 σιπύη: τὸ κανίσκιον ἢ ἡ ἀρτο-
θήκη. Καλλίμαχος: ἐκ δ᾽. ἄρτους κτλ. Cf.
Apoll. Dyse. De adverb. p. 605. 6.

“ The fact that the owl is the speaker points to this being
from the Hecale.


> The reference to the bull seems to yo this to the
Hecale.


268


HECALE


θμήϊον, a sailor’s hire; Callimachus: “ Wherefore,”
etc. In Aegialus is a descent to Hades, where
Demeter got news of her daughter, and, it is said,
she granted them a remission of the ferryman’s fee.


32 (164)


But of the goddess, even Pallas who hath me for
her appointed messenger.*


E.M.: διάκτορος ; epithet of Hermes. In other
poets used simply as “ messenger.” Callimachus has
the epithet: of an owl. “But...”


88 (275)


He haled and the other [2.e. the bull] followed, a
sluggish traveller.?

Schol. Apoll Rhod.: Callimachus uses it of the
defeated bull: “He...”


34 (313)


The sandals which the abundant mould had not
rotted.¢ 3


35 (454)


And from the bin she took loaves in plenty and
set them down.


ὁ It is natural to assume that the reference is to
the sandals of Aegeus and that the fragment belongs to the
Hecale. For νήχυτος ef. schol. Apoll. Rh. iii. 530 νήχυτον
ὕδωρ" τὸ πολύχυτον " τὸ yap νῆ καὶ στέρησιν σημαίνει καὶ ἐπίτασιν"
καὶ ἀχύνετον ὕδωρ [Nicandr. Alex. 174], τὸ πολύ, κατὰ Ἴωνας
καὶ Σικελιώτας. Cf. Musaeus?247, Hesych. 8.0. νήχυτον " πολύ.


269


IAMBI


INTRODUCTION


Toat Callimachus was the author of a poetic work
entitled Jambi—though it is not included in the list of his
works by Suidas—was known from various citations
referring to Καλλίμαχος ἐν Ἰάμβοις or ἐν Χωλιάμβοις. Our
knowledge of this work is now considerably increased by
the discovery of the Ovyrhynchus Papyri 1011 (ed. A. S.
Hunt, 1910) and 1363 (ed. B. P. Grenfell and A. 5. Hunt,
1915). The latter, it is true, extends but to thirty lines,
none of which is preserved entire, and nearly all of which
are beyond restoration. Yet even so itis able to confirm
an ingenious conjecture of Bentley (see lamb. 5 (86)
below). But the former preserves for us a considerable
fragment of the Jambi, and, though large portions of it are
in a state of. hopeless mutilation, we are able to gain from
it some knowledge of the nature and method of the work.

Metrically, the Papyrus makes it clear that the work
was written not only in Iambic Trimeters and Choliambic
(Scazon) Trimeters but also in Trochaic Tetrameters—not
apparently in Trochaic Tetrameters Scazon (i.e. ending
in — — | — instead of — v | —), which were sometimes written
by Hipponax (Diog. Laert. i. 84). As to Callimachus’
management of those metres we learn various details, e.g.
that in his Choliambs he did not permit a spondee in the
5th foot but did allow an anapaest in the 2nd and 4th ;
and that he frequently Sag teind the caesura in his
Trochaic Tetrameters.

As to the contents of Papyrus 1011, it preserves for
us the opening lines of the Jambi and proves the truth of Ὁ
what was previously only a conjecture, that Callimachus
appears in the character of the New Hipponax or Hipponax
redivivus who returns from Hades not to pursue his
quarrel with Bupalus, but to sing a new song.

Two episodes are preserved in sufficient completeness
to give us quite a good idea of the style and character of
the work—the episode of the Cup of Bathycles and that
of the Quarrel of the Olive and the Laurel. The latter
explains itself, but a word of explanation is perhaps
necessary in regard to the first.

Diogenes Laertius i. 27 ff. gives us, in his life of Thales,
various versions of the legend. Certain Ionian youths


270


IAMBI


bought from some fishermen of Miletus their ‘‘shot”
(βόλος). A tripod being fished up, a dispute ensued, until
the Milesians sent to Delphi to consult Apollo, who
declared the tripod to belong to “him who is first of all
in wisdom.” So it was given to Thales, who passed it on
to another, and he to a third, and so on until it came to
Solon, who declared that “‘the god was first in wisdom”
and sent the tripod to Delphi. ‘‘ A different version of
the story,” says Diogenes Laertius, “‘is given by Calli-
machus in his Jambi, which he took from Maeandrius of
Miletus (author of Μιλησιακά, a work on the antiquities
of Miletus). According to this version Bathycles, an
Arcadian, left a eup (φιάλη) with instructions that it be
given τῶν σοφῶν τῷ ὀνηΐστῳ. It was presented to Thales,
and in the course of its circuit to Thales again. He sent
it to Apollo at Didymi with the dedication, according to
Callimachus: Θαλῆς we τῷ μεδεῦντι Νειλέω δήμου | δίδωσι,
τοῦτο δὶς λαβὼν ἀριστεῖον. The prose inscription is: Θαλῆς
᾿Εξαμύου Μιλήσιος ᾿Απόλλωνι Δελφινίῳ ᾿Ἑλλήνων “ἀριστεῖον dis
λαβών. The son of Bathycles who carried round the cup
was called Thyrion, according to Eleusis, On Achilles,
etc.” Diogenes gives other versions of the story. Ac-
cording to one, the prize was a golden cup presented by
Croesus ; according to another it was a tripod offered by
the Argives; or it was a tripod belonging to a ship of
Periander, which was wrecked on its way to Miletus, the
tripod being recovered by some fishermen ; or, finally, it
was a tripod wrought by Hephaestus and given by him
as a wedding-present to Pelops, from whom it passed to
Menelaus. When Paris carried off Helen, he took the
tripod also, but Helen threw it into the sea off Cos,
prophesying that it would be a bone of contention, So
it came to pass afterwards that some men of Lebedos
bought the draught of some Coan fishermen, who, when
they fished up the tripod, refused to fulfil their bargain.
The Lebedeans appealed to their metropolis Miletus,
which declared war on Cos. After many on both sides
had fallen, an oracle told them to “ give it to the wisest.”
Both parties agreed to give it to Thales who, after
circulating it, dedicated it to Apollo at Didymi.


271


IAMBOI


1


Oxyrhynch. Papyr. 1011 (in Oayrhynchus Papyri,
vii. (1910) p. 31 ff. ed. by A. S. Hunt).
: Fol. 2 verso
᾿Ακούσαθ᾽ ᾿Ἱππώνακτος + [o]t yap ἀλλ᾽ ἥκω
ἐκ τῶν ὅκου βοῦν κολλύ[βου π᾿]͵ιπρήσκουσιν,3
φέρων ἴαμβον οὐ μάχην [ἀείδἼοντα
[τὴν Βο]7υπ[άλ]ειον,3 [και]νά͵. .[ . . . ἄνθρωπος 95
[εὰς stale was 3h mieten agdsnndace ee jew


Fol. 2 recto
ὦπολλον... 2. ws ς παρ᾽ αἰπόλῳ μυῖαι
3 \ YA ~
. . peikes . πὸ θύματος Δελῴφοῦ
᾽ὔ ΦΊ 9 4 /
Se ee Pras te ot ιν ὦ “Katyn πλήθευς
. . Wow ev... «os. . πνοὴν ἀναλώσει 100


-. 1 =Callim. fr. 92 Schneider, i.e. Hephaestion v. 4, schol.
Aristoph. Nub. 232, Ran. 58, Suid. s.v. οὐ yap ἀλλά.

2 =Callim. fr. 85 Schneider, ὁ.6. Pollux ix. 72 εἴη δ᾽ ἂν
καὶ κόλλυβον λεπτόν τι νομισμάτιον. Καλλίμαχος γοῦν ἔφη, περὶ
τῶν ἐν ἅδου λέγων, Ἔκ τῶν κτλ., ὡς ἂν εἴποι τις τοῦ
προστυχόντος.

3 φέρων. .. Βουπάλειον = Callim. fr. 90 Schneider, i.e.
Julian, Ep. xxx. προσθεὶς τοὺς ἰάμβους οὐ μάχην ἀείδοντας τὴν
Βουπάλειον, κατὰ τὸν Κυρηναῖον ποιητήν. Schol. Saib.,
Hephaest. p. 80 Gaisford παρὰ Καλλιμάχῳ δὲ (ὁ ἴαμβοΞς)


272


IAMBI


Hear ye Hipponax’%! Nay indeed I come from
that place where they sell an ox for a penny; bring-
ing an iamb which sings not the quarrel with Bupalus,
but news [such as a dead man might have for the
living].

O Apollo! |they throng] like flies beside ἃ goat-
herd or [many as] the wasps [that buzz about the
priest] after a Delphian sacrifice. O Hecate! what
a crowd!® [On you, poor wretches, Charon] will


# Callimachus is a Hipponax redivivus, who comes from
Hades where things are proverbially cheap (see note on
Epigr. xv. 6). Hipponax of Ephesus circ. 550 8.c., famous
iambographer and reputed inventor of the choliambic metre.
Especial objects of his satire were the sculptors Bupalus
and Athenis of Clazomenae, whither he had retired when
Athenagoras became tyrant of Ephesus.

ὃ The restoration assumes that Hipponax redivivus ex-
presses amazement at the crowd of shades on the hither
bank-of Acheron, whom Charon has to ferry over to the
ripa ulterior. A ‘* Delphian sacrifice” was proverbial, cf.
Paroem. Gr. Gaisford, p. 130: “Τῇ you sacrifice at Delphi,
you will eat no meat yourself: Of those who spend much
and get no benefit; since sacrificers at Delphi, on account
of the number of the guests, got nothing to eat themselves.”
The reference of 111 f. is unknown.


καινὸν εἶναι. δοκεῖ ws “φέρων ἴαμβον οὐ μάχην ἀείδοντα τὴν
Βουπάλειον. "ἢ

4 The schol. just quoted suggests that the word after
Βουπάλειον is καινά : perhaps something like καινὰ δ᾽ of’ ἂν
ἄνθρωπος | θανὼν δύναιτο τοῖς ζοοῖσιν ἀγγέλλειν.


T 273


CALLIMACHUS


Wig ie: ee λον τὸν τρίβωνα γυμνώϊσ . .
σωπὴ γενέσθω καὶ γράφεσθε τὴν ῥῆσιν.
ase Βαθυκλῆς ᾿Αρκάς--οὐ μακρὴν ἄξω


a Ο᾽.-- as + we, καὶ γὰρ οὐδ᾽ αὐτὸς
udye σχολάζ Rav] εἰμὶ πὰρ μέσον δινεῖν 105
εἷς s-€RaxEepO. . .. ς * REA. Adwort.. 06. 5 5 ene
> δ / > > 4 3 ’ὔ
ἐγένετο πά[ν7τα δ᾽ εἶχεν οἷσιν ἀνθρώποις
θεοὶ τελευ. ... .. ας ἐπίστανται.3
» eee. τοὺς μὲν ἔνθα, τοὺς δ᾽ ἔνθα 111


ἔστησέ <K>ov κλωστῆρας" εἶχε γὰρ δεσμὸς
μέλλοντας ἤδη παρθένοις ἀλινδεῖσθαι.3
«ἔπλευσεν ἐς Μίλητον: ἦν γὰρ ἡ νίκη
Θάλητος, ὅς τ᾽ ἦν τἄλλα δεξιὸς γνώμῃ.)


Fol. 3 verso


\ “A « ᾽ὔ .. 7 ᾽ὔ
καὶ τῆς ᾿Αμάξης. ἐλέγετο σταθμήσασθαι 8
A > / / /
τοὺς ἀστερίσκους, ἧ πλέουσι Φοίνικες. 120
> ¢ / pb “
εὗρεν δ᾽ ὁ προυσέληνοϊ[ς] αἰσίῳ σίττῃ
> ~ / \ / /
ev τοῦ Διδυμέος τὸν yéplo|vyTa Kwv<ei>w


Evovta τὴν γῆν καὶ γράφοντα τὸ σχῆμα


1 The provisional restoration which we translate is:
ὥπολλον, [ὀχλεῦνθ᾽ ws map αἰπόλῳ μυῖαι [ἢ o]d<n>Kes [ἀμφ᾽
ἱρῆ] ᾽πὸ θύματος Δελφοῦ [ὅσ]ζολι μιν[υρίζουσΊιν " ὦ ᾽κάτη πλήθευς.
[δε]ιλοῖς ἐν [ὑμῖν τὴν] πνοὴν ἀναλώσει [Χάρω]ν [ἄμαλ]λον τὸν
τρίβωνα γυμνώσας]. σωπὴ γενέσθω καὶ γράφεσθε τὴν ῥῆσιν.
ἀνὴρ Βαθυκλῆς ᾿Αρκάς---οὐ μακρὴν ἄξω [ὁδὸ]ν [λζόλγων σ᾽, ὦ
ξε]ῖνε, καὶ yap οὐδ᾽ αὐτὸς μέγα σχολάζων] εἰμὶ πὰρ μέσον δινεῖν
[τὸ χεῦςμ»᾽] ᾿Αχέροϊντο]ς" τ[ῶν] π[α]λαιζολπ[λουτεύντων] ἐγένετο,
πάϊν)τα δ᾽ εἶχεν οἷσιν ἀνθρώποις θεοὶ τελευϊτᾶν τὰς “χάριτ]ας
ἐπίστανται. In the last line τελευτᾶν εὐτυχίας might be read.

ὅν, 113 quoted anonymously in H.M. s.v. ἀλινδῶ" τὸ
κυλίω " οἷον μέλλοντας κτλ.

3 These, with the two preceding lines, constituted formerly


274


IAMBI


expend his breath, baring his [napless] coat. Let
there be silence and write down my tale.

One Bathycles an Arcadian—I will not lead you,
Sir, by a long [path of words]; for I myself have no
great leisure to tarry hard by the stream of Acheron
—was [one of the rich from of old] and he had all
those things wherewith the gods know to [perfect
their favours] to men.


Some here, some there he set the spindles; for
a string held them ready for the maidens to twirl.

He® sailed to Miletus; for the victory fell to
Thales,? who was a man of clever mind in general
and who was said to have mapped out the little stars .
of the Wain*® by which the Phoenicians sail. And
the prelunar ὦ visitor-by happy luck found the old
man in the temple of Apollo of Didymi’ scratching
the ground with a cane and drawing the figure which


« Thyrion, son of Bathycles.

> Thales of Miletus, the earliest Greek philosopher. His
most famous feat in astronomy was his prediction of the
solar eclipse of 28th May 585 B.c.

¢ Ursa Minor, the Lesser Bear, by which es Phoenicians
sailed, while the Greeks sailed by Ursa Maj Arat. 37 ff.
Sir T. Heath, Aristarchus of Samos, ἢ 23 ren δά σταθμήσασθαι
etc. as ** used as a standard, i.e. for finding the Pole, the
small stars of the Wain,” but the Greek merely means that
he mapped out the constellation ; ¢f. Pind. O. xi. 45.

“i.e, Arcadian. The primitive character of the Arcadians
was indicated by the saying that they were older than the
moon (Aristot. fr. 591, Apoll. Rh. iv. 264, Lycophr. 482).

ὁ See critical notes on Branchus.


frag. 94= Achilles on Aratus, Phaen. i., ef. Diog. Laert.
i. 23 Καλλίμαχος αὐτὸν (sce. Θάλητα) oldev εὑρετὴν τῆς ἄρκτου
τῆς μικρᾶς, λέγων ἐν τοῖς ἰάμβοις οὕτως" καὶ τῆς. . . Φοίνικες.


275


CALLIMACHUS


τοὐξεῦρ᾽ ὁ Φρὺξ Εὐφορβ[ος], ὅστις ἀνθρώπων
Τρ [(γ Ἰωνα καὶ σκ ἰαληνὰ] πρῶτος ἔγρ [αἾψε
καὶ κύκλον ἑπίταμήκε᾽, ἠδὲ νηστεύειν
τῶν ἐμπνεόϊντ]ων ε[ἧπεν: οἱ δ᾽ ὑπήκουσαν

> , 5 Ww a > 7 ὃ ͵ 1
οὐ πάντες, ἀλλ᾽ οὗς εἶχεν [οὕτερος δαίμων.


πρὸς δή [μ]ιν ὧδ᾽ ἔφησε.

> aA > / >

ἐκεῖϊνο) τοὐλόχρυσον ἐξ.

οὑμὸς] πατὴρ ἐφεῖτο Toul
δοῦναι] τίς ὑμέων τῶν σοφ[ῶν ὀνήιστος 3

1 Diog. Laert. i. 24 παρά τε Αἰγυπτίων γεωμετρεῖν μαθόντα
[sc. Thales] φησὶ Παμφίλη πρῶτον καταγράψαι κύκλου τὸ τρί-
_ywvov ὀρθογώνιον καὶ θῦσαι βοῦν. οἱ δὲ Πυθαγόραν φασίν, ὧν
ἐστιν ᾿Απολλόδωρος ὁ λογιστικός. οὗτος προήγαγεν ἐπὶ πλεῖστον
ἅ φησι Καλλίμαχος ἐν τοῖς ᾿Ιάμβοις Εὔφορβον εὕρειν τὸν Φρύγα,
οἷον σκαληνὰ καὶ τρίγωνα καὶ ὅσα γραμμικῆς ἔχεται θεωρίας.
Diodor. Sic. x. 6 ὅτι Καλλίμαχος εἶπε περὶ ἸΤυθαγόρου, διότι
τῶν ἐν γεωμετρίᾳ προβλημάτων τὰ μὲν εὗρε, τὰ δὲ ἐκ τῆς Αἰγύπτου
πρῶτος εἰς τοὺς “Ἕλληνας ἤνεγκεν, ἐν οἷς ὅτ᾽ ἐξεῦρε [τοὐξεῦρε 3]
Φρὺξ Εὔφορβος ὅστις ἀνθρώποις τρίγωνα καὶ σκαληνὰ καὶ κύκλον
ἑπταμήκη δίδαξε νηστεύειν τῶν ἐμπνεόντων, οἱ τάδ᾽ οὐδ᾽ ὑπήκουσαν
πάντες. Schol. Pind. P. iii. 64 Καλλίμαχος δέ φησιν οὐ πάντες
ἀλλ᾽ ods ἔσχεν ἕτερος δαίμων.

2 Diog. Laert. i. 28 aaa δοῦναι τῶν σοφῶν ὀνηΐστῳ.
δοῦϊναι] τίς Housman, coll. mn iv. 185, Hpig. xxx. 2,
frag. 272, Ait. iii. 1. 60. Add (AE to present Editor)
Hymn i. 93. The reading seems to be confirmed by the
oracle given to the Milesians : τίς σοφίῃ πάντων πρῶτος, τούτου
τρίποδ᾽ αὐδῶ (Diog. Laert. i. 28).


#« Kuphorbus was a Trojan slain by Menelaus (Hom. J1/.
xvii. 59) of whom Pythagoras of Samos aginst himself
to be a reincarnation, Diog. Laert. viii. 4 f., Aul. Gell. iv.
11. 14. The mathematical achievements here γὐ πδικοτο ἴο
Pythagoras are referred to with such brevity that the
meaning is exceedingly obscure. The figure which Thales
is found drawing appears to be the describing of a circle
about a right-angled triangle, which was attributed to Thales
or Pythagoras (Diog. Laert. i. 24), in other words the demon-


276


125


130


IAMBI


the Phrygian Euphorbus@ discovered: who first of
men drew triangles and scalenes and the seven-length
circle and who bade men abstain from eating living
things:? and his teaching was hearkened to, not
by all but by some misguided men.°¢

To him he spake thus: “. . . that cup of solid
gold my father enjoined me to give to him who is


stration of the theorem.that ‘‘the angle in a semicircle is a
right angle.”. The words τρίγωνα καὶ oxadynvd—the καί which
was suspect in Diog. Laert.’s σκαληνὰ καὶ τρίγωνα and Dio-
dorus’s τρίγωνα καὶ σκαληνά is now confirmed by the Papyrus—
can apparently mean only ‘‘ triangles and scalene triangles.”
Dr. T. G. Smyly of Trinity College, Dublin, suggests that
there may be a reference to the theorem that ‘the sum of
the angles of a triangle is two right angles,” which, accord-
ing to Geminus, was proved first for equilateral, next for
isosceles, and lastly for scalene triangles (the most difficult
case); or to the theorem that “ the square on the hypotenuse
of a right-angled triangle is equal to the sum of the squares
on the sides.” Such triangles must, if the sides are com-
mensurable, be scalene. Were it not for the context it
would be tempting, as Professor E. T. Whittaker suggests,
to take the phrase to refer to triangular numbers and scalene ἡ
numbers, especially in view of the arithmetical bent of
Pythagoras ; and it is, of course, possible that Callimachus
has confused numbers with geometrical figures. What is
meant by κύκλος ἑπταμήκης remains an unsolved problem.
The interesting suggestion is made by Dr. Smyly that there
may be a reference to the distances of the seven planets
and the original form of the theory of the ‘‘ harmony of the
spheres ” (see Heath, Aristarchus of Samos, p. 107 ff.). ᾿

> According to some Pythagoras enjoined abstention from
all animal ἔοοα---ἐμψύχων ἀπέχεσθαι Onesicritus ap. Strabon.
716, Porphyr. De abstin. 7 who quotes Eudoxus as sayin
that he refused even to associate with butchers (μάγειροι) an
hunters. According, however, to Aristoxenus he limited
his abstinence to the ploughing ox and the ram (Diog. Laert.
viii. 20, Aul. Gell. iv. 11).

ὁ δαίμων ἕτερος, euphemism for an ‘‘ evil genius”; Pind. P.
iii. 34, Plato, Phaedo 114 ©, Plut. Mor. 369 5.

277


CALLIMACHUS


τῶν ἕπτά: κἠγὼ σοὶ δίδωμ;[᾽ ἀριστεῖον.

[Θάλης δὲ τῷ] σκίπωνι τοὔδαφος πλήξας

[καὶ τ]ὴν ὑπήνην τἠτέρῃ [λαβὼν χειρὶ 135
ἐξεῖ [ale τὴν δόσιν μὲν [οὐκ ἀπαρνεῦμαι +

σὺ δ᾽ ἐ. . 1. εῶνος μὴ λόΓ.

Tea oe Node we 126 lee . | edAl


Fol. 3 recto


κὰν ἣν Oph τις, “οὗτος ᾿Αλκμέων © φήσει,
αἱ εἰ βεῦνε, βάλλει dedy’,” ἐρεῖ, ““ τὸν ἄνθρωπον 140


τὴν centage ἐξ κονος ὡς κύων ὅταν πίνῃ. 144


. τὰ τρά]χηλα γυμνάζει 147
apie ae fe foe τον 154.


Fol. 4 verso

τἀπὶ Κρόνου" τοῖς ἀντιτ᾽ ἀ[λλ]οτ᾽ [ἠλλαξεν, 160
λέγουσι, καί κως [ο][κ ὀ]νημέναις [ὀργαῖς
δίκαιος ὁ [Ζε]ύς," οὐ δίκα [να] δ᾽ αἰσυμνῶν

“ ε ~ \ 35 \ /
τῶν ἑρπετῶν [μ]ὲν ἐξέκοψε τὸ P0E|yya,

1 [οὐκ ἀπαρνεῦμαι] Editor. 2 Bins Papyrus.

8 =fr. 98 Schneider, ἐ.6. E.M. s.v. κέλευθος". . . γίνεται
yap μεταβολὴ γένους eis ἕτερον γένος, ws ἀπὸ τοῦ ὁ τράχηλος τὸ
τράχηλον᾽ ἔνθεν πληθυντικῶς παρὰ Καλλιμάχῳ' τὰ τράχηλα


γυμνάζει. Cf. schol. A Hom. Jl. i. 312, etc.
4 [Ζε]ύς Housmann.


« Thales apparently suggests that the cup should be offered
to Bias of Priene (Diog. Laert. i. 82 ff.).

>’ Alemaeon, son of Amphiaraus and Eriphyle, is the
typical matricide ; οὐ Dio Cass. Ixi. 16.


278


IAMBI


best of you, the Seven Wise Men. And I present
the prize to thee.’ Then Thales smote the ground
with his staff and taking his chin in one hand he
said: The gift* [1 do not refuse,|] but if thou...
Bias . .


Fol. 3 recto


But anyone who sees him will say “There is
Alcmeon δ᾽ and “ Flee! he’s going to strike!” he'll
cry, “flee from the man!


rolling his tongue, like a dog when he drinks


exercises his throat.¢


τς green figs*® 3


Fol. 4 verso


. . . in the reign of Cronus.’ [But anon,] they
say, Zeus [changed all things] to the contrary [and
in no happy mood], Zeus, the just, dispensing
injustice, he robbed four-footed things of speech and,


¢ Bentley’s conjecture that these words referred to
a bull is now proved to be wrong.

@ Cf. Athen. 80 5.

¢ The reference is to some legend of a reversal of the
order of nature whereby animals were changed into human
beings, ef. Semonides’ Jamb upon Women. Andronicus,
some unknown person whom the poet addresses. Aesop,
according to our earliest notice of him, Herod. ii. 134, was
the slave of Iadmon of Samos in the time of Amasis circ.
550 B.c., which is quite consistent with his being a native of
Sardis. For the legend of his death at the hands of the
Delphians ef. Suid. s.v. ἔωσεν * καὶ περὶ τοῦ Αἰσώπου" οἱ Δελφοὶ
ἔωσαν αὐτὸν κατὰ κρημνοῦ μάλα.


219


CALLIMACHUS


γένος δὲ τοῦτ᾽ ἀΪνιγ)]ρόν, ὥσπερ οὐ κάρτος

ἡμέων ἐχόντων χἠτέροις ἀπάρξασθαι, 165
[jer ly ἐς ἀνδρῶν: καὶ κενὸς [dp le[vav] δῆμος
[πλείω φιλόψου ψιττακοῦ λε[λήκασιν.

ot [δὲ] τραγῳδοὶ τῶν θάλασσαν oi κεύντων

ἔχοϊυ]σι φωνήν: οἱ δὲ πάντες [ὑμνῳδοὶ


καὶ που[λ)]ύμυθοι καὶ λάλοι πεφύκασιν 170
> A > / “ 3 w
ἐκεῖθεν, ὠνδρόνικε, ταῦτα δ᾽ Aliow|mos ~
ὁ Lapdinv<o>s εἶπεν, ὅντιν᾽ οἱ Δελφοὶ
» “ > ~ 29 7 F
ἄδοντα μῦθον οὐ καλῶς ἐδέξαντο.
: : : : ς ; 189
e \ , "ἢ
το» ὧν | ζοὴ μετέστραπται.. ..


Fol. 4 recto


κρηγύως ἐπαιδεύθην 194


. καὶ θεοὺς ἀπρηγεῦντας 5 198
ονόνονος μοχθηρὸς ἐξεκνήμωσε 8 19.
.. 2. ἂν ἦν ὀνήισϊίτο ]ς 200


ἄκουε] δὴ τὸν aivov: ἔϊν κοτε Ἱμώλῳ

δάφνην ἐλαίῃ νεῖκος οὗ πάλαι Λυδοὶ

λέγουσι θέσθαι: καὶ yalp ἣν τανύπτορθον 4

καλόν τε δένδρον

σείσασ[α] τοὺς ὅρπηκίας 215


1 The supplements in 160-161 are by the Editor; the
rest of the text is that of Prof. A. Platt in Class. Qu. iv.
(1910) 205, except that in place of ἄνθρωποι in v. 169, we
suggest ὑμνῳδοί,. In 172 the Papyrus has Σαρδιήνευς, which
is clearly wrong. vv. 171-3 ταῦτα. : . ἐδέξαντο, quoted


280


IAMBI


as if we had not strength enough even to bestow
on others, he changed this hapless race to human
kind. And the empty-witted people [chatter] more
than the dainty-loving parrot: the tragedians have
the voice of them who make the sea their home;
and all the [hymnists,] garrulous and wordy, have
their birth therefrom, Andronicus. This is the tale
of Aesop of Sardis, whom, when he sang his story,
the Delphians received in no kindly wise.


.


. life is turned topsy-turvy .. .


Fol. 4 recto


. I had a good education.


. and gods inactive.
. wickedly destroyed.

. would have beep the best.
_ Hear now® the tale. Once upon a time on
Tmolus,? [the ancient Lydians] say, the Laurel had
a quarrel with the Olive. For she was a [long-
branched] and beautiful ssi . . . Shaking her
boughs.


« The regular formula of the story-teller, Plato, wary 523 a,
» Mountain in Lydia.


anonymously by Apollon. Sophist. s.v. ἄειδε, had previously
been assigned to Callimachus by Schneidewin and Ahrens.
5 ἀπρηγεῦντας Housman ; ἀπρηγεῦνται Hunt.
ae Hesych. ἐξεκνημώθη " ἐξεφθάρη.
e supplement is a suggestion by Wilamowitz.
281


CALLIMACHUS


Fol. 5 verso


ὡριστερὸς μὲν λευκὸς ὡς ὕδρου γαστήρ,
ὁ δ᾽ ἡλιοπλὴξ * ὃ ὃς τὰ [7 JoAAa γυμνοῦται.
τίς δ᾽ οἶκος οὗπερ οὐ LK] ἐγὼ παρὰ φλιῇ;.
τίς δ᾽ οὔ με μάντις ἢ τίς οὐ ᾿θυτὴρ ἕλκει;
καὶ Πυθίη γὰρ ἐν δάφνῃ μὲν ἵδρυται,
δάφνην δ᾽ ἀείδει 5" καὶ δάφνην ὑπέστρωται.
» > / A \ ~ > /
ὥφρων edain, τοὺς δὲ παῖδας οὐ Βράγχος
\ ~ > / Φ ¢ - > /
τοὺς τῶν ᾿Ιώνων, ois ὁ Φοῖβος ὠργίσθη,
δάφνῃ τε κρούων κῆπος οὐ τόΪνῳ τρανε]ῖ ὃ
δὶς ἢ τρὶς ε[ἰΠΛπὼν ἀρτεμέας ἐποίησε;
b] A \ ie SD A a ι > \ /
[κ͵]ἠγὼ μὲν ἢ “mi Satras ἢ ᾿ς χορὸν φ[οιτέω
\ oe / / \ 3,
τὸν [Πυθαϊστήν, γίνομαι δὲ «κἄεθλον,
ς ~ \ / : /
ot Δωριῆς δὲ Τεμπόθεν με τέμνουσιν
> / dee Pa. é \ / 3 /
ὀρέων am ἄκρων καὶ φέρουσιν ἐς Δελφούς,
ἐπὴν τὰ τὠπόλλωνος ἱρὰ γίνηται.
ὥφρων ἐλα u[¢]n, πῆμα δ᾽ οὐχὶ PEED,
οὐδ᾽ οἶδ᾽ ὁκ[οίη]ν otAadynddpos* κάμπτει,
aly γάρ εἰμι: κοὐ πατεῦσί μ᾽ ἄνθρωποι,
1 ἡλιοπλήξ Only here.
" ἀείδει] ? ἐρείδει = chews.
3 οὐ τόϊνῳ τρανε]ϊ is the Editor’s suggestion in reference


to the name Branchus (βράγχος = hoarseness).
4 Cf. Hesych. οὐλαφηφορεῖ" νεκροφορεῖ.


*@ The left is the Westward or sheltered side, the right
is the Eastward side (Plato, Legg. 7 60 D) which is exposed
to the sun, ef. Hom. Tl. xii. 239 f. el τ᾽ ἐπὶ δεξί᾽ ἴωσι πρὸς ἠῶ
T ἠέλιόν τε, εἴ τ᾽ ἐπ᾽’ ἀριστερὰ τοί γε ποτὶ ζόφον ἠερόεντα and
schol. Athere. The reference is to the olive and the difference
of colour between the upper and under surface of the leaves.
τὰ πολλά refers to the peculiarity which the olive shares with
the lime, elm, and white poplar, of inverting its leaves after
the summer solstice, καὶ τούτῳ γνωρίζουσιν ὅτι γεγένηνται
<ai> τροπαί Theophrast. H.P. i. 10; οὐ Nicander 678 ff. ἠὲ καὶ


282


220


225


230


235


IAMBI


Fol. 5 verso


. The left “ side white as the belly of a water-
snake, the other, which is mostly exposed, smitten
by the sun. But what house is there where I am
not beside the doorpost? What seer or what
sacrificer carries me not with him? Yea, the Pythian
priestess hath her seat on laurel, laurel she sings and
laurel hath she for her bed. O foolish Olive, did
not Branchus,? when Phoebus was wroth with the
sons of the Ionians, make them whole by striking
them with laurel and uttering twice or thrice in no
clear tone his spell ?

And I go to feasts or Pythian dance, and I am
made the prize of victory. The Dorians cut me on
the hill-tops of Tempe? and carry me to Delphi,
whenever the, holy rites of Apollo are celebrated.
O foolish Olive! sorrow I do not know, nor wot I
the path of him that carries the dead, for I am pure ;
and men tread not on me, for I am holy. But with


ἠελίοιο τροπαῖς ἰσώνυμον ἔρνος ἥ θ᾽ Ὑπεριονίδαο παλινστρέπτοιο
κελεύθους τεκμαίρει γλαυκοῖσιν ἴσον πετάλοισιν ἔλαίης, Where
schol. has καὶ αὐτὴ yap ἡ ἐλαία τὰ γλαυκὰ τῶν φύλλων ἄνω ἔχει
ἐν θέρους ὥρᾳ, τὰ δὲ μέλανα χειμῶνοςς The masculine noun
to be supplied is probably λοβός.

- For the story ef. Clem. Alex. Strom. v. 8. 48 ᾿Απολλόδωρος
δ᾽ ὁ Κερκυραῖος τοὺς στίχους τούτους ὑπὸ Βράγχου ἀναφωνηθῆναι
τοῦ μάντεως λέγει Μιλησίους καθαίροντος ἀπὸ λοιμοῦ. ὁ μὲν γὰῤ
ἐπιρραίνων τὸ πλῆθος δάφνης κλάδοις προκατήρχετο τοῦ ὕμνου ὧδέ
πως" μέλπετε, ὦ παῖδες, Ἑκάεργον καὶ ᾿Εκαέργαν, ἐπέψαλλεν δ᾽ ὡς
εἰπεῖν ὁ λαός: βέδυ, ζάψ, χθώμ, πλῆκτρον, oplyé, κναξζβίχ, θύπτης.
φλεγμό, δρώψ. μέμνηται τῆς ἱστορίας καὶ Καλλίμαχος ἐν ᾿Ιάμβοις
(=Schneider’s fr. 75, probably our present passage).

¢ The crown at the Pythian games was originally of oak-
leaves, afterwards of laurel to commemorate the purification
of Apollo (Frazer, G.B. iv. 80 ff.).

@ ef, Plut. Ait, Gr. 12, Steph. Byz. p. 223. 12.


283


CALLIMACHUS


ἱρὴ γάρ εἰμι" σοὶ δὲ χὠπόταν νεκρὸν
μέλλωσι καίειν ἢ [τἀ Ἰφίῳ] περιστέλλει [v
αὐτοί τὰ ἀνεστέψ [avTo χ͵ ὐπὸ τὰ πλεῦρα

τοῦ μὴ πνέοντ [ος Kim Ἰυτὰξ 1 ὑ ὑπ [έσ [τ Lea” |
ἡ μὲν τάδ᾽ αὖ <x rb [o” ]+ ἀλλὰ τὴν ἀπήμ [vve 3 940
μάλ᾽ ἀτρεμαίως ἡ τεκοῦσα τὸ χρῖμ [a:

“ὦ πάντ᾽ ἄκυθεϑ τῶν ἐμῶν τόκ[ων δάφνη,
ἐν τῇ τελευτῇ κύκνος [ὥς τις ἡδίω
ἤεισας" οὐ συν Ἰῆκά μοι μ[ετὸν τούτων;
ἐγὼ μὲν ἄνδρας ovs "Αρηΐς ἀπόλλυσι 245
σὺν ἔκ τε πέμπω. xv ΕΟ gh, OID, ALOE H,

. . τῶν ἀριστέων ot <a Ρννν νος om

[ἐγὼ δ]ὲ λευκὴν ἡνίκ᾽ ἐς eddy τήθην

φέρο[υσι] παῖδες ἢ γέροντα Τιθωνόν, |
αὐτο[ῖς ona pres κὐἠπὶ τὴν ὁδὸν κεῖμαι, 250 _
[apx Je [doa] ὃ πλεῖον ἢ σὺ τοῖς aywetow

ἐκ τῶν σε Τεμπέων. ἀλλ᾽ ὅτευ γὰρ ἐμνήσθης,
καὶ τοῦτο κὠς ἄεθλον οὐκ ἐγὼ κρέσσων

σεῦ; καὶ γ[ὰ]ρ «ὦ »γγὼν οὖν ᾿θλυμπίῃ μέζων © |
ἢ ν το [σι Δελφοῖς- ἀλλ᾽ ἄριστον ἡ σωπή. O55
ἐγὼ μὲν οὔτε χρηστὸν οὔτε σε γρύζω
ἀπηνὲς οὐδέν, ἀλλ᾽ ἀ[λ]ηθες Ἴ ὄρνιθες
[ἐ]ν τοῖσ[ι] φύλλοις ταῦτα τινθυρίζουσαι


4


1 [κἠπι]τάξ is Wilamow,’s suggestion, ef. dit. i. 1. 9.
But the sense κατ᾽ ἐπίταγμα is not very appropriate here.
The statement in #.M. s.v. émirdé . . . εἰς δὲ τὸ ῥητορικὸν
λεξικὸν εὗρον τὴν λέξιν σημαίνειν εἰν bhi: κωμικῶς " Ὅστις τῆς
ὁδοῦ ἡγήσεταί σοι τὴν ἐπιτάξ' οὐχ ὡς οἱ τραγικοί, μακρῶς, is
very puzzling, and there is some evidence for another word
ἐπιπάξ (ef. Hesych. s.v. ἐπιζάξ, etc.) in the sense of ‘ finally,”
which might be read here. The sense would be very nearly
that of εἰσάπαξ, which Hunt suggests.

2 ἀπήμζυνε is very doubtful ; ἀπήνϊτησε would be better,
but the accusative is then a difficulty.


284


&


IAMBI


thee, whenever men are to burn a corpse or bestow
it in the grave—with thee they wreath themselves
and thee they strew by ordinance under the sides
of him who breathes no more.”

Thus she, boasting. But the mother of oil answered
her very quietly. “QO altogether barren of that I
bear, Laurel, like the swan,* thou singest sweetest at
the end. Do I not know my part in those things?-
I help to speed those whom Ares slays and [1 attend
the funeral] of chieftains who [nobly die].? And
when the children carry to the tomb a white-haired
grandmother or some aged Tithonus,’ it is I who go
with them, it is I who am strewn upon their path,
doing them a greater service than thou to those
who bring thee from Tempe. And as to the matter
whereof thou spakest, even in that am I not greater
than thou? For the festival at Olympia is greater
than that at Delphi. But silence is best. For my
part I say nothing of thee either good or unkind,
but indeed? the birds among the leaves have long


«The swan was supposed to sing its sweetest song just
‘before its death.

> We translate χἠπὶ τὰς ταφὰς φοιτέω τὰς τῶν ἀριστέων ol
καλῶς τεθνήκασιν.

¢ Tithonus, type of extreme longevity. (Arist. Ach. 688).

ὦ ἄηθες, ‘* unwontedly,” could only refer to the strangeness
of birds talking.


ἢ ἄκυθε, if right, involves ἄκῦθος as against dxi@os in

Hymn i ii. 53.
4 The supplements are by the Editor.

5 [dapx |e[Sca] Editor.

8 σευκαιγ.. ρουγωἤνουλυμπιη Papyrus; Hunt reads σεῦ,
K<od> γ[ὰ]ρ <w>yev, ἢ ᾽ν ᾽᾿ολυμπίῃ.
re ἄληθες Editor; anfes (but « erased) Papyrus; ἄηθες

unt.


285


CALLIMACHUS
πάλαι κάθηνται KwriAlor|s [ὁμηρ]εῦσαι 1


“zis δ᾽ εὗρε δάφνην; γαῖα [τήν γ᾽ édituloler,?


Fol. 5 recto


ὡς πρῖνον, ὡς δρῦν, ὡς κύπειρον, ὡς ὕλην.
τίς δ᾽ εὗρ᾽ ἐλαίην; Παλλάς, ἢ ἦμος ἤ[ρ]ιζ[ε

: τῷ φυκιοίκῳ κὴδίκαζεν ἀρχαῖος

ἀνὴρ ὄφις τὰ νέρθεν ἀμφὶ τῆς ᾿Ακτῆς.

ἕν ἡ δάφνη πέπτωκε. τῶν δ᾽ ἀειζώων.

τίς τὴν ἐλαίην, τίς δὲ [τ]ὴν δάφνην τιμᾷ;
δάφνην ᾿Απόλλων, ἡ δὲ Παλλὰς ἣ ἣν εὗρεν.
ξυνὸν τόδ᾽ αὐταῖς, θεοὺς γὰρ οὐ διακρίνω.
τ[ίς] τῆς δάφνης ὃ καρπός; ἐς τί χρήσωμαι;
μήτ᾽ ἔσθε μήτε πῖνε μήτ᾽ ἐπιχρίσῃς.

ὁ τῆς δ᾽ ἐλαίης ἕαδε πόλλ᾽, ἔσω“ μάσταξ
ὡς ἔ[νθεσι]ν καλεῦσιν, ἂν δὲ τὸ χρῖμα
ἐν[ῇ, κο]λυμβάς], ἣν ἐπα[ῦρε] χὠ Θησεύς.
[τὸ δ]εύ [τερ]ον τίθημι τῇ δάφνῃ πτῶμα.
τεῦ γὰρ [τὸ] φύλλον οἱ ἱκέται προτείνουσι;
τὸ τῆς ἐλαίης. τὰ τρί ἡ δάφνη κεῖται.
φεῦ τῶν ἀτρύτων οἷα κωτιλίζουσι:"

λαιδρὴ κορώνη, κῶς τὸ χεῖλος οὐκ ἀλγεῖς;
[τεῦ γ]ὰρ τὸ πρέμνον Δήλιοι φυλάσσουσι;
[τὸ τ]ῆς ἐλαίης, ἣ κ[αθεῖσ]ε5 τὴν Λητώ.


1 κωτίλοις ὁμηρεῦσαι Editor. Cf. Hes. Th. 89.

Ξ: Supplement by Editor.

3 ὕλην] πεύκην Papyrus in marg., probably rightly.

4 ἔσω] the Papyrus has apparently ir written over the w.
5 The supplements are by the Editor.


6 κ[αθεῖσ]ε was suggested by Wilamowitz. Hunt says ἃ


might be read for x. Possibly λ[ζόχευσΊε.
286


260


205


910.


275.


280


IAMBI


while been muttering such things, as they sit chatter-
ing together: ‘Who discovered the laurel? “Twas
the earth that gave her birth, as she gave birth to
the ilex, the oak, the galingale, or other shrub. Who
discovered the olive? Pallas when she contended
with the Dweller among Seaweed for Acte, and the
ancient man, a snake in his lower parts, acted as
judge.* That is one fall against the Laurel. Who
of the ever-living ones honours the Olive, who the
Laurel? Apollo honours the Laurel, Pallas the
Olive which she herself discovered. This bout is
even, for I distinguish not between gods.

What is the Laurel’s fruit? For what shall I use
it? Eat it not nor drink it nor use it to anoint.
The Olive’s fruit pleases in many ways: inwardly? it
is a mouthful as they call a snack; with the oil in it,
it is the preserved olive which Theseus also enjoyed.- I
count this the second fall against the Laurel. Whose
is the leaf that suppliants extend? The Olive’s.
Three falls against the Laurel!’ Oh! the endless
babblers, how they chatter! Shameless crow, how
does thy lip not ache? ‘ Whose trunk do the Delians
preserve? ‘The Olive’s which gave a seat to Leto.’”’ ¢

« For the story of the contention of Athena and Poseidon
for Attica (Acte) see Hecale i. 2.

> If ἔσω is right, we should expect ἂν δὲ xrX. to refer to
an external application. Hence Hunt thinks that κολυμβ
... ete. refers to the famous dive of Theseus told in
Bacchylid. xvi. and suggests éo[riv] κολυμβᾶν ἣν ἐπᾶλτο.
The reading in the text takes the reference to be to the
‘Kou Bas ἐλαία which Hecale served to Theseus (see Hecale,
fr. 54 with note). The objections are that (1) this reading
provides no antithesis to ἔσω, (2) ἐπαῦρε would naturally take
a genitive. For ἔνθεσιν see Hesych. s.v., Telecleid. and
Pherecrat. ap. Athen. vi. 268.

¢ There were three holy trees at Delos, all connected with
the birth of Apollo—the palm, the laurel, the olive: cf.
287


CALLIMACHUS


ὡς εἶπε, τῇ δ᾽ 6 θυμὸς ἀμφὶ TH ῥήσει
ἤλγησε, μέζον δ᾽ ἢ τὸ πρόσθεν yl σχαλλΊ]εν.
[φεῦ] φεῦ, τὸ λοιπὸν evko. ἐστονουτ. . .3
ΤῊ ὦ ἢ pig epee τὴν pet ope
ἔλεξεν, ἣν γὰρ οὐκ ἄπωθε τῶν δένδρων"
“οὐκ, ὦ τάλαιναι, παυσόμεσθα, μὴ λίην
γεν «ώ pel? ἐχθραί; μὴ "λέγωμεν. ae
ἄνολβα. ναὶ. ... ἀλλὰ ταῦτ᾽ ὁ .. να.
τὴν δ᾽ ἄγρι [ο]ς φανεῖσα Ταῦρος ἡ δάφνη
ἔβλεψε καὶ τάδ᾽ εἶπεν" “ὦ “κακὴ λώβη,
ὡς δὴ pe neo καὶ σὺ μή με ποιῆσαι
εὔστεκτον 3: ἢ γὰρ γειτονεῦσ᾽ ἀποπνίγεις.


99


Fol. 6 verso


. x . ἀ]οιδὸς ἐς κέρας τεθύμωται.
τὴν ξένην ἀνακρίνει
ἣν δοῦλον εἶναί φησι καὶ παλίμπρητον.
“hy 50 “- ε \ / “λλ
φεσον ὅθεν πῦρ οἱ τὰ μέτρα μέλλοντες
τὰ χωλὰ τίκτειν μὴ ᾿μαθῶς ἐναύονται.


Fol. 6 recto
Aadoto[t....


᾿Ιαστὶ καὶ Δωριστὶ καὶ τὸ σύμμικτον.


1 ἐς At the beginning of the line the first hand wrote some-
thing like ηγρὴσ or ἡστησ, which the corrector apparently
wished to convert into #\ynce” (Hunt). Wilamowitz pro-
posed <@dnce> and ἤλγησεν at the end of the line. The text
is the Editor’s suggestion. 2 εἰκὸς és τὸν οὐτασμόν ἵ

3 εὔστεκτον, if right, is a new word.


Eurip. ph. in Taur. 1098 f. “Apreuw ὀλβίαν ἃ παρὰ Κύνθιον
ὄχθον οἰκεῖ φοίνικα θ᾽ ἁβροκόμαν δάφναν τ᾽ evepvéa καὶ γλαυκᾶς
θαλλὸν ἱρὸν ἐλαίας, Λατοῦς ὠδῖνα φίλαν, Catull. 84.. 7 ““ (Latonia)
quam mater prope Deliam Deposivit olivam.”


288


290


295


353


IAMBI.


So she spake. And the heart of the other was
pained by her speech, and she was angrier than before.
Alas! Alas! next‘ it is likely [they would have come
to blows], had not . . . who was not far from the
trees, said: “ Wretches! let us cease, lest we become
tao embittered. Let us not speak evil of one another !
Nay, even these things... .’ Then the Laurel,
like a wild bull, glared® at her and said: “O evil
- thing of shame, do not thou bid me be patient, as
if thou wert one of us. Verily thy neighbourhood


stifles me.”
΄


Fol. 6 verso
the minstrel rages horn-wise.°


He examines the stranger who, he declares, is a
slave and a thing of sale.

Ephesus whence they who would write the halting @
metres not unwisely light their torches.


Fol. 6 recto


They talk in Ionic and Dorian and a mixture of
the two.


« The strife of the Laurel and the Olive is apparently
interrupted by someone, but who the would-be peace-
maker is cannot be made out.

> Cf. ταυρηδὸν βλέπειν (Arist. Ran. 804), δέργμα ἀποταυροῦσθαι
(Eur. Med. 188).

¢ This curious phrase, properly of an angry bull, occurs
Eurip. Bacch. 743 ταῦροι δ ὑβμισταὶ κἀς κέρας θυμούμενοι and
is imitated by Vergil, Georg. iii. 232 ““ οὐ tentat sese atque
irasci in cornua discit Arboris obnixus trunco.”

4 Writers of choliambs or scazons take Hipponax of
Ephesus as their model,


U 289


CALLIMACHUS


Σόλων": ἐκεῖνος δ᾽ ὡς Χίλων᾽ ἀπέστειλεν.

Choeroboseus ap. Cramer. Anecd. Ox. ii. 277. 10
Χίλων... εὕρηται καὶ ἐν συστολῇ παρὰ KadAr-
μάχῳ, οἷον Σόλων κτλ.


-


΄΄Κ


πάλιν τὸ δῶρον ἐς Θάλητ᾽ ἀνώλισθεν.
Choerobose. ap. Bekker. Anecd. 1380. E.M. 50.
Θάλης.


Θάλης με τῷ μεδεῦντι Νείλεω δήμου
δίδωσι, τοῦτο δὶς λαβὼν ἀριστεῖον.
Diog. Laert. i. 29.


ἐς TO πρὸ τείχευς ἱρὸν ἁλέες δεῦτε,
οὗ τὸν πάλαι Παγχαῖον ὁ πλάσας Ζᾶνα
γέρων ἀλάζων ἄδικα βιβλία ψήχει.3

Plutarch. De plac. philos. i. 1 (Moral. 880 Ε) τὸν
δ᾽ Εὐήμερον καὶ Καλλίμαχος 6 Κυρηναῖος αἰνίτ-
τεται ἐν τοῖς ᾿Ιάμβοις γράφων: εἰς τὸ πρὸ κτλ.
Cf. schol. Tzetz. Allegor. Cramer, Anecd. Ox. iii. p. 380,
E.M. 5.υ. ἀλές, ete.


1 πάλαι Παγχαῖον. .. ψήχει Bentley; πάλαι χάλκεζ(ι)ον
“2. ψύχει (ψήχων Sext. Empir. Adv. dogmatic. iii. 51).

Bentley’s emendation is now confirmed by Crom hymontt
Papyrus 1363 (ed. Grenfell and Hunt . 1915) which has
πάλαι IIdyxaolv]. Also this papyrus supports ψήχει as
against ψήχων (Schneider from Sext. Empir.) in so far as it
proves that a new sentence begins the next line.


« The reference, as in the next two fragments, is
to the Cup of Bathycles. Chilon was an ephor at Sparta
circ. 560 B.c., where after his death he was venerated as a
hero, Paus, iii, 16. 4, Life in Diog. Laert. i, 68 f. Renowned


290


[AMBI
2 (89)


Solon; and he sent it * to Chilon.


3 (96)
Again the gift returned to Thales.


4 (95)


, Thales presents me to the Lord of the people of
Neileus,? having twice received this prize.


5 (86)


Come hither all together to the temple before the
wall, where the old impostor ὁ who feigned the ancient
Panchaean*Zeus scrapes his unrighteous scriptures.


as one of the Seven Wise Men, ef. Herod. i. 59, vii. 235.
Plutarch. De poet. aud. 35 f.

> Neileus=Neleus, son of Codrus of Athens, founder of
Miletus, cf. Strabo 633. The Lord of Miletus is Apollo of
Didymi or ἐν Βραγχίδαις, ef. Strabo.634. The prose version
of the inscription on the Cup of Bathycles was, according
to Diog. Laert. i..29, Θαλῆς ᾿ξαμύου Μιλήσιος ᾿Απόλλωνι
Δελφινίῳ Ἑλλήνων ἀριστεῖον Sis λαβών.

¢ Kuhemerus of Messana in Sicily was a friend of
Cassander (311-297) at whose request he undertook various
journeys to the far south. He wrote a work entitled ‘Iepa
ἀναγραφή in which he pretended to have reached an island
Panchaea in the Indian Ocean where he found a temple of
Triphylian Zeus in which was a pillar whereon Zeus had
recorded the deeds of himself and*his predecessors Uranus
and Cronus, showing that all three were originally human
kings. , The ‘‘ rationalizing” of Euhemerus has given rise
to the modern term ‘* Euhemerism.”


291


CALLIMACHUS


τὴν ὡγαμέμνων, ὡς ὁ μῦθος, εἵσατο,
τῇ καὶ λίπουρα καὶ μονωπὰ θύεται.
Schol. Aristoph. Av. 873 Εὐφρόνιος δέ φησιν ὅτι
ἐν ᾿Αμαρύνθῳ ἡ Kodawis διὰ τὸ τὸν ᾿Αγαμέμνονα
θῦσαι αὐτῇ ἐκ τοῦ κηροῦ κριὸν KdAov: ἐπὶ ταύτης


δὲ Καλλίμαχος λέγει: τὴν κτλ.


οὐ γὰρ ἐργάτιν τρέφω
τὴν Μοῦσαν, ὡς ὁ Ketos “Υλλίχου νέπους. -
Schol. Pind. Isth. ii. 9, cf: Tzetz. Chil. viii. 228.


ἦν κεῖνος οὑνιαυτός, @ TO TE πτηνὸν
καὶ tovv θαλάσσῃ καὶ τὸ τετράπουν οὕτως
ἐφθέγγεθ᾽ ὡς ὁ πηλὸς ὁ Προμήθειος.

Clem. Alex. Strom. v. p. 707 Pott. γήινον μὲν ot
φιλόσοφοι. . τὸ σῶμα ἀναγορεύουσι . 2. Καλ-
λίμαχος δὲ διαρρήδην γράφει: ἦν κτλ.

ἐγὼ φαύλη
δένδρων ἁπάντων εἰμί.

Pseudo-Tryphon, Περὶ τρόπων (Walz, Rhet. Gr.
viii. p. 760) παρὰ δὲ Καλλιμάχῳ ἀστειζομένη ἡ
ἐλαία φησίν: ἐγὼ φαύλη πάντων τῶν δένδρων
εἰμί.

καὶ τῶν νεήκων εὐθὺς of τομώτατοι.

E.M. s.v. κόχλος. ... ὡς παρὰ τὸ ἱερός γίνεται
ἱέραξ καὶ νέος νέαξ, ὡς παρὰ Καλλιμάχῳ: καὶ
τῶν κτλ.

« An aetiological legeffd to deylaan the by-name Κολαινίς
under which Artemis was worshipped at various places,


Paus. i. 31, Aristoph. 4v. 873, as if from κολός, ** docked,”
“ὁ hornless ᾽ or the like;


292


IAMBI


6 (76)

Whom Agamemnon, as the legend “ tells, estab-
lished—the goddess to whom the tailless and the
one-eyed are sacrificed.

Schol. Aristoph.: Euphronius says that in
Amarynthus (in Euboea) Artemis was worshipped as
Colaenis (“ hornless’’), because Agamemnon sacrificed
to her a hornless ram made of wax. In reference to


her Call. says, ete.
7 (77)


For no hireling Muse do I cherish, like the Cean
descendant ὃ of Hyllichus.


8 (87)
It was that year when’ the winged fowl and the
dweller in the sea and the four-footed creature talked
even as the clay of Prometheus.


Clem. Alex. : The philosopers call the body earthy
Callimachus says expressly, “ It was, etc.”


9 (93 b)
I am the meanest of all trees.?
Pseudo- Tryphon.: In Callimachus the olive


ironically says, “I am, ete.”
3 3


LOLT 8) ici
And straightway the sharpest ° of the youths.


> i.e. Simonides of Ceos of whose mercenary muse many
tales are told.

¢ Reference to some legend of a time when the lower
animals could speak like ‘‘ the clay of P.,” i.e. human beings.

2 Quoted to illustrate ἀστεισμός, a pleasantry or urbanity,
here almost irony.

ὁ Possibly there is a pun on νεηκής, ** newly sharpened.”


293


CALLIMACHUS


κοὐχ ὧδ᾽ ᾿Αρείων τὠπέσαντι πὰρ Act
ἔθυσεν ᾿Αρκὰς ἵππος.
Steph. Byz. s.v. ᾿Απέσας . . ἀφ᾽ οὗ Ζεὺς ᾿Απε-
’ὔ or Καλλί δὲ > a
σάντιος [Paus. ii. 15. 3]. iwayos δὲ ἐν τοῖς
᾿άμβοις τὸ ἐθνικὸν ᾿Απέσας φησί: κοὐχ κτλ.


> ~ > / ¢ “-Ἐ ’ὔ
αἰτοῦμεν εὐμάθειαν ᾿Ἑρρμᾶνος δόσιν.
Et. Florent. s.v: ὦ τάν.


τὰς “Adpoditas (ἡ θεὸς yap od pia)

πάσας ὑπερβέβληκε τῷ καλῶς φρονεῖν

ἡ Καστνιῆτις" ἥδε γὰρ χαίρει μόνη

θυσίαις ὑείαις.

Strabo ix. 488 Καλλίμαχος μὲν οὖν φησιν ἐν τοῖς

᾿Ιάμβοις τὰς ᾿Αφροδίτας (ἡ θεὸς γὰρ οὐ μία) τὴν
Καστνιῆτιν ὑπερβάλλεσθαι πάσας τῷ φρονεῖν ὅτι
μόνη παραδέχεται τὴν τῶν ὑῶν θυσίαν. We give
the above restoration as one more among many: to
recover the words of Callimachus with certainty is of
course impossible.


Μοῦσαι καλαὶ κἄπολλον οἷς ἐγὼ σπένδω.


Eustath. on Jl. ix. 658 and Od. xv. 162, schol.
Soph. O.C. 1621, and Suidas.


« Areion is the famous horse of Adrastus, reputed to
be the offspring of Poseidon and Demeter when she in
equine form was seeking. her daughter near Thelpusa in
Arcadia, Paus. viii. 25. 5 ff. Apesas is a hill near Nemea.

> Aphrodite Castnia (Lycophr. 403 and 1234) is Aphrodite
as worshipped at Aspendos in ae lia, so called
from Castnion, a hill near Aspendos. i κα τ σα was a
colony from Argos (Strabo xiv. 667), tien Castnia
is simply Aphrodite as worshipped at Argos to whom
swine were sacrificed: Athen. 964 ὅτι δ᾽ ὄντως ᾿Αφροδίτῃ ds


294


IAMBI
11 (82)


And not so sped Areion,* the Arcadian horse,
beside the shrine of Apesantian Zeus.


12 (82 a)


We ask the boon of learning easily, the gift of


Hermes.
13 (82 b)


All the Aphrodites—for the goddess is not one
goddess only—are excelled in wisdom by Aphrodite
of Castnion®; for she alone rejoices in sacrifice of
swine.

Strabo: Callimachus says in his Jambi that
Aphrodite of Castnion excels all the Aphrodites (for
she is not ἃ single goddess) in wisdom since she
alone accepts sacrifices of swine.


14 (83 c)


O Muses fair and Apollo to whom I make libation.¢


θύεται μαρτυρεῖ Καλλίμαχος  Znvddoros ἐν ἱστορικοῖς ὑπομνήμασι
γράφων ὧδε. “᾿Αργεῖοι ᾿Αφροδίτῃ ὗν θύουσι καὶ ἡ ἑορτὴ καλεῖται
᾿στήρια." ‘The assertion in Roscher’s Lev., 5.0. Kastnia, that
Callimachus said swine were offered to Aphrodite Castnietis
at Metropolis in Thessaly Histiaiotis is not true. What
Strabo says is that whereas Callimachus asserted that only
Aphrodite Castnietis received swine sacrifice, it was after-
wards pointed out that other Aphrodites did the same,
and among them Aphrodite at Metropolis.
¢ Quoted to illustrate preference of masculine to feminine
in concord, whereas Homer, //. l.c. gives the preference
to the feminine. In Hom. Od. /.c. and Soph. 1.6. the
masculine is preferred as in Callimachus.
295


CALLIMACHUS


οὐ πρῷν μὲν ἡμῖν 6 Tpaywddos ἤγειρεν.
Suid. s.v. πρῴ. Cf. Herodian i. 494. 7 Lentz.


4 τις τραγῳδὸς μοῦσα ληκυθίζουσα.
Schol. Saib. Hephaest. p. 36 Gaisf. ii.


τὰ νῦν δὲ πολλὴν τυφεδῶνα λεσχαΐνεις.
Herodian, Περὶ λέξ. μον. ii. p. 914 Lentz.


λίχνος εἰμὶ καὶ τὸ πεύθεσθαι..
Schol. V Hom. Jl. xiv. 172.


2


ἔβηξαν οἷον ἀλίβαντα 35 πίνοντες.


E.M. s.v. ἀλίβας: ὁ νεκρός. . . . σημαίνει δὲ
καὶ ὄξος ὡς παρὰ Καλλιμάχῳ: ἔβηξαν κτλ.


τὸ πῦρ δ᾽ ὅπερ ἀνέκαυσας ἐς πολλὴν φλόγα
πρόσω KEXWPNKE .. 1... +. ee

el Senile ate yr ἴσχε δὲ δρόμου

μαργῶντας ἵππους μηδὲ δευτέραν κάμψῃς


1 ἥ Tis] ἢἤ τις. Oxyrhynch. Papyr. 1363. 13 reads. . .
wdo. μουσα τ... Which might be identified with this line.
The letter after μοῦσα is uncertain.

2 ἀλίβαντα] adiBavra, i.e. of ad., Schneider, as one would
expect the first syllable of ἀλίβ. to be short.


* Meaning and context quite unknown. πρῷν would
naturally be=pwnv, but ἤγειρεν suggests that Callimachus
used it in the sense of πρῴ.

> For λήκυθοι, ληκυθίζειν in this sense cf. ampullae, ampullari


296


IAMBI


15 (84)
Not early for us did the tragedian wake. . . .4


16 (98 c)
‘Some tragic muse with her tropes.? .. .


17 (98 b)
But now thou talkest much vapour.°
18 (98 4)


I am greedy of getting information.4


19 (88)
They coughed as if drinking vinegar.


20 (98 a)
The fire which thou didst kindle has gone:on to
be a great flame. . . . Restrain thy steeds eager for
the race nor run a second turn... lest on the


and the commentators on Aristoph. Ran. 1200ff., Hor.
Ep. i. 3. 141, A.P. 97.

¢ The line is quoted to illustrate rudedéva metri gr.
for τυφεδόνα. τυφεδών is here=rigos, vapouring talk, ef.
ληρεῖν καὶ τετυφῶσθαι (Demosth.); ““ inflammation” (L. ἃ 5.)
is quite wrong.

ἀ Quoted to illustrate the metaphorical use of one sense
for another: λίχνος properly of greediness for food, here
for information. The reference of Strabo ix. 438 καὶ μὴν
πολυίστωρ [sc. Καλλίμαχος] εἴ τις ἄλλος καὶ πάντα τὸν βίον, ὡς
αὐτὸς εἴρηκε, τὸ ταῦτα μυθεῖσθαι βουλόμενος may be to this
passage, but Schneider’s attempted restoration is futile.


297


CALLIMACHUS


ky «cat ee μὴ παραὶ νύσσῃ δίφρον
ἄξωσιν, ἐκ δὲ κύμβαχος κυβιστήσῃς.

Tryphon, Περὶ τροπ. ποιητ. Boissonade, Anecd.
iii. p. 271, Choeroboscus, Ilepi τ. mount. τροπ.
Cramer, Anecd. Ox. iv. p. 399. The above restoration
mainly follows Schneidewin and Bergk.

: '
χαῖρ᾽ Ἑὐκολίνη.
Et. Sorbon. ap. Gaisford, ΕΜ. s.v. Ἑὐκολίνη" ἡ


A
“Ἑκάτη κατὰ ἀντίφρασιν.


« These quotations, which need not be supposed to
be consecutive, are used to illustrate Allegory: ‘* Allegory
is a form of language which expresses one thing while it
suggests the idea of another. It is fittingly employed when
prudence or modesty forbids frank expression, as by


298


~* oe Oe Aree


ΧΙ i δὲ...» νὰ


ee Stee ΚΣ ΤΑΣ eS δ νων».


th τονε,


IAMBI .


turning-post they wreck the car and thou come
tumbling down.


21 (82d)
Hail, Eucoline ὃ!


Callimachus in his Jambi” (Tryphon, /.c.). This suggests
that the ‘‘fire” referred to is the passion of love. The
mysterions ἕρος which in Cramer /.c. follows dvéxavoas may
be ἔρως, a gloss on rip.

δ This euphemistic by-name for Hecate is not  other-
wise known. Bentley, reading ‘ExdA7n for ‘Exdry, referred the
fragment to the Hecale, cf. Plutarch, Thes. 14.


- 299


INCERTAE SEDIS FRAGMENTA


καί μιν ᾿Αλητιάδαι πουλὺ γεγειότερον +
τοῦδε παρ᾽ Αἰγαίωνι θεῷ τελέοντες ἀγῶνα
θήσουσιν νίκης σύμβολον ᾿Ισθμιάδος,
ζήλῳ τῶν Νεμέηθε, πίτυν δ᾽ ἀποτιμήσουσιν,
ἢ πρὶν ἀγωνιστὰς ἔστεφε τοὺς ᾿Εφύρῃ.
Plutarch, Quaest. Conviv. v. 677 B.


΄


ΓΝ; ἈΝ a , eo 2 .
οἱ μὲν ἐπ᾽ ᾿Ϊλλυρικοῖο πόρου σχάσσαντες ἐρετμὰ
λᾶα πάρα ξανθῆς ‘Appovins ὄφιος
ἄστυρον ἐκτίσσαντο, τὸ μὲν Duyddwy τις ἐνίσποι
Γραικός, ἄταρ κείνων γλῶσσ᾽ ὀνόμηνε []όλας.
Strabo, i. 46, cf. ν. 216.
Κι For γέγειος cf. fr. incert. 135 and 136, Suid. s.v. γέγειαι


O€s.


« The original prize at the Isthmian games in honour of
Poseidon (Aegaeon) had been a wreath of pine (πίτυς), but
later the wreath of wild celery (σέλινον) was introduced from
Nemea.

> Aletes, great-grandson of Heracles, was the founder of
Corinth ; ef. Pind. O. xiii. 14. ¢ Corinth.

@ Strabo quotes Callimachus for the tradition that some
of the Colchians sent by Aeétes in pursuit of Iason and
Medea reached the head of the Adriatic where they founded
Pola or Polai. Cf. Apoll. Rh. iv. 516 οἱ δ᾽ dp’ ἐπ’ ᾿Ιλλυρικοῖο
μελαμβαθέος ποταμοῖο, τύμβος iv’ ᾿Αρμονίης Κάδμοιο τε πύργον


300


—_ * Sst" =


FRAGMENTS OF UNCERTAIN LOCATION
1 (103)


And it % (the wild celery) shall the sons of Aletes,?
when in the presence of the god Aegaeon they cele-
brate a festival more ancient by far than this, appoint
to be the token of victory in the Isthmian games, in
rivalry of those at Nemea; but the pine they shall
reject, which aforetime crowned the combatants at
Ephyra.°¢

2 (104)

Some by the Illyrian waters stayed their oars and
beside the stone of fair-haired Harmonia, become a
snake, they founded a town, which a Greek would


call the city of Exiles, but their tongue named it
Polae.4


ἔδειμαν, ἀνδράσιν ᾿Ε γγχελύεσσιν ἐφέστιοι; Lycophr. 1021 ff.
Cadmus with his wife Harmonia was driven from Thebes,
and came to Illyria where they were changed into snakes.
M. Arnold, Hmpedocles on Aetna, ““ The Adriatic breaks in
a warm bay Among the green Illyrian hills . . . And there,
they say, two bright and aged snakes, Who once were
Cadmus and Harmonia, Bask in the glens,” etc. “If the
**stone” is not here=‘‘tomb,” it must refer to the δύο
πέτραι (Dion. Per. 395), λίθοι ([Scylax] 24f., Geog. Gr. Mim.
isp. 31), two rocks in or off [Illyria called the rocks of
Cadmus and Harmonia. Dion. Per. ἐ. 6. clearly distinguishes
the tomb (390) from the two rocks (395), Cf. Athen. 462 8,
- Ovid, M, iv. 563 ff,


301


CALLIMACHUS


οὔπω Σκέλμιον: ἔργον ἐύξοον, ἀλλ᾽ ἔτι τεθμῷ
δηναίῳ γλυφάνων ἄξοος ἦσθα σάνις"

ὧδε γὰρ ἱδρύοντο θεοὺς τότε: καὶ γὰρ ᾿Αθήνης
ἐν Λίνδῳ Δαναὸς λεῖον 5 ἔθηκεν ἕδος.
Plutarch. ap. Euseb. Praep. Ev. iii. 8 Ἥρας δὲ

Kat Σάμιοι ξύλινον εἶχον εἶδος [l. ἕδος], ὥς φησι

Καλλίμαχος: οὔπω Σκέλμιον ἔργον κτλ.


κουφοτέρως τότε φῶτα διαθλίβουσιν ἀνῖαι

ἐκ δὲ τριηκόντων μοῖραν ἀφεῖλε, μίαν,

ἢ φίλον ἢ ὅτ᾽ ἐς ἄνδρα συνέμπορον ἢ ὅτε κωφαῖς
ἄλγεα μαψαύραις ἔσχατον ἐξερέῃ.

Stobaeus cexiii. 6, E. M. s.v. δυσίν. Καλλίμαχος
ἐν «τοῖς» ΟΣ ΤΣ ἐκ δὲ... μίαν. As πὸ
separate work called Elegies is known, we include the
fragment here.


αἴθε yap, ὦ κούροισιν ἐπ᾽ ὄμματα λίχνα φέροντες
᾿Ερχίος ὡς ὑμῖν ὥρισε παιδοφιλεῖν,
ὧδε νέων ἐρἄοιτε, πόλιν κ᾽ εὔανδρον ἔ ἔχοιτε.
Lucian, Amor. 49.


1 Clemens Alex. Protrept. 41 τὸ δὲ ἐν Σάμῳ τῆς Hpas
ξόανον Σμίλιδι Εὐκλείδου πεποιῆσθαι ᾿Ολύμπιχος ἐν Σαμιακοῖς
ἱστορεῖ. id. ibid. 40 καὶ τὸ τῆς Σαμίας Ἥρας, ὥς φησιν ᾿Αέθλιος,
πρότερον μὲν ἣν σάνις, ὕστερον δὲ ἐπὶ ἹΠροκλέους ἄρχοντος
ἀνδριαντοειδὲς ἐγένετο: ο΄. Arnob. vi. 11. Paus. vii. 4. 4
εἶναι δ᾽ οὖν τὸ ἱερὸν τοῦτο [86. τὸ ἐν. Σάμῳ τῆς Ἥρα] ἐν τοῖς
μάλιστα ἀρχαῖον οὐχ ἥκιστα ἄν τις καὶ ἐπὶ τῷ ἀγάλματι.
τεκμαίροιτο" ἔστι γὰρ δὴ ἀνδρὸς ἔργον Αἰγινήτου Σμίλιδος τοῦ
Εὐκλείδου. οὗτος ὁ Σμῖλίς ἐστιν ἡλικίαν κατὰ Δαίδαλον, δόξης δὲ
οὐκ “ἐς τὸ ἴσον ἀφίκετο. Cf. schol. Paus. l.c. (ed. F. Spiro
in Hermes xxix., 1894, p. 148) Σμῖλις] ὅτι Dutrdus Αἰγινήτης τὸ
ἄγαλμα τῆς Σαμίας Ἥρας εἰργάσατο Δαιδάλῳ κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν

χρόνον γεγονώς " ὁ δὲ Καλλίμαχος Σκέλμιν ἀντὶ Σμίλιδος φησί.
peed λιτὸν Voss; κίον᾽ Bentley. But λεῖον is absolutely
right


302


FRAGMENTS OF UNCERTAIN LOCATION
3. (105)


Not yet the polished work of Scelmis α wert thou,
but still according to ancient custom only a board
unpolished by the carver’s knife. For in such wise
did they in those days establish. their gods: yea, in
Lindos also did Danaus set up for Athene an un-
sculptured board.?

4 (67)


More lightly do his sorrows press upon a man—
of thirty parts it takes one part away—when to a
friend or fellow traveller, or to the muieeding idle
winds at least, he tells his griefs.?


5 (107)


O ye who. cast greedy eyes upon the youths,
would that ye would love the young as Erchius°¢
defined for you that youth should be loved; so
should ye possess a city of goodly men.


4 Scelmis (cf, Celmis, one of the Idaean Dactyls) seems
to be an etymologizing substitute (cf. σκάλμη" μάχαιρα Θρᾳκία
Hesych.) for Smilis (from σμίλη), ef. Wilamow. Hermes 1.c.
p. 245. Hera as bride is a Samian coin-type representing, it
seems, the image attributed to Smilis. Cf. Varr. ap. Lact.
Inst. i. 17. For the Lindian Athena and her image ef.
Apollod. ii. 13 προσσχὼν δὲ Ῥόδῳ τὸ τῆς Λινδίας ἄγαλμα ᾿Αθηνᾶς
ἱδρύσατο (Aavaés); Diodor. v. 58. But Herod. ii. 182, Strabo
655 attribute the foundation of the temple at Lindos to the
daughters of Danaus.

ae Kur. Iph. in T. 43, Med, 56,
rchius is not known,


303


, CALLIMACHUS


τῇ μὲν ἀρισκυδὴς εὖνις ἀνῆκε Διὸς

ἼἜΑργος ἔ ἔχειν, ἴδιόν περ ἐὸν. λάχος, ἀλλὰ γεηθλη
Ζηνὸς ὅπως σκοτίῃ τρηχὺς ἄεθλος € ἔοι.
Schol. Pind. N. x. 1.


ἔνθ᾽ ἀνέμων μεγάλων κῦμα διωλύγιον.
Stobaeus, Serm. lix. 10.


Καλλίστη τὸ “πάροιθε, τὸ δ᾽ ὕστερον οὔνομα Θήρηι
μήτηρ εὐίππου πατρίδος ἡμετέρης.
Strabo 837, cf. Strabo 347 and schol. Pind. P.
iv. 459 (for v. 1) Strabo x. 484 (for v. 2).


(a) Διγλήτην, ᾿Ανάφην τε Λακωνίδι γειτόνα Θήρῃ.
(0) ἄρχμενος ws ἥρωες am Αἰήταο Kuratov
αὖτις ἐς ἀρχαίην ἔπλεον Aipovinv.
Strabo i. 46 quotes both (a) and (b), in x. 484 he
again quotes (a).


ἃ vads,-a TO μόνον φέγγος ἐμὶν τὸ γλυκὺ τᾶς ζοᾶς
ἅρπαξας, ποτὶ τὲ Lavos ἱκνεῦμαι λιμενοσκόπω. ...


A.P. xiii. 10.


1 For ἄρχμενος cf. Hyman iii. 4, Aitia iii. 1. 56.


« Heracles.

> Cyrene ΤῈΣ a colony from Thera: evimmov . . . Kupdvas
Pind. P. iv.

¢ Both Fapinkits refer to the Argonautic expedition. (8)
A terrible darkness fell upon the Argonauts in the wide gulf


304


FRAGMENTS OF UNCERTAIN LOCATION
6 (108)


To whom the wrathful spouse of Zeus gave Argos
to keep, albeit it was her own possession, to the end
that it might be a stern labour for the bastard off-
spring “ of Zeus.

7 (411)


Where the tremendous wave raised by mighty
winds ...


8 (112)


Calliste in former times, but afterwards named
Thera, mother of our fatherland of goodly horses.?


9 (113 a, b)¢
(a) (Apollo) Aegletes, and Anaphe nigh to


Laconian Thera.
(b) Beginning with the story how the heroes sent
by Aeétes of Cyta sailed again to ancient Haemonia.


10 (114)


Ship that hast carried away from me my only
light, the sweet light of my life, I entreat thee by
Zeus, Watcher of Havens...


of Crete. Iason prayed to Apollo who caused to appear
before them the little island of Anaphe near Thera. There
the Argonauts anchored and made a temenos and altar for
Apollo, calling him ““ Aegletes” because of his radiance,
and the island Anaphe because Apollo caused it to appear :

Αἰγλήτην μὲν. .. εἵνεκεν αἴγλης | Φοῖβον κεκλόμενοι. ᾿Ανάφην
δέ τε λισσάδα νῆσον | ἴσκον ὃ δὴ Φοῖβός μιν ἐμ is με, ἀνέφηνεν
(Apoll. Rh. iv. 1714 ff.).

For (b) see note on frag. incert. 2.


x 305


CALLIMACHUS


ἔρχεται πολὺς μὲν Αἰγαῖον διατμήξας ἀπ᾽ οἰνηρῆς


/
lov
ἀμφορεύς, πολὺς δὲ Λεσβίης ἄωτον νέκταρ oivavOns
ἄγων.


A.P. xiii. 9; v. 1 also Hephaestion vi. 2.


wv > > / ~ ~ “ 4 > 7
ἔνεστ᾽ ᾿Απόλλων τῷ χορῷ: τῆς λύρης ἀκούω"
\ ~ > 7 > / ” > /
καὶ τῶν ᾿Ερώτων ἠσθόμην" ἔστι Kadpodirn.

Hephaestion xv. 17.


ε - “ aA - ay} /
Ἑρμᾶς 6 περ Φεραῖος αἰνέει θεός,
ἐμμὶ τῶ φυγαίχμα.
Hephaest. vi. 8.


ἡ παῖς ἡ κατάκλειστος,

τὴν οἵ φασι τεκόντες

εὐναίους ὀαρισμοὺς

ἔχθειν ἶσον ὀλέθρῳ.
Hephaest. De poem. i. 3.


A /
χαῖρε βαρυσκίπων, ἐπίτακτα μὲν ἑξάκι δοιά,
\ /
ἐκ δ᾽ αὐταγρεσίης πολλάκι πολλὰ καμών.
Schol. Pind. N. iii. 42.


ἔλλατε νῦν, ἐλέγοισι δ᾽ ἐνιψήσασθε λιπώσας
χεῖρας ἐμοῖς, ἵνα μοι πουλὺ μενοῦσιν ἔτος.


Schol. Pind. N. iv. 10.


« Meaning and reference are a matter of conjecture.
Φεραῖος may refer to Pherae in Thessaly, where ‘Epuaios
appears as amonth-name. Some take the word 85 -- Φαραῖος,


806


κι


FRAGMENTS OF UNCERTAIN LOCATION


11 (115)


Comes many a jar across the Aegean from Chios
rich in wine, and many a jar that brings nectar, the
flower of the Lesbian vine.


12 (116)


Apollo, too, is in the choir; I hear the lyre; I
note the presence of the Loves; Aphrodite, too, is


here.
13 (117)


As Hermes, god of Pherae; agrees, I belong to
the fugitive.”


14 (118)


The cloistered maiden, who, her parents say, hates
marriage talk even as perdition.


15 (120)


Hail! thou of the heavy staff,? who by command ¢
didst perform labours six times two, but of thine
own undertaking many times many.


16 (121)


Be γε gracious now and lay your anointed hands
upon my elegies, that they may endure for me many
a year.
referring to worship of Hermes at Pharae in Achaia, cf.
Paus. vii. 22. Wilamowitz reads 6 Περφεραῖος.


> Heracles in reference to his club.
¢ of Eurystheus. ὦ The Muses, or possibly the Charites.


307


CALLIMACHUS


Kal παρ᾽ ᾿Αθηναίοις γὰρ ἐπὶ στέγος ἱερὸν ἧνται
κάλπιδες, οὐ κόσμου σύμβολον ἀλλὰ πάλης.
Schol. Pind. N. x. 64.


νηφάλιαι Kat τῇσιν ἀεὶ μελιηδέας ὄ ὄμπας
λήτειραι καίειν ἔλλαχον “Hovyides.


Schol. Soph. O.C. 489.


apd. δέ ot κεφαλῇ νέον Αἱμονίηθεν
μεμβλωκὸς πίλημα περίτροχον ἄλκαρ ἔκειτο
ἴδεος ἐνδίοιο.3


ἔπρεπέ τοι προέχουσα καρῆς εὐρεῖα καλύπτρη,
ποιμενικὸν πίλημα, καὶ ἐν χερὶ χαῖον ἔχουσα. . .
Schol. Apoll. Rh. iv. 972. ς


δέσποιναι Λιβύης ἡρωΐδες at Νασαμώνων


1 νηφάλι: at Schneider, cf. Stengel, Opferbriuche d.
Griechen, p. 132.

2 Schol. Soph. O.C. 314 περισσοὶ ἦσαν of Θεσσαλικοὶ πῖλοι,
ὡς καὶ Καλλίμαχος: εἴδεος ἀμφὶ δέ οἱ κεφαλῇ νέον Αἱμονίηθεν
μεμβλωκὸς πίλημα πέτρου ἄλκαρ ἔκειτο. The text is due to
Toup who restored περίτροχον from Suid. πίλημα περίτροχον *
περιφερὲς σκέπασμα and Naeke who, from Hesych. εἴδεος
ἐνδίοιο" καύματος μεσημβρινοῦ, restored ἴδεος ἐνδίοιο as the end
of the quotation.


« At the Panathenaea jars of olive oil were given as prizes
(Pind. l.c.).


308


i al i i ie


\ 5 SDD a be ited


at


FRAGMENTS OF UNCERTAIN LOCATION


17 (122)


For among the Athenians also beside the holy
dwelling pitchers sit, a symbol not of ornament but
of wrestling.”


18 (123)


And evermore to burn for them honey-sweet cakes
is the duty of the sober priestesses, daughters of
Hesychus.?


19 (124)


‘And about his head was set a round felt cap,
newly come from Haemonia, a defence against the
noontide heat.’ ;


20 (125)


There stood out from her head her broad head-
gear, a shepherd cap, and holding in her hand a
shepherd’s staff . . .4


21 (126)
Ye Heroines, queens of Libya, who look upon the


’ The Hesychides, who claimed descent from the
Athenian hero Hesychos, had charge of the worship of the
Eumenides, who received wineless offerings (Aesch. Hum.
107).

¢ Prob. from Hecale, in reference to Theseus, whose head-

ear is the broad Thessalian (Haemonian) felt réracos. Cf.
oph. l.c. κρατὶ δ᾽ ἡλιοστερὴς | κυνῇ πρόσωπα Θεσσαλίς νιν
ἀμπέχει ; Theophr. H.P. iv. 8. 7.

2 Reference probably to Hecale. The yatov=properly the
shepherd’s crook. Amerias (the Macedonian, author of a
Glossary (γλῶσσαι), Athen. iv. 176, etc.) seems to have given
it as merely = ῥάβδος.


309


CALLIMACHUS


αὔλια Kat δολιχὰς θῖνας ἐπιβλέπετε,
μητέρα μοι ζώουσαν ὀφέλλετε.3
Schol. ΑΡΟ]]. Rh. iv. 1322. Cf. Steph. Byz. s.v.
Νασαμῶνες.


3 ‘Xr ~ Ar 3 + ε A
ἄρνες τοι, φίλε κοῦρε, συνήλικες,3 ἄρνες ἑταῖροι
ἔσκον, ἐνιαυθμοὶ δ᾽ αὔλια καὶ βοτάναι.
Stobaeus, Flor. Ixxvi. Cf. E.M. s.v. ἐνιαυθμός.


ὅστις ἀλιτροὺς
αὐγάζειν καθαραῖς οὐ δύναται λογάσιν.

E.M. s.v. λογάδες, ἐπὶ τῶν ὀφθαλμῶν τὰ λευκά'
Καλλίμαχος: ὅστις κτλ. Cf: Melet. ap. Cramer,
Anecd. Oxon. iii. 69. 6.

εἴ σε Ilpounbeds
ἔπλασε καὶ πηλοῦ μὴ ᾿ξ ἑτέρου γέγονας.

Clem. Alex. Strom. v. p. 708, Euseb. Praep. Ev.
xili. 13.

ἀλλὰ θεόντων,
ὡς ἀνέμων, οὐδεὶς εἶδεν ἁματροχιάς.
Porphyrius, Quaest. Hom. iii.


1 αὔλια Sealiger; αὖλιν. 2 ὀφείλετε Valckenaer.
3 συνήλικες Wernicke ; ὁμήλικες.


« The Heroines are the ἡρῷσσαι Λιβύης τιμήοροι Apoll. Rh.
iv. 1809 -- yOovins . . . νύμφαις αἱ Λιβύην ἐνέμοντο id. ii. 504f.
into whose keeping Apollo gave Cyrene. ‘* My mother” is
no doubt Cyrene as the native city of Callimachus. So Pind.
Isth. i. 1 μᾶτερ ἐμά... Θήβα. .

ὃ Possibly from the episode of Linos, Jit. i.

ο Of. Habakkuk i. 13, Thou that art of purer eyes than
to behold evil and canst not look on iniquity.

ἃ What seems a reminiscence of this fragment occurs in
an inscription from Pisidia in vol. iii. of the publications of


310


FRAGMENTS OF UNCERTAIN LOCATION


folds of the Nasamones and the long sands, bless ye
my mother in her life.@


22 (127)


Lambs, dear boy, were the companions of thy
youth, lambs were thy comrades and thy sleeping-
place the sheepfolds and the pastures.’


28 (182)
Who with pure eyes cannot look upon sinners.¢


24 (133)


If Prometheus fashioned thee and thou art not
made of other clay.?


25 (135)


But, as they sped like the winds, none saw the
track of the wheels.’


the American School of Classical Studies at Athens (Boston,
1888), by Sterrett: εἷς yap Ζεὺς πάντων προπάτωρ, ula δ᾽ ἀνδράσι
ῥίζα, εἷς παλὸς πάντων. Cf. G. Kaibel, Hermes xxiii. (1888), p.
543 f.


¢ Porphyrius finds fault with Callimachus for confusing
ἁματροχιά with dpuarpoxid. He defines the two words thus :
ἔστι δὲ ἁματροχιὰ τὸ ἅμα τρέχειν καὶ μὴ ἀπολείπεσθαι, .. .
ἁρματροχιὰ δὲ τῶν τροχῶν τὸ ἴχνος. In Hom. Jl. xxiii. 423
ἁματροχιὰς ἀλεείνων, the meaning οὗ ἁματροχιά is “ collision,”
but the old lexicons recognize the other use: H.M. 8.υ.
ἁρματροχιά gives the same distinction as Porphyrius, quoting
Il. xxiii. 423 for ἁματροχιά and xxiii. 505 for ᾿ἁρματροχιά, but
8.0. ἁματροχιά᾽ map’ Ομήρῳ ἡ τῶν τροχῶν σύγκρουσις, παρὰ Tots
νεωτέροις δὲ ὁ τῶν τροχῶν ἐν γῇ τύπος. Cf. Suid. s.v. ἁματροχιά,

Hesych. s.vv., Nicandr. Ther. 263 with schol.
5:1


CALLIMACHUS


ἔκλυε. . . τῶν μηδὲν ἐμοὺς δι᾿ ὀδόντας ὀλίσθοι,
Πηλεύς.

Schol. Pind. N. v. 25 οἷδεν οὖν ὁ Πίνδαρος τὸν
Φώκου θάνατον, ἀλλ᾽ ἐκτρέπεται εἰπεῖν. μήποτε
δὲ καὶ τὸ παρὰ Καλλιμάχῳ, ἔκλυε κτλ., οὕτως
ἀποδοτέον, ὅτι at γυναῖκες ὠνείδιζον αὐτῷ τὸν
Φώκου θάνατον.


εἰ θεὸν οἶσθα,
3 > ὦ \ cs ’ ~ ,
ἴσθ᾽ ὅτι καὶ ῥέξαι δαίμονι πᾶν δυνατόν.
Plutarch, Mor. 880 Ε.


/
καὶ tpitatn ἸΠερσῆος ἐπώνυμος, ἧς ὀρόδαμνον
Αἰγύπτῳ κατέπηξε.
Schol. Nicandr. Alex. 101.


ἀμφί te KeBAnv
εἰργμένος ἀγλίθων οὖλον ἔχει στέφανον.
Schol. Nicandr. Alex. 433.


> i’ > 3, ,
ἐγὼ δ᾽ ἤντησα Λυκείου
ἈΠ ἄρτι ἢ t x , 3 ,
καλὸν ἀεὶ λιπόωντα κατὰ δρόμον ᾿Απόλλωνος.


Schol. Soph. 0.7. 919.


« Peleus and Telamon, sons of Aeacus and Endeis, slew
their half-brother Phocus, son of Aeacus and Psamathe.
The reluctance of Callimachus to speak of the deed seems
to be an echo of Pindar’s treatment of the same theme in
Nem. v. 14 ff. αἰδέομαι μέγα εἰπεῖν κτλ.

ὃ The reference is to the persea which Schweinfurth has
now, by examination of the material of persea wreaths from
tombs, identified as Mimusops schimperi, a native of
Abyssinia. The legend was that it was introduced into


312


a


FRAGMENTS OF UNCERTAIN LOCATION
26 (136)


Things were said of Peleus, whereof may none
slip through my teeth ! @

- Schol. Pind.: So Pindar knows of the death of
Phocus but avoids speaking of it. Probably the
passage in Callimachus should be rendered in the
same way: “Things were said. . .᾽᾿ - because the
women reproached him with the death of Phocus.


27 (137)


If thou knowest God, thou knowest that every-
thing is possible for God to do.


28 (139)


-And third the tree which is named after Perseus,
whereof he planted a scion in Egypt.?


29 (140)


And, wreathed about his head, he wears a curly
garland of garlic.


30 (141)


And I met (him) beside the field of Apollo Lyceios
that always shines fair with oil.


Egypt from Persia by Perseus, and that while it had been
poisonous in Persia it was edible in Egypt, Dioscorides i.
129, schol. Nicander, Ther. 764, Plin. V.H. xv. 45, Diodor.
Sic. i. 34, Columella x. 405 ff. See also Theophr. H.P. iv.
2. 1, and for a discussion of the persea and its confusion in
ancient authors with the peach (μῆλον Περσικόν) see W. T.
aa ρον Journal of Philology, xxxiv. 67 (1915), p
87

® ** The Lyceum i is a gymnasium at Athens where Apollo
is worshipped ”’ (schol. Soph. ἰ.6.). λιπόωντα refers to the oil
used by athletes, οὐ λιπαρᾶς παλαίστρας Theocr. ii. 51.


313


CALLIMACHUS


τὸ δὲ σκύλος ἀνδρὶ καλύπτρη
γιγνόμενον, νιφετοῦ καὶ βελέων ἔρυμα.
Schol. Soph. 47. 26. Suid. s.v. κατηναρισμένας.


| ὅς ῥ᾽ ἔφυγεν μὲν
᾿Αρκαδίην, ἡμῖν δὲ κακὸς παρενάσσατο γείτων.
Schol. Aristoph. Nub. 508.


> / / / ’ 3 “-
ἠρνεόμην Θανάτοιο πάλαι καλέοντος ἀκοῦσαι
μὴ μετὰ δὴν ἵνα καί σ᾽ ἐπιθρηνήσαιμι θανόντα.
Suidas s.v. μή". .. μὴ τὸ ἀπαγορευτικὸν ἀντὶ
~ >? a A / 3 /
τοῦ Οὐ Keira παρὰ αλλιμάχῳ: ἠρνεόμην .. .
μεταδήν. τουτέστιν: οὐκ ἀπέθανον πρὸ τούτου,
ἵνα οὐ μεταδὴν καὶ ἐπὶ σοὶ θρηνήσω ἀποθανόντος.
We restore as above.
LAA / > / > - 1
ἄλλικα χρυσείῃσιν ἐεργομένην ἐνετῇσιν.
E.M. sv. ἄλλιξ. Cf. Suid. s.vv.. ἄλλικα and


ἐνετῇσι, Et. Paris. Cramer, Anecd. Par. iv. p. 5, ete.


, \ A " ae ee »
πολλάκι καὶ κανθῶν ἤλασ᾽ ἄωρον ἄπο.
E.M. s.v. ἄωροι.
1 ἐνετῇσι Suid, s.v. ; ἐνέτῃσι.


« The reference is to the λεοντεία δορά, the hide of the
Nemean lion worn by Heracles.

ὃ The reference is to Cercyon, son of Agamedes and
Epicaste. Agamedes with Cercyon and 'Trophonius, son of
Epicaste by a previous marriage, robbed the treasury of
Augeas in Elis. Agamedes was caught in a trap and to
avoid discovery Trophonius cut off the head of Agamedes
and fled with Cercyon to Orchomenus and from there
Trophonius to Lebadeia, Cercyon to Athens. Cf. the story


314


FRAGMENTS OF UNCERTAIN LOCATION


31 (142)


And the hide that becomes headgear for a man,
a defence against snow and missiles.“
32 (143)
Who fled from Arcadia and settled beside us, an
ill neighbour.?


33 (144)

I refused to hearken to Death who called me long
ago, that—not long after—I should mourn thee
dead.°

Suidas: μή as prohibitive particle is found in
Callimachus in place of οὐ. “I refused. . .,” ze. I
did not die before this so that not long after I should


lament thy death.
34 (149)


A cloak fastened with buckles of gold.


35 (150)
And often I drave sleep from my eyes.@


in Paus. ix. 37. This Cereyon is identified sometimes
with Cereyon, son of Poseidon, 6.9. Plutarch, Thes. 2, who
killed strangers whom he forced to wrestle with him until
Theseus killed him. Hence this fragment almost certainly
belongs to the Hecale.
¢ This passage might be referred to the Hecale, if we
suppose that Hecale is trying to dissuade Theseus from
going against the Marathonian bull. As it happened, he
returned safe to find her dead. The passage is quoted by
Suidas to indicate an apparent use of μή for οὐ, i.e. the
negation is confined to μετὰ δήν and does not extend to ἐπιθρ.
Cf. Hom. Od. iv. 684f.
4 Cf. Hesych. dopos* ἄυπνος" Μηθυμναῖοι.
sh is


CALLIMACHUS


ἐν δὲ Ildpw! nada? τε καὶ αἰόλα βεύδε᾽ ἔχουσαι.
Ε.Μ. s.v. βεῦδος: Καλλίμαχος": ἐν δὲ Πάρῳ κτλ.


Ud A \ / “a” a ¢ /
σημαίνει δὲ τὰ ποικίλα ἢ πορφυρᾶ ἱμάτια.


οἵους βωνίτῃσιν ἐνικρύπτουσι γυναῖκες.
E.M. s.v. βωνίτης. Cf. Cramer, Anecd. Par. iv.
180. 20. ς


γαιοδόται“ καὶ σπάρτα διηνεκὲς εὖτε βάλωνται.
E.M. s.v. γαιοδόται. Cf. Suid. s.v. γαιοδότης"


ὁ ἀπεμπολῶν γῆν.


καὶ γλαρίδες σταφύλη τε καθιεμένη τε μολυβδίς.
E.M. s.v. γλαρίς. Cf. Hesych. s.v. σταφύλη.


- > A / ” /
ξεῖνος ἐχιδναῖον νέρθεν ἄγων δάκετον.


E.M. s.v. δάκετον.
ee


μηδ᾽ am ἐμεῦ διφᾶτε μέγα ψοφέουσαν ἀοιδήν.
Ε.Μ. s.v. διφῶ.


1 ἐν δὲ Πάρῳ H.M.; ἐν Παρίῳ δὲ cf. schol. Aristoph.
Wasps 1189 ἐν Παρίῳ ψυχρὸν μὲν ὕδωρ καλαὶ δὲ γυναῖκες.

2 καλαί Bentley ; καλά.

3 ἐνικρύπτουσι Bentley ; ἐνὶ κρύπτουσι.

4 yawodérat] γαιοδάται Sturz (Bentley had suggested


γεωδαῖται).


« The reference is to bread baked in the ashes: ἄρτος
ἐγκρυφίας, panem subcinerictum quem Bannokam_ nostri
appellitant (lo. Maior, De Gestis Scotorum i. 2); Hesych.
$.v. ἐγκρυφίας" ἄρτου εἶδος ὁ ἐν σποδῷ γενόμενος τῷ μὴ εἶναι
κλίβανον ; Athen. 1104 8, 115 Ε.

> E.M. 5.0. σταφυλή (2nd article, p. 742. 44 Sylburg)


316


Ie VSS 2 sa. Oe


τς ait


FRAGMENTS OF UNCERTAIN LOCATION
36 (155)


In Paros are women fair and robed in shining
raiment.


87 (157)


Such loaves as women bake in the ashes for >
herdsmen.?


38 (158)


And land-surveyors when they cast their ropes
from end to end.


39 (159)
Chisels and level and lead that is let down.®


40 (161)


The guest bringing from the underworld the
snaky beast.° ;


41 (165)
And seek not from me a loud-sounding lay.”


confuses this with the μολιβδίς : σταφυλὴ ὀξύνεται καὶ βαρύνεται,
ὥς φησι Πτολεμαῖος [? of Ascalon, in his work Περὶ διαφορᾶς
λέξεων] τὸ μὲν γὰρ βαρυνόμενον ὄνομα ἐπὶ τῆς καθιεμένης
μολίβου παρὰ τοῖς ἀρχιτέκτοσι τίθεται, τὸ δὲ ὀξυνόμενον ἐπὶ τῆς
ὀπώρας.

¢ The 12th labour of Heracles was to bring from Hades
Cerberus whose mother was Echidna. Cerberus had three
dog’s heads, the tail of a serpent, and on his back all
manner of snake heads (Apollodor. ii. 122). Whose guest
Heracles became, is a matter of conjecture ; possibly the
king of Troezen, where he ascended from Hades (Apollodor.
ii, 196).

4 Cf. Ovid, Rem. 381 “" Callimachi numerisnon est dicendus
Achilles.”


317


CALLIMACHUS


δύπται τ᾽ ἐξ ἁλὸς ἐρχόμενοι
ἔνδιοι 1 καύηκες.
E.M. s.v. δύπτης-: δύπται λέγονται αἱ αἴθυιαι.
Cf. schol. Apoll. Rh. i. 1008 δύπτειν ἐστὶ τὸ δύνειν.


ε 3 > A ee Fe Te ,
ὁ δ᾽ ἠλεὸς οὔτ᾽ ἐπὶ σίττην


βλέψας.


ἠλεὰ μὲν ῥέξας, ἐχθρὰ δὲ πεισόμενε.
E.M. s.v. ἠλεός.


εἰδυῖαν φάλιον ταῦρον ἰηλεμίσαι.


E.M. s.v. ἰάλεμος. Cf. schol. Theoer. iv. 28.


αὖτις ἀπαιτίζουσαν ἑὴν 2 εὐεργέα λάκτιν.


E.M. s.v. λάκτιν.


αἰεὶ 8 τοῖς μικκοῖς puxKa* διδοῦσι θεοί.
Artemidor. Oneirocrit. iv. 80 ὀρθῶς γοῦν καὶ τὸ
- » ee | /
Καλλιμαχεῖον ἔχει" αἰεὶ κτλ., E.M. 5.υ. μίκκος.


1 ἔνδιοι] εὔδιοι Schneider, cf. Arat. 913 ff.
2 ἑὴν (which Casaubon had conjectured) Ht. Florent. ;


éxvov :
3 αἰεὶ om. H.M. 4 μικροῖς μικρὰ Artem.


α Τῇ seems clear that, in the poets at least, various birds
of the gull sort were not very, clearly distinguished. Thus
Hesych. s.v: κήξ, ὁ λάρος κατὰ ᾿Απίωνα (time of Augustus to
Claudius, successor of Theon as head of the Alexandrine
School). λέγεται δὲ καὶ καύηξ, τινὲς δὲ καὶ αἴθυιαν ἀποδιδόασιν,
οἱ δὲ κέπφον, οἱ δὲ διαφέροντα ἀλλήλων. Schol. Hom. Od. xv.
479 some say the κήξ is the λάρος, some say the αἴθυια. Ε΄. ΜΠ.


318


FRAGMENTS OF UNCERTAIN LOCATION


42 (167)


And diver gulls coming forth from. the sea at
noon.®


43 (173)


But he being foolish and regarding no omen.?


44 (174)


O thou that hast wrought folly and shalt suffer
hateful things.
45 (176)
Skilled to bewail the white-flecked bull.¢


46 (178)


Asking back again her own well-wrought stirrer.*


| 47 (179)
Always the gods give small things to the small.°


8.0. καύηξ, ὁ γλάρος [.6. λάρος], . . . Ἑὐφορίων᾽ τῆς οὐδ᾽ αἴθυιαι
οὐδὲ κρυεροὶ καύηκες. ᾿ :

® Lit. the nuthatch, a bird of omen. Cf. Lambi i. 191.

¢ Apis, the sacred bull, worshipped at Memphis in Egypt.
Though φάλιος is said usually by the old lexicographers to
mean white (6.0. E.M. s.v. φαλακρός), it rather means with
white spots. Hesych. s.v. φαλιόπουν: . . . φάλιοι γὰρ οἱ
λευκομέτωποι. Herod. iii. 28 describes him as black with a
white square on the forehead, and the monumental evidence
agrees with this. Tibullus seems to translate this line i. 7.
28 ““ Memphitem plangere docta bovem.”

@ There seems to be a play upon éépyn or εὐέργη-ετορύνη,
Pollux vi. 88.

ὁ Artemidorus quotes this apropos of dreams. The good
or evil indicated by dreams is proportionate to the rank of
the dreamer.


319


CALLIMACHUS


re L141 A ΤΗΝ, ” λ ὅλ.
καί ῥα παρὰ " σκαιοῖο βραχίονος ἔμπλεον ὀλπιν.
E.M. s.v. ὄλπις.


2 νΝ
Σκύλλα γυνὴ κατάκασσα καὶ οὐ ψύθος οὔνομ᾽ ἔχουσα.


E.M. s.v. ψίθυρ. Cf. Suid. s.v. ψύθος.


, , ἂξ FOR ΠΈΡΙ, 2
Βριλήσου Aaydvecow ὁμούριον ἐκτίσσαντο.


ee ese / ~ ,
Galen, De praesagiis ex puls. iii. 6 μήτε τῶν Aayo-
«ε / > > σ ~ / /
νων, ws σύνηθες, GAN οὕτω δεῖν φάσκε λαγόνων
3 / ς | ae ma Hs / ae
ἀκούειν, ὡς ἐπὶ τοῦ ὄρους Βριλλήσου KadAiwaxos
wv /, / 9. ἢ / “a > 7
εἴρηκε: Βριλλήσου λαγόνες εἰσὶ νόμου ὃν ἐκτήσαντο.


Φοῖβος Ὑπερβορέοισιν ὄνων ἐπιτέλλεται ἱροῖς.


τέρπουσιν λιπαραὶ Φοῖβον ὀνοσφαγίαι.
Clem. Alex. Protrept. p. 25, schol. Pind. P. x. 49.


δείελον αἰτίζουσιν, ἄγουσι δὲ χεῖρας ἀπ᾽ ἔργου.
Schol. Hom. Od. xvii. 599. Cf. Eustath. ad ἰοο.


Μηκώνην, μακάρων edpavov, αὖτις ἰδεῖν ὃ
} παρὰ] κατὰ Meineke.
2 The text is due to Bentley, who did not decide between
ἐκτήσαντο and ἐκτίσσαντο.
ὃ Μηκώνην. . . ἰδεῖν schol. Pind. JN. ix. 23.


α ὄλπη (ὄλπις) usually Ξε λήκυθος, oil-flask, but see Athen.
495 c τὴν δὲ ὄλπην Κλείταρχος Κορινθίους μέν φησι καὶ Βυζαντίους
καὶ Κυπρίους τὴν λήκυθον ἀποδιδόναι, Θεσσαλοὺς δὲ τὴν προχόον.

> Scylla, daughter of Nisus, king of Megara. When Minos
attacked Megara, he corrupted Scylla, who cut from the


320


i


FRAGMENTS OF UNCERTAIN LOCATION


48 (181)
- And on the left arm a full flask.¢


49 (184)


Scylla,? a lecherous woman and not falsely named


50 (185)


They founded (a city) nigh to the flanks of
Brilesos.°

Galen: λαγόνες is to be understood not in the
usual sense but as Callimachus uses it of Mt.
Brilessos,


51 (187)


Phoebus visits the Hyperborean sacrifices of asses.


| 52 (188)
Fat sacrifices of asses delight Phoebus.?¢


53 (190)


They ask their evening meal and stay their hands
from work.


54 (195 + 465)
To behold again Mecone, seat of the Blessed,


head of her sleeping father the purple or golden lock on
which his life or his success depended, thus betraying her
fatherland to the enemy. Hence she was true to her name
Scylla (σκυλεύω, **to despoil ”).

¢ Brilesos, hill in Attica (Strabo 399). For λαγόνες ef.
Heliod. Aeth. ii. 26.

4 Cf. Pind. P. x. 30ff. where Perseus is said to have
ious the Hyperboreans sacrificing κλειτὰς ὄνων ἑκατόμβας to

pollo,


Y $21


CALLIMACHUS


\
ἧχι πάλους ἐβάλοντο, διεκρίναντο δὲ τιμὰς Σ
: / 2 7
πρῶτα γιγαντείου δαίμονες ἐκ πολέμου.


᾿Αρσινόης, ὦ ξεῖνε, γάμον καταβάλλομ᾽ ἀείδειν.
Schol. Pind. N. ii. 1-


Ἔργῖνος Κλυμένου ἔξοχος ἐν σταδίῳ...
Schol. Pind: Ο. iv. 82.


*Hiw ἀνάσσεσθαι, Διὸς οἰκίον, ἔλλιπε DvdAct.
Schol. Pind. O. x. (xi.) 55.


πολλάκι δ᾽ ἐκ λύχνου. πῖον ἔλειξαν ἔαρ-
Schol. Nicand. Alex. 87. Cf. E.M. s.v. ἐρωδιός.


Ῥήγιον ἄστυ λιπὼν ᾿Ιοκάστου Αἰολίδαο.
Tzetzes, Lycophr. 54 and 739.


αἱ δὲ βοόκρανοιο map’ ἄγκυλον ἴχνος ᾿Αραίθου.
Schol. Lycophr. 409. |


1 Fxe . . . πολέμου schol. Vat. Eurip. Hec. 467.


« There seems every reason to combine the two frag-
ments. Mecone was the old name of Sicyon (Strabo, 382).
For the casting of lots at Mecone ef. Hesiod, Th. 535 ff.

> Arsinoé II. (Philadelphus), married to her brother
Ptolemy Philadelphus circ. 277 3.c., certainly not later than
274/3 (Pithom stele).

° Erginus, an Argonaut, who took part in games in
Lemnos, where the women scoffed at his prematurely grey
322 ᾿


FRAGMENTS OF UNCERTAIN LOCATION


where first the gods cast lots and apportioned their
honours after the war with the giants.“


55 (196)


O stranger, I begin to sing the marriage of Arsinoé.?


56 (197)


Erginus, son of Clymenus, excellent in the (short)
footrace.°


57 (198)
He left Elis, the abode of Zeus, to be ruled ip
Phyleus.?


58 (201)
And often they drank rich oil from the lamp.


59 (202)


Leaving Rhegium, the city of Iocastus ° son of
Aeolus. ὁ


60 (203)
And some by the crooked track of the ox-headed
Araethus. 7


hair, yet he won the footrace (Pind. OQ. iv. 19, Liban.
Ep. 303).

ὦ Phyleus, son of Augeias, bore witness against his
father when he refused to reward Heracles for cleaning his
stables. For this Augeias banished him, but. afterwards
Heracles slew Augeias and gave the kingship of Elis to
Phyleus (Apollod. ii. 141).

-& Reputed founder of Rhegium, cf. Diodor. v. 8.

7 Araethus here and Lycophr. 409=Aratthus, river in
Epirus (Strabo 325). Rivers were often represented as
tauriform or bull-headed, ef. Soph. Trach. 13.


323.


CALLIMACHUS


A a aA > / ”
καὶ κρῖμνον κυκεῶνος ἀποστάζοντος ἔραζε.


Schol. Lycophr. 607, οὐ E.M. 5.0. κρὶ λευκόν.


τὴν μὲν ὅ γ᾽ ἐσπέρμηνεν “Epwit TiAdwoain.
Schol. Lycophr. 1225 (cf: 153).


Φωκαέων μέχρις Ke μένῃ μέγας εἰν ἁλὶ μύδρος.
Schol. Soph. Antig. 264.


θηρὸς ἀερτάζων δέρμα κατωμάδιον.
Schol. Apoll. Rh. i. 1248 κυρίως of ποιηταὶ τὸν
λέοντά φασι θῆρα, ws καὶ Καλλίμαχος.


καὶ τὰ μὲν Ws ἤμελλε μετὰ χρόνον ἐκτελέεσθαι.
= Apoll. Rh. i, 1809, where the schol. says Καλ-
λιμάχου 6 στίχος.


ἀντὶ yap ἐκλήθης “IpBoace ἸΠαρθενιόυ.
Schol. Apoll. Rh. ii. 867 (cf. i. 187); schol. Pind.
O. vi. 149.
(ἀκαινανῚ
ἀμφότερον κέντρον τε βοῶν καὶ μέτρον ἀρούρης.
Schol. Apoll. Rh. iii. 1323 ἄκαινα δέ ἐστι μέτρον
δεκάπουν Θεσσαλῶν εὕρεμα. ἢ ῥάβδος ποιμενικὴ
παρὰ [Πελασγοῖς ηὑρημένη" περὶ ἧς “Καλλίμαχός
φησιν: ἀμφότερον κτλ. Cf. E.M. s.v. ἄκαινα.


«α Probably from the Hecale. Both schol. Lycophr. and
E.M. recognize two senses of xpiuvor, (a) a kind of barley :
τὸ παχὺ Tod ἀλεύρου (H.M.), (6) τὸ ἀπόσταγμα τοῦ κυκεῶνος.

> Tilphosa=Telphusa=Thelpusa on the river Ladon in
Arcadia, where Demeter had the cultname of Erinys.
**He” is Poseidon, **her” is Despoina, i.e. Persephone.
See for the legend Paus. viii. 25, where the daughter of


324


FRAGMENTS OF UNCERTAIN LOCATION


: 61 (205)
And groats of pottage dripping on the ground.


62 (207)
Her he begat with Erinys of Tilphosa.?


63 (209)


So long as the Phocaeans’ mighty mass of metal
remains in the sea.°


64 (211)
Hanging on his shoulders the hide of the beast.4


65 (212)


And these things were thus to be fulfilled in after
time.


66 (213)


For in place of Parthenius thou wert called
Imbrasus.° |
67 (214)


The rod), at once a goad for oxen and a measure
8
of land’


Demeter and Poseidon is left nameless—Ouvyarépa ἧς τὸ ὄνομα
és ἀτελέστους λέγειν οὐ νομίζουσι; cf. Iamb. 9.

¢ Herod. i. 165 tells how the Phocaeans under Persian
pressure determined to emigrate to Corsica. They invoked
terrible curses on anyone who remained behind and in
addition μύδρον σιδήρεον κατεπόντωσαν καὶ ὥμοσαν μὴ πρὶν és
Φώκαιαν ἥξειν πρὶν ἢ τὸν μύδρον τοῦτον ἀναφανῆναι.

4 Heracles and the Nemean lion.

¢ Imbrasus, river in Samos, formerly called Parthenius
(Strabo 457).

7 So our own “rod,” ‘* pole,” ** perch,” and the Roman
as =asser, |


325


CALLIMACHUS


“Ῥιπαίου πέμπουσιν ἀπ᾽ οὔρεος, ἧχι μάλιστα .. .
Schol. Apoll. Rh. iv. 284.


σὺν δ᾽ ἄμυδις φορυτόν τε καὶ ἴπνια λύματ' ἄειρεν.

Schol. Aristoph. V esp. 832 ἴπνια τὰ ἀποκαθάρ-
ματα τοῦ ἰπνοῦ ἢ τὰ πρὸς τὴν κάμινον ἐπιτήδεια
καύσιμα. Καλλίμαχος δὲ τὴν κόπρον τῶν ζώων:
σὺν δ᾽ κτλ. Cf. Suid. 5υυ. iva and ἄειρεν, schol,
Aristoph. Ach. 927.


Κυπρόθε Σιδόνιός με κατήγαγεν ἐνθάδε γαῦλος.
Schol. Aristoph. Av. 598.


οὐδ᾽ ἔτι τὴν Φθίων εἶχεν ἀνακτορίην.


Ammonius, Περὶ λέξ. διαφ. 148.


τεθναίην, ὅτ᾽ ἐκεῖνον ἀποπνεύσαντα. sees


Schol. Aesch. Ch. 438.


χἡὴ Παλλάς, Δελφοί νιν ὅθ᾽ ἱδρύοντο ΠΡροναίην.
Schol. Aesch. Eum. 21.


μέσφα Kadavpeins ἦλθεν ἐς ἀντίδοσιν.
Schol. Aesch. Hum. 21.


* The mythical Rhipaean mountains, where the Danube
was supposed to rise, formed the south boundary of the
Hyperboreans (Aleman fr. 58, Aesch. fr. 197, Strabo 295
and 299).

> Probably refers to Heracles cleaning the stables of
Augeias.

¢ Reference robably to Peleus, cf. Ait. i. 1. 23 f.

@ The title Pronaia refers to the position of her image


326


FRAGMENTS OF UNCERTAIN LOCATION
68 (215)


They send from the Rhipaean mountain where
chiefly . . .*
69 (216)


Together he took litter and filth of the midden.®


70 (217)
A Sidonian galley brought me here from Cyprus.
| 71 (218). οτΆ |


And no longer did he hold the sovereignty of the
Phthians.°


72 (219)
Let me die when I hear that he has breathed his
last.
73: (220) fe
And Pallas when the Delphians established her as
Pronaia.? Σ
74 (221).
Until he came (it came) to the exchange of
Calaureia.’
before the temple of Apollo (£.M. s.v. etc.), of. Paus. ix. 10.
2. This title was sometimes confused with her title of Pronoia,
cf. Paus. x. 8. 6, Aeschin. iii. 108.
ὁ The myth was that Pytho originally belonged to
Poseidon, who exchanged it with Apollo for Calaureia, an
island off Troezen (Paus. ii. 33. 2, x. 5. 6). Strabo 373-4


says Poseidon gave Delos to Leto for Calaureia and Pytho
to Apollo for Taenarum.


S27


-


CALLIMACHUS


τοῦ «τε» μεθυπλῆγος φροίμιον ᾿Αρχιλόχου.ἢ
Eustath. Hom. JI. p. 629. 56.


ἵππους καιετάεντος ἀπ᾽ Etpwtao κομίσσαι.
Schol. Hom. Od. iv. 1, Eustath. ad loc.


ἔσκεν Or ἄζωστος χἁτερόπορπος ἔτι.
Schol. Eurip. Hecuba, 934.


εἰμὶ τέρας Kadvddvos, ἄγω δ᾽ Αἰτωλὸν “Apna.
Schol. Eurip. Phoen. 134 "Apn δ᾽ Αἰτωλόν' ὡς


ἔχοντος αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ τῆς ἀσπίδος τὸν περὶ τοῦ συὸς
πόλεμον: Καλλίμαχος" εἰμὲ κτλ.


μὴ σύ ye, Θειόγενες, κόψῃς χέρα ἸΚιλλικόωντος.
Schol. Aristoph. Pa, 363, Suid. s.v. πονηρός. ζ:
Suid, sv. Κιλλικῶν.


1 ᾿Αντιλόχου ; corr. Ruhnken.


« Archilochus of Paros circ. 650 B.c., famous for his
‘“‘hymns of hate,” or iambic lampoons, ef. Athen. 628 a,
μέτο ὡς Archilochus boasts of his skill in writing dithyrambs
pcs * συγκεραυνωθεὶς φρένας.

ὃ Quoted δρτοροβοῦτψμου, . Ναιόμάξυ σαν (Zen.), for κητώεσσαν,
which some interpreted as καλαμινθώδη = abounding in mint, cf.
Hesych. s.v. καίατα, others as full of pits (καιέται), of. Strabo 367.

¢ The Lacedaemonian girls were ἄξωστοι καὶ ἀχίτωνες, ἀπ-
girdled and without a tunic, ἱμάτιον μόνον ἐπὶ θάτερα ἐπιπε-
828


FRAGMENTS OF UNCERTAIN LOCATION


75 (223)
The hymn of wine-smitten Archilochus.%


76 (224)


To bring horses from the Eurotas abounding in
mint.?


77 (225)


When she was still ungirdled and her mantle
pinned on one shoulder.°


78 (226)


I am the Wonder of Calydon and I bring Aetolian
war.@


‘Schol. Eur. Phoen.: Aetolian war: because he
had on his shield the battle of the (Calydonian) boar.


79 (227)


Theogenes, cleave not thou the hand of Cillicon.’


πορπημένα. Kustath. Hom. 171. p. 975. 37 (schol. Eurip. ἐφ᾽
ἑκατέρου τῶν ὥμων, read ἐφ᾽ ἑτέρου).

ὦ Kurip. l.c. says of Tydeus, son of Oineus, king of
Calydon in Aetolia, “Apy δ᾽ Αἰτωλὸν ἐν στέρνοις ἔχει, i.e. the
device on his shield is a representation of the Hunt of the
Calydonian Boar.. For Tydeus as the Boar of Calydon cf.
Lycophr. 1066, Eur. Phoen. 411, etc.

$ Cillicon betrayed Miletus to Priene. Afterwards he
entered the shop of one Theogenes to buy meat. Theogenes
asked him to point out where he wanted it cut and, when
he stretched out his hand, cut it off, saying, ‘‘ With this
hand thou shalt never betray another city,” schol. Aristoph.
and Suid. l.c,


329


CALLIMACHUS


ἑρπετά, τῶν αἰεὶ τετράφαται λοφιαί.

Schol. Nicandr. Alex. 611 περὶ τῆς σμίλου φησὶν
᾿Ανδρέας περὶ Αἰτωλίαν πληθύνειν καὶ τοὺς
ἐγκοιμηθέντας αὐτῇ ἀποθνήσκειν. ὁ δὲ Θεόφραστος
[Η. P. iii. 10. 2] περ ὶ μὲν τῶν ἀνθρώπων οὐδὲν
εἴρηκεν, αὐτὸ δὲ μόνον ὅτι τὰ λόφουρα τῶν ζώων
γευσάμενα ἀποθνήσκει, λόφουρα δ᾽ εἰσὶ βόες
ἡμίονοι. ἸΚαλλίμαχος δέ: ἑρπετά L κτλ.

Cf. Aelian, De animal. ix. 27 μισῶ μὲν σκορπίους,
φιλῶ δὲ ἀνθρώπους. Καλλίμαχος δὲ ἄρα ἐν τῇ
γῇ τῇ Τραχινίᾳ dde δένδρον τι φύεσθαι καὶ
καλεῖσθαι σμῖλον. ᾧ τὰ ἑρπετὰ γειτνιάσαντα καὶ
παραψαύσαντα ἀρχὴν εἶτα ἀποθνήσκειν.


εἰκαίην τῆς οὐδὲν ἀπέβρασε φαῦλον ἀλετρίς.

Suidas 5.0. εἰκαία, and s.v. ἀποβράσματα, τὰ
πίτυρα παρὰ Καλλιμάχῳ:" τῆς οὐδὲν κτλ. Cf. 8.0.
aAerpis and schol. Arist. Pax 957.


ἷπόν τ᾽ ἀνδίκτην τε μάλ᾽ εἰδότα μακρὸν ἁλέσθαι.
ἐν δ᾽ ἐτίθει παγίδεσσιν ὀλέθρια δείλατα δοιαῖς.


Pollux x. 156. Cf. E.M. s.vv. ἀνδίκτης, δέλεαρ.
τὸν μὲν ἐπ᾽ ἀσκάντα κάθισεν.
E.M. s.v. ἀσκάντης. 3


« According to Bentley τῶν. . . λοφιαί is a paraphrase of
λόφουρα, 7.e. bushy-tailed. It must. be :said that in this case
αἰεί is strange, and λοφιαί, which should refer to the mane or
neck, if we must here refer it to.the hair of the tail, is
awkward, in spite of λόφουρα. It ‘seems at least possible
that λοφιαί here means ‘‘ necks,” and that the ms.
τετρύφαται is right : ¢.e. ‘*animals whose necks are always
bruised,” i.e. beasts of burden, ἑρπετὰ λόφουρα. It is not
necessary to give λοφιή the sense of λόφος in Addoupos, and
this rendering gives meaning to αἰεί. Bentley supposes


330


FRAGMENTS OF UNCERTAIN LOCATION


80 (228)
Animals whose brushes are always well grown.”


Schol. Nicandr.: Andreas says of the yew that it
abounds in Aetolia, and that those who sleep on it
die. Theophrastus says nothing of human beings,
but only that bushy-tailed. animals die if they eat
of it. By bushy-tailed animals he means oxen or
mules... .

Aelian: I hate scorpions but I love men. Cal-
limachus sings of a tree growing in Trachis called
“yew, which, if four-footed things approach and
eat at all, they die.


81 (232)


Ordinary meal, from which the mill-woman has
sifted. nothing coarse.?


82 (233 + 458)


Trap and spring well skilled to leap afar; and
in the two snares (she 5) put deadly bait.


83 (287)
(She) made him sit upon a stool.?


Aelian 1.6. to confuse ἑρπετά, meaning ‘‘ animals” generally
(Hesych. s.v.), with ἑρπετά in special sense of “" serpents.”
Schneider defends Aelian by assuming that he is referring
to some other (possibly prose) passage of Callimachus. M.
Wellmann, Hermes xxiv. (1889), p. 542, agrees with Bentley.

ὃ The antecedent to eixainy might be κριθήν or ἀλφίτου
ἀκτήν. What is meant is whole meal unbolted (ἄσηστος)
and ““ having everything in it” (Athen. 114 £), as opposed
to κριθῆς καθαρῶς ἠσσημένα πάντα (Athen. 111 Ε). Probably
from the Hecale. ¢ Probably Hecale.

4 Reference probably to Hecale and Theseus.


331


CALLIMACHUS


δέκα δ᾽ ἄστριας αἴνυτο λάτρον.
ΕΜ. sv. ἄστριας. Suid. sv. ἄστρια. Cf. -
Hesych. s.v. ἄστριες, Poll. ix. 99.


ζορκός τοι, φίλε κοῦρε, Λιβυστίδος αὐτίκα δώσω
πέντε νεοσμήκτους ἄστριας.
Schol. Platon. p. 319 Bekker ; δ Eustath. Hom.
‘Il, p. 1289. 55.


“ A / > /
ὅσον βλωμοῦ πίονος ἠράσατο.


E.M. s.v. βλῶμός.


τὴν δὲ γενὴν οὐκ οἶδα.
E.M. 5.υ. γενέθλη.


γράμματα δ᾽ οὐχ εἵλισσεν ἀπόκρυφα.
E.M. s.v. γράμμα, Eustath. Hom. Od. p. 1959. 61,
Ammon. Περὶ διαφ. AE. p. 38.


εἰ δέ ποτε προφέροιντο" διάσματα, φάρεος ἀρχήν.
Et. Florent. p. 87, cf. E.M. s.v. δίασμα.


τὸ δ᾽ ἐκ μέλαν elap ἔλαπτεν.
E.M. s.v. etap.


θηρὸς ἐρωήσας ὀλοὸν κέρας.
E.M. s.v. ἐρωή. Cf. Suid. s.v. ἐρωείς.


1 προφοροῖντο Schneider, cf. Poll. vii. 32 στῆσαι τὸν στήμονα
ἢ τὰ στημόνια, Kal προφορεῖσθαι" οὕτω yap ἔλεγον οἱ ᾿Αττικοὶ
τὸ νῦν διάζεσθαι.


α ἄστρις, as ..Μ. rightly explains; is a ὑποκοριστικόν or pet
name for ἀστράγαλος. > Cf. Theophrast. Char. v. 4.
¢ Reference probably to Heracles and 'Theiodamas.


332


FRAGMENTS OF UNCERTAIN LOCATION


84 (238)
And ten dice (he) took for ἔδεε.


85 (239)


I will give thee straightway, dear boy, five newly-
polished dice made from a Libyan antelope.?


86 (240)
As much as he loved the rich morsel.°


87 (241)
His birth I know not.4


88 (242)
And he did not unroll secret writings.’


89 (244)
And if*ever they cast the warp, the με πω of


the robe’
90 (247)


And lapped therefrom the dark blood.


91 (249)
Staying the deadly horn of the beast.’


@ Reference to Nile?

e Quoted to show use of γράμματα-ε συγγράμματα, ““ writ-
ings,” not ““ letters.”

7 Cf. ἱστὸν στήσαιτο γυνὴ προβάλοιτό τε ἔργον: Hesiod, W.
779.

9 Reference probably to Theseus and the bull of
Marathon,

333


CALLIMACHUS


ov Te μάλιστα βοῶν ποθέουσιν ἐχῖνοι.
E.M. s.v. ἐχῖνος.


ἄξονται δ᾽ οὐχ ἵππον ἀέθλιον, ov μὲν ἐχῖνον
βουδόκον.

E.M. s.v. ἐχῖνος; Εἰ. Flor. p. 188 ἄξονται ..
᾿ βουδόκον, so Et. Sorb. ete.


> <2 @ A ¢ / ” / :
ἢ ῥ᾽ ὅτι, τὼς ὁ γέγειος ἔχει λόγος.


ἦχι γέγεια
ἄνθεα μήκωνός τε. ..
E.M. 5.υ. γέγειος.


~ A δὲ: 2 \ Fae
τῷ ἴκελον τὸ γράμμα τὸ Kwiov.
Ε.Η͂. s.v. Oe:


e
τέρπνιστοι δὲ τοκεῦσι τόθ᾽ vides . ..


Ε.Μ. s.v. τέρπνιστος.


πτέβνῃ θ᾽ ἵππος ἐ cuvtncues:
Schol. Pind. O. xiii. 27.


αὐτώρης ὅτε τοῖσιν ἐπέφραδε.
Schol. Pind. P. iv. 104 ἔνθεν. δὴ καὶ αὐτώρης ὁ
τρίπους, ὡς Segrnyen sd αὐτώρης κτλ.


1 ὅν τε E.M.; ὅτε or ὅτι the other Etymologies.


* Cf. Nonn. x. 333f. ; βουχανδὴς ὁ λέβης, AP. vi. 153,
334


FRAGMENTS OF UNCERTAIN LOCATION


92 (250 a)
Which most of all the bellies of cattle desire.


93 (250 b)


And they will carry off (as prize) not a racehorse
nor a cup that would hold an ox.¢ ©


94 (252 a)
Or, as the old tale is, that . . .


95 (252 b) |
Where old flowers of poppy and .


96 (254)
Like thereto is the writing of the man of Cos.’


97 (256)


And sweetest then to parents are their sons . . .


98 (263)
And horse urged by the rider’s heel.


99 (264)


When the tripod of its own motion declared to
them.°


> Reference probably to Philitas (Philetas) of Cos, famous
scholar and elegiac poet, teacher of Ptolemy Philadelphus.

¢ Battus consulted the Pythian oracle about his stammer-
ing voice, but the oracle took no regard to his question, but
τῶ him to leada colony to Libya. Cf, αὐτομάτῳ κελάδῳ Pind.

iv. 60,


335


CALLIMACHUS


ἢ ὑπὲρ αὐσταλέον ἢ Χαρίτων λόφον.
Schol. Pind. P. ν. 31.


ev δὲ θεοῖσιν ἐπὶ φλογὶ καιέμεν Sutras?
Schol. Nicandr. Alex, 450.


ε \ Ψ - Se
ὑπεὶρ ἅλα κεῖνος ἐνάσθη
3 / / »
Αλκάθοον τίς ἄπυστος.
Schol. Soph. 0.C. 8 τίς οὐ πυσματικῶς ἀλλ᾽
ἀντὶ τοῦ ἄρθρου. ὅτι δὲ τῷ τίς ἀντὶ τοῦ pai


χρῶνται, Καλλίμαχός φησιν οὕτως: ὑπεὶρ.
ἄπτυστος [sic; corr. Bentley].


τί δάκρυον εὗδον ἐγείρεις;
Schol, Soph. O.C. 510, Suid. s.v. δεινόν.


μαστύος ἀλλ᾽ ὅτ᾽ ὃ ἔκαμνον ἀλητύι.
Schol. Apoll, Rh. i, 1353.


Τυρσηνῶν τείχισμα Πελαργικόν.
Schol. Arist. Av. 832.


1 ἀσταλέων, ** naked,” Ruhnken, ef. Hesych. ἀσταλής.
μὴ περιβεβλημένος. : pred ὄμπνας schol. Nicand.
3 ἀλλ᾽ ὅτ᾽ Editor; ἄλλοτ᾽.


« The Hill of the Graces, from which the Cinyps flows,
lies between the Greater and Lesser Syrtes. The epithet
αὐσταλέος, incomptus, seems to correspond exactly to
Herodotus’ description of it (iv. 175): δασὺς ἴδῃσι. The


metaphor is the same as ὄρος κεκομημένον ὕλῃ, Hymn i iii. 41,
336


FRAGMENTS OF UNCERTAIN LOCATION


100 (266)
Or over the unkempt Hill of the Charites.*


101 (268).
And withal to burn in the flame wheaten cakes to


the gods.
3 ΟΦ (272)


He settled beyond the sea who unwittingly <slew>
Alcathous.?

Schol. Soph.: tis, not interrogative but for the
article. For τίς as article cf. Callimachus: “He”
etc.


103 (273)
Why wakest thou the sleeping tear?


104 (277)


But when they were weary with wandering in
search,


105 (283)
The Pelargic wall of the Tyrrhenians.°


> Quoted to illustrate use of ris=és. Alcathous, brother
of Oeneus, was slain by his nephew Tydeus, who was
therefore banished (Apollod. i. 76).

¢ For the Πελασγικόν or Πελαργικόν lying below the
Acropolis at Athens ¢f. Paus. i. 28. 3, Thuc. ii. 17, Strabo
221. The Tyrrheni came from Lydia, Strabo 219: Pelasgus
was son of Niobe, daughter of Tantalus of Lydia. Hence
Tyrrhenians = Pelasgians. The Pelasgic wall was supposed
to have been built by the Pelasgians. H.M. s.v. Iedapyixdy
has: τὸ ὑπὸ Τυρρηνῶν κατασκαφὲν τεῖχος κτλ.


Ζ 337


CALLIMACHUS


ἃ πάντως ἵνα γῆρας
αὖθι τόδ᾽ ἐκδύοιμι.

(a) Suid. s.v.a. Καλλίμαχος: ἃ... γῆρας. So
‘schol. Plat. p. 393 Bekker ete. ὦ πάντα συναγείρας,
Hesych. s.v. a and Et. Paris. ap. Cram. Anecd. Par.
iv. p. 84. (6) Ammon. De diff. adfin. voc. p. 27
κακῶς οὖν Καλλίμαχός φησι: αὖθι κτλ. ἀντὶ
τοῦ μετὰ ταῦτα.


εἵνεκεν οὐχ ἕν ἄεισμα «διηνεκὲς » 1 ἤνυσα.
* Apoll. Dyse. 1)6 conjunct. p. 505. 17.


ἔλλετε, βασκανίης ὀλοὸν γένος.
Eustath. Hom. J/. p. 756. 87.


τὰ μὴ πατεοῦσιν ἅμαξαι,
A / πο σ > Ἁ Bin /
τὰ στείβειν, ἑτέρων δ᾽ ἴχνια μὴ καθ᾽ oud.


Olympiodor. in Platon. Phaedon p. 66 Β καὶ Πυθ-
αγόρειον ἦν παράγγελμα φεύγειν τὰς «λεωφόρους
ὥσπερ “᾿τὸ τὰ... στείβειν᾿᾿ καὶ “ἑτέρων 8°”
KTA.; cf. Eustath. Hom. 7. p. 1317. 18 and Eustath.
Prooem. comm. Pind. xxiii. 14.


δύην ἀπόθεστον “ ἀλάλκοι.
Suid. s.v. δύη.


1 διηνεκές in marg. Cod. Par. Bekker, Aneed. p. 1117,
extr.; ef. Ammon. De diff. adfin. voc. p. 106 Καλλίμαχος
εἰπών" εἵνεκεν. . . ἄεισμα.

2 ἀπόθεσθ᾽ mss. ; corr. Porson.


«α« The Editor ventures to combine these two fragments.
338


FRAGMENTS OF UNCERTAIN LOCATION


106 (323 + 286)


Ah! verily, that I might strip off again this old
age ! 4 . . :


107 (287)
That I did not make one continuous poem.?


108 (292)
Plague upon you, baleful children of envy!


109 (293)


To walk in paths where no wheel comes and not
to follow the tracks of others.


Olympiodorus: And it was a Pythagorean precept
to avoid the highways, like the precept (of Callim:)
“To walk,” εἴς."


110 (302)
And ward off unenviable woe.4


Schneider suggested that the object of ἐκδύοιμι might be
yipas; ef. Aristoph. Pax 336.
_ © Possibly refers to-the sort of criticism implied in the
schol. on Hymn ii. 106 (see Introd. to that Hymn).

¢ In spite of καί in Olymp. these two quotations seem
to belong together; cf. Verg. G. 111. 292 ‘*iuvat ire iugis
qua nulla priorum Castaliam molli divertitur orbita clivo.”

4 ἀπόθεστος = ἀπευκτός, deprecandus was by some derived
from ποθέω.ς So Suid. here, ἣν οὐδεὶς ποθεῖ.


339


-CALLIMACHUS


μή με τὸν ἐν cies λέγοι μόνον οὕνεκα RORY


ἤγειρον.
Steph. Byz. frag. s.v. Δωδώνης of. Bekk. Anecd.
p. 1228.


Schol. Apoll. Rh. iv. 1614 ἀλκαία λέγεται ἡ τοῦ
λέοντος οὐρά... KadXipayos δὲ κακῶς ἐπὶ τῶν
μυῶν" τέθεικεν"

ἀλκαίας ἀφεῦσαν.3


φθέγγεο, κυδίστη, πλειοτέρῃ φάρυγι.
Et. Flor. p. 247; cf. ἘΜ. s.v. πλειότερος.


Suid. s.v. Μαραθών"... τοῦτον Καλλίμαχος ἐννότιον
λέγει, τουτέστι δίυγρον ἢ ἔνυδρον.


μεῖον yap ὄντως Τρωΐλος «γ᾽ » ἐδάκρυσεν ἢ Πρίαμος.

Plutarch, Consol. ad Apoll. xxiv. 114 a}; ef. Cie.
Tusc. Qu. i. 39 “Non male ait Callimachus multo
saepius lacrimasse Priamum quam Troilum.”


δράκαιναν
Δελφύνη
Schol. Apoll. Rh. ii. 706.


1 μυῶν Bent. ; μυιῶν or μηρῶν.
2 ἀφεῦσαν Ed. ; ἄφυσσα.


« See Hymn i iv. 286 n. Δωδωναῖον χαλκεῖον was a proverb,
ἐπὶ τῶν ἀκαταπαύστως λαλούντων, Gaisf. Paroem. Gr. p. 131;
ef. pp. 223 and 377.


340


FRAGMENTS OF UNCERTAIN LOCATION


111 (306).


Lest one say of me that I did but wake the
brazen gong at Dodona.%


112 (317)
ἀλκαία is properly said of the lion’s tail, but
Callimachus uses it improperly of mice :
They singed? their tails.


118 (331)
Speak, most glorious one, with fuller ° throat.


114 (350)
Marathon is called by Callimachus ἐννότιος, i.e.
moist or watery.¢ : 7
: 115 (363)
For truly Troilus * wept less than Priam.


116 (364)
The dragoness:Delphyne.


ὃ Bentley wrongly compared Hesych. ἠφυσάμην᾽ ἐφειλ-
κυσάμην, which refers, of course, to Hom. Od. vii. 286 ἀμφὶ
δὲ φύλλα ἠφυσάμην. '

© πλειότερος not, as Ε΄. Μ.. compar. of πλεῖος but double
compar. from πλείων. Such forms (ὀλιζότερος, μειότερος, etc.)
are common in post-classical poetry.

4 Cf. Hecale i. 1. 8.

¢ Troilus, youngest son of Priam, slain, while still a boy,
by Achilles in the temple of Apollo Thymbraeus.

341


‘“CALLIMACHUS


τριγλώχιν ὀλοῷ νῆσος ἐπ᾽ ᾿Εγκελάδῳ.
Choerob. . ap. Bekk, Anecd. 1424 B; cf. schol.
Pind. O. iv. 11 ὁ μὲν Πίνδαρος τῷ Τυφῶνί φησιν
ἐπικεῖσθαι τὴν Αἴτνην, ὁ δὲ Καλλίμαχος τῷ
᾿'Ἐγκελάδῳ.


3 A A 90." 4
ἐπεὶ θεὸς οὐδὲ γελάσσαι
ἀκλαυτὶ μερόπεσσιν ὀιζυροῖσιν ἔδωκε.
Schol. Gregor. Naz. Or. Stelit. i. 70.


πιπράσκει δ᾽ ὁ κακὸς πάντα πρὸς ἀργύριον.
Schol. Thue. vii. 57.


Μοῦσαί μιν ἑοῖς ἐπὶ τυννὸν ἔθεντο
«γούνασι».
Apollon. Dyse. Pronom. Ῥ. 148.


ἄγνωστον δὲ φίλῳ μηδὲν ἔχοιμι καλόν.
Theoph. Simoc. Qu. Phys. 7; Eustath. Jl. 748. 7;
937. 57; Od. 1684. 40.


ἔκ με Κολωνάων τις ὁμέστιον ἤγαγε δαίμων
τῶν ἑτέρων.
Schol. Ambros. Q. Hom. Od. xiv. 197; cf. Suid. s.v.
Κολωνάων. So νησάων Hymn iv. 66 and 275.


οἵ κεν βρωσείοντες ἐμὸν παρίωσιν ἄροτρον.
Apollon. Soph. Lex. s.v. ὀψείοντες.


@ Sicily, under which is buried the giant Enceladus.
342


FRAGMENTS OF UNCERTAIN LOCATION


117 (382)


The three-forked island (that lies) upon deadly
Enceladus.


Schol. Pind.: Pindar says that Aetna lies upon
Typhon, Callimachus says upon Enceladus.


118 (418)


For God hath not granted to woeful mortals even
laughter without tears.


119 (419)


The base man sells all for silver.


120 (420)


The Muses set him when a little child upon their
knees


121 (422)
Let me have no good thing unknown to a friend.


122 (428) -


To share (whose) hearth some cui fate brought
me from Coloni.


123 (435)
Who anhungered pass my plough.?


ὃ The speaker is probably Theiodamas; οὐ Hymn iii.
161». Knaack, Hermes xxiii. (1888), p. 134.


343


CALLIMACHUS


οἱ δ᾽ ὥστ᾽ ἐξ ὀχεῆς ὄφις αἰόλος αὐχέν᾽ ἀνασχών .. .
Orion. Etym. p. 165. 2.


ἀμάρτυρον οὐδὲν ἀείδω.
Schol. Dion. Per. i. p. 318 Bernh.


ots Βρέννος ἀφ᾽ βαπρρέριο θαλάσσης


να ‘ENivew 8 ἐπ᾽ ἀνάστασιν."
Schol. Dion. Per. 74.


οὐδ᾽ ὅθεν ofdev ὁδεύει
θνητὸς ἀνήρ...
Schol. Dion. Per. 221.


καὶ τόσον ὀφθαλμοὶ yap ἀπευθέες ὅσσον ἀκουὴ
εἰδυλίς.
Et. Gud. p. 163. 22, ete.


ἃ βάλε μηδ᾽ ἀβόλησαν.
Schol. ms. in Dionys. Thrac. (Ernesti).


Μουσέων δ᾽ οὐ μάλα φειδὸς ἐγώ.
Cod. Voss. E.M. p. 791. 11.


πάλαι δ᾽ ἔτι Θεσσαλὸς ἀνὴρ
ῥυστάζει φθιμένων ἀμφὶ τάφον φονέας.
Proclus on Plato, Rep. p. 391; cf. schol. AB
Leid. Hom. Ji. xxii. 397.


1 én’ ἀνάστασιν Ruhnken; εἰς ἐπανάστασιν.


344


FRAGMENTS OF UNCERTAIN LOCATION


-


124 (438)


And they, even as a-coiling snake lifting its neck
from its lair...
125 (442)


-I sing naught that hath not its witness.


126 (443)
Whom bBrennus from the Western sea...
brought for the overthrow of the Hellenes.%


127 (445)
And no mortal man knoweth whence he? travels.


128 (451)
For the eyes are as ignorant as the ears are


knowing.
129 (455)
Ah! would that they had never even met!


130 (460)
Not parsimonious of the Muses am I.


131 (466).
And even from of old the Thessalian hales the
slayers of the dead around their tomb.


@ Brennus was leader of the Gallic invasion of 279 B.c.
ὃ The river Nile.


848


CALLIMACHUS


Καλλιχόρῳ ἐπὶ φρητὶ καθέζεὸ παιδὸς ἄπυστος.
Schol. Clem. Alex. Protrept. p. 16.


οἱ δ᾽, ἕνεκ᾽ Εὐρυνόμη Τιτηνιάς, εἶπον, ETUKTE.
Schol. V. Hom. J/. xviii. 399; cf: Apollon. Dyse. De
conjunct. p. 505. 17.


ἀλλ᾽ ἀντὶ βρεφέων πολιόν, νέον, εἴρενα, μέσσον.
Choerob. in Theodos. ap. Bekk. Anecd. p. 1198,
Epimer. ap. Cram. Anecd. Ox. i. p. 413.


᾿Ατράκιον δἤπειτα λυκοσπάδα πῶλον ἐλαύνει.
Choerob. in Theodos. ap. Bekk. Anecd. p. 1846,


\ A A
ἔστιν ὕδος καὶ γαῖα Kal ὀπτήτειρα κάμινος.


Choerob. in Theodos. ap. Bekk. Anecd. p. 1209.


ὔ + A \ 3 / LA
πάσχομεν GoTHVvOL’ τὰ μὲν οἴκοθε πάντα δέδασται.

Et. Florent. s.v. ἄστηνος ὃ δυστυχὴς καὶ πένης"
Καλλίμαχος" πάσχομεν κτλ.


αὐτίκα Κενθίππην τε πολύκρημνόν τε Πρόσυ-
μναν. |
Et. Florent. s.v. Kev@inan. —


2 Demeter. > Persephone.

¢ Kurynome, daughter of Tethys and Oceanus (Hes. Th.
358) and wife of Ophion (Apoll. Rh. i. 503), was mother of
Charis or the Charites (Hes. Th. 907).

ὦ Perhaps from the Linos episode (Aié. i. 2). εἴρην ΞΞ
youth of twenty years (Laconia).

¢ Atracian=Thessalian (Lycophr. 1309, Stat. Th. i. 106,


846


FRAGMENTS OF UNCERTAIN LOCATION


132 (469)


By the well of Callichorus thou “ didst sit, having
no tidings of thy child.’


133 (471)
Some said that Titanian’ Eurynome’ was her


mother.
134 (473)


But, for infants, the grey-haired and the child,
the young man and the middle-aged.@


135 (414).
Then he drives_a wolf-bitten Atracian colt.’


136 (475)
Water there is and earth and the baking kiln.


137 (476)


We suffer in misery ; all at home is expended’


138 (477)


Straightway Centhippe’ and many-cliffed Prosymna.


Propert. i, 8. 25, Val. Fl. vi. 447) from Atrax, town in
Thessaly. Thessalian horses were proverbially good (Strabo
449). λυκοσπάς as epithet of horses indicates excellence or
speed. An explanation is indicated in Geopon. xv. 1. 5
ἵππος ὑπὸ λύκου βρωθεὶς [v.l. δηχθεὶς] ἀγαθὸς ἔσται καὶ ποδώκης.
7 Hom. 1. i, 125.

9 So called as the place where Bellerophon first used the
spur (κεντεῖν) to Pegasus. For Prosymna in Argolis ¢/f.
Strabo 373, Paus. ii. 17. 1, Stat. Th. iv. 44.


347


CALLIMACHUS


Ana ὅπου Κλυμένου τε πολυξείνοιο δάμαρτα.
Et. Florent. s.v. KAdpevos.


μὴ μετρεῖν σχοίνῳ Περσίδι τὴν σοφίην.
Plutarch, De eail. 10, p. 602.


ὃ προἵμης ὥρης θηρίον od λέγεται.

Galen in Hippocr. De fract. iii. 51 ὃ ἠλίθιος
εὐήθης ὁμοίως λέγεται TH τε γλυκείᾳ Kal τῷ
καλλίᾳ, γλυκεῖαν μὲν τὴν σῦν ὀνομαζόντων τῶν
ἀνθρώπων ὅταν θύηται τοῖς θεοῖς εὐφημίας
ἕνεκα, καλλίαν δὲ τὸν πίθηκον, ἐπειδὴ καὶ τούτου
τὴν προσηγορίαν φυλάττοντες λέγουσιν, ὥσπερ καὶ
Καλλίμαχος" ὃ πρὸ μιῆς [corr. Nauck] κτλ.

Cf. Lucian, Amor. 39 εἰ γοῦν ἀπὸ τῆς vuKTépov
κοίτης πρὸς ὄρθρον ἂν ἴδοι τις ἀνισταμένας γυ-᾿
ναῖκας, αἰσχίους νομίσει θηρίων τῶν πρωΐας ὥρας
ὀνομασθῆναι δυσκληδονίστων.


Περσίη ἧς θ᾽ ἕνεκεν πένθος ἀπωμόσατο.
Apollon. Dyse. De conjunct. p. 504. 30.


ἀρχόμενοι μανίην ὀξυτάτην ἔχομεν.


α Demeter. > Persephone.

¢ Clymenus : by-name of Hades especially in Hermione,
ef, Athen. 624 £.

@ Hades is πολυδέκτης Hom. H. v. 9, πολυσημάντωρ πολυ-
δέγμων ἐδ. 31, πανδοκεύς Lycophr. 655, rodvéevos Aesch. fr.
229,


348


FRAGMENTS OF UNCERTAIN LOCATION


139 (478)
_ Where (they worship) Deo® and the spouse? of
Clymenus,’ host of many guests.?


140 (481)
Measure not wisdom by a Persian chain.®


- 141 (482)


The beast which is not mentioned in the early
hours.


Galen: The foolish person is called εὐήθης (lit. of
good character, decent, honest) in the same way that
men call the pig “sweet” by way of euphemism
when it is sacrificed to the gods, and the ape’
“ pretty ’’—for the ape also people avoid calling by
its own name, as Callimachus says “‘ The beast,” ete.

Lucian: At any rate if one were to see women
when they rise in the morning after a night in bed,
he would think them uglier than the beasts whom it
is ill-omened to name in the early hours.


142 (485)


And the persea,’ for which she foreswore her
mourning, :


143 (487)
In the beginning we have keenest rage.


¢ The schoenus as a (Persian) measure of length was
variously reckoned from 30 to 60 stades, ef. Strabo 804.

7 For the ape cf. Pind. P. ii. 72 καλός τοι πίθων, παρὰ
παισὶν αἰεὶ καλός, and for εὐήθης see Thuc. iii. 83 τὸ εὔηθες, οὗ
τὸ γενναῖον πλεῖστον μετέχει καταγελασθὲν ἠφανίσθη.

9 Referring probably to Isis and Osiris. For persea see
fr. incert. 28 ἢ.


349


CALLIMACHUS


Choerob. Dict. in Theod. i, 15 ἐπειδὴ κατὰ τὸν
Θουκυδίδην (ii. 8) “ ἀρχόμενοι πάντες ὀξύτερον ἀντι-
λαμβάνονται καὶ Καλλίμαχος δὲ τὸ αὐτὸ τοῦτο.
λέγει, “ ἀρχόμενοι κτλ. ᾿


νήιδες ot Μούσης οὐκ ᾿ὀγένοντο φίλοι.
Choerob. zbid. p. 193 ; Hephaest. xv.


a “A ς ’, ᾽ 35Ὰ7
παῖς ἅτε, τῶν δ᾽ ἐτέων ἡ δέκας οὐκ ὀλίγη.
Hephaest. xv.


τίκτεσθαι, βροντᾶν δ᾽ οὐκ ἐμὸν ἀλλὰ: Διός.

Hephaest. xv. Cf. Plutarch. Mor. 54D εὐφυής
εἶμι ποιητὴς καὶ στίχον οὐ φαυλότατον γράφων,
βροντᾶν δ᾽ κτλ.


ΝΜ Ὰ αἱ
᾿ «ἄτερ αὐλῶν»
es \ / 3 ~ /
ῥέζειν καὶ στεφέων evade τῷ Ilapiw.


Hephaest. xv.


τέμνοντα σπορίμην αὔλακα γειομόρον.
Ε.Μ. s.v. γειομόρος. Εἰ. Flor. p. 75.


ὁ δ᾽ ἐκ Λοκρῶν τείχεος ᾿Ιταλικοῦ

: . ‘ ἧκεν apvvTwp.

Schol. Hom. Jl. xxii. 56.
1 παῖς ἅτε Gaisf.; παίσατε.


«ΟΠ A:P.v. 289. 4.

ὃ Combined by Dilthey with fr. incert. 41.

¢ When Minos was sacrificing in Paros to the Charites, he
heard of the death of his son Androgeos; he stripped off his:
garland, stopped the flute, etc. Hence the Parians sacrifice
to the Graces without flutes or garlands. Apollod. iii. 210.


350


FRAGMENTS OF UNCERTAIN LOCATION


Choeroboscus: Since according to Thucydides “in
the beginning all are keener to take part” and
Callimachus also says the same thing, “ In the begin-
ning” etc.

144 (488)


Friends who were not ignorant of the Muse.


145 (489)
Like a child, yet the tale of her years is not small.*
146 (490)
To produce, but to thunder belongs not to me but
to Zeus.


Cf. Plutarch: I am a clever poet and write not
bad verse, but “to thunder ”’ ete.’


147 (491).
The Parian is pleased to sacrifice <without flutes>
and garlands.°


148 (491 b)
A farmer? cutting the seed-furrow.


149 (493)

And he came from the Italian walled town of the
Locrians as their defender.’ _

4 Probably Theiodamas, cf. Hymn iii. 161. G. Knaack,
Hermes xxiii. (1888) p. 133, suggests that ἔτετμεν ended the
preceding line.

¢ When Odysseus came to Temesa in Bruttium, one of his
crew, Polites, was stoned to death by the inhabitants. His
ghost in the shape of an evil demon preyed upon Temesa,
until Euthymus, a famous boxer, came from Locris and
overcame him. Paus. vi. 6, Strabo 255, cf. Plin. W.H.
vii. 152 (=fr. 399 Schn.).

351


CALLIMACHUS


ἁγνὸν ὑφαινέμεναι τῇσι μέμηλε πάτος.
᾿Μεϊεῖ. ap. Cram. Anecd. Ox. iii. p. 93.


otre βιοπλανὲς ἀγρὸν ἀπ᾽ ἀγροῦ
φοιτῶσιν.
Choerob. ap. Bekk. Anecd. p. 1253.


ὁ δρόμος ἱερὸς οὗτος ᾿Ανούβιδος.
Strabo xvii. p. 805.


ἵλαθί μοι φαλαρῖτι, πυλαιμάχε.
Schol. Hom. Od. iii. 380.


αἷμα τὸ μὲν γενεῆς Ἐὐξαντίδος.
Et. Flor. p. 134; cf: E.M. p. 394. 34, schol. Dion.
Thrac. p. 850. 26, ete.


νυμφίε Δημοφόων, ἄδικε ἕένε.
Herodian. De monad. p. 10. 8. Choerob. ap. Bekk.
Anecd. p. 1361 B. :


μέσσαβα βοῦς ὑποδύς.
Procl. Hesiod, Erg. 467. Tzetz. Lycophr. 817.


« Of. Hesych. mdros . . . ἔνδυμα τῆς Ἥρας.

> From Strabo’s account of Heliopolis in Egypt.

¢ Athena. ᾿
ἢ Euxantius was son of Minos and Dexithea (Apollod.
ili. 7, cf. Ait. iii. 1. 67) and father of Miletus, the eponymus
of that town (schol. Apoll. Rh. i. 185).
352


FRAGMENTS OF UNCERTAIN LOCATION


150 (495)


Whose task it is to weave the sacred robe of Hera.


151 (497)
Who in their wandering life roam from field to field.


152 (501)
This is the holy course of Anubis.’


153 (503)
Be gracious Lady ὁ of the Helmet, Fighter in the
Gate.
154 (504)


By blood partly of the race of Euxantius.@


155 (505)


Bridegroom Demophoon, unrighteous guest.’


156 (513)
An ox under the yoke. f


¢ Demophoon, son of Theseus, on his way home from
Troy married Phyllis, daughter of the Thracian King
Sithon. He left his newly made bride, promising to return
to her Soon, but broke his promise (Tzetz. Lycophr. 494,
Apollod. Epit. Vat. p. 221 Wagner, Ovid, Her. 2).

7 Both Procl. and Tzetz. explain μέσσαβα as being αἱ τοῦ
ζυγοῦ γλυφαί, apparently the part of the yoke which rests on
the neck of the ox (ἔνθα οἱ αὐχένες τῶν Body δέδενται, Tzetz.).


Qa 353


CALLIMACHUS


«Γαῦδον» . . . ὀλίγην νησῖδα Ἰζαλυψοῦς.
Ammon. De different. p. 103.


Μουσέων κεῖνος ἀνὴρ ἀτέει.
Schol. Hom. 7{. xx. 232.


Φιλαδελφείων ἄτμενος ἦα δόμων.
Et. Flor. p. 51; ef: Diels, Hermes xxiii. (1888) p. 286.


a
αὔλιος ὃς δυθμὴν εἶσι μετ᾽ ἠελίου.
Schol. A Hom. J/. xi. 62.


ὅς τ᾽ ᾿Ιταλὴν ἐφράσαθ᾽ ἁρμονίην.
Schol. Vratisl. Pind. O. xi. 18.


πρώκιον ἐνδυκέως
“φ μὲ
εἶδαρ ἔδων. .
Schol. Theocr. iv. 16.


ὁ δ᾽ ἀείδων Maddes ἦλθε χορός.
Bekk. Anecd. p. 1187.


@ Referring to Ptolemy Philadelphus and Arsinoé Phil-
adelphus.

> The Evening Star.

¢ Xenocritus of Locri Epizephyrii invented the ‘** Locrian ”
ee mode (ἁρμονία Λοκριστὶ προσαγορευομένη schol. Pind.
He);


354


FRAGMENTS OF UNCERTAIN LOCATION


157 (524)
(Gaudos) .. . Calypso’s little isle.


158 (537)
That man is heedless of the Muses.


159 (538)
I was a servant of the house of the Philadelphi.“


160 (539)
The star’ that bids the shepherd fold, which passes
to his setting with the sun.
161 (541)
Who devised the Italian harmony.°¢


162 (542)
Eagerly eating his dewy food.?*


163 (543)
The choir of Apollo Maloeis* came singing.


-@ The grasshopper was supposed to feed on dew.
Theocr. iv. 16, Verg. #. v. 77.

¢ Maloeis (Callim. Maloés) was a by-name of Apollo
in Lesbos, cf. Thuc. iii. 3 ᾿Απόλλωνος Μαλόεντος ἔξω τῆς
πόλεως ἑορτή, ἐν 7 πανδημεὶ Μυτιληναῖοι ἑορτάζουσι.


355


AA TN ama Ne SRR


4 ye
i ως a τ
7 ἕ ᾿ Φ
ν Ν
is ) ore
7 3.4
. ὃ
."}) A \ ι
at. |
ra f |
J Ray Ἕ
Ῥ - Fy Ma .
1}, ᾿ sane pe
μος 4
ae '


mee


abd ce
t


7
‘


Tee (
ae


δι ὦ


δ
ri


a
ars


Fj


-


THE PHAENOMENA
OF ARATUS


fac as
ite


“ae


τ


i
4


INTRODUCTION
1. Tue Lire or Aratus


Authorities. —Suidas s.v.“Aparos and four ancient Vitae.
(A. Westermann, Biographoi, Brunswick, 1845, p. 52 ff.)


Vita I., first published by Petrus Victorius with other
Greek commentaries on Aratus, Florence, 1567 ; then by
Dionysius Petavius in Uranologium, Lutet. Paris. 1630,
p- 268 ff.

This life, once supposed to be by Achilles Tatius,
author of the romance of Leucippe and Cleitophon (cire.
fourth cent. a.p.), is shown by E. Maass, Avatea, Berlin,
1892, p. 16, to be by one Achilles, a grammarian, who
lived towards the end of the second or beginning of the
third cent. a.p. It is printed in Buhle ii. p. 429 ff. ;
Maass, Comment. in Arati Reliquias p. 76 ff.

Vita II., first published by Iriarte in Catal. bibl. Matrit.
i. p. 201 from cod. Matritensis lxi. written by Con-
stantinus Lascaris in a.p. 1465. This ms., which has
also Vita IV., divides Aratus into four books (1) 1-450, (2)
451-732, (3) 733-818, (4) 819-end. Maass suspects that
this Life is the work of Sporos of Nicaea (cire. a.p. 200),
who commented on Aratus (Leont. Περὶ κατασκευῆς ’Aparelas
σφαίρας᾽ ὥς φησι Σπόρος ὁ ὑπομνηματιστής ; ef. schol. Arat.
541, 1091). It is printed in Buhle ii. p. 442 ff. ; Maass,
Comment. in Arat. Relig. p. 323 f.

Vita III., first ed. by Ruhnken from cod. Baroccianus
in Ernesti’s edition of Callimachus i. p. 590; then by
Iriarte from cod. Matritensis lxvii. in Catal. bibl. Matrit.
p. 239. This life is also given in cod. Vindobonensis.


359


ARATUS


- This, which is the best Life, is expressly attributed in
cod. Mediolan. C 263 to Theon (Θέωνος ᾿Αλεξανδρέως γένος
᾿Αράτου) and Maass has shown that this ascription is
correct (Analecta Eratosth. Berlin, 1883, in Kiessling u.
Wilamowitz, Philol. Untersuch. vi.). There exists a trans-
lation of this in bad Latin (ed. Breysig, Erfurt, 1870)
which occasionally fills up gaps in the Greek text. Buhle
ii. 444 ff. ἧ

Vita IV., first published by Aldus Manutius, and
thenceforth. the Vita usually prefixed to editions of
Aratus (e.g. Buhle, Bekker). It is the most worthless of
the Vitae. Maass, Comment. in Arat. Relig. p. 324 ff.

There is so much similarity between the Vitae that
they may be assumed to be all derived ultimately from
the same original Life, possibly that of the Stoic Boéthus
of Sidon (circ. 150 B.c.) who wrote upon Aratus (Vita 11.)
in at least four books (Geminus Isag. 14 ὅθεν καὶ Βόηθος ὁ
φιλόσοφος ἐν τῷ τετάρτῳ βιβλίῳ τῆς ᾿Αράτου ἐξηγήσεως KTH,
Cicero, De divin. i. 8. 13 * Atque his rerum praesensio-
nibus Prognostica tua referta sunt. Quis igitur elicere
causas praesensionum potest? LEtsi video Boéthum
Stoicum esse conatum, qui hactenus aliquid egit, ut
earum rationem rerum explicaret, quae in mari caelove
fierent.” Cf schol. Arat. 1091).


Aratus of Soli in Cilicia—as distinct from Soli in
Cyprus—was the son of Athenodorus and Letophila
(Lenodora, Vita IV.). His family was one of some dis-
tinction in war and in other fields (Vita I/.). He was an
older contemporary of Callimachus (Vita J. μέμνηται γοῦν
αὐτοῦ καὶ Καλλίμαχος ws πρεσβυτέρου οὐ μόνον ἐν Tots ἐπιγράμ-
μασιν ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐν τοῖς πρὸς Πραξιφάνην, πάνυ ἐπαινῶν αὐτὸν ὡς
πολυμαθῆ καὶ ἄριστον ποιητὴν ; the relation is reversed in
Vita IV. γηραιῷ δὲ τῷ Κυρηναιῷ ἐπεβάλετο, παρ᾽ οὗ καὶ ἐπιγράμ-
ματος ἠξιώθη), and his birth may be put about 315 B.c.

He was a pupil (ἀκουστής), Suidas says, of the gram-
marian Menecrates of Ephesus and of the philosophers
Timon and Menedemus.

Menecrates was author of an Ἔργα or poem on agri-


360


INTRODUCTION


culture, apparently in the manner of Hesiod (Z.M. s.v.
nOubs. Of. Varro, R.R. i. 1. 9 “easdem res etiam quidam
versibus, ut Hesiodus Ascraeus, Menecrates Ephesius,”
and iii. 16. 18; Pliny V.H. Ind. viii. and xi. ; and xi. § 17).
From Varro, &.#. iii. 16. 18 and the last two references
in Pliny it appears that he was an authority upon bees
and the flowers on which they fed (schol. Nicand. Alex.
172). It appears from schol. Eurip. Rhes. 529 that he
also wrote on astronomy (Diels, Poet. Philos. Fr. p. 171).
We may fairly assume that it was at Ephesus and in his
earliest years that Aratus was his pupil.

Timon of Phlius (Life by Diog. Laert. ix. 12), sceptic,
philosopher, and sillographist, lived cire. 320-cire. 230
B.c. Accidentally making the acquaintance of Pyrrho,
he went to Elis and became his disciple. Afterwards he
made his living as a peripatetic teacher in the towns
about the Hellespont and Propontis, and finally settled
in Athens—some time after 276—where he spent the rest
of his life, with the exception of a short sojourn in
Thebes.

Two statements in Diog. Laert. /.c. are of interest for
Aratus: (a) § 110 ἐγνώσθη (Se. Τίμων) δὲ καὶ ᾿Αντιγόνῳ τῷ
βασιλεῖ καὶ Πτολεμαίῳ τῷ Φιλαδέλῴφῳ, ὡς αὐτὸς ἐν τοῖς ἰάμβοις
αὑτοῦ μαρτυρεῖ. (δ) ὃ 118 φασὶ δὲ καὶ "Ἄρατον πυθέσθαι αὐτοῦ πῶς
τὴν Ομήρου ποίησιν ἀσφαλῶς κτήσαιτο; τὸν δὲ εἰπεῖν, Εἰ τοῖς
ἀρχαίοις ἀντιγράφοις ἐντυγχάνοι καὶ μὴ τοῖς ἤδη διωρθωμένοις.

It would not be relevant to discuss here the question
whether Timon personally visited the court of Phil-
adelphus, though some colour is given to that view by
‘the jesting reference by Timon to the Museum which
is preserved in Athen. i. 22p. That Timon visited the
Macedonian Court is more generally accepted, in which
case the conversation between Timon and Aratus will
have taken place there circ. 276 B.c., the rash emenda-
tion, against which Aratus is warned, referring to the
recent edition of Zenodotus.

The third teacher of Aratus mentioned by Suidas is
Menedemus of Eretria (Life by Diog. Laert. ii. 18),
founder of the Eretrian School of philosophy, who died


361


ARATUS


some time not long after 278, at the age of seventy-four
(Diog. Laert. /.c. 18). Diog. Laert. /.c. 10 says: ἠσπάζετο
(se. Μενέδημος) δὲ kal” Aparov καὶ Λυκόφρονα τὸν τῆς τραγῳδίας
ποιητὴν καὶ τὸν Ῥόδιον ᾿Ανταγόραν. This would seem clearly
to belong to the time when Aratus was studying in
Athens, to which period also would belong his acquaint-
ance with Callimachus, with the stoic philosopher Persaeus
(Vita IV. probably wrongly says Persaeus was his teacher),
with Praxiphanes the Peripatetic (Susemihl 1, 144 ff. who
puts his association with Aratus and Callimachus cire.
291-287).

The VIIth Idyll of Theocritus, the scene of which is
laid in Cos, introduces an Aratus (98 ff.) as one apparently
of the group of poets whose central figure was Philetas of
Cos. It has been very generally assumed that this Aratus
to whom Theocritus also addresses Idyll VI. is the author
of the Phaenomena (so too the schol.). Against the identi-
fication it is pointed out (1) that the name Aratus was a
common one in Cos, occurring on coins® and in inscrip-
tions® of this period. (2) That in Theocritus”Aparos has
the first syllable short, whereas”Aparos of the Phaenomena
has always in Greek the first syllable long.

Of those who accept the identification some put the
Coan sojourn of Aratus before his residence in Athens
(Susemihl i. 286), others put it after (Croiset v. 225).

At some date, probably cire. 291, Aratus came to
Athens where he made the acquaintance of his somewhat
younger contemporary Callimachus, and with him apparently
attended the lectures of the peripatetic philosopher Praxi-_
phanes, but afterwards attached himself to Zeno of Citium,
founder of the Stoic School of philosophy.

At this time too he made the acquaintance, as we have
seen, of Menedemus. Zeno was on friendly terms with
Antigonus Gonatas who may have become acquainted with
Aratus in Athens. It is likely then that it was at the
request of Antigonus himself that Aratus went to the
Macedonian court along with his fellow students Persaeus


« Paton and Hicks, /nsecriptions of Cos, pp. 309, 313, 318.
> Paton and Hicks, Nos. 106 58 and 81.


362


INTRODUCTION


and Philonides soon after Antigonus became king of all
‘Macedonia in 276 B.c. It has been suggested that the
occasion was the marriage of Antigonus with Phila,
daughter of Seleucus and Stratonice, and it was then
probably that Aratus produced his Hymn to Pan in
honour of Antigonus’ victory over the Celts at Lysimacheia
in 277 B.c., allusion being made to the panic fear which
had seized the enemy in that battle.

The Macedonian court was then the home of an active
literary circle. - .

Here Aratus wrote at the instigation of Antigonus his
Phaenomena, following the prose work of Eudoxus which
bore the same name (Vita III. τῶν Ἐὐδόξου Φαινομένων) or
was (Vita 1.) entitled Kdrorrpov. This must have been
between 276-274, because in the latter year this literary
circle was broken up by the invasion of Pyrrhus, and it
was not till 272 that Antigonus was restored.

The legend that Aratus and Nicander of Colophon were
contemporaries and that at the request of Antigonus
Aratus wrote the Phaenomena, though he had no astro-
nomical attainments while he knew about medicine: that
Nicander, on the other hand, who knew astronomy, wrote
by request of Antigonus the Theriaca and Alexipharmaca,
is ridiculed on chronological grounds by Vita 1. and Vita
IV. It is alluded to by Cicero, De oratore i. 69, cf. G.
Knaack in Hermes xxiii. (1888), p. 313.

Upon the invasion of Pyrrhus, Aratus went to the
Court of Antiochus I. (Soter), son of Seleucus, where he
lived for some time and where he completed an edition
of the Odyssey of Homer. It appears that Antiochus
wished him to edit the Iliad as well, but this apparently
he did not do. Subsequently Aratus returned to the
court of Antigonus at Pella, where he died at some
date previous to the death of Antigonus (who died 240--
239 B.c.). .

A monument was erected to him at Soli and his
portrait appears on coins of that town.’


@ *Kvorrpov, Hipparch. i, 2. 2.
ὃ Head, Hist. Num. p. 729.


363


ARATUS


2. Tue Mss.


1. The two oldest mss. of the Phaenomena are:


M = Marcianus 476, containing Aratus (no life or title)
with scholia and prefaces, and Lycophron with scholia.
This ms. was written for his own use by Nicetas diaconus
whom Maass identifies with the distinguished Bishop of
Serrhai (Seres) in the eleventh century. It belonged to
the library of Cardinal Bessarion and contains some anno-
tations by him. Maass distinguishes a second hand
(about. thirteenth cent.) and a third, and lastly Bessarion
himself (fifteenth cent.). _ This is both the oldest and
best ms. of Aratus and represents, in all probability, the
recension of Theon of Alexandria (fourth cent. a.p.) father
of Hypatia and the last known member of the Alexandrian
Museum, a distinguished philosopher and mathematician,
author of commentaries on Aratus, Euclid, and Ptolemy.
Theon’s choice of readings was influenced by his apologetic
tendency in favour of Aratus which led him to adopt the
conjectures of Attalus of Rhodes and possibly to make
conjectures of his own with a similar purpose. Some
variants noted by Nicetas from another ms. may, as
Maass thinks, represent the text of Sporus.

V=Vaticanus 1307 (no life, title ᾿Αράτου Φαινόμενα sup-
plied by a later hand), containing Lycophron with scholl.
and Aratus with scholl. The similarity of writing shows
that this ms. was written about the same date as M.
The two mss. agree closely even in minutiae. Bekker -
believed V to be the older of the two, but Maass, from a
comparison of the scholia and on the ground that V
is in general more corrupt than M, decides in favour of
M and holds that V is derived either from M or from
the archetype of M. 2

2. Later mss. These, dating from the thirteenth to
the fifteenth century, are of two classes. —

(a) Interpolated mss., i.e. containing the interpolated
lines of Maximus Planudes, a monk of Constantinople
(fourteenth cent.). His interpolations, intended to bring
Aratus into conformity with the Almagest or Megale


364


INTRODUCTION


Syntaxis of Claudius Ptolemaeus (2nd cent. a.p.), consist
of 16 lines to follow Phaen. v. 480, 10 lines to follow
v. 501, 14 lines to follow v. 514 (printed in Bekker’s
edition Berlin 1828).

These are: Barberinus i. 43, saec. xv. ; Bodleianus
inter Bareccianos 78, saec. xv.; Bodleianus inter Baroc-
cianos 109, saec. xv. ; Laurentianus xxviii. 37, written
at Florence in 1464 by Joannes Scutariotes and
once belonging to Angelo Poliziano, the famous humanist
(1454-1494) ; Vindobonensis 127 (Lambecius) 341 (Nessel).
v. Buhle ii. p. 377, Groddeck, Epist. Crit. in Arati Phaen.,
ee The τε δ χρὴ recension is of no independent
value.

(6) Non-interpolated mss.—Maass mentions (1) with
scholia: Casanatensis G V 5, saec. xiv.; Vaticanus, 1910,
5. xiii. vel xiv.; Vaticanus, 1692, 5. xiii. vel xiv. ;
Vaticanus 121, 5. xv.; Vaticanus 199, 5. xv. ; Marcianus
480, 5. xv.; Ambrosianus C 32, sup. s. xv.; Ambro-
sianus H 42, sup. s. xv.; Parisinus 2841, s. xiii. ;
Parisinus 2726, 5. xv.; Parisinus 2403, 5. xiii. vel
xiv.; Parisinus 2842; written 1475; Butlerianus Brit.
Mus. Add. mss. 11886, s. xv. vel xvi.; Burneianus
Brit. Mus. 63, s. xv.; Mosquensis (scholia printed in
Buhle i. p. 269 ff.).

(2) Without scholia: Laurentianus xxxi. 32, 5. xv. ;
Palatinus (inter Vaticanos) 137, s. xv. ; Neapolitanus bibl.
nat. ii. F 37, 5. xv.; Marcianus 465, 5. xv. ; Marcianus
317, 5. xv.; Parisinus 2728, 5. xv.; Parisinus, 2860, 5.
xv.; Parisinus 2848, 5. xv.; Palatinus 40, 5. xiv. ;
Rhedigeranus 35, s. xv.

Some of these have an independent value. Maass
selects for his apparatus criticus two which he holds are
not derived from M or V, though, like these, they derive
from the recension of Theon; Parisinus 2403 (A) and
Parisinus 2728 (C).

It is to be added that vv. 1-9, 10-12, 778-817, 822-891
of the Phaenomena are preserved in the LEc/logae of
Joannes Stobaeus (sixth century).


365 -


ARATUS


3. THe ScHorra


The Scholia imply in general the same text as the
Marcianus. Mainly, no doubt, they are founded on the
commentary of Theon, but they contain also notes from
the commentary of Sporos (schol, Arat. 541, 1091) and
others.


4. BrsBui0oGRAPHY


Editio princeps. — Aldine, Venice, October 1499 (in
Astronomi veteres, with scholl. and Latin version, along
with the Aratea of Cicero, Germanicus, and Avienus; the
Astronomica of Firmicus and Manilius; Procl diadochi
Sphaera with version by T. Linacre).

This was followed by a close succession of editions of
Aratus either separately or along with kindred works
(detailed account in edn. of J. T. Buhle i. xv. ff.); Gr.
and Lat. with preface by Phil. Melanchthon, Wittenberg,
1521 ; another (Ὁ) Basel, 1523; Ceporinus, Basel, 1534 ;
I. Mycillus, Basel, 1535; in Sphaera atque astrorum
coelestium ratio, natura et motus, Basel, 1536 ; with Cicero’s
Aratea supplemented from Vergil, Germanicus, and
Avienus, Joachim Perionius, Paris, 1540 (rep. Basel,
1540); ὁ. scholl., Ceporini, Cologne, 1543; ap. Henr.
Petri, Basel, 1547; ap. Guil. Morelium, Paris, 1559,
1595; Arati Phaen. Latinis versibus reddita a Nicolao
Aleno, Essextiano Anglo, Paris, 1561; H. Stephanus (in
Poet. Graec. principes heroicit carminis), Paris, 1566 (a -
new recénsion of the text, which became the vulgate).

In 1567 appeared the editio princeps of the Greek com-
mentators on Aratus (Hipparchus and Achilles [Tatius]
with the scholl. and Life of Aratus), by Petrus Victorius,
Florentiae, In offic. Juntarum, Bernardi filiorum.

In 1600 Hugeianus Grotius (Huig van Groot, 1583-1645)
published his Syntagma Arateorum, Opus Antiquitatis et
Astronomiae studiosis utilissimum, Ex Offic. Plantiniana,
ap. Christoph. Raphelengium, Acad. Lugd. Batavy.
Typogr. In the epist. dedicatory, dated from The Hague
VII. Cal. August. M.D., he refers with pardonable pride
to his youth. The Syntagma contains Aratus, Cicero’s


366


INTRODUCTION


Aratea with the lacunae supplied in the same metre
by Grotius, the Aratea of Germanicus, for which he
used a ms. from the library of Jacobus Susius (Suys) of
Grysenoordt ; plates of the constellations from that ms. ;
notes on Aratus, Cicero, and Germanicus; and Avienus
with! short marginal notes. Grotius’ references to mss.
are very vague—‘‘manuscriptus,’ “alii codices,” ete. ;
Buhle says he used codex Palatinus — presumably
Palatinus 40.

Aratus was included in the Poet. Gr. veteres carminis
her. scriptores of Jacob. Lectius, Aureliae Allobrogum
1606 ; also in a collection of (mainly) astronomical works,
Lyons, 1608. Other edd. are E. Schedius, Gustrou, 1631 ;
John Fell, afterwards Bishop of Oxford, Oxford, 1672
(text mainly founded on Morel); A. M. Bandini, Florence,
1765 (with Italian verse trans. by A. M. Salvini). Buhle’s
judgement of Bandini is worth quoting: ‘‘In Arati editione
textum Grotianum cum omnibus vitiis et mendis repetiit,
ut adeo labores, de quibus conqueritur, non nisi mendaciis
fingendis, quibus Florentinae ecclesiae Subdecano im-
poneret, contineantur. . . . Qui tandem factum est,
ut putidissimus homo celeberrimae Italiae bibliothecae
praeficeretur ?”

The first volume of the edition of Io. Theophilus Buhle
appeared at Leipzig (Weidmann) in 1793 (the preface is
dated Géttingen, 21st Feb. 1793). The mss. on which he
relies are Barberinps, Rhedigeranus, Mosquénsis, and
the Augustanus Eclogarum Stobaei for the lines quoted
by the latter from Aratus. Vol. i. contains Life of Aratus
(iv.); Hypothesis; the Phaen: and Diosem. with Latin
prose version facing the text and the scholia vulgata at
the foot of the page; Leontius De Sphaer. Aratea;
**scholia Theonis” from cod. Mosquensis; and lastly
critical animadversions. Vol. ii. (same place and publisher)
appeared in 1801 and contains the Aratea of Cicero,
Germanicus (with scholl.), Avienus ; notes on these ; ep.
crit. of G. ἘΞ Groddeck. Lives of Aratus I., 11., III.
and the notice in Suidas; with an essay on the life and
writings of Aratus and his Latin interpreters.


367


ARATUS


Editions subsequent to Buhle are: F. C. Matthia,
Frankfort-on-Main, 1817; J. H. Voss (with German
verse trans.), Heidelberg, 1824; Phil. Buttmann (critical
notes), Berlin 1826 (founded on codd. Mosq., Vratislav.
Barberin. Vindob, Palatin. and Bekker’s collations of
Mss. in France and Italy); I. Bekker, Berlin, 1828 (with
scholl.). Bekker’s text is founded on Paris. Reg. 2403,
Paris. Reg. 2726, Paris. Reg. 2728, Paris. Reg. 2841, Paris.
Reg. 2842, Paris. Reg. 2843, Paris. Reg. 2860, Vaticanus
1307, Vaticanus 1910, Casanatensis O. Praedicatorum
Minervitanorum J. 11. 6, Laurentianus Plut. 28 cod. 37,
Marcianus 476, Marcianus 480; and Palatinus (in
Vaticano) 137 as far only as v. 67. Didot (in Poet.
Didact.), Paris, 1851. Finally E. Maass, Berlin, 1893 :
the standard critical edition.

Translations.—Besides those mentioned above, there
are translations in French by Halma, Paris, 18233; in
English by John Lamb, D.D., Master of Corp. Christ.
Coll. Camb., London, 1848 (rhymed verse); by E. Poste,
London, 1880.

Recent literature on Aratus includes: E. Maass,
Aratea, Berlin, 1892, and Commentariorum in Aratum
Reliquiae, Berlin, 1898 ; E. Bethe, Aratillustrationen,
18934; G. Kaibel, Aratea 1894°; Wilamowitz-Moellen-
dorf, ‘Aratos von ‘Kos, 1894; G. Dittmann, De Hygino
Arati interprete 1900; J. Hoepken, Uber d. Entstehung
d. Phaenomena d. Eudoxus—Aratus,, 1905; G. Sieg, De
Cicerone, Germanico, Avieno Arati interpretibus, Halis
Sax. 1886; J. Maybaum, De Cicerone et Germanico Arati
interpretibus, Rostock, 1889; G. Knaack, Wil.-Moell.,
Untersuch. viii., 1886.


ας Rhein. Mus. xlviii. (1893).
ὃ Hermes xxix. (1894).


368


INTRODUCTION TO THE PHAENOMENA
I.


Evpoxus of Cnidus, on whose prose work Aratus based
his poem, lived circa 390-337 B.c. He was a pupil of
Plato and a very distinguished mathematician. Proclus
attributes to him the Fifth Book of Euclid’s Elements, and
among other achievements he is said to have solved the
so-called “ Delian problem” ¢ and to have determined the
volume of the pyramid and the cone by the method of
exhaustion. According to Hipparchus i. 2. 2, ‘two books
on the phenomena [i.e. the starry sphere] are attributed
to Eudoxus, which, with very few exceptions, are in
almost all points concordant. One of his books is entitled
Enoptron, the other Phaenomena ; it is on the latter that
Aratus bases his poem.”

Hipparchus, whose three books of commentary ‘‘ on the
Phaenomena of Aratus and Eudoxus” we possess, belonged
to Nicaea in Bithynia and lived circa 190-120 B.c. His
most famous achievement is his discovery of the Precession
of the Equinoxes.

The poem of Aratus found many commentators, the
most careful of whom, in the opinion of Hipparchus, was
Attalus of Rhodes: ἐξήγησιν μὲν οὖν τῶν ᾿Αράτου Φαινομένων
καὶ ἄλλοι πλείονες συντετάχασιν * ἐπιμελέστατα δὲ δοκεῖ πάντων
"Arrados ὁ καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς μαθηματικὸς τὸν περὶ αὐτῶν πεποιῆσθαι
λόγον (Hipp. i. 1. 8). Besides the commentary of
Hipparchus we possess the Introduction of Geminus of
Rhodes (first century B.c.), that of Achilles (circa a.p. 200),
and lastly, the work of Leontius (circa a.p. 600 (?)) περὶ
κατασκευῆς ᾿Αρατείου σφαίρας.


«κα, 96. the duplication of the cube (διπλασιασμὸς κύβου).
2B 369


ARATUS


II.


Out of many the following testimonia may be quoted.
Hipparchus i. 1. 7 ἡ yap τῶν ποιημάτων χάρις ἀξιοπιστίαν
τινα τοῖς λεγομένοις περιτίθησιν (ef. Pind. O. i. 80]. καὶ πάντες
σχεδὸν οἱ τὸν ποιητὴν τοῦτον ἐξηγούμενοι προστίθενται τοῖς ὑπ᾽
αὐτοῦ λεγομένοις.

Dionysius Thrax (Vita 111. p. 59 W.): συναγορεύει δὲ αὐτῷ
[1.6. Hipparchus] καὶ Διονύσιος ἐν τῷ “ περὶ συγκρίσεως ᾿Αράτου
καὶ Ὁμήρου᾽᾽ περὶ τῶν μαθηματικῶν, ὅσπερ γέ φησιν “ οὐ
τίθεμεν αὐτὸν ἰατρὸν εἶναι γράψαντα τὰς ἰατρικὰς δυνάμεις, οὐδὲ
μαθηματικὸν θήσομεν οὐδὲν ξένον εἰπόντα τῶν Εὐδόξου."

Leontius (Buhle i. 257 f.): ἰστέον δὲ ὅτι τὰ περὶ τῶν
ἄστρων τῷ ᾿Αράτῳ εἰρημένα οὐ πάνυ καλῶς εἴρηται, ὡς ἔστιν ἔκ
τε τῶν ‘Immdpxw καὶ Πτολεμαίῳ συντεταγμένων περὶ τούτων
μαθεῖν. αἴτιον δὲ πρῶτον μέν, ἐπεὶ καὶ τὰ Ἐϊὐδόξου, οἷς μάλιστα
ἠκολούθησεν ὁ ἤΓΛρατος, οὐ λίαν ὀρθῶς εἴληπται, ἔπειτα δὲ ὅτι καὶ
οὐ πρὸς τὸ ἀκριβές, ὥς φησι Σπόρος ὁ ὑπομνηματιστής [com-
mentator], ἀλλὰ τὸ χρήσιμον τοῖς ναυτιλλομένοις ταῦτα οὕτω
διαγέγραπται. :

Cicero, De re publ. 14: “ Dicebat enim Gallus sphaerae
illius alterius solidae atque plenae vetus esse inventum, et
eam a Thalete Milesio primum esse tornatam, post autem
ab Eudoxo Cnidio . . . eandem illam astris stellisque
quae caelo inhaererent esse descriptam; cuius omnem
ornatum et descriptionem sumptam ab Eudoxo multis
annis post non astrologiae [i.e. astronomy], sed poetica
quadam facultate versibus Aratum extulisse.”

Cicero, De orat. i. 15: ‘si constat inter doctos hominem
ignarum astrologiae ornatissimis atque optimis versibus
Aratum de caelo stellisque dixisse.”

Theon, i.e. Vita 111. p. 59W.: ὅθεν τινὲς. . . ἔδοξαν μὴ
μαθηματικὸν εἶναι τὸν “Aparov' ὑπέλαβον γὰρ μηδὲν ἕτερον
τῶν ἘῤΛδόξου Φαινομένων ποιήσαντα αὐτὸν εἰς τὸ σύγγραμμα
θεῖναι. .. βιάζονται δ᾽ οὐ μετρίως. ἣν γὰρ καὶ τὸ εἰδέναι
μεταφράσαι ἐμπειρίας μαθηματικῆς" εὑρήσομεν δὲ αὐτὸν καὶ
ἐπιμελέστερον τὰ πλεῖστα τοῦ Εὐδόξου ἐπιστάμενον.

Achilles, i.e. Vita I. p. δδ W.: ἐπιτετευγμένως δ᾽ αὐτῷ
ἐγράφη τὰ Φαινόμενα, ws παρευδοκιμηθῆναι πάντας ὑπ᾽ ᾿Αράτου.

Vita IT. p. 57 W.: ἀλλ᾽ ὅμως πάντων λαμπρότερον 6” Aparos
ἔγραψε.

370 ¢


INTRODUCTION TO THE PHAENOMENA


Callimachus, EF. xxix.

Leonidas of Tarentum (contemporary of Aratus), A.P.
ix. 25:
Τράμμα τόδ᾽ ᾿Αρήτοιο δαήμονος, ὅς ποτε λεπτῇ

φροντίδι δηναιοὺς ἀστέρας ἐφράσατο,
ἀπλανέας T ἄμφω καὶ ἀλήμονας, οἷσιν ἐναργὴς

ἰλλόμενος κύκλοις οὐρανὸς ἐνδέδεται.
αἰνείσθω δὲ καμὼν ἔργον μέγα καὶ Διὸς εἶναι

δεύτερος, ὅστις ἔθηκ᾽ ἄστρα φαεινότερα.
Meleager, A.P. iv. 49: ἄστρων τ᾽ ἴδριν “Aparov.


Epigr. by Πτολεμαῖος ὁ βασιλεύς in Vita 1.
Πάνθ᾽ “Hynoidvaé τε καὶ Ἕρμιππος τὰ κατ᾽ αἴθρην
τείρεα καὶ πολλοὶ ταῦτα τὰ φαινόμενα
βίβλοις ἐγκατέθεντο, ἀποσκόπιοι δ᾽ ἀφάμαρτον,
ἀλλὰ τὸ λεπτολόγου σκῆπτρον ἤΛρατος ἔχει.


C. Helvius Cinna (Miller p. 87, Baehrens, 17. Rom.
Poet. 324) :
Haec tibi Arateis multum vigilata lucernis
Carmina, quis ignes novimus aetherios,
Levis in aridulo malvae descripta libello
Prusiaca vexi munera navicula.


Ovid, Amor. i. 15. 6:
**Cum sole et luna semper Aratus erit.”


Quintilian, Inst. x. 1. 55: ‘* Arati materia motu caret,
ut in qua nulla varietas, nullus adfectus, nulla persona,
nulla cuiusquam sit oratio; sufficit tamen operi cui se
parem credidit.”


Ill.


Among Roman writers Aratus attracted much attention
and his influence upon Lucretius and Vergil need only be
mentioned. His poem was translated by Cicero in his
early youth (“ admodum adulescentulus,” De nat. ὦ. ii. 41 ;
cf. Ad Attic. ii. 1. 11 (June 60 B.c.) “ prognostica mea cum
oratiunculis propediem expecta” ; as Cicero was then forty-
six years of age, this would seem to imply that at first he
had translated only the Phaenomena so-called, i.e. 1-732).


371


ARATUS |


Of his translation we possess some 670 lines. Some part
at least of the poem was translated by P. Terentius Varro
(82-37 B.c.), surnamed Atacinus from the river Atax in
his native Gallia Narbonensis, who ‘‘ nomen est adsecutus
interpres operis alieni,” Quintil. Jnst. x. 1. 87 (he translated
also the Argonautica of Apoll. Rhod.). Some fragments
are preserved by Servius on Verg. G. i. 375, 397. We
have also some 857 lines of the translation of Germanicus
Caesar (15 B.c.—a.p. 19), the nephew of Tiberius. We
possess further the paraphrase in 1878 lines by Rufus
Festus Avienus (proconsul of Africa a.p. 366). The
Astronomica of Manilius (under Tiberius) also owes much

to Aratus.


ἄν.


After the Prooemium (1--8) Aratus mentions the Axis _
of the stellar sphere terminating in the, North and South
Poles (21-26). He now proceeds to enumerate the con-
stellations.


A. 26-318


The Northern constellations, i.e. those North of the
Zodiac but including the zodiacal signs themselves. His
method is to start with the Bears and to work Southward
to the Zodiac, then return to the Bears and again work
South to the Zodiac, proceeding round the Pole from East
to West. Thus 1 and 2. The Bears, Ursa Minor and .
Ursa Major, also known as The Wains. The modern
derivation of ἅμαξα is ἅμα -- ἄξων, and something of the sort
seems to be alluded to by Aratus in v. 27. 3. Draco.
Hipparchus i. 4. 2 ff. objects that the leading stars in Ursa
Minor are nearly parallel with the tail of Draco, so that it
is incorrect to say with Eudoxus and Aratus that Ursa
Minor is in the coil of Draco; incorrect, too, to say with
Aratus 47 that the Bears are on either side of the coil,
when they are really on either side of his tail. More
interesting is the remark of Hipparchus i. 4. 4 ff. that
Aratus should have said not right temple, but /e/t temple.
He adds an important remark: ‘‘ To say, as Attalus does,


372


INTRODUCTION ΤῸ THE PHAENOMENA


that Aratus conceives the head of Draco to be turned the
other way and not turned towards the inside of the sphere,
is quite unplausible. For all the constellations are formed
with reference to our point of view and turned towards us,
except when one of them is in profile (xardypagov). This
is made clear by Aratus repeatedly; for whenever he
mentions the right or left portion of a constellation, his
statement agrees with this assumption.” Hipparchus
seems to imply that Draco is not conceived in profile (as
he usually is in star-maps) and he holds that not the right
temple but the left (y Draconis) is in a straight line with
the tongue of Draco and the end of the tail of the Great
Bear. It may be noted that German. 58 and Avien. 162
follow Aratus in saying right temple.

84, Engonasin, the Phantom on his knees, who, accord-
ing to the later interpretation, represents Hercules at
the moment when he slew the Dragon which guarded the
apples of the Hesperides. Hipparchus i. 4. 9 points out
that Eudoxus and Aratus are guilty of an oversight in saying
that Engonasin has his right foot on the head of Draco
(69 f.), whereas it should be his left. Attalus attempted
to exculpate Aratus by reading μέσσου δ᾽ ἐφύπερθε καρήνου
δεξιτεροῦ, i.e. on the middle of the right side of Draco’s
head—which Attalus imagines to be turned away from us
(ἔξω τοῦ κόσμου. But it is shown by Hipparchus that this
assumption (see above) is contrary to the practice of
Aratus. Moreover it is more an oversight (παρόραμα)
than an error (ἁμάρτημα) on the part of Aratus, as is shown
by his other references to Engonasin 270 ff., 612 ff., 591 ff.
Hipparchus is here clearly right. Heracles has his club
in his right hand : the advanced knee must therefore be
the left. So he is described in [Eratosth.| Catast. 4
and Hyginus, Ast7. s.v. Engonasin, German. 68; but
Avienus 192 follows Aratus in saying right foot. It is
to be said, further, that the confusion of right and left is
not only extremely natural but is also as a matter of fact
extremely common in ancient accounts of the constella-
tions. Moreover, many mss. of Germanicus actually
represent Engonasin as Hercules with the lion’s skin


373


ARATUS


over his right arm, his club in his left, the left leg bent

to the ground, the right advanced. (Boll, Sphaera,
. 102.)

é 5. The (Northern) Crown, Corona Borealis, said to be

the crown of Ariadne, daughter of Minos, set among the

stars by Dionysus: ‘‘ Ariadneae caelestia dona Coronae,”

Manil. v. 21; ““ Coronam Gnosida,” Ovid, F. iii. 459.

6. Ophiuchus, Serpentarius, Anguitenens, the figure
of aman holding in his hands a serpent (Anguis, Serpens).
He was sometimes identified with Asclepius ; [Eratosth. ],
Cat. i. 6.

7. Scorpio, the Eighth Sign of the Zodiac.

8. The Claws of Scorpio, the Seventh Sign of the
Zodiac ; also known as Zvyés, Libra, the Balance, the
sign which the Sun enters at the Autumnal Equinox.

9. Arctophylax or Bodtes with his brightest star
Arcturus.

10. Virgo, the Maiden, the Sixth Sign of the Zodiac,
identified with Diké (Justice) or Astraea. In token of
rustic simplicity she carries in her hand a corn-ear—
represented by the bright star Spica (a Virginis). Usually
this is said to be carried in her left hand | Eratosth.] Cat.
i. 9; German. 95. Protrygeter, Vindemitor, a star on
the right wing of Virgo; [Eratosth.] 4.6., Hygin. s.v.
Virgo. This line 138 is given by ACM, but it is not
translated by German. 141 nor Avien. 353. The schol.
on 137 mentions protrygeter, but it is not clear whether
he read it.

11. Gemini, the Twins, Castor and Pollux, Third Sign
of the Zodiac.

12. Cancer, the Crab, Fourth Sign of the Zodiac.

13. Leo, the Lion, Fifth Sign of the Zodiac.

14. Auriga, the Charioteer, including the Goat, Capella
(a Aurigae) and the Kids, Haedi (7, ξ Aurigae).

15. Taurus, the Bull, the Second Sign of the Zodiac,
including the Hyades.

16. Cepheus. 17. Cassiepeia. 18. Andromeda. 19.
Equus, Pegasus.

20. Aries, the Ram, First Sign of the Zodiac. 21.


374


INTRODUCTION TO THE PHAENOMENA


Deltoton (i.e. A-shaped) or Trigonon, Triangulum. 22.
Pisces, the Fishes, Twelfth sign of the Zodiac. 23.
Perseus. 24. Pleiades in the constellation of Taurus,
here treated separately on account of their importance
as seasonal signs. 25. Lyra, the Lyre.

26. The Bird, the Swan (opp. to Iovis ales= Aquila,
Manil. i. 350).

27. Aquarius, the Water-Carrier, Eleventh Sign of
the Zodiac.

28. Capricorn, the Goat, Tenth Sign of the Zodiac.

29. Sagittarius, the Archer, Ninth Sign of the Zodiac.

30. Sagitta, the Arrow. 31. Aquila, the Eagle. 32.
Delphinus, the Dolphin.


This ends the Northern constellations: Haec sunt
Aquilonia signa (Manil. i. 379).


B


CoNSTELLATIONS SoutH oF THE Ecripric


1. Orion. 2. Canis Major, the Dog, including Sirius
(a Canis Majoris). 3. Lepus, the Hare. 4. Argo. 5.
Cetus, the Whale. 6. Eridanus, the River. 7. Piscis
Australis, the Southern Fish. 8. Hydor, Water. 9.
Ara, the Altar. 10. Centaurus, the Centaur, often con-
fused with the other Centaur, Sagittarius. 11. Therium,
Bestia, the Wolf. 12. Hydra. 13. Crater, the Cup.
14. Corvus, the Raven. 15. Procyon.


This ends the Fixed Stars.


C


Next Aratus refers to the Five Planets which he
declines to discuss. He does not name them but he
means, of course, Saturn or Cronus, Jupiter or Zeus,
Mars or Ares, Venus or Aphrodite, Mercury or Hermes.

375


ARATUS


D


Aratus next describes the Circles of the Celestial
Sphere (454-461).

1. Gala, the Galaxy or Milky Way, a Great Circle of ’
the Celestial Sphere.

2. The Tropic of Cancer, an imaginary circle 233°
North of the Equator, marking the extreme Northern
limit of the Sun’s annual path.

3. The Tropic of Capricorn, an imaginary circle 233°
South of the Equator, marking the extreme Southern
limit of the Sun’s annual path.

4. The Equator, a Great Circle of the Celestial Sphere,
its plane being perpendicular to the axis of the Celestial
Sphere. It is called ἰσημερινὸς κύκλος, or the Equinoctial,
because when the Ecliptic or annual path of the Sun cuts
it (1) when the Sun enters Aries (circa March 21), and
again (2) when the Sun enters Libra (circa September 23),
day and night are equal all over the globe.

5. The Zodiac, used sometimes generally in the sense
of the Ecliptic, a Great Circle of the Celestial Sphere,
representing the apparent annual path of the Sun among
the stars. The plane of the Ecliptic is inclined to the plane
of the Equator at an angle of (roughly) 233°. This so-
called ‘‘ obliquity of the Ecliptic”’ is what causes variation
in the length of day and night at different seasons and in
different latitudes. When the Zodiac is used more strictly,
it means the belt of sky extending some 6 to 12 degrees
on either side of the Ecliptic and comprehending the
so-called zodiacal signs or constellations. In the Ecliptic
lie the apparent paths of the Sun, Moon, and chief planets,
and it gets its name from the fact that the Moon must be
in or near the plane of the Ecliptic when an eclipse takes
place.

E. 559-732 ᾿


Aratus next deals with the συνανατολαί and ἀντικαταδύσεις
of the constellations, i.e. what stars rise with a given
zodiacal sign or set when the zodiacal sign is rising. The
order in which he enumerates the signs of the Zodiac is


376


INTRODUCTION TO THE PHAENOMENA


from the Summer Solstice onward: Cancer, Leo, Virgo,
Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces,
Aries, Taurus, Gemini.

Since in modern editions of the Classics statements
about the rising and setting of stars are notoriously
untrustworthy, it seems desirable to explain what exactly
is meant by the rising and setting of a star. The early
Greek writers on the matter distinguish the real or
imperceptible rising and setting from the apparent or
perceptible rising and setting. We thus have: (A) Real
Risings and Settings. (1) The true Cosmical Rising, i.e.
Star and Sun rise together (the star, though above the
horizon, being invisible on account of its proximity to the
Sun). (2) The true Cosmical Setting, i.e. the Star sets
as the Sun rises (the star again being invisible because
before it actually reaches the W. horizon it is obscured by
the light of the rising Sun). (8) The true Acronychal
Rising, i.e. the Star rises as the Sun sets (again the star
is invisible as it emerges from the E. horizon because the
light of the departed Sun still illuminates the sky). (4)
The true Acronychal Setting, i.e. Star and Sun set
together (the Star being therefore invisible).

But corresponding to these ye have: (B) The Perceptible
Risings and Settings which are of more practical im-
portance. And these are: (1) The Heliacal rising, i.e.
the first visible appearance of a star on the E. horizon
before sunrise. The star is just sufficiently in advance of
the Sun to be visible for a moment. (2) The Heliacal
Setting, i.e. the last visible setting of a star in the evening
(next night it will have reached the West while there is
still too much light for it to be seen). (3) The (apparent)
Acronychal Rising, i.e. the last visible rising of a star in
the evening (next night it will have risen while there is
still too much light for its emergence above the E. horizon
to be seen). (4) The (apparent) Cosmical Setting, i.e. the
first visible setting of a star in the morning (the previous
night it does not quite succeed in reaching the West
before sunrise; every morning thereafter the interval
between its setting and sunrise increases).


51]


ARATUS


The Rising of a Star normally means its Heliacal
Rising ; the Setting of a Star its Cosmical Setting.

Hipparchus ii. 1. 1 ff. remarks that Aratus in treating
the signs of the Zodiac is concerned with the actual
constellations, not with the ideal divisions of the Zodiac,
and is therefore bound to be relatively inaccurate, since
those constellations are sometimes less, sometimes larger
than the twelfth part (δωδεκατημόριον) which they are
supposed to occupy. Some of them, moreover, do not lie
wholly in the Zodiac but considerably North of it, e.g. Leo
and the more northerly of the two Fishes. He notes
further (ii. 1. 15) that Aratus in his division of the Zodiac
begins with the solstitial and equinoctial points, and so
makes those points the beginnings of the signs, while
Eudoxus makes those points the middle of the signs, the
solstices occurring in the middle of Cancer and Capricorn,
the equinoxes in the middle of Aries and Libra.


F


The Weather Signs, it is now generally agreed, are an
integral part of the poem. ,The separate title given by
some grammarian to this part of the poem is Διοσημίαι or
Διοσημεῖαι, not Διοσημεῖα. For διοσημία in the sense of
some significant phenomenon of the weather οὐ Aristoph.
Ach. 170 f. λέγω δ᾽ ὑμῖν ὅτι | διοσημία ’ort καὶ pavis βέβληκέ
με, Plut. Mor. 419: σύγχυσιν μεγάλην περὶ τὸν ἀέρα καὶ
διοσημίας πολλὰς γενέσθαι, Poll. viii. 124 ἀνίστατο δὲ τὰ
δικαστήρια εἰ γένοιτο διοσημία " ἐξηγηταὶ δὲ ἐκαλοῦντο οἱ τὰ
περὶ τῶν διοσημιῶν καὶ τὰ τῶν ἄλλων ἱερῶν διδάσκοντες. Cf.
Suid. 5.0. διοσημία and Diodor. v. 40, speaking of the
Etruscans: γράμματα δὲ καὶ φυσιολογίαν καὶ θεολογίαν ἐξεπό-
νησαν ἐπὶ πλέον, καὶ τὰ περὶ τὴν κεραυνοσκοπίαν μάλιστα πάντων
ἀνθρώπων ἐξειργάσαντο" διὸ καὶ μέχρι τῶν νῦν χρόνων οἱ τῆς
οἰκουμένης σχεδὸν ὅλης ἡγούμενοι θαυμάζουσί τε τοὺς ἄνδρας καὶ
κατὰ τὰς ἐν τοῖς κεραυνοῖς διοσημίας τούτοις ἐξηγηταῖς χρῶνται.

A vexed question is the relation of the Weather Signs
to the little work Περὶ σημείων which passes under the
name of Theophrastus. On the one hand Maass (Introd.


378


INTRODUCTION TO THE PHAENOMENA


to his edition, p. xxv) thinks that both are based upon an
original written in Ionic. On the other hand Kaibel
(‘* Aratea” in Hermes xxix. (1894)) is of opinion that the
Περὶ σημείων was written after the publication of the poem of
Aratus and that the work shows indications of disarrange-
ment due to subsequent additions from Aratus and other
sources. As these additions agree in style and language
with the rest of the work Kaibel holds that they were
made by the author himself.

The details of the Metonic Cycle referred to in 752 ff.
cannot be discussed here, but a few words must be said.
The problem is to find a cycle which will contain a whole
number of solar years and at the same time a whole
number of synodical months. Meton found that 235°
lunations amount practically to nineteen solar years. He
therefore made a Cycle of 6940 days, made up of nineteen
years with seven intercalated months. The chief relevant
texts are Theophr. Περὲ σημ. 4, Diod. xii. 56, Geminus
37 νυ (Petav.). The words of Aratus 754 ff. have been the
subject of much controversy. They appear to refer to the
Metonic Calendar as distinguished from the Metonic
Cycle., In his Parapegma? or Calendar the first phenomenon
seems to have been the rise of Orion’s Belt, then the rest
of Orion, up to his foot; then Sirius; and all the other
stars, whether governing terrestrial things mainly (the
stars of Zeus) or mainly nautical affairs (the stars of
Poseidon). But Ideler i. 327 thinks the reference is to
the first and last phenomena recorded in the Metonic
Calendar. EE. Miiller supposed the Belt of Orion to
denote the beginning, while Sirius denoted the end of the
stellar year.


- ὦ It was usual for early astronomers to ‘fix up,” παρα-
πηγνύναι, their calendars on pillars in a public place (Aelian,
V.H. x. 7); hence παράπηγμα, affiche, comes to mean
‘**calendar.” Meton’s calendar appears to have begun with
13th Scirophorion (27th June), 432 B.c., his first New Moon
falling on 16th July.’


΄


379


APATOY ®AINOMENA:


“Ex Διὸς ἀρχώμεσθα, τὸν οὐδέποτ᾽ ἄνδρες ἐῶμεν
ἄρρητον" μεσταὶ δὲ Διὸς πᾶσαι μὲν ἀγυιαΐ,
πᾶσαι δ᾽ ἀνθρώπων ἀγοραΐ, μεστὴ δὲ θάλασσα
καὶ λιμένες" πάντη δὲ Διὸς κεχρήμεθα πάντες.
τοῦ γὰρ καὶ “γένος Elev" ὁ δ᾽ ἤπιος ἀνθρώποισιν δ
δεξιὰ σημαίνει, λαοὺς δ᾽ ἐπὶ ἔργον ἐγείρει,
μιμνήσκων βιότοιο, λέγει δ᾽ ὅτε βῶλος ἀρίστη
βουσί τε καὶ μακέλῃσι, λέγει δ᾽ ὅτε δεξιαὶ ὧραι
καὶ φυτὰ γυρῶσαι καὶ σπέρματα πάντα βαλέσθαι.
αὐτὸς γὰρ τά γε σήματ᾽ ἐν οὐρανῷ ἐστήριξεν, 10
ἄστρα διακρίνας, ἐσκέψατο δ᾽ εἰς ἐνιαυτὸν
ἀστέρας οἵ κε μάλιστα τετυγμένα σημαίνοιεν
ἀνδράσιν ὡράων, ὄφρ᾽ ἔμπεδα πάντα φύωνται.
τῶ μιν ἀεὶ πρῶτόν τε καὶ ὕστατον ἱλάσκονται.
χαῖρε, πάτερ, μέγα θαῦμα, μέγ᾽ ἀνθρώποισιν ὄνειαρ, 1δ᾽
αὐτὸς καὶ προτέρη γενεή. χαίροιτε δὲ Μοῦσαι
μειλίχιαι μάλα πᾶσαι" ἐμοί γε “μὲν ἀστέρας εἰπεῖν
ἡ θέμις εὐχομένῳ τεκμήρατε, πᾶσαν ἀοιδήν.

Οἱ μὲν ὁμῶς πολέες τε καὶ ἄλλυδις ἄλλοι ἐόντες 1

1 ἰόντες codd. recc., cf. schol.


* Cicero, De legg. ii. 3 ** Ab love Musarum primordia
sicut in Aratio carmine ps! sumus”’; Germ. Arat. 1f. ‘* Ab
love principium magno deduxit Mesias Carminis ” ; Avien.
Arat. 1 ““ Carminis inceptor mihi Iuppiter.”

> N.T. Acts xvii. 28, ¢ Cicero ap. Priscian. x. 11.


380


ARATUS: PHAENOMENA


From Zeus let us begin;* him do we mortals never
leave unnamed; full of Zeus are all the streets and
all the market-places of men; full is the sea and the
havens thereof; always we all have need of Zeus.
For we are also his offspring ;®. and he in his kindness
unto men giveth favourable signs and wakeneth the
people to work, reminding them of livelihood. He
tells what time the soil is best for the labour of the
ox and for the mattock, and what time the seasons
are favourable both for the planting of trees and for
casting all manner of seeds. For himself it was who
set the signs in heaven,’ and marked out the con-
stellations, and for the year devised what stars
chiefly should give to men right signs of the seasons,
to the end that all things might grow unfailingly.
Wherefore him do men ever worship first and. last.
Hail, O Father, mighty marvel, mighty blessing
unto men. Hail to thee and to the Elder Race?!
Hail, ye Muses, right kindly, every one! But for
me, too, in answer to my prayer direct all my lay,
even as is meet, to tell the stars.

They,’ all alike, many though they be and other


4 The Elder or Earlier Race is variously interpreted in
the scholia as (1)= Zeus (ἐπεὶ αὐτὸς εἶ kal ἡ προτέρα γενεή) ; (2)=
Titans; (3)=the brothers of Zeus ; (4)=the earlier astro-
nomers ; (5)=the heroes. ὁ Cicero, De nat. d. ii. 41.


381


ARATUS


> Pe eas a 7 > ΝΜ A (aee
οὐρανῷ ἕλκονται πάντ᾽ ἤματα συνεχὲς αἰεί: 20
3 \ “ > 2Q> \7 / LAAG ἊΝ Ὁ
αὐτὰρ ὅ γ᾽ οὐδ᾽ ὀλίγον μετανίσσεται, ἀλλὰ μάλ᾽ αὕτως
” Ph ne] τῶν “Ὁ Ὅν ἢ ἐκ 2
ἄξων αἰὲν ἄρηρεν, ἔχει δ᾽ ἀτάλαντον ἁπάντη
a“ A ~
μεσσηγὺς γαῖαν, περὶ δ᾽ odpavov! αὐτὸν ἀγινεῖ.
καί μιν πειραίνουσι δύω πόλοι ἀμφοτέρωθεν:
> > e \ > DB « 3 3 / 2 /
ἀλλ᾽ ὁ μὲν οὐκ ἐπίοπτος, ὁ δ᾽ ἀντίος ἐκ Bopéao 25
¢ / > ~ / / > \ Ν
ὑψόθεν ὠκεανοῖο: δύω δέ μιν ἀμφὶς ἔχουσαι
ΑΡΚΤΟΙ ἅμα τροχόωσι, τὸ δὴ καλέονται “AMAZAI.
« 3 ΝΜ \ A ἃς 35 <9 / >A ”
at δ᾽ ἤτοι κεφαλὰς μὲν ἐπ᾽ ἰξύας αἰὲν ἔχουσιν
3 7 >, 4 \ / /
ἀλλήλων, αἰεὶ δὲ κατωμάδιαι φορέονται,
ἔμπαλιν εἰς ὥμους τετραμμέναι. εἰ ἐτεὸν δή, 80
A ν >
Κρήτηθεν κεῖναί ye Διὸς μεγάλου ἰότητι
: 2 / ,ὔ
οὐρανὸν εἰσανέβησαν, ὅ μιν τότε κουρίζοντα
/ > > ὃ 4 ὃ \ "ὃ ᾽ὔ
Δίκτῳ ἐν εὐώδει, ὄρεος σχεδὸν ᾿Ιδαίοιο,
ἄντρῳ ἐγκατέθεντο καὶ ἔτρεφον εἰς ἐνιαυτόν,
a“ / ω / > /
Δικταῖοι Kovpnres ὅτε Κρόνον ἐψεύδοντο. 8ὅ
καὶ τὴν μὲν ΚΥΝΟΣΟΥΡΑΝ ἐπίκλησιν καλέουσιν,
A ὃ 3 5 we ε “EAL A + ὃ
τὴν ἑτέρην ἝΛΙΚΗΝ. ίκῃ γε μὲν ἄνδρες
᾿Αχαιοὶ
> «4 / Ὁ \ ~ > -
εἰν ἁλὶ τεκμαίρονται ἵνα χρὴ νῆας ἀγινεῖν,
τῇ δ᾽ ἄρα Φοίνικες πίσυνοι περόωσι θάλασσαν.
3 ὃ, «ὦ \ \ A> / ε /
ἀλλ᾽ ἡ μὲν καθαρὴ καὶ ἐπιφράσσασθαι ἑτοίμη 40
Ἁ / ¢e / / > A / ,
πολλὴ φαινομένη. Ἑλίκη πρώτης ἀπὸ νυκτός"
¢ > ¢ εἶ 3
ἡ δ᾽ ἑτέρη ὀλίγη μέν, ἀτὰρ ναύτῃσιν ἀρείων"
μειοτέρῃ γὰρ πᾶσα περιστρέφεται στροφάλιγγι:"
τῇ καὶ Σιδόνιοι ἰθύντατα ναυτίλλονται.
1 οὐρανὸν M ; οὐρανὸς AC.
« Ocean here=horizon, as usual in Aratus.
» The Greater and the Lesser Bear.
° Cic. De nat. d. ii. 41. The translation of ἔμπαλιν κτλ.
is too disputed to be discussed here.


4 Dicton, apparently a by-form of the usual Dicte. It is,
of course, not near Ida, as Strabo points out: καὶ γὰρ ἡ


382


PHAENOMENA


star in other path, are drawn across the heavens
always through all time continually. But the Axis
shifts not a whit, but unchanging is for ever fixed,
and in the midst it holds the earth in equipoise, and
wheels the heaven itself around.

On either side the Axis ends in two Poles, but
thereof the one is not seen, whereas the other faces
us in the north high above the ocean.* Encompass-
ing it two Bears’ wheel together—wherefore they are
also called the Wains. Now they ever hold their
heads each toward the flank of the other, and are
borne along always shoulder-wise, turned alternate
on their shoulders.’ If, indeed, the tale be true, from
Crete they by the will of mighty Zeus entered up
into heaven, for that when in olden days he played as a
child in fragrant Dicton,’ near the hill of Ida, they set
him in a cave and nurtured him for the space of a
year, what time the Dictaean Curetes were deceiving
Cronus. Now the one men call by name Cynosura and
the other Helice. It is by Helice that the Achaeans
on the sea divine which way to steer their ships, but in
the other the Phoenicians put their trust when they
cross the sea.° But Helice’ appearing large at
earliest night, is bright and easy to mark; but the
other is small, yet better for sailors: for in a smaller
orbit wheel all her stars. By her guidance, then,
the men of Sidon” steer the straightest course.


Aixrn πλησίον (τῆς Πράσου), οὐχ ὡς ΓΑρατος ““ ὄρεος σχεδὸν
᾿Ιδαίοιο." καὶ γὰρ χιλίους ἡ Δίκτη τῆς [Ἴδης ἀπέχει (Strabo 478).
Zenodotus of Mallos understood δίκτον 8.5 -- δίκταμνον, the
plant ““ dittany,” hence the epithet ‘‘ fragrant” (schol. ).

¢ Ovid, Trist. iv. 3. 1-2 ‘*‘ Magna minorque ferae, quarum
regis altera Graias, Altera Sidonias, _utraque sicca, rates.”
Cf. Οἷς. De nat. d.}ii. 42.

f The Great Bear (Ursa Major). 9 The Phoenicians.


383


4


ARATUS


\ \ . Ie ΄ “ a > A
Tas δὲ δι ἀμφοτέρας οἵη ποταμοῖο ἀπορρὼξ 45
εἰλεῖται μέγα θαῦμα, APAKON, περί 7 ἀμφί τ᾽
ἐαγὼς
, e > + ¢ / ε / /
μυρίος": αἱ δ᾽ ἄρα οἱ σπείρης ἑκάτερθε φέρονται
ἼΑρκτοι, κυανέου πεφυλαγμέναι ὠκεανοῖο.
αὐτὰρ ὅ γ᾽ ἄλλην μὲν νεάτῃ ἐπιτείνεται οὐρῇ,
ΝΜ \ / / : «ε / εν ᾽
ἄλλην δὲ σπείρῃ περιτέμνεται. ἡ μέν οἱ ἄκρη 50
4. (ἢ \ A « ’ 3 / ΝΜ
οὐρὴ πὰρ κεφαλὴν “Ἑλίκης ἀποπαύεται "Αρκτου:
/ i, / / ” ¢ \ > r Pe,”
σπείρῃ δ᾽ ev Kuvdcoupa κάρη ἔχει" ἡ δὲ κατ᾽ αὐτὴν
a A ”
εἰλεῖται κεφαλὴν Kai οἱ ποδὸς ἔρχεται ἄχρις,
ἐκ δ᾽ αὖτις παλίνορσος ἀνατρέχει. οὐ μὲν ἐκείνῃ


οἰόθεν οὐδ᾽ οἷος κεφαλῇ ἐπιλάμπεται ἀστήρ, δῦ

3 \ 4 / 4 > » e > ς

ἀλλὰ δύο κροτάφοις, δύο δ᾽ ὄμμασιν: εἷς δ᾽ ὑπ-
ἔένερθεν


ἐσχατιὴν ἐπέχει γένυος δεινοῖο πελώρου.
λοξὸν δ᾽ ἐστὶ κάρη, νεύοντι δὲ πάμπαν ἔοικεν
δ > «ς ’ > / Z / aad X tte /
ἄκρην εἰς “Ἑλίκης οὐρήν: μάλα δ᾽ ἐστὶ κατ᾽ ἰθύ
καὶ στόμα καὶ κροτάφοιο τὰ δεξιὰ νειάτῳ οὐρῇ. ρα
~ /
κείνη που κεφαλὴ TH νίσσεται, ἧχί περ ἄκραι
/ / ᾽ὔ \ > A > 7
μίσγονται δύσιές τε καὶ ἀντολαὶ ἀλλήλῃσιν.
“99 ~ >
Γῃδ᾽ αὐτοῦ μογέοντι κυλίνδεται ἀνδρὶ ἐοικὸς
» \ A 3 eet > \ 3 a
εἴδωλον. τὸ μὲν οὔτις ἐπίσταται ἀμφαδὸν εἰπεῖν,


{Ὁ Draco.

> 7.e. never set for Northern latitudes.

¢ Cynosura (Ursa Minor).

4 Hipparchus says it should be 147 temple.

ὁ Cic. De nat. ἃ. ii. 42 ** Et reliquum quidem corpus
Draconis totis noctibus cernimus: ‘ Hoc caput hic paulum
sese subito aequore condit, Ortus ubi atque obitus partem
admiscetur in unam.’” At latitude x° a star x° from Pole
would just touch the horizon at its lowest point. The head of
Draco lies between 33° and 39° from the Pole (34° -- 37°,
Hipparch. i. 4. 8), and hence about lat. 37° it would just
touch the horizon at its lowest point, ¢.e. it lies within the


384


PHAENOMENA |


Between them, as it were the branch of a river,
circles in wondrous way the Dragon,” winding infinite
around and about ; on either side of his coil are borne
along the Bears, that shun evermore the blue sea.?
Now towards the one he stretches the end of his
tail, but with the coil he intercepts the Lesser Bear.¢
The tip of his tail ends by the head of Helice, but
in the coil Cynosura has her head. For his coil
circles past her very head and comes near her feet,
but again, turning back, runs upward. Not one lone
star shines on his head, but on his brows are two
stars lit, and two in his eyes, and one beneath is set
upon the chin-point of the dread monster. Aslant
is his head, and he seems most like as if he were
nodding to the tip of the tail of Helice; his mouth
and right? temple straight confront the end of her
tail. That head wheels near where the limits of
setting and rising blend.°

Right there in its orbit wheels a Phantom form,’
like to a man that strives at a task. That sign no


circle of perpetual visibility (ὁ det φανερὸς κύκλος): ef.
Hipparch. l.c., who refutes Attalus who said it lay some-
what south of this. In other words, a star so situated that
it rises nearly due North will set nearly due North, and the
interval between setting and rising will be very short:
setting and rising blend; οὐ Scott’s Last Expedition (Smith,
Elder & Co., 1913), chap. ix. April 23, ‘*The long mild
twilight which like a silver clasp unites to-day with
esterday ; when morning and evening sit together hand in
ἡ εν beneath the starless sky of midnight.” Homer’s
remarks upon the Laestrygones, Od. x. 82ff., especially
ἐγγὺς yap νυκτός τε καὶ ἤματός εἰσι κέλευθοι, point, as Crates
rightly saw (schol. Arat. 62), to a people of the Far North.

7 Cicero, De nat. d. ii, 42 ““1α autem caput [sc. Draconis]
‘Attingens defessa velut maerentis imago Vertitur’ quam
quidem Graeci ‘Engonasin vocitant, genibus quia nixa
feratur.’” See 270 n. and Introd. p. 373.

2C 385


ARATUS


553 ὦ ’ ~ / > / 4
οὐδ᾽ ὅτινι κρέμαται κεῖνος πόνῳ, ἀλλά μιν αὕτως 66
ΕΓΓΌΝΑΣΙΝ καλέουσι. τὸ δ᾽ αὖτ᾽ ἐν γούνασι κάμνον

3 / ” > 93 > / / ¢ »
ὀκλάζοντι ἔοικεν: ἀπ ἀμφοτέρων δέ of Mov
χεῖρες ἀείρονται" τάνυταί γε μὲν ἄλλυδις “ἄλλη
ὅσσον ἐς ὀργυιήν" μέσσῳ δ᾽ ἐφύπερθε καρήνῳ
δεξιτεροῦ ποδὸς ἄκρον ἔχει σκολιοῖο Δράκοντος. 70

Αὐτοῦ κἀκεῖνος ΣΤΈΦΑΝΟΣ, τὸν ἀγαυὸς ἔθηκεν

ee es / > / >A Lo
σῆμ᾽ ἔμεναι Διόνυσος ἀποιχομένης ᾿Αριάδνης,
νώτῳ ὑποστρέφεται κεκμηότος ϊἰδώλοιο.

Νώ WOTW μὲν Στέφανος πελάει, κεφαλῇ γε μὲν ἄκρῃ
σκέπτεο πὰρ κεφαλὴν "Oduieaon. ¢ ἐκ δ᾽ ap ἐκείνης 75
αὐτὸν ἐπιφράσσαιο φαεινόμενον ΟΦΙΟΥΧΟΝ᾽
τοῖοί οἱ κεφαλῇ ὑποκείμενοι ἀγλαοὶ ὦμοι
εἴδονται: κεῖνοί γε καὶ ἂν διχόμηνι σελήνῃ
εἰσωποὶ τελέθοιεν" ἀτὰρ χέρες οὐ μάλα toa:
λεπτὴ γὰρ καὶ τῇ καὶ τῇ ἐπιδέδρομεν αἴγλη. 80
ἀλλ᾽ ἔμπης κἀκεῖναι ἐπόψιαι" οὐ γὰρ ἐλαφραί:
ἀμφότεραι δ᾽ "Οῴιος πεπονήαται, ὅς ῥά τε μέσσον
δινεύει ᾿Οφιοῦχον: 6 δ᾽ ἐμμενὲς εὖ ἐπαρηρὼς

\ > / / / > ,
ποσσὶν ἐπιθλίβει μέγα θηρίον ἀμφοτέροισιν,
> ~ Ve | / A
SKOPIION, ὀφθαλμῷ τε καὶ ev θώρηκι βεβηκὼς 85
ὀρθός. ἀτάρ of ΟΦΙΣ ye δύω στρέφεται μετὰ χερσίν,
δεξιτερῇ ὀλίγος, σκαιῇ γε μὲν ὑψόθι πολλός.


α Engonasin, Jngeniculus: later supposed to be Heracles
at the moment when he slew the dragon (Draco) which
guarded the apples of the Hesperides (Avien, 169 ff.) ; also
called Gnyx, i.e. On his knees ἐν 591, 615; or Hidolon, here
and 64. By Roman poets called ‘Nixus, Effigies, Imago.
Cf. Avien. 631, Germ, 271.

ὃ Hipparchus i in Arat. et Hudox. Phaen. i. 2. 6 points out
that both Eudoxus and Aratus say ‘‘ right foot,” whereas it
should be ‘* left foot.”

¢ Corona Borealis. Οἷς, 1.6. ‘* Hic illa eximio posita est
fulgore Corona.”


386


PHAENOMENA —


man knows how to read clearly, nor on what task he
is bent, but men simply call him On His Knees.
Now that Phantom, that toils on his knees, seems to
sit on bended knee, and from both his shoulders his
hands are upraised and stretch, one this way, one that,
a fathom’s length. Over the middle of the head of
the crooked Dragon, he has the tip of his right foot.’

Here too that Crown,’ which glorious Dionysus
set to be memorial of the dead Ariadne, wheels
beneath the back of the toil-spent Phantom.

To the Phantom’s back the Crown is near, but by
his head mark near at hand the head of Ophiuchus,@
and then from it you can trace the starlit Ophiuchus
himself: so brightly set beneath his head appear
his gleaming shoulders. They would be clear to
mark even at the midmonth moon, but his hands are
not at all so bright; for faint runs the gleam of stars
along on this side and on that. Yet they too can be
seen, for they are not feeble. Both firmly clutch
the Serpent,’ which encircles the waist of Ophiuchus,
but he, stedfast with both his feet well set, tramples
a huge monster, even the Scorpion,’ standing upright
on his eye and breast. Now the Serpent is wreathed
about his two hands—a little above his right hand,
but in many folds high above his left.


ἃ Cic. l.c., ** Atque haec quidem a tergo, propter caput
autem Anguitenens, ‘Quem claro perhibent Ophiuchum
nomine Graii. Hic pressu duplici palmarum continet An-
guem, Atque eius ipse manet religatus corpore torto; Nam-
que virum medium serpens sub pectora cingit. Ille tamen
nitens graviter vestigia ponit Atque oculos urguet pedibus
pectusque Nepai [=Scorpio].’” Cic. ap. Priscian. xiv. 52
** Huic supera duplices humeros affixa videtur Stella micans
tali specie talique nitore.”

¢ Serpens. 7 Scorpio.


387


ARATUS


Kai δή οἱ Στεφάνῳ παρακέκλιται ἄ ἄκρα γένεια,
νειόθι δὲ σπείρης μεγάλας ἐπιμαίεο ΧΗΛΑΣ.
ἀλλ᾽ αἱ μὲν φαέων ἐπιδευέες, οὐδὲν ἀγαυαί.
᾿Ἐξόπιθεν δ᾽ “Ἑλίκης φέρεται ἐλάοντι ἐοικὼς
ἈΡΚΤΟΦΥΛΑΞ, τόν ῥ᾽ ἄνδρες ἐπικλείουσι ΒΟΩΤΗΝ,
οὕνεχ᾽ ἁμαξαίης ἐπαφώμενος εἴδεται "Ἄρκτου.
καὶ μάλα πᾶς ἀρίδηλος" ὑπὸ ζώνῃ δέ οἱ αὐτὸς
ἐξ ἄλλων ΑΡΚΤΟΥ͂ΡΟΣ ἑλίσσεται ἀμφαδὸν ἀστήρ.
3 / \ \ Ὁ / 7
Αμφοτέροισι δὲ ποσσὶν ὕπο σκέπτοιο Βοώτεω
ΠΑΡΘΕΝΟΝ, ἡ ῥ᾽ ἐν χερσὶ φέρει Στάχυν αἰγλήεντα.
εἴτ᾽ οὖν ᾿Αστραίου κείνη γένος, ὅν ῥά τέ φασιν
ἄστρων ἀρχαῖον πατέρ᾽ ἔμμεναι, εἴτε τευ ἄλλου,
3 / / \ > / +
εὔκηλος φορέοιτο' λόγος ye μὲν ἐντρέχει ἄλλος
ἀνθρώποις, ὡς δῆθεν ἐπιχθονίη πάρος ἦεν,
ἤρχετο δ᾽ ᾿ ἀνθρώπων. κατεναντίη, οὐδέ ποτ᾽ ἀνδρῶν
οὐδέ ποτ᾽ ἀρχαίων ἠνήνατο φῦλα γυναικῶν,
ἀλλ᾽ ἀναμὶξ ἐκάθητο, καὶ. ἀθανάτη περ ἐοῦσα.
καί é Δίκην. καλέεσκον" ἀγειρομένη δὲ γέροντας,
ἠέ που εἰν ἀγορῇ ἢ εὐρυχόρῳ ἐν ἀγυιῇ,
δημοτέρας ἤειδεν ἐπισπέρχουσα θέμιστας.
οὔπω λευγαλέου τότε νείκεος ἠπίσταντο
0." ’ / 0." ~
οὐδὲ διακρίσιος πολυμεμῴφέος οὐδὲ κυδοιμοῦ,
Ψ > » \ > > 4, /
αὕτως δ᾽ ἔζωον: χαλεπὴ δ᾽ ἀπέκειτο θάλασσα,
καὶ βίον οὔπω νῆες ἀπόπροθεν ἠγίνεσκον,
ἀλλὰ βόες καὶ ἄροτρα καὶ αὐτή, πότνια λαῶν,
μυρία πάντα παρεῖχε Δίκη, δώτειρα δικαίων.
τόφρ᾽ ἦν, ὄφρ᾽ ἔτι γαῖα γένος χρύσειον ἔφερβεν.
ἀργυρέῳ. δ᾽ ὀλίγη τε καὶ οὐκέτι πάμπαν ἑτοίμη *
1 ὁμοίη A.
« Scorpion’s Claws or Libra.
> Bootes. Cic. /.c. “" Septentriones autem sequitur ‘ Arcto-


phylax, vulgo qui dicitur esse Bootes, Quod quasi temoni
adiunctam prae se quatit Arctum.’ Dein quae sequuntur.


388


90


95


100


105


110


115


PHAENOMENA


Toward the Crown leans the Serpent’s jaw, but
beneath his coiling form seek thou for the mighty
Claws%; they are scant of light and nowise brilliant.

Behind Helice, like to one that drives, is borne
along Arctophylax whom men also call Bodtes,® since
he seems to lay hand on the wain-like Bear. Very
bright is he all; but beneath his belt wheels a star,
bright beyond the others, Arcturus himself.

Beneath both feet of Boétes mark the Maiden,°
who in her hands bears the gleaming Ear of Corn.@
Whether she be daughter of Astraeus, who, men say,
was of old the father of the stars, or child of other
sire, untroubled be her course! But another tale is
current among men, how of old she dwelt on earth
and met men face to face, nor ever disdained in
olden time the tribes of men and women, but mingling
with them took her seat, immortal though she was.
Her men called Justice; but she assembling the
elders, it might be in the market-place or in the
wide-wayed streets, uttered her voice, ever urging
on them judgements kinder to the people. Not yet
in that age had men knowledge of hateful strife, or
carping contention, or din of battle, but a simple life
they lived. Far from them was the cruel sea and
not yet from afar did ships bring their livelihood, but
the oxen and the plough and Justice herself, queen
of the peoples, giver of things just, abundantly
supplied their every need. Even so long as the
earth still nurtured the Golden Race, she had her
dwelling on earth. But with the Silver Race only


Huic enim Booti ‘ subter praecordia fixa videtur Stella micans
radiis, Arcturus nomine claro.’”
¢ Virgo. Cic. 1.6. ** cuius [Arcturi] pedibus subiecta fertur
“ Spicum inlustre tenens splendenti corpore Virgo.”’
@ Spica.
389


ARATUS


ὡμίλει, ποθέουσα παλαιῶν ἤθεα λαῶν.
ἀλλ᾽ ἔμπης ἔτι κεῖνο κατ᾽ ἀργύρεον γένος ἦεν"
δ 3 3 διε. ἢ ς ,ὕ > /
ἤρχετο δ᾽ ἐξ ὀρέων ὑποδείελος ἠχήέντων
μουνάξ, οὐδέ τεῳ ἐπεμίσγετο μειλιχίοισιν'
3 > ε 4 3 > Y / : 7 A
ἀλλ᾽ ὁπότ᾽. ἀνθρώπων μεγάλας πλήσαιτο κολώνας, 120
ἠπείλει δὴ ἔπειτα καθαπτομένη κακότητος,
3 4 > »γ > A 3 ᾽ὔ /
οὐδ᾽ ἔτ᾽ ἔφη εἰσωπὸς ἐλεύσεσθαι καλέουσιν"
“οἵην χρύσειοι πατέρες γενεὴν ἐλίποντο
χειροτέρην: ὑμεῖς δὲ κακώτερα τεξείεσθε.
\ 7 / \ \ Vs / e
καὶ δή που πόλεμοι, Kat δὴ καὶ ἀνάρσιον αἷμα 125
33
ἔσσεται ἀνθρώποισι, κακὸν δ᾽ ἐπικείσεται ἄλγος.
ὡς εἰποῦσ᾽ ὀρέων ἐπεμαίετο, τοὺς δ᾽ ἄρα λαοὺς
εἰς αὐτὴν ἔτι πάντας ἐλίμπανε παπταίνοντας.
5 > @& \ > a : ae ε 3 3 /
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε δὴ κἀκεῖνοι ἐτέθνασαν, ot δ᾽ ἐγένοντο,
χαλκείη γενεή, προτέρων ὀλοώτεροι ἄνδρες, 180
ol πρῶτοι κακόεργον ἐχαλκεύσαντο μάχαιραν
εἰνοδίην, πρῶτοι δὲ βοῶν ἐπάσαντ᾽ ἀροτήρων,
καὶ τότε μισήσασα Δίκη κείνων γένος ἀνδρῶν
3
ἔπταθ᾽ ὑπουρανίη: ταύτην δ᾽ ἄρα νάσσατο χώρην,
a μὴ
ἧχί περ ἐννυχίη ἔτι φαίνεται ἀνθρώποισιν 186
Παρθένος, ἐγγὺς ἐοῦσα πολυσκέπτοιο Βοώτεω.
“ \ 3 3
Τῆς ὑπὲρ ἀμφοτέρων ὥμων εἱλίσσεται ἀστὴρ
[δεξιτερῇ πτέρυγι" ΠΡΟΤΡΥΓΗΤΗΡ δ᾽ αὖτε καλεῖται: |*
τόσσος μὲν μεγέθει, Toin δ᾽ ἐγκείμενος αἴγλῃ,
οἷος καὶ μεγάλης οὐρὴν ὑποφαίνεται Αρκτου. 140
δεινὴ γὰρ κείνη, δεινοὶ δέ οἱ ἐγγύθεν εἰσὶν
> /
ἀστέρες" οὐκ ἂν τούς ye ἰδὼν ἐπιτεκμήραιο


1 ACM ; but not translated by Germ. or Avienus.


* Cic. De nat. ἃ. ii. 63 ** Quibus [bubus], cum terrae
subigerentur fissione glebarum, ab illo aureo genere, ut
poetae loquuntur, vis nulla unquam adferebatur. ‘ Ferrea
tum vero proles exorta repente est Ausaque funestum prima


390


PHAENOMENA


a little and no longer with utter readiness did she
mingle, for that she yearned for the ways of the
men of old. Yet in that Silver Age was she still
upon the earth; but from the echoing hills at even-
tide she came alone, nor spake to any man in gentle
words. But when she had filled the great heights
with gathering crowds, then would she with threats
rebuke their evil ways, and declare that never more
at their prayer would she reveal her face to man.
“ Behold what manner of race the fathers of the
Golden Age® left behind them! Far meaner than
themselves! but ye will breed a viler progeny?!
Verily wars and cruel bloodshed shall be unto men
and grievous woe shall be laid upon them.” Even
so she spake and sought the hills and left the people
all gazing towards her still. But when they, too,
were dead, and when, more ruinous than they which
went before, the Race of Bronze was born, who were
the first to forge the sword of the highwayman, and
the first to eat of the flesh of the ploughing-ox, then
verily did Justice loathe that race of men and fly
heavenward and took up that abode, where even
now in the night time the Maiden is seen of men,
established near to far-seen Boétes.

Above both her shoulders at her right wing
wheels a star, whereof the name is the Vintager ‘“—
of such size and with such brightness set, as the star
that shines beneath the tail of the Great Bear. For
dread is the Bear and dread stars are near her.
Seeing them thou needest not further conjecture
est fabricarier ensem Et gustare manu vinctum domitumque
luvencum.

> Of. Hor. C. iii. 6. 46 ‘* Aetas parentum, peior avis, tulit


Nos nequiores, mox daturos Progeniem vitiosiorem.”
¢ Vindemiator.


391


ARATUS


a ε , /
[οἵ μιν πᾶσαν ὄπισθεν ἑλισσόμενοι τυπόωσιν,)} 1494
οἷός of πρὸ ποδῶν φέρεται καλός τε μέγας τε
εἷς μὲν ὑπωμαίων, εἷς δ᾽ ἰξυόθεν κατιόντων,
» 3 > / ς \ 7 > > » /
ἄλλος δ᾽ οὐραίοις ὑπὸ γούνασιν: ἀλλ᾽ dpa πάντες 145
ς / + + > / /
ἁπλόοι ἄλλοθεν ἄλλος ἀνωνυμίῃ φορέονται.
Φι ὧν
Kpati δέ of atarmol, μέσσῃ δ᾽ ὕπο ΚΑΡΚΙΝΟΣ
ἐστίν᾽
Ψ A
ποσσὶ δ᾽ ὀπισθοτέροισι ΛΈΩΝ ὕπο καλὰ φαείνει.
” \ ᾽ 7 / / > /
ἔνθα μὲν ἠελίοιο θερείταταί εἰσι κέλευθοι"
\
at δέ που ἀσταχύων κενεαὶ φαίνονται ἄρουραι 160
ἠελίου τὰ πρῶτα συνερχομένοιο Λέοντι.
τῆμος καὶ κελάδοντες ἐτησίαι εὐρέϊ πόντῳ
ἀθρόοι ἐμπίπτουσιν, ὁ δὲ πλόος οὐκέτι κώπαις
- “a > ~
ὥριος. εὐρεῖαί wou ἀρέσκοιεν τότε νῆες,
> ” \ \ \ ~ ”
εἰς ἀνεμον δὲ τὰ πηδὰ κυβερνητῆρες EXOLEV. 155
Ki δέ τοι “HNIOXON Te Kai ἀστέρας ᾿ ΗἩνιόχοιο
/ / / B »
σκέπτεσθαι δοκέει, καί τοι φάτις ἤλυθεν ΑἸΓῸΣ
“ 3
αὐτῆς ἠδ᾽ ἘρΙΦΩΝ, οἵ T εἰν ἁλὶ πορφυρούσῃ
3
πολλάκις ἐσκέψαντο κεδαιομένους ἀνθρώπους,
αὐτὸν μέν μιν ἅπαντα μέγαν Διδύμων ἐπὶ λαιὰ 160
/ 7 ¢ / 4, Se /
κεκλιμένον δήεις" ᾿ Ἑλίκης δέ of ἄκρα κάρηνα
ἀντία δινεύει. σκαιῷ δ᾽ ἐπελήλαται ὥμῳ
Ἃ ε / \ / / \ \ > A
at€ ἱερή, τὴν μέν τε λόγος Διὶ μαζὸν ἐπισχεῖν,
ὮὯλ / ὃ / A? A \ / > ς ~
evinv δέ μιν Aiya Διὸς καλέουσ᾽ ὑποφῆται.
1 Read only in later mss. Cf. ν. 171.

« Cic. ap. Priscian. Gramm. vi. ‘* Tertia sub caudam ad
genus ipsum lumina pandit.”

ὁ Gemini. Οἷς. De nat. d. ii. 43 “ἘΠ᾿ natos Geminos
invises sub caput Arcti: Subiectus mediae est Cancer,
pedibusque tenetur Magnu’ Leo tremulam quatiens e corpore
flammam.”’ ¢ Cancer. @ Leo.

¢ About 23rd July the Sun enters the zodiacal sign Leo :


ef. Hipparch. ii. 1. 18 who, after quoting Aratus 149-151,
remarks: ‘‘ For the greatest heat occurs about the time


392


PHAENOMENA


what stars beyond them model all her form. Such
stars are borne along, beautiful and great, one in
front of her forefeet, one on her flank, and one
beneath her hind knees. But all singly one here,
one there, are wheeled along without a name.

Beneath the head of Helice are the Twins? ; be-
neath her waist is the Crab¢; beneath her hind feet
the Lion@ brightly shines. There is the Sun’s hottest
summer path. Then the fields are seen bereft of
corn-ears, when first the Sun comes together with
the Lion. Then the roaring Etesian/ winds fall
swooping on the vasty deep, and voyaging is no
longer seasonable for oars. Then let broad-beamed
ships be my choice, and let steersmen hold the helm
into the wind.

But if it be thy wish to mark Charioteer ’ and his
stars, and if the fame has come to thee of the Goat”
herself and the Kids,’ who often on the darkening
deep have seen men storm-tossed, thou wilt find him
in all his might, leaning forward at the left hand of
the Twins. Over against him wheels the top of
Helice’s head, but on his left shoulder is set the
holy Goat, that, as legend tells, gave the breast to
Zeus. Her the interpreters of Zeus call the Olenian


when the Dog-Star rises, which is as nearly as possible thirty
days after the summer solstice. At that date, according to
Aratus, the Sun is in-the beginning of Leo. The sun, there-
fore, at this (the summer) solstice occupies the beginning of
the Crab (Cancer).”

7 The Etesian or trade-winds which blow every year in the
Mediterranean during the summer, mostly from the North,
begin at the rising of the Dog-Star, being preceded by the
prodromi which, also from the North, begin eight days
before the rising of the Dog-Star. The Etesian winds blow
for some fifty days. 9 Auriga, » Capella.

ὁ Haedi; cf. Verg. A. ix. 668 ** pluvialibus Haedis.”


393


ARATUS


ἀλλ᾽ ἡ μὲν πολλή τε Kai ἀγλαή: οἱ δέ οἵ αὐτοῦ 16
λεπτὰ φαείνονται "Ἐριφοι καρπὸν κάτα χειρός.
Πὰρ ποσὶ δ᾽ “Ηνιόχου κεραὸν πεπτηότα ΤΑΥ͂ΡΟΝ

μαίεσθαι. τὰ δέ οἱ μάλ᾽ ἐοικότα σήματα κεῖται"

/ ¢ \ 7 > / »,
τοίη ot κεφαλὴ διακέκριται" οὐδέ τις ἄλλῳ
σήματι τεκμήραιτο κάρη βοός, οἷά μιν αὐτοὶ 170
ἀστέρες ἀμφοτέρωθεν ἑλισσόμενοι τυπόωσιν.
καὶ λίην κείνων ὄνομ᾽ εἴρεται, οὐδέ τοι αὕτως
νήκουστοι TAAES. ταὶ μέν ῥ᾽ ἐπὶ παντὶ μετώπῳ
Ταύρου βεβλέαται: λαιοῦ δὲ κεράατος ἄκρον

\ / \ / « /
καὶ πόδα δεξιτερὸν παρακειμένου ᾿ Ἡνιόχοιο 175
εἷς ἀστὴρ ἐπέχει: συνεληλάμενοι δὲ φέρονται,
ἀλλ᾽ αἰεὶ Ταῦρος προφερέστερος “Ἡνιόχοιο
εἰς ἑτέρην καταβῆναι, ὁμηλυσίῃ περ ἀνελθών.

Οὐδ᾽ ἄρα ζηφῆος μογερὸν γένος ᾿Ιασίδαο

αὕτως ἄρρητον κατακείσεται" ἀλλ᾽ ἄρα καὶ τῶν 180
οὐρανὸν εἰς ὄνομ᾽ ἦλθεν, ἐπεὶ Διὸς ἐγγύθεν ἦσαν.

νν 5 Τῇ, \ / ae | / ”
αὐτὸς μὲν κατόπισθεν ἐὼν Kuvocouvpidos "Ἄρκτου
ΚΗΦΕΥΣ ἀμφοτέρας χεῖρας τανύοντι ἐοικώς"
ἴση οὗ στάθμη νεάτης ἀποτείνεται οὐρῆς
> / 3 / Ψ \ > / ,
ἐς πόδας ἀμφοτέρους, ὅσση ποδὸς ἐς πόδα τείνει. 185


@ Amalthea: Olenian as being on the arm (ὠλένη) of
Auriga or as daughter of Olenus or from Olenus or Olene in
Achaia (Strabo 387, who quotes Aratus). Cf. ‘* Nascitur
Oleniae signum pluviale Capellae,” Ovid, F. v. 113, ** Oleniae
sidus pluviale Capellae,” Ovid, M. iii. 594.

ὃ The participle πεπτηώς occurs five times in Aratus, here
of Taurus, 318 of the bright stars in the Dolphin, 324 of
Orion, 353 of Andromeda, 369 of certain nameless stars.
The mss. of Homer confuse the perfect participle active of
πίπτω with that of πτήσσω (Leaf on Jl. xxi. 503). There
seems reason to think that in some cases, e.g. 324, Aratus
treated πεπτηώς as from πίτνημι, πετάννυμι, in the sense of
** extended,” ** spread.”


394


PHAENOMENA


Goat. Large is she and bright, but there at the
wrist of the Charioteer faintly gleam the Kids.

At the feet of Charioteer seek for the crouching?
horned Bull.“ Very lifelike are his signs; so clear
defined his head : not by other sign would one mark
the head of an ox, since in such wise those very
stars, wheeling on either side, fashion it. Oft-
spoken is their name and not all, unheard-of are the
Hyades.4. Broadcast are they on the forehead of
the Bull. One star occupies the tip of his left horn
and the right foot of the Charioteer, who is close by.
Together they are carried in their course, but ever
earlier is the Bull than the Charioteer to set beneath
the West,’ albeit they fare together at their rising/

Nor all unnamed shall rest the hapless family of
Iasid Cepheus.?_ For their name, too, has come unto
heaven, for that they were near akin to Zeus.”
Cepheus himself is set behind the Bear Cynosura,
like to one that stretches out both his hands. From
her tail-tip to both his feet stretches a measure
equal to that from foot to foot.’ But a little aside


¢ Taurus.

ἃ Hyades in the constellation of Taurus.

ὁ ἑτέρη may refer to West, as here, and 279, 659, or to
East, 571, 617, 726, always according to the context. —

7 The Bull sets sooner because he is farther South than
Auriga (schol,). For criticism of this passage ¢f. Hipparch.
i. 5. 14 ff.

9 Cepheus, King of Aethiopia, father of Andromeda by
Cassiepeia. He was descended from Io whose father, ac-
cording to one version, was Jasus, son of Argos (Apollod.
ii. 5).

» As descended from Io.

ὁ Hipparchus i. 2. 12 says that this remark, in which
Aratus agrees with Eudoxus, is not true, the distance be-
tween the feet of Cepheus being less than that from either
foot to the tip of Cynosura’s tail.


395


ARATUS


αὐτὰρ ἀπὸ ζώνης ὀλίγον κε μεταβλέψειας
πρώτης ἱέμενος καμπῆς μεγάλοιο Δράκοντος.

Τοῦ δ᾽ dpa δαιμονίη προκυλίνδεται οὐ μάλα

πολλὴ
νυκτὶ ,φαεινομένη παμμήνιδι KAZ3IEIIEIA
ov γάρ μιν πολλοὶ καὶ ἐπημοιβοὶ γανόωσιν 190
ἀστέρες, οἵ μιν πᾶσαν ἐπιρρήδην στιχόωσιν.
οἵῃ δὲ κληῖδι θύρην ἔντοσθ᾽ ἀραρυῖαν
δικλίδ᾽ ἐπιπλήσσοντες ἀνακρούουσιν ὀχῆας,ἷ
τοῖοί οἱ μουνὰξ ὑποκείμενοι ἰνδάλλονται
ἀστέρες. 4 δ᾽ αὕτως ὀλίγων ἀποτείνεται ὥμων 195
ὀργυιήν. φαίης κεν ἀνιάζειν ἐπὶ παιδί.

Αὐτοῦ γὰρ κἀκεῖνο κυλίνδεται αἰνὸν ἄγαλμα
ANAPOMEAH® ὑπὸ μητρὶ κεκασμένον. οὔ σε μάλ᾽ οἴω
νύκτα περισκέψασθαι, ἵν᾽ αὐτίκα μᾶλλον ἴδηαι"
τοίη ot κεφαλή, τοῖοι δέ οἱ ἀμφοτέρωθεν 200
ὦμοι καὶ πόδες ἀκρότατοι καὶ ζώματα πάντα.
ἀλλ᾽ ἔμπης κἀκεῖθι διωλενίη τετάνυσται,
δεσμὰ δέ οἱ κεῖται καὶ ἐν οὐρανῷ: at δ᾽ ἀνέχονται
αὐτοῦ πεπταμέναι πάντ᾽ ἤματα χεῖρες ἐκεῖναι.

᾿Αλλ᾽ ἄρα οἱ καὶ κρατὶ πέλωρ ἐπελήλαται ἽΠΠΟΣ 205
γαστέρι νειαίρῃ: ξυνὸς δ᾽ ἐπιλάμπεται ἀστὴρ
τοῦ μὲν ἐπ᾽ ὀμφαλίῳ, τῆς δ᾽ ἐσχατόωντι καρήνῳ.
οἱ δ᾽ ap’ ἔτι τρεῖς ἄλλοι ἐπὶ πλευράς τε καὶ ὦμους
ἵππου δεικανόωσι διασταδὸν ἶσα πέλεθρα,


καλοὶ καὶ μεγάλοι: κεφαλὴ δέ οἱ οὐδὲν ὁμοίη, 210


1 oinv . . . ὀχῆες ACM.
« Cassiepeia offended the Nereids by vying with them in
beauty. ence Poseidon sent a sea-monster (Cetus) against


Aethiopia.

ὁ The W-shaped constellation of Cassiepeia is a familiar
spectacle in the sky. It is probably unnecessary to suppose
that more is meant than that C. presents roughly the same


396


PHAENOMENA


from his belt look to find the first coil of the mighty
Dragon.

Eastward his hapless wife, Cassiepeia,* gleaming
when by night the moon is full, wheels with her
scanty stars. For few and alternate stars adorn her,
which expressly mark her form with lines of light.
Like the key? of a twofold door barred within,
wherewith men striking shoot back the bolts, so
singly set shine her stars. But from her shoulders
so faint she stretches a fathom’s length. ‘Thou
would’st say she was sorrowing over her daughter.°

For there, too, wheels that woeful form of Andro-
meda, enstarred beneath her mother. Thou hast
not to wait? for a night, I ween, whereon to see her
more distinct! So bright is her head and so clearly
marked are both the shoulders, the tips of her feet
and all her belt. Yet even there she is racked, with
arms stretched far apart, and even in Heaven bonds
are her portion. Uplifted and outspread there for
all time are those hands of hers.

Beneath her head is spread the huge Horse,’ touch-
ing her with his lower belly. One common star
gleams on the Horse’s navel and the crown of her
head. Three other separate stars, large and bright,
at equal distance set on flank and shoulders, trace a
square’ upon the Horse. His head is not so brightly


aspect as that presented by the bars of a folding-door, where
one half-door acts as door-post to the other and vice versa.
If these two bars were secured by a drop-bar passing through
the two, the resemblance would be clearer still.

¢ Andromeda, who was exposed to the Sea-Monster
being chained to a rock until she was rescued by Perseus.

4 2,9. She can be seen any night.

¢ Pegasus, the winged horse of Bellerophon.

7 The Great Square of Pegasus, made up of a, 6, ¥
Pegasi with a Andromedae.

397


ARATUS


»59.9 3 \ / > 7 > \ ΝΜ > A
οὐδ᾽ αὐχὴν δολιχός περ ἐών. ἀτὰρ ἔσχατος ἀστὴρ
αἰθομένης γένυος καὶ κεν προτέροις ἐρίσειεν
τέτρασιν, οἵ μιν ἔχουσι περίσκεπτοι μάλ᾽ ἐόντες.
0.5 9 4 > ’ Dt Dye? / \ +
οὐδ᾽ 6 ye τετράπος ἐστίν. ἀπ᾽ ὀμφαλίοιο yap ἄκρου
4θ ς Ar, rr ς \ Ἵ 915
μεσσόθεν ἡμιτελὴς περιτέλλεται ἱερὸς Ἵππος.
a \ / > oe ae ~
κεῖνον δὴ καί φασι καθ᾽ ὑψηλοῦ ᾿Ἑλικῶνος
A ΄ 3 a 3 / « /
καλὸν ὕδωρ ἀγαγεῖν εὐαλδέος ᾿ἱἹππουκρήνης.
οὐ γάρ πω ᾿ Ἑλικὼν ἄκρος κατελείβετο πηγαῖς,
ἀλλ᾽ Ἵππος μιν ἔτυψε" τὸ δ᾽ ἀθρόον αὐτόθεν ὕδωρ
9.» 7 ~ / / ε \ ~
ἐξέχυτο πληγῇ προτέρου ποδός: οὗ δὲ νομῆες 220
πρῶτοι κεῖνο ποτὸν διεφήμισαν ᾿ἱππουκρήνην.
3 \ \ \ 7, ee. / 0. 7 3 4.
ἀλλὰ τὸ μὲν πέτρης ἀπολείβεται, οὐδέ ποτ᾽ αὐτὸ
Θεσπιέων ἀνδρῶν ἑκὰς ὄψεαι" αὐτὰρ ὁ “ἵππος
ἐν Διὸς εἰλεῦται Kai τοι πάρα θηήσασθαι.
Αὐτοῦ καὶ κριοιο θοώταταί εἶσι κέλευθοι, 225
Os ῥά τε Kal μήκιστα διωκόμενος περὶ κύκλα
γῶινκ 5 / / / ΝΜ
οὐδὲν ἀφαυρότερον τροχάει Kuvocoupidos ΓΑρκτου,
αὐτὸς μὲν νωθὴς καὶ ἀνάστερος οἷα σελήνῃ
/ / > ae “ 3 /
σκέψασθαι, ζώνῃ δ᾽ ἂν ὅμως ἐπιτεκμήραιο
᾿Ανδρομέδης" ὀλίγον γὰρ ὑπ᾽ αὐτὴν ἐστήρικται. 280
μεσσόθι δὲ τρίβει μέγαν οὐρανόν, ἧχί περ ἄκραι
χηλαὶ καὶ ζώνη περιτέλλεται ᾿Ωρίωνος.
” / Se a ae / > / ~
Koti δέτοι Kai ἔτ᾽ ἄλλο τετυγμένον ἐγγύθι σῆμα
/ > / \ Py, 2 ae \ > /
νειόθεν ᾿Ανδρομέδης, τὸ δ᾽ ἐπὶ τρισὶν ἐστάθμηται
AEATOTON πλευρῇσιν, ἰσαιομένῃσιν ἐοικὸς 28ὅ
ἀμφοτέρῃς" ἡ δ᾽ οὔτι τόση, μάλα δ᾽ ἐστὶν ἑτοίμη
εὑρέσθαι. περὶ γὰρ πολέων εὐάστερός ἐστιν.
τῶν ὀλίγον Kpiot νοτιώτεροι ἀστέρες εἰσίν.


« The constellation of Pegasus is only a προτομή or bust,
showing head and forefeet and half the body.

® A fountain on Helicon, near Thespiae in Boeotia, said to
have been caused by the hoof of Pegasus, the winged Horse
of Bellerophon (Paus. ix. 31. 3).


398


PHAENOMENA


marked, nor his neck, though it be long. But the
farthest star on his blazing nostril could fitly rival
the former four, that invest him with such splendour.
Nor is he four-footed.. Parted at the navel, with
only half a body, wheels in heaven the sacred
Horse.“ He it was, men say, that brought down
from lofty Helicon the bright water of bounteous
Hippocrene.? For not yet on Helicon’s summit
trickled the fountain’s springs, but the Horse smote
it and straightway the gushing water was shed
abroad at the stamp of his forefoot, and herdsmen
were the first to call that stream the fountain of the
Horse. From the rock the water wells and never
shalt thou see it far from the men of Thespiae; but
the Horse himself circles in the heaven of Zeus and
is there for thee to behold.

There too are the most swift courses of the Ram,’
who, pursued through the longest circuit, runs not a
whit slower than the Bear Cynosura—himself weak
and starless as on a moonlit night, but yet by the
belt of Andromeda thou canst trace him out. For
a little below her is he set. Midway he treads the
mighty heavens, where wheel the tips of the
Scorpion’s Claws and the Belt of Orion.

There is also another sign, fashioned near, below
Andromeda, Deltoton;? drawn with three sides,
whereof two appear equal but the third is less, yet
very easy to find, for beyond many is it endowed
with stars. Southward a little from Deltoton are
the stars of the Ram.

¢ The Ram, Aries, situated on the Equator, which is a
Great Circle of the celestial globe, completes his circuit of
the heavens in the same time that Ursa Minor completes her


smaller circle.
@ Triangulum.


εν 999


ARATUS


ego 47 > / » 2.2 ~ /
Οἱ δ᾽ dp’ ἔτι προτέρω, ἔτι δ᾽ ἐν προμολῇσι νότοιο,
Shas VEN Ὁ , x 2
IX@OYES. ἀλλ᾽ αἰεὶ ἕτερος προφερέστερος ἄλλου,
καὶ μᾶλλον βορέαο νέον κατιόντος ἀκούει.
3 / / > / > A \
ἀμφοτέρων δέ σφεων ἀποτείνεται HiTE δεσμὰ
οὐραίων ἑκάτερθεν ἐπισχερὼ εἰς ἕν ἰόντων.
/
καὶ τὰ μὲν εἷς ἀστὴρ ἐπέχει καλός τε μέγας τε,
ὅν ῥά τε καὶ σύνδεσμον ὑπούραιον καλέουσιν. 245
3 / 7 > > \ > 4 ”
Ανδρομέδης δέ τοι ὦμος ἀριστερὸς ᾿Ιχθύος ἔστω
σῆμα βορειοτέρου: μάλα γάρ νύ οἱ ἐγγύθεν ἐστίν.
> “-
Αμφότεροι δὲ πόδες γαμβροῦ ἐπισημαίνοιεν
ΠΕΡΣΕΟΣ, οἵ ῥά οἱ αἰὲν ἐπωμάδιοι φορέονται.
ἥν LA >..3 / / / LAA 250
αὐτὰρ 6 γ᾽ ev βορέω φέρεται περιμήκετος ἄλλων.
καί οἱ δεξιτερὴ μὲν ἐπὶ κλισμὸν τετάνυσται
/ / \ Jee \ /
πενθερίου δίφροιο" τὰ δ᾽ ἐν ποσὶν ofa διώκων
ἴχνια μηκύνει κεκονιμένος ἐν Aut πατρί.
” / ε “a > / ” θ “
Αγχι δέ οἱ σκαιῆς ἐπιγουνίδος ἤλιθα πᾶσαι
A
TIAHIAAES φορέονται. ὁ δ᾽ οὐ μάλα πολλὸς
ἁπάσας 255
~ » \ 3 93 pe / > /
χῶρος ἔχει, καὶ δ᾽ αὐταὶ ἐπισκέψασθαι apavpat.
,
ἑπτάποροι δὴ ταί ye pet ἀνθρώπους ὑδέονται,
Δ / 7 A > / > aA
ἕξ οἷαί περ ἐοῦσαι ἐπόψιαι ὀφθαλμοῖσιν.
> / > / > \ > \ > /
od μέν πως ἀπόλωλεν ἀπευθὴς ἐκ Διὸς ἀστήρ,
> e A nO > ͵ὔ 3 \ an Ὁ 26
ἐξ οὗ καὶ γενεῆθεν ἀκούομεν, ἀλλὰ μάλ᾽ αὕτως 0
εἴρεται. ἑπτὰ δ᾽ ἐκεῖναι ἐπιρρήδην καλέονται
> /
Αλκυόνη Μερόπη τε ζελαινώ τ᾽ ᾿Ηλέκτρη τε
A ee a
καὶ Στερόπη καὶ Τηϊγέτη καὶ πότνια Μαῖα.
¢ \ ¢ ~ 5Ὰ7 δ}9 / > >, see A
αἱ μὲν ὁμῶς ὀλίγαι Kal adeyyées, ἀλλ᾽ ὀνομασταὶ
xe / 7, A δ᾽ ” ὦ NC 265
ἦρι Kat ἑσπέριαι, Ζεὺς δ᾽ αἴτιος, εἱλίσσονται,


« Pisces. Hipparchus i. 6. 8f. points out that not both
but only one of the Fishes is south of the Ram. ‘The schol.
takes Aratus to mean south of Triangulum.

> a Piscium, the knot of the band of stars joining the tails
of the two Fishes.


» 400 5


PHAENOMENA |


Still farther in front of the Ram and still in the
vestibule of the South are the Fishes.“ Ever one
is higher than the other, and louder hears the fresh
rush of the North wind. From both there stretch,
as it were, chains, whereby their tails on either side
are joined. ‘The meeting chains are knit by a single
beautiful and great star, which is called the Knot of
Tails.? Let the left shoulder of Andromeda be thy
guide to the northern Fish, for it is very near.

Her two feet will guide thee to her bridegroom,
Perseus, over whose shoulder they are for ever
carried. But he moves in the North a taller form
than the others. His right hand is stretched toward
the throne of the mother? of his bride, and, as if
pursuing that which lies before his feet, he greatly
strides, dust-stained, in the heaven of Zeus.

Near’ his left thigh move the Pleiades, all in a
cluster, but small is the space that holds them and
singly they dimly shine. Seven are they in the
songs of men, albeit only six are visible to the eyes
Yet not a star, I ween, has perished from the sky
unmarked since the earliest memory of man, but
even so the tale is told. Those seven are called by
name Haleyone, Merope, Celaeno, Electra, Sterope,.
Taygete, and queenly Maia. Small and dim are
they all alike, but widely famed they wheel in
heaven at morn and eventide, by the will of Zeus,


3 Perseus, son of Zeus and Danaé, who rescued Andro-
meda.

@ Cassiepeia, mother of Andromeda.

ὁ Hipparch. i. 6. 12 criticizes this: ‘*The left knee of
Perseus is a long way from the Pleiades.”

f The missing Pleiad is sometimes said to be Merope,
sometimes Electra. Hipparch. i. 6. 14 says that by looking
carefully on a clear moonless night seven stars can be seen.


2D 401


ARATUS


6 σφισι Kal θέρεος καὶ χείματος ἀρχομένοιο
σημαίνειν ἐκέλευσεν ἐπερχομένου τ᾽ ἀρότοιο.
Kai xears, ἥτ᾽ ὀλίγη: τὴν δ᾽ ἄρ᾽ ἔτι καὶ
παρὰ λίκνῳ
“Eppetns ἐτόρησε, ΛΥΡΗΝ δέ μιν εἶπε λέγεσθαι.
κὰδ δ᾽ ἔθετο προπάροιθεν ἀπευθέος Ἐϊδώλοιο 210
οὐρανὸν εἰσαγαγών. τὸ δ᾽ ἐπὶ σκελέεσσι πέτηλον
γούνατί οἱ σκαιῷ πελάει: κεφαλή γε μὲν ἄκρη
ἀντιπέρην "Ορνιθος ἑλίσσεται: ἡ δὲ μεσηγὺ
ὀρνιθέης κεφαλῆς καὶ γούνατος ἐστήρικται.
Ἦ τοι γὰρ καὶ Ζηνὶ παρατρέχει αἰόλος ΟΡΝΙΣ. 275
ἀλλ᾽ ὁ μὲν ἠερόεις, τὰ δέ οἱ ἔπι τετρήχυνται
3 / ΕΝ / / > A > \ > “~
ἀστράσιν οὔτι λίην μεγάλοις, ἀτὰρ οὐ μὲν ἀφαυροῖς.
αὐτὰρ ὅ γ᾽ εὐδιόωντι ποτὴν ὄρνιθι ἐοικὼς
οὔριος εἰς ἑτέρην φέρεται, κατὰ δεξιὰ χειρὸς
Knydeins ταρσοῖο τὰ δεξιὰ πείρατα τείνων 280
ηφείης ταρσοῖο τὰ δεξιὰ πείρατα τείνων,
λαιῇ δὲ πτέρυγι σκαρθμὸς παρακέκλιται Ἵππου.
Tov δὲ μετασκαίροντα δύ᾽ ᾿Ιχθύες ἀμφινέμονται
av A > » ¢ “ \ ε
ἵππον" πὰρ δ᾽ ἄρα οἱ κεφαλῇ χεὶρ ὝΔΡΟΧΟΟΙΟ
δεξιτερὴ τετάνυσθ᾽ - ὁ δ᾽ ὀπίστερος Αἰγοκερῆος
“λλ ¢ a ΄σ / \ / αλλ
TEAAETAL. αὕταρ O γε προτερος καὶ νειόθι μᾶλλον 286
κέκλιται ΑἸΓΟΚΕΡΩΣ, ἵνα τε τρέπετ᾽ ἠελίου is.
μὴ κείνῳ ἐνὶ μηνὶ περικλύζοιο θαλάσσῃ ᾿
πεπταμένῳ πελάγει κεχρημένος. οὔτε κεν ἠοῖ
πολλὴν πειρήνειας, ἐπεὶ ταχινώταταΐί εἰσιν"
»39 + \ / > / 25
οὔτ᾽ ἄν τοι νυκτὸς πεφοβημένῳ ἐγγύθεν ἠὼς 290
ἔλθ \ LA \ / 3 ες 3 iA \
ἐλθοι καὶ μάλα πολλὰ βοωμένῳ. οἱ δ᾽ ἀλεγεινοὶ


“ Their heliacal rising (ἑῴα ἀνατολή) in May was the sign
of harvest; their cosmical setting (ἑῴα δύσις) in November
the sign of the sowing-season; cf. Hesiod, W. 383 ff. So
Theophrast. De sign. i. 6 διχοτομεῖ δὲ τὸν μὲν ἐνιαυτὸν Πλειάς
τε δυομένη καὶ ἀνατέλλουσα.


402


PHAENOMENA


who bade them tell of the beginning of Summer and
of Winter and of the coming of the ploughing-time.*

Yonder, too, is the tiny Tortoise,? which, while
still beside his cradle, Hermes pierced for strings
and bade it be called the Lyre: and he brought it
into heaven and set it in front of the unknown
Phantom.’ That Croucher on his Knees comes near
the Lyre with his left knee, but the top of the Bird’s
head wheels on the other side, and between the Bird’s
head and the Phantom’s knee is enstarred the Lyre.

For verily in heaven there is outspread a glitter-
ing Bird. Wreathed in mist is the Bird, but yet
the parts above him are rough with stars, not very
large, yet not obscure. Like a bird in joyous flight,
with fair weather it glides to the west, with the tip
of its right wing outstretched towards the right
hand of Cepheus, and by its left wing is hung in the
heavens the prancing Horse.

Round the prancing Horse range the two Fishes.
By the Horse’s head is stretched the right hand of
Hydrochous.* He is behind Aegoceros, who is set
in front and further down, where the mighty Sun
turns.’ In that month use not the open sea” lest
thou be engulfed in the waves. Neither in the
dawn canst thou accomplish a far journey, for fast
to evening speed the dawns; nor at night amid thy
fears will the dawn draw earlier near, though loud
and instant be thy cry. Grievous then is the crash-

δ Lyra. For the invention of the lyre by Hermes ef.
Hom. H. Herm. 39 ff.

ὁ Engonasin ; cf. v. 66 n. 4 Cygnus, the Swan.

¢ Aquarius, the Water-bearer. 7 Capricorn.

9 Tropic of Capricorn, so called because the Sun enters
the zodiacal sign of Capricorn at the winter solstice, #.e.
22nd December.


huh .. « θαλάσσῃ quoted by [Longin.] De sublim. xxvi. 1.
403


ARATUS


τῆμος ἐπιρρήσσουσι νότοι, ὁπότ᾽ Αἰγοκερῆϊ
’ t Wak fed / \ ͵ὔ > / >
συμφέρετ᾽ ἠέλιος: τότε δὲ κρύος ἐκ Διός ἐστιν
ναύτῃ μαλκιόωντι κακώτερον. ἀλλὰ καὶ ἔμπης
3) / 9 \ ς \ / /
ἤδη πάντ᾽ ἐνιαυτὸν ὑπὸ στείρῃσι θάλασσα 295
/ ” \ , > /
πορφύρει: ἴκελοι δὲ κολυμβίσιν. aidvinow
πολλάκις ἐκ νηῶν πέλαγος περιπαπταίνοντες
Ὁ + Med er oust 4 >? \ / ¢ > ,
ἡἥμεθ᾽ ἐπ᾽ αἰγιαλοὺς τετραμμένοι" οἱ δ᾽ ἔτι πόρσω
κλύζονται: ὀλίγον δὲ διὰ ξύλον “Aid” ἐρύκει.
K \ δ᾽ “nv 1 / θ λ 4 λλ \
αἱ δ᾽ av ἐπὶ προτέρῳ ye, θαλάσσῃ πολλὰ
πεπονθώς, 800
/ wv 3 27 / \ ΝΜ δ /
To€ov ὅτ᾽ ἠέλιος καίει καὶ ῥύτορα Τόξου,
ἑσπέριος κατάγοιο, πεποιθὼς οὐκέτι νυκτί.
σῆμα δέ τοι κείνης ὥρης καὶ μηνὸς ἐκείνου
Σκορπίος ἀντέλλων εἴη πυμάτης ἐπὶ νυκτός.
3 \ / / δὲ. » Ἴ > / /
ἦτοι yap μέγα τόξον ἀνέλκεται ἐγγύθι κέντρου 305
TOZEYTHS* ὀλίγον δὲ mapoitepos ἵσταται αὐτοῦ
Σικορπίος ἀντέλλων, ὁ δ᾽ ἀνέρχεται αὐτίκα μᾶλλον.
ρ ᾿ ρχ μᾶλλ
~ \ \ / > / A
τῆμος καὶ κεφαλὴ Kuvocovpidos ἀκρόθι νυκτὸς
4 4 / ε \ 4 A \
ὕψι μάλα τροχάει, 6 δὲ δύεται ἠῶθι πρὸ
ἀθρόος ᾿Ωρίων, Ἰζηφεὺς δ᾽ ἀπὸ χειρὸς ἐπ᾽ ἰξύν. 810
Ἔστι δέ τις προτέρω βεβλημένος ἄλλος ΟΙΣΤΟΣ
αὐτὸς ἄτερ τόξου: ὁ δέ οἱ παραπέπταται "Opis
> / / / / δ m +
ἀσσότερον βορέω. σχεδόθεν δέ of ἄλλος ἄηται
3 / / \ > ε A > a
οὐ τόσσος μεγέθει, χαλεπός ye μὲν ἐξ ἁλὸς ἐλθεῖν


νυκτὸς ἀπερχομένης" καί μιν καλέουσιν AHTON. 81
ΔΕΛΦῚΣ δ᾽, οὐ μάλα πολλός, ἐπιτρέχει Αἰγο-
κερὴϊ


1 ἔτι Cs; read ἔτι προτέρω ὃ


« [Longin.] De subl. x. 5-6 contrasts this passage of Aratus,
ὀλίγον. . . ἐρύκει, with Hom. 14. xv. 624-628 (ending τυτθὸν yap
a θανάτοιο φέρονται), and awards the palm for sublimity to

omer.


404


PHAENOMENA


ing swoop of the South winds when the Sun joins
Aegoceros, and then is the frost from heaven hard
on the benumbed sailor. Not but that throughout
the year’s length the sea ever grows dark beneath
the keels, and, like to diving seagulls, we often sit,
spying out the deep from our ship with faces turned
to the shore; but ever farther back the shores are
swept by the waves and only a thin plank staves off
Death.

But even in the previous month,” storm-tossed at
sea, when the Sun scorches the Bow and the
Wielder¢ of the Bow, trust no longer in the night
but put to shore in the evening. Of that season
and that month let the rising of Scorpion at the
close of night be a sign to thee. For verily his
great Bow does the Bowman draw close by the
Scorpion’s sting, and a little in front stands the
Scorpion at his rising, but the Archer “ rises right
after him. Then, too, at the close of night Cyno-
sura’s head runs very high, but Orion just before
the dawn wholly sets and Cepheus from hand to
waist.”

Further up there is another Arrow “ shot—alone
without a bow. By it is the Bird’ outspread nearer
the North, but hard at hand another bird 9 tosses in
storm, of smaller size but cruel in its rising from the
sea when the night is waning, and men call it the
Eagle (Storm-bird).”

Over Aegoceros floats the Dolphin’ with few


>’ November, when the Sun enters Sagittarius.

¢ Sagittarius.

@ Vy. 303 ff. are discussed by Hipparch. i. 7. 1-18.

4 Sagitta. 7 Cygnus. 9 Aquila, Eagle.
h Aétos, here derived from ἄηται, ‘* is blown.”

ὁ Delphinus.


405


ARATUS


μεσσόθεν ἠερόεις" τὰ δέ οἱ περὶ τέσσαρα κεῖται
γλήνεα, παρβολάδην δύο πὰρ δύο πεπτηῶτα.

Καὶ τὰ μὲν οὖν βορέω καὶ ἀλήσιος ἠελίοιο
μεσσηγὺς κέχυται: τὰ δὲ νειόθι τέλλεται ἄλλα 820
πολλὰ μεταξὺ νότοιο καὶ ἠελίοιο κελεύθου.

Λοξὸς μὲν Ταύροιο τομῇ ὑποκέκλιται αὐτὸς
ΩΡΙΩΝ. μὴ κεῖνον ὅτις καθαρῇ ἐνὶ νυκτὶ
ς “ ~ / ΝΜ ,
ὑψοῦ πεπτηῶτα παρέρχεται ἄλλα πεποίθοι
οὐρανὸν εἰσανιδὼν προφερέστερα θηήσασθαι. 325

Τοῖός οἱ καὶ φρουρὸς ἀειρομένῳ ὑπὸ νώτῳ
φαίνεται ἀμφοτέροισι ΚΥΩΝ ὑπὸ ποσσὶ βεβηκώς,
ποικίλος, ἀλλ᾽ οὐ πάντα πεφασμένος: ἀλλὰ κατ᾽

αὐτὴν
Ε 4 / ¢ ’ὔ ἐν
γαστέρα κυάνεος περιτέλλεται, ἡ δέ οἱ ἄκρη
ἀστέρι βέβληται δεινὴ γένυς, ὅς ῥα μάλιστα 880
ὀξέα σειριάει" καί μιν καλέουσ᾽ ἄνθρωποι
ΣΕΙΡΙΟΝ. οὐκέτι κεῖνον ἅμ᾽ ἠελίῳ ἀνιόντα
φυταλιαὶ ψεύδονται ἀναλδέα φυλλιόωσαι.
ca \ Ss ” \ / »δλ > oh
ῥεῖα yap οὖν ἔκρινε διὰ στίχας ὀξὺς ἀΐξας,
\ A A a ~ \ / » /
Kal τὰ μὲν Eppwoev, τῶν δὲ dAdov ὥλεσε πάντα. 88
/ \ / > 4 ¢ \ \ 5,
κείνου καὶ κατιόντος ἀκούομεν: ot δὲ δὴ ἄλλοι
σῆμ᾽ ἔμεναι μελέεσσιν ἐλαφρότεροι περίκεινται.

Ποσσὶν δ᾽ ’Qpiwvos ὑπ᾽ ἀμφοτέροισι ΛΑΤΩΟΣ

ἐμμενὲς ἤματα πάντα διώκεται. αὐτὰρ ὅ γ᾽ αἰεὶ

/ 39 7 / / > 7
Σείριος ἐξόπιθεν φέρεται μετιόντι ἐοικώς, 840
καί οἱ ἐπαντέλλει, καί μιν κατιόντα δοκεύει.

Ἥ δὲ K \ / 3 > \ Er

€ Kuvos μεγάλοιο κατ᾽ οὐρὴν ἕλκεται ΑΡΓῺ


« The Ecliptic or apparent path of the Sun among the
stars.

» As the constellation of Taurus represents only the fore-
quarters of the Bull it is natural to take τομήτε προτομή,
““ forequarters.” The schol., however, takes it as ‘* section,”
i.¢@. the section of the Zodiac represented by the Bull.


406


PHAENOMENA


bright stars and body wreathed in mist, but four
brilliants adorn him, set side by side in pairs.

Now these constellations lie between the North
and the Sun’s wandering path,* but others many in
number rise beneath between the South and the
Sun’s course.

Aslant beneath the fore-body ὃ of the Bull is set
the great Orion. Let none who pass him spread
out on high on a cloudless night imagine that, gazing
on the heavens, one shall see other stars more fair.

Such a guardian, too, beneath his towering back
is seen to stand on his hind legs, the Dog’ star-
enwrought, yet not clearly marked in all his form,
but right by his belly he shows dark. The tip of
his terrible jaw is marked by a star that keenest of
all blazes with a searing flame and him men call
Seirius.? When he rises with the Sun,’ no longer do
the trees deceive him by the feeble freshness of their
leaves. For easily with his keen glance he pierces
their ranks, and to some he gives strength but of
others he blights the bark utterly. Of him too at
his setting are we aware, but the other stars of the
Dog are set round with fainter light to mark his legs.

Beneath both feet of Orion is the Hare 9 pursued
continually through all time, while Seirius behind is
for ever borne as in pursuit. Close behind he rises
and as he sets he eyes the setting Hare.

Beside the tail of the Great Dog the ship Argo ἢ is


¢ Canis Major, the Great Dog. 4 Sirius, a Canis Majoris.
¢ In July. 7 In the end of November. 9 Lepus.
h «* At Canis ad caudam serpens prolabitur Argo | Con-
versam prae se portans cum lumine puppim,” Cic. De nat.
ἃ. ii. 44; of. Eratosth. Catast. 35 εἰς δὲ ra ἄστρα ἀνετέθη τὸ


εἴδωλον οὐχ ὅλον αὐτῆς, οἱ δ᾽ οἴακές εἰσιν ἕως τοῦ ἱστοῦ σὺν τοῖς
πηδαλίοις.
407


ARATUS


πρυμνόθεν: οὐ yap τῇ γε κατὰ χρέος εἰσὶ κέλευθοι,
ἀλλ᾽ ὄπιθεν φέρεται τετραμμένη, οἷα καὶ αὐταὶ

νῆες, ὅτ᾽ ἤδη ναῦται ἐπιστρέψωσι κορώνην 345
ὅρμον ἐσερχόμενοι" τὴν δ᾽ αὐτίκα πᾶς ἀνακόπτει
νῆα, παλιρροθίη δὲ καθάπτεται ἡ ἠπείροιο"

ὡς ἥ γε πρύμνηθεν ᾿Ιησονὶς ἕλκεται ᾿Αργώ.

καὶ τὰ μὲν ἠερίη καὶ ἀνάστερος ἄχρι παρ᾽ αὐτὸν

ἱστὸν ἀπὸ πρώρης φέρεται, τὰ δὲ πᾶσα φαεινή. 350
Kal ot πηδάλιον κεχαλασμένον ἐστήρικται

ποσσὶν ὑπ᾽ οὐραίοισι Kuvos προπάροιθεν ἰόντος.

Τὴν δὲ καὶ οὐκ ὀλίγον περ ἀπόπροθι πεπτηυῖαν
᾿Ανδρομέδην μέγα KHTOX ἐπερχόμενον κατεπείγει.

ἡ μὲν γὰρ Θρήϊκος ὑπὸ πνοιῇ βορέαο 355
κεκλιμένη φέρεται, TO δέ οἱ νότος ἐχθρὸν ἀγινεῖ
κῆτος, ὑπὸ ἹΚριῷ τε καὶ ᾿Ιχθύσιν ἀμφοτέροισιν,
βαιὸν ὑπὲρ ]οταμοῦ βεβλημένον ἀστερόεντος.

Οἷον γὰρ κἀκεῖνο θεῶν ὑπὸ ποσσὶ φορεῦται
λείψανον HPIAANOIO, πολυκλαύτου ποταμοῖο. 860
καὶ τὸ μὲν ᾿Ωρίωνος ὑπὸ σκαιὸν πόδα τείνει"
δεσμοὶ δ᾽ οὐραῖοι, τοῖς ᾿Ιχθύες ἄκροι ἔχονται,
ἄμφω συμφορέονται ἀπ᾽ οὐραίων κατιόντες"

Κητείης δ᾽ ὄπιθεν λοφίης ἐπιμὶξ φορέονται
εἰς ἕν ἐλαυνόμενοι: ἑνὶ δ᾽ ἀστέρι πειραίνονται 365
Κήτεος, ὃς κείνου πρώτῃ ἐπίκειται ἀκάνθῃ.


Οἱ δ᾽ ὀλίγῳ μέτρῳ ὀλίγῃ δ᾽ ἐγκείμενοι αἴγλῃ


α Hipparch. i. 8. 1 criticizes this: the bright stars, « on
the debke β on the keel; lie considerably East of the Mast.

> See note on 167,

© Cetus.

4 Hipparch. i. 8. 5.

¢ Eridanus, Flumen, the River, sometimes called the Nile.
The Eridanus was identified with the river Po, into which
Phaéthon fell and where his sisters, the Heliades, wept for


408


PHAENOMENA


hauled stern-foremost. For not hers is the proper
course of a ship in motion, but she is borne back-
wards, reversed even as real ships, when already the
sailors turn the stern to the land as they enter the
haven, and-every one back-paddles the ship, but she
rushing sternward lays hold of the shore. Even so
is the Argo of Jason borne along stern-foremost.
Partly in mist is she borne along, and starless from
her prow even to the mast,* but the hull is wholly
wreathed in light. Loosed is her Rudder and is
set beneath the hind feet of the Dog, as he runs
in front.

Andromeda, though she cowers?® a good way off,
is pressed by the rush of the mighty Monster® of
the Sea. For her path lies under the blast of
Thracian Boreas, but the South wind drives against
her, beneath the Ram and the Pair of Fishes, the
hateful Monster, Cetus, set as he is a little above
the Starry River.4

For alone are those poor remains of Eridanus,’
River of many tears, also borne beneath the feet of
the Gods. He winds beneath Orion’s left foot, but
the Shackles, wherewith the Fishes’ tails are held,
reach from their tails and join together, and behind
the neck of Cetus they mingle their path and fare
together. They end in a single star of Cetus, set
where meet his spine and head.

Other stars, mean in size and feeble in splendour,


him; ‘poor remains,’ because Eridanus was partly burnt
up. Aratus is the first to call the River Eridanus.

7 Stars lying between Argo and Cetus and the Hare,
which were not grouped as a constellation and given a
special name. Hipparch. i. 8. 2 f. says the ‘‘ nameless
stars” really lie between the River and the Helm of
Argo.

409


ARATUS


μεσσόθι πηδαλίου καὶ Κήτεος εἱλίσσονται,
γλαυκοῦ πεπτηῶτες ὑπὸ πλευρῇσι Λαγωοῦ
νώνυμοι" οὐ yap Tol γε τετυγμένου εἰδώλοιο

/ / > / @e/ \
βεβλέαται μελέεσσιν ἐοικότες, οἷά τε πολλὰ
ἑξείης στιχόωντα παρέρχεται αὐτὰ κέλευθα
ἀνομένων ἐτέων: τά τις ἀνδρῶν οὐκέτ᾽ ἐόντων
> / > >Q3 > 7 4 > > \ /
ἐφράσατ᾽ ἠδ᾽ ἐνόησεν ἅπαντ᾽ ὀνομαστὶ καλέσσαι
ἤλιθα μορφώσας. οὐ γάρ κ᾽ ἐδυνήσατο πάντων
οἰόθι κεκριμένων ὄνομ᾽ εἰπεῖν, οὐδὲ δαῆναι.

A A / / + ee ee, TO /
πολλοὶ yap πάντη, πολέων δ᾽ ἐπὶ ἶσα πέλονται
μέτρα τε καὶ χροιή, πάντες γε μὲν ἀμφιέλικτοι.
τῶ καὶ ὁμηγερέας οἱ ἐείσατο ποιήσασθαι
> 7 + > > \ + / ΝΜ
ἀστέρας, ὄφρ᾽ ἐπιτὰξ ἄλλῳ παρακείμενος ἄλλος
εἴδεα σημαίνοιεν. ἄφαρ δ᾽ ὀνομαστὰ γένοντο


Ν A 3 ,ὔ ~ ς A / / > 7
ἄστρα, καὶ οὐκέτι νῦν ὑπὸ θαύματι τέλλεται ἀστήρ.


3 > ε A a > / > /
ἀλλ᾽ ot μὲν καθαροῖς ἐναρηρότες εἰδώλοισιν
φαίνονται" τὰ δ᾽ ἔνερθε διωκομένοιο Λαγωοῦ
πάντα μάλ᾽ ἠερόεντα καὶ οὐκ ὀνομαστὰ φέρονται.
Νειόθι δ᾽ Αἰγοκερῆος, ὑπὸ πνοιῇσι νότοιο,
ixers ἐς Κῆτος τετραμμένος αἰωρεῖται
οἷος ἀπὸ προτέρων, NOTION δέ € κικλήσκουσιν.
δ ὃ 7 (ὃ ς , “γὸ Ae
Αλλοι δέ, σποράδην ὑποκείμενοι “YSpoxori,
Κήτεος αἰθερίοιο καὶ ᾿Ιχθύος ἠερέθονται
/ / \ > 4 > / /
μέσσοι νωχελέες Kal ἀνώνυμοι: ἐγγύθι δέ σφεων,
δεξιτερῆς ἀπὸ χειρὸς ἀγαυοῦ “Υδροχόοιο,
-“ / > 5Ὰ7 / Ψ ” A. Ww
οἵη tis τ᾽ ὀλίγη χύσις ὕδατος ἔνθα Kai ἔνθα
/ \ A > / ey /
σκιδναμένου, χαροποὶ καὶ ἀναλδέες εἱλίσσονται.
> / 7 ~ > / /
ev δέ σφιν δύο μᾶλλον ἐειδόμενοι φορέονται


« Hipparch. i. 8. 8 ff. discusses 367-385. As against
Attalus who accused Aratus of redundancy and obscurity,
Hipparchus thinks Aratus has given a masterly exposition
(kexparnuévws ἀποδεδωκέναι) of what was in his mind, namely,


410


370


375


380


385


390


395


PHAENOMENA


wheel between the Rudder of Argo and Cetus, and
beneath the grey Hare’s sides they are set without
aname. For they are not set like the limbs of a
fashioned figure, such as, many in number, fare in
order along their constant paths, as the years are
fulfilled—stars, which someone of the men that are
no more noted and marked how to group in figures
and call all by a single name. For it had passed his
skill to know each single star or name them one by
one. Many are they on every hand and of many
the magnitudes and colours are the same, while all
go circling round. Wherefore he deemed fit to
group the stars in companies, so that in order, set
each by other, they might form figures. Hence the
constellations got their names, and now no longer
does any star rise a marvel from beneath the horizon.
Now the other stars are grouped in clear figures and
brightly shine, but those beneath the hunted Hare
are all clad in mist and nameless in their course.”

Below Aegoceros before the blasts of the South
wind swims a Fish, facing Cetus, alone and apart
from the former Fishes; and him men call the
Southern Fish.?

Other stars, sparsely set beneath Hydrochoiis,°
hang on high between Cetus in the heavens and the
Fish, dim and nameless, and near them on the right
hand of bright Hydrochoiis, like some sprinkled
drops of water lightly shed on this side and on that,
other stars wheel bright-eyed though weak. But
among them are borne two of more lustrous form,
that he who first grouped the stars in constellations decided


to group and name only those stars which spatially belonged
together, neglecting those which did not naturally form a
group, or figure.
> Piscis Australis. ¢ Aquarius.
411


ARATUS
3 / ” \ > 7 3 73. 2 ,ὔ
ἀστέρες, οὔτε τι πολλὸν ἀπήοροι, οὔτε μάλ᾽ ἐγγύς"
εἷς μὲν ὑπ᾽ ἀμφοτέροισι ποσὶν καλός τε μέγας TE
¢ ὃ / ¢ ὃ \ / « \ K: / 7 A
Ydpoxdov, ὁ δὲ κυανέου ὑπὸ Kijreos οὐρῇ.

\ / / ¢ >\/ \ +
τοὺς πάντας καλέουσιν ὝΔΩΡ. ὀλίγοι ye μὲν ἄλλοι
νειόθι Τοξευτῆρος ὑπὸ προτέροισι πόδεσσιν 400
δινωτοὶ κύκλῳ περιηγέες εἱλίσσονται.

PLEA ey 19 3 / / / 7
Αὐτὰρ ὑπ᾽ αἰθομένῳ κέντρῳ τέραος μεγάλοιο
Σκορπίου, ἄγχι νότοιο, ΘΥΤΗΡΙΟΝ αἰωρεῖται.

“ 3 ” >\ 7 7 NX / ς 7Q> 4. ἢ
τοῦ δ᾽ ἤτοι ὀλίγον περ ἐπὶ χρόνον ὑψόθ᾽ ἐόντος
πεύσεαι: ἀντιπέρην γὰρ ἀείρεται ᾿Αρκτούροιο. 405
καὶ τῷ μὲν μάλα πάγχυ μετήοροί εἰσι κέλευθοι
ΑΙ / A ὃ \ θᾶ συ». / aA a

ρκτούρῳ, τὸ δὲ θᾶσσον ὑφ᾽ ἑσπερίην ἅλα νεῖται.
3 Φ-. # A \ “ 7 > / /
ἀλλ᾽ dpa καὶ περὶ κεῖνο Θυτήριον ἀρχαίη Nvé,


> 7 / / ~ ”
ἀνθρώπων κλαίουσα πόνον, χειμῶνος ἔθηκεν


> / 4 a / Ἁ > /
εἰναλίου μέγα σῆμα. κεδαιόμεναι yap ἐκείνῃ 410
“ ΝΜ / > \ > » 3 /
νῆες ἄπο φρενός εἰσι, τὰ δ᾽ ἄλλοθεν ἄλλα πιφαύ-
σκει


σήματ᾽ , ἐποικτείρουσα »ολοβῥοθίονς ἀνθρώπους.

τῶ μή μοι πελάγει νεφέων εἰλυμένον ἄλλων

εὔχεο μεσσόθι κεῖνο φανήμεναι οὐρανῷ ἄστρον,

αὐτὸ μὲν ἀνέφελόν τε καὶ ἀγλαόν, ὕψι δὲ μᾶλλον 416
κυμαίνοντι νέφει πεπιεσμένον, οἷά τε πολλὰ

θλίβετ᾽ ἀναστέλλοντος ὀπωρινοῦ ἀνέμοιο.

πολλάκι γὰρ καὶ τοῦτο νότῳ ἔπι σῆμα τιτύσκει

Νὺξ αὐτή, μογεροῖσι χαριζομένη ναύτῃσιν.

οἱ δ᾽ εἰ μέν κε πίθωνται ἐναίσιμα onuawovon, 420


α This is not Sagittarius but the Centaur, usually
identified with Cheiron. Both being regarded as centaurs
they are often confused. Even the name Cheiron is some-
times used of Sagittarius, e.g. Germanicus, Arat. 668.

ὃ These form Corona Australis, the Southern Crown,
Στέφανος Νότιος.


412


PHAENOMENA


not far apart and yet not near: one beneath both
feet of Hydrochoiis, a goodly star and bright, the
other beneath the tail of dark-blue Cetus. This
cluster as a whole men call The Water. But others
low beneath the forefeet of the Archer (Centaur),“
turned in a circled ring,’ go wheeling round the sky.

Below the fiery sting of the dread monster, Scorpion,
and near the South is hung the Altar.° Brief is the
space thou wilt behold it above the horizon: for it
rises over against Arcturus.? High runs the path of
Arcturus, but sooner passes the Altar to the western
sea. But that Altar even beyond aught else hath
ancient Night, weeping the woe of men, set to be a
mighty sign of storm at sea. For ships in trouble
pain her heart, and other signs in other quarters she
kindles in sorrow for mariners, storm-buffeted at sea.
Wherefore I bid thee pray, when in the open sea,
that that constellation wrapt in clouds appear not
amidst the others in the heavens, herself unclouded
and resplendent but banked above with billowing
clouds, as often it is beset when the autumn wind
drives them back. For often Night herself reveals
this sign, also, for the South Wind in her kindness to
toiling sailors. If they heed her favouring signs and


¢ Ara, fabled to be the altar on which the gods swore
when Zeus proceeded against Cronus: ‘* Inde Nepae [i.¢. .
Scorpion] cernes propter fulgentis acumen | Aram quam flatu
permulcet spiritus austri,” Cic. De nat. d. ii. 44. ‘* Neve
sinisterior pressam rota ducat ad Aram,” Ovid, M. ii. 139.

@ ἢ 6.9 according to the interpretation of Hipparchus and
Attalus, the Altar is as far from the South Pole (νότιος
πόλος, ἀφανὴς πόλος) as Arcturus is from the visible Pole
(ὁ ἀεὶ φανερὸς πόλος). This, says Hipparchus, is not true, as
Arcturus is 59° from the North Pole, while a, the bright star
in the middle of the Altar, is only 46° from the South Pole
(Hipparch. i. 8. 14 f.).


413


ARATUS


αἶψά τε κοῦφά τε πάντα καὶ ἄρτια ποιήσωνται,

22 758 3 ᾿ / / > / δ.
αὐτίκ᾽ ἐλαφρότερος πέλεται πόνος" εἰ δέ κε νηΐ
ὑψόθεν ἐμπλήξῃ δεινὴ ἀνέμοιο θύελλα
αὕτως ἀπρόφατος, τὰ δὲ λαίφεα πάντα ταράξῃ,
ἄλλοτε μὲν καὶ πάμπαν ὑπόβρυχα ναυτίλλονται, 495
ἄλλοτε δ᾽, αἴ κε Διὸς παρανισσομένοιο τύχωσιν
εὐχόμενοι, βορέω δὲ παραστράψῃ ἀνέμου ἴς,

\ 43> > / 4 / > /
πολλὰ μάλ᾽ ὀτλήσαντες ὅμως πάλιν ἐσκέψαντο
ἀλλήλους ἐπὶ νηΐ. νότον δ᾽ ἐπὶ σήματι τούτῳ
δείδιθι, μέχρι βορῆος ἀπαστράψαντος ἴδηαι. 480
εἰ δέ κεν ἑσπερίης μὲν ἁλὸς ΚΕΝΤΑΥΡΟΥ ἀπείη
ὦμος ὅσον προτέρης, ὀλίγη δέ μιν εἰλύοι ἀχλὺς
αὐτόν, ἀτὰρ μετόπισθεν ἐοικότα σήματα τεύχοι
Νὺξ ἐ ἐπὶ παμφανόωντι Θυτηρίῳ, οὔ σε μάλα χρὴ
ἐς νότον ἀλλ᾽ εὔροιο “περισκοπέειν ἀνέμοιο. 435
Anes δ᾽ ἄστρον ἐκεῖνο δύω ὑποκείμενον ἄλλοις"
τοῦ γάρ τοι τὰ μὲν ἀνδρὶ ἐοικότα νειόθι κεῦται
Σκορπίου, ἱππούραια δ᾽ ὑπὸ σφίσι Χηλαὶ ἔχουσιν.
αὐτὰρ ὁ δεξιτερὴν αἰεὶ τανύοντι ἔοικεν
3 / an 7 > / ε > \ ᾿
ἀντία δινωτοῖο Θυτηρίου, ἐν δέ οἱ ἀπρὶξ 440
ἄλλο μάλ᾽ ἐσφήκωται ἐληλάμενον διὰ χειρὸς
ΘΗΡΙΟΝ᾽ Ws γάρ μιν πρότεροι ἐπεφημίξαντο.

α ‘For the gen. after ἴδηαι cf. Aristoph. Frogs 815.

> 4.¢. when the shoulder of the Centaur culminates
(μεσουρανεῖ). Hipparch. i. 8. 19 ff. complains that Aratus
does not specify which shoulder, which is not a matter of in-
difference, as they would not both culminate at the same time.

ὁ Centaur, cf. ““ Propterque Centaurus, ‘ Cedit equi partes
properans subiungere Chelis. Hic dextram porgens, Quad-
rupes qua vasta tenetur, Tendit et illustrem truculentus
cedit ad Aram,’” Cic. De nat. d. ii. 44.

4 Hipparch. i. 8. 21 f. says Aratus is wrong here, since
nearly the whole of the Centaur lies under Virgo, only his


right hand and the forelegs of the horse stretching below
the Claws.


414


PHAENOMENA


quickly lighten their craft and set all in order, on a
sudden lo! their task is easier: but if from on high
a dread gust of wind smite their ship, all unforeseen,


_and throw in turmoil all the sails, sometimes they
make their voyage all beneath the waves, but at


other times, if they win by their prayers Zeus to
their aid, and the might of the north wind pass in
lightning, after much toil they yet again see each
other on the ship. But at this sign fear the South
Wind, until thou see’st * the North Wind come with
lightning. But if the shoulder of Centaur is as far
from the western as from the eastern sea,? and a
faint mist veils it, while behind Night kindles like
signs of storm upon the gleaming Altar, thou must not
look for the South, but bethink thee of an East Wind.

The constellation of Centaur’ thou wilt find
beneath two others. For part in human form lies
beneath Scorpio, but the rest, a horse’s trunk and
tail, are beneath the Claws.4¢ He ever seems to
stretch his right hand’ towards the round Altar, but
through his hand is drawn and firmly grasped
another sign—the Beast,’ for so men of old have
named it.

ὁ Hipparch. i. 8. 23 objects that between his right hand
and the Altar lies the whole of the Beast (Θηρίον) and most
parts of the Scorpion ; cf. v. 402 f.

7 Fera or the Wolf. Manilius i. 440 confuses the Beast
with the Cetus of Andromeda. The Centaur was represented
as holding in his left a thyrsus with a Hare hung upon it, in
his right a Therium, of what nature the ancients did not de-
fine; cf. Cic. Arat. 211 ** Hic dextram porgens quadrupes qua
vasta tenetur | Quam nemo certo donavit nomine Graium.”
Frequently the Beast is confused with the Hare, but in later
times it is generally known as the Wolf. Cf. [Eratosth.]
Catast. 40 ἔχει δὲ Kal ἐν ταῖς χερσὶ τὸ λεγόμενον Onpiov.. .
τινὲς δὲ ἀσκόν φασιν αὐτὸ εἷναι οἴνου, ἐξ οὗ σπένδει τοῖς θεοῖς ἐπὶ τὸ
Θυτήριον. ἔχει δὲ αὐτὸ ἐν τῇ δεξιᾷ χειρί, ἐν δὲ τῇ ἀριστερᾷ θύρσον.

415


ARATUS


"ANN ἔτι yap τε καὶ ἄλλο περαιόθεν ἕλκεται


Ν
ἄστρον"
¢ / \ \ 4 > \
TAPHN μιν καλέουσι. τὸ δὲ ζώοντι ἐοικὸς
> Ν > a / ¢ aAn ς \ / ;
ἠνεκὲς εἰλεῦται" καί of κεφαλὴ ὑπὸ μέσσον 445


/ ε a / 2 +€ \ ~ la
Kapkivov ἱκνεῖται, σπείρη δ᾽ ὑπὸ σῶμα Λέοντος,
οὐρὴ δὲ κρέμαται ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ Kevravpouo.
δ Ὁ
μέσσῃ δὲ σπείρῃ ΚΡΗΤΗΡ, πυμάτῃ δ᾽ ἐπίκειται
>
εἴδωλον ΚΟΡΑΚΟΣ σπείρην κόπτοντι ἐοικός.
\ \
Kai μὴν καὶ mpoxron Διδύμοις ὕπο καλὰ.
φαείνει. 450
Ταῦτά κε θηήσαιο παρερχομένων ἐνιαυτῶν
ἑξείης “παλίνωρα' τὰ γὰρ καὶ πάντα μάλ᾽ αὕτως
>
οὐρανῷ εὖ ἐνάρηρεν ἀγάλματα νυκτὸς ἰούσης.
Οἱ δ᾽ ἐπιμὶξ ἄλλοι πέντ᾽ ἀστέρες, οὐδὲν ὁμοῖοι,
/ > 7 / [4
παντόθεν εἰδώλων δυοκαίδεκα δινεύονται. 455
> vn » > > wy ¢ 7 > /
οὐκ ἂν ἔτ᾽ εἰς ἄλλους ὁρόων ἐπιτεκμήραιο
/
κείνους ἧχι κέονται" ἐπεὶ πάντες μετανάσται,
\
μακροὶ δέ σφεων εἰσὶν ἑλισσομένων ἐνιαυτοΐ,
ακρὰ δὲ σήματα κεῖται ἀπόπροθεν εἰς ἕν ἰόντων.
2 δ᾽ Wy θ λ / , > Δ ΣΝ ᾿» 460 ;
οὐδ᾽ ἔτι θαρσαλέος κείνων ἐγώ" ἄρκιος εἴην
3 / / / / > 52 7 / > > A
ἀπλανέων τά τε κύκλα τά τ᾽ αἰθέρι σήματ᾽ ἐνισπεῖν.
> a“ A
τοι μὲν τά ye κεῖται ἀλίγκια δινωτοῖσιν
’ ~ / / 2, / /
τέσσαρα, τῶν κε μάλιστα πόθη ὄφελός TE γένοιτο


@ περαιόθεν occurs four times in Aratus, here and 606, 645,
720. In the last three cases it means ‘‘ from the Eastern
horizon.” The schol. on the present passage says ‘‘ either
from the East or from a quarter beyond and farther than the


Centaur.” > Crater, the Cup.

¢ Corvus, the Crow. Both these small constellations lie
on the back of Hydra.

@ Procyon or Canis Minor.

¢ The Fixed Stars. 7 The Planets.


9 The reference, as the scholiast says, is to the ‘‘ great
Platonick yeere ” (Herrick), the A ie or τέλεος ἐνιαυτός, when


416


PHAENOMENA |


Another constellation trails beyond,* which men
call the Hydra. Like a living creature it winds
afar its coiling form. Its head comes beneath the
middle of the Crab, its coil beneath the body of the
Lion, and its tail hangs above the Centaur himself.
Midway on its coiling form is set the Crater,’ and at
the tip the figure of a Raven®¢ that seems to peck at
the coil.
There, too, by the Hydra beneath the Twins
“brightly shines Procyon.@

All these constellations thou canst mark as the
seasons pass, each returning at its appointed time:
for all are unchangingly and firmly fixed’ in the
heavens to be the ornaments of the passing night.

But of quite a different class are those five other
orbs, that intermingle with them and wheel wander-
ing on every side of the twelve figures of the Zodiac.
No longer with the others as thy guide couldst thou
mark where lies the path of those, since all pursue
a shifty course, and long are the periods of their
revolution and far distant lies the goal of their con-
junction.’ When I come to them my daring fails,
but mine be the power to tell of the orbits of the
Fixed Stars and Signs in heaven.

These orbits” lie like rings, four in number, chief
in interest and in profit, if thou wouldst mark the


there is a general reversion of nature to the position at the
beginning of the period, a so-called ἀποκατάστασις. Then
the planets moving in different orbits and with different
speeds complete their orbits together (Plato, Timaeus 39).

» The four rings are the Great Circles of the Equator and
the Ecliptic and the smaller circles of the Tropic of Cancer
and the Tropic of Capricorn. Thus in size the Equator is
equal to the Ecliptic, while the two Tropics are equal to one
another, Ξ

QE 417


ARATUS


μέτρα περισκοπέοντι κατανομένων ἐνιαυτῶν.
σήματα δ᾽ εὖ μάλα πᾶσιν ,ἐπιρρήδην περίκειται 465
πολλά τε καὶ σχεδόθεν πάντη συνεεργμένα πάντα.
αὐτοὶ δ᾽ ἀπλανέες καὶ ἀρηρότες ἀλλήλοισιν
πάντες" ἀτὰρ μέτρῳ γε δύω δυσὶν ἀντιφέρονται.

Ei ποτέ τοι νυκτὸς καθαρῆς, ὅτε πάντας


ἀγαυοὺς :
ἀστέρας ἀνθρώποις ἐπιδείκνυται οὐρανίη Νύξ, 470
οὐδέ Tis ἀδρανέων φέρεται διχόμηνι σελήνῃ, -


ἀλλὰ τά γε κνέφαος διαφαίνεται ὀξέα πάντα---
εἴ ποτέ τοι τημόσδε περὶ φρένας ἵκετο θαῦμα,
σκεψαμένῳ πάντη κεκεασμένον εὐρέϊ κύκλῳ
οὐρανόν, ἢ καί τίς τοι ἐπιστὰς ἄλλος ἔδειξεν 475
κεῖνο περιγληνὲς τροχαλόν, TAAA μιν καλέουσιν"
τῷ δ᾽ ἤτοι χροιὴν μὲν ἀλίγκιος οὐκέτι κύκλος
δινεῖται, τὰ δὲ μέτρα τόσοι πισύρων περ ἐόντων
οἱ δύο, τοὶ δέ σφεων μέγα μείονες εἱλίσσονται.
Τῶν ὁ μὲν ἐγγύθεν ἐστὶ κατερχομένου βορέαο. 480
ἐν δέ οἱ ἀμφότεραι κεφαλῳὶ Διδύμων φορέονται,
ἐν δέ τε γούνατα κεῖται ἀρηρότος ᾿Ἡνιόχοιο,
λαιὴ δὲ κνήμη καὶ ἀριστερὸς ὦμος ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ
Περσέος, ᾿Ανδρομέδης δὲ μέσην ἀγκῶνος ὕπερθεν
δεξιτερὴν ἐπέχει" τὸ μέν οἱ θέναρ ὑψόθι κεῖται, 488
ἀσσότερον βορέαο, νότῳ δ᾽ “ἐπικέκλυται ἀγκών:
ὁπλαὶ δ᾽ Ἵππειοι, καὶ ὑπαύχενον ᾿Ορνίθειον
ἄκρῃ σὺν κεφαλῇ, καλοί τ᾽ ᾿Οφιούχεοι ὦμοι,
αὐτὸν δινεύονται ἐληλάμενοι περὶ κύκλον"
ἡ δ᾽ ὀλίγον φέρεται νοτιωτέρη, οὐδ᾽ ἐπιβάλλει, 490
Παρθένος- ἀλλὰ Λέων καὶ Kapkivos: of μὲν ἄρ᾽
ἄμφω
ἑξείης κέαται βεβλημένοι, αὐτὰρ ὁ κύκλος
« Hipparch. i. 9,1 ff. reads ἀπλατέες, {.6. without breadth,
418


PHAENOMENA |


measures of the waning and the waxing of the
Seasons. On all are set beacon lights, many in
number, all every way closely penned together.
The circles are immovyable,* and fitted each to
other, but in size two are matched with two.

If ever on a clear night, when Night in the
heavens shows to men all her stars in their bright-
ness and no star is borne faintly gleaming at the
mid-month moon, but: they all sharply pierce the
darkness—if in such an hour wonder rises in thy
heart to mark on every side the heaven cleft by a
broad belt,’ or-if someone at thy side point out that
circle set with brilliants—that is what men call the
Milky Way. A match for it in colour thou wilt find
no circle wheel, but in size two of the four belts are
as large, but the other two are far inferior.

Of the lesser circles one ¢ is nigh to Boreas at his
coming, and on it are borne both the heads of the
Twins and the knees of the stedfast Charioteer, and
above him are the left shoulder and shin of Perseus.4
It crosses Andromeda’s right arm above the elbow.?¢
Above it is set her palm, nearer the north, and south-
ward leans her elbow. The hoofs of the Horse, the
head and neck of the Bird‘ and Ophiuchus’ bright
shoulders % wheel along this circle in their course.
The Maiden” is borne a little to the South and does
not touch the Belt, but on it are the Lion and the
Crab. Thereon are they both established side by


which he defends against δὲ πλατέες, which was preferred by
Attalus.
> The Galaxy or Milky Way. ο Tropic of Cancer.
4 Hipparch. i. 10 disputes these statements ; cf. i. 2.
ὁ Hipparch. i. 10. 6.
7 Hipparch. i. 10. 7. 9 Hipparch, i. 10. 9.
» Virgo, ef. Hipparch, i. 10, 10.


419


ARATUS


A A ~
Tov μὲν ὑπὸ στῆθος καὶ γαστέρα μέχρι παρ᾽ αἰδῶ
τέμνει, τὸν δὲ διηνεκέως ὑπένερθε χελείου
, / / , /
Kapxivov, ἧχι μάλιστα διχαιόμενόν κε νοήσαις 49
3 / υσ > > A / ε 7 ε
ὀρθόν, ἵν᾽ ὀφθαλμοὶ κύκλου ἑκάτερθεν ἴοιεν.
τοῦ μέν, ὅσον τε μάλιστα, δι᾿ ὀκτὼ μετρηθέντος,
πέντε μὲν ἔνδια στρέφεται καθ᾽ ὑπέρτερα γαίης,
τὰ τρία δ᾽ ἐν TEpaTn* θέρεος δέ of ἐν τροπαί εἰσιν.
ἀλλ᾽ ὁ μὲν ἐν βορέω περὶ Καρκίνον ἐ ἐστήρικται. 500
“AMos δ᾽ ἀντιόωντι Ῥότῳ μέσον Αἰγοκερῆα
τέμνει καὶ πόδας ‘Ydpoydou καὶ Kijreos οὐρήν;"
> / e -3 / > A \ > / \
ἐν δέ of ἐστι Λαγωός: ἀτὰρ Kuvos οὐ μάλα πολλὴν
δ 3 3 ε > / / > / >
αἴνυται, ἀλλ᾽ ὁπόσην ἐπέχει ποσίν: ev δέ οἱ
> A
Αργώ,
\ rs / 4 > / /
Kat μέγα Ἱζενταύροιο μετάφρενον, ev δέ τε κέντρον 505
Σκορπίου, ἐν καὶ Τόξον ἀγαυοῦ To€euripos.
τὸν πύματον καθαροῖο παρερχόμενος βορέαο
ἐς νότον ἠέλιος φέρεται: Tpemerat ye μὲν αὐτοῦ
χειμέριος. καί οἱ τρία μὲν περιτέλλεται ὑψοῦ
\


τῶν ὀκτώ, τὰ δὲ πέντε κατώρυχα δινεύονται. 510
Μεσσόθι δ᾽ ἀμφοτέρων, ὅσσος πολιοῖο Γά-
λακτος,


A ς / 7 / > 7
γαῖαν ὑποστρέφεται κύκλος διχόωντι ἐοικώς"
ἐν δέ οἱ ἤματα νυξὶν ἰσαίεται ἀμφοτέρῃσιν,
φθίνοντος θέρεος, τοτὲ δ᾽ εἴαρος ἱσταμένοιο.
σῆμα δέ οἱ Ἰζριὸς Ταύροιό τε γούνατα κεῖται, 515
Κριὸς μὲν κατὰ μῆκος ἐληλάμενος διὰ κύκλου,
Ταύρου δὲ σκελέων ὅσση περιφαίνεται ὀκλάξ.
> ὃ / / ¢ 7 > L4 Ὦ /
ev δέ τέ οἱ ζώνη εὐφεγγέος ᾿Ωρίωνος


« Hipparch. i. 8. 5ff., i. 9. 10.
> Summer Solstice, the longest day, 22nd Fone!
¢ Tropic of Capricorn, Hipparch. i. 2. 21, i. 10. 16.
4 Winter Solstice, the shortest day, 22nd December.


420


εἰ


PHAENOMENA


side, but the circle cuts the Lion beneath breast and
belly lengthwise to the loins, and the Crab it cuts
clean through by the shell where thou canst see
him most clearly cut, as he stands upright with his
eyes on either. side of the Belt. The circle is
divided, as well as may be, into eight parts, whereof
five in the daytime wheel on high above the earth
and three beneath the horizon.* In it is the Turn-
ing-point of the Sun in summer.’ _ This circle is set
round the Crab in the North.

But there is another circle* to match in the
South. It cuts through the middle of Aegoceros,
the feet of Hydrochoiis, and the tail of the sea-
monster, Cetus, and on it is the Hare. It claims no
great share of the Dog, but only the space that he
occupies with his feet. In it is Argo and the mighty
back of the Centaur, the sting of Scorpio, and the
Bow of the bright Archer. This circle the sun
passes last as he is southward borne from the bright
north, and here is the Turning-point of the sun in
winter.? “Three parts of eight of his course are
above and five below the horizon.

Between the Tropics a Belt,’ peer of the grey
Milky Way, undergirds the earth and with imaginary
line bisects the sphere. In it the days are equal to
the nights‘ both at the waning of the summer and
the waxing of the spring. The sign appointed for it
is the Ram’ and the knees of the Bull—the Ram
being borne lengthwise through it, but of the Bull
just the visible bend of the knees. In it are the
Belt of the well-starred Orion and the coil of the

ὁ The κύκλος ἰσημερινός or Equator, a Great Circle like the
Milky Way.

7 Spring and Autumn Equinoxes, Hipparch. i. 9. 9.

9 Hipparch. i. 10. 18 ff.

421


ARATUS


/ 5 > 7 7 > τ e Δι τὰν A
καμπή τ᾽ αἰθομένης “Ydpys: evi ot καὶ ἐλαφρὸς
/ > \ / eS δ᾽ 3 / 3 aA
Κρητήρ, ev δὲ Κόραξ, ἐνὶ ἀστέρες οὐ μάλα
πολλοὶ
Χηλάων" ἐν τῷ δ᾽ ᾿Οφιούχεα γοῦνα φορεῖται.
οὐ μὴν Αἰητοῦ ἀπαμείρεται, ἀλλά οἱ ἐγγὺς
Ζηνὸς ἀητεῖται μέγας ἄγγελος. ἡ δὲ κατ᾽ αὐτὸν
¢€ / \ Ve 4 εχ,
ἱππείη κεφαλὴ καὶ ὑπαύχενον εἱλίσσονται.
Τοὺς μὲν παρβολάδην ὀρθοὺς περιβάλλεται
ἄξων
4 ¢ \ / > ͵
μεσσόθι πάντας ἔχων: ὁ δὲ τέτρατος ἐσφήκωται
\ > > / σ , eo Ue ’ὔ ”
λοξὸς ἐν ἀμφοτέροις, οἵ piv ῥ᾽ ἑκάτερθεν ἔχουσιν
ἀντιπέρην τροπικοΐ, μέσσος δέ ἑ μεσσόθι τέμνει.
οὔ κεν ᾿Αθηναίης χειρῶν δεδιδαγμένος ἀνὴρ
ἄλλῃ κολλήσαιτο κυλινδόμενα τροχάλεια
τοῖά τέ καὶ τόσα πάντα περισφαιρηδὸν ἑλίσσων,
ὡς τά γ᾽ ἐναιθέρια πλαγίῳ συναρηρότα κύκλῳ
ἐξ ἠοῦς ἐπὶ νύκτα διώκεται ἤματα πάντα.
καὶ τὰ μὲν ἀντέλλει καὶ αὐτίκα νειόθι δύνει
,ὔ 7 / / > \ δ 7
πάντα παραβλήδην: μία δέ σφεων ἐστὶν ἑκάστου
ἑξείης ἑκάτερθε κατηλυσίη τ᾽ ἀνοδός τε.
αὐτὰρ ὅ γ᾽ ὠκεανοῦ τόσσον παραμείβεται ὕδωρ,
ὅσσον am Αἰγοκερῆος ἀνερχομένοιο μάλιστα
Καρκίνον εἰς ἀνιόντα κυλίνδεται: ὅσσον ἁπάντη
3 / > / / A > / 4
ἀντέλλων ἐπέχει, τόσσον γε μὲν ἀλλόθι δύνων.
Ὁ : Pe | a “-Ἔ 3 / 3 /
ὅσσον ὃ ὀφθαλμο ἴο βολῆς ἀποτέμνεται αὐγή,
ἑξάκις ἂν τόσση μιν ὑποδράμοι. αὐτὰρ ἑκάστη
ἴση μετρηθεῖσα δύω περιτέμνεται ἄστρα.
ΖΔωΐδιον δέ ἑ κύκλον ἐπίκλησιν καλέουσιν.


« Or ‘is blown”; ἀητεῖται is ἅπ. λεγ.. see ν. 815.

ὃ Tropic of Cancer, Tropic of Capricorn, and the Equator.

ο Kcliptic, κύκλος λοξός, circulus obliquus, the apparent path
of the Sun in the heavens.


422


520


525


530


535


540


PHAENOMENA


gleaming Hydra: in it, too, the dim-lit Crater and
the Crow and the scanty-starred Claws and the
knees of Ophiuchus are borne. But it has no share
in the Eagle, but near it flies * the mighty messenger
of Zeus. Facing the Eagle wheel the head and
neck of the Horse.

These three Belts ὃ are parallel, and at right angles
to the Axis which they surround and which is the
centre of them all, but the fourth® aslant is fixed
athwart the Tropics: they on opposite sides of the
Equator support it at either limit, but the Equator
bisects it. Not otherwise would a man skilled in
the handicraft of Athena join the whirling Belts,
wheeling them all around, so many and so great like
rings, just as the Belts in the heavens, clasped by
the transverse circle, hasten from dawn to night
throughout all time. The three Belts4 rise and set
all parallel but ever single and the same is the point
where in due order each rises or sets at East or West.
But the fourth circle passes over as much water of
ocean ὁ as rolls between the rising of Aegoceros, and
the rising of the Crab: as much as it occupies in
rising, so much it occupies in setting. As long as is
the ray cast to heaven from the glance of the eye, six
times as long a line would subtend this Belt. Each
ray, measured of equal length, intercepts two constel-
lations.‘ This circle is called the Belt of the Zodiac.


@ Hipparch. ii. 1. 17.

¢ The distance between the point of the horizon (ocean)
where the Sun rises at Mid-Winter and the point where he
rises at Mid-Summer.

7 Each side of a regular hexagon inscribed in a circle is
equal to the radius of the circle (Euclid iv. 15). If the
earth be regarded as the centre of the celestial sphere, the
ray cast from the eye of the observer to the vault of heaven

423


-


ARATUS


Τῷ ἔνι Kapxivos ἐστί, Λέων δ᾽ ἐπὶ τῷ, καὶ ὑπ᾽
αὐτὸν 545

Παρθένος: at δ᾽ ἐπί οἱ Χηλαὶ καὶ Σκορπίος αὐτός,
Τοξευτής τε καὶ Αἰγόκερως, ἐπὶ δ᾽ Αἰγοκερῆϊ
᾿Ὑδροχόος: δύο δ᾽ αὐτὸν ὕπ᾽ ᾿Ιχθύες ἀστερόωνται"
τοὺς δὲ μέτα κριός, Ταῦρός δ᾽ ἐπὶ τῷ Δίδυμοΐ τε.
ἐν τοῖς ἠέλιος φέρεται δυοκαίδεκα πᾶσιν 550
πάντ᾽ ἐνιαυτὸν ἄγων, καί οἱ περὶ τοῦτον ἰόντι
κύκλον ἀέξονται πᾶσαι ἐπικάρπιοι ὧραι.

Τοῦ δ᾽ ὅσσον κοίλοιο κατ᾽ ὠκεανοῖο δύηται,
τόσσον ὑπὲρ γαίης. φέρεται: πάσῃ δ᾽ ἐπὶ νυκτὶ
ἕξ αἰεὶ δύνουσι δυωδεκάδες κύκλοιο, 555
τόσσαι δ᾽ ἀντέλλουσι. τόσον δ᾽ ἐπὶ μῆκος ἑκάστη
νὺξ αἰεὶ τετάνυσται, ὅσον τέ περ ἥμισυ κύκλου
ἀρχομένης ἀπὸ νυκτὸς ἀείρεται ὑψόθι γαίης.

Οὔ κεν ἀπόβλητον δεδοκημένῳ ἤματος εἴη
μοιράων σκέπτεσθαι ὅ ὅτ᾽ ἀντέλλῃσιν ἑκάστη" 560
αἰεὶ yap τάων γε μιῇ συνανέρχεται αὐτὸς
ἠέλιος, τὰς δ᾽ ἄν κε περισκέψαιο μάλιστα
εἰς αὐτὰς ὁρόων' ἀτὰρ εἰ νεφέεσσι μέλαιναι
γίνοιντ᾽ ἢ ὄρεος KEK PUP LEV aL ἀντέλλοιεν,
σήματ᾽ ἐπερχομένῃσιν ἀρηρότα ποιήσασθαι. 565
αὐτὸς δ᾽ ἂν μά α τοι κεράων ἑκάτερθε διδοίη
᾿᾽Ωκεανός, τά τε πολλὰ περιστρέφεται ἑοῖ αὐτῷ,
νειόθεν ὅὁππῆμος κείνων φορέῃσιν ἑκάστην.

Ov οἱ ἀφαυρότατοι, ὅτε ΚΑΡΚΙΝΟΣ ἀντέλλῃσιν,
ἀστέρες ἀμφοτέρωθεν ἑλισσόμενοι περίκεινται, 570


is the radius of the sphere, and six lines of that length will
give the inscribed regular hexagon. Each of those sides
will subtend an arc of the sphere containing two signs of the
Zodiac. Bisect each side, and each half side will correspond
to one sign. This method of describing the Zodiac is what
424


τ


PHAENOMENA |


In it is the Crab; after the Crab the Lion and
beneath him the Maiden; after the Maiden the
Claws and the Scorpion himself and the Archer and
Aegoceros, and after Aegoceros Hydrochoiis. Be-
neath him are enstarred the Two Fishes and after
them the Ram and next the Bull and the Twins. In
them, twelve in all, has the sun his course as he
leads on the whole year, and as he fares around this
belt, all the fruitful seasons have their growth.

Half this Belt is set below the hollow of the
horizon, and half is above the earth. Every night
six constellations of this circle’s twelve set and as
many rise; as long is each night ever stretched as
half the belt rises above the earth from the fall of
night.¢

Not useless were it for one who seeks for signs of
coming day to mark when each sign of the Zodiac
rises. For ever with one of them the sun himself
rises. One could best search out those constellations
by looking on themselves, but if they be dark with
clouds or rise hidden behind a hill, get thee fixed
signs for their coming. Ocean himself will give thee
signs at either horn—the East or the West—in the
many constellations that wheel about him, when
from below he sends forth each rising sign.

Not very faint are the wheeling constellations that
are set about Ocean at East or West, when the Crab
Vergil refers to in Eel. iii. 40 ff. **In medio duo signa,
Conon et—quis fuit alter Descripsit radio totum qui gentibus
orbem, Tempora quae messor, quae curvus arator haberet?”
Our “‘ ray” is, of course, derived from radius.

« The Zodiac is a Great Circle and therefore is bisected
by any other Great Circle, ¢.g. the horizon. Now day lasts
while the Sun is above the horizon. When the Sun is


setting a half circle of the Zodiac has risen since his rising,
i.é. six zodiacal signs.


425


ARATUS


\ A ΠΑ A : a > > lowe:
τοὶ μὲν δύνοντες, τοὶ δ᾽ ἐξ ἑτέρης ἀνιόντες.
δύνει μὲν Στέφανος, δύνει δὲ κατὰ ῥάχιν ᾿Ιχθύς.
ἥμισυ μέν κεν ἴδοιο μετήορον, ἥμισυ δ᾽ ἤδη
ἐσχατιαὶ βάλλουσι κατερχομένου Στεφάνοιο.

EA! 7 | et J lt 4 , Ld \ 3
αὐτὰρ ὅ γ᾽ ἐξόπιθεν τετραμμένος ἄλλα μὲν οὔπω 575
γαστέρι νειαίρῃ, τὰ δ᾽ ὑπέρτερα νυκτὶ φορεῖται.
τὸν δὲ καὶ εἰς ὥμους κατάγει μογερὸν ᾿Οφιοῦχον
Kapxivos ἐκ γονάτων, κατάγει δ᾽ “Odw αὐχένος


> 4
ἐγγύς.
οὐδ᾽ ἂν ἔτ᾽ ᾿Αρκτοφύλαξ εἴη πολὺς ἀμφοτέρωθεν,
/ > / Α YS / ᾿ ”
μείων ἠμάτιος, τὸ δ᾽ ἐπὶ πλέον ἔννυχος ἤδη. 580


τέτρασι yap μοίραις ἄμυδις κατιόντα Βοώτην
κεανὸς δέχεται: ὁ δ᾽ ἐπὴν φάεος κορέσηται,
βουλυτῷ ἐπέχει πλεῖον δίχα νυκτὸς ἰούσης,
ἦμος ὅτ᾽ ἠελίοιο κατερχομένοιο δύηται.
- / e \ / 7. Ψ > A / /
Keivat οἱ καὶ νύκτες ἐπ᾽ ὀψὲ δύοντι λέγονται. 585
Δ ¢ \ 4 ¢ >.> / 2O\ > /
ὡς οἱ μὲν δύνουσιν, ὁ δ᾽ ἀντίος, οὐδὲν ἀεικής,
> > > \ 4 > > > ’ὔ, \
ἀλλ᾽ εὖ μὲν ζώνῃ, εὖ δ᾽ ἀμφοτέροισι φαεινὸς
» Ὦ , 7 , ΠῚ θ ͵
ὦμοις, ᾿ῶρίων, ξίφεός γε μὲν ἶφι πεποιθώς,
/ / / / / ΝΜ
πάντα φέρων Ἰοταμόν, κέραος παρατείνεται ἄλλου.
᾿Ἔρχομένῳ δὲ AEONTI τὰ μὲν κατὰ πάντα


φέρονται ὅ90
Καρκίνῳ ὅσσ᾽ ἐδύοντο, καὶ Αἰετός. αὐτὰρ ὅ γε
\
Γνὺξ '


«2,9, facing the East; or reversed, i.e. standing upon his
head, cf. 620 (Hipparch. ii. 16), 669. Hence in later times
he is also θεός τις karaxégada κείμενος. The peculiarity of his
rising feet-foremost and setting head-foremost (Hygin. Asér.
iii. 5 ** Hic occidens capite prius quam reliquo corpore devenit
ad terram; qui cum totus occidit ut pendere pedibus
ex Arctico circulo videatur, exoriens ante pedibus quam
reliquis membris’”’) is referred to by Manilius v. 645 ff. He
who is born under this constellation—‘‘ Nixa genu species et


426


PHAENOMENA


rises, some setting in the West and others rising in
the East. The Crown sets and the Southern Fish as
far as its back. Half the setting Crown is visible in
‘the sky but half already sinks beneath the verge.
Of Engonasin, backward turned,* the waist is still
visible but his upper parts are borne in night. The
rise of the Crab brings down from knee to shoulder
the wretched Ophiuchus and Ophis to the neck. No
longer great on both sides of the horizon is Arcto-
phylax but only the lesser portion is visible, while the
greater part is wrapt in night. For with four signs?
of the Zodiac Boétes sets and is received in the
bosom of ocean; and when ‘he is sated with the
light he takes till past midnight in the loosing of
his oxen, in the season when he sets with the sink-
ing sun. Those nights are named after his late
setting. So these stars are setting, but another,
facing them, no dim star, even Orion with glittering
belt and shining shoulders and trusting in the might
of his sword, and bringing all the River,? rises from
the other horn, the East,

At the coming of the Lion those constellations
wholly set, which were setting when the Crab rose,
and with them sets the Eagle. But the Phantom


Graio nomine dicta Engonasi (ignota facies sub  origine
constat) ’’—will be plotter and a footpad, or—a tight-rope
walker: “ΕΠ si forte aliquas animis exsurget in artes | In
praerupta dabit studium vendetque periclo | Ingenium. Ac
tenues ausus sine limite grassus | Certa per extentos ponet
vestigia funes, At caeli meditatus iter vestigia perdet |
Paene sua et pendens populum suspendet ab ipso.”

> Hipparch. ii. 19.

¢ Bootes takes a long time to set because he sets in a
perpendicular position, while he rises quickly (608) because
he is in a horizontal position (Hipparch. ii. 17 ff.).

ὦ Kridanus. :


427


ARATUS


ἥμενος ἄλλα μὲν ἤδη, ἀτὰρ γόνυ καὶ πόδα λαιὸν
οὔπω κυμαίνοντος ὑποστρέφει ὠκεανο to.
ἀντέλλει δ᾽ Ὕδρης κεφαλὴ χαροπός te Aaywos
καὶ Προκύων πρότεροΐ τε πόδες Kuvos αἰθομένοιο. 595
Οὐ μέν θην ὀλίγους γαίης ὑπὸ νείατα βάλλει
ΠΑΡΘΕΝΟΣ ἀντέλλουσα. Λύρη τότε Κυλληναίη
καὶ Δελφὶς δύνουσι καὶ εὐποίητος ᾿Οἴστός-
σὺν τοῖς Ὄρνιθος πρώτα πτερὰ μέσφα παρ᾽ αὐτὴν
οὐρὴν καὶ ἸΪοταμοῖο παρηορίαι σκιόωνται" 600
δύνει δ᾽ Ἱππείη κεφαλή, δύνει δὲ καὶ αὐχήν.
ἀντέλλει δ᾽ “Ydpn. μὲν ἐπὶ πλέον ἄχρι παρ᾽ αὐτὸν
Κρητῆρα, φθάμενος δὲ Κύων πόδας αἴνυται ἄλλους,
ἕλκων ἐξόπιθεν πρύμνην πολυτειρέος ᾿Αργοῦς.
ἡ δὲ θέει γαίης ἱστὸν διχόωσα κατ᾽ αὐτόν, 605
Παρθένος ἦμος ἅπασα περαιόθεν ἄρτι γένηται.
Οὐδ᾽ ἂν ἐπερχόμεναι ΧΗΛΑΙ, καὶ λεπτὰ φάουσαι,
ἄφραστοι παρίοιεν, ἐπεὶ μέγα σῆμα Βοώτης
ἀθρόος ἀντέλλει βεβολημένος ᾿Αρκτούροιο.


᾿Αργὼ δ᾽ εὖ * μάλα πᾶσα μετήορος ἔσσεται ἤδη: 610


ἀλλ᾽ “Ydpn, κέχυται γὰρ ἐν οὐρανῷ ἤλιθα πολλή,

2 A nv ὃ 4 / δ᾽ > \ X: λ ὙΠ ΝΣ 9
οὐρῆς ἂν δεύοιτο. μόνην δ᾽ ἐπὶ Χηλαὶ ἄγουσιν
δεξιτερὴν κνήμην αὐτῆς ἐπιγουνίδος ἄχρις |

von 4 Ee \ 4 ~
αἰεὶ Τνύξ, αἰεὶ δὲ Λύρῃ παραπεπτηῶτος, 615
ὅντινα τοῦτον ἄϊστον ὑπουρανίων εἰδώλων
3 / 4 A\i72 es > /
ἀμφότερον δύνοντα καὶ ἐξ ἑτέρης ἀνιόντα

/ > \ ͵ὔ “ \ ae ”
πολλάκις, αὐτονυχεὶ θηεύμεθα. τοῦ μὲν ap’ οἴη
κνήμη σὺν Χηλῇσι φαείνεται ἀμφοτέρῃσιν"
αὐτὸς δ᾽ ἐς κεφαλὴν ἔ ee που τετραμμένος ἄλλῃ 620
Σκορπίον ἀντέλλοντα μένει καὶ ῥύτορα Τόξου"


1 εὖ Hipparch. cod. L ii. 2. 42. Cf. (Οἷς, <Arat. 396
**Totaque iam supera fulgens prolabitur Argo” ; German.
637° ** Oceaaue puppis habet”; Avien. 1133 iam celso
Thessala puppis Aethere subvehitur’’; οὐ ACM and schol.


428


PHAENOMENA |


On His Knees sinks all save knee and left foot
beneath the stormy ocean. Up rises the Hydra’s
head and the bright-eyed Hare and Procyon and
_the forefeet of the flaming Dog.

Not few, either, are the constellations which the
Maiden at her rising sends beneath the verge of
earth. Then set the Cyllenian Lyre, the Dolphin
and the shapely Arrow. With them the wing-tips
of the Bird® up to her very tail and the farthest
reaches of the River are overshadowed. The head of
the Horse ἢ sets, sets too his neck. The Hydra rises
higher as far as Crater, and before her the Dog brings
up his hind feet, dragging behind him the stern of
Argo of many stars. And she rises above the earth,
cleft right at the mast, just when the whole of the
Maiden has risen.

Nor can the rising Claws, though faintly shining,
pass unremarked, when at a bound ¢ the mighty sign
of Bodtes rises, jewelled with Arcturus.¢ Aloft is
risen all of Argo, but the Hydra, shed as she is afar
over the heavens, will lack her tail. The Claws bring
_ only the right leg as far as the thigh of that Phantom
that is ever On his Knees, ever crouching by the Lyre
—that Phantom, unknown among the figures of the
heavens, whom we often see both rise and set on the
selfsame night. Of him only the leg is visible at the
rising of both the Claws: he himself head-down-
ward‘ on the other side awaits the rising Scorpion
and the Drawer of the Bow’ For they bring him:


« Cygnus. > Pegasus. 9 See 585 ἢ.
4 The brightest star in Bootes (a Bootis).
4 Of, S15. 7 Sagittarius.


2 613 δεινὸν ἐφεστηῶτ᾽ ᾿Οφιουχέα" τοῦ μὲν ἔπειτα A; om.
Μ.


429


ARATUS


οἱ γάρ μιν φορέουσιν, ὁ μὲν μέσον ἄλλα τε πάντα,
χεῖρα δέ οἱ σκαιὴν κεφαλήν θ᾽ ἅμα Τόξον ἀγινεῖ.
ἀλλ᾽ ὁ μὲν ὡς τρίχα πάντα καταμελεϊστὶ φορεῖται"
ἥμισυ δὲ Στεφάνοιο καὶ αὐτὴν ἔσχατον οὐρὴν 625
Kevravpou φορέουσιν ἀνερχόμεναι ἔτι XnAai.
τῆμος ἀποιχομένην κεφαλὴν μέτα δύεται Ἵππος,
καὶ προτέρου Ὄρνιθος ἐφέλκεται ἔ ἔσχατος οὐρή.
δύνει δ᾽ ᾿Ανδρομέδης κεφαλή" τὸ δέ οἱ μέγα δεῖμα
Κήτεος ἠερόεις ἐπάγει νότος" ἀντία δ᾽ αὐτὸς 630
Κηφεὺς ἐκ βορέω μεγάλῃ ἀνὰ “χειρὶ κελεύει.
καὶ τὸ μὲν ἐς λοφιὴν τετραμμένον ἄχρι παρ᾽ αὐτὴν
δύνει, ἀτὰρ Κηφεὺς κεφαλῇ καὶ χειρὶ καὶ ope.
Καμπαὶ δ᾽ ἂν Ποταμοῦ to καὶ αὐτίκ᾽ ἐπερχομένοιο
ΣΚΟΡΠΙΟΥ͂ ἐμπίπτοιεν ἐυρρόου wKeavoto* 635
“a δ. 9 / / 7 > /
ὃς Kal ἐπερχόμενος φοβέει μέγαν “Opiwva.
ΝΜ Α Er / ‘ / λ 7 σ a
preps ἱλήκοι" προτέρων λόγος, of μιν ἔφαντο
¢ “ / / .. / 7
ἑλκῆσαι πέπλοιο, Χίῳ ὅτε θηρία πάντα
καρτερὸς ᾿Ωῶρίων στιβαρῇ ἐπέκοπτε κορύνῃ.,
θήρης ἀρνύμενος κείνῳ χάριν Οἰνοπίωνι. 840
ἡ δέ οἱ ἐξαυτῆς ἐπετείλατο θηρίον ἄλλο,
νήσου ἀναρρήξασα μέσας ἑκάτερθε κολώνας,
Σκορπίον, ὅς pa μιν οὗτα καὶ ἔκτανε πολλὸν ἐόντα
πλειότερος προφανείς, ἐπεὶ Αρτεμιν ἤκαχεν αὐτήν.
τούνεκα δὴ καί φασι περαιόθεν ἐρχομένοιο 645
Σκορπίου ᾿Ωρίωνα περὶ χθονὸς ἔσχατα φεύγειν.
ρ p pi x x γ
οὐδὲ μέν, ᾿Ανδρομέδης καὶ Κήτεος ὅσσ᾽ ἐλέλειπτο,
κείνου ἔτ᾽ ἀντέλλοντος ἀπευθέες, ἀλλ᾽ ἄρα καὶ τοὶ


πανσυδίῃ φεύγουσιν. ὁ δὲ ζώνῃ τότε Κηφεὺς


γαῖαν ἐπιξύει, τὰ μὲν ἐς κεφαλὴν μάλα πάντα 860
βάπτων ὠκεανοῖο, τὰ δ᾽ οὐ θέμις, ἀλλὰ τά yo
αὐταὶ


” A λ ’ὔ “ὃ A ~ ». Pe J 7
PKTOL κωλύουσι, TOOaS και youva και ἰξύν.
480 4


PHAENOMENA


Scorpion brings his waist and all aforesaid; the Bow
his left hand and head. Even so in three portions is
he all brought up piecemeal above the horizon.
Half the Crown and the tip of the Centaur’s tail are
upraised with the rising Claws. Then is the Horse
setting after his vanished head, and dragged below
is the tail-tip of the Bird, already set. The head of
Andromeda is setting and against her is brought by
the misty South the mighty terror, Cetus, but over
against him in the North Cepheus with mighty hand
upraised warns him back. Cetus, neck downward,
sets to his neck, and Cepheus with head and hand
and shoulder.

The winding River® will straightway sink in fair
flowing ocean at the coming of Scorpion, whose
rising puts to flight even the mighty Orion. Thy
pardon, Artemis, we crave! There is a tale told by
the men of old, who said that stout Orion laid hands
upon her robe, what time in Chios he was smiting
with his strong club all manner of beasts, as a service
of the hunt to that King Oenopion. But she forth-
with rent in twain the surrounding hills of the
island and roused against him another kind of beast
—even the Scorpion, who proving mightier wounded
him, mighty though he was, and slew him, for that
he had vexed Artemis. Wherefore, too, men say
that at the rising of the Scorpion in the East Orion
flees at the Western verge. Nor does what was left
of Andromeda and of Cetus fail to mark his rise but
in full career they too flee. In that hour the belt of
Cepheus grazes earth as he dips his upper parts in
the sea, but the rest he may not—his feet and knees
and loins, for the Bears themselves forbid. The


@ Cygnus. > Eridanus.
431


ARATUS


e \ \ 7 15 A > , > 7
ἡ δὲ καὶ αὐτὴ παιδὸς ἐπείγεται εἰδώλοιο
δειλὴ Κασσιέπεια. τὰ δ᾽ οὐκέτι οἱ κατὰ κόσμον
, > / / \ , ἈΝ
φαίνεται ἐκ δίφροιο, πόδες καὶ γούναθ ὕπερθεν, 655
ἀλλ᾽ 7 5 ἐς κεφαλὴν ἴ ton δύετ᾽ ᾿ἀρνευτῆρι.
μειρομένη γονάτων, ἐπεὶ οὐκ ἄρ᾽ ἔμελλεν ἐκείνη
Δωρίδι καὶ Πανόπῃ μεγάλων ἄτερ ἰσώσασθαι.
ε \ ΝΜ 9 > ec 7 / \ A / ΕΝ
ἡ μὲν ap εἰς ἑτέρην φέρεται" τὰ δὲ νειόθεν ἄλλα
> A > ’ A / 4 /
οὐρανὸς ἀντιφέρει, Στεφάνοιό Te δεύτερα κύκλα 660
σ > > 4 / a” (OF; 4
ἵδρης τ᾽ ἐσχατιήν, φορέει T ἔπι Kevravpow
σῶμά Te Kal κεφαλὴν καὶ Θηρίον ὅ Op ἐνὶ χειρὶ
δεξιτερῇ Κένταυρος ἔ ἔχει. τοὶ δ᾽ αὖθι μένουσιν
τόξον ἐπερχόμενον πρότεροι πόδες ἱππότα Φηρός.
Τόξῳ καὶ σπείρη "Οῴφιος καὶ σῶμ᾽ ᾿Οφιούχου 665
ἀντέλλει ἐπιόντι: καρήατα δ᾽ αὐτὸς ἀγινεῖ
Σκορπίος ἀντέλλων, ἀνάγει δ᾽ αὐτὰς ᾿Οφιούχου
χεῖρας καὶ προτέρην "Οῴφιος πολυτειρέος ἀγήν.
τοῦ γε μὲν ᾿Εγγόνασιν, περὶ γὰρ τετραμμένος αἰεὶ
> / , \ / 3.» ἢ ΝΜ
ἀντέλλει, τότε μὲν περάτης ἐξέρχεται ἄλλα, 670
γυῖά τε καὶ ζώνη καὶ στήθεα πάντα καὶ ὦμος
δεξιτερῇ σὺν χειρί: κάρη δ᾽ ἑτέρης μετὰ χειρὸς
Τόξῳ a ἀνέρχονται καὶ TOEOTHI ἀντέλλοντι.
σὺν τοῖς Eppain te Λύρη καὶ στήθεος ἄ ἄχρις
Κηφεὺς ἠῴου παρελαύνεται ὠκεανοῖο, 675
ἦμος Kal μεγάλοιο Κυνὸς πᾶσαι ἀμαρυγαὶ
δύνουσιν, καὶ πάντα κατέρχεται ᾿ῶρίωνος,
πάντα γε μὴν ἀτέλεστα διωκομένοιο Λαγωοῦ.
ἀλλ᾽ οὐχ ᾿Ηνιόχῳ "Ἐριφοι οὐδ᾽ ᾿Ωλενίη Αἱξ
2O.\ LO 3 A φυ τὰ ae a
εὐθὺς ἀπέρχονται" τὰ δέ οἱ μεγάλην ava χεῖρα 680
1 ἀγήν (with v erased) Μ᾿; αὐγήν AC.
“ Andromeda.


> Nereids, whom Cassiepeia offended a vying with them
in beauty.


432


PHAENOMENA |


hapless Cassiepeia herself too hastes after the figure
of her child. No longer in seemly wise does she
shine upon her throne, feet and knees withal, but
she headlong plunges like a diver, parted at the
knees; for not scatheless was she to rival Doris and
Panope.? So she is borne towards the West, but
other signs in the East the vault of heaven brings
from below, the remaining half of the Crown® and
the tail of the Hydra, and uplifts the body and head
of the Centaur and the Beast that the Centaur holds
in his right hand. But the fore-feet of the Centaur-
Knight 4 await the rising of the Bow.

At the coming of the Bow up rises the coil of the
Serpent and the body of Ophiuchus. Their heads
the rising of the Scorpion himself brings and raises
even the hands of Ophiuchus and the foremost coil
of the star-bespangled Serpent. Then emerge from
below some parts. of Engonasin, who ever rises feet-
foremost,’ to wit, his legs, waist, all his breast, his
shoulder with his right hand; but his other hand
and his head arise with the rising Bow and the
Archer. With them the Lyre of Hermes and
Cepheus to his breast drive up from the Eastern
Ocean, what time all the rays of the mighty Dog
are sinking and all of Orion setting, yea, all the
Hare, which the Dog pursues in an unending race.
But not yet depart the Kids of the Charioteer and
the Arm-borne (Olenian) Goat’; by his great hand


¢ i.e. of Corona Borealis (cf. 625), as Hipparchus, who
agrees with the statement, interprets τὸ λοιπὸν τοῦ Στεφάνου.
Grotius wrongly supposed the words to mean Corona Aus-
tralis—which was unknown to Aratus under that name.
See 401 n.

4 Php of the Centaur, as in Pind. P. iv. 119, iii. 6, ete.

© Of, 620 ἡ. 7 Of, 164.


2F 433


ARATUS


λάμπονται, καί οἱ μελέων διακέκριται ἄλλων
κινῆσαι χειμῶνας ὅτ᾽ ἠελίῳ συνίωσιν.
᾿Αλλὰ τὰ μὲν, κεφαλήν τε καὶ ἄλλην χεῖρα καὶ
ἰξύν,
ΑἸΓΌΚΕΡΩΣ ἀνιὼν κατάγει" τὰ δὲ νείατα πάντα
αὐτῷ Τοξευτῆρι κατέρχεται. οὐδέ τι Περσεὺς 685
οὐδέ τι ἄκρα κόρυμβα μένει πολυτείρεος ᾿Αργοῦς"
ἀλλ᾽ ἤτοι Περσεὺς μὲν ἄτερ γουνός τε ποδός τε
δεξιτεροῦ δύεται, πρύμνης δ᾽ ὅσον ἐς περιαγήν"
αὐτὴ δ᾽ Αἰγοκερῆϊ κατέρχεται ἀντέλλοντι,
ἦμος καὶ Προκύων. δύεται, τὰ δ᾽ ἀνέρχεται. «ἄλλα, 690
“Opus τ᾽ Αἰητός τε τά τε πτερόεντος ᾿Οϊστοῦ
τείρεα καὶ νοτίοιο Θυτηρίου ἱερὸς ἕδρη.
Ἵππος δ᾽ ὝΔΡΟΧΟΟΙΟ νέον περιτελλομένοιο
ἔν \ a > ΄ 3 , > ὦ
ποσσί τε καὶ κεφαλῇ ἀνελίσσεται" ἀντία δ᾽ Ἵππου
ἐξ οὐρῆς Ἱζένταυρον ἐφέλκεται ἀστερίη Νύξ. 695
> > ” ε 4 A. 0.9 3 / ”
ἀλλ οὔ οἱ δύναται κεφαλὴν οὐδ᾽ εὐρέας ὥμους
αὐτῷ σὺν θώρηκι χαδεῖν. ἀλλ᾽ αἴθοπος Ὕδρης
αὐχενίην κατάγει σπείρην καὶ πάντα ᾿ μέτωπα.
ἡ δὲ καὶ ἐξόπιθεν πολλὴ μένει: ἀλλ᾽ ἄρα καὶ τὴν
αὐτῷ Κενταύρῳ, ὁπότ᾽ ΙΧΘΥῈΣ ἀντέλλωσιν, 700
ἀθρόον ἐμφέρεται. ὁ δ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ᾿Ιχθύσιν ἔρχεται ᾿Ιχθὺς
αὐτῷ κυανέῳ ὑποκείμενος Αἰγοκερῆϊ,
οὐ μὲν ἄδην, ὀλίγον δὲ δυωδεκάδ᾽ ᾿ἀμμένει ἄλλην.
οὕτω καὶ μογεραὶ χεῖρες καὶ γοῦνα καὶ ὦμοι
>A: 5 “ὃ δί / \ A 7 LAA δ᾽
νδρομέδης δίχα πάντα, τὰ μὲν πάρος, ἄλλα
ὀπίσσω, | 705
τείνεται, ὠκεανοῖο νέον ὁπότε προγένωνται
et θ ,ὔ 3 ὔ Ἁ / ¢ \ ὃ \ \
χθύες ἀμφότεροι. τὰ μέν οἱ κατὰ δεξιὰ χειρὸς
> ar ὦ ‘4 \ > > A / ω
αὐτοὶ ἐφέλκονται, τὰ ὃ ἀριστερὰ νειόθεν ἕλκει
ΚΡΙΟΣ ἀνερχόμενος. τοῦ καὶ περιτελλομένοιο
ἑσπερόθεν κεν ἴδοιο Θυτήριον: αὐτὰρ ἐν ἄλλῃ 710
434


aS es


PHAENOMENA —


they shine, and are eminent beyond all his other
limbs in raising storms, when they fare with the
sun.

His head, hand and waist set at the rising of
Aegoceros*: from waist to foot he sets at the rising
of the Archer. Nor do Perseus and the end of the
stern of jewelled Argo remain on high, but Perseus
sets all save his knee and right foot and Argo is gone
save her curved stern. She sinks wholly at the
rising of Aegoceros, when Procyon sets too, and there
rise the Bird® and the Eagle and the gems of the
winged Arrow and the sacred Altar, that is estab-
lished in the South.

When Hydrochoiis* is just risen, up wheel the
feet and head of the Horse. But opposite the
Horse starry Night draws the Centaur, tail-first,
beneath the horizon, but cannot yet engulf his head
and his broad shoulders, breast and all. But she
sinks beneath the verge the coiling neck and all the
brow of the gleaming Hydra. Yet many a coil of
the Hydra remains, but Night engulfs her wholly
with the Centaur, when the Fishes rise ; with the
Fishes the Fish® which is placed beneath azure
Aegoceros rises—not completely but part awaits
‘another sign of the Zodiac. So the weary hands
and knees and shoulders of Andromeda are parted
—stretched some below and others above the
horizon, when the Two Fishes are newly risen from
the ocean. Her right side the Fishes bring, but
the left the rising. Ram.¢ When the latter rises,
the Altar is seen setting in the West, while in the


« Capricorn. > Cygnus. ¢ Aquarius.
4 The Southern Sue Piscis Australis.
ries,


435


ARATUS


Περσέος ἀντέλλοντος ὅσον κεφαλήν τε καὶ ὦμους.
Αὐτὴ δὲ ζώνη καί κ᾽ ἀμφήριστα πέλουτο
ἢ Ko es φαείνεται ἢ ἐπὶ TATPOI,
σὺν τῷ πανσυδίῃ ἀνελίσσεται. οὐδ᾽ 6 ye Ταύρου
λείπεται ἀντέλλοντος, ἐπεὶ μάλα οἱ συναρηρὼς 715
νίοχος φέρεται: μοίρῃ ye μὲν οὐκ ἐπὸ ταύτῃ
iBpdos ἀντέλλει, Δίδυμοι δέ μιν οὖλον & ἄγουσιν.
ἀλλ᾽ "Ἔριφοι λαιοῦ τε θέναρ ποδὸς Αἰγὶ σὺν αὐτῇ
Ταύρῳ συμῴφορέονται, ὅτε λοφίη τε καὶ οὐρὴ
Κήτεος αἰθερίοιο περαιόθεν ἀντέλλωσιν. 720
δύνει δ᾽ ᾿Αρκτοφύλαξ ἤδη πρώτῃ τότε μοίρῃ
τάων, al πίσυρές μιν ἄτερ χειρὸς κατάγουσιν
Aas: ἡ δ᾽ αὐτῷ μεγάλῃ ὑποτέλλεται "Αρκτῳ.
᾿Αμφότεροι δὲ πόδες καταδυομένου ᾿Οφιούχου,

μέσφ᾽ αὐτῶν γονάτων, ΔΙΔΥΜΟΙΣ ἔπι σῆμα τετύχθω 725
ἐξ ἑτέρης ἀνιοῦσι. τότ᾽ οὐκέτι Ἱζήτεος οὐδὲν
ἕλκεται ἀμφοτέρωθεν, ὅλον δέ μιν ὄψεαι ἤδη. °
3 \ ~ / ς \ > ~
ἤδη Kat Ποταμοῦ πρώτην ἁλὸς ἐξανιοῦσαν
ἀγὴν ἐν καθαρῷ πελάγει σκέψαιτό κε ναύτης,
αὐτὸν ἐπ᾽ ᾿Ωρίωνα μένων, εἴ οἵ ποθι σῆμα 780
ἢ νυκτὸς μέτρων ἠὲ πλόου ἀγγείλειεν.

/ \ / A ie /
πάντη yap τά γε πολλὰ θεοὶ ἄνδρεσσι λέγουσιν.


ΔΙο- Οὐχ ὁράᾳς; ὀλίγη μὲν ὅταν κεράεσσι σελήνη
ΣΗΜΙΑΙ ἑσπερόθεν φαίνηται, ἀεξομένοιο διδάσκει
μηνός: ὅτε πρώτη ἀποκίδναται αὐτόθεν αὐγή, 735
ὅσσον ἐπισκιάειν, ἐπὶ τέτρατον ἦμαρ ἰοῦσα"
ὀκτὼ δ᾽ ἐν διχάσει: διχόμηνα δὲ παντὶ προσώπῳ. ὄ


ἃ Taurus. ὃ Gemini.
¢ Cf. 581. @ Eridanus.
436


| a ea


Mew


PHAENOMENA


East may be seen rising as much as the head and
shoulders of Perseus. |

As to his belt itself disputed might it be whether it
rises as the Ram ceases to rise or at the rising of the
Bull,“ with whom he rises wholly. Nor lags behind
the Charioteer at the rising of the Bull, for close are
set their courses. But not with that sign does he rise
completely, but the Twins? bring him wholly up.
The Kids and the sole of the Charioteer’s left foot
and the Goat herself journey with the Bull, what
time the neck and tail of Cetus, leviathan of the
sky, rise from below. Now Arctophylax is begin-
ning to set with the first of those four ὁ constella-
tions of the Zodiac that see him sink wholly, save
his never setting left hand that rises by the Great
Bear.

Let Ophiuchus setting from both feet even to his
knees be a sign of the rising of the Twins in the
East. Then no longer is aught of Cetus beneath
the verge, but thou shalt see him all. Then, too, can
the sailor on the open sea mark the first bend of the
River ὦ rising from the deep, as he watches for Orion
himself to see if he might give him any hint of the
measure of the night or of his voyage. For on every
hand signs in multitude do the gods reveal to man.


Markest thou not? Whenever the Moon with wEaTHE
slender horns shines forth in the West, she tells of a ®!¢%*
new month beginning : when first her rays are shed
abroad just enough to cast a shadow, she is going to
the fourth day: with orb half complete she pro-
claims eight days: with full face the mid-day of the

Ἶ 437


ARATUS


αἰεὶ δ᾽ ἄλλοθεν ἄλλα παρακλίνουσα μέτωπα
εἴρει ὁποσταίη μηνὸς περιτέλλεται ἠώς.

ἼΑκρα γε μὴν νυκτῶν κεῖναι δυοκαίδεκα μοῖραι 740
ἄρκιαι ἐξειπεῖν. τὰ δέ που μέγαν εἰς ἐνιαυτόν,
ὥρη μέν τ᾽ ἀρόσαι νειούς, ὥρη δὲ φυτεῦσαι, 1
ἐκ Διὸς ἤδη πάντα πεφασμένα πάντοθι κεῖται.
καὶ μέν τις καὶ νηΐ πολυκλύστου χειμῶνος
ἐφράσατ᾽ ἢ δεινοῦ μεμνημένος. ᾿Αρκτούροιο 745
ἠέ τεων ἄλλων, οἵ τ᾽ ὠκεανοῦ ἀρύονται |
ἀστέρες ἀμφιλύκης, οἵ τε πρώτης ἔτι νυκτός. 1ὅ
ἦτοι γὰρ τοὺς “πάντας ἀμείβεται εἰς ἐνιαυτὸν
ἠέλιος μέγαν ὄγμον ἐλαύνων, ἄλλοτε δ᾽ ἄλλῳ
ἐμπλήσει, τοτὲ μέν τ᾽ ἀνιὼν τοτὲ δ᾽ αὐτίκα δύνων" 750
ἄλλος δ᾽ ἀλλοίην ἀστὴρ ἐπιδέρκεται ἠῶ.

Γινώσκεις τάδε καὶ σύ, τὰ γὰρ συναείδεται ἤδη 20
ἐννεακαίδεκα κύκλα ae ἠελίοιο,
ὅσσα T ἀπὸ ζώνης εἰς ἔσχατον ᾿Ωρίωνα


Νὺξ ἐπιδινεῦται Kiva τε θρασὺν ᾿᾽Ωρίωνος, 755
σ / ¢ 7 Ἅ A > “-

οἵ τε Ἰἰοσειδάωνος ὁρώμενοι ἢ Διὸς αὐτοῦ |

ἀστέρες ἀνθρώποισι τετυγμένα σημαίνουσιν. 25


τῶ κείνων πεπόνησο" μέλοι δέ τοι, εἴ ποτε νηΐ
πιστεύεις, εὑρεῖν ὅσα που κεχρημένα κεῖται

σήματα χειμερίοις ἀνέμοις ἢ λαίλαπι πόντου. 6ΟῸΟ 760
μόχθος μέν τ᾽ ὀλίγος, τὸ δὲ μυρίον αὐτίκ᾽ ὄνειαρ


γίνετ᾽ ἐπιφροσύνης αἰεὶ πεφυλαγμένῳ ἀνδρί. 80


δ. \ A ~ ’ὔ ἯΝ A \ »
αὐτὸς μὲν τὰ πρῶτα σαώτερος, εὖ δὲ Kal ἄλλον
\ Ν “
παρειπὼν ὥὦνησεν, ὅτ᾽ ἐγγύθεν ὥρορε χειμών.


Ἔα νυ νυν a


Πολλάκι yap καί τίς τε yadnvain ὑπὸ νυκτὶ 7165


« Both the (heliacal) rising (in September) of Arcturus
and his (cosmical) setting (in March) brought stormy
. weather. In the Rudens of Plautus the Prologue is spoken
by Arcturus who says (70f.) ‘‘Nam signum Arcturus
omnium sum acerrimum: Vehemens sum exoriens, quom


438


PHAENOMENA


month ; and ever with varying phase she tells the
date of the dawn that comes round.

Those twelve signs of the Zodiac are sufficient to
tell the limits of the night. But they-to mark the

reat year—the season to plough and sow the
fallow field and the season to plant the tree—are
already revealed of Zeus and set on every side.
Yea, and on the sea, too, many a sailor has
marked the coming of the stormy tempest, remem-
bering either dread Arcturus® or other stars that
draw from ocean in the morning twilight or at the
first fall of night. For verily through them all the
Sun passes in yearly course, as he drives his mighty
furrow, and now to one, now to another he draws
near, now as he rises and anon as he sets, and ever
another star looks upon another morn.

This thou too knowest, for celebrated by all now
are the nineteen cycles? of, the bright’ Sun—thou
knowest all the stars wheeled aloft by Night from
Orion’s belt to the last of Orion and his bold hound,
the stars of Poseidon, the stars of Zeus, which, x
marked, display fit signs of the seasons. Wherefore
to them give careful heed and if ever thy trust is
in a ship, be it thine to watch what signs in the
heavens are labouring under stormy winds or squall
at sea. Small is the trouble and thousandfold the
reward of his heedfulness who ever takes care.
First he himself is safer, and well, too, he. profits
another by his warning, when a storm is rushing
near.

For oft, too, beneath a calm night the sailor
occido vehementior” : ¢f. Hor. C. iii. 1. 27 f. ** saevus Arcturi
cadentis Impetus.”


> The nineteen-year cycle of Meton. For this and follow-
ing lines see Introduction, p, 379.


439


ARATUS


νῆα Venere πεφοβημένος ἢ ἦρι θαλάσσης"

ἄλλοτε δὲ τρίτον ἦμαρ ἐπιτρέχει, ἄλλοτε πέμπτον, 35

ἄλλοτε δ᾽ ἀπρόφατον κακὸν ἵκετο" πάντα γὰρ οὔπω

ἐκ Διὸς ἄνθρωποι γινώσκομεν, ἀλλ᾽ ἔτι πολλὰ

κέκρυπται, τῶν αἴ κε θέλῃ καὶ ἐσαυτίκα δώσει 770

Ζεύς: 6 yap οὖν γενεὴν ἀνδρῶν ἀναφανδὸν ὀφέλλει,

πάντοθεν εἰδόμενος, πάντη δ᾽ ὅ γε σήματα φαίνων. 40

ἄλλα δέ τοι ἐρέει ἥπου διχόωσα σελήνη

πληθύος ἀμφοτέρωθεν 7) ἢ αὐτίκα πεπληθυῖα"

ἄλλα δ᾽ ἀνερχόμενος, τοτὲ δ᾽ ἄκρῃ νυκτὶ κελεύων "1

ἠέλιος" τὰ δέ τοι καὶ ἀπ᾽ ἄλλων ἔ ἔσσεται ἄλλα

σήματα καὶ περὶ νυκτὶ καὶ ἤματι ποιήσασθαι. 45
Σκέπτεο δὲ πρῶτον κεράων ἑκάτερθε σελήνην.


ἄλλοτε γάρ τ᾽ ἄλλῃ μιν ἐπιγράφει ἕ ἕσπερος αἴγλῃ,


ἄλλοτε δ᾽ ἀλλοῖαι μορφαὶ κερόωσι σελήνην 780
εὐθὺς ἀεξομένην, αἱ μὲν τρίτῃ, αἱ δὲ τετάρτῃ"
τάων καὶ περὶ μηνὸς ἐφεσταότος κε πύθοιο. 50


λεπτὴ μὲν καθαρή τε περὶ τρίτον ἦμαρ ἐοῦσα

εὔδιός κ᾽ εἴη: λεπτὴ δὲ καὶ εὖ μάλ᾽ ἐρευθὴς

πνευματίη: παχίων δὲ καὶ ἀμβλείῃσι κεραίαις Ἴ8δ᾽

τέτρατον ἐκ τριτάτοιο φόως ἀμενηνὸν ἔχουσα

ἣ νότῳ ἄμβλυνται ἢ ἢ ὕδατος ἐ ἐγγὺς ἐόντος. 55

εἰ δέ x’ ἀπ’ ἀμφοτέρων κεράων, τρίτον ἦμαρ
ἄγουσα,

μήτ᾽ ἐπινευστάζῃ μήθ᾽ ὑπτιόωσα φαείνῃ,

ἀλλ᾽ ὀρθαὶ ἑκάτερθε περιγνάμπτωσι κεραῖαι, 790

ἑσπέριοί κ᾽ ἄνεμοι κείνην μετὰ νύκτα φέροιντο.

εἰ δ᾽ αὕτως ὀρθὴ καὶ τέτρατον ἢ ἦμαρ ἀγινεῖ, 60

HT ἂν χειμῶνος συναγειρομένοιο διδάσκοι.


«εγρ. Georg. i. 424-435, Plin. .H. xviii, 347 «Proxima
sint iure lunae praesagia,” etc. For this part of Aratus the
reader should consult the whole of Plin. V.H. xviii. 8 218—end.
440


PHAENOMENA


shortens sail for fear of the morning sea. Sometimes
the storm comes on the third day, sometimes on the
fifth, but sometimes the evil comes all unforeseen.
For not yet do we mortals know all from Zeus, but
much still remains hidden, whereof, what he will,
even hereafter will he reveal; for openly he aids the
race of men, manifesting himself on every side and
showing signs on every hand. Some messages the
Moon will convey with orb half-full as she waxes or
wanes, others when full: others the Sun by warnings
at dawn and again at the edge of night, and other
hints from other source can be drawn for day and
night.

Scan first the horns on either side the Moon.
For with varying hue from time to time the evening
paints her and of different shape are her horns at
different times as the Moon is waxing—one form on
the third day and other on the fourth. From them
thou canst learn touching the month that is begun.
If she is slender and clear about the third day, she
heralds calm: if slender and very ruddy, wind’; but
if thick and with blunted horns she show but a feeble
light on the third and fourth night, her beams are
blunted by the South wind or imminent rain. If on
_the third night neither horn nod forward or lean
backward, if vertical they curve their tips on either
side, winds from the West will follow that night.
But if still with vertical crescent she bring the fourth
day too, she gives warning of gathering storm.¢


ὃ Theophr. De signis 51 καὶ ὁ μεὶς ἐὰν τριταῖος ὧν λαμπρὸς
ἢ, εὐδιεινόν.

¢ Theophr. 12 ἐὰν μὲν ἢ πυρώδης, πνευματώδη σημαίνει τὸν
μῆνα, ἐὰν δὲ ζοφώδης, ὑδατώδη.

4 Theophr. 38 χειμῶνος δὲ rdde . . . τὸ σηλήνιον ἐὰν ὀρθὸν
ἦ μέχρι τετράδος καὶ εἰ εὔκυκλον, χειμάσει μέχρι διχοτόμου.


4.41


ARATUS


? , » ε / oo. , 9 4
εἰ δέ KE OL κεράων TO μετήορον εὖ ἐπινεύῃ,


δειδέχθαι βορέω" ὅτε δ᾽ ὑπτιάῃσι, νότοιο. 195
αὐτὰρ ἐπὴν τριτόωσαν ὅλος περὶ κύκλος ἑλίσσῃ
πάντη ἐρευθόμενος, μάλα ras TOTE χείμερος εἴη" 65


μείζονι δ᾽ av χειμῶνι πυρώτερα φοινίσσοιτο.
Σκέπτεο δ᾽ ἐς πληθύν τε καὶ ἀρ ϑρεμον


διχόωσαν,
ἠμὲν ἀεξομένην ἠδ᾽ ἐς κέρας αὖθις ἰοῦσαν, τ 800
καί οἱ ἐπὶ χροιῇ τεκμαίρεο μηνὸς ἑκάστου.
/ A 6 ~ ἀλ᾽ ὑδ ᾽7 é 70
πάντη yap καθαρῇ Ke μάλ᾽ εὔδια τεκμήραιο '


, 9.5 7 ? oP ,

πάντα δ᾽ ἐρευθομένῃ δοκέειν ἀνέμοιο κελεύθους"

3 ΒΨ 3 / / ς aA

ἄλλοθι δ᾽ ἄλλο μελαινομένῃ. δοκέειν ὑετοῖο.

σήματα δ᾽ οὐ ἡ μάλα πᾶσιν ἐπ᾽ ἤμασι πάντα τέτυκται" 805

ἀλλ᾽ ὅσα μὲν τριτάτῃ τε τεταρταΐῃ τε πέλονται,

μέσφα διχαιομένης, διχάδος γε μὲν ἄχρις ἐπ᾽
αὐτὴν 15
/ / 3 Ἁ / > ’ὔ

σημαίνει διχόμηνον, ἀτὰρ πάλιν ἐκ διχομήνου

ἐς διχάδα φθιμένην: ἔχεται δέ οἱ αὐτίκα τετρὰς


3 ~ \ ,ὔ 3
μηνὸς ἀποιχομένου, τῇ δὲ τριτάτη ἐπιόντος. 810
A “Ἐ 3 A
εἰ δέ κέ μιν περὶ πᾶσαν aAwat κυκλώσωνται
a / 3
ἢ τρεῖς ἠὲ δύω περικείμεναι ἠὲ pul’ οἴη, 80


τῇ μὲν ἰῇ ἀνέμοιο γαληναίης τε δοκεύειν,
ῥηγνυμένῃ ἀνέμοιο, μαραινομένῃ δὲ γαλήνης"


@ Theophr. 27 ἔστι δὲ σημεῖα ἐν ἡλίῳ καὶ σελήνῃ τὰ μὲν
μέλανα ὕδατος τὰ δ᾽ ἐρυθρὰ πνεύματος. ἐὰν δὲ ὁ μεὶς βορείου
ὄντος ὀρθὸς εἱστήκῃ, ξ ἐφυροι εἰώθασιν ἐπιπνεῖν καὶ ὁ μὴν χειμερινὸς
διατελεῖ, ὅταν μὲν ἡ κεραία (ἡ ἄνω) τοῦ μηνὸς ἐπικύπτῃ, βόρειος
6 pels, ὅταν δὲ ἡ κάτωθεν νότιος" ἐὰν δὲ ὀρθὸς καὶ μὴ καλῶς
ἐγκεκλιμένος μέχρι τετράδος καὶ εὔκυκλος εἴωθε χειμάζειν μέχρι
διχομηνίας, σημαίνει ζοφώδης μὲν Ov ὕδωρ, πυρώδης δὲ πνεῦμα.

ὃ Theophr. 8 ὡς δ᾽ αὔτως ἔχει καὶ περὶ τὸν μῆνα ἕκαστον"
διχοτομοῦσι γὰρ αἵ τε πανσέληνοι καὶ αἱ ὀγδόαι καὶ αἱ τετράδες, ὥστε
ἀπὸ νουμηνίας. ws ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς δεῖ σκοπεῖν, μεταβάλλει γὰρ ὡς ἐπὶ τὸ


4.4.2


PHAENOMENA


If her upper horn nod forward,* expect thou the
North wind, but if it lean backward, the South. But
when on the third day a complete halo, blushing red,
encircles her, she foretells storm and, the fierier her
blush, the fiercer the tempest. .

Scan her when full and when half-formed on
either side of full, as she waxes from or wanes again
to crescent form, and from her hue forecast each
month. When quite bright her hue, forecast fair
weather; when ruddy, expect the rushing wind;
when dark stained with spots, look out for rain.
But not for every day is appointed a separate sign,?
but the signs of the third and fourth day betoken
the weather up to the half Moon; those of the
half Moon up to full Moon; and in turn the signs of
the full Moon up to the waning half Moon; the
signs of the half Moon are followed by those of the
fourth day from the end of the waning month, and
they in their turn by those ofethe third day of the
new month. But if halos¢ encircle all the Moon,
set triple or double about her or only single—with
the single ring, expect wind or calm?; when the ring
is broken, wind’; when faint and fading, calm ;


πολὺ ἐν τῇ τετράδι, ἐὰν Se μή, ἐν τῇ ὀγδόῃ, εἰ δὲ μή, πανσελήνῳ"
ἀπὸ δὲ πανσελήνου εἰς ὀγδόην φθίνοντος, καὶ ἀπὸ ταύτης εἰς τετράδα,
ἀπὸ δὲ τετράδος εἰς τὴν νουμηνίαν.

© ἀλωή (ἅλως), lit. ‘*threshing-floor.” Seneca, V.Q. i. 2
‘‘coloris varii circulum . .. hune Graeci halo vocant, nos
dicere coronam aptissime possumus 5: tales splendores
Graeci areas vocaverunt, quia fere terendis frugibus destinata
loca rotunda sunt.”

4 Theophr. 51 ἅλως δὲ ἐὰν ὁμαλῶς παγῇ καὶ μαρανθῇ, εὐδίαν
, σημαίνει.

ὁ Theophr. 81 αἱ ἅλωνες περὶ τὴν σελήνην πνευματώδεις
μᾶλλον ἢ περὶ ἥλιον" σημαίνουσι δὲ πνεῦμα ῥαγεῖσαι 2 τ, ἄμφω,
καὶ ἣ ἂν ῥαγῇ, ταύτῃ πνεῦμα.

443


ARATUS


ταὶ δύο δ᾽ av χειμῶνι περιτροχάοιντο σελήνην".
/ 7. Ἃ ~ / / > /
μείζονα δ᾽ av χειμῶνα φέροι τριέλικτος ἀλωή,
Η A A ~ A 2 οὖ / “
καὶ μᾶλλον μελανεῦσα, καὶ εἰ ῥηγνύατο μᾶλλον.
καὶ τὰ μὲν οὖν ἐπὶ μηνὶ σεληναίης κε πύθοιο.
3 / ὃ / r / ¢ / 3}
Ἠελίοιο δέ τοι μελέτω ἑκάτερθεν ἰόντος.
ἠελίῳ καὶ μᾶλλον ἐοικότα σήματα κεῖται,
᾿ἀμφότερον δύνοντι καὶ ἐκ περάτης ἀνιόντι.
᾽ὔ «ε / / 4 > /
μή ot ποικίλλοιτο νέον βάλλοντος ἀρούρας
κύκλος, ὅτ᾽ εὐδίου κεχρημένος ἤματος εἴης,
μηδέ τι σῆμα φέροι, φαίνοιτο δὲ λιτὸς a ἁπάντη.
εἰ δ᾽ αὕτως καθαρόν μιν ἔχοι βουλύσιος ὥρη,
δύνοι δ᾽ ἀνέφελος μαλακὴν ὑποδείελος αἴγλην,
Kal κεν ἐπερχομένης ἠοῦς ἔθ᾽ ὑπεύδιος εἴη.
3 > > ε / a > / /
ἀλλ᾽ οὐχ ὁππότε κοῖλος ἐειδόμενος περιτέλλῃ,
0939 ~«¢ 19 3 / ε \ 4 ς \ ~
οὐδ᾽ ὁπότ᾽ ἀκτίνων at μὲν νότον at δὲ Bopha
/ ᾽ὔ A > Ss \ / /
σχιζόμεναι βάλλωσι, τὰ δ᾽ αὖ περὶ μέσσα φαείνῃ,
ἀλλά που ἢ ὑετοῖο διέρχεται ἢ ἀνέμοιο.
tf > ” / > % © , 9.33 /
Σκέπτεο δ᾽, εἴ Κέ τοι αὐγαὶ ὑπείκωσ᾽ ἠελίοιο,
αὐτὸν ἐς ἠέλιον: τοῦ γὰρ σκοπιαὶ καὶ ἀρισται"
wv / © ΝΜ > 4 e/ A
εἴ τί οἱ ἤπου ἔρευθος ἐπιτρέχει, οἷά τε πολλὰ
« ’ / > , 4 Ν
ἑλκομένων νεφέων ἐρυθαίνεται ἄλλοθεν ἄλλα,
ἢ εἴ που μελανεῖ: καί τοι τὰ μὲν ὕδατος ἔστω
/ / \ > 52 / 4 Ὁ /
σήματα μέλλοντος, τὰ δ᾽ ἐρεύθεα πάντ᾽ ἀνέμοιο.
εἴ γε μὲν ἀμφοτέροις ἄμυδις κεχρημένος εἴη,


@ Verg. G. i. 488 ff. **Sol quoque et exoriens et cum se
condet in undas, Signa dabit ; solem certissima signa sequun-
tur, Et quae mane refert et quae surgentibus astris. ΠΙᾺ
ubi nascentem maculis variaverit ortum, Conditus in nubem,
medioque refugerit orbe, Suspecti tibi sint imbres ; namque
urguet ab alto Arboribusque satisque Notus pecorique


sinister.”


ὃ Theophr. 50 ἥλιος μὲν ἀνιὼν λαμπρὸς καὶ μὴ καυματίας καὶ


μὴ ἔχων σημεῖον under ἐν ἑαυτῷ εὐδίαν σημαίνει.


¢ Theophr. 50 καὶ δυόμενος ἥλιος χειμῶνος εἰς καθαρὸν εὐδιεινός,


4.44.


815


85


820


825


95


830
100


835.


105


PHAENOMENA


two rings girding the Moon forebode storm ; a triple
halo would bring a greater storm, and greater still,
if black, and more furious still, if the rings are
broken. Such warnings for the month thou canst
learn from the Moon.

To the Sun’s 5 march at East and West give heed.
His hints give even more pertinent warning both at
setting, and when he comes from below the verge.
May not his orb, whenever thou desirest a fair day,
be variegated when first his arrows strike the earth,
and may he wear no mark at all but shine stainless
altogether. If again thus all pure he be in the
hour when the oxen are loosed, and set cloudless in
the evening with gentle beam, he will still be at
the coming dawn attended with fair weather.¢
But not so, when he rises with seemingly hollow
disk, nor when his beams part to strike or North or
South, while his centre is bright. But then in truth
he journeys either through rain or through wind.4@

Sean closely, if his beams allow thee, the Sun
himself, for scanning him is best, to see if either
some blush run over him, as often he shows a blush or
here or there, when he fares through trailing clouds,
or if haply he is darkened. Let the dark stain be
sign to thee of coming rain, and every blush be sign
of wind. But if he is draped both black and red at
ἐὰν μὴ ταῖς προτέραις ἡμέραις εἰς μὴ καθαρὸν δεδυκὼς ἢ ἐξ εὐδιῶν.
οὕτω δὲ ἄδηλον. καὶ ἐὰν χειμάζοντος ἡ δύσις γένηται εἰς καθαρόν,
εὐδιεινόν. Verg. G. i. 468. ‘* At si cum referetque diem
condetque relatum, Lucidus orbis erit, frustra terrebere
nimbis, Et claro silvas cernes Aquilone moveri.”

4 Theophr. 26 καὶ ἐὰν κοῖλος φαίνηται ὁ ἥλιος, ἀνέμου ἢ ὕδατος
τὸ σημεῖον. .. ἐὰν αἱ ἀκτῖνες αἱ μὲν πρὸς βορρᾶν, αἱ δὲ πρὸς
νότον σχίζωνται τούτου μέσου ὄντος κατ᾽ ὄρθρον, κοινὸν ὕδατος καὶ
ἀνέμου σημεῖόν ἐστιν (Verg. G. i. 445f.). Plin. ΔΗ. xviii.
342 ““ Primumque a sole capimus praesagia,” etc.

445


ARATUS


Kat Kev ὕδωρ φορέοι καὶ ὑπηνέμιος τανύοιτο.
εἰ δέ οἱ ἢ ἀνιόντος ἢ αὐτίκα δυομένοιο
ἀκτῖνες συνίωσι καὶ ἀμφ᾽ ἑνὶ πεπλήθωσιν,

ἤ ποτε καὶ νεφέων πεπιεσμένος ἢ ὅ γ᾽ ἐς ἠῶ
ἔρχηται παρὰ νυκτός, ἢ ἐξ ἡ ἠοῦς. ἐπὶ νύκτα,
ὕδατί κεν κατιόντι παρατρέχοι ἤματα κεῖνα.
μηδ᾽ ὅτε οἱ ὀλίγη νεφέλη πάρος ἀντέλλῃσιν,
τὴν δὲ per” ἀκτίνων κεχρημένος αὐτὸς ἀερθῇ,
ἀμνηστεῖν ὑετοῖο. πολὺς δ᾽ ὅτε οἱ περὶ κύκλος
οἷον τηκομένῳ ἐναλίγκιος εὐρύνηται.

πρῶτον ἀνερχομένοιο, καὶ ἂψ ἐπὶ μεῖον ἴῃσιν,
εὔδιός κε φέροιτο" καὶ εἴ ποτε χείματος ὥρῃ
ὠχρήσαι κατιών. ἀτὰρ ὕδατος ἡμερινοῖο
γινομένου κατόπισθε περὶ νέφεα σκοπέεσθαι
κὰδ δὴ δυομένου τετραμμένος ἠελίοιο.

ἣν μὲν ὑποσκιάῃσι μελαινομένῃ εἰκυῖα

ἠέλιον νεφέλη, ταὶ δ᾽ ἀμφί μιν ἔνθα καὶ ἔνθα
ἀκτῖνες μεσσηγὺς ἑλισσόμεναι διχόωνται,

7 τ᾽ ἂν ἔτ᾽ εἰς ἠῶ σκέπαος κεχρημένος εἴης.
εἰ δ᾽ ὁ μὲν ἀνέφελος βάπτοι p ῥόου ἑσπερίοιο,
ταὶ δὲ κατερχομένου νεφέλαι καὶ ἔτ᾽ οἰχομένοιο
πλησίαι ἑ ἑστήκωσιν ἐρευθέες, οὔ σε μάλα χρὴ
αὔριον οὐδ᾽ ἐπὶ νυκτὶ περιτρομέειν ὑετοῖο"
ἀλλ᾽ ὁπότ᾽ ἠελίοιο μαραινομένῃσιν ὁμοῖαι
ἐξαπίνης ἀκτῖνες ἀπ᾽ οὐρανόθεν τανύωνται,
οἷον ἀμαλδύνονται ὅτε σκιάῃσι κατ᾽ ἰθὺ
ἱσταμένη γαίης τε καὶ ἠελίοιο σελήνη.


@ Verg. G. i. 450 ff. ‘*‘ Hoc etiam emenso cum iam decedit
Olympo, Profuerit meminisse magis; nam saepe videmus
Ipsius in vultu varios errare colores: Caeruleus pluviam
denuntiat, igneus Euros; Sin maculae incipient rutilo im-
miscerier igni, Omnia tum pariter vento nimbisque videbis


446


110


115


850


120


125


860


130


865


PHAENOMENA


once, he will bring rain and will strain beneath the
wind.” But if the rays of the rising or setting Sun
converge and crowd on one spot, or if he go from
night to dawn, or from dawn to night, closely beset
_ with clouds, those days will run in company with
rushing rain. Nor be thou heedless of rain, what
time before him rises a thin mist, after which the
Sun himself ascends with scanty beams.2 But when
a broad belt of mist seems to melt and widen before
the rising Sun and anon narrows to less, fair will be
his course, and fair too, if in the season of winter his
hue wax wan at eventide.© But for to-morrow’s
rain face the setting Sun and scan the clouds. If a
darkening cloud overshadow the Sun and if around
that cloud the beams that wheel between the Sun
and it part to either side of the cloud, thou shalt
᾿ still need shelter for the dawn.* But if without a
cloud he dip in the western ocean, and as he is
sinking, or still when he is gone, the clouds stand
near him blushing red, neither on the morrow
nor in the night needst thou be over-fearful of
rain. But fear the coming rain when on a sudden
the Sun’s rays seem to thin and pale *—just as they .
often fade when the Moon overshadows them, what
time she stands straight between the earth and
Fervere. non illa quisquam me nocte per altum Ire neque
ab terra moneat convellere funem” ; cf. caps πὶ 91.

δ Verg. G. i. 446 ff. ““ὍὉ] pallida surget Tithoni croceum
linquens Aurora cubile, Heu male tum mitis defendet pam-
pinus uvas.’

¢ Theophr. 50 καὶ ἐὰν δύνων χειμῶνος ὠχρὸς ἢ, εὐδίαν
σημαίνει.

¢ Theophr. 11 καὶ ἐὰν καταφερομένου τοῦ ἡλίου ὑφίστηται
νέφος ὑφ᾽ οὗ ἐὰν σχίζωνται αἱ ἀκτῖνες, χειμερινὸν τὸ σημεῖον.

¢ Theophr. 13 καὶ ὅταν ἀνίσχοντος τοῦ ἡλίου αἱ μέν οἷον
ἐκλείποντος χρῶμα ἴσχωσιν, ὕδατος σημεῖον.


447


ARATUS


οὐδ᾽, ὅτε οἱ ἐπέχοντι φανήμεναι ἠῶθι πρὸ

φαίνονται νεφέλαι ὑπερευθέες ἄλλοθεν ἄλλαι, 135
ἄρραντοι γίνονται ἐπ᾽ ἤματι κείνῳ ἄρουραι.

μηδ᾽ αὕτως, ἔτ᾽ ἐόντι ᾿ πέρην ὁπότε προταθεῖσαι


ἀκτῖνες φαίνονται ἐ ἐπίσκιοι OO πρό, 870
ὕδατος ἢ ἢ ἀνέμοιο κατοισομένου λελαθέσθαι.
ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν κεῖναι μᾶλλον κνέφαος φορέοιντο 140


> a “ / 27> & /
ἀκτῖνες, μᾶλλόν Kev ἐφ᾽ ὕδατι σημαίνοιεν"

> ne de As , A / > /
εἰ δ᾽ ὀλίγος τανύοιτο περὶ δνόφος ἀκτίνεσσιν,


οἷόν που ᾿μαλακαὶ νεφέλαι φορέουσι μάλιστα, 875
HT ἂν ἐπερχομένοιο περιδνοφέοιντ᾽ ἀνέμοιο.
οὐδὲ μὲν ἠελίου σχεδόθεν μελανεῦσαι ἀλωαὶ. 145


εὔδιοι" ἀσσότεραι δὲ καὶ ἀστεμφὲς μελανεῦσαι
μᾶλλον χειμέριαι. δύο δ᾽ ἂν χαλεπώτεραι εἶεν.
κέπτεο δ᾽ ἢ ἀνιόντος ἢ αὐτίκα δυομένοιο, 880
εἴ πού ot νεφέων τὰ παρήλια κικλήσκονται
μ / 2A ~ > / Ἅ ε ,ὔ
ἢ νότου ἠὲ βορῆος ἐρεύθεται ἢ ἑκάτερθεν, 150
μηδ᾽ οὕτω σκοπιὴν ταύτην ἀμενηνὰ φυλάσσειν.
οὐ γάρ, ὅτ᾽ ἀμφοτέρωθεν ὁμοῦ περὶ μέσσον


ἔχουσιν
9-4 A / \ > a
ἠέλιον κεῖναι νεφέλαι σχεδὸν ὠκεανοῖο, 885
γίνεται ἀμβολίη διόθεν χειμῶνος ἰόντος.
εἴ γε μὲν ἐκ βορέαο pl οἴη φοινίσσοιτο, 155


ἐκ βορέω πνοιάς κε φέροι, votin δὲ νότοιο,
ἢ καί που βαθάμιγγες ἐπιτροχόωσ᾽ ὑετοῖο.

Εσπερίοις καὶ μᾶλλον ἐπίτρεπε σήμασι τούτοις" 890
ἑσπερόθεν yap ὁμῶς σημαίνεται ἐμμενὲς αἰεί.


4 Cicero ap. Priscian. x. 11 “"Τῦὶ cum Luna méans Hype-
rionis officit orbi, Stinguuntur radii caeca caligine tecti.”

ὃ Theophr. 10 ὕδατος μὲν οὖν σημεῖα τὰ τοιαῦτα δοκεῖ εἶναι.
ἐναργέστατον μὲν οὖν τὸ ἑωθινόν, ὅταν πρὸ ἡλίου ἀνατολῆς φαίνηται
ἐπιφοινίσσον σημεῖον ἢ γὰρ αὐθημερινὸν ἐπισημαίνει ἢ τριῶν
ἡμερῶν ὡς ἐπὶ τὸ πολύ.


4.4.8


PHAENOMENA —


Sun; nor are the fields unwetted on that day, when
before the dawn, as the Sun delays to shine, reddish
clouds appear here or there.? Be not heedless either
of wind or rain ὁ to come, when, while the Sun is still
below the verge, his precursor beams shine shadowy
in the dawn. The more those beams are borne in
shadow, the surer sign they give of rain, but if but
faint the dusk that veils his beams, like a soft mist
of vapour, that veil of dusk portends wind. Nor are
dark halos* near the Sun signs of fair weather:
when nearer the Sun and dark without relief, they
portend greater storms: if there are two rings, they
will herald tempests fiercer still.

Mark as the Sun is rising or setting, whether the
clouds, called parhelia,’ blush (on South or North or
both), nor make the observation in careless mood.
For when on both’ sides at once those clouds gird
the Sun, low down upon the horizon, there is no
lingering of the storm that comes from Zeus. But
if only one shine purple to the North, from the
North will it bring the blast; if in the South: from
the South ; or down pour the pattering raindrops. g

With even greater care mark those signals when
in the West, for from the West the warnings are
given ever with equal and unfailing certainty.


¢ Theophr. 11 καὶ ἐὰν ἐκ νεφελῶν ἀνέχῃ, ὑδατικόν, καὶ ἐὰν
ἀκτῖνες ἀνίσχοντος ἀνατείνωσι πρὶν ἀνατεῖλαι, κοινὸν ὕδατος
σημεῖον καὶ ἀνέμου.

4 Theophr. 22 καὶ ἅλως αἱ μέλαιναι ὑδατικόν, καὶ μᾶλλον αἱ
δείλης.

¢ So-called ‘*‘ mock suns,” ‘‘ imagines solis ” (Seneca, V.Q.
i. 11).

f Theophr. 22 ἐὰν παρήλιοι δύο γένωνται, καὶ ὁ μὲν νοτόθεν, ὁ
δὲ βορρᾶθεν, καὶ ἜΣ ἅμα, ὕδωρ «διὰ ταχέων σημαίνουσι ; cf.
Seneca, (ΛΟ Ο. i. 19. Σ

9 Theophr. ou. παρήλιος ὁπόθεν ἂν ἢ, ὕδωρ ἢ ἄνεμον σημαίνει.


2G 449


ARATUS


Σκέπτεο Kal SATNHN. ἡ μέν τ᾽ ὀλίγῃ εἰκυα 160
ἀχλύϊ βορραίη ὑπὸ ἹΚαρκίνῳ ἡγηλάζει:"
ἀμφὶ δέ μιν δύο λεπτὰ φαεινόμενοι. φορέονται
ἀστέρες, οὔτε τι πολλὸν a ἀπήοροι, οὔτε μάλ᾽ ἐγγύς, 895
ἀλλ᾽ ὅσσον τε μάλιστα πυγούσιον οἰίσασθαι:"
εἷς μὲν πὰρ βορέαο: νότῳ δ᾽ ἐπικέκλιται ἄλλος. 16
καὶ τοὶ μὲν καλέονται ONOI* μέσση δέ τε Φάτνη.
ἥτε: καὶ ἐξαπίνης πάντη Διὸς εὐδιόωντος


yiver’ ἄφαντος ὅλη" τοὶ δ᾽ ἀμφοτέρωθεν ἰόντες 900
ἀστέρες ἀλλήλων αὐτοσχεδὸν ἰνδάλλονται"
οὐκ ὀλίγῳ χειμῶνι τότε κλύζονται ἀρουραι. 170


> A / \ > διὸ 8 > / >

εἰ δὲ μελαίνηται, τοὶ δ᾽ αὐτίκ᾽ ἐοικότες Wow
ἀστέρες ἀμφότεροι, περί χ᾽ ὕδατι σημαίνοιεν.

> > ε \ > / / > A /
εἰ δ᾽ 6 μὲν ἐκ βορέω Φάτνης ἀμενηνὰ dacivor θ9θ0
λεπτὸν ἐπαχλύων, νότιος δ᾽ "Ὄνος ἀγλαὸς εἴη,
δειδέχθαι ἀνέμοιο νότου: βορέω δὲ μάλα χρὴ 175
ἔμπαλιν ἀχλυόεντι. φαεινομένῳ τε δοκεύειν.

Σῆμα δέ τοι ἀνέμοιο καὶ οἰδαίνουσα θάλασσα


/ \ \ >? > \ /
γινέσθω καὶ μακρὸν ἐπ᾽ αἰγιαλοὶ βοόωντες, 910
/ > /
ἀκταί τ᾽ εἰνάλιοι ὁπότ᾽ εὔδιοι ἠχήεσσαι
’ / 7 ΕΝ ΝΜ 180
γίνονται, κορυφαίΐί τε βοώμεναι οὔρεος ἄκραι.


\ 7 Ἃ pe, \ se pigs A 3 \ /
Kai δ᾽ ἂν ἐπὶ ξηρὴν ὅτ᾽ ἐρωδιὸς οὐ κατὰ κόσμον
> ¢ \ wv ~ \ /
ἐξ ἁλὸς ἔρχηται φωνῇ περιπολλὰ λεληκώς,


/ / [4
κινυμένου κε θάλασσαν ὕπερ φορέοιτ᾽ ἀνέμοιο. 915
/ \ /
καί ποτε Kal κέπφοι, ὁπό εὔδιοι ποτέονται,
> / / Ts fF. > A /
ἀντία μελλόντων ἀνέμων εἰληδὰ φέρονται. 185


πολλάκι δ᾽ aypiddes νῆσσαι ἢ εἰναλίδιναι


α Cicero ap. Priscian. xvi. 16 and xviii. 172 ““ Ast autem
tenui quae candet lumine Phatne.”

> Praesepe; Theophr. 23 ἐν τῷ καρκίνῳ δύο ἀστέρες εἰσίν, οἱ
καλούμενοι ὄνοι, ὧν τὸ μεταξὺ τὸ νεφέλιον ἣ φάτνη καλουμένη.


τοῦτο ἐὰν ζοφῶδες γίνηται, ὑδατικόν. Plin. ΔΝ. ΠΗ. xviii. 353.
450


PHAENOMENA


Watch, too, the Manger.* Like a faint mist in
the North it plays the guide beneath Cancer.
Around it are borne two faintly gleaming stars, not
far apart nor very near but distant to the view a
cubit’s length, one on the North, while the other
looks towards the South. They are called the
Asses, and between them is the Manger.’ On a
sudden, when all the sky is clear, the Manger
wholly disappears, while the stars that go on either
side seem nearer drawn to one another: not slight
then is the storm with which the fields are deluged.
If the Manger darken® and both stars remain un-
altered, they herald rain. But if the Ass to the
North of the Manger shine feebly through a faint
mist, while the Southern Ass is gleaming bright,
expect wind from the South: but if in turn the
Southern Ass is cloudy and the Northern bright,
watch for the North wind. |

A sign of wind be the swelling sea,’ the far
sounding beach, the sea-crags when in calm they
echo, and the moaning of the mountain crests.

When, too, the heron ὁ in disordered flight comes
landward from the sea with many a scream, he is
precursor of the gale at sea. Anon, too, the stormy
petrels when they flit in calm, move in companies to
face the coming winds. Oft before a gale the wild


¢ Theophr. 43 ἡ τοῦ ὄνου φάτνη εἰ συνίσταται καὶ fopepa
γίνεται, χειμῶνα σημαίνει.

4 Verg. G. i. 356 ff.; Theophr. 29 θάλασσα οἰδοῦσα, καὶ
ἀκταὶ βοῶσαι καὶ αἰγιαλὸς ἠχῶν ἀνεμώδης ; cf. 31; Cic. De div.
i. 8; Plin. V.H. xviii. 359 f.

4“ Theophr. 28 αἴθυιαι καὶ νῆτται καὶ ἄγριαι καὶ τιθασαὶ ὕδωρ
μὲν σημαίνουσι δυόμεναι, πτερυγίζουσαι δὲ ἄνεμον. οἱ κέπφοι
εὐδίας οὔσης ὅποι ἂν πέτωνται ἄνεμον προσημαίνουσι. .. . ἐρωδιὸς
ἀπὸ θαλάττης πετόμενος καὶ βοῶν πνεύματος σημεῖόν ἐστι, καὶ ὅλως
βοῶν μέγα ἀνεμώδης.

451


ARATUS


A 4

αἴθυιαι χερσαῖα τινάσσονται πτερύγεσσιν"
Ἅ / » v4 > ~
ἢ νεφέλη ὄρεος μηκύνεται ἐν Kopud pow. 920
ἤδη καὶ πάπποι, λευκῆς γήρειον ἀκάνθης,

ΡΟΣ ΕΣ eee 9.» Ais sR {εν ἃ , \
anu ἐγένοντ᾽ ἀνέμου, κωφῆς ἁλὸς ὁππότε πολλοὲ 190
4 > f \ \ / + Q> > /
ἄκρον ἐπιπλώωσι, τὰ μὲν πάρος, ἄλλα δ᾽ ὀπίσσω.

Kai θέρεος βρονταί τε καὶ ἀστραπαὶ ἔνθεν ἴωσιν,


# 3 7 / >

ἔνθεν ἐπερχομένοιο περισκοπέειν ἀνέμοιο. 925
\ a” 3 > 7 >

καὶ διὰ νύκτα μέλαιναν ὅτ᾽ ἀστέρες ἀΐσσωσιν
/ \ > + ε Ye /

ταρφέα, τοὶ δ᾽ ὄπιθεν ῥυμοὶ ὑπολευκαίνωνται, 196


/ / ~ eet ες" > 7
δειδέχθαι κείνοις αὐτὴν ὁδὸν ἐρχομένοιο
/ av A \ ” > / >
πνεύματος" ἢν δὲ καὶ ἄλλοι ἐναντίοι ἀΐσσωσιν,
ἄλλοι δ᾽ ἐξ ἄλλων μερέων, τότε δὴ πεφύλαξο 930
παντοίων ἀνέμων, οἵ τ ἄκριτοί εἰσι μάλιστα,
ἄκριτα δὲ πνείουσιν ἐπ᾽ ἀνδράσι τεκμήρασθαι. 200
Αὐτὰρ ὅτ᾽ ἐξ εὔροιο καὶ ἐκ νότου ἀστράπτῃσιν,
»” 3.ϑ».0Ὠ 4 oe, 4 A /
ἄλλοτε δ᾽ ἐκ ζεφύροιο, καὶ ἄλλοτε πὰρ βορέαο,


δὴ τότε τις πελάγει ἔνι δείδιε ναυτίλος ἀνήρ, 935
μή μιν τῇ μὲν ἔχη πέλαγος τῇ δ᾽ ἐκ Διὸς ὕδωρ:
ὕδατι γὰρ τοσσαίδε περὶ στεροπαὶ φορέονται. 20ὅ


πολλάκι δ᾽ ἐρχομένων ὑετῶν νέφεα προπάροιθεν
: , , 3 , > Qe
οἷα μάλιστα πόκοισιν ἐοικότα ἰνδάλλονται,


« Theophr. 34 πρὸς κορυφῆς ὄρους ὁπόθεν ἂν νεφέλη μηκύνηται,
ταύτῃ ἄνεμος πνευσεῖται ; cf. Theophr. 45.

ὃ Theophr. 37 ἐὰν ἐν τῇ θαλάττῃ πάπποι φέρωνται πολλοὶ οἱ
γινόμενοι ἀπὸ τῶν ἀκανθῶν, ἄνεμον σημαίνουσιν ἔσεσθαι μέγαν.
Verg. G. i. 868 f. ‘*Saepe levem paleam et frondes volitare
caducas, Aut summa nantes in aqua colludere plumas.”

Ὁ Theophr. 32 θέρους ὅθεν ἂν ἀστραπαὶ καὶ βρονταὶ γίνωνται,
ἐντεῦθεν πνεύματα γίνεται ἰσχυρά: ἐὰν μὲν σφόδρα καὶ ἰσχυρὸν
ἀστράπτῃ, θᾶττον καὶ σφοδρότερον πνεύσουσιν, ἐὰν δ᾽ ἡρέμα καὶ
μανῶς, κατ᾽ ὀλίγον.

@ Theophr. 18 ἀστέρες πολλοὶ διάττοντες ὕδατος ἢ πνεύματος,
Kal ὅθεν ἂν διάττωσιν, ἐντεῦθεν τὸ πνεῦμα ἢ τὸ ὕδωρ: 34 οἱ
κομῆται ἀστέρες ὡς τὰ πολλὰ πνεύματα σημαίνουσιν ; 37 ὅθεν


452


PHAENOMENA


ducks or sea-wheeling gulls beat their wings on the
shore, or a cloud is lengthwise resting on the
mountain peaks. Marked, too, ere now as sign of
wind have béen the withered petals, the down of
the white thistle,? when they abundant float, some
in front and others behind, on the surface of the
silent sea.

From the quarter whence come the peals of
summer thunder’ and the lightning flash, thence
expect the onset of the gale. When through the
dark night shooting stars ὦ fly thick and their track
behind is white, expect a wind coming in the same
path. If other shooting stars confront them and
others from other quarters dart, then be on thy
guard for winds from every quarter—winds, which
beyond all else are hard to judge, and blow beyond
man’s power to predict.

But when from East and South the lightnings
flash,’ and again from the West and anon from the
North, verily then the sailor on the sea fears to be
caught at once by the waves beneath and the rain
from heaven. For such lightnings herald rain. Often
before the coming rain fleece-like clouds’ appear or


ἂν ἀστέρες διάττωσι πολλοί, ἄνεμον ἐντεῦθεν: ἐὰν δὲ παντα-
χόθεν ὁμοίως, πολλὰ πνεύματα σημαίνουσι. Verg. G. i. 365 ff.
** Saepe etiam stellas, vento impendente, videbis Praecipites
caelo labi, noctisque per umbram Flammarum longos a
tergo albescere tractus.”

ὁ Theophr. 21 ἀστραπαὶ δὲ ἐάν ye πανταχόθεν γένωνται, ὕδατος
ἂν ἢ ἀνέμου σημεῖον. Verg. G. i. 370 ff. ** At Boreae de parte-
trucis cum fulminat, et cum Eurique Zephyrique tonat
domus, omnia plenis Rura natant fossis, atque omnis navita
ponto, Humida vela legit.”

7 Theophr. 13 ὅταν νεφέλαι πόκοις ἐρίων ὅμοιαι ὦσιν, ὕδωρ
σημαίνε. Varro Atac. ap. Serv. on Verg. G. i. 397 ‘* nubes
<ceu> vellera lanae Stabunt”; cf. Verg. l.c.


453


ARATUS


ἢ διδύμη ἔζωσε διὰ μέγαν οὐρανὸν ἶρις, 940
ἢ καί πού τις ἅλωα μελαινομένην ἔ ἔχει ἀστήρ.
Πολλάκι λιμναῖαι 7 ἢ εἰνάλιαι ὄρνιθες 910


ἄπληστον κλύζονται ἐνιέμεναι ὑδάτεσσιν,
ἢ λίμνην πέρι δηθὰ χελιδόνες ἀΐσσονται


γαστέρι τύπτουσαι αὕτως εἰλυμένον ὕδωρ, 945
) μᾶλλον δειλαὶ γενεαί, ὕδροισιν ὄ ὄνειαρ,
αὐτόθεν ἐξ ὕδατος πατέρες βοόωσι γυρίνων, 215


ἢ τρύζει ὀρθρινὸν ἐ ἐρημαίη ὀλολυγών,
ἤ που καὶ Aaxépula Tap ἠϊόνι προὐχούσῃ
χείματος ἐρχομένου χέρσῳ ὑπέτυψε κορώνη, 950
ἤ που καὶ ποταμοῖο “ἐβάψατο μέχρι παρ᾽ ἄκρους
ὦμους ἐκ κεφαλῆς, ἢ καὶ μάλα πᾶσα κολυμβᾷ, 220
ἢ πολλὴ στρέφεται παρ᾽ ὕδωρ παχέα κρώζουσα.

Kai βόες ἤδη τοι πάρος ὕδατος ἐνδίοιο


> \ > ’ > > > / > /
οὐρανὸν εἰσανιδόντες ἀπ αἰθέρος ὠσφρήσαντο" 955
καὶ κοίλης μύρμηκες ὀχῆς ἐξ ὥεα πάντα
θᾶσσον ᾿ἀνηνέγκαντο" καὶ ἀθρόοι ὦφθεν ἴουλοι 225


τείχη ἀνέρποντες, καὶ πλαζόμενοι σκώληκες
κεῖνοι, τοὺς καλέουσι μελαίνης ἔντερα γαίης.


α Theophr. 22 ἐάν τε πολλαὶ ἔριδες γένωνται, σημαίνει ὕδωρ
ἐπὶ πολύ. > Cf. Theophr. l.c. ἅλως αἱ μέλαιναι ὑδατικόν.

© Theophr. 15 ὄρνιθες λουόμενοι μὴ «οἱ ἢ) ἐν ὕδατι βιοῦντες
ὕδωρ ἢ χειμῶνας σημαίνουσι. Varro Atac. ap. Serv. Verg. G.
i. 375 ‘* Tum liceat pelagi volucres tardaeque paludis Cernere
inexpleto studio - certare lavandi Et velut insolitum pennis
infundere rorem”; cf. Verg. i. 383 ff.; Plin. V.H. xviii. 362.

ὦ Varro Atac. l.e. = Verg. G-% 377 “ἌΣ arguta lacus
circumvolitavit hirundo.”

δ Theophr. 15 χελιδόνες τῇ γαστρὶ τύπτουσαι τὰς λίμνας ὕδωρ
σημαίνουσι.

7 Theophr. 15 βάτραχοι μᾶλλον ἄδοντες σημαίνουσιν ὕδωρ.
Cic. De div. i. 9: Verg. G. i. 378.

9 Theophr. 42 ὀλολυγὼν ἄδουσα μόνη ἀκρωρίας (early morn)


4.84.


"


PHAENOMENA
a double rainbow % girds the wide sky or some star
is ringed with darkening halo.®

Often the birds ¢ of lake or sea insatiably dive and
plunge in the water, or around the mere for long the
swallows? dart, smiting with their breasts the rippling
water,’ or more hapless tribes, a boon to watersnakes,
the fathers’ of the tadpoles croak from the lake
itself, or the lonely tree-frog9 drones his matin lay,
or by jutting bank the chattering crow” stalks on
the dry land before the coming storm, or it may be
dips from head to shoulder in the river, or even
dives completely, or hoarsely cawing ruffles it beside
the water.

And ere now before rain from the sky, the oxen?
gazing heavenward have been seen to sniff the air,
and the ants’ from their hollow nests bring up in
haste all their eggs, and in swarms the centipedes *
are seen to climb the walls, and wandering forth
crawl those worms that men call dark earth's in-


χειμέριον ; cf. Theophr. 15 ὁ χλωρὸς βάτραχος ἐπὶ δένδρου ἄδων
ὕδωρ σημαίνει. According to one interpretation in the schol.
the ὀλολυγών is ‘*a bird like a turtle-dove” (τρυγών). Cie.
De div. i. 8 translates it by acredula, apparently=owl. In
Theocr. vii. 139 ὀλολυγών is now taken to be the tree-frog
(green frog), not, as some supposed, the nightingale.

ἃ Theophr. 16, Οἷς. De div. i. 8 ““ Fuscaque non nunquam
cursans per litora cornix Demersit caput et fluctum cervice
recepit”; Verg. G. 388 f. ‘*Tum cornix plena pluviam vocat
improba voce Et sola in sicca secum spatiatur arena.”

‘ Varro Atac. l.c. “ΕΠ bos suspiciens caelum, mirabile
visu, Naribus aerium patulis decerpsit odorem”; οὐ. Cic.
De div.i. 9; Verg. G. i. 375 f.

i Theophr. 22 μύρμηκες ἐν κοίλῳ χωρίῳ ἐὰν τὰ φὰ ἐκφέρωσιν
ἐκ τῆς μυρμηκιᾶς ἐπὶ τὸ ὑψηλὸν χωρίον, ὕδωρ σημαίνουσιν, ἐὰν δὲ
καταφέρωσιν, εὐδίαν. Verg. G. i. 379f. ‘*Saepius et tectis
penetralibus extulit ova Angustum formica terens iter.”

k Theophr. 19 ἴουλοι πολλοὶ πρὸς τοῖχον ἕρποντες ὑδατικόν.


455


ARATUS


Kat τιθαὶ ὄρνιθες, ταὶ ἀλέκτορος ἐξεγένοντο, 960
4 59 , Ἂ oF / an

εὖ ἐφθειρίσσαντο καὶ ἔκρωξαν μάλα φωνῇ,

οἷόν τε σταλάον ψοφέει ἐπὶ ὕδατι ὕδωρ. 230


Δή ποτε καὶ γενεαὶ κοράκων καὶ φῦλα κολοιῶν
ὕδατος ἐρχομένοιο Διὸς πάρα σῆμ᾽ ἐγένοντο,


φαινόμενοι ἀγεληδὰ καὶ ἱρήκεσσιν ὁμοῖον 965
φθεγξάμενοι. Kai που κόρακες Siovs σταλαγμοὺς
φωνῇ ἐμιμήσαντο σὺν ὕδατος ἐρχομένοιο" 235


᾿ \ / / / “-
ἤ ποτε καὶ κρώξαντε βαρείῃ δισσάκι φωνῇ
μακρὸν ἐπιρροιζεῦσι τιναξάμενοι πτερὰ πυκνά"


“ \
Kal νῆσσαι οἰκουροὶ ὑπωρόφιοί τε κολοιοὶ 970
a /
ἐρχόμενοι KATA yeloa τινάσσονται πτερύγεσσιν,
a ; we - ͵ 3 % > \ /
ἢ ἐπὶ κῦμα διώκει ἐρωδιὸς ὀξὺ λεληκώς. 940


Τῶν τοι μηδὲν ἀπόβλητον πεφυλαγμένῳ ὕδωρ
γινέσθω: μηδ᾽ εἴ κεν ἐπὶ πλέον ἠὲ πάροιθεν
δάκνωσιν μυῖαι καὶ ἐφ᾽ αἵματος ἱμείρωνται, 975
ἢ λύχνοιο μύκητες ἀγείρωνται περὶ μύξαν
νύκτα κατὰ σκοτίην' μηδ᾽ Hv ὑπὸ χείματος ὥρην 245
λύχνων ἄλλοτε μέν τε φάος κατὰ κόσμον ὀρώρῃ,
ἄλλοτε δ᾽ ἀΐσσωσιν ἄπο φλόγες Hite κοῦφαι
πομφόλυγες, μηδ᾽ εἴ κεν ἐπ᾽ αὐτόφι μαρμαίρωσιν 980
ἀκτῖνες, μηδ᾽ ἣν θέρεος μέγα πεπταμένοιο


@ Theophr. 42 γῆς ἔντερα πολλὰ φαινόμενα χειμῶνα σημαίνει.

» Theophr. 17 ὅλως δὲ ὄρνιθες καὶ ἀλεκτρυόνες φθειριζόμενοι
ὑδατικὸν σημεῖον καὶ ὅταν μιμῶνται ὕδωρ ws Bor.

¢ Theophr. 16 κόραξ πολλὰς μεταβάλλειν εἰωθὼς φωνὰς τούτων
ἐὰν ταχὺ δὶς φθέγξηται καὶ ἐπιρροιζήσῃ καὶ τινάξη τὰ πτερά, ὕδωρ
σημαίνει. καὶ ἐὰν ὑετῶν ὄντων πολλὰς μεταβάλλῃ φωνάς. .. καὶ
ἐάν τε εὐδίας ἐάν τε ὕδατος ὄντος μιμῆται τῇ φωνῇ οἷον σταλαγμούς,
ὕδωρ σημαίνει. ἐάν τε κόρακες ἐάν τε κολοιοὶ ἄνω πέτωνται
καὶ ἱερακίζωσιν, ὕδωρ σημαίνουσι ; cf. Verg. G. i. 381 f.

ἃ Theophr. 18 καὶ ἡ vijrra ἥμερος ἐὰν ὑπιοῦσα ὑπὸ τὰ
γεῖσα ἀποπτερυγίζηται, ὕδωρ σημαίνει, ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ κολοιοὶ καὶ
ἀλεκτρυόνες, ἐάν τε ἐπὶ λίμνῃ ἢ θαλάττῃ ἀποπτερυγίζωνται, ὡς
νῆττα ὕδωρ σημαίνει. καὶ ἐρωδιὸς ὄρθριον φθεγγόμενος ὕδωρ ἢ


456


PHAENOMENA


testines* (earthworms). Tame fowl? with father
Chanticleer well preen their plumes and cluck aloud
with voice like noise of water dripping upon water.

Ere now, too, the generations of crows ° and tribes
of jackdaws have been a sign of rain to come from
Zeus, when they appear in flocks and screech like
hawks. Crows, too, imitate with their note the
heavy splash of clashing rain, or after twice croaking
deeply they raise a loud whirring with frequent
flapping of their wings, and ducks“ of the homestead
and jackdaws which haunt the roof seek cover under
the eaves and clap their wings, or seaward flies the
heron with shrill screams.

Slight not aught of these things when on thy guard
for rain, and heed the warning, if beyond their wont
the midges ὁ sting and are fain for blood, or if on a
misty night snuff gather on the nozzle of the lamp,/
or if in winter's season the flame of the lamp now
rise steadily and anon sparks fly fast from it, like
light bubbles, or if on the light itself there dart
quivering rays, or if in height of summer the


πνεῦμα σημαίνει. καὶ ἐὰν ἐπὶ θάλατταν πετόμενος Bog μᾶλλον
ὕδατος σημεῖον ἢ πνεύματος καὶ ὅλως βοῶν ἀνεμῶδες ; cf. Verg.
G. i. 363 f. **notasque paludes Deserit atque altam supra
volat ardea nubem.”

ὁ Theophr. 23 καὶ τὸ δημόσιον τὸ περὶ τὰς μυίας λεγόμενον

ἀληθές" ὅταν γὰρ δάκνωσι σφόδρα, ὕδατος σημεῖον.

7 Verg. G. i. 390 ff. ‘*Ne nocturna quidem carpentes
ensa puellae Nescivere hiemem, testa cum ardente viderent
cintillare oleum et putris concrescere fungos.” Theophr. 14

οἱ μύκητες ἐὰν νότια 7, ὕδωρ σημαίνουσι, σημαίνουσι dé καὶ
ἄνεμον κατὰ λόγον ὡς ἂν ἔχωσι πλήθους καὶ μεγέθους, σμικροὶ
δὲ καὶ κεγχρώδεις καὶ λαμπροὶ ὕδωρ καὶ ἄνεμον. καὶ ὅταν
χειμῶνος τὴν φλόγα (ὁ λύχνος) ἀπωθῇ διαλιπὼν οἷον πομφόλυγας,
ὕδατος σημεῖον, καὶ ἐὰν πηδῶσιν αἱ ἀκτῖνες ἐπ’ αὐτὸν καὶ ἐὰν
σπινθῆρες ἐπιγένωνται ; 34 μύκητες ἐπὶ λύχνου νότιον πνεῦμα ἢ
ὕδωρ σημαίνουσιν.

: 457


ARATUS


νησαῖοι ὄρνιθες ἐπασσύτεροι φορέωνται. 280
μηδὲ σύ γ᾽ ἢ χύτρης ἠὲ τρίποδος πυριβήτεω,


σπινθῆρες ὅ ὅτ᾽ ἔωσι πέρι πλέονες, λελαθέσθαι:


μηδὲ κατὰ σποδιὴν ὁπότ᾽ ἄνθρακος αἰθομένοιο 985
ose πέρι σήματ᾽ ἐοικότα κεγχρείοισιν,
3 5 \ \ / / ¢ a
ἀλλ᾽ ἐπὶ Kat Ta δόκευε περισκοπέων ὑετοῖο. 255


Ki ye μὲν ἠερόεσσα παρὲξ ὄρεος μεγάλοιο
πυθμένα τείνηται νεφέλη, ἄκραι δὲ κολῶναι
φαίνωνται καθαραΐί, μάλα κεν τόθ᾽ ὑπεύδιος εἴης. 990
εὔδιός K εἴης καὶ ὅτε πλατέος παρὰ πόντου
φαίνηται χθαμαλὴ νεφέλη, μηδ᾽ ὑψόθι κύρῃ, 260
ἀλλ᾽ αὐτοῦ πλαταμῶνι παραθλίβηται ὁμοίη.

Σκέπτεο δ᾽ εὔδιος μὲν ἐὼν ἐπὶ χείματι μᾶλλον,


ἐς δὲ γαληναίην χειμωνόθεν. εὖ δὲ μάλα χρὴ 995
és Φάτνην dpaav, τὴν Kapxivos ἀμφιελίσσει,
πρῶτα καθαιρομένην πάσης ὑπένερθεν ὁμίχλης. 26


κείνη γὰρ φθίνοντι καθαίρεται ἐν χειμῶνι. ᾿
Καὶ φλόγες ἡσύχιαι λύχνων καὶ νυκτερίη γλαὺξ


ἥσυχον ἀείδουσα μαραινομένου χειμῶνος 1000

γινέσθω τοι σῆμα, καὶ ἥσυχα ποικίλλουσα

ὥρῃ ἐν ἑἕσπερίῃ κρώξῃ πολύφωνα κορώνη: 270
/


καὶ κόρακες μοῦνοι μὲν ἐρημαῖοι βοοῶντες

δισσάκις, αὐτὰρ ἔπειτα per ἀθρόα κεκλήγοντες"
/ 2, ; / 3 \ / /

πλειότεροι δ᾽ ayeAndov, ἐπὴν κοίτοιο μέδωνται, 100δ᾽


α Theophr. 19 χύτρα σπινθηρίζουσα πᾶσα περίπλεως ὕδατος
σημεῖον.

ὁ Theophr. 25 φασὶ δέ τινες καὶ εἰ ἐν ἄνθραξι λαμπρὰ χάλαζα
ἐπιφαίνηται, χάλαζαν προσημαίνειν ὡς τὰ πολλά᾽ ἐὰν δὲ ὥσπερ
κέγχροι μικροὶ λαμπροὶ πολλοί, ἀνέμον μὲν ὄντος εὐδίαν, μὴ
ἀνέμου δὲ ὕδωρ ἢ ἄνεμον ; 2 of. 42.

¢ Theophr. 51 "ολυμπος δὲ καὶ ΓΑθως καὶ ὅλως τὰ ὄρη τὰ
σημαντικὰ ὅταν τὰς κορυφὰς καθαρὰς ἔχωσιν, εὐδίαν σημαίνει. καὶ


458


PHAENOMENA


island birds are borne in crowding companies. Be
not heedless of the pot or tripod on the fire, if
many sparks encircle it, nor heedless when in
the ashes of blazing coal® there gleam spots like
millet seed, but scan those too when seeking signs
of rain.

But if a misty cloud 5 be stretched along the base
of a high hill, while the upper peaks shine clear,
very bright will be the sky. Fair weather, too,
shalt thou have, when by the sea-verge is seen a
cloud low on the ground, never reaching a height,
but penned there like a flat reef of rock.

Seek in calm for signs of storms, and in storm for
signs of calm. Scan well the Manger, whereby
wheels the Crab, when first it is freed of every
covering cloud. For its clearing marks the waning
tempest.

Take for sign of storm abating the steady-burning
‘flame of the lamp,’ the gentle hooting of the owl
at night,/ and the crow” if with gentle varying note
she caw at eventide, and the rooks,’ when singly
they utter two lonely notes followed by frequent
rapid screams, and when in fuller company they
ὅταν τὰ νέφη πρὸς τὴν θάλασσαν αὐτὴν παραζωννύῃ, εὐδιεινόν ; ef.
Verg. G. i. 401.

4 Theophr. 51 ἡ τοῦ ὄνου φάτνη ὅτε ἂν καθαρὰ καὶ λαμπρὰ
φαίνηται, εὐδιεινόν.

4 Theophr. δ4 λύχνος χειμῶνος καιόμενος ἡσυχαῖος εὐδίαν
σημαίνει.

7 Theophr. 52 γλαῦξ ἡσυχαῖον φθεγγομένη ἐν χειμῶνι εὐδίαν
προσημαίνει" καὶ νύκτωρ χειμῶνος ἡσυχαῖον ᾷἄδουσα. Verg. G.
i. 402 ἢ. ‘*Solis et occasum servans de culmine summo
Nequiquam seros exercet noctua cantus.”

9 Theophr. 53 κορώνη ἕωθεν εὐθὺς ἐὰν κράξῃ τρίς, εὐδίαν, καὶ
ἑσπέρας χειμῶνος ἡσυχαῖον ᾷδουσα.

h Theophr. 52 κόραξ δὲ μόνος μὲν ἡσυχαῖον κράζων, καὶ ἐὰν
τρὶς κράξῃ, μετὰ τοῦτο πολλάκις κράξῃ, εὐδιεινός.


459


ARATUS


φωνῆς ἔμπλειοι" χαίρειν κέ τις οἰΐσσαιτο,

οἷα τὰ μὲν βοόωσι λιγαινομένοισιν ὁμοῖα, 275
πολλὰ δὲ δενδρείοιο περὶ φλόον, ἄλλοτ᾽ ἐπ᾽ αὐτοῦ,
ἧχί τε κείουσιν καὶ ὑπότροποι ἀπτερύονται.

καὶ δ᾽ ἄν που γέρανοι μαλακῆς προπάροιθε


γαλήνης 1010
ἀσφαλέως τανύσαιεν ἕνα δρόμον ἤλιθα πᾶσαι,
οὐδὲ παλιρρόθιοί κεν ὑπεύδιοι φορέοιντο. 220


*Hyos δ᾽ ἀστερόθεν καθαρὸν φάος ἀμβλύνηται,

οὐδέ ποθεν νεφέλαι πεπιεσμέναι ἀντιόωσιν,
οὐδέ ποθεν ζόφος ἄλλος ὑ  ὑποτρέχῃ οὐδὲ σελήνη, 101ὅ
ἀλλὰ τά γ᾽ ἐξαπίνης αὕτως ἀμενηνὰ φέρωνται,
μηκέτι τοι τόδε σῆμα γαληναίης ἐπικείσθω, 285
ἀλλ᾽ ἐπὶ χεῖμα δόκευε:" καὶ ὁ ὁππότε ταὶ μὲν ἔωσιν
αὐτῇ ἐνὶ χώρῃ νεφέλαι, ταὶ δ᾽ ἄλλαι ὑπ᾽ αὐταῖς

\ vSers , 1 Ὁ» 3427 , ,
ταὶ μὲν ἀμειβόμεναι, ταὶ δ᾽ ἐξόπιθεν φορέωνται. 1020

Καὶ χῆνες κλαγγηδὸν ἐπειγόμεναι βρωμοῖο

χειμῶνος μέγα σῆμα, καὶ ἐννεάγηρα κορώνη 290
νύκτερον ἀείδουσα, καὶ ὀψὲ βοῶντε κολοιοί,
καὶ σπίνος ἠῶα σπίζων, καὶ ὄρνεα πάντα
> / 4 eae / a Vs A 4
ἐκ πελάγους φεύγοντα, καὶ ὀρχίλος ἢ καὶ ἐριθεὺς 10251
δύνων ἐς κοίλας ὀχεάς, καὶ φῦλα κολοιῶν
> a’ 52> , δὲ i oy WOR | ss
ἐκ νομοῦ ἐρχόμενα τραφεροῦ ἐπὶ ὄψιον αὖλιν. 295

0.3 =ON > \ / ~ >/
οὐδ᾽ ἂν ἐπιξουθαὶ μεγάλου χειμῶνος ἰόντος


« Verg. Geor ἐφ i. 410 ff. **Tum liquidas corvi presso ter
gutture voces Aut quater ingeminant, et saepe cubilibus
altis, Nescio qua praeter solitum dulcedine laeti, Inter se in
foliis strepitant; iuvat imbribus actis Progeniem parvam
dulcisque revisere nidos.”

δ Theophr. 52 ὅταν γέρανοι πέτωνται καὶ μὴ ἀνακάμπτωσιν,
εὐδίαν σημαίνει" οὐ γὰρ πέτονται πρὶν ἢ ἂν πετόμενοι καθαρὰ
ἴδωσιν. Contrast the sign of storm, Theophr. 38 ἐὰν ὑποστρα-
φῶσι (γέρανοι) πετόμενοι, χειμῶνα σημαίνουσι. Verg. G. i. 373 ff.


460


PHAENOMENA


bethink them of the roost,* full of voice. One
would think them glad, seeing how they caw now in
shrill screams, now with frequent flight around the
foliage of the tree, now on the tree, whereon they
roost, and anon they wheel and clap their wings.
Cranes,? too, before a gentle calm will wing their way
steadily onward in one track, all in a company, and
in fair weather will be borne in no disordered flight.
But when the clear light from the stars is dimmed,
though no thronging clouds veil, nor other dark-
ness hide nor Moon obscure, but the stars on a
sudden thus causelessly wax wan, hold that no more
for sign of calm but look for storm. Foul weather,
too, will come, when of the clouds some are stationary,’
but others passing by and others following after.
Sure signs of storm are geese hastening with
many a cackle to their food, the nine-generation
crow cawing at night,’ the jackdaw chattering late,
the chaffinch’ piping in the dawn, waterfowl all
fleeing inward from the sea,’ the wren” or the robin
retreating into hollow clefts, and tribes of jackdaws
returning late to roost from dry feeding-grounds.
When the furious tempest is imminent, the tawny


‘“nunquam imprudentibus imber Obfuit: aut illum sur-
gentem vallibus imis Aeriae fugere grues.”

¢ Theophr. 45 ὅταν ἑστώτων νεφῶν ἕτερα ἐπιφέρηται, τὰ δ᾽
ἠρεμῇ, χειμέρια. . ; ᾿

4 Theophr. 39 χῆνες βοῶντες μᾶλλον ἢ περὶ σῖτον μαχόμενοι
χειμέριον.

4 Theophr. 39 κορώνη καὶ κόραξ καὶ κολοιὸς ὀψὲ ἄδοντες
χειμέριοι.

f Theophr. 39 σπίνος σπίζων ἕωθεν χειμέριον.

σ Theophr. 40 ἐὰν ἐκ πελάγους ὄρνιθες φεύγωσι, χειμῶνα
σημαίνουσι; cf. Verg. 6. i. 360 f.

h Theophr. 39 ὄρχιλος εἰσιὼν καὶ εἰσδυόμενος εἰς ὀπὰς χειμῶνα
σημαίνουσι. καὶ ἐριθεὺς ὡσαύτως.


461


ARATUS


πρόσσω ποιήσαιντο νομὸν κηροῖο μέλισσαι,
ἀλλ᾽ αὐτοῦ μέλιτός τε καὶ ἔργων εἱλίσσονται"
οὐδ᾽ ὑψοῦ γεράνων μακραὶ στίχες αὐτὰ κέλευθα
τείνονται, στροφάδες δὲ παλιμπετὲς ἀπονέονται.
μηδ᾽, ὅτε νηνεμίῃ κεν ἀράχνια λεπτὰ φέρηται,
καὶ φλόγες αἰθύσσωσι μαραινόμεναι λύχνοιο,
ἢ πῦρ αὔηται σπουδῇ καὶ ὑπεύδια λύχνα,
πιστεύειν χειμῶνι. τί τοι λέγω ὅ ὅσσα πέλονται
σήματ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἀνθρώπους; δὴ γὰρ καὶ ἀεικέϊ τέφρῃ
αὐτοῦ πηγνυμένῃ νιφετοῦ ἐπιτεκμήραιο,
καὶ L λύχνῳ χιόνος, κέγχροις ὅτ᾽ ἐοικότα πάντη
prt σήματ᾽ ἔχει πυριλαμπέος ἐγγύθι μύξης,
ἄνθρακι δὲ ζώοντι χαλάζης, ὁ ὁππότε λαμπρὸς
αὐτὸς ἐείδηται, μέσσῳ δέ οἱ Hite λεπτὴ
φαίνηται νεφέλη, πυρὸς ἔνδοθεν αἰθομένοιο.
IIpivou δ᾽ αὖ καρποῖο καταχθέες οὐδὲ μέλαιναι,
σχῖνοι ἀπείρητοι" πάντη δέ τε πολλὸς ἀλωεὺς
αἰεὶ παπταίνει, μή οἱ θέρος ἐκ χερὸς ἔρρῃ.
πρῖνοι μὲν θαμινῆς ἀκύλου κατὰ μέτρον ἔχουσαι
χειμῶνός κε λέγοιεν ἐπὶ πλέον ἰσχύσοντος.
μὴ μὲν ἄδην ἔκπαγλα περιβρίθοιεν ἁπάντη,
τηλοτέρω δ᾽ αὐχμοῖο συνασταχύοιεν ἄρουραι.


α Theophr. 46 ὅταν μέλιτται “μὴ ἀποπέτωνται μακρὰν ἀλλ’
αὐτοῦ ἐν τῇ εὐδίᾳ πέτωνται, χειμῶνα ἐσόμενον σημαίνει ; Verg.
G. iv. 191 ff. ‘*Nec vero a stabulis pluvia impendente
recedunt Longius aut credunt caelo adventantibus Euris, Sed
circum tutae sub moenibus urbis aquantur, Excursusque
breves tentant.”

> Theophr. 38 ἐὰν ὑποστραφῶσι (γέρανοι) πετόμενοι χειμῶνα
σημαίνουσι.

¢ Theophr. 29 ἀράχνια πολλὰ φερόμενα πνεῦμα ἢ χειμῶνα
σημαίνει.

@ Theophr. 29 ἐὰν πῦρ μὴ θέλῃ ἅπτεσθαι, χειμέριον" καὶ
ἐὰν λύχνος ἅπτεσθαι μὴ ἐθέλῃ, χειμῶνα σημαίνει.

ὁ Theophr. 42 τέφρα πηγνυμένη νιφετόν (σημαίνει).


462


1030


300


1035


305


1040.


910


1046.


91ὅ


1060.


PHAENOMENA.


bees* go not far afield to cull wax, but wheel hard —
by their honey and their stores, nor do cranes ὃ on
high in long lines wing their steady onward course,
but wheel and double in their flight. Look, too,
for foul weather, when in windless calm airy
gossamers® are flying, and when the rays of the
lamp are wan and flickering, or when in fair weather
fire and torches? are hard to kindle. Why recount
all the warning hints that come to men? The
unsightly clotting of the ash? is sign of snow: the
ring of spots like millet’ seed around the blazing
wick of the lamp betokens snow; but sign of hail
are live coals, when they outward brightly ‘shine,
but in their centre appears, as it were, a hazy mist
within the glowing fire.

Nor are holm-oaks,’ laden with acorns, and the
dark mastich* untried. With frequent glance on
every side the miller ever peers, anxious lest the
summer slip from his hand. Holm-oaks with
moderate crops of frequent acorns will tell of heavy
storm to come. Pray that they may not be ex-
ceedingly heavy laden, but only that far from
drought the cornfields flourish even as_ they.


7 Theophr. 42 ἐὰν ὥσπερ κέχροις πολλοῖς κατάπλεως (ὁ λύχνος)
ἦ, χειμερίσει" καὶ ἐὰν κύκλῳ περὶ τὸ λαμπρὸν ὦσιν εὐδίας
οὔσης, χιονικόν. .

9 Theophr. 25 φασὶ δέ τινες καὶ εἰ ἐν ἄνθραξι λαμπρὰ χάλαζα
ἐπιφαίνηται, χάλαζαν προσημαίνειν ὡς τὰ πολλά.

h Theophr. 45 οἱ πρῖνοι ἐὰν εὐκαρπῶσι, χειμῶνες πολλοὶ
σφόδρα γίνονται ; 49 οἱ πρῖνοι ὅταν εὐκαρπῶσι σφόδρα, ὡς μὲν τὰ
πολλὰ χειμῶνα ἰσχυρὸν σημαίνουσιν, ἐνίοτε δὲ καὶ αὐχμούς φασι
γίνεσθαι.

ὁ Pistacia Lentiscus L. See M. de Thevenot, Travels
into the Levant, Eng. trans. Lond. 1687, i. chap. lxii. for
the confusion of cxivos, σκίλλα (Urginea maritima); cf. Plut.
Per. 3.


463


ARATUS


/ \ - / \ / ς s
τριπλόα δὲ σχῖνος κυέει, τρισσαὶ δέ of αὖξαι
γίνονται καρποῖο, φέρει δέ τε σήμαθ᾽ ἑκάστη 820
ἑξείης ἀρότῳ. καὶ γάρ T ἀροτήσιον ὥρην
vf
τριπλόα μείρονται, μέσσην καὶ ἐπ᾽ ἀμφότερ᾽ ἄκρα:
πρῶτος μὲν πρώτην ἄροσιν, μέσσος δέ τε μέσσην 1055
’ὔ
καρπὸς ἀπαγγέλλει, πυμάτην γε μὲν ἔσχατος
ἄλλων.
ὅντινα γὰρ κάλλιστα λοχαίη σχῖνος ἄρηται, 8326
/ > > EA + Jes ”
κείνῳ γ᾽ ἐξ ἄλλων ἄροσις πολυλήϊος εἴη,
~ / > aby wn / 5Ὰ 7 / 4 ,
τῷ δέ γ᾽ ἀφαυροτάτῳ ὀλίγη, μέσσῳ δέ τε μέσση.


αὕτως δ᾽ ἀνθέρικος τριχθὰ σκίλλης ὑπερανθεῖ 1060
σήματ᾽ ἐπιφράσσασθαι ὁμοιίου ἀμητοῖο.
ὅσσα δ᾽ ἐνὶ σχίνου ἀροτὴρ ἐφράσσατο καρπῷ, 330


τόσσα δὲ καὶ σκίλλης τεκμαίρεται avOei λευκῷ.


Αὐτὰρ ὅτε σφῆκες μετοπωρινὸν ἤλιθα πολλοὶ


/ / \ € = / /
πάντη βεβρίθωσι, καὶ ἑσπερίων προπάροιθεν 1065
“. μ 3 / ~
Πληϊάδων εἴποι τις ἐπερχόμενον χειμῶνα,
εχ, A
οἷος ἐπὶ σφήκεσσιν ἑλίσσεται αὐτίκα δῖνος. 335


θήλειαι δὲ σύες, θήλεια δὲ μῆλα Kai αἶγες

ὁππότ᾽ ἀναστρωφῶσιν ὀχῆς, τὰ δέ γ᾽ ἄρσενα πάντα
δεξάμεναι πάλιν αὖτις ἀναβλήδην ὀχέωνται, — 1070.
αὕτως κε σφήκεσσι μέγαν χειμῶνα λέγοιεν.


α Theophr. 55 ὁ τῆς σχίνου καρπὸς σημαίνει τοὺς ἀρότους"
ἔχει δὲ τρία μέρη καὶ ἔστιν ὁ πρῶτος τοῦ πρώτου ἀρότου σημεῖον,
ὁ δεύτερος τοῦ δευτέρου, 6 τρίτος τοῦ τρίτου καὶ ὡς ἂν τούτων
κλίνῃ κάλλιστα καὶ γένηται ἁδρότατος, οὕτως ἕξει καὶ ὁ κατὰ
τοῦτον ἄροτος ; Cic. De div. i. 9 (quoted Plin. Ν΄. Π. xviii. 228)
‘“*Tam vero semper viridis semperque gravata Lentiscus
triplici solita est grandescere fetu, Ter fruges fundens tria
tempora monstrat arandi.”

ὃ Theophr. H.P. vii. 18. 6 ποιεῖται δὲ (ἡ σκίλλα) τὰς ἀνθή-


464


PHAENOMENA


Thrice ® the mastich buds and thrice wax ripe its
berries. Each crop in turn brings a sign for the
sowing. For men divide the sowing season into
three—early, middle, late. The first crop of mastich
heralds the first of grain; the second the middle;
the latest the last of all. The richest crop that
the teaming mastich bears will hint of the wealthiest
harvest from the plough: the meanest crop fore-
tells scanty grain, and average mastich heralds
average corn. Likewise the stalk of the squill?
flowers thrice to give hint of corresponding harvest.
All the hints the farmer marked in the mastich
crop, the same he learns from the white blossom of
the squill.

But when in autumn frequent swarms of wasps °
crowd on every side, one can foretell the winter-
storm to come even before the Pleiads are wester-
ing,? swift and sudden as the eddy wherein the
wasps are wheeling. Sows and ewes and she-goats,
when after mating with the male they mate again,’
equally with wasps foretell heavy storm. When she-


σεις τρεῖς ὧν ἡ μὲν πρώτη δοκεῖ σημαίνειν τὸν πρῶτον ἄροτον, ἡ δὲ
δευτέρα τὸν μέσον, ἡ δὲ τρίτη τὸν ἔσχατον. ὡς γὰρ ἂν αὗται
γένωνται, καὶ οἱ ἄροτοι σχεδὸν οὕτως ἐκβαίνουσιν.

¢ Theophr. 47 ἔστι δὲ σημεῖον χειμώνων μεγάλων καὶ ὄμβρων
καὶ ὅταν γένωνται ἐν τῷ μετοπώρῳ πολλοὶ σφῆκες.

@ The scholl. wrongly explain this of the ‘* evening rising ”
(ἑσπερία ἀνατολή) of the Pleiades. ‘The reference is to the
time when in the morning they are near the Western
horizon, precisely as in Theocritus vii. 53 ἑσπερίοις ᾿Ἐρίφοις
means when the Kids are in the West inthe morning. The
setting of the Pleiades marked the beginning of Winter ;
here early Winter comes before they set. The statements
in the Calendars of late Greek and Roman writers have to
be used with the greatest caution.

, Theophr. 24 ὅταν (πάλιν) ὀχεύωνται πρόβατα ἢ αἶγες, χειμῶνος
μακροῦ σημεῖον.


2H 465


ARATUS


ὀψὲ δὲ μισγομένων αἰγῶν μήλων τε συῶν τε

/ 3 3 7 Ὁ ¢ ᾽ 4 Q λ /
χαίρει avoABos ἀνήρ, 6 ot οὐ μάλα θαλπιόωντι
εὔδιον φαίνουσι βιβαιόμεναι ἐνιαυτόν.

Χαίρει καὶ γεράνων ἀγέλαις ὡραῖος ἀροτρεὺς
ὥριον ἐρχομέναις, ὃ δ᾽ ἀώριος αὐτίκα μᾶλλον"
αὕτως γὰρ χειμῶνες ἐπέρχονται γεράνοισιν"
πρώϊα μὲν καὶ μᾶλλον ὁμιλαδὸν ἐρχομένῃσιν

’ἢ > \ re, > A \ 3 3 \ A
πρώιον" αὐτὰρ oT ὀψὲ καὶ οὐκ ayeAnda φανεῖσαι

/ / > \ / 299 ἢ ,
πλειότερον φορέονται ἐπὶ χρόνον οὐδ᾽ ἅμα πολλαΐ,
3 / ~ > / LA ”
ἀμβολίῃ χειμῶνος ὀφέλλεται. ὕστερα ἔργα.

Ki δὲ βόες καὶ μῆλα μετὰ βρίθουσαν ὁ ὁὀπώρην
γαῖαν ὀρύσσωσιν, κεφαλὰς. δ᾽ ἀνέμοιο βορῆος
ἀντία τείνωσιν, μάλα κεν τότε χείμερον αὐταὶ
Πληϊάδες χειμῶνα κατερχόμεναι φορέοιεν.
μὴ δὲ λίην ὀρύχοιεν' ἐπεὶ μέγας οὐ κατὰ ,κόσμον
γίνεται οὔτε φυτοῖς χειμὼν φίλος οὔτ᾽ ἀρότοισιν.
ἀλλὰ χιὼν εἴη πολλὴ μεγάλαις ἐν ἀρούραις,
μήπω κεκριμένῃ. μηδὲ βλωθρῇ ἐπὶ ποίῃ,
ὄφρα τις εὐεστοῖ χαίρῃ ποτιδέγμενος ἀνήρ.

Oi δ᾽ εἶεν καθύπερθεν ἐοικότες ἀστέρες αἰεί:
μηδ᾽ εἷς μήτε δύω μήτε πλέονες κομόωντες"
πολλοὶ γὰρ κομόωσιν ἐπ᾿ αὐχμηρῷ ἐνιαυτῷ.

Οὐδὲ μὲν ὀρνίθων ἀγέλαις ἠπειρόθεν ἀνήρ,
ἐκ νήσων ὅτε πολλαὶ “ἐπιπλήσσωσιν ἀ ἀρούραις,
ἐρχομένου θέρεος χαίρει" περιδείδιε δ᾽ αἰνῶς
ἀμητῷ, μή οἱ κενεὸς καὶ ἀχύρμιος ἔλθῃ
αὐχμῷ ἀνιηθείς. χαίρει δέ που αἰπόλος ἀνὴρ


@ Theophr. 54 πρόβατα ὀψὲ ὀχευόμενα εὐδιεινὸν ἀποτελοῦσι τὸ
σημεῖον. Contrast 40 πρόβατα ἐὰν πρωὶ ὀχεύηται, πρώϊον χειμῶνα
σημαίνουσι.

> Theophr. 88 γέρανοι ἐὰν πρωὶ πέτωνται καὶ ἁθρόοι, πρωὶ
χειμάσει, ἐὰν δὲ ὀψὲ καὶ πολὺν χρόνον, ὀψὲ χειμάσει.

° Theophr. 41 μετοπώρῳ ἐὰν πρόβατα ἢ βόες ὀρύττωσι.. ..


466


840


De ee ee


PHAENOMENA


goats and ewes and sows mate late 5 in the season, the
poor man rejoices, because their mating reveals to him
that is thinly clad the coming of an open winter.

In seasonable flight of thronging cranes? rejoices
the seasonable farmer: in untimely flight the un-
timely ploughman. For ever so the winters follow
the cranes: early winters, when their flight is early
and in flocks: when they fly late and not in flocks,
but over a longer period in small bands, the later
farming benefits by the delay of winter.

If oxen and sheep “ after the heavy-laden Autumn
dig the ground and stretch their heads to face the
North wind, verily the Pleiads at their setting will
bring a stormy winter. Pray that their digging be
not excessive, for then is the winter exceedingly
severe and a foe both to tree and tilth. May deep
snow clothe the mighty fields, veiling the tender
᾿ shoot, not yet separate nor tall, so that the anxious
husbandman may rejoice in well-being.

May the stars above shine ever with due bright-
ness; and may no comets,’ one nor two nor more,
appear! for many comets herald a season of drought.

Nor on the mainland’ does the husbandman
rejoice at the coming of summer to see trooping
flocks of birds, when from the islands they alight
upon his fields, but exceeding dread is his for the
harvest, lest vexed by drought it come with empty
ears and chaff. But the goat-herd rejoices even in


τὸν χειμῶνα χειμέριον σημαίνει. ἐν δὲ τῷ Πόντῳ φασὶν ὅταν
᾿Αρκτοῦρος ἀνατείλῃ θᾶττον, ἐναντίους τῷ βορρᾷ νέμεσθαι.

4 Theophr. 34 οἱ κομῆται ἀστέρες ὡς τὰ πολλὰ πνεύματα
σημαίνουσιν, ἐὰν δὲ πολλοί, καὶ αὐχμόν.

ὁ Theophr. 17 καὶ θέρους ὅταν πολλοὶ ἁθρόοι φανῶσιν ὄρνιθες
of βιοτεύουσιν ἐν νήσῳ, ὕδωρ σημαίνουσιν" ἐὰν δὲ μέτριοι, ἀγαθὸν
αἰξὶ καὶ βοτοῖς, ἐὰν δὲ πολλοὶ ὑπερβολῇ, αὐχμὸν ἰσχυρόν.

467


ARATUS


A > /
αὐταῖς ὀρνίθεσσιν, ἐπὴν κατὰ μέτρον ἴωσιν,
Ξλ / / λ λ / > ~ 1100
ἐλπόμενος μετέπειτα πολυγλαγέος ἐνιαυτοῦ.

a \ \ A“ / ΝΜ +
οὕτω γὰρ μογεροὶ καὶ ἀλήμονες ἄλλοθεν ἄλλοι
+ a

ζώομεν ἄνθρωποι. τὰ δὲ πὰρ ποσὶ πάντες ἑτοῖμοι 370
σήματ᾽ ἐπιγνῶναι καὶ ἐσαυτίκα ποιήσασθαι.

3 ~ ~

Apvaou μὲν χειμῶνας ἐτεκμήραντο νομῆες,


> A ¢ / “- > / /
ἐς νομὸν ὁππότε μᾶλλον ἐπειγόμενοι τροχόωσιν, 110ὅ.
+ 22 > / / + A ae \
ἄλλοι δ᾽ ἐξ ἀγέλης κριοί, ἄλλοι δὲ καὶ ἀμνοὶ
δὲ, Κ / >? / /
εἰνόδιοι παίζωσιν ἐρειδόμενοι κεράεσσιν" 375


ἢ ὁπότ᾽ ἄλλοθεν ἄλλοι ἀναπλήσσωσι πόδεσσιν
τέτρασιν οὗ κοῦφοι, κεραοί γε μὲν ἀμφοτέροισιν"
δι λυ» 3.2. 5.5 “2... > ΄ Σέ 1110
ἢ καὶ ὅτ᾽ ἐξ ἀγέλης ἀεκούσια κινήσωσιν
/ > / Ψ \ \ / / :
deleAov εἰσελάοντες ὅμως, τὰ δὲ πάντοθι ποίης
δάκνωσιν πυκινῇσι κελευόμενα λιθάκεσσιν. 380
3 \ ~ > ἢ > > / \ /
Ex δὲ βοῶν ἐπύθοντ᾽ ἀρόται καὶ βουκόλοι
ἄνδρες
/ ~ > \ / e / \
κινυμένου χειμῶνος" ἐπεὶ βόες Om7oTe χηλὰς
γλώσσῃ ὑπωμαίοιο ποδὸς περιλιχμήσωνται, 1115
ἢ κοίτῳ πλευρὰς ἐπὶ δεξιτερὰς τανύσωνται,
3 / > / / > 7 3 3 /
ἀμβολίην ἀρότοιο γέρων ἐπιέλπετ᾽ apotpevs. 385
οὐδ᾽ ὅτε μυκηθμοῖο περίπλειοι ἀγέρωνται
> / / / / LA
ἐρχόμεναι σταθμόνδε βόες βουλύσιον ὥρην,


σκυθραὶ λειμῶνος πόριες καὶ βουβοσίοιο 1190
αὐτίκα τεκμαίρονται ἀχείμεροι ἐμπλήσεσθαι.
οὐδ᾽ αἶγες πρίνοιο περισπεύδουσαι ἀκάνθαις 390


» 0" / ~ > ’
εὔδιοι, οὐδὲ σύες φορυτῷ ἐπιμαργαίνουσαι.


@ Theophr. 15 βοῦς τὴν προσθίαν. ὁπλὴν λείξας χειμῶνα ἢ
ὕδωρ σημαίνει.

ὃ Theophr. 41 βόες... ἐπὶ τὸ δεξιὸν κατακλινόμενοι χειμέριον ;
54 βοῦς ἐπὶ τὸ ἀριστερὸν ἰσχίον κατακλινόμενος εὐδίαν σημαίνει,

. ἐπὶ δεξιὸν δὲ χειμῶνα.

¢ Theophr. 49 καὶ τὸ πανταχοῦ δὲ λεγόμενον σημεῖον δημόσιον
χειμέριον ὅταν σύες [μύες Th. ; μῦες (sic) Wimmer, Hort] περὶ
468. :


PHAENOMENA


the birds, when they come in moderate flocks
with promise of a season of plenteous milk.
For thus do we poor, changeful mortals win in
divers ways our livelihood, and all are ready to
mark the warnings at their feet and adopt them
for the moment.

Sheep warn the shepherd of coming storm when
they rush to pasture in haste beyond their wont, but
some behind the flock, now rams, now lambs, sport
by the way with butting horns, when some here,
some there, they bound aloft, the sillier young with
four feet off the ground, the horned elders with two,
or when the shepherd moves an unwilling flock,
though it be evening when he drives them to their
pens, while ever and anon they pluck the grass,
though urged by many a stone.

From oxen too the ploughman and the neat-herd
learn of the stirring of the storm. When oxen lick @
with their tongue around the hooves of their fore-feet
or in their stalls stretch themselves on their right
side,? the old ploughman expects the sowing to be
delayed. When with ceaseless lowing the kine
collect as they wend at eventide to their stalls,
the heifers reluctant to leave the meadow pasture-
land give warning that anon they will not feed in
stormless weather. Not fair weather do the*goats
betide when greedy for prickly holm-oak, and the
sows rage furiously over their bedding.°


φορυτοῦ μάχωνται καὶ φέρωσιν. Verg. G. i. 399 f. (a good
weather sign is when) ‘*non ore solutos Immundi meminere
sues iactare maniplos.” Plut. Mor. 129 4 seems to attribute
this sign to Democritus: ἄτοπον γάρ ἐστι κοράκων μὲν λα-
ρυγγισμοῖς καὶ κλωσμοῖς (κλωγμοῖ5) ἀλεκτορίδων καὶ “᾿συσὶν ἐπὶ
φορυτῷ μαργαινούσαις, ὡς ἔφη Δημόκριτος, ἐπιμελῶς προσέχειν,
σημεῖα ποιουμένους πνευμάτων καὶ ὄμβρων.


469


ARATUS


\ ὔ ¢ / A / > ,
Kat λύκος ὁππότε μακρὰ wovdAvKos ὠρύηται,


“85> 9 , 5Ὰ 7 , 3 ἘΞ
ἢ oy ἀροτρήων ὀλίγον πεφυλαγμένος ἀνδρῶν 1125
ἔργα κατέρχηται, σκέπαος YATEOVTL ἐοικώς,
> , 3 ͵ ? εχ, > Ὁ ”
ἐγγύθεν ἀνθρώπων, wa ot λέχος αὐτόθεν εἴη, 395


τρὶς περιτελλομένης ἠοῦς χειμῶνα δοκεύειν.
οὕτω καὶ προτέροις ἐπὶ σήμασι τεκμήραιο
ἐσσομένων ἀνέμων ἢ χείματος ἢ ὑετοῖο,
αὐτὴν ἢ μετὰ τὴν ἢ καὶ τριτάτην ἔτ᾽ ἐς ἠῶ.
᾿Αλλὰ γὰρ οὐδὲ μύες, τετριγότες εἴ ποτε μᾶλλον 400
εὔδιοι ἐσκίρτησαν ἐοικότες ὀρχηθμοῖσιν,
ἄσκεπτοι ἐγένοντο παλαιοτέροις ἀνθρώποις"
οὐδὲ κύνες: καὶ γάρ τε κύων ὠρύξατο ποσσὶν 1135
ἀμφοτέροις χειμῶνος ἐπερχομένοιο δοκεύων,
καὶ κεῖνοι χειμῶνα μύες τότε μαντεύονται.
καὶ μὴν ἐξ ὕδατος καὶ καρκίνος ᾧχετο χέρσον,
χειμῶνος μέλλοντος ἐπαΐσσεσθαι ὁδοῖο.
Kai μύες ἡμέριοι ποσσὶ στιβάδαᾳ στρωφῶντες 1140.
κοίτης ἱμείρονται, ὅτ᾽ ὄμβρου σήματα φαΐνοι.
Τῶν μηδὲν κατόνοσσο: καλὸν δ᾽ ἐπὶ σήματι


1180


405


OTe 410
/ “a A aA > + Sony: | 27
σκέπτεσθαι: μᾶλλον δὲ δυοῖν εἰς ταὐτὸν ἰόντω
3 \ / / / /
ἐλπωρὴ τελέθοι, τριτάτῳ δέ Ke θαρσήσειας.
: ee, 39. ἃ / > θ ’ > “
αἰεὶ δ᾽ ἂν παριόντος ἀριθμοίης ἐνιαυτοῦ 1145.
/ / Ν \ > ΣΦ > / ,
σήματα, συμβάλλων εἴ που Kal ἐπ᾽ ἀστέρι τοίη
7A > / / av /
ἠὼς ἀντέλλοντι φαείνεται ἢ κατιόντι, : 415
ε , \ a / / > Ψ ”
ὁπποίην καὶ σῆμα λέγοι. μάλα δ᾽ ἄρκιον εἴη
/ ’ 3 / / A
φράζεσθαι φθίνοντος ἐφισταμένοιό τε μηνὸς
1160.


τετράδας ἀμφοτέρας" αἱ γάρ τ᾽ ἄμυδις συνιόντων
470


an


PHAENOMENA


When a solitary wolf* howls loud, or when, as if
he sought for shelter, recking little of farmer men,
he descends to the cultivated lands near to men to
seek a lair there, expect a storm when the third
dawn comes round. So, too, by the previous signs
thou canst forecast the winds or storm or rain to
come on the self-same day or on the morrow or it
may be on the third morn.

Mice, too, as sign of storm, whenever with louder
squeaking than their wont they gambolled and seemed
to dance in fair weather, were not unmarked by the
weather-seers of old. Nor were dogs. The dog ὁ
‘with both his paws digs when he suspects the
coming of a storm, and then too those mice turn
prophets. And landward comes the crab, when the
storm is about to burst.

Mice in the daytime toss straw and are fain to
build a nest when Zeus shows signs of rain.

Make light of none of these warnings. Good
rule it is-to look for sign confirming sign. When
two point the same way, forecast with hope; when
three, with confidence. Thou canst always add the
signs of the passing season, comparing whether at
rising or at setting of a star the day dawn such as
the calendar would herald. It would profit much
to mark the last four days of the old and the first
four of the new month.4¢ They hold the terms of

« Theophr. 46 λύκος ὠρυύμενος χειμῶνα σημαίνει διὰ τριῶν
ἡμερῶν. λύκος ὅταν πρὸς τὰ ἔργα ὁρμᾷ ἢ εἴσω χειμῶνος ὥρᾳ,
χειμῶνα σημαίνει εὐθύς.

> Theophr. 41 μύες τρίζοντες καὶ ὀρχόμενοι χειμέριον.

¢ Theophr. 42 κύων τοῖς ποσὶν ὀρύττουσα . . . χειμέριον.

4 Theophr. 5 μάλιστα δὲ κυριώτατα (sc. σημεῖα) ἀπὸ τοῦ ἡλίου
καὶ τῆς σελήνης. ἡ γὰρ σελήνη νυκτὸς οἷον ἥλιός ἐστι" διὸ καὶ αἱ
σύνοδοι τῶν μηνῶν χειμέριοί εἰσιν ὅτι ἀπολείπει τὸ φῶς τῆς σελήνης
ἀπὸ τετράδος φθίνοντος μέχρι τετράδος ἱσταμένου. ..

471


ARATUS


μηνῶν πείρατ᾽ ἔχουσιν, ὅτε ᾿σφαλερώτερος αἰθὴρ

ὀκτὼ νυξὶ πέλει, χήτει χαροποῖο σελήνης. 420.ῦϑ
Τῶν ἄμυδις πάντων ἐσκεμμένος εἰς ἐνιαυτὸν

οὐδέποτε σχεδίως κεν ἐπ᾽ αἰθέρι τεκμήραιο.


a


472


PHAENOMENA


the meeting months, when the sky on eight nights
is deceptive beyond its wont for lack of the bright-
eyed Moon.

Study all the signs equa throughout the year
and never shall thy forecast of the weather be a
random guess.


473


~ LYCOPHRON


~


INTRODUCTION
1. Toe Lire or Lycorpuron


Our authorities for the life of Lycophron are a notice
in Suidas s.v. Λυκόφρων, and a Life by Tzetzes prefixed to
his commentary (Westermann, Biogr. p. 142), and some
scattered references in other authors. The information
which these give us is of the scantiest kind, and in the
matter of dates we have to depend on various inferences.

Lycophron was a native of Chalcis in Euboea ; son of
Socles (possibly the Socles of Athen. xi. 473 a) and the
adoptive son of the historian Lycus of Rhegium, of whom
Suidas s.v. Λύκος says: ‘Also called Butheras, of
Rhegium, historian, father of Lycophron the tragedian ;
flourished in the time of the Diadochi and was plotted
against by Demetrius of Phalerum. He wrote a history
of Libya, and on Sicily.”

The date of Lycophron’s birth may be put about 330-
325 s.c. His earlier years seem to have been spent in
Chalcis and Athens, possibly also in Rhegium, and his
literary activity was devoted to the writing of tragedies.

In those early years he naturally came in contact with
Menedemus (died soon after 278 B.c.) of Eretria, founder
of the Eretrian or Neo-Megarian School of Philosophy
(Life in Diog. Laert. ii. chap. 17); ef Doig. Laert. ii.
132. Méenedemus was fond of entertaining and held
symposia both of poets and musicians. ᾿Ἡσπάζετο δὲ καὶ
"Aparov καὶ Λυκόφρονα τὸν τῆς τραγῳδίας ποιητὴν καὶ τὸν ἱῬόδιον
᾿Ανταγόραν (epic poet : some lines of his to Eros preserved
in Diog. Laert. iv. 26 f.). To this period must belong
the Menedemus of Lycophron, which was a satyric


ATT


LYCOPHRON


drama: Diog. Laert. ii. 140 ἃ πάντα φησὶν ὁ Λυκόφρων ἐν
τοῖς πεποιημένοις Σατύροις αὐτῷ, ods Μενεδημον ἐπέγραψεν,
ἐγκώμιον τοῦ φιλοσόφου ποιήσας τὸ δρᾶμα. ὧν καί τινά ἐστι
τοιαυτί *

ὡς ἐκ βραχείας δαιτὸς ἡ Bard κύλιξ

αὐτοῖς κυκλεῖται πρὸς μέτρον, Τράγημα δὲ

ὁ σωφρονιστὴς τοῖς φιληκόοις λόγος.

(fr. 3 Nauck)


’ (i.e. “ When after a scanty meal the little cup circles
among them moderately and for desert the studious
guests have improving conversation ”’).


Athen. ii. 55 » “ Lycophron of Chaleis in a satyrie
drama which he wrote in mockery (ἐπὶ καταμωκήσει) on
Menedemus the philosopher, from whom was named the
sect (aipecis) of the Eretrics, making fun of the banquets of
the philosopherssaysxal δημόκοινος . . . συμπότης (see below).
Athen. x. 419 f., after an amusing description from the
Life of Menedemus by Antigonus of Carystus of the
banquets of Menedemus, adds: ‘‘ Lycophron of Chalcis,
too, bears witness with regard to these,, having written
a satyric play Menedemus (γράψας σατύρους Μενέδημον), in
which Silenus says to the satyrs :


παῖδες κρατίστου πατρὸς ἐξωλέστατοι,
ἐγὼ μὲν ὑμῖν, ὡς ὁρᾶτε, στρηνιῶ"

δεῖπνον γὰρ οὔτ᾽ ἐν Καρίᾳ, μὰ τοὺς θεούς,
οὔτ᾽ ἐν Ῥόδῳ τοιοῦτον οὔτ᾽ ἐν Λυδίᾳ
κατέχω δεδειπνηκώς. ᾿Απολλον ὡς καλόν.


(fr. 1 Nauck)


(i.e. ““ Cursed children of most excellent father, I, as you
see, wax riotous. For not in Caria, by the gods, nor in
Rhodes, nor in Lydia, do I remember to have dined so
well! Apollo! what a feast 1); and again :


ἀλλὰ κυλίκιον
ὑδαρὲς ὁ παῖς περιῆγε τοῦ πεντωβόλου,
ἀτρέμα παρεξεστηκός. ὅ τ᾽ ἀλιτήριος
καὶ δημόκοινος ἐπεχόρευε δαψιλὴς
θέρμος πενήτων καὶ τρικλίνου συμπότης.


(fr. 2 Nauck)
478


INTRODUCTION


(i.e. ‘* But the boy carried round a watery cup of five-obol
wine, slightly turned ; and the accursed hangman lupine
danced on abundantly—the boon-companion of poor men
and the dining-room ᾽᾽).


He goes on to say that discussions were carried on over
their wine (ζητήσεις ἦσαν παρὰ πότον),
τράγημα γὰρ
ὁ σωφρονιστὴς πᾶσιν ἐν μέσῳ λόγος.
(fr. 3 Nauck)
(i.e. ‘‘ For dessert improving conversation ”’).


It is related, too, that their meetings were often so
prolonged that
ὁ τὴν ἕω καλῶν
κατέλαβεν ὄρνις, τοῖσι δ᾽ οὐδέπω κόρος.
(fr. 4 Nauck)
(i.e. ““ Chanticleer, calling the dawn, surprised them still
unsatisfied ’’). .


It was inevitable that Lycophron should be attracted
by the brilliant literary society then flourishing in
Alexandria. Thither accordingly he went, at what date
we do not precisely know. But we have seen that Suidas,
in his notice of Lycus, mentions the enmity which existed
between that historian and Demetrius of Phalerum.
Demetrius apparently enjoyed great influence with Ptolemy
I., whom he advised to put the crown of Egypt past the
son of Berenice. That son came to the throne as Ptolemy
IJ. Philadelphus in 285 B.c. on the abdication of his
father, and, after the death of the latter in 283 B.c., he
put Demetrius under ward μέχρι τι δόξει περὶ αὐτοῦ. Shortly
afterwards Demetrius was bitten in his sleep by an asp
and died (Diog. Laert. v. 78). The removal of his
adoptive father’s enemy would open the way for Lycophron
to go to the court of Ptolemy, and we shall probably be
sufficiently near the truth if we suppose that he went to
Alexandria circ. 285-283 B.c.

Here Lycophron was entrusted with the arrangement
of the Comic Poets in the royal library, and it was then
doubtless that he wrote his treatise Ilepi κωμῳδίας : Athen.


479


LYCOPHRON


iv. 140 a3 vii. 278 a B Λυκόφρων ἐν τοῖς περὶ κωμῳδίας ; Xi.
485 D Λυκόφρων δ᾽ ἐν τῷ 0 περὶ κωμῳδίας : xi. 501 D E3 xiii.
555 a Λυκόφρων ὁ Χαλκιδεὺς ἐν τοῖς περὶ κωμῳδίας.

How long Lycophron remained in Alexandria, or whether
he died there, we have no knowledge. Nor do we know
anything of the circumstances of his death beyond what
we gather from Ovid, Jbis 531 f., who seems to imply that
he was killed by an arrow:


Utque cothurnatum cecidisse Lycophrona narrant,
Haereat in fibris fixa sagitta tuis.


2. Works


The notice in Suidas s.v. Λυκόφρων after mentioning his
parentage proceeds: ‘‘Grammarian and maker of tragedies.
At any rate he is one of the seven who were called the
Pleias. His tragedies are Aeolus, Andromeda, Aletes
(Wanderer), Aeolides,s Hlephenor, Heracles, Hiketae
(Suppliants), Hippolytus, Cassandreis, Laios, Marathonii,
Nauplius, Oedipus a β', Orphanus (Orphan), Pentheus,
Pelopidae, Symmachi (Allies), Telegonus, Chrysippus. Of
these the Nauplius is a revised version (diacxevj). He
also wrote the play called Alexandra, the obscure poem
(τὸ σκοτεινὸν molnua).”

The Πλειάς was the name given by the later Alexandrine
scholars to the seven most eminent tragic poets of the
time of Ptolemy Philadelphus. ‘The list is variously given.
Schol. A Hephaest. p. 140 Consbr. gives Homer the
younger (son of Andromachus and Myro), Sositheus, Lyco-
phron, Alexander (Aetolus), Philicus (Philiscus), Dionysia-
des. Here some nameis wanting. Choeroboscus, Hephaest.
p- 296 Consbr., gives the last three as Aeantiades, Sosi-
phanes, Philicus, but mentions that for Aeantiades and
Sosiphanes some give Dionysiades (Strabo xiv. 675) and
Euphronius.

According to Tzetzes in Lyc. pp. 262 and 270 (Miiller)
Lycophron wrote in all either 64 or 46 tragedies. The
list in Suidas, apparently extracted from a more complete


@ Αἰθαλίδης O, Iahn, Philol. xxviii. 6.
480


INTRODUCTION


list, is in a roughly alphabetical order. It need only be
noticed further that some of the titles suggest Lycophron’s
tendency to use the less familiar myths, while the Cas-
sundreis apparently dealt with the fortunes of the people
of Cassandreia= Potidaea (Strabo vii. 330) on the isthmus
of Pallene, and was thus founded on contemporary. history.
Besides the fragments of the Menedemus quoted above
we have four lines from the Pelopidae preserved in J.
Stobaeus, Floril. 119. 13 Λυκόφρονος ἐκ Πελοπιδῶν "
ἀλλ᾽ ἡνίκ᾽ ἂν μὲν ἦ πρόσω τὸ κατθανεῖν,
“Αἰδης ποθεῖται τοῖς δεδυστυχηκόσιν"
, ὅταν δ᾽ ἐφέρπῃ κῦμα λοίσθιον βίου,
τὸ ζῆν ποθοῦμεν" οὐ γὰρ ἔστ᾽ αὐτοῦ κόρος. 2
(fr. 5 Nauck)
While death is far away
Sad hearts are fain to die; |
But when the latest wave
Of life draws nigh,
We fain would live, for life
Knows no satiety.


The date of the Alevandra has been the subject of
much dispute.

It is argued, on the one hand, that it belongs to the
early or Chalcis- Athens period of Lycophron’s life
because (1) it shows no trace of Attic or Sicilian comedy,
while it is full of echoes of tragic, lyric, and iambic poets ;
(2) it shows no special knowledge of Egyptian geography
nor any trace of his special relation to the Ptolemaic
court. Thus Alexandra 576 Triton=Nile, while in 848
Asbystes=Nile. Wilamowitz held that Callim. fr. 13
(from the Aitia i.) ap. Steph. Byz. s.v. ᾿Ασβυστία" οἵη τε
Τρίτωνος ἐφ᾽ ὕδασιν ᾿Ασβύσταο is meant as a tacit correction
of this. (But it is quite in Lycophron’s manner to use
either Triton or Asbystes indifferently to mean Libyan.)
On these grounds it is argued that the A/evandra as a
whole may be dated as early as 295 B.c.

As against this it is urged (1) that Lycophron would
scarcely have been included in the Pleias, if on coming
to Alexandria he had ceased to write tragedy. (2) The

21 481


LYCOPHRON


enormous number of tragedies ascribed to him-implies a
prolonged activity in that kind.

But two passages in the Alewandra cause special
difficulty : vv. 1226-1280 and 1446-1450.

The first of these. passages raised difficulties in the
mind of the schol. Mare. (Theon ἢ) v. 1226 f. ἐντεῦθεν περὶ
“Ῥωμαίων λέγει καὶ Λυκόφρονος ἑτέρου νομιστέον eivac τὸ ποίημα, οὐ
τοῦ γράψαντος τὴν τραγῳδίαν" συνήθης γὰρ ὧν τῷ Φιλαδέλφῳ οὐκ
ἂν περὶ Ρωμαίων διελέγετο (cf. Tzetz. ad loc. περὶ Ῥωμαίων
ἐντεῦθεν διαλαμβάνει. τὰ δὲ λοιπὰ τοῦ σχολίου γέλοια" φασὶ γὰρ
Λυκόφρονος ἑτέρου εἶναι τὸ ποίημα. . . διελέγετο), .6. Lyco-
phron at the court of the Ptolemies would not have
referred to the Romans as holding ‘‘the sceptre and
monarchy of earth and sea” (1229).

But apart from the position of Lycophron!as a court
poet, a further difficulty was raised by C. J. Fox (1749-
1806), in his correspondence with Gilbert Wakefield
(1756-1801). Fox pointed out that a Greek poet of
Lycophron’s time, i.e. before the First Punic War (264-
241 B.c.), could not have referred to the power of Rome
in the terms of 1226 ff. and 1446 ff. which also apparently
refer to Rome.

R. P. Knight to Dr. Parr, Whitehall, Jan. 22: ‘* Fox
and I have been lately reading Lycophron, and having
been both startled with the distinctness of some predic-
tions of events which happened long after the age when
he is supposed to have flourished, we have had some
correspondence upon the subject, but without any other
effect than increasing our perplexity. The Testimonium
Veterum, published with Potter’s edition, is strong in
support of the authenticity of this poem, and of its being
written by one of the Pleiades, as they are éalled; yet in
v. 1226 et seg. there is a distinct prediction of the uni-
versality of the Roman Empire ; and in v. 446, as distinct
a one of the fall of the Macedonian monarchy μεθ᾽ ἕκτην
γενεάν (sic) from Alexander, who is clearly described.
Perseus, indeed, was not the sixth king of Macedonia
from Alexander, but, nevertheless, he was the sixth in
the line of descent of his own family from that conqueror,


482


INTRODUCTION


which is more in point. Cannot you prove that Lycophron
was a Jew or Atheist who conversed with some inspired
persons of that nation? What a triumph would it be for
Revelation ! for, except the prophecies of Isaiah concern-
ing Cyrus, there are none in the sacred volume half so
unequivocal ; and the merely human testimony (the only
one which infidels will admit) in support of the prophecies
of Isaiah, is weak indeed when compared with that in
support of Lycophron” (Parr’s Works vii. p. 304).

Niebuhr“ assumed that the A/exandra was the work of
a later poet who wrote after the First Punic war. In
general:scholars have inclined to one or other theory :
that the passages in question are later interpolations,
or that the Alevandra as a whole is the work of a later

oet. .

The reference in 1435ff. is exceedingly obscure.
According to Wilamowitz the lines refer to Alexander the
Great. The Argives who must bow themselves before
him are the Persians, who are in 1442 designated by the
word ὅμαιμοι as brothers of Alexander; ᾧ 1446 is, accord-
ing to Wilamowitz, Alexander. He translates μεθ᾽ ἕκτην
γένναν αὐθαίμων ἐμός as **mihi post sex generationes co-
gnatus,” and he reckons the six generations backwards
from Cassandra thus: Cassandra—-Priam—Laomedon—
Ilos—Tros—Dardanus—Zeus, whose -son was Perseus,
ancestor of the Argeads and the Persians, Hdt. vii. 150.
Hence he concludes that αὐθαίμων ἐμός must be either the
Persian people generally, or a definite Persian. He him-
self decides for Artabazos, father of Barsine, whose son
(Heracles) by Alexander was put to death by Polyperchon
in 309 5.6. (L. 801 ff.).

Holzinger® takes the reference in 1435 ff. to be to
Pyrrhus (aidwr, 1439). The wolf of Galadra is Demetrius
Poliorcetes. The sons of Cassander, who as sons of
Thessalonice are Argeads, were compelled to give up the


« B. 6. Niebuhr, ‘‘ Ueber das Zeitalter Lykophrons des
Dunkeln,” Rhin. Mus., 1827, pp. 108 ff.
δ Lykophron’s. Alewandra, gr. u. deutsch, C. von
Holzinger, Leipzig, 1895.
483


LYCOPHRON


throne of Macedonia to Demetrius. The blood-relation
of Cassandra is Fabricius, who is the εἷς τις παλαιστής 1447.
Holzinger takes ped’ ἕκτην γένναν ---τηοϑὺ improbably — to
mean ‘‘after six crops,” in reference to the six years’
duration of the campaign of Pyrrhus in Italy. Holzinger
puts the date of the Alewandra about 274 8.0.

William N. Bates in Harvard Studies in Classical
Philology vi. (Boston, 1895) discusses ‘‘The Date of
Lycophron” p. 75f. This discussion appears to be
entirely without value, but his conclusion may be quoted :
Lycophron ‘‘was born between 325 and 320, wrote his
Alexandra about 295, was appointed to arrange the
comedies in the Alexandrian library in 285-284” (this is
based on the assumption that the Alexandra was imitated
in the βωμός of Dosiades written 285-270 (Wilamowitz),
292-290 (Susemihl)) ; ‘‘ about 280 he was flourishing as a
tragic poet, and continued as such down to the date of his
death, which must have occurred before the year 250, and
probably shortly before the year 265.”

The problem of the Alewandra is discussed by
P. Corssen, ‘‘ Ist die Alexandra dem Tragiker Lykophron
abzusprechen?” Rhein. Mus. Ixviii., 1913, pp. 321-335.

He agrees with Sudhaus that the Lion 1489 is Alexander
the Great and that the ᾿Αργεῖοι 1443 = Πέρσαι (cf. Herodot.
vii. 150); but he does not agree with him in identifying
αὐθαίμων ἐμός 1446 with T. Quinctius Flamininus, who de-
feated Philip V. of Macedon at Cynoscephalae in 197 B.c.

To that identification he objects that (1) σκύλων ἀπ-
apxds κτὰ. 1450 would in that case be meaningless, as
the Romans got no immediate profit from the war with
Philip; (2) the victory of Flamininus, in alliance with the
Achaeans and actively supported by the Aetolians, the
fruits of which fell to the Greeks, the ancient enemies of
Troy, could in no sense be regarded as a revenge for the
destruction of Troy. /

Corssen’s own view is briefly as follows: The struggle is
between Asia and Europe, which have nothing in common
(1283 f.). In this struggle the two great events are the
destruction of Troy by Agamemnon and the expedition


484


INTRODUCTION


of Xerxes against Greece. According to Herodotus it was
in the destruction of Troy that the Persians found the
ground of their hostility to Greece. Accordingly, to
the sack of Troy by Agamemnon 1369 ff. corresponds the
expedition of Xerxes 1412 ff. The long struggle between
Asia and Europe is ended by Alexander the Great 1439 ff.,
who as successor to Agamemnon leads the hosts of
Europe against Asia.

The leading idea in the poet’s mind is not of “ recon-
ciliation ” either between Rome and Macedon or between
Rome and Greece—but of the equating justice of Fate.
What Troy lost in the East is balanced by the success of

‘roy’s descendants—the Romans—in the West, and this
is expressed in 1226 ff.

Here arises the difficulty of the words γῆς καὶ θαλάσσης
σκῆπτρα καὶ μοναρχίαν.

Now if by μοναρχία we understand world-dominion, then
that could not be predicated of the Romans even after the
battle of Cynoscephalae, in view of the fact that the
power of Syria and Egypt was still unshaken. World-
dominion could not be predicated before the battle of
Pydna in 168 B.c.

The poet of the Alewandra knows nothing of the extent
of the Roman dominion as at the beginning of the second
century B.c. The limits of the Roman kingdom known
to him must be assumed to coincide with the limits of the
kingdom of Aeneas as described in 1238 ff., together
with the extensions made through the struggle of the
Romans with the sixth successor of Alexander the Great
1450).

Prom the conquest of the Persians by Alexander the
poet passes to Pyrrhus and the Romans.

The Lion of 1440 is clearly a definite person and, as
the ancient scholia recognized, must be Alexander the
Great, who is a Thesprotian, i.e. an Epeirote, on his
mother’s side, and a Chalastraean, i.e. a Macedonian,
(Strabo vii. 330. 20) on the father’s side, and is moreover
a descendant of Aeacus and Dardanus (1440) through his
mother: ἡ δὲ ᾿Ολυμπιὰς ἡ μήτηρ αὐτοῦ eis Πύρρον τὸν ᾿Αχιλλέως


485


LYCOPHRON


καὶ “Ἕλενον τὸν Πριάμου τὸ γένος τὸ ἀνέκαθεν ἀνέφερεν, ὥς yor
Θεόπομπος καὶ ILvpavdpos. ἀναφέρεται δὲ ὁ Πύρρος εἰς Αἰακόν, 6
δὲ Ἕλενος εἰς Δάρδανον (schol. Lycophr.).

Now if the Lion is Alexander, the Wolf of Galadra (a
Macedonian town, according to Steph. Byz.) must be
distinguished from him. ‘The explanation of the. expres-
sion is no longer apparent, but the Wolf must embody the
whole nation which, finally, was conquered by the Romans.
ο The six generations must be ‘represented by the kings
of Macedon. Including Alexander, we get Pyrrhus in the
sixth place, thus: Alexander, died 323 ; Philip Arrhidaeus,
died 317; Cassander, died 297 ; his three sons 297-295 ;
Demetrius Poliorcetes 294-288; Pyrrhus. The fact that
Pyrrhus immediately lost the throne of Macedon does not
prevent the poet from seeing in him the heir-of Alexander
who, turning against the descendants of the Trojans,
renews the old struggle. The ‘‘ wrestler”’ (1447) is, like
the Wolf of Galadra, not an individual but the whole
people. :

When the poet says that the Romans came into collision
with Pyrrhus by sea and by land, that is not in the strict
sense true. But Pyrrhus suffered from Rome’s allies, the
Carthaginians, a heavy defeat at sea, which benefited
Rome as well, and the Romans themselves, through the
Greek towns of South Italy, won importance at sea, so
that the expression γῆς καὶ θαλάσσης σκῆπτρα καὶ μοναρχίαν
referring to the successes won in the’ Tarentine War, is
not entirely without justification. But the term μοναρχία
is to be understood in the light of the historical idea which
underlies the whole poem ; 1.6. the Persians handed over
the sceptre of their old dominion, for which Asia and
Europe had fought from of old, to the Wolf of Galadra.
Pyrrhus loses the sceptre to the Romans, and thus the
old dominion, which was taken from Priam by Agamemnon,
reverts again to the Trojans.

With Pyrrhus the Romans made neither peace nor
treaty. Pyrrhus gave up the struggle and went back
home. But before Tarentum fell, the astute Ptolemy,
rightly recognizing the importance of the Roman victory,


486


INTRODUCTION


hastened to conclude an alliance with them. The
Romans on their side sent an embassy in 273 5.60. to
Alexandria, which was honoured by Ptolemy with valuable
gifts, which, however, the ambassador handed over to the
state: (Dio Cassius fr. 41, Livy, Perioch. xiv.) The
personal object to be supplied with εἰς διαλλαγὰς μολών
is, accordingly, not the defeated party. After his victory
the Roman will conclude agreements and be celebrated as
the most honourable friend.

On this interpretation the prophecies of Cassandra do
not go beyond the poet’s own time, and his glorification of
the Romans does not stand in contradiction. to the policy
of his royal master.

Thus the statement of Suidas that the author of the
Alexandra was Lycophron the tragic poet is confirmed.
Nor is there good ground for doubting his statement that
Lycophron of Chalcis, son of Socles, was adopted by
Lyecus of Rhegium. Beloch, holding that Suidas has
confused two different Lycophrons—(1) of Chalcis, son of
Socles, author of the A/ewandra, (2) son of the historian
Lycus of Rhegium, the tragic poet at the Court of Ptolemy
Philadelphus—found support for this theory (1) in
Suidas s.v. Avcos where Lycus is called the father of the
tragic Lycophron, (2) in the Tzetzes’ Life where it is said :
ὁ Λυκόφρων οὑτοσὶ τῷ μὲν γένει Χαλκιδεὺς Fv vids Σωκλέους ἢ
Λύκου τοῦ ἱστοριογραφοῦντος κατά τινας.

This, Corssen says, is merely a wilful perversion of the
tradition, induced by the surprise which the Scholiast
expressses that a court poet of Philadelphus should have
expressed himself in praise of the Romans. But just this
surprise shows what the tradition was.

To the objection that, if the author of the A/exandra
were the adoptive son of Lycus, he would not have passed
over the works of his adoptive father and confined himself
exclusively to Timaeus, Corssen replies by an endeavour
to show that in his account of the fortunes of Diomedes
and his companions (615 ff.) Lycophron does in fact follow
Lycus in opposition to Timaeus.

Corssen’s conclusion is that external evidence and the


487


ad


LYCOPHRON ;


results of an analysis of the poem agree excellently, and
thereby the abstruse poem of Lycophron obtains the
importance of a historical document which strikingly
reflects the great impression which the victory of the
Roman arms over the Hellenistic king made upon his
contemporaries.


3. MANUSCRIPTS


The critical recension of E. Scheer (Berlin, 1881) is
based on the following mss. : .

Class I.—A=Marcianus 476 (Venetus lxx. 3). — This,
which is by far the best ms. of Lycophron, belongs to the
eleventh century and bears to have been written by one
Nicetasa deacon. After the Argument there is a marginal
note : κἀνταῦθα συνήθροισα λέξικοῦ λέξεις | νικήτας οὐλάχιστος τῶν
διακόνων. Scheer, Rhein. Mus. xxxiv., identified this
Nicetas with the distinguished bishop of Serrhai (Seres) in
the eleventh century.

The ms. extends to sixty-five folia, sixty-two of which
are written upon. Foll. 2-30" contain Aratus with the
scholia; fol. 31". to the middle of fol. 62 contain
Lycophron’s Alexandra with scholia and two paraphrases—
an older (P) and a more recent (p).

V=Vaticanus 1307. This is a copy of a copy (X) of A
and it is occasionally useful as A has suffered alteration
by two later hands A?, Α5, subsequent to the time when
the copy (X) was made, V itself has suffered similar
interpolation, but it is not often that A and V have suffered
in the same passage.

B=Coislinianus 345 belonging to the tenth century.
It is so called as belonging to the collection of Henri
Charles du Cambout de Coislin (1664-1732), Bishop of
Metz, now in the Bibl. Nat., Paris. This MS. contains
a number of Lexica and amongst them from p. 225 to p.
253 λέξεις ἀλεξάνδρας καὶ ὑπόθεσις. ἘΣ

At the end is τέλος σὺν θεῷ τοῦ λεξικοῦ λυκόφρονος

The reason of it being included among Lexica is that
the lines are broken up into sections to each of which is
appended the interpretation of paraphrase P. Thus v. 1


488 .


INTRODUCTION


λέξω τὰ πάντα : φράσω τὰ πάντα : νητρεκῶς : ἀληθῶς. καὶ yap
ἐπιτατικῶς νοοῦμεν τὸ ἢ, ὡς τὸ νήχυτος καὶ νήδυμος : ἀρχῆς ἀπ᾽
ἄκρας : ἅ με πυνθάνῃ καὶ ἐρωτᾷς : ἢν δὲ μηκυνθῆ λόγος : ἐὰν δ᾽
ἐκταθῇ τὸ ἔπος.

“ΓΘ. ms.,” says Scheer, “which is most elegantly
written, has in fol.-225" 35 lines, of which 7 contain the
Argument μαντευομένην ... ἅπαντα ; the other pages have 36
lines each, except the last, which has 27 lines. The lemmata
are marked off from the paraphrase by two points usually
and small spaces: rarely by a colon, very rarely by a
comma. Much more often the scribe has forgotten to
distinguish the lemmata from the paraphrase; at other
times he has omitted the paraphrase or the lemma or
both: finally he has repeatedly confused the sequence of
the sections of lines. The ms. is so full of errors that
I have seen no ms. of Lycophron—except Par. 2840—so
corrupt.”

Class II1.—C=Parisinus 2723. The subscription states
that the ms. was finished in June 1282. Foll. 1-76 contain
the Alexandra of Lycophron with the commentary of Isaac
Tzetzes. The colour of the ink shows that the scribe
* took many various readings from the ms. which he was
copying and afterwards wrote between the lines and in
the margin and even inserted in the text (C*) other
readings from a second ms., from which also he inserted
interlinear scholia, the greater part of which was not
derived from the commentary of Tzetzes. There are also
a few corrections by a third hand (C’).

D=Parisinus 2403, thirteenth century. The ms.
consists of 808 folia, of which foll. 58-99 contain the
Alexandra with the commentary of Tzetzes. There are
many interlinear scholia mostly from the commentary
of Tzetzes, also variae lectiones mostly inserted by the
original copyist, very few added later (D®).

E=Palatinus graecus 218, fourteenth century. Foll.
9-65 contain the Alexandra with the commentary of
Tzetzes and many variae lectiones copied by the scribe
along with the text and occasional corrections by another


hand (E2).
489


LYCOPH RON


-


4. Tur PAaRAPHRASES


We have two paraphrases of the Alexandra :

P, the older, composed by some Byzantine grammarian
and based on an ancient body of scholia, is best preserved
in B, on which, accordingly, Scheer bases his recension,
using as subsidiary aids A and Vaticanus 117, a fourteenth
century ms. containing the Alexandra with the com-
mentary of Tzetzes (foll. 30-113), both of which give P
in a less perfect form. it

p, a later paraphrase of uncertain date based upon P.
Scheer’s recension is based on A with the subsidiary
aid of V.


6b. Tue ScHorra


The scholia of Lycophron are very excellent and are
probably ultimately based on the commentary of Theon,
son of Artemidorus, a grammarian of the time of Augustus
aud Tiberius, who wrote commentaries on Theocritus,
Apollonius, Callimachus, Nicander, and Lycophron, as
well as on some of the older classical poets. Cf. Steph. -
Byz.. 8.0. Kirwa πόλις Θεσσαλίας, ὡς Θέων ἐν ὑπομνήματι
Λυκόφρονος. So id. 8.0. Awe . .. Θέων ὑπομνηματίζων τὸν
Λυκόφρονα.

The ancient scholia are best represented by Marcianus
476; also Vaticanus 1307—a grandchild as we have seen
of Marcianus 476—and Neopolitanus, Bibl. Nat. ii. D 4,
a thirteenth-century ms. wrongly inscribed ᾿Ισαακίου τοῦ
Τζέτζου σχόλια eis Λυκόφρονα, the scholia being in the main
the ancient scholia, only some gaps due to injury to the
original ms. having been filled up with the scholia of
Tzetzes in the fifteenth century. "

In addition to the ancient scholia we have further the
commentary of Tzetzes (twelfth century): εἰς τὸν Λυκόφρονα
σχόλια ᾿Ισαακίου γραμματικοῦ τοῦ Τζέτζου.

This commentary is in all mss. ascribed to Isaac
Tzetzes; so also in John Tzetzes’ commentary on the
Works and Days of Hesiod (p. 10 Gaisford). But there is
extant a letter in Parisinus 2565 Bibl. Reg. (No. xx.) of


490


INTRODUCTION


John Tzetzes to. one Basilius, who had apparently, after
Isaac’s death, inquired of John whether it were true that
he and not Isaac was. the real author of the commentary
on Lycophron. The letter runs thus: “‘To the First
Secretary of the Patriarch (of Constantinople), Basilius of
Achrida (town on lake of same name near Monastir) who had
found in the title of John Tzetzes on Lycophron the name
of Isaac Tzetzes. Pheidias, the famous sculptor, doing a
favour by the law of friendship to Agoracritus, a painter
by profession, but an unskilful one, having with. great
sculptural skill made the image of Zeus and Nemesis at
Rhamnus, ascribed it to him, inseribing on it ATOPAKPITOY
ΠΑΡΙΟΥ͂, and by means of that inscription made up to him
for his lack of skill. If, then, Pheidias by the law of
friendship did. not. hesitate. in a matter of the highest
moment to do a favour to a man unskilful in his art, am 1
to be behind him in regard to my brother, a carpenter, in
Pindar’s phrase, of deft hymns and incomparably dearer
to me than Agoracritus was to Pheidias, inasmuch as
brotherhood is a more compelling bond of affection than
friendship? In this spirit both Pheidias and I ordered
our inscriptions. But neither Pheidias of old suffered,
nor has Tzetzes now suffered, from mental derangement or
lethargy so as to reach such a pitch of madness as to
forget his own name as some have suspected.”’ So, too,
in Chil. ix. 298 John Tzetzes refers to the commentary as
his own work: ἐν δὲ τοῖς εἰς Λυκόφρονα ἐμοὶ ἐξηγηθεῖσι καὶ περὶ
τούτου ἔγραψα τότε τοῦ Ζωύλλίου.

Scheer is of opinion that the commentary was in the
first place composed by John Tzetzes, who handed it over
for revision and publication to his brother Isaac, who for
his trouble received the credit of authorship. This would
account for the numerous inconsistencies and contradic-
tions of the commentary. Collaboration is implied by the
words : οὕτως ἡμῖν τοῖς Τζετζίοις [τ. TE. is lacking in a (Par.
2723) | δοκεῖ ἔχειν (Tzetz. ad Lycophr. 17). Moreover, Scheer
points out that in Tzetz. Lycophr. 1226 occur the words
Ἰωάννης δὲ ὁ φιλόπονός φησιν εἶναι tBatov. This had been taken
to mean Ἰωάννης Φιλόπονος, a proper name. But Scheer


491


LYCOPHRON


takes these words to refer to John Tzetzes, and he points
out that these words occur only in Parisinus 2723 (a)
which may be taken to represent the commentary as first
published by Isaac, while they have disappeared in the
mss. which represent subsequent revisions by John, of
which there were several.

The chief mss. which contain the Tzetzes commentary
are classified thus :

Class I. —a= Parisinus 2723, representing the com-
mentary as originally published by Isaac Tzetzes.

Class I].—Representing revisions by John Tzetzes, and
including: Parisinus 2403; Vaticanus 1306; Palatinus
18; Ambrosianus 222 (this last representing the final
recension by John Tzetzes).

The commentary of Tzetzes is based on a corpus of
scholia similar to that contained in the Marcianus, with
additions from other sources (discussed by Scheer ii. pp.
xiv. ff.).


6. BrsLioGRAPHY


Editio princeps.—Aldus Manutius, Venice, 1513 (with
Pindar, Callimachus, Dionysius Periegetes) ; Paul Lecisius,
Basel, 1548 (with Tzetzes' commentary); Canter, Basel,
1566; Meursius, Leyden, 1597; Potter, Oxford, 1697 ;
Reichard, Leipzig, 1788; C. G. Miller, Leipzig, 1811 ;
Sebastiani, Rome, 1830; Bachmann, Leipzig, 1830;
Dehéque, Paris, 1853; G. Kinkel, Leipzig, 1880 (with
scholia Marciana); E.. Scheer vol. i. (text, critical notes
and the two paraphrases) Berlin, 1881; vol. ii. (scholia)
Berlin, 1908 ; C. von Holzinger, ‘Leipzig, 1895 (text with
German blank verse translation to face. the text, intro-
duction, and commentary). Εἰ. Ciaceri, Catane, Gian-
notta, 1901, text, trans. and commentary. Transla-
tion by Joseph Justus Scaliger, 1584. Text and trans.
F. D, Deheque, Paris, 1853.

Editio princeps of Tzetzes, Oporinus, Basel, 1546.
Other literature: J. Konze, De Lycophr. dictionis pro-
prietate in universum ratione simul habita Homeri et
4.92


INTRODUCTION


tragicorum, Miinster, 1870; C. H. G. Voelcker, De
Lycophronis Cassandrae vv. 13-15, Giessen, 1820; Scheer,
Nonnulli Lycophronis loci, Plon, 1876; W. N. Bates,
Harvard Studies in Classical Philology, vol. vi., Boston,
1895 (‘The Date of Lycophron’’); Gasse, De L. mytho-
grapho, 1910; I. Geffcken, ‘‘ Zwei Dramen [ Elephenor and
Nauplios] des Lykophron,” Hermes xxvi. (1891) pp. 33-42 ;
also the same writer on Timaeos’ Geographie d. Westens,
Philol. Unters. (Kiessling-Moellendorff) 13, Berlin, 1892


493


AYKO®PONOS
AAEHZANAPA


Λέξω τὰ πάντα νητρεκῶς, ἅ μ᾽ ἱστορεῖς,
ἀρχῆς am ἄκρας" ἣν δὲ “μηκυνθῇ λόγος,
σύγγνωθι δέσποτ᾽: οὐ γὰρ ἥσυχος κόρη
ἔλυσε “χρησμῶν, ὡς πρίν, αἰόλον στόμα,
ἀλλ᾽ ἄσπετον χέασα παμμιγῆ βοὴν
δαφνηφάγων φοίβαζεν ἐ ἐκ λαιμῶν ὄ ὅπα,
Σφιγγὸς κελαινῆς γῆρυν ἐκμιμουμένη.
τῶν ἅσσα θυμῷ καὶ διὰ μνήμης ἔχω,
κλύοις ἄν, ὦναξ, κἀναπεμπάζων φρενὶ
πυκνῇ ΓΉΥΣΣΣΕΣ δυσφάτους αἰνιγμάτων
‘olwas τυλίσσων, ἧπερ εὐμαθὴς τρίβος
ὀρθῇ κελεύθῳ τὰν σκότῳ ποδηγετεῖ.
ἐγὼ δ᾽ ἄκραν βαλβ ἴδα μηρίνθου σχάσας,
ἄνειμι λοξῶν εἰς διεξόδους ἐ ἐπῶν,
πρώτην ἀράξας νύσσαν ὡς πτηνὸς δρομεύς.
"Has μὲν αἰπὺν ἄρτι Onyiov πάγον
κραιπνοῖς ὑπερποτᾶτο [[ηγάσου πτεροῖς,
Τιθωνὸν ἐν κοίταισι τῆς Κέρνης πέλας
λιποῦσα, τὸν σὸν ἀμφιμήτριον κάσιν.


« Priam. ’ Cassandra.


¢ The runner breaks the ‘‘ tape ” and takes off.


404.


10


LYCOPHRON
ALEXANDRA


The speaker is a slave appointed to watch Cassandra and
report her prophecies. He addresses Priam.


Aut will I tell truly that thou askest from the
utter beginning, and if the tale be prolonged,
forgive me, master. For not quietly as of old did
the maiden ἢ loose the varied voice of her oracles,
but poured forth a weird confused cry, and uttered
wild words from her bay-chewing mouth, imitating
the speech of the dark Sphinx. Thereof what in
heart and memory I hold, hear thou, O King, and,
pondering with wise mind, wind and pursue the
obscure paths of her riddles; whereso a clear track
guides by a straight way through things wrapped
in darkness. And I, cutting the utter bounding
thread,’ will trace her paths of devious speech,
striking the starting- point like winged runner.
Dawn, was just soaring over the steep crag of
Phegion 4 on swift wings of Pegasus, leaving in his
bed by Cerne’ Tithonus,’ brother of thine by


4 Mountain in Aethiopia.
ὁ Cerne, a fabled island in the remotest East (Plin. ΔΝ. ἢ.
vi. 198 ff.) or West (Strabo i. 47).
7 Son of nigh coe: and Strymo or anes and so half-
brother of Priam. -
495


LYCOPHRON


e > > / > δ M4
οἱ δ᾽ οὖσα γρώνης εὐγάληνα χερμάδος
ναῦται λίαζον κἀπὸ γῆς ἐσχάζοσαν
a ¢ \ / /
ὕσπληγγας. at δὲ παρθενοκτόνον Θέτιν
ἰουλόπεζοι θεῖνον εὐῶπες σπάθαις
πελαργοχρῶτες, αἵ Φαλακραῖαι κόραι,
ς \ ~ \ / /
ὑπὲρ Kadvdvarv λευκὰ φαίνουσαι πτίλα,
ἄφλαστα, καὶ φώσσωνας ὠργυιωμένους
ἀπαρκτίαις πρηστῆρος αἴθωνος πνοαῖς.
ἡ δ᾽ ἔνθεον σχάσασα βακχεῖον στόμα,
“A Se ee λ / Ἃ /
τῆς ἀπ᾽ ἄκρων βουπλανοκτίστων λόφων,


τοιῶνδ᾽ am ἀρχῆς ἦρχ᾽ ᾿Αλεξάνδρα λόγων"


Aiat, τάλαινα θηλαμών, κεκαυμένη
καὶ πρόσθε μὲν πεύκαισιν οὐλαμηφόροις
᾿ τριεσπέρου λέοντος, ὅν ποτε γνάθοις
Τρίτωνος ἠμάλαψε κάρχαρος κύων"
»” A \ « / 4
ἔμπνους δὲ Saitpos ἡπάτων φλοιδούμενος
τινθῷ λέβητος ἀφλόγοις ἐπ᾽ ἐσχάραις
σμήριγγας ἐστάλαξε κωδείας πέδῳ,
ὁ τεκνοραίστης, λυμεὼν ἐμῆς πάτρας,
6 δευτέραν τεκοῦσαν ἄτρωτον βαρεῖ
τύψας ἀτράκτῳ στέρνον, ἔν T αὐλῷ μέσῳ
πατρὸς παλαιστοῦ χερσὶν ὀχμάσας δέμας

@ Apoll. Rh. iv. 1731 ὑπεύδια πείσματ᾽ ἔλυσαν.

> i.e. the ships of Paris built of wood from Phalacra in
the Troad.

¢ i.e. the Sea (Hellespont in wider sense; ‘‘ maiden-
slaying ” in reference to death of Helle).

ἀ Two islands near Tenedos. ¢ Cassandra.

7 Ate, thrown out of Olympus by Zeus (Jl. xix. 126),
fell on a hill in the Troad which was hence called the Hill
of Doom ("Arns λόφος). Dardanus was warned by Apollo
not to build a city there. But Ilus, his great-grandson, being


told by an oracle to found a city where a certain cow should
rest, did so; and this place chanced to be the Hill of Doom.


496


20


25


30


35


40


ALEXANDRA


another mother, and the sailors loosed in calm
weather the cables* from the grooved rock and
cut the landward ropes. And the centipede fair-
faced stork-hued daughters of Phalacra® smote
maiden-slaying Thetis® with their blades, over
Calydnae? showing their white wings, their stern-
ornaments, their sails outspread by the northern
blasts of flaming stormwind: then Alexandra ὁ
opened her inspired Bacchic lips on the high Hill
of Doom’ that was founded by the wandering cow
and thus began to speak :


Alas! hapless nurse ¥ of mine burnt even afore-
time by the warlike pineships of the lion” that was
begotten in three evenings, whom of old Triton’s
hound of jagged teeth devoured with his jaws. But
he, a living carver of the monster’s liver, seething in
steam of cauldron on a flameless hearth, shed to
ground the bristles of his head ; he the slayer of his
children,’ the destroyer of my fatherland ; who smote
his second mother? invulnerable with grievous shaft
upon the breast ; who, too, in the midst of the race-
course seized in his arms the body of his wrestler


9 Ilios.

rt Heracles. For his birth cf. Apollod. ii. 61 Ζεὺς... τὴν
μίαν τριπλασιάσας νύκτα. When Laomedon refused to pay
Poseidon and Apollo for building the walls of Troy, a sea-
monster appeared to which an oracle required that Hesione,
daughter of Laomedon, should be exposed. Heracles
entered the belly of the monster (Triton’s hound) and cut its
inside to pieces. Laomedon had promised to give Heracles
the horses of Tros as a reward for slaying the monster and
when he broke his word, Heracles burnt Troy.

ὁ Heracles slew his children by Megara daughter of Creon.

; Hera: Hom. Il. ν. 392f.; ‘*second mother” because
Athena tricked her into suckling him.


Qk 407


LYCOPHRON


Κρόνου παρ᾽ αἰπὺν ὄχθον, ἔνθα γηγενοῦς
ἵππων ταρακτής ἐστιν ᾿Ισχένου τάφος,

ὁ τὴν θαλάσσης Αὐσονίτιδος μυχοὺς
στενοὺς ὀπιπεύουσαν ἀγρίαν κύνα
κτανὼν ὑπὲρ σπήλυγγος ἰχθυωμένην,
ταυροσφάγον λέαιναν, ἣν αὖθις πατὴρ
σάρκας καταίθων λοφνίσὶν δωμήσατο,
Λέπτυνιν οὐ τρέμουσαν, οὐδαίαν θεόν"
ἐξηνάριξεν ὅν ποτ᾽ ἀξίφῳ δόλῳ
νέκυς, τὸν Αιδην δεξιούμενον πάλαι:
λεύσσω σε, τλῆμον, δεύτερον πυρουμένην —
ταῖς τ᾽ Αἰακείοις χερσὶ τοῖς τε Ταντάλου
Λέτριναν οἰκουροῦσι λειψάνοις πυρὸς
παιδὸς καταβρωθέντος αἰθάλῳ δέμας,
τοῖς Τευταρείοις βουκόλου πτερώμασι
τὰ πάντα πρὸς φῶς ἡ βαρύζηλος δάμαρ,
στείλασα κοῦρον τὸν κατήγορον χθονός,
ἄξει, πατρὸς μομφαῖσιν ἡ “ἠγριωμένη,
λέκτρων θ᾽ ἕκατι τῶν τ᾽ ἐπεισάκτων γάμων.
αὐτὴ δὲ φαρμακουργός, οὐκ ἰάσιμον᾽
ἕλκος δρακοῦσα τοῦ ξυνευνέτου λυγρὸν
Γιγαντοραΐστοις ἄρδισιν τετρωμένου


α Zeus. > At Olympia.

¢ A giant: his tomb at Olympia where as Taraxippus he
causes horses to shy.

4 Seylla, whom Heracles slew because she robbed him of
one of the oxen of Geryon. Her father, SABDUSYA Pt restored
her to life by burning her body.

ὁ Persephone: τὴν λεπτύνουσαν τὰ σώματα τῶν ἀπο-:
θνησκόντων (schol. ).

Jf Nessus the Centaur, when dying by the arrow of
Heracles, gave of his blood a pretended love-charm to
Deianeira' who smeared with it a mantle for Heracles which
consumed him; ef. Soph. 77, 555 ff.


498


45


50


55


60


ALEXANDRA


sire * beside the steep hill of Cronus,? where is the
horse-affrighting tomb of earth-born Ischenus*; who
also slew the fierce hound ὦ that watched the narrow
straits of the Ausonian sea, fishing over her cave, the
bull-slaying lioness whom. her father restored again
to life, burning her flesh with brands: she who
feared not Leptynis,’ goddess of the underworld.
But one day with swordless guile a dead corse’ slew
him : yea, even him’ who of old overcame Hades;
I see thee, hapless city, fired a second time by
Aeaceian hands” and by such remains* as the funeral
fire spared to abide in Letrina/ of the son” of Tan-
talus when his body was devoured by the flames,
with the winged shafts of the neat-herd Teutarus ’; all
which things the jealous spouse ™ shall bring to light,
sending her son” to indicate the land, angered by
her father’s ® taunts, for her bed’s sake and because
of the alien bride.” And _ herself,? the skilled in
drugs, seeing the baleful wound incurable of her
husband” wounded by the giant-slaying arrows of


g9 Heracles, who wounded Hades at Pylus, J/. v. 395.

% Neoptolemus.

ἐ The bones of Pelops were brought from Letrina near
Olympia to Troy, as an oracle declared that Troy could not
otherwise be taken. 7 In Elis. * Pelops.

? Teutarus, Scythian who taught Heracles archery and
- bequeathed his bow and arrows tohim. Heracles bequeathed
them to Philoctetes, who with them slew Paris and enabled
the Greeks to take Troy. x |

™ Oenone, the first wife of Paris, sent her son to guide
the Greeks. When Philoctetes slew Paris with the bow
which Heracles had used in the battle of the gods against
the giants, Oenone threw herself upon his corpse and died
with him; ef Tennyson, Oenone.

n Corythus, son of Oenone by Paris.

° Cebren, father of Oenone.

P Helen. 4 Oenone. r Paris.


499.


LYCOPHRON


\ > / \ > 7 /
πρὸς ἀνθοπλίτου, ξυνὸν ὀγχήσει μόρον,
πύργων ἀπ᾽ ἄκρων πρὸς νεόδμητον νέκυν
ε \ > ᾽ὔ / /
ῥοιζηδὸν ἐκβράσασα κύμβαχον δέμας"
πόθῳ δὲ τοῦ θανόντος ἠγκιστρωμένη,
ψυχὴν περὶ σπαίροντι φυσήσει νεκρῷ.

Στένω, στένω σε δισσὰ καὶ τριπλᾷ, δορὸς
> \ > \ \ \ /
αὖθις πρὸς ἀλκὴν καὶ διαρπαγὰς δόμων
καὶ πῦρ ἐναυγάζουσαν αἰστωτήριον.

/ 7 \ / > /
στένω σε, πάτρα, καὶ τάφους ᾿Ατλαντίδος
δύπτου κέλωρος, ὅς ποτ᾽ ἐν ῥαπτῷ κύτει,
ὁποῖα πορκὸς ᾿Ιστριεὺς τετρασκελής,
ἀσκῷ μονήρης ἀμφελυτρώσας δέμας,

Ῥ θ / / Δ . ee a

ειἰθυμνιάτης κέπφος ὡς ἐνήξατο,
Ζήρυνθον ἄντρον τῆς κυνοσφαγοῦς θεᾶς
λιπὼν ἐρυμνὸν κτίσμα ζυρβάντων Σάον,
ὅτ᾽ ἠμάθυνε πᾶσαν ὀμβρήσας χθόνα
Ζηνὸς καχλάζων νασμός: οἱ δὲ πρὸς πέδῳ
πύργοι κατηρείποντο, τοὶ δὲ λοισθίαν
νήχοντο μοῖραν προὐμμάτων δεδορκότες.

ηγὸν δὲ καὶ δρύκαρπα καὶ γλυκὺν βότρυν
/ ‘ - “ 3 2 3 /
φάλλαι τε καὶ δελφῖνες αἵ τ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἀρσένων
’ὔ “ / ~ “
φέρβοντο φῶκαι λέκτρα θουρῶσαι βροτῶν.
Λεύσσω θέοντα γρυνὸν ἐπτερωμένον
τρήρωνος εἰς ἅρπαγμα Πεῴφναίας κυνός,
ἣν τόργος ὑγρόφοιτος ἐκλοχεύεται,
κελυφάνου στρόβιλον ὠστρακωμένην.
Καὶ δή σε ναύτην ᾿Αχερουσία τρίβος


« Philoctetes. > Klectra.

¢ Dardanus, buried in Troy, was son of Zeus and Electra,
daughter of Atlas. During the Deluge he swam from
Samothrace to the Troad.

4 In North Crete. ¢ In Samothrace.

7 Hecate. 9 Samothrace.


500


€5


70


80


90


ALEXANDRA —


his adversary,” shall endure to share his doom, from
the topmost towers to the new slain corpse hurtling
herself head foremost, and pierced by sorrow for the
dead shall breathe forth her soul on the quivering
body.

I mourn, mourn twice and three times for thee
who lookest again to the battle of the spear and the
harrying of thy halls and the destroying fire. I
mourn for thee, my country, and for the grave of
Atlas’ daughter’s® diver son,’ who of old in a stitched
vessel, like an Istrian fish-creel with four legs, sheathed
his body in a leathern sack and, all alone, swam like
a petrel of Rheithymnia,’ leaving Zerynthos,’ cave of
the goddess/ to whom dogs are slain, even Saos,9 the
strong foundation of the Cyrbantes, what time the
plashing rain of Zeus laid waste with deluge all the
earth. And their towers were hurled to the ground,
and the people set themselves to swim, seeing their
final doom before their eyes. And on oat and acorn
and the sweet grape browsed the whales and the
dolphins and the seals that are fain of the beds of
mortal men.’

I see the winged firebrand 7 ὍΠΗ to seize the
dove,* the hound of Pephnos,’ whom the water-
roaming vulture brought to birth, husked in a
rounded shell.”

And thee, cuckold sailor,” the downward path of

h See H. Usener, Die Sintflutsagen, pp. 45 f.
ὁ For the seal’s affection for.man οὐ, Aelian, WV.A. iv. 56.
4 Paris. * Helen. ὁ In Laconia.

m Referring to Zeus and Leda, and the birth of Helen
from an egg.

» Paris reaches Taenarum in Laconia where was a fabled
entrance to Hades ; passes Onugnathus and Las and through


the ** two thoroughfares ” (entrance and exit between Cranaé
and the mainland) to Gytheion.


501.


LYCOPHRON


καταιβάτις πύγαργον, od πατρὸς κόπρους
στείβοντα ῥακτῶν βουστάθμων, ξενώσεται,
ὡς πρόσθε, κάλλους τὸν θυωρίτην τριπλαῖς.
ἀλλ᾽ ὀστρίμων μὲν ἀντὶ Γαμφηλὰς 6 ὄνου
καὶ Λᾶν περάσεις, ἀντὶ δ᾽ εὐχίλου κάπης
καὶ μηλιαυθμῶν ἠδὲ χερσαίας πλάτης
τράμπις σ᾽ ὀχήσει καὶ Φερέκλειοι πόδες
δισσὰς σαλάμβας κἀπὶ Γυθείου πλάκας,
ἐν αἷσι πρὸς κύνουρα καμπύλους σχάσας
πεύκης ὀδόντας, ἕκτορας πλημμυρίδος,
σκαρθμῶν ἰαύσεις εἰναφώσσωνα στόλον.
Καὶ τὴν ἄνυμῴον πόρτιν ἁρπάσας λύκος,
δυοῖν πελειαῖν ὠρφανισμένην γονῆς
καὶ δευτέραν εἰς ἄρκυν ὀθνείων βρόχων
Anirw ἐμπταίσασαν ἰξευτοῦ πτερῷ,
Θύσαισιν ἁρμοῖ μηλάτων ἀπάργματα
phéyovoay ἐν κρόκαισι καὶ Βύνῃ θεξ,
θρέξεις ὑπὲρ Σκάνδειαν Αἰγίλου τ᾽ ἄκραν,
-αἴθων ἐπακτὴρ καγχαλῶν ἀγρεύματι.
Νήσῳ δ᾽ ἐνὶ δράκοντος ἐκχέας πόθον
᾿Ακτῆς, διμόρφου γηγενοῦς σκηπτουχίας,
τὴν δευτέραν ἕωλον οὐκ ὄψει Κύπριν,
ψυχρὸν παραγκάλισμα κἀξ ὀνειράτων
κεναῖς ἀφάσσων ὠλέναισι δέμνια.


α Onugnathus, cape in Laconia.

> In Laconia.

¢ Builder of the ships of Paris.

Δ Haven near Sparta.

¢ Paris sailed with nine ships (schol.).

f Paris.

9 Helen, who was not wedded to Paris.


h Τριπξεηεῖαι Helen’s daughter by Theseus, and Hermione,


her daughter by Menelaus.
* Helen was first carried off by Theseus.


502


95


100


105


110


ALEXANDRA


Acheron shall receive, walking no more the byres of
thy father’s rugged steadings, as once when. thou
wert arbiter of beauty for the three goddesses. But
in place of stables thou shalt pass the Jaws of the
Ass® and Las,” and instead of well-foddered crib and
sheepfold and landsman’s blade a ship and oars of
Phereclus¢ shall carry thee to the two thorough-
fares and the levels of Gytheion,?: where, on the
rocks dropping the bent teeth of the pine-ship’s
anchors: to guard against the flood, thou shalt rest
from gambols thy nine-sailed ° fleet.

And when thou, the wolf, shalt have seized the
unwed heifer,’ robbed of her two dove daughters ἢ
and fallen into a second* net of alien snares and
caught by the decoy of the fowler, even while upon
the beach she burns/ the firstlings of the flocks to
the Thysad nymphs and the goddess Byne, then
shalt thou speed past Scandeia* and past the
eape of Aegilon,’ a fierce hunter exulting in thy
capture.

And in the Dragon’s Isle™ of Acte,” dominion
of the twyformed son? of earth, thou shalt put from
thee thy desire; but thou? shalt see no morrow's
aftermath of love, fondling in empty arms a chill
embrace and a dreamland bed.? For the sullen


7 Helen was carried off by Paris when she was sacrificing
to the Thysades (Thyiades) and Byne=Ino Leucothea,

k Haven of Cythera (//. x. 268).

1 Island between Cythera and Crete.

m Cranaé (Hom. 11. iii. 445, cf. Paus. iii. 22. 1), where the
bedding of Paris and Helen took place, is generally localized
near Gytheion in Laconia. Here it is identified with the
so-called Helen’s Isle near Sunium. Tzetzes took it to mean
Salamis.

» Attica. ° Erechtheus. P Paris.

a Proteus replaced the real Helen by a phantom.

503


LYCOPHRON


e , ,ὔ , a Ψ

6 γάρ σε συλλέκτροιο DAeypaias πόσις
στυγνὸς Τορώνης, ᾧ γέλως ἀπέχθεται
καὶ δάκρυ, νῆις δ᾽ ἐστὶ καὶ τητώμενος
3 ὡς ε , ” 5.1 %s ,
ἀμφοῖν, ὁ Θρήκης ἔκ mor εἰς ἐπακτίαν
Τρίτωνος ἐκβολαῖσιν ἠλοκισμένην
χέρσον περάσας, οὐχὶ ναυβάτῃ στόλῳ,

3 > 5 / 53 e/ /
ἀλλ᾽ ἀστίβητον οἶμον, οἷά τις σιφνεύς,
κευθμῶνος ἐν σήραγγι τετρήνας μυχούς,
νέρθεν θαλάσσης ἀτραποὺς διήνυσε,

/ > 4 \ ’ /
τέκνων ἀλύξας Tas ἕενοκτόνους πάλας
καὶ πατρὶ πέμψας τὰς ἐπηκόους λιτὰς
στῆσαι παλίμπουν εἰς πάτραν, ὅθεν πλάνης
Παλληνίαν ἐπῆλθε γηγενῶν τροφόν---
κεῖνός σε, Γουνεὺς ὥσπερ, ἐργάτης δίκης
τῆς θ᾽ “Ἡλίου θυγατρὸς ᾿Ιχναίας βραβεύς,
ἐπεσβολήσας λυγρὰ νοσφιεῖ γάμων,
λίπτοντα κάσσης ἐκβαλὼν πελειάδος"

a“ \ / \ / /
os τοὺς Λύκου τε καὶ Χιμαιρέως τάφους
χρησμοῖσι κυδαίνοντας οὐκ αἰδούμενος

9.39 => / » Ων \ /
οὐδ᾽ ᾿Ανθέως ἔρωτας οὐδὲ τὸν ἕένοις
σύνδορπον Αἰγαίωνος ἁγνίτην πάγον
” ~ > \ > ~ /
ἔτλης θεῶν ἀλοιτὸς ἐκβῆναι δίκην,


α Proteus came from his home in Egypt to Pallene
(=Phlegra, Herod. viii. 123 in Chalcidice), the birth-place of
the giants, where he married Torone, by whom he had two
sons who slew strangers by compelling them to wrestle with
them and were in the end themselves slain by Heracles.
Proteus, vexed by the wickedness of his sons, besought his
father Poseidon for a passage under the sea back to Egypt.
On his sons’ death he could neither be sorry nor glad.

> Nile. ¢ Tmolus and Telegonus.


504


115


120


125


130


135


ALEXANDRA


husband,* whose spouse is Torone of Phlegra, even
he to whom laughter and tears are alike abhorred
and who is ignorant and reft of both; who once on a
time crossed from Thrace unto the coastland which
is furrowed by the outflow of Triton ®; crossed not
by sailing ship but by an untrodden path, like some
moldwarp, boring a secret passage in the cloven
earth, made his ways beneath the sea, avoiding the
stranger-slaying wrestling of his sons’ and sending
to his sire? prayers which were heard, even that he
should set him with returning feet in his fatherland,?
whence he had come as a wanderer to Pallenia, nurse
of the earth-born—he, like Guneus, a doer of
justice and arbiter of the Sun’s daughter of Ichnae,9
shall assail thee with evil words and rob thee of thy
bridal, casting thee forth in thy desire from thy
wanton dove: thee who, regarding not the tombs of
Lycus and Chimaereus”, glorious in oracles, nor thy
love of Antheus* nor the pure salt of Aigaeon/
eaten by host and guest together, didst dare to sin,
against the gods and to overstep justice, kicking the


2 Poseidon. ὁ Egypt. ;

f Guneus, an Arab famous for justice, whom Semiramis
pric arbiter between the Phoenicians and Babylonians
schol.). )
( 9 Tigomis Ichnaia, worshipped at Ichnae in Thessaly
(Strabo 435).

ht L,. and C., sons of Prometheus and Celaeno, were buried
in the Troad. The Lacedaemonians, being visited by a
plague, were bidden by an oracle to ‘‘ propitiate the Cronian
daemons in Troy,” and Menelaus was sent to make offerings
at their graves.

ἐ Son of Antenor, was loved by Paris who killed him
unwittingly. Menelaus, being at the time in Troy, took
Paris with him to Sparta to save him from punishment.
Thus Paris, as guest of Menelaus, had ‘‘ eaten his salt.”

4 Poseidon =


505


LYCOPHRON


Adéas τράπεζαν κἀνακυπώσας Θέμιν,
“ἄρκτου τιθήνης ἐκμεμαγμένος τρόπους.

Τοιγὰρ ψαλάξεις εἰς κενὸν νευρᾶς κτύπον,
ἄσιτα κἀδώρητα φορμίζων μέλη"

/ A 7 A A AQ Xr 7
κλαίων δὲ πάτραν τὴν πρὶν ἠθαλωμένην
σ -“ ov > 7
iEn χεροῖν εἴδωλον ἠγκαλισμένος
τῆς πενταλέκτρου θυιάδος Τ]λευρωνίας.
γυιαὶ γὰρ εὐναστῆρας ἄμναμοι τριπλαῖς
πήναις κατεκλώσαντο δηναιᾶς ‘Adds
νυμφεῖα πεντάγαμβρα δαίσασθαι γάμων.

οιὼ μὲν ἁρπακτῆρας αὐγάσει λύκους,
A / ἐς Ὁ A > /
πτηνοὺς τριόρχας αἰετοὺς ὀφθαλμίας,

A : eee “ε 3 A ~ “-
τὸν δ᾽ ἐκ [Πλυνοῦ τε κἀπὸ Καρικῶν ποτῶν
βλαστόντα ῥίζης, ἡμικρῆτα βάρβαρον,

3 a > ~ a
᾿Ἐπειόν, οὐκ “Apyetov ἀκραιφνῆ yovats.
οὗ πάππον ἐν γαμφαῖσιν '᾿Ἐνναία ποτὲ
“Epxovy’ ᾿Βρινὺς Θουρία Ξιφηφόρος
ἄσαρκα μιστύλασα τύμβευσεν φάρῳ,
«τὸν ὠλενίτην χόνδρον ἐνδατουμένη.

« \ \ e 7 \ \ ᾽ὔ
ὃν δὴ δὶς ἡβήσαντα καὶ βαρὺν πόθον


ΕΣ


α Paris, exposed when a child, was suckled by a she-bear.

> Helen, daughter of Leda, daughter of Thestius, son of
Agenor, son of Pleuron.

ὁ The Fates—Clotho, Lachesis, Atropos, daughters of
Tethys. —

ὦ ‘Theseus, Menelaus, Paris, Deiphobus, Achilles.

ὁ Theseus and. Paris. .

7 Menelaus is a descendant of Atlas (Atlas—Sterope—
Oenomaus — Hippodameia — Pelops — Atreus — Menelaus)
who dwells in Libya, here indicated by Plynos in Cyrenaica
(Strabo 888). Carian either refers to Καρικὸν τεῖχος (Steph.
B.) in Libya or to the Cariams having once dwelt in
Lacedaemon (schol.) or to Minos’ dominion over the Carians.
Menelaus is thus a ‘‘ barbarian’? and through his mother.
Aerope, daughter of Catreus, son of Minos, he is ‘half-
506


140


155


ALEXANDRA


table and overturning Themis, modelled in the ways
of the she-bear @ that suckled thee.

Therefore in vain shalt thou twang the noisy
bowstring, making melodies that bring nor food nor
fee; and in sorrow shalt thou come to thy father-
land that was burnt of old, embracing in thine
arms the wraith of the five-times-married frenzied
descendant? of Pleuron. For the lame daughters ¢
of the ancient Sea with triple thread have decreed
that her bedfellows shall share their marriage-feast
among five bridegrooms.%

Two shall she see as ravening wolves, winged
wanton eagles of sharp eyes; the third’ sprung
from root of Plynos and Carian waters, a half-Cretan
barbarian, an Epeian, no genuine Argive by birth:
whose grandfather 9 of old Ennaia* Hercynna Erinys
Thuria, the Sword-bearer, cut fleshless with her
jaws and buried in her throat, devouring the gristle
of his shoulder: his who came to youth again and
Cretan.” As grandson of Hippodameia he is an Epeian=
Elean (Pind. O. ix. 58, x. 35).

9 Pelops was served up by his father Tantalus at a banquet
to the gods, when Demeter ate part of his shoulder un-
wittingly. Restored to life and carried off by Poseidon
(Pind. O. i. 40), he was sent by Zeus to Elis where he
overcame Oenomaus in a chariot-race and won his daughter
Hippodameia for his bride, after thirteen previous suitors
had been slain by her father (Pind. O. i. 81 ff.). His victory
was due to the treachery of Oenomaus’ charioteer Myrtilus,
son of Hermes, who, when he asked Pelops for the price of
his treachery, was by him hurled into the sea, which was
hence called Myrtoan (Paus. viii. 14. 11), cursing with his
last breath the house of Pelops.

rk Demeter: E. in reference to rape of Persephone in
Σ Enna; H. by-name of Demeter at Lebadeia in -Boeotia ;
E. at Thelpusa in Arcadia (Callim. fr. incert. 91); Th.=
ες Passionate ” with grief for her daughter (schol.) ; Sw., cult-
name of Demeter in Boeotia (schol.).

507


LYCOPHRON


ὄντα Ναυμέδοντος ἁρπακτήριον
ΨΥ Ψ τ \ > / /,
ἔστειλ᾽ ᾿Ἐρεχθεὺς εἰς Λετριναίους γύας
λευρὰν ἀλετρεύσοντα Μόλπιδος πέτραν,
~ \ / > ,ὔ /
τοῦ Ζηνὶ δαυτρευθέντος ᾿Ομβρίῳ δέμας,
γαμβροκτόνον paicovta πενθεροφθόροις
a > 4 “a ε ,
βουλαῖς ἀνάγνοις, ἃς ὁ ζαδμίλου γόνος
” \ \ A a oe \ /
ἤρτυσε. τὸν δὲ λοῖσθον ἐκπιὼν σκύφον
/ wv / 4
φερωνύμους ἔδυψε Νηρέως τάφους,
/ “- / /
πανώλεθρον κηλῖδα θωύξας γένει,

¢ A / / ¢ “A
ὁ τὴν πόδαργον Ψύλλαν ἡνιοστροφῶν
καὶ τὴν ὁπλαῖς “Apmuvav “Αρπυίαις ἴσην.

Τὸν δ᾽ οὗ τέταρτον αὐθόμαιμον ὄψεται
κίρκου καταρρακτῆρος, ὅν τε συγγόνων

\ A “-“ - / /
τὰ δευτερεῖα τῆς δαϊσφάλτου πάλης
λαβόντα κηρύξουσιν. ἐν δὲ δεμνίοις
τὸν ἐξ ὀνείρων πέμπτον ἐστροβημένον
εἰδωλοπλάστῳ προσκαταξανεῖ ῥέθει,

\ / t δ -o A
τὸν μελλόνυμφον εὐνέτην Κυταϊκῆς,

“ / Ψ 3 >. Ὁ 7
τῆς ξεινοβάκχης, ov ποτ᾽ Οἰνώνης φυγάς,
μύρμων τὸν ἑξάπεζον ἀνδρώσας στρατόν,
Πελασγικὸν Τυφῶνα γεννᾶται πατήρ,

9. 68», ἐν \ / / /
ad’ ἑπτὰ παίδων φεψάλῳ σποδουμένων

~ / 3 7 /
μοῦνον φλέγουσαν ἐξαλύξαντα σποδόν.

᾿ Χὠ μὲν παλιμπόρευτον ἵξεται τρίβον,
σφῆκας δαφοινοὺς χηραμῶν ἀνειρύσας,
ὁποῖα κοῦρος δῶμα κινήσας καπνῷ"

α Poseidon. > Zeus. ¢ Elis or Olympia.

ἃ During a drought in Elis Molpis offered himself as a
victim to Zeus Ombrius.


¢ Oenomaus, father of Hippodameia.
7 Myrtilus, son of Cadmilus=Hermes; charioteer of


Oenomaus. 9 Myrtoan Sea.
» Psylla and Harpinna, horses of Oenomaus.
ὁ Deiphobus. 7 Paris,


508


160


165


170


175


180


ALEXANDRA


escaped the grievous raping desire of the Lord of
Ships and was sent by Erechtheus® to Letrina’s
fields to grind the smooth rock ὁ of Molpis 4—whose
body was served as sacrifice to Rainy Zeus—that he
might overcome the wooer-slayer® by the unholy
device for slaying his father-in-law which the son’
of Cadmilus devised ; who drinking his last cup dived
into his tomb in Nereus—the tomb’ which bears
his name—crying a blighting curse upon the race;
even he who held the reins of swift-footed Psylla
and Harpinna” hoofed even as the Harpies.

The fourth* again shall she see own brothei of
the swooping falcon’; him whom they shall proclaim
to have won the second* prize among his brothers
in the wrestling of war. And the fifth’ she shall
cause to pine upon his bed, distracted by her
phantom face in his dreams; the husband to be of
the stranger-frenzied lady ™ of Cyta; even him whom
one day the exile” from Oenone? fathered, turning
into men the six-footed host of ants,?—the Pelasgian
Typhon, out of seven sons? consumed in the flame
alone escaping the fiery ashes.

And he” shall come upon his homeward path,
raising the tawny wasps from their holes, even
as a child disturbs their nest with smoke. And


* i.e. next to Hector. ? Achilles.

m Medeia from Cyta in Phasis, married in Elysium to
Achilles, ¢f. 798.

” Peleus, exiled for slaying his half-brother Phocus (Pind.
NV. v. 12 ff.).

° Aegina.

» Hesiod, fr. 76 (100), tells how Aegina was populated by
turning ants into men.

a Thetis to test the immortality of her sons by Peleus
put them into the fire. Six sons perished in this way. The
seventh, Achilles, was saved by his father. r Paris.


509


LYCOPHRON


οἱ δ᾽ ad προγεννήτειραν οὐλαμωνύμου
βύκταισι χερνίψαντες ὠμησταὶ πόριν,
τοῦ Σκυρίου δράκοντος ἔντοκον λεχώ,..
Δ ¢ 7 / c \
ἣν ὃ Evvevvos Σαλμυδησίας ἁλὸς
> A / ¢ 7 /
ἐντὸς ματεύων, “EAAddos Kaparopor,
δαρὸν φαληριῶσαν οἰκήσει σπίλον
Κελτοῦ πρὸς ἐκβολαῖσι λιμναίων ποτῶν,
ποθῶν δάμαρτα, τήν ποτ᾽ ἐν σφαγαῖς κεμὰς
λαιμὸν προθεῖσα φασγάνων ἐκ ῥύσεται.
βαθὺς δ᾽ ἔσω ,ιῥηγμῖνος αὐδηθήσεται
ἔρημος ἐν κρόκαισι νυμφίου δρόμος,
στένοντος ἄτας καὶ κενὴν ναυκληρίαν
καὶ τὴν ἄφαντον εἶδος ἠλλοιωμένην
γραῖαν σφαγείων ἠδὲ χερνίβων πέλας
“Αἰδου τε παφλάζοντος ἐκ βυθῶν φλογὶ
“a Δ / / ~
κρατῆρος, ὃν μέλαινα ποιφύξει φθιτῶν
σάρκας λεβητίζουσα δαιταλουργίᾳ.
Χὠ μὲν πατήσει χῶρον αἰάζων Σκύθην,

εἰς πέντε ποὺ πλειῶνας ἱμείρων λέχους.

ς 3 3 \ \ “- / /
ot δ᾽ ἀμφὶ βωμὸν τοῦ προμάντιος Kpdvov
σὺν μητρὶ τέκνων νηπίων κρεανόμου
ὅρκων τὸ δευτεροῦχον ἄρσαντες ζυγὸν
στερρὰν ἐνοπλίσουσιν ὠλέναις πλάτην,
σωτῆρα Βάκχον τῶν πάροιθε πημάτων


« Iphigeneia.

ὃ Neoptolemus, here son of Achilles and Iphigeneia;
called ‘*the dragon of Scyrus” because he was reared by
Deidamia, daughter of Lycomedes, king of Scyrus. In one
version Deidamia is his mother. ¢ Achilles.

@ Iphigeneia became priestess of Artemis Taurica in the
Crimea, where she had to sacrifice Greeks who came there.

ὁ Island of Leuce. 7 Danube.

9 When Iphigeneia was being sacrificed at Aulis, Artemis
substituted a deer for her.


510


185


190


195


9500


205


ALEXANDRA


they in their turn shall come, sacrificing cruelly
to the blustering winds the heifer® that bare the
war-named son,? the mother that was brought to
bed of the dragon of Scyrus; for whom her
husband ¢ shall search within the Salmydesian Sea,
where she cuts the throats of Greeks,4 and shall
dwell for a long space in-the white-crested rock ¢ by
the outflowing of the marshy waters of the Celtic
stream/; yearning for his wife whom at her slaying
a hind shall rescue from the knife, offering her own
throat instead. And the deep waste within the
wash of the waves upon the beach shall be called
the Chase” of the bridegroom, mourning his ruin
and his empty seafaring and her that vanished and
was changed to an old witch,’ beside the sacrificial
vessels and the lustral water and the bowl of Hades
bubbling from the depths with flame, whereon the
dark lady will blow, potting the flesh of the dead
as might a cook.

And he/ lamenting shall pace the Scythian land
for some five years yearning for his bride.“ And
they,’ beside the altar of the primal prophet,
Cronus, who devours the callow young with their
mother,” binding themselves by the yoke of a second
oath,” shall take in their arms the strong oar, in-
voking him who saved them in théir former woes, even

» Achilleius Dromus, a strip of land between the Dnieper
and the Crimea (Herod. iv. 55). ὁ Iphigeneia in Tauris.

4 Achilles. * Iphigeneia. 1 The Greeks at Aulis.

™ Hom. 7]. ii. 308 ff. At the altar of Zeus in Aulis a
snake devoured a sparrow with her brood of eight. Calchas
interprets the omen to mean that the war against Troy will
last nine years, and that the city will be taken in the tenth.

” The earlier oath was taken by the suitors of Helen, who


swore to her father, Tyndareus, to support the successful
suitor.


511


LYCOPHRON


/ > / e . > a
UddArnv avevalovres, @ ποτ᾽ ἐν μυχοῖς
Δελφινίου παρ᾽ ἄντρα Κερδῴου θεοῦ
Ταύρῳ κρυφαίας χέρνιβας κατάρξεται
ὁ χιλίαρχος τοῦ πολιρραίστου στρατοῦ.

ᾧ θυμάτων πρόσπαιον ἐκτίνων χάριν
/ > / \ /
δαίμων ᾿Ενόρχης Φιγαλεὺς Φαυστήριος

/ ’ 3 93 / 7
λέοντα θοίνης, ἴχνος ἐμπλέξας Avyous,
σχήσει, τὸ μὴ πρόρριζον αἰστῶσαι στάχυν

/ > > / \ / /
κείροντ᾽ ὀδόντι Kat λαφυστίαις γνάθοις.

Λεύσσω πάλαι δὴ σπεῖραν ὁλκαίων κακῶν,
σύρουσαν ἅλμῃ κἀπιροιζοῦσαν πάτρᾳ
δεινὰς ἀπειλὰς καὶ πυριφλέκτους βλάβας.

« / / A BM 4

Os μή ce Κάδμος wher’ ἐν περιρρύτῳ
Ἴσσῃ φυτεῦσαι δυσμενῶν ποδηγέτην,

, “96 γῇ 52λ7 ,
τέταρτον ἐξ Ἄτλαντος ἀθλίου σπόρον,
τῶν αὐθομαίμων συγκατασκάπτην [Πρύλιν,
τόμουρε πρὸς τὰ λῷστα νημερτέστατε"

799 ἊΝ / ¢ \ » \
und Αἰσακείων οὑμὸς ὦφελεν πατὴρ
χρησμῶν ἀπῶσαι νυκτίφοιτα δείματα,

“ δὲ 7 \ ὃ λ ~ e \ ’ὔ
μιᾷ δὲ κρύψαι τοὺς διπλοῦς ὑπὲρ πάτρας
μοίρᾳ, τεφρώσας γυῖα Λημναίῳ πυρί:
οὐκ ἂν τοσῶνδε κῦμ᾽ ἐπέκλυσεν κακῶν.


Καὶ δὴ ΠΠαλαίμων δέρκεται βρεφοκτόνος


« Agamemnon sacrifices in Apollo’s temple at Delphi.

ὃ Dionysus. For his cult at Phigaleia in Elis cf. Paus.
viii. 39. 4.

¢ Telephus king of Mysia who, when fighting Achilles,
was tripped up by the tendrils of a vine, Dionysus thus
requiting sacrifices made to him by Agamemnon at Delphi.

4 Lesbos. ὁ Cadmus =Cadmilus (cf. 162) = Hermes.

7 Atlas—Maia—Hermes—Prylis, son of Issa.


512


. 210


215


220


225 ©


ALEXANDRA


Bacchus, the Overthrower, to whom, the bull-god,
one day in the shrine beside the cavern of Delphinius
the Gainful god, the lord ¢ of a thousand ships, a city-
sacking host, shall make secret sacrifice. And in un-
looked-for requital of his offerings the god of Phigaleia,
the lusty Torch-god,? shall stay the lion’ from his
banquet, entangling his foot in withes, so that he
destroy not utterly the cornfield of men, nor lay it
waste with tooth and devouring jaws. :

Long since I ‘see the coil of trailing woes
dragging in the brine and hissing against my father-
land dread threats and fiery ruin.

Would that in sea-girt Issa? Cadmus ὁ had never
begotten thee to be the guide of the foemen, fourth /
in descent from unhappy Atlas, even thee, Prylis,
who didst help to overthrow thine own kindred,’
prophet most sure of best fortune”! And would
that my father‘ had not spurned the nightly terrors
of the oracles of Aesacus and that for the sake of
my fatherland he had made away with the two in
one doom, ashing their bodies with Lemnian fire.’
So had not such a flood of woes overwhelmed the
land.


And now Palaemon,’ to whom babes are slain,


9 The Trojans, related through Electra, mother of Dar-
danus and daughter of Atlas.

r Prylis prophesied the taking of Troy by the Wooden
Horse. That was best fortune for the Greeks. For τόμουρος
cf. Hesych. s.v., Strabo 328.

ἐ Priam, whom his son Aesacus advised to kill Hecuba
and Paris, because before the birth of the latter Hecuba
dreamed that she had borne a fire-brand.

2 Proverbial. Lemnos through the ‘‘ volcano” of Mosy-
chlos is much associated with Hephaestus.

k Son of Ino Leucothea, worshipped in Tenedos with
sacrifices of children,

| 4} 618


LYCOPHRON


ζέουσαν αἰθυίαισι πλεκτανοστόλοις
γραῖαν ξύνευνον ᾿Ωγένου Τιτηνίδα.
Καὶ δὴ διπλᾶ σὺν πατρὶ ῥαίεται τέκνα,
στερρῷ τυπέντι κλεῖδας εὐάρχῳ μύλῳ,
τὰ πρόσθεν αὐλητῆρος ἐκπεφευγότα
ψυδραῖσι φήμαις λαρνακοφθόρους ῥιφάς,
ᾧ δὴ πιθήσας στυγνὸς ἄρταμος τέκνων,
αἰθυιόθρεπτος πορκέων λιναγρέτης,
κρηθμοῖσι καὶ ῥαιβοῖσι νηρίταις φίλος,
χηλῷ κατεδρύφαξε διπτύχους γονάς.
σὺν τοῖς δ᾽ 6 τλήμων, μητρὸς οὐ φράσας θεᾶς
μνήμων ἐφετμάς, ἀλλὰ ληθάργῳ σφαλείς,
- πρηνὴς θανεῖται στέρνον οὐτασθεὶς ξίφει.
Καὶ δὴ στένει Μύρινα καὶ παράκτιοι
ἵππων φριμαγμὸν ie δεδεγμέναι,
ὅταν Πελασγὸν ἅλμα λαιψηροῦ ποδὸς
εἰς Oty’ ἐρείσας λοισθίαν αἴθων λύκος
κρηναῖον ἐξ a ἄμμοιο ῥοιβδήσῃ γάνος,
πηγὰς ἀνοίξας τὰς πάλαι κεκρυμμένας.
Καὶ δὴ καταίθει γαῖαν ὀρχηστὴς "Apns,
στρόμβῳ τὸν αἱματηρὸν ἐξάρχων νόμον.
ἅπασα δὲ χθὼν προὐμμάτων δῃουμένη


αΤείῃν5 (the sea), wife of Ogenos= Oceanus.

> The Greek ships reach Tenedos.

¢ Tennes and Hemithea (H. Usener, Die Sintflutsagen,

pp. 90 ff.), children of Cycnus by his first wife, Procleia. His

second wife, Philonome, abetted by the flute-player, Molpos,
induced Cycnus to set them adrift upon the sea in an ark.
Tennes, who was really a son of Apollo, came to land in the
island of Leucophrys, which, after his name, was thence
called Tenedos.

ὦ Cycnus, son of Poseidon and Calyce, slain with his
children, Tennes and Hemithea, by Achilles. This was an
auspicious omen for the success of the Greeks at Troy.


514


230


235


240


245


250


ALEXANDRA


beholds the hoary Titanid bride α of Ogenus seething
with the corded gulls.®

And now two children®¢ are slain together with
their father ὦ who is smitten on the collar-bone with
the hard mill-stone, an omen of good beginning ;
those children which before escaped when cast-.out
to death in an ark through the lying speech of the
piper,” to whom hearkened the sullen butcher of
his children—he the gull-reared, captive of the nets
of fishermen, friend of winkle and bandy sea-snail
—and imprisoned his two children in a chest. And
therewithal the wretch,’ who was not mindful to tell
the bidding of the goddess mother but erred in
forgetfulness, shall die upon his face, his breast
pierced by the sword. ,

And now Myrina” groans and the sea-shores
awaiting the snorting of horses, when the fierce
wolf? shall leap the swift leap of his Pelasgian foot
upon the last beach and cause the clear spring’ to
gush from the sand, opening fountains that hitherto
were hidden.

And now Ares, the dancer, fires the land, with
his conch leading the chant of blood. And all the
land lies ravaged before my eyes and, as it were


¢ Molpos, who-supported the false accusation made
against Tennes by his step-mother, after the fashion of
Phaedra.

* Cycnus, who was exposed on the sea-shore by his
mother, and was fed by sea-birds until he was taken by some
fishermen.

g Mnemon, who was sent by Thetis to warn Achilles not
to slay Tennes. He failed to deliver his message, and
Achilles in anger slew him.

h In the Troad, Hom. 71. ii. 811. # Achilles.

1 When Achilles leapt ashore at Troy, a spring arose
under his footprint, cf. 279.

515


LYCOPHRON


κεῖται, πέφρικαν δ᾽ ὥστε ληίου yar
λόγχαις ἀποστίλβοντες, οἰμωγὴ δέ μοι
ἐν ὠσὶ πύργων ἐξ ἄκρων ἰνδάλλεται,
πρὸς αἰθέρος κυροῦσα νηνέμους ἕδρας,
γόῳ γυναικῶν καὶ καταρραγαῖς πέπλων,
ἄλλην ἐπ᾽ ἄλλῃ συμφορὰν δεδεγμένων.
Ἐκεῖνό σ᾽, ὦ τάλαινα καρδία, κακὸν
ἐκεῖνο δάψει πημάτων ὑπέρτατον,
εὖτ᾽ ἂν λαβράζων περκνὸς αἰχμητὴς χάρων,
πτεροῖσι χέρσον αἰετὸς διαγράφων
ῥαιβῷ τυπωτὴν τόρμαν ἀγκύλῃ βάσει,
κλάζων τ᾽ ἄμικτον στόματι ῥιγίστην βοήν,
τὸν φίλτατόν σου τῶν ἀγαστόρων τρόφιν
Πτῴου τε πατρός ἁρπάσας μετάρσιον,
ὄνυξι γαμφηλαῖσί θ᾽ αἱμάσσων δέμας,
ἔγχωρα τίφη καὶ πέδον χραίνῃ φόνῳ,
λευρᾶς βοώτης γατομῶν δι᾽ αὔλακος.
λαβὼν δὲ ταύρου. τοῦ πεφασμένου δάνος,
σκεθρῷ ταλάντῳ τρυτάνης ἠρτημένον,
αὖθις τὸν ἀντίποινον ἐγχέας ἴσον
Πακτώλιον σταθμοῖσι τηλαυγῆ μύδρον,
κρατῆρα Βάκχου δύσεται, κεκλαυσμένος
νύμφαισιν at φίλαντο Βηφύρου γάνος
Λειβηθρίην θ᾽ ὕπερθε Πιμπλείας σκοπήν,
ὃ νεκροπέρνας, ὃς προδειμαίνων πότμον
« Achilles. The ref. is to the dragging of the body of
Hector by Achilles, Hom. /1. xxii. 303 fF > Hector.
¢ Apollo, who, in one version, was father of Hector. He


had a famous temple on Mt. Pton in Boeotia. Herod.
viii. 135.

4 Hector. ὁ Achilles.

7 In reference to Hom. 7]. xxii. 351, where Achilles says
he would not give back the body of Hector for his weight in
gold; hence the legend that Priam actually ransomed his


516


ALEXANDRA


fields of corn, bristle the fields of the gleaming
spears. And in my ears seems a voice of lamenta-
tion from the tower tops reaching to the windless
seats of air, with groaning of women and rending
of robes, awaiting sorrow upon sorrow.

That woe, O my poor heart, that woe shall wound
thee as a crowning sorrow, when the dusky, sworded,
bright-eyed eagle % shall rage, with his wings mark-
ing out the land—the track traced by bandied
crooked steps—and, crying with his mouth his dis-
sonant and chilly cry, shall carry aloft the dearest
nursling ὃ of all thy brothers, dearest to thee and to
his sire the Lord of Pto6n,° and, bloodying his body
with talon and beak, shall stain with gore the land,
both swamp and plain, a ploughman cleaving a
smooth furrow in the earth. And _ having slain the
bull? he® takes the price thereof, weighed in the
strict balance of the scales‘ But one day he shall
for recompense pour in the scales an equal weight of
the far-shining metal of Pactolus’ and shall enter
the cup of Bacchus,’ wept by the nymphs who love
the clear waters of Bephyras‘ and the high seat of
Leibethron 7 above Pimpleia*; even he, the trafficker
in corpses, who, fearing beforehand his doom, shall


body for its weight in gold, an idea which seems to have
been used in the lost play of Aeschylus Φρύγες or Ἕκτορος
λύτρα, and which appears in certain vase-paintings. Cf.
Robert, Bild und Ined, Ὁ. 142.

g When Achilles was slain, his body was redeemed for an
equal weight of gold from Pactolus (cf. Herod. v. 101).

% When Dionysus was chased by Lycurgus he gave to
Thetis a cup which in Naxos he had received from Heph-
aestus. In this were put the ashes of Achilles and Patroclus.

ὁ River flowing from Olympus.

4 Town on east slope of Olympus. |

ἃ Spring in Pieria, near Olympus.

517


LYCOPHRON


καὶ θῆλυν ἀμφὶ σῶμα τλήσεται πέπλον.
δῦναι, παρ᾽ ἱστοῖς κερκίδος ψαύσας κρότων,
καὶ λοῖσθος εἰς γῆν δυσμενῶν ῥῖψαι πόδα,
τὸ σόν, ξύναιμε, κἀν ὕπνῳ πτήσσων δόρυ.

Ὦ δαῖμον, οἷον κίον᾽ αἰστώσεις δόμων,
ἔρεισμα πάτρας δυστυχοῦς ὑποσπάσας"
οὐ μὴν ἀνατεί γ᾽ οὐδ᾽ ἄνευ μόχθων πικρῶν
πένθους θ᾽ ὁ λῃστὴς Δωριεὺς γελᾷ στρατός,
ἐπεγκαχάζων τοῦ δεδουπότος μόρῳ,
ἀλλ᾽ ἀμφὶ πρύμναις τὴν πανυστάτην δραμὼν

᾽ὔ , “- /
πεύκαις βίου βαλβῖδα συμφλεχθήσεται,

“ > 93 3 a Aa / ,
καλῶν ἐπ᾽ εὐχαῖς πλεῖστα Φύξιον Δία
πορθουμένοισι κῆρας ἀρκέσαι πικράς.
τότ᾽ οὔτε τάφρος, οὔτε ναυλόχων σταθμῶν
πρόβλημα καὶ σταυροῖσι κορσωτὴ πτέρυξ,
οὐ γεῖσα χραισμήσουσιν, οὐδ᾽ ἐπάλξιες"
ἀλλ᾽ ὡς μέλισσαι συμπεφυρμένοι καπνῷ
καὶ λιγνύος ῥιπαῖσι καὶ γρυνῶν βολαῖς
+ \ / \ ~ /
ἄφλαστα Kai κόρυμβα καὶ κλῃδῶν θρόνους
πυκνοὶ κυβιστητῆρες ἐξ ἑδωλίων

“ ε 7 3 , ,
πηδῶντες αἱμάξουσιν ὀθνείαν κόνιν.

Πολλοὺς δ᾽ ἀριστεῖς πρωτόλειά θ᾽ “Ἑλλάδος
αἰχμῇ φέροντας καὶ σποραῖς ὠγκωμένους,
αἱ σαὶ καταξανοῦσιν ὄβριμοι χέρες,
φόνῳ βλύουσαι κἀπιμαιμῶσαι μάχης.
ἐγὼ δὲ πένθος οὐχὶ μεῖον οἴσομαι,
τὰς σὰς στένουσα καὶ δι᾽ αἰῶνος ταφάς.
οἰκτρὸν γάρ, οἰκτρὸν κεῖν᾽ ἐπόψομαι φάος
καὶ πημάτων ὕψιστον, ὧν κράντης χρόνος,
μήνης ἑλίσσων κύκλον, αὐδηθήσεται.

« When Calchas prophesied that Troy could not be taken |
without Achilles, Thetis, knowing that if he went to Troy
518


RS


ALEXANDRA


endure to do upon his body a female robe,” handling
the noisy shuttle at the loom, and shall be the last
to set his foot in the land of the foe, cowering, O
brother,® even in his sleep before thy spear.

O Fate, what a pillar of our house shalt thou
destroy, withdrawing her mainstay from my unhappy
fatherland! But not with impunity, not without
bitter toil and sorrow shall the pirate Dorian host
laugh exulting in the doom of the fallen; but by
the sterns running life’s last lap shall they be burnt ¢
along with the ships of pine, calling full often to,
Zeus the Lord of Flight to ward off bitter fate from
them who perish. In that day nor trench nor
defence of naval station nor stake-terraced palisade
nor cornice shall avail nor battlements. But, like
bees, confused with smoke and rush of flame and
hurling of brands, many a diver shall leap from deck
to sternpeak and prowpeak and benched seats and
stain with blood the alien dust.

And many chieftains, and many that bore away
the choicest of the spoils won by Hellas and gloried
in their birth, shall thy mighty hands destroy, filled
full with blood and eager for battle. But not the
less sorrow shall I bear, bewailing, yea, all my life
long, thy burial. For pitiful, pitiful shall that day
be for mine eyes and crown of all my woes that
Time, wheeling the moon’s orb, shall be said to
bring to pass.


he must perish, disguised him as a girl in female clothes and
put him in the charge of Lycomedes, king of Scyrus, with
whose daughters he was reared (Apollod. iii. 174). The
episode was the subject of a sig by Polygnotus (Paus,
i. 22. 6). > Hector.

¢ The reference is to the burning of the Greek ships by
the Trojans,, Jl. xv. 704 ff.


519


LYCOPHRON


Aiai, στενάζω καὶ σὸν εὔγλαγον θάλος,
ὦ σκύμνε, τερπνὸν ἀγκάλισμα συγγόνων,
Ψ > »+ / / A
ὅς τ᾽ ἄγριον δράκοντα πυρφόρῳ βαλὼν
” / 4 4, a 4
ἴυγγι τόξων, τὸν τυπέντα δ᾽ ἐν βρόχοις
μάρψας ἀφύκτοις βαιὸν ἀστεργῆ χρόνον,
πρὸς τοῦ δαμέντος αὐτὸς οὐ τετρωμένος,
\ 4 ¢ / : ,
καρατομηθεὶς τύμβον αἱμάξεις πατρός.
Οἴμοι. δυσαίων, καὶ διπλᾶς ἀηδόνας
\ / / / > 2 ,ὔ
καὶ σόν, τάλαινα, πότμον αἰάζω, σκύλαξ"
ὧν τὴν μὲν αὐτόπρεμνον ἡ τοκὰς κόνις
χανοῦσα κευθμῷ χείσεται διασφάγος,
λεύσσουσαν ἄτην ἀγχίπουν στεναγμάτων,
> » 4 \ / /
iv ἄλμα πάππου καὶ χαμευνάδος μόροι
τῆς λαθρονύμφου πόρτιος μεμιγμένοι
σκύμνῳ κέχυνται, πρὶν λαφύξασθαι γάνος,
πρὶν ἐκ λοχείας γυῖα χυτλῶσαι δρόσῳ"
\ 3 3 \ \ A \ /
σὲ δ᾽ ὠμὰ πρὸς νυμφεῖα Kai γαμηλίους
ἄξει θυηλὰς στυγνὸς ΐφιδος λέων,
μητρὸς κελαινῆς χέρνιβας μιμούμενος,
Δ 3 - / /
qv εἰς βαθεῖαν λαιμίσας ποιμανδρίαν
/ “Ὄ \ » ’ὔ
στεφηφόρον βοῦν δεινὸς ἄρταμος δράκων


α Troilus, youngest son of Priam, loved by Achilles and
by slain at the altar of Apollo Thymbraeus (Stat. S. ii.
6. 32).

> Achilles.
¢ Apollo of Thymbra, whose son, in one version, Troilus
was. :

@ Laodice and Polyxena, sisters of Cassandra. -

¢ Hecuba,


520


810.


315


320


325


ALEXANDRA


Ay! me, for thy fair-fostered flower,“ too, I groan,
O lion whelp, sweet darling of thy kindred, who
didst smite with fiery charm of shafts the fierce
dragon® and seize for a little loveless while in
unescapable noose him that was smitten, thyself
unwounded by thy victim: thou shalt forfeit thy
head and stain thy father’s® altar-tomb with thy
blood.

.O, me unhappy! the two nightingales¢ and thy
fate, poor hound,’ I weep. One,f root and branch,
the dust that gave her birth shall, yawning, swallow
in a secret cleft, when she sees the approaching
feet of lamentable doom, even where her ancestor’s 9
grove is, and where the groundling heifer’ of
secret bridal lies in one tomb with her. whelp,’
ere ever it drew the sweet milk and ere she
cleansed her with fresh water from the soilure of
childbed. And thee/ to cruel bridal and marriage
sacrifice the sullen lion,” child of Iphis,’ shall lead,
imitating his dark mother’s lustrations; over the
deep pail the dread butcherly dragon shall cut thy
throat, as it were a garlanded heifer, and slay thee


7 Laodice, on the capture of Troy, was swallowed up by
the earth near the tomb of Ilos (Apollod. epit. v. 25).

9. los, 7]. xi. 166.

» Cilla was sister of Hecuba and wife of Thymoetes,
brother of Priam. On the same day Hecuba gave birth to
Paris and Cilla to Munippus, the father being Priam. When
told by an oracle to destroy ‘* her who had just given birth
and her child” Priam killed Cilla and her child.

‘ Munippus.

7 Polyxena, sacrificed by Neoptolemus at the grave of
Achilles.

* Neoptolemus.

t Iphigeneia, mother, in one version, of Neoptolemus by
Achilles.

521


LYCOPHRON


ῥαίσει τριπάτρῳ φασγάνῳ Kavéddovos,

λύκοις τὸ πρωτόσφακτον ὅρκιον σχάσας.

σὲ δ᾽ ἀμφὶ κοίλην αἰχμάλωτον ἠόνα

πρέσβυν Δολόγκων δημόλευστον ὠλένῃ

ἐπεσβόλοις ἀραῖσιν ἠρεθισμένῃ

κρύψει κύπασσις χερμάδων ἐπομβρίᾳ,

Μαίρας ὅταν φαιουρὸν ἀλλάξῃς δομήν.
‘Oo ἀμφὶ τύμβῳ τἀγαμέμνονος δαμεὶς

κρηπῖδα πήγῳ νέρθε, καλλυνεῖ πλόκῳ,

ὃ ὁ πρὸς καλύπτρης τῆς ὁμαίμονος τάλας

ὠνητὸς αἰθαλωτὸν εἰς πάτραν μολών,

τὸ πρὶν δ᾽ ἀμυδρὸν οὔνομ᾽ αἰστώσας σκότῳ,

ὅταν χέλυδρος πυρσὸν ὠμόθριξ βαρὺν

ἀπεμπολητὴς τῆς φυταλμίας χθονὸς

φλέξας τὸν ὠδίνοντα μορμωτὸν λόχον

ἀναψαλάξῃ γαστρὸς ἑλκύσας ζυγά,

τῆς Σισυφείας δ᾽ ἀγκύλης λαμπουρίδος

λάμψῃ κακὸν φρύκτωρον αὐτανέψιος

τοῖς εἰς στενὴν Λεύκοφρυν ἐκπεπλωκόσι

καὶ παιδοβρῶτος Πορκέως νήσους διπλᾶς.
᾿Εγὼ δὲ τλήμων ἡ γάμους ἀρνουμένη,

ἐν παρθενῶνος λαΐνου τυκίσμασιν

ἄνις τεράμνων εἰς ἀνώροφον στέγην


« Candaon here= Hephaestus, who gave the sword to
Peleus, he to Neoptolemus. This seems to refer the lines
to the sacrifice of Polyxena. Otherwise it would be natural
to refer ἥν to Iphigeneia. ὅρκιον σχάσας : ef. Homer's ὅρκια
πιστὰ ταμόντες (11. ili. 73 ete.). Potmandria is another name
for Tanagra in Boeotia, and ravdypa is an ἀγγεῖον χαλκοῦν ἐν
ᾧ ἤρτυον τὰ κρέα (Hesych. s.v.); hence the use of ποιμανδρία
= ἀγγεῖον, in Lycophron’s manner.

ὃ Hecuba. ¢ Hecuba is stoned to death.

4 Maira, the hound of Erigone; here hound generally ;
Hecuba was turned into a hound; cf. 315.


522


330


335


345


350


ALEXANDRA


with the thrice-descended sword of Candaon,* shed-
ding for the wolves the blood of the first oath-
sacrifice. And thee,’ again, an aged captive by the
hollow strand, stoned by the public arm of the
Doloncians, roused thereto by the railing curses,
a robe shall cover with a rain of stones,° when thou
shalt put on thee sable-tailed form of Maira.4

And he,’ slain beside the altar tomb of Agamem-
non shall deck the pedestal with his grey locks—
even he who, a poor prisoner ransomed for his
sister's? yeil, came to his country devastated with
fire, and shrouded in dim darkness his former name”
—what time the fierce-crested serpent,’ seller of the
land that bred him, kindles the grievous torch and
draws the belly-bands and lets slip the travailing
. terrible ambush,’ and when the own cousin” of the
crafty reynard, son! of Sisyphus, lights his evil
beacon for them who sailed away to narrow Leuco-
phrys™ and the two islands” of child-devouring
Porceus.°?

And I, unhappy, who refused wedlock, within
the building of my stony maiden chamber ‘without
ceiling, hiding my body in the unroofed tenement


ὁ Priam was slain by Neoptolemus at the altar of Zeus
Herceius. .

7 i.e. Zeus-Agamemnon. 9 Hesione.

% Podarces, the earlier name of Priam. When captured
by Heracles and Telamon, Hesione purchased wee his
life with her veil. Hence his name Priamus.

ὁ Antenor, said to have been a traitor to Troy.

7 The wooden horse. % Sinon.

? Odysseus. m Tenedos. ™ Calydnae.

° Porceus and Chariboea, the snakes which came from
Calydnae and killed Laocoén and his sons. For a discussion
of the story see Robert, Bild und Lied (Berlin 1881), Ex-
cursus 1.


523


LYCOPHRON


εἱρκτῆς ἁλιβδύσασα λυγαίας δέμας,
ἡ τὸν Θοραῖον Πτῷον ‘Qpirnv θεὸν
λίπτοντ᾽ ἀλέκτρων ἐκβαλοῦσα δεμνίων,
ὡς δὴ κορείαν ἄφθιτον πεπαμένη
πρὸς γῆρας ἄκρον, Παλλάδος ζηλώμασι 355
τῆς μισονύμφου Λαφρίας Πυλάτιδος,
τῆμος βιαίως φάσσα πρὸς τόργου λέχος
γαμψαῖσιν ἅρπαις οἰνὰς ἑλκυσθήσομαι,
ἡ πολλὰ δὴ Βούδειαν Αἴθυιαν Κόρην
ἀρωγὸν αὐδάξασα τάρροθον γάμων. 300
ἡ δ᾽ εἰς “τέραμνα δουρατογλύφου στέγης
γλήνας ἄ ἄνω στρέψασα χώσεται στρατῷ,
ἐξ οὐρανοῦ πεσοῦσα καὶ θρόνων Διός,
ἄνακτι πάππῳ χρῆμα τιμαλφέστατον.
ἑνὸς δὲ λώβης ἀντί, μυρίων τέκνων 365
“Ἑλλὰς στενάξει πᾶσα τοὺς κενοὺς τάφους,
οὐκ ὀστοθήκαις, χοιράδων δ᾽ ἐφημένους,
οὐδ᾽ ὑστάτην κεύθοντας ἐκ πυρὸς τέφρην
κρωσσοῖσι ταρχυθεῖσαν, ἣ θέμις φθιτῶν,
ἀλλ᾽ οὔνομ᾽ οἰκτρὸν καὶ κενηρίων γραφὰς 370
θερμοῖς τεκόντων δακρύοις λελουμένας
παίδων τε καὶ θρήνοισι τοῖς ὁμευνίδων.

᾿Οφέλτα καὶ μύχουρε χοιράδων Ζάραξ
σπίλοι τε καὶ Τρυχάντα καὶ τραχὺς Νέδων
καὶ πάντα “Διρφωσσοῖο καὶ Διακρίων 375
γωλειὰ καὶ Φόρκυνος οἰκητήριον,
ὅσων στεναγμῶν ἐκβεβρασμένων νεκρῶν
σὺν ἡμιθραύστοις ἰκρίοις ἀκούσετε,
ὅσων δὲ φλοίσβων ῥαχίας ἀνεκβάτου
δίναις παλιρροίοισιν ἕλκοντος σάλου, ! 380

# Apollo. » Aias Oiliades, the Locrian Aias.
¢ Athena. Sea-gull as goddess of sea-faring (Paus. i. 5. 3).

524


ALEXANDRA


of my dark prison: I who spurned from my maiden
bed the god Thoraios,* Lord of Ptoén, Ruler of the
Seasons, as one who had taken eternal maidenhood
for my portion to uttermost old age, in imitation of
her who abhors marriage, even Pallas, Driver of the
Spoil, the Wardress of the Gates—in that day, as a
dove, to the eyrie of the vulture,® in frenzy shall be
haled violently in crooked talons, I who often invoked
the Maiden, Yoker of Oxen, the Sea-gull, to help
and defend me from marriage. And she unto the
ceiling of her shrine carven of wood shall turn up
her eyes and be angry with the host, even she that
fell? from heaven and the throne of Zeus, to be a
possession most precious to my great grandfather ὁ
the King. And for the sin of one man/ all Hellas
shall mourn the empty tombs of ten thousand chil-
dren—not in receptacles of bones, but perched on
rocks, nor hiding in urns the embalmed last ashes
from the fire, as is the ritual of the dead, but a
piteous name and legends on empty cairns, bathed
with the burning tears of parents and of children
and mourning of wives.

O Opheltes’ and Zarax,? who keepest the secret
places of the rocks, and ye cliffs, and Trychantes,’
and rugged Nedon,’ and all ye pits of Dirphossus Κ΄
and Diacria,? and thou haunt of Phorcys*! what
groaning shall ye hear of corpses cast up with decks
broken in twain, and what tumult of the surge that
may not be escaped, when the foaming water
drags men backward in its swirling tides! And how


2 i.e. the Palladium, heaven-fallen image of Athena.

6 Tlus. 7 Aias Oiliades.

9 Hills in Euboea, in reference to wreck of Greeks on
coast of Euboea on way home from Troy.

k Coast of Euboea; Phorcys, the old man of the sea.


p25


LYCOPHRON


ὅσων δὲ θύννων ἠλοκισμένων ῥαφὰς
πρὸς τηγάνοισι κρατός, ὧν καταιβάτης
σκηπτὸς κατ᾽ ὄρφνην γεύσεται δῃουμένων,
ὅταν καρηβαρεῦντας ἐκ μέθης ἄγων
λαμπτῆρα φαίνῃ τὸν ποδηγέτην. σκότου
σίντης, ἀγρύπνῳ προσκαθήμενος τέχνῃ.
Tov δ᾽ οἷα δύπτην κηρύλον διὰ στενοῦ
αὐλῶνος οἴσει κῦμα γυμνήτην φάγρον,
διπλῶν μεταξὺ χοιράδων σαρούμενον.
Γυραῖσι δ᾽ ἐν πέτραισι τερσαίνων πτερὰ
στάζοντα πόντου, δευτέραν ἅλμην σπάσει,
βληθεὶς am’ ὄχθων τῷ τριωνύχῳ Sopi,
᾿ᾧ vw κολαστὴς δεινὸς οὐτάσας λατρεὺς
ἀναγκάσει φάλλαισι κοινωνεῖν δρόμου
κόκκυγα κομπάζοντα μαψαύρας στόβους.
ψυχρὸν δ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἀκταῖς ἐκβεβρασμένον νέκυν
δελφῖνος ἀκτὶς Σειρία καθαυανεῖ.
τάριχον ἐν μνίοις δὲ καὶ βρύοις σαπρὸν
κρύψει κατοικτίσασα Νησαίας κάσις,
Δίσκου μεγίστου τάρροθος ΚΚιυναιθέως.
τύμβος δὲ νείτων ὄρτυγος πετρουμένης
τρέμων φυλάξει ῥόχθον Αἰγαίας ἁλός.
Ἁ / \ A ᾽ὔ Ἁ
τὴν Kaorviav δὲ καὶ Μελιναίαν θεὸν
λυπρὸς παρ᾽ “Αιδην δεννάσει κακορροθῶν,
ἣ μιν παλεύσει δυσλύτοις οἴστρου βρόχοις,


« Nauplius, king of Euboea, who, in revenge for the
death of his son Palamedes, whom the Greeks stoned to
death on a charge of treason, lured the Greeks on their


way from Troy upon the rocks of Euboea.


ὃ Aias Oiliades, the Locrian, wrecked by Poseidon on the


Gyrae.


¢ Cliffs near Myconos and Tenos, where the Locrian Aias


was saved after his shipwreck.
526


385


395


400


405


ALEXANDRA


many tunnies with the sutures of their heads split
upon the frying-pan! of whom the down-rushing
thunderbolt in the darkness shall eat as they perish :
when the destroyer “ shall lead them, their heads yet
aching from the debauch, and light a torch to guide
their feet in the darkness, sitting at his unsleeping
art.
And one,? like a diving kingfisher, the wave shall
carry through the narrow strait, a naked glutton-fish
swept between the double reefs. And on the
Gyrae’ rocks drying his feathers dripping from the
sea, he shall drain a second draught of the brine,
hurled from the banks by the three-taloned: spear,
wherewith his dread punisher,4that once was a
thrall,’ shall smite him and compel him to run his
race among the whales, blustering, like a cuckoo,
his wild words of abuse. And his chilly dolphin’s
dead body cast upon the shore the rays of Seirius
shall wither. And, rotten mummy-fish, among moss
and seaweed Nesaia’s sister’ shall hide him for pity,
she that was the helper’ of the most mighty Quoit,”
the Lord of Cynaetha. And his tomb beside the
Quail’ that was turned to stone shall trembling
watch the surge of the Aegean sea. And bitter in
Hades he shall abuse with evil taunts the goddess /
of Castnion and Melina, who shall entrap him in the
unescapable meshes of desire, in a love that is no


@ Poseidon.

ὁ Poseidon as servant of Laomedon, in building the walls
of Troy.

f Thetis. 9 Hom. 7. i. 396 ff.


r Zeus in reference to his being swallowed by Cronus.
For worship of Zeus at Cynaetha in Arcadia cf. Paus. v. 22. 1.
ὁ Ortygia= Delos, where the Locrian Aias was buried.

J Aphrodite,
527


-


LYCOPHRON


” > ” > 412 4
ἔρωτας οὐκ ἔρωτας, ἀλλ᾽ ᾿Ερινύων
πικρὰν ἀποψήλασα κηρουλκὸν πάγην.

σ A δ᾽ tA ὃ / J /

πασα δ᾽ ἄλγη δέξεταί κωκυμάτων,

Ὁ ” ; > A >? A /
ὅσην "Ἄρατθος ἐντὸς ἠδὲ δύσβατοι
Λειβήθριαι σφίγγουσι Δωτίου. πύλαι, 410
οἷς οὑμὸς ἔσται ,κἀχερουσίαν πάρα
ῥηγμῖνα δαρὸν ἐστεναγμένος γάμος.
πολλῶν γὰρ ἐν σπλάγχνοισι τυμβευθήσεται
βρωθεὶς πολυστοίχοισι καμπέων γνάθοις
νήριθμος ἑσμός" οἱ δ᾽ ἐπὶ ξένης ξένοι, 415
παῶν ἔρημοι δεξιώσονται τάφους.

Τὸν μὲν yap ᾿Ηιὼν Στρυμόνος Βισαλτία,
᾿Αψυνθίων ἄγχουρος ἠδὲ Βιστόνων,

, YX? Ῥ 7 3 “ /
κουροτρόφον πάγουρον ᾿Ηδωνῶν πέλας
4 \ a“ A 3 / /

κρύψει, πρὶν ἢ Τυμφρηστὸν αὐγάσαι λέπας, 420
τὸν πατρὶ πλεῖστον ἐστυγημένον βροτῶν,
ὅμηρον ὅς μιν θῆκε τετρήνας λύχνους,
ὅτ᾽ εἰς νόθον τρήρωνος ηὐνάσθη λέχος.

Τρισσοὺς δὲ ταρχύσουσι Kepxadov νάπαι
ἼἌλεντος οὐκ ἄπωθε καύηκας ποτῶν" 425

\ ᾽ὔ ~ / , ’

τὸν μέν, Μολοσσοῦ Kuréws ἸΚοίτου κύκνον,
συὸς παραπλαγχθέντα θηλείας τόκων,
7 3 > > 4 ~ ε ,ὔ Ἁ
ὅτ᾽ εἰς ὀλύνθων δῆριν ἑλκύσας σοφὴν
τὸν ἀνθάμιλλον αὐτὸς ἐκ μαντευμάτων


@ Greece, especially North Hellas.

> River of Ambracia. ¢ Near Olympus.

4. In Thessaly. ὁ Thesprotia.

7 Phoenix, tutor of Achilles (Hom. 11. ix. 432 ff.). Died
on his way home from Dey and was buried at Eion.

g In Thessaly.

r Amyntor who, from. jealousy of ite and his son
wha υροπρα put out the latter’ 5 eyes {Apoll iii. 13. 8).

ytia,


528


ALEXANDRA


love but springing for him the bitter death-drawing
snare of the Erinyes.

And woes of lamentation shall the whole land 4
hear—all that Aratthos? and the impassable Leibe-
thrian gates ° of Dotion ὦ enclose: by all these, yea,
even by the shore of Acheron,’ my bridal shall long
be mourned. For in the maws of many sea-monsters
shall be entombed the countless swarm devoured by
their jaws with many rows of teeth; while others,
strangers in a strange land, bereft of relatives, shall
receive their graves.

For one’ Bisaltian Eion by the Strymon, close
marching with the Apsynthians and Bistonians, nigh
to the Edonians, shall hide, the old nurse of youth,
wrinkled as a crab, ere ever he behold Tym-
phrestus’ crag 9: even him who of all men was most |
hated by his father,” who pierced the lamps of his
eyes and made him blind, when he entered the
dove’s * bastard bed. ᾿

And three’ sea-gulls the glades of Cercaphus
shall entomb, not far from the waters of Aleis: one ἢ
the swan of Molossus Cypeus Coetus,’ who failed to
guess the number of the brood-sow’s young, when,
dragging his rival™ into the cunning contest of the
wild figs, himself, as the oracle foretold, shall err


2 Calchas, Idomeneus, Sthenelus, all buried at foot of
Cercaphus near Colophon.

* Calchas, the prophet, hence the swan of Apollo (here
indicated by three obscure cult-names), was warned that he
should die when he met a superior prophet. Meeting
Mopsus, Calchas proposed the problem of telling how many
figs there were on a certain fig-tree. Mopsus answered
correctly, and in turn asked Calchas to foretell how many
young a certain brood sow would throw. Unable to answer
Calchas died of grief,

? Apollo. ™ Mopsus.

2M 529


LYCOPHRON


σφαλεὶς ἰαύσει τὸν μεμορμένον πότμον"
τὸν δ᾽ αὖ τέταρτον ἐγγόνων ᾿Ερεχθέως,
Αἴθωνος αὐτάδελφον ἐν πλασταῖς γραφαῖς"
τρίτον δέ, τοῦ μόσσυνας ᾿Εκτήνων ποτὲ
στερρᾷ δικέλλῃ βουσκαφήσαντος γόνον,
ν Γογγυλάτης εἷλε Βουλαῖος Μυλεύς,
ἀγηλάτῳ μάστιγι συνθραύσας κάρα,
ἦμος ξυναίμους πατρὸς αἱ Νυκτὸς κόραι
πρὸς αὐτοφόντην στρῆνον ὥπλισαν "μόρου.
Aowot δὲ ῥείθρων Ilvpdpov πρὸς ἐκβολαῖς
αὐτοκτόνοις σφαγαῖσι Δηραίνου κύνες
δμηθέντες αἰχμάσουσι λοισθίαν βοὴν
πύργων ὑπὸ πτέρναισι Παμφύλου κόρης.
αἰπὺς δ᾽ ἁλιβρὼς ὄ ὄχμος ἐν μεταιχμίῳ
Μάγαρσος ἁγνῶν ἠρίων σταθήσεται,
ὡς μὴ βλέπωσι, μηδὲ νερτέρων ἕδρας
δύντες, φόνῳ λουσθέντας ἀλλήλων τάφους.
Oi πέντε δὲ Σφήκειαν εἰς Κεραστίαν
καὶ Σάτραχον βλώξαντες “ὕλάτου τε γῆν
Μορφὼ παροικήσουσι τὴν Ζηρυνθίαν.


α Idomeneus, son of Deucalion, son of Minos, son of Zeus,
came safely home to Crete but afterwards went to Italy
and finally Colophon (Serv., Verg. 4. iii. 401). In Od. Le.
Odysseus pretends to be Aethon, brother of Idomeneus.

> Zeus. ¢ Homer, Od. xix. 181 ff.

@ Sthenelus, son of Capaneus. The latter was one of the
Epigoni against Thebes (Ectenes = Thebans, οὐ Paus. ix. 5.1),
who boasted that he would take the town in spite of Zeus
(Aesch. Sept. 440), and was slain by a thunderbolt.

¢ Thebans.


7 Zeus. For Ζεὺς Βουλαῖος cf. Paus. i. 3.5. 9 Erinyes.
» Eteocles and Polyneices, at once sons and brothers of
Oedipus. * Oedipus.


j anphiioaiide and Mopsus: as sienets: they are called
hounds of Apollo. When Amphilochus wished to visit
Argos, the home of his father Amphiaraus, he entrusted


530


# τ οδήβδξοιευΣ ὃν


ALEXANDRA


and sleep the destined sleep; the next, again,
fourth in descent from Erechtheus,? own brother of
Aethon® in the fictitious tale; and third,? the son of
him that with stern mattock ploughed the wooden
walls of the Ectenes,? whom Gongylates,’ the Coun-
sellor, the Miller, slew and brake his head in pieces
with his curse-expelling lash, what time the maiden
daughters of Night’ armed them that were the
brothers” of their own father? for the lust of doom
dealt by mutual hands.

And two/ by the mouth of the streams of
Pyramus,* hounds of Deraenus,’ shall be slain by
mutual slaughter, and fight their last battle at the foot
of the towers of the daughter ™ of Pamphylus. Anda
steep sea-bitten fortress, even Magarsus, shall stand
between their holy cairns, so that even when they
have gone down to the habitations of the dead, they
may not behold each other’s tombs, bathed in blood.

And five” shall come to the Horned Isle? of
Wasps and Satrachus? and the land of Hylates,? and
dwell beside Morpho” the Lady of Zerynthus.


the town of Mallos in Cilicia, which they had jointly
founded, to Mopsus for one year. As on his return Mopsus
refused him his share in the town, they fought a duel in
which both fell. They were buried on opposite sides of
Magarsus, a hill near Mallos. * In Cilicia.

‘ Apollo: cult name from Deraenus near Abdera.

m Magarsus, foundress of Magarsus in Cilicia.

 'Teucer, Agapenor, Acamas, Praxandrus, Cepheus.

° Cyprus. P River in Cyprus.

4 Apollo. For Apollo Hylates cf. inscription from Egypt
(probably Kuft) of third century s.c. Dittenb. Orient. Graec.
Inscrip. Select. No. 53 ᾿Απόλλωνι ὙὝλάτηι ᾿Αρτέμιδι Φωσφόρωι
᾿Αρτέμιδι Evodlar Λητοῖ Εὐτέκνωι Ηρακλεῖ Καλλινίκωι ᾿Απολλώνιος
διοικητής. This specially Cyprian by-name was found also
near Magnesia on the Maeander (Paus. x. 32. 6).

* Aphrodite: cf. Paus. iii. 15. 10.


531


LYCOPHRON


‘O μὲν πατρὸς μομφαῖσιν ἠλαστρημένος
Κυχρεῖος ἄντρων Baxdpov TE ναμάτων,
οὑμὸς ξύναιμος, ὡς ὀπατρίου φονεὺς
πώλου, νόθον φίτυμα, συγγενῶν βλάβη,
τοῦ λύσσαν ἐ ἐν ,ποίμναισιν αἰχμητηρίαν
χέαντος, ὃν χάρωνος ὠμηστοῦ δορὰ
χαλκῷ τορητὸν οὐκ ἔτευξεν ἐ ἐν μάχῃ,
μίαν πρὸς ΓΑιδὴν καὶ φθιτοὺς πεπαμένον
κέλευθον, ἣν γωρυτὸς ἔκρυψε Σκύθης,
ἦμος καταίθων θύσθλα Ἱζωμύρῳ λέων
σφῷ πατρὶ λάσκε τὰς ἐπηκόους λιτάς,
σκύμνον παρ᾽ ἀγκάλαισιν ἀΐτα βράσας.
οὐ γάρ τι πείσει φῖτυν, ὡς ὁ Λήμνιος
πρηστὴρ ᾿Ἑνυοῦς, οὔποτ᾽ εἰς φύζαν τραπεὶς
ταῦρος βαρύφρων, δυσμενεστάτου ἕένων
ἔτυψε δώρῳ σπλάγχνον, ἀρνεύσας λυγρὸν
πήδημα πρὸς κνώδοντος αὐτουργοὺς σφαγάς.
ἐλᾷ δὲ πάτρας τῆλε Τραμβήλου κάσιν,
ὃν ἡ ξύναιμος πατρὸς ἐκλοχεύεται,
δοθεῖσα πρωταίΐχμεια τῷ πυργοσκάφῳ.
ἣν δή ποτ᾽, ἐν ῥήτραισι δημοτῶν σταθείς,
γλαυκῷ κελαινὸν δόρπον ὥτρυνεν κυνὶ


στεῖλαι τριπλᾶς θύγατρας 6 σπείρας βαβαξ,


@ Teucer, son of Telamon and Hesione, daughter of
Laomedon, was banished from Salamis by his father when
he returned from Troy without Aias.


> Telamon. ¢ Prehistoric king of Salamis.
@ River in Salamis.
ε Hesione was sister of Priam. 7 Aias.


¢ Heracles’,lion-skin (Pind. J. 5 (6)).

* Aias was vulnerable in one part only (Plato, Symp.
219 £), viz. his side. The story followed here is that when
Aias was an infant Heracles wrapped him in his lion’s skin,


532


es hrs) coe ARE Ύ pees .


A Abe


Fo


ALEXANDRA


One® shall be he that shall be banished by his
father’s ® taunts from the cave of Cychreus° and the
waters of Bocarus 4; even he my cousin,’ as a bastard
breed, the ruin of his kin, the murderer of the colt 7
begotten by the same father; of him who spent
his sworded frenzy on the herds; whom the hide of
the lion 9 made invulnerable by the bronze in battle
and who possessed but one” path to Hades and the
dead—that which the Scythian quiver covered, what
time the lion,’ burning sacrifice to Comyrus,’ uttered
to his sire his prayer that was heard, while he
dandled in his arms his comrade’s cub. For he*
shall not persuade his father’ that the Lemnian
thunderbolt ™ of Enyo—he the sullen bul! that never
turned to flee—smote his own bowels with the gift
of his bitterest foe,” diving in a sorrowful leap on
the sword’s edge in self-wrought slaughter. Far
from his fatherland his sire shall drive Trambelus’ °
brother, whom my father's” sister? bare, when she
was given to him” who razed the towers as first-
fruits of the spear. She it was that the babbler,’
the father of three daughters, standing up in the
council of his townsmen, urged should be offered as


and prayed to Zeus that the child might be invulnerable
where the lion’s skin touched him. The quiver of Heracles
prevented the skin from touching him at one place, where
he was therefore vulnerable. For another version cf. Pind.
Tsth. v. (vi.).

ὁ Heracles. j Zeus.

κ᾿ 'Teucer. + Telamon.

m Aias, son of Telamon.

" Hector’s sword (Soph. 47. 815 ff.).

° Son of Telamon and Hesione, and so brother of Teucer.

» Priam. 4“ Hesione. ἡ * Telamon.

5 Phoenodamas, whom Laomedon asked to expose his
three daughters to the sea~monster.


533


LYCOPHRON


~ ~. Ὁ“ “ /
τῷ πᾶσαν ἅλμῃ πηλοποιοῦντι χθόνα,
Ὁ ͵ 2 ΄ 2
ὅταν κλύδωνας ἐξερεύγηται γνάθων,
λάβρῳ σαλεύων πᾶν τρικυμίᾳ πέδον. 41ὅ
ὁ δ᾽ ἀντὶ πιποῦς σκορπίον λαιμῷ σπάσας
Φόρκῳ κακῆς ὠδῖνος ἔκλαυσεν βάρος,
’ὔ / / /
χρήζων πυθέσθαι πημάτων ξυμβουλίαν.
«ε ᾿ , A ~ > / /
O δεύτερος δὲ νῆσον ἀγρότης μολών,
χερσαῖος αὐτόδαιτος ἐγγόνων δρυὸς 480
λυκαινομόρφων Νυκτίμου κρεανόμων,
τῶν πρόσθε μήνης φηγίνων πύρνων ὀχὴν
σπληδῷ κατ᾽ ἄκρον χεῖμα θαλψάντων πυρός,
χαλκωρυχήσει καὶ τὸν ἐκ βόθρου σπάσει
βῶλον, δικέλλῃ πᾶν μεταλλεύων γνύθος. 485
“Ὁ ζω ) EE > a /
οὗ φῖτυν ἠνάριξεν Οἰταῖος στόνυξ,
~ > / / /
βουβῶνος ἐν τόρμαισι θρυλίξας δέμας.
3 3 ε 7 \ ~ LN ”
ἔγνω δ᾽ 6 τλήμων σὺν κακῷ μαθὼν ἔπος,
ὡς πολλὰ χείλευς καὶ δεπαστραίων ποτῶν "
μέσῳ κυλίνδει μοῖρα παμμήστωρ βροτῶν. 400
ε 3 > Oe! > “" “ ran! δ .
6 δ᾽ αὐτὸς ἀργῷ mas φαληριῶν λύθρῳ
, \ \ / * 3 /
στόρθυγξ δεδουπὼς τὸν κτανόντ᾽ ἠμύνατο,
/ > / » > ~ /
πλήξας ἀφύκτως ἄκρον ὀρχηστοῦ σφυρόν.


α Sea-monster sent by Poseidon when Laomedon refused
to pay him for building the walls of Troy.

δ Hesione: ‘* woodpecker” merely contrasts the feeble-
ness of Hesione with the scorpion, Heracles.

¢ Heracles; cf. 34n.

@ A sea-god, son of Pontus and Gaia. )

ὁ Agapenor from Arcadia. * Arcadians.

9 Son of Lycaon, king of Arcadia, who was..slain and
served as food by his father to Zeus, who was Lycaon’s
guest. Zeus turned Lycaon and his sons into wolves.


534


ALEXANDRA


dark banquet for the grey hound,“ which with briny
water was turning all the land to mud, spewing
waves from his jaws and with fierce surge flooding
all the ground. But, in place of the woodpecker,?
he swallowed in his throat a scorpion “ and bewailed
to Phorcus ὦ the burden of his evil travail, seeking to
find counsel in his pain.

The second “ who comes to the island is a country-
man and a landsman, feeding on simple food, one
of the sons/ of the oak, the wolf-shaped devourers
of the flesh of Nyctimus,’ a people that were before
the moon,’ and who in the height of winter heated
in the ashes of the fire their staple of oaken bread ;
he shall dig for copper’ and from the trench drag
the soil, mining with mattock every pit. His father/
the tusk * of Oeta slew, crushing his body in the
regions of the belly. In sorrow, wretched man,
he learnt the truth of the saying that the all-
devising fate of men rolls many a thing betwixt the
life and the draught of the cup.’ That same tusk,
all flecked with glistening foam, when he had fallen
took vengeance on his slayer, smiting with unescap-
able blow the dancer’s ankle-bone.


» i.e. of primeval antiquity (Apoll. Rh. iv. 264).

ὁ Copper mines in Cyprus.

i Ancaeus.

* The Calydonian Boar.

“Two Ancaei are known to mythology—Ancaeus of
Arcadia and Ancaeus of Samos. Of the latter—who is
often confused with the other—it is told that when planting
a vine it was prophesied that he would never taste its fruit.
Just when he was about to drink the wine of its grapes, there
came the news of the Calydonian Boar. He went to the
hunt and was killed. Hence proverb: πολλὰ μεταξὺ πέλει
κύλικος Kal χείλεος ἄκρου. He is the ““ dancer” (493) either as
a warrior or in reference to Hom. 1]. xvi. 745 (Holzinger).


535


LYCOPHRON


/ A “~ / > / /
Τρίτος δὲ τοῦ μάρψαντος ἐκ κοίλης πέτρας
κέλωρ γίγαντος ὅπλα, τοῦ ποτ᾽ εἰς λέχος ᾿ 495.
λαθραῖον αὐτόκλητος ᾿Ιδαία πόρις
¢ a > ? 7 e@ /
ἡ ζῶσ᾽ és “Any ἵξεται καταιβάτις,
θρήνοισιν ἐκτακεῖσα, Μουνίτου τοκάς"
ὃν δή ποτ᾽ ἀγρώσσοντα ἸἹΚρηστώνης ἔχις
a rd ὔ 3 / /
KTevel, πατάξας πτέρναν ἀγρίῳ βέλει, 500
ὅταν τεκόντος αἰχμάλωτος εἰς χέρας
ἡ πατρομήτωρ τὸν δνόφῳ τεθραμμένον
βάλῃ νεογνὸν σκύμνον. ἧ μόνῃ ζυγὸν
δούλειον ἀμφήρεισαν ᾿Ακταίων λύκοι
τῆς ἁρπαγείσης ἀντίποινα θυιάδος, 505
ὧν ὀστράκου στρόβιλος ἐντετμημένος
κόρσην σκεπάζει ῥῦμα φοινίου δορός.
\ 25'S. / + a4
τὰ δ᾽ ἄλλα θριπόβρωτος ἄψαυστος δόμων
σφραγὶς δοκεύει, θάμβος ἐ ἐγχώροις μέγα.
ἃ δὴ πρὸς ἄστρων κλίμακα στήσει δρόμον 510
Tots ἡμιθνήτοις διπτύχοις Λαπερσίοις"
οὗς μήποτ᾽, ὦ Ζεῦ σῶτερ, εἰς πάτραν ἐμὴν
στείλαις ἀρωγοὺς τῇ δισαρπάγῳ κρεκί,
δὲ is ὁπλ ἡλκάδ ‘i
μηδὲ mrepwras ὁπλίσαντες ὁλκάδας :


* Acamas, son of Theseus. Theseus was son of ἄθρει
(really of Poseidon) and Aethra, daughter of Pittheus of
Troezen. Aegeus hid his sword and. shoes under a rock to _ 4
serve as tokens by which their son might make himself :
known to his father when he grew up. Before the Trojan ᾿
war Acamas went to Troy with Diomede to demand back ~~
Helen. Here, by Laodice, daughter of Priam, he had a son -
Munitus who was reared by his grandmother Aethra, who φ
was then in Troy in attendance on Helen. When Troy was :
taken, Aethra gave up Munitus to Acamas, while Laodice
was swallowed by the earth near the tomb of Ilus. Munitus Ξ
afterwards died by the bite of a snake in Thrace. |

» Theseus. © Aegeus. @ Acamas.


536


ALEXANDRA


And the third @ is the son of him ὃ who took from
the hollow of the rock the arms of the giant’; even
he? into whose secret bed shall come self-invited that
heifer 6 of Ida who shall go down to Hades alive,/
worn out with lamentation, the mother of Munitus,
whom one day, as he hunts, a viper of Crestone 9
shall kill, striking his heel with fierce sting; what
time into his father’s” hands that father’s father’s
mother, taken captive, shall lay the young cub*
reared in the dark: she on whom alone the wolves !
which harried the people of Acte™ set the yoke of
slavery in vengeance for the raped Bacchant,” those
wolves whose head a cloven egg-shell® covers, to
guard them from the bloody spear; all else the
worm-eaten untouched seal? watches in the halls,
a great marvel to the people of the country. Which
things shall rear a ladder to the trace of the stars
for the twin half-mortal Lapersii¢ Whom, Ὁ
Saviour Zeus, never mayst thou send against my
fatherland to succour the twice-raped corncrake,”
nor may they equip their winged ships and from the


4 Laodice. 7 See v. 314 n. 9 In Thrace.
% Acamas. ὁ Theseus.

j Aethra, mother of Theseus; Munitus, son of Acamas.
k Munitus. - The Dioscuri.

m Attica. ” Helen.


° The Dioscuri wear a conical cap resembling half an egg-


- Shell, half the Leda-egg from which they were born.


» Worm-eaten wood was used in early times as a seal.

@ The Dioscuri, i.e. Castor and Pollux, who shared their
immortality day and day about, Hom. Od. xi. 298 τῇ,
Pind. P. xi. 63 ff. They received divine honours in Athens
because when they invaded Attica they carried off Aethra
but touched nothing else. They are called Lapersii because
they sacked Las in Laconia.
᾿ ” Helen as a child was carried off by Theseus, later by

aris.


537


LYCOPHRON


πρύμνης ἀπ᾽ ἄκρας γυμνὸν αἰψηρὸν πόδα

εἰς Βεβρύκων ῥίψειαν ἐκβατηρίαν,

μηδ᾽ οὗ λεόντων τῶνδε καρτερώτεροι,

ἀλκὴν ἃ ἄμικτοι, τοὺς "Αρης ἐφίλατο,

καὶ Ot ᾿Ενυώ, καὶ τριγέννητος θεὰ

Βοαρμία Λογγᾶτις ‘Oporais Bia.

οὐκ ἄν, τὰ χειρώνακτες ἐργάται διπλοῖ,

Δρύμας τε καὶ ἐϊρόφαντρυ, ὁ ͵᾿Κρώμνης ἀναξ,

ἐλατύπησαν κοιράνῳ ψευδωμότῃ,

ἕν ἦμαρ ἀρκέσειε πορθηταῖς λύκοις

στέξαι βαρεῖαν ἐμβολὴν ῥαιστηρίαν,

καίπερ πρὸ πύργων τὸν Kavaotpaiov μέγαν

ἐγχώριον γίγαντα δυσμενῶν μοχλὸν

ἔχοντα, καὶ τὸν πρῶτον εὐστόχῳ βολῇ

μαιμῶντα τύψαι ποιμνίων ἀλάστορα.

οὗ δή ποτ᾽ αἴθων πρῶτα καινίσει δόρυ

κίρκος θρασὺς πήδημα λαιψηρὸν δικών,

Τραικῶν ἄριστος, ᾧ πάλαι τεύχει “τάφους

ἀκτὴ Δολόγκων εὐτρεπὴς κεκμηκότι,

Μαζουσία προὔχουσα χερσαίου κέρως.
᾿Αλλ᾽ ἔστι γάρ τις, ἔστι καὶ παρ᾽ ἐλπίδα

ἡμῖν ἀρωγὸς πρευμενὴς ὃ Δρύμνιος

δαίμων Ipopavbeds Αἰθίοψ Γυράψιος,

ὅς, τὸν πλανήτην ᾿Ορθάνην ὅταν δόμοις

σίνιν καταρρακτῆρα δέξωνται πικρὸν

οἱ δεινὰ κἀπόθεστα πείσεσθαί ποτε


@ 4.¢. Troy. > Idas and Lynceus, sons of Apharsus.

¢ Athena Tritogeneia, a much-disputed title. Boarmia,
etc., are said to be Boeotian cult-names of Athena.

a Apollo in Miletus. ὁ Poseidon in Thurii.

f In Paphlagonia. 9 Laomedon.

» Hector: called Canastraean because he is a ** giant,”
and the home of the Giants is Pallene with its town
Canastraeum.


538


-


ALEXANDRA


stern end set their naked swift foot in the landing-
place * of the Bebryces! Neither may those others?
who are mightier than these lions, the unapproach-
able in valour, whom Ares loves and divine Enyo
and the goddess that was born on the third day,°
Boarmia Longatis Homolois Bia. The walls which the
two working craftsmen, Drymas? and Prophantus,?
Lord of Cromna, built for the king? that brake his
oath, would not avail for one day against the ravaging
wolves, to keep out their grievous ruinous assault,
even though they have before the towers the mighty
Canastraean,’ the native giant, as a bar against the
foemen, eager to smite with well-aimed shaft the
first harrier of the flocks. His spear shall a bold
falcon ἡ first handsel, swooping a swift leap, best of
the Greeks, for whom, when he is dead, the ready
shore of the Doloncians/ builds of old a tomb, even
Mazusia jutting from the horn of the dry land.

But we have one,* yea one beyond our hope,
for gracious champion, even the god D»ymnius
Promantheus Aethiops Gyrapsius, who, when they /
who are destined to suffer things dread and undesir-
able shall receive in their halls their fatal guest,”
the swooping robber, the wandering Orthanes,” and


‘ Protesilaus of Thessaly was first to leap ashore at Troy
and was slain by Hector.

7 Thracian Chersonese, where Protesilaus was buried near
Mazusia, opposite Sigeum (Strabo vii. 331 fr. 52, cf. xiii.
595).

2 Zeus: the cult-names Drym. and Pr. are Zeus in
Pamphylia and Thurii respectively ; A. and G. in Chios.

¢ The Laconians. : m Paris.

” A licentious deity, cf. Strabo 588 οὐδὲ yap ‘Holodos olde
Πρίαπον, ἀλλ᾽ ἔοικε τοῖς ᾿Αττικοῖς ᾿Ορθάνῃ καὶ Κονισάλῳ καὶ
Τύχωνι καὶ τοῖς rovovross So Athen. 441 f. couples Orthanes
and Conisalus.


539


LYCOPHRON


μέλλοντες, ἔν τε δαιτὶ καὶ θαλυσίοις
λοιβαῖσι μειλίσσωσιν ἀστεργῆ Ἰζράγον,
θήσει βαρὺν κολῳὸν ἐν λέσχαις μέσον.

\ ~ A / > / OA
καὶ πρῶτα μὲν μύθοισιν ἀλλήλους ὀδὰξ
βρύξουσι κηκασμοῖσιν ὠκριωμένοι, 545
αὖθις δ᾽ ἐναιχμάσουσιν ᾿αὐτανέψιοι,
ἀνεψιαῖς ὄρνισι χραισμῆσαι γάμους a
βιαιοκλῶπας ἁρπαγάς τε συγγόνων

χρήζοντες, ἀλφῆς τῆς ἀεδνώτου δίκην. i
ἢ πολλὰ δὴ βέλεμνα Κνηκιὼν πόρος 550
ε ’, > ~ > / $
ῥιφέντα τόλμαις αἰετῶν ἐπόψεται, ᾿
3 A ae.’ , /
ἄπιστα καὶ θαμβητὰ Φηραίοις κλύειν.
6 μὲν κρανείᾳ κοῖλον οὐτάσας στύπος
φηγοῦ κελαινῆς διπτύχων ἕνα φθερεῖ,
λέοντα ταύρῳ συμβαλόντα φύλοπιν. δδδ
¢ > > 7 43 > v4 \
ὃ δ᾽ αὖ σιγύμνῳ πλεύρ᾽ ἀναρρήξας Boos
κλινεῖ πρὸς οὖδας. τῷ δὲ δευτέραν ἔπι
πληγὴν ἀθαμβὴς κριὸς ἐγκορύψεται,
ἄγαλμᾶ πήλας τῶν ᾿Αμυκλαίων τάφων.
ὁμοῦ δὲ χαλκὸς καὶ κεραύνιοι Borat ὁ. 560.
ταύρους καταξανοῦσιν, ὧν ἀλκὴν ἑνὸς
οὐδ᾽ ὁ Σκιαστὴς ᾿Ορχιεὺς Τιλφούσιος
ἐμέμψατ᾽, ἐν χάρμαισι ῥαιβώσας κέρας.

Ἁ

καὶ τοὺς μὲν ἽΛιδης, τοὺς δ᾽ ᾿Ολύμπιοι πλάκες
παρ᾽ ἦμαρ αἰεὶ δεξιώσονται ξένους, 565
φιλαυθομαίμους, ἀφθίτους τε καὶ φθιτούς.


* Zeus, to prevent the Dioscuri going against Troy,
involves them in a quarrel with the sons of Aphareus.

ὃ Idas and Lynceus fight with Castor and Polydeuces,
Pind. WV. x.

¢ Phoebe and Hilaeira, daughters.of Leucippus.

@ River near Sparta.


540


ALEXANDRA


when at banquet and festival they shall seek to
propitiate the inexorable Lord α of Cragos, shall put
in the midst of their talk grievous wrangling. And
first in words they shall tear each other with their
teeth, exasperate with jeers; but anon the own
cousins? shall ply the spear, eager to prevent the
violent rape of their cousin birds,* and the carrying
off of their kin, in vengeance for the traffic without
gifts of wooing. Surely many a shaft shall the
stream of Cnacion ὦ behold hurled by the daring of
the eagles, incredible and marvellous for the
Pheraeans ὁ to hear. One/ with his spear of cornel-
wood shall smite the hollow trunk of the black oak
and shall slay one ’ of the pair—a lion joining battle
with a bull. The other” in turn with his lance
shall pierce the side of the ox’ and bring him to
the ground. But against him/ the undaunted ram *
shal] butt a second blow, hurling the headstone of the
Amyclaean tomb. And bronze spear and thunder-
bolts together shall crush the bulls ——whereof one ᾽
had such valour as even Sciastes Orchieus,” Lord of
Tilphossa, did not scorn, when he bent his bow in
battle. And the one pair? Hades shall receive : the
others? the meadows of Olympus shall welcome as
guests on every alternate day, brothers of mutual love,
undying and dead.

4 In Messenia; Hom. /1/. ix. 151.

2 Idas. 9 Castor. » Polydeuces.

‘ Lynceus. 7 Polydeuces.

* Idas hurls the tombstone of his father, πρόσεστι at
Polydeuces, Pind. NV. x. 66.

‘I. and L.

™ Idas who fought with Apollo for Marpessa, daughter of

Evenus. @ Apollo.


pollo
° Idas and Lynceus, Castor and Polydeuces.
"» Hom. Od. xi. 303; Pind. WV. x. 55 ff. ; Apollod. iii. 137.


541


LYCOPHRON ᾧ

*

Καὶ τῶν μὲν ἡμῖν εὐνάσει δαίμων δόρυ,
βαιόν τι μῆχαρ ἐν κακοῖς δωρούμενος.

ἄλλων δ᾽ ἄπλατον χειρὶ κινήσει νέφος, |

ὧν οὐδ᾽ 6 ‘Powods iis εὐνάζων μένος 570


σχήσει, τὸν ἐννέωρον ἐν νήσῳ χρόνον

μίμνειν ἀνώγων, θεσφάτοις πεπεισμένους,

τροφὴν δ᾽ ἀμεμφῆ πᾶσι τριπτύχους κόρας

ἴσκων παρέξειν, Ἰζυνθίαν ὅσοι σκοπὴν

μίμνοντες ἠλάσκουσιν ᾿Ινωποῦ πέλας, 575°
Αἰγύπτιον Τρίτωνος ἕλκοντες ποτόν.
ἃς δὴ Πρόβλαστος ἐξεπαίδευσε θρασὺς
μυληφάτου χιλοῖο δαιδαλευτρίας

ἕρπιν τε ῥέζειν ἠδ᾽ ἀλοιφαῖον λίπος,


οἰνοτρόπους Ζάρηκος ἐκγόνους φάβας. 580
at καὶ στρατοῦ βούπειναν ὀθνείων κυνῶν Ἂ
τρύχουσαν ἀλθανοῦσιν, ἐλθοῦσαί ποτε ἢ
Σιθῶνος εἰς θυγατρὸς εὐναστήριον. fs

Kai ταῦτα μὲν μίτοισι χαλκέων πάλαι |
στρόμβων ἐπιρροιζοῦσι γηραιαὶ κόραι" δ8δ᾽
Κηφεὺς δὲ καὶ Πράξανδρος, οὐ ναυκληρίας =
λαῶν & ἄνακτες, ἀλλ᾽ ἀνώνυμοι σποραΐί, Ἰ
πέμπτοι τέταρτοι γαῖαν ἵξονται θεᾶς g


Γ Γόλγων ἀνάσσης" ὧν ὁ μὲν Λάκων᾽ ὄχλον
ἄγων Θεράπνης, θάτερος δ᾽ ἀπ᾽ ᾿Ωλένου
vuns τε Βουραίοισιν ἡγεμὼν στρατοῦ.


« The Greek expedition against Troy under Agamemnon.

> Anius, son of Apollo and Rhoeo, king of Delos and
— of Apollo, asked the Greeks to stay for nine years in

elos.

ὁ Delos.

@ Which said that Troy would not be taken till the tenth p
year.


542


ALEXANDRA


So their spear shall god lull to rest for us, granting
us a brief remedy in our woe. But a cloud of others %
unapproachable in their might shall he rouse—whose
rage not even the son? of Rhoeo shall lull nor stay,
though he bid them abide for the space of nine years
in his island,’ persuaded by his oracles,? and though
he promise that his three daughters?’ shall give
blameless sustenance to all who stay and roam the
Cynthian hill beside Inopus/ drinking the Egyptian
waters of Triton. These daughters lusty Problastus’?
taught to be skilled in contriving milled food and to
make wine and fatty oil—even the dove grand-
daughters of Zarax,” skilled to turn things into wine.
These shall heal the great and wasting hunger of the
host of alien hounds,‘ coming one day to the grave
of Sithon’s daughter./

_These things the Ancient Maidens* whirl on
with rushing thread of brazen spindles. But Cepheus’
and Praxandrus,” not princes of a naval host but a
nameless brood, fifth and fourth shall come to the
land” of the goddess 9 queen of Golgi; whereof the
one shall lead a Laconian troop from Therapna; the
other from Olenos and Dyme shalt lead his host of
the men of Bura.


“ Oeno, Spermo, Elais, who had the gift of producing
wine, corn, and oil at will. Collectively called Oenotropi

7 River in Delos fabled to have a connexion with the Nite

9 Dionysus.

x First husband of Rhoeo and so step-father of Anius.

‘ The Greeks at Troy, suffering from hunger, sent
Palamedes to fetch the Oenotropi buried at Rhoeteum in
the Troad.

4 Rhoeteia, daughter of Sithon, King of Thrace.


* The Moirai or Fates. ἐ From Achaia.
™ FRrom Therapnae in Laconia.
" Cyprus. _ @ Aphrodite.


543


LYCOPHRON


Ὁ δ᾽ ᾿Αργύριππα Δαυνίων παγκληρίαν
3 > / \ ’ὔ
παρ᾽ Αὐσονίτην Φυλαμὸν δωμήσεται,
πικρὰν ἑταίρων ἐπτερωμένην ἰδὼν
οἰωνόμικτον μοῖραν, ot θαλασσίαν
δίαιταν αἰνέσουσι, πορκέων δίκην,
, > / ΄ > 4 ’
κύκνοισιν ἰνδαλθέντες εὐγλήνοις δομήν.
ε, > “9 ’ 3 / \
ῥάμφεσσι δ᾽ ἀγρώσσοντες ἐλλόπων θοροὺς 600
φερώνυμον νησῖδα νάσσονται πρόμου,
θεατρομόρφῳ πρὸς κλίτει γεωλόφῳ
ἀγυιοπλαστήσαντες ἐμπέδοις τομαῖς
πυκνὰς καλιάς, Ζῆθον ἐκμιμούμενοι.
ὁμοῦ δ᾽ ἐς ἄγραν κἀπὶ κοιταΐαν νάπην
νύκτωρ στελοῦνται, πάντα φεύγοντες βροτῶν
κάρβανον ὄχλον, ἐν δὲ γραικίταις πέπλοις
’ > 4 > / ? 7
κόλπων ἰαυθμοὺς ἠθάδας διζήμενοι, ΐ
καὶ κρῖμνα χειρῶν κἀπιδόρπιον τρύφος
μάζης σπάσονται, προσφιλὲς κνυζούμενοι,
τῆς πρὶν διαίτης τλήμονες μεμνημένοι.
Τροιζηνίας. δὲ τραῦμα φοιτάδος “πλάνης
ἔσται κακῶν τε πημάτων παραίτιον,
ὅταν θρασεῖα θουρὰς οἰστρήσῃ κύων ,
κ / ’ὔ 3 Ψ “ΤΆ > 7 /
πρὸς λέκτρα. τύμβος δ᾽ αὐτὸν ἐκσώσει μόρου 6]
Οπλοσμίας, σφαγαῖσιν ηὐτρεπισμένον. |
4 > 9 a 3 /
κολοσσοβάμων δ᾽ ἐν πτυχαῖσιν Αὐσόνων


α Diomedes, son of Tydeus of Aetolia. Returning to
Argos he found his wife in adultery with Cometes. He
escaped their machinations by taking refuge at the altar of
Hera. He then left Argos and came to Daunia in Italy.
Daunus, the king of the country being engaged in war,
Diomedes helped him. Winning the war, Daunus proposed
to give him either the booty or the land. Alaenus, being
made arbiter, awarded the land to Daunus, the booty to
Diomede, who in anger cursed the land that it should never


544


ἐξ εχ ©


ALEXANDRA


Another® shall found Argyrippa,? a Daunian
estate beside Ausonian Phylamus,° seeing the bitter
fate of his comrades turned to winged birds, who4
shall accept a sea life, after the manner of fishermen,
like in form to bright-eyed swans. Seizing in their
bills the spawn of fishes they~shall dwell in an
island ¢ which bears their leader’s name, on a theatre-
shaped rising ground, building in rows their close-set
nests with firm bits of wood, after the manner of
Zethus.’ And together they shall betake them to
the chase and by night to rest in the dell, avoiding
all the alien crowd of men, but in folds of Grecian
robes seeking their accustomed resting - place
they shall eat crumbs from the hand and fragments
of cake from the table, murmuring pleasantly,
remembering, hapless ones, their former way of life.’
His wounding of the Lady” of Troezen shall be
part cause of his wild wandering and of his evil
sufferings when a wild lustful bitch * shall be frenzied
for adulterous bed. But the altar-tomb of Hoplosmia/
shall save him from doom, when already prepared
for slaughter. And in the glen of Ausonia” he shall


be fruitful save for one of Aetolian blood. He erected
pillars throughout Daunia to signify that the land belonged
to him. After his death Daunus caused them to be thrown
into the sea but they miraculously returned to their place.

> Arpi (Strabo 283).

* Unknown river in Italy.

@ For the story ef. Ovid, M. xiv. 498 ff.; Verg. 4. xi.
271 ff. ; Strabo 284.
ὁ TInsulae Diomedeae.

7 With his brother δ δὴ he built the walls of Thebes.

9 Antonin. Lib. 37; Aelian, H.A. i 1; Plin. ΛΗ x.
127; Aristot. M. 80.

h ’ Aphrodite, Hom, 1]. v. 335 ff.

* Aegialeia, daughter of Adrastus, wife of Diomedes.

Hera. * Italy.


ΩΝ δ48


LYCOPHRON


σταθεὶς ἐρείσει κῶλα χερμάδων ἔ ἔπι
τοῦ τειχοποιοῦ γαπέδων ᾿Αμοιβέως,
τὸν ἑρματίτην νηὸς ἐκβαλὼν πέτρον.
κρίσει δ᾽ ᾿Αλαίνου τοῦ κασιγνήτου σφαλεὶς
εὐχὰς ἀρούραις ἀμφ᾽ ἐτητύμους βαλεῖ, 620
Δηοῦς ἀνεῖναι μήποτ᾽ ὄμπνιον στάχυν, ‘
γύας τιθαιβώσσοντος ἀρδηθμῷ Διός,
7 ἣν μή τις αὐτοῦ ῥίζαν Αἰτωλῶν σπάσας
χέρσον λαχήνῃ, βουσὶν αὔλακας τεμών.
στήλαις δ᾽ ἀκινήτοισιν ὀχμάσει πέδον, 625
ἃς οὔτις ἀνδρῶν ἐκ βίας καυχήσεται
μετοχλίσας ὀλίζον. ἢ γὰρ ἀπτέρως
αὐταὶ pr ar ἵξονται βάσιν
ἄνδηρ᾽ ἀπέζοις ἴχνεσιν δατούμεναι.
θεὸς δὲ πολλοῖς αἰπὺς αὐδηθήσεται, 680.
ὅσοι παρ᾽ ᾿Ιοῦς γρῶνον οἰκοῦνται πέδον,
δράκοντα τὸν φθείραντα Φαίακας κτανών.
Oi δ᾽ ἀμφικλύστους χοιράδας Γυμνησίας
σισυρνοδῦται καρκίνοι πεπλωκότες ᾿
ἄχλαινον ἀμπρεύσουσι νήλιποι βίον, 636
τριπλαῖς δικώλοις σφενδόναις ὡπλισμένοι. :
ὧν at τεκοῦσαι τὴν ἑκηβόλον τέχνην
ἄδορπα παιδεύσουσι νηπίους γονάς.
οὐ γάρ τις αὐτῶν ψίσεται πύρνον γνάθῳ,
πρὶν ἂν κρατήσῃ ναστὸν εὐστόχῳ λίθῳ τς
ὑπὲρ τράφηκος σῆμα κείμενον σκοποῦ.


4“ Stones from walls of Troy used by Diomedes as ballast
for his ships.

,2 Poseidon, who built the walls of Troy.

‘e Alaenus, half-brother of Diomedes.

ἃ Demeter.

ὁ Reference to the Dasii, according to Holzinger, cf. Sil.
Ital. Pun. xiii. 32, etc.


546


~ ALEXANDRA


stand like a colossus resting his feet on the boulders,“
the foundations of Amoebeus,® the builder of the
walls, when he has cast out of his ship the ballast
stones. And, disappointed by the judgement of his
brother Alaenus,° he shall cast an effectual curse
upon the fields, that they may never send up the
opulent corn-ear of Deo,4 when Zeus with his rain
nurtures the soil, save only if one ὁ who draws his
blood from his own Aetolian stock shall till the land,
cleaving the furrows with team of oxen. And with
pillars not to be moved he shall hold fast the land:
pillars which no man shall boast to have moved
even a little by his might. For as on wings they
shall come back again, traversing with trackless
steps the terraces. And a high god shall he be
called by many, even by those who dwell by the
cavernous plain’ of Io, when he shall have slain
the dragon that harried the Phaeacians.9 +

And others” shall sail to the sea-washed
Gymnesian? rocks—crab-like, clad in skins—where
cloakless and unshod they shall drag out their lives,
armed with three two-membered slings Their
mothers shall teach the far-shooting art to their
young offspring by supperless discipline. For none
of them shall chew bread with his jaws, until with
well-aimed stone he shall have won the cake set as


7 The Ionian sea.

9 Cercyraeans. The dragon is the Colchian dragon whic
followed Jason to Corcyra to recover the Golden Fleece.
It was slain by Diomede.

* Boeotians. ὁ The Balearic Isles.

7 Diodor. v. 18; Strabo 168. The dwellers in the Balearic
Isles (or Gymnesiae) were famous slingers (hence popular
derivation from βάλλω---Βαλιαρεῖς). They carried three slings,
one on head, one round neck, the third round waist.


547


LYCOPHRON


καὶ TOL μὲν ἀκτὰς ἐμβατήσονται λεπρὰς
᾿Ιβηροβοσκοὺς ἄγχι Taprnood πύλης,
"Apvns παλαιᾶς γέννα, Τεμμίκων πρόμοι,
Γραῖαν ποθοῦντες καὶ Λεοντάρνης πάγους
Σκῶλόν τε καὶ Téyupav ᾿Ογχηστοῦ θ᾽ ἕδος
καὶ χεῦμα Θερμώδοντος “Ὑψάρνου θ᾽ ὕδωρ.
Τοὺς δ᾽ ἀμφὶ Σύρτιν καὶ Λιβυστικὰς πλάκας
στενήν τε πορθμοῦ συνδρομὴν Τυρσηνικοῦ
καὶ μιξόθηρος ναυτιλοφθόρους σκοπὰς
τῆς πρὶν θανούσης ἐκ χερῶν Μηκιστέως
τοῦ στερφοπέπλου Σκαπανέως Βοαγίδα
ἁρπυιογούνων κλώμακάς τ᾽ ἀηδόνων
πλαγχθέντας, ὠμόσιτα δαιταλωμένους,
πρόπαντας “Αἰδης πανδοκεὺς ἀγρεύσεται,
λώβαισι παντοίαισιν ἐσπαραγμένους,
ἕνα φθαρέντων ἄγγελον λιπὼν φίλων
δελφινόσημον κλῶπα Φοινίκης θεᾶς.
ὃς ὄψεται μὲν τοῦ μονογλήνου στέγας
χάρωνος, οἴνης τῷ κρεωφάγῳ σκύφον
χερσὶ προτείνων, τοὐπιδόρπιον ποτόν.
ἐπόψεται δὲ λείψανον τοξευμάτων
τοῦ Κηραμύντου Ilevkéws [Παλαίμονος,
οἵ πάντα θρανύξαντες εὔτορνα σκάφη
σχοίνῳ κακὴν τρήσουσι κεστρέων ἄγρην.
ἄλλος δ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἄλλῳ μόχθος ἄθλιος μενεῖ,


τοῦ πρόσθεν αἰεὶ πλεῖον ἐξωλέστερος.


« Odysseus and his comrades.

> Straits of Messana. ¢ Scylla.

@ Heracles at Macistus in Elis (Strabo 348). Spademan
in ref. to cleaning the Augean stables; cattle-driver in ref.


to the cattle of Geryon. ὁ Sirens.
7 Odysseus, who had a dolphin for device upon his shield.
9 Athena, the Palladium. » Polyphemus,


548


ALEXANDRA


a mark above the board. These shall set foot on the
rough shores that feed the Iberians near the gate of
Tartessus—a race sprung from ancient Arne, chief-
tains of the Temmices, yearning for Graea and the®
cliffs of Leontarne and Scolus and Tegyra and
Onchestus’ seat and the flood of Thermodon and the
waters of Hypsarnus.

Others “ shall wander beside Syrtis and the Libyan
plains and the narrow meet of the Tyrrhenian Strait”
and the watching-place fatal to mariners of the
hybrid monster* that formerly died by the hand of
Mecisteus,* the hide-clad Spademan, the Cattle-
driver, and the rocks of the harpy-limbed nightin-
gales. There, devoured raw, Hades, mine host,
shall seize them all, torn with all manner of evil
entreatment; and he shall leave but one’ to tell of
his slaughtered friends, even the man of the dolphin
device, who stole the Phoenician goddess.’ He shall
see the dwelling of the one-eyed lion,” offering in
his hands to that flesh-eater the cup of the vine
as an after-supper draught.’ And he shall see
the remnant’ that was spared by the arrows of
Ceramyntes Peuceus Palaemon.* © That remnant shall
break in pieces all the well-turned hulls and shall
with rushes pierce their evil spoil, as it were of
fishes.’ Unhappy labour after labour shall await
him, each more baleful than that which went before. ©

ἐ Hom. Od. ix. 345 ff. j Laestrygones.

* Heracles, who, when the Laestrygones attempted to
rob him of the cattle of Geryon, slew them all but a remnant.
Ceramyntes = Alexicacos, Heracles as averter of evil;
Peuceus, cult-name of Heracles in Iberia (schol.) or Abdera
(Z.M.); Palaemon i.e. Wrestler (παλαίειν =to wrestle).

? The Laestrygones attacked the ships and the crews of


Odysseus, ἰχθῦς δ᾽ ὡς πείροντες ἀτερπέα δαῖτα pépovro (Hom.
Od. x. 194).


549


LYCOPHRON


ἢ 2 ἃ 4ι.Κ , ~
ποία Χάρυβδις οὐχὶ δαίσεται νεκρῶν;
ποία δ᾽ ᾿Ερινὺς μιξοπάρθενος κύων;
τίς οὐκ ἀηδὼν στεῖρα Κενταυροκτόνος
“Αἰτωλὶς 1 ἢ Κουρῆτις αἰόλῳ μέλει
πείσει τακῆναι σάρκας ἀκμήνους βορᾶς;
ποίαν δὲ θηρόπλαστον οὐκ ἐσόψεται
δράκαιναν, ἐγκυκῶσαν ἀλφίτῳ θρόνα,
καὶ κῆρα κνωπόμορφον; οἱ δὲ δύσμοροι
στένοντες ἄτας ἐν συφοῖσι φορβάδες
γίγαρτα χιλῷ συμμεμιγμένα τρυγὸς
καὶ στέμφυλα βρύξουσιν. ἀλλά νιν βλάβης
μῶλυς σαώσει ῥίζα καὶ Κτάρος φανεὶς
Νωνακριάτης Τρικέφαλος Φαιδρὸς θεός.
Ἥξει δ᾽ ἐρεμνὸν εἰς ἀλήπεδον φθιτῶν
καὶ νεκρόμαντιν πέμπελον διζήσεται
ἀνδρῶν γυναικῶν εἰδότα ξυνουσίας,
ψυχαῖσι θερμὸν αἷμα προσράνας βόθρῳ,
καὶ φασγάνου πρόβλημα, νερτέροις φόβον,
πήλας ἀκούσει κεῖθι πεμφίγων oma
λεπτὴν ἀμαυρᾶς μάστακος προσφθέγμασιν.
Ὅθεν Γιγάντων νῆσος ἡ μετάφρενον
θλάσασα καὶ Τυφῶνος ἀγρίου δέμας
φλογμῷ ζέουσα δέξεται μονόστολον,
ev ἦ πιθήκων πάλμυς ἀφθίτων γένος
δύσμορφον εἰς κηκασμὸν ᾧκισεν τόσων,
ot μῶλον ὠρόθυναν ἐκγόνοις Κρόνου.


@ Od. xii. 430 ff. ὃ ΡῈ lla. ¢ Siren.

@ The Centaurs who esca from Heracles were so
charmed by the song of the Gone that they forgot to eat
and so perished.

¢ The Sirens were daughters of Acheloiis, a river which
divides Aetolia from Arcarnania; Curetid = Acarnanian
(Strabo 462 f.).


550


ALEXANDRA


What Charybdis% shall not eat of his dead? What
half-maiden Fury-hound®? What barren nightin-
gale,’ slayer of the Centaurs,4 Aetolian or Curetid,?
shall not with her varied melody tempt them to
waste away through fasting from food? What beast-
moulding dragoness/ shall he not behold, mixing
drugs with meal, and beast-shaped doom? And
they, hapless ones, bewailing their fate shall feed
in pigstyes, crunching grapestones mixed with grass
and oilcake. But him the drowsy root shall save
from harm and the coming of Ctaros,’ the Bright
Three-headed ” god of Nonacris.’

And he shall come to the dark plain of the
departed and shall seek the ancient seer’ of the
dead, who knows the mating of men and women.*
He shall pour in a trench’ warm blood for the souls, .
and, brandishing before him his sword to terrify the
dead, he shall there hear the thin voice of the ghosts,
uttered from shadowy lips.

Thereafter the island” that crushed the back of
the Giants and the fierce form of Typhon, shall
receive him journeying alone : an island boiling with
flame, wherein the king of the immortals established
an ugly race of apes, in mockery of all who raised
war against the sons of Cronus. And passing the


7 Circe turned the comrades of Odysseus into swine, but
Odysseus was saved by the magical plant μῶλυ given him by
Hermes (Od. x. 302 ff.). 9 Hermes.

» Suid. 5.0. τρικέφαλος, where it is explained as ὥσπερ
διδάσκων τὰς ὁδούς, .6. Hermes as Guide, facing three ways


at the cross roads. * In Arcadia. 7 Teiresias.
* Apollod. iii. 71 f.; cf. Ovid, M. iii. 324 ** Venus huic
-erat utraque nota.” . Hom. Od. xi. 23 ff.


m Pithecussa=Aenaria, under which the giant ‘Typhoeus
lies buried and where the Cercopes were turned into apes by
Zeus to mock the giants (Ovid, ἢ. xiv. 90).


551


LYCOPHRON


Baiov δ᾽ ἀμείψας τοῦ κυβερνήτου τάφον
καὶ Κιμμέρων ἔπαυλα κἀχερουσίαν
ῥόχθοισι κυμαίνουσαν οἴδματος χύσιν
Ὄσσαν τε καὶ λέοντος ἀτραποὺς βοῶν

\ > - > ν > / 7ὔ
χωστὰς ᾿Οβριμοῦς τ᾽ ἄλσος οὐδαίας Κόρης,
Πυριφλεγές τε ῥεῖθρον, ἔνθα δύσβατος
τείνει πρὸς αἴθραν κρᾶτα Ἰ]ολυδέγμων λόφος,
ἐξ οὗ τὰ πάντα χύτλα καὶ πᾶσαι μυχῶν
πηγαὶ κατ᾽ Αὐσονῖῦτιν ἕλκονται χθόνα,
λιπὼν δε Ληθαιῶνος ὑψηλὸν κλέτας
λίμνην τ᾽ ΓΑορνον ἀμφιτορνωτὴν βρόχῳ
καὶ χεῦμα Ἰζωκυτοῖο λαβρωθὲν σκότῳ,
Στυγὸς κελαινῆς νασμόν, ἔνθα Tepuseds
ὁρκωμότους ἔτευξεν ἀφθίτοις ἕδρας,
λοιβὰς ἀφύσσων χρυσέαις πέλλαις γάνος,
μέλλων Τίγαντας κἀπὶ Turiivas περᾶν"
θήσει Δαείρᾳ καὶ ξυνευνέτῃ δάνος,
πήληκα κόρσῃ κίονος προσάρμοσας.
κτενεῖ δὲ κούρας Τηθύος παιδὸς τριπλᾶς,
οἴμας μελῳδοῦ μητρὸς ἐκμεμαγμένας,
αὐτοκτόνοις ῥιφαῖσιν ἐξ ἄκρας σκοπῆς
Τυρσηνικὸν πρὸς κῦμα δυπτούσας πτεροῖς,


α Baiae was named from the steersman of Odysseus who
perished during the Italian wanderings of Odysseus (Strabo


245, Steph. Byz. s.v.; Sil. Ital. viii. 539).
b Od. xi. 14 ff. ; located near Cumae (Strabo 944).
° The palus Acherusia near Cumae (Strabo 944).
@ Hill in Italy (schol.).


¢ Heracles, who built a dam between the Lucrine Lake


and the sea (Strabo 245; Diodor. iv. 22).


7 Persephone, her grove near Avernus (Strabo 245, c/.


Hom. Od. x. 509).
9 Pyriphlegethon (Strabo 244).


552


695


790


705


710


715


Ss νὸς.


a ome


——


ALEXANDRA


tomb of Baius,” his steersman, and the dwellings of
the Cimmerians ὃ and the Acherusian ¢ waters swelling
with heaving surge and Ossa®% and the cattle-path
built by the lion’ and the grove of Obrimo, the
_ Maiden who dwells beneath the earth, and the Fiery
Stream,’ where the difficult Polydegmon’” hill
stretches its head to the sky; from which hill’s —
depths draw all streams and all springs throughout

the Ausonian land ; and leaving the high slope of
Lethaeon* and thé lake Aornus’ rounded with a
-noose and the waters of Cocytus* wild and dark,
stream of black Styx, where Termieus’ made the
seat of oath-swearing™ for the immortals, drawing
the water in golden basins for libation, when he
was about to go against the Giants and Titans—he
shall offer up a gift to Daeira and her consort,”
fastening his helmet to the head of a pillar. And
he shall slay the triple daughters? of Tethys’ son,
who imitated the strains of their melodious
mother? : self-hurled 4 from the cliff’s top they dive
with their wings into the Tyrrhenian sea, where the


* A lofty mountain in Italy, from which they say flow all
the rivers in Italy (schol.) (Apennines ?).

ὁ Hill in Italy (schol.).

7 Lacus Avernus near Cumae; for its circular shape cf.
Strabo 244, Aristot. WM. 102.

Branch of the Styx, Od. x. 514. ? Zeus.

™ Hom. 7]. xv. 37, etc. The gods swear by the Styx.

” Persephone and "Pluto, to whom Odysseus dedicated his
helmet upon a pillar.

° Sirens, daughter of Acheloiis, son of Tethys. Here
three, while Hom. Od. xii. 52 and 167 uses the dual.

» Melpomene.

« The Sirens were doomed to die when anyone passed
their shores safely (Hygin. Fab. 125 and 141). When
Odysseus did so, they threw πα αλαράβαμν ἰὰ from the Sirenes
rocks (Strabo 247) into the sea.


553


LYCOPHRON


“ \ ~ ε 4 /
ὅπου Awepyns κλῶσις ἑλκύσει πικρά.

A A Mar / 7 > 4
τὴν μὲν ἤρου τύρσις ἐκβεβρασμένην
Γλάνις τε ῥείθροις δέξεται τέγγων χθόνα’
οὗ σῆμα δωμήσαντες ἔγχωροι κόρης
λοιβαῖσι καὶ θύσθλοισι ᾿ἰαρθενόπην βοῶν
ἔτεια κυδανοῦσιν οἰωνὸν θεάν.

3 \ \ A 3 > > /
- ἀκτὴν δὲ THY προὔχουσαν εἰς ᾿Ενιπέως
Λευκωσία ριφεῖσα τὴν ἐπώνυμον

/ > 4 ’ ” / Ἃ
πέτραν ὀχήσει δαρόν, ἔνθα λάβρος “Is
γείτων θ᾽ ὁ Λᾶρις ἐξερεύγονται ποτά.
Λίψγεια δ᾽ εἰς Τέρειναν ἐκναυσθλώσεται,

/ / : \ \ 4
κλύδωνα χελλύσσουσα. τὴν δὲ ναυβάται
κρόκαισι ταρχύσουσιν ἐν παρακτίαις,
᾿Ωκινάρου δίναισιν ἀγχιτέρμονα.
λούσει δὲ σῆμα βούκερως νασμοῖς "Αρης
ὀρνιθόπαιδος ἵσμα φοιβάζων ποτοῖς.
πρώτῃ δὲ καὶ ποτ᾽ αὖθι συγγόνων θεᾷ
κραίνων ἁπάσης Μόψοπος ναυαρχίας
πλωτῆρσι λαμπαδοῦχον ἐντυνεῖ δρόμον,
χρησμοῖς πιθήσας. ὅν ποτ᾽ αὐξήσει λεὼς
Νεαπολιτῶν, οἵ παρ᾽ ἄκλυστον σκέπας
Ὁ “- / /
ὅρμων Μισηνοῦ στύφλα νάσσονται κλίτη.
Βύκτας δ᾽ ἐν ἀσκῷ συγκατακλείσας βοὸς


« Parthenope, washed ashore and buried at Naples,
previously called Phalerum from its founder Phalerus (Steph.
Byz. 8.0.): ὃ Clanius, river near Naples.

¢ An athletic contest was annually held in her honour
(Strabo 246), 5

@ Another of the Sirens, cast ashore at Poseidonia=
Paestum. ὁ Poseidon.

7 Leucosia, small island near Paestum (Strabo 123, etc.).

9 Rivers of Italy (schol.).

» Ligeia, the third Siren, is cast ashore at Tereina in
Bruttium (Steph. Byz. s.v. Tépewa).


554


720


125)


structs Ae x


ALEXANDRA


bitter thread spun by the Fates shall draw them.
One“ of them washed ashore the tower of Phalerus
shall receive, and Glanis’ wetting the earth with its
streams. There the inhabitants shall build a
tomb for the maiden and with libations and sacrifice
of oxen shall yearly honeur’ the bird goddess
Parthenope. And Leucosia®@ shall be cast on the
jutting strand of Enipeus° and shall long haunt the
rock’ that bears her name, where rapid Is and
neighbouring Laris’ pour forth their waters. And
Ligeia” shall come ashore at Tereina spitting out
the wave. And her shall sailormen bury on the
stony beach nigh to the eddies of Ocinarus; and an
ox-horned Ares? shall lave her tomb with lois streams,
cleansing with his waters the foundation of her whose
children were turned into birds. And there one
day in honour of the first goddess of the sisterhood
shall the ruler’ of all the navy of Mopsops array
for his mariners a torch-race,* in obedience to an
oracle, which one day the people of the Neapolitans
shall celebrate, even they who shall dwell on bluff
crags beside Misenum’s? sheltered haven untroubled
by the waves.

And he shall shut up the blustering winds” in


ὁ Unknown.

7 Diotimus, an Athenian admiral, who came to Naples
and there in accordance with an oracle sacrificed to
Parthenope and established a torch-race in her honour
(Timaeus ap. schol.). Thuc. i. 45 mentions an Athenian
admiral Diotimus who is presumably the person meant.
Mopsops, an old king of Attica.

* In honour of Parthenope in Naples.

’ Cape near Cumae, called after Misenus, a companion of
Odysseus (Strabo xxvi.).

m Odysseus receives from Aeolus the winds tied up in an
ox-skin, Od. x. 19 ff.


(555


LYCOPHRON


παλινστροβήτοις πημοναῖς ἀλώμενος
κεραυνίῃ μάστιγι συμφλεχθήσεται
καύηξ, ἐρινοῦ προσκαθήμενος κλάδῳ,

ὡς μὴ καταβρόξῃ νιν ἐν ῥόχθοις κλύδων,
Χάρυβδιν ἐκφυσῶσαν ἑλκύσας. βυθῷ.
βαιὸν δὲ τερφθεὶς τοῖς ᾿Ατλαντίδος γάμοις,
ἀναυλόχητον αὐτοκάβδαλον σκάφος
βῆναι ταλάσσει καὶ κυβερνῆσαι τάλας
αὐτουργότευκτον βᾶριν εἰς μέσην τρόπιν
εἰκαῖα γόμφοις προστεταργανωμένην.

ἧς οἷα τυτθὸν ᾿Αμφίβαιος ἐκβράσας

τῆς κηρύλου δάμαρτος ἀπτῆνα σπόρον
αὐταῖς μεσόδμαις καὶ σὺν ἰκρίοις βαλεῖ
πρὸς κῦμα δύπτην ἐμπεπλεγμένον κάλοις.
πόντου δ᾽ ἄυπνος ἐνσαρούμενος μυχοῖς,
ἀστῷ σύνοικος Θρῃκίας ᾿Ανθηδόνος ς
ἔσται. παρ᾽ ἄλλου δ᾽ ἄλλος, ὡς πεύκης κλάδον,
βύκτης στροβήσει φελλὸν ἐνθρώσκων πνοαῖς.
μόλις δὲ Βύνης ἐκ παλιρροίας κακῆς
ἄμπυξ σαώσει στέρνα δεδρυφαγμένον

καὶ χεῖρας ἄκρας, αἷς κρεαγρεύτους πέτρας
μάρπτων ἁλιβρώτοισιν αἱμαχθήσεται
στόρθυγξι. νῆσον δ᾽ εἰς Κρόνῳ στυγουμένην
ἽἍρπην περάσας, μεζέων κρεανόμον,
ἄχλαινος ἵ ἵκτης, πημάτων λυγρῶν κόπις,
τὸν μυθοπλάστην. ἐξυλακτήσει γόον,

ἀρὰς τετικὼς τοῦ τυφλωθέντος δάκους.


a i i Od. xii. 432 ff.
so, Hom. Od. vii. 245 ff.


of Odysseus, Hom. Od. v. 234 ff. 2 Poseidon.
4 BP ρος son of Poseidon, was a fisherman from Anthedon
in Boeotia who became a god of the sea. Once a year he


visited all coasts and islands (schol. Plato, Rep. x. 611).
556


740


765


ALEXANDRA


the hide of an ox, and wandering in woes that ebb
and flow, he, the sea-gull, shall be burnt with the
lash of the thunderbolt, clinging to the branch of
a wild fig-tree” so that the wave which draws
spouting Charybdis to the deep may not swallow
him in the surge. And, after brief pleasure in
wedlock with the daughter? of Atlas, he dares to
set foot in his offhand vessel* that never knew a
dockyard and to steer, poor wretch, the bark which
his own hands made, vainly fastened with dowels
- to the midst of the keel. Wherefrom Amphibaeus ὦ
shall toss him forth, as it were the tiny unfledged
brood of the haleyon’s bride, and cast him, with mid-
beams and deck together, headlong as a diver into
the waves, entangled in the ropes, and sleepless,
- swept in the secret places of the sea, he shall dwell
with the citizen ὁ of Thracian Anthedon. And like a
branch of pine, blast after blast shall toss him as a
cork, leaping on him with their gusts. And hardly
shall the frontlet of Byne/’ save him from the evil
tide with torn breast and fingers wherewith he shall
~~ elutch the flesh-hooking rocks and be stained with
blood by the sea-bitten spikes. And crossing to
the island’ abhorred by Cronus—the isle of the
Sickle that severed his privy parts—he a cloakless
suppliant, babbling of awful sufferings, shall yelp
out his fictitious tale of woe, paying the curse of
the monster” whom he blinded. Ah! not yet, not


7 Ino Leucothea, by whose veil Odysseus was saved
(Od. v. 334 ff.).

9 Corcyra, under which was buried the sickle (δρεπάνη,
ἅρπη), with which Zeus mutilated Cronus, or Cronus mutil-
ated Uranus (Hesiod, Th. 162, 179; Apoll. Rh. iv. 988 f.).
Hence its old name Drepane.

* The Cyclops Polyphemus, who cuted Odysseus. (Od.
ix. 534),


557


LYCOPHRON


οὔπω μάλ᾽, οὔπω" μὴ τοσόσδ᾽ ὕπνος λάβοι

λήθης Μέλανθον ἐγκλιθένθ᾽ ἹἹππηγέτην.

ἥξει γάρ, ἥξει ναύλοχον “Ῥείθρου σκέπας

καὶ Νηρίτου πρηῶνας. ὄψεται. δὲ πᾶν

μέλαθρον ἄρδην ἐκ βάθρων ἀνάστατον 770

μύκλοις γυναικόκλωψιν. ἡ δὲ βασσάρα

σεμνῶς κασωρεύουσα κοιλανεῖ δόμους,

θοίναισιν ὄλβον ἐκχέασα τλήμονος.

αὐτὸς δὲ πλείω τῶν ἐπὶ Σκαιαῖς πόνους

ἰδὼν μολοβρός, τλήσεται μὲν οἰκετῶν 1108
στυγνὰς ἀπειλὰς εὐλόφῳ νώτῳ φέρειν ᾿
δέννοις κολασθείς, τλήσεται δὲ καὶ χερῶν

πληγαῖς ὑπείκειν καὶ βολαῖσιν ὀστράκων.

οὐ γὰρ ἕέναι μάστιγες, ἀλλὰ δαψιλὴς

σφραγὶς μενεῖ Θόαντος ἐν πλευραῖς ἔτι, 780
ὕγοισι τετρανθεῖσα, τὰς 6 λυμεὼν

ἐπεγκολάπτειν ἀστένακτος αἰνέσει,

ἑκουσίαν σμώδιγγα προσμάσσων δομῇ,

ὅπως παλεύσῃ δυσμενεῖς, κατασκόποις

λώβαισι καὶ κλαυθμοῖσι φηλώσας πρόμον. 785

ὃν Βομβυλείας κλιτὺς ἡ Τεμμικία

ὕψιστον ἡμῖν πῆμ᾽ ἐτέκνωσέν ποτε,

μόνος πρὸς οἴκους ναυτίλων σωθεὶς τάλας.

λοῖσθον δὲ καύηξ ὥστε κυμάτων δρομεύς,

ὡς κόγχος ἅλμῃ πάντοθεν περιτριβείς, 790
κτῆσίν τε θοίναις Πρωνίων λαφυστίαν


4 Poseidon. ὃ In Ithaca.

¢ Penelope ἐ suitors. μύκλος Ξ- ὄνος, the ass being’ the type
of lust (Pind. P. x. 36).

β ficoste

© Od. xvii. 219, xviii. 26.

7 Od. xix. 66 ff. etc.

7 In order to enter Troy as a spy Odysseus got himself


558


7. ALEXANDRA


yet! Let not such sleep of forgetfulness find
Melanthus,* the Lord of Horses, bending. | For
he shall come, he shall come to Rheithron’s?
sheltering haven and the cliffs of Neriton.2 And
he shall behold all his house utterly overthrown
from its foundations by lewd wife-stealers.¢ And
the vixen,’ primly coquetting, will make empty
his halls, pouring forth the poor wight’s wealth in
banqueting. And he himself, poor parasite,’ shall
see trouble beyond what he endured at the Scaean
gates ; he shall endure to bear with submissive back
sullen threats from his own slaves‘ and to be
punished with jeers; shall endure, too, to submit
to buffeting of fists and hurling of potsherds. For
not alien stripes but the liberal seal of Thoas? shall
remain upon his sides, engraved with rods: stripes
which he, our destroyer, shall consent without a
murmur to have engraved upon him, putting the
voluntary weal upon his frame, that he may ensnare
the foemen, with spying wounds and with tears
deceiving our king.” He whom of old the Temmi-
cian? hill. of Bombyleia’ bare to be our chiefest
bane—he alone of all his mariners, wretched one,
shall win safely home. And lastly, like a sea-gull
that roams the waves, worn all about by the salt
water even as a shell and finding his possessions
swallowed up in banqueting of the Pronians* by the
beaten and wounded by Thoas by way of disguise (J/. Parv.
Kinkel, p. 42). Of. Homer, Odyssey, iv. 244 ff.

» Priam. ~.

ὁ Boeotian : according to one legend Odysseus was born
in Boeotia (Miiller, F.H.G. i. 426).

7 Athena, inventor of flute (Pind. P. xii.), worshipped
under this name in Boeotia.

* The wooers of Penelope ; Pronians=Cephallenians ; cf.
Προνναῖοι, Thuc. ii. 30.

559


LYCOPHRON.


πρὸς τῆς Λακαίνης αἰνοβακχεύτου ᾿κιχών,
σῦφαρ θανεῖται πόντιον φυγὼν σκέπας
κόραξ σὺν ὅπλοις Νηρίτων δρυμῶν πέλας.
κτενεῖ δὲ τύψας πλευρὰ λοίγιος στόνυξ
κέντρῳ δυσαλθὴς ἔλλοπος Σαρδωνικῆς.
κέλωρ δὲ πατρὸς ἄρταμος κληθήσεται,
᾿Αχιλλέως δάμαρτος αὐτανέψιος.

/ \ \ > A / 3
μάντιν δὲ νεκρὸν Εὐρυτὰν στέψει λεὼς
Ὁ 3 IR / 4 290 7
67 αἰπὺ ναίων Τραμπύας ἐδέθλιον,
ἐν ἣἧ ποτ᾽ αὖθις Ἡρακλῆ φθίσει δράκων
Tupdatos ἐν θοίναισιν Αἰθίκων πρόμος,
τὸν Αἰακοῦ τε κἀπὸ Περσέως σπορᾶς
καὶ Τημενείων οὐκ ἄπωθεν αἱμάτων.

Πέργη δέ μιν θανόντα, Τυρσηνῶν ὄρος,
> / / /
ἐν Γορτυναίᾳ δέξεται πεφλεγμένον,
ὅταν στενάζων κῆρας ἐκπνεύσῃ βίον
παιδός τε καὶ δάμαρτος, ἣν κτείνας πόσις

| eee 7 €Q\ a
αὐτὸς πρὸς “Αἰδην δευτέραν ὁδὸν περᾷ,
a > “-“ > / /

σφαγαῖς ἀδελφῆς ἠλοκισμένος δέρην,
Γλαύκωνος ᾿Αψύρτοιό 7° αὐτανεψίας.

Χὠ μὲν τοσούτων θῖνα πημάτων ἰδὼν
ἄστρεπτον “Αἰιδην δύσεται τὸ δεύτερον,
γαληνὸν ἦμαρ οὔποτ᾽ ἐν ζωῇ δρακών.

ὦ σχέτλι᾽, ὥς σοι κρεῖσσον ἦν μίμνειν πάτρᾳ
βοηλατοῦντα καὶ τὸν ἐργάτην μύκλον


@ Penelope, as daughter of Icarius, brother of Tyndareus.

> Spear of Telegonus tipped with spine of thornback.

¢ Telegonus, son of Odysseus and Circe.

4 Achilles in Elysium (Simonid. fr. 213, Ibyc. fr. 37) has
to wife Medeia, daughter-of Aeétes, brother of Circe.

¢ Polyperchon, king of the Epeirotes, murdered . in
309 s.c. Heracles, son of Alexander the Great and Barsine
(Paus. ix. 7. 2). :
7. Odysseus, 9 Unknown hill in Etruria.
560


ALEXANDRA


Laconian lady of fatal frenzy, ancient as a crow he
shall flee with his weapons the shelter of the sea
and in wrinkled age die beside the woods of Neriton..
The deadly spike,? hard to heal, of the Sardinian
fish shall wound his sides with its sting and kill
him; and his son® shall be called the butcher of
his father, that son who shall be the own cousin of
the bride® of Achilles. And in death he shall be
garlanded as a seer by the Eurytanian folk and by
the dweller in the steep abode of Trampya, wherein
one day hereafter the Tymphaean dragon,’ even the
king of the Aethices, shall at a feast destroy
Heracles sprung from the seed of Aeacus and Perseus
‘and no stranger to the blood of 'Temenus.

When he is dead, Perge,? hill of the Tyrrhenians,
shall receive his ashes in the land of Gortyn’ ; when,
as he breathes out his life, he shall bewail the fate
of his son* and his wife,/ whom her husband * shall
slay and himself next pass to Hades, his throat cut
by the hands of his sister, the own cousin of Glaucon
and Apsyrtus.!

And having seen such a heap of woes he shall go
down a second” time to unturning Hades, having
never beheld a day of calm in all his life. O
wretched one! how much better had it been for
thee to remain in thy homeland driving oxen, and

r Cortona in Etruria, where Odysseus was said to be
buried. :

ὁ Telemachus. 7 Circe.

κ΄ Telemachus, who married Circe and killed her, and
was himself killed by Cassiphone, daughter of Odysseus and
Circe, and thus half-sister of Telemachus.

t Aeétes, Pasiphaé, Circe, are children of Helios, and thus
Apsyrtus, son of Aeétes, Glaucon (Glaucus), son of Pasiphaé, .


Cassiphone, daughter of Circe, are cousins.
m He had gone to Hades before as a living man.


20 561


LYCOPHRON


κάνθων᾽ ὑπὸ ζεύγλαισι μεσσαβοῦν ἔτι
πλασταῖσι λύσσης μηχαναῖς οἰστρημένον
ἢ τηλικῶνδε πεῖραν ὀτλῆσαι κακῶν.

Ὃ δ᾽ αἰνόλεκτρον ἁρπαγεῖσαν εὐνέτης
πλᾶτιν ματεύων, κληδόνων πεπυσμένος,
ποθῶν δὲ φάσμα πτηνὸν εἰς αἴθραν φυγόν,
ποίους θαλάσσης οὐκ ἐρευνήσει μυχούς;
ποίαν δὲ χέρσον οὐκ ἀνιχνεύσει μολών;
ἐπόψεται μὲν πρῶτα Τυφῶνος σκοπάς,
καὶ πέμπελον γραῦν μαρμαρουμένην δέμας,
καὶ τὰς ᾿Ερεμβῶν ναυβάταις ἠχθημένας
προβλῆτας ἀκτάς. ὄψεται δὲ τλήμονος
Μύρρας ἐρυμνὸν ἄστυ, τῆς μογοστόκους
ὠδῖνας ἐξέλυσε δενδρώδης κλάδος,
καὶ τὸν θεᾷ κλαυσθέντα T αὔαντος τάφον
Σχοινῇδι μουσόφθαρτον ᾿Αρέντᾳ Ξ Ξένῃ,
κραντῆρι λευκῷ τόν ποτ᾽ ἔκτανε πτέλας.
ἐπόψεται δὲ τύρσιας ἹΚηφηίδας
καὶ Λαφρίου λακτίσμαθ᾽ “Ἑρμαίου ποδὸς
δισσάς τε πέτρας, κέπφος αἷς προσήλατο
δαιτὸς χατίζων. ἀντὶ θηλείας δ᾽ ἔβη
τὸν χρυσόπατρον μόρφνον ἁρπάσας γνάθοις,


* Odysseus, feigning madness to avoid going to ΤΊΟΥ
(Od. ii. 170, xxiv. 115), yoked to his plough an ox and an ass
(schol.) or a horse and an ox (Hygin. Faé. 95).

> Menelaus; for his wanderings in search of Helen cf.
Od. iv. 81 ff.

¢ Helen. @ Cf, 112 ff., 131. ὁ Cilicia.

* Cyprus. When Aphrodite hid from the gods on Mount
Casion in Cyprus, her hiding-place was revealed by an old
woman, whom for her treachery Aphrodite turned into stone.

9 Aethiopians or Arabians.

% Byblus in Phoenicia. Myrrha, before the birth of
Adonis, was turned into a tree (myrrh) ἐδ Aphrodite
(Apollod. iii. 184, Anton. Lib. 84).


562


825


880.


835


ALEXANDRA


to harness still the working stallion ass to the yoke,
frenzied with feigned pretence of madness,* than to
suffer the experience of such woes !

And he? again—the husband seeking for his
fatal bride ὁ snatched from him, having heard rumours,
and yearning for the winged phantom ὦ that fled to
the sky,—what secret places of the sea shall he not
explore? What dry land shall he not come and
search? First he shall visit the watching-place of
Typhon,’ and the old hag turned to stone,’ and the
jutting shores of the Erembi,’ abhorred by mariners.
And he shall see the strong city of unhappy Myrrha,”
who was delivered of the pangs of child-birth by a
branching tree; and the tomb of Gauas* whose
death the Muses wrought—wept by the goddess/ of
the Rushes,* Arenta, the Stranger’: Gauas whom
thé wild boar slew with white tusk. And he shall
visit the towers™ of Cepheus and the place” that
was kicked by the foot of Hermes Laphrios, and
the two rocks on which the petrel leapt in quest
of food, but carried off in his jaws, instead of a
woman,’ the eagle son? of the golden Sire—a male

# Adonis, son of Myrrha, killed by a boar (Apollod. iii.
183), to hunt which he Rad been incited by the Muses’ praise
of hunting (schol.). 4 Aphrodite. _

* Name of Aphrodite in Samos.

? Aphrodite in Memphis (Herod, ii. 112).

m Aethiopia, cf. Arat. 183.

” In Aethiopia was a place Ἑρμοῦ πτέρνη where the foot
of Hermes, who was here watching Io, caused a spring to
burst forth.

° Andromeda, exposed to the sea-monster Cetus (petrel
here, in Lycophron’s manner).

P Perseus, son of Zeus and Danaé, whom Zeus visited in
a golden shower, rescued Andromeda. He allowed himself
to be swallowed by the beast, whose inwards he then cut to
pieces with a sickle,


563


LYCOPHRON


τὸν ἡπατουργὸν ἄρσεν᾽ ἀρβυλόπτερον.
πεφήσεται δὲ τοῦ θεριστῆρος ξυρῷ
φάλαινα δυσμίσητος ἐξινωμένη,
ἱπποβρότους ὠδῖνας οἴξαντος τόκων.
τῆς δειρόπαιδος μαρμαρώπιδος γαλῆς"
Δ ~ ΝΜ 3 Ν A
ὃς ζῳοπλαστῶν ἄνδρας ἐξ ἄκρου ποδὸς
ἀγαλματώσας ἀμφελυτρώσει πέτρῳ,
λαμπτηροκλέπτης τριπλανοῦς ποδηγίας.
᾿Ἐπόψεται δὲ τοὺς θερειπότους γύας
\ ca > 4 \ 4
καὶ ῥεῖθρον ᾿Ασβύσταο Kal yapevvadas
εὐνάς, δυσόδμοις θηρσὶ συγκοιμώμενος. ἢ
\ 7, ὔ 3 4 > “Ὁ A
καὶ πάντα τλήσεθ᾽ οὕνεκ᾽ Aiytas κυνὸς 860.


τῆς θηλύπαιδος καὶ τριάνορος κόρης.


ἥξει δ᾽ ἀλήτης εἰς ᾿Ιαπύγων στρατόν,
καὶ δῶρ᾽ ἀνάψει παρθένῳ Σκυλητρίᾳ
Ταμάσσιον κρατῆρα καὶ βοάγριον
καὶ τὰς δάμαρτος ἀσκέρας εὐμάριδὰς.
΄ A a \ / tA
ἥξει δὲ Lipw καὶ Λακινίου μυχούς,
ἐν οἷσι πόρτις ὄρχατον τεύξει θεᾷ
ς / a > ,
Οπλοσμίᾳ φυτοῖσιν ἐξησκημένον.
γυναιξὶ δ᾽ ἔσται τεθμὸς ἐγχώροις ἀεὶ ,
πενθεῖν τὸν εἰνάπηχυν Αἰακοῦ τρίτον 860
α Perseus cuts off the head of Medusa; from the blood | 3
spring the horse Pegasus and the man Chrysaor.
> Medusa, calleda weasel because weasels were supposed to 2
give birth through the neck (Ant. Lib. xxix.; Ovid, M/. ix. 323).
¢ Perseus with the Gorgon’s head turned Polydectes, king
of Seriphos, and his people to stone (Pind. P. x. 48, xii. 14).
@ The daughters of Phorcys, the Graeae, had but one eye
in common (Aesch. P. V. 795), which Perseus stole but restored
when they consented to guide him to the Nymphs, who gave
him winged shoes, a wallet, and the cap of invisibility.


e Egypt. f The Nile.
9 i.e. seals; Homer, Odyssey iv. 351 ff.
* Helen. Aegyan=Laconian, cf. Steph. Byz. s.v. Αἴγυς.


564


ALEXANDRA


with winged sandals who destroyed his liver. By
the harvester’s blade shall be slain the hateful whale
dismembered : the harvester* who delivered of her
pains in birth of horse and man the. stony-eyed
weasel’ whose children sprang from her neck.
Fashioning men as statues from top to toe he shall
envelop them in stone “—he that stole the lamp of
his three wandering guides. “

And he shall visit the fields® which drink in
summer and the stream of Asbystes/ and the couch
on the ground where he shall sleep among evil-
smelling beasts.’ And all shall he endure for the
sake of the Aegyan bitch,” her of the three husbands,’
who bare only female children.’ And he shall come
as a wanderer to the folk of the Iapyges” and offer
gifts to the Maiden of the Spoils,’ even the mixing-
bowl from Tamassus”™ and the shield of oxhide and
the fur-lined shoes of his wife. And he shall come
to Siris” and the recesses of Lacinium,? wherein a
heifer? shall fashion an orchard for the goddess
Hoplosmia,? furnished with trees. And it shall be
for all time an ordinance for the women of the land
to mourn” the- nine-cubit hero,’ third in descent

* Menelaus, Paris, Deiphobus.

j Iphigeneia and Hermione. * In S.E. Italy.

? Athena ᾿Αγελείη (Hom.). The reference is to Castrwm
Minervae, south of Hydruntum ; ¢f. Strabo 281.

™ In Cyprus, famous for metal-work (Strabo 255 and 684).

π᾿ On the Gulf of Tarentum (Strabo 264),

° Cape near Croton with temple of Hera Lacinia (Steph.


Byz. s.v. Λακίνιον, Livy xxiv. 3).
» Thetis, who dedicated Lacinium to Hera (Serv. on Aen.


iii. 552). 4 Hera in Elis (schol.).
r The women of Croton mourn for Achilles and wear no
gay dress.


* Achilles, son of Peleus, son of Aeacus and of Thetis,
daughter of Doris; ‘‘ nine-cubit ” i.¢. of heroic stature.


565


LYCOPHRON


καὶ Δωρίδος, πρηστῆρα δαΐου μάχης,
καὶ μήτε χρυσῷ φαιδρὰ καλλύνειν ῥέθη,
μήθ᾽ ἁβροπήνους ἀμφιβάλλεσθαι πέπλους
κάλχῃ φορυκτούς, οὕνεκεν θεᾷ θεὸς ᾿
χέρσου μέγαν στόρθυγγα δωρεῖται κτίσαι.
ἥξει δὲ ταύρου γυμνάδας κακοξένους
πάλης κονίστρας, ὅ ov τε Κωλῶτις τεκνοῖ,
᾿Αλεντία κρείουσα Λογγούρου μυχῶν,
ἽἌρπης Κρόνου πήδημα Κογχείας θ᾽ ὕδωρ
κάμψας, Γονοῦσάν τ᾽ ἠδὲ Σικανῶν πλάκας,
καὶ θηροχλαίνου σηκὸν ὠμηστοῦ λύκου,
ὃν Κρηθέως ἄμναμος ὁρμίσας σκάφος
ἔδειμε πεντήκοντα σὺν ναυηγέταις.
κρόκαι δὲ Μινυῶν εὐλιπῆῇ στελγίσματα
τηροῦσιν, ἅλμης οὐδὲ φοιβάζει κλύδων
οὐδ᾽ ὀμβρία σμήχουσα δηναιὸν νιφάς.

ous δὲ θῖνες οἵ τε Ταυχείρων πέλας
μύρμηκες αἰάζουσιν ἐκβεβρασμένους
ἔρημον εἰς ΓΑτλαντος οἰκητήριον
θρυλιγμάτων δέρτροισι προσσεσηρότας"
Μόψον Τιταιρώνειον ἔνθα ναυβάται
θανόντα ταρχύσαντο, τυμβείαν δ᾽ ὑπὲρ
κρηπῖδ᾽ ἀνεστήλωσαν ᾿Αργῴου δορὸς
κλασθὲν πέτευρον, νερτέρων κειμήλιον,
Αὔσιγδα Kwidewos 4 τέγγων ῥόος


« Thetis to Hera.

ὃ Lacinium.

¢ Eryx, son of Butes and Aphrodite, who compelled
strangers to wrestle with him till he was slain by Heracles.
At Mount Eryx in Sicily was a temple of Aphrodite Erycinia.

«@ Aphrodite in Cyprus (schol.).

ὁ Aphrodite in Colophon (schol.).
7 Unknown. 9. Drepanum in Sicily.


566


ALEXANDRA


from Aeacus and Doris, the hurricane of battle
strife, and not to deck their radiant limbs with
gold, nor array them in fine-spun robes stained
with purple—because Ά goddess“ to ἃ goddess @
presents that great spur? of land to be her dwelling-
place. And he shall come to -the inhospitable
wrestling-arena of the bull® whom Colotis? bare,
even Alentia,? Queen of the recesses of Longuros,f
rounding the Cronos’ Sickle’s leap and the water
of Concheia,’ and Gonusa/ and the plains of the
Sicanians, and the shrine of the ravenous wolf” clad
in the skin of a wild beast, which the descendant
of Cretheus, when he had brought his vessel to
anchor, built with his fifty mariners. And the
beach still preserves the oily scrapings of the bodies
of the Minyans, nor does the wave of the brine cleanse
them, nor the long rubbing of the rainy shower. _.

And others‘ the shores and reefs near Taucheira 7
mourn, cast upon the desolate dwelling-place* of
Atlas, grinning on the points of their wreckage:
where Mopsus’ of Titaeron died and was buried
by the mariners, who set over his tomb’s pedestal
a broken blade from the ship Argo, for a possession
of the dead,—where the Cinypheian stream ™ fattens


r Heracles, with the lion’s skin, to whom Jason, son of
Aeson, son of Cretheus, built a temple i in Aethalia (Elba),
where curiously coloured pebbles were supposed to get their
colour from_the flesh-scrapings (ἀποστλεγγίσματα) of the
Argonauts (Minyae) (Diodor. iv. 56, Strabo 224, Apoll. Rh.
iv. 654, Arist. Μέγαν. 106).

- Guneus, Prothous, and Eurypylus wander to Libya.

§ Near Cyrene (Herod. iv. 171). & Libya.

‘ Mopsus from Titaron in Thessaly was the seer of the
Argonauts. He was killed by snake-bite i in Libya(Apoll. Rh.
iv. 1502).

™ Cinyps (Herod. iv. 175).


567


LYCOPHRON


νασμοῖς λιπαίνει, τῷ δὲ Νηρέως γόνῳ
Τρίτωνι Κολχὶς ὦπασεν δάνος γυνὴ
χρυσῷ πλατὺν κρατῆρα κεκροτημένον,.
δείξαντι πλωτὴν οἶμον, ἧ διὰ στενῶν
μύρμων ἐνήσει Tidus ἄθραυστον σκάφος.
ραικοὺς δὲ χώρας τουτάκις λαβεῖν κράτη
θαλασσόπαις δίμορφος αὐδάζει θεός,
ὅταν παλίμπουν δῶρον ἄγραυλος λεὼς
ἽἙλλην᾽ ὀρέξῃ νοσφίσας πάτρας Λίβυς. :
εὐχὰς δὲ δειμαίνοντες ᾿Ασβύσται κτέαρ 895
κρύψουσ᾽ ἄφαντον ἐν χθονὸς νειροῖς μυχοῖς, i
ev 7 Kudaiwv δύσμορον στρατηλάτην
ναύταις συνεκβράσουσι Βορραῖαι πνοαΐ,
τόν τ᾽ ἐκ Παλαύθρων ἔκγονον Τενθρηδόνος,
᾿Αμφρυσίων σκηπτοῦχον Εϊὐρυαμπίων,
καὶ τὸν δυνάστην τοῦ πετρωθέντος λύκου Ἢ
ἀποινοδόρπου καὶ πάγων Τυμφρηστίων. at
ὧν ot μὲν Αἰγώνειαν ἄθλιοι πάτραν
ποθοῦντες, οἱ δ᾽ ᾿Εχῖνον, ot δὲ Τίταρον
Ἶρό i Τρηχῖνα καὶ Περραιβικὴν a Ε
ρόν τε καὶ Τρηχῖνα καὶ Περραιβικὴ 905
Γόννον Φάλαννάν τ᾽ ἠδ᾽ ᾿Ολοσσόνων γύας és
καὶ Kaoravaiav, ἀκτέριστον ἐν πέτραις
αἰῶνα κωκύσουσιν ἠλοκισμένοι.


@ Between Taucheira and Cyrene.

> Son of Poseidon and Amphitrite, daughter of Nereus.

ο Medeia.

@ Triton guided the Argonauts out of Lake Tritonis, re-
ceiving from Jason a bronze tripod (here a mixing-bowl),
which he placed in his temple, declaring that when a
descendant of the Argonauts should recover the tripod, a
hundred Greek cities would be founded near Lake Tritonis.
When the neighbouring tribes heard this, they hid the
tripod (Herod. iv. 179 ; Apoll. Rh. iv. 529 ff., 1547 fe; Diodor.
iv. 56). ὁ Steersman of the Argo (Apoll. Rh. i. 105).

7 Triton, half-man, half-fish.


568


ALEXANDRA


Ausigda® with its waters, and where to Triton,®
descendant of Nereus, the Colchian woman’ gave
as a gift the broad mixing-bowl ὦ wrought of gold,
for that he showed them the navigable path whereby
Tiphys* should guide through the narrow reefs his
ship undamaged. And the twy-formed god, son of
the sea, declares that the Greeks shall obtain the
sovereignty of the land’ when the pastoral people
of Libya shall take from their fatherland and give
to a Hellene the home-returning gift. And the
Asbystians, fearing his vows, shall hide the treasure
from sight in low depths of the earth, whereon the
blasts of Boreas shall cast with his mariners the
hapless leader” of the men of Cyphos and the son‘
of Tenthredon from Palauthra,’ king of the Amphry-
sians of EKuryampus,’ and the lord’ of the Wolf™
that devoured the atonement and was turned to
stone and of the crags of Tymphrestus.”. Of whom
some, unhappy, yearning for their fatherland of
Aegoneia,® others for Echinos,? others for Titaros”
and for Iros” and for Trachis? and Perrhaebic
Gonnos” and Phalanna,” and the fields of the
Olossonians,” and Castanaia,? torn on the rocks shall
bewail their fate that lacks the rites of funeral.


9 Founding of Cyrene (Pind. P. iv.)

» Guneus from Cyphos in Perrhaebia (1. ii. 748).

ὁ Prothoiis, 11. ii. 756. 7 In (Thessalian) Magnesia.

* On the Amphrysus in Faas

? Eurypylus from Ormenion in Thessaly (1. ii. 734).

™ When Peleus had collected a herd of cattle as an atone-
ment for the murder of Actor, son of Acastus (schol.) or
Eurytion (Ant. Lib. 38) or Phocus (Ovid, M. xi. 381), the
herd was devoured by a wolf which Thetis turned into stone.
This stone is variously located in Thessaly or Phocis.

” In Thessaly. ° In Malis.

» Near Mount Oeta. 4 In Magnesia.


569


LYCOPHRON


Αλλην δ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἄλλῃ. κῆρα κινήσει θεός,

ἀγορὴν ἐσ: νόστου συμφορὰν δωρούμενος.
᾿ Αἰσάρου τε ῥεῖθρα καὶ βραχύπτολις

Θρωνῥῥίας γῆς κεγχρίνῃ βεβρωμένον
Κρίμισα φιτροῦ δέξεται μιάιφόνον"
αὐτὴ γὰρ ἄκραν ἄρδιν εὐθυνεῖ χεροῖν
Σιάλπιγξ ἀποψάλλουσα Μαιώτην πλόκον᾽
Δύρα παρ᾽ ὄχθαις ὅς ποτε φλέξας θρασὺν
λέοντα ῥαιβῷ χεῖρας ὥπλισε Σκύθῃ
δράκοντ᾽ ἀφύκτων γομφίων λυροκτύπῳ.
Κρᾶθις δὲ τύμβους ὄψεται δεδουπότος,
εὐρὰξ ᾿Αλαίου Παταρέως ἀνακτόρων,
Ναύαιθος ἔνθα πρὸς κλύδων᾽ ἐρεύγεται.
κτενοῦσι δ᾽ αὐτὸν Αὔσονες 1Πελλήνιοι
᾿βοηδρομοῦντα Λινδίων στρατηλάταις,
οὗς τῆλε Θερμύδρου τε ζαρπάθου τ᾽ ὀρῶν
πλάνητας αἴθων Θρασκίας πέμψει κύων,
ξένην ἐποικήσοντας ὀθνείαν χθόνα.
ἐν δ᾽ αὖ Μακάλλοις σηκὸν ἔγχωροι μέγαν
ὑπὲρ τάφων δείμαντες, αἰανῆ θεὸν
λοιβαῖσι κυδανοῦσι καὶ θύσθλοις βοῶν.


«α Philoctetes, son of Poeas from Magnesia, returns from
Troy to his home, but owing to a sedition went to S. Italy,
where he founded Chone, Petelia, and Crimisa (Strabo 254).

» Near Croton (Strabo 262).

¢ Philoctetes having been bitten by a viper was left by
the Greeks in Lemnos, but as Troy could not be taken
without the bow and arrows of Heracles which he had, they
afterwards brought him to Troy, where he killed Paris.

4 Paris, in reference to Hecuba’s dream.

¢ Athena in Argos (Paus. ii. 21. 3), where was a temple of


Athena Salpinx, said to have been founded by Hegeleos, _


son of Tyrsenus, the reputed inventor of the trumpet.
f i.e, Scythian.


570


925


910


920.


ALEXANDRA


One evil fate after another shall god arouse, pre-
senting them with grievous calamity in place of
return to their homes.

Another® shall the streams of Aesarus?® and the
little city of Crimisa in the Oenotrian land receive :
even the snake-bitten ὁ slayer of the fire-brand 7; for
the Trumpet ὁ herself shall with her hand guide his
arrow point, releasing the twanging Maeotian’ bow-
string. On the banks of Dyras% he burnt of old the
bold lion,” and armed his hands with the crooked
Scythian dragon’ that harped with unescapable
teeth. And Crathis’ shall see his tomb when he is
dead, sideways from the shrine of Alaeus ἢ of Patara,
where Nauaethus? belches seaward. The Ausonian
Pellenians ™ shall slay him when he aids the leaders
of the Lindians,” whom far from Thermydron® and
the mountains of Carpathus? the fierce hound
Thraseias? shall send wandering to dwell in a
strange and alien soil. But in Macalla,” again, the
people of the place shall build a great shrine above
his grave and glorify him as an everlasting god with
libations and sacrifice of oxen.

9 River near Oeta where Heracles was cremated by
Philoctetes who inherited his bow and arrows.

» Heracles. ὁ Heracles’ bow.

7 River near Sybaris.

* At Crimisa Philoctetes built a temple to Apollo Alaeus
(1.6. “" οἵ wandering”). Patara in Lycia had a famous temple
of A llo (Strabo 666).

iver near Croton where Trojan captive women burnt
the Greek ships (Strabo 262).
m Philoctetes died ae for Rhodian settlers in Italy,


who had been carried thither by the N.N.W. wind, against
settlers from Pellene in Achaea.


” Lindos in Rhodes. ° Harbour of Lindos.
» Island between Rhodes and Crete.
7 N.N.W. wind. r Town in Chonia.


571


LYCOPHRON


ὋὉ δ᾽ ἱπποτέκτων Λαγαρίας ἐν ἀγκάλαις,
ἔγχος πεφρικὼς καὶ φάλαγγα θουρίαν,
πατρῷον ὅρκον ἐκτίνων ψευδώμοτον,
ὃν ἀμφὶ μήλων τῶν δορικτήτων τάλας
πύργων Ἰζομαιθοῦς συμπεφυρμένων στρατῷ
στεργοξυνεύνων οὕνεκεν νυμφευμάτων
᾿Αλοῖτιν ἔτλη τὴν ζυδωνίαν Θρασὼ
ὁρκωμοτῆσαι τόν τε Ἰζρηστώνης θεὸν
Kayddov" ἢ Μάμερτον ὁπλίτην λύκον,

ὁ μητρὸς ἐντὸς SeAgvos στυγνὴν μάχην
στήσας ἀραγμοῖς πρὸς κασίγνητον χεροῖν,
οὔπω τὸ Τιτοῦς λαμπρὸν αὐγάζων φάος
οὐδ᾽ ἐκφυγὼν ὠδῖνας ἀλγεινὰς τόκων.
τοιγὰρ πόποι φύξηλιν ἤνδρωσαν σπόρον,

ἐν ἐσθλόν, πτῶκα δ᾽ ἐν κλόνῳ δορό
πύκτην μὲν ἐσθλόν, πτῶκα Ὁ δορὸς,
καὶ πλεῖστα τέχναις ὠφελήσαντα στρατόν"
a“ > \ - \ / ΞΖ
ὃς ἀμφὶ Kipw καὶ Κυλιστάνου ' γάνος
ἔπηλυς οἴκους τῆλε νάσσεται πάτρας,
τὰ δ᾽ ἐργαλεῖα, τοῖσι τέτρηνας βρέτας
τεύξει ποτ᾽ ἐγχώροισι μέρμερον βλάβην,
καθιερώσει Μυνδίας ἀνακτόροις.

Ἄλλοι δ᾽ ἐνοικήσουσι Σικανῶν χθόνα,
πλαγκτοὶ μολόντες, ἔνθα Λαυμέδων τριπλᾶς


1 Κυλιστάνου Scheer from H.M. 544, 30 Κυλιστάρ(νγου.
« Near Thurii in S. Italy, founded by Epeius (Strabo


263). > Epeius.
¢ In later epic Epeius is typical coward (Q. Smyrn. iv.
323 ; xii. 28, etc.). ὦ Panopeus.


¢. ’ Panopeus went with Amphitryon against the Taphians
and Teleboans. Pterelaus, king of the former, had a lock
of golden hair which made him invincible. Comaetho, his
daughter, fell in love with Amphitryon and cut off the
lock. Amphitryon captured the city of Pterelaus and put
to death Comaetho. Panopeus seized some of the spoils


572


930


ALEXANDRA


In the sheltering arms of Lagaria® shall dwell
the builder’ of the horse. Afraid’ of the spear and
the impetuous phalanx, he pays for the false oath
of his father? regarding the spear-won herds, which
wretched man, when the towers of Comaetho’ were
confounded by the army in the cause of loving
marriage, he dared toswear by Aloetis Cydonia Thraso,f
and by the god” of Crestone,” Candaon or Mamertus,
warrior wolf. He* even within his mother’s womb
arrayed hateful battle against his brother with blows of
his hands, while he looked not yet onthe bright light of
Tito, nor had yet escaped the grievous pains of birth.
And for his false oath the gods made his son grow
to be a coward man, a good boxer but a skulker in
the mellay of the spear. By his arts he most greatly
helped the host; and by Ciris’ and the bright waters
of Cylistanus he shall dwell as an alien, far from his
fatherland ; and the tools wherewith he shall bore
the image and fashion sad ruin for the people of my
country, he shall consecrate in the shrine of Myndia.*

And others shall dwell in the land’ of the
Sicanians, wandering to the spot where Laomedon,”
unjustly, but denied it on oath, swearing falsely by Athena
and Ares. .

7 Athena Aloetis, as avenger of sin; Cydonia, cult-name
of Athena in Elis where she had a temple founded by -


Clymenus from Cydonia in Crete; Thraso (‘ Bold”), as
warlike goddess,

9 Ares. Here Candaon must be a title of Ares, but in
328 Hephaestus. » In Thrace.

ὁ P. fought with his brother Crisus in his mother’s womb.

4 =Aciris, river near Siris (Strabo 264), in Lucania.

* Athena, from her cult at Myndusin Caria. ὃ In Sicily.

m When Phoenodamas refused to expose his daughters to
the sea-beast, Laomedon had to expose his own daughter
Hesione. In revenge he gave the daughters of Phoeno-
damus to some merchants to expose in the far West.


573


LYCOPHRON


, Ψ 4 /
ναύταις ἔδωκε Φοινοδάμαντος κόρας,
ταῖς κητοδόρποις συμφοραῖς δεδηγμένος,
τηλοῦ προθεῖναι θηρσὶν ὠμήσταῖς βορὰν εἰς 96
μολόντας εἰς γῆν ἕσπερον Λαιστρυγόνων,
ὅπου συνοικεῖ δαψιλὴς ἐρημία.
αἱ δ᾽ αὖ παλαιστοῦ μητέρος Ζηρυνθίας
σηκὸν μέγαν δείμαντο, δωτίνην θεᾷ,
μόρον φυγοῦσαι καὶ μονοικήτους ἕδρας, 960
Ξ \ ’ Υ / > \ Ul ΕῚ
ὧν δὴ μίαν ἸΚριμισός, ἰνδαλθεὶς κυνί,
” / / ¢ A /
ἔζευξε λέκτροις ποταμός: ἡ δὲ δαίμονι
τῷ θηρομίκτῳ σκύλακα γενναῖον τεκνοῖ,
τρισσῶν συνοικιστῆρα καὶ κτίστην τόπων.
ὃς δὴ ποδηγῶν πτόρθον ᾿Αγχίσου νόθον 966.
ἄξει τρίδειρον νῆσον εἰς ληκτηρίαν,
τῶν Δαρδανείων ἐκ τόπων ναυσθλούμενον.
Αἰγέστα τλῆμον, σοὶ δὲ δαιμόνων φραδαῖς
πένθος μέγιστον καὶ δι᾿ αἰῶνος πάτρας
ἔσται πυρὸς ῥιπαῖσιν ἠθαλωμένης. 970 —
μόνη δὲ πύργων δυστυχεῖς κατασκαφὰς ᾿
νήπαυστον αἰάζουσα καὶ γοωμένη
δαρὸν στενάξεις. πᾶς δὲ λυγαίαν λεὼς
«ἐσθῆτα προστρόπαιον ἐγχλαινούμενος
αὐχμῷ πινώδης λυπρὸν ἀμπρεύσει βίον. 975

3 > ἂν “. A /
κρατὸς δ᾽ ἄκουρος νῶτα καλλυνεῖ φόβη,
μνήμην παλαιῶν τημελοῦσ᾽ ὀδυρμάτων.
Πολλοὶ δὲ Σῖῆριν ἀμφὶ καὶ Λευταρνίαν
α Aphrodite, as in 449 : but in 1178 Hecate.
> Eryx: see 866 ἢ,


ο Aegesta. A dog, representing Crimisus, appears on
coins of (S)egesta (Sestri) (Head, Hist. Num. p. 164 f.).


574


ALEXANDRA


stung by the ravages of the gluttonous sea-monster,
gave to mariners to expose the three daughters of
Phoenodamas that they. should be devoured by
ravenous wild beasts, there far off where they came
to the land of the Laestrygonians in the West,
where dwells always abundant desolation. And
those daughters in their turn built a great shrine for
the Zerynthian ὦ mother of the wrestler,® as a gift to
the goddess, for as much as they had escaped from
doom and lonely dwelling. Of these one ¢ the river
Crimisus, in the likeness of a dog, took to be his
bride: and she to the half-beast god bears a noble
whelp,@ settler and founder of three places.* That
whelp shall guide the bastard’ scion of Anchises
and bring him to the farthest bounds of the three-
necked island,’ voyaging from Dardanian places.
Hapless Aegesta! to thee by devising of the gods
there shall be most great and age-long sorrow for my
country when it is consumed. by the breath of fire.
And thou alone shalt groan for long, bewailing and
lamenting unceasingly the unhappy overthrow of
her towers. And all thy people, clad in the sable
garb of the suppliant, squalid and unkempt, shall
drag out a sorrowful life, and the unshorn hair of
their heads shall deck their backs, keeping the
memory of ancient woes.”

And many shall dwell by Siris‘ and Leutarnia’s /


4 Aegestes.
ὁ Aegesta, Eryx, Entella.
* Elymus, eponym of the Elymi.
9 Sicily.
r The native garb of the people of Segesta is interpreted
as,mourning for Troy ; ef. 863, 1137.
ὁ In Lucania.
7 Coast of Calabria.
575


LYCOPHRON >


ἄρουραν οἰκήσουσιν, ἔνθα δύσμορος
Κάλχας ὀλύνθων. Luovdeds ἀνηρίθμων
κεῖται, κάρα μάστιγι γογγύλῃ τυπείς,
ῥείθροισιν ὠκὺς ἔνθα μύρεται Σίνις,
ἄρδων βαθεῖαν Xwvias παγκληρίαν.
πόλιν δ᾽ ὁμοίαν ᾿Ιλίῳ δυσδαίμονες
δείμαντες, ἀλγυνοῦσι Λαφρίαν κόρην
Σάλπιγγα, δῃώσαντες ἐν ναῷ θεᾶς
τοὺς πρόσθ᾽ ἔδεθλον Ξουθίδας φκηκότας.
γλήναις δ᾽ ἄγαλμα ταῖς ἀναιμάτοις μύσει,
στυγνὴν ᾿Αχαιῶν εἰς ᾿Ι[άονας βλάβην
λεῦσσον φόνον 7 ἔμφυλον ἀγραύλων λύκων,
ὅταν θανὼν λήταρχος ἱρείας σκύλαξ
πρῶτος κελαινῷ βωμὸν αἱμάξῃ βρότῳ.
Ἄλλοι δὲ πρῶνας δυσβάτους Τυλησίους
Λίνου θ᾽ ἁλισμήκτοιο δειραίαν ἄκραν
᾿Αμαζόνος σύγκληρον ἄ ἄρσονται πέδον,
δούλης γυναικὸς ζεῦγλαν ἐνδεδεγμένοι,
ἣν χαλκομίτρου θῆσσαν ὀτρηρῆς κόρης
πλανῆτιν ἄξει κῦμα πρὸς ἕένην χθόνα.
ἧς ἐκπνεούσης λοῖσθον ὀφθαλμὸς τυπεὶς
πιθηκομόρφῳ πότμον Αἰτωλῷ φθόρῳ
τεύξει τράφηκι φοινίῳ τετμημένῳ.


4 In connexion with Heracles and his carrying off of
the oxen of Geryon, legend told that Heracles, seeing a
seer (here called Calchas) sitting under a fig-tree, asked him
how many figs were on the tree. ‘‘Ten bushels and one
fig,” said the seer. When Heracles vainly tried to put the
odd fig into the tenth bushel, the seer mocked him and
Heracles killed him with his fist.

» Sisyphus is the type of cleverness.

_ © The fist of Heracles. @ i.e, Siris.

¢ Achaeans come from Troy and settle near Siris on the

site of the later Heracleia. They kill the Ionians, the


576


980


985


990


995


1000


ALEXANDRA


fields, where lies the unhappy Calchas “ who Sisyphus-
like’ counted the unnumbered figs, and who was
smitten on the head by the rounded scourge “—
where Sinis’ ὦ swift stream flows, watering the rich
estate of Chonia. There the unhappy men shall
build a city like Ilios,’ and shall vex the Maiden’
Laphria Salpinx by slaying in the temple of the
goddess the descendants’ of Xuthus who formerly
occupied the town. And her image shall shut its
bloodless eyes, beholding the hateful-destruction of
Ionians by Achaeans and the kindred slaughter of
the wild wolves, when the minister son of the
priestess dies and stains first the altar with his dark
blood.

And others shall take to them the steep Tylesian”
hills and sea-washed Linos’” hilly promontory, the
territory of the Amazon,’ taking on them the yoke of a
slave woman, whom, as servant of the brazen-mailed
impetuous maiden,’ the wave shall carry wandering
to an alien land: slave of that maiden whose eye,
smitten as she breathes her last, shall bring doom to
the ape-formed Aetolian pest,* wounded by the
previous settlers, in the temple of Ilian Athena; οὐ Aristot.
Mirab. 106, Athen. xii. 523, Strabo 264 (who says it was
the Ionians who murdered the earlier Trojan settlers).

f Athena, cf. 356, 915.

7 Tonians, lon being son of Xuthus.

*% Unknown, but apparently in Bruttiums

ὁ Clete, nurse of Penthesileia.

i When Clete heard that Penthesileia had fallen at Troy,
she set out in search of her but was carried py stress of
weather to Italy where she found a town which bore her
name in Bruttium.

* Thersites (for his deformity cf. Jl. ii. 216 ff.) from
Aetolia. When Achilles slew Penthesileia, Thersites in-
sulted the corpse by thrusting his spear in her eye, where-
upon Achilles killed him (Q. Smyrn. i. 660 ff.).

QP 577


LYCOPHRON


Κροτωνιᾶται δ᾽ ἄστυ πέρσουσίν ποτε
᾿Αμαζόνος, φθέρσαντες. ἄτρομον κόρην
Κλήτην, ἄνασσαν τῆς ἐπωνύμου πάτρας.
πολλοὶ δὲ πρόσθεν γαῖαν ἐκ κείνης ὀδὰξ
δάψουσι πρηνιχθέντες, οὐδ᾽ ἄτερ πόνων
πύργους διαρραίσουσι Λαυρήτης γόνοι.

Οἱ δ᾽ αὖ Τέρειναν, ἔνθα μυδαίνει ποτοῖς
᾽Ωκίναρος γῆν, φοῖβον ἐκβράσσων.͵ ὕδωρ,
ἄλῃ κατοικήσουσι κάμνοντες πικρᾷ.

ov δ᾽ αὖ τὰ δευτερεῖα καλλιστευμάτων
λαβόντα, καὶ τὸν ἐκ Λυκορμαίων ποτῶν
στρατηλάτην σῦν, καρτερὸν Γόργης τόκον,
τῇ μὲν Λίβυσσαν ψάμμον ἄξουσι πνοαὶ
Θρῇσσαι ποδωτοῖς ἐμφορούμεναι λίνοις,
τῇ δ᾽ ἐκ Λιβύσσης αὖθις ἐμπίπτων νότος
εἰς ᾿Αργυρίνους καὶ Kepavviwy νάπας
ἄξει βαρεῖ πρηστῆρι ποιμαίνων ἅλα.
ἔνθα πλανήτην λυπρὸν ὄψονται βίον
Λακμωνίου πίνοντες Αἴαντος ῥοάς.
Κρᾶθις δὲ γείτων ἠδὲ Μυλάκων ὅροις
χῶρος ' συνοίκους δέξεται ζόλχων Ἰ[όλαις,
μαστῆρας ous θυγατρὸς ἔστειλεν βαρὺς
Αἴας Κορίνθου τ᾽ ἀρχός, Eidvias πόσις,
τὴν νυμφαγωγὸν ἐκκυνηγετῶν τρόπιν,
οἵ πρὸς βαθεῖ νάσσαντο Διζηροῦ πόρῳ.
1 ὄρος (cod. Β) χώρας Scheer.

« E.M. s.v. Κλείτη says that not only the city but also the

queens who succeeded the first Cleite (Clete) bore the same


name. As Clete was mother of Caulon, founder of Caulonia,
‘the reference seems to be to the taking of Caulonia by
Croton.

ὃ Daughter of Lacinius and wife of Croton (schol.).

¢ In Bruttium, 4 Nireus (Hom. JJ. ii. 671 ff.).

¢ Thoas. 7 =Evenus in Aetolia (Strabo 451).
578


ALEXANDRA


bloody shaft. And the men of Croton shall sack the
city of the Amazon, destroying the dauntless maiden
Clete,? queen of the land that bears her name. But,
ere that, many shall be laid low by her hand and
bite the dust with their teeth, and not without
labour shall the sons of Laureta® sack the towers.

Others, again, in Tereina,’° where Ocinarus moistens
the earth with his streams, bubbling with bright
water, shall dwell, weary with bitter wandering.

And him,? again, who won the second prize for
beauty, and the boar leader? from the streams of
Lycormas,’ the mighty son of Gorge,’ on the one
hand the Thracian blasts, falling on taut sails, shall
carry to the sands of Libya; on the other hand from
Libya again the blast of the South wind shall carry
them to the Argyrini” and the glades of Ceraunia,'
shepherding the sea with grievous hurricane. And
there they shall see a sorry wandering life, drinking
the waters of Aias’ which springs from Lacmon.*
And neighbouring Crathis’ and the land of the
Mylaces™ shall receive them in their bounds to dwell
at Polae,” the town of the Colchians whom the angry
ruler® of Aea and of Corinth, the husband of Eiduia,?
sent to seek his daughter,’ tracking the keel” that
earried off the bride; they settled by the deep
stream of Dizerus.*


9 Daughter of Oeneus. ,

» In Epirus (Steph. Β.). * Mountain in Epirus.

j i.e. the Auas or Aoiis (Strabo 271, 316).

* =Lacmus; cf. Herod. ix. 23.

* Unknown river in Illyria.

m I}lyrians (ἰλλός Ξε μυλλός, ἐ.6. ““ squinting ”).

Cf. Callim. fr. incert. 2n. ° Aeétes.

» Hes. Th. 958, where Aeétes, son of Helios, is husband
of Idyia, daughter of Oceanus.

4 Medeia. * Argo. ᾿ς “5 In Illyria (Steph. B.).


579


LYCOPHRON


Ἄλλοι δὲ Μελίτην νῆσον ᾿Οθρωνοῦ πέλας
πλαγκτοὶ κατοικήσουσιν, ἣν πέριξ κλύδων
ἔμπλην Παχύνου Σικανὸς προσμάσσεται,
τοῦ Σισυφείου παιδὸς ὀχθηρὰν ἄκραν
ἐπώνυμόν ποθ᾽ ὑστέρῳ χρόνῳ γράφων

/ > ὦ / 4
κλεινόν θ᾽ ἵδρυμα παρθένου Λογγάτιδος,
Ἕλωρος ἔνθα ψυχρὸν ἐκβάλλει ποτόν.

Παπποκτόνος δ᾽ ᾿Οθρωνὸν οἰκήσει λύκος,
τηλοῦ πατρῷα ῥεῖθρα Ἰζοσκύνθου ποθῶν.
“a 9 ᾽ὔ / 1... tO
ὃς ἐν θαλάσσῃ χοιράδων βεβὼς ἔπι
ῥήτρας πολίταις τὰς στρατοπλώτους ἐρεῖ.
χέρσου πατρῴας οὐ γὰρ ἂν φονῆ ποσὶ
ψαῦσαι, μέγαν πλειῶνα μὴ πεφευγότα,
Δίκης ἐάσει τάρροθος ελφουσία
Λάδωνος ἀμφὶ ῥεῖθρα ναίουσα σκύλαξ.
ὅθεν, πεφευγὼς ἑρπετῶν δεινὴν μάχην
δρακοντομόρφων, εἰς ᾿Αμαντίαν πόλιν

/ / \ ~ > 4 4
πλώσει. πέλας δὲ γῆς ᾿Ατιντάνων μολών,
Πράκτιν παρ᾽ αὐτὴν αἰπὺ νάσσεται λέπας,
τοῦ Χαονίτου νᾶμα Πολυάνθους δρέπων.

ὋὉ δ᾽ Αὐσονείων ἄγχι Κάλχαντος τάφων,


¢ Malta. :

ὃ Hesych, s.v. Οθρωνός says ‘island off Corcyra”; so
Pliny, V.H. iv. δῶ. Hence Scheer supposed that Lycophron
confused Melita= Malta with the Illyrian Melita= Meleda.
But Steph. Byz. s.v. ’O6p. says ““ according to some an island
to the south of Sicily.” .

¢ Cape in south-east Sicily, of which the western point
was called ᾿Οδυσσεία ἄκρα (Ptolem. iii. 4. 7).

@ Odysseus, according to one legend son of Anticleia
and Sisyphus. _ ὁ Athena; ef. 520.

7 River near Pachynus. — 9 Island near Corcyra.

* Elephenor of Euboea (//. ii. 540) having unwittingly
slain his grandfather Abas had to go into exile for a year.
Meanwhile the Trojan war breaks out, in which as a suitor


580


ALEXANDRA


Other wanderers shall dwell in the isle of Melita,”
near Othronus,? round which the Sicanian wave laps
beside Pachynus,’ grazing the steep promontory that
in after time shall bear the name of the son? of
Sisyphus and the famous shrine of the maiden
Longatis,’ where Helorus*’ empties his chilly stream.

And in Othronus 9 shall dwell the wolf” that slew
his own grandfather, yearning afar for his ancestral
stream of Coscynthus.? Standing in the sea upon
the rocks he shall declare to his countrymen the
compact of the sailing army. For never will the
ally of Justice, the Telphusian hound?’ that dwells
by the streams of Ladon, allow the murderer to
touch with his feet his fatherland, if he has not
spent a great year in exile. Thence, fleeing from_
the terrible warfare of the serpent-shaped vermin,"
he shall sail to the city of Amantia,’ and coming
nigh to the land of the Atintanians,” right beside
Practis” shall he dwell upon a steep hill, drinking
the waters of Chaonian Polyanthes.

And near the Ausonian false-tomb of Calchas °


of Helen (Apollod. iii. 180) he has to take part. When he

comes to summon the Abantes to the war he may not land,

es must speak from a rock in the sea; ef. Arist. ’A@. Πολ.
ὁ In Euboea (schol. ).

te Demeter-Erinys, cult at Telphusa or Thelpusa in


Arcadia. * Reference unknown.
? -- Αβαντία in lilyricum.
™ In Epeirus (Strabo 326). » Unknown.


° Calchas was buried near Colophon (cf. 424f.), but
‘*there are shown in Daunia on a hill called Drion two
heroa (hero-shrines), one of Calchas on the top of the hill,
where those who consult him sacrifice to him a black ram
and sleep upon the skin; the other of Podaleirius at the foot
of the hill. From it flows a small stream which is a
sovereign remedy (rdvaxes) for the diseases of cattle”
(Strabo 284).


581


LYCOPHRON


δυοῖν ἀδελφοῖν ἅ ἅτερος, ψευδηρίων
ξένην ἐπ᾽ ὀστέοισιν ὀγχήσει κόνιν.
δοραῖς δὲ μήλων τύμβον ἐ ἐγκοιμωμένοις
χρήσει καθ᾽ ὕπνον πᾶσι νημερτῆ φάτιν,
νόσων δ᾽ ἀκεστὴς Δαυνίοις κληθήσεται,
ὅταν κατικμαίνοντες ᾿Αλθαίνου ῥοαῖς
ἀρωγὸν αὐδήσωσιν ᾿Ηπίου γόνον
ἀστοῖσι καὶ ποίμναισι πρευμενῆ μολεῖν.
ἔσται ποτὲ πρεσβεῦσιν Αἰτωλῶν φάος
ἐκεῖ γοηρὸν καὶ πανέχθιστον φανέν,
ὅταν Σαλάγγων γαῖαν ᾿Αγγαίσων θ᾽ ἕδη.
μολόντες αἰτίζωσι. κοιράνου γύας,
ἐσθλῆς ἀρούρης πῖαρ ἔγκληρον χθονός.
τοὺς δ᾽ εἰς ἐρεμνὸν ζῶντας ὠμησταὶ τάφον
κρύψουσι κοίλης ἐν μυχοῖς διασφάγος.
τοῖς δ᾽ ἀκτέριστον σῆμα Δαυνῖται νεκρῶν
στήσουσι χωστῷ προχμάλῳ κατηρεφές,
χώραν διδόντες, ἣν περ ἔχρῃζον λαβεῖν,
τοῦ κρατοβρῶτος παιδὸς a: ἄτρεστου κάπρου.
Τῶν Ναυβολείων δ᾽ εἰς Τέμεσσαν ἐγγόνων
ναῦται καταβλώξουσιν, ἔνθα Λαμπέτης
“Ἱππωνίου πρηῶνος εἰς Τηθὺν κέρας


« Podaleirius.

> Podaleirius and Machaon, sons of Asclepius, from
Thessaly (171. ii. 730 f.).

“ Stream flowing from Mount Drion. 2 Asclepius.

ὁ Justin xii. 2 says Brundusium was founded by the
Aetolians under Diomede. When the Aetolians were ex-
pelled by the Apulians they consulted the oracles and got
the answer ‘* locum quem repetissent perpetuo possessuros.
Accordingly they sent ambassadors to demand restitution of
the city. The Apulians, having learnt of the oracle, killed
the ambassadors and buried them in the city, ‘‘ perpetuam
ibi sedem habituros.”

7 Unknown. 9 Diomedes.


582


ALEXANDRA ~
~

one 5 of two brothers? shall have an alien soil over
his bones and to men sleeping in sheepskins on his
tomb he shall declare in dreams his unerring message
for all. And healer of diseases shall he be called
by the Daunians, when they wash the sick with the
waters of Althaenus*¢ and invoke the son of Epius ὦ
to their aid, that he may come gracious unto men
and flocks. There some time for the ambassadors ὁ
of the Aetolians shall dawn a sad and hateful day,
when, coming to the land of the Salangi’ and the seats
of the Angaesi,/ they shall ask the fields of their lord,9
the rich inheritance of goodly soil. Alive in a dark
tomb within the recesses of a hollow cleft shall the
savages hide them; and for them the Daunites shall
set up a memorial of the dead without funeral rites,
roofed with piled stones, giving them the land which
they desired to get,—the land of the βοὴ 5 of the
dauntless boar” who devoured the brains? of his enemy.

And the mariners of the descendants 7 of Naubolus
shall come to Temessa,* where the hard horn of the
Hipponian? hill inclines to the sea of Lampeta.™


» Tydeus fought with Polyneices in Argos. Adrastus had
received an oracle that he should marry his daughters to a
lion and a boar, and a seer now recognized in Polyneices the
lion, in Tydeus the boar (Eur. Suppl. 140 ff.).

* In the war of the Seven against Thebes Melanippos
(Aesch. Sept. 415) was opposed to Tydeus (ibid. 377).
Tydeus was wounded by Melanippos whom he then slew.
As Tydeus lay dying, Athena brought a drug which was to
make him immortal. But Amphiaraus, who hated Tydeus,
cut off the head of Melanippos and gave it to Tydeus who
opened it and supped the brains (Apollod. iii. 76).

i Schedius and Epistrophus, sons of Iphitus, son of
Naubolus, from Phocis (J/. ii. 517).

κ᾿ Tempsa in Bruttium (Strabo 255).

’ Vibo Valentia (Strabo 256), in Bruttium.

τ Clampetia, in Bruttium.


583


< LYCOPHRON


σκληρὸν νένευκεν. ἀντὶ δὲ Kpions ὅρων
ἹΚροτωνιᾶτιν ἀντίπορθμον αὔλακα
βοῶν ἀροτρεύσουσιν ὁλκαίῳ πτερῷ,
πάτραν Λίλαιαν κἀνεμωρείας πέδον
ποθοῦντες ᾿Αμφισσάν τε καὶ κλεινὰς Ἄβας.
Σήταια τλῆμον, σοὶ δὲ πρὸς πέτραις μόρος
μίμνει δυσαίων, ἔνθα γυιούχοις πέδαις
οἴκτιστα χαλκείῃσιν ὠργυιωμένη
θανῇ, πυρὶ φλέξασα δεσποτῶν στόλον,
ἔκβλητον αἰάζουσα Kpdbidos πέλας
τόργοισιν αἰώρημα φοινίοις δέμας.
σπιλὰς δ᾽ ἐκείνη σῆς φερώνυμος τύχης
πόντον προσαυγάζουσα φημισθήσεται.

Ot δ᾽ αὖ Ἰ]ελασγῶν audi Μέμβλητος ῥοὰς
νῆσόν τε Κερνεᾶτιν ἐκπεπλωκότες
ὑπὲρ πόρον Τυρσηνὸν ἐν Λαμητίαις
δίναισιν οἰκήσουσι Λευκανῶν πλάκας.

Καὶ τοὺς μὲν ἄλγη ποικίλαι τε συμφοραὶ
ἄνοστον αἰάζοντας ἕξουσιν τύχην
ἐμῶν ἕκατι δυσγάμων βυσταγμάτων.

Οὐδ᾽ of χρόνῳ μολόντες ἀσπαστῶς δόμους
εὐκταῖον ἐκλάμψουσι θυμάτων σέλας,

7 / / /

χάριν τίνοντες Κερδύλᾳ Λαρυνθίῳ.
τοιαῖσδ᾽ ἐχῖνος μηχαναῖς οἰκοφθορῶν
παραιολίξει τὰς ἀλεκτόρων πικρὰς
στεγανόμους ὄρνιθας. οὐδὲ ναυφάγοι
λήξουσι πένθους δυσμενεῖς φρυκτωρίαι
πτόρθου διαρραισθέντος, ὃν νεοσκαφὲς


* Phocian towns (Ji. 1.6...
> Setaea, a Trojan captive, set fire to the Greek ships.
Hence Setaeum, cliff near Sybaris.


584


ALEXANDRA
And in place of the bounds of Crisa* they shall till


with ox-drawn trailing ploughshare the Crotonian
fields across the straits, longing for their native
Lilaea ¢ and the plain of Anemoreia 5 and Amphissa ¢
and famous Abae.*. Poor Setaea®! for thee waits
an unhappy fate upon the rocks, where, most pitifully
outstretched with brazen fetters on thy limbs, thou
shalt die, because thou didst burn the fleet of thy
masters: bewailing near Crathis thy body cast out
and hung up for gory vultures to devour. And
that cliff, looking on the sea, shall be called by thy
name in memory of thy fate. τ

And others again beside the Pelasgian streams Ὁ
of Membles and the Cerneatid isle shall sail forth
and beyond the Tyrrhenian strait occupy in Lametian
waters Leucanian plains. |

And griefs and varied sufferings shall be the lot
of these—bewailing their fate which allows them
not to return home, on account of my haling to
unhappy marriage.

Nor shall they who after many days come gladly
home kindle the flame of votive offering in gratitude
to Cerdylas Larynthius.¢ With such craft shall the
hedgehog ὦ ruin their homes and mislead the house-
keeping hens embittered against the cocks. Nor
shall the ship-devouring hostile beacons abate their
sorrow for his shattered scion,?@ whom a new-dug

¢ Zeus. The meaning of these cult-names is quite
obscure: Cerdylas possibly = Κτήσιος, Zeus as god of
property.

4 Nauplius (‘* hedgehog,” from proverbial craftiness of
that animal, Ael. Δ. 4. vi. 54), in revenge for his son
Palamedes, lures the Greeks by false beacons on to the
rocks and by lies induces their wives to be faithless.


ὁ Palamedes, stoned to death by the Greeks, was buried
by Achilles and Aias near Methymna (in Lesbos).


585


LYCOPHRON


κρύψει ποτ᾽ ἐν κλήροισι Μηδύμνης στέγος.


ὋὉ μὲν γὰρ ἀμφὶ χύτλα τὰς δυσεξόδους


ζητῶν κελεύθους αὐχενιστῆρος βρόχου

ἐν ἀμφιβλήστρῳ συντεταργανωμένος
τυφλαῖς ματεύσει χερσὶ κροσσωτοὺς ῥαφάς.
θερμὴν δ᾽ ὑπαὶ λουτρῶνος ἀρνεύων στέγην
τιβῆνα καὶ κύπελλον ἐγκάρῳ ῥανεῖ,
τυπεὶς σκεπᾶρνῳ κόγχον εὐθήκτῳ μέσον.
οἰκτρὰ δέ πέμφιξ Ταίναρον πτερύξεται,
λυπρὰν λεαίνης εἰσιδοῦσ᾽ οἰκουρίαν.

ἐγὼ δὲ δροίτης ἄγχι κείσομαι πέδῳ,
Χαλυβδικῷ κνώδοντι συντεθραυσμένη,

ἐπεί με, πεύκης πρέμνον ἢ στύπος δρυὸς
ὅπως τις ὑλοκουρὸς ἐργάτης ὀρεύς,

ῥήξει πλατὺν τένοντα καὶ μετάφρενον,

καὶ πᾶν λακίζουσ᾽ ἐν φοναῖς ψυχρὸν δέμας
δράκαινα διψὰς κἀπιβᾶσ᾽. ἐπ᾽ αὐχένος
πλήσει γέμοντα θυμὸν ἀγρίας: χολῆς,

ὡς κλεψίνυμφον Kod δορίκτητον. γέρας
δύσζηλος ἀστέμβακτα τιμωρουμένη.

βοῶσα δ᾽ οὐ κλύοντα δεσπότην πόσιν
θεύσω κατ᾽ ἴχνος ἠνεμωμένη πτεροῖς.
σκύμνος δὲ πατρὸς κῆρα μαστεύων φόνου
εἰς σπλάγχν᾽ ἐχίδνης αὐτόχειρ βάψει ξίφος,


κακὸν μίασμ᾽ ἔμφυλον ἀλθαίνων κακῷ.


᾿Ἐμὸς δ᾽ ἀκοίτης, δμωίδος νύμφης ἀναξ,


Ζεὺς Σπαρτιάταις αἱμύλοις κληθήσεται,
\ / 3 / / 4
τιμὰς μεγίστας Οἰβάλου τέκνοις λαχών.


¢ Agamemnon is killed in the bath by Clytemnestra.
δ᾽ In Laconia, where there was a descent to Hades.


¢ Clytaemnestra.


¢ The Chalybes i in Pontus were famous workers in metal.


586


1100.


1115


1120


1125


ALEXANDRA


habitation in the territory of Methymna shall
hide.

One? at the bath while he seeks for the difficult
exits-of the mesh about his neck, entangled in a
net, shall search with blind hands the fringed
stitching. And diving under the hot covering of
the bath he shall sprinkle with his brains tripod
and basin, when he is smitten in the midst of the
skull with the well-sharpened axe. His piteous
ghost shall wing its way to Taenarus,® having looked
on the bitter housekeeping of the lioness. And I
beside the bath shall lie on the ground, shattered
by the Chalybdic ὁ sword. For she shall cleave me—
broad tendon and back—even as.a woodcutter work-
man on the mountains cleaves trunk of pine or stem
of oak—and, sand-viper as she is, will rend all my
cold body in blood and set her foot on my neck and
glut her laden soul of bitter bile, taking relentless
vengeance on me in evil jealousy, as if I were a
stolen bride and not a spear-won prize. And calling
on my master and husband,’ who hears no more,
I shall follow his track on wings of the wind. But
a whelp,’ seeking vengeance for his father’s blood,
shall with his own hand plunge his sword in the
entrails of the viper, with evil-healing the evil
pollution of his race.

And my husband, lord of a slave bride, shall
be called Zeus’ by the crafty Spartiates, obtaining
highest honours from the children of Oebalus.” Nor


4 Agamemnon.

7 Orestes, son of Agamemnon, slays his mother Clytaem-
nestra.

9 Zeus-Agamemnon, worshipped in Sparta,

» Father of Tyndareus.


587


LYCOPHRON


οὐ μὴν ἐμὸν νώνυμνον ἀνθρώποις σέβας
ἔσται, μαρανθὲν αὖθι ληθαίῳ σκότῳ.
ναὸν δέ μοι τεύξουσι Δαυνίων ἄκροι
Σάλπης παρ᾽ ὄχθαις, οἵ τε Δάρδανον πόλιν
ναίουσι, λίμνης ἀγχιτέρμονες ποτῶν.
κοῦραι δὲ παρθένειον ἐκφυγεῖν ζυγὸν
ὅταν θέλωσι, νυμφίους ἀρνούμεναι

τοὺς 'Ἑκτορείοις ἠγλαϊσμένους κόμαις,
μορφῆς ἔ ἔχοντας σίφλον ἢ μῶμαρ γένους,
ἐμὸν περιπτύξουσιν ὠλέναις βρέτας,
ἄλκαρ μέγιστον κτώμεναι νυμφευμάτων,
2 / > “ = cs \
Ἐρινύων ἐσθῆτα καὶ ῥέθους βαφὰς
᾿πεπαμέναι θρόνοισι φαρμακτηρίοις.

, > \ A * \

Keivais ἐγὼ δηναιὸν ἄφθιτος θεὰ
¢ 7 \ ᾽ὃ θ /
ῥαβδηφόροις γυναιξὶν αὐδηθήσομαι.

Πένθος δὲ πολλαῖς παρθένων τητωμέναις
τεύξω γυναιξὶν αὖθις, αἱ στρατηλάτην
3 4 4 \ ~
ἀθεσμόλεκτρον, Kimpidos λῃστὴν θεᾶς,
δαρὸν στένουσαι, κλῆρον εἰς ἀνάρσιον
πέμψουσι παῖδας ἐστερημένας γάμων.
Λάρυμνα, καὶ Σπερχειέ, καὶ Βοάγριε,

\ ~ A / \ 7
καὶ Kive, καὶ Σκάρφεια, καὶ Dadwpids,
καὶ Ναρύκειον ἄστυ, καὶ Θρονίτιδες
Λοκρῶν ἀγυιαί, καὶ Πυρωναῖαϊ νάπαι,

\ ~ c / > / /
καὶ πᾶς ᾿Οδοιδόκειος ᾿Ιλέως δόμος,


@ «* A lake in Italy” (schol.) ; possibly the reference is to
Salapia. ® Unknown.

¢ The schol. says this means that the hair is worn long
behind and shorn in front. Cf. Hesych. 8.0. Ἕκτόρειοι *
κομῆται. Δαύνιοι καὶ Πευκέτιοι ἔχοντες τὴν ἀπ᾽ ᾿Ιλίου τοῖς ὥμοις
περικεχυμένην τρίχα (Plut. Thes. 5).

@ Aristot. Mirab. 109 refers to the black clothes worn by all
Daunians, male or female. The schol. quotes Timaeus for
the statement that the Daunian women wore a dark dress,


588


1130


1135


1140


1145


pi a aa ΗΝ


oe ee Ys CRORES


DR ier...“


1150 —


.


ALEXANDRA


shall my worship be nameless among men, nor fade
hereafter in the darkness of oblivion. But the
chiefs of the Daunians shall build for me a shrine
on the banks of Salpe,* and those also who inhabit
the city of Dardanus,’ beside the waters of the lake.
_And when girls wish to escape the yoke of maidens,
refusing for bridegrooms men adorned with locks
such as Hector wore,’ but with defect of form or
reproach of birth, they will embrace my image
with their arms, winning a mighty shield against
marriage, having clothed them in the garb of the
Erinyes 4 and dyed their faces with magic simples.
By those staff-carrying women I shall long be called
an immortal goddess.

And to many women robbed of their maiden
daughters I shall bring sorrow hereafter. Long
shall they bewail the leader’ who sinned against .
the laws of marriage, the pirate of the Cyprian
goddess,’ when they shall send to the unkindly
shrine’ their daughters reft of marriage. Ὁ
Larymna” and Spercheius and Boagrius and Cynus
and Scarpheia and Phalorias and city of Naryx and
Locrian streets of Thronium and Pyronaean glades
and all the house of Ileus son of Hodoedocus—ye


were girt with broad ribands, wore τὰ κοῖλα τῶν ὑποδημάτων,
i.e. reaching to the calves of the leg (és μέσην τὴν κνήμην
ἀνήκοντα, Poll. v. 18, cf. vii. 84, Ael. W.A. vi. 23), carried a
wand in their hands, and painted their faces with a reddish
colour—suggesting the Furies of tragedy.

¢ Aias the Locrian, son of Oileus (Ileus), who assaulted
Cassandra in the temple of Athena.

f Aphrodite.

9 Shrine of Athena in Troy. The reference is to the
Locrian maiden-tribute. See Callim. Ae. i. 8 n. and οὐ
Strabo 601 and Plut. De ser. vindict. 557.

» This and the other places named are in Locris.

589


΄


LYCOPHRON


ὑμεῖς ἐμῶν ἕκατι δυσσεβῶν γάμων
\ / / > > / ~

ποινὰς Γυγαίᾳ τίσετ᾽ ᾿Αγρίσκᾳ θεᾷ,
τὸν χιλίωρον τὰς ἀνυμφεύτους χρόνον
πάλου βραβείαις γηροβοσκοῦσαι κόρας.
αἷς ἀκτέριστος ἐν ἕένῃ ξέναις τάφος

/ / \ > la
ψάμμῳ κλύδωνος λυπρὸς ἐκκλυσθήσεται,
φυτοῖς ἀκάρποις γυῖα συμφλέξας ὅταν
Ἥφαιστος εἰς θάλασσαν ἐκβράσῃ σποδὸν

a > / / > /
τῆς ἐκ λόφων Tpdpwvos ἐφθιτωμένης.
ἄλλαι δὲ νύκτωρ ταῖς θανουμέναις ἴσαι
Σιθῶνος εἰς θυγατρὸς ἵξονται γύας,
λαθραῖα κἀκκέλευθὰ παπταλώμεναιυ,

ἋἋ > / > / /
ἕως av εἰσθρέξωσιν ᾿Αμφείρας δόμους
λιταῖς Σθένειαν ἵκτιδες γουνούμεναι.
θεᾶς δ᾽ ὀφελτρεύσουσι κοσμοῦσαι πέδον,
δρόσῳ τε φοιβάσουσιν, ἀστεργῆ χόλον
ἀστῶν φυγοῦσαι. πᾶς γὰρ ᾿Ιλιεὺς. ἀνὴρ
κόρας δοκεύσει, πέτρον ἐν χεροῖν ἔχων,
ἢ φάσγανον κελαινόν, ἢ ταυροκτόνον
στερρὰν κύβηλιν, ἢ ἢ Φαλακραῖον κλάδον,
μαιμῶν κορέσσαι χεῖρα διψῶσαν φόνου.
δῆμος δ᾽ ἀνατεὶ τὸν κτανόντ᾽ ἐπαινέσει,
τεθμῷ χαράξας, τοὐπιλώβητον γένος.

Ὦ μῆτερ, ὦ δύσμητερ, οὐδὲ σὸν κλέος

ἄπυστον ἔσται, Ἰ]ερσέως δὲ παρθένος


Βριμὼ ἡ δἠκορφαὶ θήσεταί σ᾽ ἑπωπίδα


« Athena Gygaea either, in spite of the quantity, from
the Τυγαίη λίμνῃ in Lydia (Strabo 626) or ef. Tuya? ’AOnva
ἐγχώριος (Boeotian?) Hesych. Agrisca as goddess of
mericulbure.

ὃ Holzinger takes this to mean that the first Locrian
maiden escaped her pursuers by jumping into the sea from
Cape Traron in the Troad. It seems better to suppose it


590


1155


1160


1165


1170


1175 ©


ALEXANDRA


for the sake of my impious wedlock shall pay
penance to the goddess Gygaea Agrisca,* for the
space of a thousand years fostering to old age your
unwed daughters by the arbitrament of the lot.
And they, aliens in an alien land, shall have without
funeral rites a tomb, a sorry tomb in wave-washed
sands, when Hephaestus burns with unfruitful plants
the limbs of her ὃ that perishes from Traron’s peaks,
and tosses her ashes into the sea. And, to fill the
place of those that shall die, others shall come by
night to the fields® of Sithon’s daughter by secret
paths and glancing fearfully, until they rush into
the shrine of Ampheira® as suppliants beseeching
with their prayers Stheneia.¢ And they shall sweep
and array the floor of the goddess and cleanse it
with dew, having escaped the loveless anger of the
citizens. For every man of Ilios shall keep watch
for the maidens, with a stone in his hands, or a
dark sword or hard bull-slaying axe, or shaft from
Phalacra,’ eager to sate his hand athirst for blood.
And the people shall not harm him who slays that
race of reproach, but shall praise him and grave his
name by ordinance.

O mother, O unhappy mother! thy fame, too,
shall not be unknown, but the maiden daughter 9
of Perseus, Triform Brimo, shall make thee her


means that the ashes of every maiden who died were cast
into the sea from Cape Traron.

¢ Rhoeteum, ¢f. 583.

4 Athena Ampheira as a name of Athena is unknown ;
᾿Αθήνη Σθενιάς was worshipped in Troezen (Paus. ii. 30. 6 ff.).

© Cf. 94.

7 Hecuba, who was turned into a dog and stoned to
death.

9 Hecate, daughter of Asteria and Perses (Perseus) son
of Crius and Eurybia.


591


ane
vi


εν -
-


LYCOPHRON


ear ai


~~ we
~ Ss


KAayyato. ταρμύσσουσαν ἐννύχοις βροτούς,
ὅσοι μεδούσης Στρυμόνος Ζηρυνθίας a
δείκηλα μὴ σέβουσι λαμπαδουχίαις, '
θύσθλοις Φεραίαν ἐξακεύμενοι θεάν. 1180
ψευδήριον δὲ νησιωτικὸς στόνυξ
Πάχυνος ἕξει σεμνὸν ἐξ ὀνειράτων

ταῖς δεσποτείαις ὠλέναις ὠγκωμένον


ῥείθρων ἙἙλώρου πρόσθεν ἐκτερισμένης"


ὩΣ ¥


ὃς δὴ παρ᾽ ἀκταῖς τλήμονος ῥανεῖ χοάς, 1186
τριαύχενος μήνιμα δειμαίνων θεᾶς, Ϊ
“ ~ 4 « “

λευστῆρα πρῶτον οὕνεκεν ῥίψας πέτρον Ξ
Ady κελαινῶν θυμάτων ἀπάρξεται. :
Σὺ δ᾽, ὦ ξύναιμε, πλεῖστον ἐξ ἐμῆς φρενὸς Ἢ

, , cf \ , ¢ Fi
στερχθείς, μελάθρων ἕρμα καὶ πάτρας ὅλης, 1190.


? > \ A / /
οὐκ εἰς κενὸν κρηπῖδα φοινίξεις φόνῳ
ταύρων, ἄνακτι τῶν ᾿Οφίωνος θρόνων
πλείστας ἀπαρχὰς θυμάτων δωρούμενος.
> > + / \ / /
ἀλλ᾽ ἄξεταί σε πρὸς γενεθλίαν πλάκα

A »δ ἢ “- > , /
THY ἐξόχως Γραικοῖσιν ἐξυμνημένην, 1195
ὅπου ode μήτηρ ἡ πάλης ἐμπείραμος
τὴν πρόσθ᾽ ἄνασσαν ἐμβαλοῦσα Ταρτάρῳ
ὠδῖνας ἐξέλυσε λαθραίας γονῆς, Ἢ
τὰς παιδοβρώτους ἐκφυγοῦσ᾽ ὁμευνέτου
θοίνας ἀσέπτους, οὐδ᾽ ἐπίανεν βορᾷ 1900
νηδύν, τὸν ἀντίποινον ἐγμάψας πέτρον, =
ἐν γυιοκόλλοις σπαργάνοις εἰλημένον,
τύμβος γεγὼς Kévravpos ὠμόφρων σπορᾶς.
νήσοις δὲ μακάρων ἐγκατοικήσεις μέγας

* Hecate.

ὃ In Thessaly. Hecate with torch appears on coins of
Pherae (Head, H.W. 307 f.).


¢ Cenotaph of Hecuba built in Sicily by Odyssaus.
@ Hecate. 4 Hector. 7 Zeus.


592


ALEXANDRA


attendant, terrifying with thy baying in the night
all mortals who worship not with torches the images
of the Zerynthian queen of Strymon,* appeasing
the goddess of Pherae® with sacrifice. And the
island spur of Pachynus shall hold thine awful
cenotaph,° piled by the hands of thy master,
prompted by dreams when thou hast gotten the rites
of death in front of the streams of Helorus. He
shall pour on the shore offerings for thee, unhappy
one, fearing the anger of the three-necked goddess,@
for that he shall hurl the first stone at thy stoning
and begin the dark sacrifice to Hades.

And thou, O brother,’ most beloved of my heart,
stay of our halls and of our whole fatherland, not
in vain shalt thou redden the altar pedestal with
blood of bulls, giving full many a sacrificial offering
to him’ who is lord of Ophion’s’ throne. But
he shall bring thee to the plain of his nativity,’
that land celebrated above others by the Greeks,
where his mother,’ skilled in wrestling, having
cast into Tartarus the former queen, delivered her
of him in travail of secret birth, escaping the child-
devouring unholy feast of her spouse’; and he
fattened not his belly with food, but swallowed
instead the stone, wrapped in limb-fitting swaddling-
clothes: savage Centaur, tomb of his own offspring.
And in the Islands of the Blest* thou shalt dwell,


9 A Titan, who preceded Zeus as king of the gods.

» Thebes, where was a place called Διὸς Tovat (schol. 74,
xiii. 1), The Thebans were told by an oracle to bring
Hector’s bones to Thebes (Paus. ix. 18).

# Rhea overcame Eurynome, wife of Ophion.

7 Cronus, called Centaur as father of Cheiron.

* In Thebes was a place called Μακάρων νῆσοι. Hesych.
5.0. M. νῆσος says it is the acropolis of Thebes.


29 δ08


LYCOPHRON


“ : > \ A , 3
Npws, apwyos λοιμικῶν τοξευμάτων, 120
ὅπου σε πεισθεὶς ᾿Ωγύγου σπαρτὸς λεὼς
χρησμοῖς ᾿Ιατροῦ “Λεψίου Τερμινθέως
ἐξ ᾿Οφρυνείων ἠρίων ἀνειρύσας

ἄξει Ἰζαλύδνου τύρσιν ᾿Αόνων τε γῆν
σωτῆρ᾽, ὅταν κάμνωσιν ὁπλίτῃ στρατῷ 1210
πέρθοντι χώραν Τηνέρου τ᾽ ἀνάκτορα. ᾿
κλέος δὲ σὸν μέγιστον ᾿ΕΚτήνων πρόμοι
λοιβαῖσι κυδανοῦσιν ἀφθίτοις ἴσον.

Ἥξει δὲ Κνωσσὸν κἀπὶ Γόρτυνος δόμους ἣ
τοὐμὸν ταλαίνης πῆμα, πᾶς δ᾽ ἀνάστατος 1215
ἔσται στρατηγῶν οἶκος. οὐ yap ἥσυχος
πορκεὺς δίκωπον σέλμα ναυστολῶν ἐλᾷ,
Λεῦκον στροβήσων φύλακα τῆς μοναρχίας,

δραῖσί τε ἔχθραν μηχαναῖς ἀναπλέκων.
ὃς οὔτε τέκνων φείσετ᾽ οὔτε συγγάμου 1290
Μήδας δάμαρτος, ἠγριωμένος φρένας, :
οὐ Ἰζλεισιθήρας θυγατρός, 7 ἧς πατὴρ λέχος
θρεπτῷ δράκοντι συγκαταινέσει πικρόν.
πάντας δ᾽ ἀνάγνοις χερσὶν ἐν ναῷ κτενεῖ,
λώβαισιν αἰκισθέντας ᾿Ογκαίου βόθρου. 1228

Γένους δὲ πάππων τῶν ἐμῶν αὖθις κλέος
μέγιστον αὐξήσουσιν a ἄμναμοί ποτε,
αἰχμαῖς τὸ πρωτόλειον ἄ ἄραντες στέφος,
γῆς καὶ θαλάσσης σκῆπτρα καὶ μοναρχίαν
λαβόντες. οὐδ᾽ ἄμνηστον, ἀθλία πατρίς, 1230 |


_.@ The Thebans sprang from the dragon’s teeth sown by
Cadmus. » Karly king of Thebes.
᾿ ¢ Apollo. 2 In the Troad.
¢ Karly king of Thebes. 7 Boeotians.
9. Son and priest of Ptoian Apollo in Boeotia.
ἃ Boeotians. ὁ In Crete.
j Nauplius (cf, 1093) goes to Crete, where he incites


594


ALEXANDRA


a mighty hero, defender of the arrows of pestilence,
where the sown ® folk of Ogygus,? persuaded by the
oracles of the Physician’ Lepsius Termintheus, shall
lift thee from thy cairn in Ophryneion® and bring
thee to the tower of Calydnus? and the land of the
Aonians / to be their saviour, when they are harassed
by an armed host which seeks to sack their land and
the shrine of Tenerus.2? And the chiefs of the
Ectenes” shall with libations celebrate thy glory in
the highest, even as the immortals.

And unto Cnossus? and the halls of Gortyn * shall
come the woe of me unhappy, and all the house of
the ruiers shall be overthrown. For not quietly
shall the fisherman’ voyage, rowing his two-oared
boat, to stir up Leucus, guardian of the kingdom,
and weaving hate with lying wiles. He shall spare
neither the children nor Meda the wedded wife, in the
rage of his mind, nor the daughter Cleisithera, whom
her father shall betroth unhappily to the serpent ”
whom he himself has reared. All will he slay with
impious hands in the temple, maltreated and abused
in the Trench of Oncaea.’

And the fame of the race of my ancestors
shall hereafter be. exalted to the highest by their
descendants,” who shall with their spears win the
foremost crown of glory, obtaining the sceptre and
monarchy of earth and sea.” Nor in the darkness
Leucus, to whom Idomeneus during his absence in Troy
had entrusted his kingdom, to seize the throne and to murder
Meda, wife of Idomeneus, and her children, Iphiclus and
Lycus, as well as his own bride, Cleisithera, daughter of
Idomeneus. .

* Leucus, exposed in infancy, had been adopted by
Idomeneus. ᾿

1 Demeter Erinys. m The Romans.

” See Introduction, pp. 482 f.


508


LYCOPHRON
“- 9 \ > / /
κῦδος μαρανθὲν ἐγκατακρύψεις ζόφῳ.

/ > > / 4 / ~
τοιούσδ᾽ ἐμός τις σύγγονος λείψει διπλοῦς
σκύμνους λέοντας, ἔξοχον ῥώμῃ γένος,

ὁ Καστνίας τε τῆς τε Χειράδος γόνος,
βουλαῖς ἄριστος, οὐδ᾽ ὀνοστὸς ἐν μάχαις.
“ ~ \ « / > / /
ὃς πρῶτα μὲν “Ραίκηλον οἰκήσει μολών,
Κισσοῦ παρ᾽ αἰπὺν πρῶνα καὶ Λαφυστίας
/ A > a /

κερασφόρους γυναῖκας. ἐκ δ᾽ ᾿Αλμωπίας

/ / / /
πάλιμπλανήτην δέξεται Tuponvia
Λιγγεύς τε θερμῶν ῥεῖθρον ἐκβράσσων ποτῶν,

\ se ie / > ce 4 /
kat Ilio’ ᾿Αγύλλης θ᾽ αἱ πολύρρηνοι νάπαι.

\ / / / > \ nv /
σὺν δέ σφι μίξει φίλιον ἐχθρὸς ὧν στρατόν,
ὅρκοις κρατήσας καὶ λιταῖς γουνασμάτων
νάνος, πλάναισι πάντ᾽ ἐρευνήσας μυχὸν
ἁλός τε καὶ γῆς. σὺν δὲ δίπτυχοι τόκοι
Μυσῶν ἄνακτος, οὗ ποτ᾽ Οἰκουρὸς δόρυ
γνάμψει Θέοινος, γυῖα συνδήσας λύγοις,
Tapywv τε καὶ Τυρσηνός, αἴθωνες λύκοι,
τῶν Ἡρακλείων ἐκγεγῶτες αἱμάτων.
Ψ / > % , 7
ἔνθα τράπεζαν εἰδάτων πλήρη κιχών,
τὴν ὕστερον βρωθεῖσαν ἐξ. ὁπαόνων,
μνήμην παλαιῶν λήψεται θεσπισμάτων.


α Romulus and Remus. > Aeneas,

ὁ Roma: ῥώμη. 4 Aphrodite, mother of Aeneas.

ὁ On the Thermaic Gulf.

? Worshippers of Dionysus (Laphystius) i ad Macedonia.

9. In Macedonia (Thue. ii. 9). » Etruria.

ὁ Unknown: Arnus? 7 In Etruria.

* Odysseus, who is said to have met Aeneas in Italy.
Hellanicus ap. Dion. Hal. A.R. 72.

‘ Odysseus is here identified with the Nanus or Nanas of
Etruscan legend. m Telephus, cf. 207 ff.

” Heracles, father of Telephus.

° Verg. A. iii. 251 ff. Aeneas in the Strophades south of


596 |


ALEXANDRA


of oblivion, my unhappy fatherland, shalt thou hide
thy glory faded. Such a pair of lion whelps® shall
a certain kinsman? of mine leave, a breed eminent
in strength ©: the son of Castnia@ called also Cheiras,
—in counsel best and not to be despised in battle.
He shall first come to occupy Rhaecelus ὁ beside the
steep crag of Cissus® and the horned women? of
Laphystius. And from Almopia’ in his wandering
Tyrsenia” shall receive him and Lingeus* bubbling
forth its stream of hot waters, and Pisa’ and the
glades of Agylla,? rich in sheep. And with him
shall an erstwhile foe* join a friendly army, winning
him by oaths and prayers and clasped knees: even
the Dwarf’ who in his roaming searched out every
recess of sea and earth; and therewithal the two
sons of the King” of the Mysians, whose spear one
day shall be bent. by the Housekeeping God of
Wine, who shall fetter his limbs with twisted
tendrils : even ‘archon and Tyrsenus, tawny wolves,
sprung from the blood of Heracles.” There he shall
find full of eatables a table® which is afterwards
devoured by his attendants and shall be reminded
of an ancient prophecy. And he shall found in


Zacynthus receives from ‘the harpy Celaeno an oracle of
Apollo declaring that Aeneas should not found a city in
Italy till hunger should compel the Trojan exiles to ‘‘ eat
their tables.” The prophecy is fulfilled Verg. A. vii. 109 ff.
Aeneas and his company reach the Tiber. ‘They take their
meal on the banks of the river, using wheaten cakes on
which to lay their other eatables. When these are consumed,
hunger causes them to eat the wheaten cakes as well.
Thereupon [ulus exclaims: ‘*Heus! etiam mensas con-
sumimus!” Vergil in the latter passage attributes the
prophecy to Anchises. Varro, in Serv. on Aen. iii. 256, says
Aeneas got it at Dodona, Dion. Hal. 4.R. i. 55 says from
the Erythraean Sibyl] in the Troad ;


597


LYCOPHRON


κτίσει δὲ χώραν ἐν τόποις Βορειγόνων
ὑπὲρ Λατίνους Δαυνίους τ᾽ φκισμένην,
πύργους τριάκοντ᾽, ἐξαριθμήσας γονὰς
συὸς κελαινῆς, ἣν ἀπ᾽ ᾿Ιδαίων λόφων

καὶ Δαρδανείων ἐκ τόπων ναυσθλώσεται,
ἰσηρίθμων θρέπτειραν ἐν τόκοις κάπρων'"
ἧς καὶ πόλει δείκηλον ἀνθήσει μιᾷ

χαλκῷ τυπώσας καὶ τέκνων γλαγοτρόφων.
δείμας δὲ σηκὸν Μυνδίᾳ Παλληνίδι,
πατρῷ᾽ ἀγάλματ᾽ ἐγκατοικεῖ θεῶν.

ἃ δή, παρώσας καὶ δάμαρτα καὶ τέκνα
καὶ κτῆσιν ἄλλην ὀμπνίαν κειμηλίων,

σὺν τῷ γεραιῷ πατρὶ πρεσβειώσεται,
πέπλοις περισχών, ἦμος αἰχμηταὶ κύνες,
τὰ πάντα πάτρας συλλαφύξαντες πάλῳ,
τούτῳ μόνῳ πόρωσιν αἵρεσιν, δόμων
λαβεῖν ὃ ὃ χρήζει κἀπενέγκασθαι δάνος.

τῷ καὶ παρ᾽ ἐχθροῖς εὐσεβέστατος κριθείς,
τὴν πλεῖστον ὑμνηθεῖσαν ἐν χάρμαις πάτραν
ἐν ὀψιτέκνοις ὀλβίαν δωμήσεται,

: τύρσιν μακεδνὰς ἀμφὶ Κιρκαίου νάπας
᾿Αργοῦς τε κλεινὸν ὅρμον Αἰήτην μέγαν,
λίμνης τε Popes Mapowwvidos ποτὰ


« The Aborigines (Strabo 228 ff.).

> Aeneas received from Helenus in Epirus a prophecy
that he would be guided in founding a city by a sow.
When he was sacrificing on the banks of the Tiber, a sow,
one of the intended victims, escaped and fled inland, finally
resting on a hill where it gave birth to thirty young. The
number thirty is variously interpreted in legend ; here with
reference to the thirty Latin towns of which Lavinium was
the metropolis. According to the usual version the sow was
white, e.g. Verg. A. iii. 392 ** Alba, solo recubans ” Hence


598


1255
1260.


4


1265


ee


1270


1275


ALEXANDRA


places of the Boreigonoi ¢ a settled land beyond the
Latins and Daunians—even thirty towers, when he
has numbered the offspring of the dark sow,? which
he shall carry in his ship from the hills of Ida and
places of Dardanus, which shall rear such number
of young at a birth. And in one city © he shall set
up an image of that sow and her suckling young,
figuring them in bronze. And he shall build a
shrine to Myndia Pallenis? and establish therein
the images of his fathers’ gods.¢ He shall put
aside his wife and children and all his rich posses-
sions and honour these first, together with his aged
sire’ wrapping them in his robes, what time the
spearmen hounds, having devoured all the goods
of his country together by casting of lots, to him
alone shall give the choice to take and carry away
what gift from his house he will. Wherefore being
adjudged even by his foes to be most pious, he
shall found a fatherland of highest renown in battle,
a tower blest in the children of after days, by the
tall glades of Circaeon 5 and the great Aeétes haven,”
famous anchorage of the Argo, and the waters of


some suppose Lycophron in his riddling manner to mean
here horrid, terrible, ‘* black ” metaphorically.

¢ Lavinium, founded where the sow came to rest.

@ Athena: Myndia, cult-name of Athena from Myndus in
Caria. A temple of Athena Pallenis lay between Athens
and Marathon.

¢ Penates.  -

7 Anchises. Xenoph. Cyn. 1. 15 says: ‘* Aeneias, by |
saving his paternal and maternal gods and saving his father,
won such renown for piety that to him alone of all whom
they conquered in Troy the enemy Par ees that he should
not be robbed of his possessions.” Cf. Aelian, V.H. iii. 22,
Serv. on Aen. ii. 636. .

9 Circeji. ἃ Cajeta.

599


LYCOPHRON :


Τιτώνιόν τε χεῦμα τοῦ κατὰ χθονὸς
δύνοντος εἰς ἄφαντα κευθμῶνος βάθη,
Zwornpiov TE κλιυτύν, ἔνθα παρθένου
στυγνὸν Σιβύλλης ἐστὶν οἰκητήριον,
γρώνῳ βερέθρῳ συγκατηρεφὲς σφέγης.
Τοσαῦτα μὲν δύστλητα πείσονται κακὰ
οἱ τὴν ἐμὴν μέλλοντες αἰστώσειν πάτραν.
Τί γὰρ ταλαίνῃ μητρὶ τῇ ἸΪρομηθέως
ξυνὸν πέφυκε καὶ τροφῷ Σαρπηδόνος,
ἃς πόντος “Ἑλλης καὶ πέτραι Συμπληγάδες
καὶ Σαλμυδησὸς καὶ κακόξεινος κλύδων,
Σκύθαισι γείτων, καρτεροῖς εἴργει πάγοις,
λίμνην τε τέμνων Τάναϊς ἀκραιφνὴς μέσην
ῥείθροις ὁρίζει, προσφιλεστάτην βροτοῖς
χίμετλα Μαιώταισι θρηνοῦσιν ποδῶν.
᾿Ὅλοιντο ναῦται πρῶτα Καρνῖται κύνες,
οἵ τὴν βοῶπιν ταυροπάρθενον κόρην
Λέρνης ἀνηρείψαντο, φορτηγοὶ λύκοι,
πλᾶτιν πορεῦσαι κῆρα Μεμφίτῃ πρόμῳ,
ἔχθρας δὲ πυρσὸν ἦραν ἠπείροις διπλαῖς.
αὖθις γὰρ ὕβριν τὴν βαρεῖαν ἁρπαγῆς
Κουρῆτες ἀντίποινον ᾿Ιδαῖοι κάπροι


@ Lacus Fucinus.

ὃ The schol. says ““ Titon, a river of Italy near the river
Cireaeus, which does not flow into the sea but is swallowed
up by the earth.”

¢ Apollo. @ Cumae.

ὁ. Asia, mother of Prometheus by Iapetus (Apollod. i. 8).

7 Europa, mother of the Cretan Sarpedon by Zeus.

9 Hellespont.

r The Euxine, i.e. Hospitable, previously called Axine,
i.e. Inhospitable.

* The river Don.

2 The idea is that the water of the Don does not
mingle with the water of the sea. So Arrian, Periplus


600


πο fy beer te ee


1280
1285,
1290.


1295


ALEXANDRA


the Marsionid lake of Phorce” and the Titonian?_
stream of the cleft that sinks to unseen depths
beneath the earth, and the hill of Zosterius,° where
is the grim dwelling ὁ of the maiden Sibylla, roofed
by the cavernous pit that shelters her.

So many are the woes, hard to bear, which they
shall suffer who are to lay waste my fatherland.

For what has the unhappy mother ὁ of Prometheus
in common with the nurse’ of Sarpedon? Whom
the sea 5 of Helle and the Clashing Rocks and Salmy-
dessus and the inhospitable ἢ wave, neighbour to the
Scythians, sunder with strong cliffs and Tanais+
divides with his streams—Tanais who, undefiled,’
cleaves the middle of the lake * which is most dear
to Maeotian men who mourn their chilblained feet.

My curse, first, upon the Carnite?’ sailor hounds !
the merchant wolves who carried off from Lerne
the ox-eyed girl, the bull-maiden, to bring to the
lord of Memphis a fatal bride, and raised the beacon
of hatred for the two continents. For afterwards
the Curetes,” Idaean boars, seeking to avenge the


Eux. Pont. 8 says of the Phasis that ἐπιπλεῖ τῇ θαλάσσῃ,
οὐχὶ δὲ συμμίγνυται. :

* Lake Maeotis or Sea of Azov.

‘ The quarrel between Asia and Europe (Herod. i. 1 ff.)
began with the carrying off of lo, daughter of Inachus king
of Argos (Lerne), by the Phoenicians care or Carnos is the
port of Arados, Strabo 753). Io was turned into a cow by
Zeus, hence ‘‘ bull-maiden.” She became wife of Telegonus,
king of Egypt (Apollod. ii. 9), who is here ‘‘ lord of Mem-
phis”; or, if Io is here equated with Isis, the lord of
Memphis will be Osiris.

™ The Cretans (Curetes) carried off Europa, daughter of
Phoenix, from Phoenicia (Sarapta or Sarepta, town on coast
of Phoenicia) to become wife of Asterus, king of Crete. The
‘*bull-formed vessel” rationalizes the myth that Zeus in
form of a bull carried Europa to Crete to become his bride.


601


LYCOPHRON


“ζητοῦντες, αἰχμάλωτον ἤμπρευσαν πόριν
ἐν ταυρομόρφῳ τράμπιδος τυπώματι
Σαραπτίαν Δικταῖον εἰς ἀνάκτορον
δάμαρτα Κρήτης ᾿Αστέρῳ στρατηλάτῃ.
οὐδ᾽ οἵ γ᾽ ἀπηρκέσθησαν. ἀντ᾽ ἴσων ἴσα
λαβόντες, ἀλλὰ κλῶπα σὺν Τεύκρῳ στρατὸν
καὶ σὺν Σκαμάνδρῳ Δραυκίῳ φυτοσπόρῳ
εἰς Βεβρύκων ἔστειλαν οἰκητήριον,
σμίνθοισι δηρίσοντας, ὧν ἀπὸ σπορᾶς
ἐμοὺς γενάρχας ἐξέφυσε Δάρδανος,
γήμας ᾿Αρίσβαν Κρῆσσαν εὐγενῆ κόρην.
Kat δευτέρους ἔπεμψαν “Atpaxas λύκους

ταγῷ μονοκρήπιδι κλέψοντας νάκην,
δρακοντοφρούροις ἐσκεπασμένην σκοπαῖς.
Δ > / \ \ 4
ὃς εἰς Κύταιαν τὴν Λιβυστικὴν μολών,
καὶ τὸν τετράπνην ὕδρον εὐνάσας θρόνοις,
καὶ γυρὰ ταύρων βαστάσας πυριπνόων

ΝΜ \ 7 \ /
ἄροτρα, καὶ λέβητι δαιτρευθεὶς δέμας,
οὐκ ἀσμένως ἔμαρψεν ἐρράου σκύλος,

> > 3 / ¢ / oh
ἀλλ᾽ αὐτόκλητον ἁρπάσας Kepaida,
τὴν γνωτοφόντιν καὶ τέκνων ἀλάστορα,

> \ 7 / « /
eis τὴν AdAnOpov κίσσαν ἡρματίξατο,
φθογγὴν ἑδώλων Χαονιτικῶν ἄπο
βροτησίαν ἱεῖσαν, ἔμπαιον δρόμων.


«Τῆς Cretans sent an army to the Troad under Teucer
and Scamandrus, who received an oracle bidding them
settle ‘‘ wherever the earth-born (γηγενεῖς) should attack
them.” This happened at Hamaxitos, where the ‘* earth-
born” proved to be a plague of field-mice which devoured
the leathern parts of their armour. So they abode there
Seige 604). Arisba, daughter of Teucer, became wife of

ardanus, and thus ancestress of Cassandra. :

> Trojans. ¢ The voyage of the Argonauts.

@ Thessalian, from Atrax in Thessaly Hestiaeotis.


602


ALEXANDRA


rape by their heavy deed of violence, carried off
captive in a bull-formed vessel the Saraptian heifer
to the Dictaean palace to be the bride of Asteros,
the lord of Crete. Nor were they contented when
they had taken like for like; but sent with Teucer 4
and his Draucian father Scamandrus a raping army
to the dwelling-place of the Bebryces® to war with
mice; of the seed of those men Dardanus begat
the authors of my race, when he married the noble
Cretan maid Arisba.

And second® they sent the Atracian ὦ wolves to
steal for their leader of the single sandal ὁ the fleece/
that was protected by the watching dragon’s ward.
He came to Libyan Cytaea’ and put to sleep with
simples that four-nostrilled snake, and handled the
curved plough of the fire-breathing bulis,” and had
his own body cut to pieces in a caldron? and, not
joyfully, seized the hide of the ram. But the self-
invited crow’ he carried off—her who slew her
brother * and destroyed her children “—and set her
as ballast in the chattering jay™ which.uttered a
mortal voice derived from Chaonian abode and well
knew how to speed.


¢ Jason (Pind. P. iv.).

7 The Golden Fleece.

9 In Colchis.

h Pind. P. iv. 224 ff. ; Apoll. Rh. iii. 1284 ff.

* Medea renewed the youth of Jason by boiling him in a
magic caldron.

Medeia.

* Apsyrtus.

? When Jason married the daughter of Creon, king of
Corinth, Medea in revenge slew her own children by Jason.

™ The ship Argo, in which, while it was being built,
Athena inserted a piece of the oak of Dodona (hence
Chaonian), which gave it the gift of human speech and of
prophecy.

603


LYCOPHRON


Πάλιν δ᾽ ὁ πέτρας ἀσκέρας ἀνειρύσας
καὶ φασγάνου ζωστῆρα καὶ ξίφος πατρός,
ὁ Φημίου παῖς, Σκῦρος ᾧ λυγροὺς τάφους
κρημνῶν ἔνερθεν aiyirus ῥοιζουμένων
πάλαι δοκεύει τὰς ἀταρχύτους ῥιφάς,

\ \ / a / /
σὺν θηρὶ βλώξας TH σπάσαντι Syias
Μύστῃ Τροπαίας μαστὸν εὔθηλον θεᾶς,
ζωστηροκλέπτης, νεῖκος ὥρινεν διπλοῦν,
στόρνην T ἀμέρσας καὶ Θεμισκύρας ἄπο

\ / / > ᾽ὔ
τὴν τοξόδαμνον νοσφίσας ᾿Ορθωσίαν.
ἧς αἱ ξύναιμοι, παρθένοι Νεπτουνίδος,
Ἔριν λιποῦσαι, Λάγμον, ἠδὲ Τήλαμον,
καὶ χεῦμα Θερμώδοντος ᾿Ακταῖόν τ᾽ ὄρος,

\ > ᾽ 3 ε \ 7]
ποινὰς ἀθέλκτους θ᾽ ἁρπαγὰς διζήμεναι,

ς \ \ » BA /
ὑπὲρ κελαινὸν “lotpov ἤλασαν Σικύθας
ἵππους, ὁμοκλήτειραν ἱεῖσαι βοὴν
Γραικοῖσιν ἀμνάμοις τε τοῖς ᾿Ερεχθέως.
καὶ πᾶσαν ᾿Ακτὴν ἐξεπόρθησαν δορί,

\ / > 7 /
τοὺς Μοψοπείους αἰθαλώσασαι γύας.

Πάππος δὲ Θρήκης οὑμὸς αἰστώσας πλάκα
χώραν τ᾽ ᾿Εορδῶν καὶ Γαλαδραίων πέδον,
ὅρους ἔπηξεν ἀμφὶ [Πηνειοῦ ποτοῖς,
στερρὰν τραχήλῳ ζεῦγλαν ἀμφιθεὶς πέδαις,


α Theseus. For the legend see Introduction to Calli-
machus, Hecale.

> Aegeus.

¢ Poseidon, who was said to be the real father of Theseus
(Bacchylid. 16).

4 Theseus either threw himself from a cliff in Scyrus or
was pushed over by Lycomedes, king of the island. His
bones were brought to Athens in 473 3.c. by Cimon (Plut.
Thes. 35-36).

¢ Heracles, who was initiated in the Eleusinian mysteries
before he went to bring Cerberus from Hades.


604


ALEXANDRA


And again he® that took up from the rock his
father’s ® shoes and sword-belt and sword, the son
of Phemius,° on whose sad grave “—whereto he was
hurled without funeral rites — steep Scyrus long
keeps watch beneath its hissing precipices—he went
with the wild beast, the Initiate,? who drew the
milky breast of the hostile goddess Tropaea,f and
stole the belt% and roused a double feud, taking
away the girdle and from Themiscyra carrying off
the archer Orthosia”; and her sisters, the maidens
of Neptunis,’ left Eris, Lagmus and Telamus and
the stream of Thermodon and the hill of Actaeum
to seek vengeance and relentless rape. Across the
dark Ister/ they drove their Scythian mares, shouting
their battle-cry against the Greeks and the descen-
dants of Erechtheus. And they sacked all Acte*
with the spear and laid waste with fire the fields
of Mopsopia.* |

And my ancestor? laid waste the plain of Thrace
and the country of the Eordi and the land of the
Galadraei, and fixed his bounds beside the waters
of Peneius, fettering them with a stern yoke laid
upon their necks, in battle a young warrior, most


* Hera, who by a trick was induced to give the breast to
Heracles (Diod. iv. 9, Paus. ix. 25).

9 Hippolyte’s girdle.

: " The Amazon Antiope, here called Orthosia, a cult-title
of Artemis (Pind. O. iii. 30).

ὁ The scholiast says this was a name of Hippolyte. Hol-
zinger takes it as a cult-name of Artemis from Nepete in
Etruria. The Amazons, in revenge for the expedition
against them of Heracles and Theseus, invade Attica.

7 Danube.

κ᾿ Attica.

? lus, great-grandfather of Cassandra, invaded Thrace
and Macedonia; cf. Herod. vii. 20 and 75.


605


LYCOPHRON


ἀλκῇ νέανδρος, ἐκπρεπέστατος γένους.

ἡ δ᾽ ἀντὶ τούτων τάρροθον βοηλάτην

τὸν ἑξάπρυμνον, στέρφος ἐγχλαινούμενον,
στείλασα, λίστροις αἰπὺν ἤρειψεν πάγον,
τὸν ἡ παλίμῴφρων Γ οργὰς ἐν “κλήροις θεῶν
καθιερώσει, πημάτων ἀρχηγέτις.

Αὖθις δὲ κίρκοι, Τμῶλον ἐκλελοιπότες
Κίμψον τε καὶ χρυσεργὰ Πακτωλοῦ ποτά,
καὶ νᾶμα λίμνης, ἔνθα Τυφῶνος δάμαρ
κευθμῶνος αἰνόλεκτρον ἐνδαύει μυχόν,
Αγυλλαν Αὐσονῖτιν εἰσεκώμασαν,
δεινὴν Λιψυστίνοισι τοῖς τ᾽ ἀφ᾽ αἵματος
ῥίζαν γιγάντων Σιθόνων κεκτημένοις
λόγχης ἐν ὑσμίναισι μίξαντες πάλην.
εἷλον δὲ Πῖσαν καὶ δορίκτητον χθόνα
πᾶσαν κατειργάσαντο τὴν "Ομβρων πέλας
καὶ Σαλπίων βεβῶσαν ὀχθηρῶν πάγων.

Λοῖσθος δ᾽ ἐγείρει γρυνὸς ἀρχαίαν ἔριν,
πῦρ εὗδον ἤδη τὸ πρὶν ἐξάπτων φλογί,
ἐπεὶ Πελασγοὺς εἶδε “Puvdaxod ποτῶν
κρωσσοῖσιν ὀθνείοισι βάψαντας γάνος.

ἡ δ᾽ αὖθις οἰστρήσασα τιμωρουμένη
τριπλᾶς τετραπλᾶς ἀντιτίσεται βλάβας,
πορθοῦσα χώρας ἀντίπορθμον ἠόνα.


« Kurope sends Hera¢les to sack Troy.
ὃ Reference to the oxen of Geryon.
¢ Hom. Jl. v. 640 ff. (Heracles) ὅς more δεῦρ᾽ ἐλθὼν ἕνεχ᾽


ἵππων Λαομέδοντος | ἕξ οἴῃς σὺν νηυσὶ. . . | Ἰλίου ἐξαλάπαξε
πόλιν.

4 The skin of the Nemean lion.

4 Hera.

7 Tyrrhenians from Lydia come to Etruria.

9 Echidna.


» The Pelasgians.
606


ALEXANDRA


eminent of his race. And she® in return for these
things sent her champion, the driver of the oxen,?
him of the six ships,’ robed in a hide,? and laid in
ruins with the spade their steep hill; and him shall
Gorgas,’ changing her mind, consecrate in the estate
of the gods, even she that was the prime mover
in his woes.

And in turn the falcons/ set forth from Tmolus
and Cimpsus and the gold-producing streams of
Pactolus and the waters of the lake where the
spouse 9 of Typhon couches in the hidden recess
of her dread bed, and rioted into Ausonian Agylla
and in_battles of the spear joined terrible wrestling
with the Ligurians and them” who drew the root
of their race from the blood of the Sithonian * giants.
And they took Pisa and subdued all the spear-won
land that stands near the Umbrians and the high
cliffs of the Salpians./

And, last, the fire-brand* wakens the ancient
strife, kindling anew with flame the ancient fire
that already slept since she’ saw the Pelasgians™
dipping alien pitchers in the bright waters of
Rhyndacus.” But the other? in turn in a frenzy
- of revenge shall repay the injury threefold and four-
fold, laying waste the shore of the land across
the sea. .

ἐ Sithonia and Pallene, the middle and southern spurs of
Chalcidice, are the home of the giants; cf. 1406 ἢ,

7 Unknown. Some suppose the reference is to the
Alps. Holzinger takes it as=the Σάλυες or Salvii in N.W.
Etruria.

* Paris.

? Asia.

™ Argonauts.

” River in Mysia.

° Europe sends the Greeks against Troy.

607


LYCOPHRON


“Πρῶτος μὲν ἥξει Ζηνὶ τῷ Λαπερσίῳ
ὁμώνυμος Ζεύς, ὃ ὃς καταιβάτης μολὼν
σκηπτῷ πυρώσει πάντα δυσμενῶν σταθμά.
σὺν ᾧ θανοῦμαι, κἀν νεκροῖς στρωφωμένη
τὰ λοίπ᾽ ἀκούσω ταῦθ᾽, ἃ νῦν μέλλω θροεῖν.

Ὃ δεύτερος δέ, τοῦ πεφασμένου κέλωρ
ἐν ἀμφιβλήστροις. ἔλλοπος μυνδοῦ δίκην,
καταιθαλώσει γαῖαν ὀθνείαν, μολὼν
χρησμοῖς ᾿Ιατροῦ σὺν πολυγλώσσῳ στρατῷ.

Τρίτος δ᾽, ἄνακτος τοῦ δρυηκόπου γόνος,
τὴν peninscire hho παρθένον Βραγχησίαν
παραιολίξας βῶλον ἐμπεφυρμένην
νασμοῖς ὀρέξαι τῷ κεχρημένῳ δάνος,
σφραγῖδα. δέλτῳ δακτύλων ἐφαρμόσαι,
Φθειρῶν ὀρείαν νάσσεται μοναρχίαν,
τὸν πρωτόμισθον Κᾶρα δῃώσας στρατόν,
ὅταν κόρη κασωρὶς εἰς ἐπείσιον
χλεύην ὑλακτήσασα κηκάσῃ γάμους
νυμφεῖα πρὸς κηλωστὰ καρβάνων τελεῖν.


¢ Agamemnon, in reference to cult of Zeus-Agamemnon
in Sparta. Lapersios consequently is here transferred from’.
the Dioscuri (see 511) to Zeus. The real meaning of this
word is of course very obscure.

ὃ Orestes, son of Agamemnon, occupies Aecolis.

¢ Apollo.

a Reference to popular derivation of Αἰολεῖς from αἰόλος,
** varied.”

ὁ. Neleus founds Miletus in Ionia.

7 Codrus, the last king of Athens. The Peloponnesians,
invading Attica, were told by the Delphic oracle that they
would be successful if they did not kill the Athenian king.
This becoming known to the Athenians, Codrus disguised
himself and went out of the city gates to gather firewood.
Picking a quarrel with two enemy scouts, he slew one and


608


138


|


ALEXANDRA


First there shall come a Zeus“ who bears the
name of Zeus Lapersios; who shall come with
swooping thunderbolt to burn all the habitations
of the foe. With him shall I die, and when I flit
among the dead I shall hear these further things
which I am about to utter.

And, second,’ the son of him that was slain in
a net, like a dumb fish, shall lay waste with fire
the alien land, coming, at the bidding of the oracles
of the Physician,’ with a host of many tongues.?

And third, the son’ of the woodcutter king,
beguiling the potter maiden’ of Branchidae to give
him in his need earth mixed with water, wherewith
to set on a tablet his finger-seal, shall found the
mountain monarchy of the Phtheires,* when he has
destroyed the host of the Carians—the first to fight
for hire ‘—what time his wanton daughter? shall
abuse her nakedness and say in mockery of marriage
that she will conclude her nuptials in the brothels
of barbarians,”


was himself slain by the other, thus saving his country.
peas Contra Leocrat. 84 ff.

9 Neleus was told by an oracle to found his city where he
should first receive ‘‘ earth and water.” At Branchidae near
Miletus he asked a potter maid for some clay (the so-called
terra sigillata or γῆ Λημνία) for a seal. She gave him the
moist clay, thus giving him ‘‘ earth and water.”

Ὁ Φθειρῶν ὄρος (Homer, 71. ii. 868), near Miletus.

ὁ Cf. Archiloch. fr. 30 (Hiller) καὶ δὴ ᾿πίκουρος ὥστε Kap
κεκλήσομαι.

7 Neleus received at Delphi an oracle which bade him
** go to the golden men ” (i.e. the Carians, cf. Jl. ii. 872) and
that ‘* his daughter would show him.” Returning to Athens
ἤκουσε τῆς θυγατρὸς γυμνῆς τυπτούσης τὸ ἐπείσιον καὶ λεγούσης"
Δίζεο σεῦ μάλα ἐς θαλερὸν πόσιν ἢ ἐς ᾿Αθήνας ἢ ἐς Μίλητον"
κατάξω πήματα Καρσί. Cf. Ε.Μ. 5.υ. ἀσελγαίνειν.

* Carians.


QR 609


LYCOPHRON


Oi δ᾽ αὖ τέταρτοι τῆς Δυμαντείου σπορᾶς,
Λακμώνιοί τε καὶ Κυτιναῖοι Κόδρου,
ot Θίψρον οἰκήσουσι Σάτνιόν τ᾽ ὄρος,
καὶ χερσόνησον τοῦ πάλαι ληκτηρίαν
θεᾷ Kupita πάμπαν ἐστυγημένου,
τῆς παντομόρφου βασσάρας λαμπούριδος
τοκῆος, ἥτ᾽ ἀλφαῖσι ταῖς Kal” ἡμέραν
βούπειναν ἀλθαίνεσκεν ἀκμαίαν πατρός,
ὀθνεῖα γατομοῦντος Αἴθωνος πτερά.

ὋὉ Φρὺξ δ᾽, ἀδελφὸν αἷμα τιμωρούμενος,
πάλιν τιθηνὸν ἀντιπορθήσει χθόνα
τοῦ νεκροτάγου, τὰς ἀθωπεύτους δίκας
φθιτοῖσι ῥητρεύοντος ἀστεργεῖ τρόπῳ.
ὃς δή ποτ᾽ ἀμφώδοντος ἐξ ἄκρων λοβῶν
φθέρσας κύφελλα καλλυνεῖ παρωτίδας,
δαπταῖς τιτύσκων αἱμοπώταισιν φόβον.
τῷ πᾶσα Φλεγρὰς ata δουλωθήσεται
Θραμβουσία τε δειρὰς ἥ τ᾽ ἐπάκτιος
στόρθυγξ Τίτωνος αἵ τε Σιθόνων πλάκες
Παλληνία τ᾽ ἄρουρα, τὴν ὁ -βούκερως
Βρύχων λιπαίνει, γηγενῶν ὑπηρέτης.

Πολλῶν δ᾽ ἐναλλὰξ πημάτων ἀπάρξεται
Kavdaios ἢ ἣ Μάμερτος, ἢ ἢ τί χρὴ καλεῖν
τὸν αἱμοφύρτοις ἑστιώμενον μάχαις;


α Lycophron now passes to Dorian settlements in Asia,
founded by Dorians from N. Greece.
> Dymas, Pamphylus, and Hyllus were the eponyms of
the three Dorian tribes—Dymanes, Pamphyli, se Hylleis.
¢ Codrus (cf. 1378 n.) here merely =*‘ ancient.”
¢ In N.W. Thessaly. 6 In Doris.
7 Unknown places in Caria. | 9 The Cnidian Chersonese.
* Krysichthon, see Callim. H. vi. ; Ovid, M. viii. 738 n.
- ἢ Demeter.
Ὁ 4 Mestra, daughter of Erysichthon, got from Poseidon the


610


ALEXANDRA


And then, again, the fourth,* of the seed of
Dymas,® the Codrus-ancients® of Lacmon? and
Cytina ’—who shall dwell in Thigros’ and the hill
of Satnion’ and the extremity of the peninsula 9,.of
him” who of old was utterly hated by the goddess
Cyrita*: the father of the crafty vixen’ who by
daily traffic assuaged the raging hunger of her
sire—even Aethon,” plougher of alien shires.

And the Phrygian,’ avenging the blood of his
brothers,” will sack again the land” that nursed the
ruler® of the dead, who in loveless wise pronounces
relentless judgement on the departed. He? shall spoil
the ears of the ass, lobes and all, and deck his
temples, fashioning a terror for the ravenous blood-
suckers.‘ By him all the land of Phlegra shall be en-
slaved and thé ridge of Thrambus and spur of Titon
by the sea and the plains of the Sithonians and
the fields of Pallene, which the ox-horned Brychon,”
who served the giants, fattens with his waters.

And many woes, on this side and that alternately,
shall be taken as an offering by Candaeus* or
Mamertus *—or what name should be given to him
who banquets in gory battles?


gift of assuming whatever form she pleased. When her
father, in order to get the means of satisfying his hunger,
sold her in one form, she returned in another to be sold
again (Ovid, M. /.c.). & — Erysichthon.

¢ Midas who, according to Lycophron, invades Thrace
and Macedonia. -

ἢ ‘Trojans. » Europa. ° Minos.

» Midas, in a.musical contest between Pan and Apollo,
gave unasked his verdict against Apollo, who, in revenge,
gave him the ears of an ass, to hide which Midas invented
the tiara (Ovid, M. xi. 180 f. ** Ile quidem celat turpique
onerata pudore Tempora purpureis tentat velare tiaris ”’).

4 1.6. flies. * River in Pallene (Hesych.). 5. Ares.


611


LYCOPHRON


οὐ μὰν ὑπείξει γ᾽ ἡ ᾿᾽πιμηθέως τοκάς,
ἀλλ᾽ ἀντὶ πάντων Περσέως ἕνα, σπορᾶς
στελεῖ γίγαντα, τῷ θάλασσα μὲν βατὴ
πεζῷ mor ἔσται, γῆ δὲ ναυσθλωθήσεται
ῥήσσοντι πηδοῖς χέρσον. οἱ δὲ Λαφρίας
οἶκοι Μαμέρσας, ἠβθαλωμένοι φλογὶ
σὺν καλίνοισι τειχέων προβλήμασι,
τὸν χρησμολέσχην αἰτιάσονται βλάβης,
ψαίνυνθα θεσπίζοντα Πλούτωνος λάτριν.
στρατῷ δ᾽ ἀμίκτῳ πᾶσα μὲν βρωθήσεται,
φλοιῶτιν ἐκδύνουσα δίπλακα σκέπην,
καρποτρόφος δρῦς ἀγριάς τ᾽ ὀρειθαλής.
ἅπας δ᾽ ἀναύρων νασμὸς. αὐανθήσεται,
χανδὸν κελαινὴν δίψαν αἰονωμένων.
κύφελλα δ᾽ idv τηλόθεν ῥοιζουμένων
ὑπὲρ κάρα στήσουσι, Κίμμερός θ᾽ ὅπως,
σκιὰ καλύψει πέρραν, ἀμβλύνων σέλας.
Λοκρὸν δ᾽ ὁποῖα παῦρον ἀνθήσας ῥόδον,
καὶ πάντα φλέξας, ὥστε κάγκανον στάχυν,
αὖθις παλιμπλώτοιο γεύσεται φυγῆς,
μόσσυνα φηγότευκτον, ὡς λυκοψίαν
κόρη κνεφαίαν, ἄγχι παμφαλώμενος,
χαλκηλάτῳ κνώδοντι δειματουμένη.

Πολλοὶ δ᾽ ἀγῶνες καὶ φόνοι μεταίχμιοι
λύσουσιν ἀνδρῶν οἱ μὲν ἐν yaia! πάλας
δειναῖσιν ἀρχαῖς ἀμφιδηριωμένων,
οἱ δ᾽ <2 μεταφρένοισι βουστρόφοις χθονός,
ἕως ἂν αἴθων εὐνάσῃ βαρὺν κλόνον,
‘am’ Αἰακοῦ τε κἀπὸ Δαρδάνου γεγὼς

1 One expects ‘on the sea,” but no satisfactory emenda-
tion has been proposed.
@ Asia. ὃ Xerxes.

612


ALEXANDRA


Yet the mother® of Epimetheus shall not yield,
but in return for all shall send a single giant? of
the seed of Perseus, who shall walk over the sea
on foot and sail over the earth,’ smiting the dry
land with the oar. And the shrines of Laphria
Mamerse ὦ shall be consumed with fire together with
their defence of wooden walls,’ and shall blame for
their hurt the prater of oracles, the false prophesying
lackey of Pluto. By his unapproachable host every
fruit-bearing oak and wild tree flourishing on the
mountain shall be devoured, stripping off its double
covering of bark,’ and every flowing torrent shall
be dried up,” as they slake with open mouth their
black thirst. And they shall raise overhead clouds of
arrows hurtling from afar, whose shadow shall obscure
the sun, like a Cimmerian darkness * dimming the sun.
And blooming for a brief space, as a Locrian rose,’ and
burning all things like withered ear of corn, he shall
in his turn taste of homeward fliglft, glancing fearfully
towards the oaken bulwark hard at hand, even as a
girl in the dusky twilight frightened bya brazensword.

And many contests and slaughters in between
shall solve the struggles of men, contending for
dread empire, now on land, now on the plough-
turned backs of earth, until a tawny lion *—sprung
from Aeacus and from Dardanus, Thesprotian at

¢ Reference to the bridging of the Hellespont and the
canal through Athos.

@ Athena on the acropolis at Athens. 4 Herod. viii. 51.

* Apollo is here the servant of Pluto because his oracle
causes death to the defenders of the Acropolis.

9 Herod. viii. 115.  * Herod. vii. 21. ἐ Od. xi. 1419.

7 Pollux v. 102 ῳ ῥόδον παρειαῖς φυτεύει, αὐθωρὸν ἀνθοῦν καὶ
θᾶττον ἀπανθοῦν κατὰ τὸ Λοκρόν. It is the type of that which
is fleeting.

* For this passage see Introduction, pp. 483 f.

613


nes ἃ


LYCOPHRON


Θεσπρωτὸς ἄμφω καὶ Xadaorpaios λέων,
πρηνῆ θ᾽ ὁμαίμων πάντὰ κυπώσας δόμον
ἀναγκάσῃ πτήξαντας ᾿Αργείων πρόμους
σῆναι Ταλάδρας τὸν στατηλάτην λύκον
καὶ σκῆπτρ᾽ ὀρέξαι τῆς πάλαι μοναρχίας. 1445
ᾧ δὴ μεθ᾽ ἕκτην γένναν αὐθαίμων ἐμὸς

Φ ᾽ὔ Ἁ > \ \
εἷς Tis παλαιστής, συμβαλὼν ἀλκὴν δορὸς
πόντου τε καὶ γῆς Kels διαλλαγὰς μολών, ᾿
πρέσβιστος ἐν φίλοισιν ὑμνηθήσεται,

/ > \ \ 7 /
σκύλων ἀπαρχὰς τὰς δορικτήτους λαβών. 14
Τί μακρὰ τλήμων εἰς ἀνηκόους πέτρας,

εἰς κῦμα κωφόν, εἰς νάπας δασπλήτιδας
βαύζω, κενὸν ψάλλουσα μάστακος κρότον;

/ Ἁ ε “. Ἁ δ Ψ
πίστιν γὰρ ἡμῶν Λεψιεὺς ἐνόσφισε,
ψευδηγόροις φήμαισιν ἐγχρίσας ἔπη, 1455

\ / / > ~ /

καὶ θεσφάτων πρόμαντιν ἀψευδῆ φρόνιν,
λέκτρων στερηθεὶς ὧν ἐκάλχαινεν τυχεῖν.
θήσει δ᾽ ἀληθῆ. δὺν κακῷ δέ τις μαθών,
“59 2Q\ μὴ a > - /
ὅτ᾽ οὐδὲν ἔσται μῆχος ὠφελεῖν πάτραν,

\ / eA, / 4
τὴν φοιβόληπτον αἰνέσει χελιδόνα. 1460

Τόσσ᾽ ἠγόρευε, καὶ παλίσσυτος ποσὶν

ἔβαινεν εἱρκτῆς ἐντός. ἐν δὲ καρδίᾳ
Σιεειρῆνος ἐστέναξε λοίσθιον μέλος,
Κλάρου Μιμαλλών, ἢ Μελαγκραίρας κόπις
Νησοῦς θυγατρός, 7 τι Φίκιον τέρας, 1406.
ε \ / tA 3
ἑλικτὰ κωτίλλουσα δυσφράστως ἔπη.


ἐγὼ δὲ λοξὸν ἦλθον ἀγγέλλων, ἄναξ,


ὦ Apollo, who gave to Cassandra the gift of prophecy,
but so that no one believed her prophecies.

> Aesch. Ag. 1208 f.

¢ Cassandra. The swallow is the type of unintelligible
speech (Aesch. Ag. 1050, Aristoph. Ran. 98).


614


ALEXANDRA


once and Chalastraean— shall lull to rest the
grievous tumult, and, overturning on its face all
the house of his kindred, shall compel the chiefs
of the Argives to cower and fawn upon the wolf-
leader of Galadra, and to hand over the sceptre
of the ancient monarchy. With him, after six
generations, my kinsman, an unique wrestler, shall
join battle by sea and land and come to terms, and
shall be celebrated among his friends as most
excellent, when he has received the first fruits of
the spear-won spoils.

Why, unhappy, do I call to the unheeding rocks,
to the deaf wave, and to the awful glades, twanging
the idle noise of my lips? For Lepsieus” has taken
credit from me, daubing with rumour of falsity my
words and the true prophetic wisdom of my oracles,
for that he was robbed of the bridal which he
sought to win.? Yet will he make my oracles true.
And in sorrow shall many a one know it, when there
is no means any more to help my fatherland and
shall praise the frenzied swallow.°¢

50 ὦ much she spake, and then sped back and
went within her prison. But in her heart she
wailed her latest Siren song—like some Mimallon
of Claros*’ or babbler of Melancraera,’ Neso’s
daughter, or Phician monster,’ mouthing darkly
her perplexed words. And I came, O King, to

4 Here begins the Epilogue, spoken by the slave who
watched Cassandra.

ὁ Μιμαλλών is properly a Bacchant; here ‘‘ Mimallon of
Claros” (famous for cult of Apollo) means merely frenzied
prophetess ; cf. Eustath., Dion. Per. 445 καὶ παρὰ τῷ Λυκό-
gpove ἡ Κασσάνδρα Κλάρου Μιμαλὼν λέγεται, τουτέστε βάκχη καὶ
μάντις Κλαρία.

7 Sibyl (of Cumae), daughter of Dardanus and Neso.

9 Sphinx ; ef. Bt’ ὀλοήν, Hes. Th. 326. sie


LYCOPHRON


A I “~ ig /
σοὶ τόνδε μῦθον παρθένου φοιβαστρίας,
> / > ΜΝ / oh /
ἐπεί μ᾽ ἔταξας φύλακα λαΐνου στέγης
καὶ πάντα φράζειν κἀναπεμπάζειν λόγον
ἐτητύμως ἄψορρον ὥτρυνας τρόχιν.
δαίμων δὲ φήμας εἰς τὸ λῷον ἐκδραμεῖν
τεύξειεν, ὅσπερ σῶν προκήδεται θρόνων, Ἶ
’ | 4 / ᾿
σώζων παλαιὰν Βεβρύκων παγκληρίαν. ᾿


Se


a ae a eh ee gee


»
δον τ 3


PIER Rp RATT ARR aD it τ. ᾽ν


616


ALEXANDRA


announce to thee this the crooked speech of the
maiden prophetess, since thou didst appoint me to
be the warder of her stony dwelling and didst charge
me to come as a messenger to report all to thee and
truly recount her words. But may God turn her
prophecies to fairer issue—even he that cares for
thy throne, preserving the ancient inheritance of
the Bebryces.* :


α Trojans.


617


(0


»
ΠῚ
<


σὰν SE


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES


A.=Aratus, Phaenomena.
Ait. = Aitia of Callimachus.


Ber. =Coma Berenices.


C.=Callimachus, Hymns.
E.=Callimachus, Epigrams.

F. = Fragmenta Callimachi incertae sedis.
H. = Hecale of Callimachus.

I. = Jambi of Callimachus. ἢ
L.=Lycophron, Alexandra,


Abae, L. 1074

Abantes, C. iv. 288

Abantias = Euboea, C. iv. 20

Acacesius, Hermes, C. iii. 143

Acamas, L. 494 ff., L. 501 ff.

Acanthus, E. xi. 1

Aceson, E. lv. 2

Acestoridae, C. v. 34

Achaean, A. 37, C. iii. 231, iv. 100,
v. 13, L. 989

Achelotis, L. 671, 712, C. vi. 18,
E. xxxi. 1. 3 3

Acheron, L. 90, 411

Acherusian Lake, in Campania,
L. 695

Achilles, L. 175, C. ii. 20

Acontiadae, Ait. iii. 1. 52

Acontius, Ait. a 1. 26, etc.

Acrisius, Ἦ. xi.

Actaeon, Hill of i.e. Mt. Athos, L
1334


Actaeon, C. v. 109
Acte, i.e. Attica, L. 111, 504, 1339
Actorion, 5. of Polyxo, C, vi. 79
, Admetus, C. ii. 49
Adrasteia, C. i. 47
Aea, the land of Aeétes, i.e. Colchis,
L. 1024


Aeacus, gf. of Achilles, L. 860
Aeétes, L. 1023 ff.
Aegaeon= Poseidon, L, 135, F. 103


Aegean Sea, C, iv. 317, L. 402, F. 11
Aegeste, t. in Sicily, L. 964 ff.
Aegestes, L. 961 ff.

Aegeus, L. 494, 1322

Aegialeia, L. 612 ff.

Aegialus, C. iv. 73

Aegilon, isle between Cythera and
Crete, L. 108

Aegina (Oenone), L. 175, ἘΠ. xx. 3

Aegletes, F.

Aegoceros, Capricorn, A. 284, 286,
292, 316, 386, 501, 538, 547, 684,
689, 702

Aegoneia, t. in Malis, L. 908

Aegyptus (Egypt), C. iii. 171

Aegys, town in Laconia, L. 850

Aeneas, L, 1234 ff.

Aenus, t. in Thrace, E. lxii, 1

Aeolian (1) Smyrna in Aeolis, E.
vi. 123 (2) Canace, daughter of

Aeolus, ©. vi. 99; of, F. 59

Aesacus, L. 86, 224 ff,

Aesarus, t. in Italy near Croton,
L. 911

Aeschra, E. li. 1

Aeschylus, E. lviii. 2

Aethalia, now Filba, L. 50, 871 ff.

Aethices, a tribe of Epirus, LL. 802

Aethiopian, C. iv. 208

Aethiops, Zeus, L. 537

Aethon (1)= Erysichthon, L. 1396,


619


᾽
/


INDEX


C. vi. 67; (2)=Odysseus (who in
Hom. Od. xix. 183 says falsely,
ἐμοὶ δ᾽ sare κλυτὸν Αἴθων), L. 432

Aethra, L. 501 ff.

Aethyia= Athena: L. 359

Aetna, C. iii. 56, iv. 141

Aetolians, L. 623, 671, 1000, 1056

Aétus, Aquila, The Eagle, N. con-
stellation, A. 315 (derived from
ant, to blow), 522, 591, 691

Agamemnon, C. iii. 268, 288, L.
209, 1099ff., l116ff., 1871 ff.;
worshipped as Zeus at Sparta,
L. 335, 1124, 1370

Agapenor, L. 479 ff.

Agesilas, by-name of Hades, C. v.


130 (Athen. 99 B Kai Αἰσχύλος τὸν


“Διδὴν ᾽Α
Agoranax,
Agrisca= Athena as

agriculture, 1). 1162
Agylla=Caere, t. in Etruria, L.

1241, 1355
Aias (1) s. of Telamon, half-brother

of Teucer, L. 452 ft 5 derivation

of Aias from αἰετός eagle, L. 461:

(2) 5. of Oileus (Ileus) Locrian,

L. 357, 11503; (3)=Aoiis, τὸ in

Epirus, *L. 1020


σίλαον (εἶπε)
hodian dramatist, Εἰ. 1.1
goddess of


Aix, The Goat, Capella, a Aurigae,


A. 157, 168, 164, 679, 718. See

also Heniochus
Alae (Halae), Araphenides, C. iii. 178
Alaenus, h.b. of Diomedes, L. 619 ff.
Alaeus= Apollo, L. 920
Alalecomenae, L. 786
Alentia= Aphrodite, L. 868
Ales, r. near Colophon, L. 425
Aletiadai=Corinthians, F. i.
Alexandra = Cassandra, L. 30
Alcides= Bee, a ili. 145
Alemene, L. 33,
Almopia, t. in Macedonia, L. 1238
Aloetis= Athena, L. 9
Althaenus, r. in Calabria; L. 1053
Amaltheia, C. i. 49; v. Aix
Amantia, L. 1043
Amazons, L. 1332 ff., C. iii. 237
Amnisus, C. iii. 15, 162
Amoebeus = = Poseidon, L. 617
Ampheira= Athena, L. 1168
Amphibaeus= Poseidon, L. 749
Amphilochus, L, 439 ff.
Amphipolis, EB, xxvi,.1


620


Amphissa, t. in Locris, L. 1074
Amphitryon, L. 935
Amphrysus, L. 900, C. ii. 48
Amyclae, Ait. iii. 1. 24; Amyclaean
tomb=tomb of ‘Aphareus, L. 559

Amymone, ©. v. 48

het sats - 421 ff,

Anaphe, F

Anaurus, aa) r. in Thedaaly, C. iv.
103; (2) r. in Arcadia, C. iii. 101

Anchises, L. 965, 1265

Andromeda, ἃ. of Cepheus, L. 836ff.;
as N. constellation, A. 189, 230,
284, 246, 354, 484, 629, 647, 705

pneu i aes Phocis (Hom. 1].
11. 521), L. 1073

Angaesi, tribe in Daunia, L. 1058

Anius, L. 570 ff.

Ancaeus, (1) Arcadian, f. of Aga-
penor, killed by boar in the
Calydonian tint L, 486-90; (2)
s. of Zeus (or Poseidon) and Asty-
paleia, king of Samos, C. iv. 50.
Cf. Li. 488 ff.

Antenor, Trojan, h. of Theano,
sister of Hecabe ; host of Odysseus
and Menelaus when they came to
Troy to ask the restoration of
Helen before the War (Hom. Ii.
iii. 205), and subsequently he
urged the surrender of Helen
(Hom. Il. vii. 347ff.). His
friendly attitude to the Greeks
δι Troianae suasorem Antenora
pacis,” Ovid, F. iv. 75) led later
‘to charges of treachery ; opens
door of wooden horse and lights
the way for the Greeks, L. 340 ff.

Anthedon, δε in Boeotia (Il. ii.
568), L

Antheus, τ ish:

Anticleia, m. of Odysseus by
Sisyphus, L. 344; companion of
Artemis, C. iii. 211.

Anubis, F. 152

Aonia, ὁ.6. Boeotia, C. iv. 75;
Aonians= Boeotians, L. 1209

Aornos Limne=Lacus Avernus in
Campania, L. 704 ff.

Aoiis, Auas, Aias, στ. in ἀρ,
rising in Mt. esng L. 1020

Apellis, E. lvi. 3

Aphareus, s. of Perieres, f. of Idas
and Lynceus (Pind. N. x. 65,


INDEX


᾿Αφαρητίδαι) ; grave at Amyclae,
L. 559


Aphrodite, m. of Eryx, L. 867, 958,
of Aeneas, L. 1234, E. xxxix. 1

Apidanians, Arcadians, C. i. 14

Apollo, passim

Apsynthians, Thracian tribe, L. 418

Apsyrtus, s. of Aeétes, nephew of
Glaucus and Cassiphone, L. 811,
killed by his sister Medeia, L. 1318

Araethus, F. 60

Araphenides. See Alae

Aratthus, r. of Ambracia, L. 409

Aratus, Εἰ. xxix. 4

Archilochus, F. 75

Archinus (1) Cretan, E. xxxvi. 2;
(2) E. xii. 1

Areion, I. 11

Arenta= Aphrodite, L. 832

Ares, C. i. 77, iv. 58, 64, 133, 178,
277, Li. 249, 518; ef. Candaeus,
Candaon, Mamertus

Arges, one of the Cyclopes, C, iii. 68

Argo, ship of the Argonauts; as
S. constellation, A. 342, 348, 504,
604, 610, 686

Argos, C..iv. 73, v. 45, 54, 138,140,
L. 151, 614, 1298, Ait. i. 2, F. 6

Argyrinni, tribe in Epirus, L. 1017

Argyrippa, t. in Daunia founded
by Diomedes, L. 592

Ariadne, A. 72 |

Aries, See Ram

Arimaspi, C. iv, 291

Arimmas, Εἰ, xv. 1

Arisba, d. of Teucer, w. of Dar-
danus, L. 1308

Aristaeus (1) s. of Apollo and
Cyrene, f. of Actaeon by Autonoé
d. of Cadmus, C. v. 108; Zeus
Aristaeus, Ait. 11, 1, 84: (2)
Cretan, E. xiii. 2

Aristoteles = Battus,
Cyrene, C. ii. 76

Arcadia, birth-place of Zeus, C. i. 7,
home of Pan, C. iii. 88, C. i, 20,
lii, 220, iv. 70, F. 32

Arcadians, acorn-eating ; sons of the
oak, their ancestor Arcas having
espoused a Dryad Chrysopeleia ;
at Troy under Agapenor, L, 479 ff.

Arcasides, 7#.¢. descendant οἵ
Arcas, i.e. lasius, g.g.g.s. of
Arcas, C. iii, 88


founder of


Arcti, the Greater (Helice) and
Lesser (Cynosura) Bears; Ursa
Major and Ursa Minor, also
called the ἽΔμαξαι, Wains, A. 27;
Helice (Callisto) and Cynosura
were daughters of Lycaon, King
of Arcadia, C. i. 41, who were
turned into bears and suckled
the infant Zeus in Crete, and, as
a reward, were set among the
stars, A. 80 ἢ, The Greeks steer
by Helice, the Phoenicians by
Cynosura, A, 37 ff. (cf. Callim. I.
1, 120, and Straboi, 8), A, 48, 51,
93, 140, 182, 227, 652, 723

Arctophylax = Bodtes, N. constella-
tion, A, 92, 579, 721

Arcturus, the brightest star of
Arctophylax, A. 95, 405, 407,
609, 745

Arne, t. in Boeotia (Hom. J1,) ii,
507), L. 644

Arneius, Arneid, Ait, i, 2. 1-2

Arsinoé, d. of Ptolemy I. (Soter)
and Berenice, wife of her brother
Ptolemy Philadelphus, wor-
shipped after her death as
Aphrodite Zephyritis (from the
promontory Zephyrium near
Alexandria: τὸ Ζεφύριον, ἄκρα
ναΐσκον ἔχουσα ᾿Αρσινόης ᾿Αφρο-
Sims, Strabo. xvii. 800, Athen,
vii. 318), Εἰ, vi. 1. 8, F. 55

Artemis, A. 637, 644, C. i. 78, ii.
60, iii. passim, iv. 229, v. 110,
E, xxxy. 1, lxiii. 2, Ait. iii, 1. 22


. Asbystae, a people in Cyrenaica


(Herod. iv. 170ff.), L. 893-906;
hence Asbystian land =Cyrenaica,
C, ii. 75; stream of Asbystes=
Nile, L. 848, Ait. i. 5

Asclepius, s. of Apollo and Coronis,
f. of Podaleirius and Machaon,
L. 1048-1054, E. lv. 1

Asopus, r. in Boeotia, f, of Aegina,
Thebe, etc., C. iv. 78

Assyrian river, The, i.e, the
Euphrates (¢f, O.T. Deuteron, i.
7), Ὁ. ii. 108

Astacus, son of, a Cretan, Εἰ, xxiv.
(ter)

Asteria, sister of Leto, to avoid
Zeus turned into a quail (ὄρτυξ)
and was then turned into a stone


621


INDEX


by Zeus, l. 401,and thus became
the island of Delos (formerly
Ortygia, Asteria), C. iv. 37, 40,
197, 224, 225, 244, 800, 316

Asterus (Asterius), King of Crete,
to whom Huropa is given as
*bride, L. 1301

Astraeus, f. of Dice or Justice, A. 98.

Atalanta, ἃ, of Iasius (Iasion), w.
of Melanion, C, iii. 215

Atarneus, t. in Mysia opposite
Lesbos, Εἰ. 1.1 —

Ate Hill or Hill of Doom, L. 29

Athamas, s. of Aeolus, f. of Phrixus
and Helle; after Helle is named
the Hellespont, L. 1285, Ait.


1i, 5

Athena (Athenaea), C. v. 35, 51, 79,
vi. 75, A. 529, Ait.i. 8.

Athos, mt. in Chalcidice, L. 1334;

‘canal dug through it by Xerxes
(Herod. vii. 22 ff.), L. 1415

Atintanes, tribe on the Aoiis in
Epirus (Strabo vii. 326), L. 1044

Atlas, f. of Electra, L. 72, and
Calypso, L. 744, g.f. of Dardanus,
L. 72, g.g.f. of Prylis, L. 221


Atrax, t. in Thessaly (Strabo ix.


438, etc.), L. 1309, F. 135

Attica (Acte), L. 111, 504, 1339;
(Mopsopia), L. 1840

Auge, d. of Aleus and Neaera, to
whom Mt. Parthenium in Arcadia
was sacred, C. iv. 70

Aulis, in Boeotia on the Euripus,
where the Greek fleet assembled
on the way to Troy, and where
Iphigeneia was sacrificed; ef
L, 202 ff., 195 ff.

Auriga. See Heniochus

Ausigda, t. in Cyrenaica, L. 885

Ausonian=Italian, L. 44, 598, 615,
702, 922, 1047, 1855

Autonoé, ἃ, of Cadmus, τὴ, of
Actaeon, C, v. 107

Avernus. See Aornos

Axeinos Pontus, i.e. the Euxine or
Black Sea, L. 1286

Azania, districtin N.-W. Arcadiaand
so Arcadia generally, C. iii. 235

Azilis (Aziris), in Libya, where
the Greeks from Thera settled
before founding Cyrene (Herod,
iv, 157), C. ii. 89


622


Bacchus, E. ix. 2

Baius, L. 694

Balearides. See Gymnesiae

Basilo, E. xxii. 2

Bathycles, I. 1. 103

Battiadae=Cyrenaeans, C. ii. 96

Battus, s. of Polymnestus of Thera,
founder of Cyrene, C. ii. 65

Bears, The. See Arcti

Bebryces, mythical people of
Bithynia, then=Trojans, L. 516,
1305, 1474

Bephyrus, r. in Macedonia, L. 274

Berecynthian = Phrygian, C. iii. 246

Berenice, d. of Lagos, w. of Ptolemy


L, m. of Arsinoé, deified after.


her death, E. lii. 3; Ber. 1, 5

Bia= Athena, L. 520

Bisaltii, Thracian tribe, L. 417

Bistones, Thracian tribe, L. 418

Blame. See Momos

Boagidas= Heracles, L. 652

Boagrios, r. near Thronion in
Locris, L. 1146

Boarmia= Athena, L. 520

Bocarus, r. in Salamis, L. 451

Boédromios= Apollo, C. ii. 69

Bombyleia= Athena, L. 786

Boétes=Arctophylax, A. 92, 96,
136, 581, 608

Boreas, North wind, A. 25 and
passim, ©. iii. 114, iv. 26, 65, 281,
293, L. 898; cave of Boreas in
Thrace, C. iv. 65

Boreigonoi, “ἃ tribe in Italy”
(schol.), as if Northmen, possibly
with reference to Aborigines,
L. 1253

Brennus, F. 126

Briares (Briareos), C. iv. 143

Brilesos, F. 50

Brimo= Hecate, L. 1176

Bringer of Light, or Torch-bearer,
a of Artemis, C. iii. 11 and

4


Britomartis, nymph of Gortyn in
Crete, ἃ. of Zeus and Carme,
beloved by Artemis, C. iii. 190,
also called = by the Cretans
Dictynna, ©. iii. 198, who also
called Artemis herself by the
same names, C. iii. 205

aie ha one of the Cyclopes, C.
iii.


BESSA ha tae Sg Aly


RE Os


cy Bere ie


ne


INDEX


Brychon, τ. in Pallene, L. 1407 f,
Budeia= Athene, L. 359

Bulaius= Zeus, L. 435

Bupalus, 1. 1. 95

ice in Achaea, C. iv. 102, L. 586


Byblus, t. in Phoenicia, cult of
Adonis there, visited by Menelaus,
L. 828 ff.

Byne=Leucothea, L. 107, 757


Cabeiri, E. xli. 1

Cadmilus= Hermes, L. 162

Cadmus, (1) = Cadmilus = Hermes,
L. 219; (2) s. of Agenor and
founder of Thebes, C. v. 107,
125

Caeratus, r. near Cnossus in Crete,
C. iv. 44

Calaureia, F. 74

Calchas, L. 203, 426, 980, 1047

Callichorus, C. vi. 15

Callignotus, E. xxvii. 1

Callimachus, E. xxiii. 1

Calliste, F. 8

Callistion, ΕἸ. lvi. 1

Calydnae, L, 25, 347

Calydnus, L. 1209


ae. “ger C. iii. 218; of


Canastra, 8. 100 of Pallene, L.
526


Candaeus= Ares, L. 1410

Candaon= Ares, L. 938, also L. 328
(here = Hephaestus ?)

Canopus (Canobus), t. at mouth
of Nile; the Ce of Canopus=
Serapis, E. lvi. 1

Capaneus, L. 483 ff.

Carians, Ait. iii. 1. 62, L..1384

Carcinus, Cancer, The Crab, the
4th zodiacal constellation, A.
147, 446, 491, 495, 500, 539, 545,
569, 898, 996

Carna, t. in Arabia, L. 1291

Carneius, by-name of Apollo in
Sparta and elsewhere, C. ii. 71,
72, 80, 87

Carnion, C. i. 24

Carpathus, L. 924

Carthaea, Ait. iii. 1. 71

Caryae, Ait. iii. 1. 59


Cassandra (Alexandra), L. 80

Cassiepeia, wife of Cepheus and m.
of Andromeda; as N. constella-
tion, A. 189, 654°

Cassiphone, L. 809 ff.

Castanaea, L. 907


r Castnia= Aphradtie, L. 408, 1234


Castor, C. v.

Caucones, pees in 8.W. Pelopon-
nesus, Ὁ. i. 39

Caulonia, L. 995 ff.

Caystrus, r. in Lydia, C. iii. 257

Cebren, f. of Oenone, L. 59


-Cecropia= Athens, C, iii. 227; sons


of Cecrops = Athenians, C. iv.
315


Celadon, r. in Arcadia, C. iii. 107

Celaenae, Ait. iii. 1. 48

Celaeno, a Pleiad, A. 262

Celtic war, C. iv. 173

Centaur, (1) son of Ixion and
Nephele and ancestor of the
Centaurs, half-horse, half-man
(Pind. P. ii. 35ff.); including
Cheiron, C. 27, and even, L. 1203,
Cronus, the father of Cheiron by
Philyra. The Centaurs were
represented as  wine-bibbers ;
hence the reference in E. Ixii. 3;
cf. L. 670; (2) S. constellation,
A. 431, 486, 447, 505, 626, 661,
695, 700

Ceos, Ait. iii,1. 32

Cephalus, C. iii. 209

Cepheus, (1) King of Aethiopia, f
of Andromeda, L. 834; as N.
constellation, A. 179, 183, 280,
810, 681, 633, 649, 675; (2) leader
of the Achaeans from Troy to
Cyprus, L. 586 ff. ; οὐ L. 447 ff

Ceramyntes = Heracles, L. 663

Cerastia, old name of Cyprus,’ L
447


Ceraunia, hill:in Epeirus, L. 1017

Cereaphus, L. 424

Cerchnis=Cenchreae, Ὁ. iv. 271

Cercyra, C. iv. 156; itis the Harpe
of L. 762; island of the Phaea-
cians, L. 632

Cerdoiis= Apollo, L. 208

Cerdylas=Zeus, L. 1092

Cerne, L. 18

Cerneatis Island, L, 1084, uncertain ;
τὴν Κέρνην νῆσον Κερνεᾶτιν εἶπε


623


INDEX


παραγώγως schol. ; possibly Cor-
sica (Cyrnos) or Sardinia

Ceryneian Hill, jn Achaia, C. iii.
109


Cetus, Balaena, The Whale, 8. con-
stellation, A. 354, 364, 366, 368,
387, 390, 398, 502, 630, 647, 720,
726

Chalastra, t. in Macedonia, L. 1441

Chalciope, C. iv. 161

Chalcis, t. on the Euripus, C. iv. 46

Chalybes, Ber. 4, L. 1109

Chaonia, W. district of Epeirus ;
hence Dodona is ‘‘ Chaonian,” L.
1320

Chariclo, m. of Teiresias, C. v. 67

Charidas, of Cyrene, s. of Arimmas,
Ε xv. i, 3

Charites=Graces, Εἰ. xxxiv. 2, Ait,
iv. 1, 2

Charmus, 5. of Diophon, Εἰ. xvi. 2

Charybdis, L. 668, 743

Cheiras, or Choiras= Aphrodite, L.
1234

Cheiron, C. iv. 104

Chelae, or Claws, i.e. the Claws of
the Scorpion, The Balance or
Scales, 7th sign of Zodiac, A. 89,


232, 438, 521, 546, 607, 612, 619,.


626

Chelys, or The Shell, i.e. the con-
stellation Lyra, A. 268

Chersonesus, i.e. peninsula; (1)
Thracian, L. 331 ff., 533; (2)
Cnidian, L. 1391; (8) Tauric, 1..
197 ff.

Chesion, C. iii. 228

Chilon, I. 2

Chimaereus, L. 132

Chios, C. iv. 48, A. 638, F. 11


Chitone, i.e. Artemis, C. i. 77,
iii. 11, 225
Choiras. See Cheiras


Chonia, district on W. of gulf of
Tarentum, L. 988

Chrysaor, L. 842

Chryso, Ait. iii. 1. 71

Cilla, L. 320

Cimmerians, dwell on Bosporus,
milk mares, under their King
Lygdamis attack temple of Ar-
temis at Ephesus, C. iii. 258 ; but
the Cimmerians of Homer (0d. xi
14 ff.) dwell in the extreme West


624


and so in the region of darkness
L. 1427, localized near Cumae,
L. 695

Cimon, Εἰ. lxi. 1

Cimpsos, r. in Lydia, L. 1352

Cinyphos or Cinyps, r. in N.
Africa, L. 885

Circaeum (= Circeii), cape in
Latium, L. 1278

Circe, L. 678, 808 ff.

Cissus, L. 1237

Cithaeron, C. iv. 97

Clarius, epithet of Apollo, C. ii. 70

Claws. See Chelae -

Cleinias, Εἰ. vi. 11

Cleisithera, L. 1222 ff,

Cleombrotus, Εἰ. xxv. 1

Cleonicus, Εἰ, xxxii. 1

Clete, an Amazon, L. 995 ff.

Clymenus (a) F. 56; (Ὁ) F. 189

Clytaemnestra, L. 1099 ff., 1114 ff.,
1372


Cnacion, L. 550 :

Cnidus, ©. vi. 25; οὐ L. 1391

Cnossus, Ὁ. i. 42, "43, L. 1214

Cocytus, L. 705 f.

Codrus, the last king. of Athens,
L. 1389, Ait. iii. 1. 32

Coetus= Apollo, L. 426

Coeiis, C. iv. 150

ee L. 1022 ff.; cf. L. 632,
88


Colotis= Set ΣΈ Ψα L. 867

Comaetho, L. 934 f

Comyrus= Zeus, L. 459

Concheia, L. 869

Conon, Ber. 1

Conopion, E. lxiv. 1 }

Corax, Corvus, Crow, 8. constella-
tion, A. 449, 520


- Core, the Maiden, (1) Persephone,


L. 698 ; (2) Athena, L. 359, 985
Corié, by-name οὗ Artemis as
Goddess of Maidens, C. iii. 234

Corinth, L. 1024 °

Coroebus, Ait. i. 9

Coroneia, C. vy. 61, 68

Corybantes, See ‘Cyrbantes
Corycian, Nymphs, Ait. iii. 1, 58
Corythus, L. 58

Cos, C. iv. 160, F. 96

Coscynthus, L. 1035

Couralius, r. in Boeotia, C. v. 64
Crab, The, Cancer, the 4th zodiacal


INDEX


sign, A. 147, 446, 491, 495, 500,
539,545, 569, 893, 996.
Cragus, mt. in Lycia, cult of Zeus;
hence by-name of Zeus, L. 542
Cees C. iv. 188, vi. 77; of.


2
el ἐ 8. constellation, A. 448, 520,


Crathis, (1) E. xviii. 1; (2) r. in
Achaea, C. i. 26; (3) r. near Sy-
baris, L. 919, 1079; (4) uncertain
river in Illyria, L. 1021

Creion, hill at Argos, C. v. 40, 41

Creophylus, s. of Astycles, ancient
poet of Chios or Samos, FE. vii. 1

Crestone, district in Thrace where
Munitus was fatally bitten by a
snake, L. 499; cult of Ares
(Candaon) there, L. 937

Cretan, C. i. 8, 9, 84, iii, 41, 205,
EK. xiii. 2, xxiv. 1, lxiii. 1; in L.
1297 Curetes = Cretans, who carry
off Europa from Phoenicia in
vengeance for the rape of Io

Crete, A. 31, C. iii. 191, iv. 272,
309, L. 1801

Cretheus, s. of Aeolus, f. of Aeson,
g.f. of Jason, L. 872

Creusa, wife of Aeneas, left, by him
in Troy, L. 1263

Crimisa, t. near Croton founded by
Philoctetes, L. 913

Crimisus, L. 961

Crisa, t. in Phocis, L. 1070;
Crisaean plains near Delphi, C.
iv. 178

Crisus, L. 939 ff.

Critias, (1) Εἰ. xiv. 45; (2) lvi. 2

Cromna, t. in Paphlagonia with
cult of Poseidon, L. 522

Cronian laws, C. v. 100

Cronides, i.e. son of Cronus, C.
i. 61, 91

Cronion, hill at Olympia, L. 42

Cronus, C. i. 53, A. 35 (deceived by


tes)

Croton, t. in Bruttium, L. 859 ff.,
1002 ff., 1071

Crotopus, Ait. i. 2

Crown, Stephanos, Corona Borealis,
A. 71, 572, 578, 625, 660

Ctarus= Hermes, L. 679

Curetes, similar to and sometimes
confused with the Corybantes:


28


with beating of drums and war-
dance they protect the infant
Zeus from Cronus, C. i. 52, A.
85; in L. 1295=Cretans; in L.
671, a tribal name for Acarnanian
(Homer, Jl. ix. 529 puts the
᾿ Curetes in Pleuron)

Cychreus, prehistoric
Salamis, L. 451

Cyclades, islands round Delos, C.
‘iv. 8, 198

Cyclopes, C. iii. 9, 46, 67, 81, 85,
ΕἸ. xlvii. 2, lu. 659 ff., 765

Cycnus, s. of Poseidon and Calyce,

: L. 232 ff. 9
ydippe, «{{{. iii. 1. 1

Cydonia, t. in N.-W. Crete, C. i.
45, iii. 81, 197

Cylistarnus, r. in Italy near Lagaria,
L. 946

Cyllene, mt. in Arcadia, A. 597, C.
iv. 272

Cynaetha, t. in Arcadia with cult
of Zeus; hence Cynaetheus=
Zeus, L. 400

Cynossema. See Hecabe

Cynosura, (1) district in Arcadia,

- hence Cynosurian dogs, C. iv. 94;
(2) The Lesser Bear, Ursa Minor,
A. 86 ff., 52, 182, 227, 308

Cynthus, mt. in Delos, C. ii. 61, iv.
10, ἘΠ. lxiii. 1

Cynus, t. in Locris, L. 1147

Cyon, Canis Major, The Dog, 8.
constellation, A. 327, 342, 352,
508, 595, 608, 676, 755. In A.
842, 676 called the ‘‘The Great
Dog” in contrast to Procyon,
Canis Minor. See further Sirius,
Procyon

Cypeus= Apollo, L. 426

Cyphus, t. in Thessaly (Perrhaebia),
L. 897

Cypris= Aphrodite, C. iv. 21, 308,
v. 21, BH. vi. 2, L. 112, 1143

Cyrbantes = Corybantes, L. 78

Cyre, C. ii. 88

Cyrene, (1) d. of Hypseus, C. iii.
208 ; (2) t. in Ν. of Africa, colony
from Thera, named after Cyrene
(1), CG. ii. 73, 94, HE. xxii, 5, xv.
2, xxiii. 2. Legend of the founda-
tion of Cyrene (Herodot. iv.
145 ff.), L. 877 ff. ; see Battus


625


king of


INDEX


Cyrita= Demeter, L. 1392 |
Cyrnus = Corsica, C. iii. 58, iv.


19
Oyta, t. in Colchis, home of Medeia,
F. 9, L. 174, 1812
Cytina=Cytinion (Thue. i. 107), t.
in Doris, L. 1889 !
Cyzicus, t. in the Propontis, E.
xiv. 1


Daeira= Persephone, L. 710

Damasus, Ai%t. i. 6

Danaans, the people of Argos, C. v.
142


Danaus, s. of Belus, b. of Aegyptus, .


King of Argos, C. ν. 48

Daphnis, E. xxiv. 3

Dardanus, (1)s. of Zeus and Electra,
d. of Atlas, L. 72, married Arisba
(d. of Teucer) also called Bateia,
after whom was-named the town
in the Troad, L. 1308, ancestor of
the “Lion at once Thesprotian
and Chalastraean,” L. 1440. He
eame from Arcadia or from Crete
to Samothrace, and thence during
the flood on a raft of skins to the
Troad, L. 78 ff., where he founded
Dardania.
72. His son, Ilus, was father of
Laomedon, father of Priam; (2)
unknown t. in Apulia, with cult
of Cassandra, L. 1129°ff.

Daunia, 8.-Eastern Italy (Apulia
and Calabria), L. 592, 1052,
1128 :

Deioneus, 5. of Eurytus of Oechalia,
f. of Cephalus, C. iii. 209

Deiphobus, s. of Priam, second in
bravery of Priam’s sons, L. 170,
becomes the fourth husband of
Helen, L. 148, 168, 851

Delian palm: the palm which sup-
ported Leto at the birth of Apollo
and Artemis, C. ii. 4

Delos, C. iv. passim, Ait. iii. 1, 26;
ef. also Cynthus, Inopus, Asteria

Delphi, t. in Phocis with famous
temple of Apollo, L. 208, Ait. iii.
1. 20 3: of. C. iis 98

Delphinius= Apollo, L. 208

Delphis, Delphinus, The Dolphin
(Δελφίν, Eratosthenes), N. con-
stellation, A. 316, 598


626


Buried in Troad, L. .


Deltoton, Triangulum, N. constella-
tion, A. 235

Demeter, C. vi. passim, E. xl. and
xlvi., Demeter and Pelops, L. 152
ff., Demeter and Erysichthon,
L. 1391 f. cf. Li. 152 f., 621, 1040,
1892

Demodice, EB. lv. 2

Demonax, Ait. iii. 1. 66

Demophon, F. 155

Deo= Demeter, C. ii. 110, vi. 17 and
133

Deraenus= Apollo, L. 440

Dexamenus, C. iv. 102

Dexithea, Ait. iii, i. 67 :

Diacria, hills on coast of Euboea,


L. 375

Dice (Justice), A. 105 ff., L. 1040

Dicon, E. xi. 1 -

Dicte, mt. in Crete, L. 1800, C. i. 4,
and 47, iii. 199, E. xxiv. 3, A
33 ff.

Dictyna, C. iii, 198

Didyme, E..xiy. 2

Didymoi, Gemini, The Twins, 3rd
zodiacal constellation, A. 147, 450,
481, 549, 717, 725

Dike or Justice, A. 105 ff., L. 1040

Dindymon, E. xli. 2

Diocleides, Εἰ. xix. 2

Diocles, Εἰ. xxxi. 1

Diomedes, L. 1066, C. v. 35

Dionysias= Naxos, Ait. iii. 1. 42

Dionysus, A. 72, C. vi. 71 f., E. x. 1,
xlv. 2, xlix. 5

Diophon, f. of Charmis, Εἰ. xvi. 4

Dioscuri, Ο. v. 24

Diotimus, L. 732 ff.

Dirce, C. iv. 76


Dirphossus=Dirphys, hill in Eu-


boea, L. 875

Discus, or Quoit= Zeus, L. 400

Dizerus, a river, L. 1026

Dodona, in Epirus (Thesprotia)
famous oracle of Zeus, C. iv. 284,
L. 1320, Ait. ii. 7, F. 111

Doliche = Icarus,oneof the Cyclades,
C. iii. 187

Dolonci, a Thracian tribe, L. 331,
533


Doom, Hill of. See Ate

Dorians, C. ii. 89

Doris, w. of Nereus, m. of Thetis,
L. 861; a Nereid, A. 658


ily oa? Mua ey “.};


INDEX


.


Dotion, plain 8. of Ossa in Thessaly,
L, 410, Ο. vi. 25


Dracon, Draco, The Dragon, N.con- -


stellation, A. 45 ff., 70, 187
Dragon’s Isle, L. 110°
Draucos, t. near Ida in Crete, home
of Scamandros, L. 1034


Drepanum, t. in Sicily, der. from:


Sickle (δρέπανον) with which
Cronus mutilated Uranus, L. 869
“Apts Κρόνου πήδημα, Att. ii. 6
Dromus Achilleius, L. 193, 200
Drymas= Apollo in Miletus, L. 522
Drymnius=Zeus in Pamphylia, L.
536


Dymas, s. of Aegimius, ancestor of
Dorian Dymanes, L. 1388

Dyme, t. in Achaea, L. 591

Dyras, r. of Mt. Oeta, L. 916


Echemmas, ΕἸ. Ixiii. 1

Echidna, L. 1353 f.

Echinades, C. iv. 155

Echinos, t. on Malian gulf, L. 904

Echo, C. iii, 245, E. xxx. 6

Ectenians, ΐ.6, Boeotians, L. 433,
1212

Edonians, Thracian tribe, L. 419

EHétion, E. xxvi. 1

Egypt, Ait. i. 1. 6, ii. 8. 1, F. 28

Hidyia, wife of Aeétes, L. 1024

Hileithyia, C. i. 12, iv. 182, E. liv.
1; Eleutho, C. iv. 276:

Kion, L. 417

Elais. See Anius

Electra, A. 262

Elephenor, L. 1034 ff.

Eleusis, C. vi. 31

Eleutho.. See Hileithyia

Elis, Εἰ. 1lxi. 1

Ellopians= Euboeans, C. iv. 20

Elymi, people in N.-W. Sicily, L
974


Elymus, L. 965 ff.

Enceladus, F. 117

Engonasin, Ingeniculus, The Man
on his Knees, A. 63 ff., 575, 669 ;
also called Gnyx (On his knees),
A. 6591, 615; also Eidolon=
Phantom, A. 64, 73, 270; N.
constellation

Enipeus= Poseidon, L. 722

Enna, C. vi. 31; hence Ennaia=
Demeter, L. 152


Enorches= Dionysus, L. 212

Envy. See Phthonus

Enyo, C. ii. 85, iv. 276, L. 463, 519

Eordi, tribe in Macedonia, 1). 342

Eos, L. 18

Epeian, 7.e. Elean, L. 151

Epeius, L. 930 ff., E. xxvi. 8 (?)

Ephesus, C. iii. 238, 258

Ephyra, C. iv. 42, 48, F. 1

Epicydes, E. xxxiii. 1

Epimetheus, s. of Asia, L. 412

Epistrophus, L. 1067

Epius=Asclepius, L. 1054

Erasixenus, Εἰ. xxxvii. 1

Erchius, F. 5

Erechtheus, L. 1338, ef. L. 110 f. 3
= Zeus, L. 158, 431

Erembi, L. 827

Erginus, F. 56

Erichthonius, H. i. 2

Eridanus=Potamus, qg.v. A. 360

Erigone, d. of Icarius, Ait. i. 1. 4

Erinyes, L. 406, 437 f., 1040 f.,
1137 f.

Eriphi, Haedi, The Kids, E. xx. 6,
A. 158, 166, 679, 718; see Henio-
chus

Eris=Iris (earlier called Eridius,
Arr. ap. Eustath. ad Dion. Per.
783), a river in Pontus, L. 1333

Erymanthus, r. in Arcadia, C. i.


18

Erysichthon, C. vi. passim, L. 1388
ff., v. Aethon, Mestra

Eryx, (1) 5. of Aphrodite, L. 866 f.;
(2) hill in Sicily, L. 958

Eteocles, L. 487 f.

Etesian winds, A. 152 ff.

Euboea, C. iv. 197, 290; see L.
373 ff.

Eucoline, I. 25

Eudemus, Εἰ. xlviii. 1

Eumedes, C. v. 37

Euphorbus, I. 1. 124

Eupylus, Ait. iii. 1. 71

Euripus, ©. iii. 188, iv. 45

Europa, L. 1283 ff.

Eurotas, r. in Laconia, C. v. 24, F.
56

Euryampus, L. 900

Eurynome, L. 1192 f., F. 133

Eurypylus, (1) s. of Hvaemon, L.
877, 901; (2) 8. of Poseidon and
Celaeno, C. ii. 92


627


INDEX


Eurytanians, os tribe, L.799

Eurytus, E. vii.

Euthymenes, E. ἀνῇ.

Buxantius, F. 154; οἱ saat iii. 1. 67
Euxitheus, EB. xxxii. 15

Evaenetus, EH. lvii. 1.

Everes, C. vy. 81, 106


Fish, The Southern. See Ichthys
Fishes, The. See Ichthyes


Gala=Milk, ic. The Milky Way,
A. 476, 511

Galadra, t. in Macedonia, L. 1342,
1444


Galatae, Gauls, C. iv. 184

Galenaea, BE. vi. 5

Ganymedes, s. of Tros, became
cup-bearer to Zeus, E. litt 3

Gargarum, Ait. i. 7

Gauas= Adonis, L. 831

Gaudos, F. 157

Gauls. See Galatae

Geraestus, cape in 8. Euboea, C.
iv. 199

Geryon, L. 652, 1346; ¢f. 47, 697

Giants, L. 127, 1408, L. 1357;
Briareus, C. iv. 148, Ischenus,


L. 48, Erechtheus, L. 111; asa |


general epithet, Aegeus, L. 495,
Hector, L. 527, Xerxes, L. 1414;
cf. L. 63, 688 ff.

Glanis, i.e Clanius, river near
Naples, L. 718

Glaucon or Glaucus, s. of Minos
and Pasiphaé, L. 811

Glaucopion, H. 27

Glaucus, (1) fisherman of Anthedon
who became a prophetic sea-god
(Glaucus Pontius), L. 754 ; (2)
s. of Hippolochus, leader of the
Lycians at Troy, who exchanged
arms with Diomedes (Hom, 1].
vi. 234), E. xlix. 2

Gnyx, A. 575; see Hngonasin

Golgi, t. in Cyprus, L. 589

Gongylates=Zeus, L, 485

Gonnos, town in N. Thessaly, L.
906


Gonusa, in Sicily, L. $70
Gorgas=Hera, L. 1349

Gorge, m. of Thoas, L. 1013

sa γο, t. in Crete, C. iii, 189, L.


628


Τὰ
Gortynaea, i.e. Cortona in Etruria,
L. 806
Graea, i.e. Tanagra in Boeotia, L
645
Graeae, L. 846


Graeci, Greeks, L. 532, 891, 1195,
1838, F. 2


*Guneus, (1) an Arab, L. 1128; (2)


leader of the men of Cyphus
(Perrhaebi), L. 877 ff., 897 f.
Gygaea= Athena, L. 1152
Gymnesiae, the Balearic islands.
The inhabitants. were famous
slingers (popular derivation from
βάλλω, hence Βαλιαρεῖς) carrying
_ three slings, one on head, one
round neck, the third round waist,
L. 633 ff.
Gyrae Rocks, L. 390 ff.
Gyrapsius=Zeus in Chius, L. 537
Gytheion, L. 98


Hades, C. iv, 277, Att. iii, 1.15

Haemonia, F. 9 (Ὁ), 19

Haemus, mountain range in Thrace,
C. iii. 114, iv. 63

Halcyone, a Pleiad, A. 262

Hales, r. near Colophon, L. 425

Haliartus, t. in Boeotia, C. v. 61

Halicarnassus, t. in Caria, E. ii. 4

Hamaxae, The Wains, A. 27, 98, cf
1. 1. 119; see Arcti

Harmonia, F, 22

Bares Drepane, i.e. Corcyra, L


PN aia L. 167, 653

Harpina, L. 167

Havens, Watcher of (Limeno-
scopos), ὁ.6. Artemis, C. iii. 259

Healing of All (Panaceia), C. ii. 40

Hebe, Youth, bride of Heracles, L
1349


Hecabe, L. 1177

Hecaerge, d. of Boreas, C. iv. 292

Hecaergus, t.e. Apollo, C. ii. 11

Hecate, d. of Perses deine, and
Asteria, Wy. 1275, Tek.

Hector, L. 260 ff., 280, ron , 527 ff.,
1204 ff.


Hegemone, i.e. Artemis, C. iii. 227.

Helen, d. of Zeus (Tyndareus) and
Leda, C, iii. 232

rig s Isle=Cranaé off Attica, L.
10


rae Sm "2 ri Os ano


PMS rss


ae eee eee ee


INDEX


Helice, (1) t. in Achaea, C. iv. 101; (2)

Ursa Major, A. 87 ff., 51,59, 91, 160

are, A. 216, 218, C. iv. 82, v.
1, 90 :


μων)

Hellas, E. ix. 4

Helle, d. of Athamas, sister of
Phrixus, L. 22, 1285

Hellen, L. 894, C. iv. 172

Hellespont, L. 22, 27, 1285, 1414

Helorus, r. in Sicily, L. 1033, 1184

Hemera, Gentle, by-name of Ar-
temis, C. iii. 236

Heniochus, Auriga, N. constella-
tion, A. 156, 167, 175, 177, 482,
679 ff., 716. On his left shoulder
is The Goat (Aix, Capella, a
Aurigae), and on his left wrist
are The Kids (Eriphi, Haedi)

Hephaestus, C. i. 76, iii. 48, 74,
iv. 144, H. i. 2. 3

Hera, C. iii. 30, Ait. iii. 1. 4

Heracleia Hodos, Strabo 245. ** The
Lucrine Gulf extends in breadth
as far as Baiae; it is separated
from the a by an embankment
eight stadia in length and the
breadth of a carriage-way; this
they say that Heracles built
(διαχῶσαι) When he was driving
away the cattle of Geryones.”
This embankment is the Heracleia
Hodos; ef. Diodor. iv. 22, who
confuses the Lucrine with the
Lacus Avernus, L. 697

Heracleitus, elegiac poet of Halicar-
nassus, E. v. 1

Heracles,(1)s.of Zeus and Alemena,
C. iii. 108, 159, v. 305 (2) 8. of
Alexander the Great and Barsine,
slain by Polysperchon, 1). 801 ff.

Hereynna, ἃ. of Trophonius.but=
Demeter, L. 153

Hermes (Hermeias, Hermaon), A.
269, 674, E. xivi. 3, C. iii. 69, 143,
iv. 272, F. 13, I.°12

Hermione, d. of Menelaus and
Helen, L. 103

Hermou Pterna, L. 835

Hesiod, E. xxix. 1

Hesione, d. of Laomedon, slave-
wife of Telamon, m. of Teucer,
aunt of Cassandra, 1. 452ff.
She was exposed to a sea-monster
which Heracles slew, L. 34 ff.,


470 ff. Laomedon refused to
pay Heracles his promised reward,
L. 523. Hesione ransomed her
brother Podarces from Heracles
with her golden veil, and thence-
forth he was called Priamus
(πρίαμαι, buy), L. 337 ff. After
the fall of Troy she was given by
Heracles to Telamon, L. 469

Hesperides, L. 885

Hesperis = Berenice, t. inCyrenaica,
KE. xxxviii. 6

Hesperus, the Evening-star, C. iv.
174, 280, 808, vi. 7, 8, E. lvi. 4

Hestia, C. vi. 109

Hesychides, F. 18

Hié Paeéon. See Paeéon

Hippacus, E. xiv. 1

Hippaeus, Εἰ. Ixi. 2

Hippegetes= Poseidon, L. 767

Hippo, an Amazon punished by
Artemis, C. iii. 239, 266°

Hippocrene, ©. v. 71, A. 217 f.,
Att. iv. 1. 6

Hippolyte, an Amazon whose
girdle was carried off by Heracles
and Theseus, L. 1329 ff.

Hipponax, I. i. 1

Hipponion=Vibo Valentia in Brut-
tium, L. 1069

Hippos, Equus, later called Peg-
asus, The’ Horse, N. constella-
tion, A. 205, 209, 215, 219, 223,
281, 288, 487, 524, 601, 627, 698

Hodoedocus, f. of Oileus (Ileus)
and g.f. of Aias (2), L. 1150

Homer, E. vii. 3, Ait. i. 1.9

Homolois = Athena, L. 520; ef. Zeus
Homoloios as a cult-name, especi-
ally in Thessaly and Boeotia

Hoplosmia= Hera, L. 614, 858

Horites= Apollo, L. 352

Horse, The. See Hippos

τὸ |i star group in Taurus, A.
173


Hygor, Aqua, Water, part of the
constellation Hydrochoiis, Aqua-
rius, A. 399

Hydra, Anguis, 8. constellation,
A. 414, 519, 594, 602, 611, 697

Hydrochoiis, Aquarius, the 11th
sign of the Zodiac, A. 283, 389,
892, 398, 502, 548, 693

Hydrussa, Ait. iii. 1. 58


629


INDEX


Hylaeus, a Centaur, C. iii. 221
Hylates = Apolloat Hylei in Cyprus,
L. 448


Hyleus, L. 491 ff.

Hyllichus, I. 7

Hyperboreans, C. iv. 281 ff., F. 51

Hypsarnus, r.'in Boeotia, L. 647

Hypseus, s. of Peneius, King of
the Lapithae, and f. of Cyrene, C.
ii. 92, iii. 208

Hypsizorus, Ait. ii. 2

Hyrradius, E. i. 2


Iaon, r. of Arcadia, C. i. 22

Iapyges, Li. 852

Tasides, 7.e. Cepheus, A. 179

Tasius, f. of Atalanta, C. 111. 216

Iason; s. of Aeson of Ioleus and
leader of the Argonauts; grand-
son of Cretheus, f. of Aeson, L.
892, 1310 ff.

Iatros=Apollo, L. 1207, 1877

Iberians, L. 643

Icarian Sea, i.e. the Aegean Sea
8.W. of Asia Minor, C. iv. 14

Icarius, Ait. i. 1. 3

Ichnaia, epithet of Themis from
Ichnae in Thessalia Phthiotis or
in Macedonia, L. 129

Ichthyes, Pisces, The Fishes, the
12th Zodiacal constellation, A.
240, 246, 282, 857, 362, 548, 700

Ichthys Notios, The Southern Fish,
A. 387, 390, 572, 701

Iemius, Aét. iii. 1. 34

Icus, island off Magnesia, Ait. 1.1. 8,
24


ian () mt. in Troad, C. ν. 18,:-1).
1256, Ait. i. 7; (2) mt. in
Crete, L. 1297, A. 33, Ὁ. i. 6, 47, 51
Idas, s. of Aphareus and b. of
Lynceus, L. 553 ff.
Idomeneus, King of Crete, L. 431 ff.,
1214 ff.


Tleus (Oileus), L. 1150

Tlios, L. 984, Ait. i. 8 <

Ilyria, F. 2.1

Tlus, s. of Tros and g.f. of Priam, so
g.g.f. of Cassandra, L. 319, 1341,
receives the Palladium from
Zeus, L. 364, founds Ilios, L. 29,
conquers Thrace and Macedonia,
L. 1342 ff, grave in Troad, L.
819 ff.

*

630


~


Imbrasus, r. in Samos, hence Arte-
mis Imbrasia, C. iii. 228, F. 66
Inachus, s. of Oceanus and Tethys,
founder and king of Argos, C. v.
140. His daughter Io was turned
into a cow (Bous) which gave her
name to the Cimmerian Bosporus,
C..iii. 254, identified with Isis, Εἰ.
lviii. 1. Inachus was also name of
a river at Argos, C. iv. 74, v. 50

Ino, d. of Cadmus and Harmonia,
becomes a sea- -goddess under
name of Leucothea, also called
Byne, L. 107, 757

Tnopus, r. in Delos, C. iii. 171, iv.
206, 268, L. 575 f.

Iocastus, F. 59

Toleia, or Iole, ἃ. of EKurytus, E
viii. 3

Ioleus, in Thessalian Magnesia on
Pagasaean gulf, C, iii, 208

Ionian sea, L. 631

Tonians, L. 989, I, 1. 225

Ionis, Εἰ, xxvii. 1

Iphicles, Ait. iii. 1. 46@

Iphigeneia (Iphis), L. 324

Iris, (1) d. of Thaumas, messenger
of the Gods, C. iv. 157; (2) (or
Eris), r. in Leucosyria, Ls 1333

Iros, t. in Thessaly or in Malis, L.
905

Is, r. in Lucania, L. 724

Ischenus, L. 43

Ischys, H. i. 4. 7

Isis, Εἰ. 1. 4, lviii. 1

Islands of the Blest, a place in
Thebes with a cult of Hector, L.
1204

Ismenus, r. in Boeotia, C. iv. 77

Issa, old name of Lesbos, L. 220

Isthmus of Corinth, C. iv. 72;
Games of, F. 103

Istros= Danube, L. 188, 1336

Italia, C. iii. 58, F. 149, 161

Itonian Athene, C. vi. 75, from her
cult at Itone (Iton) in Thessalia
Phthiotis

Iulis, t. in Ceos, Εἰ. vi. 7, Ait. iii.

52, 72


Labdacidae, C. v. 126
Lacedaemonian, C. v. 24
Lacinium, L. 856 ff.
Lacmon, L, 1020, 1389


ae Ὁ


INDEX


Laconians, L. 586 ff.

Ladon, r. in Arcadia, C. i. 18, L.
1041

Laestrygones, L, 662, 664 f., 956

Lagaria, t. in Lueania, L. 930

Lagmus, r. in Pontus, L. 1333

Lagoiis, Lepus, The Hare, 8. con-
stellation, A. 338, 369, 384, 503,
594, 678

Lametian waters=Lametine gulf
9. ne ser ἊΣ ποταμὸς ᾿Ιταλίας
(schol.), L. 108

Lampete= Olampetile, t. in ‘Brut-
tium, L. 1086 5

Laoco6én, L. 347

Laodice, L. 314, L. 496 f.

Laomedon (Laumedon), s. of Ilus,
t Na Priam, L. 470, 523, 592,
61

Lapersioi=Dioscuri, L. 511; Zeus
Lapersios= Zeus Agamemnon, L.
1369


Laphria= Athena, L. 356, 985, 1416

Laphrios = Hermes, L. 835

Laphystius=Dionysus in Mace-
donia, L. 1237

Laris, r. in Lucania, L. 725

Larisa, t. in Thessaly, C. iv. 104

Larymna, t. in Locris, L. 1146

Larynthius= Zeus, L. 1092

Las, t. in Laconia, L. 95; see La-
persioi

Laumedon. See Laomedon

Laurete, ἃ. of Lacinius and w. of
Croton, L. 1007

Lechaeum, W. harbour of Corinth,
C. iv. 271

Lectum,, Ait. i. 7

Leda, m. of Helen, L. 88 f., 506

Leibethron, t. near Olympus, L.
275, 410

Lelantian plain, between Chalcis
and Eretria in Euboea, C. iv. 289

Leleges, Ait. iii. 1. 62

Leon, Leo, The Lion, 5th sign of
the Zodiac, A. 148 ff., 446, 491,
545, 590, Ber. 6

Leontarne, t. in Boeotia,.L. 645

Leontichus, Εἰ. lix. 1

Leoprepes, Εἰ, 2

Lepreum, t. in ey er W. coast
of Peloponnese, C. i.

Lepsieus, L. 1454, Lepsios, L. 1207


= Apollo


Lepiynia= Persephone, L. 49

Lerna, L. 1293

Lesbos, L. 219, F. 11

Lethaeum, L. 703

Leto, C. iii. 45, 73, 88, 138, iv. 39,
57, 60, 68, 99, 122, 204, 222, 246,
326, I. 1. 281

Letrina, L. 54, 158

Leucanian= Lucanian, L. 1086

Leucaros, Εἰ. lx. 2

Leuce, island at mouth of Danube,

8 f.-

Leucippus, L. 543 ff.

Leucophrys=Tenedos, L. 346

Leucosia, a Siren, L. 723 ff.

Leucus, L. 1218 ff.

Leutarnia, in Calabria, L. 978

Libya, C. ii. 66, 86

Ligeia, a Siren, L. 726 ff.

Ligustinoi= Ligurians, L. 1356

Lilaia, t. in Phocis, L. 1078

Limnae, on borders of Messenia and
Laconia with temple of Artemis
(Paus. — ii. 825-46) "iy. * Shes
Strabo 362), C. iii. 1τ8

Lindos, t. in Rhodes, L. 923

Lingeus, r. in Italy, ἴω 1240

Linon, cape in 8, Italy, L. 994

[Linos], Ait. i. 2

Lipare, formerly Meligunis, island
off Sicily, home of the Cyclopes,
C. iii. 47

Locrians, Ait.
L. 1429

Loios, Macedonian month-name=
August, Εἰ. xlvi. 2. It is the same
as Homoloios, which is frequent
in Boeotian inscriptions as a
month-name. Hoffmann, Die
Makedonen, p. 105

Longatis= Athena, L. 520, 1082

Longurus, in Sicily, cult of Aphro-
dite, L. 868

Lotophagi, L. 648

Loxo, ἃ. of Boreas, ©. iv. 292

Lusa or Lusi, t. in N. Arcadia, C.
iii, 235

Lycaenis, E.-liv. 1

Lycaeum, C. i. 45 cf. 1. 41

Lyecoreian, C. ii. 19

Lycormas, L. 1012

Lyctos, t. in Crete, Ὁ. ii. 33, E.
Xxxviili. 1

Lycus, L. 182 ; see Chimaereus


631


i. 8; Locrian rose,


INDEX


Lydians, I. 1. 202

Lygdamis, C. iii. 252, Att. iii. 1, 28

Lynceus, s. of Aphareus, b. of Idas,
slain by Polydeuces, L. 553 ff.

Lyra, N. constellation, A. 269, 597,
615, 674

Lysanias, Εἰ. xxx. 5.


Macalla, L. 927

Macedonian, C. iv. 167

Macelo, Ait. iii. 1. 67

Macris = Euboea, C. iv..20

Maenalus, C. iii. 89, 224

Maeonia, C. iv. 250

Maeotis Limne, Sea of Azov, L.
1288 f.; on its shores dwell the
Maeotian Scythians, hence Maeo-
tian=Scythian, L. 917

Maera, the dog of Erigone, d. of
Icarius (as a star=Sirius) used
for ‘‘dog” generally, L. 334, Ait.
iii. 1. 35

Magarsos, L. 444

Maia, a Pleiad, A. 263

Maiden, The. See Parthenos

Maiden’s Isle. . See Parthenia

Malis, district on. coast, 8. of
Othrys, C. iv. 287

Maloeis, F. 163

Malta=Melite, L. 1027

Mamersa= Athena, L. 1417

Mamertos= Ares, L. 938, 1410

Marathon, H.i.1.8 .

Marpessa, L. 563

Marsian, L. 1275

Mazusia, L. 534

Mecone, F. 54

Meda, w. of Idomeneus, m. of
Cleisithera, slain by Leucus, L.
1221 ff.

Medeia, L. 174, 887, 1315

Medusa, L. 842 f.

Megacles, Ait. iii. 1. 70

Megara, HE. xxvii. 6, Ait. i. 10

Melancraera, L. 1464

Melanippus,(1)E. xxii. 1; (2) Li. 1066

Melanthus= Poseidon, L. 767

Melas, r. in Arcadia, C. i. 23

Meliae, C. i, 47, iv. 80; ef. Ait. iii.
1. 68

Meligunis, C. iii. 48

Melinaea= Aphrodite, L, 403

Melissae, C. ii. 110

Melite, now Malta, L. 1027


632


Melpomene, m. of Sirens, L. 712 f.

Membles, unknown river, L. 1083 ;
ποταμὸς ᾿Ιταλίας πλησίον τῶν
Λευκανῶν schol. ,

Memphis, t. on left bank of Nile,
hence Μεμφίτης πρόμος, L. 1294

Menecrates, Εἰ. xlvi. 62

Menelaus,. L. 151, 539, 820

Menexenus, E. xlv. 5

Menippus, Εἰ. ii. 34

Menitas, E. xxxviii. 1

Merope, a Pleiad, A, 262

Meropeis, epithet of Cos from
Merops,. 8. of Triopas f. of
Cos and king of that island, C. iv.
160


Mestra, ἃ.

1394 ff. ;

Methymna, t. in Lesbos, Εἰ. xvii. 3,
1098


Metope, r. in Arcadia, C. i. 26

Miccus, (1) E. xlix. 1; 22) Εἰ. li. 2

Miccylus, E. xxviii. 3

Midas, L. 1397 ff., Ait. iii. 1. 47

Miletus, C. iii. 226, I. 1. 114

Mimallo, L. 1237, 1464

Mimas, C. iv. 67, 157, vi. 93

Minos, C. iii. 190

Minyai, the Argonauts, L. 874

Misenum, L. 737 :

Mnemon, L. 240 ff.

Moirae, dd. of Tethys, L. 144 f., 585

Molossus=Apollo, L. 426

Molpadia, L. 1331

Molpis, L. 159

Momos, C. ii. 113

Mopsopia= Attica, L. 1340

Mopsops, L. 733

Mopsos, (1) 5. of Apollo and Manto ;
famous seer, L. 427; (2) Argo-
naut, from Titaron in Thessaly,
L. 881

Morpho= Aphrodite, L, 449

Munippus, L. 224 ff., 319 ff.


of Erysichthon, L.


. Munitus, L. 495 ff.


Munychia, C. iii. 259

Muses, A. 16

Mycale, C. iy. 50

Myconos, L. 388, 401
Myleus= Zeus, L. 435
Myllaces=TIllyrians, L. 1021
Myndia=Athena, L. 950, 1261
Myrina, L. 243

Myrmidons, Ait, i. 1. 23


INDEX


Myrrha, m. of pees L. 829
Myrtilus, L. 162

Myrtusa, C. ii. x 2

Mysian, Mysian εν La ama C. iii. 117
Mystes= Heracles, L..1328
Mytilene, home of Pittacus, EH. i. 2


Naryx, t. in Locris, L. 1148

Nasamones, F. 21

Nauaethus (Neaethus), L. 921

Naubolus, L. 1067

Naucratis, Εἰ. xl. 1

Naumedon=Poseidon, L. 157

Nauplius, L. 384 ff., 1093 ff., 1217 ff.

Navel, Plain of the. See Omphalion

Naxos, E.-xx. 1, Ait. iii. 1. 38

Neapolis= Naples, L. 717

Neda, C. i. 33, 38

Nedon, L. 374

Neilos, C. iv. 185, 208

Neleus, s. of Codrus, founder of
Miletus, C. iii. 226

Nemea, t. in Argolis, F. 1

Nemesis, C. iv. 56

Neoptolemus, L. 183, 828 ff., 324

Neptunis (v./.), Nepunis= ‘Artemis
at Nepete in Etruria, L. 1332

Nereus, g.f. of Triton, L. 886 ;=Sea,
L. 164, C. i. 40

Neriton, mt. in Ithaca, L. 769,
794


Nesaia, a Nereid, L. 399

Neso, m. of Sibyl, Li. 1465

Nessus, L. 50 f.

Nicippe, priestess of Demeter, C.
vi. 43

N icoteles, E. xxi. 2

Nile. See Neilos

Niobe, C. ii. 22 ff.

Nireus, L. 1011 ff.

Nomius, name of Apollo as god of
herds, C. ii. 47 ; see Amphrysus

Nonacriates = Hermes, L. 680

Nyctimus, L. 481

Nyx, Night, A. 409 ff., L. 437


Obrimo= Persephone, L. 698

Ocinarus, r. near Tereina, L. 729,
1009

Odysseus, L. 344, 815, 1030

Odysseus, Cape of, the W. point of
Cape Pachynusin Sicily, L. 1031 f.,
where Odysseus built a cenotaph
for Hecabe, L. 1181 ff.


Oebalus, f. of Tyndareus, hence
‘children of O.”’=Spartans, L
1125

Oeceus, f. of μὰ δορί and Hip-
ponous, C. iv.

Oedipus, L. pa ‘called Oedipodes

. li. 74

Oekourus = Dionysus, L. 1246

Oeneus, s. of Porthaon, King of
Calyden in Aetolia, f. of Tydeus,
Meleager, Deianeira; failed to
honour Artemis who in revenge
sent the Calydonian boar, C. iii.
260

Oenomaus, L. 161 ff.

Oenone, (1) ἃ. of Cebren and wife of
Paris, dies with him, L. 57-68.
See Corythus; (2) old name of
Aegina, L. 175

Oenopion, A. 640

Oenotria, L. 912

Oeta, L. 486

cone eee L, 231
ZY: 12

Ose | See Oenotropi

Oenotropi, dd. of yee (so g.dd. of
Apollo) and Rhoeo d. of Staphylus
5. of Dionysus (and so g.g.dd. of
Dionysus) who subsequently mar-
ried Zarax, L. 570 ff. When the
Greeks suffered from hunger
before Troy, they brought the
Oenotropi from Delos; to help
them to escape, Dionysus changed
them into doves, L. 581 ff.; see


Anius

Oileus, s. of Hodoedocus, f. of
Locrian Aias, 647, L. 1150 :

Oistos, Sagitta, Eratosthenes’ Τόξον,
N. constellation, A. 311, 598, 691

Olen, C. iv. 305

Olenos, t. in Achaia, Li. 590

Olosson, t. in Thessaly, L. 906

Olympia, I, 1, 254

Olympus,(1) mt. in Macedonia, home
of the gods, C. i. 62, iv. 220, vi.
59, L. 564; (2) mt. in Mysia, C.
iii. 117

Ombrius=Zeus as god of rain, L.

60


1
Ombroi= Umbrians, L. 1360
Omphalion Pedon, in Crete, C. i. 45


Oncaea = Demeter, L. 1225
Onchestus, ὕ, on Lake Copais in


633


INDEX


Boeotia with temple of Poseidon,
L. 646

Onoi, Asini, The Asses, constella-
tions N. and 8. of Phatne q.v.,
A. 898, 906

ol βδον Gamphelae= Onou Gnathos,


opheltas, mt. in Huboea, L. 373

Ophion, L. 1192

Ophis, Anguis, Serpens, N. constel-
lation, A. 82 ff., 578, 665

Ophiuchus, Serpentarius, N. con-
Stellation, A. 74 ff. 488, 521, 577,
665, 724

Ophrynion, t. in Troad with grave
of Hector (Strabo 595), L. 1208

Orchieus= Apollo, L. 562

Orestes, Εἰ. Ix. 1 ff., Ait. i. 1. 2

Orion (Oarion), giant hunter of
Boeotia, C. iii, 265. As 8. con-
stellation, A. 232, 310, 323, 361,
518, 588, 636, 639, 676, 730, 756

Ormenidae, Ss. of Ormenus, 1.€.
men of Ormenion ; t. in Thessalian
Magnesia, C. vi. 76

Ornis, The Bird = Latin Cygnus, The
Swan, N. constellation, A. 272,
273, 274, 312, 487, 599, 628, 691

Orthanes= Paris, L. 538


Orthosia, properly cult-name of


Artemis, Pind. Ol. iii, 30; in L.
1331=an Amazon

Ortygia, old name of Delos, C. ii.
59; myth that Delos is a quail
(ὄρτυξ) turned to stone, L. 401. In
ἘΠ. lxiii. 1 epithet of Artemis,
who was worshipped at Ortygia
in Syracuse (Pind, Ν. i. 2 1.)

Ossa, (1) mt. in Thessalian Magnesia,
C, iii. 52, iv. 137; (2) mt. in Cam-
pania, L. 697

Othronos, island near Corcyra, L.
1034; in L. 1027 an island near
Sicily (Ὁ)

Othrys, mt, in Thessalia Phthiotis,
C. vi. 86

Otos, s. of Poseidon and Iphimedeia,
b. of Ephialtes, slain by Apollo
or Artemis, C. iii, 264

Otrera, an Amazon, τη. of Penthe-
sileia, L. 997


Pachynus, cape in Sicily, L. 1029,
1182 ‘


634


Pactolus, r. in Lydia, C. iv. 250,
L. 272, 1352

Paeéon, Paeon, Paean, + Pape of
Apollo, C. ii. 21, 97, 103

Palaemon, (1)= Melicertes, s. of Ino
Leucothea, children sacrificed to
him at Tenedos, L. 229; (2) by-
name of Heracles, L. 663

Palamedes, s. of Nauplius and
Clymene, L. 1098

Palauthra, t. in Thessalia Magnesia,
home of Prothoiis, L. 899

Palladium, the image of Pallas
which was said to have fallen
from heaven and which was the
pledge of the safety. of Ilios,
L. 363 f.; stolen by Odysseus, Lh.
658. See Helenus

Pallas=Athena, C. v. passim,
ἈΠ, Pe Fa |

Pallatides, rocks near Argos, C. v.
42


Pallene, peninsula on Thermaic
gulf; its former name Phlegra
(-ai), and associated with the
giants, L. 127, 1407

Pallenis=Athena, L. 1261 .

Pamphilus, HE. 1. 8 ;

Pamphylus, L. 442

Pan, C. iii. 88, E. xlvi.

Panaceia. See Healing of All

Panacra, hill in Crete, C. i. 51f.

Panchaea, I. 5

Panemos, Macedonian name for
month of July, Εἰ. xlvi. 1

Pangaeum, mt. with gold and silver
mines in Thrace, C. iv. 134

Panope, a Nereid, A. 658

Panopeus, s. of Phocus, f. of ©
Epeius, L. 932 ff.

Paris, 1,. 86, 91, 168, etc.

Parnassus, C. iv. 93, Ait. iii. 1. δ΄

Paros, F. 36, 147

Parrhasia, t. in Arcadia (Hom. 1].
ii. 608), hence Arcadia generally,
C. i. 10, C. iii. 99

Parthenia, old name of Samos, C.
iv. 49

Parthenium, mt. in Arcadia sacred
to Auge, ὁ. iv. 71

Parthenius, r. in Pontus, Ait. iii.
1. 25; τ΄. in Samos, F. 66

Parthenope, L. 714 ff.

Parthenos, . Virgo, The Maiden,


INDEX


the 6th sign of the Zodiac, A.
ie 546, 597, 606; the myth, A.
97 ff.


Pasiphaé, C. iv. 311

Patareus= Apollo, L. 920

Pausanias, E. xii. 4

Pegasus, the winged horse of
Bellerophon, given by Zeus to
Eos, L. 17; see also Hippos

Pelagones, C. i. 3

Pelasgian, OC. iv. 284, v. 4. 51, vi
26, H. xl. 1, L. 177, 245, 1083,
1364, F. 105

Peleus, s. of Aeacus, f. of Achilles
by Thetis, L. 175 ff., 901 f., Ait.
i. 1. 24, F. 26

Pelion, mt. in Thessaly, C. iv. 118

Pellaios (?), E. xv. 6

Pellene, t. in Achaia, H. iv 2.12;
their colonists in Italy—Ausones
Pellenii—kill Philoctetes, L. 922

Pelopeis=Peloponnesus, C. iv. 72

Pelops, L. 53 ff., 152 ff.

Peneius, r. in Thessaly, C. iv. 105,
112, 121, 128, 148, L. 1348

Penthesileia, L. 997 ff.

Pephnos, L. 87

Perge, (1) t. in Pamphylia wit
temple of Artemis, C. iii. 187;
(2) a hill in Etruria, L. 805

Perrhaebi, L. 905

Persephone, L. 710

Perseus, (1)=Perses, f. of Hecate,
L. 1175 ; (2)s. of Zeus and Danaé,
L. 8873; (8) Perseus (2) was set
among the stars after his death
as a N. constellation, A. 249, 484,
685, 687, 711; cf. F. 28

Peuceus= Heracles, L. 663

Phaeacians, L. 632

Phaedrus, (1) HE. lvii. 4;
Hermes, L. 680

Phalacra, L. 24, 1170, Ait. i. 7

Phalanna, t. in N. Thessaly, L. 906 ;
see Polypoetes

Phalerus, founder of Naples, L. 717

Phalorias, t. in Locris, L. 1147

Phatne, The Manger, A. 892, 898,
905, 996

Phausterius= Dionysus, LL. 212

Phegion, mt. in Aethiopia, L. 16

Phemius, L. 1324

Pheneius, t. in Azania in Arcadia,
C. iv. 71


(2)=


Pherae, (1) t. in Thessalia Pelasgio-
tis, cult of Artemis-Hecate (on
coins of Pherae represented seated
with torch on horseback) ; hence
Pheraean as epithet of Artemis-
Hecate, C. iii. 259, L. 1180; (2) t.
in Messenia, hence Pheraeans,


Phereclus, L. 97

Phician Monster, i.e. the Sphinx
(Phix), in L. 1465=Cassandra

Phigaleus= Dionysus, L. 212

Phileratis, E. xxxv. 1

Philippus, E. xxi. 1, xlvii. 3

Philoctetes, s. of Poeas, bitten by
snake and left by the Greeks in
Lemnos, L. 62, 912 ff.

Philoxenides, E. lvii. 4

Philyra, d. of Oceanus, m. of
Cheiron by Cronus, C. i. 36, iv. 118

Phlegra, in Pallene, scene of the
battle of the giants, L. 1404

Phlegyas, H. i. 4. 8

Phocians: the Phocian=Pylades,
E. lx. 3; Phocians found Temesa
in Bruttium, L. 1067

Phocus, s. of Aeacus and Psamathe,
f. of Crisus and Panopeus, slain
by Peleus and Telamon, his’ half-
brothers, who had in consequence
to leave Aegina, L. 175

Phoebus= Apollo, Ait. iii. 1. 21

Phoenician Goddess=Athena in
Corinth (schol.), L. 658

Phoenicians, A. 39, 1. 1. 120,
C. iv. 19, Phoenician Cyrnus
(Corsica), as a Phoenician settle-
ment

Phoenix, s. of Amyntor, tutor of
Achilles (κου Has ced πάγουρον),
L. 419 in ref. to his age (Hom.
Ii. ix. 446 and 487 ff.) and King
of the Dolopes near Tymphrestus.
Buried by Neoptolemus at Hion,
L. 417-423

Phoenodomas, Trojan who had
three daughters and who pro-
posed that Laomedon’s daughter
Hesione should be exposed to the
sea-monster, L. 470 ff., 952 ff.

Phoree, Lake= prob. Lacus Fucinus,
L. 1275

Phorcides, d. of Phorcus and Ceto,
also called Graeae, cf. L. 846


635


INDEX


Phorcus, L. 876, 477

Phrygia, C. ii, 23, iii. 159, E. li

Phrygian : the Phrygian, C. v. 18=
Paris ᾿

Phtheires, L. 1383 ᾿

Phthia, (1) in Thessaly, C. iv. 112;
(2) mistress of Amyntor, L.
421


Phthonus, C., ii. 105, 107, 113

Phylamus, r. in Daunia, L. 594

Phyleus, F. 57

Physadeia, fountain at Argos, C. v.
47


Phyxius= Zeus, L. 288
Pilgrim Ship, The, θεωρίς (ναῦς), C.
iv. 314


Pimpleia, mt.and fountainin Pieria,


Geive Τῷ 1.278

Pindus, C. iv, 139, vi. 88

Pisa, (1) t. in Elis, Ait. iii. 1. 79;
(2) t. in Etruria, L. 1241, 1359

Pitane, C. iii, 172

Pithecusa or Pithecusae, island or
islands off coast of Campania,
beneath which the giants are
buried, L. 688

Pithoigia, Ait. i. 1.1

Pittacus, E. i. 1

Plato, E. xxv. 3

Pleiades, A, 255, 1066, 1085

Pleistus, r. in Phocis, C. iv. 92

Pluto, E. xv. 4

Plynos, L. 149

Podaleirius, s. of Asclepius, buried
in Daunia, where he heals the sick
who sleep on sheep-skins and are
sprinkled with the water of the
Althaenus, L. 1047 ff.

ἘρύδθθοΗ, earlier name of Priam,

39


Poeéssa, Ait. iii. 1. 73

Poimandria, L. 326

Poine, Ait, i. 2

Pola or Polae, t. in Istria, L. 1022
(which, however, may refer to
another Pola given by Steph.
Byz. as in Illyricum), F. 2. 4

Polyanthes, r. in Chaonia, L. 1046

Polydegmon, L. 700 = the Apen-
nines, possibly in reference to
the use of Polydegmon as a by-
name of Hades in Hom. Hymn
Dem. 31—thus Hades-hill in
reference to volcanic action


636


Polydeuces (Pollux), one of the
Dioscuri, L. 506, he being son of
Zeus while Castor was son of
Tyndareus (Pind. N. x. 80 ff.).
In the fight with Idas and Lyn-
ceus Polydeuces killed Lynceus
and Idas with the help of Zeus,
and voluntarily undertook to
share his immortality with Castor
who had been mortally wounded
by Idas, L, 553 ff., E. 2

Polygonus, L. 124

Polymestor, L. 331

Polyneices, L. 437 ΩΣ

Polyphemus, Cyclops, Εἰ. xlvii. 1

Polypoetes, s. of Peirithous, leader
at Troy of men from various
Thessalian towns, e.g. Olosson
and Phalanna (Hom. J1. ii. 738 ff.,
where "Ορθη-- Φάλαννα), 1.. 906

Polysperchon (Polyperchon), one
of the generals of Alexander the
Great, who in 319 B.c. was nomi-
nated by Antipater as his suc-
cessor in Macedonia(in preference
to his own son Cassander). In
816 he was driven from his king-
dom by Cassander. In 315 Anti-
gonus appointed him commander
of the Peloponnesus and Greece
was declared free. A peace was
concluded in 811 by which Greece
fell to Cassander, while Poly-
sperchon was confined to some
towns in Peloponnesus. Later
he was induced by Antigonus to
support the claim to the throne


of Macedonia of Heracles, s. of


Alexander and Barsine. He ac-
cordingly invaded Macedonia but
accepted the proposal of Cas-
sander to divide the kingdom of
Macedonia, with an independent
army and dominion in Pelopon-
nesus. Thereupon he assassin-
ated Heracles (309 B.c.). He is
the ‘“‘ Tymphaean dragon” of l.. 801

Polyxena, ἃ. of Priam and Hecabe,
sister of Cassandra, L. 314; she
was sacrificed by Neptolemus at
the grave of Achilles, L. 323 ff.,
her throat being cut with a knife
which Peleus had received from
Hephaestus.


vee Ce


INDEX


Polyxo, mt. of Actorion, C. vi. 78
Pontus Euxeinos: the expression
κακόξεινος κλυδών, L. 1286, refers
to the old name of the Black
Sea, πόντος afevvos. The name is
said to have been changed to
evée.vos either after the voyage
of the Argonauts, or after Hera-
acles’ expedition against the
Amazons or after the foundation
of the Milesian colonies. Pind.
P, iv. 208, has ἐπ᾽ ᾿Αξείνον στόμα
(he is speaking of the Argonauts),
but Ν. iv. 49 Εὐξείνῳ πελάγει
Porceus, one of the two snakes
_ (Porceus and Chariboea) which
came from Calydnae and kilied
Laocoon and one of his two sons.
The story was told by Arctinus
in his Iliupersis, L. 347
Poseidon, C. iii. 50, iv. 101, 271, vi.
98, helps Apollo to build walls
of Troy, L. 522, 617; carries off


Pelops, L. 157 ; destroys Locrian -


Aias, L. 390ff.; f. of Proteus,
L. 125; Cycnus, L. 237 ; Theseus,
L. 1324; cult-names, Aegaeon,
L135 ; Amoebeus, L. 617 ; Amphi-
baeus, L. 749; Enipeus, L. 722;
Hippegetes, L. 767; Melanthus,
L. 767; Naumedon, L. 157; Pro-
phantus, L. 522; Phemius, L.
1324; Lord of Cromna, L. 522

Poseidon, the stars of, A. 756.
The scholiast’s interpretation
seems to be correct : ‘‘ The stars
of Poseidon are those which show
forth storms and fair weather ;
the stars of Zeus are those which
indicate weather suitable for agri-
eulture.” Cf. Avien. 1377 ff.:
**Hic est fons, unde et deduxit
tempora lunae Navita cum lon-
gum facili rate curreret aequor,
Et cum ruris amans telluri farra
parenti Crederet; ingenti petat
haec indagine semper Seu qui
vela salo, seu qui dat semina
terrae”

Poseidon, Cape of Poseidon near
Poseidonia (Paestum). L. 722

Potamus, Flumen, The River, 5.
constellation, A. 358, 589, 600, ~
624, 728; also called Eridanus,


A. 360. Cicero calls it Eridanus
(“‘Eridanum cernes ... funes-
tum magnis cum viribus amnem”)
and adopts the legend that it
represents the tears of Phaéthon’s
sisters ; Germanicus, 361, calls
it Amnis and follows the same
legend; Avienus, 780, calls it
Flumen but refers to the Auso-
nians of old who call it Eridanus

- and to the Phaéthon legend.

Practis, unkuown place in Epirus.
Some take it to mean Acro-
ceraunium. Holzinger thinks
Practis =avenger = Erinys and
that Elephenor built a shrine
to her, beside which he built his
ci


Praxandrus leads Laconians of
a from Troy to Cyprus,
. 586


Priam, Εἰ, 115

Problastus= Dionysus, L. 577

Procris, d. of Erechtheus, w. of
Cephalus, companion of Artemis,
C. iii. 209

Procyon, Canis Minor or in par-
ticular a Canis Minoris. So
called because it rises nearly a-
fortnight before Cyon, The Dog,
Canis Major, A. 450, 595, 690

Proetus, King of Argos, s. of Abas;
driven from Argos by his twin-
brother Acrisins he went to
Lycia and married Sthenoboea ;
returning to Peloponnesus he
became king of Tiryns. Founds
two shrines to Artemis when his
daughters were healed of their
madness, C. iii. 232

Promantheus=Zeus, L. 537

ae s. of Asia, L. 1283, I. 8,

- 24

Pronians, the suitors of Penelope,
so called from t. in Cephallenia
(Προνναῖοι, Thue. ii. 30, ἸΤρώνη-
gos, Strabo 455), L. 791 :

Prophantus, by-name of Poseidon
at Thurii, L. 522

Protesilaus, s. of Iphiclus, leader
of Thessalians in Trojan War,
first to leap ashore at Troy, killed
by Hector; tomb at Mazusia,
L. 530 ff. In answer to the


637


INDEX


prayers of his wife Laodameia
(or Polydora) he was allowed to
return for a short space to the
upper world

Proteus, s. of Poseidon, comes
from his home in Egypt to Pal-
lene (Phlegra) in Chalcidice,
marries Torone and has by her
two sons, Tmolus and Telegonus,
who kill strangers by compelling
them to ἃ wrestling - match.
Proteus prays his father Poseidon
to convey him by a path beneath
the sea to Egypt. When his sons
were slain by Heracles, he could
neither be wholly glad nor wholly
sorry—neither smile nor weep.
He gives to Paris a phantom in
place of the real Helen, L. 115 ff.

Prothoiis, s. of Tenthredon of Pal-
authra, shipwrecked in Libya,


Protrygeter, Vindemiator, The Vin-
tager, star on the right wing of
{Virgo, A. 188. Its rising in
August was the herald of ap-
proaching vintage; “ΧΙ. Kal.
Sept. Caesari et Assyriae stella,


quae Vindemitor (Ov. F. iii. 407) -


appellatur, exoriri mane incipit
vindemiae maturitatem promit-
tens” (Plin. N.H. xviii. 74)

Prylis, 5. of Hermes and Issa, g.g.s.
of Atlas, a Lesbian seer who
foretold the capture of Troy by
the wooden horse, L. 222

Psylla, one of the mares of Oeno-
maus, L. 166

Pterelaus, f. of Comaetho, leader
of the Taphians, defeated by
Amphitryon, L. 934

Ptolemais tribe, E. xii. 3

Ptolemy, i.e. Ptolemy II. Phila-
delphus, s. of Ptolemy I. Soter
and Berenice, King of Egypt,
285-247 B.c. He was born in Cos
(308 B.c.), C. iv. 188. Married
(1) Arsinoé, d. of Lysimachus of
Thrace; (2) his sister Arsinoé,


Q.V.
Ptoios, Apollo, from his temple on
Mt. Ptodn in Boeotia, L. 265,


352
Pylades, s. of Strophius, king of
638


Phocis, companion of Orestes,
EK. lx. 6

Pylaia, by-name of Demeter, E.
xLed


Pylatis, by-name of Athena, L, 356

Pyramus, r. in Cilicia, L. 489

Pyriphlegethon, stream from hot
springs at Cumae, L. 699

Pyronaean (mss. _ Pyranthian)
glades ; in Locris, L, 1149

Pythia, I. 1. 222

Pytho, old name of Delphi, C. ii.
35, 100, 250, iv. 90


Ram, The, Crius, Aries, the first
sign of the Zodiac, A. 225, 238,
357, 515, 516, 549, 709, 713

Rhaecelus, t. on Thermaic gulf,
L. 1236

Rhamnusian, epithet of Helen, C.
iii, 232

Rhea, ©. 10ff.; in Thebes, L.
1196 ff., where she hurls her
predecessor Eurynome into
Tartarus

Rhegium, F. 59

ay ope harbour in Ithaca, L.

68

Rheithymnia, t. in Crete, L. 76

Rhipaean, F. 68

Rhodian, E. 1. 2

Rhoecus, a Centaur, C. iii. 221

Rhoeo, g.d. of Dionysus, m. of
Anius by Apollo, g.m. of the
Oenotropi, L. 570 ff.

Rhoeteia, d. of Thracian king
Sithon, buried at Rhoeteum in
Troad, L. 583, 1161 :

Rhoeteum, prom. in Troad, L.

61


Rhyndacus, r. in Mysia and Phry-
gia, Argonauts draw water from
it, L. 1364

River, The, a8. constellation. See
Eridanus and Potamus


Salangi, L. 1058

Salmydessus, L. 186, 1286

Salpe, ‘‘lake in Italy” schol.; some
identify it with Salapia, a t. in
Daunia, L. 1129

Salpians, L. 1361, according to
some=the Alps according to


INDEX


others = Salyes (Strabo 184,
etc.


Salpinx= Athena, L. 915, 986

Samos, formerly called Parthenia,
C. iv. 49; Samians, Εἰ. xviii. 2;
the Samian, E. vii. 1=Creo-
phylus, s. of Astycles, an ancient
epic poet of Samos (Strabo, 638) ;
the 8. xlix. 4= Dionysus

Samothrace, island 5. of Thrace;
‘*Samothracian gods,” Εἰ. xlviii.
3=the Cabiri (Samothraces di,
Varro, L.L. v. 58; ‘‘magnaque
Threicia sacra reperta Samo,” Ov.
A.A. ii. 602). See Saos

sere A> Acanthus, s. of Dicon, E.


xi.

Saos, old name of Samothrace, L.
78, where it is called the founda-
tion of the Cyrbantes=Cory-
bantes =Cabiri

Sarapis (Serapis), Egyptian deity,
E. xxxviii. 3

Saraptia—Europa, ἃ. of Phoenix,
ae Sarepta, t. in Phoenicia,


. L. 1800
Sardis, capital of Lydia, C. iii. 246,
1. 172


Sardo=Sardinia, C. iv. 21; in L.
796 Σαρδωνικῆς seems to be
**Sardinian.” .

Saronic gulf, between Sunium and
Scyllaeum on the Isthmus of
Corinth, C. iv. 42

Sarpedon, s. of Zeus and Europa,
L.' 1284

Satnios, hill in Caria, L. 1890

Satrachus, r. in Cyprus, L. 448

Saunii = Savvtrac=Samnites, L.
1254

Saviour. See Soter

Scaean Gates, of Trov, L. 774

Scamander, f. of Taucer, g.f. of
Arisba, L. 1304 ff.

Scandeia, haven of Cythera (Hom.
Il. x. 268), L. 108

Scapaneus= Heracles, L. 652

Scarpheia, t. in Locris (Scarphe,
Hom. I. ii. 532), L. 1147

Schedius, Ὁ. of Epistrophus, 5. of
Iphitus and g.s. of Naubolus, L.
1067

Schoineis= Aphrodite, L. 832

Sciastes= Apollo, L. 562


Scolus, t. in Boeotia (Hom. 17, ii.
497), L. 646

Scopadae, E, 2

Scorpius, Scorpio, The Scorpion,
8th sign of the Zodiac, A. 85,
304, 307, 403, 488, 506, 545, 635,
643, 667

Scyletria= Athena, L. 853

Seylla,; L. 45, 669, F. 49

Seyrus, L. 185, 277, 1324

Seythia, C. iii. 174, 256

Selenaea, Εἰ. vi. 2

Seriphos, one of the Cyclades, L.
844 f,


Setaea, Trojan captive who with
her fellow captives set fire to
some of the Greek ships on the
way from Troy and was bound
to a rock (Setaeum) near Crathis,
where she was devoured by sea-
birds (other versions of the legend
in Strabo 264, Plut. Rom. 1, Aet.
Rom. 6), L. 1075 ff.

Sibyl, d. of Dardanus and Neso,
d. of Teucer; the Erythraean
=Cumaean Sibyl, L. 1145; her
cave at Cumae, L. 1278 ff.
Another name for the Cumaean
Sibyl is Melancraira (Arist. De
mir, ause. 95), L. 1464

Sicanian, properly of the Sicani in
Sicily, but used for Sicilian in
general (Lycophron has _ not
Σικελοί nor Σικελία), L. 870, 951,
1029 (in all cases with first
syllable long), C. iii. 57 (with
first syllable short, Τρινακίη
Σικανῶν ἕδος)

Sidonians, A. 44

Silarus. See Laris

Simois, r. in Troad, C. v. 19

Simone, E. xxxix. 2

Simus, E. xlix. 1

Sinis, L. 982

Sinon, s. of Aesimus (or Sisyphus),
b. of Anticleia, m. of Odysseus
by Laertes or Sisyphus, and
hence cousin of Odysseus, L.


344 ff.

Sirens, L. 671, 712

Siris, L. 978

Sirius, a Canis Majoris, The Dog-
star, A. 332, 340. It has been
supposed that in Archiloch. fr.


639


INDEX


61, Hesiod, W. 585, S. 397, by
Sirius is meant the Sun and so
ἀκτὶς Σειρία, L. 397 is interpreted
of the rays of the Sun

Sisyphus, L. 344, 980, 1030


Sithon, King of Thrace, f. of
Rhoeteia, L. 583, 1161, Pallene
and Phyllis


Sithonia: Sithonian giants, L. 1857
=the Pelasgians who are said to
have come from Thessaly to
found Agylla (Strabo 220).

Smintheus, L. 1806

Smyrna, E. vi. 12

Soli, t. in Cilicia, native town of
Aratus, who is hence called ὁ
Σολεύς, ἘΠ. xxix. 3

Sopolis, s. of Diocleides, Εἰ. xix. 2

Soter, (1) Saviour, as a title’of the
Ptolemies, C. iv. 166; (2)=
Dionysus, L. 2

Southern Crown. See Crown

Sparta, C. ii. 72, 74

Sparti, L. 1206

Spercheius=r. in 8S. Thessaly, L.
1146

Spermo. See Oenotropi

Sphaltes= Dionysus, L. 207


Spheceia, old name of Cyprus -


(from Spheces ‘* wasps,” the old
name of the Cyprians), L. 447
Sphinx, monster in shape of a
young woman with breast, feet
and claws of a lion, sent by Hera
to afflict the Thebans. She pro-
posed riddles and devoured the
people when they were not

solved, L. 7, 1465

Stachus, Spica, The Corn-ear, a
Virginis, A. 97 ἷ

Stephanus. See Crown

Sterope, a Pleiad,; A. 263

Steropes, one of. the Cyclopes, C.
iii. 68.

Stheneia= Athena, L. 1164

Sthenelus, s."of Capaneus, buried
near Colophon, L. 433

Strophia, r. at Thebes, ἃ, of
Ismenus, C. iv. 76.

Strymon, r. in Thrace, on which
was Hion, L. 417, with cult of
Hecate, L. 1178; hence Stry-
tae ον πῆρες of Boreas, C.
iv. 26


640


Stymphaea, t. in Epirus, hence
Stymphaean, v.l., C. iii. 178

Stymphalus, in N.E. Arcadia,
hence Stymphalian, v.l., C. iii.


178
Styx, ©. i. 36, L. 705 ff.


Sunium, 8.E. promontory of Attica, |


C. iv. 47

Symplegades, ‘‘ Clashing Rocks” at
entrance to the Black Sea, also
called Planetae or ‘‘ wandering”
rocks, L. 1285

Syrtis, the lesser Syrtis, dangerous
bay on N. Coast of Africa, L. 648


Taenarum, Cape Matapan in
Laconia, near it, entrance to
Hades, L. 90, 1106

Tamassus, t. in Cyprus, famous for
metal work, L. 854

Tanagra, also called Graia (Strabo
403, Paus. x. 20. 2); and Poi-
mandria (from Poimandrus, Paus.
l.c.), L. 326

Tanais, the river Don flowing into
Lake Maeotis (Sea of Azoy), L.

88


12

Tantalus, f. of Pelops, L. 53, served
up his son as food for the gods,
L. 152 ff.

Taraxippus. See Ischenus

Tarchon, s. of Telephus, King of
Mysia, b. of Tyrsenus, mythical
founder of Tarquinii, L. 1248

Tartarus, L. 1197

Tartessus=(1) the Guadalquiver,
(2) town at mouth of that river,
of fabulous wealth, L. 643

Taucheira, t. in Cyrenaica, L. 877

Tauri, Scythian people of the
Tauric Chersonuese (Crimea),
where human sacrifice was made
to Artemis, C. iii. 174, ef L.


Zodiac, A. 167, 174, 177, 322, 515,
517, 549, 713 f.
Taygete, a Pleiad, A. 263
Taygeton (-os), mt. in Laconia, C.
iii. 188
Tegyra, t. in Boeotia, L. 646
Teiresias, s. of Everes and Chariclo,
famous Theban seer. who was


«tii “wi


INDEX


struck with blindness by Ar-
temis, C. v. 59, 75, L. 682 f.

Telamon, s. of Aeacus, f. of Aias (1),
Teucrus and Trambelus ; having
slain his brother Phocus, he left
Aegina for Salamis of which he
became king. He accompanied
Heracles when he went to attack
Troy and obtained from him
Hesione as his prize, L. 450 ff.

Telamus, r. in Scythia (=Tanais ὃ),
L. 1333


_ Telchines, C. iv. 31, Ait. iii. 1. 65
Telegonus, (1)s. of Proteus, L. 124;

©, ᾿: of Odysseus and Circe, L.
95 ff.


Telemachus, L. 809 ᾿
Telephus, King of Mysia, f. of Tar-
chon and Tyrsenus, L. 207, 1246

Telestorides, Ait. i. 6

Telphusa or Thelpusa, on the
Ladon in Arcadia, worship of
Demeter Erinys, L. 1040, Εἰ, 62

Temenus, g.g.s. of Heracles (Her-
acles, Hyllus, Cleodaius, Aristo-
machus, Temenus) and ancestor
of Alexander the Great, L. 804

Temesa, t. in Bruttium, L. 1067

Temmices, a people of Boeotia, L.
644, hence = Boeotian, L. 786

Tempe, C. iv. 105, I. 1. 230, 252

Tenedus, island off the Troad. Its
earlier name was Leucophrys, L.
346, its later name being from
Tennes, L. 229 ff. Thence the
Greeks receive Sinon’s beacon
signal, L. 344 ff.

Tenerus, s. of Apollo and Melia,
priest of Ptoian Apollo in Boeotia,
ΤΠ. 1211

Tennes and Hemithea, L. 232 ff.

Tenthredon, of Palauthra in Thes-
salian Magnesia, f. of Prothoiis,
L. 899

Tereina, t. on the Ocinarus in
Bruttium founded by Tereina, a
favourite of Ares, L. 726 ff.,
1008 ff.

Termieus= Zeus, L. 706

Termintheus= Apollo, L. 1207

Tethys, a Titanid, wife of Oceanus,
L. 231, C. iii. 44, iv. 17, m. of the
Moirai (Fates) (here called “AAs),
L. 145, τη. of Achelotis and so σ΄ τὴ.


Ae


of Sirens, L. 712. Metonymy for
**Sea,” L. 1069

Teucri, C. iii. 231

Teucrus, (1) s. of Telamon and
Hesione, h.b. of Aias, L. 450 ff. ;
(2) s. of Scamandrus and Idaia,
leads the Teucri from Crete to
Troy, fights with field mice which
devoured his army’s weapons,
L. 1306. His ἃ. Arisba marries
Dardanus, and so Teucrus_ be-
comes ancestor of the Trojan
royal house, L. 1306 ff.

Teutarus, L, 56, 458, 917

Thales, (1) Εἰ. lviii. 1; (2) I. 1. 115,

᾽ ΕΣ

Thaumas, 5. of Oceanus and Gaia,
f. of Iris, C. iv. 67, 232

Theaetetus, E. ix. 1

Thebes, L. 433, 602, 1194

Theiodamas, C., iii. 161

Thelpusa. See Telphusa

Themis, L. 129, 137

Themiscyra, t. in Pontus at mouth
of the Thermodon, home of the
Amazons, L, 1330

Thenae, t. in Crete near Cnossus,
C. i. 42 1,

Theocritus, Εἰ. liii. 1

Theogenes, Att. i.1,21 .

Theoinus= Dionysus, L. 1247

Theotimus, E. xlii, 5

Thera, C. ii. 78, 75 (bis), The leader
of the Spartan colony to Thera
was Theras, s. of Autesion, s. of
Tisamenus, s. of Thersandrus, s.
of Polyneices, s. of Oedipus, hence
ἕκτον γένος Οἰδιπόδαο, C. ii. 74

Therapna (Therapnae), village in
Laconia with temple of the Dios-
curi, L. 586 ff.

Theris, Εἰ. xiii. 2

Therium, Bestia, Fera, The Beast,
8. constellation, A. 442, 662

Thermodon, (1) r. in Pontus, near
which dwell the Amazons, L.
1234; (2) r. in Bosotia near
Tanagra, tributary of Asopus
(Paus. ix. 19. 4), L. 647

Thermydron, harbour of Lindos in
Rhodes, L. 924 ‘

Thersites, s. of Agrius, an Aetolian,
the ugliest man at Troy (Hom. JI,
ii. 212 ff.), L. 1000


641


INDEX


Theseus, C. iv. 308, 318, H. i. 1,
1, 274, f. of Acamas, L. 494,

s. of Aegeus or Poseidon and
Aethra, α, of Pittheus of Troezen.
When Aegeus left Aethra he hid
his sword, shoes, and girdle under
a rock (Callim. Hec. fr. 66) as
anagnorismata which Theseus,
when he grew up, should bring
to him in Athens and thereby be
recognized, L. 494 ff., 1322 ff. He
was one of the five husbands of
Helen, L. 148, 147, 505, and, ac-
cording to one version, Iphigeneia
was d. of Theseus and Helen, L.
103. He accompanied Heracles
against the Amazons, L. 1327-40 ;
died and was buried in Scyrus,
L. 1324 ff.

Thespiae, t. in Boeotia,; C. v. 60;
Thespians, A. 223

Thesprotians, L. 1441

Thessaly, C. iv. 103, 109, 140, E.
xxxii. 1, Ait. i. 1. 24

Thetis, d. of Nereus and Doris, L.
861, sister of Nesaia, L. 399; she
helped Zeus when Poseidon and
Athena wanted to bind him, L.
400. She married Peleus to whom
she bore six sons whom she killed
in infancy by putting them in fire
to test their immortality ; the
seventh, Achilles, was saved by
Peleus, L. 179. Mourns the early
death of Achilles, C. ii. 20; ef. Τὰ.
240, 274, 857. A mixing-bowl
which she received from Bacchus
serves as urn for the ashes of
Achilles, L. 273. Buries the
Locrian Aias, L. 398. Metonymy
for ‘‘ Sea,” L. 22

Thigros, t. in Caria, L. 1390

Thoas of Aetolia, s. of Andraemon
and Gorge. _ At the request of
Odysseus, Thoas scourged Odys-
seus to enable him to enter Troy
asaspy, L. 779 ff. After the fall of
Troy he goes with Nireus to Libya,
Epeirus, and Illyria, L. 1011 ff.

Thoraios= Apollo, L, 352

Thracian, C. iii. 114, iv. 63, A. 355
(Boreas) ; Thracian drinking, Ait.

ag) Pye: tgs δ

Thrambus, t. in Pallene, L. 1405


642


Thrascias, N.N.W. wind, 4L.°925)
Thraso= Athena, L. 986. ὃ


Thronion, (1) t. in Epeius, ar 1045; +


(2) t. in Locris, L. 1148

Thuria= Demeter, L. 153

Thysai = Thystades = Thyiades,
female Bacchants, L. 106

Thyterion, Ara, The Altar; S. con-
stellation, A. 404, 408, 434, 440,
692, 710

Tilphusius= Apollo, L. 562,, from
his sanctuary at Tilphossa near
Haliartus in Boeotia

Timarchus, E. xii. 1

Timodemus, Εἰ. xl. 3 :

Timon, Εἰ. iii. 1, 5. of Echecratides,
Κολλυτεύς, famous misanthrope
towards end of fifth century B.c.

Timonoé, E. xvii. 1

Timotheus, E. xvii. 2

Tiphys, s. of Agnius, from Tiphae
(Siphae) near Thespia, was pilot
of the Argo, L. 890

Tiryns, t. in Argolis, native town
of Amphitryon, hence Heracles,
C. iii. 146, is Τιρύνθιος ἄκμων

ὌΝ = Tethys, L: 281, C. iv.


1
_ Titans, C. iv. 174


Titaron, t. in Thessaly, home of
Mopsus, L. 881

Titarus, mt. in Thessaly, L. 904

Tithonus, s. of Laomedon and
Strymo or Rhoeo, and thus half-
brother of Priam (s. of Laomedon
and Leucippe). On account of
his beauty he was carried off by
Kos to Aethiopia, obtaining the
gift of immortality but not
eternal youth, L. 18 ff.

Tito=Hos, L. 941

Titon, mt. in Thrace,!L. 1406

Titonian, L. 1276

Tityus, s. of Gaia, giant who in-
sulted Leto'(or Artemis herself),
and was slain by Artemis, C.
iii. 110

Tmarus (Tomarus), hill near Do-
dona in Thesprotia (Hesychius
mentions a Tmarion hill in
Arcadia), OC. vi. 52

Tmolus, (1) mt. in Lydia, L. 1351,
I. 1, 201; (2) 5. of Proteus and
Torone, L. 124


4 ἀφ΄
Ἐν δ


INDEX


Torone, wife of Proteus, «after
whom is named Torone in Chal-
cidice, L. 115

Toxeuter or Toxotes, Sagittarius,
The Archer, 9th zodiacal sign,
A. 306, 400, 506, 547, 665, 673

Toxon, the bow of the preceding,
A. 301, 305, 506, 621, 628, 664,
665, 965

Trachis, t. founded by Heracles at
foot of Mt. Oeta, L. 905

Trambelus, s. of Telamon and
Hesione (?) or another, and so
brother or half-brother of Teu-

* erus, L. 467

Trampya, t. in Epeirus with oracle
of Odysseus, L. 800

Traron, L. 1158

Tricephalus= Hermes, L. 650

Trimorphus= Hecate, L. 1176

Trinacia or Trinaeria, old name of
Sicily from its three promon-
tories (ἄκραι), C. iii. 57; also
called τρέδειρος, L. 966

Triopas, the stemma is:

Aeolus


Poseidon—Canace
Triopas


Erysichthon
Triopas was king in Thessaly, C.
vi. passim, L. 1388 ff. See Ery-
sichthon
Tripodiscus, Ait. i. 10
Triptolemus, C. vi. 22
Triton, s. of Poseidon and Amphi-
trite, and so g.s. of Nereus, L.
34, 886, 892. Metonym.=Nile, L.
119, 576, Ait. i. 5
Tritonis Limne, lake in Cyrenaica.
Triton shows the Argonauts the
way out of it to the sea and
- receives a mixing - bowl from
Medeia as reward, L. 886 ff.
Troezen, t. in Argolis, C. iv. 41,
# cult of Aphrodite, L. 612
Troilus, L. 807-818, F. 115
Tropaia = Hera as goddess of
victory, L. 1328


Trychai or Trychas, mt. in Euboea,
L. 374


Tunic, Artemis of the. See Chitone

Tydeus, s. of Oineus, f. of Diomede,
L. 1066

Tylesian hills, unidentified hills in
Italy, L. 993

Tymphaea, district in Epirus, L.
802, C. iii. 178 (υ.1.)

Tymphrestus, mt. in W. Thessaly,
L. 420, 902

Tyndareus, s. of Oebalus, L. 1125,
husband of Leda, f. of Helen,
Clytaemnestra, and the Dioscuri

Tyndaridae, Εἰ. lvii. 8

Typhoeus or Typhon, a giant, f. by
Echidna, L. 1358, of the dog
Orthrus, Chimaera, etc. His
lair in Cilicia, L. 825, buried
under Pithecusa, L. 688 - 693;
Achilles is called the Pelasgian
Typhon, L. 177

Typhon’s wife= Echidna, L. 1353

Tyrrhenian Sea, L. 715, 1085

Tyrsenus, L. 1351 ff.

Twins, The. See Didymi


Umbrians, L. 1360

Upis, (1) d. of Boreas, C. iv. 292;
(2) by-name of Artemis, C. iii.
204, 240

Uranidae, sons of Uranus, C. i. 3

Uranus, mutilated by Cronus, L.
869


Xanthus, r. and t. in Lycia, C. iv.
305


Xene= Aphrodite, L. 832
Xenomedes, Ait. iii. 1. 54
Xerxes, King of Persia, L. 1413
Xiphephorus, sword - bearer =
emeter, L. 153
Xuthidai, sons of Xuthus, f. of Ion
and Achaius, hence Ionians, L.


Zarax, husband of Rhoeo, step-
father of Anius, L. 580; hill in
Euboea, L. 378

Zephyrium, Εἰ, vi. 1

Zephyrus, the W. wind, C. ii. 82

Zerynthia, of Zerynthus in Samo-
thrace, (1) = Aphrodite, L. 449,
958 ; (2)=Hecate, L. 1178

Zerynthus, t. in Samothrace, L. 77


643


INDEX


Zethus, s. of Zeus and Antiope, b. Zeus,


“passim
of Amphion. He and Amphion |; Zodiac, The, A. 544, where for
built the walls of Thebes, ωΐδιον of all mss. and ΕΜ. 58.υ.


Amphion moving the stones to oss conjectured fwidier,
their places by the music of his Arist, Meteor. i. 6, i. 8, ete.
ap thus by sheer strength, | Zosterius=Apollo, L. 1278


THE END


Printed by R. & R. Crark, Limirep, Edinburgh.


Cf.


seas


a ον fick iy ete Υ


a


from th
the anci


of the uf Ἂ

, Ξ 4 φ
κύκλος ὁ δα 1 |

oe) Ee - a Fei S RI
TOU opiCe. te ad


Bavopevoe~ :


jo!
ἀνατολὴν %


στρεφόμε


. Ρ le a — % = is Ὁ : ;
ae nS. ni lke Yani


er nd


τὴν τοῦ |


ἥλιος τὴν


[μ....-.-


esos


ἥλιος θες =


om the edition of Aratus by Buhle, Leipxig 1801 who took
of Eratosthenes.


. 7 2 es
i, "δῇς. τὰ Ss ee > <
ἔων 8 Fm RS eee hae νὰ — ate Tees) eo “- el Υ -
> 5 τ τ oe “.- JS) ᾿ ᾿ τω. se oe : . .
a < = . αὐ γον, Ee be 7 7 ἐ ᾿
γα ν - τῷ ὁ. ᾿ o~ . Se Γ j ace ee ἵν Ε
"" ᾿ Em a - + ἃ“ " > 7 M7
᾿ς ae — - 1a δ ς ἂν. ἡ 3 Ἔν ς
. “ ᾿ << »» ἤν -" - σ᾽ “ Σ - =)
7 £ - ν "Ἢ " “. νυ» "
> Ὁ ΄ . "] , , Γ ri
Ν x r ~ “ » ἫΝ - κ J - ᾽ 4
3 = ‘ ἐν ᾿ 4 δ 7 at SP « ἔῃ
4 3 ist ¥ a Ἢ ; ; s -
- > - yy .
a ¢ 4 a ΄ -
ι Pa wi ᾿- Ἢ ; - :
*
.: > "Ἢ e
> . νυ a - )
” r ᾿ ~ >
a 9 “ ~
᾿ ῦ q >
bs ° ie 7 μόνε - 2 - A
Ι . " 5 as x f “4 - γέ Ἂ
- "αα, ω ΕἼ - . "᾿ . ᾿ ᾿
- “ m1 =~ "»,., % « q.- -
Ξ Dig’ - 7s ies
! -
ἀν «Ὁ ἐς Ὁ ω Ν ,
᾿ ‘ : ~ ᾿ς Ὦ ἊΣ j -
; ἃ Ν tbs - “
C 2 ΝΕ lied = ὰ ὩΣ σ΄. ῃ .
Γ = = 2 » Ε
< ~~ = fan ἵ
‘ - nd an δὲ a so a ” . J .
es t = 5 ἂ 5
« sok 4 e
“ 8 q =
. i 5 cs ἐν τς ᾿
γ᾽. ᾿ - rs
5 ῃ a _ = = <— 4 = ¢ P
᾿ ‘ ἃ ; ‘ ι ν᾿
-- 5 ι ~ ν > 1 =
; = 4
" J “ ᾿ .
Η τῇ 4 ~ A :
Ἂν
> ;
»» »" 4 *
“ --ἠ
»* = - >
- “ i < Ὁ
~* f re x ~ ᾿
- 2 ἢ
a: ἶ : t
ἂν
‘a : - “ἢ
ᾧ "Ὁ ὃς Ρ Ἷ
πω πὸ ἅν 6 Ad a. ee
Pp — Cope τῷ τα. -ν-- 5ι:- “Ὁ: ε
fog eee 4 τῇ ᾿
> fe. tao « a >. -
a Α - - ν * Ἢ
Is, Ee ato 5 = .


Ae qualor


\
τὴν Pace


μοι


= a - .
a ee cee wy pte ὅν


THE LOEB CLASSICAL
LIBRARY.


VOLUMES ALREADY PUBLISHED.


Latin Authors.


APULEIUS. The Golden Ass (Metamorphoses). Trans. by W. Adlington
(1566). Revised by 8. Gaselee. (2nd Impression.)

AUSONIUS. Trans. by H. 6. Evelyn White. 2 Vols. Vol. I.

BOETHIUS: TRACTS AND DE CONSOLATIONE PHILOSOPHIAE.
Trans. by Rev. H. F. Stewart and E. K. Rand.

CAESAR: CIVIL WARS. Trans. by A. G. Peskett.

CAESAR: GALLIC WAR. Trans. by H. J. Edwards. (2nd Impression.)

CATULLUS. Trans. by F. W. Cornish; TIBULLUS. . Trans. by J. P.
Postgate; and PERVIGILIUM VENERIS. Trans. by J. W. Mackail.
(4th Impression.)

CICERO: DE FINIBUS. Trans. H. Rackham. (2nd Impression.)

CICERO: DE OFFICIIS. Trans. by Walter Miller. (2nd Impression.)

CICERO: LETTERS TO ATTICUS. Trans. by E. O. Winstedt.
8 Vols. (Vol. I. 3rd Impression. Vol. II. 2nd Impression.)

CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTINE. Trans. by W. Watts (1681).
2 Vols, (2nd Impression.) :

FRONTO: CORRESPONDENCE. Trans. by C. R. Haines. 2 Vols.

HORACE: ODES AND EPODES. Trans. by C. E. Bennett. (3rd
Impression.)

JUVENAL AND PERSIUS. Trans. by G. G. Ramsay. (2nd Impression.)

LIVY. Trans. by B. O. Foster. 13 Vols. Vol. I.

MARTIAL. Trans. by W. C. Ker. 2 Vols.

OVID: HEROIDES AND AMORES. Trans. by Grant Showerman. (2nd
Impression.)

OVID: METAMORPHOSHS. Trans. by F. J. Miller. 2 Vols. (Vol. I.
2nd Impression.)

PETRONIUS. Trans. by M. Heseltine; SENECA: APOCOLOCYN-
TOSIS. Trans. by W. H. Ὁ. Rouse. (37d Impression.)

PLAUTUS. Trans. by Paul Nixon. 5 Vols. Vols. I. and II.

PLINY: LETTERS. Melmoth’s Translation revised by W. M. L.
Hutchinson. 2 Vols.

PROPERTIUS. Trans. by H. E. Butler. (2nd Impression.)

QUINTILIAN. Trans. by H. E. Butler. 4 Vols. Vols. I. and II.

SALLUST. Trans. by J. C. Rolfe.

SENECA: EPISTULAE MORALES. Trans. by R. M. Gummere.
3 Vols. Vols. I. and II.


THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY.


SENECA: TRAGEDIES.1 Trans. by F. J. Miller. 2;Vols.

SUETONIUS. Trans. by J. C. Rolfe. 2 Vols. (2nd Impression.)

TACITUS: DIALOGUS. Trans. by Sir Wm. Peterson; and AGRICOLA
AND GERMANIA. Trans. by Maurice Hutton. (2nd Impression.)

TERENCE. Trans. by John Sargeaunt. 2 Vols. (3rd Impression.)

VIRGIL. Trans. by H. R. Fairclough. 2 Vols. (Vol. I. 2nd Impression.)


Greek Authors.


ACHILLES TATIUS. Trans. by 8. Gaselee.

AESCHINES. Trans. by C. Ὁ. Adams.

APOLLONIUS RHODIUS. Trans. by R. C. Seaton. (2nd Impression.)

THE APOSTOLIC FATHERS. Trans. by Kirsopp Lake. 2 Vols.
(Vol. I. 3rd Impression. Vol. II. 2nd Impression.)

APPIAN’S ROMAN HISTORY. Trans. by Horace White. 4 Vols.

CALLIMACHUS AND LYCOPHRON. Trans. by A. W. Mair. ARATUS.

. Trans. by G. R. Mair, ᾿

CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA. Trans. by Rey. G. W. Butterworth.

DAPHNIS AND CHLOE. Thornley’s Translation revised by J. M.
Edmonds ; and PARTHENIUS. Trans. by &. Gaselee,

DIO CASSIUS: ROMAN HISTORY. Trans. by Εἰ. Cary. 9 Vols.
Vols. I. to VI.

EURIPIDES. Trans. by A. 5. Way. 4 Vols. (Vols. I. and IL. 8rd
Impression. Vols. III. and IV. 2nd Impression.)

GALEN: ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES. Trans. by A. J. Brock.

THE GREEK ANTHOLOGY. Trans. by W. R. Paton. 5 Vols. (Vols.
I. and II. 2nd Impression.)

THE GREEK BUCOLIC POETS (THEOCRITUS, BION, MOSCHUS).
Trans. by J. M. Edmonds. (3rd Impression.)

HERODOTUS. Trans. by A. Ὁ. Godley. 14 Vols. Vols. I. and II.

HESIOD AND THE HOMERIC HYMNS. Trans. by H. G. Evelyn
White. (2nd Impression.)

HOMER: ODYSSEY. Trans. by A. T. MURRAY. 2 Vols.

JULIAN. Trans. by Wilmer Cave Wright. 3 Vols. Vols. I. and II.

LUCIAN. Trans. by A. M. Harmon. 8 Vols. Vols. I. and II. (2nd
Impression.)

MARCUS AURELIUS. Trans. by C. R. Haines.

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE. Trans. by W. H. 8.
Jones. 5 Vols. and Companion Vol, Vol. I.

PHILOSTRATUS : THE LIFE OF APOLLONIUS OF TYANA. Trans.
by F. C. Conybeare. 2 Vols. (2nd Impression.)

PINDAR. Trans. by Sir J. E. Sandys. (2nd Edition.)

PLATO: EUTHYPHRO, APOLOGY, CRITO, PHAEDO, PHAEDRUS.
Trans. by H. N. Fowler. (3rd Impression.)

PLATO: THEAETETUS, SOPHIST. Trans. by H. N. Fowler.


PLUTARCH : THE PARALLEL LIVES. Trans. by B. Perrin. 11 Vols.
Vols. I. to IX.


τς ποτ ee:


πες


ν᾿


THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY.


PROCOPIUS; HISTORY OF THE WARS. Trans. by H. B. Dewing
7 Vols. Vols. I to III.

QUINTUS SMYRNABEUS. Trans. by A. S. Way.

SOPHOCLES. Trans. by F. Storr. 2 Vols. (Vol. I. 8rd Impression.
Vol. II. 2nd Impression.)

ST. JOHN DAMASCENE: BARLAAM AND IOASAPH. Trans. by the
Rev. G. R. Woodward and Harold Mattingly.


STRABO: GEOGRAPHY. Trans. by Horace L. Jones. 8 Vols. Vol. I.


THEOPHRASTUS: ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS. Trans. by Sir Arthur
Hort, Bart. 2 Vols.


THUCYDIDES. Trans. by C. F. Smith, 4 Vols. Vols. I. and 11.
XENOPHON: CYROPAEDIA. Trans. by Walter Miller. 2 Vols.
XENOPHON: HELLENICA, ANABASIS, APOLOGY, anp SYM-
Soa Trans. by C. L. Brownson and O. J. Todd. 8. Vols. Vols.
. an R


IN PREPARATION.


Greek Authors.


AENEAS TACTICUS, ASCLEPIODOTUS anp ONESANDER, The
Tllinois Club.


AESCHYLUS, H. W. Smyth.

APOLLODORUS, Sir J. G. Frazer.

ARISTOTLE : ORGANON, St. George Stock.

a POLITICS anp ATHENIAN CONSTITUTION, Edward
‘apps.

ATHENAEUS, C. B. Gulick.

nie ebm baat DE CORONA anp MIDIAS, C. A. Vince and J. H.
ince.

DIO CHRYSOSTOM, W. E. Waters.

DIODORUS, W.S. Fox.

DIOGENES LAERTIUS, W. L. Hicks.

EPICTETUS, W. A. Oldfather.

EUSEBIUS, Kirsopp Lake.

GREEK IAMBIC AND ELEGIAC POETS, E. D. Perry.

GREEK LYRIC POETS, J. M. Edmonds.

HIPPOCRATES, W. H. 8. Jones.

HOMER: ILIAD, A. T. Murray.

ISOCRATES, G. Norlin.

LIBANIUS, Wilmer Cave Wright.

LONGINUS, W. Hamilton Fyfe.

MANETHO, 5. de Ricci.

MENANDER, F. G. Allinson.

PAPYRI, A. 8. Hunt.


“-


THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY.


PHILOSTRATUS : IMAGINES, Arthur Fairbanks.

PHILOSTRATUS anp EUNAPIUS: LIVES OF THE SOPHISTS,
Wilmer Cave Wright.

PLATO: ALCIBIADES, HIPPARCHUS, ERASTAI, THEAGES, CHAR-
MIDES, LACHES, LYSIS, EUTHYDEMUS, W. R. M. Lamb.

PLATO: LAWS, R. G. Bury.

PLATO: PARMENIDES, PHILEBUS anp CRATYLUS, H. N. Fowler.

PLATO: PROTAGORAS, GORGIAS, MENO, W. R. M. Lamb.

PLATO: REPUBLIC, Paul Shorey.

PLUTARCH : MORALIA, F. C. Babbitt.

POLYBIUS, W. R. Paton.

ST. BASIL: LETTERS, Prof. Van Den Ven.

XENOPHON : MEMORABILIA anp OECONOMICUS, E. C. Marchant.

XENOPHON : SCRIPTA MINORA, E. C. Marchant.


Latin Authors.


AMMIANUS, C.. U. Clark.
AULUS GELLIUS, 5. B. Platner.

BEDE: ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY, Rev. H. F. Stewart.
CICERO: AD FAMILIARES, E. O. Winstedt.

CICERO: DE NATURA DEORUM, H. Rackham.

CICERO: DE ORATORE, ORATOR, BRUTUS, Charles Stuttaford.


CICERO: DE SENECTUTE, DE AMICITIA, DE DIVINATIONE, W. A.
Falconer.


CLAUDIAN, M. Platnauer.

FRONTINUS: DE AQUIS anp STRATEGEMATA, C. E. Bennett.
LUCAN, 5. Reinach.

LUCRETIUS, W.-H. D. Rouse.

OVID: TRISTIA anp EX PONTO, A. L. Wheeler.
PLINY: NATURAL HISTORY, F. G. Moore.

ST. AUGUSTINE: MINOR WOR“, Rev. P. Wicksteed.
SCRIPTORES HISTORIAE AUGUSTAE, Ὁ. Mazgie.
SENECA: MORAL ESSAYS, J. W. Basore.

STATIUS, H. G. Evelyn White.

TACITUS : ANNALS, John Jackson.

TACITUS: HISTORIES, C. H. Moore.

VALERIUS FLACCUS, A. F. Scholfield.

VELLEIUS PATERCULUS, F. W. Shipley.


DESCRIPTIVE PROSPECTUS ON APPLICATION.


London . . . WILLIAM HEINEMANN.
New York - . G P. PUTNAM’S SONS.


4


ba Ps
¢


Mi
ὶ


Pay
ote =.
ἵν
Ν
᾿


bye ‘


pons Ξ


+4 way ie


+


"


wit ee ᾽ν A
get 5 ati
ΣΕΥ cn 1g -


[Pa 3612


CZ 1921 Sh


Cc
ro)
ς
ik
Ω.
re)
ia
5"
oad
Ὄ
ς
σ
”
τ
Ps
o
©
τ
@
.


”
5
uke
oot
mo 0 CO
EEO
— σ᾽)
i
“- = >
oO OL.
UUs


—-


_~


΄ ao. «dat gl ix «
ΤΣ Rane od Poe ..


αν». ners μα αν


ἘΡΒΉΗ ΠΗΡΒΗ ΜΝ


e's»


Ἐρτὶ ταν τ τς


ΤῊ ΚΑΚῊ
ane


ois ot etbrgrstotans ye’
Sou οἰν σφισι engie 04. a
ὃς


per ees)
he leds,


tafser,

f
fehetenetsstehke

eG sgt


fake pes
res
" . ‘90
ΣΡ ΝΕ τον iene


Fs the tie


(ua


BOOS
ele tel,
oi . ieiehope ἜΡΟΝ


pee
