Google


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project
to make the world’s books discoverable online.


It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country, Public domain books
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that’s often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book’s long journey from the
publisher to a library and finally to you.


Usage guidelines


Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.


We also ask that you:


+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.


+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google’s system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.


+ Maintain attribution The Google “watermark” you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.


+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can’t offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book’s appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.


About Google Book Search


Google’s mission is to organize the world’s information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world’s books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web


aifhttp: //books . google. com/|


THE


SYDENHAM SOCIETY


INSTITUTED


MDCCCXLIII


LONDON


MDCCOENT.


APETAIOY KATIMNAAOKOY


TA YQZOMENA.


THE EXTANT WORKS


ARETEUS, THE CAPPADOCIAN.


EDITED AND TRANSLATED BY


FRANCIS ADAMS, LL.D.


LONDON:
PRINTED FOR THE SYDENHAM SOCIETY.


MDCCCLVE


iy. ADVERTISEMENT,


the Society. the matters contained in the annotations are mostly
of a philological nature—nearly everything professional having
been excluded by the advice of the Council. In the present
instance, it was felt that our primary object was to supply the
profession with an improved text of the original, and a correct
translation; and that there was no necessity either for a
running commentary on every chapter, as was given in the
“Paulus"—or for claborate annotations embracing a compa-
rison of ancient with modern opinions on the various subjects
treated of, as was done in the two volumes of “ Hippocrates.”

Although the edition of Kiihn formed the basis of mine, I
have admitted the sub-division of the chapters introduced by
Wigan. In orthography and accentuation I have endeavoured
to conform to the present usage at the University Press of
Oxford, except in a few instances, when I have deviated from
it on what I conceived to be sufficient grounds.

The Index is constructed very much upon the plan of
Wigan’s, and, like it, is merely applicable to the translation.
An index to the text would have been valued by so few of
my readers, that I did not think of undertaking so very
formidable a task.

I think it my duty to acknowledge publicly, that in con-
structing the text, and in conducting the work through the
press, I have derived much assistance from my learned friend,
Professor Geddes, of King’s College, Old Aberdeen, who care-
fully examined every proof-sheet along with me, and kindly
afforded me his opinion on many important questions con-
nected with the minute structure of the Greck language.


Banchory, Aprit 2st, 1856.


THE


SYDENHAM SOCIETY


INSTITUTED


MDCCCXLIII


LONDON


MDeCeLNT.


vi THE EDITOR'S PREFACE.


the one had avoided to mention the other. It is deserving of
remark that we have a still more extraordinary example of two
contemporary authors under similar circumstances, mutually
neglecting to quote one another, in the case of two writers
who lived a short time before Galen, namely Dioscorides and
the Elder Pliny; both of whom are most voluminous and
accurate writers, and both handle the same subjects critically,
yet, as we have stated, neither of them takes the slightest
notice of the other. In this instance, indeed, there are various
circumstances which lead us to infer that the Roman writer,
who is merely a great compiler on all subjects, was indebted to
the Greek authority on the Materia Medica, and hence the
learned are pretty generally agreed that the work of Diosco-
rides must have preceded that of Pliny, although both were
productions of the same age. One thing, at least, is indis-
putable respecting them, as evel person familiar with their
productions must be convinced, that there is such a conge-
niality and accordance between their opinions on various sub-
jects which they treat of in common, that we can have no
hesitation in setting them down as authors who had lived
about the same time. And I am clearly of opinion from my


+ Tt would appear to have been
the rule in the age of Quintilian,
who lived only a short time before
Galen, for contemporary writers
not to notice one another by name,
it being probably held to be im-
possible to pass judgment on them
sine ira aut studio, Of this wo
havea notableexample in the tenth
Book of his work, where, treating
of all the great satirical poets, he
dismisses Juvenal and his other
contemporaries with the remark:
“sunt clari hodieque et qui olim
nominabuntur.” In the preceding
generation, however, the practice


would appear to have been very
different, for Virgil, Horace, Tibul-
Jas, Propertius, and Ovid, are con-
stantly mentioning one another
in terms ofthe greatest kindness,
Mwcenas seems to have possessed.
the wonderful talent of keeping up
the best feeling among the literary
worthies whom he patronised.
But there are abundant proofs in
Grecian literature that profes-
sional rivalry was even a stronger
passion in ancient than in modern
times. Sec in particular Hesiod,
Op. et Dies ; Callimachus, Hymn.
in Apoll.; and Pindar, OL ii,


-


long familiarity with the works of Galen and Areteus, that
had chosen Hippocrates for their model, and had their minds
thoroughly imbued with his opinions. Both show an inti-
mate acquaintance with the true spirit of the Platonic philo-
sophy, as manifested in the first and succeeding centuries.
Both display a great acquaintance with Sphygmology, and use
the same identical terms in describing the varied conditions of
the arterial pulse. Both possess a more intimate knowledge of
Anatomy than any of the other authorities on ancient medi-
eine. In Therapeutics, also, there is a striking coincidence
between them; and, in regard to the Materia Medica, both
not only prescribe the same simples, but also, in many instances,
the same compound medicines. Altogether, then, there is such
aconformity between both their theoretical and practical views
in their profession as we never find to exist except between
authors who lived in or about the same period. It is true
there is one striking difference between them—the one writes
modern Attic in a style worthy of Xenophon or Theophrastus,
whereas the other uses Ionic or old Attic, bearing a con-
siderable resemblance to the language of Hippocrates and
Herodotus. This, however, when attentively considered, will be
found to be a confirmation of my views regarding the identity
of the age in which the two authors in question flourished;
for it would appear to have been the practice of learned men
in the second century, from some unexplained taste, to write
sometimes in the one dialect and sometimes in the other,
Thus Arrian, who flourished in the earlier part of that cen-
tury—that is to say, immediately before Galen—although in
most of his historical and philosophical works he uses very
pure Attic, has made use of Ionic, or at least a modified imita-
tion of it, in one of his works, the Indica, In like manner


his contemporary Lucian, whose general style ia chaste and
b2


vill THE EDITOR'S PREFACE. ~


elegant Attic, has left among his books two tracts written in
the Tonic dialect, namely de dea Syria and de Astrologia. In
the same way we can account for a difference between the
practice of our two authors in regard to the class of poets
which they familiarly quote, our author always quoting Homer,
and Galen the dramatic poets; for this difference of taste is
obviously the necessary consequence of the style affected by
each of them, since the Ionic dialect is inseparably connected
with the Homeric poems, and the Attic with the Athenian
drama,

From what has been stated it will be seen there is a large
amount of probabilities that our author must have been a con-
temporary of Galen, respecting whom it is satisfactorily ascer-
tained that he was born a.p. 131, and that he died about the
end of that century. We cannot then be far from the truth if
we assume it asa settled point in the chronology of medical
literature, that Areteus flourished about the middle of the
second century of the Christian era.

From the epithet  Cappadocian” with which his name is
always associated, it may be assumed that he was a native of
one of the most eastern departments of the Roman empire.
Although nothing is related of his education and course of
life, we are warranted in believing that his literary and
professional reputation was not acquired amongst his native
mountains, but that his ambition had taken him, like his great
contemporary of Pergamus, and the scarcely less celebrated
Archigenes, to try his fortune in the great seat of empire.
This is further inferred to have been the case from his pre-
scribing to his patients the use of the most approved Italian
wines of that period, namely, the Falernian, the Fundan, the
Signine, and the Surrentine.* He himself has left it on record
that besides the present work, he had written on Fevers, on
Surgery, and Pharmacy.*

2 De curat. Morb, Acut.ii.3. * Ibidi1. ¢ Morb. diuturn. ii, 12,


THE EDITOR'S PREFACE. 1x


It cannot but appear remarkable, that, notwithstanding the
indisputable merit of our author's works, they should be so
seldom noticed by subsequent writers. Aitius, probably of
the fifthyand Paulus Agineta, probably of the seventh cen-
tury, and the author of the Euporista, formerly ascribed to
Dioscorides, but now generally admitted to have been of a
much later date, are the only ancient authorities that have
quoted Aretwus by name. By the Latin and Arabian writers
he is wholly unnoticed; but for this oversight a probable
reason can be assigned without referring it to his obscurity.
Of the Latin authorities after his age no one has any preten-
sions to learned research; and the silence of the Arabians
respecting him may be supposed to be owing to the circum-
stance that as a considerable space of time had elapsed between
his age and the dawn of the Arabian celebrity in science, all
the treasures of Grecian medicine had been previously method-
ized and compiled by Aétius, Oribasius, Alexander, and Paulus
Afigineta, from whose works the Arabian authorities were con-
tent to extract the information they required, without being at
the trouble of referring to the original sources of information,
_ Another reason why our author is so seldom noticed by subse~
quent authorities is supposed, by Wigan, to be that his repu-
tation, although deservedly high, was eclipsed by that of
Axchigenes, an author of very great reputation in the age
immediately preceding his, and the greatest ornament of the
celebrated sect to which he belonged, namely, the Prev-
MATIC.

OF the principles of this Sect, I should have thought myself
called upon to give a detailed exposition in this place, if I had
not done so already, in the argument prefixed to the transla~
tion of the Hippocratic treatise ‘‘ On the Sacred Disease.”*
The doctrine of the Pneuma, it is there stated, namely, of an


* Hippocratos’ works, Syd. Soc. Edit, tf. pp. 897, 835,


x THE EDITOR'S PREFACE.


etherial principle existing in the microcosm, by means of which
the mind performs all the functions of the body, may be traced
as far back as the Hippocratic treatises, and was very gene-
rally received as the established opinion of the sgavans of
antiquity, and more especially of the Stoics, whose doctrines
were then in high repute, as being patronised by the illustrious
Marcus Antoninus the Roman emperor. It is identical with
the Innate Heat,—the O¢pyn gudvros of our author, and the
calidum innatum of modern physiologists, especially those of
the seventeenth century,°—a principle of animal life which we
are now content to dispense with, although it will be admitted,
that in default of it, scarcely all the resources of Chemistry
and Natural Philosphy are sufficient to account for the extra-
ordinary powers of the human organism, whereby it is
enabled to preserve its temperature unabated at more than
100° below the point of congelation in our thermometers.
Holding, then, the existence of this vital principle, it is not
to be wondered at if the learned physicians of Greece and
Rome supposed it to play a very important part in the animal
economy, both in regard to the preservation and the restora-
tion of health. Accordingly, as already stated, it figures in
the medical theories as early as the time of Hippocrates; but
it was not until the first century of the Christian era that
this principle was made to form the basis of the system of
an important sect, the Pneumatists, which originated with
Athenzus of Attaleia, and soon afterwards acquired still greater
celebrity from Archigenes, who flourished in Rome during
the reign of Trajan; that is to say, in the beginning of the
second century. The dogmas of this author are animadverted
upon by Galen in many parts of his works, more especially
in his elaborate Treatises on the Pulse; and if our conclusions,
formerly announced, be well founded, he must have been the


* Soe in particular tho works of Harvey, plurics.


THE EDITOR'S PREFACE. xi


immediate predecessor, and, perhaps, the preceptor of Areteus.
Of late, it has been disputed whether or not our author did
actually belong to the Pneumatic sect; and this is one of those
controversies which can never come to a satisfactory result,
since all the works of the acknowledged Pneumatists are lost,
and the only information we can obtain respecting the prin-
ciples of the sect must necessarily be incomplete, as being
derived at second hand. For my own part I need only declare
in this place, that having familiarised myself with the works
of all the ancient writers on medicine which have come down
tous, I give it as my decided conviction, that the doctrine
of the Pneuma holds a more prominent position in the works
of Arctwus than in those of any of the other authorities, and
hence I am satisfied that he belongs to the same sect aa
Athenwus and Archigenes, It is unnecessary for me to quote
fully and comment on all the passages in his works, from the
examination of which I have been led to draw this conclusion,
but I subjoin references which will enable the reader, if so
disposed, to satisfy himself whether or not my opinion on this
subject be well founded.?

After the cecond century, the Pneumatic sect had ceased to
exist by name, this system and all the others having been
extinguished by the prevalence of the Galenic. Galen, it is
true, continued to recognise the pneuma as a principle in the
animal economy which ministers to the preservation and
restoration of health, but it no longer played the same promi-
nent part in medical theory as it did in the system of the
Pneumatists."

* DosignisMorb, Acut.ili. 3,p. 40 De ourat, Morb. Acut. i. 1,p.193


» — Dinturn, 1.16, p.131 = » & 1pag9

. » ii, Speed ” » ii, 2 p2a7

> » ii 7,p.160 - nit, 4,p.269
» 12, p169 Kithn’s edition.


weSeyin tine, do diffi, respir, iii. : Seer eer de
Jocis aftectis, iii.


xii THE EDITOR'S PREFACE.


In modern times, the closest resemblance to the Pneumatic
hypothesis is found in the system of Van Helmont, more espe-
cially as expounded and upheld by Stahl and Hoffmann. That
the archeus of Helmont was in many respects identical with the
pneuma of the ancient authorities, must appear obvious to any
one who is familiar with his works; indeed, he himself ex-
plains it by comparison with the “impetum faciens” of
Hippocrates, and proclaims it to be, sometimes a “ causa effi-
ciens,” and at others an “ aura genialis,” and ‘spiritus semi-
nis.” After the fashion of this system had passed away, the
spiritual essence which had been supposed to perform so im-
portant a function in the animal frame, may be said to have
lost its independent existence in medical theory, when it was
held, in the Cullenian system, to be a mere virtue or energy
of the body, under the appellation of a vis medicatrix nature.
Of late, in the philosophy of medicine, life has ceased to be
held connected with a vital principle, although it will scarcely
be denied, that many of the symptoms of disease and many of the
undoubted phenomena of Animal Magnetism cannot otherwise
be well accounted for. But it would be out of place to prose-
cute these reflexions further at present. Suffice to say, in con-
clusion, that whoever approaches the study of the Pneumatic
hypothesis with an unbiassed mind, must be disposed to recog-
nise in ita great and important truth as its basis, however much
he may be inclined to think that an exaggerated importance
‘was attached to it by the followers of Athenmus and Aga-
thinus, in the second century, and by those of Helmont in
the eighteenth. Sed hac hactenus.

On the virtues of Areteus, as a medical author, I shall only
add a few words. His descriptions of diseases have been
universally admitted to be unsurpassed for elegance and ac-
curacy. No doubt, it must be admitted, that they do not
convey the impression of being original copies from nature, so
much as those of Hippocrates; but, on the other hand, they


THE EDITOR'S PREFACE. xiii


are more: jive and more studiously elaborated. As
asolitary proof of their value, I may mention that Hippocrates
and Aretsus are almost the only authorities among his pre-
decessors, in whose works Laenneo detects any anticipations of
his own system of diagnosis in diseases of the chest. To have
his name thus honourably connected by so great a master in
Semeiology, is a eulogium to which it would be superfluous
to attempt any addition. Ina word, no one can fail to per-
ceive that he was gifted with the rare talent of giving » more
striking delineation of a series of morbid phenomena, in one
page, than most authors would give in a long treatise.

His system of treatment also can scarcely be too highly
commended, being generally founded on rational and judicious
indications, which, as soon as stated, command the assent of
the unprejudiced reader. Even at the present day, when
judged of impartially, it will be difficult to convict him of
having in any single instance laid down erroneous rules of
treatment. And not only are his general principles in thera-
peutics to be admired, but also the skill and taste with which
he reduces them to practice. For, in general, it will be ad-
mitted that it would be difficult to accomplish the fulfilment of
the indications laid down, by any more appropriate means than
those he makes use of. As a practitioner of the art, he would
appear to have attained the happy medium between feeble
timidity and reckless audacity. Moreover, there is scarcely a
single class of remedies presently in use from which he does notat
one time or another draw certain specimens, from the simplest
and most delicious of the culinary preparations up to the most
potent resources of Surgery and of Pharmacy. The fermented
juice of the grape, and other savoury potations; acids, bitters,
astringents, carminatives, narcotics, diuretics, emmenagogues,
catharties, and emetics; soap to cleanse the skin, and cantha-
rides or mustard to stimulate it; the lancet, and, in extreme
cases, the actual cautery: such are the remedial means recom-


iy ‘THE EDITOR'S PREFACE.


mended and employed by the learned Cappadocian, with
admirable skill and discrimination, to combat the multifarious
symptoms of disease which he himself has 20 graphically de-
Tineated. As a record, then, of the opinions of a most talented
and experienced physician, in a remote age,-on some of the
most vital questions connected with medical practice, there is
surely no member of the profession but must feel interested in
the remains of such an author, and deeply deplore the loss of
those portions which have unfortunately perished.


§ I1—On THe Eprrions oF ArEraus.


‘Tue first edition of Areteeus was the Latin translation of
Junius Paulus Crassus, printed at Venice, A.D. 1552, in quarto.
The editor, in his preface, announces that the work in Greek,
bearing the name of AnETaus, THE CaPPapoctan, had
accidentally fallen into his hands, and that with great labour
and care he had made his version, and published it, lest such
valuable fragments, in so perishable a state as he found them,
should be altogether lost, This Latin version was reprinted in
1554, at Paris, by William Morel and James Putianus; and in
1567, by Henry Stephens, in his work ‘ Medicm Artis Prin-
cipes.” In 1581, another edition, carefully amended by the
editor, was published at Basle, after his death. The translation
of Crassus bears evident marks of having been prepared by a
scholar well competent for the task; and who, although he
had not the advantage of examining several codices which
have since been discovered, would appear to have enjoyed the
privilege of consulting some MS. which has since disappeared.
This version, then, must always deserve the careful attention
of any one who undertakes to give an edition of our author.


THE EDITOR'S PREFACE. xv


The first Greck edition was issued at Paris, in 1554, by
Jacobus Goupylus, from the press of the celebrated Adrian
Turnebus, the King’s printer. The editor professes to have
followed principally a MS. in the Royal library. This edition
is executed on good paper, and in the elegant type for which
Turnebus has always been held remarkable. It would appear
to have been the same type as that used by him in his edition
of Aeschylus, printed about that time. Like other editions,
however, of that ago, it is faulty in punctuation; and, as no
conjectural emendations are admitted, the text in many places
is 80 corrupt as to be altogether unintelligible. But, at the
end, there are some curious attempts to amend the corruptions
of the text. Altogether, this—the Editio princeps of our
author—is a performance highly creditable to the editor, the
printer, and the age in which it appeared,

The next edition was the Greek and Latin edition of
Henisch, published at Augsburgh, in 1603. ‘The editor pro-
fesses to have formed his text from the collation of three MSS.,
**Venetum, Bavaricum, Augustanum.” This edition contains
a good many different readings in the margin, but these, in
general, are of little value; and, as regards accuracy of the
text, the printing is execrable. The commentary at the end
is made up of common-place matters, from which little or no
information can be gathered. This edition, then, poseesser
yery little value in any point of view.

The third edition is one of a very different stamp, namely,
the magnificent edition of Wigan, printed at the Clarendon
Press of Oxford, 1723, and dedicated to the celebrated Dr.
Freind, of London. As announced in the title-page, the text
ia mainly formed from a collation of the Vatican and Har-
leyan MSS.; in fact, it is formed almost entirely on the latter,
and this it is which constitutes its main defect, as monstrosities
are often retained in the text which even the most cautious
editor ought to have no scruple in expunging. In most other


xvi THE EDITOR'S PREFACE.


respects, the performance is beyond all praise; for as to elegance
and accuracy of typography, and all the other embellishments
of a classical edition, it is unsurpassed. In particular, the
notes and emendations, along with the copious dissertations on
all matters connected with Aretsus, are most interesting and
valuable.

The next edition is that which bears the name of the
famous Herman Boerhaave, having been got up under his
patronage by Dr. Groeneveld. It was printed at Leyden,
1735. As regards typography and style of execution, it
is far inferior to the Oxford edition, which had come out a
few years previous; but, withal, it is enriched with a large
amount of valuable matters, collected from a variety of
sources. In particular, it contains the very important com-
mentaries of Peter Petit, the celebrated Parisian physician,
which are about the most ingenious and judicious labours of
the kind which have ever been expended on an ancient
author, One can scarcely over-rate the benefits which the
cause of Medical Literature owes to Petit, insomuch that it
may be doubted if in this line he has any equal, unless,
perhaps, Fots, the admirable editor of Hippocrates. The
Leyden edition, also, possesses the annotations and conjec-
tural emendations of Triller, along with the Greck index
‘and other matters supplied to the Oxford edition by Mait-
taire, a high authority in classical literature at that time.
The text of this edition is the same as that of the editio
princeps, but at the bottom of every page is given a
convenient collection of Jectiones variantes and conjectural
emendations,

The next edition is that of Kiihn, published at Leipsic,
1828. The text is little else than a reprint of the preceding
edition in an octavo shape; but both in paper and typography,
it is of a very inferior stamp. In particular, the punctuation
is so faulty, that no one can possibly read the works of our


THE EDITOR'S PREFACE. xvii


author with any pleasure or advantage from this edition.
The only recommendation it possesses is, that it contains, in a
very convenient shape, most of the valuable matters originally
published in the edition of Boerhaave.

‘We now come to the latest edition of our author, namely,
that of Dr. Franciscus Zacharias Ermerins, published at
Utrecht, 1847, in 4to. No competent judge can hesitate to
say of this edition, that it is a most elaborate performance,
executed with much care, and indicative of great critical
acumen. The editor makes it appear that he had carefully
collated nearly all the existing MSS., and all the previous
editions of our author. From the careful study of all these—
in many instances with much success, although, in not a few,
with too bold a spirit of innovation —he gives a very excellent
and, on the whole, an improved text of our author. How
highly I estimate his labours will be seen by the many re-
ferences made to them in my notes; and, where I think
myself compelled to reject his proposed alterations, I shall
readily be believed sincere when I say, that it is with much
respect for the talent and attainments of my predecessor.
Having spoken freely of the blemishes of defunct editors, I
must be permitted slightly to touch upon the defects of my
contemporary. Though his work in general bespeaks much
elaboration, I was rather disappointed to find so many in-
stances of very inferior Latinity, both in the Prolegomena and
Notes; and even in the text, the lapses, as regards accentuation
and typography, are more numerous than in the Oxford
edition. I have also remarked, in several instances, that the
Latin translation has not been altered, so as to suit the changes
of the text introduced by the editor. But, as already hinted,
my principal ground of objection to this otherwise valuable
edition is the enormous amount of conjectural emendations,
more especially the freedom with which he has—“ suo peri-
culo”—ejected hundreds of words from the text, on the un=


STANTURD, &


LIBRARY
RSITY


- ANS


|


xviii THE EDITOR'S PREFACE.


proved assumption, that they are interpolations which have
crept into it from the Glossema.

There have been two English translations, both very in-
complete, namely, the translation by Moffat, London, 1785,
and that of Reynolds, London, 1837, As neither of the
translators lays claim to any critical acquaintance with our
author, it cannot be expected that 1 should admit having
received any important assistance from my predecessors in
this line.

Of my own preparations for undertaking the task of editing
Areteeus it now becomes my duty to say something. I beg to
state, then, that I had been familiarly acquainted with our
author's work, through the study of most of the previous
editions, long before I thought of offering to edit it; and that
since I undertook this task, I have diligently examined the
text in all the existing editions, and collated with some care
all the MSS. to be found in Great Britain, namely, the three
following :—

1. Copex Harteyanus, VICIOQCCCXXVI ; small in folio, of the
end of the 16th century.—British Museum.

Il. Cop. Askew; commencement of the 16th century—Library of

the Medical Society of London,

ILL. Cop. Pamsrr.; of the 16th century—Library of Sir Thomas

Phillips, of Middle-hill, Worcestershire.


To the examination of all these editions and MSS. I have
added, in most instances, a comparison of collateral passages
in all the other authorities on Ancient Medicine; and have
further endeavoured to prepare myself for my editorial duties
by a diligent revision of all the Greek writers who used the
peculiar dialect of Aretmus, from Herodotus and Hippocrates
down to Arrian and Lucian. I trust, also, it will be seen in-
directly, that I have not been remiss in availing myself of the
distinguished Inbours of contemporary philologists, especially
of Dindorf and Daremberg, and the lexicographers of Oxford.


THE EDITOR'S PREFACE. xix


Having bestowed so much pains on my work, I shall certainly
feel come disappointment if it is not such as to satisfy the
reasonable expectations both of the classical scholar and of
the learned physician. More especially, I shall be curious to
ascertain how my attempted emendations of several corrupt
passages, which had defied the ingenuity of preceding editors,
will be received by the few scholars now existing in Europe,
who are possessed of the requisite amount of professional: and
philological knowledge to sit in judgment on such literary
attempts. Satisfied, indeed, as I have long been of the rave
combination of critical acumen and practice required for
restoring the decayed remains of Ancient Literature, it is not
without considerable misgivings that I have ventured to as-
sume myself to be possessed, even in a small degree, of a
“ curiosa felicitas,” which has reflected so much honour on the
names of Elmsley and of Porson.

‘There is one omission in this edition, for which I feel myself
called upon to furnish an explanation. I have not thought it
necessary to imitate the example of several preceding editors,
in giving at the end a list of the Jectiones variantes, having
been principally deterred from doing so by the trouble and
expense which would have been thereby incurred. The
reader may form a pretty correct estimate what these would
have amounted to, when I state that in the Leyden edition
they occupy twenty-three closely printed pages in folio. To
these, if I had added all the conjectural emendations and
erasions of Ermerins, and all the alterations suggested by
myself, I should have required more than sixty pages for this
purpose. The members of the Sydenham Society will, there-
fore, see that they would thus have been subjected to a very
great additional expenditure, and myself to a great sacrifice
of time and of labour, without any corresponding amount of
benefit to any reader of the volume. Indeed, I may venture
to repeat the judgment which Wigan pronounced on these


xx THE EDITOR'S PREFACE.


different readings:— Haud facile ex iis, ut opinor, quispiam
eruet, quod faciliorem reddet Aretwi lectionem,” etc. More-
over, there are very few scholars who take delight in the
minutix of philological criticism, who have not access to one
‘or more of the preceding editions which contain the lectiones
variantes.

Of the Translation, I need only say, that it is scrupulously
close, and that I have taken every pains to make it correct.


APETAIOY KAIIIIAAOKOY


EPL


AITIQN KAI ZHMEION OZEQN ITAGON,


BIBAION ITPQTON:


INAZ TON KE®AAAION,


Tepi Opeverucdy
Tepi AnBapyucsiy
[epi Mapacpod
Hepi ‘Axowdnkinc
Nepi 'BeAnping
Lepl Terdvou ah te
Mepl Zuvdyyng ss eee
Mepi rov card ry Kovida addy 6 ee
Dipi rév card MapioOua ded « ‘

Tlepi Wevpirdog «wwe


ee eee
seeee
wee ee
eee
eee.
ee ee
eae


@


4 NEPI AITION KAI ZHMETQN


“Hy 88 mdqelov ibn" F rod wapokvepod, Kip pappa-
pryal mpd ris bpios mopdupéwv f) peddverv, 7) mdvrov uod
ouppepeyplryav, ds Soxéew tiv ev obpav@ reravicbas Tov,
yor dire, Sapvoduln: dpyidor, mixpéxoros ma, xar~
Grecov ody tives ixrd mpopdotos, cE aBupins perekerepot
88 pedpars rorapod arevés évidévres, t} tpox@ Sivevpevy,
BbuBuce Quccopévy Gdrore 52 Soppnows Bapediv dopav
kariBare, domep yaydrov NiGov. roicde wev obv ev rH Ke~
pars 7d xaxov éornpiyOn re, nal évreibev mmuavOev dpye-
tas: pereberépoice 58 xal dard tev roppwrépp Tis Kepadijs
veipwy, dxéca Evurabéa tH dpyh ylyverat. Sdervdor yoiv
peyddor yetpdv i) mobév Evvédxovrat, kal mdvos Kat vdpKn
kai Tpopos Ererat, at és Kepadiv touvréwy % dpyl) Fev.
tw éprov 73 xaxdy els tiv xepadiyy lentar, wata@yos Touré
ovat ybyveras ws dard mays H Evdov,  AMBov. xai Eava-
ordyres exSupyeivrat, ds bd rev €& ériBoudijs maraxbévres.
HSe pévror drdry ylyverae dxdcovee rode mpdrrov 7d Kaxby
Evvdrece ols 82 Edvnfes 1d mdBos, hy erly wey % vodcos,
8 Sderudov 82 ibn Adlenras, 4} dws tev dpEyrac, Evvijdeas


? The common reading in the
MSS, is ei8eoc, which is evidently
inadmissible. Petit, in his Commen-
tary, suggests that the true reading
is dog j.  Wigan also prefers arAn-
ior tin ioc. Exmerins accordingly
renils mAnoiow fy dioc. None of
these editors, however, refers to any
authority for this expression, which
wars to me quaint and unnatural
but if the dread of a paroxysm
‘bo at hand.” I prefer oy on the
authority of many parallel pas-
sages, as for examplo—wAnolow &
fbn rod gpevituy dyrec, Galen, de
oe, affect iil; verévrog & dn rob
euprrdparog, P. Ag. iii. 5, in the
chapter on epilopsy. Ermerins yery


properly restores it, in another pas
sage of our author, where fide had
been substituted for it (Sympt, dius,
morb, i.9). Indeed oy, in such
‘eases, occurs frequently in the works
of our author,

Moreover, in the margin of the
celebrated Reiske’s copy of Henisch’s
edition, there is found this emenda-
tion—jjén ioc, See G, Dindorf’s
Appendix to Kithn's edition, ‘The
‘Latin translation of Crassus would
agree very well with the reading T
Fropose; while it is unsuitable to
the toxt when diog is admitted:
“Quum yero accessio appropin-
quat.”


OZEQN TIA@QN, BIBA. A’ 5


dpwyors xadgover tabs mapedyras, mporyraae 700 péddovro
to curaplys Siacdloyew te nad dvaxddet wal cuvreivew
Sdovras ra xatépyovra pépea Kat abrol 8 éwuréouew ed-
xovar Ta pipea, Sxwarep Tiyv vodaov eEapoipevor Kal opeov
4 roujde exixouply Kore wal & iudpnv viv onpaciny bud-
gato.) moddoicr & PiBas éott ce emidvtos Onplov, 4) exes
darracin, nai ofrm xarémecov.

Evy 88 7h onpacin dvarcbijrms pv xéerac dvOparros,
xtipes 8 of omacu@ Evvépyorrac, cxédea ob Stamerdoy-
aerenirrer: dopaypévorar tatipoure Se ixédn %) Evudopyr
abyny dyxidos, xepady toumidws Suietpopos GdoTe pev
Saapinash ae vaslearsbenrairainn chi orinondicents
dpelBet, EdNove 52 és 7d perddpevor dvaxrérat, Bews rots
Grd rips xopns Axopévoree Bin, cdre &0a f evOa eri rods
Syors iver. ydenover whya, evbpa Enpir, yévoa mpo-
piers, os nai xivSvvoy Tpaparos poydrou rylyveaBat, }) daro~
Topijs,  xore oracn@ Evvepelaover of 86vres, dOadpot
Sbebernutvor, Bépapa Ta TOMA Biéxovra Ev wadwdr fv
8 éripticae xoré érouv, ob EvpSddrovor ra Arépapa, os
Kal Ta Aeved Spijobar éE inroddaws. dppies diddore piv és
ro pecidpvov dverpévat,' Sxeos Tois yareralvoucr, &Xore
8 d& rods xpordhous damyyévat, wordy Te wAdrov, cd 7d
Bipua wept 7d pérorroy addipa mepirerdaar kai ras roo
pecoppion purlBas eEadrnipar ira pulp, maXdduerar


* The common reading in the ture, substitutes Ewnypivar, ax I

MSS, is cai te ie Sarin ean think unnecessarily, "Aviyiva may

siny dvioaro, In the margin of the be interpreted literally, “inclining,”
F


Hippocrat.,
_ merins teaneposes tiv from before Would not dvdjevar be a suitable
sipipny, as above. reading? I hare translated the
‘Dr. Ermerins, on pure conjec- passage accordingly.


6 TIEPI AITIQN KAI SHMEIQN


qeetrea, cord dv usr & ABD peponbra, Indore 82 és rd
mrdyia drmypéva, ebre roict ddoio1 weprrelverat, Toioe
pebiaoe Spolos.

‘Ey abEy 52 70d xaxod Kat wedidvorns rod mpoodmov
mpooyiyverat, dyyelwv rav dv r@ abyéve Eudracis, os ev
voy fol) dvaie pechy ae psbys eaSolir Iai oe BS
nai crevaryyos 3) pov), nal 4 dvarvoy mig, ds émayyondver®
oduypot apospol xal rayées, wal cuixpol ev tpor dpypoe
peydror 82 Kat Bpaddes xad vol pot dri rG rédet, draxros Sd
és 1d Fdvodor alboiwy Eivraci. rdbe uev ody és réd0s Tis
onpacins mdaxovs.

“Hy 88 & ddeow dduxvéovras tod xaxod, obpa airépara,
Korine mepirrucis pereberépoice 5 xab yoviis dmrébxpures
Th OMA Kal miéoe tov dryyelov, 4 yapyaduep@ Tod wévou,
kal iypacins mpokdijos. ylyvovras yap ey veipovat mévoe
xa roiede, ordua Bluypov, péyua wodéev, Tayd Kab
apuxpiv, wai ef Erxoiy abrd, ri padrov dv mijBos abréou
Enpicao. jv 5¢ xpivp paxpp Kai wiv TOXAp Apacdj
Hey 7a Evbov Tod Oapyxos, mveipa 58 éyxareipy Oey Ta mavra
celog, oracpds 52 Kab tdpaxos rév abréwy Ey, KdUbav 58
typéw dvarréy es ras Starrvods, orbpa xat piva, adv ipa
82 10 rvedpa, dveors 83) ris mpoabey rvikws drdvrwy tou.
adpoy 8 drowtdover domep eri roice peyddorot mredpact
% Oddacca viv dxynv® ebre Kal ékavioravras diOev ds
Téeurijcavros ToD Kaxot> él 88 rH drromadar vobpol Ta
pikea Ta rpira, KapnBapixol, Siadedupevor, rdperor, drypol,
Sicbupor, xarnpées, Kapdrp xa aloxivy rod Savoo.

* Tho common reading before der that neither of them refers to
Emmerins was cai y vit. Ihave the Eumenides of Aeschylus (1. 116)
cheerfully adopted, also, his emen- ax an authority for this meaning of


dation of yuypdc into puypds, as the term,
suggested by Petit; and only won- * Homer, Iliad. iv, 421, et #eq.


OZEQN TAGQN, BIBA. A. 7


Keg. <'. TMept Teravov.


Zracpol of réravos, xapra pay érrlrrovor, sEvraros 52 xreivac,
Grip ov8é pnldioe WO jvar. pay rav ev yvdOowws Kal revov-
tev Tabe wabea Ewvdidor 88 7d Kaxby els ro wa Grravra
wap Eourabia riot dpyioe yiyverae iSéae 88 rijs Evvodeis
Sace pels es eb00, és rd atoms, & toturpocbey. és bd
hey 6 réravos, etre datpafti\s GvOpwiros nal dxaprriys évre-
rerai* al B8 ey robmlow, 4 & robyepoader Euvodxal Eby 7h
dow Kal 7G ywply loxover ry énixdnow. Thy nev yp
xarémy Tov vortovros dvdkuaw oruabbrovoy Kadéopev, TOV
tide rerovOirwy veipwy. eumporBdrovov Bi, fy es totp-
mpocBev kaparidhyras SvOparos ert rotate mpécev veipourt:
tévos yap vetpwr Kal évrdavos obvoua.
TIpopdoves 82 réivbe puplas, xal yap émt rpmpate pide
var ylyvecbas ipdvos, 4) pvdy, t veipwv yuyevtov, eire Th
mOmrd Ovijoxovet, eri tTpdpate yap oracpos Cavdorpov™
owdrai 88 val end &uSrdpare } yu}, drdp kad He ob dra
meprybyerat. Kai rev wardgavros peyiros tov aiyiva
pereberepor orrivras, Kat Yikes 62 xdpra loxupiy ryhyrera
altin, Sia ré8e yeipa ply pddora wdvrov there réde Th
mrdbea, Beirepor 82 jp adv 7H peromdipy, Bépos 8 Haora, eb
pi xardpty rpajua % volrwy GXoBamtv euBnely pwraiees
88 dvSpiiv omdwras piv pGdrov, bre Yuypal drdp alve
mepuylyvorrat padrov, Gre iypat. Hrsxlae 82, maibes ev
auveyis, GAN’ ob pEXAov Ovijaxovas, Ore EbnOes wad olectoy
mdBos* vies 82 ‘rovréwy Facov wdaxoucr, paddov 8 Ovsje-
Kove, dxpdtovres Husora: ydpovres 82 mavray piidNow Kat
mdcxover xai Ovicxover. alrin yap yikes wai Enpérys


‘ Hippoerat, Aph. ¥. 2


6 MIEPI AITIQN KAI SHMEION


xelrea, nore piv dud és dE) pepuedra, dddore B és ra
wrayia danypdva, ere roice dSodot wepirelverat, Totes
pedidor Spots.

‘Ev abfy 88 705 Kaxod wal wedidvirns rod mpoodmou
mpoorylyverat, drryelov rav év r@ adyévs Budracws, os ev
ar dpurln, dvaobyoln, nad eb peya euBojs puyids 8
ah crevards 4 gor, kal} dvarvo} mlb, os dorayyondve®
oduypol apodpol nai rayées, nal cpexpol ev thot dpyfoe
peydrdor 8% xal Bpadles xat voOpol eri rq rédet, Grantor dt
és 1d Eivohov alfoiwy Fivracis. rdde yey obv és rédos ris
onpacins mdéoxover.

“Hy 88 é deo dgucvéwvras rod Kaxod, odpa abrépara,
Koidins meplmrucis perekerépocs 5¢ nal yovijs dardxpurs
TH Orth wat moe rév deyyelov, i) yapyaducu@ rod wévou,
wai bypacins mpordujer. ybyvovras yap év vetpoae mévoe
kat roiade. oriya Siuypov, dMypa woNdy, mayd Kad
apuypov, wal el axow adrd, eri paidrdov dv wrijOos abréou
enpicao, iv 8 xpirp paxpg Kai mévy mOrdAG Apacbip
piv te Evbov Tot Bcspnros, mreipa 8 eyxareipyOev Ta mavra
oeiop, omacpds 88 Kal tdpaxos Tav adréwy Ey, KUdwv 38
typéw dvarhép és ras Biarrvods, otéya Kal piva, civ iypd
82 7d mrvejpa, dvecrs 8) ris mpdcber mviws dmdvrav Eouce.
‘ddpiy 82 drowrdoucr domep emt rolee peyddowsr mveipace
3 Odracoa tiv dxvqv® ebre nal eEavicrayrar bf0ev as
Tédevrijcavros ToD Kant em) 82 7H dmworatcs vobpot ra
pédea Th mpirra, kapnBapixol, Siadedvpévor, mdperor, dyxpor,
BioFupor, karndées, kapdrp nal aloxtvy Tod Sevod.

* Tho common reading before dor that neither of them refers to
Ermerins was «ai 4 wvik. Ihave the Eumenides of Axchylus (1. 116)
cheerfully adopted, also, his emen- as an authority for this meaning of


dation of wvypdc into pvypdg, a8 — the term,
suggested by Petit; and only won- — * Homer, lind. iy. 421, et seq.


OZEQN TA@QN, BIBA. A’. / 9


karémw Kexdacpévat, oxédhea evarrles yap
byvty xarimw* ndyrrreras,

*Hy 88 és 1d Ewrpoober Edxwvrat, Kuptol pev Ta yore,
én” Ioov roict peragpivorer tov loylov ewbeupévav pays
Gry es ebOU4 Kopudiy mpnvis, Kear és Bcipnxa cuvverev-
xvia, yérus emt voice arépvowas memnyuia, xeipes ouvnpeo~
pévat, oxédea éxrerapéva. ovo xaptepol, avi) amdvrav
KravOpadns’ rrevatover 5¢ pifoyres BUGvov. Hy pev obv Tod
Ocopnxos Kab ris dvamvois APyTac 7d Kaxdv, pnidlos Tod
Giw dmijyaye dyabdv wey 7 vootovre és wévev kal dia-
orpodiis Kal aicytvns dmadrdaryhy, adumérepoy 82 Kal roice
mapeotat, xiv vids, } rarhp Ey. iv 88 és-7d Gv Ere Suapxén,
THs dvarvons, el Kat Kaxijs, cuvtedoupévns 8 obv, és Ta
mpoabev ob rofobvrat pdvoy, dAAd Kal earpodyrat, dy ry
rediadiyy de roles rota Exety, wal'ra axédea nal 7d vera
és rd mpdabev xexddaBas, ds Boxdery & byvinv xard yévu ro
Ep por IgicBa.

EfdvOpiomes 4 compoph, ead drepms dv Bp, BBumph
34 ead 7G: dpbovrs 66y* donfecorrov 827d Beuvdy ‘dv la 8
bri Biacrpodiis nat roix pidtarous dvOpavrois* ed 88 rotee
mapcoiar 4 mpéabev oby doin, viv dyabiy ylyveras, dmedbe-
pevas +00 Blov rav képvovra, és daradrayhw Ev 76 Gav wal
tev wivev Kal Tov dtepréwy xaxay. drdp obdé inrpds
mrapeiov nad Spdey, obre és Lay, oitre es daroviny, drip obre
és popiy Ext erapeée, ef yap Kal éreviiivae éBéroe ra
Han, Gavre dv BuarpsjFat Kal xardétae tiv dvOpwrov. roice
2 "The common reading, canéy rz, * Ermorins adopts Bie soy
is obviously at fault. The present partly on the suggestions of
Teading is Sesloed ha Beamon poly Se calr Dee eGR,
using fyrty in place of fyvig. Still nisch. It is also the reading of the
there is something in Askew MS, The common reading
the text. rede ead foto sere 4s xu, Neither the one nor the
in strictness, to


plied, ‘back part other is quite sntisfactory.
estan erueiperetcuine


8 MEPE AITION KAI SHMEIQN


yiipaos, Kal Bavérov ide giows. iw 88 4 Yikes Ey civ
iypG, dowkarepol te wal dopadécrepor eis xivSuvoy of
omracpol.

Biveors wey abréorot, dBpdov ev eipiobar, érace révos
kat Evracts tevévrmy Kal payeos, kal pdv tov ev yvdbouws
at Badpnxs, épelBover yap Thy xara ryévuv mpos Thy dive, os
pub? poxrotow 4 aba 81d. pnidles oviiras BéracGas, ty
88 nai Bip Siayayiv rods dddvras evetdty tus bypov, ob
xararivover, GAN’ eexdover, 4 ev TH ordpare Leyoucr, i} és
tas pivas dvaxérrera. 5 te yap icOuds cvvepeideras Kal
Ta maplcOuia oxdnpa Kal évrerapéva evra ov Evpriares
els Thy BOAnpw tod Kataivouévov. mporwma épvbpa,
memourpéva, dpOarpot pixpod Seiv drevées, pods mrepidi-
votpevot, TIE loxupi), dvarvo} Kaxi, xeipiv Kal oxedéay
Taos, pies TaddOpevor, mpoowra roixihos Sidotpopa,
pia wal yeirea tpopddea, yévus maddopérn, dddvrav
GipaBos er’ Dd 8 dv rie wal ra dra, ey bE COnedpny
kai wtpator. odpa érirydpeva péxpr Sucoupins xaprepijs,
4 abropdrus éxyecpeva OUuBopuévys rijs xioteos, Tabe piv
ody Eby réon isn oracpav.

“Téa 82 éxdorys, rerdvou pév i és evOd dréracts Shou
dotpaSiys mdvrn wal axduvis, vOéa 58 nal oxédrea nad
xelpes.

‘OmieOdrovos 8 karomw dyxidre Trav dvOpwrov, os Thy
xepadiy dvaxexhacpévny pecony) T&v apoTraréwy KéecOar,
Bpoyyos ebbyer, yévus ta moda Silorarat, ordviov 5 ebre
EvvepeiSer 7H dive, paypds 4 dvarrvod, mporerées xovhiny Kab
Gadpnxa. odpoy tovréocs paddov dxparés. énuyderpiov
érurerapévoy nal, ei émixpovors, évnxoi yeipes éy extract

* Thocommon reading is @avdrow x0 a8 to produce a suitable reading


# Garg, to which Ermerins adds — with little violence to the text.
ijde, which I have substituted for


OZEQN TIA@QN, BIBA. A’. il


rip airipy Binv rols EEwGer alrius Yaxee. yunol $6elporres
towbev nad Ewber drip Kal vodcor pappdxours Sydsyry-
plovat Ixedas, xal amd pappdxwv eudover sxota muperiv
clvena. Bey ob8 dmeoinds & r@ Romp rH ev AOivnes
pereberépouy Soxéery els rd $ptara. éy 7 Heipaued imd Te-
Rorovvnalov euPeBrjjebar pappaxa. ob ydp Evviecav
GvOparroe 3 Euviy rob Karo’ Tod Norpddeos pds ra Bydmy=
Tipu.


Biveore 88 roict pay xovaryyixoios preypovi) rapioOpulov,
dapuyylOpev, mavrés To otépatoy. yMicoa Tporeris
tarov, doropptov Kai yruypdv- épvbpol ta wpbcwwa, Kab
Srnputvar, dpbadyol eElaxorres, dvanrerées, eépvipor 7
moriv & Tas pivas dvanémrerar mévoe xaptepol, dra Kal
ind vis munbs curbionperos dpavpetvras, Ban wal nap-
bin brbyerav rob} uxpod Hépos: elomvéover 82 pixpov
mdyv, & te wal dremviyOncay, euppayelons rijs & Tov
Ocipmaa Sd8ov. eviocae 88 és wveipova % Ebvboats pyidlas-
oi 88 peraordet Ovijcxover muperot vwOpol, paraxol, oddev
dpedéovres. ef S6 rw és dyabiy tpéorta, arootdctes yhy-
vovra: tvOa Kal EvGa wap’ ods tw, 4 Svdov és ta mapicb-
jaar iy per Gov vépey, pi) xdpra Bpadtws, wepuyiyvovras
pay, Ed» mrévy 82 nal xoBiny fy 8 rpemopbnor és dordora-
wy dynos pélow tnrorylyvyrat, & xopuphy ris droardotos
dnarapévns, abpbov mviyovras. tdbde piv ra xuvdryyns
eldea,


Euvdryns 88, odurrmass, loxvimns, dxpérys céverts
BBarnot wotror, elow Bebuadress pipuyE «al ryapryapéor
dvermacpévos, wapla8uia él piddov mpoaikovra, adevine
mvt 4 robbe rod eldeos Tis mpocbev TodAOY Te KpaTacorépn,
dy Biopmes eivrog rod xaxod, Eva 4 dpyi) ris dvamvoie: of
88 bftraror Ovijoxoves airijpap, %o8' bry Kal mpl Kare


ot TIEPT AITIQN KAT SHMEIOQN


cacbar tiv inzpiv, of 82 nad drxaderdjevor obey dvayto.
dréBavov yap mplv 4 tov inrpdv ext réyrn xpijoacbat.
Sxdaos S¢ és dryabov tpérerat, erupreypalver mdvra, é& arep
73 Ube theron) seethes dos ombonoie dd oordonges
ybyvecbae dryaboy 88 Kal év Ocopyxe olSnua xaprepoy, 4 épu-
almedas cupavéws. nal intpos 82 dyabds 4) cindy els tiv
Bdpnxa ro Kaxdy dviyyarye, } olvnm és Ta orépva Kal ds Ta
mapa yvdBovs pépen eres, etdxuce tw wad bérvevoe
pereEerépoict 58 és ev Spayd rd naxdy brd rouréwy dre-
Adon Ew, drrerabev® &¢ GP pws éraduvdpdunce Kad Ervikes
Tipopdotes 52 pupiar, yiktes padrov, hoaov exxatcres,
mapyal, doréwy ixGimy Siamdpoves és Ta rapleOpua, Yuypo-
rrocias, péOas, TAycpoval, Kal Ta ard Tis dvarrvois KaKd.


Keg. 7.


Td ard ris trrepoms exxpepey capa creppdy, peowyd Tov
rrapia6plov, xlov xal yapyapemv xadterat. araguds) yap
mdbeds dari oivoya. velpov 8é dome % Kiovis riy dicw,
GAN bypdvr dv yap byp@ xéerar ywpiy. d8e obv 6 yapya-
ptiy mrebva micye wéBea. Kal yap emi dreypovp maxt-
verat, loos dard rijs Biows dypt roi mépatos axpov, émrip7j-
xns yuyvopevos, kal épiOnpaloyer. xiwv 82 rode rod mdbeos


Tlepi ray xara rhv Kiovida rabav.


'T have followed Wigan and Rr-
merins in interchanging the places
of cuvdéyyn and cuvdyyy as they
stood in all the MSS I have also,
Uke them, substituted deooe for
Sxdoor; and have added ie before
dap, on the authority of Ermerins.
But all thie patchwork still leaves
the sentence in a very unsatisfactory
condition.

¥ Exmerins has substituted the two
words above for dmerd0y and dxo-


Avéix, which have no proper signi-
fication in this place, It must be
admitted, that although somo im-
provement, the substituted terms are
not quite suitable; as it can scarcely
be sald, that an internal disease ix
“driven outwards” by an external
application,

> ‘The common reading is txdoyts.
‘Tho other word ocenrs in the Codex
Philipp, and is no doubt the true
reading.


OZEQN TLAGQN, BIBA. A’. 13


Hemiednows, eb ward wépas podvov orpoyyidverat, al
peyebet wedudyvds yiyverat, wal imopedaviker, orapudi) ere
mypov Tike 7) wdBos. wdvra yap lech abréy, wal oxic,
kai xpoui, Kal péyeBos. tpirov wdBos doth ipévean, tvOa Kab
Oa, olév vt Aérea wraréa, f) vuerepBev wrépuyes eedal-
vovras ipdvrioy rébe xadéerar. imac yap tkedat al toy
dpévery ols wrdros EEarrddoves. ee 52 ds Aerdv Kal Edprjinn
pire TUTE xiovis, olév re obplaxov xara mépas Laxovea,
xpdowedoy thy éravupiny toyet. ryiyveras 82 r05e Kal abro~
pdroos pay ex peiparos, Sxwmomep wat Erepar dtdp wal dd
ropijs erinapalys, eyxaradumévros Tob inrpod butva xaTd
play mrevpiv. i 88 Sxpda tpéor Siocotce exepcptor Eva
rat &vOa rylyyrat, otvona wey ode layer 768€ mdBos Exdqrov,
Gravee 88 pyldtov Cenoapévy pryvooxev.

TINE 82 és" abréows rice, nai jeiora jmidlos carat.
vovot, PE emt mace piv, wdduota bt emi roict ipavriocs,
ral éri ols xpaomBoee. yapyedouds ip vis dprpins
a ae ee ee eg
bnpp00-AdOpm & Thy dprnplnr, bey dvaPecover End 87h
orapury Kat 7G clove Stomvoa eri paddov, Kal xdpra
movnp)) kardwroos. Kal yap é tas pivas emi ravbe rd
Dypiv dvaPXBerat, cvprably ray mapicOplwv. ynpaoios 6
lov avviOns, cradury Se véowws wai dxpdfovor modtanor
yap wal drupdeypatve: wadrov. Sdenover 82 wal aol rd
tueriBea. réuvew Bi wdvra dowla: énd 88 7H oraperg
Exe epulpubay, alpoppayin wat wévor nal fdeyporiis earl
Sooes!


*Hipgoeaion Aphor. li6. Wa sia etree te oot
aro indebted to


“4 MEP! AITIQN KAl SHMEIQN


Keg. @. Tlept raiv xard ra mapic Oa edxay.


"Erxea dv toics wapicOploics ylyveras, Ta wey EvvijOea,
ebifea Kai dowia, ra Sé Eevd, Nowpmdea nat xrelvovra.
etijGea pév dxoia xabapd éote nai cpuxpd cai 48a0i, ode
erupreypatver, xai dvmdvvar Aowwddea 88 dxica wraréa,
Kotha, purapa, érimdyp Reve@, 7) TeuUSYO, ty wédrave ovve-
xopevar dpbar robvopa rotct Execs. iv 82 wal 6 trimaryos
Yoxn BdBos, doxdpn 7d maBos nai ore eal wadeerac’ dv
ric 58 ris Coxdpns (pbOnua ybyveras xaprepoy Kat prey-
pov) wal révos Pr\eSav, ws éx’ GvOpaxos, wal puxpa be
EavOjpara dpad yvyvopeva, revra mpocervyyvopeva
cuvijpOn Te dy xa ard Edxos éyévero. xiv pev tao és rd
grduck buerras: dnt viv csewlBa. Gel re py, kal chy Ambrapes,
kal 5 viv ~Adooav éoxeddaOn, nal és odda, Kal és xadivots
xai d8ovres éxivyfOncav cai eueddvOncav Kal é roy spéxn-
Roy %} reypovi eEweeirs. nad olde wey ob mrodvipepor Ovijo~
pours bheyovG wad mepervios, eaxeBly ear Sarocwha. or
88 & roy Owpyxa véunrae Sid ris dptypins, xal abriipap
drémute. mvetpov yap xal xapdin, obte d8urs roijode,
obre édxéwy, obre lympwv dvéyovras, GX Pijyes Kal dvo-
moa yiyvovras,

Airln péy obv rob épyou rév rapicOpiav, nardroces
Wuxpav, tenxéov, Ccppiiv, dEéwv, ctupivrav rade yap Ta
pépea Kal Odpyxe els poviy xal avarvoyy, nat oly &
tpodijs Suarowaiy, kat cropdyo és xardémocw Bvaxovéerae
ef 88 xal rotoe Evdov 71 cvpBaln mdPos, xordin, eal cropaye,
nal apne, & tov loOpov Kal rd maplaOjua Kal ra rHdE
xopla rod xaxod 4 dvagop) kal dmepebbues. Bid ré8e wraiSla
Biota néoxe &xpis HAns pddora yap madla ral peya
wal \uxpiv dvarvéew mdelerov yap Td Oeppov ev rovréowe*


OZEQN HAGQN, BIBA. AY 17


Komi eumecdvres. iv 88 dw ris Sevrépas ES8opuddos 4
apy Tis dvaywryis tay wrudkwv yliyvytas wat tav Euvree-
wrrav xaxdv, és rv Tecoaperxadexdrny Ovijcxovcr, tof!
Gry 82 peony) rovréou rod xXpivou és mveipova mdvrov
EivBoou yiyverat. arxee yap mveipwv és éwvray, Kal pavis
atlBapats, div) ’xal doi hace nlbv ankles, wavetpiansd aire
GBpiov drerviyn SvOpwmos, perarrdas tod waBeos. jy Sd
ratryy tmepiNBy bvoakav, wah ards eleoar9s pw} doBvhereyy,
tumvos yoyverar. rade pev ody, fv és xaxdv émbidG.

“Hy 88 éml 7b dyabiy tpdérnrac, aipoppayly Sia pio
MéBpws, etre GOpdoy Aderac  vodcos* Ererae at trvos Kal
dvaporph dreypudrior, Eeeras 88) yerwBboor Nenraiys: EnV 8
Baov Newrorépwy, aibis 8 Sialucov, mayéwv, capxoedéov.
shy éri réw Balwov radwSpopén pav 4 yori, én’ aif 58
pdéypa, daparis 4 droxardotacts Kal rade, hw dro tplrns
mépns Epyyrat, Kal pniBlas dvaPjecovet, rela, Suara,
bypa, (ot) otpoyyida® ds é8Sdunv 7 satlerseray ebre
Kal nothing exrapaybelans xorwdéwv, dvarrvois xardatacts,
yripn cbotabiys, muperol évbibovres, ebovroer jv 88 dard Tis
Seurépns (A8opmdbos rade dpEntas, és tiv Tecoapecxaibexdrny
xaloravrat.

*Hy 82 us}, els dwrinua rpérerat, ebre piyea evbelxvurac,
rrévor vuypaT@bees, dvaxablyvvabat Bédover, dvarrvo) Kanlooy*
Béos rére pA aov pi) wretipeov dOpoov 7d Tiov Exicas dao-
viky tov dvOpwmov, ra mpérra kal ra pelbo Siadyydvra
nah, Bits 7d ucowy) vay wrevpluv php, «ab Siac
wien tdade, Kal xopupiy é To EEw mpoRddrnrat, f) és Evrepov
evparyi, Ta Oda repuylyverat 5 dvOpwrros.

Pipe B tiv vodoor, Spy piv, xerpiw pdduora wdvrow,
Setrepov POwvérapor, Hip 8 Hacov, iy pr) Kore Yruxpav yly-  *


* Tho negative seems to be required here. Seo Petit and Ermerins,
°


16 ‘HEP! AITIQN KAI XHMEION


ruplxayra yap dévra ra Odxea mpocepriparas ind Bépuns
tis dvarvojs* Bpdyxos, ddwrin, al rdBe drt 7d xdxiov
éretyet, etre dOpbov xararecéyres els Thy civ eb Ourov.


Ke. ¢. Tept TAeupiridos.


"Td thot whevpjioe Kad rH payer nal r@ EvBor Pcipyes dype
Krediv thy Newrds Kparaws iméotpwras, Toiat doréoue
mpoorrepunas, imelwxis roivona, dde émiy preypovriy
yernrat, wip Eby Byyl nal wruddowe moxidoos, Tepiris
7d mdBos Kadterar. xpi} 88 rabra ddujrows Evvwda wal
Edprvoa tupera, ard pois airins Eiumavra’ éxéica yap
touréwy atropdény dAdo tr’ AAAns altins ylyveras, wiv Ta
mdvra dua émiporrnoy, ob wadteras wreupiris’ Ebveors 8
mébvos otis KAnidtoy, wip Spynd, xatdwmuors ri piv viv
preypalvovcay mrevpi etpopos' ev Epy yap ier rH éwv-
réou b ipsjy els 1d drréxewa 88 éradvvos td yap tod
dxBeos kai ris ddeypovijs xal rijs Eaprijcvos droréraras 4
6dtvn aype Tis dmdons Evvadins rod ipévos és dpous Kab
rdnidas, pereEerépoict 58 wal és vara Kad & dporddryy.
vearvainy Thy 52 whevpiriv éxddeov of mpécbev. mapéreras
82 Sdorvoa, dypuTvin, drocerin, pihav épvOnua dadpiv,
PAE Enpd, wricra pores dvaryopeva, preypa i yosbdes,
Biaipov xataxoptws, 4) imdgavbov- nai rade raft ove loyovta,
Gore 88 da exuporréovra Kal dmoyuyvopeva’ xdxvoy Sd
dmdvrov, jy To Slamoy exdeltmp, ylyvovras 68 rapddnpow
ors 8 Gre Kai kopardbdees, Kai év rij karapopi wapddpopor.

“Hy pey obv & xaxdv tpérytas 4 voices, mévrov émt 76
wdniwoy eribidovrov, évros EBSéuns ofSe Ovijcxoucr & ovy-

* Wigan and Ermerins read  Oxpuije dvaxvoije to their read-
Oepniic tic dvamvonics but the al- ing.


teration seems to me uncalled ' Hippocrat. de Morbis, iii. 16, 4,
for. I should prefer td ri¢ vil. p, 144, ed. Littré.


APETAIOY KAIIIAAOKOY


EPI


AITION KAI SHMEION OZEQN ITAQON,


BIBAION 4ETTEPON.


TINAX TON KE@AAAION.


Ky.
Tlepl Hepurvevpoving a
TMepi Aiparog "Avaywyiic - Bw
Tlept Evyeoniig ZA
Thepi Katowy 28
Tsp XoMpne a 2
Tepi Badeod spa Hae S oe
Tiepi ray card rd"Hwap dtivy wadiy ar ie
Thepl ric card riw Koidny dking vovoou =. wets
Liepi rav kara roig Neppoic bfiwy wabav . - o
Tlepl rey card ry Kiorwy btiuy xadav wo
Tlepl ‘YorepigHinyig sk
Tlept Zarupijcews Ma: He ae AB


18 TEP] OZEQN WAGQN, BIBA. A’.


youre’ Bépas 8 iesora. sduxly, wpérov raw dev mdo~
ovat ryépovres, of Kad paddov érépwv 7d mdBos SuabiBpdo~
rover, obre yap peydry dy ylyvorro peypow) év Enpp 7H
axivel, obre & mveipova %) perdorac. ypuxpérepos yap
4 ert Dns Hraxlys, ead dvarvoi cpcxpi), xal 4 due) derdv-
tov odbyn. véor 58 wai oi drt dxpijs, ob pada piv macyxover,
Grap ob8: pada wepuysyvovras’ obyap ay wdBoey ert opixph
airig ob83 cpixpiy preypoviy® ext 88 rolow peyddot
pelfov 6 xivSvvos. aides teeta yootoves wevpirey drdp
Kai hocor Ovijcxover, td reydp cdpara pava, xal rd iypa
e¥poa, Kal woXd+) % Svazrvo} Kal droopy}. S0ev obdt peyddy
Emlovaras geyuorh fe rhs Auclys abroyhy 2 vfde wp
wdbel.


® This is tho reading inthe Askew rins. There are considerable varia-
MS, which is approved of by Erme- tions in the other editions,


APETAIOY KAIIMAAOKOY IIEPI AITION
KAI SHMEION OZEQN IIAGQN,
BIBAION B’.


Kep. a. [epi Tvevpovins.


Avoics totes mparoct, tpodi Kal rveipart, ta Spa fF,
rouréwy 8) aroXday exucarporépy % dvarvon. ty yap erly
ame dary, obe ee. jiaxphy Biapebse, 602 abrlee Orfares
GrOpemos. spyava 5é pupla, doy) wey pives, 6835 dprnpin,
neon 88 rvetipeov, BmpnE 88 rveipovos Epywa nad Boys GNA
ria pev bxeos Spyava podvov Siaxovécrar TG top" mveiwav
88 ead rip alrhyy laxet ris Sdais: evlfes yp abréov wéoor
amhdyyov Gepyav iy xapsia, fwijs Kai dvarvojs dpyyj. H5e
Kal rp wveipor Tis Odxis TOD Yuxpod iépos Thy roBijy
Gbod degrbyes yap abriv, Ewes 82 xapSin. mpirov
rovyapoby iv wey 7} xapBln mdOp, ob els paxpdv Tod Bavdrou
4% epBors.

*Hy & rvetpov, ert pay opexpy th alrly, Siomvora’ Goee
xaxirs, Odvaros pxctoros, fw jo} Tus dxénrae emt 88 weydde
adbel, Sxoiov } peypov), mveypos, dpovin,, dmvowa, EheOpos
adrixa’ ij5e éorly fy xadkopev mepimvevpoviny, ¢deywov)
708 mveipovos, Edv dg uper@, ebre Etvertiy airtooe
Bépos 708 Biopmxas, deavin, fy pobvos Pdeywiiry 6 mrejpaw.


OZEQN TAGQN, BIBA. B’. 23


perdoracts dri Tod mheuptov, fy wélov 7d deyabdy inroyiy=
vyrat. xiv pey és Evrepow 4 xborw 7d dwd rijs wAcupis
wapwxyereiOn mwiov, és wey 7d wapavrixa dpijicay dmd rhs
Trepemvevpovins Edxos 52 waxpoxpdvioy laxovaw év mevpi,
AA meprybyvovrat. iy 82 és tiv avetpova spprijoy 7d miov,
eloly of dorerviyncay «ad dOpdp éxxtos, wat dvayaryiis


Keg. f'.  Tept Atparos Avaywyis.
Aiparos gopis ris but ordparos iBéae Stor 4 pey Sud o7d-
Haros ded Kedadijs nab rév riSe deyyelor d3ds 5¢ inrepan,
daptrryeOpor, tia kal dpyal eroudxov nal dprnpins. dva~
xpenyuoe 8 wal Bnyd cpuxph xab mpoxetporépn és 7d Tope
drrepedyovrae td aluar ds tH ye did ordpatos, ob82 dvd~
xpewyes mapopapred Eumrvars iS xadieras éml 88 wadrov,
tw Bpaxén 4} hop) rod aluaros, cal ordySny Kat dOpéov ard
Tis wehadis, i) dard tod oripatos &y, ob Kore dvayaryiy
xadkerat, dN’ i) 7 abrd, 4 mrices,! 4) aisoppayin.

“Hy 82 vipGer divin dd Bcopnxos xal raw ride omhayyvor,
arvetyovos, Tonxelns dprnpins, tay mapa rip paxw, i dm)
rovréew gop) ob mriats, GAN’ dvaywy) xadéeras, wis. doe
Tews ris S806 rotvopa Exovea.*

Equcia B dupoiy 7a piv Ed opuxpd eal wadpa, dxécov
Kai 7d xeplov, &v0a kat dvayoryiis xal wricws  Evvaryery):
'Ermerins suppresses ) wrieg,as tate to expunge these words, ns
I think, unneecssurily. being a gloss on the text, Instead


+ Wigan ix not eatislied with ri¢ of doing this, I should mther be
6805; and Ermerins does not hesi- disposed to read, rijg iZsdov,


pre TLEPI AITIQN KAI 2HMEIQN


ra 82 éxdorys Ba peydda Kal roddd Kal émieapa, olow
éxarépny jmiBiov Sayavas. iv obv dad Kebadjjs tp, eri
“piv TONG 7h alpare plo nal whim Ta mapedvra, opsKpa
88 ev Gdéyy Kal cpixph th wrice Bdpos adréows, roves,
Grov jyor, eptOnua rpoodrov, preBiov Sacrdcres, cxoTd=
Sivos+ Kal mpd robrav 8 4 alrin edonuos, mary, Yikes,
eyxatares, oivopduyin: Hide yap GOpdov miwmrdnoe tiv Reba-
Nyy, GOpbov Kal exyéee exparyévtos drryelou eri 8 cpixph
péOy mrbaves €E dpaubows. loxeral more bid pwev aipop-
payin EuviOns- els repay 8 tpewopérn dvaryaryiis pavra-
olny rapéxet. iv ov ard xepadijs Ep, yapyakucpes tare-
pays, dvdxpepyrus arucv)), xal eri ride 1 mrbcw Aiterar
Oupads epybyverat, xal eb pdéda Bijocouct. jv Be és viv
dprnpiny did tis trepams ecpuy, tore Bijoccovres avdryoucr
kal ie éati 4 dardry rota iyyeupévoure dvd omddyyvav
rév xdérobev dvdyecBar. eopéer 88 nai & tiv ordpayov
ard ris Kepadijs, ebre Eby vaurly Eudovew For. 82 wad Abe
Grady, d3 dmb oroudxou pépecOat Soxéev. iv 587d ard
Tis mrbcws alua, Tayd piv od xdpra, xpouj S¢ pédav,
Nelo, Suarov, duvyes Erépns odcins. ypewrropévoure yap
ebOds él ry yrdocav Epyetar etpoyyiroy, jmidios dmo-
Avopevov: jv 68 Kal iy brepdny Kabopéns, Sacvtépny Kal
ecdbea Syreat, wal rd word taiwov- intpin 5e dpeécer
ami, cpixp), oTippara pév és riyy trepamy, Kal rade yur
xpd. eri yap toict Peppaivover nal rotor dpatoder Kat
evpbvover % popi) pelwvr wat rode Td téxpap Tijs dard Tijs
Keparis wrictios: és S& tiv Kxepadiy nevidores i) dit pre-
Bav, 4) bia puvéwy, % i’ Erépns Starvoijs. wal rdbe xpi)
taxéas Spi, jy yap 7d alua ei roddav xpévov ty, wedrérn
nev Epylverae rij hop Eos 88 roicw rH5e yaplorce és ird-
SeEv rob alwaros Edxobras 82 Kai dprypla, xat Biocoves
dyri Tis xpiurfios, robvrebbev 88 POopiis yiyverar %) apy}.


OZEQN ITAOQN, BIBA. B’. 25


'H 82 ard Odpneos nai risv vépbev omddyyver aipatos
Hopi dvaryory) kadéeras ore 88 xdpra wey ddeOpin, jy ard
tov réw emixalpwy expayérrav ép, i) Koidms Preis Tis &y
KapSlg dd rob ipraros Siaxoveumévys 7b alua, #) ris 7H
pdxe maparerauévns maxelys dprnpins. aipoppayly yap
Gkwomep dv apayi xai Svorvon dixwtos SdeOpos: ola be
ard rreipovos, i} Thevphjs, it) dprnpins ris tTpnxelns, ooor
piv dFas Ovicxover, ody jimota 88 twmvae Kai pOloves
whyvovrat. rovréov 88 doPevertépn 4 ard ris Tenyelys
dprnpins: iv 88 ard oropdyou i) Kording éuéyrat, obre
kdpra édebplas texover, wiv mavu mod} aipoppayln ep,
obre 4 GNekes paxph kat mowidy iy 88 ard jyratos Kal
amdnvis, ob pnidly pty, ode Evvexsisr és yap ry Kordtny
al Evrepa rouréwv 3) aréxpiars érotporépn. od piv oddé 4
Graber bia rvedpovos Kai dprnping, abivaros, i) démrietos.
wal yap & muperois dxd ordnvis Kal Fratos Sia pay
aipoppaytover, war’ tke tof omAdyyvou Tov pueTiipos
péovros. tdrroe wey ody ad? dverep % drywry) olde Kat # és
xlvduvoy # ddeBpow Scapopy}.

Oi 88 rpémroe tpets Eacw f yap dxd prjktos drryeiou, 4
SiaBpadowos, 4} dpauiowos dvdryerat. prjyvuTat pev obv éfa~
wales, 4 orp, 4 errdas SyGe0s, #) dvwOjoe,? 4} dard
thfous Gwar, f xal Boj, nal dpyh peyidy, i} rey Gg
Syoly alrly, cre abrixa émt rh dprnpig AéBpes 7 alya
dexgerav jy 82 dod Bpdcros, yp eravepwriy, et xore
mpdabey EBnke SvOparros, f Siomvous yéyove, H) vavrin, i}
Eperos Srrye dps. de yap roudwSe moduxpovlew Buea lerat
Ta doyyeia peipare Euvexki wat word Kai Spepdi.  éajy oly
? ‘The common reading is dya@i- ing, I feel confident, will bo admit-


ou, Exmerina reads ) ivram dy- ted to be the truc one by any im-
Owe dvafion, & very partial critic,
emendation. My


26 TIEPI AITION KAI SHMEION


arodney Evyraxivra Kal Nerruvdévra és rédoy dravadwbf) rd
dpréyovra tuna, 7 alwa exyéer % 88 &E dpaubows dppa~
opis wav, Bid 7d8e obre odd}, obre aOpon, obbre mayéos
aluaros dpawbor 82 rév dryyelov 1d NewTdv droTiBéeTar
dy Se moda adducbiy dv xoldy yehpy abbey dvdyntac, wa
xirepoy pay éwvrod ylyveras, od piv mayd xdpra, odBe
peray, dxotov ainddayr wheiov 88 rg wrujOei, ds dod
ABpolcios, ebbds dvahéporro. rode 7d elBos vis dyaryis,
syuvatkt cbs érirav od xaParpopévyas tdbe erriutivia yiyveras,
kat év thot aizijios meptddoure tis xabdpows érupalverat,
Kai érl ries mpobeopines Tis amomavaws loyerae Kijv yd)
ini 4 yurn, & wordas wepiddous dvrurepteice 4} dvarywyir
pereEerépnot 88 Kal dreppdryn Ta dryyeia Tq TAAOei.

Auapophy ‘vis -drayeryhs, wah eb aE dpraplas, # GreBbe
dydyouro, pédav pév ydp Kal wayd Kal pnidios mpyvipe-
vov, Hv dmrd preSds, Kal Hocov és xivivvoy péret, wal exi-
exerat Oaacoy. iy 58 dx’ dprnpins, avOby Kal rerrdv,
xal ob pdda mipyvuras, xat 6 xlvduvos dxbrepos, Kab # eri.
oxects ob pdra pyidly. ai yap Siaopikies tis dprnpins
alpoppayins mpékrnow totéovrat, Kal 7d Tpdpa ob cuudves
Th modvKwnely.

Anrbekss 82, fy wey dard SaBpadcioy paxpi, xat ob pnibln,
ral oparepiy ind yap edrdelpews & odudpvow rd Edxos ode
aducvéerar xaos yap, ob tpdya yiyverar emi 82 rior
Pike 4 cbppvers Erowporépy. yrater yap dMujrov rod
Tp@paros Ta yeldear Ere Hide dy 4 Suadhop) Sevrépn es xiv=
Suvov, doweordrn 58 4) drt riot dpaubowe loxerae yap
abropdras, xat intpin orinns Kal Eepuks lear}.

Xnpavréot 62 Kal oi réarot, ag’ dvrep dvdyera. Evvd
yap WOM onpeta, Kal 4 dad pnidin, nad igrply Erépn.
amd ctopdyou piv ov obre Nyy €E dpaudovos dvdyerac’ 4
yap Taw Bpwparay re kal rov ropérov Wikis Te Kal oTinis


OZEQN MLA@QN, BIBA. BY. 27


és mixvwow dye Td pépea drdp ob8i SiaBpacres Euveyses
lot, wal roe paddoy tis mporépns’ Ta yap dvabdxvoyra THY
pevpdrov ob xpooloyerat wodhav ypévoy, GAN i} arerricOn,
4 Boman xdro. ovvnGectépy 88 cropdym doriv 4 phkes.
ai odv droppayj xore, aipopparylas ob Kdpra peyddat,
Sxoias dri Bopneos. iayva yap vibe Ta PrcBla, cpexpal
82 wal dprnpias idéy 8876 alua ob xdgra pédav, »} iwogav-
Boy ob xataxopiws, Netov, } orddowws pepeypévov, Fev vavrin


4 aris rot Edxcos drt rotet xatarivopévouet’ moddov Be
HidAoy, iy Yyuxpa xdpra H Gepua 4 otpupva Er eyyiyreras
82 xal aévos 708 cromdyou, pereferipauce Bd phage pera
gpévov' Eueror preyparadbecs’ éravapépovos 8é Kore, ériy
&s pros 4} votcos érerabij, xat pétwy éy drrocrrin, rovréwv
mee wruperoh ob pada Evveyées, dNAd pepBe-


So pe ale ae eae wy dri
dprnplys 7 tv 88 dard dre Bds, wodAdy Te wehdyrepov, oNhOY
82 wal maryercrepovs vautin odd) nai sueros preypdrov
wal yodwdéov, toler curiotcs cuppeyripevoy tb alua, iv
mpoBeSpsien drOpanos: &y yap 1h airh xopy dupe dua
Adlferas eal 4-1pop) xal-rd alua, éfepebfier srodAal, Spo
pabdees* xijv piv odd) Evddcyij, arropin, cxorddwos: iy 52
ueOf abe, jmtfoves. Exdvror, eavowdees 7d otprray, wovos
Euveygs ris wovhins,

Amd 52 ris tpnxelns dpraplys wxpdv kab obdSpa EavOdy
70 alua al Eby Any) dvdyouor xiv wi) dvdeywor 58, Sinve-
néws Biecouer alaOnors 88 kai mévou, &vBa b Bpdyyos, 4
axpiv ze vipber } tmepler guarhy Roaryystees, dais:

"Hy 82 dari: wvedpavos jj, GOpdcas 4) dvaryury)}, emi 58 watdXov,


28 TIEPI AITIQN KAT SHMEIOQN


el de SiaBpdcws, fv Anyi word} EavOdv xataxopios,
dbpabes, orpoyyidov, ds Env dx’ Ags dvaryoryiy Ba-
xexplaBar ddrAd Kai 4 év Erg aeyyel@ opi) rev Tod Baipn-
Kos dvayontvoy Ay Kal Sacricas dy ra Eyppeprypéva
ex mapabécwos, as bvra pépea Budpynkos ris ra 82 ibény
caproeidéa Soxolns dv metpovos Eupevac pépen. Peopnxos
Bdpos, drovin, épbOnwa mpoodmov mohNov Te jeidRov TouTE-
ost.

“Hy 6&2 dard Ocopyxos éravin, és To mpocbev Kata 7d oTépvoy
moves Sacnpaiver tod eppwydros jeépeos. BE ctyrovos
xat podg dvdyouoa. 7d 58 ala EavOdv od xdpra, péows
may), dvadpov. iv 5¢ xal mvetpov éx ris mapddou Evyra-
Pion, mpochibot rod ddpwbeos* ddd yap Bcpneos és dpry-
plny aveipeoy.

*Hy & dri mrevpiis, Fdv Anyd per, wédav Be Kal detov,
xdxobpov, Bpwopiides, sxoioy ris onmedovos, Tovos Tis Thev-
pis Ets. moddAol yodv OvijoKoves mAcuperixdy tpomov Edy
muper@.

"Dpn 8 péper typi) val Peppy. tordvde rd dypdv Kad
Ocppov tap. Setrepov 7 Bépos’ perérmpoy hooov, yeywov
88 jpaorar Ovijcxouce 8 Oépovs piv padiota aipoppayin*®
HBvayreamehi yn '00 indarn way chal sphyvorrasirore Napoy Gab
repor, Pdeynar# kal mruperotos navosBerr. pOwordspy 82
ths errimav jmidios Bbac yiyvortat.

Abpéov 58 eipijobar, em mdcy aluaros dvayary), xiv
puxph, tps chy A8n papsey. 7d paybrra, Sreras.Bvebynin,
Sucedmiorin, dréyrwos Tob Blov. tis yap obtws ebotabijs
as dpi piv cwuriv opayi Ikehov merovOéra, pi) oppwdén
Bards Gaverens kad. ipdp ead x bbe vay! tebeoy. nak Ta
Grxtpasrepa, SKotov of radpot, aluopparyln Ovijcxover dxiora.
GRA Tide pev ob péya Td Odipa, Odijpa Ba péya r6de.
eri qap Th dd rvebpovos pop) potvy yaderwrdry coven


OZEQN MA@QN, BIBA. B. 29


ote drorpryvwaxovet éovrdy of dvOparrot, xiv iy 7 toydre
bwor. Boxéw 52 Eywye viv rod srvedpovos droviny alriqy
Fupevas’ rivos yap xiv opixpds Ep, Odvaroy dppwdéer wad
tort dy tolct mreiotoae poBepwrepos 4} Kaxlev drovin dé
kal éy roice peyddowe xaxoict, apoSin Bavdtov, nal tore
kaniav i) poBeparéon.


Keg. y'. - Hept Svyxomis.


Ed ye Sras 5 intpds, 788 6 Enudrys, ed ye xiesjows
tobde Tod xdeos. axurdérou xaxod dors ovoya ri pév
yap wétov i) dxbrepov cvynomis Suvdpeos ; rh 58 obvopa
Srepov eis érlchnoey tobbe rob mparyparos WadXoV conpoy ;
ri 88 Kapbins @Xo Karpubrepoy és Lay ij ds Odvarov ; obBé
Diy cuyxomiy dmatoy Tis xapSins vovoor §upevat, i airy
alvos tis ev adtén tod Siv Buvdpios récoy Te Téxos TOD
Erepov, roujde kal (iy. kore yap rd mabos Mow Tov
Seopéw ris els Lany Suvdusos, avritow rij averdce Tob
dyOpdrov div. rijade yap amplE raBdpevov ob peBinat,
ON’ és Siddvow tpére. Kat ob pbya 7d Odipa. Kal yap
kat Eepa wdBea t8ia xai erixatpd twwv peptwov earl,
oloimep dudiver, kal rouréav dkdmreras’ BouSaves piv of


4 The reading in all the MSS. is, hesitation in edopting it, provided
& xégev ob —wonls which evidently there were any anthority for it; but


have no meaning. ac- this, I fear, is not the ease. I have
cordingly erases them, with the — therefore ventured to substitute Oxu-
three following—«axod lore rérov in place of it; and Lum per


LANE MEDICAL LIBRARY
STANFORD UNIVERSITY
MEDICAL CEN


q


RO, CALE aR


4


380 HEP AITION KAI SHMBEIQN


Dowudidees nal opiipa xaxorjGees eE fpraros* €E dddov bd
ybpovrat obdevds. veipa 58 réravos, ércdiypin 88 neparfs.
de ody Kal 4 cvyxom) Kapding dort Kal fwijs rodeos.
érécor 8% oroudyou wyfovras 7d mdBos Eupevas, obvexa
orrlowrl re Kad olvep, pereFeréporcr 88 nal yruxpe, % divans
éordOn, kad td Kaxiv é&yrd0n, of 8é por Soxéover kai rhy
dpatriy tprydy ris xepadijs, xal to Sépparos vodcoy apyé-
eabar, obvexev xavph wal réyEe abréwy pmitover of dpeverixol.
GAA yap Tis xapdins yerrévnya nalpiby éore d erdpaxos,
€E obrrep Erxet 1) xapdiy olnetov % ay, v. Kal yap kab
Sid mvetpovos Erner mrveua els dvarvoiy 4 xapSin, dd
ody? mveipov && tons dpyiis dvarvée? ob yap év totoe
Opydvoirs ai Suvduces, GAN’ EvOa dey} Swiis hv Kad loydbos.
oripayos 5¢ ore dpyi obre ywplov foi} BraPijoerat Sé rus
Sia drovinv. xal yap nal Ta xapdioB6da Bpdpara ob tov
arépaxov civeras, GdAd bi abréou Ti Kapdinv’ eres Kar oi
émi roicbe Ovijcxovres onpeia oxover xapdins mdbcos,
aogirynods puxpods, d8pavéas, mérayow ris rapdins, éxi
andre Kaptepp, sKoTddivos, RevroOupln, vdpxn, Kal rapd-
cues peéwy, pas dioyeros, movdds, Yves dou, dvaccOnotn,
ddeovin. mob 5) tov orépayov micyew rade; arta 58
airéov Bia, vavrin, Eweros, amoavrin, Nye, Epedéues, Of
peynin emi 88 rote kapdubocover Kal alcbijot dkirepot, as
Beiv kal dxovcar waddov i) mpécbev, kal youn elotabec-


#1 must own, that I feel somo-
what disposed to follow the sugges-
tion of Wigan, and read (jy: for
it is well known that pestilential
buboes occur principally in the
groin (i.e. near the pubes), as is
first noticed by Procopius (de Bello
Persico, 22,23). 1 am not aware,
moreover, that any of the ancient
authorities refer the pestilential bu-
boes to the liver, but to the glands


ofthe groin, Sce Agathias, Hist. v,
and the other authorities quoted at
P. Aorwer. ti. p. 232, Syd. Soe.
Eait,

? Were I disposed to indulge in
conjectural emendation, I should
certainly not hesitate in this place
to read, & tone rj dpxj. TE won-
der the present unsatisfactory read-
‘ing has escaped the animadversions
of all the editors and commentators,


OZEQN MAOQN, BIBA. B. 81


Tépot, Kal yuri) xabapdrepor, xal rdbe obx. els 74 mapetyra
Hobvoy, kat és td péddovra pdvries drpentes. ur) ody Kab
aide oropixou ai duvduses, GAG Kapbins, EvOa Kal 4 Yruxiy
kak } pias airéns, els jy wai 7 wdBos } rev riSe Suvd-
pew.

"Eore 82} rijs votcou i8&) kedvers tod révou tis ictos
én! airly yuk wad Sypsrnrs. wal ydp GBepyor, xal 7a efow
Kai rh Ee, xad dupor al yuypiv dvamvéovet, Kiv ee
peyddwy Kal xavewdiov dott muperay, && dymep ékdwrerat
i Evyeom}, ebre wey ydp Epparae  piows, wal dor eb-
Kparos, mdvrav pév xparéer, mace 82 onpuaiver, xat bypp,
nal wvedpart, kai orepecias, Kal rh Tobrwv edrakin Kal Evp-
werply & Soy Bieres tiv AvOpwror iy 82 ris pdcios 6
Scopes, touréors 6 révos, AvOG, rére yiyerae Ts wdBos.
wardpyet 5 airéoy xadcos, bs dare rowwrde,


Keg. 8. Tept Kavowy,


Tip piv raven xai Spypd nal rewrv, uducra 82 ra cow
dvarvor epi), ds de mrupds, jépos drwy weyddrn, Yuxpod
exiBupin, yrioans Enpirns, adacpos xerMéov Kad 3épparos,
dxpea Yuxpr, otpa xoMBada karaxoplas, cypurvin, opuy-
Hol muxrol, cyexpol, xrurovr SgOarpol edaydes, Kawrpol,
tmépulpov mpocdiou ebxpoln.

“Hy 88 emi addov ably 1d wabos, péfo Ta wdvra Kal
Kaxia’ o¢vypol cuexpéraror Kal truxvoratos, wip Enporatov
Kad Spisiraror, qpaipin mapdhopos, wdvray drrwatn, Seyi
Bees, Yadoar yuxpod ériBuyuin, rolxov, eabijros, éBdseos,
trypod xeipes Yuxpal, Oévapa Ocppsrara, bruxes medbvol,
dvarvoh wuxiwh, voris wept pérarra Kal ednldas.

“Hy 88 & dxpov Enpérnros nat Oepuacins tien % picts, 7
Hey Bepyiv és Yruxpiv, 6 88 abxyis és crop Spiny tpémeras.


82 TEEPE AITIQN KAI SHMEIOQN


ai yap tov mpyyydrov ey 7d Soyarov ererdates eis riyv
évavriny peraBddrdover (inv. eri oby WOH ris gious
Ta Beopi, robe doth } avykom), Tore iphs dayxeros dvr
Tob cdparos, dvasrvo} yup), dtwds dvd pivas wovdds,
ddufrot, eEjpavrat yap ta 7’ Eda, drdp nai ra aXe Sypa-
Aa Spyava, oréua, ordpaxos' odpa rerrd, vbarwdea™
Koidin 7a word pev Enpi, kore 88 wad olor dropéper
Bpaxta xoruddea, movdds wAdbos, Stappées 83 wal ra doréa
Avopevar wai dd mdvrov ads dy moraym es 7a to
popr.

Vuyiis xatdoracis,? alePnors ciara xabaph, Sidvow
Aer), youn pavriny. mporyvyvecnover pev ody mporricTa
Hey duréoiee rod Blov ri peradrayiy Srera roict Tape-
cdot mpodéyouer 7a ables Codueva’ of 88 adréous piv kof
Gre wal ddroddocew* Soréover ri droBdor 88 ray elpn-
pivoy Cwipdfover SvOpwrot. perebérepor 82 wat mpooda-
Moves riy Katovyouévon tial, Téya ev TapedyTas dpeivTes
adrot pobvor, tad dewris Kal Kabapis aicbijcws, raya &
abrav Tis Wuyiis mpoyywwoxotons, kai Supyevpéys tods
divSpas olow Evvécovrar, mpdcbev piv yap ev roics iypoice


1 Ermerins transposes all this
clause, Mipavrat......0rdpaxoc, 10
the beginning of the chapter, after
Géipnarog. 1 find difficulty in recon
ciling myself to this change; in
deed, in either place, the mesning
of these words is not clear,

2 There haa beon much differenes
of opinion respecting these two
words, I regard the construction
as an Attic anacoluthon, of which
many oxamples occur in our au-
thor’s works, and in those of lian
and Arrinn, who wero about his
‘age. Ermerins mentions that Kuhn
was disposed to regard thom as be-
longing to the Glossema, This, I


know, was suggested to him by the
late Dr. Kerr, of Aberdeen, whose
correspondence with Kiitn I saw at
the time it took place, about thirty
years ago.

* ‘This conjectural emendation of
Petit, which is adopted by Ermering
and Wigan, is an ingenious substi-
tute for the common reading, 6\Ao
gael, which evidently has no mean-
ing. A still more simple emenda-
tion, however, would be, EAAo paa0as
—that is to say, the spectators
“ fancy that they speak strange, i.e.
incoherent," See Liddel and Scott's
Lexicon under d\Aog, for this mean-
ing of the word.


OZEQN IIAGQN, BIBA. BY. 33


chs dy ING Lony wal Sopot direl 88 rdbe ebijytrnae  vodoos,
Kal dd rey dbbadpdy ri axdtv ere, dpéover rd re ev 7B
éps, Kad uv +H) Yruxsi ybyovras udvries arpendes of BE
& roakvbe Newréryz0s typi Kad Tis yduns ddvypévor ob
peda roe srepryiyvovrar, EEnepamarns H5n ris Swruelis Suvd-
pos.


Keg. €. Tlept Xodepns.


“H xorépn warivopads dare pop ris Odys rhs v rw marrl
& by ordpayoy Kal tiv xoidiny kai ta Evrepa, dEirarov
Kaniv’ BuexBker 58 drepBev wav & Eueroy 7a bv TH cTopdyy
Gdifipeva: Sid 88 ris rdrw Siefd8ou ra ev rH Koidly Kai
trois évrépous bypa. iSéqy 5¢ ra mpdrra piv Warddea re bv
énérov, 7a 88 8: Bpns nompava bypa, dvodbear dares yap
Evvexées al rijobe mpopdares’ jv 82 rade drrokhvaby, prey-
pardbea, Erevta yodwobea’ Ta mparra pev pmidlas, drdvas:
Grera bi Eby évrdceot pév 6 oropaxos, yarrhp 52 perd


oxpipa.
“Hy 82 és ri xdixcov eriBi8G, xai otpior peifoves, Nevro~
Oupin, Eervors pedéwv, drropin, dmocerinr jy 88 nal te mpoo-


a TIEPL AITIQN KAI SHMEIQN


*Hy 88 és redkeuriy Hep 7d Kaxdv, drdp Bpot dyOparros,*
xody pirawa dvw kal xaro. obpa cxebeiow xboris id
omacpor ddd’ obde odpov ddikeras tard ris és rd Evrepov
rév inpiv peroxeretcews: ddevin, ogvypol cpexpéraror
Kal mukvorator, dxicor eri Evyxomiy évrdotes duérou Euve-
xées weveal, mpobupiae reverpdbees, Enpal, dxvror Odvaros
Srdsbuves kal olerier0s, cmaaud xal mvvyt xa) duére Keg.

Héper pev 7d wdBos Spy pev Oépeos, Seirrepov 52 pOuvs-
apor, ip Heoov, xed Heora’ jruelar 8, al rav véeov
rai dxpatévrov yipas feta, Tabla 8 Touré wadXov,
GN ob Cavarddea.


Keg. <'. Tlept Eideod.


Eyrépowee ylyrerae yey Preypovr, dbivqy edeOpiny Euro
cea. Onjcxovar yap puplor orpépoicr xaprepoiae eyyly-
verae 82 nad mveiua yuxpiv, dpyy, obre Kérw mephoas


pevoy év odynce Tov divw EiEeo robverev nat rd mdBos
éridnow Eoxer ciredv. iy mpis roils otpégors 5% Kal
leas Kad padBats trav evrépwy &p, Kai roudd Td droyde~
tpuov wmepicxn, xopbayyos 7} Towirdy dome obvopa"
Eynows wey dp a padBakis* xopbiy 52 evrepwy émaivypor.
kal yap Kat érvyopSida 75 pecevrépiov exixdnoxoy of mpoc~
ev, 7a Te peomry) veipa Kal Ta wyyeia Kad Tods ipévas Tods
droygias ri érrbowr.

Alrin rob eideod cuvexyys Hev Brapboph ovriwv moNav Te
ea roudNaey xa) 0d Euilev, xa Oxy dx? Dn drevrln,
paduora § emt rotor eideddert, oxoiby Te perdy online.
oie dBéenros 88 wrap, 1) YES, #) yuxporoaln ep! iBpérre,


+ Ermerins places the words drdp the nocessity for this change is not
Upot GrOpwroe after ry2uc, but very clear.


OZEQN IAGON, BIBA. BY. 35


ny 4} xavbir xad olor 8 Errepor és tov Boyeor Edv ximrpye
KaréBn, Kal ob devda8n & iw Koidiny, GX dvedsjhOn Bin,
rouréous toy erupreypalven ra xdtrm evrepa. Fvrnbes Se
7d wdBos radios, ole tsrep dy Kat dreyrln 3, kal 7d BAAB0s
Buadiépdexover paidrov did re ro Eos wad tiv iypéryra
Tiv éredpur ddaOnpa oder yéporres 83.05 whda yar arda~
xover, meprylyvarras 82 fjeurra. dipy Oépeos theres piidrov
Typos, PBrvomapor 58 xerpdvos, dpspoiv Se rt wadrov Bépos.

TlodAok jtv ody él rovrous otpadotee Grijcxoves airixa®
pereEerépoiee 52 wal miov eyylyverat, wat adlis pedavbey
tore ro Evrepov Kal diacaréy Etec, kai obrws éfé\urov.
Fuverts 88 abréois, ef pe ervereds eldeds ety, movos Exo
cbpevos, croudyou mrdbos, éxduaws, waraxin, pebres evad
ead obdiy &$erobar, otMln SroBopBopltoven ‘pooper, dar
opin peopl Bpns, békobor be dredées.

“Hy 82 driractw loyn 4 eldeds, wdvreov dives 4 pop, mev-
pdrov, ¢riqparos, yorjs. eyoboe yoiv rdbe Ewxpor,
uxpol 13 wav oxivos révos rounds, dvarrvoH Kany, Bxra-
réow*


"Hy 88 nal Ovjoxew pAddwot, Bpds yruxpis, Sveoupin,
Bpn arorernupdry, Gy wb loxvdv Oaopa beddoar xé-
mpav Eweror, dvOparrot dipwvor, apvrypol mpbabev nav dpacoh,
apuxpol apd Cavdrou 88 opixpérarot, Kal muxvoraro. kab
dedelrovres. rade yey oby rolae Newtoics évrépoics Fup~
ominrret.

‘Arip xal xoodo Ta aba mébea yiryverat, kat rh Evvovra,
Spore, Kar 4 abr) cvpspopr}. rouréwy 8 pereftrepor Biads-
Spdexavel wore, iv wiov dpyévyras Th wiry. aitly 62 7d
BdBos rd capnoeidis rod évrépov. mévos 88 loxvas wer, 782
Ofds éwl roice Newroias évrépoior, wAdros 62 Kal Bdpos

ee epere See the which explain the difficulties about
Notes of Wigan and Exmerins, the text without removing them,

D2


af TIEPL AITIQN KAL SHMEIOQN


*Hy 88 és redeuri jxy 7d Kaxdv, drap Spot &vOparos,*
XOM) pAdcuva diva kal Kato. odpa cxebdioa xioris id
oracpoir XX’ ob88 odpov dditerae ind ris bs 7d evrepov
Tov iypiv peroxeretioews: dpavin, opuypol cusxpiraroe
Kal rruxvérator, dxécoe eri Evyxoni dvrdaves duérou Euve-
xcs weveai, mpobvplas rewvecpcddees, Enpal, dyvdov Bdvatos
dmedvvos xal olericros, cracu@ nal mviyl nal enero Kev@.

Déper padv rs maBos pn pev Oépeos, Setrepoy 88 hOcvs-
mwpov, hp hacor, xerpiv Hora’ juxiac 8, al rav véov
kal dxpativrav’ yijpas ijxiora, wasdla 82 rouréav padov,
GAN ob Pavaradea.


Ke. =’. epi Eidcod.


‘Evrépows yiyverae pev preypovi, ddivnv dd<Opiyy euro
obca. Ovicxoves yap puplos orpopows xaprepoior eyyly-
verat 52 nal arveDpa wuxpiv, dpydv, obre Kdtw mephioae
prlSvoy otre dive dveNOéevas’ plpver 2 érurodd Qucod-
pevoy ev ddbynet TOV dvw aiEeor robvexev wal rd wrabos
éxinknow koxev eidedy. iy mpos toils otpédors 52 Kat
leas Kai wddBakis ray évrépwy Ey, xat moudd TO droydo-
tpov imepicxy, xopbayros 7d Towirdv éoTe oivopa"
Anas pev yap  wadOakis’ yophi) 8 evrépwv eraovupov.
wal yp wa) xnyophiBa 7) ererrépior eeledgoxov of pio
Bev, rd Te peony) veipa kai ra wyyeia Kal rods ipévas rods
dyoynas Tay évrépwy.

Airl rob efheod cuveyiis pév SiapBopiy cvrlwv woddav Te
nal rrouxideoy xad ob EvrnBéeov, nal Gdn ex’ GAQ arreyin,
pémora 8 él roiae cided@dect, dxoidv te peddv onrins.
ode dddxnros 88 wdyyh, } Yukis, }) yuxporocin ep’ iSpare,


* Ermerins places the words drdp the necessity for this change is not
Upot sivOpwnog after peyéduec, but very clear,


OZEQN TAGQN, BIBA, B. 37


Haxporepa 8% voodoues. tpyov yap airéov tod Kara tiv
Steupdrworw oie Forw dvdwauda, 0088 duBorsf emt 8) rv
apdiny Kal ra vépBev rod Biappdryparos évreiBey yap Tod
aluaros apécces.

“Hy eri wkSove airy, mayyp, } biapBophioe Evveyéae won-
Adv wal naxdv cetlov, ead oivopruyly, H WEL kaprepp, kad
vy riot midyoe yiyverac preypovh, coxuaros SrcOpos. Tip
ev yp ioBpixiov, ddapwmes, Spcpd, opvrypol vobpol, mé-
vou l8éq woiidn wai ravroln, GXore pév a Obivn Ori Tae
Sekid Beedprapévy, cbs Borde dd Béros eyxéec Oar, doe
88 orpddw ixéday addis 5é kore mévos apis, Baptraros
peony 88 ris d8bvys drovin Kal ddwvin’ Suippayya war
imefondos Exxovras: dmb réovBe yap. dyBos 73 Harap Horyro"
Bua 768e és why ear’ lew wrqlBa SBbym Kaprepy> BIE be dre
dijs mrpoBvply BE podvor xijy és rédos Kore ddienras, Enp.
dvarvoh Kari ob yap Evvrywmpter rH mveimove 73 Sud-
dpaypa, Evvopapréoy és Ewaywyiy cal didoracw. mvedpa
opixpov Axovar, éemvéouas peter xpouiyy weddyydopor, po~
MBBoedées dardcvrou' Hy bE re epocevéyKeovras puowbdecs 7H
rroyenBpl, pels yorsBers 86 lwcra, Bpasdees ravein,
Bidaracve neve), yaarhp dmoderypévn vd arora, syorsiBen,
Méoxpa, Ppayia® del 82 éravkéia ybyverar rh wdOea
youn ob xdpra mapddopos, voOph, peTéwpos, Terupapévn,
Srvos mauris, WOES dxpéwy, rpipot, plyea, ME Ker}, crac
eins, Lerepos, xodi) Expntos, xoMBaqoe 7d wav. jy Sb
Kal mpd EBSipuns pari, kal ddrous Exreve cvyvods+

‘Oxébcot 88 4) alpopparyin, 4) xoidins Tapdyy modhoict yodd~
Seo, # odporee axpiyrours cuyvoice Trav SdeOpov dinddEarro,


=


86 MEPI AITIQN KAI SHMEION


Yoxtov emi r@ xaidgy.® Sualocer 82 6 mdvos, ENore pdy exh
Tice Treuphet, ebre davracin eyylyveras mAcupiribos" Kai
yap vad mvperalvover oiSe adore BE bd THet voB Ros dv
Od8e Kat EvOa, ds Soxtew viv d8ivqv ipraros 4 owdnvos
Eupevarr adds xore ev Toice xeveddot, TOMY yap Td KANOv
kat mévrn Euxas Toveipevov' pereterépowre 82 nal és ro
epov derréov epelBet, wad és pnpods, nad Bidipor xpeuarrh-
pas. emt 88 roier xamrdccoior wero. mreives evol, ra be
Jaeliuera ewrdy aycdBeu;: 2rsionsSha. Keri. B2 Sierveles
kivBuvos roodvée dotvérrepos, dxdcoy Kat to Kadov TaY
Aewriov évrépwv capKoerSéorepoy Kal maytrepoy xal dvefuca~
Kxdrepov.


Keg. (.  Tept rv xara ro “Horap dftwv radar.


Tév dri xapbins oi ard ipraros otx dxbrepoy ev, éremo-
vérrepov 8¢ Ovijoxoves. kate yap aiwatos mdyos Td wel-
otov tyrap' hw Se ev rice widpor abréou Evyprécy Tus Oa-
vdrou altin, ob peiov okéos #) of dd xapdins Ovijoxover.
ipéor yap, nab révorer érixalpoict Kat Aewroict, Kat preyl
peyddyor eEipayras rade ta pépea. cs 88 Kal ra¥ copay
ddmpybovral tives, xa spuyiis eribupin rpde eyxdOnra. ai-
poppayln uty yap imeplaxe mavra rorrbv pikwars yap
pdeBeov Hrap.' yiyverar ov &v airép peyddn pév prey-
pov), oF Kdpta Evveyéos, ob88 vy toiow és ra érixaipa
xepla® pbdver yap eEOdv rod Gv GvOpwmos. apuxpo-
répn St Capuvd rovverev SiabiipdoKover pty trav ddeCpov,


2 Enmerins deserves great credit
for his ingenious emendation of this
passage. ‘The common reading is
‘mAddog and texoy, from which no
suitable meaning can be drawn. In
the Askew MS, we read ieyviv and
swdw. In it, by the way, the iota


subscriptum is generally want-
ing.

1 Hippocrat, de Alimont.

*T have followed Ermerins in
substituting Sv for dy, and rotow
for rusiv. Still neither the reading
nor the punctuation is satisfactory.


OZEQN HAOQN, BIBA. B. 39


mapa viv paw, nal dnd ris pdyeos bid rob fpraros ext
si eaphinn. robes qip 4 abr

“Hike ode 4 Ghd; coy yd Sorkin; H POpmracra. vorkes Sbbrt
wdBeot, naprepoior’ pla ydp ears waioa pereterépours 58
inrpoter potvn Sorte rapa ry faye vorden, oflvera ris es
Thy Kapdiny 7d onueia ob mpogavéa. evrds yp rod Babpy-
Kos Sarérarae mpos obbiy mpoouryoudyn, GAN’ évaswperjévy
7 Odpnee, & 7° dv dari rod Bragppdryparos dudiy 7H xapbip.
ip obv 7 peyddow xaxév loxn vivde viv $MBa, Evéxpupe
Ayardyr 8 bdonE.

Tiyverac 8 oby duh aiybe wiv @ikBa wad eiByara: are
Prprvpéyn aivopparyly tixcora erelver: SmepBev prev bude reb-
paves Kal dprnpins exxeouevou, A ev re Ocipyxe pays iv 8
rapa riv dpyiy, & viv xdrwo Kocdlnv rota évrépovae mrepe-
xéerat, tos (umdelesv rd Evrepa, ebre mplv Hy xabliv’ depavi}-
vat 73 alua, Onjonovor oike Hy 82 4 wordin wAnpevueyy
aluaros.

Diprerat 8¢ nad greynov} dugh viv gréBa, drdp wal He
atkus erelves Hv weridy ber wip wdy yp Bpuud, Baxries,
a ree wondinos dugoty &naBeapyutror, Bpayd 82 potvor
tmepixor, &s Boxter drrowivy Nemriy Eupevas Blpuny 4
82 GOpwros xalecBat Soxées opvypol cpexpol, TuKvérarot,


dveowacpéva, dBiivn bri befid padrov, kal waruds ride
mapaurens, wéxpe Tis Rayivos pereferépous 8 nal cijs
dprnplns rijs mapa viv payer, jy 5 opvypds & 7d Erepov
trroxérvSpiov Baonyalvy. Evprabiys yap Kad ipSe rybyveras
map’ airénv éx’ dpurrepa Keston, ws vis del +6 ravi


* The common reading is xpdéqy any interpretation, See Petit, Wi-
raG iy, which can scarcely admit of gan anid Ermerins,


38 TEPT AITION KAI 2HMEION


rovréoure 5 perd rpets {S8opdbas & dmicracw arbov To
iyrap tpérrerae’ iy 82 Ere oddev inrepBdddAD ypdvov dvev
drroordatws, & bipema dgpucrov rereuTa Suppadtor, Bpayu-
ora, Enpol Td cxijvos, Gdumbes. dkéwy erivpin, dorovos 9)
yebors, .
Theres 88 768e ro rdB0s POwwirrwpor civ wr\Bovs copatcor,
kal woulda dmreyity ip\uely 82, racéwv paddov dcp


Keg. 9. ep ris xara rv xotdnv prtBa o£elns
vovcou.


Amd trav wrvddov rod iraros eipeia Prop Siatooe phon
téy ro08e mepdrwv. det yap > Newra kal wredva oyito-
pérn bri rédos es dhavéa rio dYuow wavTy Tod Hratos
oxidvarar roict 88 Touréwy mépace Gov Pr<eBiv aepa-
ribcves Kata 7) otépa Evyxéovras, alrrep ex Nerréw Kat
mrevvew pétoves xal eddoooves ylyvovrac émt rédeos ey
hey <p fran dylan $XéBa pepidqy curayelpirrat.
rebber 82 Sovat eE drocylowos ywyropeven mépny Tob Fpraros
dduevéoyrar. % pev yap dv tov mpérroy NoSdv Eramepy}-
caca és Ta Kuptad airtou eEepadvOy trevra mepivaca 7d
Biddpaywa euapiver 7H xapdiiy Koldn Prey ide eadéerar.
9) 88 érépn, Tov Kaw NoBov Tov méwmrov Siamepijvaca weype
Tév xuprév, ert ri pdyw eer, wal ride waparéraras
péxpe trav loylov. drap «al i8e xoldy. otvoua rd adro,
obvexey pla nal duri dorey prep Thy dpyhy dard rod jra-
tos loyovea. ef ydp tus €Odot, Sveddoas dv Eracpa nal
amd Tis dvobey ris dri iy Kapdiny Koldys PreBds és Tv

* Ermerins reads depvain. But the end. It is, in short, an Attle ana-
common reading is quite in accord- coluthon, very common in the works
ance with the usage of our author, of that age, such as those of Jian


‘and § retained by Ermerins himself and Arrian.
In chap. x. of this book, near the


OZEQN ITAGON, BIBA. B. 41


iy Hey i yaorhp 4 4 xboris 7d wordy bmoépy, obBE duérou
Bek eb 82 poh, dr) ONG 7B YruypG 7d woNday dudoras yh.
exparyein yap dy SvOpwmos, et rocdvbe mivwy pndey diaxw-
poin, paar, #) odpoure, 3 Kordip.


Keg. @. Tept ra xara rovs Nedpovs dftov
malay.


Repel, hv ty rod dylaros.Ila'ob eda’ dlp 26
xlvBuvov, fv Kal re waOuee dEEws. Adevddees yap Thy piow,
& 88 EreOpov etijbeer? errixatpoy 82 abréwv rd Epyov, ih Te
Sidxpiors tév obpwy dd tod alparos Kai i) ardxpiocs.
"Exbyer 52 rijyBe f) MOos, #) eryeyvourn preyuovi}, 4
aipdrarp, ij re roubvbe ebre éx EupraBlys pév ris Bud vy
LBEqv 705 odparos Kaxdv ryiyverae obbiy, 4) 88 ericxects Ta
olpur wévra 1a Bard mpjooe.? ip uly rip Spiny dove


4 It appears to mo that all the the text by meddling with it, and
translators misunderstood the substituting ydp for dé nfter Iminai-
pen


‘Wigan and Ermering—*
men facile interimant.” Moffat r- —_ plied not to the whole body, but to


death?” which surely can imply no- in which Aretmus applies to
thing but that the affections of the a particular part of the body. See
kidneys are not naturally deadly, Morb. Diut.i.10; Carnt. Morb. Dint,
(Seo Liddel and Scott’s Lexicon i, 18; also Galen, Do Locis Affectis,
under the word.) In fact, whoever 19, Aristotle applies It ex-
‘will read the context carefully must —pressly to the kidneys, in the sense
see that this meaning in the only of the fleshy part of the organ, or
‘one in accordance with if, and with viscous, H. A. i.17,33. The mean-
what is said below, namely, that ing of the passage

the majority of enses are not fatal.


i
i


42 EPI ATTIQN KAI SHMEION


Ses, burn Kar’ dopiv del fixe Bapeia, Bidracs rév pepov,
p@Xov 88 Trav dugi 7d roxsySpior obpov erlexeces, ode
& To mdpray, GAL oTéyiny piv obpiover, erBuply Bd
TOAdy exyéas’ mANLpKpYs yap aleOnow. jv 82 Kad Td
odpov Spipd wad Saxvisbes &yyévyras, iktes, tpduot, orac~
pol, Erardcves Kal wAnpwaes dv inroyovSplar Ikédty 4
Evpopt) de nad EvvaloOnars vyiyverat rotct dd whijBcos
airiav Kai Biabbopiis dapvonBeias riv Koidiqy ogurypot 7a
mpirra wey dparol, vabpoi: iv 8¢ eri waddov 7d xandy miétp,
cpuxpol, wuxvol, rapayadecs, draxros, avoe Nertol, dbvve=
Bees, ob Sinverces, cal Eamlyns éxBopvipevor ds inci vigwos,
elra trrodépovrat & xia, os brd Kaydrow Thy ydpny ob
kdpra mapdpopor, Mpwbdees, wedbvol ra mpsewma: Hy Se
iixn ad0s Kore Tis obprjcvos 4 mpobvul, emt omacpoict wad
peyadrpor dBivyor Bpayd dv nat ordrybnv ekéxpuve, dre ope-
pov éravijxe ray mévev cra & Ta abd mwadwSpoptes:
dfbrara 5¢ Ovijoxover révb_ olow obbév éxxplver, dudcos Siy
Ovijaxover of whedves yap Teprylyvovras, } Tod MBov é riv
xboriv bi rav otpwv éxrecdvros, 4) Tis Pheywovis és miov
tperopérns, }) Kata Bpayd Suarveouéryns. iy yap Kat emt
opixpdy evbetis Siekip rd obpov jmidlws SiadiBpyorover iv
BreOpov* ypdvp 58 waxp@ POlvover iy Ew. dpbas rdde
of yortoyres wrdoyouert, Kal xatayiyovrat és atvrngiv tro.


case, owing to tho peculiar nature of
the affected viseus itself, but the re-
tention of the urine produces most
horrible mischief." Wigan trans-
Intes the passage thus, —“rellqui
corporis species, nullo affectus ex
contonsu, perturbatar,” Boerhaave
thas:—" quandoguidem ex consensa
affectionis ob formam corporis pro-
‘vonientis nulla creatur offensio?” and
Ermerins thns: “quo facto nullam
quidem malum oritur propter cwte-


sD


rarum partium cum renis subitantia
consensum." Of these translations
that of Ermerins approaches nearest
to the true import of the passage,
‘The other two have no distinct
meaning.

* ‘The text in all the MSS. is evi-
dently vitated. Ihave adopted the
mendations partly of Wigan and
partly of Ermerins, ‘The reforms of
the latter are sometimes too radical
for my conservative judgment,


OZEQN ITAOQN, BIBA. B. 43


Pepiuevor, pac 88 nal ydpac wad jrwias pépovor, almrep
kal rd ard ras noldas pdéBas.

‘Ekeppiryn nord alua dard rir vedpiv woXdav dBpéoy, wal
modAfjet tudpnos Evvexes Eppeer GAN’ ob Teves aipoppayin
Orijoxover, ddd rH preypovg 7H Ely alwoppayin ywyrouévy,
fy dreye0§ 73 ala’ 2 wrod 82 aE emcarysoros él weyédy
preypori} Ovijoxoves.


Keg. ¢.


Kioris yaher) piv dv vodcous dféyot wovijca xiv ad
Rowe EvpremivOy yarerwripy St Kat Oavatwderrépy, jy
Gg’ éwurijs dpEnras, xai yap nal duvatwrdry mdvra Eup-
rata roujjoat, xal vetipa, xal yvdpny. velpov yap 7} xtores
buxpir xal Neuxdv, drdp al roppwrdra to oixelov Bdd~
eos Spyvitiew Bi vis Hw opébios. ev gdp rh vesaiph
yactpl xarardro ie mpocwrdéra tod Owpnxos ddrad nab
Epyor abréns érlxarpov % trav objpww &odos.

Kijy ody pobvov ibe émieyeB i) MBourt, 4) OpspBoror, Hj rep
@Ag iin, } @arorpin Evppoph, Cavaribdes. emt yuvaixor
Hay yap abrkey wad dorépor greyuor) dvamvéter,). én
dvipdy 8, 73 teyarov, Td edd, To mapdpnxes Evrepov. ev
moddotos 88 de xaprepins dexovoioy ine albois év EuNASyoiot
4) Euvbeirvoiee wrnpoupérn Siarérarat, aSpaviy re wepioro-
Aajs obxérs peOlner, eri obv drlicxyn ta obpa, wrnpwates
wal rév Trepbev pepiov vebpay, olpytipwr Siatdoves


Tlepi ray xara rv Kiotw dftov rabav.


Pdeypivand dy ketal
next clause ho erases rd 00. By
merely changing ¢Asypovde into},


Tam persuaded that a legitimate


‘Foes. It is to be borne in mind that
the pAtypow7) of the ancients was a

rather than an inflamma-
tions i.e, it was bysos dduvmpéc, See
Foes, Be. Hipp.


44 TTEPI AITIQN KAI SHMEIQN


Aaybvav dbivn Bapeln, cracpis, tphpos, plyea, yrouny
mapdpopot. iy 82 mpas toice xa Edxos texévOy fh Preypo-
Viv, WOAAR pev ra Kana, SreOpos i wodrdby te Axéww b-
xiaros. GX’ dudt wey Edxeos Kal doroordotos wumdeos, Kat
tév dxéca pi) dftrata 3, ev roicw xpoviows NedéEerar
éxéoa 82 xarétea, al év & jpépyowy, 4 dAby@ Baecov, i
Bpdbiov Kreiver, dxoiov preypov, }) OpdpPar, t) AlBos es tov
Tpdxndov éumecwy, rept ravbe viv épéw. Hy obdv Te TouTéwy
Eup8p, otpav emiuryéores, byxos tv 7G troyartplep, odtvy
fein, wdvrn tis xovdins’ wepiracis ris KicTios, 6 d@ypos
Bpis tH Sexdry, fueroe preyparwdees, terra yoradees,
avks Shou, woddy 8 pido jy Se emi pélov 7d xaxiv
dprp, Tuperol Auyywdees, opvypol, drakiy muxvol, eal p-
xpol, épvOnpa tod mpocwvrou, Sipadsees, drropin, yrouny
rrapddopot, omacpol, emi 5& gdapydxoer Sydayrnploct,
xavOaplat, ) Boumpijart, al rvedpact eumlrparas % xbatis,
xal } Edpraca Koln Stacorépn, rai mdvra Kalo, Kal obx
els paxpov % Tod Oavdrou du8ors.

Aipoppayéer Kore xtoris* EavOdv re Kai Nerrov ride 7d
ala Ad’ odbdéy Te Bid rivb_ Ovyjrxover, xiv pi pnidiy 4}
Urla yeu, GIN en) Toles OpspRoics. nad ep ipreyuorgis
xlyduvos. wikis yap Kat véxpwors, Kal yayypawaous, Kai
7a ext rAde Kad pmibleos wreiver,

Peper SE ras vacous, xeipa, nal perdmwpov. dain Se
dai), Ere Be widdov ryfipas al 88 ddXae Spat xai ai Hraxiae
otrre Euveydos xal jriota xrelvover, dowkiorara 58 mdvrov


7a mala.


Ke. ca’. Mept “Yorepixis TMveyos.


"Ev rot Awybor Thv yuvaccey péonot eyxéerae 4 piirpn,
emdayxvoy yuvauciiov dyyiota Gwiddes. xuvéeras yap é&


OZEQN IIAGON, BIBA. B. 45


dwuréns fvOa xai tvOa eri ras Nawryivas: drap Kal és 7a aver,
heat! Tay dy oud dv 5iB por red) Geipitoky deh wha BY
GeV Bebeds 4 de Apcorepdy' 4: despa! abpheres
82 Kat mporerertépn és 7d xdrw, xal EvNUjPEnv elreopev,
mdvrm earl mravddys kal ebodberr dopijoeos réprerat, xab
rr aima Terav Gy Gerace 5é Toist Kaxodpovt, Kad adra pev-
yee Kalrd Edamav év rH dvOpdrre dork i botépn, dxoiov Te
Spor d> te.

"Hie oby fw eEamivns dvcloros yéryras, wad exerond dive
pelvn, rat &xBidonra Ta omddyyva, dwemvixOn Kore 7) dv-
Spares, Tporov Tov ériuprrixoy, dvevdev omacpin emié-
kero yap dukwos orevoywply iyrap, Sidppaypa, mveipoov,
wapSin.  robvexev darvoln Euveivas Boxkes xa devin. drdp
xa) al xapwrides Eupmabin rips xapdins wéfovras, Sid rébe
xapnBaplas v6, Kal dvacOnola Eiverrs xal xdpos.

Diyreras 5¢ xa do rdbos abrénas txedov ride Evp-
Hophi, Edv mvp Kab dpoviy, GX’ obx awd dorépys. wad
Slay spas 7a yuvarwjia drobiouy thee Se érépnor tade
obdty éxapiyer Kal ra pédea xevéorras dard borépys, dro be
Tod érépou rd Beos Herre. coh gM ghee piace


ap ProbpBiov.

iter oprepah fe Sepa: eliopperlen bpbns txlenects
Kal éxioa rode.

“Hy otv dipkyrae mdoxee mevevptrns dvw ris borépns,

Sevos Epryov mpijkios, Exrvers, drovin, yourdrewv dxpacin,


+ Kimara flciorty adopt the ? As suggested by Wignn and
of Wigan, and substi- Ermerins, there appears evidently to
Gaediowatea ler ethhyion Oh bea lacuna in the text here. None,
common reading. ee ee ee

tish


46 TIEPI AITIQN KAI SHMEION


orordbivos, Kal ra ryvia Miovras, Kepadijs mévos, xapnBapin.
ris GMBa vas dearipwdey vis puvs Ady} crv}.

“Hy 8 xararécwot, napdubrcovet,.........ev Tole tro-
xovbplor, Naryoves keval, EvOa i pn ris borépys, opvypod
Sradelrovres, dtaxtot, éxdelwovres, wviE xaptepi, adawvin,
dvaaOnoln, 4 dvarvol donuos, dcagis, Gxaros Kal dre
ares 6 Odvaros. obStv yap loxovor vexpirdes’ > xpoviv
Senidees. epvOpdrepar wiidrov péxpe wood Tob Gavdrou
Sp Oaryol puxpoy re eEleyorres, Napmpol, ob xdpra pev
drevées, drap 0088 xdpra rexappévor,

"Hy 82 peraxweénral kore & SMpyy 4 borépn, wplv és rédos
lvat 79 wdbos, SiadiSpdexoves ri wviya’ etre Koidin tmo-
RopBopttes, iyporns trav yuvateniwy térev, dvarvon) bacv-
tépn xal cadeotépn’ dxiaty ex tod mabeos H Eyepows, deus
xal 6 Odvaros &xvotos. Kai yap jmidies Toice avo mporye-
pl’ dep 982. puiBlon- dblovarae deptadoss enya
borkenp typol 82 xad of dpéves of dfs adrie: byply BE wal
7d ywplov, évOa xéerar %) Datépn* mpos 88 duryi re wal dppi
xpteras Séov te nal dndtov. pnidims ody vedere Seas
wplpvov évOa wat EvOa, dvw te nal dro moe. bid rode
verfvecs 7d maBos ybyverat, yepaerépnet S8ijmora. joe ydp
Piveky rend) Beer ead tyre] wrannBerréon, riot wah
forkge tort peuBador dapuseortoyes? 83 ebovatla: cal
Grucly wad Blo, vad yrdpn, wad doréon. Fe pv oy 4 oud
borépns wvlé podvpes yuvactt maponapréet.

Tiryeras 88 wad Euva mpas dvdpas rdbea rH borépp, prey-
por}, alwopparyny Grd B8 al rd wapebyra onueia, muperol
dagutlyn, itis, dpwvin: eri 88 rij aluopparyip wal dfbrepot
of Odvaror, dxoioy re ev Leip odary}.


* ‘This is, undoubtedly, tho true has no suitable meaning, See Wi-
Feading,andnot r@dscwripyo, which gan and Ermerins.


. OZEQN TAGQN, BIBA. B'. at


Keg. (8. Tept Zarvpuicens.


Ol crérvpos. 700 Aworboou. teped, dv cies ypadsios wad roles
dybruacr Spb. Toxoues 72 alBoia, EljsBohar rod Oelov
mpiryparos. tots bé xal wdBeos i5éy, dvicyovros Spf.a rob
mdaxovros Th aidoia: érixdnows catupincs és Sporyta
Tob Beod oxyjpuaros.

‘Opyi, 85 done doxeros és Suidtqy drap ob8' by res
Tpocdbotar obdév dxpedcovras obB8 emi arohAjot al cuver
eect Gwirinor mpndvovras 7d SpBiov. orracpol Sé dmdvrev
Téw velpwr, xai Evracis Tevdvtev, Kat BovBowwy, xal Try
xibos, Greyport) trav aldolwy xai mrévos, épvOnua mpootrou,
tal lxpds voriBe lei. amepoTeArpyeros, Houys extdvror,
arate, dorep dyBspevor ri Evupopiy iy 88 dmeploxn
Kal viv aida tab dvOpdrrov 7b mdBos, dxparées pry pagans
& 13 Eeoopor dxparker 82 es 73 Sudadov nad ris Tod Epyou
xpifis, rapdgopoe civ manny és 7b doxmuor. xarkyeir
yap ob Stvarrae’ Sxypwdees, Peypa wodrov éubover Ererrey
rotce xelrect depos épitdver, Sxwomep toice dpyace Ta
tpdeyor" drip 88 dou) Swoin. odpov & émiexdows Todds,
Revedy, mayd, yovoedés, xoidln drohenupevy, yapyaducpol
abriparo mheuptwv Kal paryaddv, emacpddecs, drbccrot,
ei 8 xpoodépowro, dpmaytyy, rapaxdbees

*Hiy 83 ds BxeOpow Fey 7d kaxdy, uocsbees? oihtny éarnp-
pévot, Tevovrow Kal pudv Tov mavrev Eiytacss, SuoKwnein,
Fuvodxai pedéwy, ofvypot prxpol, doderies, draxror.

“Enuet nore tide mdvta xothin extapaxOeica Troddoice
Preyparadert, yokddert, Euetos duolws. ov« dvevdey ewbi-
vou Inaus, Darvos Babs nal prjxeoros: Yrikis yap wal mépeows
kan vapen vetpoy, irvos rovdts. vdpxn & nal yokes caru-
pinow tires.


48 TEPI OZEQN WAGON, BIBA. B.


Tirpera 82 13 wdBos Hjpos pdducta nal Bipeos Hexinee
82, petpaxiows nal véow. pdduota 8 dxdcoue i quoi es
Evrovetny érofun’ dfvrarov ie drepmis, 782 dxoopoy xaxoy.
Ta Odd typ ev EBBipen Oviporxover, Déoyos 8 Ere Kal yo-
valves wderxouer Tobro 7) 3dBos, Kal Hj Te és Ta ddpodlove
Speip Spoly sali 3 Nowa Edporavra 1a 'adrés eye Bl nee
rocinny pay yuvackl dypior melBopac ylyvecbar, & Exyvow
700, wAsGwes Toler: cotuphyew 82 Felore obra ip}
spbors aria trolur Spuyph der OX! obBd pa be bp-
Oinory, Sxwomep cdrupos, tryer yur), Gomep 7d wdbos exrob-
vupov. 0088 yap oft wvbya thy dard ierépys vootoues dv-
Bpes, obvecer ob layer tarkpnw dmip.


APETAIOY KAIITIAAOKOY


EPI


AITION KAI SHMEION XPONION ITAGOQON,


BIBAION TIPATON.


IINAZ TON KE®AAAION,


iy
$


epi Xpoviay xabav .

Tlepi Kepadaing .

Upi Zxorwparucdy

Tepi'EmAnying

Uepi Medayxoding 6 we
MepiMaving . - 1 wy

Tlepi Mapadiocwg.

Tepl @8iaog

Hepi’Epaviedy .  . ::
Lipi roy eard rbv Minor dmoeréotwy
epi "Ac®parog . aoe

epi Hvevpedov . -

Wepl"Hearog 6 www Ye


RRR RANA NER


Wepiwrmvig 6 ee
epi ‘Ieripov . ow
Mepl Kaxeling . . wee ew


APETAIOY KATITIAAOKOY TIEPI AITIQN
KAI SHMEIQN XPONION ITAGQN,
BIBAION A’.


Keg. @. TT pooljuov.


Xpoviey votowy wives pev roudds, xpovos 58 paxpos cwv7sj-
feos, wal aBéSacos } drOckis. fy yap ob8' &ndrdOnoav és 7d
mdpray, i) rl cucxpi dpaptworj madcvdpopéover ai vovcot.
obre yap drpepéew of voodovres toduéover es rédos ardp
982 duaprdvover év ret paxphet Siairnor, wiv atpepéwor
fy 82 xad mév0s by emimbvou dijaios, BALys, duped, apydceeoy
mixpav Kai dduvwdéav, }) Topi, 7) nadows, dvrép ote oy
what Sodryfiee votcours xpéos, trodiipyoxover of xdpvovres,
5 Oavdrou SiPev airéov dpeysuevor. Oa bi) dperiy dia-
elerau dvbpis byrpod, xal paxpoBuuins, xai mouidns, Kal
xdperos dBhaBods rév jSkov, kat mapaupdctos* drdp wat
tov yookovra xpi) Gxipov Eupevat, nar Evvicrarbae re inrp@
kara Tod vooypatos. ob yap ToD adparos modvoy dmplE
AaSbpevoy taxd dvacpiryer te Kal Sarre, GNA és OARS
kal tiv ala@yoiny éxrpéme, GdANd Kai rhy Yuyiy expaiver
dxpacly Tot adpartos. roujvbe Tv paviny Kat Thy weday-
xorlnv taper, rept Gv ables épéo aviv & dui xeparalys
dpacw.


E2


52 TIEPI AITION KAT SHMELOQN


Keg. ’. ; Tlepi Kepadains.


“Hy ddyin xepadi) oxedios eri mpooxaipy alriy, xiv eel
mredvas, Kepararyin xadéeras. iv 52 Ered iLy ypinw paxpp
76 Gdynpa, kal mepiddoure paxpijot Kat wodNjot, Kal mpoce-
meyiyytas pétw re xai wrebva SucadO}}, Kepadalyy Kudsjo-
Kopev.

Tdéae 82 pvplar. riot piv yap diBsos 6 wévos Kal opexpos,
GAN’ ob Bradelrwv trot 58 es reploboy wepemdel, Seas roles
mrupetalvouet dudnpcpivov map’ taépny Gddroe 8 dri
Sicws & peonpBpiny, wal ride rédcov drowaveras’ # dd
peonuBpins & domépnv i erixpoobey és vinta. fide H
meplodos ob xdpta bnBiver Kal toios ev H Kepars) adyée
mica: wal ijde Eddore uev emt Bekide EXAore b8 ex” dpic~
repé 4 pbromor,  Bpeyna, wad rabra ev xp abrp suéog
peuBdbea Tporov.

Toior 8% nai ra SeEwd pobvov, } Ta Aad podvor, & Soov
bpitwv Kxpdrados, i} ds, 4 xa dppds pia, } dpOarpds els, 4
pls wéode pécou és toa répver, eréxewa 88 Td Gdynpa ob
rep GN ev tice pipver rH iis Kepadijs yapi—p.! erepo-
xpavin 765 podvoy Kadéerav obx etnbes xandv, xiv Siadetry,
wiv opixpov Eppevae Soxey fy yap eumtay Kore dkws,
aleypa wal Sewd mpijccer cracpds nal Siactpodi) tod
mpocdrou yiyverae’ dbbadpol % drevées xépact Uxedo meryj~
yact, } THde Kdxcice orracpadecs Evdov cidOvTat’ cxoTd-
Bwos' dh0arpav droSpbyvos roves dxpe pyviyyor. pas
daxeros, revovtav éEamims adyos,? domeped twos matd-

‘The changes in the text here — * The common reading is Kpde
introduced by Ermerins, are abso- doyerog revovrwy Eawivyc @oyoo,
lutely demanded by the confused which Exmorins alters to lpi


stato of matters as they stand inthe dexsroc’ revivrww wévog LEamivng,
MSS. @Xoyoc; but the obvious objection


ler CESS abi h talent tia
thy votcov ob bt daiSeiv ref) dxodoat reprvdv ebpopor’
KdxoSpos riyv Sedpyow, nal obre te ebdes abréous Tépret,
derpérovrat 58 nai Td naxwbea’ &ySovrar 76 Bip, Cavaraot
Gb peomot.

Alin 88 rovréasv Edy Enporare ypbbus" Hw 88 BnObvy wa ey
weber pry emi roice révowst, 7d aos cxiropa yiyvera.


Keg. 7.
"Hy Sidos tas BYras ox, wat Sivos dupi viv xepadiy édic~
onrat, xai dra SouBén Sxos peovrav ravaynbov morapay, i
oloy divepos ioriows eyeuBepvij,' i) addav, i) wal cuphyyov
om, 4 xpiowod, dudtns lay), dvoudtoner cxérana 7d
rdBos, naxiv ir, Kijy obyrropa xepadiis, Kandy 5, wiv
de BrabéEwos xeparalns, 4 E éwuréns xpoviov votoou din. iv
yap rade piv pi) dmoyiynrat, plpyy 88 1) cxorodlen, %
Xpovy paxp@ TehewOy Toict Wiower cupmropact ob Tivos
dxeoutvou, mdBos 7d oxdrapa yiyverat, em’ altin irypi) Te


Tlepi Sxoropartxav.


fo this cmendation is, that it does


as abore; but I find that had beon
anticipated by Wigan in so far.
‘This word can scarcely be the
right reading; but it is difficult to
find a proper substitute for it, Were
1 disposed to bold attempts at emen~
dagion, I should propose to substi-
tute InBpipera in place of it; for,
considering how fond our author is


of Homeri¢ diction, nothing seems
0 natural as to suppose that he had
in mind the celebrated passage in
the Diad,—

———lvipow a4 davig diprne

“orig éupiparas (xv. 627).
Wigan suggests lyevpeavig or Lyev-
raviy; but these words are at least
as objectionable as the one they are
intended to supply a substitute for,
Tn the MS. in the British Museum,
we read ehepyte vat: and this, per
haps, is the true reading.


54 MEPI AITION KAI SHMELQN


kal Yuypi ddd Kal dpyi rabiov DXwy, jy é& dvijeeotoy
Tpamj, waving, wehayyorins, eeadmvins, mpocemryeyvoHevey
éxdarn tov iSiov Evprropdrav oxord patos 8% 4 isa,
Bépos ris xepadijs, dpbarpav papyapyyal éri worG 7H
oxordbe:’ ayvacin éwutéwy te xal tov wédas’ Kal jy ox?
adbijcer ) vobcos yiyrytas, Ta Te yuia Avovras, xal Eprovras
Nawal: vaurin kat Yweros préyparos, 7) yorwdior, EavOdv,
#) pedaivor. edbre dri pev EavO) xorg, maviae ylyovrar
Gi 8 rotow pédact, pedayyorin emi be rH préypars, H
érdyyty. macév yap Hide voicwy tpom.?


Ked. &.  Mept Exdmpins.


Tlotxinov 88 dddéxorov Kaxdv % eridnrin, Onpiibes pev ev
mapokvopoice nal xdétokv xal dd¢Opiov. Exrewve yp Kore
mapokvopas els’ fv 82 peréryor dépy dvOpmmos, GH pev
aloxea xat dvelSea xal dryea pépwv, pyiSlos 8 ode dares
4 vodoos, GAA ev Huxinad te Tier xpelrrooe evorxéer Kal
Spp tH dpalp. fvvdiarraral re mart wal perpaxlorr.
ebyrdOn 8€ nore br’ edruyins, 8’ adAHs Hrucins peovos,
etre TG xdddei cuvékecce Tis Gpys* GNAA nal rére pereke-
tépovs aleypods drodelkaca, drédAvar Tods maidas POivo
Tod xddrdeos, 7) xerpos dxpaciy, i) mpoowrov Siacrpodj, i
mnpbar twos alaPjcwws? iv 8 porevon Td Kandy és plfyv,


*Ermerins finds great difficulty
in explaining the exact meaning of
the Inst sentence. He does not
seem to havo adverted that our
author had in view § 75, 76, 77, 78,
79, 80, of the seventh section of the
Aphorisms of Hippocrates, See the
Commentary of Galen, and the
English edition, Syd. Soc. Ed. t. ti.
p.773. I must say, howorer, that
ride seems wanting in this place,


‘Our anthor here has evidently
in view a passage contained in the
Hippocratic trentise “On the Sacred
Disease.” See Syd. Soc, Ed. tii.
p.851. I cannot sce the same ob-
jection to g@5ry, the common read-
ing, ax Exmerins does, who proposes
to substitute @0jpy in place of it.
The other, although metaphorical,
is quite in the style of our author.


XPONIQN TAGQN, BIBA. A‘. 55


oirre inzpG obvre ajduxins peraBorats és Eodov welGeras,
GAA EvpBwi pérgs Cavarov. wort Kal éximovos 7 vodoos
omacpoict cal diactpopijos peda re Kal BYtos, Frpeye
8€ kore Kat yvepny és paviny. drepmijs wey i rod mapofve~
p08 Ben, airyph 5% Kad 4) amddenjus abréov, él dhoby Kai
etipourt ad adropileryy only.

AMA Kai dSokos 7 Evppopdry Soxdee yap rola és thy
Kidjoxover thw wdByv drap xal i’ &ddas wepopdoras, A
péyeBos Tod Kaxod" lepov yap 7d péya’ 4) iiows ole avOpw-~
mrivns, GAA Geins, } Salpovos SéEns és Tov drOpwrrov eiaddou,
1 Euprdvrav dod, rivbe dxlknaxov lepriv.

*Oxkea: dy obv:ds. dat Abehy iybyveras vf voir, wepoaOay


AbuBor dvd riv eedadiy. qrbooa dads nal rrapdqopos
4 twd ris Babéows ris votcou, 4 tard Tpwpdrow év rpoe
karadipfert, omacpebees. aoa piv orpwdarar tv re
oropare Totxtheos irorelverat b& Kote Kal tiv Sidvowy H
vobcos, @y Ta TdvTa papaive arap Kal roicde airin iv


Keg. ¢. Tlept MeAayxoalns.


Mérawa yoni}, év peey dkeor dvabev daveioa, xdpta dxéOpiov-
Kate 8b éfwica ob edpta dvadreOpov- ev 82 totes ypovlosce,
tw pev inely xdre, &s Sucevrepiny Kal ipraros wévov TedeuTe
vail 82 cAblapires din Sv ‘Sriqaqrtov, vcd Ola dnb
Rell. Swoe fy 82 dive perp as avéuaxor,  & ppivax,


56 EPI AITIQN KAI SHMEION


HedayXOrny Teixer. Goody ve yap ewrrorkel eal gpuyis
xaxddbsas, tyOvideasr Brarréumes 88 wal néro diicas yropd-
Beas, cuvrpérres 82 Kal hw yapny. Sid rd8e Kat pedarryo~
Mods Kal puowdeas roticde exixrnoxov of mpbaber perete~
réporer 82 ore ica obre pédawa yor) epylyverat, dpyh
88 dxpyros xal Adwy Kal Karnheln Serv}. Kai rovebe odv
Hedayyorinods Kadeonev, YO) wey Tis dpyis cumppatone-
ys peralyn 68, woddjjs Kal Onpubdeos’ Téxpap b¢ “Opnpos,
0a gai,
Toles 8° dvtery

"Bpas 'Arpeldge ebpurpelov ‘Ayapdamuy

*Ayvipevos’ peveos 8 pdya ppéver dupt peawar

Diundart’, Sace 8é ol vp! Rapeerderrs ders,


towwide yuyvovras of pedayyoradecs, edt’ dv inrd tod xaxod
xrewiovtas.

“Eore 82 dOvpin eri puji favtaciy, dvev te muperoir
Border re 5E wor waving Te Enpevar apy Kal pépos H} pedary-
xorin. rotor pev yap pawoudvorsr GdroTe pev és Opry,
adore & és Cupndiny %) yvoipn tpéreras, toicr 58 pedayyxo-
Aaos és Adarny Kal AOvplny podvoy.' dtap Kal paivoyrac
wey és ta mAciota tod Biov, adpovéovres nai Bewvd nad
aicypd mpijrcovres’ perayyortar 88 ode él evi elbet Exa-
ator! dX’ if) mpds dappaxiny itrorrot. t &s épnulyv deb-
youct picavOpwrin, i és SercvSacpoviny tpérovrat, #) piods
ore rod Gv rovréowss. iv 88 cE GOvyulns dddore Kal dddoTE
Sudyvors yévnrat, HSov} mpooylyverar eri roict mrcicrose
of 82 palvovran.

"Onws 52, nal arr xolwv yopiwv Ta moa yiyvorrat dpd-
cw. iy udv ev roice trroyovdpiost wipvy 7 aitin, dudl ras
ppivas eideerat, xal SueFler yodi dvwOev, i) xatwbey pedary-


‘The sense evidently requires common reading, See Petit and
4Gupiny in place of Supndiny, the Exmerins,


XPONIQN TIAGON, BIBA. A’. 57


xordowr jy 88 wai xedadiy & Eywrabelny dyn, wal duel-
Beras 13 mapddoyor rips 6Evbuping és yédwra Kat pBoviyy &
Ta wodAd rob Blov, of bt paivoyras ailEy rijs votaou wiry
}} Gray TaBeos.

‘Ex’ dudoiv 5¢ Enpirns airin. dvbpes wav obv palvoyrac
kal pedayyorace, f) xal dvbpiv eddacous* Kdxcov 82 dvdpav
al tpvaixes expalvovrae’ iduxin, pos dpi, Kal of dxpd-
bovress dipy Okpos piv nal pOwirwpoy rixrer, gap Se xpiver

Texpripia wav oby odk donna. yap Hovyor, f) arvyvol,
xarnpées, vabpol Eacr Gddyas, ot rive ex’ airin, wedaryxo-
Ras dpyt. Ere 6 Kab spyldoe mpooybyvorrar, Sic Oot,
dypurvor, éx ray inven exBopyBotpevor.

“Eyer 82 abréovs nal rdépBos Exroroy, iy és abEnow rd
vienna gory, ebre xal dvepor drnOles, Seryarbdecs, evap-
ies. dxboa yap trap éerpéovras émotov dv kaxod, rdbe
évorviov dpéover dppnce® mpds 7d pnldiov peraryvaovas ebxo-
dot, alaxpol, apixpordyor, dapor, xal per’ ob mod) darhot,
dawror, mortbwpor, ote dperi Yuyijs, Xda mouxiMly voor}
patos’ iy 82 Gri wadXov 7d Kaxdv méy, pioos, pvyavOpo-
rly, Odddupaoe és Keved, bwijs xaxijyopor: tpavrae 82 Bavd-
Tov. modrdoior be & dvaicOnalnv cal padpwow % youn
péret, Geos ayvares dmdvrey, if crdijopoves éwuTéiov, Blov
Yiwor Soxbdear Evvrpérerar 8 xal rod oxijveos es rovnpdv
4 Eas port) meddyyAmpos, thw pi) BreFin wérw %) yor), dAAL
dyaxéqrar Eby 7H aluare és 73 wav Popol yey, loyvol 8é
Trvos yap atréo, olre rice ottre SpwrG ovyxparée Ta
perear dypurvin 88 axidvnor & viv tw dopijr rovyapoiv
Koidly Enpiy obdev Beto. iy BE Kore exbi8G, Enpd, oTpoy-
qiha, Biv repippig pedavi, xordBea, odpa opexpa, Epysia,

* This passage, in all the MSS, of Ermering, although very bold,
fn confessedly corrupt. I have and, must add, not quite eatisfac~
adopted the conjectural emendation Lory.


60 TEPI AITIQN KAl SHMEIQN


ebpabécs darpovopin ddBaxros,? drocodin abroudrn, wrol-
now Sibley dard povetwv. Toye yap te Kal ey votcoos
ebypnotor 4 ebradevoiy toics 88 drabeiroce dyBopopin,
anroepyin, téxroves, 7 ABoEGoe yiryvoyrat & Kai dddOxoToe
davraciat. dBebier ydp ris Apxibav Exmra@ow.........ead
Bros ote Erive, Soxéwr Ewurdv wrlvOor Experac, ws pi) TH
bp G Aufl.

Mo@oroyéerae 88 wat réde° réerov Hin emi ofxov piv
aaégpor dpyirys fy, werpoar Fodor, wéryar, Booa, Evy-
youpioat, dppboa, Evredécat Sipov vygartes, tote épyo-
oegiea dee Arat): Ea Aiiras, dpadfeasred hope ator tae
xalov, 6 88 dm piv rod ywplov rod Epyou aide elye yrdpns
Hp Bi 8Ebg word by cryopy, dwt hovrpir, Hv" exépay dnkeyeay,
tibels rd brda mparov Eotever, elra eripyey Gum fui
driv Bh define rije re rir olueriiy Obie wal hs ro0 Bayou
mpnitws xai rod xoplou, rdéyrav eepaivero" xiv madwbpo-
pion Taxd. aibis eooppovee. xal iSe Tod yoplov xal Tis
wapns %) EupBors}.

“Toxover 88 ri alriny tod vooyjparos Kepadt xal inro-
spbvtioses eh vorre pie Bpen dipspen ip Epler; Xherre Bh BOK
Dover -Eurrijeopodvra’ 1d 88 KBpos ey roles omrdyxvoiol
derrs dm} Lavin wal pedmyyodtg; Bxorowep ey rp Kebadg wat
rotor aicbijicece Ta modha Toler ppevirinoict. olde wey yap
mrapaoPdvovrat, xal ra ph) mapedvra dpéovor Sie as
mapeiyra, Kal Ta pi) pawspeva ddAp Kat’ dnpey lvSddreTa


"Though I have not moddled
with the text, I am much inclined
to think that the trne reading would
be durodidaerog. It occurs in 2s-
chylus, Agamem. 984, By the way,
the example referred to by the Ox-
ford lexicograptiers, to prove that


Gditaerog is sometimes used syn0~
nymously with airodidaxroc (name~
ly, Lucian, Hist. Conser. 34), is not
fn point here. We cannot say that
“astronomy” is untaught, in the
samo sense that we ean say that
* political sagacity” is so.


XPONIQN ILA@QN, BIBA. A’, 6L


of 8¢ parpevor Sptovers pdveas os xpi) dpi’ ob yuyndoxovee
&e wrepl abréwv ads xpi) yuyvionetv.

“Hy ot» péya 3 7) Kandy, ebxivnror, dees Tv alaOnow,
trorrot, bpyiros, ote éx atrin tei, BioPvpor pev ardyos,
oles & exvOporrdy  pavin tpémerav olae 88 es Oupndinv,
ebBvpor GN olde rapadsyws dryputvor, dudw ddroudecs
ras Bias, eepadadyies, } mdvres ye Bdpos ris keane
Fiveors etijeooe 82, dNAA Spdbiorar tiv yvapny. ex evi-
oie yap tact &) Hyot Grav, kal BouSoe, wéyps Si} ye cad-
ainppov te Kal abddv fy és aitnow i vodcos ylyyntas,
duodbees, dodBees, Bopol nal néBpor bv rh eBubj. dpe
véover yap" dypumvin 58 Bopiv drdp obBé lexvoi cs vo-
clovres pedayyorovreov padhov edcapkin* Kal braypor.
fv Be ve viav omddryxvey dy Grequaciy Hi yeyords Ty Spek
A Thy Opi auBriver dpBadyol wodror, ob cxapSapirror-
Tes* po ray Obadpew ivSdr\para Kudvea, 4 wédava, olow
& pedayyoXiny 5 tpomi* epulpérepa 22 olaw & paviny, wat
Gowixea davrdcpara, woddoiot pey bs dmactpdmrovros
srupas, xal tdpBos abrious ds dd oxnmrrod Aap Adve” pere-
Feréporce 82 xal dépubpos nal ipatpor SpOarpol.

"Eni xopudijs 82 tof xaxod dvepmrrover ddpodiotwy 62
dayeros ériBupln, drdp ob82 és ro dudaboy aides i dxvos
duading voubecly 82 xal erumdujtes & dpyiv éxperuabevres
és 7d wdwmav éxpalvovrar, totyredOey dddos GAA palverac
of pev Béovar doxéros, oie Grws eldéres es Taba maduv-
Spopéovar oi dé és Sypdv roice médas dquxvéovras’ doe 8
ad Rosier ddopupopevor dpmaryiy,  Biyy. oi B¢ puyarOpan
mevouor & tpnulyy, opict abréoure Spedéovres.

EL88 er dveow ijxovev 700 xaxod, vwO pol, hovyor, eridivror.


4 fe must be admitted, that Er- holding that deapeiy is the true
merins has strong grounds for reading,


62 HMEPI AITIQN KAI ZHMEILON


és émurraclyy yap tis votoov adixvedpevos, dyOorrat TH
Sunpopii.


Mavins eléos érepoy.


Tépvorrai tives rd wddea, Oeots lors, ws dasrobor, yaptto-
pevor eboeBet davraciy nal éore rijs brodijrios H) wavin
poivoy, Ta 58 EAXa cwdpovéovsr, eyelpovrar 62 atdgi wat
Oupndin, 4 wé0y, 4 rv wapeivrav mporpor). EvOeos je 7}
paviy why dropavic, vOvpor, dendées, dy TAT TES TH
Oc@, xpoor 8 Kal ieyvol, wal ds waxpoy deBevées movois THY
Tpapdrteov.


Ked. ¢'. Mepi Mapadvoews.


AromdyEln, tapardpyln, wapects, wapddvats, dravta TH
pve reobreds4 yap eorfovos, Hasbis, 9 dudoty dors Geko tue
wore Kal yvadpns, Kore Kal ris Gdns alcdjcws. ddr
dro Ankln wey brov Tod cxijveos, Kal ris alaOicids Te Kab
wapins cai xanows ote mapddrvers. Toryapody aomAnk-
nv Maat loxupiy yey Adivarov, dobevh b& od pnidiov."
srapandmyin 88 ard pects wav ddfis Kal xuvhowws, ANNA pépeos,
4 xerpisy 9 oxtreoy mapdduers 8%6s erbray xanforos
potvon; dvepyelgg re wdpecss fv Ba Sb) tedeley podem xork,
—ordvov &8 7d rodvbe,—dvaicOnoin wadrov i) mdpeos
Kixdjoxerac’ fv 58 drémAnerov 6 ‘“Imroxparys elmy oxedos
7b xar’ Tew, cs vexptides, 7d dypelov Kal Td dvaddés Oéder
Spouse? “Bydp eri rp Houma drondntin dort loxuph,
ré8e év rh axédei maparrAnyinv dpdter nbatws be objpov
exéctos i) dxpactns, mapects rd Képiov» Br|epdpov 62 Kab
paar rad pviiv rev ev yrdBors, wal ryévvos ém) 8d-repa mapa-


* Hippocrat. Aph. i. 42. 9 ippocrat, Epid iii,; and Pror-
thet ii.


XPONIOQN TLAGQN, BIBA. A’. 63


yoy, ty dri oracp@ Bartpipyrar, Kunixds oracpos 4
edjow Eeduow St youvérwr Kal alaOjows mpooxaipor
vépeyv kad dxuyiny wad xardorreciy, deroGupiqy xadouey.
Tapierat dy, Diners paiben nel deakhappaiak
Sdururos, f te pelo, xelp, axtdos* dNdore 82 duo whebvat
kal sore BeEtd waiver, hy dpuorepay 4 Bip wah Bip, 9) fin
trayra’ er’ dxpiBes, i) ocov. ob ra Sieordra podvoy «al
Sudvopa Kai spigvya, spOarpol, xeipes, oxédos, ddd& nab
7A. Eysputa, pis dp 7d Teor, xad ydiooa phos réav Spier
rod pécov, xat mapicO ov by, Kal ia8uas, Kal xardmoors bs
iipiav. Sorta 8é ey Kote xai oréuayov, kal ta évrepa,
kal kdorw, kal Td mapdpnes Evrepor dype ris dpyijs twdrd
werovOévae’ GNA Ta wey pédea Ta évrds exAvdpeva® xpyrTa
ad. dgavba speredtes. 88 wal ai évépyeias: 7H8é os Sonées
vat jpcrabea Eppevar ra pépea dex bard ris vobcou teryn-
phva, 70Be pévroe 7d mpipypa Sibarypa Siagopiis vvduds
re nah «plows pls. dpurreph Befscis. Yon ule yap eal
mpocitovea aizin, Euvat 5é duoiv rod mabeos ai mpoda-
ous, Hv re Yukus, iy te dreyrin, GAA dudr.rrabeiv obx toa
dy. iadppomos 82 4} piaus, ws év looppime, twiriv 5é ey
dvicos dbivarov. jy piv ody Tis Kepadis dro aby THs
Apygh, dxoidy re 700 varrialou pvedod 3} plveyt, 7a dudovyma
kad Evatte wapadberar, Bef bert Sefwolor, wal dx? dpore-
polos raid. fv Bxardayy xepadh, eed yey role Bebsoioe
+4 Nad wapadteras, Befid 2 ex? dprorepoien airly 8%
rav dpyéwv trav veipwr % éradhayy. od yap kar’ Tew Ta
Seid eri Befid SBovropéer, wage meparéivrar, add’ Eudura
ah dpyh txaara ebOds én’ éxeiva posri, aNAPAOWE érradra-
4 The common reading, ixiwe indebted to the latter for various
vin, having evidently no meaning, other amendments in this chapter,


I follow Wigan and Ermerins in which I do not think it necessary to
adopting this word. 1 am also mention singly.


64 EPI AITIQN KAI SHMEION
Rineva els xray exrnaros: dbpéor B2 cipfoBae, ere Bip


mayra duod, etre wépea mapletat, ........ } Ewapporépwr,
vetpa 38 ddAore pév Ta dd Kehadijs waoyer’ Tabe pevroe és
dvaicOnalnv tpémovrat, as bros elreiv’ ob yap pmidlas
és dxwnalny e& curéwy péree rade xiv wey toiot xeverpe-
vourt Evpradijon, mdoyer nal rade cpixpiy dxwnolp-
loryee vip nal Thy xinow eF duréwy, ef kad eni hooey poe
@®Aore 8 ra dard prdr* és phas sreparotpeva, rude 7d xipos
Tijs mevijowos loyet, Kal roice dard rips xepadijs mposbBot. kab
yap aire da’ exelvov To Wetorov Tips Kuvhovos Coyenr® leyer
82 wat €& douréav wal drarrov’ rdde pévtoe dxuneinv mdo~
Ket Uaddov’ omdviov 5é et Kore CE éwuréwv els dvavoPnoiny
tpérovrat, Soxet Kal pip els rd wdwrav jy be Edveeopos Tes
vevpov dub tav &E daréwv repuxétwv Tivos, Kar KpacvovTov
& daréa, 4) payévros,® dxparéa Ta pépea Kat ericupipeva,
ove dvaicOnra, ylyverat.

EiBea 8 mapardyxtixd rdbe. Adore piv & Exracw
AédAvrat Ta pédea, OdSe warivSpopees es xdurpw, edre py}-
Kista Koda palverar’ Grote SE KvAAa yoyverat, obBE ey
pines dmorelverac €} 80 eravbaai: Bedrat, Seis toda.€5
waviva’ karakewv, Ta pédea Spaxtrepa éwuréwy rylyverar
rabe macye Gudw ra elbea, kab i év trois dpbarpoics map-


Althongh I have not ventured
to alter the read


® This can scarcely be the tre
reading. Should it not be payy?


me, from the distinction which our
author makes above betiveen the
corcbra] and spinal nerves, that he
rofers here to the lutter, und that
wo onght to read, vwriaiov jrvehoiis
or, perhaps, the former word might
be dispensed with,

*Ermerins docs not hesitate to
substitute aleGjewc in place of
swviorog, a8 fancying that the seuise
requires this change,


7 Tho common reading is leave,
which appears to have no meaning.
‘The emendation ix due to Ermerins.
T have adopted it; although I must
be permitted to say, it is far from
satisfactory. ‘The translation given
by Ermerins is: “Quasi ligna ad
regulam dolaret"; but it does not
seem at all appropriate to the pas-
sage.


XPONIQN MA@QN, BIBA. A’. 65


Oivos. ad ydip éxxzerae moddbv és usyeBos, edre TaTUKO-
plae drondtower:. rap. 982 Eurdyeras, 2 euueph #cobpty
etre GOlaw fy 482 pubpinew. dy xucdsfone. dx nad
xtaris wapleras ém) rotor iBiowas Epryoiot. 4) yap els Exra-
ow Nera, i) dxpari Ta dupa éxyéct, 4) Evverdéerae és Eco
Téqy, ebre, Grav TAnaO oljpou, ob Sulnow.

Airias 88 mapéicwos pév EE dpyovras Bé rpmpart, ™ ry,
$k deeply, Nayrlp, olvofdinly drip wad spuyie depar
ria wdbea, éxmditves, $o8or, ducOuplar drap kal madlouws
weds dioBectos péype Oavérov, adda rade pey apy
mpiry borden 82 nab xasphy, Yok guirov Bepyod> ext
bypornre 4 Enporyre mdaxee ibe, wal dvcadOiys rijs érépns
pov drip xat éxl tpmpare at Biaxor} vetipou dvarijs*
idanin, ypovres, wal ol8e Svea Bees" mrasBlours 82 ebavdxdn-
rot dpm, xeysov, bap Betrepov, émecra perdmepoy, Bépos
imarar ees, of maydes xara diary, iypol, dpyol, Landdees.

Tedcoblivra piv obv ra mdbea Exbnra dxsvnaly Kal dvaic-
Onaig Geppoi ve Kai Yruxpoi, drip Kal rdw Kal Kenopéw
nal yavolov. ondvioy ebre toict Ta mépara ddyéet, GANA
és dvdednaw ob xaxlwv 4 darovin. ybyverat pev obv eEart-
wns’ iw 86 Kore Kal dpxds toxy emipsjxeas, Bdpos, Svoxi-
ynain, véprn’ ‘bEws aloBnats, &ddote Gidzeos trepBors,
trot cpuxpol, pavracias pétoves, edre GBpcov ra; wav.

‘Emi 8¢ Kova cracp@ Gravra pév Ta Tob Tpocwrov
Hépea orracbat od xapra Eivnbes’ emi Scud 52 ra dprotepa,
ral &: dpurrept ra SeEcd pours, edre nal ris yévu0s tvOa i}
Oa eri worry 4 wapayaryh, Sews €E Bpns xevovpérns ris
rprdBov. Kal ryip kat roici Kore eé8n 7d dpOpov, edre wéya
xavovrev eri rd Erepoy 7 yévus mrapryxOn' DAwais Tod ob-
Oarpot tod ctvapod psjdov, Eby ri tnroxoiblds wadpss?
maXAeras 82 cal oh dye BAkbapoy,, Bidore por, Eby 7e

¥


66 TEPI AITIQN KAT SHMEIQN


Spbarus, Grote 8 podvor Evvretverae 82 wal ra yelhea
18ln éxdrepov' Gore 82 dupa Eyprecdvra wabrater. tote
82 ols pduvee xdpra, dOpdov 82 Sileraras, eat tiv Evvijdea
mrve poy yopéer,

Xwrarat nal ~dooa xal ydp ise pis dors rab vedpar
ebre mpds tov odpavdy és wrdros Sky 4 Edpduors aOpsov
adyjvaro, kai KAévov mdrayov crroince. omirat 5é kal Kio,
Kad ef piv 7h oropa cuvdyer, Thvbobev addxnros 6 waérayos"
dw 88 Barrjon Ti oropa, SYeac ri xiovida, ddore pay
mpordvopérny &s mhatos TO obpavg, Edore bi dromwad-
Ropérny Bin coxéws cwriive Spolws, edre xal ibn matayet.
dordrn 8é rou Eiverts Toice Kuvixoiot omacpoict. Soxéer yap
roict Oewpévorcr ta amrdPea Thy vodoov Toyew. TH yap
oreperdces kal 7H xporj Kal TH Tod SPOaryod péfonr, dyéa
Ta owapa dalverat, eréyyerae Se nad ev ryédevre wal Nada
wal xarapice. ta pév ye civapa orarat mdyra maTdyy,
xetros dperdis, delvnrov iv Nady, Sr*Spapov ode erizpoyov,
SpGarpds drevis, dvaleOntos 4 adj 7d 82 ida dadel,
xarapte., aloBdverar, yeda.


Keg. 7.


"Hy 2dxos & drrocrdcios ev 7H rvedpove yérnrat, Hj ex Bnyds
xpovins, ) dvaywyis alparos, xal avaSijooy riov, arin,? Kal
bdlaty kachijonares: $84 6ioHE W aihevply dumutayy ere


Tlept DBicwos.


1 Exmerins docs not appear to me
to be warranted in substituting $069
for win, contrary to the authority
‘of all the MSS. Moreover, it seems
to be excluded from this place by
the terms in which our author ap-
plies gq to @ particular state of


the disensed parts—dAXd gOsny wee
radapBdva; ie“ but the disease
assumes the peculiar name of
Phthoe.” He is right, however, in
following the suggestion of Petit,
and substisuting tAcog for ivrig at
the commencement.


XPONIOQN IA@QN, BIBA, A’. 67


varyytar 52 Sid rod arveimovos, durin ibe robvouas iy Bt
xt roios Kal 3 veipon aos toxy, dvaBpwbeis ind rod
RapBdver Eiveors 88 wal wip Euveyis, dos phy Borkew,®
Aiyor piv obxore, NjOor 88 8° Hudns Bpdire wad yobs rod
exijveos. xal yip nal ra (Bua pOdns dori, tw % Oépun
Gervp}, nab dy voera deddumg, spbpny 82 ad0es év rola
om 4 paretier By roi 52 4 Suepopin, kal 4 dBvvapein,
al ai Euvrifves. dw yap dreblipnone rod cxiveos 81’ Hpyd-
prs v8 wip, mis ob dy éoapxoird re Kal Bivaro, xab ebps=
pos elyev dvOpwrros; cbre yap dvdye, ert padrov ra Seve
abkéeras opvyyol cpixpol wal duvbpol, dypumvin, &xpova,
kal ré\Aa mévra éxdca of muperalvorres lSéae be iypav
Bupla, wedbvav, perdvwv xataxopéwy, t myporeteav, %
AcuxoyAwpéwv waréov, etpoyyiAwy aKAnpiy, dvohvrwv,
7) pavav, Avopévor 4 dvicpuwr, 7) Kaxwdkwr aravra be
réBe wiou Fac Stas. sebooe yap #) mruph H Oars rd typ
rexpalporrat, ob xdpra por Soxéovar pOdny olSe ryeyvarrnery™
matoripn yap 4 Bros dadans Eas alaOfows, ob Tov
dvayopevev podvov, adda Kal tod elSeos tod vocéovros. fv
pap xal Equdrns Wy rby dvOparrov dypdv, ddpavi, avaPijo~
covra, Euvrernxéra, drpexia pavreterar Oinv drdp 768
dxdcoure pev exos pev ode bore ev arveipovt, Evvrerixace
82 ruperoias xpoviowt, mvavaa 82 nal oxAnpd kal dredéa
*1 am not mware that the term of Phthisis, I was convinced that po)
iporiny occurs elsewhere, Hippo- is the preferable reading, The words
erates and Galen, I believe, univers of Aurelianus are: “Sequitur autem
milly use the substantive igminya,  mgrotantes febricula latens,” ete,

or the adjective Zumvor—the Inter +1 am not satisfied with dvdye
‘being their more common practice. _in this sentence; bat have not been
* At first Lwas inclined to adopt able 0 find « proper mubstitute for
tho alteration of Ermerins, who sub- it, ‘The translation of Crassus is
stitutes por for xj; but, after read- most suitable to the context: “ut
ing Celius Aurelianus'’s description ‘cian eli ae Qu. dvldg?

¥2


68 TIEPL AITIQN KAI 2HMEIQN


Bijocover, cal dvdyouct ob8dv, xal roiode POiainods Kucdijo-
Kovet, ob mdvy dovjuos. Fiverrs 8 tod Odpnxos Bapos*
mretpov yap droves,’ don, Svadopln, arocitin, éomtpy
mephyukis, cal Oépun és thy kor Spas dpe Odpyxos-rijs Bép-
bys Svapopirepos’ Bnyds dvaywyat woinldas, dxolas Beka.

Savi Bpayxwdns abyiv imocxodos, padiwis, obx etma-
paywyos: dxoidv r+ Evvrerapévos’ Sdxrvdor icyvol, ra 8
Gp0pa twayéa* datéwy potvev % Win cptyorrae ydp Kab
adpxes dvuyes ypurol Saxridwv, ai xoidlae puoal nai mra~
ties in’ doapxlas yap obre riyy reperaeviny obre 7d oTpoy-
yirov loxover. bid rode Kal Svuyes ypuTol ide yap H
dvaxwy), xal i imootacy abréwy, irs éy Tho Kopudiet
mend nopevn elveev airiv Eats Kal 6 Tovos, domep Kai Ta
areped” fis dEeln, lox), pia inrepicxovra wal épvdpd,
SPOarpol Kotdor, cTiAmvol, yavowvres* olSadéot, xal dypol,
4 Tedbvol Ta mpicwra. ydlwv ta reWTd Toias ddoicE
mpocrtaver pedudor Ixedov, Ta mdvra vexpwdees. cde ab
ra mavra loxer icyvol, dcapror, Spayrovar pies Gdnror,
pativ ob52 tyvn, exdavées 58 potvar Ondral. mrevpads ob
xatarégat poivoy elonuov, adda Kal darn xpatvovar, éawdeiv
pnisior ob6 yap ai mpos rods amovivdous ouvabpadaves
ebEbyxpurrrov bijdau 62 Kai ai cis Td oTépvov eriBoral Ta


* In all the MSS, and editions, that it is out of the question in this


except that of Ermerins, we read
roveg, which is unsuitable to the
place,

° Ermerins, on his own authority,
substitutes wAarias; but the other
reading is in accordance with a
well-known Tonic usage, All the
recent translators have fallen into
the mistake of applying this passage
to the abdomen; whereas a careful
examination of the context will show


place. Crassus more correctly ren-
ders it thus: “Digitorum rentres
rugosi et lati.” Korie in this
place evidently applies to the pulps
of the fingers,

7In this passage we are under
obligations to Ermerins; in partica-
Jar for supplying révog instead of
évoc. I have not adopted his
other alterations.


XPONION TAGQN, BIBA. A’. 69


péoa tiv mrevptay xotha, pouBoudia® as & ry trav
bariwv meprayeyiv troysvépia Nayapa, dveowacpiva, éxt~
aiderpion 5 dyer npooguls al rareiv. Splpa evapyi,
Hap6pa, drapesbea, ead %) rium, loylor re xa) Bpaylar.
treplayer ij dxavOa trav orovithaw 4 wpdcbev Koldy trav
éxarépov éxrernxitev pvdv' dporddrar expavées Brat,
Sees arépuyes dpridwv. rovréowe jy Koihty exrapay6i,
avéxmiaror iy 82 és irpetqy tpémrntat, Ta evavria Toict Gde~
Oplovoe emecporrj.

Pnpawt pev ob Evvextes wdoxew® Siabidpioxover 58
fewrra: véor 88 péxpt dxpiis amd aluaroy dvayoryis Owe~
Sees yiyvovrat, wal iyidtorras pev, ob pnidios 86 madia
Eoveyin = Brg méxpe $0ns word pbs udgerar tus
& pabivol, caviBeddecs, wrepuyddees, eEeyéBpoyyot, Nevxol,
apaibrepor viv Gdlpnua® xpae Be Yuxpal eal iypal, dxdoas
1G eBei 705 wdeos dBedal.


Keg. &. epi Eumvixav.
Ole by rfre woidtper 7d veo) nar? Teer rob Gcopnnos 4) rd
dros tb 12 Sidibparypa wéov droordaves ylyovras, Hv judy
dvdywot, &umrvoe olde xaddovras’ jv 88 rb riov Sek ly Kdrw,
dmocrnpariae xiuedyjoxovrar Kal ev piv Bcopyes dv roice
Ehuccors, Hproe dv whedpove, fv ExBexerac pO6n, f imebiondre bv


*Phis word is most probably a
falte reading. Sce Wigan and Er-


Bondia

If I thought myself warranted to
inalreny shange ithe renng:
would be to faxBondia. See
eed gL and Galen, ti.
pp. 244, 246, ed. Daremberg.


°'The change of ob» into oi, as
made by Ermerins, is indispensable,

+ Although not inclined to adopt
unauthorised emendations, I must
say that I think this reading, on
the authority of Ermorins, is a great


ing,

of Aretwus, it is quite common to
find dyOpwérov written dyw, by
contraction,


70 TEP AITION KAT 2HMEIQN


mrevp@, } orépyp, Hj xdrw mm mpis 7H Euppier rod mved-
povos Kata pays, i wn Tod Cdpyos dXXy,—Evpmdvreor 5d
es dvayaryiy 683s 7G wip eveipev. dd 8 7d Budepaywa
dy roict omhdyyxvoot, ipratt, ordqvi, vehpoios, eicres: dard
qquvaunioy Be Kal boripy Erapov 58 Kal ey ev Kéidep rvi
kore dréctacw ta él Seki pos jprate Kwai moddév ze
dain kw miov' roNdav 58 Kai dit vedpav Kal xiorios és
audpas mrebvas eppin, xal aepreyévero csvOpwrros.

Alrlae 88 Eval pev drdvrov mary), dreyin, yokes, 82
bxoia roudBe. . roiae 88 ev Bdpne, BE xpovln, eal mev-
piris, kat arepenvevpovin, xai pedpa xpéviov- drdp Ab: dkeias
vovoou éy &y Te rouréww arécemyris,

Te 88 dypov Eddore wey depyiv, dBpavis, eyxteral rp
ArAg Gore wey Spipd Sawrds, wal opweddvas euaroicov
bode Pavirov. al yap xal iSéar puplat, dxécas abdes
gpdaw, Odipa 82 Gxoos €E Yptvos Newrod te Kal loyvod,
BdBoy od Loxovros, Toi inelwxdros, toobvbe péee mor
rondav yap woddoice Evveddyn. airin 88 greywacin dard
mepiovalys alwaros, pj maxtveras 6 tiv, drdp Abe dx
moNdod alparos modddv ylyverar év péow rior xy pay
elow pémy, ai mhevpal ra dcréa Kath xupav thy opoy
aiTéwy,. 00. POlow adeba mpicbev érépav Euuevas cup
PeBdcav wath piow* iv 88 Ew perp, ddcrara ra doréa,
& yap & 7 raw peowy mAevpiav iis dmoordavos 4 kopuxpiy
eyelperas, etre EvBa xal tvba Trevpa Tapwbéerat,

Snuijia 88 ra ey dwdvrav Euva, Ta 58 éxdorov tras
Bépos 4) rrévos ye Fundy reveiw yap drovos* ruperol dpa
Spot, piyea mpos éorépny, iSpiires xr’ dvécs, dypurvin, oiby-
pata év dxpoct oct Kal xeipiw Saxcridovwt, &dore Kal
@drore xabotdpeva, wat erraipspevar Evopopin, ésrooerin,
loxvorns ddov' iy 8 xad pijxos toxy Hf peraBory, Eke pO
yedns. ob yap ere pices Epyou yera. ob yap mefns


XPONIQN MA@QN, BIBA. A’. * wa


Sxoin mpécbev, ode evoapeln, xposi) fopdiins’ dvamvei) waae
Bey Kah, caxlav 52 olos és hy ava xodlny. dradp cal BYE
7a mpirra, péods dv i ¢reypacin mete, edre xal mover
péekoves wal piyea, nal Odpyn, xa aypunvin, wai diorrvxa
Se pidrov oduypol cpexpol, vobpoi, ddpavées, Ty yroyny
rrapddypor, Sidtacis tod Bcopynos.

“Hy 88 Hen els yévrnow jixp mov, wdvra peyote dva-
yor 82 cpuxph eri Bnyl pétovt, xal eF droardows Bialys.
td mpirra preyparwdéiwv xohoBdduv emi 7d weddvrepor,
Sos cE aibdrns Ere 82 Sialuwv wal raxéwv fy 88 wad
paytioesBas phd, mad caproadéuy. Padber, xai Ww. fori
xlvSuvos pev aviftos, fv toNAbv cad dOpsov exyvOj aiov fy
& obv expéy oytinv, drpexter riov iv xdrw mepioat BEdn,
Ta pev dvw pépea tvOa 4 drooracis, SEs mévos, Koln
typ), Ta mp&ra Warddea Ely preypatadect’ Erera me-
pippoa aivarwdéov, xa aifis capxocdéav, jv in payg.
Greras 82 rovréoice riov, 4 va Korrins, } odpwr dryabai 38
midvrav padrov, al és: vehpods nal kioTias peTadiyues.

Péperac 82, iy Te dvw, iv te xdtw, xpdos wiov oxldov,
exper, f) Aevxdy, H redpitor, #) medudviv, }) wéday, eal naxér~
Sex i) dvocpov nal maytraroy i) péows Iryov, i delov,
Spadoy, 4 Tpnx®, dvoparor, kal caproeidéa ra eumddwvra,
orpoyryiha, fy) mraréa, jidleos dmomhuvépeva, i) ifbbea
dOpbov 52 zeph miov elpioba, dxica wey AevKd, wérova,
tivoopa, rela, oTpoyyvAa, Kal dvaPijooerar Cdecov, } iro-
Piperar, weprcaryxira’ dxooa 88 twxpa, yorwbea, dv
para, noxOnpd. moddav 88 rovréwy Kani, Ta meubva Kab
pave, onweddva yp Kal dvecOidueva onpuaivovor ta
O\cea,


Tipockuvévas 88 rovréowss xat riy ef, xa ra Evvopapré-
oyra 7H vole. fy yap emi rp éxxpicr eipipas pipy, daru-
pos yiyynrat, eb re méoay, etxpous, cbostos iv dvaSijoog


72 MEPI AITIQN KAI SHMEION


edpapérs, elerpuetos, ebrovos ylyvirrat, dvadeOpos 6 voata*
dw 88 érumuperaivy, kai wdvta & Kaxov Tpérntas, dvdr
atos. mpootunévar 58 cal ra yeopla, vba ai droordcves"
dxicoee yap ey TG orépyy To duminua yhwrerae, Bpadéws
ddlararat. Wid yap nai dcapxa xai yovipwbea Ta pépear
7a 8% toudde ob pnidios Séyerae preypoviy meprovelyy*
dyexminra 8 jeipver wovdiv xpsvor Yruxpay yap of xérbpor,
@Xa rawbe dowies pev al dreypoval,—rijs ews 62 Kaxat
cuvriities,—paxpoy yap Swamrvioxes xpivov. omdiyy Kat
Sprap kal rrveipav nal dudppaypa oFtrepa piv és deminow,
émixivduva 8é wal Pavarabea.


Keg. ¢.  Tlept rev xara roy [vevuova dmoora-
cewy.


Eire dxécoroe repurvevrpovixoior dv phéypa &p, Kal pi Sia-
xénrat, meprylyovrar oi 88 Siadiipijoxovres 7 xdroku Tod
mdBeos Ewrrvor yiyvovtas. Ta pey ody pedrovons #) TeTEhe-
opérns drocrdawos onpeia ev rotor ewriooe deta jy be
rerecbh, ob Bins Kal mivev és dmrippnkw Kal dvaryoyhy
xptos, drwomep ev Tolct capacv GARG yap pyidlas dvadé-
perat, Siatdows paddov Tov dpawolwy yevouérns, ijrep
ios cwpdrov. pavis yap Kal wodtrpytos b mveipeov,
omoyyin ixédos, ob yaderralvov Te irypd, EXAnv dr’ EAs
edpuxmpinv ‘duelBovrt, néode rijs tpnyelns dpryplns Frey.
areplodot 88 7 dyp@ pnlBrar. edeapymes yap 782 ddoOnpdy
miov. drap Kal % dvarvo) dvw ro Tveipa puoj mepi~
ylyovras 88 ra oda, ef pa} Kore Tis arrenveyy abpin
Axdvat rod bypod, Tis dptnpins ob Sexouévns Tov a}épa waj=
et 700 how. Ovjoxowrs BE pereEErepor-xpévy rev dOWeBea


1 Althongh I have not meddled that we ought to read elther eGov
with the text, I cannot but think or dypdy, instead of mvedja.


XPONIQN IAQQN, BIBA. A’. 73


kal viv éumuixdy rpbmov 7a 88 Da Neued, trragpa, eddy
wepwyptvr Gddore &' ad reppoebia, 4) iropedavikovra’ Kal
Bporyxlov core dverricOn emi mouii edxel, jv Bdbos toxy
i dmrécracis, edre al daroppivyes dvadpépovrar Tod omddéry-
xvov. Bparyyuisees, Spaydrvoor, Bapipwrer, ra oribed ogi
ebpta yiyrerat, kai edpurépwr rijs iypacins Séovras® og-
Oadwdv ra pédava oridrvds ta be NeuKd, Revxdrata Kal
miova’ pijha épevdij, préBes év rH mpoowmp xupral. Bioim
pa 8¢ ext rovréwy. roves nev yap edoaprins peikwr, envry!n


82 révov Suvatwrépy.


Keg. ia. Tept “AcOparos.


Eli dd Spopov wat yopvaciow xal mavris épyou bvorvod 4
dvarrvo}, dcOya Kadeirav Kal % vodcos 82 dpAdmvora, at
ibe xiwdajoxerar dcOpar ev yap toice mapofvopoicr agO-
fialvoves kal olBe:) SpObmvovav' 8 eedreov, obvecey. &p6l@
exilar: pobvey dvarvéovar eiipws* mvlE ydp ev xara~
KM. eivexey rod révov Tob emt 7G mvetpars dpPirvoa
Tobvoua.' pbs yap dvarératas és dvamvony, xijy tarrios
; kataxbvO) GvOporras, xivbvvos mvuyivat.

Tldoyer 8 trevor Evprabées 58 wai ra Evvredodvra
ds dvamvoiv, Budgparypa, Qaipné> Hy 88 xapBin mdBp, obcore
& moddby Biapxécee. rHbe yap % Tis dvarvofjs xal ris
Salis dpyt.

Alri 82 Yikes Kal ixypérys rob arvetparos* An Se bypa,


* Surely some such word as did
is wanting before rij¢ bypacing, or
the text is otherwise at fault.


fon the ground that itis supertiuous
and out of place. I fear this must
be held to be an unwarrantable


liberty on the part of un editor,
whose duty it is to restore the
words, but not attempt to improve
the sense of bis author.

2 Ermerins agrees with Petit in
reading wyeiporog. I am donbt-
fal.


74 TIEPI AITIQN KAI SHMEION


mayéa, xodiSea" elnrablies 58 yuvaixes dvopdv yaiddov, Sre
mep bypal re xal ruypat of 52 sraides tobrwy mepuylyvovras
pntrepov, 4 yap iow év abfijoe Cepyivar Suvatwrdry.
divbpes bé ef xai x) pyldvoe wabeiv, ddA Ovijexoucs Cagcov.
dpBor) 88 Bavdrov bcos ev Epyou mpiitt, 4 év ciple
tretuov Oddrreras xai SialBeras, dxotby Te Toilet Tis TeTavOU
epyarner, i) xarxebot, 4 oxBnpedos, i) wal Novrpaw srupoev=
Tiipot.

Maddyopod 88 onyria, Sdpos tod Oapyxos, Sxvos és 7d
Etunbes Epyov, drap 38 és dracav mpitw, dicmvaa ev
Spdum,  mpas d8dv dpOijv Sparyyaddecs kal Byyddees, doa
év roice trroxovipiows xai épvyal mapddoyor, dypurvin,
Oeppacin vinrwp curxph, doadrjs pls dfeln, és dvarvoiy
Sroiyn.

"Hy 8 émi wéfov 73 xaxdv Epmp, uijra épudpd- dpOardpot
mporrerées, ds em dryydvn, panos &v eyprrydpoe? aodrdv BF
peov Td Kaxdv év Urve typi) xal &nyos % Gowri): odrod
xat Yuxpod iépos ériPupin: és 7b trrasOpov levrar, mas yap
airéower olxos és dvarvoiy od Siapejs’ avarvéover SpOrot,
Sxws Gravra omdca. tov Edxopevov iépa mrobéovres, im
arropins 8é rob H}épos Kai Siolyoues 76 oTépa, ds rHdE pélove
Xpeopevol” eypol ra mpocwma, jv Tov paprov. Tade yap
épevOij. pare meph pérwrov Kal xrnidas' BE ovvex}s,
Bialy dvaryory) opixp), ert, uypiy, deédy bmotdy re Kab
adpod érdvOicpa. tpaxynros oidéer mveipatos mprot. Urro-
xovipa dvecracpiva. opvypol cpuxpol, muxevol, meted
pevor loyva oxédea Khy dneprabij tdde, dwérvké nore
Sarkis spine:

2 Wigan and Ermerins read pwx- dor quem Greci rhogmon vocant.”
pecs but the other seems tome the Morb. Acut. ii 10, Sco Pauies
proferable term, The authority of Avontera, t i. p. 482, Syd. Soc.


Calius Aurclinnus seems tome de- Edit,
isivo on this point: * Gutturis stei-


XPONIQN IA@QN, BIBA. A’. %


‘Hy 8é & dyabiw pérqras, BHE paxporépn al dpaorépy.
dvarywryh whetveoy re miwy kat iryporépww" Koidins Tépayos
TOMY WBarwidav obpwv exxpurts Torr}, iv é& tndc~
rasw pnbixw jen dwvh yeyavordpn, Dmvor abrapxées,
troyoriploy veo’ jxé wore arévos es werddpevoy én’
dvict Ga8pa dpasdy, delov, xepyvades.* aide pv ody Siadc~
Spionxover tov SreOpov ev 8 thor eravécect, xiv mrepilwoe
Spboardbyy, Tov maBeos hépovar EbuSoda.


Keg. o8'.  Tlept Mvevpmdov.


“AcOparos iden Td mvevphbes, al dd Tod mvetpovos 7d
mdbos rms x’ deOuats. Euva yip nal ta mapedvta’ opus-
pov 8¢ ral 7d Eeddopor. Stemvoia piv yap Kal BIE wad
aypurvin xat Bépun Evvd* wai drocerin nal loxverns brov.
xal qap és xpivov' 13 xaxdy drrorelverat, my ob mepactépe
bvas Ereos. jv te yap 1a perbmapov dpkp, els 7d bap if) 7d
Bépos daroyiyvovra:: ify re yemudv, és td perdmrmpov Tehev-
root tov Blov. Koté xal yépovres Ghavae pnidcor Kal dard-
ppicrot dddvres, boov Spayelns porijs és edviyy Bavdrou xpéos®

* Tum not satisfied that Ermerins


was warranted in prefixing of to
sepxviteg, contrary to the authority


‘Tyrannus of Sophocles; namely—
spenpt wadaed civiitee port
—that is, “A slight inclination of


‘of all the MSS,

"I follow Wigan and Eimerins
in adopting this reading in place of
alexpiy by.

71 must say, I have never been


properly remarks, that in this sen~
tence there is an indirect reference
to a celebrated yerse in the CEdipus


the scale scts old persons asleep in
death.” But then dmégpurro d\év-
reg create difficulty, inasmuch as
the adjective never occurs elsewhere,
as far as I am aware; and, more-
‘over, I do not see how a shivering
fit shoulil necessarily occasion death,
Instead of it, I would prefer deé-
$paxro.; that is to say, with the
meaning, “being seized with ob-
structed respiration.” Still, how~


76 EPI AITIQN KAI SHMEIQN


dopgata Emavres darvoot, ogvypol cpixpol, wvevol, duvdpol.
Odd rébe pév Eva wpds 7d dcOpa lig 8 dvaPjeooves
ds dvdEovres. patawrrovéovas 5¢ obdiv yap dvdyours. ef
8é re Tod whevpovos aroppayely Bin, cpexpdv, NevKdV, oTpOY-
yiror, xaratiaber Baipyt ebptrepos piv, dduiorpodos, 782
dvédxcros iy 82 dvexrintos 6 svetmev ij, bypaw 82 dxoidy
Te mempyétoy Sumrews, Biases tev mapokvepéw Tobbe
petoves. of yey ov dwerviynoay Baccov, mply Te xdxvov és
76 way drookiyas pereEerépouer 83 &s DSepor wept Nayora
i} dva cdpxa rd waBos TedevrG.


Keg. ty’. Tept “Hraros.
“Hrap omdnvi é& yéveow pv lodpporroy Seka yaip 482 ex”
SpierepA vA lowhayyre twdppa\ sp. goat Snake
Sivapev Kai dv ixye’y xal &v voto. ev ively pev, Srewep
7 xpdros tis Tpodis ro Hrap toxer pilkwow yap pr<eBav
jyrap"' drap &y votcorst xal & ixyelny woddov Te loyupo-
répny Exec al rod Oavdrou ri alrinv® dxédcov obv irap
és tyelw xpécoov, tocbvbe xdxiov dv yotoow. Kal yap
émipdeypalves Oaoodv te Kat Buudrepov, xal ddloraras
Euvexdorepov te Kal ddeOpuirrepov. eri oxipp@ 88 dxtrepov
oTAnvos Kal mepiadydotepoy Krelve. Ta pev ody THs prey-
pacins év toict oFéot treba,

“Hy 88 és wiov tpérnrat, ddtvn deta loyer péode nrevbos,


ever, there is a difficulty, inasmuch
a it would not be easy to find any
authority for this participle, al-
though the verb be not uncommon,
See Liddel and Scott. One might
think of dmérAgerot, which would
bo a very suitable term, as this is a


very natural cause of sudden death
in asthma.

' Hippocrat. de Aliment.

71 have not ventured to eject fe
dysiny from this clause, as suggested
ly Wigan and practised by Erme-
ring,


XPONIQN TA@QN, BIBA. A’. 7


4} dxpov duou. tnd yap 706 dyBeos Exeras 7d Budhparya,
€E ob 73 Hymap Hprntae ro 8 Sedbparywa tiv brd riot whev-
pice bpéva BplBer Evvijrrae yap airégr 6 88 ext viv KAy-
iba 582 dxpw rav dpewv drorérarat, kai rdde Evvepédxerat
ebreos, “arp Soph Bor plyort: dmbing drrorrdaey, AVE Bip,
ob pada rune, xporly xrajSapos. iy 8 xataxopéws Soo
lxrepwbecs, To Nevxoxpdov eldeos* Srvos xaBapol payracins
od pada. vypadrZoe wey és mavrar & bv BE te tov mpoc-
kalpav. dfarlvne wapaxowal, eal. xarearddncav ebbbos:
Syxos bard rerOjjoe 4) wWrevphas, dmdry 82 woNdoler dens Tee
pirovatou -ybyveras. GN’ i piv 3 td tas vébas dynos
kal ddvvn meterpévors, 7d Iyrap oldéer tuhewv yap bypa-
oins tw 88 py brd to doréov [" wipvwor dhe"), rod tyévos
75 onputiov kab rod wev weprypadj) Kal rd dpa Sika ped
tap Thy mepaywyhy tev NoBav es haryapdy rd exvydarpioy
mittouca xelp ifdver meprrovatov dé dépiatos 4) aKAnpln Kab
rod wéparos } drogvars davis, jv wey low 3 drdoracs
pérp, woMAov te Kpkeoov 4) picis inzpob 4 yap & Evrepa,
ip emt bot tpdyrer 74 miov' aowerrépn 82 rodrOv 7 és
bot 636s. iv 82 ta pémp, raxdv pev pi) Tdpver. iv re
8p obras 8p, drecOlerai bxd 700 aiov 7d trap, wal obe
aporny 6 Odvaros. iv 52 Bédrgy5 tduvew, aipopparyijoas
xivSuves, cat adrixa av dvOpwrov éxOaveiv. doyeros yap
aipoppayin ef fprats. iy obv és dvdyuny Topijs Karins Kore,
xavrijpa tumvpov biapavéa ruphoat, nai Siaear péodu rod
mbov. rebrd ydp cor Tépver Te Kal Kaies. Kat Hy mepyyly-
vyras, mov dxpevoer Acvxdv, mérrov, Aeiov, xaxdbes, dre
tray rolde al zruperol wat ra Bewa Evvbib0r fnidios re
# In most of the editions there is Ro lena appears In any of our
the mark of a lacuna before these British MSS. which I have exa-


words; and Ermerins suppresses mined,
them altogether, as being redundant. r


LANE MEDICAL LIBRARY


78 TIEPI AITIQN KAI SHMEION


GdOigeras wdvra. fw 88 ey Evrepoy 7d wooy eyyénras, h
yarthp mpwriara piv bsaréden Siappées Erevta xpedy wri
Haat ikea adfis ad bucevrepiiden dxoia éd’ Exeot. drip
ral aipdrany word nal Opbufor irbytn. dpperas nal xohd
EavOi xaraxopis, 4 mpacoedijs, at dordrn és SdeOpov pé-
ata.

*Hy 8 dvexminroy rd @dxos yhyvyrat, xal xaxddea %
qyacrip dxoiév re oxrediva tardyes, tpoph) dmerros BrexBéee
th? dxpacins Koidins te Kal évrépwv. ob mérre yap aii
eb tyov 7d trap" mip re emi rotode Spipd, Kal mdvros és
xaxdy 4) Tpom}. caprdv Evvrijkves, opuypot cpixpol, bie~
arvoot, etre obk els paxpov érededryoay Tov Blov. perekeré-
poe 82 ¥ Sucevrepin piv kal 7d dxos ij6n, és Vpwma be
xartatpeyye tj vobcos. jy 5é drravra Evvdié@, riov Aevedy,
Aelov, suaddv, dvoopov yap éxpéer, a yaorhp mérret Te Ta
ourla, cedars GvOpwros* Eprrov 58 8: objpwr xexpicBas*
der$arsoréon 88 kad dcweorépn 4 Tide r00 mio SBbs.

*Hy & ard ris Preypovijs dvexrinrov J 7 Imrap, drrovov
Bev ob yiyverar,? tov Syxov re Tov oxAnpoy oy els oxippov
Wpberas. ebre mévos pev ob Evveyis, veobl)s 88 xiv mapir
Gpau) 88 wat Cépun drocirin, mixpav yevpdrav HSovij,
spruxéwy dndin, puywBees, trddeveot, yAwpol, oidadéor de giv
xal wédas. mpdcwra pucd, yaorhp Enpiy, Suaywpioves ru
Kwai. Kxopudh yap Tay Kandy Gpwrp.

Ent 7G oem, fy ply olpa worra, wayka, exiBoow
Eyovra rodiv lhu@Sea katapparyy, edmis expedoar tov


“J at first changed lepin, for
which there is no authority in a
transitive form, into ieyin, (Erme-
rins suppresses yap, and further
reads uxpin, to which, however,
there is the same objection as to
Uepiu.) Bat, upon second thoughts,


by a slight change of the punctun-
tion, I flatter myself that I have
brought the text to m passable
state.

* Enmcrins substitutes dsrovoy for
ropov, which latter word evidently
is wrong. See Wigan.


XPONIQN TIAGQN, BIBA, A’. ce


Bepov Hy be Newrd kal dverdorara Kal ddiya, TH ’Spome
tinmpéer iv 5& perafdrry eis rd dpyaiov i dices, Kal
xarappayj Kore els xoiMyy, éxt moddoiet LdarwSect Kal Tov
pura ijoaro: oparepi) 88 ¥ rowadry emixoupin’ ext yap
Thos dbpdyoe xeviooers Ht thot doydryor Evprrdcect ebé-
Gaviv Kore im’ abyvapins of xdpvovres, dxws €E aipoppa-
anlns.  dowkarepoy 82 die iBpds, Hw words éxpup. od mrdvw
nap ixuaréor of dSpwmubdees. HSe trav ev trate wabkwy a
Tedevrh *plyveras.

*Hy &¢ durvéy 7d frap,. .. . . pelpaxes Kal of péoge
depuis, hooov yuvaikess mpopdores 88 dxpacin Kal vodcos
paxp)), paMaota ert Svcerreply kal Euvrij-ecs. nal yap Si)
wat rovode éxixdnexov Evyrnerixods, rods éi Exec fraros.
loxvods drobvijcxovras.


Keg. 08. Tept SxAqvos.


Xmryvi EbvnBes xpéviov voonua, oxippos. Epsrvos b8 ob
pniBlas, ylyverat 8 obv. etre roves pev ob Tpnyds, byKos
32 movdds Tis ervrovins pétwv" él Beka yap ShOn wéode
roi fratos Sdn TH Kowevin erordéwy. tobverey ToddoIct
dardrn yiyveras, @s Towwdbe obx edvtos aTAqvos, GAL TOD
dpdvos mdBeos. 7d ykp meperévatoy preypdevery epics Soxéer,
darnvis 82 Kal drépapvos Sxas AiBos. Towdebe Ta TOARa
nl oxippy yiyverac omdiy, ebre Kal dropin Eiveore mav-
edie.


"Hy 8 nal gurvtorp, dais piv, etkeov eri rh Olke xara
xopupiy, &vOa % tod miov yévvar Grn be dvexminros, ob
dlxes. Gddore 88 7h xordly das emascpyrat, Tide Kaxcice
apis Tas dmdowas depipevos, & 7 dy opixpbrepos coy
xmpny és 7 eumdadew loxy. vavtin, dropin, wiora mpos
res pifecs


80 TEP AITIQN KAI SHMEIQN


"Ent 88 rdavos onpijia, muperoi, mévor wad plyea. ra
TOM yap tact Gppyor S¢ ex Bpaxein Pépay xa dvoduvor,
Tide Kal NAGE ore és ow Aijva droctacts. javov yap Kab
éravalaOnrov Kai ev dyelp Td omddyyvor olbadéot, Udepa-
Sees, weddyyrwpor, Edv Svehoply 4 Starvore ws dard Bdpeos
70d Bripnxos, éridndov yap 7) Kaxdv' dxpt Tey dive yaoThp
mivmrarat vrd Tveiparos Tayéns, dpsyddeos, bypod as
Boxbeiv, lve &r°. CSvros Srypot> Bakes wokdar Gunde. eryhy-
verat, nat Spayéa Enpa Brjccoucs, Koidin iv te xdéto dépn
Uareden, rd mpérrov cpuixpov emixoupifovca ef Se ext
Bao €x55G, Evyrijree uev rov dvOpw@mor dpedéer 52 obdey
Frrov.

*Hy & xal expayi, miov pev xaBbapdv, mérov duxore
éaatOn, iméddevxov 58 Kal reppoeSes, dove be Tpuyades H
mrerbviv jv 82 Kat Baburépn ¥ dréctacis yévytat, Kad
pédav 70 bypov" ebre nat rod Yupod TL TOD ordyvis Efaoe
cuvtaxévros. peteberéporot 58 xat Sra pédea tod owdy-
vos qvéxOn edAvtos yap Kab dice awry fy 88 eal pi
xablornras td Edxos, piuvy b& és woddY ypdvoy, d7d-
outot, Kaxéxrat, oidaréot, ideiv amperées, roduehxées avr
pada 82 es xvijuas oTpoyytha, weMubva, Kotha, purapa,
Sucabia ra Pdxea* ride emcEvvranévres ddovto.

"Ent 82 cpixp@ dyn werd cxAnplns, dvrerumins, darovin*
Sid rd8e roddOv xpovov Liar olbe" el 8 rod ardBeos irryvTo,
xpedw Her, i) Plows, kal rob oxsjveos rhxeddv emuyiyve-
rae drap #58 obros 6 tpdmos Tot GAeOpou adéas Tod Gv
edryet.

Tlaidla piv ody wai véou mabey te jmtrepor xa dmadda~
ryiivac jntrepor ryépovtes Be ovx etrrabées piv, Siabpivar Be
abwvaror dap Kat mpecBirar Erabdy tives td omAnvOs
SiapOapévres. Kai yap xai emi cpixp@ dyn tod ddCpov


XPONIQN HA@QN, BIBA. A’. 81


aglaw  pomj piper 8 nal vodoos paxpi, POudbdns, eal
véowwt apyin pddora, dxdcome dx” dywvins, i) yypvaclov
TOMY, darovey Td cpa. ywpla éwdea, Vara maya,
Ghuupd, Speopddear dpav, +d Onpriides werdrapor.


Keg. ce’. Tept "Ixrépou.


‘Hy yodis Eavbiis, NexiBadeos, t} xpoxoewdéos, i} ris wéhary-
XMipou, & Td Tavrees dvdyuers dard Tow omddyyvou yévy-
rat, Td mdbos terepos KiKMjoxerac, yaderov pev ev dkéou
od dp pdvov mpd éABsuns wrelver paver, GNA Kal perd
EBBopunv Exrewe puplovs’ owavlas be edre Expive muperdv és
8doy 73 wdBos, GXN' abris ob jniBlers Miberas.

Euvioratae 88 ote ex’ airly motvov fraros, Sxeos tick
zéy inrpév Border, BAA Koikly Kal omy) xa veppoter
wal Kir rad ef? iprare piv bbe jy Preypatyy wév i
exippov taxn 7d imap, dtperrov 8¢ 7d €s épyaclny én,
theres pv ev 1H Hare xorv, wad Siaxplver rivbe 4) ev
iyrare obca riots GN iy al hépovcas és rd Evrepov tiv
ody d8oi dnd Tis preywacins, Tob cxippow ppaxGiat,
wAnuBUpH 6 4 boris, wadicouTos 4 yor} TH alpare obv
ploryerat, Td 82 alya, és wav TO crijvos povréov, dye Thy
KOM mavth TH ompare ylyverae 8 H iBéy Node euKe
BE nal dpydabbea ra oxiBara ob yap yiyverae xodjBapa,
Gr rep ote Toyer rod yupod Ty erippoyw rie Kad yaorhp
xiEnpos: ire yap iypaiverar oltre Sdeverae yodj xporiy
&e rob AeuKoyAwpou elSeos.

“Emi omdnyl 8 iy Werepos arf, wedayyAmpos* wérawva
yap abréov #) tpopi), Srumep éxpayetov éorw alwatos péda~
vos, ob thy dxabapainy éobcay ob béyerat, old? ewrovéer
vootwy 6 omdijy 4 8 Fly rH alpate mdvry gosh. Bia
Tbe weddyyrwpor amd amAnvos ixrépov' atdp wal émi toiae


82 TIEPI AITION KAI ZHMEIQN


oxuBéroor toice Evvifbect, Ere xat pedavrépn pour}. Tis
yap omdnvis tpopijs To meperrov és Eodov weplrrapa
sylverat,

Kai éri xidp wal yaorpl terepos, ivrep eis wep i
yacrip kal 73 KaNov xaxwbi Kat yap xal év Keddo wbfrosy
wal dd Todd. 7 és TO Hrrap dvaywy) tpodis. jv obv dpo-
tépny Td Fprap riv EAnv rpopiy AGBy, Thy pev IBiny epya~
olny rovées, Thy 88 dBvelny eg. 7d yap dv rH dvabder alua
Ty depylay ri tod xebdou éréyov Siacrelper marti yedue-
vor dareyin 82 4 &v weddey odie dors dpyacin®

*NBe rat et mavri ybyverBae omhayyyy Suvariy terepor,
od povoy Tay és rd Hrap reprdvrwv tpodiyy, ANNA Kijy ard
praros AapSdrp. ob yap oxeroict alcOnroiat podvor
gious marti Siaréuree viv rpopiy, GNA OAS mréov
Grpotar, olrep arb mavros ely wav dveyOrvar pytBior, Tis
dicios atrods xat bid orepedy wal ruxwav dyodons yy
vovras oby of drpol yorBador, kal xpdtover, § dv Roos
700 cdparos. od iv eri Karp h Tis Koidins Expiry
Dever}. dowls yap TO Hrap é yéveow, ral éxpoiy Toye
ert Evrepa yoniis.

Avvatwrirn 58 xal i) ext 1 mavrl Eki lerepov texeiv.
Yoryes yap Kat év dd riv alrinv. Fore 88 roude wayrt pév
7d Beppov & mréyuv, mavri 8 dypdv yéwa Kal Suixpros,
Ero piv ddr, dedory 82 oleety & caped pay Bods, &
SepOarysaters 84 Edicpuars dy Ep pov BE wah peo) wok ey dork
Kuporls. iy obv é3 Exaarov epyov 7d Oeppiv éyxapun, abrd
flare Spyid nad upsides expdarg’ird 82: type’ ererra yey
Tae xoAH* upds yap Epya mixpa Kal yorsBaha. jy be


1 Although Ihave adopted Erme- _* This sentence is evidently in an
ring’ change of Gpérepoy into -yy, unsatisfactory state.

I must say I am still not satisfied

‘with this sentence.


XPONIQN IAGQN, BIBA. A’ 88


rad év aljare dmepln Eopi9h, yreras 7d alua yoroeibis,
oxldvarar 8% maytl tpégpov Sid ré8e travel alveras ods}
Bewde wir rydp ro wédos, goBeph 824 xpbn eBei, xa xpv-
coudées tact riyv pou ob yap avOpdmre eixpems 5 ye ev
Mbp Kadiv Ey meperriv 5é wor dpdtew nai wobev robvopa,
Tip dxdcov rav xepoalwv leriBev ray terparddev Onplov,
rowiae 8 tace of dares biolde.

EiBea rob mébeos 80d. 9 yap ey 7d EavOby kal rd xpo-
xordes erpdarn Tod NevkoyNadpov elbeos, H és 7d medBviv Kal
pray. vine yévror th alti % 8) kab yodav bors abroy
wad yap xa rijobe 4) wey EavOiy, Newt, Srecdjs, Nevxorépou
elBeos, 4) 88 xaraxophs, ds xpéxov, } AéxBoy ddvas, rod
abrod eldeos2 Beurépy 88 pe\avrépns xporijs, mpaclfovea,
lacarains, pédaswvar prplas 8¢ év pow Tév xpoudv mapar-
Aayat: mapd Be rd Bepydy rovréww Kad rd iypa 4) tpomy}.
GAA nal TA oTrdy Va TOISE dome alria* jv F EavOdv, ds
to tprap } wedidvov, ds 6 cmd iy piv rt omhdyyry
twi terepos yévntat, eri irate piv, Ta Hpratos mpopavia*
Gri 82 omdqvi, Ta omdrnvés. Exacta 58 ra Tév Gdrwv Exd~
arou' jy be pndevds dalvyras, Tis Ons eds dove 4 wdOy.
Sapavi 52 xara ra Deved ev rotor dpbarpoior* perdrrov
58, mpds xpotddowss paddov Tolar AevKoicr ios, xai ert
opexps ixrépy 4 xpor) uetov eravbéct.

‘Oxicorr piv ody pédas 6 ixrepos, xpor} weubyyAcpor,
puyaibees, dbpavées, Seve elxovres, EPvpot, Apwpabecs 52 riy
dcpiy, tuxpol 88 riv yetow, Thy dvarvoiy ox elxodot,
qyaotph Saxvidecs, Siaxwpyiyara mpacoedéa, trropédava,
Enpa, pis Biaxeoporpera, obpa Kataxopia emi ro peddivren

2 The text here given, is as  dg0aAwoter, being evidently at fault,


amended by Petit and Ermerins, I have not serupled to adopt the
In the MSS. it is much vitiated. conjectural emendation of Erme-
ring,


a2


bed TEP AITIQN KAI SHMEIQN


pov, darerrot, daréaitot, Gypyrvor, Evpot, pedaryyodd-
Bees.
"Emi 82 7b Neuxdrepor, xpor piv NevadyReopor, eyveopeyy SE
datdpirepor ciriav dpEacbas way dxvnpol, eadayeiv 52 ox
dyeveis, wear jmldvor rav mpécbev paddov Siaxeapéovee
Revd, Enpd, apyrdBea obpéover Fava, mypd, xpoxocs-
béa.

‘Apdo & rd Eiurav cba xvnopédes’ Cépun ava pivas
opixph wey, Saxvedns 86. dutiocor 7d yordides" yebous pay
mixpav ob tixph, Td Bodpa, ob piv rudy yruxtov be
mixph. % yap ev 7G ordpare yori evitovca tH yoooy,
éxixpoobey ray eerray evrvyydvousa, Ti alaBnow copi-
tera rive. 4 yap pPrSoca dvarwica Tijs yoXis Theke,
ove éxetvev alaOdveray Kal Tov pev mpdcbey Tov Tips droct-
ain xpdvev drpendes.1} sods, drdp of82 ¥ yrBawa’ rp HOt
EyGerar Fy 22 dvathoy yebpacs erimpoaber réav Beoray
Ty pierces Aba ceed ee ely mucin by eetlaniert
xpov aloOnois iv re yauxd, yordbeosr pOdver yap
alaOnois Tis yoXs’ amdrn be Eiverts roice Hryevpévowee TH
Tikpa pruxta daivecBar, ob yap olrws Eyer, GAN Gre pip
énir@ ialvorrs minpa mixpaterat, povov bid 7d Evivnbes tis
votcou, gavracin yruxdtovros yiyverat. 1% uri 8 xaTd~
crags Kal éy yAuwéoe kal mexpoict yetpace dmatphav dpa
Pesgecht oie peaebnahiejcee point

SFI: ae, oBv ph El ivor ow Ady pen Oépuiia'ty haxf
dow's piv ds érlray, waxpérepov &¢ iy 88 nad eyypovien
nar eripdeypaivg omhdyyvoy, és DSperra ta mod wad
naxetlny redevTa. moddol 82 nai diya ipwmos exraxdyres
drovro, Etvnbes 62 perpaxtorer, véowwt, nal rotor 6¢ dow

5 The common reading, ds eve- _proviously suggested by Petit, Wi-


ay, having scarcely any meaning, I gan reads, cide suis, which also
have adopted that of Ermerins, is not unsuitable,


XPONIOQN HAQQN, BIBA. A’. 85


véarepor salou 82, obx cndes mayyy ob mdvrn G8
dagudts.


Ke. ix’. Tept Kayegétns.


Eupravrov Spot saGiwv xayetln tpom}. dmacar yap ai
voor tiioke drrordxa. drap Kat He wovvy dvevOev trav
ov, pappdxoy éribocw txovea morAjv, ivddea KaTd
porate yiyrerat waos.' Kai Eis wey waxi) xeBt0s Furi)
mdvrov, xat Evyprtipara Twodra, Kar obvoua Tobe Eipfo~
Ror loxwirns 5 %) dypos 4 olbos Kai ef te Erepov mpbaxar-
poy ava Td cpa nayekin 82 évds peyddrou wdBeos ibe, Kat
Tile rotheniar § pital dripdrmou d.a% wed ebebin, ak
i & wep 4 &s dwidoow alpatos yévva: 768 may epyov
guts, é6) olat ebrrvou, ebrovin, etxpoln, ro mpdaber iryeln.
jy Bi ds dabeviny xaxoxupins % pics tpari, rébe dotiv 5
naxebin.

‘A votaos ide SvoadOis, 35% prjmiotov Kaxdv. nal yap


as it stood in the former editions,
and patting a comma after a\\wr,


for which I have the authority of
Wigan. I do not hesitate to affirm,
that gappdcwy and the other words
connected with it are indispensable
to the full signiflention of the pas-
sage, us any one may be convinced
who will compare the account of
Cachexia given by other authors,
‘Thus, among the canses of Cachexia
‘enumerated by Crlins Aurelianus,
we find “item ex medicaminibus

\o potatis"—and “curatione
mala medicantis.” Tard, Pass iii. 6.
And much in the same style Celsus,
treating of Cachoxia, says: “Quod
fere fit, cum longo morbo vitiata
corpora, etinmsi illo vacant, refec-
tionem tamen non recipiunt; aut
cum mialis medieamentis corpus
affectum est.” iii. 22,


86 TIEPI AITION KAI ZHMEIOQN


rhereras xpivep paxpe, Kad ob ex) pj Tod oc@patos Kaxip,
Kai obi él om ddryyvy evi ddA yap Tov drdvrey TpET}
és mrovnpév. rovyapody ra dréroxa Tobbe voryjmara dpuxTa
yiyrerat, Spares, 7 HOloves, f} Evvrijgves. wal ydp roe wal
ris xaxeklns mpopdaves ddedpal rijs Euvrijkws dace 7) 68
voicos paxpi) Sucevrepin Evveysjs: volcwy trroatpopat évi-
out. eboitln pev yap,—xai Tor Kal mpoopépovrat TOAK,—
eopay 82 kal drpérto % dvdboors. epyacin yap tpopis
és méypuv, dmropos.

Alrin 8% Kal aipoppolidwy poov éricxecis, i ¢uérev Evvij-
Cov draddayy yunvaclov dpyin, adacpos Bparwv, «at
peyddov révov pabupin edre trav rapedvtwy Exactov, ds
7) pndty, ode emiatpéper,* Bdpos Tod crijveos, dypos Gr-
Dore Kal Errore, yarrihp Prowsys, dpbarwot xotrow, Trvor
Bapées, vwOpol. adda rdbe, peuBasea wey ywyvopeva, vou-
cou dmoriny toxer jv 88 prfeoavra pluvy, pyde drcévas
0édy, weyddov Kaxod eer cipBora. éatadres pev oldadéoe
sré8as Te Kal Kyjpas, KaTaKMvopevor BE Ta KeKapeva popia*
wiv @vaddaEn Thy Kardkduow, 7d oldos én’ éxeiva court
bypod te Kat yuypod és 7d Bdpos mrepiodos. iv yap 4) Open
70 typo ekarplfp, Todd ove dvayeopevov, elra xaTappéct.
eovror pev moda citiwy, dbnbdyor xdpra. dyvddoorws
taxutépn mews, dporépwy paddov i) drérrwv. eEavép-
ryaoroy 2 x Opéyus. adrd robe obe ev TH Dry wéocerat
imi tis piows. 4 yap ev TH Kotdin tod Oepyod arovin, wal
& 7G ceiver, 6poln. rovyapody ob88 xpnorov, ov8é etypouv
alya yiyverat.

Kai ériyy dpdv ddov 1d ciya mrnoOj, wai es Ta
ovria dpekis otyntat, al rijs xaxetins dde wéodu otopedyou

4 do not think myself warranted as altered by him, it appears to me


in adopting the text in this place as to be in a most unsatisfactory
it is remodelled by Ermerins. Even state.


XPONIQN ITA@QN, BIBA. A’. 87


vepoperns, kat rod wdBeos Kopudiy layovros ii5n, olbadéoe
piv, ddpavées 88, xad és wicav mpikw aOvpor. xoidty dé
Enporépn. yoda Ta Tora Kal Revxd, tpnyéa, Kal dyad
Suaympiover. 7d oxfvos adios, dvidpwres, ermopmdees, tarvos
Bpaios wey addayij, xerdpévy 68 vverarypds. Bpadimrvoot,
oduypot dyuavpol, dobevées, munvol: muxvoratos 6&8 ext
don xa cpixpi mpite. GoOua St eri roiabe 4 dvarrvor:
déBes eri roice Kporddoee emypuévar doapnly raw wé pce,
Grap «al eri rotce eaproict odd pétoves Siorbéoveas,
Heddyydwpoy td alua. mi roiade pOicrs, t) otvrnks dvd
cdpxa Dipurra, ij twa doxirny iryaye. Kal réwde digunros H


tie 82 Hruclas, yijpas, wal ob a
Le hes nad sheath cel Revove fat ae
dxpdfovres ob mdyyy piv mabey Erorpor ov mapmay be
draddavyhvae eteodor. Spy Bi ob pln piper réBe, ob62 és
pny redeuTa ddrA GOevdrepoy pay Kiet, xeypdy ruOnvel,
tap 58 és xopudiy redeoope?, Bépos 52 xreiver.


APETAIOY KAIITIAAOKOY


EPI


AITION KAI SHMEION XPONION ITAGOQN,


BIBAION 4ETTEPON.


INAX TON KE@AAAION.


®
$s


-  Hept"Ydpwxog
Tiepi AcaBirew
Tlepl riiy xara rode Neppois a0
Tiepl rv iv Kéort ay fas
Tiepi Fovoppotag
Thep Eropayucay .
Thepi Kowdtaxiic d.a8iowg
Tepl Kwuxsy
Thepl Avervreping
Tepi Aeevreping
Tepl ‘Yorepuesy
Thepi *ApOpiridog eal "nates
TlepiBAigavrog .


ARERR


Rn RAN


18


2


APETAIOY KAIINMIAAOKOY ITEPI AITION
KAI SHMEION XPONIQN IIAGQN,
BIBAION B’.


Ked. a. Tepi “Y8parros.


"Yopoyr areprrés pev éordeiv madBos, yaderav 52 wal rabeiv.
Bradidprjaxovee yap réb_e méyyxu maipor im’ eiruxins, wad
Bet parov 7 rexyns Ta yap pélova mavra iByras podvos
Geol. ¥} yap ev amddyxvp Katpin voonua podedoav Expeye
és xaxyekinv rb wav, } Td Evprav cxijvos Notpod xatdpav-
tos & xaxoyupinv iperpe Ta omhayyva’ edte GdAjAoLTE
Guo & 7d Kandy Evvripcpéer, aowes 52 oddey, EE odmep
kak opsxph Th pboe yiyvouro dy éxsnoupin: fore 52 és erop-
Bole jciua yoxpir, wayd, dxotoy 4 3uiyn 7G arrl!
4} TpoTh inypiis Kad yuxpijs atrins, é& toujyBe Ew Exeporobons
tov dvOparrov. ob yap Td dv tH Kodi 7H Kdtw ddUuLopevov
iypov tipwmra xadopey, eet obbe 7d mdbos THbE dort, GAN


* Petit and Wigan suggest wveipa
instead of fedpa; but the former
reading is defended by Ermerina,
‘Though the general import of the
passage be obvious, thero ix still
something unsatisfactory in the lan
guage. Of course, reference is here
made by our author to the saying


of Heraclitus, as told by Diogenes
Lacrtius. The philosopher having
become dropsical, proposed a riddle
to his physicians:—"If from rainy
weather they could make dryness”
ul Fivawro if éxopPBping aixpoy
roujoas,


92 TIEPI AITION KAI SHMBION


re Evprrapopapries +h vowow 5 Syxos, rd olBas,  xport,
988 &s 73 Dba Evrrijxovea eis, Dpay ré dors wal eadéeras.
sly yap éxpayi Kore 7d DSwp atroudras Efe, i rauav Tos
70 troydvipiov éxyéy, eb’ Bons Eacr of Wpwrvodecs.
Bey ov mpwrlern alrin xayekln.

"Tdéae 88 rreivas, fs drap Svoya Erepov Kad Erepov. Hv
py yap } wapéyxvows Evoypos ev thos Aayovers Curdip,
Kal dod Tis pies év Toict mardyourt boxén ws TURTaVy,
tupmaving newdijoxeras. fy ¢ iSwp &as és rd meperdvacoy
durepeéyntas, dumdcn 8 7H inypG Ta tvrepa, nadeouer
éricdnow aaxirny. jy 88 ai Awyoves wey pydty TovTéoy
Toyxwot, Td mav 58 rapodalvy exivos, tv pav ext heveg
pdypare xal wayéi Kal yuxpd, preywatins kadéera iy
88 é yupov ainddwra, bdarwdea, Nerrov, cuvraxiat al
a , dvd adpxa ybyerar Dipwy kar pev i éxdorou
Eicracis. xaxlov 58 roddov Te % Tévbe riikin® reve
gap aut tas Naydvas ly El tov ava 7d way EvpPi ye
Kore’ yaherwraros 68, jv 6 Tuwmavias TG) dvd cdpxa wey OH.
Kal yap [Sin rév pev dul Tas Aaydvas, doxirov Tumavias
xepelov, Trav St Gov Tod cxijveos 6 NevKodreyparias TOU
dya cdpxa pelov' erukis piv dv, év dreOmictows, fy 6
pelov Evor) 7@ pelove’ raxlov Se el ris Tav pevavey Evi TeV
petovar és reuTd Eve Sir yy be & dixpas fy wikis Gl Henrae
Bvotv peydrorv, mélov Kaxdv Td Exyovov.

Snpeta $2 peyora wal piiora ieiv nal Ovyéew wal eloa~
codons ‘eal ply wp dating tee bykav av shail Neyer,
oldos dul ta 7dde mpdcwrra 5 Kal Spayloves kat Ta dra
loyva, oibfover Spyits te Kat récOn, wal 6 Eiumras Kavdds
oxoduds €& dvioov rob otdeos. Olyetv 782 epeicayta mp riy


21 have followed Crassus, Petit, merins should have persisted in
and Wigan in sappressing of before retaining the negative,
wasiwy; and am surprised that Er=


XPONIQN TA@QN, BIBA. BY. 93


xeipa Kar Nayiva* eiowHeiv' rs yap ixypiy eri ra Gra
népea perappéc drap Kai év thot rod avOparrov THe %
aide emuetpopiics, & ras peraxdictas 7d iypov, Byxov Te
kai wrbSova rote, écaxovery te Kal Tov KAvSwvOS* GAG
fey naiziv Rberudor dpelegs,-8 spipos.yhyveras esther, de
xpivov re srovNiv peiuver KoDdos. Tdde pev ra dolrov.

Topmavlas: 88 mpds rp) vo Byxou Gly’ wad dxodaal tars
Borda. fw yap wardens «B -xeiph, 7d droydorpioy Bovéer,
ob8e peraywpée 7d mreipa ev That emarpophot, mvebya
Yap, Kiv perakmOj 7d dwméyov dvw re Kal xétw, Ioov
mdvrn paver’ jy 82 és dulydny Kal Bop rpérntas 76 mvedpa,
(xal yap daxitns dd typraviou,) dye(Berat wey, Hv pi &
Téhos Tpar]) KoTE, HucTEM)s meTappewv.

‘O88 ava cdpxa 5¢ Tod Neveod Peyparos, Tas wey hwyo~
vas loyouat xeveds, oldaréor face xal mpdcwra nal Bpayi-
ovas’ dtdp 7% dxboa tolce dddowe xeved, toiabe ylyverar
Fhijpea. Grhywa piv yap Aevxdy ext 7G revag preyparig
cuvicrara, yruxpay re xal mayw Tobde Gumlrhatas TO Tay,
oidalver 88 To mpdcarmov, aingiy te rat Spaxioves’ maxd bé
7a émvydorpiov dad rob otSeos" patol 6 és Syxov alpovrat,
Sécr0e véow dexpiy Brees éy eiruyln ris Pruxlys: emi Be 7
dvd cdpxa tyxeBiv ris capxis és yupdv capKoeibéa, iydp Te
aiptravnror,,Suotos poet. dred drrrépeay Bhaceor- rosbaBexad. en}
Or\dopace dri Bapeos eurecdvros, fv tds Th exumodijs, 6
yvpie tephes: 4 82 ray Boot derrubln Suspotv Toye ra
ony.

Hbprract 82 Sud biveors, Sypos, Bbomvo.a, Big, ENdere
Kal Gore vobbes, devas mouds, drécuros Hy GE rs mpocai-
pwovrat, xiv Spayd xal dpuoov, puowbdees, Siardaves cos dd

7 I have followed Wigan and Er- ever, does not seem to me so un-


merins in adopting this reading, suitable as they represent.
instead of card Aéyow; which, how-


of TEPI AITION KAI SHMEION


mAnopoviis dvexpor, 5:5 ob82 eri Novtpotoe ixpadtor, Acv-
ot, yuvarxedees of 8¢ dvd cdpxa, peddryyrapot, podavd~
rcBes. doxirnos pev wal tupravinot emipavées wal ev
mpoodmp* wal kaprotct eal érvyartpiy. eri 88 rolot dvd
capxa kai 76 ddeypatip oldei &mavra xptrreras, Trvoe
Bapées, vo8poi, cpexpol, ayruyin, cpixpodoyin, pirototy.
kaprepin ovx am’ evOupins Kal ebemiotins Sxws Toict ev
ebruyin, GAN €E abréou rod mdBeos" obre hariv Thy airiyy,
Ocvpdcar St rode péya, drt pév ye EXRovos ob dpmay Gde~
Opiicr of vookovres dBvpor, xarnpées, épdrae tod Oardrov™
émt 86 rue edédmiBes nal pidrdtwor yiyvovrar. dpdw be
7a evavria tixtovor ai vodcot.

Dhyrerae tdpary wai ekarlyys nore én’ dbpin vuxporo~
alp, iy ind Sixros yavbov word yuxpov eyyén vdmp, elra
7d trypov & meperévacov évexOi bi & 52 her Kodlgor 7d
Eudutov Oeppdv xareyiy@n, Erevra els Tods Kevedvas ara-
roves expéover, ai mpdcbev els Siarrvony éEnepotpevat Breho-
podvro. rode oby el ylyverat, pnirépn i révbe Tnows, mpl Te
Tov omdayyvav 1) Sov Tov dvOpwmov wabeiv. dradp Abe
BWeopa puodses cab dreyrin nal Bobrpnotes Erexov bSpa-
mas.

“Eort 8¢ Euvov wdvrwv 7d xaxiv, dvdpav, yuvarndy, He
xlns mdans, dxdcov Eddot és dXo elB0s aor cpator, dv
oapra aides 452 Tod AevKod Prbyparos- véor be péype
dxpis, of Kata Nayovas mryjopw0r yépovres pay wavra
mabéew éroipor, drabeppow wuxpov yap 7 yijpas’ GAN &
bypob rAHB0s Face dvalrwt. Toiede obv Tuwravins EuvyjOns.

‘Amayra pév ody rrovnpa ra elded ore? Epa yap mav-
Tov THY voonLaTwV KaKdv" NAA TovTéwy euKopreyparins

“This ts tho reading suggested state; but yet I ennnot bring myself


by Wigan in place of eiepécoror, to adopt the multifarious alterations
* The text ix not in a satisfactory introduced by Ennerins


XPONIQN ILAGQN BIBA. BY 95


pay eimBlarepos. woNdd) yap Kal moccidy ext robSe 4 ebru-
xin Bpdros } ovpwy, 4 xovdin wore ex’ airtous kareppdyn,
Auoplens ijn vijs Tob Dépwmos Eos. aden) Bb tymma-
ving, eal rovde 5 dvd odxpa padrAov- Tov 82 inrpov ev rede
mdbet Srov xph tov EvOpwrov GNrdEar. dd pévtor ove
Oeoiat jmbrepov.

"Tbe 82 nad ey opixph Kore dvOpwmos, 4 xehadiy ert
Bpoxedary, #) srvetuova potvor, 7) iyrap, i) awdjva, Kal ext
quxiw berion® wal vibv Die Fike ebaNBeorion. fv
yap Td oréuov dvf ee ths mpicbev pictos, typoy pev eb
Exot, exyser Eo. jy 88 mvedpa, eFedvoyOn rébe hy 36 ze
aed chica tren wou a Salar ete hh Sed peenos

[dn rig Erépm UBpwros ibe yryvbaneras, xborries cpaxpal,
ouyral, wipees typed, 2yntorras 1B xaple fila 8 diene
fuioraray drip jv dumdtace r@ woddAG iype técpap bE
ip yap rerpivas 7o trvydatpiov éxyéns ert Bpayelg pop
00) byp00, &riobey av enbbpaten } xbovss, jv 73 Spyavev
Subcp, aifes expée robe pévror 7d eldos obx etmbes. 7é0ev
yap dv deméowor ai xiaries, ddds ob ebrropos Aoyos 5é
pereberépovee Gri Hedy nove 80 evrépwy toaibe Kictues byt
82 ove dyrvma, Sid T68e viv obdey ypddo* ode yap mpl
abréwy & re Neko exw elre yap ee 708 Kirov, 4 This yaotpds
4 Gop), tis 6 tpiros ris Evordatos ; ddds yp és Fodor
drdvrav 8 Bpns ciipoos % 82 abrod rob bypod ris ev
Rayive Evddozijs, dxiatos H tov evrépwv pay}. od ydp
dawvis ob8) dveadeBpov rpwOly Evrepor?


* Tt seems difficult to necount for 7 The text in the Inst part of this
this term being in the nominative, chapter is corrupt. Should we not
while those of all the other organs read did before ray, ear Ae?


it so in all the MSS. and editions.


96 EPI AITIQN KAI SHMEIQN


Keg. 8. Tept AcaBijrew.


Owipa 7 SiaBijrew waBos, ob xdpra Eivnbes dvOparoce
capriw nai wedev és odpov } Ebrrnes: dypi) wai yuxpit,
Beas dv Bpan, airin. ddds 88 4 EvwjOys, vefpot re wal
boris. ob yap Siadelmover obpéovres, GXAA Sxmamep CE
Apiowes Sxerdv Umraveros 4 gop. xpor’n way 4 Ths vosoow
gui, maxp@ Kutoxerar xpovyr BpaxtBros 8 SvOpwros, jy Hh
watdcracis Tedecbiy oben yap  tHxeddoy, tayds 52 6
Bdvaros, mort xal Bios alexpos Kat émimovos Sifros dnparés
Todurocin dvicoperpos olipoict roddoicw ahelov ydp exper
7d obpoy, xal ov ay éricyor tis abréous, ore mivovras abre
obpéovras. jv 88 én’ dxapes dvricywor, Hw piv rod mueiv,
dyixpot pev Td orbpe, abadéor 88 7d oxivoy' Ta 5é omAdyyva
xaieaBar Soxéover, dowBdees, daropor, ob« és paxpov Ovij-
eKover trupupheyées Biya. drroupéew 82 tis Gv érlayot
tpirros; 4) ris aloyivy mévov xpécawv; GNA& wyy és puKpov
eyxparées yévavrar, mapodéover dopiv, Spyras Kai loxlar
why dviaot, exyéover pev Td odpoy Grey ta 8 erroBlovra
Eapteras' Evvbiborae yap és xbortw i) wAnppipa.

Kijv pév redec89 7d xaxov, elonpov' eriv 88 péddy,
dvixpoe 73 arbpa, clados eveds, appwbns, dros dard Sipeos,
pal cttece Bifor, baoyeriolew Bépor iatotnaie @adlote
yactpas és xiativ Bippns, } Wilkos, dxas mpécodos Tapi-
ovros tod vorijuatos® drap 76¢ obptover rod EvvijBeos puxpov
te padrov’ Sipos Te, ANN’ obbéKw péya.


4 The common reading is Eajpe- better with the sense of the pamage,
rai. Potit suggests tEqepoivrar; and seems to be sustained by the
but Ermerius’ reading, as given translation of Crassus: “ Prout
abore, is preferable, adventantia morbi processus est.”

1 have adopted aplovroc in Ermerins reads, Socroplovros.
place of opiovrog, as it ngrecs


- um


XPONIQN MA@QN, BIBA. B’. 97


"Hy 82 eri paddov abfnrat, Béppaveis pexpt) piv, Saxves-
Sys 88, evifovea roict om ddbyyvorcr exvydetpioy pucool,
EmigneBon Loyyo) 82 rhy Bday Bw, ebre eal 9 ofpnors na
78 Sifos éravkla ybyverac Hn Kore Kijv ts Expov rov aviv
4 cwvalabnos dari, ebOds obptovor, ribE wor Sonée
kadéerGar biaPiyrys erixdnow, sxotiv te SiaBrjrns cov,
odverey év 7 axrjve Td bypdv ob pluver, GAA Seas bahd-
Opn 7G dvOpimp é& Eodov ypéeras*® Siapréover be és
xpovov Teva, ef xal pi) xdpra mroddbv, ort wivedvres dtpéover,*
Tyxedav 88 yiryveras Sexy obre ydp te ex Tis mécws péya
és 7b oxijvos Epyerat, xal Euvarrépyerar Tav capKay és ra
odpa pupla.

Airin 82, SEedv votowy tis dmérempey & robe, Kal ev
xplot KpbBdnv +o xaxdnBes eyxardduroy al vodoor. ob«
ABixyrov xal Eqrariiptey Kore vibe Thy altiqy loxew tov
dxbow xbers wal veppotar tvanimres erdp et eden ros. bard
rips Sixrddos, roujde roi Edxeos 4) dO Supas 88 7b épwerav
Onplov, i Bdey rid, doyerov Shpos eFdrre. mlvovel re
GEnv obt és Bixpeos dixos, GNX’ és Ty Tis Koidlys Anu pbpay
dxoply srorod fv 88 ddyty rH meperdos THs Koidins, wad
ax Bin, Kal rs dypdv ericyn és pixpov, aibis anv rivover
Bupdvres, kal be rav waxdy 7) duor}. cuvriuopée yap
AAjrovee Skyros «al mordv. GdAow SE ove obpéover, odbé
ris GNAq rod Tivopevov Siarrvor}. Tovyapoty dxoplp pev tod
worod, wAnuptipy Sé irypod, weperdat 88 ris Kowdlns, eEep-
payncay dbpsws.


* The common reading is Cay * Dr. Ermerins improves the sense
rhetwy, which is evidently faulty, very much by substituting suites
Even as corrected by Wigan and for woviovrec. It is well known
Ermorins, the sentence is still in an that intense thirst and wasting are
unsatisfactory state, Seo note to the characteristica of Diabetes,
the translation.


98 TIEPI AITIQN KAI ZHMEIQN


Keg. ¥. epi raiv xara rovs Neppods mabay.


Nedpol rhv duiv pev ddewbees, xpouhy 5¢ epvOporepor,
dxotéy te iyrap, waiddoy 4 patol wal Spyves. Kat yap war
olde dddves, GAN Aeundrepor. apa SE Bibijporre Txedor,
mrartes widdov tact dpa wat xapridot, xoidas 8 ope-
xpat HOmocdécs es tiv Tay objpwv SujOnow, éxmepinacs be
dxerol veupddecs, dxoidy Te aidol ap’ Exarépov. eyrepi-
kage St olde Toicr dpows tis KiaTios ExdrepBer. ton Se
Tév oljpev ard vehpay % Odds és KdoTiv.

Audi 88 rivde, rods vehpods, xal rods mépous rotiade,
MEXAA eal rouctha yyveras wea, 72 ply ofa, ey alpop-
payly Kal ruperoicn, xal deypovfjar «relvovra, dxboa pou
Wikerras TA Bayete. omxelivs Mobre hv ckeRouain
drinefpa piv, dvaBba 8% wad EwarcOricxorca: xpivus
oby, drorrdotes, Ehxea, MOwy yévva, aipoppoldes. Ehxea
pev €E dmocrdcws yujkiota, 76¢ Sucadbia wdyra tov
dvOparov.

Tév MOwv 52 xpovln wer 1) yévvar d8uvddees odyvarcres.
ob.yap pniorn % biéEodos" yaderh 52 mpds roice Kal 4 row
abpuy exlayerrs. aXx’ ef elo) moddo). cpuxpob, AXAAovyly
pbuvovas, A ds ubyas eubpay6f, nal én’ dudoty cotv
veppotv EupBi rade, é5 obpwv cxéow xal Suéracw, Owy}-
Recok Cohonouat.. 28 fe (skero. ah diboee: rusia machete
pee ibea roles obearipei ip. xoihiqy av vebpim. veibages
apuxpey Spa p&tova, bros dy, iv dro very Aibos, pmlrmny
d8av ri és Kbotw toyy. Siu rdde Kal exryuynees of AiPor
phprovrar apis :yap rotor obpyriipas 3a okN2 mnpyvirras:
wal dxdcor ride és maXO5 Avicol, NeTTOl pev Eact Ta Tpbow,
Bia rods obpnriipas orevorépous Séyras* rrayées 88 7d érlaw
Sid 7d rods vehpods Karoo petv. éyrylyvovras Bt roles ve-


XPONIQN IAOQN, BIBA. B. 99


gpoter potvov, ddAd Toicr Brariposr, odd: Bony ydp ev
Tote olpytiipee ove Toyouet of Mba, ddA TA apnpla civ
tote oiipours xdro Siarhées rdep xai onpijia Kal Dy Tod
mdBeos yiyverae iy be iuppaxOh Kore ri Kody witor
TeAdcobels, ovo rijs depts audi tas ydas plode Taw
pécwv mrcvpéwv. mordoIct yoow dxdrn wévov, dy amd
Trevplribos Sdpos lexlov, xara payw Svoxaymées og Evy.
veioas yaderdis erdduvor arpdpor, Baptes, dveihuorot. 7d
yap Errepov aduxoerdés. iy nai wAnupUpy Td odpov, Kat
Siardoves, mpobuply arovpiictos Sxwamep wdivwv. puad-
Bees, ABisGoBas 82 al Giicras aruperch Saanisbees,, txiEqpon
atadén ply yroooa, Enp) 82 % wocdiny loyoh, darbotror
xiy te mpocalpwrras, obre wéyrae oltre dvadaBeiy jmibtor
jy 82 és tov obpyriipa 8 AlBos éwméon, Bpacpis dis ami
pbyeos, aloOncrs rod NiBov dbouroptovros Edy weno Baler?
xiv é& riv wborw duréoy, otpwv Gus vbaTwdiwy &eyvors,
Koirins todo. ducwdees, ctoudyou xatdetacis, peeves,
dvdmavew tév mpdcbev Kaxdv' mpocext0n care Kal mpds
raw obfpov alua, dvabop} tod wépov dryawin b€ Sevrépy rod
Méov + Sid rod xavdrod SréEodos. Hv yap pélww rijs ovpy}-
Opns &, évicyetas moda xpovov, Kal mAnpupuped 9 ROOTES,
val icxouply viv éradyertépy fv yap ride Kal obprriipes
wlumpavrat’ yaherwrdrn 6: 4 tev oxoddy EEoSos. Kad
yap dryxtotpoedéas crema, al dri trois wépois emimape-
ous?  emiatxees 8 ta wodhd SiaTAaccopevn tmrd TIE
tow mopar Eos. xporf Se &XAox tv Nevxol, dpysAdBdees,
Ta womrAd masloior Eddov 8 EavOol, xpoxoesdées, yépover,
clot mrep al éy vedpotan of Aldor Eumibecs. ev xtors ydp


100


TIEPI AITIQN KAI SHMEION


masBlowot paXdor. Berra Sai alrias iis wits. ryépovet
pay 7d cipa Yuxpiy, may) 7d aluar yuypiv 8 ra rayon
Oaccoy wippuct. rixpap 8, tay Waray tov Coppa dice
aimnyal droyuybivra yap, els tapwerbla Mov wipyruras.
radios 8¢ roddav id tod alpatos td Dhuddes EpnOey,
yerécros, Gxas wip, thy pny toyer*

Ahoy piv obv audi yeréovos rovdde rdOn. perektrepoe
&y wrepidbouct obpéovet alua’ roics drs aipoppotbwr ixédy
de 4 Evpdopry duoly 8 wat i rod execs xardatacws,
ELwypot, voblpot, dimpneros, deéavror, dmewrot’ xijy per
éxxpsO)), Exduros, wdperos Ta pédea’ Kehadiy 62 Kodpot ab
eradporepor jy Se és tiv aeploSov wydiv éxpufj, xeparar-
ress, duaupol Tas Bras, ceorwbees, dudiiwevpevor évrev-
ev éxridyrrrot puploe GdXat olfadéor, drayAvotjuevor, L5par-
mubbeey AdXot 58 perayyodsdecs H mapddrvro emroye-
a1oy yap alyoppoins EuvhBeos éméroxa. rdSe. ity ple oby
éxpiy 7 alya rabapoy, dpryts obpot, ra wokAd éxpéer
ard xictis tv otpwy 7d alua. déperal Kore wal dard
piikwos trav vedpav ord dOpdov' drap ibe mayor teyet, xad
ybyorrat OpipBor ds ta yubévr dyn xore wal év hort,
etre laxoupln tybyverat Betv7.

‘Eml & rH payi edrxea oupBaiver ypdvia xai SvoadBéa.
téxpap 58 épedls, 7} dpénov, ebre dpdynoy, épulpov éxxpe
Biv, # eBoy revedv obpyily, Dirore wey. Kabapdy, dures,
rote 8 obpoist Evppepeypévor roicse xpi) nal dwoord~
owas Saryeyvoonew, jy mpooyévwvras tupetol és éomépny
Kad plyca révor dudl rh dogdv, xvncpok sy 82 Kal éxpayn,


* 1am 60 satisfied that the text is
corrupt, that for once T felt « strong
inclination to adopt the following
conjectural reading of Ermerina,
although, in the present instance,
even he is afraid to admit it into


the text:—IMawdioun a woNNdy ded
Orppod rod oviparoc rd Avades
Unbly yeviowe bxwe xep rij» Kpgy
Taye. Instead of Oppod, however,
T should prefer Spync.


XPONIQN TIAGQN, BIBA. B. 101


OpiuBoe sndBees, capxoedées, drap 162 Aeveod wiov ard-
oracis' ta 58 EXxca, Baxvidea, Gdore piv xabarpsueva,
More 68 purTapa bvra. Sydot 32 7d wiv, drap H6e odpa
xdxodpa, i) dvobya tap piv obv aipoppaylas rites nab
drocrdaias eri 82 Kai pOivorwpov, MOovs hv be ext
AlBoree Erxca yévyrae, dvarbdes pev ai voiros, Taxeln THIKE-
Stor wal Odvaros.


Ked. 8. epi rav ev Kuore.


Tay dv th xbore votowy ob&ty einBes ra yey dEba drey-
pacly Kai tpdpact, crac Kab mupetoict offer wreivovra*
®dxos 82 Kal drroordates, f) mapdduors, h Cos peyas xpi
iv, dvadOiy BE obze yhp Optarreras,  wéor, H dapuany,
ij dudBptrrroiro, oitre aowwéws réuverar.® xpi yap nal ra
Aerrd rips torus Euvrduvew 1d 82 airijpap Exrevve,
Oréyaes juépyet, oracpotcs nal srupetoias Ovijcxover jy
52 ui) rdpns, els obpwv oyéoe, Kal révoret, xal arupetotos H
mnxeddat opvyerae dvOparros- jy 5é ui) xdpra péyas 6 Mas
&p, oxéores wey obpav Euvextorepar és yap Tov aiyéva pni-
Blas dwmlarrev droépyet otpwv eodov. tdyvew 8¢ ef xai tov
pebivor dopartarepo, GARI Téuverac nboris, Kijy Tes Toy TOD


'T have followed the reading
suggested by Wigan, and adopted
by Ermerins. Xpéva is wanting in
all the MSS. but sooms indispensa-
le,


#T admit there is something equi-
‘yoral in the text of this remarkable
sentence; but I have not ventured
to alter it, Wigan reaila: Obr« yap
Opimreren H wher, H Pappdey dypr-
Qpiery, era. Exmerins is still.
Bolder in the Liberties he uses: Obre
yep Be Opiercrar xbor, obre dow


viwg rivera, By the way, he
might well have spared one word
which he ejects, by reading médae
dappdnwy. Were 1 to meddle with
the text at all, I should propose to
read ns followst Oire ydp Opimre
rat i} wba gappdewy, iy éppOpia-
rowro (dpgiOpirrerai?) obre dow
viug rivera. 1 am willing to
boliere that the passage contains
allusions to Lithotripsy, Lithotrity,
and Lithotomy!! See Pautes or-
SETA, ti. p.359, Syd. Soo. Ed.


102 TIEPI AITION KAI ZHMEION


Bavarov xivbuvov expiryn, pudbos ybyveral oi wdbos* xiv aly
Suvoy Ep, dAX’ ob hopnriv edevOépours dévvaoy, Expéery odpov,
wiv Rablfp, xiv bin, drepmis 32 iy Badly. of 8 xdpra
cpixpol Ta TOMA Tdpuvovrar dawweus Hy be Evprepiny TH
nictt MOos, Sidénros pév tiice pededdveor, ardp ode
dowels roves Kat Bapei, xiv av 5 Bvcoupins drep iy Be
wh, wat Svooupéer, Edpravras 62 rods AOovs Si@yvolns av
thor tay Yapplov év roice otpocr irocrdcect drdp 482
mpdkarro: Ta aldoia ylyvovrat. ebre yap drrovptover, wal
Great nal 5 XlBos, d8vvéovrat, al dupadhiwor, nai Exovee
ra alBota, Sua rv AiBo Edy rf) chore taspeduevoc: Eup
mabet 82 nal py xvnopedys yryvopevn’ mporeriys 88 ad
dpxos Bip xal évrdcect, pavracty ws éxxpicvos biGev rod
Ribov. dudm yap cvyxtovras dAAjAoweL EBpy Te Kal Kors.
dy éxardpov mdcxovros méoyer Kai Odrepov®... . bd rode
xal ext preypacly dpyod, loyaupée xiotis, xa él rice
Tis RboTIOS dnict od Sano Epn, xiv ys) exlEnpos %) yaothp
ey. Tota ey adyea Te NiOwv.

Aiuopparyin 82 why ch wbpra SEbas evel, xpinp Bl
eervce puplove? of 8 dx” abréns OpbuBor, Loyoupl Ebb
Or€Bptow, Sxwoorep of Aor nai yap hy 7d alpa Newry TE
xat EavOov cab pi) rayyy 7 ebrayes, GN’ 9 xbotes és TrONdOY
ariker xpovov, xat ide Ocppaivovea nal dpodca myyviet,
Kal dbe ylyverar OpduBos. leyoupin wev odv Svvatwrdrn
xreivat. mpocercylyverac 58 tovréours dos OED, Tip Bpyud,
deca Enph, nad ext roicde rapdpopor Ovijcxover.

‘Hy &¢ él rpdparte dyes éxpav), tpapa pev ddeOpior
7d 88 rxos xiv yw) dpyiOev xrelvy, muperois 4 preypov7
dvijncaroy ybyverar Rerrriy piv To maxos KboTIs vedpov BE


* The last four words are added the text. ‘The lacuna is not marked
by Ennerins to supply a lacuna in in our British MSS.


XPONIQN ILAGQN, BIBA. B. 103


vw gui rdmrep 0888 capxotras obre jmidlws ererre-
Noiras, ror kat rd odpor yorsdes, Sprpd, SaxvidBes* rod
Arxcos 4 Furi Blacra ide dy pey thot PAnpdcece aréraras
iy Bt neroOj, Ewiter maces ody dpOpov wdBet év éxrdce
re xal xdprbu apOpe 88 ove ebarbes Erxos obdév.

Kai Survos 88 é& dwoordaws ybyverar’ xtotios onpria,
tdmep én’ iroor eri preypacly yap, kal éml wuperoict,
wal plyeat, 4 drdaracis* Kivbuvor of dutol- wiov S¢ ddr’ el
ray), evedy, ob néeoBuov eedibot, einGéa ra dd véwBe
deca’ fy 88 emivéunras, rpvyobea, prborord, xdxcodua ob
plover ray rovdvbe ob Bpadiver Bdvaros: Saxvaden wey ra
clpa d8iumpd 83 4 mpberts abriy, Balooes. 834 sion
péode dxpov ro Kavdod Bddarec 52 alréous wdvra Kab
ravayria’ Kal mhycpov) Kad Kévoors, kal dpyly Kar xivnors,
ral Rovrpat wad Arover, nad posh eal deposi, wa rea
Kal dféa, Gow Gra pev dpedetvrov, dda 82 BAarrovrev,
els &y Eup Sijvae po) Buvapéror,


Keg. &. epi Qovoppotas.


Avdrebpov pév x} yovippoa, drepris 82 Kal dndis péoe
Gxojjs. jv yap dxpacin wai mdpecws ra typ toxn Kal
adripa pépea, Gems 5c drpiywoy pees 4 opi, obB8 emicxew
atrrbge dow) ob8 dy tmrovas, Edd ofp Gv re bg, Hy re
Sapirvepen, dveriaxeros %) Gopiy, dvalaByros 88 i} po} rod
ryivou ylyverae’ vootoves 8¢ kal yuvaixes tide Thy voicoy,
EN errl eoncpoice tiv popiey Kad iBovg mpoxéerae ries
Goph; drip wah spb Srkpas byidlp dvasoycrrye Eriper Bt
GOP Shes SBSB ovens rh BA | Mov teypdy; Nemrbv, Puyplo,
dxpouv, dyovey. was yap Lwerydvor éeméiunrat oméppa sux)
oica 4 dior; iv 88 nab véor mdoywor, ynpartous xpi)


yeviabar madvras ri Eki, vobddeas, éxdirous, dyriyous, ~


104 EPI AITION KAL SHMEIOQN


bxvéovras, xexpods, daBeréas, pixvods, darprcrous, émdrypous;
Revxods, yuvarxiddeas, droalrous, yruxpods wedtov Sdpea,
xal vdpxas oxehéwy, dxparéas, wai és wavra mapérous. ibe
H vobaos S805 és mapddvow woddoist ylyverar. mas yap
obk dy rév veipwv iin 4 Sivapis mdBo1, Tis & Gwijs yeveow
plows dmeyrrypevys + Kat jpéas dvbpas mroréer foobar % Gopi,
Beppods, evdpBpovs, Kaclous, edpavovs, evOUpous, KpaTaiols
vonoal te al péEae Sydovcs oi dvbpes. olos 5é ode Everts
bwoica 4 opi, pixvol, dabevées, SEdpwvor, azpryes, dye
veto, yuvdsnwders* Snroder oi ebvoiryor.' Hy bE res avnp Kal
eyxpariis &n tijs Sopiis, xpataids, ebrodwos, dravjers péohe
Onplov réxpap 8% GPXyrdv of caddpoves. Kai ydp kal of
dice twdv Kpéccoves, im’ dxpacins woddav TaY Yerpoveoy
yiyvovrat xepeioves. rodddv St of Gat yepelous in’ &yxpa-
tins yoyvovrar Kpecodvey Kpércoves. atap ode Seov &&
GAou tev ylyverar kparasdy f) Bopijs. wéya ody nad és iyelqy,
nal é& ddxiy, Kal é& erpuyinv, nal & yévecw Swoira %
Oop. dard carupijcews és yovoppoujs drécxmpw %} xard~


oracis.*
.


Ked. o'.  Tept Sropayexav.

STitisayos WBovise wal BoBhre Fyeyebr-naphley weclocer tpetebs
Paina dy bron Kadi Byjdh, Bh BDokay, che roxy contally,
Bie oreudyou mpbruera Blvapes. dbs py oly ploy Ny
Maseran’ darbronoe Aeris dy, eben, ebotapela/eepole
Ftaecsjberoe. las BA\ rourrbain idowirrleieor 2 eal QOULEE


‘Ermerins yentures to erase the
Jast three words, and also ndove
ol Gvdpec, above, from the text.
Non felicissimé audax!

*T cannot bat think that the true
reading must be werderanc. Ido


not think myself warranted, how-
ever, in making such an alteration
without authority, Ermerins reads,
yoroppoiny drdoxnyic, which does
not appear to me to be an improve-
ment,


XPONION (AOQN, BIBA. B’. 105


Bh Exe tpodiy, pedayyonrddece 82 xdrooerly. jy odv bbe
vootn, wiaos Kai droorpodi ray yeumdrwy, abe iy mpocal-
provrae povoy, dAa xjy GBinta piv} Ta outia. dvarrepd~
Sorras 8¢ vaurin, i} dropin, jh rAdy, #} Kapbiadyly’ xal cra
Raban 8a, wal dueroe elovt. <xfviepaes ad lati relat hy
aiacriip paing weveh rie, rbvbe xdver pbrepor ge vis
Tpocdpavos. ty 68 Kat in’ dvaryens Kore dy iv ebwoiy ty,
mov Kdxiov bbe mdvos ToD Mow &y TH oTépaTe Aejjvac
Gdyos, kararudy peter div" ardp wal ody mpds piv Ta
oixcia Tomaobe és 8 ta GAMKOTA ypnoTds, Gd\AayH TOY
Beal dibced kesh formarieaban aonkerosieal depvedt
pioos cvrlow érl 88 totes peroryd trav dporharéwy yupl-
ova @yos* woNd 88 wal pélov, Hy 7 yrae Kal KaTa~
mivaae don, dropin, tyes dpavpal, drow iyor, Bdpea
reparijs, vipey peréov, xal rd yuia Mortar madpis év
toiat troxoviplowe, parractn ris pdxwos és Th owédec KevEU-
névys, @dore GAy Tide Kancioe PépecBac boxéover, xijv
éorijewct, xiv xataxdovrat, Sxeos id abpns dviuwv Kéda-
Hot, i) Sév8pea prLyna Yuxpiv, dBapes droBdifouar, émiy
88 Kal yor) F mimpoydrows, cxoTdwbdees, &beyou® niv én?
eéopacr Supiv Soxéwas, drypumvor, veobpol, vurradéor, ody
tirvp dxpexti? neopardberr 8 dpovorabics, lexvol, Ewypor,
daBeres, eduror, Neoredparter, Euxen Beidol, Hotyor
eEamivgs 88 dpyldov xdpra pedayxorddees. Kal yitp &&d~
ethdy xore & pedaryyorinv of rovolbe.

Tide pévroe ris Yruxiis, tod croudyou évbidévros, elvac
Set tiv wdPnv of 88 8) dvOpwra ove eidores Ta Exprabléa
spépea, ep’ olor ra Bevérara yiyveras, Tov oTépayov altiov
yotwrae péya 80 és riot dv eyo f Evvddhea tis Kapdiis,
{0a mivrov jp apy. pécov yap eviker 7G aveipon 9%


? Exmerins alters the text to xodi p, wecpdxodou; but no change seems
to be required,


106 MEPI AITION KAI ZHMEIQN


xapsin, 4 82 rovrav pecdrns tiv orduayov cuvarres
dud 8 mpooredixace 1H pix Sid 7d8e wpis thy Kapdiny
syerrovnpa, Kal xapSiadyln, xa Exruows, Kat rd pwedaryyodd-
Sea,

Alrias 8é rijs votwou, kal drat piv pupias, xacpin Be,
mriov cuyyiy did xoidins Sid oropdyou yubév. EvvnBes &
Kal rots bd re dvdynaus exdeBiyrnwtvous Newz} Kal cxdnpo-
répy bialry, drap Kad roice bs crasdelny wovedct, Kal és tivbe
Trrjpost, olor eins wey pabijowws mob}, ddeyoowrly 8 Kab
aypuTvin, Kal peredcovy Neywov Te Kal mprryudrov copie
ole inrepoyrin pev Siadrns ddpijs wad mouxidys, Mpds 82 a
Tpop), Kal tbwp wordy, kai év tary dixvin. olot padBaxiy
iv ein Lorperros ayia; dpsplBdnua 88 ebredrds; dyereytim
dpav}, rd 88 rodde xpdvos 6 xowds dijp, tobros Se ervoins
Gelng sreproveln te Kal xpijows. rade yap abréocs dyaba
rybyveras Epwre mraidelny Kal el mpocalpovrat, ebredis pev
arrlov, od82 & Képov edwbijs, GNX’ és Swiy wotvor ote ex?
olvp Bcopntis, ob Ovandin> od péuBos Kal oreplobor, ob om-~
Harav doxnass, ov8¢ capri mepiBors. Tivos yap ob dy
drrdyor masbelys tpws; marpldos, toxtjwv, xacvynirav, éwu-
thv péoge Oavdrov. toisbe ody Thxedoy yey TOD oKyVEOS,
dixpoot THY poppiy, al dv veorgte y~nparéot, xal ix’ évvolys
xanpol, yuyiyy 5¢ duerdées, apeidryos* ropyou 5 xaxooer lay
raxds 6 Kopos ris EvvijDeos ebredéos Kai éroiuou tpodis,
dnBein St rocxidns edwdijs Sxvos 88 wdvrev yevparov, Hy Se
Kal hdBwat st ray Elveer, BNS Pay. che oorpopoe abby er
mdvra. ie dori cropayou xpovin voicos: Preypoval 58
xal petpara, kal napdurypos, }) Tov0s, eTOWaYtKOY OD KUKI}!
axerat 7480s.

Gépos dryet rivbe vodcov- EvOa Kab mépios Kai dpébws Kab
mdvrov ddvvauln. jruxin Sé yijpas, olow wat Sixa mdBeos
81d 70 rod Blov réos, Kal 9 dpekis és Tépua teen


XPONIQN TLAOQN, BIBA. BY. 107


Ked. (.  Mept Kosdcaxijs dadéotos.


Korth, omddyyvov rerripiov, xduves thy meu, dxdre
Bidppoia tiv avOpwmrov loxer Kal Eorw typiis tpodhs
Grérrov % Bidppoia dX’ Hy phy emt oxedlov ris alelns
ybyorro ré8e es jinv 4) Seurépny auépny potvyy, mpds 52
nah Bros § kvOpemos doBerber, dxpoply 700 cwiveos, xpovln
voices # Koihiani) yiyverat, drovin tod méccovros Bepyod,
nad yike rijs xotding ebre Mwerar pev és Bepudy 4 Tpody
AN ode éxrréoces Heppdv, ovde és yuudv oixetov tpérret,
Hureenhe BA Velass BSparely cov heer! fb Speen
tis epyacins & xaxdv ddowirat Kal xporp eat ddyj wad
avarhar. devich pv dp Kad EycRos’ f pou}, xheoBua 82
wal BopBopeBexr inp 22 ad’ doteraros dmpayly, pobrav
88 dperin Toxovon ris wé\pios why dyn.

Aid robe dvowdecs & Thy yaorépa, epvyal Evvexses,
naxiodees, dy 88 al xdro mepijowos, Tpiter wey Ta Evrepa,
diaat b¢ beEvior Saccias, typal, dpyrddees’ pavraciat 52
én’ abréowse toy StexBéovros ixypoi* srévos rijs kothing Bapis,
éxoiov viypa, ore Kal EXdore laxvds 82 Kal Expopos
GrOpwros, axes, ddpavijs obdéy re mphac tov cuvjlwv
eirovos. dddd eijy Babify, Metat Ta pédea, PreBes xpord-
pov érnppévar, drpoply yap xothoxporados, éripdeBor be
kal rayti 7 cipart. ob yap ob méaoer podvoy 7) voicos,
GAN obbe Thy dpyiy és Tov byxov dvabidot. Soxéer yap poe
ob Tie whiny pobvoy, EXXA kal Ths dragopis 73 mAbor
Supevas,


1 Ermerins reads as follows: sht- necessity for this alteration, which
radia % Aelmu ddpaviy: % 6 dge- appears to me anything but an
Odiow rob ridvog ric ipyacing,mr.A. improvement,

Tmust say, I cannot recognise tho


108 EPI AITION KAI SHMEION


“Hy 88 wai é abfiicer %) vodeos yiyyyras, ayer Kai Ta
drd rob wavros els tiv KothGy wddur, ebre bq tHKeddv THs
Hs. abadéor 82 7b ordpa, dvupor 88 ri émerodip, dvi-
Spares, Korin Gore mupibdeyhs ws dx’ dvOpaxos, Grote
8 ws dd xpvord\rov wuypoorayis. Kore 58 xal alpa
rout écxdrow. dv oxuBdroucr émipple EavOdy, dxpnror,
dpeyes, os Soxéew preBos ordpuov dvetryBar. dverOie yap
7d Spd ras GdreBas. arjxiotov Kai SvoadGes Kaxdv, Kal
yap iw Soxéy werabcbar, dvev pavepis mpopdawos Tadiwipo-
peer eoadbes 8% Kal dri cpimpi duaprwds madivopaos fret.
& rreplodov yoow H8n porrh.

Tépoves tévnBes 73 xaxdy, wad yuvacth p&ddov # dvBoder,
mravdioce 5é Sidppora pay Evveyis, é>nutpp axpactn tpo-
Gils. ANN ob Koidlns xbrel } vodoos? heres 8¢ Bépos av
EdAwv dploy pArrov perdmupov Sebrepor, xeyudw 8 6
uxpéraros, iy dyyod oBéowws 7 Ocppdv Hep" ext xpoviy
88 votow xal ide xal Sucevrepin xal Aevertepin tiereTas.
GAN Kal xavbbv Yuxporocly Kore Evyéernce tiv vodcoy.


Keg. y'.  Tlept KoAcxaav.


" Keduxoi 8) xrelvovrat elhep nal otpidw dflws. mdvy pay
oty aitia pupia toxer ris Siabkcvos” onprjia, Sdpos pay ex”
datrin, tvOa 5) 7d wdBos pddiord ye xpaiver’ Sxvos ovis,
vwbées, doctor, loxvol, dypyrvot, oléadéor mpdowra: xiv
piv mpds TH arr vorkn Kadov, WeddyyAwpor, ReuKb-
xAwpor 8%, dxdoos pos frat, Evyrabely tav dyyota
omrdyyrav ty 88 mpocalpwvrae tpodiy, wal em) cpscph
pal adbay kdgra pvoeSeus, eal apoOuuln way & Banvody,

* Kira in this clause is not a Ermerin, It ia worthy of remark,
satisfactory reading; and yet I thet Ayte is a Scottish term for


would hesitate to adopt we with stomach, It occurs in Burns?
Wigan, or xoiy ivoxjrra with Poems .


XPONION MAOON, BIBA. B,. 109


aiéEobor Bi diioat, épvyal re dow Budwevar, dap Kad alse
Gredées. jy Sé mm repien Bla, dias Spwpabecs yey ai
Givw xai dfupeypucdsecs vebpol xal xioris Evprabla wovy
kai lexouphy rovrénct Dra dvr Drwv. Podpa 8 rov-
thaw iter, & Epyuas eal xpewacriipas Abéxyroy d&yos
émigorri srodAobs rév inrpéiv ibe Hy EywraBeln doje. Kab
vip wai {Eérapav Kore tods Kpepasrijpas, bs IBiqv Exovras
Dbporrat 82 xai drréroxos robbie voioor, dmoordaves wey
a) 8Xxea: oie eteflear BBépos 82 nari pBloes, dvedBla. drt
yap Wilke nat yupotos waxéoe Kal PrSyware woAP KodRed~
Bei Euvloraras }j voboor: drip eal Hhuxlg Kal Spy -fuxph
eruporrs, xvipy, kat xeluare xaprepg.


Kep. &. QWept Avoevrepins.


"Berkpioy rd pil Gre hawt nab yonaben pbops rod ropnob)
xorddes erixdny: dard 88 rouréwy Ta Kdtw maya Kal cap-
(cad udorba ile bpiis v00 ellos cor lpan:

“Expyiyverat aty ev dract Edxea Svcertepin bt travb_ THv
Ouedww ai idéae, 81a rd8e wouidar face ai voico, Ta pev
pap erumodis Eder vrepa, dvabopiw potvny wovetipeva, xad
torw dowta, drap 58 dowéorepa modrdv, fy xdteo y Ta
wd0ry ANN fy 88 opaxp® piv kre Babirepa Ta Brea, obe
eivjGea 82 kai ride. DAa Babéa Kai oty iotdpeva, adr’
doOibpeva, dduvad_a, éprovra, xab emepaxedtfovra, Oava-
ribea’ drdp kal r<eBia ert rice vophoe ylyvovrae repi-
Bpwra, & ze toict Edxeot wai ordkves aipoppayias 7)
pétov WdXo elbos rxkwv byOddea, tpnxéa, avaduada, tydal~
4 In this sentence I have not hesi- ddeddea. Enmerins substitutes


tated to adopt Petit’s suggestion, gaydanwdea; but for this term he
and have read dévvedea in place of can quote no authority,


110 EPI AITION KAI ZHMEION


via, as dv Evdp Skov elropev. Svoadbia rade, obre yap
drethiy pnidlos loxes, fmtrepsv Te yap Aorta.

Alrias 6é Bucerrepins javplar, éxixaipor &, dmeyrlac,
pikus ovveyées, Spinéwv mpocapars, pyTrwrdr, Kpoppvou
atrod, cxopédov, xpeiv radatév Sprpéev eSwdy. ep’ olor
dreply ixypov andes, kuxeiy, ) Bputéwy mépa, f) ola xara
xeopny Exdaorny dvrt atvou ryiyverae bipeos dixea. drdp xab
may wal Wikis nal yruxporoain rixtover Enea,

Ai 82 éxxpicues nal rd Evvedvra rotce Execs Erepa Kal
Erepa, éx’ @rowwe nai drow. iv piv yap eremodis Ep,
dvaBey pay Nerd, yonadea, dvorpa, wiv dxdcov dr’ évré-
pov. ra 8 dad tis vijetios kataxopla waddov, xpoxoedéa,
wanddea* 7a 8 xal Eby tH tpodjf ACAvmEvy pév, GA Tpy-
xeln Grove xdxodpdv dors, Ta Sb Enea onmeddvea GAdore
88 ioxet, ds dd oxvBadwy pobvor Tiy doprjv dard Se ray
xdrwo eri roict Bdxect, idarddea, Newrd, dvorpa* dy Se
émi paddov Baba, tywpoedéa, inrépvOpa, oivadea, %) Sxas
Kpeav TAUma. Gddore pév lSin TdBbe, drove SE Edy toics
xorplor' Kal rdde iypd Nedupéva rH mrepippi@, coda,
ivoopa 4 Evveorérra, Enpa cElaci, ducOnpda rH Mepippog
tw 8 pelo wal Nevstepa j Ta Edxea, el pev Toicr dvw,
yorddbea, rat dd’ dv nal 8’ dv Epyerar—xal yap viv Spnv,
—didxver. Spypcia yap } yor), eal ert waddov Hy dd’ Edeeos*
Kal 4 yor St mleov Sxews Aimas. emt 88 roice Baburépas
rolat Katw aipddany maxis oly pdéypate, capKocidéa ob
kdpra mlova, Evopardbea, os dm’ évrépwr elvar, arap xab
Dra cuppduixrar pépea’ péperar revwd, wayéa, pubdbea,
oréate Euyxomévrt ixeha, Edy 7 wepippdw. rade wévrou dard
70d edOéos tod mapaprKeos évrépov. addore 88 pubwdea
potvey, Sabsten, cpseod, crpoyytha, Sambtes, havaaré=
cas ruKivas, Kal mpobupiny Edy iSovh roretpeva, éxxptovas
82 xdpta opixpds' rewacpds robde  eixdnors, dd 68


XPONIQN TA@QN, BIBA. B. m1


Tob Kirov déporras xa adpnes EfépvOpor Kal weyddat, mrept-
ypabiy roddav pélova tyourar ef $2 Sabla yiyvera ta
Axea, kai alua way, tpuyites, rdbe ndxobya ray mpiaer
Haddov. emiy 8 Epp Kai éoBin ta Edxea, wal loxnras
pnbapa ext pnderi, dvaber pev mpds Totoe xomideos Toles
xaTaxopéat, xpoxweea, kai Srabpa, tpvyifovra, al wédava,
igardbea, mpacocdda, maxtrepa tiv mpocbev, Kaxwdea,
Snag 4) onmediv, Buaympéer. Tpopty voy amemrorépy, ws ind
bdytwy AdBSpav Texprpspéevn pobvov. jy Se ra Kérw dreo-
Obyrae, alpddurmes wédares, ayia, caproebia, é%pOpa,
OpopSddea, dove wey wédava, dddore Se rayrolws Tomi da,
xdxobpa, ob hopyra, apéares rv typi &8otdyrow dare-
Aven Kore Kal ebyenxes dixperov Kata Trcdva, Sxeos byes TH
tvrepov, nai Sé03 mapéryev appl Evrepov roles dyvooice Tod
mpiyywaros. 7o 5é dere rouvbe. tov evrépwy, dews Tis
xoolns,, yuriaves. Zacx Bowl érap al GddsfNows driBar-
Rouse ofSe Aokol. dy oiv %) SurAdy Aud, b wer evrds yurdw
dmoards é wixos tw xopéer, 6 52 derds wipver podvos, wal
capkoirrat, Kal érwretdoirat, nal ddéEovrat, kal Gomoe
dawkes. mdoyer 88 7d xdétw pobvoy, alrin 58 rov yerdvev
7) capxoed&s. iv 52 alua dad rev dryyelov fépnrae Favor,
4 pddrav, xabapiv péee, duuyis Tpodis, i) oxvBdrov drep.
el 88 éwimayos erumerdvyvro matict dpaxviows tKedos
OpouPotras, iv yuyxO ob82 yap } mlatis alparos Exnptors*
76 88 poll worrAG Eby mveipare wklov rijs wepiatdaros
Perracin vhs dexplaios. tybyverad ‘kore eah év widy méoy
Gréotacss, obdéy te tov Gov av évtds Axbov Eevorrpe-
meatépn. xat yap Ta onijia xal 7d Triov Kad % dOcEs Tav
xk } duty. jy B8 explores oxdnpal rav capKoedéov
oor, rerpyiuevar, tpnydar ampace txerar, 4 dmooracts ob
toi eixjOeos tpémou- pier Kore TodAdy dard Tod KwAOU Twp,


112 EPI ATION KAI SHMEION


Bucerrepubbea tporov. GEpwmos réb_e puplovs epptcaro?
Ta pty Drea, de Gros. eiweiv, 7a dv role dvrépore roudbe
drap 788 nai 5 révbe iBén, wal ai dwd rawbe exxploes, dub
cas trea.

Dpdow 82 nal ra Euvedyra éxdeto rev vocedytwy, iy
re etijGea, iy Te civapa Ta Erxea. aOpdov pev ody elpijcbe,
tw exerodis avadopiy, iv te ava, iv te xara Ep, drrupor,
Grover, Spborrdiny irakipevor, ocpixpios thee Sialrpoe
Erepotas. iv 82 Edxos eyyévyprat, oxi pev rote dvw atpddos
Saxvains, Spysds, ads awd yore Oepuis cpexpips, Eervee
Gddore Kal Edore 1d 88 wrdoy, Eusrvoe? i) weyres Here
Nes, obk dwéceroe fy 82 rotce kat Edxea yévytat, oS
7 dowéotepa Tay ave wai yap Ta Evrepa roby Tt warOV
raw Gddwv caproukéa. iy 82 kotha nal dvecBlovra és Ta
Giveo ylvyras, wuperol dbées, dhaptées, dv tolat owhdyyvorcs
troSpbyion, wephpukis, droowrin, dypurviy éperyal xaxe-
Bees, vaurin, xodis Eeror, cxorodivn’ jy 8 words) wey Hh
opi), yorwBerrépwv S8 yiyvyrat, eriporoe orpégot, Kab
GdXot Trovoe paAoV worl Kal exdtaves Suvdusos, inrodtores
youvdray, Kkavowbess, Seyaréor, daowbecs, vavtin peddver,
yhaooa Enph, opvypor cpixpol, drovor, tovréwy dbedga,
dxdoa dri roice xaoeidéce Erxece thea ra Savarébea,
xapbimocover pict Rewrobupins. perekerepor 52 obbe és
dyaxrnow éra@uvipopncay GAN’ obrws eEéBavor’ rade ra
Seva Ed xai riot dxd tay Kérw evrépav BiaSpadcect, iv
wianrae pay ra Edxea, doyeros & 1) hopyj whi dxdcor of
orphipts eal ol arbvot bm’ 'riv Susaniw  wderen, SoOaitnves

* Hippocrat, Aph. vi. 14. Hiv roiew dvw erpdgog axrdlag,
+The text, which is by no means epic, de dard xodsic, Vlppun epucpi
in satisfactory state, is thus at- 4XAors eal @dXort, 7d yap wior


tempted to be emended by Ermo-  fumvot.
rinss—iy Gi TAxog iyyivyras, bei


XPONIQN TAGQN, BIBA. B. 113


Biat 8 albe rév dexplocwy, Sxolas.thefa. Hy 88 mb roioe
Tpwrowe opuxpa 5, dvaxtoy) dé els waxpov j voums, GXda ex”
Dros Dvea ylyeratr, rav wey mpnivouévey, EXXev 52 Ko-
pupovperay; Seas év Oaddoon xiuara. torbvbe td tiv éd~
xiwv xine. iv 88 Kal Kore éraprion ev i doors, ova
exon 52 cal 6 inrpds, rémavrac pev 4) voui), xab Bdvarov
obk dppwdéer, cKAnpd BF Kal dyOdiBea plaver rd Evrepa, wal
rivbe ds waxpor hj ENGeEes.

Alpopparlg 88 dx’ évripov, jy pév peyddys Preis #
dprnpins &y, oxds 6 Odvaros. obB8 yap obbe rv xetpa bu.
vardv tow éopdoacbat, kat rod ddyeos Ovyeiv, } pappaxov
air 70 Edxel mpocBddrew. nal Tot Kai ef erricyouto % ai-
Hoppayin dapydny, ode drpeis tod Oavdrou %) duyy}. pere-
ferépouar yap weydrns eoxdpns txmrwors ris PreBds 7d
orépiov és peor ebpiver edre xad OpsuBor trav éyytyvorras
nal plpvovor tow, dpueros %} voices. xpi) ody dpyopévnot
aipoppaylgas apie. dijdx 88 wy erimav rybyveray péd-
Rouea, ef ral ph méprav ebonpos’ don Everts, aropin,
Bapos rob rorov, &Oa pijocerat, épvOnpa rod mpocdrov,
av nBixe parry wiv why 1) GAP veopparrys ky, dx elray
parbdacerar méumav. iv 8¢ mpbcw i} xpovou, yaderdrepov
wai Bpabtrepov. ord8e wiv ra ev évrépois Edxea.

Tiryreras 5¢ Gépeos Spy Sebrepov POwordpou, hecov pos,
Hecate xemdvos. Kal Sidppowas pev, raidlowst wal perpa-
xlooe buoerrepin 8 dxpdtouer Kai véowre’ ryipas 8¢ Sucad-
O85 Kai bs coreckijy xpoviov' Ta Bi dvecBiopeva yépouer dxjDea"
drap nai aipopparyin Edupovos -pipg.*

‘The common reading is ambi- bloody discharges from piles, which


goous, Ermerins reads d&ippwvog. aro not uncommon in old age,
Perhaps our author refers to the


ms HEP! AITION KAI SHMEION


Keg. ¢. Tlept Accevrepins.


“Hy éxi Sucerrepine: at Edxecs wratics xal xagta Babécs
Taw ave érripwr arehal epyhyrevrat wueval, Tayeias, ore-
phrenic, 7a ovrla te rinrBe de 12. wdkrwe BrexBbes, inypi, dBude
xptra Tob Tpodiyou To yap Taw évrépww dpaudy & obwep &
thy dvo gopiy 4 tpopiy dvalocet, dwékheacer 3 ered.
Expapla ofr. rv EvApurnen bexes aah dypote, eank drerks,
devedgr 73 aides Neterrepln Laxes,—rd exh 77) ONG Meyeo TOP
derkgun,—robropa: wad viv piv.df dduhew davis ably:
aDoore 82 Errepa. pay drrechiyy obs layer Bos 82 wal pedérg
Scappueioa éxbiidones ra Evrepa. rd yap ev rovréours Bep-
Hoy dy xatayuyOe Kore pire katawicoy, pijte é& Thy dva-
Sepiv.doatoap, Leparer, 2-in° doberign bp, Rabdphras
sr yor xpoph. EAN fe wv ops sa) pi) Spay
vyrat % xdBapors, ddA Gatdy, dwhods Eweros dd ceriov
Ehuce riy voicor. iy 82 rpooxeidy ypirg, xal ev Bpy Ky i
alvin xowrlan, obSiv bsfedios.

Theres 8 wai xpovin voices, xal spboorddyy xayeEly
drip Kal ibpwrts xore és robe aricempay elruyas, &
seascly ply de mined, G02 apkewur 4 Baboyk


Keg. ca’. epi "Yorepixav.


Tice yovaikl berépn ayabi) piv és xdbapow xal toxor,
Evpsoph 82 voicwr puplov re al kaxdv. od yap edxtav }
dreypacins } pod podvor, ara xiv eEamlvns Sky dive xive~
rat, coxéws xrelver. yeypdparas per ody ev GdXowwt, dxoia
Ti dnt civigs Gy EMdBpia Sea. rh Bl pine poor Be
mrébos, cKAnply, Edxea, Ta wey dowda, TA 2 Kaxorbea’ mpd~
armas dns, i) wépeos.


XPONIQN NAOGON, BIBA. B. 15


“Péas yar oiv, épullpis, #) Nevwsxpoos* iSéa Spo? epulpis
nev, Jy alua Eavbiv, cat ai roibe (lac, iy wedudvdv # pe
Rav, eal herrov, mayb xal wempyds, oloy OpipBow ev-
Spores ah dggnkGention i ga acnebe 32 Seat
Aeros! 3 Newris tydp Kar xdwoduos, Aeveds B as sDov,
5.80 drpects, ds Neveds Spor drip ead aluddwy nord 7G
trip ouvexpéer. jpvpias 82 Gat wapd Th méddov TovTéwy
al jrrov Ibias. meplobos 83 EXAore wav 4 emt pve ndBap-
ave) dXN! ode: és. why dpyalgy. Eovlararas sepoBerulep::.0b
modrér pev 7d alua, ey jpéppor 58 modrjjor expber dary}-
pepos 82 +4 Sudderfus, JANI: xaBaph. drXos mrepidBou tpbe
sor; ate wrpollespilry 82 ieal obe delarijtos aephiwhaionar.s
srpéry ndBapaie Bie 8 nal zple xaBalpovras dvd mdvre
rv wives EA Bb, Kryeros pir 4 job nal opus 68 ide
pns Exdarns, ara els Tov hoy pia ob mdyyv Barj. obBs
Si lt el ls Lo la ia fae

ow inyporytos mdayovea ef Sé pojre biadelrer pajre opa~
xpov expées, alpoppayly Ovicxover. anyrjia 52, mpds thot
Xporiias rob poov 4 xpoul) ris dvOpamow dypumvor, dmécerou,
dewbbets, Seksroe.émt. 1d dpOpbv piddor, kad sbovdbect,
ral wéxobyioy én’ éqboiv' 7 pedjua' GNA p&XXor kal ogoy
rare cal Ddore. 6 pev yap Meveds xaxiav, py wdbwv mov
Hy onmedav by dddore 5é 5 épvblpds, sy ayptatyy 1) dudSpe-
oy. GOpsov 5 cipiobw, pédas pév dwdvroy xaciwy, me-
Mébvis Bevrepov, dypis bE Kal Neveds Kal mudins, paxpo-
repor ev, hocov St xivduvcddecs, Tovrwv 8 abréwy 6 mypods
Kanto pev, Tod 62 Kpéocov 6 TS cunjlet pepvypevos.
EvviOns 82 epvbpis wev xat ra roibe elBea 7d BE ddybds
ryeparrépnet raxtoves of epubpol: ievota 82 verjvicr of Rev-


+ Ermerins reads, on his own which signifies a sort of Ocular
conjectural judgment, dradurrov, Collyrium.
12


116 HEP! ATION KAI THMEION


wol. rig wal dowicrepos Tatryes of EuriGers* Dos poor
Demabe; § Eayehror aides Newt, Spy, al ZEabiee
Sa ae ae ee SS
Blos xpéchgces. robe 1d Bos yoréppouar yurascelar DsE-
per. fers 82 sin toripes Yiber; eSvecer dspatie vie
ypar yoyrevar dxap xal +5 alua & yposty Nevmby dpeles
705 yap =upis obe loys to Gowiceor. rivte riv wébqr
Sjnlge faxes, eve civ Zabpptear rookas

Tépreras Dxca xal & ioripg, ra perv wharés, ergopeden,
Gmrep Dua, xs dvabops tus érvrolip, Toor Tayo, drocpor,
Odbyor. eitifea tdbe ta Deca DAs tovréaw Sabirepa
wai xaxiova, ols xévos cyixpol, wioy GAéyp wheiov, padAoY
xdxodpa, DX’ Eprys eben wai rake. jv 82 éxi per
(Bathe bprgven, elo jcethani vee Dimmer dargoke apa
dyaip THs xaxddqs, eal wévos Tar wpicber peter, avecBies Be
thw borépny td Oreos ébijea Bé nore nai arokwér Ts cap-
scler eyj he dreshe tae pehasever scritves aka) apteeee
spbyvevas kapra? rode nai gaySdawa cuxdjoxeras. odébpa
82 ra Edxea, ty xpos Toles Dvyos sftvp, xai 9 GvOparros aro-
Pie owmedae 32 dws 105 Oiceos ples obre airiges Goparty
dypraiver Yatceci re cai gappdxoes, xai yoderalve res
nal inzpin’ GdéBes 82 ey iotépy és Eyeor alpovras Eby we-
pitdcec. téw wédas gore 88 wemvuptvous ode doquoy tH
SBS ob qlp Oras Spor wip 82 xa) Soy ed varie
2 Ermerins certainly does appear rity, reads wrrvempivger, on the


to improve the clause, drdp....fe groand that, in ancient times, mid-


* Ermerins suppresses this clanse.
I bave merely ventured to ald }
before xptmor, and altered the


punctuation.
¢ Ermerins, contrary to all aztho-


wives alone were entrasted with the
treamment of diseases of the female
genital organs. This, however, was
‘evidently not the case, as must be
obvices to amy one who has care-
fally read the Hippocratic treatise
om this subject, and the other works
cottained in the Gynacia.


XPONIQN IAGQN, BIBA. B. 117


rat oxdnpln Edverrey, Yrep totes Onpuodert, Cavarodea
Svra GAxea,? drdp Kat erixdnow loyer Kaprivoy, ANos xap-
ivos: Dxos pay obBapys, Syxos 88 oxAnpds, arépapvos:
Eurriralves 82 rhy torkpny ddqy, drdp Kal Gdyea ward 7d
Dra bra spider radra 80 dupw a xapevd8ea val
xpévia kab dré8pia" morddv 88 rd Edxos Tod dvededrov
hasiy ell Serpg; nak miyocas, eal Gained

Ebloraral core rie Spgs} bevdpn Bin, eal ead roler
Mnpotce ris cyuvasnds iYdver dmurros 4 Evudoph, dX’ obx
GBéyros 4 borépn, ob88 dybvvnros 4 alté. EuvblBover
yap of ipéves, of pds rods Aaydvas, dyijes Tis borépns
dbrres veupesBecy- of uy xavd wuOybra mpds nhy dopey he-
‘rroi: of 8 kar’ aiyéva ta Kal vba mpds rods daydvas"
of 58 wdduota veupwbdecs, wharées Sxws veis alpea, mdv-
tes ody Evvdibover oie, Hy tw % torépn dlzon. xreives
Bey ody Ta TOMAR Exrrtw@cis Hide. ylyverae yap eri duPro-
ope, nal cepoice peyddoics, Kal Bialw rox jy 82 pi
xrdyp, & paxpov albe Siovew, dpéovear Ta pi) Bent wal
riOnvoicae eo nal Savxardoa viv bordpnv® Soxéer dé
kore Tis Sumdbns tis barépns 6 Evo imetionis uray, drroc~
Paficban 160 fomasbtors (Saale of cyléer july ct exyXhoy-
plea Nettvor 88x "ely dblarraras’yidr nad pebjiars, eal
errpwcpg Kal Bralp roxy, etre éxi 7H xopiy mpooméfuney
abtéy. jy yap robe Exxnrat Bip, cuverepdaas 6 ris to~
nie Rane se AAA AY dh axBday 4 yur), wadtvopaos
7d aitd cuvibOn Kore otdb uy, fj opixpov tw dalverac
oxémet yap roice pnplovar 4) yuvy}. -mpoomlmrer Kore To orb-
mov rijs dorépys podvov phage Tod aixyévos, GAX' adfis clow
* Ths claus, which bad pusled meri in reading BaveahGem in
all the former editors, is expunged stead ‘Emmerins
from the text altogether by Erme- frther seprene ea Opevese


ring. 7 The text here is under great
#1 have followed Petit and Er- obligations to Ermerina,


11s TEPI AITIQN KAI SHMEION


Berar, $v derppalyras  borkpy Oyuchor xanibbet. Ddxee
82 aizhp cad 4 qm), fv dodpalvrrar Oopurréy ebwdéov.
drdp xal xepot pains drpipa elow Bker, Houyi reeleupérn
Ka xpioutrn wepdaber rolat botépns werhoypacs."


Keg, of’. epi "ApOpiridos xat "loyuados.


Huis piv dardvrev tév dpOpwv mévos 4 apOptriss da
Selle piv wotlypm. eahtowey, Toutha BI Ue vhey, rahes
ypnw 82 xeupaov" ify rye pay oé8cos 3} él reve Tov mpocKalpov
aizlov 4 mévos, 4) KpbRinv 88 pederijoy ToXdov xpévov H
voices, cite érl mpopdor cyuxpi 6 aévos Kal % vodcos
E440 Fors 88 derdvray EAPEqy roy vetpwr 4 wdbn,
dy adknOev 1d Kandy Grace eriporri: apy 52 vedpa ra
Seopa rév apPpwy, nal dxéca e& dcréwv wépuxe wal ev
doréoist gudiver, Pcdvpa 88 rovréwy péya. od rrovécr ev
yap Opié? ob8 av répvy tes  OMBy* jy Se eF swvréwv
movi, ob8& Erepov ddyéee tovbe Suvatdrepov, ob aidnpd
oglyyovra, ob Beapa, ob titpdaxov Eidos, ob Katov mip.
wal yap cab raira éravarpoivrae ws pelovay rovav dxea


“Tam not aware that this word
occurs elsewhere in any medical
‘author, as applied here, I am per
‘suaded, then, that the proper read-
ing is paddyyace. On the malag-
mata or emollient plasters of the
ancients, sce Pacres Momnra,
Syd, Soc, Edit, b. iii, pp. 576—881.
‘They were much used in utering
Gireases, Seo Thid. b. iii. «. 68, ete.

'¥ havo ventured to read # in-
stead of jv, on my own anthority;
and have substituted rox in place


wiv into yh, which I think spoils


the passage; and have preferred
jay, which has the authority of the
Vatican MS,

* @piE hero is used in an unusmal
sense, The literal translation of the
expression would be, “They are not
pained « hair,” or “a hair's-breadth,”
i.e. in the slightest degree Erme-
tins refers to Theocritus, Idyll. xiv.
9, for an example of this usage.
See further Liddel and Scott's Lex~
icon, under the word. This usage
of it uppears very forced in the pre-
sent instance, and I suspect the
reading to be corrupt.


XPONIQN TA@QN, BIBA. BY. 119


ral jy réup rs adrd roveivra, dpavpoiras 6 Tis Topis
moves cpuxpos td tod péfovos’ iv Be dbe xparép, Hbor)
ofdas Miluras érdujbovea rav mdpos wdoxougs 58 Toiro
O8érres nal daria.

Airiny 82 dxpexéa pév icace podvor Beot, dovcviay & Kab
rOparroe gate 88 ws Eros eimeiv rowvde. Td pév xdpra
munvdy avalcOyroy yyatows Kal tpeoc.os, Tie Kal darovor
ator kal tpdcs. Gdyos yap tpyyeia ev alcbijor, ro be
wuecvov atpiyueror bid réde nal drovoy 7d 88 dpasdy,
elacOyrov, nai tpyyiveras tpdpatt, dN éret xal ta
sever {5 dedi Shpingy: cad laBeras\xpte np. Glas et
pay odcuidns i Spdoa airin tor, olov % payatpa 4 Bos, 7d


pay és layla, cal ra word ride eryslpves yids, dooa re
péded Kore puxpov, etre ob6e del ta cyexpa ovr}, odas
re xal yeipas. iv yap pakover KdéPyrac pertaw xopicas
Thy votcov Suvaptvwy, oby imepBaiver ra dpyava’ Hy 88
dd rod cpuxpod Sptyra, core ebvjOns Kat dddxyros %
elaBorj. loxuddos pay dard pnpod xardrev, i iprios, Hj


7 fn the common editions, and I be eee eet OF the word,


120 MEPI AITIQN KAI ZHMEIQN


reruns, 4 dpi. adore 8 emi ri) Koridy 7d Oona pal-
verat, adbis & yRovrdy 7 doqpiv dxddret, Kal wdvra paddov
dorw ¥ Sdxnows loylov. datdp al ra dpOpa SBE mas dpye~
Tax Tob modés Tov péyay Sdarudov adydet, adOis tiv eri=
mpbow wrépyny, more ornpitopeba Erevra és 7d KoThoy
tre 73 82 ogupiv e&gince forarov. mpdpacw 88 airiiv-
rat dvairiov, of wev xpytidos Katwijs tTpiBov, of 8 paxphy
mepiodov’ adXos 8 wyyiy i) marnpa obbels 8 dpdoes riv
cleoBey oBcay, drip nal éxotoass volo. wda-xours 1 drpe=
nis Boke drrurrov- Sua rode es dvijnectov érpdmn, Grerep
apot dpyget belie cadeverviry tot) 4 voiwos; 6 ynpis obe
évicratar iv 88 xpdve KparwO}, dvévyros 1) wedéry. Tic
ply oby & woBaw Eppa lpves pers Oavérou, cst 88 rhuee
rat és THY Tod TmavTds axiveos mreplodov’ Ta modAd be dard
tév modav és xelpas Hike. ob yap peydda Ta Spa TH vobow
xeipav re Kal moby, Sre dudw Suodvéa, loxva ral doapea
kat eyyurdrw tod ew yvyeor drwrdro 82 Tob tow Odd-
mreos. ais dyxdv nal yovu' eri 82 toiet KoTiNas, Trepl-
Grpopor Be eréBacwtits Wiérou plor wal Goprkoed Nerds
roy’ els Baoy Epics ¥ kaxby, owbvbunos ehytours pbyebs
re Kal abyévos, nal és dixpov épeiSer tot lepod dotéou Kat
Evprrdyrav tod BovBévos xal i8in %) Exdorov ddivn.® drdp


* Though the text be not in quite
‘a satisfactory stato, I prefer leaving


which wonds, in the old translation
of Crassud, are rendered literally,—


it as it stands, rather than adopt the
slashing alterations made in it by
Ermerins, He reads the last clause
thus: fei 28 rote korihyor mepi-
erpogoct Hien peréBacig ig virov
béag eat Odpneog. Wigan merely
Proposes to reail meplorpopos vck.

* The following most extraordi-
nary reading occurs in all the MSS:
Kai Evprdvre re 5 Bode, Gvoc, eal
4% lain (iin, Harl.) imiorou b36vn;


“Simulque omnium bos, asinus, et
proprius cujusque dolor.” What
can an ox oF an ass have to do with
an attack of Schiatica?

Fortunately the Askew MS. be-
Tonging to the Medical Soclety of
London, has guided me to what I
do not hesitate to pronounce the
true reading, In the margin of this
MS, opposite the corrupted words,
stand the following characters, ap-


XPONION TIAGQN, BIBA. B’.


121


of 88 révovres 88 pes Eby evrdos GXydouct, yvdBeov xab
Kporddbav pies: vedpay xai xbarios % Biadoxy. & 70d O6b-
paros, ert macs mdeyer pivas, xab Gra, xal yelrea, wdvrn
‘ap veipa kal pies rijs Kepadijs Hryeb tus papas, ode
eldds ev 5 Te rovée, eeikvve Tav paday Td elBca, Nokijv,
edBeinv, émxdpawov, dricw te kai mpocw" loxviv 88 riv
G8trqv Kal roict darko urerappivnv. Tacav yap darkoy


parently in the handwriting of the
armanuensis:—
te! Poway’.
That is to say, fowe, Bovdvoc.
Now, that “pain of the groin” is a
constant nttendant of Sebiatica,
every practical is well
aware; and, in fact, this is one of
the symptoms enumerated in the
best descriptions of the disease fur-
nished by the ancient authorities.
For example, Calius Aurelianus has


changes, however, are requisite in
this passage, which might be effected,
fn two or three different ways I
subjoin a few of my own attempts,
some of which may perhaps be


thonght superior to the reading T
have adopted :—

1, kal Zxpmévrwy rou BovBavoc
[rdmew] eat iin iederov 886yn.

2 cai Lopmdvrww re BovBavog
kai idiy ¥ ixkorou b86yn.

3. xai Lipravrog rot BovBovog
kai 3 Wig iedorov ddivn.

4. nal ic Lopray rd rod BovBa~
vog wai (Bin iederov 88d¥n.

Every one of these specimens of
an mended text brings out an
appropriate meaning ; namely, that
“there is a pain of the
whole inguinal region, and a par-
ticular pain of every part situated
therein.”

I bare now to state briefly the
emendations of this passage pro-
posed by preceding editors and
commentators, Wigan, while he
retains the vitinted reading of the
‘MSS., adds in a note at the end:


122 EPI AITION KAL SHMEION


EupSoriw véperas % vodcos, Seas wodas i} yerpds &pOpov.
sphyrovras 88 ray dpOpav nal drimapdcies ta mpata pay
éxoiov dwoordaves teyouct eri 82 waddov uxvoivras, Kal
wiyyvupévou Tod irypod darnvies ai decres Tédos 82 ardipoe
oreppol, Aevxol Evvirayrar és 52 way Syxot cyexpol dxoiov
YovOor nat wove inypdv 82 mayb, Nevxdy, yaratades. Kab
ap Tod mavris % vodaos yuypi) Sxws xddatar Sonder 32
Odpuns 4 yds toxew Bradopijy. Kal ydp tise tiv ad
BSeadvKrév Hove  euot $2 dvddver plnv pay alriqn viv
Sudvrov Wik Eupevar, piv 88 wal wav GX fv pev
ebPiws eridmy wat Oépun pavi, ends xpéos wal roice
répmeras. dvopdtoves 82 Gkounv nfvbe fv 82.6 wévos é
totes velpours elow pluvp, Euremtany &2 ro GpBpov aBep-
pov, unde erodéy, yuxphy rivde palyy Eupevat, ép' iis
Gepydw dappdxey & avdednow Bpyns xpéos. xpi be rade
mOra Tov Képra Spipéwv, Ocppacty yap ra Te Eypremra-
xéra pépea els dynov ipyeipe, xat viv ow Bpyny és dvdeds-
ow ipyaye ere tov Yuyxpav ypéos. mictis Toict yap
Birkowes ob ib abr Evpilper- xad-yip'8 nore: Eveirepen,
tor’ EBrapev drrore* cs SE Eros elzreiv, O€pyns eri rH
apy, Yikws 82 éxl 7G réder ypéos. Euveyijs pev obv
moddypn ob pnidios yhyverar, Biadelmes 82 &c8 dn yxpdvov
Baxpov, Nerth ydp" Kad ‘Odvprlacs évixnce robaypis x”
dyéot Spépov.

ANN dyBpes pev mabeiv jmtrepor, yuvaxdiv Se éhadpére-
pov yuvaixes && dpaidtepov pév dySpav, yadererrepov OE.


The common reading, wal yap
olen raw «) BorAverion jor, has
evidently no meaning. Petit and
Emmerins try their hands at conjec~
tural emendations, bat in such a
style as I cannot approve Petit
suggests the following as a probable
substitute for the vitiated text: eal


ip oles ray Ocppy, ebre dt Yuere
roy sptovi. Ermetins boldly sub-
stitutes the following sentence for
the words he expanges: xal yap of
ply reve rovriwy geiyover, rotor
8 ad ix ray GXdoun Bidverav
wort.


XPONIQN TIAOGN, BIBA. B’. 123


20 Wap 1h dr Set pnBd oleetov, hy ied docoyens xphocor
yiryrat, Staci peova river viv Evpdopiy dxty rd
TON pdy dard eréwy évre Kal Tpuijkovra. Bacay be ead
Bpdbtov de ris dedotou dicws wat Sialrys. Seevoi per odv
of mrévot, Kal ta wapeéyra Téveav péfova’ RevroOupln eri
Thiet Yatoeae, dxonoin, doroaerin, Bios, drypumviny iv 52
éraviboct, rotro pév, Sxors dx Gavdrou mepevyires, dveros
tiv Blov, dxparées, dadol, ebOypot, Sapodéxot, al és viv
Slacrav 48pol robra 88 cs ée Oavdrov adfis écdpevoe aénv
xptovras +H rapotcy Gop? drécempe woddoics és Bpara
% woSdypy, dddore 8 és GaOpar xal révde dipuetos §
Siadoy7}.


Keg. 7. Tlept "Edépavros.


Erégarre rG wdbet nad rH Onpip 7H edépavre Evvd pupia
ial 18eq ccd poi a oeylBed ead long drip olBd Ady
mp teeda, obre 7d wréBos abet, obre rd UBov Sip" eréhas
ser te 7% Onploy wal xdipra Biaslpor pdriara ply oe
peyrrov Kab maxtor peyibet pev dxdcov dv Sov én”
Eide ow mupyndov dvabelys péya’ wdyverov be és whedva
Gh whore, eb waphaana Eovdelas. drip. ob80. Ww
xdpra rp ixedoy" ypory pev wédaves rataxoptws dmrayres
xat 80 ddou Tob crijveos. Tarmos ev ye GAos ev Neuxdra~
tos, Sxws of Opiixes “Privo! ddrdot be rédapyoe, kos
Modrew mbtapyos? of 88 EavOol, bras éxardy xal mevrh-
wovra’® dddoe 88 xudveor Ur eicdpevos mapedéfato
kvavoxairn.* dide nat Boes, dbe xa wives, 72 dxdoa ava


t Ermerins ventores to introduce * Hind, xxiii. 255.
ode before adic; and it seems to ? liad, xi, 680,
be required, + Wiad, xx. 294,

* Hind. x. 437.


124 TIEPI AITIQN KAI SHMEIQN


wiv viv épwerd nal Sia dipBerar. ddépavres 82 podvos,
Lodoedées tiv xpoujy vunrl 82 xal Bavdre Tedov iBépr 82,
kdpnva pay peddvrata xaréyww xal mpicwra donua, alén-
Aa Thy poppin, én! aizgin cnueps, os Bockew Thy repay
éni rotor Gpouos idve wal dde obx Exdndov. dra yap
Heydda, wharka, wrepuy@sea, péogs AnlBwy Te Kal orépvou,
Gore xpiyar rov adyéva toils wal, Sxws vies Aaldect.
pipara: 88 Oibduin Bichewnce & Oban’ ced pcheorserye parebee
repos tdbe S8évras Kucdsjoxovcr’ tdbe potwa devxérata,
Sxas obBevds Grou re ovdey obS2 Reveod You wal rade oby
imép pérawa wal xporddous, dews rotct xepacdépocs i
du GXAA nerd crbua ead viv Eve ynéBor, SpOia pidv & 7d
mpbcber ob kdgra’ GNAd dvw cpixpéy te Kapwida Seog
Sariocecbas dx rod SpBiou évein, nal dpacbas dyBos ey roict
S8obet cypois. peydda 88 ra xépara, pijeos pay dxicov
opyuciw of pécos. ardor 82 wroddsy zt Tovréwy pétous
pbode Simdiv mpoSodijv F toyes 4 dvw yvdBos ard rob
xeldeos paxpiy, dvécreov, oxodsiy, épwerdbea. Soul be
émi rd tixpov ris mpoBorijs tact éxrpijcues" xal rdode
Siaprepis phos rod avetipovos érérpnvey 4 dics, Seas
abhav Bipvéa ypéerar 2 7d Sov és dvamvoiy, dxws put
aide rH olpuyye drdp rai xepoi ride Kai xwBeovinv Te yap
Aéforra, Sabra Bidet, 7h wpoBoder aadrauPéves ve Kal
Taxes kparaiirs, Kat obx dv Tis dxpédovro airéov Bip, iv pip
xploawy Eros aéspar drip wal soln é vowhy TiS.
pacreber, 0062 TG orépart eal roict cpixpoice dbofcr
tcbwv cdpxas fH. modes yap edprixces dmeper ris vis
moddav 7d Ygov dvéyovres' ardp Kal cuixpds abyiy bas
Deka. obxow Sivatar 7H oropate eis tiv yi véwerBas,
mori nal 1) Taw xepdtav mpa Tov atdparos Expuais eipyes Tis
srolns drrecOae 7d ordpa, rovyapoiv dvipairas Th mpoBorH
géprov pbyav Erevra, Sxeos dpaddobderiipt, THbe EvSyoas


XPONIQN TAGOQN, BIBA. BY. 125


evrlOnae moddav rH Koidly® ebre of mparos mpoBooKiba
tive xaddover. érimpoaber yap tod fwov rijbe Bécxeras.
drip off mui dmd Myvns 4 morayod TE oTduars Oéysse
Heurh yp airing. aXAA Hw Supp, erriBeras pay 7G Bars
vis mpoBockibos dxpnv viv piva’ treera bxws avarvéwy,
dyn rod sépos, rob BBaros Oveee woMASy émiv 88 wey,
Gxeos KedBwva, Ty piva, 7G oTipars morapnbiv eyxée’ era
adbis Ernee xal addis eyyéer, & 7° dy wjon Exes hopribos
nds Tiw yaorépa. pwov tpnyiv nal mayurrov, oyOdBeas
parypors loxovra, addwas emipijixeas, érépas évropds Kol-
Aas, emixapalous, dddas 8 rokads, Babelas xapra, txedov Td
Etymav tpurddy ve.’ rplyes 88 dddow:s pd Shore pice
908 wal yatrav érépavre 82 réde earl 6 xvods puplas 52
pal EXNae mapeWNoyalinp icra GOA Cornel fOpibrtows
word xard yive xdprret, Beas dvOparmos, Kai watov mpos
riot parydrnor Taxes Sxos ryuvaines ddX’ ottre wor xpéos
aviv audi rod Cohou ypaddew, wriyy dxdcov EEadrév re Kab
Hvotcos 6 edéhas wal dxdoa txeda % ibén Tod yoootvros
Toyer tH rod Kou puy" éxixdmaxoy 82 eal Moya rd madbos,
rod emoxuviov ris Suouryros elvenev, fv borepoy ppdow"
482 caruplnow tév Te pxjdwv Tod épuBijparos Kal Tijs és
cwovelny dppijs aoxérov te xal dvaytvrov. drap Kal
tppdxdeov dre tobbe pétov ovdey ov88 drxiyucdrepov.

Méya per ody 76 mdBos és Sivamw" Kreivas yap mavrow
pidXov Svvardrarov' drap wal ibdeOar aloypiv Kal Secua-
Taber 7a wévra és. edbpas 7d Onplor ard’ Apveros 4


*Thave here adopted an emenda- ing can be drawn from these
tion suggested by Bernard, and re- words,

‘eeived into the text by Ermerins. © The reading in the MSS. is
In the MSS. it stands thus: (rare rpeodovig, a word of no meaning.
dedoa rh pwlenpiddov 2 eno ‘That which we have given was sug
rte Ewvdjoa rg orduars, ivri- gested by Wigan and is adopted by
Ono wodAdby rp Koiy. Nomean- Ermerins


a &


126 EPI AITION KAI ZHMEIQN


voboos rikreras yap Cavdrov em’ airly. itis dori rod
dudvrov Bepyod ob juxpd ye, i} al md-yos, ds Sy te pepo
xéina, ere 7b Simp tpémerat es xudva, 3 wal ydratar,
xpiotadXov, 7) mayor. Fde éork 4 Evy) Oavdrov wal rod
wdBeos aitin, drap obde loyes rixpap obdey 4 apy) ris
votcou péya ode Ts Eevorrperés xaxdv tiv dvOpwroy emi
our bbe eri roioe érerodis Tod oxtveos parrdteras,
ths iSeiv re edBis Kat dpyopév dpijtas, dra trois, owAdy-
ror eupadeicar Saas dtSqrov wip, Hn roperay, kal-rar
dew xparijcay addis xore Grewodaiws ekdwrerat, Ta FOMAa
nev Sxos dard cxomeis rob wpoodmrov dpysuevoy ryhepards
mip xaxév. pereberépoice S¢ dard Tod dixpou dryxéves, you~
varos, xovbUAwv yetpiy re xal woddw. ride xal dvdari-
erot of dvOpwrot, Ss rep 6 intpds ob mpds Tas dpyds
ras dobevertdtas To mdBcos rH téxvy xpéeras, palveln
xal ayvoly Tav Kapvovrew rips Evpdopis. vobées pev yap,
tos dirs oyxediov mpopdcws, tarvadétor, hobywot, ri Koodiny
eritnpot. rade xai roice byiaivover xdpta ole dnBea* emi
82 thot abfijoecs rod mdBeos dvarrvol Bpwpwtys ex nips
&Bov EiapGopis rod wvetuaros. touide 6 aijp, # re tev EEw-
Bev airiny loxew Soxéer odpa maxéa, deved, Godepa, olov
imotuylov. ard ovrlov apayv te Kai drérrav i avdbooss,
xat otre rovréwy ori alaGnois re wal pedéty. obbe yap
008 Ay pl) woot ywyvdoxover spoln dreyrin al mefus
ise els xpnotiv yap % olxcioy, od EvrijOns abréowos # we
apus. dvddoous 82 fmidin, dxws ey Tiv éwuréwy Tpopiy dp-
ardrySnv Edxovros Tob maBeos. Sid rode emiEnpor Thy Karo
xoidlay’ 6y0or éravierdpevor, drow map’ Gddous Evveyées
perv obdéxw, wayées 58 Kal rpmyées, kal Td peony) Tov
Sy Gav Eppnerac, Sxas Tov pivdv edéhas.? edpetae 58 PrEBes


7 The common reading, ippeire, for it was suggested by Petit and
bas no meaning. Tho substitute adopted by Ermerins,


XPONIOQN TAGQN, BIBA. B. : 127


ob mAnppipn Tod alpatos, dA TH Tod Sipwatos mayer”
oie é& moddov 88 Kal Bpa Sin, tod wavrds els loov
EGov eyerponévour tpixes ey ply 7G mavti mporebyijoxover,
xepor, pnpoiat, xvijunor, abfics, HB, yerelours dpacad, ye-
Svat 88 Kal él ri Kepadg nopar rd be piddav mpdmpor
woduol al pardxpwats abpin. ovk ls paxpoy 88 Sn Kal
yéveroy yoda ef 88 Kal eripipvorey ravpal tplyes, amperé=
eorepas Taw droryoptve Bépua ris Kebadijs kareppuryis eis
BdBox puribes 58 ovyyai, Babeia, tpyycias IyBor és 7d
spocwroy axdnpol, abe dddore pev &s xopudiy Neveol
mrouodérrepor b¢ Thy Bdow opvypol suixpol, Bapées, vw
Opol, Sxas 8’ Dos pores xevedpevor GrEBes xporddhov dryp-
pévat, wal tors vis praicons Koidias yorwbers. ydooa
xarakioberr livOover rpnyeia’ ode dbéxyrov xal rd Ejumay
oxivos Syarhecwy roubvbe Expevar, xalrydip Kal roict Kaxo-
xbnoss iepeloor a xpda yardins dori sumdear fy 8
arodday alpnral re amd riav Svbobey, % én wal exh votes
dxpowre dalvyras, Neryives emi roics dxposs Saxrddowre,
qowvace xvnopol, xal raw Kvnopdw darrovras pet! *Sovijs-
dyrioyes 58 6 deny kal yivev xore év Kindy epevder 82
nal piiha fv dyep ob xdpra peyddy orrles dyduddecs,


peray. émcoxivioy obv péya edxetar xadvrray dcac, SKus
‘rots Oupovpévows, 4) Mover Sid tobe Kai Aedvrrov Kudsj-
oKeras, Tovyapoby ov Aéovar ovde CAdpavre pobvor, GAA Kad
peer Goh Srahiarres Gavowos? fle; ody Spores place, Sapir
oeidées, yerdéov mpoBor mayety 7d be Kare wedbvor
Expwes d8dvres ob Aeveol pév, Sowéovres 82 inrd pédavos,
Gra épudpa, pedavoerta, Kexreopéva, eehavra@dea, ws


“ iad, xii, 463,


128 TEP! AITIQN KAI ZHMEION


Boxter péyeBos toyew péfov rod FuvijBeos" Erxea emi rice
Bdceot raw drwy, iySpos pias, evnepddea* pucol rb wav
oxivos puriat tpnxelyor drap nal évropal Babeias, dxotov
abdaxes péraves trav pay. bid robro xal 6 adédas rod
wdBeos rotvoua iyvéwv al wrepréwv péode Tov peowy THY
Sacrirday pikes. iy 88 eri waddov ab—y 1d xawdv, Oxed-
Sees rods SyGous, ppv, vyevelouv, Saxtidwv, yovdrav, xa~
xodpa Kal dvadBéa Ta Enea. Gra yap én’ Grow éFavi-
oratat, x’ Gddowrt GAXa rpriverat, ibn Kote Kal Tov pe-
Mwy mpoarobvijxee Tod dvOpdmrou dxpe éxmreavos, pls,
Sdwrvdor, wrddes, aldoia nai drat yelpes. od8€ yap Pava-
rot 7) xaxdy els doraddayiy Blov aicypod Kai adybwy Se-
vw mpocber i es pédea StatpnOivas tov dvOpwrov ddda
paxpoBidv dort, Sxas edéhas Td Liov. jy 8 Kal &dyos
dprias by Téiv pedeav, moddov te emiximres Baptrepov,
@Ay Kal GrAy ravetpevov' ceriwv bpekis ole ayevvis,
Grrotos % yedors, ov88 reprviv 7) édwd) Kal ¥ woos" amdv-
tov 82 im dyOnddvos, picos, drpopin, erBupin Aveorwdns
xémrot airouarot, wedéwv éxdorov iStn Bapeia, eal tov dv-
Opwmov dxOéer xal ra cpyixpd pédea drdp Kal 7b cdpa
mpos davra dyGerat, ob Novtpoiat réprrerat ovK ddovaly,
ob tpoph, ove dovrly, ob xivijor, ob« ipeulp. macs yap
Sptornney 4 volcos.. trves Newrds, dypvmvigs xaclav dav
tacly Sicrvova Kapreph mviyes as dx’ dryydvns. abe yoov
ties katéotpepay tov Biov, viryperoy imvoy és Odvaroy
etSovres.

Towovede ody dévras ris ote ay piryor } rls ox dv éerpa-
arein, wity vids, ) wari &p, xiv xaclyntos tix; Sé05 eal
Gpdt peradécwos tod Kaxod. moddol yodv én’ epnuins Kat
€s dpea tods pidtdrovs éEéBecav, of pev €s xpdvoy érapy-
yovres TH Ape, of b2 Hxrorra, ws opéas eOérovres exBaveiv.
Rayos b¢ chs raw én” epnyulns dduypévov ris ebepricavra


XPONIQN ILA@QN, BIBA. B. 129
ex Tis vis Suv Bav, bx’ dvdyens tod Mod A rh det
dyBeabels, dy duchbacbas rb Kaxdv xaxG, Savtos evépaye
700 Exios) kad od repicber tredeirnee xplv 9 wrérra arg
Siacamivat xai drocrivas ta prea. doy 82 ibetv Exey els
miBov yretKeos épricavta, mibvra te Tod yretneos els
xbpov droSdtca, modddv 58 Kal tod iod owveryeiv Te
sprainet” Grret 8 daremviyn td Onpiov ev rH preted, yavdov
wal ToNSy Tod yRetKeos mieiv Tov dvOpunrov, draddaryhy
rot Biov Kai tod mabeos Sifjpevov' cs &é és Kbpov Hee wat
péeOny, Exevro pev yapal ra mpata dKeas droOvijcxey' ered
82 de Tod ipo Kal rijs wéOns éErjypero, mepteppinaay ev
7a mpara ai xdpar, tre be Sdxrudol re Kal Sruxess EFAs
82 crepererijxcvrav mavra. érel bd Exe ev orréppare i) Biva~
pas iv, cxnpotthaaoteer adbis, Seas ex yeverijs, tov dvOpwmoy
4 pious eEOpeye pév Gras xépas wai Svuyas véows Kal
cdpxa xabapiy, nal éEébu yey toy madaidy pid, os oyhpas
dprerot dravexdajOn 8 es piua hoijs, nas Gros dvOperros.
de pév oby 6 pibos, ob kdpra yey dzpexis, ob wayyy bd
dmiatos. Kxaxdv yap xaxG BrapOjvar murrov. tiv plow
be eri 7G dovre Larripe dvavedicar Tov GvOpwroy, ovK dmi~
tov & téparos idéqv.


APETAIOY KAIIMIAAOKOY
OZEQN NOYSQN GEPAIIEYTIKON


BIBAION IIPNTON.


DINAX TON KE@AAAION.


Keg.

Tipooioy
Ctpamtia Ppemrinéy 3. at
Crparcia AnBapyesy +B.
Orparcia Mapaopod ‘ 7:
Grpartia'Awowdnting . 5 +e Pa ct
Gtpartia xapokvopos teeters oe
Orpantia Terdvov . 7 os
Otpaxcia Eovdyyne 1k
Otpartia ray xard ry Kuvida radev. a
Otpaxtia risv xara riyy bépuyya emus waOiv. . 0
. ew


Orparcia Wrevpiridog «


APETAIOY KATITIAAOKOY OZEQN
NOY=SON GEPAIEYTIKON
BIBAION A’.


TIpooipuov.


‘Okeiiv votcwy dixea Ewadéa riot onuntwv itor, audi dy
rois Evyypdppact, doa por mpdober yeypddarat. dxdca
per div &v aruperéav Ocparely ylyverae xard te Thy Tobrew
Biagophy, kal xara rhy ray voonudrev iSéyv, Kal ri ev
airois wouxidny, rouréov Ta wWheleo ev roles dul muperéav
Déyoure AedEEerae” dxoca be Edv wupervias dkla yhyerae
wdBea, Sxoiov % dpertris, 4 SvevOe aruperdv, dxolov daro-
mAntln, duh révbe wotvoy ra. deen dpdaw doe Bd yi) Bia-
paprdver, nde paxpyryoptew, Erepa év érépowse ypdpovra,
apy) 4 wbri  xal audi rav waBéwv, Kal redevr} %) wbr7.


Keg. a. Ocparela Ppevirixav.


Karaxexdio8ar xpi) tov vooéovra év olxp edperpy, ebxprire,
euudvos way &r dbp, Bipeos 82: 8v ypiyed vorepi Bapos 82
xal POwordpou mpas Tas dpas rexpalperBas. Frevra jov~
xinv dryew xededev wal atrov vootoyta Kal rods él ris
oixins Gravray dfuijxoos yap be yodov xabarrépevor


134


dpemirixol drap tard révb_ walvovrat. Totyor Neto, duadol,
pnd tnreplcxovres, nde dyvais wndé ypadjjor eixocpor*
pebiorixdy yap Torxoypadly. Kai yap xpd rev dbOarpav
dpudhatpéovel' twa wevdta ivbddpara, nal ta pi) eEloyovra
dudapdwct ds tmepicyovra: nal maca mpipacis dvastin
mpoxrnow xeipav opis. «rlvns pijxos wal wredros otp-
herpov, 5 prjre PrnotpikecBar ev rH wdarelp, prjre dard
Tis orevijs cerimrew xolrns. ev yidoiat Toilet oTpipact,
as pi) xpoxvdivery trdpynors bor. atap 762 dv padBaxoicr,
dorepyis yap toice vetporct } oxAnpl) Kolm. ody Hxweta
82 rév ev roles ppevitixoiar Ta veipa rrovéet, pada ydp
tot omavrat ppevirixol. eloodor trav pirrdtov por Kai
Aare} pi) Orpodaxciss rdvra yap evOvpéecBar xpi, widuora
rotor és dpyhy t) mapapopy xardkaors } ev Lope, } ev dart
mpos 7d voonua Texpaprén. av yap mpos Ti airy dypial-
vot, kal épéoor Ta ji) BvTa, Kal Ta i) Dreovra havrdtovrac,
He avO Exépwv Erepa ywyvbcrwor, 4 Eéva WvSddXpata mpo-
Baddwvrat, eal rd Edvodov rhv ateyhy if ra ev aby Bedlr-
tavrat, Cohov aipéeaPar ypr’ fv 88 pi), Tobwavriov.® dya-
Bay 82 apis abyhy coppovée te xal rpyivecOar tiv ma-
pepopiy. Bdvela pay paxpit ovrka 80 typorepa (kal Boa
Tepa kal cuveyi}. perhiypata yap Ovpod ovria edxaspin dé


THEPL OEPATIEIAS


+ Ermerins ventures to substitute such editorial practices, If the


mapgaivover for this word, for no
‘other reason but because he fancies
it more suitable to the passage than
the one in the text, Our author
has in view Hippocrat. Prognost, 4.

* Ermerins, following in the wake
‘of Wigan, suppresses, first, the clause
cai dior ra pi) Svras and, second,
i) dO" tripwe tropa yryvdonwer, us
being mere glosses on the clauses
eonnected with them. I must say,
decidedly, that 1 cannot approve of


‘works of the ancient authorities are
to be thus modified agreeably to the
tastes and caprices of modern edi-
tors, we shall by-and-bye be at a
loss to know what is ancient and
what modern, in works reputed to
be of olden date. And, morcover,
although the clauses in question
may not be indispensable to the
meaning, I eannot but think that
they give effect to the other clauses
in this passage.


OZEQN MAGQN, BIBA. A. 135


dv riot cravéceas ducoiy, xal upetod nal wapadophs. iv
82 bx? daerins expalvovras, kal Hy wh waprien 6 superds,
SB6vae pi) weyddra eri euperg Brdwrovra, dryabov ¢ Eup.
uovéecy ah rbv muperav, Kad Thy mapagopiy, & re Tbs
mapokvopois Kal ras eravéowas.

“Hy dy then 6 xaipis és Opti, mparriota oxenréov el xpi}
ddparpiey alua. jv yar dv 4 wapahoph Eby wuper dpyi-
Ger cic Barry Tips mpcirrns # Bevrépns Huépys, rape préBa
thw & dryxiint, uddurra viv péony drdp nai i és Tpirny
ij rerdprny huépny % mapadoph ihxn, udope rijs mparns Tar
xpiolwov mepddov téuverr ef &@ mpocwrépw rod Séovros
xpivov ixrales dévre 4 éBboualy, ey, wodddy mpd tov Kpe-
clow dv votes ofko Kevodv xpi}, } pappanevery, 7) rota EXdowre
dpeOropotes xpbecBar. drdp ear ¢déBa rduser yh wOKAEY
ddaipéerr, wip bv dpyi tdurgs. ppevires yap etrperrov &
avyxoti xaxév hy 88 wodurdy Bis 6 vortwy Ey, Kai veqvins,
nal o£ aBigayins wal oivopdurlns,—olbe ob ris dperiribos
fact of Noyiepol,—adrX wal dvev Tapadophs wodAdv Tov-
bey dpaipber aluar woXdby 52 yclov depauplew, fv ole
Sao of dpeverixol’ tapvew bé bdé8a tovréwy eirohusrepov,
fv && ioyorSplerv Kal ph dd xepadin } voices J. evbibe
wap Tis Gwis dove} dpyry xeariy 80 xdpos wey alaBijavos
Kal veipav apicwos’ alua &¢ mapa xapdins Edxee paddov 7
rouse Sibor. hy dv wewbvOy Hde, ob xpi ri én’ dryive
rdpvev PréEBa. rdde yap wdbea xevearryiav ef! olor
BrEBn ob opiepy. xiv pay 4 Sivapus dvréyy els 7d ixavov
Tis xevdbatas, draft dcpaipéerv, Seas pi) év rH Sartdor ris
erasparpéaioy Bioddinras ris Tpopis % eyxaspin. Euvextes
yap roict ppeverixoice of sruperol, xal odbe éravéctas pa~
pas, d\XA Bpayelas nal dorjpovs Koudiapods Toieipevor.
iw 82 mpd ris Eupperpins dravbjjon 6 voréwy, és Seurépny
emdveaw tmepRaxreaOat, Ww wh & paxpiv demtary ef 88


136


ph, dvaxaderdpevoy dapper, Kal satoeot mpocayrou, Kal
mot modi airixa ddapév ywapa bé ris abrapxins 4
Stvayus.

Tpogi) ixypiy witos wav roics wuperalvover, obk jurta be
dpeverixoiar emcEnporepoe yap muperéw pobvow. to be
Hedixpnrov, ty ply yormBees Ewoe deremrov yap Tolce mim
xpoxdraoee® xdvbpor wAvrol Edy Sars, ) medixpiyry. dya~
dv 8 Kal x rovbe podypara dBévac dha, dota ObuBpns,
# cerivon, 4) avijbov evpnuévor’ ebarvoa yap rdbe Kab Siov-
pnrixd. aipeopov 88 ppeverixotar obpnows Aaydvav mav-
Tov pev, paMaTa be pardyns. dyaliv yap Td yMioxpacpa
wal & AevornTa Yboons Kal dprnpins, al és Thy Ta” KO-
mplaw Bikobov. Spurrov 82 Kal rebrhov, wad Bdbrov, wal Ko=


TLEPL OEPATIEIAE


povorrovs, Kai Kodoxivrae Kad! Spnv, Kal & re dv ep Exdorns
Gpns dpwarov }. mrurdvns 88 yudas typdraros juev ev mpa~
Tout, tos dtpodwrepos Eos emi 52 wdov maysrepos, dxdcov
dv } vobcos sporcor xpévor. tmoorérrecOas 88 ey Thee
plac hah paket cup rear. npuciaors Ade Bice eee
vodoos In, wi) ddapée trav mpocbeciav, da orrdbea
SBdvas, ds eEapxécy 6 vorgwv' etre xal xpediv dxpéwv rab
srereipiiv yokes, rab aroKAa votat yuhotas errqicojslrany impres
ap inphrdbe dx np epee dec Gar. -RyObuy ob arérpalie
on EXAew upbrcovbs clot, - dbrav’ 83 -rods ty mf 3ehpe
dplerovs‘alperboir Nn yap drat Epon Hye: hae
wenlorevras ypu: ispas olvsbeor Smoareveaban, Ke


Garis yap Kad dpevaw ax moder jy 88 dvdyen Ep, vis


® have adopted the reading sub-
stituted by Ermerins in place of the
ordinary text which stood thus:
ob8t psRixpnror, fy po) xorsdeer
fwor, simenrov yap roin mupoxd=
Rows. Petit proposes to improve
the text hy leaving out py, and sub-


stituting Growroy for ebmerrov.
But the emendation substituted by
Ermerins seems preferable, being
founded on the rules Inid down by
Hippocrates in his work, * On Ali-
ment in Acute Disenses."—Sce Syd.
Soc, Eni, i.


OZEQN TLAOQN, BIBA, A’. 137


Suvduios, } 700 oTopdyou Bragopévorr, bpd &v weduxprire, fp
Grea éy orkars, dxoiav piira, Borko. rir Edaw Cepps
Dart Ecacrov eervew, hv és woivnv Thy Toi eroudyou wapa-
pubinn didGs Hy 82 Kai é Sivapwv béy, wi) xdpra 7d olvades
éxdiciv. tpoph pev div, tos bros elmeiv, rowjbe.

Téyyew 88 viv wepadiy és Eusputw, Mai als Su-
panos rerpiypévys. dreaiveaOas yap i xeparsy ob pircee
dpeverixotor jy 58 Kal dypurvly Kal pavracty taor, podivou
Hare loov low Ta mpara ere 8 waddov 7d pddtvov torw
mréov és otiipuw wal Epub ris xepadijs. iv Se cal ri
‘popny mapaxutovrat, wal viv POeyEw éEadrddoowvras, tp
mixov ripuns evelryréov ev voice ehalouct, #) nercod yudov,
sronuyivoy arapayuréoy’ jy 8° dn) uadrov sh rapagop) tBd-
qrqrat, Kal revxédavov cai amrovdidov Toias édaloure éve-
“yciv, wai bEous mapayeiv. drydv yap rdbe nai Bépuns
Siarvevorixa, xal maxtor yupdiv Sadurixa, & rijs mapaho-
pis Fuvakrin...mepundyfas 8: sypiy: rdBe; tbe: pi) de rr ads
xe Kal rods révovras } réyEts Hep. Trodpln yap révoves
Kal veupoios. xarpos 88 mas réykws, mA Tis éoBodis
tot mapokvopot dpatorépy b¢ év ri dvaSdou mdvtev ba
Hémora ev dxpiy i) 8 dv éxpaivorrar, ribe padaora réyyew
Yoxpiy ah yrrxoptnp em paddov Gépeos Spy euros Ba
xmMap@. ely 58 7d mpyivew rhv mapadpopiy, dtuxpity, i
rovitns Arjpart, xal oroyyi) Ta mpéowra rupiiy Srevra
xpiew olvavdivy, 4 poxive Nai, kal ris pivas xab 7a dra
toate Siaxplev.

Tad pévrow nat trrvou aywyd. jv yap mdvvuyor péy
Syprioowor, pnd be spépys eddwor, crevées 88 7d Eiumrav*
bpOarpol, dxoidy re xépas korijxawar, Bdnorplbavras 52 kab

* Ermorins crases the clause dre- and di in the following clause, I


wieg 8 18 Eipway fwor altogether. flatter myself that I have succeeded
By merely deleting the last word, in emending the text sutisfactorily.


138 TIEPI OEPATIELAS


ekameravrat, tmvov adréoice xal jpepinv pnyavterBa,
mpdricra pty bud Tov Ths Reparijs TeyElov, podivov dxpjrou,
4 dpapanlvov Eiv yvd@ xioaod, 4) éprirov, 7) kal wedudaorou
evadewripate, ert paddov 82 tnrvearixcdv jujeav depeyrn-
Ocioa ev Aérai, & te rd Tis Kehadrss Apeypa, } dBare és
7) mpicwmov Ev omoyyf tnrorsBévas 88 xph Kat aizas
édas, ef clev veodpereis, ywpas toler trroxepadaiout.
mraytver yap Kai irypaiver rd mveipa Enpov te wal Newrdv
div, xar dulyrny rhow albijceas wapéye Bap bé Kab
wobes duiydn, prep tarvou dpyyy iv 88 petovay Bkovrat,
kal aire 7d pyxdvewov és Ta pérora Edy bBare yplew 782
inradelpew ray pivas xal & 7a dra eyyéew yradin
moda ebaphs Eby Xarai, aio ris xehadss, dvurexoy be
Kal xvijow pdducta Kpordpwv re xal drwv. Kal yap Kab Te
Onpia és dvaravday dpyis te nal Oupod Kvjot Grav re Kat
Kpordpaov Sapvawrat. tavou 5 dywyd éxdorov xal ra Evvij-
Gea vavrihw piv, i ev dxdr@ katdeuow, wal dv Baddcon
mrepihoph, Kal aiyiaday iyyos, xa xuyperwv xrdmros, dvigov Te
AbuBos, Kat Oardoons Kat rnds d8yr) povern@ 88 ere, éOto-
pos adhay &f? Hovyly, } rarpds AWpns, H amcriBos, f weer
traidoy obv Bijr Siacxddw 88, vyrudxeov piBwov mpoco-
pity. dou 8 adda bavov Oderiipia.

Totet 82 inroyoviplowe nal ri Koidin euBpéypata, Kat
émmicpata, iv preypoviy ai cxAnpin emaipyrae Kab
ven, édaov Spurerods edains euBddrdew.® mayd yap cat
sMoxpov Kal ddeatvov. ré8e dv xpéos év preypacin. evmb=
Hobe 58 ev abri dvnBov, xbvutar dyaboy 88 spot ra mdvra
jy 88 Kar bon évp, xvpivov Kal cedivov tév Kapréiay 78e
dxboa obpeov Kal qvebov dyeryd? ah virpov evaeloavre dh


* T have partially adopted Ermerins’ very extensive alterations of the
‘text in this place.


OZEQN TA@QN, BIBA. a’. 139


méocey, i 82 7d trap tiv weiow Kad tiv dbivny toxn,
Spa pev kare oictr@ mivapa amd ris dios Erasov Bi rd
deri rips Supaxas, 7) pobwov' ploryesy Se xpiy elpacov "EXy-
vxiv, ) Kpijra, xal cveyeiv pedro, plkavrd te és fa
XUMy ra mdvra xatatovely 7 rap omdnvi 8a 7d Edasov
ody dfel term, 7 et weber i) mply Boxéor, dEtxpytov, Kal dvrt
Aplaw émoyye) saiditin pbs bps rotate Scala Hale ve
weal mpniverat. iy 88 7d inroysvbpua elawo jj, 782 dives elpin-
tat, Kai 7d Séppa meperelvyrat, dpiotov wey dyrt Tod Niraos,
4) bbe abréy, wayd oinépiov Toov.® xédvuta 8 dor@ Kal de
Raveris 72 eveYripara: rai Erqbov ob drepmts.

“Hy 8 érumddocew eixaspin En, toiae pe edalowsr rotes
airéors ypéeobas drt roias Suotar. thy 88 divov omépua,
wai rides, xal Edarov xpibijs Newrdv’ deyaliy 88 kai xbapos,
rai Spoor, ty eFoiSaivy i yearip. wérrypor 88 dy Orica
& paprirowt rupinua xoipov cal padOaxcv ddxecpérn
82 wal Eiv pédure, wat daly, nad divov oréppare tnroyovbpl-
ows ert hacpa yar? EvOn. 88 cab: Bordvas nah owip-
para, daca por ev tote éuSptypace NéreKraL, wai dy roles
érumdacpact toto Ta wird pede 8 Kal civ abréowe pev
dyabdy és cboracw rév Enpéw, kai é pikw rév abyynpar,
ral ds 4 Oépyn & woNdav Biapeéyt adyabiv 82 Kad aizd
podvoy, Kal érimracpa julepbov, kal EuSpeypa Edv rwe
ray ipa Auber, pwaNOékas, Gdefvar, puotav xa) obpoy
dyaryov, mpnivar mpiows tdbe yap al pedixpytov rordee
rrofiv, xal Tovrea mova Kal Kpécoova, elow mapedBov
dernpiy, kai rveipovt, wal Biopyee, Kai xotdty.


* The common reading ia wéyei deo occurs before iv; for which
imeaipiov, words of no meaning. Wigan suggests doxovdploun,
Petit was the first to suggest wuxi- which Ermerins adopts; but, as will
ploy, on which see Foes’ (Econom. be seen, removesit alittle way dowa
Hippocrat, in voce; also Erotian. the sentence.

* In the original the term iepa~


140 EPI OEPAMEIAS


Euveyéws 82 rv xordiny épebifery Baddvoret, i) Saxplo-
tout, (erstnpalvovrac yap Toda), & Te THy Odxiyy Tay dod
Tie bebe, Srdp 928.48 Beawvoly viv by xp Oat pa,
head loci Wid by 79 bye tir OO nak rok NGE snarl
qarrhp erloxntat, xritew xpi porxpiiry, Kal Ealy, Kal
vitpy.

*Hy 8@ ply d€los troxatacréce ai ris pdeypovijs mpn-
Séves, otxiny Oévra, evrduvev, 20a dv % pdeypovi) xpaivy
al pilav bp plgy 88-4 Bevrdpry, bean bv 3h ve Gheypale
vorra onualvy nal i divapis xedevy, drdp Kal td wrHO0s
tov alpatos rorwiSe texpaptéov dpetpin yap ovyxoTis
airin. && yey dv tyedpny plny 4 Seurépny réykes f wdrh, es
82 riy tplryv xnperi civ tue Merai tov éuBpeyparov.
Srevra ériOijpara, ev preypacly ev iy éredor, dooarros,
$ikie SPO} Br cedaepiirwy -repjulrBou! 60-dured  yarrb,
senpost Ta 88 Baa er rotor airéouss ra wird. iy 82 pip
rovréoist éraviy undiv ) rapapoph, xouphs tis Kepadiie
xPéos, Hv mev prpevorar elev ai xbpar, ra mpdriata & Huo
alla Boaytrepats ev pg Smevne pkey) crahaBbrranry
Sivapwy, cixiny Kata ris Kopupis mpocBadrew de dpac~
péewy alpa xotdn &¢ mporépy és Ta perddppeva KexodrrjaBeo.

"Enel 82 wai Odpynxa ev maoyoe rior dkelpor vovcoure
dxéerOar xpi), Tov mdvry Kdpvovra, Eby xapbip, eal mveb-
poviy, mpioriore: piby om! davdeyucys ix Gveemvort Eddore pide
Oeppiis, @dore 58 yuypiis Exe 88 id aruperod xavewSens,
xat Bnxds, Kal iypav rovnpins, kal vetpwv xowwving, Kab
cropdxyou cupdopis, xal imeloxdros te xal Siadpdyparos
xarins’ (xapSin yap nv wdOn pétov re Secvdv ottrore dxderar)
éri 88 roiot ppeverixoicr Kat pada xpi) rade peidlocev.
mapagopi) wev yap werekerépoioe Ex Tevos Tov ev TH Ocbpyne”
dvarvoh Beppu te Kal Enpy Siros Spywd, ov« ethopov rip,
7p mavrn és Ocwpyxa Evppéev. al xaxln pev ard Tob


OZEQN TA@ON, BIBA. A’. Mi


oixeiou Oddzreos rerpaypévor pétwv re nad Svegopwrtpn i
dard Taw drwy é& Bdpynxa Fivboor. dxpea yap yeypd,
kegan, aéBes re, wal xeipes® tmrepBer 82 rénBe & BisonE.
wal Skerau dy dpipyew iypacly Kab spits. réykis wav dy
Arawor Er awapirye AnBy 4 vipBer Olpeos 82 nal
alpaios EXAnnixds: iv 82 Kai emBeroves dén xpteabas, gol-
vues ev olvp adornp@ Sevbévres’ Emevra deior és pata
terpippbror Eiv vapdp, ddplroves, olvdvOn, mpoonves Bapnes
érimhacpar yruxtixoy 88 nal pia Pracbévra Fv waariyn
wal pesderrp. mdvra 88 xnpG wai vdpdy dvadapPdver
fy 88 wat rev orépaxov Ey vdpen Kai drroosrin, dNrivOiow
ur F} Kounv Toolde Eu\rcalver Kal Ode EpnBlyre Eby
Maral xaracoveiv rd trroyovSpiov. memlonew 82 Kal rb dard-
Bpeypa 4 xvdav abréou mpd Tis tpodijs, éxdoov KudBovs Sto
rob dwoBpéyyaros, # xiao wupod 708 yuhod Flv BBaras
nudBots Bio. dy 82 kal xadaos bx tiv erépayor, obx émd
Tis katactdcews Tis votrov, 4XX' ato} potvou dmb yu-
péiv Spipécov xal ddhwupdv, | tard yodjs Baxvoputvov, xad
Sixpet avawwouerov, ibpopwyés yéda Soréov &v pop), bcov
ipsxoriMoy Tod yddaxtos év Héaros xudby evi puppdvev
88 abréou 7d wreiztov. Bpayd 86 1 Kal ody pre dvadt-
one.

“Hy &¢ rat xaicos Exp tov divOparrov, wat Bixpos, xal aro-
pin, nai pavin, cai eribupin Yroxpod BBaros, biBévas pelov
[BH Setar ty xaboou vebow Sied poerirBos. rand yap
Aydt rév veipwr dppwdéew xpi}. SiBdvae dv dxdcov és or0-
wdxou dros’ ddiyov 82 drapaée Spaxvrdras yap of dpe-
veruxcol.

*Hy 82 wad els cvyxomiw tpdmevrar, ylyverat yap Kat
* Ermerins does not hesitate to I ean see. Tarde applios only to


eject these five words from the text, the fect and hands,
without any good reason as far as


12 TLEPI OEPATIEIAS


robe Tips pey Suvdpuos Avowévns, pare 58 yeouérov tod
GyOpdrrov, ravtav 82 els 7d éxrds Thy opi wovevpévow
tév bypéiv, Kal Tod Tévou Avopévov Kat Tod mveiparos, &
re denbinv ev ris mapapopns, déos 8 eis arpov AvOiivae
xal iypactny tov dvOpwrov Gheap podvoy dor olvos,
Opiyar pev dixéws Kat’ odcinv, xal wdvrn péxpe mepdrov
Hore révy 5e wpooGeivat révoy, Kal mvejpa vevapeopdévor
aysipas, PEW drafivas, ovinpas wASBov, Gepopbrev kw wah
peovrwy kpariicas, i8ds ev dodpalverBar és sSoviyv, xpa-
raids 88 ornpikar Sivamey &s Lory dprtos 82 peidlbas
Oupov ev mapapopiy rdébe pévroe robes Gua wdvra mpyocet.
Ovpdy re yap mpnivovras parOdke dpevav, nad eE dwurday
& Sivapw tpépovrar drap 788 éwuréows eprviovor ey
Sovrjv2

“Orav mpicw yey ij5n moddov Fen xpdvou, 5 re auperis
wobig Ep, drdp 788 a mapadhop? és pedpwow 7 . 70
88 trroydrdpiov pty odAdv te mpocSrdarytas H Syxep, 7
duonat, # oxAnpin, nehads 52 +3 wdéov Exn tis airins, xp)
rodpéovra Rover 58 KaTasovely rohhsv Te tiv xebadafy.
re yap sis iypavbijcerat, nal %) xepadsy SarrveveBijceras,
wal rd Edumrav oxivos SatmucOijceras. abe yap 7d pev En-
piv duPrtverat, Kai kabapeterar de ris ducydrns %) alo Bnors
4 88 yveoun eborrabis bd Ewredos pluver. trade pévror ris
Adetos ris volirou yvopara.


® The last clause of this sentence corruptions of the text! Perlt sug-
seems decidedly to be corrupt. How gests dwuriovg dumMMove, which
mach is it to be lamented that this would be an improvement of the
culogium on wine, which appears to sense, in my opinion; but it is re-
bo #0 judicious and so eloquent, jected by Ermerins,
should be marred, in so far, by the


OZEQN TAOQN, BIBA, A’.


Keg. 8. Qcpareia AnBapyixav.


Anbapyixoiar ardxuons év pari cat mpds airy fodos
yap i voices: 788 gv ddéy mado Wikis dp Euduros
airln. xoirn ebagis, toryoypaply, otpdpata moiida,
mdvra dxbca mep épebiotind SyYrios, Made}, Yoradly Edy
miéor modiv Tol” enopol. jy abd Kiya tox, euPo~
9015, vovBeain dpylhn, Seipa, ép' oles Seipatver. mporay-
yen Tov Sxdca érdbee Kai mpocedixes. mavra & éypr-
yopow évayrins roles ppeverixoict,

Apgi 82 nai xevoows Anbapyixdy rade xph ywoone.
dy péy e& éxépns voiicou, droiév re ppeviriBos, SiabeEnrae
jOn, GM Ba wey wi) rdpverr, pm e ABpdov wobiv xevodv
alua. inroxdatew 88 Thy Koiddny, pip Tor KRompwbeos elvexe
poivoy, ANN’ Seas te xal dvabey dvramacOi, Kal amd Tips
xepadijs dxerevOj. mov obv Eotw adav Te Kal virpov.
dpuoroy 52 7G KMIcpaTe ei KacTépiov dyrdcoos yruypoy
tap 75 née Evrepoy AnBapyixoice Kal mpds Exxpiow vexpdi-
Ses. fv Se yi dx Siadétios voirov, GAN’ éwuréov dpynras 6
AjPapyos, xai Soxén menMjabac 6 voveéav, jy piv aluatos,
$MBa tiv én’ ayxiave tdpvew fy be pdéypatos ibaradeos
ere Dov xupérv, xabalpew xpi xvedpo adv ri wrodyp,
HOAXXBipp pdrave Ev pedixprry, mpos thee dpxficr, hw
Herpios Body ty 88 petivoos, rod papudxou ris lepiis
Kadevpérns vijore Sidovar Odes <P, Ev peuxprfrou xud-
Bows tpi, Kal repipeivavra xabijpacbar, tore Siddvae curl,
iy watpds jy 88 pi, els tiv ertodcay suépny 4 Tpody)
ctraupley Bh were ah bv bowipy obyreras vis legis. Shes
<a’ Sars i) peduxprire Avouevys, xudBors Sto.

‘Arpopln raxdv, xaxdy 52 Kal wodurpodin. xpi) dv dde-


144 NEPI OEPAHEIAS


ryoourin xpéeoBas és éxdorny jpépny Gbpoov 8 pi) dovrei
trropyiards Te yap 98 GAéqs 7h cropdyy yptos dvd wacay
why jépny. drdp wal 4 tpodi) éorw Nerrivouca xal bra~
xeoprrruch ev Sopoiae padrov i dwroies Gdexroplét, Key
xpids' Aavdtwors 82 EvveyeloOw nad dtos mapayedebeo,
rai roiot 88 yudoior duBddrew, ef aor Béor yvAG ypdeoBar
mrusdyns, eirevooy 782 obpaw dryaryor, pipabpov, cbdsvov, ri
Adyava, 7} tourdwy rods Kapmots. dryabdy 8¢ eal mpdcov TH
Spisirirs, wal kpduPy Edv daly wal ydpy dpioroy 82 Kat
xtipevoy yrund, Eby xpdpSn, ductov 788 aipar epePierba
np # eborss, 382 yaorhp, &v doy wf vodope

Téytus rijs xebadijs, alrrep wal rotor dpeverixoict. “Au-
doiy yap ai aloPijovs wréae ylyovras drpmadv, hs drréhad-
vew xpi Ybbei Kal orth, podive, xat xizcod yup 7
eEarpivew &s Siarvoiy rotet Newrivover, olov Epride év
Set adv rH podlyyr jy be vedpww sévos &y Kal Wikis ddov,
TONG 58 waNov dxpéwy, TG kacropie Ebv dynBive dewal-
vew, 98e reyyew Thy Kepadiy Kal Tov abyéva, Kal thy dye
xpuw TO abrG Edv Narai, cixvovly, 3} y~reualv, H wadauge
Evyxpiew 88 nal rd xeipe dro rav dpev, Kal ro wide dd
tav BovBdvev. rooide pévror Kal ri Kiotw raTauovely,
xal &s velpov mdxyouay, Kab ds oljpwv dbav Kduvouoay,
drap Kat ri Sppiryre tev Xuan dxBoperny xoduibea yap
ta odpa. iv 88 pétwv d tpduos Ey, xal xivdvvos oracpod,
wal cixvovi els ti Kepadiy in’ dvayens xypterOar OMyn
88 iro 4 xpiows iy 82 nat Preypaciae ray droxovéplov
foot, nal mpijores Kal pidcat, nad meprrdores Tob Sépparos,
i xothoy yiyynrat, elow elpvopévov rod trroxovbpiov, gu-


+X have adopted Sxroie in- and introducing words, to make his
stead of dexpiows, as suggested by author uso the language which the
Petit. editor fancies he ought to have used.


? Ermerins has entirely remodel- 1 have adopted only a few of his
Jed this passage—altering, ejecting, changes,


OZEQN TLA@QN, BIBA. A’. M5


Bpéyara Kal erumdrdopara, bxdca por ev ppevirixoioe
MreKrae.

Liain femora yptecbas jv dard ppeviriBos fwor, ebrod-
Bérepoy 82 Hy dpyiOev Hj votaos eiaBddry. gv 82 yrdooa
Bainter Kal dynos év toict troyov8plowt onpalyy, ix
dvdryens TH out yxptecBar’ eri 88 mpds Te pipet rod
xpivou KevwOijcerae that aicbijreat, tddda 8 ebweréorepov
Pion, TH Kopuph Tis Kepadiis mporhddrew' dumov yap 7H
Suvdue ro evredbev Kevoov.

“‘Ayew te ral picas avo re Kal Kdrwo. voto yap
cuvayayov AijBapyos Kab dv Thaw KoiAlnae Kal ev rq Bhp
oxivet apyin Kai vobin nal dxruyly Stamvevorixiv 8e
xlynows 482 eypipyoposs. Biaxplew odv amipyavov xrapov
tplBovra Edy ywédere nal virpp: dywyov ré bore plidov
ductor Eby rouréorct Kab reppivOou pnrivns pépos Er xal
ruply mpokrnrixh puctwy, 3} mivapoias Bepyoice éplas, pn-
xbot marawis pdnect, } oroyyij Edy Bare, M6 Tecarrov, H
Splyavor, § ohn, 4 fur Konrax- dyoe 8 dy dboas, #8
éxéica mpd rév curlwv miveras, tdarep Kal dréypa Kal yori
év rotaw évréporcs Kal oroudym dyer, Doowmov ev pede


epiiry dpdir, Blerayvor 73 Kpnrucdy, éplyavor Bpiuta
pay, drywya 82 dBlavrov, dypwotiy tabe wévror Kal puotwv
xal obpwv xarappyxrixd.

“Hy 82 rpépos yepav xal repadis &, xaotdpwov memi-
orev Spayuiis drxis frou Edy wedexpryrou xudBors tpucl é¢
fudpas mreivas: fv 82 ph) mirg 1686, érrpeewy Eoubbons
Praiov,? {0a miyavoy eveticOy xudBors tpuat, 7d 5¢ Suddov


? The reading in moet of the able meaning, with little violence to.
MSS., fereviiy Evppopiic Edy Arai, the text. Wigan suggests Evypipor
has evidently no meaning. Petit or Edugepov éyeiy. Ermerins creates
mentions, that on the margin of a « reading to sult his own fancy—
certain good MS, he found ic ie- ke réy Ejppepov. Such a change
gevliy, which certainly gives a pass- appears to me utterly inadmissible

L


146 NEPT GEPATIEIAS


& 7d wdra Evrepov eyyéew, wai ré5e € whebvas jpépas.
pera 88 ro éx rouréou Eiudopov, (dicas yap aya avo re
kat xére’ pereberéposs 88 wai odpa nal xompiov') jy by
aroley eit 7b wy Seabéor Hen, drpowa #82 xparazd A. veOpa
ybyrerat wal ras Eas & 7d Ceppiv wal Enpiv ddrowt xad
Tas katactdcwas tev voUowy tphre. dpictov 52 wal és
ras pivas éupuciy Kal yap xab ride mvevpdrev KaTappne-
Tixdv wrappoiat” Kal dxotéy Ts Kiores drpwryav otjpwy xal ply
patns mpjooe 88 Bépuy mpoonvet rade rHde Kal Ta GK
Tiv Trappixiw xpécoor, memrépeos, E\AeBopov, etpovilov,
ebopBlou, séBe-ndp. és chy mpéarqr 482) rundenn Gite
drnvia al tapaxtixd xeparijs te al aicOijctos, de mpora-
ryoryiis 62 7b Kacrépiov adealver xehadjor 52 nal Ddws
Evudopov, Stemep ta vetipa maven évOévde mepidierar’ you=
cov Bi vetipwr xaatéproy inripiov. ddd Evpylorye rdb_
Tov yeypapupevov twit Tiss, ox dyaps. iy yap pry, w)
atrixa pev xepadiv Evupérpws tapdtat, & paxpov 6¢ tiv
Bépyny ébdypar.

"Typivae thy piva mpodijor dopats Sprpelass pev es
alcOnow, és Sivapty 82 Beppais: dxotov airs td Kacrépioy,
4 Gace, Ai spshcer, 4 Oluon adap, A Bid Seuleers
Bei.

Aptpéwv dappaxwv xptoves Kata roy Toby Kal youvarow.
Dry S& gorw ddealvovsa Kal Sdevovca éx mpocayaryijs.
dpdoty yap xptos AnBapyiKotar és Oadyrew Kal eypryyopouv.
7a mpiira piv dv wal xviby paorifew ta oxédea. mpocl-
Youces nde sich, ote es, wredady. p2v Siapebes, Shomerba
Bakropide Kad wbvov wEiot. perplus 82 kellie +e eal
mapoSlexet, Kal Oeppacinv mpoxadéerat. iv 5é ext padrov
a being both violent and intro- have tried my skill in emending


ducing meaning not suitable to this passage—with what success,
the place, Is will be seen that I judicent eruditi.


OZEQN TAOQN, BIBA. A’. M7


Bedxjons rade ror ylyverGas, AnprijariBos 48 edpopBlov loa
Eby Airai prevelvp yplav. dpicrov cal oxdddys dpis
Aewrotos serplBar yp 82 dropdbarra tay wedbor'rd
Ambder (KBqeror yhp wa Bpyad Edn Neral Hv ph apne
widbes), } xumpivy, haprevaive, h ovcvevig. iv 68 eri rouré-
ovow Ext Bald wipia Ton, otevor ypih.xov Sypiov tov Beet
sphparta ows ton pty Fuppltavra, riBévace Spend 52
vd éximhacpa Kal cnéws épvbyjpara evretfov, deéws 88
oldadéa Biuevov' ei xivbuvos 88 Gducrawdaws Kal tpwpdrov,
Eweydws eralpew 70 érimhacpa, raBopéovra prj t+ Tovréov
FonBin.. réde pty Sv & 92 pulle wal vexpiibes atréou, at
és mdvra Kaipov, wri Thee éoBodfor Trav wapébvopav.
"Hy &8 dvadépn pév in Thy alcOnow, Bdpos pév re emt
is xepadi, nad Iyos, } BouBos ky, nab Bid 100 ovbuaros
Gyew pdeypa, pactiyny ta mphra és pdonow didovra, os
Euveyes dromriov Srevra 8 aides aaradi8os dypins, Koxxou
Tob ris Kyidou, mavrov bt wadvora otviprios, Sre re Eivnbes,
drap 988 dre tay GXAwv paddov 7Hde Preypdrwv dryarybv"
xiv wey xaramly vis éxdy, inavov pey ra dv 7h ctopdyy
Adoae’ Suvardv 52 Kal bypivae yaorépa Kal picas dyayetv
kat ydp pol kore de Euvrvying tdbe EvvéBy, xatamidvros rob
drOpsrrov xara. opiouny viv dur dyad} 8 BSéexados i
mrelpy’ xpi 88 Kal adrov reipiy’ «bNa Bln yap dzrerply.
Xpiy Be wal riy Kepariy werd viv xoupiy tiv &y xpp, iy
1 pbpa He dvb, Eopedy ds Biarvory- ark 380 bs apd
rear Bpipéar xplaw, rob Bid rhs Anuvfarribes, 4 ABépeny,s 4
Caryiny, t civame iypav e& datos Eiv dpte SemdG és tpby-
4In the text of all the MSS.we ‘con in voce), Ermerina expunges it


rénd bédp, which is evidently a altogether; and perhaps he docs
monstrosity, Upon the whole, I rights for Anuwijoric nnd d2dpeq


think it most probable that the were the same, or nearly the same,
Adarce is meant (see Ed. Gr. Lexi- thing.


L2


148 TEPI OEPATIEIAS


voy éyypicavra tumdacew ri nepadiy pudd£avra 82 és
pny pinv edeaipin omdyyours Oeppotat mupeiy.

Oix dvaedes 8 Kal rover, 15 wavrev per, } Trav ye
Trelorav Kal raiplov rév é& Tv vodoov Nedupevon. Tis be
vebeins pevotons, edre nal almpns xpéos, al tplyros, ab
mdons mpoanvods Kuvijatos.


Kep. 7. Mapacpoi Gepareia.


Towde pévror xiv papacpos &n, aprryey Oaocoy lévra et
Rourpa xal ivyjows. papacpyod pévroe Kal yada inripiov,
nal Operas, al arefvar Kab bypivat yaorépa, Kal Kiorw
mpnivar drap 758 xaréyous twird ra Evpdépovra. duoln
yap Kal 4 with tavbe ray voicwy % ibn. Kaorépiov 82 Tov-
Téowt Katpuarepov Te Kal eduevérrepoy ueiv Te Kal yploa-
oOat Kat és 7 Evrepov evetvar. Thar Se yuvaskt dxoia Tou-
réowt Iecha mdbca dad borépns rylyverat, ev Totot yuvas-
xeloos NedéFerat.


Keg. 8. Gepameia "ArorAnkins.


* #1 ArromAnEln loxup) wev ein, dravra yap tace
vexpibees, tv xal 6 vourkwv ynpacas 7}, Tota’ rep Edvnbes To
mdBos. ob yap wepvylyvovra TH te weyébet tod xaKod xad
7h Tis Hrauxins Evpdopp. Seas 58 texpaptéa ta peyébea,
mpicbev yor rdrexra. iy Se venvins, kal dobevips i) dro~
arntin wédy, loa pev ob pniéiov, mephoba Se dv.
ladpporov pev dv inripiov, ds peyddp wabet péya BoriOnpa,
prcBorouln, Av pu} tus & dyaptwdjy tp rod mAjBeos' Sve~


1 Although some words are evi- is singular that there is no lacuna
dently wanting at the beginning, it in any of the British MSS.


OZEQN IAGQN, BIBA. A’. 149


réxpaprov 88 7d pérpov. tiv Te ‘yap opp whéov ddérys,
rpocaréxvtas tov dvOparoy. és yap 7d Gv rovréowt Kat
78: opaKpie ales Sirkordbrerrov) wah. 4 db re Calis 08
erifieoy nad ris cpobie ebr* Yy-re pisiov rife. alelys, obBiy
peya Guncas Bid peyddou dxeos Ere yap 4 alrin wlaver
xpéocov 88 és 7d Bracco duapravev. iy yap nai boxéy
pev évdéew, ypnoral 5& reves tropdores yiyvowro, adlis
éravarduvev tiv GdéBa. Tauver 8 ri ev 7G Kolhp rod
Syeiives, etipoos opp Be ev vB Nau EvvrenpalpecOas 82 dv
7H cuixpp aromdrnkly Kal rd mapera pépea, el ex" dpratepa,
Hh defied, 4) mdpecns. drs yap tév bympav, dy bros ebreiv,
Tiv dpalpeowy xpi) moder, apes pap ak Ali atpon xp
nal 4 mapoxérevors dd trav owapév.

pavepis mpopdavos drémdneroe ybyvwvrat, bbe yph cvAXo-
pikeabar dup rips dparpéoros: iy 88 dard whepyiis, ) xara~
Hopiis, 1) meéowos Eup}, od xp} dvahddrxcOau.? pereferé-
povae Se ré5e podvov ely dxeow 82 Cwiy tpxecev.

“Hy 8¢ pip bonéy répvew préBa, Yofios woddjjs nai vdpens
Kal docta So ios, dyispiryodans rw EeCporovs incarhbtun de
rivwow Tob TIVES Ta év ToIe évrépouee (Ta TONAR yap


tm’ dbndaylns nal olvopdruyins apardiyyes ylyvovrat), Kab
els thy dyricracw Tév Tiyv Kepadiy dppeyovtoy yuma
fore 8 7h dopa Spi, nal preypdrwy Kat ods dyaxy,
5 pi) virpar Sur pobvor, EXNA wad: ebdbpBiey, Bcor: ais
tpioBorov, és rode EtvnBes mdnOos rob KAvcpaTos, Kai
KohonuvOidos ro évrds, 4) xevrauplou Tis buns dpeyrjuaros
els Qatoy, } bbap. dproroy & xdvcpa Kal rd Towvde Tod


? The text is not quite satisfac- animal heat which imparts life to
tory; but we cannot venture to food introduced into the system.
adopt the bold alteration Introduced Wigan suggests the necessity of
by Ermering: eal adlq rie Gwile ob before xpr}, and Ermerins accord-
eai rot oxiveog rpopy) iéy. The ingly adopts it,
meaning seems to be, that it is the


150 EPI OFPATIEIAD

pedatos 7G Evvipbes wiyyavov Eby 7 Arai EynOev, wal rep-
plvOov rob Sévipeos Tis pytivns, nal ddéy dvtl vitpov, xad
deowmrov Ayjparas.

Kai iv &e rave puxpiv dvéypyrae 6 dvOpwros, th xeved-
Mevos Toict wuperoiat, 1) alabavépevos ard tijs avaroBynolns,
4 evorukin yévorro, fy Bhws 7d xpdowmov elanpov J, edeharey
xp» Expevar, 38° dpiyyew ebrodudrepov. xparivavra av
peoryy) viv Sivapuv rijs iephs rol KaBaprnpiov biddvae vijo~
tei, wddoTa pay To Tay THs Mocs ef be Kadupa %) Bivapes
Eon, & 70 Fuuov adv pedexprit@. Kai xivéew abrov éy bidpe
drOlvra. dvaxNirp, drptua. piv alapoirrav. rin pepierey,
Siavawaderrai8d: Fovejbe Bek’ 73. deowar-iacy silk amie xe
ebphros'braddoy, Biyaabas €2'82 i, CBaxp: 3) juedlapyron tein
micnew, dcov xudbovs Stor iy Se wal vavrly pev Erp drt
nfo nabiipaent; piderorpemesy, 4 ve drraawite dypivepant
See te Lairrupov, nal 6 trav preyperav Eueros viv abrinv Tis
votcou tiyet. aiaBijaws 82, xal xepadijs, xat velpwy xaap-
wijpiov 4 lep} 7a ddpyaxov. dul uev dy Kevdowos tay~
tolng, ths ev dpyjot, Gus.

%ONav 88 yp vv drOpwrror. éploues ebilEavra. xarmoviiy
de eruaavlany Sh panicles Th mihi Rela teahear pad
Fina dvrecci -oopspepiypbvowes. Epuorov. Bd. wnpad: puree
évrijxen &5 mdyos tév ddeibdrov ....... more de xpi)
Burareortpny rive: dumdecery 82. nab. virpou al, menépeos.
Sore 3 derrd cyotora xonotoy wkya Bd és, Straps nie
maplrrev eal 73 xacrépiov- xal Ddeiuua, Fou rive Miral raw
elpnpévey, roddbv 82 Suvarcrepov wal memlanew Edv pede
Roig. 73 88 wribos Scboay xl nbapyewdw lopey’ Eurrex-
palperBat 8 Kal tiv Huxtny xal Thy yvepqv Tod vooéovTos,
el meiv &¢ wrebvas huépas Erotwos. tote 62 Kal ypiopara
Bpbsathd wih rb Rus, aida plorrépk ve kak Tancar eerie nore


yap Tepippée es TO THY oTpwpaTwr aloxos dydpiToY yap


OZEQN TA@QN, BIBA. A’. 161


Tolet Kdpvover 7d Totvbe, Ka mpociteras rp oxijvei, & re
ta Euvraxivra iad re rijs ddéns dveréOn4 adda Kal Td
Aibwy abrir dymiorév, srepippéee pip 4 reyEs. Ody B8
Sreipdren dv. Sichon por Mdeerar Flv airlowes 8 xaarb-
pray, prion reppivBov 106 BérBpeos, ebopBiov, Anunforribos,
trupibpov loa werépwos, xarSdens & jus’ Eby virpy
Abprrig tpemddauv, xypot éxdcov & ateracw bypiy.
morrav 82 rouréwy pappaxly rowidkwtépy Kal mdéor Kal
Bip Medextal’ eru@ddopara thot eKAnplyor Kal That ev-
rdcect tov peptay embertov Irn Sé, Alvou oméppa, THs,
ddrdurov KplOwov, pds, Pratov Ya mipyavov i dnBov
eiaOn, ddOains pita Komeica Kal ev wedixpiite AnOeica,
ds renpoediys yevicOar otw 88 evapéa xal mpoonvéa TH
Evordon. iy wey dy darupos Eeooe bri, f pixpov exeruperat-
woot, rdde xpi) mpijocev obx ddeyitovra ris Bépuns.

*Hy 88 auperol dkfes gwar eat 4 An vodcos opcxporépy
révbe dalvyras, nat és tov KivSuvov olde Evverelyoot, mpas
rotebe xph thy Slacray nal thy EXAny Oecpamelay dppbtea Bas,
rpopjal re dv reNéms Nerrfjat, ebméwros xpcecBar' Kal TH
eixaipin mpocerréoy viv waddov’ Kal rods mapokvapods
troorédnea bat ey macav inrpelyy, xal 75 Eipmav tote wupe-
Toict mpookteobat xpy}.

“Hy 8 xpdcw mporjxy xpovp Kal riv rebadiy év airiy
lox, otxiny xpij é& 7d ivlov mpooBddrovta, aipaooey
dpeBéws. kal ydp preBoropins dvivnce paXdov, ral tas
Buvdwias ove apaipées. mporépn 52 peony Ta&v mporha~
réwv xoudh T10écOw & dvricracw ris ev 7G ivi.

Tlaperi6n wor’ xal rardrocts, iprep pobvn drom)ajx-


4 have ventured to substitute troduces very many alterations into
dxdpuroy for dxpnorov, and eal the text.

for si. Ermerins changes dxpqerov * The text is very unsatisfactory.
into eéxpnoroy, and otherwise in~


152 EPI OEPANEIAS


rota ddxap cori cwornpins, els re Thy Tis Tpodijs Kardmoow
nal é& tiv tév dappdxwv mdpodov. ob yap &rpodins cal
Aryod ivvvos podvor, GAA Kal Snyds, xal Svomvoins, Kat
mvikws. xiv yap wad eyyén ves els tO or6pa bypov aeriov,
3 Thy dprnplyv inroppée, obre téw raptoO ular Evparemroy-
tov és tov wopov Tav citi@y, odre THS exuporrribos éve-
Lovdans & iv éwurijs Bpnv, irs eriOnua ris dprnplns
midune. xpi) dv pedixpnrov 4 yvrdy éyxéavra puotidy
Haxp§ imepaipovra imép rijs dprnpins és tov otépaxor
éyxéev. tobe yap Ere és xatdmocw trovpyéer et 8 6
vortay & BreOpovitp feravey, & 88. adyin civ 1p evamveg
mipyrinta, tov te atyéva Kai tov dvOepedva Bepudopace
xplew te xai muptiy. patadmovos Sé Kai aiSpues dxicor
cixiny és tov dvBepediva mpocBdddover & eiptryta tod
croudxov. ov yap Siartdowws xpéws és EvOeaw Tis Tpodis,
G4 Evprrdows & Katrdroow. mpocbuuacrédret 8 ouebn,
xiv xatarivey Ody, erlaxe Ti dmoatdat Te Kal dvbodxi
eraviévas 88 xp) és why mepioroMy Tis xaramécuor wpds
88 tovréoce tiv aprnplyy mAnpot és xivévvoy émonvikios.
GAN v8 ci EvOa nai Erba rod Spdyxou Ocins dpryer pies
yap Kat velpa, Kai révovres, xal pdréPes emimpoobev tact
abréov.

Kioris 8 xal 7d yadapov dpxod Grote pwév és Exxpiory
mapetrat, al éore tov Tepito del Evrepa® wAsjpea, KUaTIS
8é Kal és dyov péyrtov deiperar, dddore be els xdbeEw
airéwy, Siappéee yap Ta mepirra chs St dxriywv. Oa dy &
Bey rip Kiotiv To KaOeriipe Spydvy otk ettodwov xpéec bar


© The common reading, idvra, is tor myself that my amendment is
evidently inadmissible; and al- both natural and obvious when
though Ermerins changes it into suggested. Seo further towards the
iévrwy, I cannot see that even then — end of the chapter, where this term
the text is much improved. I fiat- occurs.


OZEQN ILAGON, BIBA, A’ 153


rlvbuvos yap chanedive rh xiore, 82 omacpiy Bibdvac
7 dvflpamy. inrowraitew 82 wi) TOrAG awraMed tod wrod
xpiacov' xiv exxorpabi 75 Errepov, mpocerévar Eiv eral
wxactépioy, edmls 82 potvy ai wdvtov duod rév mapéreov,
wal Wig -riov pepkav, 4 el Baroy evikgass: 4 82 xpdaros
abréns dv roiat xpoviowe elpijceras,


Keg. €. Ocpareia rapoEvepod Em)yrrixév.


The. exoop fing ddeOpln dvs} mpuorlory ‘wardmreats, Hr
OFdws elaBddry 4 vodcos. Exrewe ydp nore eal Audpy perf.
ovbovaddees 88 Kai of év riot mepiddoree mapokvopol. Sid
rade pev dv nal dv role dféce xatayéyparrae 7 erdapiy
dy 82 és perérny pay ijxp rod Kaxod dvOpamos, % 88 vodcos
dmplE cudica Exnrat, ob xpovin podvoy ryiyverat, ddrad
ereterdpoue alovin.. jv qrip tmepBdrry why dephy ais
Adcxlns, Eorrnpi re Kal EoraroOrfanet

‘Oxéea pay dv ds xpovbg deriv biriipia ev relee ypovloat
Aedékerae’ dxdoa be & 7d rdxos rod ddOpov mpyeréa,
tavbe Ta TAedVa piv ext Tolot dmromAnKTiKOIoL AéheKTAt,
PreBoropln, Kiopara, xplores, ovxtn. Tdde yap és dvé-
repow Swvardérara. dxdoa & Wva xatarrmavos dxea, tade
viv dpdow. mradiourr pév cov olor éx BrapCopiis, 4) de oe-
tos loxyuphis, Firnbes 13 adds, Eyeros, 4 cvrlan, } pMeywar
Tos, 3) dXAov xupod Twos dvyiarév. rida de iplvw pip
devbivra vavriny épebiter drap Kat 7d tpwov ode &ypnatov
els viv rév mapicOulov xplow. Evpretteev 88 rh Naydva.
mpnéws ert yaordpa éxxpeues mpoBdddrovra Td masdioy.
robe yap To oxfwa mpds twerov prjicto iv be Kal omarae
4 Siastpédnyras thy Kérw yvibov, i Tw xeipe xal Ta oxédea
plarryrat, xal Ejpras reralvnral oi dnp, Ta yuia yyhadly Edy
Aéral padidooay, amibive re ris bus ta Sudatpopar


154 EPI OFPANEIAD


mpnios 8¢ Biaxparéey, ds pi) Siarrpépytas ra ila. rd
Apuypa rrupiiv } mwapoiee épiows 7) madawior tpiyerr Sua
axplewy ve viv Spy pédere Ebv aryavings daly, ) Eby viepy,
4) pyrivy dypii Eby rotade, nai Suobeiv rpnéws Sow ris Epys.
rdde yap puatwv dyoyd diaas 58 dueblover emi riod. Tis
vovcov aides.” jy 5é xatamivey Sivwrra, Sddvas robde
tod pappdxou' xapSapdpov pwépos Ev, xadxob Kep. d. Tabe
Edy pedixpyre woricnev. i) yap eEjpecay Eby toiss & 7p
eropeyy witwves, H taqhsdy diyaonip © Gporerond
Sxdevypa wal ride rod KapSapdpav, xal cwijrwos, kal dood
mov ths Kops loa, tpidos ris pitns pépos &, Eby virpou
Semraciy, memépios és tpirov, wéduts gupdcavra uot ta
wadvra, baorjcavra tiv yévuv & To orbya éyyéev, drap
Kai te mpocwrépw tay rapicOulav, ews xatamloey. rdde
piv dv madior rtoios 8 veyvinor wal rade Eiudopa.
ardp Kal ddppaxa Suvaterepa és Ewerov aiptecBat, vap-
xicoou BokBovrs, ows Kal icowrov toa, nal xadxod
wai merépios, wolpns tév mporépwr és fyucv, ody pédere
dupdoavra biddvae réde pev dy és dvéyepow tod mrapokve~
pod ra 88 és Adow Tod voorjwaros ev Toles xpoviows
ereerat,


Kep. s'. Ocpareia Terdvov.


Niv para xp) Kolrny paraxiy, ebadéa, reinv, mpornvéa,
Ocppiv Eupevar. darnvéia yap Kal cxdnpd nal rerawdpeva
Ta veipa ind Tis vobcou yiyverat. atdp xal Td épya wav
xappartov xal tpnyd repirératat, ra mpdcbev ebrpoxya
Prkhapa pays toiae dpOarpoiar errpver, dpOarpol be
drevies, évdebivnuévor, drap xat ta dpOpa EvvdeSerar ob
xivetpeva rh That. éarw Se xai d olkos édecevds, xyv Bépeos
Dy HA pepe Bparav, # eedicwos. &s cvyxomhy yap } voooos


OZEQN NAGQN, BIBA. A’. 155


pérre, xpi) 82 ynbe es ra Edda Ta peydda dixea péNrew
ob Wap Kaspos dpBodis. elre dy bia yoke dvev pavepiis
mpopdaws yévoro réraves, elre ext tpipate, etre dr’ dpm
Brcicet yuvaixds, PAEBa thy ex” dyxdve tdpvecr. spown-
Cevipevoy Kal viv mleow roi Bpaxlovos ev rH emidéat, ds &
ide vip cmacpiiy mpoxdsjores: nad dodmak dpaspéery ebpé-
Tpas, pi) expe NeewoOuping Kab mepeydEvos. nd’ ex’ dow
tins Ey Yruxpiv wat Enpov Mépds. Sibdvar dy peOuxpijrou
creer derrreoripou, al wrisdanf uno Gir pdnerss rie
ryap nal rapicOploics es &xOXeuy atroverrara, Kal cropdyy
és xardroow eta Kal pijicra, Kad és padOakw Koidins
padaxdrara, xa é bivayw byvatdrara’ 7d bt Edpray
oxijvos éplowss xarerixOw SeBeupévoire édaigs yreveivo, f
rporivey, ev ols i) MBavaris, 4 xbvuta, f dprepicly evipyn-
ta. wal ta mdvra Oeppad és Sivapiv wal & Bik sore
xpleww 88 7G Sed vis Anpwrjoribos, xat ebpopBiov, kai virpov,
xal rupéOpou ddelppare mpocSadrew 8 toiade Tot KagTo-
plow cvyvivy eb 8 wal rods révovras EvAAapPdvew roloe
Uplate, wad xpletr ead rikwap! obs ealdvepedva, -rdBe yap
Hadtota méoyes te Serva nad relver. srupiiy 88 Kodo
Geppdcpacs révovras Kal RicTi, papalrors Exouce Kbéyypov
rreparypérny, ij xborece Body edatov Beppod tyumrnpéar, os
els wAdros émixdgvrae ray mrupteopévav yoplov. éBujoard
kore dvdryen mupiicar Kebadiy, obk dopares nev alaBijoers,
velpoier 88 dyabér, -réake pay spip sulyrns ex” dvadoph
drpudv mlumdnor, dvinor 8 Ta veipa.? xp obv TH pom
‘The common reading, riive, “we are on the stretch.” Similar
examples occur in Latin; as, “ pro
ra avertit.” Virg. Zin. 1.104.

talre holds rsivn tobe an example  *I havo adopted the conjectural
of an active verb taken ina passive arrangement of the words intro-


signification (ed. Wigan). Wewould duced by Ermerins.
render it by tenduntur,


156 TIEPI OEPAMEIAS


re rhs muplns dx dagareardry xpleaBas, xal thy ph od-
Spa Bapuotup psi GAA Try pev sorw raw 3d ey
xboteat davicov dy Sexh@ doyyely exyenBiv, } Brg Newrol
by np wareml. ehyypes ip nal Now exippa chassis ple,
drpadea 82 nad Bapiodua. rpdros 88 upins brorerdobae
bef rots tévoucs inrriows Ta mupidpara dype Ths Kopudiis:
mpocwrépw &é érl rs Bpéypa ut) mpoSalver. réd_e yap ro
xewploy dardons pev ris alabijouws dots xowdy Kal dd toide
mraaa ai ddécres dpeding te Kal Brdyrios jy 82 éxemddo-
cay 5p tods Tévovras, vépGev Eotw roi iviov.® dvwrépw
yap ci eins, Thy Kepadiy mMujces dtpay ToD vou orip-
patos Kal Tis THAews' él 88 Toler eriemrAdo pace dyabby
auxin és 7d ivloy ris pdxwos éxarépwbers Ecrw Se ped
TOMA) Tis PAroyos’ dbuvynpdy yap Kal oracpabes Taw yer
Rev ris cine } dupifracrs. xp dv é& Snpdv Edxew
kal padBaxie wadrov, 4 BOpdov ev ddbyp xpsry.. be yap
dy cou xuptwbein 7d ywpiov dmoves, dep emitdpyew xpi.
réxpap 8 cor Tis aindtvos ris cupperpins %) Sivapus yuyre=
c6e. réde wey dv tay dvev Edxéwv rerdvev Ta dixea.

“Hy 8&8 ém tpdpare orracpos yévntas, dMeOpiov pev Kab
Svetrmiorov' apie 88 yxprj perekérepol te yap Kal de
qosdinbe awOncavs. sepa Ge epoirh Oda epelielae
Arxea iijcOat, réykt Oepparvdvtay, daca por dédexrat, Kab
mruply Kal érumddcpact, papydxoisl re dxdoa jmidleos Bep~
paves re xal Today retker Tiov. Enpd yap eri rerdve ra
frxca. ote dv MBavorod rijs wavvns, Kal modlou ris
xopns, al pyrivns dad repalvOou Kai mlrvos tav bevdptwov,
nat &dOalns pl&s, Kal myydvou Kai Kovitns ris Bordyns.
zdbe xpi) cupploye Tots Crimdopact, TA wey THKovTa, TA
82 dumdcoovra, ra 8e Eiv edhaly mpodeaivovra: ey pede


2 The common reading, Sp%ev by the joint labours of Wigan and
forw +d iviov, is altered as above Ermerins,


OZEQN HAGQN, BIBA. A’. 157


xpire 88 tiv ddOainy Kexopperny mpoeeiy’ érumdocey be
3G fkxel cal Tol kacroplo 6d apsep) BY § Erfler Gdky By
7B cejvel, Bre al rd biyes 7h dard rbay edxteiy wacoriOen,
eyyplav 52 ras pivas 76 Kacropiy Edv xpoxivw Mma’ Gdud
wai memicnew Tovbe Evveyéws dxdcov Geis tpidBodov’ iv
88 apis ré8e dravbijoy 3 oréuaxos, peowyd arplov pikys
SBovae ris Sdeijs +d Ioov 7G xacroplep, h cuipyys, ToD cir-
giov Hyuov. Gravra 88 Fly peuxpyry memiocxey, ef 88
etrropin dod tod athpiov tod dard Tijs Kupijvns ‘yévovro,
reve sph shore dpOp evesAlEarri, Sxtooy bpbfou jkyeles;
waramuiy B:évas Apiorrey dp bbe; dx vyy tapings NEB 06
maparrdkas Bpuuds yp nal tiv dpuyiy demnvis, xdéicoB pos
tov. Hy 82 wy Sdvytac Gbe Kata iv, pekuxpiTy Mearra
Sidivat. dmdvrev yap tay xataroréy buvareirepoy, dxdca
mépuce ddealvey te wal bypaiverv, xal dvévae ris Tdows,
xat partdocey vedpa. fv 88 pndiy xararivect, és Ti
pny eyxéew Flv dai, tod kacropiov. rede Kal yplew
ahy Bonu. Biv abwrat fy tdere nGBe nad chy ‘eberay reyyesy
re xal xpietv és mayos Elv xnpG ri}kavra. jy 5¢ nal pias xat
wémpiov dyer Katpos }, Tis iepijs 700 xaBaprnplov ddxjs<
bo Flv peruxpriry kad ral dvtras. Fv ydp 7 dyer
Be Ere wal rd Errepov eal ri ebro Koclqy eervpif.
rouxldov yap Kal Gepuov ddppaxoy % iepi}.


Keg. €. Oepameia Suvayyns.


Aoal cuvdyyns tacs tides. % pev odv Oeppacin Kab weyddy
apices rOv ‘maptaOuler, eal Boyndes Ser drdp eal F
qdeca, xal 6 yapyapemv, xal rdvra ta ride épea es Syxov
delperas: 4 82 Erépn Edparrwals éote rovréwy 388 & 7d bow
mlects, Ev deyxdvn pétovs, ds Soxéev Thy pdeypacinv elow


158 MEPL OEPAMEIAD


péads ris Kpadins epnpeioBas. ride xpi) wadora doxias
apiyyav ride yap Kal dxéiws Ovrjoxover.

“Hy péy dv dard xpaumddns Kab oivopduyins two, tro-
Krifav abrijpap. GA Kal biooois wiopacr, 7h yey
funibes, as. dyer compabea’ 7p 80 be drooracbal 1s Tov
Xuma ard rov wapicOplev te Kal Oapnos. Fotar dv,
DO pire Axporearépy, 2.4 + wee? ab eerraniplov sa
teowrov Npijpata. tdde yap ral preyudtov dyaryd. xiv
88 dard Newrijs Siairns wor, tduvery GeBa Thy er’ aryxdive,
Héfova 82 rhv rophy oxdtery, Seas portydsv 788 dOpdov péy
roalua. Se yap 6 péos ixavds mev ds Seuora Cepuaatny
mpnivas, Suvaros 8€ ayyovnv dicate Kal mdvra pedoat.
ob« aryevves 82 nal péxpe evroBvpins dyer, wi) pévTor Aew~
robupiev. peretérepor yap Eiv th wAnyh ebéBavov emi rH
Aecrorpuxip. « «<i Secpoion odiyyovres inép apupa
kai yotvara: dpictoy 88 Kai imip rapwods é miyeas wad
tnrép miyeas és Bpaxlovar tv 88 xatamlver prjiatov j, eha-
Tiprov Sidovas Ev peduxpijrm nal oppd yddaxros, xbcoy dv
xabijpas ixavov % tov dvOparrov. édarijpiov 82 Toiade Taw
draw ealagrnpiav epéacor Ebppopoy 82 xa rvéespov wad
vary. twde yap dudw tas xodlas xaBalper eri 82 roioe
dw pi dvdi8wor ai mprores, mpos Tov odpavov dvaxddoayra
ay phdocay rduvier te dviadrég dkbbas sil iebpbe wal
Today pup 7) alua, Tov EAXay pAdrov dv dvnoe. réyEtes
éni roics Greypalvouor, Ta mphra péy oripoveat, Snas és
marippoav tmow ai trav tpi 7 dv mevapd Ev oicire,
Sevdévra olve Kal drelhare Tq ard Tis Chains THs Gudaxos.
dap xai ra érumhicpara txeha 7H Téykt, holvimes & olv
BeBevpévor; Aelou ‘fv poBloics merdroiet, dx 88 ydloypov


‘Although some words certainly — Incuna in elther place, in any of our
appear to be wanting here and a British MSS.
short distance below, there is no


OZEQN TA@QN, BIBA. A’. 159


re Kal padaxdy Ep 70 erithacpwa, Kal ddyrov term, f Mvov
omréppa, kal pert, nad Exaov, &s thy amdvrev wig. fy 58
és winow tpérnrat, Toit Ceppoicr xpéecbas, olaep Kad
dal vis érépns curdnens. tikes Sv Sora 1) Bdupror, nak
pavva, kai pyrivy ra ryet& Kal modlou Kdun eunacctcbor,
xai rrupin Sepuh omdyyours Sdgyns Tot Kaprod Kal boow-
mou &rijpart. é& 88 eurinew Svvarwrarov, weduibav #
xwvéy Kémpov mpocerimdacey Newriy dard Kpnaépys Sia-
micpara 8%, wedixpyrov Ebv paxiis th boodvmov Apjpare, 3
‘Bedaws a suckle, A Shah wieerere. Supls hdl orban
may pixpe ris Erw papvyyos, droice mév,—xvrp pdpow,
poy bbare NeavOdvrwav, h howler Nrijpare hapyanows
88 rf Sub rv popev, i} Kal 7) Bycacg, Kal xuAG pods, Kal TH
bid tev yerdivav. fy 82 Erxea eoxdpwv iwor, duaxdb-
cpata rd8e Kal dvaxoyyudopol, becdrov deviate tv
pOuKpire, t cixey trav mover év Hate wal ert roicbe
Spuon. BeBe de pedarprhep) 9) ried: QB, 4 vo


you.

"Emi 8 rijs perd Evparractos cuvdyyns, bowler to
diyev wdvra, kal bypa, nal Oéppyv, kal odpxa racay, as
éfoyxéy Ew 7d wav. trrwoav dv Beppal al réykies Eiv
amydve Kal avibe, éurarcopévou virpov" Kal erem\dopara
Eby rouréows ta mpdcber. dryabdy 52 xnpariy ody virpp
kad cuvirre TeBkvar és Beppwaclyy. Beppacty 8 % és rd ew
rd roudde iipras. arp #82 eLoyxées és rav aizyévar &yeos 84
mepurvevpovins pierac erascopetmevos Ew claw b& roice
ewayxinoias drOpiov Kaxév décor 52 im’ ebdaSins ris
Gri rips covdenens mvs viv dprnplyy Erayov é& dvarvoiyy,
ob jor Soxtover melpy 7d mpywa motbcacbay H Te yap
Ocppacin rijs Preyzacins wikwv ée rod Tpmparos ybyveras
nai mpoottpopéet tH mveyl, Kad Sijeaover jy be Kai dws
exhiyact révbe tov rivduvoy, ob Eurdyerat Tod Tpmparos Ta


160 HEPL GEPAMEIAS


xeirea. dupe yp xovbpeibea xa dEvudura. bs
* * * * * = * *
* * * * * * * * * *
*


* *
*


* * * *


Ked. n'. Scpareia rév xara tiv Keovida rabav.


Tév rabiov éxica dud viv xiovida ylyverat, 7a pév brro-
tdpvew xp), ENN ob rob mapedvros Myou 4 TéevBe yerpoup-
yin Ta 5é ds oka iijoOas. pnidios yap mviyer Kal Svarrvoly
Twa Touréwy wrelver. tordde pévrou eo, fy Kadtouey ora~
gudify re Kal eioyBa. Sudeo yap Ev Greywacty vad maxed
cat pixel Evviorarras, ds és tiv dptnpiny éxxpepéa yiyver-
Gar Yow pay mdiyet dm rhs Baws peop dxpov rob obpavod
6 xlav dvlcw 38} otapudyj. rhode yap loxvi pev i ard
rod obpavod Bday és 82 7d dxpov otpoyyt\y Kal mayeia,
fy dpvBjpars, 4 wedrbon vide nal oraguMy exledknoor
tynne 7d 7aBos. roiat dy xpi) dxéws dprryev. dxictos
op 8 dad wveps BNeb pos.

“Hy piv dv venviae of removbites oot, rdézvew tiv én”
ayndve PEBa, 78 dOpdov xevody uéfovs TH TouH. as yap
dx’ dyysuns dmréduce rijs mvuyos % toujbe ddalpecrs: Set 52
tnroxdite wdvowi mpnéi, Erevra 8 Spy Errore Kad
Gore, & 7 dv Exton te dvobev & perdotacw. mepiKe~
drfloway: Baikal Serjichaibhyyorrer. dxpoict ntteneeeiert
beeip oxpupd eal-yotvara. xa) tmepbev napriiy wal mityeay é
Bpaxlovas. et 8 re avlE ércarépyon, crxtny ext 7d iviov,
788 és tov apnea mpocBarrety, kab rouréav evrdvew Twa"
mpiecev te dmavra, dxdca por ev TH cuvdyyn éedexTat.
wires yop. dupotv SrSOpo tpémos EXAA nal. roles és 73
orbpa pappdxocr Toict atréoure xpterOae xal orinpece wad


OZEQN TA@QN, BIBA. A’. 161


parBasrnploes, eal ruply 7H tEwOev, nal exvmrdopact, nad &
7) arépa éyxplopace sept 88 iv Kiova ty thy otaguNiy
form oriupa, pods yuds, pédere } HBare MwOeica axarla,
tmoniaris, yi) Saply, h Anpvin, 4) Levers, 182 dupdnvow
i 8 Ekeadins Ep, xoppe al duvrov devbevra pdswv H drowt-
Koy dbeyrijpare, xat wrusdvns, i tpdyou xvdds" eri 58 rod
xlovos tora méov re rev ebrovearépav, Sut cutpyys Te Kab
xéotov, kal xvmépov. dvéxerat yap tavbe raw Spipéov &
weloov. iv 52 Eurrvoy 88e 6 yspos yévyrat, pereEeréporae 752
Ta ris drrepiims daria ébOdpn, ral és paxpoy pOivovres Tov
Sioy éredeirncay. révbe wévror Ta dxea ErépwOt Nedeferat.


Keg. @. Ocpareia tov xara rv Dapvyya
Aoyuxor maar.


IIij wev Evry wai rove mpos TadKa abe Ta dv ToIot Tra-
praBulowe inrpein, ai) 8¢ i8in, earl preywaaty xal dryyivn,
Kucpol, preBorouin, reyEves, erurdaares, Tuply, Sudder por,
oinin, mdvra Twbtd. xpioves 52 dappaxav Svvatwrépor


ob yap drpepéet Ta Edxea, ode doyapac ylyvovras émmonijs:
GAA xiv iywp dri tovréwy elow oraky, Seiota pey Edxod-
Tat Th pépn, chy dowsa yy devote 88 els To clow véwerat Kab
rreiver. trupt piv dv Kale 7d waBos dpwydv, GNX’ afb-
veroy 5d ov laOusv happaxoroe 8é rrupt txédowe xpecrOae
& re thy érloyeow ris veutjovs, drap 962 & rhv Trav éo~
xaptwv txmrwow. torre 58 orumrnply Edv pédurt, xpxis,
Baraveriov, Enpd,  Eiv pedixpirp. totes 88 adbrois Kat
euduoty nadrdpp, )mrihy, } kavd@ mayei nal eriernel, cs
tiv Orxéwv Ouyydve ra pdpwana.' dpirrov 8 Kal yad-

‘ Ermerins introduces most ex- any of them. I hare merely intro-


tensive alterations in this passage; duced # after Eqpd, which the sense
but I have not ventured to adopt absolutely requires.


M


162 EPI GEPATIEIAS


aires darth Eby xadpuin Nety Edv bE Fore 8 poipns burda-
cu tis xaduins, cal prov 4 pita Eiv ru typ. guddo~
cecbas 8 xp} ravbde ras emOas iypalva yap Ta
®dxca wal eri paddov véperar. xpi) dv wrep@ ta Enpad
xarandocew Ta 88 iypa iypérata wotéovra és TOY yapya-
petiva eye. ty 88 ai oydpas iin re dwodteovrat, Ta dé
Brcca épvOpd yoyrras, xivbuvos Tore pddota eracpod.
émEnpalverar yap as éréray ta Edxea, wal roics be Ta
veipa Everelveras. xpi) dv yddaxte Flv api ral yurg
wricdyns, t) Tp@yov, i) Mvov oréppari, i) THMos padBaooen
xat iypalvew. pereberéporce 88 xai 4 xiovig bce SpoOn pé-
xpws doréoy Tod Tijs irepdns, Kal Ta waplcOwia Expr Races
eal drvprorrribos, xal del xj dreidf xarawlvery obre orepeby,
obre trypoy iSdvarro, GANA Kal To moTiy dvaxomTomevoy
dxberyoyt nove Tov SvOpeewoy Mpls.


Kep. ¢.  @epamela WAcvpiridos.


Oin auBorijs xapds ev wrevpirixoict, ov’ tmrepbbcwos
peydrns inrpeins 5 re yap muperas, xdrokus dv, é BdeBpov
Opyar i re dbvvn rob dnekwxeros Evvereiyes xi 7o xdmcov"
drip xal Bijxes Kdovéouca tiv Pdrpnxa Kai thy Kepadiy
trodtouce tas Suvdwias. pddiota pév dv abtijwap ¢MBa
tdpvav iy 8¢ dard mujovos olraw Kal roréy ey, ex’ doerins
inv yépny duratavra, apaipéew dar’ dyxéivos ris ev 7H
ol preBds, Tod xar’ lew row érépnat mreupper' Kpéa~
cov yap dmardrw dyew. rd Be mAjbos pi) wexpe demo


‘The common reading is rod yj}; T have effected the same purpose by
but it is clear that the negative merely suppressing the negative jij.
cannot stand with the words that I have adopted bis reading of dm’
follow: rjerériage «wpe, Er- in place of ¥m’, in the same sen-
mering guts over the difficulty by tence,
suppressing the last three words.


OZEQN AON, BIBA. A’. 168


Supine meperverpoviny yap exuporrijcas xivbuvos, jy 73
oipa empuxBey riw Yuyiy dedeley? low yap ra dypa
Evrdéer, ris éxris dcharpefivra Oépyns te kal rdcwos. svei-
paw 88 pavis te xal Ocpyds, xat & ddxiv buvardraros.
mheupdw 82 yerrdynua, zvedpov, Kai kowovds Gdylov: drap
xal ai robde Biadekes ob pdda mepvyiyvorras. mrepuotnxvia
Se mdevpinis dard meperveupovins, ebnPiorepov yap? xpi
dy él Euppexpy 7h poh r00 aluaros peowy) rev dvOpwrov
Earsfarra adds dparpeer ef pty eb Eyors abriwap, Ti
eravécws parpis qvyvoptvys: iv 88 ph, ris berépys’ jv Be
pbb 8 muperdy: eB —rd waNdA Gide pwhay Hudony 6 rv
petos layer ve Kat aitet.—ri tpiry dv rh Sevrépy eravicr
aaipée, Tirrep Kal ra wpocdppata Boréov, derapés wey
xploavra ddov tov dvOparrov et 88 ri mevph wal Eraoy
Oévra parBaxov Fiv adelbats Ccppg myydvou 7H avijlou
dgeyjparos: xarasovely $2 7d meupiv eb pide mpoonvéws.
pereEerépouat 82 nal 7d ddynpa eal %} preypacln eco dreshe,
hs Soxéew tay ibe +o wdBos elvar rd bE doe rev Evbov
adtnows.

Tpopis 82 viv, ds duph mdons iyrpelos tore hbyosy de
pordey és duaprwdy ely. ev tpodi yap xeicerar ra pdp-
Haka, crap ral rd pépuaxa ev rpoph* yévei uev dav Bepyry
kal drypiy, jB2 rely Kad Spars, opsyyuareibys, Scadvrexi,
Adioat, Nerrivar preypa Svvauévn. cvriwv piv dv dravreoy
mriadyn mpoxexpla0w év dpyi wav els yudov SinOnpérn, ds


* Though I have not ventured to described: Tov 2° Phert deyy (v.
alter the text, I cannot but think 696); upon which words thn scho-
that we ought to rend yuyH. For lion is, obrog 8 Heroic.
in AucwoOypia and Asroguyia, it # Compare Williams on Pucumo-
surely is thought that the spirit for mia, Encycl. of Med., te iii. 435,
® time leaves the body—not that * Hippocrat, de Aliment; Foes,
the body leaves the spirit, In the ti.435.
liad, the act of swooning ia thus

u 2


164 TEPI GEPATIEIAS


poivoy. wrucdyns 8¢ ra Evrijfea és Soviy wal mroudiny
Géppaxa darbores, viv yp dpect & yunds podvos’ ear}
pr types exh: Beppvas, Buvach. BE ASoas. GrErpic: xa
opijtar dave 88 dvéyew piv dréves dxéca dvayerOae yp
dmraryery 82 jniBleos Thy Kody. mpoonres 88 7d Nelov aris
xai é xataroow etxodov. drap xal 7) y~loxpacpa Beppa~
clas mpyivet, ipévas xabaiper, wenalves Bijyas, wavra pad-
Oiacer, aide xpidiis tact dperal Sevrépny 82 yaapyv Exoves
of xi Spor, OMyool Tie THis wresdyns dryaboies wat adrol
dpirror éévres. 7d YMoxpacpa ‘yap, Td Aeiov, 7d mpoonves
és xatdmoow, Euvoy' ta § Gia wévra pelovs' werorjo-
Owcay 82 Kai oiSe droit Edy pédere podvor. dryabot 82 wad
tpdryot. xaxlov 88 éx’ abray bpufa Enpivas, tpmyivat, el
cxelv xdBapcw mrevphv padrov t obpicas dpieros 82 wad
dipros Enpds xorels, xpnodpy cernopétvos, etxpntos, eiremros,
Biv pouepiny Bapeds rpoph.. dv 82 Ay my mperieg 4
vodcos, mpds 5¢ ta orrla danudjicy &rOpwmros, wricdyy per
ex xpiBiis 8:35c0w Rely, xéBepOos dvnBov 82 Errw Kal Gres
mrudyns Ta tat Kal Oaov Nerriy, drrowov, dyucxpov,
axpifyurroy kpkacov 88 Ei xh wredvg, ds 4} woXABy TOD
draiou dpeiv. Kalyap riov ley 7d podnua, wal Ti eaxigy
7d Edatov dAdvat. obbE yap Euhaves Ere piyverar TH TONAH
Efrijor els tov yuRV avarrobév. korw be nal mpdcov Edy rH
ebyiny rad ddySada minpa tiv 7G qwNp Apipeva. ebmvoly
te yap Kal dappaxddes bd ravbe ylyveray, wal ra mpdoa
RpwBjvac bord rob xvAob, dvnoupipa Kai HSiora. #8 52 wad
dav xaipds ebythov jy Se typi wal wrohAd) dvaywyi ey,
Belov 709 dripov eumaccécbw wal virpov. dptatov 58 Taw
dpreréxav mov So0jvas éx wrupos dripwv. dard yap Tis wn-
pds 4 Geopn, dyporépy pay srupds, olceioréon bri woobarre,
Snes éx Syiou Lino. iy Se Preyya eodraSes &y Kal yYrloxpov,


OZEQN TTAGQN, BIBA. A’. 165


& Tadd Pasor Epyéew wal pyrions vis Eypis rhs dd
rizvos dumdacey, bxas 7d Belov xpércov by, Kal ris ard
TepplvBov 52 mi€avrar Kal wémept dvnioriv wad év dois kat ev
wricdvn Kal imact Tolar edécpace Kal dxdca meréper Evvpdd*
Kpetw dxpdrodes ev xuAolor taxepol, mérevat, ddexropides
Eat cvdy dyeéparor, dred pay ed mB ervmddyr dvev
52 rouréou dxvicot.s iv 58 dxepyvos én, Soréov Kat Padac-
olov,}) werpalav & re bv dpurrav x) ympy hépy. ds BE pai
duaprévy emBoply, pnd  owiyenrar bv 7h dewrp Bialry 6
voréwy, yaplterOar orapns, prjov épbav dv Sate H je~
Mepiire, } oréare Srréw—aaipéew 58 xpi rod Aémovs wal
ta évrbs tpnxtwy Flv roice oréppacr—éd’ pny 82 wal
ctv. - drip nab rie Daas Boréey; dxbacov Wf 2fiaBis
J dmiipn, NAA wal drmiorss. dus ubv div poss rdBe,
‘Emi 8 7G wrevp@ xteaBas xp) Foia Oyuindirra Gelep,
Nai BeBevudva, Ela drmflor Kpyrar,  minavor. Evex’s
82 rovréowoe 7d rAeupdy Karatovelv, }5¢ érumddrrew mpd Tis
mpocdpotos mpos rotor Evrnjbect mrdopact, wedtdeorov EYrn=
Biv Ely wedaxprire, Eumuloyorra pwvos ris capeds éryy~
npevns, kal pdvvns Gdyroy dumdacew iy 8 byporépn 7 dva-
yor Kat rods), alpns Gyrov H epveiuov Fupploryery nad
virpov dumdocew dw 88 pijxos i}5n ris voboou ylyryrat, Kat
Tis dbdvys yeeopevys, wat bypis xaBdpotos yyvopéys, Eu-
smuoy wey earls rav dvOparrov Eveo Oar olvnme 8 Euppioryew
Kat edryypu roice erimhdicpact. iw 5¢ Kat ~uxpay Trav
rémeov elawBev rotor képvovar alaOnow rylyvnras, 60s Tapa-
xteww. xphy 82 eveprydv rove Bat, és modddv Ty Ceppactny
rav ervmhacpdtov Siapréew. Kplsowv yap iin Kal i


* "There is somothing inexplicable Pleurisy, but also no one says any>
in this paragraph; for not only does thing of roasting the brains of swine
no one of the other authorities re- in their caulx I suspect the text
commend braina in the treatment of — must be corrupt.


166 TEP OEPATIEIAS


Oépun ris Trav erumracpdtov vewypeaios. taTwcay dv
Oddajpes ev xupBacinas bid ddésv, 4 xérypov, 4 Mmaos Bep-
poo dv xbcrect.® Kxoddoy 58 gore wav unydynpa wupins, os
Bi) 7a dxGea pis TH wévy movov dvbibG. Toiede pévroe
nak mi ri tpoph xpéecOat, Hv Evveretyn To Gyos.

Hin 88 emi roisde wai cuxcins xaipds yévouro" dprotos 88
6 peta EBSdynv, mpdcGev Se jai) EvvereryBeins. ob yap etyj-
Oces ai vodcor, éxdcar mpd éB8ouns arartéover cixdnv.
éarw 58 peyddy, eipeia wavy, duduoryeiv 7d ddyéov yaploy
ixavi}. ob yap elow évéidot rd Exyos, GAN’ els eBpos xéxuras,
Sore 82 nal i) id tH cindy GE rod}, cs pi) podvoy
Arxdoat, dNAA Kal drejvae mpd rijs dwoaBéaws Tod mupos’
kal pera tiv dmdcBeow dmocxydcavra dbaipiav alpa,
dxdcov dv 4 Sivayis wapely. moda be Ectw wor eb
dor’ GAAns mpopdaros dd rév iroxoviplov dparpéou alua.
émidnroradtn yap eri rev whevperixdaw %) drrd cuxdns dperely®
dde5 58 4} vizpoy emi rotor exdoeat, SneTucdy wey Kal dyer
vov, dyewov 5é dddd EvvrexpaiperPas Tas Suvdpsas Kal
Tob dvOpwrou Tov tTpémov. fw yap Gres Thy Wuyi Kab
xaprtepos En, eurdocey tiv Gdév, wi adtoice Toios Edxece
és abréoy watew, 7h 52 d06vy érumdcoey SeBeupévg rH
Nmai, 82 erimerdta 7G ywply. of yap ex Tis cuvrijtws
iySpen. rip drdy eles inarérépou. wohAdn. Siren Meas
xaratovely xpi), Seas TH mpoonver Tobe dpAdiUvy Td adeyos
tis Snkus. Seutépn 82 ajuépy dperroy thy owminy mpocBar-
Dew, cs de rev tpapdrow EXxntal tis Rewrds lywp. 7d8e
TONby ev Tis erlrpocbev auxins dvvarpebrepov, moNAoy be
Tis Suvdpios pudaxrixcrepov. ob yap alua, x) rpodi), dra


The common reading is eldwy, made a few moro alterations of my
for which Wigan and Ermering own, in justification of which, sce
properly substitute dAdv. I have Nonnus, Epit. § 129.


OXEQN TIAOQN, BIBA. A’ 107


ixtp éxpies. nat ribe phrror mpocuxpunicas audi ris Buvd~
mos mpiocey. ri Tpiry be xnpwriy Fv re Kumpivg wal
mryavy TiBévar. ty 88 Ere xabdpowos Ta mrbada Benrat,
Toict enpwpace pytivns Evvrixew, 4) tod Gelov rob arripov
Evpploryerr nai adbis rupiny 7d ywplov Exew as rpdros
é cuctins Exe dy xpi xepapeody xodpov dppitor rh whev-
pi, ebpd, re xadrxeov, mpnves emi rd yelrea dudBeivar
role ddybouce irotPévar 88 prdya peyadny Edy Mai,
Sxwos Cae és moddav Siapty xpdvor" i) meperdplyyery Be 7a
xethea pds tH capel, adr’ és Searvony Siaboxy} tus dorm
ws why BraxBeobén +H mveyl és moNdaw BE eEdrrecOae Bre
A rap W8ov éxelvou Bépyn, Epirrov ev crupinua, dyabhy 58
mpoxrnars Bpdrav.

Xpiy 88 ynde viv xdreo inrpeiny drrepopiiv, dvbpdoe wav és
7) Evrepov mnydvivev Edatov éyyxéovra, yuvaki Se Kad és
boréonv: Eryvexéa 88 rd rivépeva wal katdrora bora, we-
Axpurov Ein 7G mnydvp, wai yun wrerdyns, Hw Evveyes
Bijoon, os év pops pappaxov- iv 8 ji zpogiis xaipds &,
tore 81} te Kal tov rorKldwv" mivépiov Edv wédere expnbav és
cboracw. Tas 8 xpi odalpas péyeBos bcov Kudpov otpoy-
rybdas oboas BiSévae ind thy parrav Sew, Siahépovra rijb6
xdxeioe, ds pi) KaTdémrorov, GANA THKTOV Ey Tpoonves bE Kat
7d Sia Tis wrjxovos Edv wédere Kal pOudT@ ddppaxoy Aeiov
kal imvixiv. rabe wévros xal po THs Gpavos, Kal x’ abrén,
Plidelaptary bbe sairp Be Th dapanddens iii:
kat Xivov 700 orépparos, kal duirou, xad xevou ToD KoKeddov
Aelov, éxdorov Kiabor Kal dpiydddov rv mixpav mévre Kal
elxoot Tov dpBpbv récot 88 Kal wemépios KiKKow. payOévra
88 ypi Acta pédere és dy Exdevypa duphve Trav déots pvorldy
ubr ty 88 ipa kal dmenra dvdny, owtpvns erxiie-< Blo,
xpoxou fly, memépios Koxxor Sexarrévre, pEduTOs pupivar Ni-
tpq ply. Tobe pévror Hn 7d Papyaxoy Kal mpd Tis dpavos


168 EPI OEPAMEIAS OFEQN DAGON, BIBA. A’.


Boriov, uvotirns Hyucy. dyabby ro8e ext rice xpovifoves,
ebre cai dkipers 8:dévae yp, fy Sdorvova Everretyp.

Vuypiv 5 Twp dxbcor trav intpay totes whevperinoioe
Bocay, oie dxolp Nyy EvpBadéew Exe, obre +i welpy tie
racacba. el dp twes dd yuypod SipAdEavro Tov xiv
Suvoy, of8e por ob eSéxeoy elvac mhevperinol, dXXA nab roice
madatorépovar inrpoics iden Tes Evvdpopiis wAeupires exueds}-
axero, xoris éxxpiors odea Edv wévy wevpod éml opexpp
aruperg, #) Kal dvev mruperiiv. 768e pévroe 7d 7dBos obvoma
pev mdevpiribos, 7d 88 mpipypa ob loyer GAA xal mrvetud
nore, Euverray ev weup@, Sipav evbcB0t Kal 68ivny rovnphy,
Harbariv re Oépuny Kal rode éxddecav dvbpes dldpues
trevpire. él ravde dy tSwp >uypdv dxos dy ylyvorro
edruyly Tod xpeopevou" eoPicOn pev dy 7d Sixvos, #) SE yor
kal 7d rve}pa im rdOn, nai Bérvevee ro GAyos Kal 4 Oépune
emi 88 dreypaciy wrevpod, xat rod inetwxdros mpijor, ob
povov DSap ypuypov, dAXA Kad dvarvor Arvyph Kandy.

“Hy dy &x rips mpdcBev inzpelns repuylyrwrrat of mevpt~
rixol, &re 8 Bpayéa Bijcowor xal Oépyn Grote al dove
loxn, omeddew xpi) Siaddew rébe i yap trotpopas moder
Ta eyxaradpwravopeva, I €s uminciv tpemeras.


APETAIOY KATITIAAOKOY
OZEQN NOYZON GEPAIIEYTIKON


BIBAION 4ETTEPON.


TINAX TON KE@AAAION.


Orpaxela Hepexvevpoving

Orpamtia Atparog 'Avaywyiig

Orpartia Kapharcy .

@tpaxtia Xodpag Sat ess

Grpamtia Bod. .

Orpartia roy karé rd “Heap Slav xaday.

Otpamela Nwriaiag @sBd¢ kal ‘Aprnpiag teas
voboov ‘

Ocpantia rig ard roig Negpode itslac votcow

Owpantia roy kara ry Kier dtiwy xadiy

Orpamela ‘Yorepuxiig Unyde . P

Orpaxdla Zarvpiowe. 6 ee


HREM ASAE RAE


APETAIOY KATIMAAOKOY OZEQN
NOYSON GEPATIEYTIKON
BIBAION B..


Ked. a. Gepareia Meprmvevpovins.


Kadrofv xal érivapov xaxiv deyacly xal mphows Tod
arvetpovos, ed’ olas mvif dduyoxpovin. xpi) Gv avri-oa Hdd
dxéa Eupevar ta ddeEjuata: tdpvew abrixa ras dx’ dryxive
Pras 8 dude Jva emi befid wai dprorepd piidrov, i) de
sis péov0s,—es dp’ éxarépns Tis xapns ToD mveipovos %
dyricraas tiv bypév ty wh pwéode evroOuplny moor
peopéee yap rH muy 4 revmoypuyin. add rij opexpov
dvarvetowat, émoxvra xpi thy poy addis ddacpbew. fy
yap &€ alparos ai mpopdoves Ewer, adriv thw altinv 4 de
Boropln dyer iv re $reypa, 7 deppos, Hj 74 dddo trav dypiv
mpriocy, ai tev -pheSOv Keveoores elpytépny Thy Tod mvEd-
Hovos rovéoves xapny és Slodov ris dvarvo;s.
Xph 82 cad nde Syew dypd wah $oaar, rt dy PreBoro-
pins Siaxplovra tiv pny Mrpy, wOxtt, myydvy, privy TH
dard ris tepplvOov rH typi. dvrl 8 ris PreBoropins, ef
Bev 4 Kaducs For, broxdifev yurdi Spiudi, dol pey
pds 1 Nrpy, st bring 88 vis TepulrOou Ey 1h pddere


172 TIEPI GEPATIEIAS


amipyavoy 8 dv 76 dale xal docwrov dy 7G Dart dnberra,
wal rododvrns 88 ris dypins al cdpxes, ai claw, ErnPeicae
Foy Dart, dporas.

Xixvae xoixpar és ta perddpeva cal tov véerov wal ra
trroyévipta mdvry Edudopor. i 86 was 6 BcopynE eticapnos
&, das pi) dudl rotor doréows ro Bépwa H) cuxty dpde-
Orion épelbovea, xal r@de wporBddrdew iy yap wavy tod
owparos Ta Te type ébédxnras Kal 1d wrvetpa tw reralyn-
rat, otal rep 6 mrveiuav mviyeras, dvdrvevers dv yiyvorro.
Tod Kaxod. mdvrn yap wokwpxéew xpi) tiv Tepervevpo-
vinv.

‘Ardp wnbe tov Bua cropatos dheroivray papydxwy inre-
popiy pndev. Eder yap 6 rveipev wal év byeln dypov, Kat
dw vooh. dappdxwv Si8ovar dy dxoca Newriver ta bypa és
Starrvo}yy, 82 daoOnpa Kai etpoa és dvayoryhy rebEer mivey
Hey & rdxos tis dperelns Mrpov Edv boodmou Epjjare, A
Gryuyv Edv beet wal wédere, elope bypiv Edv podcxpijry.
éurdaocay 58 éxdory Kat rijs tpidos ris plfys wal memépios
ebrokwov’ drap xal réde Enpa ojcavra Eby pédere biBovac,
ty 88 dimvos taor Se jmépns, 58 eypyyopiae mavvvyor, Séos
Bi) 6 dyOpwros pavij, Kal rroulrov happdxwy imverixev
xpéos, Hv jx) Te evdi5G H vodeos, Sxars Kal Tiy TaXaumwpiny
6 rev dapudeov waipds etvdog. Ta wONrA yap ylyverat
rapéBea, ty 88 ey dxpf ris mveybs' wal md r@ énéSpp
ddppaxov &i8¢s, Cavdrou ay elns mapa” roict Syporpoe
atrws.

Xp) 88 nal ra cvria teeda Enpevat, Spyséa, Aewrd, Sia-
Aurixd mayéos, cunrypaTwdea: Naydvwv, mpdcoy, 4 Kopwve~
arous, #) xvldn, 4 xpduBn ev det AfpyOeioa, atarnpiv 82,
arisdyns 6 xUNS, Tis épuydvov #} bocdrov mpochaBay, HBL
mremépwos Kal Aizpou meiov dvrl réw Gddv xdvBpor Eby pé-


OZEQN ILA@QN, BIBA. B. 173


Nxpijre xdBepbo.! dpuca 8 ravra ev rH Afrjot Foro. Ka~
kay yap mepurvevpovixcion pica, olvos moray, jv darupor
Swot, ji) TONGAN Te Tis oTIYPLos Exeov. trUKvarTLKOY Yap cw”
pétov 4 otis. yph 8 rovréoe dpacoiy piv Ta pépea
Pa Xov, sodrXOv be aye Ta wWrveda’ TO Eiprrav 88, driyor
fat wordy: mveipove yap Téyks Kaxdv, obverey Tvevpor
db otopdyou axe Kat xordins,

Oho 82 dcxembeBw elploves Ev Alara, nad ddrpyp, hadat
Apiaroy 88 xpicpa rd ba Tis MumjorBos, civyme Enpiv
Biv espe yp al ed. Elpmar Be: dyer nal yp ea}
Ocpyacinv nai mvedpa. dprpyer Kai Sodpnaws Spruéwy, xp
outs, dxpev Serpos. rade pévroe mocéovte Hv pa) ele 4) vod-
a0, dvékariatos 6 dvOpwmos.


Ked. 6’. Ocpamela Atuaros Avaywyis.


Tldcas 82 iBiae dvaywyijs alwaros otk einiBees, ob Tod tpd-
mov woivoy, iv ex priEvs, %) Sia Spmows, ddAd xiv dpaiwoss
spépy’ ov8 iv dard Bdpnxos, # wvevpovos, 4) otondyou, 4
ipraros, ta Kivduvadlov adda xiv ard xepadiis %) doweo~


tépn. aluaros yap 7) popry alua 88 mdvrav rpody}, may
tev 88 Bépyn, rdvreav 52 ypouj' Kal poBepov pav iSeiv bead
ardpatos éxocoby ploy waxdv 8é, iy ye dad omAdyyvov
xatplou' xdxvov 88 iy ex priEos Kai 8aBpactos.

Xpi) dv rav inrpov tod mdBeos Euveretyew paddov apy-
yorra. al mpérrov pev Yuxpérepov alpécoBae iépa és
dvamvohy, anxdy erimeSov, ehleny Boalyy, Sees. ynBdy. cel
tar—épebiorinoy yap ai celoves—xolry 5¢ oreper), jai) képra
elxovea unde Babel, EBepuoy SpQcov 88 rd oxijpar Hovyly

1 Ermerina, on the authority of ‘The other reading is retained by


one Parisian MS, reads xérep0o,, Littre, the latest editor of Hippo-
to avoid the recurrence of aspirates. crates, t.vil. p. 176.


174 TIEPI OEPATIELAS


Aaduijs, 982 dxovepdrov. suyiis drapakin, eOvuly. wayyy
82 roice rovréows Evvopaprées Sucedmiotin. ris yap duéoy
alya Pdvarov ob dppwdéer ;

*Hy dv rodtaoe nat eripdeBor twor, eri mécy idly
dvayaryis tduver PréBar iv re rydp ex prjEwos # SaBpdcros,
ebidppooros preBorouin jv te em’ dpascer, Béos ly dorop-
prikp 76 wdiiOos* tduver 58 riv ex” dyxdve notdmv etipody
ve yap 10 alua rhode Kal xararydtecrBa pyidin, xa és
Tredvas Hpkpas péew daowéws etrropos. earl maior 88 mdy~
Tev, ds bros elrreiv, row Kacplov oT rdyyvev dds ibe alparos.
9) 88 dvwrépy rijobe, wat He, droox Ses Eat, pris ris dard
tod Bpaxlovos, dude. dare odbéy pétov % averrépw vis
pétns & Svnow layer. aldpues yap trav drocyuclov, Sooe
oropayp nad rare Euvinpav viv avo, ty 88 dard omdnvds!
iby nsksast tie Gpacereit beta aera ie eer ese
pixpod te Kal mapapécov. tivde yap Tav Intpaw pereke-
repor Soxéover emi omdijva xpalvew’ drdp wal HSe vév ex’
dyxive vis Kdtw éori % dmoryiors. th dv mAdov ef pds
roiot Saxridows, Kal ph én’ dyxeve tapvor tus adrénv;
pelfov yap rH’e Kal ebpoos. 1d Eiwrav pév dv mpdow
Aevrobuplns emioyeiv’ arap unbe moddov adarpéew. ixavi)
yap wal 4 aipoppayin yuidicar tov dvOpwrov. Euveyes BE
kal dard opuxpiis adatpéoros erradaipéew, xal airijpap, Kal
ris dorepalns, Kal emt ris EXAns derépys. fy 88.6 dobe
vie loyvis xal eipaipos &, wi) Tdpvew préBa. rade piv
dv dui aparpéoros alparos,

Apipyew 88 nai Secpoics dxpors odédv pev, imep opupa
ral yotvata’ xeipdv 8, trip Kapriv Kal Bpaylova’ rawin
mrarein, Sxws  Sidopvyks xpatac) wey jj, adyos Be pip
gépy toice 52 aivopparyéovor xwploroe emPdrrew ypr


+ This is evidently the proper reading, and not wvetpovec.


OZENN ITAQQN, BIBA. B. 175


Iie piv werberra olatery dd ie Stor vbpyesr 88 se
olng abornpe, nar podirw, i wupolv Mmai. jy 88 Everelyy
4%} aipoppayin, dvri ply risv éplav ombryyours xpkecBav dket
8, dyzi roi olvov. tmarepécbm 82 pupal rd xapior
éromdcoey 88 roict créyyours Tis dxaxins,  droKierlBos
Enpv raw ypndy, # ead Eddins: Spverov 82 wal 73 gugdmor
Ofek Nv. iy Be x} reyes donpow fh wal BUoxpopor, dumrda~
zport xpéecBat. wal yap rd Séppa mepereivover, wal olov rh
xeip) xparkoves, drdp xa) al Suvduers abrbuv oripas kat
Enpivae Svvaréraras. puplas S¢ wal Eros drat meipp
Baos miata: Spuoras 82 bebous BEos toyowrs wad drbay EN
Aav yvAdY, HOE Kad dopadrov, Kal idv, Kal orumrypiny, nab
MBaveriv, Kal owipvny, Kal yadxov Kexavpévor Kal rew(da,
wah dxécas Tovaibe él roics Gumrdatpoce’ 4 Epia ra mrivd~
evra, f} of ombyyor év Bpayéi Sevdévres bEet fy 82 viv rd~
vuow Trav éurddotpww pi) dépwor, érlOcua roréew pol-
vixes of rrioves év olvp pérave adornpg Sevbévres és pwatav
tplBovrav Ereta dxarin gumdaceras rely Kal oldiar éy-
xpicbévra 8 és tpiysov Kata Tob Bapnxos TiBerar. addura
olvp, i Stet Sevbévra, H8e axis Gdnrov Nerriv, Kpneépn
ceonopivor, knpwr} %) podivp pipp dvadapPavovra rBévat.
ployew 8 xal cupdiroy ris pltns ceonoperns. “Addo
BpaBirov dypiwy pikas dpeiv ev bei xat tpipavra & patay,
qrapapioyery pods, Kat xdpuptos, eal pupoivns Spay. révde
pévroe ye GdAa adroit Evpploryerr, bevy dv loydos rips trav
Happdxwv ral mpoonvelys Kai soprjovos déyras. xpi) yap
xal roiet kdpvover xaplaacGar, rade pev éerds Gerd diy.

'H b¢ ravée xarpuwrépy ino ev roiet orotic. Kal Kara~
mérowt xéerat, ds dyyiora Tay Terpwptvey & Ta dappaxa.
tpicary 5 rovréwr 7) iSen 4H ods dxerods Tod pood Shoat,
Euvayoryij Kal miéct trav dryyelwy, t) 76 péov wayival re Kal
mijkas ds wi) Siappty, xiv maparéwmoor of dyeror % Enpit-


176 TIEPI OEPATIEIAS


var ras éfoSous apis Bpnv viw dpyalyy rd alua orjoavra,
Gras wi 7H Exippof) xevedperor of yspor mpooperteect, AnH-
pupacr 88 Eva 4 EtvBoows. eri pév ris dpaudcws tav
PreSav % orinfis dpxéer. Sapte “pip, ws iipeiov véow
Sevey, riot dpaumcect, drap 782 eri rHoe Buupéoeos
orinyis pay inzpeln és viv Evayeryiy tay xedtor péloor
82 cal Suvarwrépocr toice gappdxars xpiecbas. fv 52 6
Tis BiaBpwiaos Ep tporos, wal pi) Evvdyntas ined tis ord-
bios 700 Edrxcos ra yeldea, cectipy 88 7d tphua, AEipBa-
tov dx rips Bcabdixpwos dov, wéyor xpi) tod aluaros, drap
988 Tis Okpyns moccew. dxivnoig yap tavde wal wife Tora-
ras 6 péos. o€txpnrov pev dy roles dpawier ixavdy és ord-
ayo. 0082 yap of88 alua dxpytév dors 7d pdov, GNA todde
yap Sa opixpaw ov oroplaw Kai robSe ob odrXob abe
modAdess ypéos* pereEerépowss 82 wai 4 efwbev inrpein
Grip wal: golewr  wepanie) BeBinaer Efrina weber; js0>
voy ijpwece. Eatw 82 rd tos olvwr py rev oruddvtwy To
spivei, el wi) Gappaxely 82, ddAd 7G ypivo Sprph re wal
oripov. ert 8 riot diactdccot rev Tpmparev xpds TO
Suxpire gore ddppaxa ara iy mpirny, dpvoyhbacou
Xvr~es, f) rokvyivou, H cépibos, Exccrov polpn pos TG dEu-
pire jw 8 emi padrov pén, iroxioriB0s, # dxaxins Enpav
eurdaces, é& % xvdBovs rod dEvepyrov, Sdwis tavde Spay-
Biv plnv. Apurros Be Kal yuras Sudanos. fy 82 xpicowv
4 Evppoph) rhe yiyvytas, xqxiba reiyy nat Bdrov pity
Enpiv, nai Bor viv €& adds KoupddXuov rely Enpiw eu-
méacay. byvarwrépy b¢ révde rod prov i pita, dupitac,
Enpivat, orias, ra rdvra wotjcar drdp Kal Hide Eby 7G
Eunpiiie notnpr sy 88 netinean dipper xpos, rien estos


* Petit was the first to remark, that the common reading, oi@ly, is
inadmissible,


OZEQN TAGQN, BIBA. B’. VT


Tis olpibos, Ein dpvoprdooy, nis pitas Gumdacew Sxaje
TpubBorov, és xuaBovs rob ipod tpeis ) téooapas. emt Se
Thee SiaSpmcecr rote Dwg ev exelvy otinpw euroréew és
miéryoy tod Svappéovros alpatos’ Kal roice Seyoudvoure Sums
ard moX0D Tod Tpwparos piwor al préBey GXrd Kal ra
mobpeva tora xpataut, Syvata rosijoas mayov. yvdov Ov
opsdvov Ev Bf, 582 Nayod rapuads, 4 veBpod, # eplibov,
Hw) moder 88 Sidévac, Exrewe yap Kore tovrdwy me TH
Tribe” GANA Tod pev yVAOD Tob xopidvou pi) petov pev
fiuucudbov bs xpeds 700 Sévepiirou, ris 82 rapscod 3Bodod
pay apets, 73:88 wrelaroy SBcrod BS’. de 8 wk voudBe elec
Tis opti, nab yf} dplory Xaula, xal dovip xbpra Neveds,
nai Eperpras,® xai Swirres, wai odpayis ) Anurly. tov-
réwy 88 Odety oraOpod, Td petov, <a. tpels S875 mreiorow
Edy tive tov Enpdrav, howixwv, i xepatiov ewdipeov, i
pikiov Broo ty 88 spnytvaras %} dprnpin eal én) rGbe
Bijoop, cipaly 76 Kenting urdocew vibe. dpiatoy és
Aelwowy dprnpins Kal dpuros Fiy roles Seubels" Edy yap 76
aig ead nb morepby Hayes. fy ply Sy ps) Eoverelyy 9
dor Sarak wis Hudpns mpd vis mpoadporos Borkor: fy 8,
nal Sis wal tpirov és tiv éomépnys ex 82 ray hapydxav
kal xardmora roiew Enpiw év pédere EbOG és ciotacw
ris Rely dpueroy Se nad pdos és ta dyfra, yiyapta, kad d
éfvAardbov xapros, xat i8ln éxdorou, Kal Eur). Tdbe pévroe
wal imd tf asian Exe bs 7d Biqverts rhs ovrnigios.
drip Kal xiype Ev xf guns wad tpdyou vis dxdvOns 7d


°In all the MSS. and editions,
the words «ai ‘Eperpdc¢ come in
‘between the Samian earth, and Sa-
mian aster. That they have becn
transposed by mistake, must be
quite obvious to any one who will
rend the account of these substances
given by Dioscorides, M. M. y.1715


and Galen, de Simpl. viii. t, ii. p.118,
ed. Basil. On these medicinal earths,
ace further, Pavius Louse, t. iii.
pp. 83—85, Syd. Soc. Edit.

‘I have ventured to transpove
the negative, pv), from the second
clanse of this sentence to the firsts
the sense absolutely requiring it,


N


178 TEPI GEPATEIAD


Sdxpuoy® rouihov 88 pappedxaw pupin pev 4 melpn, mockidas
88 nal xpijoves, tpoylexwy, Tob bid ris Abyurrrias dxdvOns,
nal érépou 80° aéetpou, Kat Gov Tod Kpoxdbeos, dv i
axevacin idin Medexrar.

‘Avev piv dy truperav Gravra todpéey emi roics pap-
péxowrt, Kal Toa Kal words bddvra* iy be émemupe-
raivoot,—ta TOG Kal eri thot Preypaclyor Tov Tpw-
pdrav yiyvovrae muperol,—pijre dbpdov toyew riy popiv,
pitre te rolet. wapobvopicios ‘dédppaxe. avelenter. waddab
yap tard mruperdy Bacoov Sddvvrat % bd Tis tod alpatos
dopiis-

Tpoai rroridat xal thy idénv dxota Ta ddppaxa, drap
kal 7a pdppaca ey rpopp. obre yap él usp potvy drayra
ebpedy ra tpopijs ayaa etrropov, ote, fy pay ody potwn és
Innpelqy dpxdy, nef poiry ypbeoBar, Bx nav ebpor pnlBiov:
Sabina souct he eleany 0b Shy Gon’ seperloriplyperalis are
dy ortpouca nad és Sivapsy Yixoura drap ibe és Our
Gkpun vip aluaros mpbednore. yérSpoe wrurol> Spute é
SEbxpnror iv 88-72. Sos Bayan: dumotey, pocrlenn Ebrquas
pros otis, xardEnpos, Komrels, 158 xal &s dArov cecno~
ples... drévrov dv pddnua tiv Meal O5pBpy drat Hiv
Oitra; pods 'dmbmacrwa.’-dv-8k nad jyvaploarBal ms ehiyourt
ergs, woplavov Sore & ssBoviy Bry Sldov, H x4 ray obpy~
Tixéav 7158 ebrvowv amepparov. paxds, jv pev %) aluoppayin
Gerakypy (Ely daroyiasousy ac vNG ny Bical: ood gebtlene
Geib. ob yap ebmerroy. ob8é wpoonr's & yetaw. -yph'8)
Tovréoct ieiota wavtwy Siomerra Siddvar, iy b8 €E
aipopparyins Odvarov dppwodns, nal ateprés Kal SicmenToy"
88 amypba: lore 7d edkovra. xneds dv Enphy heln, mpore-


* On this form of circumlocution, amended the text most felicitously,
seo below. Morb, Dioturn. Curat. by a few slight alterations. O, om-
IL? nia si sic? ‘The common reading is


© Ermerins, in this sentence, has —fdn & det xpoviwy,


OZEQN IAOQN, BIBA. B.. 179
remacviabes $ax ni Emp eal Yoxpg a Opies wayla,
Fev poss odious, 4 wneid. ibe dort im’ dvdyuns ev dap-
dep xpopit mordv 88 72 Elymay Sdiyor Fora’ Enph yap
Biairy bypiv dEvupopor. rouibe péy, oriyrar wal Yotae ef
eédes' fy 82 maydvar kat alua wal srvedpa, ydda wad
Eavros nad xév¥po, Endore pv bir uth, EXdare 88 Eby
xovOpp yada & miéw e } ooracs ds pi) pdd>nwa bypov
B. fw 88 eri padAov waydvar nal oriyrac Oédrys, of ydvbpor
pe Eiv doluks epeicbwaav és 88 Thy ctctacw, ayvdos
fo7m, nal yada, dpiotov Kal pap Ta Tuppnvixdy, maxd ddv
xal YMexpov, Kal Korrdbes Eby rH yddaxte™ rajucob be
rol épipou irypoios toise éyrijpact mpoceyyéey es iw,
Gxeos ei yddaate és véov tupod Evaracw layer" saxyvrepoy
82 rovréay, xéyxpos EbBbs Eby yddaxte ds 7d hap, wal 7d
ertractoy % xyxls xal ra ciBia. TexpalpecOat 8% ras Evp-
-_— trav Enpawovrwy 4 waxyvivrov Ka yap Bnyddea

rabra, trepBorg te Enpérntos perekerépowce mpoatppnte
Tas GréBas. iy ¢ eb mpoonrac wey,” loxnras 5é 7 alway
és tavayria éx mpocaywyis H peraSods: Kal pndiv dyay.
Grdorpopa yap rdée xal KaxujGea. xpi 5é capxody ijn
tov dvOpwrov Kal ras dvreidds és Td minpov dyewv, alwpys, i)
tphpect parOaxjjor, meprido.rr, Oupndinat, tpopi) mroiKidn
wah EuvijBei?


The far of the Romans was a
variety of the spelt, See Appendix
to the Edinburgh Lexicon.

*T have ventured to read mpijo-
enraa instead of xphoyra:, on the
suggestion of Petit ; and to add ed
on my own authority—supported,
indeed, by that of the Latin transla~
tion of Crassus.

* Ermerins boldly changes mnpdv
to orepidy, a word bearing uo re~
semblance whatever to the one in
the text, I prefer leaving matters


as they are, although I must say,
have a strong wish to expunge the
words rig dreAde altogether, as
being quite out of place. Our au
thor seems to say, that-in haiopty-
sis it is a good thing to put flesh
and fat on the patient. Of course,
ruppoe is intended as the Tonic of
miapég. Wigan uses roy wapor
instend of rd miuypdy; but I am not
aware that there is any authority
for this term being applied to a
cicatrix in the fleshy parts,
n2


130 HEPI GEPATEIAS


Tade piv dv, fv é ris popis rod aluaros 7d rpéia
Evyrécn, ral 6 xapos iracd edaxéws* iv 58 dyxaradeley-
tat Brxos, Kat Eidrvov yiyyrat, érépys pmedérns xpéos"
mat qydp ent-érépuy BiaBtyera y opr. /ep) habe wlvros
éy roiat xpoviowt Nedéberas.


Keg. y'. Ocpareia Kapdvaxav.


‘Ev cuyxori pdda xpi) tov tytpiv mpovoray érerndedeer
péARoveay pev yap hv mpoyvyvooRys, Ta Te TapedvTa emea~
cupévas cuvepyoity aot, arap nde tkerdos av abrénv
mply fey. mapeotoay Si ob pmidims SiSprjcxovee of vo-
cebvres. vow yap Ths pUcios THY ouyKoTHV EreEa’ od
maricavros 8& picts AvOcica, THvbe dv pddioTa piv
péeXAoucay Kwodvew jy be ph, apre dpyouevyv. mpoye
yookey 58 xpi totor ev roict dudt trav dfs votcwy
Aereypévost, eDre Tv aitinv, arap 762 nal Ta onpsiia
&patiueba. Kadaos ply yp 5 muperds Spy. ert 8 np
xatow xdxiota onprjia, Enporns, dypumvin, Oepuacin trav
omArdyxvev, Seog dad mrupds, Yuypa be ra Ew yetpes Kab
mdbes dxpor yuyxpéraror dvamvol és Gdehy jaxpi srobé-
over yap ~uxpov népa, oliverey exmvéovar mip. odvypob
pixpol, muxvorator, Tpopdbecs. éx Tavbe dv Texpaipopevos
98 dxdca pot év roics onuntosor Adexrat, abric’ &E dpyiis
dprjyew.

‘Hy dy pt} wdvra Kordy, tis, Hjruxin, Spy, ayruyly rod
dvOpdzrov, rdpvew préBa* xiv word Korb, els S€ Tes
dpiOurs erixarpos J}, sxoiov yAdooa Tpyxeln Kal Enpi) Kad


‘The common reading, ovvepyd tit suggests tverjay. Exmerins has
ivoro, is evidently inadmissible. Po- ay cin oon


OZEOQN TAGQN, BIBA. B. 181


pedawa" iiSe Tor yap Ta elow wdvra onpalver'® Evvrerpal-
peadae 5é dri raat ri Bivaysy, ef pip mpoarntiinne ée Tis
voicou Tévev re xal Siairns. ob8e yap ob82 evSely podvor,
GAA Kal wrvvyl tw & bard wAHBeos yiyyntac cvyxoTh, Kad
PreyHacin v5 troxovbpiov, % iyraros, péya Siacnpalyy,
ob: duBoris xpéos. Tdpverv be niv err’ dyxdve Thy Kolkyr
drdp 78¢ bia cpuxpis Tis axdaowos apaipéew, by jt) ofd8pa
7h Suvdyer EmlSnrov Jf. edéyyee yap tiv diaw 7d aOpoor
kal modrbv Te péiov t} bi das mpopdovas ddarpéerv. fy
yap eri cuyxor Kal cpixpov dpaptyin, jnidloos els dou
tpémet. avrixa dy &Bdvae tpopiy es vedxpywow tis Suvd-
poy ydvurae yap } picts xal TH TY Tada dary’,
xal TH TeV roratviay mpocOihen.

“Hy 82 GreBoroulyy yey 4 divayes derorpémp, Preypaclar
82 Ewot, cixtny tide mporBddreLw wodd mpdcbev Tis Kpi-
ows To voojpatos. ev xpiaipois yap 1 avyxom éret
Thee abrégar repiddorer al re picres xplvover, al re vodcot
wreivouct. xiv yap és dvdryeny olvorocing ijxp 6 avOparos,
ab. kdprd dodadts dnl @reynorfics olroworkew,. clvos.ofip
Preypalvovar piv mévew ériSoars, ddreypdvrouce 82 pictos
abknois. eimpocbey 88 ris otxtns, mpd paijs %) Sevrépys,
érim\acwos xptos, é Te dveow ray weptwy, arap Hbe és ed-
poiliro0 aldaros pereferépoict 82 Kal. tet. rp cukhy & tiv
Seankony dnemdaoer. Barw 82 xalribe Ged" wlybuvos gp
tetiie rob: aluaros vis dperpins wal, enh xf euxdp. Ave
poiot 82 ext cxvBddorer madacior podvoy xplo" rijs duvd-
putos 58 peideo.


9m this clause I have found It ant. The language would appear
neceseary to follow the conjectural to be imitated from the Hippocratic
emendation of Petit, which isadopted treatise De Morbi, iii, 6.
also by Ermerivg, whose annotations —_* ‘This is evidently the true read
on this passage are highly import- ing, and not xpiog.


182 TIEPT OEPATIEIAS


Téybues weparijs Yuxpa, dxéom por exl ppernucstoe
Dedéxarat, Geos edyerpins diye wee. Kablapds Hip, yu-
xperepos, és dvimvevow. tpios tepradt), dvray, ypadiis,
Udrwv, ds épjebar ra wdvra Hbkws. adi) tev srapedvrov
Hiroperdys jovyin, Qyundln rod vortovros. dcpal etxiders,
dBapées es xepadss alcOyow. drdp xal ray tpeddvrav
torwaay dcpal, dddirwy Eby iar: Sevddyrev, f SEet dprav
Geppdsy veomértov olvw 8¢ pi) xdpta writew ordpa,
pnde dua elpyecv.

Tloriv Bircov wat cuveyéorepoy i) Toit ddXotoe™ tpodi)
dvd wacav juépny xotdn, ebrremros, Ta TOARA orredns We
al iSeia, xiv puxpdy xelpwv Ep. toicibe yap tay dNhov
Hider xapieréoy. oby Heeta yap ta cropdyy és Exhvow
Svoicor dapiver, daria 82, 9) Sunde, olbapa. leary op 4
vodcos Ta wdvra hagitac. fy 82 jy wey Ibn H areplobos és
xplow, voris 83 ednida Kal wérwrroy ikdvp, nad dxpea yroypa,
aduypos 82 cyixpdraros 182 muxvéraros, éxolov éprav,
duvépis tov tévoy, pixpév te dpa raBeiv xpi) clrwy, ad
olvov évepyiis dorrecPar. pi) 5 xehadiv xponoparicbae
réyEect, 162 Tv Kictw. Nédewrar 86 wor rdbe 7a dixea ert
rota dpevitixoiar. Si8évar 52 otvov pi) yardav, unde ddyv.
parebtrepo BY whqapovie Sxaipiy, dvapebip re! kal eopanla
r00 fayely re Kab mrudiv, dmbRovro: woNdoice 88, «al ebole
rout dodar, Aedupevys ibn THs Pdatos, ovdey Td wAROoS és
7d pt) Oavetv ijpxece, és wey Thy yaotépa Kativrwy Tor
ovriwv, obk avovrav 52 és thy Stvauw ard tijs Kothéns.
form dy ovrla pev rrokida, Ta TOA oiTibea, ds pupa
vew padKov 4) pacacbar* xiv oreped En, ducOnpa ywyrécOw.
oa ph xapra Ewvectara, pnd’ dara dda, rod orepeod yunya
apeopol EuaBpoyor olvm, Ta mpérra Bepye, duo 4 pets” ext bE
toict Ta mdvTa Yuxpd, hy pi) Uroiovpéwor preypoval
olvos boing, pi) kdpta oribay, wayds 52 ws fjeota. ‘EX-


OZEQN TIAGQN, BIBA. B’. 183


Agvixol pey Xios, 4) AdoBios, deécor re drat ynovéyras
Rerrol: "Tranéw 82, Xoupertivos, i) Bouvdavis, 4) Parepivos,
H Xvyrives, qv pi cpodpa oripy’ mapacréec@as be ravd_e
tiv ndpra madatov, 3) vedrepov. Sid0var dv, Ta mpaTa,
Gepuiv, 1) peloy xvddow reovdper, mpd Tis xplaws, pbd
Kortans wheiav, xiv etrroros &n' émt 82 tevde ovriov didovra,
el ra Tis preypaclys wapixor, ablis yuxpov dpbyev, Beas
& dxos Bipeos. mpds dvdyxny 8é, px) wovov wey, Edv aurle
8& mpovmepnpciofas 88 xpi, ds jl drew dpevdv 6 olvos
movenrat, Kai émi roior ¢ cwaréyew xiv éx diacrdovos
ebdey Ody, Houyln mpocacrén. iv 52 movdds pev Bpay
expen, oxpurypod 84 mpds dxavnainy, 6Geia 88 dear}, ABepua 82
Kal Ta orjBea, Sidévat tod olvov éxécov dv bivnrac meiv.
podvos yap olvos admis & Loi Yuxpots. kal olvos by
EuvijOns et ely, adore pév meeiv, adore 62 ad curioy Edv
oly payeiv. ex Siacriows py és dvawavXay tof apdérov,
Tod Ex te THs voUcou Kal ris Tpopis. ev yap cuiepH TH
loxti poyéoucr kdpra nai éml +7 eSwd7. xpi) dv atrdv te
adxijevta xal elOvpov Eupevas, wal roy intpov rece wey
srapadaBas ts ededmieriny Eapevas, ds 84 dpryecw rowxthy
Tpopi Te rad olve.

Xpi) 58 wai rH Gy intpelip evepy@ xpéeoOa, & te ri
tov ipirev xabekv, nat ris Suvdpios dvderacw és TO Gd-
mupov: tore dy ériOnua 1B Odpnxe es Tov dpiorepdy pa-
arbv, poivixes ev olve Nelot, Edv Gdby Kal paorixy, Knpwr}
83 iv vépBy wemompery dveriipbe nade nal fy robe dow.
piv yhyrpras, &XXo emereBévas eriOnua, wideov éedsvra 7d
anéppa xal Ste wep hy oxdnpiv }, Ordoavra, Evpploryew
GArpiroce ebwdbect. Crevra dyivBlov xouny, Kat wvpalvys,
48 dxaxins, xat pavyns ceonopévov, Evpploryew’ dpod 88 7a
mdvra pupdcavra, xnpwri dvadapyBdvew olvavBlvyy fy 52
imrd rave pi) loyntar 6 pas, Supaxos xvrds els ppnow


184 TIEPI GEPATIEIAS

furrebels,* nal dxaxin, xal xippe, 788 pods +d eBebdipyor, xat
otummmpin, cal doivixes, xal podwv yudbs ebrrvooy Gya
mdvra vdpbp re xal olvdvOns 7G Abrai, és tov Oapnea
miblvar xal yap ré8e durpiyes re kal oride, xaraxeiobw
88 dv Hepe yruyps, elre wal wpds dpxrov 6 olxos: ef 6 wal
ef atipn Bopéov yuxp) érervelovea, Sarypiicee naxios Kexa-
gnéra OupdvS totw 82 wai els Nexpéwas Kal myyds Kab
Kedapttovras dyerovs Kal yap Kal rd ebarvoov réwbe Kal #
Ovpnbin wai riy Yuyiv Oddre Kal viv piow fwrype. arap
xal wpoxAnos Tod paysiv re Kal muciv: Hv be tx’ droping
ph rade mus edruyi, pipéerGae yp) Kal aiipny wexpiy,
rropbwv ebwdéov jSovijs puriat, nal dpyv elapds pidrows
98 dvOece roics mapeotas otopécayra Ti yi. drdp Kab
ériPrnyua toto Kodhov, madavdy, ds Séynrat pev Tov yHépa,
Siarvéy 82 rod Bdpnos rv Bépynvy. dpierov 88 dBdrn
madavj. maccew 8 aixtvas kal KArnibas dddlrows, wad
Gdopnxa: tpépew pev 7G dioup, 7H SE abyunpd Evvéyerv.
xai ramddy 88 rod odparos 7d dpaiy dumdocey. drdp
kal Ta mpoowra 7TH Yi TH Lapin, TH epnokpy ceonopery és
Obovnv dpavny evijcavra, katavdccey, Oy SiaciOnrat és Ta
pérota Kal Ta pia i dyvy Kal ritavov écBeopévny, Kai
yoyov orriy, onabivra év xpnotpy pixph, euBdrdew ext
rotate ixpadtoor Earnoé te Kote iSpGras Kal onroyyln
spuxpod és 7a rpdowra mposBrnbeioa, mitt wey trav Svap-
peévray inypiov, ruevérnte 88 Tis dpawdoros. Biaypiew 8
why Bpny, dxas i rod yruxpod pica xal ris rpopijs eeye-
nrat. bé dvaxadécacbat raw dxpwv Tiv Oépunv yreuKivo
4 cixvavip Maai Eiv merépet, xai 7H Kactopl, Kai viTpw,


4 In this place I have deleted One thing seems clear—thnt both
these two words, dugdeiov dxwatoy cannot stand, since they are syno-
instead of the former clanse, upa- nymous,

og, 7A», a8 is done by Ermerins, —* Tlind. v. 696,


OZEQN TACQN BIBA. B. 185


ral xéypy, enpot spixpov evrixovra, ds mobi 7d xpicpa*
kal But ris Murijoribos, 78 apopBiov, kat Sddvys rob
xaprob dXelypart, cravaxdnaww Opuns woer Bas. drap Kat
BorBor epot of cpixpol re wal épuOpot bv memépet ab
bEous tTavyly Aelp dpirtov erimracpa trav wobdw, Kal’ Spyv
fuveyéotata deipovrar xivbuvos yap Edxéwy nde phueracveo-
ows. eri roict édmls tov dde voogovra Sradpivar tiv
brcOpov.

Kijy wdvra piv ra xara Myov inzpds épby, eb 8¢ wdvra
xepéen, Eby 7H Evyxory wal et Greywaclas eriéact, éxdvovrar’
‘aol Bods plo otaud, Bloime 88 Sv ieanass adrry, dts ee
és dxpous médas Kal dvd pivar 7b 88 mpdcwmov ebypoor
aguypol és péyeBos sjppévor, drpopot, apobpol dav) 58
EunrfOns, ebpovos, wal ra mdvta Ywmbys* xdparos ob
cyevvis, drap 48 ebSev Sparac wal fv dy yev Garvos, e&é-
eye piv 7A oxrla, eEembe 8 viv alaOnow, drdp #8 efe-
Prdornae tiv puiv. xiv & imvov bypyrat, eirmrvoos, ebora-
djs, ebrovos, dvarrewmateras 8%, Sxas mep Svap, Tv vodaov.

Mere€erépoics 88 rruperot dpavpol éyxatadelrovrat, nal
mm Kat preypaciar cpixpal, xa yoooa Enpii dvixpor,
poydbees, vobpat, Siadeupévor, olos & papacpov % aepi-
Tpreh) clve ob warahaneoy ph apenhy ead Xewef
Siar GAN es eavioat, dyesry alone inal. xphivor, seal
Aourpav, Sxeos éx Tod vexpwbeos évraléy Kal dvatpapéy To
feirrupov. S:8dvar dé Kal yada, wdduota jeev yuvarxds veo-
réxou Kai xovpotpépov. Kal yap olde dvatpodijs, Seas dpri-
roxot aides, Séovrar. jv 52 ji), dvou pi) madavordKou™
€irmrov yap 76 rovbe yada. Kal él roiabe és dvddmav
Sree sel a uve:


186 TIEPI OLPATIETAS


Ked. &. Oepareia Xodépys.


"Ev yorépy 3 tev hepoptveoy erloyects naxdv drerta yap.
XPH dy Nas pyidlas adripata SéyerOas jy 88 ps}, drpdverv,
&:Bovras Haros edxprrov pupdaiver, Evveyds ye wiv, dAcyor
82, Gras pei evrdores woe xeval cTopdyyp, emacpadees’ Hy
88 nai otpédoe two, nal wodav Wiktes, réyyew pey rip
noiriny Marat Gepup Ely myydvp Kai Kupive efrnbérre, és
ras Tay duotwy Siaxpiovas, Kat erirBévas elpiov. wal ro
mide Neraivovra jovy tpiSav, dudadiavra padrdov I
mittovra. drip xal éypr rv yourdrew qpeyvéaOw rébe, Bs
dvdxdnow Oépuns. Kai péodi nev nbmpia xétobey dayo-
péet, dvabev 5& yopéer yorwbea, rade xpi) Tovey.

"Hy 82 brekprby pév 6 was wadatds aitos, yoral 8
Bulwer, xal yorudns Eueros Kal Sidtaces &p, 88 nat don, ead
Aap, Ralsdbvvcsshy, puypou Bbaros mudboue ieee a eee
bovat, & Te Thy Tis Kodins oTinpw, oxws exicyy Thy
mudlppoiay, ibd rar orépanyan albbjseroy Gakeen Eueytar
Berike, ery 7 wolly eudep, apace. pmlBlas jan nd
Sypir b <p withly Ocdaeras: drdp 48d eeeucs 8 cxtahen
dyOy8bve 700 Ocppod xal yuyxpod' Evveyas 58 robéee yuxpoy
morov.

"Hy &2 rai opvypol pev es 70 ptxpov Evyrécmar, 758 és TO
Evyexés nal muxvoy Suxmvrat, Spas 58 mept pérarra xab
Edgibas, kai mdvry Tod cepatos otéySnv peg, Kal yaoriip
pi erloxntat, Kat 6 oropaxos eudy bre Ebv Tact al Necro-
oxip, xat olvov Bpayd émiordtey 7G bate TE Yuypg,
ebadeos, cTipovtos, & te Ti Tis alaOijows dvdednow td
wis dopis Kal és Thy tobrou pacw!' tard ris Svvdptos, eal

2 Tobrow here refers to the sto- I do not approve of Ermerins”


mach, Indeoil, 1 felt inclined to alteration to rod owparo.
change the text to rod oropdyou.


OZEQN TAGQN, BIBA. B. 187


és Thy Tob othparos mpiabeow id rijs Opyrios. olvos yap
douds piv & viv dyw lew bs riy madppoin axéBew Aewrds
82, chs pyidleas yvbels rH pio Thy dw éppdiaba.? xparasds
88, ds Sivapev orijoas péoveav. émumdacew 88 xal dddlraw
wor, véov, ebrvdwv. iy 5¢ Evverelyy mdvta, ipax xat
&yracis, ob Tob croudyou podvoy, Ad Kal veipwv, NYE
even), kal mbes Evvreralvwvrat, Kal Koidln dropépy woNdA,
xad axduiins SvOpwros, cpynoir 88 mpds dxwwnalyy koe,
réte xpl pOdvew ride tiv Katdatacw ef 8 Kal maph,
uxpod Kal olvou modddv re SiSdva, poi) dxpyrearépov be,
Sad rhv wen Kai 7d vedpa, iv curio yopoicr diaSpé-
oro SSévan 52 Kal ris EdAns Tpopiis, dxola éy ovyxomh
Hot A2dexrat, drapyy cripoveay, ova, péowAa, pra Kv-
Sdivia, orapursy.

“Hy 82 ra ravra euéy, kal 6 erdpaxos pndty loxn, & Ta
Ocppad wat rord nai Spdpara radivSpopéev" perekeréporce
yap Serqoey 4 weraBodsy 7d Deed 82 Sores Oeppsrara: tr
88 undév te rotrwv dpityg, cuniyy és Td peony) ToY dpo-
mraréwy mpochdrrewv, Kal xatwBev dudadod tpérev cuve-
yas 5 tas cuwtas pebibiver. dbvvnpoy yap rd éripovoy
xal xivévvoy dépov prverawadaros. dvncé Kote Kivnows
aldpys eirrvoos ds nad 7d mrvebua Swryphicat, Kal ry tpopiy
€v tH xordin oyéBev, Kat elrvooy nal ebopumtoy tov vook-
ova Dépevat,

"Fly 84: End jubloo ploprntan née ead rhe xotbgs wal rod
Ocrpnnos riBivar' kai rade atm dota és cvryKomijy, poiviKes
&v olvp Sedeupdvor, dxaxin, bronoris. tdde Eby podivy
anparh dvadaBovra, éyyploavra 58 és dBbvnv, ext riy Kot
Ainv rBévar. es 52 tov Bcopnxa, parrixny, ddbnv, dyrevOlov
répny delay Edv xnpwr) vapbivy 4 olvdvOns, exemdrdeae Dp
7H Ocpyee & 88 rods wd8as Kal rods pias, jv teralywvras,
*T have adopted this reading from Petit and Ermerins, instead of evvitar.


188 EPI GEPATEIAD


oixvdviey, yretervov, f madav dreuvpa, Edy knp@ opixpe
xplew erumdoceay 52 Kat rob xdatopos- jv 58 Kal Yruypol
Soe of robes, xa TH Sie ris MprijotiBos Kal edpopSlov
yplaw delazars, nad. eplout éupedlootsy, wad ppragly
xeipav dmBive Gd xai ri pdysv, xal rods révovras Kai
tods pias Tav Te curyover, Toict alTéoice ypiew.

Kp july tui rotes Uoroyras ely 6 Rods nah yaanipi ive
oropayos Séxntar ra ceria Kal pi Even, odvypol 52 peyddos
Te Kal etrovor Ewart, nal 4 Edvracts dmronelrp, Oéppn 82 Kai
mévra dvalpy wai é& 7a dxpa ddiep, trvos 58 wdvra wécop,
Seurépy huépy #) tpiry Nobcavra, Tpémew és Ta EvvijOea’ jv
88 mdvra pew drreuén, pds 88 doyeros pén, Yruypos Be wat
meds yiyyntae dvOpwros, ohvyyol 8% mpds dmricBeow
Koo, xa darnvdjxy, ayabov vy toict rovréoes ebrperéia
eipécOar puyiv.


Kep. €. Oepamela Eidcod.


"Ev eide® rivos éorl 6 Krelvwv ém preypovg evrdpey,
Bracis Kal mpiois’ dixrtos be Kdxioros SdeApos. jere-
Eérepor pev yap avedrlotws vootovres Odvarov mpopavéa
pebvor SppwBbowar’ of'8 év athe arévov Sep Bon}, Gareroy
&pavrat. xph dy wfre opexporepov re yiyveaOa Tov lyzpiv
rod méBeos, wire Bpadvrepov. Grd, Hv pev preywaciny
airinv etpnrat, tdpvew préBa viv ex” dyxiive peyddy TH
oxdar, Sas aOpéas Siexpéy 1d alua, ris preypacins
tpop), wiv uéads RevroBuplnsy rd8e yap I) drrovins dpyn
qeyverat, fy vdpxns & dvaicOnolny dvdrvevois 88 év eihep,
riy on" dryvolns & Bay xpévov & Tod movou duBors-
érel kal 7d Ovijcney toils pev mde rrovéover edSacpovin’ Tw
dpyintp@ 8 ob Oéuis mpijocew. Oduis bé Kote mpoyryved~


OZEOQN TAOQN, BIBA. B. 189


oxorra aia rd mapsivra tv 0b pifiwa, wapnBaphy valph
ebvac Bac.

"Bay 22 veo) phepeactys; tnd Bua Boph A splbe wparap
tylyverar 6 eideds, pdeBoroplny pev loxew, 7a BE Nowra Fua
Tavra mpijocew" éuéev dd bdatos Capwa, cvyviv mivev
frawoy, cra ails cEepéew. gdoas dye nétw épBicpace
dperorixiy péy nuxapivov xurds, xai vizpov, #) Gress Gu
choy Bi drywyd edpuvov, 352 miyavoy. xpi dv wdvra Syod
oy pyrivg 79 rob repylvOou Siaypiew rae, kal omdyyoure
arupsiiis cole Be trcichSber ecb edb gdNev pa
icowmp, Kal Kodoxivrns ayplas tis capKds Apipare xiv
exxpidfy xdmpos, aidis Eraov Oeppiv Edv wnydve enévar
robe yap jw elow pluvn, trupinpa toice évrépoios cipevés.
réyyew 88 ra movéovra xopla Chaig Eiv mnydry wal dviOeo
anv Anbar. torw 5é xai ruplin, paxév ray Kepapnwy, ty
xarxéwr, ) Kéyxpov Kai ddaw porybdvrov. éremMopara
mpos toice Evvoice Extra alpns adyrov wal xipevov Kab
boadrrov 4 Spuydvou xbyx cuxdat 8 Koddat pev, cvxval 6,
Gq mpis Gras rBepern, és ro exvydorprov, és Tas iEbas
pos PovBesrer 483 xarémw & loyla ape veppods wal
pay. mdvrn yap dvrienay tov rovov Evadépos.' mporl-
ve S¢ xuplvov 4 mnydvou apeyrjpatos, kal rod olaavos, #)
bby rouréowe Tay pappdxov Trav dveadtvwy twa" pvpla be
Brae BAAD walpy yoyiidet wierh) dejaBBy BQ cad! BBE
Sylray dpnaxov, ubtev 700 pérpou wpds 7d Ebrnbes olléve
fy 82 pire 6 mrévos &vd.5, prjre pica, psjre wimpwov dvaboln,
70d KaBaprnplou rijs lepiis tm’ dvdyrns Biddvar. 4 yap
darn hddn Edv preyuare wal xorg 7d pdppaxoy, 7) biprev
Edyor picas, cxiBara, Preyna, xorjy, Tol Kaxod Tas


' The common reading in all the most felicitously amended as above
‘MSS. is dy rig wavra, which was by Wigan.


TIEPL @EPAITEIAS


190


évrdavas. tpodn) SeEd@youra’ Lwopot ddexropidwy, xoyya-
pity, mricdyns 6 yuros xdBebbos, Eby OAS Mirai dpyfDev
Tpoceyxubevre Tis EYijotos* cuveweiv rSe," KYpsvoy, Alzpor,
mpacov Edy TH Roun" i) intpein Edy Sones tor Staxmpytixg,
paxdlas dxpos $00), wad cobréay 88 unde} ron Bap
wordy, Av auperatvy, Ev derdpy, #-répti, Waco epi paler
xat yap pions dyaryd, cal obpytixd, xal eimrvoa’ jy 88 drupos
Gp, wal olvos & ve tiv rév evrdpwv Olpuny, drdp be &
dvdkdnow rijs Buvdyios, dprpyer” al papdOpov pits nua
WOM aL A Rleavron) sd eiakeampows

*Hy 83. & aeécracw tpbmyras 4) phequacin, Tpbe Fue
Aadrew dpewov, toiar & amicracw papyaovss ypebnevoy"
yeypddarat 82 rade ev rotor xpovioust, Evba xwuxdv Bepa~
areby eypdeon,


Ocpameia trav Kara ro “Hap dféov
nabov.


Keg. =’.


‘Ev iyrate rob aljwatos %) yévva, xai és To wav EOev 4 robSe
Gets! nal rs Etymrav Hap sxolov aluatos ayo.
OF’rarat dy ai rpde Preypoval. eyxéerae yap TG ywpip
pe 4 rpoph. ty ply Erdpabi ay @heyorh avorp, ob
xdpra ylyverat key fer yap 4 700 aluatos exeppoj? emi


2 L here adopt the ingenious con-
jecture of Ermerins, in place of the
common reading, fyew @de.

UThis reading, instead of the
common one, rod dgexi, was first
suggested by Petit,

Phe common reading is vée,
which Ermerins makes véy, having
adopted it from Bernard, ad Non-
‘num, i. p. 62. Tt occurs also in Cod.
Harley. But neither the one nor


the other furnishes any meaning
suitable to the place. To my mind,
there can be no doubt that the pro-
per reading is lie, which occurs in
Alexander's description of inflam
mation of the liver, as follows:—


“Ori piv diowep daca pdeypovi} le


Llowrog alparog tyes ry youn,
obrw eal i by rg iran, er. (vi.
19), ‘Tho meaning, then, obviously
is, that in inflammations of other


OZEOQN TIAGQN, BIBA. B. 191


82 7p firare ob xplos éripwber eer Av dp ris Budpabis
Tas cdbous érioyy, wiumparas 70 ireap Tis expoijs duepBev"
6 82 vis tpopijs elopous és 70 iprap Ere plaverr oby éxépy
wap d50s ris tpodiis és 7d wav oxijvos dd Tis Kordlns Kad
raw évrépav

Eirrépws dv xpi) viv xvwow eurroéev, répvovra pdiBas
tas dx’ dyxau, cvyviv pav aparpéovra, pi GOpdov bé.
drroatin piv Ta Tpdra, Gdvyoorréy 88 adOes, SKeoy Kal Toios
lower 7d Hap Keveiv 3. xph 88 Kal rota erBérowe
Siacxidvavar ra dv rH iprart oraBivras réykis piv dy Eby
Abn Hh Rrp@" elpta mvdevra olay. xpos dy éupikos,
obvena, 7 alpars alBeras 73 trap Gepudy njdp 7b alua.
rodde xp) cal rd émemhdcpara tupevar, adjrov pey
alpivow, 3) épuaipeov, 4 xpiBijs, Kal Mvov omépuaros upd
88, olvou dktos, wijdwv Tod yuAod, édlkwy ris dyumédou,
oindvOns wis dpalys, #700 ody pe Nieaoy’aryply, owbye
potos xaprod Saris AYrjpatos, cxivov, pujywvos, Ipidos.

‘Emjy 88 rovréoise wpndyys, cuxdny mpooBdrrev pétova
tos dupidaBety maven 70 bmoydvbpiov, évrdpuvew 5¢ Babirepa
ds Today Erxtionas alua pereferéporor 82 al BSXat, 7
oydoas, xpéacov. maperodverae b¢ trod tiiov % Sik ardp
nde péLovas SiaSpdaras wouderae rijde Kal Sucerloxeros
dard 1a teov ‘alubppoia: ey Env widv deméog 7d Onplov,
cixtny mpoaBddry.v vépbev yap edxee Td viv. Khy Dus
ayn xevedows, és piv ta tpdpata loyalyact ypteaOas


the blood, which is the paba~


inflamed; whereas in inflammations
the liver, the blood is inflamed in
the place where it is originally


formed.
* The negutive, obx, is wanting


in all the MSS; but, as Wigan
remarks, it is evidently required by
the sense.

*The common reading, ord@ea,
has no meaning. I have adopted
the sis eaten ‘emendation of Wie

in preference to Peainttas
which is the reading of


202 TIEPI GEPAMEIAZ OFEQN MAGON, BIBA. B.


eiptours 82 xaBapoice wal erumrdopace ddealvouer. eud-
Nake ydp Kore raw vetpov tas mphovas 4 Tobe Oepareln.
Grip xa wemlexey r00 xdaropos Flv peduepiry. rpopal
Grpodot, yuxpal, Spayéa pey ra curedy ta mrciora,
Adyava, waddyn, Brlrov, OpiBaxlym, eYyth ‘xodonivrn,
cixvos Epbds, reméwy cpatos: olvov 88, Kal xpedv, pode
moda dradohyres, eid. olvos yap Oéayres ly dens vebo
prov padBates 82 puyte,, ewavderyers BR idbovin, yore
Wits, eal erpedajans ebpotiatans

TéSe pos de 7a BEéa yeypdsple area. yp) 82 al abrév
rive. Evvevropbew, wih mévra addorpin Evyrypagly poo
eyovra Tov voov. oltre ra dkéa mdbea yiyverat, ds ev rake
re: rolos ryeypayspbro.es, kal podvours; 4 Sacre ypterBas:


APETAIOY KAIITIAAOKOY


XPONION NOYSQN GEPAIIEYTIKON


BIBAION IIPATON.


TINAX TON KE@AAAIQN.


Keg.
TIpooiiov =. a
Otpaxcia Kegadainc. B.
Otpartia Exorwparicsy . y.
Ocpartia "Ex Amping 5 v.
@tpaxtiaMedayyoding 6 we
Otpantia Maving o 8 8 Pe
Orpartialapadiog 9% * * * * *% Fy
Crpamtia P8icwog eb Wee th Gage
Otpamia'Eumvicoy 89% * * * % 8 &,
Otpartia risv ig rdv Tvebpova'Axoorasiwy * *
Ocpaxcia"AcQuarog = * = * * * * * aa,
Opardalveypwdov * * * % * * BL
Otpaxtia"Hxarog soe oe + ty
Ocpantia ExAnvig + 8 8 oe
@tpartia ‘Ieripov re ec
ee ee re


Orpancia Kaxeking


APETAIOY KAIITIAAOKOY XPONIQN
NOYZOQN GEPATIEYTIKON
BIBAION A’.


Keg. @. TH pooiueov.

‘Ev riot xpovlyos votcout 4 dpPord ris inxpelys Kandy.
tw? dpAnanlgs qhp bebe & Grfrecta widens “pitas ip
GB Toye, os pi priBlos darogoeriiat, Hy CoBiddy drab.
iy BE xai éxdnPivn; xpivy Kaprepd Sorae Kai Ewvarrobvy}-
ore yiyveral kore’ xal Ta opixpa petdvaw roréerar diadé-
Eas why 7d mpdcbev & xlvbwvov dowes , 4 ToKos rév8e
splyverac dr€0pios. xpi) av papre tov vootovra avyiy aléot
rod édéyyou ris vodcov, unde irrobidpijoxew bee rhs Iy-
tpelns, pojre Tov inzpiv KatauBraxedew. dudw yap & 7d
dvijxeotov EvvdSou.? perekerepon 88 rév apvorrov, br’ d-
qwootns Te Tov Tapedvrwv Kad tay adlis éxopevov és tédos
fuvBiarréovrae tH voiow. et yap toiet mrelotoict obre
Burra, otre dppwSéover Odvarov. bie rdbe dv intpp
edeas abrods ob émetpérover. miotis 58 Tovréwy Kepa-
abn, ts dupe mpérepor gow.


4The common reading, gusiwec,  * Either dy or something else
having no suitable meaning, Erme- seems to be wanting in this see
rins did right in altering this clause, tence.
agreeably to the suggestion of
Wigan.


206 EPL OBPATEIAS


Ked. 8. Qcparela Keadrains.


Kesar) 22, éxdaov és Gui dvayeatoy, roadyBe votay ade
merdry Kal tov dud rivde votowy t) uv éoBors) etrabiig,
eri cpuxp® @vyei xal iyouse drwy wal Bdpei. ef 88 abEnow
mpoordBor, Kai Ta rédXy GAOpia. ui) Gv jende Ta cpexpa
inrepopiy ddyea” opuxpoioe yap Kal roies dxeat pereeré-
pores An. i 8¢ xpdcw per ix xpdvou, wéw yap mpore-
moylyverar axGca, Téuverv thy éx’ dyxive pM Ba” mpicber
82 Svoiv Hudpasy olvov wumioxew. Evvrexpaipopevov 82 ri


Bivaper 73 -maH0s Sgaipbew. Epovoy Bi ph dodwak ds 4
Sivapls re dvéynrac tiv wANOdy Tijs datpéawos, Euveyés Te
rotate adrdoves woxdetnras i} voices. dde péyror mdonoe
het xpoviger vobco.s EurpSsv- wey) 82 tpidr 4 reredpur
Suepdiv ABporépas Sraxray, dresra Tiy lephy, 7d eaBapriptay,
Eov pouxpiinp mumiaxar. dréyeryip wddsara fide ded ris
xeharis Tis vovcou Tiv Tpodyjv. wAOos 52 rod dapydxov,
dxéooy récoapes # wévre Sdeiie Spaypal fy «@ xaBalpyrad,
Rediaie Sco kati clvc BRtrasjen) mir tron mibee ieee
al6cs réprey ¢48a rin dni 7, perdmy rir SpOfv... kvpia
tary yap ibe i adaipecis: 7d 8 wijOos dcov KordAns
cpixp@ Triov. Avew Te ji) weparrépew, Kevearyyéey yap ob
xpi Grevra tas Kopas Eup@ ddaipéovra cuxdny rij xopudiy
mpooRérrew mporépny. viv 88 érépny viv pecryd tae
Gpowdarkow:dpelbery dvalpaxray, oyétey re. miy ent is
mogudijencepedtion Zora whijGeos. heirs sal deine ell
Bé8e0s evropiv xebadalyy yap ra wkypis dorkaw dvtenas
Muara. $v 8 é dreddy hep 7a tpduara, ris deraplas
éerdpvew. Serdai & ai wey xatdry eal drwv opixpov Te
mporwrépw, Sijrae &¢ rats Siacpibeor ai 8 Top ards és
robpmpocey, abrav mryalov. wapdyeras yap TH dvrerpayyy,


XPONIQN HA@QN, BIBA. A‘. 207


drdp wai aive Sirdar Siacpigecr. tdyvew B& mpds Tots
doréog ris pdkovar albe gap. dvqiotal: erukaras eal
Frepas Exdotpor, xapta rental, bs ob6 Shedos exrdpverr.
6 88 tpdros é thot yetpoupyiner rédexTar. peya be 7d
dixos xeparalnor xai erodm in, xal cxordpact, Kat Eup irj-
Sy dmdoges rice ris xepadijs vobrorcs.'

‘Em mace 82 preypa d&yew xpi mpoxeveocayra Tiyy ya-
aripa' 4 katamirp impréry, Hj wbicpg Gddore pst de
portiv wrappinoiar, Grote 82 Sid crdparos toice dyouce
preypa. iby 52 wrappuixdy wev mérept, ctpoviov 4 pika,
xdaropos bpyie rade nal Evvir és Newrd 82 xéxpavra xad
cjcavta Kaddum éupvoiy % avr wrepod ynvds Taxed.
dywyirepov 8 rave wal Biadtepov eidpBiov Fiv rive
tévbe mybdv ardp nai édalovor 82 pioryerar yrevnive,
auxvevio, ) 76 dma aotipaxos wipp. trypov 8 yiryverae
xdpra ds txyvrov éyyeiras 88 bid rod puvds q addod.
SiBvpor 88 olde Evyudvées dd jucijs éxpofs, ds érdmak duco-
répowot eyyéew. ob yap dvacyerdv 4 Suiotacws éxarépou
pucriipos Win kad (Sip. mlumparae yap 7 xeadj) atrixa
wat Spr) Dvyos aipler xa 88 bd roO orbparos dyorra
Pre ya, civyre, xénnos b ris xvlins, wérept, atagis dypinr
Se Flv ddan, wal, iSlyr erel'83 nab of paofoaabas
wey alrd eal 1d wie Evvexés core gal tare f) peuxpriry
pikavra biBbvat, eutew te Td oTdpa Kal &s Ta TaplaOuie
mapiaavra dvardat Tod adxévos, TH Tis eemvois mvevpaTe
kniteur emivy 8, &s Boor Bigs, 73 Gdeyya drydryps, dover
Kal xaravovely Tiy xepadiy Kdpta moAS Bepus Toate és
Sarvory. icxupal yap ylyvovrac ednvacres.

Actrvoy eiterés tatw Sé xal olvos és dvdxAnow tod
aropdyor pda ydp Tot Kal.dde trovéer, emiy 88 peonyd
tip Sivapw Bpdoys, Kueu@ ype TH EvvijGei, Alrpov

| The common reading, instead ard. The reading I have intro-
of plya, is yard, in Kihn’s edition, duced seems to me self-evident,


208


MEPL GEPATELAZ


TOMI eumdrowy, i pytivys tis ard tis teppivOov tov
Sévbpeos evrijeav Odes Spaypds Svor es 88 tiv erodcav
Huépny alua ris puvds EvBov daipéerv, ds elow rapwOetobas
70 Opyavov Kareuibvov ebunnes, t) TO Kadedpevov topivnv.2 A
el mis Adena apis rdBe Eyer, xnvos xph wrepod rob
xavdod Tod Taytos droyuinpavra rdpvew Ta vetpa é& ddévras
bxms mpioriipa’ Kal réde & piva xariévat, wéode tay HO-
poudav® Ererra dudorépascr yepot xuvéew, ds Evyyapde-
covro ind raw d8dvrev 6 xSpos. pnidin 88 ral odds) ToD
alparos  popi pr<éBex yap icxval ride Kpalvovor Kal ra
ctpata padaxd wal etrunta. éace $2 Kal toioe Squdryce
worrol Tis éyxapakws of tpéroe wat Bordvyoe tpnyelnoe
nal pbrovor Sddyys Enpotes, évbévres rabe totes SaxtUdouwe
xwéew ebroves. Kevdcavra 52 dxdcoy xpi (form dé wrjPos
€> xorddns 7d fyutcv') pdecew omdyyoure nal dEvxpire, A
Enpév re loxatpoy eudueiy, xnxida, } cyeoriy orumrnpinry,
4 Badatiorwv.

“Hy 8 et rovréowe  xepadradyin pluvy, xiv mote
dromainrat, abro xpi) és Tédos ieee Tis intpelys. dv-
méarpooy yap Kandy, kal ev Spy tov ra wodra dwrevers
xp? dv dpatplovra ras xbyas Evp@, (wal yap rod_e Kepary
Gvniorov,) Kaiew rrupipar kauripoy,' érumodijs pév és was"
iy 82 péoge doréou eOérns, dmdvevbev Kab tov mud: pies
yap KavOévres fact omacpdy mpordjores. Kijy pev éxt=
mods ations, olvov ebady deveov Eby podly@ xatasovely
dds. d06vnv 8¢ xpi réyEavra érvreravvivat Thee érxapyet
pode tépns tpirns’ jv 88 Babcias Foor ai drydpas, mpd-


“Ermerins does right in substi-
tuting this word for cropivy. See,
in particular, Pollux, and the note
of Foes, (Ke, Hippocrat,, under this
word. Tt wus « sort of ladle.

? The common reading in all the
editions, except that of Ermerins,
is (oOpoutov.


“Though I have not ventured to
change mupiger into mupiy, IL have
little doubt that the latter (which
signifies the knob of a specilium or
cautery) is the true reading. See
P. Ai. vi. 66, et pluries.


XPONIQN HAOQN, BIBA. A’. 209


cou xpi) Kduny Edy GAl tpiyravra 362 és d0dvyy éyypicavra
rBévae’ 7 88 tpirn xnpwriy ex poblvoy éri rote éremo-
Aaloics, 4} dandy Eiv pédere ted rice Bublowe doxépner
7Bivat. dxdga 88 eri dre} pdppaxa GAy wy yeypdye
vas. Exapdv tives tnrép pérwmoy kata thy orebdvyy Td
Bipua Sxpes doréour nad réBe SriBborarres f). druchfravres
péode Sumdbns & odpxwcey ipyaryov. of 58 Kal évérpwoav
7G ooréw, wérhe priveyyos. ebrohwa Se Ta dikea Ga
XpieOas, Kijv emi mace piv i) xeparain erolpvy, 6 BE
vocéwy ebOupos, Kai 6 Tovos TOD capaTos dyabds,

"Hy &x mpocaywyijs twat, yupvarwa opba és orépva wal
Siicen) espovapéy, édrjptor Boddy SFaNe te, kal Evrevral:
Bevros ev rotrous dveihnows’ Tpiis Ta mpata Kal Ta Dorata
oKedav, xeparis 62 és pécov.

Tlirroxomin rh umdrrev Evveyis* gowlacew 8¢ xab
spe webadiy, Ddere dy elvan Biv Apr Bedi oryplorrs,
tbe sh dppntov ely co ardpr EXXore 82 Gdpuana Evvanat:
Govra, wy To EtvBerov 7b bid Tis Mepuvijoribos Kai ebpopBiov
xal rupéOpou eyes 88 wai dvadvvov epi re Tov év Kap
srévov Kal és wdydevow ris pitns Tod Kaxod, Baxpins 6 dds,
wal hiv Tbe $puawa, Sxdow CeoBalrecrd Soya; kad
ibvOouse txcra expier Sractipara.

Alarra''82 4 pav ef sedan tiv Sdylow Nem}, Ohoyo-
morln Kal L8pororin, erimpoctey pdduota diKeds Tivos.
Eipray 82, Sprpéwv per apetis, xpoypiar Kat oxopodav Kab
bod Tob aiAhlov, curjrios 58 iy maryyy, eal ydp 7 Sprpd
airtoy mpis Tf 700 aroudyou dperfy xa & nepaXhy ode
dyapt, Preyua ybov, xal Siarvéov,#) Siehaivov dro. domplov
xdmoroy tapos xal ra todbe eldea, miaaol, Kat dxpol, Kat
Borxol Sedrepov axl, of ye Exovar pdv twas dperds
mols te nal éxxploros, xeparis 5¢ mrjopwor Kal mévou

* Ermerins sappresses ep iperdr- are superfluous, and unsuitable to
rey altogether; and seemingly these this place.

Pr


210 NEPI OEPANEIAS


mowrixol’ wiv efnBévres Ebv memipe ove darokevarréor
xovbpor &8 of re whurol yaplevres Edy olvm, eal pédere Scov
WPbvar Kal 7d éx rovréwy pédnua Kat of Edv dahoiar fopotar
kadol yap Kal of ev 7h xapuxela xapro’, xdpov, Kopidvou,
dvigov, cedivou' tovréwy 52 xptcowv %} HSborpos 4 Botdyn,
Kai pujyeov mpas roice ebibect, tryouel rt Kal obpay dywyov
xat duodv tEodov. xpedv 5é rovnpa wey Ta mada TavTa*
veorpayi 58 ddéeropos, wrnvéw i) pdoca, H} wedeuds, Kal Ta
@\da Gxéca pi) padiota Tlova. avav Ta dxpea, Aaywos
brros: Bods 8 nal dios Taxivev Te Ral Kepadrijs mjcpiov"
pupos 82 ob rdvrm Kaxds' yada Kali Tupol kepadradyées.
byObwv of mezpator, 782 xdcor Kara Yerpny Epurror, Naydvaw
82 épbav pev dxica obpwy Kal Korrias trayarya, pardyn,
Br&rov, redrrov, dordpayor Sprpd 88 Kal kpduSy dpa Be,
Opidaxivn mévrov &purov- pita 6% rovnpal xa &pOad,
papavides, yoyyuriBes, crapudivor’ obpntixd pev, Mjopea
8& cisapoy puowbes pev Kai oTopdyou éraptixoy. olvoy
Aeunds, Nerds, yAuads wey eyyeypdhOw, cTinvwos Exwv, ais
PA oyen “iw yarrtoee cperyna’ wiv eepakahge eae
golvixes adons i8éns' cixov 88 dxrapy Kai oradud) mpo-
onves, xal 5 te dy éxl rijs dpns dpictov's wncpor) wavrov
wal riv cperobvrey waxby. xdeioy 88 dmeyly xbmoe
arevrins pev dowéorepor, émtPraBées Se Kai olde. repi-
tarot &wbev, mt rijs Korhins éxxplor’ etrrvoor 58 xad eipopor*
dpicrot 5é ral of éxl 7G Selrvp aldpy paxpa, vijvepos,
dvidwos tH xepadfy Kaxds yap abrén 6 celpios. spidly
ryuvaixds Kehadjy, velpous, Kaxdy érlamactoy. darodnuln és
Beppdrepoy ard xuypav, nal amd typdv és Enpdrepov.
Ebudopos 5% robs Kat ev Bardooy Suetaywy) rod Blow
kiv mapddds tes 9, dyabev AovecOal Te Th Byun vuxph,

“The common reading is evew» — be seen that, by a less violent change,


‘4&2 drréipn, which Ermerins has al- I haye succeeded in amending the
tered to éxépy¢ dt oiea, It will text,


XPONIQN ITAGQN, BIBA. A’. 211
kal vijyeaOat 7H Oaddaon, Kal thet yrdppoure éyradiwbéerOas,
xai Siorevew & Oddaccay.

‘Exeporpavins rabra dxea, dxoia yap th Kebady Sry
dxea mpéodopa, roiade pds dav ris Kepadijs ukpos ype
eaBar xaddv. sndcoure 52 ex réavbe dpueros 4 voicos, EAE
Pibpo xptecBat, rH eeydrn wal Swvarordry mavrwv dryoryi.


Kep. y¥'. Sepameia Sxormparixav.


Kab. de Biadibies dv xabadabpsyhyvereiicairatintey dean
xai abrh mpérn éx’ altinot pberat, alpoppolsav jdou
érurxéae wav demi puvos alua ph péy, mpoader péov, 4 wip
Siarvénrar rd oxivos, 4 Bpar., i) wove, mpicbev wovev-
pevoy. jw wav dy eri rH Keparaly Evorh, rdde xpi mprjo~
cew & Tnow, éxica emi rioe xeparalgor Mrexrar tio 88
xai Buudrepov ijobar xpi és TéA0s HV axéeov, botepov
dpdcw’ iv 88 dro tev exioxéowos bypay % vodcos droBh,
Ti EuviOn Exxpiow xivéew, dyvewov yap ths pious i
madivbpopin. iv 8 4 pev péddy, 7d Se sraBos aify, ext
piv Tijee Aner eruaxéoent, THat bud pris, j} Bpdrrov, Gra
rdpvew tiv ex dyxive jv & ert irate wrynpptpovre,
omy, } tee Tov ev Toiet pécorss oTAdyyveV, apiyyor %
axin. xpi) 88 dxdcov dy éx preBds wodav expen, Torovbe
éx révbe dpaipée alua. robe yap rijs mpopdctos % tpodi),
Gomep 5) nal yaoriip: emi be rHbe Ta rips epadiis dea
Ewvdrrrewv, $MBa riv emi rH pwerdmp spOiv tdépvovra, 4)
tas txarépwbey rijs pwds mpds Toict xavBoice, cucbyy Ti
xopudi) mpooBadreww, éxdrrew tas aprypias Eupeiv viv
repardy, powlooew, preypna dyew Sid purdv wrappuxoiae,
Bid crdparos, Skws érekat dravra mpiiccew ev bop TH
Gri rH xeparalp cipnwévp, Triyy dxdcov xukraplvou xUAds,
4) dvayarridos, éyyutis eis tiv piva, exer thw mpdaOeaw.
r2


212 HEPI OEPATIEIAZ


Emi 82 tov dppi ri xebariyy dxtoov Tey és rédos, dxoca
Bratérepa és Tobs cxorwbeas, rade yph mprjoreav’ éuéroroe
volar tind Sebrvou, #88 roies dard papaviberv xypbecBlas, 7d de
7o0Be Beov dav}, drip 188 ds eXAeAbpou ‘mrapacKeuir jee
apes yap “xpi r00 eropdyor dudeiv, enV sete Bewordeoues
euernplace kkrdp wal ro Péypa Aewrdrepov viv ylyverat,
al és tov EXALBopov ebbyvrov’ EXrePépou 52 Soares wAeives,
rotate ev loyvporépoce dpékas és péyelos onodpuou,' 7
Orlyov dSpérepoy rerunuévor Eby yovipw re ThuTG } harp
4 Boas" orabpds Be ddxfis Spaxyal bio. eri 8¢ rav dabe-
veorépwy Kal loyvorépwy rd Erna Ebv pédere’ witpov pve
artras 8604 pete rihabe rowjotos 5 rpdros EXAp ay Nedeberat.
peony) 82 éxdarov dxeos, iravarpéew Tov vooéovTa, & THY
rév péowy iropavijy.

Aprpyew 88 ead dei roies mapokvepotes Be SiaBeeuw pay
ra oxédea trip odupd Kal yotvara, kal xerpds KapTrous Te
ral Boaylovas Svepbe riav Sua apis roles dyxtion vey
Etes nepaniiy poBivov pdpor Eby bei eveyfoar 8 xpi) 7H
alo épridduov, 4 atrovb0hov, 4) Kercods, H Te ToLvbe.
dvdrpujis dxpow kal mpoowmou dadpnars bes, Yhyjyovos,
Abolition, eal dba Bint Bhat Bidorazy Groene
brn yap épeiBover tas ydbous" yapyadiopos wapicbulov,
desea aledachapudel we deckirjops tyry fare snordie hd aro
ypovro éx Tob Lopov. tdbe pev dy és Thy Tov Tapotvenod
mapyyoplyy, kai axédacw rod Lopadeos.

Bialroy 88 sep): oméons chs & vf Gepamely wah sds
aidis rébe yeyvickm. Dmrvos wovdds Kaxdv, Kal dvmvin.
Tous pev yap vapKd Tas aicOyjovas Tis xepadis. dtpav
mAnupipg, Sevos dmdans mpitios® réBe wévror Bdpeos xa


' Enmerins, following the sugges- _* Ermerins suppresses this clause
tion of Potit, substitutes this word — altogether.
for &unc, which is quite unsuitable
to the place.


XPONIQN TIAOQN, BIBA. A’. 213


ixov kal pappapyyav dort altia, ris voicou ra EbuBorar
dyputvin 82 dremrov, étpopov, RazaTnpiy Te oxsjvel, 4Ou-
How, ebmapdyaryos 4 yvapny bud rdbe pnidias palvoyras Kad
Hedayxodovar olde Evudopos 88 6 pérpios, és Thy iis
Tpopiis olxovouiny, Kal és dvéravray rév 8: ypépas Kapd-
Twv, mpbvova eal eripovy* wpoedpin Tis Koidins és dard~
kpiow Siarvois yap 7 pétwr aitin, Koil. dvdrpufis
adits oxerov 8: jyuerupBlov tpnyéav péode dowikwos,
Grevra varou Kal wReupéwy, totata xepadijs” dard Tovréaw
weplimarot, mpoonvics wav dpyiPev wat é dmromavow, éxl-
payee Oh ofiasoos, Speiebes Kerdovaces croll revel uanruy tat
rola. mepurdrot Err. dvadwvéew xpi, Toice Bapéos
$Obrryowre widdov xpebyeror slew. Sbbes yap, kebadis
Siacrdoves, Kporddwv marpol, eyxepdrov Siacikies, oip-
Qarncov mphores, Hyer dxor werpln dEvpaovin wepars dre
torov trea 8e Kaipds alps, & Siarvo)y tod mavrds
xeparijs Bdpeos, wAAPos 88 Erras moddv, TAIy dKdcoy
adpatoy J+ unB8 eri Edxyatar roter roi xwplov, pnBd
Evvexdae Kaprfot, aldpn ywyicde. Iiryav yap 7d8e
mpordjaves. edOées 88 Kal paxpol Kai reior torwv Kal of
meplrarot. iy ev dv ev tee kwor dpiotou, dprov pévou
Spéyerv, sxdcov pndév éwrodav rotor yumvactovos Eupevac,
mporenépOar yap xpi xepart xal xeipes, al ai rave
tplires’ emi 52 roiex olov -mpnéws és dvaxdnow Odpuns, Kab
edcapkins, kal rovowr trea xepadiw tpiBecBar Sphov
éwuréou pétov. iéyovra’ ardp Kal rd yupvdora és tpaxy)-
Rou mpijotas, nal és Slacpov yerpay evvrelver, ebrasdetras”
inrepavwpetvra 52 xpi Thy Kepadiyy, nal Tas dyrias yuuvdter
xeipovoyly, 4 Blonav Bod, 4 $idaveucetvra meyuit xaxdy
Re cpatpa, expr re nal weydday ris yap RepaXjs wal rv
bpbadpav ai Sunijorés re kal variates cxoTdpara Toréovery.


* Ermerins also crases these needed, See, further, Petit and
words, which do not scem to be Wighn.


24 EPI GEPANEIAS


dpiorov addrous wal Spdzor, 1d of) pay way ey ta oxéhea
mdyrar tovaous yuxporovein arovelns xpécowy ddov-
cin 88 Cepporovelns ctinpat, ruxvdcat, Enpiivar Kedariy
Yuxpodoveln Swarardrn, ixyeins t wardotacis’ bypijvat,
Aiea, dyrvdoas, Oepyodovely Swvarwrdry. xeharis yap
votcou ai mpoddores’ rovolde xai of vérot, Bapvijxoos. yav-
xin emi roice yupvaciac, & Katdotasw Tod Tapdyou.
micas Tis Kehadijs és Tiy rob Séppatos Etow.

Iporécus datos, i) olvou WSaptos' dpictow etredts:
Asx drew mbps 7. parasriipa, paddsyns, revrrev, Bdbrow.
Eu Pappa eiotépayov, edotonov, xoidins paOaxtixdv, dBa-
pes 88 xedarg, Sid Otyou, 4 OtuSpns, i) civiprios. div ta
Oepud yermirvos Bépeos S28 ra Yuyxpd, yupva rod dorpaxd-
eos, pi) dtd: Odaias, Golvixes, tdpiyos dpaiov, xdvbpos
truris, Edy reve tev prvKéwy, dxdcor HSivar, alperdv. et
roiabe ares. apeuly, hovyin xal dxois Kat radaijs. epi
mato, &0a dy civoov xai ebyapt, Sdvipect, ij} Bordvpee
iy 82 es Seirvov ip, padducta pev abdis yvyporovréav,
opixpoy troypicdpevoy dirai el 8 pi), oxédea podvov.
70 Scimvoy cxrddes, olov ixpiov, i) podmpa xovopou, f wrad-
yn diduoos, AYpijat etrremros: fdpyaxa 58 rd és HSoviy ris
mricdvns, mémept, prjxeor, Hivoopov, Kpoupior 4 mpdowr
opixpor, ube dxdcov eurrcioae SEeos 8 7d Spyad Eippo-~
pow Kpedv rd dx médvev ji) wlovar oviewv mrédes nal eebadsy
arnva ndvra’ 1 WrsjBei be rexpalperBar Nays Kal Ta
Onpevra & ddrexropls etsropos Kal Evppopos. tpdynpa war
xeparadyes, Tri polvixos, ij Tav dpalov cixwy, } oradu-
Djs, dv duces SyOpormoc by" 38% metudror. ebwenra, wad
dxvica, xai rodpa. meplrator Oupndia: év jovyin és tarvov
ddects.


XPONIQN MAOQN, BIBA, A’ 215


Kep. 8. Gcpareia ExAmpins.


‘Aniav bre mep pbya wal Swvardratoy és erimpiny ype
erbat. duyi) yap ob podvoy eremévou wdBeos Kal xevduvd~
Seos ep" Exdorns ixropvijaws, EAA Kal iBéys aleyeos, wal
Gvelbeos Tis cuppopijs. Kal por Soxte, elrrep ely adXXjdovs
&y roict wapokvopoios evéBrewov, dxdca mécyover of
vorebvres, obk dv Ere fwew Tratev dv. adda yap 7a Sewd
txdory wat 7d aloypd dvaaBnoly eal dBenaly «ptmrer
Euvopapreiy 82 viv inrpelny rH pacrévy rijs dictos dpicrov,
etre tioe peraBodjoe ris Hrxlns és wéya dpelBer Tov
&Opwrov. tv yap %) EvviOns ro KaxG Slaera, ev } epBro-
rever } votcos, olyero, obeére ereporréer és tov dvOparrov
Evvarrolyeras yap TH mpoabev HSéi,

“Hy dy rips xepadjjs NByrac, évorréee’ ride dravra xph
mpiocetv, dxdoa por dul Keparalns Mérexrat, dudl re ras
Tod alpatos apaipécvas,— 5 dud ras xafaporas,'—re-
Béy raw én’ dryxéivos, peta@mrou Tijs dpBlas, cuxiny ras Be
aparpécias ph péodr rerroBupins moréecCar, mpoadnows
yap rod maBeos NevroBupln’ aprnplas tdpvetv dmdoas, ras
te drwy mpocw Te xal dricw xabdporas 88 rodeo Bat eEo~
xéas tovréwy névrwy, Th lepi 78 xabaprnpip xat rhs Kea
Ais Tolar dyouce prsypa wOrAG 88 Swvatdrepa torw
Pdppana déper yap % eis ravBe rods movousy ebOuply Se
xai dedriatin tinct rods vorgovras TArjuovas. xYpedv eat


mip pépew és riv xeparsjv


‘IT wonder that Ermerins should
have thought it necessary to ex-
punge these words, It appears to
me that, from the commencement
of this paragraph down to rhijovac,
we have one of those long and com-
plicated sentences in which Thacy~
dides, Demosthenes, and other of
the great writers of antiquity de-


dvbet yap. rerpivat 82 xpi


lighted. ‘This style of composition
is very different from the periodic
style in which Roman, French, and
English authors compose their works,
Clarendon, Milton, and Cobbett are
the best examples we have, in Eng-
lish, of the old Grecian style of
writing in long sentences.


216 NEP OEPATIEIAZ


mpira Td doréov péxps Simdéns, Srevra Knpwrior wal éme-
Trdopact xptecbar. & 7 dv} piwyt ray doréwy drooth,
repérpyp xpi) wepixdrrew Ta yupwa fv Ere opixpa dvréxn
phys atropdrav droomdawos, bre pidains eave rovrbav
xa raxeln cbipel i pijyeyE wai ery és pibnow, 4H Kal
xdBapaw, Tob intpod ebrodpws dxeopévon, és @rejy Eup Sf
Td Tpapa, SvOpwmos ee Tis voloov. él mact, dowwi-
Eves wepadijs, Eurjees pay, dxacae por év rolow mpécbev
elpéarar’ Suvaterépn 58 7 bid tov xavPapiBwr yph Se eri-
spoabey ris xpijoros, TpLdv suepdv arivew ydda és Thy Tis
xberios dudanijv. xavOapides yap xépta civovra: Kictiy.
rade pay dy hy Kehads) memdvOp.

"Hy 8¢ 7 péoa elodyy tiv aitiny al rdde erd-yer viv
vodcov,—ixiora S¢ rade yiyverae’ Evprabics yap xehadry
rat pda paddov, os ert peyddp Kana, frrep dpy)) THs vot
cov —Bees 8 oy loxy, ¢réfa vduverr Thy om dyedvereal
dri ravbe dd omharyyvew yap % por drdp wal xaBalpew
rovade paddoy Tov drwy, Kal TH lep}, Kal Kvewpe, Kal-KoxKe
xvibns tdde yap preyudrov dywyd. Oo 5é Kaipwov
abréwv 4 cuxin emeOnpdroov 8, xal erurhacpdrav, 6 popros
eBSy dos, wah ardory ypdgery srepcrrdv, lj) debqroy. drape
airéov ywicnev, brs xp) Toicde Newrival, Siarveicat,
etpoa xai etrvoa ogc xal remrnpiocs pappdxows,
Pcppoiar, Enpoior, Kal obfpwv ayaryoior ypedpevoy, al év
mpoph wal &v apuaxty xpbocoy 88 ardvrav xdoropos boxes,
mivépevos ev pedixpiity Todddnts TOU pyVvos, dxdea Te Tot
rile Sépparc -rosbrdv. mpiores, 3 ibid rw Ouplew arcsktNay
ral 4 Tod Mibpiddrew érvroxidwrépy’ rivew 32 Kal ri
Byoriov ebrenra nip eat ebyyiarraira wot olen pene
éxéca yap xph ypddey rav érrdv dapudney, albe Eyouse
al Suvduces, xivvapopoy eal Kaoiny, p0\Na Ta padkaBabpov,
kal memépwos Kai cecéhos macas idéas. Kal ti yap ox av


edpos ev toicde ray Swatwrdtav; éyos, re Kal yumis


XPONION MAOQN, BIBA. A’. 217


byxépadros wal albvings dpijs xpadin, xai ai rarorw(Broe ya~
Aéae? Bowberres Moves Tiv votcor" eyo be rade pev odK
éxeipiOyy Bcacdpny 84 dvOpdrrou ye veooparyos drobivras
giddny 7B tempat Kal dpucapdvous tod alyaros mivovras.
& ris wapeotions peyddys dveryens, Thijvas xaxdy dxécacbas
padcpare nang et 58 wat dyides de robrov éyévorro, drpe-
ds obbels Exes wos Neyew" An SE ves ypaghy Eppaker, Hyrap
dyOpdrrov payeiv. adda rdbe wey yeypdgdlw roicr péxpe
réevbe Thijpoce.

Tpocapiyyew 82 xal rH Stairp, xal exderovss trav yvopd-
vey, # Bi EXAaw; Bi abroo.. viv 82 yp) obBdy tmrepopiiv,
pndé mpijoceyr v1 clei, udduaora pay ef’ Exdarowoe opexpotoe
mrdvras dpercdvra- jv 88 wh, SAdarovra pndiv? Kal yap
Spijpara éxooa ji) Onnta, kal dxotopara, kal yeipara, Kai
Ounrd pupia eréyxee thy vodoov. dpdteabae cv aepi
mdvror para. tmrvos woddds, waxuris, dpyln, dulydn ris
aicOjowy dyabov 88 Eupperply xowdlys éxxpiois mi roiae
trot dpotov, widora wveupdrov Kal pheypdrov. me-
plraro: paxpol, bees, dvituxror, ebrvoot, id Sévipect
wry pupaoivns,  Sddyns, ty roto Spewéat, wal ebesbeor Bord~
ypot 8%, KaraylvOy, yrjyore, Oium, Hbvdoue pddmora
Bey Toict dyploiet, abropdtosr jy be ys), Kav momroio
& rote wal alépac paxpal rai albe ebBkes' ddormopinae
xadiv xpteaOar, ps mapa rrotapiy cis 73 peiua évopiiv,
(Xbpyov yap mowyruxdv péos,) pyBi es wbedov orpaxpd~
pevoy, unde BéuPxa Sivedpevov.s daBevéotepos yap eSpaiov


* That this is the true readin,
and not of ivoueidior yadeoi, Is
quite obvious from Dioscorides, ii
27. All the yadeot were sea ani-
mals, Seo Appendix to Dunbar's
Greek Lexicon.

2 Ennering, following the advice
of Petit, by the addition of yo, and
slightly altering the punctuation,
greatly improves the text in this


place. Our author evidently alludes
to the celebrated passage in the
Epidemics of Hippocrates. See
vol. i. p.360, Syd, Soe. Edit.

+ ‘Tho common reading is und iy
Kindy orpogodpevor, for which Bx-
‘merins proposes to substirute the
above, on the authority of « Pari~
sian MS.


218 NEPL OEPAMETAS


iordvae 1d mvedpa Evediccerar yap TH Kikry. Sivnow
82 oxordéparos Kal ris émednyrins mpoxdnows dad 82 Tis
aldpns, mepimatos tpenaios’ Sera 4 hovyin, és droxard~
eracw Tod ev Ti aldpy Tapdyou™ yuuvdow 8¢ él robrowe
mpos xeipas, TprBevrov Tay dxpov dd’ HpyerupBiou Adwoice
dyoior® ddeppa et) xdpra Nemapor tpixpis év pedujcer
nev odca," oxdnporépn 8 és mixvoow oibadéor yap Kai
maxées of Treiotor. peanyd 5é Gdns ris Tpifios Kedadi
SpOin rerpibOw. yupvdow ra els Tov atyéva Kal dpous
xetpovouln mavra éxdoa por emt cxormpatixiy hédexTaL.
Gdus 5¢ évOd5e Tot exet poprov. mdijv dxdca dEbrepa yph ra
tavde yunvdowa Eupevar és pita wal Gépunv. tade yap
mévra Nertive. atdp xal dv 7G avril Bip xpi) SEvOupiny
dépynrov éurdcdecv.

Tpofad rica: waysect domploat, xaxiv censbeis 82;
prot Enpérepor, xév8por wrutol, wal ra éx Tavb_ popyjparat
oh 88 ds Bort deppanaiwadrd ois srpbabev.. rv Soajader
88 viv Eorw ahedva, mwemépios, SeyyBépios, Avyvorixod.
euBdppara 2, &¢ d€eos Kal xypivov, xal j8éa nal ypiorpa,
xpedv pdduora piv dmeipyOwe mdpmav ei Se pwd ye, ev TH
Ocparrein’ 5 8 thy dvddppw éotw dxdca noida F dice,
oloy te ra wryva, THI vijcons Kal TH mApe, SKws raywol,
lav mébes, tapryos’ Kat émi roict, Sifros dyabov. otvev
Odvyorocin, Nevxod, Newrob, ebadeos, obpeouévor’ Kaydvwy
éfOdv, dnica és Sivayw Spipéa AewTivat, olpa xiwijoat,
éxotéy 71 epduBn, domdpayos, xvlin* opdv 8 Opidaxivy ef?
Gp cixvos 8 xai wérwv dvbpl wiv xparepp wepitta, Tat
88 Boréov udode vyebowos. Kaxdv yap ravbe 4) mANBds, Yu
xpav éovrwv Kal iypay. aiixou xAwpod Kal ataduds


*T have not serupled, in this sen- placa. ‘The passage is still ob-
tence, to follow Ermerina in substi- senre.

tuting rpiBivrow for ivéyrwy, which Instead of dy peXAijout, Ermerins
has no meaning suitable to the reads éypédye. 1 am doubtful,


XPONIQN ILAGQN, BIBA. A’. 219


xpiicws cpatos’ mepiratoe ext rote &¢ Ovpndin d&drv-
mos.
‘Opyh 82-xal Aayveln, nab wad yp. 73 mpiya tis
voicou déper ra ovuBoda. dardrn 5é rus & Te wereterépous
larpods cuvovains. drei yap % Tis diiotos els dv8pa pera~
Bord) dyabiv re mpijoce, pereBidoavro Thy waldov dicw
dap Evvovely, ds Oaacov dvappaaovres’ dryvotouct 88 ris
piows Thy abtoudrny mpobecuiny, ef § mdvra ylyveras
Ta dxea* fide yap éxdory jxly ovvrixres ta olxeia ev
xpovors mpaincs ev xporp yap of memaxpol amépuatos,
yeveiou, rods, tis dv inrpds mpocadrAdEat tis diows
Tobro pév Thy dpyiley Tay omepudtwv petaBorijy, Toro Se
iw és éxdorou mpoberpiny; adda Kai mpoctxoyray és tir
giow 70d voorjparos. obxérs yap Eyxatpol twes tact TH
dex) rijs Evvovelys, mpocwéspevoe deopin rod mpijywaros.

Buorevew 58 xph ev xeippow Oepufior, Enpiow. syuxpoy
yap, Kat iypor, %) vodaos,


Kep. €. Oepameia MeAayyorins.


Xpei Aovris ddl aljaros dxpasphoves dy relce pehayyo-
Axoton, dd’ ob ylyverae %) voicos, GAA Kal xaxoxyulns, ob8
orl cpexp@ TH WAHOet jy wey Gv Araunins véns MiByras nal
dipns capwis, rdpvew prS8a riyy ex dyndve re SeEu@ wéony,
Bems dard rod: frraros ely érleaupor's, for. ride yap 7d
omhdyxvoy aiparos ai mnyal, xorjs bb 4 yéveows, dude
perayyorins } Tpopy Tépvew 82 wiv loxvol foot, kal det-
parpoe opixpov 8 ddaipéery, dxdcov alaBorro romis i Sv-
vapis’ odt eheyyBeln 88 exit Tovy. Kal yap el maxd, Kad
xordbes, kal memos ein To alua, nal pédav xaos duopyn,
GAA TdB¢ earl THs Pdatos 6 yapos Kal 4 Tpody. fv dv Tod
Blovros odrby ddthps, dxpopln 4 Goes eloraras ris


220 TEPI GEPATIEIAZ


Bpns" jy be rodrvauos J, 7a odd dv ob xdpra ylyverar
movnpov Tauvewv 52 rh pdé8a' Kad pi) abtiiuap dxdcov xpi
adaipéeay, ANN’ éx Baardewws" Kai abrfap b& 1d 88 dj
Gos Enacovew ai buvdures. jpeorpyd 88, dbporkpes Saerav
& @gs revasowos trropovijy. xpi) yap xal 16 cropdyp
dpipyewv, kal 7G vocéovte Kal Kdpvovrs, THbe Tihs pedralyns
XOds eyeopevns: émirporGev pais Hpépns Newrds Sary-
Bévrt, péravos EXdeBepov Soréov Edy peduxpiry, crab yoo
Gxdcov ddxds S00. tnrdyen yap b8e pédawav xodp" arap
Kal rod Oipou rod Arrixod 1 Kopn, Kar ide dye pédawav
xomjy’ dpurrov bé Evpuloyovra Sidovar ixdarov pdpos bv és
ora < bio dydoiv. dovew te dard Tis Kaldpows, Kal
olvou Apaxd S:86vat, xal rijs GAs ris év rH tpodf xdperos.
cropdyou yap TH Suvdmer kaparnpoy 4 xdOapors. peraSat
vew addis eri ra wéoa* dxpe 8 mpoyaddcavra éremddo~
part Kal réyft, cuctnv mpds Td Frap Kal Ti Koidiny, H 7d
aropa tadrys, mporBddrew. Se yap % adbalpeots moder
71 éxixaiporipn rijs $reBoroping: arpooBadrev 8 nad role
petabpivowre pecnyd Tov apoTharéwy évtadba Tod oTo-
Hdxov éorl i} mpdaduars. lr’ adbis eravarpépew, nal iy
af dialry BracrnOh 4 Bivaues, rw eepardy fuptewr Freire
ouxiny 7H Kepady mpooBarrew, wat yap % mparn ead pe-
yiarn tis voucou ev toloe vevporct! airly. add’ ovdé ai
alcOijoves tact dowwées, exeilev ydp ohewv 4 darécracts
Kal 4) dpy}. Evvrpérovras dv Kai aide, kowwval odoas rijs
mdOny perekérepor 88 Kat mapacOdvorrar, mapadoph Tis
alaBijows xpi) 88 udduora 7H oToméy upiyyew, Kal Tope
vooéovros, Kal év rede Tis pedalvns Yods eyxeomevys. mem
exe dy xpi TOD xUAOD Tod dyivGlov Evvexas, dard cui«pod
Fob pnytBeos Bxpe' eudBov. mabhupa yap réBe yore perk
alos ‘dyaBey Bi nad drdq, FBe Hap tadyes ely +8 acckew

* Wigan and Ermerins have very votsoo. Petit suggeste ty role
properly substituted this word for GAAoist,


XPONIQN TIAGQN, BIBA. A’. 221


Srrepov viv xodsv. sy piv dv vebroxoy 7b ardBos jh, xa hh
TOMév dvOporos exrpamy, ole Gdns wey em rotor iijows,
Tis 52 Nourijs Sialrys xpéos, & te dvadmpu Tis vos, xal &
xaBapaww dxpiSta rob wabeos, nal loxdy ris Suvdcos, ws jai)
madwépopéwor ai vodcor dpdaw 88 adlis tiv ev 7H dva-

“Hy &¢ éml roiebe cprxpov re tromrataca 4 vobcos maXi-
vopaos 840%j, wetéveev dxkow xpéos. pei) dv duBor) xpdvou
yeyvéc Bax GAX' fy ert oxéos yuvarnds Karapnvioy, }) dvbpos
aipoppolSuv poou, 4) vadcos sapjj, épeBitew +4 ywpla, mpo-
xéew re 708 Eunifeos: iu 82 wédAy wal jw) Hep, GQ wy
ToD aluaros werappvévros, émiamépyy 8¢ #) vodcos, Kevdovas
rrovserGas airs, iyyeiuevov dard tov adupav. xiv pi &
Boor ph évreiier dspedns, eal v én? detains dures GE
peony 88 rpidv 9 reaadpay Huepdv dvatpsysos thy lepiv
76 Kabapripiov ddppaxov mimicnew: Erevra cudnv Totae
péoowre mpor Barre, 7 irate éyyplwrovra, epiocew TE
7a tpya jh} téxos dvtovra, cpixpolor pev yap dxeoe ob
melBerar. hy & ta peydda Envy, ev Bn Wee } weday-
edly Kal ty mdory, ro dbperos dvounjoy, aleOheeat,
youn, aipart, yorp, AGByras 68 Kal vevpwv, airy te és
bsicacanepenerae sratenniSrnarg akived triaansepemade
Tey ToKovs, oTacpod, paving, mapadvowos" Kijy ce pedary-
Xorns rade yiyytat, ra ervyryvopeva dvixeata. €r<_Bipe
Ov xptecBar es Inow tod xaxod. érlmpoobev 5¢ rod édrc-
Bépov xpi tév re oTépaxov péderijoas dene, nal ra
typa Aerrivat, Kal 7o cxivos epooy rove Eyeror 88 rade
Tpiiccovet, Grote piv of vijoties, Gddore bE pacavides.
Gpdow 68 rév re tpérov Kal riv DAqr dpdow 88 Kal rod
reBopov ra elbea, Kal ris xpictos rods Tpérous, Kad

The common reading, tyrord, Ermering, in preference to tyspordl,


being evidently inadmissible, Ihave as enggested hy Petit, or dyeia as
preferred the reading adopted by proposed by Wigan.


222 HEPI GEPAMEIAS


Sxes wpoevxpwijoas Exarroy xpi), Kal Sxas ev Totes Epérotoe
dpippew. Grvatov, dri toiabe ef ply EXUIn és 7d waprrav
voticos, #) Todd éréwy Eye Siaretias. Ta moda yap
roibe daréroxor podaryyoriar’ fy 82 Eumedoy ide, ph dn
wepipdverr. xpi) dv 7a & Tov EXBopov &ravra mpijacev.
irpéas pav dv dravrtas moe abivatov tods voréorras’ F
aap dy iyrpis Kpécowy Geod? drroviny 88 nai Siadrelyuas
kal vobrwy éemixptyrias, Spiv Cfus intpév. % dv dravdqy
del rotete nal Gwopretc Oe, arpotercoudvein 8: BraBer, 4
kal & rédos Totoe Epyours Spsdterr SiBévae 5e nad ris lepijs
tijs 80 Gdons Grote Kal adore Kalpwv yap ddpyaxov
Tis pedayyorins 768, otopdyov, Kal ipratos, Kal xodjjs
rabapaws dxoy ov arap Kal paddyns orépparos, éxocov
Ores Spaxuiy, werioxev Eiv tart, apicrov melpy res
emaréicato, pupla St ray amdav happdxwy ddda GAdooe
& xpnord.

"Emi 82 rote wivowse rotabe és avddmpw ayew. perete-
répoioe yap és ev Tov Tis intpelns Kaipov % votaos eE Epns
Bd bcnjbir dy’ 88'es Boderhacw capniey nad Beoidwoe bol par
ie Sieg Eureeany NO aries vie poteron 7d: Fria Sorapaae
pir dp boos byelav <heres; BaBlvea 88 vebcor. dackres
dy & dvddmpfu 6 voréwv, meduxoce Bepyoicr Tbace évbiat-
messavor) xaliyap'rh é rotebe béppaxa ntord,* kopahrors
HOciev,} evincinph, woNASy -whebves router Eines” Bunda
fiked “WyaBbv pte *yep bypacly e€ adyp00 «fe vobcou sna
rédadruply rhe tows Spaad 88 wal padOacad cdpees
fmicral mpds ddecw rod vooyjparos Enpal 82 wal muxval
Tos peAaryyoAdor al odpxes. Gera AuTrapoy dua bee
ebapois, TOAAG TG Arai Séyovra . os se ee ates
Giproe mrutol, Eiv tiv prunel, cipal 7 Kpntixa® ake oKu-


2 Hippocrat, Prognost. ® Wigan has substituted this read
* Tt is so accented in all the MSS. ing for Onpaiy rq epnri.
and editions,


XPONIOQN TAGQN, BIBA. A’. 213


jixwv Kal pappapyyay dove atria, ris vouoou ra EdpSorar
dypunvin 82 dremroy, dtpopov, Kaparnpoy To cxsjvei, GBv=
Hor, edrapdyaryos 7 ‘yveipay Bur rdBe pnidios paivovras wat
Herayyoréovar olde Eiupopos 52d pérpos, ts thy ris
Tpodijs olxovopiny, Kal és dvdravray tay 3: jpdpas Kapd~
Tav. mpbvora Kal émipovsj* mpoedpin ris Kothins és dmrd-
xpiow Sucrvois yap 4 wor alrin, Koln. dvdtpufris
aibes oxcdiv 8¢ jperypBlov cpnxéov péodi powlEws,
Heaven vibraul ah ae Nevjpbinxserrenies eondichijy- 4 ead eta a
mreptraror, mpoonvées wey dpyibey nab és drémavow, émi-
tpoxot 82 of pécor, ijpeuln, xardotacts Tod wvetuaros emi
toios wepurdrot torw. dvadwview xpi, Toicr Bapéoe
$Obrryoa wadXov xpebueroy Hyteur. ables yap, Kebadis
Sacrdaves, Kpordwv maryol, éyxepddov Siacpiktes, dp-
Badpév mprjares, Hixwv dxorjs perpin dEupovin rebar dvi
iatov erecra 8 Kxatpds alwpys, & Siamvohy tod wavrds
Kepadis Sdpeos, wriOos b¢ Exras Todrdv, Ty deécov
dxdparov i pnded érl eypotee rotor rot ywpiov, nde
Fuvexéoe xaprfjor, alépn yvyiada. idbyyov yap rdbe
mporrsjares. ebfées 82 xal paxpol Kab reior Eorwv Kal of
méplraror. iv pev dv év tet éwoe dpiorov, dprov pévou
Ophyev, dxdcov pydiv eumodiv roiss yupvaciois Eupevar,
mpomenéslas wp xpi wear nal xeipes, Kad al rivbe
amples dri 88 roice olov -mpniws és dvdxdnery Odpyns, kab
ebcapklns, Kat rovou' Greta xehadjv rpiSecBar dpGiov
tourion pétore iéyovta’ ardp wal 7d yupvdora é& Tpaxy-
Rou mpijouas, wal es Slwcpov yerpav ouvreiver, edradetras
tnrepascopeivra 8 xpij Tiy Kepadiy, nal ras Bias yuprdter
xeipovoply, ) Blexww Borg, t porovecceivra muyyi Kaxov
Bi acpaipa, maxprj re Kal weydry’ Tijs yap Kepadis Kai rdw
éfbarpév ai Bivijords re Kal dvordovs oxoTdpara Toor.


? Ermerins also erases these needed, See, further, Petit and
words, which do uot seem to be Wigin.


222 EPI QEPANEIAS


Sxws srpoeuxpwijoas Exaoroy xpi), kat Sees dv roiee epérowse
dpiyyew. dematov, eri rotade ef pi) EX0On os 7d wdprav H
vodaos, 4) wodddw éréwy Erye BuarelYias. Ta wONdA yap
robbe dméroxo: porwyyoria fy 52 Eumedos He, iy hon
mrepipévery. xpi) Ov ra és Tov EAXBopov &ravra wpe.
trydas pay dv dravras mode ddivatov tods vortovras’ #
yap dv inrpis Kpéoowy Beot.® daroviny 58 nai Siadelyuas
kai votcwy émuxpiyias, Spiv Oéues inrpév. %) dy dravdiv
émi roicde nal dmapveiabac, mpoiryonévous Td dvadbes, H
kat é& rédos Tota Epyoure duiréer SiScvar 5é Kal ris lepiis
rijs 8’ addons addore Kai Gddore Kaipwv yap ddppaxov
Tis pedayyorlns Tobe, oTondyov, Kal fpratos, Kal yodijs
kabdpavs dxos dov' drap Kal pardyns omépparos, SKorov
refs Spaxuiy, werloxey Eiv ibart, apictov welpy ws
émicrdoaro. pupla dé rav dwhiv pappdxwv &\Na &ddowe
&y xpnord.

"Emi 88 rota mévouse Totcde es dvddmpu dyew. pereke-
répower yap és wav Tov vis Iytpelns Katpdy 4 vodcos eE Spys
88 dxiviOn jy 88 & dvdrhaow capri Kai Suvducos dvOpw-
mos ix, EvvarnddOn mdvra tis vovcou Ta tyvia. Bivapes
Hev yap gdaios iryelay rice, doBévea Bt vodoov. drirw
Sy & dvdampur 5 vorkey, mepuxéor Geppoter Cat dSiat-
mibjlevog! wal yop viv ey rotabe Gulp paca Srmtord Boban
4) Ociov, 4) otumrnpin, mohAav Tedves Touréww GArat Buvd~
pues, ayabov pev yap bypacin e& abypod ris votcou Kat
Tadarwpin tijs ijcvos* dpa 88 xal padOaxal cdpees
pnioral mpos decry rod vooyjparos Enpal 5é wat muKval
Toi pedayyordor al cdpres. Adeipua drapsy Gum phys
edagods, TONAG Th Almat Séyorra .. ee +
prot mhurol, Edv rive pPunel, cipal 7H Kpntixd® ad cxv-


* Hippocrat. Prognost, * Wigan hos substitated this read~
* Tr ix so accented in all the MSS, ing for Onpaiy ry epnri.
and editions,


XPONIQN TIAGQN, BIBA. A. 223,


Beduri 7 Tapping. ip olvos nai wéds piktos radaciis: didv,
kal yuxporépwy xal Oepydv, tov yuprav ard tod dotpa-
wavbeos” Kpedy, Ta 3) love Kal cunypaTddea” cud wey 3é-
bes, walt wip xepad}s, wryviov rh arrepd derlavar Onplaiv,
Aaywiv, Sopxddwy, wraxds Smaps, Gxaidy te Gpuatov He
eri ri rod cropdxou dvahoph mpopnPécabar mpd Tis Tpo-
dis, Skos yh) atamobels dvepiprat. SiBdvas Ov mpd mdv-
rey crrlay pedteprrrov, xuddov fucav, wal mbvra éEepbew es
Thy Tob oropiyou KdBapow. dbe yap cor % tpopi Epaly
never déppaxa 88 raw dvaryxaloy xaPapriipia, wires Kap-
sos Kal xvibns, Tay orepudrov Tod KoKxddov, Kal reméptos,
dpvySdrwv ai micpal, kal pede j rede H Edoracis Hy B
Enpijvas O2dys, dpiorov outpva, xal Ypews 4 pita, wal rd Bud
$8y Ohplar sedpuaxcy; cad $ 10d Bigorteov, sal Mullpiberoy,
nal GdAav puplaw eribripara bé, 4 av erumhacpdrov An,
Hed arTov, Kal wheeves, Kat repplvbov Bdxpvor, Kai boowrror,
wal Kaas td drs pédwv, 4 Tis olvdvOns. npds 82 rouréav
mdvrav mdyos. Gderppa Nerapdv" aisipar mepimarae ANN”
Oca capxéyv re dvdr hacw rroiderae Kal duvduios lexdv, rab
Tis pdows és 7 dpyaiov cronatderacw.

CS ee ae ee Ter coe Peer vane |
ee ae ee


Ke. 9. Ocpareta Dbiowos.


# % # Sea ey vt cad yadiyp. cad opp, eb ebrryoln &
voréoy, &v Baddacy ylyvorr’ dv aicpy xal Bior}. Kal ydp
wi Eaply & 72 Bruce FurBBoos Dyn dd 82 1s aléone
edyovydcavra xplecBar viv umrap@ mai, et row tpipece
éfexes xaravovovpuevov . .. . . an’ ddtyou ek mpocaywyis,
& xortdas trévre, ) 2, f) woddv Tu wAclov" Hy Be uh, dxdcov
ms bivyrar moNAdKe yap 1d6e pobvoy dvrl rdons Tpobis
iipkece’ yada &é 46d piv mpocdpacbar meiy &¢ pricrov,


224 NEPI GEPATIEIAS


orepedv Opeyrat, Kal tpopis drdans éx maskas EvvnBéorepov
Weiv 8 reprviv +H xpori ddppaxov S¢ dprnply dxepyvor,
BiamrrepSoar Bobyyor, byeiy ¢deypa, ebrrvooy, dua Oypiv 82
Ty nibren BibEoBor-> Eres 82 peipeansy.prond xk GQ
mavris edpeveorepov. ty wey dy tes odddy Todd srivy,
obdeuins tpodis drys xptos. dyabby yap ev voiow eve
ddppaxov yada twiriv yiyverBae Kai rpodijv. Kal yap
avOparwy Tav yadaxtopaywy Ta EOvea ciroy otm kee
Sprarov 82. For yddaxrs, na) aedroh; xak Irpla, wat xsvSone
evrol: xa) duboe Berra de yhaxros iyiyveras..xal mpeg
fu. drdone Bép; borren Suoky, wriodine. 3 yeuNde, ebbremyos; Nei
yp 82 rocbvBe J8b/Oar, dxbcar junpdvecdal dove pulsry:
$v nal ray és ABaviv 1b Nap Bdorg, wad vbde Larrea bps
Avyvorixod Kdpny, Yjywva, jitocyov, dav Spayd, dos,
estan fe pibr orbpaiyor deremnby).rbbe.meipkyens pt
janBto. BBe'sexpocaaryedtiy ndireey dav vrrurdyn iepheoene
decors 82 thy wricdvny és xovbpov GdAdkar dduedrepos yap,
nal elmenrirepos Kal curyparmdns ty ds mricavy mricOy?
dy afias tryporéppat. doaysrypers xvasios: xabaloes Erker BAN
fore duowdns. miads Kal xpos, dxdcov ddvadrepa, To-
vie Edxéwv dxabaprorepa. Evvrexpaipipevoy dv mpos Ta
maptovra, roia8e xpijobas: ya 82 atréay, fowa wal eet
mruadvy rédextav’ wa 6 éx mupds pev Vbapéa, Oepud>
dourror Bb de Ghani dertroke, npiy-ts* ee
* * # * * * Ce a


Ke. «7. Separeia “Hrraros.


* * & Jatt Edxos bor dNLOpiov. 1} XadeTwrdry BE és Thy
yacrépa Evppoia tod miov, iy Tov otipaxor toxy ddiv 2
tiv vw gopiv. rpodiy yap airln rob Sip cpodiis 5 spye~


1 The common reading is jv kal rugng rij, the meaning of which
Gg wrivivn pryparsi’ne dxrio®w; — seems to me very equivocal,
which Ermerins alters to opnya~


XPONIQN TA@QN, BIBA. A’. 225


pov & orépaxos* mott nal rd ddppaxa G6 Toice elow
Siahéper. iv av mpds dravra pev bevos katamdcios Op,
Oaccov éxbavetv dvdynn voew Te Kal Ayum. yveopara bb
éxderou yapov, Sn td miov tpéyerat, Erepa wal Erepa.
jv re Bo évrépay then, expogot, yaoriip dypi, Geynara Kal
Nor), Exerra Eiv repippop aiuddanp, 1} replrducws dKoln
kpedv Guar fv 88 es, xborwv. &p, Bdpos' ev vedpotae’ wad
soptin. rdipudy Sy mpira wodAA nal yoroBaglar Frere
Oodepd, dyurbarara Kal dxardorara émt mitor 8é kal 4
iméboracis devel mapein. iv 88 & oTipaxov dvw péry,
vautin, droctrin, Enero prbyparos, % XOX, Nevrobupln,
axorobwvin, péoe Evppar(.

Matucra plo dv duorptme vite cornph yap 4 see,
dy 82 7d miov Biaérepov pedop, xpi) Tavra Torey Kal 7H
oTopaye apiyyew Kal tpodijct, xat happdnoret, xat dialrass,
mdyra peidiyos. pappdxos & tiv tod xédaov pari
Bordyns tis toodrou Eby pedexpyit@ murlonety, kal pa-
clou rhs xbuns, Kal rhode Flv pedexprirp Kal yuo ris
GxpivOov. rade pévror mpd trav cericov mivew xpedv, bs
ena dy 18 Gyp ylyrras;, Bpoa'82 22 yepla, efpnera 88
7a tumva odpata. Sidévar Kal Svou yida, retov, dxodov,
ebepaper,"&s tupiy Aotorarey, rep earl yahaxros dpery.
mpooriber 82 Kat ydpras méyatos Kal citov. Ki piKpd
xelpw rav dperetvrov twos, Sidovar,—Forac rap biéEobos
vaurubdel nal dréprret iypge—pereterépaus yap %} Tob abou
Biobos Praar. pro te wal dmdcvro kcovrat’ Kiv Te
NABeoti eimpibes: “yp 88 Kad “en "afled Dger eepofes
mavrolny pedérny 700 eroudyou rrovkeaOae’ be yp i) dv
tov dappdxeav 865 pepviobae 88 Kal 708 fraros xpewy,
S090 viv edekew doth Slt! fv 82 de xberrwv bpud, obpm-


‘Though I have not ventured to not see the significance of the latter,
alter the text, I must say that I whereas the former is of frequent
think the true reading would be use with our author as applied to
#dBav, instond of Arxiwy. Ican- the liver,

Q


226 MEPL OEPAMELAY XPONIQN IAO@QN, BIBA. A’.


nuncio ayer, dakpou ris pillns, wad dod sna) BBidvron,
wal prjov, Tov gurotav. tdde pévroe Eby peuxpiirp memi-
oxewy* roxidav pév 70 Byotivoy ddppaxov, xat rd did tov
gucaribor dpictov, 8 dxdca bid melpns rial erawéerae.
fy 82 80 evrépwv dyns, Td deywrydy Exes ydda, pduora yey
Svou, Hy Se yup, abyds, 7 prjrav. yxvrol 58 GrcoBnpoi Kab
opryyparmdecs, 6 THs mrudvns tyra, mérept, feypylBepr,
Aeyverixdv. dOpdov bé elpabae audi mdons Sualryns, ext
méay ovppiit, tpopal wey ebyvyot, edorépayor, ciremror
A xwrol, 4 of Sid yddaxros wéXrot, duvdos, izpla Ev ya-
pe a a ee ee ee sey


Ked. 3. Qepareia SrAnvos.


Xxippov! tov ext orAnvi AWoeas ob priota. jv Se Kal
drrbroxor Tavbe vodcor yévwvtat, Dpary i) xayefln, dxéAder
7) Kaxov és dvnjxertov, «es tov inrpoy Tov exippoy
tjeOar, xpi) dv arrotpérev yryvousvous, nal Mew dpre
dpyopévous’ evictacbar 52 riot Preypovijor, iprep of
oxlppor SudSoyov .... és Siamvo)y aywvrar .... Thy
aréctac. tdbe yap preypacins * * * * inrnplowe 88
xpéecOae dxdca por év rior dEelyor NéAewras, i 88 wdvra
cor mpiccorts ev preyyaciy 6 cxlppos éupévy wal rupli
inérovar xpto és pddOakw rijs oxdnplas, réyEece bi’ dEéos
wal édalov, kal péduros’ avti 82 elplov wrtypata gota ard
Alvou. curdocev wbde Tijs pwupoBaddvou cernopuévys, eri-
TMéicpacl te Toit padOaxwrdtoc, * * * #
ca ee ee


* Liddel and Scott, conformably to analogy, but in opposition to general
usage, read exipoc.


APETAIOY KAIITIAAOKOY
XPONION NOYZQN GEPAIIEYTIKON


BIBAION 4EYTEPON.


INAE TON KE@AAAION.


Orpamea"Yopurog 8 **
Orpartia AeBirov ww


Otpaxcia rév kara robg Negpodg eaOsv . ww ys
Otpartia rovivKiorn * * % % % © BL
OtpamtiaTovoppoing =. . - sw ee
@tparcia Zroayuey - wk
Orpamtia Kotaxijg daBiowg » - wwe
Orpaxtia Kwdursy | a a eo
Otpancia Avewreping © * * *% % 8%
Otpancia Auevreping 8% * * * % F ey
Otpantia Yortpusy — * 7 2 8 8 we,
Otpaxtia 'ApOpiridog eal "Ioxvidog * of’.
Otpamtia'BAgavrog wwe


Q2


218 TEP! OEPAITETAS


iordvat 7) Tvedpar Evvediocerar yap TH Kikry. Sivnows
88 exoreparos Kal ris eredapins mpdxdnors’ dard 82 ris
aidpns, meplmaros tpepaios erera 4 Hovyln, és droxard~
oracw 70d ev 7H aldpy tapdxou" yypydowe 8¢ emt robrowe
ampos xétpas, TpiBévtav t&v dxpwov dd yperupBlov Awoiee
dpoiov® ddeyepa jet) xdpta Aerapov' tpiyrs ev peddjoer
pev odca," sKdrnpotépn & & mixvoow oidadéor yap Kal
maxétes oi Theiotor. peonyd be dys Tis Tpiyrios Kepadt
bp0in rerplp6o. yupvdeia ra els ra abyéva eat Sous’
xerpovoly mavra éxéca, por én cKorwpariniy déderras.
Gdus 82 evOGSe Tob ened poprov. mdjv dxdca dEbrEpa xph Ta
ravbde yupvdowa Eupevar és Spirta nal Bépunv. rade yap
oréyra Newrive. érdp wal dv 7 marth Bly xpi) GEuGupiny
dépynrov éurocdery.

Tpopal wacar mayéect dompiowt, xaxdv’ ovrmders 82,
pros Enpérepos, xxévBpoe wruroh, xal-rd de ravBe podiuarar
rit 88 ds jSoviv ddpyaxa rapa trois mpécbev. Tov Sprpéor
88 viv gorw wredva, memépios, LvyyiBépws, Myvorixod.
euPdppara 82, 81 feos xad xuulvov, eal s}Béa nad ypfoysa,
xpeiv pdtuora pev drelpybm mapmay ei 58 pei ye, ev tH
Geparely: 25:82 riv dvddmpw kore deioe nolha p dict,
oléy re rh rgd, wiv mjoons Kal-rh eps, Gems hanwooh,
id médes, répiyos: ai em) roles, Siyos dyabiv.. ofvon
ddwyoroain, NevKov, Aerob, edwdeos, odpeopévor’ Kaydvew
Ebay, sxboa es Sivan Spike Newrivan obpa kofedt,
dxotéy te xpduBn, dowd payos, xvlby dpdv 82 Opibaxivy ep"
pq: elevos 88 xal wérwy dvBpi piv xparepg wepsrrd, ria
88 Borkov whos yebowos. Kandy yap Tavbe x} wAnBds, ux
xpav error wal iypov. ovxov xdwpob Kal otapvdis H


*T have not scrupled, in this sen- place, The passage is still ob-
tence, to follow Ermerins in substi- scare,
tating rpBivrww for ivévrwy, which Instead of dy peAAjou, Ermerins


has no meaning suitable to the reads éppédyg. 1 am doubtful,


XPONIQN ILAGOQN, BIBA, A’. 219
wee meptrator él rotar 88 BupnSin adv


“(ene Sere Kaxév Kal yap Td Tpirywe Tis
votoou diper ra cipBora. dmdrn Sé Ts & Te wereterépous
larpods cuvovains. érei yap 3 ris dows ely dvBpa pera-
Bor) dyabév te mpioce, pereBidcavro viv ralsov iow
disp Evvoveln, ds Sacco dvappmcorres* dyvocouce 88 Tis
dicws tiv aitopdrny apobecpiny, éf' j) mavra yiyverac
7a dixeat ibe yap éxdory Hruxely cvvrixree ta olxeia ev
xpivors dpainct. ev xpdvp yap of memacpol oméppatos,
yevelov, modus. tis dv intpds mpocadrAdkar rhs puctos
tobro wiv Thy dpyiber Tov orrepudrov petaBordy, Toiro be
ti es éxdierou mpobecpinv; ddd Kal mpoctxoway es thy
giaty Tod varjparos. avxérs yap Syxatpol twas éaoe TH
apyi THs Evvoucins, mpocwdpevoe dwpin 700 mpiyyparos.

Borevew 88 xpi; év ydpnee Beppfer, Enis puxpiv
‘rap, kal bypiv, 4) votaos.


Kep. ¢.  Ocpareia MedayxoNins.


Xped Bouriis dudh aiuaros dparpéavos ev roice weharyxo-
Atcolos, a’ ab ybyverae H vobcos, dNAd Kal Kaxoxvplys, ob8
eri cuixpg 7H wrajBel ty pev dy Araxlns véns MéAyras Kab
Spns eapwijs, rduvew GrEBa viv em deyniove rg’ Sebi’ peony,
bxwg dd rod fmaros ely émixatpos 4 pov}. ré8e yap 7d
aomréyyvoy aluaros ai mryal, xodis 8&4 yoveors, &ubo
perayyonrins 4 tpopiy Tapvew 8 xiv loxvoi foot, wal dei-
gator opuxpdv 8 depaiptew, dxdcoy alaBorro ropiis % 8i-
vapis’ obx edeyybeln 88 emi rg Tévy. Kal yap et maxi, Kal
xorades, kal memmyos ely Td alua, nat pédrav dxas dudpryn,
AXA 1dbe kori Tis Plots 6 yaIpos Kal 4 rpopr}. fv dv Tod
Siovros Trodrov dpedrys, atpopin % piars cElorata Tijs


220 EPI @EPATEIAS


Bons" fv 88 swodvaruos }, ra wONAa ply od xdpra ylyveras
movnpoy’ tdpve 82 riyv Gé8a" cal ph) abripap dxécov xpiy
ddaipéew, GAN’ éx Biacrdctos" Kai adripap 8& rd be wd;
Gos Syrdoovery ai Suvduies. peomyd 88, ddporépas Sarrav
és ddAns Keviocwos trrouovijy. xpi) yap kal 7G cropayp
apie, xal 7 vootovre Kal xdpvovrs, THde Tis pedaivns
NOs eyxeopevys: erirpoobev weijs Juépns Newras Suary-
Biv, pédravos dreBepov Soréov Eiv peduxpyry, oral uod
éxéov ddxas Bio. indyen yap bbe pédrawav yor drap
wal ro Oipou Tod ‘Artixod 1) xdpn, xad ibe ayer péraway
NON Apiaevov Ba opployorra'BStvas txdovou plpor ty ee
orwhy < bio audoiv. ovew re dd tis xabdpotos, Kat
olvou Spaxd Si8dvac, al ris ys Tis ev TH TpobH yaperos.
eropdyou yap TH Suvdpe Kaparnpoy 4 xdBapow. peraSat-
vew adlis ert ta péoa" dype 8¢ mpoyaddoavra eremhdo~
part Kai réykt, cuxtyy mpds Td Hap Kal tiv Kodlny, } TO
aropa tatrns, mpocddrew. ide yap % dpaipeoss woddov
tt erixaiporépy THs PeBoroulns mporBaddrew Se kai rotate
perappivoic: peoryy) tov dpomharéwy évraiba rod oro-
paxou cori i mpooguaws. elt’ adbis eravatpépew, wal jy
pi dialsy Bdacry0g 9 Blain, hy wobadayy Eualeuel wena
cucinv 7H Kaba mpooBarrew, ai yap 4 mpirry Kad pe
Hiren Tae: Poosoy dr rote welpoien? \alihy e GANvoeaas
Bis Okriat Rack carintesy daeiDev “hp “aban sh Menbartste
nal} apy. Evvtpérovrat dy nal aise, wowvwval odoae ris
mdOny peretérepor S¢ xal mapaicPdvovrar, mapadoph Tis
alaOhaior yph 82pdrsara. +8 crojmdyys torhyewr nal nodBe
vooéovtos, kal év Ede THs wehalyns xOd}s éyneomerns. Teml-
cen dav ph TOD wrod 70d aypwOlov Eveys, dad opurpds
Tob weyéBeos dypt KudBov. Kaddupa yap Tobe YoOdAjs vyevé-
cus. dyabov 6 Kal Gdén, Se yap indyer els 7d Kato


' Wigan and Ermerins have very voteo. Petit suggests iv rola
properly substituted this word for  ddXow.


XPONIQN TA@QN, BIBA. A’. 221


Evrepoy tiv yoy. hy per dv vedroKov Td wabos Hy Kal pi}
Today dvOpwrros éxrpamy, ovK GAs pev drl rotoe bjoros,
ris 82 Nouriis Sialrys ypéos, és re dvalmpw Tis EEtos, wal és”
KaBapow dx pila 700 maBe0s, nad laxdv ris Buvdwi0s, tos pi)
wadwvSpoptwot al vodcor ppdow be adfis tiv év tH} dva~
Mire Btorijy.

"Hv Ba dn) rovabe ojsuepér vt boromriabara.s) votes send
repos 565, nation dalaw ober. hdr Sper) plo
qypdoOa GX fy emt cxéoe yuvaunds xataynviay, fy avBpis
aiuoppotbur péov, i voles maph, JpeOitew 7d yopla, mpo~
xkewr 74 700 EuviBeos sv 82 wEdg ea wi) Hep, BM en
To aluaros perappuévros, eriamépyn 52%} vodcos, Kerwavas
motecbar aitg,. Hyecpevov dmb rav apupiv. xiv wi &
Boor ph drretber dibergs, wal chy ex’ dyedive répverw oaéBa.
peowyd 88 rpidw f} Texodpwv repay dvabpéyrios Tiyy iepiy
td xabaprijpioy pappaxoy memioxey Srevta oixtny Tolat
pécowss mpocBadrew, 7G irate éyypiwrtovra, mpiocev Te
ta tpya § téyos dvbovra. cpixpoicr wey ydp dxece ob
melGeras, hy & 7a peydra bnOivy, év Bpy Ter} weray-
xoMy Kal iy wdvrn rol cdpatos évorijoy, aicPicect,
youn, aiwart, yorj, Na Sntac 8 Kal vevpwv, abry te és
dvjxeorov tpémeras, évrixrer® re TH anrjvet Erépwv voonpid-
tev téKous, cTracpod, paving, mapadtaws «iv ex wedary~
xorins rade ylyvytar, Th erveyryvopeva dvixerra. rXeBépy
dy xpkecBae és tnow rod xaxod. erimpocbev 8 tod édre-
Béopov xph tév Te oTopayov pererijcar eFewew, nal tra
bypa Aerrivas, Kai 7d axijvos edpoov mrovéew" Eperor BE rake
mpijecouct, GNAoTe pev of vijoties, GArore Se pahavides.
dpdaw 8 rév re tpérov Kal ri DApr ppdow Se Kal rod
EXAcBépou ta elBea, wal ris xprows robs tpémous, Kal

“The common reading, tyeord, Exmerins, in preference to dyxpordt,


being evidently inadmissible, Lhave as suggested hy Petit, or éyciu as
preferred the reading adopted by proposed by Wigan,


222 TIEPL GEPATIEIAS


Sxeos mpocuxpwijoas Exacrov xpi}, Kal 6xws ev rotor euérovoe
dpipyev. drearov, srl toiade ef wi) O0On és 7d wdprav
voices, } woddav eréwy éoye Siarelias. Ta wodDdA yap
roiBe daréroxor pedayyodlarr Hy 88 EurreBos HBe, pi H8n
mepipdverv. xpi) dv ta és rov EXAEBopov dravra mpijooey.
tyéas pav dv dravras rrovew ddivarov rods vootovras’
yap dy intpds Kpérowy Beod.® droviny 5& Kai Siarelyuas
nat vobowv émixptypias, Spiv Ogus inrpév. 4) dv dmavdqy
éri roicbe nal drapveiobat, mpolaxouévovs 7d dvadbes,
kal és rédos totet Epyoure ducréerv SiBévac 88 wad rijs lepiis
wis &v ddins dddore kal dddoTe Kalpwov yap Pdéppaxov
Tis medaryyorins 768¢, oTopdyou, Kal ffratos, Kal yore
Kabdpavos dxos dov- drap Kal pardyns orépparos, dxbcov
Oreijs Bpaypiy, werloxey Fiv fart, dpicrov melpy ms
émigtécaro. jsupla 8¢ rév drhév dapudnov &Xra ddrowwe
én xpnord.

"Emi 82 rotate mévouse rotcde és dvddmpu dyew. eereke~
tépoice yap és ev Tav Tijs inrpelns Katpov %) vodcos €E pny
88 dxivyOny fv 88 és dvdrkacw capKdv Kal Suvdpcos divOpw-
aros Hep, EvvarrnrdOn wdvra rijs vocou Ta tyvia. Sivapes
Bev yap dicts byelav rinre, doOévera 88 vodcov. data
dy és dvddppuv 6 vookwv, wepuxdot Oeppotor bBact évdra-
rdpevos. Kal yap Ta év roicde dpwaxa svniora,* dapadros,
9) Oetov, 4) orumrnpin, woNddv wHedves TovTéwy Grae burd~
pues. dyabov wev yap irypacin €E abypod ris voirou Kal
Tarairwpin THs bjows* dpa b& nal padOaxal cdpxes
frictal mpos kperw rod vooijparoy Enpal bé Kat muKval
Tots perayyormar al cdpres. Gretppa Aumapov dua Tplfrcoy
edapots, TOAAG TH Arai Séyovra .... . 3
&prou muro), Eiv tue yruxel, ctpales 76 Kpntiag® nad oxv-


? Hippocrat. Prognost. * Wigan has substituted this read~
4 It is so accented in all the MSS, ing for Onpaiy ry «pati.
and editions,


XPONIQN ITAGQN, BIBA. A’. 223


Bederp 1 Hapginy. tpalvos eal wide plfios madaiiy ar,
Kal Ayuxpotépwy Kal Geppiv, TOY yuuvev amd Tob doTpa~
xaabeos’ xpediv, Ta pi) wlova xal cpmyparadea: cud pev mo-
bes, nal Ta Tips Kehadijs, wrnvav Ta wrepa dmlova’ Onpiwv,
Aaywdv, Sopeddwy, wrwxods* drrapys, Gxoiav Te apirtov Tf.
mi ri) Tod croudyxou dvapoph mpopnPeeabar mpd Tis Tpo-
His, bxas iy xararobels dvepiyras. SiBdvae dv mpd wdv-
rev ceriwy pedixpyrov, kudbov tyuiov, xai movra éFenéew és
Thy Tob atopdyou Kdfapow. abe yap cox 4 tpoph pain
Hever’ pdppaxa 82 rév dvayxalov xabaprijpia, wirvos Kap=
ms Kal Kvidns, THY oTrepudtow Too KoKKdXoU, Kal TeTéptos,
dpvySddwv ai mixpal, wat pede fj rade} Fberacts* fy de
Enpfivae Oérys, dptorov optipva, Kai tpews 4 pia, wad rd bid
tiv Onpiov ddpparoy, xat 4 700 Byarivov, xat Mibpiddrov,
kal Edda jvpla:y deriOiiucrras 8a, 4 hier Oxo dacpdrav Oh,
pedi doTov, Kal wrjewves, Kal repulvOov Sdxpvov, Kai toowrov,
Kak May 7b dd péduov, 4 rie olvéoOns: wnpby 82 -rovrbew
mdvrow mdyos. Gdetwpa Kemapdv- alispai mepimarou GX’
Sea capxév te dvdr\acw roverat Kal duvducos iexdy, Kal
wis pots és 7 dpyatov droxardaracw.

ee ee ee ee ee ee
Le ee ee |


Keg. 7: Gcpameia DOictos.


* * * Gros ev vyt al yadgjvp. Kai yap, ef evruyoin 6
vootwy, &v Cadicon ylyvorr’ av aldpy xal Bors}. Kal yap
me Enpov és Ta Edxea Evvbidwor Gun dri 82 rijs aidpys
égnovydoavta xpiec bas viv émap@ Arai, emt rHot tphpere

ax’ ddtyou é« mpocarywyis,
&5 xottnas rrévre, # &E, i) roby Te elov" Hy Se jai), dxdoov
ris Sdvnrav ToAdKe yap Tdbe podvoy dvrt mdens tpopis
Hipxece’ ydda Se 480 pev mpocdpacbar’ mety Se phictov,


224 HEPI QEPAIEIAS


arepedy Opdyras, Kal rpopis dmdans ée madd: Euynbécrepov™
iBeiv 82 -reprvdv vB xporr Pdppaxoy St dprnply dxapyvoy,
Siarrrepdoat Spoyxov, dyew Preyua, ervoov, ucOnpov 8
tiv xara Siébodov. Edwere 5 hdpyaxov yrud Kal Grou
mavros edpevéorepov. iv pev dv ris moddaw Tobde aivy,
oddeuins tpopiis GdAns xplos. dyabdv yap éy voicw kv
ddppaxoy yada twiriv yiyvecrBae Kal rpodyv, Kal yap
avOpdrreav trav yadaxtopdywy 7a EOvea cirov otm eeu
dipuoroy 88 Eby yddaxrt, Kal wodrol, xai izpla, xal xvdpor
mAvrol, kal dxéoa beard éx yddaxtos yiyveras. Kal rpodbiis
ty Exépns bey, form Spoln, wriadvns 5 yudax, ebrremros, Meni
xp} 88 rocdvbe HbivOa, dxdcov puupdvecBal éore pytary
ip xal rév és iSoviiv 7 KauBdvy, nai ré5e Ero dd pyaxov,
Avyporixod xdunv, Pujywva, jdvocpor, dhav Bpayd, Eos,
A pers. fv pev orbpayos dremréy, rode mapéyerr ty 6a
pndiv b8e wpocavaykdty, wdvrev dott wricdvn xpéooaw
eEeare 52 thy wrusavny és xovbpov ddrAdkar dduvadrepos yap,
kal ebremtérepos Kal opnyparwdns i as mricdvy wriaBye
ev rioe iyporépyos dvaywyios Kvapyos Kabalpe Edrxea, GXX
fore puowdys. muds nai dyxpos, dxooov dpuadrepa, To~
wivbe Exel dxabaprévepa: Eurreruaipsyeror dv mpis 7a
mapbnra, relote apacGad:. Wbaitd abréun, Room Uetiae
mnaiiyy dinenrae! 6a 180. de.ipe, ey dbaplin Seon
&piorov Se ée Sesmv dpriroxa, mpiv tiv * * *

Ce eee * * * *” le


Keg. ey’. Separeia “Hraros.


* % % Frrare Exos Gor GALOpiov. %) Xaerrwrdty 88 & Ty
yaoripa Evppoa rod miu, fv Tov otduaxov toyn Oddy 45
thy dv dopiv. cpoph yap alrly rob tiv Tpodijs 88 trye-


1 Tho common reading is jy ead 60g wri, the meaning of which
be xnodvn juyparding drie0w; seems to me very equivocal.
which Ermerins alters to ennypa-


XPONIQN ITAQQN, BIBA. A’. 225


pov & orépayos* Toth rat ta pdppara de toics elow
Siahépe. iy cv mpos dravra pev dxvos rataroctos Eby,
Gaacov éxBaveiv dvdyen voow te Kal Ap@. yropata be
éxdarou yadpov, brn Th miov tpéperac, Erepa wal Erepa.
iw Te 8 evrépww Fup, eTpodor, yaariip dypiy, PASynaTa Kab
KOM}, Exevra Edy wepippof aluddanp, 4 meplrdvcs Sxoln
kpedv dpb Fy 88 és eborw Ep, Bdpos ev veppotor’ wal
bopvi. ta wey dy mpara wodAd Kal yoroBadéa Srevra
Oodepa, dvurdcrata xal anatdotata’ emi mace St xal }
trécracts Neve) wapeln. iv 8 és orépayov dvw péry,
vaurin, dmoowrin, iueror préypyaros, f) KOA, NevroBupin,
oxorobivin, pérde Evppary).

Méxora piv dv drorpémew rijvber rovnph yap 4 d86s,
ty 88 76 mritov Bracérepov pevoy, xpi) Tavra moéew Kal TH
oropayy apiyyew Kal Tpodjer, cal Papydxorat, Kal bralracs,
rdyta perrixas. appdxowt és Thy TOD KéATOU payiv
Bordvns ris ieodrou Eby pedcxprire memicxew, Kal mpa-
ciov ris xbums, Kai riiode Ev pedexpiiro Kal yup Tis
ayivbou. rabe pévror mpd tév cutie mivew xpedy, os
Aewrd piv rd bypd ybyvyras, ebpoa 88 7d yupla, eUpnera 8
7a turva compara. Sid6var wai Bvov yada, Eloy, dyodor,
etzpogoy, és tupoy datertatov, iyrep dott yadaxtos dpery.
mpooriber 88 al ydpitas mépatos Kal cirov. xiv pixp@
xelpw Tov dheretvrav wor, Siddvat,—%orac yp bkEobos
vauruddel nal dréprei typg'—pereEertpous yap % Tob mlov
Biobos Prayar. prio te Kal drdovroe kcovrar’ xiv Te
AdBaar eimpées. yxph 8 wal emi thos Grryor éxpogar
maytolny pedérny Tod oropdyou mroecOar’ S8e ydp 1 mav-
rev dappdxov 686s pepviicbar 88 Kal roi Hpraros ypedy,
Joa viiy Bdcdev deth 4 fille! fy BO es eberw bpuh, obpn>

‘Though I have not ventured to not see the significance of the latter,
alter the text, I must say that I whereas the former is of frequent
think the truo reading would be use with our author as applied to


PruBar, instead of Axéwy, Ican- the liver,
Q


226 MEP OEPANEIAY XPONIQN MAGQN, BIBA. A’.


nixoias Eayav, dcdpow ris pitas, wal pod, al abuivrov,
cal prov, Taw eurotev. tade perros Eby pedsxpriry meri.
oxay Toxidoy pay to Bootivoy ddppaxov, cai ro bid ta
guoartiav Gpurtov, 78 sxica id welpys rich érawieras.
ty 82 80 dvrépey dys To arporyiy Eyes yada, paducta per
Srov, fw 82 sh, abyss, H psprew. sudod Be EdsoOypol. wal
oprppparidess, 6 Tig wrucdms ya, weeps, burylBepr,
Aeyuorixév. dBpdoy 3¢ eipjobar audi wdons sialrys, ext
dan cuppi€t, tpodal wey edryupot, elordpayot, ebremror
4 ywrol, 4 of Bed yddaxros wddror, dpvros, irpia Edy yd-
ee ee ee, ee oe, mee:


Ke. 8. Ocpareia Srrnvos.


Xxippou' rob ext omdypl rdcers ob piioras. jy Sd wal
drironn Tobe voodoo yerwrtat, dopa i xayekin, GxOXe
TO Kaxoy és Gvixertov, ». +. +++ tov inzpov Tov oxippoy
fijeOas, xpi dv dmotpérev ywyvopévous, cal Mew dpre
dpyopdvous evictacbar 88 rijcr Preypovijor, irrep of
axippor Suiboyoy ..,. és Samvohy aywvra: .... TH
dméctacy. tdde yap dreypacins * * * * inrnpiow bd
xpbecbas dxdca por ev rot okelpot Nédextar. jv 8€ wave
oot mphocovrs év dreypaciy 5 exippos eupévy at rrupi
ixédowe ypto és pdrOakw ris oxdyplas, réybeoe &¢ dEzos
xai dralov, nai pédtutos dvti 88 elploy wrbypata éorw arb
Mrov. dumdocev db_ ris wupoBaddvoy ceoncpevys, eme-
mrdcpaal te Tot wadOaxwrdrot. = * * * *
TC en ee oe, Oe


* Liddel and Scott, conformably to analogy, but in opposition to general
usage, read cxipoc.


APETAIOY KAIITIAAOKOY
XPONION NOYZQN GEPAITEYTIKON


BIBAION 4ETTEPON.


TIINAZ TON KE@AAAION.


Keg.
Ocpartia"Ydpwxog ge 8) geet SE OTR
Grpaxcia AvaBiyrov ara B.
Ocpantia rév kara rode Neppode walav Y
OpaniaravivKiors * * * * % *
Gcpamtia Tovoppoing cA
Opantia Eropayusy 6 ee ee
Otparsla Kodaniig daBiowg - www
Orpamtia Kuducsy An a
Oxpancia Avowreping © * * % % % BL
Ocpartia Acuvreping 9% * % * % %
Orpartia ‘Yorspuay —* SS al
Grpantia'ApOpiridog eat 'Ioxvidog * *  * p'.
Ocpamcia 'EXigavrog . . . . . .


Q2


APETAIOY KATITIAAOKOY XPONIQN
TIAGQN GEPATIEYTIKON
BIBAION B.


Kedar tpatn relrrer.


Ked. 6’. Qcpamelia AvaBirov.


"Téparros i8én 7d SiaSrrew méb0s airly nai biabéor, yopy
82 potvy Budcpopov, Eva +d iypiv expect. doxiry pév yap
Soxeiov, Tb meprrovaroy, ob8' expoty Toyer, GAA plavov TIdE
a hisoptds | BesRifren\ 80s jibe oypos dard od de
oXovTos % wvTH, xad civrnkis és 86 veppods Kai Kiorw 3
Fivbocws Ta rept EEobov péper. Se roice bepidice 4 ddde
eruylyverat, iy és dyabev % vobc0s tpérnrar. dryabby 82 i
Avors Tis altins, Kal ui Tod dyBeos Eradply podvor’ BApos
82 rovréoies utfov, éxpéov yap To dypov abalven

“Eort 82 ta deea és riv érloyeow rijs Evvrifios, ra
wbrd roict iparper & 58 7d Spor peyddns lntpelns xpéos,
708e yap ev Te elbei dyer mavrov uéfov. Kal iv miaoi Te
bypov, mpoKdnars obpijeios, ort wal éxBéoy rode Evvard-
yee Tikov Ta ev TE cxijvet. appdrov dv ddlpwv ypeos*
SAvos yap péya, axoply roto}. moray yap ov8' Scov yi
waras Sixpeos dxos. maven Set 7B ctopdyw dpryey &vba


230 HEP GEPAMEIAS


rob Bhpeos al myyal. iv av rH iepi xabalpys, éxPrjpace
xpe, vipio, pactiyn, polite, pido xvBwviotce dpoics
meavBe Saudis par Fiv vdphip nad poBlne, Sptaror & rey
Srkenacpa & § cép abtkw fv pasrbyper nal Gobike
éy npg 88 xat vépdy 7§ wipe % rovréaw pikes dyabiy, 4 of
Xwrol dxaxins Te Kal broxtotibos & te Tas TéyEuas wal és Ta
énimhdcpara,

‘Ardp nat déwp rd wordy Ev rice dreippor dpeicbeo.
tpopal 82, xal ydda, kat Eiv nde ceria, dpudot, ydrBpor,
podyjpara. olvot ortpovres és tov roi oroudyou rover,
dxpyrécrepor widroy, és tiv Tov Grey yupiv €Enépwoly re
kal Sidvnpivy Gpedbear yap Shpos olvos 82, erihaw F dua
kai spbywv, weraBorf re xal ebxpacly ypiomoy és Siva
pty 82 xijy olvos prunds, dxoiov alua Ep, és thw abrod yévav.
ddppaxa routha ra wore, } Sia trav Onpioy, 4 rod MiBpe~
Sdrew, 4 bid trav drrwptwv, td Tre Edda dxbca operos
byntord. drap xat i} Eipraca Siarra kal 5 Bios wirds.


Ked. 7. Ocpareia \ubtavews Kai EAxdoews
Nedpav.


Ypdh by Greynacins,. cal alwoppayigs, wal Scboa setae
dori vehpaw xretvet, vy toics bkéor yeypdparar dydi 8
Auetsci0s, 43) MBey yerkaros, bxboa mh wOAA EvveroGrhs
oxe mpecBirnot, udducta viv ypddw dyyicta pev és
dxeow' ef 82 pip, oloe Gye wapmyopicerat.

Alby pev Gv eipui yervay és dyovov rpéfrar, ddbvaror.
pnitrepov wey yap mritpnv droxoy Béuevas, 7} vedpods NOriv-

* This word, or some other of  tosugyest. Ermerins does not hesi-


similar import, is evidently required tate to adopt it.
in this place, ss Petit was the first


XPONIQN TAOQN, BIBA. BY. 231


ras ddiBous. es BidEodov Exes dpryryetv prj iv dv év pn
Toor of AiBo1, ra dixea dpdow. xdpra yap sduvéovrat, Tork
kal eféGavoy expipoct ual efdéy widov wad leyouply.
Euvagéa yap arrsfrowws veppol re Kat Kadov. Ay Hydp Aibeow
évrdaves Ewer, eri 8 roier icxoupln te Kal orpdpor, Tiv
bring ofups rdpvaw déBa 78 nar’ Uber 700 veppod. al
yap 108 aluaros dd vedpiv Sepovas dviios riav riBrov ras
adlyfias. pdeypovh yap Sijcaca toxe ra mdvrar rey-
povijs 88 Kevearyryein Abou réyyew re tas yas EOa tov
veppav } xr Maras 68 maraidy, ¥ 7d véov, prnv loxéror
olipnrixdy 82 Kal dviBov % xdun kal MBavwris, } odurruyov.
roiade xpi}, Seas Doar, KaTacovelv’ spixpov yap al xplotes.
drap xal roicke mrupiiiv, Bocinot xiorect éyyéovra Edatov
avOéuiS03. erimhacpdrov viv Ody Ebv tote. adroit
wiry}. edvoe xal ovxin kon ore Tov Mba Thy Everaci*
Epuorov' 82 chy dnt Greynaaim eyays. fv 82 réBe cos
morkovte bre piuvwot of AlOot, & Eravov Tov dvOparrov
rabiévas. ré8e ydp ror Spa mévra woiker aden wiv yang,
mi) 82 dwyerypalver’ rd Sprpd 88 &s mpobuplny Sever.
rade pévror Eoba AiBeov Kal oiiv mpoxdsjoves’ mivew be


Gopudnur nav dm dav wey las, $00, wher, doapor Bordvas
88, viv trptovirny, f) rerpiceavoy, } clov' rroucddov 82, pipa
pey dxéoa Toye vapdov, xaciny, cpipvay, xevyduepov

ee et oe en oer ieeey


arovrace clvnm, nal éx supos erxdpat, Kal éribjpara &
mpocbev por Rédexrar' Slarra 82 wal Hrens, kal Trods,
xal % év Baddcon Biot}, Gravra totes él vebpiw éore
fixed.


2 In the Askew MS, there is a page, but none at the end of the
lacuna here, occupying a whole chapter, as in the printed editions.


TIEPI GEPATIELAZ


Ked. £'. Ocpameia Korduaxdv.


"Hy viv ovriav axparis % workin En, beappéy 88 4 Tpoph
deremros, Operros, cis), Kad pndev eis Tov dyxoy avin, KoO~
axods tovcde Kivdsjononer. Yoyet pv dudirov ris és
méxpev Bepnacins, droviy Se rijs és dvdSoow Buvdusos.
Xpi) dv rip xodiny mpdrista pév rovev dvévas jpeuip
kai drrocurig’ dde yap Twadwipopéover ai Suvdures. sy 82
xal TrjOcos Trav ev 7G croudym pavtacty &, wijarert dud-
rou xptecbar ad’ Haros, f) weduxpijrou ri Koidiny 62
oxtrery wai réyyew &s ori, éplowre peév trois é& bios miva~
poiae Aiwai S¢, podivp pilpy, }) 7H bed rijs olvdyOys, th
parivg dpiotoy, Kijv dard tod axivov, Kal tnroxoribt, %
bupanigs Edv roiabe 3¢ émemicpara, Oepuad wev & BiEW,
&: Sivaper 6 otpupvd* xai ify mn roi Hpmaros, #) Tis Korins
Kara oop évracves, 4} preypacias Soot, outny mpocBdr-
Aovra évrdpvew wal core oloe ré5e potvoy ipece emi é
rnporfos & aireidiyy fen 7d Tpdpata, di emi oxryply
xpalvn, Tide BdéXas rh Onpla mpocBddrew: Grevra dri
Ojpara merrixd TuBévas, dxoiov Td bid Tov owepydtav, iy
loxn xapaidéovros pitar’ dpiotov cai Ea oi ris Sabyns
fact naprol, Kal 7d pidaypa erixdnow 7d xdwpdy, Kab
Tovpoy To pvoTipiov, Tabe yap waddooe Te Kal dpicce,
nal Beppacinv éyeiper, kal dduoa ra ordayyva Troe, dv
sep és otinpw xpéos. drip xat olvazt, kal Mpynoris, wad
ebpbpBuov, xal éxica rouide ravra ti pév Wik kodder,
dvdwdnow 8& Bépyns morderat. raxdbe xph wal ins
Pdppana & orinpuv.
dpvoyocoou yurds Eby Dare doTuppéry piproves, } Kvbo~
viowe pajroure dpiotov xai yiyaptov ctapuNijs Gudaxcribos"
olvor Tay Képra arudivrey. Erevra $8 ta ddOalvoyra Tiyv


XPONIQN MA@QN, BIBA. BY.


Gcparela Tropayixav.


Keg. =".
‘H &y voice ddrotwr wébect pera thy Beparelny Biarra és
laxdv wal xpdros rod gdpatos eimeprin dyabi otopayt
xoiat 82 patos Hide ybyveras wAyppedsis. Seas dv airy
ylyouro, ppdow. ixavi) yap aidpy, mepimarot, yunvacty,
duvacnin, tpopal és ref dyabal, dvauaxécacba tiv tod
oromdyou Kaxooitiny abivaroy 52 rdbe xal daeyinv Moat
Haxpiy, wal tiv oxéderiny tod cxrjveos eboyxov cdpxa
motjoar mondby 88 wéfov ém rouréwy Lorav ai rolot Kdp=
yours xapires, Kal Te KaBbapiis Grav Spay, eal riot émiOv-
pliner Erecbas rov larpiv, }) peydda BXdrrovra’ dpurrov
ip 78Be, fv ih dora dipehetrraw Bpckis hep. pdpuaca
82 mora, xudol, dyplvOiov, xad vdpdos 76 piipov, nad ij Bick
rév Onpiwv, xa rod ev mrérpais 6 Kapris,? nal LnppPepios,
nal memépios, xat cecbuos. tdde memripia’ Kal kata Tob
orépvou & orinfw eriOnua, vapdor, paoriyar, dddac, dxa~
xlat, Kat pijov kudeviav 6 yvr0s, ab abrat 88 rSv jurpov
ai cdpres dudiOracbeioae Ely pointe eridnua oridoy.
drdp wat rédKa dxdca por &y SiaBijrew yeypddaras, és
Biveos dxos. ta wird yap Kab Totes Shpos yiyverar’ 6 52
tévos TOD croudyou ddipov eropaxiKoiot.


+ Ermerins erases rd ipoy, fancy
ing that the ointment could not be
suitable in this place, However,
Actuarius recommends the Nardi-
num Unguentum expressly for Sto-
machics, Meth, Med.vi. 10.

7 If the text here be sound, the
‘expression must be understood ns a


strange circumlocation for merpooe-
Mov or iivou rod ly wizpace.
‘See below, in the next chapter. It
is worthy of remark, that this mode
of circumlocution was much prac
tised by the writers in the Tonic
dialect, Sco Gregorius Corinthns,
under mpi 'Idgog.


234 HEPI OEPATELAS


Ked. ¢'.  Ocpamela Kordtaxav.


"Hy rdv avriov dxpatis 4 Kordin En, Ssapptn 88 % Tpod)y
drewros, GOperros, api), ead pndev els Tov dyxov dvlp, Kode
axods tovade Kikdjoxopev. aries pév euirov ris
mej Ocpyacins, droviy Se rijs és dvaSoow Surdyios.

Xpiy dy viv Koitiny mparicta péy mévev dviévar hpeniy
xai drocwrig’ &8e yap mwadw5popéoves ai Suvduses. fy 2
xat wdiGeos raw ev TG cTomdyy pavracin py, vijorect eye
rose xptecOar dd’ Saros, i) weduxprrou’ ri Koidiny Se
oxbre «ai réyyew & orinpcy, éplowcs pév trois €& dios mva~
potoe Aérai Se, podivp piipy, } 7G did ris olvdvOns,
Endivo dpiorov, xiv dard tod oxlvov, kal iroxoriér, 4
budaxig’ Eby roicse b¢ éxemdcpara, Oeppa pev és OlEw,
&s Suvapuv 8¢ otpudva Kal iy an Tob sfraros, H THs Koihins
Kara oropa évracres, t preypacias Soor, ovxtyy mpor hdr
Aovra évrduvew Kai tore oloe rade pobvov ijpxece emiyy bé
xnporiios és drei jen Ta Tpopata, Hde eri oxdyply
xpaivp, ride BdérAas Ta Onpla rpocBddr«w: Srevra eri-
Oijpara merrixd T1Bévat, dxoiov Td Suk THY oTEpmaTov, Hy
foxn xapairtovros pitas dpictov nai évOa oi rijs Sabyns
fact naprol, Kal 7d puidaypa erlicrnow Td xrwpdv, Kab
totpov Td puoripiov. tdde yap paddocet te Kal duiocet,
kal Beppactyy éyeiper, kal ddvoa rd orddyyva Trove, Gv
mep és orinpw xpéos. drap xat olvym, nal Aipynotis, Kal
eipopBuoy, xal dxoca Todd mdvra iy pev WoEW Korver,
dydurnow 8 O€puns wrovéerat. rouide yph wat mumloxey
ddppana és oripuv. xpéos uev mpdtiota . .... . 6700
dpvoyiacou xurds Edy bars éoruppéerp priproise, 7) evd@=
viowt proicv dpiorov Kal ylyaptov otaduAiis GudaxtriBos"
olvor Tow Képra orupdvrov. Erera S¢ ra ddOalvovra Thy


XPONIQN HAG@QN, BIBA. B'. 235


yaorépa $dppaxa word, dxdca bud SnrySepios Kai meré-
pios, Kal cedlvou Tod naprod rod dypiou Tob ev rérpais,
7d bid tov Onplov trav dydvav wemrimdrarov’ iy 82 emt
toiae pndey, #} cpexpoy &vdid6, roiat dard papavidmy duéroure
xptor iy 8 nad éyxptirys taiede edr«Sdpou tod Nevxod pi-
tay és plny viera, ebroverdrn dv coe yévorro 4) xdéBapors,
& re thy rav bypéy tov yuypav xdbapoly re kad Exxpiow,
nal és rhy Sayre rod Oeppod.

‘rap xat 4 Slavra, nad 6 Blos, roiade Sore Eiupetpa. of
trrvos vinrwp pev, bi Hyépns 82 aeptrator, dvahwvijoves,
aidpn, ij re dv Sapvyct,  pupplvaror, ) Oipp. Eyer ydp re
Siarvoy nal i dvarvoly rovdwbe dxippaxov memrijpoy’ yup~
vow, tpijues, xetpovouly, éXrijpwv Boraics rod Gdpnxos,
xai tis xotdins Kébror mporbares* opixpérata yap els Tévoy
elatadds dptos. bmi révbe dolvikis, weplraros palu—


ee oe oe
* * * * * * * * *
He. Ried pit t ees eed te


Keg. 8. Gepameia “ApOpircdos xat "Ioxiados.


* * * curiay Kal padavidmv modrdadmis.? Ererta és Tov
€EBopov dryer. Slavta 8é 1 exri roiabe Evviy Totes Grove
mdbeov nar emi rh &alry ddenfris, Yruxpodovely Cadacoin
pddora pev dv Grace &pOpetixoict Euva dxea’ Kal yap Kat
Toice modaypixoiat EXXBopos TO péya dxos, GNA ev Thee
mpwrnet mpooBoriice Tod maBeos. jv 62 éx moddaw péy


! There can be little or no doubt times, sec Pavtus Morera, ti,
that the words in the lacuna imme- pp. 2—S4. On the use of emetics
Aiately adjoining oriwy, were Zxe- inthe cure of Arthritis and Schiatica,
rog dé, On the popular modes of sce further, Ibid. t.4. pp. 652—676,
producing easy vorniting in ancient passim,


236 TIEPI GEPATEIAZ


#8 xpévev tp, drap wal ée SiabéEws warépav davij, Euva-
mrobvijcet i vodoos. es 52 rots mapokvepods réav dpOpwr
rade xph mpiocew. elpla pev Eorw €E dioy 7a olovmaidea
réyEves 82 81d podlvov xa olvou' pereEcrépoice 8 Kal oroy-
sia, Biv abuepiirp Grqoe. ‘Grevra dri hacpa, dptos Eby
Toles iyouct KoNoKiyrys, kal mérovos" Kal cuetn NeTH, Kal
dprdyhaoaor + Boriévr, cel PSBavs® Gitnall <Sripiaal 5
aidnpine Sxoves Eby Eprp, wali Rpoor, nad aujuporou pike,
wal werdguddos:h\ Bordvy, wal arpdawes 4 retow GONADICE
Aewry. tijebe pévroe rd pev adiynua ekdvtdnpa drovow
abr}, erfracya, Ebv ull, xpiOBv deri jew ve
ray eitplav 79 ABporav Ev argbrou pieroy eine Eypay
wal Odown Eby cin riaw ddsfrew. Se wlrros sikios H Oday
nal robe yévtoe GANoTE GAXov Gvnoe Kal twirdy Gore
BdApt pereberépoias 82 7a ddealvorra Eyupipes; eadred=
riy Bddore Dy Spedéer. Nbyos 82 xa) 7éBe xdpra Srovov
Supers: alya yp} Bordns rhs Ipibos eupayety emhy 82
mAnoO}, Siadelrovra éxdécov 4 vous} ev 7H yaotpl payBetn,
xarabicar tiv alya, 762 évros Tijs yaoTpis és Ti Kompov
eyxptar tm robe. pdppaxa St pupla, Kal yap Tads vooé-
ovras éwuTav pappaxtas ebrrépous TIOnor 4 Evudopij Tay
Bh inrpav rd ddpnana dy thos ypadfios MdEera.


Keg. ty’. Gepareia Edepavros.


Tay votowy pétova xpi ta dea es Now abréwv Fupevare
edépavros 88 ry Aixov KaKad rls dEwsvixos rylyvorr’ dy inzpeins
ob yap wépel, h omrdyyry Er, 4 ESor evomfarres pobvor, 4


* There is evidently something ever, that the more natural reading
wanting in the text. Petit and would be ji}; meaning, that the
Ermerins substitute dpeAia after remedies in certain cnses proved
dy. I oxnnot but think, how= beneficial, and in others not.


XPONIQN TAOOQN, BIBA. BY. 237


fw 7d xaxdv Epes, GAA Gobi re bro 7H dvOpdmw vor
fet, kai Drov Eabev duméxer. dreprés wey kal poBepiv
ieiv Anplov yap iby Séos 52 Evy Pwdv re wat Evvdia-
TaeAat, ob jeiov %) rotuG. dvarvois yap és perddoow
pnibin Bad}. ri dv dy ebpor ris ev inrpix® todbde &Eov
Exov dros; dda yap mdvra xph Eyudepev ddppaxa, kab
Sialrny, wal eldnpa, xai mip: Kai rade xiv wey Eri veordeg
7 wdOci mpoaBarys, emis ijows jy Be & dxphy ix
yevéows, xal dv roiat omrdyyvouas éBpatov ity, ort Kal és
Ta mpdcwra mpooBarry, avénmiaros 6 vootwy.

Tapvey dv ras én’ dryravi GreBas Gpcpeo BE rdyverv Ee
wal ras ert odupoict pi) abrijpap'® xptecov yap %) bidera-
ats & Te wodAhy tiv rod aiwaros poiv, xal & dvdxAnow
ais Bumdylos.. xpedy yap alua woXAduee xa) aoXddv devas,
Tob mdBeos Thy tpopyv. apixpoy 68 év abrép 7d ypnoror,
ris piows 4 tpody. EvvrexpalperOae dv, adatpéovra ro
rovmpov, xat Evrnxrov peor) 7d olxeiov, weeds dy mpoa~
mavbijon dtpopln %} voioos. 4 yap veapiy, Eywmdaxcion 7G
oapart, xpivp HaxpG jpaipwce thy madaujve Erecra Thy
lephy remloxev pi) dodrak add yeyvécbo mdvra woNdd-
nig €E dvadsypios xal madwépoutns. Tw Kal i GNA
KaBapors pappaxddys év aurip’ % emt re loi, Hv Beka,
Eerreis 489 ida: dSadecprrov—aroX AB 82 Boras esBe— es Bice
xepnow meiv. éexéra be poipny rhy méuarny dbwp, os av
To yada Buexbéev. es euérous 82 Oaacov dyew, vierias 7d
mparov, ard atrov 8 abfis, trevra dard papavibuw mon-
Ades 68 Kal Evveyéws mdvra yuyvécbw. & éXréBopov
dyovra Kaip@ marl, paddov 88 Lapos Kai POiworedpov b:56-


‘The common reading, @&ov — * Petit, Wigan, and Exmerins are
ixov, is changed by Ermerins to all agreed, that the negative parti-
d&iévucov. 1 cannot soe that this cle, alshough wanting in the MSS.,
change is any improvement. ig here required by the sense.


240 WEPI GEPAIEIAY XPONIQN NAGON, BIBA. B’.


tow es pitay Bpupévar, iy draverjon 7a dour dixea, TObe
pobvov inripiov. amupt Teedov yap és Stvapsy Neuxds dé
Bopos «al & ri rep wip épydferas éxxaioy, roite whkoy
@ABopos elow mapexPéwv mprijocer, elmvorav pey éx Svor-
volqs, & dypolgs 88 etzypolny, xa ded oxederiys eboupxiyy.


OF
ARETAUS, THE CAPPADOCIAN,
ON THE
CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS OF ACUTE DISEASES


BOOK I.
CONTENTS.

. cour.
Ow Pureyitis * # * © (wanting) I
Ow Lernarcy = Oe do. IL
On Marssmvs  * * * * do. OL
On AporLExy Be Hn Se OF do. Iv.
On Errzrsy o® 2 Erwan Gs v.
Ow Tzranvs . . . . . » VL
On Qoiszy . . . . VIL
On THE AFFECTIONS ABOUT THE UVULA . . VIL
On THe Uicens anour ae Towsms =. 2. IX,
Ow Pizvrmy . Hamat) é . . xX


OF ACUTE DISEASES—BOOK I. 245


of a piece of it being cut off, should the teeth come forcibly
together with the spasm; the eyes rolled inwards, the eyelids
for the most part are separated, and affected with palpitation;
but should they wish to shut the lids they cannot bring them
together, insomuch that the white of the eyes can be seen
from below. The eyebrows sometimes relaxed towards the
mesal space, as in those who are frowning, and sometimes
retracted to the temples abnormally, so that the skin about the
forehead is greatly stretched, and the wrinkles in the inter-
superciliary space disappear: the cheeks are ruddy and quiver-
ing; the lips sometimes compressed together to a sharp point,
and sometimes separated towards the sides, when they are
stretched over the teeth, like as in persons smiling.

As the illness increases lividity of countenance also super-
venes, distension of the vessels in the neck, inability of speech
as in suffocation; insensibility even if you call loudly. The
utterance a moaning and lamentation; and the respiration a
sense of suffocation, as in a person who is throttled; the pulse
strong, and quick, and small in the beginning,—great, slow,
and feeble in the end, and irregular throughout; tentigo of
the genital organs. Such sufferings do they endure towards
the end of the attack.

But when they come to the termination of the illness, there
are unconscious discharges of the urine, and watery discharges
from the bowels, and in some cases an evacuation also of the
semen, from the constriction and compression of the vessels, or
from the pruriency of the pain, and titillation of the humours;
for in these cases the pains are seated in the nerves. The
mouth watery; phlegm copious, thick, cold, and, if you should
draw it forth, you might drag out a quantity of it in the form
of a thread. But, if with length of time and much pain, the
matters within the chest ferment, but the restrained spirit
(pneuma) agitates all things, and there is a convulsion and dis-
order of the same, a flood, as it were, of humours swells up to


46 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


the organs of respiration, the mouth, and the nose; and if
along with the humours the spirit be mixed, it appears like
the relief of all the former feelings of suffocation. They
accordingly spit out foam, as the sea ejects froth in mighty
tempests; and then at length they rise up, the ailment now
being at anend. At the termination, they are torpid in their
members at first, experience heaviness of the head, and loss
of strength, and are languid, pale, spiritless, and dejected,
from the suffering and shame of the dreadful malady.


CHAPTER YI.


ON TETANUS.


TeTanvs, in all its varieties, is a spasm of an exceedingly
painful nature, very swift to prove fatal, but neither easy to be
removed. They are affections of the muscles and tendons
about the jaws; but the illness is communicated to the whole
frame, for all parts are affected sympathetically with the pri-
mary organs, There are three forms of the convulsion, namely,


in a straight line, backwards, and forwards. Tetanus is in a
direct line, when the person labouring under the distention is
stretched out straight and inflexible. The contractions for-
wards and backwards have their appellation from the tension
and the place; for that backwards we call Opisthotonos; and
that variety we call Emprosthotonos in which the patient is
bent forwards by the anterior nerves. For the Greek word
réyos is applied both to a nerve, and to signify tension.

The causes of these complaints are many; for some are apt
to supervene on the wound of a membrane, or of muscles, or of
punctured nerves, when, for the most part, the patients die; for,
“ spasm from a wound is fatal.” And women also suffer from


OF ACUTE DISEASES.—BOOK. L 7
this spasm after abortion; and, in this case, they seldom re-
cover. Others are attacked with the spasm owing to a severe
blowin the neck. Severe cold also sometimes proves a cause; for
this reason, winter of all the seasons most especially engenders
these affections; next to it, spring and autumn, but least of all
summer, unless when preceded by a wound, or when any strange
diseases prevail epidemically. Women are more disposed to teta-
nus than men, because they are of a cold temperament; but
they more readily recover, because they areof a humid. With
respect to the different ages, children are frequently affected,
but do not often die, because the affection is familiar and akin
to them; striplings are less liable to suffer, but more readily
die; adults least of all, whereas old men are most subject
to the disease, and most apt to die; the cause of this is
the frigidity and dryness of old age, and the nature of the
death. But if the cold be along with humidity, these
spasmodic diseases are more innocent, and attended with less
danger,

In all these varieties, then, to speak generally, there is a
pain and tension of the tendons and spine, and of the muscles
connected with the jaws and cheek; for they fasten the lower
jaw to the upper, so that it could not easily be separated even
with levers or a wedge. But if one, by forcibly separating
the teeth, pour in some liquid, the patients do not drink it but
Squirt it out, or retain it in the mouth, or it regurgitates by
the nostrils; for the isthmus faucium is strongly compressed,
and the tonsils being hard and tense, do not coalesce so as to
propel that which is swallowed. The face is ruddy, and of
mixed colours, the eyes almost immoveable, or are rolled about
with difficulty; strong feeling of suffocation; respiration bad,
distension of the arms and legs; subsultus of the muscles;
the countenance variously distorted; the cheeks and lips tremu-
lous; the jaw quivering, and the teeth rattling, and in certain
rare cases even the ears are thusaffected. Imyself have beheld


ms ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS.


this and wondered! The urine is retained, so as to induce
strong dysuria, or passes spontaneously from contraction of
the’ bladder. These symptoms occur in each variety of the


Bat there are peculiarities in each; in Tetanus there is ten-
sion in « straight line of the whole body, which is unbent and
inflexible; the legs and arms are straight.

Opisthotonos bends the patient backward, like a bow, s0
that the reflected head is lodged between the shoulder-blades;
the throat protrudes;- the jaw sometimes gapes, but in some
Tare cases it is fixed in the upper one; respiration stertorous;


the belly and chest prominent, and in these there is usually —


incontinence of urine; the abdomen stretched, and resonant if
tapped; the arms strongly bent back in a state of extension;
the legs and thighs are bent together, for the legs are bent in
the opposite direction to the hams.

But if they are bent forwards, they are protuberant at the
back, the loins being extruded in a line with the back, the
whole of the spine being straight; the vertex prone, the head
inclining towards the chest; the lower jaw fixed upon the
breast bone; the hands clasped together, the lower extremities
extended; pains intense; the voice altogether dolorous; they
groan, making deep moaning. Should the mischief then seize
the chest and the respiratory organs, it readily frees the patient
from life; a blessing this, to himself, as being a deliverance
from pains, distortion, and deformity; and a contingency lesa
than usual to be lamented by the spectators, were he a son
or a father. But should the powers of life still stand
out, the respiration, although bad, being still prolonged, the
patient is not only bent up into an arch but rolled to-
gether like a ball, so that the head rests upon the knees,
while the legs and back are bent forwards, so as to convey
the impression of the articulation of the knee being dislocated
backwards. -


OF ACUTE DISEASES—BOOK 1. 9


An inhuman calamity! an unseemly sight! a spectacle pain-
ful even to the beholder! an incurable malady! owing to the
distortion, not to be recognised by the dearest friends; and
hence the prayer of the spectators, which formerly would have
been reckoned not pious, now becomes good, that the patient
may depart from life, as being a deliverance from the pains
and unseemly evils attendant on it. But neither can the
physician, though present and looking on, furnish any assist-
ance, as rogards life, relief from pain or from deformity. For
if he should wish to straighten the limbs, he can only do so
by cutting and breaking those of living man. With them,
_ then, who are overpowered by the disease, he can merely sym-
pathise, This is the great misfortune of the physician.


CHAPTER VU.
ON ANGINA, OR QUINSEY.


Anon is indeed @ very acute affection, for it is a compression
of the respiration. But there are two species of it; for it is
either an inflammation of the organs of respiration, or an
affection of the spirit (pnewma) alone, which contains the cause
vf the disease in itself.

‘The organs affected are, the tonsils, epiglottis, pharynx,
uvula, top of the trachea; and, if the inflammation spread, the
tongue also, and internal part of the fauces, when they pro-
trude the tongue outside the teeth, owing to its abnormal size;
for it fills the whole of the mouth, and the protuberance
thereof extends beyond the teeth. This species is called
Cynanche, either from its being a common affection of those
animals, or from its being a customary practice for dogs to
protrude the tongue even in health.


2h) ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


The opposite symptoms attend the other species; namely,
collapse of the organs, and diminution of the natural size,
with intense feeling of suffocation, insomuch that it appears to
themselves as if the inflammation had disappeared to the in-
ternal parts of the thorax, and had seized upon the heart and
lungs. This we call Synanche, as if from the disease inclining
inwardly and producing suffocation. It appears to me that
this is an illness of the spirit (pneume) iteelf, which: has under-
gone a morbid conversion to » hotter and drier state, without
any inflammation of the organ itself. Nor is this any great
wonder. For in the Charonwan caves the most sudden suffo-
cations occur from no affection of any organ,’ but the persons
die from one inspiration, before the body can sustain any
injury. But likewise a man will be seized with rabies, from
respiring the eflluvia of the tongue of a dog, without having
been bitten. It is not impossible then, that such a change of
the respiration should occur within, since many other pheno-
mena which occur in ‘a man bear a resemblance to external
causes, such as juices which become spoiled both within and
without. And diseases resemble deleterious substances, and
men have similar vomitings from medicines and from fevers,
Hence, also, it was not a wonderful thing, that in the
plague of Athens, certain persons fancied that poisonous
substances had been thrown into the wells in the Pireus
by the Peloponnesians; for these persons did not perceive
the affinity between a pestilential disease and deleterious
substances.

Cases of Cynanche are attended with inflammation of the
tonsils, of the fauces, and of the whole mouth; the tongue
protrudes beyond the teeth and lips; they have salivation, the


1 The Charonman ditches or pits _vii.; Epid.i.t, xvii. p.10, ed. Kan;
here mentioned, were in Phrygia. and Pliny, HN. vii. 93. Their pea-
See Strabo, xii.6. They are men-  tilential exhalations are often no-
tioned by Galen, de usu partium, — ticed by ancient authors,


OF ACUTE DISEASES —BOOK 1. 251


phlegm running out very thick and cold; they have their faces
ruddy and swollen; their eyes protuberant, wide open, and
red; the drink regurgitates by the nostrils, The pains
violent, but obscured by the urgency of the suffocation; the
chest and heart are in a state of inflammation; there is a long-
ing for cold air, yet they inspire but little, until they are
suffocated from the obstruction of the passage to the chest.
In certain cases, there ig a ready transference of the disease to
the chest, and these die from the metastasis; the fevers feeble,
slight, bringing no relief. But if, in any caso, there is a turn
to the better, abscesses form on either side, near the ears ex-
ternally, or internally about the tonsils; and if these occur
with torpor, and are not very protracted, the patients recover,
indeed, but with pain and danger. But, if a particularly
large swelling should occur, in such cases ag are converted
to an abscess, and the abscess is raised to a point, they
are quickly suffocated. Such are the peculiar symptoms of
eynanche,

‘Those of Synanche are, collapse, tenuity, and paleness; the
eyes hollow, sunk inwardly; the fauces and uvula retracted
upwards, the tonsils approaching one another still more; loss
of speech: the feeling of suffocation is much stronger in this
species than in the former, the mischief being seated in the
chest whence the source of respiration. In the most acute
eases, the patients die the same day, in some instances, even
before calling in the physician; and in others, although called
in, he could afford them no relief, for they died before the
physician could apply the resources of his art. In those in
which the discase takes a favourable turn, all the parts become
inflamed, the inflammation being determined outwardly, so
that the disease becomes cynanche in place of synanche. Itis
also a good thing when a strong swelling, or erysipelas, appears
externally on the chest. And the skilful physician diverts the
mischief to the chest by means of the cupping-instrument, or


252 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


by applying mustard to the breast and the parts near the jaws
he determines outwardly and discusses the disease. In certain
cases, indeed, the evil by these means has been for a time driven
outwards, but when so driven out it speedily reverts, and pro-
duces suffocation.

The causes are infinite, more especially exposure to cold,
and, less frequently, to heat; blows, fish-bones fixed in the
tonsils, cold draughts, intoxication, repletion, and the ills from
respiration.


CHAPTER VII.
ON THE AFPECTIONS ABOUT THE UVULA.


Tue solid body suspended from the roof of the mouth
between the two tonsils is called columella and gurgulio. Uva
is the mame of the affection. The columella (uewle) is of a
nervous nature, but humid, for it is situated in a humid
region. Wherefore this body, the columella, suffers from
various affections, for it becomes thickened from inflamma-
tion, being elongated and of equal thickness from the base to
the extremity, and is attended with redness. Columna is the
appellation of this affection. If it be rounded towards the
extremity alone, and with its enlargement become livid and
darkish, the name of the affection is Uva; for it altogether
resembles a grape in figure, colour, and size. A third affec-
tion is that of the membranes when they have the appearance
of broad sails, or the wings of bats, on this side and on that.
This is called Lorum, for the lengthened folds of the mem~
branes resemble thongs. But if the columella terminates in a
slender and elongated membrane, having at its extremity a
resemblance to the butt-end of a spear, it gets the name of


OF ACUTE DISEASES —BOOK I 253
Fimbria. This affection arises spontaneously from a defluxion,
like the others, but also from an oblique incision when the
surgeon leaves the membrane at one side! But if the organ
(uvula) become bifid with two membranes hanging on this
side and on that, it has no distinet appellation, but it is an
easy matter for any one who sees it to recognise the nature of
the disease.

A sense of suffocation accompanies all’these affections, and
they can by no means swallow with freedom. There is cough
in all the varieties, but especially in those named lorum and
fimbria. For a titillation of the trachea is produced by the
membrane, and in some cases it secretly instils some liquid
into the windpipe, whence they cough. But in uva and
columella there is still more dyspnea and very difficult
deglutition; for, in these cases, the fluid is squeezed up to the
nostrils, from sympathy of the tonsils. The columella is
common in old persons, the uva in the young and in adults;
for they abound in blood, and are of a more inflammatory
nature, The affections of the membranes are common in
puberty and infancy. It is safe to apply the knife in all
these varieties; but in the uva, while still red, hemorrhage,


Pains, and increase of inflammation supervenc.


CHAPTER IX,
ON ULCERATIONS ABOUT THE TONSILS.
Uxcens occur on the tonsils; some, indeed, of an ordinary
nature, mild and innocuous; but others of an unusual kind,
pestilential, and fatal. Such as are clean, small, superficial,
without inflammation and without pain, are mild; but such as


‘Our author alludes here to the tonsils, described by Paulus
the surgical operation, excision of Aigineta, vi. 30.


254 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


are broad, hollow, foul, and covered with a white, livid,
or black concretion, are pestilential. Aphtha is the name
given to these ulcers. But if the coneretion has depth, it
is an Eschar and is so called: but around the eschar there is
formed a great redness, inflammation, and pain of the veins, as
in carbuncle; and small pustules form, at first few in number,
but others coming out, they coalesce, and a broad ulcer is
produced. And if the disease spread outwardly to the mouth,
and reach the columella (wewa) and divide it asunder, and if
it extend to the tongue, the gums, and the alveoli, the teeth
also become loosened and black; and the inflammation seizes
the neck; and these die within a few days from the inflamma-
tion, fever, foetid smell, and want of food. But, if it spread
to the thorax by the windpipe, it occasions death by suffoca-
tion within the space of a day. For the lungs and heart can
neither endure such smells, nor ulcerations, nor ichorous dis=
charges, but coughs and dyspnoa supervene.

‘The cause of the mischief in the tonsils is the swallowing of
cold, rough, hot, acid, and astringent substances; for these parts
minister to the chest as to the purposes of voice and respira-
tion; and to the belly for the conveyance of food; and to the
stomach for deglutition. But if any affection occur in the
internal parts, namely, the belly, the stomach, or the chest, an
ascent of the mischief by the eructations takes place to the
isthmus faucium, the tonsils, and the parts there; wherefore
children, until puberty, especially suffer, for children in par-
ticular have large and cold respiration; for there is most heat
in them; moreover, they are intemperate in regard to food,
have a longing for varied food and cold drink; and they baw!
loud both in anger and in sport; and these diseases are
familiar to girls until they have their menstrual purgation,
The land of Egypt especially engenders it, the air thereof
being dry for respiration, and the food diversified, consisting
of roots, herbs of many kinds, acrid seeds, and thick drink;


OF ACUTE DISEASES.—BOOK 1. 255


namely, the water of the Nile, and the sort of ale prepared
from barley. Syria also, and more especially Coclosyria, en-
genders there diseases, and hence they have been named
Egyptian and Syrian ulcers.

The manner of death is most piteous; pain sharp and hot
as from carbuncle;* respiration bad, for their breath smells
strongly of putrefaction, as they constantly inhale the same
again into their chest; they are in so loathsome a state that
they cannot endure the smell of themselves; countenance pale
or livid; fever acute, thirst is if from fire, and yet they do not
desire drink for fear of the pains it would occasion; for they
become sick if it compress the tonsils, or if it return by the
nostrils; and if they lie down they rise up again as not being
able to endure the recumbent position, and, if they rise up,
they are forced in their distress to lie down again; they mostly
walk about erect, for in their inability to obtain relief they.
flee from rest, as if wishing to dispel one pain by another.
Inspiration large, as desiring cold air for the purpose of refri-
geration, but expiration small, for the ulceration, as if pro-
duced by burning, is inflamed by the heat of the respiration.
Hoarseness, loss of speech supervene; and these symptoms


hurry on from bad to worse, until suddenly falling to the
ground they expire,


CHAPTER X.
ON PLEURISY,


UnveEr the ribs, the spine, and the internal part of the thorax
a8 far as the clavicles, there is stretched a thin strong mem~-


' The term in the original, somewhat doubtful to which of
drOpak, may either wgnily “0 live these significations our author ap-
coal," or the disease “ plies it here; indeod, the former
Seo Paulus Agineta, iv. 25. Itis would be the more emphatic.


256 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS

brane; adhering to the bones, which is named succingens.
When inflammation occurs in it, and there is heat with cough
and parti-coloured sputa, the affection is named Pleurisy. But
all these symptoms must harmonise and conspire together as
all springing from one cause; for such of them as occur sepa-
rately from different causes, even if they all occur together,
are not called pleurisy. It is accompanied by acute pain of
the clavicles; heat acrid; decubitus on the inflamed side easy,
for thus the membrane (pleura) remains in its proper seat,
but on the opposite side painful ; for by its weight, the inflam-
mation and suspension of the membrane, the pain stretches to
all its adhesions at the shoulders and clavicles; and in certain
cases even to the back and shoulder blade; the ancients called
this affection Dorsal pleurisy. It is attended with dyspnea, in-
tomnolency, anorexia, florid redness of the cheeks, dry cough,
difficult expectoration of phlegm, or bilious, or deeply tinged
with blood, or yellowish; and these symptoms observe no
order, but come and go irregularly; but, worst of all, if the
bloody sputa cease, and the patients become delirious; and
sometimes they become comatose, and in their somnolency
the mind wavers.

But if the disease take a bad turn, all the symptoms getting
worse, they die within the seventh dey by falling into ayn-
cope; or, if the commencement of the expectoration, and the
more intense symptoms occurred with the second hebdomad,
they die on the fourteenth day. It sometimes happens that
in the intermediate period there is a transference of all the
symptoms to the lungs; for the lung attracts to itself, being
both porous and hot, and being moved for the attraction of
the substances around, when the patient is suddenly suffocated
by metastasis of the affection. But if the patient pass this
period, and do not die within the twentieth day, he becomes
affected with empyema. These, then, are the symptoms if
the disease get into a bad state.


OF ACUTE DISEASES—BOOK I. 257


But if it take a favourable turn, there is a profuse hemor=
thage by the nostrils, when the disease is suddenly resolved;
then follow sleep and expectoration of phlegm, and afterwards
of thin, bilious matters; then of still thinner, and again of
bloody, thick, and flesh-like; and if, with the bloody, the bile
return, and with it the phlegm, the patient’s convalescence is
secure; and these symptoms, if they should commence on the
third day, with an easy expectoration of smooth, consistent,
liquid, and (not) rounded eputa, the resolution takes place on
the seventh day, when, after bilious discharges from the
bowels, there is freedom of respiration, the mind settled, fever
diminishing, and return of appetite. But if these symptoms
commence with the second week, the resolution occurs on the
fourteenth day.

But if not so, it is converted into Empyemsa, as indicated
by rigors, pungent pains, the desire of sitting erect, and the
respiration becoming worse. It is then to be dreaded, lest,
the lungs suddenly attracting the pus, the patient should be
thereby suffocated, after having escaped the first and greater
evils. But if the abscess creep in between the ribs and sepa-
rate them, and point outwardly; or, if it burst into an intestine,
for the most part the patient recovers.

Among the seasons of the year winter most especially en-
genders the disease; next, autumn; spring, less frequently;
but summer most rarely. With regard to age, old men are
most apt to suffer, and most readily escape from an attack;
for neither is there apt to be a great inflammation in an arid
frame; nor is there a metastasis to the lungs, for old age is
more frigid than any other age, and the respiration small, and
the attraction of all things deficient. Young men and adults
are not, indeed, very apt to suffer attacks; but neither, also, do
they readily recover, for from a slight cause they would not
experience even a slight attack of inflammation, and from
great attacks there is greater danger. Children are least of all

8


258 OF ACUTE DISEASES—BOOK T.


liable to pleurisy, and in their case it is less frequently fatal;
for their bodies are rare, secretions copious, perspiration and
exhalation abundant; hence neither is a great inflammation
formed. ‘This is the felicity of their period of life in the
present affection.


oF
ARETAUS, THE CAPPADOCIAN,
ON THE


CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS OF ACUTE DISEASES


BOOK II.
CONTENTS.
cnar.
Ow Pyevmonta . . L
Os THe Barmumna uP or Buoop IL
On Srxcore mL
On Cavsvs Iv.
Ox Cuomzra . v.
Ow Inevs . . VI.


Oy rae AcuTE AFFEctions aBouT THE LIVER VIL.
On Tae Acure Arrectioy anour THE Vena Cava VIII.
On tHe Aocore Arrgctions aout THE Kipweys IX.
On tHe AcuTs AFFECTIONS ABOUT THE BLADDER =X.
Ow THE Hrerentcat Convuision xi.
On Sarrrisis . XxIL


262 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


Joss of speech and of breathing, and a speedy death. This is
what we call Peripneumonia, being an inflammation of the
lungs, with acute fever, when they are attended with heaviness
of the chest, freedom from pain, provided the lungs alone are
inflamed; for they are naturally insensible, being of loose
texture, like wool, But branches of the aspera arteria are
spread through them, of a cartilaginous nature, and these,
‘also, are insensible; muscles there are nowhere, and the nerves
are small, slender, and minister to motion. This is the cause
of the insensibility to pain. But if any of the membranes, by
which it is connected with the chest, be inflamed, pain also is
present; respiration bad, and hot; they wish to get up into an
erect posture, as being the easiest of all postures for the respi-
ration. Ruddy in countenance, but especially the cheeks; the
white of the eyes very bright and fatty; the point of the nose
flat; the veins in the temples and neck distended; loss of ap-
petite; pulse, at first, large, empty, very frequent, as if forcibly
accelerated; heat indeed, externally, feeble, and more humid
than natural, but, internally, dry, and very hot, by means of
which the breath is hot; there is thirst, dryness of the tongue,
desire of cold air, aberration of mind; cough mostly dry, but
if anything be brought up it is a frothy phlegm, or slightly
tinged with bile, or with a very florid tinge of blood. The
blood-stained is of all others the worst.

But if the disease tend to a fatal termination, there is in-
somnolency; sleep brief, heavy, of a comatose nature; vain
fancies; they are in a doting state of mind, but not violently
delirious; they have no knowledge of their present sufferings,
If you interrogate them respecting the disease, they will not
acknowledge any formidable symptom; the extremities cold;
the nails livid, and curved; the pulse small, very frequent,and
failing, in which case death is near at hand, for they die
mostly on the seventh day.

But if the disease abate and take a favourable turn, there is


st
?


“OF ACUTE DISEASES—BOOK II. 263


@ copious hemorrhage from the nose, a discharge from the
bowels of much bilious and frothy matters, such as might seem.
to be expelled from the lungs to the lower belly, provided it
readily brings off much ina liquid state. Sometimes there is a
determination to the urine, But they recover the most speedily
in whose cases all these occur together. 9

Jn certain cases much pus is formed in the lungs, or there is
© metastasis from the side, if a greater symptom of con-
valescence be at hand. Butiif, indeed, the matter be translated
from the side to the intestine or bladder, the patients imme-
diately recover from the peripneumony; but they have a
chronic abscess in the side, which, however, gots better. But
if the matter burst upon the lungs, some have thereby been
suffocated, from the copious effusion and inability to bring it
up. But such as escape suffocation from the bursting of the
abscess, have a large ulceration in the lungs, and pass into
phthisis; and from the abscess and phthisis old persons do not
readily recover; but from the peripneumony, youths and adults.


CHAPTER Il.
ON THR BRINGING UP OF BLOOD.


Tuere are two species of the discharge of blood by the mouth.
The one that by the mouth from the head and the vessels there;
the passage is by the palate and fauces, where are situated the
commencement of the msophagus and trachea; and with
hawking, and small and more urgent cough, they eructate the
blood into the mouth; whereas, in that from the mouth,
neither does hawking accompany, and it is called Lmptysis Cor
spitting of blood]. But when the discharge is more scanty,
and by drops, or when it comes more copiously from the head,


OF ACUTE DISEASES.—BOOK IL 265
and this it is which deceives them into the supposition that it
comes from the viscera below. It runs, also, from the head
into the stomach, when it is vomited up with nausea, and thus
proves a source of deception, as appearing to come from the
stomach. The blood brought up by spitting is not very thick,
but dark in colour, smooth, consistent, unmixed with other
substances; for, being hawked up, it comes immediately upon
the tongue in a round shape, being readily separated; and if
you examine the roof of the palate, you will find it thickened
and ulcerated, and, for the most part, bloody; and « slight
and simple plan of treatment will suffice, namely, astringents
applied to the palate in a cold state; for by hot, relaxing, and
dilating applications the flow is increased, and this is an indi-
cation that the spitting is from the head, in which case evacu-
ations are to be made from the head by the veins, the nostrils,
or by any other channel of discharge. And these things must
be done speedily; for if the blood is discharged a considerable
time, the flow will become permanent, and the parts there will
contract the habit of receiving the blood. The trachea, also,
becomes ulcerated, and the patients cough instead of hawking;
and this proves the commencement of a consumption.

The flow of blood from the chest and viscera below is called
a bringing up (in Greek, dvayary}). It is truly of a fatal
nature, if it proceed from any of the vital parts which are
ruptured—either the vena cava in the heart, which conveys
the blood from the liver, or from the large vein which lies
along the spine. For from hemorrhage, as from slaughtering
or impeded respiration, death ia very speedy. But in those
cases in which the blood comes from the lungs, the side, or
the trachea, they do not die so speedily; but, nevertheless, they
become affected with Empyema and Phthisis. Of these the
least formidable is that from the trachea, But if the vomiting
come from the stomach or bowels, the cases are not of a very


266 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


fatal nature, even though the hemorrhage be large; neither is
the recovery slow and changeable. But if it proceed from the
liver and spleen, it is neither readily nor constantly discharged
upwards, but the defluxion is more easy into the stomach and
intestines. Yet neither is the discharge upwards by the lungs
impossible or incredible, for in fevers there occur hemorrhages
of blood from the liver and spleen by the nostrils, the blood
flowing from the nostril on the same side as the viscus from
which it comes. These, then, are the places from which the
blood comes in the bringing up, and such the differences as to
danger or mortality.

But the modes are three; for it is brought up either from
rupture of 9 vessel, or from erosion, or from rarefaction,
Rupture, then, takes place suddenly, cither from a blow,
straining at a load, or lifting a weight upward, or a leap from
a height, or from bawling aloud, from violent passion, or some
other similar cause, when blood is instantly poured forth from
the vessel in great quantity.

But if it proceed from erosion, the patient is to be interro-
gated if he ever had a cough before, or was affected with
dyspnea, and whether nausea or vomiting ever afllicted him
previously, For from such chronic affections the vessels are
corroded by a continued, copious, and acrid defluxion. When,
therefore, the containing vessels, having been long wasted and
attenuated, at length give way, they pour forth blood.

But the mode by rarefaction is, indeed, unattended by rap-
ture, and on that account the discharge is neither copious nor
sudden, nor does it consist of thick blood; for by the rare-
faction of the vessels, the thin portion is excreted. But if
much collect in a cavity, and be again brought up, it becomes
thicker than natural, but yet not very thick, neither black,
like a clot; but it is quickly brought up in greater quantity,
as being from a collection. This mode of bringing up blood
is common with women who have not their monthly pur-


OF ACUTE DISEASES—BOOK IL + 207


gation, and appears at the periods of the purgation, and stops
during the intervals between them; and if the woman is not
cured, the discharge upwards of blood will revert for many
periods, and also, in certain cases, the vessels burst from
fulness.


And there is a difference of the discharge, whether it be
brought up from an artery ora vein. For it is black, thick,
and readily coagulates, if from a vein; it is less dangerous, and is
more speedily stopped; but if from an artery, it is of a bright
yellow colour and thin, does not readily coagulate, the danger
is more imminent, and to stop it is not so easy; for the pulsa~
tions of the artery provoke the hemorrhage, and the lips of the
wound do not coalesce from the frequent movements of the
vessel.

Recovery, if from erosion, is protracted, difficult, and doubt-
ful; for, owing to loss of substance, the parts of the ulcer do
‘not come together, for it is an ulcer, and not a wound; and
adhesion takes place more readily in ruptures, for the lips of
the wound touch one another. This, then, is another difference
as to danger. The mode attended with least danger is that
from rarefaction; and in it the styptic and refrigerant method
of treatment is sufficient.

The places are to be indicated from which the blood is
brought up; for many of the symptoms are common, decep-
tion is easy, and the cure different. Blood, then, from erosion
is not readily brought up from the stomach, for the coldness
and stypticity of the articles of food and drink bring the parts
to a state of condensation. Neither, also, are cases from erosion
eommon, although more so than the former; for acrid de-
fluxions do not adhere for any length of time, but are either
brought up or are passed downwards. . Rupture is more com-
mon in the stomach. If, then, any rupture take place, the
hemorrhage is not very great, such as that from the thorax;
for the veins there are slender, and the arteries also are small,


268 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS:


But in appearance the blood is not very black, not intensely
yellowish, smooth, or mixed with saliva, being brought up
with nausea and vomiting, slight cough, sometimes with some
discharge, and sometimes alone, without any expectoration;
for the trachea sympathises with the gullet, being extended
along and connected with it. There is pinching or constric-
tion of the ulcer from the things swallowed, more especially if
they are very cold, hot, or austere; and in certain
pain is produced in the stomach, extending as far as the back;
vomitings of phlegm, und sometimes, when the disease is long
protracted, and there has been long abstinence from food, they
bring up a great quantity of them; fevers, not of a continual
type, but of an irregular kind.

But, from the stomach, what is brought up may be black
and coagulated, even if it proceed from an artery; but if it
proceed from a vein, it is much blacker and much more com-
pact; much nausea and vomiting of pituitous and bilious
matter; blood mixed up with the food, provided the man had
eaten previously, for both the food and the blood are collected
together in the eame place; eructations frequent and fetid,
and, if much collect together, there is anxiety of mind and
vertigo; but if these be vomited they are relieved. They are
prostrate in strength, generally affected with a burning heat,
and constant pain of the stomach.

But from the aspera arteria they bring up scanty and very
fluid blood, with a cough; or, if they do not bring it up, they
cough incessantly. There is a painful feeling in the throat,
either a little below or above; voice hoarse and indistinet.

But if it be from the lungs, the discharge is copious, espe-
cially if from erosion, with much cough, of an intense yellow
colour, frothy, rounded}. so that what is brought up from one
part may be distinguished from what is brought up from
another. But the defluxion, though contained in a common
vessel, from the chest, is diversified after mixture, and you


OF ACUTE DISEASES —BOOK I. 269


may distinguish parts of them as being portions of the thorax,
and parts which have a fleshy appearance as being portions of
the lungs. There is heaviness of the chest, freedom from pain,
and much redness of the face, particularly in these cases,

But if brought up from the thorax, pain stretching to the
anterior part of the breast is indicative of the ruptured parts
cough intense, expectoration difficult, the blood not very fluid,
moderately thick, without froth. But if, in passing, the lung
be affected by consent, a certain amount of froth is imparted
to it, for the passage from the chest to the trachea is by the


But if, indeed, from the side there be discharged with cough
blood which is black, smooth, fotid, stinking, as from putre-
faction, with acute pain of the side, many die after the manner
of pleuritics with fever.

A season that is humid and hot engenders these affections,
Spring is thus humid and hot. Next the summer; autumn
Jess, but winter least of all. They die in summer mostly from
hemorrhage, for great inflammations do not readily occur
then; secondly, in spring, from inflammation and ardent
fevers; but in autumn, attacks of phthisis readily occur.

In a word, every discharge of blood upwards, even if small,
and although the ruptured vessels may have already united, is
attended with lowness of spirits, dejection, and despair of life.
For who is so firm in mind as to see himself enduring a state
resembling that of a slaughtered animal, and yet have no fear of
death? For the largest and most powerful animals, such as bulls,
die very quickly from loss of blood. That, however, isno great
wonder. But this isa mighty wonder: in the discharge from the
lungs alone, which is particularly dangerous, the patients do
not despair of themselves, even although near the last, The
insensibility of the lungs to pain appears to me to be the cause
of this; for pain, even although slight, makes one to fear
death, and yet, in most cases, it is more dreadful than perniy


270 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


cious; whereas the absence of pain, even in the great illnesses,
is attended with absence of the fear of death, and is more
dangerous than dreadful.


CHAPTER IL


ON SYNCOPE.


Wet by all means has the physician, and well have the com-
mon people succeeded in the appellation of this affection! It
is, indeed, the name of a very acute malady; for what is there
greater or more acute than the power of Syncope? and what
other name more appropriate for the designation of this
matter? what other orgon more important than the heart for
life or for death? Neither is it to be doubted that syncope is
@ disease of the heart, or that it is an injury of the vital powers
thereof—such is the rapidity and such the mode of the destrac-
tion. For the affection is the solution of the bonds of the vital
power, being antagonistic to the constitution of the man; for
having seized fast thereon, it does not let go its hold, but
brings him to dissolution. Nor is it any great wonder; for
other diseases are peculiar to, and prove fatal to, certain organs,
in which they are engendered, and to which they attach
themselves, Thus pestilential and very malignant buboes
derive their origin from the liver, but from no other part;
tetanus, in like manner, from the nerves, and epilepsy from
the head. Thus, therefore, syncope isa disease of the heart
and of life. But such persons as regard it to be an affection of
the stomach, because by means of food and wine, and in
certain cases by cold substances, the powers have been restored
and the mischief expelled—these, it would seem to me, ought
to hold phrenitis to be a disease of the hair and skin of the


OF ACUTE DISEASES—BOOK II, ame


head, since the phrenitics are relieved by the shaving and
wetting thereof, But to the heart the vicinity of the stomach:
is most important, for from it the heart draws both what is
suitable and what is unsuitable to itself. And by the lungs
the heart draws spirit (pneuma) for respiration, but yet the
lungs do not hold a primary place in respiration; for the
powers are not in the organs, but there where is the original
of life and strength. But the stomach is neither the original
nor seat of life; and yet one would be injured by atony there~
of: for food which proves injurious to the heart does not hurt
the stomach itself, but by it the heart; since those dying in
such cases have symptoms of heart-affections, namely, pulse
small and feeble, bruit of the heart, with violent palpitation,
vertigo, fainting, torpor, loss of tone in their limbs, sweating
copious and unrestrainable, coldness of the whole body, insen-
sibility, loss of utterance. How should the stomach endure
such symptoms? For those peculiar to it are nausea, vomit-
ing, loss of appetite, hiccup, eructation, acidity; whereas in
cardiac affections the patients are more acute in their senses,
so that they see and hear better than formerly; they are also
in understanding more sound, and in mind more pure, not
only regarding present things, but aleo with regard to futurity
they are true prophets. These, then, are the powers, not of
the stomach, but of the heart, where is the coul and the nature
thereof, and to it is to be referred this affection of its powers.
But this form of disease is a solution of the natural tone
from a cold cause and humidity, and therefore they are not
affected with heat, either internally or externally, neither do
they suffer from thirst, and their breath is cold even when the
disease proceeds from strong and ardent fevers, by which syn-
cope is usually kindled up. For when nature is strong, and
of the proper temperament, it rules all and commands all,
whether humour, spirit (pneuma), or solid, and, by their good
order and symmetry, regulates the man in life; but if the bond


LANE MEDICAL LIBRARY
STANFORD SITY
MEDICAL GETTER
STANFORD, GA, 94305


272 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


of nature—that is to say, its tone—be dissolved, then this
affection is produced. The original of it is cawsus, which is in
this form.


CHAPTER Ivy.
ON CAUSUS, OR ARDENT FEVER.


Hear, indeed, everywhere, both acrid and subtil, but espe-
cially in the internal parts; respiration hot, as if from fire;
inhalation of air large; desire of cold; dryness of tongue;
parchedness of lips and skin; extremities cold; urine intensely
tinged with bile; insomnolency; pulse frequent, small, and
feeble; eyes clear, glancing, reddish; healthy colour of the
countenance.

But if the affection increase, all appearances become greater
and worse; the pulse very small and very frequent; heat very:
dry and very acrid; intellect wavering; ignorance of all
things; they are thirsty; a desire to touch anything cold,
whether a wall, a garment, the floor, or a fluid; hands cold,
palms thereof very hot, nails livid; breathing thick; perspira~
tion like dew about the forehead and clavicles.

But if nature attain the extremity of drynesa and of heat,
the hot is converted into cold, and the parched into humidity;
for extreme intensities of things change to the opposite state.
When, therefore, the bonds of life are dissolved, this is syn-
cope. Then is there an irrestrainable sweat over all the body;
respiration cold, much vapour about the nostrils; they have
no thirst, and yet the other parts are parched except the
organs of thirst, namely, the mouth and stomach; the urine
thin and watery; belly for the most part dry, yet in certain
cases the discharges are scanty and bilious; a redundancy of


OF ACUTE DISEASES. —BOOK IL 373


humours; even the bones, being dissolved, run off} and from
all parts, as in a river, there is a current outwards.

As to the state of the soul, every sense is pure, the intellect
acute, the gnostic powers prophetic; for they prognosticate to
themselves, in the first place, their own departure from life;
then they foretell what will afterwards take place to those pre-
sent, who fancy sometimes that they are delirious; but these
persons wonder at the result of what has been said. Others,
algo, talk to certain of the dead, perchance they alone perceiy-
ing them to be present, in virtue of their agute and pure senge,
or perchance from their soul seeing beforehand, and announc-
ing the men with whom they are about to associate, For
formerly they were immersed in humours, as if in mud and
darkness; but when the disease has drained these off, and
taken away the mist from their eyes, they perceive those
things which are in the air, and with the naked soul become
true prophets. But those who have attained such a degree of
refinement in their humours and understanding will scarcely
recover, the vital power having been already evaporated into
air.


CHAPTER Y.


ON CHOLERA.


CHOLERA is a retrograde movement of the materiel in the
whole body on the stomach, the belly, and the intestines; a
most acute illness, Those matters, then, which collect in the
stomach, rush upwards by vomiting; but those humours in the
belly, and intestines, by the passages downwards. With regard
to appearance, then, those things which are first discharged
by vomiting, are watery; but those by the anus, liquid and
T


274 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


fetid excrement, (for continued indigestion is the cause of
this discase); but if these are washed out, the discharges are
pituitous, and then bilious. At first, indeed, they are borne
easily, and without pain; but afterwards the stomach is
affected with retchings, and the belly with tormina.

But, if the disease become worse, the tormina get greater;
there is fainting, prostration of strength in the limbs, anxiety,
loss of appetite; or, if they take anything, with much rum-
bling and nausea, there is discharged by vomiting bile in-
tensely yellow, and the downward discharges are of like kind;
spasm, contractions of the muscles in the legs and arms; the
fingers are bent; vertigo, hiccup, livid nails, frigidity, ex-
tremities cold, and altogether they are affected with rigors. ,

But if the disease tend to death, the patient falls into a
sweat; black bile, upwards and downwards; urine retained
in the bladder by the spasm; but, in fact, sometimes neither is
there any urine collected in the bladder, owing to the me-
tastasis of the fluids to the intestine; loss of utterance;
pulse very small, and very frequent in the cases affected with
syncope; continual and unavailing strainings to vomit; the
bowels troubled with tenesmus, dry, and without juices; a
painful and most piteous death from spasm, suffocation, and
empty vomiting.

The season ofsummer, then, engenders this affection; next
autumn; spring, less frequently; winter, least of all. With
regard to the ages, then, those of young persons and adults;
old age least of all; children more frequently than these, but
their complaints are not of a deadly nature.


276 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


lower intestines to get inflamed.* This affection is cus-
tomary with children, who are subject to indigestion, and they
more readily escape from the mischief, owing to their habits
and the humidity of their intestines, for they are loose, Old
persons do not readily suffer from the complaint, but rarely
recover, The season of summer engenders the disease rather
than that of spring; autumn, than winter; but the summer
more than both,

Many therefore die speedily of these tormina. But in
other cases pus is formed; and then again, the intestine
having become black and putrified, has separated, and thus
the patients have died. In these cases, provided the eus is
mild, there is a twisting pain, copious humours in the stomach,
loss of tone, languor, vacant eructations bringing no relief,
borborygmi in the bowels, the flatus passing down to the anus,
but not making its escape.

But if the attack of Ileus acquire intensity, there is a de-
termination upwards of everything, flatus, phlegm, and bile;
for they vomit all these; they are pale, cold over the whole
body; much pain; respiration bad, they are affected with
thirst.

If they are about to die, there is cold sweat, dysuria, anus
constricted, so that you could not pass a slender metal plate by
it; vomiting of fieces; the patients are speechless; pulse, at last


? The substance of all the in-
formation to be found in the
works of the ancient authorities
on the subject of Hernia, may be
seen in Paulus Hgineta, b.vi, 65, p.
66, Syd.Soc. Edit. I'may mention,
however, that although there be
nothing in the works of the medi-
cal authorities which would lead
us to suppose that the ancient
surgeons were in the practice of
operating to relieve incarcerated


Hernia, the following passage in
one of Martial’s Epigrams would
almost lead us to suppose the con-
trary, “Mitias implicitas Alcon
secat enterocelas,” Kpigr. xi, 845
which might be thus translated,
“The surgeon Alcon inflicts leas
pain in cutting for incarcerated
intestinal hernia’

* Perhaps he means “a needle.”
See Testa, Mai. del Cuore, t. iii,


OF ACUTE DISEASES—BOOK Il.


rare and small, but before death very small, very dense,
failing. These symptoms attend the disease in the
intestines,

But the same affections occur also in the colon, and the
symptoms are similar, as also the issue; some of these escape
if pus form in the colon, the reason of which is the fleshy
thickness of this intestine. The pain is slender and sharp
in the small intestines, but broad and heavy in the colon;
the pain also sometimes darts up to the ribs, when the disease
puts on the appearance of pleurisy; and these, moreover, are
affected with fever; but sometimes it extends to the false
ribs, on this side or on that, so that the pain appears to be
seated in the liver and spleen; again it affects the loins, for
the colon has many convolutions in all directions; but in
other eases it fixes on the sacrum, the thighs, and the cre-
masters of the testicles. But in colic affections, they have
rather retchings; and what is vomited is then bilious and
oily. And the danger therefrom is so much the less, as the
colon is more fleshy, and thicker than the small intestines,
and consequently more tolerant of injury.


CHAPTER VU.
ON THE ACUTE AFFECTIONS ABOUT THE LIVER.


In the affections of the liver, the patients do not die, indeed,
more quickly than in those of the heart; but yet they suffer
more pain; for the liver is, in a great measure, a concretion of
blood. But if the cause of death happen to be situated in its
Porta, they die no less speedily than from the heart; for these
parts are tissues formed of membranes, of important and
slender nerves, and of large veins. Hence certain of the philo-


278 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


sophers have held that the desires of the soul are seated
there. In hemorrhage it greatly surpasses all the others;
* for the liver is made up from the roots of veins.” Wherefore
@ great inflammation does form in it, but not very frequently,
nor in its vital parts, for the patient would die previously.
But a smaller inflammation often takes place, whence it
happens that they escape death, indeed, but experience a more
protracted state of disease. For of its office, as regards san-
guification, there is no stop nor procrastination, as from it a
supply of blood is sent to the heart, and to the parts below
the diaphragm.

If from a greater cause—a stroke, or continued indigestion
of much and bad food, and intoxication, or great cold—an
inflammation forms in the portal system, a very speedy death is
the result. For there is a latent, smothered, and acrid heat;
pulse languid; the kind of pain varied, and every way diver-
sified, sometimes darting to the right side, so as to resemble a
sharp weapon fixed in the place, and sometimes resembling
tormina; again, at other times the pain is deep—nay, very
deep; and, intermediate between the pain, atony and loss of
utterance. The diaphragm and succingens (pleura) are dragged
downwards; for from them the liver is suspended as a weight.
For this reason, a strong pain extends to the clavicle on the
same side; an ineffectual cough, or only a desire thereof, and
when it comes to a conclusion, dry; respiration bad, for the
diaphragm does not co-operate with the lungs, by assisting
them incontraction and dilatation. They draw in a small breath,
but expire a larger; colour, a dark-green, leaden; they loathe
food, or if they force themselves to take any, they become
flatulent in the epigastrium; ernetations bilious, acid, fetid;
nausea, retchings, belly mostly loose, discharges bilious, viscid,
small in quantity. The affections always go on increasing;
mind not very much deranged, but torpid, unsettled, stupid;
much timidity; coldness of the extremities, tremblings, rigors,


OF ACUTE DISEASES.—BOOK IL. 279


hiccup of a spasmodic nature, jaundice, bile intense, the whole
body tinged with bile, But if it appear before the seventh
day, it proves fatal in many cases,

But those who have escaped a fatal termination, either by »
hemorrhage, or a rapid discharge from the bowels of bilious
matters, or from frequent discharges of intense urine, in these
cases, after three weeks, the liver is converted into a purulent
abscess. But if it pass considerably,this period without an
abscess, it ends inevitably in dropsy; the patients are thirsty,
drink little, are dried in body, lose fat; there is a desire for
acids, and an insensibility to taste.

Autumn engenders this affection, along with the indigestion
produced by much summer-fruit and multifarious food. Of
all ages, the adult is most subject to it.


CHAPTER VIII.
ON THE ACUTE DISEASE OF THE VENA CAVA.


From the porte of the liver, there passes a wide vein through
the space intermediate between its extremities, which, being
always divided into slender and more numerous branches, is
distribmted at last all over the liver in vessels imperceptible to
the sight; and with their extremities anastomose the extremi-
ties of other veins, which, at first, are slender and numerous,
grow larger and fewer in number, and, at last, they are col-
lected into one large vein; hence, having become two by
division, these pass through the liver. The upper one, then,
having passed through the first lobe, appears on its convex
side; then, having passed the diaphragm, it is inserted into the
heart: this is called the vena cava. The other, having passed
through the lower lobe, the fifth, to its concave side, makes its


230 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


exit near the ‘spine, and is extended along it as faras the ischintio
region; and it, also, is called vena cava. It obtains the same
name, as being one and the same vein, which derives its origin
from the liver. For if one choose, one may pass a plate of
metal from the vena cava connected with the heart to that by
the spine, and from the spine through the liver to the heart;
for it is the snme passage leading upwards,

This vein, then, as L think, is all diseased in acute and
strong affections; for it is altogether one vein. But other
physicians fancy that only the part along the spine is affected,
because there are no manifest symptoms in regard to the
portion about the heart; for it is extended through the chest,
having no adhesions, but floating in the chest, until, from the
diaphragm, it adheres to the heart. If, then, any of the
great ailments seize this vein, they are concealed by the thorax
surrounding it.

Wherefore Aedmata* also form about this vein when a he-
morthage, bursting forth quickly proves fatal, the blood being
discharged by the lungs end the arteria aspera, if it burst in
the chest; but if, at its origin, the blood is poured into the
lower belly, 20 that the bowels float in it, when the patients
die before the blood makes its appearance, the belly being
filled with blood.

Inflammation likewise forms about the vein, and it, also,
proves fatal, if it be great; for there is an acrid and pungent
heat enclosed in the cavities of both, but little surpassing what
is natural, so that to the touch the heat appears to be slight;
but the patient fancies himself burning hot; pulse small, very
frequent, #0 as to appear comprested and forcibly accelerated;


* See the note on the English to it in this place. Tt is not un
translation of Hippocrates, Syd. likely that sortal aneurisms were
Soc, Edit, voli. p. 216, and the sometimes confounded with it. On
authorities there referred to. The this subject, soo furthor Tusta,
ancurismal yarix would apply best Malattie ded Cuore, teil.


OF ACUTE DISEASES —BOOK IL 281


coldness of the extromities; intense thirst; dryness of the mouth;
redness of countenance, along with paleness; he is reddish
over the whole body; hypochondriac region hard, and retracted
upwards; pain principally on the right side, and palpitation
therein, extending to the flanks; and in certain cases, also, of
the artery along the spine, provided the pulsation displays
itself in the other hypochondrine region; for lying, as it does,
on the left side, it sympathises with the other; the exhalation
in the general system affording no relief, and not even making
the skin soft, for it is dry, shrivelled, and rough; and more
especially in the regions of the body where the bones are
prominent, such as the back part of the elbow, the knees, or
the knuckles. Sleep disturbed; the bowels, in certain cases,
discharging nothing, and in others, the discharges small, acrid,
bilious; urine, a bright yellow and pungent; not disordered, in-
deed, in mind, but they are torpid and wasted, Hence, those
who have seen this constitution of disease have called it Causus,
for the present symptoms are those of a species of Causus; and
in autumn there isa tendency to malignity, both in adults and
the young, in whom the habit of body is slender, from bad
diet and hard labour. These, for the most part, die on the
fourteenth day; but when the disease is protracted, they die
in double that period. But those who either originally have a
slight inflammation, or when a great inflammation is gradually
resolved, escape the disease indeed, but never get rid of the
mischief; for they labour under causus a long time. But the
dangerous symptoms cease, namely, the pains, distension of
the hypochondria, the bad pulse, and torpor of the intellect;
but still they have nausea, are ill at ease, with distress of mind;
and, moreover, these are attended with an accession of causus
and thirst, dryness of the tongue and mouth; they inspire
largely, drawing in a long and copious breath, as if wishing to
draw in the whole atmosphere, for the purpose of refrigeration:
And if they drink a large draught of cold water, they are


282 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


relieved, indeed, for a short time; but then again the thirst is
kindled up, and again they drink copiously. And this is the
successive course of the malady. And a good physician would
give with impunity a copious cold draught, as in other
species of causus, and even with less risk, in the case of those
labouring under causus from disease of the vena cava. And
if either the bowels or the bladder carry off the drink, there
is no necessity for inducing vomiting; but if not, after much
cold drink much vomiting must be induced. For the patient
would burst, if, after drinking so much, he should have no
discharges by sweating,-by urine, or by the bowels.


CHAPTER IX,
ON ACUTE AFFECTIONS OF THE KIDNEYS.


Tue kidneys, as far as regards the peculiar structure of the
organ, are not productive of any great danger, even if they
should suffer acutely; for, being of s glandular nature, they
are mild and do not experience deadly diseases, But their office
is important, namely, the secretion of the urine from the blood,
and its expulsion.

It is stopped either by a stone, or an inflammation arising
there, or a clot of blood, or something such; when no mis-
chief arises from sympathy, owing to the peculiar nature of the
organ affected, but the retention of the urine produces all sorts
of dreadful symptoms. Heat, which is acrid, and induces
nausea; a heavy pain along the spine at the loins; distention
of the parts, especially of those about the hypochondrium;
suppression of urine, not entirely, but they pass urine in drops,
and have a desire to pass more, for there is the sensation of an
overflow. But if the urine become acrid and pungent, cold-
ness, tremblings, spasms, distention and fulness of the hypo-


OF ACUTE DISEASES —BOOK II. 283


chondria supervene. This miserable state and the conjoined
feeling become similar to that of tympanites produced by in-
digestion, from the taking of too much food. Pulse, at first,
indeed, slow and languid; but, if the evil press harder, small,
frequent, tumultuous, and irregular: sleep slight, painful, not
continued; and suddenly starting up as if from the stroke of a
sharp instrument, they fall over again into a deep sleep as if
from fatigue: they are not much deranged in intellect, but
talk incoherently; the countenance livid. But if the desire of
making water return again, the patients pass a small quantity
in drops, along with spasms and great pains, when, for a short
time, they are relieved from their sufferings, and again they
experience a relapse. Of those that die, they sink most
quickly who pass no urine; but the greater part. recover,
either from the stone dropping down into the bladder along
with the urine, or from the inflammation being converted into
pus, or from being gradually dispelled. For, if the urine pass
easily even in small quantity, they escape death; but for a
length of time they waste in constitution; the patients undergo
these sufferings while still able to keep up, but gradually fall
into a state of consumption. The same seasons, places, and
ages induce these affections as induce those in connection with
the ven: cave.

Sometimes blood bursts from the kidneys suddenly in large
quantity, and flows continuously for many days. None, how-
ever, die from the hemorrhage itself, but from the inflamma-
tion accompanying the hemorrhage, if the bleeding is stopped;
but most frequently they die of strong inflammation induced
by the stoppage. a


24 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


CHAPTER X.
ON THE ACUTE AFFECTIONS ABOUT THE BLADDER.


Tue bladder is a dangerous part to suffer in acute diseases,
even when it merely sympathizes with other parts; but more
dangerous and fatal if the affection begin with itself; for it is
very potent to make the other parts sympathise with it, as the
nerves and the understanding: for the bladder is a cold and
white nerve, at a very great distance from the innate heat, but
very near the external cold: for it is situated in the lowest
part of the belly, at the greatest distance from the chest. But,
also, its office is of vital importance, namely, the pasmge of
the urine.

Even, then, when the passage is only stopped by stones, or
clots, or from any native or forcign mischief, it is of a deadly
nature. In women, the phlegmonous tumour of the uterus
may compress it; and in men, the straight intestine at the end
bowels, called the Rectum. In many cases, too, owing to
involuntary restraint from modesty in assemblies and at ban-
quets, being filled it becomes distended; and, from the loss of
its contractile power, it no longer evacuates the urine. When,
then, the urine is stopped, there is fulness of the parts above,
namely, the kidneys; distension of the ureters, grievous pain
of the loins, spasms, tremblings, rigors, alienation of mind.
But if it suffer from an ulcer or inflammation, there are, in-
deed, many bad symptoms; but death from the ulcers is by
far the most speedy. With regard, however, to the ulceration
and purulent abscess, and those other affections which are not
very acute, they will be treated of among the chronic diseases;
but such as are acute, and prove fatal in fourteen days, or a
little earlier or later, such as inflammation, thrombus, or a
stone falling down to the neck of the bladder, of these I will
now treat. If, therefore, any of these occur, there is retention


OF ACUTE DISEASES —BOOK I. 285
of urine; swelling in the hypogastric region; acute pain all
over the abdomen; distension of the bladder; a sallow sweat
on the tenth day; vomitings of phlegm, then of bile; coldness
of the whole body, but especially of the feet: but, if the mis-
chief spread farther, there come on fevers attended with hiccup,
pulse irregularly frequent and small, redness of the counte-
nance, thirst, distress of mind, delirium, spasms. From dele-
terious substances, such as cantharides and buprestis, both the
bladder is distended with flatus, and the whole belly suffers
violence; and all things get worse, and death cannot be long
delayed.

The bladder also sometimes suffers from hemorrhage; the
blood there is bright and thin, but the patients never die from
it, although it may not be easy to stop. But from the clots
and the inflammation there is danger; for the coldness, morti-
fication, gangrene, and the other evils consequent upon it
readily prove fatal.

Winter and autumn bring on these diseases. As to age,
manhood, but still more old sge. The other seasons and
periods of life do not generally produce the diseases, and they
very rarely prove fatal. Of all others, infants are most free
from danger,


CHAPTER XI.
ON HYSTERICAL SUFFOCATION,


In the middle of the flanks of women lies the womb, a female
viseus, closely resembling an animal; for it is moved of itself
hither and thither in the flanks, also upwards in a direct line
to below the cartilage of the thorax, and also obliquely to the
right or to the left, either to the liver or spleen; and it like-
wise is subject to prolapsus downwards, and, in a word, it is


238 ON THE UAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


altogether erratic. It delights, also, in fragrant smells, and
advances towards them; and it has an aversion to fotid smells,
and flees from them; and, on the whole, the womb is like an
animal within an animal.

When, therefore, it is suddenly carried upwards, and
remains above for a considerable time, and violently compresses
the intestines, the woman experiences a choking, after the
form of epilepsy, but without convulsions. For the liver, dia-
phragm, lungs and heart, are quickly squeezed within a nar-
row space; and therefore loss of breathing and of speech seems
to be present. And, moreover, the carotids are compressed
from sympathy with the heart, and hence there is heaviness of
head, loss of sensibility, and deep sleep.

And in women there also arises another affection resembling
this form, with sense of choking and loss of speech, but not
proceeding from the womb; for it also happens to men, in the
manner of eatochus, But those from the uterus are remedied
by fetid smells, and the application of fragrant things to the
female parts; but in the others these things do no good; and
the limbs are moved about in the affection from the womb,
but in the other affection not atall. Moreover, voluntary and
involuntary tremblings........... but from the ap-
plication of a pessary to induce abortion, powerful congelation
of the womb, the stoppage of a copious hemorrhage, and such
like.

If, therefore, upon the womb’s being moved upwards, she
begin to suffer, there is sluggishness in the performance of her
offices, prostration of strength, atony, loss of the faculties of
her knees, vertigo, and the limbs sink under her; headache,
heaviness of the head, and the woman is pained in the veins
on each side of the nose.

But if they fall down they have heartburn... .. in the
hypochondriac regions; flanks empty, where is the seat of the
womb; pulse intermittent, irregular, and failing; strong sense


OF ACUTE DISEASES.—BOOK I. 287


of choking; loss of speech and of sensibility; respiration im-
perceptible and indistinct; « very sudden and incredible death,
for they have nothing deadly in their appearance; in colour
like that of life, and for a considerable time after death they
are more ruddy than usual; eyes somewhat prominent, bright,
not entirely fixed, but yet not very much turned aside.

But if the uterus be removed back to its seat before the
affection come to a conclusion, they escape the suffocation.
When the belly rumbles there is moisture about the female
parts, respiration thicker and more distinct, a very speedy
rousing up from the affection, in like manner as death is very
sudden; for as it readily ascends to the higher regions, so it
readily recedes. For the uterus is buoyant, but the mem-
branes, its supporters, are humid, and the place is humid in
which the uterus lies; and, moreover, it flees from fetid
things, and secks after sweet: wherefore it readily inclines to
this side and to that, like a log of wood, and floats upwards
and downwards. For this reason the affection occurs in
young women, but not in old. For in those in whom the
age, mode of life, and understanding is more mobile, the
uterus also is of a wandering nature; but in those more ad-
vanced in life, the age, mode of living, understanding, and
the uterus are of a steady character, Wherefore this suffoca-
tion from the womb accompanies females alone,

But the affections common to men happen also to the
uterus, such as inflammation and hemorrhage, and they have
the common symptoms; namely, fever, asphexy, coldness, loss
of speech. But in hemorrhage the death is even more sudden,
being like that of a slaughtered animal.


38 OF THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


CHAPTER XIL
ON SATYRIASIS.


Tax Satyrs, sacred to Bacchus, in the paintings and statues,
have the member erect, as the symbol of the divine perform-
ance. It is also a form of disease, in which the patient has
erection of the genital organ, the appellation of Satyriasis
being derived from its resemblance to the figure of the god.

It is an unrestrainable impulse to connection; but neither
are they at all relieved by these embraces, nor is the tentigo
soothed by many and repeated acts of sexual intercourse.
Spasins of all the nerves, and tension of all the tendons, groins,
and perineum, inflammation and pain of the genital parts, red-
ness of countenance, and a dewy moisture. Wrapped up in
silent sorrow, they are stupid, as if grievously afflicted with
their calamity. But if the affection overcome the patient's
sense of shame, he will lose all restraint of tongue as regards
obscenity, and likewise all restraint in regard to the open per-
formance of the act, being deranged in understanding as to
indecency; for they cannot restrain themselves, are thinty,
and vomit much phlegm. Afterwards, froth settles on their
lips, as is the case with goats in the season of rutting,
and the smell likewise is similar. The urine, after long
retention, is white, thick, and like semen; bowels constipated;
spontaneous titillations of the sides and arm-pits; they have
convulsions, loathe food, or, if presented to them, they match
it confusedly,

But if the illness tend to death, they become flatulent, belly
protuberant, ‘tension of the tendons and of all the muscles,
difficulty of movement, contraction of the limbs, pulse small,
weak, and irregular.

All these symptoms have been sometimes removed by
copious discharges from the bowels of phlegm and bile, and by


OF ACUTE DISEASES.—BOOK Il. 289
vomiting in like manner, not without danger. The proper
cure is deep and very protracted sleep; for much sleep induces
coldness, paralysis, and torpor of the nerves; and torpidity
and refrigeration cure Satyriasis.

‘The affection, for the most part, is formed in spring and
summer. Of the periods of life, it occurs principally in boys
and striplings, more especially in such as are naturally prone
to sexual intercourse. It is a most acute, disgusting, and un-
seemly ailment, For the most part, the patients die on the
seventh day, It is said, that women also suffer from this
affection; that they have the same impulse to venery, and
the other symptoms the same. I believe, indeed, that lust is
engendered in women of a humid temperament, s0 as to in-
duce a copious dischange of the superfluous humours; but I do
not at all believe that they are affected with Satyriasis, for their
nature, being cold, is not adapted to it. But neither, also,
has woman the parts necessary for erection, like those of a
Satyr, whence the affection derives its name; and neither also
are men subject to suffocation from the womb, because men
have not an uterus.


OF


ARETZUS, THE CAPPADOCIAN,


ON THE


CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS OF CHRONIC


DISEASES


BOOK I.


CONTENTS.


Tae Prevace .

On CErHALZa .

Ox Vertigo .

Ow Epmzrsy

On MELANCHOLY

Ow Manta

Ow PaRatysn .

On PaTaps . - .
Ow Persons AFFECTED WITH EaryeMa
Ow Asscesszs oF THE Lunas.

Own AsTHMa

On PNEUMODES. .

On AFFEctions oF THE LIVER

Ow AFFECTIONS OF THE SPLEEN

On Jaunpice .

Ow CacHExia . .


u2


OF
ARETZUS, THE CAPPADOCIAN,
ON THE


CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS OF CHRONIC
DISEASES


BOOK I.


CONTENTS.

cuar.
‘Tue Prerace . L
On CEPHALEA . IL
On Vertigo . IL
On Ermzrsy . IV.
On MELANCHOLY Vv.
On Manra VI.
On Paratysis ‘ a VIL
On Pores . . . . * VL
Ow Persons AFFECTED WITH EmMpYEMA . x
Own Asscesses or THE Lunas. . < x.
On AsTHMA . . . . . xL
On PNevMopzs, . . . . XIL
On Arrzorions oF THE LIVER . . xuL
On AFFECTIONS OF THE SPLEEN . . XIV.
On JaunDIce . . . . . XY.
Ow Cacexta . < Fi i . XVI.


u2


oF


ARETZUS, THE CAPPADOCIAN,
ON THE


CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS OF CHRONIC
DISEASES


BOOK I.


CHAPTER I.
THE PROGMIUM.
Or chronic diseases the pain is great, the period of wasting


long, and the recovery uncertain; for either they are not dis-
pelled at all, or the diseases relapse upon any slight error;


for neither have the patients resolution to persevere to the
end; or, if they do persevere, they commit blunders in a
prolonged regimen. And if there also be the suffering from a
painful system of cure,—of thirst, of hunger, of bitter and
harsh medicines, of cutting or burning,—of all which there is
sometimes need in protracted diseases, the patients resile as
truly preferring even death itself. Hence, indeed, is developed
the talent of the medical man, his perseverance, his skill in
diversifying the treatment, and conceding such pleasant things
as will do no harm, and in giving encouragement. But the
patient also ought to be courageous, and co-operate with the
physician against the disease. For, taking a firm grasp of the
body, the disease not only wastes and corrodes it quickly, but


i


204 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


frequently disorders the senses, nay, even deranges the soul
by the intemperament of the body. Such we know mania and
melancholy to be, of which 1 will treat afterwards. At the
present time I shall give an account of cephalea.


CHAPTER II.
ON CEPHALMA.


Tr the head be suddenly seized with pain from a temporary
cause, even if it should endure for several days, the disease is
called Cephalalgia. But if the disease be protracted for a long
time, and with long and frequent periods, or if greater and
more untractable symptoms supervene, we call it Cephalma.
There are infinite varieties of it; for, in certain cases, the
pain is incessant and slight, but not intermittent; but in
others it returns periodically, as in quotidian fevers, or in
those which have exacerbations every alternate day: in others
it continues from sunset to noon, and then completely ceases;
or from noon to evening, or still further into night; this
petiod is not much protracted. And in certain cases the whole
head is pained; and the pain is sometimes on the right and
sometimes on the left side, or the forehead, or the bregma;
and these may all occur the same day in a random manner.
But in certain cases, the parts on the right side, or those on
the left solely, so far that a separate temple, or ear, or one
eyebrow, or one eye, or the nose which divides the face into
two equal parts; and the pain does not pass this limit, but
remains in the half of the head, This is called Heterocrania,
an illness by no’ means mild, even though it intermits, and
although it appears to be slight. For if at any time it set in
acutely, it occasions unseemly and dreadful symptoms; spasm


OF CHRONIC DISEASES,—BOOK I, 205


and distortion of the countenance take place; the eyes either
fixed intently like horns, or they are rolled inwardly to this
side or to that; vertigo, deep-seated pain of the eyes as far as
the meninges; irrestrainable sweat; sudden pain of the ten-
dons, as of one striking with a club; nausea; vomiting of
bilious matters; collapse of the patient; but, if the affection
be protracted, the patient will die; or, if more slight and not
deadly, it becomes chronic; there is much torpor, heaviness of
the head, anxiety, and ennui, For they flee the light; the
darkness soothes their disease: nor can they bear readily to
look upon or hear anything agreeable; their sense of smell is
vitiated, neither does anything agreeable to smell delight
them, and they have also an aversion to fetid things: the
patients, moreover, are weary of life, and wish to die.

The cause of these symptoms is coldness with dryness. But
if it be protracted and increase, as regards the pains, the affec-
tion becomes Vertigo.


CHAPTER II.
ON VERTIGO, OR SCOTOMA.


Ie darkness possess the eyes, and if the head be whirled round
with dizziness, and the ears ring as from the sound of rivers
rolling along with a great noise, or like the wind when it
roars among the sails, or like the clang of pipes or reeds, or
like the rattling of a carriage, we call the affection Scotoma
(or Vertigo); a bad complaint indeed, if a symptom of the
head, but bad likewise if the sequela of cephalwa, or whe-
ther it arises of itself as a chronic disease. for, if these
symptoms do not pass off, but the vertigo persist, or if, in
course of time, from the want of any one to remedy, it is


206 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS.


completed in its own peculiar symptoms, the affection vertigo
is formed, from a humid and cold cause. But if it turn to.an
incurable condition, it proves the commencement of other
affections—of msnia, melancholy, or epilepsy, the symptoms
peculiar to each being superadded. But the mode of vertigo
is, heaviness of the head, sparkles of light in the eyes along
with much darkness, ignorance of themselves and of those
around; and, if the disease go on increasing, the limbs sink
below them, and they crawl on the ground; there is nausea
and vomitings of phlegm, or of yellow or black bilious matter,
When connected with yellow bile, mania is formed; when
with black, melancholy; when with phlegm, epilepsy; for it
is liable to conversion into all these diseases,


CHAPTER IV.
ON EPILEPSY.


Ertersy is an illness of various shapes and horrible; in the
paroxysms, brutish, very acute, and deadly; for, at times, one
paroxysm has proved fatal. Or if from habit the patient can
endure it, he lives, indeed, enduring shame, ignominy, and
sorrow: and the disease does not readily pass off, but fixes its
abode during the bettor periods and in the lovely season of
life. It dwells with boys and young men; and, by good
fortune, it is sometimes driven out in another more advanced
period of life, when it takes its departure along with the
beauty of youth; and then, having rendered them deformed,
it destroys certain youths from envy, a3 it were, of their
beauty, either by loss of the faculties of a hand, or by the
distortion of the countenance, or by the deprivation of some
one sense, But if the mischief lurk there until it-strike root,


OF CHRONIC DISEASES—BOOK L 207


it will not yield either to the physician or the changes of age,
80 as to take its departure, but lives with the patient until
death. And sometimes the disease is rendered painful by its
convulsions and distortions of the limbs and of the face; and
sometimes it turns the mind distracted. The sight of a
paroxysm is disagreeable, and its departure disgusting with
spontaneous evacuations of the urine and of the bowels,

But also it is reckoned a disgraceful form of disease; for it
is supposed, that it is an infliction on persons who have sinned
against the Moon: and hence some have called it the Sacred
Disease, and that for more reasons than one, as from the
greatness of the evil, for the Greek word depis also signifies
great; or because the cure of it is not human, but divine; or
from the opinion that it proceeded from the entrance of a
demon into the man: from some one, or all these causes
together, it has been called Sacred.

Such symptoms as accompany this disease in its acute form
have been already detailed by me. But if it become invete-
tate, the patients are not free from harm even in the intervals,
but are languid, spiritless, stupid, inhuman, unsociable, and
not disposed to hold intercourse, nor to be sociable, at any
period of life; sleepless, subject to many horrid dreams, with-
out appetite, and with bad digestion; pale, of a leaden colour;
slow to learn, from torpidity of the understanding and of the
senses; dull of hearing; have noises and ringing in the head;
utterance indistinct and bewildered, either from the nature of
the disease, or from the wounds during the attacks; the
tongue is rolled about in the mouth conyulsively in various
ways. The disease also sometimes disturbs the understanding,
so that the patient becomes altogether fatuous. The cause of
these affections is coldness with humidity.


ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


CHAPTER Y.
ON MELANCHOLY,


Brack bile, if it make its appearance in acute diseases of the
upper parts of the body, is very dangerous; or, if it pass
downwards, it is not free from danger. But in chronic
diseases, if it pass downward, it terminates in dysentery and
pain of the liver. But in women it serves as a purgation
instead of the menses, provided they are not otherwise in a
dangerous condition. But if it be determined upwards to the
stomach and diaphragm, it forms melancholy; for it produces
flatulence and eructations of a fetid and fishy nature, and it
sends rumbling wind downwards, and disturbs the understand-
ing. On this account, in former days, these were called
melancholics and flatulent persons. And yet, in certain of
these cases, there is neither flatulence nor black bile, but mere
anger and grief, and sad dejection of mind; and these were
called melancholics, because the terms bile (xvod) and anger
(épyi}) are synonymous in import, and likewise black (ué\acva),
with much (srodA}) and furious (@npwdéns). Homer is authority
for this when he says:—
“Then straight to speak uprose

‘The Atreidan chief, who ‘neath his sway a wide-spread empiro held:

Sore vexed was he; his mighty heart in his dark bosom swelled

With rage, and from his eyes the fire like lightning-flashes broke."*


The melancholics become such when they are overpowered by
this evil.
It is a lowness of spirits from a single phantasy, without
‘——_—_—__———- Toor 8' dwiory

“Hpor 'Axpeidgs eipuxpeiay ‘Ayauduvaw

*Axvinevos’ pivcor 32 péya pines dppyséhacrar

Mipmdarr’, Soce 84 of rupi Naumerduvts derny.

Niad, 1.101, eto.


‘OF CHRONIC DISEASES—BOOK E 0


fever; and it appears to me that melancholy is the commence
mentand a part of mania, For in those who are mad, the un-
derstanding is turned sometimes to anger and sometimes to
joy, but in the melancholics to sorrow and despondency only.
But they who are mad are so for the greater part of life,
becoming silly, and doing dreadful and disgraceful things;
but those affected with melancholy are not every one of them
affected according to one particular form; but they are either
suspicious of poisoning, or flee to the desert from misanthropy,
or turn superstitious, or contract a hatred of life, Or if at any
time a relaxation takes place, in most cases hilarity supervence,
but these persons go mad.

But how, and from what parts of the body, the most of
these complaints originate, I will now explain. If the cause
remain in the hypochondriac regions, it collects about the
diaphragm, and the bile passes upwards, or downwards in cases
of melancholy. But if it also affects the head from. sympathy,
and the abnormal irritability of temper change to laughter and
joy for the greater part of their life, these become mad rather
from the increase of the disease than from change of the
affection.

Dryness is the cause of both. Adult men, therefore, are
subject to mania and melancholy, or persons of less age than
adults. "Women are worse affected with mania than men.
As to age, towards manhood, and those actually in the primo
of life. The seasons of summer and of autumn engender, and
spring brings it to a crisis.

The characteristic appearances, then, are not obscure; for the
patients are dall or stern, dejected or unreasonably torpid,
without any manifest cause: such is the commencement of
melancholy. And they also become peevish, dispirited, sleep-
less, and start up from a disturbed sleep.

Unreasonable fear also seizes them, if the disease tend to

increase, when their dreams are true, terrifying, and clear:


300 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


for whatever, when awake, they have an aversion to, as being
an evil, rushes upon their visions in sleep. They are prone to
change their mind readily; to become base, mean-spirited,
illiberal, and in a little time, perhaps, simple, extravagant,
munificent, not from any virtue of the soul, but from the
changeableness of the disease. But if the illness become more
urgent, hatred, avoidance of the haunts of men, vain lamenta-
tions; they complain of life, and desire to die. In many, the
understanding so leads to insensibility and fatuousness, that
they become ignorant of all things, or forgetful of themselves,
and live the life of the inferior animals. The habit of the
body also becomes perverted; colour, a darkish- 1, unless
the bile do not pass downward, but is diffused with the
blood over the whole system. They are voracious, indeed,
yet emaciated; for in them sleep does not brace their limbs
either by what they have eaten or drunk, but watchfulness
diffuses and determines them outwardly. Therefore the bowels
are dried up, and discharge nothing; or, if they do, the dejec-
tions are dried, round, with a black and bilious fluid, in which
they float; urine scanty, acrid, tinged with bile. They are
flatulent about the hypochondriac region; the eructations
fetid, virulent, like brine from salt; and sometimes an acrid
fluid, mixed with bile, floats in the stomach, Pulse for the
most part small, torpid, feeble, dense, like that from cold.

A story is told, that a certain person, incurably affected, fell
in love with a girl; and when the physicians could bring him
no relief, love cured him. But I think that he was originally
in love, and that he was dejected and spiritless from being
unsuccessful with the girl, and appeared to the common
people to be melancholic. He then did not know that it was
love; but when he imparted the love to the girl, he ceased
from his dejection, and dispelled his passion and sorrow; and
with joy he awoke from his lowness of spirits, and he became
restored to understanding, love being his physician.


OF CHRONIC DISEASES—BOOK 1


CHAPTER VI.
ON MADNESS.


Tne modes of mania are infinite in species, but one alone in
genus, For it is altogether a chronic derangement of the
mind, without fever. For if fever at any time should come
on, it would not owe its peculiarity to the mania, but to some
other incident. Thus wine inflames to delirium in drunken-
ness; and certain edibles, such as mandragora and hyoscyamus,
induce madness: but these affections are never called mania;
for, springing from a temporary cause, they quickly subside,
but madness has something confirmed in it. To this mania
there is no resemblance in the dotage which is the calamity of
old age, for it isa torpor of the senses, and a stupefaction of
the gnostic and intellectual fuculties by coldness of the system.
But mania is something hot and dry in cause, and tumultuous
in its acts. And, indeed, dotage commencing with old age
never intermits, but accompanies the patient until death;
while mania intermits, and with care ceases altogether. And
there may be an imperfect intermission, if it take place in
mania when the evil is not thoroughly cured by medicine, or
is connected with the temperature of the season. For in cer-
tain persons who seemed to be freed from the complaint, either
the season of spring, or some error in diet, or some incidental
heat of passion, has brought on a relapse.

‘Those prone to the disease, are such as are naturally passion-
ate, irritable, of active habits, of an easy disposition, joyous,
puerile; likewise those whose disposition inclines to the oppo-
site condition, namely, such as are sluggish, sorrowful, slow
to learn, but patient in labour, and who when they learn
anything, soon forget it; those likewise are more prone to
melancholy, who have formerly been in a mad condition. But
in those periods of life with which much heat and blood are


302 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


associated, persons are most given to mania, namely, those
about puberty, young men, and such as possess general
vigour. But those in whom the heat is enkindled by black
bile, and whose form of constitution is inclined to dryness,
most readily pass into a state of melancholy. The diet which
disposes to it is associated with voracity, immoderate repletion,
drunkenness, lechery, venereal desires. Women also sometimes
become affected with mania from want of purgation of the
system, when the uterus has attained the development of
manhood; but the others do not readily full into mania, yet,
if they do, their cases are difficult to manage. These are the
causes; and they stir up the disease also, if from any cause
an accustomed evacuation of blood, or of bile, or of sweating
be stopped.

And they with whose madness joy is associated, laugh, play,
dance night and day, and sometimes go openly to the market
crowned, as if victors in some contest of skill; this form is
inoffensive to those around. Others have madness attended
with anger; and these sometimes rend their clothes and kill
their keepers, and lay violent hands upon themselves. This
miserable form of disease is not unattended with danger to
those around. But the modes are infinite in those who are
ingenious and docile,—untaught astronomy, spontaneous philo-
sophy, poetry truly from the muses; for docility has its good
advantages even in diseases. In the uneducated, the common
employments are the carrying of loads, and working at clay,—
they are artificers or masons. They are also given to extraor
dinary phantasies; for one is afraid of the fall of the oil-
cruets . . . . . and another will not drink, as fancying himself
a brick, and fearing lest he should be dissolved by the liquid.

This story also is told:—A certain joiner was a skilful
artisan while in the house, would measure, chop, plane, mortice,
and adjust wood, and finish the work of the house correctly;
would associate with the workmen, make bargain with them,


OF CHRONIC DISEASES—BOOK 1. 303
and remunerate their work with suitable pay. While on the
spot where the work was performed, he thus possessed his
understanding. But if at any time he went away to the
market, the bath, or on any other engagement, having laid
down his tools, he would first groan, then shrag his shoulders
as he wentout. But when he had got out of sight of the do-
mestics, or of the work and the place where it was performed,
he became completely mad; yet if he returned speedily he re-
covered his reason again; such a bond of connection was there
between the locality and his understanding.

‘The cause of the disease is seated in the head and hypochon-
drine region, sometimes commencing in both together, and the
one imparting it to the other. In mania and melancholy,
the main cause is seated in the bowels, as in phrenitis it is
mostly seated in the head and the senses, For in these the
senses are perverted, so that they see things not present as if
they were present, and objects which do not appear to others,
manifest themeelves to them; whereas persons who are mad
see only as others see, but do not form a correct judgment
on what they have seen.

If, therefore, the illness be great, they are of'a changeable tem-
per, their senses are acute, they are suspicious, irritable without
any cause, and unreasonably desponding when the disease
tends to gloom; but when to cheerfulness, they are in excellent
epirite; yet they are unusually given to insomnolency; both are
changeable in countenance, have headache, or else heaviness
of the head; they are sharp in hearing, but very slow in
judgment; for in certain cases there are noises of the ears,
and ringings like those of trumpets and pipes. But if the
disease go on to increase, they are flatulent, affected with
nausea, voracious and greedy in taking food, for they are
watchful, and watchfulness induces gluttony. Yet they are
not emaciated like persons in disease (embonpoint is rather
the condition of melancholics) and they are somewhat pale,


204 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


But if any of the viscera get into s state of inflammation, it
blunts the appetite and digestion; the eyes are hollow, and do
not wink; before the eyes are images of an azure or dark colour
in those who are turning to melancholy, but of a redder
colour when they are turning to mania, along with purple-
coloured phantasmata, in many cases as if of flashing fire;
and terror seizes them as if from a thunderbolt. In other
cases the eyes are red and blood-shot.

At the height of the disease they have impure dreams, and
irresistible desire of venery, without any shame and restraint
as to sexual intercourse; and if roused to anger by admonition
or restraint, they become wholly mad. Wherefore they are
affected with madness in various shapes; some run along
unrestrainedly, and, not knowing how, return again to the
same spot; some, after a long time, come back to their relatives;
others roar aloud, bewailing themselves as if they had ex-
perienced robbery or violence. Some flee the haunts of men,
and going to the wilderness, live by themselves,

If they should attain any relaxation of the evil, they become
torpid, dull, sorrowful; for having come to a knowledge of
the disease they are saddened with their own calamity.


ANOTHER SPECIES OF MANIA,


Some cut their limbs in a holy phantasy, as if thereby pro-
pitiating peculiar divinities, This is a madness of the appre-
hension solely; for in other respects they are sane, They are
roused by the flute, and mirth, or by drinking, or by the
admonition of those around them. This madness is of divine
origin, and if they recover from the madness, they are cheer-
ful and free of care, as if initiated to the god; but yet they
are pale and attenuated, and long remain weak from the pains
of the wounds.'


* Our author, as Petit remarks, particular, the Aiys of Catullus,
evidently refers here to the wor- and Apuleius, viii.
ship of Cybele ; on which see in


OF CHRONIC DISEASES.—BOOK 1.


CHAPTER VII.


ON PARALYSIS.


Apoplexy, Paraplegia, Paresis, Paralysis, are all generically the
same. For they are all a defect of motion, or of touch, or
of both; sometimes also of understanding, and sometimes of
other sense. But apoplexy is a paralysis of the whole body,
of sensation, of understanding and of motion; wherefore to
get rid of a strong attack of apoplexy is impossible, and of a
weak, not easy, But paraplegia is a remission of touch and mo-
tion, but of'a part, either of the hand or of the leg. Paralysis
for the most part is the remission (paresis) of motion only, and
of energy.! But if the touch alone is wanting—(but such a
case is rare)—the disease is called Anzesthesia rather than paresis.
And when Hippocrates says, “the leg on the same side was
apoplectic,” he means to say that it was ina death-like, useless,
and incurable state; for what is strong apoplexy in the whole
body, that he calls paraplegia in the limb. Paresis, properly
speaking, is applied to suppression or incontinence of urine in
the bladder. But distortion of the eye-brows, and of the
cheeks, and of the muscles about the jaws and chin to the
other side, if attended with spasm, has got the appellation of
Cynic spasm. Loss of tone in the knees, and of sensibility
for a time, with torpor, fainting, and collapse, we call lipo-
thymia,

Wherefore, the parts are sometimes paralysed singly, as one
eye-brow, or a , or still larger, a hand, or a leg; and
sometimes more together; and sometimes the right or the left


1 Tt is difficult to,find anappro- sensibility or of motion. Alex
priate word cither in the Latin or ander, however, makes little or no
English for the term mépeais. It distinction between itand paraly-
‘would seom to be particularly ap- sis, x. 2.
plied to “a partial loss” either of


206 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


only, or each by itself, or all together, either entirely or in a
Jess degree; and the parts only which are distant, homonymous,
and in pairs—the eyes, hands, and legs; and also the parts
which cohere, as the nose on one side, the tongue to the
middle line of separation, and the one tonsil, the isthmus
faucium, and the parts concerned in deglutition to one half.
I fancy, also, that sometimes the stomach, the bladder, and the
rectum, as far as its extremity, suffers in like manner; but the
internal parts, when in a paralytic state, are concealed from the
sight. Their functions, however, are but half performed; and
from this I conclude, that these parts are half affected, as being
cut in twain by the disease. And, indeed, this thing teaches
us a lesson in respect to the diversity of power and discrimi-

nation between the sight side and the left. For the inherent
cause is equal; and means which occasion the affection are
common in both cases, whether cold or indigestion, and yet
both do not. suffer equally. For Nature is of equal power in
that which is equally paired; but it is impossible that the same
thing should happen where there isan inequality. If, therefore,
the commencement of the affection be below the head, such as
the membrane of the spinal marrow, the parts which are
homonymous and connected with it are paralysed: the righton
the right side, and the left on the left side. But if the head
be primarily affected on the right side, the left side of the body
will be paralysed; and the right, if on the left side. The cause
of this is the interchange in the origins of the nerves, for they
do not pass along on the same side, the right on the right side,
until their terminations; but each of them passes over to the
other side from that of its origin, decuseating each other in the
form of the letter X. To say all at once, whether all together
or separate parts be affected with paralysis . . . . . orof both;
sometimes the nerves from the head suffer (these, generally,
induce loss of sensibility, but, in a word, they do not readily
cocasion loss of sensibility; but if they sympathise with the


OF CHRONIC DISEASES.—BOOK L wT


parts which are moved, they may undergo, in a emall degree,
the loss of motion); and sometimes those which pass from
musele to muscle (from the spinal marrow to the muscles), these
have the power of motion, and impart it to those from the
head; for the latter possess the greater part of their motory
power from them, but yet have it, to a small extent, of them-
selves: the former, too, principally suffer loss of motion, but
rarely of themselves experience anwsthesia; indeed, as appears
to me, not at all. And if the ligaments of nerves, which
derive their origin from certain of the bones, and terminate in
others, be loosened or torn, the parts become powerless, and
are impeded in their movements, but do not become insensible.?

The varieties of paralysis are these: sometimes the limbs
lose their ficulties while in « state of extension, nor can they be
brought back into the state of flexion, when they appear very
much lengthened; and sometimes they are flexed and cannot
be extended; or if forcibly extended, like a piece of wood on
a rule, they become shorter than natural. The pupil of the
eye is subject to both these varieties, for sometimes it is much
expanded in magnitude, when we call it Platycoria; but the
pupil is also contracted to a small size, when I call it PAthisis
and Mydriasis, The bladder, also, is paralysed in respect to
its peculiar functions; for either it loses its powers as regards
distension, or it loses its retentive powers, or it becomes con-
tracted in itself, when being filled with urine, it cannot expel
the same. There are six causes of paralytic disorders; for they
arise from a wound, a blow, exposure to cold, indigestion,
yenery, intoxication. But so likewise the vehement affections
of the soul, such as astonishment, fear, dejection of spirits, and,
in children, frights, Great and unexpected joy has also occa-


* See the note on the text. ‘On this use of the term “Nerve,”
* It will readily be understood see Hippocrates “On the articu-
that our author here referwto the lations,” pluries,
ligaments proper of the joints.
x2


308 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


sioned paralysis, as, likewise, unrestrained laughter, even unto
death. These, indeed, are the primary causes; but the ulti-
mate and vital cause ia refrigeration of the innate heat. It
suffers from humidity, or dryness, and is more incurable than
the other; but if also in connection with a wound, and com-
plete cutting asunder of a nerve, it is incurable. In respect to
age, the old are peculiarly subject, and difficult to cure; in
children, the cases ure easily restored, As to seasons, the
winter; next, the spring; afterwards, the autumn; least of all,
the summer. Of habits, those naturally gross, the humid,
indolent, brutish.

When the affections are confirmed, they are made manifest
by loss of motion, insensibility of heat and cold; and also of
plucking the hair, of tickling, and of touching. It is rare
indeed when in them the extremities are painful; but insensi-
bility to pain is not worse ag regards recovery. Wherefore
the disease occurs suddenly; but if at any time it have pro-
longed onsets, there supervene heaviness, difficulty of motion,
torpor, a sensation of cold, sometimes an excess of heat,
short sleeps, greater phantasies, when they become suddenly
paralytic,

But in the Cynic spasm, it is not usaal for all parts of the
face to be cramped; but those of the left side are turned to
the right, and those of the right to the left, when there is a
considerable distortion of the jaw to this side or to that, as if
the jawbone were dislocated. And in certain of these cases,
also, there is luxation at the joint, when in yawning the jaw is
displaced to the opposite side: strabismus of the affected eye,
and palpitation in the under eyelid; the upper eyelid also pal-
pitates, sometimes along with the eye, and at other times alone.
‘The lips are distended, each on its own side; but sometimes
both being collapsed, they splutter; in others, they are closely
compressed, and are suddenly separated go as to expel the
common spittle with a noise.


OF CHRONIC DISEASES. —BOOK I. 300
The tongue, also, is drawn aside; for it consists of a muscle
and nerves, and at certain times, along its whole extent, it
starts up to the palate, and makes an unusual sound. The
uvula, also, is drawn aside; and if the mouth is shut, there is
an unexpected noise within. And if you separate the mouth,
you will perceive the uvula sometimes attached to the palate
through its whole surface, and sometimes swiftly palpitating
with force, like a bag-fish, when likewise a sound is produced.
But there is apt to be deception in cynic spasms; for to the spec-
tator it appears as if the parts unaffected were those possessed
by the disease; for owing to the tension and colour of the
affected parts, and the enlargement of the eye, they appear as
if they were diseased. But in laughter, speaking, or winking,
the true state of matters becomes manifest; for the parts af-
fected are all drawn aside with a smack; the lip expresses no
smile, and is motionless in talking; the eyelid is immoveable,
the eye fixed, and the sense of touch is lost; while the sound
parts speak, wink, feel, laugh.


CHAPTER VIII.
ON PHTHISIS.


Ir an ulcer form in the lungs from an abscess, or from a
chronic cough, or from the rejection of blood, and if the
patient spit up pus, the disease is called Pye and Phthisis. But
if matter form in the chest or side, or be brought up by the
lings, the name is Empyema. But if, in addition to these
symptoms, the lungs contract an ulcer, being corroded by the
pus passing through it, the disease no longer gets the name of
empyema, but takes that of Pithoe instead of it. It is accom-
panied with febrile heat of a continual character, but latent


310 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


ceasing, indeed, at no time, but concealed during the day by
the sweating and coldness of the body; for the characteristics
of phthoe are, that s febrile heat is lighted up, which breaks
out at night, but during the day again lies concealed in the
viscera, as is manifested by the uneasiness, loss of strength,
and colliquative wasting. For had the febrile heat left the
body during the day, how should not the patient have acquired
flesh, strength, and comfortable feeling? For when it retires
inwardly, the bad symptoms are all still further exacerbated,
the pulse small and fecble; insomnolency, paleness, and all the
other symptoms of persons in fever. The varieties of the
sputa are numerous: livid, black, streaked, yellowish-white, or
whitish-green; broad, round; hard, or glutinous; rare, or dif
fluent; devoid of smell, fetid. There are all these varieties of
pus. But those who test the fluids, either with fire or water,
would appear to me not to be acquainted with phthoe;' for the
tight is more to be trusted than any other sense, not only with
regard to the sputa, but also respecting the form of the disease.
For if one of the common people see » man pale, weak,
affected with cough, and emaciated, he truly augurs that it is
phthoe (consumption). But in those who have no ulcer in the
lungs, but are wasted with chronic fevers—with frequent, hard,
and ineffectual coughing, and bringing up nothing, these, also,
are called consumptive, and not without reason, There is pre-
sent weight in the chest (for the lungs are insensible of pain),
—anxiety, discomfort, loss of appetite; in the evening coldness,
and heat towards morning; sweat more intolerable than the
heat as far as the chest; expectoration varied, as I have
described.

Voice hoarse; neck slightly bent, tender, not flexible,


} Our author would appear to commended. Seo de Morbis, ii.
allude hore to certain passages in 47, t. vii. p, 72, ed. Littré; Com
the psendo-Hippocratic treatises, prunot. ct alibi. See also Paulus
wherein these testa of pus are re- _Agineta, t.i, 498, ote., Sy, Soo. edit,


OF CHRONIC DISEASES.—BOOK I, an


somewhat extended; fingers slender, but joints thick; of the
bones alone the figure remains, for the fleshy parts are wasted;
the nails of the fingers crooked, their pulps are shrivelled and
flat, for, owing to the loss of flesh, they neither retain their
tension nor rotundity; and, owing to the same cause, the nails
are bent, namely, because it is the compact flesh at their
points which is intended as a support to them; and the tension
thereof is like that of the solids. Nose sharp, slender; cheeks
prominent and red; eyes hollow, brilliant and glittering;
swollen, pale, or livid in the countenance; the slender parts
of the jaws rest on the teeth, as if smiling; otherwise of a
cadaverous aspect. So also in all other respects; slender,
without flesh; the muscles of the arms imperceptible; not a
‘vestige of the mammie, the nipples only to be seen; one may
not only count the ribs themselves, but also easily trace them to
their terminations; for even the articulations at the vertebree are
quite visible; and their connections with the sternum are also
manifest; the intercostal spaces are hollow and thomboidal,
agreeably to the configuration of the bone; hypochondriac
region lank and retracted; the abdomen and flanks contiguous
to the spine. Joints clearly developed, prominent, devoid of
flesh, so alzo with the tibia, ischium, and humerus; the spine
of the vertebre, formerly hollow, now protrudes, the mus-
cles on either side being wasted; the whole shoulder-blades
apparent like the wings of birds. If in these cases disorder
of the bowels supervene, they are in a hopeless state. But, if
a favourable change take place, symptoms the opposite of
those fatal ones occur.

The old seldom suffer from this disease, but very rarely
recover from it; the young, until manhood, become phthisical
from spitting of blood, and do recover, indeed, but not
readily; children continue to cough even until the cough
pass into pithoe, and yet readily recover. The habits most
prone to the disease are the slender; those in which the sca


ne ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


pule protrude like folding doors, or like wings; in those’ which:
have prominent throats; and those which are pale and have
narrow chests. As to situations, those which are cold and
humid, as being akin to the nature of the disease,


CHAPTER IX.
ON PERSONS AFFECTED WITH EMPYEMA.


THose persons in whose cavities above, along the region of
the chest, or, in those below the diaphragm, abscesses of mat-
ter form, if they bring it up, they are said to be affected with
Empyema; butif the matter pass downwards, they are said
to labour under Apostemes. And in the ulcers in the chest,
or in the lungs, if phthoe supervene, or in the pleura, or the
sternum, or anywhere below at the junction of the lungs with
the spine—in all these cases the passage for the matter
upwards is by the lungs. But in the viscera below the din-
phragm, the liver, spleen, and kidneys, it is by the bladders
and in women by the womb. And I once made an opening
into an abscess in the colon on the right side near the liver,
and much pus rushed out, and much also passed by the
kidneys and bladder for several days, and the man re-
covered,

The common causes of all are a blow, indigestion, cold and
the like. Of those in the chest also, chronic cough, pleuritia,
peripneutnony, and protracted defluxion; but also the deter-
mination of some acute diseases to any one of them.

The humour is sometimes inert, weak, and rests on
something else; sometimes bitingly acrid, and occasioning
putrefactions even unto death. And there are many other
varieties, as I shall presently declare. It is a wonder how


OF CHRONIC DISEASES—BOOK I. 313


from a thin, slender membrane, having no depth, like that
which lines the chest, so much pus should flow; for in many
cases there is a great collection. The cause is an inflamma+
tion from redundancy of blood, by which the membrane is
thickened; but from much blood much pus is formed inter-
mediately. But if it be determined inwards, the ribs being
the bones in this region. LT have said above, that
another species of phthisis would naturally occur. But if it
point outwards, the bones are separated, for the top of the
abscess is raised in one of the intercostal spaces, when the ribs
are pushed to this side or to that.

‘There are certain symptoms common to all, and certain ones
peculiar to cach. A heaviness rather than pain is a common
symptom (for the lungs are insensible), weak fevers, rigor
towards evening, sweats in the remission, insomnolency,
swellings in the extremities of the feet, and fingers of the
hands, which at one time sbate and at another increase;
uncomfortable feeling; loss of appetite; wasting of the whole
body; and if the change be prolonged, the phthisical habit
is formed; for Nature can no longer perform her office, for
the digestion is not as before, nor is there the plump habit of
body; the colour dark; respiration in all cases bad, but worse
in those affecting the upper cavity; but also cough at first
as long as the inflammation is urgent, when the pains also are
greater, and rigor, and heat, and watchfulness, and dyspnea
still more; pulse small, sluggish, feeble; they are disordered
in the intellect; distension of the thorax.

Bat if it be already come to the formation of pus, all the
the greatest symptoms take place. Expectoration small with
greater cough, and from an urgent abscess, at first of pituitous
matters, tinged with bile of a darker colour as if from soot,
but likewise tinged with blood, and thick; but if about to
burst, of fleshy and deep-seated matter. And, if it burst,
there is danger of suffocation should much pus be suddenly


314 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


poured forth; but if gradually, there is no danger. If then
the pus is going to pass downwards, the upper part, where
the abscess is situated, experiences sharp pain; discharges from
the bowels fluid, at first watery with phlegm, afterwards
bloody matter; and then again, substances resembling flesh
floating in a fluid, if it has already burst. Pus follows them
either by the bowels or the urine. Metastasis to the kidneys
and bladder peculiarly favourable.

The pus, whether it be carried upwards or downwards, is
of various colours—pale, white, ash-coloured, or livid, black
and fetid; or devoid of smell and very thick; or interme-
diate; or smooth and consistent; or rough and unequal, with
fleshy substances floating in it, these being round or broad,
readily separated or viscid. To say all in a word respecting
the pus, such kinds as are white, concocted, devoid of smell,
smooth, rounded, and are quickly coughed up, or pass down-
wards, are of a salutary character; but such as are very pale,
bilious, and inconsistent, are bad. Of these by far the
worst are the livid and black, for they indicate putrefaction
and phagedenic ulcers.

Along with these things, it will be proper to know also the
habit and other concomitants of the disease. If at the time
of the discharge, he feels comfortable, and gets rid of the
fever; has good digestion, good colour, and a good appetite,
if he coughs up readily, has » good pulse, and good strength;
the patient is free from danger. But if fever supervene,
and all the other symptoms turn worse, he is in a hopeless
state. One ought also to consider the places in which the
abscesses are seated. For where the matter forms in the ster-
num, it is slowly turned to a suppuration; for the parts are
slender, devoid of flesh and cartilaginous; and such parts do
not readily receive the superfluities of inflammation, but
remain a long time without being formed into pus; for car-
tilage is of s cold nature, but the inflammations thereof are


OF CHRONIC DISEASES—BOOK I. 315


innocuous. The wasting of the constitution is bad; for the
suppuration lasts a long time; the spleen, the liver, the lungs,
and diaphragm pass more quickly into suppuration, but they
are dangerous and fatal,


CHAPTER X.
ON ABSCESSES IN THE LUNGS.


When, in cases of peripneumonia, the patients survive, though
the inflammation be not discussed, those who escape the acute
stage of the affection have suppurations. The symptoms, then,
ofan incipient and of a formed abscess have been stated by
me under Empyema, If formed, then, there is no necessity for
the same harsh measures and pains to procure the rupture and
discharge of it as in the solid parts of the body, as it is readily
brought up; for the distension of its pores is required rather
than of the solid texture of its parts; for the lungs being s
porous body and full of perforations like a sponge, it is not
injured by the humour, but transmits it from pore to pore,
until it reach the trachea. Thus the fluid finds « ready outlet,
the pus being a flexible and slippery substance, and the respi-
ration blows the breath (pneuma) upwards. For the most part
they recover, unless at any time one be suffocated by the
copious influx of the fluid, when, owing to the quantity of the
pus, the trachea does not admit the air. Others die a pro-
tracted death, after the manner of those labouring under
phthisis and empyema. The pus is white and frothy, being
mixed with saliva, but sometimes ash-coloured or blackish.
And sometimes one of the bronchia has been spit up in a case
of large ulceration, if the abscess is deep, when portions of the


316 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


viseus are also brought up. Hoarse, breathing short, voice
heavy-toned, their chest becomes broad, and yet they stand in
need of its being still broader, owing to the collection of Quid;
the dark parts of the eyes glancing, the whites are very white
and fatty; cheeks raddy; veins in the forehead protuberant.
There is a marvel in connection with these cases, how the
strength is greater than the condition of the body, and the
buoyancy of spirits surpasses the strength.


CHAPTER XI.
ON ASTHMA.


Ir from running, gymnastic exercises, or any other work, the
breathing become difficult, it is called Asthma (&c@pa); and
the disease Orthopnea (ép8érvo) is also called Asthma, for in
the paroxysms the patients also pant for breath. The disease
is called Orthopnea, because it is only when in an erect position
(6p8i cyzjwarc) that they breathe freely; for when reclined
there is a sense of suifocation. From the confinement in the
breathing, the name Orthopnea is derived. For the patient
sits erect on account of the breathing; and, if reclined, there is
danger of being suffocated.

‘The lungs suffer, and the parts which assist in respiration,
namely the diaphragm ‘and thorax, sympathise with them.
But if the heart be affected, the patient could not stand out
long, for in it is the origin of respiration and of life.

‘The cause is a coldness and humidity of the spirit (pnewma);
but the materiel isa thick and viscid humour. Women are more
subject to the disease than men, because they are humid and
cold. Children recover more readily than these, for nature in


OF CHRONIC DISEASES—BOOK I. 317


the increase is very powerful to heat. Men, if they do not
readily suffer from the disease, die of it more speedily. There
isa postponement of death to those in whom the lungs are
warmed and heated in the exercise of their trade, from
being wrapped in wool, euch as the workers in gypsum, or
braziers, or blacksmiths, or the heaters of baths.

The symptoms of its approach are heaviness of the chest;
sluggishness to one’s accustomed work, and to every other
exertion; difficulty of breathing in running or on a steep
roatl; they are hoarse and troubled with cough; flatulence
and extraordinary evacuations in the hypochondriae region;
restlessness; heat at night small and imperceptible; nose sharp
and ready for respiration.

But if the evil gradually get worse, the cheeks are ruddy;
eyes protuberant, as if from strangulation; a rdle during the
waking state, but the evil much worse in sleep; voice liquid
and without resonance; a desire of much and of cold sir;
they eagerly go into the open air, since no house sufficeth for
their respiration; they breathe standing, as if desiring to draw
in all the air which they possibly can inhale; and, in their
want of air, they also open the mouth as if thus to enjoy the
more of it; pale in the countenance, except the cheeks, which
are ruddy; sweat about the forehead and clavicles; cough
incessant and laborious; expectoration small, thin, cold, resem-
bling the efflorescence of foam; neck swells with the inflation
of the breath (pneuma); the precordia retracted; pulse small,
dense, compressed; legs slender: and if these symptoms in-
crease, they sometimes produce suffocation, after the form of
epilepsy.

But if it takes a favourable turn, cough more protracted
and rarer; a more copious expectoration of more fluid matters;
discharges from the bowels plentiful and watery; secretion of
urine copious, although unattended with sediment; voice
louder; sleep sufficient; relaxation of the preecordia; sometimes


318 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


@ pain comes into the back during the remission; panting
rare, soft, hoarse. Thus they escape a fatal termination. But,
during the remissions, although they may walk about erect,
they bear the traces of the affection.


CHAPTER XII.
ON PNEUMODES,


PxeEUMODES is a species of asthma; and the affection is con-
nected with the lungs as is the case in asthma, The attendant
symptoms are common, and there is but little difference; for
dyspnea, cough, insomnolency, and heat are common symp-
toms, as also loss of appetite and general emaciation. More-
over, the disease is protracted for a time, yet not longer than
one year; for, if the autumn begin it, the patients die in
the spring or in the summer; or if the winter, they terminate
their life towards the autumn. Old persons also are at certain
times readily seized; and being seized with rigors, it requires
but «slight inclination of the scale to lay them on the bed of
death. All labour in particular under want of breath; pulse
emall, frequent, feeble. But these symptoms are also common
to asthma; they have this as peculiar; they cough as if going to
expectorate, but their effort is vain, for they bring up nothing;
or if anything is forcibly separated from the lungs, it isa small,
white, round substance, resembling a hailstone.t_ The thorax is
broader, indeed, than natural, but not altered in shape, and is
free from ulceration; yet, though the lungs be free from sup-
puration, they are filled with humours, which are, as it were,
compacted. The intervals of the paroxysms in this affection


* Soo in particular Galen, de loa Paulus Agineta, Syd. Soo. Edit,
affect, iv; Alexander, vi 1; and ti. p.47&.


OF CHRONIC DISEASES.—BOOK I. 319


are greater. Some, indeed, die speedily of suffocation before
anything worse is transferred to the general system. In other
cases the affection’ terminates in dropsy about the loins, or in


CHAPTER XII.
ON THE LIVER.


In the formation of the body, the liver and spleen are equally
balanced; for these viscera are equal in number, the one on
the right side and the other on the left. They are unequal,
however, in power, as regards health and diseases. In health,
indeed, inasmuch as the liver has the power of nutrition, for
“‘the roots of all the veins unite to form the liver": but in
diseases it has much greater power to restore health and ocea-
sion death. As far, then, as the liver is superior in health, so
much the worse is it in diseases, for itexperiences more sudden
and violent inflammations, and has more frequent and more
fatal abscesses. In scirrhus, too, it proves fatal more quickly
and with greater pain than the spleen. Those things which
relate to inflammations thereof I have described among the
acute affections.

If it be converted into pus, a sharp pain possesses the parts
as far as the clavicle and the tops of the shoulders, for the
diaphragm from which the liver is suspended is dragged down
by the weight, and the diaphragm drags the membrane lining
the ribs to which it is attached, and this membrane (tho
pleura) is stretched up to the clavicle and top of the shoulders,
which also are dragged down. Along with the abscess there
is acrid heat and rigors; cough dry and very frequent; colour
grass-green; and if the patients be intensely jaundiced, it is of


OF CHRONIC DISEASES.—BOOK 1. aa


the bowels are fetid like putrefaction, the food passes undi-
gested, owing to the stomach and intestines having lost their
tone; for thus the liver, even though now in good condition,
does not perform digestion; along with theae symptoms there
is acrid heat, and altogether there is a turn to the worse;
colliquative wasting of the flesh, pulse small, difficulty of
breathing, when at no distance of time their life is at an end.
Tn certain cases, the dysentery and the ulceration have healed,
but the disease changed to dropsy. But if all these symp-
toms abate, if pus that is white, smooth, consistent, and in-
odorous, is discharged, and the stomach digests the food,
there may be good hopes of the patient. But the best thing
is for it to be discharged by the urine; for the passage by it
is safer and less troublesome than the other.

But if, after the inflammation, the liver does not suppurate,
the pain does not go off, its swelling, changing to a hard state,
settles down into scirrhus; in which case, indeed, the pain is
not continued, and when present is dull; and the heat is
slight; there is loss of appetite; delight in bitter tastes, and
dislike of sweet; they have rigors; are somewhat pale,
green, swollen about the loins and feet; forehead wrinkled;
belly dried up, or the discharges frequent. The cap of these
bad symptoms is dropsy.

In the dropsy, provided there is a copious discharge of thick
urine, haying much re-crementitious sediment, there is a hope
that the dropsical swelling may run off; but if the urine be
thin, without sediment, and scanty, it conspires with the
dropsy. But if nature change to her pristine state, and burst
upon the bowels, along with copious watery discharges, it has
also sometimes cured the dropsy. This mode of cure, how-
ever, is dangerous; for what from the copious evacuations,
and the extreme prostration, the patients have sometimes died
of weakness, as from hemorrhage. Sweating, if copious,
carries off the disease with less danger, for dropsical persons

Y¥


322 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


generally have not a moist skin. Such is the termination
of the affections in the liver,

But if the liver suppurate . . . . . children, and those till
manhood; women less so, The causes are intemperance, and a
protracted disease, especially from dysentery and colliquative
wasting; for it is customary to call these persons fabid who
die emagiated from ulcers of the liver.


CHAPTER XIV.
ON THE SPLEEN.


Scrmnuvs, a chronic disease, is habitual to the spleen (suppu-
ration does not readily occur in it, and yet it does occur
sometimes), when the pain is not severe, but swelling much
greater than the pain; for it has been seen swelled on the right
side as fur as the liver in the whole common space between
them, hence many have been deceived in supposing that it is
not an affection of the spleen, but of the membrane, for it
appears to them that the peritoneum is inflamed. It is hard
and unyielding as stone. Such the spleen generally becomes
in scirthus, when also it is attended with great discomfort.
But if it suppurate, it is soft to the touch, yielding to pres-
sure at its top, when there isa formation of pus; but when
it is not suppurated it does not yield. Sometimes it hangs
entire in the abdomen, being moved about to this side and to
that, whilst it remains’ small body, and has space to float in.
Nausea, restlessness, especially about the time of breaking.
The symptoms of distension are, fevers, pains, and rigors
(for generally they are free of rigors, and of pain when the heat
is small, and hence abscess about the spleen is sometimes
latent); for the viscus is porous and insensible even in health:
they are swollen, dropsical, of a dark-green colour, along


OF CHRONIC DISEASES—BOOK I, 333


with disquietude, dyspnea as if from weight of the chest, for
the evil is well marked. Even to its upper parts the ab-
domen is filled with a flatus (pneutnia), thick, misty, humid in
appearance but not in reality; much desire of coughing comes
on, and their expectoration is small and dry. If there be

watery discharges from the bowels, they at first bring some
slight relief; but if they increase, they waste the patient, and
yet nevertheless they do good.

But, if it should break, pure concocted pus is never dis-
charged, but whitish and ashy, sometimes feculent, or livid.
If the abscess become deeper, the fluid is dark, when likewise
some of the juice of the melted spleen is discharged. In
certain cases, entire portions of the spleen have been brought
up, for the spleen is of a soluble nature. And if the ulcer
does not heal, but remains for a long time, they lose appetite,
become cachectic, swollen, unseemly to look at, having many.
ulcers on all parts of the body, especially on the legs, where
the sores are round, livid, hollow, foul, and difficult to heal.
Wasted thereby, they expire.

In a small tumour, with hardness and resistance, pain is
wanting; on this account they live a long time. But if over-
powered by the affection, dropsy, phthisis, and wasting of
the body necessarily supervene; and this form of death re-
moves them from life.

Children, then, and young persons are most readily affected,
and most readily escape from it. Old persons, indeed, do not
often euffer, but they cannot escape; but certain elderly persons
have been cut off by latent disease of the spleen; for, even with
a small swelling, the scale of death has turned with them, A
protracted and consumptive disease induces these affections, and
in young pertons inactivity especially, when, after contention
and many exercises, the body has become inactive. As to.
localities, the marshy; as to waters, the thick, saltish, and.
fetid. Of the seasons, ome peoularly malignant,

x


324 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


CHAPTER XV.
ON JAUNDICE, OR ICTERUS.


If a distribution of bile, either yellow, or like the yolk of an
egg, or like saffron, or of a dark-green colour, take place from
the viscus, over the whole system, the affection is called Icterus,
& dangerous complaint in acute diseases, for not only when it
appears before the seventh day does it prove fatal, but even
after the seventh day it has proved fatal in innumerable
instances. Rarely the affection has proved a crisis to a fever
towards the end, but itself is not readily discussed.

It is formed not only from a cause connected with the liver,
as certain physicians have supposed, but also from the stomach,
the spleen, the kidneys, and the colon. | From the liver it
this manner: if the liver become inflamed or contract scirrhus,
but remain unchanged with regard to its functional office, i
produces bile, indeed, in the liver, and the bladder, which is
in the liver, secretes ity but if the passages which convey the
bile to the intestine, be obstructed from inflammation or
scirrhus, the bladder gets over-distended, and the bile re-
gurgitates; it therefore becomes mixed with the blood, and the
blood, passing over the whole system, carries the bile to every
part of the body, which acquires the appearance of bile. But
the hardened faeces are white and clayey, as not being tinged
with bile, because the bowels are deprived of this secretion. |
Hence also the belly is very much dried up; for it is neither
moistened nor stimulated by the bile. The colour in this
species is whitish-green.

If jaundice make its appearance in connection with the
spleen, it is dark-green, for its nutriment is black, because the
spleen is the strainer of the black blood, the impurities of
which it does not receive nor elaborate when diseased, but


OF CHRONIC DISEASES. —BOOK T. 325


they are carried all over the body with the blood. Hence
patients are dark-green from icterus in connection with the
spleen; but the colour is darker than usual in the customary
discharges from the bowels, for the superfluity of the nutri-
ment of the spleen becomes recrement from the bowels.

And icterus also is formed in connection with the colon and
stomach, provided their powers of digestion be vitiated; for
digestion takes place even in the colon, and from it a supply of
nutriment is sent upwards to the liver. Provided, then, the
liver receive its other food in a cruder state than usual, it
indeed goes through its own work, but leaves that of the other
undone; for in distribution it diffuses the blood which carries
the marks of the inactivity of the colon to all parts of the
body. The indigestion in this case is connected with the
formation of the bile in the colon.

Thus icterus may be formed in any viscus, not only of those
which send nutriment to the liver, but also of those which re-
ceive it from the liver. For nature sends nutriment to all parts,
not only by ducts perceptible to the senses, but much more so
by vapours, which are readily carried from all parts to all,
nature conducting them even through the solid and dense
parts. Wherefore these vapours become tinged with bile, and
discolour any part of the body in which they get lodged.
Moreover, in jaundice connected with the colon, the evacua~
tions are not white; for the liver iz not disordered as regards
the function of bile, and is not impeded in the transmission of
bile to the intestines.

The general system, likewise, is most pewerful in producing
icterus; for the cause is seated in the whole body. It is of
this nature: in every part there is heat for concoction; in
every part for the creation and secretion of humours, different
in different places, but in each that which is peculiar to it: in
flesh, indeed, sweat; in the eyes, tears; in the joints and nose,
mucus; in the cars, wax. If the heat, then, fails in the per-


OF CHRONIC DISEASES. —BOOK I. 387


dark-green colour, are subject to rigors, become faintish, in-
active, spiritless; emit a fetid smell, have a bitter taste, breathe
with difficulty, are pinched in the bowels; alvine evacuations
like lecks, darkish, dry, passed with difficulty; urine deeply
tinged with black; without digestion, without appetite; rest-
less, spiritless, melancholic.

In the whiter species, the patients are of a light-green colour,
and more cheerful in mind; slow in beginning to take food,
but eat spiritedly when begun; of freer digestion than those of
the former species; alvine discharges, white, dry, clayey; urine
bright-yellow, pale, like saffron.

In both cases the whole body is itchy; heat at the nostrils,
small, indeed, but pungent; the bilious particles prickly. The
taste of bitter things is not bitter; and yet, strange to tell,
it is not sweet; but the taste of sweet things is bitter. For
in the mouth the bile lodged im the tongue, prevailing over
the articles of food, sophisticates the sensation; for the
having imbibed the bile, does not perceive them, while, during
the season of abstinence from food, the bile remains torpid,
neither is the tongue unpleasantly affected with that to which
it is habituated; but the bile, if heated up by the tastes of the
articles of food, impresses the tongue. When, therefore, the
food is bitter, the sensation is of the bitter things; but when
sweet, of the bilious. For the sensation of the bile anticipates
the other, and thus deceives those who suppose that bitter
things appear sweet; for it is not so, but because it is not exa-
cerbated by the bitter lodged in it from being habituated to
the disease, the phantasy of sweet is created; and there is the
same condition in sweet and bitter tastes; for the bile is the
screen of the fallacious tastes.

When, therefore, it appears without inflammation of any
viscus, it is usually not dangerous, though protracted; but if
prolonged, and the viscus gets inflamed, it terminates most
commonly in dropsy and cachexia. And many haye died


323 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


emaciated, without dropsy. It is familiar to adolescents and
young men, and to them it is less dangerous; it is not alto~
gether unusual also with children, but in them itis not entirely
free from danger.


CHAPTER XVI.


ON CACHEXIA, OR BAD HABIT OF BODY.


CacHeExta arises as the conversion of nearly all diseases; for
almost all diseases are its progenitors. Butit likewise is formed
by itself, separately from all others, as an original affection of


the noxious kind, by deriving its increase from the administra-
tion of many and improper medicines. And “a bed habit’
for a season is common to all complaints, with many symptoms;
and of this its name is significant. There is emaciation, pale-
ness, swelling, or whatever else happens for the time to be
prevalent in the body. But cachexia is the form of one great
affection, and gives its name to the same. For “the good
habit of the patient” (Zuheria) in all respects, as regards diges-
tion, the formation of blood for distribution, and every natural
operation whence arise good breathing, good strength, and
good colour, constitutes the pristine state of good health. But
if its nature become changed to the weakness of cacochymy,
this constitutes cachexia.

This disease is difficult to cure, and is a very protracted
illness; for it is engendered during a protracted space of time,
and not from one infirmity of the body, nor in connection with
only one viscus ; for it is formed by the conversion of all into
8 vitiated state. Wherefore those diseases which are its off-
spring are incurable, as dropsy, phthisis, or wasting; for,
indeed, the causes of cachexia are akin to those of wasting.


—


OF CHRONIC DISEASES.—BOOK I, 329


The disease is a protracted and continuous dysentery, and the
relapses of diseases in certain cases. Generally there is suffi-
cient appetite, and plenty of food is taken; but the distribution
thereof takes place in a crade and undigested condition, for
the operation of digestion is not performed upon the food.

The cause of it also may be the suppression of the hemor-
thoidal discharge, or the omission of customary vomiting,
inactivity as regards exercises, and indolence as to great
labours. When each of its attendants has ceased to return,
there is heaviness of the whole body, now and then paleness,
flatulence of the stomach, eyes hollow, sleep heavy, and inac-
tivity. But these symptoms occurring in an erratic form con-
ceal the existence of the disease; but if they remain and strike
root, nor readily give way, they are significant of a mighty
illness. When in an erect posture, then they become swollen
in their feet and legs; but, when reclining, in the parts they
lay upon; and if they change their position, the swelling
changes accordingly, and the course of the cold humour is
determined by its weight. For when the heat evaporates the
humidity, if it be not diffused, the humidity again runs in a
liquid state. They have an appetite for much food, and are
very voracious; the distribution is more expeditious than the
digestion, of matters that are crude rather than undigested ; but
digestion is not at all performed, nor is it digested in the whole
body by nature. For the weakness of the heat in the belly
and in the system is the same, neither is good and well-coloured
blood formed.

And when the whole body is filled with crudities, and the
desire as to food is gone, the cachexy having now extended to
the stomach, and the affection having now attained its summit,
they become swollen, inactive, and spiritless towards every exer-
tion. The belly is dried up, and, for the most part, the alvine
discharges are without bile, white, hard, and undigested. They
are parched in person, without perspiration, troubled with


300 OF CHRONIC DISEASES—BOOK 1.


itchiness; sleep at no time settled, but drowsiness in the
reclining position; respiration slow; pulse obscure, feeble,
frequent, and very frequent upon any, even a very small,
exertion; respiration in these cases asthmatic; veins on the
temples elevated, with emaciation of the parts around; but at
the wrists the veins much larger and tumid; blood of a dark-
green colour. Along with these, pithisis or tabes induces ana~
sarca or ascites, and from their progeny there is no escape.

With regard to the ages which induce this disease, in the
first place, old age, in which there is no recovery; children
are readily affected, and more readily recover; adults are not
very much exposed to the affection, but have by no means
easy recoveries, No one season produces this disease, nor
does it terminate in any one; but autumn indeed conceives
it, winter nurses it, spring brings it to its full growth, and
summer despatches it.


|


or
ARETEUS, THE CAPPADOCIAN,
ON THE
CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS OF CHRONIC DISEASES


BOOK II.
CONTENTS.

omar.
Ow Drorsy . . . . . I.
On Draserzs . . . I.
On A¥FEcTIONS OF THE Kwwevs . . IIL.
On Arvzctions oF THE BLADDER . . Iv.
On Gononnn@a . . . . . v.
On Sromacuic AFFECTIONS . . . VL
On THe Catiac AFFECTION . . - VIL
On Cotics . . . . - VL
On Dysenreny . . . . . x
On Lieyrery . . . . x.
On AFFECTIONS OF THE Wous . . . XL
On Arrserms aNnp Iscatatio Disease . . XD


On ELEPHANTIASIS . . . . XI


or
ARETUS, THE CAPPADOCIAN,
ON THE
CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS OF CHRONIC DISEASES


BOOK IL.


CHAPTER L
ON DROPSY.


Drorsy is indeed an affection unseemly to behold and
difficult to endure; for very few escape from it, and they more
by fortune and the gods, than by art; for all the greater ills
the gods only can remedy. For either the disease lurking in
a vital organ has changed the whole system to cachexy, or
the general system from some plague that has gone before
has changed the viscera to a Cacochymy, when both co-
operate with one another to increase the illness, and no part is
uninjured from which even a slight assistance might be rendered
to Nature. It is a cold and dense vapour converted into hu-
midity, resembling a mist in the universe; or, it is the con-
version of a humid and cold cause which changes the patient
to such a habit. Fora fluid rolling about in the lower belly
wwe do not call Dropsy, since neither is the affection situated in
that place; but when the tumour, swelling, colour, and the
habit melting down to water, conspire in the: disease, it both
is, and is called Dropsy. For, even should the water at any


334 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


time burst outwardly, or should one give vent to it, by
making an incision in the hypochondrium, the dropeical
affection will still remain confirmed; wherefore the primary
cause of it is cachexia.

There are many varieties, each having different names.
For if the watery suffusion float in the flamks, and, owing to
its fulness, when tapped it sound like a drum, the disease is
called Tympanites. But if the water be confined in large
quantity in the peritoneum, and the intestines float in the
liquid, it gets the appellation’ of Ascites. But if the lower
belly contain none of these, but the whole body swell, if in
connexion with a white, thick, and cold phlegm, the disease
is called Phlegmatias ; but if the fleshy parts are melted down
into s sanguineous, watery, or thin humour, then the species
of dropsy called Anasarea is formed. The constitution of each
of them is bad; but the combination of them is much’worse.
For sometimes the variety which forms in the lower belly
(Ascites), is associated with that variety in which the fluid
is diffused all over the body. But the most dangerous is that
form in which Tympanites is mixed with Anasarca. For of
the dropsies that form in the lower belly, Tympanites is
particularly worse than Ascites. But of those affecting the
whole body, Leucophlegmatia is less than Anasarca, It is
mild then, so to speak of such hopeless diseases, when a
smaller affection is combined with another smaller one, But
it is much worse if one of the smaller enters into combi-
nation with one of the greater. But if a complete mixture
of two great affections take place, the product thereof is a
greater evil,

The symptoms are very great and very easy to see, to touch;
and to hear; in Ascites, for example, to see the tumidity of
the abdomen, and the swelling about the feet; the face,
the arms, and other parts are slender, but the scrotum and
and prepuce swell, and the whole member becomes crooked,


OF CHRONIC DISEASES—BOOK II. 335


from the inequality of the swelling:—To touch—by strongly
applying the hand and compressing the lower belly; for the
fluid will pass to other parts. But when the patient turns to
this side or that, the fluid, in the change of posture, occasions
swelling and fluctuation, the sound of which may be heard,
But if you press the finger firmly on any part, it becomes
hollow, and remains so for a considerable time. These are the
appearances of Ascites.

Tympanites may be recognised, not only from the sight of
the swelling, but also by the sound which is heard on per~
cussion. For if you tap with the hand, the abdomen sounds;
neither does the flatus (pneuma) shift its place with the
changes of posture; for the flatus, even although that which
contains it should be turned upwards and downwards, re-
mains always equally the same; but should the flatus (pneuma)
be converted into vapour and water (for Ascites may super-
vene on Tympanites), it shifts its form, indeed, the one half
running in a fluid state, if the conversion be incomplete.

In Anasarca and Leucophlegmatia the lower belly is empty,
the patients are swelled in the face and arms; and likewise, in
these cases, whatever parts are empty in the others, in them
become full. For in Leucophlegmatia there is collected a
white, cold, and thick phlegm; with it the whole body is
filled, and the face is swollen, and also the neck and arms;
but the abdomen is full from the swelling; but the mamme
are raised up into s swelling in the case of such youths as are
still in the happy period of life. But, in Anasarca, there is
wasting of the flesh toa fleshy humour, and a bloody ichor,
such as runs from ulcerations of the bowels, and such as flows
from bruises produced by the fall of weights, if the onter
skin be searified. But the combination of the two has the
symptoms of both.

In all the species there are present paleness, difficulty of
breathing, occasional cough ; they are torpid, with much languor


336 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


and loss of appetite; but if they take any food, however
small in quantity and free from flatulence, they become fla-
tulent, and have distension as if from repletion; skin dry, so
that it does not become moist even after the bath; they
are white and effeminate; but in Anasarca they are of a dark-
green colour, and have dark veins; in Ascites and Tympanites
these are prominent, both in the face, and in the wrists, and the
abdomen. But in Anasarca and Leucophlegmatia all the parta
are concealed by the swelling; sleep heavy; they are torpid,
with slight dejection of spirit; concern about trifles; fondness of
life; endurance not from good spirits and good hopes like those
in prosperity, but from the nature of the affection. Itis not
possible exactly to state the cause; but this is a mighty wonder,
how in certain diseases, not altogether dangerous, the patients
are spiritless, dejected, and wish to die, but in others they
have good hopes and are fond of life. Diseases produce both
these contrarics.

Dropsy sometimes is occasioned suddenly by a copious cold
draught, when, on account of thirst, much cold water is swal-
lowed, and the fluid is transferred to the peritonwum; by
which means the innate heat in the cavities is congealed, and
then the drops which formerly were converted into air and
dissipated, flow into the cavities. If this, therefore, happen,
the cure of these cases is easier before any of the viscera or the
whole person is affected. Moreover flatulent food, indigestion,
and the Buprestis' have sometimes occasioned dropsies.

It is an illness common to all, men and women, in every
period of life, only that certain ages are more exposed to
certain species of the disease; children to Anasarca and Leu-
cophlegmatia; young men until manhood are subject to swel-
ling about the lower belly (Ascites?) Old persons are prone to
suffer all kinds, as being deficient in heat, for old age is cold;

* The Meloe vesicatoria, See Puulus Agineta, Syd. Soc. edit, till,
p.74; and Dioscorides, ii. 69.


OF CHRONIC DISEASES.—BOOK I. 337


but they are not exposed to collections of humours, and to
them, therefore, Tympanites is the familiar form.

All the species, indeed, are unfavourable; for dropsy, in all
its forms of disease, is bad. But of these, leucophlegmatia is
the more mild; for in it there are many and various chances
of good fortune, such as an evacuation of sweat, of urine, or
from the bowels, by which the dropsical habit is carried off.
But tympanites is of a difficult nature, and still more so
anasarca; for in this affection the physician would require to
change the whole person, a thing not easy for the gods them-
selves to accomplish. »

Sometimes the dropsy forms in a small space, such as the
head in hydrocephalus; or in the lungs alone; or in the liver,
orthe spleen; or the womb in women; and this last is easier to
cure than any of the others, for provided its mouth relax from
its former constriction, if it contains a fluid, it discharges the
same outwardly, and if a flatus, it is dissipated. But if the
uterus suffer at all in anasarca, for the most part the whole
woman becomes dropsical.

This other form of dropsy is known: small and numerous
bladders, full of fluid, are contained in the place where ascites
is found; but they also float in a copious fluid, of which this
isa proof; for if you perforate the abdomen so as to evacuate
the fluid, after a small discharge of the fluid, a bladder
within will block up the passage; but if you push the instru-
ment farther in, the discharge will be renewed. This species,
then, is not of a mild character; for there is no ready passage
by which the bladders might escape. It is said, however, that
in certain cases such bladders have come out by the bowels.
T have never seen such a case, and therefore write nothing of
them; for Iam unable to tell whether the discharge be from
the colon, or the stomach. What is the mode of their forma-
tion? For the passage whereby all matters may be discharged
by the anus is patent; but the discharge of the water collected

Zz


OF CHRONIC DISEASES—BOOK IL 339


but if it be merely coming on, the patients have the mouth
parched, saliva white, frothy, as if from thirst (for the thirst
is not yet confirmed), weight in the hypochondrinc region. A
sensation of heat or of cold from the stomach to the bladder
is, as it were, the advent of the approaching disease; they now
make a little more water than usual, and there is thirst, but
not yet great.

But if it increase still more, the heat is small indeed, but
pungent, and seated in the intestines; the abdomen shrivelled,
veins protuberant, general emaciation, when the quantity of
urine and the thirst have already increased; and when, at the
same time, the sensation appears at the extremity of the
member, the patients immediately make water. Hence, the
disease appears to me to have got the name of diabetes, as if
from the Greek word S:aPirns (which signifies a siphon),
because the fluid does not remain in the body, but uses the
man’s body as a ladder (Sa8d0pn), whereby to leave it They
stand out for a certain time, though not very long, for they
pass urine with pain, and the emaciation is dreadful; nor does
any great portion of the drink get into the system, and many
parts of the flesh pass out along with the urine.

‘The cause of it may be, that some one of the acute diseases
may have terminated in this; and during the crisis the diseases
may have left some malignity lurking in the part. It is not
improbable, also, that something pernicious, derived from the


* Altogether, this interpretation
is #0 unsutisfuctory, that I was
almost tempted to alter the text
quite differently from Wigan and
Ermerins, and to read dxoide res
dia8qecior, when the passage might
be rendered thus—*it got the
name of diabetes, as if signifying
one having a frequent desire of
descending, because the fluid does


not remain in the system, but
uses the man’s person as a laddor
for its exit” At all events, the
reading of Wigan and Ermering
seems inadmissible ; for how can
thé two comparisons, to's siphon,
and to a Indder, be admitted to-
gether} It is possible, howerer,
that Bua8dépy is faulty, and that wo


OF CHRONIC DISEASES.—BOOK IL ut


but partly chronic, others wearing out the patient by wasting,
and although not of a fxtal character, incurable, and persisting
until death. Wherefore, the chronic are—abscesses, ulcers,
the formation of stones, and hemorrhoids. The ulcerations from
abscess in man are all very protracted, and difficult to cure.
The formation of stones is a long process, the stoppage of
them painful, for the passage of them is not easily accom-
plished; and in addition to these, the retention of urine is
formidable. But if several small ones stop together in the
passage, or a large one be impacted; and if these occur to both
kidneys, so as to occasion retention of urine and distension of
the parts, the patients die in a few days, Nature, therefore,
did well in forming the cavity of the kidneys oblong, and of
equal size with the ureters, and even a little larger, so that if
a stone formed above, it might have a ready passage to the
bladder. On this account, also, the stones have an oblong
form, because, for the most part, they are consolidated in the
ureters; and such in that place as are of unequal thickness are
slender before, owing to the ureters being narrow, but thick
behind, because the kidneys verge downwards. They are
formed in the kidneys only, but when in a heated state; for
the stones have no fixed place in the ureters, but the gravel
floats downwards with the urine, and thus is both indicative of
theaffection, and furnishes the materiel ofit. But ifan unusually
large one at any time be detained in the pelvis of the kidney,
pains of the loins, about the regions of the psoe, as far as the
middle of the ribs, take place, and hence, in many cases, the
pain leads to mistake, as if it proceeded from pleurisy; hea-
viness of the hips; painful flexion about the spine, so that they
stoop forward with difficulty; very painful tormina; at the same
time, the pains are heavy with a sense of twisting, for the
intestine is convoluted. But if the urine be retained in large
quantity, and with distension, the desire of making water
resembles the pains of labour; they are troubled with flatu-


342 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


lence, which cannot find vent; the fevers are pungent, and of
a dry nature. Tongue parched; the belly, also, dried up;
they are emaciated, and lose appetite; or if they take any~-
thing, they cannot readily swallow or digest it. But if the
stone fall down into the ureters, there is shivering, as if from
Tigor, the sensation as if from the passing of a stone with
violent exertion. And if it fall down into the bladder, there
is an abundant evacuation of watery urine, flatulent discharges
from the bowels, the stomach settled, eructations, rest from
former illnesses; and sometimes blood is poured out along with
the urine, from excoriation of the passage. Another painful
operation is the passage through the member; for if the stone
be larger than the urethra, it is detained for a long time, the
bladder is filled behind, and the ischuria is very painful, for
along with the bladder the ureters, also, are filled. The pas-
sage of crooked stones is most difficult, for I have seen hooked
protuberances on certain of these concretions, But, for the
most part, they are oblong, being formed according to the
shape of the passages. In colour, some are white, clayey, as
is mostly the case with children; others are yellow, and saffron-
coloured in old persons, in whom the stones usually form in
the kidneys, whereas in children it is rather in the bladder,
‘The causes of the concretion are two-fold: in old persons, a
cold body and thick blood. For cold concretes thick fluids
more readily than heat, the proof of which is seen in the
Thermal springs; for when congealed, the water gets concreted
into a sort of chalk-stones. But in children, the copious
recrement of the blood, being overheated, gives origin to their
formation, like fire.

Such are the affections connected with the formation of
stones, Certain persons pass bloody urine periodically: this
affection resembles that from hemorrhoids, and the constitution
of the body is alike; they are very pale, inert, sluggish, with-
out appetite, without digestion; and if the discharge has taken


OF CHRONIC DISEASES—BOOK Il. as
place, they are languid and relaxed in their limbs, but light
and agile in their head. But if the periodical evacuation do
not take place, they are afllicted with headache; their eyes
become dull, dim, and rolling: hence many become epileptic;
others are swollen, misty, dropsical; and others again are
affected with melancholy and paralysis. These complaints are
the offspring of the stoppage of a customary discharge of
blood. If, then, the blood flow pure and unmixed with urine,
for the most part the blood of the urine flows from the
bladder, Sometimes it is discharged in great quantity fom
rupture of the kidneys; sometimes it is coagulated, and a
thrombus is formed of extravasated blood; sometimes it is
coagulated in the bladder, when dreadful ischuria comes on,

After the rupture there succeed uleers, which are slow and
difficult to heal; the indication of which is a ecab, or red film,
like a spider's web, or white pus passed in the urine, sometimes
pure and unmixed, and sometimes mixed up with the urine.
And by these symptoms we may also diagnose abcesses, if, in
addition, fovers and rigors supervene towards evening; pains
about the loins, pruritus; but if it burst, clots of a purulent
and fleshy nature, and now a discharge of white pus. But
the ulcers are pungent, sometimes clear, and sometimes foul.
This is indicated by the pus and the urine, whether fetid or
free of smell.

Spring, then, induces hemorrhages and abscesses; winter
and autumn, stones, But if along with the stones ulcers
be formed, the diseases indeed are incurable, there is speedy
emaciation and death,


ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS:


CHAPTER IY.
ON THOSE IN THE BLADDER.


Or the diseases in the bladder no one is mild: the acute
proving fatal by inflammation, wounds, spasm, and acute
fevers; while an ulcer, abcess, paralysis, or a large stone, are
chronic and incurable. For it (« /arge stone?) can neither be
broken by a draught, nor by medicine, nor scraped outwardly,
nor cut without danger. For the small ones of the bladder
are to be cut out, but the other proves fatal the same day, or in
a few days, the patients dying from spasms and fevers; or, if
you do not cut him, retention of the urine takes place, and
the patient is consumed slowly with pains, fevers, and wasting.
But if the stone is not very large, there is frequent suppression
of urine; for by falling readily into the neck of the bladder, it
prevents the escape of the urine. Although it be safer to cut
in these cases than for the large stones, still the bladder is cut;
and although one should escape the risk of deuth, still there is
@ constant drain of water; and although this may not be dan-
gerous, to a freeman the incessant flow of urine is intolerable,
whether he walk or whether he sleep; but is particularly dis-
agreeable when he walks. The very small ones are commonly
cut without danger. If the stone adhere to the bladder, it
may be detected with care; and, moreover, such cases prove
troublesome from the pain and weight, even when there is no
dysuria, but yet the patient may have difficulty of making
water. You may diagnose all cases of stone by the sediments
of sand in the urine, and, moreover, they have the genital
parts enlarged by handling them; for when they make water,
and there isa stone behind, they are pained, and grasp and
drag the genital parts, as if with the intention of tearing out the
stone along with the bladder. The fundament sympathises by
becoming itchy, and the anus is protruded with the forcing


OF CHRONIC DISEASES. —BOOK II. 345


and straining, from the sensation, as it were, of the passage of
the stone. For the bladder and anus lie close to one another,
and when either suffers, the other suffers likewise. Where-
fore, in inflammations of the rectum, the bladder is affected with
ischuria; and in acute pains of the bladder, the anus passes
nothing, even when the bowels are not much dried up. Such
are the sufferings connected with calculi.

Hemorrhage, although it may not prove fatal very speedily,
yet in the course of time has wasted many patients. But the
clots of blood produced by it are quickly fatal by inducing
ischuria, like as in stones; for even if the blood be thin, of a
bright colour, and not very coagulable, yet the bladder accu-
mulates it for a length of time, and its heating and boiling (as
it were) coagulates the blood, and thus a thrombus is formed.
Ischuria, then, is most peculiarly fatal. But on these symp.
toms there supervene acute pain, acrid heat, a dry tongue, and
from these they die delirious.

If pain come on from a wound, the wound itself is dan-
gerous; but the sore, even if not fatal at first, becomes incura-
ble from fever or inflammation; for the bladder is thin, and of
4 nervous nature, and such parts do not readily incarnate nor
cicatrise. Morcover, the urine is bilious, acrid, and corrosive.
‘The ordinary condition of the ulcer is this:—when the bladder
is filled, it is stretched; but when emptied, it contracts: it is
in the condition, then, of a joint in extension and flexion, and
no ulcer in a joint is easy of eure.

‘The bladder also suppurates from an abscess. The symptoms
of an abscess of the bladder are the same as in other cases; for
the abscess in forming is attended with inflammation, fevers,
and rigors. The dangers are the same. But if it discharges
urine which is thick, white, and not fetid, the ulcers from
them are mild; but if it spread, they pasa urine which is fecu-
lent, mixed with pus, and of a bad smell: of such persons the
death is not distant. The urine, indeed, is pungent, and the


Me


36 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


evacuation thereof painful, and the pain darts to the extremity
of the member. All things, even those which are opposed to
one another, prove injurious to them; repletion and inanition,
inactivity and exercise, baths and abstinence from baths, food
and abstinence from food, sweet things and acid things; cer-
tain articles being serviceable in certain cases, but proving
injurious in others, not being able to agree in any one.


CHAPTER Y.
ON GONORRHGA.


GonorrHea is not, indeed, a deadly affection, but one that
ig disagreeable and disgusting even to hear of. For if impotence
and paralysis possess both the fluids and genital organs, the semen
runs as if through dead parts, nor can it be stopped even in sleep;
for whether asleep or awake the discharge is irrestrainable, and
there is an unconscious flow of semen. Women also have this
disease, but their semen is discharged with titillation of the parts,
and with pleasure, and from immodest desires of connection
with men. But men have not the same prurient feelings; the
fluid which runs off being thin, cold, colourless, and unfruitfal,
For how could nature, when congealed, evacuate vivilying
semen? And even young persons, when they suffer from this
affection, necessarily become old in constitution, torpid, re-
laxed, spiritless, timid, stupid, enfeebled, shrivelled, inactive,
pale, whitish, effeminate, loathe their food, and become frigid;
they have heaviness of the members, torpidity of the legs, are
powerless, and incapable of all exertion. In many cases, this
disease is the way to paralysis; for how could the nervous
power not suffer when nature has become frigid in regard to
the generation of life? For it is the semen, when possessed of


OF CHRONIC DISEASES—BOOK IT. wT


vitality, which makes us to be men, hot, well braced in limbs,
hairy, well voiced, spirited, strong to think and to act, as the
characteristics of men prove. For when the semen is not pos-
sessed of its vitality, persons become shrivelled, have a sharp
tone of voice, lose their hair and their beard, and become
effeminate, as the characteristics of eunuchs prove. But if any
man be continent in the emission of semen, he is bold, daring,
and strong as wild beasts, as is proved from such of the athleta:
asare continent. For such as are naturally superior in strength
to certain persons, by incontinency become inferior to their
inferiors; while those by nature much their inferiors by con-
tinency become superior to their superiors: but an animal
becomes strong from nothing else than from semen, Vital
semen, then, contributes much to health, strength, courage,
and generation. From satyriasis @ transition takes place to an
attack of gonorthesa.


CHAPTER VI.
ON THE STOMACHIC AFFECTIONS.


Tue stomach is the president of pleasure and disgust, being
an important neighbour to the heart for imparting tone, good
or bad spirits, from the sympathy of the soul. This is the
primary power of the stomach. These things have been
described by me in another place. The offxpring of pleasure
are, good digestion, good condition, and good colour of the
body; of disgust, their contraries, and also sometimes depres-
sion of spirits, when proper nutrition is wanting; and in
melancholic patients, loathing of food. If, then, this organ be
diseased, there is dislike and abomination of articles of food,
not only if administered, but even if the food is not seen;


m8 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


nay, the very remembrance of them is attended with nausea,
distress, water-brash, and heart-ache; and in certain cases
there is salivation and vomiting. Even when the body wastes,
provided their stomach remain empty, they bear this pain
more easily than that produced by the administration of food.
But if at any time they are compelled by necessity to take
food, the pain is worse than hunger; the act of masticating
in the mouth occasions sufferance, and to drink is a still
greaterpain. And it is not that they suffer thus from suitable
food, and bear more unusual food well; owing to a change
from that which is natural to the opposite, there is a painful
sensation as to everything, an aversion to, and dislike of, all
kinds of food. Along with these there is pain between the
seapul, much greater after the administration of food or
drink; loathing, distress, sight dull, noises of the ears, heavi-
ness of the head, torpidity of the limbs, their joints sink
under them; palpitation in the hypochondriac region; phan-
tasy, as of the spine being moved towards the lower limbs;
they seem as if carried about, now this way and now that,
whether they stand, or lie down, like reeds or trees shaken by
a gale of wind; they belch out a cold and watery phlegm.
But if there be bile in bilious persons, they have dimness of
sight, and no thirst, even when owing to the food they appear
thirsty; are sleepless, torpid, drowsy, not from true sleep, but
like those in comatose affections; emaciated, very pale, feeble,
relaxed, imbecile, dispirited, timid, inactive, quick to passion,
very moody; for such persons at times have fallen into a state
of melancholy.

‘These mental emotions necessarily attend the affection when
in connection with the stomach; but certain people, recog-
nising the parts which sympathise, and from which the most
dreadful symptoms arise, reckon the stomach as the cause,
But the contiguity of the heart, which is of all organs the
first, is a strong confirmation of the truth of what I say; for


OF CHRONIC DISEASES—BOOK II. 349


the heart is placed in the middle of the lungs, and this inter-
mediate space comprehends the stomach; and, moreover, both
are connected with the spine; and from this vicinity to the
heart arise the heart-ache, prostration of strength, and symp-
toms of melancholy.

There are other, and, indeed, innumerable causes of this
disease; but the principal is, much pus poured forth by the
belly through the stomach. It is familiar to such persons as
from their necessities live on a slender and hard diet; and to
those who, for the sake of education, are laborious and per-
severing; whose portion is the love of divine science, along
with scanty food, want of sleep, and the meditation on wise
sayings and doings—whose is the contempt of a full and
moultifarious diet; to whom hunger is for food, water for
drink, and watchfulness in place of rest; to whom in place of
a soft couch, is a hammock on the ground without bed-clothes,
& mean coverlet, a porous mantle, and the only cover to whose
head is the common air; whose wealth consists in the abundant
possession and use of divine thought (for all these things they
account good from love of learning); and, if they take any
food, it is of the most frugal description, and not to gratify
the palate, but solely to preserve life; no quaffing of wine to
intoxication; no recreation; no roving or jaunting about; no
bodily exercise nor plumpness of flesh; for what is there from
which the love of learning will not allure one?—from country,
parents, brothers, oneself, even unto death. Hence, to them,
emaciation of the frame; they are ill-complexioned; even
in youth they appear old, and dotards in understanding; in
mind cheerless and inflexible; depraved appetite, speedy satiety
of the accustomed slender and ordinary food, and from want
of familiarity with a varied diet, a loathing of all savoury
viands; for if they take any unusual article of food, they are
injured thereby, and straightway abominate food of sll kinds.
It is a chronic disease of the stomach. But inflammations,


350 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


defluxions, heart-burn, or pain thereof, are not called the
Stomachic affection.

Summer brings on this disease, whence springs the complete
loss of digestion, of appetite, and of all the faculties, With
regard to the period of life, old age; for in old men, even
without any disease, owing to their being near the close of
life, the appetite is nearly gone.


CHAPTER VIL
ON THE C@&LIAC AFFECTION.


Tae stomach being the digestive organ, labours in digestion,
when diarrhea seizes the patient. Diarrhoea consists in the
discharge of undigested food in a fluid state; and if this does
not proceed from a slight cause of only one or two days’ dura-
tion; and if, in addition, the patient's general system be debi-
litated by atrophy of the body, the Corliac diséase of a chronic
nature is formed, from atony of the heat which digests, and
refrigeration of the stomach, when the food, indeed, is dis
solved in the heat, but the heat does not digest it, nor convert
it into its proper chyme, but leaves its work half finished,
from inability to complete it; the food then being deprived
of this operation, is changed to a state which is bad im colour,
smell, and consistence, For its colour is white and without
bile; it has an offensive smell, and is flatulent; it is liquid,
and wants consistence from not being completely elaborated,
and from no part of the digestive process having been properly
done except the commencement.

Wherefore they have flatulence of the stomach, continued
eructations, of a bad smell; but if these pass downwards, the
bowels rumble, evacuations are flatulent, thick, fluid, or


OF CHRONIC DISEASES—BOOK TI. 361


clayey, along with the phantasy, as if a fluid were passing
through them; heavy pain of the stomach now and then, as
if from a puncture; the patient emaciated and atrophied, pale,
feeble, incapable of performing any of his accustomed works.
But if he attempt to walk, the limbs fail; the veins in the
temples are prominent, for owing to wasting, the temples are
hollow; but also over all the body the veins are enlarged,
for not only does the discase not digest properly, but it does
not even distribute that portion in which the digestion had
commenced for the support of the body; it appears to me,
therefore, to be an affection, not only of the digestion, but
also of the distribution.

But if the disease be on the increase, it carries back the
matters from the general system to the belly, when there is
wasting of the constitution; the patients are parched in the
mouth, surface dry and devoid of sweat, stomach sometimes
as if burnt up with a coal, and sometimes as if congealed with
ice. Sometimes also, along with the last scybala, there flows
bright, pure, unmixed blood, so as to make it appear that the
mouth of a vein has been opened; for the acrid discharge
corrodes the veins. It is a very protracted and intractable
illness; for, even when it would seem to have ceased, it relapses
again without any obvious cause, and comes back upon even
slight mistake. Now, therefore, it returns periodically.

‘This illness is familiar to old persons, and to women rather
than to men. Children are subject to continued diarrhea,
from an ephemeral intemperance of food; but in their case the
disease is not seated in the cavity of the stomach, Summer
engenders the disease more than any other of the seasons;
autumn next; and the coldest season, winter, also, if the heat
be almost extinguished, This affection, dysentery and lientery,
sometimes are engendered by a chronic disease, But, like-
wise, a copious draught of cold water has sometimes given rise
to this disease.


ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


CHAPTER VIII.
ON COLICS.


Persons in colic are cut off speedily by volvulus and tor-
mina. There are very many causes of this affection. The
symptoms are, heaviness during abstinence from food, particu-
larly in the part most affected; much torpor; they are inactive,
lose appetite, become emaciated, sleepless, swollen in counte=
nance, And if the colon be affected in connection with the
spleen, they are of a dark-green colour; but of a light-green
when in connection with the liver, from the sympathy of the
nearest viscera. And if they take food, even in small quan-
tity, and such as is not flatulent, they become very flatulent,
and have a desire to pass wind, which, however, does not
find vent: forced eructations upwards, but without effect; or,
if any should be forcibly expelled, the flatus is fetid and acid
which escapes upwards, The kidneysand bladder sympathise,
with pain and ischurin; but in such cases the symptoms inter-
change with one another. But a greater wonder than these,
—an unexpected pain has passed down to the testicles and cre-
masters; and this sympathetic affection has escaped the obser-
vation of many physicians, who have made an incision into
the cremasters, as if they were the particular cause of the
disease, But in these cases also the symptoms interchange
with one another.

From this disease are produced other diseases; abscesses and
ulcers, of no mild character; dropsies and phthisis, which are
incurable. For the disease is formed from cold and thick
humours, and a copious and glutinous phlegm; but, also, it
comes on with a frigid period of life, a cold season, and a cold
locality, and during a hard winter.


OF CHRONIC DISEASES.—BOOK It. 303


CHAPTER IX.
ON DYSENTERY.


Or the intestines, the upper being thin and bilious (yordea)
as far as the cacum, have got the Greek name yoddées. From
these proceed the lower, which are thick and fleshy, as far as
the commencement of the Rectum.

Wherefore ulcers form in all of them; and the varieties of
these ulcers constitute Dysentery: on this account, these dis-
eases are complex. For some of them erode the intestines
superficially, producing only excoriation; and these are innocu-
ous; but they are far more innocent if the affections be low
down. Or if the ulcers be yet a little deeper, they are no
longer of a mild character. But ulcers which are deep and
have not stopped spreading, but are of a phagedznic, painful,
spreading, and gangrenous character, are of a fatal nature; for
the small veins get corroded in the course of their spreading,
and there is an oozing of blood in the ulcers. Another larger
species of ulcers: thick edges, rough, unequal, callous, as we
would call a knot in wood: these are difficult to cure, for they
do not readily cicatrise, and the cicatrices are easily dissolved.

The causes of dysentery are manifold; but the principal are,
indigestion, continued cold, the administration of acrid things,
such as myf{élos,! onions by themselves, garlic, food of old
and aerid flesh, by which dyspepsia is produced; also unac-
customed liquids, eyceon,* or zythus* (ale), or any similar
beverage produced in any country as a substitute for wine to

1 A.sort of condiment, contain- cheese, wine, ete. It is mentioned
ing garlic and other acrid things. both in the Iliad and Odyssey.
Seo Pollux, Onomast. vi. * On the composition of the an-


* A thick soup prepared from dix to the Edinburgh Greek
various substances, that is to say, Lexicon, in voce, Zi0os,
AA


OF CHRONIC DISEASES—BOOK II, 305


the former; but if the ulcers spread and are phagedanic, and
if nothing will stop them, above, in addition to being intensely
bilious, the dejections become saffron-like, frothy, feculent,
blackish, like woad or like leeks, thicker than the former,
fetid like a mortification; food now undigested, as if only
masticated by voracious teeth. But if the under parts are also
corroded, black clots of blood, thick, fleshy, very red, clotted,
sometimes, indeed, black, but at other times of all various
colours, fetid, intolerable; involuntary discharges of fluids.
And sometimes a substance of considerable length, in many
respects not to be distinguished from a sound piece of intes-
tine, has been discharged, and, to those iguorant of the matter,
has caused apprehension about the intestine: but the fact is
this,—the intestines, like the stomach, consist of two coats,
which lie close to one another in an oblique manner; when,
therefore, the connection between them is dissolved, the inner
coat, being separated to some length, protrudes externally,
while the outer one remains alone, incarnates, and gets cica-
trised, and the patients recover and live unharmed. It is the
lower gut alone which suffers thus, owing to its fleshy nature,
And, if blood be discharged from any vessel, it runs of a bright
red or black colour, pure, and unmixed with food or seybala;
and if a concretion is spread over it like broad spiders’ webs,
it coagulates when cold, and no longer would be taken for a
secretion of blood; but being discharged with much flatulence
and noise, it has the appearance of being much larger than its
actual amount. Sometimes, also, a purulent abscess forms in
the colon, nowise different from the other internal ulcers;
for the symptoms, the pus, and the mode of recovery are the
same. But if there be hard secretions of matters resembling
flesh, as if pounded, and like rough bodies, the abscess is not
of a mild nature. Sometimes » copious discharge of water
takes place from the colon in the form of dysentery, which
has freed many patients from dropsy. In a word, such are
aA


OF CHRONIC DISEASES—BOOK IL aT


place in the ulcers, some subsiding, and others swelling up,
like waves in the sea. Such is the course of these ulcers. But
if nature stand out, and the physician co-operate, the spreading
may, indeed, be stopped, and a fatal termination is not appre-
hended, but the intestines remain hard and callous, and the
recovery of such cases is protracted.

In hemorrhage from the bowels, if it proceed from a large
vein or artery, it is sudden death; for neither is it possible to
introduce the hand so as to reach the ailment, nor to apply any
medicine to the sore. And even if the hemorrhage were
restrained by the medicine, the escape from death would not
be certain; for, in some cases, the falling off of a large eschar
widens the mouth of the vein, and when clots form within,
and remain there, the disease is incurable. It is necessary, then,
tocure hemorrhages in their commencement. Its approach, also,
for the most part is obvious, although not in all cases quite
apparent: anxiety attends, with restlessness, heaviness in the
part where the rupture is to take place, ruddiness of the
countenance if the blood has not yet burst forth. And if the
yein has burst lately, for the most part the symptoms are
alleviated; but if it has been a longer time ago, this takes
place more slowly, and with more difficulty. Such are the
ulcers in the intestines.

They occur in the season of summer; next in autumn; less
in spring; least of all in winter. Diarrhea attacks children
and adolescents, but dysentery adults and young persons. In
old age convalescence is difficult, and cicatrization protracted.
Corroding sores are unusual in old persons, but yet hemorrhage
is in accordance with old age.


368 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


CHAPTER X.
ON LIENTERY.


Ir many thick and hard cicatrices form after dysenteries, and
broad and very deep ulcerations of the upper intestines, the
food passes from them to those below in a fluid state, without
separation of the nutritious part; for the cicatrix shuts up the
pores by which the nutriment is carried upwards. The patient,
therefore, is seized with atrophy, loss of colour and of strength.
The affection gets the appellation of Lientery, this name being
spplied to a cicatrix of the intestines. And here the affection
is from ulcers. But sometimes the intestines do not acquire
cicatrization, but yet usage and habit reconcile the intestines to
the discharge. For, the heat in these parts, if congealed, neither
at times performs digestion, nor is the nutriment distributed
upwards; but being unchanged, owing to weakness, it fails to
undergo any part of the process. But if the purging, though
of vitiated matters, be temporary, and not confirmed, a simple
vomit after food will sometimes remove the disease. But if the
exciting cause be prolonged, and get confirmed, it docs no
good. -

A chronic disease, and cachexia so mild as not to confine
the patient to bed, will engender this disease, But dropsies
sometimes have terminated favourably in this disease; a change
from one evil to another, but still a better change.


CHAPTER XI.
ON AFFECTIONS OF THE WOMB, OR HYSTERICS. ~


‘THE uterus in women is beneficial for purgation and parturi-
tion, but it is the common source of innumerable and bad


OF CHRONIC DISEASES—BOOK IT. 369


diseases; for not only is it subject to ulcers, inflammation, and
the fluor, but, if the whole organ be suddenly carried upwards,
it quickly causes death, The fatal diseases of an acute nature
connected therewith have been described elsewhere: but the
chronic affections are, the two species of fluor; hardness;
ulcers, part mild, but part malignant; prolapsus of the whole,
or of part.

The fluor, then, is either of a red or white colour; its ap-
pearance indicates this. It is the red if it consist of bright
red blood, and the varieties thereof; or livid, or black and
thin, or thick and coagulated, like a thrombus; or white, like
water; or a bright ochre colour, like bile: in thickness like a
thinnish or thin and fetid ichor, The white flux (or fluor
albus) is like pus, and the true form like white whey; but a
clot of blood frequently runs off with the pus. But there isan
infinite variety of forms of it, as regards more or less quantity.
Its periods sometimes agree with those of the menstrual purga-
tion, but it does not continue the regular time as before; there
is not much blood, but it flows during many days; the interval
is for a few days, but is quite free from discharge. Another
variety as to the period: the first purgation is at the regular
time, but it occura two or three times during cach month.
Another variety: a continual flux; small, indeed, every day,
but by no means small during the whole month; for the
uterus never closes its mouth, labouring under relaxation, so
as to permit the flow of the fluid: but if it neither intermits
nor diminishes, they die of hemorrhage. The symptoms are,
the woman’s colour in accordance with those of the discharge;
sleepless, loathes food, anxious, relaxed, especially in the red
flux, and subject to pains; the discharge fetid in both varieties;
but to a greater and less extent at different times; for the
white is worse if the putrefaction be unusually great; and
sometimes the red, if the erosion be exacerbated. In a word,
the black is the worst of all; the livid next; the pale, the


360 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


white, and the purulent, are more protracted, indeed, but less
dangerous. Of these the pale is worse indeed, but much
better when mixed with the customary discharge. Now the
customary discharge is red in all its varieties. But, indeed,
the red are worse in old women; but the white are not at all
so to the young; but even to them that which is customary is
Tess troublesome. Another white fluor: the menstrual dis-
charge white, acrid, and attended with an agreeable pruritus;
along with which the discharge of a white thick fluid, like
vemen, is provoked. This species we call female gonorrhosa.
It isa refrigeration of the womb, which therefore becomes
incapable of retaining its fluids; hence, also, the blood changes
to a white colour, for it has not the purple colour of fire, The
stomach, also, is subject to the affection, and vomits phlegm;
and also the bowels are similarly affected in diarrhoea.

Ulcers, too,are formed in the womb; some broad and attended
with tingling, which, being close together, are, as it were, a
superficial excoriation; pus thick, without smell, scanty. These
ulcers are mild. But there are others deeper and worse than
these, in which the pains are slight, pus somewhat more abun-
dant, much more fetid, and yet, notwithstanding, these also
are mild. But if they become deeper, and the lips of the
sores hard or rough, if there isa fetid ichor, and pain stronger
than in the former case, the ulcer corrodes the uterus; but
sometimes a small piece of flesh is cast off and discharged, and
this sore not coming to cicatrization, either proves fital after a
long time, or becomes very chronic. This sore gets the appel~
lation of phagedena. The sores also are dangerous if in these
eases the pain gets exacerbated, and the woman becomes
uneasy. From the sore there is discharged a putrid matter,
intolerable even to themselves; it is exasperated by touching
and by medicines, and irritated by almost any mode of treat-
ment. The veins in the uterus are swelled up with distension
of the surrounding parts. To the skilled, it is not difficult to


OF CHRONIC DISEASES—BOOK IT. 361
recognise by the touch, for it is not otherwise obvious. Febrile
heat, general restlessness, and hardness is present, as in malig-
nant diseases; the ulcers, being of a fatal nature, obtain also
the appellation of cancers, Another cancer: no ulceration
anywhere, swelling hard and untractable, which distends the
whole uterus; but there are pains also in the other parts which
it drags to it. Both these carcinomatous sores are chronic and
deadly; but the ulcerated is worse than the unulcerated, both
in smell and pains, in life and in death.

Sometimes the whole uterus has protruded from its seat,
and lodged on the woman’s thighs; an incredible affliction! yet
neither has the uterus not been thus seen, nor are the causes
which produce it such as do not occur. For the membranes
which are inserted into the flanks, being the nervous (ligamen-
tous?) supporters of the uterus, are relaxed; those at the fundus,
which are inserted into the loins, are narrow; but those at its
neck, on each side to the flanks, are particularly nervous and
broad, like the sails of = ship. All these, then, give way if
the uterus protrude outwardly, wherefore this proctdentia gene-
rally proves fatal; for it takes place from abortion, great con-
cussions, and laborious parturition. Or if it do not prove
fatal, the women live for a long time, seeing parts which
ought not to be seen, and nursing externally and fondling the
womb. It would appear that, of the double membrane of the
womb, the internal lining coat is sometimes torn from the
contiguous one, for there are two transverse plates of the coat;
this, then, is thrown off with the flux, and in abortion and
laborious parturition, when it adheres to the placenta. For if
it be forcibly pulled, the coat of the uterus being stretched,

... + But if the woman do not die, it is either restored to
its seat, or but a small part appears externally, for the woman
conceals it with her thighs. Sometimes the mouth of the
womb only, as far as the neck, protrudes, and retreats inwardly
if the uterus be made to smell to a fetid fumigation; and the


362 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


woman also attracts it if she smells to fragrant odours. But
by the hands of the midwife it readily returns inwards when
gently pressed, and if anointed beforehand with the emollient
plasters for the womb.


CHAPTER XI.
ON ARTHRITIS AND SCHIATICA,


AgTHRitTis is a general pain of all the joints; that of the
feet we call Podagra; that of the hip-joint, Schiatica; that of
the hand, Chiragra. The pain then is either sudden, arising
from some temporary cause; or the disease lies concealed
for a long time, when the pain and the disease are kindled
up by any slight cause. It is, in short, an affection of all
the nerves, if the ailment being increased extend to all; the
first affected are the nerves which are the ligaments of the
joints, and such as have their origin and insertion in the
bones. There is a great wonder in regard to them; there is
not the slightest pain in them, although you should cut or
squeeze them; but if pained of themselves, no other pain
is stronger than this, not iron screws, nor cords, not the
wound of a sword, nor burning fire, for these are often had
recourse to as cures for still greater pains; and if one cut
them when they are pained, the smaller pain of the incision
is obscured by the greater; and, if it prevail, they experience
pleasure in forgetting their former sufferings. The teeth and
bones are affected thus.

‘The true reason of this none but the gods indeed can truly
understand, but men may know the probable cause. In a
word, it is such as this; any part which is very compact is
insensible to the touch or to a wound, and hence it is not


OF CHRONIC DISEASES—BOOK If. 303


painful to the touch or toa wound. For pain consists in an
exasperated sense, but what is compact cannot be exasperated,
and hence is not susceptible of pain, But a spongy part is
very sensible, and is exasperated by an injury. But since
dense parts also live by their innate heat, and possess sen~
sibility by this heat, if then the exciting cause be material,
such as either a sword, or a stone, the material part of the
patient is not pained, for it is dense by nature. But if an
intemperament of the innate heat seize it, there arises a
change of the sense; the heat therefore is pained by itself,
being roused within by the impression on the sense, The
pains then are from nature's being increased, or a redundance
thereof,

Arthritis fixes itself sometimes in one joint and sometimes
in another; sometimes in the hip-joints; and for the most part
in these cases the patient remains lame in it; and the other
joints it affects little, and sometimes does not go to the small
joints, as the feet. and hands, If it seizes the greater members
which are able to contain the disease, it does not go beyond
these organs; but if it begin from a small one, the attack is
mild and unexpected. The commencement of ischiatic
disease is from the thigh behind, the ham, or the leg. Some-
times the pain appears in the cotyloid cavity, and again ex-
tends to the nates or loins, and has the appearance of anything
rather than an affection of the hip-joint. | But the joints begin
to be affected in this way: pain seizes the great toc; then the
forepart of the heel on which we lean; next it comes into the
hollow of the foot, but the ankle swells last; and they blame
& wrong cause; some, the friction of anew shoe; others, a long
walk; another again, a stroke or being trod upon; but no one
will of his own accord tell the true one; and the true one
appears incredible to the patients when they hear of it. On
this account the disease gets to an incurable state, because at
the commencement, when it is feeble, the physician is not at


S64 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS’


hand to contend with it; bat if it has acquired strength from
time, all treatment is useless. In some, then, it remains in the
joints of the feet until death, but in others it spreads over the
compass of the whole body. For the most part, it passes from
the feet to the hands, For to the disease there is no great
interval between the hands and the feet, both being of «
similar nature, slender, devoid of flesh, and very near the ex-
ternal cold, but very far from the internal heat) next the
elbow and the knee, and after these the hip-joint; aie is the
transition to the muscles of the back and chest. (It is inere-


dible how far the mischief spreads> The vertebra of the
Spine and neck are affected with the pain, and it extends to
the extremity of the os sacrum: there is a general pain of all
the parts of the groin, and a pain peculiar to each part thereof.


it likewise the tendons and muscles are intensely pained; the
muscles of the jaws and temples; the kidneys, and the bladder
next in succession.) And, what a wonder! at last the nose,
the ears, and the lips, suffer; for every where there are nerves
and muscles. A certain person had pains in the sutures of
the head, and not knowing why he was pained there, he
pointed out the shapes of the sutures—the oblique, the straight,
the transverse—both behind and before, and stated that the
pain was narrow and fixed in the bones; for the disease spreads
over every commissure of the bones, in the same manner as
in the joints ofa foot or of a hand. <Callosities also form in
the joints; at first they resemble abscesses, but afterwards they
get more condensed, and the humour being condensed is
difficult to dissolve; at last they are converted into hard,
white tophi, and over the whole there are small tumours, like
vari and larger; but the humour is thick, white, and like
stones.) For it is a cold disease of the whole (body), like hail;
and there appears to be a difference in regard to heat and
cold; for in certain eases there is delight in things otherwise
disagreeable. But, I fancy, that the cause is « refrigeration


OF CHRONIC DISEASES—BOOK IL. 365


of the innate heat, and that the disease is single; but if it
speedily give way, and the heat re-appears, there is need of re-
frigeration and it delights in such things; this is called the hot
species. But if the pain remain internally in the nerves, and
the part not becoming heated subside, nor get swollen, [
would call this variety cold, for which there is need of hot
medicines to restore the heat, of which those very acrid are
most necessary, For heat excites the collapsed parts to
swelling, and calls forth the internal heat, when there is need
of refrigerants. In proof of this, the same things are not
always expedient in the same cuses, for what is beneficial at
one time proves prejudicial in another; in a word, heat is
required in the beginning, and cold at the conclusion. Where-
for nut does not often become unremitting; but sometimes it
intermits a long time, for it is slight; hence a person subject
to Gout has won the race in the Olympiac games during the
interval of the disease,

Men then are more readily affected, but more slightly the
women; women more rarely than men, but more severely.
For what is not usual nor cognate, if from necessity it gets
the better engenders a more violent ailment. The most
common age is after thirty-five; but sooner or slower according
to the temperament and regimen of every one. The pains
then are dreadful, and the concomitants worse than the pains;
fuinting even upon touch, inability of motion, loss of appetite,
thirst, restlessness. But, if they recover partly, as if escaped
from death, they live dissolutely, are incontinent, open-handed,
cheerful, munificent, and luxurious in diet; but partly, as if
they would (not?) again escape from death, they enjoy the
present life abundantly. In many cases the gout has passed
into dropsy, and sometimes into asthma; and from this suc-
cession there is no escape.


ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


CHAPTER XII.
ON ELEPHAS, OR ELEPHANTIASIS.


THERE are many things in common as to form, colour, size,
and mode of life between the affection Elephas and the wild
beast the elephant; but neither does the affection resemble
any other affection, nor the animal any other animal. The
wild beast, the elephant, indeed, is very different from all
others; in the first place then, he is the greatest and the
thickest of animals; in size, he is as great as if you were to
put one animal on another, like a tower; in bulk, he is as
large as if you should place several other very large animals
side by side. But neither in shape is he much like unto any
other. Then, as to colour, they are all intensely black, and
that over their whole body. One horse, indeed, is very white,
like “the Thracian steeds of Rhesus”; others white-footed,
like “the white-footed horse of Menelaus”; and bay, like
“one hundred and fifty”; others are tawny, as “assuming the
shape of a horse having a tawny mane, he lay down with
her.” And so it is with oxen, and dogs, and all other reptiles
and animals which live on the earth. But elephants are only
of a lurid colour, “like to night and death." With regard
to shape, they have a very black head, and unseemly face of
fo marked form, upon a small neck, so that the head appears to
rest upon the shoulders, and even then it is not very conspicuous.
For the ears are large, broad, resembling wings, extending to
the collar-bone and breast-bone, so as to conceal the neck with
the ears, like ships with their sails. The elephant has wonder-
fully white horns on a very dark body—others call them
teeth—these alone are most white, such as is nothing else of
even any other white animal; and these are not above the
forehead and temples, as is the nature of other horned
animals, but in the mouth and upper jaw, not indeed quite


OF CHRONIC DISEASES.—BOOK It. 367


straight forwards but a little bent upwards, so that it might
swallow in a straight direction, and lift a load in its flat teeth.
Moreover the horns are large, the medium length being as
much as a fathom, and some much larger; that is to say, as
long as two fathoms. And the upper jaw from its lip hasa
long, ex-osseous, crooked, and serpent-like protuberance; and
there are two perforations at the extremity of this protu-
berance; and these by nature are perforated all the way to the
lungs, so as to form a double tube, so that the animal uses this
pipe asa nostril for respiration, and likewise as a hand; for it
could take a cup if it please with this protuberance, and
can grasp it round and hold it firmly, and none could it
take by force from the animal, except another stronger
elephant, And with this also it secks herbage for food; for
neither does it live by eating flesh with its mouth and small
teeth. For, its feet being long, raise the animal considerably
above the ground; but its neck also, as 1 have said, is emall,
and therefore it cannot browse on the earth with its mouth;
and moreover the excrescence of the horns in front of the
mouth prevents the mouth from touching the herbage.
Wherefore it raises a great load with its protuberance; then
as if with a binder having bound the same with it, he can
convey it th his mouth; whence the ancients properly call
it proboscis, for it collects food im front of the animal. But
neither is it able to drink from a lake or river with its mouth,
for the same reason. But, if it is thirsty, it introduces into the
water the extreme nostril of the proboscis, and then, as if
inhaling, it draws in much water, instead of air; and when it
has filled its nose, as it were a cup, it pours the came as 9
stream of water into its mouth, and then it draws anew and
discharges again, until it fills its belly, as it were a vessel of
burden. It has a rough and very thick skin, containing
fissures with prominent edges, long channels, and other
hollow clefts, some transverse, others oblique, very deep, like


368 ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


in all respects to a furrowed field. Other animals have na-
turally hairs for a mane, but in the elephant this is merely
down. There are also innumerable other, differences between
it and other animals; for, like man, it bends its leg backward
at the knee; and like woman, it has ite dugs at the arm-pits.
But there is no necessity for me now to write concerning the
animal, except in go far as. there is any discrepancy between
the animal and the disease, and in so far as the symptoms of
the patient resemble the nature of the animal, The disease
is also called Leo, on account of the resemblance of the eye-
brows, as I shall afterwards explain; and Setyriasis, from the
redness of the checks, and the irresistible and shameless im-
pulse ad coitum. Moreover it is also called the Heracleian affee-
tion, insomuch as there is none greater and stronger than
it.

Wherefore the affection is mighty in power, for it is the
most powerful of all in taking life; and also it is filthy and
dreadful to behold, in all respects like the wild animal, the
elephant. And from the disease there is no escape, for it
originates in a deadly cause; it is a refrigeration of the innate
heat, or rather  congelation like a great winter, when the
water is converted into snow, or hail, or ice, or frost. This is
the common cause of death, and of the affection. ~

But the commencement of the disease gives no groat indica~
tion of it; neither does it appear as if any unusual ailment
had come upon the man; nor does it display itself upon the
surface of the body, so that it might be immediately seen, and
remedies applied at the commencement; but lurking among
the bowels, like a concealed fire it smolders there, and having
prevailed over the internal parts, it afterwards blazes forth on
the surface, for the most part beginning, like a bad signal-fire,
on the face, as it were its watch-tower; but in certain
cases from the joint of the elbow, the knee, and knuckles of
the hands and feet. In this way the patient’s condition is


OF CHRONIC DISEASES —BOOK IL. 369


hopeless, because the physician, from inattention and ignorance
of the patient's ailment, does not apply his art to the com-
mencement when the disease is very feeble. For, indeed,
they are merely torpid, as if from some light cause, drowsy,
inactive, dry in the bowels, and these symptoms are not very
unusual even in healthy persons. But upon the increase of
the affection, the respiration is fetid from the corruption within
of the breath (pneuma). The air, or something external, would
seem to be the cause of this. Urine thick, muddy, like that
of cattle; the distribution of crude undigested food; and yet
of these things there is no perception nor regard; for neither
are they aware whether or not they digest, thus digestion or
indigestion is all one to them, since, for anything useful
and proper to them, digestion is not usual with them. The
distribution, however, is easy, the disease, as it were, greedily
attracting the food for its own nourishment; for this reason
the lower belly is very dry. Tumours prominent, not con-
tinuous with one another anywhere, but thick and rough, and
the intermediate space cracked, like the skin of the elephant.
Veins enlarged, not from abundance of blood, but from thick-
ness of the skin; and for no long time is the situation of them
manifest, the whole surface being elevated equally in the
swelling. The hairs on the whole body die prematurely, on
the hands, the thighs, the legs, and again on the pubes; scanty
on the chin, and also the hairs on the head are scarce. And
still more frequently premature hoariness, and sudden baldness;
in a very short time the pubes and chin naked of hair, or if
a few hairs should remain, they are more unseemly than
where they are gone, The skin of the head deeply cracked;
wrinkles frequent, deep, rough; tumours on the face hard,
sharp; sometimes white at the top, but more green at the
base, Pulse small, dull, languid, as if moved with difficulty
through the mud; veins on the temples elevated, and also
those under the tongue; bowels bilious; tongue roughened
BB


870


ON THE CAUSES AND SYMPTOMS


with vari, resembling hailstones; not unusual for the whole
frame to be full of such (and thus also in unsound victims, the
flesh is full of these tubercles resembling hail). But if the
affection be much raised up from the parts within, and appear
upon the extremities, lickens occur on the extremities of the
fingers; there is pruritus on the knees, and the patients rab
the itchy parts with pleasure!’ And the Jichen sometimes


* Our author in this place evi-
dently alludes to mentagra, a ma-
Tignant disenso of the face, very
prevalent in Rome in his time,
that is to say, towards the end
of the first and the beginning of
the second century, The first


description of it which wo possess,
is contained in Pliny’s Nat. Hist,


xxvi,, at the beginning, and is to
the following effect: That it was
one of the new diseases of the
face, which at one time had spread
over most parts of Europe, but
was then mostly confined to Rome:
"That it had been called by the
Grocks, lichen, but that latterly
the Latin term mentagra had been
applied to it, He farther asserts,
that it was unknown in former
times, and made ita first appoar-
ance in Italy during the reign of
‘Tiberius; that the men of the
middle and lower classes, and
more especially women, were ex-
empt from it, the ravages of the
disease being confined principally
to the nobility, among whom it
was propagated by kissing. He
adds respucting it, that it was
cured by caustics, tho effects of
which often left unseemly scars
on the face. That the disease had
como originally from Egypt, the
mother of all such distempers,


Another very interesting ac-
count of the disease, under thé
names of ficken and mentagra, is
given by Marcellus, the Empiric,
in chap. cxix, wherein elephan-
tiasis, lepra, and other inveterate
diseases of the skin are described,
Ho says that the distemper (vi-
tium) when neglected is apt to
spread all over the face, and to
contaminate many persons. He
prescribes various caustic and sti-
taulant applications for it. Along
with it, he gives a very good ac~
count of elephantiasis, which, he
remarks, also generally begins in
the face with vari and other ap-
pearances, similar to those de-
scribed by our author, He states
decidedly that the disease ix
endemical in Egypt, attacking not
only the lower ranks, but even
kings themselves.

Now it is worthy of remark,
that beyond all question this in
the disease to which frequent al-
lusion is made by the poet Mar-
tial as prevailing extensively in
Rome, and as being propagated by
the fashionable practice of per-
sons saluting one another, by kiss
ing, in the streets. ‘The following
passages evidently allude to it—
Epigr. xi, § 8; xii. 59,

From all these descriptions, we


OF CHRONIC DISEASES—BOOK IL 37h


embraces the chin all round; it reddens the cheeks, but is
attended with no great swelling; eyes misty, resembling bronze;
eye-brows prominent, thick, bald, inclining downwards, tumid
from contraction of the intermediate space; colour livid or
black; eye-lid, therefore, much retracted to cover the eyes, as
in enraged lions; on this account it is named /eontium. Where-
fore it is not like to the lions and elephants only, but also in
the eye-lids “ resembles swift night.” Nose, with black protu-
berances, rugged; prominence of the lips thickened, but lower
part livid; nose elongated; teeth not white indeed, but
appearing to be so under a dark body; ears red, black,
contracted, resembling the elephant, so that they appear to
have a greater size than usual; ulcers upon the base of the
ears, discharge of ichor, with pruritus; shrivelled all over the
body with rough wrinkles; but likewise deep fissures, like
black furrows on the skin; and for this reason the disease has
got the name of elephas. Cracks on the feet and heels, as far
as the middle of the toes; but if the ailment still further
increase, the tumours become ulcerated, so that on the checks,


cannot entertain a doubt, that the
disease, then so prevalent in Rome,
‘was of a malignant and contagious
nature, which attacked principally
the face, and was propagated by
kissing ; and, further, that it was
2 disease of the same class a ele-
phantiasis, Taking all these cir-
cumstances into account, one may
yenturs to decide pretty confi-


dently, that it was a disease akin ij


to the Siveens of Scotland, which
it strikingly resemblea in all its
characters as described above.


Sivoens, in short, is a species or il


variety of syphilis, which is readily
communicated both by the mouth,
as in kissing, and per coitum. Fur-


ther, that Syphilis, and its conge-
ner Siveens, are the brood of the
ancient elephantiasis, no one at
all acquainted with the history of
the latter in ancient, medimval,and
modern times, will entertain a
doubt, Seo the note to Paulus
Agineta, t, ii, 14, 15, 16, and the
authorities there referred to : also,


some of which are springing up on one part, while others
members of the patient will die, = as to drop off, euch as
the nove, the fingers, the fret, the privy parts, and the whole
bands; for the ailment does not prove Stal, so as to relieve
the patient from a foul life and dreadfal sufferings, until he
has been divided limb from limb. For it is long-lived, like
the snimal, the elephant. Bat if there be a mdden pain of
the limbs, it attacks much more grievously, spreading some-
times to this part, and sometimes to that. Appetite for food
pleamre; sversion to all things from a painful feeling; atrophy;
libidinous desires of a rabid nature; spontaneous lassitude;
the figure of each of the limbs heavy, and even the small
limbs are oppressive to the patient. Moreover, the body is
offended with everything, takes delight neither in baths nor
abstinence from them, neither in food nor in abstinence from
it, neither in motion nor in rest, for the disease has established
itself in all the parts. Sleep slight, worse than insomnolency,
from its fantasies; strong dyspnoa, suffocation as if from
strangling. In this way certain patients have passed from life,
sleeping the sleep which knows no waking, even until death.
When in such a state, who would not flee;—who would
not turn from them, even if a father, a son, or a brother?
‘There is danger, also, from the communication of the ailment.
Many, therefore, have exposed their most beloved relatives in
the wilderness, and on the mountains, some with the intention
of administering to their hunger, but others not so, as wishing
them to die. There iy a story that one of those who had come
to the wilderness, having seen a viper creep out of the earth,
compelled by hunger, or wearied out with the affection, as if
to exchange one evil for another, ate the viper alive, and did
not die until all his members had become.putrid and dropped


OF CHRONIC DISEASES.—BOOK II. 373


off: and that another person saw a viper creep into a cask of
new wine, and after drinking of the same to satiety, vomit it
up, and discharge a great deal of its venom along with the
new wine; but when the viper was smothered in the new
wine, that the man drank of it largely and greedily, seeking
thus to obtain a rescue from life and the disease; but when he f
had carried the drinking to satiety and intoxication, he lay
down on the ground, at first as if about to die; but when he
awoke from his sleep and intoxication, first of all his hair fell
off, next the fingers and nails, and all the parts melted away in
succession. But as the power was still in the semen, nature
formed the man again, as if from the act of generation: it
made other hairs to grow, and made new nails and clean flesh,
and put off the old skin, like the slough of a reptile; and
he was called back, like another new man, to a growth of
life. Thus goes the fable; not very probable, indeed, nor yet
entirely incredible; for that one ill should be overcome by
another is credible. And that from the existing spark nature
should renew the man, is not so incredible as to be held to be
a prodigy.


LANE MEDICAL LIBRARY
STANFORD UNIVERSITY
MEDIGAL CENTER
STANFORD, CALIF. 94305


A


OF
ARETEUS, THE CAPPADOCIAN,
ON THE
THERAPEUTICS OF ACUTE DISEASES


BOOK I.
CONTENTS.
cmap.

PREFACE.
Tar Cure of PHRENTTICS . . : L
Tae Core or Lernaraics . . . IL
Tae Cure or Marasuos . . . TL
Tus Cure or APOPLEXY . . . Iv.
Tue Core or THE Panoxysm or Ernersy . v.
Tas Cours or Teranus . . . . VL
Tae Cures or Quinser . . > . VIL
Tae Cure oF AFFECTIONS OF THE UVULA . VuL
Tue Core oF PxsrientiaL AFFECTIONS OF THE

Faves. . . . xk


Tae Cure or PLEURIBy . . . . x


THERAPEUTICS


CHAPTER L.
THE CURE OF PHRENITICS,


Tue patient ought to be laid in a house of moderate size, and
mild temperature—in a warm situation, if winter, and in one
that is cool and humid, if summer; in spring and autumn, to
be regulated according to the season. Then the patient himself,
and all those in the house, are to be ordered to preserve quiet;
for persons in phrensy are sharp of hearing, are sensitive to
noise, and easily become delirious. The walls should be smooth,
level, without projections, not adorned with frieze! or paintings;
for painting on a wall is an excitant. And, moreover, they
catch at certain false appearances before their eyes, and grope
about things which are not projecting, as if they were so; and
any unreal occasion may be a cause sufficient to make them
raise their hands, Length and breadth of the couch moderate,
so that the patient may neither toss about in a broad one, nor
fall out of a narrow bed. In plain bed-clothes, so that there
may be no inducement to pick at their nap. But on a soft
bed, for a hard one is offensive to the nerves; as in phrenitica,
above all others, the nerves especially suffer, for they are subject
to convulsions. Access of their dearest friends is to be per-
mitted; stories and conversation not of an exciting character;
for they ought to be gratified in everything, especially in cases
where the delirium tends to anger. Whether they are to be
Inid in darkness or in light must be determined by the nature


of the attack; for if they are


+ The Greck word dxvae would
appoar to have been applied like
‘Frieze in English, both to the nap
‘on woollen cloth, and in architec-
ture, to ornaments of sculpture on
a flat face. Our author evidently
uses it in the latter sense; but I


exasperated by the light, and


suspect the translators fail to re
cognise it. For the former mean-
ing, see Erotian, and Fées Cie,
Hippocr. Modern lexicographers
do not seem acquainted with this
use of the term. See Liddel and
Scott's; and Dunbar’s Lexicons,


OF ACUTE DISEASES —BOOK L 379


see things which exist not, and represent to themselves things
not present, or confound one thing with another, or if strange
images obtrade themselves upon them; and, in a word, if they
are frightened at the light, and the things in the light, darkness
must be chosen; but if not, the opposite state. It is a good
symptom, too, when they become of a sound mind, and their
delirium abates, on exposure to the light. Abstinence from
food should not be prolonged; food should be rather liquid,
scanty, and frequently administered, for food soothes the soul:
the proper time for giving it is during the remissions, both of
the fever and of the delirium. But if they have become
delirious from want of food, and if the fever do not, remit, we
are to give food that does not do much harm in fever, It is a
favourable circumstance, when the fever and the delirium agree
both as to the paroxysms and intermissions.

Tf, therefore, the time for the administering of food be come,
in the first place, it must be enquired whether it be necessary
to abstract blood. If, then, the delirium have come on with
fever at the commencement, in the first or second day, it will
be proper to open a vein at the elbow, especially the middle.
But if the delirium supervene on the third or fourth day, we
are to open a vein up to the first period of critical days. But
if it was past the proper time for bleeding, on the sixth or
seventh day, it will be proper to evacuate considerably before
the crises in acute diseases, either by giving purgative medi-
cines, or by using other stimulants. But when opening a
vein you must not abstract much, even if you open the vein
at the commencement; for phrenitis is an ailment easily con=
vertible into syncope. But if the patient be plethoric and
youthful, and if the ailment be connected with fulness in
eating and drinking, those indications have nothing to do with
the phrenitis; for even without the delirium, it would be proper
to abstract much blood in such circumstances; but much leas
is to be abstracted, if such persons labour under phrenitis,


380 THERAPEUTICS


But we may open a vein the more boldly in these cases, if the
disease proceed from the precordia, and not from the head; for
there (in the precordia) is the origin of life. But the head is
the seat of sensation, and of the origin of the nerves; and it
attracts more blood from the heart than it imparts to the
others. If it therefore suffer, it is not proper to open the vein
at the elbow; for these affections are such that it isno small
injury to evacuate in them. And if the strength be sufficient
to withstand the evacuation, we must abstract only once, lest
during the interval between the acts of evacuation, the proper
season for food be lost. The fevers, in cases of phrenitis, are
of a continual type, neither have they long intermissions,
but experience short and ill-marked remissions, But if the
patient give way before a sufficient quantity has been ab-
stracted, it must be put off until another remission, unless it
oceur at a distant period; but, if not, having resuscitated the
patient by odours, stroking the face, and pricking the feet, we
are immediately to abstract blood. The measure of sufficiency
is the strength.

Liquid food is proper in all febrile diseases, but especially in
phrenitic cases, for these are more arid than mere fevers, The
mulse is to be given, unless they are bilious, for it is indigest-
ible in patients who are subject to bitter bile. Alica* washed
with water, or mulse, is a good thing; also it is good to give
pottages of a plain kind, such as decoctions of savory, of pars-
ley, or of dill, for these are beneficial to the respiration, and
are diuretic, and a free discharge of urine is beneficial in
phrenetics. All kinds of pot-herbs, especially melons, for their
gluten is good for lubricating the tongue, the trachea, and for


* As this torm is of frequent Greeks and theatica of theRamans
occurrence in the works of our wasthe species of graiu called Spelt
author, as in those of Hippocrates, (Triticum Spelta) broken down into
it may be proper to mention, once rough granules; that is to say, it
for all, that the yév2por of the was coarsely ground Spelt.


OF ACUTE DISEASES—BOOK I. 3st


the alvine evacuations; but the best of all are beet, blite, cress,
gourd in season, and whatever else is best in its own season,
‘The juice of ptisan in a very liquid state, and containing little
nourishment, is most proper at first, being made always thicker
as the disease progresses. But the quantity of nourishment is
to be diminished at the crises, and a little before them. And,
if the disease be protracted, the customary food must not be
abstracted, but we must give nourishing articles from the
cereals, in order to support the patient; and when there is need,
of the flesh of the extremities of beasts and fowls, mostly dis-
solved in the soups: these ought to be completely dissolved
during the process of boiling. The rock fishes are preferable
to all others; but on the whole we must choose the best in
the country, for countries are believed to differ as to the kinds
of fish which are best in them. Fruit containing wine must
be given restrictedly, for it is apt to affect the head and pra~
cordia; but if required by the state of the strength and of
the stomach, we must give such articles as apples boiled in
mulse or roasted in suet. Of other things, each is to be diluted
with hot water, if you give it solely for the refreshment of the
stomach; but if it is wanted also for strength, you must not
dilute the vinous part much. In a word, the food must be
such as I have described.

For the sake of refrigeration, the head is to be damped with
the oil of the unripe olive pounded; for in phrenitics the head
is not fond of being kept warm. But if restlessness and false
visions be present, we must mix equal parts of rose-oil at first;
and the rose-oil is to be increased for the astringing and cool-
ing of the head. But if they become disordered in under-
standing, and their voice change, the hair (capillary leaves?) of
the wild thyme must be boiled in oils, or the juice of ivy or

* All the Greek and Arabian ticularly excellent. See Paulus
authorities on dietetics hold, that Aigineta, t. i p.159.
fishes caught among rocks are par~


332 “THERAPEUTICS


of knot-grass is also to be infused, But if the delirium get
more violent, hog’s-fennel and cow-parsnip are to be boiled in
the oils, and some vinegar poured in; for these things dissipate
the vapours and heat, and are solvents of the thick humours
which contribute to the delirium. But care must be taken
that the moist application do not extend to the neck and the
tendons, for it is prejudicial to tendons and nerves. Every
season is suitable for the damp application, except the com-
mencement of a paroxysm; it should be used more rarely
during the increase, but most frequently at the acme; and
whenever they are delirious, then, in particular, it will be
proper to use a cold application, made still more cold in the
season of summer, but in winter tepid. To soothe the delirium
it is well to foment the forehead with oxycrate, or the decoc~
tion of fleabane, by means of a sponge, and then to anoint
with the oil of wild vine or of saffron, and also to anoint the
nose and ears with them.

These things, moreover, also induce sleep. For if they lay
awake all night, nor sleep during the day, and the eyes stand
quite fixed like horns, and the patients toss about and start up,
we must contrive to procure sleep and rest for them; first, by
fomentations to the head, with unmixed rose-oil, or oil of
marjoram with tho juice of ivy, or the decoction of wild thyme
or of melilot. But poppy boiled in oil is particularly soporific
when applied to the fontenelle of the head, or with a sponge
to the forehead. But the poppies, if recently plucked and
green, may be applied whole under the pillows; for they
thicken and humectate the spirit (pnewma), which is dry and
attenuated, and diffuse over the senses fumes which prove the
commencement of sleep. But if greater applications are needed,
we may rub in the meconium (expressed juice of poppy) itself
on the forehead with water, and also anoint the nostrils with
the same, and pour it into the ears. Gentle rubbing of the
feet with oil, patting of the head, and particularly stroking of


OF ACUTE DISEASES—BOOK I. 283


the temples and ears is an effectual means; for by the stroking
of their ears and temples wild beasts are overcome, so a8 to
cease from their anger and fury But whatever is familiar to ~\,
any one is to him a provocative of sleep. Thus, to the sailor,
repose in a boat, and being carried about on the sea, the
sound of the beach, the murmur of the waves, the boom of
the winds, and the scent of the sea and of the ship. But to
the musician the accustomed notes of his flute in stillness; or
playing on the harp or lyre, or the exercise of musical chil-
dren with ong. Toa teacher, intercourse with the tattle of
children, Different permons: are: soothed to-wleep by.different:
means,

To the hypochondria and region of the stomach, if distended
by inflammation, hardness, and flatulence, embrocations and
cataplasms are to be applied, with the addition of the oil of the
over-ripe olive, for it is thick, viscid, and calefucient; it there-
fore is required in inflammation: let dill or flea-bane be boiled
in it, and it is a good thing to mix all together; but if flatu-
lence be present also, the fruits of cumin and parsley, and
whatever other things are diuretic and carminative, along
with sifted natron, are to be sprinkled on the application,
But if the liver experience suffering and pain, apply unwashed
wool just taken from the ewe, oil from the unripe olive, or
rose-oil; but we must mix also Hellenic or Cretan rob, and
boil in it melilot, and mixing all these things into one juice,
foment the liver therewith, To the spleen the oil must be


* This passage savours much of magnetical manipulation. The fol-
lowing verses of Solon have been quoted as referring to the same
subject —


“Inxpoi* kal rois obbiv treats réhos”
HodAda 8 df dAlyps Gdvwns péya yiyveras yor,
Kote dv ris Avoaur’ fra dppara dots:
‘Tay 82 kaxais votours Kueipevor dpyadias re
Aypiperos xeipois aba riOna” inj.


384 THERAPEUTICS _


mixed with vinegar; or if it should appear to be enlarged in
bulk, oxycrate, and instead of the wool a soft sponge; for the
spleen delights in and is relieved by such things. But if the
hypochondria be collapsed and retracted upwards, and the
skin be stretched, it will be best instead of the oil, or along
with it, to’use thick butter in equal quantity, and let fleabane
and rosemary be boiled in the decoction, and dill is not
unsuitable.

But if it be the proper time for cataplasms, we may use the
same oils to the same places, the ingredients of the cataplasms
being linseed, fenugreek, or fine barley-meal; beans and vetches,
also, are proper if the abdomen be swelled. Roasted millet,
also, in bags, makes a light and soft fomentation; when ground
it makes, along with honey, oil, and linseed, an excellent cata=
plasm for the hypochondria, Also let the same flowers, herbs,
and seeds which I have described among the embrocations be
used for the cataplasms, Honey, also, is useful along with
these things, to give consistency to the dry things, and for the
mixing of the toasted things, and for the preservation of the
heat; it isa good thing, likewise, by itself; also a cataplasm
half-boiled, and an embrocation dissolved in some of the
liquids, is effectual as an cmollient, calefacient, carminative,
and diuretic, and to moderate the inflammations. These
effects are produced also by mulse when drank, and even
more and greater effects when conveyed internally to the
trachea, the lungs, the thorax, and the stomach,

The bowels, also, are to be frequently stimulated by suppo~
sitories or liniments (for they are generally constipated), in
order to act as derivatives from the head, and also for the
evaporation of the vapours in the chest, and for the evacuation
of the matters in the belly; but, if the belly be confined for
several days, it must be opened by a clyster of mule, oil, and
natron.


But if the distension of the inflammation do not properly


OF ACUTE DISEASES,—BOOK L 385


subside, we must apply « cupping-instrument with scarifi-
eators where the inflammation points and is greatest, on the
first or second day, according as the inflamed parts may indi-
cate, and the strength direct; and from those the amount of
the evacuation of the blood must be determined, for excess
occasions syncope. During the first and second day the
fomentation should be the same; but, on the third, cerate with
some of the oils used in the embrocations is to be applied:
then, if they be still in a state of inflammation, epithemes,
consisting of hyssop, fenugreek boiled in mulse, the resin of
the turpentine plant, and wax; the oils the same for these
places. If by these means the delirium do not at all abate, it
will be necessary to have recourse to cropping of the head,
provided the hairs be very long, to the extent of one half;
but, if shorter, down to the skin: then, in the meantime
having recruited the strength, to apply a cupping-instrument
to the vertex, and abstract blood. But dry-cupping is first to
be upplied to the back.

But since in all the acute diseases the chest must be reme-
died, this part generally suffering with the heart and lungs,
more especially from the difficulty of the respiration, which is
sometimes hot, at other times cold; and, moreover, from ardent
fever, cough, badness of the humours, and sympathy of the
nerves, and complaint of the stomach, and illness of the pleura
and of the diaphragm (for the heart, if it suffer from any dread~
ful illness, never recovers),—in cases of phrenitis these parts in
particular must be soothed. For, indeed, the delirium in certain
cases arises from some of the parts in the chest; respiration hot
and dry; thirst acrid; febrile heat not easily endured, as being
determined from all parts to the chest; and illness from the per=
version of its native heat, but greater and more intolerable the
communication of the same from the other parts to the chest:
for the extremities are cold—the head, the feet, and the
hands; but, above these last, the chest. It is to be remedied,

ce


then, by humectation and refrigeration. For bathing, oil
boiled with camomile or nard; in summer, also, Hellenic rob.
But if it be necessary also to apply epithemes, dates moistened
with austere wine, then levigated and pounded into « mass with
nard, barley meal, and flower of the wild vine, form a soothing
cataplasm for the chest: a cooling one is forfhed of apples
bruised with mastich and melilot; all these things, however, are
to be mixed up with wax and nard. But if the stomach be
affected with torpor and loathing of food, the juice or hair of
worm-wood are mixed up with them; and the hypochondrias
region is to be fomented with this boiled up in oil. The
infusion or the juice of it may be drunk before food to the
amount of two cupfuls of the infusion, or one cupful of the
bitter juice with two cupfuls of water. But if the stomach
be affected with heartburn, not from the constitution of the
disease, but of itself from acrid and saltish humours, or from
being pinched with bile, or from being parched with thirst, we
must give in the food milk mixed with water to the amount
of half a hemina of milk in one cupful of water; the patient
should swallow the most of it, but he may take a small portion
of it with bread.

But if the patient be also affected with Causus, and there be
thirst, restlessness, mania, and a desire of cold water, we must
give less of it than in a case of Causus without phrenitis, for
we must take care lest we injure the nerves; we are to give
them as much as will prove a remedy for the stomach, and a
little is sufficient, for phrenitics are spare drinkers.

But if converted into syncope, and this also happens (the
powers of life being loosened, the patient being melted im
sweat, and all the humours being determined outwardly, the
strength and spirit (pneuma) being also dissolved), we must dis-
tegard the delirium, and be upon our guard lest the patient be
resolved into vapours and humidity. Then the only support
is wine, to nourish quickly by its substance, and to penetrate


ay


OF ACUTE DISEASES—BOOK 1. 387


everywhere, even to the extremities; to add tone to tone, to
rouse the torpid spirit (pneuma), warm that which is cold,
brace what is relaxed, restrain those portions which are flowing
and running outwards, wine being sweet to the senses of smell
s0 a8 to impart pleasure; powerful to confirm the strength for
life; and most excellent to sovthe the mind in delirium. Wine,
when drunk, accomplishes all these good purposes; for they
become composed by the soothing of their minds, are spon-
taneously nourished to strength, and are inspired with


pleasure.

But when the fever has become protracted and feeble, and
the delirium is converted into fituity, but the hypochon-
drium is not much injured by swelling, flatulence, or hard~
ness, and the head is the part principally affected, we must
boldly wash the head, and practise copious affusions on it; for
thus will the habit of body be moistened, the respiration of the
head and exhalation over the whole body will be restored;
and thus will that which is dry become diluted, and the sense
purified of its mist, while the understanding remains sound
and firm. These, indeed, are the indications of the removal
of the disease.


CHAPTER IL
THE CURE OF LETHARGICS.


Lermanetos are to be laid in the light, and exposed to the
rays of the sun (for the disease is gloom); and in « rather
warm place, for the cause is a congelation of the innate heat,
A soft couch, paintings on the wall, bed-clothes of various
colours, and all things which will provoke the sense of sight;
conversation, friction along with squeezing of the feet, pulling,
tickling. If deep sleep prevail, shouting aloud, angry re-


ec?


368 ‘THERAPEUTICS


proach, threats regarding those matters which he is accus-
tomed to dread, announcement of those things which he
desires and expects. Everything to prevent sleep—the reverse
of that which is proper for phrenitics,

With regard to the depletion of lethargics this should be
known:—If the obliviousness be the sequela of another disease,
such as phrenitis, we must not open a vein, nor make a great
evacuation of blood in any way, but inject the belly, not
solely for the evacuation of its contents, but in order to pro=
duce revulsion from above, and to determine from the head:
there should be a good deal of salts and natron in it, and it
answers very well if you add a sprinkling of castor to the
clyster; for in lethargics the lower intestine is cold, and dead,
as it were, to evacuation. But, if the lethargy is not the con-
sequence of another disease, but is the original affection, and
if the patient appear to be plethoric, provided it be with blood,
we must open a vein at the elbow; but, if with a watery
phlegm, or other humours, we must purge by means of cneoros!
with the ptisan, or by black hellebore with honeyed-water, in
the beginning, if you wish to do so moderately; but if to a
greater extent, you must give to the patient when fasting of the
medicine called Hiera, to the extent of two drams with three
cupfuls of honeyed-water; and, having waited until it purges,
then give food, if it be the proper season; but otherwise
nourishment is to be given the next day. It will be season-
able then to give in the evening « dram of the hiera, dissolved
either in two cupfuls of water or of honeyed-water.

Total abstinence from food is bad, as is also much food. It
is proper, then, to administer a little food every day, but not
to withdraw food altogether; for the stomach to be reminded
of its duties and fomented, as it were, during the whole day,
Also the food must be attenuant and laxative, rather in the
form of soups than roasted, such as hens or shell-fish; and the

* Daphne Cneorum L.


OF AOUTE DISEASES—BOOK I. 380
herb mercury is to be boiled with it, and some vinegar added.
And we may add to the juices, if it be proper to use the juice
of ptisan, something to promote exhalation and the discharge
of urine, such as fennel, parsley—the pot-herbs themselves, or
their fruits. Horehound, also, by its acrid qualities, does good;
and likewise colewort with oil, and the brine of fish (garwm).
‘The sweet cumin is a most excellent medicine for the flatu-
lence and urine; for the stomach and bladder are to be stimu-
lated during the whole time of the disease.

The moist applications to the head the same as in the case
of phrenities; for in both the senses are filled with vapours,
which must either be expelled by refrigerants and astringents,
such as the oil of roses or the juice of ivy, or dissipated into
exhalation by attenuants, such as wild thyme in vinegar, with
the rose-oil. But if there be pain of the nerves, and coldness of
the whole body, but more especially of the extremities, we
must besmear and bathe the head and neck with castor and
oil of dill, and anoint the spine with the eame along with
Sicyonian oil, the oil of must, or old oil; at the same time, we
must rub both the arms from the shoulders and both the legs
from the groins. With these, moreover, the bladder is to be
soothed, which suffers, as being of a nervous nature, and is
stressed as being the passage for the urine; and also is irritated
by the acrimony of the humours, for the urine is bilious. But
if the trembling increase, and there be danger of a convulsion,
we must necessarily use Sicyonian oil to the head, but use it
in small quantity, But if there be inflammation of the hypo-
chondria, and fulness thereof, flatulence, and tension of the
skin, or if there be a hollow there from retraction inwards of
the hypochondria, we must apply the embrocations and catap-
lasms, described by us under Phrenitics.

‘The cupping-instrument is by no means to be used if the
disease be the consequence of phrenitis, but this may be done
more boldly if it be the original disease. If the tongue be


399 THERAPEUTICS


black, and a swelling point in the hypochondria, the eupping-
instrument must necessarily be used. When in the course of
time the senses have been evacuated, and the patient is other~
wise more tolerant of the disease, we may apply the cupping-
instrument to the top of the head, since we can evacuate from
it without injury to the strength.

Flatulence is to be expelled both upwards and downwards;
for lethargy produces collections of fiatus both in the cavities
and in the whole frame, from inactivity, torpor, and want of
spirit, which motion and watchfulness dissipate; wherefore,
haying rubbed up green rue with honey and natron, we anoint
therewith; it will expel the wind more effectually if one part
of the resin of turpentine be added to these things. A fomen-
tation also will expel flatus, either with hot unwashed wool,
ot with rough old rags, ora sponge with water in which hyssop,
marjoram, penny-royal, or rue, have been boiled. The potions*
also which are taken before food expel flatus, and these also
bring away phlegm and bile in the stomach and bowels; such
are hyssop, boiled mulse, Cretan dictamny, or marjoram:
maiden-hair and agrostis? are acrid, but possessed of expulsive
qualities, for indeed they evacuate flatus and urine.

If there be trembling of the hands and ‘head, he may take
a draught, consisting of castor with three cupfuls of honeyed~
water, for some days; or if he will not drink this, we may
melt down the castor in a sufficient quantity of oil, wherein
rue has been boiled, to the amount of three cupfuls; and a
double amount of this is to be injected into the lower bowel,
and is to be repeated for several days; and after the benefit
derived from it (for it brings off flatus upwards and down-
wards, and, in certain cases, urine and faces), if it should


* Propomate, or whots, See ken at the beginning of a feast.
Paulus Atgineta, vol. iii, p. 544. Comp. Horat. Sat. ii. 4, 11, 24—27.
They correspond to the Liguewre — * Probably tho Triticum repens,
of the present day, but were ta-


OF ACUTE DISEASES.—BOOK I. 301


be diffused over the whole system in any way, the nerves
recover from their tremblings and become strong, and it
changes the habit of body to the hot and dry, and alters the
constitutions of diseases. It is also a very excellent thing to
blow it into the nostrils, for in this way it expels flatulence by
‘sneezing; for as the bladder secretes urine, so does the nose
mucus. It effects these things by its gentle heat, in which re-
‘spect it is superior to the other sternutatories, pepper, hellebore,
s0ap-wort, and euphorbium; for these things, both at their first
and last impression are harsh,and disorder thehead and the sense,
whereas castor gradually creates a gentle heat. To the head
it is also otherwise suitable, because the nerves everywhere
derive their origin from it; and castor is a remedy for the
diseases of the nerves; but to mix it with some one or more
of the medicines described will not be disagreeable, for if it
be mixed, it will not immediately disorder the head, even in
a moderate degree, but after a.time it will stir up the heat,
The nose is to be moistened by tickling; by odours acrid
indeed to the sense, but possessed of heating powers, such as
the castor itself, or savory, or penny-royal, or thyme, either
in a green state, or in a dried, moistened well with vinegar.
Anointing with acrid medicines is proper to the fect and
knees, The materiel thereof should be heating and pungent
by degrees; for there is need of both in cases of lethargy to
induce warmth and watchfulness. In the first place, it is
proper to whip the limbs with the nettles, for the down
thereof sticking to the skin does not endure long, but imparts
no disagreeable tingling and pain; it also moderately stimu
lates, induces swelling, and provokes heat. But if you desire
to have these effects produced more powerfully, rub in equal
parts of lemnestis* and euphorbium, with oil of must. It is
* An efflorescence collecting the Appendix to Dunbar's Greek
about reeds in salt lakes. The Lexicon.
game as dddpxy, for which seo


OF ACUTE DISEASES—BOOK I. 305


or compression, there must be no procrastination, for in certain
cases this alone is sufficient for the cure and to save life.

But if it is not thought expedient to open a vein, owing to
the patient’s having been seized with much coldness, torpor,
and insensibility, an injection must be given for the evacuation
of the engorgement in the bowels (for very generally persons
are seized with apoplexy from the immoderate use of food and
wine), and for the revulsion of the humours seated in the head.
‘The clyster should be acrid; and an evacuant of phlegm and
bile, consisting not only of natron, but also of cuphorbium, to
the amount of three oboli, added to the usual amount of a
clyster, also the medullary part of the wild cucumber,
or the decoction of the hair (leaves) of centaury in oil or
water, The following is a very excellent clyster: To the
usual amount of honey add rue boiled with oil and the resin
of the turpentine tree, and some salts, instead of natron, and
the decoction of hyssop.

And if by these means the patient be somewhat aroused,
either from being moved by the supervention of fevers, or
having recovered from his insensibility, or the pulse has
become gvod, or if the general appearance of the face has
become favourable, one may entertain good hopes, and apply
the remedies more boldly. Wherefore, when the strength is
confirmed, the purgative hiera may be given to the patient
fasting, and particularly a full dose. But, if the strength be an
objection, it is to be given, to the amount of one-half, with
honeyed-water. And we are to move him about, after having
laid him stretched on a couch; and those who carry him must
do so gently, he being allowed to rest frequently, to avoid in-
ducing lassitudg, And if there be a copious evacuation from
the bowels, we are to permit it; but if not, give water, or
honeyed-water, to the amount of two cupfuls, for drink. And
if nausea supervene upon the purging, we are not to interfere
with it; for the exertions of the body have some tendency to


396 THERAPEUTICS


resuscitate the patient, and the vomiting of the bile carries off
the cause of the disease. The medicine hiera is a purger of
the senses, of the head, and of the nerves. Enough, indeed,
has been said respecting evacuation of every kind at the
commencement.

But having wrapped the whole of his person in wool, we
are to soak it with some oil—the Sicyonian, oil of musk
(gleucinum), or old oil, either each of these separately, or all
mixed together; but it is best to melt into it « little wax, so
a8 to bring it to the thickness of ointments; and it is to be ren-
dered more powerful by adding some natron and pepper: these
are to be reduced toa powder, and strained in # sieve. But
castor has great efficacy in cases of palsy, both in the form of
a liniment with some of the fore-mentioned oils, and it is still
more potent when taken in « draught with honeyed-water, the
quantity being to the amount we have stated under lethargics;
but, at the same time, we must consider the age and disposition
of the patient, whether he be ready to take the drink for several
days. Inunctions are more powerful than fomentations, a8
being more easily borne, and also more efficacious; for the
ointment does not run down £0 as to stain the bed-clothes (for
this is disagreeable to the patient), and adheres to the body
until, being melted by the heat thereof, it is drank up. More+
over, the persistence of their effects is beneficial, whereas liquid
applications run off. The ingredients of the ointments are
such as have been stated by me; but along with them castor,
the resin of the turpentine-tree, equal parts of euphorbium, of
lemnestis, and of pellitory; of pepper, and of galbanum one+
half, with triple the amount of Egyptian natron; and of wax,
$0 as to bring it to a liquid consistence. But a much more
complex mode of preparing these medicines has been described
by me on various occasions, and under a particular head.
Cataplasms are to be applied to the hardened and distended
parts; their ingredients are linseed, fenugreck, barley-meal, oil


OF ACUTE DISEASES,—BOOK I, 397


in which rue or dill has been boiled, the root of mallows
pounded and boiled in honeyed-water, so a8 to become of the
consistence of wax, They should be of a soft and agreeable
consistence. These things are to be done if the patient still
remains free of fever, or if the fever be slight, in which case
no regard need be had to the heat.

But if the fevers be of an acute nature, and the remaining
disease appear to be of minor consequence, and if these induce
urgent danger, the dict and the rest of the treatment must be
accommodated to them. Wherefore, the patients must use
food altogether light and of easy digestion; and now, most
especially, attention ought to be paid to the proper season for
eating, and, during the paroxysms, the whole of the remedial
means must be reduced; and, altogether, we must attend to
the fevers.

But if the disease be protracted, and if the head be at fault,
we must apply the cupping-instrument to the back of the head,
and abstract blood unsparingly; for it is more efficucious than.
phlebotomy, and does not reduce the strength. But, dry-
cupping is to be first applied between the shoulders, in order
to produce revulsion of the matters in the occiput.

Sometimes, also, the parts concerned in deglutition are
paralysed, which is the sole help and safety of persons in
apoplexy, both for the swallowing of food and for the trans-
mission of medicines. For not only is there danger of want
of nourishment and hunger, but also of cough, difficulty of
breathing, and suffocation; for if one pour any liquid food
into the mouth it passes into the trachea, neither the tonsils
coming together for the protrusion of the food, nor the epi-
glottis occupying its proper seat where it is placed by nature,
as the cover of the windpipe; we must, therefore, pour
honeyed-water or the strained ptisan into a piece of bread re-
sembling a long spoon, and passing it over the trachea, pour
its contents into the stomach; for in this way deglutition is


308 ‘THERAPEUTICS


still accomplished. But if the patient be in the extremity of
danger, and the neck with the respiration is compressed, we
must rub the neck and chin with heating things and foment.
They effect nothing, and are unskilful in the art, who apply
the cupping-instrument to the throat, in order to dilate the
gullet; for distension, in order to procure the admission of
food, is not what is wanted, but contraction of the parts for
the purposes of doglutition, But the cupping-instruament
distends further; and, if the patient wish to swallow, it pre=
yents him by its expansion and revulsion, whereas it is neces-
sary to pass into a state of collapse, in order to accomplish the
contraction of deglutition; and in addition to these, it stuffs
the trachea 80 as to endanger suffocation. And neither, if
you place it on either side of the windpipe, does it any good;
for muscles and nerves, and tendons and veins, are in front
of it,

The bladder and the loose portion of the rectum are some=
times paralysed, in regard to their expulsive powers, when the
bowels are constantly filled with the excrements, and the
bladder is swelled to a great size. But sometimes they are
affected as to their retentive powers, for the discharges run
away as if from dead parts. In this case one must not boldly
use the instrument, the catheter, for there is danger of in-
ducing violent pain of the bladder, and of oceasioning @ cons
vulsion in the patient. It is better to inject with no great
amount of strained ptisan; and if the bowel be evacuated of
the faces, it will be proper to inject castor with oil. But the
sole hope, both of general and partial attacks of paralysis,
consists in the sifz bath of oil, The manner of it will be
described under the chronic diseases.


OF ACUTE DISEASES—BOOK L 309


CHAPTER Y.

CURE OF THE PAROXYSM OF EPILEPTICS.
Even the first fall in epilepsy is dangerous, if the disease
attack in an acute form; for it has sometimes proved fatal in
one day. The periodical paroxysms are also dangerous; and,
therefore, on these accounts, epilepsy has been described among
the acute diseases. But if the patient has become habituated
to the illness, and the disease has taken a firm hold of him, it
has become not only chronic, but, in certain cases, perpetual;
for if it pass the prime of life, it clings to him in old age and
in death,

Such remedies, then, as are applicable in the chronic state
will be described among the chronic diseases; but such things
as must be done for a sudden attack of ‘the disease, of these
the greater number have been described under apoplectics,
namely, venesection, clysters, anointings, the cupping imstrus
ment; these means being the most powerful for the purpose of
arousing. But I will now describe the peculiar remedies for
an attack of the falling sickness. In children, then, to whom,
owing to dyspepsia, or from excessive cold, the disease is
familiar, vomiting, either of food, or of phlegm, or of any
other humour, is beneficial. Feathers, then, dipped in the
ointment of iris, excite vomiting; and the unguentum irinum
is not inapplicable for smearing the tonsils with. But having
first laid the child on his belly (this is the easiest position for
vomiting), we must press gently on his lower belly, But if
the lower jaw be convulsed or distorted, or if the hands and
legs be tossed about, and if the whole face be fixed, the limbs
are to be soothed by gentle rubbing with oil, and the dis-
tortions of the countenance rectified; the straight parts are to
be gently bound, so that they may not become distorted. The


400 ‘THERAPEUTICS


cold parts are to be fomented with unscoured wool, or with
old rags. The anus is to be mbbed with honey along with
the oil of rue, or with natron and liquid resin along with these
things; and they are to be gently pushed within the anus, for
they expel flatus, and children pass flatus in this disease. But
if they can swallow, we may give them of this medicine: Of
cardamom, one part; of copper, one siliqua. These things
are to be drunk with honeyed-water; for cither it is vomited
up along with the matter annoying the stomach, or the bowels
are opened. This is avery excellent linctus: Of cardamom, of
mustard, and of the hair of hyssop equal parts; of the root of
iris, one part, with a double quantity of natron; of pepper, to
the amount of one-third. Having mixed up all these things
together, and having separated the jaw, pour into the mouth,
and even beyond the tonsils, so that the things may be swal-
lowed. These things are proper for infants, and for young
persons the same are applicable. But the more powerful
emetics are to be taken: the bulbous root of narcissus; of
mustard and of hyssop, equal parts; of copper and pepper,
one-half the proportion of the former things. They are to be
mixed with honey and given. ‘These things are proper, in
order to rouse from the paroxysm; but those calculated to
produce the resolution of the disease will be described under
the chronic diseases.


CHAPTER VI.
THE CURE OF TETANUS.


Now, indeed, a soft, comfortable, smooth, commodious, and
warm bed is required; for the nerves become unyielding, hard,
and distended by the disease; and also the skin, being dry


|


OF ACUTE DISEASES.—BOOK !. 401


and rough, is stretched; and the eyo-lids, formerly so mobile, can
scarcely wink; the eyes are fixed and turned inwards; and like-
wise the joints are contracted, not yielding to extension. Let
the house also be in a tepid condition; but, if in the summer
season, not to the extent of inducing sweats or faintness; for
the disease has a tendency to syncope. We must also not
hesitate in having recourse to the other great remedies; for it
is not a time for procrastination. Whether, then, the tetanus
has come on from refrigeration, without any manifest cause,
or whether from a wound, or from abortion in a woman, we
must open the vein at the elbow, taking especial care with
respect to the binding of the arm, that it be rather loose; and.
as to the incision, that it be performed in a gentle and expe~
ditious manner, as these things provoke spasms; and take away
a moderate quantity at first, yet not so as to induce fainting
and coldness. And the patient must not be kept in a state of
total abstinence from food, for famine is frigid and arid.
Wherefore we must administer thick honeyed-water without
dilution, and strained ptisan with honey. For these things do
not preas upon the tonsils, so as to oceasion pain; and, more~
over, they are soft to the gullet, and are easily swallowed, are
laxative of the belly, and very much calculated to support
the strength. But the whole body is to be wrapped in wool
soaked in oil of must or of saffron, in which either rosemary,
fleabane, or wormwood has been boiled. All the articles are
to be possessed of heating properties, and hot to the touch,
We must rub with a liniment composed of lemnestis, eu-
phorbium, natron, and pellitory, and to these a good deal of
castor is to be added. The tendons also are to be well wrapped
in wool, and the parts about the ears and chin rubbed with
liniments; for these parts, in particular, suffer dreadfully, and
are affected with tension. Warm fomentations, also, are to be
used for the tendons and bladder, these being applied in bags
containing toasted millet, or in the bladders of cattle half
pb


OF ACUTE DISEASES—BOOK L 403


ous, and little isto be hoped. We must try to remedy it,
however, for some persons have been saved even in such cases.
In addition to the other remedies, we must also treat the
wounds with the calefacient things formerly described by me,
by fomentations, cataplasms, and such other medicines as excite
gentle heat, and will create much pus: for in tetanus the
sores are dry. Let the application consist of the manna of
frankincense, and of the hair of poley, and of the resins of
turpentine and pine-trees, and of the root of marsh-mallow and
of rue, and of the herb fleabane. These things are to be
mixed up with the cataplasms, melting some of them, sprin-
kling the others upon them, and leviguting others beforehand
with oil; but the mallow, having been pounded, is to be boiled
beforehand in honeyed-water. We are to sprinkle, also, some
castor on the ulcer, for no little warmth is thereby commu-
nicated to the whole body, because the rigors proceeding from
the sores are of a bad kind. Rub the nostrils with castor
along with oil of saffron; but also give it frequently, in the
form of a draught, to the amount of three oboli. But if the
stomach reject this, give intermediately of the root of silphium
an equal dose to the castor, or of myrrh the half of the sil-
phium: all these things are to be drunk with honeyed-water.
But if there be a good supply of the juice of the silphium
from Cyrene,* wrap it, to the amount of a tare, in boiled honey,
and give to swallow. It is best given in this way, as it slips
unperceived through the palate; for it is acrid, and occasions
disagreeable eructations, being a substance which has a bad
smell. But if it cannot be swallowed thus, it must be given
dissolved in honeyed-water; for it is the most powerful of all
the medicines given to be swallowed, which are naturally


+1 would remind the profes grew copiously in the region of
sional reader, that the Cyrenaic Cyrene. See Paulus Agineta, Syd.
silphium was a superior kind of Soc. Edit, t. iii, 337.
assa-fotida, which st one time

pp2


ad


warming, Glluent, und cam relcx ditemicas and mothe the
nerves. Bat if they con swallow nothing, we mast inject =
into the anu with the oil of custor; and thos the amas & to be
anointed with oil cr homey. With this, alo, we most anome
the fandament, along with oilor honey. Bat if they will
drink nothing, we most make an injection of some castor with
the ot With thix, alo, we am to anoint th= fendement,
along with fat or honey; and also foment the bladder; and
se it as an ointment, having melted it with a sufficiency of
wax to bring it to the proper consistence. Bat if it be the time
for evacuating flatulence and feces, we are to inject two drams
of the purgative hiers along with honeyed-water and oil, since,
along with the expulsion of these, it warms the lower belly;
for hiers is both a compound and heating medicine.


CHAPTER VIL
THE CURE OF QUINSEY.


THERE ate two forms of quinsey. The one is attended with
heat, and great inflammation of the tonsils, and swelling out-
wardly ; moreover, the tongue, uvula, and all the parts there,
are raised up into a swelling. The other is a collapse of these
parts, and compression inwardly, with greater sense of suffoca-
tion, 20 that the inflammation appears to be determined to the
heart. In it, then, particularly, we must make haste to apply
our remedies, for it quickly proves fatal.

If, then, it proceed from taking too much food and wine,
‘we must inject the bowels on the day of the attack, and that
with two clysters: the one a common clyster, so as to bring off
the feculent matters; and the other for the purpose of pro-
ducing revulsion of the humours from the tonsils and chest.


OF ACUTE DISEASES.—BOOK L 405


Tt will therefore be, but not undiluted ....... and the
decoctions of centaury and hyssop; for these medicines also
bring off phlegm. And if the patient has been on a restricted
dict, we open the vein at the elbow, and make a larger incision
than usual, that the blood may flow with impetuosity and in
large quantity; for such a flow is sufficient to mitigate the
heat most speedily, is able to relieve the strangulation, and
reduce all the bad symptoms, It is no bad practice, likewise,
to bring the patient almost to fainting, and yet not so as that
he should faint altogether, for some from the shock have died
of the fainting. ....... or binding them with ligatures
above the ankles and knees. It is a very good thing, like-
wise, to apply ligatures to the forearms above the wrists, and
above the forearms to the arms. And if deglutition be easy, we
are to give eclaterium with honeyed-water, and the whey of
milk, as much as will be sufficient to purge the patient. In
these cases, elaterium is preferable to all other cathartics; but
cneoros and mustard are also suitable, for both these purge the
bowels. If the inflammations do not yield to these means,
having bent the tongue back to the roof of the mouth, we
open the veins in it; and if the blood flow freely and co-
piously, it proves more effectual than all other means. Liquid
applications to the inflamed parts, at first of an astringent
nature, so as to dispel the morbid matters: unwashed wool,
then, with hyssop, moistened in wine, and the ointment from
the unripe olive. But the cataplasme are similar to the liquid ap-
plications,—dates soaked in wine, and levigated with rose-leaves,
But in order that the cataplasm may be rendered glutinous
and soft, let flour or linseed, and honey and oil be added, to
produce the admixture of all the ingredients. But if it turn
to a suppuration, we are to use hot things, such as those used
in the other form of synanche. Let fenugreek be the powder,
and manna and resin the substances which are melted; and let
the hair of poley be sprinkled on it, anda hot fomentation


“—"


OF ACUTE DISEASES—BOOK L 407
wound do not coalesce; glint megan pale
not of a nature to unite* * sii
* * * * * * * *
* * * * * * * *
= * * * *

CHAPTER VIII.


CURE OF THE AFFECTIONS ABOUT THE COLUMELLA (or


UYVULA).


Or the affections which form about the columella, some require
to be treated by excision; but the surgical treatment of such
cases does not come within the design of this work. Some
are to be treated as acute affections; for some of them readily
prove fatal by suffocation and dyspnaa. These are the dis
eases which we call wea and columella; for both are attended
with inflammation and increase in thickness and length, so
that the parts hang down, and come into the arteria aspera.
The columna is of equal thickness from the base to the extre-
mity in the palate: the wea is of unequal thickness; for its base
at the palate is slender, whereas at its extremity it is rounded
and thick, with redness and lividity, whence it gets the appel-
lation of uva. These, then, must be speedily relieved; for the
death from suffocation is very speedy.

If, then, the patients be young, we must open the vein at the
elbow, and evacuate copiously by a larger incision than usual;
7 On the Ancient History of the Sixth Book of Paulus Rgineta,
Laryngotomy, see Paulus Ainota, lately published in Paris by Dr.
tii, pp.301—303, Syd. Soc, Edit. Réné Brian. .As regards the text,
1 would avail myselfof thepresent it is everything that could be de~
opportunity of bringing into the sired; and the translation which
notice of my learned readers the accompanies it is generally cor-
veryaccurate and élegant edition of rect,


40 THERAPEUTICS


there is then most danger of convulsion; for generally the
ulcers are dried up, and thereby tonic contractions of the
nerves are induced. It is necessary then to sofien and moisten.
by means of milk, with starch, and the juice of ptisan, or of
tragus, or linseed, or the seed of fenugreek. In certain cases
also the uvula has been eaten down to the bone of the
palate and the tonsils to their base and epiglottis; and in
consequence of the sore, the patient could neither swallow
anything solid nor liquid; but the drink regurgitating has cut
him off by starvation.


CHAPTER X.
CURE OF PLEURISY.


Is cases of Pleurisy there is no time for procrastination, nor
for putting off the great remedy. for the fever, being very
acute, hastens to a fatal termination; the pain also of the
suecingens hurries on to the worse; and moreover coughs which
agitate the chest and head exhaust the powers, Wherefore
then, on the selfsame day we must by all means open a vein.
But if it be in connection with repletion of food and drink,
having kept the patient fasting for one day, we are to abstract
blood from the vein in the hollow of the elbow, in « line
with the opposite side, (for it is better to take it from a very
great distance); but not to the extent of deliquium animi,
for there is danger of Peripneumonia supervening if the body,
being congealed, should leave the soul; for the fluids rush in~
ward when deprived of their external heat and tension. For the
Lungs are of loose texture, hot, and possessed of strong powers
of attraction; the lungs also are the neighbours of the ribs,


OF ACUTE DISEASES—BOOK L ail
and their associates in suffering; snd this succession of dis-
ease is not readily recovered from; whereas in Pleuritis from
Peripneumonia, recovery readily takes place, this combination
being milder, It is necessary, therefore, after a moderate
flow of blood, to recruit the patient for a time, and afterwards
abstract again; if matters go on well, the same day, provided
the remission belong; butif not, on the day following. Butif
there is no remission of the fever (for generally the fever
prevails and increases for one day), we are to abstract blood
the third day during the second remission, when also food is
to be given—after having anointed the patient freely, having
also applied to the side soft oil with the heating ointment of
rue, or the decoction of dill. A very soothing fomenta-
tion is also to be applied to the side. In certain cases, the pain
and inflammation are determined outwardly, so as to.make it
appear an affection of the parts there; but it is merely an ex-
acerbation of the internal symptoms.

Let us now treat of regimen, in order that, respecting all
the system of treatment, there may be no mistake, ‘+ For in
food will consist: the medicines, but also the medicines in
food.” In kind, then, it is to be hot and humid, smooth and
consistent, detergent, solvent, having the power of dissolving
and attenuating phlegm. Of all kinds of food, therefore,
ptisan isto be preferred; at the commencement, then, strained
to its juice, so that the solid part of it may be separated; and
made with honey only; and let the usual articles added to it
for seasoning and variety be absent (for now the juice alone
is sufficient). It will be calculated to moisten and warm, and
able to dissolve and clear away phlegm, to evacuate upwards
without pain such matters as should be brought up, and also
readily evacuate the bowels downwards. For its lubricity
isagreeable and adapted to deglutition, Moreover, its glu-
tinous quality soothes heat, purges the membranes, concocts
coughs, and softens all the parts. ‘These are the virtues of


OF ACUTE DISEASES—BOOK I. 413


more congenial to the patient, as proceeding from one animal
to another. But if the phlegm be glutinous and viscid,
pour oil into the eggs, and sprinkle some of the dried resin
of pino—so that the sulphur may be more powerful; melting
also with them some of the resin of turpentine; pepper also
and all cognate substances are beneficial in eggs, and in all
kinds of food; the extremities of animals melted down in
soups, pigeons, boiled hens; the brains of swine roasted with
the cawl, but without it they are not savoury. If the patient
has no rdle, we must give him fish from the depth of the sea,
or rock fish, the best which the country produces. And that
the patient may not transgress in regimen, owing to his
appetite, nor become wasted by a spare diet, he is to be gra~
tified with some fruit; such as apples boiled in water, or
honeyed-water, or stewed in suet (but we must take off the
ekin and rough parts within along with the seeds,); and in
season we may give some figs. We must give likewise of any
other kind of autumn fruit which is not only not hurtful but
also beneficial. So much with regard to diet.

Wool fumigated with sulphur and moistened with oil
in which dill and rue have been boiled, is to be laid on the
side, Foment the side constantly with these, and, before the
administration of food, apply cataplasms, in addition to the
usual ingredients containing melilot boiled with honeyed-
water, and mixing therewith some of the fleshy part of the
poppy in a boiled state, and eprinkling on it the meal of the
manna thuris* But if the expectoration be more fluid and
copious, we are to mix the flour of darnel, or of hedge
mustard, and sprinkle natron on it. But if the disease be
prolonged, the pain having become fixed, and the purging
liquid, it is to be apprehended that pus is about to form;
wherefore mix with the cataplasms mustard and cacirys ;*

* See Paul, Agin. t. iii. p. 241, appendix to Dunbar’s Greek Lexi-

ABarwris,


* Probably the Cachryslibanotis, con under
See Dioscorides, M.M.iii.78; and


OF ACUTE DISEASES—BOOK I. 415


good rule to apply the cupping-instrument again, so as that a
thin sanies may be abstracted from the wounds. This, indeed,
is much more effectual than the previous cupping, and much
less calculated to impair the strength; for it is not blood, the
nutriment of the body, but sanies that runs off. This then
you are to do after having made a previous estimate of the
strength. On the third day we are to apply cerate with the
ointments of privet and of rue. But if the sputa still require
purging, we are to melt into the cerates some resin, or mix
some native sulphur therewith, and again the part is to have
a fomentation. With regard to the form of the eupping-instru-
ment, it should either be an earthen vessel, light, and adapted
to the side, and capacious; or, of bronze, flat at the lips, so as
to comprehend the parts affected with pain; and we are to
place below it much fire along with oil, so that it may keep
alive for a considerable time. But we must not apply the lips
close to the skin, but allow access to the air, so that the heat
may not be extinguished. And we must allow it to burn a
long while, for the heat within it, indeed, isa very good fo-
mentation, and a good provocative of perspirations. »

And we must not overlook purging downwards, in men
injecting oil of rue into the gut, and, in women, also into the
womb. And let something be constantly drank and swallowed;
for this purpose, honeyed-water, with rue and juice of ptisan,
if there is a constant cough, as being a medicine in the food.
But if it is not the season of administering food, let it be one
of the compound preparations, such as butter boiled with
honey to a proper consistence. Of this, round balls the size
of a bean are to be given to hold under the tongue, moving
them about hither and thither, so that they may not be
swallowed entire, but melted there. The medicine also from
poppies with honey and melilot is agreeable, being possessed
of soothing and hypnotic properties. This is to be given
before the administration of food, after it, and after sleep. To
the patient when fasting, the following medicinal substances are


oF
ARETZUS, THE CAPPADOCIAN,
ON THE


THERAPEUTICS OF ACUTE DISEASES


BOOK II.


CONTENTS.


Tae Cure oF PRRIPNEUMONIA

Tae Core or THE Brinaine uP oF B10.

Tar Curr or Carpucs. . . .

Tae Core or CHOLERA

Tae Core or Inzvs . .

‘Tam Cone oF THE AUER AYWROTIONS ABOUT THE
LiveR . .

‘Tax Cons or THR Acure Disease or Tax Donsat,
‘Very ayp ARTERY .

‘Tan Conn o mux Acunt Disease aDour Tax

‘Tae Cone oF TH Acura Arreomioys aDour THE
BLADDER . . .

‘Tae Cone oF THE Hyemmnicat Coxvotatox .

‘Tae Cure or Sarnia. . .


a ARR ne


He k


OF ACUTE DISEASES —BOOK Il AM
need of various soporific medicines unless the disease give
way, so”that the seasonable administration of these medi-
cines may lull the suffering, for these things are usually
soporific. But if you give a medicine at the acme of the
suffocation, or when death is at hand, you may be blamed for
the patient’s death by the vulgar.

The food afto must be suitable, acrid, light, solvent of thick


matters, detergent: of pot-herbs, the leek, or the cress, or the .


nettle, or the cabbage boiled in vinegar; of austere things
(frumentacea?) the juice of ptisan, taking also of marjoram,
or of hyssop, and of pepper, and more natron instead of the
salts. Also spelt in grains well boiled with honeyed-water: in
the course of the boiling, they should all be deprived of their
flatulence, for flatulent things are hurtful to persons in peri-
pneumonia. If they are free from fever, wine is to be given
for drink, but not such as is possessed of much astringency,
for astringency condenses bodies; but in these the parts are
rather to be relaxed. We must also promote the expulsion of
the sputa. On the whole the drink should be scanty, for
drenching is prejudicial to the lungs, because the lungs at-
* tract from the stomach and belly.

Let the chest be covered up in wool, with oil, natron, and
salts, The best ointment is that prepared of the lemnestis,
and dried mustard with liquid cerate; and, on the whole, we
are to determine outwardly the fluids, the heat, and the spirit
(pneuma). And smelling to acrid things is beneficial, also
anointings, and ligatures of the extremities When these
things are done, if the disease do not yield, the patient is in
a hopeless condition.


OF ACUTE DISEASES—BOOK II. 423


for several days). In a word, then, in all the diseases of all
the vital organs, this is the outlet of the blood. For the one
higher up and this are both branches of the humeral, so that
the one above can have no more remedial power than the
mesal. They are ignorant of these divisions who have con-
nected the upper vein with the stomach and liver. But ifthe
flow proceed from the spleen, they direct us to open the vein
of tho loft hand, which rms between the little finger and the
one next the middle; for certain physicians held it to terminate
in the spleen; but it is a branch of the vein below those at
the elbow. Why, then, should we rather open the vein at the
fingers than the one at the elbow? for there it is larger, and
the blood flows readily from it. Altogether, then, we are to
stop before coming to deliguium animi. Yet neither, also, is
much blood to be abstracted; for the hemorrhage itself is cal-
culated to enfeeble the patient; but, after abstracting a small
quantity, repeat the bleeding the same day, the next, and the
day following. But if the patient be thin, and scantily sup-
plied with blood, we must not open a vein. So much re-
speeting the abstraction of blood.

We are also to assist by means of ligatures to the extremities.
Above the feet to the ankles and knees, and above the hands
to the wrists and arms, a broad band is to be used, so that the
constriction may be strong, and yet not produce pain. To the
regions, also, from which the blood flows, we are to apply un-
washed wool from the sheep; but moisten it with a liquid,
such as austere wine, and the oils of roses and of myrtles,
But if the hemorrhage be of an urgent nature, instead of the
wool we are to use sponges, and vinegar instead of the wine,
and let the part be anointed with myrtle oil; and we are to
dust upon the sponges some of the dry inspiseated juices, euch
as that of acacia, or of hypocistis, or else of aloes, The juice
of the unripe grape, dissolved in vinegar, is also a very ex-
cellent thing. But if the liquid application be troublesome or.


OF ACUTE DISEASES—BOOK II, 425
is sufficient, for it rans through the pores like fluid when
poured into a water-cask newly wetted. And also in the
division of vessels stypticity is the remedy, by producing con~
traction of the lips; but for this purpose we must use the
greater and more powerful medicines. But if the form of
hemorrhage be that from erosion, and if the lips of the ulcer
do not coalesce by the action of the astringents, but the wound
gapes, and cannot be brought together by compression, we must
produce congelation of the blood, and also of the heat; for the
flow is stopped by the immobility and coagulation of these,
To the rare parts, then, oxycrate is sufficient for producing
astriction; for the fluid is not pure blood, but the sanies thereof
from small orifices; and even of this medicine, there is no
necessity of much being given, or frequently; and in certain
cases, the external treatment is sufficient. So, likewise, the
decoction of dates and of edible carobe, when drunk, has by
itself proved sufficient. Let the vinegar be from wines of an
astringent nature, and if not by pharmaceutical preparation,
at all events let it be such as by time has become acrid and
astringent. But in dilatations of the wounds, in addition to
the oxycrate, let there be given the simple medicines at first,
such as the juice of plantain, of knot-grass, or of endive; of
each an equal part with the oxycrate. But if the flow increase,
sprinkle on it one dram of the dried hypocistis, or of acacia,
on three cupfuls of the oxyerate. The juice, also, of the wild
grape is very excellent. But if the ailment prevail over this,
sprinkle on it triturated gall, and the dried root of the bramble,
and the sea stone, the coral, triturated and dried. But the
root of rhubarb is more powerful than these to cool, to dry,
to astringe; in short, for every purpose. But it is used with
the oxyerate alone; or, if more powerful things are required,
asaremedy. ~To the juices of endive with plantain we add
some of the root, namely, three oboli of it to three or four
eyathi of the fluid, But in erosions, we must produce astrin-


OF ACUTE DISEASES—BOOK If. 497


Tn the absence of fevers, everything is to be attempted in
regard to medicines, giving them copiously and frequently.
Bat if fever come on—and most frequently fever takes place,
along with inflammations of the wounds—we must not stop
the flow suddenly, nor give medicines during the
for many die sooner of the fevers than of the flow of blood.

The articles of food are various in kind like the medicines,
butalso “the medicines are in the food ;” for neither would it be
ensy to find all the good properties of food in any one article,
nor even if'a solitary thing were sufficient for the cure, should
one only be used, as one would thus readily produce satiety;
but we must grant variety if the disease should prove pro-
longed. Let the food, then, be astringent and refrigerant in
properties, as also to the touch, for heat encourages bleeding.
Washed alica; rice added to oxyerate; but if the vinegar
excite coughing, the decoction of dates; baked bread which
has been dried and pounded down to meal, and sifted. Of
all these things a draught is to be made with oil; savory
seasoned with salts, and sumach to be sprinkled upon it. And
if you wish to gratify the patient’s palate, let cotisnder be
added, for this purpose, whenever it is agreeable, or any of the
diuretic and diffusible seeds, Lentil, then, with the juice of
plantain, if the hemorrhage be urgent, but if not, we should
spare the juice, for neither is it of casy digestion, nor pleasant
to the taste; for in these cases we must not give indigestible
things. But if you apprehend death from the hemorrhage,
you must also give what is unpalatable and indigestible; nay,
let even harsh things be given if they will preserve life;
wherefore, let galls, dried and pulverised, be sprinkled when
dry, and cold lentil: eggs thick from boiling, with the seeds
of pomegranate or galls, for the food necessarily consists in
the medicines. The drink altogether should be scanty, since
liquids are incompatible with a dry diet. These are the pro-
per things, provided you wish to astringe and cool. But if


OF ACUTE DISEASES —BOOK II, 429


CHAPTER HI.
THE CURE OF CARDIAC AFFECTIONS.


Iw Syncope, it is necessary that the physician should exercise
fore-knowledge; for, if you foresee its approach, and if things
present co-operate strongly with you,' you may avert it before
its arrival. When it is come on, patients do not readily escape
from it, for I have said that syncope is the dissolution of
nature; and nature when dissolved cannot be restored. We
must try to prevent it then, when still impending, or if not,
at the commencement. We must form our prognosis from
the circumstances stated by us among the acute diseases, where
we have described the cause and also the symptoms. The
fever Causus, then, is the commencement of the attack, and
with Causus the worst of symptoms, dryness, insomnolency,
heat of the viscera, as if from fire, but the external parts cold;
the extremities, that is to say, the hands and feet, very cold;
breathing slowly drawn; for the patients desiderate cold air,
because they expire fire: pulse small, very dense, and trem-
bling. Judging from these and the other things stated by
me among the symptoms, you will immediately give assistance
at the commencement,

Unless, then, when everything is against it, the habit, the
age, the season, the timidity of the patient, we must open a
vein, and even if many symptoms contra-indicate it, but an
especial one require it, such as the tongue rough, dry, and
black (for it is indicative of all the internal parts). And in


¥ Allusion is here made to Hip- “things present" (ri mapéovra) 5
pocrates Aph.i. In the Aphorism and this is no doubt the reason
it is “the attendants and exter- why in this instance the neuter
nals" (rods rapéovras ania tfoOer), plural is construed with a verb
which our author condenses into plural. Seo the text.


OF ACUTE DISEASES —BOOK IL. 431


under Phrenitis, but somewhat more liberally. Pure air,
rather cooler than otherwise, for respiration. The delight of
the sight is to be studied as to plants, painting, waters, 20 that
everything may be regarded with pleasure. The conversa-
tion of attendants cheerful; silence and cheerfulness on the
part of the patient. Smells fragrant, not calculated to prove
heavy to the senses in the head. And let the articles of food
also possess a fragrant smell, such as flour moistened with
water or vinegar; bread hot, and newly baked. The mouth
not to be very often rinsed with wine, nor is it to be altogether
rejected,

ink to be given more frequently and more copiously than
in other complaints. Food every day, light, digestible, mostly
from grain, and that which is pleasant, even if somewhat less
suitable. For, in these cases, rather than in any other, the
palate is to be gratified, since not unusually the disease is
generated in the stomach, so as to occasion resolution thereof
Abstinence or famine by no means; for the disease is sufficient
to devour up all. But if the period be already come to a,
crisis, if there be a dew on the clavicle and forehead, the —
extremities cold; the pulse very small and very frequent, as_
if creeping, and feeble in tone, the patient must take a little |
food, and partake of wine effectually. The head, too, is to
be strengthened by lotions, as also the bladder, These re-
medies have been described by me under Phrenitis. We are
to give wine, not copiously nor to satiety, for certain patients
by unseasonable repletion have died of anorexia, and inability
to eat and drink; and to many patients having a good ap-
petite, when the natural powers were dissolved, the abundant
supply of food was of no avail; the food descending, indeed,
into the stomach, but not ascending from the belly to re
erait the strength. Let the food, therefore, be diversified,
for the most part from grain, 90 as that it may be supped
rather than masticated; or if solid, let it be made easy to


swallow. Eggs, not quite consistent nor roasted whole, but
deprived of their solid portion; two or three pieces of bread
soaked in wine, at first hot; but, after these, everything cold,
unless there be latent inflammations. The wine is to be fra-
grant, and not very astringent; but by no means thick. OF
the Greek wines, the Chian or Lesbian, and such other of the
insular wines as are thin; of the Italian, the Surrentine, or
Fundan, or Falernian, or Signine, unless it be very astringent;
but of these we must reject such as are very old or very young.
It is to be given at first hot, to the amount of not less than
four cyathi, before the crisis, nor more than a hemina even if
the patient be accustomed to drink. But after these things,
having given food, if the symptoms of inflammation be past,
‘we are again to give it cold as if for a remedy of the thirst;
but this from necessity, and not by itself, but along with the
food. We must also take care that the wine do not affect the
brain; and after this, abstain. And if after an interval, he
wish to sleep, quiet is to be enforced. But if much sweat
flow, the pulse come to a stop, the voice become sharp, and
the breast lose its heat, we are to give as much wine as the
patient can drink. For those who are cold, wine is the only
hope of life. Wine, therefore, if the patient be accustomed
to it, is sometimes to be taken in drink, and sometimes food
is to be eaten with the wine, after an interval, as a respite
from the fatigue induced by the disease and the food, for
when the strength is small, they are much fatigued, even
by the act of taking food. Wherefore the patient must be
stout-hearted and courageous, and the physician must en-
courage him with words to be of good cheer, and assist with
diversified food and drink.

The other treatment is also to be applied energetically for
restraining the sweats, and for resuscitating the spark of life.
Let, therefore, an epitheme be applied to the chest on the
left mamma,—dates triturated in wine along with aloes and


OF ACUTE DISEASES.—BOOK II. 433,


mastich,—and let these things be mixed up with a cerate
composed of nard.* And if this become disagreeable, we
may apply another epitheme, made by taking the seed, and
whatever is hard out of the apples, and having bruised them
down, mix up with some fragrant meal; then we are to mix
together some of the hair of wormwood, and of myrtle, and of
acacia, and of the manna of frankincense, all sifted; which being
all rubbed up together, are to be added to the cerate of wild vine.
But if the sweat be not thereby restrained, the juice of the
wild grape is to be added to the mixture, and acacia, and
gum, and the edible part of sumach, and alum, and dates,
and the scented juice of roses. All these things along with
nard and oil of wild vine are to be applied to the chest; for
this at the same time cools and is astringent, Let him lie in
cool air, and in a house having a northern exposure; and if the
cool breeze of Boreas breathe upon him, “ it will refresh his
soul sadly gasping for breath.” The prospect should be to-
wards meadows, fountains, and babbling streams, for the
swect exhalations from them, and the delightful view, warm
the soul and refresh nature. And, moreover, it is also an
incentive to eat and to drink. But if from want one is not
fortunate enough to possess these things, we must make an
imitation of the cool breeze, by fanning with the branches of
fragrant boughs, and, if the season of spring, by strewing
the ground with such leaves and flowers asare at hand, The
coyverlet should be light and old, so as to admit the air, and
permit the exhalation of the heat of the chest; the best kind
is an old linen sheet. We are to sprinkle the neck, the region
of the clavicle and chest with flour, so that it may nourish by
its fragrance, and restrain by its dryness; and the spongy parts
of the body are to be dusted with meal, but the face with
the Samian earth, which is to be passed through a sieve; and


* No doubt the Indian nard, namely, Patrinia Jatamann, Don,
FF


OF ACUTE DISEASES. —BOOK II. 435


and vigorous; ‘and here calls to his memory the circumstances
of the disease like a dream.

But in other eases obscure fevers are left behind, and some-
times slight inflammations, and a dry tongue: they are parched,
have rigors, are enfeebled, and relaxed, in which cases there
is a conversion to marasmus; when we must not waste time
with rest and a slender diet, but have recourse to motions,
by gestation, and to friction and baths, so that the embers of
life may be roused and mended. We are to give milk, espe-
cially that of a woman who has just borne a child, and that a
male child; for such persons require nursing like new-born
children. Or if it cannot be obtained, we must give the
milk of an ass which has had « foal not long before, for such
milk is particularly thin;* and by these means the patient is to
be brought back to convalescence and his accustomed habits.


CHAPTER IY,


CURE OF CHOLERA.


In Cholera, the suppression of the discharges is‘ bad thing, for
they are undigested matters, We must, therefore, readily per~
mit them to go on, if spontaneous, or if not, promote them by
giving some tepid water to swallow, frequently indeed, but in
small quantity, so that there may be no spasmodic retchings
excited in the stomach. But if there also be tormina and
coldness of the feet, we are to rub the abdomen with hot oil,
boiled with rue and cumin, to dispel the flatulence; and we
are to apply wool. And, having anointed the feet, they are to
4 cy on the
oe Sees
the spocific gravity of milk, by Syd. Soc, Ed,
FR2


be gently rubbed, stroking them rather than pinching th
And these things are to be done up to the knees for
restoration of the heat; and the same is to be practised.
the feces pass downwards, and the bilious matters
upwards.

But if all the remains of the food have been discharg
downwards, and if bile be evacuated, and if there still b
bilious vomiting, retchings, and nausea, uneasiness and loss o
strength, we must give two or three cupfuls (eyathi) of cold
water, a8 an astringent of the belly, to stop the reflux, and i
order to cool the burning stomach; and this is to be repeatedly
done when what even has been drank is vomited. The co
water, indeed, readily gets warm in the stomach, and th
the stomach rejects it, annoyed as it is both by hot and cold
but it constantly desiderates cold drink.

But, if the pulse also fall to a low state, and become ex
ingly rapid and hurried, if there be sweat about the 4
and region of the clavicles, if it run in large drops from al
parts of the body, and the discharge from the bowels is no
restrained, and the stomach still vomits, with retchings and
deliquium animi, we must add to the cold water a sm
quantity of wine, which is fragrant and astringent, that it
may refresh the senses by its bouquet, contribute to the
strength of the stomach by its spirit, and to the
of the body by its nutritious powers. For wine i
tributed upwards over the system, s0 as to restrain the ae
and is subtil, so that when poured into the frame it strengthen
the habit, and it is strong so as to restrain the dissol
powers. We are also to sprinkle on the body some fi
and fragrant meal. But if the bad symptoms become urge
with sweating, and strainings, not only of the stomach, but
also of the nerves, and if there be hiccups; and if the feet are
contracted, if there be copious discharges from the bowel
and if the patient become dark-coloured, and the pulse ix


OF ACUTE DISEASES—BOOK. II. ar


coming to a stop, we must try to anticipate this condition be~
forehand; but if it be come on, we must give much cold water
and wine, not indeed wine slightly diluted, for fear of intoxica~
tion, and of hurting the nerves, and along with food, namely,
pieces of bread soaked in it. We are likewise to give of other
kinds of food, such as have been described by me under syn=
cope, autumnal fruit of an astringent nature, services, medlars,
quinces, or the grape.

But if everything be vomited, and the stomach can contain:
nothing, we must return again to hot drink and food, for in
certain cases the change stops the complaint; the hot things,
moreover, must be intensely so. But if none of these things
avail, we are to apply the cupping-instrument between the
shoulder-blades, and turn it below the umbilicus; but we are
to shift the cupping-instrument constantly, for it is painful
when it remains on a place, and exposes to the risk of blister-
ing. The motion of gestation is beneficial by its ventilation,
so as to recreate the spirit (pnewma), stay the food in the
bowels, and make the patient's respiration and pulse natural.

But if these symptoms increase, we must apply epithemes
over the stomach and chest; and these are to be similar to
those for syneope—dates soaked in wine, acacia, hypocistis,
mixed up with rose cerate, and spread upon a linen cloth, are
to be applied over the stomach; and to the chest we are
to apply mastich, aloe, the pulverised hair of wormwood,
with the cerate of nard, or of wild vine, as a cataplasm to the
whole chest; but if the feet and muscles be spasmodically dis-
tended, rub into them Sicyonian oil, that of must, or old oil with
a little wax; and also add in powder some castor. And if the
feet also be cold, we are to rub them with the ointment con-
taining lemnestis and euphorbium, wrap them in wool, and
rectify by rubbing with the hands. The spine also, the
tendons, and muscles of the jaws are to be anointed with the
same.


OF ACUTE DISEASES.—BOOK I. 439


he foresees that present symptoms cannot be escaped from, to
lull the patient asleep with narcotics and anasthetics,

But if the ileus arise without inflammation, from corruption
of the food or intense cold, we are to abstain from bleeding,
but at the same time to do all the other things, and procure
vomiting frequently by water, and drinking plenty of oil;
then, again, we are to procure vomiting, and produce the ex-
pulsion of the flatus downwards, by stimulant medicines,
Such a stimulant is the juice of sow-bread, and natron, or
salts. Cumin and rue are carminatives. Wherefore we must
rub in together all these things with turpentine resin, and
foment with sponges; or we must inject with these things and
oil, honey, hyssop, and the decoction of the fleshy parts of the
wild cucumber, And if feculent matter be evacuated, we
are again to inject hot oil with rue; for, if this remain in-
wardly, it proves a grateful fomentation to the bowels: and
apply to the suffering parts lotions composed of oil which has
been strongly boiled with rue and dill. And the fomentation
is also to be applied, either by means of earthen or brazen
vessels, or with millet and roasted salts. In addition to the
ordinary cataplasms, one may be made of the flour of darnel
and cumin, and the hair of hyssop and of marjoram. Cup-
ping, without the abstraction of blood, indeed, but frequently
applied, sometimes to one place, and sometimes to another—
to the epigastric region, and to the loins as far as the groins,
and behind to the ischiatic region as far as the kidneys and
spine; for it is expedient to produce revulsion of the pain by
all means. They should also get whetters (propomata') of the
decoction of cumin, or of rue, and of sison;* or along with
these some of the anodyne medicines, Of these there are very

' See Bekker's Charicles, p.248; Dioscorid. M. M. iii, 57 ; Galen, de
and Paulus Bgineta, tii. p.646.  Simpl.vii.; and Panlus Agineta,

+The Siton amomum, Stone till, p.339,
parsley, or German amomum. See


OF ACUTE DISEASES—BOOK II. 441


place. If, therefore, inflammation form anywhere elsé, itis not
remarkably acute; for it is an influx of blood that is inflamed;
but in the liver there is no necessity for its coming from
another quarter. For if any obstruction shut the outlets, the
liver becomes inflamed by being deprived of its efflux, since
the entrance of the food to the liver still continues patent;
for there is no other passage of the food but this from the
stomach and intestines to the whole body.

It is necessary, therefore, to make a copious evacuation, by
opening the veins at the elbow, and taking away blood fre~
quently, but not in large quantity at a time. Total abstinence
from food at first, but restricted dict afterwards, so that the
liver may be devoid of its customary ingesta. It is necessary,
also, by external applications to dispel the matters impacted in
the liver. Lotions, therefore, with aloe or natron are proper,
and unwashed wool isto be applied. There is need, then, of
cooling means, because the liver is inflamed by the blood; for
the blood is hot. The cataplasms, also, should be of such a
nature, consisting of the meal of darnel, or of hedge-mustard,
or of barley, or of linseed; and of liquid substances, such as
acid wine, the juice of apples, of the tendrils of the vine, or of
the leaves of the vine in season, or of the oil prepared with
it. Fomentations are to be applied on sponges, of the decoo-
tion of the fruit of bays, of the lentisk, of penny-royal, and of
irks.

When you have soothed by these means, you must apply
cupping-instrament, unusually large, so as to comprehend the
whole hypochondriac region, and make deeper incisions than
usual, that you may attract much blood. And, in certain
cases, leeches are better than scarifications; for the bite of the
animal sinks deeper, and it makes larger holes, and: hence the
flow of blood from these animals is difficult to stop. And
when the animals fall off quite full, we may apply the cup-
ping-instrument, which then attracts the matters within. And


OF ACUTE DISEASES—BOOK II. 443


CHAPTER VII.


CURE OF THE ACUTE DISEASE OF THE DORSAL VEIN
AND ARTERY.


Tue inflammation of the vena cava and large artery, which
extend along the spine, was called a species of Causus by
those of former times. For in these cases the affections are
similar: febrile heat acute and acrid, loathing of food, thirst,
restlessness; a palpitating pulsation in the hypochondriac
region and in the back, and the other symptoms described by
me under this head, Moreover, the febrile heat tends to syn-
cope, as in cases of causus. For, indeed, the liver is formed
by the roots of the veins, and the heart is the original of the
artery. You may suppose, then, that the upper portions of
these viscera are subject to fatal ailments; for itis the heart
which imparts heat to the artery, and the liver which conveys
blood to the vein; and being both mighty parts, the inflamma-
tions, likewise, which spring from them are great.
Wherefore we are to open the veins at the elbow, and
abstract a considerable amount of blood; not all at once, how-
ever, but at two or threo times, and on a different day, #0 that
the Btrength may recruit during the interval. Then we are to
apply a cupping-instrument and cataplasms to the hypochon-
drium, where is the pulsation of the artery; and also between
the scapulm, for there, too, there are pulsations. We are to
scarify unsparingly, and abstract much blood; for from this
sort of evacuation the patients are not much prone to deliquium.
The bowels, also, are apt to be unusually confined, and emol-
lient clysters are to be used to lubricate them, but not on any
account acrid ones; for they suffer an increase of fever from
brine and the melting of the natron. The juice, therefore, of
linseed and of fenugreek, and the decoction of the roots of


OF ACUTE DISEASES—BOOK IL 445


CHAPTER VIIL
CURE OF THE ACUTE DISEASE IN THE KIDNEYS.


InpLamMAation in the kidneys is of an acute nature; for the
veins passing from the liver to the kidneys are inflamed at the
same time, and with these the liver; for these veine are not
very long, but are very broad, so as to give the kidneys the
appearance of being suspended near the liver. But suppres-
sion of urine takes place along with the inflammation, thereby
contributing to the intensity of the inflammation; for the
cavity of the kidneys is filled by the overflow of the urine


which fails to escape. The same happens also with stones,


provided one larger than the breadth of the ureters be formed
in the kidneys: it then becomes seated there, and, not passing
through, it occasions a stoppage of the urine. But we will
treat of the formation of calculi among the chronic diseases;
how they may either be prevented from forming, or how they
may be broken when formed. With regard to heat and ob-
struction, such of these affections as prove quickly fatal will be
described by me in this place.

Whether it be impaction of stones, or whether it be inflam-
mation, we must open the vein at the elbow, unless particular
period of life prove an obstacle, and blood must be taken ina
full stream and in large quantity. For not only are inflam-
mations alleviated by evacuation, but also impacted stones are
slackened by the evacuation of the vessels, and thus the stones
escape during the passing of the urine. Then the parts are
to be relaxed by bathing them with oil of must or of privet,
and by fomentations and cataplasms. The herb southern-
wood, the schoenus, and calamus aromaticus, should form the
ingredients of the cataplasms. Then we are to apply
the cupping-instrument over the kidneys, in the loins, more


ad


OF ACUTE DISEASES. —BOOK IL 47


CHAPTER IX.
CURE OF THE ACUTE AFFECTIONS ABOUT THE BLADDER,


AcurE affections, resembling those of the kidneys, form also
in the bladder; namely, inflammations, ulcerations, calculi,
and the obstructions from clots, and, along with these, sup-
pression of urine end strangury. But in this part the pain is
more acute, and death most speedy; for the bladder is a broad
nerve, whereas the kidneys are like a concretion of blood, of
the same species as the liver. But, moreover, the sufferings
are most dreadful and most lamentable:


for there, by far,
On wretched men most cruel pains inflicts the god of war.


We must, therefore, straightway make an incision in the
flanks, and soothe the bladder by means of a fomentation of
much oil, with rue and dill. But if grumous blood be the
cause of the pains and stoppage of the urine, we are to give
oxymel to drink, ora little quantity of lime with honeyed-
water for the solution of the clots, and also such other things,
both herbs and seeds, as promote the secretion of urine. But
if there be danger from hemorrhage, it is to be stopped with-
out delay, more than in the other cases; for the danger from
it is not small. We must remedy it by the medicines which
stop bleeding. In this case refrigeration of the bladder is
beneficial; bathing with rose-oil and wine, and wrapping the
parts in cloths made of unwashed wool.! An epitheme may
be formed with dates soaked in wine, with pomegranate or the
juice of sumach. But if the patient is averse to the weight of


* This process is very ciroum- Coll.x.18. Dr. Daremberg trans-
stantially described by Oribasius lates it, Penrowement avec les
under the name ofesre(Anoxs. Mod. bandes.


OF ACUTE DISEASES—BOOK IL. Ho


CHAPTER X.
CURE OF THE HYSTERICAL CONVULSION,


THe uterus in women has membranes extended on both sides
at the flanks, and also is subject to the affections of an animal
in smelling; for it follows after fragrant things as if for pleasure,
and flees from fetid and disagrecable things as if for dislike,
If, therefore, anything annoy it from above, it protrudes even.
beyond the genital organs. But if any of these things be
applied to the os, it retreats backwards and upwards. Some-
times it will go to this side or to that,—to the spleen and
liver, while the membranes yield to the distension and con-
traction like the sails of a ship.

It suffers in this way also from inflammation; and it pro-
trades more than usual in this affection and in the swelling of
its neck; for inflammation of the fundus inclines upwards; but.
if downwards to the feet, it protrudes externally, a trouble-
some, painful and unseemly complaint, rendering it difficult
to walk, to lie on the side or on the back, unless the woman
suffer from inflammation of the feet. But if it mount up-
wards, it very speedily suffocates the woman, and stops the
respiration as if with a cord, before she feels pain, or can
scream aloud, or can call upon the spectators, for in many
cases the respiration is first stopped, and in others the
speech. It is proper, then, in these cases, to call the physi~
cian quickly before the patient die. Should you fortunately
arrive in time and ascertain that it is inflammation, you must
open a vein, especially the one at the ankle, and pursue the
other means which prove remedial in suffocation without in-
flammation: ligatures of the hands and feet so tight as to
induce torpor; smelling to fetid substances—liquid pitch, hairs
and wool burnt, the extinguished flame of a lamp, and castor,

Go


OF ACUTE DISEASES.—BOOK I. 46h


countenance, plucking of the hair, with bawling aloud, in
order to arouse. Should the patient partially recover, she is
to be seated in a decoction of aromatics, and fumigated from
below with fragrant perfumes. Also before a meal, she is to
drink of castor, and a little quantity of the hiera with the
castor. And if relieved, she is to bathe, and at the proper
season is to return to her accustomed habits; and we must look
to the woman that her menstrual discharges flow freely.


CHAPTER XI.
CURE OF SATYRIASIS.


INFLAMMATION of the nerves in the genital organs occasions
erection of the member with desire and pain in re venerea:
there arise spasmodic strainings which at no time abate, since
the calamity is not soothed by the coition. They also become
maddened in understanding, at first as regards shamelessness
in the open performance of the act; for the inability to refrain
renders them impudent; but afterwards. ....... when they
have recovered, their understanding becomes quite settled.
For all these causes, we must open the vein at the elbow,
and also the one at the ankle, and abstract blood in large
quantity and frequently, for now it is not unseasonable to
induce deliquium animi, so as to bring on torpor of the
understanding and remission of the inflammation, and also
mitigation of the heat about the member; for it is much blood
which strongly enkindles the heat and audacity; it is the
pabulum of the inflammation, and the fuel of the disorder of
the understanding, and of the confusion. The whole body is
to be purged with the medicine, the hiera; for the patients
not only require purging, but also a gentle medication, both
oG2


OF ACUTE DISEASES—BOOK II. 453


ripe pompion. Wine and fleshes to be used sparingly until
convalescence have made considerable progress; for wine im-
parts warmth to the nerves, soothes the soul, recalls pleasure,
engenders semen, and provokes to venery.

Thus far have I written respecting the cures of acute dis-
eases. One must also be fertile in expedients, and not require
to apply his mind entirely to the writings of others, Acute
diseases are thus treated of, so that you may avail yourself of
what has been written of them, in their order, either singly
or all together.


oF
ARETZUS, THE CAPPADOCIAN,


ON THE


CURE OF CHRONIC DISEASES


BOOK I.


CONTENTS.

omar.

Tae PREFACE . . . . . L
Cong or CEPHALZA . . : . I.
Core or VerTico . . . . UL
Core or Epuersr . . . a Iv.
Cure or MELANCHOLY . . a v.
Core or Mania * ul = * VL
Core or Paratysis * cj = a VIL.
Core or PaTawis * ¥ ie e VII.
Cone or Empvema * * * bd 1x.
Core oF AsscrssEs of THE Lunes * * x.
Core or AsTHMA = * * * * XL
Cong or PNEUMODES * ‘3 = id XII.
Core or Tae Liver * J bd ig xu.
Core oF THE SPLEEN * ‘ ° * XIV.
Core or Jaunpicn * ‘3 = * Xv.
© ° bs XVI.


Cure or CacHExia *


OF CHRONIC DISEASES.—BOOK I. 469


we are to scarify unsparingly, for the purpose of attracting the
redundant fluid and of making an incision in the deep-seated
parts. For remedial means applied even to the bones are bene-
ficial in cephalwa. When the wounds are cicatrised, we are to
excise a portion of the arteries;’ (of these there are two, one
behind the ears, at a little distance from them, being obvious
from their pulsations; the others in front of the ear, and close
to it, for they lie close to the antitragus; and these also are
discovered by their pulsations); we are to incise the larger
ones at the bones, for they afford relief Adjacent to them are
others, very slender, which there is no benefit from excising.
The mode of operating has been described under operative
surgery. This is the great remedy in cephalea, epilepsy,
vertigo, and, in fine, in all the diseases of the head.

In all cases we are to bring off phlegm, first evacuating the
bowels, either by a purgative draught, or by a clyster; and
sometimes from the nostrils by sternutatories; and sometimes
from the mouth by sislogogues. Among the kinds of sternu-
tatories are pepper, the root of soapwort, and the testicle of
the beaver; these may all be used together; having levigated
and sifted them,-we are to blow the powder in, either with a
reed or the thick stalk of a goose quill. Euphorbium is more
active and stronger than these when mixed with any of them.
It is also mixed up with the oils, such as gleucinum, the
Sicyonian, or the ointment from storax. It is made into a
liquid form as an injection, and it is injected by means of a
nasal pipe; the instrument consists of two pipes united
together by one outlet, so that we can inject by both at the
same time. For to dilate each nostril separately is a thing
which could not be borne, as the head gets quickly filled, and
thus contracts a sharp pain. The medicines which evacuate
phlegm from the mouth are, mustard, the granum cnidium,


' Soc Paulus Aiginota, b. vi. 5,


OF CHRONIC DISEASES—BOOK L 461

Whether the pain remain, or cease after these things, we
must go on to the conclusion of the system of treatment;
for the mischief is apt to return, and frequently lurks in the
seat of the disease. Wherefore, having removed the hair
with a razor (and this also is beneficial to the head), we are to
burn with heated cauteries, superficially, down to the muscles;
or if you wish to carry the burning to the bone, you must
ayoid the muscles, for the muscles when burnt occasion con-
yulsions. And if you burn superficially you must foment the
part with plenty of fragrant sweet wine, along with rose-oil;
4 linen cloth wetted with this is to be spread over the eschars
until the third day. But, if the eschars be deep, having
pounded the hairy leaves of leeks with salt, and spread upon
linen rag, we are to apply it. On the third day, we are to
put the cerate from rose-oil upon the superficial cschars, and
lentil with honey upon the deeper. The medicinal applications
to be made to the wound will be described in another place.
Some have made an incision in the skin above the forehead,
at the coronal suture, down to the bone, and having scraped it,
or cut out a portion down to the diploe, have afterwards
brought the part to incarnation. Some have perforated
the bone, even to the meningx. These are bold remedies,
but are to be used, if, after all, the cephalwa continue,
and the patient be courageous, and the tone of the body

*

But, if they progress gradually, they are to take exercises
in the erect state of the body for the benefit of the chest and
shoulders; the chironomy,S the throwing of the halferes; leap~
ing, and the well-regulated contortions of the body accom=


* On this heroic method of treat- reader to consult the part of Do
ing diseases of the head, see Paulus Haen’s works there referred to.
Azgineta, tii, pp.248-250, and 258, en Orlane


trial of it, I would recommend the


OF CHRONIC DISEASES —BOOK 1 463


as are old are bad; of the recently killed, that of the hen is
good; of birds, the wood pigeon, the common pigeon, and
such others as are not very fat; the extremities of the swine;
the roasted hare; that of the ox and of the sheep is incrassant
and fills the head; the kid is not altogether bad. Milk and
cheese occasion headache. Of fishes, those found among
rocks, and those things that are best in each particular
country, Of potherbs, such as promote the urinary and alvine
discharges, the mallow, the blite, the beet, and asparagus; but
the kale is also acrid. Among raw articles, the lettuce is the
best of all. Roots are bad, even when boiled, such as radishes,
navews, and parsnips, which are diuretic, but occasion reple-
tion; the garden parsnip indeed is flatulent and swells up
the stomach. Wine which is white, thin, and sweet, is to be
admitted, if it have some astringency, so as not to bind the
bowels, All articles of the dessert occasion headache, except
dates of every species. In autumn the fig and grape are
wholesome, and whatever other fruit is very good at any
particular geason. Repletion of all things, even of such as are
proper, is bad; and so, also, indigestion is bad, Lassitude is
less injurious than indigestion, but still it is hurtful. The
morning walk after evacuation of the bowels, but so as not to
affect the breathing nor induce weariness; and it is also very
good after supper. Prolonged gestation, not exposed to wind
or sun, is good for the head; but the dog-star is bad for it.
Sexual intercourse is a self-inflicted evil to the head and
nerves. A journey from a cold to a warmer climate, or from
as humid to a drier, is proper; also a sea-voyage, and passing
one's life at sea; and if one lives by the sea-side it is a good
thing to bathe in the sea-water, to tumble on the sands, and to
reside close by the ses.

The remedies for Aeterocrania are the same; for it is well to
apply toa portion of the head the same remedies as are proper
for the whole of it. In all cases in which the disease is not


OF CHRONIC DISEASES.—BOOK L 465


done in the order described under cephalwa, except that the
juice of sow-bread or of pimpernel is to be used as an injec-
tion into the nose.

But when you have exhausted all the remedies for cephalwa,
the more violent means which are applicable for vertigo are
to be used; we must use the emetics after supper, and those
from radishes, which is also required as a preparation for the
hellebore; for the stomach is to be trained beforehand to the
more violent emetics. But the phlegm now becomes thinner,
and fit for solution in the hellebore. There are several modes
of giving the hellebore; to the stronger sort of patients it is to
be given to the size of a sesame,' or a little larger; or, in slices,
with washed chondrus or lentil, the dose, about two drams.
In the case of feebler and more slender persons, the decoction
with honey, to the amount of two or three spoonfuls, is to be
given. The manner of preparing it will be described else~
where. In the interval between each remedy, the patient is to
be supported, in order that he may be able to endure what is
to be given in the intermediate periods.

‘The patient is to be assisted during the paroxysms thus:—
The legs are to be bound above the ankles and knees; and the
wrists, and the arms below the shoulders at the elbows. The
head is to be bathed with rose-oil and vinegar; but in the oil
‘we must boil wild-thyme, cow-parsnip, ivy, or something such,
Friction of the extremities and face. Smelling to vinegar,
penny-royal, and mint, and these things with vinegar. Sepa-
ration of the jaws, for sometimes the jaws are locked together;
the tonsils to be tickled to provoke vomiting; for by the dis-
charge of phlegm they are sometimes roused from their gloom.
These things, then, are to be done, in order to alleviate the
paroxysm and dispel the gloomy condition.


+ The sesaimum orientale, or oily-grain of the East, See Appendix to
the Edinburgh Groek Lexicon.
HEH


OF CHRONIC DISEASES—B0OK L 467


is to be gently performed for the restoration of the heat, for
plumpness, and strength. Then the head is to be rubbed while
the patient stands erect below a person of higher stature than
himself. Gymnastics skilfully performed which tend to disten-
sion of the neck, and strong exercise of the hands. Itis proper,
also, by raising the head, to exercise the eyes at chironomy, or
at throwing the quoit, or contending at boxing. The exercise
both with the large and the small ball is bad, for the rolling of
the head and eyes, and the intense fixing of them, occasion
vertigo. Leaping and running are very excellent; for every~
thing that is keen is beneficial to the limbs, and gives tong to
the general system# The cold bath is better than no bath at
all; no bath at all is better than the hot bath: the cold bath is
very powerful as an astringent, incrassant, and desiccant of the
head, which is the condition of health; while the warm bath
is most powerful to humectate, relax, and create mistiness; for
these are the causes of disease of the head, and such aleo are
south winds, which occasion dulness of hearing. There should
be rest after exercises, to allay the perturbation, Pinching of
the head, even to the extent of producing excoriation of the
skin.

Whetters made of water, or of wine diluted with ‘water,
should be given before a meal. Lunch should be slight: laxa-
tives from the capillary leaves of pot-herbs,—of mallow, of beet,
and of blite. A condiment of a stomachic nature, which is plea-
sant to the mouth, laxative of the bowels, and not calculated to
induce heaviness of the head, is made of thyme, or of savory,
or of mustard. Eggs, hot in winter, and cold in summer,
stripped of their shell, not roasted; olives, dates, pickled meat
in season. Granulated spelt washed, with some of the sweet
things, s0 as to give it a relish, is to be chosen; and, with


? For an account of most of the our author, see Paulus Agineta,
anciont exercises mentioned by ti p.22—27, Syd. Soc. Edit.
Hu


a]


OF CHRONIC DISEASES.—BOOK I. 469


every one what is dreadful and disgusting in his own case. It
is best that the method of cure should follow the alleviation of
nature, when, with the changes of age, she changes greatly
the man. For if the diet akin to the ailment, and on which
the disease subsisted, be changed, the disease no longer seizes
tho man, but takes its departure along with that in which it
delighted.t

If, then, it seize on the head, it settles there; to it, there-
fore, we are to do those things which have been described by
me under cephalwa, regarding the abstraction of blood (and
also the purgings) from the veins at the elbow, the straight
vein at the forehead, and by cupping; but the abstraction is
not to be carried the length of deliquium animi; for deli-
quium has a tendency to induce the disease; we are to open
all the ordinary arteries before and behind the ears, and we are
also to practise purgings, which are more potent than all these
things, by the purgative hiera and those medicines which
draw off phlegm from the head; but the medicines should be
particularly powerful, for the habit of such persons renders
them tolerant of pains, and their goodness of spirits and. good
hopes render them strong in endurance. It is necessary, also,
to apply heat to the head, for it is effectual. In the first
place, we must perforate the bone as far as the diploc, and
then use cerates and cataplasms until the meninx separate
from the bone. The exposed bones are to be perforated with
the trepan if still any small portion prevent its spontaneous
removal, when the meninx there is found black and thick-
ened; and when, having gone through the process of putrefac-
tion and cleansing under the bold treatment of the physician,
the wound comes to complete cicatrization, the patients escape
from the disease. In all cases we are to use rubefacient appli-
cations to the head; namely, the common ones, as described by


+ See Hippocrat. Apb. ii. 46.


OF CHRONIC DISEASES.—BOOK I. 47


eaten, remove the disease; but I have never tried these things.
However, I have seen persons holding a cup below the wound
of a man recently slaughtered, and drinking a draught of the
blood! 0 the present, the mighty necessity, which compels
one to remedy the evil by such a wicked abomination! And
whether even they recovered by this means no one could tell
me for certain. There is another story of the liver of a man
having been eaten. However, I leave these things to be
described by those who would bear to try such means.

It is necessary to regulate the diet, in respect to everything
that is to be done either by others or by the patient himself.
Now nothing must be omitted, nor anything unnecessarily
done; and more especially we must administer everything
which will do the slightest good, or even that will do no
harm; for many unseemly sights, sounds, and tastes, and mul-
titudes of smells, are tests of the disease. Everything, there-
fore, is to be particularly attended to, Much sleep induces
fatness, torpor, and mistiness of the senses, but moderate sleep
is good. An evacuation of the bowels, especially of flatulence
and phlegm, is very good after sleep. Promenades long, straight,
without tortuositics, in a well ventilated place, under trees of
myrtle and laurel, or among acrid and fragrant herbs, such as
calamint, penny-royal, thyme, and mint; so much the better
if wild and indigenous, but if not, among cultivated; in
these places, prolonged gestation, which also should be
straight. It is a good thing to take journeys, but not by a
river side, so that he may not gaze upon the stream (for the
current of a river occasions vertigo), nor where he may see
anything turned round, such as a rolling-top, for he is too weak
to preserve the animal spirits i) stendy, which are,
therefore, whirled about in a circle, and this circular motion is
provocative of vertigo and of epilepsy. After the gestation,
a gentle wali, then rest so as to induce tranquillity of the
agitation created by the gestation. After these, the exercises


OF CHRONIC DISEASES —BOOK 1 473
fallen into a mistake respecting coition; for seeing that the
physical change to manhood produces a beneficial effect, they
have done violence to the nature of children by unseasonable
coition, as if thus to bring them sooner to manhood. Such
persons are ignorant of the spontancous law of nature by
which all cures are accomplished; for along with every age
she produces that which is proper for it in due seasons, At a
given time there is the maturity of semen, of the beard, of
hoary hairs; for on the one hand what physician could alter
Nature's original change in regard to the semen, and, on the
other, the appointed time for each? But they also offend
against the nature of the disease; for being previously injured
by the unseasonableness of the act, they are not possessed of
seasonable powers at the proper commencement of the age
for coition.

The patients ought to reside in hot and dry places, for the
disease is of a cold and humid nature.


CHAPTER V.
CURE OF MELANCHOLY.


In cases of melancholy, there is need of consideration in
regard to the abstraction of blood, from which the disease
arises, but it also springs from cacochymy in no small amount
thereof. When, therefore, the disease seizes a person in early
life, and during the season of spring we are to open the
median vein at the right elbow, so that there may be a
seasonable flow from the liver; for this viscus is the fountain
of the blood, and the source of the formation of the bile,
both which are the pabulum of melancholy. We must open
a vein even if the patients be spare and have deficient blood,
but abstract little, so that the strength may feel the evacuation


OF CHRONIC DISEASES—BOOK II, 475


wise, from alienation of the senses have perverted feelings. It
is necessary, then, especially to cure the stomach as being
disordered of itself, and from black bile being lodged in it.
Wherefore we must give to drink continuously of the juice of
wormwood from a small amount to a cupful (cyathus), for it
prevents the formation of bile, Aloe also is 2 good thing, for
it brings down the bile into the lower gut. If, then, the
disease be of recent origin, and the patient be not much
changed, he will require no other treatment in these ciroum-
stances. There is a necessity, however, for the remaining
part of the regimen to the restoration of the habits, and the
complete purification of the affection, and the strengthening of
the powers, so that the diseases may not relapse. I will explain
afterwards the course of life during convalescence.

But if the disease, having yielded a little to these means,
should be seen relapsing, there will be need of greater
remedies. Let there, then, be no procrastination of time, but
if the disease appear after suppression of the catamenial dis-
charge in women, or the hemorrhoidal flux in men, we must
stimulate the parts to throw off their accustomed evacuation.
But if it is delayed and does not come, the blood having
taken another direction, and if the disease progress rapidly,
we must make evacuations, beginning from the ankles, And
if you cannot get away from thie place so much blood as you
require, you must also open the vein at the elbow, And
after pursuing the restorative process for three or four days,
we are to give the purgative medicine, the hiera. Then we
are to apply the cupping-instrument to the middle parts of
the body, bringing it near to the liver, and do those things
which speedily prove effectual; for melancholy does not yield
to small remedies, and, if long continued, it remains fixed in
a spot, And if the disease lodge in all "parts of the
body,—in the senses, the understanding, the blood, and the
bile,—and if it seize on the nerves, and turn to an incurable


OF CHRONIC DISEASES.—BOOK 1. a7


flesh and of his strength, all traces of the disease become era-
dicated. For the strength of nature produces health, but her
weakness, disease. Let the patient, then, proceed to the pro~
coss of restoration by frequenting the natural hot baths; for the
medicinal substances in them are beneficial, such as bitumen,
or sulphur, or alum, and many others besides these which are
possessed of remedial powers. For, after the parching heat of
the disease, and the annoyance of the treatment, dilution is a
good thing. Moreover, rare and soft flesh most readily throws
off the disease; but in melancholy the flesh is dry and dense.
‘An oily liniment, by gentle friction, with much oil containing
Para aoe washed bread, with something sweet, ag
the Cretan must, and the Scybelitic from Pamphylia, or wine
and honey which have been mixed up together for some time,
Eggs, both cold and hot, which have been stripped of their
shells. Of fleshes, such as are not fatty, and are detergent. Of
swine, the feet and the parts about the head. Of fowls, the
wings, which are not fatty. OF wild animals, hares, goats, and
deer. Of autumnal fruits, whatever is excellent in its kind.
When the stomach rejects the food, we must consider before-
hand that what is taken be not vomited up. Wherefore,
before giving food, we are to administer honeyed-water to the
amount of half a cyathus, which, being drunk, is vomited up
again for cleansing the stomach. For, in this way, the
food remains in the stomach. Medicines which are purga-
tive of the necessary discharges are—the fruit of the pine, of
the nettle, and seeds of the coccalus,! and pepper; bitter
almonds; and let honey give it consistence. But if you wish
to dry, the best thing is myrrh, or the root of iris, the medi~
cine from vipers, and that of Vestinus, of Mithridates, and
* Galon identifies the xdéxeaor to make them distinct substances,
of Hippocrates (de vict, Acut) with There being several spocies of the
révos, or the fruit of the pinus pine tribe, it is not always easy to


478 ON THE CURE


many others, For the epithemes, the materiel of ca
plasms, melilot and poppies, and the tear (gum?) of turp
tine, and hyssop, and the oil of roses, or of vine-flowe
wax should give consistence to all these. Liniments
oil; gestation, promenades, and whatever promotes the rep
duction of flesh, and the strength of the powers, and the res


ration of nature to its pristine state of * *
* * * * * * *
* * * * * * *
* * * * * * *


CHAPTER VIII
CURE OF PHTHISIS.


..... sina ship and inacalm. And if the patient ha
it fortunately at his command, gestation and living on the t
will be beneficial. For the sea-water contributes somethi:
desiccant to the ulcers. After the gestation, having reste
the patient is now to be anointed with fat oil. After t
frictions .......... . from a small dose gradually 1
to five or six heminz, or even much more; or if not, as muc
as one can, for often this alone sufficeth in place of all foo
For milk is pleasant to take, is easy to drink, gives sol
nourishment, and is more familiar than any other food :
one from a child. In colour it is pleasant to see: as
medicine it seems to lubricate the windpipe, to clean, as
with a feather, the bronchi, and to bring off phlegm, improv
the breathing, and facilitate the discharges downwards. 1
ulcers it is a sweet medicine, and milder than anythin
else. If one, then, will only drink plenty of this, he wi
not stand in need of anything else. For it is a goo
thing that, in a disease, milk should prove both food an
medicine. And, indeed, the races of men called Galact


OF CHRONIC DISEASES. —BOOK I. 479


phagi use no food from grain, But yet it is a very good thing
to use porridge, pastry, washed groats of spelt (alica), and the
other edibles prepared with milk. And if other food is
required, let it be of the same nature, as the juice of ptisan,
well-concocted and plain; but it is to be so seasoned as that it
may become easy to swallow; or if anything be added as a
seasoner, let it be something medicinal, as the hair (capillary
leaves?) of lovage, penny-royal, mint, and a little of salts,
vinegar, or honey. If the stomach suffer from dyspepsia, this
is to be given; but if there be no such necessity, ptisan is of
all things the best. One may also change the ptisan for alica,
for this is less flatulent, and of easier digestion, and becomes
detergent if, when used in the ptisan, the grain be bruised.
When the sputa are unusually fluid, the bean cleanses tho
ulcers, but is flatulent. The pea and the pisum ochrys, in so
far as they are less flatulent, are in the same degree inferior as
cleansers of the ulcers. Forming a judgment, then, from pre-
sent symptoms, select accordingly. Their condiments are to
be such as described respecting the ptisan. Eggs from the
fire, in a liquid state, but hot; they are best when newly laid,

* *


before the * * * *

* * * * * * * *

* * * * * * * *
CHAPTER XIU.


CURE OF THE LIVER.


. + in the liver the ulcer may be dangerous. But the most
troublesome is a defluxion of pus on the stomach, when it
makes the stomach its route in the course of being distributed
upwards, For the food is the cause of life, but the stomach is


OF CHRONIC DISEASES.—BOOK I. 481


vomit. It is necessary, also, in the other defluxions, to have
especial care of the stomach, for it is the passage to all sorts of
medicine. It is necessary to keep in mind the liver, which is
the root of the ulcerations But if the defluxion be to the
bladder, we are to promote it by diuretics, as the root of
asarabacca, valerian, maiden-hair, spignel, in drinks; for these
things are to be given to drink in honeyed-water. The com-
pound medicine of Vestinus is also very good, and that from
alkekengi, and such others as from trial have acquired reputa-
tion. But if you determine to draw off the discharge by the
bowels, you can do this with milk, especially that of the ass, or
otherwise of the goat or sheep. Give, also, juices of a lubricat-
ing nature and detergent, as the juice of ptisan; condiments,
as pepper, ginger, and lovage. In a word, with regard to
every method of diet in any case of abscess tending to rupture,
the food should consist of things having wholesome juices, of
savoury things, things of easy digestion, eee sme
grande retires neh Maret ge * *


* * * * * *


CHAPTER XIV.
CURE OF THE SPLEEN,


Resoturron of scirrhus of the spleen is not easy to accom-
plish. But if the diseases engendered by it come on, as dropsy
and cachexia, the ailment tends to an incurble condition

. the physician to cure the scirrhus; we must try
‘hen bo avect Rohan leer on, and to remove it when
just commencing; and attend to the inflammations, and if the


See thenote on thotext. The improved by reading “blood-vea-
senso would bo evidently much sels” in place of “ulcerations,”
it


482 ON THE CURE OF CHRONIC DISEASES—BOOK 1,


we are to use the remedies described by me a1


the acute diseases. But if, while you are doing everythin
the scirrhus remain in an inflammatory state, you must
also the means resembling fire to soften the hardness; lotio
of vinegar, oil, and honey; but, instead of wool, use
presses of linen; add to them, in powder, nut-ben sifted;
to the most emollient cataplasms * * *

* * * * * co *


OF
ARETZUS, THE CAPPADOCIAN,
z ON THE


THERAPEUTICS OF CHRONIC DISEASES


BOOK IL.
CONTENTS.

cur.
Cone or Drorsy * * bs = L
Cons or Diaperes . . . . IL
Cong oF THE AFFECTIONS ABOUT THE KIDNEYS UL
CURB OF THOSE IN THE BLADDER * * Iv.
Conn or GoNORRH@A . . . . v.
Couns oF SromacH AFFECTIONS . VI.
Core oF THE CarLIAO AFFECTION . VIL.
Cone oF Coxics * * * * VI.
Core or Dysentzrr * * * i} x
Cons or Lientmpy = * id = bol x.
Core or Hyermics * sg = * xi.
Cone or Apraairis AND Iscuiatio Disease . xi.
Couns oy ELEPHANTIASIS . . . XII.


Se 22 eee oe eee
ems ee ec Se oe oe ee
¢ . peru ees me eee
6 wfenge a wee - So Ss oe = seo
deere ¢ Soe 2 eee sew es
=e ew eee ee es: See
Aen. Such mpe RICE ze Soest ore oe
we amtahie ere oC Doe es eto ee or She wt
elle @ oe ee ee eee
Nemes tence te ee wo = Ee Seer
deme Woe nemeccr. ror eve eres et ce se
we opthees the ee me ee Se eee
paeo SF Teme werk ots et eat Se et rs ‘ee
her pus wth Tastiex mt Gees Gore 3 cee Sree -
tact oY eee wih woe mut te et eee cE we
whe uee wf eee md ore et her “oe
nanan

ant he wor weet we ico & 2 miet won em
fue Tu Sot os Se mike mot wah Ee ei
ipsa J wer aie, ele See we oe
Me temaen. mi ces ton Iie Timed. no mie ou oe
tA mt dear rwry he uder Somows: br duct = =e
dower yy wide eings Bae woe warn & = te
ine wtelagens ant eviing, pes Seneieiad be mince
change wt gt emyerament: Sor co Sees se
wink i ee Und, whieh ale 2 Some The empom
walieinen ste tha same, wt that from vipers, the Michraces
that fern sntaren freit, and the others which are waefal
Auqay. Vout the whole regimen and couse of Efe is ti


ments,


-m ON THE THERAPEUTICS

prevent refrigeration indeed, and procure resuscitation of t
heat. Such medicines also the patient must drink for astri
gency. In the first place, there is need... =... t
juice of plaintain with water made astringent by myrtles
quinces. The stone of an unripe grape is also a very go
thing, and wines of a very astringent character. Then t
medicines which warm the bowels, namely euch potions as 1
made with ginger, and pepper, and the fruit of the wi
parsley which is found among rocks, and the very digesti
medicine made from the reptiles the vipers. But if it dc
not yield at all or slightly to these means, use emetics fro
radishes; and if you will put into them the root of the whi
hellebore, for a single night, the purging will thus becor
very strong, for purging away and removing the cold humot
and for kindling up the heat.

And likewise the diet and manner of life should be mod
rate. Sleep by night, by day walks, vociferation, gestati
among myrtles, bays, or thyme; for the exhalation and re
piration of such things prove a digestive remedy. Gymnastic
friction, chironomy, exercises of the chest and abdomen t
throwing the halteres. Propomata; for bread alone contribut
little towards strength. After these, rubefacients, walking


* * * * * * *

* * * * * * *

* * * * * * *
CHAPTER XII.


CURE OF ARTHRITIS AXD ISCHIATIC DISEASES.


+++... from food and radishes frequently. Then to ha:
recourse to the hellebore. The diet after these the same


OF CHRONIC DISEASES—BOOK It. 493
and the cold sea-bath. These in an especial manner are the
common remedies in all arthritic diseases, for in gouty cases
hellebore is the great remedy, yet only in the first attacks of
the affection. But if it has subsisted for a long time already,
and also if it appear to have been transmitted from the patient's
forefathers, the disease sticks to him until death. But for the
paroxysms in the joints, we are to do this: let unscoured
wool from the sheep be applied; bathe with rose-oil and wine;
and in certain case sponging with oxycrate has done good.
Then as a cataplasm, bread with the cooling parts of gourd
and pompion, and simple cucumber, and the herb plantain
and rose leaves. And the sideritis! mitigates pain, along
with bread, also lichen, and the root of comfrey, and the herb
cinque-foil, and the species of horehound having narrow leaves;
of this the decoction makes a fomentation which allays pain,
and it forms « cataplasm with crumbs of bread or barley-meal,
And the part of citrons which is not fit for food, is excellent
with toasted barley-meal, Dried figs and almonds with some
of the flours. These form the maferiel for refrigeration; and,
indeed, this is sometimes beneficial to one, and sometimes to
another. In certain cases calefacients are beneficial, and the
same is sometimes useful to another. It is said that the fol-
lowing application is powerfully anodyne; let a goat feed on
the herb iris, and when it is filled therewith, having waited
until the food it has taken be digested in the stomach, let the
goat be slaughtered, and bury the fect in feces within the
belly. The medicines for the disease are innumerable; for
the calamity renders the patients themselves expert druggists.
But the medicines of the physicians will be described in works
devoted to these things.


+ Sideritie scordivides,


|


OF CHRONIC DISEASES. —BOOK Il. 495,


give the hiera in a potion not once only, but let everything
be done several times after recovery and recurrence. And let
the other medicinal purgation by the food be practised; and
let the treatment be that which I have described under
Ischiatic disease, and let the patient drink undivided milk—
and that in great quantity—for opening the bowels. Let it
receive the fifth part of water, so that the whole of the milk
may pass through. They are quickly to be treated with
emetics, at first those given when fasting, next, those after
food, then those by radishes. Let all things be done frequently
and continuously; administering the hellebore at all seasons,
but especially in spring and autunm, giving it every alternate
day, and again next year. And if the disease has acquired
strength, we must give whatever liquid medicines any one has
had experience of; for it is e good thing to administer medi-
cines frequently as a remedy. And I will now describe those
with which I am acquainted. Mix one cyathus of cedriat
and two of brassica, and give. Another: Of the juice of
sideritis* of trefoil one cyathus, of wine and honey two
cyathi. Another: Of the shavings of an elephant’s tooth
one dram with wine, to the amount of two cyathi. But like-
wise the flesh of the wild reptiles, the vipers, formed into
pastils,* are taken in a draught. From their heads and tail
we must cut off to the extent of four fingers’ breadth, and
boil the remainder to the separation of the back-bones; and
having formed the flesh into pastils, they are to be cooled in
the shade; and these are to be given in a draught in like
manner as the squill, The vipers, too, are to be used as a
seasoner of food at supper, and are to be prepared as fishes,
But if the compound medicine from vipers be at hand, it is to


1 Probably gum werniz. Soo divides L. Sco Appandix to Dun
Paulus Aginota, t iii. p. 452 bar's Lexicon in wvee.
* Or Troches, See Paulus Aigi-
1 Probably the sideritis sor nota t.iii-p. 635.


OF CHRONIC AFFECTIONS.—BOOK. IT. — 497


tinued baths are appropriate for humectating the body, and
for dispelling the depraved humours.

‘The food should be pure, wholesome, of easy digestion, and
plain; and the regimen every way well adjusted, as regards
sleeping, walking, and places of residence. As to exercises,
running, tumbling, and the exercise with the leather-bag;’ all
these with well-regulated intensity, but not so as to induce
lassitude. Let vociferation also be produced, as being a sea-
sonable exercise of the breath (pneuma). The clothing should
be clean, not only to gratify the sight, but because filthy things
irritate the skin. While fasting, the patients are to drink the
wine of wormwood. Barley-bread is a very excellent thing,
and a sausage in due season, and a little of mallows or cabbage
half-boiled, with soup of cumin. For supper, the root of
parsnip and granulated spelt (alice), with wine and old honey
adapted for the mixing; and such marine articles as loosen the
bowels—the soups of limpets, oysters, sea-urchins, and such
fishes as inhabit rocky places. And of land animals, such as
are wild, as the hare and the boar. Of winged animals, all
sorts of partridges, wood-pigeons, domestic-pigeons, and the
best which every district produces. Of fruits, those of sum-
mer; sweet wines are preferable to such as are strong. The
natural hot-baths of a sulphureous nature, a protracted resi-
dence in the waters, and a sea-voynge.

Courses of Hellebore :—White hellebore is purgative of the
‘upper intestines, but the black of the lower; and the white is
not only emetic, but of all purgatives the most powerful, not
from the quantity and variety of the excretion—for this cholera
can accomplish—nor from the retching and violence attending
the vomitings, for in this respect sea-sickness is preferable;
but from a power and quality of no mean description, by
which it restores the sick to health, even with little purging


* Seo Oribasius Mod. Collect, vi.33, and Paulus Aginots, ti. p, 24.
KE


498 THERAPEUTICS OF CHRONIC


and small retching. But also of all chronic diseases
firmly rooted, if all other remedies fail, this is the only
For in power the white hellebore resembles fire; and wh
fire accomplishes by burning, still more does hellebore —
by penetrating internally—out of dyspnaa inducing fn
of breathing; out of paleness, good colour; and out of en
tion, plumpness of flesh.


500


Axripores, uses of, in renal calculi,
446.


Yirtuos and uses of certain, 470,

those of Symphon and Philo, 489,

uses of several, in melancholy,
ATT, 478

ar ied Vestinus in gonorrhea,


ane | aR from vipers in
epilepsy, 470.
‘Apna, stunted atthe left side of the
vena cava, and sympathises
with it, 281.
symptoms of the, inflamed, 28t.
treatment of, 443.
Avurix, description of these ulcers,
254,


Arornexr, its nature, 305-7.
from a blow, 307, 394; from a
fall, 308.
generally indaced by excess in
cating, 3
treatment of, 394.
Axrmnioroxy, useful in cephalea,
vertigo, epilepsy, and most
Uisonses of the head, 459, 464.
Axreny, the dorsal, affected in in-
flammation “of the vena cava,
443.
this affection held to be a species
of causus, 443.
known by its peculiar symptoms,
443,
the origin of arteries, the heart,


Anruniris, 4 general pain of the
joints, S62.
wien to be treated by refriger=
ants, 365,
whien to be treated by calefacionts,
365,
a general affection of the nerves,
363.
its cause not ascertained, 363.
how it spreads, 364, 365.
treatment of, 492, 493.
Ascrres, the nature of,
ite symptoms, 334,
how distinguished from cachexia,
385,
how distinguished
panites, 336,
the fluid in, the
n, 334,
Asruma, a torm sometimes used in a
general sense, 316.
nature of the diseaso properly 80
~callod, 316.


from tym-


INDEX.


in certain cases not d
air.
Avromx, occasions affections o!
bladder, 283.
oceasions calculus, 343,
inflammation of the
279.


Barns; the hot, their powers,
the hot, hurtful im vertiga,
the cold, their powers, 467,
483,


bituminous,
choly, 477.
useful in 6h
Bie, signifies an
yellow, vomiting of, in
indicates mania, 296.
Vlack, indicates melancholy,
discharged upwards in


298,
medicines which purge,


melan 0a, 475,
hiera of aloes, 477.
ainthium, of WORM!


Brappre, a white and eold nerve
membrane), 285,
affords the passage to pusin n
‘ofthe liver, spleen, snd kidt
31a.
affected in arthritis, 364,
colic, 352.
inflamed by the drinking of
tharides or bupmestis, 255.
alto by rubefacients con
ing cantharides, 470.


608


Phihisis continual
tom cece of the Ings, after
Seton


from Gamat ati amps


oes hesdsaes OF eee spleen, 323.
its symptoms, 310, 311.
treatment of, 478, 479.
ies of, without ulceration of
Iungs, 310.
of the pupil of the eye, 307.
Parnof, its nature, 309; and peculiar
ms, 310.

Pua, abe the exerelse, objection:
able in vertigo, 467,

Praoee, the Athenian, 250,

Preora, abscess of the, sometimes
leads to an extraordinary dis-
charge of pus, 313.

matter therefrom discharged by
the lungs, 312.

Pxevnisy, the nature of, 256,

after pneumonia curable, 411.

relioved by hemorrhage nt the
nose, 257.

relieved by bilious diarrhera, 257.

causes abscesses in the breast,
257.

symptoms of, 255-8.

treatment of, 410-16.

dorsal, 256,

false, 416.

sometimes false supposod to exist
in colic, 277.

from ‘renal ealenli, 341.
Pxxumonns, resembles asthma, 318,

its difference from asthma, 318,

sometimes passes into dropsy,
318,

Pxevmonts, or Prriexeomonia, an

inflammation of the lungs, 261,
a cause of abscesses of the breast,
263,
as m sequel of pleuriay fatal,
315.
resolved by hemorrhage from the
nose, 2
resolved by b
copious d
263.
symptoms of, 261-263.
treatment of, 419-421.

Ponacua. Sve Gout.

Porsows, action of, resembling pesti-
lential discases, 250.

taken in drink sometimes inflame
the bladder, 285.
resemble diabetes, 340,


as diarrhea, 263,
arge of urine,


INDEX.


Poxra of the Liver,
‘thereof fatal, 277.
mee eee
2


Lee) Enc medicinal


San the Bath of ml in
4
in the urine « symptom


culus,
Sarrnrasis, how named, 288.
its symptom, 283, 289,
its mene 451-3, aa
sues echo, 347
tloptantiasis sometimensom
See Elophantiasix,


Sormnaus of the liver,
4 frequent affection of the
322,
discussed with payers 481.
symptoms of, 922, 323.
treatment of, 481, 482.


phthisis, 296.
symptoms of, 305.


health and courage, $47.


510 INDEX.


Unnra. See under Kidneys. Vomiting ( (continued).
‘8 copious discharge of, removes to be procared in boys by
hepatitis, 279. irinum, 399.
pneumonia, 263, on an empty stomach, in
dropsy, ee Sate phantiasis, 495, :
Unuurr Fisrvra ic) woun melancholia, 471
¥. oo sie tender, wn rca tacihes in contig disenes
‘ant, like is hel eicoes. in tongue, siasis, 495.
from elephantiasis, $70. Selncholy, 474.
or excited by medicines vertigo, 465.
rubbed into the skin, 462. from hellet See Hellebo
‘Vana Cava, description of disease of,
279-82. ‘WArER, COLD, & cause of
its treatment, 448-4. of dysentery, 354.
‘Vana Porta; 00 Portes. of 275.
‘Vameszcrion from the vein at the its medicinal uses in cho!
elbow, 379, et; ; shot
ypters under an- tepid, uses of, in cholera, 435
gina, apoplexy, cephalea, affec- thermal, or natural hot water,
of the uvula, epilepsy, of, in melancholy, 477.
hssmopt} convul-  Wure, its medicinal powers, 386.
, melan- uses in 432,
cholia, pleurisy, suppression of in phrenitis, 386.
urine, satyris syneope, to- in the last stage of syncop
tanus, ulcers of the tonsils, unicum, 431.
acute affections of the bladder, in cag perm! a
in excess, 2 canse of angina, 4
from the frontal vein (consult of apoplexy, 305.
cephalza, epilepsy, )s of inflammation of the li
from the veins of the tongue (con- 278,
‘salt angina) of madness, 302,
from the nasal veins (see bringing of paralysis, 307.
up of blood, ). ‘Wows, seat and nature of the, 28!
‘at the pubes, 450. cancer of the, $61.
at the ankle, 449. fiuor albus and niger of the,
quantity of blood to be abstracted
by, 458, ef alibi. the, 287.
‘use of a large opening in, 405. treatment of, 449.
‘Vurr1G0; seo under Scotoma, dropsy of the, 337.
Vocireration; see Voice, ic ulcer of the, 360.


‘Votce, exercise of, in coeliac disease, Prolapsus of the, 361.
492, ‘ulcers of the oe,
in elephantiasis, 497.
eons of,
chexia, p. 329,
the translation,


LANE MEDICAL LIBRARY


To ayoid fine, this book should be returned
on or before the date last stamped below,


on rank)


LANE WEDICAL LIBRARY
STANFC LVL RSITY
300 PASTHuk DRIVE
PALO ALTO, CALIF,
