Orlando Furioso
Ludovico Ariosto, translated by Sir John Harington (1591)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): The complete text of Ariosto's Orlando Furioso in Sir John Harington's 1591 translation — the FIRST English Ariosto, a masterpiece of Elizabethan translation. Raw OCR via Internet Archive (orlandofuriosoin00ario, 1634 edition of the 1591 translation); Harington's epigrams removed. This 1591 translation is in the public domain.

========================================================================

I


• ’4

\'--y  ^ '


i.


I


1


in  2016



si«^  i':-'


rORIANDO

FVRIOSO


^ dBaiheKni^Bt  ‘Wm


^^ufAorstJiijraffis.  |


y.^0TaC2>^  .

onfirajp^^


Tina


i-.'  .


note  of  the  matters  contained  in  thii  rphole  V olume.

The  Epiftle  Detlicatorie  to  the  Queenes  MajeRie.

The  Apologie,

An  advertifement  to  the  Reader.

The  firflxxiij  Cantos,  or  Bookcs  of  Orlando  Furiofo,  ending  with
, Orlandos  falling  mad.


The  other  xxiij  Cantos  of  Orlando  Furiofo , in  which  he  recovered
his  wits  j ending  with  Bradamants  marriage.

A gcnerall  Allegoric  of  the  whole. .

The  Life  of  Ariofto.  ,

The  Table  of  the  Booke.^



TO  THE  MOST  EXCbLLENT,

VERTVOVS,  AND  NOBLE  PRINCESSE,

ELIZABETH,


BY'THE  GRACE  OF  GOD,  QUEENE  OF
ENGLAND,  FRANCE  AND  IRELAND,
DEFENDEROF  THEFAIT  H,3cc.


^Ofl  renowned  (and  mofl:  worthy  to  be  moft  re-
nownedjSoveraigne  Ladie  j I prefiime  to  offer
to  your  Highneffe  this  firft  part  of  the  fruit  of
the  little  garden  of  my  lender  skill  It  hath  been
the  longer  in  growings  and  is  theleffe  worthy
the  gathering^becaufe  my  ground  is  barren  and
too  cold  for  fuch  dainty  Italian  fruits,  being  al-
fo  perhaps  overfhaded  with  trees  of  lome  older  growth  : but  the
beams  ofyourbleffcd  countenance,vouchlafingto  fliine  on  fopoore
afoilc,  (hall  foonc  difperfe  all  hurtfull  mills  that  would  oblcure  it,
and  eafily  diffolve  al  If  whether  they  be  Mehdews,  or  Fel-dewsj  that
woald  fterve  this  fli allow  fct  plant.  Idefireto  bebriefe,  becaufel
lovetobcplaine.  Whatfocver  I amorcan,isyourMajefties.  Your
gracious  favours  have  been  extended  in  my  poorc  family  even  to  the
third  generation,  your  bounty  to  us  and  our  heires.  Wherefore  this
(though  unperfe(fi  and  unworthy  worke)  I humbly  recommend  to
that  gracious  protection,  under  which  I enjoy  all  in  which  I can  take
joy.  If  your  Highneffe  will  read  it,  who  dare  rejeCt  it  ? if  allow  it,
who  can  reproove  it?  if  proteCt  it,  what  M o m v s barking,  or
Z o 1 L V s biting  can  any  way  hurt  or  annoy  it  ? And  thus  mofl
humbly  craving  pardon  forthisboldneffejlceafeto  write,  though  I


will  not  ceafe  to  wish,  that  your  high  felicities  may  never  ceafe-


Tour  moH  humble  feryant^


lOHN  HaRINQTON^
2


Ttedivi-
fon  tf  tbu
jlpttogie
into  thrct
fm.


OjFottrie


A PREFACE,  OR  RATHER  A BRIEFE

APOLOGIE  of  POETRIE,  AND  OF  THE
Author  and  Tranflator  of  this  Pocme.


He  learned  Platarch  in  his  Laconicall  Apothegmes , tds  of  a So-
phiftcr  that  made  a long  and  tedious  Oration  in  praifeof  Hercules ,
and  expeding  at  the  end  thereof  for  fomc  great  thankes  and  ap-
plaufe  of the  hearers,  a certaine  Lacedemonian  demanded  him,  who
had  difpraifed  Hercules  ? Me  thinkes  the  like  may  be  now  laid  to
me,taking  upon  me  the  defence  of  Poefie  : for  liircly  if  learning  in
general!  were  of  that  account  among  us , as  it  ought  to  be  among
all  men,  and  is  among  wife  men , then  fhould  this  my  Apologie
of  Poefie  (the  very  firft  nurfe,  and  ancient  grandmother  of  all  learning)  be  as  vaincand
luperfluous  as  was  that  Sophifters,  becaufeit  might  then  beanlwered,  andtmly  anlwer-
cef,  that  no  man  difgraced  it.  But  fith  we  live  in  fiich  a time,  in  which  nothing  can  efcape
the  envious  tooth  and  backbiting  tongue  of  an  impure  mouth , and  wherein  every  blind
corner  bath  a fquint-eyed  Zoilus , that  can  looke  aright  upon  no  mans  doings , (yea  fure
there  be  fome  that  will  not  fticke  to  call  himfelfe  a daftard,  bccaufo  forlbcth  he

fought  with  a club , and  not  at  the  rapier  and  dagger: ) therefore  I tbinke  no  man  of  judge-
ment  will  judge  this  rhy  labour  r.eedldle,  in  Icelang  to  remove  away  thofe  danders  that
cither  the  malice  of  thole  that  love  it  nor,  or  the  folly  of  thole  that  underftand  it  not,  hath
deviled  againft  it:for  indeed  as  the  old  laying  is,  Setentia  ha^et  wimicum  prater  ipnoran^
tern ; Knowledge  hath  no  foe  but  the  ignorant.  But  now  becaufe  I make  account  I have  to
deale  with  three  fundry  kinds  of  reprovers , one  of  thofe  that  condemne  all  Poctrie,
which  (how  ftrong  head  foever  they  have)  I count  but  a very  wcake  faction ; anotlier  of
thofe  that  allow  Poetrie,  but  not  this  particular  Poeme,ofwhich  kind  fure  there  cannot  be
many  ; a third  of  thofe  that  can  beare  with  the  art , and  like  of  the  worke,  but  will  find
fault  with  my  not  well  handling  of  if, which  they  may  not  onely  probably,  but  (I  doubt)  too
truly  do,  being  a thing  as  commonly  done  as  faid , that  where  the  hedge  isloweft,  there
doth  every  man  go  over.  Therefore  again!!  thefe  three  I mufl:  armc  me  with  the  beft  dc-
fenfive  weapons  I can  : and  if  I happen  to  give  a blow  now  and  then  in  mine  owne  defence,
and  as  good  fencers  ufe  to  ward  ana  (Irike  at  once,  I mufl:  crave  pardon  of  courfe,  feeing
our  law  allotves  that  is  done [e  defendendo : and  the  law  of  nature  teacheth  vim  vi  repellertt
Firft  therefore  of  Poetrie  it  felfe,for  thofe  few  that  generally  difallow  it,  might  be  liiiJicient
to  alledge  thofe  many  that  generally  approve  it,  of  which  I could  bring  in  Inch  an  army,  not
of fouldiers  , but  of  famous  Kings  and  Captaines , as  not  oncly  the  fight,  but  the  very  lound
of  them  were  able  to  vanquifh  anddifmaythe  fmall  forces  of  our  advcrlaries.  For,  who
would  once  dare  to  oppofehimfelfeagaini Hb  ximiy  tydlexanders , Cafars^  Setpios^  (to  omit
infinite  other  Princes  both  of  former  and  later  ages,  and  of  forraine  and  nearer  countries)
that  with  favour , with  ftudie , with  praeftice , \vith  example , wddi  honours , with  gifts,
with  preferments , with  great  and  magnificent  coft,  have  encouraged  and  advanced  Poets
and  Poctrie  ? As  witnefle  the  huge  Theaters  and  Amphitheaters , monuments  of  ftupendi-
ous  charge,  made  onely  for  Tragedies  and  Comedies,  the  works  of  Poets,  robe  reprefen-
ted  on : but  all  thefe  aids  and  defences  I leave  as  luperfluous ; my  caufe  T count  lb  good,
and  the  evidence  lb  open,  that  I neither  need  to 'ufe  the  countenance  of  any  great  ftate
to  bolfter  it,  nor  the  cunning  of  any  fubtill  lawyer  to  inforce  it : my  meaning  is  plaincly


ft  Apologie  of  Poetries,

and  l>ona  fJty  confeffing  all  the  abules  that  can  truly  be  objedled  againft  fome  kind  of  Poets,to
fliew  you  what  good  ufe  there  is  of  Poetrie.  Neither  do  I fuppole  it  to  be  greatly  bchovcfiill
for  this  purpole,  to  trouble  you  v ith  the  curious  definitions  or  a Poet  and  Pocfic,and  with  the
fubcill  diltindions  oftbeir  fimdry  kinds,  nor  to  diipute  how  high  and  fupernatiirall  the  name
of  a Maker  is,  fo  clirifti  icd  inEngliflaby  thatunknowne  Godfather,  that  this  laftyeare  lave
one,  viz.  1 5 8p.  let  forth  a booke,  called  the  Artof  Englifh  Poetrie  : and  Icaft  of all  do  I pur-
pole  to  belfow  any  long  time  to  argue,  whether  Plato,  Zenophon  and  Erafmtti,  writing  fidli-
ons  and  dialogues  in  prole,  may  j’uftly  be  called  Poets ; or  whether  Lacan  writing  a ffory  in
verfe  be  an  Hill:oriographer,or  whether  Mailer  Paire  tranllating  ^/r^^<7,Mafter  Cj aiding  tran-
flaring  Ovtd.  Metamorphofis,  and  my  lelfe  in  this  worke  that  you  fee,be  any  more  then  verli-
fiers,  as  tlie  lame  Ignoxo  termeth  all  trarflators : for  as  for  all,  or  the  mod  part  ofluch  quefti-
ons,I  will  referre  you  to  Sir  Phihp  Sidney t Apologie,who  doth  handle  them  right  learnedly,
or  to  the  forenamed  treatife, where  they  are  aifcourled  more  largely,and  where,  as  it  were  a
a whole  receit  ofPoetrie  is  preferibed,  with  lb  many  new  named  figures,as  would  put  me  in
great  hope  in  this  age  to  come  would  breed  many  excellent  Poets,  lave  for  one  obfervation
tliat  I gather  out  of  the  very  lame  booke.  For  though  the  poore  gentleman  laboureth  greatly
to  prove,  or  rather  to  make  Poetrie  an  art,  and  reciteth  as  you  may  fee  in  the  plurall  number,
fome  pluralities  ofpatternes,  and  parcels  ofhis  owne  Poetrie,  with  divers  pieces  of  Parthe-
niads  and  hymnes  in  praife  of  the  mod  praife-worthy : yet  whatlbever  he  would  prove  by
all  thefe,  fore  in  mv  poore  opinion  he  doth  prove  nothing  more  plainely,  then  that  which  M.
Sidney  and  all  the  learneder  fort  that  have  written  of  it  do  pronounce,  namely  that  it  is  a gift
and  not  an  art ; I fay  he  proveth  it,becaufe  making  himfelfe  and  many  others  lb  cuniing  in  the
art,  yet  he  Ihewethhimfelfe  lb  (lender  a gift  in  it,  defervingto  be  commended  as
praifoth  one  that  he  compares  to  TuUy.

Carntina  ejaod ferihiSy  mujts  & ApoHineHullo
Laudari  dehesjitc  CiceronU  ha^e/.

But  to  come  to  the  purpole,  and  to  fpeake  after  the  phrafe  of  the  common  lbrt,that  termc  all
that  is  -written  in  verfe  Poetrie,  and  rather  in  fcorne  then  in  praife,bedow  the  name  of a Poet
on  every  bafenmer  and  ballad-maker  : this  I lay  of  it,  ana  Ifbinke  I fay  truly,  that  there
are  many  good  lelfons  to  be  learned  out  of  it,  many  good  examples  to  be  found  iri  it,  many
good  ules  to  be  had  of  it,  and  that  therefore  it  is  not,  nor  ought  not  to  be  delpifed  by  the  wifer
fort,  tut  lb  tobedudied  and  employed,  as  was  intended  by  the  fird  writers  and  devifers
thereof,  which  is  to  foften  and  polilh  the  hard  and  rough  difpofitions  of  men,  and  make  them
capable  of vertue  and  good  difeipline.

I cannot  deniebuttous  that  are  Chriftians,  in  relpedl  of  the  high  end  of  all,  which  is
the  health  of  our  foules,  not  only  Poetrie,  but  all  other  dudics  of  Philofophie,  are  in  a man-
ner vaine  and  foperfluous : yea  (as  the  wife  man  laith)  whatfoever  is  under  the  fiinne  is  va-
nity of  vanities,  and  nothing  but  vanity.  But  fith  we  live  with  men  and  not  with  faints,  and
becaufe  few  men  can  embrace  this  dri(ft  and  Stoicall  divinity,  or  rather  indeed,  for  that  the
holy  Scrintiires,  in  which  thofe  high  myderies  of  our  falvation  are  contained,  are  a deepe
ard  profound  dudie,  and  not  fobjedl  to  every  weake  capacity,  no  nor  tothehighed  wits
and  judgements,  except  they  be  fird  illuminate  by  Gods  Ipirit,  or  indrudkd  by  his  teachers
and  preachers : therefore  we  do  fird  reade  fome  other  authors,  making  them  as  it  were  a loo-
king-glalfetothe  eyes  of  our  mind;  and  then  after  we  have  gathered  more  drength,  we
enter  into  profounderdudies  of  higher  myderies,  having  fird  as  it  were  enabled  our  eyes
by  long  beholding  the  fonnein  abafon  of  water,  at  lad  tolooke  upon  thefonne  itfeJlc.
So  we  reade  how  that  great  whofe  learning  and  fan<ftitie  is  lb  renowned  o-

ver  all  nations,  was  fird  indrufled  in  the  learning  of  the  ^Egyptians,  before  be  came  to
that  high  contemplation  of  God  and  fomiliaritie  (as  I may  lb  terme  it)  with  God.  So  the
notable  Prophet  Daniel  was  brought  up  in  the  learning  of  the  Chaldeans,  and  made  that .

f 3


Afolegie  cfPfietric^,

the  firft  ftep  of  his  higher  vocation  to  be  a Prophet.  If  then  wc  may  by  the  example  of  two
fuchfpeciall  fervants  of  God,  fpend  lomc  ofour  yong  ycarcs  in  ftudies  of  humanity,  what
better  and  more  fwcetftudy  is  there  for  a yong  man  then  Poetric?  fpccially  Heroicall  Poefie,
that  with  her  fvveetc  ftatelinefle  doth  cred:  the  mind,  and  lift  it  up  to  die  confideration  of  the
higheft  matters ; and  allureth  them,  diatof  themfelvcs  would  otherwife  loth  them,  to  take
and  fwallo w and  digeft  the  wholfome  precepts  of  Philofophie,  and  many  times  even  of the
Divinitie.  Wherefore  Plutarch  having  written  a whole  treatife  of  the  praifc  of  Hitmert
dii  ‘^FoetU.  ^vorkes,  and  another  of  reading  Poets,  doth  begin  this  latter  with  this  comparifon,diat  as  mai
that  are  fickly  and  have  weake  ftomackes  or  dainty  taftes,  do  many  rimes  thinke  that  flefii
moft  delicate  to  eate,  that  is  not  fiefh,  and  thole  fifties  that  be  net  fi fti : lb  yong  men  (faith  he^
do  like  beft  that  Philofophie  that  is  not  Philofophie,  or  that  is  not  delivered  as  Philolbph.ie  :
and  fuch  are  foe  pleafant  writings  of  learned  Poets,  that  are  the  popular  Philofophers  and  the
Tajfo.  Ca-  popular  Divines.  Likewile  Ta§'o  in  his  excellent  worke  of  Icrufalem  Liberato,mtx\txh  Poc-
toi.fiafc  trie  to  the  Phyficke  that  men  give  unto  little  children  when  they  are  ficke ; his  verfe  is  this  in
Italian, Ipeaking  to  God  with  a pretie  Prolbpopeja  ;

Sai^che  la.  corre  iltnovdo^ove  pin  verft
*J)i  fue  dutcez.K.e,  il lufingier  Parnap>i
E che’l  veto  conditow  rnoUi  'Verfi,

I piu  fchivi  allettando  ha  perfttafe
Cod  egrofdnciul  porgiamo  afperfo
Di  foavi  liquor  gU  Or  It  del  vafo
Succhi  amari  irtgamato  in  tant$  ei  btve
£ dal inganno  fuo  vita  receve»

Thou  know  Fi, the  wantonwgrldtings  ever  irtinni
Tofveeete  Parnaffut  fruitejyhow  othcrrvhile
The  truth  wetlfawc'd  with  pU^efunt  verfe  hath  woune
tJiioFl fqueawip) fiomaekps  with  the fugred flilex
So  the  ficke  child  that  pothns  all  d^th  (hume^

JVithcomfetsand  wiihfugar  we  beguile ^

And cattfe  him  take  a wholefome  fowre  receift
He  drinl^et ^ndfaves  bis  life  with  fuch  deceit*


This  is  then  that  honeft  fraud,  in  which  (as  Plutarch  faith)  he  that  is  deceived  is  wilcr  then  he
that  is  not  deceived, and  he  that  doth  dcceive,is  honefter  then  he  that  doth  not  deceive.

Jirrppit  But  briefly  to  anfvvcr  to  the  chiefe  objections,  Cornelius  a man  of  learning  and

deva.'iita-  authority  not  to  be  defpifed,  maketh  a bitter  invective  againft  Poets  and  Poefie,  andthclum
ttfaentia-  of  his  reproofe  of  it  is  this  (which  is  all  that  can  with  any  probability  be  faid  againft  it:)That  it
^Fwre^ob-  ^ of  lies,  a plealer  of  fooles,  a breeder  of  dangerous  errors,  and  an  inticer  to  wanton-

jeffions  a-  I might  hefc  warnc  thofe  that  will  urge  this  mans  authority  to  foe  dilgrace  of  Poctrie,
g;a'n/l  Po  to  take  heed  (ofwhat  calling  foe ver  they  be)  leaftwith  foe  fame  weapon  that  foey  thinke  to
give  Poetrie  a blow,  they  give  themfelves  a maime.  For  Agrippa  takerh  his  pleafiire  of grea-
ter matters  then  Poetrie  : I marvcll  how  he  durft  do  it,  favc  that  I fee  he  hath  done  it,  he  hath
Ipared  neither  miters  nor  feepters . The  courts  of  Princes, where  vertue  is  rewarded,  juftice
maintained,  oppreftions  releeved,  he  cals  them  a Colledge  of  Giants,of  tyrants, of oppreflbrs,
warriors:  the  moft  noble  fort  of  noble  men,  lie  termeth  curfed,  bloudle,w'icked,and  facrilegi-
ous  perfons  .Noble  men  (and  vs  poore  Gentlemen)  that  thinke  to  borrow  praifo  of  our  aunce-
ftors  dderts  and  good  fame,  he  affirmeth  to  be  a race  of  the  fturdier  fort  ofknaves,  and  liccn-
cious  livers . T reafurers  and  other  great  officers  of  the  common  wealth,  with  grave  counfol-
lers,  wbofc  wife  heads  are  the  pillars  of  the  State,  hcaffirmeth  generally  tote  robbers  anci
peelers  oftheRealme,  and  privie  traitors  foat  fell  their  Princes  ftvours,  and  rob  wel-defer-
ving iervitors  of their  reward.


K^n  Apole^ie  of  Poetries,

I omit  as  Ills  fttccadi/ia,  how  he  riicknamcrhpricfts  faying,  for  the  mofl:  part  they  arc  Hypo-
crites ; Law)'ers, faying  they  areall  theeves  jPhjfitians, faying  tliey  arc  many  oftheni  murth.c-
rers ; fo  as  I tliinkc  it  were  a good  motion,  and  would  cafily  pafle  hy  the  cqnftnt  of  the  three
eftates,  that  this  mans  autlioritie  foould  be  utterly  adnihilatcd,  that  dcaleth  fo  hardly  and  un-
jufHy  with  all  forts  of profcfQons.  But  for  the  rejedling  of  his  writings,  I refor  it  to  others
tliat  have  power  to  do  it,and  to  condemne  him  for  a gencrall  libeller ; but  for  that  he  writeth
againft  Poet rie,  I mcane  to  fpeake  a word  or  two  in  refuting  thereof.  And  fi rd:  for  lying,  I Jnfrrer  ti
iniglrt  if  I lift  exaifc  it  by  the  rule  of  Poetisa  licemn,  ana  claime  a priviledge  given  to  Poctric,  tf’e  firfi  of
avhole  art  is  but  an  imitation  (as  Arijlotle  calleth  it)  and  therefore  arc  allov/cd  to  fainc  what  0"'^-
they  lift,  according  to  that  old  verfe,

luridicisy  Breho^  vivererapto^

MilitibfiSimedicis,tortori,occidzre  Ludo  efl :

Mentiri  Afironomts,piB:oribus  alette  Poctis.

Which  becaufe  I countit  without  reafon,!  will  Englifh  it  without  rime.

LavfjerSyHe ligand  the  Checquerare  allowed  to  live  en  jpoilCj^

SouUiers ,Pkifitians , and  hangtnrnmake  afporiof  murther,
AJlrottomerSyPainterSyditdPoetsmaj  lye  by  authorttie.

Thus  you  foe,  that  Poets  may  lye  if  they  lift  Ciemprivilegio  : but  what  if  they  lye  leaft  of  all
other  men?  what  if  they  lye  not  at  all?  then  Ithinke  that  great  flaunder  is  very  unjuftly
rafted  upon  them.  For  in  my  opinion  they  are  faid  properly  to  lye,  that  aiJirme  that  to  bee
true  that  is  falfe  : and  how  other  arts  can  free  tliemfelves  from  this  blame,  let  them  looke  that
profefle  tlicm  : but  Poets  never  affirming  any  for  true,  butprefenting  them  to  us  as  fables
and  imitations,  cannot  lye  though  they  would  ; and  becaufe  this  objection  of  lyes  is  the
chiefeft,  and  that  upon  which  the  reft  be  grounded,  I will  ftand  the  longer  upon  the  clearing
thereof.

The  ancient  Poets  have  indeed  wrapped  as  it  were  in  their  writings  divers  and  fiindric
meanings,  which  they  call  the  fences  or  myfleries  thereof.  Firft  of  all  for  the  literall  fence
(as  it  were  the  iitmoft  barke.or  ryne)  they  fet  downe  in  manner  of  an  Hiftorie,  the  a(fts  and
notable  exploits  of  fome  perfons  worthie  memory ; then  in  die  famefiefion,  as  afecond
riiac  and  fbmewhat  more  fine,  as  it  were  nearer  to  the  pith  and  marrow,  they  place  the  Mo-
rall  fence,  profitable  for  the  aftive  life  of  man,  approving  vertuous  adions,  and  condem-
ning the  contrarie.  Many  times  alfo  under  the  felfefame  words  they  comprehend  fbme  tnie
iinderftanding  of  naturall  Philofophic,  or  fometime  of  politike  governem^nt,  and  now  and
then  ofdivinity : and  thcfc  fame  fences  that  comprehend  fo  excellent  knowledge  we  call  the
Allegory,  which  Plutarch  defineth  to  be  when  one  thing  is  told,and  by  that  another  is  under-
ftood.  Now  let  any  man  judge,  if  it  be  a matter  of  meane  art  or  wit,  to  containe  in  one  Hifto-
ricall  narration  either  tme  or  fained,  fo  many,  fb  diverfe,  and  fo  deepe  conceits : but  for  ma-
king the  matter  more  plaine,!  will  alledge  an  example  thereof.

Perfeus  Sonne  of  lupiter  is  fained  by  the  Poets  to  have  flaine  Gor^otty  and  after  that
conqueft  atchieved,  to  have  flowne  up  to  heaven.  The  Hiftoricall  fence  is  this,  Perfe-  tamorpk^h
us  the  Sonne  of  Jupiter^  by  the  participation  of  lupiters  vertues  that  were  in  him  ; or
rather  comming  of  the  ftocke  of  one  of  the  Kings  of  Cree^-,  or  Athens  fo  called ; flue  g organ
a tyrant  in  that  countrey  (jargon  in  Greeke  fignifieth  earth)  and  was  for  his  vertuous  parts
exalted  by  men  up  into  heaven.  Morally  it  fign'fieth  tlius  much,  Perfeus  a ^vife  man,

Sonne  of endowed  with  vertue  from  above,  flayethfinre  and  vice,  athingbafeand
earthly,  fignified  by  (jergoMy  and  fo  mountethtotheskie  of  vertue  : Itfignifies  in  one
kinde  of  Allegorie  thus  much  ; themiixl  of  man  being  gotten  by  God,  and  fo  the  childe
of  God,  killing  and  vanquifhing  the  carthlineffe  of  this  Gorgonicall  nature,  afoendeth
up  to  the  underftanding  of  heavenly  things,  of  high  things,  of  eternall  things,  in  which  con-
templation confifteth  ffie  perfeiftion  of  man;  this  is  the  naturall  Allegorie,  becaufe  man, one  of

% 4


/


kAh  ApologUtf  Pmricjl

the  chlefc  workes  of  nature : It  hath  alfo  a more  high  a'>i<i  heavenly  Allcgorie,  that  the  hca^
venly  nature,  daughter  of  fnpiter,  proairing  with  her  contiruau  motion,  corruption  and
mortalitie  in  the  inleriour  bodies,  Ibvcred  itfelfe  at  1 aft  from  thefe  earthly  bodies,  and  few
up  on  high,  and  there  remaineth  for  ever.  It  hath  alfo  another  Tlx  ologicall  Al  Vgorj-,  that
the  angelicall  nature,  daughter  of  themoft  high  God  the  creator  of  all  things;  Killing  and
overcomming  all  bodily  fuhftancc,  fignified  by  Gor^etty  afeended  irto  heaven  : the  like
infinite  Allegories  I could  picke  out  of  other  Poeticall  fi<ftions,  favc  that  I would  avoid
tedioufneffe.  It  fuiBceth  mee  dierefore  to  note  this,  that  the  men  of  greauft  lean  ing
and  higheft  wit  in  the  auncient  times,  did  of  purpofc  conecale  tlicfe  deepe  myftcrKs
of  learning,  and  as  it  were  eover  them  with  the  vei’e  of  fables  and  verfe  for  furdry  cau-
les:  onecaufewas,  that  they  might  not  be  rafhlyabufed  by  prophanc  wits,  in  whom  fei-
ence  is  corrupted,  like  good  wine  in  a bad  veflell : anoth.er  caule  why  they  -wrote  in  vcrlc,
-was  confervationofthe  memory  of  their  precepts,  as  wee  fee  yet  the  gcrerall  rules  almoft
of  every  art,  not  fo  much  as  husbandrie,  but  they  are  oftr.cr  recited  and  better  i emcn>
bred  in  verfe  then  in  profe  : another,  and  aprincipall  caule  of  all,  is  to  bcc  able  with  one
kinde  of  meate  and  one  difh  (as  T may  fo  call  it)  to  feed  divers  taftes.  For  the  weaker  ca^
pacities  will  feed  rlicmfelves  with  the  plealartnefle  of  the  Hiftoric  and  fwcctr.cfie  of  the
verfe,  feme  that  have  ftronger  ftomackes  will  as  it  were  take  a further  taft  of  the  Mo-
rall  fence,  a third  fort  more  high  conceited  then  they,  willdigcft  the  Allcgorie  : fo  as  in-
deed it  hath  besie  thought  by  men  of  very  good  judgement , luch  manner  of  Poeticall
writing  was  an  excellent  way  to  preferve  all  kind  of  learning  from  that  corruption
whdeh  now  it  is  come  to  fince  they  left  tltat  myfticall  writing  of  verfe.  Now  though  I
know  the  example  and  aiithoritie  of  <iy^riftetle  zvA  Plato  bee  ftill  urged  againft  this,  who
tocketotheinfelves  another  manner  of  writing  : firft  I may  fay  indeed  tliat  lawes  were
made  for  poore  men,  and  not  for  Princes,  for  rhefc  two  great  Princes  of  Philofophie,
brake  that  former  allowed  manner  of  writing,  yet  Plato  ftill  preferved  the  fable,  but  re-
fiifed  the  verfe.  tAriftotle  though  rejeding  both,  yet  retained  ftill  a kind  of  obfcuritic,
infbmuch  he’anfwered  Alexander ^ who  reproovedhim  iii  a fort,  for  publifhing  the  la-
cred  fecrets  of  Philofophie,  that  he  had  fet  forth  his  bookes  in  a fort,  and  yet  not  let  them
forth;  meaning  that  they  were  fo  oblcurethat  they  would  be  underftoodof  few,  except,
they  came  to  him  for  iiillrudions  ; orelfe  without  they  were  of  very  good  capacity  and
ftudious  of  Philofophie.  But  (as  I fay)  P/^/ohowfoever  men  would  make  him  an  cnemic
ofPoetrie  (becaufehe  found  indeed  juft  fault  with  theabufes  of  fome  comicall  Poets  of
his  time,  or  fome  that  fought  to  fet  up  new  and  ftrange  religions)  yet  you  fee  bee  kept
ftill  that  principall  part  of  Poetrie,  which  is  fidion  and  imitation ; and  as  for  the  other
part  ofPoetrie  which  is  verfe,  though  he  ufcd  it  not,  yet  his  Mafter  Socrates  even  in  his
old  age  wrote  certaine  verfes,  as  Plutarch  teftifieth  : but  becaufc  I have  named  the  two
parts  of  Poetrie,  namely  invention  or  fidion,  and  verfe,  let  us  fee  how  well  we  can  au-
thorife  theufe  of  both  thefe.  Firft  for  fieftion,  againft  which  as  I told  before,  many  in-
veigh, calling  it  by  the  foule  name  of  lying,  though  notwithftanding,  as  Ithen'f^d,  it  is
fartheft  from  it : titmofthenes  the  famous  and  renowned  Orator,  when  he  would  perfwade
the  Athenians  to  wane  againft  told  them  alolemnetale  how  the  Wolves  on  a time

lent  Ambaftadors  to  the  fhcepe,  offering  them  peace  if  they  would  deliver  up  the  dogs  that
kept  their  folds,  with  all  that  longcircumftance  (needleffe  to  be  repeated)  by  which  hee
perfwaded  them  far  more  ftrongly  then  if  he  fhould  have  told  theminplainetermes,  that
Philif  fought  to  bereave  them  of  their  chiefo  bulwarks  and  defences,  to  have  the  better  abili-
tie  to  overthrow  them.  But  what  need  we  fetch  an  authority  fo  far  off  from  heathen  authors,
that  have  many  neerer  hand  both  in  time  and  in  place  ? Bifhop  Ttfher  a flout  Prelat  (though
I doenotpraife  his  Religion)  when  hee  was  affaidby  King  Henrie  the  eight  for  his  good
will  and  aftent  for  the  luppreftlon  of  Abbeys,  the  King  alledging  that  he  would  but  take
away  the  fuperfluities,  and  let  the  j^ftanceftand  ftill,  oratleaftfec  it  converted  to  better

and


n A poUgit  cf  Paetricj*

and  more  godly  u(cs  I the  grave  Bifliop  ^»i*wercd  it  intliiskindc  of  Poedcall  parable : He
laid  there  was  an  axe  that  wanting  a helve  came  to  a thicke  and  huge  overgro\vn  wood,  and
fccl'ought  Ibme  of  the  great  okes  in  that  w^od,^  to  {pare  him  fo  much  timber  as  to  make  him
a handle  or  helve,  promifing  that  if  he  mig^^^  fir’-de  that  favour,  he  would  in  rccompence
thereof,  have  great  regard  in  preferving  that  wood, in  pruning  the  branches,  in  cutting  away
the  unprofitable  and  fiipeifluous  boughes,  in  paring  away  the  bryers  and  thorncs  that  were
comherfome  to  the  fayre  trees, and  making  it  in  fine  a grove  of  great  delight  and  pVafurc:  but
when  this  lame  axe  had  obtained  his  fiite,  he  ft)  laid  about  him, and  ib  pared  away  botii  timber
and  top  and  lop, that  in  fliort  fpacc  of  a woodland  he  made  it  a champion,  and  made  her  lihe-
ralitytl  c inllnimcnt  of  her  overthrow.

Now  though  this  BiHiop  had  no  very  good  fiicccfle  with  his  parable,  yet  it  was  lb  farre
from  being  counted  a lye,  that  it  was  plainly  feene  foone  after  that  the  lame  axe  did  both
hewdownethofe  woods  by  the  roots,  and  pared  him  off  by  the  head,  and  was  apceceof
Prophecic,as  wcllasapceceof  Poetry  : and  indeed  Prophets  and  Poets  have  bene  thought
to  have  a great  affinity,  as  the  name  Fates  in  Latine  doth  teftifie.  But  to  come  againe  to  this
manner  offitfiion  or  parable:  the  Prophet  Nathan^  reproving  King  David  for  his  great  finne
of adultcrie  and  murtlicr,  doth  he  not  come  to  him  witli  a pretie  parable,  of a poore  man  and
his  lambc  that  lay  in  his  bolbme,  and  eat  of  his  bread,  and  the  rich  man  that  had  whole
flocks  ofhis  owne  would  needs  take  it  from  him  ? In  which  as  it  is  evident  it  was  but  a para-
ble, fo  it  were  unreverent  and  almoft  blafphemous  to  fay  it  was  a lye.  But  to  go  higher,  did
notour  Saviour  himfelfelpeake  in  parables  ? as  that  divine  parable  of  the  Ibwer,  that  com-
fortable parable  of  the  Prodigall  fonne,  that  dreadfull  parable  of  T)ives  and  Laz.arw^  though
I know  of  this  lalf,  many  of  the  fathers  hold  that  it  is  a ftory  indeed,  and  no  parable.  But  in
the  reft  it  is  manifeft,  that  he  that  was  allholinefle,  all  wifdome,  all  truth,  ufed  parables,
and  even  fuch  as  difereet  Poets  ufe,  where  a good  and  honeft  and  wholfome  Allegory,  is
hidden  in  apleafant  and  pretie  fi«5lion,  and  therefore  ft)r  thatpart  of  Poetrie  of  Imitation,

I thinke  no  body  will  make  any  queftion,  but  it  is  not  onely  allowable,  but  godly  and  com-
mendable,  if the  Poets  ill  handling  of  it  doe  not  marre  and  pervert  the  good  ufe  ofit.  The  oHnventi.
other  part  of  Poetry,  which  is  Verfe,  as  it  were  the  clothing  or  ornament  ofit,  hath  manyaw,  and
goodufes;  ofthehelpe  of  memory  I fpake  fomewhat  befbre ; fbr  the  words  being  couched  .

together  in  due  order,  meafure,  and  number,  one  doth  as  it  were  bring  on  another,  as  my
felfe  have  often  proved,  andfo  I thinke  do  many  befide,  (though  for  my  owne  part  lean
rather  boaft  of  the  marring  a good  memory,  then  of  having  one,)  yet  I have  ever  found
that  Verfe  is  eafier  to  learne,  and  farre  better  to  preferve  in  memory,  then  is  profe.  Another
fpeciall  grace  in  Verfe  is  the  forcible  manner  of  phrafe,  in  which  if  it  be  well  made,  it  farre
excelleth  loofe  fpeech  or  profe : a third  is  the  pleafure  and  fweetnefle  to  the  care,  which
makes  the  difeourfe  plealant  unto  us  often  time  when  the  matter  it  felfe  isharfh  and  un-
acceptable; for  my  owne  part  I was  never  yet  fbgood  a husband,  to  take  any  delight  to
heare  one  of  my  ploughmen  tell  how  an  acre  of  wheat  muft  be  fallowd  and  t wyfallowd,  and
how  cold  land  Ihould  be  burned,  and  how  fruitfull  land  muft  be  well  harrowed,  but  when  I
Iieare  one  read  Firgii  wliere  he  i^th :


Sape  etiant  fierilet  ineendere  prafnit  Mgr  os,

Atjj  tevem  fiipu/amcrepita»til>fu  vrere  fiammis,

Sive  inde  occult  as  vires  ($•  pabula  terra
Pinguia  concipiunt ; five  iUii  omneper  ignem
Excoquithr  vitittm^Mt^exudAt  inutUU  humor
And  after.

LMultum  adeOf  rMPirhglebas  qui  frangit  inert es
Vimineaf^  trabit  crMtesfijuvat  strvA,

With  many  other  leffoj^  of  homely  husbandrie,  but  delivered  in  fo  good  Verfe  tfiatme

thinkes


AfoUgie  cf  Poetries',

thinkcs  all  that  while  I could  find  in  my  heart  lo  drive  the  plough.  But  now  for  the  aiitho-
riticofVerfc,  ifitbenot  iufficientto  fay  for  them,  that  the  grcatcftPhilofophers,  andgra-
vcft  Senatours  that  ever  were,  have  ufed  them  both  in  their  fpceches  and  in  their  writings,
that  precepts  of  all  Arts  have  beene  delivered  in  them,  that  verfe  is  as  auncient  a writing  as
prole,  and  indeed  more  auncient,  in  refped  that  the  oldert  workes  extant  be  verfe,  as  Or-
phcHij  Limes,  Hefiodm,  and  others  beyond  memory  of  man,  or  mention  almoft  of  Hiftory ; il'
none  of  thele  wdll  ferve  for  the  credit  of  it,  yet  let  this  ferve,  that  fomc  part  of  the  Scripture
was  written  in  verle,  as  the  Plalmes  of  David,  and  certaine  other  fongs  dtDebetah.o^Salc-
mon  and  others,  which  the  learned  eft  divines  do  afhrme  to  be  verfe,  and  find  diat  they  are  in
mceter,  though  the  rule  of  the  Hebrew  verfe  they  agree  not  on.Sudiceth  it  me  only  to  prove
that  by  the  authority  of  Ikrcd  Scriptures,  both  parts  of  Poefie,  invention  or  imitation,  and
yerfc  are  allowable,  and  confequently  that  great  objedion  of  lying  is  quite  taken  away  and
Anfxotr  to  refitted.  Now  the  fecond  objedion  is  pleafing  of  fooles ; I have  already  fliowed,how  it  dil-
the  fecond  plcafeth  not  w'ile  men,now  if  it  have  this  vertue  tco,to  pleafe  the  fooles  and  ignorant,!  w'ould
OhjeUfm.  article  ofpraife  not  of  rebuke  : wherefore  I confeffe  tliat  it  pleafeth  fooles,and

lb  pleafeth  them,  tliat  if  they  niarke  it  and  oblerve  it  well,  it  will  in  time  make  tliem  wife, for
in  verle  is  both  goodnelfc  and  fw'cctnelfe,  Rubarb  and  Siiger candle,  the  pleafant  ai'.d  the  pro-
fitable : wherefore  as  faith,  Omne  tHlttpHnUnmq'tirKifaiitvtUe  dtelri^  he  that  can

mingle  the  fweete  and  wholelbmc,  the  pleafant  and  the  profitable,  he  is  indeed  an  abfolute
good  writer  :ard  Inch  be  Poets,  if aiiy  be  llich,they  prelent  unto  us  a prettie  tale,ablc  to  keepc
a childe  from  play, and  an  old  man  from  tlx  ci'iimnie  corner : Or  as  the  fame  Horace  laith  to  a
covetous  man :

Tantaltti  d labrU fitiem  fugientia  captat
Tlttmina,  ejHtd  rides  ? mfttafo  nomine  de  te
• 'FaiuU  narratur.

One  tels  a covetous  man  a tale  of  that  fits  up  to  the  chinne  in  water,  and  yet

is  plagued  with  fbirll:.  This  fignifies  the  fellefame  man  to  whom  the  tale  is  told,  that  w-al-
lows  in  plenty,  and  yet  his  milerable  minde  barres  him  of  the  ule  of  it ; As  my  felfe  knew
and  I am  liire  many  remember  luftice  RandoU  of  London,  a man  pafiirg  impotent  in  body
but  much  more  in  mind,  that  leaving  behind  him  athoufandpoundsof  gold  in  achelHiilloF
Old  boots  and  fiiocs,  yet  was  fo  milerable,  tlrat  at  my  Lord  Maj  ors  dinner  they  fay  he  would
put  up  a widgen  for  his  fupper,  and  many  a good  meale  he  did  take  of  his  fianke  neighbour
thewiddow  Pennex  f.ut  to  come  to  tlie  matter,  this  fame  great  linnethat  is  hide  to  Poetrie
'./tn freer  to  of  plcafing  fboles , is  fufhicienf.y  aiifwored  if  it  be  worth  the  anfwcring.  Now'  for  th.e  bree-
tke  t bird,  ding  of  errours  which  is  the  third  Objedion,  I fee  not  why  it  fhould  breed  any  wlxn  iione
is  boup.d  to  beleeve  that  they  write,  nor  they  looke  not  to  have  their  fid:iors  belecved  in
the  Hterall  fence,  and  therefore  bee  that  well  examines  whence  errours  fpring,lhall  finde  the
writers  of profe  and  not  of  verfe,  the  autliors  and  maintainers  of them,  and  this  point  I count
fo  manifo!!:  as  it  needs  no  proofo.  The  laft  reproofe  is  lightnes  and  wrantonnefie:  this  is  indeed
an  Objedion  offome  importance,fith  as  Sir  Philip  Sidney  conftfleth,C«pi<^o  is  crept  even  in-
to the  Hcroicall  Poems,  and  confequently  maketh  that  alfo,  fiibjed  to  this  reproofo : I pro-
mifed  in  the  beginning  not  partially  to  praife  Poefie,  but  plainelyandhoneftly  toconfefie
that,  that  might  tmely  be  objeded  againft  it,  and  if  anything  mavbc,  furcitisrhislafcivi-
oufneffe ; yet  this  I will  fay,  that  of  all  kinde  of  Poefie,  the  Heroicali  is  leaf!  infeded  there-
with. Tlie  other  kinds  I will  ratlier  excufo  then  defend , though  of  all  die  kindcs  of
Poefie  it  may  be  laid,  where  any  feurrilitie  and  Icwdnefie  is  found,  there  Pc^triedoth
not  abule  us,  but  writers  have  abufed  Poetrie.  And  brieflic  to  examine  all  the  kindes :
Firft  the  T ragicall  is  meerely  free  from  it,  as  reprefertirg  onely  the  crucll  and  lawlelfe  pro-
ceedings of  Princes,  moving  nothing  but  pitieordeteftation.  The  Comicall  (whatfoever
foolilh  play  makers  make  it  offend  in  this  kind)  yet  being  right;ly  ufed,  it  reprefentstbem


Apoldgie  of  Poetries,

{b  ns  to  make  die  vice  fcorned  and  not  embraced.  The  Satyrike  is  merely  free  from  it,  as  being
wholly  occupied  in  mannerly  and  eovcrtly  reproving  of  all  vices.  The  Elegic  is  dill  mour-
ning : as  for  the  Pal^orall  rvirh  the  Sonnet  or  Epigramme,  though  many  times  they  favour  of
wantonnes  and  loue  and  toying, and  now  and  then  breaking  tl'.e  rules  of  Poctric,go  into  plaine
(burrilitie,  yet  even  the  wonl  of  them  may  be  not  ill  applied,  and  arc, I mull:  confefle,  too  dc-
lighthilljin  fo  much  as  C^fartial faith,

LAttdaMt  ilUj  ftd  ijla  Icgmtt
And  in  another  place,

Ernbuit  meum  LucretU  UhrHtn:

SedfnrAKn  Byffto.  Brute  recede  Jeget.

Lftcretia  (by  which  he  fignifies  any  chad  matron)  w’ill  bludi  and  bcadiamcdto  reade  3
lafeivious  lK)oke  : but  how  ? not  except  Brnttu  be  by,  that  is, if  any  grave  man  fhaild  ice  her
reade  if;  butif  •'»/«#  turnc  his  backe,  fhe  vvillto  it  againcandrcadcitall.  Biitto  cudthis
}xu  t of  my  Apologic,  as  I count  and  conclude  Hcroicall  Poefic  allowable,  and  to  be  read
and  dudied  without  all  exception  : fbmay  Iboldlyfay,  that  Tragedies  well  handled,  be  a
mod  worthy  kind  of  PoefiCj  that  Comedies  may  make  men  fee  and  fliamcattheir  owne
faults,  that  the  red  maybe  fo  written  and  fo  read,  as  much  pleafurc  and  fome  profit  may  be
gathered  out  of  them.  And  for  mine  owne  part,  as  Sc4l$ger\vnx.d!ao^yirgil,  lb  Ibeleeve,
tliat  the  reading  of  a good  Heroicall  Poeme  may  make  a man  both  wifer  and  honeder : and
for  Tragedies,  to  omit  other  famous  Tragedies,  that  that  which  was  played  at  Saint  lokns'm
Cambridge,  the  third,  would  move  (Jthinkc)  the  tyrant,  and  terrific  all

tyrannous  minded  men,  from  following  their  foolilh  ambitious  humors,  feeing  how  his  am-
bition made  him  kill  his  brother,  his  ncphewes,his  wife,  befidc  infinite  others  ] and  lad  of  all
after  afliort  and  troublcfome  raigne,  to  '^d  his  mife table  life,  and  to  have  his  bod ie  har-
ried after  his  death.  Then  for  Comedies  : how  full  ofliarmelefle  irurth  is  our  Cambridge  Pc-
dantius?  and  the  Oxford  Bel  lumGrammaticalc?  ortofpeake  of  a London  Corncdic,  how
mucli  good  matter,  yea  and  matter  of  date,  is  therein  that  Comedie  called  the  play  of  the
Cards  ? in  which  it  is  diew^ed  how  fbure  Parafiticall  knaves  robbethe  fbure  principall  vo-
cations of  the  Rcalme,  vtdel.  the  vocation  of  Souldiers,  Schollers,  Merchants,  and  Husband-
men. Ofwliich  Comedie  I cannot  forget  the  flying  of  a notable  wife  Counleller  that  is  now
dead,  who  when  fomc  (tofing  advifed  that  it  fhoiild  be  forbjdden,  becaufcit  Sir  fraiu

fbme what  too  plaine,  and  indeed  as  the  old  faying  is,  footh  board U no  bo&rd^  ycthe  would
have  it  allowed , adding  it  was  fit  that  they  which  do  that  they  (heuU  not^  {hoald  heare  that  they
yrouldmt.  Tinally,  if  Comedies  may  be  fo  made  as  the  beholders  maybe  bettered  by  them,
without  all  doubt  all  other  forts  of  Poetrie  may  bring  their  profit  as  they  do  bring  delight;  and
if  all,  then  much  more  the  chiefe  of  all,  which  by  all  mens  conlent  is  the  Hcroicall.  Ai-,d  thus
much  be  faid  ofPoefie.

Now  for  this  Poeme  of  Orlando  Furiofp, which  as  I have  heard, hath  bene  dilliked  by  fome,
tliongh  by  few  of  any  wit  or  judgement,  itfbllowesthat  Ifaylbmcwhat  in  defence  thereof
which  I will  do  the  more  moderatly  and  coldly,  by  how  much  the  paincs  Ihavetakeiiinit
(fifing  as  you  may  fee  to  a good  volume)  may  make  me  feeme  a more  partiall  praifer.  Wher-
fore  i will  make  choife  of  fome  other  Poeme  that  is  allowed  and  approved  by  all  n:»en,and  a
little  compare  them  together ; and  what  worke  can  ferve  this  turne  fo  fitly  as  Firgi/t  zy£ne-
adosy  ‘whom  above  all  other  it  feemeth  my  author  doth  follow,  as  appeares  both  by  his  begin*
ning  and  ending.  The  one  begins,

Armavirf*mjj  eano*

The  other,

Le  donne  I cavaUieri  /*  drmegti  amori
Le  cortejie  /’  audace  imprefi  jo  canto,

Virgil  ends  with  the  death  dlTnrnui :

Vitay^  cum  gemitufugit  indiguatM  f %h  umhrM,


Afokgie  of  Poetries,

'Arioiio  ends  wfth  the  death  of  Radoment^

*BefltfHtAndofugt  V aim*  fdegnoft
C he fnfi  alter oal  mo»do  e f orgogliefa.

Virgil  extolleth  ty£neas  to  pleafe  Angnilpu,  of  whofe  race  he  was  thought  to  come.  A-
rio^o  praifeth  Roger  o to  the  honour  of  the  houfe  of  E fte.  tyEneas  hath  his  Diao  that  tetaineth
him : Rogero  hath  his  Alcina : finally  left  I Ihould  note  every  part, there  is  nothing  of  any  fpe-
ciall  obiervation  in  Virgily  but  my  author  hath  with  great  felicity  imitated  it,  fo  as  whofo-
ever  will  allow  Virgil  muft  ipfofaflofis  they  (ay)admit  /^rwiJo.Now  of  what  account  Firgil
is  reckned,and  woraiily  reckned,for  ancient  times  witneffeth  Aaguftm  Cafars  verfe  of  him:
Ergone  fupremiipotmt  voximprobaverhii
Tam  dirummandarenefoi  ? ^e.

Concluding  thus,

Lattdet$tr,placeaty  •Uigeaty  relegatUTy  ametur.

This  is  a great  praife,comming  from  lo  great  a Prince.  Por  later  times,  to  omit  Scaliger^
whom  I recited  before,  that  affirmeth  the  reading  of  Virgil  may  make  a man  honeft  and  ver-
tuous : that  excellent  Italian  Poet  *Dam  profefleSi  plainly*  that  when  he  wandred  out  of  the
right  way  (meaning  thereby,  when  he  lived  fondly  and  loofly)  Virgil  was  the  firft  that  made
him  looke  into  himfelfe,  and  reclaime  himfelfe  from  that  frme’dangerous  and  lewd  coiirfo.
But  what  need  we  fiirther  witnefte?  do  we  not  make  our  children  reade  it  commonly  before
they  can  underftand  it,  as  ateftimonythatwedo  generally  approve  it  ? and  yet  rvefeeold
mehftudie  it,  as  a proofe  that  they  do  fpecially  admire  it ; fo  as  one  writes  very  pretily,  that
children  do  wade  in  Virgil yZnd  yetftrong  men  do  fwim  in  it.

Now  to  apply  this  to  foe  praife  of  mine  author,  as  I faid  before,  fo  I fry  ftill,  whatfoever
is  praifo-worthy  in  is  plentifully  to  be  found  in  Ariofioy  and  fome  things  that  Virgil

could  not  have  for  the  ignorance  of  the  age  he  lived  in,  you  find  in  my  author,  fprinkledo-
ver  all  his  worke,  as  I will  very  briefly  rote,  and  reforre  you  for  the  reft  to  the  booke  it  felfe.
.The  devout  and  Chriftian  demeanor  of  charUmaine  in  the  j 4.  booke  with  His  prayer,

Non  voglia  tna  hon  taper  mio  falUre
Cb'l tHopopolfidele  habhia  a patirey^c*

‘ 'And  in  the  beginning  of  the  1 7.  booke  that  would  befeemc  any  pulpit :

IlgiMflo  Dio  ^Handoi peccati  no  fir i.

Butaboveall,thatinthe4i.bookeoftheconverfionof  Rogero  to  the  Chriftian  Religion,'
where  the  Hermit  fpeakedi  to  him,  containing  in  e ffedl  a foil  inftrudion  againft  prefumptioii
and  dcfpaire,which  I have  fet  do  wne  thus  in  Englifh,

(at  I /aid)  this  yrife  that  Hermit  Jpoke-,

And  part  doth  comfort  hiWyand part  doth  chechf ;

Heblameth  him  that  in  that  pleaf ant  yoke
He  had  fo  long  defer d topnt  his  neckfy
“But  did  to  roratb  his  maker  fii8 provokei
And  did  not  come  at  his  fir fl  call  and  beckgy
But  (liU  did  hide  himfelfe  array  from  Gody
Z^ntiS  he  faw  him  comming  with  his  rod.

Then  dtd  hh  comfort  himyand  make  him  knoWy
T hat  grace  is  nere  denide  tofuch  as  aske.

As  do  the  workmen  in  the  ^ofpell psow^

Receiving  pay  alike  for  divers  taske.

And  fo  after  concluding,

Howto  Chrift  he  muft  impute
The  pardon  of  his  finnes^yet  nere  the  later
He  told  him  be  muft  be  baptirfd  in  water.

Thefc


k^h  Analogic  of

Thefe  and  infinite  places  full  of  CbrilHan  exhortation , doctrine  and  example,  1 could
quote  out  of'the  book, lave  that  I half  en  to  an  end,  and  it  would  be  needlelTe  to  thofc  that  will
not  read  them  in  the  lx>oke  it  felfe,and  fiiperfluous  ro  thofc  that  will : bur  moft  manifcfl  it  is
and  not  to  be  denyed,  that  in  this  point  my  Author  is  to  be  preferred  before  all  theancici.c
Poets,  in  which  are  mentioned  fb  many  falle  gods,  and  of  them  lb  many  foule  deeds , their
contentions,  their  adulteries,  their  inceft,  as  were  botli  oblcenous  in  recitall , and  hurtfull  in
example;  diough  indeed  thofc  whom  they  termed  gods,  were  certaine  great  Princes  that
committed  liich  enormous  faults,  as  great  Princes  in  late  ages  (that  love  Hill  to  be  cald  gods
of  the  earth)do  often  commit.  But  now  it  may  be  and  is  by  Ibme  objeded,  that  although  he
write  Chrillianly  in  fome  places,yet  in  other  Ibme  he  is  too  lafcivious,  'as  in  that  of tlie  baw'-
dyPrier,in  and  copulation, in  Anfilmw  h\sGiptian^\r\Richardctt0  hismeta-

morpholis,  in  mine  hofts  tale  of  AHolfe^md  Ibme  few  places  befide;  alas  if  this  be  a fault,par-
don  him  this  one  faultjthough  I doubt  too  many  of  you(gentle  readers*)  will  be  too  exorabfc  in
tin's  point ; yea  me  thinks  I fce  Ibme  of  you  fcarching  already  for  thefc  places  of the  booke,
and  you  are  halfe  offended  that  I have  not  made  Ibme  diredions  that  you  might  find  out
and  read  them  immediately.But  I bcfcech  you  (lay  a while,  and  as  the  Italian  faith  ‘l^tan  pia-
no take  this  caveztvjknyou,'to  read  them  as  my  author  meant  them,  to

breed  dcte(lation,and  not  deledation:  remember  when  you  read  of  the  old  lecherous  Frier,
that  a Fornicator  is  one  of  die  things  that  Godhateth.  When  you  read  of  thinkc

Iiow  lofeph  fled  from  his  inticing  miftreffc ; when  you  light  on  Anfelmtu  tale,learne  to  loath
beaftly  covctoufneffc,  when  on  Rich*rdetto,  know  that  fwcet  meat  will  have  lb  wre  fa  wee,
when  on  mine  hofts  talc(if  you  will  follow  my  counfell)turnc  over  the  leafe  and  let  it  alone,
although  even  that  lewd  tale  may  bring  fome  men  profit , and  I have  heard  that  it  is  already
(and  perhaps  not  unfitly)tcrmed  the  comfort  of  cuckolds.  But  as  I fay,ifthis  be  a fault,  then
Vifgil  committed  the  fame  fault  in  T)Uo  and  iAEneoi  entertainment : and  iffome  will  fcy,he
tels  that  mannerly  and  covertly,  how  will  they  excufe  that,  where  yulcan  was  intreated  by
Venns  to  make  an  armour  for  <iy£neas  ?

^ixerat^(fr  ni'vijt  hinc  at ^ hinc  divaUcertU
CnoSlantem  amplextt  ntotlif»vet,iUe  repente
/iccepit  folitam  flammam^notm^  per  artui
Jntravit  calor.  And  a little  after.  Ea  verba  locHtttt
Optatos  dedit  amplexns,placitnm^  petivh
Con'jugis  infufiesgretnio  per  membra  foporem,

I hope  they  that  underftand  Latin  will  confefle  this  is  plaine  enough,  and  yet  with  modeli
words, and  no  obfeenous  phrafc;and  fo  I dare  take  upon  me  that  in  all  Ariojio(a\\d  yet  I think
it  is  as  much  as  three  t^neads)  there  is  not  a word  of  ribaldry  or  obfeenoufnefle ; farther,
there  is  fomeet  a decorum  in  the  perfons  of  thofc  that  fpcak  lafeivioufly , as  any  of  judge-
ment mull  needs  allow  ; and  therefore  though  I rather  crave  pardon  thenpraife  for  him  in
this  pointjyet  me  thinks  I can  (mile  at  the  finenelfc  of  fome,that  will  condemne  him,  and  yet
not  onely  allow,but  admire  our  Chawcer,yj\\o  both  in  words  and  fence  incurreth  ferre  more
the  reprehenfion  of  flat  fcurrilitie,as  I could  recite  many  places,  not  oncly  in  his  Millers  talc,
but  in  the  good  wife  of  Bathes  talc,  and  many  more,  in  which  onely  the  decorum  he  keepcs,
is  that  that  cxcufcth  it,and  maketh  it  more  tolerable.  But  now  whereas  fome  will  lay,  Ari-
oHo  wanteth  art,  reducing  all  heroicall  Poems  unto  the  method  of  Homer  and  ceitaine  pre-
cepts of  Arifiotle.Yor  Homer  I lay, that  that  which  was  commendable  in  him  to  write  in  that
age, the  times  being  changed,  would  be  thought  other  wife  now,  as  \ve  fee  both  in  phrafe  and
in  falTiions  the  world  growes  more  airious  each  day  then  other:  Ovid  gave  precepts  ofma-
king  love,  and  one  was  that  one  Ihould  fpill  wine  on  the  boord  and  write  his  miftrefl'e  name
therewith,  this  was  a quaynt  caftinthat  agcj  but  he  that  Ihould,  make  love  fo  now,  his
love  would  mocke  him  for  his  labour , and  count  him  but  a flovenly  futor ; and  if  it  be  thus
changed fince Ow'd/ time,  much  more fince tiipx.  Andya  for  ArieHos  talcs  that

many


K^pologie  of  Peetrte.

many  diink  unartificially  broughtin ; Homer  himfclfe  hatli  the  like  : as  in  the  Iliads  the  con-
Krence  of  with upon  fome  arts  oF  Belierophon:  and  in  his  Odyiftas  the

difeourfe  of  the  hog  with  Vljjfes.  Further,  for  the  name  ofthe  book,  which  fome  carp  at,bc-
caule  he  called  it  Orlando  rather  then  Roger o ; in  that  he  may  alfo  be  defended  by  ex-
ample of//<7w^r,who  profelTing  to  write  of  calleth  his  book  Iliade  of  Troy,and  not

Achtllide.  As  for  Ari^otU  t rules, I take  it,he  hath  followed  them  very  ftrirtly.

Briefly,  andthebcftcenfurersofPoefie,  would  have  the  that  is,  the

heroieallPoem,  fhould  ground  on  fome  hiftorie,  and  take  fome  fhorttimein  the  lame  to
beautifle  with  his  Poetrie : fo  doth  mine  Author  take  the  ftory  of  K.  Charles  the  great , and
doth  r.ot  exceed  a yeare  or  thereabout  in  his  whole  worke.  Secondly,  they  hold,that  nothing
IFould  be  fained  utterly  incredible.  And  fure  Ariofto  neither  in  his  inchantments  excee'deth
credit  (for  who  knowes  not  how  ftrong  the  illufions  of  the  Devill  are?  ) neither  in  the
miracles  that  »yAHelfo  by  the  power  of  S.  lohn  is  fliined  to  do,  fince  the  Church  holdeth  that
Prophep  both  alive  and  dead  have  done  mighty  great  miracles.  Thirdly,  they  would  have
^^j^*'oj^®^^Pocrr>(2fwellasaTragedie)tobefullofPfr/^tf(M,which  I interpret  an  agnition
of  fome  unlooked  for  fortune  either  good  or  bad,  and  a fudden  change  thereof:,  of  this  what
ftore  there  be  the  reader  fhall  quickly  find.  As  for  apt  fimilitudes,for  pafllons  well  exprefled,
of  love,ofpitie,ofhate,ofwrath,a  blind  man  may  fce,if  he  can  but  heare,  that  tliis  work  is  fiill
of  them.

There  fbllowes  onely  two  reproofs,  which  I rather  interpret  two  peculiar  praifes  of this
writer  above  all  that  wrote  before  him  in  this  kind  : One,  that  he  breaks  off  narrations  very
abruptly,  fo  as  indeed  a loofe  unattentive  reader  will  hardly  carie  away  any  part  of  the  ftory  ;
but  this  dcubtlefle  is  a point  of  great  art,  to  draw  a man  with  a continiiallthirft  to  read  over
the  whole  work,  and  toward  the  end  ofthe  book  to  clofc  up  the  diverfe  matters  briefly  and
cleanly.  had  counted  this  a fault,  he  would  not  have  done  fo  himfe’fciii

his  Arcadia.  Another  fault  is,that  he  fpeaketh  fo  much  in  his  own  perfon  by  digreffion,which
they  fay  alfo  is  againft  the  rules  of  Poetrie,becaufc  neither  Homer  nor  Virgil it.  Me  thinks
it  is  a fiifficient  defence  to  fay,  ArioHo  doth  it ; fiire  I am,it  is  both  delightfuU  and  very  profi-
table,and  an  excellent  breathing  place  for  the  reader : and  even  as  if  a man  walked  in  a faire
long  alley, to  have  a feat  or  refting  place  here  and  there  is  eafie  and  commodious : but  if  at  tiie
fame  feat  were  planted  fome  excellent  tree,that  not  only  with  the  fliade  fliould  keep  us  from
the  heat,  but  with  fome  pleafantand  right  wholfome  fruit  fliould  allay  our  thirft  and  comfort
our  ftomacke,  we  would  think  it  for  the  time  a little  paradife  : fo  are  A'ioflos  morals  ai^d
prettie  digreffions  fprinkled  through  his  long  work,  to  the  no  lefle  plcafiirc  then  profit  of the
reader.  And  thus  much  be  fjpoken  for  defence  of mine  Author,  which  was  the  fccond  part  of
my  Apologie.

The  third  Now  remaines  the  third  part  of  it,  in  which  I promifed  to  fpeake  fom.e  what  for  my  fol  fo,

which  part,  though  it  have  moft  need  of  an  Apologie  both  large  and  fubftantiall ; yet  I will
7°  fiiortly  and  flightly , becaufe  indeed  the  nature  of  the  thing  it  felfc  is  fiich,

that  the  more  one  doth  fay,  the  leffe  he  fhall  feemetofay;  and  men  are  willinger  topraife
thatin  another  man,  which  himfolfo  fhall  debafe,  then  that  which  he  fliall  feemtomair-
taine.  Certainly  ifl  fhould  confefle  or  rather  profoflc,  that  my  verfe  is  unartificiall,  theftile
rude,the  phrafe  barbarous,the  meeter  unpleafanr,many  more  would  believe  it  to  be  fo,  then
would  imagine  that  1 thought  them  fo:for  this  fame  (tn\AvrU  or  folfe-plcafing  is  fo  common  a
thing,  as  the  more  a man  protefts  himfelfe  to  be  from  it,  the  more  we  will  charge  him  vvitli
it.  Wherefore  let  me  take  thus  much  upon  me,  that  admit  it  have  many  of  the  forenamed  im-
perfertions,  and  many  not  named,  yet  as  writing  goes  now  adayes,  it  may  pafle  among  the
reft;  and  as  I have  heard  a friend  of  mine  (one  very  judicious  in  the  beauty  of  a woman)
fay  of  a Lady  whom  he  meant  topraife,  that  ihe  had  a low  forehead,  agreatnofe,  a wide
mouth , a long  vifage,and  yet  all  thefc  put  together , flic  f eemed  to  him  a very  rvcll  favou-
red woman  ; fo  I hope,  and  I finde  alrcadie  fome  of  my  partiall  friends,  that  what  fevcrall

imper-


^_/{n  Apologkof  ?oetrt€^.

imp€rfe(flions{bevertlieyfindinthistrai-inarion,  yet  taking  all  togctlierjthey  allow  it,  or  at
Icall  wife  they  read  it,  which  is  a great  argument  of  their  liking.

Str  ThomM  Moore  a man  of  great  wifdome  and  learning,  but  yet  a little  inclined  (as  good
wits  are  many  rimes)to  fcojfing , when  one  had  brought  him  a booke  of  Ibme  ihallow  dil-
courfe , and  preafled  him  very  hard  to  have  his  opinion  of  it,  advifed  the  party  to  put  it  ii.to
verlc;  the  plaine  meaning  man  in  the  beft  manner  he  could  did  foj  and  a twelve-moneth
after  at  the  lead,  ame  with  it  to  Sir  Thomeu^  who  flightly  perufing  it,  gave  it  this  encomium^
that  now  there  was  rime  in  ir,but  afore  it  had  neither  rime  nor  reaibn.  Ifany  man  had  meant
to  ferve  me  fo,yet  I had  prevented  him;  for  fure  I am  he  fhall  find  rime  in  mine, and  ifhe  be
not  void  of  realon,he  ihiall  find  rcalbn  too.  Though  for  the  matter,  I can  challenge  no  praife,
havi'  g but  borrowed  it;  and  for  the  verfe  I do  challenge  none,  being  a thing  that  every  body
tliat  never  fcarce  bayted  their  horfe  at  the  V niverfitic , take  upon  them  to  make.  It  is  pofli-
ble  tliatif  I would  have  imployed  that  time  that  I have  done  upon  this,  upon  fome  inven-
tion of  miix  owne , I could  have  by  this  made  it  have  rifbn  to  a Juft  volume , and  if  I would
havedone  as  many  fparc  not  to  do,  flown  very  high  with  flol’en  fcatl'crs.  Biit  I had  rather
men  Ihibuld  lee  and  Know  tlnat  I borrow  all,  then  that  I fleale  any  : and  I would  wifh  to  be
called  rather  one  ofthe  not  word  tranflators,  then  one  ofthe  meaner  makers.  Speciallyfith
tlie  Earle  of  Surrey,  and  Sir  thatarevet  called  the  firlh  refiners  of  the  Englifh

tongue,avere  both  trar.flators  out  of  Italian.  Now  for  thofc  that  count  it  fuch  a contemptible
and  trifling  matter  to  trar.flate , I will  but  lay  to  them  as  <lM.  'Bartholomew  Clarke  an  excel-
lent learned  man,  and  a right  good  tranflator,  laith  inmaner  ofa  prettie  challenge,  in  his-
Pre&ce(as  I remember)  upon  the  Courtier , which  booke  he  tranflated  out  of  Italian  into
Latin.  You(laithhe)thattbiiikeit  fuchatoy  , lay  afide  my  booke  , and  take  my  authouv  in
your  hand, and  try  a leafe  or  fuch  a matter,and  compare  it  with  mine.  Ifl  ILould  fay  lb, there
would  be  enow  that  would  quickly  put  me  downe  perhaps ; but  doubtleflc  he  might  bold-
ly fay  it,  for  I thinke  none  could  have  mended  him.  But  as  our  Englifh  proverbe  faith,  many
talkeof/?o^#wHWthatneverfhotinhisbow,  and  fome  correal  ^Magnificat  ^ that  know
notejuid  fignificat.  For  my  part  I will  thanke  them  that  will  amend  any  thing  that  I have
done  amifle,  nor  I have  no  fuch  great  conceipt  of  that  I have  done , but  that  I thinke  much
in  it  is  to  be  mended  ; and  having  dealt  plaitiely  with  fome  of  my  plaine  dealing  friends , to
tell  me  frankly  what  tliey  heard  Ipoken  of  it  (for  indeed  I fuffrred  fome  part  of  the  primed
copies  to  go  among  my  friends,and  fome  more  perhaps  wentagainft  my  will)  I was  told  that
thelc  in  effcd  were  the  faults  were  found  with  it.  Some  grave  men  mifliked  that  I fhould
fpend  ib  much  good  time  on  fuch  a trifling  worke  as  tliey  deemed  a Poeme  to  be.  Some  more
nicely,fbund  fault  with  fo  many  two  fyllabled  and  three  fyllabled  rimes,  Some(not  undefer-
vedly)reproved  the  fantafticalneffe  of  my  notes,  in  which  they  lay  I ha\'e  (trained  my  felfe
make  mention  of  Ibme  of  my  kindred  and  friends,  that  might  well  be  left  out.  And  one  fault  ^
more  there  is,  whicli  I will  tell  my  felfe,  though  many  would  never  find  it;  and  that  is  - I
have  cut  flnort  feme  ofliis  Cantos,  in  leaving  out  many  ftaves  of  them,  and  fometimes  put  die
matter  oftwo  or  three  Ifaves  into  one.  To thefe  reproofs  Khali  pray  you  gentle  and  noble
Readers  with  patience  heare  my  defence,and  then  I will  end.  For  the  firfl:  reproofe,either  it  jnCrv
is  already  excufed,  or  it  will  never  be  excufed  ; for  I have(I  think)finhciently  proved,  both
the  art  to  be  allowable,and  this  work  to  be  commendable : yet  I will  tell  you  an  accident  that  ^ *
happened  unto  my  felfe.  When  I was  entred  a prettie  way  into  the  tranflation,  about  the  fc-
venth  booke,  comming  to  write  that  where  Meliffa  in  the  perfon  oi'Rogeros  Tutor,  -comes
and  reproves  Rogero  in  the  4ftaffe  : ^

JVas  it  for  this,  that  I in  youth  thee  fed
With  marrow?  gfre.  And  againe :

I s this  a means  ^or  ready  way  you  trow^

“That  other  worthy  men  have  trod  before^
t/i  Cxlar  or  a Scipio  to  grow  ?


Srraigh!;


f


i^pologie  of  Poetrie.

Flemming  Straight  I began  to  thinke,that  my  Tutor , a grave  and  learned  man,  and  one  of  a \'cry  au-
•i  Kings  fterclife,  might  fay  to  me  in  like  Ibrt,  Was  it  for  this,  that  I read  and  P//ifo  to  you

CoUedge  and  indnKTcd  you  fo  carefully  both  in  Grecke  and  Latin?  to  have  you  now  become  a tranfla-  '
r»  Ca»2-  tor  of  Italian  toyes  ? But  while  I thought  thus,  I was  aware,  that  it  was  no  toy  tliat  could
theCeconi^^'^  luch  an  hondt  and  ierious  confideration  into  my  mind.  Now  for  them  that  find  fault
^ with  polyfyllable  mccter,  me  thinke  they  are  like  thofe  that  blarrte  men  for  putting  fugar  in
their  wine,and  chide  too  bad  about  it,and  fay  they  inarre  all,  but  yet  end  with  Gods  blefling
on  tlieir  hearts.  For  indeed  if  J had  knowne  their  diets,  I could  have  laved  fome  of  my  coft,
at  leaft  fome  of  my  paine ; for  when  a verfe  ended  with  oivilitie^  I could  eafier  after  the  an-
cient manner  of  rime,have  made  or  or  dfcriff  to  anfwer  it,  leaving  the  accent  upon
the  laft  fyllable,  then  hunt  after  three  fyllabled  words  to  anfwer  it  with  facilitie,  gentilttie,
tranquillities  hoUilitie , fcurrtlities  debil$tiesagilitte,fai^tlities*>obiltties  fwo^i/irxV,  which  who
miflike,  may  tall:  lampe  oyle  with  their  eares.And  as  for  two  fyllabled  meeters,they  be  l6  ap-
prooved  in  other  languages,that  the  French  call  them  the  feminine  rime,as  the  fweeter ; and
the  oite  fyllable  the  mafeulin.  But  in  a word  to  anfwer  this,  and  to  make  them  for  ever  hold
their  peaces  of  this  point ; Sir  Philip  Sidney  not  onely  ufoth  them, but  affoeficth  them : ffg»ifics
dignt^e: Earned  t»s*tamed isjblamed  isihide  awayyhide arvaj.  Though  if my  many  blotted  papers
that  I have  made  in  this  kind , might  affoord  me  authoritie  to  give  a rule  of  it , I would  fay
that  to  part  them  with  a one  fyllable  meeter  betweene  them,  would  give  it  beft  grace . For  as
men  ufe  to  fo w with  the  hand  and  not  with  the  whole  facke , lb  I would  have  the  eare  fed.
The  third,  but  not  cloyed  witlithele  pleafingand  fweet  falling  meeters.  For  the  third  reproofo  about
the  notes,  lure  they  were  a worke  (as  I may  fo  call  it)of  fupererogation,  and  I would  wifh
fbmtimcs  they  had  been  left  out,and  the  rather,  ifibein  fuchfaire  polTibilitie  to  be  thought
a foole  or  fantafticall  for  my  labour.  T rue  it  is,  I added  fome  notes  to  the  end  of  every  Can-
to, evenasiffbmeofmy  friends  and  my  felfe  reading  it  together  (and  fb  it  fell  out  indeed
many  times ) had  after  debated  upon  them , what  had  beene  moft  worthy  conlideration  in
them,and  fo  oft  times  immediatly  I fet  it  down.  And  wheras  I make  mention  here  and  ther>e
of  fome  of  mine  owne  friends  and  kin,  I did  it  the  rather,becaufe  Plutarke  in  one  place  Ipeak-
ingof  /^owry,partly  lamenteth,and  partly  blameth  him,  that  writing  fo  much  as  he  did,  yet  in
none  of  his  works  there  was  any  mention  made,or  fo  much  as  inkling  to  be  gathered  of  what
flock  he  was, of  what  kindred,of  what  towne,nor  fave  for  his  language,of  what  country.  Ex-
aife  me  then,  if  I in  a worke  that  may  perhaps  laft  longer  then  a better  thing,  and  being  not
afhamed  of  my  kindred ,name  them  here  and  there  to  no  mans  offence,  though  I meant  not  to
make  every  body  fo  far  of  my  counfell  why  I did  it,  till  I was  told  that  fome  perfon  of  fome
reckoning  r.oted  me  of  a little  vanitie  for  it : and  thus  much  for  that  point.

‘TdK fmth  Eor  my  omitting  and  abbreviating  fome  things,  either  in  matters  impertinent  to  us,  or  in

fome  too  tedious  f, arteries  of  perfons  that  we  never  heard  of^  if  I have  done  ill,  I crave  par-
don; for  fure  I did  it  for  the  beft.  But  if  any  being  ftudious  of the  Italian, would  for  his  better
underfhinding compare  them  , thefirft  fixbookes(fwealittleofthethip^)willftand  him  in
flead.  But  yet  I would  not  have  any  man  except,that  I lEould  obferve  his  phrafe  fo  ftriflly  as
an  interpreter,  nor  the  matter  fo  carefully,  as  if  it  had  been  a ftory,  in  which  to  varie  were  as
great  a fin,  as  it  were  fimplicity  in  this  to  go  word  for  word.  But  now  to  conclu'^e,  I fhall
pray  you  all  that  have  troubled  your  felves  to  read  this  my  triple  Apologic,  to  accept  my  la-
bours, and  to  exculemy  errours , if  with  no  other  thing,  at  leaft  with"  the  name  of  youth,
(which  commonly  hath  need  of  cxcufer ) and  fo  prefuming  this  pardon  to  be  granted,
we  fhall  part  good  friends.  Onely  let  me  intreat  you  in  reading  the
tie  life  booke  enfuing,  not  to  do  me  that  in  jurie,  that  a

ejeiric^o.  Potter  did  to


AN  ADVERTISEMENT  TO  THE  READER  BEFORE

H£  RE  AD  E this  FOEME,  OF.SOME  THINGS  TO  Be  OBSERVED,
at  neU  in  the  fubjtance  of  this  worl^e,  a*  alfo  in  the  fitting  forth  thereof,  nith  the  ufe  of  the  Fidures,

T able, and  annotations  to  the  fame  annexed.


Here  are  peradventurc  many  men,  and  feme  of  tliofc  both  grave  and  godly  men,  that
^ iiiii  J In  refpc^l  thcy  count  all  Poetry  as  mccrly  tending  to  wantonncflxand  vanitkjWill

“ at  the  very  firft  fight  rejeft  this  booke,  and  not  only  not  allow,  but  blame  and  re-

prove the  travcll  taken  in  fetting  foiih  the  fame  in  our  mother  tongue.  And  furely
forfuchcenfurers  aswillcondcmne  without  heating  the  caufe  pleaded,!  can  be  well
content  to  have  them  fparc  the  labour  in  reading,  which  they  thinke  ! have  loft  in
writing  j and  appealing  from  them,  if  not  to  higher  at  Icaft  to  more  indifferent
judges, namely  fuch  as  will  vouchfafe  to  hcarc  what  can  be  fpoken  in  defence  of  the
maDtcr,and  then  will  yccld  (as  wife  men  everfiiould  do)  to  theflrorger  reafbn : I
do  to  them  direft  this  my  Ihortadvertifemtnt,  which  (bccaufc  all  that  may  readc


this  bookc  are  not  of  equall  capacities)  I will  endevour  to  explaine  more  plainely,  then  for  the  learned  fort  had
haply  bcene  requifite.  _ - . .

And  firft  ifany  bavethisfcruplcjtharir  might  be  hurtfiill  for  hisfoule  or  con^'ence, to  readc  a book  of  Poetry,
as  though  it  might  alien  his  mind  from  vertuennd  religion,  I referre  him(bcfidTmany  other  excellent  mens 'mi-
tings,bothin  defence  and  praife  thereof)  to  a litlcbricfetreatifc  in  the  beginning  of  this  bookc,  written  by  me  ta  vertuc.
gcnoally  in  defence  of  Pocmes,and  fpccially  of  thisprefent  worke, which  I dare  affirmc  to  be  neither  vicious  nor
profane,  but. apt  to  breed  thequitecomrary  cffcfts,ifagieat  fault  be  not  in  the  readeisownc  bad  difpofition.

Secondly,!  ha  vein  the  marginall  notes  quoted  the  apt  fimilitudcs,and  pithic  fentcncesor  adages,withthe  beft
defcriptions,and  the  excellent  imitations,  and  the  places  and  authors  from  v/hence  they  arc  taken.  *

Furthci,  where  divci-sftories  in  this  worke  feemc  in  many  places  abruptly  broken  off,  I have  fetdireffions  in  TrireHlioitfef
themar^eritjwhcictofind  the  continuance  of  every  fuch  ftory,thoughI  would  notwiflt  any  to  read  them  in  that
order  at%hc  firft  reading,  but  ifany  thinke  them  worthy  the  twifcrcading,thcn  he  may  the  fccondtimc  uotun-  fbedivm  >
conveniently  ufe  it,  if  the  meanc  matter  bctwccnc  the  fo  divided  ftorics  (upon  which  commonly  they  depend)  *
be  no:  quite  out  of  hismemoric.

Alio  (according  to  the  Italian  naanner)  Ihavcin  a ftaffe  of  eight  verfes  comprehended  the  contents  of  every  The
Bookeoi  Canto,in  the  beginning  thcrcofjwhith  hath  two  good  ufesjone  to  undcrftandthcpifhircthcperfcacr,

the  other  to  rcmcmbcrthc  ftoric  the  better.

As  for  the  pifturcSi  they  arcall  cut  inbralTc,  and  moftofthem  by  the  beft  workmen  in  that  kind^  that  have  Thtfi&ares.
bin  in  this  land  this  many  yearcs:  yet  I will  not  praife  them  toomuch,betaufcIgaTcdueftion  for  their  making,
and  in  regard  thereof,!  may  be  thought  paitiallibut  this  I may  truly  fay, that  (for  mine  own  part)I  have  not  fecne
any  made  in  England  bcttcr,nor  (indeed)  any  ofthickind  in  any  book,  except  it  were  a trcatifc  fet  fonh  by  that
profound  man  maftcr  Broughton  thclaft  ycatc,upon  the  RcveIation,in  which  there  arc  fome  three  or  foure  pre-
tic  pi£lurcs  (in  oftavo)  cut  m brafle  vciy  woikmaniy.  As  for  other  bookes  that  1 havefeene  in  this  Rcalmc,cithcr
in  Latinc  or  Englifli  with  piffurcs,  a*  Li  vic,Gcfncr,  Alciats  cmblemcs,  a bookc  de  Spellris  in  Latinc,  and  in  our
tongue  the  Chronicles,  the  bookc  of  Martyrs,  the  bookc  of  hauking  and  hunting,  and  M.Whitneys  excellent
Emblcmcs,  yet  all  their  figures  are  cut  in  wood,and  none  in  mctall,  and  in  that  refpeft  inferiour  to  thcfc,at  Icaft
(by  the  old  proverbe)  the  more  coft,  the  more  worfhip.

The  ufeof  the  pifturc  is  evident,  which  is,  that  (having  read  over  the  bookc)  you  may  readc  it  (as  it  were  a-
gainc)  inthevery  pifturc;  and  one  thing  is  to  be  noted,  whuhcvcry  onc(haply)  will  not  obfirve,  namely  the
peifpeftivc  in  every  figure  For  theperfonagesof  men,  thefliapcsof  horfes,  and  fuch  like,  arc  made  large  at  the
Dottomc,and  Icfler  upward, as  if  you  were  to  behold  all  the  fame  in  a plaine,that  which  is  neareft  fccmcsgrcatcft,
and  the  fardeft  fiicwcs  fmallcft,which  is  the  chiefc  art  in  pifture.  * .

If  the  name  of  any  man,  woman,  countiy,townc,horfe,  or  weapon  fcem.eftransc  teany,  T have  made  a table  TheTablK
where  to  find  it.  And  inthcfamctable,  adireftion  for  thcfcvcrall  tales,whcre  to  begin  and  end,ihofc  that  may  Tbettttf,
convrnicBtly  be  rcadfingIe,of  which  kind  there  arc  many, and  thofe  not  unplc.ifant.

Laftly,at  the  end  of  evciy  Book  or  Canto,bccaurc  thcReadeimay  take  not  onIydelight,but  profit  inreading,

I have  noted  mail  (as  occafion is  offered)  the  Morall,  the  Hiftory,thc  Allcgory,and  the  Allufion

The  Morall,  that  we  may  apply  it  toour  own  manners  and  difpofiiion,to  the  amendment  of  the  fame.  MeraU.

The  HLftory,boththat  the  true  ground  ofthcpocmc  may  appcarc,(for  learned  men  hold, that  a pcrfcf!  ppemc  Hifioriu
muft  ground  of  a truth)(as  I fiicw  more  at  large  in  anothcrplacc)as  alfo  to  explaine  fome  things  that  aie  lightly  '
touched  by  him,as  examples  of  all  times,  cithei  of  old  or  of  late.

The  Allegory,  offomc  things  that  arc  mccrciy  fabulous,  yet  have  an  allcgorkall  fence,  which  every  body  at  odae^orie,
the  firftfhew  cannot  perceive.

The  Allufion;  of  fic!ions,to  be  applied  to  fome  things  done,  cr  written  of  in  timCspaft,  as  alfo  where  It  may  .AUnfim,
be  applycd  without  cffcncctothctimc  prcfcnt.But  thefe  happen  in  very  few  books.

And  thisis  all  that  I have  to  advertife  the  Reader,  for  if  any  other  notes  happen  tocomc  after,  it  is  buffer
want  ofroomc  in  the  margent,  that  they  wcrcfainc  to  be  put  out  of  their  due  place.  It  rcmainesoncly  to  wifti
(becaufel  find  it  will  bcdclighcfull  to  many)  that  it  may  be  hurtfull  to  none, left  (if  it  ILould)  both  they  and  J
Recalled  to  account  for  it, where  not  only  cvill  woiks,but  idle  words  fliall  be  puniflicd.

Jo.  Har.


A


THB  FIRST  BOOKS  OR  CANTO

OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


t Thtt

ty  irmUUtH
Jrofft

$l;t  i.ofh’j
viriig,

cano.


THE  ARGVMENT.


Charles  hath  the  foyle,  Angelica  flies  thence:
Renaldos  horfe  hotpe  him  htt  Love  to  find:
Fcrra  w with  him  doth  fight  in  her  defence:
She  flies  againe,  they  flay  not  long  behind.
Argalias  reproves  Ferraws  offence^

The  Spaniara  to  new  vows  himfelfe  doth  bind.
His  miiiris  pre fence  Sacra  pant  enjoy  eth,
ivith  BradamantjRenaldo^fm  annoyeth.


JF  Dame*,  'of  Knights,  of
armes,  oflovcs  delight,

’ Of  courtefiesjof  high  at-
tempts Ifpeakc,

Then  when  the  Moores  tran-
fported  all  their  might
On  A fricfie  ftas,  the  force
of  f ranee  to  breake:

^ Incited  by  the  joiubfnll
_ hcare  and  fpight

Of  Agram.tnt  their  King,  that  vow’d  to  wreake
Thedcath  ofKing  Trayano  (lately  flainc)

Vpon  the  Romane  Emperour  Charltmaine,


b Meamng
htreby  bu
mfirejfr,
rthom  bte
to

libttri'^  iH
tht\^

fiafi.


e Thu  ii  by
the  nulhor
intended  to
CardintU
Hippoliio,
butby  the
Irattjhtor  to
dTrince  far
more  veottby.


I will  no  IcfTc  Orlandos  a£Is  declare,

(A  talc  in  profc  neverfe  yetfung  erCaid)

Who  fell  beftraught  with  love,a  hap  moft  rave,
T o one  that  erft  was  counted  wife  and  ftaydi
If  my  f\vcet  Saint  •>  that  caufeth  my  like  care.
My  flender  mufc  affoord  fome  gracious  ayd,

1 make  no  doubt  but  I fhall  have  the  skill.

As  much  as  1 hare  promifi  to  fulfill.


It  may  fuffice  a poore  and  humble  debter.

To  fay,and  if  he  could  it  llioulde  be  better*

Here  fliallyou  find  among  the  worthy  pceres,
Whofe  praifes  I prepare  to  tell  in  verfe,
iio^erojuim  from  whom  of  auncient  yceres
Your  princely  ftemsderived,!  reherfe;

Whofe  noble  mind  by  princely  afts  appcarcs,
Whofe  worthy  fame  even  to  the  *kic  doth  peife:
So  you  vouchfafe  my  ••  lowly  ftik  and  bafe,
Among  your  high  conceits  a little  plafe.

%

Orlando  who  long  time  had  * loved  dearr,

Angel  Mthcfiirciand  for  her  fake.

About  thcworldjin  nations  far  and  ncare.

Did  high  attempts  performe  and  undertake,
Rcturii’d  with  her  into  the  Weft  that  yeafe.


1

1


l>.


I

I


That  Charles  his  power  againft  the  Tur^s  did  make:  Ur,t,jvrituii


i


Vonclifafe  (O  Prince*  of  moft  renowmed  race.
The  ornament  and  hopcofthis  our  time)
T’accept  this  gift  prefented  to  your  grace,

Ey  me  your  fervanr rudely  here  in  rime.

And  though  I paper  pay  and  inkc,in  place
Ofdecpei  dcbfjvct  take  it  foi  no  crime:


And  with  the  foxcof  Germanic  and  Prance^
Ncare  Pyien  ^ Alpcs  hisftandarddid  advance.

6

To  make  the  Kings  of  Affrii{e  and  of  SpainCy
Repent  their  rafli  attempts  and  foolifh  vaunts.
One  having  brought  from  Affrilieia  bistraine.
All  able  men  to  carry  fword  or  launce,

T he  other  mov’d  the  Spaniards  now  againe
To  oven  hrow  the  goodly  Rcalme  of  Fraunce,
And  hither  (asl  faid)  Orlando  went.

But  of  his  comming  ftraight  he  did  repent.

A X


bytme'Bef'.

ardui.

fThebllUi

tbttpMrt

FttMceuti

Sftint,


dlnuMint
off'iriil  «•
OSavim:
.Atqu*  btne
Jtnttemfrr*
Arcum  niter  [
ftlitCt  btdf
ramtibifir-
ptrt  Uureh  '
tTbitbrtb
refirtiKtua
farmer  tre*.
iftceiM
OrleMiot


For


a


THE  FIRST  BOOKE


Himiu  Du{t
tifBi'Jttr,


SMlt.

Imitation  of

Virfil.-u

t/£voad,

Improvtfum

aj/iri-tveiiiti

qui  fenUttHt

angutm.

’Rtnaido  hit

htrfcs  namt

ifu'Baitrdf,


Foi  l)Crc(behold  how  humane  judgements  are.

And  how  the  wifei  fort  art  oft  miftaken)

His  Ladie  whom  he  guarded  had  (b  farre.

Nor  had  in  fightsnordangersgreat  fotfaken.
Without  the  dint  of  fword  or  open  warre,

Amid  his  friends  away  from  him  wastaken.

For  Charles  the  grcat,a  raliant  Prince  and  wifcj
Did  this  to  quench  a broilc  that  did  arife.

%

hetwcenc Orlando zni  RenaldohtCf
T here  fell  about  Angelica  foine  brail.

And  each  of  them  began  the  tothcr  hate.

This  Ladies  love  had  made  them  both  fo  thrall.

But  Charles  who  much  miflikcsthat  fuch  debate
Bciwecnefuch  friends  fliouldrife,on  caufc  fo  fmall,
loNamus  of  Bavier  in  keeping  gave  her.

And  fuflfred  neither  of  them  both  to  have  her,

9

But  promift  he  would  prefcnily  bcAow

The  damfcll  fairc,on  him  that  in  that  fighfj
The  plaineft  proofe  fbould  of  his  prowelic  fliowi
And  danger  moA  the  Fagans  with  histnight.

But  (ay  the  whilejthc  Chriftians  take  the  blow.
Their  fouldicrs  flame, t heir  Captaines  put  to  flight.
The  D uke  himfclfc  a prifner  there  was  taken.

His  tent  was  quite  abandon’d  and  foifakcn.

10

Where  when  the  damfcll  fairc  a while  had  ilayd>

That  for  the  viftor  pointed  was  a pray.

She  tookc  hcrfaorfe,ne  farther  timedelayd.

But  fecrctly  convay’d  her  felfc  away.

For  fhe  forefawjand  was  full  fore  anaydj
That  this  to  Charles  would  prove  a difmall  day.
And  riding  through  a wood jflic  hapt  to  meet
A Knight  that  came  againft  heron  his  feet.

1 1

His  curats  onjhis  helmet  not  undono.

His  fword  and  target  ready  to  the  fame.

And  through  the  wood  fo  fwiftly  he  did  runne,

As  tlxyrhat  go  halfe  naked  fora  game.

But  never  did  a fliephcards  daughter  fhunne
Morefpeedily  a fnakethaton  her  came.

Then  fairc  Angelica  did  take  her  flight.

When  as  flic  once  had  knowledge  of  the  Knighe.

la

Thisvaliant  Knight  was  Lord  of  Clafnnount ,

Duke  Ammons  fonnc,asyoii  flrall  underftand.

Who  having  loft  his  hoi  fe  of  good  accoufit.

That  by  mifliap  was  dipt  out  of  his  hand.

He  follow’d  him, in  hope  againc  to  mount,

Vntill  this  Ladies  fight  did  make  him  ftand,

Whofc  face  and  fliapc  proporaion’d  were  fo  well.
They  feem’d  the  houfc  where  love  it  felfc  did  dwell.

But  file  that  fliuns  RenaldozW  flic  may,

Vpon  her  horfes  ncckcdoth  lay  the  raine,

Through  thicke  and  thin  flic  gallopcth  away,^

Nc  makes  (he  choife  of  beaten  way  or  plainc,

But  gives  her  palfiey  leave  to  chufc  the  way.

And  bring  mov’d  with  fcarc  and  with  difdaine,
Now  up, now  downc,flie  never  leaves  to  ride.

Till  flic  airivcd  by  a river  fide.


Fafl  by  the  ftreame  Ferram  flie  fees  anone,  fmme  a

(Who  noyd,in  part  with  dull, and  pan  with  fweat)  Spamjh
Out  of  the  battcll  hither  oarac  alone,

With  drinkc  his  thirft,with  aire  tofwage  bis  heat,-
And  minding  backc  againc  to  have  bene  gone.

He  was  detain’d  with  an  unlookt  for  lot.

Into  the  ftreame  by  hap  his  helmet  fell.

And  how  to  get  it  out  he  cannot  tell.

I s

And  hearing  now  the  noife  and  mournfull  cite
Of  one  with  piteous  voice  dcmaunding  ayd.

Seeing  the  damfcll  eke  approching  nic,

T hat  nought  but  hclpc  againft  Renaldo  prayd,

What  wight  It  was,hcgucflcdby  and  by.

Though  looking  palcjlikc  one  that  had  benefrayd,  ;

And  though  fhe  had  not  late  bene  in  his  fight.

He  thought  it  was  Angelica  the  bright.

I6

And  being  both  a flout  aixl  courteous  Rnight,

And  love  a little  kindling  in  his  breft.

He  promiftftraight  to  aide  her  all  he  might.

And  topcrforfnc  what  ever  fliercqucft.t
And  though  he  want  an  bclmet,yet  to  fight
With  bold  Renaldo  he  will  do  hisbefl.

And  both  the  one,thc  other  flraight  defied.

Oft  haring  cither  others  value  tried,

>7

Bet  weene  them  two  a combat  fierce  began ,

With  flrokesthat  might  have  pierft  the  hatdefl  rocks;
VVbilcthcy  thus  fight  on  footc,and  man  to  man.

And  give  and  take  fo  bard  and  heavy  knocks.

Away  the  damfcll  pofleth  all  fhe  can.

Their  painc  and  travcil  fl;c  requites  with  mocks.

So  hard  flic  rode  while  tiKy  were  at  their  fighr.

That  flic  was  clcanc  efcaped  out  of  fight.

18

Whentheylong  time  contended  had  in  vaine,

Who  fliould  rcmainc  the  maftcr  in  the  field.

And  that  with  forcc,with  cunning, nor  with  paine.

The  tone  of  them  could  make  the  ocher  yccid,

Renaldo  ftrR  did  move  the  Knight  of  Spainc
(Although  he  us’d  fuch  curtefic  but  fecld)
Tomakcatruccjnc  washc  to  be  blamed.

For  love  his  heart  to  other  fight  inflamed,

19

You  thought  (faid  he)  to  hinder  me  alone.

But  you  have  hurt  your  felfc  as  much  or  more,

You  fee  the  fairc  Angelica  is  gone,

So  foonc  we  leefe  that  catft  we  fought  fo  fore.'*

Had  you  me  tanc  or  flaine,your^ainc  w ere  none,

Sithyou  wcrcnerc  the  nerc  your  love  thcrforc.

For  while  we  two  have  made  this  little  flay.

She  lets  us  both  aionc  and  goes  her  way.

20

Butif  you  love  thcLadie,asyou  fay.

Then  let  ui  both  agree  to  find  her  out,

Tohavehcrfirft  will  beourwifeft  way,

And.whcn  of  holding  her  there  is  no  doiibf.

Then  by  confent  let  her  rcmainc  his  pray.

That  with  his  fword  can  prove  himfclfc  moft  flour,

I fee  not  clfcaftcr  our  long  debate.

Kow cither  ofuscan  amend  hisflatc.


ferravt


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


i


2 I

Terraw  (that  fcltfinall  plcafute  in  the  fight)
Agreed  a found  and  friendly  league  to  make;
They  lay  afidc  all  wrath  and  malice  ouight,
And  at  the  paitingfrom  the  running  lake.

The  Pagan  would  not  let  thcChriften  Knight
To  follow  him  on  footc,fbr  manners  (ake:

But  prayes  him  mount  behind  his  horfes  backe.
And  fo  they  feekc  thedamfcll  by  the  tracke.
xa

O auncient  Knights  of  true  and  noble  hart.

They  ritals  were, one  faith  they  liv’d  not  under^
ii0fi  thtt  it  Bcfide  they  felt  their  bodies  fluewdly  fmart

of  blowcs  late  given,and  yet  (hehold  a wonder)
'!^ompeti-  Through  thicke  and  thir^fufpition  fct  apart,
irrstttneof-  Like  fiiendsthey  ride,aBd  parted  not  afundcr,
Vntill  the  horfc  with  double  fpurring  drived,
Vnto  a way,which  parts  in  two, arrived.


^3

And  being  neither  able  to  defcrie
Which  way  was  gone  Angelica  the  bright,

Becaufe  the  tracke  of  hoi  Ics  feet,  whereby
Theyfceke  her  out,appeare  alike  in  fight:

They  parc,and  either  will  his  fortunctry.

The  left  hand  onctthe  other  takes  the  right.

The  Spaniard  when  he  wandred  bad  a while.

Came  whence  he  went, the  way  did  him  beguile,

*4

He  was  arriv’d  but  there, with  all  his  paine.

Where  in  the  foord  he  let  his  helmet  fall.

And  of  hisLadie(whom  he  lov’d  in  vaine)

He  now  had  little  hope,or  noneat  all.

His  helmet  now  he  thinkcs  to  get  againc.

And  feckcsitout.butfecke  it  while  he  (hall.

It  was  fo  deeply  funken  in  the  (and.

He  cannot  get  it  out  at  any  hand.

Hard  by  the  banke  a tall  yong  Popler  grew.

Which  he  out  downc, thereof  a pole  to  make.

With  which  each  place  in  feeling  and  invew,

. Tofind  hisfcullheupanddownedothtakc,

art  But  lo  a hap  unlookt  for  doth  enfew,

While  he  fuch  nccdlcflcfrutelcirc  paine  doth  take,
He(aw  a Knight  arife  out  of  the  brooke,
Breaft-hie,vvith  vifage  grim,and  angry  lookc,

26

TUtUflcf  The  Knight  was  arm’d  at  all  points  fare  thehed,

helmet  plaine.

That  very  helmet  that  fuch  care  bad  bred
In  him  that  late  had  fought  it  with  fuch  paine.

And  lookit^  grimly  on  FerrawMt  fed,

Ah  faithlcfie  wretch,  in  promife  falfeand  vaine.

It  greeves  thee  now  this  helmet  fo  to  mifle,

T hat  (Iiould  of  right  be  rendred  long  ere  this.

Remember  (crucll  Pagan)  when  you  killed
Me, brother  to  Angelica  the  bright:

Voufatd  you  would  (as  I then  dying  willed)

Mine  armcrur  drowne,when  finifht  were  the  fight.
Now  if  that  ft^tunehave  the  thing  fulfilled,

Which  thou  thy  ftlf  flioldfi  have  perform’d  in  right,
Greeve  not  thy  fclfe,or  if  thou  wilt  be  greeved,
Greeve  that  thy  promife  cannot  be  bclccved.


ftrrsM.


Tefltr  u 4
trutbtt
jnwtthijf
tittmir


aS

But  if  to  want  an  helmet  thou  lepinc.

Get  one  wherewith  thine  honour  thou  maifi  fave.
Such  hath  Orlando  Countic  Paladioc.

Renaldo  fuch  fit  one  perchance  moie  brave.

That  was  from  Almont  nine, this  from  Mambrine:
Win  one  of  thefcjthatjthoii  with  praife  maift  have.
And  as  for  this,furcca(c  to  feekc  it  more.

But  leave  it  as  thou  premis’d  me  before.

Terrarv  wasmuch  amaz’d  to  fee  the  fpritc.

That  made  this ftrange  appearance  unexpeaed.
His  voice  was  gone, his  hairc  did  (land  upright.
His  fcnles  all  were  fo  tofcarcfubjcflcd.

His  heart  did  fwcll  with  anger  and  defpighr.

To  hcarc  his  breach  of  promife  thusobjefted.

And  that  Argalia  (fo  the  Knight  was  named)
With  juft  reptoofe  could  make  him  thus  afliamed.

JO

And  wanting  timc,thc  matter  to  cxcufc.

And  being  guiltie  of  no  litlc  blame.

He  refted  mutc,and  in  a fcnflefTe  mule.

So  fore  his  heart  was  tainted  with  the  (hame.

And  by  Lanfufas  life  he  vow’d  to  ufc
No  helmct,till  fuch  time  he  gat  the  fame.

Which  from  the  (iout  Almont  Orlando  wan^

When  as  they  twoencountred  man  to  man.

31

But  he  this  vow  to  keepe  more  firmcly  ment.

And  kept  it  better  then  the  firft  he  made.

Away  he  parted  hence  a malcontent,.

And  many  dales  enfning  refted  fad.

T o feekc  Orlando  out  is  his  intent/

With  wham  to  fight  he  would  be  very  glad,

But  now  what  haps  unto  Renaldo  fell,

That.tQokc  the  othei-  way,tis  time  to  tell.

TNot  farre  hcwalkt,but  he  his  horfc  had  fpide,
T.bajtpraunfing  went  before  him  on  the  way,
Holla.’my  boy  holla  {Renaldo  ct'iie)

The  want  of  thee  annoy’d  me  much  to  day.

But  Bayard  will  not  let  his  maftcr  ride.

But  takes  his  hceles  and  fafter  goes  away.

His  flight  much  anger  in  Renaldo  bred:  .

But  follow  we  Angelica  that  fled.

33

That  fled  through  woods  and  dcfertsall  obfeure,
Threiugh  places  uninhabited  and  waft,

Nc  could  (he  yet  repute  her  felfefccurc.

But  farther  ftill  fliegallopcthin  haft.

Each  icafe  rhat.ftirres  in  her  doth  fearc  procure.
And  maketh  her  aftrighted  and  agaft;

Each  noife  (he  hcarc$,each  fhadow  fhe  doth  fee,
She  doth  miftruft  it  (Lould  Renaldo  be..

34

j/ike  to  a fawnCjOr  kid  of  bearded  goate,

That  in  the  wood  atyger  fierce  cfpide.

To  kill  her  dam,and  firft  to  tcare  the^broatc.

And  then  to  feed  upon  the  hamhotfide,

Bp^  feare  left  fhe  might  light  on  fuch  a lot.

And  fcckc  it  fclfc  in  thickcft  brackes  to  hide,

And  thiokes  each  ooife  the  wind  or  aite  doth  caufc.
It  (clfc  in  danger  ofthe  tygersclawes.


Tiu  unfit
4tcorum,fo  to
makfFttr/iw
tofiveart  bjt
bu  methen
hfe,u>hieh  a
tht  Spamfit
manner.


Hefindt  Or*
landoabt  is.
boobp  in  .^t’

Untet  inebi  ■
ted  paliaci,
the  s8


He  findi  hit
her  ft,  tbit

both.


Z'miU.


That


THE  FIRST  BOOKE


That  day  and  night  fTicwandicd  here  and  there.

And  halfc  the  other  day  that  did  cnfuc,

. Vntill  at  laft  flic  was  arriTcd  where
A fincyong  grove  withpleafant  fliadow  grew,
Ncare  to  the  v>d)ich  two  little  rivers  were,

Whofe  moiftiiredid  the  tender  hetbes  renew.

And  makeafwcetc  and  very  pleating  foundj
By  running  on  the  fand  and  flonic  ground.

Here  flic  at  laft  her  fc’fe  in  fafetie  thought,

As  being  from  many  a mile.

Tyr’d  with  annoy  the  heatc  and  travel!  brought.
She  thinkes  it  beft  with  fleepe  the  time  beguile.
And  having  firft  a place  convenient  fought.

She  lets  her  horfcrcfrcfli  his  limbcs  the  while.

Who  fed  u poll  t he  bankes  well  cloth’d  with  grafle.
And  dranke  the  river  water  clecrc  as  glade.

37


41

Like  to  the  lofc  I count  the  virginc  purei
That  grow’th  on  native  ftem  in  gardenfaire.
Which  while  it  ftands  with  walsenviion*d  fore.
Where  heardmen  with  their  beards  cannot  repaire
Ta  favor  it,  it  feemeth  to  allure
The  morning  dcaw,the  heatc,  tbcearth,ihe  aitc.
Tong  gallant  Dieo,and  lovely  damesdclight
In  th^eir  fweet  rcnr,and  in  their  plcadng  dght.

43

But  when  at  once  tis  gathered  and  gone.

From  proper  ftalkc,whcrc  late  before  it  grew.
The  lovcjthc  liking  little  it  or  none.

Both  favour, grace  and  beautie  all  adew.

So  when  a virgin  grants  to  one  alone
The  precious  flourc  for  which  fo  many  few.

Well  he  that  getteth  it  may  love  her  wft,

But  flie  forgoes  thclorcof  all  the  red.

44


Similt.

Tki  m u\tn
•M  cfCdtul-
/tu,6ia£rtdl-
ly  bitiered:
ytjlatinftfi
fu  fieritui
nafcHmr  bvr>


Hard  by  the  brooke  an  arbor  flic  defon'de.

Wherein  grew  fairc  and  very  fragrant  floures.

With  rofes  fwcot,and  other  trees  oefide.

Wherewith  the  place  adornes  the  native  homes.

So  fenced  in  with  fliadcson  either  fide.

Safe  from  the  heatc  of  late  or  early  houres.

The  boughes  and  leaves  fo  cunningly  were  mixf>

No  funnc,no  light, could  enter  them  betwixt,

...  S*  ,

Withinjthe  tender  herbisa  bed  do  rhake.

Inviting  folkc  to  take  their  red  and  cafot
Here  nicancs  this  Ladie  fairc  a nap  to  take.

And  fals  to  flcepe,tlic  place  fo  well  doth  plcafo.

Not  long  fliclay,but  hera  noife  did  wake.

The  trampling  of  a horfo  did  her  difeafe.

And  looking  out  as  fccrct  as  flic  might,  '

To  come  all  arm’d  flic  faw  a comely  Knight.

J9

She  knowes  not  yet  ifhe  be  foe  or  friend,’  * *

T wixt  hope  and  fcarc  flic  doubtfully  doth
And  what  he  meancs  to  do  flic  doth  attend,  '

And  who  it  was  flic  faine  would  iindcrftand.

The  Knight  did  to  the  river  fide  dclccnd.

And  reding  downe his  head  upon  hishand^

All  in  a mufc  he  fitteth  dill  alone.

Like  one  transform'd  into  a marble  flone.

40

He  tarri'd  in  this  mufc  an  home  and  more,  ^

With  lookc  cad  downe  in  fad  and  hcavic  guifC]

At  laft  he  did  lament  bis  hap  fo  fore.

Yet  info  ftvcetc  and  comely  mourncfull  wife.

So  Irard  a heart  no  tyger  ever  bore.

But  would  have  heard  fuch  plaints  with  watfifli  eics.
Hi&hcait  didfeemca  mountaincfiJlofflamc,

His  cbcckes  a ftreame  of tearcs  to  quench  the  fame.

4*

Alas  (faid  he)  what  meaner  this  divers  paflion?
tatUno/Sa,'  I burnt  as  fire, and  yctasfroft  1 freefe,

eraptmt.  I ftill  lament,  and  yet  I movccompaflion,

I come  too  Iatc,and  all  my  labom'  Icefe.

I had  but  words  and  lookes  forflicw  and  fafliion.
But  others  getthe  garac,and  gaincfull  fees;

If  ncithcrfruitc  nor  flourc  come  to  my  part.

Why  fliould  her  love  confumc  my  careful!  hart?


She  may  cfcfcrvc  his  lovc,but  othershate.

To  whom  of  love  flic  flicwd  her  felfc  fo  fcant,

(Oh  then  my  cruell  fortune  or  iry  fate)

Others  have  ftorc,  but  1 am  ftarv’d  with  want;

Then  leave  to  love  this  ladie  fo  uagrate:

Nay  live  t®  love(bchoId  I foonc  recant)

Yea  fiift  let  life  from  thefe  my  limbs  be  rent.

Ere  1 to  change  my  love  fhall  give  confent.

45

If  fomc  perhaps  dcflious  arc  to  know.

What  wight  it  was  with  forrow  fo  oppreft,

Sacra^ant  wasaffliAcd  fo.

And  love  had  bred  this  torment  in  his  breftr
That  trick  ling  woundjthat  dattting  crucll  foe,

Moft  happic  they  that  know  and  haveitlcaft.

The  love  of  her  I fiy  procur’d  his  woe.

And  flic  had  heard  and  knew  it  long  ago.  .

46

Her  loveallur’ d him  from  the  Eafterne land,

Vmo  the  Wefterne  fhorcs,where  fets  the  Sunne,

And  here  he  heard  how  by  Orlandos  hand,

A paflage  fafe  from  th'Indies  fhe  had  wonne.
Herfequeftrationhedid  underftand.

That  Charles  bad  made, and  how  the  fame  waidone
To  makethe  Knights  more  vcmcrous  and  bold,
infighting  for  the  Flourc  dc  luce  ofgold.  T6t  flume

i*bKiu\{tre

And  furthermore  himfclfc  had  prefent  bene  ^iJ**^*  ^

When  Charles  his  men  were  overt hrownc  and
Since  thcn,hc  travcl'd  farre  to  find  thisQuecnc,  fremt.

But  hitherto  it  hath  bene  all  in  vainc.

Now  much  defpaire,anol  little  hope  betweene.

So  rufully  thereof  he  doth  complaine.

And  with  fuch  wailing  words  his  woes  rchearft.

As  might  the  haideft  ftonic  heart  have  pcaift.

And  while  in  this  moft  dolefull  ftate  he  bides.

And  Cghes  full  oft,and  fheddeth  marly  a tcare.

And  fpcakes  thefo  fame, and  many  words  befidcs,

(Which  1 to  tell  for  want  of  time  forbcarc)

His  noble  fortune  fo  for  him  provides.

That  all  this  came  unto  bis  mtllreflc  care.

And  in  one  moment  he  prevailed  more
Then  he  had  done  in  many  yeatca  befote.

Angeli((&


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO;


I


Angelica  wiih  great  attention  hard.

The  nionc,aiid  plaint, that  him  tormented  fore.
Who  long  had  loved  her,wiih  great  regard,

As  the  had  triall,many  yeares  before.

Yet  a$  a marble  pillar  cold  and  hard.

She  not  inchnes  to  pittiehim  the  more.

Like  one  that  all  the  world  doth  much  dilHaine,
And  deemeth  none  worthie  her  love  againe,

50

But  being  now  with  danger  compaft  round,

Similtt  She  thought  it  beft  to  take  him  for  her  guide.

For  one  that  were  in  water  almoft  drown’d.

Were  very  ftout,if  for  no  helpe  heende;

If  (he  let  pafTcthe  fortune  now  flic  found.

She  thinkes  to  want  the  like  another  tyde.

And  furthermore  for  certainc  this  flieknew.

That  Sacrapant  had  beenc  her  lover  true.

51

Ne  meant  flic  tho  to  quench  the  raging  fires.

That  ay  confum’d  his  faithful!  loving  heart,

Nc  yet  with  that  a lov«  moft  defires,

*1  ‘aflwage  the  paine  in  all, or  yet  in  parts
She  mcancs  he  firft  fliallpull  her  from  the  briers.
And  feed  him  then  with  words  and  womens  art,

T o make  him  firft  of  all  to  lerve  her  turne.

That  dooe,to  wonted  coynefle  to  icturne.

Vnto  the  river  fide  flie  doth  dclccnd.

And  toward  him  moft  goddefle  like  flic  came,

^ r faid,all  peace  to  thee  my  deareft  friend,

wficmntrie  With  modeft  leoke,and  cald  him  by  bis  name,
fttfUiftttt  And  further  faid,thc  Gods  and  you  defend
iiuyiu.  My  chaftity.minc  honour  and  my  fame,

• Sueb-yiH  And  never  grant  by  their  divine  permiflion,

^ fiilpition.

kidifeoiaid

a/W*.  With  how  great  joy  a mothers  mindc  is  fil  d,

iimiii.  To  fee  a foanc,for  whom  flic  long  had  mourned.

Whom  flic  heard  lace  in  battellto  be  kild.

And  faw  the  troopes  without  him  home  tetumed^’
Such  joy  had  Sacrapant  when  he  bchild,
HisLadicdcercihistearcstofmiles  are  turned.

To  fee  her  bcautic  raie.hcr  comely  favour.

Her  princely  prcfcnce,and  her  ftatcly  havour.

,54

Like  one  allraviflit  with  her  heavenly  face,

Vnto  his  loved  Ladie  be  doth  runne,'

Who  was  content  inarmeshim  to  embrace.

Which  flie  perhaps  at  home  would  not  have  done.
But  doubting  now  the  dangerous  time  and  place.
She  muft  go  forward  as  (he  hath  begun.

In  hope  by  his  good  fervicc  and  afliftancc.

To  make  hci  home  rcturnc  without  rcfiftaoce^

JT

And  in  moft  lov'Iy  manner  (hedoth  tell.

The  ftrange  adventures, and  thcdiveis  chance.
That  fince  they  two  did  part  to  her  befell.

Both  on  the  way, and  (ince  (became  to  France:
And  how  Orlando  ufed  her  right  well.

Defending  her  from  dangerand  mifchance,
Andthataisnoble  foicc  and  magnanimttie,

I Had  ftillprcfcrv’dt  he  floiue  of  her  virginity,  ..


SS  .

It  might  be  true, but  fure  it  was  incredible.

To  tell  to  one  that  were  difcrcct  and  wife.

But  unto  Sacrapant \t  feemed  poflible,

Becau(e  that  love  bad  dafled  (o  his  eyes:

Lovccaufcth  what  isfccnc,tofccmcinvi(Ible,

And  makes  of  things  notfcene,a  fliapctorifc*

It  is  a provcibc  ufed  long  ago.

We  foonc  bclccvc  the  thing  we  would  baTcfo^

57

Bat  to  himfclfc  thus  Sacrapant  doth  f^y,

B’it  that  my  Lord  of  Jnglant  were  fo  mad.

To  take  noplcafureof  lb  fairc  a pray.

When  he  both  time  and  place,  and  power  had.

Yet  am  not  I obliged  any  way,

To  imitate  a prefident  fo  bad.

He  rather  take  my  plcafure  while  I may.

Then  wailc  my  want  of  wit  another  day.

58

lie  gather  now  the  frcfli  and  fragrant  ro(e,

Who(c  bcautic  may  with  (landing  ftill  be  (pent.

One  cannotdo  a thing  (as  I fuppofe)

That  better  can  a womans  mind  content:

Well  may  they  (ceme  much  grieved  for  a glofc.

And  weepe  and  waile,and  dolefully  lament.

There  fliall  no  foolifb  plaint$,nor  fained ire.

Hinder  me  tocncarnatmydclirc,

Thisfaid,fort‘hwith  he  did  himfclfc  prepare,

T’alTault  the  fort  that  eafly  would  be  wonne.

But  loc  a (bdaine  hap  that  bred  new  care,  •

And  made  him  ceafe  his  cnterpnfc  begonne.

For  of  an  enemy  he  was  aware.

He  clalpt  his  helmet  late  before  undone.

And  armed  all, he  mounteth  one  his  bead.

And  ftandeth  ready  with  his  (pcare  in  rc(l,

60

Behold  a warrior  whom  he  did  not  know.

Came  dewnc  the  wood  in  fcmblancc  like  a Knight,
The  furniture  was  all  as  white  as  fnow.

And  in  the  hclme  a plume  of  fethers  white.'

King  Sacrapant  by  proofedoth  piaincly  (how.

That  he  doth  take  the  thing  in  great  (befpite,
TobcdlfturhMand  hindicd  from  that  plcafure.
That  he  prefer’d  before  ail  other  trcafurc.

61

Approching  nie,thc  warrior  he  defide,

And  hopes  to  fet  him  quite  befidc  t he  feat;

The  other  with  fuch  lofdc  words  replide,
A$per(bnsufe,in  cholerand  in  heat.

At  iaft  when  glorious  vaunts  were  laid  afide.

They  come  to  ftrokesiand  each  to  do  his  fear.

Doth  couch  his  fpeare.and  running  thus  they  (ped.
Their  courfers  both  cncounned  hed  to  hcd.

62

As  Lions  mccte,or  Buis  in  paftures  grcenc.

With  teeth  & homcs,8c  ftaine  with  bloud  the  field,
Suchegerfight  thefc  warrierswasbetweene.

And  cithers  fpearc  had  pearftthetothers  (heild.

The  (bund  that  of  thefe  ftrokes  had  railed  bccne.

An  ccebo  lowd  along  the  vale  did  yecld.

T’was  happie  that  their  curats  were  fo  goodj
The  Lances  elfe  had  pierced  to  the  blood,

A 4 Fo?


SetaiKcei


Ortan  do  rva%

iordef^M^

giant.


Ovid  Vim

licetafftUttl
grata  e/l  vm
tUafutUitt
quod  juvat
invitafiepe
dtdijfi  V0‘
iant.


THE  FIRST  BOOKE


«»

For  quite  unable  now  about  to  whccle,

Similt  They  butt  like  raimncs,thc  one  the  others  head,

Thi  u{e  u in  Whereof  the  Pagans  horfc  fuch  painc  did  fcclc,

Duaifgiiiit  That  ere  long  fpacc  had  paft  he  fell  down  dead.
The  tothctshoilc a little  gan  to  reele.

But  being  fpurd,full  quickly  up  he  fped.

The  Pagans  horfc  thus  overthtowne  and  flainc.
Fell  backward  greatly  to  his  mailers  paine.

64

1 hat  unknowne  champion  feeing  thother  downc.
His  horfc  upon  him  lying  dead  in  tcw.

Expelling  in  this  fight  no  moreicnowne,
Deteimin’d  not  the  batfcll  to  renew.

But  by  the  way  that  Icadeth  fi om  the  towne.

The  firll  appointed  journey  doth  purfew.

And  was  now  ridden  halfe  a mile  at  lead,

Before  the  Pagan  parted  from  his  bead,

6s

Like  as  the  tiller  of  the  fruitfull  ground,

ThtOktiti’*  With  fodainc  dorme  and  temped  is  aftoni/lr’d

'^ho  fees  the  dani,and  heaicsthe  thunders  found,
fltui  alit’er  their  madtrs  fakeSjthccattell  punilh’d,

ftupuiquxm  Or  when  by  hap  a fairc  old  pine  he  found,
qui  Uvii  By  force  of  raging  winds  his  leaves  diminifli‘d,

igmbta  tSu  So  flood  amaz’d  the  Pagan  in  the  place,

'vaxnefJiii  Ladic  prefent  at  the  wofull  cafe,

ij'ft/ux.  66

He  fctcht  a figh  mod  deepely  from  his  heart.

Not  that  he  had  put  out  of  joynt,or  lamed
His  armc,hislcgge;,or  any  other  part.

But  chiefiy  he  his  evill fortune  blamed.

At  fuch  « timc,to  hapfooverthwart.

Before  his  lovc,to  make  him  fo  afiiamcd:

And  had  not  (he  fomt  caufc  of  fpccch  found  out.
He  had  remained  fpecchlclTe  out  of  doubt.

67

My  Lord(faid  flie)  what  ailcs  you  be  fo  fad?

The  want  was  not  in  you,but  in  your  deed,

Feir  whom  a dable,or  a padurehad
Beene  fitter  then  a courfeattilc  indeed.

Nor  is  that  adverfe  partie  TCry  glad,

As  well  appeareSjthat  parted  with  fuch  fpeed.

For  in  my  judgement  they  befaid  to  yccld.

That  fird  leave  ofF,anddo  depart  the  fceld.

68

1 hits  while  fhe  gives  him  comfort  all  flic  may.
Behold  there  came  a melTenger  in  pod.

Blowing  his  hornc,and  ridmgdownethc  way.
Where  he  before  his  horfc,  and  honor  lod.

And  comming  nearer  he  ofthem  doth  pray.

To  tell  if  they  had  fccnc  pafle  by  that  cod,

A champion  arm’d  at  all  points  like  a Knight,

The  fhicldjthc  horfc,and  armour  all  of  white.

69

I have  both  fecne  the  Knight,  and  felt  his  force,
(Said  Sacrapant)  for  here  before  you  came,

He  cad  me  downc  and  alfo  kild  my  hoiie,

Ncknow  1 (that  doth  greevc  me  mod)  hit  name.
Sir  (quoth  the  pod)thc  name  I will  not  force.

To  tell,fith  you  defire  to  know  the  fame,
Firdjknow  that  you  were  conquer'd  in  this  fight,
By  ralour  efadamfcll  fairc  and  bright.


"Bradt.  S.


B^xria
Ukeaed  u
hmtfhtUnt
in  tiat  hie
t»eald  fttf'
fer  ne  rider
qaittlrtm
ha


70

Ofpafllngdrengthjbutofmorc  pafflng  hew,

And  Bradarmnt, thit  damfcll  fairc  is  named,

She  was  the  wight,whofc  meeting  you  may  rew.

And  all  your  life  hereafter  be  afbamed.  Thipefl

This  faid,he  turn’d  his  horfc  and  bad  adew.  au-ru^uh

But  Sacrapant  with  high difdainecRflamed,

Was  fird  fo  wroth, and  then  fo  fliam’d  thereto.

He  knew  not  what  to  fay, nor  what  to  do.

71

And  after  he  had  ftaid  a while  and  mus’d.

That  at  a womans  hands  he  had  received
Sucha  difgraccascould  not  be  excus’d,

Nor  how  he  might  revenge  it  he  perceived.

With  thought  hereof  his  mind  wasfo  confub’d,
lie  dood  like  one  of  wit  and  fenfe  bereaved.

At  lad  he  go*th,a  better  place  to  fir.de.

He  takes  her  horfc  and  makes  her  mount  behind,

7»

Now  having  rode  a mile, or  thereabout.

They  heard  a noi(e,a  trampling  on  theground.

They  thought  it  was fomc company  or  rout,

Thaccaufed  in  the  woods  fo  great  a found:

At  lad  they  fee  a warlike  horfc,  and  dour.

With  guilded  barb,thatcod  full  many  a pound.

No  hedge,  no  ditch, no  wood, no  vs  atcr  was,

Thatdopped  him  where  he  was  bent  to  padc.

7X

At^gelica  cading  her  eye  afide*

Except  (faid  flic)rainc  eics  all  dazled  be,

I have  that  famous hor/c  fpidc.

Come  trotting  downc  the  wood,as  fccmci  to  met
(How  well  for  us  our  foruinc  doth  provide)

It  is  the  very  fame,  1 know  tis  he;

On  onepoore  nag  to  ride  we  two  were  loth.

And  here  he  commeth  fit  to  ferve  us  both.  /

KitigSacrapatit  alighted  by  and  by.

And  thinkes  totakc  him  gently  by  the  raine.

But  with  bis  hccles  the  horfc  doth  dreight  reply,

As  who  Hiould  fay,hisrulc  hedid  dildainc.

It  happic  was  he  flood  the  bcaft  not  nye.

For  if  nc  had, it  had  becne  to  his  painc,

For  why, fuch  force  the  hotfe  had  in  his  heclc,

He  would  have  burft  a mouataine  all  of  dcele.'

75

But  to  the  damfcll  gently  he  doth  go,

In  humble  manncr,and  in  lowly  fort,

A fpanicll  after  abfcncc  fauncth  fb.

And  feekes  to  make  hismaflerplay,and  fport.

For  aid  to  rmnd  the  damfcll  tho.

When  fhc  unto  Albrt^cca  did  refort.

And  us’d  to  feed  him  for  bis  matters  fake.

Whom  fhe  then  loT’d,afld  hedid  her  fbifakc.

76

She  takes  the  bridle  boldlyin  her  hand.

And  flrok’t  his  brcft,and  oecke,with  art  and  skill:

T he  horfc  that  ha^  great  wit  to  underdand,

Like  to  a lambe,by  Mr  he  dandeth  dill,  .

And  while  Bayardo  gently  there  did  dand.

The  Pagan  got  him  up, and  had  his  wilL
And  fhc  that  erfl  to  nde  behind  wasfaine.

Into  her  faddlcinounted  now  igaine.

And


Similu

udLhftajeca,
loakjt  in  the

Indent  tg.
tie.


77


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


gjtiutdf.


And  being  newly  feticd  in  her  fcate.

She  faw  a man  on  footc  all  armed  mnne
Straight  in  her  mind  flreganto  chafe  and  fret,
Becaufe  kne vv  it  >vas  Duke  Ammm: fonne^
Molt  carneftly  he fude  her  Jove  to  get
More  earncflly  fhe  feekes  his  love folhunne.

Once  Hie  lot’d  him,he  hated  her  as  much
A nd  now  he  lovcs.fhe  hatcs,his  hap  wasfuch.

wo  fo„o«ioosg„„,

Mb  tin  u f3(l,but  in  cfFeSs  unlike,

tbttwtjhsfts  I a in  denna,  each  in  others  vcw

Who  tafts  the  one,Iovcs dart  has  hear?  doth  ftrik^

Contrary  of  the  or  her  doth  enfevv,  *

Who  drinkc  thcreof,thcirlovcrs  n?all  minike.
Rsnaldo  dranke  of  one, and  lore  him  pained,

Shce  drunkc  theother  and  his  lore  difdained .

The  Uquor thus  \vith  feact renim  mingkd.

Makes  her  to  Hand  fo  HifFdy  in  the  n^

On  whom  Renaldos  heart  was  wholy  kindled.
Though  fcarcc  to  lookc  on  him  flie «n  away.


wfCmfii,
Div€rfimm

K,  ftett
iitU  tmtrt.


from  his  fight  defiring  to  be  fingled,

Wnh  foft  low  voice  the  Pagan  flie  doth  pray,

1 he  approch  no  nearer  to  this  KmVht

But  flic  away  with  all  thefpeed  he  might/

80

'^Of  m " make  you  fo  fmall  efteeme.

Of  mc,as  though  that  I to  him  fiiould  yceld>  '

That  fafe  from  him  yom  fcife  1 cannot  fijicld*
Then  you  forget  it  fhould  feeme.

And  that  fame  night,when  I amid  the  field.

Alone  unarmed  diddefend  you  then,

Againft  King  African  and  all  his  men.

81

Nofir/aW  /7ic(nc  knowesfhc  what  tof^y)

Becaufe  Renaldo  now  approcht  fo  me
And  thieatncd  fo  the  Pagan  in  the  w.^y.

When  under  him  his  horfc  hcdidefpic,^

Andfawthcdamfclltakcn  asa  pray.

In  whofe  dcf^cnce  he  meanes  to  live  and  die.
wi hii carriers  fcarcc,

Withinthefecondbookcldorehcaifc.


Df  France,

even  i^eje^ouTejcoreyeafes. namely  Granada  rvbirh"-n,^'/hJif  7C'\T  ^ pme  part  thereof

Sabclhcustt>mc/^,  that j or  cer  taint  ie  there  lived  in  thanTme  of  Marcus  Antoniw

are  tn  thtsworhyfo  often  named,  and  ejpecial/y  he  maketh  ofthofe famota  PaUadinei,  that

indeed  very  martiaU  then, and  ho»  Charles  obtained  ereat  viaoriel afftming  that  they  rstete
^*1/  t andfirength,Tvho  tooke  cettaine  tiamely  he  telleth  of  one  Fcr-

TPhtch  OthMught  rpith  him  hand  to  Ltd  nr  o trhole  dales  and  Orlando,

a^rmerh,that  the  fame  Chiileamne,  for  his  Preat  favour  '^anijutjltt  him.Furtler.the  fame  author


« -->^o„KLmepytyjiyingPom  them, as  the  Scribtme  it  rclfrtpZiJi  r the  temtations  of  the  Mi

minds  that  cannot  he  abatedmtb  any  force,  are  often  rubZeTl^  ^ the  courage  of  our

rrd^c«jT5r/  treremthjiaverie.  often  fubduedfyjlatterte  andgentleufage,  nU  they  be  intheLdevm

feemes  to  allude  to  B.7rcpiafes  Ak;:andcrs  horfef' ^‘^^'o,favc  that  it  femes  in  Renaldos  horfc  Bayardo,  hee  Allufic


BninrJo


V^naeUca

'H  mnUo

BffWWpBMBBSWpH

i~-'  1 rr^.  .‘1  - tW.

THE  SECOND  BOOKE:


9


THE  ARGVMENT.

tyi  Frirc  ^etweenetifo  rivals  parts  the  fray t
"By  magicke  art : Renaldo  hajleth  home^

But  inembafr'age  be  ii  fent  array  y

fVheH  tempefr  makes  the  fea  to  rage  an^  feme.

Bradamantyjf^w  herfroufcy  hsst  hy  the  reayy

^hilejhe  aboHt  the  country  wyid  did  rontey

^et  Pinnabel,»Aa  by  a craftie  trainSy

Both  fought  y and  thought  the  Ladie  to  have  Jlaine,


1

Blind  god  Love,  why  takft
thou  fiach  delight,
Withdarts  of  divers  force
our  hearts  to  wound  ?

By  thytoomuchabufingof
thymighr.

This  difeord  great  in  humane
hearts  is  found.

When  I would  wade  the
fl] allow  foord  aright,
inhtod.  Thou  draw  Itmctothedeepetohavemedround,
From  thofc  love  me, my  love  thou  doft  recall.

And  place  it  where  I find  no  love  at  all.  *

X

Thou  mak.*d  mod  faire  unto  Renaldo  feeme
Angelica,x.h3t  takes  him  for  a foe.

And  when  thatflieof  him  did  wclleftecrae
Then  hediflikt,anddid  refufe  hcrthoc.  *

Which  makes  her  now  of  him  thcleflc  todceinc.
Thus  (as  they  fay)  fbc  renders  quit  pro  quo.

She  hatech  hihi,and  doth  deteft  him  lb.

She  fird  vvill  die, ere  Ihe  will  with  him  go.

Renaldo  (full  of  dately  courage)  cride,
Downcthecfefromofmy  horfc,downc  by  and  by.
So  rob’d  to  be  I never  can  abide,

Tbifi  fnU  ‘faat  do  it  dearely  diall  afeyci

&uakmibt-  I-adic  you  mulVlcave  befide,

lyvtttiimujl  Blfe  one  of  us  in  her  defence  will  dye-

tt  imfuttd  u A hotfe  fo  good,and  fuch  a eoodly  dame.

leave  unto  a thcefe  it  were  a fhamc.

MM/evt,  ,,,,  . . . ♦

W hat.  me  a thcefe?  thou  in  thy  throat  dod  lye,

(Quoth  Sacrapanr,  thzt  was  as  hot  as  he)


In  tri}^  of

hu  btol^ettht
frnil'fe,ir
femtume
Tnore,bavt
font  pretit
aertU  tr
fiHitaet  not
impertinent
lotijt  mitttr


Thcefe  to  thy  fclfc,thy  malice  1 defie,
ForasIhcare,thenameis  due  tothce;

But  if  thou  dare  thy  might  and  manhood  trie.
Come  take  this  Ladic.or  this  horfe  from  me.
Though  I allow  in  this  of  thine  opinion.

That  of  the  world  fhe  is  the  matchlcfic  minion.

5

Like  as  two  madive  dogges  with  hungric  mawes,
Mov*d  fil'd  to  hate, from  hate  to  raging  ire,
Approch  with  grinning  teeth, and  griefly  jaws,
With  daring  eyes, as  red  as  flaming  fire,

At  lad  they  bite,and  fcratch  with  teeth  and  claws.
And  tcarc  thcmfclvcs^and  tumble  in  the  mire.

So  after  byting  and  rcprochfull  words.

Did  theft  two  worthy  warricisdraw  their  (VvcrdsC

6

One  was  on  foote,thc  tothcr  on  a horft.

You  thinke  perhaps, the  horfeman  vantage  had.

No  furc,no  whi^hc  would  have  wiflit  to  skorcc.
For  why  at  lad  to  light  be  mud  be  glad.

The  bead  did  know  thus  much  by  natures  force,'
To  hurt  his  maderwcrcafeivice  bad.

T he  pagan  could  not  nor  with  fpur  nor  hand ,
Make  him  unto  his  mind  to  go  or  ftand.

7

He  flops, when  be  Ihould  make  a full  eareire.

He  runnes  ortrets,when  he w«3bld  have  him  red.
At  laft  to  throw  hit  rider  in  the  mire.

He  plungcth  with  his  head  beneath  bis  bread*

But  Sacrapant  that  now  had  fmall  defire,
Atfuchatime,  totamefbpronda  bcaft.

Did  woikc  fo  well  at  laft  by  Height  and  force.

On  bis  left  fldc,he  lighted  from  hit  horfe.


Sm&o


When


to


THE  SECOND  BOOKE


14  dtfcriptio

if  a combat
bitvotent  two
Kiiietti  ikiC.
full  iH  ibttr
wtttfon.


TuiltfU  vu
RtH'ldti

/mrd.


JiH  Buchafi
htrmil,sr  ret-
thtr  pt-
erin, II*
vehofa  ptrfon
bctouchnb
tin  holy
Churchmen,
that^md
much  devo-
ti  not fucb
Sitmi,


t

When  from  BayarJes  over  furious  might,

The  Pagan  bad  himfclfc  difeharged  fp.

With  naked  fwords  there  was  a noble  fight.
Sometimes  they  lyc  aloft,fomctimcs  aloe,

And  from  their  blowesthe  fire  flies  out  in  fight:

I thinkc  tbitVulcans  hammers  brat  more  flow.
Where  he  within  the  mountaine  8/f  tuas  chaps.
Doth  forge  for  /ove,the  fcarfull  thundctclaps«

9

Sometimes  they  profer,then  they  paufe  a while.
Sometime  flrtke  out, like  mafiers  of  the  play.

Now  ftand  upright,now  floup  another  while.

Now  open  lye,thcn  cover  all  they  may.

Now  ward, then  with  a flip  the  blow  heguilet
Now  forward  flep,now  backe a little  way;

Now  r'^iind  about, and  where  the  rcnegircsplace.
There  flill  the  other  preflethin  his  place.

10

Rtnaldo  did  the  Pagan  Prince  invade.

And  Itrikc  at  once  with  all  the  might  hccowd.

The  other  doth  oppofe  againfl  the  blade,

A fhield  ofboneand  ftceleoftempcr  good.

Uut  through  thefame  a way  furkcrtismade.

And  of  the  blow  refbunded  all  the  wood:

The  fteele,the  bone  like  y fe  in  pceces  broke.

And  left  his  arrac  benummed  with  the  flroke,

1 1

Which  when  the  faire  and  fcarfull  iamfeU faw.

And  how  great  damage  did  enfuc  tbeicby.

She  looked  palc,foranguifh  and  for  aw.

Like  tbofe  by  d c ome  that  arc  condemn’d  to  dye:
She  thinks  it  beft  her  fclfc  from  hence  withdraw,
Elfc  will  Jienaldo  take  her  by  and  by,"

The  fame  Rcnaldo  whom  fhe  hateth  fb.

Though  love  of  her  procured  all  his  wo;

12

Vmo  the  wood  the  turner  her  horfc  in  haft.

And  takes  a little  narrow  path  and  blind;

Herfcarfull  looksofttimes  flic  backe  dothcaft,

Still  doubting  left  Renaldaczme  behind:

And  when  that  fhe  a little  way  hadpaft.

Alow  the  vale  a Hermit  fhe  did  find;

Awcakcold  man,  with  beard  along  his  breft.

In  flicw  dcvout,and  holier  then  the  reft,

n

He  feen.’d  like  one  with  faftsand  ageconfumed.

He  rode  upon  a (louthfull  going  afle.

And  by  his  looke,a  man  would  have  pvefunoed.

That  of  his  confcicncefcrupulous  he  was.

Yet  hcryoungfaccjhisold  (ighifo illumed.

When  as  he  faw  the  damfcll  oy  to  pafT:

(Though  wcakc and  faint,asfuchan  age  behoved)
That  charicic  his  courage  (omewhat  moved.

14

The  damfell  of  the  HerMit  askt  the  way.

That  might  unto  ftwnc  hav’n  town  lead  moft  neare,
That  flic  might  part  from  France  without  delay.
Where  once  Remildos  name  ftic  might  not  hcaic.
The  fl  ier  that  could  cncliaunt,doth  all  he  may,

T o comfort  hcr,and  make  her  of  good  chearc.

And  to  herfafetie  promifing  to  looke,

Outofhis  bag  foithwiih  he  drew  a booke.


15

A booke  of  skill  and  learning  fo  profound.

That  of  a Icafc  he  had  not  made  an  end,

But  that  there  rofc  a fpiitcfrom  under  ground.
Whom  like  a page  hedothof  arrants  lend.

This  fpnte  by  wordsof  fecrctveituc  bciUid,

Goes  where  thefe  Knights  their  combat  did  intcndl
And  while  they  two  wcrt  fighting  very  haid,
tie  enters  them  betweene  without  regaid.

16

Good  firs((]uoth  he)for  coortfiefakemefhow.

When  one  of  you  tbetother  fliall  havcflainc.

And  after  all  the  travell  you  beftow,

What  guerdon  you  cxpcft  for  all  your  painc,
"Behold  firlando  fluking  nere  a blow.

Nor  breaking  ftaffe,whilcyou  ftrive  here  in  vaine.
To  Paru  ward  the  Ladic  faire  doth  caric,

While  you  on  fighting  imdifcrcetly  taric.

17

I faw  from  hence  a mile, or  thereabout,

Orlando  with  Angelica  alone.

And  as  for  you,thcy  jeftand  make  a ftouf.

That  fight  where  praife  and  profi(  can  be  none.
Twer  heft  you  quickly  went  to  fccke  them  out,
Before  that  any  farther  they  bcgoncj  ‘

Within  the  walls  of  Paris  if  they  get.

Your  eye  on  her  againe  you  ihalinot  fct.

18

When  as  the  Knights  this  mefiage  had  received.

They  both  remain’d  ama2ed,dumbc  andfad.

To  heart  Or/ando  had  them  fo  deceived.

Of  whom  before  great  jealoufie  they  had-
But  good  Renal  Jo  fb  great  gnefe  conceived.

That  for  the  time,Iikc  one  all  raging  made.

He  fwarc  without  regard  of  God  oi  man.

That  he  will  kill  Orlando  if  he  can.

19

And  feeing  where  hishorfe  flood  ftill  untide.

He  thither  gocsi  fuch  haft  he  makes  away,
Hcoftersnot  the  Pagan  leave  to  ride.

Not  at  the  parting  once  adjeu  doth  fay.

Now  Bayard  felt  his  mafters  fputresin  fide.

And  gallops  mainc,oc  maketh  any  ftay.

No  rivcrs,rocks,no  hedge, nor  ditches  wide.

Could  ftay  his  courfc,  or  make  him  ftcpafidc.
zo

Nor  marvell  if  Rcnaldo  made  fome  haft.

To  mount  againe  upon  bis  borfes  backe.

You  heard  before  how  marydayes  hadpaft.

That  by  his  abfcncc  he  had  felt  great  lackc.

The  hotfe(that  had  of  humane  wit  feme  taft,)

Ran  not  away  for  any  jadifh  knacke,

His  going  only  was  to  this  intent.

To  guide  his  maftcr  where  the  Ladie  went.

zi

The  horfc  had  fpidc  her  when  fhe  fookc  her  flight,
Firft  from  the  tent,  as  he  thereby  did  ftand.

And  fcJlow‘d  her,and  kept  her  long  in  fight,

As  then  by  hapout  of  bis  mafters  hand.

(His  mafterdid  not  long  beforcalight.

To  combat  with  a * Baron  hand  to  hand)

The  horfc  purfude  the  damfell  all  about.

And  holpc  his  mafto  flill  to  find  her  our.

He


Thuwai  0
hi  da  • i/a4
bythatiw.
mnto/ani
tbtvtovaty.


TSa^irioi

tamparai

wahtuaad
pbdlm  fm


Tbutarm

Kogarot

ts  apptdrcth
in  Bojardot
foama  euBai
Ortaudoin-  .
imorafoaH
which  th*
whoU  »

doth  (Upanim


II


OF


OR, L ANDO


FVRIO,SQ.


XI


29


He  followed  her  through  valley ,hill  andplaine.
Through  woods  and  thickets  for  his  mafters  fake.
Whom  he  permitted  n*t  to  touch  the  raine.

For  feare  Icti  he  Tome  other  way  Hiould  take,

By  which  Rcnaldo  though  with  mickle  painc
jli  Twifefound  her out,tv%afc fhedid  him  forfaket

i^beftmer  /crra»,then  Sacrapant  withftood.

That  by  twife  Bnding  her  he  did  no  good.

Bayario  trufling  to  the  lying  fprite,

Whofe  falfe  (but  likely)  tale  folate  he  hard.

And  donbting  not  i^was  both  true  andf  ight,
Hc.doth  hisduty  now  with  due  regard.

« BewWopnekt  wuh  love  and  raging  fpite,

Doth  pricke  apace,  and  all  to  Paris  ward,

To  Paris  ward  he  maketh  fo  great  fliift.

The  wind  it  fclfc  feemes  not  to  go  fo  fwift.

Such  haft  he  made  Orlando  out  to  find.

That  leant  heceaft  to  travellall  the  nighty
So  deeply  ftacke  the  ftoiie  ki  his  mind,

Tlvit  wasof  latedevifed  by  thefprite!

Betimes  and  late  as  firft  he  had  aftign’J,
Herodeuntill  he  faw  the  townein  fight.”

Where  Cl!4r/ef  whole  chance  all  chriftned  hearts  did
With  thefmalli'elikcsofhispowrc  withdrew,  (rew,
a?

And  for  he  lookes  to  be  aftaulted  then,

Orelfe  befieg’d,  he  uiethall  hiscare,

T o ftore  himfelfe  with  viftuall  and  with  men.

The  walls  eke  of  the  townc  he  doth  repaire.

And  takeadvice,  both  how,and  where, and  when.
For  his  defence  each  thing  he  may  prepare.

An  armie  new  to  make  he  doth  intend.

And  for  new  fbuldicrs  into  England  fend.

26

He  minds  to  take  the  field  againe  erelong.

And  trie  the  bap  of  wane  another  day,

• And  all  in  haft  tomake  himfelfe  more  ftrong.

He  fends  RenaUo  Englands  ayd  to  pray.

Remldo  thought  the  Emperouidid  him  wrong.

To  fend  him  in  fuch  haft,and  grant  no  ftaw
Not  that  ill  will  to  th’lland  he  did  carie,

But  for  another  caufc  he  fame  would  tarie .

27  . , ,

Yet  now  although  full  foreagainft  his  mind.

As  loth  to  leave  the  Ladie  he  fo  loved,

Whom  he  in  Farir  hoped  had  to  find,

Becaufe  t’obey  his  Prince  it  him  behoved.

He  raketh  this  embaftage  thus  aifign’d.

And  having  fti-aight  ail  othcrlets  removed.

He  pofted  firft  to  CaUis  with  great  haft.

And  there  embarkt  ere  halfc  next  day  was  paft.

28

Againft  the  mariners  and  mafters  minds,

'(Such  haft  he  made  to  have  returned  backc)

He  takes  the  Tea  though  fwelling  with  great  winds,
And  threatning  mine  mamfeft  and  wraoke.
PicretBoreat  that  himfelfe  defpifed  finds,

Doth  beateon  feas  with  tempeft  fouleand  blackc.

By  force  whereof  the  waves  were  rais’d  fb  hie.

The  very  tops  were  fptinkled  all  thereby.


The  mariners  take  in  their  greater  faile.

And  by  the  wind  they  lie,butallin  vainr.

Then  backc  againe  they  bend  without  aviile.
Now  they  areout  jtbey  canoot  in.igainc.

No  (faid  the  wind)  my  force  /hall  fo  prcvaile.

Your  bold  attempts  fhallput  you  to  fomcpaihc
Itwasa  folly  any  more  toftrive.

Needs  muft  they  follow  as  the  wind  did  drive.

30

In  the  forcfliip  fometimes  the  blaft  doth  blow.
Straight  in  the  poope.the  feas  breake  to  tiic  skies.
Needs  muft  they  bcarc  a fade, though  very  low.

To  void  the  waves  that  higher  flill  did  rife;

But  fith  my  web  fo  divsTfc  now  doth  grow,

T o weave  with  many  threds  I muft  devife,

I lave  RenaUo  in  tliisdangcrous  place.

And  of  his  fifter  fpeakc  a little  fpacc.

31

I mcjnc  the  noble damfcl!  Bradamant,

Of  Ammon  daughter,  and  dame  Beatrice,

In  whofc  rare  mind  no  noble  part  did  want.

So  full  of  value,and  fo  void  of  vice,

King  Charts  France^f  tier  might  rightly  vaunt

Sochaft,fo  faire,fb  faithful!  and  fo  wife,

And  in  the  feates  of  armes  of  fo  great  fame,

A man  might  gueflc  by  tliTtof  whence  flic  came,

3*

There  was  a Knight  cnamourd  on  this  dame.

That  out  of  Affticke  came  with  Agramant,

Rogero  hight,  fo  was  his  fathersname,

(His  mother  was  the  child  of  Ago lant)

The  damfcll  that  of  worthy  linage  came,”

And  had  a heart  not  made  of  adamant,

Difdaincd  not  the  love  of  fuch  a Knight,

Although  he  had  but  fecld  bcncin  her  light.

3?

Long  travell  and  great  p.aine  flic  had  endured.

And  rid  alone  her  lover  to  have  found,

Nc  would  fhcthinkchcrfaftic  more  aftiircd.

If  with  an  armie  flic  were  garded  round.

You  heard  before  how  flic  by  force  procured
King  Sacrapant  to  fall  and  kiftc  the  ground.

The  wood  flicpaft,and  after  that  themountaine,
Vntillatiafi  fltefawa  goodly  fountainc..

34

A goodly  fountaincrunning  in  a field.

All  full  of  trcc?,whofc  leaves  do  never  fade,

W bich  did  to  paflengers  great  pleafurc  yccld.

The  running  ftrcaine  fo  fwcctc  amurmur  made,
Vpon  thcScutb,a  hill  theSunnedid  fliicld.

The  giound  gave  floures, the  grove  .i  gratefull  fliade
Now  here  the  dame  calling  her  eve  afidc,

I A man  at  aimcs  faft  by  the  brookc  dcffiidc.

35

A man  at  armes  flic  fpvcd  by  the  brookc,

Whofc  banks  with  flowersof  divers  hew  were  clad.
Of  which  fwcet  place  hcfolmall  plcafiirctooke,

His  face  did  flicw  his  heart  was  nothing  glad.

His  targe  and  helmet  Were  not  farre  to  kioke,

Vpon  a tree  where  tide  his  hoifc  he  had;

His  eyes  ware  fwolne  with  tears,  his  mind  opprefled
With  bitter  thoughts  thxe  had  his  heart  diftrcllcd.

B The


Htmabtf
tberf.nd$o
^tMke,by  4
p^urt  ctUti


Hi  (tales  to
kimag^aiHe.

ai.

Sradam  ai
rvhom  he  U ft
«« the  pr(t


Index  »f
aamei  tj  the
floij’(/.4ef
iant  and  Ro  •
^erai  mether
named  Gal-
ha  cotta.


The  taureJI,
the  ycugb  ^
the  bcluy  be
ever  greent.


Pinaabelftii
of  .Aufelmue
t^rleofMa'

ganxjt.


^tUnta  un.
f^le  t9  Rogt-
r»  * great
NectcmSeer,
%ih»  did
wtrkfthii  bj
tmbMtnUHt


Similtt


\AitanUt
tafile  made
by  enchant'
tntnt.


So  they  torite
that  .AcbiL
itf  armor
vpae  tempe-
red to  make
it  im/metra-
bit.


THE  SECOND

The  damfcll  faire  entic’d  by  deepe  defire.

That  all  (but  chiefly  women)  hare  toknow^

All  flrangers  flatcs.doth  eameflly  require
Thcdolcfull  Knight  his  inward  griefc  to  Hiow*

Who  marking  well  her  manner  and  attire.

Her  courteous  fpeech  with  him  prevailed  lb.

He  tels  his  ftate,cftccm»ng  by  the  fight.

That  needs  Hie  mufl  have  benefome  noble  Knight*

Good  fir  (faid  he)  you  firft  muft  underftand,

I ftivcd  Charles  againft  the  King  of Spaine,

1 horlcmcn  had  and  footmen  in  my  band.

In  ambufh  plac’d  the  Spanifi)  King  t’havc  flaine;

1 brought  the  fairefl  Ladie  in  this  land,

A nd  my  beft  loved  with  me  in  my  traine,

Wheri  fodainly  ere  1 thereof  was  ware.

There  edme  a horfeman  that  piocui’d  my  care.

. . 5®

Perhap  a man, or  fomc  infernall  fprite,

Jn  humane  fliape,  I cannot  certaine fay.

But  this  1 fay,he  tookethe  damfcll  bright.

Even  as  a faulcon  feafeth  on  his  pray.

So  he  my  loving  Ladie  did  affright.

And  fo  affrighted  bare  her  quite  away.

And  when  1 thought  to  refeue  her  by  force*

Aloft  in  aire  he  mounted  with  hishoife.

39

Even  as  a rav’nous  kite  that  doth  efpie
A little  chicken  wandring  from  the  other.

Doth  catch  him  flraight,and  carries  him  on  hie.
That  now  repents  he  was  not  with  his  mother.
What  could  1 do?  my  horfe  wants  wings  to  flie.
Scant  could  he  fetone  leg  before  the  tot  her,
Hetraveld  bad  before  fo  many  dayes.

Among  the  painfull  hilsand  flonic  wayes.

40

But  like  to  one  that  were  his  wit  befide,

1 leave  my  men  to  do  my  firft  intent.

Not  caring  of  my  fclfe  what  fhould  betide,

(So  ftrongly  to  my  fancic  was  I bent)

And  tookethe  blind  god  Cupid  for  my  guide,

By  wayes  as  blind  to  feeke  my  love  I went.

And  though  my  fenfe,my  guide, my  way  were  blind)
Tet  on  I go  in  hope  my  love  to  find.

41

A fenight  fpacc  abating  but  a day.

About  the  woods  and  mountaines  I did  range,

In  favage  defer  ts  wildc  and  void  of  way.

Where  humane  fteps  were  rare  and  very  ftrange.
Faft  by  the  defert  place  a plaine  there  lay,
Thatfliewed  from  the  reft  but  little  change.

Save  onely  that  a caftle  fallof  wonder

Did  ftand  in  rockes  that  had  bene  clov’n  afunder.

4»

This  caftle  fiiincs  like  flaming  fire  a fane,

Not  made  oflime  a nd  ftonc  as  ours  are  here:

And  ftill  as  1 approcht  a little narre.

More  wondeifull  the  building  doth  appeare.

It  is  a fort  impiegnable  by  warre.

Compared  all  of  mettall  fhining  cleare.

The  fiends  of  hell  this  foi  tof  fteele  did  make,
Ofmctall  tempted  in  the  4 Stigian  lake.


BOOKE;  \

43  ...

The  towres  are  all  of  fteele,and  polifht  brigbf,

There  is  on  them  no  fpot  or  any  tuft.

It  (hincs  by  day,by  darke  it  giveth  light,

Heic  dwcls  this  robber  wicked  and  unjuft,

And  what  he  gets  againft  alllawcsand  right.

The  lawleffe  wretch abufeth  here  by  luft.

And  here  he  keepes  my  faire  and  faithfull lover.
Without  all  hope  that  I may  her  recover.

44

Ah  wo  was  me.  in  vaine  I fought  to  heipe,

I fee  the  place  that  keepes  that  I love  befl.

Even  as  a foxc  that  crying  heares  her  whclpe,

Now  borne  aloft  into  the  Eagles  neft,

About  the  tree  fhc  goes, and  fainc  would  heipe,
Butisconftrain’d  for  want  of  wingstoreft.

The  rocke  fo  ftecpe,thc  caftle  is  fo  hie.

None  can  get  in  except  they  Icarnc  to  fli^

4<

And  asl  tarri’d  intheplaine,behold

Ifiiw  two  Knights  come  riding  downe  the  plaine,
Led  by  defire  and  hope  to  win  this  hold.

But  their  defire  and  hope  was  all  in  vaine.

Gradajfo  was  the  firft  of  courage  bold,

A King  of  Serican  that  held  the  rainc.

Rpgero  next, a man  of  noble  nation.

Of  ycaics  but  yong,but  of  great  eftimation,

4*

A littlcdwarfe  they  had  to  be  their  guide,

Who  told  me  that  they  came  to  trie  their  force
Againft  the  champion  that  doth  ufc  to  ride
Out  oftbis  caftle  on  the  winged  horfe.

Which  when  I heard,  to  them  for  heipe  I cride.
And  pray’d  them  ©f  my  cafe  to  take  remorfe,

And  that  they  would,if  twcrc  their  chance  to  win.
Set  free  my  love  that  there  was  locked  in.

47

And  all  my  griefe  to  them  I did  unfold.

Affirming  with  my  tearcs  my  talc  too  true;

No  fboner  I my  heavy  hap  had  told.

But  they  were  come  within  the  caftle;  vcw,

I flood  aloofc  the  battel!  to  behold,

And  praid  to  God  good  fortune  might  cnfiic.

I Beneath  the  caftle  lies  a little  plaine.

Exceeding  not  an  arrow  fhoorc  or  twainc.

48

And  as  they  talkt  who  firft  fliould  fight  or  laft.

They  were  arrived  to  the  caftle  hifi.

At  length  Gradajfo  (whether  lots  were  caft,

Or  that  Ao^eroyccldcd  to  his  will)

Doth  take  his  home, and  blew  therewith  a blaft.
The  noife  whereof  the  caftle  wals  did  fill.

And  ftraight  with  greater  fpeed  then  can  be  gueft.
Came  out  the  rider  of  the  flying  beaft.

49

And  as  we  fee  ftrange  cranes  are  wont  to  do,

Firft  ftalkca  whi1e,rre  they  their  wings  can  find,
Thcnfeare  from  ground  not  paft  a yard  or  two,
Till  in  their  wings  they  gatha’d  have  the  wind;,

At  laft  they  mount  the  veiy  clouds  unto.

Triangle  wife,according  to  their  kind:

So  by  degrees  this  Mage  begins  to  flie,

The  bird  of  /ove  can  hatdly  mount  fo  hie.

And


Siirik,


Gradafti


Simile

Strange
tranei^t-
tanfe  thi
bird  it  apa
Jtngtr  that
geeth  over
Jea.

They  flie  in

a triangle,

Pliniewiu

leth.

Mageer

Magifiatei


I


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


Simili-


i mire  Gra-

it[fo  Toit

tn,b*viu^
vtwed  never
te  ride  bcrft
tiUbe  eeuii
get  ttrird
'Rtanldet
btrft.


50

Ar.J  when  he  fees  his  time, and  thinkes  itbeft.

He  falleth  downc  like  lead  in  fearfull  giiifc.

Even  as  the  faiilcon  doth  thefowlearreft.

The  duckc  and  mallard  from  the  brooke  that  rife,
Sohedefeending  wichhisfpearcin  reft,

Poih  pierce  theatre  in  ftrangcand  monftrous  wife.
And  eie  Graiajfo  were  thereof admonifli’d.

He  felt  a fttipe  that  made  him  halfc  aftonifti’d,

5 I

The  Afez^cupon  Gradajfo  brake  his  fpcare.

Who  ftnkes  in  vaine  upon  the  aire  and  wind.

Away  he  flue  without  or  hurt  or  fearc.

And  leaves  Gmiaffb  many  a pace  behind.

This  fierce  encounter  wasfohard  tobcare,
Thatgood  Alfanato  the  ground  inclind,

T his  f^me  Aljana  was  Gradajfos  mare,

The  fair’ft  and  beft  that  evcrfaddic  bare.

52

Alofcthe  ftarres  theforc’rer  doth  afeend.

And  wheeles  about, and  downc  he  comes  againe,
And  on  Kogero  hcc  his  force  doth  bend.

That  had  compaflJon  on  Gradajfos  paine:
Soforcth’aflault  RogcroAid  offend.

His  horfe  the  force  thereof  could  not  fiiftaine,

And  when  to  ftrike  againc  he  made  account,
Hefaw  his  foe  up  to  the  clouds  to  mount.


53


Sometimes  the  Aftz^e  Rogero  doth  aflailc.

Straight  way  GradaJ/b  he  doth  fet  upon,

And  oft  they  ftrike  againc  without  arailc,

So  quickly  he  at  whom  they  ftrike  is  gone.

He  winds  about  as  fhips  do  under  faile.

His  failes  are  wings,and  reft  he  gives  them  none.
But  fets  upon  them  in  rofudden  wife,

T hat  he  amaz’d  and  dazeld  both  ihcir  eyes.


U


Mtny  timet
wife  nun  art
readier  to
ielttvt
ftrangt  ri‘
fntt  af  ere- '


Betw'ccnc  this  one  aloft,  and  two  alow,
Thisconflitft  did  nolittlcfpace endure,

Vntill  at  laft  the  night  began  to  grow,

With  miftic  clouds  making  the  world  obfeure:
1 fiw  this  fight,!  he  truth  thereof  I know,

1 prefent  was  thereat, yet  am  I furc.

That  very  few  (except  the  wifer  fort)

Will  cred ence  give  to  fuch  a fliangc  report.


dibU  ferfant  5 5

tbentbtfaa-  This  heavenly  hcllifli  warn'our  bare  a fliield
On  his  left  arme  that  had  afilkencafe,

1 cannot  any  caufe  or  reafon  yeeW,

Why  he  would  koepc  it  cover’d  (b  long  fpacc:

It  bad  fi'ch  force, that  who  fo  it  beheld.

Such  fhininglight  it  ftriketh  in  their  face.

That  downc  they  fall  with  eyes  and  fenfes  clofed,
And  leave  their  corps  of  him  to  be  difpofed,

56

I OftbiPiield  The  target  likcthecarbuncledoth  fhine,
tnnebte  fia.  Such  light  was  never  fccnc  with  mottall  eye,
vatd.Tbt  makes  to  ground  the  lookers  on  decline,

imitation  Bethey  farrc  off,or  bcthey  ftandingnic:
mubenof  And  as  it  clos'd  their  fight,itclofcd  mine.

That  in  a tranccnolittlcfpace  wasl.

At  laft  when  I a wakt  and  rofe  againc.

The  aire  wasdarkc,and  voided  wastheplaine.


13


The  forccrer  hath  tanc  them  (I  furmife)

Into  hiscanic,as  isJikcly  nioft,

And  by  this  light  that  dazeld  all  our  cies.
My  hope  is  gone, their  liberty  is  loft:

This  is  the  truth, nc  ooi  ought  devife.

You  hcate  the  fame,  1 felt  it  to  my  coft,

Now  judge  if  I have  reafon  to  complainc.
That  have  and  do  endure  fuch  cndlcfTc  paine.

58

When  as  this  Knight  his  dolcfull  talc  had  done.
He  fate  hirndowncallchcatlefTcin  the  place.
This  was  Earle  P«»4k/  AnfeltnusfonnCf
Borne  in  Magan\a  of  that  wicked  race.

Who  like  the  reft  fo  lewd  a courfc  did  runne.
He  holpc  the  more  his  linage  to  deface:

For  oneJy  vertue  nobicnefle  doth  dignifie.
And  vicious  life  a linage  bafe  doth  lignific.


f'irtia  vera
neli/itiu.


59

The  Ladi'cfaircattcntivcall  this  while.

Doth  hearken  unto  thh  Magan\efe  tile ^

Rogeros  nimc  fometime  dotli  make  her  fmilc,
Sometime  againc  for  fearc  flielookcth  pale;

But  hearing  how  a forccrer  bafe  and  vile,

Should  in  a caftic  fo  dctainc  him  thrall,

She  pitied  himjand  in  her  mind  flic  fretted.

And  ofcdelir’d  tohearc  the  tale  repeated.

60

When  at  the  laft  the  whole  flic  imdcrftood.

She  faid,fir  Knight  mourne  not,  but  take  fome  plea>
Perhaps  our  meeting  may  be  to  your  good,  (furc.
And  turnc  ycurenemic  untodifplcafurc:

Shew  me  this  fort,  for  why  it  frets  my  blood.

So  foulc  a prifon  holds  fo  fairc  a treafurc
And  if  good  fortune  favour  mine  intent,

You  will  right  well  fuppofc  your  travcll  fpent.

6l

Ah  (faid  the  Knight)  fhould  I rcturnc  againc,
Topaftetheie  mountaines  hard  and  ovcrtwhaici
Though  for  my  fclfc  it  is  but  little  paine.

To  toilc  my  bodic  having  loft  my  harti
For  you  to  go  where  as  you  may  be  ftaine.

Or  taken  pnfncr  were  a foolifti  part:

Which  if  it  hap,  yet  me  you  cannot  blame,

Becaufc  1 give  you  warning  ofthefamc.

62

This  faid,herifcth  uphlshorfcto  take,

The  noble  Ladie  on  the  way  to  guide,

Who  mcancs  to  venter  for  Regeros  fake.

Or  death  or  t hraldomc,or  what  ere  betide,

Butloe  a meftenger  great  haft  doth  make,

That  comes  bchind,and  (tarry  bo)  hciride,

This  was  thepoft  that  told  toSacrapant,

How  file  that  foyld  him  was  Dame  Bradamant.

6J

This  meftenger  brought  tidingsin  great  poft.

Both  from  Narhona  and  from  Mompeleetej
How  they  were  up  in  armes  along  the  coft
Of  AquamortjZnd  all  that  dwelled  nt cic.

And  how  Marfiliat  men  their  hearts  hacfloft,

Becaufc  of  her  no  tidings  they  could  hearc;

And  (for  her  abfcncc  made  them  illapayd)

They  fent  to  have  herprcfcncc  and  her  ayd.

£ X Thefis


70.


14


THE  SECOND  BOOKE


«4


The  li  mill  of
Fnveact-


Thcfc  townes  and  others  many  to  the  fame,

Betwcenc  the  fticamcs  of  Rodon  and  of  Vare,

The  Empror  had  aflign’d  this  worthy  damCj
Committing  them  unto  her  truft  and  care.

Her  noble  value  gat  her  all  this  fame,

Becaufem  armes  herfclfe  flic  bravely  bare,

And  fo  the  cities  under  her  fubjedion.

This  meflage  fcntjvcquiring  her  dircftion.

<5

Which  when  flic  heard, it  made  her  fomewhat  paufe,
Twixt  yea  and  no  flic  flood  a prctic  fpace,

Of  one  fide  honor  and  her  office  drawes ,
Onth'other  fide  love  heipcs  to  pleadc  the  cafe.

At  Idft  flicmeanes  I’cnfuc  the  prefent  caufc.

And  fetch  Rogcro  from  th’inchantcd  place;

And  if  her  force  cannot  to  fhisattainc.

At  Icafl  with  him  a prifner  to  remainc.

66

In  curtcous  fort  her  anfwcr  flic  contrived.

With  gracious  words, and  fent  away  the  port.

She  longs  with  her  new  guide  to  have  arrived,

To  that  fame  place  where  both  their  loves  were  loft
But  he  perceiving  now  flic  was  derived.

From  CUrimont  rhat  he  detefted  moft.

Doth  hate  her  fore,  and  feareth  to  the  fame.

Left  flic  fliould  know  he  of  Magan^a  came.

67

There  was  betwcenc  thcfc  houfesauncient  hatcj
Thisof.v/(7^4K^d,that  of  Chrimounf,

And  each  of  them  had  weakned  others  ftate.

By  killing  men  in  both  of  great  account.

This  Pinnabel  (a  vile  and  wicked  mate.

That  all  his  kin  m vices  did  furmount)

Meaneswith  himfelfcthisdamfcll  to  betray.

Or  clfc  to  flip  afide  and  go  his  way.

'6g

And  this  fame  fanciefb  his  head  didfiP,

With  hatc,with  feare,with  anger  and  with  doubt.
That  he  miftookc  the  way  againfl  his  will.

And  knew  not  how  againc  to  find  itout.

Till  in  the  wood  hefaw  a little  hill.

Bare  on  the  top,  where  men  might  looke  about.
But  Bradamant  fuch  amorous  paffions  feclcs.

She  followctb  like  a fpanncll  at  his  hcclcs.

69

The  craftic  gtiidc  thus  wandring  in  the  wood.
Intending  now  the  Ladic  to  beguile.

Said  unto  her  forfboth  he  rhought  it  good,

Sith  night  grew  on,themfclves  to  reft  a while;

Here  is,quoth  he  (and  flicwd  which  way  it  flood)
Acaftlefairc,and  hence  not  many  a mile:

But  tarry  you  a li  ctlc  here  untill
I may  deferie  the  countrey  from  the  hill.

70

Thisfaid,hc  mounted  to  the  higher  ground,

A nd  ftanding  now  the  higheft  part  upon,

Hecaft  about  his  eyes  and  looked  round.

To  find  fomc  path  whereby  he  might  be  gone.


When  unawares  a monftrous  cave  he  found.

And  ftrangc  cut  out  and  hollow’d  in  the  ftone,
Deepe  thirtie  cubits  downe  it  dothdefeend.

Having  a fairc  large  gate  at  lower  end.

71

Such  asgreat  ftatcly  houfes  wont  to  have.

Out  ©f  which  gate  proceeds  a fli  ining  light,

Thar  ail  w ithin  moft  hghtfome  makes  the  cave.

And  all  this  while  on  this  felonious  Knfglit
This  noble  Ladic  due  attendance  gave.

And  never  fuffied  him  go  out  of  fight.

She  follow’d  Pinmbel  hard  at  his  backe,

Bccaufe  flie  was  afeard  to  leefe  the  trackc-

7»

When  as  this  villainc  traitor  did  efpie,  >

That  hisdcfigncmcnts  foclifli  were  and  valne.
Either  to  leave  her,or  to  make  her  die.

He  thought  it  beft  to  trie  a further  trainc,
Perfwadir.g  her  for  todefeend  and  trie.

What  Ladies  fairc  within  the  cave  remainej
For  why  (faid  he)  within  this  little fpacc

, 1 faw  a goodly  damlcll  in  the  place.

Both  rich  arayd  and  very  fairc  ofhew.

Like  one  of  noble  linage  and  degree,-
And  this  her  fortune  made  me  more  to  rew.

That  here  againfl  her  will  fli  e feem’d  to  be.

And  when  I thought  for  to  defeend  and  vcw,
ThccauCcofthis  her  griefc  to  know  and  fee,

1 was  no  fbener  from  my  horfe  alighted.

But  with  infcrnall  hags  I was  afrighted.

74

The  noble  Bradairunt  that  was  more  flout
Then  warie,  who  it  was  did  her  peifwade.

Hath  fuch  defire  to  heipe  a damfcll  out.

That  ftraight  the  cave  fhe  meancth  to  Invade,

She  finds  by  hap  a long  bough  1 hereabout.
Thereof  a pole  of  mightic  length  flic  made,

Firft  with  her  fword  flichcwcs  and  pares  it  fit.
That  done  fhe  lets  it  downc  into  the  pit,

75

She  giveth  Pinnabel  the  bigger  end.

And  prayes  him  ftand  above  and  hold  it  faft.

And  by  the  fame  intending  to  defeend,

V pon  her  armes  h cr  whole  waight  fhe  doth  caft.
But  he  that  to  deftroy  her  did  intend.

Doth  askc  if  flic  would  learne  to  Icapc  a caft.

And  laughing, loos’d  lus  hands  that  were  together.
And  vviflit  thatall  the  race  of  thorn  were  with  hes,

Yet  great  good  hap  the  gentle damicll  found.

As  well  deferv’d  a mind  fo  innocent:

For  why  the  pole  flrakc  firft  upon  the  ground.

And  though  by  forccit  flnvci’d  all  and  rent.

Yet  were  her  limbcs  and  life  kept  fafe  and  found,
For  all  his  vile  and  traitcrous  inr enr.

Sore  was  the  damfcll  mazed  with  the  fa?l.

As  in  another  bookc  declare  I fliaii.


/n


I


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.  15

jnthii  fccond  Bool^e  in  the  combat  betwccnc  R«rnaliJo<j«(iSacrapant  jWec  may  ohferxe  here  ilepajpon  ofioie,  itge~
ther  rvith  the  termes  that  men  //and  upon  jor  their  reputation  and  credit , are  vjttntimes  cccafwns  oj  bitter  qua?  els  ■ and
in  their  fudaine  parttnganj  great  perplexity,  that  both  of  them  xtereflriel^en  inioly  the  jalfe  tale  tlat  the  tfirit  told
them  of  Oflindo.rve  may  gather  lota  vetyapt  jeloufe  is  to  eoncehe  andbelecxeeztticjalfe  report.

By  RenMosobcdicnectoCharlesingoing  on  embaJJ'age  nomithflanding  all  hit  prinjat affahes and affe^iont,
»e  vu^tahe  example  of  dutifuU  obedience  roour  latvfull  Prince.  And  inthat  Pinnabcl  feehyt  to  betray  Bradaniant,
and  to  hi/iher  ly  letting  her  fall  into  the  cave,  into  the  mhuhfhec  trujled  herrouldhaxe  let  herdonne  fa^  ely  andfiiend-
ly,rche  may  note  two  jpeciaU  things,  one,  that  it  is  good  to  bee  rraric  into  whofe  hands  wee  commit  the  fd^egard  of  our
lives  and  Jt  ate  : the  other,  that  bafe  minded  men  beingwich^edliefet  on  revenge,  care  not  by  what  trcafonovvillame
they  worl^e  the  overthrow  of  their  enemies.

For  the  Hiftorie  of  this  Canto , I will  not  affrmc  tooprecifclie,  for  I find  not  in  any  credible  author  of  KenMos
tmhaffage  into  England,  neither  is  it  very  hl{cly,  if  the  King  o/Englanci  were  then  in  Paris,  (as  in  another  place  of
thisworhe  is  affirmed)  that  a Pccrc  of  France  Jhouldbe  fent  hither,  and  not  rather  fame  Englijh  noble  man  fentfiom
the iQngto  hisothcr fubjeOs  in'En^\ind,with dirciUons andinfiniOions ftomhim.

That  ^trhandCiMTleshimfelfcwcre  in  fame  diflrcjffc  about  that  time, is  not  unprobabte,  and  that  the  Turlccsar
their  firfi  arrivaU  prevailed  very  farre  againfl  the  Ckrifiians,  though  it  la/lcd  but  awhile.

As  for  Rogero,  whom  hee  toiicheth  in  this  Bool^e,  and  that  is  Jo  much  ff'oficn  of  in  tl  is  whole  worlie,  as  /Eneas  is  in
Virgin,  though  in  bothrather  in  Fabulous  and  in  AUegoricall  fence , then  plainclie  and  hiftoricallie yet  l finde  it
in  very  good  Authors,  that  a man  of  that  name  was  indeed  the  chieferaifer  of  the  hotifc  of  Lffe  the  now  SO  u{cs  oJ  Fer-


rara.


For  the  AUegorie , as  1 noted  in  the  firfi  Bool^e  of  Bayardo , foihe  fame  is  ftill  contimed  or  rati  cr  repealed,  name  A!Ie<'ory
ly,  that  thchorfe,  by  which  is  meant  mans  fervent  and  furious  appetite,  which  is  more  plaincly  fignificdwherc  it  is  faid  **  ^

of  the  horfe  ;

His  going  onciy  was  to  this  intent.

To  fhew  liismaflcr  where  thcdamfcll  went

So  that flill  this  unbridled  defire  figured  by  Bayardo,  leades  Rcnaldo  on foote,  whcrely  is  imierfload fenfualitie,  to
purfue  An^e\ic3, with  a bafe  dejire  of  the  mo/l  bafe ple.a/itre.

jn  the  fhield,  whofe  light  amazed  the  lookers  on,  and  made  them  fall  downaftonied,  may  be  Allegorically  meant  the
great  pompes  of  the  world,  that  mafe  JhiningJhewcs  in  the  bleared  eyes  ofvamc  pcop'e,  and  blind  therti,and  mal;e  them
to  admire  and fall  downe  before  them,having  indeed  nothing  butfhining  titles  without  venue, lil{e  painted fheathswith
leaden  weapons,  or  lif;e  flraw  without  thegraine:  either  clfc  may  be  meant  the  faring  beauties  of fime  gorgeous  women
that  afl'onifb  the  eyes  ofweal^emindedmen,  apt  to  receive  [itch  loving  imprcjjms , as  Athnnsjhidddidamaie  their
fenfet  that  beheld  it.

^ For  the  Allegory  of  the  horfe,  what  is  meant  therely,  1 referve  to  another  place  where  I will follow  it  more  at  large
then  this  little  jpace  willgive  me  leave,  and  in  that  bool^ewhcrc  he  is  more  treated  of.


The  ASufion,  to  which  tins  flying  horfe  is  rejcrred.andfrom  whence  it  is  tafcn,is  from  Pcgarus,//;f  flying  hor/i  that  Pin.  a n r
d^twrites  of,  bred  of  the  blood  of  Medufa,  on  which  beafi  Bcllerophonwaswortt  to  ride,  flyingthe  jalfe  acciifation  of


i’rctus»//t.

Alfa  the  fhidd  it  /c[  t fleemes  t o allude  to  the fable  6j  Medufas  hcad,that  turned  riten  into  ft  ones.


THE  THIRD  BOOKE.


'7


jg^2?

wm

i^^sg


'^k


Ftitre  Bl  adamant  »r<w  falne  in  Mci  I ins  cavc^

MclifTa  meetes  her  there  her  ancient  friend,
tyFnd  there  to  her  fke  pet  file  notice  t^Ave ,

Of  fetch  brave  men  as  fliould  from  her  defccnd.

She  told  her  w>here pie  pould  Rogcfo  have,
whom  old  Atlanta  had  in  prifon pend,

/lad pom  Brunello  hotp  to  take  the  ring.

That  unto  liberty  her  deere  might  bring,

w^-

{ *?r  "*


JT  thatmy  head  were  fo  well

ftor^d  with  skill,

>t;:  Z * noble  fubjeft  fit  to
treat,

^ , Oh  that  my  wits  were  cquall

to  my  will,

' To  frame  aphrafe  fit  for  fo
high  conceat  '•

Ye  Mi'fes  that  do  hold  the  fa-
_ cred  hill,

Infpirc  my  heart  with  flame  of  learned  heat,

While  I prefume  in  bale  and  lowly  verfe»

The  names  of  glorious  Princes  to  reherfe.

i

SuchPrincesas  excell  all  Princes  far.

In  all  thegiftsof  body  and  of  mind,

Temprat  in  peace,  fiftorious  eke  in  war,

Themfclvcs  moft  noble,  come  of  noble  kind.

And  fuch  (except  my  guefle  do  greatly  er)

A s arc  by  heav’ns  eternall  doomc  affign’d.

In  wealth, in  fame,  inrulc  and  in  piofperiiy.

To  lire  themfclrcs,  their  children  and  poftcrity .

3

Nor  can  I now  their  feverall  aAcs  moft  rare,

Atchcev’d  by  cr’ry  one  of  them  recite.

No  though  my  verfe  with  Virgils  might  compare.
Or  I as  well  as  Homer  could  endite :

With  their  great  ptaife,gteat  rollumcs  filled  arc.
With  large  difeourfe,  by  them  that  ftorics  write.

I onely  meane  to  fhew  what  wasforefhowne.
Long  ere  theit  perfoos,  or  their  deeds  were  knowne
4

But  firft  of  Pinndbel  a word  to  fpeake.


Who  as  you  heard  with  traitcrous  intent,

Tire  bonds  of  all  humanity  d'ld  break,

For  which  ere  long  himfelfe  wasafter  flicnt.

Thus  while  bafe  minds  their  wrongsdo  bally  wreak,
They  do  that  once  that  often  they  repenr,

And curfethat  time, a thoufand  times,toolate
When  they  parfude  their  unrevenged  hate.

5

With  fainting  heart,  (for  fin  is  full  of  fearel
By  ftealing  ftepsfrom  hcncehcdothdcpart,

And  as  he  goes  he  pricth  here  and  there.

His  featcfulllookebcwraies  hisguilty  hart.

Nor  yet  his  dread  doth  move  him  toforbcarc,

To  hcape  more  fin  upon  thisill  defart.

Appal’d  with  fearc,  but  toucht  with  no  temorfe,
Suppofing  flic  was  flaine, he  takes  her  horfe.

6

But  let  him  gountill  another  time.

For  I do  meane  hereafter  you  fliall  heare,

How  he  was  dealt  with,  when  his  double  crime,
Infccret  wrought,  moft  open  did  appearc.

Now  unto  Bradamant  I bsnd  my  rime.

Who  with  herfalljwasyet  of  heavy  f heare  :

And  had  beene  taught  a gamball  for  the  nonce.

To  give  her  death  and  buriall^tonce,

7

Now  when  flie  came  unto  her  felfcagaine,

And  had  recover’d  memory  and  fence.

She  gets  her  on  her  feet, although  with  paine,

1 n mind  to  fcckefomc  way  to  get  fro  thence.

When  loc,  before  her  face  flic  feeth  plainc,
Aftatclyportall  built  withgrcatcxpencc.

And  next  behind  the  fame  flic  might  deferie,

A larger  roome  and  fairerto  the  cie.

B 4


ate:  dum
fenas  odio
ptr  vim  fc  -
Pinit  inuUt,

Siniemt,

Sentence:
Ovid:  here
guam  diffi-
cile efleri-
men  aonpro-
dere  vuLiuf


'Soo^e  3i  jla.
76.


This


THE  THIRD  BOOKE


sS


Jiltr'iH)

ttnit.


This  ;vas  a (Church  moft  (bicmnc  and  devout.

That  ftands  on  marble  pillars  fmall  and  round,

And  rais'd  by  arc  on  arches  all  about.

That  made  each  voyct  toyecld  a double  found.

A lightfomclampe  that  never  gocth  out,  •

Did  burne  on  altar  landing  in  the  ground-*

That  though  the  roomes  were  large  6c  widcinlpace.
The  lampc  did  ferve  to  lighten  all  the  place.


15


And  glad  of  chit  adventure  unexpefted,

She  followeth  her  guide  with  gi«at  delight,

And  ftraight  /hefaw  theftately  tcombecicflcd.
Of  marble  pure  that  held  his  bones  and  fpthc,
And  (that  which  one  v\ould little  havclulpetfrd''
The  very  marble  wai  lb  clearc  and  brighr,
Thatthough  the  funne  no  light  untoitgave.


The  tombe  it  fclfc  did  lighten  all  the  cave.


Cirijt  eur
SxviOHT,


The  noble  damfcll  full  of  rev’renc  fcare,

VVhenas  herfclfeinfacrcd  place  Ihe  fees,

(As  one  that  ftill  a godly  minde  did  bearc,)
Begins  to  pray  to  him  upon  her  knees,

Whofe  holy  fide  was  peril  with  cruell  (peare.
And  who  to  fave  our  lives  his  ovs  tie  did  leefc;
And  while  fhe  Hayes  devou  tly  at  her  prayre.
The  fage  Melyjpi  doth  to  her  icpairc.

lO

Her  gownc  ungyrt,ber  haire  about  her  head,
Much  like  a piieft  or  prophctelTc  arraid,

And  in  her  bookc  a little  while  Hie  red.

And  after  thus uhto  the  damfcll  faid:

O thou  by  Gods  appointment  hither  led,

0 Bradamunt,  moll  wife  and  worthy  maid,

1 long  have  looked  here  for  this  thy  comming,
Foretold  thereof  by  prophet  Merlins  cunning.


Tot  dtferip-
tsoa  of Mcr.
tins  tom6f,
€ia  of  the
bukjt  of
91rthur:but
this  is  poeU‘
call  licence  to
faiaeitto  bee
in  Trance,
for  it  ii  in
WnUi.


Here  is  thetombe  that  Afier/wc  crfl-diimakc.

By  force  of  fccret  skill  and  hidden  arc.

In  which  fometimes  the  Ladic  of  th^a{e.
That  with  her  bcautie  had  bcwitcht  his  hart.
Did  make  him  enter  fondly  for  her  fake,
From  whence  henever  after  could  depart,

And  he  was  by  a woman  over  reached.

That  unto  others  prophefied  and  preached.


TiB  donut


For  whether  be  the  nature  offomc  llont,

A darkefome  place  with  lightlomenes  to  fill,
Orwcrcitdonc  by  magikcanalonc.

Or  clfc  by  hclpeofMathematike  skill.

To  make  ti  anlpaicncics  to  mecce  in  one.

And  fo  convey  the  funne-bcames  where  you  v\ilh
But  fine  it  was  moll  curious  to  behold.

Set  forth  with  carved  workes  and  guilt  with  gold.

*7

Kow  when  thcdamfcll  was  appreched  nyre,

To  thisllrangc  toombe  where  Merlins  bones  were
Forth  of  the  flones  that  Hiinc  likeflaming  fire.

His  lively  voyce  fuch  fpctches  out  doth  call:

Let  fortune  cVer  favour  thy  dcliie,

O Bradamant  thou  noble  maid  and  chart,

From  out  whofe  wombe  an  ilTucllinllpioccedj  o
That  all  the  world  in  clone  fliall  exceed,  .


II


His  carkas  dead  within  this  Hone  is  bound,

Butwithdead  covlc  the  living Ibulcdoth  dwell:,

And  lliall  uncill  it  licare  the  trumpet  found,

That  brings  reward  of  doing  ill  or  well.

His  voice  (Toth  livc.and  anfwei-  and  expound,

And  things  both  prefent  pall  and  future  tell,
Refolving  men  of  cv’ric  doubtfull  cafe ,

That  for  his  counfell  come  nnto  this  place.

13

About  a moncth  or  little  more  or  leffe,

It  is  lince  I repaird  to  Merlins  grave,

Of  him  about  the  lludic  I piofefle,'

Some  precepts  and  inrtrurtionsto  have.

And  (for  I willing  was  I mull  confclTc)

T o meetc  you  at  your  comming  to  this  cave:
Forwhichhc  did  prefixe this  ccrtainc day.

This  moved  me  of  puipofe  here  to  Hay.

>4

Duke  Ammons  daughter  filem  Hands  and  Hill,'

T he  while  the  wife  Melyjfd  to  her  fpakc,

Aftonifiicd  at  this  unuluall  skill,

And  doubting  iflhcwerc  aflcepcoi  wake,

A modert  lhair.e  with  grace  her  eyesdoth  fill.

With  which  dcwnecaftjthisanfwcr  flic  doth  make;

Alas  what  good  or  nrciitc  is  in  me

That  prophets  flioiild  my  comming  fo  fortfec?


The  noble  blood  that  came  of  ancient  Troj',

By  two  clearc  fprings  m thee  together  mixt.

Shall  bleed  the  flowrc,ihc  jcwell  and  the  joy,
Dfallon  whom  thefunne  his  beames  hath  fixf,
Twixt  thofe  that  hcatjand  tlrofc  that  cold  annoy,
FiomFdgeto  indsfDantih  and  Nile  betwixt,
EmpVorsand  Kings, and  Dukes  and  Lords  for  ay,
Ofehis  thy  linage  eairic  fliall  the  Iway.

19

And  many  a Captaincbiavc  and  worthy  Knight,

Shall  ifluc  from  thisflocke,that  fliall rcflorc
By  warlike  feates  the  gloric  Arming  bright.

That  y/a^pofl’cfl'cd  heretofore.

And  magirtrates  to  maintaine  peace  and  tig^tj
As  Muma  and  Avgujim^id  before,

Tochcrifii  vertue,  vicefoto  aflvvagc,

Asfiiall  to  us  bring  backc  the  golden  age.  i

to

Wherefore  fith  God  hath  by  predertination.

Appointed  thee  to  bcAegcrorwife,

And  means  to  blcrtc  thine  heirs  and  generation,

W'ith  all  the  graces  granted  in  this  life,

Peififi  thou  firmc  in  thy  determination.

And  rtoutly  overcome  each  flerme  of  rtnfcj
And  woikc  his  worthy  puniflimcntand  paine^

T hat  doth  thy  lives  delight  fretn  theedetaine,

21

This  faid;  the  prophet  Merlins  hold s his  peace,
AndgiTcsA/f/tj(7<nime  to  werkc  her  will,

Who  when  flicdid  perceive  the  voice  to  ceafe,

Shep  urpolcth  by  praflifc  of  hersbll,

ToTltcw  thcdamfelJpatiofth.it)rcreale,

That  flicutd  wuh  lame  the  world  hcieafirr  fill;

And  for  this  piiipofc  fhe  did  then  aflicmble,

A treupe  of  /pnghti  their  pnfoas  to  icfrirWe.

. W'ho


tnibe'oU
Cbronicltt  ijf
Trance  tbtp
derrut  ter-
taine  great
benfes fi-om
d>*  blood  of
Pfiamm.
tythe  ntmet
of thtfe  fruri
t iven  it  un-
dtrftooijttjl,

mfisAortk
andSoutb,  I


i


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


Seme  bold
tftnion  that
Aert  tt  ffi-
fuiix  the
tire  df
wtfi  intbt
taelbt


It

Who  ftraight  by  woids  of  fca  ct  vcrtuc  bound,

In  numbers  great  unte  the  cave  icpairCj
Of  whence  I know  not, whether  under  ground,
Orclfe  of  thofe  that  wander  in  the  airc:

Then  thrife  flie  drawes  about  acircle  round.

And  thrife  flie  hallo wes  it  with fecret  praitc,
Thenopens  file  a triple  clafped  booke.

And  foftly  whifpcnng  in  it  flie  doth  lookc.

13

This  done  flie  takes  the  damfell  by  the  hand
Exhorting  her  ilte  fliould  not  be  afraid.

And  in  a circle  caufeth  her  to  if  and.

And  for  her  more  fccuritie  and  aid,

And  as  it  were  for  more  aiTuied  band,

Vpon  her  head  fomecharaffers  ilielaid.

T hen  having  done  her  due  and  folemne  rites.

She  doth  beginne  to  call  upon  the  fprites.

14

Behold  a crav  of  them  come  rufliing  in.

In  fundrrcfhapes  with  perfons  great  and  tall.

And  BOW  they  filled  all  the  roomc  within.

So  readily  they  came  unto  her  call.

When  BraJamant  to  feare  did  ftraight  begin.

Her  heart  was  cold, her  colour  waxedpall.

But  yet  the  circle  kept  her  like  a wall,

So  that  (he  needed  not  to  feare  at  alU
*5

Howbeit  Afe/y^caufed  them  be  gone.

From  thence  unto  the  next  adjoyning  cave.

And  thence  to  come  before  them  one  by  one,

The  better  notice  of  their  names  to  have.

That  at  more  leyfure  they  may  talke  thereon.
When  as  occafion  fo  may  feeme  to  crave.
Although  (quoth  flic)  this  fliort  timccannot  ferve
j To  ipcakc  of  cv’ric  one  as  they  deferve.

Lo  here  the  firft  thy  firft  begotten  forme,

■ Ut  biliary  — . , \ ° 1 I ■ /-  I

; the  end  of
t'l  third

S'  >ke.

f.mimtiti-
I kttl^en
%tofthe  t.

I ikeofl^tr-


That  bcarcs  thy  favour  and  hisfathers  name.

By  whom  the  Lombards  fliall  in  fight  be  wonne,
To"DefidcriM  their  Kings  great  iliamc,

Who  fhall  at  Fontyr  make  the  ftreames  torunne.
With  blood  in  fields  adjoyning  to  the  fame.

And  fhall  revenge  thcdccdsand  minds  unpure,
Of  fuch  as  did  his  fathers  fall  procure.

17

And  for  this  noble  ad  among  the  reft,

The  Emperour  ihall  give  him  in  reward.

The  honours  great  of  Ca/<2fl«and  £fi.

By  which  his  family  fliall  be  prefard.

The  next  Vberto  is  whofc  valiant  breft.

Shall  be  unto  the  church  a gard.

Defending  it  with  valiant  heart  and  hand.

To  th’honorof  * Hc^eryan  times  and  land.
iS


• (Ittftbe

ieuntt

iletffeu

. herUT^Xf.
•ftbtB*.

» Wttloo^t
iwnouttf


Whofe  triumphs  arc  moft  famous  cv’rie  where.
Then  bis  Tonne  that  did  MiUaln  winnc.

And  for  his  creft  two  vipers  us’d  to  bcare.

Next  Atfo  IS  and  next  to  him  of  kinne,

That  erft  of  Lombardie  the  crownc  fliall  wcare.
Then  Albertajfb  by  wborcmcancs  arc  wonne.
The  * Metirtgyrs  both  father  and  the  fonric.


iAtft.

Hinaiit.

^ibortnffaiji

Rtnaldt,


Ip

19

T o him  fliall  Oihons  favour  fo  enchne,

He  fliall  in  marnagegive  to  him  bis  daughter.

Now  Hugo  comes  againe,6  happie  line.

And  happie man  that  (av’dfogreata  ilaughter,  HugoS,
When  at  Chrifis  vicars  rule  Aowedid  repine.

He  daunteth them  and  ib  reftor’d  them  after:

T he  which  by  wit  without  the  dint  of  fword,

He  fliall  cftVd  in  Othons  time  the  third.

30

Now  Ful{o  comes  that  to  his  brothers  gave,  FSco,

His  land  in  Italy  which  was  not  fmall,  .

And  dwelt  in  Almavy\\ts]nt\d  to  favc
Ob Samfotiy,  that  unto  him  did  fall.

A Dukedome  great  that  did  with  Caftlcs  brave,

Accrewto  him  for  want  ofifTnc  male.

By  himthatnoblc  houfcishcld  andcheriflicd,

1 hat  but  for  him  would  beextinft  and  pcriflied.

31

Then  commet  h Atfo  that  mifliketh  wane,

Biityet  hisfonnes  Bcrtuldaiid  AlhertajJe,

With  Iccond  Henrie  fhall  be  ftill  at  jane.

And  bring  the  'Dutchmen  to  a wofull  pafTc.

Next  young  Ronaldo  Aiming  likea  ftaric.

Shall  be  untothc  Church  a v.’allof  brafle.

And  worke  the  utter  ovcithrow  and  loflc,

Ofwicked  Fiedril{e  named  Bcubaroffe,

, 3»

Behold  another  fliall  poircfTc,
t'cro«a  with  a ftatcly  temtoric,

OiOton  and  Hsnorm  no  IcfTc,

Shall  bea  marqueflemadeto  his  great  glory.

It  would  be  long  their  names  all  to  cxprcfTc,

That  fliall  proceff  thcfacied  confiftoric,

And  in  moft  valerous  and  marfliall  manner,

Difplay  and  eke  defend  the  Churches  banner.

33

Obyfo  next  and  FoU^o  you  may  view.

With  Henries  two,thc  father  and  the  fbnne,

BothG«e/jer  that  ictixibtxWHumbrya  fliallfubdcw.

And  keepe  the  Dukedome  there  by  conqueft  won.

Behold  him  that  the  good  ftacc  doth  renew,

Of  Italy  that  late  was  quite  undone.

Cal’d  Atfofththti  bravely  overthrew.

The  crucll  EJfelino  and  him  flew,

34

Th.atcrucll£j^/y«a  thatwasthought,

T o have  bccnc  gotten  by  feme  wicked  divcll,

That  never  any  goodnclTc  had  bccnc  taught.

But  fold  Ills  fiulc  to  finne  and  doing  cvill.

Comparing  with  the  crucll  affs  he  wrought.

Fierce  Hero  were  but  myld  and  Sylla  civill,

Befidc  this  ylr/o  fliall  in  time  to  come
The  powre  of  fccond  Fredrilf  overcome.

And  then  he  fliall  his  brother  Albandrine,

Vnto  the  Florentines  for  monic  gage.

And  Othon  with  the  fa^ion  Gebellyne,

He  fliall  fupprcfTcamid  the  furious  rage,

Andraifc  the  C hutch,  nor  letting  it  decline,

But  fpending  to  defend  it  all  his  age.

For  which  good  fervicc  he  fliall  juftly  mciice.

The  Dukedome  of  Fenara  to  inheritc.


Ohrfim

Feleo,


Next


10


THE  third  BOOKE


Ktntldofo}-

fuHtdti

fUt.


Obyfi,

iJuolat.

,A!debrandtn

Kkolas  2,


tyontU.


hjfftliu.


Next  him  RemUo  now  cnfu’th,  whofclot,

Shall  be  at  Mapkt  to  be  made  awaj,

A death  his  vertuous  deeds  defenred  not,
Bucwotothemthat  guiltlcflc blood  betray.

Now  followeth  a worthy  cruC  and  knot,

Whofcadls  alone  to  tell  would  /pend  a day;

Obyfo, Nicolas  and  AUhrandine,

Whofc  noble  deeds  fhall  honour  much  their  line.

37  i

ThcnNifo/<«  is  he  that  next  cnfu'tn.

That  rul’d  m tender  yeares  both  neere  and  farre.
That  Andes  and  eke  revengeth  their  untruth,

That  fought  his  ftateby  civillftrifcto  mane.
Thefportsand  exertifesof  his  youth.

Are  blowes  and  fightSj'and  dangers  great  and  vvaire.
Which  makes  that  ere  to  manly  ftate  he  came.

For martialldeeds  begets  theonely  name.

Lo  Lyonc/l  the  glory  of  his  age.

Maintaining  peace  and  quiet  all  hit  time.

And  keeping  that  with  cafe  by  wifedomc  fage.

To  which  feme  others  by  much  painedodime,

1 hat  fettred  furie  and  rebuked  rage,

That  locks  up  in  walsofftone  and  lime:

That  all  his  wit,his  care  and  travcllbent,

T o make  his  fubjeds  live  in  ftatc  content.  ^

39

Now  Mercies  comCf,an  Hercules  indeed,

Who fe deeds  fliall  merite  ever  during  fame;

That  byhispaineshiscounttieseafcniall  breed,
And  puthisenemiestoflight  and  fliame.

Sharpe  to  devife,  to  execute  with  fpeed,

Both  flout  t’atiempt, and  patient  to  the  lame.

No  Prince  fit  all  ever  rule  hiscountric  better,

No  Prince  had  evercountric  more  hisdettcr.

40

Not  oncly  that  he  fliall  their  moorifli  grounds.

By  grc3t  expence  to  pafture  firmc  reduce,

Not  that  the  towne  with  wall  environ  round,

And  florc  with  things  bchooffull  to  their  ufc.

Not  that  when  warre  in  ech  place  fliall  abound.

He  fliall  mantaine  them  peaceably  in  truce,

Not  that  he  fhall  according  to  their  asking
Disburden  them  of payments  and  of  tasking;

41

But  that  he  fliall  more  and  above  all  thefe,'

Leave  them  behind  him  fuch  a worthy  race,

As  fearch  within  the  circuit  ofthefeas.

You  fliall  not  6nd  two  tofupplie  their  place.

So  fliall  the  one  the  other  flriveto  pleafc.

So  fhall  the  one  the  others  love  imbrace.

As  may  for  loving  brotherly  icgard.

With  Cay?or  and  with  Po^ux  be  compard.

4*

The  elder  ofthefc  two  Alfonfohightt
The  next  of  them  Hyp/)o//ro  we  call,

Both  palling  flout  and  valiant  in  fight.

Both  palling  wife  and  provident  withall:

And  both  in  due  defence  of  countricf  right,

Shall  feeme  a bulwarke  and  a brazen  wall:

They  both  fliall  have  of  enemies  good  ftorf.

They  both  fliall  Arllfubduc  them  cvamoic.


Their  mother  (if  I may  a mother  name,)  '

One  more  like  Progne  and  Medea  fell,

Vnto  herendlcfTc  infamie  and  fliame,

Againft  herfbnne  Aljonfo  fliall  rebtll,

And  joyne  with  Venice  force  (for  this  to  blame)

T hough  for  the  fame  ere  long  they  paid  full  well,
Forthofc  they  thought  to  hurt,  they  did  this  good.
To  make  the  ground  more  fruitful!  with  their  blood.

Not  farfro  thence  the  Spanifli  fouldier  hired.

By  pallors  purfe  and  in  that  pallors  pay.

That  with  a forcible  aflault  afpired.

To  take  a fort,  and  ckc the  captaine  flay.

But  loc  he  comes  and  they  perforce  retyred.

And  iiavcfoflioita  plcafure  of  this  pray,
Scarfeoneof  tlicmin  life  is  left  abiding,

Tocarric  notice  offo  hcavie  tiding.

4<

His  wit  and  valour  fliall  him  Co  advance.

To  have  the  honour  of  Romania  field.

Where  by  his  mcanes  unto  the  force  of  Prance,

The  Pope  and  S'panr.tnfr, forced  are  toyeeld:

And  there  inChriflian  blood.ofatall chance.

Shall  horfcsfwimmc.fuchnumbcr  fliall  bekccld,
Nor  fliall  not  nidi  enough  alivcremaine.

To  buricthofc  that  arc  in  battcllflainc.

The  while  hlsbrothcrundcr  Card’nalscap,

Sliall  cover,nay  fliall  flicw  a prudent  head,

(I  nieanc)wbo  fliall  have  hap.

With  band  of  men  but  fmall  (yet  wifely  led)

To  give  to  the  Venetians  fuch  a clap.

As  few  the  like  in  floricsfiavc  bene  read.

T o take  three  times  five  Gallics  at  one  tide,
Andbarkes  and  boates  a thoufand  more  befide.

Behold  two  Sygifmonds  both  wife  and  grave,

Alfonfo  ncxtjwhofcfameistalkt  of  rife,

With  his  five  fonncsjthcn  Mercies  chatfliall  have
The  King  of  France  his  daughter  to  his  wife.

That  towards  him, her  fclfc  fliall  fo  behave.

Shall  make  him  live  mofl  happic  all  his  life.
Myppolito  it  is  that  now  comes  in.

Not  Icafl  forpraife  and  glorrc  of  his  kin.

48

Next  Francis  named  third, .4/^o»/8f  two,

With  many  others  Worthy  of  renownc.

The  which  to  name  might  findc  one  workc  to  do.
From  Phoebus  rifiug  to  his  going  downe.

Now  therefore  if  you  willconfcnt  thereto,

I here  will  end  and  fend  chefpiritsdowne:

To  this  the  worthy  damfell  faid  not  nay.

And  ftraight  the  fpirits  vaniflit  all  away.

49

Then  Bradamant ,xhit  all  well  marked  had,

Of  whom  her  fclfc  fliould  be  the  ancient  mother.

Did  fay, to  Icaine  flic  would  be  very  glad,

What  two  thofewere  thatdiflfered  from  the  othcr^
That  came  with  backward  fleps  and  lookt  (b  fad,
Vpon  the  good  Aljon/b  &nd  his  brother.

Mefyjfa  fighs,mifliking  that  fuggeflion.

Which  put  it  in  her  heart  to  ask  t&t  queftion.'


J wet  pud

thatSUonor*
wot  the  mo-
iherhe  meat
here,  for  her
be  fraffet  im
the  1}.  bookje:
but  rather
the  mother
Church  that
favoured  not
the  D of  Fer-
rara.


Oftbu  visit-
ty  tootle  Guy-
thariine  ia
bit  eight  btole


SigifmUHd  a

-Alfonfo,

Hertlet,


Hyfftlitoo


Frauea.

Alfmfiu


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


31


f < thii  mtu-
W*Tff  *!»•

«» “«»•
fnfii  btt
imtuttt  ytr


midtt  §f
higrtetia.


Tbt  c»c{t
tailed  font
Qvi.ie/jfi,


Snuntt.


SO

And  then  as  in  a trance  thclc  words  Hie  fpake,

0 thou  more  vvbrthy  fonne  of  worthy  fire,

T hey  arc  thy  bloud , on  them  cornpallion  take.

Let  grace  afTwage, though  jufiicc  kindle  ire:

Then  unto  Bradamant  as  new  awake,

1 mult  (faid  flir)  denieyouthisdefire,

1 fay  no  more,contcntyou  with  the  Tweet,

For  you, this  lower  morfcll  is  not  meet.

To  morrow  whentheSunneat  breakc  of  day,

With  light  fiiall  dim  thclightof  cv‘iy  ftarre;

I meanemy  fclfc  toguideyou  on  your  way.

So  as  I will  befurc  you  fiiall  not  aite.

The  place  whereas  your  love  is  forc’d  to  ftay,

Is  from  tlie  fait  fca  flrore  not  very  farre:

That  were  you  paft  a mile  beyond  this  wood.

The  other  way  would  cafic  be  and  good.

5*

Of  this  nights  ftay  thcdamfell  wascontent.

And  in  the  cave  with  her  Hie  doth  remaine.

And  moft  thereof  in  Merlins  tombe  fliefpentj
Whofc  voice  with  talkcdid  hcrftillentertainc:
Emboldning  her  to  give  her  free  confent.

To  love  where  fiic  mould  fure  be  lov'd  againC.
Now  gan  the  mclTcngcr  of  day  to  cro.

When  as  her  guide  and  flic  away  did  go.

53

Th  e way  they  went  was  darke  and  unaccelfiblet
By  lecret  vaults  and  hollowes  of  the  hill.

To  find  it  out  had  bene  a thing  impoflible.

But  with  a guideof  knowledge  greatand  skill;

At  laft  they  came  unto  a path  morepafilble.

By  which  they  ceafe  not  to  a(ccnd,untill
They  quite  had  left  the  darke  and  lothlbme  place.
And  Taw  the  bcames  of  Fhxbui  chearefull  face.

5+

And  while  that  up  this  hill  they  flowly  ftalke.

With  paufingpantingoft,and  taking  wind.

To  make Icfte  weaiic  Iceme  their  wearie walkc,
Mclyjfa  ftill  doth  ftorcof  matter  find.

And  now  of  this, and  then  of  that  doth  talke.

But  chiefly  fiie  thcdamfell  puts  in  mind.

Of  her  Rogero,  how  he  had  bene  trained
Into  thcptifon  where  he  now  remained.

55

Magician  ftrangc is  he
That  holdcch  him  (I  iruft)  umo  hiscoft.

But  had  you  Pallas  ftrength  or  Mars  (quoth  ihe)
And  eke  of  armed  men  a mightic  hoft.

Yet  to  attempt  by  force  to  fee  him  free,

Your  travcll  and  your  la  hour  all  were  loft.

Alt  mnftbc  wonne  by  art, and  not  by  might,*
Force  cannot  free  your  wclbclovcd  Knight.

56

For  firft  the  caftlc  mounted  is  on  hie.

Impregnable  with  wals  all  over  ftecld.

And  nextjthe  horfe  he  rides  hath  wings  to  flic.
And  gallops  in  the  aircasin  the  field;

And  laft  he  dazlcth  ev’iy  monall  cic,

By  hidden  force  of  his  cnchamed  fiiieid.

With  light  whereof  mens  fenfes  are  To  dazed,
"With  fight  thereof  they  fall  downc  all  amazed.


57

In  all  the  world  one  onely  meanc  hath  hectic,

And  is  yet  ftill  to  worke  To  rare  a feat,

A ting  there  is  which  from  an  Indian  Queene,

Was  ft®lc  fomcttme,of  price  and  vertue  great:

This  ring  can  make  a man  to  go  unfeCne,

This  ring  can  all  inefaantments  quite  defeat;

Piing  Agramant  hath  fent  his  fccietaiic,

Vnto  Rogero  this  fame  ring  to  caric,

5«

Biunelio in  his  name  that  bath  the  ring,

Moft  leud  and faIre,butpo|iiike  and  wife.

And  put  in  mift  cfpeciali  by  his  King,

With  it  Rogeros  faferic  to  devife:

Whichfith  I wifh  not  he, but  you  (liould  bring,

To  bind  him  to  you  by  this  enterprife.

And  for  I would  not  have  the  Turl^e  proteft  him,
Bccaufel  know  he  greatly  doth  affca  him,

59

Do  therefore  this,  when  you  do  meetc  this  man,

Whofc  markes  I wifh  in  memory  you  bcarc,

His  ftature  is  two  cubits  and  a f]ian.

His  head  is  long  and  giay,and  thin  ofhaire,
Hisnofeisfhortand  flar,his colour  wan,

With  beetle  brow, eyes  watricnot  with  tcare.

His  beard  growes  on  bis  face  without  all  flint,

And  to  conclude,  his  looke  is  all  a fquint,

♦ o

Now  when  as  you  this  comely  manfhall  mccfi
As  fare  you  fhall  within  a day  or  two.

You  may  with  curtcous  words  hitn  feeme  to  grec^
And  tell  him  panly  what  you  meanc  to  do.

But  fpeakc  not  of  the  ring  although  you  fcc't.

For  fo  you  may  the  matter  all  undo.

Then  he  great  courtefie  to  you  will  offer.

And  ftraigbt  biscompanie  to  you  will  proflet'.

But  when  unto  the  caftlc  you  come  nie.

Then  fee  you  fet  upon  him  enthe  way.

And  take  away  the  ring  and  make  him  die.

Nor  give  him  any  time,  left  he  eonvay
The  ring  into  his  mouth, and  fo  thereby
Out  ofyour  fight  he  vanilTi  quite  away.

The  worthy  damfcll  markes  hcrfpeeches  well.

And  fo  the  one  the  other  bids  farewell .

62

Next  day  flic  hapt  Bruncllo  to  tfpic.

She  knew  him  ftraight,  flic  found  him  at  her  Innc/
She  growes  to  queftion  with  him  by  and  by.

And  lie  to  lie  doth  by  and  by  beginne.

And  (hcdifTcmblcstoojand  doth  denie

Her  countrey,ftockc  and  name,  and  fex  and  kinhe.

Brunello  plcafaotly  doth  talke  and  tipple.

Not  knowing  he  did  halt  before  a cripple.

*3

Now  when  they  almoft  broken  had  their  faft.

She  marking  more  his  fingers  then  hiseyes.

When  much  good  talke  between  them  two  had paft^
T he  moft  whereof  were  falfc  and  forged  lies,

Behold  mine  hoft  came  umo  them  in  haft.

And  told  them  newes  that  made  them  foonerrififs
But  here  I meane  to  makea  little  paufe.

Before  I tell  what  was  thtreofthecaufe,


The  ring  wa
fltlnt


^ mithia^
•vilUn  fesTO-
Urifim


il


Morall .


Scoiic.


.Inttchrifioi


THE  THIR©  BOOKE

/« the  third  boul^e  we  may  note  in  Bradamant  a wort  }y  example  ofdciotien,trat  in  Itr  fedahie  nt'Jhap,h<tdrectur/e
to  prayer. In  the  great  prat Ji  o/Rogcro  and  Bradamant  his  pof/ertty, noblemen  andgenlltmtn  oj  good  hm/et  may  ta{e
comfort  of  their  vertuvxt  anceflon,  and  thinhe  themfelvcs  beloved  oj  G od,  and  bkfjbdwith  great  temporall  bl^ofgt,
if  themfehes  degenerate  not  from  their  worthy  joref at  hers . Alfa  we  may  note,  that  lommonty  good  parents  bring  good
children.

Andwhereas  Mclyffa  brings  Biadama«t  ly  intricate  wayesfrom  the  cave.and  inflruHs  her  how  to  confound  Atlan-
«•»  devices,  it  JJjetns  how  eoodandgodly  coun/ell  maizes  men  overcome  all  troubles,  and  enables  them  to  withfrandall
wicked  praili/i,s.  And  in  'that  Bradamant  dijfembles  with  Bruncllo,  we  may  gather  a lejfen,  yrhith  in  this  age  we  bee
tio  apt  to  learne, namely ,to  dijfcmble  with  dtjfemblers.

Concerning  the  hifioiy  of  this  hoofe,it  is  divers,  and  therefore  1 meam  to  note  the  prindpallefr  of  then,  as  far  as  my
title  reading  is  able  to  difeover-.  andfirfr  jor  Merlin  ( called  the  Englijh  Prophet)  I hnm  many  are  hard  of  beleeje^and
thinhe  it  a mcerc  fable  that  is  written  both  of  his  birth,  oj  his  life,  andchiefiy  oj  his  death.for  his  birth, indeed  1 heleexe
not  that  herras  gotten  ly  an  Incubus,  j/ef  the  pojfibility  thereof  might  be  proved  by  difeourfe,  fave  it  were  too  tedious,
j and  perhaps  too 'ull  of  unmannerly  termes  for  this  place : i rather  holdwith  the  great  clerl^  that  fiick  birth

, is  etrhiT  impojfible, or  peculiar  to  tkegreat  Antlchrifi  when  he  fitall  come. But  concerning  his  life,  that  therewas  fiicha
man,agreat  counfeller  to  King  Anhur,/  ) old  it  certaine.  that  he  hadacaflle  inlViltjhtre  called  after  him  Met  linsbu-
ry,(now  Marlborow)itis  vety  hhyly,ihc  oldruims  whereof  are  yet  feetce  in  our  highway  from  Bath  to  London.  Alfuthe
great  ft  ones  of  unmeafkrable  bignefte  and  number,  that  lie  fcattetedaboutthe  place,  have  given  occajion  to  fume  to  re-
port,and  others  to  bclecve  wondroxs  ftratagems  wrought  ly  hisgreat  slfiU  in  Mag:cl^,as  liifwife  the  great  ft  ones  at  Sto-
rage on  Sal  bury  plaine, which  the  rgnorat  people  believe  he  brought  out  of  I reland:  and  indeed  the  wifi  r fort  can  rather
tnarvellat,  then  itUwhyor  how  they  acre  fet  there.  But  for  the  manner  of  his  death, and  place  ofhisburiall,  it  Ufa  di-
verjlywrittenof,  an.lhy  fofundiy  countreys  challenged,  asamanmay  he  bolder  to  fay  that  all  of  them  are  fa! fe,  then
that  any  of  than  be  true. Some  will  have  him  buried  in  Cornewalffome  in  JVales  ( rehere  they  fay  he  was  borne,)  Arirflo
by  Poetitall  licence, maizes  this  tombefor  him  in  France,  and  thefilfion  of  the  tombe  is  tafen  o_  a former  filfion  in  Ifing
Arthurs  boalf,n.amely,that  Merhn  being  exceedingly  in  love  with  the  L tdy  of  the  Lal^e  ( lit  brag  of  his  cunning)  flsew-
edher  one  day  among  other  dec  ices  of  his,  a tombe  that  kee  hadm.tde  of fiifflcicnt  capacity  to  hoLlhtm  andhiswife,  and
withalljhewedher  a charmc,  which  being  pronounced  in  an  order  that  he  fbewedher,  the  tombe  would  clofe,  and  nexer
agatnebe  opened.  She  having  no  minde  to  him,  or  rather  indeed flaily  haling  him,  grew  on  the  fodaine  veiy  gamefome
with  him,’  and  Jhewed  him  feme  extraordinary  findnejfe,  and  in  the  end  for  want  of  better  paft  me  would  needs  per-
fwade  him  to  prove  if  itwould  hold  them  both,  and  fo  offered  her  ftlfe  togoe  in  with  him  : he  fuJpe6Hng  nothing  lejfe
then  her  maltcioiis  purpefe, went  fimply  in,  and  ftraigbtfheefhut  himinwith  the  cover,  and  hound  it  fof  aft  with  the
charme,  as  it  will  never  more  be  loo  fed.  This  1 thought  good  to  fet  downe  for  expounding  tfe  1 1 . ftaffe  of  this  bool^e
the pl.tincT,not  that  any  matter  herein  is  worth  the  noting,  without  it  be  to  warne  men  not  to  tell  fuch  dangerous  fecrets
towomen,  except  they  will  tal^e  occafionto  imitate  the  wifdome  of  Czto  in  repenting  it  after.  And  thus  much  for
Merlin.  The  reft  of  the  bool^c  is  in  a manner  all  a true  hiftory,  and  is  a repetition  of  the  pedegree  of  Alfonfo  Z>a^e  of
Ferrara, with  fame  briefc  touches  out  of  auncient  hiftorics  of  their  great  exploits  in  italte ; thee  xpofition  of  all  which,
J Will  not  pur fue  at  length,  as  beingncedlejfe  to  the  learned  that  have  read  thofe  ft  ories,  and  not  very  pleafant  to  the
ignorant, nor  familiar  to  our  nation.fVherefirre  I will  onely  note  fame  very  kw  of  them,  fuch  as  I thinlic  moft  neceffay,
andomitthcreft-,  or  referre  thofe  that  be  deftrous  better  to  injome  themfelves  to  fume  authors  where  rhtymayreade
it  more  at  large.

Rogcib,yo««eo;  Bradamant,  and  this’Rogcro  fo  much  Jpol^en  of  in  this  whole  boofe,  camewith  Charles  the  great
into  Italic  where  among  other  Venetian  captaines  thatholpc  to  fupprejfe  Dcfidcrius  KjngojLomhardieithU  Rogcro
was  thought  to  do  fogood fervice,that  the  Emperour  in  rewardgave  him  andbis  heircs  the  honors  o/Calaon  and  Eflc,
neare  Fadua .

T he  vipers  came  to  be  the  creft  of  the  Vicounts  of Millaine  ly  this  occafwn.Oiho  a valiant  man  of  that  family  fn  the
journey  that  Godfrey  of  BuUenmade  to  lerufalem,  calledthe  holywarres,  did  fight  at  the  fiege  of  JeruftUemhandto
handwith  Wo\\sce,captaine  of  the  Painims,  and ftue  him,  who  to  mal^e  himfelfe  more  terrible,  did  cany  on  bis  creft  a
huge  viper  devouring  of  a child.  Ever  fince  in  memory  hereof  that  houfe  carries  the  viper.

Beringars, of  this  name  there  were  three, but  the  chieje  man  (meant  here)  was  nephew  to  tfie  frrft , and  came  after  the
death  of  his  grandfather  into  Italic,  and  prevailed  fo  farre.that  he  was  proclaimed  Auguftus,  and  made  his  fonne  King
oj  Lorrdtardiewith  title  Ifing  of  Romanes:  but  A^a[>hu%  then  Bijbop  of  Rome,  calledinOtho  Kingof  the  Almaines  ta
deliver  Italic  from  the  tyranny  of  the  Beringars,  who  overcame  them,  and  ufed  them  after  with  great  clemency,  tiUaf-
tetward  they  feeliingbyhelpeofanufurpingPopctotyranni-^e  as  before,  the  fame  Otho  came  againe,  andin  fine  de-
ft rayed  them  both,  in  which  it  feemes  Albcrtazzo  dtd  fame  great  fervice.

O/FrcdcrikcBarbarofla  Sabcllkuswri/crh,  thathemaintainedO&aci\\x%  Aatiyiapa  (orufurping  Pope)  againft
Alexander,  ly  whichgreat  broilesgrew  in  Italy, and  much  bloodjhed,  and  that  the  Romanes  were  fo  crujhed  in  one  bat-
t elf, that  he  writeth  they  would  never  be  able  againe  to  holdup  their  heads.  But  after  this,  BarbaroflTa  both pre/ecuteJ
by  his  enemies  iandpunijbed  with  the  plague  in  his  camp,  wasgladto  flyinto  Germany : and  camming  hac\e  with  new
forces,  was  by  the  confederates  vanquijhedandqulte  put  downe,  anddrivenin  the  end  to  crave  Pope  Alexanders  fa-
11  our. Of  this  Alexander  the  Venetians  mahe  great  boa  ft  how  they  reftored  him,  and  have  theftory  ingraven  or  painted
inone  of  their  principail  Churches : for  the  Pope  flying  thither  in  di/^ifedappareX,  andliving  clofelyinthetawnt
bheapoore  Prieft.a  noble  man  o«e  Ciano  diftoveredhimiandmade  him  be  great  tybonowed^  the  whole  city, by  whom
as  it  akrefaid he  was  reftored.


H^ktreat


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.  23

IVhercai  the  twofaClions  of  GueIfs««iiGhcbclIincs  isfpol^enof  (tJmigh  it  •would aslje  a longclifioiir/e to  tel  the
eriginaUhow  it  prfigrew)yet  fomewhat  Imufl  needs  fay  oj  it.thefaflionjirfi  ro/e  o!  adtfeord  bciwtc/.e  two  ‘Dutih-


men  in  Italie  being  naturall  brothers,  though  unnaturally  falling  out,  and  either  drawingfarttes,  it  grew  in  rfre  end  to


fich  afa(f  ion  M neither  Sylla  and  Mitius,  orCxhrand  Pompey  in  Home,  norours  ojLancafer  and  Torino  in


gland, nor  any  other growtte  of  religion,  or  what  caufe  foe-ocr  befides,  hath  hcenc  more  violent.  ' ■vatu  Uctu

Eflcllino  a notable  tyrant, whom  one  M ufatto  a Padoan  in  a iragedic  he  wrote,  affirmes  to  have  bingotten  hy  the  di-  “«•

1 ell;  His  cruelty  was  fitch, he  would  cut  up  women  quief^e  with  child,  and  burned  at  one  time  i zooo.  men  alive  He  was
after  tal^en  pri finer, and  died  of  famine.

0/Hcrculcs  as  the  praifis  are  great  hee  gives  him,fo  it  appeares  /«  Guyehardine,  they  arc  welldefcrved.

Forwhen  Charles  the  eight  came  into  Italie  Uhe  athunder  (aswrtters  of  thofi  times  call  him J tbisHc\cu\cswith
his  prudent  cariage  fi  ordered  himfilje,  as  he  and  his  countrie  efcaped  that  tempefl.

Concerning  the  viilory  that  this  Hippolito  had  of  the  Venetians,  l/Jpallhave  more  occafion  to  Jpeaf^e  of  it  in  the  40.
lool^e.

The  two  /i!7frfBradamant  asl^eth  Mclyfla  of, were  brothers  to  Alfonfo  2)«^c  of  Ferrara,  their  names  are  Fci  dinand
andluVio'.thcfioty  is  this.  It  Itappcned  that  being  allyong  men,Hippo]ho  and  one  of  thefiyonger  brothers  fell  both  in
love  with  one  Cultefan,  but  Jhe  entertained  the  Love  of  iheyounger  •with  mofl  Ifindnejfe  j whereupon  Hippolito  ast^^cd
her  one  day  very  inft  ant ’y, what  it  was  that  moved  her  to  prefer  his  brother  afore  him ; and Jhe fiid  it  was  his  beaut  ijtill
cyeiwhereupon  H ippoliio  made  fime  of  his  pages  to  thrufi  out  his  eyes.  Notwithfanding  he  altera  ard  recovered  his
eyes , and  finding  no  redrejfe  by  idmplaining  to  A Ifonib,  he  and  one  other  brother  confpired  tolfill  him  j but  at  the  time
of'the  execution,  their  hearts  failed  them,  or  their  minds  altered ; and  after  the  lonfpiracie  being  difeovered,  they
wereheptinperpetuallprifon.  ‘ aii  r

jiiul  in  this  he  alludes  to  that  o/Marcellus  in  VirgiI,Luilus  nc  quaere  morum.  Alluuon


Itlanlr


^tlnntr


lir^idtrrt


j(  .4fiairtrj

irSi


Hrtttiaman


^r/tdnmarrtT


Arndamernr


Bradttmantc


Brunfilfi


THE  FOVRTH  BOOKEi


^5


THE  ARGVMENT.

Bradatnant  overcomes  the  falfe  Magician ,
oy4.nd  fets  Rogero  fiecytvho  by  And  by
Leapt  OH  a horfe  Hot  knowing  his  condition^
who  bare  him  (jHtte  from  fight  of any  eye,
RenaIdoyi»7f<ji  <«  he  had  commiffton^

T"®  England  ward, but  borne  by  wind awriCf
Oy^t  C.allidon  in  Scotland  he  arrived.


Thu  it  ftiher
mntxcufe
thtn  ttfraife
ejitfftm.
Utrtg,


Stmeitcti


Hough  he  that  uicth craft
and  fimulation*

I>oth  fcldomc  bend  his
ads  to  honed  ends.

Bar  rathfr  of  an  cnll  in-
' clination,

v»it  and  skill  to  others
.m.'fchicfc  bends;,

Yet  fith  in  this  our  world-
ly habitafinn,

We  do  not  ever  dwell  among  our  friends,
DilTcmblini;  dbiibtlcllcoftentimcs  may  fave
Mens  lives, their  fame  and  gOods,and  ajl  they  have.


Somediffim.  |f  man  by  long  acquaintance  and  great  proofe,

* - To  truftfdme one  man  fcant  can  be  allured,

Towhom  hemay  inprefcnceor.aloofc,  •.

V’nfold  the  fecrets  of  his  mind  alTured:

Then  doth  this  damfell  merit  no  reproofe.

That  with  F/«ne//o  (to  all  fraud  inured)

Doth  frame  her  felfe  to  counterfeit  a while.

For  to  deceive  deceivers  is  no  guile.

firtit/tndum  Now  while  thefctwodid  to  cbnferre  begin,
r«r»».  she  to  his  fingershaving /lilfan  eye,  ‘ '

The  hofr  and  otherfervantsbf  tbeinne,  . ^

Came  on'the  (bdaine  with  a wofull  crie.

And  fome  did  gaze  withbut,and  fome  within^

(As  when  men  fee  a Cower  in  the  skic)  ‘

Thecaufeof  this  their  wondring  and  their  crying,
Was  that  the^  jfaw  an  armed  hotfeman  flying.

4'  ■

And  ftraight  by  th*hoft  and  others  they  were  told.
How  one  thachad  in  Magtcki'nt  great  skillj


tUng^i  have
iia  tommcH-
dxilt  tirne-
ceffdry,  as
tbtt  of  BrU-
tat  inTtr-
fWfdM  time
to  ftw  him-
f‘lfe  from
the  tyrant.


fibas,

Comets  or
ilafitg  fiars
for  the  mtji
pan  caufe
great  won-
dring.


Not  far  from  thence  had  made  a (lately  hold.

Of  (liining  ftcclc',and  plac’d  it  on  a hill.

To  which  he  bringeth  Ladies  yong  and  old.

And  rhen  and  mai-^  s according  to  his  will.

And  when  within  that  caftlc  they  have  bccne.

They  never  after  hive  bene  heard,  orfccnc.

5.

No  (boner  can  he  fpie  a prctic  maide.

But  (Iraight  he  takes  her  up  into  the  aire.

The  which  his  cuftomc  makes  them  all  afraid.

That;  cither  are  or  th'inke  that  they  be  faire.

Thofe  hardie  knights  that  went  to  give  them  aide,
Ofwhich  fort  many  hither  did  repaire.

Went  like  the  bcafls  to  theficke  Lions  dtfn.

For  all  went  in, but  none  return^  agen.

6

Thistalcin  worthy  Bradamant  did  breed
A kind  of  plcafure  and  confufed  joy,

In  hope  (which  afrer  (he perform’d  indeed)

The  fight  of  her  beloved  to  enjoyi
Sb^'praid  thchoft  procure  a guidewilh  fpeed.

As  though  each  Itttlo  (lay  did  breed  annoy;
Shefwcarcj  that  in  hfcr  heart  fhclorfg’d  towraftlc
With  him  that  keptthccaptivcsmhisdaftic.

, -7  '

Becaufc  that  you  fir  kpight  (hould  want  no  guide,

( Brune/lo  (aid ) I will  nay  felfe  be  he,

I know  the  way, and.fpiricwhat  have  befide,.

By  which  may.fortqhe'ybu  may  pleafur’d  bci
HOmOahttbe  ringof  forcc  and  vertuctride,
Althoi^gh  he  mean  vp9t  flic  the  fame  (hould  fee.
Great  thanksfquotb  (T[ie)that  you  will  take  thepain,
I n hope  hereby  the  precious  ring  to  gain.

C a Tkus


Simile-
Horaee:  Otai
tiia  te  ad-
verfum  (pe-

Satoia-^uUx

retrmfam.


n6


THE  EOVRTH  BOOKE.


Trtm  thii
itMum  one
UK)’  Jii  Icth
itt  otit  fra


Tbuseach from otticnhiding  their  intent.

They  forward  fct  like  friend*  by  breake  of  day,
BrmcUo  fometimeforcrr.eft  ofthem  went,
Semetime  behind ,as  chanced  on  the  way.

Now  had  thcyccrtaine  houresintravcllfpcnt»

When  they  arrived  where  the  calUe  lay.

Whereas  mount  Pyrene  ftands  above  the  plaine,

So  high  as  may  dilcover  prance  and  Spaine^

^stitbiMbir.  Whcnastheca/Hc  did  inilghtappcarc.

So  ArangCjfo  faire,lb  ftatcly,and  fo  hie.

In  which  that  Knight  whom  flicefteem’d  fodcare,
With  many  others,  prifoner  did  lie.

She  thought  her  fitted  timedrew  very  neare,

To  take  the  ring,and  make  Prune/Ho  die.

VVhereforc  with  open  force  fhe  doth  affaile  him,
Whofe  drength  with  age  and  fearefoon  gan  tofaile

10  (him

Her  meaning  wasthe  Caitife  to  have  kild,

£ut  unto  that  her  noble  heart  faid  nay,

Smallpraife  would  come  from  bloud  fobafely  fpild.
She  rncanes  to  get  the  ring  another  way;

Sut  drd  /he  bound  him  where  he  wild  or  nild.

And  tnough  with  tearet  he  did  for  pittiepray.

Yet  left  {he  him  unto  a tree  fad  tide.

And  with  the  ring  away  fhe  draight  did  ride«

1 1

And  being  in  thegieene  fad  by  thetowre.

Straight  (as  the  fafhion  was)  her  home  /lie  blew.
Out  came  that  armed  Knight  that  prefent  houre,
And  feeing  there  a challenger  in  vew.

He  feemeth  to  adault  her  with  great  powrc.

But  by  the  ring  fhe  all  his  falfhood  knew;

Shefaw  he cariide neither  fwordnor  fpeare.

Nor  any  weapon  that  oneneed  tofearc.

12

Heonlycarrideat  bisfaddlc  bow,

A fhield  all  wrapped  in  a crimfon  cafe,

And  read  a bookc  by  W’hich  he  made  to  fiiow
Some  drange  and  drong  iliufions  in  the plac<u*

And  many  that  thefc cunnings  did  not  know.

He  had  deceiv'd  and  tane  in  little  fpace.

And  caus'd  both  fwordsand  lances  to  appeare.
When  neither  fword  nor  lances  them  were  neare.

*3

But  yet  the  bead  he  rode  wasnot  of  art,

But  gotten  of  a Grijfeth  and  a Mare,

And  like  a Griffcth^ad  the  former  part.

As  wings  and  head,  and  clawes  that  hideous  are.
And  pafling  drength  and  forceand  ventrous  hart.
But  all  thered  may  with  a horfe  compare.

Such  beads  as  thefe  the  hils  of  Ryjee  yceld.

Though  in  thefe  parts  they  have  bin  fcenc  but  fccld.

14-

This  ir.onder  rare  from  farthed  regions  brought
This  rBrc  Magician ordred  with  fuch  skill.

That  in  one  month  or  little  more  he  tought.
Thefavage  mender  to  obey  his  wills
A nd  though  by  conjurations  drange  he  wrought.

In  other  things  his  faocie  to  fulfill,
f Ascunning  men  dill  trie  each  drange conclufion)
*/ei  in  this  Grijfeth  horfc  was  one  collufion.


15


Sieart  delu.
dtutrmui


The  Ladie  faire  proteffed  by  the  ring.

Found  all  his fleights (although  fha/eenv*d  notfb^

Her  purpofe  to  the  better  pafle  to  bring,

And  fird  (h  e feemes  to  ward  a comming  blow.

And  then  todtike,and  oft  tocurfc  the  wing.

That  carride  dill  away  her  flying  fo.

And  fith  to  fight  on  horfebacke  did  not  bootc.

She  feemes  as  in  a rage  to  light  on  footc.

I6

The  Necromancer, at  his  manner  is,

Difclofcd  at  the  lad  hfs  fhining  fhield,

Suppofing  that  the  vertue  would  not  mifle.

To  make  her  (as  it  had  done  others)  yceidi  Xim!*,

So  have  I feene  a craftic  cat  ere  this.

Play  with  a filly  moufe  of  houfc  or  field.

And  let  it  go  a while  for  fport  and  play.

But  kill  at  lad  and  beareit  quite  away.

‘7

I fay  that  he  the  cat,the  other mife,

Rcfcmblcd  had  in  every  former  fight.

But  now  this  ring  had  made  this  one  fb  wife,

That  when  flie  faw  thedrange  enchanted  lights
She  failcth  not  of  force, but  of devife.

As  though  fhe  were  adonied  at  the  fight,

And  lay  like  one  of  life  and  fenfe  bereaved.

By  which  the  poorc  Magician  was  deccaved.

ti

For  draight  he  lighted  from  the  flying  horfe,_

To  take  her  as  he  had  done  many  mp.

The  fhield  and  bookein  which  was  all  his  force.

He  left  behind  him  at  hi  s faddle  bow.

But  thinking  to  have  found  a fcnflefTc  cotfe.

Amaz'd  and  dcad,he  finds  it  nothing  fb.

For  up  fhe  darts, fb  quite  the  cad:  was  altred.

That  with  the  cord  he  brougbt,himfclfc  was  haltrcd.

19

And  when  with  tfiofefelfe  bonds  flie  had  him  tide.

By  which  he  thought  before  her  to  have  fnared.

She  drong  and  yong,hewithei’d,oId  anddridc,

Alas  an  unmeet  match  to  be  compared.

Forthwith  determining  he  fhould  have  didc.

To  ftrike  h'shcad  from  fhouldcrs flic  prepared.

Tin  fhe  was  mov'd  ttf  mercy  with  his  tcarcs.

And  with  the  fight  of  white  and  hoary  haires.

20

For  when  he  faw  his  force  was  overlaid.

And  that  her  drength  was  not  to  be  withdood,

O pardon  life  thou  heavenly  wight  (he  faid^

No  honour  comes  by  fpilling  aged  blood.  StMUnct.

Which  word  s to  mcrcic  mov  *d  t he  noble  maid,

Whofe  mind  was  alwaycs  mcrcifull  and  good.

Then  why  he  built  thccadlc  flic  demanded,

A nd  what  he  wa$  to  tell  her  him  commanded.


21


With  wofull  words  the  old  man  thus  replide,

1 made  this  cadlc  for  no  ill  intention,

Forcovcficeor  any  fault  befide.

Or  that  I loved  rapine  orcontention.

But  to  prevent  a danger  fliall  betide
A gentle  Knight, I framed  thisinvention:

Who  at  the  heavens  hath  fhewd  me  in  fliort  feafon.
Shall  die  in  Ohriftign  ftatc  by  filthy  treafon.

Rogero


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


«7


Stiumei.

Sir  Tho.
hlecre.  Sit
qu*  pTtfdt.
Tu  viundi

tultia,  Sluid
fnfcirt}u-
uatquttpa-
Ktrt  unttf


Stmt  btid
•pimot  tbst
tniureri
Umllptriti
infMimbtU
Uivflemi,&
b^tbumorK*
tbtir  fbwne


Rogero  namcii  is  tliis  worthy  youth,

Whofe  good  and  (afctic  fainc  1 would  advance,

My  name  Jilante  is  to  tell  you  truth,

1 bred  him  of  a child,till  his  hard  chance,
vAnd  valiant  mind  (that  breeds  alas  my  ruth)

With  yigramant  entift  him  into  Frame.

And  1 that  (like  mine  owncchiId)a'way  lov’d  him,
from  France  and  danger  fainc  would  haveremov  d
2}  (him.

By  art  and  hcipeof  many  a hcllifTi  elfc.

This  cafllc  tor  if  ogcro  I did  build,

And  took  him  as  I meant  to  takcthytelfe,

But  that  with  greater  art  I was  beguild.

From  daint  y fare, and  other  worldly  pclfc,

Becaufc  he  fliould  not  thinke  himfelfc  ciild.

For  company  I brought  him  worthy  wights.

Both  men  and  women, Ladies  fairc  and  Knights,

T hey  have  all  plentie  of defired  plcafure,

1 bend  to  their  contentment  allmy  care.

For  them  I fpend  ray  travelland  ray  treafure.

For  muficke, clothes  and  games,and  daintie  fare,

As  hart  can  think,and  mouth  require  with  mcafure,
Great  (lore  for  them  within  thiscaftle  arc.

Well  had  I travcl’d,wcll  my  time  beftowed,

But  you  have  mard  the  fruits  that  I had  fowed.
ly

But  if  y cur  mind  be  gracious  asyourlookc.

If  ilonie  heart  bi • not  in  tender  breft.

Behold  I offer  thee  t 'V  fliieldand  booke,

Andflymg  horfc,and  grant  my  juftrequeft.

Seme  two  or  three, or  all  thcKnightsI  tooke,

I give  thee  free, let  but  Rogero  reft:
Whofchcalth.whorc  wealth, whole lafty  and  welfare
Hare  ever  bene  (and  ever  fliall)  my  care.

26

Your  care  (quoth  flie)  is  very  ill  beftowne,

In  thraldome  vile  to  kcepc  a worthy  wight:

As  for  your  gifts  you  offer  but  mine  ownc,

Sith  by  my  conqueft  you  are  mine  in  right.

Thofc  dangers  great  you  fayto  be  forefhownc.

And  upon  nira  in  time  to  come  muft  light.

With  f guret  caft  and  heavenly  planets  vewedj
Cannot  beknowneorcannotbe  efehewed.

*7

How  can  you  others  harmes  forcfccfo  farre.

And  not  prevent  your  owne  that  were  fonieJ
I certainc  fhall  fuppofe  your  art  doth  erre.

And  for  the  reft  the  end  the  truth  fhallttic:

I now  intend  your  matter  all  to  marre.

And  that  before  thefe  bonds  1 will  untie,

You  fhall  fet  free  and  looTeyour  prifners  all.

Whom  in  this  caftlc  you  detained  thrall.

2S

When  as  the  poore  old  man  was  fb  diftrcfl.

That  needs  he  mud  for  fcare  and  dread  obay.

And  that  this  fame  imperious  dames  bchedt
Could  neither  beare  dcniall  nor  delay.

To  do  as  fhe  commands  he  deemes  it  beft.

And  therefore  takes  th’inchantcd  place  away,  '

He  breakes  fbmc  hollow  fuming  pots  of  done.

And  draight  the  wals  and  buildings  all  were  gone.


^9

This  doncjhimfclfc  eke  vaniflit  out  of  fight,

As  did  the  cadlc  at  that  prefent  hower.

Then  Ladics,Lordi,  and  many  a worthy  Knight,
Were  draight  rclcad  from  his  enchanted  power:
And  feme  there  were  had  taken  fuel:  delight
In  thofc  fo  datcly  lodgings  of  that  tower.

That  they  edeemd  that  liberty  a painc.

And  wifht  that  plcafant  flavery  againc.

3°

Here  were  at  frccdomc  fet  among  the  red,
GtadaJfbiSacrapant, two  Kingsof  name,

Prajj/ldo  and  Iroldo  that  from  th*£d
Into  this  country  with  Renaldo  came.

Here  Bradamant  found  him  flie  loved  bed.

Her  dcarc  Rogero  of  renowned  fame,
Whoaftcrccitainc  noticcof  her  had.

Did  flicw  to  fee  her  he  was  very  glad,

31

As  one  of  whom  he  great  account  did  make.

And  thought  himfclfeto  her  mod  highly  bound.
Since  fhe  put  off  her  helmet  for  his  fake,

And  in  her  head  receiv’d  a grievous  wound,

Twcrc  long  to  tell  what  toilc  they  both  did  take.
Both  night  and  day  each  other  to  have  found.

But  till  this  prefent  time  they  had  no  meeting,

Nor  giv’n  by  word  nor  writing  any  greeting.

Now  when  before  him  prefent  he  beheld

Her  that  from  danger  had  him  fblc  redeeraecf,

His  heart  with  fb  great  joy  and  mirth  wasdld.

The  happied  wight  on  earth  himfelfe  he  deemed.
And  chridall  teares  from  her  faire  eyes  didild ,
Embracing  him  whom  flic  mod  dcarc  edeemed.

As  oft  wc  fee  a drong  and  fodaine  paflion.

Bring  forth  effcAs  quite  of  another  fafhion.

The  Oriffeth  horfc  the  while  upon  the  plaine,

Stood  with  the  target  at  hisfaddle  bow.

The  damfell  thought  totakc  him  by  the  raiae.

But  he  then  mounteth  up,  and  like  a crow
Chad  by  a dog  forthwith  defeends  againc.

And  dandeth  dill,or  foareth  very  low.

And  when  that  fome  come  nie  in  hope  to  take  him.
He  dies  away  that  none  caa  overtake  him,

34  ^

But  neare  unto  Rogero  fbonc  fie  daid.

Which  by  Atlantai  care  wasfble  procured,

Who  for  Rogeros  danger  was  afraid.

And  thinkes  hisfafctic  never  well  affured.
Wherefore  he  feat  this  monderfor  his  aid.

And  by  this  meancsfrom  Europe  him  allured,

T o his  welfare  his  cares  and  thoughts  he  benieth,
Tofuccorand  preferve  him  he  intcadeth.

35

Rogero  from  his  horfc  forthtvithalightcd,

(The  horfc  he  rode  on  was  Rrbntyno  named^

And  with  this  flying  hotfe  was  fo  delighted.

That  though  he  fa  w him  wanton  and  untamed,  '
Yet  up  hclcapt,aBdfoone  wasforc  afrighted,

Ha  finds  he  would  not  to  bis  mind  be  framed,

For  inthc  aira  thcGriffeth  for  A foYiie^

As  doth  the  Faulcon  that  at  fbwlc  doth  flie,

C 5 The


Syrulu


sS


THE  FOVRTH  BOOKE


beivtH  if
sn  ei^le.


Thcdamfcllfairc  that  now  beheld  her dcarf.

Borne  farre  away  by  force  of  monfters  wing,
Wasforrowfull  and  offo  heatiecheare,

I That  to  theircourfe  her  wits  (he  fcant  could  bring,
^Pa’titobei  * ThetalcofGa^OTedfhconcedidheare,

Juftierscup.  Whom  Poets  fainc  to  tend  the  hearenly  King,
teartr^und  shc  ^oubts  may  true  of  her  Rogers  be,
tariedHp  ta  That  was  as  comely  and  as  faire  as  he.

37

As  long  as  cyfight  could  at  all  prevaile.

So  long  fire  viewd  himftill  in  all  and  part ;

But  when  his  d iftaocc  made  the  fight  to  faile.

At  lead  file  followed  him  in  mind  and  hart.

To  fob, to  fighjto  weepe, lament  and  waile,

It  fjUovii  in  never  leaves  thefe  chances  ovci  thwart.

And  feeing  plaine  her  love  and  fiic  were  parted*

She  tookc  i=Yo»/j/«o  and  away  departed.

38

Now  was  Rogers  mounted  up  fo  hie.

He  feem’d  ro  be  a mote  or  little  pricke.

For  no  man  could  diftingiiifh  him  by  cie.

Except  his  fight  were  palling  fine  and  quickc*

All  foutherly  this Griffeth  horledoth  file,

, -g  (Was  never  jade  that  ferv'd  man  fuch  a trick e)

,/)e6.Tol{e*  But  let  himon  hisway,Godfpccd  him  well,
t6.Jiajif.  For  ofi?e««/do  fomewhat  I mud  tell.

39

Who  all  thewhile  with  raging  tempeft  ftrived.

Borne  where  himfclfe  nor  no  man  elfc  did  know.

By  cmell  ftormie  winds  and  weather  drived,  r
That  dayes  and  nights  furceafed  not  to  blowJ
At  lad  in  Scotland  weary  he  arrived,  ,

^famoia^  Where  woodsofC4/lf/do«yfiid do  fhow,  ,

A famous  wood  wherein  in  times  of  old.

Brave  deeds  were  done  by  venttous  KnightJ.  & bold,

40

Here  havethofe  famous  Knights  great  honour  won.

At  whole  rare  worth  the  world  it  fclfedid  wonder,
Here  were  mod  valiant  aftsatchiev’d  and,dpna.

By  Knightsthat dwelt  there ncare orfaralundcr.
And  many  a man  hath  here  bene  quite  undone,
Whofe  feeble  force  his  enemie  was  under.

Here  were, as  proved  is  by  ancient  charter,

The  famous  T riorum, Lmcellot  and  fir  Arth^rr  ' '
41

At  this  fame  w'ood  Renaldo  from  his  fleet.

Well  mounted  on  \\\sBayardi  backe  did  part.

He  points  his  men  at  B<rrB>/Vi5;ehImto  meet.

The  while  himfclfe  alone  with  valiant  heart.
Sometime  on  horfcbackejfomctiraeon  hisfccte,,
Doth  marchin  mind  to  do  fomc  worthy  part.

But  feeing  now  the  night  came  on  fo  fad,

Vnto  an  Abbey  be  repairesatlafl.

4»

Utreytu  The  Abbot  and  his  Mo/)ks  with  comely  grace,
TouJdtit  Asholy  menofhumancmanncisskilled,  i ,
ftngltuUof  Did  welcome  him,  and  in  a littlcfpacc,

Ctniurayun-  With  codly  fare  bisempticdomackc  filled.  • i ,,  ;•
totbtio.Hdff'  ife«a/ilodraightcnquiredofthcplacc,
afibe  6.b»Q^  What  feates  of  armes  had  there  bene  late  fulfilled.
And  where  a man  by  valiant  a£ls  may  fiaove.

If  lut  exploits  deferve  difprailc  or  no.


43


Tbit  Ittnii*

Utt,  thanked
be  Gtd,u
gmtUcdm
tbit  Hand
tbit  gni
wbik.


They  faid  that  in  that  wood  and  foriWdjfind

Adventures  ftrangc  and  feates  of  armes  he  might,

But  as  the  place ,fo  are  the  aftions  blind,’

That  oft  their  doings  never  come  to  light.

But  if(fay  they)  we  may  perfwadeyour  mind.

Attempt  an  aftion  worthy  of  a Knight,

Where  if  you  palTc  the  pcrill  and  the  painc,

Etcrnall  famelhall  unto  you  rcmainc.

44

For  ifyou  would  performc  an  aft  indeed.

Whereby  great  name  and  honour  may  be  wonne.

Then  this  would  be  the  heft  and  noblcft  deed.

That  late  or  long  time  pall  was  ever  done;

Our  Princes  daughter  llandcth  now  in  need,

Ofgreat  defence,  a danger  great  to  fliunne,

Againll  a Knight  Lurcanio  by  name.

That  fcckcs  to  take  away  her  life  and  fame.

4J

This  Knight  hath  her  unto  the  King  acculcd,

1 thinkcofmaliccrathcr  then  of  right.

That  he  hath  fccne  how  llie  her  fcJfe  abufed,

And  clolcly  tookoher  lover  up  by  night.

Now  by  thdawes  that  in  this  land  afe  ufed,

Except  lli^c  have  a champion  that  by  might  ,

Within  a month  Lurcanio  prove  a licr,

Shc  fliall  be  ftraigbt  condemned  to  the  ficr.

46

ThcScouifli  law  that  breedeth  all  this  llrifc,

Appoints  thatailof  bafe  or  better  fort.

That  take  a man  except  fhc  be  his  wife.

And  fpendsher  time  with  him  in  T'cwKsfport,

By  crucll  torment  finifli  lliall  her  life,

E xcept  fhe  find  fomc  Knight  that  will  fupport,

That  Ihe  the  hainous  faft  hath  not  committed.

But  that  inlaw  Ihc ought  to  be  acquitted.

47

The  King  for  faire  Gem/m  takes  great  thought,  Ctnturs

Both  for  her  fafctic  and  hcrcllimation,  daugbutf

And  fecks  by  all  good. mcancs  that  may  bewrought  tbtbingaf
For  herdcfcncc,and«iakcth  proclamation,

That  by  whole  heipe  from  danger  Ihc  is  brought,

(Provided  he  be  one  of  noble  nation)

.Shall  have  the  goodly  damfell  for  his  wife.

With  livings  large  to  keepc  him  all  his  life.

4«

But  if  within  this  month  that  now  cnfu’th,

(Solittle  time  for  hci  dcfcoccislcft  her)

No  Knight  will  come  thqt  will  defend  hertruth.

Then  friends  and  fame,and  life  will  bcBercft  her.

This  enterprife  would  much  commend  your  youth,

T he  praife  w hereof  would  laft  a great  while  after;

And  from  Atlanttn  pillars  unto  Inde,

A fairer  Ladicyou  lliall  never  findc.

49

Now  then  befide  the  honour  and  the  praHe,

Tohavea  llatc,may  make  you  livecontent.

The  Princes  love  (that  hcipeth  many  waies)  J^ttighutrt

Whole  honour  now.  is  halfcconfum’d  and  fpent.  ftvenuta  dt

Againc  true  Knights  lliould  hclpc  at  all  aflaics,  "^r^***

When  gny  harmeto  Ladies  faire  is  ment.  %Jd^d  t

Thc,verj.law  ofJtnighthood  hath  commanded,  rtlerattht
To  gfant  this  aide  that  wc  have  now  demanded,  opprtjfed,

Renalda


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


men

Piauli  count

It  a greaur,

notirithflan-

tiiaggood

Reaaldei

tpiman.


Jn  tki  point
I tbinl^e  mu-
vt  ate  of
that  reUgion,


50

Rerui’ilo  paus’d, and  after  thus  he  fpake.

Why  then  (faid  he)  muft  this  faircdaRifcII  die*
That  for  her  true  and  fccrct  lovets  fakcj
Did  condcfccnd  within  |)is  atmes  to  lici
Acciirftbcihcythatfuch  alawdid  make,
Accuift  bethey  tliat  meane  to  live  thereby.

Nay  rather  pointa  puni/liment  and  painc
For  filch  as  do  t heir  iovcis  true  difdainc.

5 I

If  faire  G eneum  had  her  fiicnd  or  no,

I lland  not  now  thcinattertodccidc.

Yea  I would praife  her  hadflicdoneit  fb,

That  by  her  foes  it  had  not  bene  cfpidc,

Jf  c a^  be  may.my  meaning  is  to  go
T o fight  for  her,if  1 may  have  a guide
That  will  but  fhew  me  where  is  her  accufer, '

And  I fliall  quickly  prove  he  doth  abufc  her.

T I

1 know  not  of  the  fa^l  flic  have  committed.

Nor  can  ! fay  in  this  thecertainc  fuie:

But  this  I fay, it  ought  to  be  remitted,

Aluch  rather  then  fliefliould  difirefle  endure,

I further  fay,thcy  were  but  meanly  witied.

That  did  fo  firasgbt  a Ifatute  firfl  procure,

I alfo  fay,  this  law  they  ought  recall,

In  place  thereof  a better  to  cnfiall.

Sith  likedefiic  the  fanciesdoth  pofTefle,

Both  of  the  male  and  of  the  female  gender.

To  do  that  thing  that  fooles count  great  cxceflc.
And  quench  the  flamcthat  Cupiddoth  engender.
To  grant  the  men  morefcopc,the  women  IclTe,
Islaw  for  which  no  reafbn  weean  render*

Men  ufing  many  never  arc  aflramed.

But  women  ufing  oncortwoare  blamed.

Thisdaw  I fiy  is  partiall  and  naught.

And  doth  to  women  plainc  and  open  wronr>,

1 trult  in  God  they  fliall  be  better  taught,  ^

And  that  thislaw  fliall  bcrcvokterc  long.

The  Abbot  and  his  Monks  in  word  and  thought,
Allowd  Renaldos  fpecch,both  old  and  yong:

They  all  condemne  the  law, and  partly  blame
The  king  that  may  and  mendeth  not  the  fame.


5J


Next  morning  when  Kenaidodoth  pcrceare

The  Sunne  appcarc,and  ftarres  their  heads  to  hide.
He  thanks  them  for  his  chcarc,and  taketb  leave.
And  takes  a target  bearer  for  his  guide.

For  fcare  Icflunknowne  paths  fliould  hirndcceavc.
Himfclfcall  armed  dothonS^ardridc
And  to  the  Scot! iJhtouTt  hegoesaftranger.

For  to  defend  the  damfell  ftireftoni  danger.

And  for  they  thought  to  take  a way  more  nie.

They  leave  the  common  way  a mile  or  twaine.
Whcn  fuddcnly  they  heard  a piteous  cric.

Well  like  to  one  that  feared  to  bcflainc.

In  hafl  they  fputre  their  horfes  by  and  by.

Along  the  vale,and  looking  downe the  plaine,

A maidc  betwccnc  two  murderers  they  fa w
That  meant  to  take  her  life  againfl  all  law,

Thccaitifcs  put  the  damfcll  in  great  fearc,

A nd  fliew’d  that  they  were  come  to  end  her  day  c$,

h'ch  made  her  vvccpc,andfliedfu’l  many  atcarc,

T o move  their  minds  flic  tricth  many  wayes-
And  though  the  faft  a while  they  did  forbcarc.

Yet  now  they  had  removed  all  delayes.

When  as  RenaLlo  came  unto  her  aid,  '

And  made  the  malcftilors  fore  afraid.

SS

Away  they  fled  and  left  the  wench  alone,

affrighted.

Who  all  hercaufc  of  danger  andofmone, '

Vmo  Renaldo  ftraight  would  have  recited,
Butfogicathaft  hemaketh  to  begone.

He  gave  no  care,nor/rom  his  horfe  alighted.

But  to  enfuc  the  journey  firfl  alTignld  him.

He  caus  d the  guide  to  take  her  up  behind  him.

Arid  nowon  horfebacke  marking  wclllicr  fate/. . , .

A nd  mai^ingmorc  her  geflure antibebaviour,

Her  pieafing  fpecch,and  inodcft  fobergrace,

And"X  V't  ^ f dcal^morc  his  favour;

Anq  after  he  had  rode  a Jmlc  ip  ace, .

An^il  her;

,And  flic  began  syjthhumblc  vipi(;cand  low.

As  morcat  large  hereafter  1 wiHfl^qw.


Atlamas inc))aritmmts,ancrfrufixate  alllUpurpofi, mayiot'e  jfoyv rea/lniS-rT  t


I


the  fovrth  booke

, . 1 irl,  Jhhnjhhwife§>ueencGucnevct7tas  buried, a7tdwitlinouTTnems)ytaf^enupi)taccffin,wkb

Cl  Glafenhury,in  wkch  Abby  his  ^ aweliirg  tf. mahout  l ate  npor-

her  body  andjace  tlUlfe  died, U is  ^dolbijuu!  and  that  r^kich  thy  report  fecms  meer'yja-

ted  But  what  f a barge  fiom  a bridge  eaUed  Fomperles,  r^are  tbcfaid  Glajjer.luy,  and  fa

Pomife  to  bring  him  bacl^e  againe  one  day  .-  upon

MU  ferns  thefS/pecilegroundedthd^^^^^

covered  fiorn  the  fea.an^

mooresjand  ^ fuppL  dtfaid  K^ing  being  drowned  there  by  fame  miftap,andbeirgweUbe-^

up  to  Glajfenbury  mthofe  ,pat  he  was  but  eone  a link  way,  and  would  come  again.-  aide

loved  oj  thepeople.fomefatned  J ^ tale  fj  / finow  not  what  to  make  the  people

Senate  of  Rome,  having  killed  intiaJry  of  our  tme,nritcth  that  RUg  Atthurs  bpay  wat  taken

ni.  in  helecvehewatturnedtoagod.U.Ci  r ,rt„i^Henrv  the  diond  which  indeedis  mofi  credible,ai he thieproveth.

of  Ovtdt  Miiitatomnisamans,  8c  babetfua  caftra  Cupido.

“ sfpra  gli  hLcrfharca  fol  doc

Vpon  his Jhoulders  rotre  two  mighty  „ l,-

Atlant  takes, and  imprifons  thofe  he  taket-Love  ts  such  be  thewayes  of  that  pajfwr.

Nclmcizodelcamindi  noftra  vita*

Mirctrovai  peruna  felva  ofeura,

Chela  drittaTiaerafmarrita.

IVhileyet  my  life  was  in  her  middle  race,

I found,l  wandred  in  a darkeftne  wood,

Ond*lofon  fatto un* animalfilrcitxo,

Che  CO  pic  yaghi  folitari  c Uffi.  . . . ^

Porto  il  cor  grave.egli  occhi  humidi  c bafll,

A1  mondo  che  e per  me  un  defeyo.

Thus  1 am grownt  afavage  beafi  andvyld.

That  /fill  with  wandring  fieps  andfoUtane,

A heavy  heart  and  waned  eyes  do  eane.

About  the  world  which  is  ^ cafllt,  it  fgnifieth,  that  Jeticiomfarc  anS

'*  ^ OtiafitolUs.pcricrccupulinisarcus,

Contcmptxquejaccnt  8c  fine  luce  facci.

TakeidleneJ/eawc^, and  out  of  doubt

Cupids  bow  breakes,aad  a^hu  '"’"W  J'!’*  fi,uatkn  and  height, and  every  thing  that  isfaid of


i


‘RitijU,"*


:||

1™™!^^  -'__!^  "'jJ'iJllllM^^^

HI

THE  ARGVMENT.

Dalinda  teb  ivhat  fleights  her  Duke  devifed^
‘To get  with f Aire  Geneura  reputation',
Lurcanio  of  hit  brothers  fall  advifed^
Accus'th  her  pub  likely  of  fornication,
tyi Knight  unknowne  in  armour  blackg  difguij
Comes andrvithflands  Lurcanios  accufation^
XJnti  //  Renaldo  made  all  matters plaine.

By  whom  the  unjuji  Dukp  was  juf  I j flaine.


Z^o^e  more
ta  large  im
the  end  of
tbeboel(e,of
fbiimeraU-


iPeutesl^
ttb  marriage
ytbtSjno-
nraa  of  the
admtit filed.


E fee  the  reft  of  liring
creatures  all,

Both  birds  and  beads  t
on  the  earth  do  dvvell
Live  mod  in  peace,  or
they  hap  to  brail.

The  male  and  female  dill
agrecthwell.

I The  fierce,thefaint,th4'.'  "
greater  nor  the  fmall,  ~
Againd  the  law  of  nature  will  rebcll,  t-

The  ravage  Lions, Beares  and  Buis  mod  wyld,

Vnto  their  females  fhewthemfclvcs  mod  mvid.

3

What  fiend  of  hell,what  rage  raignes  here  fo
Didurbing  dill  the  date  of  humane  harts?  ..
How  comes  it  that  we  find  twixt  man  and  wife,
Continuall  jarresbred  by  injurious  parts?

The  undefiled  bed  is  fiWeby  drife,

And  teares  t hat  grow  of  words  unkind  and  thwartsf
Nay  oft  all  care  and  feare  is  fo  exiled,

'rheir  guilty  hands  with  blood  have  bene  defiled.

No  doubt  they  ate  accurd  and  pad  all  grace.

And  fuefa  ashaycofGod  nor  man  no  feare.

That  dare  to  drijee  a damfell  in  the  face,

Orof  her  head  to  minidi  but  a haire:
jBut  who  with  knifeot  poifon  woiHd  unlace
Their  lineoflifc, or  flefh  ia  pecces  tcare,

No  roan,nor  tnadcof  dedi'and  blood  I dcemehiwjs
^ut  fure  Lome  hound  of  hell  1 do  edeeme  him.

4

Such  were  theft  theeves  that  would  the  damfell  kill.
That  by  dterwWof  comming  was  recovered;


They  fecretly  had  brought  herdowne  the  hill.

In  hope  their  faft  could  never  be  difeovered,

Yet  fuch  is  God,fo  good  his  gracious  will,
Thatwhen  flic  lookcdlead  fliewasdclivcred.
And  with  a chcarcfull  heart  that  late  was  foric.
She  do*h  begin  to  tell  the  wofull  dorie..

5

Go^d  fir(faid  fhe)my  confcience  to  difchargc.

The  greated  tyranniel  fiiallyou  tell,

_That  erd  in  Thei>cs,in  Athens  or  in  Arge,

Was  ever  wrought,or  where  word  tyrants  dwell;

y voire  and  skill  would  faile  to  tell  at  large
The  filthy  faft,  fori  belecveit  well,

Vpon  9)is  countrey  PWasdiincs  more  cold,
Bccaufe  he  doth  fuch  wicked  ads  behold.

Mcnfeckcwefee,and  have  inevery  age,  ^

1 o foile  their  foes,and  tread  them  in  the  dud:

But  thereto  wreake  their  rancor  and  their  rage,
Where  they  arc  lov’d, is  foulc  and  topunjud.
Love  fhould  prcvailc,jud  anger  toa/Twrfge,

If  love  bring  death,w  hereto  can  women  trud:

Yet  love  did  breed  my  danger  and  noy  firare,

Asyou  f^all  heare  if  you  will  give  me  care.

7

For  entring  fird  into  my  tender  fpring,

Ofyouthfull  yoares,unto  the  court  I catn4,  ‘

^And  ferved  there  the  daughter  of  our  King,

And  kept  a place  of  honour  with  good  fame.

Till  love  (alas  that  love  fuch  care  fhould  bring)
Eovidemy  datc,and  fought  to  dome  fhame.

Love  made  the  Duke  of  Alban  feeme  to  me.

The  faired  wight  that  erd  mine  eye  did  fee.


Inthejitbrei
cities  divert
crueU  tyraM'
ttiet  have
beetle  cotm-
milted,
hlec  tama-
verjia  equoi
tyria  fol  jiM.
gitabvrbe.


Sevteeeet,


And


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


8

And  (for  1 thought  he  lov'd  me  all  above)

SttJtnu.  1 bent  my  fclfc  to  hold  and  love  him  beft.

But  now  I find  that  hard  it  is  to  prove.

By  fiijht  or  fpccch  what  bides  in  fecret  breft.
While  1 (poore  i;did  thus  belcevcand  love,

He  gets  niy  body, bed  and  all  the  rell.

Nor  thinking  this  might  breed  my  miftres  wrong
Ev’n  in  her  chambci\this  1 ptaftis’d  long.

9

Where  all  t he  things  of  gieatcft  value  lay.

And  where  Gvneura  flecpcs  her  fclfc fomciime,
There  at  a window  we  did  findca  way,

In  fecret  fort  to  cover  thisour  crime:

Here  when  my  love  and  I were  bent  to  play,

I taught  him  by  a fcalc  ofcoid  to  clime.

And  at  ihevvindow  I my  fclfc  would  (land.

And  let  the  ladderdowne  into  his  hand.

10

So  oft  we  meetc  together  at  this  fport.

As  fairc  Gencurai  abfence  gives  us  leave.

Who  us’d  to  other  chambers  torefbrt
I n fummer  time, and  this  for  heat  to  leave:

And  this  we  earned  in  fo  fccrer  forr.

As  none  there  was  our  doings  did  perceavc.

For  w!iy,this  window  ftandethout  of  fight.
Where  none  do  come  by  day  nor  yet  by  night.

1 1

Ttvixt  us  lilts  ufi;  continu’d  many  dayes,
lea  many  months  we  us’d  this  privictrainc.
Love  fer  my  heart  on  fire  fo  many  wayes.

That  iiill  my  liking lafted  to  my  painc.

1 might  Iiavc  found  by  ccrtainelliangedclaycs,
Th.it  he  but  littlclov’d  and  muchdtd  fainc.

For  all  his  fleiglits  were  not  fo  clofcly  covered.
But  that  they  might  full  cafly  be  difcovercd.

1 2

At  lad  iny  Duke  did  feeme  enflamed  fore.

On  fairc  GcHcur.-z.  ncitbcr  can  I tell,

If  now  this  love  began  or  was  before,

That  I did  come  to  court  with  her  to  dwell.

But  looke  if  I were  fubjcil  to  his  lore.

And  looke  if  he  my  love  requited  well,
jftiaUicit  Hr  asktmyaid  herein  no  whit  afhamed,
ujidfrme.  To  tell  me  how  of  licr  he  was  enflamed.

umeiow90

wiaTte ImT-.  al  1 cf  love,but  partly  of  ambition,

Jlres.  He  facarcs  in  hand  his  minde  is  onely  ber.t,

Bccaufc  of  her  great  ftateand  hie  condition.

To  have  her  for  his  wife  is  hts  intent:

He  nothing  doubteth  of  the  Kings  permiffion.
Had  he  obtain’d  Gmeuroi  freeaffent.

Ne  was  it  hard  for  him  to  take  in  hand,

T hat  was  the  fecond  perfon  in  the  land.

U

Hcfwaretome,ifI  wouldbefokind  ^

His  hie  attempt  to  futtherand  aflifl.

That  at  hisfaandsi  fliould  great  favour  finde.
And  of  the  King  procure  me  what  me  lift;

How  he  would  ever  keepe  it  in  his  mind.

And  in  hisfoimcr  love  to  me  perfift.

And  notwithftanding  wife  and  all  the  reft,

1 foould  be  Cure  that  be  would  love  me  bcft.i


3?

15

I ftiaight  cor.fcntcd  to  bis  fond  requeft.

As  rcadic  his  commandment  to  obay.

Anti  thinking  ftill  my  timccmploied  beft,

Wlicn  1 iiad  pleas’d  his  fancy  any  way;

And  when  I found  a time  then  was  1 picft.

To  talkcof  him, and  good  of  him  to  fay.

1 u(cd  all  my  art, my  wit,and  painc,

Gemurai  love  and  liking  to  obtainc.

\6

God  knoweth  how  glad  I wasto  worke  his  will.

How  diligent  1 follow’d  his  dircdlion,

X fpai’d  no  time,  no  tiavell.nor  no  skill.

To  this  my  Duke  to  kindle  her  affeftion:

But  al  way  es  this  attempt  fucceeded  ill.

Love  had  bei  licai  t already  m fubjeftion,

A comely  Knight  did  fairc  Gc«cwr« pleafe.

Come  tothiscountueftom  beyond  thcfcas.

•7

From  Italy  for  fcrvice  (as  I hcare)

Vnto  the  court  he  and  his  brother  came,'

In  tourneys  and  in  tilt  he  had  no  pcere.

All  Brittain  foonc  was  filled  with  his  fame.

Our  King  did  love  him  well  and  hold  himdccre.

And  did  by  pi  incely  gifts  confirme  the  fame.

Faire  c3ftels,towncs,and  lorddiips,  him  be  gave.
And  made  him  grcat,fuch  power  great  princes  have.

18

Our  Soveraigne  much, his  daughter  likt  him  more.

And  Atiodant  this  worthy  Knight  isnamed.

So  brave  in  deeds  of  armes  himfclfe  he  bore.

No  Ladicofhis  love  need  bcafliamcd;

The  hill  of  Sicil  burncth  not  fo  fore,

Nor  is  the  mount  Vefuvio  fo  infldmed.

As  Ariodantes  heart  was  fet  on  fire,

Geneuroi  beautie  kindling  hisdefire.

19

His  certaine  love  by  fignes  moft  certaine  found,
Caufctliat  my  futc  unwillingly  was  hard.

She  well  perceiv’d  bislovefinccrcand  found,
Enclining  to  his  futc  with  great  regaid.

In  vaine  I feeke  my  Dukes  love  to  expound,

The  more  1 feeke  to  make  the  more  1 mard.

For  while  with  words  I feck  to  prailc  and  grace  him
No  Icfle  withworkesfiteftrivcihtodefacehim,

20

Thus  being  oft  rcpulft  (foill  fpcdl,)

To  ray  coo  much  beloved  Duke  I went.

And  told  him  how  her  heart  was  fixi  alreadic,

How  on  the  ftranger  all  her  mind  was  bent.

And  praid  him  now  fith  there  was  no  remedic.

That  to  furccafe  his  futc  he  would  confent,

. For  Ariodant  fo  lov'd  the  princely  maid,

T hat  by  no  mcancs  his  flames  could  be  alaid .

21

■When  Po'yncJfo{(6thc'DnV.i  we  call)
Thistalcunpicafantoftcntimc  had  hard,

Andof  hinjfclfc  had  found  his  hopes  were  finall.
When  with  my  words  her  deeds  he  had  compar’d,
Greev’d  vvith  rcpulfc.and  vexed  therewithal!.

To  foe  this  ftranger  thus  to  be  prefar’d.

The  love  that  late  his  heart  fo  fore  had  burned.

Was  cooled  all,and  into  hatred  turned.

Inten'


'UcfuvUyta'a
niouDtatnet
tJjat  did  cajt
ouiflaoitt.


Utarntru
ctmabiU  (Jh,


THE  FIFT  BOOKE


22

Intending  by  fome  vile  andfubtill  traine,

To  j art  Gcncura  from  her  faithfiill  lover.

And  plant  fo  great  miflike  bctwccnc  them  twainei
Yet  withfocunning  flicw  thclamcto  cover.

That  her  good  name  he  will  fo  foule  diftaine.
Alive  nor  dead  flie  never  fliall  recover.

But  left  he  might  in  this  attempt  be  thwarted,

1 o none  at  all  hisfccret  he  imparted.

Now  thusrefoU’d  {7)alinda  faire)  quoth  he,

(I  foam  cald)  you  know  though  trees  be  topt.

And  /hrowded  low,yet fprout  yong  fliootswe fee.
And  ifloe  from  that  head  fo  lately  lopt:

So  in  my  love  it  fateth  now  with  me.

Though  by  repulfccut  lliort  and  fhrcwdly  cropfj
The  pared  topsfuch  buds  of  love  do  render.

That  ftilll  prove  new  paftions  there  engender.

^4-

Ncdol  decmcfodcarc  the  great  delight.

As  I difdainc  1 fliould  be  forejeft,

And  left  this  griefe  ftiould  overcome  me  quight,
Bccaufe  I fade  to  bring  it  to  cffeil,  »

To  pleafe  my  fond  conceit  this  veiy  nighr,

I pray  thee  dearc  to  do  as  I dirrft.’

When  faire  Gencurato  her  bed  is  gene.

Take  thou  the  clothes  file  ware  and  put  them  on.

*5

As  flic  is  wont  her  golden  haiic  to  drefle,

111  ilatcly  fort  to  wind  it  on  her  wire,

So  you  herpoyfon  lively  toexprefle.

May  dreftcyourowne  and  wcarc  her  head  attire.
Her goi gets  and  her  jcwclsrich  no  leflV,

You  may  put  on  I’accompliflj  rry  defirc.

And  when  unto  the  window  1 afeend,

I will  my  comming  there  you  do  attend,

26  '

Thus  I may  paftc  my  fancies  foolifti  fit.

And  thus  (quoth  ht)  my  fclfcl  would  deceive.

And  ythat  had  no  reafon  nor  no  wit.

His  fliamefitll  drift  (though  open)  to  perceive.*

Did  wearemy  miftreftc  lobesthat  ferv’d  me  fit.
And  ftood  at  window.therc  him  to  receive.

And  of  the  fraud  1 was  no  whit  aware.

Till  that  fell  out  that  caufcdall  my  care.

27

of  latetwixt  him  and  ylriodant  had  paft.

About  Gencuta  faire  thefe  words  or  fuch,

(For  why  there  was  good  friendfliip  in  times  paft
.Betweene  them  two, till  love  their  hearts  did  tuch)
The  Dukefuch  kind  of  fpccchcsout  didcaft.

He  faid  to  Ariodant,he  marvcl’d  much.

That  feeing  he  did  alwaics  well  regard  him.

He  fliould  againc  fo  thanklefly  reward  him.

Iknow  you  fee  (for  needs  it  muft  beftene^

The  goed  confenr  and  matrimoniall  love.

That  long  bctwccnc  Gcnear’  and  me  hath  beene.
For  whom  I mcanc  ere  long  the  King  to  irove.
Why  ftiould  you  fondly  thruft  your  felfc  bctwccnc?
Why  ftiould  you  rove  your  reach  fo  farre  above?

For  if  my  cafe  were  yours  I would  forbeaxci
Or  if  i knew  that  you  fo  loved  were.


29

And  1 much  more  (the  other  ftraight  replies^

Do  marvell  you  fir  Duke  arc  fo  unkind.

That  know  our  love,and  fee  it  with  ycur  eye*,
(Except  that  wilfuInefTe  have  made  you  blind).
That  no  man  can  morefured  knots  devife.

Then  her  to  mc,and  me  to  her  do  bind.

Into  this  futc  foraftily  are  intruded,

Still  finding  from  all  hopeyw  arc  excluded.

30^

Why  bcarc  you  not  to  me  the  likerefpeft,

As  my  good  will  rcquircth  at  your  hand?

Since  that  our  love  is  growne  to  this  efFcif,

Wc  mcanc  to  knit  our  felvcs  in  weddings  band;
Which  to  fulfill  ere  long  I do  expeft,

For  know  I am  (though  not  in  rents  or  land)

Yet  in  my  Princesgtaccnowliit  infcrioor.

And  in  his  daughtcrs,grcatly  ycur  fiipciiour.

3»

Well  (faid  the  Duke)  errorsare  hardly  moved.

That  love  doth  breed  in  unadvifed  breft.

Each  tliinkes  himfclfc  to  be  the  beft  beloved.

And  yet  butoncof  usislovcd  beft.

Wherefore  to  have  the  matterplainly  proved,
Which  ftiould  proceed  in  lovc,arid  which  ftiould  reft,
Let  us  agree  that  viftor  he  rcmainc.

That  of  her  liking  fticweth  fignes  moft  plaine.

32

I will  he  bound  to  you  by  folcmncoth.

Your  fccrcts  all  and  counfell  to  conccalc,

So  you  like  wife  will  plight  tome  your  troth.

The  thing  1 fticw  you  never  to  rcvcalc.

To  trie  the  matter  thus  they  greed  both.

And  from  this  doomc  licrcaftcr  not  rcpcale;

But  on  the  Bible  firft  they  wcredcpcfcd,

That  this  their  fpcech  ftiould  never  bcdifclofcd.

33

And  firft  the  ftrangerdoth  his  ft.itc  revcale.

And  tell  the  truth  in  hope  to  end  theftrife.

How  flic  had  promift  him  in  wo  and  wcalc,
Tolivcwitli  him,and  love  him  all  her  life:

And  how  with  writing  with  her  hand  and  feale.

She  had  confirmed  ftie  would  be  hii  wife.

Except  flic  were  forbidden  by  her  father,

F or  then  to  live  unmartide  flic  had  rather.

34

And  furthermore  he  nothing  doubt?  (he faid)

Of  his  good  fcrvicc  fo  plainc  proofe  to  fliow.

As  that  the  King  fhall  nothing  be  afraid.

On  fuch  a Knight  his  daughter  to  beftow:

And  bow  in  this  he  needeth  little  aid,

As  finding  ftill  his  favour  greater  grow,

Ht  doubts  not  he  will  grant  his  liking  after
That  he  ftiall  know  it  pleafctlifoliis  daughter.

And  thus  3?i)u  fee  fo  found  ftands  mine  eftate.

That  I my  felfc  in  thought  can  wifti  no  more,

Who  (cekes  her  now  is  furc  to  come  too  late,

For  that  he  fcckes  is  granted  me  beforCj
Now  oncly  refts  in  marriage  holy  ftatc.

To  knit  the  knot  that  muft  dure  evermore.

And  for  her  praife,!  need  not  to  declare  it.

As  knowing  none  to  whom  1 may  compare  it.

Thui


Simile.

The  Uke  ii  in
Ilwitcehii
i.Ode  of'the
fourth  bool{;
Duru  ut  ilex
ten  fa  btfenni-
but.


Smnut.


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


35


Thus  Ariodant  a talc  moft  true  declared.

And  what  reward  he  liopcd  for  hi'  paine.

Rut  m}'  falfc  Duke  that  him  had  fouly  fnared.

And  found  by  my  great  folly  fuch  atraine.

Doth  fwcarcal!  this  might  no  way  be  compared
With  his, no  though  himfclfedid  judge  remat ne.
Fori  (quoth he)  can fliew  (ignes  fo  exprefl'e.

As  you  your  felfc  infcriour  fit  all  confelTc.

n

Alasfquoth  he)  I fee  you  do  not  know

How  cunningly  thefc  w'omen  can  diflcmble.

They  lead  do  love  where  they  makegieatcft  fliow,

A nd  not  to  be  the  thing  they  mofl  relcmble.

Rut  other  favours  I receive  1 trow,

Wiien  as  wetwodofccrctly  afl'rmble.

As  I v.-ill  tell  you  (though  I fliould  conccalc  it)
Bccaufc  you  promife  never  to  rcvcalc  it.

38

The  truth  is  this, that  I full  oft  have  fccne

Her  ivory  corpcs,and  bene  with  her  all  night.

And  naked  lame  her nakedarmes  betwcenc.

And  full  enjoyde  thefruitesoflovcsdelight:

Now  judge  who  hath  in  greateft favour  becnc.

To  which  of  us  fliedoth  pertaine  in  right.

And  then  give  place, and  yecld  to  me  raitieowne,
Sith  by  juft  proofes  1 noav  have  made  it  knownc,

39

luft  proofes?  (c\voth Ariodant)  nay  iTiamefull  lies,

Nor  will  I credit  give  to  any  word:

Isthis  the fineft  talc youcandevife?

What, hop’d  you  that  with  this  I could  be  dord?
No,no,but  fith  a flander  foulc  doth  tife
By  thee  to  her,  mainraincit  with  thy  fword,

1 call  thee  lying  traitor  to  thy  face.

And  meanc  to  prove  it  in  this  prefent  place,

40

tfihtVtteUo  TuOi  (quoth  the  Duke)  it  werca  foolifli  part,
tmanuntt  For  you  to  fight  with  me  that  am  your  friend,
tound  to  an.  5 jjh  plaine  to  (hew  without  dcccitor  art,

^nt^fer’^L  ^ ® tnuch  as  I have  faid  1 do  intend,

Thefc  words  didgripepoore  ^r/0(ii«rer  hart,
Downeall  hislimbesa  fliiveringdothdcfccnd.

And  ftill  he  ftood  with  eyes  caftdowncon  ground.
Like  one  would  fall  into  a deadly  found.

4»

With  wofull  mind,  with  pale  and  chcarlcfTc  face.


43

Some  ruin’d  houfes  ftood  oppos’d  dirc£l

Againft  the  window  where  he  doth  afeend,

But  Ariodant  d'tCcTeetly  doth  fufpctft

That  this  falfc  Duke  fome  raifchiefcdid  intend|

And  thought  ihatall  did  tend  tothiicffcff.

By  trechcry  to  bring  him  to  his  end,

That  fure  helutd  devifed  this  pretence.

With  mind  to  kill  him  ere  he  parted  thence.

44.

Thus  though  to  fee  this  fight  he  thought  it  longj
Yet  tooke  he  care  all  mifehiefe  to  prevent,

A nd  if  perhap  they  offer  force  or  wrong.

By  force  the  fame  for  to  refift  he  ment.

He  had  a brother  valiant  and  ftrong,

Lurcanio  cal’d,znd  ftraight  for  him  liefcnt,

Not  doubting  but  alone  by  his  affiftance,
Againft  twice  iwcntic  men  to  make  rcfiftance.


45


fttfi:atien  of
any  report  if
he  can  prove
it  tail  true.


With  trembling  voice  that  came  from  bitter  thought
He  faid  he  much  defi  r’d  to  fee  this  place.

Where  fuch  ftrangc  feats  and  miracles  were  wrought
Hath  fairc  Geneura  granted  you  this  grace.

That  I (quoth  he)  fo  oft  in  vainc  have  fought?

Now  furc  except  I fee  it  in  my  view,

I never  will  bclcevc  it  can  be  new.

42

The  Duke  did  fay  he  would  with  all  his  h.irt

Both  fhew  him  where  and  how  the  thing  was  done.
And  ftraight  from  him  tome  he  doth  depart.
Whom  to  his  purpofc  wholly  he  had  wonne.*

With  both  of  us  he  playth  fo  well  his  part.

That  both  of  us  thereby  were  quite  undone,
f irft  he  tcls  him  that  he  would  hare  him  placed
Among  fome  houfes fainc  and  quite  defaced.


He  bids  his  brother  take  his  fword  in  hand.

And  go  into  a place  that  he  would  guide.

And  in  a corner  clofely  there  to  ftand,

Aloofc  from  tothcr  tbrecfcore  paces  wide.

The  caufe  he  would  not  let  him  underftand.

But  prayes  him  there  in  fccrct  fort  to  bide,

Vntill  fuch  time  he  hapt  10  hcarc  him  call,

Elfc  (if  he  lo\  ’J  him)  not  to  ftirre  at  all.

4«

His  brother  would  not  his  requeft  dcnic.

And  fo  went  Ariodant  into  bis  place,

And  undifcovct’d  clofely  there  did  lie,

Till  having  looked  there  a little  fpacc,

The  craftie  Duke  to  come  he  might  dcfciie.

That  meant  the  chaft  Geneura  to  deface,

Who  having  made  tome  his  wonted  fignes,

I let  him  downe  the  ladder  made  of  lines.

47

Thegownel  ware  was  white, and  richly  fet

With  aglets,pearlc,and  lace  of  gold  well  garniflicd.
My  ftatcly  trclTescovei’d  wkh  a net
Of  beaten  gold  moft  pure  and  brightly  varniflicd.
Not  thus  content, the  vailc  aloft  I fet.

Which  only  Princes  wcarc:  thus  ftatcly  harnifhed.
And  under  Cupids  banner  bent  to  fight.

All  unawares  1 ftood  in  all  their  fight.

48

For  why  Lurcanio  eithertaking  care.


Left  Ariodant  fliould  in  fome  danger  go,

Or  that  he  foupht(as  all defirous  arc)
Thccouufclsof  hisdeareft  friend  to  know,
Clofe  out  of  fight  by  fccrct  fteps  and  ware.
Hard  at  his  hccles  his  brother  follow’d  fo,

Till  he  was  nearer  come  by  fiftic  paces.

And  there  againc  himfelfc  he  newly  places.

49

But  1 that  thought  noill,fccurcly  came
Vnto  the  open  window  as  1 faid.

For  once  or  twice  before  I did  the  fame.

And  had  no  hurt, which  made  me  IcfTc  afraid;

I cannot  boaft  (except  I boaftof  fliamc)

When  in  her  robes  1 h.id  my  fclfcarraid.

Me  thought  before  1 was  not  much  unlikcher,
Bu;  ccrtainc  now  1 feemed  very  like  her.


Sentenct,


S*  that  bet
Jioodwithin
ten  paces  of
hs4  brother .


But


L


36


the  sixt  booke


57


Kotall  ivtu
men

faithUJpt

wvmn.


f the  damna^
•Itji  thing
hat  nu^  bet,
^theruUt
1^  ChrifttaH
'iligion.


But  Ariodant  that  flood  fo  farre  aloofe.

Was  mere  deceiv’d  hy  d iftance  of  the  place,

And  ftraight  bclccv’d  againft  bis  ownc  bchoote,
Seeing  her  clothes  that  he  had  fcenc  Iicr  face.

Now  let  thole  judge  that  partly  know  by  proofc,
The  wofull  plight  of  Ariodantes  cafe.

When  Folynejfo  came  my  faithlcfle  frond,
la  both  their  fights  the  ladderto  afeend,

SI  ,

I that  hisconuning  willingly  did  wait.

And  he  once  come  thought  nothing  vyent  amiue.
Embrac’d  him  kindly  at  thefirft  reccit,

Hisiipsjbis  checks.and  all  his  face  did  kilTc,

Acd  he  the  more  to  colour  his  deceit.

Did  ufe  me  kinder  then  he  had  ere  this.

This  fight  much  care  to  Ariodantc  brought,
Thinking  with  the  Duke  was  nought.

The  griefeand  forrow  finketh  fo  profound

Into  his  heart, he  ftraight  rcfolvestodie,

He  puts  the  pummellof  hisfwordon  ground.

And  mcancs  himfelfe  upon  the  point  tc)  lie-
Which  when  EHreawwfaw  and  plainly  found.
That  all  this  while  wasclofely  (landing  by.

And  comming  did  dilcerre.

Though  wh®  it  was  he  never  yet  could  learne,

He  held  his  brother  for  the  prefent  time.

That  clfe  himfelfe  for  griefe  had  furely  fiainc.
Who  had  he  not  flood  nigh  and  come  betime.

His  words  and  fpccches  had  bene  all  in  vaine.
What  (hall  (quoth  hej  a faithlcfiTe  womans  crime,
Caufe  you  to  die  or  put  your  felfe  to  painc?

Nay  let  them  go,and  curd  be  all  their  kind.

Ay  borne  like  clouds  with  cu’ry  blaft  of  wind.

You  rather  fliould  fome  juft  revenge  devife,

As  (he  dcfervesjto  bring  her  to  confufion;

Sith  we  have  plainly  fcenc  with  both  our  eyes.
Her  filthy  fail  appeare  without  collufion.

Love  thofc  that  love  againe,if  you  be  wife,

For  of  my  counfell  this  is  the  conclufioii,

Put  up  yourfword  againft  your  felfe  prepared.
And  let  her  finne  be  to  the  Kingdeclared.

His  brothers  words  in  yiriodanferrnind  ^

Scemc  for  the  time  to  make  fome  (mall  tm^ie^on,
But  dill  thccurcleflc  wound  remain’d  behind,
Defpairc  had  of  hii  heart  the  full  po(Te(fion.

And  though  he  knew  the  thing  he  had  affign  d.
Contrary  to  a Chriftian  knights  profc(Tion;

Yet  here  on  earth  he  torment  felt  foforo.

In  hell  it  felfe  he  thought  there  was  no  more.

56

And  feemin®  now  after  a little  paiile,

Vnto  his  brothers  counfcllto  confent.

He  from  the  court  next  day  himfelfe  withdrawes.
And  makes  none  privic  unto  his  intent.

His  brother  and  thcDukc  both  knew  the  caufe.
But  neither  knew  the  place  whereto  he  went.*
Divers  thereof mod  diverfly  did  judge.

Some  by  good  will  perfwadcd,fomc  by  grudge.


Sev’n  dayes  entire  about  for  him  they  fought,

Scv’ii  dayes  entire  no  newes  of  him  was  found.

The  eight  a peafant  xoGencura  brought
Thefc  ncwcs,that  in  the  fca  he  faw  him  drown  d:

Not  that  the  waters  were  with  temped  wrought.

Nor  that  hisflup  was  ftricken  on  the  ground.

How  then?  Forfooth (quoth  hejand  therewith  wept,
Downc  from  a rockc  into  the  (ca  he  Icpt.

S«

And  further  he  unto  Gc«ciirir  told,

How  he  met  Ariodant  upon  the  way,

Who  made  him  go  with  him  for  to  behold
The  wofull  a£l  that  he  would  do  that  day.

A nd  charged  him  the  matter  to  unfold.

And  to  his  Princes  daughter  thus  to  fay.

Had  he  been  blind.hc  had  full  happic  bccnc.

His  death  (hould  flicw  that  he  too  much  had  fecnc.

59

There  ftandsa  rocke  againft  the  Irifli  ilc.

From  thence  into  the  fea  himfelfe  he  caft:

I ftood  and  looked  after  him  awhile.

The  height  and  (IccDnefTc  made  me  fore  agaft,

I thtnee  have  travei’J  hither  many  a mile.

To  flicw  you  plainly  how  the  matter  pad.

When  as  the  clownc  his  talc  had  verifide,

Geneurai  heart  was  throughly  tetrifide.

60

O Lord  w'hat  wofull  words  by  her  were  fpoken,'
laid  all  alone  upon  herrcftlelTc  bedj
Oftdid  flicftnkc  hcrguiltlcfic  bred  in  token
Of  that  great  griefe  tha*  inwardly  was  bred;

Hei  golden  trefles  all  were  rent  and  broken,
RccountingftilJ  rhofe  wofull  words  he  fed.

How  thatthccaufc  hiscriicll death  wasfuch.

Was  onely  thls,that  he  had  fcenc  too  much.

6I

The  rumor  of  his  death  fpread  farre  and  ncare.

And  how  for  forrow  he  himfelfe  had  killed,

7 he  King  was  fad, the  court  of  heavy  chcarc.

By  lords  and  Ladies  many  tcares  were  fpillcd.

His  brother  tTjoft, as  loving  him  mod  dcarc.

Had  fo  his  mind  with  (brrow  overfilled.

That  he  waslcantly  ableto  refrainc,

With  hisowHC  hands  himfelfe  for  to  hav^ainc.

And  oftentimes  repeating  in  his  t bought.

The  filthy  fa£l  he  faw  the  other  night,

Which  (as  you  heard)  the  Duke  and  I had  wrought,
1 little  looking  it  would  come  to  light.

And  that  the  fame  his  brothers  death  had  brought,
Onfairc  Gewo/rahedoth  wreakchisfpight,

N«t  caring  (fodid  wrath  him  overwhdmc)

To  Icefc  the  Kings  good  will  and  all  his  rcalme.

«3

The  King  and  Nobles  fitting  in  the  hall.

Right  pend  VC  allfor  Ariodants  dcftrudlioni
Lurcanio  undertakes  before  them  all,

To  give  them  perfeft  notice  and  inftruflioo,

Whe  was  the  caufc  of  Ariodantes  fall;

And  having  made  fome  little  introdudion,

Hcfaid  it  was  unchaft  Gciieurtff  crime.

That  made  him  kill  himfelfe  befote  his  time.

What


Ovid:Titfe-
lira,  tone
virapiifi-
nut  at  ptilf
rapUuxii


37


OF  ORL'ANDO  FVRIOSO,


6+

What  fiiould  I ftcke  to  hide  his  good  intent  ?

Hislove  was  fuch  as  greater  none  could  be.

He  hop’d  to  have  your  highnefle  free  alTcnr,
AVheo  you  his  value  and  his  worth  (hould  fee :

But  while  a plaine  and  honed  way  he  went.
Behold  be  faw  another  climb  the  tree.

And  in  the  midd  of  all  his  hope  and  (ute.

Another  tooke  the  pleafure  and  the  frute.

6i

He  further  faid,not  that  he  had  furmifed.

But  that  hiseicshad  fecncGrneHid  dand.

And  at  a window  as  they  had  devifed.

Let  down  a ladder  to  her  loverrhand.

But  in  fuch  fort  he  had  himfelfcdifguifcd,

That  who  it  was  hccould  not  undetdand.

And  for  due  pcoofcofthishisaccufation.

He  bids  the  combat  draight  by  proclamation.

66

How  fore  the  King  was  griev’d  to  heare  thcfcncwcsj
I leaveit  as  a thing  not  hard  toguefle,

Lurcanio  plaine  his  daughter  doth  accufo.

Of  w horn  the  King  did  looke  for  nothing  lelle :
And  this  the  more  his  feare  and  care  renewes.

That  on  this  point  the  lawes  arefo  expredc^

Except  by  combat  it  beprov’d  a lie.

Needs  mud  Geneuta  be  condemn’d  to  die..

67

How  hard  the  Scottifh  law  is  in  this  cafo,

I do  not  doubt  but  you  have  heard  it  told,  '

How  die  that  doth  another  man  embrace^
Bendeher  husband,  be  Hie  yong  or  old.

Mud  die.  except  within  two  fortnights  TpaceJ
She  find  a champion  dout  that  will  uphold.

That  unto  her  no  punifoment  is  due.

But  he  that  doth  accufc  her  is  untrue.

6%

TheKing  (oferime  thatthinkes(7cn«rr«cleare)

M akes  offer  her  to  wed  to  any  Knight,

That  will  in  atmes defend  his  daughter  deare.

And  prove  her  innocent  in  open  fight.

Yet  for  ail  thisnoebampiondoth  appeare,

Such  feare  they  have  of  this  Lurcanm  might.

One  gazeth  onanothcr  as  they  dand.

But  none  of  them  the  combat  takes  in  hand.

69

And  further  by  ill  fortune  and  mifchance.

Her  brother  Zerbin  now  is  abfent  thence.

And  gonetoSpainc  (I  thinke)  or  clfc  toFrance,
Who  were  be  here,  flic  could  not  want  defence.

Or  if  pethap  fo  lucky  were  her  chance,

Tofond  him  noticcof  her  need  from  hence.

Had  Ihc  the  prefence  of  her  noble  brother.

She  diould  not  need  the  aide  of  any  other.

70

The  King  that  mcancs  to  make  a certainc  trial!.

If  faire  Geneura  guilty  be  or  no,

(For  dill  foe  difHy  flood  in  the  dcniall.

Of  this  that  wrought  her  undeferved  wo^
Examincsall  her  maids,  but  they  reply  all,

Thar  of  the  matter  nothing  they  did  know.

Which  made  me  feck  for  ro  prevent  the  danger,

The  Duke  awd  I might  have  about  the  ftrangcr.


71

And  thus  for  him  more  then  my  fclfe afraid,

(So  faithfull  loveto  this  falfe Dukcl  bare)

1 gave  him  notice  of  thefe  things,  and  faid.

That  be  had  need  for  both  of  us  beware.

He  prais’d  my  co.nftantlove,  and  farther  praid.
That  I would  credit  him,  and  take  no  care.

He  points  two  men  (but  both  to  ire  unknowne)
To  bring  me  to  a cattle  ofhisowne.

72

Now  fir,  I thinke  ycu  find  by  this  effect,

How  foundly  1 did  love  him  from  my  heart Ji
.And  how  I prov’d  by  plainccouricanddireft.

My  meaning  was  not  any  wayes  toflart ;

Now  markc  if  he  to  me  bare  like  refpedt,

.And  markc  if  he  requited  my  defarr,

Alas  how  fliall  a filly  wench  attaine,

By  loving  trucly  to  be  lov’d  agains.

This  wicked  Duke  ungratefull  and  perjured,
Bcginneth  now  of  me  to  havemitlruft,

His  guilty  confcience  could  not  be  allured.

How  to  conceale  his  wicked  a£ts  unjufl.

Except  my  death  (though  cauflefle)bc  procured.
So  hard  his  heart,  folawlcffe  washisluft .

He  laid  he  would  me  to  his  caflie  fend,

But  that  fame  caflie  Ihould  have  beene  mine  end.
74

He  wild  my  guides  when  they  were  paft  that  hill.
And  to  the  thicket  a little  way  dcfccndcd.

That  there  (to  quite  my  love)  they  foould  me  kill.
Which  as  you  faw,  they  to  have  done  intended.
Had  not  your  happy  commingftopt  their  will.
That  (God  and  you  be  thankt)  I was  defended.
This  talc  T>dhida  to  Renaldo  told.

And  all  the  while  theirjourney  on  they  hold.

7s

This  ftrangc  adventure  luckily  befell

To  good  Renaldo,  for  that  now  he  found,

By  xhAsDalinda  that  tbistale  did  cell,

Gencuras  mind  unlpotted  cleare  and  found,

And  now  his  courage  was  confirmed  well,

That  wanted  erfla  trucand certainc ground:

For  though  before  for  her  he  meant  to  fighr.

Yet  rather  now  for  to  defend  tlic  riaht.

O

76

TogreatS  Andrewestowne  hemakethhafl.
Whereas  the  King  wa.s  fot  with  .ill  his  traif-c,

Mofl  careful!  waiting  for  the  trumpetsblaft.

That  muft  pronounce  his  daughters  joy  orpaine.
But  now  Renaldo {ymted  had  fo  fafl.

He  wasarriv’d  within  a niilcortwaine.

And  throfigb  the  Village  as  he  then  was  riding,
Hemet  a page  that  brought  them  frefiicr  tiding.

77

How  there  was  come  a Warriour  all  dilguilcd.

That  meant  to  prove  Lurcanio  faid  untreu,
Hiscolours  and  his  armour  well  devifed,

In  maner  and  in  making  very  n<-w  .*

And  though  thatfundry  fivndrily  furmifed,

Yet  whoit  was  for  certaine  no  man  knciv.

His  page  demaunded  of  his  mafters  name,

Did  fweare  he  never  heard  it  fince  he  came.

Da


' ^ )iiji  ejwtr-
rtU  u a great
eticcuragt-

mentinjigJiu


1


78


3*


THE  FIFT  BOOKE


7«

Now  came  Rerulio  to  the  City  wall.

And  at  the  gate  butJittlc  time  he  llaid.

The  porter  was  fo  ready  at  his  call :

“Bieaufetf  But  poorcZ);i/i/j(ij.now  grew  fore  afraid,
tht  Uw  that  HcnaUo  bids  her  not  to  tcarc  at  all,

'thvom  For  why  he  would  her  pardon  beg  he  faid  j
So  thrufting  in  among  the  thickeft  rout,

He  faw  them  Hand  on  fcaHblds  all  about.

It  Hraight  was  told  him  by  the  Handers  by.

How  there  was  thither  come  a flrangcr  Knight,
That  meant  Ocncuras  innocence  to  try,

And  that  a'teady  was  begun  the  fight :

And  hoW  the  grcenc  that  next  the  wall  did  ly.

Was  rail’d  about  of  purpofc  for  the  fight.

This  newesdid  make  Ac«,7/;/ohaHenin,

And  leave  behind  2)alinda  at  her  Innc.

80

He  told  her  he-would  come  again  ere  long,

And  fpurs  his  horfe  that  made  an  open  lane,
Hepierced  inthe  thickcH  preafleamong,

Whereas  thefc  valiant  Knights  had  giv'n  andtane.
Full  many  Hrokes,  with  Hurdy  hand  and  Hrong,
Lurcanio  thinks  to  bring  Geneuras  banc,

The  other  meancs  the  Lady  to  defend,
Whoxnfthough  unknown)thcy  favor  and  commend.

81  '

There  was  Duke  Potyncjfb  bravely  mounted,

Vpon  a ceurfer  of  an  cxc'Ient  race,

’ Sixe  Knights  among  the  better  fort  accounted,

On  foot  in  atmes  do  marfliall  well  the  place.

The  Duke  by  office  all  the  rcH  furmounted.

High  Conflablc  fas  alwaics  in  fuch  eafe)

Who  of  Gencuroi  danger  was  as  glad,

A sail  the  reft  were  forrow  full  and  fad.

82

Now  had  Renaldo  made  an  open  way,

And  was  arivcd  there  in  lucky  howte.

To  caufc  the  combat  to  furceafe  and  Hay,

Which  thefe  two  knights  applid  with  al  their  pewre.
RenalJo  in  ihcCciirt  appear’d  that  day.

Of  noble  Chivaliy  thevery  flowrc.

For  firft  the  Piinccsaiidiencc  hepraid,

Then  with  great  expeftation  thus  he  faid.

83

Send  (noble  Prince)  quoth  he, fend  by  and  by.

And  caufc  forthwith  t hat  they  fiiiccafe  the  fight.
For  know,  that  which  Co  ere  of  thefe  doth  dy,

It  ccrtainc  is  he  dies  againft  all  righr.

One  thinks  he  tcls  tlictruthand  tcisa  ly,

And  is  deceiv’d  by  error  in  his  fight,

And  looke  what  caufc  his  brotllcrs  death  procured,
T hat  very  fame  hath  him  to  fight  allured.

84

Thetotherofa  nature  good  and  kind,

Nor  knowing  if  be  hold  the  right  or  no.

Tody  or  to  defend  her  hath  affign’d.

Left  fo  rare  beauty  fliould  be  fpilled  fo.

I harmelcfle  hope  to  favc  the  faultlcHc  mind:

And  thofethat  mifehiefemind  to  workc  them  w®,
Bur  firft  6 Prince  toftay  the  fight  give  ordci,

Before  my  fpccch  procccdcih  any  fardcr.


85

Rcnaldos  pertbn  with  the  talc  he  hold,  >

Mov’d  fo  the  King,  that  ftraight  without  delay.
The  Knights  were  bidden  both  their  hands  to  hold.
The  combat  for  a time  was  caus’d  to  Hay,

Then  he  againc  with  voice  and  courage  bold,
Thcfccrctofthe  matter  doth  bewray  j
Declaring  plainc  how  Polynejfos  luH
Was  firH  contriver  of  this  deed  unjuH.

85

And  proffrethofthisfpcech  tomakc  a proofe,

By  combat  hand  to  hand  with  fword  aftdfpeare  :
The  Duke  was  cafd  that  Hood  not  "far  alOoic,

And  fcantlyablctoconccalchisfeare  ;

He  firfl^cnics,  as  was  for  his  bchoofe,

And  Hraight  to  battcll  both  agreed  were,

They  both  were  arm’d,  the  pi  ace  be  fore  was  ready  J
Now  muH  they  fight  there  could  be  no  remedy.

*7

How  was  the  King,  how  were  the  people  glad.

That  faire  GeneurA  faultlcHc  there  did  Hand,

As  Gods  great  goodnefle  now  revealed  had.

And  fliould  be  proved  by  Renaldos  hand.

All  thought  the  Duke  of  mind  and  maners  bad,

The  proud’fl  and  crucl’fl  man  in  all  the  land,

It  likely  was  as  every  one  furmifcd,

That  this  deceit  by  him  fliould  be  devifed.

88

Now  Hands  with  doubtfull  breft,

With  fainting  heart, with  paledifmaied  faoej
Their  trumpets  blew,  they  fet  their  fpcarcs  in  reft,  v
Renaldo commeth  on  a mighty  pace,

For  at  this  fight  he  finifli  will  the  feaft.

And  where  to  Hrike  him  hcdefigncsaplacC  ;

His  very  firft  encounter  was  (b  fierce,

Rc/uUos  Ipcarc  the  tothers  fidcs  did  pierce.

83

And  having  overthrow ne  the  Duke  by  force.

As  one  unable  fo  great  Hrokes  to  bide.

And  caft  him  cleanc  fixe  paces  from  his  horfe,
Himfclfe  alights  and  th’othcrs  helmc  untide,

Who  making  no  refiftance  like  a corfe,

With  faint  lowvoicc  for  mercy  now  he  cride.

And  plaincconfcft  with  this  his  later  breath,

The  fault  that  brought  him  this  deferved  death.

90

No  fooner  had  he  made  this  laH  confeffion.

But  that  bislifedid  faile  him  with  his  voyce.
GcMeurrJidoublcfcapcoffouleopprcffion,

In  life  and  faoie  did  make  the  King  rejoycei
In  lieu  of  her  to  Iccfc  his  crowncspofl'effion,

He  would  have  wiflit,  iffuch  had  beenc  his  choyce  j
T o Icefe  htsrcalme  he  could  have  becnc  no  fadder :
To  get  it  loH  he  could  have  becnc  no  gladder.

9i

Thccombatdonc,  Renaldo  hraight  untide
His  beaver,  when  the  Kingtbat  knew  hisfacc,

Gave  thankes  toGod  that  did  fb  well  provide,

So  doubtlefTc  hclpc  in  fuch  a dangerous  cafe.

That  unknownc  Knight  flood  all  this  while  aCde,
And  faw  the  matters  pafTcd  in  the  place.

And  cv’ry  one  did  muft  and  marveU  much.

What  wight  it  was  whofe  cnrtcfic  w#s  fuch.


The


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


39


9*


The  Knight  with  much  intrcaticdid  aflent,
And  to  ddarmc  himfelfc  he  (traight  prepat’d.
But  who  It  was  if  you  voiichfafc  to  lookc,

1 will  declare  it  in  another  bookc.


The  King  did  askc  his  name  becaufe  he  ment,

With  kingly  gifts  his  fervicc  to  reward^

AfHrming  plainly  that  his  good  intent,  ^

Deferved  thanks  and  very  great  regard.

The  very  beginning  of  this  bool^e  being  as  tt  were  a morall  of  it felfe  .were  JUfficietfoT  the  point  it  treats  ofwithout  any  Morall.
more  Jpeech  to  that  purpofe:  but  becaufe  the  rnatter  is  fuch  as  cannot  be  too  much  Jpof^en  of  .namely  t o per f wade  men  to
concord  in  matrimony,  I mufi  needs  add  a word  or  two  thereof,  uindfrfl  for  mine  opinion,  I profefft  that  1 1 hinti  it  a
venue  for  a man  to  be  l^indto  his  wife, and  / am  of  the  Cefor  Cato  hu  mind,  who  being  a marvellous  aufi  ere  man  other -
wife, yet  pronounced  flaily  that  a man  could  not  b:  an  honefl  man,  that  was  not  to  his  wife  a l^ind  man.  And  / wtUgoe
us  much  farther,  thatyou  fhall  hardly  finda  difereet  loving  husband,  1 mean  (without  diffmulation  or  flattery  )but  is


thus


withal  avertuousgoodmindedman,be  they  ofwhat  calling  they  lift : wherjore  / honor  matrimoniall  love  in  myfitpert-
ors,l  love  it  in  rrty  equals,/ praife  it  in  my  inferiors,/ commend  it  in  all.and  to  all  ofwhat  fort  or  fix  foever,i/y  / wtfh
them  but  to  call  to  mind  his  comparifon  before  fet  down  in  verfe,and  to  this  effcH  in  profe,that  if  the  male  and  female  in
bea/ls  an  I joule, for  the  mofl  part, live  in  concordand  agreement, what  a joule  andworfe  thenbcaflly  thing  is  it, for  man
andwij'c  to  be  ever  bralling  and  fnarling,  (for  as  for  fnitingj  / count  it  more  then  monfrotis.and  let  all  forts  embrace
this  honejl  love,  not  only  commended  but  commanded  by  God,  in  holy  Scriptures,  where  they  are  called  hot h one  fejh,to
g’ve  us  iherhy  to  underfland,that  as  we  would  not  willingly  brealiour  own  fhtns.nor  let  our  finger  ah^  if  we  could  remedy
the  fame, and  if  we  fee  oneflrih^e  himfelje,or  fnocl^  his  head  to  the  wall,  we  thinl^him  Bedlam  mad.So  he  that  fhall  wil-
lingly grieve  the  wife  of  his  bofome,or  wicf^edly  hurt  her,  we  may  thinfe  him  far  from  a fober, and  farther  from  an  honefi
nun.  Andeven  as  if  one  have  an  ach  oranygriefe  inhis  toe  or  finger,  jiraight  he  doth  Lap  that  part  inwarme  cloth, and
eafeth  it  all  he  can, and  cherifheth  it  more  then  before  till  it  he  found  again; fo  if  any  thing  either  ill  don,or  lU  tal^cnf per-
haps though  not  ill  ment,)  have  bred  a title  powting  or  lowiing  tcrwardunfindneffe,  we  mufi  lap  up  the  part  thus  grie-
ved in  warme  imbracements,  and  keale  it  with  fweet  words.  And  if  it  be  but  agreene  wound,  annoint  it  wit  h the  pre-
cious ktlfamum  (which  all  good  ftrgeons  l^ncrw  to  be  a foveraigne  medicine  for Juchgriefes)  andfoweejhallfoundly
cure  it  without  any  maime  01' fcai  re,  but  we  rnuft  never  come  to  the  extremities  of  cutting  or  fearing,  except  the  dif
eafe  grow  toa  Ginpena  or  fume  canhyedmalice  unpoffible  tohe  cured.

Another  goodmor  all  oh fervatio  to  be  gathered  in  this  canto, is  the  choije  of  Geneuti, who  being  a great  Lady  by  birth
yet  chofc  rather  agallantfairc-conditionedgentleman  then  a great  T)til^e.For  fir  ft  it  is  no  difparagemet  for  thegreateft
Empreffe  in  the  world  to  marie  one  that  is  a gentleman  by  birth, according  to  the  old  proverb,  A gentleman  may  make
a king  Sc  a dark  may  prove  a 9ope.Secondly,ifwe  marfigenerafy  the  fiiccejfe  of  all  mariages  ,we  may  find  the  frying
^Themiftocles  true.  Better  is  a man  without  mony,  then  mony  without  a |^an,  T oo  many  and  too  too pitifuU  are
the  examples  that  we  have  heard  of,  / will  not  fay  feene,  if  thofe  Ladies  that  to  match  them  fives  or  their  daughters
one  ft  ep  higher,  luiy  but  even  the  higher  end  of  the  fame  ftep  higher  then  they  might  otherwife  have  done,  have  with
that  ambition  undon  them,  making  them  live  with  great  di front  ent, or  to  fuy  the  truth, flat  mifrry.with  their  proud  and
unlfind  Lord.Andyet  cannot  fitch  evident  and  neare  examples  move  fame  both  faire,  and  mode  ft , and  venuous,  to  feepe
them  out  of fitch  gildcdgives.Beleeve  it  Lady, to  whomfoever  /fpeat^  it, that  a happy  woman  is  feene  in  a white  apron  as
often  as  in  .an  embrodred  Ifirtle,  and  hath  as  quiet  fJeeps  and  as  contented  walkings  tn  a bed  of  doth  as  under  a fparver  of
ttffue.Bozcidofpcalftng  of  the  coyneffeoj  fame  grave  widowes, as  well  as  nice  tLimfrls , frith  as  / remember  in  the  laby-
rinth of  lovers  to  this  effeli.Be  a man  (faith  hejnever  fo  difeafed,  dejormed,  decrepit  ,uKwholfome , unfavory  yet  if  he
have  bene  either  j'ogood  aftorerfor  mony, that  he  may  leave  his  wi  e wealtlystr  be  fr great  in  titles  though  a beggar  in
living, that  fhe  may  tal^c  her  place  the  higher,  they  will  ( faith  he ) be  contented  to  lay  their  fo  delicate  and  daintily  pre-
fcTvcd  morfds,infii- h lothfome  difhes  to  be  daily  fm.acl{t  .and Jlavered, binding  themfelves  to  fuffer  fitch  a penance  God
linowes  how  long,  only  to  frtisfie  thofe  humors  of  covet  ou fine Jfe  and  pride,  ft  arving  to  their  grifre,  the  third  humour  (if
they  be  fo  vertuoas)  that  is  by  fame  thought  the  predominant  humour  in  that  fix,  and  many  times  dwels  under  the  fame
roofe  with  the  other  two.Tet  fiirely  / couldrather  commendhis  cairte fan  that  hewrites  oj  in  his  Decameron, »ho  having
barganied  with  a "Dutchman,  one  M BrufTaIdo,for  feven  daies  board  and  lodging  at  a great  rate,kaving  found  him
jor  one  or  two  nights  to  be  hut  an  unfavory  bedjellow,jhc  chofe  rather  to  leefe  thofe  two  nights  hire,  then  to  endure  five
more  at  fo  painfull  a price.  But  / doubt  /grow  too  tedious  while  / fhoot  out  fuch  bolts  out  of  a Boccas.  Mow  to  go  for-
ward in  the  moral/.  Tou  may  note  in  t’olyndTo  an  envious  and  trechcrous  mind;  in  Ariodant  the  hurt  of  a credulous  je-
loufie;  in  t.uscinio  the  vehemencie  of  awrong  furmife.  //rPoIynclTos  intent  to  liUl  Da.\in6a, you  may  obfrrvc  how
wicked  men  often  bewray  their  owne  mifleeds  with  feclfng  to  hUe  them.  JnGeneutzsaccufition  and  delivery,  how
God  euer  defettds  the  innocent.  And  lafft'y  in  Polyncfl'os  death,  how  wicfedneffe  ruincs  it  fife.

For  the  Hiftory  of  this  bool^e,either  the  whole  is  a hiftory,  or  there  is  no  matter  hiftoruall  tn  it  to  be  flood  on.  Storic.

A llegory  there  is  none  in  this  boo!{e  at  all.  ^ llesorv

AUufion  there  is  in  this  tale  of  Geneura,K/ifo  a ftory  written  in  Alciats  duello, o/»r  m.'itron  in  France  accufd  in  fuch  Allullon
fart, by  two  men, and  a certaine  fouldier  oj  Barcellona  came  with  a i ompanion  oj  his, and  toofe  upon  them  the  defence  of
the  woman,  and  being  fighting,  the  companion  of  the  fruldier fed  ; notwithftanding  he  of  Barcellona  with  his  courage
andvertuegat  theviiioryof  the  other  two,  and  fo  in  ftrange  attire  went  home  to  his  countrey  unl^nowne,  to  which
Ariodant  feems  to  allude.  Some  others  affirme,  that  this  very  matter,  though  fet  downe  here  by  other  names  .happened
in  Ferrara  to  a Ifinfewoman  of  the  Dulses,  which  is  here  figured  under  the  name  of  G eneuta,  and  that  indeed  fitch  «
praliife  was  ufedagainft  her  by  agreat  Lord,  and  difeovered  by  a darnfeU  as  is  here  ft  downe.  Howfoever  it  was, fire
the  tale  is  a prettie  comicalt  matter,  and  hath  beene  written  in  Englijh  verfr  frmefewyeares  paft  ( learnedly  and  with
goodgrace)though  inverf  of  another  l(ind,by  M George  Turberuil.

The  roc\efrom  which  Ariodant  leapt  into  the  fa,Alludeth  to  the  roefe  o/’Lewcade,  where  men  that  were  madfor
love  leapt  into  the  water, and  wafhed  away  (as  they  thought)  th.it  fancie.  Strabo  caUeth  it  faltus  amatorius.


Z),


4'


THE  SIXT  BOOKE


Lutreti'U  a
Poet  faith  ta
tbu  tffed.
Siuifft  vbi
ft  multi  per
famnta  [apt
loqutmet
froditnt,&e.


Gcncura  faire  to  t^rhdant  isgivsn^

K^nd  he  a Duke  is  made  that  verie  day*

Rogcro  rvith  the  Griffeth  boric  is  drivett^

Vnto  Alcynas  lle^md  there  doth  ftaj,
mtrtle  in  the  middle flrangly  riven ^

Alcinas  frauds  doth  unto  himhcwray:

of  which  en form’d  he  thence  would  have  departed^

But  by  the  way  he  finds  hts  pttrpofe  thwarted.


; Oft  wretched  he, that  thinks
by  doing  ill,

^iHiscvill  dccdeslong  to
] conccale  and  hide,

‘ For  though  the  voice  and
tonguesof  men  beftill,

► Byfoulesorbeafts  his  fin
fiiall  bedeferide:

jAndGodoftworkethby

his  fecret  will.

That  finneitfcifethcfinner  fo  doth  guide,

That  of  hisowne  accord, without  requeft.

He  makes  his  wicked  doings  manifeft.

i

The  gracelcfic  wiohr,Duke  Polhieyfo  thought.

His  former  fault  ftiould  furc  have  bin  concealed.

If  that  T)alinda.  unto  death  were  brought,

By  whom  alone  the  fame  could  be  revealed.

Thus  making  wotfe  the  thing  before  was  nought.
He  hurt  the  wound  which  time  perhaps  had  healed.
And  w'eening  with  morefinne  the Icfte  to  mend.

He  haftnedon  his  well  deferved  end.

And  left  at  once  hislifc,hisflatc,and  frends.

And  honour  too,a  loftcas  greator  more.

Now  (as  I raid)  thatunknowneKnigffi'cntcnds,

Sith  everic  one  to  know  him  fought  fo  fore.

And  fith  the  King  did  promife  large  amends.

To  fiicw  his  face  which  they  faw  oft  before,

And  jdmdanfmoU  lovely  did  appearc.

Whom  they  thought  dead  as  you  before  did  heare.

4

He  whom  GetjfHrd  wofully  did  waile.

He  whom  L’lrcanio  deemed  to  be  dead.


He  whom  the  King  and  court  did  ft)  bewaile,

He  that  to  all  the  rcalmefuch  care  had  bred^

Doth  live.-  the  clownes  report  in  this  did  fade.

On  which  falff  ground  the  rumour  falic  was  fpred.
And  yet  in  this  the  peafant  did  not  mockc.

He  la  w him  Icapc  downc  headlong  from  the  r ock.

But  as  we  fee  men  oft  with  rafit  intent
Aredefperate  and  do  tcfolve  todie.

And  ftraight  do  change  that  fancieand  repent.
When  unto  death  they  do  approch  more  me.-
So  Ariodant  todrownchimfeife  that  ment,

Now  plung’d  in  lea  repented  hyand  by.

And  being  of  his  limbes  able  and  ftrong,

Vmo  the  lliorchc fwam  againe  erelong.

6

And  much  dilpraifing  in  his  inward  thought,
Thisfond  conceitthat  latehis  mindepofleft,
Atlafta  blind  .*ind  narrow  path  him  broughti
All  tyi’d  and  wet  to  be  an  hermits  giieft:

With  whom  to  ftay  in  fecret  lort  he  Ibuglif ,

Both  that  he  might  his  former  griefedigeft,

And  leaine  the  truth, if  this  fame  clowncs  report.
Were  by  Geneura  tanc  in  griefc  or  fpert.

7

There  firft  he  heard  how  flic  conceiv'd  fuch  griefc,
Asalmoft  brought  herlife  to  wofullcnd,

He  found  of  her  they  had  fogood  bcleefe.

They  thought  Ihc  would  not  in  fitch  fort  olFcnd;
Hcfurtlicr  heard  except  fiice  hadrelecfe.

By  one  that  would  her  innocence  defend.

It  was  great  doubt  Lurcanios  accuftifion.

Would  bring  her  to  a Ipeedie  condemnation,


D 4


And


Sentevet,


42


THE  SJXT  BOOKE


t

And  lookc  how  love  before  his  heart  enraged.

So  now  did  wrath  enflame.and  though  hekiftw  wel
To  wreake  his  harmc,his  brothers  life  was  gaged.

He  nathles  thought  hisaafofouleand  crucll.

That  this  his  anger  could  not  be  afTwaged,

Vnto  bis  flame  love  found  fuch  ftore  offewel;

And  this  the  more  incrcafl  his  wrath  begun,

To  hearc  how  every  one  the  fight  did  fiiun.

9

For  why  Lurcanio .vfiifo  flout  and  wife,

Except  It  wcie  fortodefend  the  truth,

M en  thoucht  he  would  not  fb  the  King  deipiie,

A nd  hazai^d  life  to  bring  Gencuras  ruth.

Which  caufld  cverie  one  his  friend  advifi:.

To  fiiunnc  the  fight  that  muft  maintaine  untruth*
But  Ario.lant  after  long  difputation,

Mcancs  to  withfland  his  brothers  accufation.

10

Alas(qeo:h  he)  I never  fliall  abide,

Herjthrough  my  caufe.todie  in  wo  and  paine.

For  danger  or  for  death  what  may  betide.

Be  file  once  dead  my  life  cannot  remaine.

She  IS  mv  faint,! n her  my  bliflcdoth  bide,

Her  golden  rayes  my  eies  light  ftill  maintaine,

Fall  backe, fall  edge, and  be  it  w rong  or  right,

In  her  defence  1 am  refolv ’d  to  fight.

1 1

I take  the  wrong.but  yet  ilc  take  the  wrong.

And  die  1 fliall,yet  if  I die  1 care  not.

But  then  alas,by  law  flie  dies  ere  long,

0 crucll  lawes  Co  fwcetc  a wight  that  fparc  not:

Yet  this  fmall  joy  1 findc  thefe  griefes  among.

That  Polinejfo  to  defend  h cr  dare  not,

A nd  flic  fliall  finde  how  little  flic  waslovcd.

Of  him  that  to  defend  her  never  moved.

12

And  flie  fliallfccmc  dead  there  for  her  fake.

To  whom  fo  great  a damage  flic  hath  done:

A nd  of  my  brother  juft  revengement  take

1 flialljby whom thisftrifc was firft  begun,

For  there  at  Icafl  my  death  plainc  proofc  fliall  make
That  he  this  while  a fooltfli  thred  hathfpun.

He  thinketh  to  avenge  his  brothers  ill,

The  while  himfclfc  his  brother  there  fliall  kill.

13

And  thus  rcfolvM,  he  gets  him  armour  new.

New  herfe  and  all  things  new  that  need  full  beeae
All  clad  in  blacke,  a fad  and  mctirnfull  hew,

And  croft  with  wreath  ofycllowand  of  grccne,

A ftrangcr  bare  his  fliccld  that  neither  knew
His  maflersname  nor  him  before  had  fccnc.

And  tliusat  I before rchcarfl,difguifcd
He  met  his  brother  as  he  had  devifed.

U

I told  you  what  fuccefle  the  matter  had.

How  Ariodant  himfclfcdid  thcndiicover,
Forwhom  the  King  himfclfc  waseven  as  glad,

As  late  before  his  daughter  to  recover,

And  fince  he  thought  in  joyfull  times  and  fad.

No  man  could  fliew  himfclfc  a truer  lover
Then  he  that  after  fo  great  wrong,  intended
Againfl  his  brother  her  to  have  defcodad.


• 5 ,

Both  loving  him  by  his  ownc  inclination.

And  prai'd  thereto  by  many  a Lord  and  Knight,
And  chiefly  by  Aend/dorinftigation,

He  gave  to  Ariodant  Geneura  bright.

Now  by  the  Dukes  attcint  and  condemnation,
Albania  oivaexo  be  the  Kings  in  right.

Which  dutchie  failing  in  fo  luckic  boure*

Was  given  unto  the  damfcll  for  her  dowre.


Rcnaldo  for  T>alindas  pardon  praidc.

Who  for  her  error  did  fo  fore  repent.

That  fliaieht  flic  vowd.with  honefl  miU'^  and  ftaid,  ^*^"*^*
Toiivc  her  li/c  in  prayer  and  penitence;  - ‘

Away  flie  packt.nor further  time  dclaid.

In  Datia,  to  a nunric  there  flic  went.

But  to  Rogero  now  I muft  repaire.

That  all  this  while  did  gallop  in  the  airc.


Ht  raumti
iDRtHaUo.t,

R<g<r».


•7

Who  though  he  were  of  mind  and  courage  flout.

And  would  not  cafily  fcarcor  be  difmaid.

Yet  doubt Icflc  now  his  mind  was  full  ofdoubr.

His  hart  was  now  appai’d,  and  fore  afraid.

Farrc  from  EuropaMc  had  travail’d  out.

And  yet  his  flying  horfc could  not  be  ftaid.

But  paft  the  pillars  xij.fcorc  leagues  and  more,
Pitcht  there  by  Hades  many  ycarcs  before.

18

This  G riffeth  hor[e  a bird  moft  huge  and  rare.

Doth  pierce  the  skic  with  fo  great  forccof  wing.
That  with  that  noble  bird  he  may  compare.

Whom  Poets  fainc./o'uer  lightning  downe  to  bring
To  whomall  other  birds  inferior  are,

Bccaufe  they  take  the  Eagle  for  their  king.

Scarfe  feemeth  from  the  clouds  to  go  fo  fvriff.

The  thunderbolt  feat  by  the  lightnings  drift.

19

When  long  this  monftcr  ftrangc  had  kept  his  rase.
Straight  as  a line  bending  to  neither  fide,

Hefpidc  an  lland  diftant  little  fpace.

To  which  he  bends  in  purpofe  there  to  bide.

Much  like  in  fcmblance  was  it  to  the  pWcc,

Where  Arethufa  us’d  her  fcife  to  hide,

And  feckes  fo  long  her  love  to  have  beguil’d.

Till  at  the  laft  flic  found  het  fclfc  with  child.

20

A fairer  place  they  faw  not  all  the  while,

That  they  had  travail’d  in  the  airc  aloft.

In  all  the  world  was  not  a fairer  ilc,

if  all  the  world  to  fi  ndc  the  fame  were  fought;

Here  having  travail’d  many  a hundred  mile,

Rogero  by  his  bird  to  reft  was  brought.

In  pallurcs  greenc,and  hils  with  coole  frefh  aire,
Clccrc  rivers, (hadic  banks,  and  meddowes  faite.
c

Hccre  divers  groves  there  were, of  dainty  fliado.

Of  Palme, or  Orenge  trees, of  Cedars  tall.

Of  fundric  fiuitcs  and  flowers  that  never  fade,

The  (hew  was  fairc,the  plenty  was  not  fmall*

A nd  arbours  in  t he  thtekeft  places  made.

Where  little  light  and  heat  came  not  at  all;

Where  Nightingalct  did  ftraine  thei'r  little  throtec,
Recording  ftill  tneir  fwcetc  and  plcafant  notes.

Amid


TbtE^glt
called  Imu
alet.


^reehafi,
Mitin  tht
taiitt


Simile  la^tH
cm  of  Data,


OF  ORL'ANDO  FVRIOSO.


43


21


29


Amid  the  lilly  white  and  fragrant  rofe,

Prtfcrv’d  Itill  frcfti  by  warmcand  tcrapratc  airc,
The  fcatefull  harcjand  conny'carclcflc  gocs^

The ftag  with  ftattly  head  and  body  faire.

Doth  feed  fccfiic,  not  fearing  any  foes.

That  to  his  damage  hither  may  repaire,
TheBuckcani  Doe  doth  feed  amid  the  fields*

As  in  great  fiorc  t he  plcafant  forrefl  yeclds.

Itnecdleflewastohid  light.

When  as  his  horfe  approched  nigh  the  ground.

He  cafthimfclfcout  of  his  faddlequitc.

And  oh  his  feet  he  fallcth  fafe  and  found.

And  holds  the  horfes  raincs,  left  clfc  he  might
ply  quite  away,  and  not  againc  be  found;

And  to  a mirtle  by  the  water  fide,

Betweene  two  other  trees  his  bcaft  he  tide.

24

^nd  finding  thereabout  a little  brooke.

That  necre  unto  a (Iiady  mountafneftands,

His  helmet  from  hifs  head  forthwith  he  tookc.

His  fhicld  from  armc,  his  gantlet  from  his  hands,
And  from  the  higher  places  he  doth  loOke,

Full  oft  to  Tea,  fullofttofruitfull  lands,
Andfcckcsthecooleand  pleafant  airc  to  take* '

That  doth  among  the  Icarcs  a muimiirc  make.

2j

Oft  with  the  water  of  that  cryftall  well,

Hcfcckcs  to  quench  his  thirft  and  fwage  hisheate,
With  which  his  vcincscnflam’d  did  rife  and  fwcll.
And  caus’d  his  other  parts  to  fry  infwcatc  ^

Well  may  i't  feeme  a marvell  that  I tell,

Yet  will  I once  againc  the  fame  repeate,

Hctravcl'd  had  above  three  thoufand  mile.

And  not  puf off  hisarmourall  the  while-.

26

Behold  his  herfe  he  lately  tycd  there*.

Among  the  boughs  in  fliady  place  to  bide,

Straveto  goloofc,  and  ftarted  backe  for  feare.

And  puls  t he  tree  to  which  t he  raincs  were  tide.

In  whichfasby  thcfequell  fliall  appearej
A humane  foulc  it  feffe  did  ftrahgely  hide.

Withall  liisftrcngrh  thefteed  ftrircsto  bcloofed,

By  force  whereof  the  mirtle  fore  was  broofed.

27

Andasan  armc  oftree  from  body  rent,

By  pcafant  ftrength  with  many  a fturdy  ftrokc.
When  in  the  fire  the  moifturc  all  is  fpem.

The  empty  places  fild  with  airc  and  fmokc,

Do  boileand  ftrive,and  find  at  laft  a vent,
Whenofthe  brand  a fiiiverout  is  broke,

So  did  the  tree  ftrivc.bcnd,  writh,  wring  and  breake.
Till  at  a little  hole  it  thus  did  fpcake.

2%

Right  curtcous  Knight  (for  fo  I may  you  deemc.

And  muftyou  call  not  knowing  other  namej
Iffo  you  areas  gracious  as  ycu  fcerric.

Then  let  your  friendly  deed  confirmc  the  fame,
Vnloofc  thismonfter,fent  asl  cftccme,

To  adde  fomc  farther  torment  to  my  fliame,

Alas  mine  inward  griefes  were  fitch  before.

By  outward  plagues  they  need  be  made  no  more.


Kogero  mazed  looked  round  about,
ffany  manor  woman  he  might  fee.

At  laft  he  was  rcfolvcd  of  hisdoubt.

He  found  the  voice  was  of  the  mirtle  tree,

. With  which  abafht,  though  he  were  wife  and  flout,  ,

He  faid,  I humbly  pray  thee  pardon  me,  _

W’licthcr  thou  be  fomc  humane  ghoft  or  fpright,

Or  power  divine  that  in  this  wood  haft  right.

3°

Not  wilfulncflc,  but  ignorance  did  breed
Thine  injury,  mine  error  in  this  cafe ;

And  made  me  do  this  iinadvifed  deed,

By  which  unwaresthy  leavcs/diddcfaec.”

But  let  tby  fpccch  fo  farre  forth  now  proceed.

To  tell  me  how  thou  art  that  in  thisplace,

Doft  dwell  in  tree  amid  the defert  field.

As  God  from  hailcand  tcmpclt  thee  mayfhicld.

31

And  if  that  I for  this  amends  may  make.

Or  now  ot  after, or  by  pains  or  art,

Ifwearctothec  by  her,  and  for  her  fake.

That  holds  of  me,  and  fliall  the  better  part.

That  1 fliall  not  furceafe  all  painesto  take,

Toiyorkc  thy  joy, or  toaflwage  thy  fmart.

This  faid,  he  faw  again  the  mirtle  fhake.

And  then  again  he  heard  that  thus  it  fpake;


Brjtdammi
TowhomRst
gtro  •

futer.


3»


Sir  Knight,  your  curttfie  doth  me  conftraintf.

To  flicw  to  you  the  thing  that  you  defier.

Although  I fwcat  (as  you  may  fee)  with  paine.

Like  greeneft  boughes  upon  the  flaming  fier,

I will  difeover  unto  you  her  trainc,

(Wo  worth  the  time  that  ever  I came  nic  her)

Thatdid  formaliceand  by  magicke ftrange,

My  lively  fliapc  tolivclcflc  branches  change,

, . 33

I was  an  Earlc,^y?<)/pf;o  wasmy  name,

Wcllknowne  in  Franccin  time  of  waitcand  peace,

Ortandos  cofen  and  Renalis,  whofc  fame
While  time  fliall  laft  in  earth  fliall  never  ccafc.

Of  Oton  King  of  Englifl}  lie  I came,

And  fliould  iucceed  him  after  hisdeceafe,

Both  comely,  y ong,  careleflc  of  worldly  pcife,

T o none  an  enemy  but  to  my  fclfc.

34  '

For  ps  we  turned  from  the  EJ^ern  lies,

Whofebanksare v/orne withfiirgeof  Indianwive,  hathri,

WhereT  and  many  more  with  witching  wiles,  feretut  mht
Were  ftraight  inclofcdin  a hollow  cave,  caUed

Vnrill  Orlando  did  avenge  the  guiles,  OrUnda  ItS'

And  found  by  force  a meancliis friends  to  fa ve,

We  Weftward  w’cnt  upon  the  fliorc  and  fand,

'That  licth  on  the  North  fide  of  the  land.

35

And  aswe  tra veil’d  homeward  on  our  way.

As  chancedid  leade or deftiny  usdrive,

It  wasour  fortune  once  on  brcaJee  of  day,  l

Hard  by  Aliynas CaMe  to  arrive.

Where  flie  alone,  to  fport  licr  fclfc  and  play,

Such  kind  of  gins  for  fiflies  did  contrive.

That  thoughwefaw  nonet,  no  bait,  no  hooke,!

Yet  ftill  we  faw  that  ftoreof  fifli  flic  tookc,

Th«


44


the  SIXT  BOOKE


36

The  Dolphin  ftrong,  thcTuqny  goodoftaft,

The  Mullet,  Sturgeon,  Samon  (princely  filli)

With  Porpofc, Scales,  andThornpoclescanac  asfall,
AsHicwas  pleafed  to  commaund  or  wifi;.

A nd  dill  (he  tooke  of  each  kind  as  they  pad.

Some  drange  for  diew,  fomc  dainty  for  the  difli,
Thehorfefilh  and  thel^ge  and  mondrous whales,
Whefe  mighty  members  harned  are  with  fcalcs.

?7

Among  the  red  that  were  too  long  to  count,

We  faw  the  fifh  that  men  Balcna  call.

Twelve  yards  above  the  water  did  amount
His  mighty  backe,  the  mondcr  is  fo  tall  ;

And  (foritdood  fo  ftillj  we  made  account.

It  had  becnc  land,  but  wercdcccived  all,

We  were  deceiv’d,  well  I may  row  the  while.

It  wasfo  huge  we  thought  it  was  an  lie,

I fay  this  potcat  witch  Alcym  tooke
All  forts  offidi  withoutor  netoraide.

But  only  reading  in  a little  booke.

Or  mumbling  words,  I know  not  what  Hie  faid.

But  feeing  mc,fo  well  die  lik’t  my  looke,

That  at  her  fport  but  little  tiinc  flic  daid>

But  fought  forthwith  to  trap  me  by  her  skill.

Which  draight  fell  out  according  to  her  will.

39

For  toward  me  with  pleafant  chcarc  flic  came,

In  modedmancrand  in  comely  fort.

And  did  withall  her  fpccch demurely  ftamci
And  praid  me  to  herlodgiog  to  refort.

Or  if  1 would  be  partner  ofher  game,

Sheoffred  me  to  fliew  me  all  the  fport.

And  all  the  kinds  of  fifli  in  fcas  that  were,
Somegrcatjfomcfnialljfomefmooth,  and  fbmc  with

40  (hatre.

And  if  you  lid  a Mermaid  fairetofec.

That  can  wi  th  fong  the  raging  dormes  appeafe,

A t yond  fame  little  bankc  you  may  (ouoth  flic)

To  which  we  two  will  fafely  pafle  witn  cafe :

( The  bankc  which  flic  pretends  to  fliew  to  me.

Was  that  fame  fifli  the  mondcr  of  the  fcas)

And  I that  too  much  loved  toadventer,

Vpon  the  fiflics  back  with  her  did  enter.

4t

Mycoufins2)M.Y(m  and  Rea.iUo  beckned

To  draw  me  thence,  I heard  not  what  they  faid,

But  of  their  fpccchand  fignes  llittlcrcckncd,

I had  not  wit  enough  to  Be  afraid ;

Butfoonctny  courage  was  appal’d  and  weakned,

1 draight  was  faine  in  vainc  to  cry  for  aid,

The  mondrciis  fifli  that  frem’d  to  me  an  lie,
Straightbarc  mefromthc  fliotcfullraany  a mile.

42

There  was  Hcnaldo  like  to  have  bcenedrownd,
Whofwam  tofavc  nicifpcrhaps he  might,
Butfbddainly  ofhimand  ofthe ground,

A mifly  cloud  did  takeaway  the  fight :

Alfynaand  I with  fcas  environ'd  round.

Did  travcll  on  that  mondcr  all  the  night.

And  then  with  gracious  fpccchcs  flic  began
T o give  me  ail  the  comfott  that  flic  can.


And  thus  at  lad  to  this  place  we  repaire.

Of  which  by  wrong  Aliyna  kcepcs  podciCoB,
Depoiing  forcibly  thetightfull  heire,

(Her elder  lawful!  fidcr)  by  oppreflion.*

The  other  two  more  vicious  then  fairc.

Are  badaids,  and  begotten  in  traDfgrcdion,

I heard  it  told,  and  have  it  not  forgotten.

She  And  Morgana  were  in  inced  gotten.

44

And  as  their  fird  beginning  was  of  finne.

So  is  their  life  ungodly  and  defamed.

Of  law  nor  judice  paffing  not  a pinne.

But  like  the  heifer  wanton  and  untamed,

By  warre  they  fecke  their (idersiight  to  wioae.
Their  elder  fiAex  LogifiiUa  named.

And  have  fo  farre  prevailed  with  their  powers.

They  have  of  hersabout  an  hundred  towers.

45

And  had  ere  this  time  taken  all  away.

Save  that  the  red  is  drongly  fenced  round.

For  of  one  fide  the  water  dops  the  way,

Onth’other  fide  the  vantage  of  the  ground.

Which  v/ith 3 mighty  bankc  doth  make  a day*
Much  like  the  Englifli  and  theScottifli  bound;

And  yet  the  badard  fidersdoe  their  bed.

And  labour  dill  to  fpoiie  her  of  the  red.

46

And  why,  becaufe  they  fee  her  good  and  holy.

They  hated  her  becaufe  thcmfclvcs  arc  vicious.

Bat  to  rcturne,  and  tell  you  of  my  folly,

T hat  turn’d  to  me  fo  hut tfiill  and  pernicious,

1 now  again  grew  fomwhat  bold  and  jolly,

I fee  no  caufc  to  fcarc  or  be  fufpiciout.

And  finding  flic  lov’d  me  by  fignes  mod  plaint,

1 wholly  bent  my  felfc  tolovc  againc.

47

When  I her  dainty  members  did  embrace,

I deemed  then  there  was  none  other  blifle,

Me  thought  all  other  plcafurcs  were  but  bafe,
Offriends  nor  kin  1 had  no  want  nor  rmfle,

I onely  wiflitto  dand  in  her  good  grace,

A nd  have  accede  her  corrall  1 i ps  to  kiffe,

I thought  my  felfc  the  happied  of  all  creatures.

T o have  a Lady  of  fo  goodly  features*

48

And  this  the  more  confirm’d  my  joyand  pride,

T hat  toward  me  flic  flicw’d  fuch  love  and  care.

By  night  and  daily  I was  by  her  fide.

To  do  or  fpeake  againd  me  no  man  dare,

1 was  her  day,  I W’as  her  Iioufcs  guide,

I did  cemmaund,  the  red  as  fubie£f  s arc :

She  truded  me,  alone  with  me  flic  talked.

With  me  within  flic  fat,  without  flic  walked.

a9

Alas,  why  do  I open  lay  my  fore.

Without  all  hope  of  medicine  or  releefc  ?

And  call  to  mind  the  ficklejoy  before.

Now  being  plung’d  in  gulfcsof  cndleflegricfe?

For  while  I thought  flic  lov’d  mcrrorc  and  more.
When  as  I deem’d  my  joy  and  blifle  was  ebiefe.

Her  wailing  lovcaway  from  me  was  taken,

A ccwgueft  camc,tbeold  wascleanefotfaken.

Then


lt$\e  M«f.
gMuin$b»

uiu.


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


50

Then  dic^  I find  full  foonc,thoiigh  too  too  late.

Her  wanton, wavcrirgjwily  womans  wit,
Accuftom’d  in  a trice  to  love  and  hate,

I niwanothcrinmy  fiatctofit:

Her  love  was  gone,  forgone  my  happic  (late,
Themarkeismift  that  1 was  wont  to  hit:

And  I had  perfeft  knowledge  then  ere  long.
That  to  a thoufand  Ihc  had  done  like  wrong.

51

And  lead  that  they  about  the  world  might  go.

And  make  her  wicked  life  and  falfhood  knownc,
In  divers  places  fhe  doth  them  beftow,
Soasabrodc  they  fiiall  not  make  their  mono.
Some  into  trees, amid  the  field  that  grow.

Some  into  bcads,ar!d  fomc  into  a done:

111  rockes  or  rivers  fliedoth  hidethe  red,

As  to  her  crucll  fancic  feeineth  bed.

>*

And  you  that  are  arriv’d  by  deps  fo  drange.

To  this  unfortunateand  fatall  lie,

Althougli  in  youtlifull  fports  a while  you  range,
And  though  Alcina  favour  you  a while,

( A It  liough  you  little  looke  for  any  cha  ngc,)
Although  die  friendly  feeme  on  you  to  fmile,

Yet  looke  no  ledc,but  chang’d  at  lad  to  be,

Into  fome  brutilh  bcad,fomc  done  or  tree.

Thus  though  perhap  my  labour  is  but  led.

Yet  hate  I giv’n  you  good  and  plainc  advife.

Who  can  themfclvesbcware  by  others  cod.

May  be  accounted  well  among  the  wife:

The  wavesthat  my  poorc niipfofotc  hath  tod.
You  may  avoid  by  heed  and  good  devife.

Which  if  you  do,then  your  fucccdc  is  fuch.

As  many  others  could  not  do  fo  much.

Jiogerodid  with  much  attention  hcare
AftoV'os  fpcech,and  by  his  name  he  knew
T o Bradamant  be  was  of  kindred  nearc.

Which  made  him  more  his  wofull  date  to  rewf
And  for  her  fake  thatlovcd  him  mod  dcarc.

To  whom  from  him  all  love  againe  was  dew.

He  fought  to  bring  him  aid  and  fomc  releefe.

At  lead  with  comfort  to  afTwage  his  gricfe.

55

Which  having  done,hcasked him  againe.

The  way  that  would  to  Logidilla  guide.

For  were  it  bythehils,  by  dale  or  plaine,

He  thither  mcantforthwith  to  runne  or  ride.
>4y?of/banfwci*d  it  would  askc  much  painc.

And  many  a weary  jouracy  he  fliould  bide,
Becaufe  to  dop  this  way  Alcina  fets
A thoufand  kindsof  hindrances  and  lets.

56

For  as  the  way  it  fclfc  is  very  deepe,

Not  padable  without  great  toilc  and  painc.

So  fhe  that  in  her  mifehiefe  doth  not  fleepc.

Doth  make  the  matter  harder  to  attaine.

By  placing  men  of  armes  the  way  to  keepc,
which  (be  hath  full  many  in  her  trainc.

Rogero  gave  Afiolfo  many  thanks.

For  giving  him  this  warning  of  her  pranks.


4T


57

And  le.idirg  then  the  flying  horfe  in  hand.

Not  daring  yet  to  mount  a bead  fowildc.

Lead  (as  before  1 made  you  underdand)

He  might  the  fccond  time  have  been  beguil’d;

He  mcancs  to  goto  Logifitl/at  land,

A vertuous  La^ic.chaftjdifcrcct  and  mild.

And  to  withdand  Alcina  tooth  and  nailc.

That  upon  him  her  force  might  not  picvaile.

58  _

pm  well  we  may  commend  his  good  intent.

Though  miflingthat  to  which  hedid  afpiic.

Who  ludgeth  of  our  adions  by  th’event,

I wifli  they  long  may  want  their  moddefirc.

For  though  RogerototcCiii  herment,

And  feared  her  as  children  fcare  thefire.

Yet  was  he  taken  to  his  hurt  and  fhame.

Even  a's  the  flic  is  taken  in  the  flame.

59

For  going  on  his  way, behold  he  fpKS

A houfe  more  datcly  then  can  well  be  told,
Whofciwalsdo  feeme  exalted  to  the  skies,

From  top  to  bottomc  fliining  all  of  gold,

A fight  toravifl]  any  mortal!  eyes,

Itfecm’d.fbme  Alcumiddid  make  this  hold,
Thcwalsfccm’d  all  of gold, but  yeti  trow
All  is  not  gold  that  makes  a golden  fliow,

60

Now  though  this  dately  fight  did  make  him  day.

Yet  thinking  on  the  danger  him  foretold.

He  left  the  cafic  and  the  beaten  way.

That  Icadcth  to  this  rich  and  datcly  hold.

And  to  her  houfe  where  rertuc  bearcs  t he  fway,

He  bends  his  deps  with  all  the  had  he  could:

But  ere  he  could  afeend  themouutaines  top,

A crew  of  catives  fought  his  way  to  dop.

61

A foule deform’d,  a brinifii  ciirfcd  crew.

In  hodie  like  to  antike  worke devifed.

Of  rhonflrous  fIiapc,aBd  of  an  ugly  hew,
LikemaskingMathachin.a$alldifguifcd.

^ Some  looke  like  dogs,and  fome  like  apes  in  vcw»
Somcdreadfull  lookc,and  fome  to  be  defpifed,
Yong fiiamelelTc folke,and doting foolifh  aged.
Some  nak’djfomc  drunk,fomc  bcdlam-likc  enraged.

6z

One  rides  in  had  a horfe  without  a bit.

Another  rides  as  flow, an  afle  or  cow ,

The  third  upon  a Centaurs  rumpe  doth  fit,

A fourth  would  flic  with  wings, but  knows  not  how*
The  fift  doth  for  a fpcarc  employ  a fpit,

Sixt  blowesa  bladlikconc  that  gelds  a fbw.

Some  Carrie  ladders, others  ca rric chai nes ,

Some  firand  fleepc  while  others  take  the  paines*

The  Captainc  of  this  honorable  band.

With  belly  fwolne,and  puffed  blubber’d  face,
Becaufe  for  drunkenncfic  hccouldnctdand,

Vpona  tortefle  rode  a heavy  pace;

His  fergeants  all  were  round  about  at  hand.

Each  one  to  do  his  office  in  his  place;

Some  wipe  the  fweat,with  fans  fome  make  a wind.
Some  day  him  up  bcforciand  fomc  behind.


Ovid-  Careat
fuccejjibm
opu>  quijquit
ab  eventufa-
£ianttan(U
futet.

Simile.
Fetrar^,  *


Smtsee.


Ltikjt  in  the


4<5


THE  SIXT  BOOKE


«s


Ro^erot
fttord,  a-
gamjl  tthich
na  ihcltnnted
armor  could
Uotd.


(dr

Tiicnoneofilicfctliat  had  his  feet  and  breft
Of  manlike  fhape,  but  like  unto  abound
in  eareSjin  nccke^and  mouthjand  all  the  reft
Doth  utter  barking  words  withcurrifli  found,
i’art  to  command  and  partly  to  requeft
The  valiant  knigbttcleavcthc  higher  ground,

A nd  to  repairc  unto  Alcynas caftlc.

Or  els  they  two,for  mallery  muft  wraftlc.

65

This  monfler  feeing  his  requeft  (hfnide,

Strakc  at  Rogeros  beaver  with  a launce.

But  he  that  could  no  fuch  rudejeftsabidc,

^Vi^h  B.i/lifariLtfir\ote  him  in  the  paunch
Out  came  the  fword  a foote  on  tl/other  fide,

With  whicli  he  led  his  fcllowes  fuch  a daunce,

That  Ibmehopt  hcadleflcjfomc  cut  by  the  knees.
And  feme  their  arms,  and  fomc  their  cares  did  Iccfe.


7i

Thofc  ornaments  that  do  fet  forth  the  gate,

Emboft  a little  bigger  then  the  reft,

All  are  cnrich’t  with  flones  of  great  eftato,

Thcbeft  and  licheft  growing  in  the  Eaft,

In  parted  quadrons,witha  feemely  rate,

Thecollons  diamonds  as  may  be  gueft:

I fay  not  whether  counterfait  or  true.

But  (liine  they  did  like  diamonds  in  view.

7*

About  ihefc  ftately  pillars ard  betweenc
Arc  wanton  damfcls  gadding  to  and  fro.

And  as  their  age,fo  are  their  garments  greene,

The  blacke  oxe  hath  not  yet  trod  on  their  toe.

Had  venue  with  that  beautie  tempted  becnc.

It  would  have  made  the  fubftancelike  the  fliow:
Thefc  maids  with  curtcous  fpcech  and  manners  nice
Welcome  Rogcroto  this  Baradife.


66

In  vaine  it  was  their  targets  tooppofe
Againft  the  edgeof  his  enchanted  blade,

No  ftede  hid  forceto  beare  thofc  fatall  blowes,
Vnto  iht  quicke  the  fword  a pafl'agemade:

But  yet  with  mimbers  they  do  him  inclofe,

Their  multitude  his  force  did  ovcrlade;  •

He  needs  at  lead  Biiarm  hundred  armes
To  foilc  the  foes  that  ftill  about  him  (\varmes.

67

Had  heremembred  to  unfold  the  lliield,

Atlatita  canid  at  his  faddle  bow.

He  might  have  quickly  overcome  the  field.

And  caus’d  them  all  without  receiving  blow.

Like  men  difmai’d  and  blind  themfclvesto  yccld;
But  he  perhaps  tliat  venue  did  not  know.

Or  if  he  did, perhaps  he  would  difdaine.

Where  force  did  faile,by  fraud  his  will  to  gainc.

68

But  being  full  refclved  not  toyceld

V’nto  (uch  beafts,but  ere  he  parted  thence
He  would  hiscarkalfe  leave  amid  the  field,  ^

_ And  manfully  woulddie  in  Iiis defence,

JtHdaceifor.  Then  logood  hap  thatfailestheforwardfceld,
tuna  tuvtt.  Provided  hima  meane  to  rid  him  hence.

There  came  two  Ladies, either  like  a Queenc,

And  each  of  them  moft  ftately  to  be  fcenc.

69

tht  Foreachofthem anVnicornedid ride,

AUtipry.  yvs  white  as  LillieSjor  unmolten  fnow.

And  eachof  them  wasdeck’t  with  fogreatpridc,
Asmight  moft  richly  fetthem  forth  to  fliow,

But  cachof  them  wasfo  divinely  eidc.

Would  move  a manin  Iwvewitb  them  to  grow,

• A nd  each  of t hem  in  all  points  was  (b  choice.

As  in  their  fight  a man  would  much  rcjoycc.

70

Then  both  of  them  unto  the  medow  came.

Whereas  i?o^cro  fought  with  all  that  rout,

' And  both  them  thofc  brutifli  beaftsdid  blame,
That  fought  to  harme  a knight  fo  ftrong  and  ftout.
Rogcro blufliing  now  with  modeft  fliame.

T liank't  them  that  had  of  danger  holp’t  him  out,

A nd  ftraight  confented  with  thofc  Ladies  faiic,
Voto  Al<ynas  caftlc  to  repaite.


If  fb  I may  a Paradife  it  name.

Where  love  and  lull  have  built  their  habitation.
Where  time  well  fpent  is  counted  as  a lliamc.

No  wife  ftaid  thought,no  carcofcftimation.

Nor  nought  but  couiting.dauncih^, play  and  game,
Difguifcd  clothcs.eachdaya  fundry  fafliion.

No  vemious  labour  doth  this  people  pleafc.

But  nice  apparrcll,bclly-chcarc  and  cafe.

74

Their  airc  isalway  temperate  and  clcarc.

And  wants  both  winters  ftorms,  and  fummers  heate.
As  though  that  Aprill  lafted  all  the  yearc,

Someone  by  fountaines  fide  doth  take  hisfeate.

And  therewith  fained  voice  and  carclefTc  cheaie.
Some  fonnet  made  oflove  he  doth  repeate:

Some  othcrs,othcr  where  with  other  fa fli  ions,
Defcribe  uniq^hcir  loves  their  loving  paflions,

75

And  CHp/</thcn,thecaptaincof  the  crew,
Triumphsupon  the  captives  he  hath  got,

And  more  and  more  his  forcesto  renew,
Supplieswith  frcfli  thearrowes  he  hath  fliot,

0 With  whicivlic  hits  (hislevcll  is  fo  true)

And  woundsfulldeepc, although  it  bleedctli  not;
This  is  the  place  to  which  iio^cro  went.

And  thefc  the  things  to  which  our  youth  is  bent.

76

Then  ftraight  a ftately  ftced  ofcolour  bay.

Well  limb’d  and  ftrong  was  to  Rogero  brought.
And  deck’t  with  fairccapparifon  moft  gay.

With  gold  and  pcarle  and  jewels  richly  wrought,

, The  Griffcth  horfc(that  whilomctoobey
Thclpurrcand  bit  was  by  taught)

Becaufc  his  journey  long  required  reft.

Was  carrid  to  a ftable  to  be  dreft.

77

ThcLadiesfaire  that  had  the  knight  defended.

From  that  fame  wicked  and  ungracious  band,
Which  as  you  heard  at  large  before  pretended,
iio^cror  paflage  ftoutly  to  withftand,

Told  now  Rogero  how  that  they  intended,

Becaufe  his  valew  great  they  underftand,
of  him  to  crave  his  furtherance  and  aid,

Againft  their  fo  that  made  th  cm  oft  afraid.

There


OF  ORLANDO  FYRIOSO.


47


Moral].


Uiiloric.

^Icgory,


AlluGon.


«


80

Rogcro  thus  in  curtcous  fort  replide,

Faire  Ladicsgladlj  1 accept  yourmotion^

If  other  fervice  I may  dobefide,

You  may  command,  1 ftand  at  your  devotion?

For  this  I wearc  this  coat  and  blade  well  tride^

Not  to  procure  me  riches  or  promotion.

But  to  defend  from  injuric  and  wrong.

All  fuch  as  have  theirenemics  too  fttong.

8 1

The  Ladiesdid  Rogero  greatly  thanke.

As  well  deferv’d  fo  ftout  and  brave  a Knighr,

That  profei'd  at  the  firft  requeft  fo  franke,

Againft  the  gyantefle  for  them  to  fight.

Now  they  drew  nyeunto  the  rivers  bankc.

When  as  Erifila came  out  in  fight:

But  they  that  in  this  ftory  take  fomc  pleafure.

May  heare  the  reft  of  it  at  further  Icafurc.

In  Ariodants  combat  with  hit  brother,  we  may  note  hm  the  love  of  l^inrediiftcngives  place  to  the  love  of  carnality.
In  Dalindas^ot/^  into  religion,  a;ter  Jhe  had  her  pardon,  we  may  note,  that  amendment  of  life  is  necejfaiy  after  true
repentance. In  ftogeros  travelling  three  thoufand  miles, and  then  refiing  at  AlcynaSjWe  may  obferve  how  the  thougbt$
ej  men  ranging  abroad  into  a thoufand  matters,  laflly  abide  in  the pleafantefi.

In  Aftolfos  metamorphofis  into  a myrtle  tree  (which  tree  is  faid  to  be  tlcdicated  to  Venus^  we  m^y  note,  how  men
given  over  to  fenfuality,  leefe  in  the  end  the  vetyfoime  of  man  ( which  h reafon ) and fo  become  beafies  or  fioches:  but
thefe  two  lajt  notes  will  be  more  aptly  confidered  in  the  Allegory.

Hifiory  there  U none  in  this  booh^e,but  the  continuation  oj  the  tale  ^Geneura,  amplif  edprohably, though  I thinfie  n9
way  truly.

The  rtf  of  this  whole  boo\e  is  an  AUegorie,fo  ptaine  to  thofe  that  will  indeed  loo\e  heedfully  into  it, as  needs  noexpo-
fition,  a/U  it  is  continued  in  the  next  boohe,  and  in  a manner  there  expounded,  totheunderfandingofanyreafonable
capacity, yet  for  plainnes  fahe  1 will  touch  fame  things  with  my  accuflomed  briefenes,  and  leave  the  refi  to  the  difereet
reader  to  fcan,and  to  apply  to  his  awne profit.  Firfi  therefore  o/Rogero,  (as  in  part  we  have  touched  before)  we  may
underfiand  the  Griffethhor/e  that  carriedhim,  to  fignifie  the paffionof  the  minde  contrary  to  reafon,  that  caries  mem
in  the  aire,  that  is, in  the  height  of  their  ima^nations  ,out  of  Europe,  that  is, out  of  the  compajfe  of  the  rules  ofChrifiicm
religion  and feare  of  God,mto  the  lie  ofAXeyaa-,  which  fignifieth  plcafure  ahdvanities  of  this  world.

T he  example  of  Ai\.o\hs  mifhap,  andhisgood counfell  which  Kogexofollowedfo Jlenderly,  fhewhowneitherthe
counfels  of  friends, nor  no  examples,  can  for  the  mofi  part  fay  a mam.  in  hisyouthfull  courfe,jfom  that  which  he  /hall  af-
ter furely  repent.  Rogeios  offring  togo  to  Logiftilla,  which  betokens  venue, fignifes  the  good  motives  that  men  have
often, ly  reading  good  bool(S,  or  hearing  good fermons  to  amend  their, lives : but  then  the  monflrous  crew  thatfioppetb
'R.ogcxofignhying  the  bafe  conceits  of  men,  andfoule  de fires  th§t  ajfaile  them,  as  namely  thofe  feaven  finnes  which  bs
called  the  deadly  finnes,  \y  ftrong  tempt  ations  and  lewd fuggeJlions,do  put  us  out  of  that  right  way, or  at  leaf  encombcp
Ks  fo  as  we  proceed  but  Jlowly:  howbeit  t hefe  do  not  prevaik  fofarre,hut  that  an  honefl  and  well  given  minde  doth  with-
fiandthem,  andyeeldeth  not  to  them  till't]^  two  Ladies  ridinguponVnicornes,  w\)ich  fame  under ftandby  chafi  love  >
oratleafiafhew  of  honourable  love,  or  rather  I fiwpofe  thereby  to  bee  meant  ambition  and  dejire  of  advancement,
thefe  two  drive  away  alt  thofe  bafe  thoughts  that  ajfai'.ed  him,  hut  yet  they  bring  him  at  laft  unto  the  court  o/ Alcina,
where  he  is  heldjaft,as  fijall  bejhcwed  in  the  next  boohe.

By  F.rifila  is  ment  covet oufnejfe,  as  the  name  it  felfejhewes,  which  mufl  be  beaten  downs  ere  we  can  come  to  honour
or  love.

ByLogc{{\X]a,that  is  invaded  ly  the  two  baflard  fiflers,  is  ment  allegorically , the  true  Chriflian  religion-,andihert
is  another  cofen  of  theirs  called  here  fie,  and  the  graund fire  of  them  all,  called  At  heifmc,  that  are  of  late  very  bufie  with
her . Butfhe  is  dejendedwith  the  water, which  fignifes  the  holy  Scripture,  andwith  the  mountaine,which  in  the  Scrip-
ture ii  felfe  is  tahenfor  preachers, as  S . Auguftinc  noteth  upon  the  Pfalmes.  I lift  up  mine  eyes  to  the  hils, whence  corn-‘
mth  my  falvation.

The  transformat  ion  of  AHoUp,  alludes  to  Cyrccs  witchcraft  in  Homer.


There  is(quoth  they)  a bridge  amid  our  w ay.

To  which  we  arc  already  vcricnie.

Where  one  doth  all  file  may.

To  damage  and  annoy  the  pafters  by,

A Giantcflc  fhc  is, flic  lives  by  pray,

Her  fafliionsarc  to  fight, deceive  and  lye:

Her  teeth  be  long,hcrvifage  rough  with  heare.
Her  naylcs  be  fliarpc,and  fcratchinglikc  a Beare,
79

Thcharmcis  great  this  monftcr  vile  doth  doe.

To  flop  the  way  that  but  for  her  were  free.

She  fpiU  and  fpoilcf,fIic  cares  not  what  nor  who.
That  griefe  to  hcarc,3nd  pittic  is  to  fee;

And  for  to  adJc  more  hatred  hereunto.

Know  this,  that  all  yon  monfters  you  did  fee,
Arctothts  monftcr  cither  fbnncs  nrdaughtersi
And  live  like  her  by  robberies  and  ftaughters.


E


i


THE  SEVENTH  BOOKE


ARGVMENT.


THE


whenfeule  Erifila  vtas  overcome,
R.og^cro£»Ue4  bj  two  ftAtely  dAmes^

Alcynas  fnmpt»oHt  court  doth  come,

Inhere  be  his  time  in  pleafure  /pends  and  gamer,
Melifla  him  rebubes,  he /landeth  damme,
iyfrtdat  her  true  reproofes  he  greatly  pjames,

J n fine,by  her  good  counfell  and  dire  Elion,

He  frees  himfclfe  from  that  moflfoule  fubjeElion.


Tadi  fold
megnu  rebut
inejfe  fides.

Thsi  ii  to
t'nofe  vtMei-
not  U'lder/lad
the  idegoty
*fiu


ttttttoct.


LL  tfiry  that  to  far  coun-
tries do  tffort.

Shall  Ice  flrangc  fights,  in
cart  hjin  fcas, in  skies.
Which  when  againcat
home  they  Ihall  report,

' Thci  r folcmnc  t a Ics,  eftce-
med  areas  lyes,
j For  why  the  fond  and  fim*
pic  common  Ibtt,

Bclccvc  but  what  they  fceleor  fee  with  eyes.
Therefore  to  thcni,my  talc  may  feeme  a fable,
Whofc  wits  to  underftand  it  arc  not  able.
z

But  carcleflc  what  the  fimple fots  furmife,

If  they  fiialldecrac  ita  dcviccor  deede,

Yet  furc  to  thdfe  that  arc  difcrcetc  and  wife.

It  will  no  wonder  nor  no  pafilon  breed;

Wherefore  my  tale  to  fuch  I do  dcvilc.

And  wifh  them  to  the  fame  to  take  good  heed,

For  fomethercarcjmay  fortune  in  this  booke.

As  in  aglaflcthciraftsandhapsto  lookc.

For  many  men  with  hope  and  fliow  of  plcafiirc,

Arc  earn’d  far  in  fooliflr  fond  conceit,

And  waft  their  pretious  timc,&  fpend  their  treafurc,
Before  they  candifeover  this  deceit.

O happic  they  that  keepe  within  their  mcafurc.

To  turnc  their  courle  in  time,  and  found  tctreiti
Before  that  wit  with  late  repentance  taught.

Were  better  never  had  then  fo  dcarc  bought.

A little  while  before  I did  reherfe.

How  shat  Rogero  by  two  dames  was  brought,


To  coftibat  with  the  feerfe,

Who  for  to  flop  the  bridge  and  paflage  fought,

In  yatne  it  were  for  to  declare  in  Tcrfo,

Ifow  liraiptuoufty  her  armor  all  was  wrought.

All  let  with  ftoncs,  and  guilt  with  Indian  gold.
Both  fit  ferufc.and  plcafant  to  behold.

5

She  mounted  was.but  not  upon  a fteed,

Inftecd  thereof  Ihe  on  a Wolfe  doth  fit,

1 A Wolfe  whole  march  Apulia  doth  not  breed.
Well  taught  to  hand ,although  fiieus’d  no  bit.
And  all  of  fartdic  colour  was  her  weed.

Her  armes  were  thus  (for  fuch  a champion  fit)

An  ugly  Todc  was  painted  on  her  fiiield.

With  poy  fon  fwolne,  and  in  a fable  field,

6

Now  each  theotber  forthwith  had  dcfoiide.

And  each  withotherthen  prepar’d  tofight.

Then  each  the  other  fcorncfullydcfidc.

Each  fcckcs  to  hurt  the  other  all  he  might.

But  flic  unable  his  fierce  blowcs  to  bide.

Beneath  the  tizer  fmitten  was  fo  right:

That  from  her  feat  fixe  paces  fhc  was  heaved.
And  lay  like  one  of  life  and  fenfe  bereaved.

7

Rogero  rcadie  was  to  draw  his  fword.

To  head  the  monfler  lying  on  the  fand,

Vntill  thofc  dames  with  many  a gentle  word,
Aflwag’d  his  heat  and  made  him  hold  his  hands
He'might  in  honour  now  her  life  afFoord,  ,

Sit  h at  his  mcrcic  wholly  fire  doth  ftand;
Wherefore  fir  Knight  put  up  your  blade(fay  they)
Lets  paftc  the  bridge  and  follow  pn  our  way.

£ X


Uonce,

turn  rk^
mtUutru
Dauttia  iit
la  Id  alit


The


THE  SEVENTH  BOOKE


Ovid:  Ccmdi.
da  futpureit
tiUia  mtliM
rojiu


yeOotP  baire
and  blacl{e
tyts  ii  man.
firom,  and
fildomt  or
never  feintt
Ovid:  Lttt-
dara  ftciem
Ixvar  quoque.


Ovid:  Si  fua
ieUHt  tneli*-
rtfutM,


50

Z

The  way  as  yet  unplca(ant  was  and  ill.

Among  the  t hornic  bullies  and  betwecnc.

All  ftony,fteep,afcending  up  the  hill,

A way  le^  pleaCant  feldomc  hath  been  fcenc;

But  this  once  paft  according  to  their  will.

And  they  now  mounted  up  upon  thegrecne,
Theyfaw  thefaireft  caftlc  ftandingby.

That  ere  was  feene  with  any  mortal!  eye.

9

^Icyna  metthem  at  the  outer  gate.

And  came  before  the  reft  a little  fpace.

And  with  a count’nancc  full  of  high  eftate.

Salutes  Rogero  with  a goodly  grace.

And  all  the  other  courtiers  in  like  rate.

Do  bid  Rogero  welcome  to  the  place.

With  fo  great  fliowes  of  duty  and  of  lore.

As  if  fome  god  dcfcendcd  from  above.

10

Nor  onely  was  this  pallace  for  the  fight,

Moft  goodly, fairCjand  ftately  to  behold.

But  that  the  peoples  courtfie  bred  delight,

'Which  was  as  great  ascould  with  tongue  be  told.
All  were  of  youth  and  beauticfhining  bright.

Yet  to  confirme  this  thing  i dare  be  bold.

That  fairc  Alcyna  paft  the  reft  as  farre,

Asdoth  the  Sunne  another  little  ftarre.

1 1

A fiiape  whofelikein  waxe  twere  hard  to  frame,

Or  to  expreftc  by  skill  of  painters  rare.

Her  haire  was  long, and  yellow  to  the  fame.

As  might  with  wireof  beaten  gold  compare;

Her  lovely  cheekes  with  fliew  of  modeft  ftrame,
With  roles  and  with  lilUcs  painted  are,

Her  forehead  faire  and  full  of  fecmcly  cheare.

As  fmooth  as  polillit  Ivory  doth  appearc.

12

Within  two  arches  ofmoft  curious  fafhion.

Stand  two  gray  eycs,that  like  to  cleare  funs  fliin’d.
Of  ftedie  lookc,but  apt  to  take  compalfion,

Amid  which  lights, the  naked  boy  and  blind,
Dothcaft  his  darts  that  caufcfo  many  a paftlon.
And  leave  a fweet  and  curclcfle  wound  behind:
From  t hence  the  nolc  in  fuch  good  fort  defeended.
As  envie  knowes  not  how  it  may  be  mended.

Conjoyn’d  to  which  indue  and  comely  fpace,

Doth  ftand  the  mouth  ftain’d  with  Vermilion  hew,
T wo  rowes  of  preciousperle  ferve  in  their  place,
Tofhow  and  niut,a  Upright  fairc  to  vew;

Hence  come  the  courteous  words, and  full  of  grace.
That  mollifie  hard  hearts  and  make  them  new;
From  hence  proceed  thofefmilings  fweet  and  nice.
That  feeme  to  make  an  earthly  paradice.

»4

Her  breft  at  milkc.her  nccke  as  white  as  fnow.

Her  necke  was  round,  moft  plum  and  large  her  breft
Two  Ivory  apples  feemed  there  to  grow.

Full  tender  fmooth,  and  fitteft  to  be  preft;

They  wave  likefcas,  when  winds  moft  calme  doth
But  Argos  felfc  might  not  difeerne  the  reft,  (blow,
Yet  by  prefumption  well  it  might  be  geft,

That  that  which  was  concealed  was  the  beft,


Xi

Her  armes  due  meafure  of  proportion  bare,  ^
Her  fairc  white  hand  was  to  be  viewed  plainef
The  fingers  long,thc  joymsfo  curious  are-/

As  neither  knot  appeal’d  nor  fwclling  vaine.
And  full  to  perfe^  all  thofc  features  rare,
Thefoote  that  to  be  feene  doth  fo  remaine.
Both  flcndcr,(hort,littlc  it  was  and  round,

A finer  footc  might  no  where  well  be  found.

16

She  had  on  every  fide  prepar’d  a net,

if  fo  fire  walke,or  laugh, or  fing,or  ftand;
Rogero  now  thccounlell  doth  forget.

He  had  recciu’d  late  at  Afioljos  hand:

He  doth  at  nought  thofc  wholfbmc  precepts  fer.
That  warned  him  to  fiiun  AUynas  land.

He  thought  no  fraud, no  trcalon  nor  no  guile,
Could  be accompani’d  with  fo  fwcete  a fmilc.

>7

Thedamc  of  Jru«ce,whom  he  fo  loved  erft.

He  q ui  tc  forget  s,fo  farre  a wry  hefwarvedi
The  talc  Aflolfo  had  to  him  reherft,

Hethinkcth  falfe,orclle  by  him  defarved:
AUynas  goodly  fliape  his  heart  fo  perft.

She  onely  feem'd  a miftreffe  to  be  farved:

Ne  muft  you  blame  Rogeros  inclination!

But  rather  blame  the  force  of  incantation.

18

New  asabrodethe  ftately  courts  did  found,

Gf  trumpets,fhagbor,cornets,and  of  flutes.
Even  fo  within  there  wants  no  pleafing  found.
Of  virginals, of  vials  and  of  lutes,

VptJn  rhe  which  pcrfons  not  few  were  found.
That  did  record  their  loves  and  loving  futes.
And  in  lomcfong  of  loveand  watuon  vei  fc*

T heir  good  or  ill  fuccelTcs did  rcherle.


Ovid:  fet
rrat

fedie  bat  of.
njftma  farms


19

Asforthefumptuous  and  luxurious  fare,

1 thinkenot  they  that  ATy««sdidfucceed,

Nor  C/eop(jrj,jfaire,who<criot  rare.

To  Antonie  fuch  love  and  loflc  did  breed,

Mighr  with  Alcynas  any  way  compare.

Whole!  ovc  did  all  the  others  farrcexcced.

So  deepely  was  fhc  raviflit  in  the  fight.

Of  this  fo  valiant  and  fo  comely  Knight.

20

The  fupper  done, and  tables  tanc  away.

To  purpofes  and  (uch  like  toyes  they  went.

Each  one  to  other  fccretly  to  fay

Some  word,by  which  fome  prctic  toy  is  meat.

This  hcipt  the  lovers  better  to  bewray
Each  unto  other  what  was  their  intent.

For  when  theword  was  hither  toft  and  thither.
Their  laftconcluficn  was  to  lie  together.

XI

Thefc  prettie  kinds  of  amorous  fports  once  ended,
With  torches  to  hischamber  he  was  brought.

On  him  a crew  of  gallant  fquires  attended.

That  every  way  to  do  him  honour  fought.

The  chambers  furniture  could  not  be  mended.

It  feem’d  AraeJme  had  the  hangings  wrought,

A banket  new  was  made,the  which  once  finifh’d.
The  company  by  one  and  one  diminifli'd.

Now


The  Vtrjitm

VtTtTiMoUt

feaften,a
Haraee  fattb.
Ver/kesadi
fueraffara-

tm.


Aracim*

cmnting
vritvtr  of
Mfiflrit,


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


51


21

jjow  was  Rogero  couched  in  his  bed,

Betwecnc  a paircof  cambricke  rticets  perfumed.
And  oft  he  hearkens  with  his  wakeful!  hed,

For  her  whofclove  his  heart  andfoulcconfumcd:
Each  little  noife  hope  of  her  comming  bred,

Ovid:  Auti’  Which  finding  falfe,  againfi  himfelfe  he  fumed.
And  curft  the  taufc  that  did  him  fo  much  wrong,’
omnt  Tocaufc  Ahyna  tarty  thence  fo  long.

tdvtttui  jtr*-

fitum  (rtdi-  Sometime  from  bed  he  foftly  doth  arife,
m4i  *!!•  «v».  lookc abroad  if  hemightherefpie.

Sometime  he  with  himfcifedoth  thus  dcrife,

Now  file  is  comming,  now  flic  dravves  thus  nic;
Sometime  for  very  anger  out  be  cries,

What  meancth  fiiCjOie  doth  no  fafter  hie?
Sometimes  he  calls  lead  any  letHiould  be,
Betwecnc  his  handand  this  ddtred  tree.

But  fairc  Ahj/na,when  with  odors  fweet.

She  was  perfun>’d  according  toher  skilly
The  time  once  come  fhc  deemed  fitand  meet.
When  all  the  houfe  were  now  afleepe  and  ftill;
Wiihrich  cmbrodei’d  flipperson  her  feet.

She  goes  to  giyc  and  takeefjoyes  her  fill.

To  him  whom  hope  and  fearefo  long  alTailed,

T ill  lleepe  drew  on, and  hope  and  fcare  both  failed.

If

Now  when  Aflolfos  fucceflbrcfpide
Thofccanhly  ftarres,hcr  fairc  and  he«v*nly  eyes.
As  fulphur  once  in  flamed  cannot  hide,

Even  fo  thcmettall  in  his  veincs  that  lies.

So  flam'd  that  in  the  skin  it  (cant  could  bidcS
But  of  a fodaine  flraight  he  doth  arife.

Leaps  out  of  bed, and  her  in  a rmes  embraced,

Nc  would  he  flay  till  flic  her  felfe  unlaced.

26

So  vtterly  impatient  of  all  flay,

That  though  her  mantle  was  but  cyprous  light,
And  next  upon  herfmockeoFlawnritlay.

Yetfo  the  champion  haded  to  the  fight.

The  mantle  with  his  fury  fell  away.

And  now  the  fmocke  remain’d  alone  in  fight,
Which  fmockc  as  plaine  her  beauties  ail  difclofcs,
As  doth  a glafTe  the  lillics  fairc  and  rofes.

And  lookc  how  clofc  the  Iviedoth  embrace
The  tree  or  branch  about  the  which  it  growes.

So  clofc  the  lovers  couched  in  the  place.

Each  drawing  in  the  breath  the  other  blowes:

But  how  great  joyes  they  found  that  little  fpace.
We  well  may  gucfTe,but  none  forcerraine  knowes:
Their  fport  was  fuch,  fo  well  their  Iccre  they  couth,
That  oft  they  had  two  tongues  within  one  mouth.
It

Now  though  they  kecpcthisclofe  with  great  regard.
Yet  not  foclofe  but  fbmc  did  find  thefame.

For  though  that  vcitue  oft  wants  due  reward.

Yet  fcldome  vice  wants  due  deferved  blame.

Rogero  flili  was  more  and  more  prefard
Each  one  to  him  with  cap  and  court'fle  eaoie.

For  faire  Altyna  being  now  in  love.

Would  havchim  plaft  the  others  all  abofC


Tbmhfcivi^
9U0  itfcrtfti-
•«*/  etrtuU

fltaptrt

WttJinottf-
fit$d  the  (b*fi
**rti  ar
Ihwgbn  of  a-
Wtto  ratbtt
Jhmmt  the
otaebaft,  that
bavoibtm-
filvtt  betno
at  fUtbl(in4
ofiaa^tii.

Stmtnet.


39

In  plcafurc  here  they  fpend  the  night  and  day.

They  change  their  clothes  fo  often  as  they  luft,
Within  they  fcafl,thcy dance, difport  and  play,
Abroad  they  hunt, they  hauke,  they  ride, they  jufl.
And  fo  w hilc  fcnfuall  life  doth  bcarc  the  fway.

All  difcipline  is  troden  in  thcdull.

Thus  while  Rogero  here  his  time  mifpends.

He  quite  forgets  hisdutic  and  hisfrends.

Tor  while  iiogero  bides  in  fcafl  and  joy.

King  Agramant  doth  take  great  care  ^d  painc.
Dame  Bradanunt doih  fuffer  great  annoy.

And  travcl’d  farre  to  findc  him  all  in  vainc;

She  little  knew  Alcyna  d\den\oy

Her  doc  delights,  yet  doth  fhc  monc  and  plaine.

To  ihinkc  how  flrangely  this  fame  flying  horfc.
Bare  him  away  againft  his  will  by  force.

3*

In  townes,in  fields, in  hils,in  dales  flic  fought.

In  tcnts,in  cair'pes,in  lodgings  and  in  caves.

Oft  flic  cnquii’d, but  yet  llic  learned  nought.

She  pad  the  rivers  frclli  and  fait  fea  waves.

Among  the  Tur\es  flic  leaves  him  not  unfought,
(Gramerty  ring  that  her  from  danger  faves;)

A ring  whofc  vertue  workes  athingfeant  pofTible,
Which  holdingin  her  mouth  flic  goes  invifiblc.

3*

She  will  not, nor  fhe  cannot  thinkc  him  dead.

For  ifa  man  of  fo  great  worth  fhould  die,

1 1 would  fbmc  great  report  or  fame  have  bred.
From  Eall  unto  the  Well, both  farre  and  nic.‘

It  cannot finkc  nor  fcttlcin  her  head.

Whether  he  be  in  fcas.in  earth  or  skie.

Yet  flill  fhc  fcckcs,and  he^ompanions  arc
Sorrowes  and  fighcs,and  fSj:cs,and  loving  care.

Atlafl  flicmcancsto  turneunto  the  cave.

Where  licthc  great  and  learned  Merlins  bones.

And  at  that  tombe  to  ciic  fo  loud  and  rave,

A s fhall  with  pitic  move  the  marble  ftones;

Nor  till  (Iicmay  fomc  certaine  notice  have
Ofhcrbclov’d  to  flay  her  plaints  andmoncs,

I n hope  to  bring  her  purpofe  to  cfFcfl,

By  doing  as  that  Prophet  fhould  direfl.

^ 14

Now  as  her  courfeto  Poytiers  ward  (he  bent,

Mclyjfa  ufing  wonted  skill  and  art,

Encountred  hcr,her  journey  to  prevent,

Whoknew  full  well,  and  did  to  her  impart.

Both  where  he  wss,and  holv  his  time  he  fpent.
Which  griev’d  the  vertuous  damfcll  to  the  hart.
That  fuch  a Knight, fo  valiant  effland  wife.

Should  fo  be  drown’d  in  plcafurc  and  in  vice.

O poyfbn’d  hookc  that  lurkes  in  fugred  bait,

O plcafutcs  vainc, that  in  this  world  arefound,
Which  like  a fUbtilc  thccfedolicin  waite.

To  fwallow  man  in  finkc  of  finne  profound.*

O Kings  and  pccrcsjbcwarc  of this  deceit.

And  be  not  in  this  gulfc  of  plcafurc  dround.*

The  time  will  comc,and  muft  I tell  you  all.

When  thefe  your  joyes  fhall  bitter  fccrac  as  gall.

K 3 Then


Of  tbi  ring
look.t  the
Table,


THE  SEVENTH  BOOKE


r


.3*.


Smwt.


\Siwlt,


Then  turnc  your  iloth  of  gold  to  clothes  of  heares.
Your feafts to  faftsjto  lorrowcs turnc  your  fongSj
Y'our  wanton  toyes  and  fmilings  into  tcarcs.

To  reftitution  turnc  your  doing  wrongs.

Your  fond  fccurciicfic  turnc  to  godly  feares.

And  know  that  vengeance  untoGod  belongs,

Who  when  be  comes  to  judge  the  fouks  of  men.

It  will  be  late  alas  to  mend  it  then.

37

Then  fliall  the  vertuous  man  fliine  like  the  fiinnc,  ^
Then  fliaH^hc  vicious  man  repent  his  plcafurc.
Then  one  good  deed  of  almcs  fmcerely  done.

Shall  be  more  worth  then  mines  of  Indian  treafnre,
Then  fentcncc  fliall  be  gir’n  which  none  fliall  fiiun,
Then  God  fliall  wey  and  pay  our  deeds  by  mcafure,
Vnfonunatc  and  thrice  accurfed  thay.

Whom  fond  delights  do  make  forget  that  day.

But  to  rcturilc  unto  my  tale  againe,

I fay  Afe^,^tooke  no  little  care,

To  draw  Rogero  by  feme  honefl  traine,

From  this  fame  place  of  feafts  and  dainty  fate.

And  likea  faithfullfriend  refus’d  no  paine.

To  fei  him  free  from  her  fwcet  fenflcfTc  fnare.

To  which  his  unkle  brought  him  with  intent
His  dcftitiie  thereby  for  to  prevent.

39

As  oft  we  fee  men  are  fo  fond  and  blind,

To  carry  to  their  fonnes  too  much  affeiftion,

That  when  they  fccn,cto  love, they  are  unkind,

(For  they  do  hate  a child  that  fpare  correftion)

So  did  AtlantAiViot  with  cvill  mind.

Give  to  Rogero  this  fo  bad  dircftion.

But  of  a purpofc,thcreby  to  withdraw
His  fatall  end  that  he  before  forefaw.

40

For  this  he  fent  him  paft  fo  many  Teas,

Vnto  the  lie  that  1 before  did  narne,

Efteeming  lelTe  his  honour  then  his  cafe,

A few  yeares  life  then  cvcrlafting  fame.

For  i his  he  caufed  him  fb  well  to  plcafc
Alcynaxhit  fame  rich  lafciviousdamc;

That  though  his  time  eld  Hefiors  life  had  finifli'd,
Yet  lierafFcilion  fliould  not  be  diminifli’d.

41

But  good  Melyjfd  on  a ground  more  fure,

That  lov’d  his  honor  better  then  bis  weak,

By  found  pcrfwafions  mcancs  him  to  procure,

From  plcafures court  to  vertues  to  appeale;

As  leeches  good  that  in  a defperate  cure.

With  fteclcjWith  ftamc,and  oft  with  poifon  hcale,
Of  which  although  the  patient  docomplaine.

Yet  at  the  laft  he  tbankes  him  for  his  paine.

*

And  thus  Mdyjfa  promifed  her  aid.

And  heipe  Rogero  backc  againe  to  bring.

Which  much  rccomfortcd  the  noble  maid.

That  lov’d  this  Knight  above  each  earthly  thing.

But  for  the  better  doing  this  (flie  faid)

It  were  bchovcfull  that  he  had  her  ring,

Whofc  Tcituc  was  that  who  fo  did  it  weare.

Should  aercr  need  the  force  of  charrocs  to  fcare,


43

But  Bradamant  that  would  not  onely  (pare
Her  ring  (to  do  him  good)  but  eke  her  hart.
Commends  the  ring  and  him  unto  her  care.

And  fo  thefe  Ladies  take  their  leave  and  part.
Mclijfa  for  her  journey  doth  prepare,

By  her  well  tried  skill  in  Magickc  art,

A bcaft  thatmighifupplyhcrprcfcnt  lacke.
That  had  one  red  foot  and  another  blackc.

44

Such  haft  fhc  madc,that  by  the  breake  of  day
She  was  arrived  m Ahynoi  iJc,

But  flraight  flicch.ing’d  her  fliapcand  her  array,
That  fhc  Rogero  better  might  beguile;

Her  ftaturc  tall  flic  makes,hcr  head  all  gray,

A long  white  beard  flic  takes  to  hide  the  wile.
In  fine  flicdothfo  cunningly  diflcmblc.

That  flic  the  old  AtlantadLoxh  refcmble.

45

And  in  this  (brt  flic  waiteth  till  fhc  might
By  fortune  find  Rogero  in  fit  place.

Which  very  (eldome  hapt,for  day  and  night
He  flood  fo  high  in  fame  Alxynen  grace.

That  flie  could  leaf!  abide  of  any  wight.

To  have  liimabfcnt  but  a minute  fpacc,

A t laft  full  early  in  a morning  fairc,

She  fpidc  him  walke  abroadc  to  take  the  aire.

46

About  his  necke  a carkneet  rich  he  ware,
Ofprcciousftoncs.all  fet  in  gold  well  tride.

His  armes  that  erft  all  warlike  weapons  bar<^

Jo  golden  bracelets  wantonly  were  tide:

Into  his  cares  two  rings  conveyed  arc.

Of  golden  wire^at  which  on  cither  fide
Two  Iniian  pcarlcs  in  making  like  two  pcaret.
Of  pafling  price  were  pendent  at  his  cares.

47

Hislocks  bedew’d  with  waters  offweet  favour.
Stood  curled  round  in  order  on  his  hed.

He  had  fuch  wanton  woman! fli  behaviour.

As  though  inValence  he  had  long  bene  bred:

So  chang’d  in  fpccch,in  manners  and  in  favour.
So  from  liimfclfcjbeyond  all  rcafon  led.

By  thefe  inchantmentsof  this  am’rous  dame,

He  was  himfelfc  in  nothing  but  in  name.

..

Which  when  the  wife  and  kind  Me^ffd  faw,
(Refcmbling  ftill  Atlanta!  perfon  fage)
Ofwhom/?agcroalwayesflo(xl  inaw.

Even  from  his  tender  youth  to  elder  age^

She  toward  him  with  lookc  auftcrc  did  draw.
And  with  a voice abrupt,as  halfe  in  rage.

Is  this  (quoth  flic)  the  guerdon  and  thegainC,

I find  for  all  my  travel!  and  my  painef

49

What  was’t  for  this  that  I in  youth  thee  fed,

With  marrow  of  the  Eearesand  Lions  fclk
That  I through  eaves  and  deferTs  have  thee  led.
Where  ferpems  ofmoft  ugly  fhape  do  dwell,
Where  T ygers  fierce  and  crucll  Leopards  bred.
And  taught  thee  how  thcirforceaall  to  quell;

An  Atis  or  Adonis  for  to  be,

Ynto  Alcyna  as  1 cow  thee  fee.


Wai


f


Atldat  X».
gtniKmcU
tuU  febnit’
M/Ser.


A defer^tSi
cf autlfna-

nautourwh


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


53


50

W.iJthi*  forefliCwM  by  thofc  obfcrvcd  ftarrcs,

By  figures  an  ^ nativities  oft  caft,

By  drcamcs.by  oracles  that  never  arres,

By  thofc  vainc  arts  I ftudide  in  time  paft.

That  thou  Ihould’fi  prove  lb  rare  a man  in  vvarres,
Whofc  famous  deeds  to  cndlcflc  praifefliould  laft?
Whole  aftsfliould  honord  be  both  farreand  nearc,
And  not  be  matcht  with  fuch  another  pearc.

X f I

Is  this  a meane  or  ready  way  you  trow?

Which  other  worthy  men  have  trod  before,

A Cicfar  or  a Scipio  to  grow.

And  toincrcafcin  honor  more  and  more?

But  totheend  a man  may  certaine know,

How  thrall  thou  art  unto  Alcynai  \oxCy

Thou  weareft  here  her  chaines  and  flavifii  bands.

With  which  fhe  binds  thy  warlike  armesand  hands.

52

If t hou  regard  not  thine  owne  efiimation.

To  which  the  hea>  ’ns  ordaine  thee  if  thou  would.
Defraud  not  yet  thine  heiresand  geoerationi
Of  which  I have  thee  oftentime  foretold,

^Vppointed  by  eternepredeftination,

Except  thou  do  their  due  from  them  withhold.

Out  of  thy  loinetand  bowels  to  proceed

Such  men  whofc  match  the  world  did  never  breed.

5?

Let  not  lb  many  a worthy  foule  and  mind,

Pram*d  by  the  wifedomeof  the  hcav’nly  King,

Be  hindred  of  the  bodies  them  allign’d,

Whofc  of-fpring  chiefc  muft  of  thy  iflue  fpring;

Be  not  unto  thine  owne  blood  lb  unkind.

Of  whofc  great  triumphs  all  the  world  fiiall  ring.
Whole  fuccclTorSjwholc  children  and  poftcrity.

Shall  hclpe  our  country  to  her  old  profperity,

54

What  good  hath  this  great  Queene  unto  thee  done.
But  many  other  queancscando  the  fame?

What  certaine  gaine  is  by  her  fcrvice  wonne.

That  foone  doth  fancie,fooncrdoth  defame?
Wherefore  to  make  thee  know  what  thou  ball  done.
That  of  thy  doings  thou  maill  have  fome  lliame,
But  wearc  this  ring,and  next  time  you  repaire
To  your  ^/cyK<r,markc  if  flic  be  fairc.

5i

ijo^eroall  abalht  and  mute  did  Hand,

With  filent  tongue, and  lookc  for  fliamc  downc  call,
The  good  enchantrelTc  tooke  him  by  the  hand.

And  on  his  finger  ftraight  the  ring  fhe  plall.

But  when  this  ring  bad  made  him  undcrlland
His  owne  cftatCjhc  was  lb  fore  agall.

He  wifh  t himlclfc  halfe  buride  under  ground.

Much  rather  then  in  luch  place  once  be  found.

56

But  Ihe  that  faw  her  fpcech  tooke  good  elFc A,

And  that  Rngero  lliamedofhisfinnc.

She  doth  her  pcrlbn  and  her  namedeteft.

And  as  herfclfc(not  ^t/4«/)dothbeginnc,

By  counfcll  and  advice  him  to  direft.

To  rid  himlclfc  from  this  fo  dangerous  ginne;

And  gives  him  perfeft  notice  and  inftruAion,

How  tbefc  deceits  do  bring  men  to  delliu£lion.


57

She  fliew'J  him  plainly  llic  was  thither  lent.

By  B radamant  xhit  lov*d  him  in  finccririe.

Who  to  deliver  him  from  bondage  ment.

Of  her  that  blinded  him  with  falfc  profperity.
How  111  c tooke  Atlants  perlbn  to  th’intcnt
Her  countenance  might  carry  more  aullcriiie.

But  finding  now  him  home  reduc’d  ag.iine.

She  faith  flie  will  declare  the  matter  plainc.

58

And  unto  him  forthwith  llic  doth  impart.

How  that  fairc  dame  that  bell  deferv’d  his  love.
Did  fend  that  ring, and  would  havcfciit  her  hart.
If  fo  her  heart  his  good  fo  farre  might  move.

The  ring  this  vertue  had,it  could  fubvert

All  magick  frauds,and  make  them  vainc  to  prove;

Rogcro  asl  faid,no  time  did  linger.

But  put  the  ring  upon  his  little  finger.

59

Whenlruth  appeal ’d,i?o^ero  hated  more
Alcyms  tiumprics,and  did  them  dctcll.

Then  he  was  late  enamored  before,

(O  happie  ring  that  makes  the  bearer  blell)

Now  law  he  that  he  could  not  fee  before.

How  with  dcceitsy41y'»<i  had  bcnedrcll.

Her  borrow’d  beauties,all  appeared  (lained,

The  painting  goncinothing  but  filth  remained.

60

Ev’n  as  a child  that  taking  fiom  the  tree
An  apple  ripc,and  hides  it  in  fome  place.

When  he  rcturncs  the  lame  againc  to  fee.

After  a fenight  or  a fortnights  fpacc.

Doth  fcant  bclcevc  it  Ihould  the  fame  fruite  be.
When  rottcnnclTc  that  ripenelTc  doth  deface.

And  where  before  delight  in  it  he  tooke.

Now  leant  he  bides  upon  thefamc  to  lookc.

61

Ev*n  lb  Rogero  plainly  now  delcridc,

Alcyms  toulc  difgraccs  and  enormlcie,

Becaufc  of  this  his  ring  flic  could  not  hide.

By  all  her  paintings  any  onedeformitte:

He  faw  moll  plainly  that  in  her  did  bide,

Vnto  her  former  beauties  no  conformity.

But  lookesfo  ugly.that  from  Eall  to  Weft,

Was  not  a fouler  old  m'islhapen  bcali.

6a

Her  face  waswan,aleancand  writhled  skin.

Her  llaturc  fcant  three  hoilcloavcs  did  exceeds
Her  hairc  was  gray  of  hue,and  very  thin.

Her  teeth  were  gonc,hcr  gums  ferv’d  in  their  Heed,
No  fpacc  was  there  between  her  nofc  and  chin.

Her  noilbmc  breath  contagion  would  breed.

In  fincjof  her  it  might  have  well  bene  faid.

In  Me/? orr  youth  flic  wasa  prctic  maid.

63

I fcarc  her  arts  arc  learned  now  a day  cs,

To  counterfait  their  haire  and  paint  their  skin.

But  reafons  ring  their  crafts  and  guiles  bewrayes,
No  wife  men  oftheirpaintingspalTca  pin.

Thole  vertues  that  in  women  merit  prailc.

Arc  Ibbcr  fiicwcs  without, chart  thoughts  within.
True  faith  and  due  obedience  to  their  make.

And  of  their  children  boneft  care  to  ta  kc.

S 4 Kow


Ximilt’


The  Jtformi.
ty  «f  pleajmt
tvlitattu  bt»
held  vflii
reafen.


Ueftar  lived
mtfome  write
i^ojeartti


KahyctH,

tbttibU,

Moral!.

Hifloric.

Allegory.


THE  SEVENTH  BOOKE


54

«4

Now  though  Rogero  (as  before  I fed)

Deteftca  fore  the  ugly  witches  fight,

• Yet  by  Mclyjfat  counfell  wifely  led,
Hcdothconcealethe  matter  for  a night.

Till  of  proTi'fion  he  were  better  fped.

With  which  he  might  more  fafely  take  his  flight.
And  taking  care  his  meaning  clofc  to  hide.

He  doth  forthwith  his  armour  all  provide.

65

And  tthAlcyna  hewould  go  and  trie.

If  that  he  were  not  waxen  grofle  or  no,

Becaufe  that  idle  he  fo  long  did  lie.

And  never  fought  with  any  armed  fo«

Hisfword  unto  his  girdle  he  doth  tie.

With  armouron,a  walking  hedothgo.

And  with  a fearfe  about  his  arme  he  lapt
The  fliicld  thaf  in-the  cypreflTc  cafe  was  wrapt.

«6

And  thusarrai'djhe  commeth  to  the  (fable,

And  tooke  a horfc  (as  wife  Mclyjfa  taught)

A horfc  as  blacke  as  any  jeat  or  fable.

So  made  as  if  in  waxe  he  had  bene  wrought,

Moft  fwift  for  cour(e,and  ftrong  of  limbes  and  able.
This  horfc  hight  Rabican  was  thither  brought
By  Duke  Aftolfot  who  by  forccric
Was  turned  late  into  a mirtle  tree


«7

As  for  the  GrifFeth  horfc  that  there  was  by,

Mely/fa  wifheth  him  to  let  h(m  (land.

And  fay  th, that  fhe  her  fclfeere  long  would  trie.

To  make  him  gentle  to  the  fpur  and  hand;

And  that  (he  would  hereafter  time  efpic.

To  bring  it  him,and  let  him  underftand.

How  he  (liould  do  with  very  little  painc.

To makehim  yeeld  to fpurre,to rod  and  rainr.

68

she  further  faid,hi$  flight  would  be fufpe^fed.

Except  he  let  the  flying  horfe  to  flay,

Rogero  none  of  all  her  words  negleflcd.

But  did  her  counfell  wife  and  fage  bbay;

And  fo  before  his  meaning  was  detefted.

From  this  misdiapen  hag  hcftolcaway,  •

And  meanes  (if  God  will  grant  him  fo  much  grace)
To  he  At  Logi/fiUai  in  {hoitfpice.

69

Such  men  of  armes  as  watched  at  the  gate
He  flue, the  rclf  hefodainly  aflailcd,

Good  was  his  hap  that  fcapt  with  broken  pate  ,
They  tooke  their  heeles  when  as  thcii  hearts  them
Al  y>ia  now  had  notice  all  too  late,  (failed.

Rogero  was  fo  farre  it  nou  ght  availed;

But  in  another  booko  fliall  be  contained.

How  himdamc  LogejtiUa  entertained.


In  ’EtiRh  that  is  overthrotrne  by  Rogero  and  not  !^i  lied,  we  may  obfirve,  that  the  liberality  that  men  maf^e  great
Jhew  of  in  their  youth  ju/l  pleafitrcs  and  entertainments,  is  not  the  true  vertue  that  doth  indeed  quite  extinguijh  and
flill  that  monfler  of  covet  oufnejfe.  In  Alcyna  and  Rogeros  lafeivious  love, fiom  whom  Rogero  is  glad  at  lajt  to  rumie
away,  we  may  note  the  notable  allurements  of  fiefhly  fenfuality,  and  tal^e  agood  leffon  to  avoid  themonclyfy  flying
from  them, as  hath  beene  m part  touched  before.  MelylTas^ood  counfell,  every yong  Rogero  may  apply  to  himfilfe,  and
learne  therefy  to  begone  to  Logcllillas  in  time,  left  he  be  turned  into  fome  beaft  or  tree,  as  thefe  notable  enchantreJJ'es
do  daily  transforme  their  follower  s . But  of  all  this  Iwitlfpeahe  more  at  large  in  the  Allegory.

Concerning  the  Hijlory  of  this  bool^, there  is  no  matter  hifloricall  thereitvOnly  sphere  there  is  a compart  fan  of  the  riot
•/Alcyna  wtth  that  of  the  Perfian  Ifings,  and  that  of  ClcopAttAythofe  to  whom  thefloiy  is  not  l^ttownejhall  find  an  ex-
planation thereof  in  the  Table  or  Index.

I Jhewed  before  how  lyEtiRlA  is  meant  covet  oufnejfe,  which  over younggallants  beate  dtrwnzbut  l(iU  not , my  oft  it
rifeth  againe  and  overcomes  them,  and  mah^es  them  *all  to  metre  rapine  and  extortion.  IVhereas  in  the  eight flaff'e, the
way  was  faid  to  be  unplea/dnt  (though  that  feeme  contrary  to  the  faying  ofHesculesiwowaiesofviccandvcrtueJyet
no  doubt  but  even  in  this  way  ofpleafure,  there  be  many  tllfavouredand  dangerous  pajfages,  as  one  o'  the  fathers  well
notcth,ihat  a wretched  worldling  doth  oftentimes  toile  more  to  go  to  hell j or  his  labour, then  a vertuous  man  doth  to  win
heaven.The  things  that  allure  moft  to  fenfmliiy,  are  fet  downe  in  order.'  in  the  ninth  flaffe  hind  entertainment:  in  the
tenth,  fhmptuous  building:  in  the  eleventh  and  fo  forward  to  the  fixteenth,  artifciall  behaviour  and  exqui file  beautie,
(et  forth  with  all  cunning,as  Ovid  faith, Et  meruit  formofa  vidcri, is  fhe  deferved  with  the  painc  jbe  tooh  to  feem
kandfome:in  the  eighteenth, mufich  and  wanton  fonnets  of  loveiriotous  fare  in  the  nineteenth, with  atlhjnd  of  delicacies
to  provoke  venerysin  the  twentieth, svanton  difeourfes  andpiirpofes,  o' which  commonly  their  lafi  conclufion  is  to  lie  to-
gether, as  there  is  faid:  in  the  two  and  twentieth,  perfumes  and  all  effeminate  delicacies,  in  all  which  we  fee, the  eye, the
eare,the  taftjhe  fmeUing,  the  feelitig,  the  wit, the  thoughts,  all fed  with  their  ohjeds  of  delight,  making  men  quite  to
jorget  G od  and  all  good  counfell,  as  Rogero  quite  forgat  Bradamant  and  the  counfell  of  Aftolfo.  And Jure  it  is  worth
the  noting  where  it  is  faid  in  the  fixteenth  ft  off, that  the  talc  Aftolfo  late  to  him  lehcarftjhc  tbinket  h falfc  or  elfc  by
him  deferved -Howyong  men  that  at  thefirft  hav:  feemed  very  well  given, veiy  religious,  conttnent  and  ftudious  of  all
vertue  andgoodlearnirg,  yet  <^ier  when  they  come  to  be  advanced  to  high  favours  or  to  great  living,  thydefpifeaU
that  was  taught  them  before,  and  count  religion  but  a poUicie,  and  phibfophie  but  a folly, and  the  admonition  ^grave
andgodly  men  that  reprove  their  ambition,  or  their  fenfuality,  or  their  extreme  covetoufneffe,to  proceed  but  of  envie
to  tneir  high  eft  ate  andfelidtie,  which  they  would  be  glad  to  come  to  themfelves  and  cannot.  And furely  if  any  will  but
tal(e  a note  of  any  fpeciall  perfons,  toucht  with  any  or  with  all  three  of  theft  enormo'ss  vices,  let  them  but  marine  ifth(y
have  not  in  their  whole  lives  and  adions  ( and  fome  perhaps  in  plains  words ) difcoveredthis  their  contempt  of  religion
atid  vertuous  difeiplitte:  I would  this  age  were  barren  of  examples  of  this  hfnd.

Now  concerningthe  inchantments  that  bring  men  into  this  blindnes  to  thinly  Alcyna  fofaire  a woman, it  is  nothing  but
afhew  ofveTtue,ofbeautie,ofgracioufnes,  that  tbefoolijh  lover  perfitades  himftlf  that  he  feeth  in  the perfon  or  idol  of
his  rmftris,  of  which  Petraike  faith.  Da  quefti  magi  traasformato  fui;  Theft  are  the  witches  that  transformed  me.


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.  55

The  griefe  rJfidf  Bradamant  w](;cr/or  Rogcros  mijpendittghii  time,  may  note  to  ui  the  grace  anilong  fufferance  of
God, when  man  runneth  aftray  ajter  the  worldly  vanities.  Mcly  fTa  that  ojfereth  her  fervite  to  go  to  reclame  Rogcro,
doth  figure  unto  us  both  Preachers  and  Philo fophers , thatjhew  us  fy  the  ring  ( which  hath  beene  expounded  before  to  be
reafun)  our  foule  errours  and  our  wandring  courfes,  and  fo  maizes  us  fee  our  owne  deformities,  and  the  deformity  of  that
we  efieemed  fo  dearely,  as  in  this  bool^eyou  fee  what  manner  ofmonjler  Alcyna  appeared  inher  owne  lilienefe,  when
the  Tingif  fcafon  had  dijfolved  all  inchantments . Infinite  matter  more  might  he  apply  ed  in  allegoricali fence  out  of  this
bool^,tj  iwouldcovet  tofianduponevety  fmall  matter,  for  as  l faid  at  the  firft  ,thcfe  two  booses  he  in  a manner  a
mcere  Allegory  from  the  beginning  to  the  ending.

The  comming  0/  MelilTa  to  Rogcro  allud/eth  to  the  camming  ^Mercuric  to  ^neas  in  Virgil,  who  was  then  at  Car-
thage flay  dhy  the  love  <^Dido,  as  Rogcro  was  here  ly  Alcyna.

The  nig  that  had  the  vertuebefidedtjfolvinginchantmcnts,  tomal;e  oncgoeinvifible,aUudethtoGyge%ring,of
which  it  is  fayd,that  by  the  helpe  thereof  he  became  l{ing  of  Lydia.


I


Alluflent


I


Si-otin


’{•ft hr  iff  Alrtfui


^Inna


. 7

acficro  ,

Vij:


Xaccirttov


1

iftsSLIF^  ''**^-

--  ■

■a^  - jffpl  ^ Hril

iWlT^n

■ u’Nun^h  Inc

bmhR  f ^WjSl^

THE  EIGHT  BOOKE


5;^


Rogero fled:  Melifla after flaid^

Aftolfo  rtitb  feme  ethers  to  reflere :

Renaldo  mufiersfouidiersfeietfor  aid.

To  Chztlcs  the  great  jTpho  never  needed  mere  %
Angelica  hy  dretefle  hermit  laid.

Is  tane  and  henna  all  naked  to  the  Jheres
Orlando  hfo  trenhltd  with  biedreame.

He  leaves  the fervice  of  his  King  andreame.


JH  ftrangecnchantmcfits
ufcd  now  adajesj
[ Oh  charmers  ftrangc  a-
mong  us  daylj  founds
I ^ That  find  (b  many  charms
and  Subtle  waicS)
'Wherewith  they  hold  fond
' lovers  hearts  faft  bound,

^ Not  with  conjured  /pi-
I fits  that  they  raifc.

Nor  knowledge  of  the  ftarsand  skill  profound.

But  blinding  menscoriceits,and  them  faft  tying,
With  fimulation,  fraud,dcceit  and  lying.

s

But  he  that  had  the  rule  and  ringbf  reafon,  (cover.

Should  fcone  their  frauds,their  crafts  and  guiles  dif-
And  findca  hoordoffoule  and  lothfome  treafbn.
To  lurkc  within  the  /liew  of  fuch  a lover:

Well  may  they  feeme  moft  lovely  for  a feafbn.
When  all  their  wrinkles  they  with  painting  cover.
But  unto  men  of  wit  and  reafon  learned.

Their  fubtlcties  fhall  quickly  be  difterned*

3

Rogero  (as  I faid)  in  fecre t fort,

With  ifahtcaw  oat  of  the  caftle  went.

And  made  the  watch  and  guard  unpleafant  /port.
That  moft  of  them  his  comming  might  repent :

Some  had  their  armes,  and  fome  their  heads  cut
All  put  to  flightjthe  gates  in  pcecc?  rent,  (fhort.

And  thenunto  the  wood  he  entred,whca
He  met  by  chance  one  of  Alcynas  men,

4

Thisman  did  bearea  faulconon bis fift,

’ With  which  he  went  on  hauking  day  by  day.


To  file  in  field, or  river  as  he  lift,

7’he  countrie  full  of  game  ftill  yeelded  pray,'

He  had  a fpaniell  could  not  well  be  mift^

And  eke  a hanking  nagge  not  very  gay.

And  meeting  good  Rogero  halfcdilguifedf,,

That  he  was  fled  away  he  ftiaight  furmifed.

The  (ervant  rideth  on, and  at  their  meeting.

He  askt  ii^ero  why  he  rodefo  faft,

Rogero  gave  him  very  flender  greeting.

As  though  on  fuch  a fquire  he  little  paft;

Well  (quoth  the  faulkner)  though  thou  now  ars
1 truft  ere  long  to  fhew  thee  fuch  a call,  (fleeting^
That  with  mydoggc,my  faulcoa  and  my  horfc,

I do  not  doubt  to  fetch  thee  backc  by  force.

6

And  firft  he  lets  the  faulcon  take  her  flight.

But  as  faft  as  Ihc  did  flic.

Then  fi'om  his  horfe  the  faulkner  doth  alight^

His  horfe  flue  like  an  arrovv  by  and  by.

Then  went  the  doggc,who  was  of  courfcfo  lighfa
As  is  the  wind  that  blowcth  in  the  skic;

And  laft  of  all  himfclfc  ran  with  fuch  fhifr,

It  feem*d  the  lightnings  flame  was  not  fo  fwift»

7

Rogero  thinketh  it  a fbultdifgrace.

That  any  man  fiiould  thinkc  he  fled  for  feare.

And  more  bccaufc  he  now  was  had  in  chafcj
Wherefore  he  doth  a while  the  flight  forbeaxd,

And  manfully  to  them  he  turnes  his  face.

And  feci^  no  man  but  the  faulkner  there,
Andthar  no  weapon  in  his  hand  he  faw.

He  much  difdain’d  on  him  his  {word  to  draw.


THE  EIGHT  BOOKE


ss


But  ftraight  the  dog  doth  bite  his  horfes  heelcs,
Thchaukc  his  head  amazed  with  her  wings.
When  Rabycan  fuch  Grange  foes  forces  fccles.
He  rifeth  up  beforejbehinde  he  flings:

Rogero  thought  the  world  had  run  on  wheeles,
t.ogmtfmrii  And  Bali  far  dd  out  at  once  he  brings.

But  they,it  rcem’dfo  well  were  feene  in  fence.
That  all  his  blowes  to  them  brought  no  offence.


Both  loth  to  flay,  refolved  not  to  yceld.

He  takes  bis  target  from  his  faddlc  bow,

And  with  the  dazling  lightof  that  fame  fhccld,
Whofc  force  Melyjfa  lately  made  him  know.

He  made  them  fall  as  if  their  eyes  were  feel’d.

So  that  no  farther  let  from  them  did  grow.

But  having  vanquiflit  them  this  wife  with  eaft,

He  now  may  ride  at  leafure  where  he  pleafe.
to

Thefe  foes  once  foil'd  their  forces  overcome,

Alcyiia  flraight  had  notice  of  his  flight,

Forof  the  watchmen  one  to  her  was  come.

That  while  thefe  things  were  done  did  Hand  in  fight.
This  made  her  fland  like  one  halfe  dead  or  dumme.
And  after  put  her  into  fuch  a fright.

That  forthwith  for  avoiding  further  harme.
Through  all  the  townefhe  made  them  cricalarnie.

1 1

And  calling  oft  her  fclfe  a foolifli  bcaff,

Becaufe  Rogero  fo  from  her  was  fiipt.

Sometime  fhe  beats  her  head, her  face  and  bread.
Sometime  in  rage  her  ga  rments  all  flie  ript:

She  calleth  all  her  men  from  mofl  to  leaft,

A part  of  whom  unto  the  (ea  fhe  fhipt.

And  of  the  reft  flic  makes  a mighty  band.

To  fetch  Rogero  backe  againc  by  land.

12

All  were  fo  bufic  to  this  fervicc  bent.

That  none  remain’d  the  pallace  faire  to  gard.
Which  greatly  helpt  Melyjfai  good  intent.

Which  chiefly  was  as  you  before  have  hard.

To  fet  at  large  pooreprifoners  fo  long  pent.

Which  now  to  do  (fhe  abfent)  was  not  hard,
DilTolving  all  her  circles  and  her  knots.

And  ftroying  all  her  figures  and  her  lots.

13

And  thus  in  fields,in  houfes,and  in  woods.

She  fet  at  large  as  many  as  fhe  found.

That  had  beeneturn'd  to  trees, to  ftones  and  floods.
And  in  that  ftate  by  magicke  art  fall  boond:
Likewife  to  them  fhe  rendred  all  their  goods.

Who  when  they  fa w thcmfelves  fo  cleare  unbound,
Departing  thence  with  all  the  haft  they  might,
T!oLogeftiUa  they  arriv’d  that  night.

*4

And  firft  of  all  and  chiefcof  all  the  reft.

The  Engiijh  Duke  came  tohimfclfeagaine,

Becaufe  Rogero  lov’d  and  wiflit  himbeft,

And  lends  the  ring  that  makes  inchantments  vaice.
But  good  Melyjfacovdd  by  no  meanesreft,

Vntill  flic  could  his  armour  eke  regainc,^

And  that  fame  famous  worthie  guilded  raunce,

That  bad  to  him  luch  honor  done  in  Fr^wice.


15

With  which  Argalia  got  no  little  fartie.

Who  ufed  oft  the  fame  in  fight  to  beate.

Now  when  to  the  caftlc  came.

She  found  his  other  armour  with  thefpeare.

And  this  atchccu*d,thc  fage  and  friendly  dame
Mounts  on  the  Griffith  horfe  without  all  fcarc.

And  Duke  Aftolfo  mounting  on  his  crupper,
ToLogefitHoi  came  that  night  to  flipper.

\6

Now  was  Rogero  with  no  fmall  ado.

Tiring  hinifelfc  amid  thofe  craggic  wayes.

And  ftriving  all  that  he  with  paine  may  do.

To  cut  off  all  thofe  lot  hfomc  long  delayes.

That  hindred  him  for  fooncr  comming  to
ThatLadic  faire  whofc  vertucs  merit  praife.

Till  nearc  the  Southerne  fca  with  mickle  paine.

He  came  unto  a fandy  defert  plaine.

, '7  ,

Here  was  he  plagu’d  with  thirft  and  parching  heat.
And  with  the  funne  refleifing  on  the  fand.

Which  from  the  South  upon  the  banke  did  beat,
Enfiaming  ftill  the  airc  on  cither  hand.

But  leaving  now  Rogero  in  this  fwear.

That  ftill  I may  not  in  one  matter  (land.

To  Scotland  now  I will  remrne  againc.

And  of  Rcnaldo  talkc  a word  or  twainc.

I S

Great  was  his  entertainment  and  hischeare.

Made  by  the  King  and  people  of  the  land.

Which  fcafts  once  done, the  worthy  valiant  peare^
As  was  his  charge,  doth  let  them  underftand.

How  Charles  the  great, whofc  ftate  doth  touch  then*
In  no  fmall  need  of  their  good  aid  did  ftand,  (’ncaio
And  how  for  this  he  fent  him  to  their  nation,

And  to  this  talc  he  ads  an  exhortation.

19

Then  was  it  anfwer’d  him  without  delay.

That  for  King  Charts  and  for  the  Empires  fake,
They  all  were  ready  to  do  all  they  may,

And  would  for  this  behoofe  fhort  order  take,
Andcffrcd  himtoflicwfifhcwould  flay)

What  ftorc  of  horfe  and  footmen  he  could  make:
Namely  the  King  himfclfc  would  be  right  glad,
Togoinpcrfon,but  his  age  forbad,

20

Nor  yet  fhould  age  with  him  fo  much  have  done.

As  make  him  from  the  battcll  to  abide.

Save  that  bo  had  a wife  and  valiant  fbnne,
Wellablcfuchabandofmcntoguidc,  ji.

Whofc  value  had  already  praifes  wonne.

And  ofhis  youth  was  now  in  flourcand  pride.

This  noble  tow.nrd  impc  he  doth  intend.

As  captainc  ofhis  armed  men  to  fend.

21

Wherefore  about  his  rcalme  forthwith  he  fenf^

To  get  of  horfes  an-f  of  men  good  ftorc.

With  fhips,and  things  to  wlrmoft  pertinent.

As  nccdfull  mcatc,and  mony  needfullmore:

The  while  /{ciw/i/o  into  England  went.

The  King  to  Barxviclie  companie  him  bore.

And  men  report  that  when  they  fliould  depart.

The  King  was  feena  to  weepe  for  tender  hart.

Renal d9


Ht  foUivpn
thii  nutter

IQ,

3J.


ZtrhjH0^ '


SdtttHtt.


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


5P


Tht  »3Ublt
comnuduy
thitjonain
tuttoni  ivt  ■
pale  to  our
ferns  u that
the  tjde  flatu
fo  far  up  that
river.


He  foSotMt
•tin  the  lo.
vro!{Jlaf,  6i.


»4nieUi*.


11

Hcnaldoweat  with  fairc  and  profprouswind.

And  part  alon^  upon  the  Englijh  coaft,

Vntill  lichapt  the  noble  Tcffif  to  find,

Of  which  all  London]\x^^y  make  their  boafi :

Here  he  tooke  land  as  firft  he  had  aflign’d.

And  in  twelve  houres  journey  riding  poll,
Vntothc  Prince  of  IVales  he  was  conduced.
Whom  of  thefe  matters  fully  he  inftrufted.

The  Prince  that  was  Vicegerent  to  the  King,

(That  0fo«  highr^  wholbjourn’dnow  in  France^
From  whom  did commiffion  bring,

To  take  up  horfc,and  men, and  ordinance:

When  he  had  once  true  know Icdgeof  that  thing.
Which  of  all  other  he  would  moftadvance ;
Hcmaiflial’d  n en  ofarmes  withoutdelay.

And  points  them  meet  at  Caliice  by  a day.

24

But  here  I muft  a while  from  h^ncedigrefle,

Lefi  to  one  tale  my  pen  fIiould,fiill  be  bound,

As  good  mulitiansdo  t heirskill  expre fle.

By  playing  cn  the  firings  of  divers  found  ;

VVhilc  Renaldherc  ischcar’d  with  great  cxcelTc,
(As  ever  in  the  Englijh  land  is  found  j
I meaneto  tell  how  that  faire  Lady  fped,

That  twice  befoie  from  this  Renaldo&cd.

iS

I told  you  how  Angelica  the  brighf , -
Pled  from  Renaldo  in  a thicke  d^arkiwood.

How  on  a Hermit  there  fire  hapt  to  light.

And  how  her  fight  reviv’d  his  aged  blood  i
But  fire  that  tooke  in  him  but  fmall  delight,
Whofe  hoary  haires  cpuld  do  her  littje  good.
With  this  good  Hermit  made  b.ut,l'ttle  flay.

But  turn’d  her  hotfesrajus  and  went  away.

26

The  Hermit  feeing  he  contemned  was,

(Whom  age  long  fince,and  love  did  newly  blind)
Dothfpurre  a thoufand  times  his  filly  afie.

Who  ftill  remained  more  and  more  behind.

And  fith  he  faw  hccould  not  bringto  paife,
TofiophercoutfcCafflidled  much  in  mind)
Invainehedoth  hispooreaflcbeateandcuifc,  '
His  trot  was  very  bad, his  gallop  worfe.

27

And  being  out  of  hope  of  comming  nire.

As  having  almoftlofi  her  horfes  tracke.

He  fiudies  now  to  compafic  his  defire.

With  fome  rare  firatagemc  to  bring  her  back  ;
Vnto  that  art  forthwith  hedothretire,

(That  damned  art  that  is  furnamed  blacke)

And  by  his  bookes  of  magicke  he  doth  make,  ,
Alittle  fpritethe,  Lady  overtake.

And  as  the  hound  that  men  the  Tumbler  name,  ^ '
When  he  a hare.orcony  dothefpie,  !

Doth  feeme  anpthcr  way  his  eputfe  to  frames
As  though  he  itreant  not  toappioch  moit'sk,.
Butyet  hemeeteth^t  thc  lafthisaame,  . , ,

And  niakcthUuAtill he roakeit  die.*  , •

Sodoth  the  I^srmit  travetfi;  alt  about,  ^ r ’ ,

At  ev’ty  turoe  to  find  the  damfell  out.


29


What  he  intendstodo,  full  well  [ wot,

And  mcane  ere  long  the  fame  to  you  to  fliow,
Thedamfcll  travel!  dftill  that  knew  it  nor,

1 he  fpright  to  do  hisofike  was  not  How,

For  firaight  within  the  horfc  himftlfe  he  got.
As  file  on  landsof Ga/coigne  (casdid  go,

T!ie  fpdght  that  fully  had  pofiefi  the  horfe.
Did  drive  her  to  the  Tea  with  all  his  force.


30


Whicli  when  the  faire  and  fearcfnll  datrfell  fuv.
Although  (lie  tiide  frill  oft  with  red  and  mine,
Hcrpalficy  from  hisdangerouscourfetodraw,

Yet  (ccing plainly  flie  did  ftrivein  vainc,

Wiili  crjourchang’d  foranguifh  and  for  aw.

And  carting  oft  her  lookc  to  land  againc.

At  lafi  fbe  fitteth  fiill,  nor  further  firiveth.

For  needs  they  muft  go  whom  the  divclldrivcth,
3«

In  vaine  it  was  to  ftrike  the  horfe  her  bare,

J t was  not  dene  by  th.'it  poore  palfrcis  fait,
Wherefore  file  tucks  her  garments,  taking  care
Lefi  they  fiiould  be  bedew’d  with  waters  (alt,
Vpon  her  haire,  which  then  all  loofe  (lie  ware.
The airedothraakean  amorous aflalt.

The  greater  winds  were  rtill,  I thinkeofduty,
That  they  acknowledge  to  fo  rare  a beauty.

3X

The  waters  more,  the  land  fiill  lelTe  flic  fees.

At  lafi  file  faw  but  one  fmall  pcece  of  land.

And  that  fmall  peccein  fmall  time  flicdoth  Icefc,
Now  fees  flieneitherfhore  nor  any  fand.

Then  cold  dcfpairc  all  lively  hope  did  freefc.
When  as  herherfedid  turneto  the  right  hand,
And  at  the  twilight,  or  not  long  before.

Did  bring  her  to  a folitary  (Iiorc.

33

Here  fiie  remaining  helplcflc  and  alone.

Among  the  fruitlcfle  trees  and  fcnflefTe  rocks.
Standing  her  felfc  all  likethe  marbleftone.

Save  that  fometime  flic  tare  hcrgoldcn  locks.

At  lafi  her  eyes  to  tcarcs,her  tongue  to  monc.
She  doth  refolve,  her  faire  foft  bread  flic  knocks.
And  blames  the  God  ofheav’nand  power  divine
That  did  the  fates  unto  herfall  incline.


34


Sentence.


O fortune,  fortune  (thus  the  damfcll  cride)

Fill  now  thy  rage  and  execute  thine  ice',  . ,t
And  take  this  life  thattakeftall  befide,  '

Atjd  let  my  death  accomplifli  thy  defire  ;

I ha  ve  and  daily  do  thy  force  abide  j
Fcafc  fiilJ  my  mind.travcll  my  limbsdothtire,'  '
Ai^  makes  methink  in  this  great  ftormc  and  fiiifc.
That  death  wcrcfwecttofhortenfufchahfc.  i

35

Can  ajltfiy  malice  do'mc  further  fpite  ?
Cananyftatebcworfeormorcunftcdy  ? .

That  am  from  princely  feepter  haniiflit  quite,

A hclp'cflc  hap  and  hurt  paft  all  remedy,  jA.
And  worfethenithis,  mine  honor  fhining  bright
Isftained  fore, and esr-’n defaft alrcdyv  • ‘ 1
For  though  in  aft  noilll  ever  wrought.

Yet  wandriog  thus  willmakc  men  think  nlc  nought.

F * ‘ 39


Ca far  pat  lU
way  hu  wifi
for  ptjpiuot/f
aUcdging.
Hon folitm  4
maio,  fedd
fttjpitioneca^
vendum.


6o


THE  EIGHT  BOOKE


What  can  a woman  hold  of  a ny  price.

If  once  fhe  Iccfc  her  honor  and  good  name?

Alas  I hate  this  bcautie  and  defpire.

And  wifli  it  never  had  bene  effuch  fame;

Ne  do  I for  this  gift  now  thanke  the  skies.

By  which  my  fpoilc  and  utter  ruine  came,

Which  caus  a my  brother  Argal  fhed  his  blood,

Ne  could  hisarmes  enchanted  do  him  good.

37

^Uthkflcty  For  this  the  Kingof  Tirtar  Agricane,
wfAUitfet  Sought  of  my  father  Galafion  the  fpoilc,

whilome  was  in  India  cald  great  Cane,
trdas  Orion-  And  after  dide  with  forrow  of  the  foilc.
daiaomuroK  For  this  I dayly  doubting  to  be  tanc.

From  place  to  place  do  pafle  with  endlefle  toilc.
And  now  to  loofc  alai  what  haft  thou  left  me.

Since  fame, and  goods, and  friends  arc  ail  bereft  me?

38

If  drowning  in  the  fea  were  not  a death
Severe  enough  to  quench  thy  raging  fpitc,

Then  fend  fomebeaftout  ofthisdefert  heath,

To  tearc  my  limbs  and  to  devoure  me  quite:

1 fhall  thee  thanke  for  flopping  of  my  breath.

If  to  torment  me  thou  have  no  delight.^

Thcfc  wofull  words  vtterd  the  Ladic  bright.

When  ftraight  the  hermit  came  within  her  fight .

39

Who  all  the  while  had  in  a corner  flood,

And  heard  her  make  this  piteous  plaint  and  mone.
Proceeding  from  her  fad  and  mourning  mood,
Enough  to  move  a heart  as  hard  as  ftone:

It  did  the  fenex fornicator  good.

To  thinkethathe  was  there  with  her  alone,

Yet  fo  devoutly  commeth  this  old  carrion.

As  though  it  had  bene  Faul  or  Saint  Hillariin.

40

When  as  thedamfell  faw  a manappeare,

In  fuch  a defert  folitary  place.

She  ftraight  began  to  be  of  better  cheare,

Though  feare  and  dread  appcarc  ftill  in  her  face;
And  with  a voice  fo  loud  as  he  might  heare.

She  praid  him  pitie  this  her  wofull  cafe,
Recounting  all  her  dangers  overblowne.

To  him  to  whom  they  were  already  knowne.

41  '

No  fooner  had  the  hermit  heard  her  out.

But  ftraight  to  comfort  her  he  doth  begin,

And  fiiewcs  by  many  rcafoas  and  devour.

How  all  thefc  plagues  were  fent  her  for  her  fim
The  while  he  puts  his  faweie  hands  about,  ' ^

Sometime  her  breafts,  fometime  her  neck  and  chin,
And  more  and  more  ftill  gathaing  heart  of  grace.
He  offers  boldly  her  for  to  embrace.

4*

But  fhe  that  much  difdain’d  this  homely  fafhion,

Doth  ftainc  her  checkes  with  red  for  very  fliame,
Thruft  back  his  carten  corpes  without  compafiion,
Reviling  him  with  many  a fpitefnll  name.

Who  tefty  with  old  age  and  with  new  paflion.
That  did  him  now  with  wrath  and  love  inflame,
Drawes  out  a bottlcof  a ftrangeconfe^ion.

That  fleepe  procureth  by  a ftroDginfcaioui


With  this  he  fprinkleth  bet  h the  damfcl*  eie«,

(Thcfc  eyes  whence  Ciipidoit  liisariowes  f])ct'

Straight  found  aflcepe  the  gocdly  damfcll  lies,

Subjcdlcd  to  the  will  of  fuch  a fot.-
Nc  yet  for  otight  he  did  or  could  dtrife.

He  could  procure  his  curtail  ftir  a jot.

Yet  oft  hckiftherlipsjhcrcheekcs  her  breft.

And  felt  and  faw  the  beauties  of  the  reft.

The  dullcrd  jade  ftill  hahgeth  dewne  his  head,
Sturringorfpiirring  could  not  make  him  praunce,
Thefundrier  wayeshc  faid,the  worfe  hefped,

Hisyouthfull  dayes  were  done,  he  could  not  daunce.

His  fttength  was  gone,his  courage  all  was  dead,

His  weapon  looked  like  a broken  Hunce:

And  while  himfelfe  in  vaine  he  thus  doth  cumber.

He  falleth  downc  by  her  into  a flumber,

4t

But  now  another  evill  chance  befell,

(For  one  ill  tUrne  alone  is  feldome  done)  SttunH,

The  which  toth’end  I may  the  better  tell.

Know  this,about  thefetting  of  the  funne.

There  is  an  lie, Ebuda  as  men  tell,

Whofc  habitants  arc  welnigh  ail  undone.

By  mcancs  that  mightie  Proteus  thither  lent
An  OrI;e  that  doth  the  people  tearc  and  rent.

'46

Within  this  lie, as  auncient  ftories  tell,

(I  not  affirme  how  falfe  they  are  or  true)

Sometime  a King  of  miehtic  powredid  dwell.

That  had  a daughter  pa^ng  fairc  ofhue.

The  which  fairc  Ladic  Proteus  lik’t  fo  well.

When  heronfands  in  walking  hedid  vcw.

That  though  he  dwelt  in  waters  fait  and  cold,'

Yet  frefli  hot  love  on  him  had  taken  hold.

47

Which  hcate  when  all  the  fea  could  not  aflwage.

He  thought  her  milkwarm  flcfii  could  only  quench.

And  (for  he  faw  fhe  was  oflawfull  age)

With  her  confent  he  forft  the  princely  wench:

Which  finne  did  fet  her  father  in  fuch  rage.

That  ftraight  condemning  her  in  open  bench;

Her  of  her  life  he  publikely  bereaved,

Nor  fpar’d  theinfant  in  her  wombe  conccavcd.

48

This  cmcll  ad  her  lover  fo  inflamed,

OnKing  and  Hand  hcdothwreakchisfpitc.

He  (ends  that  monfter  that  before  I named,

With  other  bcafts  to  ftroy  the  Hand  quite;

Thefc  monfters  hurt  their  men,beat,kild  and  lamed.

In  fine  put  all  the  people  in  fuch  fright.

That  to  efcape  the  bcaft  devoid  of  pitie.

They  left  their  ficlds,and  fled  unco  their  citie.

4*

And  though  men  arm'd  the  gates  and  wals  defend.

Yet  they  within  fcant  thought  tbemftlves  fccure.

And  fith  their  harmes  have  ncithercafe  nor  end.

And  tir’d  thefc  tedious  travels  to  endure,

Vnto  ApoUos  oracle  they  fend,

To  know  how  they  their  fafctic  might  procure.

Who  after  humble  fute  and  faaifice,

Anfwcr’d  them  of  Ebuda  in  this  wife.

Blood


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


Si


50

Blood  guiltlcfle  fpih  did  breed  great  Proteui  ire.
Inflam’d  with  love,  and  f'edv/ithbeaury  rare.
Blood  guiltlelTc  murt  be  fpilt  to  quench  this  fire,
Till  one  be  found  may  with  the  firft  compare;
Thisyoumuftdo  and  if  you  peace  dcfire.

To  take  of  damfcls  thole  that  faired  are,

And  offer  one  a day  upon  the  fliorc.

Till  he  find  one  like  unto  that  before,

51

ThIswofiiU  anfwer  breeding  mochdcfpaire,

And  more  diflikc  within  their  carcfull  heart*.

To  thinkc  that  ev’ry  day  a damfell  fairc,

Mud  for  a prey  be  giv’n  without  defam ;

This  is  the  caufc  that  maketh  them  repaire,

(To  find  fufScient  dore)  to  fundry  parts.

And  get  them  Virgins  faire  and  undeflourei
Of  tins  moft  ugly  Or^e  to  be  devoured.

Now  if  this  be  of  Proteus  trucor  not,

I meanc  not  in  defence  of  it  to  ftand.

But  this  is  certaine  Co,  full  well  I wot,
Mcnufethiscrucllcuftome  in  that  land.

And  day  by  day  a maid  is  drawnc  by  lot.

And  left  for  prey  upon  therockc  orfand,

Vnto  the  monftcr  that  doth  them  devoure,
Ev’nin  thcirpiimcof  youth  and  tender  flourc.

53


57


Yet  fuch  great  force  her  palling  beauty  bad,  ,

Among  thefc  barbarous  and  lavage  wights,
Thattney  appeared  forrowfull  and  fad.

To  wey  the  danger  of  her  doleful!  plights,

Itfeemcd  all  of  them  would  havebccne  glad.

To  have  preferv’d  her  many  dayesand  nights;

But  luch  fmall  ftore  of  ot  hers  there  remained,

At  laft  to  offer  her  they  were  coaftrained.

58

Who  can  the  woes,  the  teares,  the  plaints  rehcarfe,

The  lamentations  & the  mourning  found,  fpearcej
That  feem’d  the  heavens  thcmfclvcs  with  noifeto
To  rend  the  rocks,  and  ftir  the  ftedy  ground  ?

Her  iv’ry  corps  con  vay’d  (as  in  a hearfe)

By  wailing  wights,  wherethey  rouft  leaveit  bound;
The  thought  hcreofinmefuch  pang  doth  breed,

I can  no  further  in  this  talc  proceed.

59

Wherefore  I muflfome  other  matter  find,

Vmillmy  Mufc  her lorrow may  afTwage,

For  furc  no  cruell  beafi  were  fo  unkind,

Nor  Tyger  in  their  greateft  wrath  and  rage.

Nor  any  cruell  tyrant  caji  we  find,

(Although  there  are  good  ftore  in  cv*ry  age)

That  could  behold  or  thinkc  without  tompafliOa|

A Lady  bounden  info  vile  a fafhioo.

60


O wretched  wights,  whom  fubtic  fnarcs  have  brought  Ob  bad  Orlando  notice  of  her  fmart,


To  this  unfortunate  andfatall  .le.

Where  damfcls  faire  and  handfomeout  arefbught,
Toferveforfood  untoamonftervilc?

Their  pyrats  bring  them  home, their  vcffcls  fraught
With  fuch  they  take  byforcc,  or  trap  with  wile.
With  which  they  fill  their  prifons  and  their  towres.
To  have  them  ready  at  appointed  hourcs.

5*

Thus  fendi ng  out  their  veffcls  day  by  day.

It  chanc’d  that  one  of  them  with  tempeft  tofi,

Hapt  to  arrive  whereas  the  Hermit  lay
With  that  faiic  Lady  hard  upon  the  coft  :

Oh  cruell  chance,  oh  precious  p<  crleffc  pray.

Among  the  piratscitherto  beloft.

Or  to  be  caried  tothefacall  lie,

To  be  devoured  of  a monftcr  vile.

55

That  beamy  rare  that  Sacrapant  ay  deemed
Morcdcarc  thep  living,  lioerty  orlifc  '•

That  beauty  rarcthat  to  Or/ando  feemed
Moft  fit  ©fall  the  world  lo  be  his  wife.*

That  beauty  rare  in  India  fb  efteemed,

That  bred  fbmany  a blow  and  bloody  ftrife.

Is  now  fo  quire  of  aid  and  comfort  reft,

Not  one  to  fpeake  a word  for  her  is  left.

The  damfell  fairc  drown’d  in  a deadly  fleepc.

Was  taneand  bound  before  flie  could  awake,

Alfb  thcdrowfic  Fryer,  to  make  him  keepe
Hcrcompany,  away  with  them  they  take  :

This  done,  they  lanchcd  out  into  thedeepe.

And  with  this  precious  prey  they  homeward  make,
Where  in  a Caftlc  they  detain'd  her  thrall,
Vmilltody  herlucklc^clot  fliouid  fall.


Who  was  to  PrtfM  gone  to  fcckc  her  out.

Or  tbofetwoKnightswhom  latethc  fiend  did  part.
The  which  for  love  of  her  together  fought.

They  would  for  herufe  all  paine,carc  and  art.

Of  death  nordangcr  they  would  putnodoubt:

But  if  they  hclpe  not  now,  it  is  no  wonder,

Sith  they  and  fhe  were  plac’d  fo  far  afundcr.

61

Now  in  this  time  to  Paris  (icge  was  layd.

By  famous  Agramant  Trajanos  fonne,
Ofwhichatlaitthcy  grew  fo  fore  afraid.

The  towne  had  almoft  of  the  Turl{S  been  wonne.
Had  not  their  vowes  procur’d  them  hcav’nly  ayd.
They  had  bin  ruin’d  all  and  quite  undone.

The  force  of  Francehid  welnighthcn  binfoylcd.
The  holy  Empire  had  almoft  bin  fpoylcd.

6z

For  when  that  now  the  City  was  on  fire.

And  when  all  hopeof  humane  hclpe  was  paft,

Then  mighty  God  forgetting  wrath  and  ire,

Vpon  their  teares,  repentance  true  and  fall.

At  Charier  his  humble  prayer  and  defire.

With  hclpe  from  hcav’n  rcicev’d  them  at  the  laft.
And  fent  fuch  rainc  to  aide  the  noble  Prince,

As  fcld  was  fccnc  before,  and  never  fince,

6}

Now  lay  Orlando  on  his  rcftlelTc  bed.

And  thinks  with  fleepe  to  reft  his  troubled  Ipritej
But  ftili  a thoufand  thoughts  pclTcft  hisbead,
Troubling  his  mind,  and  fleepc  expelling  quite  ;
Ascirclcs  in  a water  clearcarcfpread.

When  fun  doth  fhine  by  day,  and  mooneby  night
Succeeding  oneanother  in  a ranke.

Till  all  by  one  and  oiicdotouchthc  bankc*

F2


Karit^nii

uAngeUit

io.Beokft


6z


THE  EIGHT  BOOKE


64

So  when  hismiflrisentredin  his  thought,

(Aslighcly  ihe  was  never  thence  away)  ,

The  thought  of  her  in  him  fuch  circles  wrought.

As  kept  him  waking  ever  night  and  day,

To  tbinke  how  he  hom  Jndia  had  her  brought,

And  that  fhcfliould  thuson>the  fodaine  fttay,

Kor  that  hecould  of  her  true  notice  know.

Since  Charles  at  Biirdels  had  the  overthrow.

The  griefe  hereofdid  him  moft  neerely  tuch.

And  caus’d  him  often  to  himfclfcto  fay.

What  bcaft  would  have  been  overrul’d  fo  much  ?
That  when  I might  have  made  her  with  meftay,
fForwhy  her  lovcand  zcaletome  wasiuch.

That  in  hcrlifc  flic  never  <aid  me  nay)

Yet  I muft  fufFcr  Marti'M  for  to  guard  her.

As  though  my  felfe  but  little  did  reguard  her.

66

1 fliotild  to  Charles  myftlfe  have  rather  feufed,

And  as  I did,  have  kept  thedamfellftill,

Orif  excufesallhad  bin  refufed,

I might  in  Head  of  reafon  pleaded  will  t
And  rather  then  have  bin  fb  much  abufed,

All  thofethat  Hiould  rcHH  me  Hay  and  kill.

At  Icaft  1 might  have  got  her  fafer  keeping.

And  not  have  let  her  thus  be  loft  with  fleeping.

67

Where  bldeft  thou,whcve  wanderft  thou  my  dcarc  ?

So  yongjfb  lovely, and  fo  faire  of  hew  ?

Even  like  a lambc  when  ftarresdo  firft  appeare,

(Her  dame  and  fliepheard  being  out  of  vew)
Bleateth  aloud  to  make  the  ftiepheard  heatc.

And  in  her  kind  her  evill  hap  doth  icw,

Vnrill  the  wolfedoth  find  her  to  her  painCy
The  filly  flicpherd  feeking  her  in  vainc,

68

Where  is  my  love, my  joy, my  lifcsdclight  f

Wanderft  thou  ftill  J do  not  the  wolves  offend  thee  ?
Or  nccd’ft  not  thou  the  fctvico  of  t hy  Knight  J
And  keepeft  thou  the  flovvre  did  fo  commend  thee  ?
That  flowrc  that  me  may  make  a happy  wight.
That  flowrc  for  which  t cverdiddefcnd  thee.

That  I forhare,  to  plcafc  thy  mind  (too  chart)

Is  not  that  flowrc  falas)  now  gone  and  part  i
f 9

O moft  unfortunate  and  wretched  I,

If  they  have  tanc  that  fwcet  and  precious  flourc.
What  can  1 do  in  fuch  a calc  but  dy  ?

Yea  I would  kill  my  felfe  this  prefent  hourc,

I would  this  world  and  that  tccomedefy,

Earth  fitftmy  coarfc,  and  Hell  my  fculcdevoure.
And  this  unto  himfclfcOr/rt»</o  faid,

With  care  and  forrowes  being  overlaid,

70

Now  was  tlie  time  when  man  and  bird  and  heart.

Gives  to  his  travel’d  body  due  repofe,
Wlien/bmconbeds,  and  fomcon  boordsdoreft,
Slccpcmakingthem  forget  both  fricndsand  foes.
Blit  cares  do  thee  Orlando  fo  molcft,

That  fcarcc thou  canft  thine  eye*  a little  clofc.

And  yet  that  fugitive  and  little  flumber,

With  dreames  unpleafant  tbec  doth  vex  and  cumber.


7*

He  dreamt  thatftanding  by  a pleafatit  greene,

V pon  a bank  wirh  fragrant  flowers  all  painted.

He  faw  the  faireft  fight  that  erft  was  fecnc,

Imcanc  that  face  with  which  he  was  acquainted.

And  thofetwo  ftars  thatCupid  fits  between  (tainted.
Whence  came  that  fhaft  wbofe  head  his  heart  hath
The  fight  whereof  did  breed  in  him  that  plcafurc,

T hat  he  prefer’d  before  all  worldly  treafurc.

72

He  thought  himfelfe  the  fortunateft  wight
That  ever  was,  and  eke  the  blclTedft  lover;

But  lo  a ftoi  medeftroy’d  the  flowers  quite.

And  all  the  pleaiant  banke  with  hatic did. cover : ]
Then  fuddcnly  departed  his  delight.

Which  he  remain’d  all  hopclcflc  to  recover  j
She  being  of  this  lempcftfo  afraid.

That  in  the  wood  to  favc  hcrfclfc  flicflraid,

7?

And  there  (unhappy  wretch)  againft  his  will.

He  loft  his  i.ady  tn  unlucky  howrt  t
But  her  to  find  agamc  he  travel’d  ftill.

Employing  to  her  <afcty  all  his  powrc,

The  woods  and  deierts  he  with  plaints  doth  fill.

And  c:  idc,  alas  turn'd  is  try  Iweettofowtc  :

And  whilerh'‘fi  fameand  fuch  like  words  he  faid,
Hethougnt  he  heard  her  voice  demaunding  aid.

74

At  this  fame  voice  (well  knownc)  a while  he  ftaid,
Then  follow’d  as  the  found  him  guided  moft.

With  this  mifchancc  hisnund  was  much  difmaid.

His  body  fore  with  toileand  travell  toft;

When  ftraight  he  heard  another  voice, that  faid,
Now  hope  no  more, for  all  thy  hope  is  loft.

And  of  the  fodaine  waking  withthe  found.

His  eicsallfullof  watry  tcarcs  he  found.

7T

So  fere  he  was  affrighted  at  this  vifion.

That  ev’n  as  though  it  had  been  fo  indeed,

And  not  a fancy  vainc orapparition,

Thinking  hislady  ftoed  of  himin  need  ;

In  fccrct  fort  hegetteth  all  provifion.

To  makcrepaire  unto  her  aid  withfpeed  :

And  (for  he  would  not  willingly  be  knowne)

He  tooke  nor  man  nor  armour  of  his  ownc.

76

Hiscoatc  of  armes,  of  colour  white  and  red.

He  left  behind  for  doubt  ofill  fucccfTe,

That  if  it  fortun'd  he  but  evill  fpeed.

At  Icaft  the  Ioffe  and  foilc  fhould  be  the  Icfle  :

Vpon  hisarmourcypreffe  blackc  hefpred,

With  colour  fad,  hisforrow  to  expreffe.

And  thusdifguis’d  in  fad  and  mournjng  hue.

He  parts,  and  biddeth  not  his  friends  aduc*

77

Not  of  KingCbar/ofrwhofe  kinfman  he  isnearc,
Nortakcih  he  his  leave  of
Nor  yet  to  kinfman  kind,  or  frcind  moft  dcarr,

Doth  he  his  meaning  open  or  impai  t :
Noruntilldaydid  allabrcxle  appeare.

Was  Charles  advifed  that  he  did  depart,

But  in  great  rage  andcholcr  when  he  knew  if.

He  fwatc  and  vow’d  Orlando  fore  ftiould  rue  it.

At


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


^3


7*

Atwhich  good  Braiifna<«T  was  greatly  grccvcd.

Atone  that  deem'd  it  was  without  dcfart.

And  (that  hisfrend  by  him  might  be  rcleeved)

To  find  him  out  fromthenre  hcftraightdothpart^
For  hy  his  words,  he  certainly  bcleeved.

That  he  could  cafe  bis  friend  Orlandos  fmart,
fierdtUig*  But  this  to  Fiordeledge  he  not  imparted,
wtfitaBTtt)*-  For  fearc'tbat  his  purpofe  would  have  thwarted.

dmtrt.

This  Fiordeledge  of  him  was  dearely  loved,

A Lady  of  great  beauty  and  cleare  fame,

Ofparcnts  good, of  mannersunreproved,

Both  wealthy,  wifeand  modeft  tothefamc,
Ycttakcthhc  no  leave  of  his  beloved,

But  early  in  the  morning  from  hcrcame,

Toturoc  that  night  was  his  determination.

But  was  deceived  of  his  expe^ation.


So

And  when  (he  waited  bad  a month  or  mote,
Fxpeding  his  retiirnc,and  all  in  vaine,
Forloveof  himflie  was  inflam’d  foforc,

Alone  fliegocs  to  find  himoutagainc.

And  many  forty  haps  fliebid  therefore,

Asin  the  ftory  fliall  beflicwcd  plaine.

For  of  Orlando  now  1 have  to  fhy,

That  isof  more  importance  then  both  thay.

81

Who  having  chang’d  the  armes  he  late  did  wcarc,
Direftly  to  the  City  gate  he  went,

A nd  told  the  Scntnelljfoftly  in  his  eai  e,

What  wa-s  his  name,  and  what  was  his  intent  j
Who  ftraight  abaft  the  bridge,  without  all  feare,
ffupofiog  ftire  his  uncle  had  himfent;)

And  ftraight  upon  the  Pagan  campc  he  lighted,
Asinthc  bookcenfuing  isrecitcd.


Moral.  adventures  o/ Angelica, wewi^  note  hoto  perillout  a thing  beauty  is  if  it  he  not  ejpecialfygardedwith  tie

grace  of  G od,andrvuh  verme  of  the  mind,beingcontinuaUy  ajfail'  drvith  enemies  jpirituall  andtempurall:  /«Orlan-"
dos  dreame  we  may  fee  how  unquiet  thoughts  are  bred  in  the  minds  ofthofe  that  are  given  over  to  the  pajfm  of  love  or
ambition,or  what  fever  elfe  may  bee  underfioodby  Angelica.  Lafily  in  that  Orhndo  abandons  his  Prince  and  counny
in  their  great  eft  extremity  ;we  may  obferve  the  uncomely  and  carelejfe  a6fs  that  difhoneft  or  tinordinaie  love  do  provol^e
even  the  noble  ft  unto,iJ  once  they  get  harbour  in  their  minds, and  be  not  overruledwith  rcafon  and  grace.

Hiftorv  hiftoricall  matter, fave  of  the  diftrejfe  of  the  Parifians,  oj  which  I will  not  greatly  (land  more

then  that  I /did  b fore , it  is  not  improbable  that  they  were  about  that  time  ajfailedfy  the  Turtle  ; asfor  ether  matters
that  be  here  lightly  touched,  as  the  devotion  o/Paul  or  Hylanon,  the  fable  of  Proteus  or  fuih  lil^e,  the  tablcfhall fet  it
domne  more  plaine.

Allegory.  Tbeformer  Allegory  is  here  continued  of  Rogeros  flying  fiom  Alcyna,  by  which  muftftill  be  tinderftood,a  m.m  refor~

mingbis  courfe  of  life,  and  flying  from  fenfuality  and  pkafures ; now  whereas  it  is  faid  in  this  booli  that  Alcinasmw
or  herfaull^ner  with  his  horje  haiil^and  dog  did  impeachRogesospaftage,  I taby  it  that  by  the fe  four  e are  meant  the  fours
pafjions  that  mo  ft  trouble  the  mind  when  it  begins  to  encline  to  vertue,  namely  by  the  Jervant  feare  may  be  under  flood,
which  is  ever  fervile  and  bafe,fy  the  hau\  covetoufneffe  that  is  ever  feeding  new  prey  and  is  never  fatisfed : by  the  dog
griefe  and  difeontentment  that  is  alway  by  ting  and  envying  and  greeving  at  others  well  doing:  by  the  horfe  is  underftood
inordinate  joy, which  is  in  another  fmd  an  enemy  to  vertueis" conftancy  ,foT  as  foon  is  a temperat  and  moderate  mind  dif
covere  din  prosperity  asin  adverfity,  and  {as  Tully  faith)  a wife  man  is  neither  Aducrlis  rebus  oppicfl'usnccclatiis
fecundis : to  which  ejfclf  I remember  a verfe  of  my  fathers,  written  to  an  Earle  manyyceres  fince.

Such  one  is  ware  by  what  degrees  heclymes.  And  can  in  both  fb  well  uphold  his  ftate.

Rather  pleafant  then  ptoud  in  high  eftate.  As  many  would,  but  few  can  do  or  none,

lather  bold  then  abaflit  in  lowring  times.  Of  which  few  fort,  I wifli  your  Lordlliiponc.

But  to  proceedin  the  Allegory, the  fe  impediments  that  difturbe  men  in  their  good  courfe, are  all  hut  life  owls  or  hatts
drive  away  with  Junfhine:jur  the  light  ojunderftadingand  ihefhiningoftrueworthincs,or(as  M.Dycr  in  an  excellent
verfe  of  his  termeth  it ) the  light  thatfhines  in  worthines ,diffulveth  and  diperfeth  tlefc  dufty  impediments , that  let  a,
man  in  his  journey  to  Lostftcillas  Court, that  is,to  the  court  of  vertue , of  temperance,  oj  piety,  where  all  good  Icjfons  are
taught,  as  fhall  be  fhewed  more  plaine  in  that  part  of  this  boof, where  Rogcrotoim  roLogcftilla,

By  Mclyfla  that  recovers  fiom  Alcyna  Aftolpbosdr?»or,a/2iif^ie  Lancia  d'oro  or  Gold-launcc  .andlilyvifc  reft  ores
Aftolpho  to  his  former  ftate  andfhape  ly  vertue  of  the  ring, in  the  ab fence  of  Alcyna^^  her(  I fay)  we  may  under  ft  ani
fome  grave  andghoftly  cmnceller,  that  with  ftrong  reafons  and  godly  per  fwafions, having  driven  awayjor  the  time,  a
mans  finfuli  thoughts  and  de fires, tafes  occafion  utterly  to  cxtingiufb  them,and  deliver  a man  from  them  with  the  fame
reafons, and  to  draw  him  to  vertue  and  Religion.  Alcynas/ortcr  fhe prepares  by  fea  and  by  land,  fignify  the  meanes  our
ghoftly  enemies  ufe  to  bring  lis  bacf  again  to  our  old  vices  (lifethe  dogtohisvomit)  by  land  fhe  JoUowes  him,and  after
by  fea  fhe  encounters  him, which  briefly  fhowes,that  the  remernbrance  ofpaffei pleajures  mafe  a man  often  in  pcrill  to  be
drawn  baefe  as  it  were  by  land,  and  then  hy  fea  (as  a place  of  terror  and  danger)  we  are  ajfailed  with  grievous  adverfi-
ties,as  without Jpeciallfuccour  wefhouldbe  quite  caft  away.

Rogeros  hard  travell,ftony  waies,and  afterward  the  fweat  and  drought  he  abode,  fignifie  A Uegorically  the  unplca-
/antnes  of the  charge  of  evill  life  to  an  auftere  courfe  of  living,  which  after  notwithftanding  is  mo  ft  exceeding  comfor-
table and  delight  fame.

Allufion.  ^ bawdy  Fryer  that  by  his  impotency  more  then  his  honefty  faved  Angelicas  maidenheai,is  alluded  by  my  Author,
(as  fome  have  ftippofed)  to  fome  ftuh  Prelate  in  \tzly  of  his  acquaintance,  andhut  for  goodmanners  fa{e  might  beal-
ludedto  fome  thathave  been  fo  tlludedby  fuch  good  men,  that  notwithftanding  they  tfiight  fue  their  writ  ojdotage.yet

tviiUmtrii,  as  forward  as  theyongeft  inthat  fervice.  Atquc  jacentpigro  crimen  onufquctoro.

Angelicas  horfe  that  tarried  her  into  the  fea,  Alludes  to  the  hull  that  hare  Europa  fuch  another  voy.ige.


THE  NINTH  BOOKE


THE  ARGVMENT.

Orlando  haf}ethis  journey  vehen  he  henrSy
fVhat  coFUjfood  Proteus  his  Orke  alleges y
"But  by  thevaj  mov'd  with  Olimpias  tenrSy
Thtt  did  lament  her  latecaptived  jpoufoy
Hti  haliy  journey  he  a while  forbears  y
To  wreake  her  wrong  upon  her  foe  he  vowes,
fyhtch  done  no  longer  in  the  place  he  tarries  :
By reno/«//e  Olimpia  marries.


Thi/rutet  of
wihontll  U»t


in  every  thing-

And  of  the  Church  a Championwas  before,
Now  that  in  loves  blind  pathcs,hc  learns  to  plod,
Forgets  himfclfe,his  country  and  bis  God.
a

Faine  would  1 him  disburden  of  thisbiame.

Glad  in  my  faults  a fellow  fuch  toHndc,

For  to  my  good  Ifcele  me  dull  and  lame.

But  prompt  to  ill,  and  Aviftcr  then  the  wind :
Henot  bethinking  him  how  great  a fliame,

1 1 was  to  leave  his  hclpleffc friends  behind.

Went  whercthe  Kingsof  Affrid^c  and  of  Spetiney
Did  ly  in  held  cncampt  with  all  their  trainc.

3

Yet  not  encampt  1 can  them  call,  for  why
They  lay  abroad  difperfed  with  theralne.

Some  twenty,  ten,  or  eight  together  lie,  -
Or  fixe, or  five,  orfoure,orthree,or  twaW :
Some  farther  off*,  and  fome  are  lodged  nie.

All  weary  with  their  former  taken  paine  ;

He  might  have  kill’d  of  them  a worthy  crew,
Keyet  bi«  ’Dvenndana  once  be  dretv.


iomtnet.  T he  caufc  was  tbit,  fe  noble  was  hit  minde.


To  muriher  men  afleepe  he  thought  it  bafe,

He  lets  them  reft,  and  fcckcs  his  lore  to  findc.

By  cv’iy  pcrfbn,and  intv’ry  place.

And  thole  he  meets,  with  words  and  fpecchcs  kind,
(Dcftribing  her  apparcll  and  her  face)

He  praics  of  all  good  fcllowfhip  to  fiioc.

Or  where  fhc  is,  or  whither  Ihc  did  goc-
Towhoraoflatemoft  faith-  5

full  love  he  bore.  When  light  approcht  and  day  beganto  breake.

Who  carft  fograve  and  wile  By  day  he  fcckcs  her  in  the  hoft  of  r«r/;ef.


Las  what  danunage  cannot
Cupii  bring,

A noble  heart  once  thralled
to  his  lore  ?

That  makes  Orlando  carelcs
of  his  King,


OvidSnthe
ptrpm  tflAe.
•Uo.

Viieo  mtlU
trapTobo^,
dtttricrx
pqutr.


His.pafllons  ftrong,  do  make  his  rcafon  wcake,
Yccld  to  the  fit  that  in  hisfancy  workes.

Some  heipe  it  was,  he  could  their  language fpcake.
By  which  the  fafer  he  among  them  lurkes :

His  words,  his  weeds,  fo  like  to  theirs  were  feene.
As  though  he  bred  in  Tripoly  had  bccnc,

6

But  when  he  faw  his  flaying  was  for  nought,

A t three  daics  end  away  from  thence  he  flang,

He  left  no  townc  of  France  and  ^aine  unfought,
Nc  yet  this  paine  could  ought  aflwage  that  pang :
Him  Autumnefirft  this  wandring  humor  brought.
When  frutesdo  fade,  his  fruitlcfTc  loye  firft  fprang.
And  laded  ftill  his  force  and  ragerenuing,

Both  all  the  fpring  and  fuimncr  next  enfuing.

7

Kow  havin*  travcl’d  as  his  cuftomc  was.

From  rcalmc  to  realme,  he  came  upon  a day.

Where  as  the  river  clcare  femetimes  asglaftc.

That  twi'xt  the  Britans  and  the  Normans  lay.

Was  grownc  fo  high  as  now  he  could  not  paflV,

The  fnow  and  raine  had  borne  fb  great  a fway.

By  force  whereof  the  bridge  was  overthrowne,

Tbc  pallagc  ftopt,thc  foords  were  oy  erftownc.

F+  i


66


THE  NINTH  BOOKE


s

And  looking  round  about  the  fhorc  at  large,
Devifing  how  to  palTe  to  th’othcr  fide.

He  faw  a little  way  from  thence  a barge.
That  feemed  toward  himthc  courfc  to  guide.
Of  which  a certainedamfi:!!  had  the  charge.
To  whona  with  voice  aloud  Orlando  cride,
Iittreating  her  becaufc  his  had  was  great.
Within  the  barge  him  to  affoord  a feat.


9

The  maid  affirm’d  no  price  the  barge  could  hire,
And  to  command  it  he  had  no  commiffion,  ,
But  promift  flic  would  grant  him  his  defire,

V pon  a ccriainc  cov’nant  and  condition  •
Which  was  to  undertake  by  fword  and  fire.
For  to  deftroy  an  He,  without  remiffion,

A cruel!  lie,  EhuJa  cald  by  name,

The  wickcd'il  place  where  ever  creature  came,
to

For  know  (quoth  flicj  beyond  the  /riJljhndj
There  lyes  among  the  reft  this  graccldTc  lie.
That  yecrely  fends  of  wicked  wights  a bind.
To  rob,  to  fpoile,  to  fraud  and  to  beguile ;

All  women  kind  that  happen  in  their  hand,
Ito^e  in  the  They  give  for  food  unto  a monfier  vile,
'smkfln“  monfter  vile  that  ufeth  every  day,
toe  To  ^ maid  or  woman  for  his  pray.

Spry.  1 1

■ Of  merchants  and  of  pyrates  that  do  come.

They  get  them  ftorc,  and  of  the  faired  mod  .*
Now  gutfle  by  one  a day  how  great  a fomme.
Of  women  kind  within  this  lie  arc  loft.

1 f then  of  love  you  ever  tafted  cromme,
Makeonc  within  the  King  of  Irelands  hoft.
That  make  them  ready  fliortly  to  proceed.

To  take  a faire  revenge  of  this  foulc  deed.


la

No  foonn  had  Orlando  heard  her  out.

But  vow’d  to  be  as  forward  asthe  firft,

T o joyne  himfclfc  with  that  fame  worthy  rout,
Sent.OvU.  And  now  (for’lovc  doth  ever  caft  the  word)

Efi  rttfalitU  Within  himlelfc  begins  to  caft  this  doubt,
tipUHtutnt-  Lead  that  this  wicked  monftcr  and  accurd,
ri4*mar.  hisLady  for  a dainty  bit,

Becaufc  he  heard  no  newes  of  her  as  yet,

13

And  this  conceit  his  mindc  (b  much  pofteft.

And  in  his  heart  madcfuch  a deepe  impreffion,
Sentenct.  (For  both  in  nature  he  did  ftill  deteft
^irutpro-  Allfuch  asuntoothcrsdooppfcffion)

/fity  tfnobi-  much  he  fear’d  his  love  awong  the  reft.

Might  fall  into  the  monfters  vile  podeffion.

That  ftraight  he  fliipt,  and  by  their  due  account.
Within  three  daies  he  pallS.  Michels  mount,

*4

But  having  pafled  now’  the  milke  white  fand,,
Ofwhich  the  Ilcof  Albion  tulces  his  name.

The  wind  thatinthc  South  beforedid  ftand.

With  fo  great  fury  to  thcNorthwcft  came.

In  vaincit  wasagainft  the  fame  to  ftand.

And  therefore  to  retire  it  was  no  fliamc,

Backc  in  one  night  the  tempeft  drauc  t hem  more
Then  they  had  fail’d  three  dales  and  sights  before.


1$

For  when  they  faw  it  was  no  boote  to  ftrivci
Againft  thefuryof  fo  feirce  a winde.

They  went  even  as  the  weather  did  them  drive
Vntill  the  ftreame  of  Antrperpe  they  did  findc.
Where  they  to  land  with  fafety  did  arrive :

There  loc,  an  aged  man  with  yccrcs  haife  blinde,
Who  deem'd  Or/(jn</o  of  that  crew  thcchicfe,
Tothiscffedl  utterd  to  him  hitgricfc.

16

How'  that  a certaine  Dame  of  noble  blood,

Of  vertue  V cry  great,  of  beauty  rare.

Of  fober  cheate  and  of  behaviour  good,

(Though  now  oppreft  with  mifery  and  care)
Requefted  him,  except  his  haft  withftood,

T hat  flic  to  him  a matter  might  declare.

In  which  to  aske  his  wifeadvife  flic  ment^

To  which  quickly  did  confent.

17

The  Ladies  pallace  flood  within  the  land,

To  which  the  Earle  conduced  was  with  fpeed.
Where  at  the  entry  did  the  Lady  ftand,

In  mourning  fhew,  and  (brrowfull  indeed.

Who  brought  Orlando  fadly  by  the  hasd.

Into  a chamber  hang’d  w ith  mournfuU  weed,

Firft  him  by  licrto  fit  flic  doth  befeech.

And  then  in  rucfull  fort  flic  us’d  this  fpccchi

18

Firft  (worthy  Knight)  1 would  you  underftood,

I was  the  Earle  of  Hollands  daughter  dcare.

Who  was  to  me  fo  tender  and  fo  good,

That  though  my  brothers  both  were  him  as  ncaitf
Yet  my  defire  in  nothing  he  withftood.

Nor  fpakc  the  word  that  I was  loth  to  heave;

Thus  whiles  in  ftatc  moft  fteddy  I did  ftand,

A certaine  Duke  arrived  in  this  land.

19

The  Duke  of  Z eland,  and  his  arrant  was.

To  there  againft  the /fooref  to  fight.

His  age  and  beauty  that  did  others  pauc,

Moov’d  me  that  had  not  tafted  loves  delight,

Nor  arm’d  againft  hisdartswith  ftccle  or  erafte,

T o yccld  my  fclfc  his  prifner  without  fight,  ^
Belccving  then  at  ftill  1 do  and  fliall.

That  he  to  me  doth  carry  love  not  fmall.

20

For  while  the  windes  contrary  here  him  ftay.
Though  naught  for  his,yctcxc’lcnt  for  my  drifts
What  time  me  feem'd  each  weeke  was  but  a day.
The  pleafant  houresdid  Aide  away  lb  fwift.

We  kept  ourfclvcstogether  day  byday.

Till  at  the  laft  we  made  usfo  good  fliift.

That  ere  we  parted  we  had  fo  procured.

Each  was  to  other  man  and  wife  allured.

21

Byreno  was  from  hence  but  newly  gone,

(So  is  my  dearc  beloved  husbands  name)

But  that  a great  Ambaftador  anon
Dirc^ly  from  thcKing  ofFrifclandcame,
Totreata  certaine  marriage  upon
With  other  of  that  nation  of  good  fame.

That  to  my  Sire  from  Holland  did  repaire.

That  I might  marry  with  hisTon  and  hcirc.


KeriUgiMt
tht  taU  af
Oljafia,


3ut


OF  ORLANDO  FVRlOSO.


3X

But  I in  whom  faith  tookc  fo  dccpc  a roote,

I could  not  change  my  new  made  choice,  and  tho
I would, to  Ative  with  love  it  was  no  boorc, .

That  wounded  me  fo  lately  with  his  bow.

To  ftop  the  motions  newly  fet  on  foote.

Before  they  might  to  farther  matter  grow  :

1 would  not  go,  I flatly  told  my  father,

Thatl  todyca  thoufand  deaths  had  rather.

My  luring  fire  that  chicfcfl:  caredid  take.

That  all  he  did  might  me  his  daughter  plcalc.
Agreeing  to  my  wil',  and  for  my  (ake.

My  griefe  fo  new  conceived  to  appeafe.
Straightway  themotion  of  this  marriage  brake,
Which  did  foforc  the  Frifelatid  King  difplcafe.

He  made  fliarpc  wattes  on  HoUand  in  (hort  fpace,
By  force  whereof  he  ruin’d  all  my  race.

Forflrflheisoflimbesand  body  ftrong,
Tomcctehisenemiesin  open  field.

And  then  fo  policickc  in  doing  wrong,

He  makes  their  force  unto  his  fraud  toyeeld;

He  hath  his  other  weapons  flrange  among,

A weapon  flrange,  before  this  ftene  but  fceld,
Atrunkcofiron  hollow  made  within.

And  there  he  puts  powder  and  pellet  in.
a?

ThupmfU  All  doled  fave  a little  hole  behind,

itfntftpmef  Whereat  nofooDcr  taken  is  theflamc,  '*  '

^KirihtHs  The  bullet  flies  with  fuch  a furious  wind.

Ml  in  As  though  from  clouds  a bolt  of  thunder  came.

ufe,iQib  be-  And  whaifoevcrinthcway  it  find,
fume  Oiym.  burncs.i'  brcakcs,it  tcarcs  and  fpoilcs  the  famcj
the  doubt  fomc  fiend  of  hell  or  divcllifli  wight,'

tndtflhie  Deviled  it  to  do  mankind  a fpite.

toil^eiatb*

bijltrj.  And  thus  with  this  deviceand  many  other,

Inopen  field  our  battels  twice  he  brake.

And  firft  in  fight  be  flue  mine  elderhrother,

(The  bullet  through  hiretirat  way  did  make)

And  next  inflight  he  tookc  and  kild  the  tother.
Which  caus’d  my  fathers  aged  heart  to  quake,
Who  notwithftanding  ftoutly  did  intend,  '
His  honor  and  my  fafety  to  defend.

But  inaho!d,thatonclynow  waslcft  him.

They  him  befieg’d  that  all  the  reft  had  wonne,  ■
And  by  fharpe  battell  all  the  reft  had  reft  him.
Where  to  a loup  one  Icveld  fo  a gunne,

The  blow  thereof  of  life  andfenfe  bereft  him,
Sofwiftit  came  as  none  the  fame  may  fliun,

A weapon  vile,  wherewith  a foolifli  boy
May  worthy  Captaincs  mifchiefe  and  annoy.

28

Thuswasmy  father  and  my  brothers  flaine,

Before  this  furious  King  his  watre  would  ceale.
And  1 (ole  heircof  Holland  did  remaine.

Which  made  his  former  fancy  morcincreafe;

He  thinks  by  match  with  me  my  la  nd  to  gainc,
And  offer’d  to  my  peoplcreft  and  peace.

If  I Arbante  marry  would  his  fonne.

Which  I before  refufed  to  have  done.


>9

And  I (as  well  for  hatred  I did  bcare,

Mofl  juft  to  him  and  all  his  generation^

By  whortxmy  fire  and  brother  skilled  were
By  whom  was  fpoii’d  ana  robbed  all  our  nation^

A s that  to  breake  my  promife  I did fcarc.

Which  1 Byreno  made  w'ith  proteftation,

That  howfoercrfouuncs  wlicclc  fliould  turnC)

Yet  noncdiould  marry  meullhisrcturne)

30

Made  anfwcr  this,  that  if  for  every  ill

I now  abide  1 fliould  have  thoufandsmorc.

Though  they  my  corpes  with  cruell  torments  kill,

I would  not  breake  mv  promife  given  before.

My  countrymen  pcrfvvadc  me  change  this  will,

Firft  praying  me,  then  threatning  me  full  fore.

Except  ldo,coyccld  mcandmyland
CDcfircd  prey)  into  mine  enemies  hand.

31

But  finding  ftill  their  threats  and  prayersraine,

A nd  ftill  that  in  my  former  mind  I ftaid.

Me  and  my  country  by  a privy  trainc,

Vmo  the  King  of  Frifcland  they  betraid  j
Who  thinking  now  with  flat  try  mt  togainc,

Firft  bid  me  not  to  fcare  or  be  difmaid,

Then  offied  frecto  give  me  landsand  hfc,

If  1 would  he  his  fonne  Arbantes  wife.

3*

‘Thcnl  thatrccmyfelfcinforccdfo,

Although  I meant  that  death  fliould  £ct  mc  fice,

Yet  loth  as  unrevenged  hence  to  go.

On  thofe  that  had  fo  greatly  injur’dme  s’*
Didmufeonmany  mcancsto  hclpc  my  wo.

At  laft  I thought  dilTcmbling  bell  to  be.

Wherefore  I fatned  that  1 was  relented.

And  that  to  have  hisfoni  was  contented.

33

Among  fbme  fervantsthat  my  father  had.

Two  brethren  ftrong  and  hardy  I did  chufc^

Moft  apt  todo  what  ever  I them  bad.

And  for  my  fake  no  danger  torefufe.

For  each  of  them  wa  s brought  up  of  a lad
Within  our  houfe,!  did  their  Icrviccufc
In  warre  and  peace,  and  found  theirfaithsas great
As  were  their  hearts  to  any  hardy  feat.

?4  _

To  thefe  two  men  I open  made  my  mind.

They  promift  mc  their  fcrvicc  and  their  aid.

One  into  went  a barketofind.

The  other  with  my  fclfc  in  Holland  ftaid  ;

Now  was  ourdayfor  marriage  a IRgnM,

When  flying  newes  the  ftrangersmade  afraid,

"With  many  failcr  Byreno  wasveported,

Into  thefeparts  newly  to  hare  reforted .

ss

Forwhen  thefirft  confiiff  and  broilc  was  fought.
Wherein  my  brother  cruelly  was  flaine,

I ftraight  by  letters  with  wrought,

T o make  all  fpeed  to  fuccourus  from  Spaine.

But  while  provifion  for  each  thing  wasfought.

The  Frifcland  King  gatcallthatdid  remaine,

Byreno  Irearuig  not  what  late  was  paft,

ConduAs  his  nary  httberin  great  haft.

a


(58


THE  NINTH  BOOKE


StntiHci.

Mottct,

SlutpptmhU

tniftru  flttui

4<ttnnuaque

frtjkitt.


The  Frife  land  King  thit  heard  of  his  repaire.

Doth  leave  the  marriage  for  biseldeft  fonoe.

And  to  the  lea  he  goes  with  navy  faire.

They  meet,  they  fight, the  Kingof  FrifelandwoRnCf
And  to  cxpcll  all  comfort  with  defpairc,

Byreno  pnfner  tanc,  I quite  undone,

Ab  ode  ^rerzocaptiuclikc wascarried.

At  whom  unco  his  cn’my  1 was  married,

But  when  bethought  in  armes  me  to  embrace,

And  have  that  due  that  wives  their  husbands  ow.
My  fervant  (landing  m a fecrct  place,

Which  I to  him  d»d  for  this  purpofc  (how,

Affoords  him  to  his  fport  but  little  fpace.

And  with  a 'ollax  drake  him  fuch  a blow.

That  (laggring  ftraight,and  making  little  Atifc,

He  left  his  love,  his  living  and  his  life.

And  thusthis  youth  borne  in  unhappy  houre,

Came  to  his  death  as  he  deferved  well,

In  fpitc  of  all  his  fire  Cymofeos  powre,

Whofe  tyranny  all  others  did  exccU :

Whofefword  my  (ire  and  brothers  did  devourc.

And  from  my  native  foile  did  mccxpell,

And  meanttoenteruponallroy  lands.

While  I by  marriage  fhould  be  in  their  hands*

But  when  we  once  performed  had  this  deed.

And  taken  things  of  greated  price  away,

Beforethat  any  noyfe  ortumult  breed,

Outofthe  window  we  devis’d  a way  .*

And  packingthence  with  aP  expedient fpeed,
Wccame.to  fea  before  the  breakeofday.

Whereas  my  fervant  waited  with  a barge.

As  he  before  receiv’d  of  me  in  charge.

I know  not  if  Cymofeo  tooke  more  griefc.

Or  wrath  or  rancor  kindled  in  his  mind.

To  fee  hision  that  lay  pad  all  iclicfc.

To  find  nothingofvalue  left  behind.

Then  wl'cn  his  p’^ide  and  glory  fliould  be  chiefc,

Then  when  to  make  a triumph  be  adign’d.

And  hoping  all  were  at  a wedding  glad.

He  finds  them  all  as  at  aburiallfad.

His  hate  of  me  andpittyofhisfonne.

Torment  him  night  and  day  with  cndicflc  griefc :

But  fith  by  tearesno  good  the  dead  isdonr.

And  fharpe  revenge  alTwagcth  malice  cheefe.

From  dolefull  tcares  to  rage  he  l^raight  doth  runne.
And  fecks  of  all  his  forrow  this  relecfe.

To  get  me  in  his  hands  with  fubtile  traines.

Then  me  to  kill  with  torments  and  with  paincs.

41  '

Thofeof  my  friends  or  fervants  he  could  find.

Or  that  to  me  did  any  way  retaine.

He  all  dedroyd,  and  left  not  one  behind,

Som  bang’d, fom  burn’d.&  fom  with  tormentflaine.
To  kill  Byreno  once  be  had  adlgn’d,

Of  purpofeoncly  to  procure  my  paine.

But  that  he  thought  his  life  would  bca  net.

The  fooQct  me  into  hts  hands  to  get.


4?

Wherefore  he  fet  a hard, and  rruell  law.

Except  ^re»o  could  in  twelve  months  fpace.

Find  mcancs  by  fraud  or  forces  me  to  draw,

T o yccld  my  felfc  a prifner  in  his  place,

(Such  Princes  arc  that  hare  of  God  no  aw)

Then  dy  he  fhould  without  all  hope  of  grace  ;

So  that  to  favc  hit  life,  my  death  alone
M ud  be  the  mcancs,  for  other  can  be  none*

44

All  that  by  paine  ot  cod  procure  I could.

With  diligence  1 have  already  done,

Sixe  Cadies  faire  in  Flanders  I have  fold.

The  mony  fpent,  and  yet  no  profit  wonne,'

I fought  to  bribe  thofe  that  him  kept  in  hold.

But  they  my  craft  with  greater  craft  did  fhunne;

I alfo  mov’d  our  neighbours  nrerc  and  farre,
F^nglijh  and  7)utch  on  him  to  make  Oiarp  warre,

45

But  thofe  I fent  when  they  longtime  had  daid,

1 thinkc  they  would  not,  or  they  could  not  fpeed  ;
They  brought  me  many  words,  but  little  aid,

My  (lore  dccread,  but  greater  grew  my  need.

And  now  (the  thought  whereof  makes  me  afraid)
That  time  drawes  ny,  when  neither  force  nor  meed,
As  (bone  as  full  expir^  is  the  yeere.

From  crucll  death  can  fafe  prefervemy  deare.

46

For  him  my  father  and  his  (bnnes  were  daine.

For  him  ray  date  and  living  all  is  lod.

For  him  thofclittlc goods  that  did  remained
1 have  confum’d  to  my  great  care  and  cod.

For  him  with  hea'tsdifeafeand  bodies  paine.

With  troublous  waves  of  fortune  I am  toft.

Now  lad  of  all  I mud  lay  down  my  life,

1 o favc  my  fpoufa  from  blow  of  bloody  kaife*

47

And  finding  that  my  fortune  isfb  bad,  ]

1 mud  to  favc  bis  life  lay  downc  mine  owne.

To  Iccfe  mine  owne  1 (liall  bcfainc  and  gla^

Where  forrow  fprings  of  feeds  that  love  had  fownc  ^
Thisonely  fcare  and  doubt  doth  make  me  fad,
Bcc;^ufe  I know  not  how  it  may  be  knownc.

If)  (hall  furc  icicaftr ^re»or  bands.

By  ycclding  me  into  the  tyrants  hands.

r 4«.

I fcare  when  he  hath  fhut  me  in  this  cage,

I fall  rhe  toi  ments  I (h  all  then  endute,

Hi's  fury  ro  Byreno  rt\3j  alTwagc,

Whofcli berry  I dudy  to  procure*

I rather  fcare  lead  following  his  rage.

When  he  fliall  find  he  hath  us  both  fo  fiire.

He  will  not  care  bis  oath  and  vow  to  bi  cake,
Vponusbothat  once  hiswtathto  wreake,

49

Behold  1 he  caufe  why  I did  long  fo  (ore

To  fpeake  with  you,  demaunding  your  advice.

As  I have  oft  of  others  done  before.

Yet  found  I none  fo  bai  dy  nor  fo  wife#

That  would  alTure  his  frccdome  to  redore,

Whofe  love  doth  me  to  hate  my  felfc  intice,
Thccaufcno  doubt  is  this,  they  dand  in  fcare
Of  thofe  his  guns,  whofe  force  no  dcclccan  bcare.

But


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


69


50

But  if  your  vcrtuc  do  not  difagrce,

With  this  your  comely  fliapc'and  manly  (Iiow,
Let  me  rcijucft  you  fir  to  go  with  me.

Where  I my  fclfe  in  piifon  fliall  beftow,
ilnd  promifemeto  fet  Byreno  fice,

Iffo  the  tyrant  fiom  hispromifego.

For  1 fiiall  die  with  great  content  and  joy.

If  by  my  death  Byreno  feape  annoy.

51

Hcrdolefull  tale  the  damfcllhercdid  end,
jltrut  Which  ofi  was  interrupted  with  herteares!

fijmtfvtf  Orlando  loving  not  the  time  to  fpend

UrndcBu-  In  idle  talke,all  ahfwer&longforbeares,
f't*  **  But  in  his  mind  he  fully  doth  intend

ft*  iwr  foes  and  rid  her  of  her  fearcs,

He  briefly  faidjthat  fiiefiiould  him  commaund,
Todomuch  morethen  fiiedid  himdemaund.

52

He  meancs  not  tho  that  fiie  her  felfe  fiiould  yeelJ
Vnto  thecrucll  tyrant  as  a pledge,

Except  hisfword  (that  failed  him  but  fccld)
SimU,  on  the  fodaineloflhisforccand  edge.

He  meanes  (like  common  birder*  in  the  field)
To  catch  the  birds  and  never  hurt  the  hedge#
And  thus  rcfolv’d  to  do  this  worthy  deed,

From  Flanders  now  by  fca  they  go  with  fpecd.

5J

The  skilfull  Pilot  doth  the  vdicll  ftcare,
Sbmenmc  on  th*oae,{bmetimeon  th’other  fidcj
Tie  lies  of  Zcland  ibme  before  appeare.

And  fome  behind  as  faft  themfelvesdo  hide,
And  ftraight  to  Holland  they  .npproched  neaic,
Orlando  went  to  land,  but  bids  her  bide:
Hismeaning  is  that  fhe  fiiall  underfland.

The  tyrants  death  before  fiic  comcon  land#


U

Himfolfe  forthwith  wasmounted  on  a ftced,

A darke  browne  bay,with  white  ftarre  in  his  face.
Both  large  and  ftrongly  limb’d  (like  FlemiJlj  breed)
But  not  fo  full  of  life  nor  fwift  of  pace,

Y ct  good  enough  to  lervc  him  at  his  need.

When  as  his  Briliador  was  not  in  place:

And  thus  he  came  to  2?ordrec^, where  he  found
With  men  of  armes  the  gates  environ’d  round,

55

T he  way  es, the  wals,with  arm’d  men  watched  were,
Stnttnd.  For  tyrants  ftill  arc  moft  of fuch  condition,

Utlia  eofiit  (And  chiefly  new)  that  ay  they  ftand  in  fcare,

And  further  now  fome  neweshad  bred  fufpition.
How  that  an  armic  great  appreched  ncare,

Well  dot'd  with  men,  and  flufled  withmunition.
The  which  they  faid  Byrenos  cofin  brought^

By  force  hit  kinfmans  freedome  to  have  wrought:

Orlar.doyvihs  watchman  carry  word

V nto  their  King, how  that  a wandring  Knight
Defires  to  prove  his  force  with  fpearc  and  fword.
Whom  if  Ac  King  could  overcome  in  fight*]

^cn  he  fhould  have  the  Ladic  by  accord*
Tn^t{[uej4rbanteotx  his  wedding  night:

For  he  had  taken  her  into  protedion.

And  could  dclivci  her  to  bufubjefhon.


57

But  craved  eke  the  King  fhould  bounden  be.

By  promife  firmc  (if  he  were  overcome)

To  fet  his  prilncr  (cald  Byreno)  free,

And  ofhismcflagethiswas  all  thefumme:

And  this  was  told  unto  the  King, but  he
That  of  true  vcrtuc  never  caded  emmme.

Bent  all  his  will  and  wit  againd  all  reafon.

To  falfliood  foulc,to  falfc  deceit  and  treafon.

58

HcmakesaccountifhcthisKnightcanday,  ^
The  which  to  do  he  meancs  great  meancs  to  make.
That  then  the  Ladic  quickly  gc«  he  may.

And  make  him  yeeld  her  for  his  fafetie  fake,
HcfcndeA  thirtic  men  a privic  way,

Him  to  inclofc  about  and  pnfncr  take,

Who  fetching  compaflTc  t > avoid  fufpition,

At  lad  arrived  where  they  had  commiflion.

. . 59  .

In  this  meane  time  with  words  he  foded  out.

The  worthy  Earle, untill  hefaw  his  men.

According  as  he  bad  them  come  about,

Enclofing  all  the  way  behind, and  then
Out  of  the  gates  he  mfheth  with  a rout.

Of  men  onhorfe  and  font  of  three  times  ten.

As  hunters  do  inclofe  the  beads  in  woods,
Orfiflicrsdo  inclofc  the  fifli  in  floods.

60

So  doth  the  King  Cyrhofcocare  and  fhive.

To  flop  the  wayes  with  all  forefight  and  heed,

And  meaneth  fure  to  have  him  tanc  alive.

And  thinks  the  fame  is  fuch  an  cafic  deed,
Thatofthofe  guns  with  which  hediddeprive
So  many  lives, he  thinks  there  is  no  need.

For  fuch  a weapon  fci  veth  very  ill.

Where  he  did  meane  to  take  a.nd  not  to  Iciff«

61

As  cunning  fowlers  do  the  birds  referve.

That  firfl  they  take  in  hope  of  greater  pray.

And  makes  them  for  a bait  and  flalc  toferve,’

To  take  the  red  byfportand  pi  ctieplay.

So  meancs  the  King  alive  him  to  prcfcrvbi
But  unto  this  Orlandos  force  faid  nay:

He  meanesnot  to  be  handled  in  that  fbrr#  '

But  breakes  the  nets  and  marreth  all  the  fport,

62

The  noble  Earle  with  couched  fpesrein  hand,

Doth  ride  where  as  he  finds  the  thickeft  prrafe,
Two,threcand  fourc,that  in  his  way  did  fland,'
The  ^carc  doth  picrce,nor  at  the  fi ft  doth  ccafc.

It  paft  the  fixt  the  brodenefleof  a hand,

Nor  that  fame  handbredth  makethany  peace,
Thcfcvcnthrogrc.it  a blow  therewith  he  ftrake,
Tbatdownc  he  fell  and  never  after  fpakrf,

63  .

Ev  n asa  boy  that  fhootsabroadeforfport.

And  finds  fbmc  frogs  that  ina^itch  have  bred,
Doth  prickc  thcni  with  an  arrow  in  fuch  foit.

One  afterontf  untill  fuch  ftorc  be  dead.

As  that  for  more  his  /haft  may  feeme  too  fhort.
From  fcthersfild  already  to  the  head.

So  with  bis  fpearc  Orlando  him  befturd.

And  that  once  leff,hcdravrctb  out  his  fword,

Thai


SimOti


Simthi


70


THE  NINTH  BOOKE.


SintiU,


6a.

Thatfworcl  that  never  yet  was  drawnc  in  vainc,
Agamft  whofe  edge  doth  armour  little  bootc.

At  ev’ry  thriiftor  blow  he  gave  vva^llainc,

A niaa  on  horfc,or  clfe  a man  on  footc.

1 Ik  edge  whereof withcrimfon  ftill  doth  Haine,
And  where  It  lights  it  picrcethtotheroote.

The  King  repents  him  nowtoolate,

That  he  for  haft  his  guns  behind  forgate.

t'i

With  voice  aloud,  and  many  a boiftrous  tbret.

He  bids'thcm  bring  his  gun, but  rone  doth  heart,
Who  once  within  the  gate  hisfoot  can  get,

Hec  dare  not  once  peepe  out  againefor  fcare;

But  when  he  faw  none  by  his  words  did  fet.

And  that  almoft  they  all  departed  were.

He  thought  it  beft  to  fave,himfelfc  by  flight.

From  fo  great  force  ofthisfamc  furious  Knight.

He  back  retires,  ne  drawes  the  bridge  for  haft,

JBccaufc  Or/.mYo  new  approcht  fo  nie.

And  had  not  then  his  horfe  him  fpeeded  faft.

As  though  he  did  not  runne  but  rather  flic,

Orlando  would  have  made  him  foi  c agaft,

Who  caring  not  to  make  the  poorc  fort  die,

Paft  by  thereft  and  keptthe  King inchafc.

That  fav’d  himfclfe  by  his  good  horfes  pace,

67

But  yet  ere  long.againc  he  dothreturne.

And  brings  w ith  him  his  iron  caneand  fire,

Wher  with  he  doth  beate  down,  and  brufc  and  burnc
All  thofe  whom  he  to  mifehiefe  doth  defire:
Hehopes  this  weapon  well  fliallfervc  his  turnc.

Yet  for  all  this  he  mcanes  to  come  no  nirc.

But  like  a hunter  privily  doth  watch.

Where  he  the  hecdlcflc  bcaft  may  fafeft  catch.

68

The  King  with  this  his  engine  ly’th  in  wait,

A weapon  tearing  trees  and  rending  rocks,

Whofe  force  nofeiicecan  ward  with  any  Height,

It  gives  fo  found  and  unexpe^led  knocks :

Thus  having lainc  a little  at  receit,

And  watcht  his  vantage  like  a crafty  foxe,

When  once  the  Earle  within  his  reach  he  Ipide,

He  fetteth  fire  unto  his  pceces  fide.

69

Straight  like  a larape  of  lightning  out  it  flics,  '

And  fendeth  forth  withall  fo  great  a {bund.

As  feem’d  to  fliakc  the  cvcrlafting  skies.

And  to  remove  the  unremoved  ground.

The  fliot  gainft  which  no  armour  can  fuffice,  '

But  breaketh  all  that  in  the  way  is  found,

Doth  whiz, and  fing,  and  kindlcsas  it  went.

Yet  did  not  that  effeS  the  tyrant  ment.

70

For  whether  twere  his  overhafty  fpeed.

And  too  great  will  to  hurt  did  make  him  (werve^

Or  whether  feare  pofteft  bimin  thedeed,  1
That  not  to  guide  his  hand  his  heart  could  (erre.
Or  whether  God  of  mercy  mecre  and  meed.

Was  pleas’d  his  champion  longer  to  preferve :

It  onely  ftrakc  the  horfe  with  fo  great  paine.

That  down  he  fell  and  nerer  role  againc.


71

The  horfe  and  horfeman  downc  together  fell,
Downe  lay  the  horfe,  up  quickly  rofethc  Knight,
And  on  hisfect  was  ftraight  tecover’d  well,
Morccarncftly  bent  then  before  to  fight.

And  asthcftoricsofH«rhfKJtcll,

In  whom  each  fall  increafed  more  his  might;

So  though  Or/isndo  with  his  fall  was  troubled.

His  force  and  fury  feemed  to  be  doubled.

7*

But  when  the  King  of  Frifeland  plainly  faw.

How  this  bold  Knight  grew  fiercer  then  before.
He  thought  it  beft  by  flight  himlclfc  withdraw.
His  fainting  heart  with  feare  was  pierft  fo  fore:
Alidc  he  turnes the  horfes  foming  jaw.

Now  full  refolv’d  to  prove  his  force  no  more,
Orlando  w ith  fuchfpeed  doth  him  purfuc,

As  doth  an  arrow  from  a bow  of  Yue. ,

Andwhat  hecculd  not  riding  erft  atchieve.

He  doth  the  fame  and  more  upon  his  feet,

And  runs  fo  fwift  as  few  men  would  believe.
Except  thcmfelves  had  prefent  bin  to  fee  it,

Vntill  at  laft  fo  hard  he  him  did  drive,
Heovertooke  him  in  a narrow  Itreet,

And  with  hisfword  he  cleft  his  head  in  twaine.
The  fcnflcftccorpcsdothonthc  ground  renaaine.


^tnheiit,

Lookjein  tit
Tabu.


74

Now  as  Orlando  did  this  featc  contrive.

There  grew  new  broilcs  from  thence  a littlediftance.

For  thcnByrcKOf  cefin  didarrive.

With  men  on  horfe  and  foot  for  his  afliftance.

And  finding  none  that  durft  againft  himftrive.

He  entred  had  the  gates  without  refiftance.

So  late  a feare  was  in  the  people  bred.

That  none  ofthem  durft  come  to  make  a hed.

75

The  filly  Burgers  knew  not  whatto  fay,

Nor  who  thefe  were,  nor  what  was  thoir  defiie,

Vntill  the  Zdanders  themfcivcs  bewray.

Both  by  their  fpcet  h and  manner  of  attire ;

Then  made  they  peace, & promift  them  ftraightway.

To  do  what  ere  thecaptainc  fhould  require,

Againft  the  men  of  Frifeland  them  to  aid.

Who  yet  in  prifon  ftill  Byreno  ftaid.

7 6

For  why,that  people  alwaics  had  in  hate.

The  King  of  Frifeland  and  his  men  of  warre.

Their  Dukes  late  death,  and  altring  their  eftate,

Had  mov'd  their  minds,  but  that  that  all  did  marre.

Was  overtaxing  them  in  fuch  a rate,

Asalwaiesbrcedsa  great  diftikeand  jarre.

Orlando  tvf  'xxx  thefe  men  made  fuch  conclufion,  StHtcHct,

As  turn’d  unto  the  Frifeland  mens  confufioa .

77

For  ftraight  to  ground  they  threw  theprilbn  gate.

They  fetch  the  prifners  out  vt'ithout  a kay,

Byreno  to  the  Earle  is  not  ungrate.

With  thanks  a part  of  hisduedebttopay  j
And  then  they  go  to  fticw  Byrenos  ftatc,

To  faireO/ym/itis  that  at  anchor  lay,  ^

For  fo  they  call  the  Lady  rhaft  and  faire, ‘

That  of  that  Country  was  undoubted  hairo.

She


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


7*


7i


She  that  was  thither  by  Orlando  broughti
Without  all  hope  of  any  fuch  focccflc,

Wlio  lately  (filly  creature^  onely  (ought.

Her  death  might  bring  her  lover  ^om  difirclTc  ;
Now  was  her  fafety  and  Byrenos  wrought.

When  (he  fuppos’d  and  lookt  for  nothing  lelTc ;
The  joy  cannot  with  many  words  be  told,
Whttitwith  the  tone  the  tothcr  did  behold.

79

The  people  do  thedamfell  faire  rcftorc,

Vnto  the  ftate  that  unto  her  wasdue;

But  flic  that  vowd  her  felfc  for  cveimore.

To  be  unto  Byreno  lover  rruc,

Ferfifling  now  as  faithfull  as  before.

Nor  fearing  any  haimc  that  might  cnfuc.

Doth  grant  to  him  for  love  and  meerc  affofiioa
Of  her  and  her  eftate  the  fut  protcAion.

So

Byreno  leaves  his  cofin  in  his  place,

Toguide  that  Country  with  fijflicientgard,

His  loving  wife  in  Zeland  he  will  place,
Thatdoncjwith  forccsmarchto  Fri/clandwixdt
And  hopes  to  conquer  it  in  little  (pace.

If  that  his  fortune  were  not  over  liard,

And  that  which  mofla(Tur’d  him  of  this  thing.
He  had  in  hold  the  daughter  of  their  King.

81

VVhom  he  did  mcane  to  marry  (as  men  fay)

Vnto  a younger  brother  of  his  name;

Orlando  fbipt  himfirlfcthat  prefentday,

Byreno  with  him  to  his  (hipping  came.

And  oifer’d  him  a large  part  of  the  pray,'
Becaufe  his  valcour  cheedy  won  the  fame.

Who  nothing  tookc  but  that  (ameengin  rare.
Which  we  before  to  lighrningdid  compare.

8a

Nc  took  he  this  away  becaufe  he  nient.

To  prove  the  force  thcrof  upon  his  fop.

Or  ufc  the  fame  when  he  to  battell  went.

His  courage  would  not  fuffer  him  do  fo  :

T o hurlc  away  the  fame  wa?  his  intent.

Where  it  mankind  might  neverdamage  moe  t
He  lets  nor  powder  nor  the  fliot  remaine,

Nor  ought  that  did  unto  the  fame  pertaine.


Merall.


And  when  that  now  the  (helves  and  fliallow  fl:ore.

Some  twenty  leagues  or  there  about  was  left.

No  land  difeern  a behind  nor  yet  before,

V pon  the  right  hand  or  upon  the  left,

Bccaufe(faid  hej hereafter  never  more.

May  any  Knight  of  life  and  limb  be  reft
By  thee,  or  coward  vaunt  him  with  the  (lout.

Lye  there  alow  untill  I fetch  thee  out.

*4

0 curd  device  found  out  by  fome  foulefend.

And  fram’d  below  by  Bel^elub  in  hell.

Who  by  thv  mcane  did  purpofe  and  intend.

To  mine  afl  that  on  the  earth  do  dwell.

From  whence  thou  camft,  I thither  thee  do  fend;

(Thisfaid^  the  pcecc  unto  the  bottom  fell;

Orlando  maketh  all  thefpeed  he  may,

Him(clfe  unto  Ebuda  to  coo v ay.

85

1 fay  the  noble  Earle  in  haft  him  hide,

Vnto  that  crucll  lie  to  find  that  wight.

Whom  he  more  lov’d  then  all  the  world  befide.

On  whom  his  fhoughts  were  running  day  and  night
Nor  would  he  by  the  way  one  whit  abide.

Left  of  new  (lay  might  new  occafion  light,

Andcaufehim  when  he  had  hispurpo(emift.

To  cry  with  late  repentance, had  I wift.

86

Hiscourfe  heraeanesof  neither  fide  to  bend,  '

Nor  South  nor  North,  fuch  haft  he  meanes  to  make.

But  goes  as  that  blind  archer  doth  him  fend.

That  deepc  with  dart  of  golden  bead  him  drake.  Hi  murHsi

And  herea^whilc  to  leave  him  I intend,  to  Orlando  irt

Retttrning  to  the  match  of  which  1 fpake;  ***

For  you  may  thinke  I loft  it  in  the  carriage.

If  you  (hould  hearc  no  more  newes  of  the  marriage,

*7

Greatfeafts  were  made  in  Hoi^4n<^and  great  fport,
Bccau(cofthisncw  match  and  copulation  ;

But  greater  fliall  in  Zeland  by  report,

For  which  there  was  great  care  and  preparations
Yet  would  I not  you  thither  fliould  refort.

Except  you  knew  Byrenos  inclination.

For  chaunces  fell  that  fpoiled  all  the  chcare,  :


flafa^t


Hiftoric.


Allegory,

»

Allufion.


As  in  the  book  enfuing  you  (hall  hcare.

InOthndothat  atthe  firfi  motion  entertainedtheentirprije  o/Ebuda,»c  rnaylearne  to  be  prone  and  ready  to  all  ho-
mrable  exploits:  In  his  comming  to  fiiccour  the  dry?re^iOlimpia,we  may  note  how  God fends  unexpelfcd reliefe  to  the
honeft  affiSled:  /«  Olympia  »c  may  fee  a rare  mirror  of  con  fancy, which  1 doubt  too  few  of  her  fex  will  imitate.By  Cy-
mofeos  tyranny  and  death, all  Princes  may  tahe  a warning,  that  no  engins  nor  flratagems  can  l^cepe  a tyrant  fafe  in  hts
tfiate,but  only  clemency  and  bounty, that  to  lawfull  Princes  breeds  evermore  love  and  loyalty  in  the  fitbjeSis.

Concerning  the  indention  oj gumies,he  feemeth  to  infinuate  that  they  have  been  invented  long  before  the  time  that  our
IV riters  Jpeahe  of  inGermony, which  was  about  Richard  the  fecond  his  r/OTc.- Virgil  hath  a verfe  in  the6.ofthe  JEaci-
dos,  that  founds  much  to  this  e^eif,  and  niy  felfe' have  wondered  at  it  many  times, to  fee  how  plainely  it  exprejfeth  the
qua'ity  of  a peece  of  Ordenance.  Hete's  that  one  Sallomoncus  a Gyant  had  an  engin  of  war  with  which  he  imitated  (u-
pitcrs  t hinder  and  lightniig.and  furely  this  he  would  not  have  fained,hut  that  he  heard  of  fome  fitch  things:  the  verfe  is
this,'D\xm  flamm-  s lovis  & fonitus  imitatur  Olympi.  Some  ofourfarre  travelled  men  tell  us  that  they  of  Chyna  had
rife  ofpeeces  fome  t houfands  of yeeres , which  I could  be  willing  to  credit, fave  that  they  alfo  tell  of  the  records  there  Jince
before  Adams  creation  manyyetres.

A llegmy  I find  none  bat  of  the  He  o/Ebuda  where  women  he  given  to  monfters  to  be  devoured,of  which  I willjpea\e
in  another  of  the  Cantoes  that  follower  of  that  matter.

In  the  monfrous  effeffs  ofgun-powder,he  alludes  perhaps  to  that  huge  damage  done  at  V cniccwhen  their  Arfenal  or
florchoufe  was  blown  up:  as  a lH;e  mijhap  though  not  fo  terrible,happened  in  theTower, try  grandfather  Sir  lohn  Mark**
ban'itcirgL’eutenantoJtheTower.


litUins.


4:


THE  TENTH  BOOKE


7?


tvicked  Byreno  fait  in  love  of  nere,
tAnd  in  an  lie  hie.  kind  Olympia  leaves :
Rogero  bids  Alcynas  realms  adew,

Bat  Logeftilla^#wf(^  himrtceaves :

She  fhevees  him  how  to  rule  the  borfe  that  fieri  :
He  fiyifig  in  the  aire,fiom  thence perceaves
Renaldos  mufiers : after  which  he  found
Angelica  unto  the  rockefafi  bound.


Mong  the  mirrors  rare  of  loy-
all  love.

That  prefent  are,  or  have  bin
intiaicpaft,

Whofe  faith  no  force  of  for-.

tunc  could  remove
With  fanning  chcarc,noryct
with  frowning  blaft  z


Iftfiat  he  fhew’d  to  her  thelike  good  willj
If  he  regarded  as  he  ought  of  right.


) Olympia  fairc  all  others  farre
above.

By  juft  defett  requireth  to  be  plaft  :

Whofe  ftedfaft  love  (to  fay  1 dare  be  bold)

Doth  pafle  the  paternsof  the  new  or  old.


To  bend  unto  her  liking  all  his  skill.

Nay  ifforgetting  all  her  merits  quite,
Vngrate,  unkind,  he  fought  her  life  to  fpill :
Behold  1 fliall  a talc  to  you  recite,

Would  make  a man  his  li  p for  anger  bite.

y

And  when  that  I fhall  have  declared  plaine.


flow  could  fhcftgncsmorc  evident  impart,
VmoByreno  of  her  loving  mind  ?

No;  though  flic  fhould  have  open  laid  her  hart.

Yet  could  flic  not  have  ptov’d  hcrfclfc  more  kind  ;
And  if  fuch  love  and  duty,  by  defart
.Hay  lookc  ofduclikc  love  again  to  find.

Her  faith  requires  unto  Byreno  fliownc.

That  he  fliould  fcckc  her  fafety  as  his  ownc,

, 3'

Nor  onely  not  to  leave  her  in  annoy,

Or  her  reject  for  any  other  dame.

No  not  for  her  that  bred  the  bane  of  Troy,'

Or  any  ether  of  more  worthy  name.

But  her  preferre  before  all  wordly  joy.

Before  his  fenfes  five,  before  his  fame.

Or  any  oth'r  thing  of  greater  price.

To  be  expreft  by  word  or  by  device.

4

Now  if  Byreno  did  her  well  requite.


Hjs  cruelty,  her  loves  unkind  reward,

1 thinkeyou  Ladies  never  will  againc

Bciccvc  mens  woids.your  hearts  will  wax  fohard  j

For  * lovers  loved  Ladies  loves  to  gainc.

Do  promife,  vow  and  fwcarc  without  regard.
That  God  doth  fee  and  know  their  falfliood  fiili.
And  can  and  fliall  revenge  it  at  his  will.


f)|ii


'.I


StHtlKS.  jl

metuMt  ju*i  ,
rare,  nihil  1,
frtmitutt  > ‘
farcunt.  1
OviiLlupitei'
ex  alte  fer>
juris  ridtt  ai
mamutn.  ^
TibuUu.Vf  •
neru  ferjurid.^
venutmu


Theirothesbut  words,thcir  words  arc  all  but  wind,
Vttcr’d  in  haft, and  with  like  haft  forgotten.

With  which  their  faiths  they  do  as  firmely  bind.

As  bundcls  are  trufi  up  with  cords  all  rotten  ;
Coynefle  is  naught,  but  worfc  to  be  too  kind.

Men  rare  not  for  the  good  that  fooneis  gotten  :

But  women  of  their  wits  may  juftiy  boft.

That  arc  made  wifer  by  an  others  coft.

7

Wherefore  I wifli  you  lovely  dames  bemre,

Th^r  bcardlcflc  youths,  whole  faces  fliine  fb  neate,
Whofe  fancies  fconc  like  ftrawe  fire  kindled  arc.
And  fooncr  quencht  amid  their  flaming  heatc  ;

The  hunter  chafethftill  the  flying  hare,

By  hill,  by  dale,  with  labour  and  vvithfwcatc.

But  when  at  laft  the  wiflicd  prey  is  taken.

They  fcckc  new  gamc,thcoId  is  quits  forfaken.

Gz  i


per  terras
fietafummx
ferunt.  ji

Catlmachun\
luravit  qut-  {
dem,fed  a-
matatia  jurA.
menta  deeru  |
nanfubeuHt  >
Mrcs,  I

iieater.ce.  I
Falix  quem^
factuxtaUe-  i
enapericuUt  j
tasslum.  f

Ovtd,  Flam.  I
mt^defti.  ,
pula  noflra
bretiuj,  fust.  1
Ovi.  Venaur  ’
fe^uitur  fu.  \
giesitia  capu
r elm  quit.
Simile,  ‘


THE  .TENTH  BOOKE.


74


8


Ovi.  Saetef-
fart  novo
toUitar  otmii

Milt,


< Stmme.


Simili,


SimiU,


1 Ovid. Mica-
nareft  odio
J ma)ut  fcelit,

■ Of  Mmha.


Ercn  fo  thcfcyoutTir,  the  while  you  fay  them  nay.

In  humble  fort  they  feck c,thcy  fuc,thcy  fcrvc.
They  like, they  love, they  honor, and  okay,

T hey  wait.thcy  watch  your  favours  todeferve  :

A part  they  plainc.in  prcfcnce  of  they  pray.

For  love  of  you  they  mournc,  they  pine  and  ftarre  t
But  having  got  that  erft  they  fought  fo  fore.

They  turnc  their  failes  unto  another  fhore.

9

Though  this  be  true,  1 not  perfwadeyoutho.

To  leave  to  love,  for  that  were  open  wrong,

T o caufc  you  like  a vine  undreft  to  grow,

Vneared  for  the  briers  and  thorncs  among:

But  lead  on  youths  you  fliould  your  felves  bedow.
That  never  in  one  fancy  tarry  long:

The  meane  is  bed, young  fruits  the  flomach  gripe,
The  cider  cloy  when  they  be  over  ripe.

lo

I fiicw’d  you  in  the  tale  I told  you  laft,

How  that  Byreno  had  Cymofeos  daughter.

To  marry  whom  a motion  late  was  pad,

Becaufe  his brothet  lov’d  and  grcatlyfought  her.

But  his  owne  mouth  was  of  too  lickridi  tad.

To  leave  fo fwcet a morlcll, having  caught  her:

He  thought  it  were  apointoffoolidi  kiadnede.

To  part  withall,  a pcccc  of  fo  rare  dncnclTc.

It

The  damfell  little  pafled  fourte.ene  yeare,

Mod  tender, fwcet  and  lovely,  ftcfli  and  faire.

As  when  the  budding  rofedoth  fird  appeare.

When  funny  bcamesin  May  make  temperate  aiio,
Byreno  likes  her  face,  her  fober  chcare,

^ad  us’d  to  her  to  makefo  oft  repaire.

That  ev’n  as  Brimdonc  quickly  taketh  flame.

So  love  tookc  him  to  his  perpetuall  fliame.

12

The  dreame  of  tearcs  that  for  her  fire  /he  flied,

A flaming  fornacc  bred  within  his  bred.

The  plaints  fkemade,  and  dolcfull  words  flic  fed.
Doth  breed  his  hope  of  getting  his  rcqijcd,

T hus  foulc  defires  with  hopes  as  foule  arc  fed.

As  water  hote  from  boiling  draightdoth  red.

When  liquor  cold  is  powred  in  the  pot.

So  with  new  love  his  old  was  quite  forgot.

From  flow  to  ebbe  thus  turned  was  the  tide.

His  late  belov’d  OlympialothCome  grew,
Toloekeon  her  his  heart  could  fcant  abide.

His  thoughts  were  all  fo  fctled  on  the  new.

Yet  till  the  time  might  ferve  he  thinks  to  hide.

His  filthy  hate  with  faireand  painted  hew,

And  though  in  fancy  hedid  herdeted,

Yet  dill  great  kindnefle  he  in  fhew  profed.

14

And  if  hc/Tiew’d  the  other  fignes  of  love,

(Although  fitch  love  was  worfc  then  any  hate)

Yet  none  there  was  herein  did  him  reprove.

But  tookc  his  meaning  in  another  rate.

They  thought  fom  good  remorfc  his  mind  did  move.
In  gracious  fort  to  pity  hereflate.

And  that  to  her  he  charitably  ment,
Bccaufc/Iiewasfoyongand  innoccut.


U

O mighty  God,  hew  much  are  men  midane  ?

How  oft  with  fained  fhewes  they  arc  deceived  ?
Byrenos  wicked  meaning  and  prophane,

For  good  and  godly  was  of  men  received  ;

The  marriners  their  oarcs  in  hand  had  tar>e.

And  from  the  fhore  the  fhip  was  quickly  heaved,
To  Zeland  ward  the  Duke  with  all  his  traine.

With  helpe  of  oarcs  and  failcsdoth  pafTc  amainc,
it

Now  had  they  loft  the  fight  of  Holland  fliore,

And  marcht  with  gent  le  gale  in  comely  rankc.

And  (for  the  Wind  was  wcftcrly)  they  bore
To  come  within  the  lucof  Scotttfh  bankc.

When  as  a fbdain  temped  rofcfo  fore.

The  force  thereof  their  fliips  had  wellnicfanke.
Three  dayes  they  bare  it  out,  the  fourth  at  night
A barren  llandhapncd  in  their  fight.

17

Here  faire  Olympia  from  her  (hip  to  fand.

From  fands  flic  pafTeth  to  the  higher  ground,

Byreno  kindly  led  her  by  the  hand,

(Although  his  heart  another  ha  rbour  found)

They  fup  in  their  pavillion  pitcht  on  land,
'Environ’d  with  a tent  aboutahem  round  .*

The  dipper  done,  to  bed  do  go  they  twaine,

The  reft  unto  their  fliips  rcturnc  againc.

18

Thctravell  great  (he  lately  did  endure.

And  had  three  dayes  before  her  waking  kepti
And  being  now  upon  the  fliorc  fecure,

(Now  glad  ofthat  for  which  ere  long fhc wept)

And  taking  her  amid  his  armcsfccure,

All  this  did  caufc  that  (he  the  founder  flept,

(Ah  filly  fbulc)  when  fhc was  leaft  afraid.

Of  her  falfc  husband  thus  to  be  betraid,

»♦

The  trecherous  J^rcno,whom  deceit

And  thought  of  leud  intent  doth  waking  keepe.
Now  having  time  for  which  he  long  did  wait,
SuppofingfaircO/ympiafound  afleepe,

Vnto  his  fhips  he  hies  with  fliott  retrait.

And  makes  them  all  lanch  forth  into  the  deepc  t
And  thus  with  wicked  praAife  and  unjuft.

He  berforfooke  that  chiefly  himdidtrufL
ao

Now  were  the  failes  well  charged  with  the  wind.

And  bearc  him  lighter  then  the  wind  away.

The  poote  Olympia  now  was  left  behind.

Who  never  waked  till  that  breake  of  day.

To  ligbtfomnefle  had  chang'd  the  darkneffe  blind,
A nd  funny  beames  had  driv’n  the  mill  away.

She  ftretent  her  armesbetwixt  afleep  and  wake.
And  thinks  Byreno  in  her  armes  to  t;flce.

21

She findeth  none,  and  drawing  back  againe.

Again  flic  rcacht  them  out, but  findeth  none.

Her  leg  likcwifc  flic  reached  out  in  vaine.

In  vaincjfor  he  for  whom  fhcfcclcsis  gone,

Fcarc  flcepcxpcls.herciesfhe  opens  plainc,

Noryct  (he  hcarcs,  flic  fees, nor  fccles  not  one.
With  which  amaz'd,  the  clothes  away  fliecafl.

And  CO  the  fliotc  (lie  runneth  in  great  baft.


Ov-OfTaim

MnaiaarfAt

SljktnMn

tnaruUiapn

Sara  coca

i^iihtbenti

4fo  fit  lerii

taotimtuTf

reui  credhur

tjpfiv..


A


aa


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


75


With  heart  difmalcljand  feeing  her  before
Herfatall  bap, unto  the  Tea  the  hicsj
Shefmotc  hei  birft ^her  haire  ihe  rent  and  torci
INow  looking  (for  al!  lightfomc  were  the  skies)

If  ought  the  could  difcernCjbut  even  the  Ih  orC;

But  even  the  lhore,no  otherthing  Ihcfpies;

Then  once  or  twife  (lie  cald  J^renos  name.

Then  once  ortwifc  the  caves  icfound  the  fame.

*3

And  boldly  then  the  mounted  on  the  rocks,

All  rough  a nd  ftcepe/uch  courage  Ibrrow  brought,
Hcrwofull  woids  might  move  the  ftones  and  (locks.
But  when  (hefaw,or  at  the  lead  /he  thought,

S he  fa  w Jie  Gups,  her  guiltldTc  breft  th e knocks.

By  fignes  and  ciies  to  bring  them  backe  (he  fought.
But  fignes  and  cries  but  little  now  availes.

That  wuui  bate  them  away  that  fild  iheuc  (ailrs.

What  meaneft thou  (thus  poOrcO^JWprafpake)

So  cruelly  without  me  to  depart?

Bend  backthycourfe,andceafe  fuchTpeedtomakc,
Thy  vclTell  of  her  lading  lackesa  part;

It  little  is  thti  carkas  poore  to  take.

Since  that  it  doth  already  bearcthe  hart:

Thus  having  by  the  Giorccndelongin  vaine,
Vnlothctcnt  flic  backe  rcturnesagainc.

*5

And  lyjng  groveling  on  her  reftleflc  bed,

Moiflning  the  fame  with  watcrof  hcrcics,

Sith  two  on  thee  did  couch  lad  night  (flic  fed)

"W  hy  did  not  tw  o from  thee  toget  her  rife?

Accurfl  the  wombe  that  falfc  Byrtna  bred,

Accord  the  day  that  (ltd  I faw  die  skies.
WhatfhalMdo?  what  can  I here  alone,

Or  who  (wo  me)  can  mitigate  my  monc?

I fee  no  man,nor  any  /igne  I fee,  ' i

That  any  man  within  this  He  do:h  dwell;  '•  (

I fee  no  flnp  that  hence  may  cany  me.

With  (at  the  lead)  (bme  hope  of  being  well;

I here  fliall  darve,  it  cannot  other  be,

And  buried  how  to  be  I cannot  tellj
Ah  how  ifwolves  that  wander  in  this  wood,
Dcvoiuc  my  flcfli,or  drinke  my  guililcffe  blood?

*7

Alasl  doubt, and  dand  cv*n  now  in  feare.

Left  that  fome  rav’nous  wolfe  that  here  abides,
Somelion,Tyger,orfomergly  Beare,

With  teeth  and  clawes  fliall  pierce  my  tender  (Ides,
Yet  what  bead  could  with  greater  torment  tea  re.
Then  thou  more  fiercethen  any  bcaft  befidcs?

For  they  contented  are  but  once  to  kill,

But  thou  my  life  a thoufand  times  dod  fpill ,

i8

But  prefuppofe  fome  vefTcll  heie  arrive,

And  take  me  flom  this  place  forpittie  fake.

And  To  perchance  I may  beleftalive,

TheBcarcs  nor  Wons  never  fliall  metake^

Yet  will  it  hem  vaine  for  me  to  drive,

Againc  to  HoUand  my  repaire  to  make;

Thou  keep’d  by  force  the  place  where  I was  borne,
IV  hence  by  dcceiuhou  broughtsme  (faKcforfworn)


Thou  rook’d  from  me  my  living,  by  pretence
And  colour  of  thy  fricndfliip  and  alliance.

Thy  men  of  armes  were  paid  by  my  cxpence,

I gave  thee  all,fuch  was  my  fond  affiance;

Or  /hall  I tuinc  to  Flanders?i\th  fiom  thence
1 fold  my  fclfc.and  am  at  flat  defiance
With  all  the  nation, whom  to  fet  thee  free*

I quite  forfookc,  that  now  ah  wo  is  me?

30

Is  there  for  me  in  Frifclandzay  place?

Where  I refus’d  for  thee  to  be  a (^tccne.

The  which  rcfufall  min'd  all  my  race,

As  by  thefcqucll  was  looplainly  fccnc?

O criiell  hap, 6 drange  and  mondious  cafe,  •

The  righteous  God  judge  thee  and  me  bctwccnc.
Was  ever  Tyger  carried  heart  fo  hard,

For  (b  firmc  love  to  pay  fofoulc  rev/ard?

3«

But  what  and  if  fome  pyrat  wanting  feare
Of  God  and  man,/hall  take  me  as  a (lave?

Thou  God  forbid, let  Tyger, Wolfe  and  Beare,

Fird  carry  me  a prey  intothcircavc.

And  there  my  flcfli  in  pececs  all  to  tcaic.

That  dying, I my  chaditiemay  favc.

This  /aid, her  raging  griefe  her  hands addre/Tes,

, T o offer  force  unto  her  golden  neffes.

3»

And  even  as  Hccwktf  fell  raging  mad.

With  griefcof  mind  and  forrow  fore  opprc/Tcd,

To  fee  her  Polydoras  little  lad.

By  kinfmans  fraud  and  crucltiedidrc/Tcd;

Sorav*d  Olympia  fairc,as  thout>h  flic  had
With  twcmic  thoufand  divels  bene  pofleffed:

At  lad  flic  fitteth  on  thcrocks  alone  ,

And  feemes  as/enfleffe  as  the  fenflefle  done.

And  in  this  date  I mcane  to  let  her  day,

Tillof  have talkt  a while,

VVhotravd’d  in  the  hot  and  Tandy  way^

Full  many  weary  and  unplcafant  mile:

And  now  it  was  the  middle  of  the  day.

When  as  upon  the  South  fide  of  the  He,

He  faw  three  Ladles  nccrc  a little  towre.

Did  (port  thcmfcivcs  within  a pleafant  bowre.

Thefc  Ladies  fairc wercof  Jlcynas  crew^

And  there  rcficflu  thcmfcivcs  a littlc/pace,

■They  had  great  doreof  wines  both  old  and  new.
And  fundry  kind  of  junkets  in  like  cafe;

A prety  barkc  there  hy  within  thciivcw.

That  did  attend  their pleafures  in  the  place,

And  wait  when  any  little  gale  fljould  blow,

(For  now  was  none)  that  they  might  homeward  go.

Then  one  of  thefc  that  had  efpidc  the  Kniofit,

At  fuch  a time,  and  in  fuch  way  to  ride,*’

With  courteous  fpecch  invites  him  to  alight;

The  fccond  brings  him  wmeon  th’other/idc.

And  makes  him  fane  more  thirdic  with  the  fight.
But  thefc  enticements  could  notcaufc  him  bich.

He  fearcs  Alcyna  prifner  fo  might  take  him.

If  by  this  day  /he  hapt  to  overtake  him.

G 3


I

j


Kt  hUtwn
tbit  of

pi*  tfbm  QT'o
Undofttmi
htrnakjtdta'^
Ehidd,bool{tl


I


Even


THE  TENTH  BOOKE


76


MmiUt


36


Simi/t,


JUfraii,


Even  as  fait  pecter  mixt  with  brimftonc  pure,
Inflamcth  ftraight  when  once  it  fecles  the  fire.

Or  as  the  fca  with  winds  and  airc  obfeute,

J Doth  wdrkc and  fwclljand  ever  rifeth  hier;

I % So  tliey  that  faw  their  wordscouldnotallure,

« His  noble  mind  to  follow  their  defier,

Tooke  high  difdaine  that  they  werefo  contemned.
And  him  of  great  difcourtefie  condemned.

. 57

Leakfut  the  ^‘^ight  the  third  as  in  a raging  mood
Said  thuSjO  creature  void  of  all  gentilitic,

And  boinc  (no  doubt)  of  bafe  unworthy  blood,  ’
And  bred  w.  ere  never  ufcd  wascivilitie,

Ay  during  life  fro  thee  depart  all  good.

Nor  maift  thou  die  in  ejUict  and  tranquillitie.

But  burned  maid  thou  be, or  cut  in  quarters,

Or  driven  to  hang  thy  felfc  in  thine  owne  gaiterJ,

5*

With  thefe  and  many  bitter  fpeeches  mo.

They  raileon  him, and  then  they  take  their  barkej
And  coait  along  upon  the  Southerne  fhorc.

That  they  hispaflage  and  his courfe might  markc.
But  he  that  now  was  gotten  fane  before.

Did  little  to  their  threats  or  curfcsharkc.*
Andnotwithftanding  all  that  they  conuived,

Yet  to  his  fli  ip  in  dafctic  he  arrived.

39

The  Pilot  doth  Rogero  much  commend.

That  from  Alcyna  fo  himfcifc  did  favc.

And  as  a wife  and  well  experienc’d  frend,

Sound  counfell  and  good  precepts  him  hegavei
And  wifht  that  he  his  time  would  better  fpend.

And  leave  fond  toyes, embracing  wifed  ome  grave.
And  fiom  the  good  the  cvill  to  difcerne.

As  Logefiilld  ufed  men  to  learnc,

40

T here  is  the  food  that  fils  and  never  cloycth.

There  is  the  love, the  beauty  and  the  grace.

That  maketh  him  moft  blcil  that  them  cnjoycth,

To  which  compai*d,aJl  other  jdyes  arc  bafe;

There  hope, nor  fcarc,nor  care  the  mind  annoycth,
Refpeft  of  pcrfons,nor  regard  of  place:

The  mmd  ftillfinding  perfit  contentation,

T hat  icfis  it  fclfe  in  vertuous  contemplation.

41

There  are  (faid  he)  fomc  better  IclTons  taught.

Then  dancings,dalIyings,or  dainticdict.

There  flial  you  learnc  to  frame  your  mind  & thought
Frorti  will  to  wit, to  temperance  from  riet;

There  is  the  path  by  which  you  may  be  brought
Into  tlie  perfect  paradifeof quiet.

This  talc  the  Pilot  to  Rogero\o\6,

And  all  the  while  their  courfe  they  forward  hold.

42

But  lo.tlicy  fcca  navic  under  faile,

Of  fhips  thartoward  them  in  haft  did  bend,

Alym  \y  raxhfull  ftriving  tooth  and  nailc,

Don,  binke  to  fetch  againe  her  fieeting  frend:

Bur  all  hcrdiligcncc  could  not  availc,

Rogiro  to  returne  doth  not  intend.

And  of  Her  forces  he  was  not  afraid,

Beeaufe  that  LogifiHi*  fent  him  aid.


For  ftraight  a watchman  ftanding  in  a towre.

So  high  that  all  the  hilsand  fhorc  was  under.

Did  ring  the  laium  bell  that  prefent  hourc.

He  faw  her  fleet, though  diftantfarre  afunder:

And  when  that  now  dpproched  was  their  powre,'
With  cannon  (hot  they  made  them  fuch  a thunder.
That  though  Alcyua  tbreatned  much  and  braved.
Yet  was  Rogcro  fiom  her  malice  faved.

44

Then  athisfirft  arrivalltoche  fhorc,

Fourcdamfi-Is  met  him  fent  by  Logefiilla,
Andronica  that  wifely  fees  before.

And  Fronefts  the  jtift.and  chart  TJrupUa,

And  ftic  that  boldly  fights  for  vcrtucslorc,
DefeendSng  fiorfi  the  Romanc  race  Camilla:

And  ftraight  ruftit  out  of  men  a worthy  band.

Ay  preft  to  meet  their  foes  on  fea  and  land.

Within  a large  and  very  quiet  bay,

A navic  was  of  veffcls  big  and  tall.

That  readie  at  an  howers  warning  lay,

Togo  CO fightatany  Iittiecall:

And  now  there  was  begun  a great  affray.

By  land  and  fea  the  conflidl  was  not  finall.

Which  did  the  realme  in  burly  burly  fet,

Alcyna  late  did  from  her  After  get.

4«

This  ftrange  to  fet  of  wars  the  ftrangc  ruccclle,  '
She  that  qflatc  wascounted  of  fuch  might,

Is  now  (b  driv’n  in  danger  and  diftrcfle,

Y hat  leant  flic  could  prrftrve  her  felfc  by  flightj  '

' Rogeios  paiting  brought  hcrgiicfc  no  Idle,

T hen  did  ilicfoilc,which  both  bicd  fuch  dcfpitC,
And  fuchdcfpaircjtodic  ftie  had  intended,

(If  fo  flic  might)  to  have  her  torments  ended.

And  as  her  felfc  ihcdamc  of  Carthage  kild,

W hen  as  the  Troyan  Dukedid  her  forfake:

Or  as  her  blood  the  Quecne  of  e/ffgyprfpild ,

For  that  fo  famous  Remane  captaines  fake;

Even  fo  ALyna  with  like  forrowes  fild,

Wiftitof  htrlclfe  with  like  death  end  to  makf,

But  (cither  aiincicntfolkcbclcev’d  a lie,

Or  this  is  uae)  a fairy  cannot  die.

4«

But  leave  we  now  Alcynaitt  this  paine.

That  from  her  elder  fiftcr  fled  apace.

And  to  Rogero  let  us  turnc  againe,

That  was  cond  uded  to  a better  place.

Where  finding  now  that  he  did  Dfcrcmainc,

He  thanked  God  that  gave  him  fo  much  grace,

To  fee  his  focsof  forccsall  deprived,

Himfcifc  within  thccaftle  fafe  arrived.

And  fuch  a caftlc  that  in  ftately  f!iow

And  coftly  fubftance  othcA  al)  furmounted.

The  value  ofthc  walscan  no  man  know.

Except  he  firft  upon  the  fame  had  mcuntcdi
Men  have  not  jewels  of  fuch  price  below.

For  Di’monds  .ire  to  thefe  but  droftc  accounted,

And  Pcarlesbut  pclfc,and  Rubies  all  are  rotten,
W'hcrc  ftoncs  of  fuch  rare  vertue  can  be  gotten.

Thefe


Here  tndi  tjl
ofAleytu.


The  prsifi  ej"

L»ie(Uit»

beufi.


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


50

Tliffc  wals  arc  built  of  ftoncf  of  fo  great  price.

All  otliei  unto  thcfccomefarre  behind;
inthefe  men  fee  the  vertue  and  the  vice,

«.  That  clca  veth  to  the  inward  frulc  and  mind.

K0ttr.  Til.*  vvho  looks  in  fuch  a glalTcjmay  grow  fo  wife.

As  neither  flattering  praifcs  fliall  him  blind
dtxmfioia  With  tickling  words, Horundcfeivcd  blame,
nmh  Sluif  With  forged  faults  fliall  workc  him  any  fliamc.

aifi  menio.  ^ ,

"***  hence  dot  h come  the  eveilafting  light.

That  may  with  Fbxbxs  beames  fo  clcare  compare.
That  when  the  Sunne  isdownc  there  is  no  night.
With  thofe  that  of  thefe  jewels  flored  arc:

Tlicfc  gems  do  teach  us  .to  difeerne  aright,

Thefe  gems  arc  wrought  with  workmanfliip  fo  rare,
Ovid:  Mile.  That  hard  it  were  to  make  true  cflinaation,

Which  is  more  worth  the  fubflance  or  the  falhion.

On  aiches  rais’d  of prophiry  pafling  hie,

So  hie  that  to  afirend  them  feem’d  a paine,  ,

"Were  gardens  fairc  and  picafant  to  the  cic.

Few  found  fo  fairc  below  upon  a plainc;

Sweet  fmclhng  frees  in  order  ftandtng  by.

With  fountaincs  waning  them  in  Heed  of  raine.
Which  do  the  lame  (b  naturally  nourifli ,

As  all  the  yearc  both  flowtcs  and  fruites  do  flouriflu
53

No  weeds  or  fruitleflc  trees  are  in  this  place.

But  herbs  wbofe  vcrtucs  arcof  higheft  price,
Asfovcraigncfagc,and  thrift, and  herbe  of  gracCi
And  time, which  well  beftowed  maketh  wife,,

And  lowly  patience-proud  thoughts  to  abafe.

And  hearts  cafcjthat  can  never  grow  with  vice.
Thefcarcthc  herbsthat  in  this  garden  grew,

Whofe  vcitucsdo  their  beauties  ftill  tchcw.

5+

The  Ladic  of  the  caftic  greatly  joyed,

To  fee  thefafe  arrivail  of  this  Knight,

And  all  her  care  and  travcll  flic  employed.

That  honor  might  be  done  him  in  her  fight.

Afiolo  (in  his  paflage  IclTc  annoyed)

JDoth  take  in  his  acquaintance  great  delight,

A lid  all  rhe  other  his  good  favour  fought,

That  by^Mc/yj^tothcmfclvcswerc  brought.'

55

Now  having  all  thcmfclves  feme  dayes  repofed
InLogeflilloi  houfe,and  taken  reft,

And  finding  all  themfclvc.s right  welldifpofed,

T o make  iciurne  againc  into  the  Weft,

The  good  Mclyjfa  for  them  all  propofed,  A

Vnto  the  mighty  Ladic  thisrcquefti
Thatby  herlcavcwithout  incurring  blame,

T hey  might  rcturnc  them  all  from  w hence  they  came.
s6

To  whom  dame  Logcftilla  thus  replidc.

That  after  they  a day  or  two  had  ftaid,

She  would  for  them  moft  carefully  provide.

For  alii  their  journey  furnituic  and  aid:

And  firft  flic  taught  Rogero  howto  ride  '

The  flying  horfc  ^f  whom  he  was  afraidc)

To  make  him  pace  orpafTea  full  catccrcs
As  readily  as  other  liorfes  here.


57


When  all  was  ready  now  for  him  to  part,

Rogero  bids  this  worthy  dame  farewdf.

Whom  all' his  life  time  after  from  his  hart
He  highly  honored  and  loved  well.

Firft  I will  fliew  how  well  he  playd  his  part,'

Then  of  the  Englifli  Duke  1 mcanc  to  tell,

How  in  more  time, and  with  far  greater  paine,

He  did  rcturnc  to  Charles  his  court  againe.

58

Rogero  mounted  on  the  winged  ftced,  ,

Which  he  had  Icarn’d  obedient  now  to  make.

Doth  deeme  it  were  a brave  and  noble  deed.

About  the  world  his  voyage  home  to  take.

Forthwith  beginnethEaftward  to  proceed.

And  though  the  thing  were  much  to  undertake^

Y ct  hope  of  praifc  makes  men  no  travcll  fljunne^  StHttnet',

To  fay  another  day ,wc  this  have  done.

59

And  leaving  firft  the  Indian  river  T ana.

He  guides  his  journey  to  the  great  Catay,

From  thence  hcp-ifiTcth  unto  Mangiana,

And  came  witTiin  the  fight  of  huge  ^infajs  ,

Vpon  the  right  hand  leaving  Scricana,

And  turning  from  theScythians  away.

Where  Afia  from  Europa  firft  doth  draw,
Fomeria,RuJftaiFrutina  he  faw.

6o

His  horlc  that  hath  the  ufc  of  wings  and  feet.

Did  heipe  with  greater  hafte  home  to  retire.

And  tho  with  fpced  to  turnc  he  thought  it  nacct,

Bccaufc  his  Bradamant  did  lb  defire,  StHuaeA

Yet  having  now  of  travcll  fcltthcfwccr,  » ^ofto

(Moft  fwcet  to  thofe  to  knowledge  that  alpirc)  tAs  m uMi
When  Germany  a nd  Hungry  he  had  paft,  luiltttr.

He  mcancs  to  vifit  England  at  the  laft,

Wherein  a medow  on  a morningfaire,  paHtbeold

FaftbythcTcwf  at  Lo«do«hcdid  light,  ' Koimmui
Delighted  with  the  water  and  the  airc,  &***’•

And  that  fairccitic  ftanding  in  his  fight,  uuAAht

When  ftraight  he  faw  that  louldiers  did  repaire,  ttbe  BritSnn
To  mufter  there,  and  asking  of  a Knight,

*1  hat  in  the  medow  he  had  met  by  chance,

He  underftood  that  they  were  bound  for  France.

6Z

Thefe  be  thefuccors  (thus  the  Knight  him  told)

Renaldo  fude  for  at  his  comming  hither.

With  Irijh  men  and  Scots  of  courage  bold.

To  joyae  in  hearts  and  hands  and  purfc  together.

The  muftei*stanc,and  each  mansnamc cnrold.

Their  oncly  ft^  is  but  for  wind  and  wether.

But  as  they  palTc  I mcanc  to  you  to  fliew  them,

T heir  names  and  armcs.that  you  may  better  know

(them,  doth

You  fee  the  ftanderd,  that  fo  great  doth  fliow,  bm  rove  a

That  joyncs  the  Leopard  and  the  Flouredchic^,  *W*

That  chiefeft  is.thc  reft  do  come  below,  mtKs  mtmet,

And  rc\’rcncc  this  according  to  our  ufc:  ^ Jh»^

Duke  Leonell  Lord  gcncrall  doth  it  ow,  write  of tbt

A famous  man  in  time  of  warre  and  truce,  ruble  men  of

And  nephew  dearc  unto  the  King  my  mafter,

Who  gave  to  him  the  Dukedome  of  Lanca/ler.  . »<*•»»

G 4 This


rHE  TENTH  BOOKE.


This  banner  that  ftanJs  next  unto  the  Kings,

With  glittering fliew  that  fliakcs  the  rell  atreng,
And  bcaresin  azure  field  thice argent  wings.

To  Richard  Earle  of  fVaitvicl^^c  doih  belong,

This  man  the  Dukeef  G/f// err  banner  brings,
jiff  .eons  head, except  my  guefle  be  wrong,
Thefietbrand  the  Dukcof  Clarence  is.

The  tree  the  Duke  of  Torf^e  doth  claime  for  his.

The  launce  into  three  fundry  pceccs  rent,

Belongs  unto  the  worthy  Duke  of  NorfoU^e:

The  lightning  longs  unto  the  Earle  of
The  Gtiphin  longs  unco  the  Earle  of  Pembrol{e:
The  ballancc  er'n  by  whieh  juft  doome  is  ment.
Belongs  untothe  noble  Duke  of Suffolf^e.

T he  Dragon  to  the  i aliant  Earle  of  Cumberland,

T he  garland  it  the  bi  a ve  Earls  of  Northumberland
66

The  Earle  of  Antndell a ffiip  halfe  drown'd,

The  MarquefTefijr/f/ygivesanargent  hilli
The  gallant  Earle  of  Ejfex  hath  thefjound.

The  bay  iteeDarby  that  doth  flourlA  ftill;

The  wbcele  hath  Dorfet  ever  running  round.

The  Earle  of  March  his  banner  all  dot  h fill
WithCaedar  trees:  the  Duke  of  Somerjet
A broken  chaire  doth  in  hts  enfigne  fee.

«7

The  Faulcon  hovering  upon  her  neft.

The  Earle  of  Z)e'i;*nj7;t>e  doth  in  banner  bearej
And  brings  a (luidy  crew  from  out  the  Weft,

The  Earle  of  Oxewjonf  doth  give  the  Beare;

The  banner  all  with  blackc  and  yellow  dieft.
Belongs  unto  the  Earle  of  iVinchefler.

He  that  thecriftallcrclTe  in  banner  hath.

Is  fent  from  the  rich  Biftiop  of  the  Bath.

68

The  archerson  horfcjwith  other  armed  men,

Arc  two  and  fortie  t hoiifand  more  or  K fle,

T he  other  footmens  number  doubles  them.

Or  wants  thereof  but  little  as  I guefle:

The  banners fhew  their  captainsnoblc  ftem,

A crofle,a  wrcath.an  azure  bar, a feflTc,

Geffray  and  Ermant ,Ed.rt!ard\>o\d  and  Harry,
Vnder  their  guide  the  footmen  all  do  carry.

69

The  Duke  of  Bud^ingham  that  firft  appeares.

The  next  to  him  the  Earle  of  Salsbuy:

Biiriary  ncxt,a  man  well  ftricke  in  ycares,

Ana  E.irpardoext  thcEarle  of  Shrewsbury.

Now  turnc  about ,and  lo  the  Scott ijb  peaces.
Brave  men,and  well  appointed  you  fliall  fee.
Where  Zerbin  Tonne  unto  the  Scottijh  King,
Vnto  the  field doththirticthoufand  bring.

70

All  chofen  men  from  many  a fliirc  and  towne.

All  ready  to  refift,airaile,invadc.

Their  ftanderd  isthe  bcaft  of  moft  renow ne.
That  in  his  paw  doth  hold  a glittering  blade.
This  isthe  heire  apparant  to  theciowne,

This  is  the  goodly  impe  whom  nature  made.

To  fliow  herchiefeft  workmanflnpand  skill.
And  after  brake  the  mould  againft  her  will.


71

T he  Earle  of  Otion  commeth  after  him,

That  in  bis  banner  beafes  the  golden  barrCf '

The  TpottedLeppaid  that  looks  fo  grim,

‘ That  IS  the  enfigne  of  the  Duke  of  ATarrc.

Not  far  from  him  there  commeth  Aliuhrin,

A man  of  mighty  ftrength  and  fierce  in  warre.

No  Duke,nor  Earle, nor  Marqutfl'e  as  men  fay.

But  of  the  favages  he  bearcs  the  fway.

7>

The  Duke  of  Tra^ord  beaies  in  enfigne  bright.

The  bird  whofeyono  ones  flare  in  Fhoebusfzce:
Lurcanio  Lo\d  of  Avgui,  valiant  Knight,

Doth  give  a Bull,whom  two  dogs  hold  in  chafej
The  Duke  of  Albanie  gives  blue  and  white,

(Since  he  obtained  faitcGewewrtfs  grace)

Earle  Bohune  in  his  ftatcly  banner  bcarcs
A Vulture  that  withclawei  a Dragon  tcarei.

7J

Their  horfemen  arc  with  jacks  for  moft  part  clad,

Their  hoifcs  aic  both  Iwift  of  courfc  and  ftrong,'
They  rimonhorfcback  with  a flendergad.

And  like  a fpcarc,but  that  it  is  more  long;

Their  people  arc  of  wairc  then  peace  more  glad,

. More  apt  to  offer  then  to  fufFer  wrong;

Thefc  arc  the  fuccors  out  of Scotlandfentf .

T hat  with  the  noble  Prince  Zerbino  went.

74

Then  come  the  IriP}  men  ofvaliant  harti,

And  aftivelimbsjinpcrfonages  tall.

They  naked  ufc  to  go  in  many  parts,

But  with  a mantle  yet  they  cover  aPj
Short  fwords  they  ufe  to  carry  and  long  darts.

To  fight  both  ncarc  and  farrcaJoofc  wuhall.

And  of  thefc  bands  the  Lordsand  leaders  are,

T he  noble  Earles  of  Ormond  and  RJldare.

7i

Some  fixtccnc  thoufand  men  or  thereabout.

Out  of  the  Itifli  lie  at  this  timewent,

Bcfidc  the  other  Hands  thcica  bout,

Snevelandand  Ifland  other  fuccors fenti

To  good  King  Charles , for  why  they  ftood  in  doubt,

Jf  hcwcrcconque.’d  they  fl>ould  all  repent,

A nd  ftill  their  numbers  daily  did  incrcafc
Ofihofethat  better  like  of  warre  then  pe*ac&

76

Now  while  /?o^erolcarncsthcarmesand  name
Of  every  BrittiP)  Lord,bchold  a rout
Of  citizens  and  folkc  of  all  forts  came,

Some  with  delight,  and  fomc  with  dread  and  doubt.
To  fee  a bcaft  fo  ftrangc,fb  ftrong,fo  tame,

And  wondiingmucbjthcycompaft  him  about:

They  thought  it  was  aftrangcand  monftrouilhingj
To  fee  a hoifcthai  had  a Griffons  wing,
e 77

Wherefore  to  make  the  people  marvcll  more.

And  as  it  were  to  fport  himfi  Ife  and  play.

He  fpui'd  his  bcaft, who  ftraight  aloft  did  fbare.

And  bare  his  mafter  Weftward  quite  away:

And  ftraight  he  was  beyond  our  Englijh  fliorc.

And  mcancs  to  pafle  rhe  /rijh  Teas  that  day.

Saint  George  hischanncll  ina  little  while.

He  part, and  afterfa  w the  Irifl}  He.


Where


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO:


7*

Where  men  do  tell  ftrange  talcs, that  long  ago
Saint  Fatricii  built  a folitary  ca?c.

Into  the  which  they  that  devoutly  go.

By  purging  of  their  fins  their  fbulcsmayfavc:

Now  whether  this  report  be  true  or  no,

1 not  afii  rme,  and  yet  1 not  deprave.

But  croifing  from  hence  to  Ifland  ward  he  found
jingelicaunto  the  rock  fall  bound.

79

Both  nak’d  and  bound  at  this  fame  Tie  of  wo,

For  Ilcofwoitmay  be  juftly called,

Where  peerJefic  pceces  are  abufed  fo,  *

By  monftcr  vile  to  be  devour’d  and  thralled.

Where  pyrats  ftill  by  land  and  fca  do  go,
Afiaulting  forts  that  arc  but  weakly  walled  :

And  whom  they  take  by  flattry  or  by  force,
Theygiveamonfter  quite  without  remorfe.

So

I did  declare  no:  many  books  before,

If  you  the  fame  in  memory  do  keepc.

How  certaine  pyrats  tookc  her  at  a fltorc.

Where  that  chaft  Hermit  lay  by  her  afleepe,
Andhow  atlaft  forwantofotherftorc.

Although  their  hearts  did  melt,  and eies  did  weepc,
Moov’d  with  a helplelTc  and  a vaine  companion.
Perforce  they  bound  her  on  this  wofull  fafiiion.

8l

And  thus  the  caiti  ves  left  her  all  forlorne.

With  nothing  but  the  rocks  and  fcas  in  fight.

As  naked  asof  nature  fiie  was  borne.

And  void  offuccour,and  ail  comfort  quite.

No  vaileoflawncasthen  by  her  was  worne,'

To  firade  the  damask  rofe  and  lillies  white,

Whofe  colours  were  foreixt  in  every  member.

Like  fragrant  both  in  luly  and  Deesmber.

8«

R0gero  at  the  firfl:  had  fiirely  thought,

S he  was  fome  image  made  of alabaficr.

Or  of  white  marble  curioufly  wrought.

To  (Iicw  the  skilfull  hand  of  fome  great  mailer.
Butvewing  necrer  he  was  quickly  taught,

S he  had  fome  parts  that  were  not  made  of plaller  ;
Both  that  hercies  did /Tied  fuch  wofull  teares,

And  that  the  wind  did  wave  her  golden  heares.

, 83

To  fee  her  bound  tohearehermourneandplaine.

Not  onely  made  that  he  his  lOurney  ftaid.

But  caus’d  that  he  from  teares  could  fcant  abilainc.
Both  love  and  pity  fo  his  heart  afiail'd,

Ow.Mrt.O  At  laft  with  words  to  mitigate  her  painc,

c!aem^cu»t  Thusmuchtohcrinlouingfbrthefaid,  ’

fuiiu4  tmer  ® Lady  worthy  onely  of  thofe  bands,

fiCupidi  Wherewith  love  bindsthchcartsand  not  the  hands.

iwt^unwa-  8^

mMci.  And  farre  unfit  for  thefe  or  any  fuch,

what  wight  was  found  fo  crucll  and  unkind,

T o b.anifli  all  humanity  fo  much.

Thole  poltflit  Ivory  bands  in  chainestobind.

About  that  corps  whom  nonccan  worthcly  tuch
With  hurtful!  hands, unworthy  bandsto  wind  i
This  faid,  fiie  blul]u,fceing  thofe  parts  were  fpidc.
The  which  (though  fairc)yct  nature ftri ves  to  hide.


Faine  would  fhc  withherhand  have  hid  hcreyesj
But  that  her  hands  were  bound  unto  the  Hone,
Which  made  her  oft  to  breake  to  wofull  ccics,

(Sole  remedy  where  remedy  is  none)

At  lall  with  fobbing  voice  Ihe  doth  devile
To  tel  I the  Knight  the  caulc  of  all  her  monc  S
But  from  the, lea  a fodainc  ooife  was  heard.

That  thishcrfpccchand  all  t he  matter  mard.

t6

Behold  there  now  appear’d  the  monller  great,

Halfc  underneath  and  haife  abovethe  wave.

As  when  a lliip  with  wind  and  weather  bcatj
Dothhallento  the  hav’n  it  fclfctofave.*

So  doth  the  monller  hall,  in  hope  to  cate
The  dainty  morfcJl  he  was  wont  to  have  :

Which  fight  lb  fore  the  damfell  did  appall,

Rogero  could  not  comfort  her  at  all.

87

Yet  with  his  fpeare  in  band,  though  not  in  reft.

The  ugly  upon  the  brow  he  llrakc,
fl  call  him  Ori^e,  becaufcl  know  no  beaft,

Nor  filh  from  whence comparifon to  take)

His  head  and  teeth  wcrciikea  borc,the  reft
A malTc,of  which  I know  not  w hat  to  make.

He  gave  him  on  the  brow  a mighty  kno^c,

But  pierft  no  mote  then  if  it  were  a rockc.

88

And  finding  that  his  blowfofinallhurt  brings,
Heturnes  again  on ftclh  him  toalTay,

The  Orf{e  that  faw  the  lhadow  of  great  wings,
Vpon  the  watcrup  and  down  to  pUyi
With  fury  great  and  rase  away  he  nings,

And  on  the  fiiore  doth  feave  thcceitaine  pray.

The  fliadow  vain  e he  up  and  downc  doth  chalc^
The  while  iio^crolayth  him  on  apace.

89

Even  as  an  Eagle  that  cfpiesfrom  hie.

Among  the  herbs  a party  colour’d  fnake.

Or  on  a bank  funning  her  lelfe  to  lie,

’To  call  the  elder  skin,  a new  to  make.

Lies  hovering  warily  till  fliemayfpic
A vantage  furc  the  venom’d  wormc  to  take.

Then  takeshim  by  the  back,  and  bcates  her  wings,
Matiger  the  poifou  of  his  forked  llings.

$0

So  doth  Rogero  both  with  fword  and  Ipcaie,

The  cruell  monller  warily  alTaile,

Not  where  he  fenced  is  with  grizly  heare.

So  hard  as  that  no  weapon  could  prevailc,-
But  (ometime  pricks  him  ncerc  unto  hiscare.
Sometime  hisfides,lbmctimcs  bis  ugly  tailc;

But  nature  had  with  fuch  ftrong  fences  arm’d  htm^
As  all  hisblowcs  butfmallor  nothing  harm’d  him.
91

Sohavellcenecrcthisa  filly  flic.

With  mallivcdog  in  fomm.ers  heate  to  play,
Sometime  to  fting  him  in  hisnofeor  eie,

Somctiitie about  his  grizlyjawcstoftay.

And  buzzing  round  about  his  cares  to  flic.

He  fiiaps  in  vaine,  for  Hill  fhe  whips  away,

And  oft  fo  long  file  dailies  in  thisfort,

Till  one  Inap  comes  and  man  eth  ail  her'lportf.


SimtHiK


SiatUi


Sinil*.


THE  TENTH  BOOKE


So-


9t

But  now  Rogero  doth  this  fleightdcrifi:,

Sith  that  by  force  he  cannot  make  him  yeeld.

He  meanes  to  dazle  both  the  mongers  eyeSj
By  hidden  force  of  his  enchanted  fhecld.

And  being  thus  refoiv’d  to  land  he  flies.

And  from  all  harme  the  Lady  faire  to  fheeld,

He  puts  thepreciousRing  upon  her  hand.

Whole  vertuc  was  cnchaotmcntS  to  withfland,

93

That  ring  that  worthy  Bradamant  him  lent,

W'hea  flie  from  falfe  Brune/lo  had  it  tane.

With  which  Melyjfa  into  India,  went.

And  wrought  hisfreedome  and  Alynathaae^
That  ring  he  lends  thedamfcll,  with  intent
Tofave  her  eyes  by  vertueofthe  fame.

Then  takes  he  forth  the  fliicld,  whofe  light  To  dazed
The  lookers  on,  they  fall  down  all  amazed.

94

The  monfler  now  approaching  to  the  fhore, «

Amaz’d  at  this,  refiftance  none  did  make^

Rogero  hewes  upon  him  more  and  more,  '

But  his  hard  fcales  no  harme  thereby  did  take.

Oh  fir  (faith  fhe)  unloofcH  me  before  *

Outofthismaze  the  monfler  do  awake.

And  let  your  fword  flay  me  this  prefent  hourej"  - "

So  as  this  monfler  may  not  me  deroure.


9?

Thefe  wofull  words  mov’d  fb  Rogerot  mind.

That  flraight  hedid  unloofe  the  Lady  faire.

And  caus’d  her  by  and  by  to  get  behind
Vpon  his  horfe,  then  mounting  in  the  aire.

He  leaves  his  Spanijl7  journey  firft  aflign’d.

And  untolittlc  Brittain  doth  repaire,

But  by  the  way  be  fure  he  did  not  miflc,

To  give  her  many  a fwcet  and  friendly  kiflci

96

And  having  found  a (blitary  place,

A plealant  grovewcll  water’d  with  a fpring,

Which  never  herd  nor  hetdman  did  deface.

Where  Philomela  ufed  ftill  to  fing.

Here  he  alights,  minding  to  flay  a fj^ace.

And  hither  hetheLady  fairedid  bring,

But  fure  it  feem’d  he  made  his  full  account.

Ere  long  upon  a better  beaft  to  mount.

97

His  armour  made  him  yet  a while  to  bide.

Which  forced  flay  a more  defire  did  breed.

But  now  in  him  it  was  mofl  truly  tride,

Oft  times  the  greater  haft, the  worfe  thefpced.

He  knits  with  haft  two  knots,  while  one  untidci  StnuauH
But  fcft’tis  beft  no  furder  to  proceed,

Inowcutofipabruptly  here  my  rime.

And  keepe  my  talc  unto  another  time»


Moral!.  Byreno  that  abandoned,  hu  l(tnd  Olympia  irtltdejolate  Hand,  atidfeU  in  love  tvith  another,  we  nu^  note  an  ex-

ample of  ingratitude, the  monfir  oia  fault  oj  aSfaulf^,and  mofi  odioiA  before  God  and  man:  and  herein  learne  to  abhorre
and detefi  this  vice  in  him  and  in  all  others, thatlpdving  teceivedpreferment  or  advancement,  either  fy  men  or  women,
when  thqi  have  done,fha\e  them  offlihe  horfes  that  be  lame, or  garments  that  be  old,  preferring  one  to  the  mill,the  other
to  the  dunghill:  or  as  oarStuklcy  faith, mal^e  as  nmchoffhUwife  as  he  touldiiif  ^ary  couldmah,e  more  of  her, th^  might
tal^e  her, after  he  hadgotten  many  thoufand pounds  ^ n^ing  much  of  her.  in  the fixtejul  words  that  one  of  Alcynas  wo-
menJpa\e  of  R ogcro,we  ??3<^  obfervk  the  maner  of  wanton  worldlings , that  if  they  fee  ayong  man  live  temperatly,  or go
plainly, or Jpea}{e  devoutly,  flraight  they  fay  he  U'a  bafi  fellow, and  one  that  hnowes  not  what  belongs  to  a Gentleman;
which  foolijb  maner  ofphra/e,by  ^.ogcros  example  we  muft  learne  to  contemne,andl^n(m>  that  fiuh  men  are  indeed  ba/e
as  thinl^e  temperance, and fobriety.am  devotion  tafe  qualities,  finally  in  ilogcros  travell  about  the  world, we  may  fee
how  commendable  it  is  for  ayong  Gent  'eman  to  travell  abroad  intojoi  raine  nations, lut yet  we  may  note  withall  an  in-
convenience that  comes  maty  times  with  it, to  fee  forde  Angelicas  nafed,  that  will  tempt  men  ofveryfianchgaxernrr^t
andftaidyecres  to  that  which  they  Jhall  after  repent,di  JHogero  did  this  his  wantonneJfe,as  appeares  more  plainly  in  the
next  Boo\e,tyhereyou  Jhall  find  he  lofi  both  his  horfe  and  the  ring  ly  the  ungratefulnejfe  of  Angelica.

- . For  the  matter  hifi  orkall  of  this  tenth  Bool^, there  is  litle  to  be  laid, and  nothing  to  he  affirmed: for  the  fuccors  fern  to

ni  OTIC.  France  from  England  .Scotlandjlreland  and  ma^y  places  therealouts, though  I cannot  affirme  precifely  of  the  time,yet
fure  it  is  that  maty  have  beenc  fent  hence  againfi  the  Turk  to  France  and  elfcwhere.  Andwhereas  he  jpea\es  o/Saint
P ittkk  the  Uifh  Saint,  I would  have  them  that  would  }(now  the  fiory  ofhimtoloohein  Suriusdc  vitis  Sandorum,
and  there  they  may  fie  it  at  large:  for  mine  ownpart,at  my  beitg  r»  Ireland,  where  1 tariedafew  months .Iwasinqui-
fitive  of  their  opinion  dfthis  Saint, and  I ioitla  learne  nothing,  other  then  a reverent  conceit  that  they  had  of  him, as  be-
comes all  Chrifitavs  to  have  of  devout  men  and  chiefly  ofthofe  by  whom  they  are  fir fi  infiruffedin  the  Clrifiian  Faith;
AUcgotie,i^'Wt/or  his  Purgatory,  I found  neither  any  that  affirmed  it  or  beleeved  it.  Logcflillas  Caflle,the  ornaments  therof,the
herbs  of  the  gar  den, all  thefe  figure  the  true  magnificence  glory,  comfort,  and  utility  ojvertue.  T hefoitre  Ladies  fent  to
refeue  Rogero,  are  thefoure  CardinaU  vertucs,  which  betng  well  unitedtogether,  are  able  to  overthrow  whole  navies
of  vicious  pleafiircs.  And  fowhatfoever  elfe  is  fpofen  ofLogeftilla  in  Allegory  is  tal^enjor  vertue.

AlluCon.  Angelica  tied  to  the  rocli.and  delivered  by  Rogero, (le  alludes  manifefily  to  the  tak  in  Ovid  of  Andromade  and
Pctftvtsfl/howiihhiiffiiddturnedthebeholders  irUofiones.

I


% .•


Smiie,


A n»\nhlt


Sa  THE  ELEVENTH  BOOKE.


^Igsg

3efe

3b^2K


THE  ARGVMENT.

Angelica  ^tth  hide  her  felfe  avay^

'Ey  vertue  of  the  Ring  Rogcro  lent  her  ;
Rogero  fees  a (fyant  benre  nrvay
Hu  Jpovfe  hnlfe  deetd^nnd greatly  doth  lament  heri
Orlando  at  the  lie  of  woe  doth  pay^

Inhere  many  women  meete  but  hard adventer ;
Here  he  the  LMonfler  kild,  Olympia
To  marry  whom  Oberto foone  agreed.


'W^

ISi


He  gallant  courfcr  in  his  full
carricrc,

Is  made  by  man, to  fiopwith
Header  raine:

Butman  himfelfc  hisluft
and  fond  dcdrCj
Isfeldome  drawneby  rea-
fbn  to  rcfrainc :

*Tis  hard  to  Hop, but  harder
to  retire.

When  youthfull  courfe  enfaeth  pleafure  vaine.

As  Bears  do  breake  the  hives  and  weakc  defences.
When  fmcll  of  hony  commeth  to  their  fences,

X

No  marvell  if  iitgerocould  not  hold.

But  that  he  would  now  take  a little  Ipott,

That  naked  did  Angelica  behold.

Within  a grove  alone  from  allrefort ;

His  love  to  Bradamant  now  waseth  cold,

Or  at  thcleaft  is  temper’d  infuch  fort,

Hcmcanes  therewith  at  this  time  todifpence.

And  net  to  let  this  go  a maiden  hence.

3

Whofc  beauty  was  fo  rare  as  well  it  might
Have  made  Zenoerates  an  Epicure,

No  marvell  then  if  this  fame  gentle  Knight,

Could  not  fo  ereattcmpiation  well  endure  ;

But  while  he  h^aften’d  to  hts  hop’t  delight.

Of  which  he  thought  him  in  polTeflion  fore.

There  fell  a ftrange  and  unexpefted  thing.

By  meanes  Angelica  did  knovir  the  ring,

4 .

This  was  the  ring  that  flic  with  her  had  brought


To  fr«»cc,  the  very  firll  time  foe  was  there.

What  time  by  aid  thereof  fo  well  Ihe  wrought.

She  holp  her  brother  to  th’inchantcd  fpearc.

By  vertue  of  this  ring  flic  fet  at  nought
Thofe  magikearts,  that  men  fo  greatly  feare :

With  this  Or/a«i/oGounty  Palladine,

She  didrclcafe  from  wicked  ‘Dragontine^

5

By  hclpc  of  this  invifible  fhc  went,

Out  of  the  towre  where  Atlant  had  her  fet  i
For  this  fame  Ring  B/-H»e//efalfc  wasfent
By  Agrarmnt,vi\\o  long’d  the  fame  to  get.

To  tell  that  llory  is  not  my  intent,

For  feare  it  might  my  other  matter  let.

But  certainetis,  that  when  this  Ring  was  loft.

In  fortunes  waves  fhe  had  been  ever  toft.

6

Now  when  die  faw  t his  Ring  wason  her  hand,

She  was  fo  ftrookc  with  marvell  and  with  joy,

That  fcarce  fhc  could  difeerne  and  underftand.

If  fhe  were  -wake  or  if  die  dream’d  fome  toy  :

But  to  make  tryall  how  the  cafe  doth  Hand,

And  know  if  die  this  treafure  doth  enjoy.

Into  her  mouth  the  Ring  die  doth  convay.

And  ftraight  invifible  die  gocth  away.

7

Rogero  that  each  minute  thought  an  how  re,
fHis  armour  off, and  ready  for  the  play)

Expefting  now  thedamfell  in  a bowre.

Where  he  had  pointed  her  for  him  to  ftay,

Found  al'  too  late,  that  by  the  Rings  ftrange  power.
She  had  unfeeneconvai’d  herfclfcaway
He  lent  it  hertofavc  her  eyes  from  blindnefte.

And  for  reward  die  quits  him  with  unkindne^.

With


AU  thii  i

in

'iturdot
OrUnda  ina


OF  ORL'ANDO  FVRIOS^.  §

mm


-i

With  which  her  aft  difplcas’d  and  ill  apaid.

He  cuifthimfclfe,3nJ  chaf<?d  in  his  mind:

O crucll  and  unthankfull  wcnchfhc  faid)'

Is  thisthc  love  that  I deferv’d  to  find?

Doft  thou  reward  him  thus  that  brought  thccaidJ
To  thy  pTcfcrverart  thou  fb  unkind?

Take  ring  and  iliicldjand  flying  horft  and  ine.

This  onely  barro  me  not  thy  face  to  fee.

This  faid, he  go*th about  where  fhe  had  bectre,* .

Still  groping  as  the  weather  had  bin  darke.
Embracing  of  the  aire  his  armes  betweenc.

In  fteed  of  her, then  heedfull  he  doth  harkc.

To  find  her  by  the  found  that  was  not  fcenc.

And  whence  the  lame  doth  come  he  wcl  doth  mark.

L Buten  wentnieiintillitwashcrlote  ,

To  come  into  a filly  Ihephcards  cotc*

10

And  though  this  fame  were  far  from  any  tcwtic,

Yet  there  llie  quickly  did  her  fcife  provide
Ofmeatcanddrinkc.and  of  a fimplcgownc,
Sufficient  for  the  time  her  bare  to  hide,

Not  futing  for  a Ladie  of renowne.

That  had  oin  ever  clad  in  pompc  and  pride.

Had  gownes  cf  crimlbn, purple  and  carnafion.

Of  cv’ry  colour, and  of  c?*ry  falhion.

11

But  yet  no  kind  of  weed  fo  bafe  or  ill  is.

Her  of  her  princely  beauty  to  bcrcarc.

They  that  lb  much  extol!  fairc  AmariUU,

Ot  Galate.Ao  but  t hemfelvcs  dcceavc:

Ceafe  Tytens  to  praife  thy  golden  FhiUit,  ,
Peace  Ale/efie,this  pallcs  by  your  leave;

Yc  fouldicrs  all  that  ferve  in  Cupids  garrilbn,
Way’notpreliime  with  this  to  make  compatifori.

12

Now  hcrethedamlcll  fairea  palfrey  hired,

Withother  things  moftficedfullfor  her  way.

And  meanes  to  her  owne  hbme  to  have  retired.
From  whence  Ihe  had  bin  abfent  many  a day.

Doth  feeke  his  horfc  who  had  not  long  bin  idle.

But  in  his  mafiers  abfcnce  brake  his  bridle.

Which  when  he  found.the  raines  in  pecces  tornc,

The  horfc  foar*d  far  away  with  mighty  wing.

How  could  fuch  haps  with  paticntnclTc  be  borne.
Of  one  great  loflc  to  find  a greater  fpring?

He  fitteth  in  a dumpc,likc  one  fotlorne,
for  lollc  of  herjhis  horfe.and  of  his  ring,

Whole  vertue  great  did  make  him  much  repent  if.
But  yet  much  more  her  vertue  that  had  fent  it.

And  in  this  rage  he  puts  his  armor  on.

And  on  his  Hioiilder  carieth  his  Ihicld,

Purfuing  that  firft  path  he  lights  upon.

He  found  it  brought  him  to  a goodly  field.

One  fide  whereof  when  he  a while  had  gone.

It  feem’d  the  wood  ad|oyn’d  Ibmc  Ibund  did  yceld.
And  Hill  the  neare  and  nearer  that  he  goes,

The  plainer  found  he  heard  of  fturdy  blocs.


The  while  Rogero  now  With  travcll  tired,
Lamentinz  he  had  loft  lb  fairc  a pray.


A combat  twixt  a Giant  and  a Knjght,  •

He  fees  hard  by  moft  furioufty  bcgunnc,
TheGiantwitha  dub  doth  think  by  might.

The  battell  of  the  tothcr  to  have  wonnc;

Tilt  tothcr  with  hi s fword  a nd  nimble  fight,  -
His  furious  blowcs  with  watchfull  eye  doth  IJiunne,
Rogero  feeing  this  great  incqualitie.

Yet  ftandeth  ftill  and  flicwcs  no  partialitic.

l6

But  in  his  mind  he  wiftit  the  Knight  to  win,

VV'hen  lo  the  Giant  with  new  liiry  fed.

To  lay  on  lode  with  both  handsdoth  begin.

And  with  one  blow  he  laycs him  downc  for  dead.

‘ And  ftraight  in  crucll  fort  he  fteppeth  in.

For  to  dilarmc  him, and  cut  offhis  head;

But  when  the  Giant  had  the  fate  difarmed,

Rogero  knew  the  panic  he  had  harmed.

. 17

He  faw  it  was  his  BraiamantmoHicixc^

Whom  this  fame  Giant  would  have  made  to  die.
Wherefore  with  courage  ftyp^t  he  fteppeth  ncarcp
ThcGianttonew  combat, jo dcfic.

Who  cither  hcarcs  him  not, or  would  not  hcarc,
Ormcancthnotaconfiifthcw  totric.

But  tooke  her  up,and  on  his  Ihouldcrs  lavd  her.

And  fc  in  hali  away  from  thence  convay’d  her*

• • . 18

$0  have  I fccne  a wolfe  to  bcare  away

A lambcfrom  ffiepheardsfold,fo  hare  iTccnc
An  Eagle  on  a filly  Dove  to  pray.

And  fbare  aloft'thc  skie  and  earth  betweene:
^Rogero  hies  him  after  as  he  may,

' 'V’ntiH  he  came  unto  a goodly  grecne.

But  th’ot  her  cv’ry  ftep  fo  much  out  ftept  him.

That  in  his  view  Rogero  fcantly  kept  him.

But  now  a while  of  him  I Ipeakc  no  more.

And  tb  Orlando  I rcturnc  againc,

Who  having  loft  the  fight  of  Ifolland  lliore.

Did  haften  to  Ehuda  with  much painc;

I did  declare  not  many  booki  before.

How  he  Cymofeos  engin  ftrange  did  gaine,

A nd  to  the  bottomc  of  the  lea  did  throw  it.

That  none  might  find  it  out  againc  or  know  it.
zo

And  though  his  meaning  and  intent  was  lb.

Yet  vaine  it  wasjas  after  was  perceived,

For  why,that  ferpent  vile  our  auncient  fo,

That  Eva  firrt  in  Paradife  deceived.

Not  much  above  two  hundred  yearcs  ago,

(As  we  from  our  forefathers  hare  received^

From  out  the  lea  by  nccromancic  brought  it.

And  then  in  Almanie  afrcfli  they  wrought  it„

21

T hey  wrought  it  both  i n iron  and  in  brafle.

The  cunning  and  the  art  incrcafing  ftill.

As  oft  by  proofe  we  find  it  comes  to  pafte.

The  werfethe  workc, the  greater  growes  the  skill.
And  to  each  kind  a name  affign’d  there  was.
According  to  the  firft  inventers  will,

TotcIIthe  namcsofall  were  but  a trouble,
Somedemicanonsjfomc  arc  called  double.

H Tht


?4


THE  ELEVENTH  BOOKE


32


•n  ‘ r

. ^


The  Culvcringg  to  flioot  a bullet  fariCj
The  Falcon^Saker^M  inion  and  the  Sling,

Not  armed  men, but  walled  townesto  marre.

Such  diu’ilifh  force  is  in  this  hcllifh  thing.

Ye  fouldiers  brave,and  valiant  men  of  warre.

Now  ccafe  to  field  your  manly  darts  to  bringi'

And  get  a hargubufh  upon  your  Hioulderj
Or  clfc  in  rainc  you  fue  to  be  a fouldier.

How  didft  thou  find  (oh  filthy  foule invention)

A harbor  fafe  in  any  humane  hart?

Thou  mak’/l  a coward  get  the  fouldiers  penfioo,
And  fouldiers  brave  thou  rob’ft  of  due  defart,
Whole  millions  have  bin  flainejas  ilorics  mention,’
Since  firft  devifed  was  this  wicked  art,

Trance, Italy  and  England chlefemny  rew  it.

Since  firft  they  us’d  this  art, and  fitft  they  knew  it*
H

The  Englijl)  bowmen  may  go  burna  their  boes,

And  breake  their  (hafts  and  cut  in  two  the  firing.
That  weapon  now  may  keepe  the  come  from  croes.
That  did  the  French  at  Agincourt  fo  fling;

But  to  that  wight  I v^ifli  a world  of  woes.

That  did  to  light  device  fodiv’llifli  bring,

Let  him  be  giv'n  into  the  hands  of  Sathan,

To  be  tormented  ay  with  Core  and  Nathan.  ^

U

Now  good  Orlando  though  he  greatly  flrived.

With  fpeed  to  get  him  to  the  He  of  wo.

Yet  firfl  the  Irijh  King  was  there  arriv^.

By  chanccjor  clle  that  God  would  have  it  fo,

Becaufe  it  might  the  better  be  contrived.

On  wrongfull  wights  his  judgements  juft  to  fltow.
But  when  once  in  fight  appeared,  .

all  the  company  ftraight  cheared.j
36

And  putting  offhis  armesof  colour  fable,

He  bids  the  maftcr  out  to  launch  his  boate.

And  in  the  fame  an  anket  flrong  and  cable,'

With  which  he  meanes  unto  this  lie  to  floate.

Not  doubting  (if  Iuckefcrvc)he  will  be  able.

To  put  the  anker  in  the  monftersthroate.  ,

And  thus  alone  the  noble  Knight  doth  renter,'

Into  the  lie  Ebuda  then  to  enter,

•Now  was  the  time  when  as  Aurora  faire,

Began  to  (hew  the  world  her  golden  head,

A nd  looke  abroad  to  take  the  coolc  ftcfli  airC|
Tythono  lying  flill  in  jealous  bed.

When  as  Orlando  hither  did  repaire,

By  two  blind  guides, Cwpid  and  Fortune  led,

When  lo  unto  the  fhore  his  (Iiipboatc  turning.

He  feem'd  to  hcarc  a noife  as  one  were  mourning.
28

At  which  flrangefound  rafting  hiseyc  afide.

He  might  difeerne  a goodly  damftll  naked.

With  armes  abrodc  unto  the  rocke  faft  tide.

That  what  with  cold  and  what  with  tarot  fltaked,
Eftfoones  the  hideous  monfter  he  efpide,

Whofc  fight  might  well  have  made  flout  harts  have
Orlandos  mind  therewith  is  not  amated,  (t^uaked.
Nor  his  high  courage  any  whit  abated.


39


Similt^


He  gets  betweene  the  monfter  and  hit  priy^ '

T hat  pray  that  he  fo  hotly  doth  purfue.

And  (for  before  he  was  refolv’d  what  way
He  would  attempt  the  monfter  to  fubdue)

Vpon  his  fhoulder  doth  the  anker  lay.

And  when  he  came  within  his  ugly  view.

Even  roauger  all  his  malice,might  and  rancor.

Into  his  open  jawci  be  bearcs  the  ancor.

30

As  they  that  dig  in  mine  of  cole  or  ftone.

The  fame  in  fundry  places  underprop.

Left  it  fliould  fall  when  leaft  they  thinke  thereon.

And  fo  their  breath  or'elfe  their  pallagc  ftop:

So  is  this  anker  faftend  in  the  bone,)

Both  in  the  bottotne  of  his  mouth  and  top.

That  though  he  would  againe  he  could  not  clofcif,

Nor  wider  open  it  for  to  unlofe  it*

Now  haring  gagd  his  hit^us  chaps  fo  fure.

That  out  and  in  he  can  with  fafetie  go,

He  enters  with  his  fwoid  the  place  obfture,

And  there  beftoweth  many  a thruft  and  blow*

And  asthat  citic  cannot  be  fecure.

That  hath  within  her  wals  receiv'd  herfo.

No  fafer  could  this  Orif  be  now  from  danger.

That  inbis  emralshath  receiv'd  a ftranger.

3*

But  griped  now  with  pangs  of  inward  painc.

Sometime  he  plungeth  up  unto  the  skie,

Sometime  he diveth  to  the deepc againe.

And  makes  the  troubled  fands  to  mount  on  hictf
Orlando  fecls^thc  fca  come  in  amainc.

That  forced  him  at  laft  hisfwimming  trie.

He  fwiras  to  fhore  with  body  flrong  and  ablo,

Andbcaics  upon  hit  neck  the  ankers  cable.  ‘

33

And  as  a favageBull  that  unaware  SittjlK

About  his  homes  hath  how  a cord  faft  bound.

Doth  flrive  in  vaine  to  breake  the  hunters  fnare,

And  skips  and  leaps, and  flings, and  runneth  round.

So  though  Orlando  witl\  J)i^  ftrength  fo  rare,  ,

Aflaid  to  draw  him  ncaitrto  the  ground.

Yet  doth  he  fetch  ah  hundred  frisks  and  more.

Ere  he  could  draw  him  up  upon  the  fhore.

His  wounded  bowels  fl;  ed  fuch  ftorc  of  blood,

They  call  that  fca  the  red  fea  to  this  howre,  hdtbtrtd  '

Somctiihc  he  breathed  fuch  a fuddenflood,

As  made  the  clcareft  weather  feeme  to  lowrc,

The  hideous  noife  fild  cv*ry  cave  and  wood,  ’unu  J'  at

So  that  god  Prorm  doubting  his  ownc  pewre,

Fled  ftraight  fro  thcncc,himfclfc  in  corners  biding,  rob
Not  daring  longer  here  to  make  abiding.

33

And  all  the  gods  that  dwell  in  furging  waves.

With  this  fame  tumult  grew  in  fuch  a fcare.

They  hid  thcmfcivcs  in  rocks  and  hollow  caves.

Left  thzt  Orlando  fhould  have  found  them  there?

Neptune  with  triple  mace  by  flight  him  faves,

His  charret  drawne  with  dolphins  doth  him  bearf.

Nor  yet  behind  Glaucutot  Triton  tarred,

Por  fcare  in  thefe  new  broiles  to  havemifearied.

Thofc


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


imilt,


:6

TIlofelInl.i^  crs  tlat  all  ilus  wliilc  nrtrndcd.

And  faw  tiic  ir.cnftci  dr.awncio  land  and  lar.c,
WithfupcrAiiion  niov^d  much,cord«mncd
This  godly  wcrke  for  wicked  and  profinc;

As  thougli  that  P)  oicrn  would  be  new  offended,
That  had  btfore,  at  d now  might  wcikc  their  bane
They  doubt  he  \vf>!d,(ihiisfc>oU  theirgood  haps  con'
Send  to  their  land  his  fiotk  of  ugly  monflers.  filers’

J7

And  therefore  Pf9/e;is  anger  to  appeafe.

They  mcane  todtowne  Orlando  if  they  can.
Whofedeed  they  deemd  hisgodheaddiddifpleafe;
And  cv’nas  fiicdoth  creepefrom  bran  to  bran,
Vntill  the  pile  of  wood  it  wholy  ccafc.

So  doth  thisfury  "row  from  man  toman,

Tlia'l  they  concluded  all  upon  the  matter,

To  throw  Orlaodo  hound  into  the  water.

?»

One  takes  a fling, aaioiher  takes  a bowe.

This  with  a (word  is  arm’d, he  with  a fpcare.

And  (omcaforc,  and  feme  behind  him  go.

Some  jpcarc  approeh,fomc  (land  aloofe  for  fcare:

He  mufeth  much  whir  his  ungratcfull  fo
Should  mcane,for  benefits  fuch  mind  to  bearer
And  inwardly  he  wasdifplcas’d  and  fory,

To  jGnd  fuch  wrong  where  hcdcfctvccl  glory.

J9

As  littlecurres  that  barkc  at  greateft  Bcarc,

Yet  cannot  caufc  him  once  bisway  to  fliunne.

No  more  doth  hethcrecuilike  crcatureefeaie.

That  like  a fort  of  mad  men  on  him  runne.

And  (for  they  faw  he  did  no  armor  wcarc)

They  thought  the  feat  would  have  bin  cafly  done.
They  knew  not  that  his  skrn  from  head  to  foote,
Was  fuch  to'flrikcon  it.it  was  no  bootc.

40

But  when  that  hebit’Durindana  drew.

He  layd  therewith  about  liim  in  fuch  (brt.

That  flraight  their faintnes and  hisfdfce  they  kncwi
Tliey  found  to  fight  with  him  it  was  no  fport,
Thrife  ten  of  them  at  blowesbut  ten  he  flew.

Their  fcllowcs  fled  that  faw  them  cut  fo  (horr.
Which  foes  thus  todd, Orlando  now  intended
1 ’unloofc  the  Ladie  wiiom  he  had  defended.

41

But  now  this  whiIe,beho!d  the  /rijh  band
Arrived  hearcnntothcircbicfeflcitie.

Who  had  no  foonerfet  their  foote  on  land,

Butthat  forthwith  they  put  apart  allpittie,

And  flucall  foits  that  came  unto  their  hand,
Thcficrce,thc  faint, the  foolifli  and  the  wittic,
Thuswere’tjuft  doomc,or  wereit  crtiellragc.

They  fpai’d  of  neither  feve  not  neither  age.

4*

Thus  thTlc  of  wo  is  made  a wofuil  He,

And  for  the  peoples  fake  they  plague  the  place,
Orlando  fets  the  Lady  free  the  while,'

That  there  was  bound  in  that  unfecmiy  cafe.

To  have  bin  given  unto  the  monfter  vile:

And  viewing  wcll,he  cald  to  mind  her  face.

And  that  it  (hould  Olympia  be  he  gueffed.

But  twasO/ymp/tf  that  had  thus  bin  drclTcd.


Diftreft  Olympiathus  unkindly  ferved,

Whom  love  and  fortune  made  a double  fcorncj
For  fuft  of  him, of  whom  (he  bed  deferved.

She  wai  forfaken  quite  and  left  fotlorne.

Ard  neit  by  pyrats  taken  and  referved,

Of  monfter  vile  to  be  in  pceces  tome.

.And  inrhiscafcthcgoodOi/dWf/ofoundher,

I And  then  withgrcatcompaflion  he  unbound  her.

44

And  thus  he  faid,now  tell  what  ftrangc  annoy,

Orcvill  hap  hath  hurt  thy  happy  r.iignc?

Whom  late  I left  m folace  and  in  joy.

Why  do  I find  in  danger  and  in  painc?

How  isthc  blrlTc  th.it  thou  didft  then  enjoy.

So  chang'd, and.turn’d  tomifery  againcJ
And  flic  in  wofnll  manner  thus  replied.

When  fliamc  her  checks  with  crimfon  firft  had  died.

45

I know  notffmy'chariccor  clfe  my  choice.

If  fortune  or  my  folly  be  in  blame.

Shall  I lament, or  (hall  1 now  rcjoyce.

That  In  c, in  wo, and  fliould  have  didcin  fliamc?
And  as  flicfpakc.thc  tearesdid  (lop  her  voice;

But  whenagarne  iinio  her  fclfc  (he  came.

She  told  him  all  the  wofuil ftory  weeping.

How  falfe  Byreno  had  betraid  her  fleeping,

46

And  how  from  that  fame  I le  where  he  betray’d  her,

A crew  of  curfed  pyrats  did  her  take.

And  to  this  wicked  Hand  had  cbnvay’d  her.

For  tliat  fame  foulc  and  ugly  monfters  fake.

Where  now  it  wasOrlandcs  hap  to  ayd  herr
She  walked  naked  when  thefc  words  flic  fpake.
Looke  how  "Diana  painted  is  in  tables.

Among  the  reft  of  Ovids  plcafant  fables.

47

Of  whole  fliarpe  doome  the  Poet  there  doth  tell.

How  (he with  homes  Affaon did  inveft,

Bccaufe  he  faw  her  naked  at  the  well;

Softands  P^»2p/afaire,withface  and  breft.

And  fides,and  thighes  tobedrfeerned  well,

And  legs  and  feet,  but  yet  (he  hides  the  reft.

And  as  they  two  were  talking  thus  together,

Oberto  King  of  Irijh  lie  came  thither,

48

who  being  moved  at  the  ftrangc  report,
Thatonealoncthe monfter  fliould  aflaile.

And  gag  him  witlian  anker  in  filch  fort,

T o make  his  ftrcngth,and  lifc.and  all  to  failc,

T hen  d ra  w hi m to  the  fliorc  as  fli ip  to  port
Is  tow’d  with  ropes,  withoutoroarcs  or  faile.

This  made  him  go  to  find  Orlando  out,

The  while  bisfouldiers  fpoiled  all  about.

49

Now  when  the  King  this  worthy  Knight  did  fee.
Though  ail  with  bloud  and  water  foulediftaind.

Yet  ftraight  he  gueft  it  flxculd  Orlando  be.

For  in  his  youth  in  France  he  had  remained,

And  knew  the  Lords  and  Knights  of  beft  degree,

In  Charles  hiscourt  a page  of  honor  trained:

Their  old  acquaintance  caus’d  at  this  new  meeting,
They  had  a loving  and  a friendly  greeting.

H £ And


Ovid  Mt»


8^


THE  ELEVENTH  BOOKE


50

And  then  Orlando  told  the  Irifl}  King,

How  and  by  whom  Olympia  was  abuied.

By  one  whom  oat  of  danger  great  to  bring.

She  had  no  pamcnor  death  itfelfe  refufed.

How  he  himfclfc  was  witnertc  of  the  thing.

While  they  thustalkCjOimo  her  perufed,
Whofeforrowes  paft, renew’d  with  preYent  fcaret,
Did  fill  her  lovely  eyes  with  watry  tearcs.

Mt-  Such  colour  had  hcrfaccjas  when  the Sunne
um.  ^ eo.  Doth  fhinc  on  watry  cloud  in  plcafantfpring,

Urtttftjiu  AJ»  LL/-  f t)3

advtrfifolu  n as  when  thoiommcr  16  bcgunne,

aitdu^uii.  The  Nightingales  in  boughes  dofitand  fing,
iutfe  foUt  So  that  blind  god  whofe  force  can  no  man  fhunne,
•utpurfurea  Sits  in  her  eyes,  and  thence  htsdartsdoth  fling,
*«W4,  bathes  his  wings  in  herclearecriflall  flreames.

And  funneth  them  in  her  rare  beauties  bcames.

5*

In  thefe  he  heates  his  golden  headed  dart.

In  thofc  he  cooleth  it,  and  temper’d  lb.

He  levels  thence  at  good  Ohertos  hart,

A nd  to  the  head  he  drawth  it  in  his  bow.

Thus  is  he  wounded  deepe  and  feeles  no  fmart.

His  armor  cannot  fend  fo  fierce  a blow;

For  while  on  her  fairc  eyes  and  limbs  he  gaped.

The  arrow  came  that  could  not  be  efcaped.

rltlSw.  And  fare  0/yrnp/^bcautieV  were  fo  rare,
fnubttuut^  As  might  well  movt  a man  the  fame  to  note,’

Her  haire,her  eyes, her  cheeks  moft  amorous  are.
Her  nofe,her  mouth,her  fhoulders  and  her  throte.
As  for  her  other  parts  that  then  were  bare.

Which  Ihe  was  wont  to  cover  with  her  cote.

Were  made  in  fuch  a mould  as  might  have  moved
The  chaft  Hipolyrm  her  to  have  loved,

54

A man  would  thinke  them  fram’d  by  Phydias  arts,
Thfir  colourand  proportion  g >od  was  fuch,

And  unto  them  her  Ihamefaltncflc imparts
A greater  grace  to  that  before  was  much;

I ccafe  to  praise  thofc  other  fccret  partr.

As  not  lb  fit  to  talkc  of  astj  tuch.

In  gcnerall  all  wasas  white  as  milke.

As  fnooth  as  ivory,  and  asfoft  as  filke.

55

Had  flic  in  valley  of  Idea  bccne.

When  Pafior  Paris  hap  did  fo  befall.

To  be  a judge  three  goddefles  betweene.

She  Hiould  have  got. and  they  forgone  the  ball.

Had  fliebut  once  of  him  bene  naked  fecne.

For  HelenaUc  had  not  car’d  at  all.

Nor  broke  the  bonds  of  facred  hofpitalitie.

That  bred  his  country  warres  and  great  mortalitie.

56

_ . , Had  flic  bur  then  bene  in  Crotana  towne,

lu'L*  Tabit,  When  Zeuxes  for  the  goddefle  /unosfike.

To  paint  a piftuie  of  moft  rare  renowne.

Did  many  of  the  fai  reft  damfcls  make
To  ftand  before  him  bare  from  footc  to  crowne,

A patterne  of  their  pcrfcdl  parts  to  take.

No  doubt  he  would  have  all  the  reft  refufed.

And  her  alone  in  ftced  of  all  have  chufed.


57

1 doubtlcftc  deeme  Byreno  never  viewd.

Her  naked  corps, tor  ccrtainc  if  he  had.

He  could  not  to  all  humane  Icnccexcludc,

To  leave  her  thus  alone  in  ftatc  fo  bad;:

But  briefly  all  this  matter  to  conclude.

It  Iccm’d  Oierro  would  have  bin  full  glad,

In  this  her  wo,hcr  mtfery  and  need,

T o comfort  her  by  cither  word  or  deed,

58

And  ftraight  he  promift  that  he  would  attend  her.
And  fet  her  in  her  country  if  he  may.

And  manger  all  her  cncroicsdcfcnd  her.

And  take  revenge  on  him  did  her  betray.

And  that  he  might  both  men  and  money  lend  her.
He  would  to  pawne  his  rcalmc  of  Ireland  lay,

Nor  till  Ihe  were  rcftoi’d  askc  no  repayment.

And  ftraight  he  fought  about  to  get  her  raiment.

They  need  not  travell  farre  to  find  a gowtie^

For  why  immcdiatly  they  found  good  ftore.

By  fending  to  the  next  ad  joyning  towne.

The  which  his  men  of  warre  hadVpoild  before.
Where  many  a worthy  Ladic  of  renownc.

That  had  bene  naked  tide  unto  the  fhorc,

And  many  a tender  vii-gin  and  unfoiled,  ,
Were  of  their  raiment  and  their  lives  dcfpoiled.

60

And  yet  for  all  they  were  fo  richly  gownd,

Oberro  could  not  cloathheras  he  wold.

No  not  in  Florence  (though  it  doth  abound
With  rich  cmbrodcricsof  pearlcand  gold)

Could  any  peecc  of  precious  ftufFc  be  found.

Of  woith  to  fei  vc  to  keepe  her  from  the  cold,
Whofe fhape  was  foexadkineve^part.

Even  hard  to  match  by  nature  or  by  arc.

61

Orlando  with  this  love  was  well  content.

As  one  that  hithcrcame  with  other  end.

For  fith  he  mill  Angelica^  hement

His  journey  backc  to  France  againe  to  bend.

Withtbcmby/hipto/re/«»dfirft  he  went.

As  in  his  way, and  with  the  King  his  friend.

Not  hcaring.had  his  love  bin  here  or  no,

For  all  were  dead  thatcould  have  told  him  Co.

6a

At  both  their  futes  he  fcant  ftaid  there  one  day.

His  palling  love  fuch  palllons  in  him  bred.

But  ere  he  went  he  doth  Oberto  pray
To  do  for  her  as  much  as  he  bad  fed.

And  parting  fo  from  thcncc  hctookchisway^

Ev’n  as  his  fortune  and  his  fancic  led,

But  good  Oberto  need  not  be  defiicd.

To  do  as  miKh  or  more  then  he  required.

For  few  dayes  paft  but  that  with  ha-  he  went
To  HoHandtwbere  he  raifed  fuch  commotion.

That  ftraight  Byreno  taken  was  and  flicnt.

Receiving  on  three  trees  a juft  promotion:

And  ail  thofc  Countries  did  forthwith  confenf,
Tofwcare  them  faith  and  beat  their  devotion.'

Thus  of  a countefle  fl;c  is  made  a Prince,

And  lives  in  joy  and  folacc  ever  flnce.

OtlAKit


Tbtt^d$f
thcutie  ef
OUmpu.


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


87


«4.

Orlando  bends  his  courfc  to  Brittifij  fTiore,

M^hcncc  he  not  long  before  to  fliip  did  mount.
Where  he  had  left  his  famous  'BriUiaiore^

A goodly  courfer  and  of  good  account.

No  doubt  ofvaliant  afts  he  did  good  ftore.
Though  what  they  were  1 cannot  here  recount,
Forfuch  a mindchecarridc  ftill  unto  them,

He  cared  not  to  tell  them, but  to  do  them,

^5

But  inwhatfafTiion  he  did  paflc  the  reft
Of  that  unfortunate  and  fatallycare,

I fay  by  me  it  cannot  beexpreft,

Bccauic  thereof  no  record  doth  appeare.


But  when  thefpringdid  ground  with  green  invefl-.
And  fiinncinGmfnimadc  weather  cleaic.

Then  did  lie  afts  both  worthie  of  reciting.

And  to  bekeptin  cyerlafting  writing.

66

From  hilstodalesjfrom  woods  to  p.ifturc«s  wide.
From  waters  frefli  unto  the  fait  fea  fliorc.

To  fecke  his  love  he  up  and  downe  doth  ride.

The  leffc  he  finds  he  feeketh  ftill  the  more;

At  laft  he  heard  a voice  for  helpe  that  cride.

He  drawes  hisfword  and  fpurs  his  Brilliadore,-
But  to  refrefli  the  reader  now  t is  reafon.

And  ftay  my  ftoric  to  a betterfeafon.


In  tie  beginning  of  this  eleventh  boohe  is  a notable  morall  oftemperance,mith  tmo  comparifons,  one  of  the  horJc,ano-  Moral!.
iher  of  the  Beare,  tvkkh  I judge  fit  for  this  place  rather  to  be  repeated  then  expounded.lf  (faith  he)ahorfe, with  a little
fna{fle,may  be  fiopt  in  hisjtifl  carriere,what  a fharne  is  it  for  a man  not  to  bridle  his  difhrdinate  ajf'eRions  with  reafon,
bur  to  be  life  a Beare fogt  eedy  oj  honic,  that  he  breathes  downe  the  hives, and  devoureth  the  combes,  till  his  tongtte,tyes
and  jawesbe  ft  ong,  ready  to  ma\ehmrunne  mad:  fo  doyoung  mendevotrre  with  extreme  greedinejfe,  thefc  fenfuaU
plcajiires  ,ofvencrie,furjeting,drinliing,pridc  in  apparrell,  and  all  intemperance,  till  in  the  end  they  are  plagiiedwith
fich>ieJfe,povcrtie,and  many  other  inconveniences  to  their  utter  mine  and  confufm.  iVherefore  in  the perj'on  o/Rogero
young  men  may  weigh  the  Ioffes  he  had  by  following  hisprefent  fancie  to  Angelica;  namely  his  ring  and  his  horfe:  ly  the
tone  is  underflood  reafon,  by  the  other  courage.  In  Angelica  whofe  beauty  fd  exceedingly  jhined  in  herpoore  apparel  you
great  Ladies  may  fee,thatyour  true  naturall  beauties  becomeyou  befi,befide  that  it  hath  ever  bene  counted  agreatfigne
ef  modefiie.,and  chaft  dijpofition  in  women,  to  be  rather  cleanly  then  fimptuom  in  apparrell.for  the  vaine  expence  therin
hath  bene  often  occafion  both  to  corrupt  the  minds  and  manners  of  maty  not  HI  dijpofed.  And  therefore  that  excellent
0/ Sir  Philip  Sidney  r?j  Arcadia  (which  I hyow  not  ly  what  mifitap  is  lefi  out  in  the  printed  boolit)  isin

mine  opinion  worthy  to  be praifedandfollowed,to  mal{C  agoodand  vertuous  wife.

Who  doth  defire  that  chaft  his  wife  flionld  bee,

Firft  be  he  true,for  truth  doth  truth  deferve.

Then  be  he  fuch  as  flic  his  worth  may  fee.

And  alwaycs  one  credit  with  her  preferve:

Not  toying  kind,nor  cauflefly  unkind,

Not  ftirring  thoughts, nor  yet  denying  right?

Not  fpying  faultSjHorin  plainecrrorsblind.

Never  hard  hand,nor  ever  rayns  too  lights
As  far  from  v\'ant,as  far  from  vaine  expence.

Tone  doth  cnforcc,thc  totherdothcnticc.

Allow  good  company, but  drive  fro  thence,

Allfilthy  mouthsthat  glory  inthcirvicc.

This  done, thou  haft  no  more  but  leave  the  rcll,

To  nature,fortune,timc,and  womans  breft.

Inwlich  you  fee  his  opinion  of  the  two  extremities  of  want  and  vaine  expence.

p/  the  invention  ofgunnes,as  I fomewhat  touched  two  booths  before,  fu  hereyou  fee  how  he  affirmeth  inamanner  that  liiftoric,
thty  were  invented  in  Germany.  And fo  I have  read,  that  thte  frfl  time  they  were  iifedwas  in  theyeare  1391.  inthe
Venetians  war  againfi  the  Genoas,  but  it  is  marvell  that  the  inventors  name  of  fo  monftrows  a thing  is  not  hnowne.

Bakcn  the  great  EngUfl)  necromancer  wrote  manyyeares  beiorc  that  time,  that  he  fnar>  how  to  mahie  an  engine, that
with  fait  peter  and  brimflone  well  tempered  together,  fhould  prove  notable  for  battery,  but  he  faidhe  would  not  difeover
it,forfearc  it  would  be  a meane  to  dcflroy  all  man\inde.  '

Inthe  deftruSUon  of  the  lie  a/ Ebuda,  and  all  that  hath  bccne  faid  of  it  before,  with  the  monflers  that  are  /did  to  de-
•voure  women  nailed  and  forfdl{en,this  A llegoricall  fence  is  to  be  picl^ed  out{t  hough  to  fame  perhaps  it  w iU feeme  greatly  Allegoric
firayned.)  By  the  Hand  is  fgnified  pride,  and  loofencjfe  of  life, that  they  are  brought  to  (ly  pir  at  s)  which  fgnife  flatte-^
rers,  that  goe  roving  about  to  tifethemhither,  robbing  them  indeed  of  all  their  comely  garments  of  modeflie,  andfo-
brietie,  and  at  laft  leave  them  nahydupon  the  fhore,  defpifedandforfahen,  to  bee  devoured  of  moft  ugly  and  mifhapen
monftersfig/iificdby  theorize,  as  fitly  difeafes,  deformities,  and  all  hfnde  of  eontemptible  things,  whichmonfters,  a'
good  plains  fiiend,with  an  an^er  of  fidelity  win  l^ill,  as  Orlando  did  this, and fo  cloth  againe  the  na\cdnejfe,that  before
pride  and flatterie  made  us  lay  open  to  the  world.

Andwhereas  it  is  faid  that  Neptune  and  ?Tote\is  fled  Orlando,  it  is  meant  that  a true  Chriftiandrives  a-  Allafioffl

tfey  aUfuperftitious  idolatty, where ftever  he  commetb.

/ fnde H9  AUuBonitoTth  the  noting.

H «


PALAZZO"^
D ATEAJVTE


Gtijnnte


ii«»igi,«i'ai»igj


i/5^i

mm

mmI

li^L

11^31

THE  TWELFTH  BOOKEi


JW;  JlU
tuabus  fla.
•jiftras  fi>iHS
•umibut  fuc-
tnditab
■fill,
indagaint,
iterej  fa-
■ida  uequic-
uamfilia
titri  omni-
w i»  terris
m'li  ifuafiu
tafunda-
ertsii  pad
0 draw  bet
*acb  with
irfiMts.


2^


Orlando  dotbfurfMe  vith  great  difdaine.

One  that  did  feeme  his  love  by  force  to  c*rriet

Rogero  led  by  fuch  another  trainCy

IVifh  him  dot  If  in  the  charmed  pallace  tarriez

Orlando  parting  fitm  the  place  againcy

He  fees  indeed  her  whom  be  faine  -would  marrie,

Fightswiih  Ve.rtzWyand foiled  twoTarki(h  bands,

eyfud fades faire  Kabcll  in  outlawes  bands.


• Aire  Ceres  when  ffic  haft-
ned  backc  againe,
jFrom  great  Idea  homeward
to  returnc,

[ Tlicre  where  Enceladus
wi  t h endJes  pai  ncj
beare  mount  iEtna
that  doth  ever  burne,
i When  Hie  had  fought  her
daughter  long  in  Tainc,
Whofe  lofle  fo  flrange  did  make  the  mother  mournc,
Shefpoiles  for  fpitener  btcft,ehceks,  eyes  and  hcarc>
At  laft  two  boughs  from  Pync  tree  flic  doth  tcare.

X

In  Vulcans  forge  fltc  fets  on  fire  the  brands.

And  gives  them  powrefor  ever  to  be  light.

And  taking  one  a pcecc  in  both  her  hands.

And  drawnc  in  coach  by  yoaked  ferpents  might,
Shcfearcheth  woods  and  fields  and  fcas  and  lands.
And  brooks  and  ftrexmes  and  dens  devoyd  of  light.
And  hearing  hertf  cm  earth  no  newes  to  like  her.

At  lafl  fhe  went  to  hell  it  fcife  to  fcekc  her.
i

Were  good  OtlartJos  powre  to  becom pared.

As  well  with  Ceres  as  Hs  loving  minde.

He  would  no  paine,no place, nor  t'ime  have  fpared,
Hisdeare  he]ov*<l  Jngelyca  to  Unde,

To  go  to  rocks  and  cares  he  would  have  dared.

And  place  to  (aitits,and  place  to  fends  aflign’dj
Hconely  wanted  one  of  Cerer  waggons,*

In  which  fhe  carried  was  with  flying  draggonS*

4

How  he  did  fearch  all  France  bcfdri  hefdld,

Now  Italy  to  ftarch  is  his  intent.


And  Germany  and  Caflill  new  and  old.

And  then  to  Affrica  to  pafle  he  ment.

And  as  he  thus  determined, behold
He  heard  a voice  that  feemed  to  lament.

And  drawing  nyc,to  underiland  what  tyding,

On  a great  horfe  ho  faw  a hotfc  man  ryding,

f

Perforce  he  bare  upon  his  faddlc  bow,

A Lady  fbrrowrull  and  fore  afrayd,

Thatcryde  aloud  ilill  making  open  fhow,

Of  inward  gricfc,and  thus  to  nim  flic  faid,

0 worthy  wightf Lord  of  Anglante)Vnowt

1 dye, I dye  without  you  bring  me  ayd.

And  t hen  he  thought  co^nming  more  nie  to  vew  Kera
It  vsAi  Angclyca,ind  that  he  knew  her.

6

Ifay  not  that  it  was, but  that  it  feem’d,

To  be  Angelyca  that  thus  was  cary’d.

But  be  that  juftly  great  difgrace  it  deem’d,

Thus  in  his  fight, to  have  his  miftrcfTchary’d,
Whofe  loVc above  all  treafiires  be  efteem’d.

To  ra  ke  revenge  hereof  he  nothin g tary  *d ,

But  put  his  f^urres  to  BrtUiadotesfides,

And  in  great  haft  to  that  fame  hotfeman  rydes.

7

With  many  bloodie  words  d nd  ciflicll  threats.

He  bids  that  hUrfeman  to  come  backc  againe.

But  heat  naiighf  hiswords  and  fpcccbcs fcts,
Rcjoycing  info  rich  a gotWfi  gayhe.

The  Vilen  ft  ill  ground  of  Orlafiao  gets,

Vntill  they  cafne  into  a fairi  largtplainc.

Wherein  a houfe  6f  great  eftat^  teas  built,

The  gate  hertof  iii  gorgeous  fort  was  gilt.

H 4 Tbs


I


THE  TWELFTH  BOOKE


po

8

The  building  all  of  marble  fairc  was  wrought.

Moil  coftly  carv’d  and  cunningly  contrived.

To  thisfaire  houfc,his  pray  the  foulc thiefe  brought.
Straight  after  him  Orlando  there  arrived:

Then  he  alights  and  all  about  he  fought.

For  him  that  had  him  of  his  joy  deprived.

He  makcthfearch  in  chambers  all  about,

And  galleries  and  halls  to  finde  them  out.

9

Each  roome  he  finds  fet  forth  with  rich  aray.

With  beds  of  filkc.and  gold  of  curious  art.

But  yet  he  finds  not  that  defired  pray.

The  want  whereof  did  fore  torment  his  heart,
Theicmighthe  finde  with  like  affliftion  llray»
Gradajfo,Sacrapant  and  Brandimari,

And  fcirce  Ferraro  poiTeft  with  ftrangeconfufion,
Procuied  in  that  place  by  ftrong  illufion,

10

They  ali  complainc  in  anger  and  in  rage,

How  of  this  houfc  the  mailer  them  hath  uiedi
One  loft  his  horfc,  anothcr  loft  his  p.age.

Another  doubts  his  miftrefle  is  abufed;

Thus  are  (hey  kept  like  birds  within  a cage.

And  Hand  with  fenfe and  wits  and  words  confufed
And  manie  with  this  ftrangc deception  carried.
Within  this  place  both  weeks  5c  months  had  tarrid.

1 1

Orlr^ndo  when  he  faw  he  could  not  Icarne,

Where  this  fama  theefc  his  millreftc  had  convaid,
Though  flic  was  carride  out  at  fomc  poftcrnc;
Wherefore  within  no  longer  time  lie  ftaid.

But  walkes about  thccaftleto  difeerne.

If  that  were  tiue  of  which  he  was  afraid; '

But  as  he  walked  up  and  downc  the  plainc.

He  thought  he  heard  her  call  him  back«  againc.

12

And  to  a window  carting  up  his  eye.

He  thought  he  faw  her  face  full  of  divinity,

And  that  he  heard  her  plainly  thus  to  ciie,

O noble  wight  of  proved  magnanimitic,

Hclpe  nowjor never  hclpc,  alas  fliall  T
In  mine  Orlandos  fight  Icdjp  my  virginitic?

Kill  me,or  let  a thouflmd deaths  befall  me.

Rather  then  let  a villaine  fo  to  thrall  me.

13

Thefcwofullfpecchcsonce  or  twife  repeted,

Caus’d  him  rcturnc  into  the  houfc  againc.

And  fearchingonce  againc  hcchaftc  and  freted,
(Hope  ftill  alTvraging  fomewhat  of  his  painej
And  oft  lie  heard  the  voice  that  counterfeted
The  fpcech  cf  his  Angelica  moft  plainc,

From  fide  to  fide  he  follow’d  ftill  the  found.

But  of  Angelica  no  figne  he  found.

Now  while  Orlando  tarrid  in  this  trance.

In  hope  for  to  avenge  his  miftrefle  harnies,

Rogero  (who  I told  you  had  this  chaunce)

To  fee  his  Bradamant  in  gyants  armes,

(Drawnc  to  this  place  with  fuch  another  daunce^
Namely  by  force  of  Come  unufuall  charmes,
Sawfirftthegyantin  this caftlc  enter.

And  afcCT  him  he  boldly  doth  advcntcr.


*5

But  when  he  came  within  the  caftlc  walls.

And  made  much  narrow  fcarch.a  s in  fuch  cafe,
IngarretSitowrs,inparlcrsand  in  halls,

And  under  ftairts  and  many  a homely  place.

Oft  calling  doubts  what  hurt  his  love  befalls,
Orlcft  the  theefe  were  gone  in  this  mcanc  fpacc^
Forthwith  he  walketh  out  into  the  plainc.

And  hcaresa  voice  recall  him  backc  againc.

i6

That  voice  that  lately  did  Orlando  make
Rcturnc  in  hope  Angelica  to  finde,

Rogero  now  for  Biadamant  doth  take,

Whofclcve  no Icflc poffqft  hiscarefull  mindc;

And  whena  he  voice  unto  GradaJfoCfAkcy
Or  Sacrapant.ox  Brandimart  moft  kindc.

To  everyone ofthefeit plaincly  feemed.

To  be  her  voice  whom  each  one  beft  efteemed.

'7

Atlanta  had  procur’d  this  ftrangc  invention.

Thereby  tokeepc  Rogero  from  mifchancc,

Becaiifc  he  faw  it  was  the  heavens  intention,

Tliat  he  by  treafon  fliould  be  kil’d  in  France,
Ferraro  and  thofc  of  whom  I laft  made  mention,
Whith  all  whomvallew  higheft  did  advance,

T o keepe  him  companic  he  here  detained.

With  good  provifion  while  they  here  remained,

I S

And  while  thefe  knights  with  ftrangc  enchantments
Do  here  a bide, behold  the  Indian  quccnc  (bound

Angelicathnt  late  her  rin^ had  fqund,

(Whofe  vertuc  can  her  caufe  to  go  unfccnc,

A nd  allb  fruftratc  magick  ftill  profound)

Now  longing  home,whcre  long  fli  e had  not  been.
And  being  now  ofneedfull  things  provided,

Fet  wants  flic  one  that  her  might  home  have  guided.

19

Orlandos  company  (he  would  have  had,

Or  y acrapant,  flie  ca  I’d  not  which  of  twainc.

Not  that  of  cithers  love  flic  would  be  gl*d,  ;

For  them  and  all  the  world  flic  did  difdainc.

But  (fortheway  wasdangcrousand  bad.

In  time  of  warre  to  travcll  France  and  Spaine)
ShewiflitforhcrowDc  fafcticand  her  cafe,.

To  have  the  company  of  one  of  thefe.

20

Wherefore  a while  flic  travels  up  and  downe,

T o fcckc  for  them  that  long  in  vaine  had  fought  her.
And  pairing  many  woods  and  many  a townc,

Vnto  this  placcat  laft  good  fortune  brought  her,
Where  whe  flic  faw  thefe  knights  of  great  renowoe.
Thus  feck  for  her,  flic  fcant  abftaincsfrom  laughter,
T o fee  Atlantan  cunning  and  diftcmbling.

Her  perfon  and  her  voice  fo  right  rcfcmbling.

21

Her  felfcunfccnc  fees  them  and  all  the  reft.

Now  mcanes  flic  futc  to  take  one  of  them  two,

But  yet  flic  knowes  not  which  (her  doubrfull  bred
Did  flay  as  unrefolved  what  to  do)

Orlandos  valour  could  defend  her  beft.

But  then  this  doubt  is  added  thereunto.

That  when  fli<  once  fo  highly  had  prefard  him,

Sho  fliall  iiQt  know  agaiAC  how  to  di(card  him.

But


AnitUeth


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


91


'jtlmiimi

H

Tuim*.


xs

But  Sacrapant  although?Iic  fhould  himlift
High  up  to  hcavm.yct  makcth  fhe  no  doubt.

But flic  will  find  fomc  flctght  and  pretie  flnft,

With  hcraccuftomM  coynefle  him  to  lout;

To  him  flie  goes,vefo1ved  of thisdiift.

And  flraight  the  precious  ring  flic  taketb  out
From  of  her  mouthiwhich  made  her  go  concealed.
With  m’.nd  to  htm  alone  to  be  revealed,

'*5  ,

But  ftraightcamcinOr/sKdoand  Ferraw,

That  both  dcfircd,her  to  hare  enjoy'd,

Thus  all  of  them  at  once  their  goddeffc  faw.

Not  being  now  by  magick  art  annpyd,

For  when  the  ting  on  finger  flicdid  draw.

She  made  unwares  all  their  enchantments  voyd,
Thefe  three  were  all  in  complete  armorjfarc
Ferraiv  no  headpeecc  had,nor  none  would  have.

*4

1 he  caufe  was  this,he  folemnely  had  fwornc,

Vpon  his  head  no  helmet  fliould  be  fet.

But  that  that  washy  (lout  Orlando  worne.

Which  he  did  erll  from  Trojans  brother  get,

Tzrrccio  to  wearc  a helmet  had  forborne.

Since  with  the  ghoft  of  ^rga^he  had  met;

Thus  in  this  fort  they  came  together  armed.

By  vertuc  of  her  ring  now  all  uncharmed.

All  three  at  once  do  now  the  damfcll  view,

All  three  at  once  on  her  would  ftraight  hire  fcafed;
All  three  her  faithflill  lovers  were  flic  knew,

Yet  with  alltlirecatonccfticisdifpleafcd.

And  from  all  three  (he  ftraight  herfelfc  withdrew.
Who  (haply)  one  at  once  would  her  have  pleafed.
From  henceforth  none  of  them  flie  thinks  to  need.
But  that  the  ring  fhall  fei  vc  in  all  their  fteed.

26

she  haftens  hence  and  will  no  longer  ftay,

Difdaine  and  fcar«  together  make  herfwiff*

Into  a wood  fhclcadcsthcm  all  the  way.

But  when  (lie  faw  tliere  was  none  other  fhift.

Into  her  mouth  the  ring  fhc  doth  convay.

That  ever  holpc  her  at  the  deadeft  lift.

And  out  of  all  their  fights  forthwith  (he  vanifli’d.
And  leaves  them  all  with  wonder  halfc  aftcnifh’d

27

Oncly  one  path  there  was, and  that  not  wide.

In  this  they  follow’d  her  with  no  fmall  haft.

But  flic  firft  caut’d  her  liorfe  to  ftep  afide.

And  ftandeth  ftill  a while  till  they  were  paft,

And  then  at  better  Icifurc  flic  doth  ride,

A farre  more  cafie  pace, and  not  fo  faft,

Vntill  they  three  continuing  ftill  their  tiding,

Came  to  a way  infundry  parts  dividing.

28

And  comming  where  they  found  no  furthertrackc,
Terrax>f,tbat  was  before  thetother  two.

In  cholcr  and  in  fiiry  great  tun/d  backe,

And  askt  the  other  what  they  meant  to  do,

And  (as  his  manner  was  to  brag  and  crackc)
Demaonded  how  they  durft  prefume  to  wo,

Or  follow  hcr.whofc  propertie  he  claimid.

Except  they  would  of  him  be  flainc  or  maimed.


*9

Orlando  ftraight  rep  lide, thou  foolifli  bcafl.

Save  that  1 fee  thou  doeft  an  helmet  want,

I would  ere  this  have  taught  thee  at  the  Jeaft,

■ Hereafter  with  thy  betters  not  to  vaht;

Ferravp  doth  thankc  him  for  his  care  (in  jeaft)

And  faid  it  fhew'd  his  wits  were  vtfy  (cant.

For  as  he  was  he  would  not  be  afraid.

To  prove  againft  them  both  that  lie  had  faid.

30

Sitjfaid  Orlando  to  the  Pagan  King,

Lend  him  your  headpcccc,and  ere  we  go  hence,

I will  this  bead  in  better  order  bring.

Or  fliarply  punifli  him  for  his  offence.

Nay  foft  (faid  Sacrafant)  that  were  a thing,

The  which  to  grant  might  flicw  I had  no  fence.
Lend  you  him  yours, for  lie  not  go  to  fchoolc.

To  know  as  well  as  you  to  bob  a foolc.

3*

Tufli  (quoth  Ferraw)  foolcs  to  your  faces  both.

As  though  if  1 had  bin  difpos’d  to  wearc  one,

1 would  have  fuffci’d  (were  you  lei vc  or  loth)

The  heft  and  ptoudeft  of  you  both  to  bcarc  one.
The  truth  is  this,that  I by  folcmnc  oth
Vpon  a ccrtainc  chance  did  once  forCwcarc  one.
That  on  my  head  no  helmet  fliould  bedonne,
Vntill  I had  Orlandos  helma  wonne,

32

What  (quoth  the  Earle)  then  feems  it  unto  thee,

• Thy  force  fo  much  Orlandos  doth  furmount.

That  thou  couldft  do  the  fame  to  him,that  he
Vnto  Almontadid  in  Ajpramount  ?

Rather  I thinkc,  if  thou  his  face  fliould  fee,

Thou  wouldft  fb  farre  be  wide  of  thine  account.
That  thou  wouldft  tremble  over  all  thy  body,

And  yccld  thy  fclfe  and  armour  like  a nody .

33

The  Spanijh  vaunter  (like  to  all  the  nation)

Said  he  had  often  with  Orlando  met.

And  had  him  at  advantage  in  fuch  fafliioo.

That  had  he  lift  he  might  his  helmet  get.

But  thus  (quoth  he)  the  time  brings  alteration.
That  now  I feeke,I  then  at  naught  did  fet.

To  take  his  helmet  from  him  then  1 fpared,

Becaufe  as  then  for  it  I little  cared,

<4

Then  (Laight  Orlando  mov*d  in  rightful!  anger.

Made  anfwcr  thus, thou  foolc  and  murrcnlicrj
I cannot  now  foibcarc  thee  any  longer,

I am  whom  thou  to  find  do*ft  fo  defire.

When  met  we  two  that  thou  didft  part  the  ftronger?
Thou  thought’ll  me  fardcr,  thou  flialt  fcclc  mc nicr.
Try  now  if  thou  beeft  able  mc  to  foyle.

Or  I can  thee  of  all  thy  armoui-  fpoy  le.

»S

Nor  do  I fccke  to  take  this  ods  of  thee.

This  faid, forthwith  his  helmet  he  untIde,

And  hung  the  fame  faft  by  upon  a tree,

Thendrew  his fitim  his fidcj
And  in  like  fortyou  might  the  Spaniard  fee,

T hat  w as  no  whit  abated  of  his  pride.

How  he  his  fword  and  target  ftraight  prepar’d,
Andlay  mod  manfully  unto  his  ward.

And


9i


THE  TWELFTH  BOOKE.


36


And  thus  tliefeclKinfipions  do  thc  6ght  begin
Vpon  their  courfers  ficrcc^thcmfclres  more  fierce,
And  where  thcarmour  joynes>and  is  moft  thin.
There  ftill  they  finve  with  (lurdy  ftrokes  to  pierce;
Search  all  the  vi  orld,and  two  fuch  men  therein
Could  not  be  found,for  as  old  books  rcliearfc.
Their  skins  were  fuch,as  they  had  bin  unarmed,

' Yet  could  they  not  with  weapons  have  bin  harmed.

37

FcTTM)  had  in  his  youth  inchantment  fuch,

That  but  hisnavciljhard  was  all  the  reft,

Vnto  Orlaiuio  there  was  done  as  much,

By  prayerdf  lome  faint(as  may  be  gueft)

Save  in  his  feet, which  he  let  no  man  tuth.

Take  it  fpt  truth, or  take  it  for  a jeft.

Thus  I have  found  it  wroic,that  they  indeed
VV'are  armor  more  forlhcw  then  any  need.

38  _

Thus  twixt  ih.cm  two  the  fight  continues  ftill,

Yet'not  lb  fliarpe  in  fubftance  as  in  ftiowj
jpc/tiza?  itnployingall  his  art  and  skill,

Sharpe  thrufts  upon  the  tether  tobeftow;

Grlamlo  that  ha  th  ever  ftrength  at  will,

Laj’th  on  the  Spaniard  many  a luftic  blow;

Jr’gclica  doth  ftand  fall  by  unfoene,

And  fees  alonq  the  batte  11  them  bctwccnc.

39

For  why  the  Prince  was  gone  the  while.

To  fi nd  hpr  opt,whcn  they  together  fought,

AnjJ  by  thn'r  ftr/fc,that  he  nilght  both  beguile,
rcM  Jhall  He  hopes,nhd  had  conceived  mfajs  thought:
bearee/Si-  He  rides  away, and  travels  many  a mile,
trafanta.  And  ftillhis  dcarc  bclovcd  niiftrisfoughf.

Was  oncly  prefent  at  fo  great  a fray.

40

Which  when  flic  faw  continue  in  fuch  fort.

Nor  yet  could  guclTc  by  ought

Which  was  rnoft  like  to  cuLjiic others  (liort,

I She  takes  aw<T,y  the  helmet  from  the  tree.

And  thinks  by  thistomakchcrfclfcfomcfport.

Or  they  by  tins  nvight  fbonerfundred  be.

Not  meaning, in  fuch  fort  away  to  fet  it.

But  that  thcworchy  Earle  againc  may  get  it.

41

And  with  the  fame  away  from  hence  Ihegoes*

The  while  they  two  with  painc  and  traTcll  tired,

In  giving  and  in  taking  deadly  bloes,
ferraw  Tthat  mift  the  hcadpcece  firft)  rctited.

And  for  he  did  moft  certainly  fuppofi:.

That  i'dcmpijrzr  had  tancit  iindcured.

Good  Lord  (faid  he)  what  mcanc  wchcrc  to  doJ
This  other  Knight  hath  coufened  ns  two.

4*

And  unawares  the  helmet  tane  away,

Orlando  hearing  this,doth  looke  afidc.

And  miffing  itjlic doth bcleevcftraight  way,

As  did  Jfrrtar,and  after  him  they  ride:

They  came  at  laft  into  a parted  way,

That  irt  two  parts  it  felfe  doth  there  divide,

Frelh  trackc  in  both  of  them  was  to  be  fecne.

This  of  the  Knight, thatof  the  Indian  Queene,


43


Orlandos  hap  was  to  purfiic  the  Knight,

Jerraw, that  was  more  luckicofthc  twaine.
Happen’d  upon  Angelica  tolight.

Who  to  rcfrcfli  her  former  taken  painc,

Faft  by  a foumamc  did  before  ahght.

And  feeing  fodainly  the  knight  of  Spaine,
Snaightlikca  ftiadowirom  hisfight  fiicpaft.

And  on  the  ground  the  helmet  left  with  haft
,44

But  as  the  fight  of  her  did  make  him  glad.

In  hope  by  this  good  fortune  her  to  get.

So  thus  againc  to  loofeher  m-idchim  fad,

And  flicw’d  that  flic  did  him  at  nothing  fee:
Thencurft  he  as  he  had  bin  raging  mad,
Elafpliemiiig  and  Mahomet,

And  all  the  Gods  ador’d  in  Ttiri^s  piofcffion,
Thegrkfein  him  did  make  fbdeepe  imprcflion.

45

Yet  w lien  he  had  0)7a?:dor  helmet  fpidc.

And  knew  it  was  by  letters  writ  tliercon.

The  fame  For  which  Trajanos  brother  didc,

He  takes  it  quickly  up  and  puts  it  on,

And  then  in  haft  he  aftq  hci  dotluidc.

That  was  out  of  his  fight  fo  ftrangely  gone.

He  taj^cs  the  hclmetjthinkiog  little  fliame,

Al  though  he  came  not  truly  by  the  fame.

46

But  feeing  flic  away  from  him  was  fled,

Nor  where  flic  was  he  knew  noi  could  notgueffe,
Hirafclfe  fronl^hcncc  to  Farts  waid  lie  fped.

His  hope  ro  her  waxing  Icftc  and  Icfler
^ A nd, yet, the  foirow  that  her  Ioffe  had  bicd.

Was  paitaffwag’djthe  helmet,  to  pofTcfTc,

Though  afterwaid  vvhen  nsQrlando  knew  it.

He  fvYAic  great  othes  that  he  would  nuke  him  levT  it.

47

Bui  how  Orlando  did  agarine  it  ger,  >

And  hew  Ferraw  w.is  plagued  for  that  prime.

And  how, they  two  bciuccne  two  bridges  met.
Whereas  FerraU>  was  killed  at  that  time^

M y puipofc  is  not  to  declare  as  yet,

But  to  another  ftory  turnc  my  rime;.

Now  I muft  tell  you  of  that  Indian  Quepnc,

By  veuuc  of  her  nng  thatgocth  unfccnc.

48

Who  parted  thence  all  fad  and  difeontented.

That  by  her  mcancs  Ferraw  huwill  had  got,

That  file  (with  this  unlookt  for  hap  prevented)

Left  lum  the  hclmcr, though  flic  meant  it  not,

And  in  her  heart  her  aft  flic  fore  repented.

And  with  hei  felfe  flic  faid, alas  God  wot,

I filly  foolc  tookc  it  with  good  intention,

Thereby  to breake  their  ftiifc  and  fharpe  contention.

49

Not  that  thereby  this  filthy  Spaniard  might
By  hclpc  of  my  deceit  and  doing  wrong,

Keepe  that  hy  fraud  be  could  not  win  by  might,

Alas  to  thy  true  love  and  fcrvice  long,

A better  rccompcncc  then  this  of  right,

From  me  (my  good  Orlando)  fhould  belong.*

And  thusktlhit  moft  kind  and  doleful!  fafhioa.

She  doth  continue  long  heiUtnemaoon.

Now


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


93


5®

Now  meanetli  (he  to  tra?cll  to  the  Had,

Vato  her  native  foilc  and  country  ground,

Her  journey  doth  her  other  griefesdiged*.

Her  ring  doth  in  her  journey  kcepe  her  found;

Yet  chanced  file, ere  (lie  forfooke  the  Weft,

To  traveU  ncare  a wood, whereas  fhe  found
A fine  yong  man  betweene  two  dead  men  lying,
W'ith  wound  in  bleeding  breft  even  then  a dying,
f I

But  here  a while  I ccafc  of  her  to  treate,
wmukff  Or  SacraparU, or  of  the  Knight  of  Spaine,

Before  I can  returnc  to  them  againe;

Orlandos  aftions  I will  now  repeate.

That  ftillcndui’dfiichtravclland  fuch  paine.

Nor  timeit  fclfc,that  foirowcsdoth  appeafe,.
Could  grant  to  this  his  griefe  an  end  or  cafe.

5*

And  firft  the  noble  Earlean  headpcece  bought,

By  late  ill  fortune  having  loft  his  owne,

F or  temper  or  the  ftrength  he  never  fought.

So  it  did  keepe  him  but  from  being  knownc.

Now  Pkxbus  charret  had  the  daylight  brought.
And  hid  the  ftarres  that  late  before  were  fliowne,
And  faire  Aurora  was  new  rifen  when
Orlando  met  two  bands  of  armed  men,

53  . -

One  band  wasled  by  worthy

Aman  though  ftout.yet  hoary  haird  for  age,;
Who  with  hismen  did  make  to  Parit  ward.

Be  not  for  warre, but  fi t for  counfcll  fagci

ef  the  other  had  the  guard.

Then  in  the  prime  and  chiefe  flourc  of  his  age.
And  one  that  pafled  all  the  Turlfijb  warriers.

To  fight  at  tilr,at  turncy  or  at  barriers.

54

Theft  men  with  other  of  the  Pagan  hoft.

Had  layne  the  winter  paft  not  fat  fro  thence,
When  Agramant  did  fee  his  men  were  loft.

By  vainc  aftaults  unto  hit  great  cxpcnce.

And  therefore  now  hcfwcarcsaad  makethboft,
That  he  will  never  raife  his  fiege  fro  thence.

Till  they  within  that  now  had  left  the  field,
Wereforft  by  famine  all  their  goods  to  yccld,

55

And  for  that  cauft, now  fbmmer  comes  againe.

He  gets  together  all  the  men  he  may.

With  new  fupplics  cfAjfrilie  and  of  Spaine^

And  fome  of  France  that  did  accept  his  pay.

But  that  in  order  due  they  may  remaine.

He  points  them  all  to  meet  him  in  one  day,

Who  by  commandement  hither  came  in  clufteryy
To  make  appearance  at  the  pointed  mufters.

56

Now  when  Al^rdo  fivt  Orlando  there.

Inflam'd  with  pride  and  glory  of  faismlnd.

He  longtd  ftraight  with  him  to  bicake  a fpeare,
And  fpurs  his  horfe,but  quickly  he  doth  find
Himfelfetoo  wcakefofturdy  blowesto  bearC,
And  wifticth  now  that  he  had  ftaid  behind.

He  fallcth  from  the  horfes  back  downedead,
The  fcarfull  horfewi  thout  his  maftcr  fled.


5r


Straight  there  was  rais’d  a mighty  cry  and  fiiout.

By  all  the  fouldicrs  of  Aljyrdos  band.

When  as  they  fee  their  captaine  (l.a  te  fb  flout)
Thrownedowneand  killed  by  Orlandos  hand;

Then  out  of  ray  they  compaft  him  about
Onev'ry  fide  in  number  as  thefand.

They  that  arc  nic,with  blowcs  do  him  aflaile.

And  thofe  aloofc  throw  daits  as  thickc  as  hailc.

5S

Lookc  what  a noift  an  herd  of  favage  fwine
Do  make  when  as  the  wolfe  a pig  hath  caught.

That  doth  in  all  their  hearings  cry  and  whine.

They  flockc  about  as  nature  hath  them  taught;

So  do  theft  fouldicrs  raurrhurcand  repine,

To  fee  their  capfainc  thus  to  mifthieft  brought.

And  with  great  fury  they  do  ftt  upon  him.

All  with  one  voice, ftill  cry  ing,on  bim,on  hitn.

.

I fay  the  nearer  fight  with  fwotd  and  fpeare.

And  thofe  aloofc  fend  fhafts  and  many  a dart.

But  he  that  never  yet  admitted  fcare
To  lodge  in  any  barbourof  his  hart,

Vpon  his  fhield  a thoufand  darts  doth  beare.

And  thoufands  more  oh  every  other  part.

Yet  of  them  all  makes  no  more  care  nor  keepe,

Then  doth  a Lion  of  a flockc  effliccpc.

6o

For  when  at  once  his  fatall  blade  he  drew.

That  blade  fo  often  bath’d  in  Pagans  blood.

No  ftcclc  there  wasof  temper  old  or  new.

Nor  folded  cloths  the  edge  thereof  Vvithftwd,

About  the  field,heads,Iegs,armes,fbouldersfleWi
T he  furrowes  all  did  flow  with  crimfon  flood.

Death  gocth  about  the  field  rejoycing  mickk^

To  fee  a fword  that  fo  furpaft  Us  fickle.

6i

This  made  the  Pagan  rout  (bfbreagaft.

He  that  could  fwifteft  runne  was  beft  apaid.

And  as  they  came,fo  fled  they  now  asfaftj
One  brother  for  another  never  ftaid;

Nomemory  of  love  or  fricndfhippaft.

Could  make  one  ftay  to  give  anbthcr  aid,  .

He  that  could  gallop  faftefi  wasmoft  glad.

Not  asking  if  tne  wayes  were  good  or  bad,

6a

Oncly  one  man  there  was  iii  all  the  field,

That  bad  fb  long  in  vertucsfthoolc  bin  bred.

That  rather  then  to  tiirnc  his  backeor  yceldy
He  meancth  there  to  leave  his  carkas  dead:

Old  Af4^/4rd,who  taking  up  his  fhceld,

Bveo  as  his  valiant  heart  and  courage  led.

Sets  fpurt  to  hor'ft.and  in  his  reft  aTance,

And  runtagaihft  the  PaUadine  of  traaee^

6J

Vpon  Orlandos  fhield  hisfpeare  he  brake.

Who  never  ftird  for  all  the  manly  blow.

But  with  his  naked  fword  againe  he  ftrak^e’

And  made  him  tumble  ore  the  faddic  bow:

Fortune  on  vertue  did  fome  pitic  take.

For  why, Orlandos  fword  fell  flatling  tho.

That  though  it  quite  amaz’d  and  overthrew  him,

% Yet  by  good  hap  it  maim’d  him  not  nor  flew  him*  .

Witlt


Ilueyou
P>oiM  Htgin
to  read  the
taleofjfa^
beUa,


Simile.


Moran.


Rinorie.


Allegoric


Allufion.


94.


..T^E  TWELFTH. ^.OOKfi


«4

VVtth  great  coofufion  all  the  other  fled,  '»

And  now  of  armed  men  the  field  wasvoyd.

Save  fuch  as  were  or  leemed  to  be,dcad>

So  as Or/d»do  now  no  more  annoy’d,  ...  ‘

Went  on  his  journey  as  his  (ancie  led,  '

Tofccke herein  whofe  fight  he  oncly  joy’d,

Through  plains  and  woods, through  fandy  wajts.and
He  travels  making  ftill  of  her  enquiry.  (™hyi

Vnrill  it  vvas  his  fortune  toward  night

To  come  fail  by  a mountaine,  in  whole  fide
Forth  of  a cave  he  faw  a glims  of  light.

And  towards  it  he  prefcntly  doth  ride:

Then  at  the. mouth  thcreofhcdothalight^';

And  toabnfli  faft  by  his  horfe  hetide,  , ...j
Hcdouts.aseverlpvcisfulloffcare,  •v'br.r.

That  his  bclov’d  Angelica  wa^ there.  l.’i ./  -

‘ * 66  >

Ev’n  as  the  huntersrthat  dcfirousarc,

Some  prefent  paftime  for  their  hounds  to  fee,.  <>  '

In  ftubble  fields  do  feekethe  fcarfull  hare,

Byrcv'ry  bufii.and  under  ev’ry  tree;,-  .

So  he  with  like  defire  and  greater  care,  ..i  r.  : /
Seeks  her  that  foie  of forrow  c^n  him  freejot!:  u»h
Hecntersboldly  in  the  hollow  cave,  .1  . •'

And  thinks  of  her  feme  tidings  there  to  hav£.  n .tl  f
. ‘ 67

The  entrance  ftraight  and  narrowwas  to  pafie,  1! v;
Defending  fteps  into  a place  profound,  , . r.t!  "
Whereas  a cettainefaircyongLadic  was,  T.  i '.<
Kept  by  fomc  outla  wes  prifner  under  ground,, : ;


Her  bcautk  did  the  common  fort  furpalTc,

Sofarre  asfeant  her  match  was  to  be  found,

So  as  that  darke  and  folttary  den.

Might  lecme  to  be  a Faradifc  as  then.

68

On  her  an  aged  woman  there  did  waif.

The  which  (as  oft  with  women  doth  befall)
About  fomc  matter'of  but  little  waight.

Did  happen  at  that  timd to  chide  and  brail.

But  when  they  faw  a ftrangcr  comming,  ftraighr
They  held  their  peaces,and  were  quiet  all,
OrianJodotb  falute  them  with  goed  grace.

And  they  do  bid  him  tvelcomc  to  the  place.

Then  after  common  words  of  falutattdh,

Althorigh  atfirft  of  him  they  were  afraid.

Yet  ftraiglu  he  enter’d  in  examinanon.

By  whom  in  that  fame  cave  they  had  bin  ftaid

i And  who  they  were  in  fo  unfccmly  fafhion,

T hat  kept  a comely  and  a noble  maid?

And  faid,hefaw  it  written  in  her  face.

Her  nurture  and  her  linage  were  not  baft.

70

She  told  him  firaight  how  long  flic  there  bad  beene.
And  by  what  hap  flic  had  bin  thither  brought.
Amid  her  words  the  fighs  do  pafle  betweene.

The  corail  and  the  pcarlc  by  nature  wrought,

T Sweet  teares  upon  her  tender  cheeks  were  leene.
That  (4fti'e  from  fountaincof  her  bitter  thought;  ‘
But  fofcjlcft  I fliould  do  the  Reader  wrong,

I cud  this  bookc  jthat  clfc  would  be  too  long.


/4  that  A ngclica  would  have  c^>o/cjz;Sacrapant  hrfort  Orlando,' Jve  may  note  how  women  for  the  moft  fart  in  their
choifefoUaw  ratheit  fovie  private  rejpe£t,then  the  truewotth  of  the  vie  that  offer  themfelves  at  their  devotid.in  that  /be
tooh  away  the  helmet,  with purpofe  to  mah^ /port. wifb.ir, though  at  laft  Orlando  ly  that  means  loft  it  dgabtfl  her  rvil,
we  may  fee  that  things  done  in  jeffoft  turne  to  earnefi.andthetfore  that  excellent  rule  of civility  is  evermore  to  be  f^ept;
Play  with  me  and  hurt  me  not,
left  with  me  and  fliamc  me  not.  • '

Jn  the  eftiarrell  betweene  Orlando  Ferraw,  we  may  fee  the  common  origmall  of  all  quarrels , namely  I onour  and
women  OfTcttiw  I jpal{eirithe  frfi  boohe  ojhis  firength  andftature,  but  whether  it  hetrue,  or  might  be  true, that  his
body  Jhould be  made  impenetrable  ly  forcery  andwitchcraft , 1 canneither  affirmt  it  was  fo,nor  maintaine  that  it  could
pojfibtc  be  fo,yet  /hnowjbme  that  beleeve  the  contrary, and(  as  they  thitthlupongood  grounds  :and  fomc  fay  it  is  a great
pralHfe  in  Ireland  to  char  me  girdles,  andthelH{e,  perjwading  men  that  while  they  weare  them  they  cannot  be  hurt
with  any  weapon:  andwho  can  tell  whether  the  divel  may  not  fometime  protcH  fame  of  his  fervants?htu  me  notable  ex-
ample I have  heard  tending  much  to  this  cffcH:Rciic  Ogc(a  notable  rebe/l  of  Ireland)  having  tal^cnin  a vile  and  tre~
ehcroiis  Parlee,ny  valiant  oofin  fir  HcnTieHm'mgtonprifoner,  had  one  night  hit  caben  or  little  hove/l where  he  lay
hefet  with  one  hundred  fouldicrs  of  the  faid  fir  Hcnric  his  hand,  meaning  to  re  fern  their  captaine  by  force, fith  the  rebels
demaunds  for  his  delivery  were  fuch  as  fir  Hcnrie  Hmfelfe  (being  his  prifoncr)  would  not  condefiend  unto, but  would
rather  ha\ardhis  life  as  he  b.new  he./hould:  i fay  thefe  hundred  men  well  appointed, hefet  the  hmfe/lrongly, being  made
of  nothing  hut  hardels  anddurt,yet  the  villain  ere  they  couldget  in, gat  up  tn  his  /hirt, and  gave  the  hyi^t  xnf  wounds
very  deadly,  and  after  gat  thorow  them  aU  without  hurt,  where  amoufe  almofi  could  not  have  got  betweene  them:  and
I have  heard  it  affirmed  in  Ircland,that  it  was  with  meere  witchcraft.

In  the  pallace,w  here  every  one  hath  that  he  lit^eth  heft  prefent  ed  unto  him  yet  no  man  canenjiy  it,  is  to  be  under  flood
that  he  that  follower  his  ownc  vaine  defires  without  the  rule  of  reafonffita/l  ever  tun  afiray,  and  never  attains  to  tie
triK  contentment  he  de fires:

7h  Orlando  rt?u/Fcrraw,  he  alludes  to  the  fight  of  Cygnus  and  Achilles,  who  were  both  in  lihy  forrfainedto  lave
bin  invulnerable^  ,


Thu  oldv^A
tnAH  was
Gabrina,of
nhamjiQ^  '
hetrebiu  a
intuit
tittmudKtki


96


THE  THIRTEENTH  BOOKEi


THE  ARGVMENT.


Orlando  htaret  Zerbyno’s  love  to  tell,

Her  fl range  misfortune  and  her  hard  advent er  :

outlawes  that  in  that  vaft  cave  did  dwell,
^ -'■  - Orhndo  hand’d J hat  had  in prif on  pent  her t '

B;  adamant  though  Mclifla  did  her  tell
Atlanras  frauds,  yet  doth  his  Pallace  enter,
ivhere  ^e  is  ft  aid  by  force  of  Atlant’s  charmes,
while  Agramant  muFUrs  his  men  of  armes.


Vll  »cnaous  were  the  noble
knight*  of  old.

And  worthy  that  theit  fame
fhould  aye  cnduic.

That  dujl  Wich  valiant  heart
and  courage  bold
Find  out  in  dens  and  places
all  obfeure,


Well  did  I fay  T was, for  now  alas,

1 am  the  child  of  ariguifh  and  of  paine:

LovCjOnely  love  this  great  change  brought  to  palTe,

I ovc,only  love^of  thee  I may  complaine.

That  flattringalwaiesm  thy  firft  beginnings,  SinuHct;

Yeeld’fl  certaine  lollc  in  (lead  of  hoped  winnings;


Then  in  good  flatc  I fpent  my  1


Such  as  in  courts  we  now  but  Noble  and  young, honeft  and  ricE,and  faire.


fceld  behold  ,

Fairc  dames,  of  bcaucy.raind,  and  manners  pure;
As  erft  I told  you  ho w Orktndo  f >und
A brave  young  Lady  hidden  under  ground.

»

Now  in  my  former  matter  to  proceed,

I lay  when  he  had  view’d  herperfon  well,

And  maik’d  hn  face  and  havicui  with  great  heed.
He  doth  icqucrt  the  damfell  fairc  to  tell.

Who  was  the  author  of  lb  foul  a deed,

To  force  herinfo  unfit  place  to  dwell :

And  nicasplaioc  tnd  biicflyas  fliccan.

In  this  fwcet  fort  her  wofull  fpccch  began.

Moft  woiThyknight(fiicfiid)although  I know.

That  J Ihall  buy  my  fpeech  to  you  full  dcare,

(For  lure  I am, this  woman  hcrewill  Ihow
My  words  to  him  that  firrt  did  place  me  here)

Truth  I will  telljt hough  truth  increafe  my  woe.
And  make  him  look  on  me  with  angry  chearc:
Dcfpairc  hath  ever  danger  all  contemn’d.

What  ihould  Ihe  fcate  that  is  ev*n  now  coH^emn*d?
4

I am  that  yy2iM  that  femi  ime  was
A daughter  dcare  unto  the  king  of  Spaine,


Ovid.

Stnttueti


Now  bafc,dcfpifcd,poorc,and  wanting  praife  ;
Drown’d  in  a dungeon  of  moll  deep  deTpaiie,

Thus  love  throwesdown  whom  fortune  high  doth
And  marrs  the  fport  in  which  he  is  a plaicr  i (raifc,
He  thatin  art  of  love  did  flicw  his  skill,

Saithjlovc  and  majcflic  agrees  but  ill,


But  that  I plainly  may  declare  my  rnind.

Thus  itfell  out,my  father  twelve  moncthsfince.

To  make  a famous  triumph  had  alfign’d,

Vnto  the  which  came  many  a Lord  and  Prince:
Now  whcihcr  liking  did  ir.yeys  fo  blind.

Or  thar  his  re.tuc  did  it  fclfe  convince  ;

2erhin  (me  thought)the  king  of  Scotlands  fbn
In  this  fame  triumph  honour  chief  had  won<

7

The  pairing  feats  ofarmesl  faw  him  do,

In  which  he  was  compared  with  the  heft,

Ifis  peifon  and  his  beauty  joyn’d  hereto.

In  which  he  farfurpafled  all  the  reft.

Did  caufc  that  he  no  foonerdid  me  wo.

But  i as  cjiiickly  granted  his  rcqucll ;

Interpeeters  nor  either  means  none  wanted,

To  make  the  fccch  to  grow  that  love  had  planted.

When


Gratior  eft
puUbrt  tie.
nit  ns  in  tiri
fort  virtm,


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


97


Stmm*.
Ovti,  tJM
ttnl  effiiht
futd  vtlatrt
4u»,

StrVbiiif

SitlMejtmdJ*

Mibut

ftrwbrn$

tan

ti  at  frtvenh
»t  which  tiv»
farutt  onct
ifvtfiiUf.lt’
fint.


\\  htn  as  thcfc  fcafls  and  FolftTinc  flicwes  weie  ended,
Mv  Zerbinhick.  ag'inc  toScotlunJ  haded,

VV  heicv\  ith  how  gnevoufly  I was  offended, '

Well  may  you  gueffe,  if  ever  love  you  rafted :

But  he  that  cannot  be  loo  much  commended,
Whofelovc  to  me  no  Icfl'c  in  abfence  lafted.

With  pui pofe  a nd  with  promifc  firm  to  marry  me|
Studi'd  all  means  away  from  hence  to  carry  me.

9

"1  were  vainc  he  thought  to  ask  me  of  my  fire,

(Zerbin  a Chrifien,\A  Sara\ine)

Our  country  lawcontran’d  that  defire,

T o which  our  loves  fo  wholly  did  incline :

This  feat  doth  fomc  new  ftratagem  require,
MorchcedfulIjreCTCt, circumfpcftand  fine*

When  love  hath  knit  two  heartsinperfit  unity.
They  I'cldomc  fade  to  findc  their  opportunity.

I o

An  honfe  of  great  eftate  tn  B.tyomowne,

My  father  had  with  gardcnsfweet  and  fa  ire,
Inwhich  wiclilargc  defeents  ftill  going  down
Vntoa  river  comes  the  garden  ftaire,
Hcrc(ifillfonHneon  us  do  not  frown)  »

He  means  when  1 fliall  walk  to  take  the  aire.

Soon  to  furprife  me  walking  in  an  ally^

And  fo  convey  me  to  bis  armed  gaily.

I I

But  fith  with  him  the  cafe  did  then  fo  ftand.

Not  to  be  prefent  at  this  enterprife.

He  fent  me  letters  written  with  his  hand.

By  OdcrUie  of  Bytl^ie  ftout  and  wife,

Expert  in  fervicc  both  of  Tea  and  land.

And  wils  me  do  as  he  (hould  me  ad  vile,

Whofc  faith  be  nothing  doubtetb  to  be  (bund.

As  one  to  him  by  benefits  mucii  bound.

12

This  firm  and  faft,snd  furc  obliged  friend.

Of  proved  couragCjValue  and  of  skill,

Againft  the  time  appointed  he  doihfcnd  :

And  I that  for  their  comming  looked  ftill,

Againft  the  time  appointed  did  defeend.

To  give  him  fcopc  to  work  his  maflers  will.

And  he  accordingly  came  unefpi’d.

Wit  h armed  men  under  the  garden  fide.

1 feeing  them,my  fcife  moft  fcarfull  fainc.

They  ftcing  me  foon  of  their  puipofe  fped,

Thoft  that  refift.rncc  madc.forthwith  were  flaine.
And  fbmc  afraid  and  fainti  like  cowards  fled.

The  left  with  me  as  prilhers  do  rcmainc ;

Then  ftraight  we  were  unto  the  gaily  led.

And  gone  fo  fane,  we  could  not  be  recovered.
Before  my  father  had  the  faft  difeoveted.

Of  this  departure  I my  felfe  was  glad.

In  hope  ere  long  my  Zerbin  to  have  found,
Butloafuddcn  tempcftmadcusfad,

And  nearc  to  RocheM  almoft  had  us  drownd,  "
Thcmaftcroftheniip  no  cunning  had,

To  keep  the  kcclfrom  ftriking  on  the  ground  ;

It  booted  not  againft  the  waves  to  ftri  vc,

Vpon  fiiarp  rocks  the  tempeft  doth  us  drive.


15

In  vainc  it  was  to  pull  down  all  our  failes.

And  on  the  foicboord  clofc  to  couch  the  miff.

No  painc againft  the  raging  fca  picvailcs.

On  land  wc  look  each  minute  to  bc  caft:

Divine  help  oft  dot  h come,when  humane  fades.
And  when  inieafon  all  rtliefeis  paftr
For  doubtlcffc  1 do  deem  by  power  divine,

Wc  were  prefer ved  in  this  dang’rous  time.

I6

The  that  the  danger  well  doth  note.

Doth  mcanc  a defpratc  remedy  to  trie.

He  ftiaightway  launcheth  out  the  little  bote.

He  and  two  more  go  down  therein, and  I,

This  done,bc  cuts  the  tope  and  lets  her  flote,
Thieatning  with  naked  fwoid  that  he  fliould  die,
Thatduift  prcfiimctogivcft)  bold  adventer,
Againft  out  wils  into  the  boat  to  enter.

The  rope  now  cut, away  the  boatwasearrici
By  force  cf  waves  unto  the  fliallow  fliore.

And  by  great  fortune  noncof  usmifirarricd,

So  great  a plunge  1 never  fcap’ J before.

But  thcy(poorc  foulcs)that  inthc  gaily  tarried.
Were dfown’djthevcffcll  quite  in  pccccs  tore.

Where  though  my  Ioffe  of  ftuffe  and  jewels  griev’d
My  hope  to  fee  my  Z erbin  ftill  reliev’d  me .

l8

Now  being  come  to  landfin  lucklcffc  hourc)

And  truftiiig  oncly  Oderi/^erdiieftion,
Love(thatdoth  ever  love  to  flicw  his  power.

In  tcrapring  or  diftempring  our  affcflion)

My  good  to  ill,  my  fwcet  doth  turn  to  fewer.

My  hope  to  hurt, my  health  into  infeftion  :

Hein  whofc  truft  Zerbin  fo  much  rclicth,

Freeseth  in  faith, and  in  new  fancic  fricth.

19

Now  whether  firft  atfea  this  humoui  grcwi
Or  els  he  moved  was  with  new  occafion.

To  have  me  here  alone  with  fo  fmallcrcw.

As  from  his  will  I could  not  make  evafion.

He  bids  all  faith  and  honefty  adieu.

And  ycclds  himfclfe  unto  this  foul pcifwafion  j
And  that  he  may  hii  pleafure  furcly  warranty
He  fends  the  fci  vantsof  a flccvelcffc  airant.

20

Two  men  there  were  that  had  fo  lucky  lot.

With  us  into  the  fhip-boat  to  defeend.

One  hi’ght  j4lmonie^  by  birth  a Scot,

A valiant  man, and  Zerbins  rnifty  friced,

Odril^e  ttli  him, that  it  befeemed  nor.

So  few  upon  a Princefle  to  attend.

And  chat  the  daughter  of  the  King  of  Spaine
Should  go  on  foot, and  witfa  fo  fmall  a traine.

21

Wherefore  he  wiflicth  him  to  go  before
To  RocheU,  there  a palfrey  ro  provide,

A nd  hire  fomc  men,a  dozen  or  a fcorr.

Me  to  my  lodging  manneily  to  guide  :

.Almonio  went, then  was  there  left  no  more.

But  Coteh, one  of  wit  and  courage  tri’d.

In  whom  the  Bysh^in  put  the  more  affiance,

Becaufc  that  he  was  one  of  bis  alliance.


ps


THE  THIRTEENTH  BOOKE


2Z


tcclong  liefeem’din  doubtfull  mindcto  hover,

Fainc  ^if  he  could)lic  would  bare  lid  him  thence.
At  laft  he  thinks  fn  fad  a friend  and  lover
Will  with  his  foends  iniquity  difpence  .*

Wherefore  he  doth  to  himhisniindedifcover,

In  hope  that  he  would  further  hisoffence,

S<»ientt,  -^nd  du  as  friends  in  our  dayes have  a fafhion.

Advance  their  plcafure  more  then  reputation.

But  he  whole  honed  minde  could  not  fuppofe.

That  Odcn/fC  had  bad  fo  little  grace,’

T he  fa  ft  no:  only  threatens  to  d ilclofe,

But  cals  him  falfe  and  traitor  to  his  face ;

From  bitter  words  unto  more  bitter  blowes.

They  ca  me  and  fought  together  in  the  place  j
Audi  in  thisprofpeft  no  whit  delighting.

Fled  to  the  wood  while  they  two  were  a fighting.  '

- *4

Between  them  two  the  combat  was  not  long.

But  lo  the  worfer  canle  the  better  fped.

Whether  he  were  moreskilfull  or  more  drong,
Odril^e  doth  lay  Corebo  there  for  dead ;

That  done,he  runs  the  woodsand  fernamong.

And  followes  fad  the  way  that  I had  fled,

I think  that  he  god  Cupidi  -wings  did  borrow,

He  made  fuch  had  to  haden  on  my  fortow.

*5

Feare  mademe  fwift,foi  I was  fore  afraid.

Love  made  him  Avifterrun  to  overtake  mr.

Then  fore  againd  my  will  my  courfe  he  daid.

Then  fundnly  both  foul  and  faire  he  fpakc  me,
Somtiine  he  promil’edjfomtime  he  praid,

Somtirac  he  threatned  he  by  force  would  make  me :
With  dm,  with  gifts  with  thicats  he  oft  did  prove  me,
With  fuitjwith  gifts, with  thieats  he  nought  did  move
16  (me.

But  when  he  could  not  with  his  words  prevaile.

He  doth  refolve  no  further  time  to  day.

With  open  force  he  then  did  me  adaile.

As  doth  a hungry  Bcaie  ct afe  on  his  pray.

And  I defended  me  with  tooth  and  naile.

And  cries,and  skrecks,and  all  the  waves  I may.

Nor  was  I in  mine  own  defence  afeard.

To  fcratch  his  cyes,and  pull  away  his  beard,

I know  not  if  it  were  my  slcieetcb  and  crie.

That  might  have  well  bin  heard  a league  and  mote.
Or  if  it  were  theirufe  that  dwell  thereby.

To  come  to  feck  feme  fhipwracks  on  the  fliorc.

But  draightupon  the  hill  we  might  defery.

Come  coward  usof  company  good  dote.

Which  makes  my  Bysi^ie  m.in  away  to  mn.

And  to  furceafe his  entcrprifc  begun.

»8

Trntrle,  Thus  this  uiilook’d  for  crew  picferv’d  me  then.

And  hindred  himof  hi*  unjud  dcfiie  ;

But  I W3sfav’d,asi$  tlicfloundcr,when
He  Icapctl)  from  thcdifli  into  thefiic.

For  though  thefe  barbarous  and  lavage  men
T o touch  my  perfon  did  not  once  afpirc ;

No  vertaous  thought  did  biecd  this  moderation.

But  liopc  ofgainc  and  greedy  inclination.


19

The  Leader  of  this  mifcrable  band

Did  think  his  market  will  be  railed  much.

In  felling  me,whcn  men  fhall  undcidand.

He  fclsa  maid  whom  none  did  ever  touch.

And  now  I heare  a merchant  is  in  band
Of  him  to  buy  me,  if  his  luck  be  fuch  ;

From  whom  into  the  Had  I fhall  be  fent,
W'herc  to  the  Souldan  they  will  me  prefent.

50

And  in  this  fort  her  wofull  talc  flic  told.

And  mingled  fighs  with  tears  in  lufuB  fafliion,
Expicffed  with  fuch  dolefull  words  as  would
Have  mov’d  a dony  heart  to  take  compadlon  :
Leas’d  in  part  her  mind, thus  to  unfold
The  bitter  caufc  of  her  unpleafant  padion.

Now  while  Orlando  to  this  tale  attended.

The  crevf  of  caitivcs  to  the  cave  defeended .

3»


Ovii.  Meta,
tamiH
i»fsqu>tut
pcMHu  ad\n,
tMamem
ctiorit,

Hie celer,
ilia  tinurt.


Ovid.de  faff,
XH/litaouHt
beftupretio
frtcibm^

N«  frece,
necfrecic,
nec  mnet
Hit  minii.


A barbarous  and  foul  misfliapcn  crew.

Armed ,onc  with  a fpit,one  with  a prong,
Mouthcsjcycs  and  face  mod  ugly  were  to  view^
One  had  no  nofc,  another*  was  too  long  :

But  when  thcii  leader  fomwhat  nearn  drew.

And  faw  Orlando  danding  there  among.

Turning  to  bis  <Jompanion,hc  faid,

Lo  here  a bird  for  whom  no  net  we  laid.

3»

Then  to  the  Earle  he  faid,l  am  right  glad
To  find  one  fo  well  armed  in  my  cave.

For  long  for  fuch  an  armour  long’d  I had.

And  furcly  now  this  1 fuppofe  to  have  :

How  think  you,whcn  my  perfon  fhall  be  clad
With  this  your  coat, fliall  not  I then  be  brave  >
Wherefore  good  fir,  think  not  your  welcome  fcanr.
That  come  fo  fitly  to  fupply  my  want.

Orlando  turning  with  a fower  fmile,

Anfwcr’d.his  armour  was  of  price  too  high.

And  that  he  greatly  did  himfelfc  beguile,

That  thought  of  him  his  armour  there  to  buy  t
And  as  they  nearer  came,hcdoopt the  while.

And  took  a brand  that  in  the  fire  did  lie.

And  draight  he  threw  it  at  thccaitivcshcad,

And  laid  him  there  along  the  door  foi  dead.

34

A {hort  thick  plank  dood  on  a ferubhy  pod.

That  ferv’d  them  for  a boord  to  drink  and  ear,

T his  like  a coight  at  them  Orlando  tod,

And(for  the  fame  full  heavy  was  and  gicat)

1 1 fell  down  there  among  them  to  their  cod.

They  never  faw  before  fo  drangc  a feat  :

By  which  fcarcc  one  of  them  cfcapcd  harm.

In  head, in  leg, in  brcd,in  fide  or  arm.

So  niallyoufcc  a country  man  that  takes
I n time  of  fpring  a brickbat  or  a done.

And  throwesthefameupona  knot  offnakes.

That  lie  together  cluder’d  all  in  one.

How  great  a fpoilc  the  done  among  them  makes.
And  thofcthatfcapcjhow  quickly  they  begone  ;

So  did  Orlando  with  ihefe  pcafants  play,

Thatglad  were  they  thatfeap’d  to  tun  away.

Thofe


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


99


'hit  vniutai
rtmsit  u

'Mutemii*

ml  tit  60.
Uft.


Inlhe  1|

Uoii.lltgi

*%-

Paimatm,


*6

Thofe  thatcouU  (cape  the  heavy  tables  fall,

Vnro  their  feet  commeaded  their  defence.

Which  wcrc(as  T urpin  wmes)buc  feven  in  all.

Which  feven  were  glad  to  run  away  from  thence :

But  yet  their  flying  brought  them  help  but  fmall,
Orlando  meaosto  punilh  their  offence,

Their  feet, nor  yet  their  fence  could  them  fo  guard.
But  that  he  brought  them  to  the  hanging  ward.

37

Now  when  the  forefaid  aged  woman  (aw.

In  how  bad  fort  thefe  friends  of  hers  were  ferv’d.

She  was  affeard,for  well  (he  knew  by  law.

That  no  lefTe  punifliment  (lie  had  deferv’d.
Forthwith  from  thence  (he  flaleaway  foraw.

And  upanddown  thedefartwood  (Iiefwerv’d,
Vntill  at  laft  a warriour  (lout  her  met,

But  who  it  was  I may  sot  tell  asyct<

3»

The  tender  damfell  doth  Orlando  pray.

Her  chaltity  and  honour  to  protefl.

Who  made  her  go  with  himiand  from  that  day
Had  unto  her  a fatherly  refpedf :

Now  as  they  went,a  prifner  by  the  way
They  (aw,whofc  name  I may  not  now  deteft
Now  (Lould  1 fpeak  of  Bradamant  by  light,

Whom  eifl  1 left  in  fuch  a dglefullplight.

The  valourous  Lady  looking  longmvaine.

When  her  Rogero  would  to  her  return.

Lay  in  Af<*r/i/ra  to  the  Pagans  painc.

Where  ev*ry  day  (he  did  them  fbme  ftrewd  turn ;
For  fome  of  them  in  Provence  did  lemaine.

And  Languedoc^  where  they  did  fpoilc  and  burn.
Till  with  her  value  (he  did  them  rebuke,

Supplying  place  of  captaine  and  of  duke,

40

Now  on  a day  as  (he  fate  (fill  and  mufed.

The  time  of  his  appointment  long  expir’d.
Doubting  leff  (he  by  him  might  be  abus’d,

Or  that  her  company  he  notdefit'd  •

And  often  when  (he  blam’d, (lie  ftraight  excus’d  t
Thus  while  with  carcfull  thought  her  fcif  (Tie  tir’d,
Mdijfa  whom  (he  thought  not  to  be  ncare  her.
Came  fuddenly  of  puipofc  for  to  chcarc  her.

41

With  pleafant  countenance  MeliJfaCige,

M nch  like  to  thole  that  caric  welcome  aewes,

Wils  hcTjher  cauflcCTc  forrow  to  affwage.

And  gocid  Rogei  u's  abfcncc  doth  cxcufe.

Swearing  that  (he  durft  lay  her  life  to  gage.

He  would  not  abfent  be,  ifhe  might  chufc.

And  that  he  did  now  in  hii  pioraifc  hault.

Was  not  by  his  but  by  anothers  fault.

42

Whercfore(quoth(hc)gct  youtohorfeback  flraight
If  you  would  fet  your  faithfull  lover  free.

And  I my  fclf  intend  on  you  to  wait.

Till  you  hispnfon  with  your  eye  fliall  fee.
Whereas  ^thnta\yhh  a ftrangedcceit
Deiaineih  mcn.of  bafe  and  high  degree,

And  (howesby  flrangcillunondiflrcft,

Sach  one  the  party  whom  hclovcthbclf.


4J

Each  oae  doth  deeme  he  fees  in  great  diflreffe^

His  lovcjhisfricnd,  his  fellow  or  his  page.

According  as  mens  rcafoos  moiC  or  IcfTe,

Arc  weak  or  ftrong  fuch  paffion  to  alTwage;

Thus  do  they  follow  this  their  foolifli  gueffe,

■ Vntill  they  comclike  birds mto a cage.

Searching  the  pallacc  with  a penfive  heart.

The  great  defire  not  fuffilng  them  to  part.

44

Now  thcn(faid  (lic)whcn  you  (Iiall  once  draw  nigh.

Where  this  fame  Necromancer  flrangc  doth  dwell,

Uc  will  your  comming  and  ■ he  caufc  dcfciy,

And  to  delude  you(mark  me  what  I tell)

He  flraight  will  offer  there  unto  your  eye
(By  help  of  (omc  inhabitants  of  hell)

Rogero' s perfon,  all  in  wofull  plight.

As  though  he  had  been  conquered  in  fight.

45

And  if  you  follow ,thinking  him  to  aid.

Then  will  he  (lay  you  as  he  doth  the  reft.

But  kill  him  thcieforc,and  be  not  afraid.

For  fo  you  (hallyourfricnd  deliver  btft ;

So  (hall  your  foe  Atlanta  be  betraid
In  his  own  trap  when  as  he  locketh  left.

And  fcarc  not  when  he  commerh  by  to  ftrike  him.

Though  he  your  dearc  rcfcmblc,and  look  like  him.

1 Know  full  well  bow  hard  ’twill  be  ro  try.

And  how  your  heart  will  fAlc,and  hand  will  tremble
When  you  fliall  go  about  to  make  or.cdy.

That  fhall  Rogero* s flianc fo  tight  rcfemble ;

But  iu  this  calc  you  may  not  tuft  yourcy.

But  all  your  fprites  and  forces  ail  aftemblc  ;

For  this  afliirc  ycu,  if  youlct  liim  go,

You  work  your  own  and  your  Rogero's  wo.

47

The  Proverb  (aith,oncthat  is  warn’d  isarm*d.

The  which  old  faw,  doth  prove  by  due  conftiuflion,  Smiaatt  tt
That  they  that  after  warning  had  are  harm’d,  TrevaU.
Did  ill  regard  or  follow  good  inftruflion.

Now  Bradamant  rides  to  the  place  fo  charm’d.

And  vow’d  that  old  deftnidion.

And  that  they  may  the  ted  ious  way  beguile.

They  fpcnd  the  time  in  pleafant  talk  the  while.

48

And  oft  Melijfa  doth  to  her  repeat

The  names  of  thofe  that  fliould  be  her  pofterity.

That  fliould  in  force  and  deeds  of  aimcs  be  great.

But  greater  in  Religion  and  fincenty,

Atchieving  many  a flrangc  and  worthy  feat.

And  ufc  both  head  and  hand  ^ith  great  dexterity,

In  ruling  juft,and  bountifull  in  giving,

C<efars  in  fight, and  Saints  in  ged'y  living.

49

Now  when  Melijpi^iot  fuch  things  did  (how,

ThcnoblcLady  modcftly  rcplM,

Sith  God(quoth  nie)doth  give  you  skill  to  know.

The  things  that  fliall  in  future  times  betide.

And  means  on  me (unwc  t hy)  to  heftow
Aniffuefuchasfew  (hall  have  befide.

Tell  mCjamongfo  many  men  of name.

Shall  there  no  woman  be  of  worthy  fame  1

I i Yes


100


the  twelfth  booke


I :

4


For  thtrt  Jht
fatoraU  tb*
t»in  of  that


50

Tcs  many  a onc(faid  n)e)both  chaft  and  wife,
Mothers  to  hich  as  hcaic  impcriallcrowncs,
Pillarsand  ftaycsofroy  ill  families.

Owners  of  rcalmcSjOf  countries  and  oftownes,

Out  of  thy  blcfled  ofF-fpring  muftarife.

Such  as  fliall  be  c\*n  in  theirfober  gowncs,
Fofchaftiiy  and  modefty  as  glorious.

As  Ihatl  their  husbands  be  m warre  riSloaoir;.

S«

Nor  can  I \Vel!,or  do  I now  intend,

To  ra1<c  upon  me  ail  their  names  to  tell.

For  then  mv  fpeech  would  never  have  an  end,

I find  fo  many  tliatdefervc  <o  well,

Onely  1 mean  a word  or  twotofpend.

Of  one  or  two  that  do  the  reft  excell :

Had  you  but  talk'd  hereof  in  Merlins  cave.

You  ftioald  have  feen  the  fliapcstbat  they  (hall  have.

toe^  j.  5|j3|]  j beginwith  her  whofe  veitue  rare

Shall  with  her  husband  live  in  happy  ftiife.

Whether  his  valiant  adlions  may  compare.

Or  be  prefei’d  before  her  honeft  life  ?

Hefighrs  abroad  againft  king  Charles  at  Tare,

She  ftaid  at  liomea  chaft  and  fober  wife :

Penelope  in  fpeoding  chaft  her  dayes,

As  worthy  as  wasof  praife.

s?

Then  next  dame  Beatrice  the  wife  (omtime
Of  Lodwicl^e  S tfr^e,furnamed  eke  the  Af ere  .*

Wifi- and  difcrert,a.  d kirown  without  allcrim^c.

Of  fortunes  gifts,  and  vertues  having  ftcrc  t
Her  husband  liv'd  moft  happy  all  her  time,

And  in  fiTch  ftateasfcw  have  liv'd  before  i
But  after  fell  from  being  D ukc  ofMiUcny
To  be  a capitvc  fcttci'd  like  a viHcn.

J4

To  p.ifle  the  famous  houfe  I fhould  be  forie.

Of  ^ragon,.'ui<i  that  moft  worthy  queen.

Whole  match  in  neither  greek  norlatine  ftoric,

O;  any  writer  els  hath  ever  been  :

Aud  full  to  perfeft  her  moft  worthy  glcriy,

Three  worthy  children  fhallofher  be  feen  :

Of  whom  thehcavetis  have  pointed  her  the  mother,
/shell  bj  name^yilj'o/ijo and  his  brother.

fi

As  filvei'  is  to  tin,3f  g Jd  to  biafte.

As  rofes  are  to  flowers  and  herbs  more  bafe.

As  diamonds  and  rubyes  are  to  glaflc,

Ascedarsarc  tofallowes.-  in  likccafc
Shall  famous  Lconoraot  hers  paftc.

In  vertue, beauty, modc^y  and  grace:

But  above  all, in  this  nicfhall  cxccll.

In  bringing  up  her  children  palling  well.


, 57

Then  nc.vt  hcrneece,a  faircand  famousdamc.

That  highc  Renata  I may  not  forget.

Daughter  to  I.c»f  thexij  king  of  that  name.

Whom  of  the  I utehes  hedid  get;

Whofc  vemte  o eat  fliallmeni  laflingfamc.

While  ficr  fliall  be  warm  or  water  wet.

While  wind  ftiall  blow, and  earth  irand  firmSc  foundj
And  bcav’nly  fphears  fliall  run  their  courfesround

58

I paftc  all  thofe  thatpaftc  all  ihefc  Ibme  dcale,

Whofe  foulcsafpiring  toan  higha  praife,

Defpifing  pomp  and  cafe, and  woildly  wcale.

In  facred  rites  fliall  fpend  their  blcfled  dayes  .•

Whofe  hearts  and  holy  love  and  godly  zealc
Tohcav’niy  joyesfrom  earthly  thoughts  fliall  raiTe,
That  togoodworksjtopiaycrand  purcdivinitic,
Shall  confccratc  their  lives  and  their  virginitic.

59

Thus  doth  Melyjfa  unto  her  difeour/e,

Ofthofe  fhould  come  hereafter  ofhcrlced.

And  while  they  talked  oft  by  cntercourfe.

They  in  tbeir  journey  onward  do  proceed.

And  oftentimes  Melyjfa  hath  rccourfe,

To  will  her  of  Atlanta  takegrea^t  hoed.

And  Icaft  flic  fhould  with  faint  and  foohfli  kindne*

Be  led  unwares  in  errour  and  in  blindnes.

60

Now  when  they  neaic  approched  to  the  place.

Then  Bradamant  departed  from  her  guide.

And  after  flie  had  rodea  little  (pace.

She  faw  one  brought  with  hands  together  ti'd.
Exceeding  like  Rogero  in  the  face,

In  voice, m ftaturcjhairc  and  alf  befide  r
Bound  faft  with  chaines  betwcenc  two  1
That  thteatned  tiim  erelong  he  fliould  i


?yantsle<f,
1C  dead.


He  eals  her
gueeite  be-
cauftlhevpta-

a

daugiitir.


Similt,

5iW4r,


‘tnuKctt


For  as  the  rcftcll  ever  bcarcs  a taft

Ofthat  fame  juyee  wherewith  it  firft  was  fil'd.
And  as  in  fuirfull  giound  the  feed  grewes  faft,
T-hatfi.ft  isfowhc  when  as  thefameisth’d  ;
So  look  what  lore  in  youthfull  ycarcs  is  plac’d.
By  that  hev  grow  the  woifcor  better  wil’d.
When  as  thev  come  to  manly  age  and  ftaturc,'
Sith  cducauon  it  another  nature.


But  when  the  damfell  faw  within  hei  view.

The  lamentable  ftatc  and  hard  condirion,

O f him  whofe  face  flie  certainC  though:  flic  knew.
She  chaiigcth  ftraight  her  truftinto  fufpicion.
Doubting  Mdyjfa  of  fbmc  malice  new.

Or  bidden  hate  had  giv’n  her  fuch  commifGon,

To  make  Rogero  for  a greater  fpitc.

Be  flame  by  her  in  whom  he  doth  delight.

6t

Is  not  this  hc(thui  to  her  fclf  flie  fpakc)

Whom  ftill  mine  heartand  now  mioccyesdolce  ?
If  my  Rogero  1 canfomiftake,

I never  fliall  have  knowledge  which  is  he  ;

I either  dream  and  am  not  now  awake,

Or  els  no  doubt  it  can  none  other  be,

Melyjfa?  wha',may  not  Melyjfa  Iyc>

Shall  I beJieve  her  tale.and  not  mine  eye  ?

Now  while  that  thus  flic  thought  and  thus  flic  laid.
And  in  thisunwifethought  did  thu<pcrfever»

She  thought  flic  hc.srd  him  fpeak  and  ask  for  aid.
Saving  (my  love)  aflift  me  now  or  never  j
Whacflnil  I in  thy  light  befo  betraid  ?

Doft  thou  fdrfi  kc  ircj  then  farewell  for  ever  ;

Thefe  iiakind  woid*  her  heart  fo  greatly' daunted.
She  followcs  him  into  the  houfe  inchanted.

No


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


«4

Ko  {boner  was  flic  cntci’d  in  thcgatc,

But  that  the  common  error  her  pofleft,

Wandring  about  the  houfe  betimes  and  late.

Nor  night  nor  day  flic  taketh  any  reft ;

The  ftiange  inchantment  brought  her  in  that  flate.
That  though  flicfaw  the  man  that  lov’d  her  beft^
And  fpakc  with  him, and  met  him  every  hourc,
Tokoow  the  tone  thetotherhad  no  power.

6S

Butict  not  now  the  reader  bcdifplcas’d,

*®*  Although  I leave  her  in  thischarmed  place,

I mean  ere  long  her  travcll  fliall  be  eas’d,
hmib.  flic  fliall  Tec  and  know  Rogcro’s  face,

E\*n  as  the  taft  with  diverfe  meats  is  pleas’d.

So  think  1 by  thisflory  in  Kkccafe  ;

The  friendly  reader-  fliall  be  Icflc  annoy’d.

If  with  one  matter  long  he  be  not  cloy’d.


66


SOJt


With  fundry  thredsa  man  had  need  to  weave.

To  make  fo  large  a web  as  I intend,

VVlierefore  all  other  nyatters  I miift  leave.

Of  Agramant  a littitf  time  to  fpend  ;

Who  Ibrely  at  the fio'werd?  /ace did  heave.

And  all  his  might  to  mar  the  fame  did  bend.
Sending  for  men  to  Affrid^c  and  to  Spaine,
Thofeto  fiipply  that  in  the  field  were  llaine.

67

Thus  all  on  wai  his  heart  was  wholly  fixt.

His  new  fupplicswith  fundry  captains  led
Were  comCjwit  h mcnof  fundry  nations  niixr.

With  whom  that  no  diforder  may  be  bred,

A day  for  viewesand  muflers  wasprefixt.

That  ev’ry  one  might  know  his  guide  and  head  .•
Then  fell  they  to  their  muflring  and  their  viewingi
Asfliall  be  fliew’dyou  in  the  book  enfuiiig.


(


In  this  tragicali  difcoiirfe  0/ Ifabell  a (;'or  it  U in  conclusion  an  eicccUmt  tr  age  die )yoitng  Ladies  might  ta\e  this  good  Moral!.
lejpm,that  though  th<y  mal{e  choice  of  mofl  worthy  men  ( as  Ifabella  did)yet  if  it  be  without  their  parents  goodrviU,  it
feldome  proffers, but  is  full  of  diverfe  mifadventures  and  hazards,  that  many  times  be  the  caufc  of  their  utter  mine.  In
that  Odenkegiveth  pLiceto  his  dtfordinate  lufi, forgetting  all  faith  andloyalty,we  may  note  the  frailty  ofyoiwg  men,
and  what  unfit  tutors  they  are  for  fitch  charges, who  when  they  have  brol^en  all  the  bands  of  faith  and  honefiy,  they  thinly
notw’thjlanding  they  have  made  a fufficient  excufe  for  the  matter,  if  thy  may  lay  the  fault  upon  [ favingyour  reve~
rence)  Cupfd.  /n  Corebo,  that  would  not  be  won  to  confent  to  his  friends  defirc  in fufoule  a matter,  we  may  taliegood
example  of  faith  and  loyaly,that  rmtfi  neither  for  friend fhip  nor  hfndredyecldto  any  dtfhonoiirable  all. In  the  execution
6f  the  theeves,we  may  lcarne,that  fitch  an  end  is  fit  for  men  that  live  by  robbery  and Jpoile,and  will  tah^e  no  honefi  tra~

•ceil for  their  Uving,asft(to  ttfe  the  old  Proverbe  )asa  rope  is  for  a theefc.

The  notable  women  that  are  focom:7hnded  by  lAelifTs  in  this  bool;e,were  of  the  houfe  of  YetratZy  and  many  of  them
worthy  thisexquifite  praifethat  U tec  given  them.  Thefirft  hejpeal^es  of  is  the  Duchefleo/ Mantua,  whofc  husband
had  a great  viilory  at  Tare  a river  cf  Italy  ,agtinfl  C harles  the  eight  of  France.  Arioflo  therefore  compares  her  (ha~
fiity  with  his  viHory, according  to  that  excellent  wife  faying,it  is  a greater  vertue  to  ebnquer  ones  own  affeliions  jhan
to  win  c:ties.

Bcanice  wife  ro  L od  wick  Sforzcyofwhom  in  the  three  and  thirtieth  boo\  there  is  more  fatd,only  here  he  notes  (which
was  true  indeed)  that  during  his  wives  life  he  lived  more  happy  then  he  did  after : for  at  her  death  began  his  mifery.

Hciculcs'of  Ffle  married  Alfonfo’s  daughter, of  whom  he  had  A Ifonfo  Hippolito  atti/ Ifabella.

Concerning  Renata, Lewis  tfce  xij.l^ing  of  France  married  the  ‘Duchejfe  of  Brittaine  .and  had  by  her  ijfue  this  Rena..
ta,o»c  ojwlofe  oflpring  wot  after  maid  ed  into  the  houfe  of  Auflria,fo  as  that  T>u'-edome  is  in  great  danger  to  be  (fat-
ten by  the  Spaniards, now  that  line  of  France  that  came  of  the  elder  fijl  er  is  extinguifhed  But  this  is  be  fide  the  boslffonty
1 thought  good  1 0 touch  the  particular  flodi  of fame  ofthefe  famous  women  that  my  Author  fo  much  extotleth,as  I have
xy  fclfereadoffome  of  them  in  Guiccizrdin  andYraacesyWoz  that  wrote  the  life  of  Charles  the  fift  in  Italian  : and
this  I win  notewithall,  that  ny  author  doth  with  great  diferetion  commend  three  fpeciall  vertues  in  the  women  of  the
houfe  of  Ejte.  Firfl  devotion, for  he  alledgeth  that  many  ofthcmen'.red  into  religion,  and  lived  all  their  time  devoutly ^
which  keprai/elh  chiefly,  though  in  the  lajl place, faying,  I palTc  dll  tholcthat  pafie  all  thefc  fomcdeale.  Next  cha-
ft  tty .-  Penelope  in  fpending  chart  her  dayes,as  worthy  as  Vhrtcs  was  of  praife.  T hit  dly, education  oj  children,as  is
lil^opife  touched  before  in  another  place.

The  vertuesthat  in  women  merit  piaife.  True  faith  and  ducobcdicncc  to  their  make.

Arc  Ibbcrfliowcs  without;  chart  thoughtswithin.  And  of  their  children  honeft  care  to  take.

'BtzAzmzr\i^thatafterMehfPz'%warninggivenuntoherofAt\zntz*sillufioH,yetiscaried  away  with  the  fg^tof
Rogcro  falfly  reprefented  unto  her : fignifes  ly  allegory , that  a Chriflian  having  receivedghoflly  counfell  jor  the  AUegoni
health  of  his  fbule,and  is  inflrulfed  in  true  bclieje,yet  after, wh.ntheworldandhisownegrojfe  ftnfe  reprefents  unto
him  fome  contrary  imaginations,  he  thinl^s  Melifia  that  is, the  preacher  or  inflruiter)  doth  but  abufe  him,  and  tell  him
Ctale  o/Robinhood,<»ji fo  they  are  carted  into  the  devils  pallace , where  they  find  nothing  but  fhadowes  and  illufions.

WhereOrhnAotaiiel  up  aflrebrand,  and  trilled  one  of  theotitlawes  therewith,  it  alludes  to  two  lit^e  mattersifi  f.
Ovrd.lLMct.  Eccerapit  raedijsflagramem  Rhetusabaris,  AHufioa.

Primitium  tonemdextraquca  parte  Charaxi,

Tempera  pcrfringit. And  in  ihexij.  of  Virgil.

Obvhtsambuftum  torrem  Coiincusab  ara
Conipit,&  venienti  ebufo  plagarnque  ferenti,

Occupat  os  rtammis.  Illi  ingens  baiba  rclaxh'

Nidoicmc^ue  amburta  dedit,


THE  FOVRTEENTH  BOOKE.  103


THE  ARGVMENT.


Agramant  r?}*i  firing  of  bit  menydothmijfe
T no  bundt  that  by  Orlando  late  were  Jlaine :
I Mandricard  vowes  to  be  reveng'd  of  this ,
"Btit  by  the  way  be  bapt  to  entcrtaine
'"Dame  Doralice,  wbefe  beauty  was  his  hlijfea
tAn  Angell brings  RcHaldo  and  his  traine
ZJnfeene^then  where  the  Pagan  did  encampe^
tAnd  fendetb  di/cord  to  the  Turkilll  campe.


tH  tht  I i«ci^
it  ii  rntnuo.
med  btnr
ChnUmtint
Ufl  tht  ftU
ti  Burdilt ,
f)Kt  whieb
time  thy
t^ept  the
uvr**,tnd
tUrft  tut
come  tt fit
ittttU.

Thu  ^Ifimfi


^ ^ aflaults,  and

I and  trucll  blowes,

, Thar  France  ha;h  felt  from

-^^n/c^indfiomi'parnc,
In  which  fo  many  men  fed
Wolres  and  Crowes,


/That  were  on  both  Hdesin
thcbattellflainc:
Although  the  French  were
foiled  by  their  foes,

That  long  they  came  not  ro  the  field  againc,

Yet  was  this  fcile  fore  to  the  Pagans  coll.

For  diveife  Lords  and  Pnnccs  that  they  loft.


Sodidft  thou  then  the  Flower  de  luce  uphold.
When  as  the  captainc  was  in  bactcll  dead.

For  which  the  Lawrell  crown  they  ware  of  old.
By  juftdcfertbelongctb  to  thy  head  •

And  Civill  crown,  no  Icftc  in  honour  precious.
For  faving  unto  Rojik  hei  own  Fabricias,


5


Witt  Duii  of  t % % t * *

Tintrd,of  So  bloudy  was  the  viftory  they  gate.

That  Aant  this  joy  did  courucrvailc  thai  wo.
And  if  we  may  compare  things  done  of  late,
(Renown'd  Aljons)  to  things  done  long  ago,
Ravenna  sfiW  by  fortune  cr  by  fate.

In  which  your  vertne  great  did  floariHi  fo,

To  win  the  field  fo  bloudy  and  fo  hard.
With  this  of  theirs  may  jtiftly  bccompai’d.


teham  be

fiedki  in  the

iter  uHipt'
/ju.  ,
-Oftbitiit‘
ttU  bak
Gttieciardin
Bjfibi  benor
•ffiliei


Colonna  nam’d  a collum  tme  indeed.
Vneotheftateof  Kome'and  Romanename,
Whom  yOu  by  raluc  took,and  fav’d  by  meed.
By  which  more  honour  true  and  worthy  fame,
Vmo  your  fclf  you  did  procure  and  breed  ;
Then  in  the  ovcrcomming  all  that  came.

From  Aragon,  from  CaftiU  and  NetVar,

For  all  their  fpeates  and  new  deviled  car.


Tbt  ttvriH
by  the  tfor,.
ent  Ramani


tfdiineaw-
bim  ibdt  bed
fUineeru-
i(eti  mbave
5000  itt  baS->
teU.

Cixncatera-
»a  rvM  hit
that  faved  a
eithftt  of
Rome,


iur  and  At'i  when  the  fooldicis  of  the  Spanijh  band


u undertlaod
^nighthoad,

• Pape  luUa
gave  for  ha
armesibtaly
xaitb  al(emti
of  gold.

*Tbe  ^ingof
Aragans  Cf
lours  war
yeUotr  and
red,  ■'


Whom  then  the  Ps/;e  retained  in  his  pay.

Had  almoft  got  the  vi^lcny  in  hand.

The  Frenchmen  ready  now  to  runaway,

Thoii  cam’ft  to  fuccour  with  that  noble  band
Ofvaliaiu  youths,  that  merited  that  day
The  honour  qf  the  gilded  fpurre  and liilt,
Inrccompcnccof  bloud  fo  bravely  fpilt.

4

Sodidft  thou hriiifc the ’*■  AkoTnesriehof  gold,
Sodidft  ihou break thc^ycllowftaffcand red.


Now  though  we  all  our  lives  and  fafeticsow,

T o you  tha.  this  gica t cotiqueft  d id  a tchievc,

Yet  our  fided.d  receive  fo  great  a blow,

Asfcarcc  that  joy  this  foiTOw  did  relieve  :

A nd  that  the  dames  cf  France  moft  plainly  fliow.
Whom  this  fo  bloudy  triumph  flill  doth  grieve,
Witnefle  their  widowes  in  their  mourning  gowtics.
And  watiy  eyes  in  villages  and  towncs.


Inthubtttek
theSpani
ards  devifid
to  haiie  HUB
placed  itt
carts,  ir  dri-
ving them
mioUatlj  «it
their  tne-
miis,difar>

dertd  tbmi


j

King  Lewis  of  France  had  need  in  time  prepaic.
For  captains  new  to  thefe  unruly  bands.

That  wickedly  without  all  fcare  or  care,
Oflawcsof  God, of  nature, or  of  lands.

No  fort,nor  fex,nor  age,nor  order  fparc.

From  force  of  theii  unchaft  and  bloudy  bands.
Chrifls  body  in  the  Sacrament  they  tare  it,

To  bcarc  aw'.iy  the  filver  plate  that  bareit.


Toys  raat
flnna  attH
bautU^


104


ITHE  FOVRIEENTH  BOOKE'


Guicnariim  Wretched  Ra"Jcn»a\>ettet  had  it  been,


Jm  dorvnt
the  difordert
efthe  fiutdi.
ettat  the  fac^
tf  Rtventfa^


in  ihefi  mu  •
ftert.


That  thou  the  French  fliouldft  not  at  all  refift.
Thou  mightrt  by  Brefcy  hare  been  warn’d  I ween.
Now  thou  a warning  art  for  fuch  as  lift
To  (hun  like  loflcjby  thy  mifliaps  fore-feeni
Not  ftubbornly  in  folly  topetfift  ;

So  Riminy  and  Fasni  were  prtferr’d.

By  marking  in  what  fort  thou  hadft  been  ferv’d.

9

As  nowkingLcwxfl  fay)had  need  to  fend

New  captains  to  fupp'y  their  rooms  were  deadj
So  then  the  Pagan  Princes  did  intend
To  fee  their  men  from  fundry  countties  led.

And  all  diforders  anddcfcfls  to  mend.

To  point  them  captains  thatdo  lack  a head  j
Firft  then  Afaryi//o  all  hislouldicrs  view’th}

And  Agramant  next  after  him  infew’th.

lO

The  Sates  ef  The  chief  of  thofeareof  Marfilios  traine,

Spaineare  Are  firft  the  Catalins, men  of  great  land,
kerefetdovH  ^ of  the  bed  and  nobicft  blood  of  Spahie ;

The  next  that  do  to  them  in  oidcr  ftand.

Are  of  Mavar,  whofe  King  Was  lately  flainc
At  Burdch  by  Renaldos  valiant  hand,

Marfilio  forclamcnts  thcforiccafe,

' And  pointeth  /foUr  fupply  his  place.

n

Ifany  he  de-  BtiUigant  governeth  thofe  of  Lion,
jirom  to  un-  (j rondontui  for  tWAlgarlys  doth  pre'nde,

Marfilio' s brother  called  Falfiron,

Doth  thofe  of  lellcr  Cafiik  rule  and  guide.*

Thofe  of  Mallaga  do  attend  upon
Madrajfo,  fo  doth  Civill  all  bedde.

There  where  as  Betis  waterfo  abounds.

As  all  about  it  makes  them  fcuitfull  grounds.
iz

TeJJ}ra,Baricond  and  Stordilan,

Vnto  the  field  do  bring  their  forces  in,

Granada  t\\h,Majoricti  he  hath  tane.

The  firft  to  rule  in  Lisbon  doth  begin.

Where  Larbin  late  was  bi ought  unto  his  bane^

T ejjyra  unto  Larlyn  nex  t of  kin,

Thofeof  Gallicia  Serpentine  doth  guide.

Since  valiant  Maricold  in  battcll  di’d.

Thofe  of  T oledo  and  of  Galatrave,

Whom  Synagon  did  lead  not  long  ago.

Now  Mataliji  their  government  muft  havCj
Becaufe  that  he  was  flaine  by  Chriften  fo  ;

Then  Pifardim  maninbaitell  brave.

With  all  the  band  of  Salamance  doth  go.

With  manyotherfouldiersof  Pagen\a,

Of  Avila, Zamorra  and  Palenja.

U

Thofe  of  the  court  and  of  Marfilio's  traine.

With  thofe  of  Saragofe,Ferraw  doth  guide.

The  chiefeft  flour,and  the  chief  hoft  of  Spaine,

Well  arm’d, well  hors’d, well  furniHicd  befide.

With  whom  two  kings  that  late  had  loft  their  raigne,
Morgant  and  MeUfatife  did  there  abide,

And  in  the  ftatc  of  private  men  remain’d.

And  were  by  him  moft  friendly  entertain’d.


derfland
thefe  namn,
I refer  him
%o  the  TMt,


ferrdrv.


15  '

The  name  of  many  a Duke,and  Lord,and  Knight,
For  bienty  I purpofe  to  omit.

Such  as  weie  ftoutand  hardy  men  in  fight.

Such  as  were  wife  and  politikc  in  wir.

With  th’Earlc  of  Sagunt  Anhidant x\\ze  hight,
Lir)giTan,Ammir ant ,^r\d  Malagit ;

There  was  great  Fu/iiro  n, Marfilio' s baftard.

That  in  that  fight  did  flicw  himfclf  nodaftard.

16

After  the  Spanijh  hoaft  was  view’d  and  paft.

Before  king  Agramant,  the  next  that  came.

Was  one  that  all  the  reft  in  ftatiuepaft.

The  governour  and  king  rf great  Orane,

Then  came  a band  whofe  leader  fmall  time  paft.
At  Burdets  field  was  brought  unto  bis  bane.
Lamenting  that  the  king  of  Garamant
Was  conquer’d  by  the  Lady  Br adamant.

17

Then  came  the  third, and  that  a head lefle crew,
Whofecaptaine wasin  battell  flaine.

To  this  the  fecond  and  the  fourth,  anew
King  Agramant  doth  leaders frcfli  ordaine.

But  few  there  were  that  for  tbefe  roomes  did  few,
So  few  fufficient  men  there  did  i cmainc ;

Buraldo  and  Argonia  for  the  beft.

And  OrmiJa  he  chofe  among  the  reft.

Then  came  Brunello  with  a chcarlcflc  face.

And  look  for  fliameflill  fixed  on  the  ground,

For  late  he  fell  in  Agramants  difgracc,

Who  doubted  that  his  faith  had  not  been  found.
Ere  fince  he  went  unto  th’inchanted  place,

W'herc  to  a tice  dame  Bradamant  him  bound,
Becaulc  he  loft  his  ring, whofe  lofte  fo  griev’d  him.
That  though  he  told  him  truc,henot  believ’d  him.

19

But  ifolir  the  brother  of  Ferraw,

That  was  the  firft  that  found  him  and  unti’d  himj
Avouch’d  to  Agramant  the  thing  he  faw.

How  that  by  force  fome  enemy  had  ti’d  him.

So  as  the  King  his  angerdid  with-draw,

< Although  he  never  after  well  could  bide  him.

But  fworc  the  next  offence  that  he  committed,

An  halter  fliould  unto  his  neck  be  fitted.

20

Wi  th  tbofo  of  £ ffierie  came  Soridano,

And  2)oribondid  come  ivith  thofe  of  Set,

With  thofeof Nafomanie  Prufiano,

King  Agricalt  Amonios  charge  did  ger,

Malabujers  came  with  them  of  Fifano,  '

The  reft  doth  Finadure  in  order  fet,

Ballaftro  thofe  that  follow’d  erft  Tardocco,

Thofe  of  Canaria  and  of  Morocco.

21

From  Mulga  and  Arfiliaothtnczme,

The  firft  their  former  captainc  ftilldoth  hold,

Vnto  the  next  the  King  a new  doth  same,  .

One  Corineui  a trufty  man  and  bold.

Then  Balivejfe  a man  of  evill  fame,

Clarindo  next  of  whom  great  deeds  are  told,

Sobrino  next  a man  of  elder  age,

In  all  the  camp  was  none  more  wife  and  fage.

Thofe


Agrtmsnt
mm'ier  ^
.Africans.
Hate  that
thu  teord
«*

u/ed  in
three  fundrj
ftnpn,a  I
have  Jet
domn  in  the
Afaiogte.


SruKtU*.


Of  tkk  ln^
before  in  the
heiiming
of  thefonith


SohtMh


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


*Raitntent

ti  ntuhit
Tur\t,  of
trhifio  much
tttfittth  ia

the  hockje.

He  was  k,in^

tndu  c*Ued
jimlioie  Al.
feir.fr  the
£/tri^l{ing.


before  Ca'tto
ti.intheltt-

ter  md.


Utndriwd


Thofc  of  GctulLi  came  with  Rimedont,

V^'lth  Miribaltlo  thofc  of  BolgA  vvenr.

And  thofc  of  Cofcacamc  with  Balnifionr,

Their  former  Lord  his  life  in  battcJl  fpent :

Then  tame  the  king  of  Algier  Rodomo/it,

That  lately  into  Turl^ie  had  beenfent.

To  bring  fomc  new  i'upplics  of  horfc  and  men.

And  back  againc  was  new  letorij’d  as  then,
ij

In  all  the  camp  was  not  a man  more  flour.

In  all  the  camp  was  not  a man  more  flrong.

Nor  one  of  whom  the  french  flood  more  in  doubt.
Was  there  the  T uri^ijh  army  all  among,  “•

In  Agramant!  nor  in  Miirftlh*s  rout.

Nor  all  the  followers  did  to  them  belong.

Bcfidchc  was(which  made  them  dread  him  chief)
Thegrcateflencmy  to  out  belief.

Then  camcja  gallant  king,

And  Agramantes  coufen  T>ardaneU,

Whether  fomc  Owlcdid  at  their  window  fing.

Or  otherluckleflc  bird.l  cannot  tell.

As  oft  we  fee  it  is  an  ufuall  thing,

That  fomc  prefage  ones  mifchicf  fliall  foretell;

But  fuie  It  was  prefixt  in  heav’n  on  high.

What  time  and  hour  next  day  they  both  fliould  die.

Nowall  their  bands  were mufler’d  faving  two,

Thofc  of  Noiiiia  and  oiTremifen,

King  Agramant  doth  mai  veil  what  they  do,

Hein  ’wes  not  where  tc  hcarcof  them  nor  when  t
Now  as  he  was  difpatching  hereunto
Some  mcflcngeribchold  ^ncof  the  men
Thatferv’J  the  kingof  Treffliye«,inhafl
Came  and  difcorcr'd  all  that  had  been  pad.
i«

Sir  king(quotb  be)  by  fortune  and  ill  chance,

The  noblc  kings  Alfird^nd  Manilard,

Happen’d  to  meet  a ciuell  knight  of  FrancCy
While  with  their  bands  they  trivcl’d  hitherward.
He  overthrew  them  both,  (oh  hard  mifchancc)
And  kildand  fpoi!’d,anddravc  away  their  guard.
And  furc(quoth  he) I think  his  force  is fuch,

To  all  your  camp  he  would  have  done  as  much.
zi

Among  the  refl  that  to  this  tale  gave  care.

There  was  a Prince  that  late  from  Ajfric^e csmCy
To  whom  king  Agramant  gtcatlovc  did  bcarc,

A nd  Mandricardo  was  the  Princes  name.

His  heart  was  ftout,and  far  from  any  fesre.

His  body  flrong  and  able  to  the  fame :

And  that  which  greateft  glory  did  him  yedd.

He  had  in  ^or/e  conquer’d  HeSiors  field,

2?

New  that  the  mcflcngci  his  talchad  done.

Which  made  the  hearers  heaitsforforrow  cold.
This  valiant  Prince  king  Agricanes  fbn,

Straight  wa srefolv’d  with  heart  and  courage  bold,
Thatto  winpraifcnopainc  did  ever  fliun:
Although  his  purpofcfccret  he  did  hold.

To  be  revenged  on  this  bloudy  knight,  *

That  had  fo  many  flaincand  put  to  flight.


29


p.c  ask’d  the  meflenger  what  clothes  he  ware,
And  in  what  colour’d  gaimcntshcwasclad  ?
Black  (quoth  the  mcflengei)his  raiments  arc.
No  plume  nor  bravery  his  helmet  bad  ;

And  truett  was,Or/a»c/o’xinward  care
That  made  his  heart  fo  fotiowfull  and  fad,
Caias’d  chat  his  armour  and  his  open  fhoes
Had  like  rcfemblancc  of  his  inward  woes.


JO


Marftlto  had  before  a day  or  twaine,

Giv’n  unco  Mandricard a gallant  ftced  •

His  colour  bay, but  black  nis  tailc  and  maine.

Of  pn>/d«ifwas  the  dam  that  did  him  breed.

The  Sici  was  a villan  brave  of  Spaine : (Ipced,

On  this  brave  bcaft  tins  brave  man  mounts  with
Swearing  he  will  not  to  the  camp  turn  back.

Till  he  had  found  the  champion  all  in  black.

3*

He  meets  the  filly  peoplein  the  way.

Halting, or  maim’d, or  weeping  for  their  friends.
Their  wofull  looks  their  fcarfull  hearts  bewray,
(Weeping  in  fuch  a Ioffe  but  fmall  amends)

But  when  became  where  the  dead  bodies  lay.

In  viewing  of  their  wounds  lome  time  he  fpends.

As  witneffes  of  hisftrong  hand  that  gave  them.

Him  he  envies,  and  pities  them  that  have  thena.

3*

Ev’n  as  a Wolfe  by  pinching  famine  led.

That  in  the  field  a carren  bcaft  doth  find.

On  which  before  the  dogs  and  rav’hs  have  fed.

And  nothing  left  but  homes  and  bones  behind.
Stands  ftill,3 nd  g jzeth  on  the  carkafTc  dead  t
So  at  this  fight  the  Pagan  Prince  repin’d,
Andcurfcthofr,and  calshimfclfa  bcaft,

Foi  comming  tardy  to  fo  rich  a fcafl.

3?

But  when  the  mourning  knight  not  here  hafound.
From  thence  he  travcl’d  many  a wcaiy  mile,

Vmill  he  feund  a meadow  compaft  round.

With  running  ftreames  that  almofl  made  an  lie.
Save  one  fmall  entrance  left  of  folid  ground.

Which  guarded  was  with  armed  men  that  while,

Of  whom  the  Pagan  asktth  why  they  ftand
To  guard  the  place  with  weapons  in  their  hand.

3*  .

Their  captaine  viewing  well  his  brave  attire.

Doth  think  he  was  a man  of  great  regard.

And  faid  king  Stordilano  did  then  hire.

Into  thefc  parts  his  daughter  dcaic  to  guard,
Efpous’d  to  king  of  Sar\a  by  her  Sire,

Wfjo  fliortly  for  the  mariage  prepar’d  ;
f nd  hcrc(quoth  he)  we  do  this  paflage  keep.

That  noncmay  trouble  her  while  llie  doth  fleep,

35

To  morrow  to  the  camp  we  mind  to  go.

Where  flic  unto  her  father  fliall  be  brought.

Who  means  on  Rodomont  her  to  beflow.

By  whom  this  noble  match  is  great  ly  fought.

Now  when  the  captaine  had  him  anfwer’d  fo,  •
This  Prince  that  fetteth  all  the  world  at  noughts
Why  thcn(quoth  hc)thismaid  belike  is  faire,

1 pray  thee  caufc  her  bithci  to  rcpaire«


tookf  hertdf
tHtbe  ARu'
pen.


A rate  of
harfet  im
SfatHtfai.
led  villan  di
Spigaa  irtfo-
rioter  to  tbt

Gimttt,


Simibi


106


THE  FOVRTEENTH  BOOKE


5«

My  haft  is  gicat,but  were  it  greater  far,

Yet  would  1 ftay  to  feea  prettie  maid  :

Alas  you  mifle  your  mark  your  aime  doth  arr,
(Gentle  fir  foolc)to  him  the  captaine  faid  .*

T hus  firft  they  ean  with  bitter  words  to  jar.

And  then  from  blowes  but  little  time  they  ftaid.

For  ftraight  the  Prince  did  fet  his  fpearc  in  reft.

And  fmoce  therewith  the  captaine  through  the  breft.


Herfeareincreaft  when  as  he  nearer  drew.

With  vifage  ftern  and  all  with  bloud  diftain’J,
The  cries  were  great  of  her  and  of  her  crew,

That  to  their  gods  of  their  ill  haps  complain'd  ;

For  why,bcfide  the  guard  whom  late  he  flew.

She  had(that  privately  with  her  remain’d)
LaundVers  and  nurfes,playfcllowes  and  teachers.
With  learn'd  Phyfitions,and  heathnifli  Preachers.


And  ftraightwayes  he  recovered  his  fpearc,

And  at  the  next  that  came  therewith  doth  run.
For  why  none  other  weapon  he  did  wcarc.
Since  he  the  Trojan  Heitors  armor  won.

At  what  time  he  moft  folcmnly  did  fwcare.

To  win  rhe  fword  worn  by  Trajano’s  fon,
Cal’d  DurindanyZ  blade  of  temper  rare.

That  Heitor  crfljand  now  Orlando  bare.

38

Great  was  the  force  of  this  Tartarian  knight,
That  with  hisfpearc  and  weapon  none  befide,
Durft  with  fb  many  joyn’d  together  fight ;

Yet  fets  he  fpursto  horfc,and  ftoutly  cri’d.
Where  isa  man  that  dare  withftand  my  might.
Who  dares  forbid  me  where  I lift  to  ride  i
And  with  that  fpearc  himfclfe  he  fo  beflir’d.
That  fmall  prevail’d  againft  him  bill  or  fword*


I


Simh.
OtuiLVt^
tfts
itmptU
S*>OHr  mfii.


$9

But  when  his  fpearc  in  peeces  burft  he  faw.

The  truf'chen  huge  he  takes  in  both  his  hands,
His  blowes  were  fuch,not  bloud  but  life  to  draw,
Alldcad  or  flcd,not  one  his  force  withftands ;

As  Ebrew  Samfon  with  the  AfTes  jaw.

Did  heap  on  heaps  i he  proud  Fhilifien  bands.

So  Mandricard  fmote  oft  with  fo  great  force.

As  one  ftroke  kil’d  both  horfman  and  his  horfe<

Now  though  they  took  this  thing  in  high  difHainc,
To  be  thus  conquer’d  with  a broken  ftick.

Yet  when  they  learned  had  unto  their  paine.

It  was  in  vaine  againft  the  wall  to  kick.

Though  unrevenged  lie  their  fcllowesflainc.
They  (cave  the  dead,rathcr  then  loofic  the  quick  :
But  he  fo  eager  was  to  kill  and  flay,

Thatfcant  he  fuftet’d  one  tofeape  away.

41

Andasthe reeds  in marifhes  and  lakes,

Dri’d  with  the  Sun,or  ftubblc  in  the  field.

When  ashy  hap  the  fire  among  it  takes.

May  not  it  fclfe  againft  that  fury  fhicld  :

Ev’n  fo  this  acw  But  (mail  rcfiftanccmakes.

And  cv’n  of  force  is  driv’n  at  laft  to  yeeld.

And  leave  her  undefended  to  their  fhamc.

For  whofc  dcfcncethcy  from  Granata  came.

4*

Now  when  the  pafTage  open  did  appeatc,

He  haftens  in  the  Lady  fairc  to  fee.

Whom  he  doth  findc  in  fad  and  mounting  chcare.
And  leaning  of  her  head  againft  a tree.

All  down  her  checks  ran  ftrcamcsof  criftall  clcarc.
She  makes  fuch  monc,as  greater  could  not  be.

And  in  her  countenance  was  plainly  fhown
G rca  t grief  for  ot  has  harms,fcarc  of  her  own.


Now  when  the  Pagan  Prince  faw  that  fairc  face
Whofc  fairer  was  not  to  be  found  in  Spaine,

He  thinks  if  weeping  give  her  fuch  a grace,
Whaij^l  flic  prove  when  fhc  fliall  fmilc  againe  ?
He  deemcch  Paradife  not  like  this  place,

And  of  his  viftory  he  fecks  this  gaine,  ,

To  have  his  ptifner  fuffer  him  to  wo  her.

And  yeeld  himfelf  a prifner  umo  her.

4f

Howbe't  he  maketh  her  againft  her  minde,

Vpon  her  ambling  nag  with  him  to  ride,
Hcrmaftcrs,maids,and  fcivantsleft  bebinde.

And  promis’d  them  he  will  for  her  provide.

He  will  befervicor,and  nurfe,and  hinde.

And  playfellow, and  gorcrnour,and  guide.

Adieu  my  fricnds(quoth  he)  I you  enlarge.

For  of  your  Miftris  1 will  take  the  charge.

46

The  wofull  folk  all  mourning  part  away.

With  fcalding  fighs,cold  hearts, and  watry  eyes,
And  one  unto  another  thus  they  fay.

How  deep  revenge  will  her  flout  fpoufc  dcrife.

Mow  will  he  rage  to  leefe  fo  fairc  a pray  I
Oh  that  he  had  been  ar  this  enterprife.

Nodoubt  buthc  would  quickly  wreak  this  flaughtctj
And  bring  againe  king  Stordilano'sdaapjhttt.

47

Of  this  fairc  prey  the  Prince  was  wcllapaid.

Which  fortune  gate  him  joyned  to  bis  might.

And  now  it  feem’d  his  haft  was  well  alaid.

That  late  he  made  to  meet  the  mourning  knight.
Before  he  rode  in  poft,but  now  he  (laid.
Bethinking  where  to  reft  himfelf  that  night.

To  finde  a place  was  now  hi's  whole  defire.

Where  he  might  quench  his  lately  kindled  fire.

48

And  firft  tocomfort  and  afTwage  the  paine,
of  Lady  ’DoraUceifo  was  her  name)

He  fianics  a tale, and  moft  thereof  doth  fal  ne.

And  fwcarcs  that  he  allured  by  her  fame.

Had  purpofcly  forfbok  his  home  and  raigne,

And  for  her  love  into  thefe  quartcrscame.

Not  that  he  ought  to  France  and  Spaine  that  duty.
Bat  only  to  the  ocams  of  her  rare  beauty.

49

If  love  defer  veth  love(quoth  hc)thcnl

Dcfeivc  your  liking,thar  have  lov’d  you  long ;

If  flock  you  do  eftccm,my  dock  is  high,

Sich  I am  fonne  to  /t^kan  the  flrong :

If  ftatc  may  fland  in  ncad.who  can  denie.

To  God  alone  our  homage  doth  belong  ?

If  value  in  your  choife  be  of  behoof,

I think  this  day  thereof  I have  fhow’d  proof.


Mauinesri

vettb’Dtray

lict.


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


107


so


57


Vitfil.  f»«i

Jymm4

ttU  vtil/ifU>o
fU  w»i*M


Thm  fiOttetf
imibt  xxi^-
kmK‘4htiS.
fisfe.


vtptmam.


Tiitfc  words  and  fuch  as  love  had  then  him  taught.

Who  lent  him  eloquence  to  fervc  his  turne.

So  fwcctly  in  her  tender  fancic  wrought.

That  in  a little  while  Ihcceaft  to  mournc,

' And  firft  her  fcare  a{Twag’d,and  then  her  thought,

A pleaCng  lookc  doth  to  her  eye  rcturnc,

By  which  the  Piincc  (in  love  no  novice)  gueft.

That  rtic  erelong  would  grant  himhisrequeft*

SI

Now  doth  the  night  approcb,and  Phccbia  face
Jn  Ocean  fea  begins  itfclfe  to  hide.

The  which  did  caufc  themfomvvhat  mend  their  pace
And  on  their  way  with  greater  fpeed  to  ride:

And  now  they  travcl’d  had  but  little  fpace.

When  firft  afmoke  and  then  a light  they  fpide.
Then  came  they  where  they  heard  the  bandogs  bark
VVhenas  the  aire  wasnow  obfeure  and  dark.

5»

A few  poore cotages  wheicheardmen dwell.

They  find, and  there  together  they  alight,

The  houfes  poorc,but  fuch  as  very  well
M ight  fervc  them  to  repofe  them  for  a night.

Their  fare  was  mcanc, fit  hunger  to  expcll.

To  which  thchcardmcn  fncndly  them  invite.

As  curtefie  oft  times  in  fimple  bowres
Is  found  as  great  as  in  the  ftatcly  towres.]

53

But  after  fupper  what  did  pafle  bctwccnc
Dame  Doralyce  and  Agricanes  haire.

May  not  be  told,becaufc  it  was  notfeene.

But  they  may  guclTc,  that  have  with  Ladies  faite
By  night  alone  in  place  convenient  becne.

Where  to  diftui  be  them  no  man  did  repaire^

I doubt  he  did  not  fb  his  paOion  bridle.

To  let  fo  fairc  a dame  lie  by  him  idle.

54

But  Cure  1 am  when  day  light  did  appear?.

They  both  arolewell  pleas’d  and  well  content,
Andthankt  the  heardmen  for  their  fncndly  cheare.
And  fo  from  thence  they  both  together  went,

Vntill  they  came  unto  a river  clcarc.

Before  the  forenooneof  the  day  was  fpent.

And  riding  downc  along  the  river  fide.

Two  hotfemen  with  a damfcll  they  cfpide.

JS

But  let  them  go,for  why  my  high  conceat
Forbiddeth  me  long  in  one  path  to  tread.

And  cals  me  back otAgramant  to  treat.

Who  being  newly  troubled  in  his  head.

To  hcare  there  were  from  England  fuccors  great.
Voder  the  condu£l  of  Renaldo  led.

To  counfell  cald  the  Piincesfage  and  wife.

Some  remedie  for  mifthiefs  to  devife.

5«

They  all  conclude  the  nextenfuiog  day.

With  fcaling  iaddets  on  the  wals  to  mount.

Left  dangers  new  be  bred  by  long  delay.

And  fiiccorsfrefli  hinder  their  firft  accounil
Thus  Agramant, that  doth  Marfilio  fay,
Sobrinoiage^and  crucll  Rodomont,

Who  to deftroy  Farit  alonedoth  threate.

And  to  pull  downc  the  facred  Romne


And  to  this  end  they  ftraight  provide  in  haft.
Innumerable  ladders  apt  to  fcalc.

With  timber  lowicsupon  great  whcclesfo  plaft.

As  that  they  may  approch  thccitic  wall.

From  whence  they  may  broade  bridges  fafely  call.
And  pafle  without  all  jeopardic  to  fall.

And  throw  their  ballscompaAof  firy  matter.

Then  have  they  rams,thc  walls  to  brufc  and  batter.

But  Charles,  the  day  that  went  before  that  day.

The  Painims  meant  to  do  their  worll  and  bell.

Did  caufc  the  Piieftsand  Friers  mafle  to  fay.

Did  caufe-the  people  all  to  be  confeft,

A nd  humbly  proftratc  unto  God  to  pray.

To  fa ve  and  pittic  them  that  were  oppi eft.

And  then  they  all  receiv’d  in  Chriften  union.

The  blclTcd  Sacrament, that  high  communion.

19

Himfclfc  with  Lords  and  Barons  of  great  fame,

(An  humble  fcarc  of  God  in  him  fo  wrought)

In  perfon  publikly  pci  formes  the  fame.

And  by  example  others  duties  toughr.

And  calling  on  our  Saviours  blcfTcd  name,

O Lord  (faid  he)  though  I my  fclfc  be  nought.

Let  not  my  finne,  my  wickedndTc  and  ill.

Move  thee  thy  faithfull  peoples  blood  to  fpill.

60

And  if  it  be  thy  facred  will  (O  God)

To  punifli  us  for  our  fo  great  tranfgrcfllon.

Ana  make  us  feclc  thy  hand  and  heavy  rod.

At  leaft  deferthis  plagueand  juft  opprefl^an.

That  by  thy  foes  we  be  not  overtrod.

We  that  of  thy  true  faith  do  make  profefllon.

Left  they  blafphcmethy  name  (weoverthrowne)
And  fay  thou  couldcft  not  defend  thine  ownc.

61

Soniallourfall  make  them  thylawdcfpile.

So  fhall  their  wicked  number  ftill  incicafc.

So  fhall  the  powrc  of  arife.

So  fliall  thy  Sacraments  and  Gofpcll  ceafe,

Looke  on  this  people  Lord  with  gracious  eyes,
Turnc  foilesand  warres  to  viftorics  and  peace.
That  when  t hefc  dogs  and  runnegates  be  daunted j
Thy  tombe  and  temple  may  be  daily  haunted,


The  examplt
tfthe  PriYict
d'.thmucb
wththe  feom
pie.

Charles  hi

prajCTt


62

Alas  our  merits  arc  of  none  effed.

To  pay  a portion  of  our  grievous  debt,

Except  thy  grace  our  weakncfTc  fo  proteft,

That  our  mifdccds  out  of  thy  fight  be  fet,

Lord  hcalcour  foules  with  gnerous  vice  infcfl.
Forgive  our  faults,our  errors  all  forget.

And  though  ourfinnes  the  fands  in  number  pafle.
Yet  let  thy  mcicicsgrcatncflcthcnifurpaflc.

Thus  praid  the  Prince  moft  forrowfull  and  fad.

With  humblcncflc  of  heart  and  great  contrition.
And  to  this  prayre  he  then  a vow  doth  ad.

Well  futing  to  his  ftatc  and  high  condition.

Nor  fmall  cfFcft  thefe  vowes  and  prayers  had.

For  prcfcntly  without  all  intermilfion.

His  Angell  good  up  to  our  Saviour  mounted.

And  there  his  vowes  and  prayers  all  recounted.

K.  And


loS


THE  FIFTEENTH  BOOKE'


6+


And  thoufand  pray’rs  alike  at  that  fame  time,

15y  mefl'engers  alike  to  God  were  brought.

When  !o  the  goodncfTc,and  the  powrc  divine,

That  never  flialhnor  never  vainc  was  fought,
Hisgracious  care  doth  to  their  prayre  incline.
Thole  whom  he  made,  & who  he  dearc  had  bought;
Then  to  the  Angcll  Mukacl  (ir^ight  he  bcckncd.
Who  not  a little  of  hiscalling  recLicd.

6S

And  thus  he  faid^go  thither  ftraight  in  port,’
M^heicnow  in  Picardic  the  ChriftenslaiKl,

And  fo  to  Paris  guide  that  EngjUfl)  heft.

Let  not  their  foes  their  comming  underftand,

In  this  attempt  fliall  Silence  helpc  you  moft.

Will  him  thisemerprife  to  take  in  hand.

This  done,  then  fee  you  find  dame  2)iyt(?rdout,

And  will  her  hail  unto  the  Pagan  rout.

66

And  charge  her  there  according  to  her  skill.

Among  the  beft  to  few  (uch  foule  difl'ention.

That  they  may  one  the  other  wound  and  kill.

And  fill  their  camp  with  brauls  and  with  contention;
Lctfome  men  like  their  entertainment  ill.

And  grudge  bccaufc  they  have  no  bigger  penfion.
And  let  them  all  Co  vary  out  of  mcafurc,

T hat  tlicy  may  do  their  Prince  but  little  pleafure.

67

The  blefled  Angell  not  a word  replies,'

But  doth  his  makers  holy  willobay.

Forthwith  ev’nin  amomentdownchc  flies.

And  where  he  goes  the  clouds  do  fleet  away;

But  by  the  way  he  thinks  and  doth  devife,

Ofcv’ry  place  where  Silence  find  he  may.

Though  he  an  Angcll  were  he  could  not  tell,’

Where  this  fame  enetny  of  Ipccch  doth  dwell.

68

At  lafl  he  fully  doth  himfelfc  perfwade,

T o find  him  in  fomc  houfes  of  devotion,

T hat  firfl:  for  life  monaflicall  were  made.

Where  godly  mcn,defpifeisof  promotion,

P well  farre  from  all  this  worldly  wicked  trade,-
With  minds  abhorring  flclli  and  flcflily  motion.
Where  idle  words  fliould  c lunted  be  a fliame.

And  where  on  cv’ry  wall  they  wntc  his  name.

Wherefore  into  an  Abbey  he  doth  go.

And  makes  no  queftioni’ilewcctheretofind.

And  Peace  and  Charitic,and  Love  alfo.

And  lowly  thoughts,and  well  contented  mind:

But  foonc  he  was  aware  it  was  not  fo.

All  contrary  their  humors  were  incli.nd.

For  Silence  in  that  Abbey  doth  not  hoft,

His  name  was  oncly  writ  upon  a poU.

70

Nor  ^ietnej/e, nor  HwnbleneJjfe,not  Peace,

Nor  Charitie,  nor  godly  love  was  here.

They  were  fomtimes,but  now  thofc  times  do  ccaft.
Now  Covetife,snA  £aye,and  Betty  cheare.

Pride,  Envie, Sloth,  and  Anger,  io  increafe.

That  Silence  baniflit  is  and  comes  not  neare.

With  wonder  great  the  Angcll  them  doth  TCW,

And  Hndeth  2>i/cor</in  this  cutfed  crew.


Difewit  Kfi
^rtl  and
dtfcnftUm.
Virnt.  Et


7«

Her  whom  the  hcav’nly  King  did  will  him  find,  Difierd,

Ncxtattcr4r/cflcc,hcrbe  hndtih  furfl,

^ To  fcckc  her  out  in  heli  he  had  afligii’d,

Among  thefpiritsdamned  and  accurft.

It  fore  did  gneve  his  pure  unfpotted  mind.

Where  he  exptaed  beft, to  find  them  vvorft,

It  fccm*d  to  hirn  a thing  uncouth  and  ftrange,

In  faertd  place  to  find  fo  great  a change.

He  knew  her  by  her  weed  of  fundiy  hew.

All  patcht  with  infinite  uncquall  lifts.

Her  skin  in  iundiy  places  naked  vcw  ^

At  diverstems  and  cuts,hc  may  that  lifts;

Her  haiic  was  gray, and  rcd,and  biackc and  blew,  dtntvadu

And  hard, and  foft,in  laces  fomc  fhc  twills,

Some  hangcthdowncjupiightfomc  ftandeth  flaring,^  -
Aiifcach  haue  with  other  had  bene  fquaring.

7J

Her  lap  was  full  of  writs  and  of  citations.

Of  procdTes,of  aftions  and  arrefts,

Of  bilsjof  anfwers,and  of  replications.

In  courts  of  Delegates  and  of  Requefts,

To  grieve  the  fimpic  fort  with  great  vexations;

She  had  reforting  to  her  as  her  guefts.

Attending  on  her  circuits  and  her  journeys,

Scriv'ncrs  and  Clarks, and  Lawyers  and  Atturaeys-

74

The  Angel!  calleth  hcr,and  bids  her  go,

Vnto  the  T iirl^s  it  faft  as  flic  can  hie,

Among  their  Kings  fuch  feeds  of  flrife  to  fbw.

As  one  oft  hem  may  caufc  the  totherdic.

Then  be  demaundeth  her  if  flic  do  know,

Wi  t hin  what  pi  a cc  -S’i/ence  dot  h u fc  tc  He,

He  thought  that  flic  that  travePd  much  about.

In  ftiriing  ftafe  might  hap  to  find  him  out.

75

1 cannot  call  to  mind  (quoth  flic)  as  yet,

That  I have  taikt  with  5'//rMie  any  time,

I hcarc  them  talkc  of  him, and  juaifehiswif,

And  fccrctnclTc  to  cover  any  ciimC}

But  my  companion  Fraud canCavc  you  fit,  Trnd.

For  flic  bath  kept  himcompanic  fometime.

And  which  was  Fraud  flic  pointeth  with  her  finger.

Then  hence  flic  hies  and  doth  no  longet  linger.

76

Fraud fliew'd  in  comely  clothes  a lovely  looke,  Di/iriftiut

An  humblccafl  ofcye,afoberpace,  tffradt

And  fb  fweet  fpecch,a  man  might  her  have  tooke.

For  himthat  faidjbailc  Afur/e  full  of  grace.

But  all  the  reft  dcformedly  did  looke.

Full  ofall  filthincflc,and  foule  difgrace.

Hid  under  tbofe  large  garments  that  flic  ware,

Clofe  under  which  a poifon’d  knife  fhc  bare.

77

The  Angell  asketh  her  if  flie  do  know

The  place  where  Silence  makes  his  habitation.

Forfooth  (quoth  Fraud)  he  dwelled  long  ago
With  the  wife  fages  of  the  Greckilh  nation,

Ardytas  and  Pythagotoil}.  trow)

T bat  chiefe  to  vertuc  had  their  inclination.

And  afterward  he  fpent  thefe  latrer  yeers
With  QaTmtlit  and  with  Saint  Benntt  friers, '


But


ThtUuft  •/
fitifu

tLih.

lilmtS*.


OP  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


7*

But  fince thcfe  old  Pliilofophrrs did  failc,

And  thcfc  new  faints  their  faintlikc  life  did  change^
He  fought  new  places  for  his  moft  availe.

And  ferret  and  uncercaine  he  doth  range:

Sometime  with  theeves  that  tmemendo  alTailc^
Sometime  with  lovers  that  delight  in  change,
Sometime  with  traicurs  hedoth  oide,and  futder,

1 faw  him  late  with  one  that  did  a murder.


is

And  Silence  ftill  furveycth  ail  the  tout,
Before,befidc,bcliind,with great  regard,

And  with  a cloud  dothcumpalTc  them  about.

No  manofthem  wasfecnc,no  noife  was  heard.
Then  walketh  he  among  thr  Pagans  fcout,

And  unto  them  that  kept  tlieir  watch  and  ward.

And  brought  them  lomewhat  (what  I do  not  hod)
That  made  them  for  the  time  both  dcafeand  blind.


79

With  clippers  and  with  coyners  he  doth  flay,
Sometime  in  fccret  dens  and  caves obfeure.

And  oft  he  changeth  places  day  by  day,

For  long  he  cannot  in  a place  endure.

But  1 can  tell  you  one  moft  ready  way.

Where  you  to  find  h'm  out  fhall  be  moft  fure.
Go  where  as  Sleepe  dothdwell,and  out  of  doubt.
At  midnight  you  fliallfind  him  thereabout.

80

Though  Fraui  by  cuftomeufetoUeandfaine,

Yet  was  this  talc  fo  evidently  trew.

The  Angell  now  no  longer  doth remaine.

But  with  his  golden  wings  away  he  flew
To  Arabic, where  in  a country  plainc.

Far  from  all  villages  and  cities  vew,

1 here  lieth  a vale  with  woods  fo  overgrowne,
Asfcarceatnoonc  the  daylight  there  ts  fhotvne.

A mid  this  darkc  thickc  wood, there  is  a cave,

Whofe  entrance  is  with  Ivic  oveifprcad.

They  have  no  light  within,nor  none  they  crave.
Here  5'feepe  doth  couch  his  everdrowfic  head,
And  ^/oifc  lies  by ,thatfcemsthe  gout  to  have.
And  idlenejpc,  not  fo  well  taught  at  fed.

They  point  Forgctjubie/e  the  gate  to  keepe,

T hat  none  come  in  nor  out  to  hinder  Sleepe.
it

She  knowes  no  names  of  men,nor  none  will  Icarne,
Their  mefl'ages  flie  lift  net  underftand.

She  kno-wes no  biifinefle  doth  her  concerne,
Silence  is  fentincllunto  this  band,

And  unto  thofehecomming  dothdifcernc,

To  come  no  nesre  he  beckens  with  his  hand.

He  treadeth  foft,his  fhors  arc  made  of  felt.

His  garment  fliort,and  girded  with  a belt.

8s

To  him  the  Angell  gn’th,and  in  hw  care
He  telt  him  rhuf,/ehovah  bids  you  guide
Reaaldo,  With  thefuccors  he  doth  bcare,
ToPanivvalls,fo  asthey  be  notfpide.

Notice  the  Pagans  once  fufpeif  or  fcarc
Their  comming,  nor  for  it  at  all  provide.

And  let  thcmhcarc  no  incling  of  thefc  foes,

V mill  they  find  their  force  and  fcclc  their  blocs.

*4

Noanfweri'i/cnce  made, but  with  his  head

He  made  a figne,  as  who  ftiould  fay  hewould.
And  with  the  A ngell  ftraight  himlelfc  he  fped.
In  greater  haft  thencan  be  itioughi  or  told.

To  Picard'eyfrom  whence  the  AngellieA,

That  prrfcrt  day  the  bands  of  fouldicri  bold.
To P(ir«  walls, an  hundred  miles  afunder.

Yet  no  man  was  aware  it  wasa  wonder.


86

Now  while  RtnaUo  came  with  fb  great  haft.

As  well  it  feem’d  an  Angell  did  him  guide.

And  as  he  went, with  fo  great  filence  paft.

As  by  his  fees  his  comming  was  not  fpider
King  Agramant  had  now  his  footmen  plaft
By  Paris  walls,  fall  by  iheditchtsfide.

He  mcancs  the  citic  to  aftailc  that  day.

On  ev’ry  fide  by  all  the  mcancs  he  may.

*7

Ht  that  would  take  upon  him  to  declare,

Of  Agramant  di  hoft  the  ccrtainc  numhci.
That  todeftroy  this  Citic  did  prepare.

Shall  fcemehimfclfe  as  frutciefly  to  cumber.

As  if  he  fold  what  flowres  in  Hyble  are.

What  filli  in  fca,what  waterdrops  inHMwfcer,
What  ftarres  in  skie  at  midnight  when  it  covers
The  unchail aAsof clofc  and fccrct  lovers.


Htrtimmtt
to  VsHtldoitt
the  i6  Cush


88

Thtflamm  bell  in  cv’i  y place  doth  ring.

About  thetowne  with  ftrangcdiforderd  found.

In  Churches  Mattensthey  do  fay  and  fing,

Some  kneeling  down,fomc  groveling  in  the  ground.

If  gold  were  unto  God  fogratcfull  thing,

Asfond  menthink,  no  doubt  there  would  be  found.

Enough  in  this  extremity ,that  would
Make  all  the  faints  new  images  of  gold.

8g

Thcremight  you  fccgodly  old  men  and  juft,
Lamcntingthatthcirlivcsfolongdid  laft,  OtenjHtqtus,

And  call  them  happic  that  were  laid  in  dull,

And  buried  many  ycares and  .ages  paftj
Butgallant  youths,  devoid  of  all  rnillruft,

Nor  with  thcfe  perils  any  whit  aga/l.

Whom  enemies  nor  engines  none  appalls.

Go  to  defend  rignt  manfully  the  walls.


, 90

Bold  Barons,Earles  and  Dukes  of  great  degree,
WirhfouIdierSjfor,  eincrs,and  of  ibetowne.

Did  come  to  Charles, and  praid  him  to  agree,

To  let  tlicui  our,and  let  the  drawbridge  downe:
Glad  was  King  Chatles  their  forward  minds  to  fee.
To  fight  for  Chrijts  religion  and  hiscrow.nc.

But  yet  asthen  hcdoih  nor  tlii/ike  it  beft.

In  this  one  point  to  grant  them  their  requeft,

91

He  ratherthinks  it  better  them  to  place,

The  forces  of  the  fierce  aftault  to  b cake,
Wifbdiftant  bands  a great  or  little  fpace,

A ccorcling  as  the  wall  was  ftrong  or  weakc:
Himfelfcwithchearfull  vigor  in  his  face,

V I’lo  them  all  moft  curteoufly  doth  fpeake,

Tlier<*  he  doth  comfort  them  he  doth  encou''age.
And  fill  the  flout  With  hope, the  faint  with  courage.

K a Faire


iio  THE  FOVRTEENTH  BOOKE


5»

Thf  ftrunim  F;aire  Faris  lieth  in  a plcafant  plainc,

£v'n  in  the  naTclI,raihcr  in  the  hart
Of  France,t\ie  riVet  cuts  the  fatae  in  twainCj
And  makes  an  lland  of  the  bettci  part.

The  reft  that  doth  in  grcatnciTe  more  containCj
Aditchand  walldotli  from  the plainedcpart,
Yi\a^Agreiimnt  afTaulis  the  Wefternefide,

As  having  VVeftward  gotten  all  bcflde.

9?

Marfilio  with  the  warlike  bands  of  Spai/te,

He  points  to  kcepe  the  field  in  armed  ranks,
Sobrino  Cage  and  thofe  with  him  remaine.

Arc  placed  upon  Sequans  fruitfull  banks,
Himfclfc  with  an  innumerable  traine.

With  lnddcrSjbrifigcs,fagots,bairc$and  planks.
Doth  thi  nkc  to  fill  the  ditch  and  make  it  Icvcll,
And  at  the  wallcsdo  kcepe  unruly  revel],

94

What  fliculd  I fpcake  of  RoJomont  moft  fell,
Blafphcming  God,not  onely  fcormng  men.

That  knew  toufe  a glittering  blade  fo  well.

As  I fb  well  know  not  to  ufe  my  pen.*

His  deeds  alone  would  aske  a day  to  tell.

That  in  few  hoiireshedid  pcrfoimcasthcn;

A s for  the  reft  they  came  like  fwarmes  of  flics,
Andfild  thcairc  with  fliouts  and  hideous  cries.


difenfti-  y^nd  they  no  Icfle  provided  are  within,

W'ith  rampers,biJwarks,and  with  double  dikes,
taame  wti  And  whcrc  thcit  focs  to  climbc  do  oncc  begin,

de/tnitd.  They  pufli  them  down  with  bils,with  Haves  & pikesj
If  one  be  kild,  another  fleppeth  in.

Ho  man  his  place  for  feaic  of  hurt  miflikes,  (water.
Some  throw  down  bricks,fomc  floncs,  (bme  fcalding
And  giievc  them  much  with  aIl,mofl  with  the  later,
c6

Some  throw  among  them  newly  flaked  lime.

That  burncth  moft  when  mofl  it  feemsto  quench.
With  pots  of  biimftonc, pitch  and  turpentine.
Annoying  them  with  hcate,and  fmcke,and  flench.
The  reft  are  ft  ill  employ ’d,and  Iccrcne  time.

With  wreathed  ftakesto  fortifie  the  trench;

Thusall  within  were  buflcjall  without,

On  both  fidcs  fortune  ftanding  ftill  in  doubt.


97

The  while  the  king  of  brought  about

His  ownc  and  men  of  divers  other  lands,
Himfelfc  to  fhew  his  might  and  couiagc  flout.
That  made  him  counted  valiantof  his  hands.
From  Cupids  campc  was  not  excluded  out.

But  rather  foly  fubjeft  to  fuch  bands,

A Lion  gculs  he  gives  in  Icftic  banner,

A Ladle  bridling  him  in  lowly  mannci,

So  by  the  beaft  Ijc  meant  hisowncfieiccmind.
And  by  the  dame  his  miftris  faire  was  menr,

T he  bridlewasto  flicw  howjovc could  bind
His  ioftic  heart, and  bow  it  to  her  bent.

He  little  knew,  that  ftiew’d  himfelfcfo  kind.
How  of  his  purchafe  others  tooke  the  rent;

He  knew  not  Mandricarddid  pleadc  poATtflion,
Of  her  to  whom  he  makes  this  kind  profeflion.


99

Straight  to  the  wait  arc  ihoufand  ladders  plafl.

With  double  ranks  that  two  may  chmbc  at  once.
And  up  the  fouldiei^gcton  them  in  haft.

One  fhouldcrsup  another  for  the  nonce:

He  that  goes  flow, and  he  that  climbcs  too  faftj'

Arc  each  in  pcrillof  a biokcn  fconcc.

Their  enemies  aftailing  flill  the  hicr.

Their  captains  thofe  that  lingerer  rcticr.'

ICO

Thus  cv*ry  one  do  clammer  up  the  wall.

For  value  fome,and  other  feme  for  fcaie.

And  f($mc  arc  ftaine,and  fomc  arc  made  to  fall,
Repenting  late  that  ever  they  came  there;

Fierce  Rodomont  a\one  (contemning  all)

No  painc,no  place  for  pcrill  doth  foi  beare.

But  rufticth  on,tnoreacfpratIy  thcnfloutly,
BlafphcmingGrd  while  others  pray  dcTCi^cly.

101

Apaireofeurats  pairing  hard  he  ware,

Madeof  an  ugly  Dragons  fcaly  skin.

This  armour  his  great  aunceflor  fit  ft  bare.

He  that  to  build  Babel  did  fiift  begm:

(A  towrc  whole  height  ftiold  with  the  clouds  copare)
And  thought  from  God  the  rule  of  hcav’n  to  win:
And  10  the  famceffeft  likewife  he  made,

Ofpafling  proofc  an  hclmctjfliicld  and  blade;

I os

Thus  Rodotnonr  thu  came  of  Nimrods  kind.

As  proud  and  irreligious  as  was  he,

Rcgardeth  nota  pallagc  fafe  to  find.

Or  whercthc  wail  might  weakeft  guarded  fee.

But  with  a heart  to  mifchicfe  all  inclind.

Where  he  the  fame  defended  beftdoth  fee,

(Pioteftcd  with  his  ftiicld)  he  makes  no  bones.

To  go  through  flic  and  watcr,darts  and  floncs.

103

When  once  upon  the  battlement  he  was.

Where  all  the  wall  was  broadc  and  largely  paved.
How  did  he  flay  the  Chrifiens  then  alas.

How  fierce  he  unto  them  himfelfc  behaved?

His  blade  doth  pierce  then  platesof  ftceic  and  bras.
All  wcie  notpriefts  whofe  ciownestbat  day  were
He  kild  alone  fo  many  as  their  blood  (fliaved.

Did  caufc  the  ditch  to  fill  with  crimfon  flood.

104

Befidc  the  bafer  fort,thcfc  men  of  name.

At  this  fame  fiiftconfliff  by  him  were  flaine,

Orgetto  Duke,that  late  from  Flanders  came,

Arnold  and  Hugo, tv/o  of  Charles  his  traine.

And  Lews  that  governd  Prot/eme  with  great  fame,
Walter  and  ‘Denis, Havsnee  of  SataUinc,

Some  were  thruft  through, fomc  had  (part  all  relcefc)
T heir  helmets  and  their  heads  clov’n  to  the  teeth*

105

And  (bme  by  force  from  off  the  wall  be  caft.

Among  the  which  was  one  Mofehino  hight,

That  by  his  will  would  never  water  tail.

But  ftill  in  wine  did  put  hiswholedelight:

But  lo  his  luckc  was  to  be  drown*d  at  laft.

Within  this  dirtic  ditch  for  further  fpitc.

And  be  that  never  water  could  abide
In  all  his  ltfe,now  herein  water  dide.

Now


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.  . ns

10^  109


Tbus  while  that  RoJomont  did  kill  and  flay.

All  that  he  found  upon  thctitmoft  wall ,

His  band  of  men  the  while  had  found  the  way.
To  p fTc  the  ditch  and  fothe  wall  to  fcalc.^

Hut  now  within  anothet  dike  there  lay.

The  fight  whereof  theii  courage  did  appall.

For  w hy  the  Chriflens  fent  fuch  flore  of  fliot.

As  this  fame  place  did  feeme  to  them  too  hot.

1 07

Thedike  wasdricjthe  bottome  ev’nand  plainc,
Both  fdcs  were  fteep,but  fteeptft  next  the  townc.
At  this  thcfouldiers  curtefiedo  flraine.

Which  of  them  firft  fliall  venter  to  go  downe,
Withinthccitizenshadmadea  trainc,.
wkKb  With  labour  great  and  coft  of  many  a crownc,

fr^ai/ed

when  t he  ditch  with  armed  men  was  filled,
Wi  t li  heat  and  fmothcr  they  fliould  all  be  killed.

Itciibits  had  in  bredth  thrife  ten  and  more.

And  in  the  bottome  there  wereclofely  plafl.
Barrels  of  pitch  ,brimftonc,  and  oylegoodflorc.
All  matter  quick  to  kindle, long  to  lafl.  v
The  captaine  led  themall  the  way  befoie.

And  thoiifandfouldiers  follow’d  themasfafl.
But  RoJomont  as  though  he  had  had  wings.
Quite  ore  the  dike  like  to  a greyhound  fprings.


And  being  placed  cn  the  inner  fide.

Arm’d  and  unarmed  men  to  him  arelike,  t
No  ftcele  there  was  his  forces  could  abide.

Death  follow’th  cv’ric  blow  that  he  doth  ftrikei
Which  when  a while  to  their  great  coft  they  aide.
They  do  offorce  abandon  quite  thedike.

He  follows  flaying  without  all  remorfe.

So  fliarpc  his  fword,fo  furious  is  his  fotcei
no

But  when  the  fouldicrs  thought  the  bankc  to  mount.
With  fcaling  ladders,  as  they  did  the  wall.

They  found  themfclves  deceiv’d  of  their  account,
Forftraight  the  fier  works  were  kindled  all,
Whofefudden  flames  the  clouds  themfclves  furmount
Which  fight  the  Pagans  greatly  did  appallj
And  to  incrcafe  their  terror  and  their  wonder,

It  made  a noife  like  to  cominiiall  thunder,
in

The  Chriflens  do  rcjoyce  at  this  relicfe.

To  fee  t heir  pradife  had  fuccecdcd  well;

ThcFa^ans  plagu’d, with  heat, and  fmotherchiefe.
In  great  difpairc  do  rorc  alowd  and  yell;

Thus  twixt  the  noife  of  fier  and  cries  of  griefe.

They  make  an  harmony  moftmccte  for  hell.

And  here  I mcaricto  leave  them  in  the  fire.

For  to  repofe  my  felfe  I now  dcfirc.


In  Mandricardo  that  after  his  great*exploites  atchieveiin  other  countries,  isflillriaJy  toha\ardhis  perfonfor
more  honour, may  be  obfcri  ed,  that  ambition  is  as  iinfatiabk  as  any  other  humour  of  man.  In  his  noing  of  Doralice,  we
may  fee  how  love  maizes  men  many  times,  not  onely  valiant,  but  eloquent.  In  the  aff'aulting  and  dejending  of  Paris,  is
Jet  downe  what  fundry  accidents  happen  when  fitch  populous  cities  come  to  fo  great  extremitie.  In  Chavki  that  fir/l
maizes  his  praters  to  God, and  after  mattes  all  provident  preparationfor  defence  of  the  towne,  wejee  a lively  patterne  of
an  excellent  andwonhy  Prince,  both  for  devotion  andpolicte.

Concerning  the  hiflory,/  haVe  quoted  many  things  in  the  margent,  as  the  flraightncjfe  of  roome  would  permit,  that
the  fmplcfi  reader  may  under  ft  andwhat  is  meant  ly  thefourthftaffc:  here  only  I will  ad  a word  of  Ravenna,refcrring
the  reader  that  is  defirous  to  be  better  informed  hereof, to  Guicciardin,who  fets  it  downe  at  large.  Ravennaw as  befeged
hy  the  French  under  the  condiicf  of  one  Fois,  a notable  captaine  of foyoung  a man.  The  Spaniards  and  Pope  lulio  tooli
upon  them  to  defend  it, but  in  the  heat  of  that  ajfault  Foiswas flaineyet  the  fouldicrs  either  by  force  or  by  parlce  gat  in-
to the  towne, and  being  within,they  committed  the  notableft  outrages  that  have  beenc  heard  of;  neither  abftaining  fiom
rapes  norfacriledge.  Concerning  the  Cata!yns,whom  he  nameth  formoft  in  the  mufters,  they  are  the  chiefe  houfe  in  all
Spaine:  and  it  is  to  be  noted,  that  Spaine  is  divided  into  five  hfngdomes,  Navar,  Caftill,Catalogna  (which  is  now  cal-
led Aragon)  Ponugall,and  Granata.  For  Galhciais  cowitednonc,  bccaufeithada  kingbut  awhile.  Thereft  of  the
ftrange  mmesyou  may  find  in  the  table.

In  the  defer ipt ion  ofDifcordand  Fraud,andfindingSilencein  the  houfe  ofJIeep,bcinglongfince  banifhedfrom philo-
fophers  and  divines  ithe  allegory  is  fo  plam,as  it  were  time  loft  to  ftend  time  to  expound  it,bccaufe  it  expounds  it  felf fo
plainly only  I will  obferve  one  thin^.tn  which  mine  Author  is  thought  to  h^eep  an  excellent  decorum. For  malfingTHfcord
and  F/aiidof  the  jernmne gender,  heftill  maizes  Silence  the  mafcuUnc  j as  the  lil^e pretie  conceit  is  in  our  Cambridge
Comedie  Pedant  jus,  ( at  which  I remember  the  noble  Earle  oJEffex  that  now  isywasprefent )where  the  Pedantius
fclfe, examining  theOrammaticall  inftrullion  of  this  verfe'Cetam  arma  togaE,conccdat  laurea  linguae  upon  Jpeciall
confidcmtion  of  the  two  laft  words,  taught  his  fcoUer  Parillus,  that  laurea,  lingua  funt  utraque  focminm*  generis,
fed  lingua  potiflimum,  and  fo  confequently  filence  might  not  by  any  mcanes  have  bene  of  the  feminine  gender.

In  Mandneardos  rape  of  Doralice,  he  alludes  evidently  to  a notable  villany  in  the  lihe  k}nd,done  by  Cxfar  Borgia
fon  to  Pope  Alexander  rfe  fixt.For  one  Caraccio  a captaine  of  Venice, Laving  bene  lately  contraded  to  agent  kwoman
of  good  account, fhe  came  with  an  honorable  train  neare  to  a city  called  Cefenna  in  Romagna  ; here  Borgia  wi/h  a band
of  men,fet  upon  her  company, and  took  titvay  byforce,andneither  by  threats  nor  intreaty  of  the  Venetian  Ambajfador

wouldreftore  her  agtin.-the  allufion  holds  in  many  parts, as  firft  where  he  faith  in  the  29  ftaff.That  Marfilio  badgizea
Mandricardo  an  horfe.  Of  colour  bay,but  blackc  the  taile  and  maine.

Of  FrizJand  was  the  marc  that  did  him  breed.

The  fier  was  a villan  brave  of  Spaine.

This  notes  Ti<irgh,whofe  father  was  a Spaniard.his  mother  a Flcmming,and  he  a mungrel  haftard.  In  the  one  <srA
thirtieth  ftafte,vi  the  fimile  of  the  lTol:'e,he  notethhis  cruelty:  in  the  eight  and  fortieth  ftafewherehe  faith,

Ifftate  may  ftand  inftced.who  can  dcnic,  Onely  to  God  our  homage  doth  bclongj

In  that  he  aUisdes pLtinly  to  the  Pope  that  is  reputed  Chrifts  Vicar  on  earth,

K 9


Moral!.


Hiftorie«


Allegory;


Allufloa.


Tbit  be  ^ek*
tfbeftre  in
tbe'ihird
iteke,

(htU  find  iitH
Guycciardin
ttUrjt,


<^£nmdnt.


THE  FIFTEENTH  BOOKE.


THE  ARGVMENT.

Faire  Paris  is  *(f til'd  oh  ez'rie  party
Bp  thofe  of  KffskkCyand by  thofe  c/Spaine;
From  LogclliirAftolfo  doth  depart ,
ty*fnd  takes  Calligorantxa  his  owne  iraiaCy
Thenflerv  Ot\\\Oythat  by  Magickeart
Reviv'dytphenby  the  brothers  he  rvas  Jltiae:
Stofst  Sanfonce  Aftoifo  ki»d  doth  tt fey
'Bui  Gryphin  of  his  mifires  hearts  ill  nevres


O winne  the  field  againft
our  armed  foes.

Is  counted  honourable  any
waies.

Although  it  be  with  policic
or  blowcs,

y ct  bloody  conquefls  llaine
the  Captainespraift,

Bur  chiefeft  honour  doth
belong  to  thofe,

VVliom  Fortune  to  fuch  height  of  hap  doth  raife,

To  have  their  foe  fuppreft  and  overthrowne,
Withlittlcloflc  anddamageof  their ownc.
a

Such  was  the  vi^loric  thatyou  then  gain’d,

O flout  Hyppolito  you  conquer’d  fo.

When  the  Venetian  Navic  had  obtain'd,

With  armed  velTcIs  all  the  flreame  of  Poe^

Your  policic  and  vallue  them  conftrain’d ,

With  Ioffe  ineftimabic  thence  to  go:

Their marrineis  and  fouldiers  alldeftroying,
Ourtnarrinersand  fouldiers  not  annoying.

The  Pagan  /iodomoMt  did  want  this  skill.

That  forft  ten  thoufand  men  the  trench  to  enter,
By  his  commandment  fore  againfl  their  will,

V poo  (b  periU  ous  a place  to  venter,

Whetc  flraight  the  finotherdoth  their  bodies  kill.
And  fend  their  finfull  foules  beneath  the  center,
Himfelfe  in  fafcticfccs  them  there  a dying,

Still  fwearing,curfing,hcav’n  it  fclfe  defying,

4

Kow  Agramant  an  hot  affault  and  fearcc.

Gave  where  he  thought  the  fame  was  left  expelled


He  ftrivrs  the  wals  to  battcr,brcak  and  pcarce
With  engines  flrong,and  ra  ms  thereto  crefted:

Thofe  Kings  whofc  names  1 did  before  vchcarfe.

Brought  men  Tome  flout,&  foire  with  fcaiinfcftcd^

And  fuch  as  rather  willi  to  ftand  aloofe.

Then  wcarc  a corflet  of  the  fureft  pioole.

J

But  Agramant  herein  jvas  much  dcccavcd,

for  where  he  thought  them  weakeand  unprepai'd.

He  found  that  manfully  he  wasreceaved.

And  that  the  King  himfelfe  the  place  did  guard,  CbdrUfi

With  thoufandsmorcrcadieto  be  bereaved
Ofllfcand  limbe,and  fuch  as  nought  regard.

Before  that  they  would  takefo  great  difgracc,

As  in  their  maftci'S  fight  tolccfe  their  place.


But  here  Iceafc  untill  another  time,

To  tell  of  thefe  affaults  the  hard  fuccefie.

Of  damage  like  to  both  fidcs;now  my  rime
Vnto  the  EngUjl)  Duke  I muft  addrefle,
AJlolfoCoaneof  Oion  whom  fometime
Alcynas  witchcraft  held  in  great  diftreffe,

Wholikc  another  Cyree  men  transforrned,

To  trees,to  bcafts,and  foules  of  fliapcs  deformed.

7

You  heard  before  how  all  her  fliangc deceits,

Melyffa  fage  did  with  the  ring  difeover.

And  how  flic  gave  them  alfo  good  rcccits.

As  made  them  all  theic  former  fiiapesrccovcr,

How  after  having  fcaped  all  their  flcights.

They  did  no  longer  in  fuch  fancies  hover.

But  to  be  furcly  able  to  refifl  her,  ^

They  fled  unto  her  mtuous  clderfifter.

K 4 Whers


In  the  xvi.
beetle  intb/
Xvi.Jlefe,


THE  FIFTEENTH  BOOkE


Lio'^e  in  iht


Tbttt  It  tt
pra  noHtorie
ttfand  Fejfe,
caUtd  Capa
di  na,as  ant
rrauldfap
that  ht  that
wiMt  bepend
tauU  mvtf
Tttame,

• Sir  franca
Dral(*  fol
{awed  the
Jitnte  till  ha
gained  a day
inatcount
Jram  fun  ri*
lint  tafuk
felting.


i

Where  when  they  had  with  comfort  great  remained,
Defirous  to  their  countries  to  retire.

They  asked  leave  of  her, and  leave  obtained.

Of  her  that  never  hinders  juft  defire;

But  ere  they  went  fiic  frcndly  them  conftrained,
W'uh  precious  gifts  to  be  endowed  by  her.

Such  gifts  as  were  of  precious  price  indeed.

And  all  their  lives  fliould  ftand  them  all  in  ftccd.

“ 9

ButchiePy  to  this  Englijh  Duke  flie  gave,

Of  fecrct  skill  a little  written  booke.

Containing  many  a precept  wife  and  grave.

The  which  of  her  moft  thankfully  he  tookcj
Thcfc  teach  a man  from  charmes  himfclfe  to  fare.
That  in  the  fame  advifedly  dothlocke.

And  that  to  find  them  out  he  may  be  able.

The  booke  had  in  the  end  a perfit  table,

lO

Befide  thisbooke  on  him  fhe  doth  beftow.

Another  gift  of  asgvcat  price  and  more,

A home  in  which  if  he  do  once  but  blow,

The  noife  thereof  fliall  trouble  men  fo  fore.

That  all  both  ftout  and  faint  fiiall  fliethcrefro,

So  ftrangea  noife  was  never  hear^j  before;

When  to  the  Duke  thefc  rare  gifts  were  imparted.
He  humblic  tookc  his  leave  and  thence  departed.

It

And  leaft  Aliyna  fliould  by  force  attempt,

T c.  bring  him  backe  or  worke  him  femedifeafe,
Andronica  was  with  a naviefent.

To  wafte  him  fafe  till  he  were  paft  thofc  feas.

And  vertuouE  Sophrofina  with  him  went.

To  fee  him  pafle  with  fafety  and  with  eafe.

So  good  a conduct  and  fo  fure  a guide.

As  was  not  found  in  all  the  world  befide.

12

And  ihusflie  fail'd  along  that  Jndian  fliore.

And  fees  and  leefeth  fight  of  fiindry  lies,

Thofc  caWed  fortunate  and  others  more.

That  diftant  arc,  fomc  fcw,fomemany  miles.

And  (for  he  never  heard  of  them  before)

He  askt  his  guide  fomc  queftions  other  whiles ,

As  whether  from  thofc  Indian  Teas  perchance,

A fliip  may  faile  to  England,  SpainCyZnd  France.

13

Shcanfwci’d  thus;  to  put  you  out  of  doubt,

Firft  know  the  earth  it  felfc  is  like  an  Hand,
Invironcd  with  waters  round  about,

That  compafle  in  on  cv’ry  fide  their  diie  land.

And  though  to  this  day  no  man  hath  found  out.
Nor  thinks  there  can  be  any  way  but  by  land,
Bccaufc  they  judge  the  lands  length  there  is  fiicli.
That  it  the  other  Hemifpher  dothtuch.

14

Yet  I forefccjcre many  ages  pafle.

New  marrinersand  niaftcis  new  fliall  rife.

That  fliall  find  out  that  erft  fo  hidden  was, '

And  fliall  difeover  where  the  pafiage  lies.

And  all  the  men  that  went  before  furpafTe,

To  find  new  land$,ncw  ftarres,  new  feas, new  skies.
And  pafli^about  the  earth  as  doth  theSunne,

T 0 fearch  what  viith  Atiitpodes  is  dene.


I s

Behold  I fee  the  figne  of  holy  crolTc,

Afignc  within  ihcfc  quarters  fcenc  but  fecld,

1 fee  where  ten  a thoufand  put  lolofle.

And  to  th’impcriall  banner  all  do  yecld,

I fee  in  fpitc  of  cv’iy  thwart  and  crofle.

The  houfc  of  Aragon  Ai\l  wins  the  fecld ,

1 fee  that  fortune  isdifpos’d  to  lift  *

Vp  unto  hcar’n  the  name  of  Charles  the  fift,

16

It  plcafcth  God  to  kcepc  the  waics  unknownci-
Vnto  thcfc  parts  as  they  have  bene  and  are,
Vmilircvcn  hundred  yearcs  bcovablownc.

What  time  he  meancs  to  raiic  anEmp’ronare,
That  fliall  both  find  and  make  them  all  hisowne,
Andonc  that  fliall  moft  worthily  compare.

In  warre  for  couragc,and  in  peace  for  jufticc.

With  T rajan, Wnh  Aureliia  or  Aiigu/lus.

17  ^

I fcctlicwillofhcav'n  dotlifo  incline.

The  houfe  of  Auflria  and  of  Arragon,

Shall  linkc  together  in  a happic  line.

And  be  by  match  united  both  m one;

I fee  a braunch  grow  by  thcbankcof/?^7te.

Out  ofihishouTc,  aslikc  there  hath  bene  none,
Whofe  match  (thus  much  to  fay  I dare  be  bold)

May  not  be  found  in  writers  new  or  old,

I 8

By  him  agaiac  Aflrea  fliall  be  brought.

And  be  reftored  from  her  long  exile.

And  vcrtucs  that  have  long  bene  fet  at  nought.

Shall  raigne  and  banifli  fiaud  deceit  and  guile:

For  which  gicat  works  by  himfonobly  wrought,
God  meancs  to  grant  him  all  this  earthly  lie.

And  under  this  wife  Prince  his  dearc  annointed.

One  fliepheard  and  one  flockc  he  hath  appointed.

19

Which  that  it  may  the  better  hceffefied.

He  gives  them  Captaincs  both  by  fcaand  land.

That  fliall  win  places  never  yet  detefted
And  none  fliall  darctheirforccsto  withftandj
Cortefe  firft, by  whom  fliall  be  erefted.

The  Emp'rors  bannain  the  Indian  fand.

Who  by  his  valiant  hand  and  wife  dneilior.

Shall  win  and  kcepc  thofc  /nd/er  infuhjcdlion.

20

LoCjWith  the  noble  Marquesof  Pefcart,

Frofper  Co/o««apiofperousin  fight,

Loc  him  that  may  with  bothofthemcomparc.

Or  be  preferred  if  you  do  him  right,

1 meanc  the  MarquesDd/?,whcfc  vallew  rare.

In  tender  youtlifull  yearcs  fliall  fliine  moft  blight,
Like  to  a horfe  that  running  (wifteft  pace.

Doth  laft  fet  out,and  firft  doth  winthcracc.

21

In  him  fliall  faith  and  courage  be  fo  mixt.

That  w'hcn  his  years  fliall  feeme  but  young  & tender
As  pa  fling  not  the  twenty  ycaie  and  fixt.

Yet  fliall  his  fame  and  forces  not  be  (lender;

On  him  fliall  eyes  and  heartsofmen  be  fixt.

To  him  fliall  towncs  and  forts, and  caftles  render.

As  to  a Captainc  with  fuch  worth  endewed.

As  he  alone  the  world  might  have  fubdewed,

VVhaj


Charleithi  >
fifithme  <4
the  eitie  af

Gaunt,


Tt  waa
thought  lha$
Cbarlei  ment
taenquer  ai
the  war  Id,  <5r
then  ti  enter
iteta  reltgian
and  becime
Vepe  El*.
ftror  both,  tt
w bich  thv
xitrfe  feemet
tatend,  bulil
woe  but  a
aiainittn-
cot  effamt
idle  head.


SimiAi


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO<


115


tt

What  fliouW  I fpcake  offamous  Andrew  D'Orie,

That  to  the  pyrats  fo  much  rerror  biccds,

As  Fom^ey  fo  much  piais’d  in  Latin  ftorir  ?

This  Andrew  cither  matches  oi  exceeds;

What  nobler  name  can  be,what  greater  glorie.
Then  to  toote  out  fuch  hurtfull  cuifcd  weeds?

So  a<  men  may  wuh  fafiie  and  with  cafe.

From  Italy  10  HylM  palTc  the  fcai,

M

By  hisaflinanrc.furtherancc  and  his  aide.

In  Italy  C<efar  a crowncobtaincs,

For  which  gimd  fcrvicc  though  he  be  well  paid.

Yet  for  hn^clfe  thereby  he  nothing  gaincs:

. The  painc  is  his  (6  noble  mind  well  (laid)

The  profit  to  hiS  country  foie  remaincs:

And  wheicasfomc  to  rule  their  country  fought.

By  him  his  countries  freedomc  lliall  be  wrought*

**

This  love  by  him  unto  his  country  fliowne.

In  honor  true  fhall  more  his  name  advance.

Then  both  the  C-eJars  viflorieswcllknownci
In  England, S^aine,  in  Italy  and  France:

For  though  thcii  enemies  wereoverthrowne.

By  valour  oft,  and  oftentimes  by  chance.

Yet  this  did  bloc  their  praife  and  make  it  IcfTe,

T hat  both  t heit  countries  freedomc  did  opprefle,

XS

Wherefore  let  them  and  others  all  befide.

That  tyrannize  their  countriesbeafhamcd.

And  hanging  downc  their  heads, their  faces  hide, '
When  they  fliall  hcarc  this  noble  Andrew  named,
whofc  rare  temperate  and  happic  guide.

His  countries  peace  and  freedomc  /hall  be  framed;
And  thus  Andronica  the  DuVefotetold,

What  men  in  future  ages  come  there  /hold.

26

The  while  with  prefperous  winds  the  vefTcls  drived.
Came  firft  within  the  view  of  Ferfian  fhorc.

And  then  from  thence  their  way  they  fo  contrived.
They  part  the  gulfc  (fo  called  long  bcfoic)

And  there  to  land  fo  happily  arrived,

Mifdoubting  of  Alcynoi  might  no  more.

He  thanks  thefc  guides  that  all  the  way  defend  him
And  humbly  to  their  Ladle  recommend  him.

»7

Horc  wcods  then  one, more  fields  then  one  he  part.
More  then  oncvallcy,morc  then  one  high  hill;

He  meeteth  theevesby  night,  by  dayesas  faff.

That  lie  in  wait  pooic  travellers  to  kill:
Ofbeaftsjoffcrpcnts  huge  he  wasagaft.

That  with  their  terror  thofc  wild  dcfcits  fill.

But  when  he  blew  his  borne  they  fed  away.

No  man  nor  heart  dm  ft  in  i he  hearing  ftay.

I S

He  travels  through  the  happic  Arable,

So  called  for  the  ftore  of  fpices  fweet,
Therewberetbe  bird  tharburnes  and  doth  not  die,
Todwell  ofcll  the  wo  Id  hath’hought  moft  meet.
The:Kcwen:  he  to  the  (ca,that  once  was  drie,
Which  lacobs  fbns  went  through  upon  thcii  feet,
I'roud  Fharao  fcllovving  them  untohiscoft,
Himfelfc  and  all  his  charcts  drown'd  and  lort.


>9

Fart  by  the  hanks  of  Trajans  flreame  herides;

There  where  asNylas  doth  receive  the  f^me.

An  horfeof  parting  fwiftnefle  be  be ftridcs.

That  was  ingendred  twixt  the  wind  and  flame.

Not  fuch  a heart  in  all  thcwoild  befidcs.

And  is  this  bones  name:

Now  as  along  the  rivers  banke  he  part.

He  faw  a boatc  make  towaid  him  in  haft.

A Ample  hermit  did  the  vertell  ftearc,

W hofe  beard  with  age  was  overgrowne  and  gray,
And  when  he  came  fb  nic  that  he  might  heare,

T hefc  words  to  himhcfachcily  doth  fay.

My  fonneifyou  do  hold  your  fafctic dearc.

Except  you  meanc  to  die  this  prefenc  day,

Proceed  no  farther  in  the  vv  ay  you  ride.

But  fenieoverto  the  other  fide.

)i

For  if  you  do  that  fatall  way  proceed.

You  rtiall  within  a mile  a giant  meet,

Whofc  flature  other  men  doth  fatre  exceed.

For  why  his  height  is  counted  fourtcenc  feet.

He  makes  a fport  of  ev*i  y ctuell  deed.

The  flerti  of  naan  unto  his  tart  is  fweet,

Hecateth  fomcalivciand  feme  heflayeth.

He  quarters  fbme,and  other  feme  he  flaycth.

Amid  thiscrucltie  he  hath  great  fport.

To  life  the  fctvice  of  a ccrtainc  net,

Which  in  the  common  way  in  fecret  fort.

With  duft  and  gravcll.covcr’d  he  doth  fet.

And  then  when  ftrangers  do  that  way  refort^

Firft  if  he  may,hchmd  them  he  doth  get;

And  then  with  hideous  outcries  he  them  fcates,
Vntill  they  fall  into  his  net  uawarcs.

But'having  caught  them  once  in  fuch  a cage.

Of  birth  or  merit  he  hath  no  refpeft,

0 f wealth  nor  fex,of  country  nor  of  age.

No  priviledge  from  him  can  them  protcA,

Their  carkafes  his  hunger  muft  alTwagc,

Their  fculs  like  monuments  he  doth  creft,

, In  ports  and  windowes  hanging  them  on  pins,

His  chambers  all  arc  hanged  with  their  skins.

34

Take  then  (my  fonne)  take  then  this  other  vyay,'
Where  with  more  cafe  and  fafetie  you  may  go.
Thanks  (gentle  Frier)  the  Engl'Jh  Duke  dothfay,
Yrrean  i not  yourcounfell  follow  tho,

1 hough  danger  bids  go  fafeft  way  one  may.

Yet  what  faith  honor?  honor  faith  not  fo.

Let  none  retire  with  rtiamCjihiis  honor  feath.

The  worft  that  can  befall  one  is  but  death.

. ?S

But  contrary.if  I may  him  intrap.

As  he  to  do  to  othersdoihdcvife,

And  take  himfelfc  in  hisprepared  trap,

Thegood  isgrcai  that  hereof  may  aiifc.

Well, quoth  the  hermitjGod  grant  blefled  hap.

And  fend  his  Angell^f/cbae/fiom  the  skies.

That  may  deliver  him  into  thy  hand,

Or  give  thee  rtrength  hisfoices  to  wiihftand.


’Rthictua

harfepfex.

ttUtm

nes.


CAiinMt.


I.oo\e  in  the


Smer.ee,


Oa


^tqu!  aU-
quu  dt  dit
wem  trijl  but
•ptat  pc  ficti
turj.u.


i6  THE  FIFTEENTH  BOOKE


36

On  goes  the  Duke  bicft  by  the  fimpIcFricr,

Much  truding  ui  hit  f'A'Ordjniorc  in  his  found:

And  being  nov\  approcht  a little  nicr.

The  crucll  giants  gracclelT?  houfe  he  found,
Enviion’d  all  with  manni  ground  and  mier.

His  chatnbctsall  within  weie  (urninit  round
With  skins  and  skuls  cf  many  a wofull  hedj
Of  fuch  as  cvill  diance  had  thither  led.

37  ‘

As  hunters  that  by  forreft  wild  do  dwell,

Nailc  by  on  pod  the  heads  and  pawes  of  Beaics,
And  ol  their  dangers  do  delight  to  tell.

And  call  to  mind  their  hardly  fcaped  feai  es;

So  looke  who  did  in  ftrength  the  reft  exccll.

The  giant  kept  fooie  fpeciall  limbs  of  theirs^

The  reft  in  ditches  careledy  he  throwes.

To  rot  and  bcderoui’d  by  dogsorciowc*.

38

i'alygorant  (fo  iithis  giants  name)

Stands  looking  at  his  gate  widi  watchfulleic,
Rcjoycing  much  when  any  ftranger  came-.

And  namely  now  the  Duke  he  doth  cfpie ,

Not  doubting  but  by  him  to  do  the  fame.

He  had  toothers  dcne,and make  biiv  dic;

But  firft  he  feeket  behind  the  Duke  to  get.

And  thinks  hereby  to  dn»e  him  to  the  net.

39

When  as  the  DuketheGiant  fierce  efpide.

He  ftaid  his  hbifc  and  would  not  forward  go.

For  fcareleftio  the  net  he  might  be  tide,

Of  which  the  hermit  hadforwarn’d  him  thot
T hcnblowerh  he  his  home  of  vernie  ttide,

That  in  the  hearers  terror  breeds  and  wo.

Which  fo  polTcft  his fenfes  altogether.

As  draight  he  fled,  and  faw  not  whefener  whether.

It  feemed  with  his  heart  he  loll  his  eies.

And  flill  he  fled, and  cares  not  how  noi  where.
Right  to  the  place  where  that  moll  flrange  net  lies.
Which  he  to  take  the  Duke  had  placed  there,

T he  net  his  arnies  and  all  his  members  tics,

Wliicli  then  Afioljo  faw  (now  out  of  fcaic)

Flc lightsand  dr.iwes his fwoid,iniendingthcn
To  venge  the  death  of  tlioufand  guiltlcflcn.cn'

41

But  finding  him  fofurcand  flrongly  bound.

Hr  thought  it  were  a bafe  ungentle  part.

To  flay  a ptifncr  whom  in  b^nds  he  found,

S o 35  he  could  not  ftir,iior  no  way  dart;

God  Vulcan  wrought  this  net  in  caves  psofound.

Of  flaming  c^ina,whh  fueb  skill  and  art,

T hat  though  the  wiicsdid  feem  but  final  and  weak,
ITct  could  no  force  the  fame  confumc  nor  breake.

42

Ifay  tliis  curious  net  then  Vulcanc  wrought.

When  ccrtainc  jealous  thoughts  his  heart  inflamed.
His  fpoulc  ihcr  with  in  Mars  hisatmes  he  caught.
And  openly  then  made  them  both  afhamed,^

At  which  profpefl  though  many  godsrhcfi  laughf,
Yet  many  wiflninlikc  fort  to  be  fliamedt
She  Mercuiy  did  after  ftcalc  this  ncr.

His  lovely  Clorii  therewithal!  to  ge  t.


43

Faire  Chris  who  flics  out  bcfoiethc  mOrne,

And  Ipiinklcth  aire  with  fmcll  of  fragrant  flowits.
That  in  her  lovely  lap  about  ate  borne.

From  whence  do  fall  the  plcafaiu  Apnll  fliowrcs:
'BnrMiTCury,  fithflie  bislovedid  fcorne.

Lay  with  his  net  in  waitc  not  many  bourcs.

Till  at  thelafl  by  Ny/as  banks  he  caught  bet.

And  ihcic  to  daunce  la  ’lolta  then  he  taught  her.

44

The  net  in  Anubs  temple  he  did  leave,

Where  many  ycarcs  in  fafctic  it  did  bide,

Vntill  Calygorant  not  asking  leave,

Andcanngoot  what  fliould  thereof  betide.

Of  this  great  iclitjuc  did  the  C hurch  bci  cave.

With  all  the  plate  and  ornaments  bcGdc:

And  to  this  wicked  ufc  the  net  employed.

By  which  the  palTcngcrs  were  fore  annoyed.

4f

Now  of  this  net  Aftolfo  tockea  wire.

And  (like  a thcefc)  behind  him  tide  his  hands.
Who  now  was  mcckc  as  any  coulS  defirr.

And  like  a lambc  by  him  moll  gently  flandsr
At  Icafl  the  waight  thereof  himfclfc  might  tire,
Fill!  having  bound  his  prifocr  Airc  in  bands.

He  makes  him  cany  that  upon  bisbackc.

And  ufde  him  like  a mule  to  bcarc  a packe.

4«

And  thus  heparteth  thence  triumphing  fo.

And  led  the  giant  prifner  in  a firing.

And  all  about  the  country  him  doth  fhow,

(A  fight  that  to  them  all  great  joy  did  bring)

T#  Memphu  Pyramids  he  then  doth  go,

Moll  famous  for  the  tombe  of  many  a King,

More  hie  in  height  then  fiftie  times  Pauls  flccplc,
T hen  faw  he  Cayr  fo  huge  and  full  of  pecplc.

47

But  not  fb  peopled  as  they  now  report,

T hat  tboufands  in  the  flrccts  by  night  do  lie
For  want  of  roome,yct  buiIJcd  in  fuch  fort,

T hat  cv*ry  houfe  is  made  three  ftorics  hic,

Where  runnegates  do  dwell,ihat  make  a fport.
Then  faith  and  their  falvation  to  denie;

Of  which  the  SotpJau  for  his  owne  behoofe,

Kecpcs  flftecnc  ihoufand  lodging  in  one  roofe.

48

Thenc*-went  Aflolfo  to  the  banks  of  Ny/e,

T o ‘Darryat  a citic  thereabout.

And  here  he  heard  within  a dozen  mylc
On/fodwelt,ahardy  thccfcand  flout.

That  rob’d  poorcmen,and  kild  them  other  while.
As  tuavcllers  of  him  flood  fore  indoubt,

And  (that  which  him  with  greater  wonder  filled)
The  common  voice  was  he  could  not  be  killed.

49

Full  many  a thru(l,fiill  many  a crucll  blow.

Of  many  men  in  fight  he  had  endured,
Anduniomaiiy  men  great  carcand  wo.

And  death  itfcifc  hcoficn  had  procured;

But  his  owne  body  was  enchanted  fb,

Ascv’ry  wound  lie  had  forthuith  wascured,

1 thinkefomc  F.iyiy  vvas  his dame,or  rather
I (hinkc  fume  IncubM  had  bene  his  faihcr.

The


THtr  Mt  fig
pnavtshshar
tbtgrtasVy.
ramsd  tvar
ISO  furUngt

fcrtthii  a
far

vcithin  tmf
paffa,  far
fault  not
UnU  mart
them  a fur-
/••f,  if  it
tvirtfornttci


OritUa


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


50


The  worthy  Knight  this  wicked  creature  fbughr,

Vnt'Il  at  laft  he  came  unto  the  place.

Where  then  OnV/o  with  twochampions  foughr.

The  combat  having  held  no  litt  Ic  fpacc,

Yet  at  bis  hands  they  both  had  gained  nought,
Though  both  of  them  gave  ftindiy  blowes  apace,
Cttfhin  tud  Their  names  were  thefethat  held  this  mongrclltack,

^qtuUnt.  Griffin  the  white  and  AqtiiLint  the  black,

51

The  Necromancer  fought  with  vantage  great.

He  rode  upon  a ci  noil  hideous  beaft,

A Crocodile  that  flclli  of  men  doth  cat.

And  birds  and  bcafts, and  doth  them  all  digeft.

Yet  had  thebtcthienthiownc  himfrom  hisfeae.
And  further  had  the  Crocodile diiUeii:

Buthiin  to  wound  and  kilUn  vaine  they  flrived,
Forftillhis  wounds  did  hcale,and  he  revived,

51

Sometime  they  cleft  his  head  by  force  in  twaine.

As  butchers  cleave  a bullocks  with  an  axe,

But  ftraight  he  joyneth  both  the  part*  againe,

As  if  they  had  bene  made  of  melting  waxe.

Who fo  hath  feene  the  Alcumifis  mo3  vaine.

That  vvork  with  Mcrciirie  their  cunning  knacks.
Which  quite  difpcift,rcjoyneth  cv'ry  member.
Would  (oone  by  this  be  made  that  to  remember,

53

Fierce  Aquilant  among  fo  many  blocs.

With  one,his  head  from  off  his  Hiouldcrs  (fiake,
About  he  fcckcs  and  giopcth  as  he  goes.

And  in  the  dud  to  End  his  head  doth  rake.

And  finding  itjhe  takes  it  by  thenofe.

Or  by  the  locks, nor  more  ado  doth  make,

Butfets  iron  asifit  were  but  glcwed.

And  fights  asif  his  forces  were  renewed,

54

Stout  at  a blow  cuts  ofFhisarme,

And  takes  itup  and  flings  it  in  the  brookc.

But  helike  one  that  had  receiv’d  no  harinc,

Dethdive  thefame  within  thcflrcametolooke.
Which  fourid,hcjoyncs(Iknow  not  with  what
Vmo  the  place  it  late  before  foifbokc;  (charme

Two  dames  flood  by  in  white  and  blackc  attire.

The  combat  being  fought  at  their  defirc.

the  courteousdames  that  with  great  care


57


But  when  that  Duke  both  ftwand  knew.

The  valiant  youilisGrz^«  and  Aqutlant^

Not  oncly  by  their  armes  he  law  in  vc\v.

But  by  their  blowcs,of  which  they  were  not  leant,
He  doth  acquaintance  old  with  them  renew.

And  they  no  point  of  couitcfic  do  want.

For  ftraightway  by  the  Ladies  he  was  led.

To  take  wnhthema  fupperand  a bed.

Then  in  a garden  fweet  they  did  provide
Great  ftorc  of  daintic  meats  andcoflly  wine.

Fall  by  a coole  and  plcafant  fonntaines  fide.

As  bell  agreeth  with  the  fommer  time,

The  while  the  giant  with  ftrong  chaincs  they  tide
Vntothc  body  of  an  aunciem  Pine,

Left  he  might  bap  to  trouble  and  molcft  them.
While  they  determin’d  to  refrclh  and  reft  them,

59

The  boord  with  rich  and  colli-,  fare  was  filled.

And  yet  their  fmalleft  plcafurc  was  their  mear,

7 he  K nights  in  languages  and  learning  skilled,
Talltc  of  Ori/fo  and  the  wonder  great.

To  lee  one  wounded  fo,and  yet  no:  killed,

It  feerr’d  to  them  a dreame  and  lli-angc  conceat.
And  ev*a  the  wireft  and  moll  learn’J  did  wonder.
How  be  icjoyn’d  his  members  cut  in  funder.

60

Afiolfo  oncly  in  hisbookc  had  read,

(That  bookethattaughtall  channes  to  overthrow)
Howthi*  Ori/Ho  never  could  be  dead.

While  m his  head  one  fatal!  hairedid  grow,

But  having  puld  this  haircfiom  cfFhis  head,

He  Ihould  be  fubjeft  unto  cv*ry  blow.

Thus  faid  the  bookc,but  precept  there  was  nOn(,
Among  fo  many  hain  s to  find  that  one.

61

Afiolfo]o^f\iW  of  this  good  inftruflion,

N or  doubting  but  by  this  to  make  him  die.

Full  makes  fome  circumftancc  ofintrodudliofl.
And  prayes  the  brothers  give  him  leave  to  trie.

If  he  could  biing  OriXo  to  dc(lru£lion.

And  they  this  friendly  futc  do  nordenie.

Not  doubting  he  alone  would  ftrive  in  vaine.

With  him  that  lateiefillcd  had  them  twaine.

62

Now  had  the  Sunne  remov’d  the  nights  darke  vaile,  '


Part

wbamu  J
•/•rn  dltdgti
mjt  antikir

fittmttb.


Had  brought  them  up  cv’nfrom  their  Iwathing  bads.  When  as  turned  to  the  field.

For  thefe  two  brothers  did  by  fortiine  rare  And  then  the  En^UJh  Dukedid  him  allaile.

In  theirfirft  childhood  chanccin^  their  hands;  Both  fought  on  horfeback,  both  with  fpcar  Sc  fiiicld
Thefe  two  to  Oliver jGyfrnonda  b^re,  ' F v’n  then  Orilio  felt  his  heart  to  failc.

Though  ftraisht  they  were  convaid  to  forren  lands,  (A  hap  to  him  that  hapned  had  butfceld')

VA7L— ..L.r-r...*  T I .l._3 L-: n..»_.L rt 1 j.j  i • ■'i


Whcrcthcfc  two  Ladies  kept  them  as  their  owne,
I need  not  tcH  at  large  a tale  fo  knownc.

5tf

Now  Was  the  time  that  ncare  approcht  the  night.

That  makes  each  thing  with  fh^dow  flicw  oblcurcj
So  that  not  want  of  forcc,but  want  of  light.

Did  caufc  the  combat  could  no  longer  dure:

The  Ladies  clad  in  gannems  blacke  and  bright,
That  (as  I faid)  this  eonflift  did  procure,  '

On  this  condition  did  them  all  difmille.

That  to  rcturnc  next  day  they 'do  not  mific.


Fu’n  then  lome  ftrangeprefagedid  him  offend.

That  fliew*a  hisdayesdrew  mortly  to  their  end.

Their  fpearcs  now  broke  theif  naked  Ivvords  they  drew,
Aftolfo  layes  on  bloweson  him  a mainc.

About  the  field  Orilhs  members  flew.

But  he  togcthcrgathcrsthcm  againc.

And  ftraight  hisfight  and  forcesdoth  renew,
TheEnglifh  Dukedifinembring  him  in  vaine,

Vntill  at  length  one  blowfo  luckicfped.

That  by  his  fiioulders  he  cue  ofiP  his  hed,

An4


SenUnct.
Ter  in  detdl
atanifi  mdt
beord  the
Jmt!le(l  fUtt
furr  he

guelit  have,
u their
chtart,  tH
ctmpm/ert
of  t he  plea.
Jingtal{e
that  Oappem
either  tn
mirth  er  pa-
nitj.


the  fifteenth  BOOKE


tti

64

And  having  headed  him  fo  cv’n  and  juft,

Straight  with  bis  head  on  borfcbackc  he  doth  mount

And  rides  avnyfiriUo  in  the  duft

Doth  grope  to  find  the  fame  as  he  was  wont ^

But  miflingitand  full  of  new  miftruft^t
To  overtake  him  yet  he  makes  account.

He  rides,and  would  have  cride  ho  tarrie  tarries
Butin  his  hand  the  Duke  his  tongue  doth  carrie.

6i

But  though  his  head  were  loft,  he  finds  his  hecles.

To  fpurre  and  prickc  he  neverdoth  forbearc,

T he  hcadleftc  body  never  ftirs  nor  reclcs.

But  fitsasrurcas  if  the  head  were  there:

The  while  the  skull  Aftolfo  puls  and  peeles,
Amongfuch  ftoie  to  find  th’inchanted  haire.

For  in  the  haires  no  difference  was  in  fight,

T o know  if  he  did  take  the  wrong  or  right,

66  '

But  fith  to  make  fiire  workc  he  thought  it  beft.

He  makes  hisAvord  fcrvc  for  a barbers  knife.

To  fliave  the  skull  therewith  he  doth  not  reft^

Vntill  he  finiflit  had  the  bloudy  ftrife:

He  cuts  that  haire  by  chance  among  the  reft.

That  hairc  that  held  Orillo  in  his  life.

The  face  looks  palc^dcvoid  of  lively  heate.

The  body  backward  fals  out  of  the  fcate.

6/

This  dDnc,thc  Duke  brought  in  his  hand  the  head.
Returning  to  the  company  againe.

And fticw'd  them  where hclcft  the carkas dead,
,'Which  when  they  faw  with  certain  fignes  and  plainc
A kind  of  envious  joy  in  them  it  bred.

For  glad  they  wcic  their  cnctsie  was  ftaine>

But  inwardly  they  were  difpleas’J  and  fbrie.

That  this  fame  Duke  had  got  from  them  thcgloric^

6t

T he  women  al  fo  were  not  well  content,

That  he  had  dsixntOrilioin  the  fight,

Becaufc  it  hindred  had  their  firft  intent.

Which  was  to  flay  thefc  youths  al  means  they  might.
In  hope  thereby  fome  mifchicfes  to  prevent.

Which  they  forefew  fliould  unto  them  alight:
Straight  all  that  country  was\4tth  rumor  filled.
How  iMEngliJh  Duke  Orfi/o  fierce  had  killed.

69

fhi

httrd  /««M  T he  keeper  of  the  next  ad  joyning  fort,

0^rim  fir  4 Sent  by  a Dove  a Icttir  of  the  newes,
frtnb.  From  Tiamiat  unto  the  ncaicff  port.

By  which  device  moft  rare  they  cannot  chufc
But  hcare  and  fend  with  fpced  each  true  report;

A nd  thus  in  ev*iT  ccuntiy  and  in  townc.

They  do  cxtoll  this  Englijb  Dukes  renownc.

•70

The  worthy  Duke  the  brothers  doth  perfwade.

From  thence  t heir courfes  into  Frawetobend,

To  do  the  dutic  for  which  man  was  made,

Gods  honour  and  their  countries  to  defend  ,

Which  now  the  Tariff  and  Painimr  did  invade.

And  ncai : bad  brought  the  fame  to  wofuil  end;
Which  counfcll  from  fo  great  a Prince  prcKCcding,
They  follow  ftraighl  with  forwardneffe  exceeding.


71

The  women  now  with  teates  in  wa  try  eies.

Bid  them  farewell ,-ind  fo  they  parted  thence:

And  for  they  hcaid  the  holy  cine  lies

Not  palling  fixe  or  fev’n  dayes  journey  thence.

To  take  it  in  thcii  way  they  do  devife,

Tofec  the  place, where  for  humane  offence.

True  Godjtrue  man  defeending  from  above.

Did  die  for  us  unworthy  of  fuch  love.

And  fith  the  way  bctwecnc  was  larse  and  wid^.

And  void  of  fruits  for  fuftcnancc  of  man.

They  do  good  ftorc  of  bread  and  wine  provide.

With  necdfull  things, as  for  the  time  they  can.

And  on  the  giants fliouldcrs  them  they  tide.

Who  like  a fumptcr  horfe  them  after  ran.

And  on  thisfort  with  moft  devout  intent.

Like  pilgrims  to  Icrufilem  they  went.

7J  .

Sixe  dayes  they  travcld  in  their  weary  way.

Nor  feeing  man,nor  bcaft,nor  biid  alive.

The  feventh  immediat  after  breake  ofday.

In, that  moft  blclTcd  city  they  arrive;

Thenvifit  they  the tombe  where  lefiu  lay.

When  with  his  death  he  did  us  dead  revive.

And  brought  hcll,finncand  death  into  fubjeftion.
With  fuffiing,dying,and  hisrefurreflion.

74

Now  while  the  tombe  with  great  heed  they  behold,
Bare  head  and  feet  in  flicw  of  meek  fubniillionj
And  with  more  inward  joy  then  can  be  told.

Yet  joyned  with  a deepe  and  fad  contrition.

That  ftrakc  their  hearts  in  awe  and  made  them  cold.
With  trut  remorfe  devoid  of  fupciftition.

And  with  thcmfclvcs  they  ftill  continued  mufing.
Each  one  himfclfc  m fitch  like  words  accufing.

75

Why  then, where  then  desre  Lord  didft  for  our  fake.
With  water  and  with  blood  tlie  ground  diftaine.
Shall  not  mine  eyes  fome  fmall  amends  to  make.
Shed  teares  in  memory  cf  fo  great  painc?

Oh  drowfie  heart  that  doft  not  now  awake.

Oh  frozen  heart  that  mclteft  not  in  raine.

Oh  ftony  heart  that  doft  not  now  relent,

Lament  thee  now, or  clfc  for  ay  lament.

76

Thus  with  an  humble  and  repentant  fprite.

They  tarride  at  the  tombe  no  little  fpacc.

When  lo  the  prieft  appeared  in  their  fight.

Whole  office  was  to  keepe  the  holy  place.

Who  feeing  them  fb  lowly  and  contrite.

He  doth  impart  to  them  this  fpeciall  grace,

(Sith  to  amendment  they  were  now  refbivcd)

Them  of  their  finnes  fbrepaffed  bcablblvcd.

77

This  done, they  went  about  and  view’d  the  townc.
Held  inthofe  happy  dayes  by  Chriften  hands.

Who  ftriving  now  to  keepe  each  other  downe.

With  cauflcftc  warresdo  trouble  fca  and  lands,'
Oricefingor  ncglcdiing  that  renownc.

In  which  Gods  honour  and  their  fafctic  ftands:

But  letting  chisgreat  enemy  increale.

By  their  fccld  making , never  keeping  peace.

A gallant


Aitrttm

miiWHih,


frtife  if
ChriJUiM
Tfiitcth


A gallant  knight  whom  Sanfonct  they  call,

Thiscity  govern’d  under  Charles  the  great.

Who  then  intended  to  repaire  the  wall.

And  make  t he  tow b a Arong  and  ftatcly  feat ;
jifiolftgave  to  him  the  Gians  tall.

For  Arength  and  Aaturc  fit  for  fuch  a feat.

To  ferve  his  prefent  purpofe  for  the  nonce,

Vmo  the  wals  tocanc  heavy  Aones.

- , • 79

And  Sanfonet  doth  eke  on  him  bcAow
Atuiious  belt  and  hange;s  for  a blade.

And  fpur*  ofgoId,in  fubAance rich  and  Aiow,

r-  i-  were  thought  tohave  bin  Made

S4mCitrS!t  That  flue  the  2)ra^on  with  a deadly  Blow,
W-hichdid  the  Lady  chaA  and  fairc  invade  :

Thus  gifts  both  giv’nand  tancon  either  part.

Each  from  the  other  friendly  doth  depart.

8o

Now  going  from  /erufy!em,hchcld

They  met  a irtckini  pJ^,.  mi  by  the  way,

That  fuch  ill  newestogood  GriJ^no  toid
At  made  him  out  of  temper  all  theday  ; *

It  was  hiscvill  fortune, dearc  to  h Jd,

And  give  his  heart  unto  her  fora  prey*

That  bad  a plcafing  huc,and  faiicfmoothskiii;
cut  ralic,unchaA,and  trccheroui  within.


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOsO.


is^


Of

Her  name  WisOri^iUa^whom  of  late
He  left  a:  C on/Uns  of  an  ague  fick  ^ ♦

And  hopidg  now  to  find  her  in  go^  Aatc
He  hearcs  Aie  hath  him  fciv’d  a flutti/h  trick.

As  namely  Aic  had  got  a new-found  mate.

Not  earing  if  that  he  were  dead  or  quick.*

Mie  thought  that  .<’or  her  yong  ycares’twasuoicafori
To  lie  alone  m tlia  t fweet  pleaiant  fcafon.

This  newes  his  mind  doth  gfipc,his  heart  doth  bite.
Hemourncs  by  day.by  nighchetakes  no  rcA,

That  breeds  him  painc, that  others  brcedsdeh’oht.

And  this  torments  him  more  than  all  the  rcA.^

^ Aiamcs.and  Amns  to  have  it  come  to  light.

What  was  hisgricfe  that  did  him  fo  molcA.

And  this  to  keep  it  clofe  the  rather  made  him,
Bccaufc  fiom  her  his  brother  did  diAwadc  him.

be  was  wholly  bent

bet  nought.

Yet  to  himfelfc  he  keepeth  his  intent,

Thatfccretly  his  going  may  be  wrought;

He  vowes  to  make  th’adultci  cr  repent.

Who  now  to  Antiochia  ha  had  brought  •

But  in  ano.  he,  book  I will  exprefle,  ’

Of  his  departure  what  was  the  fuccefle,


rour:  jn  token  rohcrcofthe  Lacedemonians  appointed, that  he  hat  wan  ahht/-^  fo  the  conque^

/to  o commi,  nha/ts.  in  Cliitits  i,  uie  ImedlbepimMjli  ft’"  '»  »i».  kfm

*^^bhff>meTOihuhornerinsibscounnvoftheevesandm^efaefoTt  » Prince ; InAtlolfeu


- optKe  ^ndies.his  notable  captatn'’s  and rhi  ,^re-\ i / ^oewitnej/e  gat

*^yMc*ufe  two  are  alreoily  in  EngllJh,J  imagine  ihce  be fm  that  ie  t

dronica  W Sophtofina  foyi/e  Witff  AAolfo,  le/}  AkvJ  l}}ouldatF\^  finds  An-^

^f"fi°^‘^figoricaUy,thatfortuudeandtemperan!ta

0 keep  usjrotnpka(ures,fnares,or  violent  ajTaults.^lfo  wherat  Addfn  i ^orlj

enterprtfe  to  fight  with  Orillus,  it  is  to  be  underftood  that  t'ood  advir  ^°ok  ire  he  take  upon  him  the

^ j , , Scmpcrqjveccnti  ■'  Allulit

Caede  tenebat  humus, foribas  affixa  fupetbis.

Mom, yet  tt  hath  aUufion  to fomefmhffor  be  files  that  TJr  % ' 7"*^“^“*^  o/OnJIus,  though  it  be  mehvfl

f^r‘^ff><if^ri$wasfenttocuthcrhairetoridherourolberf  -*  D^rj  V^^i^-^°"^^‘^^^-  o/Dido  lihewireis
-“‘•^^‘■«f<‘->‘ll'‘''£'iiohanr,tee,,inmhnire,.m^^^

Here  end  the  notes  of  the  xv.Bookc.  -^ojUjeTe.r.

L


/


THE  SIXTEENTH  BOOKE.


izt


Sto*^t  G rijBn  finds  his  fubttil  mifirejft  Jlfsfjing^

JVith  vtle}A^XtZ'00,hHt  is  pacifi’d:

The  Turks  and  Chriftiansa// their  farcf  di}J>lajing^
*J^o  fioht,en  both  Jidesmanj  thoufands  di'd  ;

"Both  man  andhonfe  by  [word  and  fire  dccajtngt
B>o  make  a reofnll fight  on  either  fide :
hf'tthont  the  torene  the  Chriftians p/ague  the  Turks,
f^tthinfierce  RodomonC  mtjchiefe  works.


iPraf  paincsinlpvcfull  many
A irer.  have  found,
^Ofwhifhmy  fclf havcprov*d
fog.  fat  a pair,

■Ai  hi  my  gtiH  fbmc  good
’ may  hap  tedi  und,

^To  fucli  as  are  Icffc  jkilfull  in
this  art :

Whc-tfforV  vvhat.  I affirmc
wivh  judgement  found.

To  breed  j.iftcaufc  f flelTeorgrearerfmart,

Believe  what  I fet  dewne  foi  yoiir  behrofe,
Probatumefiji  knoiv  'us  true  by  proofe.


He  knew  her  mind  and  manners  worthy  hate,
Ycc  could  not  he  this  farcy  fond  remove  ?

His  rfl&fon  faine  his  paflion  would  abate.

But  appetite  is  placed  her  above  t

That  be  fhe  nc’r  fo  falfe,ingrate  or  nought,

Yet  necdsof  him  The  muft  be  lov’d  and  fought.


Of  tba  Ito^e

in  the  mnali
More  at  larff


Simile.


Idoaffii  m,and  have, and  ever  fiiall,

That  he  that  binds  himrelf-  in  worthy  bands.
Although  hif  miftrffT'  fhewhi-n grace  biitfmall.
Although  he  fini  no  favour  at  her  hands.

Sharp  words, coy  looks, fmal  thanks.bopc  none  at  all.
Though  more  and  more  aloofe  from  him  fhc  ftands.
Yet  fo  his  heart  and  thoughts  he  highly  plac’d.

He  muft  not  mourn,  no  though  he  die  difgrac’d.
i

Let  him  lament  Jc  him  mourn, pinc,and  die.

Whom  wanton  wanthingeyes  whomflaiing  hairc
Have  made  a flave  wbenunderthem  doth  lie
A heart  corrupr,a  tonguethat  falfc  will  fwcare.

Like  wounded  D rie  in  vainc  he  feekes  to  flic.

And  in  hi»  thigh » he  fliafcaboiit dothhearc  j
And  » hr-:  abovethe  reft  torments  him  chiefc.

He  isafliam’d  ana  dares  notfliew  hisgriefc.

4 '

Such  was  the  hap,fuchwas  the  wofull  flatc
Of  G tiffin  nowpoffell  wuh  foohfh  love.


Away  he  fteales  from  hence  in  Iccrct  fort.

Nor  to  his  brothci  once  adieu  doth  fay.

For  feare  left  that  his  brother  would  dchort
Him  from  her  lovc^as  oft  be  did  aflay :

And  that  his  journey  may  be  cut  more  fhort.
He  coaftsthc  country  for  the  neareft  way.
He  travels  all  rhe  day  and  half  the  night,
Vntill  Damafeo  came  wit  hin  his  fight.


Faft  by  this  to  w n this  trull  he  overtookc,

Thar  lovingly  with  her  new  love  did  ride.
And  all  rid  friends  and  lovers  all  forfbokc.
He  was  hcrChampion,he  her  oncly  guide  s
A man  might  boldly  fwcare  it  on  a book.
He  were  a husband  fit  for  fu:h  a bride.

He  falfcjunconftant  ti  cchcrous,fo  was  fhc :
She  hadamodeft  look^andfbhad  he.


He  rode  all  arm’d  upon  a ftamping  ftced.

With  gilded  barb  that  coft  full  many  a crown  j
She  ware  no  lefle  magnificent  a weed,

A rich  embroidcrcil  purple  velvet  gown  ;

Thus  to  ‘Damafeo  ward  they  do  proceed,

W’herc  late  there  was  proclaimed  in  the  towne,

A folemnc  feaft  that  fliould  endure  fomc  dayes.

For  juftsjfor  tilt,fot  turneycs,and  for  play  cs.

L 2 Now


fn.

teUaofenu-

lum.

Or  as  the  E*  ■
gltjh  Pr»-

verl/aith.

UK*  ntibu
tiKt.tjuatb
the  DiveS
II  the  ctEity


i.


THE  SIXTEENTH  BOOKE


I2»

S 15

New  when  the  queen  good  Griffin  had  cfpi’d.  But  here  I ceafe  to  talk  oWrigiOf

(Forwhoi^ie  knew  her  fquiie  would  betooweak)  And  of  her  mate  with  hci  as  fitly  met.


ThoBgh  foieappal'd.asfcant  fhc could  it  hide.

Left  he  his  wrath  on  both  at  once  lliould  wreak.

Yet  as  the  time  permits  ftie  doth  prof  ide,
Confulting  with  her  guide  before  fhe  fpeak  :

And  when  thry  had  agreed  how  to  deceive  him.
With  open  armes  file  runneth  to  leceirc  him.

9

And  framing  then  herfpeech  with  great  regard,
Toanfwcrfit  unto  her  geftureskind,

Dcare  fir(quoth  fhe)isthis  the  due  reward.

My  loyall  love  to  you  deferfcstofind )

That  from  your  fight  1 ftiould  a yeare  be  bard ,

Your  fight  that  wholly  can  content  my  mind  ?

Yon  left  me  grieved  with  a burning  fever.

But  burning  more  in  love  of  you  for  ever.

ir

Where  I your  comming  look’d  for  long  in  vaine,

Each  houre  a day, each  monerh  did  feem  a yeare,
Andofyoura  bfirnce  long  1 d id  complaine.
Enquiring  oft, if  I of  you  could  hearc  t
Alas  how  full  iscarefull  love  ofpaine  ?

So  fad  mine  heart,fo  heavy  was  my  eheare,

As  being  indcfpairc  which  way  to  mend  it,

1 loath’d  my  life,and  did  defire  to  end  it.

11

But  lo  how  fortune  when  Hooked  leaft.

Hath  now  provided  me  ofdoubleaid.

And  fenc  my  brother, this  moft  welcome  gueft.
With  whom  I have  without  difhoneur  ftaid,

A nd  now  your  fclfe  whofc  prefence  makes  me  bleft;
Forbad  your  comming  longdf  been  delaid.

So  was  my  heart  and  foulc  to  you  inclin’d,
Thatfiirc  fcrgricfl  Ihould  havedi’d  and  pin’d,

13

Thus  fla  ttring  words  wherewith  her  tongue  abounds,
Holp  her  in  fo  good  for  t her  talc  to  frame.

That  now  on  him  the  greatcrfault  redounds.

As  glad  he  was  to  feufe  himfelfc  from  blame,

And  her  ftrongreafons  founded  on  weak  grounds.
Do  cleare  loth  her, and  him  that  with  her  came,

And  makes  him  deem’d  a kinfmanand  a brother.
That  did  hisbeft  to  maketbismaid  amothcr.

So  that  he  did  not  onely  not  reprove
Her  thay  fo  ti ech’roufly  had  him  betraid.

So  that  he  did  not  wreak  a$  did  behove,
Th’adultcrcrthatfalfcvvithherhadplaid  j
But  thinks  it  well  if  he  the  blame  remove.

Which  to  hischargefo  probably  fhc  laid : \

A nd  as  for  him(Iovc  makes  him  fee  fo  blindly)

He  calls  him  kinfman,and  falutcs  him  kindly,

14

Thus  Griffinofhis  love  no  whit  abates.

But  keeps  her  company  as  with  his  own,

Vntillthcy  came  within'Dama/co  gates.

Where  none  of  them  were  fecn  before  or  known.

The  rown  was  full  of  Lords  and  great  eftates,

The  lumor  of  the  fcaft  fb  far  was  blown.

Which  thatthey  might  have  morefecurcly  haunted,
T he  king  to  all  that  came  Cafe  conduff  graunted .


As  knavifh  jack  could  be  for  wborim  gill^

Vnehaft  and  falfe,  as  cvet  water  wet;

To  Batter  and  diftcmble  pafCng  skill.

And  all  vvas  fifii  that  came  into  her  net  t
Now  here  I leave  good  Griffin  in  her  armes.

And  turnemc  to  the  Turf^i/b  men  of  aimcf.

I6

I left  wheic  Jgramint  iiTauhed  hard^

A gate  which  he  bad  hoped  to  have  found.

But  weak  and  fecble,nakcd,unprcpar*d.

And  eafic  to  be  beaten  to  the  ground  ;

I told  you  how  king  Charles  the  placcdid  guardj
Inviroo’d  withfclc£fed  fouldicrsiound :

As  namely  Guydons  ftrong,and  Angilero,

With  Oton  ftout  Ovolyo  Berlingero.

17

Thus  either  band  in  fight  of  cither  king,

Doth  fight  in  hope  of  great  reward  and  praife.

And  thinks  fiich  honour  back  that  day  to  bung.

As  fhould  thcmfcl  ves  and  all  their  of-fpring  raife.
But  fuch  grea  t ftorc  of  darts  the  C hriftens  fling,

As  ftillthcriin(*f  are  foiled  many  way  es,

They  die, and  by  their  deaths  do  others  teacbj
How  hurtfull’us  to  rove  beyond  their  reach.

' i8

Bat  Rodomont  \>ihofc  men  confum’d  with  fire.

Do  fill  their  mafters  mind  with  double  rage.

Yet  to  avenge  their  deaths  doth  fo  defire.

As  nought  but  blood  his  thirft  of  blood  can  fwage  %
He  fparcs  not  in  the  paflion  of  his  ire.

Nor  men  nor  women,order,frxnor  age,  ]

Away  do  run  the  filly  people  crying.

And  leave  their  childrcn,frieods, and  wivciadying>
J9

They  happy  were  whofc  feet  did  ferve  them  beft.

The  fury  of  this  cruel!  to  fliun.

For  feme  were  killed  in  thefligbt,thc  reft
Vnto  the  Churches  or  ftrtxng  houlbsrun.

And  lock  the  gates  againft  fo  fieicc  a gueft,
Thttinthcftrcctshad  fb  great  mifchicfc  done;

And  of  them  all  that  had  been  flainc  in  ebafe^

Not  one  of  them  was  wounded  in  the  face.

30

But  as  the  Tygcr  kils  the  fcarfull  Doe,

That  but  by  flight  cannot  it  feif  defend,

Or  as  the  Wolves  do  fpoile  t he  fhcep : cv’n  fb
This  cruel)  T urhje  thcirguiltlcfrcblooddoch  fpen  J t
They  neither  know  toftrikenor  ward  a blow.

To  hurt  their  foe  nor  yet  to  hciptheir  friend  :

Thus  paft  the  Pagan  toS-Micbels  biidgc.

And  none  there  was  his  pafTage  to  abridge,
at

He  kilsalike  the  finnerand  the  good.

The  reverend  father  and  the  harmlefTc  child,

He  fpils  alike  the  yong  and  aged  blood.

With  widowcs,wivcs,and  virgins  undefil'd  j '•
And  though  that  all  did  yccld.and  none  withftood.
Yet  mercy  from  bis  mind  was  fo  exil’d,

He  fhew’d  to  fuch  as  things  can  truly  value.

Great  fignes  of  cruclty,but  none  of  value.


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


22


29


Nor  doth  the  cruel!  rage  and  fury  ccafc,

With  feeing  of  fo  many  people  flaine^

Butiathci  ftill  it  grow  cs  and  doth  incrcafc,

Againft  thofc  othci  that  alive  icmainc  :

Nor  grants  he  to  the  Churches  any  peace^

Butev’n  as  chough  rhewallscould  fufferpaincj
He  maketh  furious  warres  againft  the  walls.

And  flings  againft  them  ftorc  of  fiery  balls.

Their  houfes  all  were  built  in  Paris  then,

Oftimbci  (and  I judgethis  p.cfent  boure
Of  brick  anddlone  there  arc  not  fix  of  ten)

Which  iTi^dc  the  Pagan  then  to  bend  his  power.

To  burn  the  houlcsjhaving  kil’d  the  men:
And'chough  that  fire  do  of  icfelf devoure.

Yet  he  doth  hclpthc  fire  and  overthrew  them,

And  tbofe  that  lurk'd  within  he  fpoil’d  and  flue  thenu
*4

Had  Jgramant  had  likcfucceflc  without.

As  had  within  this  wicked  Aoiomoioif,

The  wals  of  Paris  had  not  kept  him  ckk.

On  which  fo  oft  he  did  afl!ay  to  mount :

But  now  this  while  the  Angeli  brought  about
Remldo  flout  the  flowa-  of  Clarimountf
Both  with  the  Englijh  and  the  Scots  fuppllcs.

As  fecrctly  Silence  could  devife.

And  that  they  might  them  more  unwares  aflaile,'
They  caft  a bridge  a league  above  the  townc,

And  pafle  the  river  to  their  belt  availe.

And  fo  in  battell  order  coraming  downe.

Not  doubting  if  their  footing  do  not  failr.

To  get  that  day  great  glory  and  renownc*

And  ftill  among  the  ranks  Renaldo  rides.

And  foe  things  needfull  evermore  provides.

26  .

Tfi^o  thoufand  horfe  in  good  D uke  Edmonds  guide.
And  thrice  two  thoufand  archers  he  dotbfend.

To  get  to  Paris  on  the  tother  fide.

To  help  within  the  city  to  defend  ;

(The  cariages  and  other  lets  befide.

To  leave  behind  a while  he  doth  intend)

Thefc  fiiccours  greatly  help  the  town  within,

And  at  Saint  gate  they  let  them  in.

vf

Renaldo  takes  the  conduct  of  the  reft.

Appointing  each  his  office  and  his  place,

As  in  his  skill  and  judgement  feemeth  befl,

Sev* ring  each  band  from  others  with  a fpacc :

And  feeing  ev’ry  one  was  prone  and  pteft,

At  was  to  be  required  in  fuchcafe.

He  callech  all  thcLords  and  Leaders  chiefe.

And  us’d  to  them  this  pithy  fpccch  and  beiefe.

i8

My  Loids(quoth  he) I need  not  to  repeat
Your  weighty  bufinefleunto  you  at  large,

I oncly  fay,you  have  jufleaufeand  great.

To  give  God  thanks  your  duties  to  difeharge.
That  here  hath  fcntyou,whcrc  with  little (Wcat,
But  giving  on  your  foes  one  valiant  charge.

You  may  obtaine  true  fame  and  glory  more.

Than  all  your  aiKcflors  obtain’d  before.


ImtUt’ta.

•tut»  /rem

14*


GodjOncly  God  that  gives  and  guides  good  chance,  i,

Hathofl'er’d  unto  you  this  good  occafion,  1

Your  names  and  glories  highly  to  advance,  !

Which  is  in  noblcminds  a flrong pcrl  wafion  <

Behold  the  kings  of  England  and  of  France,

Endangci’d  greatly  by  the  Titrl^^s  invafion.

Shut  up  In  trenches  and  in  wals  with  fliamc.

You  may  fet  free  to  your  immortall  fame.

?o

The  very  law  of nature  and  humanity

Wils  noble  hearts  to  help  the  weak  diftics’Jj
But  more  the  lawes  of  flat  e and  Chiiftianity,

Without  your  help  now  like  to  bcopprcs’d.

And  right  Religion  turn’d  to  I urkifii  vanity.

Of  which  what  harms  will  grow,  may  Icon  beguefl.

Our  tcmplesfairc  with  their  foulc  idols  fil’d.

Our  Virgins  (chaft  by  vow)dcfloui’J  and  kii’d.

No  mean, no  flay,no  end  will  be  of  flaughtcr.

Of  rapes  and  rapines  wicked  and  unjuflj
No  man  fliall  keep  hi«  fiflcr,wife, or  daughter.

From  out  the  reach  of  their  unruly  luft  :

But  now  if  you  thefc  (brrowes  turn  to  laughter,

And  raife  your  honour  troden  in  the  diift.

They  muft  owe  you  the  ficcdomcs  and  the  lives
Of  thcm,thcirfricnds,thcirchildren,and  chcii' wives.

In  ancient  times  a lawrcll  Civick  crown  Civietcortrsa

To  him  that  fav’d  one  citizen  they  gave.

If  then  they  had  fuch  honour  and  renown.

How  many  crowncs  fliall  you  defetve  to  have.

If  (not  a townfman,but)a  noble  town.

And  thoufand  in.ioccnts  therein  you  fave  ?

In  you  it  lies  them  to  ptcfcivc  and  chcrifli,

That(but  for  you)in  wo  fliould  pine  and  petiflt.

3J

Which  if  they  fhouId(asGod  forbid  they  fliould)

By  thefc  vile  Saracens  be  over-run.

Then  were  the  Romane  Empire  bought  and  fold.

The  holy  Church  were  fpoil’d  and  quite  undone :

In  you  it  is  thefc  huge  harms  to  wiih-hold,

Byyou alone  mu fl  thisexploit  be  done,

Tread  then  this  path  of  praife  fo  hrge  and  ample.

He  lead  the  way, follow  but  mine  ckamplc.

34

This  fpccch  by  him  pronounc’d  withfo  good  fpriglit.

With  voice  fo  audible, with  comely  grace,

IiKcnfcd  them  with  fuch  defire  to  fight,  '

That  tedious  feem'd  to  them  each  little  fpacc.

And  as  we  fee  in  riding  men  delight
To  fpurrea  horfe,  although  be  run  apace;

So  Air’d  Renaldo  with  this  exhortation
Tbofe  of  the  Englijh  and  the  Scuttijh  nation.

?$

And  having  thus  confirm’d  their  foiv/aid  hearts.

And  promis’d  largely  in  his  maflers  name.

Great  rccompcncc  to  ev’ry  mans  deferts,

Vnto  the  river  walls  heclofelycamc.

His  army  hcdividcsin  fundry  parts.

Left  breach  of  order  bring  themoutof  frame.

And  with  the  Iiifhhind  he  firft  indents,

Tbfpoile  their  Iodgings,and  torob  their  tents.

L 3 Tks


Sinak*


124


THE  SIXTEENTH  BOOKE


3*  . .

The  reft  he  thus  in  prudent  fort  divides.

The  wayard  Zerbin  hath  in  governlncnt.

The  Duke  oi  Lanca/ier  the  battell  guides.

The  Duke  of  t/arentewith  the  rcitwaid  went,
iienaWo  with  feme  chofen  men  befides.

Gives  firft  the  charge  by  geneiallconftm :

Then  on  a fodainc  they  do  raife  a fiiout.

And  fil’d  our  fide  with  coutage,theirs  with  doubt.

37

Renaldo  riding  out  afore  the  reft,

(With  mind  to  do  as  much  as  he  had  faid^

Puts  fpurs  to  hone  and  fets  his  fpearc  :o  reft,
Hisonely  fight  the  Pagans  greatly  fiaid ,

With  fainting  hearts,  pale  looks, and  panting  breft.
They  fliew  moft  certaine  fignes  of  minds  difmaid.
Yet  ftout  king  Puliano  fljewesno  token
Of  heart  aftonifiied  or  courage  broken.

S8

But  trufting  to  his  ftrength,and  void  of  feare.

And  ranging  out  in  fight  of  a 11  his  band.

He  met  him  man  to  man  and  fpeare  to  fpeare.

He  met  him  horfe  to  horfe,and  hand  to  hand;
Butftraight  it  plainly  was difeerned  there.

Sleight  without  force  in  little  fteed  doth  ftand :

This  kind  of  fight  was  of  a rougher  fort.

Then  running  of  a couife  at  tilt  in  fport*

39

Thus  was  king  Pulian  overthrown  and  tane.

To  no  fmall  terrour  of  the  Pagan  hoft.

Next  tame  the  king(th^^giant)of  Oran,

That  of  bis  goodly  ftature  much  doth  boft.

But  foon  Renaldo  brought  him  to  his  banc.

His  horfe, his  weapon, and  his  life  he  loft :

The  horfe  was  glad  to  find  himfelfc  inlaig’d»

And  of  his  heavy  burden  fo  difeharg’d.

40

Nor  was  Rcnaldoofhls  fwoid  more  fpare.

Then  of  his  fpeare  before  himfclfe  he  fliow’d.

His  blade  Fusberta  pietcci  to  the  bare,

When  he  his  thrufts  or  deadly  blowes  beftow’d  :

No  fhields,nocoafsoffo  good  temper  arc.

Nor  cloth  in  hundred  folds  together  fow’d.

That  thisfamc  fatall  blade  of  his  withftood.

But  thatat  cr’ry  blow  it  fetchtthc  blood.

4*

Nor  did  Zerbino  merit  common  praife,

That  of  his  value  flicwd  that  day  good  proof,

. He  met  the  ftouteft  TurfiS  at  all  aflaics.

On  horfe, on  foot,at  hand,and  fane  aloof.
Attempting  and  performing  fundry  waies.

That  might  be  for  their  harm  and  his  behoof;

And  all  his  band  in  fight  was  fierce  and  hot.

As  is  the  nature  of  the  valiant  .fcot.

4»

A nd  thus  their  fiery  heat  and  courage  bold.

Well  flicw’d  by  blowcithcy  to  the  Pagans  gave.

Did  make  their  ftomacksfjint,theiicouiagc cold,
And  glad  in  th’cnd  by  flight  thcm/clvesto  fare;

Tot  Sobrinone  m yeares  and  judgement  old,
(Though  no  lefTc  ftout  t he  thofe  IcfTc  age  that  have)
Doth  now  a littlewith  his  band  retire,
Tofliunthcfury  of  the  Scottijb  fire.


4f

T he  woi t hy  Dukes  of  Alhanie  and  Mat,

Inlu’d  in  valiant  fort  the  good  fucccflc.

And  vvith  thclamc  pievailcd  had  lofar,

Asfl  <“y  had  brought  the  to  great  diflrefle,

Ti'\jjQlir  the  new  king  of  Nazar,

Came  with  his  band  their  fuiy  to  rcprclTej
And  on  that  fide  the  battell  did  reftore,
Almoftnow  loft, at  leaf!  declin'd  bcfoie.

4*

Then  grew  the  fight  on  both  fidcs  firm  and  ftable.
Both  fidcs  defend, both  fidcs  alike  invade.

They  caft.on  boih  fidcs  darts  innumerable.

And  make  ibcicwitha  dark  urpleafing  fliade  j
An  cndlcflc  woik  it  were  to  wiitc  the  rablc.

The  Lhrifiens  kil'd  with  bow,with  bill,with blade,
Somtiiue  tlicfway  goerh  hitbcr,fomtiirc  thither.
Like  waters  duv  n wi;b  doubtfull  tides  and  weather.
45

When  one  is  ft  inc,his  room  another  fils,

When  one  ishmt,another  takes  hn  place.

And  he  that  now  another  fmites and  kils,

Fals  dead  himfclf  within  a'  little  /pace  ^

Great  he.ips  of  bodies  dead  make  little  bils.

The  earth  it  felfedoih  look  with  bloudyface.

The  grcco  wherewith  it  cift  was  ovcifprcad.

Is  turn’d  to  fanguioe  and  vermilion  red.

4^

My  pen  would  faile,and  skill  would  bctoefcant,

T o tell  the  famous  aft$  that  Zerbin  wrought.

How  his  new  brother  noble  Ariodant,

Afrc/Ii  fupplv  againft  the  Pagans  b'ought,

And  how  ftill  onefijpplying  to-hers  want,

Againft  ibcTurl^s  with  mutuall  forces  foinjhtj
• Then  namely  when  the  Prmcc  was  aloioft  ilatne.

By  baftatds  two  of  Aragon  m Spaine.

47

Chetindo  onc,the  other  Moflo  hight,

Thefc  two  at  once  on  Zerbin  bent  theii  force.

In  hope  that  if  their  hands  could  hit  aright.

To  wound  him  forc,orat  thcleaft  unhorfc.

They  wound  him  not, yet  forc’d  him  to  alight,'

For  under  htm  fo  fore  they  hurt  his  horfe,

Toferve  hisLord  he  was  no  longer  able,

But  made  the  field  his  cveilafting  ftable,

48

This  foile  and  fall  his  courage  more  do  whet,

Tolofe  thcfcrviccof  his  tiufty  fteed.

Bur  from  the  faddlcquickly  be  doth  get.

His  loftc  his  wrathjhis  wrath  revenge  doth  breed  J
He  means  net  long  to  tarry  in  their  debt,

Thatto  his  boric  did  thisunworlhy  deed  ;

And  fiift  he  gave  to  Mo/co  fuch  a thruft.

As  made  him  tumble  fenfleftcin-theduft.

49

But  when  Chelindofiw  his  brother  dead.

Revenge  and  fcarcinhi  n togcthei  ftrave,

His  inward  feare  provok’d  him  to  harefted,

Himfi-lfe  fiom  dangci  imminent  to  fare.

But  ftiaightrcYcnge  another  humour  bred.

Expelling  feare,and  makes  him  bold  and  brave.

He  fpurt  his  horfe  in  hope  to  ovcr-iun  him.

But  Zerbin  flightly  ftepsafide  to  fiiun  him.

And


lamiio  4
[•l-uiuiM’
IK/  uld  lbs

Jhdumtjt
theb,  M ou
(tuU  w§t fit
ihtfiMfer
ibtm

ftdm'rriir,

that  we  AaH

filhuHtht

jhadt.

Hit

M’  dtdtrS
Jetbt,  Mam
Uniim  iio
•i-ii/if,  &aXa
^wat  modt
^uo4  actapt*
rat  auraa,
Ovid  }.  Mm'


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


j®

And  fuch  a blow  he  lent  him  as  he  paft,

V pon  his  flioulders  from  the  rcicdcmainc.

That  hoifc  and  man  unt®  the  ground  were  call,
Whence  neither ol  them  rofc  alive againci
A nd  now  the  Spanifi)  band  came  in  Co  fall.

As  noble  Zerbin  had  almoft  bccndainc}

But  Ariodante  then  himfelfe  beftu’d.

And  makes  an  open  lane  by  dint  of  fword.

$1

The  while  the  Duke  of  Clarence  doth  affailc
Their  rerethat  was  bj  BaricondoXei,

The  Englijh aichets  ILootas  thick  as  haile.

Which  to  their  horfemen  great  annoyance  bred ;
Onev’ry  fide  the  6’irr/?c»rdoprcvaile,

On  cv’ry  fide  the  fearfull  Fagans  fled.

Great  ftore  were  flainCjand  many  prifners  taken.
Their  battell  now  declined  fore  and  fliakcn.

5»

And  had  been  loft, had  not  Ferrarv  by  chance
Come  to  their  aid  as  yong  Olimpio  fell,  <

Slaine  by  a knight  of  Scotland  or  of  trance-^

A cruell  knight,whofe  name  I cannot  tell :
feTTavD  was  fore  aggriev’d  at  this  mifthance.

He  knew  this  youth  and  lov’d  himpafling  well,
Bccaufe  his  skill  in  mufick  was  fo  choice.

Both  for  fwcet  ftroke,and  for  his  pleafing  voice.

Kad  not  the  humour  of  ambition  raine
With  crotchets  new  hisfoolifli  fancy  fil’d.

He  might  have  better  ftaid  at  home  in  Spaine,

Than  come  abroad  to  be  in  battell  kil’d :

But  thus  we  fee  they  get  but  loftc  and  paine,

That  dcalc  in  that  in  which  they  be  not  skil’d*

1 wifh  mulitions  meddle  with  their  fongs.

And  pray  the  fouldiers  to  revenge  their  wrongs.

54-

tefresw  that  faw  tea  thoufand  flainc before,

Withoutor  fetching  .igh  or  fhedding  teare ;

With  this  his  minions  death  was  grit  v’d  lb  ftsre,
Asfcarce  he  could  ev*n  then  to  weepforbeare.

But  he  that  kil’d  himfiiall  abuy  therefore,

By  Macon  and  Lanfufa  he  doth  fweare.

And  ftraight  perform’d  it  to  the  knights  great  paine,
For  with  his  polax  out  he  daflit  his  braine.

35

Nor  lb  contenr,he  runs  among  the  prefle.

And  in  his  rage  fo  many  he  flew.

That  their  late  forward nefle  he  did  reprelTq,

And  caus’d  that  they  in  haft  themfclvcs  withdrew  i
Then  to  the  tents  was  fent  the  king  ofFeJfe,

To  make  refiftance  to  the  Iri^  crew,

Thatfpoil’d  theirlodgings  having  rob’d  thebeft,
And  went  about  to  fet  on  fire  the  reft.

56

Then  when  the  ftout  king  Agrantant  tfpi’d,

The  danger  great  he  and  his  men  were  in,

And  how  thefc  new  fupplies onev’ry  fide.

Made  his  retire,and  ground  of  them  did  win  :
Tofave  his  own  in  time  he  doth  provide,

And  lets  alone  the  wals,and  them  within,

Himfelfe  with  Lords  and  other  Princes  ftore
Came  where  Ferrarv  was  entred  late  before.


And  infuchftrength  they  do  their  forces  link.

And  with  fuch  fury  tliey  leftorc  the  fight.

That  now  thei'eo/  oeg;  i>  tofaileand  flirak.

Save  that  Ae«a/..acaineev’iith:o  in  figi
And  cri’djO  worthy  Siots,  ani  du  you  th'ak
Tofave  your  felvcs  by  tounwoTl, . Highi  ?

Will  you  fo  Icefe  the  honou;  late  v -■  tvonne  ?

Care  you  no  more  toiaveyo  u m.  .rs  lonne  J
58

Doyou  no  more  regard  vour  reniuafion.

By  you  infundry  bloudy  bat.  I got.

To  leave  the  flowci  and  ;ewell  ot  your  nation.

Amid  hisfoesasifyou  lov’d  him  not  ?

Ye  fliame  yottr  lelvts  and  all  your  generation.

If  youdiftaineyou  withfofoulea  ^lot,

Turnitmn  I fay,and  take  (bine  heart  of  grace.

And  meet  and  fmite  thefc  Fanims  in  the  face.

^9

Th;y  that  before  were  fore  with  feare  pofTcft,

Were  now  fb  Iieartncdjthat  with  honeft  fliamc.

Each  one  doth  fceni  his  (alcty  todeteft.

Each  one  hi;  mind  with  anger  doth  inflame.

And  vvhetc  they  left  thci'  aptainc  halfediftreft,
With  thisib forward  guioc  asfaft  they  came  ;

So  Zei  bm  refeu’d  was  from  Furlplb  fbrres.

And  moun'sed  ftrajght  one  of  the  empty  hotfes,

Co

Renaldo  that  did  ever  take  delight

Tofeton  thofc  that  were  moft  ftrongand  flout.
When  once  king  ^-^gramam  was  erme  i flght.

Him  from  the  reft  forthwith  h . finglev  om  :

^ But  when  between  them  was  begun  the  right.

They  fundred  wcicby  thofetha*  ftooc.  about,

I meancthc  Turf^s,  who  their  chief  Prince  defended.
Who  cisperhap  his  raigne  ev’n  then  had  ended.
ol

Now  while  without  the  wals  the  battell  fo,
Oncithei/fidc  with  fury  wasicncw’d.

Fierce  Rodomont  wi.bindid  work  fuch  wo.

More  rufuU  fight  with  eye  was  never  view’d  y '
To  wrack  profane  the  holy  temples  go,

Hc/etteth  fire  on  all, and  to  conclude.

He  did  alone  lb  fpnilc  the  goodly  cine,

As  might  have  mov’d  a ftony  heart  to  pitic,

6*

And(whilc  king  Charles  that  was  farre  off  from  thcncej
Did  entertaine  the  new-come  Englijb  hoft,

The  which  Rcnaldo  fent  for  their  defence)

Behold  there  came  a mtflenger  in  port,

That  look’d  like  ere  beftraiight  of  wit  and  fence.
His  voice  with  h.;ft  and  fcarc  was  vvcinigh  loft.

And  when  hts  brc'.en  words  were  plainly  heard.

Ah  well  away  (he  cries)  wc  all  arc  mat’d.

Some  fiend  of  hcl!(forfurc  a fiend  of  hell
It  is  that  doth  our  city  fo  deftroy)

Is  fent  from  Belzcbub  with  us  to  dwell.

To  work  our  utter  ruine  and  annoy ;

This  day  wc  muft  bid  all  good  dayes  firewell.

This  day  miift  be  the  laftday  cf  our  joy,

Loyondei  hovvour  facred  temples  fmokc.

Nor  one  in  their  defence  dares  ftrike  a ftrokc.

L4


titUdWt

IIKBUragtm

mntoftht


Looks


THE  SIXTEENTH  BOOKE


ii6


Sirailu


«4

Look  how  a man  would  be  amaz’d  to  hcarc
A n<  lie  confus’d  of  backwaid  ringing  bclsj
And  after  findjwhcn  he  approchcih  ncarc.

New  fee  on  fire  his  houfc  wherein  he  dwcls  j
In  fuch  amazement  and  in  fuch  a fcare
Was  Charles  to  heaie  the  talc  this  poorc  man  tcls.
And  as  he  thither  nearer  came  and  nearer.

He  frc8  the  buildings  clearer  burn  and  clearer.


O f hardy  S (quires  he  culs  a gallant  crew.

And  means  to  drive  aVvay  this  wicked  wi^hr^

If  man  it  bc,orfpritc  with  humane  hue.

That  doth  unto  the  town  ihisfowlcdcfpight:
Now  came  he  where  he  plainc  might  fee  in  view
Men  murdrcd,houfesburn'd,a  v\oful! fight*

But  new  although  perhap  my  ftory  plcalc  you,
Topawfc  a liitlcir.ayitfrcfli  and  cafe  you.


2ilorall.


MaflerEd-
■mard  Diera

Kan,


Hiflory.


Allegoric.


Alltifion.


In  the  perfon  a/Griffino  is  deferibedayoung  man  hefottednith  love  and  affiClion  of  a.vile  ftrumpetyfo  as  flic  eafly
per/hadcs  himjhat  he  that  indeed h.ept  her  fo  openly , as  al  the  world fl>ahe  oj  it^tr  as  her  brother, oi  her  covfln-gennaH,or
fume  fuch  matter  as  eafily  blinded  his  eyes,  being  bleared  ajote  with  affedion ; and  in  this  h^ind, though  I mean  to  touch
noi  e by  name,  yet  i doubt  not  but  many  willfeele  themfelves  touebedof  both  forts  i fuel  as  Gnffinoj  that  place  their
love  in  unworthy  perfons  ; and fuc  h$s  Maixano,  that  wuler  the  name  oJ  l^indred  are  mofi  vile  and  filthy  adulterers,
which  how  common  it  is  now  adayes,  this  fafing/hewes,  turned  now  almojl  to  a proverhc.  The  nearer  ofl^n,  tie  foonet
rn  : andthat  verfe  of  Ovid, tranfated,  or  pretily  turnedby  a pkafant  Gentleman  to  this  purpofe,

Tuta  frccjucnfqj  via  eft-lub  amici  fallcrc  nomcn,

Tuta  frequenfq;  licet  fit  via,  crimen  habet.

A fa^'c  and  common  way  it  is  by  l^inred  to  deceave.

But  fafe  and  common  though  it  be,  *tis  hnav*iy  byyour  leave.

The  great  aphorifme  or  maxime  Jet  downe  in  the  two  lafl  verfes  of  the  feeondfiaffe  of  this  booif,  was  imitaiedly  4
Gentleman  of  our  country  in  huyonger  da^ts, though  a man  ever  of  great  wit  andwortb ; bis  verfe  was  this,

^ He  that  hath  plac’d  his  heart  00  high,

Mnft  not  lament  although  he  die:.

T 0 which  purpofe,  all  that  have  written  of  this  common  place  of  love,andchiefy  Petrarke  in  his  infinite  fonets,  in  the
middefl  oj  all  his  lamentations , (till  had  this  comjoTt,that  his  love'was  placed  on  a worthy  tadie : and  our  Englijh  Pe-
tra kejA’/r  Philip  Sidney,  or  i'ir  Walter  Rawlcigh  inhis  Epitaph  worthily  calletb  himjthe  Si\\no  and  the  Ve»
trarkc  of  our  time, of  ten  Comjorting  himfelfe  in  the  fonets  of  SicWa, thmgh  deffiatring  to  attaine  his  de fire, and  (though
that  tyrant  honour  ft  ill  rejufed )yet  the  nobility, the  beauty, the  worth, the  gracioufnejfe,  and  thofe  her  other  petfeOions,
as  made  him  both  count  her  and  call  her  ineftimahle  rich  j mah^es  him  in  the  midft  0}  thofe  bis  munes,  tefoya  evjen  in  bis
tmn  great  eft  lojfes^as  in  his  eighteenth  fomet, which  mafty  I am  Jure  have  read  i
, With  what  fhaip  checks  I in  my  fclfc  am  fhciu,

. When  into  reafons  reckningi  rdogo,

, ■ ' AndbyfuchccuntSjtnyfelfcabanlaoutknow,

. - Of allihofcgoods which.hc4v‘nto mchathlcnt,

Vnablc  quite  to  pay  natuics  rent.

Which  unto  it  by  birthright  I did  ow.

And  which  is  worfc,no  good  cxcufc  can  lltow.

But  that  my  wealth  I have  moll  idly  fpent ;

My  youth  doth  waft,  mV  knowledge  brings  forth  toyes.

My  wit  doth  ftrivc  thofe  palCons  to  defend.

With  my  rcward(fpotlcd  w'th  vaincannoyes)

I find  my  courfc  to  lofc  it  fclfcdoth  bend  ;

1 fee,yctdi>no  g caterforrow  take.

Then  that  I feclc  no  more  for  Stella* s fake.

And  thus  much  of  this  matter  of  love. In  the  conftid  at  Baris  gate, in  pre  fence  of  both  Fririces,we  m«y  note  how  the  Ge-
ncnerals  eye  is  a great  encouragement  to  the  foldier.In  Rcnaldo’s  orattbn,,we  may  obferve  that  eloquence  andlearrung
is  not  onely  a great  ornament,  hut  fomtime  a great  aid  to  a Captaine.Anf  fori  he  fpeech  it  felfc,  it  is  both  pitly  and  me-
thodica/l  For  betngfos  they  terme  itjofthe  deliberative  lfnd,ii  layes  downe  [though  brief y,  yet  plainly  vyou  marly  it)
thcfacitiiy,the  commcndation,the  utility, and  the  necefftty  of  that  to  which  he  perfwades  them.

For  hiftoricall  matter, there  is  little  in  this  booly, onely  where  he  touches  the  wcaly  buildings  of  Paris,  being  built  fi
high  and  fi  JJeight,it  is  evident  they  are  fi  at  this  day, and  doubt  left  U is  a great  blot  in  a magnificent  city  to  fee  brown
paper  houfes, which  were  a matter  eafily  redrejfed  in  one  age:  as  Auguftus  Catfar  did  at  Rome  f 01  bidding  them  to  build
hut  with  ft  one, and  mahjnggteat  provtfion  for  ftuffe  and  cat  iage  for  fuel  as  wouldbu  Id,  at  a reafonablc  price,  as  Sue-
tonius fetteth  downe  at  large  : but  this  is  not  much  to  the purpofi.

IVhcreas  Silence  is  fat'd  to  be  fent  by  God, with  an  AngeU  to  condulf  the  drift  ian  fuccours  to  Paris:  by  the  AngeS
is  meant  allegorically  G ods  affiftance  and  grace, without  which  no  viijories  can  be  obtained : and  by  sUenie  is  undcr^
ftoodwife  fcrctneJfc,to  concealeour  intents  from  our  enemies,  which  is  agreat furtherance  inwarre.

For  the-allufion  ^Mariano,/  referre  it  to  the  next  boofy, where  his  cowardife  is  more  largely  touched.


The  end  of  the  Annotations  of  liic  Cxtecnth  bookc.


4


THE  ARGVMENT.

Fierce  Rodomont  ieave  Parti  ii  cen^rain  dy
Martano  at  Dainafco  tilts  mofl  viljy
S tout  GrilJin  thixkj  his  running  thereby  flain'
And  goes  jtom  thence  ^ the  while  Martano  Jlily
*Doth  fleale  his  coat  and  horfe^and  fo  obtain  d
^reat  gifts, and  of the  king  is  graced  highly  ;
But  Griilin  takes  in  Martano’s  clothings
Receives  difgrace  teach  one  his  frejence  lathing.


THE  SEVENTEENTH  BOOKE.'


OfSyVt  M»i
,M0riia  cru-
read
Vtutark  i»
thtir  livet.
Heliogahattu

rim,  for  bit
mrtftrcut
Itebtry,  and
hit  variety
therein.

'■jintoHiaiu
'BaJiianm
flaine  for  hie
ieaftliaejfe
mnd  cruelty,
fir  wbiehtil
name  grew'
fa  odio)u,tbat
Bene  was  e
vtr  after  bim
fo  called.
OfEgelin  I
ga\e  before
en  the  natet  of
the  third  baet^
* He  meanet
hereby
Lodwiel(
Sftrt.e,tha$
tailed  in
Bharlet  the  8
»M  of  France
Mate  Jtxlit,


But  alfo  fend  beyond  the  Alps  high  hils.

For  other  wolves  more  hangcr-ftcrv’d  than  they  :
The  bones  of  men  ilmTkraftmeno  fils,
Thefightsof  Treb  ind  Ca««45  arc  bur  play.

If  with  our  bloudy  flaughtcis  they  compare.

Of  Add<i,Mela,Ronco,znd  of  Tare.


1

He  moft  juft  God , when
once  mans  fins  do  grow
Beyond  the  bounds  of  par-
don and  of  grace,

Becaufethat  men  his  judge-'
ments  juft  may  know.

No  Icflc  then  love,  to  rule  on

No  doobi  but  God  in  htav’nivihtonc  that  Sta
V,lcmonft5,a.  futh as  tyran-  ^nd  thtnto  our dord, aodlhought.dotb piatul, ft

Vs  to  be  fpcild  and  comjuci’d  thus  permits.

By  thofc  that  arc  perhaps  as  ill  as  we :

But  iftoplcafe  him  wc  wolild  bend  our  wits,

Then  fromthcfc  foes  he  foonc  would  fet  us  free
And  wc  fiiall  fee  their  puniftiment  ere  lon«,  *
That  us  opprclTc  by  villany  and  wronw,  ^


nizcusfb.

With  wrong  the  right, with  luft  they  lavves  deface ;
For  thi  s fame  caufe  were  Sj>//a  Cent  and  Marias,

The  Nerons  both, and  filthy  minded  Variui.


For  this  'Domician  held  in  Rome  the  raigne.

And  Antoninui  of  that  name  the  laft.

And  MaJJimin  a bafe  unworthy  fwaine.

To  plague  mankind  in  Princely  throne  was  plac’d  J
For  this  in  Thebes  did  cruel!  Creon  raigne,

With  other  tyiantsmorc  in  ages  paft,

For  this  of  late  hath  Jtalie  been  wonne.

By  men  of  Lumbardie,of  Gothland  Hmne.

3

What  fiioald  I of  unjuft  Attyla  fpeak  ?

Of  Ejfelin,and  ofan  hundred  more  ?

Whom  God  doth  fend  hisangci  juft.to  wreak.

On  us  that  ftilJ  neglcft  his  facred  lore.

Thetimes  forepart  long  fincc.the  prefent  eke,
Offuchcxamplcsycclds  us  wofull  ftoic,

How  weunthankfull  and  unfruitful!  fheep
Aregiv’n  to  hungry  rav’ning  Wolvesto  keep.

4

4 Such  Wolves  as  would  notoncly  by  their  wils,

Seaze  all  our  goods  and  fubftance  as  their  pray.


But  now  to  turn  from  whence  I did  digrefte,

I told  you  how  when  Charles  the  newes  had  heard
Of  houfes  burn  d,and  men  in  great diftrclTe,

By  him  that  doth  nor  God  nor  man  regard :

Vnto  their  aid  hedoth  himfclfaddrclte,

And  chufc  Ibmc  fpeciall  men  tc  be  his  gu.ird,

And  meeting  fuch  as  fled, their ccurfc  he  ftaid,
lAnd  thefe  or  fuch  like  words  to  them  hefaid.

7

O fimplcfooli^w  hat  mean  you  hence  to  run  ?

Turn  back  for  fiiamc, turn  back,and  do  not  flie,

Youchufcthcgrcatciillthcleflcto  fliun,
Tolivcwith  fliamc,and  may  with  honour  die »
What  city  ha  Vc  you  left  w hen  this  is  won?

What  hope  is  lcflf3*fortUBc  new  to  trie  ?

Shall  one  vile  ?<j^<j«boaft  another  day,  ,

That  he  alone  ha'th  driv’n  you  ail  away  ?


Tbrapmen^
Trebiaaad
Cannot  wen
the  pUuet  '
where  Han-
nibal flme  fi
many  of  tit
Rrmanei,
which  he
3 cemporetb  te
fome  battelf
Jeught  tu  }.
talie  in  ha
time,whicb
GeuccterdM
wriut  af.


i


Seietnct,


This


OF  ORLANDO  FYRIOSO.


In


8

This  fiid  ,hf  came  unto  the  pallace  gate,

W hcic  now  the  Pagan  Piincetunmphant  Aood,
MoA  like  a Scipem  fierce  that  hath  of  late.

His  old  skin  calland  left  it  in  the  wood,  ,
Rejoycing  now  of  his  renewed  ftatc.

Of  his  ficlTi  Arcngth,of  young  and  lufty  bloud,

He  flic  wes  his  forked  tongue  and  comes  apace,

And  cv*iy  bcaft  that  lees  him  gives  him  place.

9

1 hus  fcornfull  and  thu*  proud  the  Pagan  Aands,

With  threats  to  fpoile  the  Pallace  and  deface.

And  not  a man  that  once  bis  force  withftandfj
Vntill  king  Cfc(jr/cr  appeared  in  the  place  j
Who  looking  on  his  olc^iVjftorious  hands,  , ■

Said  thus;  and  is  now  alter’d  fo  the  cafe,  ,
Thatthefemy  hands  that  wonted  were  to  win,

T o yeeld  and  to  be  faint  (liould  now  begin }
to

Why  fhoiild  the  ftrengthjthe  vigour  and  the  might.
That  I was  wont  in  you  to  feel  now  faile  ?

Shall  this  fame  Panim^ao  cv’n  in  ray  fight.

My  people  flay,  my  dwelling  houfcaiTaile  ?

Nojfirfl  on  me  a thoufand  deaths  alight,

' Nodeathcanmakc  a piincely  hearttoquailc  j
And  with  that  word  with  couched  fpearcinicfl  ,

He  runs  and  fmites  the  Pagan  on  the  bieafl.

I iT

And  flraight  the  other  of  the  chofen  crew.

On  cv’ry  fide  the  Pagan  do  befet,

But  how  hcfcap’d,and  whatdid  thenenfew.
Another  time  ilc  tell,  but  not  as  yet  ;

For  firft  fomc  matters  paft  I muft  renew.

And  namely  Griffin  I may  not  forger.

And  crafty  OrtgiUaWnh  the  tothcr.

That  was  her  bedfellow  and  not  her  brother,
la

Thcfc  three  unto  TDamafo came  together,
Thcfair’ftand  richefttown  of  all  the  Eafl,
Whattime  great  lords  and  knights  icpaircd  thither.
Allured  by  the  fame  of  fuch  a feaft.

I told  you  from  the  holy  city  hither.

Was  fire  or  fixdayes  journey  at  the  leaft:

But  all  the  townes  about  both  fmall  and  great.

Arc  not  like  this  for  ftatc  and  fruicfull  feat.

13

For  fiiftjbefidc  thcclcareandtemp’ratcaire,

Notnoid  withlommeis  heat  nor  wintciscold.

There  arc  great  ftorc  of  buildings  large  and  fane.

Of  carved  ftonc  moft  ftatcly  to  behold,

The  flreets  all  pav’d  where  is  their  moft  repaire,

And  all  the  ground  is  offofruitfull  mold.

That  all  the  ycarc  their  fpring  doth  feem  tolafl,

And  brings  them  ftorc  of  fruits  of  dainty  tail.

14.

Above  the  City  lies  a little  hill.

That  fhades  the  morning  fun  in  early  houres,
Ofwatcisfwecc(which  here  wcufeto  ftill)

They  make  fiichftore  with  fpicc and  juyccofflowrs.
As  for  the  quantity  mightdiivc  a mill.

Their  gardens  have  faire  walks  and  fhady  bowrs  :
Butftbat  which  chief  maintainethall  the  fwcets)
Twochriftallflieams  do  run  amid  thcftrects.


I2p


1 5

Such  was  the  native  beauty  ofthc  town :

But  now  bccaufc  they  look  for  great  rcfbrt,
OfPrlnccsand  ofLoids  of  great  renown.

They  deck  their  city  in  another  fort;

Each  Lady  puttcih  on  her  richeft  gown.

Each  i]K>uic  with  Arras  hanged  in  llately  port ; r
T he  noble  youths  do  fla nd  upo n companion,

Whofe  horfe  doth  bcft,who  wears  the  beft  caparifon,
16

Thus  Griffiflattdhis  matcsco'mc  to  thisplace.

And  firft  they  view  thefe  fiiowcs  with  grcatdelight.
And  after  they  had  rode  alittlefpac^  ■ '

A courteous  fqulrc  pcrfwadcs  thdn  to  alight.

And  piaycth  tbcm  to  do  his  houfe  that  grace.

To  cat  and  take  their  lodgings  there  that  night :
They  tbank  him  for  his  kind  and  friendly  ofFety  -
And  flraight  accept  the  courtfie  he  dothprofet-

17

They  had  let  down  before  them  coflly  meat.

Of  fundry  wines  there  was  no  little  ftorc.

Of  precious  fruits  the  plenty  was  fo  great.

As  they  had  fcldomcfccn  the  like  before;

The  while  their  hoft  doth  unto  them  repeat,
Thccaufcof  all  this  fcafting, and  wherefore
The  king  appointed  all  tbefe  folcmnc  fports,

To  draw  together  knights  of  fundry  forts.


But  G«^n(though  he  came  not  for  this  end.

For  prdilc  and  bravery  at  tilt  to  run.

But  came  to  find  bis  fleeting  female  friend)
y«  was  hit  courage  fuch  he  would  not  fhdn.

In  thefe  brave  fportsfomc  little  time  to  fpend.
Where  ofwcll  doing  honour  might  be  won.

He  promis’d  ftraight(though  little  were  his  Icifiire)
Before  be  go,to  fee  and  fhew  fbinc  pleafure.

19

And  firft  he  asketh  farther  of  the  feaft.

If  it  were  new  ordain’d, or  els  of  old  ?

His  hoft  replicth  t bus  (my  worthy  gueft)  '

I fliall  in  briefc  to  you  tbit  thing  unfold  c
Our  Prince  the  greateft  Piinceinail  the  Eaft,

Hath  newly  pointed  this  great  feaft  to  hold ;

This  isthc  firft, but  all  of  his  retinue

Mind  each  fouith  month  this  cuftomc  to  continue.

20

In  token  of  great  gladncflc  and  great  joy.

By  all  the  city  is  the  feaft  begun,

I n token  of  the  danger  and  annoy
That  Noraniin  (ourking)did  lately  fliun.

Lock’d  up  fourc  months, where  he  could  noten^oy
The  ufc  of  earth, of  water,aire,norTun  ;

Yetatthc  fouicmcsnthsendby  haphcfcap’d
The  death  with  yawning  mouth  that  on  him  gap’d

21

(But  plaine  to  fhew  you  whence  did  come  the  feed.

Of  which  this  danger  feemed  firft  to  grow)

Love  did  to  this  danger  breed.

The  king  of  Cypres  daughter  pleas’d  him  fb,

Becaufc  her  beauty  did  me  reft  exceed.

To  fee  hci,necds(in  perfon)hc  would  go  :

He  fa  w he  lik’d. he  woo’d  ,hc  won  jhc  married  her,
And  homward  then  by  fliip  he  would  havccaricd  her

But


r^craudtHe.
Hirt  btgiH-
tuth  tbt  talt
tf  Lucitna  a$
thi  'lo  Ih
andendeth
aXthe  5».


Cafan  xvari
ruuy  vent,
vidi,  viti.


THE  SEVENTEENTH  BOOKE


yirgiLthe

firjity£atai.

tntnuceU.

''/ft  /‘i***-^
accepts  fiim
queUiagt-
rebat  ^(ha-
Uf.


OvU-  Met  )•
Sive  tUi  tela
partbtnf.
five  fttganti
five  tpfe  me-
ttu  pT.  hb*~

f»}  vrran j.


It

But  lo  a winiJ  and  ccmoeft  rofc  fo  fore,

A*  thi-cc  dayes  fpacc  they  looked  to  b'cdfown*d,

And  made  them  land  upon  an  unknown  flioie.
Where  ftrai^t  wcpttcht  out  tents  upoft  the  ground*
And(for,of  trees  and  graffe  there  was  good  ftorc)
Tl\c;ICing  in  hope  fome  venfon  to  have  found*

Imp  the  next  adjoyning  wood  doth  go,

: Two  pages  bcarc  his  quiver  and  Ins  bow.

His  meaning  was  fome  flag  or  back  to  kill*

Wc  wait  hiScomiring  in  the  tent  at  calc.

When  fuddenly  fiich  noifc  our  cares  doth  fill.

As  wind  in  woods,  and  waves  do  make  in  fcas^

And  aye  more  nigh  iis  it  approched,  till
We  plaine  might  fee  unto  our  fore  difcafc*

A monftci  huge  that  ran  along  the  fand.

Deploying  all  that  in  the  way  did  Band.

24

ThisOr(e(for  lb  men  dothemonftercall)

Dirciltd  ftraight  his  courfc  upon  our  tent*

Hiscyes  were  out, how  ere  it  did  befall.

But  yet  be  was  Co  quick  and  IhJtrp'of  lent*

As  all  his  blindnefl'c  holp  not  us  at  all.

He  huntethlike  a fparuell  by  the  vent.

His  fent  is  fuch  as  none  can  hope  to  Ihun  him.

His  pace  is  fuch  as  no  man  can  outrun  him.

Thus  whether  they  picpar’d  to  fight  or  fly,  ,

Or  whether  fcarc  hr  th  fight  and  flight  didictj
He  takes  them  as  his  pnliicrs  by  and  by.

Of  forty, ten  I'carcc  to  the  fliip  could  get,

Am,o.  p.  rheothcrpnrnerstanc  was  1,

bilft  1 our  Q^eenc  in  fafety  would  have ftt*

But  all  in  vainc  to  flic,  itdid  not  boot.

He  was  lb  quick  of  fcnt,aad  fwift  of  foot.
ti

As  fhepheards  ban*  a wallet  at  their  waft,
Soathisgirdlchangsa  mighty  fack.

In  which  he  better  fOrt  of  us  he  plac’d*

The  reft  he  bound  together  in  a pack.

And  to  his  cave  that  was  moft  huge  and  vaff.

He  bcarcs  usfhopclcfle  ever  to  come  back)

A comely  matron  in  this  den  he  had.

Maids  fairc  and  foule,(ome  poerc,fomc  richly  clad.


29

When  he  had  heard  at  laft  the  wofull  rewes.

How  greatly  was  his  heart  fiirpris'd  with  griefc  ?
What  gods,what  fortune  did  henot  acculc
For  all  hts  lofics,  but  Luej/na  chiefc  ?

But  dangers  all  and  death  he  firft  will  chufe*

Ere  he  then  leave  his  love  wi  hone  rt htfe,

He  cither  will  hcrlibcitie  pmcuic.

Or  els  he  will  like  chance  with  her  endure,
so

He  leaves  his  flifp,and  goes  by  land  apace,

There  where  the  monfter  had  bit  love  convaid*

And  often  wailcs  her  hord  and  wofull  cafe*

Dcfiring  and  dcfpairing  of  her  aid.

Now  came  he  in  the  kenning  of  the  place.

And  ftandstwixt  halfc  amaz’d  and  halfc  afraid:
At  laft  hccnms(lovccxpclling  fcarc)

When  by  good  hap  the  monftcr  was  not  there*

V

His  wife  was  there, who  with  compaflion  mov’d*
Adironifli’d  him  to  make  but  little  ftay*

But  haften  thence, if  fo  his  life  he  lov’d.

Left  that  her  husband  find  him  in  the  way
Yet  fronvhis  purpofc  this  him  not  icmov’d*

But  to  the  fober  matron  he  doth  fay.

In  vainc  you  feck  to  drive  me  hence  by  terror*
Pefirchath  hhher  brought  me, and  notaror,

3*

By  my  ill  hap  while  1 abroad  was  riding.

The  Orl{0  bare  away  my  deareft  wife,

I hither  come  of  her  to  hcarefomc  tiding*

Or  having  loft  my  love  to  Iccfe  my  life,

1 care  not  I, if  fbc  in  life  be  biding.

If  flic  be  dead  my  death  fliall  end  this  ftri’fe.

Love  in  this  point  forefolute  hath  made  me.

You  fliould  but  Icefe  your  labour  to  difTwadem^/'
II

The  gentle  matron  in  this  fort  replies,

Knowthis,thy  wife  in  /afecydoth  rcmalne*.

But  hard  it  is  to  eompafTc  ordevife.

Which  way  to  get  her  fiom  his  hand  againc*

His  want  offignr,his parting  ientfupphts.

To  ftiivcwith  him  by  force  it  were  but  vainc.

He  fpoileth  mcn,but  women  do  not  die,

Save  oDcly  fuch  asrtriveaway  to  flic.


>7

• Befidc  this  female  family  of  his.

He  hath  a cave  wheiein  he  keeps  his  flock,
That  cave  in  length  and  lai^cncflc  parteth  this*
Made  all  by  hand  out  of  the  ftony  rock  :
And(for  mans  flerti  his  chiefeft  dainty  is)

Into  t he  cave  he  (afely  doth  us  lock.

The  while  he  leads  abroad  hisgoais  and  rticep*
Whith  in  the  fields  adjovning  he  doth  keep,
a's

The  king  not  knowing  this, returned  back.

The  filcnce  that  he  found  fomefearc  did  breed;
But  whenhe  found  his  wife  and  men  were  lack.
He  then  to  Tea  did  haft  him  with  great  fpecd  ;
He  fees  plaine  fignes  of  haft.of  fpoilc.of  wrack*
Yet  knowc,.  he  not  the  author  oft  his  deed,
Vntili  he  had  his  rtiip  by  haprecover'd,

Then  by  hit  men  the  faft  wasplaiac  difcovct’d.


But  thofe  he  findshiscompahy  to  rtiun,

With  hatred  great  he  doth  fofayc  pu  fuc.

Some  hedoth  bang  all  naked  in  the  fun.

And  day  by  day  their  torments  do  h icnuc  j
Arvl  fome  immediately  to  death  arc  done.

Both  yongand  old, both  foiilcorfaiicof  heW*

So  that  to  feck  to  fctLa^nafrcc,

May  harm  her  much,  and  licjc  profit  thee.

I*

Wherefore  my  Tonne  dcpait  the  while  thou  itwy*

(The matron  faith)lMcyiw  rtiall  notdic.

For  hither fliortly  he  will  hcrconvay.

Where  fhc  rtiall  fare  no  woifc  than  theft  and  I*^
Depart?  (quoth  he) nay  here  I mind  to  rtay.

And  fall  what  rtiall,!  will  my  fortune  trie.

And  if  my  hap  be  fuch  I cannot  free  her*

At  leaft  I mcanc  before  1 die  to  fee  her*

Tkft


yirg.

ad.}.  Sium
men  tneyfavi
ameat

Du


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


3®

Tlie  matrons  mind  with  much  companion  movcdj
'I  o fee  his  loving  and  moft  conflantmind,

That  from  his  purpofc  w'ould  not  beremoved.

To  bring  him  aid  and  comfort  was  inclin’d:

And  then  /he  told  him  how  it  him  behoved^

If  /b  to  fee  his  wife  he  had  alhgn’d.

To  ufefomefuch  device  as /he  would  tell  him,  (him.
That  when  the  Orfi  Ihould  come  he  might  aot  fmell

?7

She  had  that  hanged  in  the  houfesroofe.

The  hairieskinsof  many  a bearded  goate.

And  knowing  beft  what  was  for  his  bchoofe.

Of  one  of  them  /lie  makes  him  make  a coate^

And  with  goatesfuet  fora  further  proefe,

Tonoint  his  body  from  the  foote  to  throaie;

A nd  in  this  fort  his  /hape  and  favour  hiding.

He  commeth  to  the  place  where  we  were  biding.

38

Now  night  drew  ncarejhis  borne  the  Gr^c  doth  blow,

A nd  all  his  heard  came  backe  unto  his  fold.

And  Morandin  among  the  goates  doth  go.

And  enters  in, love  maketh  him  fb  bold.

The  Or/’9  flmts  thedoore,and  leaves  us  fo.

Shut  up  asfafeas  in  a towreor  hold,

Then  doth  the  King  at  large  unto  his  lover,
Hiscommingand  themeanes  thereof  difeover.

39

Lucinadoth  notonely  notrcjoycc.

To  fee  her  husband  come  thus  ftrangely  clad.

But  with  moft  lamentable  mournfull  voyce.

She  blam’d  him  that  fuch  perillvemred  bad.

And  fwcares  that  if  fhe  might  hare  had  her  choyce.
She  would  alone  hare  felt  this  fortune  bad.

And  that  before  it  fomewhat  eas’d  her  paine.

To  tbinke  that  he  in  fafetiedidremaice.

Thus  faid  Lucina  fzirc  with  waited  eies.

As  feeming  now  moredolefull  thru  before;

. But  Norandino  in  this  fort  replies,

Think’ft  thou  my  d care  I loved  thccnomorc?

Yes  fuic,and  will  ev’n  now  a mcane  derife
Both  thee  and  thefc  to  frccdometoreftorc,

And  to  deliver  from  this /ervileflavery,

By  helpc  of  this  fame  skin  and  greafe  unfavery.

41

And  ftraight  he  taught  us  as  himfcifc  had  tridr.

Each  one  to  kill  a goate  and  take  the  skin,

A nd  outwardly  to  wcarc  the  hairy  hide.

And  to  he  nointed  with  the  greafe  within.

Thus  ev’ry  one  doth  for  himfcifc  provide.

Before  thefunne  did  yet  to  fliinc begin.

Then  came  the  Or^c  and  mov’d  away  the  ftonc,

And  out  the  bearded  guates  came  one  and  one.

The  fmelling  Or^o  at  thedoorc  doth  ftand.

We  paft  like  goates  and  make  no  node  norfpcecb.
Yet  oft  he  groped  with  his  hideous  hand.

But  poorc  Lucina  could  not  chufc  hot  skreechj
Or  that  he  bapt  to  touch  her  with  his  wand,

Orel/c  too  roughly  paw’d  her  by  the  breech.

So  back  he  puts  her  ftraight,and  locks  her  up,

And  fvveares  that  flie  /hould  drinkc  a lory  cup . -


131

43

Himfcifc  drives  out  hisflovke  (as  wort  be  was)

Aud  wc  like  goaics  among  t be  goa ces  do  keepe.

And  when  as  they  were  feeding  on  the  gra/Fc,

The  monftrous  heardman  laid  him  downc  to  flccpc.
Thus  wccfcapt,but  our  good  King  alas,

(That  mift  hislovc)doth  nought  butwailcand  weep
And  fare  that  ftill  he  hop’tof  her  rclicfe.

He  would  no  doubt  have  didc  of  very  gritfe.

44

At  night  he  turneth  back  with  like  defire.

As  he  before  had  tome  to  /ct  her  free.

And  he  con-ccalcsbiinfclfe  with  likeattire.

From  him  that  wants  his  inflrument  to  fee.

The  Or/je  in  flam’d  with  crucll  rage  and  ire,

Aud  finds  himfcifc  deceived  thus  to  be.

This  rccompencc  he  points  her  for  her  paincs,
Vponthat  hill  to  hang  each  day  inchaines,

45  '

A ctucll  doomc,but  who  could  it  refift?

Away  went  wc,each  for  himfclfe  afraid.

But  ever  doth  perfift

In  his  firft  purpofe  of  procuring  aid.

Lamenting  that  fo  narrowly  he  mill
To  bring  her  out,among  the  goates  heftaid.

And  like  a goate  (forgetting  his  cftatc)

Hcgo’th  out  early,  and  rcturneth  late.

She  fees  him  go  and  comc,but  all  invaine.

She  maketh  fignes  to  hi  mt®  have  him  part.

He  conftantly  rcfolvetb  to  rcmainc.

The  love  of  her  pofleffeth  fo  his  hart,

Defpifing  dangcrand  enduring  paine.

He  hopeth  hopcIc/Tc  ftill  to  cafe  her  fmart.

At  fourc  months  end  (good  fortuuefo  prepaid)
Cradajfo  thither  came  and  Mandricard.

47

And  (for  her  father  was  their  loving  frend)

They  gave  this  bold  attempt  to  fet  her  free.

And  to  her  father  ftraight  they  do  her  fend.

Who  was  full  glad  and  joyfull  her  to  fee.

And  that  berdangershad  this  happic end;

But  Norandino  wzs  more  glad  then  hc;

Who  with  the  goats  no  longer  now  did  ftayj
But^hile  the  Orlio  flept  he  ftalcaway.

48

And  now  for  joy  of  this  great  perill  pafl^.

In  which  hc  flay’d  Co  wofull  and  forlorne*

And  that  the  memorie  thcreofmay  laft.

To  tho/c  that  fhall  be,  and  arc  yet  unborne,'

(For  never  Prince  before  fuch  wo  did  taft.

Nor  flay’d  fo  long  in  mifery  and  fcorne,

And  it  fhall  be  juftfixtccnc  weeks  to  morow.

That  hc  remained  in  this  wo  and  forow.)

49

Thcrforc  I fay  the  King  prepares  this  fporr.

With  very  great  magnificence  and  boft.

Inviting  hither  men  of  ev’ry  Ibrt,

Such  asm  chivalric  cxcell  rhemoft.

That  far  and  ncarc  may  caricthc  report.

Of  thefe  great  triumphs  unto  ev’ry  coft.

This  talc  the  courteous  hoft  did  tell  his  gueft.

Of  him  that  firft  ordaind  thefumptuous  fcaft.

M Itt


THE  SEVENTEENTH  BOOKE


Charleithe
ffuttumt  ihe
prft  that  teat
foUtd  the
ne(l  Ch/ifli-
ox  for
dtftttdiHf^tbt
Church  of
T(omt.
TiriinatUa
vtt  the  firjl
that  teas  cai^
ltd  Catbo-
Ukttforiri-
%itng  tht
Mteris  out
»/  Granata,


50

In  this  and  fuch  like  talkc  they  fpend  ihc  night.

And  then  they  fleepeupon  their  bedsof  downe.

But  when  that  once  it /hined  cleareand  light.

The  truro pet* founded  overall  thetowne.

And  Griffin  flraighc  puts  on  his  armor  bright,
Afpiring  after  fame  and  high  rcnownc;

His  leud  companion  likcwilc  doth  the  famCj
To/hcwahopcaswcllashc  of  fame,

5«

All  armed  thus  they  came  unto  the  field.

And  view  the  warlike  troupesas  they  did  paffe.
Where  fome  had  painted  on  thcii  crcft  and  (hitld.

Or  fome  device  that  there  deferrbed  was.

What  hope  or  doubt  his  love  to  him  did  yccld.

They  all  were  Chriflens  then,  but  now  alas,

T hey  all  are  T urf^s  unto  the  endleflc  niarce.

Of  tliofc  that  may  and  do  not  mend  the  fame.

51

For  where  they  fiiould  employ  their  fword  and  lance,
Agninfi  the  Infidelsour  piiblikcfoes,

Gods  Word  and  true  Religion  to  advance,'

They  to  poore  Chri/lens  workc  pcrpetuall  w’oes:

To  you  I write,yc  Kings  ofSpaine  and  France,

'Let  thcfcaloncjandturne  your  force  on  thofe:

And  linto youalfolwiiteasmtich.

Ye  nations  fierce,  1 meane  and  Dutch.

Lo,toneof  C)^riy?en  Kings  ufurps  a name.

Another  Catholil^e  will  needs  be  called  :

Why  do  not  both  your  deeds  declare  the  fame?

Why  are  Chnfts  people  flaine  by  you  and  thralled?
Get  backe  againc  lerufalem  for  fhame,

Thar  now  the  Turtle  hath  tanc  from  you  and  walled
Confiantinople  get  that  famous  towne.

That  cifi  bdonged  tothTmperiallcrewnc*

Doll  not  thou  confront  with  Affrikc  flrotc.

That  more  then  /ra/y  haththccoffcndcd}

Yet  to  her  hurt  thou  Icavcft  that  before,

Againd  the  Infidels  thou  hadft  intended  j
O Italy  a Have  for  evermore.

In  fuch  fort  mard,as  never  can  be  mended,

A Have  to  flavcs,and  made  of  finne  a finke.

And  fotted  fleepe  like  men  orccomc  with  drinke;


sr

But  whither  roves  my  rudely  rolling  pen.

That  waxc  fofawcic  to  reprove  lirch  pccres?

1 fflid  before  that  rn  Damafeoxhen

They  Cbrifiend  were  ('asinrccoidsappcarcs)

So  that  the  armor  of  their  horfc  and  men

Was  like  to  ours  (though  chang’d  of  later  ycares)

And  Ladies  fi!d  their  galleries  and  towrs.

To  fee  the  juftsas  they  did  here  ill  outs.

S«

Each  drives  in  flicw  his  fellow  to  exceed.

And  to  be  gallant  inhis  midris  fight,

T o fee  each  one  manage  his  ftatcJy  deed.

Was  to  the  llaiidcis  by  a great  delight;

Som«  praife  unto  thcmfclvcs^foire  fhame  do  breed.
By  fliewing  horfes  doings  wrong  or  nghr.

The  chiefed  prize  that  fliould  be  of  thistilr.

An  armor  was  rich,(ct  with  done  and  gilt.

59

By  hap  a merchant  of  Armenia  found
This  axmour,and  to  Norandmit  fold.

Who, had  he  knownc  how  good  it  W'as  and  found,
Would  not  have  left  it  fure  for  any  gold,

(The  circumftancc  I cannot  now  expound,

1 mc3ne  ere  long  it  fliall  to  you  be  told)

Now  mud  I tell  of  Griffin  that  came  in,
lud  when  the  fport  and  tilting  did  begin.

60

Eightvaliant  Knights  the chalergc did  fudaine,
Againd  all  commers  that  would  tunne  that  day^
Thcfc  eight  were  of  the  Princes  private  trainc.

Of  noble  blood,and  noble  ev*iy  way.

They  fight  in  fport,but  fome  in  fport  were  dainc.
For  why  as  hotly  they  did  fight  in  play.

As  deadly  foes  do  fight  in  batttclltay.

Save  that  the  King  may  when  hchlt  them  day.

61

New  Griffins  fellow  was  Martano  tiamed.

Who  (though  he  v\erc  a coward  and  a bead)

Like  bold  blind  Bayard  he  wasnot  afhamed.

To  enter  like  a Knight  among  the  red.

His  countenance  likcwifcin  fhew  he  framed,

As  though  he  were  as  forward  as  the  bed.

And  thus  he  dood  and  view’d  a bitter  fight,
Betweena  Baton  and  another  Knight.


55

Yc  fwi\^ers  ficrec,iffeare  of  famine  drive  you.

To  come  to  Lombardie  to  feeke  fome  food ,

Are  not  the  Turf^s  as  nearc?  why  fhould  it  grieve  you
Tofpillyour  focs,and  fpate  your  brothers  blood?
They  have  the  gold  and  riches  to  relieve  you ,

Enrich  your  fclves  with  lawfull  gotten  good.

So  fhall  all  Europe  be  to  you  beholding.

For  driving  thenn  from  thcfc  parts, and  withholding.

56

ThiswaiLct  TliouLion  doutthatholdftofhcav’nthekayes,
titUrJb  waighticcharge)  fee  that  from  drowfic  ficepe

Thou  wake  our  realrtie,  and  bring  her  joyfulldayes,
And  from  thcfc  forren  wolves  it  fafely  keepe,

God  doth  thee  to  this  height  of  honor  raife.

That  thou  mavd  feed  and  well  defend  thy  fheepe.
That  with  a roiing  voice  and  mighty  arrac,

'Xbou  tnayd  withold  thj  flock  from  evVy  harmc.


62

Lord  of  Seleucia  the  tone  they  call.

And  one  of  eight  that  did  maintaine  the  juft.

The  Knight  Ombruno  hight  of  perfon  tall.

Who  in  his  vi  zer  tookc  fo  great  a thruft.

That  from  his  horfc  aflonied  he  did  fall,

A nd  with  his  lively  blood  diftain’d  the  duft:

This  fight  amaz’d  in  fuch  fort.

He  was  afraid  to  Iccfc  his  life  in  fpott*

Soonc  after  this  fo  fierceconflift  was  done.

Another  challenger  ftraight  fteppeth  out.

With  whom  Martano  was  requit’d  to  runne,

But  hc(whofe  heart  was  ever  full  of  doubt)

With  fond  cxcufes  fought  the  fame  to  fhunne.

And  flicw’d  hinifelfc  a faint  and  daflatd  lout.

Till  Griffin  egd  him  on,and  blam’d  his  fcaic.

As  o;cQ  de  fet  a maflivc  on  a Bcatc.

Then


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO,


t33


«+

Then  tooke  lie  hcait  of  grace, and  on  did  ndc.

And  makes  a little  florifh  with  his  fpcarc.

But  in  the  middle  way  he  rtept  aildc.

For  fcarc  the  blow  would  be  too  big  to  beaief
Yet  ore  that  would  feckc  this  difgrace  to  hide.

Might  in  this  point  impute  it  not  tofeate.

But  rather  that  his  horfenot  good  and  redie.

Did  fhun  '.he  tilc,and  laiicc  not  ev’n  not  ftcdic,

«5

Butafter  with  h’s  fword  he  dealt  fo  ill,

“Demijihencs  him  could  not  hare  defended,

0»  txitUtnk  He  {licw*d  both  want  of  courage  and  of  skill.

Orator.  So  as  the  b okerson  were  all  offended.

And  ftraight  with  hiffi  ng  and  with  voices  Hirillj
< The  onflift  cowardly  begun  was  ended;

InhisbchalfcwasGrt^/i  lore  afliam'd.

His  heart  thereto  with  double  heate  inflanicd.

66

For  now  he  fees  how  much  on  him  it  Hands,

With  double  value  to  wipe  out  the  blot.

And  Hiew  himfelfe  the  more  Hout  of  his  handsj
Sith  his  companion  fhcw‘d  himfelfe  a (bt.

His  fame  or  fhamc  muft  flic  to  fonen  lands.

And  if  he  now  fliould  failc  one  little  jot,
Thefamcwoldfcemafoulcand  huge  tranfgieflion.
His  mate  had  flld  their  minds  with  Aich  impreflion.

67

The  firft  he  met  Lord  of  Sidona  hight.

And  towards  him  he  runs  with  raaflie  fpeare.

And  gave  a blow  that  did  foheavie  light,

As  to  the  ground  it  did  him  backward  bcarC;

Then  came  of  Laodice  another  Knight,

On  him  the  flaffe  in  pecccs  three  dtd  teare,

Tet  was  the  counterbuffe  thereof  fo  great.

The  Knight  had  much  ado  to  kcepc  his  /caw<

68

Iflut  when  they  came  with  naked  fwords  to  trie.

Which  fhould  the  honor  a nd  the  prife  obtaine.

So Gri^n did  with  deadly  ftrokes  him  plie,

Atlafl  he  left  him  floni’d  on  theplaine.

Stiaightway  two  valiant  brothers  flanding  by,

Tha  t at  Griffim  tooke  no  fmall  difdainc.

The  tone  CoTimbo,ioihci  Tirfe  hight,

Thefc  two  forthwith  do  challenge  him  to  fight*

69

Succelllvcly  them  both  he  overthrew.

And  now  men  thoilght  that  he  the  piifc  would  win.
But  Salintern  that  faw  them  downc  in  vcyv.

To  cnvic  good  Griffino  doth  begin.

This  man  the  floutfl  of  all  the  courtly  crew.

Doth  take  a fpcaie  in  hand, and  entersin.

And  to  thecombat  Grij^ft  ftraight  defies.

And  fcorncstohavca  ftranget  winthc  ptize.

70

But  Griffin  chofe  one  flaffe  among  the  reft.

The  biggcft  and  the  ftiongeft  ofafcorc.

And  with  the  fame  he  picrceth  backc  and  breft.
That  downe  he  fell  and  never  ff  iircd  morcj
The  King  that  loved  and  eftcem’d  him  beft.
Laments  his  death, and  maketh  mone  therefore.
But  yet  the  common  lort  were  fainc  and  glad.

That  knew  his  mind  andinanncrs  were  but  bad.


7*

Next  after  him  two  others  he  doth  mcer,

Zrmtfflo  the  captainc  of  his  guard.

And  Carmond  Admirall  of  all  his  fleet.

With  thefc  a while  he  had  a confliiff  hard.

The  firft  unhorft  was  left  upon  his  feet.

The  other  with  a blow  wasalmcft  mard.

Thusof  eight  challcngns  remain’d  biitone.

The  reft  were  quite  fubdude  by  him  alone.

Thisonc  washeofwhomat  firft  I fpake.

Lord  of Selcuda  a valiant  man,

Thisonc  to  Griffindid  rcfiftancc  make.

And  long  it  was  ere  ought  of  him  he  wan.

But  one  blow  on  his  head  fo  fierce  he  ftrake.

As  he  like  wife  to  ftagser  now  began,

Had  not  the  King  made  them  to  have  bene  parted^

Sure  Griffin  had  him  kild  ere  he  had  parted.

73

Thus  all  thofc  eight,  that  all  the  world  defidc,

Byoncalone  were  vanquiflicd  and  flaine,

So  as  the  King  was  forced  to  provide.

An  order  new  for  thofc  that  do  rcmaincj
(By  parting  runners  fomcon cither  fide)
Foryctwasfpcntnot  paftan  hourcortwaine.

Left  this  his  triumph  fliould  have  end  too  foone.

He  makesthem  fpend  therein  thcaftcrnoonc.

7 +

But  Griffin  full  of  wrath  and  diffontent,

Backc  to  his  hoft  with  his  companion  came.

The  praife  he  wan  did  him  n ot  fb  con  tent.

As  he  wasgriev’d  at  his  companions  fliame:

Wherefore  to  leave  the  towncthey  do  confent.

While  men  were  bufic  looking  on  the  game.

And  to  a little  townc  faft  by  he  goes.

And  meaneshimfclfe  a while  for  to  tepofe.

75

The  travel!  fore  he  had  before  endured,

Sogreata  wearineffein  him  had  bred,

Andfuchdefireof  fleepe  withall  procured.

As  ftraight  he  gat  him  to  his  naked  bed.

The  while  Mariano  to  all  fraud  inured,

And  uflng  aid  of  her  mifehievous  head ,

(As  he  did  foundly  fleepe)  devis’d  1 he  wliilc
A ftratageme  nioft  ftraiigc,him  to  beguile,

76

They  do  conclude  to  take  Griffno!  fteed,

, Andcotc,and  cv’ry  warlikeimplcmcnt.

And  that  Mariano  in  Griffinos  ftced,

Himfelfe  to  Norandino  lhall  prefent

This  they  devis’d,  this  they  pcifoim’d  in  deed.

And  boldly  backc  againc  Mariano  went.

In  Griffins  armor  ftoutly  ftepping  in,

Asdidthc  Affcthat  waicthc  Lions  skin.

•jj  fibitf.

He  rtiflicth  in  among  the  thickeft  prefle,

An  hourc  before t he fetting  ofthefunne.

The  King  and  all  the  icft  ftraighrway  do  guefle,

That  this  was  he  that  had  fuch  honor  wonne:

And  ftraight  great  honoiit  they  to  him  addreffe.

And  cauic  the  like  by  others  to  be  done.

And  his  bafe  name,  not  worthy  to  be  named,

About  the  townc  vT^ith  honor  was  proclaimed,

U z Faff


Uxvtim/

tktfttflt
tautbtfi
whtmtht
friiK*  mt‘
ktibuommcb


<54


THE  SEVENTEENTH  BOOKE


Faft  by  the  King  lie  ridcth  chccke  by  chcckc,
yViiJ  in  his  piaifc  they  Tongs  and  verles  make,
3o  Hebrew  tonsuc,  tn  Lritin  and  in  Grceh^e,

A nd  now  tliis  while  did  Griffin  hap  to  wake.

And  feeing  that  his  armour  was  to  feeke^^


,7»  etuH

'cr  f^r*

iur<>


He  fiift  begins  Tome  (mall  miftruft  to  take.

Yet  hardly  could  h (Inke  into  bis  leafon,

1 hat  (he  had  giv’n  confcnttofucha  treafon.

79  _

In  Tearc  and  doubt  no  little  time  he  hovered  ; ^

But  when  hishoft  the  truth  had  plaine  declat  d,  ^

And  that  he  faw  the  faKhood  plaine  difeovered,,

By  which  iflic  had  in  follies  bands  him  fnai  d.

Then  truth  (hewd  plain, that  love  before  had  coveted.
And  to  revenge  this  wrong  he  ftraight  prepar’d,;

But  wanting  other  furniture  (perforce)
HciOoticMananor  armor  and  hishoifc.

80

And  backc  wnxoT)  imcLfco  he  doth  ride.

Arriving  there  within  an  hoiuc  of  night.

And  em  ring  at  the  gate  upon  the  (ide,  :

The  pailacc  of  the  King  flood  plaint  in  light,
Where  then  the  King  a banket  did  provide.

For  many  a Duke  and  Lord,and  valiant  Knight,  f
And  boldly  fate  amongthc  reft.

Forgetting  that  he  ware  the  fcornedcrclt.

81

And  takenforthemanwliofecoatchcware,  j.

His  prcfcacc  did  t he  batcr  fort  offend,  r .

Of  which  when  vile  AtofiJMO  was  aware,’  . •.

That  ofthc  table  fate  at  th’upper  end,  ^ . '

And  fees  that  to  difgracc  hirtr  they  forbafe , A
And  thinke  h-'m  his  companion  and  hisftend:

His  fricndfliip  and  acquaintance  be  renounced.

And  this  hard  doom  of  him  he  ftraight  pronounced.

82

Sir  King  (quoth  he)  it  feems  that  for  my  fake.

You  graciouny  forbearctodohimniamc,  >

Tiiatofhisbafcncfl'cniamcfull  proofcdid  make
This  day, and  now  againeconfirmcsthcfamc;  w
But  you  the  matter  and  the  man  miftake,

I know  not  him,his  nation ,nor  his  name.

By  chancel  met  himoncly  on  the  way,

I never  faw  him  I, till  yefterday.

Wherefore  might  I herein  your  grace  advift.

You  fiiould  a famplcmakc  him  for  the  reft.

That  here  prefents  unto  your  princely  ciei,

Himfclfc  unworthy, and  unwelcome  gueft.

Let  him  tormented  be  in  crucll  wife,

(This  is  rny  doomc)  let  him  be  bang’d  at  lean,

A nd  unrevenged  let  him  not  be  borne,  •

That  Knighthood  (liould  tccciTC  fo  great  a fcorne,


«4

Thus  much  the  vile  and  bafe  Afdrta'io  feth.

And  OrigilU  footh’d  it  with  as  ranch.

And  wiftit  an  halter  flop  the  villains  breth.

Nay  (quoth  the  King)  the  finne  is  nothing  fuch
As  IS  in  law  or  rcafon  worthy  death,

His  life  or  yet  hit  liberty  to  tuch:  ^

This,  for  examples  fake  I thinke  it  mccti
To  do  him  fomc  difgracc  in  open  ftrcct.

And  ftraight  he  rounds  a Sergeant  in  his  earc.

And  fccretly  appoints  him  what  to  do,

Who  came  forthwith  unto  the  table  where
fatc,and  made  no  more  ado.

But  Icadeth  him,that  no  fuch  thing  did  fcarc,

A feciet  prifon  and  a furc  unto.

And  foL  that  night  he  clapt  him  up  in  fetters.

Where  thccvCs do  ufc  to  lie  and  erill  debters.

Next  day  A/drratJO  that  did  greatly  dread.

Left  this  his  foulc  device  would  come  to  light,

M Griffin  fliouId  be  heard  hiscaufc  to  pleadc.
Therefore  asfoonc  as  PhahuiMned  bright,
(PictcndiugbnfiHcflc)  away  he  fped,

And  leaves  Griffino  in  this  wofull  plight:

But  ere  he  gocs,thc  King  to  him  imparts
No  fmall  rewards  for  his,not  his  dclarts.

87

But  let  him  go  his  waycs,and  do  not  doubt.

That  this  unknowne  and  unreveng’d  fhall  be:
StraigTitwas  Griffinoftomxht  jaylc  put  out.

And  carted  fo  as  all  men  might  him  fee.

Tide  hand  and  foot,and  people  all  about.

Of  which  the  moft  were  but  of  mcane  degree,  j

Alfo  the  armor  whence  this  error  came,

Washald  about  unto  hisfardcrfliamc.

88

With  many  filthy  words  they  him  revile.

From  filthy  tongues,  that  hard  it  is  to  flop.

And  fhew’d  him  round  about  the  townc  the  while.
At  cv’ry  croffcjand  houfc,and  ftall  aind  fhop.

Then  thinking  him  for  ever  to  exile.

They  led  him  of  that  hill  unto  the  top,

And  there  his  bonds  they  loofc  with  great  difgracc.
And  then  they  will  him  packc  him  thence  apace,

89

With  fcoi  nfull  found  of  bafon,  pot  and  pan.

They  thought  to  drive  him  thence  like  Bees  in
But  when  he  was  untldc,thcn  he  began  (fwarmes,
To  make  them  know  thcircirorto  their  harmes.
Then  he  did  lay  about, and  play  tlio  man.

Now  having  ufeof  both  his  wailikc  armes,
Butinwhat  fort  he  themdiftnayd  and  feared.
Within  another  booke  ftrall  bcdeclaicd.


Mtrunt  u
vtct  with  in


oral!.


Allu^or,


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.  135

!ntiit%cAotaoax.hjli  anlmijfiCTcs  the  feopU,  vithourrefij^iK^e,  orifitlyut  ayjTnsuti  nureiiadAgainfc  him^
ve  marine  hns>p:ly  and.  propetfy  r h n^tituie  may  he  i.l^pxd  to jbeepe,  not  omly  in  rla:  tl^  he Jborr^,  and  fcr-
^dezejyyeate  jor  their  rrooU,  and  fomenme  pinchedto  the  thegreediejbtarers,  but  alfoicartfhenihty

bouLi  tome  to  defend  themfelvet,  their  houfesjnd  chUiren,  from  irr.adirg  rthe  enemie,  ti^  runxe  atr.y  li{e Jbeepe,
rom  tie  wife  g- ; he  bxrkjng  oJa  link  tune,  untill  their  Jhepheardcome  and  dtend  them.

I'l  the  tale  ofUlorzadiaejthai  for  hu  ^aireLixcims  fa^e  did  hazard  his  Ire  ^ mar^ejily,  artdxtarsai  contented  to
ip  hitajelfe  up  inagoates  sh^  n,  and  to  noya  himfelfe  rter  tsithgoatcs  fuet.tte  may  rjite  'rtrc  hariie  l<r.eand  affttiien
.‘lU maf^aman  diflaine  nothing  be  it  ne-.er  fa  bafe.  In  Marcaco*  ct-wardife,  and  crafrie  undernunirg  of  GiiSnoy
cmaymarl^hj^cctrardly  jed.triS  bee  commonly  trecherous,  andpri-.ieunderminen.  And ht  that  Sctizdlne  'a
oad  natured  and  affable  Prvue^  ^td  conJemne  G riffino  to  ptifon,  mtbrut  once  caU.rg  him  to  an  Over  for  him  'U'cJree
^ tc\e  an  excelJtn  good  note  'as  tty  author  hath  done  upon  this  matter  in  :be  next  booty  iorr  turtfuli  a tbt'g  it  is  :i
common^:al:htvhen  a magi^rate^andjpecuilfy a Prince  Jhad teare  fuch  a I-Iartaniji  as  Marta nojCr  Jiuh aGil as
•rigilJa  rsasythi^tr  them  in  their  earcs,  andgr.e  nalicioas  anduntrue  though probahie)  informarions  againfi  vteH
zfcrAng  men:  And Jure, though  fime  told  opMionthaz  the~e  hinde  of  people  ( caSed  irrormert  be  :s  be  cher-jbed,ss  m-
ijfarj  J'er-tanti  of  the  Jfatey  cough  defamed  othenpi/e,  and  enten  cowefjirg  tbcm^ek.  et,  that  it  is  no  hom/i  mans  oftce;
'■tfoT  my  part, I ha-je  beard  ve:fe  menj'dyyhat  fuch  men  ate  burr'uS  to  tie  ft  ate  in  podide,  and  mary  rnore  maiK  :n-
ntsyk^  thy  difcrteriond  1 am  pure  it  is  far  from  the  rules  ofClrifen  ch^iy,  and  to  be  connoldexen  by  heat'crsifb
viliiy.  Tudly  fp  talking  of  the  Uhytnen  faith,  Anfenbiiscibaria  publicclocanrurj& caresalunrarm  Capitolio-
ihyningthem.to  be  as  nectjfaty  to  tyepe  in  the  common  rreakh,  as gcefe  and  doggs  in  the  CapiioUyet  as  Tullr  there
iTedfj  tbedoggs  barhy  without  caufe^  fuh  as  came  ofde".  otion  to  werjbip  the  Gods,  then  their  Ugs  ought  to  be  bro-
sn:Ande-jen  fo  thefe  d'ggs,  theft  blood-hounds, r.^  bloody-tcunds,  that  bite  in  their  larlyrg,  if  th-eyfcaUat  ary  time
up  at  Jiuh  as  carat  to  honor  and feroe  their  Prince  dt  were  pittie  their  leggsforAl  be  brolynirfur  though  th^  ;'ai  UnKy
V th^  can  be  carried  in  coaches  and  horjlittas ; mame  if  their  neclys  wae  bro'tyr.jke  Psalmejbo  uld  "l  thirj^aa-e
t'aire  riLLmte  of  them  But  1 wil  end  ttU  note  with  axerfe  of  that  pleaGn:  Poet  binuiillyrritten  sir.  e i socy  cares
ue  toQxCityWho  hadthcnbaniJbedpTomoonrs  tut  of  Rome:  the  width  \etje  (I  confcjfe^  cencuts  wsth  ny  :p:rJs-i
Tarba  gravis  pad^  placidaeque  ininiica  quied.

Qua  fcmpcr  mifcras  follidaba:  opes,

Tradiu  Gc^s,ncccaepit  arena  noccntes,

Et  delator  babet  quod  daba;  exiliuni,

Exular  Aufoniapro^gus  delator  ab  is  be,

Irapenfit  Titam,Cziaris  asnuateres.

To  this  ejfoH  w Engl:Jb,afteT  tj^plaine  tnarmer  tf'.tTf^fng.

The  vile  Promooteis.foes  topeace  and  cncmie*  to  reft.

That  with  fcalfe  tales,  do  never  ceafe,mens  goods  from  them  to  wieft ,

Arc  baoinit  hence  full  many  a mile,to  barren  place  and  waft.

And  he  that  others  did  exile,tbat  fclfcramc  cup  doth  taft;

O bappie  Rome, that  fiKh  hath  loft,a$  mifcbccfe  ftillconinvCi
But  CxCns  wis  a:  too  much  coft,ra  let  them  Icape  alive.

Andthis  much  for  the  moraS.

Hi  forte  1 ha\  e M*e  to  fond  upon  is  this  hoo^,j'ie?e  Jiuh  as  either  are  already  ttucitd  in  tie  tnarget;  t,  cr  el.e  to  hi
md  in  the  Table.  ^ ■'

A lUgnie  there  is  none.

Bur  the  aUufon  is  noted  by  one  Simon  Fornanu  s at  xeiy  great  lergth,  and  the  fufamet  o^aU  U this,  that  in  dejeri-
this  notable  trittmph  andfeaf  qf'Noraniino,  be  coven  ^ Je 'Iribetb  the  notable  tilting  and  tumeyingorcertainetr
r;  Medic'S  in  Florence,  andhov  one  Gentleman  if  Florence plaidjiich  apart  as  bliTziTuoJbunnirgnt^tiIt,anddid
iieed  vomit  for  Jeare,ani  was  Imgpt  at  for  bis  labrjr.  Alfa  the  nursber  of  the  chalUngers  agreed  tr  Narandiaos  sad
>:*  i ft  as  it  it  evident  that  Ftauaus  faith  right  of  the  matter.

Here  cad  the  netci  of  the  xvij.  Canto.

M 3


iXVJI


>*#>»


SaniotU'k


Hartan


Q el^tA


II  II  ■ If

y^Gpi^s  '//y.

mma^mmkd.

T'>«i^vmvvm\ 1 f L^i^JZi  S;

THE  EIGHTEENTH  BOOKE


■3r


THE  ARGVMENT.

Now  Griilin’s  k»ow»e  andfe/t:  Algyrc  doth  threaten
The’l  artar  Prince ; C harles  fightetb  and prevailes\
Martano  hke  a coward  « well  beaten,

Marfifas force  Damafco  worriers  quaiUs:

From  thence  with  tempefl  tojl,and  weather  beaten^
"Both  Ihe  GrijBn  and h^oX^ofaiUs:

Medor  and  Cloridan  with  care  and paine^

Seeks  for  the  carkas  of  their  mafler  Jloine,


WV»  I


,Ah  ixcet-
Itntfnift  in
a fritte.


[Oft  worthic  Prince  your
vcrtucs  high  and  rare,
(With  tongue  and  penne  I
praife,  and  ever  fhall,

' Aitheugh  my  words  and

1 vcrfcinfcriourarc,

* In  number  and  in  worth  to

match  them  all;

|But  all  above  this  one  I do

^ compare,

And  far  prcfcr,and  puredivincft  call,

Thatgiving  gracious earc to  thofearc  greevcdi
Yet  cv’ry  tale  is  not  by  you  beleevcd.

2

Oft  have  1 heard  your  highnclTchath  refufed.
Although  thc^  fame  moftcarncftly  were  fought
To  heare  the  guiltlcfle  abfent  man  accufed,

(And  when  a great  complaint  to  you  was  brought)
You  have  the  matter  and  thc-man  cxcufed:
Sufpending  ftill  your  judgement  and  your  thought,
And  keeping  till  the  truth  were  truly  tridc.

Ever  one  eare  for  the  contraiie  fide.

3

Had  Norandino  had  fo  great  a grace.

As  not  to credite  tales  fo  lightly  told.

He  had  not  ofiferd  Griffin  thisdifgrace,

No  though  thereby  he  might  have  gained  gold:
Butfodoth  rafltnesvertuc  oft  deface.

As  here  was  proved  that  was  faid  of  old;

The  filly  people  bcare  the  fccurge  and  blame.

Oft  when  their  Princes  do  deferve  the  fame.

■/r  . ^

Tor  Griffin  (as  in  part  I told  before)

When  as  his  bands  arid  fcctc  were  once  untidc.


Djd  dcale  about  of  blowes  and  thruftsfuchftotc,
As  well  was  he  could  forhimfclfcpiovide.

His  wrath  was  fuch  as  none  he  i hen  forbore.

The  old,the  young,the  ftroiig,thc  feeble  didci
And  they  thatlaught  before  to  fee  him  carted.
Now  for  their  labor  whinde  as  much  and  fmartcd>


The  people  faint  and  mazed  fled,  away,

Frcm  him  whomlatethcy  did  dendcand  fcotor.
He  follow’d  them  and  kiid  them  by  the  way,
Daft-irds  more  meet  to  die,thcn  to  be  borne.

But  in  thischafe  a while!  let  him  flay.
Triumphing  now  that  lately  was  forlorne;
OfRoJomont  now  fomewhat  muft  be  fpoken,

On  whom  at  oncel  faid  eight  fpeares  were  broken.


Hi  comistt
Griffin  Utt

tbu


Eight  fpeares  at  once  upon  the  fcaly  skin.

Did  light,  and  divers  darts  were  tluowne  aloofe,

For  fpeares  and  dans  he  palTeth  not  a pin.

Such  was  hisftrength,  fo  fure  his  armors  proofe.*

But  when  he  faw  that  more  and  more  came  in.

To  part  from  thence  he  thinks  his  beft  behoefc.

For  why  on  ev’ry  fide  theydoafTailchim,

That  needs  at  length  his  breath  and  ftrength  muft
7 (failchim.

Ev’n  as  the  Lions  whelps  that  fee  a Bull,  SimUt,

Are  at  the  firft  of  hrs  great  ftrength  aftlaid.

But  when  they  fee  their  fire  to  tearc  or  pull
His  throte  and  fidcs,they  runne  their  fire  to  aid.

And  fli'e  upon  his  face  and  horned  fcull.

Till  proftratc  on  the  ground  they  have  him  laid:

So  now  when  Charles  himfelfe  was  in  the  place.

Each  one  tookcatincs,each  one  took  hart  o/grace.

M 4 Who


Iimh4


th*  H.fttft
*f  tbn


Gitddtfit.

»ct.


THE  EIGHTEENTH  BOOKE


135

8

Who  fo  hath  feene  a huge  well  baited  Beare^

With  many  dogs^men  (landing  clo(c  about.

When  he  by  hap  the  Aakeor  cord  doth  teaie.

And  rufheth  in  among  the  thickeft  rout,

How  fuddenly  they  lunne  away  with  feare.

And  make  a lane  to  let  the  Beare  go  out.*

He  might  (I  fay)  compare  by  fuch  a fight,

The  mannerof  this  Pa^a?ts  Bght  uid  flight.

»

He  rufiieth  out,and  with  his  two  hand  blade.

He  Porifheth  about  in  fo  fierce  fort.

That  foonc  a way  for  him  to  pa(Te  wasmade,

1 o hinder  him  his  way  it  was  no  fpovt.

And  thofethatby  the  way  did  himinvade.

Except  they  (hifted  better, were  cut  fliort:

Thus  in  defpite  of  Charles  and  all  hisrcalme.

He  came  unto  the  banks  of  Sequans  flreame.

10

And  (landing  from  the  banire  a little diftance,

That  few  Of  none  behind  could  him  enclole.

An  howers  fpacc  and  more  he  made  refiflance,
Againfl  King  Charles, whole  powre  flil  greater  groci
Tillin  iheendin  hope  of  no  a(II  (la  nee,

Hifpleas’d ,but  nor  difgrafl  away  he  geesj
He  takes  the  river  fretting  in  hisminde.

That  he  had  left  a man  alive  behindc.

1 1

And  fo  he  Avcll’d  in  anger  and  in  pride.

That  he  had  thought  to  turne  him  backe  againe.

And  to  have  mounted  ontheotherfide.

And  all  that  fhould  withfland  him  to  have  flainc:
But  lo  a meflenger  he  then  clpide.

That  made  him  from  that  ra(h  attempt  refraine.

But  who  did  (end  him, and  what  word  he  bare,

I nieane  to  you  another  time  declare.

But  firft  what  Difcoid  did  1 meanetoHinw,

Who  as  you  heard  was  by  the  Angcll  f«  ut
Among  the  Pagans, leed$  of  llrife  to  Cow,

And  as  flic  was  commanded  thither  went:

Yet  leaving  Erawd  behind  thecoalcs  to  blow.

Lead  all  the  (ire  of  drife  fhould  quite  be  (pent.

And  to  augment  his  (lrength,as  much  as  may  be,

He  carrid  Pride  with  him  out  of  the  Abby.

13

Pride  leaves  Hypecrifieto  keepe  his  place.

And  thus  the(c  jarring  fiiends  togithergo.

And  when  they  traveld  had  a little fpace.

They  found  by  hap  dame  feloufie  alfo,

Thai  metadwarfethatruna  trudging  pace,

Ev'n  as  fiiewanderd  idlely  toand  fro;

And  learning  unto  whom  thispage  wasfent,

Togo  with  him  (lie  quickly  did  confent.

«4

fou  call  to  mind  (for  fine  you  cannot  chufe,

Bntcall  tomind  folate  a written  (loiie)

How  MandricardeDoralice  did  ufe,

Arxl  kept  with  joy  whom  he  did  win  with  glorict
She  feci  etly  lent  notice  of  this  newes,

(Though  afterwaid  her  felfe  perhap  was  foric)

To  Rodomonr,inA  fliarply  him  iiKitcd,
TorcngeherMpeatl  beforerccited.


The  mclTenger  arrived  then  by  hap.

When  from  the  (Ireamc  the  Pagan  did  tfeend.
And  told  him  all  the  talc  of  hci  mifhap.

And  hoW  another  did  pcfTcflc  his  frend:

Cold  jeloufie  (Iraight  emerd  in  his  lap.

And  Pride  with  "Difcorddo  the  matter  mend.
Alledging  if  be  put  up  thisdifgrace,

Then  let  him  ncre  lookc  Ladic  in  the  face.

I 4

Likeasa  Tygerthat  her  youi.g  hath  loft,

Siippris'd  by  hunteia  hand  and  boioc  away.

Doth  follow  on  the  foote  threugb  ev’ry  cod  ,
Hedikesnor  waters  wide  can  makeher  (lay:

So  Rodomont  with  love  (and  anger  mod)
Enfldmcd, could  endure  no  more  delay,

And  though  he  want  his  hoifcjthai  did  not  boote,
T o caufe  him  (lay, he  rather  goes  on  foote.

«7

He  meanes  what  ever  horfeman  next  he  fpide,
Totakc  his  hotfcoffretidorclfeof  fee.

At  this  IS  Difcora  plcas*d,and  (aid  to  Pride,

T hat  (he  was  glad  their  bus'nei  corned  fos
I will  (quoth  (be)  a horfe  for  him  provide.

An  horfe  (hall  coft  him  deare  enough  I trowj
But  what  of  him  and  of  that  horfe  bcfcl.

Another  time  not  now  I meancto  tell.

18

This  while  the  moft  renowned  Chiflen  King,

That  had  cxpulft  the  Pagan  from  the  tewne.

His  valiant  men  of  armes  about  doth  bring.

And  on  the  fodaine  lets  the  draw  bridge  downb
And  with  a frc(h  aifault  their  foes  (o  (ling.

While  fortune  fmild  on  Iiim,on  them  did  frowns.
That  they  had  rimnc  away  like  men  difmaid.

Had  not  Ferratf  couragioufly  them  (laid,
to

My  mates  inarmes  (quothhc)  brethren  and  frendi,
Prov’d  va(  ant  herctofore,now  hold  your  place;
More  happic  far  is  he  his  life  that  fpends.

In  hunour,thcn  that  keeps  it  in  dilgracc-
Loc  me  your  generall  that  hcic  entends/

No  way  to  ftainc  the  blood  of  Spanijh  race.
Thepatternc  follow  that  I fiiew  you  furft.

And  then  i care  not,let  them  do  their  word;’
ao

Thus  m that  part  Ferrate  the  fight  renewd,

Ai  d draws  with  him  thechofen  Spanifl}  band.

That  oft  in  chrijt  enh\ocd  thcir  hands  imbrewd.
And  none  almoll  but  they  did  now  withfland:

But  dcftiniecanncvei  be  efehewd,

A s may  by  their  fuccefte  be  rightly  fcand-.

Behold  Renaldo  comes  and . s he  came,  *

It  feem’d  he  cairid  lightning  fierccor  flame,
a 1

Not  long  before  Almontes  valiant  (bnne,

Highi  'DarnadtU,hii  (Iiinca  Chriftian  Knight,

And  pic  ud  of  that  his  gloric  lately  wonne.

And  of  this  good  fuccefte  he  had  in  fight.

About  the  field  he  carcl<’ftcly  did  runne,

Vntili  bchapttofccawofi'll  fight,

Hefaw  Alfto  veclding  up  the  ghoft,

A youth  whom  he  afleem'd  and  loved  moft*

tureiiuo


It  AAnmi&s


TerUwn

JhmtrssiMi


0dtji

ficrnmqm

kadmiu


ftlUrnttin

K


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.  .

2i


t'.ircMio  was  thf  man  that  did  the  deed.

And  T)j,rdaneli  '.o  venge  it  doth  intend,

Ltircanto  follow’d  on  and  tooke  no  heed.

The  other  all  on  him  his  force  doth  bend.

And  with  a waightic ipeare,  him  and  hi* Heed,
Vnto  the  earth  together  hedoth  (end.

And  pierft  his  thigh, and  put  him  in  fuch  paine.

As  fcant  he  able  was  to  tife  againe.

But  Arioilant  (that  dearc  his  brother  loved)

A nd  fees  him  in  fuch  paino  and  danger  He,

Was  thci  ervithallin  wrathfo  greatly  moved.

He  mcancth  to  avenge  his  hurt, or  die;

But  though  that  he  attempted  oft  and  proved.

Yet  could  he  not  to  73 ardaneff  come  nic,

For  ftill  of  other  mcn,the  throng  and  number,

Did  him  in  this  attempt  mold!  and  cumbcu

iCo  doubt  the  heat ’ns  had  ZJjridKCiK  ordained.

To  pcrifli  by  a more  viflorious  hand;

Renal  lo!  blade  mull  with  his  blood  be  ftaiued.

And  was,as  after  you  lliall  undei  ftand;

By,him  this  praife  and  glory  muft  be  gained.

The  fame  wnereof  mull  fill  both  Tea  and  land;

But  Ictthcff  wefterne  wanes  a while  remaine.

And  ofGrijJino  talkc  we  now  againc.

15

Who  taught  thofc  of  OdWjyco  to  their  harmes,

What  wrong  they  did  to  cart  him  in  fuch  fort,

They  fill  the  townc  with  uproresand  alarmes,
Mensmouthes  and  cares  wctcfiill  of  thisreporti
The  King  brings  forth  five  hundred  men  in  arnocs.
And  fcndii  five  more  to  fovtific  the  fort;

For  why  this  tumult  brought  him  in  perfwafion.
That  fui  c feme  holt  ofmen  did  make  invafioni
25

But  when  he  faw  nomcn,no  holljno  band.

No  troupes  of  horfc  the  citic  to  invade,

Onely  one  man  (well  knownc)  that  there  did  Hand,
Andof  his  people  fuch  a llaughter  made,  ^
(Mov’d  with  reniorcc)  he  llretcheth out  his  hand
Naked,in  fliew  of  peace,  as  is  the  trade.

And  openly  his  rallmeire  he  lamented.

That  filch  a Knight  to  harme  hchadconfcntcd,

2*»

And  Griffin  when  to  find  he  now  begunne.

The  King  was  of  fo  good  an  inclination.

And  that  the  wrong  to  him  before  was  done.

Not  of  his  ownc, but  others  inlligation;

To  make  a friendly  concord  doth  not  fliunnc,
Becaufe  hereby  he  loll  no  reputation:

And  there  he  tarid  at  the  Kings  rcqucll,

T o cure  his  wounds  and  take  a little  rcH>
zt

This  while  his  brother  the  blacjce.

That  with  llil)  in /eiprie  llaid.

And  fees  his  brother  row  fo  tong  did  lackc.

Was  in  his  mind  all  fad  and  ill  apaid;  )

They  heard  no  newes  of  him, they  found  notrackc.
Though  wait  about  in  ev’ry  place  was  laid,

f VotiirthcGrcckini  pilgrim  they  had  met,

By  whom  of  him  fome  inkling  they  did  get,


29

He  told  them  bow  a cerraine  wanton  dame,

Hight  OrigU/a,\viihz  ruffian  knave,

That  kept  her  openly  without  all  lliamc.

Yet  going  in  apparcjl  fine  and  brave,

Thclc  two  (the  pilgrim  faid)  together  came.

From  Antioch  (as  forth  in  fpeech  they  gave)

And  to  CatHiiyce  then  they  meant  togo.

But  what  became  of  them  he  did  not  know.

JO

And  furthevunto  Aqiiilant  he  told.

How  he  Griffino  met  this  other  day.

And  did  to  him  the  matter  all  unfold,

A fid  how  forthwith  Gr/^iia  wenrhis  way.

With  chafe  enough,  and  1 tvearing  that  he  would
Kill  thisfamc  vile  adultrcr  if  he  may:

No  fooncr  had  hi*  fpeech  the  pilgrim  ended,

In  poll  to  follow,^(2zfi/i;»r  intended,
jr

In  poll  he  follow’d  to  73amafco  ward.

And  when  he  tiavcl*d  had  a day  or  twainc,

(Behold  that  God  that  ever  doth  reward
The  good  with  blclfings  and  the  bad  with  paine)
Thatgracclcirccoupjcthat  before  you  heard,
Bctraid  Griffino  with  that  divellifh  trainc,

Iiitothc  bandsof  Aquilant

While  ;facy  in  plcaftircmoll  fccurcly  live.

1 fay  that  AquHant  by  Gods  permiflion.

Doth  meet  the  vile  Martanoon  the  way.

His  hoifc,his  coatc,and  outward  apparition^

So  like  unto  Gr/j^HO  cv*ry  way.

That  Aquilant  at  firll  without  flifpition.

Went  to  embrace him,and  began  to  fay,  '

Brother  well  mct,l  joy  of  your  welfare.

Your  abfcncc  bred  in  me  much  fcarc  and  care.

JJ

But  when  he  law  the  tothcr  not  replide,  •

But  flirunkcaway  likeoncthat  were  afraid.

Ah  traitor  villainjyecid  thy  fclfe^  he  cride.

Thou  hall  my  brother  fpoiled  and  bctraid.

Tell  me  (thou  wretch) doth  he  in  life  abide?

To  whom  in  humble  fort  Martano  faid,

(With  fainting  hart,with  quaking  voice  Sc  trcmblif\g
Yc  t in  t he  tnidft  of  all  his  fcarc  diScmbling.)

oh  pardon  fir,your  brotha  isalive.

And  like  to  live, and  hath  no  hurt, nor  fhall.

The  truth  is  thi$,I  being  loth  to  lltivc
With  him,bccaufc  I found  him  fioqtand  taD,

Did  with  no  ill  intenithisdrift  contrive.

To  favemy  fclfeanddphim  hurt  butfuiall.

For  this  fame  womans  fake  tha  t ?s  my  filler.

With  open  force  not  darjng  to  alTifi  hcc.

It  grieved  me  to  fee  hoWjhc  by  Juft

D id  her  abufe  whom  natm  c made  me  lore,

Aad  for  I thought  it  was  both  meet  and  jull.

Her  from'this  vyickc4  ciillomc to  remove.

And  fith  I'dld  hiivalewgreat  intihufi,

I thoughtit  bell  by  poiheieto  prove;

I (laic  his  horle,and  coatc  while  he  was  deeping.
And  fo  convaid  her  quite  out  of  his  keeping .


Cri^att


I40'


THE  EIGHTEENTH  BOOKE


3«


WcP  might  Mariano  bcarc  away  the  bell,

C i clfc  a w Jiet ftone cha Uengc  for  his  dew.

That  on  the  fodaine  furb  a talc  could  tell,

And  not  a word  of  all  his  talc  was  trew.

But  yet  in  fhew  it  all  agreed  well,

Save  one  which  Aquilant  moft  certalnokncw.

Was  falfc,and  he  in  vainedid  feckc  tofmother.

He  was  her  bedfellow, and  not  her  brother.

With  hand  and  tongue  at  once  he  doth  rcplle,

And  inoneinffant  he  both  ff  rake  and  fpakc,

I know  (quoi-hhc)  vilcTillainc'houdofUie,

And  on  the  face  fo  fiercely  him  he  firake.

He  makes  two  teeth  into  his  throatet  fliC)

Then  with  great  violence  hedoth  him  take.

And  him  and  her  he  binds  inf  bitter  bands,

L ike  captives  cartid  into  forten  lands.

3?

And  thus  in  had  unto*Damafco  riding,

He  fwears  that  he  the fc  bands  would  not  unbind,
Tillof  his  brother  he  do  hearefomc  tiding.

Whom  in  Dainafeu  after  he  did  find;

Who  now  with  cunning  Phifickc  and  good  guiding.
Was  almcft'heald  in  body  and  in  mind.

And  when  hcfawhisuncxpefted  brother.

They  both  ialutcd  and  embrac’d  each  other.

39

And  after  they  had  made  infpccchfbmefpoit,

About  full  manyafoohfh  accident,

(For  Aquilant  had  heard  a large  report
Of  Grifint  carting, and  his  punifhment)

Atlafi  Ucasketh Gnffinin  fv^liatfort
They  fljould  thus  couple  worthily  rorinentj
To  hang  and  draw,and  burnc  their  privie  parts.
Was  not  too  much  for  rheir  too  foulc  dcfarti.

40

T he  King  and  all  his  Councell  thought  it  good,
Becaufc  their  fault  watfuchroopenknownc,

Thai  they  Hibuld  publikely  difpill  their  blood.

And  their  defarts  might  pt’bhkcly  be  fhownc:

But  ye:  that  rilotion  Griffiii  ftraight  withflood.
Pretending  private  caufts  of  hit  owne,

*^iOnely  he  wifht  Martano  fhould  beftript.

And  at  a c^rtdiawnc  through  the  fficet  and  whipt*

4 I

And  as  for  her,  although  fli*  hadtJcfcrTcd
A asgieat  ashc.otmorc.

Yet  was  the  fcntcnccof  hef Hobmc referved
Vntill  Attt/na  came, and  not  before:

So  that  by  Griffins  mcanc  fire  was  prcfcivcd.

So  great  a fway  love  in  hisfancic  bore;

Here  Aquilam  by  G 'riJ^n  Was  procured,  ‘ -
To  bide  with  him  untill  his  wounds  Were  cured.

41

Now  Noraud/n  t, hat  all  his  pbwre  flill  bends^'  ^ ■ ,*

To  honor  Ortffin  all  the  meanft  he  may,'''"  '^V
And  with  great  eburtefie  to  makcamendsi
Forthatdiigracchedid  himth’^ptherday;  " 'I'',

To  make  anothbl'triumphhcintcnds,  * '

Set  forth  with  pompc  Srid  ftatc,and  rich  array:*''

And  that  the  fame  rtiay  flictoforrainc  nations,  .

He  notifies  ir  ftraight  by  proclamations,  '


43

At  foure  weekes  end  the  triumph  fhould  begin.

The  fame  whereof  about  fo  farre  was  blowae,
Without  the  land  of  lewne  and  within.

At  Uft  unco  itwasknownc.

Who  asking  Sanfonets  advici  herein,

Whofc  wifcdumc  he  ptefera  before  his  owne.

At  laft  for  company  they  both  agree.

To  go  together  thefe  fame  jufts  ic  fee.

44

Now  as  they  went  upon  their  way,hcliolJ
They  met  a gallant  and  a ftatrly  dame.

With  whom  this  Puke  acquain.cd  was  of  old,
/fbrjiya was  thisnoblci  adirshamc!

She  traveld  like  a Kiught,bcr  heart  was  bold.

Her  body  pafliogftrong  unto  the  fame,

And  when  fhc  kr(w  both  why  and  where  they  went,
Togo  with  thcmfhc  quickly  did  confent.

4S

And  thus  thefe  three  their  journey  fo  contrive.

As  juft  againft  theday  andfokmne  fcaft.

Together  ai'DamaJio  they  arrive.

Each  one  well  mounted  on  a ftately  bcaft.

The  King  that  fpccially  did  care  and  ftrivc.

To  honorGrr^nmorcthcnallthcrcft,

By  all  the  mcanesand  wayes  he  could  devife^
Augmented  much  the  valew  of  the  pnfe.

And  where  it  was,  as  T before  declar’d,

A fingle  armor  rich  and  finely  wrought.

Now  Nans «di»o  at  t his  time  prepard.

To  fet  it  out  with  things  not  lightly  bought;

T o this  be  adds  a horfe  moft  richly  barb’d.

By  riders  skill  to  great  perfcftion  brought,

Wei  niapt,wel  markr,ftronglimb’d,&  palling
The  bcaft  alone, fit  for  a Princesgife.

47

All  this  he  did, becaufc  great  hope  hefaw.

That  Griffin  againc  the  prife  would  win.

But  then  was  vcrifide  the  old  laid  faw.

Much  falls  bctwetnctheChallicc  and  ihechin:

For  when  Mar fi 'll  (void  of  feare  cr  aw)

Without  had  view’d  this  armor  andWithin,

And  finds  it  had  bene  facts  by  marks  well  knownc,
Shefeizeth  ftraight  upon  it  as  her  owne.

4‘f

The  King  thariJlfbgreatdifgracc  could  brookc.

Did  (licw  bimfelfethcrewtcb  much  difeontent.

And  with  a princtlyfiowne  and  angry  lookc.

His  f Icncc  thieathtd  that  fhc  fliould  repent.

And  in  fb  great  dcfpftc  rhe  thing  he  tocke.

That  ftraight  fomcfcigrantsunto  her  he  fent,

With  fouldicrs/omc  oh  fooic  and  feme  on  horfe,
Deccit’d  much  ih  heiftx,  more  in  hex  force.

49

For  never  did  a child  take  more  delight.

With  ga  wdic  flowics  ^ rime  of  fprihg  to  play.

Nor  neVerdid  yong  Ladic  brave  and  m Ight,
LiRcdauncing  bttteton  afoiemnir  d ay,

Then  eftd  Marfifh  i n the  found  a nd  fi  ^ hr
Of  glittnng  blades  a/nd  fpeates  dt  to  flay:

And  this  did  caufe  her  take  therett:  mor>.  plcafurc,
Becaufc  her  ftrength  was  great  bey  odd  all  mcafurc.

Thefe


Trmeiitl
Ov$i  Alth
MuUm  ctJ$t
laiir

Mra.


Simile.

S mUe.
Thefriief
thefe  fimtlH
umCUm»
duMtu  a
•Peet.

Uoa  fic  «tr«
jimibut  fie-

{ibm  iabreti


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


i4f


lieUuMt


50

Tfiofc  few  that  were  to  apprehend  herfent.

And  punifli  her  for  this  unlawfull  deed.

Were  caus’d  thcii  comming  quickly  to  repent,

A nd  others  by  t heir  harmes  tooke  better  heed;

The  armed  Knights  moft  diretlly  were  bent.

Some  Aanding  Ail!  to  mark  wliat  thiswould  breed.
Some  to  the  fergeants  thought  to  bring  reliefe.

Of  whom  were  Griffin  and  his  brother  chiefe. '

51

The  Englijh  Duke  doth  deeme  it  were  a Hiame,

To  leave  Marfijain  thisdangerous  cafe.

Si  thchieAy  for  his  company  niecame.

And  Sanfbnet  doth  deeme  it  like  difgracc.
Wherefore  they  meane  how  ere  the  matter  frame.
Not  leave  herunaAfiAcd  in  the  place,

Aftoljo  had  a charmed  fpcarc  all  gilt,  .

With  which  he  ufed  oft  to  runne  at  tilt.

5»

The  venue  ofthis  charmed  fpcare  was  fuch,

Befides  the  gilding  bright  and  faircof  hew.

That  whom  fo  ere  the  head  thcreofdid  tuch,
Saaight  him  from  offhishorfc  it  overthrew,
Criffino  ArA  although  difdaining  much,  *

He  quite  unhorA,nor  who  it  was  he  knew;

Then  Aqiiilant  that  to  revenge  itment,

Vnto  the  ground  in  manner  like  was  fent.

53

Thusdid  the/e  warriers  three  thcmfel  ve»  behave.

But  chiefe  Marfi/h^who  would  never  rcA,

But  would  in  fpitcof  all>  the  armor  have,j
Nor  once  vouchfafe  to  askeit  orrequeAj
S he  doth  the  King  and  all  his  nobles  brave.

And  when  the  beA  of  them  had  done  his  beA,

On  ev’ty  fide  Are  beat  the  people  downe.

And  from  them  all  made  way  out  of  the  lownc*

San/onet  and  Aflolfo  did  the  like,

KingNorandinos  men  of  armes  purfew.

The  fooIiAi people  ciie  Aopjkill  and  Alike,

But  none  comes  ncarc,  but  Aand  aloofe  to  vew;

A narrow  bridge  there  was,thi$  place  they  pike,

A nd  to  defend  it  again  A all  the  crew.

Till  Griifrt  came,having  hishorfe  recovered,

And  by  fome  markes  the  Englijh  Duke  difcovcied.

55

And  Araight  his  brother  Aquilante  came.

And  of  AJiolfo  both  acquamtance  take.

And  then  incivill  termesthey  fomewhat  blame
Her  litlecount  fhe  of  the  King  did  make,

AJiolfo  friendly  told  to  them  her  name,

Andin  defence  of  her  fomc  wordshcfpakc.

The  rcA  that  came  matvell  to  what  it  tends, ,

To  hearc  them  talkc  together  now  like  friends.

But  whenthat  Norandinos  fouldicrs  hard
Her  namCjfo  dreaded  over  all  the  FaA,

They  furcly  thought  that  they  fliould  all  be  matd.
And  that  the  citic  would  be  tane  at  leaA,
Therefore  they  pray  the  Krng  to  have  regard*

But  now  Marjifa  (moved  by  requcA
Of  thole  two  brothers)  friendly  doth  confent,
Hcrfelfe  before  the  Prince  for  to  prefent.


57

And  thus  without  much  reverence  fhe  fpaitc.

Sir  King,  I marvcll  what  ycur  highncAc  mcnr,

A prifc  and  gift  of  fuch  a thing  to  make.

As  is  not  yours  without  1 givcconfcnt;

The  Armes  this  armor  hath  plaine  proofedomake.
Namely  a crownc  into  three  pccccsrcnt:

OnccI  put  off  this  armor  in  a way.

To  chafe  a theefe  that  Aalc  from  me  a pray.

58

Thcnfaid  the  King,fairc  dame  the  truth  is  fca
Of  one  Armenian  merchant  I them  bought,

I make  no  qucAion  be  they  yours  or  no.

Nor  needs  for  proofc  more  witncAc  to  be  brought,
For  though  they  were  not,I  would  them  bcAovw
On  you,iffothefamc  by  you  were  fought;

As  for  Griffino  unto  whom  I gave  them.

He  fliall  be  pleas’d  1 hope,and  not  to  have  them.


Tbit  tbetfl

not

lo,nii  at
larf*  fit
downem
"Syardat
baakf.


59

I will  him  rccompencc  feme  ocher  way.

And  givchim  giftsof  asgreat  worth  or  more  5
Thanks  to  your  highnt  Ac  Araight  doth  fay,
Preferve  me  in  your  gracc,l  askc  no  more;

But  when  MarfiJa faw  that  av’ry  way
They  honor’d  ncr,flic  chang'd  her  mind  before.

To  flicw  magniAcence  Arc  us’d  this  drift,

T hat  he  nr.uA  take  this  armor  as  her  gift.

60

And  thus  good  friends  all  turned  back  againc,

And  then  with  double  joy  the  fcaA  they  bold.

In  which  chiefe  praife  did  Sanfonet  obtainc.

The  other  fouic  did  then  thcmfcivcs  withhold,
WiAiing  the  praife  Aiould  unto  him  remainc.

And  then  with  etcatcrcheare  then  can  be  told.

By  Horandino  they  were  nobly  fcaAcd,

And  there  thcmfeivcs  they  well  tcpcs’d  and  reAcd.

61

Sev’n  dayes  or  eight  the  King  them  entertained.

And  thoAr  once  pa  ft, of  him  their  leave  they  take,
The  which  with  gifts  and  honor  great  obtained,
Vnto  the  towne  of  Tcipoly  they  make,

And  in  one  company  thefe  five  remained.

And  mind  not  one  the  other  to  forfakc.

As  long  as  one  of  them  was  left  alive,

Vmill  in  Trance  they  fafely  Aiould  arrive.

62

And  Araight  they  get  a vcffcll  for  their  hire,

A mctcbams  Aiip  new  laden  from  the  WeA,

The  maAcrof  the  Aiip  an  auncient  fire,

Confented  to  their  wils  with  fmall  requcA,

The  wind  asthenferv’d  fitfortbeirdefire.

And  blowes  a gentle  gale  all  from  the  EaA,

So  that  with  filled  failcs  in  little  while.

They  came  as.farrc  as  Cypres  JVenus  He.

<»»

Here  cv’ry  place  was  full  of  odours  f rt’CCf,

Of  gardens  faire.of  fpicc  of  plcafant  taA,  '

The  people  luAfull  (for  dame  Vemt  meet)

From  tender  ycares  to  doting  age  do  laA,

With  wanton  damfcls  walking  in  each  Arecf ,
Inviting  men  to  pleafurc  and  repaA,

From  hence  againc  they  loofed,at  what  time,

Z>6;i  Fheebauharset  untoth*£aA  did  clilbe.


Cyfrti  an
III  CUtftr,

craUtef'*’

Hu.


143


THE  EIGHTEENTH  BOOKE


«4


SimiUi


The  weather  flill  was  cemperat  and  cleaie,

A plcafant  gale  their  fwclling  failcsdid  fill}
No  figne  of  ftorme  or  tcmpclt  did  appeare.

To  fuch  as  in  the  weather  had  beft  skill;

But  loc  t he  weather  oftdoth  charge  her  cheatc
E v'n  as  a woman  oft  d oth  change  her  wiUj
For  (bdainly  they  had  /iich  fiormesofwethei'j


As  if  that  heav’e  and  earth  would  come  together.


6s


tit  rtiurmi
taihemitth*

fiffe.


J.tHgUt.


lidridtitUo

Wirg  t
Jn/elixpuer
atque  impar
eoHgrtffiu
,/ichtBi,


The  airc  doth  on  the  fodainc  grow  obfeure,

Butlightned  oft  with  lightnings  dreadfull  light.
And  fave  their  hourcglaffe  kept  them  reckning  fure
Twas  hard  for  to  dilccrr.c  the  day  from  night:

The  defprat  mairinas  do  all  endure.

As  men  inured  to  the  waters  fpight.

The  hcav’nsaboTCjthe  wares  beneath  do  tore.

Yet  arc  not  they  difmaid  one  whit  therefore.

66

One  with  a whifile  bang’d  about  his  necke,

Showes  by  the  found  whxhcord  muft  be  undone.
And  ftraightthe  fliipboy  ready  at  a bccke,

Vnto  the  tops  with  nimble  Height  doth  runne.
The  other  marriners  upon  the  dcckc,  ,

Or  at  thefteere  the  comming  waves  do  /himne.
And  then  by  turnes  they  pump  the  water  out.

By  paine  and  care  preventing  ev’ry  doubt,

67

Now  while  this  noble  crew  with  tempeft  toft,
Wentin  the  fca  aswind  and  weathet  drave.

And  looke  each  minute  to  be  drown’d  and  loft,

T he  Chrifliatis  with  a frefli  aftault  and  brave.

Set  on  the  Fagans  forcly  to  their  coft;

Who  now  began  the  worfer  fide  to  have.

But  chiefly  then  theireonrage  gan  to  quaile,,
When  noble  Dardanellos  life  did  faile.

68

RcnalJo  him  had  noted  from  the  reft,

Full  proud  of  flaughter  of  fo  many  foes,

A nd  ro  himfelfc  he  faid  tis  furely  beft.

To  aop  this  weed  before  it  higher  gvowes.
Therewith  he  fets  hisfatall  fpeare  in  reft.

And  cries  to  DardaneXoas  be  goes,

Alas  pool  e boy, much  wo  to  thee  they  bred.

That  left  to  thee  that  fbeild  ef  whitcand  red*

69

Ilctrie  if  you  defend  thofc  colours  well,

(He  faith)  which  if  with  meyou  cannot  do,
Againft  Orlando  fierce,!  can  you  tell.

For  to  defend  them  will  bc  great  adoe.

Thus  faid  Rcnaldo,and  noblc7)ardancU,

In  valiant  wifethus  anfwer’d  thereunto.

Know  this  (quoth  he)  that  thefe  my  colours  1
Will  bravely  here  defend ,or  bravely  die.

70

.With  that  he  fpun’d  his  horfe  (as  this  he  fpake)

And  with  great  force  Renaldodid  aftaile.

But  loe  the  ftaffe  upon  his  armor  brake.

So  as  his  blow  but  little  did  availe.

But  ftraight  Renaldos  fyeare  a way  did  make.

And  pierce  the  double  folds  of  plate  and  maile.
And  went  fodeepe  into  the  tender  skin.

The  life  went  out  there  where  the  ftafFc  went  i».


7>


Looke  how  a purple  flowrc  doth  fade  and  diJr,

That  paincfull  plowman  cutteth  up  with  flicarc,
Or  as  the  Poppeys  heads  afide  do  lie.

When  it  the  bodic  cannot  longer  bcarC;

So  did  the  ncklz'DardcTtcXo  die.

And  with  his  death  fild  all  his  men  with  fcare.

As  Wai  CIS  runne  abiodc  that  breakc  their  bay.

So  fled  hisfouldieis  breaking  their  array.

7i

They  flic  unto  their  tents  with  full  perfwafior,
Thatof  the  field  themafterie  wasloft.

Wherefore  tofortificagainft  I'nvalion,

They  fparc  no  time,no  travell,nor  no  coft;

Now  Charles  by  forhead  mcancs  to  take  Occafion,
And  follows  them  full  clofe  with  all  his  hoft.

And  comming  to  their  tents  fo  bravely  venterd,

1 hat  he  with  them  thcmfclves  almoft  had  cntcid.


SimiU.
Htmtr  both
(bu  of  4
Ftjpy.


Simsltt


73


Seit'anct.
Frtnit  copit^.
iota  til  ptji
Urynn  Of-

tajio  etivt.


Had  not  his  valiant  atteirpt  bene  (laid.

By  over  haftie  comming  of  the  night.

So  thatof  force  asthen  it  wasdclaid.

And  cither  fide  was  driv’n  to  leave  the  fight,

•But  with  this  diffcrcnce,all  t he  T url^s  difmaid.

And  newly  gather’d  from  their  fearfull  flight.

The  Chrifiianson  the  tother  fidepurfewing,
Andday  by  day  their  hopt  and  pow  re  renewing.

74

The  numbei  ofthe  Tttrlis  that  day  were  flainc.

Was  more  then  fourfcorc  theufand  (as  they  fay)
Their  bloud  did  fat  the  ground  of  all  that  plaine.
And  makes  the  ground  more  fertile  to  this  day;
Among  the  dead  fbmc  men  halfc  dead  remaine.
Left  theic  for  theeves  and  robbers  as  a pray,

Within  the  Pagan  campe  great  mone  they  make.
Some  for  their  fricnds,fomc  for  their  kinsfolks  fake.


75


T wo  youths  there  were  among  fo  many  more,

Whofc friendfliip  faft  and  firmc,whofcfaithful  harts
Dtfetved  to  bc  plaft  the  reft  before.

And  to  bc  piaifcd  for  their  good  defarts,

Their  names  were  Cloridar.e  and  Medore,

Both  borne  farre  hcncc, about  the  Eftcrn  parts.
Their parentspoore,and  not  of  our  bclccfe.

Yet  for  true  love  they  may  be  praifed  chicfc.

76

The  elder  of  the  two  hight  Cloridan,

An  hunter  Wilde  in  all  his  life  had  becr.e,

Ofaiftivc  Umbs.and  eke  an  hardie  man,

As  in  athoufand  men  might  well  bcfeenc:

Medoro  was  but  yong,and  now  began
T o enter  too^bfyouth  the  pleafant  greene,

Fairc  skind,black  eyd,and  yellow  curled  hcarcy
That  hang’d  in  lovely  locks  by  cither  care.

77

Thefe  two  among  the  reft  kept  yvatch  that  night.

And  while  the  time  in  fundry  fpccch  they  fpeut*
Medoro  of  tentime  moft  fadly  fight,'

His  mafters  death  did  caufc  him  to  lament.

Oh  (faid  Medoro)  whatawofullfpightt
What  ciucll  fcourge  to  me  hath  fortune  fer.t?

That  ‘Dardanel  Almontes  worthy  fonne.

So  fodainly  fliould  unto  death  be  done?


Cl<  ridana,
hit  dote.


Suedutde^

fcrihttbtht
h,amit  of
^ebilltidtt
inf  neb  fort.
Ditlcii  adhtt
vifunivto
niittigmi  in

trt

Twrpmeat,
mut
tonui  gratiw
tmo.


Behold


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


78

Behold  hij  noble  corfc  is  left  a prey,

Tobcdc^■ouIed  by  the  wolfc  and  crow,

A food  too  fine  to  be  fo  borne  away,

. Butlfhallicmedythathapitrow,
lie  find  the  mcanc  his  coilc  thence  to  convay,

I am  rcfolv’d  my  felfc  will  thither  go.

That  for  the  good  he  did  me  when  he  liv'd,

Atlcaft  hiscorfe  by  me  may  be  reliev’d.

79

When  Cloridano  heard  this  faying  out.

He  flood  amaz’d,and  mufing  in  his  mind.

In  tender  yearcs  to  find  a heart  fo  flout,

Vnto  fo  dangerous  attempt  mflin’d.

And  ftraight  diflwadcs  him.cafting  many  a doubr,
To  make  him  change  the  thing  he  nad  aflign’d  :
But  flill  Medoro  doth  rcfolve  to  trie.

To  bury  ‘D<trda)ieU,ov  els  to  die.

80

When  Cloridan(o  refolute  him  found,

of  his  own  frank  accord  he  vow  doth  make
To  follow  him  in  broken  flatc  and  found.

And  never  him  to  leave  or  to  forfakc  j
And  ftraight  they  twodolcavc  this  fenced  ground.
And  pointing  new  fupplies  then  rooroesto  take,
They  find  the  C/;ri/?en  camp  lie  all  neglefteJ,

As  thofe  that  feare  ao  barm, nor  none  lufpcflcd.

«l

I fay  thofe  Chri/hns  that  the  watch  fliould  keep.

Lay  as  they  cared  not  for  foe  nor  friend.

Their  fenfes  (b  pofleft  with  wine  and  fleep.

That  none  of  them  their  office  did  attend  :

But  Clondan  that  faw  them  drown’d  fo  deep,

(Said  thus)A/edora,now  I do  intend
To  get  for  our  great  Ioffe  this  fmall  amends.

To  kill  fome  focs,that  killed  all  our  friends.

Si

Stand  thou  and  watch, and  haikencv’ry  way.

And  for  the  reft  let  me  alone  to  trie,

This  faid,he  goes  where  one  ^Ijeo  lay.

That  took  upon  him  knowledge  in  the  skie.

By  which  he dreami’d  he  iiould  live  many  a day.
And  in  bis  wives  beloved  bofomc  die.*

But  all  was  falfe,  his  cunning  him  deceiv’d,
,mtrlidud.  Icr  now  this  him  of  life  bcicav’d.

And  many  more  whom  here  I do  not  name.

That  fleep  on  boards, or  nmking  ftraw  their  bed;

At  lift  where  wrctclic  j GriUo  lay  he  came,
Thaton  aiiempty  bancllcoiicli’d  his  head,
Himfclfc  Ii.id  emptied  late  before  the  fame,
^Dru»{vd  A deadly  fleepthe  wine  in  him  had  bred.

The  Ti/r^e  hisfword  within  his  bowels  Gx*J,

Out  came  the  blood  and  wine  together  mix’d.

Neare  GriUo  flepr  a Dutchman  and  a Grccl{e,

That  all  the  night  had  ph’ci  the  dice  and  drink,

T ti  both  of  them  at  once  he  did  the  'ike,

Thar  dicam’d  perhaps  of  fev’n  and  of  lyfefink  :
They  bad  been  better  watched  all  the  week,

Then  it  fa  bad  a time  as  this  to  wink  ;

Umentt,  Death  cerrninc  is  to  all,  the  Pioverb  faith,

Uvenct.  Vnccnainc  is  to  all  the  home  of  death.


85


143


I rir»^4OTf
Qert.


Look  how  a Lion  fierce  with  famine  pin*d.

That  comes  unto  a flock  of  filly  fliccp.

Where  neither  fencc,nor  people  he  doth  find.

Doth  fpoile  the  flock  the  while  the  fliepheards  fleepj
So  Cloridano  with  as  bloudy  mind,  (keep.

That  found  thofe  huflit  that  watch  and  ward  fliould
Could  not  his  criicll  rage  and  malice  bridle;

Nor  was  this  while  Medoro' s weapon  idle.

85

Forhe  that  did  difdaine  to  make  to  die,

Thofe  of  the  common  and  the  bafer  fort,

Came  there  where  Duke  Labretto  then  did  lie.
Embracing  of  his  Lady  in  fuch  fort,

As  yvic  doththe  wall, they  lay  fb  nic.

Now  foundly  fleeping  afiei  Dciwsfport,

So  clofe,theairc  could  not  have  come  bctwcenc.
Medore  their  heads  at  one  blow  cuts  offclcanc.

87

Oh  happy  flate,6  life, 6 death  rooftfweet.

For  furc  I think  their  foulcs  embracing  fo.

In  heav’nly  feat  do  oft  together  meet.

And  in  good  peace  and  love  did  thither  go.

• Then  next  a captainc  of  the  FlemiJI)  fleer.

And  th’Earleof  F launders (onnesvsith  other rao,
Medoro  kil’d,aiid  fo  far  forward  went.

He  came  but  little  from  the  Emp’rors  tent.'

£8

But  loc  they  both  with  flicdding  blond  now  tir’d.

And  fearing  left  at  length  feme  few  might  wake.

Ere  long  tirrcpaftjboth  by  accord  retir’d,

And  mind  their  firft  attempt  in  hand  to  take,

(As  bothjbut  as  Afeiorochiefe  defil’d)

Moft  fccretly  unto  the  field  they  make.

They  mean  .ilthough  they  both  were  faint  ic  weary,
The  noble  DardAticUos  corfe  to  buric.

89

The  heaps  of  men  that  in  the  field  rcmainc.

Some  dcad,and  fome  between  alive  and  dead,

Had  made  their  labour  to  have  bccnin  vaine.

Had  not  the  moonc  flicw’d  out  her  horned  head.

So  bright, asclcaredifcovci’d  all  the  plainc.

That  then  wascovci’d  with  Vermillion  icd.

Were  it  a chance  or  els  hisearneft  prayer,

T hat  made  the  moon  at  that  time  fiiinc  fo  faire.

90

Now  after  fearch  by  Pboebes  friendly  light.

The  good  Medore  efpi’d  him  on  the  gr  ound.

Who  when  he  faw  that  grievous  wofull  fight.

He  wasfot  forrow  readytherc  tofound;

And  out  he  cries, alas  6 wo.tliy  wight.

Not  worthy, in  this  fort  to  have  been  found  j
Now  my  laft  duty  do  1 mean  to  pay.

And  then  to faj, farewell  to  you  for  ay.

9t

Thusfpake  A/cdoro  flicdding  inanyatearc.

And  minding  now  no  longer  time  to  tarrie,

The  loved  coife  doth  on  his  fliouldcrs  bearc.

And  Cloridano  holpthefemetocarric,

A nd  they  that  erft  were  flout  and  void  of  feare.

Were  waxen  now  fo  timerous  and  waric.

No;  for  thei  r own, butt  his  dcare  burdens  fake.

That  cv’iy  little  noife  did caufe  them  c^uoikc.

N ■ This


toeeacio
baihtht  likf
canciit  (9
lilt.


Thtcietht
nitnie  af  the
Meant,


THE  EIGHTEENTH  BOOKS


Ml

This  while  the  noble  Ze7-ii«,haTing  chart
Hisfcarfull  foes  while  other*  were  afleep.

That  had  his  heart  on  vertues  lore  fo  plac'd^

As  did  to  noble  deeds  him  waking  keep,  (hart

Came  with  his  uoopc  where  thefc  two  made  great
By  bilsjby  dalcs^by  rtony  waits  and  rteep^

The  carkas  of  their  Lord  to  bcare  away.

When  much  it  wanted  not  of  break  of  daj<

91

The  Jearr  that  were  of  noble  2erH»r  band.

And  faw  two  men  go  loden  dovNn  the  plaint.

Make  after  them  a gallop  out  of  hand.

In  hope  to  light  upon  fomc  prey  or  gaine :

When  CloriJanafpyiagore  the  land.

Did  fay  *twas  bert  to  let  the  corfe  remaine.

Alledging  thatit  wasafoolirtitrick,

In  faring  one  dead  man  to  lofe  two  quick.  ‘


9+

And  hercwichall  his  hold  hcletteth  rtid^

And  thinks  Medoro  vvould  the  fame  hare  done.

He  means  himfelfe  in  the  next  wood  to  hide,

A nd  toward  it  in  great  hart  he  doth  run  |

But  good  Medor*  that  could  not  abide,

T o leave  the  office  he  fb  late  bcgun>

Although  with  double  paine  andduller  pace.

With  all  the  burthen  fled  away  in  chafe.

9S

And  to  the  wood  the  nearert  way  he  went.

In  hope  to  get  it  ere  the  herfemen  came.

But  now  his  breath  and  rtrengtb  werefo  farre  fpenr.
As  they  had  very  neire  him  overtane.

Vet  in  his  deed  he  doth  no  whit  relent,

T 0 leave  his  Lord  he  counts  it fuch  a fhame.

But  they  that  think  this  llory  worth  the  reading,
Muft  take  a little  refpite  in  proceeding.


Mwall.  eighteenth  boohe.we  may  nete  frfi  how  hurtful!  a thing  it  utoa  Prince  or  great  Magifirate  to  judge  without

hearing  both  fidcs : and  contrary  how  great  a yraife  it  u in  them  todo(as  Alexander  ii  noted  to  have  ufedjto  \eef  one.
tare  for  the  adverfe  party,  or  (in  we  tame  it  )Jor  the  defendant.  In  the  punifhment  ofMumuOj  we  may  note  haw  falfe
accufers  ever  come  to  fame  filthy  end, at  their  vileand  filthy  livos  deferve.  In  Korandine,  that  finding  he  bad  done
G riffino  wrong, is  wiUing  to  mah^e  amends  for  it, and  to  be  jhends  with  him,  we  may  fee  a notable  example  of  princely
clemency, wht^  1 could  wifh  aU  C brifiian  Princes  tofol/ofw,tbough  indeed  commonly  they  do  tjuite  contrary  ;emd  ratfter
where  they  do  one  wrong, mahe  amends  with  a greater, according  to  that  heathmjh  ( nay  diveUifh ) faying  ofbA  achiavcll,
that  whemyou  have  done  a great  injury  to,bimyou  muft  never  pardon,  but  ftiU  perfecute.  (Tempora  temposa  quod
monrtrum  aluirtis  ? ) Ob  times  what  a monfter  haveye  bred  ? how  far  u this  doBrineftomhis,tlat  taught  toforgivV,
not  feven  times, but  feventy  times  feven  times  f

Laftly,in  Medoro,we  may  note  a notable  example  of  gratitude  towards  hu  mafters  dtadcorfefin  ha\anlirg  hU  own
life  to  burie  itt  which  is  indeed( though  he  were  a heathtnja  moft  Chrtftian  a(f,and  out  of  the  wor^s  of  charity  commen-
dtdtnthe  ScriptUre,Oi  namely  in'lohiiiwhowat  greatly  rewarded  andhlejfed  for  it : And  further  wemaynote  in
itii ages, burial! hath  been  thought  a moft  necejfary  tbing,and  religious .-  but  o/Mcdoro’s  gratitude  Ifihalifpeal^  mori
in  the  next  boo^e.

Rirtorie.  Concerning  the  dtfeription  of  the  lie  of  Cypres, fet  downe  in  6}  ft  affe, where  it  is  prat  fed  for  the  pleafantne^e  of  it, as

aU that  write  of  it  do  teftifit,and  Horace  proves  it  was  called  Venus  lie, in  this  wi  fe  to  Venus  t

Regina  Gmdi  Papbique

SperncdileftamCipron,&c

Allegory,  lVtMayob/irveagoedA!legoricallfenfc,intharKodomontisfirftafail’dhy  lealoufie,thenhow  lealoufiebreedt
Difcord.and  bow  Pride  increafeth,fttu  edging  it  forward . faying  what  a fbame  is  it  to  put  up  fticb  an  injurie  ? and
what  will  the  worLifiy  of  it}  and  who  could  beareit}  thefebethewherftonestofharpen  revenge,  and  to  fftfidlethe
caalet  offtrife.  Alfowenote  how  mine  Author pretily  noted,that2)ifcordand  Pride, wbtnthnwent fiom  the  Abbey,
left  Fraud  and  Hypocrifiefor  their  fuffleient  deputies  in  their  places;  for  where  Fraudworl^s,  there  never  wanteth  feed
tf ft  rife : and  where  Hypocrifie  is, there  wants  no  pride, though  it  be  not  plainly  difeovered.

AUuCon  Dardancllo*swicetf«g»trf>  Rcnaldo  and encountting  him,  andajter  beingjlaine  by  him, ht  altogether  aUuder  to

the  ttnftiB  between  TroylusW  Achilles.

Infalix  puer  atque  impar  congrefTus  Achillt.

The  end  of  the  anaetations  of  the  1 1 Bookc.


146  THE  NINETEENTH  BOOKE;


THE  ARGVMENT.

Angelica  doth  heale^  4nd  w^^Medorc  :
Mai  fift,wi>6  that  other  tvorthj  crew^
Landt(^after  travell lon£^  mpoa the  fhore


Of  Amazons : where  when  the  law  thej
Stont  Guydon,/ W came  thither  late  before^

Fenght  with  hit  nine  men  fine ;

'But  when  the  combat  ceafl  for  want  of  light  ^

Then  Guydon  frayth  them  lodge  with  him  that  night.


J>iom  h*vt
Written  to  tbk

tffeSl  of  the
Jicktene^t  e f
jrieniv.  but
fieri  oOf
Ovi<L
Donee  eri
falix  mnlttt
mamtrobu  »•
micof :
Tempora/i
fuerinl  nubu
Utjolut  era.

Hornet
yulgfu  inli-
imm  nt  ntere-
irix  retro  ptr^
jitra  cedii.


•One  can  deeme  right  who
faithfull  friends  do  reft.
While  they  beare  fwayand
rule  in  great  degree,

■ For  then  both  faft  and  Gai-
ned friends  are  preft.
Whole  faiths  feemc  both  of
oncefFcftto  bei
I Out  then  revolts  the  faint
and  fained  gueA,

When  wealth  unwindes,and  fortune  feemsto  flee.
But  hethat  lovesindecd  remaincth  faft,

■And  loves  and  ferves  when  life  and  ail  is  pafl.

X

If  nil  mens  thoughts  were  written  in  t heir  face.
Someone  that  now  the  reft  doth  overcrow.

Some  other  eke  ^ wants  his  foverains  grace,  (know:
When  as  their  Prince  theirinward  thoughts  Hiould
The  meaner  man  nioiild  take  the  betters  place.

The  greater  man  might  ftoopand  fit  below.

But  tell  me  now  how  poorc  Medoro  fped,

1 hit  lov’d  his  mafter  both  alive  and  dead.

In  vaine  he  fought  to  get  him  to  the  wood,

By  blind  and  narrow  paths  to  him  unknown,

'I  hen  fwift  and  his  flow  pace  the  fame  withftood,
Forc'd  by  the  hmden  that  he  bare  r.lone.

But  now, when  Cloridano  underflood
Medoro' s c.ire,hc  made  fm  him  gre.it  mone.

And  curs’d  himftlfc,.ind  was  full  ill  apaid,

That  he  had  left  his  friend  devoid  ofaid,

4

Medoro  all  about  fo  ftraight  befer.


To  leave  his  loved  load  was  thcnconftrain’d.

But  ail  in  vaine  he  fought  from  thence  to  get
His  mafters  carkas  that  behind  remain'd.

Was  unto  him  fo  fierce  and  ftrong  a let  {

It  ftaid  his  weary  ftcps,and  him  retain'd,

Ev'uasa  Beare  that  would  defend  hervvhelp,
Aboutdo(h  hover  though  flie  cannot  help.

5

So  good  Medore  about  the  corfedid  hover.

The  while  that  Cloridano commeth  back,

And(for  the  day  was  dawn’djhe  might  diftover.
How  gicatly  his  Afedsre.his  help  did  lack  j
Wherefore  to  do  his  heft  him  tc  recover.

He  takes  his  bow  and  quiver  from  his  back.

And  ata  j'co;  he  took  his  aimefo  well.

He  ftiakc  him  in  the  braine  that  down  he  fell.

6

The  fall  and  death  fo  fbdainc  of  the  ^£9/

Abated  much  the  courage  of  the  reft.

And  much  they  marvel’d  whence  fhuuld  come  thi*
And  fore  this  accident  did  them  moleft ; (fiiot.
But  Cloridan  for  this  forbade  them  not.

But  fiiotanotherin  about  the  breft.

The  whichinflam’d  Zerbino’s  mind  fo  fore.

That  for  revenge  he  would  have  flaiac  Afei/srf.

7

And  faftningin  his  golden  curled  haire.

His  wailikc  hand, thou  fi)alt(raid  hc)abuf,

TIkhi  flialtthe  penairccand  the  burthen  heart
Of  him,that  here  hath  midcmy  men  to  die :

Yet  forall  this,  Zerbinodid  forbcarc
To  kill  him,  when  he  faw  with  gracious  eye,
Hisfwcct  fad  look,and  harkned  tohis  fpccch.

That  in  this  fort  for  pardon  did  bcfeedi.

Sir


Simihi


OF  ORLANDO  FVRlOSO<


Crtat

ttmt  batb  «•

vnhttne
madtafburi-
aBt  dndihtfi

tbatwtmU

iSt

idtrttvir
titueii  mfl
tbHfldbit  ir-
fdmu  « Cf#>
mrfTbtith


.AHiflkit


t

Sir  knig!it(he  faid)  for  thy  Mejftai  Take,

I thcc  do  pray  aod  carncftly  conjure.

So  much  companion  nowon  me  to  take.

To  let  me  gire  my  Lord  his  fcpulture .

I little  caie  what  fpoile  of  me  ye  make,

What  paines  or  torture*  I ray  fcife  endure,

I oncly  fuCjfo  long  my  life  to  fave,

Asimaylaymy mafterin  hisgrare.

9

Now  while  ^eiaro  fpake  thefe  words  and  fuchj
Whereby  Ztrbino  wai  to  mercy  mov’d.

And  to  his  favour  was  inclined  much.

As  one  that  gratefulnefle  had  ever  lov’d,

A vile  bade  fwaine  (b  rudely  did  him  touch,

A s him  not  onelv  from  his  place  remov’d.

But  with  hi*  ftaffemoft  rudely  overthrew  him,  •
That  ev’ry  one  do  deem  him  dead  that  view  him.
to

Thi*  fa^i  did  fo  Zcrlina*!  mind  offend.

That  prefently  the  villain  he  did  chafe.

And  to  have  killed  him  he  did  intend.

And  hadjbut  that  the  other  fled  apace:

But  when  that  Cloridano  faw  his  friend,

With  bleeding  wound  h'c  proflrate  in  the  place|

He  means  himfclfe  no  longer  now  to  hide.

But  ev*n  to  die  by  deare  Medoro's  fide.

ti

And  as  he  purpos'd,fb  he  did  indeed.

For  fighting  manfully  lie  there  was  flainc.

The  j’forf  doonward  ontheirway  proceed,
MedoTO  halfc  alive  doth  now  rcmaine ;

And  (fill  his  breff  in  wofull  fort  doth  bleed.

The  ftaffe  had  cut  therein  fo  large  a veine,
Andfurehe  had  bled  out  his  life  and  all.

But  for  oncraregood  hap  did  him  befall,
la

Por  lo,a  damfell  came, though  meanly  clad.

In  fhepheardswccds,yet  frerli  and  faire  of  favour,
Andfuch  a one  as  in  thofebafe  clothes  had
A (liew  of  princely  birth  and  high  behaviour.

She  finding  him  lie  there  in  cafe  fo  bad.

Did  think  It  charity  robe  hisfaviour:

This  w?.s(ifyou  forgct)thc  Lady  fa  Ire,

That  of  Cataya  was  undoubted  heire.

IS

I fhewd  you  by  what  hap  fhe  gat  the  ring,

And  how  the  fame  had  fil’d  her  with  fuch  pride.
And  her  into  fo  high  conceit  did  bring.

That  all  herfuters  now  fhe  flat  deni’d.

She  careth  not  for  Earle, nor  Duke.nor  King,
Orlando  fhe  and  Sacrapant  defi’d,

Butchieflv  fhe  would  olufli  and  he  afliam’d.

If  file  but  hapt  to  heare  Renaldo  nam’d.

»4

So  great  her  folly  grew,fo  vainc  her  pride.

As  fhe  efteemed  all  the  world  at  nought.

The  which  when  once  the  blind  boy  had  efpi’d ,
(Not  blind  when  any  mifehiefemay  be  wrought)
Me  will  no  longer  this  prcfumptioii  bide.

And  for  a fitoccafionloijg  he  fought.

And  finding  this, he  thought  himfclfc  nowfped.
And  up  he  drawes  his  arrow  to  the  head.


147

15

Now  when  this  Indian  Q^eene  did  there  behold
A lovely  youth  lie  dying  in  the  place.

His  body  feeble  in  a mcrtallcolrl,

A deadly  pale  amid  his  Iwcly  face,

A kind  of  paflion  ftraiglu  oah?r  took  hold.

That  mov’d  her  mind  to  piiie  this  his  cafe.

And  much  the  rather  when  he  did  declare
The  wofull  caufc  that  b.cd  himall  this  care.

26

She  having  Icatn’d  of  Surccric  the  art.

An  ait  which  (fill  the  Indians  greatly  prize.

Which  fathei^  to  their  children  do  impart,

Whofe  knowledge  in  uadition  chiefly  lies.

Which  without  books  the  children  learn  by  hart,

I fay  doth  then  devife.

By  skill  Ihe  had  in  ju)'ccof  herbs  and  flowers.

For  to  renew  Medoro's  lively  powers.

»7

And  calling  to  her  mind  flic  late  had  feen ,

An  hci  b whofe  vertue  was  to  flanch  the  bipod.

As  ‘Dittamie, or  fomc  fuch  herb  I ween.

That  for  fuch  purpofe  whclfbme  was  and  good  j
Straightway  fhe  feeks  tbisherbupon  the  green.

With  all  the  haft  and  diligence  fhe  could  ^

And  finding  it,flic  takes  thereof  a branch,

Whofe  vertue  was  the  courfc  of  blood  to  tlanch.

IS

Then  romming  back  againcjflic  met  by  hap,

A filly  fhepheard  fecking  of  his  cow.

That  brake  out  of  his  ground  atfomefnall  gap.

And  now  was  ftraid  he  knew  not  where  nor  how.

She  prayes  him  take  the  hcibg  were  in  her  lap,

( A fervitor  morefittoferveafow)

And  bcarc  her  company  unto  the  place.

Where  poore  Medoro  lay  in  dang’ious  cafe.

19

Then  from  their  horfefiicand  the  fliephcar^  light.

And  ftraight  between  two  tilest  hofe  herbs  fiie  brus'd
And  took  the  jiiyce  between  her  fingers  bright.

And  fo  into  the  wound  the  fame  infus’d.

Whole  vertue  great  reviv’d  Medoro's  furight.

To  find  himfelfc  fo  well  and  kindly  Us’d,

Thatdo.ibt  it  was  which  moft  his  wound  did  falve.
The  precious  fii.  gcon  or  the  precious  falve.

lO

And  now  he  had  recovci’d  fo  much  fo;  ce.

As  what  with  hers, anii  with  the  fliephcirdsaid,
Hcclamct’d  up  upon  the  fliepheards  h)ifc.

How  bcit  in  the  place  fo  long  heftaid,

Vntill  he  faw  hisloved  mafterscoiTe,

Into  a grave  with  CluriJanos  laid  ;

And  thcn,and  not  before  hedid  agree,

Todo  as  they  by  her  fhould  pointed  be.

If

From  thcnccunto  the  fliepheards  houfe  flic  went.

And  made  her  patient  eke  with  herrogo.

And  thereto  hidewif  h him  flic  was  content
Till  he  were  cle.irely  nd  of  all  his  wo  :

Em  in  thiswh'lc  fhe  felt  her  heart  relen».

With  fundrv  qualms  that  wonted  notbefb.

And  wh^n  his  comely  nei  fonage  flieffw,
Afccrctheai  flic  ftU  hei  heart  to  gnaw.

N i F»r


Thu  drt  as  Jir

’P.Sidue^  HO-

Uth  in  bit

Arcadia,

watingrtai

tilimaucnjn

timpali.


OfTohumt

Dittamunt

Cre-

tea  carpn  oh
Ida,


THE  NINETEENTH  BOOKE


548

ax

For  while  fbc  heal’d  his  wound  .another  dart
Met  wound  her  thoughts,  and  high  conceits  lb  deep.

Hit  mihi  ‘ As  now  therewith  waSiaTillit  her  proud  heart,
jittJ  tm'lw  Poirclling  it  although  llic  wake  or  fleep:

umor  esl  mt.  Her  wound  to  heale.thercwainoherbnorarf,
riicabittt  her-  For  more  and  more  like  flame  the  fame  doth  creep.
Yet  her  chiefe  care  is  him  to  help  and  cure.

That  all  this  torment  doth  to  her  procure.

Thus  while  Meioro  better  growes  and  better.

She  feels  her  lelf  tormented  more  and  mote.

And  he  t hat  for  his  love  to  her  was  debter.

Is  he  a lone  that  plagueth  her  fo  fore  :

Wherefore  though  modefty  a while  did  let  het^

Yet  now  perforce  no  further  flic  forbore,  '

But  plainly  to  Medoro  told  her  grief.

And  at  his  hands  as  plainly  ask’d  relief.

O ttout  Or lepido.vahintSacrapant,

O fierce  Terraw,o  hundreds  mote  befide.

Where  arc  thofe  valiant  ads  of  which  you  Taunt  ?
Where  is  your  pomp, your  glory, and  yourpridc  ?

O nt  poorc  Medore  all  your  dcfircs  doth  daunt.

One  poorc  Medore  doth  all  your  power  deride,

And  fhe  whom  all  of  you  have  woo’d  in  vain^

To  woo  Medoro  Aot)\  not  nowdirdaine.

She  fuffers  poorc  Medoro  take  the  flowrc,  /

Ovid  in  F<-  Which  many  fought.but  none  had  yet  obtain’d

eiraj  That  fragrant  roft,that  to  that  prefent  home

Eftaitquid  Vngathcr’d  was,behold  Medoro  gain’d  j
A nd  over  her  to  give  him  perfed  power,
ramis-f^te-  'Vith  factcd  ritcs  a marriage  waa ordain'd,
euiprieidm  And  with  the  vcilcof  this  fb  facred  order,

^U^ere  wu.  She  CO vcrs  this  hcr  folly  and  difoidcr.

luercfdin.  ^6

Now  when  thefolcmnc  marriage  was  done,

Qf  which  god  Capid ask’d  the  bancs(l  trow)

She  going  forward  as  flic  hath  begun.

Continu’d  (here  with  him  a month  or  mo,

Fiom  rifi  ng  to  the  fct'ting  of  die  Sun,

With  him  flic  doth  flt,ialk,lie,ftand  and  go,
Forgetting  fo  all  maidenly  fbkrietie.

That  flic  of  him  could  never  have  fatietic.

*7

If  in  the  houfe  flic  ftaid,thcn  would  fliccravc
Medoroin  the  houfe  with  hcr  to  flay,
ifin  the  field  flic  walkjthcn  muft  flic  have
Medoro  lead  or  guide  hcr  in  the  way  :

And  by  a river  in  the  Oiady  cave,

They  eft  did  ufeto  fpend  thchcatofday :

Liketo  that  cave  where  (fliunning  ftormy  weather)
The  Trojan  Dukcand  7)ido  met  together,

i8

mid  thefc  joycs(as  great  as  joyr s might  be)

Their  manner  wis  on  cv’ry  wall  within,
Withouton  cv’ry  ftoncorfliady  tree.

To  grave  their  names  with  bodkin, knifc,or  pin,
Angelica  and  Mcdore.jou  plainc  might  fee,

(So  great  a glory  had  they  both  therein)

Angelica  and  Medne  in  cv’ry  place.

With  fundry  knots  and  wieathestheycntcrlacc.


I9

Now  when  fli  e thought  in  this  well  pleafing  place.
She  bad  already  made  fufficient  flay,

Andjfor  the  long’d  to  do  Medore  that  grace.

To  give  to  him  her  kingdomc  of  Caray,

From  whence  flic  bad  beenabfent  fo  longfpace.
From  this  poorc  houfe  (he  means  to  go  away.

Yet  minds  flic  ere  flic  go, her  hoft  to  plcafc.

With  whom  flic  found  fuch  plcafurc  and  fuch  cafe
30

xf  ff^e/rex  had  fince  flic  was  a gerlc.

Worn  on  her  arm(as  for  Orlando*!  fake)

A bracelet  tich,of  precious  flonc  and  pcarle,
Whicbasatokenflicof  himdid  take.

And  though  flic  had  it  of  this  worthy  Earle,

Yet  did  flic  thcrcofchicfeft  reckning  make.

Not  that  the  giver  flic  did  muchefleem,-
£ut  for  the  gift  was  rich, and  fo  did  feern.

By  hcr  this  bracelet  many  ycXrcs  was  worn.

Not  oncly  in  hcr  time  of  peace  and  joy.

But  cv*n  when  flic  remained  mofl  forlorn.

And  fubjedf  to  each  danger  and  annoy,

Ev’n  then  when  nak’d  as  evei  flie  was  born,
ThcOri^ocamein  hope  hcr  to  enjoy.

This  bracclet(waating  ftore  of  coine  and  pence)
She  gives  hcr  l^ft  as  for  a recompence.

ja

Next  day  betime  fhe  getteth  on  her  way,

And  makes  Medoro  foie  her  Lord  and  guide.

Me  kept  hcr  company  both  night  and  day.

And  none  but  he  with  hcr  did  go  and  ride  j
Their  meaning  is  at  Ber/elen  to  flay,

A port  in  Spaitne,  iintill  they  may  provide
A vefTcIl  that  with  help  of  oaic  and  wind
May  them  tranfport  from  Spanijb  Cvasto/ttJe.

J3

But  ere  they  wercanived  at  this  port.

They  met  a mad  raanof  his  wit  beflraught,
Bcfmear'd  with  dirt  and  mire ui  filthy  fort.

His  outward  fenfe  cxpcl’d  with  inward  thought ;

T his  mad  man  made  them  but  Jlfavoui'd  fport,  ■
And  had  made  worfe,had  he  them  rightly  caught.
But  as  it  was,he  put  them  in  great  danger.

And  flics  at  them  as  dogsdoat  a ftraogcr.

3+

But  how  flie  Leaped  and  away  did  get
With  her  new  lovc,hcrcaftcr  I declare  i
For  why  Marfifa  I may  not  forget,

And  thofe  with  hcrthatinthctcmpefl  ate,
yjit\\GriffiH,AquUant,arvi  Sanfinet,

And  th’EngliJh  Duke  that  hath  the  horn  fb  rare.
Which  five  I left  in  danger  and  difeafe.

Toft  terribly  in  the  tempefluousfeas.

S5

Now  while  the  wind  continu’d  blowing  hard.

And  of  hisragedid  fmall  or  nothing  bate,
ThcmaflcrretshucompaflcaBd  his  card.

And  cals  to  counfell  firft  themaflersmatr.

And  then  the  mariners  of  beft  regard
Confulting  of  the  weather  and  their  flate.

And  cv’ry  one  doth  tell  his  gUefleand  thought,
Ncarc  to  what  coaft  the  tempefl  had  them  brought.


There  ina
pleafur*  in,
pUmfure  it
f elf,  i font
may  not  utter

»>.(«  A

faith)lf  a
man  treni  up
to  heaven,!^
wtrt  biund
to  fay  nothing
eifit  at  hu
Ttturn,bet
mtiiU  be  [try
Jrriu


0/iiiy4l

JnaBJini

iMreimtbi


Uaffifi

Griffina,

AquiUute

ianfttttu

AfUlfa*


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO,


Some  fay  Lymijjfo,  T ripoly  fomc  fay.

Some  fay  j'4fr/a,full  ofiocks  and  fands.

And  fwcaic  that  aH  of  them  wcrccaft  away.
Except  they  keep  aloofe  frorfi  off  thofc  lands  j
This  laufcth  fomc  to  ciu  fc  and  fomc  to  pi  ay.

And  lift  to  heaf’n  their  wofall  hearts  arid  hands.
Their  ftuffc  nor  merchandize  none  care  to  lafe.
But  hutlc.thc  fame  into  the  gteedy  ware.

57

Well  might  they  boft  of  iron  heart  .and  brealf.

That  could  at  fuch  a time  be  void  of  fcarc  ?

The  ftout  Marfifa  at  that  umc  confeft.

She  wiflit  with  all  her  heart  not  to  be  there,

So  forethe  fwellingfcasdid  them  molell.

As  though  It  would  the  fliiprn  peecesteare,

Nor  was  there  any  figne  the  wind  would  ceafe.
And  that  the  fea  would  grant  them  any  peace.

3*

One  Towesa  Journey  to  the  holy  tombe,
wtmtTbt  Anotherto Galicia  vowes to  go,
fkt  msmur  VacoSaiRT  lameS,  Tome othersunto  Rame,
w Or  other  hallowed  places  that  they  know  «

t"'-  The  maiinrrt  fcare  nought  but  want  of  roorac.

Sea  roomethey  wifli, then  care  they  for  homo.

At  fourc  daies  end  it  clear’d  and  waxed  fairc,

Or  werc’t  the  fcafon,oc  their  carneft  praict.

39

And  as  the  weather  grew  morecicare  and  cleare.
They  did  difcoverplainc  a goodly  coaft.

And  to  the  port  as  they  drew  neare.and  ncare,
Sorn  in  by  tidc,their  failes  and  tackle  loftj
Behold  a goodly  citydid  appeare,

With  towtes  and  ftatcly  buildings  of  great  colt.
Of  which  w hen  once  the  mafter  was  aware.

It  bred  in  him  no  little  feare  and  care.

4^'

To  caft  his  anker  ftraight  he  doth  provide.

For  vaine  it  was  to  labour  to  go  back.

The  velTcls  wanted  faiics  to  Hern  the  tide.

The  tempeft  had  put  all  things  fo  to  wrack.

And  yet  he  feared  on  the  other  fide.

They  of  the  town  would  furc  be  onhisjack  j
Jnfi  nc  fo  full  his  mind  was  of  confufion.

He  knew  not  whcieupon  to  make  cunclufion.

41

Now  while  he  flood  confufed  in  this  fort.

The  Englijh  Dukcdcmaundswhatcauft  of  doubt
Made  him  icfufc  fo  fairc  and  fafe  a port,

And  llrivc  agaiaft  the  llrcame  to  keep  ftiti  out  t
Sir(quoth  the  maller)biicfly  to  report
T o you  the  caufe.know  this,that  hereabout
And  namely  in  chat  city  dwcls  a nation.

That  ufe  a barbarous  and  cruell  fafiiion.

4*

They  call  them  that  here  do  dwell.

Here  women  guide, and  iulc,and  govern  all,
tv,  and  a Thcmenfrom  government  they  docxpell,
\adlaxttf  Some  they  do  kill,thc  teft  keep  bond  and  thrall,
itin.  Helbic  fliall  fcape  that  runs  at  tilt  lb  well.

As  firft  to  make  ten  men  of  theirs  to  fall.

And  next  in  Vencry  and  flcfli  delight,
Canfati^fictea  women  in  one  night.


4;


And  if  a man  pciformc  the  fiill  of  tbefe.

And  hirre  Inch  hap  tooverthrow  the  men.

And  yet  at  night  hisforccdofailctoplcale
In  af>  oT  generation  d.inifcls  ten,

Hemuft  be  k>ld  or  drowned  in  tlie  fcas.

Or  kept  a prifner  in  Ibinc  cave  or  den ;

But  they  that  both  pei;fcnm,  finlll  have  theirljvcs.

And  thofc  ten  damlsls  erci  for  their  wives.

44 ,

When  asthc  pilot  out. his  tale  had  toidp

Of  women  that  delight  in  fpoile  and  murdn.

The  Englifi)  t)ukc  could  haid  his  laughter  hold;

To  heafc  of  fo  fantafticall  an  order.

And  all  the  five  affirmed  ftraigbt  they  would
Land  atthis  place, and  goby  fca  no  further  j .

Each  place  to  them  was  fafe  and  out  of  fcare.

Where  they  might  have  the  ufe  of  fwotd  and  fpeavf.

.

But  all  the  fliipmen  carried  other  minds.

As  men  that  bctterwcrc  to  flormcs mut’d.

And  would  have  thought  their  lives  in  waves  & winds.
More  then  in  confiifts  and  in  fights  aflur’d ;

But  whetherreafon  leads  or  cau^sbindsy
Or  that  the  bccicrpart  the  fame  procur’d,

1 he  flitp  with  broken  mall  and  tackle  torn.

By  force  of  ttde  into  the  hav’a  was  born.

46

No  fboner  was  the  veflell  in  the  port.

But  ftraight  a gaily  ready  for  fucii  need,

Stoi’d  with  artillery  of  cv’ry  fort.

And  one  that  could  both  row  and  fade  with  (peed.
Did  board  thcm,and(to  make  the  matter  fibort)

A woman  clad  id  grave  and  ancient  weed,

As  old  as  SibiU, OT  as  Hcflon  mother.

Spake  in effeft  thefe  words,with  many  other.

My  friend$(quoth  flic)oi  yccld  or  look  to  die.

For  hope  is  none  to  fcape  away  by  flight.

But  thustf  any  of  you  mean  to  trie.

If  healonecah  vanquifli  ten  in  fight,

And  afterward  With  twice  five  m.aidcns  lie,

And  of  them  maids  make  women  in  one  night  j
Then  filch  a one  fhall  rule  among  us  chiefe.

And  f»Te  his  friends  from  punillimcnc  and  gricfc.

4*

But  if  that  any  fliall  thefaft  attempt.

And  fade  but  in  the  firft  or  in  the  la  ft.

Then  he  fliall  die  bccaufc  pfhis  contempt.

And  into  prifon  ye  fliall  all  be  caft.

They  made  her  anfwcr  all, they  were  concent.

Not  one  man  there  was  therewithal)  agaft
For  in  both  kinds  the  knights  had  fo  been  piov’d.

As  with  the  danger  they  wcic  nothing  mov’d.

4l>

TheEngiiJb  Duke  with  thefe  three  yout  hr  of  France,
Straight  for  this  cntei  ptile  thcmfclvei  prepare.

But  chiefe  the  Duke  that  doubted  no  mifchancc.

By  vertuc  of  his  book  and  horn  moft  rare  ,•

Afarfi/i  ckc(though  for  the  fecond  daunce
She  was  not  fit)fo  manly  mind  flie  bare.

As  Ihc  would  needs  her  force  and  fortune  tr^e.

And  fwavc  hci  fwoid  all  weapons  fliould  fupplic.

N 4 And


SbUaMd
Hecuba  vtfji
aid  tarnnen.


Carntlim  .df-
griffa  iH  tit
vanuje  tffeU
tucif,  ppritit
that  Htreu-
Uf  madt  fiftf
tMidtvtmtH
i»tHtmgkt„


IJO


THE  NINETEENTH  BOOKE


50


cut  the  {nett
in  feieet  that
ti  cau/d  uH
untte,caSed
GorcUu*
Unefs.


Simitti


And  (Iraight  they  all  agreed  fome  lots  to  draw.

And  :oconclude,on  her  the  hazard  fell.

But  Hie  that  quite  was  void  of  fcare  and  aw.

Did  promifcto  perform  her  office  well  ;

This  fwoid(quoth  fhcjiliall  abrogate  this  law,

And  plague  them  all  that  in  thiscity  dwell.

And  to  undo  thefc  doubts  I will  provide,

As  Alexander  G or  dim  knots  umi’d.

51

No  forreincr  hereafter  fhall  bcwaile.

The  wicked  law  of  this  ungodly  lands
Thisfaidjfficputteth  on  her  coat  of  maile.

In  hope  alone  againft  ten  men  to  ftand.

Then  came  the  ten  were  pointed  to  alfaile.

But  he  thit  was  the  foremoft  of  the  band.

As  farre  as  by  apparaisce  might  be  gueft,

Was  one  that  fane  furpafled  all  the  reft,
ai

His  horfe  Was  black  as  pitch, or  polilh  t jet.

Save  in  one  foot,and  in  his  brow  a ftarre,

A ITiining  IpotofwhitCjnotveiy  great,

A lofty  rcinc,an  eye  that  threatned  warrej
Such  as  the  horfcjfuch  was  his  own  conceit.

His  forrowesdid  exceed  his  joy  cs  fo  fairc.

And  deadly  care  fo  drown’d  his  fmall  delight,  ,
As  did  the  black  the  little  fpot  of  white.

19

This  knight(that  cvei  vantage  did  clchcw)

Would  not  accompany  thofe  other  nine.

But  ftandeth  ftill  on  horfcback  taking  view,
Whichwaythcviftory  did  moft  incline;

rode  a horfeofdainty  hew,  ^

Giv’n  unto  hei  oflatebyNordwdwe,

His  colour  pide,  powder’d  with  many  a fpot.

Small  hcad,fierce  look,clean  limb’d, and  lofty  trot.
5A

Now  when  that  giv’n  of  battel)  was  the  figne.

On  her  alone  all  nine  at  once  did  flic.

And  flic  alone  fuftain’d  the  force  o(  nine;

The  tcnth(J  faidjwas  quiet  flanding  by.

As  one  tliat  did  againft  that  life  repine.

When  more  then  one  fliould  fcektomjkconc  dic!
And  with  the  firft  encounter  thus  Qicfpec),

She  laid  down  foure  of  them  on  ground  for  deadi

55

The  Rft  flic  juftles, and  by  forqc  unhorfes.

And  with  a trunch  the  fixt  flie  gave  a blow.

That  tothe  ground  both  man  and  horfe  inforces.
With  mazed  hcad,and  foltring  feet  to  go.

The  Handers  by  admire  her  paffing  forces.

And  chiefe  their  wives  that  l^w  them  killed  fo.

For  as  chainfliot  Iwccps  .".1!  in  the  way, .

So  with  thofe  nine  Marjifa  then  did  play,
s*

Shcb.ith’d  her  blade  in  blood  up  to  the  hilt,  •

And  with  the  fame  rheir  bodies  all  ffie  ftianglcd.
All  that  abode  her  blowcs,thcir  bloud  was  fpilt.
They  leaped  beft  that  here  and  thithei  ranged.

Or  thofe  whofc  horfesoverthrown  at  tilt,

Liy  with  their  mafterson  the  earth  intangled.
Thus  of  nine  enemies  remained  none.

Forallweic  kil’d, or  maim’d, or  ovenhrown.


17

The  knight  that  was  arraid  in  black  attire.

And  flood  allde,and  faw  this  hardy  fight.

To  lliew  that  he  for  fcarc  did  not  retire.

But  to  make  known  hiscuitlic  fhining  bright,'
Straight fteppeth  eut,and  firft  hedothdeflic
To  fpcak  with  her  whom  he  cftccm’d  a kuight.

For  he  could  nor  imagine  nor  fuppofe,

A woman  could  have  gtv'&  fuch  manly  blowcs.

5S

And  thus  he  faith, me  feems  the  odds  too  great,

Thar  ( ofyou  fhould  takc,to  fight ftraightway,
Sith  both  your  horfe  and  you  arc  in  a fwcat.

Mine  offer  is  to  refpite  you  a day.

Till  you  may  bcrcfic(htwichrcftand  meat.

That  with  mine  honour  fight  with  you  I may:

For  I fhould  think  my  felfc  difgraced  fore.

To  vanquiflj  one  wean’d  and  fpent  before.

59

Weaii’d  and  fpcnt(quoth  Hic)alas  the  while.

Think  you  I am  fo  wcari’d  and  fofpent  ?

Your  courteoiisoffcr  caufetb  me  to  fmile,

Toihmk  how  quickly  you  will  it  repent  5
You  dodeccivc your  ftlfc,and  much  beguile.

To  think  that  I to  pa  wfe  would  be  content,

I doubt  not  you  fhall  find  butlittlecaufe,

(When  you  havctri’d)to  offer  mctopaufe.'

60

Well, laid  the  knight,ifyou  will  trieit  flvaighr.

That  you  acccpt,i  cannot  wclhcfufc : .

Forthwith  two  fptaies  of  mighty  ftrength  & walghf
Were  brought, and  he  doth  bid  Marfi/d  clmfc  1
Now  was  the  Sun  foure  houres  part  his  haight.
When  as  thefe  two  began  their  fpcaies  to  ulc  ;

The  tntmptts  found, they  fet  their  fpcaics in  reft.
And  each  determining  to  do  their  beft.

61

The  fpcarcs  in  fpclsand  fundry  pccccs  flew.

As  if  they  Ivid  been  little  flicks  or  cane,

Yet  of  the  blowcs  to  both  did  hurt  enfew.

Their  Heeds  were  wclnigh  brought  unto  their  banc^
Quite  overthrown  in  all  the  peoples  view.

As  I hough  their  legs  had  quite  from  them  been  rare.
So  both  their  borfes  tumbled  on  the  ground.

Yet  both  thcmfclvcs  from  hurt  were  fife  and  found.

An  hundred  and  an  hundred  knights  and  more,

Marfifa.  had  fubdu’d (it  was  well  known)

Yet  fuch  a chance  flie  never  had  before.

To  have  her  hoifc  fo  ftrangely  overthrown  f
Alfo  the  knight  that  black  apparell wore.

Doth  matvell  whence  thu  great  raifiiap  was  growHi
And  not  a little  wondrcrt  at  her  force.

That  had  fo  ftouily  overthrown  his  horfe.

Forthwith  on  foot  the  combat  they  apply.

In  which  the  tone  the  tother  doth  not  fpare.

And  cither  thinkstomakc  theotherdic,

And  cithcTofthc  tother  doth  beware.

But  all  the  while  among  the  ftanders  by,

Appeared  great  at'cntivrncfle  and  care.

For  ncvcrcould  they  guciit  from  the  beginning,
Whichofthc  twowasin  beft  hopcof  winning.

Now


>Acmikii
tetteteue
•Mtafifu  4ttd
Cmdta,


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


ti0t  GmJm
ludtf  i/tar-

//-•


TBtt'mtit  gin  Mar fifa  to  hetCelfe  to  Cay,

ih*»Mtrjif*  It  happy  wasthat  he  before  (\ood  ftiJI,
pgf  hj(j  1,5  holp  the  tothci  nine  to  dayi
**  No  doubt  with  me  it  could  have  been  but  ill.

That  now  alone  fo  hard  doth  hold  me  play.

As  fcam  I fare  my  felfc  with  all  my  skill.

Thus  to  her  felfc  the  ^ootMarfifa  thought.

And  a 11  the  while  couragioudy  die  fought.

n*iMe*U  Contrary, to  himfelfcthe  knight  thusfaith,

'rwaswcll  for  me, that  he  before  was  fpent,

For  had  he  been  but  ficfli  in  perfeft  breath,

I doubt  me  that  etc  this  I had  been  flienr,
Stirely(thonght  he)  I leant  had  leaped  death.

If  he  to  reft  himfelfe  bad  giv’n  confenr,

Noqueftion  1 did  great  advantage  take.

That  he  refus’d  that  offer  I did  make.

66

Thus  did  the  combat  long  ’twixt  them  endure.

And  neither  party  boafted  of  theii  game,

Vntill  the  nights  dark  lhadow  and  oblhire
Did  cover  city, wood, and  vale, and  plaine.

And  that  that  reft  to  all  things  doth  pioairc.

Did  force  them  two  to  refpit  this  their  painc ;

And  lirft  the  knight  thus  faid,what  can  we  do?
Behold  how  night  is  come  to  pan  us  two.

67

You  may  (faid  he)one  night  prolong  your  life.

And  longer  not.fuch  is  the  curfed  law,

Againft  my  will(God  knowes)!  holdthis  ftrife.

And  now  I feare  and  have  no  little  aw,
left  cv’ry  one  that  was  to  them  a wife.

Whom  late  you  kil’d,  will  from  your  beds  you  draw,
For  ev’ryoncof  thole  unhappy  men
Whom  erft  you  llue,was  husband  unto  ten.


tt


So  that  for  thofe  lame  nine  that  you  have  llaine.
Nine  times  ten  women  feek  revenge  to  take :
Wherefore  I wifli  that  you  and  all  your  traine
Within  my  roofe  this  night  abode  do  make.

For  fo  pethap  fiom  wrong  they  will  abllaine.

If  not  for  right,at  Icaft  for  rev ’rence  lake,
lie  take  your  offer  fir^Marfifa  faith.

So  that  hereof  to  me  you  give  Jrour  faith.

69

That  as  in  fight  you  flicw  your  value  great.

As  I have  proved  in  this  prefent  place,

Sol  may  find  your  words  without  deceit.

Left  fallhood  Ihould  your  noble  deeds  deface;

] will  accept  your  lodging  and  your  meat.

And  willpcrfwadcmy  fellowes  inlike  cafe  j
But  rather  then  for  feare  you  fliould  it  think.
Let’s  fight  it  out  by  light  of  torch  and  link,

70

And  thus  In  fi  ne  they  all  of  them  agreed,

Thatumohim  thatnightihey  would begueft;
Straight  to  a fumptuous  pallacc  they  proceed.
By  torch-light  brought  to  chambers  richly  dreft :

- But  when  that  each  put  off  their  warlike  weed.
Then  each  ofthem  with  wonder  was  pollcft :
She, that  the  knight  did  by  his  face  appeare.

To  be  a boy,of  age  but  cigbteenc  ycatc.

. 7»

And  hcjwhcn  by  her  haire  her  lex  he  knew,
Wondet’dtolcea  womanoffuchmight,

' As  namely  that  in  fight  nine  tall  men  flue.

And  after  had  with  him  prolong’d  the  fight;
And  cither  pleafcd  in  the  others  view,

» Behold  thcone  the  other  with  dclighr.

Then  each  delir’d  the  others  name  to  learn,
Asmth’enfuing  book  you  Ihalldifccrn.


Sntmti


In  thefr/f  flaffe  of  thu  Canto  u an exceKent  moraU  of  the proofe  of friends,  ivhich  father  manyyearei  finceiid  Moiall.

tranflattalm(irpordfQTt>oTd,a»  1 havefet  it  downe,  apply ingit  to  his mafier,  thetvoithy  Lord  JdmiTaU  Seymort
and  becau/c  the  verfe  was  my  fathers,  I count  l may  rvitbout  ufutpation  claime  it  by  itsherttance.  He  appliedit  to  that
noblcpcere  (very  aptly)dnerfewayes  : both  for  hts  lije,andfor  his  death, bur  jpecialfy  (which  I count  worthy  the  ne*
ting)  for  his  fe  rvants,who  loved  bimfo  dearely,that  even  in  remembrartce  of  hts  honourable  \(ininejfc,th^  loved  one  a*
not  her  exceedingly:  and  iny  father  ( I TemembeT)but  a weelse  before  he  died,whichwas  in  theycarc  1 5 8 i-wrotewitb  his
van  hand  the  names  oftkofe  were  then  living  of  the  old  Admiralty,  (fo  he  caHed  them  that  had  been  my  Lords  men)  and
there  were  then  xxxiitj  .0}  them  living-,  of  which  many  were  Igtights,  and  men  of  more  rerenew  then  himfelfe,  and  fame
were  but  meant  men,oi  armorers, art  ^cers,l;eepers,  and  farmers ; andyet  the  me  mory  of  his  frvice  was  (itch  a hand  a-*
vtotig  them  all  of  i(indncjje,as  the  beft  of  them  di flamed  not  the  poore/land  the  meaner  had  recourje  to  the  greafef  .for
their  countenance  and  aid  in  their  honejl  caufes-,and  many  ofthem  are  even  now  living,  andyet  it  wants  little  ofjorty
yeares  fince  that  noble  manwas  put  to  death.  His  piUure  my  father  gave  after  to  the  ^eens  Majefte  that  HOW'is,witb
aprettic  verfe  written  on  it, and  it  hangs  none  in  the gafferie  at  Somerfet-houfe.  . {

That  therewere  Amaxotts,  I thinlino  man  doubteth  that  hath  readof  Alexandevi  conquc/ls.  - ; Hiftory.

In  Angchca^wedding  of fiedore, /gather  this  AltegQry,Ange\\ea  u fallen  for  honour, which  brave  men  hunt  after.  Allegoric.
hyblood,  andbattels,andmany  hard  feats, and  mijfe  it : but  a good fervant  vci.h  faith  and  gtatclulnefe  tohk'Lord
gets  is.  f '

Cloridan<j;;<f  Mcdorca/lH(/e/9Eurialu$dn<lNifuiwViigilsitneads.  . " ’ Allufioa.

The  end  of  thenotes  of  the  xix  booke.


THE  twentieth  BOOKE.’


f^ith  Guidon  sit  his  vstrthygMeRs  agree f
To  hreake  fromth' htniiom  the  morroro  morn*  t
Aftolfb  demhing  iefl  $t  wonld  not  he,

T)oth  drive  them  thence  and  fcares  them  rtitb  bit  borne  i
Zcrbino  laughs  Gabrina  gaj  to  fee ;

Marfifa  feemet  to  take  it  in  great /come,
ty^nd  'gainii  hit  toill  commits  her  to  hit  guiding.

By  Tfhom  be  heares  p/lftbella  tiding.


HtrftlUt
and  Camtit
tmtnotU*
mmrtm-

and

St^hai,  itar-
M^wnurr.


I

Tght  wondrous  deeds  bydi-
Tcrlc  dames  wcrcdoncs
In  times  of  old}  as  well  by
fword  aspeO}

Whereby  thcir  glory  fhined
like  the  lun.

And  famous  was  both  fatre
and  neaieatthen.

The  fame  Harpalice  in  bat-»
tcllwonne,

CaniUat  worth  is  eke  well  known  to  men,

Corinnoi  praife,and  Tiipbof  are difeern’d,

Abo»c  the  rcftjbccaufc  they  both  tytreleam’d,
s

W’hat  art fo  deep?  whatrcJcnceisfo  high.

But  worthy  woiticn  have  thereto  attain'd  ?

Who  lift  in  ftoriesold  to  look, may  ate.

And  find  my  Ipeech  herein  not  falfc  nor  fainM,

And  though  oflatc  they  feem  not  tocome  nigli.

The  piaife  their  fexc  in  former  times  have  gain'd,
Kodoubr  thefault  is  either  inbackbiteri,

Oi  want  of  skill  and  judgement  in  the  vrritcis.


Jorfurelfee  In  this  our  prefent  age,

Sueh  vertiious  parts  in  their  fwcet  fex  to  grow,
Theyoungfofober,and  the  reft  fo  fage,
Anda!lfochaft,aswtiters  ffiall(I  know)

Have  woik  enough  to  fill  full  many  a page.

With  their  great  prailc  that  from  their  worth  vviH
Towinthefame  thetranreftorsdid  leefe,  (flow.
And  palTc  Mtuffa  not  in  few  degrees.


4

But  now  to  turn  my  fpeech  to  her  againe,

A fay  that  vr ken  the  knight  did  ask  her  name.


She  made  him  anfvvcr,and  did  not  difdainc.

To  tell  both  what  flic  was, and  whence  fhc  camC;,
Yct(as  h«t  fafhicn  was)both  brief  and  plainc;
She  faith  thus  to  the  knight,!  called  am
Marfifa  : and  fhe  need  to  fay  no  more.

For  all  the  world  had  heard  the  reft  before#


5

The  tothci  jwhen  his  turn  to  fpcak  came  in,

Firft  making  long  and  farther  circumftancC,

In  fuch  like  manner  doth  his  talc  begin,

(And  fighingdecp)you  all  have hcaid  perchance.
Both  of  my  fathers  houfc,and  of  my  kin.

Of  fame  \n  Italic, \nSpiinc,ani  Trance:

Forfure  i am  the  houfc  of  Clarimount ,

In  all  the  world  is  known  and  of  account.

6

He  that  C/.wre//(/ and  Mamhnno  fley/,

A nd  did  their  kingdomes  ruinc  and  deface.

Out  of  one  ftork  vvi^i  me  together  grew,
Alihoijghwe  were  not  all  born  in  one  place,

Foi  why  at  I/?er  flood(to  tell  you  true)

My  fatlier  •nebcgat,and  tnchaccafe
My  rnoihei  great  vs  iih  child  he  left  behind.

And  went  tc  Trance  by  hdp  of  faile  and  svinJ.'


Ktu  begin'
meib  $ht  tdU
•f  tht  Am*'
yos.


T.nAti*Mo'
tb*T  le  Gni  ■
dta,bM  Ml
bgibefamt
n.itiar.


7

Tlnisfev'ntecn  yearesl  li’Ad  like  one  cxiFd,

Vmill  I able  was  to  break  a lancc.

And  forthai  place  mcfeeni'J  too  bafeand  yild,
1 mean  to  feck  my  fric.ids  and  k>n  in  France :
They  iianic  me  Gulden  favage  of  a cb.Id,

As  yet  I could  not  much  my  name  advance,
fci  liitlier  by  a tempeft  I wasborn,

As  you  were  now, with  Ih ip  and  tackle  tern.


Guidon  Sdi
•i/aittUtif  im

*ht  $aiio.


fitst


Letl^e  in  the
htfitrjr  of  tbit
looker


THE  TWENTIETH  EOOKE


8

Here  i\x^  Argillonvi’vh  nine  men  I kil’i,

Elcv’n  months  fince,and  that  fame  day  at  nighty
The  office  of  an  husband  Ifulfil’d,

Vnto  ten  Arm\ons  in  flefli  delight :

This done,to  take  my  choice  then  was  I wil’d,

Of  any  ten  that  plcafcd  beft  my  fight.

And  thefe  rcmainc  my  wivcs,andmuft  untill
One  come  that  me  with  other  ninecan  kill.

*

Vnto  theknights  this  feem’d  a marv’Iousftotie,

And  much  they  wondred  at  this  goTcrnmcotj
They  matvcll  chat  fo  greata  tcriitorie
For  want  of  men  was  not  confiim’d  and  fpent :
They  thought  no  lelTc  the  women  would  be  forie.
For  wancof  men  to  live  fo  continent :

*T  was  llrangc  one  man  fufficed  ten  of  thefe,

Sith  one  with  us  can  fcant  one  woman  pleafc.

10

And  ftraight  they  were  int^uifi  tire  to  know.

When  firft  this  foolifli  order  there  began.

And  upon  what  occafion  it  did  grow.

That  women  in  that  country  ruled  man  ?

Then  GKfdo»anfwei*d  thus,I  fhallyou  fliow
The  whole  difcouifc  as  briefly  as  I can.

According  asmy  felfc  have  heard  the  fame,
Sincc(by  mifltap)  into  this realmcl  came.

11

When  as  the  Greel^es  had  quitedefacedTr^,

A nd  after  twice  ten  ycares  returned  home,

(For  ten  whole  yearcs  in  danger  and  annoy.

Of  liirging  feas  they  up  and  down  did  rome)

They  found  their  wives  that  had  but  little  joy,
Solcngatime,toIivc  and  lie  alone.

Each  one  a lufty  lover  to  havechofen.

Left  with  the  cold  they  might  be  ftciv’d  and  frozen.

12

Their  houfesfiill  of  baftard  brats  they  fee  t
In  fine,thcy  purpofc after confultation,

T©  pardon  all  their  wives, and  fet  them  free.

But  for  thefe  boyes  that  bred  fomc  alteration.

To  drive  them  outa  doorc  they  do  agree.

And  makcthcin  feck  a forrainc  habitation ;

It  was  contrary  much  to  their  dcfircs,

Thatochers  bratsfliould  warm  them  at  their  fires.

13

Thus  fome  thrown  out, feme  clofe  then  mothers  keep
IncornciSjfrom  their  angry  husbands  fight.

And  when  as  elder  yearcs  on  them  do  creep.

Each  ohe  betakes  him  to  his  moft  delight  j
Some  plow,fomegrt  them  herds  of  goats  and  flicep,
Somcfcicnccs,and  fame  do  learn  to  fight.

Thi’iev’iT  one  betook  him  to  feme  trade.

As  h¥  iflTgncs  that  all  the  woild  hath  made,
t s

Amr  ng  the  reft  that  art  ofwar  enfiic,

Fha,l.iKto  fbnnc  of  Clytemne/lra  Queenc,

But ^>fghtccnycaiesof age,and  frelh  ofhue.

And  ititlir  flower  of  youths  well  plea  fin  g greene.
This  one  :o  him  an  hundred  gallancsdiur.

And  getting  fiiipsand  things  that  needfull  been,

* Withwritsof  Marc  (a  thing  that  breeds  much  fbr-
Hegetsbim  to  thcfcJ,in  mind  to  borrow.  (row)


15

Now  while  Fhalante  withhif  curfed  fleet
Abode  at  fea  with  that  morccurfed  traioc  £

It  fortun’d  at  that  time  that  they  of  6’rcrr,^

Had  Jdumeo  driv'n  out  of  his  raigne  :

Whcicforc  for  better  ftrcngthihcy  thought  ft  meet
Fhalanto  and  his  men  to  entertame  :

They  give  to  him  great  hire,and  great  reward.

The  city  of  2>ifca  for  to  guard.

16

7)irea  was  a town  ofgreat  eftate,

Rich,and  frequented  with  no  fmall  refort,

Andyccldsln  plenty  large, betimes  and  late,

Offundry  kinds  of  plcafmcs,  and  offport;

And  as  they  all  mcr>us’d,fo  in  like  rate,  .

They  us’d  tfieir  foldicrsin  fo  friendly  foit.

As  though  they  had  agreed  by  foundaccoids.

To  make  them  all  their  maftcis  and  their  Lords.'

17

But  chief  they  found  with  women  fo  great  grace.

As  they  wan  moft  of  them  unto  their  lure  j
But  when  the  warres  were  ended  in  fiiort  (pace.

And  that  their  pay  nolongcr  did  endure.

They  all  prepar'd  to  leave  this  plcafant  place.

Which  to  thcdamfclsdid  great  griefc  procure;

Tb  Iccfc  their  husbandsibrothcr,or  their  father,

T hen  thefe  new  lovers  cv*ry  one  had  rather.

18

And  when  they  faw  thejt  could  not  make  them  flay,

By  no  device  of  theirs, nor  no  requeft,

T bey  do  agree  with  them  to  ftcalc  away.

And  takcfdeh  things  as  wereof  value  beft ;

Thuscamc  thcfcd.imfclslodcnwith  their  prev.

And  thence  to  fca,and  were  now  gone  at  Icaft
An  bundled  leaguer,  with  thefe  new  lawlcflc  lovers.

Before  Tiitea  this  their  flight  difeovers.

J9

The  wand  fo  good  then  For  their  purpofc  blew,

Fhalanio  quickly  I.irded  in  thiscoaft,

And  here  tlie  amorous  and  wanton  crew
Vnto  their  loves  of  this  their  Icwdncfic  boaft  j
But  now  that  faying  was  confirmed  true,

Thar  plcafant  things,  do  often  cloy  the  moft  i SenuHtt

And  there  can  be  a greater  clog  to  ho  man,  *

Then  to  be  weary  of  a wanton  woman.

1 - 20

Wherefore  like  men  that  v.'crc,2nd  bad  been  ever
Of  gainc  moft  greedy Tparing  ofexpence  :

They  fccrctly  confulting,  do  endever
T o take  the  gooo’s,and  then  to  ftcalc  from  thence.

Thus  whi!cthc'v#omen  ftill  inlovcpcifcvcr.

They  that  regard  not  picalurc  more  then  pence.

Load  with  tlicir  Wealth,  of  which  there  was  good
Stale  to  thclca,and  left  them  onthclhore.  (ftore,

2 1

Sore  were  the  damfels  daunted  anddifmaid.

When  once  they  faw  their  loves  had  Themforfaken,

For  what  more  fpirc  can  be,then  be  betraid
Of  him  to  whom  one  hath  her  feife  betaken  ?

And  iith  thev  find  that  wcepin«doth  not  aid.

They  mcane  betimefome  order  fiiall  be  taken.

What  they  fliall  do, and  how  hereafter  live.

And  cv’ry  one  doth  ftraigh:  her  vcrdit  pivc.


One


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


Tit  eemma-  <

tUtitsef  a
loodfiau  «f
«en>.


Thtnwtri
tt»  m*u}

(itUkt)  M

tbtir'PtrlU

mtMtxphtm

iktymait

fucbaUw  m

tbtj  wtri

dnvtau

**»l*f»
ptm  d/mr.


Tit  Tntwu

iiiufitt

imldttun

todUthe  df‘

ftSicnitf

tbimnd^

fiattjiipe,

dHijttcblify


m


21

OnCjIiotnc  to  tumc  againcdoth  thi'nkeit  bcft.

And  to  their  kin  and  friends  them  to  fubmit.

And  wti-h  repentance  pardon  to  reqneff.

And  vow  the hkcfaulc never  tocommitj
Ano.hci  that  good  motion  doth  deteft.

And  I'weares  it  f]jc\v’d  the  mover  had  no  wit.

And  that  with  greater  honcftie  or  calc.

They  might  go  dcownc  them  headlong  in  the  Teas*

1 ^

Among  the  reft  one  Oronfcihighr,

That  Imeally  of Mynos  was  defeended.

And  paft  the  reft  in  bcauiic  and  good  Qirite,

And  had  leftc grievoufty  then  they  offended.

For  to  Phalanio  flic  her  troth  did  plight.

And  to  have  bene  his  honeft  fpeufc  intendedi
This  one  dcclarech  thus  her  refolution.

And  makes  the  reft  put  it  in  execution.

^4-

Shcwiflies  them  to  taiy  in  this  land.

That  had  both  fruitfull  earth  and  pleafantaire.

And  fountaincsfwccc,and  woods  onev’ry  hand.
And  mcdowcsgrcenc,and  pafturesfrcfh  and  faire,
Bcfidc  large  hav’ns, where  fhipi  at  cafe  might  ftand.
To  which  the  merchants  often  made  tcpaitc.

By  tempeft  driven, well  lodcn  with  good  trafGcke,
Of  things  that  came  from  c/£gypt  And  from  Ajfricfi,
>5

Whcicforc  this  place  flie  minds  not  to  fotfake.

But  that  they  may  as  chiefly  thcydcCrc,

A fharpe  revenge  on  men  for  ever  take.

They  vow  to  put  to  fackc.tofword  and  fire.

Such  fhips  as  to  their  hav’ji  repairedomake.

And  kill  the  mcn,and  this  they  all  confpire.*

And  ftill  when  any  comcitbis  trade  they  life.

Nor  left  a man  alive  to  carry  newet.  ’ '

26

Butwhen  chiscruelllaw  fomeyeareshad  lafted.

Which  they  had  meant  to  havcconflrtn'd  foray.
They  find  that  they  fo  faft  confum’d  and  waft^.
That  this  their  baiTcnkingdomc  would  decay.
Except  to  find  fbmc  remedy  they  hafted.

And  having  long confultcd  on  theway.

They  mcane  of  thisthcirlaw  to  bate  fbmc  rigor,

Yet  leave  the  f ubftancc  ftill  in  ftrength  and  viger.

And  thus  they  do,tbey  chufc  among  fucb  men.

As  tempefts  drive  to  this  their  wicked  nation.

Some  few  as  were  fo  luftic,as  with  ten.

T hey  could  per  formot  he  aft  of  generation,

All  in  one  right,the  reft  into  a den

They  caft,  and  k ill  them  in  moft  cruell  fafhion,

And  build  unto  revenge  a folemne  alter.

And  over  this  they  make  them  ftretch  a halter,

28

Such  men  as  live  arc  to  this  order  fwornc.

To  kill  all  fuch  as  hither  fhallrcpaite.

And  all  men  children  that  to  them  are  borne.

They  fell  or  change  as  in  an  open  faiie.

So  when  fomc  die  with  age  and  wcaknefTc  worn?.
Then  other  women  do  the  want  repaire.

Their  powre  and  number thtisdoth  ftill  inneafe.
Their  wealth  and  pomp  augmented^with  long  peace


*7


But  after  many  yearcs  it  thus  befell,

Elbanio, one  of  Mercies  noble  race,

A comely  tall  ftrong  man,  and  favord  well.

And  in  his fpecch  and  manners  pafling grace.

Arrived  where  thefe  homicids  do  dwell.

And  ere  he  knew  the  fafhion  of  the  place.

The  cruell  fergeants  tooke  him  as  they  found  him^

And  like  a fcllon  hand  and  foote  they  bound  him.

30

It  fortund  as  they  carrid  him  to  flaushter.

Among  thereft  that  did  the  fame  Dchold,

Was  AUfandtih  Oronteas  daughter,

A fincyong  girlc,about  twife eight  ycarc old,

Elbanio  humbly  as  he  went  befoughther.

To  bca  meane  thisfoulc  death  to  withhold.

That  like  a man  he  might  be  kild  at  leaft.

And  not  be  drawnc  to  flaughto;  like  a be^.

31

To  beg  my  life  (quoth  he)  it  were  a yanitie,

(Which  in  your  fcwicc  J would  gladly  fpend)

Where  humane  hearts  be  void  of  all  biimamtic.

But  all  the  futc  that  I to  make  intend,

(Which  to  dcnic  were  too  too  much  irnmanitie}

Is  this,  that  thus  my  life  I may  not  end.

But  with  my  fword  in  band  to  fight  with  men,

, With  fev'n  at  once,or  cighc,or  nine  or  ten.

This  he  to  her,thus  fiie  to  him  replies.

Though  to  mankind  we  all  profcfTc  hoftilitie.

Yet  tbinke  not  (this  fhe  fpake  with watrie  eyes}

That  all  our  hearts  arc  void  ofallgcntilitie,  i

What  Pregne  or  Afede4  could  defpife

Your  pafling  bcautie,courage  and  nobiiide?  bitt^

And  were  my  fcllowes  all  fo  ill  inclind,  wumjh

Yet  1 my  fclfe  would  bcarc  a bettet  mind.

33

And  though  the  rigor  ofourlawbefuch.

That  no  min  can  obtaine  a pardon  free.

And  cv*n  this  fmall  you  aske,to  graunt  is  much.

If  our  law  ftriftly  fhould  obferved  be.

Yet  fuch  rcinorfe  I feclc  my  heart  doth  tuch.

To  grant  thy  futc  ifothers  will  agree
Although  I feaic  thou  wilt  in  fuch  a ftrife.

Prolong  thy  painc,and  not  preferve  thy  life.

Oh(faid  Elbanio)  bicft  were  fuch  a day.

That  in  the  field  my  manhood  I might  trie.

Could  but  your  credit  cany  fuch  a fway.

Not  ten, but  ten  times  ten  I would  defic.

This  faid,fhe caus’d  the  execution  ftay.

And  to  her  mother  goes  flicby  and  by,

With  tboufand  ftings  of  Cupid  in  hci-  breft,

And  unto  her  expoundeth  his  requeft.

35

Straight  Orontea  doth  her  counfcll  call.

And  in  fuch  fort  thereof  to  them  fhc  fpake,!

In  guarding  of  our  hav*n  and  citie  wall,

Tis  good  that  oftheftrongeft  men  we  take:  ' Omtiuori^
T hercforc  to  know  who  be  moft  ftout  and  tall,  *»«  »•

•I  thinkc  it  very  good  fbmc  proofe  to  make,  •”*  btbdlf^

For  clfc  we  fliall  unto  our  feWes  do  wrong.

To  fave  the  weaker  men, and  kill  the  ftrong.

Q And


THE  TWENTIETH  BOOKE


36


[/irttma
$TiU»n  a.  ■

fainjl  E4-
<«»«•


(tvstnct.


And  who  can  wifli  to  make  a better  rriall.

Then  for  one  man  to  fight  with  five  and  five.
And  if  he  vanqmrht  them  and  make  them  dieall>
T were  ccitcs  meet  he  Hiould  be  kept  ali»c«

Thus  Orontca  faid,  and  they  replieall.

That  in  thispoint  with  her  they  cannot  ftriyCj
Save  old  Artemia  (carren  witherd  jade)

Mifiikt  the  motion, and  this  anfwer  made.

37

The  caufc  that  firft  we  did  feme  men  admit.

Was  not  to  keepe  our  hav’nsor  citic  wall.

For  we  our  fclvcs  have  ftiength  enough  and  witj
To  keepe  our  towne  (I  cruft)  and  ever  fiiall.
Were  we  as  well  for  procreation  fit.

Without  mans  hclpc,  not  one  fliould  live  at  allj
Now  for  ncccftitic  fomc  few  we  fpare.

Such  as  moll  able  for  that  fcrvice  arc.

3*

This  motiem  quite  gainfaith  our  auncient  law.

To  keepe  one  man  as  ftrongashalfcafcorc;
How  many  women  would  he  keepe  in  aw?

Had  we  tenfuch  we  fhould  bearc  rule  no  more.
And  further,tisan  old  and  cerrainefaw ,

Both  us’d  and  proved  many  ycarcs  before,
Thatthey  that  give  a weapon  to  their  ftrongci,
Arc  like  themfclvcs  to  carry  rule  no  longer.

39

But  put  the  cafe  this  one  by  our  confenr.

And  his  good  hapten  oftheotlicrskill.

How  fliall  an  hundred  vvidowes  then  lament.
That  long  muft  lie  alone  againft  their  will?

If  he  an  hundred  women  would  content.

Then  him  to  favc  I lliould  not  thinke  it  ill.

Then  were  he  to  be  lov’d, admir’d  and  wonderd,
If  he  alone  could  fausfiean  hundcid.

40

This  cniclifpecch  did  alhhoicftdirplcafe.

And  loth  they  were  Elbanie  Ihould  be  flaine,
Hisedmely  fliapc  their  niarpncflcdid  appeafe.

And  chiefly  nicthatovcraH  did  raigne.

Doth  feeke  herein  her  daughters  mind  to  plcafc.
With  many  reafonsanfwnng  her  againc.

And  point  by  point  did  all  her  fpccch  confute.
And  in  theeixl  obtaind  her  daughters  fute.

4»

T hus  to  Elbanio  pardon  they  impart.

Pro vid  cd  i f he  overcome  the  men.

And  after  bravely  play  the  husbandspair.

Not  with  an  hundred  women, but  with  ten.

Elbanio  thanketh  them  with  chcarfull  hart.

Then  was  he  freely  loofed  from  the  den;

In  fi  nCjwJien  all  things  ready  were  ordained.

In  both  exploits  the  conquefl  he  obtained.

4»

Then  Akjfandra,\n  whofc  tender  mihd

Love  had  already  madefo  deepe  imprefllen.

With  other  oine,wcreunto  him  aflfignd.

And  princely  mace  was  put  in  hupofleflion.

But  firftbyfolemnerowtheydohimbind.

To  hold  this  la w for  evei-  by  lucceflion,  j
To  facrifice  all  mcn,favefuch  as  trie.

To  killten  men,and  with  ten  women  lie.


43


And  though  that  many  have  in  ages  pall:

Attempted  both, yet  few  have  had  fucccflc,
Tofeapethe  fiift  exploit,and  trie  thclaft.

In  which  to  failc,thcdangcr  were  no  leflc.

But  he  that  both  pcrformcs,foriInvitb  is  plall
In  princely  featCjand  free  from  all  diftrefle;

And  this  their  law  (as  by  records  appcarcs)
Alreadie  lafted  hath  two  thoufand  ycarcs.

44

The  laft  but  I,that  held  this  curled  place,

ArgiUon.  high?,whomIin  combat  killed.

And  hiin  and  his  thereby  I did  dtfplacc.

And  then  their  roomes  with  me  and  mine  I filled.
Where  we  have  tartid  now  a twelvemonths  fpace.
Among  (hefe  wight  s of  good  nefle  all  unskilled,
AndlcadcaJifc  full  of  dildaineand  fcoine.

As  better  had  bene  never  to  be  borne.

45

For  why  thefc  dallyings  and  wanton  toyes.

That  wonted  arc  to  plcafc  cur  foolifli  youth.
With  coftly  fare, gay  clothes, and  VenvA  joyes.

Of  which  repentance  is  the  frute  enfewth.

Both  breed  to  me  but  anguidi  and  annoyes.

And  penfivc  cares,  and  ever  during  vuthj
Andchicfly  when  unto  my  mind  1 call.

My  liberty  is  loft,  aed  I a thrall.

. , 46  ^

Toloolcmy  luftictimein  this  vile  place,

Bemov’d  from  kin  and  friends, and  countrey  farre,
A vvofull  and  remedilcffc  difgracc,

Mov’d  by  fompill  alpefl:  of  angry  ftarrt,

, Ev’n  as  a ftallion  kept  for  breed  and  race,

Whom  fomc  milliap  hath  made  unfit  for  vvartc.
By  lolTc  of  fight  and  foundring  of  his  fccte.

For  fcrvice  quit^unablc  and  unmcetc.

The  while  this  talc  the  favage  Guidon  told.

The  Englijh  Duke  that  alf  this  while  flood  by.

And  heard  hisfpeech,and  did  his  face  behold.

And  ijoted  all  his  grace  with  watchfull  eye,

And  made  by  all  thefe  oblervaftions  bold.

He  runneth  to  embrace  him  by  and  by.

And  faid,dcarc  cofin,l  were  mucli  too  blame.
Except  I lov’d  the  houfc  from  whence  you  came,
.4*

Your  mother  could  not  tiea  better  lace

About  your  necke,to  make  your  linage  knowne.
Then  this  your  value  in  this  prefent  place,

Againft  Marfifa  in  the  battell  fliowDc:

I am  Aflolfo  one  of  Atrmons  race.

Friend  to  your  houfe,and  kinfman  of  your  ownc,

1 much  rcjoycctofind  by  thismifchancc;

Soocare  i kinfman  fo  far  off  from  France,

49

But  he  that  othcr\vife  would  have  bene  glad.

To  meet  a friend, a Piinccofkin  foncarc.

Now  on  t be  other  fide  he  was  full  fad.

And  fhewd  thefamcin  countenance  and  cheare,'
For  cv’ry  way  the  fccjuell  muft  he  bad.

For  if  he  win  they  die,thc  cafe  is  clearc,
Andifhedonri  win,  heisbutded.

Thus  by  ones  good  the  tothen  harmc  is  bred,

Oa


itm  prt

fulvo  libtr-
tas  veniimt
aim.


SimtU.

Tint  SimSe
"Eaffa  bath
uJ^tu  bmui


The (Hdaf
the  ^whru$
tale.


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


1J7


50

On  th’othcr  fide  his  ycares  and  tender  age.

Did  all  of  them  [o  farrc  with  pitue  move.

And  did  Marfifoi  hcate  fo  much  afftvage,

Her  enmitic  was  wclnigh  turn’d  to  love;

AtUft  fhe  makes  a motion  w'ife  andfage,

Which  waSjtbat  all  to  feape  by  force  (liould  prove,
Shefweaies  if  he  would  take  part  with  his  cofen,
t^bt  all  the  lowne  could  vancjuidi  that  halic  dofen,

51

Mod  glad  (faid  Guidon)  I would  take  your  part.
Though  vainc  1:  is  againft  fo  great  a number.

To  enterpnfeby  font  fence  to  depart*

Their  ver)  mnluvude  will  us  fo  cumber;

For  often  (n.  the  terror  ®f  mine  hart)

Ten  ihoufand  armed  women  1 do  number
Here  in  the  ftreets,  and  with  as  many  moie.

They  do  defend  the  port,  the  hav’n  and  fliote.

5*

TuOl  (quoth  Marfifa)  this  I not  leMitd,

Were  they  in  nuarber  as  the  fands  offcas,
Totraliant  hearts  nc  enterprifeishard.

Take  you  bur  part,  and  joynewithme  and  thefe.
Yes.anfwei’J  Guidon,  be  I made  or  mard.

Or  bec’t  with  pamcjwuh  danger  or  difeafe,

I will  take  part  with  you, but  if  1 may,

I would  advile  you  (o  a fafer  way .

5J

If  we  this  matter  wifely  take  in  hand.

This  is  the  fafeft  way  that  I do  know.

They  let  no  men  to  touch  the  fait  fca  fand,

LeA  any  fhouldattcmpt  Atom  hence  to  go:

And  fiih  dshatd  their  forces  to  withAaad,
lie  trie  a better  way  then  thar,I  trow.

Among  my  ten  I hare  one  fpcctall  wife,

Vpon  whole  miA  I venter  dare  my  life.

54

she  Oiall  a barke  provide  in  ftcretfort.

And  other  peedful!  things  for  us  prepare, '

And  when  as  to  the  tilt-yard  they  icfort.

And  of  our  fight  in  expc£fation  are,

Weliiddenly  will  make  unio  the  port.

And  fhip  our  fclves  ere  any  be  aware;

To  leade  the  way  my  feite  I am  content,  ,

So  you  and  yours  to  follow  will  confent.

55

/farjija  Araight,and  all  the  reA  agreed.

That  Guidon  for  thattime  (hould  betheir  guide.
And  that  accordingly  they  would  proceed.

As  he  for  them  had  promiA  to  provide;

Though  (faid  Marjifa)  faving  this  my  weed,

My  fliape  and  fexc  from  all  of  them  doth  hide,

1 know  my  felfc  from  harmc  could  be  excufed.
And  of  them  all  both  welcome  and  well  ufed*

56

But  BOW  (faid  fhe)fuch  parti  mind  to  take.

As  you  (hall  ta  A (how  good  or  bad  it  prove)

That  night  with  his  Aleria  Guidon  fpakc,

(So  was  her  name  that  bare  him  chiefeA  love)

And  fointsthat  fheprovifion  good  fhouldmake.
For  things  that  needfull  were  for  their  remove.
And  Die  no  rime, nor  painc,nortravell  fpar’d.

But  out  of  hand  a galley  Araight  prepar’d.


57

And  that  her  fcllowcs  might  no  fraud  fufpe^I,

To  go  to  f:ckc  a prize  flic  doth  prci  cr.d.

And  with  gieat  diligence  fhe  doth  dirc^I
All  mcancs  to  ferve  ttieir  pafTage  to  defend;

Andtbey  within  BOtimcnormcancncglcil,'

To  brin^  their  Aout  defigr\ement  to  an  end.

Thus  ev^ ry  one  their  charge  fo  well  attended,

T hacere  the  morning  all  was  done  and  ended,

58

Nofoonercamicthc  dawning  of  the  day.

But  that  thofc  Ama\ont  like  bees  in  fwarmes,
Thatfcckencw  dwellings  in  the  month  of  May,

So  came  they  well  appointed  all  inarmes,
Tofccanendofthatuncnded  fr..y,

Not  looking  for  fuch  new  and  Arauge  alarmes.

For  Araight  thofc  fixe  I nam’d  and  all  thetrtraine.

Came  with  intent  to  (cape  01  clfc  tc  (lainc.

Fji A Guidon  breakes  the  way  to  all  the  rcA,

Soone  after  him  Af<rr^/i  did  enfew,

T hen  Sanfonet  and  tWEngliJh  Duke  were  prcA,

And  next  two  brothers  came, then  all  the  crewj
But  yet  with  numbers  they  were  lb  opprcA,

Both  with  the  (hafts  they  (hot,and  darts  they  threw.

That  notwithAanding  all  they  had  devifed.

They  were  indanger  great  tobefurprifed.

60

But  when  the  Eng’ijh  Duke  the  dangerfaw,

Vnto  hin  fellc  ihcic  woidsorfuch  he  faid,'

](ecour  foes  in  troupes  togcthci  draw,

I (ee  our  friends  are  weak  ned  anddifraaid.

Now  will  1 Arikcour  enemies  in  aw.

Now  willl  bring  on  friends  unlookt  for  aid.

With  this  he  lookc  his  home  and  blew  a blaft,  |

That  made  the  hearers  ev’ry  one  agaA.

6 I

So  great  a terror  in  their  minds  was  bred,  1

ThatAraightasifwithfpritesthcy  had  bene  (card.

This  way  and  that,confuicdly  they  Acd,

And  left  ihc  gates  without  defence  crguaid.

As  tumults  often  arc  at  Aage-playes  bred.

When  falfc  reports  offudden  fires  arc  heard,  Sintilt,

Or  when  the  ovcrlodcn  fcatesdo  crack e.

One  tumblingdowne  upon  anothersbacke.

6t

One  breakesa  leg, another  breakes  an  armc.

And  feme  aic  choakt  and  Arfcd  in  the  prelTc,

Some  kill  thcmfclvcsforfcarcoffurthcr  harmc.

And  whence  t he  danger  comes  they  cannot  guefle.

But  allofthcminhaA  thcmfelvcsunarmc,

And  unto  fcarcfull  fiight  themfclvcs  addrcAct
Norwomcnonely  with  »his  fcarcarepunifh’d.

But  even  the  men  themfclvcs  were  all  aAonifli'd.

Yea  even  Marji/at  courage,  late  fo  fierce,

(Sogreata  vcituc  this  inchancment  had)

That  Arangcand  fudden  fcare  the  fame  did  pcarce.

And  fhe  by  fii::ht  to  favc  her  felfc  was  glad;

The  Knigh  s likewtfe  whom  late  I did  rchearfe.

And  all  the  men,  as  if  they  had  bene  mad.

To  fcaward  Aed,as  doth  a fcarfull  Dove,  SimiUi

When  anyjtoife  doth  fcare  her  from  above.

O % Tfau*


THE  TWENTIETH  BOOKE


64

ThusdotH  tfcc  blaft  annoy  both  friends  and  foesp
Yet  fo  as  all  the  men  to  fliipboord  went;

Ajlolio  ftilabout  the  citic  goes.

For  them  to  terrific  is  his  intent.

And  more  and  more  in  all  the  ftreets  be  blocs.

And  chiefly  thofc  where  they  do  moft  frequent.

The  while  his  fiends  were  now  to  fliipboord  gotten.
And  launched  out,aDd  him  had  quite  forgotten.

Thefhip  ^/cna  did  before  provide,

AndGttido«  taking  fhip  with  ail  the  reft.

Would  not  confent  ncareto  the  flioic  to  bide.

But  ftalcaway  withdrcadfullfeare  pofleft.

Now  came  the  V>iikc  unto  the  water  fide.

And  feeing  all  were  gonc,hc  thought  it  beft
Some  other  mcanc  and  way  to  take  in  hand.

By  which  he  might  convey  him  home  by  land.

Jftprecte-  home, and  there  did  fpecd,

dohtoullef  When  from  thofc  countries  he  was  come  to  France,
And  how  his  home  did  ftand  him  in  great  ftecd.
Defending  him  from  danger  and  mifcbance.
Hereafter  I will  fiiew,  now  I proceed
To  her  whofc  deeds  do  ftill  her  name  advance,

1 meanc  Marfifa  flout, that  made  great  hafl^

To  fiiunthc  hearing  of  the  fcarfull  blaft,

67

But  when  they  were  removed  from  the  flrore.

By  hclpe  offailcs  and  oares,fo  great  a fpace.

As  now  the  fcarfull  found  was  heard  no  more.

Each  thought  them  guilty  of  a orcat  difgracc.

And  of  their  fcare  they  were  afnam’d  fo  fore.

One  fhund  to  lookc  another  in  the  face.

The  while  their  bark  had  fo  good  wind  and  wether.
As  all  arriv’d  in  Tyrrhen  fcas  together.


7*

Thowhilc  Marfifaon  her  way  doth  ride,

Apparcld  like  a Knight  of  feme  renowne.

And  as  fhc  pafTed  by  the  river  fide.

She  met  a woman  in  a tawnie  gownc,
lifarourd,crookcd,old  and  hollow  eyd.

Her  forehead  furrow’d  with  continuall  frowne,'
Her  body  tyr’d  with  travcll  and  ill  fare.

Her  guilty  mind  afflided  more  with  care.

7a

This  filthy  hag,thiscaircn  wither’d  jade.

Was  fhc  whom  in  the  cave  Orlando  found.

When  of  the  thccvesfuch  maflacic  he  made.

That  kept  faire  Jfabella  under  ground;

This  wretch  that  holpc  them  in  that  wicked  trade
And  fear’d  the  plague  that  might  on  her  redound/
Fled  from  all  company  for  fcare  of  danger,  i
Vntill  fhc  hapt  to hght  upon  this  ftrangcr.

7}

And  fo^  flicfaw  her  clad  in  ftrangc  array,

Though  gracclcflc,yct  flic  gathers  heart  of  grace,
Aftd  at  the  foord  her  commi  ng  (he  doth  flay.

And  when  came  unto  the  place,

Sir  Knight  (for  fo  flicfccm’d)  I fiiall  you  pray,
(Said  this  old  hag)  to  do  me  lb  much  grace.

That  on  your  horfe  behind  you  I may  ride.

Till  1 be  paft  the  ftreame  on  th’othcr  fide,

, 74

Marjifa  that  was  ever  from  her  cradle,

Of  courteous  kind ,doth  grant  her  hcrdcfii  e,  ‘

And  made  facrclambcr  up  behind  herfadlc.

To  pafTctbc  river  and  a filthy  mire.

That  to  her  horfe  had  almoft  bene  a ftablc:

And  when  they  were  afeended  fomewhat  higher.
They  met  a faire  yong  Ladic  with  a Knight,

Both  richly  clad, both  comely  to  the  fight.


68


75


And  to  Marfilix  thence  by  fca  they  went.

Where  Bradamant  bare  all  the  nile  and  fway,

Who  late  as  governeffe  was  thither  fern.

Though  thence  fhc  had  bene  abfent  many  a day;
iindU.  prefent  bcne,by  her'  aficnr,

Vnentertaind  they  fliould  not  go  away.

Here  when  they  were  rcfrefln  with  meatc  and  reft,
Marfifa  tooke  her  leave  of  all  the  reft.

69

Andfaid  flic  thought  it  great  difgi  acc  and  fliamc.

So  many  in  one  company  to  fee,

Forcrowes  (quoth  flic)  and  pigeonsdo  the  fame.
And  Dccre,and  fli cepe, and  bcalh  that  fcarfull  be.
But  Falcons  that  do  fl  ic  at  ftatcly  game.

With  other  birds  and  beaftsin  tbeirdegrec.

That  fcare  not  others  forcc,and  truft  their  owne.
Shun  company,and  love  to  go  alone.

70  . ,

But  yet  the  reft  that  wereof other  mind,

1 ogether  kept, and  bad  the  Dame  farewell,

Vntill  by  hap  a caftlc  they  did  find.

Wherein  a Lord  of  great  eftate  did  dwell.

That  in  appearance  courtcousfccm’d  and  kind,
Ofth’mhio  But  not  in  ads, as  after  I fhall  tell,

fitakitifar-  For  he  furpris’d  them  all  that  night  afleepe,
'ffirmsheij.  madcthcm fwcarc  acrucll  law  to  kccpc.


But  both  their  minds  were  falfe,thcir  manners  bad.
And  therefore  matcht  together  very  fir.

For  he  was  Pinnabeff,  that  lately  had
Faire  Bradamant  deceiv’d  it  Merlins  pit.

She  was  his  love, for  whom  he  was  fo  fad.

When  Bradamant  on  him  did  hap  to  hit.

Till  after  by  this  noble  Damfcls  meanc.

That  ftrangcinchantmcnt  wasdtfTolrcd  clcane*

76

This  Ladic  that  was  PinndbcUos  love.

And  was  both  proud  and  fcornfullof  behaviour.
And  fees  this  hag, did  flraight  her  laughter  move,
Tofeorneher  writhcld  skin  and  evill  favour:

For  which  Marfifa  flout  doth  her  reprove,

And  with  a fliarpc  reply  flic  flraight  doth  brave  her,
Becaufe(quoti)flie)  I find  thcudoft’difHainchcr,
Againft  thy  Knight  and  thee  1 will  mainuinc  her,

77

I fay  this  woman  fairer  is  then  th"u,

Now  let  thy  Knight  come  fight  in  thy  defence,'

For  1 by  force  my  faying  will  avow.

And  if  that  I prcvaile,crctbou  go  hence.

Thou  flialt  thy  horfe  and  garments  all  allow
Tothisold  womanfora  recompencc.

Then  Pimabell to  fight  doth  himaddreftc,
Becaufein  manhoed  he  could  donolcflc.

But


/


[ntbafectf^


Or-ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


Znbi’U’


I


But  when  f her  met  pafling  foicc.

Was  fuch)  flic  quickly  vanqiuflicd  the  Knight,
And  overthrew  him  quite  *bcfidc  his  horfe.

This  dene, file  makes  the  ftatcly  dame  to  light.
And  with  the  aged  woman  cloths  to  fcorfe.

At  which  the  tone  tookefportjthetotherfpite.

She  tooke  likewifc  the  Ladies  ambling  nagge.

And  thereupon  flic  fetsthe  trotting  hagge.

79

\\1io  inthis  youthfull  tyre  and  rich  array.

Doth  lookc  in  fit  ew  more  ugly  t hen  before.

Thus  three  dayes  with  Marfipt  fliedid  flay.

Before  they  hapt  to  meet  with  any  morej
The  fourth  they  met  Zerbinoon  the  way,
TheScottifli  Prince  that  would  have  fav*d  ,Vfc,/(jre,
And  now  in  anger  great  thei'eof  purfude.

That  in  bis  prefence  pror’d  himfelfefb  rude,

80

Now  though  Zerbino  were  but  ill  apaid.

Yet  was  he  rtraight  with  laughter  great  furprifde.
To  fee  an  aged  woman  fo  arraid,

In  yotithfull  clothsfls  though  fhc  wcrcdifguifdc:
And  to  MarfifamerUy  hefaid.

Sir  Knight  it  feemeth  you  arc  well  advis’d,

Toget  fo  faire  a peecc  to  carric  by  you,

Asyuu  arc fure  that  no  man  willcnvicyou.

81

The  woman  feem*d  fomc  hundred  yearci  of  age.

Her  wither’d  skin  fuch  llorc  of  wrinclcshadj
And  like  an  ape  or  monkic  in  a cage.

So  looked  flic  m this  apparrcll  clad;

But  now  flic  looked  worfc,whcn  with  new  rage.
Her  eyes  enflamed  wcre,and  flichalfcmad;

For  what  more  I'pitc can  bea  woman  told.

Then  if  onefay  flit  lookctli  foulcand  old?

St

feemeth  wroth(to  make  fomc  fport)

And  thus  fiicfairh,furccafcyour  flandrous  toiing.
Your  vertueof  her  beautic  commcihfliort.

She  is  (in  fpite  of  you)  both  faire  and  youngt
And  if  you  dareconrraric  rny  report.

Or  that  hereby  you  feele  your  courage  ftoung,

1 will  mamtaineagainft  you  cv’ry  word.

On  hurfcjOr  fbotc,hy  fpcarc  orclfc  by  Iworda

8?

2cr&woatthischallcngedid  butlaffe.

And  faid  he  would  not  Icefc  their  fticndfliipfo.*
Tis  fit(quothhc)that  fwinc  fhouldfecd  on  drafftf,
I am  not  I,fo  mad  and  fond  I trow.

For  her  to  draw  a fwoi  d or  breake  a ftaffe^

Blit  ai  you  came  you  may  together  go:

No  doubt  you  are  a fitly  matched  pairc,

Ifyouas  luflic  be  as  flieisfairc,

.

Wherefore  I lift  not  paihe  and  travcll  take,

T o get  a conqueft  better  loft  then  wonne,*

Then  (anfwer’d  ftout  Marfi/a)  I will  makc
Another  offer  which  you  may  not  fliunnc.

On  this  condition  let  us  for  her  fake,

A courfc  at  field  one  with  the  other  runne:

That  if  you  win  then  1 will  keepe  her  ftill.

If  I, then  you  fhallfcivc  her  while  fhc  will.


is


Content  (cuoth  Zcrbin')ind  with  that  they  ran,

With  couched  fpears,and  met  amid  the  plainC3
But  Zeihin  had  the  worfe,  A/ar/i/j  wan.

As  better  horft.and  ftrongcr  of  the  twainc.*

Who  feeing  Zcrfit/idownc,  flic  then  began.

To  talk e with  him  and  jcft  with  him  agaiacj
Behold  (quoth  flic)  I here  to  you  prefent.

This  lovely  damfcll  foi  your  more  content.

86

Now  fee  you  keepe  your  promife  and  your  troth,

T o this  fine  dame  to  be  a champion  trew.

And  do  not  breake  the  bands  of  facred  oth,

And  fo  (qiioth  flic)  for  now  I bid  adew,

Zerbin  was  mov’d  with  fliame  and  anger  both.
Shame  for  his  foilc,  a thing  molf  ftrangc  and  new;
And  wrathfor  her  vvhom  he  thereby  did  gaine.
Which  he  might  decrnc  the  grea  ter  lolfc  of tvvaihe.

87

Then  of  his  miftrefti  new  he  doth  enquire.

What  Knighi  it  was  that  did  him  overthrow.

She  willingly  did  grant  him  hisdcCrc,

Suppofing  fo  his  gricfc  might  greater  grow.

It  was  a Ladic  in  a Knights  attire,

Mayfifahight  (quoth  flie)  that  layd  you  low,


Thtugh  II  «

titn fti  do0ne
htw  GalrtHM

jat  tedrvo'
man,y€t  U is
tt  be  gatbe-


The  which  ftrange  news  I thinkc  not  much  did  lackc  cemfx.


To  make  hit  armor  blufh  upon  his  backe.

88

Vpon  his  horfe  in  anger  great  he  gets.

And  curft  himfclfc  he  had  not  fit  more  furc.

He  bites  lj?s  lips, and  inwardly  he  frets.

And  flic  in  him  more  anger  to  procure.

With  byting  words  bisaifeontentment  whett^

Yet  he  doth  for  his  oth  fake  all  endure.

Like  tired  horfe  he  quiet  all  abides.

That  hath  the  bit  in  month,and  fpurs  in  fidcl.

* .

At  laft  intothis  bitter  plaint  he  burft,

On  thee  6 fortune  well  I may  complainc,

And  call  my  felfe  unhappic  and  accurft,

'i  hat  doft  at  once  two  plagues  for  me  ordaine,

Two  plagues  that  of  all  plagues  I count  the  worft.
As  firft  this  foiIc,my  former  fame  to  ftainej
And  having  loft  a Ladic  of  rare  features,

T o have  this  mifltcfTcjfow  left  of  all  creatures,

so

She,whofc  fuipa  fling  beautie  well  deferved.

All  worldly  blifle,whofc  match  was  never  found.
She  from  misfoituric  could  not  be  preferved.

But  that  by  cruel  Iftormcs  fliemuft  bedreund.

And  this, who  if  flic  had  bene  rightly  Icrved
Ought  long  ere  this, ha  vc  fed  worms  under  ground,
Thou  haft  thefe  many  ycarcs  and  ftill  doft  favc.
That  I by  hci  at  laft  this  plague  might  have.

9S

Bythcfcand  ftich  like  words  asZerfunfpake,

That  aged  wonsangives  aflured  guefic;

That  this  was  he,  to  whom,  and  for  whofefake,
Faire  Ifahell  (kept  erft  ingrcatdiflrcfl'e,

There  where  Orlando  did  from  theives  her  take)
Was  wont  fo  great  afle^fion  to  profefle.

And  to  deferibe  bis  parts  and  fliape  fo  trew,

As  cv’ric©nc  might  know  him  at  a vevy,

O 3 And


nie  jhe  nugif
if.


Similtl
Hortee
tbit  fimili-
iudtof  «i|
mlTe.

T)tmia»  Ml*
richlsti  ut
iniquit  mtM.
titt  feUm.
"SMthu  •/
a harfi  i$
tntrt  iwrt^.


tieekad
he-.rd  ntvret
that  JfatelU
vrnu  dreiuni
hi  feme
Pjixg  ref97U


1^0


THE  TWENTIETH  BOOKE


9imU.


Merall.


Hiftoric.


.^I'lecory,

Ailufion.


91

4ln(J  now  that  by  hi*  woidsfhc  plainely  Tound,

That  this  was  Zerbiit,  and  that  be  bclcevcd
Faire  Jfabe//a  was  in  tcmpeft  dround.

With  which  conceit  fhe  faw  he  fore  was  grccrcd.
She  that  did  know  her  to  be  fafc  and  found.

Yet  meaning  not  his  giicfe  fhould  be  relecved.

She  tcllethonely  that  that  would  difeafe  him.
And  doth  conceale  that  which  flte  thought  would

(plcifc  him.

You  fit  (fjuoth  flic)  that  me  fo  greatly  fcoine.

If you  butkncw  what  tydingsl  could  tell.

Of  hot  w horn  you  lament  as  dead  a nd  lorne.

You  would  both  fpeakemc  faire  and  ufetne  well;
But  firft  I will  with  hotfes  wild  be  tome.

And  fuffer  all  the  paines  of  earth  and  hell,
Beforcthatl  willcondcfcendto  fliow  it.

Or  then  by  me  you  ercr  come  to  know  it.

94-  .

Looke  how  a gentle  grew  nd,t  hat  doth  aflaile
And  fhes  upon  a flrangcr  at  the  furft.

Will  on  the  fodainc  faune  and  wag  his  tailc,

Iffo  of  bread  one  prefer  him  a cruft;

So  Zerbin  that  before  on  her  did  raile.

And  bitterly  unto  her  face  her  curft.

Now  he  intreates  her, and  doth  pray  and  flattcrj
To  give  liim  farther  notice  of  the  matter.

95

At  laft  with  long  intrcatic  flie  replies.

And  faith,fairc  jfahcUa  is  not  ded.

But  foflic  livesjthatfurc  flic  death  enviest
And  never  hope  to  have  her  maidcnhcd,  <


For  I have  feenc  (quoth  flic)with  thefc  mine  eyes.
How  twcntic  lawicflc  men  her  captive  led.

And  cv’ry  one  might  have  her  at  then  plcafurc.

As  having  liberty, and  luft,aad  Icafurc.

96

Ah  wicked  hagge,thou  know’ll  it  is  a lie,

And  yet  behold  how  thou  canll  paint  it  out.

Thou  know ’ft  that  none  of  them  with  her  did  lie
Thou  know*ft  Orlando  thence  did  fetch  her  out;
And  made  the  malcfaftors  ail  10  die.

That  of  her  danger  now  there  was  no  doubt.

But  now  alas  this  lying  ftoric  bred,

A thoufand  jcalouiics  in  Zahincs  hcd.

97

He  askt  her  where  and  when  his  love  flic  law.

He  fpeakesher  oftentimes  boih  foulc and  faire-
But  not  a word  more  could  he  fiom  her  draw
Neither  by  threatning  words,nor  yet  by  prayte:
Hcfccics  a cotzic  cold  his  heart  to  gnaw,

His  little  hope  was  turn’d  to  great  difpanc;

And  thus  this  old  ilfavour’dlpitefull  Caller
<5  avc  good  Zerbino  fuch  a choking  (a  )lct.  *

98

What  patience  thus  provoked  could  have  borne,

_ AtCuch  a womans  hands  fo  vile  a fpitc?

And  Ih^vc  he  was  unto  her  fcrvice  fworne.

No  doubt  he  would  have  done  her  then  her  right.
Thus  flic  of  malice  full,  and  heof  I'corne,

Went  on  their  way,untill  they  met  a Kmohe;

But  what  became  hereof  if  you  will  know.

The  bookc  enfuing  fliallthcfcquell  fliow.


Intletaleof  VhUzmo andhis companie,  vcomenmay  noteltc  notable incon/^ancic ofyoung mem dijljoncff  lovet,
lorv  fweet  and pkafant  foever  they  be  at  thefirfi.  In  ^ynabclloizwil  hh  rcije  that  fcotned  Gjibnaas  oldeageand  de-
formities tve  may  obferve  thefoule  finne andi he  jufi punijhment  of  pride  and eont erupt  of  othen.  in  the goodZexhino
that  for  his  promifefahy  fuffers  himfelfc  to  bcfonoturiuu/Iy  abufed  ofafpitefuU  malieiovA  oldnrreteh,  tve  may  mar  he  a

notable  example  of  a man  true  and jaithfu/lftj  his  tvord.

In  the  beginntrig  of  this  hool^c  he  recileih  the  names  of  fourcroorhenfamous,  twofor  rcarre,  two  for  learning,  andin-
dcal  there  ba'ic  bene  many  more, exec llent  in  either  l^ind : as  T homeris  that  frilled  Cyrus,Zenobea,  H ipficmtca  wife
to  Uyi\mdaies,Debora  I he  Hebrew, whom  the  scripture  commendeth  i Vulclca  queene  of  Bohemia,  Thcnca  qiicencof
Slavonia,  Amalafunta  queenc  of  the  G ollcs;  All  thefc  arejamousfor  their  wife  government  And  for  learning  divers

women  have  great  lyexceUedf, as  Eriana,Arp3fia,Cleobulyna,Thc.ina,Lcomio,Manto,Nicoftiata,Cara'^nra,/;c
Sibils,SuIpicia  But  yr  a pet  file  patternc  of  excellency  mbothlfmds,bothingovernmgihecommonwealthmofl  wifely,
peaceably,  profperoujiy  .and  sfiUinall  l{ind  of  learning,  and  languages,  Greelie,Larine, French, Italian  and  SpaniJJj,  I
mayfly  it  truly, and  without  faticrie,  t hat  our  gracious  i'ovcraigiie  is  to  be  prejerred  before  any  of  them, yea  before  all
of  them, and  there  ore  may  fufi  ly  be  called  the  Jewell,  or  rather  the  wonder  of  all  her  fcx.

All  the  A/lcgoricall  matter  of  this  boohy  is  onc'y  in  AftolfoS  herne,  of  which  I have  Jpohyn  before  this.

This  tale  oj  the  Grcel^s  eomming  home  from  Ti  oy,  and  finding  fo  many  bafiards,  alludes  to  a li^ehap  that  fell  unto
the  Spartans  when  they  made  wane  on  the  Mejfentans  j fiomwhenceoncin  deednamedVahmo  or  Phalantoir///)
ether  bajlards  called  Parthenians  went  totheOracle  to  l-now  what  theyflmlddo,  and  were  dire  [fed  by  thefiidOrac'.e
togotoTarennim : Their  anfiverth^  received  of  the  Oracle  was  this.

Statircum,  & pingucfolum,tibirradoTarcnti
IncoIcrc,&  late  fedem  per  lapygasxdcs.

So  as  they  tailing  heart  upon  this, went  fiom  Sparta, and  as  fome  thinl^e  built  the  citie  ofT.%rentum.


The  end  of  the  notes  upon  the  xx.  Bookc.


CdBtt  u 4
nid^wanie
thdtthey  ufi
$9  d veoman,
itfienft,  IX
lr>]h»  mub


llERi>iomo\


GABRfJVA


i6i  THE  XXI.  BOOKE;

...  jj;


THE  ARGVMENT.

(J^fajl  yvorthie  Zcrbin  l>j  his  fromift  Bound,
defends  Gabrina  mo^  anworthie  veight,
^/indjor  hcrfkl^ehe  overt brorves  to  ground
Hcrmonida,**«/wj^fV  FIcmifli  Knight:
tvbo  doth  to  him  her  moji  lerrd life  expound,
I ncrenJiHg-  by  his  fpeech^her  cruell fpite\

Tet  fliU  the  good  Zerbino  travels  veith  htr^
tAnd  many  a rsearie  mile  they  rode  togitber,


inn  a.

Hlmafide:

Ipta  ptHHU

i~  )ufi%tan~
'um  livii.


letdtbe  tM9.
tU  uptH  thit
tthttndtf
>u  ia.iit.


’ Or  Iron  naHcsmakefada
plankeor  boord
More  finne,  nor  cords*
burden  fuicr  bindc,

• Then  faith  once  giv’n  fay
promifeor  fay  word,

Tycs  moft  aflurcdly  the
vertuousminde,

'old  times  to  us  good  ftorc
of  famples  foord.

How  praife  devine  w.is  unto  faith  aflindc,

/nd  how  in  garments  white  (Iieftill  was  painted.
That  cch  final  fpot  or  ftaine  might  fiicvV  her  tainted,
a

I'airh  ever  fiiould  be  kept  in  fccrct  fort,

Although  to  one,or  whethei  given  to  more.
Although  in  deferts  farre  from  all  refbrt.

Or  elfe  a judge  or  multitude  before :

What  though  the witnefle  wants  to  make  report?
Yet  muft  we  keepe  our  cov*nant  evermore.

As  well  by  word  and  private  proteftation.

As  by  record  and  publike  obligation.

And  fo  did  Ztrhin  as  before  I told,

His  promife  firme  unviolate preferve.

And  though  Galir/n*  was  both  foule  and  old,
Though  her  mildeedsall  rigor  did  defer vc;

Yet  he  hii  faithand  promife  firme  doth  hold.

And  left  his  formei  bu fines  her  to  ferve.

Till  as  they  traveld  on  the  way  by  chance.

They  met  a Flemijh  Knight  late  come  to  France,

4

The  Knight  of  fiature  comly  was  and  tall.

And  in  his  fiiicld  he  bare  an  azure  bend.


His  name  Ermonida  they  ufe  to  call.

It  feem’d  he  was  not  this  old  womans  frend.
For  firaight  his  fight  her  heart  did  fo  appall,
Vnto  her  guide  her  life  flie  dothcommend;
And  praid  him(as  hepromift)  to  vouchfafe.
From  this  her  cnemie  to  kcepc  her  fafe,

T

This  man  (quoth  fhc)  my  guiltlcficfathei  killed.
For  malice  onely  that  to  me  he  bare:

This  man  my  onely  brothers  blood  hathfpillcd,
Beeaufe  he  wifh  t my  fafetie  and  v;clfarcs
Yet  with  revenge  his  rageeanhot  be  filled.

But  ftill  he  fcckcs  to  workc  my  farther  care.
Well  (quoth  Zerbino)  be  of  better  chearc,

For  none  fiiall  do  thee  haimc  whilfi  1 am  heare.

6

Now  when  the  Knight  of  F launders  faw  that  face.
That  of  all  faces  he  did  moft  dctcft.*

With  me  to  combat  in  this  prefent  place,

You  mufl  prepare  (quoth  hc^  and  ttieyour  heft,
Oryceld  to  me  this  woman  void  ofgrace.

That  as  flic  hath  defcrv'dlTic  may  bedrefte
Ifyou  refi ftance  make  you  will  be  ftaine.

For  fo  it  fals  to  fuch  as  wrong  maintaine.

7

zerbino  curtcou  fly  doth  thusreplie,

Bethinke  your  fclfc  with  more  confideratlon.

To  make  a woman  of  your  hand  todie.

What  ftaine  it  is  to  Knightly  reputation  •

As  for  the  combat  ifyou  nccdswiU  trie.

Her  to  defend  is  my  determination:

For  I am  fworne  to  fight  in  her  dcfcoce.

And  therefore  cannot  with  mine  othdifpcncc.


This


StmtHtn


Sinimt,


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


163


THiSjand  to  thiseffc^  much  moi c in  vaine
He  fpakejliim  fiom  his  purpofe  to  perfwade.

At  laft  they  were  fo  kindled  with  difdainCj
That  one  the  other  fiercely  did  invade;

■ Zerbino  was  the  ftiongcrof  the  twaine.

And  ftrake  thotother  through  the  niouldcr  blade.
So  as  he  fell  halle  dead  and  halfc  alivcj
Not  able  any  more  with  him  toftrivc.

9

But  Zcrbin  doubting  left  he  had  bene  dead.

With  much  companion  from  his  horft  did  lights
And  firft  he  loos’d  his  helmet  from  his  head.

And  fcckcth  to  revive  him  if  he  might}

Who  looking  firmely  on  Zerhino  fed,

I cannot  much  lament  that  fuch  a Knight,

Hath  hurt  me  in  this  fight  and  overihiowne.

In  whom  fuch  valew  and  fuch  woith  is  fliowne.

fO

In  this  alone  my  hap  I do  lament.

That  it  fiiould  be  for  fuch  a womans  fake.

And  much  I marvcll  that  jou  would  confent.

To  your  protcdlion  fuch  a one  to  take.

Which  I am  fare  you  would  full  fore  repent.

If  I to  you  her  deeds  fliould  open  make.

And  that  you  fhould  fb  grea  tly  damage  me.

For  fuch  a wicked  caitive  as  is /he.

II

ten  Uim.  And  fave  my  voice  and  flrength  will  failc  I dpubt,
itbtbeule  Before  my  tale  will  come  to  perfeft  end,

I will  declare  if  you  will  heare  it  out,  ^

The  wicked  life  of  this  ungracious  fend}

1 had  a brother  valorous  and  ftout.

In  HoUani  borne,who  (for  he  did  intend
To  win  by  fervicc  honour  and  renowne)
Hew/iaferv’dthat  bare  of  Greece  thecrownC.

" • i .

II

A noble  Gentleman  Argeo  hight,

Neare  the  confines  of  Servia  did  dwell.

Who  in  my  brother  tookc  lb  great  delighi.

That  in  fliort  fpaccthcy  were  acquainted  well,
Argct  maitide  had  this  curfed  wight.

Of  whom  the  prefent  ftoric  1 do  tell,
Andtookeinher  (unworthy)  fo  great  pleafure,
Aspaft  thebandsof  rcafon  and  of  mcafutc,

*3


ij


(Gtbriat,


lidajid


II  Si  milt }
irwv  fU‘
.Ontiuf


tpifiie.  But  file  more  light  then  leaves  in  Autumne  fcafon.


'.lUvicr  fo‘

■ [tune  cw»
^tfmdtrt
"jxiiMtMi-

, I vtutil
iitftSa
•Unt.

. td-in  the
rdeftht

■ H etUiu
, ndti  tu-
Itw  fiilf

■ UiSliu,

. nule
I'tmeialu
I it  trbore
•nu4
' inile,

! imilti


That  cv’ry  blaft  doth  blow  about  and  change
Againft  all wivcly  care,  all caufe  and  rcafon,

Bccaufe  flic  doth  delight  her  felfc  in  change,

VVith  wicked  hart  and  head  full  fraught  with  trcafbn.
So  farrcfhe  lets  her  raging  love  to  range,
Shefucstohavc,my  brotherto  her  lover.

And  doth  to  him  the  foulc  ddirc  uncover.

14

^ But  neither  doth  a rocke  more  firmely  (land
Vpon  the  fir  ore  againft  the  furging  wave,

^Nor  doth  the  Cedar  more  upon  the  land
RcCft  the  tempeftthat  doth  rage  and  rave.

Then  doth  my  brother  her  defirewithftand.

Though  (lie  at  fiindrie  times  the  fame  doth  crave,
And  though  fbcfeckcth  many  a meane  and  trial!;
Yet  ftill  flic  lurncth  with  a flat  dcniall.


At  laft  it  fell  (as  oft  it  doth  befall

To  valiant  men  that  love  to  fight  and  quarell)

My  brother  was  fore  v;oundcd  in  a brail,

Sothat  it  feem’d  his  life  was  in  ibmc  parcl!.*
Wherefore  he  gets  witliin  the  caftlc  wall.

Both  that  his  frend  might  know  & vcngchisquarcll;|
And  other  nccdfoll  things  may  be  procured.

By  which  his  hurt  might  be  the  fooncr  cured,

16

Now  while  my  brother  ftaid  in  this  ill  ftate,

His  friend  Argeo  ibmetimc  abfent  thence.

This  woman  early  vifits  him  and  late.

And  offers  him  good  llorc  of  pounds  and  peneci
But  he  that  al  waics  villany  did  hate.

And  would  not  do  his  friend  lb  grcatofFcncc,
Thought  (as  in  cvill  cafes  is  the  beft)

Of  two  great  mifehiefes  to  chufc  out  the  left.

17

He  mcancs  to  leave  Argeos  fricndfhip  quite.

And  get  him  home  againc  from  whence  he  came.

Or  hide  himfelfc  where  this  moft  wicked  w'ight
Shall  never  fee  his  face  nor  heare  his  name;

1 hiSjthoughit  griev’d  him,a$it  ought  ofright,

He  chufeth  as  a way  Icffe  worthy  blame,

Then  ycclding  to  her  luft  for  to  abufc  her.

Or  to  her  loving  husband  toaccufe  her.

18

Whcrefoie(though  of  his  wound  both  faint  and  weak)
He  doth  rcfolvc  to  part  with  conftant  mind.

He  gets  him  thcncc,and  not  a word  doth  fpeakc.
And  leaves  this  filthy  minded  bcaft  behind;

But  fortune  ill  his  purpofe  good  doth  bicakc.

And  alter’d  quite  the  courfe  he  had  defignd.

Home  came  her  husband  finding  her  alone.
Complaining  gtievoufly  and  making  monc.

19

Her  check cs  with  teares  all  blubberd  were  and  red,'

Her  lookes  did  fiicw  her  mind  was  ill  apaid.

Her  lockcs  all  tome  did  hang  about  herhed,

VVith  which  her  loving  husband  fore  afraid.

Did  askchcrofcwhatchanccfuchchangchad  bred,
Tillat  the  length  the  wicked  wretch  thusfaid.

With  fpitcful  heartjwith  wicked  voice  & trembling.
And  faind  acaufc,thccaufeit  fclfcdificmbling.

20

Alas  (quoth  fitc)  what  fliould  I feeke  to  hide
My  wickedaftand  hainous deadly finne.

Which  though  from  you,and  all  the  world  befide,

I could  conccaIc,yct  doth  the  fbule  within.

And  confcicncc  grudge,a  burden  fuch  to  bide,

Soas  the  inward  torment  I am  in.

Doth  pafTe  theplague  or  penance  far  away.

That  mortall  man  upon  my  flnnc  can  lay.

zi

If  fo  a finne  of  right  you  may  it  name.

That  one  is  forft  unto  againft  her  will.

But  thus  it  is, your  friend  that  hither  came,

(I  thinking  he  had  thought  nor  meant  none  ill)
Inforccd  me  to  my  perpctuall  fhamc,

Againft  all  laweSjall  honeftie  and  skill;

And  doubting  that  I would  the  faft  bewray.
Forthwith  he  gate  him  hence  and  fled  away.

Bus


his  1}  [MJTli
Poena  aulim
'Vibeoiem  ac
tnuht  faviet
iBie

~h!o8t  diti
fuum  pmart
inptSiart
teSem.

Ovid  Pani,
Mt&  fhSdt
torgutfripfi

Uft.


164


THE  XXJ.  BOOKE


>2

But  though  my  toJy  ho  have  Co  defil’d.

Yetis  my  mind  from  fiitne  devoid  andcleare^
Although  from  fight  of  men  I am  exil’d,

Kordare  I once  in  publikc  place  appcaic;
Thisfaid,with  thoufand  names  fhc  him  revil’d.
So  that  Argeo  that  the  tale  did  heart,

Bciceved  It, and  firaight  withall  intended
To  punifi)  him  that  never  had  offended,
aj

He  taketh  horfe  forthwith  and  follow’th  poft.

All  on  rcvLngc  his  mind  was  wholly  bent^
ABd.forhcperfitlydidknow  thecoft.

And  for  my  brother  faire  and  foftly  went.

He  met  him  in  an  hower  at  the  moft.

Bidding  him  ftand  orelfe  he  (hould  befiient:

My  brother  would  diffwade  him  if  he  might,
Butallinvaine,yir^c«  needs  would  fight.

24

The  tone  was  ftrong  and  fulloffrefh  difdaine.

The  tother  weake  and  loth  to  hurt  his  frend.

So  that  himfelfe  defending  long  in  vaine.

My  brother  was  confirain'd  to  yeeld  in  th’cnd:
And  thus  at  lafi  he  prifnerdoth  remaioe.

And  yeelds,himfclfe  unable  to  defend*

Which  CetnCfArgeo  doth  furccafe  to  ftrike.

But  Ipeaketh  unto  him  tbefc  words  or  like.

God  never  let  my  heart  fo  fane  be  moved.

With  rightfull  wrath  that  I thy  blood  fhouldfpill.
Since  once  I thee  efteemed  well  and  loved.

Whom  once  I loved,  I will  never  kill;

And  though  thy  aft  may  juftly  be  reproved.

The  world  fhall  fee  my  goodneffe  by  thine  ill.

For  be  it  lovc,or  be  it  in  difilaine,

I will  be  found  the  better  of  the  twainc.

,26

Another  mcane  then  death  toufc  I mind.

In  punifiiing  thisfinne  and  foulc  mifdecd,
Thisfaid  (with  willow  hands  he  there  did  find)
He  makes  a huidlc  fit  tofervcfuch  need.

On  which  my  brothers  body  he  doth  bind.

That  with  old  hurts  and  new  did  frcflily  blccd^
And  to  hiscaftlahe  doth  him  conva}’.

In  mind  to  kcepchim  therca  prifner  ay,

27

Yet  though  with  him  a prifner  he  remaind.

In  other  things  he  felt  no  lackc  noi  want.

Save  that  his  liberty  was  him  refiraind;

But  Io,this  wretch  that  late  did  him  fupplant.

And  to  her  hnsbandfoof  himcomplaind.

Thought  flic  would  iricif  he  would  yet  recant.
And  (for  at  her  command  flic  had  thekayes)

She  goes  to  him,and  thus  to  him  flie  fayes.

28

Now  fir  (quoth  flic)  I truft  you  fcclc  the  frute.

That  this  your  foolifli  conftanciehath  wrought.
Had  you  not  better  bene  to  graunt  the  fme.

That  I in  friendly  fort  fo  often  fought?

You  fee  tis  vaine  to  argue  or  difpute.

Say  whatyoucan,you  arc  a traitor  thought:

And  heto  whom  you  flicw’d  Co  great  fidelity.
Imputes  to  you  ttcaibh  and  infidelity.


29

I thinkc  both  for  your  cafe  and  reputation.

You  had  bene  better  graunted  my  icqueft.

You  fee  you  havea  foric  habitation.

And  in  the  fame  for  ever  looke  to  reft.

Except  you  change  your  firft  dctcrminatioOf
And  mollifieyour  ftonie  hearted  breft.

Which  if  you  yet  will  do,I  do  affuic  you.

Both  libertie  and  credite  to  procure  you.

so

No,  never  hopc,no  faid  Fr7«*K</ro, never,

(So  my  unhappic  brothers  name  they  call)

In  vaine  to  change  my  mind  youd  do  endever.

And  though  Ar^t  cauflcffekccpc  me  thrall.

Yet  I in  faith  and  troth  will  ftill  pcifcvcr,

Sufticeth  me,  that  he  that  fecth  all.

Doth  know  mine  innoccncicand  doth  fee  me.

And  when  he  lift  can  both  reward  and  free  me.

I cate  not  though  the  world  of  me  thinkc  ill,

I hope  another  world  will  make  amends.

Yet  let  Argea  flay  me  if  he  will.

Or  let  him  (as  it  feemeth  he  intends)

Though  wrongfully,in  prifon  hold  meftill.

Yet  one  day  he  will  find  he  hurts  his  fiends.

And  know  by  proofe  how  he  hath  bene  beguil’d.
When  truth  appears, and  time  brings  forth  her  child.

Yet  for  all  this, this  woman  void  of/Iiame,

Did  ecafe  no  whit  gilandro  ftill  to  tempt.

Arid  oftentimes  in  vamc  to  him  flic  came.

And  ever  turncs  rcpulft  and  with  contempt.

And  in  this  frantike  fancjie  flic  doth  frame
A thoufand  Heights  to  further  h'  r attempt.

And  many  things  in  mind  flie  doth  revolve.

Before  on  any  one  flicdoth  rcfolvc,

li

Sixe  months  Entire  flie  doth  her  fclfc  abfent.

Nor  ever  came  Fitandro  to  cm  ice.

Which  made  him  hope  that  flic  was  now  content
To  ccafe  hcrfutc.and  follow  his  advice^

But  lojhow  foitune(chat  is  ever  bent
To  further  wicked  perfoni  in  their  vice)

Doth  untohcrafitoccafion  lend.

To  bring  her  wicked  luft  to  wofull  end. '

34

There  had  bene  hate  and  enmity  of  old,

Betweene  her  husband  and  another  Knight,
Morando  cald  whooften  would  be  bold.

If  fo  abfent  were  a night ,

To  come  with  force  and  to  flfault  hit  bold.

Or  thereabout  to  do  himfomedefpight;

But  if  he  were  athosne,then  all  that  whiles
He  came  not  ncarc  him  by  a dozen  miles.

3<

"Wherefore  to  be  revenged  on  this  his  fo,

That  often  did  him  wrong  and  great  outrage,  •
Argta  gives  it  out  that  he  will  go
Vnio  lerufalmon  pilgrimaget
And  from  his  houftdifguyfd  he  parted  fo,

I nfccrct  fort, Without  or  manor  page.

And  ev’ry  night  comes  in  atthc  pofterne.

That  none  but  flic  bis  comming  might  difccrne*

Thus


nttuce.


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


Thus  all  the  d3  7 he  wanders  all  about.

In  woods, in  groveSjin  padurcs  here  and  thither.
To  fee  if  he  could  find  Morando  out j
That  in  his  abfence  ufed  to  come  hither;

And  farre  he  keepes  himfclfc  from  any  tout,

Vntill  that  darknefle  dotlrobfcurc  the  Wether,

Then  would  he  get  him  home  a fecret  way.

Of  which  hisvvifcdidkeepea  privic  kay,

37

Thusall  but  fiic,v4r^eoabfentthought.

By  which  his  wicked  wife  with  Wonted  skill,
Anothei  nieanes  and  new  occaCon  fought.

To  bring  to  palTc  herfoule  unbridled  will:

With  weeping  eyes  (her  eyes  to  wcepc  fiic  tought)
And  all  with  teares  her  bnfome  lliedoth  fill.

Then  came  Hie  to  my  brother  and  complained,
That(but  he  bdpe)  her  honour  would  be  Bained,

Nor  mine  alone,but  mine  Argeos  too.

Who  were  he  here  (cjUoth  iJie)  I would  not  care.
You  know  what  iiarme  Morando  wonts  to doo,
^Vhcn  as  mine  husbands  abfeace  makes  him  dare.
And  now  behold  thecaitivemedoth  woo.

And  tointrapm^fctsfullmanya  faaie.

And  offred  fervants  great  reward  and  hire.

So  they  would  hclpe  to  further  hisdefitc.

39

And  hearing  that  Arge9  was  away,

And  would  continue  Co  no  lirtic  (pact.

He  came  witliin  the  calllewall  to  day,

(His  abfence  gave  him  fo  much  hcait  of  grace)
Where, liad  my  husband  bene  but  in  the  way.

He  durft  not  onely  not  have  fliew*d  his  face.

But  furc  he  would  not  haye  prefum'd  at  all.

To  come  within  a kenning  of  the  wall.

4C

And  what  by  mefTagc  he  before  had  done.

Now  face  to  face  by  mouth  he  doth  the  fame.

So  as  I hardly  know  which  way  to  Hiunnc,

That  which  todo,wouId  breed  my  endlcfTc  blanic<
Had  not  my  fugred  fpeech  his  favour  wonne.

By  faining  I my  will  to  his  would  frame,

H c would  perforce  have  had  his  foule  intent,

Which  now  he  hopes  to  get  by  my  afTent.

4»

I protnifl  him  (but  piomifc  made  for  fcarc
Is  voyd)  and  I performance  never  mem,
ButfothataAl  madchimtofotbsarc.

Which  he  to  do  by  force  was  fully  bent.

N ow  if  you  be  a friend,or  ever  were,

Vnto  ArgeOjyoumzj  this  prevent.

Nor  onely  favc  mine  honour  thus  diftrcfTcd,

But  his  to  whom  fuch  love  you  have  profcfl'cd.

4»

Which  if  you  me  dcnie,theB  I may  fay.

Not  honcftie,of  which  your  bofi  you  make,
Butcnicitiedidcaufc  you  fay  me  nay.

And  of  my  futc  fo  fraall  regard  to  take;

And  that  you  were  not  moved  any  way
With  fiicndfhips  rule,or  for  Argeos  fake>

Although  twixt  usit  might  have  fcact  beene.

But  now  my  (Iiamc  muft  needs  be  knowne  ie  fcesc.


t63

Tufh  ((\uoth  Filandro)  this  is  more  then  need.

To  ulc  much  ciicumftancc  in  fiich  a cafe,

Asl  bcgan,fb  mcancl  to  proceed.

And  though  Argeo  hold  me  in  difgracc,

Yet  unto  him  I not  impute  this  deed.

But  ready  will  be  ftill  in  time  and  place.

To  do  him  fcrvicc  any  Wiy  I may,

Soyou  butfhew  to  me  the  meancand  way,

44

Sirthen  (faid  flic)  theway  were  this, to  kill

Him  thatefoth  feeke  nay  husbands  fhamc  and  mine.
Which  youmayeaflydojiffoyou  will
Awhile  unto  my  wordsyour  care  incline;

I have  put  offhiscomming  hithcr,till
It  be  betwixt  t he  houres  of  ten  and  nine.

What  time  I proroift  him  fo  to  provide,

To  let  him  in,fo  as  he  were  not  fpide.

Now  then  my  counfcll  isjthat  you  do  flay
Here  in  my  chamber,untill  1 procure
Him  to  difaimc  himfclfc,ro  as  you  may
Slay  him  with  fmall  ado, and  make  him  fure.

Th  is  is  (quoth  flic)  the  onely  ready  way.

And  faftft  for  your  felfe,I  you  afTure:

To  this  device  Filandro  doth  aflent.

Thinking  hereby  his  friends  hurt  to  prevent.

45

Now  more  and  more  approcht  the  Airfcd  night^J
When  as  his  wife  (if  I a wife  may  call)

This  bellifli  hag  aud  foule  infernal!  fprite.

Did  place  my  brother  arm'd  behind  a wall,

And  as  flie  wiflit,ev’n  fb  it  fell  aright.

For  ill  device  amifle  doth  fcldomc  fall;

Her  husband  in  the  cv*nin»  fomewhatlate,  Stun

Entcrd  hiscaftle  at  the  poiternegatc.

47

Filandro  at  one  blow  cuts  of  his  hcd,“

T aking  him  for  Morando  in  exchange.

She  ftands  fall  by  that  him  had  thither  led.

Nor  flicwes  in  word  or  geflure  any  change;

Argeo  there  remaincth  flaincand  ded,

Andkild  by  him(6  chance  moft  hard  and  flrangc)

That  while  he  friendly  thought  to  do  him  good,

Moft  crucll  and  unfriendly  flied  bis  blood.

48

Now  when  this  fcate  had  thus  bene  brought  topalle,
Gahrtna  (fb  is  this  good  womans  name)

That  doth  in  craft  the  fiends  of  hell  furpafle,

Vnto  my  brother  for  his  weapon  came,  j
Which  he  delivcrd  as  his  promife  was,

« And  rhatonccdoncjthcnflie  without  all  fliame,

Prayes  him  to  take  in  hand  a lighted  candle.

And  view  him  well  whom  he  fo  ill  did  handle.

There  hrft  he  faw  how  hie  had  kild  his  fiend,

A fij>ht  that  made  him  at  the  heart  repent.

And  fie  afrcfli  the  matter  to  amend,

Doth  thrcate,exccpt  he  would  to  herailent.

That  flic  fhould  bring  his  life  t(>fliamcfull  end.

For  to  accufc  him  of  this  faft  flie  mem,

Wifliing  him  though  his  life  he  did  defpife.

To  fliunnc  a fhamcfull  death  if  he  be  wife.

Filandro


1^6


THE  XXI.  BOOKE


JO

Filandro  maz*<l,and  full  offcaiedid  (land,

VVben  of  his  error  he  was  fi rft  aware.

He  thought  aefird  to  kill  her  out  of  hand.

By  whom  he  was  intiaptinfuch  a fnarc.

But  (he  had  got  his  weapons  in  her  hand.

And  to  defend  her  felfe  did  Ataight  prepare;

But  (lire  he  could  have  found  it  in  his  hart.

By  pei cemealc  to  have  t ornc  her  e v’ry  part.

® (Iiipin  midAofreasopprcA,
iitna  an  Bctwctnc  two  winds  that  do  together  Arire,
Uaitanufti  Can  have  no  time  of  refpitc  or  ofreA,

inaiaune  But  goes  what  way  the  Aronger  wind  doth  drive;
Nm  FiUndre  doubting  which  was  beft,

mavintvtnti  I'o  die,  or  in  luch  fort  to  bide  alive,

tertamuu  Stocd  long  in  doubtjand  neither  way  did  bend.
Yet  chofc  the  worfer  bargain  in  the  end.

. ^ 5*

Hitreafon  open  layes  before  his  face,

Thcdanger  gicatif  once  the  faft  were  knowne,
Beddc  the  infamie  and  great  difgiace.

That  would  about  the  world  of  him  be  blownCf
BcAde  to  chufe  he  had  but  little  fpace.

So  as  his  wit  and  fence  was  (cant  hisowne;

At  h A he  doth  conclude  what  ever  come.

To  fwallow  this  unfav’ry  choking  plum.


Wherefore  againA  his  will,inforA  by  feare.

He  promifeth  to  take  her  for  his  wife,

And  unto  her  he  folemncly  dothfweare.

To  marry  hei  if  now  (he  fare  his  life;

And  (for  it  was  not  fafe  to  tarry  theaie)

When  once  the  murder  (hould  be  publifht  rife.
He  turnci  unto  the  place  w here  he  was  borne.
And  leaves  behind  him  infamie  and  fcorne.


And  Aill  he  earrjd  in  his  pendve  heart,

His  friends  mifhap,lamenting  it  in  vaiar.

How  for  a ;uA  reward  of  fuch  defarr,

A Progne  and  Medea  he  did  gainc;

And  fa  VC  h'soih  rcAraincd  him  in  part,

Mtrxi,  No  doubt  he  would  the  wicked  hag  have  (laine:

Cdtu ptfat  But  yet  he  hated  hci  like  toadc  or  fnake.

Ai  d in  her  company  fmall  joy  did  take.


From  that  to  this,to  laugh  or  once  to  Anile,

He  was  not  feene,  his  words  and  looks  were  fad.
With  often  fighs.and  in  a little  while,

, , He  grew  much  like  Orf/?cf,whcn  he  had

^ainc  his  father  by  his  mothers  guile.

Then  her, and  laAofall  fell  raging  mad.

With  fpirits  Text  fo  was  my  brothers  hed.

Still  vext  till  (icknes  made  him  kcepc  his  bed.

J«

But  when  thiscurfed  Arumpet  plainly  faw.

How  fmalldclight  in  her  my  brother  tooke.

She  doth  her  fci-vcnt  love  from  him  withdraw,
And  in  (Iiort  fpace  that  fancie  (he  fotfooke:
And  laAly  (lie  rcfolvcs  againA  all  law.

So  foonc  as  flrccao  fit  occafion  looke.

To  bring  Filandroi  life  to  wofull  end.

And  after  her  firA  husband  him  to


<7

An  old  Phyfition  full  of  fal(c  deceit.

She  findci  h out  moA  fit  for  fuch  a feat.

That  better  knew  to  givea  poi(bnd  bait,

Thenfor  to  curewith  herbs  or  wholcfom  meate:
Him,that  for  gainemoA  giccdily  doth  wait.

By  proferslargc  fhe  quickly  doth  intreate.

To  take  upon  him  this  ungracious  cure.

With  poyfond  cup  to  make  her  husband  (lire.

5*

Now  while  my  felfe  was  by,and  others  more.

This  old  Phyfition  came  to  him  erelong.

And  brought  a cup,in  which  was  poyfon  Acre,
And  faidjit  cordiall  was,to  make  him  Arong:

But  lo,  Gabrina  that  devis’d  before,

Er’n  in  the  prife of  wrongito  do fome  wrong.
Before  Filandro  of  the  cup  did  taA,

Stept  twixt  the  leach  and  him  in  no  fmall  haA«

5»

And  taking  in  her  hand  againA  his  will.

The  Cup  in  which  the  poyfond  drinke  was  plaA,
She  faid,good  DoAordo  not  ukcitill,

Tbatl  require  you  fiiA  the  drink  to  taA,

I will  not  have  my  husband  drinke, untill
You  have  your  felfe  before  him  tancthetafij
I will  (faid  flic)  be  ccrtainc  by  the  rood.

That  this  you  givehim,wholfome  is  and  good*

60

Now  in  what  pickle  thinkeyou  was  the  leach?

The  time  was  fhort  to  take  a found  advice.

He  might  not  ufe  peifwafiun  now  nor  fpcach.

He  duiA  not  tell  how  fhe  did  himinticr.

Nor  could  heguefTcwhat  was  herein  her  reach.

To  make  him  taA  firA  of  the  poyfond  fpicc.
Wherefore  to  take  a taA  he  thought  it  bcA,

And  then  lie  gives  my  brother  all  thcicA*

61

Even  asa  hawke  that  hath  a partridge  truA
In  griping  calcDts,fitsand  plumes  the  fame.

Oft  by  a dog  whom  flic  doth  not  miAruA,

Is  kild  hciTclfe  and  reared  of  her  game:

So  this  Phyfition  gracclclTe  and  vnjuA,

While  he  to  greedie  gaine  his  mind  doth  frame,
Wat  us'd  by  her  even  as  he  well  deferved,

Andfo  1 wifh  all  fuch  Phyfitions  (ctved.

6t

The  poorc  old  man  that  felt  his  Aomackeake,

Began  to  take  his  leave, and  homeward  hafltd.

He  thinks  fome  Arong  Antidoton  to  take,

AgainA  the  poyfond  cup  he  lately  taAed:

She  fweares  hishomc  tcturnc  he  may  not  make.
While  th’opcration  of  the  potion  laAcd,

And  that  (he  will  fee  plainly  ere  he  go.

If  fo  it  do  her  husband  good  or  no.

By  humble  futc  and  offers  he  dot  h trie.

That  with  her  licence  he  may  thence  depart.

But  all  in  vaine, his  futc  fliedothdenic:

Now  had  the  liquor  vvclnigh  toucht  hit  hart.
Wherefore  perceiving  plainly  he  muAdie,
HcdoththefcCTCttoutall  impart;

Thustohimfclfc  he  did  thefameat  laA,

Which  oft  he  did  to  others  In  time  pa  A.

AnJ


Thief  lit
tbrJuiiHii
itoti  ftr
werduJtfm
vutofthtx.

UimgtUett
A(pt,)tndyet
it  btriijr'
min*  amber
•very  aptly
inftrudm
itauttft  bit
ultt*ad  u
f aim  forth
ibt  ItniMnef
tt/iliwearuif


Sifdltd


eariferti

etamtdieini

talftnttprt-

•entJit{iMU


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


1^7


64


And  rtraigfu  in  liitfcfpacc  my  brother  dydc.

And  after  him  didc  this  fame  falfcPhifitioB,

We  that  had  heard  and  fecnethc  matterti  idc.

Of  which  my  feUc  before  had  fome  fiifpitionj
Both  hand  and  foote  rvc  then  tbismonftei  tyde.
And  biing  her  unto  fuch  as  had  comraiflion.

Where  her  confenion,and  our  accu(a  tion,

Made  them  pronoQncc  her  doomeof  condemnation.

65

Thus  in  the  gaile  in  fetters  fhc  was  laid.

Adjudged  to  be  burned  at  a flake.

Thus  (faid  thcKnit'bt)  andinoK  be  would  hare  fat’d
How  flic  cfcapt,  and  how  fh^  pnfon  brake.

But  fo  he  fatnted,  as  they  were  affrai  J,

He  would  have  founded  at  thofe  words  he  fpake:
Wherefore  bts  page  him  to  his  hoife  doth  lift,

And  then  to  binde  his  wounds  they  make  a fliift.

6s

Then  Zerbin  tooke  his  leave  and  made  a skufe.

That  he  had  hurt  the  knight  in  her  defence.
Affirming  he  had  done,  as  is  the  ufe,

Tofavc  his  charge  from  damage  and  offence:

And  that  thenceforth  with  him  he  would  have  truce.
This  faidjhc  tooke  his  leave  and  parted  thence,

A nd  p-omifl  him  with  words  of  greatcivillity.

To  further  him  unto  his  bed  ability .


67


Sir  (ftid  the  Knight)for  thtsi  do  you  tbanke.

And  wiffi  you  ofthat  woman  to  beware,

Left  that  fhe  ferve  you  fomefiKh  ffipperie  pranke.
As  may  procure  your  ftuthcr  woe  and  care;


For  hard  fliall  any  fcape from  danger  frankf.
That  in  her  company  long  feafon  arc:

Gabrina  fiJent  all  the  while  (lands  by.

For  hard  it  is  to  prove  the  truth  a lyc.

Thus  hciKC  they  part,and  for  his  promife  fake.

At  her  commandment  Zerbin  doth  artend.

And  wiffitin  heart  ,thc  divcll  might  hmake,

"I  hough  with  his  hand  he  mud  her  dill  defend:
And  thofe  lad  words  the  Knightof  Holland  fpake.
To  give  him  warning  of  i he  curfed  fend.

Do  fill  his  mind  with  fo  great  griefe  and  fpight.
That  now  bcfcant  could  well  abide  her  fight,

69

And  this  fameold  and  weather-beaten  trot.
Perceiving  how  Zerbino  was  inclin’d.

Would  not  once  yccld  or  be  behind  a jot.

In  fpitcfull  widiing,  nor  in  evill  mind:

Her  eye  and  tongue  and  looke  conccalc  it  not.

Not  yet  her  deeds  as  after  he  did  finde.

Thus  in  this  harmony  and  concord  good.

It  was  their  hap  to  travel  I through  the  wood.

70

NOW  when  the  time  apptoched  nearetbcniglu.
They  heard  a noifeof  buftlingand  of  bl owes,
Caus*d  as  they  gucficd  by  fome  brail  or  fight.

But  where  it  was  yet  neither  of  them  knowes,
Zerbino  longed  much  to  fee  the  ^ght.

And  thitherwards  in  no  fmall  hau  he  goes.

And  in  no  lefIc,Gd^ri»axnaketh  aftcr,

As  fhall  be  fiievvd  you  morcat  large  hereafter.'


J(

itnmcct


A more  necejfarie  morrall  (as  1 thinf^c)  cannot  be  found for  our  age  we  now  live  in, then  that,  tvith  which  this  boo^  MotaH.
begins;  namely,  of  the  /peeping  of  faith, and  promife, which  even  among  turves  and  heathen  Philo/bpbers  bath  bene  re~

Itgioujly  i^ept  i andyet  among  m that  caH  our  fclves  Chrijtians,  and  boaft  an  extraordinary  light  oj  the  Gofpell,  h

often  mofi  irreligi  ujly  brot^en;  fo  that  m Ovid  faid  oj  bu  time  in  ironicall  manner.

Aurca  nunc  vcic  funt  fecula,  plurimus  auio
Venit  honos,  amo  conciliatur  amor;

In  Englifhthus,

This  may  indeed,  be  call’d  the  age  of  gold.

For  honour,lovc  and  all,  for  it  isffild.

So  may  I fiy,  this  ha  notable  time  for  credite,for  now  generally  { even  with  fome  of  the  better  fort j mens  Words  be  Oi
good  as  then  obligations  ■■  namely,  neither  of  both  worth  the  talftngfor  afarthing.  Secondly,  in  f ilandro  we  may  note  a
^cciaUgood  nature  and  inclination,  that  would  rather  abandon  a place  which  he  lilted  very  well,  then  either  breal^e  the
lawes  of fikndjh'p  and  hojpitaliiyi  or  accufe  the  wife  to  her  husbam.  In  his  filling  Argeo,and  all  the  tragicall  procee-
dings 0/  fhe  wielded Gabrina,  we  may  note  the  monfrous  ejfeSis  oj  an  unbridled  aff'eflion  in  a mtfehievous  woman,  that
htUci  both  her  husbands,  and  lafily  the  Ply  fit  ion,  and  fill  continuedworhfng  JreJh  mifehiefe  till  her  death,  as  aft  erf ol-
loweth.


Oxe^es,whomhe  fipahyofinthe  ?5-  .flnfifeofthistt.  hoohewas  fonne  of  Agamemnon,  who  ^ ujfjojy


trecherre  of  his  wije  C lytemneftia,  Oreftes  in  revenge  thereof  IfiUed  his  mother,  and  after  that, was  himjelfe  tormented
with  •uries,  or  rather  with  his  confeience  for fo  horrible  an  ad,  and  fo  fell  mad,  and  was  healed  againe-,  and  after,  that
notable  accidvit  of  Piladcs  and  him  felt  out.

Simon  Foi  narie  affirmeth  that  in  this  tale  of  Gabitna^  ny  authour  doth  allude  to  a woman  ofli\e  lew dneffe, living  AHuffon
in  his  time, and  by  ArgeoawdFilandio  to  be  ment  two  Gentlemen  oi  Naples i hut  the  truth  is,  the  tale  is  almo/l  verba-  *

tim, fallen  out  oj  Apulejus  golden  A ffc  Specially  for  that  part  of  the  Phyfition;  Sed  vxor,qua:jampridcm  no.tncn  vx-
ons cum  fide  prrdidcrar,  mcdicum  convenic  quendam  noraeperfidi*,  qui  )ani  multaium  palmarutn  fpeffatus
prttlijsyi'.ag:iidcxtixfiiaetrcphoeaHumctabit.rf5 1 before  noted  on  the  jy  ftajfe.


The  end  of  the  notes  u pon  x x j .bookc.


/


THE  XXII.  BOOKE.


M


THE  ARGVMENT.

>

Aftolfb  d»th  di(foive  the  charmed pUce^^

Andfpite  c/AtlatlC,y#/j  hit  prifnerj  free:

Then  Bradamant  doth  fee  Kogttosface:

T 0 hetpe  an  Hnknotvne  Knight  they  craved  he;

But  by  the  way  Rogero  in  /hart fpace,

Snbdeir  dfoHre  KnightSy  of  worth  and  good  degree^
That  were  by  Pinnabell  inprifon  kildy
wham  BradaoianC  witbjnf  revengment  k}ld.


4 id.  Vtt‘
Mf  fioearu
jp^undtrt
a|  Hint  in

J*

^das  J/ta.

|.t

. j ^irmtllra
50

\lUrt,

2l{tiHtht

^'Tt/thn

Hu


mt


E courtly  dames,  that  arc
both  kind  and  true,
Vmo  your  lovct^if  kindc
aird  true  be  any.

As  furc  1 am  in  all  you^
lovely  ciuc.

Of  fo  chaft  minde,  thcf  e
arc  not  over  many-,

Be  not  difplcas’d  with  thil
that  doth  enfue^

For  neither  mufti  leave  it,ncithcr  can  T,

And  bcare  with  me  for  that  I faid  before^

When  on  Gabrina  Idid  railc  fo  fore.

X

Mine  erneft  words, nor  yet  her  great  offence.

Cannot  oblcurein  honour  and  clcare  fame,

Thofe  few,  whofc  fpoticftc  lives  want  no  defence.
Whom  hate  nor  envic  no  way  can  dcfamC:

He  that  bis  mafter  fold  for  thirtic  pence.

To  lohn  nor  jPc/c)' breeds  no  blot  nor  blame:

Nor  men  of  Hipermepra  worfc  have  thought.
Although  her  lifters  were  unchaft  and  nought.

For  one  that  in  this  verfe  I fliall  difpraife.

As  dtiv’n  by  courfe  of  this  my  prefent  ftorie.
Whole  hunderds  are  whom  1 intend  to  praife,

A nd  magni  fi e their  well  defci ved  glory.

If  this  then  be  offenfi ve  any  waies,

T o all  or  any,  I can  be  but  forie:

Now  of  the  Scottijh  Prince  a woid  or  two.

That  heard  a noifc,and  went  forthwith  thereto,

4

Eetweene  t wo  mountaines  in  a fhadie  dale.

He  doth  defeend  that  way  the  notfe  him  ted.


But  when  he  came  he  faw  upon  the  vale,

A Baron  lately  (lainc  and  newly  dcd.

But  ere  I enter  fuither  in  this  tale,

I firft  muft  tell  you  how
Whom  late  I left  in  that  moft  curfed  citie,

W here  women  murthcr  men  without  all  pittic.

I told  you  how  his  home  with  mightic  blaft,

Notoncly  all  his  foes  haddriveuaway.

But  al(b  made  his  ft  tends  lb  fbreagaft.

As  not  the  ftowteft  of  them  there  durft  ftay*
Whcreforc(I  faid)  he  wasconftraind  atlaft.

Alone  to  get  him  homwaid  on  his  way.

Forthwith  on  Rabicano  be  doth  mount.

An  horfe  of  which  he  makes  no  ftnall  account,

6

His  home  that  ferves  him  ftill  at  all  affayes.

He  carries  with  him  and  his  learned  bookc,

Firft  by  Armenia  be  goes  his  wayes.

Then  Brufia  and  the  way  ofThra/e  he  tooke.

So  that  within  the  fpace  of  twentie  dates.

The  ftreame  TDamibio  he  quite  forfooke;

Then  fiom  Biemia  ward  he  doth  decline,

Vnto  Franconia  and  the  ftreamC  of  RJyne,

7

Then  through  Atiefinas  wood  10  Aquis grave.

And  thence  to  Flanders  where  he  Hiipping  found,
WhattimcaNorthcaft  windcjdid  blow  (o  brave»

A s fet  him  foonc  in  fight  of  EngUj})  ground:

So  that  no  whit  annoy, d with  winde  nor  wave.

His  native  fbilcrcceiVd  him  fafe  and  found;

He  taketJi  horfe, and  ere  the  Sunne  wasdowil^.

At  London  he  arriv’d  the  chiefeft  towne.

P X " Here


Uttmu  ie
rbataatUf,

infill}.

19


170


THE  XXII.  BOOKE


!,


8

Here  at  his  fit  A amVall  Aiaight  he  heares,  •

How  that  the  T urines  fairc  Parh  did  befeege.

And  how  his  fire  (a  maawell  Aroke  in  jcarcs)
Was  there,  and  fen  t for  ayd  to  raife  the  feege;
And  how  of  Jatc  the  Lords  and  chiefcA  pearesj"
Were  gone  with  new  fupplies  to  helpe  their  Jeege,
But  little  Aay  be  makes  thefe  words  once  hard.
But  taketh  fiiip  againe  to  Callice  ward.


9


StuUiiet',
iiiuitd  eadSt
imr  tattce
/kfnmafi


fitU,


And  for  the  windc  ferv’d  then  not  very  well,

T hey  were  by  force  thereof  borne  quite  afide.

So  that  the  maAcr  fcant  himfclfc  could  tell,

What  courfc  he  held,  they  were  borne  downe  fo
Yet  at  the  laA  fo  luckic  it  befell.  (wide.

Within  a kenning  they  fome  land  had  fpide,

And  drawing  nearethey  found  thetowneof  Koan,
Where  prcfently  the  Duke  tookc  land  alone.

10

And  crofilng  through  a wood  when  time  drew  neare.
That  neither  day  could  well  be  cald  nor  nigl|t.

He  hapt  to  finde  a chriAall  fpritig  and  cleare.

And  by  the  fidetbereofhedid  alight.

With  mind  to  quench  his  thitA  and  reft  him  beare,
As  in  a place  of  pleafure  and  delight.

He  ties  his  horfe  unto  a trec,and  thinketh
To  hare  him  tarrie  fafe  there  while  he  drinketh.

1 1

Strange  things  may  fall  betweenc  the  lip  and  cup,

For  fcant  yet  had  wet  bislip.

But  from  a bu/n  a villaineAarrcd  up,

Vntide  the  borfe,and  on  his  backe  doth  skip;

The  Duke  that  leant  had  taAcd  yet  a fup;

And  finds  htmfclfe  thus  tane  in  (itch  a trip.

Forgets  to  drinke,  and  followcs  in  a rage.

For  wrath  not  water  doth  bis'thirft  afTwage.
iz

The  little  villainc  that  the  horfe  had  gor,

(Like  one  that  did  in  knavifh  pranks  delight)
Although  he  might  have  run,yct  did  it  not,

Becaufe  Aftolfo  fliould  not  Icefc  his  fight;

But  with  falfc  gallop,  or  a gcntlctrot.

He  leads  the  Duke  unto  thatplace aright.

Where  many  Knights  and  Lordsof  high  degree,
Without  a prifon,  more  then  prifncis  be.

I J

Aflolfo,  though  his  armour  doth  him  cumber.

Yet  fearing  lea  A he  might  arrive  too  late.

In  following  the  villainc  doth  not  flumber,

Vntill  he  came  within  the  pallace  gate,

Where  (as  I faid)  of  Lords  no  little  number,

Were  wandiing  up  and  downe  in  ArangecAate;
AJioljx)  of  their  prcfcncc  doth  not  force,

But  runneth  up  and  downe  to  finde  hit  horfe,

14

The  ciaftic  villaine  was  in  no  place  found,

Though  many  a homely  place  for  him  was  fought.
Yet  Aill  the  Duke  doth  fcarch  the  pallace  round.

And  for  his  bcaA  he  takes  no  little  thought:

AtlaA  hcgucQ  it  was  cnchauntcd  ground,

And  ashy  LoPcy?i/?(*  he  was  tought.

He  tooke  his  bookc  and  fcarchcth  in  the  table.

How  todifTolvc  the  place  he  might  bf  able.


*5

And  Araightin  th’index  for  it  hedothlooke.

Of  pallaces  fram’d  by  fuch  Arangc  illufion.
Among  the  rcA,of  this  (fo  faith  the  bookc)

That  it  fliould  never  come  unto  confuficn,

Vndll  a certaioe  Aonc  awav  were  tookc.

In  which  a fpritc  was  kept  by  Arangc  inclufion.
And  if  he  did  but  lift  the  thrcAiold  Aonc,

The  goodly  houfe  would  vaniAi  and  be  gone.

16

ThcDukc  not  doubting  now  of  good  fucccfle,’

Go'th  to  the  threfliold  where  the  Aonc  was  laid.
And  which  it  was  he  prcfently  doth  gucAc,

And  then  by  force  to  move  it  he  afTaid:

But  Atlant, that  expefled  nothing Icfic,

And  fees  his  bold  attcmpt,was  fore  affi  aid.

And  Aravght  an  hundred  meancs  he  doth  devife.
To  hinder  him  from  this  bold  enterpri/e.

17

Re  makes  the  Duke, by  this  his  divellini  skill.

To  feeme  of  divert  fliapes  unto  the  rcA,

To  one  adwarfc,offacc  and  favour  ill.

To  one  a gyant,to  a third  a bcaA,

And  all  their  heartswirh  hatred  he  doth  fill,
Hethinkes  by  them  the  Duke  fliould  bcdiArcAi
Byfeeming  unto  evVic  ooethc  fane.

For  which  each  one  into  the  pallace  came.

18

Beheld  Rogero  Aour,  and  Brandimart^
PrafildeyBradamaht^  and  others  moc,

Vpon  Afiolfo  f«  with  crucll  hart.

At  to  revenge  thcmfclvcs  upon  their  fbc;

But  with  his  home  the  Duke  then  plaid  his  part.
And  brought  their  lofcie  Aomackes  fbmwhat  low;
But  had  not  th’hornc  procur’d  him  this  exemption.
No  doubt  the  Duke  had  dyde  without  redempriort.

19

For  when  they  heard  the  Arangc  and  fearfull  blafl.
They  forced  w'crc  for  fcarc  away  to  runne.

As  fearcfull  Pigeons  fl  ie  away  aga  A.

When  men  do  ring  a bell  or  flioot  a gunne^

The  Sorcerer  himfclfc  was  not  the  laA,

That  fought  by  flight  the  fcai  full  noife  to  fliunne;
Yea  fuch  it  vvas,that  neither  rat  nor  moufe,

DurA  tame  in  the  circuit  of  the  houfe.

20

Among  the  horfes  that  did  bicakc  their  bands.

Was  Rabicanof  whom  before  I told.

Who  by  good  hap  came  to  Aflolfoi  hands.

Who  was  full  glad  when  of  him  he  had  hold,

Alfo  Rogcros  Griffith  horfe  there  Aands,

FaA  tycd  in  a chainc  of  beaten  gold.

The  bukc,a$  by  his  bookc  he  had  bene  tought,
DcAroycd  quite  the  houfc  by  magickc  wrought#'
zi

I do  notdoubt  but  you  can  call  to  minde.

How  good  iJagcraloA  this  Aatcly  bcaA,

What  time  Angelica  bis  eyes  did  blindc.

Denying  moA  unkindly  his  rcqucA:

7 he  horfe  that  foicd  fwiftcr  then  the  winder
Went  backe  to  Atlant  whom  he  loved  bcA,;

By  whom  he  bad  bene  of  a young  one  bred.

And  diligently  taught, and  coAly  fed.

eiad


Jrndsrnm,


i


Simik^


I


1


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


21

Titis  Duke  wns  glad  offuch  a pray.

As  one  that  was  to  travell  gicaily  benr,

A nd  in  the  world  was  not  a better  way
For  him  to  ferve  his  pnrpofc  and  intent;

V\  hcrcforc  lie  meaned)  not  to  let  him  ftray.

But  takes  him  as  a thing  fiom  heav’n  him  lent.

For  long  eic  this  he  had  of  him  fuchproofc,

Aswcll  he  knew  what  was  for  his  behoofe,
la

Now  being  fulliefolv’d  to  take  in  hand.

To  tiavell  round  about  the  world  fb  wide,

And  vifitemany  alca  and  many  aland,

A*  none  had  done, nor  ever  (Iiould  befide.

One  ontly  care  hi‘  puipofc  did  withftand.

Which  caus’d  him  yet  a little  time  to  bide,

Hedotb  bethink  him  oft,yet  doth  notkiiow
On  whom  his  Rabicdno  to  bellow.

^4

He  would  be  loth  that  fuch  a (lately  Heed
Should  by  a peafant  be  polTell  or  found.

And  though  of  him  he  Hood  then  in  no  need,

Tet  had  he  care  to  have  him  fafe  and  found.

In  hands  of  fuch  as  would  him  keep  c and  feed;
While  thus  he  thought  and  lookt  about  him  round,
Ofthuyou  Next  day  a while  before  the  Sunne  was  let,

(ball ft*  A champion  all  in  armesunwarcs  he  met.

mare  in  to*

j nicanc  to  tell  yon  what  became
Of  good  Rogero  and  hit  Bradamant,

Who  whenagamcuntothcmfclvesthcy  came,

The  pallace  quite  dcHroyd  of  old  Atlant;

Each  knew  and  cald  the  other  by  their  name.

And  of  all  courtefies  they  were  not  fcant.
Lamenting  much  that  thisinchanted  pallace.

Had  hinderd  them  (o  long  (uch  ]oy  and  follace.

26

The  noble  maid  to  ITicw  her  felFc  as  kind.

As  might  become  a virgin  wife  and  fage.

Doth  in  plainc  termes  as  plainc  declare  her  mind.
As  thusjthat  Hie  Lislovcs  heate  will  alTwagc,

And  unto  him  her  fclfc  in  vvedlocke  bind.

And  fpend  with  him  all  lier  enfuing  age.

If  to  be  chriflncd  firft  he  wcic  content.

And  afterwards  to  askc  her  friends  conlcnt.

27

But  he  that  would  not  onely  not  refufc
. To  change  his  life  for  his  beloveds  fake.

But  allbifthechoilcwere  his  tochule.

To  leefe  his  life  and  all  the  world  forfakc.

Did  anfwerthus,my  dcare,whaterc  enfucs
'6tu  h R«.  * peiforme  what  ere  I undertake,

( trauhnt  Tobc  baptiz’d  ill  watcror  in  fire,

•itiui  ts  I will  confent  if  it  be  your  defice.

ihofuifi,  23

I goes  from  thence  with  full  intent,

t ^mufiiuu  To  take  upon  him  chriflend  Hate  of  life,
tk,n:w  not  Which  done  he  moH  finceitly  after  menc,

: twhstdoM^  To  aske  herof  her  father  fora  wifc;

• Vntoan AbbyHraighttheiicouifctheybcnr,

• Uafttr-  As  in  thofedays  were  in  thofe  places  rife,

I ‘ardintbt  Where  men  devout  did  live  with  great  frugalitie,

• And  yet  for  Hrangers  kept  good  hofpitalitic.


2>


StKUiaf,


But  ere  they  came  to  that  religious  place.

They  met  a damfell  full  of  heavy  chrarc,  , ^

That  had  with  tcarcs  bedewed  all  her  face,

Yet  in  thofe  tcares great  beautie  did  appeare,
iiegero,  that  had  ever  fpcciall grace  j

In  courtcousa£ls  and  fpeech  when  flic  came  ncare.

Doth  askc  of  her  what  dangers  or  what  fcares.

Did  move  berfo  to  make  her  Oied  fuch  tcarcs.

30

She  thus  replicsjthccaufc  of  this  my  griefe.

Is  not  for  fcarc  or  danger  of  mine  ownc.

But  for  good  will,and  for  compafllon  chiefe,

, Ofone  yong  Knight,whofc  name  is  yet  unknownCj|

Who  if  he  have  not  great  and  quick  relicfe,

Is  judgd  into  thefier  to  be  throwne.

So  great  a fault  they  fay  he  hath  committed.

That  doubt  it  is  it  will  not  be  remitted.

31

The  fault  was  tbisjthcre  was  good  will  betweene  '

Him  and  the  daughter  of  the  King  ofspaine.

And  left  his  love  lliould  be  deferide  and  fccnc.

He  finely  doth  himfclfe  a woman  faine.

And  went  and  fpake  as  if  he  had  fb  bccne.

And  thus  he  plaid  (to  tell  the  matter  plainc)  '

The  maid  in  flicw.the  man  in  deed  fo  well.

That  in  a while  he  made  her  belly  fwcll.

32

But  out  alaSjwhat  can  fo  fccrcc  be.

But  out  it  will  when  we  do  Icaft  AifpcAl
F or  pofts  have  cares,  a nd  walls  have  eyes  to  fee,

Dumbe  bcafts  and  birds  have  tongues  ill  to  detect  Senuiutt
FiiH  one  had  found  ita)ut,tben  two  or  three:

And  lookc  how  fire  doth  creepe  that  men  ncglcdl,  Sio^Ui

So  tbisicport  from  mouth  to  mouthdid  fpring.

Till  at  the  lafl  it  came  unto  the  King.

ThcKing  ftraight  fends  a truHie  fervantthether^

Who  making  fcarch  when  they  two  were  in  bed.

Found  out  the  troth,and  teoke  them  both  together.

Found  him  a man,and  found  her  belly  fped,

A way  they  canid  her  I know  not  whether,

Away  unto  the  prifon  he  was  led.

And  mull  be  burnd  this  day  or  ellc  to  morow.

The  thought  wherof doth  move  my  mind  to  lbtow>

34

This  mademe  purpofely  to  come  from  thence.

And  not  to  fee  one  of  fo  comely  fliape.

So  Iharply  puninitforthisfitiall  olftnce.

As  if  it  were  for  murder  or  for  rape.

Nor  any  hope  could  finkeinto  my  (cnee.

How  polfiblc  it  were  for  him  to  fcape.

And  wbocould  lee ot  thinke  without compalfioc^

A fine  yong  youth  tormented  in  fuch  falhion  I

35

Twas  Hrangc  to  thinke  how  nic  this  tale  did  touch
The  noble  Bradamants  mod  tender  hart.

It  feem’d  flic  pittidc  t his  mans  Hate  as  much.

At  if  her  brother  had  playd  fuch  a part;

Some  caufc  there  was  to  make  her  fancic  luefa,  Aer,ujm»

Asafteiward  at  large  I fhall impart:  JhaUfuafin

And  ftraight  flic  makes  this  motion  that  they  twainc*'*  >5.
Might  favc  this  wofull  youth  from  being  flaine.

P 3 Rogers


THE  XXII.  B00K1&


5«

Ho^ro  much  commends  her  noble  mind,

And  to  the  mourning  damfell  thus  they  faid.

We  both  are  to  this  cntcrprife  inclind.

If  fortune  ftrve  we  will  the  yong  man  aid.

But  when  they  faw  that  ftill/he  mournd  and  whind,
Tuih  (quoth  Eo^ero)  ctafe  to  be  afraid,  •

Tis  more  then  time  that  we  were  going  hence,

Not  tcares  but  force  mud  ferve  for  his  defence.


That  Tcry  night  came  to  that  houfc  by  chance,
Pourc  valiant  Knights  as  ever  armor  bare.

To  fight  on  hoifc  or  toot  with  fwoid  or  lance,
Butfew  may  with  the  worll  of  them  compare,
Thefefoure  1 fay  weic  firft  that  led  tliisdancc.
By  night  futprifed  ere  they  were  aware.

Both  Griffin,Aqttilant  and  Sanfonet,

And  Guidon  Savage, (cant  a man  as  yet.


37

Thrfc  comfortable  words  Roger o fpake.

With  that  his  warlike  lookc  and  manly  thow.
Bid  cauTe  her  heart  of  grace  forthwith  to  take,
I Yet  ftill  the  doubts  which  way  were  beft  to  go.
Not  that  the  feard  the  right  way  to  miftake.
For  all  thewayeslhepeifitlydid  know,

T o tmne  the  way  th  e came  (he  was  afraid,
Beft  in  the  way  they  haply  might  be  ftaid .


44

Thcfc foure  in  tliew  he  gently  emertaintd,

And  makes  them  friendly  countenance  and  chcare.
With  courteous  fpccch  and  friendly  manner  fained
As  if  he  lov’d  them  well  and  held  tiicm  dcarc:

But  while  fccure  they  in  their  beds  remained.

And  when  Sunne  riling  now  appioched  ncaie.

He  did  bclct  the  lodging  where  they  lay,
Andtookc  their  armor  and  their  clothes  away.


1

I


Tbiwat

idmffa

pmmibt
wuit  bi/ora
imthtCntr
miufikc  ao>


Thcrtf  are  (quoth  fiie)  two  wayes  unto  the  place,

Of  which  the  tone  is  eafie,faire  and  plainc,

T he  tother  foule,and  farre  the  greato  Q>ace,

Yet  a t this  time  the  fafer  of  the  twaine.

But  yet  I fearcjcxcept  God  fend  more  grace.

That  ere  we  thither  come, he  may  be  llainei
Thus  flood  this  damfell  ftill,not  little  mufing,

' Bctwccne  the  nearer  way  and  fafctchufing.

39

iRogeto  that  was  refolute  and  flour.

Bid  aske  what  rcafon  moor'd  her  to  perfwade
Them  two  to  take  the  farther  way  about  j
And  ftraightway  fhc  to  them  this  anfwcr  made,
Forfboth(faid  fhe)  thecaufe  that  moves  my  doubt
It  this, I feare  that  fbme  will  you  invade.

By  raeanes  chat  Finnah/t  {Anfelmta  fonne)

Rath  here  of  late  a cuflome  leud  begunne.

40

As  namely  that  whoever  that  way  ride.

Of  what  cflate  fbever  or  degree,

Muft  leefc  their  horfes  firft, and  then  befide
Muft  of  their  clothes  and  raiment  fpoilcd  be.

Foure  valiant  youths  of  ftrcngth,and  courage  tridc*
Arc  fwoine  to  t hit,  fo  that  no  he  nor  flic
Can  pafTe  that  way  without  this  evill  paiment.

That  he  muft  weapons  leefe,and  fhe  her  raiment*

4*

The  cuftome  is,  as  yet  but  threedaycsold.

By  FinaheUo  and  bis  wife  devifed.

Who  meeting  haply  (as  I heard  it  told)

A Knight,or  one  in  Knightly  clothes  difgulfcd.

With  whom  a woman  ugly  to  behold.

And  by  this  couple  fcorned  and  defpifed.

This  Finnahell  the  worfe  bad  of  the  quarrell.

His  wife  was  fpoild  of  horfe  and  of  apparrcll.

4»

This  fpite  enraged  fb  the  womans  mind.

That  wifhiog  to  revenge,not  knowing  how.

Yet  wrath  and  folly  fb  her  fence  doth  blind.

That  flraight  fhe  makesa  foolifh  folemne  vow.

And  he  that  wasto  evill  deeds  inclind
No  IcfTe  then  fh  e,doth  of  the  fame  allow:

The  vow  was  this, for  anger  of  this  foilc,

A thoufand  others  in  like  fort  to  fpoilc.


And  further  bound  them  in  that  prefent  place.

Both  hand  and  footc  as  if  they  piifncrs  were.

And  etc  he  did  thofccauflcflc  bonds  unlace.

He  makes  them  folcmnly  to  vow  and  fwcarc.

To  keepe  this  order  for  a twelvemonths  f^iace.
That  whofoever  hapned  to  come  there.

They  foure  eadcvourfhould  with  all  their  forces^
To  take  away  their  raiment  and  their  horfes.

4®

T o this  by  folemne  oth  arc  fworne  they  foure,
Conftrain'd  thereto  by  this  their  crucll  hoft.

And  though  herewith  they  were  offended  fore.

Yet  muft  they  fwcarc  for  fcarc  of  farther  coft.
Already  not  fo  few  as  ewife  a fcore.

Their  hoi  fes  and  their  furniture  have  loft.

And  none  as  yet  fb  able  have  bene  found.

But  oncof  thcfc  have  laid  him  on  the  ground.

47

But  iffomconedo  hapfo  flrong  to  be,

T o make  his  partic  good  with  one  of  thofc.

Then  (Iraight  the  order  is,thc  other  three
Muft  himafTift,  thus  noneunconquerd  goes.
Wherefore  if  you  will  be  advis’d  by  me,

Tis  beft  to  fhun  this  way  as  I fuppofc,

Sithcachof  thcfc  is  fuch  as  I recited.

How  great  thinke  you  will  be  thcirforcc  united?

48

But  prefuppofe  that  you  their  force  withfiand.

As  your  great  courage  makes  me  thinke  you  might,
Yet  needs  it  hinder  muft  the  cade  in  hand.

And  make  you  tarry  hereabout  all  night:

Sith  then  this  cafe  fo  dangcroufly  doth  (land,

1 would  perfwade  you  now  toftiun  this  fight,

L ell  w hilc  you  in  thi  s cntcrprife  rema  i n c,

Thcpooie  yong  man  may  fortune  to  be  flaine.

49

Tufh  quoth  iltgcre, ha  vc  no  doubt  at  all,'

Let  us  endevor  ftiil  to  do  our  beft.

And  then  hap  good  01  ill, fall  what  may  fall.

Let  God  and  fortune  governcall  the  reft:

I hopethisemcrpnfcl  fini/h  fiiall
So  wcll,as  I fliall  eke  do  your  requeft.

And  there  arrive  to  fave  him  in  good  time.

That  fhould  be  burned  for  fo  final!  a crime.

This


'PiHntbtlt


SiMUHCU


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO:


50

This  faidjhc  gets  him  on  the  neareft  way,

Faft  by  the  placcwhcrc  Pinnabelldothdwcl]^

And  at  the  oridge  they  forced  were  to  ftay,'
Andftraighta  man  (whofenamel  know  not  well)
C me  out  in  haft,and  ftand  to  them  doth  fay.

And  then  begins  their  order  them  to  tell,
Pafwading  them,if  they  will  (hunne  the  perill.

To  yccld  in  peace  their  horfes  and  appareil.

5«

Peace  (quoth  Rogero)  leave  thy  foolifli  prating,

A talc  already  knowne  thou  doft  repeate,

Stiitmb  Children  with  bugs,  and  dogs  arc  (card  with  rating,
Withmcitfmall  availes  to  brag  or  threate,

I lecfc  but  time  with  thee  to  dand  debating.

Shew  me  the  men  that  mind  to  do  this  fcatc.

My  haft  is  fuch  that  long  I may  not  ftay.

Wherefore  1 pray  you  bid  them  come  away.

52

Lo  here  comes  one  of  them, this  old  man  (ed.

And  as  he  fpakc  the  word, out  came  a Knight,

A tall  ftrong  man,all  arm’d  from  foot  to  hed.

His  armor  like  a foruace  (hined  bright.

His  colours  that  he  ware  were  white  and  red.

This  was  the  fiift,and5'dnyo;ze/  he  hight,

Andjfot  he  was  a man  of  mighty  ftrength.

Two  maflle  fpearcs  he  brought  of  migh^lcagth*

5}

Theoneof  thefc  he  to /Jogcro  gave.

The  otherto  himfclfc  he  doth  referve.

Then  each  in  hope  the  vi&oiv  to  have.

To  fpurre  their  ftcdic  ftccds  that  will  not  fweiTC,
Rogem  (hield  from  wounding  doth  him  (ave.

The  others  did  him  not  (o  well  preferve,

Thefpeare  bothpicift  his  (hield  and  prickt  hisarme.
And  overthrew  him  to  bis  further  barmc.

54

You  donot  fure, nor  cannot  yetforget,

Wjiat  of  Rogeros  (hield  bcfoic  I told.

That  made  the  fiend  s of  hell  with  toylc  to  fwet.

And  (hin’d  (b  bright  as  none  could  it  behold.

No  marvell  then  though  valiant  Sanfonet^

Although  his  hands  were  ftrong  and  hart  were  bold.
Could  not  prevailefb  ftrong  a (liicld  to  pierce,

Offo  great  force  as  latel  did  rehcarfc,

55

This  while  was  PinnaicU A^^voched  nic
To  Bradamant,  and  askt  of  her  his  name.

That  in  their  fight  his  force  (b  great  did  trie.

To  overthrow  a Knight  offo  great  fame.

(Lohew  the  mighty  God  that  (Its  on  hie,

SiHUHct.  Can  punifh  finne  when  lead  men  lookethefame)
Now  PirmabeU  fell  in  his  enemies  hands.

When  in  bis  ownc  conceit  moft  fafe  he  (lands.

56

It  was  his  hap  thatfcife  fame  horfc  to  ride.

Of  tiu  ft  VVhicb  eight  months  pall  from  Bradamnt  he  ftale,‘
Jigbt  reaJt  Then  when  he  falfly  let  the  pole  to  Aide,
intbttHdof  At  Merlim  cave  (if  you  did  markc  the  talc)
lAr  a But  now  when  Aie  that  traitor  vile  had  fpidc.

That  thought  by  ticchcry  to  worke  her  bale.

She  ftept  fortliwiih  bctwccnc  him  and  hiscaftle.

And  (weares  that  (lie  with  him  a pull  would  wiaftlc.


Looke  how  a fox,with  dogs  and  hunters  chaft,  SimUt,

That  to  come  backeunto  her  hole  did  wcenc.

Is  utterly  difeourag’d  and  agaft.

When  in  her  way  (he  nets  and  dogs  hath  feene;

So  he  that  oofuch  perill  did  forccaft.

And  fees  his  fo  ftept  him  and  home  bctwccnc.

With  word  him  threatning  and  with  fword  aftailing,

Doth  take  the  wood  his  heart  and  courage  failing,

S8

Thus  now  on  flight  hisoncly  hope  relying.

He  fpurd  that  horfc  that  chiefc  histrouble  bred.

No  hope  ofhclpc,and  yet  for  helpeflill  crying.

For  doubt  of  death  almoft  already  ded.

Sometime  the  faft  cxcufing  or  denying,

But  (lie  bcleeving  not  a word  he  fed,

Noncin  thecaftic  were  ofthisaware,  .

About all  fobufied  are.  ,

This  while  forth  of  the  gate  came  th’other  three.

That  to  this  law  fofolcmnly  had  (wornc,

Among  the  reft  that  came  was  alfo  (he
That  caus’d  this  la  w,full  of  di(da  ine  and  (coroc.

And  none  of  thc(c  but  (bonerwould  agree ,

With  hor(es  wildc  to  be  in  pecces  tome.

Then  to  diftaine  their  honor  and  good  name,

With  any  aA  that  might  be  worthy  (hamc,

60

Wherefore  it  gtiev|d  them  tothe  very  gall.

That  more  then  one  at  once  (houldenc  a(TaiIe«

Save  they  were  fworne  to  runne  together  all,

1 f (b  the  flrft  of  ridotie  did  faile:

And  (heujiccflfantly  ontbemdid  calf,

What  meane  you  (Irs(quoth  (he)  what  do  you  jilt?]

Do  you  forget  the  caufe  I brought  you  bithet!

Ate  you  not  fworne  to  take  part  altogether^

61

Fie,anfwercd  GvtUan,  what  a fhamc  is  this?  '

Let  rather  me  alone  my  fortune  trie.

And  ifofviftory  I haptomUTe,

At  my  returning  backe  then  let  medic.

Not  fo  quoth  (hc,my  meaning  other  is,

Andyou  I truft  will  not  your  word  denie:'

I brought  you  hither  foranothcr  caufe.

Not  ROW  to  make  new  orders  and  aew  lawes.

6z

Thus  were  they  urged  by  this  fcornfull  dame.

To  that  which  all  their  heartsabhorred  fora.

And  which  they  thought  to  them  fo  great  a (Iiame,

As  never  like  bad  chanced  them  before^

AJfo  Rogeros  words  increaft  the  fame,

Vpbraiding  them,and  egging  more  and  more.

And  asking  why  they  made  fo  long  delay.

To  take  his  armor  and  his  horfc  away.

6}

And  thus  in  mancr  ford  and  by  conftraiot,  '

T hey  came  all  three  Rogero  to  invade.

Which  aft  they  thought  wold  (bre  their  honors  taint.
Though  full  account  of  viftory  they  made,

Rogero  at  their  comming  doth  not  faint.

As  one  well  us’d  through  dangers  great  to  wade,

A nd  firft  the  worthy  0/i'Ucroj  (onnes.

With  all  thciriorcc  againft  Rogero  runner.


Rogers


^74


THE  XXII.  BOOKE


64

Rogero  turn’d  hishcifc  10  taketlie  field,

Vt^ith  tl)Jc  fime  ftafFc  that  lately  overthrew
Stout  Sanfonct^znA  with  that  pafUng  fhicld.

That  Atlant  made  by  heipe  of  hcllifli  crew,
Thatfliicld,  whofe  ayd  heufed  very  fccld.

Some  unexpefted  danger  to  elchew;

Tv;ifc  when  Alcynoi  kingdome  he  forfooke.

Once  when  the  Indian  Q^enc  from  th’Or^  betook

65

Save  thefc  three  times  he  never  us’d  the  aid
Of  this  his/hteld,but  IcftitGoverd  fUll,

If  he  abroade,  or  if  within  he  ffatd.

He  never  left  it  open  by  his  will.

As  for  thefe  three, he  was  no  more  afraid
Of  all  their  flrengtbjtheir  number  nor  their  skill.
Nor  made  no  more  account  with  them  to  fight.
Then  if  they  had  feemd  children  in  his  fight.


71

Now  while  this  thought  fiich  pafiionsdid  himyeeld.
That  though  he  had  indeed  moft  bravely  donne.
Yet  men  would  thinke  the  glory  of  the  field.

Not  by  bis  valiantncfic  to  have  bene  wonne.

But  by  the  force  of  thatinchanted  firicld.

That  call  a light  more  piercing  then  the  Sunne,

1 fay  as  thus  he  thought,be  pafied  by
A large  deept  wcll,tha:  by  the  way  did  lie,

A vvell  at  which  the  beafis  in  fummci  s beatc
Did  ufetbeirthiifiie drought  to  quench  and  coole.
And  chew  againe  their  imdigcflcd  mearc.

And  walke  about  the  fliallowcsof  thcpoole.

Here  did  Rtgero  oft  thefe  words  repcatc.

Thou  fliield,thatlatedidfi  makemcfuch  a foole.
To  caufc  me  get  a conqueft  with  fuch  fhame.

Lie  there  (quoth  he)  with  thee  go  all  my  blame.


66

And  firft  be  met  the  yongcr  of  the  twaioe.

That  Griffin  bight, who  had  fb  great  a bio,
Asinthefaddle  he  could  leant  remaine,
Butquiteamazcd  reeled  toandfro;

He  ftrakc  RogerOjbut  it  wasin  vaine.

For  why, the  (trokc  fell  overthwartly  fb.

That  quite  befide  Rogeros  fliicld  it  Dipt,

But  yet  ihc  cafe  It  all  to  tare  and  r^t.

67

Now  when  the  renting  of  the  filken  cafe.

In  which  Rogero  ufd  the  fhicld  to  hide.

Had  caff  our  fuch  a light  in  each  mans  face.
That  noneof  them  the  force  thereof  could  bide.
They  fell  downe  all  amazed  in  the  place,
Admicthey  fir,or  fland,orgo,orride,

Rogero  with  the  caufc  not  yet  acquainted.

Did  marvcll  how  his  foesfo  foone  had  fainted.


With  that  he  threw  the  fhicld  into  the  well.

The  well  wasdeepe,  the  fhield  of  mighty  weight.
That  to  the  bottomefuddenly  it  fell.

The  water  over  it  a monfirous  height:

But  lo  dame  Fame  the  thing  abroad  doth  tell.
How  he  becaufc  he  would  not  win  by  fleight^

But  by  mcerc  value, had  his  target  dtownd.

Where  it  fhould  never  afterward  be  found.

„ 74

Yet  many  (that  had  heard  the  fixange  report)

Of  thofe  that  dwelled  thcnce,fomc farre,fome  nirc-
To  fccke  the  target  thither  did  rcfbrt.

And  to  have  found  it  out  had  great  defire.

But  it  was  calf  away  in  fuch  a fort.

As  none  unto  their  purpofe  did  afpitc.

For  why  the  maid  that  oncly  did  behold  if.

And  knew  which  well  it  was, yet  never-  told  if.


6t

Blit  when  he  once  was  of  thecaufe  aware.

And  how  the  cover  of  his  fliicld  was  rent.

By  meanc  whcrcofitopen  lay  and  bare.

And  thence  fuch  light  unto  the  lookers  fent:
Hclookcsabout  where  hiscompanions  arc,
Becaufc  forthwith  to  get  him  thence  he  ment,
1 meanc  his  Bradamant,  and  that  fame  maid.
That  forthat  youth  did  erftdcmaund  his  aid.

69

But  his  belov’d  as  then  he  found  not, where
He  erft  had  left  het  when  he  went  to  juft,

And  when  he  plainly  faw  flic  was  not  there.
And  that  that  happend  he  could  not  miftruft,
He  parted  thence,  and  with  him  he  doth  bcare
The  maid  that  made  to  him  the  fiitcfb  juft,
Who  lay  that  time  amazed  with  the  reft.

With  fudden  hlafing  of  the  light  diilrcft.

70  .

He  takes  her  kittle, and  with  it  doth  hide.

The  light  that  did  f©  dazlc  all  their  eyes.

That  light  on  whirh  tolooke  none  could  abide.
As  if  two  Sunnes  had  fhonc  at  once  in  skies;
Forthwith  himfelfc  all  malcontent  doth  ride.
To  have  this  combat  ended  in  fuch  wife.

As  might  imputed  he  to  Magickearc,

Aaid  not  his  prowcftc  or  his  valiant  hart.


But  when  the  Knights  came  to  thcmfel  ves  againe.
And  were  awakc,and  one  the  othci  faw,

Thatlatc  were  vanquiflit  with  fo  little  paine.

As  if  to  him  they  had  bene  men  of  ftraw.

They  wondred  much  what  troubled  had  their  braint
And  all  of  them  did  thence  thcmfelvcs  withdraw.
And  all  that  day  they  argue  and  devife,  ^

How  that  fame  liglu  fliould  dazlc  fb  their  cycsl

This  whilccatTic  notice  c f the wofull  fall
Of PinnabcUj'^hom  Br.idamant  had  killed.

With  which  they  greatly  were difpleafcd  all.

Not  knowing  vvhy  or  who  his  blood  had  fpillcd  ;

His  wife  and  fire  that  heard  what  was  befall,
HisfonnCjher  fpoufe,  the  place  with  outcries  filled.
And  curft  and  chafed  with  too  late  repentance.
That  none  on  Piiihabe/l had  giv’n  attendance.

77

Now  whcnthcdamfcll  juftly  had  himflaine.

And  tanc  away  his  horfe,fomctimchcrownc.

She  would  have  turnd  the  way  fhccamc  againe.

But  that  the  fame  was  unto  her  unknownc.

To  purpofe  fmall,  flic  travels  with  great  paine,
Tofeckcic  out,  as  after  fliallbefliownei
For  hereto  ftay  is  my  determination.

And  paN-vfc  a little  for  my  recreation.

/M


OvU,

^tyuiurii

manucihtt


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.  175

In  the perfon  o/Bradamant , rtaf  fo  readily  inclined  to  the  ayd  of  ayoung  man,  tbou^  then  uni^nowne  to  her,  MoralJ.

wc  may  note,  hon>  to  a noble  dijpofitien,  a little perjwafton  fuffifeth,to  mo  le  them  to  the  fiiccour  of  (itch  ai  are  difiref-
fcd.  In  Pinabello  and  hit  rvife,that  thought  to  revenge  thc  fcorne  they  received, with  doing  the  it^c  fcorne  to  others, we
may  fee,  how  bafe  and  dunghill  dijpofitiuns  follow  not  any  courfe  of  value  or  true  reputation,  hut  onely  t o wreaiie  their
malice  on  fame  body, not  caring  whom:  as  they  are  wont  to  teMof  Will  Sommer  (though  otkcrwi/eaharmelejfejoole)
that  wouldevermore  if  one  had  angerd  him,jtril^e  him  that  was  next  him.  Lafityin  Bradamant  that  met  Pinnabcll  by
hap, riding  on  the  fame  herje  that  ht  had  ftolen  from  her  long  before  (what  time  he  left  her  for  dead ) and  thereby  now  dif
covered  him, and  \illed  him,wc  may  note  a mofi  tiotable  example  of  divine  juft  ice, in  the  lil^e  cafes, as  many  times  itfal-
lothout,and  in  this  Poetyoufttad  find  mary  of  them:  as  Vm\yne{[bs  death  inthefift  bool^Ci  Mananospunifisment  in  the
eighteenth  a tganon.es  execution  in  the  feven  and  thirtieth  bool^e;  ad  which  examples  (whether  true  orfained)

have  this  chiefe  fcope  andend,  to  rnahe  menl^now  that  there  is  a divine  power,  that  wi  H judge  and  puniflr  the  acf  ions  of
men,  he  th^  never  fo  fccure  or  fo  fecret  j andonely  the  eleare  confekme  it  is  that  ajfureth  a man  of  his  eft  ate,  both  in
this  world  and  in  thcworld  to  come : and  be  thatjearetb  not  that  divine  power,  it  is  uppofftble  that  he  can  live  free  of
moft  wtcl^ed  ells.  T hat  wife  and  honorable  counfeder  Sir  Walter  Mi  Wmay , as  in  ad  other  things  he  fbewed  himfclje
an  uncorrupt  man  to  his  end,  fo  his  writings  and  payings  were  ever  jpicedwith  this  reverent  jeare  of  God:  for  cx  abua~
dantia  cordis  *»5  loquitur  : and  among  other  oj  his  (worth  the  noting)  of  which  he  bimfelje gave  me  a little  volume
when  / was  a boy  of  Eaton  coUedge(tht  which  fince  his  death  have  bene  publijhed  in  print)  but  one  Jpcciad  verfe  he  had
tothat  effdlinLatine,  andwasbymeput  into  Englijhat  therequeftofthat  honorable  Gentlemanhis fount  in  law,

Maftcf  William  Fitzwilliams.

Vltio  pcccatum  fcquitur,delinqucrcnoli,  ^

Nam  fccluE  admilTum  poena  fevera  premit:

Quod  fi  forte  Dcus,paticndodiffcratiraiTi,

Sera  licet  Teniat,ccrta  venire  Iblet.

Pile  finne,forfharpe  revenge  dothfodtw  fimie,

Andwichied  deeds, do  wrathfuk  doomes  procure:

If  God  flay  long  eare  be  to  ftrU^c  beginne.

Though  long  bt  flay, at  laft  he  ftrib^eth  fire.

A worthy  faying  of  a moft  worthie  man, and  that  much  for  the  moraU.

Hipernieftra  was  daughter  to  Egimis, this  Egittus  had  fifty  daughters,  who  caufed  ilem  aU  to  he  rnatied  to  Danaos  tij/i*—
fifty fonnesiandbeing  commanded  ^ their  tyrannousfather,l^iUed  them  ad  in  one  night, only  Hipermcftia  refufed  to  obey  ™
fo  filthie  a commandement,  and  faved  her  hicsband,  whofe  name  was  Linus.


fhield,  and  refufeth  the  ufe  thereof,  the  Allegory  thereof fignifieth,  that  though  a man  for  neceftity  falie,  fometimes  hee
dri  len  \to  ta^e  fame  helpes  of  no  very  honourable  fort, and  fometimes  to  relieve  himfelfe  with  policies  fcarce  commen-
dable yet  one  fheuld  when  that  urgent  neceffity  is  paft,hurle  fticb  conoeipt  from  Urn  where  it  may  never  be  found  againe,
as  Roger©  flang  bis  Jbield  into  that  wed  i and  fo  fame  fhad  blow  abrode  our  noble  mind  in  fo  doing, as  it  did  Rogeroi
for  refufingan  ayd  of  fuch  force.  ,

The  end  of  the  Annotations  upon  xxijhookc.


THE  ARGVMENT.

Aftolfo  <?«  the  Griilith  hork  doth  meHtitt
To  Zerl^in  Pinnabellos  iahtid  ;

Oilando  faveth  him:  fierce  Rodomount
Ffoncyno  takes  from  Bradamantcs  maid:

The  l^aladyn  and  Mandricard  confront ;

■They  part  by  chance ^and  each  fiem  other firaid:
Orlando  falls  fiarke  mad  ^vith  forro'a>  taken  ^ .
To  he  are  his  miflres  hath,  hint  epnitfforfkken.


THE  XXIIf.  BOOKE.


'tittet.

< Ls’int
]vetbe  it,
\iitl  in

\msri

!“•

iunee.

Ik*  in  tf>»

i-aS  of  the
[n*r  betl^,
I r*  ihit
' It  it  lou-
t more
f/ji.

I u>.ce.


I'UKt.


Et  cvMc  one  do  all  the
good  they  can,  ;

F Or  feldom  commeth  harme
of  doing  well.

Though  juft  reward  it  tvan-
teth  now  and  than,  '

Yet  fljame,and  efill  death
itdothexpell,

^ — I — ^ But  he  that  jnifchievcth  a>

nothcr  man.

Doth  fcldomccarric  it  to  hear’n  or  hell:

Men  fay  it,and  we  fee  it  come  to  pafle.

Good  turns  in  fand,fhrcwd  turns  arc  writ  in  braffe.

a

Seeld  mountainc*  meet,biit  men  may  often  meet,

(The  Proverbe  faith)  and  who  fo  fets  a trap.

May  catch  himfclfc,as  here  you  plainly  fee’e
In  him,that  thought  his  dame  in  woes  to  wrap.

But  hurti  himfclfcja  punifiimcnt  moft  meet)

God  ftill  defending  herfrom  all  mifhap:

God  hetprcfeiv’d,  and  will  all  thofc  prcfcrvc.

As Hiunnc  all  f icc,and  him  finccrcly  lore.

It  little  did  availe  to  PimabeU,

To  be  amid  his  kinsfoHte  and  hit  frendsj
And  oearc  the  caftle,where  hit  flrcdid  dwell.

Where  cf’ry  one, him  honours  and  attends,

Loc  here  the  end  of  him  doth  plainly  tell.

How  wicked  lives  have  often  wretched  ends;

But  to  proceed,!  faid  when  hewasftainc.

The  noble  damfcll  fought  her  way  agaioe.

4

Which  when  /he  faw  Oic  could  by  no  mcanes  know.
But  mote  and  more  uncertainly  did  royC}


And  fees  the  funne  was  now  declining  low;

She  mcancstbat  night  to  reft  her  in  the  grove:

And  flccpcfometimc,oicI(cfometimc  (I  frow)

T o lodlce  on  ^fari jOn  Satutne^bt  on  love.

But  chicfly,whcrher /he  awakes  or  fleepesj
Rtgms  image  in  her  heart  fhe  kcepcs.

Oft  times  fhe  fretting  to  her  fclfc  would  fay,

LoCj  hate  with  me  farre  more  prevailed  hath.

Then  Jove  could  do, that  now  have  loft  my  way,
And  left  my  comfort  to  avenge  my  wrath,

Nor  had  my  wit  fb  much  forecaft  or  ftay.

To  take/omcmarkeof  my  forctrodden
1 did  (quoth  fhe)  asfoolcs  arc  wont  to
Take  one  nrrcwdtuinc  to  do  another
6

Thefc  Words  atjd  many  like  to  thcic  /he  fpak
To  pafle  the  reft  ofthat  hareftlcflc  night.

Till  ftarresgan  vanifb  and  thedawnidg  brake
And  all  the  Eaftcru  parts  wctefull  oflight.

Then  at  adveniurc  flic  her  way  doth  take.

Not  knowing  yet  if  it  were  wrong  or  right.

And  having  traveld  in  that  way  fome  miles.

By  hap  Aftolfo  came  that  way  the  whiles.

7

He  rides  the  winged  horfe,  butinhis  hand.

He  Icadcs  the  famous  Rabican  bchindc-.

And  ev'n  as  then, in  great  doubt  he  did  ftand.

Where  to  beftow  a bcaft  of  fo  good  kind:

She  knowing  him, went  to  him  out  of  hand,  *

With  words,with  fli owes, and  with  embraccinents
And  joyd  to  find  thiskinfiranof  her  ownc,  (kind.
And  unto  him  het  fclfc  fhe  maketh  knownc.

Aftolfo


Meaning

thePianets,


Stmtnet,


THE  XXIII.  BOOKE


578


tbaHMd
fitart  caUtd
LancKfora
ftUttlnuluU


Mtntunu$
t»  Mdalfa
tit  J ).  b»o\t
ainr  tbt  88.
fiafi,
f.^aiha


Old  hat  ft  of
Aflalfett  tha

$tb*r  htr
ftaue  that

tbetothfitm

PianaitU,


Aflolfo  much  rej*y  ft  at  this  their  treeiing.

Then  one  the  other  askt  of  their  well  fare,  >

And  after  their  long  talke,ard  friendly  greeting,
In  which  each  (hewd  ofot  her  loving  care;

Sith  I (quoth  he)  intend  hence  to  be  fleeting.

To  fee  what  fights  in  foiren  countries  are,

This  horfe  of  mc,I  fliall  requeft  you  take.

Till  1 icturne,and  keepe  him  for  my  fake.

9

Alfo  hefaid.thiscotflet  and  thisfpeare.

With  you  I leave  till  I retiirne  againe,

(This  fpeare  the  fonne  of  Ga/<sjro»  did  beare.
Whom  as  you  heard  before  Terraw  had  flaine,)
With  head  whcrcofjifany  touched  were,

Snaight  wayes  to  f.-ill  to  ground  they  muft  be  faine.
All  theft  he  left  behind  to  make  him  light.

Before  that- he  begins  to  take  his  flight,
to

Thus  leave  once  tane.,away  the  Duke  doth  fore,

Firft  leiw,and  after  ftill  more  hyc  and  hye.

Till  at  the  leagth  fhe  could  him  fee  noroore.

So  doth  the  ^lot  flrft,wah  vratchfull  eye.

Guide  out  his  vcfTcll  foftly  by  the  fhore.

While  he  doth  chinkc  cherocksand  fhalleweinye;
But  af^er  when  he  dreads  no  more  fuch  doubts.^
He  fay  let  apace, and  claps  on  all  his  clouts.  ^

ICow  when  the  Dukevvasfromthe  damfell  gone.
What  fhe  might  do  fhe  mufed  in  her  mindc,

A nd  carefully  fhc  meditates  thereon:

How  fhe  may  take  the  journey  fi  rft  aflign’d ,

And  not  neglefk  herkinfmansekargejanon
A wandiing  pcafant  twat  her  hap  to  flnjdp,

Tohim  fhc  doth  betake  the  horfesfpare,'  —
Though  of  the  wayes  they  both  untkilfull  are.
la

Her  meaning  was  te  go  to  Vdllunthrofe^

Asfirfl  her  love  and  fhe  concluded  had,

Whom  there  to  finde.fhe  certaine  doth  fuppofc;
Whom  there  to  find,fhe  would  have  bene  full  glad.
But  loc  a quite  contrary  courfc  fhe  goes.

And  feet  a fight  that  made  her  then  full  fad.

Her  fathers  houfc  Afon^o/i’anic  fhe  fpide,

In  which  as  then  bar  mother  did  abide,
ij

If  fhc  fhall  forward go,approching  nire.

She  fliall  be  flayed  there, (lie  flands  in  doubt,

If  fhc  (land  ftill.or  backward  do  retire.

She  fcares  to  meet  acquaintance  thereabout  j
If  fhc  be  ftaid,fhcfcelcsfuch  burning  fire.

Of  longing  love  as  cannot  be  put  out;

Shcchaunft  amid  thefctheughts,and  many  other.

To  meet  MarJoibcre  her  younger  brother.

14.

phis  meeting  in  her  mindebred  much  vexation,'

When  as  flie  found  her  brother  her  bad  fpide,

A nd  made  her  alter  her  determination.

Which  that  fhc  might  from  him  the  better  hide,

* She  us’d  feme  common  wordsof  falutation.

And  to  Montalban  with  him  fhc  doth  ride.

Where  as  her  mot  her  .full  of  care  and  fcare.

Had  wiflit,and  way  ted  for  hcrcumming  there*


li

But  all  tbofc  kind  rmbracir.gs  «nd  iliolc  1 ifles.

She  had  of  parciit,kininicn  kind<  .and  frendj.

She  dccir.s  of  little  valhictc  thrftbl  fic»,

1 hilt  fi  e had  Icfl.ano  iliougkt  thtni  (rrall  smendi;
Buillth  to  n cef  Romero  r.ow  fhc  miflei.

To  fend  a oKflrngcr  fliC new  inter d.<.

Seme  luch  to  whom  fhemey  a mmii  thcthaigc.
To  tell  her  mind  unio  hci  love  at  large.

16

And  if  neede  wcieiopray  him  in  hcrn.'ime.

As  he  had  promift  heijio  K haptiicdi,

And  iocxcufr,tli.-;t  thirherfl.c  not  came.

As  they  logctlici  h.'d  before  deviled;

Befidts  hishoiTe  Froniino^hy  ihc  fame.

She  fent  a horfe  r f goodnes  not  dcfpifcd.

No  horfe  in  Fratueoc ip Ane  c Accused  mere,

Buyarda  folc  cxtcp»_ai.d  Brigli^iduTe.

«7  .

Rogera  (if  you  call  it  well  to  mindc)

What  ttirc  the  Gri_fith  br>ife  he  firft  did  take.

That  foard  away  as  fwift  as  weftern  windc.

And  forft  him  quickly  Europe  to  forfakc.

That  g iMant  hcaft  Front ino  left  behind.

Whom  Btodamant  thcn.for  his mafters fake.

Took  * hoii.c,arj.  with  much  careacd  oeftly  feeding.
Made  him  by  this  nmc,fatrc  and  fat  exceeding.

)8

And  ftraight  hermaydsand  women fervants all.

That  skilfull  W'crc  to  ft'\v,to  weave, and  knit,
Sheduth  to  workein  haft  together  call.

And  flic  her  fclft  among  them  all  doth  fit,  .

To  woi  ke  a net,  of  art  and  coft  not  fmall.

For  his  cjparifon  to  make  it  fit;

When  this  was  done,. ind  finifiit.ftfaight  way  after,
Shecalls  her  nurfe  CaUitri.  cos  daughter.

IJ

Thismayd  knew  befl  her  mindc  of  all  the  reft.

And  oft  had  hcaid  her  piaifing  to  the  skyes,

Rogeros comiy  f]iape,and  valiant  in<  ft,

Hi.siiig.ed  fpeech.lwect  face, and  lov*ly  eyesj
Thismayd  wiih  Iccretsall  fliectruftcd  beft.

On  this  mayds  fccrecic.flic  much  rclycsi
Hyppalca  named  was  this  uuftic  roayd,
kerthen  flic  cald, and  thustoherfticfaid.

20

Hyppalca  mir.c.ycu  know  of  all  my  crew.

Of  women  Icrvants,!  cftceme  you  inoft.

As  one  that  hath  bencfcctct.wife^nd  trew,

A praife  of  which  wc  women  fetd  can  boft)

My  meaning  is  to  make  .n  choife  of  you.

To  have  you  to  Roger 0 ride  in  pcftj
And  unto  him  mine  abfence  to  cxcufe.

And  flieWjthat  I could  neither  will  nor  chufe.

Your fcjfc (quoth  flic)  may  ndc  a little nagge.

And  in  your  hand  lead  by  Fromino  fpate.

And  ifperhanfome  foolc  willbcfb  Wagge,

As  that  to  take  the  horfe  from  you  he  dare,

Tomakc  him  that  he  fliall  nd  (jirthcr  wagge.

But  fell  who  owes  thchorfe,and  do  nor  care*

She  thought  Rogcro  was  of fb great  fime.

That  ev*ry  one  would  quake  to  hcarc  his  name.  »

Thus


Tm  tie  favrth
iaal{r.


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


21

Tl  issv,  hen/pp2lcawas  inftruftcd  well.

Of  all  that  to  hcranant  did  belong.

And  (hat  no  more  remain’d  behind  to  tell.

She  tookc  her  horfe.a nd  there  fhc  liayd  not  long,

In  ten  mile*  fpace  (fo  luckie  it  befell)

None  offer  made  to  do  her  any  v/iong,

No  traTclIer,no  Knight,nor  peafant  (laid  her.

Nor  once  with  word  or  deed  fo  much  as  frayd  heCi

About  the  time  the  Sun  to  South  did  mount.

She  met  (poorcfoule)  aKniglit,unto  hei  coif.

That  Turtle moA  tcrriblccald  Rodomount,

That  follow’d  arm’d  on  foote,a  page  in  polfj
Who  when  he  faw  an  horfe  offuch  account.

He  God  blafphem’d  and  all'the  hea  v’nly  holf.

That  fuch  a gallant  feiviceable  beaft,
Infomemanshandjhe  had  not  found  at  lealf.

24

He  bad  befoie  profeft  by  folemne  tow.

When  wanting  horfc,hc  traveld  on  his  feet,  ,

That  wet’t  from  knight, or  knare  that  drives  a plow*
To  take  perforce  the  next  horfe  he  /hould  meet;

Yet  though  helik’t  the  horfc,to  take  this  no  w.

And  rob  a mayd  thereof, he  thought  unmeet.

He  fees  her  leadc  a horfe, and  he  doth  lacke.

And  oft  he  wilht  his  mailer  on  his  bac \e>

I would  he  were  (quoth  flic)  he  fbonc  would  make.
You  change  your  mind,  and  glad  to  get  you  hence.
And  you  fhould  find  how  muchyoudomillake,
Youi  ftrength  and  force  to  offer  him  offence.

And  who  (quoth  he)  isthis,of  whom  you  crackef
Rogero  flie  replies ; forfooth,and fence
So  great  a champion  is  the  horfes  owner,

I may  (faid  he)  then  take  him  with  mine  honor.

25

To  take  his  horfe  (quoth  he)  I now  intend,

For  of  a horfe  you  fee  I (land  in  need:

And  if  I find  it  true  as  you  pretend.

That  he  rollout  a champi'an  is  in  deed,  ’

I Rodomont  this  adlion  will  defend.

Now  on  my  prefent  journey  I proceed.

And  where  I go  my  Tertucsfiiincfo  bright.

He  foonc  may  find  me  if  he  lift  to  fight.

27

This  faid,with  crucll  threats, and  part  with  force.

He  gat  his  will,full  fore  againft  her  will.

And  ftraight  he  mounteth  up  upon  that  horlc.

She  curling  follow’d  him,  and  banning  ftill,

Uut  of  thofe  curfes  he  doth  little  force;

Then  winners  boft,when  Icefcrsfpeake  their  fill,
SeHUnee,  Bell  pleas’d  was  he,when  as  (he  wiflit  him  woift,
itmtnet,  As  ftill  the  foxc  fares  bell  when  he  is  curd.

28

But  what  Ihc  faith  he  little  doth  regard,

Suppofe  niccurft,orprayd,orrayld,or  cridc.

He  feekesout  Doralice  and  Mandriard,

And  had  the  little  dwarfc  to  be  his  guide.

No  little  haft  he  maketh  thither  ward;

TJZZ4

fiiff  And  to  that  place  of  puipofe  makes  digrcflion,
Where  Pinkie tl  was  (hnv’n  without  coafcffion.


t7P

29

The  noble  Dame  no  fooner  left  the  place.

Where  late  this  caitivc'by  her  hand  wasllaine.

But  Zerhin  there  arriv’d  in  little  fpace,

VVith  old  G (ibrina,\vho  perceiving  plaine.

One  mm  tlierd,ftraigbt  he  followed  the  trace,

(Left  murthcrunrcvcngcd  fliould  remainc)

He  minds  if  fortune  be  fo  much  hisfuidcrcr;

To  be  revenged  fliarply  on  the  murderer.

30

Gahrina  to  the  quarrie  ftraight  approchethj

Looks  all  about ,fearching  the  corfeand  prying,

(As  one  that  ftill  on  ev’ricgainc  cncrochcth)

To  win  both  by  the  Jiving  and  the  dying.

In  purfes  and  in  pockets  all  flie  pochetb^

Ofhim  that  murther’d  on  the  ground  was  lying,

A s having  this,  conjoyn’d  to  other  cvillS,

In  covetife  to  pafle  the  very  dcvills.

31

She  would  have  had  his  cotcand  armor  fainc.

Save  that  (he  knew  not  how  them  to  have  hidden.
But  from  great  part  of  that  defired  gainc.

By  want  ofleyfure  flic  was  then  forbidden;

Howb’it  flic  did  convay  away  liis  chaine,

A nd  ere  Zerbino  backc  againc  was  ridden ,

She  put  it  fafely  where  it  was  not  fcenc.

Her  upper  gowne  and  peticotc  bctwccnc.

32

And  fore  it  grieved  her  to  leave  the  reft.

But  now  Zerbino  was  returned  backe.

And  for  the  time  drew  nigh  of  taking  reft.

And  nigbteame now  to  fpred  hisraantcll  biacke,
Tofcckc  fomclodging  out  they  thought  it  beft,
Ofwhich,  in  that  wild  countric  was  great  lacke.
They  leave  the  valley ,and  they  came  that  night,
Vntoa  caftlc  Altariva  hight.

They  thither  wcnt,and  long  they  had  not  ftayd.

But  in  came  people  with  great  exclamation,
Withwofull  ncwSjthat  many  hearts  difmayd.

And  filld  their  mouths  and  eyes  with  lamentation.
How  Pinnabell  was  murderdand  betrayd.

And  loft  his  lifciand  worldly  habitation  (torches
And  ftraighttbey  brought  the  corfcwich  light  of
And  led  the  fame  through  all  the  courts  and  porches.

34

Great  were  the  plaints,thcforow  and  the  griefe.

By  kindred  made,by  tenants  ancf  his  ftends;

But  by  his  father,  old  Anfelmui  chief e,

Whojthough  revenge  be  but  a fmall  amends.

And  his  fonnes  life  was  now  paft  all  reliefe,
Byfearchtofind  the  murdicr  he  intends.

Zerbiso  hereof  makes  himfclfc  a ftrangcr.

As  well  to  fliunnc  fufptnon  as  danger.

3«

Now  when  the  funerals  in  (lately  fort.

Ordained  were  with  pompc  and  (uperftition
To  which' great  ftorc  of  people  did  refort,

And  all  thatwouId,had  frankc  and  free  pcrmiftion,
Straight  with  oycs,a  cryerdoth  report,

Thereto  afligncd  by  that  Earles commiflion.

That  who  fo  could  the  murderer  bewray.

Should  have  a thoaland  duckats  for  his  pay.

CL


Gahrina.


Sl;i*rrie  u a
■B  erd ft  a

ftrlyfigni-
Jytng  vie
fouLe  that tht
bailee  bath
find,  and
Jomtttmtt  if
metaphor  a
etjedftr  a
dead  body.


Altariva
was  Anftl^
mui  houft
jathatta
VinnabeU,


This


THE  XXIII.  BOOKE


Orlando,

ifaUU.


tSo

5«

Thii  newes  from  itioath  to  mouth , from  care  to  care,
(As  newes  arc  wont  to  do)  did  flic  fo  faft.

That  eld  C<s&rrw(S,bcing  prefent  there, .

Among  the  rcft,heard  of  it  at  the  laft:

Who  either  for  the  hatred  ITie  did  beaic.

To  good  Zerhino,  for  fomc  matters  paft,

Or  elfe  for  gainc  of  that  fo  great  reward.

Straight  todeftroy  Zerfiwo  flic  prepaid.

37

And  that  flic  might  more  furely  him  entrap,

Withth’Erlc  himfelfc  to  fpeake  flic  doth  requeft.
And  probably,  flietcls  how  this  mifhap.

Was  by  Zerbino  wrought  his  new  come  guefl;

A nd  ftraight  file  puld  the  chainc  out  of  her  lap,

Whichfolc  might  feivetorerifiethercft;

That  aged  fire,that  all  the  tale  bclecvcd.

Was  fore  inrag’d  hcrewith,not  oncly  grieved.

And  lifting  up  liis  hands  unto  the  skies.

With  age  now  feeble, feeble  now  wit  h w oc.

With  fainting  voice  he  fpake,and  watric  ties,
(My  founc)  thou  fiialt  not  unrevenged  go;

And  while  in  bed  {ecnxcZerbint  lyes.

Not  thinking  he  had  bene  betrayed  fo.

With  armed  men  his  lodging  was  befer.

He  naked  tane,as  is  a byrd  in  net.

39

With  as  great  cruelty  as  could  he  fliowne.

His  princely  armes  were  piniond  faft  behind  him.
And  to  a dungeon  deepe  he  ftraight  wastlirownc,
And  that  vile  place,to  bide  in  was  aftignd  him,
Vntillthcfcntencc  ofhisdcathwcrcknownc;

In  fine  Anfdnm  (fo  did  pafTion  blind  him)

(Her  likely  talc,  his  wrath  fo  lafiily  leading)
Condemned  liim,and  never  heard  him  pleading,

40

Thus  was  this  wonhy  Prince  v;ithout  all  caufc,
Condemnd  to  die  (fuch  is  the  wofull  being.
Where  hefts  of  law  leffe  lords,muft  ftand  for  laws.
Though  from  alllawes  andreafondifagrecing)
Now  nearc  and  neatc  his  execution  drawes.

And  gazing  people, grccdic  ftilloffecing.

In  clufters  march  and  follow  all  confufed ,

On  horfc,on  foot,asatfuch  time  is  ufed.

4»

But  loehow  God  that  ever  dothdefend,

Thofc  innocents  that  put  in  him  their  truft,

A hclpc  unlocked  for  did  thither  fend.

And  freed  him  from  this  doomc  of death  unjuft:
Orlando  did  cv'n  then  the  hillafcend,

Orlando  is  the  man  that  fare  him  muft.

And  at  that  time  there  did  with  him  remaine.
The  daughter  of  Galego^KingolSf aim.

4»

^This  was  that  /ytfieZ?,whom  he  of  late.

Recover’d  from  the  ouclawcsin  the  cave.

And  having  brought  her  out  of  that  ill  ftatc^
Yctftillhe  promift  carcofhertohavc.

And  whatfoeverdanger  or  debate.

To  him  befell, yet  her  he  ftill  did  favei
Orlando  all  that  great  aftcmblicfaw.

That  did  the  Knight  to  execution  draw.


43  '

He  thither  went  and  askcofhim  thecaufe.

Why  he  wasdrawncunto  a death  focrucll,

Forfooth  ( Zerbino  faid)  againft  all  lawes,

1 am  condemn'd  if  you  the  matter  knew  well,

Anfelmm  iagc,tbat  will  admit  no  paufc.

Vino  this  flame, doth  kindle  all  the  fcwcll;

Bclecving  falfcly  that  I flue  hisfonne.

Whereas  by  me  (God  knowes)  it  was  not  done.

44

Thus  Zer6i»  fiid,and  faid  it  in  fuch  fort.

As  made  Orlando  vow  him  to  rclccvc.

For  very  apt  he  was,  each  ill  icport.

Of  any  of  Magan\a  to  bclccvcj

Each  houfc  ftiLl  thought  to  cut  the  ocher  fliorr.

Each  houfc  ftill  fought  the  other  how  to  greeve:

Each  houfc  long  time,had  tanc  a pride  and  plcafiite,
Toworkc  the  tothcr  danger  and  dirplcafuic.

45

Vnlcaofc  the  Knight  yc  catives  (ftraight  he  cridc)

,Elfc  lookc  for  death  to  be  your  due  reward :

Whatman  is  this  (quoth one)  that  gapes fowide?

And  fpcakcsfofooliflily  without  regard?

Were  he  of  ftcclc,of  ftrength  and  temper tridcj
And  wcofftrawjhisfntc  might  hapbehard.

This  faid,  he  takethupa  mighty  launce.

And  lunncs  againft  the  FaUadinc  of  Fraunce.

46

Orlando  ran  at  him  with  couched  fpcarc.

And  though  his  armour  were  both  good  and  Turf,
Asnamely  that  Zerbino  erft  did  wcarc.

Yet  was  the  ftrokc  too  grievous  to  endurrj
For  though  the  beaver  did  it  ftifly  bearc.

Yet  did  the  blow  a greater  hurt  procure;

For  on  the  chcckc,itgavc  him  fuch  a chccke,

Thar  though  it  pierced  nor,it  brake  hisnccke.

47

Nor  at  that  courfc  did  all  his  fiirieceafe,

Six  other  of  that  fpcare  the  force  then  felt.

Then  withhisfword  among  the  thickeft  preafe.

Such  ftore  of  thrufts,and  deadly  blowcs  he  dclt.

That  many  in  thcplacc  did  ftrafght  dcccafcj
And  cv'n  as  fnow  againft  the  Sunne  doth  melt.

So  melted  they  and  fainted  in  his  fight,  SimiU,

That  in  an  hourc  he  put  them  all  to  flight.

48

When  they  were  fled,  he  fc:  Zerbino  free.

Who  would  have  kift  the  ground  whereon  he  trod.

And  done  him  reverence  humbly  on  his  knee.

But  that  the  Earle  fuch  courtfic  him  forbod;

But  yet  he  thankt  him  in  the  high’ft  degree,

Ai  one  he  honourd  moft,excepting  God;

Then  did  he  put  his  armor  on  agaitoc,

VVbich  late  was  worne  by  him  that  there  was  fiainc.

49

Now  while  Zerbino  there  a little  ftaid.

Preparing  with  Orlando  to  g®  hence.

Behold  faire  I fabeU, that  princely  maid.

That  all  the  while  had  (laid  a little  thence,

And  fees  no  farther  caufc  to  be  aftraid.

Came  neare,&  brought  great  joy  and  great  ofTcfice,

By  divert  paffions  bred  oronc  defirc.

Some  cold  as  kc,and  fomeas  hot  as  fire.

For


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


50

For  where  before  Zerbino  thought  her  drownd.

Now  cercainc  he  rcjoyccd  very  much ,

To  fee  her  in  hi*  prclcncc  fafe  and  found.

And  that  her  mifadventurc  was  not  fucht
But  wcyingin  whofehand  he  had  her  found,

A jealous  fcare  forthwithhis  hcan  doth  tucb.

And  inwardly  a greater  anguifli  bred.

Then  late  it  bad,to  hcare  that  fhe  was  dcd.

5*

Tofee  her  in  the  hands  of  fiich  a Knight,

It  greatly  did  him  anger  and  difplcafc.

From  whom  to  offer,  her  to  take  by  might.

It  were  no  honcfiie  nor  haply  cafe.

But  foMOrUnios  fake  heoughtof  right.

All  paflions  both  of  love  and  wrath  appeafcj
To  whom  in  thankfulneffc  it  were  but  meete.

To  lay  his  hands  under  Or/tS/idorfecte.

52

Wherefoie  he  makes  no  words,  but  on  he  goth
In  filcnt  for't,till  comming  to  a well
To  drinkc  they  lighted ,being  ihirftic  both.

And  cacli  his  drought  with  water  doth  expell.

But  when  thedamfcll  faw  and  knew  for  troth.
That  was Zeri>i«o  whom  fliclou’d  fo  well,
(Forwhentodrinke  hisbever  hcuntide)

Straight  fhe  her  love  had  through  his  bever  fpide.

SJ

With  open  armes  flic  runs  him  to  embrace.

And  hangs  about  bisneckea  picafant  yoke.

And  fpecchlcfTc  flie  remaind  a pretie  fpacc,
Oviddeft-  And  with  her  criftallteares  (before  flic  fpoke)  .
Jlii:pique  Surpris’d  with  joy, fhe  all  bedewd  his  face,

duU*‘p*ptH~  -And  long  it  was  ere  into  fpecch  fhe  broke,

MtnL,  By  which  the  noble  Earlcdid  plainly  fee.

That  this  could  no  man  but  Zerbino  bc«

Now  when  flic  had  agame  her  vitall  fprites.

And  that  fhe  ablcwas  her  mind  to  fhow,

Firft  flic  Orlandos  great  defarts  recites,
Thatrefeude  her  from  place  -'ffliamcand  wo,
Commending  him  above allothcr  Knights,

That  undefiled  had  preferv’d  her  fo.

And  pray’d  her  dcare,  when  fhe  had  made  lecitall  ‘
Of  his  good  dccdsjto  make  him  fomc  rccjuitall.

51

Great  thanks  w ere  gi  v*n,and  prefers  great  there  were
Of  rccompcncc  and  fcrvicc  on  each  fide,

But  lo  a hap  that  made  them  fpcccbfoibcarc.

For  why  an  armed  Knight  they  hadefpidc;
lAmintttdt  TvfiS  Mandricardo  that  arrived  there.

Who  as  youhcard,thefc  many  dayes  did  tide
To  feckc  this  Earle,  till  meeting  by  the  way
Fairc  ‘Doraitce,  a while  it  made  him  flay.

56

In  ibt  14.  heard  how  Mandricard fought  out  the  trackc,
(Mov’d  thereunto  by  envicand  difdainc)

Of  this  fierce  Knight, appaield  all  in  blackc.

By  whom  the  King  of  Frei^ycw  was  flainc.

And  thofe  Moritians  all,(o  putto  wrackc.

As  few  oftbemunwounded  did  rcmainc.

And  now  he  found  him  as  it  came  topafle,

Tct  knew  he  not  that  this  Orlando  was.


181

17

But  marking  wcll,thc  fignes  and  tokens  like.

To  thofe  be  heard,  cf  fach  as  thence  were  fled.

You  are  (quoth  he)  thcfclfc  fame  man  I feckc.

By  whom  fb  many  of  my  fiicnds  arc  dcd:

I have  (he  faid)traveld  above  a weeke
To  find  you  out, and  now  at  lafl  am  fped.

You  arc  tliemanthatl  have  fought  (1  gueffc)

And  furc  your  manly  lookc  doth  flicw  no  lefle.

}8

Sir  (quoth  Orlando*)  though  I want  your  name,

A noble  Knight  you  are  it  may  be  gueft.

For  furc  a heart  !o  thirfting  after  fame,

Is  fcldomc  bred  in  bale  unnoblc  breft:

But  if  to  fee  me  onely  now  you  canae,

I firaight  herein  willgraunt  you  yourrequefl:

And  that  you  m.ty  behold  me  to  your  fill,

I will  put  ofFminc  armour  if  you  will.

59

But  when  you  well  have  view’d  me  all  about,

Ifyct  you  have  a farther  mind  to  tiic,

W hich  of  us  two  can  proyc  himfelfe  moft  flout.

And  firft  in  field  can  make  the  tothcr  flic;

Attempt  it  when  you  lift,and  make  no  doubt,

But  hereunto  right  foone  agree  fliall  1:

That  (quoth  the  Pagan)  is  my  mind  indeed.

And  thus  to  fight  together  they  agreed .

60

But  when  Orlando  view’d  t he  Pagan  King,

And  faw  no  pollax  at  hisfaddlc  bow.

No  fword  by  fide, no  bow,nor  dart, nor  fling.

But  cv’n  a fpeare,hc  needs  of  him  would  know.
When  that  were  biuft,  unto  what  other  thing
He  then  would  triift,to  give  or  bearca  blow;

Tufli  (quoth  the  Pagan  Prince)you  need  notfearc,'
But  IwUl  match  you  onely  with  the  fpeara.^

61

I have  (quoth  he)  an  oathmoftfolcrnhefworne.

Since  firft  the  noble  Heifors  armcsl  wan.

That  by  my  fide  fliould  neverfword  be  worne,
Norotiicriron  weaponjtill  I can
Get  ’Durindana  hy  Orlando  borne.

Though  how  he  gate  it,wcll  I cannot  fcan.

But  fince  he  gate  it,grcat  reports  do  flic.

That  noble  deeds  of  armes  he  doth  thereby.

(52

NoIefTc  (quoth  he)  I faineon  him  would  wreako
My  fathcrsdcath.whomf  alfly  he  betraid.

For  well  I wot  my  fire  was  notfo  wcake,

Withany  Chrifiento  be  overlaid;

AtthisOr/a»</o  could  not  chufebut  fpeake.

It  is  a lie  (quoth  he)  that  thou  haft  faid,

I am  Orlandoyind  I will  not  bearc  it.

This  fword  is  27ari»^»,win  it  and  wcaie  it,

.63

And  though  this  fword  is  juftly  yvholly  mine.

Yet  for  this  time  1 frankly  do  agree,

A while  it  fhall  be  neithermine  nor  thine.

And  ifin combat  you  canvanquifli  me.

Then  tak’t,  and  thereat  I fliall  not  repine;

This  faid,  he  bang’d  the  fword  upen  a tree.
Indifferently  bctwcenc  them  both  to  ftand,

Vntill  the  ftrife  by  combat  might  be  fcand,  ^

N^‘


I


t.'Qk,»>n  ih*
JiiJUrie,


iSz


THE  XXIII.  BOOKE


7»


Now  one  at  th’othei  ran  with  couched  fpearc,

And  on  the  hcad-pccce  each  the  other  rtrake.

The  Have!!  in  fundry  pccccsretid  and  tearc,-
But  by  the  blovvcs  tiie  men  fmall  hurt  do  takC!

And  now  the  tiunchcns  onely  left  them  were.

And  atfoure  blowcs  the  trunchens  like  wife  brake.
Thus  when  they  faw  all  other  weapons  inift.

At  laft  they  were  inforft  to  fight  with  fill.

5o  have  I fecne  two  clowncs  fall  at  debate.

About  fome  wateicourfcor  markcoflandj
And  either  clap  the  tother  on  the  pate.

With  Crabtree  ftaffcjOr  with  as  crabbed  handj
Such  of  thisconfliil  was  the  prefcntllate.

And  each  of  them  doth  to  his  tackle  fland.

And  being  tyr'd  with  giving  frutclcireftripcs.

At  lall  they  flat  ly  fell  to  handle  gripes.

66

TheP.7^iM,part  by  fleigbt  and  part  by  force.

Thought  to  have  done  ^uHcrcles  in  timepafl.

To  fierce  Anthem  did, and  th’Eaile  infotce^

To  yecld  himfclfcjOr  leave  his  hoifc  at  laft,

Oi/Wo  that  could  finely  fit  his  horfe,*

With  all  hisftrength  bclkides  the  faddJe  fall,  •

Yet  did  the  Pagan  heave  him  with  fuch  ftrcngih,
That  all  his gytfcs  broken  wercat  length.

67

i)ownc  came  the  Earle,  yet  kept  his  faddleftill,  1
Nor  what  had  happend  was  he  well  aware.

But  as  hcfell, intending  by  his  will,  '**  •

Viito  the  Pagan  King  to  workc  fome  care,  'fi
He  meant  (but  his  attempt  fucceeded  ill)  i-
To  overthrow  the  horle  the  Pagan  bare,'  h -
. But  miffing  hold,the  horfe  unhUrt  remaines.

Yet  effhe  puld  his  hoadftalland  hts  raines.

The  horfe  that  had  at  liberty  his  bed.

Runs  over  ditch  and  vallf  y,hedge  and  wood.

As  partly  feare,and  partly  courage  led.

For  nothing  was  that  his  mad  courfe  withftoodr
But  Mandricard  flill  bcates  him  on  his  head.

And  et*n  as  if  he  fpeech  had  undetflood.

He  threatens  him  (except  he  flay)  to  bcate  him.

And  with  faire  ^(peech  fomtime  he  doth  intreStt  him.
•S9

But  aft  was  onc,thrce  mile  outright  he  rode,

£ic  Iiecould  make  the  harebraine  horle  to
Or  caufc  himonce  to  make  a fmall  abode,

But  more  and  more  he  gallops  ftill  away;

At  laft  with  haft  the  hotfeand  ekethe  lode
Fell  downeinto  a dith,and  there  they  lay.

Both  horle  and  man  all  fbyld  and  rayd  withdurt,

Ycc  neither  horfe  nor  man  had  aay  hurt.

70

This  whilcDameOwa/Zcc  that  faw  her  guide
T Inis  poll  away  againft  his  will  amaine.

She  thought  it  were  not  fafe  behind  to  bide.

And  therefore  follow'd  him'ihough  with  great  paint.
And  feeing  that  he  could  no  farther  ride,

Becaufehis  wilfull  horfe  did  want  a rainc,

She  prayes  him  take  herhorfetraine  and  bit,

For  mine  (<^uoth  flic)  will  go  though  wanung  it.


Much  did  the  Pagan  praife  her  pcntlc  offer.

Yet  did  refufe  it  as  a part  too  baft.

To  let  her  want  and  take  her  bridleofher,  '

He  thought  it  were  to  him  a great  di/gracc.

But  lo  good  chance  a better  mcane  did  prefer,
Gahrina  came  unwarcs  unto  the  place.

She  that  bctraid  of  [netYic  Scott iflj  Prince,

And  heard  (of  like)  of  hisdclivery  finec.

71

Andthcreforefcatingpuniflimentand  blame,  *

Andclog 'd  with  guilty  tonfcicnce,flcd  the  light,'
Vntill  by  hapunwaresfliethitbcrcamc.

And  on  thiscouplc  fortuned  to  light:

They  could  not  chufe  but  make  great  fport  &»amc

To  lee  fo  ftrange  and  iinagreciHg  fight,

A s fuch  a witherd  old  ilfavord  hag.

To  ride  in  purple  on  an  ambling  nag.

73

He  that  of  light  or  wrong  did  little  palTc,

Mcaiics  with  her  ftorc  his  lacke  there  to  ftipply,
Noroncedemaunded  who  or  what  flie  was,

But  takes  away  her  bridle  by  and  by;

She  skreecheth  out,and  wccpes,and  cries  alas,

Ev’n  ready  fearing  huit,unhurt  to  die:

Hereafter  I fliall  tell  what  became  on  her.

Now  for  a farewell  fliamc  I wifli  upon  her.

74

This  while  Orlando  had  his  girfei  mended.

And  new  provided  what  before  did  lacke.

And  mounting  on  his  hor(c,a  while  attended
To/ceiffij  the  Pagan  would  come  backcj
But  feeing  that  he  came  not,he  intended
To  follow  him,at:d  find  him  by  the  tracke;

But  firft  (as  one  that  well  good  manners  knew)

He  bad  Zerbino  and  hislpouleadew.

Taine  would  Zerbino  with  t his  Eat  Ic  have  gone.

And  take  fuch  part  of  ev’iy  hap  as  he.

But  that  the  noble  Eaile  hereof would  none.

And  faid  there  could  not  moredifhonorbe.

Then  for  a Knight  to  Ihun  to  fight  alonci
Wherefore  he  would  not  thereunto  agree;
’ThusZerbin  loth  doth  from  this  Earle  deparf,,

Poore  /sbeU  fliedding  tearesfor  tender  hart.

76

But  ere  they  went, this  Earle  prat'd.

If  fi  rft  he  ha  pt  on  Mandricard  to  light.

To  tell  him  how  long  time  for  him  he  ftaid.

And  meant  tofeeke  him  out  againe  to  fight.

Now  I hat  his  comming  was  fb'long  delaid.

He  meant  to  Farit  vaxd  to  go  that  night.

To  Charlet  his  camp, and  if  he  Ibught  him  there,'

He  fhould  allured  be  of  him  to  heart.

77

Thusmuch  he  praid,and  thence  away  he  went,

T o fccke  out  Mandricard,  but  found  him  not.

And  (for  the  day  now  more  then  halfe  was  (pent.
The  Sunne  and  feafon  waxing  Ibmcwbat  hot)

A fliadicgrovchefoundjand  therehement
To  take  fome  ca(e,but  found  fmall  eafeCod  wot;
He  thinks  his  thirft  and  hcate  a while  to  fwage.

But  found  that  fu  him  in  wotfe  heatc  and  rage.

For


factum  odt-
rumtuunu


Sinda  in  ’

putfuraaht

tlapruttht.


Jtee-meiu
btokf,  JS,


OF  ORtANDO  FVRIOSO-


1S3


78


Foi  looking  all  about  the  gcove,  behold
In  fundry  places  fairc  ingrav’n  he  fecSt
Her  name  whofc  louc  he  mote  efteemes  then  gold^
By  her  owne  hand  in  barkes  ofdivers  treeSj
This  was  the  place  wherein  before  I told,
Medoroxxi'd  to  pay  hisfuigcons  fees,

' Whcie /he,to  bollofthat  that  was  her  fiiame,
Vs’d  oft  to  write  hers  and  Medom  name.


8?


79

*"^-And  then  with  true  love  knots  and  prctic  pofes,
gtd  (To  fhew  how  flic  to  him  by  Io?c  was  knit)


Totuha-utt  Her  inward  thoughts  by  outward  words diulofes,
ulitjitd.  In  her  much  love  to  (hew  her  little  wit.

Orlando  knew  the  hand,  and  yetfuppofes
Jltsy^qu9t  It  was  not  file  thathad  Inch  pofics  writj
habttfbar  And  to  beguile  himfclfc,mf7i,tufii (quoth  he)
tmem  There  may  be  more  then  llic.

£0


O*

Yea, but  I know  too  well  that  prctic  hand,

J3to.  Oft  hath  flic  font  me  letters  of  her  writing;

Ovidintht  Then  he  bethinks  how  fhc  might  underftand
His  name  and  love  bythat  fame  new  inditing,
JncifiififvSi  And  how  it  might  be  done  long  time  he  fcand,  ■
i umtauo-  With  this  fond  thoughtfo  fondly  him  delighting.
matfagi.  Thus  with  fmall  hope,  much  fcare,all  malcontent.

In  thefe  and  fuch  conceits  the  time  he  fpent.

81

And  ay  the  more  he  fcckcs  out  of  his  thought
To  drive  this  fancic,ftill  it  doth  incrcafe,

Simiit.  " •*  with  birdlime  caughr.

Doth  bcate  her  wings, and  drives, and  doth  n<Jt  ceafe
Vntill  flicJhath  hcrfclfcall  overwrought.

And  quite  intaogled  in  the flimiegreafe;

Thus  on  went  be,tillhim  thewaydid  bring
Vmo  a (Iiadie  care  and  plcafant  fpring,

82

T his  was  a plaee, wherein  above  the  red.

This  loving  paire,  leaving  their  homely  hod.

Spent  time  infports  that  may  not  beexpred.

Here  in  the  parching  heatc  they  tanid  mod.

And  here  Medore  (that  thought  himfclfc  mod  hied)
Wrote  certainc  verfes  as  in  way  of  bod;

Which  in  his  language  doubtleffc  founded  prime.
And  thus  I turnc  them  to  an  ERgUflj  dittie.

83

Ye  plcafant  plants,grccnc  hcrbs,a«d  waters  fairc.

And  cave  with  fmclljand  gratefollfliadow  mixt,
Whercfwect  Arigclicajdivghter  and  heire
Of  Galafronne,  on  whom  in  vaine  were  fi xt
Full  many  hearts, with  me  did  oft  repaire
Alonc,and  naked  lay  mine  armes  betwixt  j
I poore  Afedofc, canyccid  but  praife  and  thanks.

For  thefe  great  plcafures  found  amid  your  banks.

84

And  pray  cachLord  whom  Cupid  holds  in  pay.

Each  Knight, each  damc,and  cv*ry  one  befide,

Or  gentle  or  mcanc  fort  that  pafTe  this  way.

As  fancicor  his  fortune  fhall  him  guide.

That  to  the  pUnt$,hcrbs,fpring,andcavc  he  fay.
Long  may  the  Sun  and  Moon  maintainc  your  pride.
And  the  fairc  new  of  Nymphs  make  fuch  purveyance
As  hi  thci'  come  no  heards  to  your  annoyance.


It  written  was  there  in  th’ Arabian  tong.

Which  tong  Or/<z«doperfefl:  undcidood,

A s having  learnt  it  when  he  was  but  yong.

And  oft  the  skill  thereof  had  done  him  good,  ^

But  at  this  time  it  him  fo  deeply  ftoong.

It  had  bin  well  that  lie  it  never  coud.

And  yet  we  fcc,to  know  men  ftill  are  glad,  SeMUnctl

And  yet  we  fee  much  knowledge  makes  men  mad.

86

Twife,thrifc,yea  five  times  he  doth  readc  the  rime.

And  though  he  faw  and  knew  tlic  meaning  pi  ainc,

Yetjthat  his  love  was  guilty  of  fuch  crime.

He  vvill  not  let  it  finkc  into  his  braiiic.

Oft  he  perufed  it,and  evVy  time
It  dothincrcafc  his  fharpe  tormenting  painc.

And  ay  the  more  he  on  the  matter  miifcd.

The  more  his  wits  and  fenfes  were  confufed*

87

E v’n  then  was  he  of  wit  wcinigh  bcftiaiighr.

So  quite  he  was  giv’n  over  unco  griefe,

(And  lute  if  we  belecveas  proofc  hath  taught,  itiatiut,

This  torture  is  of  ail  the  reft  thccbicfe)

His  fpritc  was  dcad,his  courage  quaild  with  thought.

He  doth  defpairc  and  looke  for  no  reliefer
And  forrow  did  his  fenfes  fo  furprife.

That  words  his  toong,  and  teares  forfooke  his  eyes.

88

Theragingpang  remained  ftill  within.

That  would  have  burft:  out  all  at  once  too  faft*

Ev’n  fo  we  fee  the  water  tarry  in
A bottle  little  mouth’d,  and  big  in  waft.

That  though  you  topfic  tuivy  turoc  the  brim.

The  liquor  bides  behind  with  too  much  haft.

And  with  the  ftriving  oft  is  in  fuch  taking.

As  leant  a man  can  get  it  out  with  fhaking.

89

At  laft  he  comes  unto  himfclfc  anew.

And  in  his  mind  another  way  doth  frame,

That  that  which  there  was  written  was  not  trev/,

But  writ  of  fpitc  his  Ladie  to  defame,

Orto  thatcnd,thathe  thcfameniight vew.

And  fb  his  heart  with  jcaloufic  inflame;

Well  bc’t  who  lift  (quoth  he)  I fee  this  clearly,

He  hath  her  hand  refcmbled  paftlng  nearly.

90

With  this  fmall  hopc,with  this  poore  little  fparke.

He  doth  feme  dcale  revive  his  troobled  fpritc.

And  for  it  was  now  latc,and  waxed  darkc.

He  fcckcs  feme  place  whcic  he  may  lie  that  night.

At  laft  he  hearcs  a noife  of  dogs  that  baikc,  ^htukt'Sia

He  finds  feme  fmokc,and  fees  fomc  candle  light,  thUu  dtfer^

He  takes  his  InnCjwith  wiirtoflecpc,not  cate,  ted»nb

Asfild  withgricfc,and  with  none  other  mcatc.  tMrifani-

9 1 eulan,

But  lohishapwasatthathoufcfohoft,  mJpZcvf^

Where  fairc  Angelica  had  laync  before,  n/ilUrutm

And  where  her  name  on  cv’ry  doorc  and  poft,  fulmina

With  true  love  knots  was  joyned  to  Medore ^

That  knot  his  name  whom  he  detefted  moft.

Was  in  his  eye  and  thought  ftill  evermore;

He  dare's  not  aske,noroncc  the  matter  tuch.


must.


For  knowing  thereof  that  he  knowes  too  much.


But


i84


.THE  XXIII.  BOOKE


if  thit
inthi  jillm.

fio’*.


SiHtettce,


A fbraft  of
fpucb  u{ed
in  thi  Lntit^
Tn^ceu  ft-
ritrim.


Vulture  it
tbitbirdtbtt
ret  call  Ra
vtn:  but  there
art  divirs
«/  (6cm


9*

But  vaineit  was  hiinfclfcfo  co  beguile.

For  why  his  hoft  unasked  by  and  by,

That  faw  his  gueft  fit  there  fo  fad  the  while.

And  thinks  to  put  him  from  hit  dumps  thereby,
Beginnech  plainc  without  all  fraud  or  guile.
Without  concealing  truth  or  adding  lie.

To  tell  that  tale  to  him  without  regard.

Which  divers  had  before  with  plealu  re  heard.  ..

As  thus,how  at  requeft  -

He  holpc  unto  his  hoiife  to  bring  Medore,

Who  tlien  was  forely  wounded  in  his  btefi,  .!

And  flic  with  furgery  did  hcale  his  fore:

But  while  with  hcrownc  hands  the  wound  flic  dreil.
Blind  wounded  herasmuchoi  mcrc,^j
That  when  her  skill  and  herbs  had  cui*d  hec  patient.
Her  cureleflc  wound  in  love  made  her  unpaticut.

94

So  that,  admit  (lie  were  the  greateft  Queene
Of  fame,  and  living  in  thofe  Eaftcrn  parts.

Yet  fo  wrth  fancic  fiic  was  ovcrfcenc.

To  marry  with  a pageof  nicanc  defarts-.

Thus  love  (quoth  he)  will  have  his  godhead  fecnc.

In  famous Queens,and  hip.hcft  Pi iiiccs  harts:
Thisfaid  (to  end  the  talc)  hefiicw’d  thcjewell
That  flic  had  giv’n  him,  which  Ortodo  knew  well.

55

This  tale,and  chiefly  this  fame  lafl  conclufion,
Wasev’n  a hatchet  to  cut  off  all  hope,  ^

Whenlovchad  aftermanya  vainccollufion.

Now  for  his  farewell  lent  him  fuch  a rope  .

To  hang  himfelfc,and  diownc  him  in  confufion.

Yet  fainc  he  would  denic  his  forrowfeope.

And  though  a while  to  fliew  it  he  foibeares.

It  breaketh  out  at  laft  in  fighs  and  tcares,

56

And  as  it  were  inforfl  he  gives  the  raine
To  raging  griefc,upon  his  bed  alone.

His  eyes  do  flied  a very  fliowre  of  raine,

With  many  a fcaldingfigh  and  bitter  gione,

He  flept  as  much  as  if  he  had  then  lainc
Vpon  a bed  of  thornes,and  fluff  with  flone.

And  as  he  lay  thereon  and  could  not  reflhim.

The  bed  it  fclfe  gave  matter  to  molcfl  him.

57

Ah  wretch  lam  (thus  to  himfclfc  he  fed)

Shall  I once  hope  to  take  repofe  and  reft  me
In  that  fame  houfei  yea  ev*n  in  that  fame  bed
Where  ray  ungrateful!  love  fo  leudly  dreft  me?

Nay,  let  me  fir  ft  an  hundred  times  beded,

Firfl  wolvcsdevoure  and  vultures fliall  digeft  me.
Strait  up  he  flarts,  and  on  he  puts  his  clothes.

And  leaves  the  houfc,fo  much  the  bed  helothcs.

98

He  leaves  his  hoft,nor  once  doth  take  his  leave,
Hcfai’dfo  ill,  he  bids  them  not  farewell,

He  leaves  the  townc.hisfervantshc  doth  leave.

He  rides, but  where  he  rides  he  cannot  tell.

And  when  alone  himfclfc  he  doth  perccavc
T o vveepe  and  waile,nay  ev*n  to  houlc  and  yell.

He  doth  not  ccafc  to  give  hisgricfca  vent.

That  inwardly  fo  fore  dad  him  torment.


99

The  day  the  riighttohim  were  both  alecke,

Abrnadcupon  the  cold  bare  earth  hclics.

No  flccpc,no  food  he  takcs,nor  none  would  ftek.

All  fuftcnancc  he  to  hinifclfc  denies.

Thus  he  began,  and  ended  halfcihc  wceke.

And  he  himfclfc  doth  marvcll,whencc  bis  eyes
Arc  fed  fo  long  with  fuch  a fpting  of  water.

And  to  himfclfc  thus  rcafons  on  the  matter,
too

No, no,  thefe  be  nO  teaiestbat  now  Iflicd,

Tbcfc  be  no  tcares,  nor  can  teares  run  fo  rife,

Butfiip  offrenziedrawth  up  to  my  bead,

Mj  vitall  humoi  that  fliould  keepe  my  lifcj
Thisftreamewill  never  ccafc  till  I bcdcad.

Then  welcome  death  and  end  my  fatall  ftrife;

No  comfort  in  this  life  my  wo  can  minifli.

But  thou  who  canft  both  life  and  forrow  finifli.

101

Thefe  arc  not  fighs,for  fighs  feme  refpite  have.

My  gripes,  my  pangs,no  refpite  do  permit.

The  blindfold  boy  made  mca  feeing  flavc.

When  from  her  eyes  my  heart  he  fiift  did  hit.

Now  all  inflam’d,!  burnc,C  rage  and  rave,

And  in  the  midft  of  fl amc  conluinc no  whit;

Love  fitting  in  my  heart  a maftcrcrcwcll,

Blowcs  with  his  wings  feeds  with  his  will  the  fcwell.

102

I am  not Ijthc  man  that  caift  I was,

Orlando,  heis  buried  and  dead,

His  moft  ungratcfull  love  (ah  foolifli  laffc)

Hath  kild  Orlando cutofFhis  head:

I am  hisghoftjthat  up  and  downc  muft  pafle.

In  this  tormenting  hell  for  ever  led.

To  be  a feaifull  /ample  and  a juft.

To  all  fuchfocles  as  put  in  love  their  truft.

103

Thus  wandiing  ftill  in  wayes  that  have  no  way.

He  hapt  againc  to  light  upon  the  cave.

Where  (in  remembrance  of  their  plcafant  play)

McdorodxA  that  epigram  ingravc.

Tofee  theftoncsagainc,his  woesdifplay.

And  her  ill  namc,and  his  ill  hap  deprave.

Did  on  the  fudden  all  his  fence  inrage.

With  hatc,with  fury,  with  revenge  and  rage,

104

Straightwayeshcdiawcth  forth  his  fatall  blade.

And  hewes  the  ftones,to  heav’n  thcfliivers  flee,

Acciirfcd  was  that  fountaine,  cave  and  fliade.

The  arbor  and  the  flowres  and  cv’ry  tree:

Orlando  of  ill  places  havockc  made.

Where  he  thofe  names  together  joyn’d  may  fee^

Yea  to  the  fpring  he  did  pci  pctuall  hurt.

By  filling  it  with  lcaves,boughs,floncs  and  durt.

los

And  having  done  this  foolifli  ffamickcfcate,

He  layes  him  downc  all  weary  on  the  ground,

Diftemper’d  in  his  bodic  with  much  baate.

In  mind  with  paincsthat  no  tongue  can  expound,  luces  expert^
Three  day  cs  he  doth  not  flcepc,noi  drinkc,norcate,“^^^'^^*

• Butlay  withopcncycsasinafound.  lackrimif^

Thefourth  with  rage,and  not  with  reafbn  svaked,  fuisieisuia
He  rents  his  clothes, and  runs  about  ftatke  naked,  pavit.

His


CaUimachsu
bath  the  li^e
in  bit  tlepj^
that  begtust
SlMcungue
iUefuitpuet
rum  tjui
pinxit  am*’
rtm,&e,  and
after  he  faith
Ken  ego  fid
ttnuit  vaptf
lot  umbra
aea.


Ovid  dtferi*
Ung  the

death  efCU‘
tia:

—Sub  Jena
MeUt  dit^.
iedn  burnt
mudxnudit
ittcempta
tapiUe,


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


i8j


106

Hishclmet  htiche  flingSjhis  pculdeinsthcrcj
He  cads  away  hiscuiatsand  hisniidd:

His  (word  he  throws  a way, he  cares  not  where,

H e featters  all  his  annor  in  the  field;

No  ragge  about  his  bodie  he  doth  beare.

As  might  from  cold  or  might  from  fliame  him  Ihicld,
And  fare  he  left  behind  this  fatall  blade.

No  doubt  he  had  therewith  great  havoekemade,
107

But  his  furpa fling  force  did  fb  exceed.

All  common  men,  that  neither  fword  nor  bill,

Nor  any  other  weapon  hedid  need,

Mccrc  dtength  fuffic’d  him  to  do  what  he  will.


He  rootes  up  trees  as  one  would  root  a weed;
And  ev’o  as  bitders  laying  nets  with  skill,

Parc  flender  thornes  away  with  cafic  ftrokes.

So  he  did  play  with  a(hcs,clmcs  and  okes.

108

The  hcardmen  and  the  fliephcards  that  did  heare.
The  hideous  noife  and  unacquainted  found.
With  fcarc  and  wonder  great  approched  ncare,
Tofee,and  know,  what  was  hereof  the  ground.
But  now  I muft  cut  off  this  treatife  heaic.

Left  this  my  booke  do  grow  beyond  his  bound;
And  ifyon  take  fomc  plcafurc  itf  this  text,

1 will  go  forward  with  it  in  the  next.


SimUtt


In  Bradamants  forrawfor  rvant  o/Rogero,  rve  may  note  how  itfaUethout  many  times,  that  over  great  dejire  of  re-  Morall.
vcnge,worl{Ctbto  our  Jilves  great  dijpleafitre,  as  wewifl]edto  our  enemies.  /«Rodomont,  that  wouldnot  tai^e  the
horfe  jrom  Hippalca,  tiU  hci{new  thatabravc  champienwas  the  owner  thereof i wemaynote^  that  though  wrong  be  in
deed  a thing  rcprovable,  towhomfoeveritisdoneyetit  iifarmoretoUcrable,  or  at  leafi  excufahle.to  be  doneto  ones
equall,then  to  poorc  or  inferior  per  fins.  In  Zerbinos  happie  deliverance,  from  aJhamcjuU  death, fyOtlandosmeanes,
we  may  obfirve  that  which  can  never  be  too  much  obfirved,  namejy  bow  divine  providence  never Jailes  the  innocent,  in
all  the  proceedings  o/Zerbino  and  Ifabclla,  a patterne  might  be  tal^tn  of  gratitude,  of  conftantnejfe,  and  of  noble  and
princely  inclination.

0/HercuIcs  atid  Anthci\$)thotigh  the  originaU  it felfe  fieme  but  fahulousyet  thus  it  is  written, that  th^  two  wraft-  Hiftoiy.
ling,  Hercules  perceived  that  Antheus  flrength  increafid  by  jailing  to  the  ground,  andtherefore  to  tal^e  him  from  his
force, he  too\e  him  up  in  his  armes,  and  fi  held  bimfiom  the  ground  till  he  had  utterly  van'qu'fhed  him.  Plutarkc  in  the
life  of Sertorius fiiitb  this  Antheus  was  threefiore  cubits  high.

In  Aftolfo,  that  put  off  his  armor, andgave  away  his  Jpare  horfi,  and  all  his  fiiperfiuous  weapons,  when  he  was  to  Allegoric.
ta\ctheGri0ithhorfi,  and fiy  about  tbeworld,  maybe  gathered  a good  aUegoricatt  fence,  or  rather  it  may  be  called
TheologicaUinamely  that  he  that  will  betaine  himfilfe  to  fi  high  a profeffion,  as  to  teach  andfiudie  the  high  myferies  of
ebrifiian  religion,  and  live  in  contemplation  of  heavenly  things,  fhotildcafi  away  the  burdenous  clog  of  all  worldly  in-
cumbrances,and  to  ufi  the  phrafiofour  Saviour  himfilfe,  (leave  father, wife  and  children)  andwbatfieverelfi  may  be
ahinderance  to  our  proceedings  in  that  hind:  but  this  difceiirfi  is  fit  for  another  place,  andrnyfilfealfi  handled  it
more  amplyin  a little  dialogue  of  mariagethat  imadein  myyoungdaies,and  therefore  here  I will  cut  it  off  for  avoi-
ding teiioufieffe. Concerning  Orlandos  maintffe  there  is  a notable  allegory  to  be  gathered  thereof,  of  which  (becaufi  I
nowhave  tahenupon  me  togo  rhorowwith  thewholeworhp)  I will  dejerre  to  Jpeah,e  till  I come  to  re  faring  of  hUwit
againe.which  I count  more  proper  for  this  fubjeli.

But  in  the  manner  of  his  falling  mad.ny  author  hath  (in  mine  opinion]  Jhew’d  himfilfe  his  crafts  mafer,  fining  it  Allufiomi
cut, wy  pathetically,  or  (tofpeaheEngUfl))  pajfwnatly.  Furder  there  is  in  it  a notable  Veripetia,  which  jignifies  the
agnition,or  taking  hnawledge  of  a fudden  mutation  of  fortune,  either  good  or  bad  to  a contrarie  extreame:  oj  which  f{ini
there  be  many  examples, bur  fpecially  one,  to  which  mine  author  feemes  to  allude.  Namely  that  of  Oedipus  in  Sopho-
elesj/or  when  a meffengcr  came  to  him,  to  tell  him  haw  by  the  death  o/Polybus  he  was  elelfed  I^ing  of  Corinth,  Oedi-
pus refuled  to  come  thither,  for fcare  of  committing  inceft  with  his  owne  mother  ( of  which  the  Oracle  hadioretold  him)
the  meffengerthini{ing  to  clear  ehim  of  that  firupk,  unadvifedly  toldhim  whofifinne  hewas  (which  he  l^new  not  be-
fore) and  thereby  now  l{ner»  certainly  that,  which  before  he  mifirufled,  namely  that  he  had  lainewith  hU  mother, where-
upon in  deed  be  fell  fiar\e  mad, and  was  after  recured, as  appeares  in  tbeflorie.


Here  end  the  firft  xxiij,  bookciof  Ariofto.


1


THE  XXIIII.  BOOKE.


SeiOtKee.


Sent,  *
Jaitb  af  DUe,
Vritar  infce.
lixDnio,i9-
ta^  -ja£stur
Z/rbe  f •areas,
StnttMt,


ScntiK:*.


Similt.


*5)


THE  ARGVMENT.

The  nehle  Zcrbin  p4rd«n  doth  mfford
T 0 Od  rik  and  Gs^xWiZ,  graceiejfe paire ;

A Turkc  with  him  fighttfor  Orlando’s  fword^
Hedies^  in  armes  <»/Iftbclla  faire,

Tierce  Rodoinont  with  ftindry  pajjiont  Jlir  d^

Tioth  fight  with  cruell  Agricanes  beire,

Bht  thetn  in  their  chief  rage  their  miRrejfe  parted,
F r»m  whence  to  aid  their  T^rince  they  both  departed.


> 1


I

Ho  to  fliall  fet  on  Cupids
Tnares  his  foot,

Muft  fcckc  to  draw  it  backe,
leaftit  be  caught.

And  madnes  rriccr,in  love  to
overllioot.

The  fool  hath  felt , the  wife
hath  ever  taught,  .

And  though  in  all  alike  it
take  not  toot.

Yet  all  Ilia  II  find  that  love’s  a thing  of  naught.

For  furc  it  is  an  open  figneof  madnefle.

To  have  anothers  plcafutc  breed  chyfadneiTe.

2

Now  though  cfFcfts  p ove  not  in  all  alike.

Yet  all  are  mad  in(brr,allgoaftray.

As  in  a wilderncflc  where  men  do  leek.

And  more  and  more  in  fcckinglofc  their  way,
Wherefere  let  no  man  this  my  wifli  miflike.

In  whom  fond  love  fliallcane  long  thefway,

1 wifi)  for  di'c  reward  fiich  doting  dolts.

Like  wilfull  ptifnerSjftore  of  irgn  bolts,

2

Some  man  perhap  will  fay,  what  foft,my  friend.

You  fpie  our  faulis,in  your  own  errors  blind  j
And  true  it  is,yecfpeak  I to  this  end.

To  bring  us  both  into  a better  mind.

As  fo.  my  felfe,!  hope  ere  long  to  mend.

And  from  thefe  bonds  in  time  my  fclfc  unwind;
Though  it  had  tanein  mcfuchvoot,!  proove  it.

As  hard  ’tis  on  the  fudden  to  remoovc  it.

4

I HiewM  you  in  the  book  thitwent  before,

&y  what  mifliap  Orlando  waxed  mad.


And  loft  not  oncly  care  of  vcrtucs  lore,

But  rcafon,wit,and  all  thefenfe  he  had  s
His  armor  he  difpcrft,hisclotbcs  he  tore,

The  veiy  clothes  wherewith  his  corps  was  clad  i
And  though  he  wander'd  all  unarm’d  and  naked^

Yet  at  his  picfencc  all  the  country  quaked.

The  countrimen  that  heard  the  noife  aloof.

Of  trees,that  with  their  fall  made  no  fmall  crack  :
Came  ncarc,and  faw  by  plainc  and  open  proof.

His  monftrous  ftrength,by  their  fo  monftrous  wtackj
And  ftraight  they  found  it  beft  for  their  behoof.
With  all  the  haft  they  could  to  get  them  back;

For  thofc  hccaught  he  did  this  Icffbn  leach.

To  keep  aloof  from  out  a mad  mans  reach.

6

Away  they  fled,but  hepurfu’d  fb  fall.

That  fbmc  he  caught, and  fomc  furpris’d  with  feare.
Stood  ftill(asoft  It  happens) all agaft.

Not  knowing  how  to  hide  rhcmfeivcs.nor  where  ;
Some  other  ploughmen  feeing  what  had  part.
Thought  it  but  little  wit  to  taric  there.

But  cl  im’d  (for  fearc)  ihci  r houfes  and  their  churches.
Not  truftingftiengthofclffits,of  bccch,and  burches.

7

Among  the  reft  he  talccs  one  by  his  heel.

And  with  bis  head  knocks  out  anothers  braine.
Which  caufed  both  of  them  luch  paine  to  feci.

As  till  doomes  day  they  never  fhall  complaine.
Another  with  his  fift  he  made  to  reel.

Till  paine  it  felfc  made  him  pafl  fenfc  of  paine.

And  when  the  men  fled  all  away  affcard.

Then  with  like  rage  he  fet  upon  their  heard.

R » The


Smeac,


Ipo


THE  XXI I II.  BOOkE


*5


Simlt.


Htrttunmb
f Orlande  in
the  i9,bt»kft
the^yfiafe.


OJeril{  iAl{tH
frif  nrr,V’
brought  to
Z’.rbino,


The  voice  af  mco,tlic bcllowings  of  bcaft,

A bout  the  country  rais'd  fo  great  a foundj
As  might  have  well  been  beard  five  leagues  at  Icafl,
And  all  the  people  ftraigbtwerc  railed  round  j
Each  man  providing(as  hccould)thc  bell.

And  for  the  prefent  time  might  tlien  be  found.

With  bowSjWitli  bils,with  (laves,  Sc  pikcs,5c  prongs
To  be  reveng’d  on thefcoiiiragious  wrongs.

9

Look  how  the  wires  are  driv*n  by  weftern  blaft.

And  one  and  one,do rife  llill  more  and  more,

Vntill  their  force  fo  great  be  at  thelall.

They  fprinkle  all  the  banks, and  beat  thefliore  •

So  now  thcfccountry  folk  came  in  fo  fall.

By  two, and  three,a  dozen,and  a fcorc  j
Till  at  the  lad  they  grew  fo  great  a number.

Their  very  multitude  themfelves  did  cumber.

10

But  when  they  fa  w their  force  could  do  no  good,

And  that  his  skin  foftrangeproteflion  had.

That  though  they  fmote  tbcreon,ihey  drew  no  blood.
They  thought  that  they  might  worfe  be  thought  then
To  fight  wiihonc  that  all  them  fo  withftood,  (mad.
Wherefore  tKey  parted  liomcdifmaid  and  fad.

The  mad  man  went  unto  the  neareft  village.
Although  he  cared  not  for  fpoile  or  pillage.

11

And  finding  no  man  tbere,nor  fmall,nor  great.

For  all  were  fled  away  from  thence  for  aw  j
As  famine  forc’d  him,hc  fought  oat  fomc  meat,

And  were  it  fine  or  coutfc,thc  firft  hefaw>

In  greedy  fort  hedothdevourcand  cat.

Not  caring  if  it  tolled  were  or  raw  j
And  when  thus  homely  he  had  tanc  repall.

About  the  country  bedlam-likc  he  pall,

Hcfcarcs  both  man  and  beill  without  regard.

He  takes  fwift  goats  and  fallow  decrc  in  chafe,
Somtimesa  Lion  fiercc,a  Bote, a Pard,

He  kils  by  llrcngth  and  fwiftnelTc  of  his  pace.

At  lall  he  came  whereas  a knight  did  guard
The  palTagc  of  a bridge,and  by  the  place
Had  built  a towrcofnofmall  work  and  charge.

As  lliall  be  lliow’d  hereafter  more  at  large.

1 %

Now  mull  I tell  what  hap  ZerhinoUidy
Who  with  faiic  Ifabe/l  together  rode-
Along  that  place  where  tins  good  Earle  fell  mad  j
But  by  the  way,thefc  t wo  made  fomc  abode,

Where  they  beheld  two  men  in  armour  clad.

That  drive  a horfc  that  barea  wofull  lode,

A knight  a prifner,  to  Zerbino  known,

That  had  been  once  a fci  vant  cf  his  own.

This  prifner  OderiliC  of  highc,

In  whom  the  Prince  had  putfb  great  a trull.

He  made  chiefe  choice  of  him  as  of  a knight,
Thatof  his piormrc wov.Id  befirmand  juft;

But  Iic(fond  beall)cllecmingfmalldclight.

And  fruitlcflc  hope  of  hisunbndicd  lull,

A bovc  hisfacred  oath  and  promis’d  fcaltic.

Would  liavcdcflourcd  her  againll  all  icaltie.


Faiic  ifabcU  by  bap  ev’nthcn  was  telling.

How  in  the  boat  flicdcfpcratcly  was  fav’d  $

And  having  fcap’d  the  llormy  leas  and  fwclling,

How  trechetoufly  this  wretch  himfclfc  behav’d.

That  (had  not  outlawcs  thereabout  been  dwelling)

He  would  havcfotc*d  bei  unto  that  he  crav’d.

And  cv*n  as  thcfc,or  fomcfuch  words  flic  faid,

- She  faw  the  man  flie  fpakc  of  captive  led.

16

Thofc  two  that  led  the  wicked  O/r/c/^e  tt’d,

Knew  well  their  Lord  when  as  they  came  in  view.

Both  by  the  Lady  that  was  by  his  fide.

And  by  the  rampant  Lion  red  of  hew.

Born  by  the  Piince,not  for  a fiicw  of  pride.

But  bis  as  from  his  prcdcccirors  dew.

They  light, and  with  a courtfic  to  tic  ground.

And  cap  in  band,falutc  their  Lord  thus  found .

17

Zerbino  knew  and  cal’d  them  both  by  name,

Coreba  tone, Almonio  tother  bight.

Which  two  with  /jabcH  fiom  Bayonamc,

In  conduftof  that  moll  unworthy  wight.

And  flraight.^/M(jmD  thus  his fpccch  doth  frame,

My  Lo,d(fiid  hc)l  fliall  to  you  recite
Somclittlc  part  of  that  unplcafant  ftoiy.

That  till  this  home  had  made  my  heart  full  fory.

i8

Sith(thank’d  bcGod)thisLady  here  doth  live,  ^Immin

Who  felt  thcfcflormcs,and  therein  chiefly  fraarted,

I know  that  flic  tlicreof  could  notice  give.

And  hath  ere  this  to  you  the  fame  impaacd ,

1 oncly  fliall  declare  what  did  me  grieve.

And  what  had  hapned  fince  from  her  I parted.

What  time  by  this  vile  wretches  lewd  intent.

For  horfc  and  men  to  RoebeU  I wasfent.


19

And  as  I went, fo  back  I turn’d  in  hall,

With  men  and  hoifcasgood  as  I could  get.

To  feck  them  our  mine  eyes  about  I call.

But  yet  mine  eyes  on  them  I could  notfet.

Their  track  I found, and  following  that  full  fafl,

It  brought  me  to  a wood  whereas  I met
My  fellow  Corcfr,pantingthen  andgroning.

This  caitife curling  and  himfclfc  bemoning.
ao

He  told  me  bow  hc(figbting  in  defence
Of  J/abeUa)wsts  fo  forcly  wounded.

That  from  that  place  he  had  not  lliircd  fince,

And  how  with  bleeding  much  he  oft  had  founded.
At  which  report  I took  fo  great  offence.

That  in  my  wits  I was  wcllnigh  confounded  c
And  toicvcngemy  heart  fb  fliaip  was  whet.

That  Corfii' danger  quite  I did  forget.

ai

But  when  in  vaine  this  wretch  I long  had  fought.

To  Corel  I returned  back  againe,

Who  was  fb  weak  and  low  by  bleeding  brought,
Thaefcant  thclifedidin  his  limbs  rcmainc ;

For  which  his  wofull  flare  1 took  g cat  thought.

As  one  that  deem’d  it  fitter  to  ordainc
Some  Priefts  and  Friers, biiriall  to  procure  him.

Then  Surgeons  or  Phylitions  that  might  cute  him.

Yet


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


ipi;


It


(Sridt  frtiff
in  t Trinte  to
frouB  the
innoctnt,  bM
not  mtdej*-
Rtn,


Oirickt

fttch.


Staunctt


StHtmt.


SimiU.


Stwtnce.


Yet  him  unto  the  town  at  laft  I caried.

Where  by  fuch  help  our  friendly  hoft  procur'd,

It  pleafed  GoA^Coreho  not  mifcaried.

But  of  his  grievous  hurts  wasfoundly  cur’d  j
Which  done,  no  longer  in  thofe  parts  wc  taried.

But  being  there  by  fundry  men  affur’d,

That  Odricl^e  in  Alfonfos  court  was  biding,

Wc  thither  went  to  heareef  him  fomc  tiding.

And  there  I challeng’d  Odricl^c  face  to  face.

And  by  the  noble  jufticc  of  the  King,

And  chiefly  (as  I deem)  by  Gods  great  grace.

That  onely  rules  and  governes  cv’ry  thing,

I took  him  prifner  in  the  prelcnt  place.

From  whence  alive  I did  him  hither  bnng,

For  why  that  king  rhat  heard  his  grcatoffcnce.

Did  grant  us  liberty  to  bring  him  thence.

2a-

1 might  have  flainc  him, as  he  well  deferv’d ,

But  yet  1 chufed  rather  of  the  twaine,

Vnto  your  doom  to  have  his  life  rclcrv’d,

That  you  might  point  him  death  with  worthy  painc
And  much  I joy  that  luckfo  well  hath  Ici  v’d,

That  wc  fofafe  have  found  your  grace  againe:

A nd  much  more  I rcjoyce,if  much  more  may  be.

At  health  and  welfare  of  this  noble  Lady.

2S

Thus  much  Almonio  faid,and  then  did  ceafe,

Expe (fling  what  Zerbino  would  reply.

Who  all  the  while  flood  ftill  and  held  his  peace,
And  view’d  the  prifner  with  an  heedfullcyc.

And  much  it  did  his  griefc  of  mind  incrcafc.

To  think  a friend  could  ftray  fb  fane  awry.

Then  fighing  deep ; what  Odrrci^e  is  this  trur,
Whcrewitl-(c]Uoch  he)^/MWWchargcthyou  ?


>9


26


The  cairivc  humbly  proftratc  on  the  ground.

Forgive  my  Lord  (laid  he)your  fervants  crime.
What  wight  on  earth  can  void  of  fault  be  found  i
What  Saint  is  fluh  as  doth  not  fin  fomtime  J
’Tween  good  and  bad  this  diffrence  foie  is  found.
That  good  men  fin  but  fccld, and  mend  betime.
The  bad  man(making  fcruple  none  or  queftion)
Yeelds  wilfully  to  cv’ry  lewd  fuggeflion,

27

If  you  to  me  fome  fomeffe  had  committed.

And  I the  fame  had  wittingly  betraid,

1 grauntfuch  fault  were  not  to  be  remitted.

But  if  I had  with  force  been  overlaid.

Then  lure  1 am  my  cafe  would  have  been  pitied.
At  Icaft  no  fin  fiiould  to  my  charge  be  laid  ;

F or  when  the  enemy  is  once  the  flrongcr,

’Tis  vainc  to  makcreCflancc  any  longer.

28

Ev’n  fo  my  Lord, my  faith  1 ought  to  guard.

No  other  then  a fortreffe  or  a hold.

Put  in  my  charge  with  cartfull  watch  and  ward.
As  long  as  flrength  will  ferve  me  it  to  hold  :

And  fol  kept  my  faith  with  due  regard.

Nor  was  I any  way  to  be  controld
V mill  at  laft  I was  lo  ftrong  alTail’d,

That  faith  gave  placc,and  fancy  then  prevail’d.


Thus  Oirici^e  laid,and  what  he  faid  befide,

I doubt  itfomwbattcdiouswcrcto  tell.

As  namcly,nonc  fo  great  adault  could  bid  e.

That  love  all  other  pafiions  doth  cxccll.

But  furc  if  it  were  ever  plainly  tridc.

That  humble  fpccch  doth  often  wrath  cxpcll-
Now  Odriclic  found  of  lowly  words  the  fruit.

That  holp  him  toobtainefohard  a fiut.

30

Zerbino  flood  a while  in  mind  confus’d,

To  punifli  ot  to  pardon  his  offence,

Somtime  his  tboughtsall  clemency  refus’d,

Somtime  the  love  and  (crvice  done  Jong  fince,
AfTwag’d  hiswrath,aod  tothers fault  excus’d.

And  mov’d  him  with  his  folly  to  difpcnce  :

And  ftill  asrage  did  kindle  fire  of  wrath.

To  quench  it  mercy  ftorc  of  water  hath.

Now  while  in  this  famedoubt  Zerbino  ftaid.

Behold  by  hap  Gabrina  there  was  brought.

She  that  of  late  had  this  good  Prince  betraid ,

, And  had  to  him  fo  great  a danger  wrought ;

Her  horfc  that  heard  whereother  horfes  naid.

Came  to  the  noife,as  nature  had  them  taught,
Againft  herwill  flic  wanting  force  tofway  him.

And  having  loft  thercines  wherewith  to  flay  Inra.

32

Theheaftly  wretch  cri’d  help,and  out  alas,

While  thus  her  hoifc  ran  over  fields  and  lands,

But  when  the  Scottijh  Prince  faw  who  fhe  was.

And  how  flic  thither  came  he  underftands,

He  gave  God  thanks  drat  fo  had  brought  to  pafle.

To  give  thofe  two  at  once  into  bis  hands.

Which  two  for  their  mifdeeds  above  the  reft,

He  had  great  caufe  to  malice  and  deteft.

And  after  (le  had  made  a little  paufe,

Vnto  his  fervants  turning  thus  he  faid,

S'usyOdriclie  fliall  not  die,altbough  by  lawcs
Hisfaftdefervesno  Icfle  uprightly  waid.

For  fith  he  faith  affeflion  was  the  caufe.

Content  I am,on  love  the  fault  be  laid,

The  fin  to  which  a man  by  love  is  driven.

So  much  the  rather  ought  to  be  forgiven.

34

The  forccofftrong  affeflion  bath  ere  this
Diftempci*d,ycaand  fomtime  overthrown
A wiferanda  ftaiderhead  then  his,

Asisiomc  by  minccxpeticncc  known.

And  that  herein  he  did  his  duty  miffc,

I muft  confcftcjthc  fault  was  part  mine  own.

That  gave  to  him  fuch  charge  and  did  no:  knovV
How  quickly  flaming  heatcan  kindle  tow.

35

Then  to  the  caitive  Odricl^e  thus  he  fpake.

Here  I forgive  thec,and  do  thecenlarge,

But  yet  the  penance  I will  have  thee  take,

IsthtSjto  takcthis woman  in  thy  charge.

And  fiveare  to  methou  flialt  her  not  forfake
For  one  whole  yeare,but  this  thine  oath  difcharge
And  that  thou  fiialtifany  would  offend  her.

Do  thy  dcver,and  unto  death  defend  her.

K i Thii


SmmcK


Sentttset',


Oiric\t

mfkmttn.


THE  XXIIII.  BOOXE


This  was  the  puniHjmentPn  him  hclaiJ,

Ami  certainly  this  fame  had  been  enow,

If  (o  the  civcumftancc  were  duly  waigh’d.

And  Oderict^r  had  right  pnform’d  his  vow.

For  why  5 lb  many  niCn  flic  had  betraid.

And  doncfuch  linnesev’n  from  her  youth  till  nc.v\'>
‘1  Im  wdicrcfocte  they  had  together  tiavxl’d.

In  hci  defence  he  mult  at  lall  be  gravcl’d.


And  further  gave  them  {'erfed  information.
Android  eachcircumftanceat  their  reque  ft.*
Zetbino  ftandeth  Hill  in  admiration,

And(as  the  manner  is)himfclfc  he  blcH,

And  with  great  griefcof  mind  and  lamentation,
Hetakcsthefvvoid  and  armour,and  the  reft.

And  Ifahclla-  hclpcth  them  to  gather.

And  lo  they  lay  them  on  a heap  together.


37

Thus  Ztrhhi  let  tins  wicked  couple  go,

And  thinks  fufficicntly  to  plagucthcm both,
r,ut  Iwcaies  if  ever  he  did  hap  to  know.

That  he  therein  fliculd  violate  his  troth.

His  flelh  (liould  ferve  as  feeding  for  the  crow,

A lit  reward  for  Inch  as  break  their  oath  •

Thus  went  tins  honeft  couple  thence  together.
Lurking  in  corncrs,wandring  here  and  thither,

38

J3ut  what  in  th’endofthefc  fame  two  became,

Iknow  not.and  mine  authordoth  not  write,

I oncly  heard  arpcech,orflyingfamc.

That  when  they  once  were qnitc  from  Zerbins  fi^h
O /ru7{f(to  fiiuti  the  quancls  and  the  fliame.

That  by  her  company  on  himmightlight)

Did  hang  her  iipjand  after  in  fhortfpatc,

Abnonio  made  him  run  tlicfclfc  fame  race.

39

The  Prince  thatfainc  fome  tidings  would  have  heard.
Of  that  Earle  Pa/Lidine,whn  tothcr  day,

Fouglu  hand  to  hand  wiih  lofty  Mandricard,

Vntill  his  raiDldTc  hnrfe  bare  him  away.

Doth  tiavcll  cn  his  way  to  Paru  ward.

Though  fairc  and  foftjand  lingring  by  the  way.

And  his  twofervarts  he  doth  lend  before.

And  kept  with  him  his  Lady, and  no  more.

40

They  rod  cnot  fane  but  that  they  fou  nd  t he  cave.

And  that  fame  plcafant  arbor  and  thefpring.

At  which  MedoTo  us’d  fuch  fport  to  have.

With  that  fnirc  daughter  of  the  Indian  king  •

Where  flic  their  names  together  did  ingiavc,

All  ti’d  with  truclovc  knots(a  wondrous  thing)
They  look,and  fee  the  lloncs,thc  words  and  letters
All  cut  and  mangled  in  a thoiifand  fitters.

41

And  as  they  mus’d  bercon,thcy  might  efpic
Orlandos  armour,and  bisfamousblade,
Hight23urin7aiwon  the  ground  to  lie,

That  fword  that  firft  forHe<?or  had  been  made.
They  fa  w where  Brigliador  was  feeding  by
Vpon  the  gialTc  amid  the  plcafant  fiiade :

Thisfiaht  did  make  them Wth  exceeding  fad.

Yet  little  did  they  deem  that  th’Eaiie  was  mad.

4*

Had  t hey  but  feen  one  little  drop  of  blood ,

They  would  have  furely  thought  he  had  been  llaine.
But  while  in  this  moll  carefull  doubt  they  Hood,
Behold  there  came  a country  filly  fwainc,

Tiiat  with  no  littlcfpced  ranthrough  the  wood.

And  reap’d  the  mad  mans  fury  with  great  paiue ;

He  told  them  how  a man  beftraught  offenfes,

Had  done  thefe outrages  and  great  offences.


4a

This  while  by  hap  came  by  faiie  Tiordebrge,

U'ho  (as  I tcid  bcMrc)with  penfive  heart
Went  to  feek  out  her  loved  Lord  and  Liege,

I mean  Orlandos  friend, King  Brandinurt,

Who  leaving  Paris  in  the  wofull  liege.

To  feek  Orlando  dii  from  thence  depavr.

Till  Atlant  to  that  cage  him  did  intice,

Wliich  he  had  fiaiir’d  by  magical!  device.

4S

The  which  inchantment  being  notv  defeated.

By  good  olfos  value  and  his  skill.

And  all  the  knights  as  I before  repeated,

1 At  liberty  togo  which  way  they  will.

King  Brandi  mart  much  in  mind  he  fretted,

'To  think  how  long  in' vainc  he  Iiad  Hoed  Hill,

Back  unto  Przr/i  ward  hiscoprfc  he  tiirri’d.

Yet  milling  her  tliewav  that  he  rctuvri’d.

Thus(as  ! faid)fairc  Fiordeliege  by  chance.

Saw  much  of  that  which  hap’d,and  heaid  thercH,
How  that  fame  wouhy  Palladineof  France,

With  inward griefe of  mind,and  thought  opprcH,
Or  by  fome  other  great  and  flrangc  mifchancc.

Went  like  a man  with  fome  ill  fpiitepoHeH,

And  flic  likewife  enquiring  of  the  peafant.

Heard  all  the  circumHance,a  tale  iinpleafanr.

47

Zcrhhio  being  farre  from  any  town,

Hangs  all  Orlandos  armour  on  a Pine,
lukc  CO  a Pcnon,and  left  any  clown
Or  peafant  vilclliould  take  a thing  lb  fine.

He  writes  upon  the  tree, lee  none  take  down
This  armour  of  Orlando  Pal/adine ;

As  who  11)  ould  fay, if  any  man  attempt  it,

Orlando  would  ere  long  taule  hi ai  repent  it.

. 48

And  having  brought  this  worthy  W'Oik  to  end.

And  ready  now  to  take  hisjrnirncy  hence.

Fierce  Mandricard  hapt  thither  to  defeend.

And  when  hefaw  thctree,heask*d  ofwhence
Thofe  weapons  were?  which  known, he  doth  intend
To  take  away  good  7>urindana  thence.

He  Heps  unto  the  tree, and  takes  the  fword.

Nor  fo  comcntjhc  adds  this  fpitefull  word.

49

Ah  fir(quoth  he)this  hap  doth  make  me  glad.

My  claime  unto  this  fword  is  not  unknown.

And  though  before  I no  polTellion  had.

Yet  now  1 lawfully  feize  on  mine  own?

‘ Alas  poor  fool,and  doth  hefainehimmad  i
And  hath  away  his  fivord  and  armour  thrown,
Becaufe  he  was  not  able  to  maintainc  it.

And  was  afeard  that  I by  foiccwould  gaiac  it  ?

Zcrbbl9


At  tht  hurl-
a'J  */  TIjughu
tf  lie  ordtr,
or  great  per-
Jemjthey
hangup  their
armesyVtth  a
ftrard  and  m
btadftttu


MmAtictri.


Titrdedtgt.


A^otfe  dif'
Jt!Ui,ed  thu
inchamment
Bfiky  a:.


OF  ORLANDO  FYKIOSO.


5©


T!n  cerilit

Mandtiftrl
<md  Z:r'Aa»»


SimiUi


Simil*.


}9Z


57


Zciblno  cric:h  ouf,  vv'n.u?  pc.icf  for  fliamc,

T.ikc  not  hisf\voril,or  think  not  1 will  beats  if.

If  by  the  coat  of  Hdtur  fo  you  camcj
You  Aslc  it, and  unwoitby  ate  to  vvcaic  it :
Tuni(>)Uoil)  the  PayM)l  will  bcarcthat  blame,
j*.sfot  your  i.bteaton’ij’.cio  not  think  1 fcare  it :

1 hus  tonesdhatpaiilwcrsjtothcrsniavpreplying

Made  them  to  fall  to  lermcsof  flatdcfying.

Ard  cither  flicwing  fipnes  cf  plains  boflilitiCj
Prepares  the  toiher  fiercely  to  invade,

Zerbino  with  his  sltill  and  great  agilitie,

His  patty  good  againll  the  Pagan  made.

And  voided  all  t he  blowes  with  much  facilitte.
Though  havinggreatdifvantageinthe  blade,

And  III  that  armour  maflic  lb  arid  Utong,

That  in  tiraespaft  to  Hc6lor  did  belong.

52

Look  how  a Grewnd  that  findsa  flurdy  Boie,

Amid  the  field  far  firayingftom  the  heard.

Doth  nan  about, behind  him  and  before,

Bccaule  of  his  fliarp  tusks  he  is  afeard .

So  Zerbin  that  had  Teen  oft  heretofore
That  blade, and  of  the  force  thereof  had  heard.

With  hccdfull  eye  to  fliun  the  blowes  Ire  watched,
Becaufe  he  was  la  weapons  overmatched.

53

Thus  warily  tliis  worthy  Prince  did  fight.

And  though  by  hccdfull  skill  he  leaped  oft
The  furious  blowesof  tlnsy^rrarMtiknight,

Yet  lo  at  laft  one  biow  capie  from  aloft.

And  fo  heavy  did  alight.

As  piciccd  through  the  hard  unto  the  fofe,

A finger  dccp,aud  went  in  length  a fpan,

Down  from  the  place  where  firft  the  wound  began.

54

The  Prince  fo  earnefl:  was,bc  felt  no  fmart.

Yet  ran  the  blood  out  oftbe  brcftaniainc,

A nd  of  his  cut  ats  all  the  former  part

With  ctimfon  ftreamcof  blocd  it  did  diflainc  ;

So  have  Ifeen  her  hand  that  to  mine  heart
Hath  becna  caufeof  angtiifh  and  much  paine.
When  file  a purple  Team  or  flower  hath  drawn.

In  fiber  kirtlc,or  in  fleeve  of  lawn,

55

The  wound  was  great,but  yet  did  greater  (Tiow,
Which  figlu  faire  IfabeUa  much  amated,

The  Prince  that  feemed  not  the  fame  to  know.
With  force  locrcafcd  rather  then  abated,

Vpon  the  Pagans  brow  gave  fuch  a blow.

As  would(uo  doubt) have  made  him  checkt  5c  matcd»
Savcthat(as  i to  you  before  rchearfl)

His  armour  was  not  eaCc  to  bepierft.

i6

The  blow  was  fuch  ascaufed  him  to  reel.

And  on  his  ftyrups  ftaggringly  he  flood.

Had  not  his  armour  been  of palling  fleel.

The  blow  would  fine  have  entredto  the  blood.

The  grievous  paine  that  he  thereof  did  feel
Did  put  him  in  fo  fierce  a raging  mood.

So  that  for  all  Zerhinos  skill  and  Height,

He  wounded  him  in  places  fer'n  or  eight.


Which  when  his  loving  JfahcHa  fav?,

She  went  te)^Doralice,ar.d  herdoth  pray,
Thcfuryofhci  husband  to  withdraw.

And  joynewith  her  to  p.irtthcbloudyfiay.

Who  both  becaufe  fhe  was  in  leave  tv^I  aw,

Left  yetilic  Prince  hctfpoufc  iml.'ir.|^Ci  may.

And  for  of  nature  kind  flic  vvas  and  meek,

Or  that  good  motion  fhe  doth  not  miflikc.

53

Thus  thofc  two  Ladicsthis  fierce  batrcll  parted.

In  which  the  Prince  received  many  a wound.
Though  bcing(as  hewas)moft  valiant  hearted.

He  never  gave  the  Pagan  inch<  fground  ;

From  thence  cMcn  .ouplc  prcfcntly  departed.

Fierce  Mandriccvriic'  Pagan  camp  was  hound.

To  Pur/i  ward  thclbincf,bur  driv’nto  flay,

By  rca'fon  cf  his  bleeding  by  the  way.

59

Dame  F tor dcliege  that  Aood  this  while  aloof,

Andfaw  how  xMand’ticard prevailed  had.

And  how  the  Piince  had  fought  with  evil!  proof.
Departed  thence  all  forrowfull  and  fad,
RevilingAfauJnMJ'dwith  juft  reproof,

T hat  of  this  evill  gotten  fword  was  glad,
Andwiflicu  thather  husband  Brandimart ,

Had  prefent  been  to  take  Zerbims  part,

60

But  as  flic  naverd  homward  to  the  camp.

She  fi w the  noble  PaUadine  of  F ranee y
Noi  like  hiinrelfe,but  of  another  ftamp,
Befmear’dand  nak’d  asantickswomtodancc5
Quite  wasextinguifhed  the  fliiniraglamp.

Of  vertue  blight  that  did  his  name  advance  :

This  fight  in  Fiordeliege  much  fotrow  bred.

But  tell  me  now  how  good  Zerbino  Ipcd.

61

Who  on  his  way  with  painfull  fleps  proceeding.

With  Ifabtlia  oncly  and  no  more.

His  former  taken  hurts  ftill  frcflily  bleeding,

Which  now  with  cold  were  ftiffc  and  waxed  fore.
And  yet  thisgriefe  in  him  the  reft  exceeding,

To  think  that  fword  of  which  I fpake  before.
Should  maiigev  him,bc  by  a F iirl-y  pofTeft,

Ifay  this  griev’d  him  more  then  all  the  reft.

6z

Now  gan  thedrcadfull  pangsof  death  aflaile  him.

So  great  a ftreame  of  blood  bis  wound  had  drain’d.
His  eyes  were  dim,!iiEfpccth  began  tofiilchim.
Strong  hart  toyeeld  to  weak  limbs  was  conftrain’di
What  can  poore /fabeUado  but  waile  him  ?

She  blam’d  the  hcav’ns  and  fates  that  had  ordain’d
Her  to  cfcapp  fuch  dangas  and  fuch  harmes.

And  now  to  have  her  deare  die  in  her  aimes.


Tite<ur»ti  ra
Maadncert  i
itittu

■jifteffc,  M


7/f  ritumat
fo  T-toritbe^e
aui  Ortanda  j
tnh,inib€  I
39.  ,

juft.  i


2erW«o  though  he  Team  could  draw  his  breath.

Yet  hearing  her  lamenting  infuchfafliion,.

Dothopc  hisclofed  lips,and  thus  he  faith,

Both  fhewing  thcn,and  moving  much  compafllon;
Somight  l(myde3tclovc)ev’naf'rcrdcath,

Bcdcare  totheeas  Idofcclgreat  paflion.

To  think  when  as  my  death  fi 6 hence  lhall  reave  me,


Alone  in  wo  and  danger  1 fliall  leave  thee.


R 4


Wight


I9i


THE  XXIIII.  BOOKE


^4


Might  I hare  left  thee  in  fomc  fafer  place,

1 Hiould  efteem  my  death  a blcffcd  hap.

And  that  the  heav’ns  had  giv’n  me  fpeciall  grace,
To  end  my  life  in  thy  beloved  lap.

Now  grieves  It  me  to  think  of  thine  hard  cafe,

In  what  a world  of  woes  I thee  fliall  wiap.

When  I muft  dic,and  leave  thee  here  alone.

And  none  to  help  thy  haim,or  heaie  thy  moMC


7*


•s


To  thisthewofu!l/yate//rcplies,

With  watted  eyes, and  heart  finpriz’d  with  anguifii.
Her  face  to  his,and  joyning  her  faire  eyes
To  his  that  like  a wither’d  rofedid  languilli.

No  thought(faid  nic)my  dearein  thee  arife
For  mCjfor  know  1 neither  do  nor  can  wilh
Thee  to  futviue,!  will  be  thine  forever.

Life  could  not,and  death  fliall  not  us  dillcver.

6<S

{tract  hath  fooncrfhallthy  breath  thy  breft  forfake.


^Ut^ttotbii
$t,  me  a
Ifarttm
mma  rafit
faturitr  vie,

’uid  mtrv
'lurai


But  I will  follow  thee  I care  not  whither,

Griefc  or  this  fword  of  me  an  end  fhall  make.

And  if  fome  ftrangcr  after  fhall  come  hither,

I hopcof  usfuch  pitie  he  will  take,

To  lay  our  bodies  in  one  grave  together :
Thisfaid,about  hisneck  her  arms  fheclafp’d.

And  drawes  the  fainting  breath  that  oft  he  gafp’d

67

The  Prince  inforcing  his  forefeebled  voice,

Saith  thus,I  thee  conjure  my  foie  delight.

By  that  dearc  love  that  made  me  firft  thy  choice.

And  thee  from  native  foilc  to  take  thy  flight.

If  ever  in  my  love  thou  didft  rejoyce,

If  to  command  thee  1 have  any  right.

That  thou  ftilllive(as  long  as  dod  fhall graunt  thee)
And  not  defpaire  how  ever  fortune  daunt  thee.

68

Th’almighty  God  from  danger  and  from  ill
Hath  hitherto,and  will(I  ttufl)  thee  fare ;

Ev’n  as  he  fent  that  noble  E^rle  to  kill
Thofccaitives  that  did  keep  thee  in  their  cave.

And  fav’d  thee  from  the  Bisliins  wicked  will,

Fnft  having  thecpieferv’d  from  fait  fea  wave.

Live  then  my  dcare,and  tiuft  in  him  above.

And  while  you  live  be  mindfull  of  my  love.

69

Thcfc  latter  words  his  lips  had  fcantly  part.

When  death  unto  hishcart  was foftly  crept  j
And  as  the  lamp  goeth  out  when  oyle  doth  wall.

So  quietly  the  noble  Zerbin  llcpt :

What  tongue  can  tell  how  fore  fhe  was  agafl.

How  flielamented,wailcd,mourn’d  and  wept.

To  her  own  eyes  and  faire  haire  doing  force.

When  as  flie  faw  her  deare  a fenflcfTc corfc  ?

70

And  griefc  had  fet  her  in  fo  great  a rage.

With  Ztrbins  fword  flic  thinks  an  end  to  make
Of  her  own  life, her  forrow  to  affwage,

Ncglcfling  thofc  laft  words  Zerirne  fpakc  :

But  lo,a  certaine  faintlikc  pei  fonage.

That  fword  from  hand  .that  thought  from  heart  doth
A certame  godly  hermit  and  devout,  ftake.

That  was  by  hap  abiding  thereabout.


Who  came  and  faid,oh  damfcll  leave  dcfpairei
M ans  nature  weak, and  womens  fex  it  fraile,
Fcarchim  that  lules  both  heav’n,and  earth, and  aiic.
Who  faith  the  word, and  his  word  cannot  failc.

That  thofc  that  unto  him  for  help  repaire.

And  put  their  tiufl  in  him.fh  all  never  quailc:

Then  fliew’d  he  her, to  prove  his  faying  true,
Examples  out  of  Scriptures  old  and  new.

7^

Of  faintlike  women  that  in  time  of  old,

T heir  lives  in  prayer  and  chafliiy  had  fpent  ^

And  further  to  the  damfcll  faire  he  told ,

And  prov*d  and  fhew’d  by  rcafons  evident.

That  worldly  things  arc  vaine  and  have  no  hold.
Alone  in  God  is  joy  and  tr  ue  content:

In  finc,hc  makes  to  her  this  godly  motion.

Her  future  life  to  fpend  in  true  devotion.

73

His  godly  fpcccb  by  help  of  hcav’nly  grace,

Powr’d  m her  heart  by  high  divine  infufion.
Wrought  fuch  c£fcft,aDd  found  fo  great  a place.

She  ccaft  to  feek  or  work  her  own  confufion  .*

But  leaving  the  profelTionof  her  race,

Profeft  hcrfclfc  a Chriflai  in  conclufion ;

She  gave  hcrfclfc  topraicrand  pure  divinity.

And  vow*d  to  God  her  life  and  her  virginity.

74

Yctdid  (Iicnot  remove  out  ofher  thought.

The  fervent  love  Zerbino\\zd  her  born,

But  by  the  hermits  help  the  corfc  flic  brought,

And  thinks  it  fin  to  leave  it  fo  forlorn.

And  in  fomc  village  thereabout  flic  bought
Sweet  balmcs  to  £11  the  flcfli  all  cut  and  torn,

Then  in  a Cypres  coffin  fhe  dotheiefe  it.

Not  being  yctrcfolv’d  where  to  difpofc  it.

7?

That  aged  fire, though  being  wife  and  flaid.

Yet  would  not  nuft  in  his  own  flay  fo  well.

To  carry  fuch  a faire  and  goodly  maid
To  fojourn  with  him  in  his  little  cell,

*Twcrc  perill  grcat(thusto  himfelfe  he  faid)

That  fire  and  ftraw  fliould  nigh  together  dwell,
Wherefore  he  means  to  Province  her  to  caric.

And  there  to  place  her  in  a moncflaric.

76

But  as  he  thitherward  with  Isbell  went^

And  by  the  way  devoutly  did  her  teach,
Allthingsunto  religion  pertinent.

And  of  the  fame  moft  learnedly  did  preach  ?

Behold  a Pagan  fierce  with  foiilcintcnt.

This  purpofc  and  their  journey  dothimpcach.

As  1 fliall  fliew  morclargely  afterward.

Now  back  I muft  return  to  Mandricard.


77


Who  having  ended  that  fame  cruell  fight,

In  whtch  the  worthieft  Prince  alive  wasflaine.
Soon  after  by  a fhady  bank  did  light,

'And  turn’d  hishotfc  a grazing  on  the  plaine.
Dame  Doraltce  in  whom  he  took  delight.
Alone  with  him  in  that  placcdid  rcmainc.
When  looking  fodainly  by  chance  aiidc,

Ab  armed  knight  come  toward  them  fhe  fpidc.


Ltt\  in  the
bi(lt,ty  tftbii
btt!{t.


Thttt  u Ml
minttoM
madt  of  her
marriage  %
and  there ftrt
beefufpejith
Zetbint  (be.
ing  a vertu-
tuiCbnfii-
an)Uftbera
virffu,
tbtugb  e^m-
fid  to  her
pivraelj.


SMiitert


Tieturtuiia

Jfabell  in
the  s8  btoi(li


Sbs


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


IP5


9imUi


Stnmc*^


SiinUt,


78

SLc  gucftjbut  yet  flic  knew  not  by  the  view.

Who  It  might  bc,iintill  flicfpi'd  her  page
That  came  with  him, then  certainly  (he  knew
*Twas  Radomontti'ull  of  revenge  and  rage.
Wherefore  unto  her  knight  flie  nearer  drew.

And  faid(ray  Loid)mine  honour  I dare  gage.

That  yon  is  Rodomont  mine  ancient  lover.

Who  tliinks  by  fight  from  you  me  to  recover.

79

Look  how  the  Falcon  in  the  aire  doth  mount.

When  niecfpiesa  Bittcror  a Hern,

So  when  thi  Prince  efpied  Rodomount,

And  by  his  baft  his  fury  did  difccin ,

Like  one  that  made  of  conquelf  full  account,
Heftartcth  up  with  vifagegrim  and  ftern  :

Straight  arm’d  and  hors’d  he  is,his  foe  to  meet,

In  hand  the  iemcs,in  ftyrups  arc  bis  feet.

80

W’ben  as  the  tone  the  tothcr  came  fo  neare;

As  each  might  hearken  what  the  tother  (aid,

¥ic):cc  Rodomont  fpakelowd  as  he  might  hearc.

With  threatning  gefturc  both  of  hand  and  head  ;
And  faid.be fine  lie  make  thee  buy  itdeare,

T hat  with  a fliort  vaine  plcafure  haft  been  led.

To  do  to  one  fo  fouleand  open  wrong.

That  can  and  will  it  wreak  bn  thee  ere  long.

81

The  Tartar  Prince  that  for  him  little  car’d.

Made  anfwer  thtis.in  vaine  you  roc  do  threat:

Poore  beyts  with  words,or  women  may  be  fear’d.
Not  I that  fight  as  willingly  as  cat :

Prove  when  you  plcafe.I  am  not  unpicpat’d,

Atany  time  for  any  warlike  feat.

On  hotfcjon  foot,in  ficld,or  in  the  lift,

1 fliall  bcrcady ; try  me  when  you  lift.

82

Thus  words  bred  wrath,and  wrath  engendred  blowes,
And  blowes  inaeas’d  their  fliarp  avenging  will,
Ev’n  as  the  wind  that  firft  but  calmly  blowes,

But  after  more  and  more  incteafing  ftilf.

At  laftit  trees  and  houfes  overt  hiowes,

And  Teas  and  lands  with  tempeft  it  doth  fi  II :

So  crucll  grew  the  fight  them  two  between,

Whofe  match  .Tiight  hardly  in  the  world  bcfccn.


85

But  asaftrong and  jtiflJy  temper’d  bow
Of  Pymount  ftce>,thc  more  you  do  it  bend,

Vpon  recoilc  doth  give  the  bigger  blow,

And  doth  with  greater  force  the  quarrcll  fend,
Ev’nfo the  Sar\an  king  thatftoop’d  fo  low.

As  highly  to  revenge  irdoth  intend.

And  to  acquit  himfclfc  of  thisdifgiace.

He  ftiikcth  at  the  Tartar  Princes  face.

86

So  fierce  he  ftiakc  in  this  fo  furious  mood.

An  inch  or  little  more  above  his  fight.

That  favc  thofc  itmzo  of  HdJ  or  was  fo  good,

No  doubt  that  blow  had  finifliM  all  the  fight.

But  fo  afton’d  thcrcwiih  the  Tartar  ftood.

He  could  not  tell  if  it  were  noon  or  night ;

And  while  in  this  amazement  he  abode.

The  tother ecafethnot  tolayciiload.

87

The  Tartars  horfe  that  (aw  the  glittering  blade.

That  Rodomont  nhoot  his  head  Co  toft.

Did  ftart  afide,and  with  a turn  he  made,

Refeu’d  his  maftci'jfofc  to  his  own  coft;

Down  with  the  blow  fils  this  unluckic  jade.

And  with  his  ft arting  he  his  life  hath  loft  ;

To  ward  his  head  hevvanced  Hefferj  fliield.

And  thcreforcdcad  he  tumblcth  on  the  field

Sg

Now  c,-»mehis  mafterto  himfclfcagaine.

Inflam’d  with  greater  anger  then  before,

Tofee  his  horfe  fo  pitifully  flaine,

But  Rodomont  foibcarcshim  ne’er  the  more.

But  fpurtson  him,and  thinks  with  fury  mainc.

To  bcai e him  down.but  he  (b  fttongly  boic
The  pufli,and  thruft  withall  Frontino  back.

He  made  hismafter  glad  to  leave  his  back.

*9

Thus  now  with  minds  more  alien’d  fioni  all  peace.

In  eager  fort  the  combat  fs  renew’d,

To  ftrike.totbinft  each  otherdoth  notccafe,

In  hope  with  bloud  their  fwords  to  have  embrew’d.
Fell  rancor, wrath  and  pride  do  flill  increale.

And  death  ofone  or  both  muft  haveenfew’d.

Ere  cither  ofthem  would  from  thence  have  darted.
Had  not  a ccitaincmcircngcr  them  parted.

90


Another
fhrtfe »»

him

thm^e  i$
nt^bti<u  iht
Speitiard
ihat  hed  but

enieyttha-

•vingthtto-

thtr

»Ut  »l  tCHHUt

faid,  "Sutnut
Nacbet.


Their  hearts  were  ftout,fb  weretheir  bodies  ftrong,
Dcfirc  to  win  in  both  alike  was  great,

Onedoth  maintainc,  tother  would  venge  his  wrong.
And  love  thcirfuiy  equal  ly  doth  wher,

1 n cqua ! 1 pci fc  t he  fi  gh t end  u red  long,

Nor  each  of  tother  any  gainc  could  ger,

Bincach  of  them  fo  firmly  kept  his  ground^

As  if  each  inch  thereof  had  coft  a pound.

84

Among  an  hundred  blowes  the  Ejrrar  fmit.

Of  which  fmall  hurt  to  Rodomont  did  rife.

Yet  one  at  la  ft  fo  heavily  did  hit
Vpon  his  hclmctjovcr  both  his  eyes  ;

Htsfenfes  all  weic  (o-am.nz’d  with  it.

He  thought  he  fiw  more  ftanc*  then  arc  in  skies.
And  ahnoft  down  he  was  ev’n  in  her  figlit,
Forwlioiii  he  raft  began  thisaucU  fight.


^ pbttfe  If
fbiktfire  aut
af  hit  tyety
M»d  tamale
him  fit  fttft
a naaat.


One  that  had  travcl’d  all  sibout  the  coft.

To  feck  them  out, to  ask  their  lie  Ip  and  aid.

To  raife  the  ficge,that  by  the  Chnjlcn  holf,

Vnto  the of  Agr am. lilt  waslaid  :

Yet  though  became  in  peace, and  ekeinpoft,

To  fpcak  to  them  at  firft  he  was  affiaid.

And  though  his  office  were  fufficient  warrant.

Yet  to  thcmfelves  he  dares  not  do  his  arrant.

9 1

But  feeing  'Doralice, to  her  he  told.

How  AgramantjMarfilir,9tordylaH,

And  ethers  more,likc  men  pent  up  in  hold.

Were  in  gfcstdangcrto  hckild  or  tane.
Wherefore  he  \^i^Kth  her  for  tounfoLl
Thus  much  to  them,th.itfoughr  each  01  hers  bane;
And  to  perfwade  them  to  fq  good  accord.

As  they  might  go  to  help  ihcii  foveraigne  Lord .


ijtS


THE  XXIIII.  BOOKE


9»


She  that  a woman  was  of  pafCng  fpritc.

And  knew  that  neither  of  them  would  offend  her,
Stept  them  between, aud  charg’d  them  ftav  the  fightj
As  they  their  honour  and  her  Tore  did  tenaer,

A nd  help  their  king  that  is  in  wofull  plight.

And  cna  this  fray  begun  of  caufe  fb  flender.

At  lead  deferfo  long  to  trie  this  quarrel!.

Till  Agramant  their  king  were  out  of pciill .

When  (lie  thus  much  to  them  declared  had.

Then  doth  the  melTengcr  declare  the  reft.

And  other  ftiong  perfwadons  he  doth  add.

And  doth  expound  to  them  their  kings requeft,
Allcdging  that  their  abfence  made  him  fad.

That  butthcyhelp,thc  camp  would  bediftreft.

And  that  if  they  to  lefcuc  him  neglcded,

A piefent  ruine  were  to  be  expefied.

94

With  his  report  and  w«th  her  ftiong  perfwafion.

The  haidy  knights  the  combatdo  defer.

Till  Agramant  be  freed  from  this  invafion.

And  all  the  Chrifien  forces  moved  are.


Thus  of  this  friendly  truce  (lie  iscccadon.

That  did  was  cauier  of  their  deadly  warj-
To  her  they  biiidthemfclvesby  folcmncotb.
That  umill  then  they  will  be  quiet  both.

95

There  ^i/cord  was  and  Prrde,and  what  they  tr  ay.
They  do  this  league  to  interrupt  and  break,

But  at  that  time  Love  bate  fo  great  a fway,

That  to  withftand  him, they  were  both  too  weak:
In  vaine  it  was  to  argue  and  gainfay.

When  Once  dame  the  woid  did  (peak,

By  herpeiTwadon  firmly  they  agreed.

Like  friends  upon  their  journey  to  proceed.

One  onely  want  there  was,that  let  them  fore.

Which  was  thzt  Mandricardos  hoifc  was  dead,
Butlo  ev’n  then  came  thither  Brygtiadoret
That  (Ince  his  mafters  madnelTc  there  had  fed,
Full  glad  the  Prince  of  Tartar  wastheicfoic.

Of  fuch  a horfe  fo  quickly  to  be  fped  :

But  lead  my  talc  with  tedioufnelTc  moleft  you,

I widi  you  lay  afidc  the  book|and  reft  you.


Moral!.


In  the  great  offence  of  Odenke, and  the  notable  dementy  of  Zerbino  in  pardoning  the  fame,  we  may  note  in  the  one
thegreat  frailtie  of  men  in  offending  (fpeciatiy  inthu  ((indof flejhly  concupifience,)  m tit  other  a notable  magnanimity
aiwell  oi  mertyinforgivinghim  : For  that  (indeed)  is  true  clemency  in  a Prince, teforgive  that  offence  that  is  com-
tnittedagainfi  hisprivate(at  they  callit)  that  is, againfi  his  own  per fon, rather  then  that  which  isdoneagainfi  thelaw,
for  that  is  rather  partiality  and  inju/i  ice, then  clemency.  Secondly, we  may  ehferve  both  in  Zerbino  <x«dlftbclla,(j  no-
table example  of  gratitude  towardOi\Ando,firfi  ingathering  his  di^erjed  armour,  next  in  that  Zerbino  fought  with
Mandricardo  in  defence  of  Orlandos  fwordsin  whi^  conoid  he  receives  his  deaths  wound, and  though  indeed  aU  that  is
told  of  this  couple. tendeth  to  a tragicaU  end.yet  is  it  withaB fet  down  by  my  author  in  a fort,  to  move  fo  great  compaf-
pon.that  it  femes  aU  that  read  it  are  as  it  were  inlovewith  them,and  lament  their  fo  unfortunate  end  i which  hath
made.me  fay  fometimes(inJport)te  feme  of  mine  honourable  friends,  that  if  I could  without  wronging  mine  author,  t
would  Jurely  have  faved  their  lives,  or  given  them  a mote  fortunate  end  .•  though  ( to  fay  true ) fith  an  end  is  of  necejftty
due  to  all  manlfnd.what  more  honourable  death  can  a Prince  have,  then  fy  awoundin  fight, JpectaBy  far  a good  quar-
reU?  what  more  fweet  death.then  in  her  beloxedarmes  whom  he  was  betrothed  to,  and  intended  to  marrte  ? what  more
happy  reward.thenfamc  and  love  in  this  world.and  heaven  in  the  next  ? Further,  though  Ifabella  were  ajter  flaine  ly
Rodomont  in  his  drunhenneffe.as  is  notedin  the  xxix.boo^e.yet  that  notable  title  that  is  here  given  to  her  (the  martyr
of  chaftity)  maizes  her  fo  famous,  and  her  vertue  fo  admirable,  as  fhe  could  never  have  wifi’t  a better  end,  ijjbc  had  li-
ved as  long  Oi  Hecuba.  Wherefore  if  it  be  true  that  Ovid  /aid  of  Cadmus,

Scilicet  ult  ima  femper

Expeftanda  dies  homini,diciquc  bcatus
Ante  obitum  nemo,  fupremaque  funeta  debet.

In  Englijh  thus.

Our  onely  dying  day  and  end  doth  JIjow
If  that  a man  have  happy  been  or  no.

Then(I  fay)  by  the  death  of  the fi  two,  though  in  Jhew  unfortunate,  yet  in  deed  mofi  glorious,  they  may  be  caUed  happy.
Tafl  ly.for  the  end  oj  this  moraU,  we  may  tal^e  one  JpeciaU  oofervation  of  great  integrity  in  the  religious  man,  that  con-
verted her  to  the  faith,  andyet  afterward  would  not  truft  himfelfe  alone  with  her , lor  in  the  flejhly  conjiilfs  and  temp-
tations,the  onely  way  to  conquer, is  to  play  the  coward  and  run  away, and  thus  much  for  tie  moraU.

The  examples  of  the  vertuuuswomenthat  are  prai/edby  tie  hermit  (though  not  named)  in  tie  72  flaffe  of  thisbool^c,
are  m.T.ty , rente  din  the  Script  are  it  fife;  as  namely  the  blejfed  virgin  Mary,  Aiv.se, and  Magdalen,  a/lwhichbetool^e
themfrlvctmo/l  devoutly  to  the  fervice  oJ  God,  and  therefore  are  wertlyto  be  canonized  for  examples  of  chaflityand
^ealc  ofrcTgion.

Allegory.  fo.iaine  parting  of  the  fray  between  the  two  famous  rivals,  onely  upon  the  commandement  oj  Doralicc,  with

whom  they  were  both  exceedingly  inlove,  this  aliegoricaBy  is  fiippofedto  be  meant,  that  the  frorgejl  pajfions  that  are,
as  anger,  and  revenge, or  what  els  fever, are  oj'ten  ovcrmafredwiih  lave.

/MlufTon.  ’TlefpecchoflC3bc\htoZetbic\o.wiJhingto  die  at  the  fame  tnfl  ant  with  him,  alludes  to  the  wijh  of  good  Baacis

and  Idiilcmon.  Q^mam  cohcordcs  cgimus  aniios,

Auferat  bora  duos  cadem,ncc  conjiigis  unquam
Bulla  mex  vidcam,nec  (im  tumulandus  ab  illa.


Hiftorie.


Here  end  the  notes  of  thcxxiiij  b:okc.


XX


■Ctrriftf


OKALICE


» i

bV

Icni^wU  14m

ImlMi’g  Em

|i|M|ilH

1

*

1^)8


THE  XXV.  BOOKE,


m


.Ro^trofaVfth  (to  hii  fftme  artk  glory')

' Hts  fpoujes  Brother  ftbat  had  els  Been  dead  :
pyho  doth  recount  to  him  the  mofullflorie^

That /o great  danger  unto  him  had  bred  ;

His  coujin  cheares  them, though  himfelfe  veere  forie^
Next,  mornethej  arme  them  all  from  foot  to  head^
(food  Malaglge  and  Vivian  to  relieve^
f^hofe  ihratdome  did  their  kjufmen  greatly  grieve.


lovttni
omitUM,  iv»
firtmgftjp.
am.


Similti


fHc  ftrifc  is'grcat  thatg'iowes
in  youthen  mind.

When  honour  falls  at  vari-
ance with  affedion.

Nor  could  it  yet  be  known  or
well  defin’d,

■ Which  palfion  kcepcs  the
tother  in  fubjeftion,

^For  both  allure , both  do  out
judgements  blind.

And  both  corrupt  »hc  heart  with  ftrong  infedion  »
Yet  lo  fometimes  thclchui  tsprotur.e  our  weal,

Ev’n  as  one  poyfon  doth  another  heale.

a

For  here  you  fee  thefe  princes  that  of  late,

Strave  fiercely  cone  the  tether  tofubdue,

Agiecd  to  refpit  this  their  Hrarp  debate,

And  to  repaiie  unto  the  Turliijh  crew.

To  fuccour  Agramants  diftrelTed  ftate.

To  whom  they  ought  in  duty  to  be  true^

And  yet  herein  loveilaimcth  halfe  thepraife.

For  {lie  commanded  them  to  go  their  waics.


And  on  they  went  without  more  difagreeing,

Faire  Dornlicc  with  th^fc  her  Servants  twaine.
The  tone  tn  fuit,onc  in  pofleflion  being.

And  yet  as  then  in  concord  they  remaine :

At  lafi  they  came  unto  a place, where  feeing
Foure  knights  t hemfelvcs  did  Iblace  on  a plaine,
(Of  which  two  were  unartn’d,two  armour  bare)
Hie  eemmtib  them  a Lady  wasof  beauty  rare.

lothema-  • , «

l*iHe  in  ibe  With  thefe  a while  they  ftaid,but  who  thefe  were,
ifAtoie,  And  what  they  did, and  whither  then  they  went.


A little  while  to  tell  I do  forbearc.

For  to  Rogero  now  my  tale  is  meant.

Who  would  no  more  the  fliield  enchanted  bcare.

But  in  the  well  did  drown  it, with  intent

That  men  might  know  his  valiant  deeds  of  armes,

Weredoneby  force  of  vcrtue,notofcharme$.

He  fcant  had  gone  a mile  orlittle  more.

From  this  fame  well, but  that  he  met  a poft
From  Agramant  ,of  which  there  went  good  (lore.

The  CaptaVnes  to  recall  unto  the  hoft.

He  told  him  how  the  kiBg(befiegcd fore.

And  like(if  fuccour  come  not)tobclofi)
Commanded  him  as  bis  true  Lord  and  Liege,

To  eome  without  delay  toraifethe  ficgc.

6

Much  was  Rogero  with  the  meffage  mov’d.

And  di  verfe  pafiions  ftrave  within  his  mind.

He  faine  would  have  his  Princes  ficgc  remov’d.

Yet  loth  he  was  t<>  leave  his  love  behind ;

But  behisdoingpraifed  or  reprov’d.

He  was  fb  to  the  preftnt  caufc  inclin’d,

Firfl  with  bis  guide  he  goes  to  ftay  the  flaughter.

Of  him  that  bad  deflowr’d  Mar  pilot  daughter.

7

They  came  unto  the  place  an  houre  ere  night.

Where  this  fame  execution  (liould  be  done,

A caftlc  that  belong’d  to  Charlet  of  right.

But  late  the  Speinip)  king  the  fame  had  wonne,

And  kept  it  in  the  midft  of  France  by  might.

By  count’nancc  of  the  great  Trajanot  fonne  ;

Jio^cro  commeth  in,aad  nonedcni’d  him,
Bccaufcthcy  knew  the  damfcll  that  did  guide  him.

There


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


Thu  VKU

JbihitidtUtt
truda’Unuis
ir»thir,but
txcetdittg
iilit  'Bradu-
taatitin  ccM-

ItnaHCt,

Of  ibu  laoha
lOfbtMcrali


Siailta


Her*  you
tuay  bigm
the  tale  of
Fiordijpint,


t

Tii<rc  fiirt  he  faw  prepar’J  a flaming  fire,

III  which  they  meant  to  burnc  the  wofuIIyoujh,’i
He  thought  fo  fmall  a finne  did  not  require
Such  puninimcnt,no  moie  it dothin truth;
Butwhciihcmarkt  his  face  and  his  attire,

A nd  heard  and  fa  w i he  manner  of  his  ruth,

Now  fute  1 know  (quoth  he)  I am  not  I,

Or  thisis  fiiJi/dWa/i/  that  here  fiiould die.

9

Tis  certainc  fhe,T  fee  which  way  it  went.

Belike  while  1 at  yonder  caftle  ftaid.

She  hither  came  afore  me, with  intent
To  bring  vnto  the  pnfner  here  fame  aid.

For  which(poorefoule)her  fclffhould  now  be  flicnt,
Yet  I am  glad  and  very  well  apaid.

That  I am  hither  come  in  fogood  (cafbn.

To  fate  her  that  fliould  die  againft  all  jcafon.

1 o

And  even  with  that, mod  furioufly  he  flies
With  naked  fword  upon  the  gazing  rout.

Who  cverllandcth  in  his  way  he  dies.

With  fo  great  force  he  hurles  his  blade  about;

Then  ftraight  the  prifners  fetters  he  unties,

Norwas  theie  one  fohardicorfo  flout.

That  once  durft  make rcfiflance  or  forbid  it.

No  not  fo  much  as  aske  him  why  he  did  it.

1 1

As  fearfull  fowleihat  in  thcfunfliine  bright,

Sit  pruning  of  themfelves  upon  a banke.

When  as  a Faulcon  doth  among  them  light.

Flic  without  care  of  order  or  of  rankci

So  when  ihefecaitivesfaw  this  noble  Knight,  '

Forthwith  thi-y  from  his  manly  prcfcncc  fhranke.

So  did  their  fearfull  hearts  and  courage  faile  them.
When  as  they  felt  Rogeroonce aflaile  them  •

’ Zi

No  marvell  tho.for  why  Rogero!  force
Was  not  as  mens  that  now  borne  later  are.

The  ftrengthef  Lion,Bcarc,or  Bull,or  Horlc,

Were  nothing, ;f  with  his  they  do  compare,
Andchiefcfrth  now  hedoth  hinsfclfc inforce,
Todoas  muchasheorcanordarc.

Hereby  from  danger  thinking  t<»  recover.

Her  unto  whom  he  was  profeffed lover-  . .

«?

Now  when  the  youth  from  danger  quite. was  freed.
And  all  that  fought  his  death  away  w|Ctc  fled.

He  thanks  the  author  of  this  worthy  deed.

And  thanketh  her  that  had  him  thither^ led
Thcn,whcnofhclpehc  flood  ingreateft  need,,
When  otherwife  he  doubtlcflc  had  bin.dcad.

And  executed  like  a malefa^ot,  >

Agnizing  him  his  Lord  and  benffa  iior,  ^ -
’ ^ c t

And  furthermore  he  doth  itigero  pray, '

Tolechim  underfland  his  name  and  nation)

Rogero  tnufiug  to  himfelfie  i^th.fay,  ...

What  meanetb  this  fo  flrangetiongratvilation}

In  face,in  fhape,in  gcflure,ia  array.

This  IS  my  loTe,I  fee  no  alterauoo.

Yet  ftrangeit  is  her  voice  fhould  be  fb  changed.
Mote  flrange  chat  fhc  from  use  cflrangcd.


^99'-

It  doubtlcflc  is  not  flic,for  if  i;  were.

Could  flic  within  three  hoiires  my  name  fo.gct!
Whcicforc  to  tell  his  name  he  doth  fotbeare,

Vntill  he  may  more  pcifcdl  notice  get:

And  thushefaid,!  have,  I know  not  where.

Scene  you  ere  this, and  1 bethinkc  me  yet
VV  hcic  it  might  bc,for  furc  I know  your  face.

Though  now  I have  fogot  the  time  and  place.

1 6

Moft  noble  fir(faid  toihcr)  I agree.

You  may  have  fccnc  mc,though  1 know  not  when,

1 rathcr^udge  it  fliould  my  fiilei  be.

That  fights  and  carries  armes  as  well  as  men:

My  mother  at  one  birth  bare  her  and  me.

And  we  be  bothfo  like,  that  now  and  then
Our  fcrvants,yca  our  father  and  our  mother
Hare  tanc  us  in  exchange  the  tone  for  tuther.

17

Chiefly  fincein her  head  fliehad  a wound.

For  which  flic  was  conftrain’d  t&cu  t her  Iiairc,

Twcrc  long  the  circumflanccs  to  expound.

How  flic  was  hurt  and  hcald,by  whom  and  where.
Since  that  betweene  us  difference  none  is  found,
Savefex  and  names  that  from  our  birth  wc  bcaic.

She  Bradamant^  1 Richardet am  cald.

She  liflcr,and  I brother  to  Rena'.d.

I S

And  further  if  you  plcafc,Ifliallyou  tell.

As  we  do  onward  onour  journey  go,

A ftrzngc  mifhap  that  unto  me  befell.

By  being  tanc  for  her  not  long  ago;

A hap  that  at  the  fiift  I liked  well.

But  after  wrought  my  danger  great  and  wo:

Yet  with  good  will,fCo^ero  faid,and  than
Yong  Richardetto  thus  his  calc  began.

*9  a

It  Iiappcnd  (as  in  part  I toucht  before)  \

My  valiant  fiflcr  pafling  through  a wood.

Was  hurt  with  certainc  Sara^ins  fo  fore.

As  bad  her  coft  almoft  her  vi'.all  blocd.

Which  wound  to  eyre,  her  trefles  fliort  flieworc.

For  fo  as  then  her  fmgeon  thought  it  good  ■

The  wound  once  cur’d,  for  which  her  head  was  pofd
Abroadc  to  go  againe  flic  waxed  bold.

20

And  having  naveld  till  the  heateof  day,

All  clad  in  armor,as  her  manner  was.

At  nooncflictooke  occafioii  to  mak^  ftay^

Faft  by  a watric  ftreameas  clcare  asglaflc.

And  putting  oft’ her  helmet,  downe  fh  e lay,

Vpbna  plcafant  banke  well  cloth’d  witJigiaflc,

And  fleepcatlaft  her  heavic eyes  did  clofc.

The  plate  inviting  her  to  take  repofe.

21

Now  while  flic  did  there  fafl  afleepe  rcmainc,

Thptc  happend  to  arrive  unto  that  place.

The  daughter  of  MatfUio  King  ofSpaine,

That  thne  by  chance  was  hunting  in  the  chafli.

And  feeing  fignes  of  manhood  very  plainc.

With  that  her  fweet  and  amiable  face,

As  horfe,and  fword, and  target  all  of  fleelc,

A little  atnorout  paflion  flicdotb  feele.

S - And


loo


THE  XXV.  BOOKE


21

And  taking  tlif  n my  flRcr  for  a man,

As  b?  all  circiimftarccs  well  flic  niiglit.

She  offers  hei  all  courtfic  that  lliccan,
Audaskthcrif  in  hunting  flic  delight;

And  tlien  ty  chufe  a Handing  they  began.

And  finding  one  far  off  from  others  fight.

She  opened  more  plainly  that  affc^lion.

That  had  her  heartalrcady  m fubjcdion.

And  favc  her  maiden  mcdcflic  forbad,

6he  would  the  fame  in  words  have  plainly  told,
Howb’it  withfighsjwithrufull  looks  and  fad.

And  filent  fignes  flic  doth  her  griefc  unfold;

And  when  the  thus  long  time  dileourfcd  had,
Suipris’d  with  IropCjflie  could  no  longer  hold.

But  Heps  unto  hcr,and  gives  her  fuch  a kiffc.

As  that  alone  flicwcs  what  her  mcaaing  is.

1 My  fifter  at  the  firft  doth  thinke  it  ftrange,

' That  fuch  a lute  fliould  unto  her  he  made,

' And  finding  flic  had  tanc  her  in  exchange,

, She  thinks  it  beft  (before  flic  further  wade,

■ Or  let  the  tothers  humor  further  range)

r Tell  trot  h, for  thus  flic  doth  her  felfc  perfvvade/

>:Ofih'u  look*  Tisbtttcr  to  be  knownea  Ladiegcntle,
tht  rnonll  Then  to  be  deem’d  a bafeman  and  ungentle.

Foi  wlut  could  be  more  cullcn-Iike  or  bafe?

Or  fitterfoi'a  man  wercmadcofftraw.

Then  Handing  in  a fairc  yong  Ladies  grace.

To  flicw  himfclfc  a cuckow  ora  daw.

And  leefe  occafion  both  of  time  and  place?

M y flHer  thcieforc  that  this  ill  forefaw,

A nd  knew  flic  wanted  that,that  her  fliould  aid.
Told  her  by  circumfiancc  flic  was  a maid.

16

And  thus  flic  told  her  how  the  worthy  fame,

Hippolita.  and  flout  Camilla  w’onne.

In  deeds  ot  armes, mov’d  herhermind  to  frame,

To  do  the  like  while  others  fow’d  and  fponne;

And  that  flic  thought  it  to  her  fex  no  fliamc.

To  do  as  women  of  fuch  worth  had  done;

She  told  her  this, in  hope  this  would  appeafe  her.
But  this  alasdid  fo  much  naorc  difeafe  her.

a?

loi  why  the  fa ncic  was  fo  firmly  fixt,

Tha  t in  her  mind  fli  c had  before  conceived,

! By  meancsof  fpeech  had  pafTcd  them  betwixt.

That  fore  it  griev’d  her  to  be  thusdcccivcd.

Before, her  fearc  with  feme  good  hope  wasmixt,
But  now  cv’.i  hope  it  felfc  was  her  bereaved;

And  this  is  one  extremefl  point  of  griefc,

, Still  todcfpaire  and  hope  for  no  rchefe.  >

' **

He  that  had  heard  her  wofull  plaint  and  mone,

Jv!  uH  needs  have  gtcatly  at  the  fame  bin  grieved.

Ah  woi5me(flicfaid)  ihatlalone

Should  live  in  fuch  defpaire  to  bcrcHeved:

In  parted  times  I thinke  there  hath  bene  none.

In  timeto  come  it  will  not  be  beleeved.

That  love  fliould  make  by  fuch  a Hrong  infcttion.
One  woman  bcarc  another  fuch  affcilion.


19

0 Cupiiy  if  thou  didft  my  Hate  envle.

And  that  thou  hadH  a mind  me  to  torment.

To  fend  fuch  paines  as  others  more  do  trie.

At  IcaH  me  thinke  thou  fliouldH  have  bin  content:
Shill  ID  fo  many  ages  none  but  I ,

Yccld  of  fo  uncouth  love  fuch  prefident?

The  female  with  the  fcmalcdothnot  wifli
To  couplc,noi  in  bcart,nor  foulc,noi  fifli.

30

1 foie  am  found  in  earth,  airc,fea,oi  fire.

In  whom  fo  rtrangc  a wonder  thou  hart  done.

On  me  thru  fliewrt  the  powci  of  tfcinc  ire.

And  what  a mighty  contjucH  thou  hart  wonne.
The  wife  of  Nynv.i  had  a rtrangc  defire,

Tojoync  in  copulation  with  her  fbnnc;

Faire  Mynha  by  her  fire  was  made  a mother.

And  made  Jdonh  both  her  fonne  and  brother.

3'

rajypfmc yCxcept  it  be  a tale.

Was  buld,  inclofcd  in  a woodden  coW;

Yet  in  all  thefe  the  female  fought  the  male,

But  mturc  doth  my  fancicdifallow;

No  Ttedalui  could  remedy  my  bale.

Nor  art  can  framc,nor  fcnfcimaginc  how.

Tins  knot  dame  mature  hatlifofirmcly  knit.

It  cannot  be  dillolv’d  by  any  wit.


tht

^Uufivn  ^
thu  bottle.


Le»b.tin  th
HiJioTf  »f

Ibu


Tliis faire  (fo  was  her  name)  ^ .

In  pittousfort  her  wofull  ftatedoth  wailc.

My  fi  ftcr  unto  her,hcr  fpeech  doth  frame,

A s chiefly  to  her  comfort  might  availc:
Andwiflit  her  this  unbridled  will  to  tame,

Sith  nature  could  not  fuffer  it  prcvailc.

And  that  flic  would  let  that  defire  be  daunted.
Which  portibly  by  no  mcancs could  begraumcef.
5?

AH  this  but  all  in  vainc  my  filler  faid.

To  fcckc  that  fancie  fiom  her  mind  t*  wrerti
^hc  that  for  comfort  car’d  nor,but  for  aid.

Doth  more  and  more  her  felfc  vexe  and  molcrt:
Now  night  «rcw  on  as  they  together  ftaid,

W hit  time  all  creatures  fcckc  tepofe  and  refl’,

T he  Ladio  piaycs  my  filler  for  her  fake,

A lodging  at  her  caftlc  then  to  take.


Where  I (Xut  that  you  did  mv  harmc  prtvent)
Should  have  bene  cart  into  the  burning  flanac;
She  that  all  kindriClTe  to  my  fiftcr  ment.

By  manyoutwaid  courtfiesfhewd  the  fame;
And  caufed  her  to  wcarc  a womans  weed.

That  men  might  know'that  flic  was  one  indeed.


To  this  rcqHcft  doth  Bradamant  aflenr.
And  fo  together  to  that  place  they  c


ThatpliCt
■KO!  iiarjit
iiotcaUUt'
mUf!
thtriH
fhauid  bavt
bnt  bwntd.


For  why  the  fcmblanccfiirc  fliefaw  before.

Of  manly  fliape  to  her  was  fb  pernicious.

She  would  now  fee  her  in  thofe  weeds  no  morCg
The  rather  ek<e  left  folke  fhould  bcfufpicious,
(Ifflichad  bene  asflicwd  the  weed  flic  wore)
Left  that  they  two  did  livctogethcrvicious;
She  further  was  by  phyfiek  rulcsaflurcd.

That  contraues  by  comraiiei  are  cured.


I


«


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


2or


SimUt.


3«

But  nought  could  falve  that  fore, nor  fwage  her  woes.
That  night  they  lay  together  in  one  bed.

But  fnndiy  and  unlike  vvai  their  repofc,

One  cjuicc  fleptjthctothers  troubled  bed
Still  wakingjOrif  flic  her  eyes  butclofe.

That  little  fleepeftrangedreamesand  fancies  bred;
Shcihoughtthcgcdsand  hcav’n  would  foallift  her,
Into  a better  fex  to  change  vay  filler.

. 37  _

As  men  tormented  with  a burning  fever,  (thirft,
Dodrcamcwithdnnkc  they  fwage  their  grievous
But  when  they  wake, they  fcclc  their  thiril  peifcvcr.
And  to  be  greater  then  it  wasatfirft}  (fever.

So  flic  whole  thoughts  from  lovc,flcepc  could  not
Did  dreame  of  that,for  which  flic  wake  did  third.
But  waking  felt  and  found  it  as  before.

Her  hope  ft  til  lcflc,3Dd  herdefite  ftillinore*

J8

How  fervently  did  flic  to  Macon  pray  ?

What  vowes  did  flic  unto  her  prayre  annex?

Iffo  by  mighty  miracle  he  may.

Her  bedfellow  turnctoa  betterfex?

Now  neare  approcht  the  dawning  of  the  day.

When  flic  in  vainchcrfcifc  doth  grieve  and  vex.*
And  lb  much  more  her  palTion  grew  the  ftronger,
Bccaufcmy  filler  now  would  ftay  no  longcc,

39

When  Fiordijpina  faw  flic  would  be  gone.

She  caus’d  a gallant  gennet  to  be  brought,

Allrichly  batbd,and  furniture  thereon.

Which  with  herowre  hand  partly  flie  had  wrought.
This  frankly  flic  beftoweth  her  upon.

My  filler  takes  it  kindly,  as  flic  ought,

And  takes  her  lcavc,and  on  her  way  doth  get.

And  home  flic  came  that  night  ere  Suonc  was  fet.

40

We  that  long  time  of  her  had  heard  no  tiding,

I mcane  her  mothcr,brothers,and  her  kin.

Do  welcome  her,and  askeof  her  abiding.

Why  flic  fo  long  from  us  had  abfent  bin?

Who  ftraight  from  us  the  troth  of  nothing  hiding.
Doth  tell  us  how  great  danger  Ihc  was  inj
And  opned  from  the  ending  to  beginning.

The  courfc  of  all  her  Icefing  and  her  winning.

41

As  namely  firfl:  how  hardly  flic  had  fped.

And  ina  conflidl  had  receiv’d  a wound.

For  which  flic  wa$conftrain*d  to  pole  her  head.
Before  her  health  flic  could  recover  found  {

She  told  how  fortune  afterwards  her  led.

Where  that  fairchuntreflehad  her  fleeping  fonndj
She  told  us  how  the  Ladiedid  her  woo.

And  all  the  circumftance  that  long’d  thereto,

4»

T o hearc  this  flory  I was  palling  glad,

Forwhy  had  feme

This  Fiordi^ina.and  feme  knowledge  had

Of  hcrlikcwifc  when  flic  in  France  had  bccnc-,

And  lik’t  her  wcll.yet  was  I not  fo  mad.

In  vainc  to  fi  t my  love  on  fuch  a Q^ccnc:

But  now  againe  I gave  that  fancic  fcopc.

When  by  th^is  tale  I had  conccav’d  feme  hope,


4?

Love  was  my  counfcllor  that  me  advifed.

My  meaning  fecrct  I to  none  impart.

This  was  the  llistagcmc  that  wedevifeJ,

This  was  the  plot  ,t  hccunning, and  the  art,

Togo  in  Bradamant  as  clothes  dilguifed.

And  for  a while  to  play  the  womans  part:

I knew  my  face  myfiftersforefemblmg,

. Would  be  the  better  heipe  for  my  diftcmbling.

The  day  cnfuingcrcit  yet  was  light,

I tooke  my  way,my  love  and  fancie  guiding,

I there  arriv’d  an  lioure  before  twas  night,

Such  hap  I had,  fuch  haft  I made  in  riding?

No  fooncr  came  1 in  the  fei  vants  fight.

But  well  was  he  of  me  could  carry  tiding:

They  lookc  (as  PnnccsoFttogivcdo  ufe)

Some  rccompcnce  for  bringing  fo  good  newes,

45

Straight  out  flic  came,and  met  me  halfe  theway.

And  tooke  me  fall  about  rhe  ncckcand  kift  me.

And  told  me  how  in  thismy  littlcftay.

In  anguifli  great  and  forrow  flie  had  mill  me,

Then  flic  did  caufe  me  alter  mine  array.

In  which  with  hcrownc  hands  flie  doth  aflift  mcj
A cawl  of  gold  flic  fet  upon  my  crowne.

And  put  on  me  a rich  and  ftately  gownc,

46

Aad  for  my  part  to  hclpethc  matter,!

Did  take  great  heed  to  all  I did  or  faid.

With fober  call  I carrid  flillminceyc,

, And  bare  my  hands  before  me  like  a maid;

My  voice  did  ferve  me  worft,biit  yet  thereby
Such  heed  1 us’d,my  fex  was  not  bewraid;

And  thus  arrayd,my  Princefle  led  me  with  her.
Where  many  Knights  and  Ladies  were  togithtr,

47

My  lookc  and  clothes  did  all  them  fo  beguile,

I hey  all  had  thought  I had  a woman  bccnc.

And  honour  fuch  was  done  to  me  that  while.

As  if  I were  a Dutchefleor  aQnecncr

And  (that  which  made  meoftentime  to  fmilc)

Some  youths  there  were  of  ycers  & judgement  green
That  call  upon  me  many  a wanton  lookc,

^My  fex  and  quality  they  fo  miftookc.

48

At  laft  came  mcatc,both  ftoreof  ficfli  and  fifli.

What  kinds  of  both, to  tell  1 oveiflip,

I maidenly  tail  here  and  there  a difli ,

And  inthcwinelfcantdo  wet  my  lip,
Thetimefeem’d  long  that  ftaid  my  wanton  wifli.
And  ftill  Idoubtcd  taking  in  fomctiip?

When  bed  time  came,flK  told  me  I muft  be
Her  bcdfcllowjthc  which  well  picafed  me.

49

Now  when  the  maids  and  pages  all  were  gone.

One oncly  lampcupon  the  cubbard  burning.

And  all coaftsclcare,  thus  I began  anon:
Fairedamel  thinkeyoumufeof  my  returning.

And  caufe  you  have  indeed  to  mufe  t hereon.

For  yefterday  when  I did  leave  you  mourning,
Ithrnkc  both  you  and  I did  thin^cas  then.

We  fliould  nocmcct  againe  till  God  knowes  when.

S a Fitft;


20i


THE  XXV;  BOOKE


Tbiiis  a fri.
vtlf-a  tile,
tievifedbf
him  t»  Heste
her  (yet,  tend
therefore  it  it
not  te^wfue
II  fhiui^te
probable,
thou^hCa-
* \ Jlelvitro  an
’ ItahaH  nri  •
ter,  ftand
jault  wuh
f,  thujbeetuft
£'  befxitb,  it
t‘  fhould have
1 1 had  more
probability.


I


50

Firft  let  me  tell  you  why  from  you  I went.

Then  why  I come,  hereafter  1 fhall  fliow;

Dearc  Ladic  (thus  it  was)  1 did  lament
Your  fruitlelTc  love  on  me  was  placed  fo.

And  though  I could  have  ay  bene  well  content,

,To  waiteonyou,and  ncfcr  part  you  fro.

Yet  fince  my  prcfcncc  did  but  make  you  languifli,

I thought  mine  abfence  mini/li  would  your  anguiflu

51  '

But  riding  on  my  way,  I fomewhat  flraid.

As  fortune  and  advcntmedid  me  guide.

And  lu  I heard  a voice  thatcride  for  aid,

Uithifi  a thicket  by  the  river  fide;

A i'lsrjr  taken  had  a naked  maid,  .

And  with  a twifted  cord  her  hands  bad  tide.

And  in  his  ufagcrcemcd  fo  to  ihrcaie  her.

As  if  that  he  would  kill  her  ftr  aighr,and  cate  her,

5a

Iruflit  to  them  with  naked  f/vord  in  hand.

And  death  to  him, and  freedomc  I did  give  hcry
She  diving  under  water  out  of  hand,

Vnrccompcnft  thou  flialt  not  me  deliver.

Quoth  fhe,for  1 will  have  you  underftand,

1 am  a Nymph  that  dwell  hereinthis  river;

And  for  this  courtfie  I do  much  regard  you.

And  am  well  able  lichly  to  reward  you.

. 53

Askeofmc  what  you  lift,and  I will  give  it.

For  I upon  the  elements  have  powre;

I can  with  charms  bring  down  the  3foo»,belceve  it,

I can  fwage  flormcs , and  make  fairc  weather  lowre.
What  is  fo  hard, but  my  skill  can  atchieve  it?

To  draync  the  fea,or  build  in  aire  a towre?

Yea  cv'n  with  fimplc  words  (and  if  I will)

1 caninforcc  and  make  theSunne  ftand  ftill.

54

VVhen  as  the  Nymph  had  made  me  this  great  offer,

(Lo  Ladic  what  great  love  to  youl  bare)

1 neither  askt  with  gold  to  fill  my  coffer,

Noi  vi£fory,of  which  fomc  greedy  arc,

’ This  favour  onely  I demaunded  of  her.

To  make  me  able  to  affwage  your  care;

Nor  nam’d  I any  meanes  for  fcarc  of  erringj
The  oncly  way  and  meanes  to  her  referring,

55

No  fbon^r  this  requeft  to  her  I told,

Butinthechriftall  ftreame  agatnc  (lie  dived.

And  fprinkled  me  withdrops  of  water  cold.

Which  to  my  skinne  no  fooner  were  arrived.

Burl  was  chang’d  from  that  1 was  of  old.

And  of  my  former  ftatc  I was  deprived;

I felt,!  fa  w, yet  fcant  bclcerelcan,

*1  hat  of  a woman  1 was  made  a man,

5«

And  faving  that  ev’n  now  I am  fo  nicyou,

Asyou  may  quickly  prove  my  talc  not  fained,
Elfcyou  mightthinkc  I faid  it  buttotricyouj
Now  lo, fince  I for  you  this  wifh  obtained,

Askc  what  you  plcafc.  I nothing  flialldcnic  you.
Enjoy  that  which  my  love  for  you  hath  gained;
When  I had  pleaded  thiis,and  flic  had  heard  it.

On  fight  of  evidence  flic  gave  her  vardit.


57

A$  one  whofc  ftatc  is  overw  hclm*d  w’lth  debt.

By  lending  or  by  fpending  out  of  menfure.

That  looks  cch  hourcwlicn  preuJing  flirccvs  will  fret
Himfelfc  to  ward,and  ofhis  goods  make  fcafure.

If  fome  unlookt  forgaine  he  hap  to  set.

By  fomc  mans  death,  or  by  fomc  trovic  treafurc.

Is  fo  furpnVd  with  joy,hcfcant  doth  know.

If  true  it  bcjor  if  he  dreamed  fo,

5*

So  flic  that  now  did  fee, and  fcclc,  and  tctich.

That  which  flic  long  had  longed  forinvainc.

It  ovcifild  her  mind  with  joy  fo  much.

It  feemed  in  a trance  flic  did  remained
^ hetein  her  incredulity  wasfuch.

As  to  rcfblvchcr  I did  take  much  painei
Ifthcfcbcdrcamcs  (quoth  flic)  for  thefe dreams  fake
I ever  wifli  to  dreameand  never  wake.

59

Not  found  of  drum,  of  trumpet, or  of  phife.

Nor  warlike  inftrument  of  any  fort,

E id  fnund  alarum  to  our  friendly  ftrife.

But  dovclike  billing  follow’d  lovely  fport.

This  battcll  hazards  neither  limbe  nor  life.

Without  a ladder  I did  fcale  the  fort-
And  ftoiitly  plant  my  ftandard  on  the  wall.

And  under  me  1 made  my  fo  to  fall.

6o

If  that  fame  bed  were  full  the  night  before,
OftcarcSjofplaintijOf  anguifli  and  annoyesj
No  dou  b c but  new  i t had  i n a s gitat  ftotc,

Both  fmilings,fports,and  folaces and  joyes;

No  luy  doth  embrace  the  pillar  moir.

Then  flic  did  me, nor  Apes  can  find  moretoyes.
Then  we  yong  foolcs d id  find  to  make  us  mcric^

Till  joy  itfclfcof  joy  did  make  us  wcaric.

The  thing  twixt  us  did  fcact  long  remaine.

And  ccrtainc  months  this  plcafurc  didendurc.

Till  fomc  bad  found,andioIdit  to  my  painc,

Asyou  well  know  that  did  my  lifcaffurc;

Yet  I confeffc  great  griefe  I flill  fuftaine.

Not  knowing  how  herfafcticto  procure.

7hit  Richardetto  to  Rogcro  to\df

And  all  the  while  their  journey  on  they  hold.

62

By  that  time  Richardettos  talc  was  done.

They  gan  up  to  a little  hill  to  mount.

And  when  an  houre  and  more  was  fet  the  Sunne,
They  came  unto  the  caftle  Agrifmomt,

Kept  then  by  Aldiger  the  baftard  fonne
OfBaoiOjofthc  houfeof  Clarimomt,

A wife  and  fober  man  and  of  good  qualitie.

And  bouDtifull  in  keeping  hofpitalitic.

And  after  hehad  bid  them  welcome, both.

One  ashiskiniman,tothcr  as  his  friend,

1 hearc  ill  newes  (quoth  he)  that  1 am  loth
To  tell  to  yon,  left  it  fliould  you  offend  i
But  thus  it  i$,to  let  you  know  the  troth,

I hearc  that  Bertolage  doth  fine  intend
To  buy  the  prifners  that  FerrcM  hath  tane.

As  nanjcly  Malagige  and  Vivianf-

Lanfufa


Sineilth


Thi  tHiot
the  tale  of
Ftordi^iriti


AfJiget,


Bertolage  of
the  bmfi  of
Magaanyt-
Malagigi  &
Viviton


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


205


S^yu•l^c^,


Tfiverit,


I^i  HyltakciIiupon  h?r  tordltlicm.

And  as  I liearc  to  morrow  is  the  day,

Vntoyour  brothers  I fent  one  to  tell  them  j
But  they  be  abfent  hence  fofarre away,

As  ere  they  comc,f)Tom  hence  they  may  cxpell  them,
lam  too  weake  to  force, too  poorc  to  pay,

^ly  lose  isj»reat,to  wifli  a!i  good  unto  thfm,

But  powre  I'o  fmalljas  good  I can  none  do  them.

Cj  #

Young  Ridardetto  mtifhmiflikt  thenewes.

So  did  Jitgero  for  the  totheis  fake,  .

.And  when  he  faw  they  both  were  ip  a mufe.

Nor  knew  what  counfcII,or  what  comic  to  take.

No  fcarc  (ejuoth  he)  let  me  this  matter  life.

On  me  f liis  entcfprrfc  lie  undertake,

So  I fliall  handle  this  affaire  fo  handfome.

This  fwoid  alone  Hiall  pay  your  kinfnrcits  ranfome.

66

Thisfpake  Rogero  hiscompnionschcaringj
But  nott'vithllanding  Aldiger,  his  hoft.

Gave  to  tbofd  ioftic  promilei  fitch  hearing.

As  if  there  were  great  boaft  and  little  toft;

Which  unto  Richardetto  plainc  appearing,
Whoknew  his  vallcw,greatcr  then  his  boft:

Good  cofen  if  you  knew  him  well  tliat  fed  it.

You  would  faid  he  unto  his  word  give  credit.

67

Then  Aldiger  on  better  information,

Gareeaie  and  credit  to  his  noblcgucll,

And  made  him  ehcarc  to  futchis  reputation.

And  plaft  him  at  the  boord  above  the  reft;

And  flipper  done, he  wasiarccmcly  fafiiion,
Inchambcrlodgdjofallthc  houfethe  heft.

The  maftei  of  the  houlc  in  notliingfcant.

His  worthy  gueft  will  fuller  nothing  want.

<S8

Now  was  the  time  when  all  men  foundeft  fleepe,
onelycannot  flecpe'a  winkc.

For  cares  and  thoughts  that  him  do  waking  keepe.
And  in  his  troubled  brainc  profoundly  finkc;

The  fiege  of  Agramint  doth  pierce  him  deepe.

And  what  diflionor  mcnofhimmay  thioke.

And  deeme  his  heart  but  fainr,his  faith  but  fickle.

To  leave  his  Soveraigne  in  fo  wofull  pickle.

(S9

Had  he  revolted  at  feme  other  time.

Men  might  have  thought  that  true  religion  mov’d
NoBccouldhavc  it  imputed  as  a crime,  (him.

Nor  no  man  probably  conld  hauc  reprov’d  him:

Now,  when  hrs  mailers  fortune  did  decline.

And  when  to  aid  him  chicfcftit  belwov’d  him,
Fcare,mcn  will  thinke,hischflngepiocuicd  chiefe.
Nor  juft  rcmorfe,nor  zcalcof  true  bclicfc.

70

This  troubled  him, and  little  lefte  then  this.

It  troubled  him,tothinkcof  his dcarc  hair,

YVhom  now  by  cvill  fortune  be  doth  mifle.

Nor  cannot  once  falutc  ere  he  depart-
Wherefore  to  write  to  hcrhii  purpol'e  is.

And  fo  to  her  at  large  his  mind  impart.

Both  that  of  him  llicmay  have  certainenewes.

As  that  ke  may  his  fodainc  going  feufe.


7«

The  chamberlaines  both  prudent  arjd  djftrcet,

Vpon  Rogcru  ijuickc  aticndancc  gave.

Providing  him ofnccdfull  thingsand meet,
lnkc,papcr,  light,  and  what  he  clfc  would  crave;
Then  (as  the  manner  is)  he  doth  her  greet,

Vpon  t he  fionc,as  letters  ufc  to  have,

Thus  after  very  harty  commendations,
Orfoincfuchphrafcof  friendly  falutations.

71

Then  eels  he  her  how  that  the  Turhjfl)  Prince,

Had  for  his  ayd,by  fpcciall  mefl'agefent.

Who  IS  befieg’d,  and  hath  bcnclong  tiniefince^
And  howto  rcftuchim  is  bis  intent;

Leaft  men  ofeowardife  might  him  convince.
That  he  away  in  time  of  danger  went;

.And  now  would  leave  his  lawful!  Lord  and  liege,
T hen  when  liis  enemies  did  him  bcficpe.

73

He  praycti)  her  to  weigh, how  foiile  a deed.

How  full  it  were  of  infamy  and  fliamc,

Toyceld  his  Prince  no  aid  in  fucha  need.

That  fent  to  himof  purpofc  for  rhe  fame;

He  wiflit  iiei  for  her  ownc  fake  to  take  liecd.
That  no  fucli  ftainc  might  fpot  her  fpoufes  name.
That  being  flic,  fo  true  and  fo  fincerc.

She  llioiild  no  blemifli  in  her  husband  bcare.

He  further  doth  his  zcalc  to  her  proteft,

Aserft  he  had  in  word  fo  now  in  writing.

And  fwoares  that  when  his  Prince  were  undiftreft.
The  fiege  quite  rais*J,by  concord  or  by  fighting.
That  fooIUIi  people  might  not  make  a jell,

T o his  icprochjthat  common  fpccch  reciting,
Rogero  loves  to  take  the  furcr  fide.

And  turncsliis  fa ilcs,as  fortune  turncs  her  tide,

75

I /Iiall  (he  writes)  when  that  time  doth  expire.
Which  in  a month  I hope  will  be  clfcftcdj
Findcfome  occafion  from  them  torctirc.

And  of  no  breach  of  honour  be  fulpefted.

Then  fhall  I full  accomplifti  y out  defire,

, Ancldo,as  1 by  you  fliall  bedirefted;

Thisoncly  for  my  honour  I demand  thee,

And  after  this  thou  ev  er  fiialt  command  nice.

76

Thcfethings,andlikcto  thefc^o^ero  wrate.

As  then  ^)y  hap  came  in  his  troubled  hed,
Tocertifie  hislove  ofhiscftatc.

And  of  the  caufc  that  his  departure  bred;

By  that  time  he  had  done,it  was  full  late.

And  then  againe  he  got  him  to  his  bed.

And  clos’d  his  eyes, when  he  had  clos’d  tlic  letter.
And  after  cookc  his  cafe  a great  dcalc  better.

77

Nextday  they  all  arofe  at  breake  of  day.

With  minde  to  go  to  fet  tlieir  kinfmenfree,

And  though  Rogero  carncftly  did  pray.

That  none  might  take  that  enterprife  but  he,

I’ct  both  the  other  ftifly  faid  him  nay.

And  thereunto  by  no mcanes would  agree,

Vnto  the  place  aflign’d  they  ride  togithcr.

And  by  the  time  appointed  they  came  thither,

s?


Regerfj  Itt  •
tet  tt  BraiU'
min$.


Vruverltt


Ths


2o8


THE  XXV.  BOOKE


Moiall.


^iflorie.


AiluGoo.


78

The  place  they  came  to  was  a goodly  plaine.

In  which  no  ticc  nor  bufli  was  to  be  (cene.
Here  Bertolage  Ax'^  point  to  take  them  twaine ,
As  were  agreed  Lanfu/iind  him  bctwccnc.


But  fiift  they  met,whilc here  they  did  lemainc.
One  that  a Phenix  bare  in  field  all  grcenc.
With  armor  faireembofl,and  guilt  with  gold.
As  in  the  booke  that  follows  fhall  be  told.


In  thU  XXV  bool^e,  in  Rogeros  valiant  proceeding  for  the  delivery  ^BichMdexto  ( though  at  then  not  f^norvne  to
kirn  what  he  was ) may  be  nteda  wonderfuU  courage  and  promptnet  to  honorable  exploits:  in  thegreat  h^neffe  of  face
o/Bradamantani/Richardctto  (though  this  be  but  a ffiion)  wt  wemayobferve  the  rare,  and  (as  it  were)  cunning
worl^manfhip  of  nature ; admirable,  as  well  in  mailing  fb  manyjundty  countenances,  one  unlilie  another ; as  al/b  fame-
times  in  matting  fome  fo  exceedirglilie, which  in  deed  though  it  feldomer fortunes, and fooner  alters  in  brother  and  ftfler,
yet  iniwo  brothers,  it  is  fecne  many  times , and  therefore  not  improbable  to  be  written,  asit  isherefor  tbeforenamed
couple. I have  hear  din  England  of  the  two  Tremaines  «or  manyyeares  pajl:l  have  l^noiwn  my  felfe  two  of  the  W rothes
in  Eaton  fchoolc, and  lately  inher  Majefties  court  two  Tracies,  two  proper  andvaliantyowigGentlcmen  x whom  my
felfe  beingfamiliarly  acquainted  with,  yet  I couldvery  hardly  iinow  one  fiotjt  the  other.  But  to  come  to  the  talc  of
Richardetto  WFioidifpina,  (which  name  fgnifieth  as  much  as  thefiowre  ofthorne,  andnot  unapt  for  her  prichfing
condition ) I mufl  confejfe  my  aui  hot  Jheweth  in  the  tale,*ather plea/ant  wit, then  any  fober gravity, and  the  befi  1 can
fay  is  this, that  it  is  a bad  matter  not  very  iU  handled.  But  as  / undertoolie  in  the  beginning  to  rtialie  fpeciallnote  of  all
the  good  matters  by  which  the  honef  re^er  m’ght  talie  profit,  fe  1 thinhe  it  as  convenient, where  any  light  and  lafcivi-
pus  matter  fals  (as  this  is  purely  one)  to  temper  it  in  fiich  fort, or  at  leajl  to  falve  it  fo,as  it  may  do  leaft  hurt. Namely,
/ would  not  have  that  xxv-ftaffe  fy  mifapplying  it, made  worfe:  being  perhaps  badenough  at  the  be/L
For  what  can  be  more  cullcn  like  and  bale.

And  fitter  fora  man  were  madeoffiraw.

Then  Handing  in  a gallaet  Ladies  grace.

To  flic w himlclfe  a cuckow  or  a daw,

Lecfing  occafion  both  of  time  and  place?  &c.

thistal{en,  as  many  will  tahe  it, may  feeme  but  lewd  doffrine,  but  thus  it  ought  and  may  behonefilytaken,that  he  that
in  good  honourable  fort  (as  put  the  cafe  in  the  way  of  marriage ) may  obtaine  the  love  of  fome  worthy  Ladie,  and /lands
in  her  high  favour,  and  then  will  be  fo  haJhfuU,  either  for  Want  of  wit  or  heart,  to  leefe  that  oportunity,  be  may  he  in
good  reafon  induedwith  thefegentile  titles ; rsevenheltffe  to  urukrfiand  it  generally  were  ungoodly,  confidering  the
Scripture  commendeth  to  us  the  example  of  laftph,  that  refufed  his  miflrts  l^indnes.  But  to  conclude  the  morall  of  this
tale, we  may  note  haw  full  of  doubts  andfeares  thefe  unlawfuU  pleafures  are,  howfoever  fome  men  hl^e  better,  to  hunt
fyfiealth  in  another  mans  wal^e,  then  to  have  thefaireft  courfc  that  may  he  at  game  of  their  owne.

The  examples  that  fiosdifpinarecitrs  of  other  womens  unlawfisU  lufls,  prejerring  them  before  her  owne,  for  their
poffibility  (hers  being  unpofftble)  are  confirmed  ly  divers  authors,  as  of  Nytxatwife  Semiramii,  that  luffed  after  a
horfe:  Mynoswt/e  ^terabuU,  and  other  fitch  tales,  though  Ithin^e  untrue, or  rather  colourdfy fitch  names:  as  in  that
ofraCxphac,itisthoughtJbeloved  onethatwas  called  Taurus  (to  fay  ahull)  and  thereupon  the  light  headed  Poets,
that  have  apriviledge  as  free for  the  pen,  as  painters  have  for  thepenciU,  nu^e  agreat  wonder  of  it,  whereas  perhaps
indeed  it  was  but  even  an  ordinarie  matter, that  is  doyly  ( or  at  leaft  nightly)  commit ted,by  many  in  thefe  times .

This  tale  ofEiorAifpina  alludes  to  that  intheninthoftheMetamorphofisoflphis,  a^the  complaint  fhe  maizes  i>
much  fallen  from  thence, and  is  wonderfuU  finely  written  fyOnd,  asyou  may  reade  there  more  at  large.

Vixque  tenens  lachrimas;  quis  me  manet  cxi  tus  inquit,

Cogmu  quam  nulli,quam  prodigiofa  novaeque,

Cura  tenet  Veneris  ? (i  di)  mihi  parcere  vellent,

Pcrderedebuerant.’finon  & perdercrcllent,

Katurale  malum  faltem,8c  dc  morcdcdilTcnt,

Ncc  vaccam  vaccae,8cc.


Here  end  thcnotc!  of  the  xxv.  booke.


THE  XXVI.  BOOKE.


suix>\


THE  ARGVMENT.

The  learned  jlranae^iddlt s fioT^es,

To  hii  companient  out  ofMedinSwtll:
fVith  Manciricard  the  Sarzan  thither  ^oes,
etyind  each  tooke  quarrels  mve^ae  there  iejtlh
For  Difcord  feed  of  flrife  among  them  fowes^
Tut  Doralices  horfe^  bj  fiend  of  hell
tyfiffriohted ,eloth  his  miftres  beare  areay,
which  caus'd  the  Pagans  both  breaks  of  the  fir  ay.


1

T ght  worth}’  damf  s tl)crc
were  in  times  of  cld,
That  mote  edeem’d  of
vcituc  then  of  wealth.
But  now  our  iron  age  is
all  for  gold.

For  bad, and  v»'orfe,in  fick-
nesand  in  health.

But  die  that  will  that  elder
cuflomc  hold.

And  leave  this  nc\v,deferves  where  ere  lire  dwclth.
Here  in  this  life  tohavea  happiechoicc.

And  in  the  next  for  ever  to  rejoy  ce.

2

Such  was  the  noble  Bradamanias  mind,

Who  fought  not  after  wealth  and  rich  ability,

Nor  flatc,nor  pompe,that  many  women  blind.
But  after  vertue  pure, the  true  nobility;

And  w’cll  deferved  he  to  find  her  kind.

That  Hiew’d  in  him  fuch  proofs  ofhigh  gentility.
And  tooke  upon  him  actions  for  her  fake.

Which  time  to  come  for  miracles  may  take.

3

Rogero  (as  before  I did  recite)

With  Aldigcr  znd  Richardettoame,

To  refeue  thofetwoprifners(if  they  might)
Thatfliould  be  fold  with  great  reproch  and  fliame,
I told  you  how  they  met  a gallant  Knight,
VVhofefliield  had  painted  that  fame  bird  of  fame.
That  ftill  renewes  it  felfe,  and  never  dies,

And  onely  ooe,in  all  the  world  there  flies.

4

Now  when  this  Knight  was  of  thefe  three  aware.
That  flood  like  men  new  plafl  in  battrll  ray.


JI  e cemes  ttAhcrn,and  feeing  what  they  are.

Will  thA  c (tjuot  h he)  fomc  one  of  you  aflTay,

If  Co  his  vSlue  can  with  mine  compare,

With  ftaffc^jwith  fword,or any  oriier way?

I f any  willVcome  thcn,and  let  us  trie  it.

If  noECjtjieirfay  lb  quickly, and  denie  it.

Sir  anfwcr’J  AUiger,  I were  content.

To  tric'my  iclte  with  yoii,a  bout  or  two,

Bgt  vftlhiee  came  hot  bcie  for  this  intent;

VVe  cbthcj  a greater  fcatc  then  this  to  do.

And  atthis  tihic,  a little  time  mifpent.

May  hinder  us,and  little  plea fure you,

Wc  three  intend  (if  God  do  fay  Amen)

To  take  two  piifncrs  from  fixe  hundred  men,

6

Sure  (faid  that  other)  if  you  mind  indeed,

So  great  an  enterprife  to  take  in  hand.

No  doubt  it  doth  of  valiant  mind  proceed,

And  pittic  t’werc,your  purpofc  to  withftand:

I rather  fliall  aflifl  you  in'this  deed,

Ifyou  vouchfafe  to  make  me  of  your  band.

And  by  my  fttvicel  will  quickly  fijoe,

Good  proofe  if  1 deferve  fucb  grace  or  no.

7

Peihapthat  fomc  would  know,and  if  they  may.

What  valiant  Kpight  thiiwas  that  did  intreat,'

To  take  Rogeros  part  in  fuch  a fray.

Whereas  the  danger  could  not  be  but  great.

Now  flic, not  hcjhacaftcr  I muft  fay,

Marfifia  was,of  whom  I did  repeat,  Marfftu

How  flie  both  fought ,and  foyld  a little fince.

And  with  GahrmUi  charg’d  the  Scottifh  Prince.

Ragm


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


207


Rogcro  Rout,  and  they  of  Clarimmmt,
of  her  and  of  her  offer  well  cftcemcd.

She  joyn’d  with  them,  they  making  fullaccount
That  17)e  had  bene  of  that  fame  lex  flicfcemed.
Straight  ready  on  their  horfes  backes  they  mount.
They  fee  a loofc  a cornet  (as  they  deerred)

Of  liorfe.and  mingled  feme  cn  footc  tcgcther,
v\nd  all  of  them  ditcffly  tending  thcthcr.

9

Their  mareh,ihcir  enfignes,penons,and  their  flags.

Did  caufe  fot  Moores  they  knowne  were  5c  dclcride.
Amid  thiscrcWjUj'on  two linlc nags
"I  he  piifnerstcdc  n it  It  hands  behind  them  tide.
That  mull  be  chang’d  for  eertaine  golden  bags,
That  Bcitokge  had  promift  to  provide;

Come  ((aith  iVrtrjT/ir)  to  the  other  three,

. Now  let  the  fcall  begin, and  fellow  me,

I c

Soft  (quoth  wanting  fome

Of  thole  that  to  the  banquet  muft  be  bidden.

And  to  begin  afore  the  gueft  become.

In  rcafon  and  good  manners  is  forbidden;

By  this, the  totber  crevv  had  overcome
The  hill, that  late  before  from  them  were  hidden,
Thefc  were  the  traitrous  wretchesof  Mcgavnfe,  ^
And  now  was  ready  to  begin  the  daunce.

I I

Ma.gA)\\a  men  of  one  fidcjmcrchant  like,

Brought  laden  moylcs  with  gold  andcofliy  waie.
The  Moon  their  prifners  brought  vvith  fword  5c  pike,
Environd  round  about  with  heed  and  carc;

The  Captains  meet  with  mind  a match  to  ftrike;-
The  prifners prefent  at  the  bargainc  are.

And.  now  arc  bought  and  fold  (for  ought  they  know)
To  Berrolage  their  old  and  mortallfoe.

1 1

Good  Aldiger  and  noble  Ammons  fonne,  ^ '•■  ■■

Could  hold  no  longer  feeing  BertolagSi  *

But  both  together  at  him  they  do  runncj
^Viih  hearts  allfct  on  fierce  revenge  and  rage,
Hisforcc  nor  fate  their  fury  could  not  fliunnc.

Their  fpearcs  his  armor  and  his  breft  did  gage,
Downc  falls  the  wretch,  his  wealth  him  cannot  fave.
Such  end  1 wifli  all  vricked  wretches  have.


If

Mar jifa  doth  as  much  on  tothcr  fide,

And  in  fiich  fort  befturd  her  with  her  blade.

That  looke  which  way  foever  flic  did  ride,

An  open  lane  for  her  the  people  madcj
If  any  were  fo  flout  the  brunt  to  bide.

Yet  foonc  they  found  their  forces  overlaid;  (enter.
Through  coats  of  pioof  they  prov’d  her  fword  would
She  fent  their  foulcs  below  the  middle  center.

16

I f you  have  feenc  the  hony  making  Bees

To  leave  their  hives,and  going  out  infwarmes.
When  as  their  kingsand  maftcisdifagrecs.

And  they  make  camps  in  th'aire  like  men  at  armes,
Straight  in  among  them  all  the  Swallow  flees.

And  cates  and  beaces  them  all  unto  their  haimes:
Sothinke  Rogero  and  Marfifa  then.

Did  dcalc  among  thefc  bands  of  armed  men.

17

Nov/  Aldiger  and  Richardetno\e{Tt’,

Vpon  Magsn^a  merchants  lay  on  lode.

Both  freciofct  their  kinfmen  from  diftrefle.

And  foi  they  hated  them  Jikefnakeortode,

They  that  the  caufe  nor  quarrcll  could  notguefle.
And  faw  rheirCaptainc  dead, made  fliort  abode.’
Their  plate,  their  coinc  and  treafure  all  they  yecld.
And  were  the  firfl  that  faintly  left  the  field.

I8

So  flic  from  Lions  filly  hcardsofGoatcs,

That  have  devourd  and  fpoild  them  at  their  lifl,

And  tome  their  fidcs, their  hanchesand  their  throtes.
Yet  none  of  them  their  fcllovvcs  dare  aflifl:

So  fled  thefc  men,andcafl  avVay  theircoates.

And  weapons  all,and  durfl  no  more  refifl;

Nor  marvel!  ifthefe  two  had  Lions  harts,  ,

That  ready  find  fuch  two  to  take  their  parts,

*9

VVhofe  3<fls  atlarge  to  tell  I do  refraine,

At  which  that  age  did  not  little  wonder.

And  now  to  tell  thcm,mcB  would  thinke  Ifaine,

Yea  though  my  words  their  aff  ions  far  were  under;
For  at  one  blow  oft  horfeand  man  wasflainc.

From  head  to  foote  whole  bodies  clov’n  in  funder.
And  cither  flandiog  on  their  reputation.

Bred  for  their  foes  a coftly  emulation.


Similes
ytrgil  Kfitti
that  Bees  dot  ^
fight  fetbaU
tell  matsf
timet.


HoraseCavt
pejm  & aa~,
gas.


Simile,


Marfifa  and  Rogero  at  this  figne,

Set  out  without  expeffmg  trumpets  blaft.

And  with  two  ftavcsofftraightwell  fcafondPinc,
T wife  twenty  men  unto  the  ground  they  caft;

The  Captaine  of  the  Moores  doth  much  repine.

They  of  Magan^a  murmured  as  faft;

For  each  fide  deemed, as  they  might  in  rcafon.

That  this  had  happend  by  the  totheis  ticafob.

14

Wherefore  each  fide  with  wrath  and  fury  kindled,
Vpbraiding  tone  the  tothcr  with  untruth,

With  fwords  and  bils,pcl  mcl  together  mingled,
Dofight,and  then  a bloudyfray  cnfu'th,

The  Moorif)  Duke  was  by  Rogero  Cnglcd,

A man  cv’n  then  in  prime  and  flrength  of  youth.

But  youth,  nor  flrength,  nor  armour  could  not  fare
ftom  fuch  a blow  as  good  Rogero  gave  hin}»  (him.


20

Still  tone  of  them  markt  tothcr*  valiant  deed.

And  e.ich  of toiliei  fell  in  admiration.

She  deemes  him  Mars  ^ot  one  of  Mars  his  feed.

And  farreabovc  ail  humane  generation:

And  fave  he  was  deceived  in  her  weed.

He  would  havegiv’n  hercquallcomincndaiioo,

And  likncd  her, as  well  he  hken  might,

Vnto  for  her  valiant  fight.

21

Thus  of  two  bands  thefc  fouret  he  battellwonne.

And  all  their  fluffe  and  carriages  they  got.

The  prifiicrs loos'd,  their  bands  were  all  undone.
Their  foes  all  foild,fuch  istheir  tappic  lot;

The  man  w’as  well  whofe  horfe  could  fwifteft  njnne.
Small  count  they  make  of  amble  or  of  trot:

The  tone  fide  leave  their  gold  on  afles  loden^
Thetothevof  their  captivcsarefotbodcu.

The


THE  XXVI.  BOOKE


io8


25

fUunltrt  Thenobic  vanquifhers  dofeizc  thepray,
bJhexceUei  Which  was  both  rich  and  fumptuous  to  behold,
ftT  trrat.  Of  Fianikrs  workc  an  hanging  rich  and  gay,

(To  hang  a ftatcly  roomc)ofiilkc  and  gcldj
They  alio  found  rich  clothing  and  array.

That  ITiould  ha»c  bene  unto  Lanfufa  fold.

And  namely  nnong  the  reft  a gallant  gowne,
Embroderd  round  with  coft  of  many  a croivnc.

They  further  found  good  vittels  and  good  ftore.

Wine  bottels  code  and  frefli, and  good  of  taft.
With  which  (rot  having  rate  that  day  before)
They  do  agree  to  baite  and  breake  their  fall,

A nd  ev’ry  one  prepares  himfelfe  therefore.

And  to  that  end  their  curats  they  unlaAt
Now  when  Marfifa  had  put  off  her  beavef*

To  be  a woman  each  one  doth  perceavc  her.

24-

Her  golden  haire  truft  up  with  carelelTe  art.

Her  forehead  faire,and  full  of  llately  grace.

Her  ejXjher  lip, and  ev’ry  other  parr.

So  futingto  her  comely  (liapeand  face.

As  bred  ev’n  then  in  each  beholders  hart,

A lev’rend  love  and  wonder  in  like  cafe;  (them.
And  flraight  they  askt  her  name,  the  which  flic  told
And  with  as  great  delight  Hic  doth  behold  them.

»5

, But  Ihe  her  fe Ifc  farre  more  then  all  the  reft,

Rogetos  lhape  and  perlbndoth  regard,

, Hisvallew  great, liis  unappallcd  bieft.

Before  the  others  all  Ihe  much  prefard.

To  him  alone  her  fpeecheslhe  addicft.

Of  him  alone  fhe  would  her  fpccch  were  hard;

Thus  flic  in  him,and  he  delighted  in  her.

The  while  the  other  had  picpard  their  dinner,  t

26

The  place  they  din’d  in  was  a pleafant  cave.

And  one  of  foure  that  famous  Merlin  wrought.
Where  he  inmilkc  white  marble  did  ingravc
Strange  (lories, which  things  future  ftrangely  taught.
The  very  images  feem’d  life  to  have;

And  faving  they  were  dumb, you  wold  have  thought
Both  by  their  lookes  and  by  their  lively  features.
That  they  had  mov’d,and  had  bene  living  creatures.

^7

Of  tbti  From  out  a defert  wood  an  ugly  beaft
th*  ^tit-

t‘7-


*9

Vnto  this  beaft  men  feem’d  to  bow  and  bend . ;

This  heart  brake  through  each  wall  and  e\’ry  fence.
No  citie  could  it  fclfe  therefrom  defend.

Strong  caftles  made  from  it  but  weakcdcfence,
IntinCjhcrpowredid  feeme  fo  fane  extend.

That  many  were  fo  fond  and  void  of  fence,
Tothinkcand  tobclcevethistnonficrfell,  »
Had  powrc  of  all  things  both  in  hcav'n  and  hclU
?o

But  when  this  bead  had  rang’d  a while,behold
One  wearing  on  his  head  a lawrell  ciowne.

With  three  that  wore  the  fierme  de  luce  of  gold,
Embrodcr’d  richly  on  their  purplegownc.

And  with  thefc  three  a (lately  Lion  bold,

Did  joync  his  force  to  put  the  monflcrdownc;

The  titles  and  the  names  that  them  concerned.

Might  in  their  garments  plainly  bedifccrncd.

One  that  withfwoid  the  beaft  thrufts  in  the  paunch,
Washe  whofc  praifeno  time  fliail  ever  fmothei,
Francis  the  firft  of  that  name  King  of  France,

Of  Auftria  Maximillcnis  another.

Then  Charles  the  fife  that  with  a mighty  launce
Smites  through  the  beaft, fi-om  tone  fide  to  the  tother!
Thefourth  that  in  the  bred  with  arrow  woiinds  him
WasHenr/e  th’eight,the  writing  fo  expoundshim.

IfCO  the  temh,the  Lion  fierce  is  called,

yVho  chart  him,  and  fart  caught  him  by  tbeeare.
And  in  the  chafe  the  heart  fo  tyrd  and  galled,

A"s  others  tooke  him  while  he  held  him  there:

this  the  world  feem’d  freed  that  erft  vv'as  ibrallcJ,
By  this  men  feem’d  fecureand  voidoffcare,

.Seeing  that  beaft  whoielook  late  madethem  tremble
Stroyd  by  the  powreof  this  fb  brave  aflcmble.

33  '

This  ftory  fo  fet  forth  (asl  hare  told)

Withcortly  workmanniip,greatpleafurebred.

In  all  their  mindsthat  did  the  fame  behold.

And  on  thisfighi  moiethen  their  meat  ihty  fed,
Andchiefc  Marfja  wiflitto  heare  it  told,

What  men  thefe  were,ifmtn  already  dead.

Or  elle  a pro^hecic  of  things  enfuing.

By  bidden  SKill,Iaiciopc  to  each  mans  vewing.

Thien  Malagigi  was  by  them  requefted.


There  feem’d  tocome,  whofi  fhape  wasthuidcfin^  As  one  in  Alathematikesfeeneright  well.
An  afl'eseares,a  wolfe  in  head  and  breft,  ^■And  had  the  method  thereof  fodigefted.


A carkas  all  with  pinching  famine  pined,

A Lionsgiizly  jaw,bucall  the  reft
To  foxlikefliape  did  feeme  to  be  inclined;

In  England, France, in  Italy  and  Spaine,

Yea  all  the  world  this  monrter  feemd  to  raigne.

28

Where  ere  t bis  cruell  monrter  fet  his  foote.

He  kild  and  fpoild  ofev’ry  fort  and  ftatc.

No  height  of  birth  or  rtate  with  him  did  boote,
Heconquerd  Kingsandclowne$,allina  rate.
Yea  thisbearts  powre  had  tane  fb  deepea  rootc.
It  enter’d  in  Chrtfl  his  vicars  facred  gate.

And  vexed  Cardinals  and  Bijhops  chiefe.

And  bred  a fcaadall  ev’o  in  our  beliefe.


As  he  all  hidden  myfteries  could  tell.

To  rticw  what  monrter  thus  the  world  molefted,
And  who  be  thefc  that  him  fiom  earth  expcll:(thcm,
Ferthough  they  faw  their  names, they  did  not  know
But  he  they  knew  by  his  great  skil  could  fliow  them,
35

'Know  then  (quoth  he)  thatthefcwhofenamesappcaic
In  marble  pure,did  never  live  as  yet.

But  long  time  hence,  after  fix  hundred  yfarc,

To  their  great  praife  in  princely  throne  fliall  fit.
Merlin  the  Englijh  prophet  plaft  them  hem
In  Arthurs  time,and  by  his  parting  wir.

Set  here  (as  yet)  their  unperformed  deeds.

And  noted  all  their  names  upon  their  weeds.

This


Of

Hiki^  ihe  8.
Ur.l(l  IH  the
biftorf  efthk


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


Ovid  faith  ef
tbt  trartagt.

Camittuatm-

Imitunajolu
(y-  turje
Cautoj  bv’flU
An^efgt'^-

V.'l  />«>«

tPtjftr.


Tilt  fruit  tf
(ov.tculurfft
told  bnhttj.


Stittenct.
Lotl^e  in  tbt
a4£*^‘TJ-


?<5

Tliif  bcsftj'oii fawjlirtd  fiilt  hfr  habitation
Ufneathdmongft  the  wicked  fiends  of  hell,

/ nd  ftaid  there  til!  that  wicked  generation,

(I  meant  the  iron  age)  on  earth  did  dwell,

VVbcn  nonedurrt  ttiill  without  an  obligation,  '
When  fraud  fiffi  came  tween  them  that  buy  and  fcl,
j|\nd  when  the  mighty  (to  their  great  regroch)

Ftrd  on  the  pooicmens  liTtngs  did  incrodi.

37

Tlien  firflthis  monflercrucllgotahrode.

And  ever  fince  her  [lowredoth  flill  increafe.

And  wherdocfc  flie  niaketh  her  abodcj
There  is  no  friend  fliip  firme,nor  godly  peacej
Confcienceand  julUcc  under frote are  trod,

Good  government  and  wholfomelawesdo  ceale.
That  Python  Phwbus  kild  with  thourand  darts.

Was  mcnllci  Idle  then  this  by  thouland  parts.

3*

Thus  Maitg'gi  faid,aud  then  he  told

Whothoic  fliould  bethatfliould  th»oionftcr  kill,

T hat  fliould  come  then  when  as  the  world  were  old.
That  fliculd  renew  each  good, and  mend  each  ill,
Whofc  names  in  facred  (file  to  be  inrcld
Dcferve.and  to  be  prais’d  and  honourd  ftill.

That  fhould  in  time  to  come,as  he  did  conftcrj
With  b>ui«ic kill  that  mircrablctronfter.

39

Thofefite  I nam*d,and  more  by  fivetimesfive,

Mine  author  namcs,that  holpc  to  flay  the  beaft,
Rogero  and  the  rcrt,thc  timcdid  drive,

In  liich  like  talke during  the  prefent fcaft,

And  ere  they  rofe, behold  there  did  arrive
Vmo  thiscavcunwarcs another  gueft.

By  name  that  maid  from  whom  of  late  by  force,
Fierce  Rodomont  had  tanc  Rogcros  horfe.

40

She  having  heard  by  hap  upon  the  way.

Her  mimis  brother  was  at  Merlins  cave.

Where  (he  had  bin  her  fclfe  anotherday.

Not  thinking  now  Rogero  dicrc  to  have  j
Him  when  flic  faw, flic  not  one  word  doth  fay
To  him, nor  any  fhoworincklinggavc.

Like  one  that  knew  fo  well  to  do  her  arrant.

As  fhc  dutftgo,fomccimc  befidc  her  warrant.

Bat  unto  Richardet  flic  frames  hei  talc.

Yet  foas  tothcr  might  her  fpccches  hcarc,

• How  one  from  her  a gallant  coiirfcrfialc.

Which  Bradamnnt  her  miftris  held  full  deare.

The  horfe  (cjuoth  flic)  Prontyno  file  did  call.

As  I had  led  him  thirty  mile  well  neare,

Marfilia  toward,  where  file  bad  me  flay,
i\iid  pointed  me  to  meet  me  at  a day.

4>

So  fond  was  1,1  feared  no  mans  force.

Nor  doubled  no  mans  will  to  do  roc  wrono.

When  once  I fliould  but  fiiew  them  how  the  horfe
Vnto  Renaldos  fiftcr  did  belong:

Yet  one  fierce  voide  of  all  remorfe,

Xlct  me, and  tooke  him  from  mc,and  ere  long
Did  meet  a fo,  with  whom  I fighting  left  him.

That  hath  (1  hope)  by  this  of  life  bnefc  him.


4?

Rogero  with  this  talc  was  fo  much  moved,
rhatfeant  hereof  Hifpalea  made  an  end,

But  Rahardctre  fiiaight  by  him  was  moved.

Yea  and  ionjuid,as  he  would  be  bis  fiend,

7 hattbisBttcmpt  might  fele  by  him  be  proved^
And  (but  thisdamfcll)  none  might  him  attend:

7 hat  flic  mny  bring  him  to  the  Pagans  fight.

That  tockc  away  her  horfcagainlt  all  tight.

44

Stout  R chardet  (though  thinking  too  much  wrong,
So  oft  to  let  anotlicr  undertake
Thofeenterprifes  that  to  him  belong)

Yet  fithfocarnclfly  Rogero  fpake.

He  gives  confenc.  and  tothcrftaid  not  long.

But  of  the  company  his  leave  doth  .ake.

And  leaves  them  all,in  wonder  great  to  fee,
Thatfuch  hie  worth  could  inayongman  be,

45

Now  when  Hrppafw was  qiiiteoiit  offight,

Slicopaed  to  i{t/^ero  a IJ  the  troth.

How  flic  that  c unts  him  her  beloved  Knight,
And'vowt  th  to  be  his  by  folemnc  oth,

Sent  lierofpurpt  fc  to  him  this  lad  niglit.

Which  flic  before conceald  (asbeingloth
Her  miftrir  brother  fliould  her  counlcllknow.
How  fire  that  horfe  upon  him  did  befiow.)

4S

*She  told  him  how  that  he  that  tooke  the  fteed,

Did  addc  thefe  proud  and  fcornfull  words  befidfl^*'
Bccaufeitis  R.ogeros  horfe  indeed.

So  raucli  the  rather  on  the  horfc  1 ride.

And  if  he  will  be  griev’d  at  this  my  deed.

Tell  him  I do  not  mind  my  fclfeto  liide,i
Fori  am  Rodomont  (he laid)  whofc  name
Where  ere  I palTc  fillcth  the  world  with  fame-

47

One  might  have  fcenc  it  in  Rogeros  face.

In  how  great  dudgen  this  great  wrong  he  tooke.
Both  for  cbc'gift  and  giver  in  like  cafe.

And  grofle  abufe,for  which  he  did  not  looker
He  thinks  what  infamy  and  foulc  difgracc
It  were  to  him, fo  great  dtfpite  to  biookcj
Which  if  he  would,thcn  jufily  cv’ry  body.

Might  take  him  for  a dafiaid  and  a nody .

48

Wherefore  with  heart  upon  revenge  full  fer.

He  followctli  forthwith  his  female  guide.

She  that  did  thinke  tbc  fray  unparfed  yef.

That  Rodoniont  and  Mandricardotside,

By  darke  blind  wayes,the  nearefi  fhc  could  get,

Vntotheplacedircflly  flic  did  ride,  i

But  as  you  heard, they  had  deferd  thc  quartll.

And  hafted  thence  to  help  their  Liege  fiom  pcrcll,

4,9

And  asl  touclit  btfore,their  hap  them  bftiifght'

Vnto  theforefaid  Merlins  famous  cave.

There  where  before  good  Malagigi  taught.

What  fccrct  meaning  all  the  pidnreshavc:  ’
Now  had  Marfi/a  (by  the  reft  befought)

Put  on  4 womans  garment  paflTng  brave,  '

Which  lately  for  LanfUJa  had  bin  made.

And  fo  aityrd,reficfltt  her  in  »hc  fliade.


Stmtnct.


ffdoniHt,
MdnJrttard,
Dcrahce, ,


When


no


THE  XXVI.  BOOKE


StHttHCtt


50

When  that  Tartarian  Prince  had  fpidc  this  dame,
Straioht  in  his  mind  he  plots  this  new  found  drift,

1 wilT (thought  he)  by  conqueft  win  the  fame,

And  give  her  Rodtmontee a my  gift,

(As  though  that  love  werebucafport  and  game.

That  miglit  be  fold  and  changed  for  a Iluft)

For  why  (he  thought)  what  needs  a mancomplaine.
If  leefing  one, he  do  another  game?

51

Wherefore  the  tothers  damage  to  repaire.

And  that  he  might  his  ownc  in  quiet  have.

And  for  Marjifa  feemly  was  and  faire.

As  no  man  need  a dame  more  comely  crave;

He  doth  forthwith  unto  them  make  repaire.
Denouncing  ftraight  the  challenge  ftout  and  brave,
That  he  with  thoiefoure  knights  at  tilt  wold  tunne.
Till  they  flue  him, or  he  their  Ladic  wonne.

Straight  ftept  out  Matagige  and  Vivian,  -
Both  preft  in  her  defence  to  breake  a fpeare.

Nor  fearing  to  encounter  man  toman,

With  thoic  two  Pagans  they  fawprefent  there,

But  when  the  fray  bccwcenethcm  now  began;

Fierce  Rodomont  flood  flill  and  doth  foibcare,
Ascomming  thither  with  another  mind.

And  not  to  change  his  purpofe  fii  ftafligud.

53

Mow  ofthebrothcrsDwwBwasthe  firft.

That  with  great  might  the  Pagan  did  invade,

Vponvvhofecreftinvainehisfpeatche  buift,  .

His  blow  no  hurt  it  did,  no  figne  it  made,  , J
His  force  was  leifl,  fo  was  his  fortune  woil^,  ,

. For  (more  perfea  in  bis  trade)

With  fo  great  ftrength  and  skill  his  fpeare  inforced.
That  he  was  ovetthrowncand  quite  unhorfed,.

54

To  venge  hisbrother,  Afa/cg/^e  thought.

But  of  his  thought  he  quickly  was  decci  ved.

His  force  thusovermatcht  prevailed  nought,  '

From  off  his  faddle  he  was  quickly  heaved.

Next  Ald'ger  his comming  dearly  bought,  . '

For  in  hislidea  g'  cat  wound  hcreceavcd,

Sodownc  upon  thegrafle  he  fell  halfe  dead.

His  vifage  waxing  palc,his  armor  red.

55

Then  Richardetto  came  with  mighty  lance.

And  piev’d  himfelfc  by  his  great  force  to  be
Worthy  the  name  of  Palladine  of  France j
A s oft  his  foes  did  fcclc,his  friends  did  fee;

But  at  this  time  one  overthwart  mifchancc
Did  hap,that  downc  among  the  reft  lay  he,
Hishorfc  wherein  he  put  fo  great  a trufl.

Fell  downc  with  bim,and  tumbled  in  the  duft.

When  as  no  other  champion  did  appeare.

But  all  were  overt hiowne  in  this  late  fight.
Thinking  this  conqueft  now  obtained  cicare.
Without  more  ftay  he  from  his  borfe  doth  light.
And  comming  unto  her  with  fmilmg  chcare,

Faiic  dame  (quoth  he)  you  now  arc  mine  by  right.
You  cannot  it  dcnic,oroncccxcufeic.

For  by  the  lawes  of  battcll  fo  wc  ufeit.


^ 57

Indeed  {Marjifa  faid)  it  were  no  wrong.

And  I were  yours  1 gram  by  law  of  wane.

If  I were  thcirs.or  did  to  them  belong.

That  you  have  foiled  in  this  picfcnt  jaire.

But  1 fhall  make  you  know  I hope  ere  long,
Youmiflcyourmarkc,youraimc  didgrcaily  arrC,

I am  mine  ownc,minc  owner  is  within  nicj
He  that  will  have  me,from  my  fclfc  muft  w in  me.

5*

I handlccan  (quoth  flic)  both  fword  and  fpeare.

And  have  ere  this  made  more  then  one  man  bleed.

Then  cald  flic  for  her  annoi  which  was  there.

Which  by  a page  was  brought  to  her  vvith  fpeed
Off  go'th  her  gowne,and  for  flic  ftilldid  wcarc
A flendrr  trufle  beneath  her  womans  weed.

Her  well  fliap*t  limbs  thriein  were  plainly  ftcnc.

In  fliapc  like  Mars, in  facclikc  a/Egypts  Quccnc.  CUefapt.

59

Whenatall  pceces  flic  wasarmed  round,

She  vautctli  nimbly  up  into  her  (cate,

^ And  twifc  or  thrifc  flie  makes  her  hoifc  to  bound.

To  bate  a little  of  his  furious  hcatc,

And  makesa  turncor  two  abovethe  ground.

Then  turncs  flic  to  her  fo  to  do  her  fcatc.

Such  was  (I  judge)  Penthefeleac  fight,

Againft  AchiUcs  famousGree^tyfc  Knight.

<0

Thus  each  tbcmfeivcsupon  their  horfc  advances.

And  with  their  couched  fpearcsfoith  with  they  run,

Vp  ina  tboufand  fplinters  flics  the  lances,^

But  unto  them  no  hurt  at  all  isdonc.*

The  greatly  marvels  how  it  chances,

Thatflic  fliouldfcapc,and  curfes  Af<?o«cand  Sm-,

And/lic  with  herfucccffcas  ill  content,

Blafplicmcth  ckc  the  hcav’ns  and  fiiniament.

61

Then  they  affayd  withfw'ords  moftdrcadfull  dint.

To  wound  the  tone  the  tother,and  to  kill.

Their  ftrokes  were  fuch  as  might  have  pici  ft  the  fliat.

And  to  their  force  was  joyned  paffing  skill;

They  lay  on  lode  amaine,and  do  not  ftinr,

Thclbund  doth  all  the  place  with  cccho  fill,

But  never  was  it  more  for  their  behoofe,  '

To  have  their  armour  of  fo  paffing  proofe<

6»

But  while  they  now  did  moft  apply  the  fray.

Fierce  Rodomont  doth  ttcpihem  both  betwixt.

And  blames  him  much  for  making  fuch  delay,

Of  thatwhichlacc  by  himwasfirmcly  fixt;

And  then  with  courteous  fpccch  he  her  doth  pray.

With  lowly  words  and  loftic,  quaintly  mixt.

That  flic  would  heipe  to  aid  Trajanos  fonne,

Whofe  tents  were  in  much  danger  to  be  wonne.

63

To  this  requeft  Afar/iyi  doth  affent.

As  well  to  hclpc  King  Agramant  thereby.

As  for  (became  to  France  with  that  intent.

The  forecsof the  PalladineS  to  try.

This  while  J?o^ero, wroth  and  malcontent.

After  the  dealer  of  his  hor(c  doth  bicj
And  having  found  of  him  the  perfeft  trackc.

He  feeds  agaioe  hit  guide  Hipj^alca  backc.

And


To  oiJt  hi

dt/Irtjftd

tnnu.


Th*


Th*  1/igU
vtsfmd  to
dttreup
GtMimed  to
Itofhtr,


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.  211


<54

And  foi  lie  thouglit  that  nonecould  do  it  better.

The  mcflciigcr  he  makes  her  ofliis  mind,

And  fends  by  her  hif  lately  wiitten  letter,

Proteflinp  he  will  ftill  continue  kind.

And  that  he  doth  himfclfc  acknowledge  debter.

And  would  himfclfeto  her  for  ever  bind,

Pconcly  prayes  her  for  a timccxcufe
Hisablenccjwhich  he  would  not,inight  hcchufc.

65

With  thisdifpatch  Hippalca  went  her  way.

And  came  to  mount  that  fame  night,

Ao^ero  made  but  very  little  ftay,

Vntill  he  had  Tro«//«o  in  his  fightj

Which  feen  5c  known,  forthwith  there  was  no  way.

But  he  will  have  his  horfe  againe,or  fight

With  hini,t  hat  had  with  fo  unnoble  force.

The  damfcll  robbed  of  the  gallant  horfe.

66

And  ftraightin  fliew  ofwarrehecotichtbjsfpeaic.
And  to  his  face  the  Pagan  hedehde.

But  RoJomontdoth  patiently  forbeare,

Ev’n  as  a /(/i,and  all  his  woidsabidc;

Not  that  of  him  he  had  oncfparkcoffeare.

For  his  great  value  often  had  bin  tridc,  •
Butthat  thedanger  of  his  Lord  and  King,

Weyd  more  with  him  then  any  other  thing.

Wherefore  he  gently  tels  him  for  what  caufc
He  may  not  fight, and  him  exhorted  to
What  all  divine, and  what  all  humane  lawes,
Vmohis  Prince  commands  a man  to  do.

1 (faid  Rogcro)  am  content  topawfc,

In  this  refpeff,  and  make  a truce  with  you.

So  that  this  horfe  againe  to  me  you  render.

Which  fn  totakc,your  rcafon  was  but  (lender.

* 68

Now  while  thefc  two  herein  do  fquarc  and  brave.

The  Tartar  King  doth  unto  them  apptoch.

And  when  hefaw  what  armes  Rogero  gave.

He  fet  another  brabble  ftraight  abroch;

Mineare  (quoth  he)  thefcarmcs  that  now  you  hare.
How  dare  you  on  my  titles  thus  incrocb?

Thecaufe  why  Mandricardo  fpake  thefc  words,

Wai  that  Rogero  gave  the  King  of  burds.

69

An  Eagle  argent  in  a field  of  blew,

Rogero  gavc,whilom  the  creft  of  Troy,

As  one  that  thence  deriv’d  bispedegrew.

And  did  by  due  dcfccntthc  fame  enjoyj
But  hereof  Mandricardo  nothing  knew.

Or  nought  bcleevM,  and  calld  it  but  a toy.

And  tookeit  as  an  injury  and  fcoinc.

To  fee  the  fame  by  any  other  wornc.

70

For  he  himfclfc  did  givc,as  for  hii  cote.

That  bird  tbatbareup  Ganimeioa  hie,'

Ere  fince  he  wan  (as  I before  did  note)

Don  Heitors  armes,and  wan  fuch  praife  thereby.
The  good  fuccefie  hereof  makes  him  afiote.

So  that  he  did  Rogero  firaight  defic,

I fliall  (quoth  he)  fome  better  manners  teach  thee.
Then  in  fuch  faweie  fort  to  ovctteach  thee.  ,


71

As  wood  well  dride  will  quickly  fall  on  fiie.

If  fo  a mana  little  doit  blowj
So  was  fio^ero  kindled  now  in  ire.

To  hcare  the  Fagan  reprehend  him  fo-,

Thoutbinkfl  (quoth  he)  to  have  thy  fond  defire.

By  charging  me  now  wit  ha  double  fo.

But  know  t hat  1 my  panic  good  will  make,

Fiom  him  mine  horfe, from  thee  mine  arms  to  lake.
72

Did  not  we  two  about  this  matter  boord?  ^

And  then  to  take  thy  life  1 did  abflainc,

Bccaufc  that  by  your  fide  I faw  no  fwordj
But  now  fich  you  begin  this  brawlc  againe.

This  fhall  be  fight  in  deed, that  was  but  word.

And  that  your  crefi  fliall  turnc  you  to  much  paine.
Which  unto  me  defeent  and  piopagation
Hath  left,  but  you  do  hold  by  ufurpa  t i on.

7J

Nay  thou  ufurp'fi.the  tothcr  ftraight  dot  h fay.

And  with  that  word  he  !Z)arf«ia«a  drew.

That  fword  that  erft Orlando  flang  away,*

And  then  acruell  fray  was  like  cnTew;

But  ftraight  the  tothcr  two  did  caufc  them  ftay,

A nd  chiefly  Rodomont  did  feeme  to  rew.

That  Mandritard of  lightncflc  fliewd  fuch  token.
That  twife  by  him  hispromife  had  bin  broken.

74

Firft  when  to  get  Marfifa  he  had  thought.

He  had  coF.flifted  more  then  twife  or  ihrifc.

And  now  with  tothcr  quarrelled  for  nought.

About  a bird  orfome  fuch  fond  devife;

Nay  thcn(quoth  hc)if  needs  you  would  have  foughr
We  two  ftiould  trie  the  title  of  out  prife.

Which  by  confent  ftiould  ftand  ftill  undecided,
Vntill  our  Princes  fafctic  were  provided,

*75

Wherefore  for  ftiame  do  as  you  have  agreed.

And  let  us  ceafe  and  lay  all  quarrels  by.

And  when  our  Prince  from  danger  fliall  be  freed.
Then  firft  betweene  us  two  the  matter  trie.

And  after  if  you  live,  you  may  proceed
To  fight  it  out  with  him, and  fo  will  Ir-
Though  well  I wof  ,whcn  1 have  done  with  you.
But  little  will  rcmainc  for  him  to  do.

7«

Tufti  (faith  the  Tartar  Prince)  for  him  nor  thee,
Norallthcwoild  bcfi,dc,l  pafle  one  draw.

For  though  you  fig!  t,  or  though  you  do  agree,
Ofneither  of  you  both  I ftand  in  aw.

As  waterin  a fpring,fo  ftrength  in  me

Shall  ftill  fupply  much  more  then  you  can  draw^

I hope  by  that  time  1 have  done  my  feate.

From  head  to  foot  with  blood  lie  make  you  fweate,
77

Thus  one  ill  word  another  deth  draw  on.

And  wrathfull  Mandricard  them  both  defies:
Rodomont  would  have  prace,but  they  would  none,
Ifthisfpeake  ftiarpe,thenthat  more  ftiarpc  rcpiiesj
Ifonc  ftrife  be  compounded,  yet  anon
Another  ftrife  as  bad  or  worfc  doth  rifcj
In  vaine^/ar^ya  labours  to  compound  them,

For  more  and  more  untowaid  ftill  flic  found  them
T Ev^n


SimiUt


Sindti,


21i


THE  XXVI.  BOOKE


78

£v*'’  2s  the  painfull  hutbnnclman  doth  thinke,

1 • I • I j ^

By  caicto  keepe  the  river  in  his  bounds,
Thatrwclswithraiae,icadretopa(rcthebrinkc,

Afu  xrsK  And  ovciflow  hismow’d  or  fowed  grounds,

Hcftrcngthcnscv’ry  place  that  firems to nuinke,

Yet  more  and  moic  the  water  flill  abounds,

And  while  he  flops  one  vent, another  groweth.

Till  over  all  perforce  at  laft  it  floweth.

, • 79

So  when  thcdamcjof  whom  Haft  made  mention.

Saw  how  liogcro  ftcwit  snd Mandricai'd,

With  Rodomunt  coniinudcin  contention.

And  each  would  feeme  for  totber  two  too  bard,

She  willing  to  compound  this  ftiarpc  diflcntion.

Pci  fwades  them,  but  they  little  it  regard,

Forftiil asone  at  hertequeft forbeares,
Theothertwoareat  it  by  the  earcs.

80

VVlicnasnic  faw  their  furic  ftill  incrcafe.

Let  either  us(cuoth  flic)our  Prince aflift.

And  in  the  mcane  time  let  all  quarrels  ccafc^

Or  if  you  in  this  fury  ftill  perfift.

Then  1 with  Mandricard  will  have  no  peace.

Do  herein  (quoth  Rogero)  as  you  lift.

For  I vcfolvcd  am  to  have  my  horfe.

Although  it  be  by  fairc  mcanes  or  by  force,

81

Then  do  (faid  Rodomont)  your  worft  and  beft,

For  with  that  horfe  to  parti  not  agree,

But  here  before  you  all  1 do  proteft.

That  if  our  King  by  this  ftay  damag’d  be,
Andthatfor  wantofaydhebediftreft.

The  caufe  thereof  did  not  proceed  of  mcj
Rogero  little  weyes  his  proteftation.

But  firmly  holds  his  Hrll:  determination.

8a

And  at  the  Sar^an  furioufly  he  flies,

And  with  his  fliouldci'  gave  him  fuch  a thruft.

He  loft  his  ftirrops,and  fo  loos’d  bis  tkics.

That  hard  he  feaped  lying  in  the  duft.

What?  hold  Rogero , Mandricardo  aks.

Either  not  fightjOr  fight  with  me  you  muft.

And  in  gicat  rage,as  that  fame  word  he  fpake,
Roeeros  beaver  with  great  might  he  ft  take.

The  blow  was  fucb,as  made  him  forward  Icane,

And  ere  that  he  himfclfeagainc could  rcare,'
Vponhimfmotethc  fonneofD^ew,
of  Ai^w,  With  fo  great  flrength  as  no  ftrength  might  it  b<  are
That  had  his  aimor  bene  of  temper  meanc.

No  doubt  they  had  an  end  madcofhim  there*
Rogeroi  hands  ftie  ope  with  fenfleffe  painc.

The  tone  his  fword,ihc  tothcr  leaves  his  raine.

84

H is  horfe  a way  bcares  him  about  the  grecne.

And  Balifird  his  blade  is  left  behind;

Marfifa  that  had  to  Rogero  beenc

Fellow  in  armes  that  day , was  griev’d  in  mind ,

T o fee  him  Us’d  fo  hardly  them  bctweenc.

And  being  ftrong of  limbes,and  ftoutby  kind,

Sbe  fm'nethMai^ricardoon  thecrownc
So  hard,as  wants  not  much  to  fell  him  downe.


Sf

After  Rogero  Rodomont  doth  get  him,

And  new  Trontinohii  wclnigh  bin  wonne.

But  by  the  way  ftout  Richardetio  met  him.

And  with  him  joyn’d  liiscoufin  BovosCon'ne-
Tone  juftics  him,and  furdcroffdoth  fet  him^

The  tothcr,namcly  Vivian,  doth  lunce,

Vnto  Rogero  that  by  this  was  waked.

And  lends  his  fword  unto  hisiight  hand  naked,

r •

' N ow  backe  hctloth  rcturnc,enrag’d  with  fcornc,

M inding  to  pay  bis  dam.sgc  home  againc,

Ev’n  as  a Lion, whom  the  Bull  hath  borne  SindUi

Vpon  his  head,is  full  officiccdifdainc,

Fliesatliimftill..noifc3rcshiscruellhcrnc
Hlsangcr  making  him  forget  his  paine,  *

And  on  his  beaver  with  fuch  force  he  thundered.

As  though  he  wold  his  head  in  twain  have  fundcred.

87

And  fure  he  had  perform’d  it  very  nearc
IfBal/yorifa  had  bene  in  his  hand,  *

Which  he  lot  fall, as  you  befote  did  heare.

Now  when  as  ’Difeord  faw  hew  things  dfd  liar.  J
She  thinks  no  peace  can  pollibly  be  here  *

And  taking  Pride  her  lifter  by  the  h.ind,^

Nowfifterlct  usturneusto  our  Prices,

For  here  (quoth  flic)  arc  rais’d  fiifficicnt  fiers.

. 88

And  fo  away  they  went,  and  let  them  oq*

And  let  me  tell  you  how  fped, .

Whogavc  to  Rodomont  foficrcca  blow.

That  fuch  a great  amazement  in  him  bicd.

That  twife  01  thnfc  he  reeled  to  and  fro-
Front ino  with  his  rcnflclTc  mailer  fled,  *

Alfo  his  fword  had  falnc  ou  t of  his  fill.

But  that  a chaine  did  tie  icto  hiswrift.

This  while  Marffa  held  the  tothcr  tacke.

And  yet  on  either  fidcthcconqutft  fwayd.

Each  had  fb  good  an  armor  on  their  backe,  ^

Of  piercing  it  they  need  not  be  a frayd.

Yet  by  acbanccAfar/ySthapt  tolackc,

• And  likewife  hapt  to  have  Rogcror  ayd,

Forinaturncflic  made,hcrhoifcdid  trip.

And  in  the  durt  upon  one  fide  did  flip,
go

Andasagainc  helabouiduptorifc.

The  crucll  Tartar  juftlcd  him  fo  etofle.

That  on  hisfidc  the  horfe  conftrained  lies,

Foundring  againc  upon  the  flimic  moflcj
Which  when  Rogero  from  aleofe  cfpics.

How  nearc  flie  waste  danger  great  and  lofle.

He  fteps  to  Mandricardfieice\y  aflailing  him.

While  Rodomont  Hands  mazd,  lusfenfes  failing  him.

9*

T be  7* artar  doth  as  fiercely  him  refill.

But  yet  Rogero  ftrake  fo  great  a blow.

Both  to  avenge  himfclfe,and  her  affift.

Whom  Mandricardo  hapt  to  overthrow.

That  liire  I thinke  that  blow  had  little  null.

Quite  to  have  clov’n  him  ro  the  faddlc  bow,

Save  that  the  Tartarsixmox  wasfo  hard.

And  that  Rogero  wanted  Bali/ard-


or  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


313


92

By  this  the  Sar^a)i  King  againc  did  wake
And  feeing  none  but  RicharJetto  ncarc.

He  cals  to  mindc  how  for  Rqgerof  fake.

That  youth  to  him  was  tioubJcTotnc  while  earc.
Straight  with  great  rage  he  toward  him  doth  make,
inching  to  make  him  buy  that  curefie  dcaie;

And  fuTC  good  Richardetto  had  repented  it,

But  that  hiscofln  with  great  art  prevented  it.

9?

Hiscofin  MdtagfgCtwhok  skill  was  great.

In  all  that  doth  tomagicke  art  pcrtainc.

With  wordsthat  he  without  booke  could  repeat,
Did  ccnjiircup  a fpry tc  of  hcllini  trainc.

And  by  this  meanes  he  works  a paflingieat*

For  (though  he  nam’d  no  place)  he  doth  ordaine.
This  fprite  in  ’Doraliccs  hoife  to  enter.

And  bcarc  her  thence  away  at  all  ad  venter.

94

The  fprite  thusconjurd,  quickly  doth  hispait.

Into  thedaitnftls  gentle  nag  he  crept.

And  fo  his  quiet  nature  did  pervart.

That  on  thefuddenthirtiefoothe  Icpt,

And  ten  foot  high,yct  with  fo  eaCe  ftait.

That  ‘Doralice  ftill  the  fadle  kept.

Yet  cndfrflic  out, in  doubt  to  have  mifearried.

For  in  thedivels  nanae  Hie  thence  was cariied.

9.5

Toithwith  to  helpc  her  Rodomonte  go’th,

Becaufc  Ihe  flcd,and  erkdetohimforaid.

To  ftay  behind  the  Tartar  is  as  loth.

For  fcare  betweene  them  he  may  be  betraid ,

He  leaves  Rogcro  and  Marfifa  both,

Not  in  the  place  fo  littlctime  he  ftaid.

As  to  accord  with  them  upon  fome  truce.

Or  make  at  lead  fome  mannerly  excufe.


56

This  while  Marfifa  was  got  up  againe.

And  now  flic  means  to  vcngchcr  on  her  fo.

But  he  was  gone, at  which  in  great  difdamc.

She  frets  and  chafes,  that  he  had  fetv’d  her  fo,
Rogcro  chafes  as  much,  for  ail  in  vaine,

Heknev;  it  would  be,aftcr  them  to  go;

They  know  their  ftceds(and  thisdoch  grieve  them
Cannot  outiun  Frontin  and  Brigliadore,  (mor

97

wherefore  fuppofing  (as  it  was  indeed)

That  they  were  gone  unto  the  Turl^ijh  hofl.

To  follow  them  foithw'ith  thefetwo  agreed,
Thoughnot  to  follow  as  they  went  in  port.

Not  doubting  but  when  Agramant  were  freed.

At  Icafurc  them  to  meet,  and  to  their  coft;

They  onward  go,but  yet  Rogero  ment.

To  bid  his  friends  farewell  afoic  he  went*

98

Downefrom  hishorfe  he  gently  doth  defeend.

And  Richardetto  he  afidc  doth  take.

And  promifl  him  for  ay  to  be  his  fiend.

And  to  his  noble  (ifler  for  his  fake:

T o whom  (faid  he)  I pray  you  me  commend,
Yctinfuchprctiefort  thefame  bcfpakc,

Flis  inward  love  was  not  thereby  dctefled.

Nor  her  great  love  to  him, one  whit  fufpc£ted.

99

Thusfblcmncleavconcc  taneon  either  fide.

And  profetsof  great  love  and  curtfle  made.

To  him  washuit,andall  the  reft  befide.

As  (fill  among  great  nobles  is  the  trade,
with  Marfifaccidoth  tide.

But  how  they  did  the  Chri/lcn  campc  invade.

And  what  gicat  Ioffe  did  Charles  thereby  receive.
In  next  enfuing  booke  you  may  pciceive.


In  the  xxvi.  hoo\e  I oiferve  that  Aldiger  did difcreetlyrefufe  the  challenge  ofMarfirayvhich  might  perhaps  have
hindred  his  better  purpofe  in  refeuing  of  his  Hippalca  »e  may  note  the  reifdome  of  a rparie  mejfengcr  ,that

f^norves  aswell  to  holdher  peace  as  to  jpeal{e.  La/llyinKogaOt  Rodomont,  H^ndikud  and  the  confufed

effects  of  difeord.

The  Princes  named  ly  mine  author  to  he  fillers  and  vanquifhers  of  the  mljerdble  monfler  (as  I called  it)ly  which  cc-  Hifiorie.
marice  is  ment,  are  fo  famous  in  all  writings  of  this  age,  that  I need  not  Jpealie  of  them,  fpecially  our  I(ing  Hcnrie  the
eight, wbofe  bounty  and  magnificence  can  never  bee  forgotten  while  this  realme  fitall  be  peopled,  or  any  ht forks  read.

This  defeription  of  the  monfer  of  covetoufmffe , is  (in  my  fancy)  very  well  handled  by  mine  Author,  far  beyond  the  Allegoric.
iil^e  in  Dant  who  mal;eth  her  onely  hhc  a Wolfe, pinedwith faminciBut  AnoRogoetkfarder,and  more  fignificantly,dc-  °

feribing  her  finfitobe  ugly,hecaufe  of  all  vices  it  is  the  moft  hatefull-,  cares  of  an  affe,beingfor  t he  mofl  part  ignorant,
or  at  the  leaf  careleffe  of  other  mens  good  opinions  i a Wolfe  in  head  and  breafl,  namely  ravenous  and  never  fatisfiedia
Lions  grijly  jaw, terrible  and  devouring-,  a Foxe  in  all  the  ref,  wyly  and  craftie,  and  timerous  ofthofe  that  are  fronger
then  bimfelfe:  all  which  applications  are  fo  proper  and fo  plaine,  as  it  is  needleffe  to  fand  upon  them.

Some  verie  fondly  have  (urmifed,  and  publijhed  the  fame  in  print,  that  thiswas  alluded  to  the  Bijh  op  of  Rome,  hut  Allufioo,
low  ab/iird  that  imagination  is,  the  praife  of  the  Pope,'  then  living,foUowing  in  the  ja.  faffe  doth  plainly  fhtw.  But
Fornarius  (itppofeth  it  to  be  meant  rather  ty  fome  temporall  Prince  of  Italk,  that  with  his  covet oufneffe  oppteff  <d  the
people, and  therefore  might  be, not  unfitly, termed  fuch  a monfier.


Here  end  the  notes  of  tlte  xxvj,  booke  .


THE  XXVIf.  BOOKE.


WoDteHs
will  mart

fiaiitm  tbtit

9um$


THE  ARGVMENT.

Rogero  And  thefe  other  Pagan  Kings ^

C^^ake  C harles  againe  to  Paris  wals retires
yfmong  the  Turks  aewfeedof^uarrell Jp>'i»gSy
And  kindles  in  their  hearts  a (^uenchltffe  fire:
which  all  their  campe  in  great  diforder  brings ,
Agraaiant  to  appeafe  them  doth  defire  j
Fierce  RodomonC  doth  leave  the  campe  in  itrath,
'Becaufe  hii  mifires  himforfaken  hath.


1


Mong  the  many  larc  and  (pc-
ciallgiftSj

That  in  the  female  fex  arc
found  to  fitj

I Thisoncischicfe,that  they
atfodaincfhifts,

^Give  beft  advice,  and  fliow
mollrcadie  wit:
i But  man,except  he  thinks
and  chcws,and  fifts.

How  ev*ry  part  may  anfwertotherfitj
By  rafh  advice  doth  often  overfhoot  him.

And  doth  attempt  the  things  that  do  not  boot  him>
a

Good  Malaglgi  thought  he  had  done  wifely.

In  making  Z)oM/ice  to  Pdrik  fly.

Bat  if  he  had  the  matter  wayd  prccifcly,

(Though  Richardetto  wa?prefcrv*d  thereby)

He  would  have fureconfefl  it  done  unwifely,
Hisfafetie  with.fl^great  ajoflie  to  buy:

For  by  this  a£).( which  he  thc/i  nqt  forethought)

A Ioffe  unfpcakcable  to  Chariot, wns  wrought.

, 3 ' .

Alas  hpwmuch  might  he  have.bcttcrdone.

If  he  b^  made  rhe  fiend  the  jvench  convay^

Vnto  the  fall  or  riflng  of  thc^unne^

To  WeftjOt  BaftjOr  any  oth^Wfy  , ■

Where  Rodomont  aad  Agricfnes  fonne.

From  Far  is  wals  might  have  gone  far  aftray  }

Bat  he  that  tvetwUheth  Chtifiens  cyill  j
So  at  this  time  did  prove  bimicite  a IDevill.

Thcfiend  her  filly  horie  raoft  flily  entetd,  ^

And, not  before  preferibed  any  pl^ce.


He  quickly  all  thecompany  diflemperdj
Nor  bare  he  her  away  a common  pace.

But  overbrooks,and  ftreams.  and  ditches  venterd:
She  crying  flill  for  a yd  as  in  fuch  cafe.

Nor  leaves  her  bcafl:  to  fling,run,fnoic  and  ftampe,
Vntill  flic  quite  was  paft  the  Chrifien  campe.

r ^

Thercdid  flic  come  cv’n  as  flie  could  defire.

Among  the  midfl  o? Agramantes  tvaine,

And  there  at  laft  flic  found  the  King  her  fire.

That  of  Granata  did  poflefle  the  raignc;

The  while  her  lovers  both  ihemfclves  do  tire.

And  inpurfuing  her  do  takegreat  paine.

By  tracing  her  with  as  great  toiie  and  care,

As  hunifmcn  do  with  plcafutc  trace  the  Harcj

6,

Now  Charles  tis  time  for  thee  to  lookc  about,

Vnto  thy  wals  and  flrcngthsmtimc  betake  thee.
Thou  never  canftcfcape  this  plunge, I doubt.
Except  thou-ftir  up;quickly,and  awake  thee.

Thy  ftrcngthjthc  lampof  France  are  quenched  out
I mcane  thy-frends  &'charfipionschicfc  forfakc  t)^ice,
Orlando  thcc,his  wits  have  him  rclinquiflicd.

And  ail  his  vertuesdrownd  and  quite  cxtinguifijcd.

' 7

Likewife  Jle«a/do,  though  not  fully  mad,

Ycflittlc  Icflfc  then  mad  feckes  there  and  hcarc.

For  faire  Angelica.iod  is  full  fad,

Tofecthat  he  ofher  no  news  can  hcarcj
For  why  a ccrtainc  old  inebaunter  had
Told  him  a forged  rale,that  toucht  him  ncare.

How  flic, to  whom  of  love  he  made  profcflion.

Was  in  Orlandos  keeping  and  poffcffien.

-T  3 This


tib^


i6


THE  XXVII.  BOOKE


s

7 Iiisir.aJe  lumat  tlic  firftfolotli  togo
T o wliithcr  he  was  fent  for  ayd;

Till*  made  him  backeagainc  cohaflcn  fo.

Then  when  the  T urtis  his  prefence  fo  difmaid,

And  thinking  after  that,(bme  newsto  know.

By  privic  fearch  the  Nttnries  all  he  laid.

And  CaAch  all, in  Farii  andabout.

To  fee  if  he  by  (Search  could  Aodc  her  out.

9

But  w hen  he  heard  of  her  no  news  nor  tid  ing.

And  that  Orfa/iio  there  likcwifc did  want.

He  could  inFdrwmake  no  longer  biding.
Doubting  his  rival!  fought  him  tofupplant,

But  up  and  downeabout  thecountrie  riding
Soircnmc  to  Brava,  fometime  to  Anglant,
Suppofing  ftill  Orlando  her  had  bidden,

Left  of  hisplcafure  he  might  be  forbidden.

I c

And  thus  the  wicked  fiend  his  timeefpidc.

To  givethc  C^r  flens  fticha  fatallblo,

VVhenas  thefe  two, in  whom  they  moft  affide,
Wcie  abient  now  their  Prince  and  countrie  ftO|
Furdei  foi  fouldicrs  of  the  Turliijlrddc,

All  that  were  valiant  men, or  counted  fo,

Were  all  againft  this  time  entifed  hither,

VVliolly  uniting  all  their  force  togithcr.

I I

Gradoj^o  ftout,and  S4crapantee  fearce,

That  in  thatcharmed caftclllong  had  dwelt.
Which  tWEngliJh  Dukc,a*.I  did  laterehcarfc,
Diftblved  quite,  and  caus’d  likcfnow  to  melt.
Thefe  two  likewife  the  Chrifien  campc  do  pearcc.
The  forces  of  thefe  two  the  Chri/iens  felt.

Rogero  and  Marffa  made  Icflc  haft.

And  fo  it  happcnd,they  arrived  laft.

11

The  firft  two  couple  nearc  the  Chrifient  tents.

Did  meet, and  then  after  long  confultaiion.

Each  unto  other  flicwing  their  intents.

They  a 11  conclude  with  one  determination,

And  all  ofthem  to  this  give  their  confents,

I n fpitc  of  all  the  Chrifien  generation,

T o fuccour  Agramant  their  Lord  and  Liege,

And  maugcr  CharU  hismight,to  raifethe  fiege.

Straight  in  one  crew  they  fouie  togithcr  knit,

Breake  through  the  Chrifien  watch  by  force  amaine.
Neither  in  hugger  mugger  did  they  it.

But  crying  lewdly,  Affrka  and  shtAne,

They  lay  on  lode,  and  cv'ric  one  they  hit.

Dead  or  aftoniflicd  doth  there  remaine.*

Alarum  then  all  ore  the  campc  was  rung.

Though  few  could  tel  thecaufc  fro  whence  it  fpiung.

Some  thought  the  G a/coign!  or  the  bold.

By  mutiny  had  madefomcinfurrefiion.

And  their  rurmife  unto  the  Emp’rortoldy
Whocamc  with  minde  to  give  them  due  correfftdo
But  when  he  did  the  bodies  dead  behold.

Incurable  untill  therefurreflion,

He  ftandeth  ftilllikeonc  with  wonder  mazed.

And  on  their  woful!  wounds  long  time  be  gazed;


Ev'nasa  man  thatwitha  boltof  thunder,  SsmUe^

Hath  fecne  his  dwtllin;^  houfe  fmit  unaware)

Straight  fcarchcth  with  no  little  fcarc  nor  wonder.

Which  way  the  bolt  did  pafTc  that  caus’d  his  care;

So  Charles  that  faw  mens  bodies  cut  in  funder.

Inquires,  offo  great  wounds  who  aut  hours  are.

And  when  he  knew  how  few  they  were  thatdidit.

Did  wifh  htmfcifc  there  ptefent  to  forbid  it.

1 6

This  w bile  on  another  fide,

VVithgood  Rogero  do  them  fore  impeach,

And  through  tnc  campc  in  fpitc  of  them  they  ridc^

Killing  or  wounding  all  within  their  reach:

As  ill  a mine  that  lies  dole  unefpide.

With  traynsof  giuipowdcr  men  make  a breach;

Or  3$  a tempeft  goes  along  by  coaft.

So  fuddcniy  thefe  two  brake  through  theboft.

17

Many  that  fcapt the  tother  foure  by  flight.

In  flying,fcll  unwarcs  upon  thefe  twaintf;'

And  felt  by  proofc  that  neither  flight  nor  fight*

Can  fare  a man  ordained  to  beflaine,

Ev’n  asa  FoxCjwhomfmokcand  fire  doth  fright.

So  as  he  dare  not  in  the  ground  remaine.

Bolts  out,  and  through  bothfmokc  & firefhefiietfa,  T^iriar*
Into  the  Tariers  mouth,  and  there  he  diech.  beundt  u

1 8 huat  the

Thus  laft  of  all,  by  this  moft  noble  paire,  with,

7 he  Chrifien  armie  once  againc  was  fundred.

And  then  to  they  all  repaire,  ^

Who  wclcoms  them, and  at  their  value  wondted«

Now  hope  and  couragc,dnvcawaydifpairr.

One  T ur\e,of  Chrifien!  ftraight  defide  an  hundred.

So  great  a boldncflc  in  their  mind  doth  rife.

By  hclpc  and  fuccour  of  thefe  sew  fupplies.

*9

Straightway  on  both  fides  out  their  men  were  brought
TNir  ftanderds  and  their  banners  all  difplaid,

A nd  there  that  day'  a bloodie  field  was  fought,

A nd  neit  her  fide  made  flicw  to  be  difmaid.

For  hopes  alike  in  either  armie  wrought.

Tones  pafled  conquefts,  tothers  prefent  aid.

But  fortune  on  the  ChrifiensCodid  frownc.

That  they  againc  were  dm*n  unto  the  towne,

20

The  pafllng  force  of crucll  Rodomomfy

The  ftrength  and  value  great  of  Mnndricard,

Rogcrot  vcituCjthat  doth  all  furmount,

Gradajfos  courage  of  no  fmall  regard,

Marfifas  hcart,of  princrpall  account,
Thcskillof5’<jc7'opisnr,with  bcftcompard,

T hefe  were  the  caufers  of  good  Cbarls  hii  lofte.

And  fent  the  Chrifient  home  by  weeping  crofts  ftvvoWj
21

Great  ftorc  were  drown'd  in  Sequana  with  haft.

The  bridge  fo  narrow  was  for  to  receive  them,

Wifliing  (as  Tfedals  forme  had  in  time  part)

Some  wings  wherewith  aloft  in  ayre  to  heave  them)

Some  thrufting,  ftrave  to  get  them  in  fo  faft,

That  ftrength  & breath,  & life  at  laft  did  leave  them
But  that,whercby  King  CharU  was  chiefly  fhakco,
VV4sihii,that  iriany  Faffarfyns  were  taken.

Thu


Simib,

SifMlet


Htreet,
Mm&fk-
fettm  ftrft*
qmterviri

fut  fitneah

ftttdtii.


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


217


gds»t  fittai
tudhttUH,


at  19

7 luis  fortune  once  a^ainc  did  tiirnc  the  whccle,  Rogcro^  MandTicaTd,2Lni  Rodomont,

The  good  King  Charlcshzd  her,  but  could  not  hold,  Gan  now  ihcirquaricls  to  renew,
Andof  this  foilc  this  hurt  he  then  did  fccle,  (her,
it  fainter  made  his  friends, his  foea  the  boldeti
T he  Marc]uis  of  Vienna  true  as  ftcclc,

Wasat  that  feivice  wounded  in  his  fliouldcr,

And  many  hurt^but  nonedid  play  bispait.


So  well  that  day,as  valiant  Brandimart.

lie  floutly  bare  it  out,  no  I ittle  fpace.

And  when  be  faw  thcie  was  no  other  way,

1 hen  to  the  fiuic  prudently  gave  place.

And  fpar’d  himrdfe.againft  anotherdayj
Now  cnceagaincis  Cibijr/r  iiuvofull  cafe^

Now  once  againe  to  Paru  fiege  they  lay.

Yong  Orphans, and  old  widdows  prayre  and  crics,
Againc  unto  Gods  hcav’nly  throne  anfe.

14

T he  .Angcll  Michel,was  but  ill  appaid.

Finding  the  caufe  of  thofe  good  Chriflcns  teares,
He  thought  his  maker  v;as  butillobaid.

And  that  he  may  be  blamd  therefore  he  feareS|
He  cals  himfelfc  deceived  and  betraid)

By  her  fiiouid  fet  the  Pagans  by  the  cares.

From  Which  (it  feemed)  now  fiicdrd  fo  vary,

\ As  Hic  bad  rather  done  the  9uite  contrary,

as

Ev’nasthe  Servitor whofclovc  andzcalc,
Morcthen  his  memory  may  be  commended,
Forgettu’grn  ibmc  waighty  caufc  todealc.

That  by  his  Lord  to  him  was  recommended.
Would  with  new  care  his  former  fault  conccalc.
That  ere  his  mafler  know, it  may  be  mended}

So  this  good  Angel^wcnt  not  up  to  God,

Till  hchad  doncasmuchashc  was  bod.

26

To  feekedame  Difeorike  doth  leave  the  skic.

And  to  the  Abby  hcrerurnesagaine.

Where  her  amid  the  monks  he  might  cfpicj
That  change  old  officers,  and  new  ordainc;

She  laughs  to  fee  their  portifes  to  flic,

Rcadie  to  knocke  out  oae  anothers  braine.*

The  takes  her  by  her  painted  locks,

Aod  with  great  furic  gives  her  many  knocks.

^7

He  brake  a crofles  handle  on  her  cro  wne.

And  gtievoufly  doth  beat  hcr,backe  and  fide,
The  wretch  upon  her  maty  bones  falsdewnc.

At  sW Angels  fcct,and  mercy ,mercycridcs

^ Packeto  the  Pagans  thcn,thatncge  yontownci
(Quoth  he)and  lee  that  you  among  them  bide.
For  if  this  place  againc  thou  ever  trouble.

Allure  thy  fclfe,tby  payment  fiiall  be  double.
ti


As  making  of  the  Chrifluins  fmall  accountj
That  unto  Pans  walls  thcmfelvcs  withdrew.*
Wherefore  to  Agramant  they  do  recount
Their  quarrels, & thbgroundsof  svhcnce  they  grew.
Each  one  by  challenge  his  juft  caufe  averring,

The  combatsordet  to  the  King  referring,
to

Alfo  Marfifa  doth  the  King  intreat,

That  Itic  may  end  her  combat  fiill  begunne.

With  as  great  haft  tbcreof,and  asgieat  heat,
Againft  the  Tartar,  Agriianes  fonne;

This  Ihcdefircswith  haft  and  inftancegrear.

As  one  that  think$,grcat  Wrong  to  her  was  done.

If  in  regard  ofanyftatc  or  powte.

She  fliould  attend  one  day,or  yet  one  bovine,

31

But  Rodomont  allcdgeth  that  of  right,

Hefirft  fhould  end  the  matter  with  hisrivail, '

Sith  by  accord  they  firftdcfcrd  thefight.

Till  time  mightferve, after  their  here  arnvall:

No  IdTc  Rogero  for  his  horfe  takes  fpight.

And  fwcaics,  that  whether  they  agree  or  fttive  all.
To  take  Frontino, no  man  fhculd  reftraine  him.

Or  clfc  to  fight  with  him  that  doth  detains  him,

Furthcr,the  matter  fan  her  to  entangle.

The  argcntEctg/e  in  the  azure  field,

G^vc  to  the  Tartar  matter  more  to  jangle.

And  quarrcll  with  Rogero  for  his  Hiieldi
And  (b  confufedly  he  then  did  wrangle.

As  though  with  all  at  once  he  would  the  ficldj
Andin  hit  furic  furc  he  had  attempted  it.

But  that  the  Kings  commandment  flat  prevented  it,
3J

. Who  fiift  with  grave  and  frcndly  admonition,

Tp.pcacc  and  good  attoncment  did  exhort  them.
But  when  beyond  all  mcancsofcompofition.

He  faw  that  wrath  and  furic  did  tranfport  them,

To  certainc  Marjloals  he  doth  givccommifiioD,
According  to  the  law  of  armes  tb  fort  them;

Andof  all  waycsjthiswasnot  thought  the  worfl.
To  trie  by  lots, which  two  fhould  combat  furft.

34

Fourc little fcrowlcs were  putintoa  pot.

The  firft  had  Rodomont  and  Mandricard;

Rodomont  and  Rogero  next  they  wrot ;

The  third  Rogero  was  and  Mandricard ;

The  fourth  paiie  that  miift  trie  the  prefent  lot.

Was  flout  Afar/yijoynd  to  Mandricard;

When  lots  werccaft,  thefe  two  firft  but  were  tanc,
Picrcc  Rodomont  and  fonne  of

35


Thougli  7)i/c6rdt  back  & arms  were  fore  with  beating  Mandricard  and  Rogero  next  they  fi  iide


Yet  thence  with  all  the  haft  fli c could  Hie  wentj
Sore  terrifi'd  with  that  great  Angels  threating,
Doubtipg  againc  in  like  fort  to  ic  flicnt:

Yet  in  (his  hafl,bchind  her  not  forgetting.
Bellows  and  eolcs,tn  ftced  of  thofe  were  fpent,'
By  which  in  many  minds,and  hearts  invincible.
She  quickly  kindle  might  a fire  inquenchiblc.


Rodomont  and  Rogero  next  wasfaid;

Mandricard  and  Marfifa  ftaid  behindc,

With  which  the  ftatcly  dame  wafs  ill  apaid:

Nor  was  well  content  in  minde,

Doubting'that  when  they  firft  their  parts  had  ^lid.
The  combat  will  befuch  bctwccncthcmtwb.

He  and  Marftja  fhould  have  nought  to  do.


mo>ig  tilt
Vagan  Vfin,

cu.


THE  XXVir.  BOOKE


*i8


TaB)/  Ha-
ting a mm
of  light  be -
btviourf  ftid
be  vxu  4 mi
aftwa  ca-
iaurt.


Cradalfa  &
I Mindricard
ftU  eui,a-
! taut  tbt
1 Jwtri,


Not  farrc  from  Parhyhy  a levcll  ground.

That  was  in  compafl'c  fcant  a thoufand  paces,

This  plain  with  rayles,  and  bars  wascompaft  round.
And  tents  therein  were  fct  withcquall  fpaccs.

With  fcafFolds  rays’d  upon  the  outward  bound.

To  give  to  lookers  on  conveflient  places^

Now  came  the  time  thefe  rtrifes  Ihould  be  decided.
Among  thefe  KnightSjtholc  tents  were  thusdevided.

57

In  the  pavillion  bordring  on  the  Eaft,

Stands  Kodomont^nh  vifage  (terneand  grim,

Ferraw  and Sacrapant  were  rcadic  preft.

To  put  his  ftaly  leipents  hideon  him:

In  tother  tent  that  was  upon  the  Weft,

Gra.daJfo  and  ftout  Faljyron  do  trim.

With  Hedors armes fo  Uately  and  fo  faire.

The  valiant  Prince,King  Jgricancs  hairc.

.5*

On  one  fide  in  a high  tribiinallfeat.

Do  fitthe  Kings  of  Ajfrica  and  Spaine,

With  Stordilan  and  other  Princes  great.

Both  feard  and  followd  of  the  Turl^ijh  traine:

Happic  was  he  that  day,that  could  but  get,

• A place  to  fit  or  ftand  although  with  paine.

On  I idge  of  houfcjor  wall,or  top  of  tree,

Info  great  prcflcjthe  goodly  fliew  to  fee.

39

On  tother  fide  fat  Ladies  of  great  name.

In  ftatcly  fort,to  fee  and  to  be  fecne,  vr!

That  out  of  divers  icalmes  and  countries  came,
Tovifit  orattend  tlv  5^a«ry?iqucene:  ’

There  TJoralyce  was  plaft,that  lovely  damey  i
Who  wears  a robe  of  crimfon  cut  on  grecnei
Yetwasthecrimfbn  ftaindinfuchafafhion,

It  rather  icemd  inclining  to  carnation.

40

Among  the  reft  Marfifa  fat  that  day,  ••  '

In  fhort  light  clothes  moft  fumptuoufly  arraid>,
Thcfaniionoffuchkindjaswellitmay  - '

Become  a warrior,and  vet  a maid,  ^

Hippolita  (I  thinkc)  us’d  fuch  array.

When  in  the  field  her  banner  fiiedifplaid,  '
Thuscach  thing  was  prepared  for  thefighr.

And  each  man  was  prepared  for  the  fight.  ^

41

AnHemWin  hiscoate  of armes fteppes out.

And  of  the  law  9f  armes  expounds  theguife,
Prcfelling  tO  refolye  each  little  doubt,;

That  in  fuch  cafe  accuftoms  to  aiifc;

The  people  gafingflandeth  all  about,

Attent  with  liftning  ears,and  longing  eyes,

When  from  the  tent  of  valiant  Mandricard
Behold  a fodaine  noyfe  and  fturre  was  hard.

4*

The  caufe  was;this,the  King  of  Serkane,

Who  (as  before  I did  rehearfe)  was  one.

That  holpe  to  arme  the  Ibnne  of^gricanef
Taking  hisfword  in  hand  toputiton.

Saw  written  in  the  handle,  Tturindane^

And  looking moreadvifedlythereonv  . -
He  faw  Almontes  armes  grav’n  on  the  blade,-
The  which  fttange  fight  him  greatly  wonder  made.


4J

And  glad  he  was  when  oncehedid  efpy  it,

(1  he  chiefeft  caufe  that  firft  to  France  he  came)
Although  before  he  never  could  come  by  it;
Whcicfoic  he  c|ue(iions  ftraight  upon  the  fame.

If  Mandricardo  wan  itjor  did  buy  it?

Who  in  this  fort  his  anfwcr  then  did  frame;

1 with  Orlando  for  this  fword  did  quaircli.

And  car  1 had  it,put  my  life  in  perrcll.

44

Further  unto  this  anfwcr  he  doth  ad,

A farther  lic,hisgIorieto  incrcafe.

How  that  Orlando  for  the  fcarc  he  had,

That  for  this  Iwoid  he  never  fliould  have  peace.

Had  throwneaway  the  fword,and  faind  him  mad.
That  thereby  he  might  caufe  his  quarrcll  ccafc;
Doing  herein,  as  is  the  Caflor  wonted.

Bite  of  his  floncs,  when  he  is  nearly  hunted.

45

Well  {cpao'daGradaJfo)  what  Orlando  ment,

I cannot  now  dilcufl'c,nor  do  I know.

But  Pure  I am  it  is  not  mine  intent.

Now  1 have  found  it  here  to  let  it  go.

The  money, mcn,munition  1 Iiavcfpcnt,
Deferveasgooda  thing asthisi  trow.*

You  did  bur  findcit,you  your  fclfcconfclTcit.

And  now  I challenge  it  and  do  pofTefte  it.

4«

If  you  denie  my  cUime,hcre  I will  prove  it.

This  field  the  court,  this  lift  my  pleading  bar.

My  plea  is  fuch,as  no  writ  can  remove  it,

M y judge  muft  be  the  fequell  of  the  war.

War  faid  the  otlier,who,can  better  lovcit
Then  I?  thefe  words  to  me  as  mufickc  ate.

If  fo  the  King  of  Sar\a  will  agree.

To  ftay  his  combat,tiJl  1 fight  with  thee.

47

pe  furc  He  anfwcr  thcr,and  all  hefide.

That  dare  prefumeto  offer  me  offence.*

With  that  Rogero  ftept  bctwccnc  and  cride,

Ho  firs.  With  this  I minde  not  to  difpcnce.

Or  let  the  fight  piocccd,as  lots  have  tridc.

Or  I myfclfc  will  put  you  to  your  fence;

Shall  he  denie  the  fword  and  flialll  ycdd.

That  you  fliall  vscaic  mine  Eagle  on  your  filicide

48

Wherefore  prefervetbat  order  firft  agreed  on.

From  which  in  honouriyou  may  no  way  ftart,

Or  if  to  breake  it  further  you  proceed  on,

1 brcakcwill  all,ifyoudo  breakea  part.

Tufh  (quoth  the  rurrar)threats  we  have  no  nced  oit,
If  Mars  were  in  you  bodi,and  tookc  your  part,

Yet  both  fhould  finde  it  folly  to  attempfy
Me  of  my  f]iicld,or  fword  once  to  prevent,

49

And  with  that  word  fonhwith  he  bent  his  fift,  ; .

And  on  Gradajfos  hand  fo  fierce  he  fitafee.

That  fodainIy,orcar  Orflii^owift,

He  made  him  unawares  the  fword  forfakv'

Who  much  repind  he  thus  his  purpofe  mlft.

And  that  fbunprepard  he  could  him  takirr''''

And  much  more  griev’d  it  hmi,rhatibiidii'gr>ec,
Wasoffeid  him  in  fuch-an  open  place,

• Whete


fmviHal  X,

Sdijnr,
ImiMtu  Ca
Sara  qui  fa
Eunaebum
ipjefuit,
(Ufitm  ava-
dere  damaa
Tefiifu'.i,


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


Wherefore  to  be  aveng’d  offogreat  wrong,

ife  Hcpjieth  bavke  and  out  hisfwoid  hcdrawcs,
Thctothcrdorh  no  farther  time  prolong.

Though  in  refpeif  ofordcr  there  wascaufe.

Nay  which  was  more,  he  thought  himfelfcfoflrong
To  fight  with  all  at  oncc,be  askt  nopaufe.

But  to  them  both  at  once  he  makcsdcfiancc.

In  hisownc  ftrengrh  he  had  fo great  affiance.

5«

1 hlsmanismad,butlct  mewith  bimtricit,

GtaLiJfo  faid,Ile  make  him  wife  againc:

Nay  foftly  (cjuoth  Rngero)  I deny  it,

Foi  this  fame  combat  doth  to  me  pertain e:

Stand  backe  faith  roncjfaith  tothcr  nay  not  I yet,
Backc  youj  yet  both  ftill  in  their  place  remainc;
Thusdo  tiiefc  three  with  malice  great  and  fpite,
Strangely  begin  a combat  tripartite,
ea

And  fine  to  much  confufion  it  had  growne.

Had  notfomc  mcn,more  Ilcut  perhap  then  wife,
Themfdvcs  amonj;  thcmundifcrectly  thrownc.
With  couiagc  great. but  yet  with  fmall  advife.

To  fuccour  others  danger  with  their  ownc:

Tet  could  no  force  them  part,norno  devife.

Till  Agramant  himfclfc,thcirdreadcd  Lord,

In  perfbn  came  their  tjuarrcll  to  accord,

53

The  rci’rcncc great  thatunto  him  they  bcare,

Made  them  forthwith  their  forces  to  reflta  me.

Who  ftratght  the  caufes  of  thefe  broilcsdid  hcare.
And  to  compound  them  fought,but  all  in  vaine.
For  leant  GradaJjotovAd  bemadeforbeare,

, The  fword  fb  long  with  tothcr  to  remainc,

Vmili  the  fight  were  ended  now  in  hand.

Of  which  the  fcqucll  could  not  yet  be  fcand,

54

Scarfe  had  the  King  with  words  of  great  pcrfwaflon.
This  quarrell  new  begun,a  while  appeas’d,

But  t|hat  another  fttife,by  new  occafion.

In  Rodamontes  tent  them  alldifcas’d:

An  hurlybuily  and  a fierce  invafion.

There  grows  betweene  two  Princes  fore  difplcas’d,
Bctwccnc  flout  SacrapitU  and  Rodomount,

As  I to  you  will  prcfcntly  rccoont.

King  Sacrapant,  aslatc  beforcltold,

Heipiirg  to  aimc  the  crucll  Sar\an  King,

With  thofcfclfearmcs  that  NlmfoJ  wire  of  old.
From  whom  this  Pririce,his  pedigree  did  bring,
Whiles  he  (I  fay)  did  curioufly  behold
His  furniturejand  cv’rie  other  thing.

That  to  his  horfc,orunto  him  belong.

To  fee  they  might  be  furcand  firmc,and  flrong.

While  he,that  llately  ftced  Frontino  vew’d.

That  proudly  champingflood  upon  his  bit.

And  all  his  raincs  withfnowlike  feme  bedew’d.
Without  rcgard,whofc  hands embrodcr’d  it,

A thought  unpleafant  in  his  mind  renew'd.

And  to  his  heart  did  feeme  fullncarc  to  fit.

He  thinks  this  hoife  was  very  like  in  fi  ght.

To  one  of  his,that  Frontlat  whilom  bight.


57

And  more  and  more  with  hccdftill  lookc  fl  ill  eying,

1 ht  markes  and  fiiapc,and  colour  of  the  ftted.

After  his  long  and  very  curious  prying,

Hefawand  knew  it  was  his hnrfc  indeed:

Which  horfc  from  him  (then  at  Albraccs.  lying)
Btmelio  ftaJc,  for  want  of  bet'crhccd;

And  fhew’d  him  an  unufuall  cunning  knacke.

To  ftcalc  his  horfc  while  he  fate  on  his  backc.

58

Brunello  flale  that  time  more  things  befide.

By  nifoe Orlandos  fwuid  hight  Balifard,

Angelicas  fairc  ring,  of vertue  tridc.

Which  file  rccovcrd  as  before  you  heard;

Likewife  a fword  ev’n  from  Marfifas  fide:

This donc,hc  gave  Rogcro  afterward,

Orlandos  fword,and  this  horfc  to  the  fame,

But  to  Frontino  firfl  he  chang’d  his  name.

59

Now  then  I fay,whcn  Sacrapant  was  furc.

This  horfc  was  Frontlat  that  fomctime  wa»  his.

And  that  the  markes  he  faw  did  him  afliit  e.

That  he  therein  tookc  not  his  markc  amis,

T o hold  his  peace  he  could  not  long  endure.

But  faid,  good  fir,know  mine  Frontino  is,

Stolne  late  from  me, as  lean  make  good  pronfe,
Although  (I  trow)  mine  ownc  woid  is  inough.

60

One  at  Albracca^ih  fiomme  this  deed.

Yet, for  our  late  acquaintance  I confenr,

Bccaufe  I fee  that  now  you  fland  in  need.

That  you  fhall  ufe  him  now  I amcontrnti
Conditionally, that  firfl  it  be  agreed.

You  fhall  acknowledge  him  not  yours,  but  lent,
£lfe  here  I claimc  him  as  my  goods  and  chattel!.
And  will  defend  my  right  in  open  battcll.

6l

The  i’rtr^anKing,  that  pafl  (I  thinkc)  in  pride.

All  Kings  and  Knights  that  ever  carrid  fword.

And  pall  (I  thinkc)  in  flrcngth  and  courage  tride.
All  famplcs  that  old  dories  us  ad'ord,

Madcanfwer  thusjifany  man  befide,

Durd  unto  me  have  fpoken  fuch  a word.

He  (liould  have  found,I  took  it  in  fuchfeotne.

He  had  bin  better  have  bin  fpcechlca  borne.

6a

But  for  ourlatc  begunne  acquaintanccfakc,

I am  content  this  at  your  hands  to  bcatc.

So  as  you  thisjdo  as  a warning  take,

The  like  attempt  hereafter  to  forbeare.

And  if  you  will  but  harke  what  end  1 make,

With  Mandricar do ^xhen  I do  not  fcarc.

But  you  fliall  fee  fuch  famplc  of  my  force.

Shall  make  you  glad,  to  pray  me  take  your  hoife.

Thcnvillany  is  courtefic  with  thee,

(Saith  Sacrapant  inflam’d  with  high  difdainc)
When  you  be  ofFcrd  fairc  you  cannot  fee,
Whctefoic  my  purpofc  is,  I tell  you  plaine ,

^ly  horfc  fliall  fervicc  do  to  none  but  mec,

Vod  with  thefe  hands  I will  my  right  maintainc;
And  that  is  mote,if  thefe  fame  hands  fhould  failc,
1 will  defend  my  light  with  tooth  and  cailc.


Virgil’  Sia$

fMipei  &

fiana  ftrox
J^uaumut


A Urns
frsvcrbtt
Otnuiut
uiguilot.


220


THE  XXVII.  BOOKE


«4

Thus  galling  fpcech,bctwccn€  them  multiplyi»g,
Till  each  laft  word,thc  former  worfer  made.

At  laft  they  fell  to  afts  of  flat  defying,

And  tone  the  totfacr  fiercely  doth  invade:
Rodomont  on  his  ftrength  and  armes  relying j
Yet  tother  fo  defends  him  with  his  blade.

And  makes  it  fo  about  his  head  to  hover.

That  feemes  alone  his  body  all  to  cover,

65

ffnitt.  Ev’n  as  a chanetwheelc  that  runnes  apace,

Seemes  to  the  eye  all  folid,fitme  and  found.
Although  twixt  evVic  fpoke  there  is  a fpace.
Concealed  from  outfights  by  running  round.*

So  Sacrapant  feem’d  armed  in  that  place,
Thougharmourthenabotithim  none  wasfound,
Sodexuoufly  himfelfe  he  then  befluid.

As  well  It  flood  upon  him  with  hisfword.

05

But  quickly  Serpentmo  and  Tcrraiv,

With  naked  Iword  in  hand,flept  them  betwixt.
With  othcis  more  that  prefent  were  and  faw.

As  friends  of  cither  part  togither  niixt,

I’ct  them  no  forccjiioc  prayre  could  once  withdraw
Their  lofiic  hearts  were  on  revenge  fo  fixt,

And  7/rath  had  quitcfbput  them  outofframc,
Till  Jgfamant  to  them  in  peifon  came.

67

Vpoathc  f pht  of  him,thcir  foveraigne  Lord,

T hey  both  agreed  their  furie  to  withhold.

Who  ftraight  perfwaded  them  to  good  accord.
And  nuub  good  counfell  to  them  both  he  told:

But  peace  and  good  perfwafions  they  abhord.

And  either  on  his  manhood  made  him  bold  f
T lieir  King  doth  but  among  them  Iccfc  his  winde.
For  more  and  more  hcfi  oward  them  doth  findc.

68

By  no  mc^nes Sacrapant  will  beintreated,

Vntothc5’rt)  :{rj«  King  his  horfe  to  lend.

Except  that  he  (as  I before  repeated)

To  borrow  it  of  him,would  condifccnd.*

The  tother  at  this  very  motion  freated,

And  fivcarcs  nor  heaven,  nor  he  fliould  make  him
To  fcck  to  have  by  prayer  or  requeft,  (bend,

A thing  of  which  by  force  he  was  pollcft.

6o

King  Agrammt  doth  askeby  what  mifchance.

He  loft  his  horfc,or  who  it  from  him  ftalc?

The  tothcropend  all  the  circumftance.

And  bluflit  for  fhame,when  as  he  told  the  talci
Namely, how  late  before  he  came  to  trance.

One  tookehim  napping, as  it  did  befall,

U undcrpiopt his faddcll with foure flakes,
anapcfible  And  lb  from  Under  him  his  courfer  takes.

tfbttriu,  70

Marfifa,thit  was  come  to  part  this  fray.

Hearing  of  this  flolneliorfc  among  the  reft.

Was  griev'd  in  mindc,  for  why  that  very  day.

Her  fvverd  was  ftolne  as  fljc  moft  truly  gueft-.

And  then  KingSacrapant  flic  knew  ftraight  way,
Whomerfl  fhe  knew  not,and  that  gallant  bcafl.

For  which  of  late  thofc  two  began  to  fight.

She  kncw,and  faicLbclong’dto  him  in  tight.


While  thefe  things  pafled  thus,  the  flanders  by.

That  oft  hereof  had  hcaid  BtuneUo  boft,

Straight  infuch  fort  to  himdidcaft  their  eye.

As  turned  greatly  to  Brunetios  coft:

By  which  Marfija  plainly  did  defetie
Hini,bv,whofc  theft  herfword  flic  late  had  left,

■J  o be  Sni«e//o,whom  flicfaw  there  fitting,
Among  great  Lords, a place  for  him  unfitting.  *

72

She  heard, and  much  it  grieved  her  tohcarc,

How  for  thefe  thefts  and  many  mo  bcllde.

The  King  rewarded  liinj,and  held  himdcarc.
Whereas  in  law  for  them  he  fliould  have  didc;

Thefe  news  fo  greatly  chang’d  Marji/'at  clicare.
That  hardly  flic  her  wrath  could  longer  hide.

Let  Agramant  accept  it  as  he  will.

She  minds  Brvnelle  prcfcntly  to  kill.

73

Straight  way  flic  armed  is  from  head  to  heclc,

And  makes  her  page  her  helmet  clofc  to  clafpe.

To  him  flic  gocs,and  with  her  glove  of  ftccle,

Sheg  ives  him  fuch  a blow  as  made  him  gafpc,

, And  whilcthcpainc  hereof  doth  make  him  reclc
V^  ith  her  ftrong  hand,  his  weakcorfe  fhe  dothgrafpe
Asdoth  theFaulcon  fierce  the  Mallard  gripe.

To  which  a while  before  flicgavca  ftnpc.

74

Whh  furie  great  from  thence  amy  flic  flings.

While  he  for  heipe, and  oft  for  mercy  ci  idc,  ,

But  will  he,nill  he,him  away  flic  brings,

Lik  c to  a thiefe  with  hands  together  tide.

Where  Agramant  among  the  meaner  Kings,

Sate  like  a judge  their  caiifcs  to  decide.

Then  making  fomcobcyfanccforgoodmanner.

She  fpeaketh  tliusinflioitbutftatcly  manner,

75

Sir  King,!  minde  to  hang  this  thiefe  your  man.

That  by  dcfait  fliould  long  ere  this  have  didc.

For  when  he  ftalc  that  horfe  from  Iiim,cv*n  than
He  ftalc  my  fword  that  hanged  by  my  fide;

But  if  there  any  be, that  darcor  can
Deny  my  words,orfay  that  I have  lidcj
Here  in  your  prefcnccs  I do  defire.

To  tiic  by  combat  whether  is  the  licr.

76

But  leaft  ibinc  fliould, as  feme  by  fortunemay  I
AffirmCjI  chufe  this  time  to  make  new  ftrife.

Alone  at  fuch  a time, on  fuch  a day.

When  other  quarrels  in  thecarDpcaicrife,

1 am  content  a day  or  two  to  flay,

A nd  to  prolong  this  wretched  caitivcs  life.

To  fee  ifany  man  will  him  defend.

And  after  furc  to  hang  him  I intend.

77

1 mcanc  (quoth  flic)  to  bring  him  three  mile  hence,

A nd  k eepe  him  as  a privet  in  yon  towre.

And  with  his  life  1 proinife  to  dilpcncc.

For  two  dayes  fpacc,and  longer  not  an  howtf,

Ifany  lift  to  fight  in  bis  defence,

T heic  let  him  come  and  trie  my  force  and  powre;

Away  flic  gallopt  when  flic  this  had  faid.

And  on  her  fiddle  bow  the  w'tctch  fliclaid.


The


OF  OllLANDO  FVRIOSO,


22X


Salrin$  <f


Sttiuitct,
and  <1  /noji
ntStniict,


?8

lie  King  was  forcdtfpleai’J  at  this  attempt.

And  much  it  did  hisprinccly  mind  enrage,

A nd  minds  himl'clfc  to  wreake  fo  gr^t  coctemf  t,
Vmill  Sobrino fOne  both  giave  and  fage,

Told  him  in  wifdome  he  mufl:  be  content,

Hischplcr  in  tin’s  matter  toalTwagCj
And  laid  it  were  a bafe  part  for  hishighncfle.

To  fight  for  one  fp'Ung  up  by  theft  and  flinefre.

7 0

Yea  though  before  hand  he  were  furc  to  win.

Yet  would  fuch  vifioric  difiionor  hate,

Eecaufc  a woman  vanquifht  were  therein;

Wherefore  (qiiotli  he)  Ityou  hislifc  might  fave,

VVi  t h one  words  fptccb,to  fpeake  that  word  were  fin  j
Forfurc  flic  doth  butlaw  and  jufiitc  crave;

A nd  Princes  never  do  Lhcmfclvcs  more  wrong*

Then  when  they  hinder  juflicc,  or  piolong.

?o

You  may  (faid  he)  to  fatisfic  your  mind.

Send  after  liAf,in  manner  of  requefi.

And  promifehcr,thar  if  juft  eaulcyou  find.

He  fhal!  he  hang’d,and  fo  ail  flrifc  may  reftj
But  if  to  thisyou  find  her  not  inclird.

Give  her  her  wiIl,for  fo  I thinkc  tis  heft;

So  that  flic  firmcly  in  your  friend  (hip  bide,

Hang  uf)  BruneSOy  and  all  theeves  bclidc.

8i

This  good  dire£>ion  Agramant  ©baying.

Went  nothimfclfc,norfcnt  nonetoniplcftlicr.

But  yet  according  to  Sibiims  faying.

He  fCnt  a mcircngcr  that  might  requeft  her?

Himfclfe  the  while  doth  travcllin  allaying
The  tumults  fierce  that  all  hiscampedo  pefter:

Pride  Irfughs  at  this;and  Difcord  fo  rcjoyces.

As  up  to  hcav*n  flic  ihcir  ctcrnall  voyce*.

8a

Five  men  moft  refolute  have  fctthcii  reft,  '

To  be  the  firft  that  will  begin  the  fight,

Thcfttifcfo  intricatc,as  would  molcft
A^oUo  to  decide  or  fet  itright.

Yet  Agramant  ftill  ftrives  to  do  his  beft.

And  to  compound  the  matter  if  he  might;

And  thus  to  end  the  matter  he  begonne,

Twixt  Rodomont  and  Agricam  fonne*

8j

He  makes  to  them  this  good  and  friendly  motion.

That  fith  for  Dorallce  they  oncly  ftravc.

They  would  agree  to  ftand  at  her  devotion.

And  let  her  take  her  clioifc  which  flic  will  have.

And  thatonce  madc,toraifcno  more  commotien.
This  pleas’d  them  both.to  thisconfent  they  gavcj
A certairchopc  and  tnift  them  both  alluring.

Each  on  himfclfe  of  her  firmc  love  alTuring.

U

The  Sar^sin  King  doth  thinkc,  that  needs  flic  mufi:

Give  fenrcncecn  his  fidc,and  be  bisowne,

Sith  oft  he  had  in  mrncys  and  in  juft,

Hei favours  worne,and  hisaffeftion  fliowne;

How  can  flic  love  {'thinkes  he)  or  put  her  truft
In  onCjW’ho  flic  fcant three  daies fpacc  hath  knowDC?
Nor  was  alone  his  owne  opinion  fuch.

But  all  the  campc  bclidc  did  thinkc  as  much.


85

They  all  thinkc  Mandricardo  ovcrfccne.

And  made  no  qucftion  but  flic  would  tejeft  himr
But  bethat  knew  what  part  had  tbembctwecr  c.

And  found  that  flic  did  inwardly  affeift  him.

Was  fine,although  his  fcrvicc  were  unfienc.

And  done  by  night,tliat  flicwould  not  neglcft  him,
Wherefore  of  her  good  will  hen  thing  doubting.

Did  fcornc  their  Icorns,  and  flouted  at  their  flouting.

Thus  having  put  the  matter  in  herchoyce.

And  put  the  choice  in  her  owne  declaration.

She  with  a fobtr  lookeand  lowly  voice,

Chofe  Mandricardy  againfl  all  expeftation:

The  T artar  Prince  heicar  did  mucti  rejf  yce.

But  all  the  reft  were  filld  with  admiration.

And  Rodomont  himfclfe  was  to  aftound.

As  hardly  he  could  lift  his  eyes  from  ground.

8/

But  when  his  wonted  wrath  had  driv*n  away
That  baflifull  fliamc  that  dyde  his  face  with  red,

Vnjuft  he  cals  that  doome,and  curft  that  day.

And  clapping  hand  upon  his  fword,hc  fed,

Thu  better  arbioratc  our  matccis  may.

Then  womens  foolifli  doome  by  fancie  led.

Who  oftentimes  arc  fo  perverfein  chuflng,  Stitunct.

They  take  the  worft,thc  ofFcrd  beftrefufing.

88

Go  then  (quoth  Mandricard)  1 little  care,

I hope  that  fight  fliallyccld  you  like  fucccfTc;

And  thus  againe  to  fight  they  ready  arc,

But  Agramant  doth  foonc  that  rage  repi  efle.

And  (aid, upon  this  point  againe  to  fquarc.

Quite  were  againfl  all  lawes  of  armes  cxprcllc;

And  Rodomont  he  fliarply  thencontrold.

That  in  hisfighewas  againfl  law  fo  bold,

89

The  Sar\an  King  that  faw  himfelfe  that  day.

So  noted  by  thofc  Pcercs  with  double  fcornc.

Both  from  his  Princc,whom  he  muft  needs  obay.

And  her  to  whom  fo  great  love  he  had  borne.

With  fury  great  he  flings  from  thence  away.

And  count* himfclfe  difgraft  and  quite forlorne;

OfaJl  his  trainc  two  men  liconely  taketh,

ThcKingjthc  campe,thc  place  he  quite  forfaketh.

90

And  as  a Bull  his  loved  heard  that  leaves.

By  his  ftrong  ri  vail  forced  to  be  gone  ;

Among  the  trees  all  clad  with  thickeft  leaves.

Doth  hide  himfclfcjand  fcckcs  to  be  alone:

So  hcjwhom  fliamc  of  comfoitall  bereaves.

Flics  fight  of  mcn,yct  ftill  he  thinks  thereon;

And  chiefe  when  lie  icmcmbcrs  what  difgraec
His  miftrisdid  him  in  fo  open  place.

91

Jiegero  gladly  would  have  him  purfude.

To  get  his  horfcjbut  yet  hedoth  refraine.

Left  men  fliould  thinkc  he  had  the  fight  efebude,

That  did  twixt  Mandricard  and  him  rcmainc.

But  Sacrapant  whom  no caufedotb  include,

Purfues  the  Sar^an  King, the  horfc  to  gainc;

And  doubtlclTc  had  outgone  him  that  fame  day*

But  for  mifliap  that  chanced  by  the  way.

A


Similei
LueoM  bttb
of

vtco'BulU
in  hit  a B0o^
gfPbarJaliih


222


THE  XxVlI.  BOOKE


Jlodawml}
tnveSiv*
ageinji  sf?«-
ine».


StmilsM.

itHUHCt.

Virgil.  /»•
Urg,  Milea*
tU  € ulis
Jutalix  lo.
Hum  ir  fit-
riUt  dtmi-
flStur  4Viwtt


9*

A damrcll  fell  by  bap  into  a river,

And  was  in  pcrill  great  to  have  btndtowndj
He  lighting  from  his  horfc  backc  co  relieve  her,
Lept  inland  brought  her  out  all  fafe  and  lound:
But  doing  this  good  a^,her  to  deliver.

Scarce  all  that  day  his  horfe  againc  he  found.

His  horfc  got  lo©fr,and  he  with  all  his  cunning.
Could  fcantly  catch  him  in  fixe  howcis  tunning.

9J

Atlaftwith  much  ado  he  doth  him  get.

And  after  Roiomont  he  then  doth  niakej
But  where,  and  how  long  after  him  he  met.

And  how  the  Saryin  did  him  prifnet  take,

1 may  not  now  proceed  to  tell  as  yet:

Firft  tell  I what  vild  woidsthei'ar^dnfpake.

That  cald  his  Prince  and  midiis  both  unkind.

And  for  her  fault  doth  raile  at  all  her  kind.

9-c

With  fcalding  fighcs,that  inward  pangs  bewrayd.
He  breathes  out  flames  in  places  where  he  goes,
From  rocks  and  caves  his  plaints  doth  eccho  ayd.
And  takes compaflion  onhisrufull  woes-,

0 womens  wits.how  weakc  you  arc  (he  faid)

Kow  fooneto  change  you  do  your  fclvcsdifpofeJ
Obfcrvci  sof  no  faith,  nor  good  dtteftion.

Moil  wretched  all  that  trull  in  your  prote^ion,

95

C oiild  neither  fcrvicc  long,norfmed  love.

By  me  above  a titoufand  way cs declared,

1 hy  fickle  mind  to  faftnelTc  fo  farre  move.

Bur  wilfully  to  let  thy  fclfc  be  (hared?

If rcafon  could  have  led  thy  mind  to  prove,

W a%  Mandricard  with  me  to  be  ccmpaied?

Hereof  can  reafon  beallcdgd  by  no  man.

But  this  alone,my  miflris  is  a wooaan.

96

1 thinkethat  nature,prfomc  angry  God,

Broughp  forth  this  wicked  fex  on  earth  to  dwell.
For  fomc  great  p|ague,or  juft  deferved  rod
TouJjthat  wanting  them  had  lived  well:

As  in  the  wormcs,an  Addcr,Snakcand  Todc;
Among  the  BcaftsjBearcSjWolves and  Tygers  fell;
And  makes  the  airethc  Flic  and  Wafpe  to  breed.
And  Tares  co  grow  among  the  better  feed.

97

Why  did  notNaturc  rather  fo  provide.

Without  your  htipc  that  man  of  man  might  come.
And  one  be  grafted  onanothersfide,

As  arc  the  Apples  with  the  Pcare  andPlora?

But  N aturc  can  no  meanc  nor  rule  abide.

But  ftill  fhc  muft  exceed  in  all  or  (bmC)

Full  eafie  tis  the  caufc  thereof  to  render.

For  N aturc  fclfc  is  of  the  womans  gender.

v8

Yet  be  not  therefore  proud  and  fuft  offcotne,

O womankind, that  mep  come  of  yout  fccdj
The  fragrant  Rofc  growth  on  t he  pricking  thorne.
The  Lilly  faire  comes  of  a filthy  weedj
In  lothfomefoylcmcn  fow  the  wholfomccotncj
The  bafeft  mould,thc  faireft  flowredoth  breed:
VngratcfuIl,faJ(e  andcraftiey'areandcmell.
Borne  of  our  burning  hell  to  be  the  fucll.


99

Thefc  woids,and  like  to  thefc  the  Paganfeixcc,

Doth  fpend  amid  hisrage  and  frantikc  fumes,

And  like  a mad  man  didthcfamcichearfc.
Sometime  in  hic,oft  times  in  baler  tunes:

I tremble  to  fet  downc  in  my  poorc  verfe,
Tbeblafphcmie  that  he  to  rpcakcprdifmcsj
And  wntiHg  this  I do,kncw  this  th.-it  I
Full  oft  in  heart  d&  give  my  pen  the  lie.
too

But  Paflioa  did  this  Pagamfenfe  fo  blind.

And  left  within  the  lame  fo  fliaipca  fling,'

That  he  not  onely  blam’d  1 is  love  unkind.

But  alfo  rag’d  againft  his foveraigne  King,

And  cut  fed  him, and  wiflicd  in  his  mind.

That  fortune  fo  great  woes  on  him  might  bring.
That  he  might  loofe  hisftatc  and  princely  crownc.
And  fee  his  country  turn’d  quite  upfidownc.

toi

And  being  to  fucb  miferies  once  brought.

And  with  advcrfitic  aftaild  fo  fore.

That  then  by  him  his  frccdoitie  might  bewionght.
And  that  he  might  his  former  flatc  rcflorc.

That  Agramant  might  by  fuch  proofc  be  taught.
Of  faithfull  friends  indeed  to  fet  more  florc.

And  Icarnc  to  know, that  fuch  a friend  as  he,
Defciv’d  in  light  and  wrong  preferd  to  be,

102

Thus  blaming  oft  hisLord,morc  oft  his  love.

To  his  ownc  native  foylc  his  courfc  he  bent.

But  changing  placc,could  not  his  fbrtow  move.
Nor  travels  paiac,hispaincrf  mind  relent,

It  feem’d  his  horfc  Frontino  well  to  prov^.

Before  his  bridle  fhould  bedrawnc,  hemenr,

To  Sonna  hedoth  ride  without  a bait.

And  minds  fro  thence  to  paffe  to  Provence  ftratt,
103

And  there  to  caft  away  all  care  and  carke.

And  all  his  anguifh  quickly  ro  appeafe.

For  Affrica  he  will  bimfelfcimbarkc,

And  pafle  the  large  Mediterranian  Teas,

But,  for  the  weather  now  waxt  dim  and  darke,
Firft  in  hislnne  he  minds  ro  take  hiscafe.

For  all  the  country,ev’n  as  farre  as  Spaine,

In  Agramaures povfYt:  did  then  rcmainc,

IO+

Now  hcrefblvcs  to  lodge  about  the  coft.

And  long  he  is  not  of  a place  to  feckc.

For  ftraight  he  was  invited  by  an  hoft.

To  take  his  houfe,  if  fo  it  might  him  like:

It  pleas’d  the  Pagan  well,  to  hcarc  him  boft.

That  he  bad  winc,and  French  and  Greece,
For  though  he  were  a TurJl[e  in  all  the  reft.

Yet  did  he  like  French  fafliion  drinking  beft.
ios

The  plcafant  hoft, that  was  indeed  of  thofc.

That  can  with  double  diligence  attend.

As  having  fav’d,amid  both  friends  and  foti.

His  goods, and  gain’d  by  that  which  bothdolpecj.
When  by  that  princes  view  he  did  fitppofe  *

Him  fome  great  man,hc  ftraight  abroadc did  fend,
^nd  thither  doth  his  kin  arid  friends  requeft.

To  belpc  to  waitc,and  welcome  fuch  a gueft.


Buc


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


223


StitteHte.


1 c6

Cut  lotf ,his  gucft  fits  mufing  all  apart.

And  of  his  Miftrcs  runneth  all  his  thought,
\Vhich(though  he  would  forgct)fpitc  ofhis  heart.
He  thinks  on  ftilljfo  flrong  thefancy  wrought :

The  ftaaders  by  are  not  fo  malipart.

To  talk  tohimjtill  he  occafion  fought;

Which  having  found,upfrom  hischaire  hcfiartcd.
And  falutations  to  them  all  imparted.

107

Then  askthc  many  quefiions  of  them  all.

And  as  occafion  (erv’d,difcourfcs  vari’d  j
Butftillvvefind,and  everfind  wcfiiall.

By  thought  of  heart  the  fpecch  of  tongue  iscari*d  :
Foi  laft  totreatof  marriage  he  doth  fall.

And  asketh  of  the  men  if  they  be  man’d  ;

And  if  they  be, he  prayth  them  to  declare.

Of  their  wives  iruths,what  their  opinions  arc.

108

Straight  all  of  them  made  anfwct  they  had  wives.
And  but  mine  hoft,all  prais’d  the  happy  ftate  j
And  find  they  were  the  comforts  of  thcit  lives.
That  diaw  a happy  yoke  without  debate  t
Aplayfcllcw  that  farre  off  all  giiefc  drives,

A ftetvard, early  that  piovidcs  and  late  j
Both  faithfull,chafi,and  fobcr,mild,and  trufty,
Huifc  to  weak  age, and  pleafurc  tothelufiy.

109

Tufii  (cjuctb  mine  bofi)undcr  your  good  correction,
(VIoft  noble  gucft)thefc  fcllowcs  fay  not  right.
But  cither  with  fond  love,or  foulc  fubjeftion.

So  blinded  arc, they  take  the  black  for  white  :

I once  my  fclfc  was  toucht  with  this  infection.
But  now  I fee  that  then  I wanted  fight :

And  now  I know,as  being  better  taught,

T hat  theiis  and  mine  be  ail  unchafi  and  naught.


f 'O

for  as  the  Phoenix  is  a bi  n nl.vrc,  Simih.

And  of  that  kind  the  w>'t  T .voild  hath  no  more ;

So(think  I)of  all  wives  there  is  but  one,  avu'in’unlt

That  liveth chart  in  loveand  vckucsIocc  :

He  bicft  may  be  that  lightcth  h"-  inoii,  Itm*  (jfjia.


Small  hopc(tliink  I)thcic  is  o !•  leant  ftore.

That  many  fiiould  have  one  ot  I tch  a kind.

Of  which  in  all  the  world  out  one  I find.

II I

I once  fo  blinded  was  as  now  be  thcfci

Till  by  good  hap  unto  my  houfc  there  came
A gcntlema  n of  Venice  from  the  Teas,

Francis  Valerio  vt  as  he  cal*d  by  name  :

He  knew, and  could  declare  them  all  with  cafe,

All  womens  wilcs,and  rtorics  to  the  fame
He  had  of  old  ; and  of  the  later  times.

To  fiicw  both  wivcs,and  finglc  womens  crimes.

I iz

He  faid,and  bad  me  hold  it  as  my  creed.

That  3llofthemarefalfe,ifthey  betri  J r
If  fome  feem’d  chafl,it  did  of  this  proceed.

They  had  the  wit  to  do, and  not  bcfpi’d.

And  knew  by  deep  diflembling  and  good  heed.
With  fober looks  their  wanton  luflsto  hide :
Andthisto  prove.hctold  mefucha  tale.

As  while  1 live  I rtill  remember  fiiall.

II  3

And  If  it  like  you  fir  to  lend  me  care.

In  my  rude  fafhion  I fiiall  it  recite
Right  glad (ouoth  Rodomont)hy  hcav*ns  I iwcare.
For  thou  haft  h t my  prefent  humour  right ;
Whcrcfore(raid  hc)fitdown  I pray  thee  there.

For  in  thy  fpecch  already  I delight :

But  here  I end  this  book,for  doubt  I have.

That  in  his  talc  mine  hoft  will  play  the  knave.


In  this  hoohyC  we  may  obferve^hora  important  a thing  it  is  in  an  army, to  have  ftore  of  good  leaders ; as  Livic  noteth  of
the  old  Romanes:  FortiorcmrcmRomanamducibuscrtcjquammiUtibus.  That  the  ftrogth  of  the  Romanes  confi-
fted  more  in  Captaines,  then  in  fouldiers.  In  quarrels  thatgretv  in  the  camp  upon  trifling  caiifes-,  we  may  note  a fault
that  many  of  Englijh  Servitors  (though  otlerwife  brave  men ) have  many  times  been  noted  of  in  their  forreine  fervice,
where  they  very  feldome  agree  together, but  fee\  to  dijgrace  one  another.  In  Agramant  we  may  note  a princely  majeflie,
in  compounding  fuch  controverfier./n  Rodomonts  bitter  invc6Hve  againft  women,we  may  fee  how pajfionate  extremes
love  and  hate  be.  In  mine  hoft, we  note  bow  fuch  bafejellowes  areftiU  ready  to  feed  the  humors  of  Princes , though  it  be
in  fhamejull  vices, or  manifeft  errors.

Hippolua  rowioOT  Uatfifa  is  compared,  as  alfo  the  whole  country  of  Ama\ons,  and  their  lawes , i have  ^oh^en  of  UiRoxic .
clswherc;  this  is  that  Hippoha,thatwas  brought  by  Thefeus^e  Athens, and  there  hada  fonne  ciz^ei/Hippolitus.

Inthat  hefaineth  that  thejprite  entring  into  Doialiccs  horfcjconv^cd  her  intothe  camp  of  the  Pagans,  to  the  great  Allceorv
dammage  of  the  Chriftians  ,we  may  therely  note  how  thatghoftly  enemy  doth  indeedwarch  ( as  the  Scripture  faith ) lihe  °
aroaringLionwhombe  may  devoure,to  do  mankind,  alt  the  hurt  that  may  be  •,  and  therefore  wemuft  not  give  him  an
inch, left  ( as  the  proverb  faith)  he  tal^e  an  ell.  :

Intbe  folemnity  of  their  combats  andpreparation,¥oTnzr\aitiioteth, that  he  alludes  to  a policy  u/edby  Ifabclla  wi/e  Allufior*.
to  Fcrdinando,j|[w^  of  Spaine.  Sbe,to  ma^e  her  men  ofarmes  more  valiant  and  couragiom,  cau/edtbem  tofght  with
the  Moores  in  the  very  fight  of  their  Ladies  and  Miftrejfes,and partly  therby  expulfed  the  Moores  out  o^Granata.  But
for  Doralices  rejeHing  o/Rodomont , andchuftng  Mandricardj  it  alludes  to  a lil{e  thing,writicn  by  Plutarch  in  his
love  difeourfes, where  Caiyfto  w<«  taljen,and  Stiato  refufed:  of  which  afterwardinfaed  the  death  of  aU three.


Here  end  the  notes  of  the  xxvij.  booke.

V


iST”


'y/tnnP


-^iruf^a  i


^^onna


THE  XXVIII.  BOOKE.


2ZJ


Fierce  Rodomofit  hearet  of  his  prating  Hoft
A to  rpomens grrat  difgrace !

Unto  Algicr  he  meanes  to pt*(je  in  pofl  i
But  by  the  rotty  he  finds  more  pleafing  place ^
Faire  Ifabell  paffeth  by  that  coll  ;

7 Pagan  cbangeth  mtnd,  and  Cues  for  grace  ;
Fhc  Hermit  ivarnes  her  keep  her  vorv  and  oth^
At  which  the  Pagan  ^Prince  is pssjfmg  rtroth.


I

Oa  Ladies,  ye  tljat  Ladiei
hold  in  prize,

Give  not (pcrdic)your  care  to
this  fame  talc.

The  which  to  tell, mine  Hoft
doth  heredevife.

To  make  men  thinkc  your
vcrtuesarc  hiitfmall;
Though  from  fo  bafe  a
tongue  there  can  aiifc.

To  your  fweet  fexc,no  juft  difgracc  at  all  j
Fooles  will  find  fault  without  thccaufcdifccrning.
And  argue  moft  of  that  they  have  no  learning.
z

Turn  oT*r  the  leaf,and  let  this  talc  alone.

If  any  think  the  fex  by  thisdiigrac’d,

1 write  it  for  no  fpite,nor  malice  none.

But  in  my  Authors  book  I find  it  plac’d  j
My  loyall  love  to  Ladies  all  is  known.

In  whom  I fee  filch  worth  to  be  imbrac’d.

That  theirs  1 am,and  glad  would  be  therefotc^

T o ihevy  thereof  a thoufand  ptoofes  and  mote.

Perufc  it  rtot ; orifyoudoittead,
Eftccmcitnotjbatasanidlebablcj  ,, ‘-t!

Regard  it  not ; or  if  you  take  fomc  heed.

Believe  it  not,hutas  a fpoltlli  fable ; ’

But  to  thcmauer,thusit  wasindced,  , , r ;

When  all  the  guefls  were  cheated  at  tbctab|e  > , ■

NcareiiodonM»r(fbvvastItePrt^«»nain’d),-  i,'  '

Down  fate  mine  Hofi, znd  thus  his  talc  he  fam’d*'
Thttaletf  4 . : '

»4ftoih,King  AfolfoA'sWomliingofLumhatdy,

•fLmbariUa  To  whona  hii  elder  biotheilcft  his  raigne-.


Was  in  his  youth  fo  ftcfli  and  faire  to  fee,  |

As  few  to  fuch  pcrfcftion  could  attainc  ; j|

^^peiJ'ermatebjOr  Zc«ccx  he  might  be,  ^ Tn>*  exttl.  i ]

That  fuch  a fhape  could  paint  without  much  painc,  *

Great  was  his  grace, and  all  the  wo;  Id  fo  deem’d  it.

But  yet  himfclfc  of  all  men  moft  cftccm’d  it.

5 _ !„

He  did  not  of  his  feepter  take  fucji  pride.

Nor  that  degree  that  common  men  arc  Under,

Nor  wealtb,nor  fiiends,nor  meaner  kings  befide.

That  tbcrcabont  dwelt  ncaicorfarafundcr :

But  of  his  beauty,  which  he  would  not  hide,

At  whole  rare  wonb  he  thought  the  world  did  won-
This  was  his  ]oy,and  all  that  he  intended,  (det.

To  bcaichis  comely  face  and  111  ape  commended.  ’

6

Among hiscouiticrSjCneabovcthe  reft,  .<

FaUfto  by  name, by  birth  a Romanc  knight : |

W'ho  hearing  oft  fo  prais’d, as  they  know  heft,

Hisfacc,and  hands,and  all  thatpraife  he  might.

The  king  did  bid  him  tell  at  hisrequeft,

Ncarc  or  faire  offif  he  had  fecn  that  wight.

That  in  all  paits  lo  pcrfe£Py  was  wrought  i
But  he  was  anfwer ’d  as  he  little  thought.

7

My  Liege  (quoth  plainly  to  declare,

BotJiwhat  my  felfcdoth  fec,and othcisfay.

But  few  with  your  rare  beauty  can  compare.

And  thatfamc  few  were  nonc,wcre  one  away  ; ,

Jocuvdo  hight,a  man  of  beauty  raic,

And  biotbetnaine,exccpting  whom,I  may
Prefer  your  grace  before  all  other  creatures.

But  he  doth  match  or  pafle  yon  for  his  features.

^ Va  The


2i6


THE  XXVIII.  BOOKE


g

The  king  to  hear*  fuch  tidings  Grange  it  thought.

As  having  ftill  till  that  day  kept  the  prize.

And  with  a deep  dcfirc  (Viaightwaycs  he  fought.

To  know  this  man.and  fie  him  with  his  eyes:

In  fine, with  Fjw/?o  fo  far  forth  he  wrought.

To  bring  him  to  his  court  he  mult  devife  ;
Althoiigh(cinoth  hc)to  bring  my  brother  to  it,

1 fliall  be  fuic  of woik  enough  to  do  it.

9

The  caufc  is  this, my  brother  never  went
Forth  of  the  gates  of  Rome  fcant  all  his  life.

And  fuch  fmall  goods  as  Fortune  hath  him  lent.

He  hath  enjoy’d  in  quiet,  free  from  ftrife.

Left  by  our  fire, and  them  be  hath  notfpeot.

Nor  yet  incrcaft,his  gainesate  not  foiifc  :

And‘hewillthtnkitmoretogotoP<lT;_y,

Then  fome  would  think  to  tW Indies  in  a Navy.

10

But  Ifliall  find  it  hardeft  when  I prove.

To  draw  him  from  h.s  loving  wife  away  ;

To  whom  he  is  fo  link’d  in  chaincsof  love.

That  all  IS  vainc,if  once  his  wife  fay  nay  ;

But  yet  your  grace  isfo  far  all  above,

You  ni.all  command  me,ccrtes  all  I may.
Thanks(quof^  the  king) and  addeth  fuch  reward.

As  might  havXmovcd  any  to  regard.

1 1

Away  he  pofis,arriving  in  few  dayci

At  iio»J2,and  to  his  brothers  houfe  he  went.

And  with  fuch  earneft  words  his  biothcr  prayes.
That  to  return  with  him  he  doth  confent  t
Alfo  his  fiftcis  love  he  fo  allaycs,

That  flic  doth  hold  her  peace  as  halfe  content,
Eefidc  great  thanks, laying  before  her  eyes
Preferments  large,that  hereof  might  arife.

I a

locmdo  now  refolvM  to  go  his  wav.

Gets  men  and  horfeagainft  he  flioulddcpair,

Sets  forth  himfcifc  with  new  and  rich  array.

As  ftill  we  fee  nature  adorn’d  by  art,

His  wife  at  night  in  bed,  at  board  by  day  ^

With  watry  eyes  to  fliew  a forte  heart,

Complaincs  his  abfence  will  fo  fore  her  giieve.

Till  his  return  fire  doubts  flic  fliaU  not  live.

IZ

Ay  mc,the  thought(quoth  Hie)  makes  me  fo  fraid.
That  fcant  thebreath  abideth  in  my  breft ;

Peace  my  fwcet  love  and  life(/oci/«dofaid)

And  weeps  as  fa  ft, and  comforts  her  hisbeft  t
So  may  good  fortune  ay  my  journey  aid.

As  I return  in  thicefcorcdaycsat  lead  :

Nor  will  I change  the  day  I fet  thee  down.

No  though  the  king  would  grant  me  half  hisetown.

J4

All  this  might  not  afl\vage  this  womans  paine.

Two  monechs  were  long,yea  too  too  long  fhe  dies.
Needs  muft  I die  before  you  come  againc,

Nor  how  to  keep  my  life  can  I devife ;

The  doleful!  dayes  and  nights  1 fhall  fuftatne.

From  meat  my  moui  h,from  fteep  will  keep  mine
Now  was  lociindo  ready  to  repent,

T hat  to  his  brother  he  hadgiv’n  coafent.


About  her  neck  a jewellrich  flic  ware,

A ciofle  all  fet  with  ftonc  i n gold  well  tridc.

This  itlick  late  a Boem  Pilgrim  bare,

And  gave  her  father  other  things  befide:

Which  coftly  things  he  kept  with  no  fmall  care.

Till  comming  from  lertifakm  hedi’d  :

And  her  of  all  his  goods  his  heire  he  makes.

This  precious  crolTc  to  her  goodman  flic  takes.

16

And  praycsliim  for  her  fake  to  wcaic  that  token.

And  think  on  her;  the  man  that  was  moft  kind.
Receiv’d  it  with  more  joy  then  can  be  fpoken.
Although  he  needed  not  be  put  in  mind,

For  why  no  time, nor  no  ftate  found  nor  broken.

Nor  abfence  long, a mean  fliould  ever  find.

To  quaile  his  love, not  oncly  while  his  breath
Maintaines  liis  lifc,but  neither  after  death.

17

That  very  night  that  went  before  the  morrow ,

That  they  had  pointed  finely  to  depart  ■,

Jocundos  wife  wasfick,and  founds  for  foirow.

Amid  his  armc«,fo  heavy  was  her  heart ;

All  night  they  wake, and  now  they  bid  Gcdmoirow^
A nd  give  theit  laft  farewell. and  fo  they  part  j
Jocundo  on  his  way  with  all  bis  tiainc.

His  loving  wife  doth  go  to  bed  againe.

Scant  had  locundo  rode  two  mile  forthright.

But  that  his  crofle  now  came  into  his  mind.

Which  on  his  pillow  he  had  laid  laft  night.

And  now  for  haft  had  left  the  fame  behind  t
He  would  devife  to  feufe  it  if  he  might.

But  no  cxcufc  fufficient  could  he  find  ;

But  that  his  love  muft  needs  be  much  fufpe^ied,

To  find  the  precious  jcwcll  fo  neglected.
t9

When  Bocxcufe  within  his  mind  could  frame,

But  that  all  feemed  frivolousand  vaincj
To  fend  his  man  he  counted  it  a fliame.

To  go  himfcifc  it  was  but  little  pamc :

He  ftaid.and  when  his  brother  did  the  fame.

Ride  fofi(quoth  be)  till  I return  againc  ;

For  home  againel  muft,there  isno  nay.

But  I willovcttakc  you  on  the  way.

ao

Th’afFaircisfuchas  nonecando  but  I,

But  doubt  you  not.T  vvill  return  as  faft  j
Away  he  fpurres  as  hard  as  he  could  hie.

Alone  without  or  roan  erpagCjfor  hafts  ^

Now  had  the  funs  new  rifing  clear  dthcskie.

With  brighteft  beamcs.erc  he  the  ftreame  had  paft.
He  hies  him  home.and  finds  his  wife  in  bed.

Full  found  allcep.fuch  cares  were  m her  bead,
zi

He  drawes  the  curtalnc  fbftly  without  found.

And  favy  that  he  would  little  havcfiifpeftea  j
His  chart  and  faithfull  yokefellow  he  found
Yok’d  with  a knavc,all  honefty  ncglcftcd  ;

Th' Adultcrer,ihough  fleeping  very  found.

Yet  by  his  face  wascafilydetcftcd  ;

A beggars  brat,brcd  by  him  from  bis  cradle,

A nd  now  w as  tidi  ng  on  his  inaftersCiddlc,

Noif


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


a»7


2S


Stmxe*.
[icm r*ith
C£4>»/2  CCf
dim,  Vniui


Now  if  he  ftoo^  amaz’d  and  difeontent.

Believe  it  ye, to  eric  that  would  be  loth ;

For  he  that  tries  it, doubtlcflc  will  repent.

As  poore  locundo  did,who  was  fo  wrot  h,

That  out  he  drew  bis  fword,with  juft  intent.

For  their  ungratefull  ad  to  kill  them  both:

But  Io,thc  love  he  bare  hcr.did  withftand,

Againft  his  heart, to  make  him  hold  his  hand.

O ribald  lcve,that  fuch  a flavc  couldft  make.

Of  one  that  now  was  fubjed  to  thy  force ;

Hecould  not  break  her  fleepfor  pities  fake.

That  brake  all  bonds  of  faith  without  remorfe  j
But  back  he  goes  before  they  did  awake.

And  from  his  houfe  he  gets  him  to  his  hoife  .*

Lovefo  pricks  him, and  he  fo  pricks  his  ftced.

He  overtakes  his  company  with  fpecd.

24

Hislook  isfad,all  changed  is  hischcare.

Full  heavy  was  hishcartthey  well  perceiv’d.

They  fee  no  taufe  of  gricfc,oor  guefle  they  neare.
And  they  that  guefle moft  Iikely,are  deceiv’d ;

They  thought  he  went  to  J?o»ac,but  you  do  hearc
How  at  Cornetto  he  his  hurt  receiv’d »

Each  man  efpi’d  that  love  procur’d  that  paflion.

But  none  deicri'd  the  manner  nor  the  faflrion.

25

His  brother  deems  that  all  hrs  griefe  doth  grow,

Bccauie  his  loving  wife  is  left  alone  j
But  he  a cleane  contrary  caufc  doth  know.

Her  too  much  company  did  caufc  his  mcne:

He  bends  his  browcs,his  looks  he  cafts  alow.

With  powting  li  ps,and  many  a grievous  groncj
In  vainc  doth  Faufiut  comfort  feck  to  bring  him.

For  why  he  knowes  not  where  the  (hoe  doth  v/ring
iS  (him.

He  gives  a fal  ve  afore  the  fore  is  found.

His  plaiftcrs  arc  as  poifon  to  the  fmart  j
He  feeks  to  healc,and  wider  makes  the  wound.

He  names  his  wifc,but  her  name  kilshis  heart:

Cone  was  hrs  taft,his  fleeps  do  grow  unfound.
Nature  decayth,and  little  hclpcth  art  j
And  that  faire  face  that  erft  was  of  fuch  fame.

Is  nowfoehang’djitfeemeth  not  the  fame.

His  eyes  arc  funk  fo  deep  into  his  head.

It  made  his  nofe  feem  bigger  then  it  fliould.

His  fleffj  doth  flirink,his  bones  do  feem  to  Iprcad,
Hcwasfo  chang’d, as  more  cannot  be  told  ^

At  laft  an  ague  makes  him  keep  his  bed.

And  bait  atinnes  morcofeen  then  he  would  :

His  faire  complexion  now  is  pale  and  withered.
Much  like  the  Rofc  that  yefterday  was  gathered.

*8

With  this  TOtfliap  was  Fauflui  fore  agriev’d.

Not  oncly  for  his  brothers  wofiill  ftate.

But  fearing  of  his  Prince  to  be  reprov’d,

V nto  whofc grace  heundei  took  fo  late.

To  (hcwthegoodlieft  man, as  he  believ’d,

Now  growneuncouthjby  force  of  inward  bate;

Yet  as  they  could  their  way  they  lb  contriv’d.

That  at  thclaft  in  they  arriv’d.


*9


He  would  not  ftraightway  fiicw  him  to  the  King,

Left  cv’ry  one  mrght  deem  his  judgement  fmall.

But  fent  by  letters  notice  of  the  thing.

And  what  mifliap  hrs  brother  drd  befall ;

How  (cant  alive  hecould  him  thither  bring,

A feerct  griefefo  greatly  did  him  gall.

And  with  an  ague  pul’d  him  down  fo  fore.

He  feem’d  not  now  the  man  he  was  before,

so

And  yet  behold  this  noble  King  is  glad

That  he  is  come, and  meancs  to  make  him  chcare.

As  if  hcwcrethcdcarcft  friend  he  had.

So  (bre  he  had  defir’d  to  fee  him  here  ;

Nor  would  the  worthy  natui’d  Prince  be  fad.

In  praifeof  beauty  to  have  found  a Pccrc^

He  knew  locundos  beauty  had  cxcel’d.

But  that  by  this  difeafe  it  was  cxpel’d.

He  placcth  him  to  his  own  lodging  nigh.

He  vifits  him  each  day  and  cv’ry  houre.

Great  plenty  of  provifion  he  doth  buy.

To  welcome  him  he  bendcih  all  his  power :

But  fttll/aruWolanguifhing  doth  lie.

His  wives  mifdecds  makes  all  his  fwcet  feem  fowre.
No  fbngs,no  fighs, which  oft  he  hcard  or  faw,
Onedram  of  this  his  dolour  could  withdraw.

3*.

Faft  by  hislodging  was(amongfl  the  reft)

A faire  large  room,whicb  very  few  did  ufe.

Here  would  he  walk, as  one  that  did  deteft
All  plcaCng  flghts,and  comforts  all  rcfule :

Here  the  wrde  wound  he  bare  within  his  br  eft.

With  thoufand  thoughts  unpleafant  he  renewes  •

Yet  here  he  found  (which  few  would  have  bcl  iev’d)

A rem^y  for  that  which  had  him  griev’d*

For  attheupperend  of  this  old  hall.

There  was  a place  of  windowes  void,and  light.

Save  that  thelime  new  molten  from  the  wall.

Let  in  a little  beamc  that  ihlned  brighf  -
Here  d id  he  fee  (which  fomc  may  thinkatalc)

A very  ftrangc  and  unexpected  fight.

He  heard  it  nor,bui  faw  it  in  fais  view.

Yet  could  he  fcant  believe  it  fliould  be  true.

14

For  at  thcchink  was  plainly  to  be  Cren

A chamber  bang’d  with  faire  and  rich  array.

Where  none  might  comc,butfirch  as  trufty  been  :
The  Ptmeefre  here  in  part  doth  fpend  the  day.

And  here  he  faw  a Dwarfc  embrace  the  Q^en,

And  ftrivc  a whilc5and  after  homely  play
His  skill  was  fuch,thatcrc  they  wentafunder.

The  Dwarfe  was  got  aloft, and  flic  lay  under.

locundo  ftandctb  ftill  as  one  amaz’d,

Suppofingfurc  that  he  had  feen  a vtfion.

But  feeing plainc  when  he  a while  had  gaz’d.

It  was  anaCt,and  riot  an  apparition;

GoAd  God(faid  hc)arc  this  Queencs  eyesfo  daz’d.
To  love  a Dwarfc.morc  worthy  ofdcrifion  ?

Whofc  husband  is  a Prince  of  worthy  fame.

So  brave  a man,fuch love?  now  fie  for  fliamc.

V 5 He


THE  XXVIII.  BOOKE


3«


luvtnttl
Jtiib  of  OHt
Ibtritu,
Vh'u  Ibiri-
itA  vir  ju^‘
eit?octui  it  •
iud,

Extorfuebti
Ut  hecoculo
€out:mt  Jit

tuto.


He  noVv  began  to  hoIJ  his  wife  eircusM^

His  anger  now  a little  was  relented  .•

And  though  that  file  her  body  had  abus'd.

And  to  her  fcivant  had  fb  roonconfented  j
Hot  her  for  this, but  he  the  fc  jc  accus'd,

That  never  can  with  one  man  be  contented  .*

If  all(quoth  he)  with  one  like  ftaine  are  fpoticd.

Yet  on  a monftcr,minc  Was  not  befotted.

The  day  enfuing  he  returned  thither.

And  faw  the  d warfe  couragious  ftill  and  jolly  j
Eke  he  another  day  repaired  hither,

And  ftill  hefound  the  Queen  committing  folly :
Heoft  rcturnrs,hc  finds  them  oft  together,

They  eeafe  not  work,  ondayes  prophanc  nor  holy ;
Yea  which  was  ftiange, the  goodly  Quccncomplain*d
That  of  the  d warfe  file  found  fiie  wasdifdain'd.

One  day  when  in  the  Corner  he  had  ftaid.

He  fees  her  come  all  fad  and  malccontent,
Becaufethedwarfc  hcrcomming  ftijldelaid,

For  whom  of  purpofe  twice  before  fiie  Tent  j
Once  more  flic  ff  nds.this  aniwer  brings  the  maid,
Forfooth  unto  his  play  he  is  fo  bent.

That  for  miftruft  atchefleto  leefca  fiiilltng,
Tocometoyou  thcapcsface  is  not  willing.

JocunJo  who  before  had  ftill  been  fad,

Vpon  this  fight  became  of  better  chcare  ;

The  pames,thc  plaints,thc  cloudy  ftormes  he  had.
Away  were  blown,thecoaft  began  to  cleare.*

Woft  ruddie  fairc  he  chearfull  grew  and  glad.

That  angell-Iikc  his  beauty  did  appeare.

So  3$  the  King  and  others  thought  it  ftrange.

In  fo  fiiort  time  to  find  fo  great  a change.

40

Now  as  the  King  defired  much  to  know.

The  mean  whereby  his  hurtfo  foon  was  heal’d^

No  Icfic  locmdo  did  defirc  to  (how.

And  would  not  have  the  thing  from  him  conceal'd,
So  as  h\s  choler  might  no  greater  grovv,

Then  his  had  bcen,whcn  as  it  were  reveal'd  ;

But  firft  be  made  him  fweare  on  his  falration,

Vpon  the  parties  to  ufe  no  caftigation.

4*

He  made  him  fweare, for  ought  he  heard  or  faw,
Wherewith  his  mind  might  fortune  be  difeas’d,

Yet  from  his  choler  lb  much  to  withdraw.

As  that  in  fiicw  he  may  not  feem  difpicai’d.

Nor  punifh  it  by  might  nor  yet  by  law.

Nor  firft  norlaftjbut  bold  hi mfclfc  appeas’d.

So  as  th* offenders  might  not  have  fufpefted.

That  their  mifdceds  were  to  his  grace  detcAcd.

4*

The  King  Ibfurcjby  ochforolemnc bound,

A $ one  that  little  thought  his  Qecnc  fo  ftain'd,
Joemdo  firft  his  own  giiefc  doth  expound ,

Why  hefolongCadoIcfull  had  remain'd.

And  in  whofc  armes  his  own  wife  he  had  found.
And  how  the  griefethcrcofro  fore  him  pain’d.

Had  not  that  falve  unlock’d  for  been  applied.

Of  that  conceit  no  doubt  he  fiiould  hare  died.


4?

But  lying  in  your  highnelTc  houfc  forlorn,  .

I faw  (quoth  he)that  minilb  c much  my  rnonc'

For  though  it  grieved  me  to  wcare  a horn.

It  pleas'd  me  wcll,I  ware  it  not  alone :

This  faid,hc  brought  him  where  the  wall  was  tom,
And  fiicw'd  him  that  that  made  his  heart  to  gionc.
For  why  the  dwarfc  did  mannage  with  fuch  skill.
Though  flic  curvccs.hc  keeps  bis  ftyrup  ftill.

44

Much  did  the  King  thisfoulc  profpeft  mifiike.

Believe  my  words  I fay, I need  not  fweare,

Horn  wood  he  was, he  was  about  to  ftrike
All  thofe  he  met, and  his  own  flcfli  to  tcare  ,

His  promife  to  have  broken  he  was  like,
Ifofhisoath  he  had  not  had  fomefcare  j
But  unrerenged  all  muft  now  be  born.

For  on  his  Agnm  Dei  he  had  fworn.

4?

Now  to  locundo  gently  he  doth  fpeak.

Good  brother mine,advifc me  what  to  do,

Sith  Tam  bound  by  oath,  I may  not  wreak
The  faft,with  fuch  revenge  as  longs  thereto  j
Foifooth  let’s  trie  if  others  be  as  Weak,

(^locundo  faid)and  make  no  more  ador
"This  was  the  counfcll  he  did  give  the  King,

Into  their  order  other  men  to  bring.

46

We  both  are  yong,and  of  fuch  plcafing  hew,

Nocto  be matcht  with  fuch  anotherpaire;

What  flic  willbefbobftinatcly  true.

But  will  be  won  with  youth,and  being  fairc )

If  youth  and  beauty  both  do  mifle  theit  due.

The  want  herein  our  purfci  fiiall  repaire  1
Let  us  not  fparc  our  beauty ,youth,and  treafinr^

Till  of  a thoufand  we  have  had  out  plcafure.

47

To  fee  ftrange  counnies  placed  farre  apart.

Of  other  women  eke  to  make  fomc  triall,'

Will  cafe  the  painc  that  whilom  pierc'd  our  heart.
And  falve  ourforc,there  can  be  no  denial!  .*

The  King  that  long’d  to  cafe  his  new-found  fmart,
Confented  ftraight,and  to  avoid  cfpiali,
Himfelfcjthe  Knigbt,two  pages,  and  no  mo.

Out  of  the  Realmc  forthwith  difguifcd  go.

48

Away  they  paft  through  Italy  and  France,

And  through  the  Flemijh  and  the  Englijh  land.

And  thofe  whofc  beauties  higheft  did  advance,
Thofe  ftill  they  found  moft  ready  to  their  hand  I
They  givc,thcy  take,fo  luckie  is  their  chance.

To  fee  their  ftockat  oneftay  ftill  to  ftand  :

Some  muft  be  w oo’d  forfooth  they  were  fo  chaft.
And  fomc  there  were  that  wooed  them  as  faft.

49

In  countries  fomc  a moneth  or  two  they  taried.

In  fomc  a wcclc,in  others  but  a day  j
In  all  of  them  they  find  the  women  maried.

Like  to  their  wivcs,too  gentle  to  fay  nay  r
At  laft  becaufc  they  doubt  to  have  mifearied.

They  mean  to  leave  this  fport,and  go  their  way  j
They  found  it  full  of  danger  and  debate.

To  keep  their  ftandiags  in  anothers  gate.

They


/


Httahhim
h»ibir,b*.
tutfi  tbiy
both  of
rntficitt)!.


Stnlui^


0,F  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


So


22p


5mr:c$,


K«tt  tlstf*-
vert/  mslftt
ftOM  tuu^bti


SimiU  »fa
/•itb  ttmfa
ud.


They  do  agree  to  take  by  common  voice",

Some  one  whofc  fliapc  and  face  may  plcafcrhcm
In  whom  vvithout  fufpcft  they  might  rcjoycc ,

For  whcreforc(quoth  the  King)fl) ould  I be  Joth,
To  haveyourfclfea  partner  in  my  choke  ?

I muft  have  one, and  I believe  for  troth.

Among  all  women  kind  there  is  not  one
T hat  can  content  her  fclfe  with  one  alone.

5«

But  of  fomc  one  we  two  might  take  our  pleafurc.
And  not  inforce  our  fclvcs  beyond  our  cafe.

But  as  they  fay, take  meat,and  drink,and  Icafuie,
And  by  our  doings  other  not  difplcafc  •

Well  might  that  woman  think  Ihc  had  a treafure.
That  had  us  two  her  appetite  to  pleafe  :

And  though  to  one  man  faithfull  noneremaine
No  doubt  but  faithfull  they  would  be  to  twainc.
5*

The  Roman  youth  much  prais'd  the  Princes  mind.
And  to  perform  it, feemed  very  faine.

Away  they  pofted  asthey  had  aflign'd.

By  town  and  city,o»er  hill  and  plainc.

Till  at  the  laft  a prettie  pecce  they  find.

The  daughter  of  an  Inkeeper  in  Spaine,

A gyrlc  of  pcifon  tall, and  fairc  of  favour,

Of  comely  prefence,and  of  good  behaviom.

She  was  new  entring  in  the  flower  and  pride
Of  thofc  well  plcafing  youthfull  yeares  and  tender,
Her  father  many  children  had  befidc.

And  poverty  had  made  his  portion  flender.

And  for  them  all  unable  to  provide.

It  made  him  foon  confcnt,away  to  fend  her  j
The  price  agreed.away  the  ftrangerscarie  her,
Bfcaufe  the  father  money  wants  to  maric  her*

In  concord  great  fhe  did  with  them  remaine.

Who  took  their  pleafurc  one  and  one  by  turn,
bcllowes  dojwhcrc  Vulcans  wonted  paine
• By  mutuall  blaft  doth  make  the  metall  burn  t
Their  meaning  is, now  they  had  travel’d  Spam,

By  Siphux  rcdimc  to  nnakc  their  home  recurn  •

And  having  leftX>4/e»^aout  of  fight.

At  faire  Zariva  they  did  lodge  at  night.

The  mafleis  go  abroad  to  view  the  town^

And  firft  the  Churches  (or  devotions  fake ;

And  then  the  monuments  of  moft  renown.

As  travellers  a common  cuflomc  take :

The  gyile  wit  hin  t he  chamber  fa  te  her  down.

The  men  are  bufiedjfbme  the  beds  do  make,
^inecarcto  dreflcthrir  wearied  horfc,andfome
Alskc  ready  meatagaiofl  their  maftctscome*

Id  this  fame  houfethc  gyrie  a Greel^e  had  fpi’d.

That  in  her  fathers  houfc  a boy  had  been.

And  flept  full  often  fwcetly  by  her  fide.

And  much  good  fport  had  pafled  them  between  •

Tet  fearing  left  their  love  fiiould  be  deferi’d,  *

In  open  ulk  theydurft  not  to  be  feen,

,But  when  by  hap  the  pages  down  were  gone.

Old  lore  renew'd,  and  thus  they  uJk  thereon.


(both,  ThcGreck  demandshcr  whn  her  ffie  was  going.

And  which  of  thefe  two  great  eftates  her  keeps  >

She  told  them  all,flie  necdsno  further  woing,

And  how  a night  bet  ween  them  both  flicflceps  j
Ah(quoththcGrcck)thou  tcllcft  my  undoing,

rUntit*,

With  thefe  two  Lords  wilt  thou  from  Spaine  be  ba-«

Arc  all  my  hopes  thus  into  nothing  vanilh’d  .*

My  fwcet  defignements  turned  arc  to  fowre,

Siy  fcivicc  long  finds  little  recompcncc  j
I made  a flock  according  to  my  power,  *

By  hoarding  up  my  wages,  and  the  pence
That  gueftsdid  givc,that  came  in  luckic  houre  •

I meant  erelong  to  have  departed  hence.

And  to  have  ask’d  thy  fires  good  will  to  maric  thee.

And  that  obtain’d, vnto  a houfc  to  caric  thee.

Tbe  wench  ofh'er  hard  fortune  doth  complaine.

And  faith  that  now  fhe  doubts  he  fires  too  late  ,•

The  Greece  doth  figh  and  fob, and  part  doth  faine.

And  UiaJl  Idic(quoth  he)in  thiicftatc  ?

Let  me  enjoy  tby  fwectnellc  once  againc,

Before  my  dayes  draw  to  their  doJcfulI  date  j
One  fmall  refrcfhing  ere  we  quite  depart.

Will  make  me  die  with  more  contented  heart.

The  gyrlc  with  pitie  movcd,thus  replier.

Think  noc(quoth  fhe)  but  I defire  the  fame  j
But  hard  it  is  among  fb  many  eyes.

Without  incurring  piinifhmcnt  and  fhame.

Ah(quoth  the  Grce^e)fome  mcanes  thou  wouldft  dc-
If  thou  but  felt  a quarterof  my  fl-amc,  fvife.

To  meet  this  night  in  fbmc  convenient  place.

And  be  together  but  a lit  tie  fpacc.

6 1

Tuft  (anfwer’d  fte)you  fuc  now  out  of  fcafon.

For  cv  ry  night  1 lie  betwixt  them  two,

^ u fcare,and  find  the  treafon,

1?”'  one  of  them  I have  to  do.

Well(quoth  the  Greece]  I could  refute  that  reafaOii
If  you  would  put  youi  helping  hand  thereto,

You  muft (ftid  he) feme  pretic.fcufc  dcvife,
nd  find  occafion  from  them  both  to  rife.

PclPc,and  after  bad

He  fhould  return  when  all  werefound  afleep,

And  learned  him,who  was  thereof  right  glad,
o go  and  come, what  order  he  fhould  keep.

Now  came  the Grec^f,as  he  hislefTon  had.

When  all  washuft  t.asfofr  as  he  could  cicep.

Full  to  the  doore,which  open’d  when  fie  puft’d.

Then  to  the  chamber, which  was  foftly  tuft’d.

3 long  and  Icifiira  blc  ftride,

And  longeft  on  the  hinder  foot  he  ftaid,
bofoft  he  trcads,a!though  his  fteps  were  wide.

As  though  to  tread  on  eggs  he  were  afraid:

And  as  he  gocs,hc  gropes  on  cither  fide
To  find  thcbcd,with  hands  abroad  difplaid.

And  having  found  the  bottome  of  the  bed.

He  crccpcth  in, and  forward  go’th  hU  head*


TmitaticH  of
Oviiin  1 M
fa/Iii
Surgita^
*»*Hl  am-
nunquett"
neMi^vefiigic
furtim
Sujfeiiji  di%
gituftrt  u-
titumagre.


V 4


Berweene


THE  XXVIII.  BOOKE


*ilty

\ntt

irr

tb*

lumd.


330

Bctwfcn  Fimettaa  tender  thighes  hecame.

That  lay  upright,as  ready  roreceire.

At  laft  they  fell  unto  their  merry  gamcj
Embracing  fwcctly  now  to  take  t heir  learc  j
He  rode  in  poil^ne  can  he  bait  for  fhame.

The  bead  was  good, and  would  not  him  deceirc,

He  thinks  her  pace  fb  eafie  and  fofurej
That  all  the  night  to  rids  he  could  endure.

<5

locundo  and  the  King  do  bothperccirc
The  bed  to  rock, as  oft  it  comes  to  paffe.

And  both  of  them  one  cirour  did  deceive,

For  cither  thoughtit  his  companion  was  .*

Now  hath  the  Greeke  taken  his  latter  leave.

And  as  became, he  back  againedoth  paflTe,

And  Phxbui  beames  did  now  to  (hine  begin,
Fiametta  rofc  and  let  the  pages  in .

66

New  with  locundo  gan  the  King  to  jeft,

Brother(quoth  he)  I doubt  we  do  you  wrong.

It  were  more  time  for  you  to  take  your  reft.

That  have  this  night  a journey  rode  fo  long.
locundo  anivvers  him  againe  in  jeft.

Oh  fir, you  do  miftake,you  fing  my  (bng  j
Take  you  your  cafc,and  much  good  do  your  grace.
That  all  this  night  have  rid  a hunting  pace.

67

I, quoth  the  King  ? J would  in  faith  I fweare
Have  lent  my  dog  a courfc  among  the  reft,

But  that  I found  yourfelfeib  bufie  were.

And  rode  Co  hard,you  could  notfparcthe  beaH.
Wcll(faid  the  Knight)it  icemeth  me  to  bcare,
Although  you  brake  your  promife  and  beheft,)

Yet  privy  quips  and  taunts  here  needed  none^j*

You  might  have  bid  me  let  the  wench  alonCf

«S

Oncurg*d  ib  fane,the  tothcr  To  repli'd.

That  unto  bi  ttcr  words  their  tongues  were  moovM,
Scarce  one  forbarc  to  fay  the  tothcr  li’d;

And  plainc  to  trie  whofe  truth  fliould  be  reproov’d ,
Thcycal’d  thegyile  the  matter  to  decide.

Who  wasafraicl,as  wcllit  her  bchoov*d ;

And  file  muft  tcll(thcy  Handing  face  to  face) ,
Which  of  them  two  deferved  this  difgrace.

*9

Tell(quoth  the  King)with  grim  and  angry  fight.

Nor  fcatc  not  him  nor  mc,but  tell  us  true.

Which  of  us  two  it  was,that  all  this  night
So  gallantly  performed  all  his  due.

Thus  either  deeming  he  did  hold  the  right.

They  looked  both  which  fiiould  be  found  untrue  :
FiiZCTe/ta  lowly  laid  hcrfclfcon  ground.

Doubting  to  die  bccaufcher  fault  was  found.

70

She  humbly  pardon  craves  for  her  offence,

And  that  they  pitic  would  her wofull  cafe.

That  flic  with  pitic  mov’d  to  rccom pence
His  love, that  lafied  had  no  little  fpacc.

And  who  it  was,nietold  thcm,and  of  whence.

Had  this  ill  luck  in  this  unluckie  place.

How  flic  had  hop’d  that  though  they  hapt  to  wake.
Yet  for  his  partner  either  would  it  take.


7‘

The  King  and  his  companion  greatly  mus’d.

When  they  had  heard  the  praflice  fo  dctcAcd,

And  their  conceits  not  little  were  confus’d.

To  hcare  a hap  fo  ftrange  and  unexpeded :

And  though  no  two  were  cverfo  abus’d.

Yet  had  they  fo  all  wratbfull  mind  rejeded.

That  down  they  lay, and  fell  in  fuch  a laughter,
They  could  not  fee  nor  fpeak  an  hourc  after.

7*

And  when  at  laft  their  ftotnaclcs  and  their  eyes
Water’d  and  ak’d,thcy  laughed  had  fo  much.

Such  (hifts^quoth  they)  thefe  women  will  devife.
Do  whatweean,  their  chaftity  isfuch  :

If  both  our  cares  could  not  for  one  fufficc.

That  lay  betwixt  us  both,and  did  us  touch.

If  al  1 our  banes  were  cycf,yct  fure  they  faid,

Wc  husbands  of  our  wives  fhould  be  betraid.

73

Wc  had  a thoufand  women  prov’d  before,

And  none  of  them  denied  our  requeft.

Nor  would  and  if  wc  tri’d  ten  thoufand  more.

But  this  one  triall  paffeth  all  the  reft :

Let  us  not  then  condemne  our  wives  fb  fore.

That  arc  as  ckaft  and  honeft  as  the  beft,

Sith  they  be  as  all  other  woir.cn  be.

Let  us  turn  home, and  well  with  them  agree.

74

When  on  this  point  they  both  wcic  thusrcfolv’d.

They  gave  the  Grcekc  Fiametta  for  his  wife,

And  ti’d  the  knot  that  cannot  be  diflblv’d.

With  portion  largc,to  keep  them  all  their  life  •
Thcmfcivcs  went  homCjand  had  their  fins  abfblv’d.
And  take  againe  their  wives, and  end  all  ftrii^jc
And  thus  mincHoft  thcprcttic  ftoric ended.

With  which  he  pray  th  them  cot  to  be  oftended.

75

The  Pa£an  Prince, of  whom  I erft  made  inention>
Was  plcafcd  with  this  ftory  paffiog  well.

And  hcardthefame  with  heed  ana  great  attentiobj
And  praifed  it,and  faid  it  did  excel].

And  iwearcs  he  thought  no  wit  nor  no  invention.
No  pen  could  write,no  tongue  attainc  to  tell.

By  force  of  cloquence,or  help  of  art.

Of  womens  trecheries  the  hundredth  part.

76

But  at  the  table  fate  another  gueft,

Ofriperycares,and  judgement  morediftreer,
Wbofuchuntruthsto  heare  could  notdigeft.

And  fee  their  praifes  fo  trod  under  feet ;

Wherefore  his  fpccch  he  prcfemly  addreft
Vnto  his  hoft,and  faid,wedaily  meet
With  Handers  and  with  lying  fables  told.

And  thisisonejtofajldarc  be  bold.

77

Nor  thee,nor  him  that  told  thcetruft  I will.

Not  hough  in  other  t hings  he  gofpcll  fpakc,

I dareaftirmit  wcll,thatevili  will.

Not  any  triall  that  himfelfc  could  make,

Mov’d  him  ofall  the  kind  to  fpeak  f^  ill.

Belike  forfomcone  naughty  wemansfaket
But  he  that  would  enter  inwomcnspraife,

On  higher  ftepi  aloft  his  ftilc  might  raifc.


A fdOHMOJ
mm*,


But


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


231


78

But  tell  me  now,if  any  oucofyou

That  married  are, have  no:  awry  yetftept  ?
Nofearcea  maiijthat  hath  not  been  untrue.

And  with  fomc  other  woman  hath  not  flcpt ;

Kay  that  is  more, they  woo, they  feck, they  few.
They  tiic,thcy  tempt  thofc  that  be  fafeft  kept.

Yet  women  feek  not  after  men  I ween,

(I  meant  not  fuch  as  common  harlots  been.)

79

Otdi  fmh.  Sutcly  the  man  cn  whom  youi  tale  you  father,
yirmtlidif-  Cannot  himfe.fc  nor  other  men  excufe,

/muUutcl^  Who  ftill  to  take  an  unknown  piece  had  ratlxr,

I » 4 fufiu  although  their  own  weic  better  far  to  chufe :

But  if  thcmfclves  were  wood,I  furcly  gather  ,
Such  curtefics  they  never  would  rcfiife.

But  rather  ftraine  themfelvcs  beyond  their  might.
Such  kindnefle  with  more  kindnefle  to  requite,

80

But  bec’t  fome  woman  breaks  chaft  wedlocks  la  wes.
And  leaves  her  husband,and  becomes unchaft.

Vet  commonly  it  is  not  without  caufe.

She  fees  her  man  in  fin  his  fubftance  waft ;

She  feels  that  he  his  love  from  her  withdrawes,

And  hathonfome(pethap)le(reworthy  plac’d,

Who  fltikes  with  (word,thelcabberd  him  may  ftrike.
And  furc  lovccrarcthlove,likc  asketh  like.

81

Indeed  in  their  behalfe  agree  would  I
That  all  wives  that  adultery  do  commltj
Should  by  a law  condemned  be  to  die,

Iffo  their  husbands  guiltlcftc  be  of  it.

But  if  that  men  unpunifti'd  walk  awry,

Doubtlcfte  in  fenfeand  reafon  ’tis  not  fit.

The  weaker  fexe  fliould  for  this  fin  be  vexf.

Do  as  you  would  be  done  to, faith  the  text.

tz

Yet  W'hen  a man  is  bent  to  fpcak  his  worft.

That  in  defpitc  he  can  of  women  fay.

He  cals  them  but  incontinent  and  curft.

No  greater  fault  he  to  their  charge  can  lay.*

T o robjto  fpoilc,houfcs  to  break  and  burft,

Whole  cities,  towncs,and  countries  to  betray,
Vfui-y,murder,all  fuch  finnes  appeaic
Proper  to  men,womcn  of  them  are  clcare.

83

This  faid  this  grave  wife  man,and  would  have  told
Some  ftory  to  the  fame,  his  fpeech  to  verifie.

Of  women  that  had  liv’d  till  they  were  old,

Chafliy  and  vcrtuoufly,and  with  fincerity.

But  that  thecrucll  3Tttri(;c  did  him  behold.

With  fo  grim  look  as  did  the  poore  man  terrific.

And  made  him  hold  his  peace  with  threats  and  terror,
Yet  hating  inwardly  the  Fagam  error.

Theft  brablcs  ended, night  on  them  did  creep.

To  reft  they  wentjhaving  their  bodies  fed  ;

But  Redomont  ftant  all  the  night  could  fleep,  V
Tot  cares  that  ran  ftill  in  his  tioublcd  head.

His  unkind  miftreffe  him  doth  waking  keep.

She  troubles  him,whcther  he  lie  on  bed.

Whether  he  go,or  ride, or  fit,or  hand,

Whether  it  be  by  water  or  by  land.


But  though  himftlfc  could  take  but  little  reft.

Yet  of  his  horfc  he  takes  no  littlcc-ne,

Both  that  he  fhoiild  be  diligently  dreft.

And  faav.c  good  provvndrrjto  mend  ins  fare;

To  go  by  water  now  he  thought  it  beft,

Himftlfc  to  cafe, and  his  good  liorfc  to  fparr,

That  horfc  he  gat,as  he  might  juiUy  vant.

Spite  of  Rogero, ind  of  Sacrapanr.

86

He  takes  a bark,and  down  the  pleafant  flreame
Of  Senna  hcdothpaflc,with  wind  and  ore.

Great  haft  he  makes, to  get  to  his  own  Reamc,

Bucch.inging  place  doth  help  him  nc’r  themorej
In  flecp,of  her  iinkindncfTc  he  doth  dreame,
Awakcjbcfiglisand  ftill  renewes  the  fore  ;

To  talk  was  beft,and  yet  not  much  the  better,

. Say  what  he  lift,ycc  cannot  he  forgciher.

87

Annoid  by  boat,againc  he  taking  land,

Z>/mia,Lionf,and  Z>alen\a  paft,

(All  which  then  were  in  jigramantes  hand.

His  late  good  hap  had  fothem  aliagaft;

To  Aquamort  he  tomes  on  his  right  hand.

And  thence  he  will  to  Algier  turn  in  haft.

And  in  his  way.his  journey  to  abridge.

He  paft  Avignon  at  the  fumptuous  bridge,

88

Not  far  from  Montpelier  a townc  he  fa  w,
of  BacchuA, and  of  Ceres  well  bclov’d.

Though  then  fofpoil’d  by  fouldleisthatforaw.

The  dwellers  all  thcmfclves  from  thence  remov’d:  and

Alfo  therewasa  Church  for  Chtiften  law,

But  yet  the  Priefts  (in  this  to  be  reprov’d)

To  favc  thcmfclvesjthcir  Church  had  quite  foiftkcn.

So  asthe  fame  by  Rodomont  waitakcn.

89

This  feat, this  place, did  fothc  PaganpleaCCf

That  here  he  minds  to  make  his  firm  abode  j '

Forofthe  tone, fide  he  might  fee  the  feas.

On  tother  fide  the  ground  with  corn  well  load:

Here  all  provifions  he  might  find  with  cafe.

Here  he  doth  cauft  his  men  his  ftuffe  unload.

Arid  makes  thatChurch(oh  horrible  abuft)

Serve  him, to  his  profane  ungodly  ufc.

' 90

Now  ftanding  pcnfivcin  this  plcafing  place.

As  ftillhcus’djhcfawaLadyfaire,

(Though  mourning,  yet  moft  full  of  pleafing  gtace)

Who  with  a Frier  made  thithcr  fieiTcpairc  ;

A goodly  horfc  they  led  a foft  flow  pace,

Andas  they  went  he  taught  hermanyapraier  :

That  horfc  did  bcaic  a coffin  on  his  back.

All  overfpread  in  mourning  fort,with  black,

91

We  think  bythisdeftription  you  may  gueffe.

Who  this  fame  Frietjand  who  this  damftll  is.

Yet  for  more  plainncfie  fakc,T  will  exprofle
Her  namcjlcft  any  may  the  matter  mifle .

’Twas 7yi&eIf<x,who did  latcprofcfTc

Thatftatc  thatleadeth  ftraightto  hcav’nly  blilTe,  'rt'en^'

He  w3stheFricr,thattothatmindconvcrtcd  her,

When  as  dcfpairc  had  almoft  quite  fubrerted  her.

Withift


Honce  xvf.

O^e  i j

terrag  '\
aUo  ctzndnu'
ta  fgU  rnutim^
mu  ?fatrtie  1 j
quit  txu',  A'*ll  ,
qUaqutJm’

git?

Scandit  nr4‘
tat  vic:t[a
Tiavis  cura:
nee  turmai  r-  • '
quiiumniin-  ' \


That  u tofdjff
Pond  n-ith


THE  XXVIII.  BOOKE


232

♦t

Within  the  mourning  coffin  wasinclosM
Hiscorfc,whom  flicfo  IotM  alive  and  dead.
And  though  to  griefe  fhe  feemed  all  difpos’d.
Though  all  in  black  fhe  went  from  foot  to  hcadj
Yet  in  that  wofull  fliew  there  wasdifclos’d
So  worthy  grace, as  in  the  Pagan  bred
A fancy , moving  fuch  an  alteration.

As  made  him  change  his  firft  determination.

, .

Tor  where  before  he  did  difpraife  and  fcorn
All  women,now  againe  he  doth  commend
That  fcxjthat  doth  indeed  the  vvorld  adorn;

His  fecond  love  to  place  he  doth  intend
On  this,  fith  that  his  firft  hath  him  forlorn  j
Here  now  he  hopeth  all  his  wo  to  end  j
Simile  And  with  tliispaftjon  to  drive  out  the  tothcr,

VUvia'cU-  do  drive  out  one  nailc  with  another.

vumftlUi,  94

And  flraight  in  mildcft  manner  that  he  can.
Saluting  her.hc  ask’d  what  caus’d  her  painc  ?
And  fhe  the  wofull  talc  to  tell  began.

How  her  true  love  h>y  Mandricard  wasftainc,
Foi  whofeiake  flic  would  never  mavric  man.
But  fewcGod  all  her  life  that  doth  remaine;
The  Pagan  laughsat  that  the  damfell  faith.

As  one  that  knowesno  God.and  hath  no  faith.


95

And  greatly  he  her  good  intent  connold.

Affirming  her  to  merit  as  great  blame.

As  doth  the  mifer  that  boards  up  his  gold.

And  neither  doth  himfelfc  imploy  the  fame,

And  yet  from  thofethat  would, doth  it  withhold  •

So  fliut  not  up  your  felfc(quoth  he)for  fliamc  j
Fierce  Lions,Bcar.*,and  Serpents  that  have  ftings.

Should  be  fliut  up,notfairc  and  harnilcftcthings.

96

The  godly  Frier  that  tooknolittlccate.

Left  this  illfpecch  might  turn  her  to  fmall  good.

With  new  exhort ings.bad  her  to  beware,

Thaifiich  intifements  ftrongly  be  withflood  :

And  for  that  end  forthv\ith  lie  doth  prepare
A funiptuousmrfrcofghofllyinward  food;

But  this  vile  Pagandid  no  fooncr  taft  it,

But  up  againe  his  fqucmifh  ftomack  call  it.

97

And  feeing  that  the  fpccches  of  this  Frirc,  v

(Whom  he  could  make  by  nomeans  hold  his  peace)
Seem’d  greatly  to  contrary  his  defire ;

Wrath  kindled, and  atlaft  did  foincreafe.

That  this  poore  prieft  got  but  a foiie  hire.

But  here  a while  my  ftory  now  fliall  ccafe,

Left  my  mifhap  or  punifliment  be  fuch
As  was  this  Pricfts.for  talking  overmuch.


Moiall.  7n  locundc  and  Aftolfo  both.may  he  noted  thevanity  of  beauty  in  tnen^and  how  wcahy  a proteHion  it  h againft  the

blow  that  never  fmartethjOS  fame  baxte  termed  it.  Turtherjn  \ocundoswife,that  ajttr  all  thegreat  prote/latient  of
flindneJfe,woi  tal^en  in  bedwith  human,  we  may  note  the  fraud  aiwcUoifiailtie  offome  of  that  fexe.  /nFiametta.
that  lying  between  a Ifng  and  a linight  ,too\e  up.a  T apfler  into  her  bed,  1 cannot  tell  what  to  note,  hut  that  which  Ovid
faith,  Noncarctcffedu,quGd  voluereduo.

Nought  can  reflraine,confent  ofiwaine.

Inthe  ^ueeneof  Lombardie,thatbefimedher  lovefobafrly,  we  may  fee  that  no  fr  ate  nor  degree  it  priviledged  from
fhame  and Jlander, except  vertue  and  grace  from  above  do  hyep  them  from  fuch  enormom  offences. Turther  we  may  fee  it
u a very  dejperate  enterprife,  to  thin\  ly  any  reftraint  to  h,eep  anuncha/t  woman  from  putting  in  praCfice  her  lewd  de-
fres.  Liftly,the  defence  of  women  ly  the  grave  wife  manjoo  truly  prooveth,  that  though  many  women  are  bad, yet  rm
ny  men  are  w or  fr, and  therefore  if  every  one  would  mejid  one{o6  the  Proverb  faith)  all  fhall  be  mended.  And  as  for  Rodo-
moms  new  love,it  fhewes  that  no pajjiongrowesfo  ftrong  by  accident, to  remove  and  tal^e  away  a natwall dijpofition.

Allufion.  Hifiory  nor  Allegory, nor  fcant  any  thing  that  ugood,can  be  picl^ed  out  of  thu  bad  bool^c:  but  for  A Uu fans , they  come
in.  my  mind  fo  plentifully, as  1 can  fcant  tell  how  tomal^e  an  endwhen  1 am  once  entred  into  them ; onely  / wiU  touch
one  or  two(to  fitl-vpthis page  withaU)that  aUudetothat point  o/Iocundos patience,  in  leaving  the  ^tiltercr  mpu-
nifbcd,and  his  wife  rcproved,tal{ing  her  in  fo  JhamefuUan  aCf.  AS  I have  heard  of  one  ofbonefi  catling  (But  namclefTc
hcjfor  biamcleflchcmuft  be)  that  frndingoneinbedwithhuwife,andfreingevideHtfytbat  fhe  bad  plaid falfe  at  ta-
bles, and  born  a man  too  many,  drew  out  his  dagger  refolutely,  and  /ware  a great  oath,  that  if  he  had  not  been  bis  very
friend, he  wouldat  leaf  have  lulled  him;  andwhen  he  had  done,he  put  up  his  dagger  againe,  andwent  about  fame  other
bufneffe.  Another , hearing  one  was  nlwlygone  out  ofhu  heufe,  that  had  done  that  for  him  which  no  body  dc fires  to  do  ly
a deputy, toohe  bisfword  and  his  bucliltr, and  followed  in  a great  rage,  and  having  overtaken  him , laid  adultery  to  his
charge  ; the  man fo  hotly  purfued,andfo  hardly  charged,confefbd  it  was  true:  with  which  the  t other  (being  fuHy  fati*-
fed, as  it  feemed  with  his  hone  ft  confejfton  )left  him,fwearing  if  he  had  denied  it, he  would  not  fo  have  put  u up.

Here  end  the  notes  of  the  axviij  book.


■T


2?4


THE  XXIX.  BOOICE


pAtre  l[kbt\\z.,toloofeher  hc4d  is^Iad^

To  fave  her  chajlitj  from  Pagans  might :

To  pacific  her  ghofi^  the  Pagan  Jad

^T>oth  make  a bridge^  at  which  fals  many  a knight  t

Orlando  commeth  thither^being  mad.,

ty^nd  in  the  water  both  together  light.

From  thence  the  madman  onward  fiill pr$ceeds,
ty^nd by  the  way  d«tb  fi range  and  mon  flrotti  deeds.


H thoughts  of  men , uncon-
ftantand  unftable.

As  rubjcii  unto  change,  as
Wcftcrn  wind.

In  all  defignments  fond  and
variable,

'Bat  chiefly  thofc  thac  love
breeds  in  the  mind :

,Lohe  thac  late  devis’d  all  he
was  able.

To  Hander  and  deface  ail  women  kind,

Yet  now  with  them  whom  hefo  fore  revil’d,

E v'n  on  the  fudden  he  is  reconcil'd.

a

Indecd(moft  nobleDames)!  am  fo  wroth
With  this  vile  T «r^e,for  this  his  wicked  (in.

For  fpeaking  fo  great  Hander  and  untroth,

Of  that  fwcet  lex, whole  grace  I faine  would  win.
That  till  fuch  time  he  fiiall  confefle  the  troth.

And  what  a damned  errour  he  was  in  ;

1 Hiall  him  make  be  fo  in  confcicnce  flung,

As  he  Hiall  teare  his  flefli,and  bite  his  tongue.

3

But  with  what  folly  he  was  then  poflcfl,

Thcfequcll  of  the  matter  plainedoth  Ihow  j •

For  he  that  yeflerday  himfelfc  profefl
To  all  the  kind  a (worn  and  open  foe;

Now  to  this  ftrangcr  one  in  ftatc  diflrefl,

Whofe  birth , whofe  kin,  whofe  name  he  doth  not
With  one  fmall  glance, and  fober  caft  of ey,  (know.
Was  fo  eothrard,he  woos  her  by  and  by.

4

And  as  new  fancy  doth  his  heart  inflame.

So  to  new  (pecch  it  doth  his  tongue  dirc£l,


A new  dI(cour(c,new  reafons  he  doth  hamc.

With  great  peifwa(ions,but  to  fmall  cfFca  ;

Foi  ftiil  the  godly  Friic  refutes  the  fame,

Exhorting  her  fuch  fpceches  to  neglefl.

And  faft  to  hold  her  purpofe  good  and  holy
Of  fcrvingGod,and  leaving  worldly  folly*

5

He  faith  the  way  of  death  is  large  and  fpaciruf,

But  that  to  life  is  ftraight  and  full  of  painc :

But  Rodomont  that  faw  him  fo  audacious,
Infpiteofhim  thisdo£lrinctomatntainC}

Steps  to  him, and  with  hand  and  tongue  ungracious,
Firft  bids  him  get  him  to  his  cell  againcj
Then  his  long  beaid  grown  on  his  aged  chin,

All  at  one  pull  he  pillcth  from  the  skin .

And  fo  fatre  forth  his  wrath  and  fury  grew.

He  wrings  hisneck,as  piocerswring  a nailc.

And  twice  or  thrice  about  his  head  him  threw.

As  husbandmen  that  thrcfli  do  tolTc  a flailc :
Reports  moft  divcrsaftcrwaids  enfew.

But  which  be  true,and  which  of  truth  do  faile.

Is  hard  to  fay  ; fome  fay  he  was  fo  battered,

That  all  his  limbs  about  a rock  were  (cattcred.

7

Some  fay  that  to  the  Tea  he  hurled  him.

T hough  diverfe  furlongs  diflant  from  the  place.
And  that  he  di’d  bccaufe  he  could  not  (wim  ;

Some  others  tcll,(bme  faint  did  him  that  grace.

To  fave  hislifc,and  healccacb  bioken  lim.

And  to  the  (horedid  bring  him  in  fliortipacc.

The  likelihood  hereof  who  lift  may  way,

For  now  him  1 have  no  more  to  fay.


Soatiat.


Simih,

SimiUi


This


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


Simile.


Simik.


Smtme,


235


Thuscrucll  that  had  removed

The  babling  5r»ethatdid  himfomuchrpight^
The  fearfiilldainfelb  love  to  win  he  proved,

Dy  all  kind  wordsand  gcfti|rcs  that  he  mightj
He  cals  he.  hisdeate  hcarr,hi.s  foie  beloved.

His  joyfull  comfort. and  his  Iwcet delight,
IJismiUrdTcand  hisgoddelTcjand  fuch names,
i\s  loving  Knights  apply  to  lovely  dames.


IT


>

Her  reafon.s  hedoth  cutteoufly  corfnte,

(Love  foone  had  made  him  fuch  a learned  clarke)

In  phralcs  mannerly  he  moves  his  fine,
i\nd  llill  his  fute  waslcueld  at  o*:c  marke.

And  though  he  might  by  force  have  pluckt  the  frute.
Yet  for  that  time  he  doth  but  kilTethc  barke;

He  tbinkes  it  will  more  fweet  and  plcafing  roakeit.
If  file  do  give  him  leave  before  he  take  it.

10

Wherefore  a while  be  is  content  to  pavvfe,

Jn  hope  by  time  to  win  her  love qnd  grace:

She  deems herfelfe  like  moufcincati  Hiarpeclawcs,
In  Grangers  hands,and  in  asftrangca  place;

She  fees  he  feard  not  Gods  nor  humane  lawes.

Nor  had  no  pittie  of  her  wefiill  cafe.

That  o.nely  for  his  lull  w luld  her  p-erfwade,

To  bicakc  the  vow  that  Ihe  to  God  had  made.


1 1


Her  heart  and  eyes  oft  times  to  hcav’n  fire  lifts.
And  prayes  the  blelTed  Zlirj'^n  and  hetS'onne,
To  favc  her  fiom  this  Pagans  filthy  drifts.
That  unto  her  no  villamc  bedonne :
Shedoth  bcthinkchcr  of  an  hundred  drifts.
How  dre  his  bcaftly  luft  may  fafcly  drunne.
That  like  an  open  gu  I fc  on  her  d id  gape.

So  as  it  feemd  unpodi  bic  to  Icapc.


I know(quoth  die)anhcrbc,and  I haverccnc
A little  (ince  the  place  wlicrc  as  it  gtew.

That  boild  upon  a fire  ofcyprcdcclcene.

And  mixe  with  elder  berries  and  withrew;

And  after  ftrained  harmclefTe  hands  betwecnc»

VVillyccld  a juyee,  that  whoinordcrdcw,

A imoint  thciewitb,diall  never  Oomage  fcclc.

By  flame  of  firc,nor  yet  by  dint  of  ftcelc.
ifi

1 fay  ifonc  therewith  annoint  him  thrife,

Thefc  drangc  effcasthcrcofwill  firait  enfew.
Provided  alwayes  that  in  any  wife
He  mud  each  month  the  liquors  rtrength  rcncwi
I have  the  way  to  make  it  in  a trice.

And  you  dial!  fee  by  proofc  that  it  is  true;

This  thing  I thinke  diould  joy  you  more  togaine.
Then  if  you  conquerd  had  all  France  or  Spaine,
j 7

And  now  for  my  reward  of  you,  I pray
Let  me  obtaine  this  favourable  meed,

Tofi-vearc  that  you  henceforth  will  notaday
A^y  chaftiiy,by  either  word  ordeed:

Fell  Rodomant  thinks  this  a blcfl'cd  day.

And  hopes  he  now  diall  never  .armor  need.

And  fwcarcs  he  will  her  honour  fafe  defend.
Though  toperforme  it  hedoth  not  intend.

18

Yet  till  die  might  this  worke  bring  to  effeiff.

He  doth  hi.mlelfe  againd  his  mind  inforce.

And  that  die  might  no  violence  expeft,

Hedoth  not  offer  any  figne  offeree;
Butthatoneedone,  hisothhcwillncgleft.

For  ofan  oth  he  never  had  remorce;

But  fpccially  he  thought  it  lead  difgracc,

Flis  oth  to  violate  in  fuch  a cafe.  °


lac  if /IV  ibe


She  finds  out  many  feufes  and  delayes.

That  CO  prolong,  which  fainc  die  would  prevent.
Sometime  in  humble  manner  him  die  prayes.
That  to  rcleafe  her  he  would  bccontcnt  ;

But  being  dill  rcpulft  at  all  aflayes.

At  lad  die  doth  a way  and  mcanes  invent,
Notoncly  howtodiun  thatprefent  diaine.

But  merit  to  bcrfcifcctcrnall  name.


19


I?


Vnto  the  cruell  that  now  began
From  all  good  couife  of  curtcfic  tofwarve,
Shecommeth  in  the  mecked  fort  die  can.

And  faithjif  he  her  honour  will  prcfcrvc;

( Which  IS  the  part  of  each  true  valiant  man)
She  would  of  him  that  favour  well  deferve.

And  give  him  fuch  a gift  asinducmcafure.
Should  farce  lurpalTc  this  momentarie  plcafiire.
14

But  if  you  needs  will  me  defloure,l’wis

(She  Paid)  when  you  have  done  you  wrllrcpcnr,_
To  thinke  how  fondly  yon  have  done  amide.
And  loft  that  might  have  bred  you  true  content:
Asforyourcarnall  love, you  need  notmidc
More  faire  then  I,  and  fi*'ter  for  your  bent.

Bat  in  ten  thoufandjoneyou  diall  not  know»
That  fuch  a gift  upon  you  can  beftow.


He  makes  to  her  a folcmneproteftation,

And  with  moft  damned  oaths  the  fame  doth  bind.
That  he  will  never  do  her  molcftation.

If  fhcprocurc  a juyceof  fuch  a kind:

This  finks  fodeepe  in  his  imagination.

Of  Cygnus  znA  Achilles  runs  his  mind.

For  by  this  meaneshe  doth  himfclfeafTiire,

Such  pri  viledgc  as  they  had  to  procure.

20

Poore  JfabeUa^zA  of  this  delay.

By  which  a while  her  chaftitie  flic  fliiclds.
Receiving  this  his  promife.go’tb  ftraightway
To  feeke  thefc  herbs  amid  the  open  fields,
inev  ry  bank  and  grovc,and  hedge  and  way.

She  gathers  fbme, fuch  as  the  country  yeclds-
And  all  the  while  the  Pagan  walkcth  by.

And  to  thedamfcll  cafteih  ftill  an  eye.
ai

And  leaf!  Gic  flfioiild  want  cyprefTe  wood  to  bitrne.

He  with  his  fwoid  cuts  downc  whole  cypreffe  trees,
And  in  all  other  things  to  ferve  her  turnc.

That  each  thing  may  provided  be  he  fees:

Now  wit  h her  herbs  fhe  made  her  home  rcturnc.

The  caldrons  arc  on  fire  (notimetolccfc)

She  boylesand  pcrboylcs  all  thofe  herbs  and  flowres.
In  which  be  thought  there  were  fuch  hidden  powres.

X At


Tbef  are
/aid  tt  have
btevt  fo  iv«
e haunted
that  tiuy
fould  fteU
nt  fame  of
fre  Htrjietk


'1'


;THE  XXIX.  BOOKE


12

At  all  thcfc  ceremonies  he  Hands  by,

And  what  flicdothhc  many  times  doth  looks.

The  fmokcand  hcatc  at  laft  him  made  fb dry.

That  want  ofdrinkc  he  could  no  longer  broeke,
Grecke  wines  there  wcre,and  thofe  he  doth  apply,
T wo  fiikins  late  from  pnflengers  he  tookc.

He  and  his  men  bydrinkingbotlitbat  night.

Their  heads  full  heavic  made,their  hearts  full  light.

23

Though  by  their  law  they  arc  forbidden  wine.

Yet  now  that  here  they  did  the  liijuor  taft,

They  thought  it  was  fo  fWeet  and  fo  divine,

That  NeeJar  and  that  Mama-  farre  it  part:

At  t ha  1 1 eftraint  they  greatly  do  repine,

Thatdid  debar  them  of  fo  fweet  lepaH,

And  at  their  owne  law  and  religion  laffing.

They  Ipcnd  that  night  carowCng  and  in  ijuaffing.

24

Now  had  faiic  IsicU finifltt  that  confection.

Which  this  groll'c  Pagan  doth  bclecve  to  be,  -
Againfl  both  Hcclcand  fire  a fafe  protections
Now  fir  ((he  faid)  you  lliall  the  mall  fee.

And  that  you  may  be  furc  that  no  infcCtion
Is  in  thcfcdrugSj'youfiill  fiiall  prove  by  me,

1 fhall  you  nicwthcrcofropertcCt  trial!.

As  you  niallfccthepioofcpaltalldeniall.

as

My  felfc  (quoth  flic)  mindfirft  to  take  the  fay,

1 hat  you  may  fee  I do  not  fainc  nor  lie.

Then  after  on  your  Iclfe  you  prove  it  may.

When  you  have  madea  witnesof  your  cic;

Now  therefore  bid  your  men  to  go  away.

That  none  be  prefent  here  but  you  and  I,

And  thus, as  with  her  felfc  fbe  had  appointed,

Her  neck  and  bi'cH$,and  fliouldcrs  Oic  annoinicd.

16

Which  done, in  chearefuli  fort  flic  open  layd
Her  naked  ncckc  before  the  bcaftly  TuThj;,

And  bad  him  ftrikc,fQi-  the  was  nor  afraid.

She  had  fuch  skill  and  truHin  t bis  rare  wotke:

He  unadvis’d,and  haply  ovcriayd

With  wine, that  in  his  idle  brainc  did  wotke.

Was  with  her  fpcech  fo  undifcrcetly  ltd.

That  at  one  blow  he  quite  cut  off  her  head.

The  head  where  lovcand  all  the  graces  dwelt.

By  hccdlcflc  hand  is  from  the  bodic  fevered,
Alaswhofchcart  at  fuch  hap  could  not  melt?

Yea  that  is  more,the  head  cut  off  cndcvcicd
Tofliew  what  pleafurc  ofherdcath  flic  felt.

And  how  flic  ftill  in  her  firft  love  perfevered:

Thiifc  from  thcfloorc  the  head  was  fcenc  rebound,
Thrifeit  was  heard  Zerbinos  name  to  found.

28

His  name  to  whom  fo  great  love  flic  did  bcarc,

As  flic  to  follow  him  would  leave  her  life.

To  whom  tis  hard  to  fay  if  that  flic  were
A truer  widow  or  a kinder  wife*

O foulethardidfl  not  death  nor  danger  fearc,

( A famplc  in  thefe  latter  times  not  rife)

To  fare  thy  chaflitie  and  vowed  truth,

£y’n  in  tbjr  tender  yestres  and  grecneft  youth.


29

GofoiilCjgo  fweeteft  foulefor  ever  bicfl.

So  may  my  verfe  picafe  thofe  wliom  I defire j
As  my  poorc  Mufe  fliall  ever  do  her  heft,

As  farre  as  pea  canpajm,and  fpcech  alpire.

That  thy  juHpraifcs  may  beplainc  citpit  fi
To  future  timcs.Go  foiile  to  heaven  ci  hyerj
And  if  my  verfe  can  graunt  to  thee  thisthanir,

T heu  flialt  bccald  of chafliiic  the  Martir.

JO

At  this  hei  deed  fo  Orange  and  adrrirablc,

]Rc  that  above  all  heav’ns  doih  ay  remair.c,

Lookt  dcwne,aiid  faid  it  was  more  conimcntfablc
Then  hers  for  whom  Tarquinio  loft  hisraigne.

And  ftraight  an  ordinance  inviolable.

Ay  to  be  kept  on  earth  hcdothoidaine.

And  thus  he  faid,cv’n  by  my  felfc  1 fwcarc,
Whofcpowrcjhcav’n, earth, fpritcs,mcn  and  Angris
J I (fcare.

That  for  her  fake  that  didc  of  this  name  laft,

Wlio  ever  fliall  hereafter  beaic  that  name.

Shall  be  both  wife  and  continent  atid  chaft.

Of  faultlcflc  manners,  and  of  fpotlcflc  fame,

Lee  writers  drive  to  make  thcirglorielaft,

And  oft  m profit  and  verfe  record  the  fame,

'Lei HeUicon,P Indus, Parnajfks  hill,

Sound  Ifabella,  Ifabctia  ftiil.

Thus  faid  the  Hy’ft.and  then  there  did  enfew
A wondrous  calmc  in  waters  and  in  aire.

The  chaft  fbiilc  up  imothc  third  heav’n  flew.
Where  Zerft/n  was, to  that  fl  cdid  repaire;

Now  when  the  bcaftly  Turi^c  faw  plainc  in  vcw.
How  he  had  prov’d  himfclfca  womanftayre.

When  once  his  drunken  furfet  wasdigtftcd,

He  blam’d  himfclfc  and  his owuc  deed  dcicftcd.

In  part  to  fatisfic  for  this  cfFencc,

And  to  appeafit  her  ghoft  as  twerc  in  part,

Altliough  he  thought  no  pardon  could  dilper.ee.
Nor  pu niflimcntfufficc  for  fuch  defartj
He  vowesa  monument  of  great  cxpencc,

Ofcoftly  workmanfliip  and  cunning  art,
Toraifefor  hcr,nor  minds  he  to  go  riirde-.

Then  that  fcl/c  chuich  w here  he  had  done  the  riiuttfer
?4

Of  that  felfc  place  he  minds  her  tombe  to  make.

And  for  thatcaufc  he  gets  ofwovkmen  florc.

For  love, for  mony,  and  for  terrors  fake,

Six  thoufand  men  hefet  to  wotke  and  morCj
From  out  thcmoiintaines  maflle  ftoncsthey  take,’
With  which  wcl  wrought  &bewd,&  fquard  theiforc
With  hicand  ftattly  arch  that  Church  he  covers,

And  in  thcnciidftintombs  the  blefTcd  lovers.

35

And  over  this  was  rais’d  with  curious  fleight,

A Pj/ramid^i  huge  and  ftately  towrc.

Which  lowrean  hundred  cubits  had  in  height.

By  mca furc  from  the  top  unto  the  flowrCj
It  feemd  a wOrke  of  as  great  charge  and  weighty
As  yir/n<i»madc,to  boft  his  wealth  and  powre.

Of  goodly  Hones,  all  rais’d  in  feeml  v lanks,.

Vpon  the  edge  of  ftately  T^brk  banks.

Now


Jfshta  rfcf

cf

tbjfiilf.


frtpbfcii]
«/4®  thn

JhtU  hart

tbt  uajKt  tf

Jfibttt,


U»its  ,A^
dnoifi,xevp
ttUtdCffttl
S*i»t,Auge.


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO,


svard  of
Heiau!tlrit
^ tthich  it
ouKtoript-
■mtnii  of
•trntu


3«

Isow  when  this  goodly  workc  wjsoncc  begunne.

He  makes  a budge  upon  the  water  by,

'I  hat  of  great  depth  and  force  did  ever  lunne.

In  former  time  a feme  there  did  lye.

For  fuch  as  would  a further  circuit  fhunne.

And  pafle  this  way  more  cafy  and  more  ny  e j
The  Fagan  takes  away  the  ancient  feme.

And  leaves  for  pa{Tcngers,nor  bote, nor  wherrie.

37

But  makes  a bridge  where  men  to  row  are  wont.

And  though  the  fame  were  ftrog,  & of  great  length.
Yet  might  two  horfes  hardly  meet  a front,

Not  had  the  fidesa  railc  or  any  flrength.

Who  comes  this  way  he  meanes  fliall  bide  a biont.
Except  he  have  both  courage  good  and  ftrength.

For  with  the  armesof  all  that  this  way  come.

He  means  to  bewtifie  faiic  Jsbcls  toomc.

^uhieumtis  ^ thoufand  brave  Atchievmenrs  he  doth  vow.
Wherewith  he  will  adorne  his  ftately  worke.

From  whom  he  taketh  all  thcfefpoilesor  how,
Hccarcs  not  whether  Chrtftian  or  Turtle.

Now  was  the  bridge  full  finiflicd,aDd  now
His  watchmen  oo  each  fide  in  corners  lurke,

To  make  him  know  when  any  one  corns  ncare.

For  all  that  come, he  means  fliall  buy  it  dcaie.

39

And  further  hisfantaflike  brainedoth  thinke.

That  n th  by, drinking  wine  he  did  that  fin.

In  lieu  thereof  he  now  would  water  drinke.

As  oft  ashy  mifhap  hefliould  fall  in:

For  when  he  fhould  unto  the  bottome  Hnke,

The  top  would  be  an  ell  above  hischin.

As  who  fliould  fay,for  ev'ric  cvill  a£fion
That  wine  procurcs,were  water  fatisfaAion.

Full  many  there  arrived  in  few  days,

Somemen,as  in  the  way  from  Spaing  to  Trance,
Some  others  fondly  thirfting  after  prayfe.

In  hope  by  this  exploit  their  names  i*advarjce.

But  Rodumont  doth  meet  them  both  the  ways.

And  fuch  bis  vallcw  was  fo  good  his  chance,  ,
That  flill  as  many  men  as  there  arrives,

LofI  all  of  them  their  arms,and  fomc  their  lives.

41

Among  the  many  prifners  that  he  tooke.

All  thofe  were  Chrifiians  to  Algyrg  be  fenr.

And  willd  bis  men  fafely  to  them  tolooke,

Becaufe  ere  long  himfclfe  to  come  he  mentj
The  rcft,fave  that  their  armors  they  forfookc.

All  haimelefTc  backe  into  their  countries  wentt
N ow  while  fiicb  feats  were  by  the  Pagan  wrought.


4?


'^7


For  Lords  and  Knights  and  Squyresof  good  eftate.
This  bridge  was  built, and  not  for  ihcc  thou  bcall;
Fc  that  no  fence  had  in  his  idle  pate.

Not  heeding  what  was  faid  Hill  onward  preft;

1 muft  (the  Fjgan  thinks)  this  fools  pride  bate.

It  feems  belike  hethinks  t am  in  jeft.

And  thereupon  he  makes  the  madman  towards,
And  minds  to  drownchim,fith  he  was  fo  fiovvatds.


44


Orlando  thither cameof  wits  bcHiaught.

42>

At  that  fame  inrtant  that  Orlando  came.

Was  Rodomont  all  armed  fave  his  bed.

The  naked  Earle  with  wits  quite  out  of  f ame,
Lc^sov’rthe  bar.and  went  (as  folly  led)

To  pafle  the  bndgc,thc  Pagan  him  doth  blame.
For  his  prefumpt'ioa,  and  withall  he  fed,
bray  fawey  villen,proud,and  undifcrcet,

, For  fuch  as  thee  tbispafTage  is  not  meet.


He  little  lookt  to  find  a match  fo  hard.

Now  while  they  two  together  gan  to  ftrive.

Behold  a gallant  dame  of  great  regard.

At  that  fame  budge  by  fortune  did  arrive,

Faire  fi'orde  liege,  that  late  before  bad  hard,

How  lovcdid  of  his  wittsthisEarIc  deprive^

She  hithercame  to  fecke  out  Brandimarr,

That  now  in  Parh  was  with  penfive  hart.

41

And  thus  thisLadie(asbcforcI  told)

Came  at  that  fcafon  to  this  dangerous  place.

And  knew  this  £ar/e,whcn  flicdid  him  behold,

And  wondcid  much  to  fee  himinfuch  cafe;

Now  held  Orlando  with  bis  foe  hard  held.

In  vainc  the  Pj^artftriveshim  todifplace.

And  grinning ,to  himfclfe  he  faid  at  length,

Who  could  have  thought,  a fooie  had  had  fuch

46  (ftiength?

And  fretting  that  he  had  his  purpofe  mift.

He  doth  by  Height  the  madmans  force  a fiay.
Sometime  he  puts  his  hand  below  his  twiH,
Sometime  above,fometime  another  way:

Orlando  Hands  unmov’djdo  what  he  liHj
The  Pagan  feemd  to  do  by  him  fhat  day,

Asdoth  the  BearCjthat  would  digup  the  tree.

From  whence  Hie  fell, but  fees  it  will  not  be.

47

Orlando  full  of  force,  though  void  of  fence.

About  the  middle  tooke  the  Pagan  fifi.

And  heaves  him  up  from  ground, and  fo  from  thence
Into  the  Hrcame  himfclfe  he  backward  caH:

Vnto  the  bottome  both  do  finkc,from  whence
Each  one  was  glad  to  get  him  in  great  half,

Orlando  nak’t  and  light ,fwam  like  a fifli ,

So  that  he  foonc  gat  out  as  he  would  wiOi.

.8

And  being  out,  away  he  Hr.night  doth  runne.

Nor  tarries  he  to  hc3TC,or  to  expeft.

If  men  do  blame  or  praife  that  he  had  donne.

But  follows  on  his  former  courfe  dire  A:

This  while  the  Pagandr^nke  nye  halfe  a tuntic
Ofwater,erc  he  could  himfclfe  creft.

And  hardly  he  cfcaped  being  drownd.

So  hcavie  arm'd,  and  in  place  fo  profound.

49

Now,  while  the  fwimmeth  for  his  life,

Faire  Fiordeliege  with  fad  and  penfive  hart,

A lively  patterne  of  a vertuous  wife.

Doth  fcarch  the  fepulcher for  Brandimarr,

Shec  tooke  her  time  while  they  fell  firll  at  ftrife.

And  up  and  downc  flic  lookt  in  evViepart,

But  hee  flicfitids  nor  arms  noryct  hismantell.

Nor  meets  with  fuch  as  of  him  tydings  can  tell.

X z


Sindh.


MtOftiR  U
vtflitBtta
faltnmut
Korueif
Pr  nut.


‘A


But


THE  XXIX.  BOOKE


Ht  rtiurnt
p Tttrdt-
iege  fM  ibl

SI.  isobe,
ttffi  \ 6,ani

I


I


^iWTir.

SimiU,


SO

But  leatc  wc  ficr  awhile  thus  mourning  fad.

And  fecking  him  each  where  favc  where  he  was.
And  tell  we  now  what  hap  Orlando  had.

And  what  ftrangc  feats  his  furie  brought  to  palTe,
You  might  perchance  belcevethat  I were  mad.

If  none  of  his  mad  pranks  I ovcrpalTe.

.Which  were  (o  ftrangOjand  in  fo  great  a number,
As  you  to  heare,and  me  to  tell  would  cumber.

51

I onely  fliall  fome few  of  thofc  recite.

As  to  my  prefent  purpofe  fliall  pertaine

The  madman  well  ward  held  his  courfe  forthright.

Straight  to  the  hils  that  fever  France  fro  Spahie,

He  fcldome  bayts,but  travels  day  and  night.

So  much  he  was  diflemper'd  in  his  braine.

And  by  the  moiintainesfide  as  he  did  pafle.

He  met  two  young  men  driving  of  an  afle.

s»

TbU  afle  they  lodcn  had  with  clefts  of  wood.

Fad  bound  upon  his  burden-beariUgbackc;

They  feeing  one  runne  nak’t  as  be  were  wood.
Amid  their  way,they  cride,hoe  firra  backe.

But  hemakcsanfwer  neither  bad  nor  good.

For  fence  and  underdanding  he  did  lacke,

Butwith  his  footc  the  poore  afle  he  fo  fpurned.
That  both  his  lode  and  him  he  overturned.

55

He  toft  him  like  a football  up  on  by,

Whence  downc  befell  and  brake  his  neckc  withitj
Thenatthe  menhedothwith  furie  fly.

Of  which  the  tone  had  better  hap  then  wit,

For  downe  the  rockc  the  tone  lept  by  and  by.

Deep  thrcefcorcyards,and  by  the  way  did  hit
Vpon  a bankcof  fuize,growncinthe  place.

And  fcap’t  with  onely  fctatching  of  his  faee,

)4

The  tothcr  that  of feare  like  paflion  feels.

Did  thinke  to  clammer  up  upon  the  rocke.

But  ftraight  Orlando  rakes  him  by  the  heels.

And  puls  him  downe  and  beats  him  like  a ftocke,
Asfifliersufcto  beat  their  Aiding  Eels,

And  cv*fl  asfawlkners  teare  fome  time  a cockc.

To  give  unto  their  hawks  their  intrals  warmc.

So  he  tears  leg  from  icg,and  arme  from  armc.


Stuffudhiu,
tbatu  to  fay
tmtdtrfuU,

that  it
to  far  hug*
or  great.

Two  lOWKtl
in  Spain*
n**riibtf*t.


Ott  it  tb*
tmddt  lh*t
lb*  tyJtiea-
vetb  ithiltd
tntlnia»l(t.


55

Thefcfame  and  other  like  ftupendioui  deeds.

He  put  in  praftife  while  thofe  hils  he  paft,

Ev*n  fuch  as  fpcech  and  credit  all  exceeds.

His  fits  fo  furious  wcrCjhis  ftrength  fo  vaft;

So  far  unto  the  weft  ward  he  proceeds.

That  to  t he  fca,  he  now  wascome  at  laft,

E?’n  to  the  fandie  flioaisof  Tarraconay
That  leadeth  right  the  way  to  Barcellona.

56

Vpon  thofc  fands  (fuch  was  his  mad  conceat)

He  purpos’d  with  bimfelfca  houfc  to  build.

And  being  noyed  with  the  parching  heat.

He  thinks  with  fand  his  skin  thcrefro  to  fliildt
Straight  with  his  hands  he  digs  himout  a feat.
And  though  the  oes  his  bodie  all  deflld.

Yet  with  that  nnould  his  members  all  he  covered.
That  nothing  bm  hit  bead  could  be  difcoveicd.


57

N ow  as  he  lay  halfc  burid  ic  the  fa  nd,

(For  favc  his  head,thc  reft  was  all  unicen,)

There  thither  camc,as  in  their  way  by  land,

Meioro  Angelica  his  Queen,

ShCTiDt  aware  what  in  her  way  did  ftand,

(Of  hci  lornc  lovers  bofting  then  I ween)

Came  unto  him  fo  ncaie  and  on  fuch  foden,
Thacupon  him  her  horfc  had  vvclny  troden.

58

But  feeing  ftraight  up  dart  a naked  man,

Tlicfight  did  her  greatly  amaze  and  fright.

She  knows  him  not,  nor  guefleat  him  fhccan,
Shethinketh  fine, he  is  fome  hcllifli  fptight;

Rough  grifly  hcard,eyc$  ftaiing,  vifage  wan.

Ail  parchr,  and  funne  buind,  and  deformd  in  fight.
In  fine  he  lookt  (to  make  a true  defeription)

In  face  like  death,  in  culloi  like  a Gyptian.

59

But  flic  at  this  ftrange  fight  (as  cift  I fiid)

Did  gallop  thence  as  faft  as  (he  coi^d  ride,

And  (crceching  lowd , flic  cricih  out  for  aid,
VntoMedoro  her  beloved  guide;

The  mad  Orlando  was  not  ill  apaid.

When  (uch a prettied amzell  he  had  fpide:

Though  he  no  knowledge  nor  remembrance  had.
How  this  was  fIic,for  whom  he  firft  fell  mad.

60

Yet,as  delighted  with  her  picafing  hew,

And  liking  well  tofeC  fo  fairc  a face,

With  great  defire  he  ftraight  doth  her  purfew,

£v’n  as  a hound  thefcarfull  Doe  doth  chafe,

Meduro  mov’d  hcrewith,his  rapier  drew.

And  after  this  mad  fellow  rides  apafe.

And  with  his  horfc  he  tbinketh  downe  to  tred  him.
And  with  his  blade  he  thinkethtobehedhim.

61

ButbyefFcdjConfrnriwifc  he  found.

That  he  without  his  hoft  his  reckning  made,

The  madman  fhrinktth  not  an  inchofgrouod.

And  his  bate  skin  was  harder  then  the  blade.

Yet  fodcnly  whenastbe  madman  found,

That  one  bcbinde  his  backe  did  him  invade.

He  tiirnd  and  with  his  fift  fo  fmocc  the  horfc.

As  made  him  ly  on  ground  a fenflcirccotfe.

6a

And  in  atrife  he  backeagainedoth  goe.

To  catch  Angelica  whofpurrs  with  fpeed.

And  thinketh  fttll  her  palfreys  pafe  too  floe
For  fuch  a curnc,  and  fb  it  was  indeed.

For  had  it  gone  like  arrow  from  a boe,

It  hardly  could  have  holpe  her  at  this  need;

At  laft  her  onely  hope  was  in  the  ring,

For  now  to  heipe  her  was  none  other  thing,  ;

63

The  ring  that  never  faild  her  at  her  need.

Did  make  her  now  to  vanifh  out  of  fight.

But  whether  that  it  were  for  want  of  heed.

Or  that  thclodainenefledid  her  affright,

Oi;  that  her  bcaft  did  founder  with  the  fpsed.

Or  that  fhe  did  determine  to  alight.

Of  all  thefe  which  it  was  I cannot  tell.

But  topfic  turrie  from  the  bsaft  fhe  fell.

liad


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


«4

Kid  fhc  filnc  HiortcrjOr  on  tntficrfidc,

Jnlilfclihood  the  madman  l).id  her  caught,

VVKicluf  he  had, flic  doubt  Ics  fiiouid  havcdtde.

But  great  good  fomme  her  deliverie wrought:

But  now  another  bcaft  flic  mull  provide,

For  this  another  pai'c  will  foonc  be  taught,

Orlando  dill  doth  hcrpuifuc  fofaft,

That  needs  he  mud  ov’rgct  her  at  the  lad.

65

As  for  Angelica  T take  nc  care,

1 know  that  die  a bcad'long  will  notlacke.

But  rather  dealconc.as  flic  did  iltat  Mare,

That  now  in  madmans  hands  will  fuffer  wrackc.

T o follow  her  Orlando  doth  not  fpat e,

Till  he  her  ftaid  and  lept  upon  hei  backe.

Then  gallojit  heas  long  as  flic  was  able,

And  lets  her  reft  in  neither  field  nor  ftablc.

6H

Vntill  atlaft  in  leaping ov’r  a ditch.

The  pooic  M aie  put  her  fhoulder  out  of  joy  nr,
Hewith  his  fail, took  neither  ach  nor  ftitcli.

Nor  of  the  briifc  he  pall'cth  not  a poyhtj
Nor  fccketh  he  for  turpentine  or  pitch,

The  poorc  beads  brufed  memberstoannoynt.
Though  he  might  fee  with  this  fall  he  had  maid  her.
Yet  fainc  he  would,fIic  fhould  have  borne  him  farder

67

At  laft  on  his  ownc  fhoulder  her  he  laid,
tumjtmilirt  And  bare  her  fo  about  an  arrow  flioot.

But  feeling  then  that  flietoohcavie  waid,

* He  Icadcth  her  and  lets  her  go  on  foot.


She  limping  follows  liim,and  ftill  hefaid,
Comeon,comc  on, but  litticdid  it  boot,

At  laft  to  make  her  her  flow  pace  to  alter.
About  Ins  right  leg  he  doth  lieher  halter.

68

And  tclshcr  now  with  eafe  flic  follow’  m.iy.

And  fo  to  harry  her  he  doth  begin.

The  fliarpe  ftoncslying  in  the  rugged  way.

Fret  of  her  hairc,and  afterward  the  skin.

The  beaft  mifufed  thus,livcs  fcaifc  a Jay:
Orlando  hathhci  tyde  unto  his  fliinnej
He  fees  notjiioi  heknows  not  flic  isded.

But  on  hedrawshcras  hisfuiic  led.

69

And  fiirc  he  would  have  ferv’d  her  fuch  a tuch,

I raeanc  his  miftics  if  be  could  have  caught  hf  t.
Had  not  the  venue  of  the  ring  bccnc  fuch.

As  how  to  walkcinvifible  it  taught  lien
Ah  cuifcd  be  thatring.and  cutft  as  much
Be  he  that  fo  unluckily  it  brought  her  j
Fife  futeOrlando  had  revenged  then
Her  often  f/iX3ngs,to  him  and  other  men.

70

Yet  why  wifli  I thiscurfeon  her  alone?

I would  the  like  might  hap  to  all  tiickinde.

For  in  a thoufand  good  there  is  not  one.

All  be  fb  proud,untbankfull  and  iinkinde.
With  flinty  hearts, carclcfrcofothcrs  monc,

Ih  their  ownc  lufts  canid  moft  headlong  blinde,
But  mere  herein  to  fpeake  I am  forbidden.
Sometime  forfaying  truth  one  may  be  chidden.


Ovid  it  artt
faUiu
{aUtmtf.tse
mdgnrt  ptm
frt'/aaum
funigtmu.i
ytiUiu  tim
punjtrtnfo


Morall.  jn  the  death  of  I fabclla  is  a notable  example  of  chaflitie,  vnhich  / mufl  confejfe  1 have  indevoiired to  fet forth  to  the

uttermofi  ofrrrypoore  of  ajpectali  love  andrevcrence  J bare  to  the  name, having  had  an  Ifabcll  to  my  mother, and

Jiich  an  at  if  nature  did  not  mahyC  me  toopartiaU  apraifer,  / would  boldly  affirme  (both  for  the  honorable  place

Jhc  lived  in, and  for  theveriuowi  fort  fhe  died  in)  to  beworthie  to  whom  the  prophecie  in  the  j i ■ faff e of  thu  i^.boo{e
may  be  worthily  apply  ed  ••  Asa  better  pen  then  mine, approved  by  this  made  Epitaph  and  intttled  in  this  fort:

A true  report  ofmiftres  I fabcH  Harington,/9iMe/ime  oj  her  Majcfiies  privie  thamber, writ  ten  by  a credible  perfon
that  was  well  acquainted  with  her  conditions.

A body  chaft,a  vertuous  mind,a  tempent  tonguc,an  humble  hart.

Secret  and  wifc,faithfull  and  kind  ,truc  without  guile,  mildc  without  art,

Afrend  to  peace, a foe  to  ftiifc,a  fpotlefIcmaid,a  matchlcfTcwife
And  thus  much  for  the  name  ofi  fabclla.  In  Rodomont  we  may  fee  effeils  of  inconfancie,fcnfualitie  anddrunhynnes,
ail  which  end  (forthemof  part)  infinities  repentance.

Hifidric>  If'hercas  this  fait  o/Tfabclla  is  preferred  before  that  of  Lucietia, who  tfiUei  her  felfe  after  Jhc  was  dejioured,/ thinite

that  no  man  can  juftly  ma\e  any  comparifon  betweene  them.for  thefioric,Iwi/l  not  fand  long  upon  to  recite  it  being  fo
well  l^nowne, but  refer  the/ludiotcs  reader, either  to  Livic  whowrites  it  in  profe  very  fully,  er/oOviddcFaftis,  wJere
*/  is  alfo  recorded  very  Poetically  and paffionatly.

Quid  faciar,pugnet?  vinccturfocmina  pugnaiis;

Clamet?  at  indextra  qui  Tctctcnfiscrat.

Aufugiat?  pofitis  urgenturpeiiora  palmisj
T um  pnmum  externa  peftora  tafia  manu-

Allegoric.  perhaps  willpictie  a pretie  Allegorie  in  the  confeifion  iharUa  bdla  made,  and  in  deed  it  is  a prettic  receit,if  it

® hewellmarhyd:  It  is  in  the  x^.flaffe:  anherbe,  whichJhenamed»ot,(fuppoJe  ittobc  trettifoUie  or  prettifoUy)  mi»~
gledwitb  elder  berries  and  rew,  ( rehith  nriyfignifie  fage  counfel  and  repentance ) and  flrained  between  harmles  hands,
which  betoh^ens  innocencie,  boyledon  afire  of  Cypres,  which  the  ancient  Romanesufed  at  funerals,  and  therefore  may
be  talien  either  for  death,  or  perfecution,  or  martyr  dome  : this  confelHon  ufedin  due  order  will  be  a good  Antidoton  oi
medicine, againft  fire  and /word:  under  which  is  fignified,all  the  perils  and  adverfities  of  the  world.

AOtjfios*  “Pfre  death  of  IfibellaaUudeth,  or  in  deed  is  mcerly  tal{enfiom  the  lil;e  example  of  one  BtaCilhofTJuraxx^)  that  in

tie  felfe  fimefort  deceived  a fouldier,andwas  hjlled  her  felfe:  as  Fornarius  noteth  at  large.


X3


Merc  end  the  notes  of  the  xxix.  bookc.


UiUiiUl

-LUJiUllI

r p:

THE  XXX*  BOOICE


241


THE  ARGVMENT.

Strangf  feats  bj  wad  Oihndo  are  atckievidj
Fierce  Mandricard  is  bj  Rogero Jlaiae:
Hioife/fe  fo  hurt, that  all  the  campe  beheved^

He  had  bin  dead  the  fortnofl  of  the  trvaine:

His  love  with  his  long  abfencefore  is  grieved:

To  breaks  his  word  his  wounds  do  him  confiraine:
Roialdo  with  his  kinsfolks  *nd  hit  fiends^

To  fit  his  Prince  at  liber  tie  intends.


Th  u i,  dPdm
Unaiia  (js
thtycaUn')
tf  tbdt  which
he fnid$n tk*
eniof  the
tafl  boahf.
Stmt*,


Hoesei.Kip
fit  vox  mip
/«  r*\*rti>


Syrnptthy  it
in  *ffe(i,its
muchtU(i»
paglon,  t*
ful-Hfi  »f
•ootbtrt
nifery.


Hen  men  wit!)  wrath  and
fodainc  pangs  of  ire.
Permit  themfclves  to  be
orewhelm’d  & drown’d,
And  hor  revenge  that  burns
like  flaming  fire,
Movesfeartsto  hurt/or
tongs  or  hands  to  wound.
Though  after  to  amend  it
they  dcfiic.

Yet  place  of  pardon  feldome  can  be  found:

Ah  (worthy  Ladies)  I do  you  bd'ceeb.

To  pardon  that  my  former  foclifli  fpeech.  /

a

Fori  am  grownclike  a diftafed  man,

Thatwhen  hefindsby  phifickcnoieliefc.

And  now  no  more  with  patience  fuffcrcan
The  burning  torture  of  his  lingring  griefe.

Doth  fall  to  rave  and  rage, and  curie  and  ban,
Elafphcming  God,  renouncing  his  bcliefcs
But  when  that  fit  is  pafl,tben  would  he  faine.

But  ah  he  cannot  call  it  backc  againe.

3 .

Yet  Ladies  of  your  clemencicl  hope,

I pitticniall,notoncIy  pardonfindc.

Although  1 fbmewhat  iwarve  from  reafonsfeope.
And  rafh  words  flow  from  unadvifed  miivle:
Sheonely  bearcs  the  blame  that  flayesmy  hope^

And  for  tiue  fcrvice  fhews  her  fclfc  unkindc:

That  I did  fpeake  was  partly  of  compaflion.

With  fynipatfay  mov’d  of  Orlandos  paffion.

4

Who  (as  I partly  did  before  declare)

In  monflrous  fort,furvaj’d  Marfilios  taigne.


And  wrought  great  wo, great  dangcr,and  great  care-.
To  all  the  then  inhabitants  of  Spaine,

I told  you  bow  he  drew  the  filly  Marc,

Tide  to  his  leg,till  (lie  was  dead  with  painc;

And  how  he  had  fo  fmalHcnccinhis  head.

He  drew  her  after  him  when  flic  was  dead.

But  comming  to  a great  deepc  running  water.

He  wasconftraind  to  let  her  there  abide.

And  (for  hefwirnmes  asperfeil  as  an  Attci)

He  quickly  pafled  tothc  tothcr  fide.

Where  then  a herdma'n  came  his  beads  to  water,

And  on  a curtail  hehimfclfcdid  ride:

And  though  he  faw  the  madman  and  did  view  him.
Yet  being  naked  he  would  not  efekew  him.

6

The  madman  piayetb  him  that  he  would  fpare
His  horfe-rhat  they  two  might  together  cope:

I left  (quoth  he) on  tothci  fide  my  Marc,
Andfaflabouthcrncckc  I left  a rope:  '

I left  bcrdcadj  but  yet  with  heed  and  care.

Of  her  lecovcric  there  is  good  hope;

The  herdman  laugheth  at  his  fcncclclTc  words.

And  unto  him  no  anfwer  he  affords.

7

Ho  (faith  Orlando)  felioWidofl  not  hcare?

I mud  thy  curtail  have,tbou  needd  not  laffe:

And  with  that  word  approching  fomewhat  neare.
The  crabbed  herdman  with  a crabtrccfladc.

Gave  him  a badinado  on  his  earc.

Which  put  the  mad  Erie  into  fuch  a chafe,

That  with  his  fid  he  made  the  hcidman  reele,  '

Tillpaineitfclfcmadchim  no  painc  to  fcelc.

X 4 T*  s


THE  XXX.  BOOKE


f

*

4

i

i

]

i'


!

I

i|


I


ptnwa  /a-

I vtl  faiuu,  tu

she  Latiat
prrvtrbi
' (4>i4.

1

f


Jie  returnet
eOrUndtm
he  19  bot!{*


9

Tills  done  he  Icapeth  on  the  horfcs  backe  ,

And  at  advcmurc  on  he  takes  bis  way,
VVherccrehevomeshc  puttcth  all  towracke,

His  hoifc  tafts  neither piovcnder nor  hay:

Hut  though  thistyrd,3  horfe  he  may  not  lackc,

T he  next  he  meets  by  force  he  takes  away;

T o ft.'ive  with  him  it  was  but  little  booic.

Me  IS  relblvcd  not  to  go  a footc.

S>

He  palTeth  to  the  ftraits  of  G ibraltar.

Or  Zibelterra  (call  it  which  you  will)

And  as  he  wcnr.with  force  ofopen  war,

Townes  he  did  burne,and  all  thcdwcllcrs  kill;
Tcnyearcs  will  hardly  make  that  he  would  mar
VVitliinonc  home, and  thus  he  travcld  llill.

Till  on  aday,ridinguponthcfand,

Hefaw  /I  fhip  newloofed  from  the  land,
ic

The  alre  was  cleare  and  mild  ,and  calme  the  wether,
And  certaincGcntlcfolke  had  hyr’d  the  barke.

With  mind  to  take  their  folacc  there  together.

And  to  fcturne  againeereit  weredarke;

The  madman  cries,hoe  firs  let  me  come  thither;

His  deeds,  his  words,  they  neither  markc  nor  harke^
Or  if  they  did  you  may  be  fine  they  thought.

They  would  not  comberd  be  with  fuch  a fraught.

1 1

He  hallows  after  them, and  vvhocpes  and  hayles,

T o have  them  ftay,&  with  fairc  wotdsdoth  wo  the,
Glad  might  they  be  they  went  with  oats  and  fayls,
For  might  he  come, he  finely  would  undoe  them.
The  fooi'e  that  fees  how  fmall  hisfpecch  prevails.
Bears  on  his  horfe,  and  mcanes  to  ride  umo  them:
Invainchis  horfe  would  fliun  this  hard  advemer.

But  he  perforce  makes  him  the  Tea  to  cBtcuj
12

Firft  lie  his  feete  doth  wct,and  then  his  knees.

And  next  his  belly,  after  that  his  hackc,

Nowfeant  hisnofeone  in  the  water  fees.

And  fiill  hclayes  himonjpoorc  hoifc  alackc.

That  cither  in  thefc  Teas  his  life  mufi  Iccfc,

Or  fwim  to  Aff'rict^ccrc  he  can  turne  hackc:

At  lalt  with  fwimming  tyrd,with  water  cloyd,

His  belly  fild,till  limbs  of  life  wcic  void.

1?

The  hoi Tc  unto  the  bottome  c|uickly  funke.

And  had  for  company  his  hurt  hen  drownd.

If  fortune  that  helps  framike  men  and  drunkf.

Had  not  himfafcconveyd  to  Ajfridic  groxiDdi
Orlando  it  the  danger  ntver  flirunke.

But  to  the  fJiore  hefwam  both  fafe  and  fbandi
It  happic  was  the  feas  were  t hen  fo  ftill,

Elfc  had  the  Eric  bin  drownd  for  all  his  skill.

14

Now  being  fafe  arrived  at  the  fliore,

Ncarc/cz/rt  firayt  he  ranged  ov*r  thecoft.

And  did  fuch  deeds  as  he  had  doncteforc.

On  tOthcr  fide  to  many  poore  mcnscoftj
At  lafi  he  came  where  as  he  found  great  ftorc,
Ofwarlikc  weapons, and  a mighty  hoft;

But  how  with  them  this  madman  difagreed,

I may  not  in  this  booke  to  tell  proceed.


If

And  fuither  how  Aiigelica  the  fairp.

Did  mcctc  her  love  3gainc,acd  wliat  a Lord
He  grew, by  matching  with  fo  great  an  liaire.

And  liv’d  with  her  in  love  and  fweet  accord,
(Although  in  birth  an  unfit  matched  paitc)

1 leave  for  other  Mufes  to  record;

For  now  I mull  addrcllcmy  fclfc  to  tell.

What  haps  in  Agramanta  ampcbcfcll.

16

'Ttold  you  two  bookes  pafi,or  thcieabout.

How  Mandricard  wis  ’Doralicei  clioicc;

And  how  in  Face  of  all  the  Pagan  rout.

She  gave  that  dcomc,  that  made  him  much  rcjoyie^
For  Ihc  was  deemd  for  beauty  (out  of  doubt)

The  beft  in  Europe  by  the  commonvoicc;

Now  chiefe  fince  fiirc  Angelica  was  fled.

And  worthy  loft  her  bed.

17

Butyetthisplcafiircwas  notfbentire.

But  that  ic  fawced  was  with  fomc  annor.

For  wrath  and  enviefet  his  heart  on  fire.

And  much  abated  of  hisprefent  joy;

It  fpites  him  that  Rogero  dare  afpne.

To  give  btscoat,  being  a bcrdleftc  beyt
And  further  that  the  King  of  S'ericantj
Should  openly  lay  claime  to  Duriniant.

I8

And  firft  Rogero  will  by  no  mcanes  yccld.

By  no  intrcatic,noi  by  no  rctjucfi,
ThacAfand'/icardflicvldcartic  that  fame  fliccld.
Which  had  the  Argent  Eagle  on  tliccrcft,

Except  he  firft  could  win  it  in  thefccld:

On  tothcr  fide  Cradrt,^6doch  not  reft.

But  lie  will  be  the  firft  to  trie  by  fight.

Which  of  them  two  had  to  the  fword  moft  right,

*9

With  Agramant  Marftlio  tookc  great  paine,

Ih  all  or  part  thefc  quarrels  to  appeafe.

But  when  they  faw  tbeirlaboUr  was  in  vainc.

To  govcrncor  perfivade  with  one  of  thefc:
Thechancc(quotb  Agramant)(lsa\ make  that  plainp.
For  which  you  ftrivc,  and  cv’n  as  fortune plcafir.

So  let  it  bc,ar.d  let  feme  lots  be  caft,

Which  two  oi  three,  fli  all  fight  the  firft  or  laft.

20

And  yet  this  juft  requeft  denic  me  not.

Before  the  matter  any  further  goth,

(Though  now  you  be  fo  violent  and  hot,
'Tliatfpccchof  peace  and  ail  accord  you  loth)
Togrant  that  who, fli allcombat  firft  by  lor.

May  Iccfing  lecfc,and  winning  winforboths
This  motion, moft  indifferent  muft  feeme,

Sith  both  their  vallcwt equal!  wc  eftecnie.

21

This  motion  ncithci  of  them  do  miflike.

And BraxghtGradaJfos and  Rogeros namCf
V pon  two  (croles  were  writ  fo  pafling  like
Tou  would  have  iudg*d  them  both  to  be  the  famef
A boy  of  foiirtccne  ycare  of  age  they  pike.

To  draw  thelot,and  he  that  firft  outcamc,

M uft  fight  with  MandricardfOnd  make  it  knowce.

He  fights  fortodici  s title  and  his  ownt.

Wh«o


There  ifM

rrmeof
feUta  n liu


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


^4?


It

W’Fcn  on  this  order  all  parts  were  agreed.

The  lot  to  fight  upon  Rogero  fell,

N\  hid)  hap  great  griefc  did  in  GradaJjTo  breed,
Although  in  nicwhefccmd  to  take  it  well;
Contrariwife  it  did  all  joy  exceed.

The  joy  Rogero  had,  it  fo  befell;

So  well  of  his  ownc  vallew  he  belio'ed.

He  joyd  at  that  at  which  the  tether  grieved.

But  yet  Grad<tJ/odoth  with  great  rigard,

J^th  favour  and  advance  Rogeros  fide.

And  flieweth  him  how  he  muft  lie  to  ward
Acommingblow,  how  he  might  flipafidc;

How  for  a thruft  hesnay  bebeil  prepard:

Which  blowes  befirme,and  which  befalfifide,
When  beft  time  is  to  follow  thrull  or  blow;

How  one  may  beft  take  vantage  of  his  foe.

24

The  reft  of  that  fame  day  that  did  remaine,

Enfui'ng  thisfamc  coiirfe  of  caftinglots.

They  fpent  as  plcafed  each  mans  plcafing  vaine,
Intalkcjorbanqucttingjortoflingpois:

Tofeethis  fightthc  people  glad  and  faine,
Clammer  the  icafFolds, gazing  ftill  like  fins.

Some  fordefircdocome  by  breakeofday.

And  fome  ail  night  within  the  placcdo  ftay.

25

Thus  (as!  fay)  thefe  fimplcfoolcsdo  long,

To  fee  the  combat  thefe  brave  Knights  betwixt,*
And  blame  the  ftay,  and  thinke  the  time  too  long,
That  for  the  fame  the  Heralds  had  prefixt;

Sutfbbcr  men  that  knew  what  did  belong
To  fuch  exploitSjwbofc  wifer  beads  were  fixt
On  publike  good  ,t  his  cjuarrcll  much  lament.

And  travcld  all  they  can  it  to  prevent.

26

And  chlcfe MarfiUo  and Sobrino  fage,

Advife  King  Agranwu  to  ftay  the  fight.

And  thefe  fame  c hampions  furie  to  aftwage.

And  to  take  up  the  quarrcll  if  they  might;
Torewarning  him  when  he  muft  battcll  wage,

With  Charles  of  Trance,  the  lofteof  oncfuchKnight
Will  do  him  greater  hurt  and  damage  then.

Then  would  thelolTc  of  thoufands  other  men.

27

But  Jgramant  knew  all  was  true  they  fjsoke.

And  faine  he  would  their  counfcll  wife  obay,

But  could  not  tell  his  grant  how  to  revoke;

Oncly  he  doth  in  curteous  fort  them  pray.

That  he  may  ftrike  with  them  fo  great  a ftroke,'
Btther  to  end  or  to  defer  the  fray ; ,

And  yeeld  the  ratherunto  his  perfwafion,

Beeaufe  it  rofc  upon  To  light  occafion.  .

28

Or  if  they  did  efteeme  fuch  toyes  fo  far,

Asthough  they  matters  were  of  true  icnownej
That  yet  they  would  the  fight  fo  long  defat,

Vntill  the  fonne  of  Pipen  were  put  downe:

And  till  they  conquerd  had  the  Realme  by  war.

And  taae  from  him  his  mantle  and  his  crowne.

This  motion  had  in  likelihood  taken  place,

Sarc  each  thought  firft  confwt  would  be  dilgrace.


29

Above  them  all  and  more  then  all  the  reft.

That  in  this  fort  their  fpccch  in  vaine  had  fpent;
Fairc  ‘Doratyce  doth  Mandricard  requeft.

That  to  the  Kings  defire  he  would  ailcnt;

She  doth  cxhort,intrcat,pcrfwade,proteft.

She  doth  complaine,and  languiftijand  lament;

To  thinke  that  by  his  ovcrhiftiecholer.

She  ftill  muft  live  in  anguifli  and  in  dolor.

30

How  can  I hope  (faid  flic)  that  etc  I fhall
Lire  any  hourc  in  folacc  and  in  joy?

When  ftill  I fee  you  rcadic  be  to  brail.

With  c»*iic  man,  for  cv*ric  trifling  toy;

The  Sar^ans  foilc  doth  me  no  good  at  all.

My  choyce  of  you  hath  bred  me  more  annoy;

To  end  that  quarrcll,ah  what  did  it  boot,

Sith  ftraight  another  quarrcll  ison  foot?

31

1 fimpic  foole,in  mindc  was  proud  and  glad^

That  fuch  a Prince, fo  brave  a man  as  you.

For  love  of  me  his  whole  Hate  venterd  had^

But  BOW  I findc  by  this  that  doth  enfirw.

That  I had  far  more  rcafon  to  be  fad,

Sith  each  like caufc,  like  dangerdoth  renew;

And  not  my  lovc,but  your  ownc  native  furie.

To  bidcfucl)  hard  adventuresdid  procure  yee.

52  . ’

But  if  ycur  love  befuch  as  in  your  fpccch.

You  do  profcflc,and  in  your  open  fliow;

Then  by  that  love  I humbly  you  bcfccch.

And  by  that  fancic  which  too  well  I know,
Dothcv’nmy  heart  and  foulc  with  love  bewitch,
Let  not  this  quarrcll  any  further  grow;

I fee  not  why  it  fliould  you  fb  molcft.

To  fee  your  Bagle  in  anothers  cieft.

If  needs  you  will  attempt  this  hardie  feat.

And  venter  life  upon  a thing  fo  vaine.

The  hazard  that  you  make  muft  needs  be  great.
But  none, or  very  fmall  can  be  the  gaine;

But  if  that  fortune  change  her  fickicfeat,

Thinke  then, 6 thinkc,what  woe  fliall  I fuftaine?
There  never  yet  was  Emperor  01  King,

Could  boaft  that  he  had  Fottuncin  a ftiing.

34

But  if  that  life  be  unto  you  Icflc  deare,

Then  is  a painted  bird  upon  a fheeld]

Yet  for  my  fake, whom  it  doth  touch  more  neare.

Let  me  intreat  you  to  this  motion  yccld;

If  you  wcic  ftainc,what  joy  could  I have  hearc?
Death  foie  from  wo, both  could  and  fliould  me  fheeld
Nor  fcarc  I deathimy  oncly  griefc  would  bee.

Before  my  death  thy  wofull  end  to  fee.

^ 35

Thus  earaeftly  faircDora/ycccdcalr,

All  that  fame  nigln,as  in  hisarmes  flie  lyes,
Andasfhefpakcjthetearcsdiftill  and  melt,

In  watrie  ftreames,  downe  from  her  cryftaU  eyes;
The  Tartar  that  no  little  paffi on  felt.

To  comfort  her  faith  all  he  can  devife:

And  wipes  her  chccke$,and  her  Iwcet  lip  doth  klfie.
And  weeps  fm company ,and  anfwets  this.

Afc


Thumumefi
$b*ebitft
€sitfr»br
i/marrtis  it-
Omieni  Tri*-
tti  tndgrm
JUtnbtfo
ftUtmit.


Dor»!)tts
Petet  taper-
Ju’adt  Alate-
dncxrdit
ftItSt,


Snttmt't


244


THE  XXX.  BOOKE


Msudricard)

tfftHT,


Jhtyfar  in
Ratine,  Mali
eminatit  pat'
fUtverbu,


3«

Ah  do  not  giicrc  thy  felfc  fo  fore  (my  dcarc)

Ah  do  not  gi  ic»c  thy  felfc  for  fuch  a toy,
rluckcupthy  fpnghts,and  be  of  better  chearc,

T here  is  no  caufc  of  fcare  mi  nc  oncly  joy;

No  though  that  all  the  Kings  and  captains  hearc,
Had  fwornc  my  death, and  vowed  mine  annoy:

Yet  all  the  Kings  and  capraincs  I would  vantjuifh.
Why  then  fliould  you  caufles  in  forrow  languilli?

What, did  not  I w«h  trunchen  of  a fpcarc,

(You  know  your  felfc  whether  1 fay  the  truth)

N ot  having  fword  nor  ocher  weapon  theare,

"V\Yn  you  from  all  your  gaid?  and  Hiall  a youth,

A beardlelTc  boy, caufc  you  my  fafetie  fcarc,

A nd  breed  in  you  fo unadvifcd  ruth?

Well  might  you  deeme  I were  a daftard  lour.

If  of  i?o^cro  I fheuld  ftand  in  doubt.

though  unto  hisgriefeand  Hiame,

Yet  if  cne  aske  him  can  it  not  gainefay,

That  when  helaft  unto  came,

1 metand  tookc  himprifnei  by  theway,'

Yet  hcisof  another  manner  fame,

Then  is  Rogero,  you  your  felfc  will  fay:

I had  him  there  a pt  ifner  at  my  will,

And  if  I lifled  might  have  kept  him  ilill.

39

And  Icaft  I fliould  ofthisgood  witnes  want,
jBcfidc  G radaJfo,thete  be  hundreds  more.

As  namely  /Jolyr, und  Sacrapant,

Whom  I fet  free  and  had  great  thanks  therefore;
Alfo  the  famous  Griffin  and  Aquilanty
That  there  were  taken , but  few  d i yes  before;

. With  divers  more  both  Turliijh  and  baptifed,

That  by  my  force  were  taken  andfurprifcd.

40

Their  wonder  in  thofe  countries  ftill  doth  laft.

Of  that  great  vallew  I thattimedid  fliow,

And  fliould  Inowadoubtorperillcaft  ?

Am  I in  greater  danger  now  you  trow?

Shall  one  young  youth  me  hand  to  hand  agaft?
Shall  1 now  doubt  hisforcc,or  fearc  his  blow?

Now  having  ‘Durindana  by  my  fide.

And  Heitors  aimour  on  my  backc  befidc?

4*

why  did  not  I,as  pointed  was  by  lot,

With  Rodomont  firtk  bloudie  battel!  wage?

That  by  his  ill  fucccflcyou  might  forewot.

The  fpecdicendof  thisyoungforrie  P®gc*

Dricup  thefetcares  (mydeare)  and  bringmenots
Before  the  combat  fuch  an  ill  prefage;

Nor  thinkcan  Eagle  on  a target  painted
Moves  me  hcreco,but  doubt  of  honor  tainted.

42

Thus  much  faid  he, but  flic  fuch  anfwcrmadc  him.
With  wordscxprclling  fuch  a loving  mone,

As  were  not  oncly  able  toperfwadc  him,

But  might  (I  thinke)  have  mov’d  a marble  ftonc:
The  force  was  great  wherewith  flic  did  invade  him,
I n fi  nc  fb  farre  file  conouers  h im  alone,

Hegrants  thus  farre  to  be  at  her  devotion,

If  peace  be  o0crd,to  accept  the  motion.


4»

And  fo  I thinke  indeed  he  would  have  done.

Had  not  Rogero  early  in  tlie  morne.

Got  up  bctorcthcrifingofibcSunnc,

And  cnicrd  m the  lifls,aBd  blownc  hjs  home,

1 o fhew  that  he  the  battcll  would  rot  fliunnc.

And  that  Joves  bird  by  him  was  juflly  borne;

Which  either  hcwilltarrieon  his  fhicld.

Or  tlfc  will  leave  his  catkas  in  the  field.

44

But  when  the  T artar  ficicc  did  heaie  that  found.

And  that  his  men  thereof  had  brought  him  word;

He  thinks  great  fhamc  fliould  unto  him  redound,
Ifany  trcatic  he  of  peace  afford;

Arme  armc  he  cries,  6c  ftraifht  he  armes  him  round.
And  by  his  fide  he  hangs  his  truftic  fword.

And  in  his  countenance  helookcsfogrim,

Scarfc  7)oralyce  her  fclfe  dares  fpeakc  to  him.

45

And  armed  at  all  pieces, up  in  haft

He  gcts,and  that  fame  courfer  he  befirides,

T hat  was  that  Chrifien  champions  in  time  paft.
Who  now  doth  tiinnc  his  wit  and  fence  bcfidcs.'

And  thus  he  comes  unto  the  lifts  at  laft.

The  placctliat  all  fuch  quarrels  ftill  decides.

The  King  and  all  his  court  foonc  after  came.

And  now  cic  long  begins  the  bloudiegamc.

4<5

Now  on  their  heads  their  helmets  arc  made  faft.

Now  are  the  Lances  pur  into  their  hands.

Now  was  the  token  giv*n  by  trumpets  blaft.

Which  both  the  hotfeand  horfcmanundciftand*;
Now  in  a fullcarryiethcy  gallop  faft,
Andcitherftrongly  to  his  takicftandsr
Now  with  fucb  foicc  the  tone  the  tot  her  ftrakc.

As  though  that  heaven  did  fall,and  earth  did  fliake.

47

"The  Argent  Eagle  comeson  cither  fide.

With  Wings  difplaid  on  cithcrcaptainesfhecid.

The  bird  which  love  (men  fay)  was  fcenc  to  ride,
(Though  bettci  wing’d)  O'l'ttheTheJfalianheldi
A s for  their  mighty  ftrtngth  and  courage  t ride.
Their  maflTc  fpearcsfufficicnt  witnclTc  yecld:
Norfturd  they  more  with  thofe  tcmpeftucus  knocks,
T hen  wind  fturs  towres,or  waves  do  ftur  the  rocks.

48

The  fplinters  of  the  fpears  flew  to  the  skie,

( As  T urpin  writeth  that  was  prefent  there)

And  were  on  fire  by  having  bin  fo  nic,

Viiio  the  fcorching  of  the  ficric  Sphcarc;
Thcchampioosout  their  fword s draw  byand  by.

As  thofe  that  neither  fword  nor  fire  did  fcare.

And  citherthruftethat  the  tothers  face.

And  fcckcsby  force  the  tothcr  to  difplacc.

49

They  never  fought  to  hurt  each  others  ftcci,

Notthat  they  made  together  fuch  accord.

But  that  they  deemd  it  an  unworthy  deed.

Not  worthy  ofa  worthy  Knight  or  Lord;

Of  bafc  revenge  they  count  that  aft  proceed.

And  meet  of  noble  minds  to  bcabhord.

So  that  in  thofe  dayes  none  wercknovvnc  to  kill
A horfc,cxecptitwcrca|aind  hii  will.

Vpon


Fntttiu
Jt\ruat  dost
uta

t/tnead.9>


Or.’andn,


Lat\e  in  tit


Siniilt.
SimiU
Ovid.Mmm
CtUatn  in-
f/thitr  Hiirs


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


50

Vf  on  their  vizers  both  do  nrike  at  once.

And  though  the  fame  were  firmc  and  plated  double,
A I being  made  of  proofc  and  for  the  nonce,

Yet  did  the  forccof  fuch  fell  ftiokcs  them  titjubfe-
And  flill  thej  lay  on  lode  asthickc  as  lionet
Of  hailcjthai  often  turne  thccornc  to  ttubble:

I thinkeit  nccdlefle  further toallcdgc.

If  thejf  have  flicngth,orif  their  fwoids  have  edge.

51

Yet  long  they  fought  together  in  that  field,

£reany  figne  cf  any  blow  was  left.

Such  waiy  heed  each  tookehimfelfc  to  fhicld^

But  'DuTtndan  atlaft  fell  with  futh  heft.

Full  on  thcciiclcof  iiogerox  fliield.

That  halfe  way  through  the  argent  bird  it  cleft.

And  pierft  the  coate  of  male  that  was  within.

And  found  a paflagetotbe  very  skin.

5a

The  cruell  blow  made  many  hearts  full  cold,

Offuclias  winuwcll  to  Rogeros  part.

For  moft  of  thofethat  flood  by  to  beheld,
iio^erc  favourd  in  theii  mrnd  and  hart.

So  that  afore  to  fay  one  might  be  bold.

If  fortune  follow  would  the  greatei  part.

Fierce  3/(j»irrC4rd  were  flaine,orclfcn]ould  yecld.

So  that  this  blow  offended  halfe  the  field.

5J

But  furcly  feme  good  Angel!  T beleeve.

The forccof thisfb  fcarfull flrokeabated,

Rogero  though  the  wound  him  fomewhat  grieve,

Yet  was  his  mind  therewith  no  whit  amated.

Great  ufuiy  be  mindeth  him  to  give.

And  tliattheftnfc  may  quickly  be  debated,

He  frankly  flrikes  with  his  whole  force  and  might.
Full  on  the  helmet  of  the  Tartar  Knight.

54

With  fo  great  force  andfmiecame  the  blow.

As  to  the  teeth  no  doubt  had  clov’n  his  head,

, Saving  by  what  mifliap  Idonot  know.

But  want  of  heed  that  too  much  hift  had  bred.

It  lighted  flailing  on  him,elfe  I trow
That  ftrokc  alone  had  himsnoftfarelyfped.

But  as  it  was  it  made  his  head  fa  idle,

Heopend  both  his  hands  and  loos’d  his  bridle.

55

Good  Brigliadore  that  felt  the  flacked  raine,

(1  tbinke  flill  mourning  for  his  mafters  change)

Ran  up  and  dewne  at  randon  on  the  plame.

His  fcpflcffe  rider  fuffering  him  to  rangcj
Who  when  became  unto  him/cife  againe.

And  faw  his  horfe  to  run  a courfe  fo  ftrangc,

A fpurned  Viper  hath  not  fomuch  wrath,

K»r  weunded  Lion,asthc  Tarter  hath.

56

He  claps  the  fpnrs  to  BrigUadoros  fide.

And  on  his  flirrups  hchimfelfc  advances;

And  to  his  fo  with  furic  be  doth  ride.

And  up  on  hie  his  rioht  armc  he  inhances,

To  ftrikeablowjbutwhcniJo^frofptdc
His  arme  lie  ope,  a<  oft  in  fight  it  chances,

Hechopt  bisfwords  pointundertothcisaiTnc,

And  puld  itout  with  blo»d  both  wetaad  warmc.


*45

By  which  hedid  notoncly  maime/iisfo.

By  Idling  blood  upon  fo  large  a vaiue.

But  bated  much  the  furic  of  the  bio.

Which  noiwithflandiiig  fell  with  forcefb  mainc.

As  made  Rogero  ftaggci  to.md  fio.

And  mazd  Ins  head, and  dazd  his  eyes  with  paiaC)

And  much  it  was  that  time  for  las  bchcofc.

To  have  iiis  helmet  of  fo  good  a proofc.

But  having  now  againe  rccovcrd  force.

And  as  it  were  new  wak'ned  from  his  dreame,

Vpon  the  Tartar  Prince  he  lui  n’d  bis  horfe.

And  on  hisihigh  he  flrikcs  with  ftrength  cxtrcarr.c.

That  through  the  flcclc  he  did  the  fword  enforce;

Out  fpins  die  blood  in  pure  vermilion  flreame.

Nought  could  availc  inchanttd  HeClors  armes,

Againft  his  fword  with  ftrongcr  temperd  charmes,

^9

The  Tartar  feeling  to  his  great  difeafe.

His  body  wounded  as  he  litlc  thought.

Did  rage  as  rcriible  asdo  the  fcas,  Siraiin

Withhigbeft  winds  and  flrongert  tcmpcfirvvrooght,

He  CLiifcth  h'  av’nsjhis  fmarting  pangs  to  cafe.

The  fliicld  that  had  the  bird  for  which  he  fought.

Away  he  hurlcih  fiom  him  for  the  nonce,

And  to  his  fword  hcfcisljothhandsat  once.
to

Ah  (quoth  Rogero)  too  plainetriall  this  is.

That  to  that  £<^/e  thou  no  title  haft,'

That  firftdidft  with  thy  fwoid  cut  mine  in  peeces,

And  now  thine  ownc  away  from  thredoft  caft.

Thus  much  faid  hc,but  whatfoever  he  fees.

He  miift  the  force  ofDurindana  raft.

Which  fell  upon  his  forehead  wi'h  fuch  might,

A Riountainc  might  have  Teem’d  to  fall  as  lights
61

I fay  the  blow  upon  his  forehead  fell.

But  yet  his  beaver  fav’d  it  from  his  face.

It  bappend  at  thattimefor  him  full  well.

That  in  the  hollow  there  was  fomuch  fpaccj
Ycttarmlcncquitctofcapc  him  not  befell.

For  why  the  fword  that  ever  cuts  apace.

Did  pierce  his  plated  fadle,and  befidc
An  inch  did  enter  into  Rogeros  fide.

6a

Thus  each  with  crimfbn  had  his  armor  dide,

And  bloud  did  flreame  frpm  both  a double  way,

Yet  hitherto  it  could  not  be  dcfciidc.

On  whether  fide  would  chances  b.iilancc  fway;

Atlaft  Ao^eiodidthatdoubtdecidc,

VVithtbatfamc  fword  tliat  ever  h.imc  doth  pay.

And  where  the  tothers  target  wants,thercjuft
Rogero  payes  him  with  a fpeeding  thtufl.

6?

The  blade, gainfl  which  prevailcs  00  Masrick  art,
Hi$curatspicrft,and  ribs  and  flefh  it  tore.

And  found  a paffage  to  the  naked  hart;

Now  muft  thcTarrur  Prince  forevermore
In  fwoid  and  painted  fbield  forfake  his  parr.

Not  onely  fo,but  that  which  grieves  him  more,

He  mufl  forfake  hit  much  beloved  life,
lilorc  laved  honour, and  moft  loved  vyifv'

The


2^6


THE  XXX.  BOOKE


The  wretch  yet  untevenged  did  not  die,  '
lUit  gave  hard  rccompcncc  ere  he  departed.

At  good  liogeros  head  he  doth  Jet  flie.

And  had  (no doubt)  the  fame  in  funder  parted.

Save  that  his  armc  was  maymd,and  fo  thereby
Much  of  his  force  fromt  hence  had  bin  divaricd.
Much  ofhisforcedivcited  was  from  thence
B£torc,whea  for  his  armc  he  wanted  fence.  .

6S

But  as  it  was, yet  too  too  hard  it  fell.

And  caus’d  the  noble  Knightgreat  paine  to  fecle.

His  helmet  it  did  clcave,thoiigh  plated  well.

And  made  for  proofe  of  tough  well  temperd  ftecle.
And  in  the  very  skull  it  clove  a fpell.

Two  fingers  deepc, and  made  him  backward  reelc.
He  backward  fals,thc  pamc  was  fo  exceeding,

VVith  gMcvous  wound  his  hed  moft  frcfiily  bleeding,

6i

Jiogeroyvis  the  fit  ft  that  tumbled  downr,

And  Mandricardb  fell  a good  wliilc  after.

All  thought  Ao^cro  dead, becaufe  hisciownc
Still  bled,h(it  chiefly  Stordilanos  daughter
loycSjthat  herfpoufehad  won  this  fights rerowne.
Now  hopes  nie,nje  fliai  turnc her  tearcs  to  laughter.
And  as  flie  thought,  'o  was  the  common  voice,

So  that  thcTaitarr  fnendsdid  all  rcjoycc.

«7

Butv/hen  there  did  appeare  hy  certainefignes,

The  live  man  living,  and  the  dead  man  flainc.

Then  'Doralycee  wrings  her  hands  and  whines.

And griefecamc  therc,and comfort  heicagaine;
Thcchiefeftparr,vvhofe  favour  all  inclines
Vnto  arc  full  glad  and  fainc.

And  grarulatc  his  good  fuccellc,and  grace  him.

And  runne  to  him, and  in  ihcir  armes  embrace  him.

68

Nor  was  this  fhew  of  lovcjdifiimulaticn.

But  true  unfained  kindBeffc,and  good  faith.

But  yet  Gradajfos  faint  congratulation
Makespnen  furmife  he  "thinks  not  as  he  faith:

He  fccretly  envies  fuch  reputation.

Though  outwardly  theflattcrer  he  playth.

And  cuiTeth  (were  it  dcftinic  or  chance)

That  to  this  cnterprifc  did  him  advance.

69

But  Agraimnt  ever  did  befoie.

Do  him  great  honor,and  him  well  efteeme.

Now  he  doth  him  admire, cxtoll, adore.

So  highly  of  his  valew  he  doth  deeme:

In  him  alone  he  puts  affiance  more.

Then  all  his  cantpc  together  it  fliould  fectnc.

Now  that  the  feed  of  Agricane  was  fpent.

And  Rodomont  gone  thence  a malcontent.

70

^VI■)at  fhould  I tell  thcpraifc  that  many  a Ladle
Gave  of  thisKnight,of  y4^r/t!jeandof5'pa/>ic<'

Who  knew  that  Mandricardo  was  no  babie.

And  faw  him  row  by  this  mans  valew  flainc;

Yea  dolefull  Dorcfpcc  her  fclfc  (it  may  be)

Save  that  for  modcftic  Hie  muft  rcfrainc.

Would  have  bene  moved  with  a fmall  rct^ucfl,

To  fpcakcas  well  of  him  as  did  the  reft.


91


1 fay  it  may  be,biit  I cannot  tell,'

for  why?  before  unconllant  flie  was  proved j
And  furc  Rogcros  ftansdid  lo  cxccll.

As  any  Ladicdoubtlcflemight  l>avc  moved.

While  tothcr  liv’djpcthap  fhe  Jik’t  him  wdl.

But  now  tc  fecke  anew  it  her  behoved.

Such  one  as  flic  her  fdfc  might  able  warrant,

Toiidc  both  day  and  nightly  on  her  arraiK-  ,

72.

Now  brought  thcKing  Rogerowh\\  greatcarc
To  hfsownc  tcnt,that  thcic  hemay  be  cured.

The  bdlPhyfitionsthithcrfcnt  foraic,

Tofeaich  hiswounds,ihcy  ftraight  his  life  afTured;

The  fliicld  and  armes  that  Mandricardo  bare.

The  wliich  this  bloudic  battell  firft  procured.

All  favc  the  fword  that  was  Gradajfos  right,

VVerc  hanged  up  by  his  beds  head  that  night.

Howbeirthat  brave  courier  Brigliadore,

Rogero  needs  would  give  ut.to  the  King,

Wtio  tookeit  tliankfiilly,andfct  more  flore
By  that  fame  fleed  then  any  fuch  like  thing:

But  hcrtofnowawhilclticatcnomore,  Hejpea^n

Firft  muft  you  hearc  what  news  the  maidc  did  bring,  efRoitroa


(I  meanc  Hjppalca)  tohermiftrisdcarcj
Whom  love  bad  made  to  be  of  hcavicchcare.

She  told  her  firft  what  bap  to  her  befell.

How  Trontine  by  a F urf[t  was  tane  away*

And  after, how  fhe  found  at  Merlins  viiil
Richardo  and  Ao^ere  that  fame  day,

*1  o whom  flic  did  her  hard  ad  venture  rell, '

And  how  Rogero  went  with  her  ftraightwav.

To  wi^thc  horfeout  of  the  Pagans  lift.

But  at  that  feafon  he  his  purpoic  mift. .

75

Alfo  flic  told  to  Bradamant  the  caufe.

Why  her  dcarclovc  himfclfc  did  now  abfent.

Who  promift  her,  to  take  a little  pawfc.

And  then  her  mind  moft  thoroughly  content:

In  fine  Hyppalca  from  her  bofomedrawes-
T hat  letter  which  was  to  her  mifti  is  fent.

Who  fo  much  Icftcdid  feemeto  like  the  letter,
Becaufc  flic  would  have  lik’t  his  picfencc  better.

76

For  fith  before  fhedid  himfclfecxpcif.

Now  paper  in  his  ftced  to  have  and  inke.

It  caufed  her  to  fcare  and  to  fufpe£f.

And  made  fome  doubts  into  her  thoughts  to  flnkc.
Yet  lik’t  flic  well  the  meaning  and  cfifcA,

And  kift  the  letter  oft,and  furc  1 thinke.

Had  burnd  it  with  the  hcate  of  her  defite.

Save  that  the  tearcs  flic  flicd  did  c^ucnch  that  fire.

77

She  read  the  writin^ov’r,fivc  times  or  fix.

The  words,the  pnrafe,  the  fence  her  pleat’d  fo  well.
And  then  flic  made  the  maid, each  time  betwix.

The  mcflagc  that  Rogero  fent  to  tell.

And  favc  he  did  fo  fliort  a time  prefix
To  come  to  her, and  ay  with  her  todwcll,

I thinke  flic  never  would  have  ccafed  mourning.
Till  IIlc  liad  fccnc  or  heard  of  bis  icturniog.

Rogero


gMUt  in  the
end  e/tit
toefy.


'OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO:

b *


78

Rogtn  to  HippaUa  piOmis’d  had,

J-iftcen  01  twenty  dayes  at  moft  to  flay,

And  hcr,to  tell  her  miftreflc  fo  he  bad.

But  fweating  to  come  foonet  if  he  may ;

But  nc’erthclcfle  good  Bradamant  is  fad.

Still  doubting  chances  to  prolong  that  day*

All  things  (faid  fhc)to  fortune  arc  fubjcfted.

And  chiefc  in  warrcs  that  ate  by  chance  dircftcd.

79

Ay  (my  R»gero J who  could  once  haue  thought,

Sith  I more  than  my  fclfceftccmcd  thee.

That  thou  by  any  means  couldft  hare  been  brought
To  bcare  thy  very  foes  more  loue  than  me  ?

Who  thou  fhouldft  hurt,by  thee  their  help  is  fought
Whom  thou  fhouldft  favc,by  thee  they  fpoiled  be  j
Needs  muft  I blame  thy  negligent  regarding.

As  well  in  puni filing  as  in  rewarding.

80

Trijino  flue  thy  firc,I  think  thou  knowft,

^For  furc  the  ftoncs  it  know)yct  to  his  fonne
Thou  think’ft  in  honour  thou  fnch  duty  oweft.

That  thou  muft  fee  no  hurt  may  him  be  done;

Is  this  fufficicnt  a revenge  thou  troweft,

Think’ft  thou  nuc  fame  can  by  fiich  fafts  be  won  ?
Lountowhatthy  flicw  of  honour  tends.

To  fei  ve  thine  enemies, and  flay  thy  friends.

81

'Yhw%BTadamant  fpake  to  her  abfcntlove.

With  paftion  great,and  evermore  her  maid
With  reafon  fecks  that  fancy  to  remove,

Afturing  her  flic  need  not  be  afFraid  ;

And  wifbing  het  with  patient  mind  to  prove.

If  fb  he  would  not  do  as  he  had  faid.

And  that  flic  would  in  all  things  hope  the  beft,
Stntiatt,  And  then  to  God  and  fortune  leave  the  reft.

With  this  good  fpcech  of  hers, and  ftrong  perfwafion.
She  doth  his  comming  till  the  day  expeft,

Which  good  Rogero  brake, not  by  occaflon  ,

That  he  hisword  and  promife  did  ncgleftj
But  that  which  hapt  againft  his  expeftation.

His  wounds  had  bred  fo  dangerous  efFeft,

But  chiefe  the  fame  he  laft  took  in  his  head.

Which  made  him  forty  dayes  to  keep  his  bed.

Now  Bradamant  doth  wait  the  twenty  dayes.

And  ftaid  at  Montalbano  with  her  mother.

And  making  ftill  inquiry  many  wayes.

If  fli  e might  hcare  feme  newes  of one  or  other,

But  none  flieheard,fave  that  which  tohispraife
Was  told  her  after  by  her  younger  brother.

Which  though  flic  joy’d  tohearc,aswasmoft  meet.
Yet  mingled  was  fomc  fowrc  with  that  fame  fwcet.


347

<4

For  why  the  value  of  Marfija  ftout

Which  did  aftift  them  greatly, as  he  told.

To  win  their  kinfmen  from  the  moorifli  rout.

That  unto  Berttlagc  fliould  have  been  fold.

This  bred  in  Bradamantes  mind  fomc  doubt.

And  ftrakc  into  her  heart  a jealous  cold,

Bccaufc  ’twasfaid,  they  two  together  went
To  Jgramant,  that  in  his  camp  was  pent.

«5

For  though  flic  could  not  chufe  but  greatly  praife  her.

That  did  her  fclfcfo  ftout  and  ualiant  prove.

Yet  on  the  tothcr  fide, her  beauty  frayes  her.

Left  he  perhap  on  her  might  fet  his  love  :

But  yet  in  finc,hope  of  his  promife  flay  cs  her,

So  that  in  twenty  dayes  he  did  not  move
From  Montalbano^  and  in  that  fame  fpace.

There  thither  came  thcchiefcman  of  her  race.  KtatUt,

S6

I mean  not  chief  of  birth,  butebiefeof  name.

For  two  there  were, in  birthmorcold  than  he,

Renaldo  unto  Montalbano  came.

His  brotbcrs,cofins,and  bis  friends  to  fee.

Whom  he  had  heard  by  fpcech  of  flying  fame.

Now  fafe  anived  at  that  place  to  be,

Anf  how  Rogero  and  Marfi/a  wrought
T heir  liberty,when  they  were  fold  and  bought.

87

Wherefore  he  came  to  fee  them  face  to  face.

And  underftand  with  them  how  each  thing  flood.

It  feem’d  he  was  as  welcome  tO  the  place.

As  is  tbcfwallow  to  hertender  brood,  Simik

Thatalmoftftarved,andinforieca(e  '

, Have  long  expeded  fuftcnance  and  food.

And  when  they  there  had  ftaid  a day  or  twainc.

Both  they  and  he  to  Parti  went  againe.

88

dilardo  and  GuicMardoy  Richardtt,

And  Malagigy  and  goodZtiviane,

Clofc  after  this  brave  Lord  themfelves  do  get,

And  Bradamant  withthem  they  would  hare  tane.

But  flic  allcdg’d  flic  could  not  come  as  yet  j
(But  hopes  erelong  they  fliould  be  over-tanc)

She  prayes  them  for  that  time  content  to  hold  them,

For  why  flic  was  not  well  at  cafe  flic  told  them.

89

And  true  it  was,flic  was  not  well  at  cafe.

Not  that  flic  had  a fit  of  any  fearer.

Or  any  other  corporalldifcafc,

It  was  a fit  of  love,  that  burncthever}

Whofc  heat  no  herb  nor  phyfick  can  appeafe  j
This  fit  did  her  from  that  brave  crew  dilTcvcr :

But  in  another  bookc  I fliall  repeat.

What  fuccour  they  did  bring  to  Charles  the  great.


Of  tbii  yau
nnyfte  mart
ttt  tba  latter
tndaflktiS
ka%kjt>


InthU  thirtieth  beo^dn  Otlandos  mad  pranl{S  (though  th^  he  fained  things  )tse  may  note^what  hard  and  impojjihle  .,

matters  are  attcmpted,and  jhmtime  at  thieved  ^ mad  men^  ^rohich  the  reafon  is  doubtfuU;  a naturall  reafon  Ugiveuy  Morall.
(though  many  vniU  doubt  thereof ) that  the  cauje  of  their  extraordinary  firength,  is  that  nature  ( intendens  omnem
'oim)as  th<y  terme  it, that  is  to  fayjbending  her  wboleforce  at  one  infant, doth  by  that  means  double  the  ftrength  anda~

Itility  to  any  hardand  unmeafurcAle  matter : as  we  fee  men  often  at  the  pangs  of  death  ( though  otherwife  but  weal{e )
yet  fo  firong,that  three  orfoure  men  cannot  hold  thenf:or  as  men  fomtimes  in  afeare  leape  over  awatl,  or  downefiom  a
window  without  bar  me. which  at  another  time  would  breal{e  their  ned^es  .Another  reafon  of  rnadmens  unreafonable

firtngtb,  is  mctaphyftcall,  or  fupernamaU,  and  that  is  when  thy  are  poffejjed  with  jpirits , of  which  there  are

T many


24S  THE  XXX.  BOOKE.

wiiry  example:.  In  Agraiuant  that  endeavours  toend  two  quarrels  with  one  comiate.we  may  olferve^tlat  it  hefeems
- the  wifdome  of  a Prince,  either  to  ta^e  up  quarrels  and  civiti  dijfentions  betweene  their  great  fuhjeCis  ahfolutely,  or  at
Icajt  to  draw  them  to  as  Jpeedy  a triaU.jand  with  at  little  dammage  as  may  be.

Hiftory  & Concerning  the  Eagle  about  which  the  two  champions  ftrave  who  Jbould  beare  it  for  hU  Ames  or  Cogptiqance  (as

Allnfian  we  terme  it  )he  feems  to  allude  to  the  civiUwarres  that  were  between  Czfar  and  Pompey,  whereas  Lucan  complain
* nethinbis excellent  Poem,

— Infeftifqj  obvia  fignis
Signa,  pares  aquilas  & pila  minantia  pilif.

For  the  Romanes  Enfignewas  the  Ea^e,and  it  is  firange  that  is  reported  ly  credible  writers,  how  in  a hattell  fought
neare  TheJfalia,betwee')i0Bmt\ss  and  CafHus  of  the  one  fide, and  Oftaviusani  Anthony  of  the  other  fide,  two  Eagles
were  vifibly  feene  fighting  in  the  aire  with  their  beah,es  and  talents  in  mofi  fierce  manner;  And  finally Jthat «/ Anth«-
nics  fideprcvailed,andput  the  other  to  flight.

Here  cad  the  notes  of  the  xxx.  bookc.


BOOKE.


JJo  'I  HE  XX  Xi


i


ixcy  y.


THE  ARGYMENT.

Z/’»w4»'«  Guidon  n>*V)^Renaldo
But  Afterward  U by  hii  brethren  known y
By  Tvhufe great  courage  and  united  mighty
Turks  are  vanqttifbed  and  oZ'er thrown.
Good  BrandimarC  feeks  out  that  wofull  knight,
Whofe  witJ  by  love  diHraught ,are  nothisonny
Is  tane^and  of  his  life  wm  in  great  perilly
Rcnaldo  and  GradaRo  fall  to  ejuarrelU


jea-

t»u(U,

* MarUgt.


Dultienm
mtruiUqui
non  gufltvit
Mmira,

Simlte.


StrUtKtt


SeAtnCO,


of  life  more  plea-
fingmay  we  find.

Then  theirs,  that  true  and
hearty  love  do  beare  ?
Whom  that  ^ fwcet  yoke
doth  faft  together  bind.
That  man  in  Paradife  firft
Icarn’d  to  wcarc.-
I V^’ere  not  fomc  fo  tormented
in  their  mind.

With  that  fame  »ile  riifpcffjthat  filthy  fcarc.

That  torture  great, that  foolifli  frenefie.

That  raging  madncfic, called  jcaloufic.

, a

For  ev’ry  other  fovviethat  gets  a place,

Tofeat  itfelfeamid  thispleafantftveer.

Doth  help  in  th’end  to  give  a greater  grace.

And  makes  loves  joy  more  grateful  when  they  meet,
Whofo  abftaines  from  rnftenancea  fpace.

Shall  find  both  bread  and  water  relifli  fwcet :

M cn  know  not  peace, nor  i ightly  how  to  deem  it.
That  have  not  firft  by  war  been  taught  t’cftcem  it.

?

Though  eves  want  fight  of  thatthey  would  feefaine.
The  thoirghtyet  fees,  & hearts  with  patience  take  it.
Long  abfence  gncves,yet  when  they  meet  againe.
That  abfcnccdoth  more  fwcet  and  plcafant  makeic:
To  feivcand  fue  long  time  for  little  gainc,

(So  that  all  hope  do  not  ev’n  quite  forfakc  u)

One  may  endure, for  when  the  paineispaft.

Reward,!  hough  long  it  ftay ,yct  comes  at  laft.

4

The  fliarprcpulfcsjand  the  deepdifdaines.

And  all  the  torments  that  in  love  arc  found.


At  laft  with  pleafure  rccompence  the  paines.

And  make  far  morccomentmenttoabound  :

But  if  this  hcllifti  plague  infeft  the  braincs.
Though  afterward  it  feem  both  whole  and  found.
The  quality  thereof  isfo  mifchievous,

T he  very  thoug  ht  is  to  a lover  grievous.

y

This  is  that  crucll  wouiid,againft  whole  fmart
No  liquors  force  prevailes,nor  any  plafter.

No  skill  of  ftarres,no  depth  of  Magick  art
Deviled  by  that  grcatclark  Zoroafler  :

A wound  that  fo  infefts  the  foule  and  heart.

As  all  our  fenfc  and  reafon  it  doth  mafter  •

A wound  whofepangand  torment  isfodurable.

As  it  may  rightly  called  beincurable.

6

Thatisa  plague  that  quickly  doth  infeft

AlMovers  hearts,and  doth  poftefte  their  thought,

A s well  with  caufclcfTc  as  with  juft  fufpeft  .

By  this  a man  to  madncfic  meere  is  brought;

Oh  plague, by  whofemoft  damnable  effeft
In  deep  def|)aire  to  die  have  divers  fought,

Oh  jealoufic,that  didft  without  defert
Poffefle  the  noble  Brudataantes  heart.

7

Not  for  the  talc  her  maid  or  brother  told.

Which  made  within  her  mind  a fliarp  imprcflion,
But  other  newes  that  made  her  heart  full  cold.
How  her  love  of  new  love  did  make  profcflion  j
As  I more  plaine  hereafter  fhall  unfold.

For  now  I needs  a while  muft  makedigreffion

To  brave  RenaldOythat  to  Paris  ward

Did  march,with  that  fame  new  ofgrcaf  regard.

Tht


Zvttjlsr  the

iHvtnurtf

meisthf


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


251


C s*-


7ft  vnuld

not  tftnlp

utbraid

%ktm.


S

The  day  enfuing  ere  it  yet  was  night.

They  met  an  armed  knight  upon  the  way,

A Lady  fairc  accompam’d  the  knight,

His  armour  all  was  black, fa»c  that  there  Jay
Atbwart  the  breft  a wreath  of  Argent  bright.

And  ftra'ght  the  formoft  man  in  their  array.

Which  Rtchardetto  was, as  then  did  chance.

He  challenged  with  him  to  break  a lance.

9

The  gallant  youth  that  never  man  refus’d.

Straight  turn’d  his  hoife,a  fpacefor  courfc  to  take,

As  one  that  (for  his  time)  had  often  us’d
Such  featsas this todo,aod  undertake  :

Renaldo  ftandeth  ffill,and  them  perus’d,

To  fee  which  knight  the  faireft  courfc  would  make.
Now  Richardet  thinks,ifl  hit  him  juft,

1 fliall  this  gallant  tumble  in  the  duft.

10

Butotherwife  it  then  to  him  befell.

And  of  bisrcckning  he  wasquitedcceiv’d.

The  totber  knew  tohit,and{it  fo  well,

That  Richardet  was  from  the  faddfe  heav’d  i
Alardt  feeing  how  his  biother  fell.

Did  think  t’avengcthcfoilcthat  he  receiv’d,

But  hclikewifeinfcriourdid  remaine.

His  arm  was  bruis’d, his  fliicid  was  rent  in  twaine.

1 1

Guicchiardo  next  the  felf:  fame  fortune  tri’d.

And  wasconftrain’d  unto  the  ground  I’lncline,
Although  to  him  Renaldo  lowdly  cri’d,

Stay,hold  yonr  hands,  for  this  couvfc  (liould  be  mine.
Vivian  and  Malagige^ind  more  bcfide,

Thatat  their  kinfinens  foiledid  much  repine.

Would  then  have  fought  with  this  fame  ftrangcr
Save  that  Renaldo  claim’d  it  as  his  right,  (knight,

12

And  faid,my  friends, we  muft  to  Park  baft.

But  to  himfelfc  he  faid,it  were  a jeft,

For  me  to  ftay  till  all  they  down  were  caft
By  one  and  ore, 'Ic  fight  and  they  (hall  i-eftj
Thisfaidjhcfpurshishorfcjand  commeth  faft,

, And  as  he  runs  he  fets  hisfpearcinrcftj
The  totherdoth  as  much, and  cithersfpeare
The  ftrokedocb  in  a thoufand  pecces  tcare.

Thchoifracn withthc ftiokc  ftir notan  inch.

They  both  had  Icatn’d  fb  pctfedlly  to  fit,

But  on  their  horfes  it  did  fhrewdly  pinch,

Yet  Bayard  fcarcc  his  courfc  doth  intermit.

The  tothers  horfc  had  fiich  a parlous  wiinch,

That  mat'd  him  e^itc,and  brake  his  back  with  it.
His  maftcr  that  was  greatly  griev’d  to  fcc’r,

Forfakes  his  feat,and  takes  hitu  to  his  feet.

14

And  to  Ae«4/do,that  with  naked  hand

Came  toward  him  in  fliew  of  truce, he  faid.

Sir  knight  I give  you  here  coUBderftand,

1 lik’d  fo  well  this  horfc  that  hercisdcad,

I think  it  would  not  with  mine  honoui  ftand.

To  leave  him  unreveng’d, which  hath  me  led
f o challenge  you,cv’n  as  you  arc  true  knightf
That  you  will  anfiver  me  againe  in  fight.


If

Renaldo  anfwci’d,ifyour  horfc  you  loft.

The  onely  caufc  of  this  your  quaricll  be,

Then  comfort  youjfor  of  mine  onely  coft.

Your  want  herein  fliall  befuppli’d  by  me.

With  fuch  a horfc, as  1 may  boldly  boaft.

To  be  as  good  a oneaseie  washc  :

Not  fo  flr,faid  the  tother,you  miftakc  it,

I will  expound  my  mind,and  plainer  make  it*

16

Though  1 lik’d  well  my  fetviccablc  horfc,

Yet  fith  he  now  is  in  thisconfli£f  flaine.

Think  not  that  of  his  death  I fo  much  force.

As  that  alone  moves  meto  fight  againe  j
But  in  plainc  termes  on  foot  to  trie  your  force,

As  well  as  erft  on  horfcbacki  would  fainc.
RenaldOjthit  of  no  mans  force  accounted,  i

Withoutdelay  ftraight  from  his  horfc diimounted.

17

And  fith(quoth  he)I  fee  your  noble  mind.

Of  this  my  company  hath  nofufpition,

They  fliall  go  on, and  I will  ftay  behind.

And  fo  will  fight  with  you  on  tv’ii  condition.

T his  faid,hisband  to  part  thence  he  affign’d.

Who  went  their  way  upon  their  Lords  commillion.
Which  bred  great  admiration  in  thefttangcr,

T o find  a man  fo  little  fearing  danger.

IS

Now  when  hisftanderd  quite  was  out  of  fight.

And  all  Renaldoe company  wasgonc.

Then  hand  to  hand  they  do  apply  the  fight.

With  forceand  fury  great  they  lay  iron  j
Each  marvels  at  the  tothers  paffing  might.

And  yet  of  either  fide  the  gainc  is  none.

They  felt  the  bio  wes  fo  heavy  and  fo  hard.

That  glad  they  were  to  lie  well  to  their  ward.

»9

Thus  thefe  two  knightSjfor  honours  only  fake.
Together  combat  in  fuch  eager  fort.

That  ev’ry  little  errour  they  fhould  make,
Endangci’d  life  in  this  unpleafant  (port;

Anhoure  and  halfc  this  travcil  they  did  take.

Each  labouring  to  cut  the  tothcr  fliort.

And  in  his  mind  Renaldo  labours  much , .

Who  this  ftiould  bcjwhofc  skill  and  force  was  fuch.

30

Aad,favc  that  he  could  not  with  bisreputation.

He  would  have  wiflit  the  battcll  at  an  end.

And  offci’d  of  a truce  communication.

And  of  his  unknown  foe  have  made  his  friend :
Likcwilc  the  tother  felt  fuch  inclination.

Now  finding  fcarcc  hccould  himfelfc  defend.

That  he  repented  his  rafli  hardy  parr.

And  would  have  had  a truce  with  all  his  heart.

ai

It  waxed  dark, there  fell  an  cv’ning  mift,

So  that  at  laft  they  neither  of  them  know
When  he  did  hit  aright, or  when  he  mift.

Nor  how  CO  give,nor  how  to  ward  a blow  :

When  firft  Renaldo  wiflit  him  to  defift,

Sith  now  the  Sun  defeended  was  fo  low.

And  that  the  combat  might  be  now  rejourn’d.

Till  Picebm  ware  abaut  the  world  return’d.

Y 5 OfFrinw


2J2


THE  XXXI.  BOOKE


Siml*.


Si»i  yJtcim‘
hUtm  ftrt.
ref  prof^eue-
r»»i  aijuiid
tolumbamt


11

OfFiing(at  which  the  ftrangcr  greatly  mws’d.

And  his  rare curtcfic  therein  commended)

To  lodge  him  where  he  fliould  both  be  well  us’d|
And  like  a man  of  honour  well  attended  ;

The  tother  his  great  curt’fie  not  icfus’d.

And  fo  between  them  two  the  fray  was  ended  ;

And  fttaight  RenaUo  gave  him  as  his  gift,

His  pages  hor(c,thai  was  both  ftrong  and  fwift.

zj

Thus  on  they  rode  unto  Rcnaldos  tent.

And  grew'  acquainted  ere  they  thither  came.

By  mcantsincertainefpccchcsasthey  went,

/JenaWo  happened  to  tell  his  name;

By  which  the  flrangcr  knevv  incontinent.

That  this  was  that  fume  PaU^dine  of  fame.

And  that  himfelfe  v/as  to  /iow/ifo brother.

By  fathers  fidcalcne,and  not  by  mother.

24

Thefavage  Ga/io»,this  brave  wanicr  hight,

That  travcl'd  had  full  many  a hundred  mile.

With  thofc  two  brothets, nam’d  the  black  and  white,
And  Sanfoaet, \iM\W  by  craft  and  guile
They  were  fiirprifcd,asyou  heard  laft  night.

And  made  againft  their  wils  to  wait  a while.

For  maintenanceof  lawcstjnjuft  and  bad.

That  wicked  PinnabeU devifed  had.

25

Now  when  as  noble  Guidon  certaine  knew
That  this  Renaldo  was,whom  he  before
Dcfircd  long  tofee,hc  much  did  rew
That  bebad  done,and  did  lament  it  fore;

A blind  man  would  not  be  more  glad  to  view
The  light,hcdoubted  he  fliould  nc’i  fee  more,

Then  Guidon  in  his  mind  was  well  appaid.

To  fee  this  kuight,and  thus  to  him  he  faid.

16

Whatflrangc  mifliap,what  finifter  adventer.

Hath  bred  this  fault  in  mejmy  noble  Lord,

That  I withyou  into  ihisflrife  fliould  enter.

With  whom  I ought  to  have  all  kind  accord  ? ,
lam  your  fathers  fonnc,not  by  One  venter,

J ever  haveyour  name  and  flock  ador’d,

Guidon  1 highr,Co»y?a»^<J  was  my  mother.*
Boinbeyond  £roci«  Teas, and  yet  your  brother.

wherefore  I pr.iy, pardon  my  fond  offence,

Tliat  have  inftcad  of  duty  offer’d  wrong,

And  tell  me  whciein  I may  rccompcnce
This  ovcrfight,and  I will  do  ere  long;

Renaldo  that  had  heard  of  himlong  lince.

And  to  have  fecn  him  did  not  little  long.

Embrac’d  him, and  not  onely  did  forgive  him,

But  commendation  great  and  praifedid  give  him.

li

He  faid  hisvalcw  wasa  pcrfeftflgnc.

To  flicw  himfelfe  in  fight  fo  fierce  and  flout.

That  he  was  truly  come  of  that  fam.c  line,

V^ofe  noble  brute  was  blown  the  world  about:
Forifyour  mannersdid  to  peace  incline,

Then  had  there  been  (faid  hc)morccaufc  of  doubt.
The  fcarfull  Hart  comes  not  of  Lions  feed.

Nor  doth  a filly  Dove  a FauUon  breed.  ,


19

Thus  fell  they  two  acquainted  on  the  way.

And  talk’d  together  friendly  as  they  went.

But  neither  did  their  talk  the  journey  flay.

Nor  did  their  riding  make  their  fpccch  reient,

Vntill  they  came  where  all  their  brothcrslay ,

When  asa  great  part  of  the  night  wasfpcnt.

Who  with  great  joy  and  pleafurc  did  behold  them.
And  chiefe  when  who  this  was  Renaldo  told  them.

For  though  he  muft  to  them  (no  doubt)havcevcr
Been  very  welcome  asa  brothei  dcirc,

•Yet  could  he  be  to  them  more  welcome  neyci  .

Then now,what  time  as  you  before  did  hcarc.

They  all  did  mind  to  do  their  befl  endearei
T o refeue  Charles  that  was  of  heavy  chcarc  ;
Wherefore  for  thisonecaufe  above  therefl.

He  was  unto  t hem  all  a welcome  gueft .

jx

Thus  now  the  day  enfuing  on  went  Guidon,
loyning  himfelfe  unto  Rcnaldos  crew.

And  as  to  wals  they  forward  ride  on.

They  met  two  valiantyouthsthatwell  him  knew;
Further  with  them  confcrring,theydcfaidcone,

A Lady  richly  clad, and  fairc  of  hew ;

Thcfc  warlike  youths  had  Gifraond  to  thrir  mother.
White  Griffin  and  black  Aqiiilant  his  brother.

3*  X

Now  Guidon  knew  them, and  to  them  was  known.

As  having  been  together  many  dayes.

By  whom  they  were  unto  Renaldo  fliown.

And  prais’d  for  gallant  men  at  all  afTayes ;

As  ill  your  judgement, likewife  in  mine  own,
{Renaldo  faid)thcfc  youthsdo  merit  praife.

For  they  have  oft  been  prov’d  two  perfeft  vraniers.
As  well  in  fpitc  as  fport,at  tilt  and  barriers,

Renaldo  did  by  their  appaicll  know  them.

Tone  ever  wearing  white,thc  tother  black.

And  friendly  countenance  he  now  did  fliow  them,
Chiefly  bccaufe  the  King  did  faccour  lack:
Wherefore  into  his  band  he  doth  beflow  them,
That  band  that  to  the  Fitter  did  bring  much  wrack,
And  they  dojoynethemto  banner.

Forgetting  allold  jars  in  loving  manner.

34

Between  the  houfe  of  Amnioti  and  thefc  twins,
Aboutone  Trujfaldin  a jarre  there  fell.

The  matter  at  the  firfl:  not  worth  two  pins.
Wherefore  the  circunaftancc  I will  not  tell.

But  now  iiewaido  their -‘'ffeftion  wins.

By  ufTng  them  fb  curtcoufly  and  well.

For  curteous  fpccch  and  ufage  mild  and  kind.
Wipes  malice  out  of  cv’ry  noble  mind.

»5

Now  after  thefc  another  knight  there  came,
night  Sanfonet  a man  of  great  account.

Who  welcom’d  was,and  took  it  for  no  fliamc,
of  flout  Roialdes  band  himfelfetoccunt :

While  this  thus  paft, behold  the  gallant  dame.

That  knew  this  noble  Lord  of  Clarimount ,

(For  flic  was  one  that  all  the  Frwich  Lords  knew)
Told  him  a talc  that  made  him  greatly


Grifflii.

firrdtlugtt


Stnfetuti


OF  ORLANDO  FVRI0SO.


jfi

Tierdelie^itt  Mv  Loid  (faid  Hic)!  bilrig you  foric  tiding,

j whom  thf  Cluiich  and  Empire  held  I'o  deare,
Riinsall  aboutjin  no  one pkccabiding.

Of  (cnfc  and  argument  deprived  cleaic ;
ife  naked  goes,not  natures  fecrcts  hiding.

Which  me  to  tell, and  you  muft  giieveto  hearc,
Orlando  (that  fame  light  and  lamp  of  France)

Hath  loft  his  wuSjGod  knowes  by  what  mifchancc.

37

His  arnres  and  fword  that  he  away  had  thrown.

As  things  by  him  left  and  forfaken  clearly,

3 f.iw  a courteous  keightjto  me  unknown,
Putonc(it  rccm’d)that  lov’d  Orlando  dearly.

Them  gather  where  they  fcattcr’d  were  and  Town,
And  cv’nofcharityjasfccmed  mecrly.

In  triumph  wife  on  tree  he  bang’d  thefame.

And  underneath  he  grav’d  Orlandos  name.

38

But  ftraight  the  fword  that  hanged  on  the  tree.

With  force  and  fcomfull  fpeech  away  was  taue,

(As  I can  witneffe  well  that  did  it  fee)

By  Mandricard  the  fonne  of  ^gricane  •

Think  you  what  hurt  this  will  to  Europe  be.

That  once againe  thcTurl{S  have  Durindane  :
Tbinvag  Thegentleknightftravelpng  with  him  to  favc  it,

ZttUmt,  But  in  the  end  was  forc’d  to  let  him  have  it.

39

I faw  Orlandolite  in monftrnus  giiifc,

To  runabout  uncouth  and  all  unclad.

With  ftrangeft  clamours  and  moft  hideous  cries:

In  fine  I do  conclude  that  he  is  mad  j
And  favc  I faw  it  fo  with  thefe  mine  eyes,

I would  not  truft  if  any  told  it  had .

She  further  told  how  fhc  had  fecn  him  later.

With  Rodomont  to  tumble  in  the  water.

40

And  laftofall  llictold  him  flichad  heard.

How  thatabout  this  fword  there  grew  Ibrncftrifc,
BetwccnGriZ.'/irj^ftoutand  Mandricard :

And  how  the  Tartar  having  loft  his  life.

The  fword  was  gtv’n  Gradaffh  afterward.

As  over  all  the  Pa^an  camp  was  rife  :

And  having  ended  this  fo  fad  narration>

Thereto  fire  addeth  this  fliort  exhortation.

41

That  he  and  ev'ry  one  that  were  not  foe

To  ftcut  Or/aniojwould  take  fo  much  painc.

In  Park  or  elswherc  him  to  bellow.

Till  he  had  purged  his  diftemper’d  braine  :

Mine  husband  Brnniitmart{di\A  flic)I  know.

To  do  him  any  good  himfclfc  would  ftrainc :

Thus  Fiofd^lUge  fpake,the  loving  wife
Of  Bra/i4imarr, ihit  lov’d  her  as  bis  life,

41

At  this  ftranpc  tale  and  wofull  accident.

Such  inward  griefe  the  good  Renaldo  felt,

T hat  with  the  thought  his  heart  incontinent
Did  feem  like  fhow  again!!:  the  Sun  to  melt.

And  with  allfpced  hemight  to  go  he  meant.

And  by  all  mcancs  he  might  fo  to  have  dcak.

To  feck  OrTando,v/hom  ifhecan  find.

He  hopes  to  bring  him  to  a better  mind.


But  fiih  he  now  had  hither  biought  hii  b.md.

Of  wcrc’t  ihcwill  ofGod,cr  weic  inhance,

He  firft  doth  mind  to  end  the  cauk'  in  liand.

And  rtftiic  Paris  and  the  king  of  France  :
Wherefore  he  makes  his  men  all  ipiict  ftand
Till  night, what  time  himlcirc  will  lead  the  dance.
And  then  between  the  fourth  and  fecend  watch,

He  mcanes  at  once  the  matter  to  difpatch.

44

He  makes  his  mcnlieclofe  for  ail  that  day.

By  way  of  Amhufeado  in  a wood.

And  cafcthcmfclvcsaHd  hoifesall  they  may.

And  take  thcfufienanccofrcftand  food.

The  place  within  three  leagues  of  Park  lay,

And  when  the  Sun  wasfcr,he  thought  it  good,
W’hat  time  the  world  doth  ufe  his  Idler  lamp,

T o Paris  ward  to  move  his  filent  camp.

45

And  as  he  purpos’d, he  peiform’d  indeed,  '

Far  ftraight  himfclfc  with  th  it  fame  gallant  grew,
Set  out  by  night, as  firft  they  had  deciccd.

In  filent  fort  fufpition  to  efehew-

Now  came  the  time  that  rhey  muft  do  the  deed.

Now  ncarc  unto  the  T url^ijlj  camp  they  diew.

When  firft  the  hcedlefle  Sentinels  intrapping,

They  Idl’d  them  all  bccaiifc  they  took  them  napping

46

The  watch  once  flainc,they  are  no  longer  dumbe.

But  after  flout  Renaldo  foon  they  came.

They  found  the  trumpet, and  ftrike  up  ihedrum,
And  tailing  flill  upon  that  noble  name.

That  often  had  the  Pagans  overcome,

(I  meant  Renaldos  UouCc  of  Mont  al  yam)

Which cric  he  caus’d  both  hisown  men  lo  quicken.
Arid  that  the  Tuil^s  might  in  more  fcarc  be  ftricken.

47

Himfclfc  well  mounted  on  hisfamobshorfe.

Doth  prdTc  amidft  the  Pagan.  Princes  tents.

And  with  his  own, and  with  hishorfcsfoicc.

He  tfeadsthem  down, and  all  in  peeces rents,

V narm’d,or  arm’d  he  kils  without  remorfe.
Whoever  commeth  in  his  way,iepcnts,
Thedrowfiemcn  halfc  arm’d  make  poorc  rcfiftance
Againft  fo  brave  a man  with  fuch ,afliftancc.

48

For  why,bcfide  thofc  men  I nam’d  before,

Wftiofe  vertue  and  whofc  value  oft  were  fhown,
Renaldo  had  fix  hundred  mcnand,inocc.

All  pcrfcift  train'd , of  ftrength  and  courage  know'tv.
Which  about  Ch^rirnont  he  kept  in  ftorc.

For  hisown  ufcand  caufcsofhisovvn.

Though  at  this  need  his  Princes  turn  toftirnifii.

He  foon  agreed  hispwn  towns  to  unfurnifli.

49

And  though  Renaldo  had  no  great  reveneu,  '

The  which  chicfefincwes  unto  warre  affords.

Yet  kept  he  ftillfix  hundred  in  retinue.

What  with  good  ufage  .i  nd  with  gentle  words.

That  all  of  them  difl'ftill  with  him  continue.

At  his  command  with  launccs.horfe  and  fvvords  •
Nor  was  there  any  that  from  him  away  went.
Though  direrfe  others  offa’d  greater  payment.

. Y 4 Novy


254


THE  XXXI.  BOOKE


so

Now  think  when  this  brave  crew  the  Turl^s  aflaU’d,

At  unawares,halfe  v\ake  or  halfc  afleep.

How  that  fame  name  Sc  that  fame  neife  them  quail’d
How  here  they  fled  and  there, with  hold  and  keep  t
But  fraally  flight,and  lefl'e  their  fight  prevail'd}

But  ev’u  as  Goats  from  Lions, or  as  flieep

From  Wolves  make  fmall  defence, fuch  in  comparifon

Thefe  Pagans  madeagaintt  Kenaldos  garifon.

51

Ontother  fide  king  Charles  (that  byefpiall)

Had  notice  of  Aenaldes  comming  hither.

With  all  thatcruelb  noble  and  fo  loyall.

That  to  bis  aid  combined  were  together.

With  divei  fe  Lords  came  forth  inperfbn  royall.

And  all  his  men  of  armeslikewifecamc  thithef;

Eke  Brandimart,ricb  Monodentes  heire.

Did  with  king  Char/er  unto  the  field  lepaire.

52

Whom  when  his  fpoufc  that  neare  about  did  hover.

Had  found  outby  hisflandard  and  hisarmes.

And  plainly  faw  it  was  her  deareft  lover,

Shcruflieth  in  among  the  men  of  armes,

A nd  unto  him  her  felfe  flie  doth  difeover.

Who  ftraight  embraced  her  in  open  armes  j
And  leaving  then  the  battell,drew  apart.

That  each  to  other  might  their  minds  impart,

53

And  afterfweet  embracing  oftentimes,

T hey  did  conferre  together  of  their  ftate  ;

O vertue  of  thofc  unfufpicious  times.

When  Ladies  early  wander  might  and  late.

And  yet  be  faultlcflc  deem'd  and  free  of  crimes.
Where  now  each  fmall  fufpef>  turncs  love  to  hate.
Yea  ev’n  for  all  their  watching  and  fafe  keeping.
They  doubt  their  wives  do  wake  while  they  are  flcc-
U (ping-

Among  the  conference  thiscouple  had.

The  Lady  did  unto  her  fpoufc  unfold.

How  his  good  friend  Or/irttdo  was  fal’n  mad,

‘ Hownichcrfelfehismadnefledid  behold.

His  running  naked, carelcfTe  and  unclad,
Notcredible  had  any  cIs  it  told.

But  credible  it  was  now  flie  had  fed  it.

For  in  far  greater  things  he  gave  hercredit.

55

She  further  did  to  Brandimart  recount.

How  fhe  had  feen  the  bridge  the  Pagan  made,

(I  mcanc  the  crucll  Pagan  Rodomount')

Vpon  the  flreame  fo  deep  as  none  could  wade.

Where  he  the  paflenger*  of  bell  account
Did  from  each  fide  with  fury  great  invade.

And  with  the  fpoilesof thofe  he  kil'd  and  took.

Did  beautific  a tombe  made  by  the  brook.

56

And  laft  fhe  told  how  with  his  ftrength  extreme
Or/d«do heav’d  the  Turtle  arm'd  from  the  ground.
And  fb  with  him  fell  backward  in  the  flreame.

With  pcrill  great  thereto  have  both  bccndiownd,
From  whence  Orlando  went  about  the  Rcamc,
Where  his  mad  parts  would  make  him  foon  befound.
This  talc  in  Brandimart  did  breed  fuch  fotrow*

He  flaid  not  for  the  next  enfuing  morrow.


f7

But  taking  for  hisgnidc  fairc  Piordclicge,

And  being  ready  arm’d, as  then  he  was.

He  go’th  to  feck  that  forefaid  pa^  lous  bridge.

In  mind  (what  ever  hap)t  he  fame  to  pafle,

Where  many  men  their  liveslinc  did  abridge.

As  in  fucli  dangers  foon  it  comes  to  pafTc :

No  fooner  came  he  to  the  utmoft  ward,

But  Rodomont  had  notice  by  his  guard.

5*

Hcgrcatly  did  to  liearefuch  ncwcsrejoycc.

And  ftraight  hccommcth  forthwith  warlike  geflurc.
And  bkli  him  with  a loud  and  feornfull  voice,

Vnto  the  tombe  to  yecld  his  armes  and  vcfturc;

Or  threatens  him, if  he  refufe  his  choice.

To  ijtakc  him  drink  beyond  all  good  drfgcflure;

But  Brandimart  his  threatsdid  nothing  fcarc.

And  makes  no  nnfwcr  but  with  couched  fpearc.

59

Then  ftraight  to  horfes  fide  he  fets  the  fpurs,

Thchorfe  he  rede  upon  Batoldohight^

The  horic  though  good  jyctfnorcs, and  ftarts,&  ftirs,
Muchfeat'd  with  narrow  biidgc,and  waters  fights
Eke  Rodomont  hisgood  prontino  fpurS,

Who  ever  ftarcs,as  ufed  to  this  fight,

Although  the  bridge  did  fltakc  all  under  feet.

When  in  the  middle  way  thefe  knights  did  meet.

60

Their  fpeares  that  wercof  firm  wtll  fcafon’d  wood.
With  fo  great  force  upon  their  armour  ftrakc,

That  though  their  horfes  were  both  ftrong  and  good
Yet  both  fell  fiom  the  bridge  into  the  lake,

Qmic  overwhelm’d  with  water  and  wit h mud.

Yet  neither  hoifeman  did  his  hotfe  forfakc ;

Long  taried  they  within  the  flreame  below.

To  fearch  if  any  Nymph  dwelt  there, I trow-

6l

This  had  not  beenthefirft  time  nor  the  fift,  (down.

That  from  this  bridge  the  Fiir/^e  had  been  throwne
Whcrcfoic  his  horfc  and  he  could  better  fiiift.

For  neither  horfc  nor  he  did  doubt  to  drown;

For  where  the  flreame  was  mofl  profound  and  fwift.
He  often  bad  been  plung’d  above  his  crown.

Which  made  his  horfc  and  him  the  more  audacious
Amid  the  fticame,although  profound  and  fpacious.

6a

He  knew  by  proofc(for  he  had  tri’d  it  oft)

Where  all  the  fhelvcs,and  where  the  channcll  lay.
Which  parts  were  gravelly, and  which  were  foft.*

The  tothcr  ignorant,wa*  born  away,

Toft  here  and  there, now  low,  and  then  aloft.

The  while  the  Pagan  greedy  of  his  prey.

At  all  advantages  doth  flill  affailc  him,

Whofe  horfes  footing  more  and  more  did  failc  himi

At  laft  with  plunging  and  with  ftriving  tir'd,

He  backward  fell  into  the  weeds  and  mud.

Where  he  waslike  to  have  been  drownd  and  mir'd,
Save  that  his  fpoufc  that  by  the  river  flood.

In  bumble  wife  the  Pagan  Prince  d efir'd.

And  in  inoft  earnefl  manner  that  flie  could,

Ev’n  for  her  fake, whofe  ghoft  he  did  adore,

To  help  her  worthy  knight  unto  the  fiiorc.


OF  ORLANDO  PVRIOSO.


3f5


64

Ah  gentlcfirjif  ever  you  did  taft

Of  love(flie  faid)or  of  a lovers  pafHon ,

Save  thatfamc  knight ,00  whom  my  love  is  plac’d.
And  let  him  not  be  drown’d  in  fo  vile  falhion  :

Suffice  it  jou,your  tombe  will  be  more  grac’d
With  oncfuch  prifner  offuch  reputation.

Then  hundreds  other  that  Hiall  bac  arrive ;

Then  take  his  fpoilcs,and  favc  himl'clfe  alive.

<5>

Thcfe  words  that  might  have  mov'd  a ftonc  I think.
Mov'd  him  to  lefcuc  noble  Brandimart,

Who  without  thiift  had  tancfuchdoreofdrinky
Asfrom  Iiii limbs, hislife did  welaigh  part:

But  ere  he  brought  him  to  the  rivers  brink.

He  caus’d  him  with  hisfword  and  armes  depart.

And  made  him  fwearc  now  he  was  in  his  power.

To  yecld  himlclfe  tine  prifner  to  his  tower.

66

The  dame  of  comfort  all  was  quite  berca  v’d.

When  as  flic  faw  how  ill  her  fpoufc  had  fped.

And  yet  lefTc  gttefe  of  this  chance  flicconcciv’d.
Then  if  he  had  been  in  the  water  dead  :

Shecals  her  fclfc  the  iraufe  that  he  receiv’d
This  harmcjthat  fondly  had  him  thither  led.

Into  a place  of  danger  fuch  and  jcopardic.

As  needs  mufl  hazard  either  life  or  libertic.

67

About  the  place  in  vainc  flic  long  did  hover.

Then  parted  (be  in  mind  to  feck  fome  knight.

Of  Charles  hiscamp,that  might  her  loflc  recover,
And  prove  bimfclfc, though  not  more  ftrong  in  fight*
At  Icaft  more  fortunate  then  was  her  lover  .*

Long  did  flic  travell  all  that  day  and  night.

And  eke  the  day^fuing,crc  flic  met  one.

Yet  was  it  hergood  hapat  lad  to  get  one.

65

"Srs'  ^tlismpion  in  a rich  artire  flic  met,

wrought  with  withered  leaves  of  Cypreffe  tree,
mfftarei  in  Hereafter  I will  tell  you,but  not  yet,

tb*  j $ What  wight  this  was,whethet  a he  or  flic  ;

ix  flanct.  j jq  thccamp,lcft  I forget

The  noble  knights  that  let  their  fovciaigne  free  j
I meane  Renaldo  and  his  new  come  brother.

With  a\xssa\ngMalagige  and  many  other.

69

VnpoflTiblcitwasaccount  to  keep

Of  thofc  were  kil’d  that  night,and  thofe  that  fled.
Fierce  Agramant  was  wak’ned  from  his  fleep.

And  with  all  fpecd  that  might  be  up  he  fped.

He  weighs  the  perill  and  t he  danger  deep.

His  fbuldicrs  loin  away,nc’r  making  head :
Marfilio,\rith  Jotnno, and  the  reft,

Wifli  him  to  flic,for  ftarc  he  be  diftreft.

70

Ad viflng  him,fith fortune  now ganirown,

Vnto  this  tempeft  wifely  to  give  place.

And  go  to  Arly, or  fome  other  town.

So  ftrong  to  dure  alTault  nolittle  fpace  e
So  might  he  favc  hisperfon  and  his  crown.

As  firft  was  to  bfe  car’d  for  in  fuch  cafe  ;

And  then  with  wifdontc  wat ily  proceeding,

T 0 wait  till  time  might  ferve  of  better  fpeeding.


7*

Thus  Agramant, to  fo  great  dangci  brought.

Well  knew  not  what  to  do,nor  what  to  fay,

Butdid  as  by  his  counfell  he  was  taught,

And  in  great  haft  convey’d  himfclfcaway :

1 he  while  much  woe  unto  his  men  was  wrought.

The  Ohriftens  them  di(comfitc,kill  and  flay :

The  darknefle caus’d  the  number  be  unknown,
Thatin  thisfight  were  kil’d  and  ovctthrown.j
7»

With  haft  full  many  were  in  waterdrown’d,

Th.1t  faw  there  was  nofafctic  in  the  land.

More  fuccour  in  their  hecles  then  hand s t hey  found ,
Againft  fuch  fierce  aflaylants  few  durft  ftand  •

But  greateft  dammagedid  to  them  redound.

By  thofc  fix  hundred  of  Renaldos  band :

Who  did  diftributc  ftrokes  in fb  great  plenty,

As  cv*i  y one  of  them  maffacred  twenty.

Some  think  that  Malagigi  plaid  his  part

In  thisconflift,not  wounding  men  nor  flaying.

But  making  of  their  foes  by  Magick  art
T o bcarc  fo  huge  a noife  of  horfes  nay  ing,

Such  found  of  Drums, fuch  fhouts  from  ev’rjr  part,

As  all  the  world  had  vowed  their  decaying :

By  which  they  all  were  ftricken  in  fuch  fcare.

As  not  a man  of  them  durft  taric  there.

74

Yet  though  the  Tur\ijb  Prince  fled  thence  fo  faft,

The  brave  Rogero  he  would  not  forget.

But  caufed  him  from  danger  to  be  plac’d.

And  on  an  cafic  paced  hoife  him  fet  .*

Thus  now  the  Turl^s  were  by  theChriftens  chas’d,
And  glad  they  were  a walled  town  to  get :

But  yet  Gtadajfmwd  his  valiant  band
Did  ftillumo  their  tacklcftoutly  ftand.

75

Nay , which  was  morc,whcn  as  he  undeiftood.

How  that  Remlia  Palladinc  of  France,

Was  he  that  fiicd  fuch  ftorc  of  Turl^ijh  blood
He  was  fo  glad  he  ready  was  to  dance  j
He  thanks  his  gods  that  were  to  him  fo  good.

To  fend  him  thisfo  much  defired  chance,

By  which  he  hopes  and  makes  account  moft  clearly,
T o win  that  hotfe  Renaldo  held  fo  deaily.

76

For  why  Gradajfo  king  of  Serycane,

Long  fince  to  FrancecAme  with  an  army  Royall,
Withoncly  hope  to  conquer
That  fatBOHS  blade  of  fo  good  proofe  and  triallt
And  eke  Renaldos  coutfer  to  have  tanc.

That  Bayard  bight : and  now  when  by  efpiall.

He  knew  Renaldo  was  on  that  bcaft  mounted.

The  conqueft  fure.thehoi  fe  his  own  he  counted.

77

So  much  the  iather,for  that  once  before.

About  this  mattertbey  had  madeafray,

Faft  by  thefea  upon  the  fandy  fhote  t
(To  tell  the  circumftance  I may  not  flay)

But  ^^a^ag^itheace  his  coda  bore.

And  did  into  a barge  him  fafe  convay  :

And  thereupon  Renaldo  ever  fince
Was  tanc  but  for  a coward  by  this  Princr.

Wherefore


25^


the  XXXI.  BOOKE


Merall.


78

wherefore  in  hope  fo  rich  a fpoile  to  reape,

T wo  howres  before  the  riling  of  the  lonne,

All  armed  orr  Alfana  he  doth  Icape,

And  with  hislaunce  to  death  arc  diversdonc;

On  /fcwc/jtheiv/oorcj',  on  Moorcr  he  French  doth
And  all  he  mecteth  he  doth  ovenunne;  *(hcapej
So  did  ambition  fet  his  heart  on  firCj
To  meet  KenaUo^iudr  washisdcfirc.

79

Soonc  after  this  each  met  withfpearc  in  reft,

(Blit  neither  llien  at  firft  the  tothffkncw)

Each  brake  his  fpcarc  upon  the  tothers  creft,

Vnio  the  heavenly  car  the  fplintcrs  flew;

Then  with  their  fwordscither  was  readie  preft,

( rhfir  lances  thrown  away,thcivfwords  they  drew)
Each  layingon  the  otherfo  fell  flrokes,

Asif  not  Kuights  had  foughtj  but  clovvncs  fcld  okcf.

Co

GTcidaJfo  though  he  knew  him  not  by  fight,

(For  yet  the  morning  bcamcswcrcnctdifplaid)

Yet  did  he  guefle  both  by  the  horfes  might,

A nd  tliolc  fierce  flrokes  the  tothcr  on  him  laidj
Wheicfoic  With  woids that  favord  fcotne and  Ipight;
He  fliaight  begins  Renaldo  to  upbraid;

And  laid  he  Iiad  his  challenge  dilappointcd.

And  not  appeared  at  the  day  appointed.

8t

Btlike  you  thought  I fliould  have  met  you  never.

But  now  (faid  be)  you  here  arc  met  right  well,

Aflui  c your  fclfc  I will  purfue  you  ever.

Were  you  taneup  to  heav’n,or  downe  to  hcllj
Ho  height  nor  depth,  fhould  hinder  mine  endever,

I mcanc  to  findeyou  out  where  ere  you  dwell.

To  fliunnc  the  fight  with  me  it  doth  not  bootc,
Vntill  you  leave  your  horfc  and  go  on  footc.

82

At  this  his  fpcechjWercdivers  Banding  by,'

As  Guidon, RichardctyZnd  others  more.

Who  would  have  flaine  Gradajfo  by  aod  by.

Had  not  Renaldo  ftepped  them  before,

And  faid  in  wtath,whatmaftcrs  am  not  I
Well  able  wreakemy  private  wrongs  therefore?

Then  to  the  Pagan  gently  thus  he  fpakc.

And  wiflit  him  markc  thcanfwer  he  did  make.

Who  ever  faith, that  I did  fight  cfcbcw.

Or  flicw  defeat  of  vallcw  any  way,

1 fay  and  do  avouch  he  faith  untrue.

And  I will  prove  by  combat  what  I fay  j
1 came  unto  the  place  to  mcctc  with  you.

No  feufes  I d id  fceke,nor  to  delay.

And  frankly  here  to  youl  offer  fight.

But  fiift  I wifii  you  were  informed  right.


84

Then  tooke  he  him  afide,and  more  at  large,

He  told  what  hapned  him  and  how  by  art,
HiscoCn  M<j/j^(geinioa  barge
Convayed  him, and  foi  fl  him  to  depart;

In  fine  himfclfc, of  blame  quite  todifeharge,

He  biought  himout  to  witiicsct’rie  parr.

And  then  to  prove  that  this  was  true  indeed.

He  offerd  in  the  combat  to  piocccd.

«S

Gradajfo  that  both  curt  cons  was,and  flour.

Gave  care  unto  the  talc  Renaldo  told.

And  though  it  feemd  he  flood  thercoFindoubf,
Yet  him  in  all  his  fpeech  he  not  contrcld;

But  in  conclufion, having  heard  it  our.

He  d oth  his  former  purpofe  fii  mcly  hold;

VV’hich  was  by  combat  fierce  ro  try  and  kno\v,

, lffohccouldB.y.3r^/owinorno.

86

The  Falldddne  that  pafl'cJ  not  a point.

Of  no  mans  forcc,to  meet  him  gave  his  vvordi
T he  place  in  which  to  meet  they  did  aj'point.
Was  ncarea  wood,and  by  a plcafa.'.tfooxd,

I 7 here  only  added  was  a further  point-,

Whith  was  that  Iword,

Should  to  Renaldo  as  of  light  .tccicw.

If  he  the  Fagan  orcrcamcor  flew.

87

Thusforthc  prefent  time  departed  they,

Vntill  the  time  approcht  cf  pointed  fight.
Although  Renaldo  frcndly  did  him  pray.

To  reft  him  in  his  tent  that  day  and  night;

And  offerd  frankc  fafe  condudl  for  his  flay.

So  curtecus  was  this  fame  couragions  Knight:
Gradajfo  greatly  prais’d  the  ncfiic  cffci.

But  yet  refus’d  the  curtfic  he  did  prefer.

88

The  fcarc  was  great  that  fecretly  did  luikc.

In  all  the  minds  of  all  Renaldos  kin.

Who  knew  the  ftrength  andcunningof \W\%Turlie
Was  fuch,as  doubt  it  was  which  fide  fiiould  win;
Paine  Malagigi  by  his  art  would  workc,

To  end  this  fray,beforc  it  fliould  begin;

Save  that  he  fcard  Renaldos  utter  enmity.

In  fo  bafe  fort  for  working  his  indemnity.

89

But  though  hisfrendsdid  fcare  more  then  was  mcc:,
Himfclfc  affurdc  himfclfc  of  good  fuccefle:

Now  at  the  pointed  time  and  place  they  meet
Both  at  one  verie  inflant,as  I gueffe.

And  firft  they  kindly  do  embrace  and  greet
The  tone  the  tothcr  vyith  all  gcmlcnelTc,

But  how  fwcet  words  did  turnc  to  bitter  blowcs.
The  next  bookc  fa ving  onc,thc  fcqucll  fljowes.


Jn  thu  xxxi.  Canto  Ifinde  little  worth  any  fpeciaU notingjhut  that  which  in  the  beginning  of  the  hool{  h faid  again f
jcaloujie,  which  is  one  0}  the  three  incurable  difeafcs  noted  in  our  old  Englijh  Froverbe:  From  Hercfie.Phrcnefic,  and
1 caloufie,good  Lord  deliver  me.  The  rejl  of  the  bool^e  hath  no  new  matter  Jbut Jiteb  as  hath  bin  noted  before:  and  thcre^
fore  1 will  end  this  little  fpace  with  this Jhort  note.


Here  end  the  Notes  of  the  xxxj.


2j8


THE  XXXII.  BOOKE.


iSii

^4  h'^'V  "vt


Good  BradamantRogero  loKgexpeEleth,

"But  heareih  newes  that  touch  her  very  ftigh^
How  he  aH  other  loves  be  fide  negleEleth  ^
Towed  MarfiftjfAw  the  fame  doth  fiie  ;

To  Ady  Bradamant  her  conrfe  direHeth^

T 0 kill  Marfifa,•^  her  felfe  to  die :

Three  kings  Vllany  fie  dothfnbdtte^

Thofe  with  her  jpeare^and  thu  with pujftng  hue


Tbtprftfif^
JUvts  «/  tbu
1 1 bo»!{  are
ej  anntbtr
tranflater,  as
jau  than  fee
not-  dtnf.me
fart  of  t.'je
netti  ufen
tbu  bootee.


Of  fh  ifs  wiiTC  t here  was  no  fmall  provifion,
Soone  had  he  gatbex'd  up  a mighty  hoft  :
There  was  no'want  of  armour  and  munition,
There wasnofpareoflaboui norofeoft,  -
That  with  fuch  taxes  Affrica  was  fefled.

That  all  the  Cities  were  full  fore  opprefled.  -


She

a woundj
She  never  felt  btfore  fuch  bitter  wo.

No  not  the  talc  which  Richardetto  told  her.
In  fuch  a ht  and  Co  grext  pangs  did  hold  bcu


Loo^t  bfreoC
in  tbe  Moral,


To  tell  you  firft,  when  I fliould  have  begun,
RenaldocilVd  my  tale  anotherway ;

No  fooner  with  Renaldo  had  1 done,
Butllraight  with  Guidon  1 was  forc’d  to  ftay:
From  this  to  that  thus  unawares  1 run.

That  1 forgot  of  Bradamant  to  (ay  /

But  now  1 mcane  to  fpeak  of  her,  before
1 fpeak  of  thofe  two  champions  any  more.

3

Yet  needs  I borrow  mud  a word  or  twaine.

How  Agramant  to  Arly  did  retire.

And  gathei’d  there  the  few  that  did  remainCj
Efcaped  from  the  fury  of  tie  fire :

Where  not  farre  off  from  Affrica  nor  Spaine,
He  plants  as  fit  as  be  could  w'cll  defire.

For  lying  on  a flood  fo  neare  the  feas,

Both  men  and  rittcll  weicfappli’datcafe.

4

To  mufler  men  Marfiito  had  commiflion,

Tha  t may  fupply  i he  place  of  them  were  loft.


Now  remember  how  by  pro-
mife  bopnd

Before  this  time  1 Hiould
haue  made  you  know
Vpon  what  caufe  fairc  Bra^
damant  did  ground.

The  jealous  humours  over-  ^

charg  d her  fo ; further  Agramant,  that  he  might  win

e never  took  before  fo  fore  Rodofnont  to  aid  him  with  his  power.

Did  offer  him  a match  of  his  neare  kin,

Kiot  Almonts  daughter  with  a Realmc  indower  j
But  he  his  profer  weighs  not  worth  a pin,

Bui  keeps  the  bridge,and  doth  the  paffagcfcowre,  ^
That.with  hisfpoilcs  the  place  was  welnigb fil’d.
Of  thofe  he  had  difmounicd,tane  and  kil'd.


But  faiie  Marfifa  toofce  another  way  :

Fot  when  Hi  c heard  how  long  the  fiege  had  Ufted,
How  Agramant  h|s  camp  at  ^rty  lay ,

How  both  hitmen  were  flaiiic,and  flore  was  wafted.
She  fought  no  caufe  of  any  more  delay,

But  thither  ftraight  without  inviting  hafted.

Her  puife  and  peifon  offi  ingin  the  fight.

In  juft  defending  of  his  crown  and  right.

, . 7

She  brings  BruneUo,and  the  king  fhc  gave  him.

Who  had  giv’n  caufe  of  very  juft  offence.

Ten  dayesand  ten  fliedid  ofeurtfiefave  him.

To  fee  who  dorft  toftand  in  his  defence)

But  when  that  no  man  made  the  means  to  hare  him.
Though  fhe  to  kill  him  had  Co  good  pretence.

She  thought  it  bafc,her  noble  hands  to  file,

Vpon  anabjcAdaftard,aad  a rile.

She  .


or  ORLAMDO  FVRIOSO.


It4\tia  tbi
jilttldU  ef

MC


Imlit  it  lb*
bifloritdf
$bi  btok,*.
I.mtan  faith
thus  tf  Mt-
jgtna\
turn
Jrmrnif
tljoifiiuSer,
Luciftruai

UT\u{f,rat


She  will  Hcfctrc  reveng  of  all  his  wrong;

And  iimo  Ally  brought  him  to  the  King;

Whore  joy  to  tclljwould  aske  a learned  tongue,
Botli  for  the  aid, and  frefent  flic  did  bring:

(For  flicw  \vberct>f,bcforcit  fliould  belong.

He  ofTcrd  her  to  malte  Brmello  wring:

And  at  what  time  fire  plcafcd  to  appoint.

To  have  him  fent  to  crack  bis  chiefeft  joynt )

9

Vntofomedefart  place  he  banifln  was,

Toferve  for  meat  foi  carrion  crowes  and  pyes,
Kogero  t hat  had  hclpt  him  oft  (alas)

Now  cannot  heare  his  piteous  mones  and  cryest
He  lyes  fore  wounded,as  it  comes  to  pafl'c.

And  little  knowes  where  poorc  Brmello  lyes:

And  when  he  undciftands  thereof  at  laft.

It  is  folate  alrcadieuis  pall.

I c

This  while  what  torments  Bradamant  indured,

Thofc  twenty  days,how  did  (he  waile  and  mournc?
Againli  which  time  file  thought  her  felfe  alTurcd,
Jler  loue  to  her,and  to  the  faith  Ihould  turne;

She  makes  no  doubt  but  he  might  have  procured.
Within  that  fpacctomake  his  home  rcturnc,

(Yea  though  he  were  tnprifon  kept  or  banillKd)

If  troth  and  care  of  promife  were  not  vaniOied.

I I *

la  thislong  looking  file  would  often  blame.

The  ficnecourfersof  the  heavenly  light,

She  thought  that  PhxbyA  wheclcs  were  out  of  frame,
Or  that  his  chariiot  was  not  in  good  plight:

Great  1-ofuahs  day  feemd  niortcrthcn  thefe  fame.
And  (Innci  feemd  vhefiKc  Amphitriens  night;(blcd
Each  day  and  night  (he  thought  was  more  then  dou>
So  fancic  blind  her  fence  and  tcafbn  troubled.

iz

She  now  envyes  the  Dormoufe  of  his  rell.

And  wifin  fbmc  heavy  fleepe  might  overtake  her.
Wherewith  fire  might  moll  deadly  be  pofleft.

Till  her  Rogero  fliould  returne  to  wake  her:

But  wakingcares  ay  lodged  in  her  bred.

That  her  defired  fleepe  did  quiteforfakc  hers
To  fleepe  fo  long  doth  fo  much  pafle  her  power.

She  cannot  frame  her  eyes  to  wincke  one  bower.

But  tuines  and  tefictin  hcrrelllellc  bed,  '

(Alas  no  turning  turncs  her  cares  away)

Oft  at  the  window  (he  puts  forth  her  hed.

To  fee  how  ncare  it  waxeth  unto  day;

When  by  the  dawning,darkefomc  night  is  fled,
Shenotwithllandingdandsat  that  fame  (layi
And  during  all  the  time  the  day  doth  lad.

She  wifhcs  for  the  night  againe  at  fad.

»4

When  fifteenc  dayes  were  of  the  twenty  fpent.

She  growei  in  hope  that  his  approch  is  ny,\

Then  from  a towre  with  eves  to  FarU  bent.

She  waytes  and  watches  iffhccandcfcry
At  lead  fame  tneflenger  that  he  hath  fent,

. May  bring  the  news  where  her  fwcet  heart  doth  ly,
Andfatisfle  her  mind  by  what  hard  chance,
Ileiscondraind  to  day  fo  long  in  FrMct.


i»

Iffarrcaloofcthc  fliinc of armour  bright.

Or  any  thing  rcfembling  it  fliclpics.

She  ftiaightway  hopes  it  is  her  on'y  Knight,

And  wipes  her  face  and  clears  her  blubbrcd  eyes;,

If  any  one  unarm'd  do  come  in  fighr.

It  may  be  one  from  him, flic  doth  fuimifc:

And  though  by  proofc  flic  findc  each  hope  untrue.
She  ccafcth  not  for  that,to  hope  anew.

16

Sometime  all  arm*d  flic  mounteth  on  her  deed.

And  fo  rides  forth  in  hope  to  meet  her  deare.

But  foonc  fomefancic  her  conceit  doth  feed.

That  he  is  pad  feme  ether  way  more  ncare;

Then  homeward  hadei  h flic  with  as  much  fpecd.
Yet  flic  at  home  no  newes  of  him  can  hearer
Fromday  today  flic pafleth on  thisfafliion.

Hither  and  thither  tolTcd  with  herpallion.

'7

Now  when  her  twenty  daies  were  full  expired.

And  that  befidewere  palled  fbmedayesmore.

Yet  not  Rogero  come,whom  fhedefired.

Her  heart  wi  th  care  and  forrowes  waxed  (brcj
With  cryes  & plaints  the  woods  and  eaves  die  tyredj
Her  breds  die  beat,  her  golden  locks  die  tore.

Nor  while  thefe  gripes  of  griefe  her  heart  embrace,
Doth  die  fotbcarc  her  eyesor  Angels  face.

I 8

Why  then  (quoth  die)  bcfccmcs  it  me  in  vaine,
Tofeckc  him  llill,who  thus  from  medothflidcl
Shall  1 cdecnaeof  himthat  dothdifdainc
My  futc,and  fcornc  the  torments  I abide?

Him,in  whofe  heart  a hate  of  me  doth  raine,
Him,that  accounts  his  vcrtucs  fo  well  tridc.

As  though  fomcgoddclTcdiouId  from  hcav*n  defend.
Before  that  he  his  heart  to  love  would  bend?

*9

Though  dout  he  is,hc  knows  how  well  I love  him.
And  how  I honor  him  with  foulc  and  hart.

Yet  can  my  hot  affcdlion  nothing  move  him.

To  let  me  of  hislovcpoflcfrc  fomc  part:

And  left  he  might  perceive  it  would  behove  hinj
To  cafe  my  griefe,ifhe  did  know  my  flnart.

To  give  me  hearing  of  my  plaint  he  feares.

As  to  the  charmc  the  Adder  ftoppes  his  cares.

20

Love;  ftop  his  courfc  that  doth  fo  loofely  range.

And  flit  fo  fail  beforemy  forric  pace;

Or  with  my  former  flare  clfc  let  me  change.

When  I fought  not  to  tracke  thy  tedious  trace:
Ihopein  vamejrcmorccto  thee  is  ftrange,

Thoudoft  triumph  upon  my  pitcouscaie:

For  hearts  thy  meat,  thy  drinkeis  lovers  tearcs.
Their  cries  the  Mufleke  doth  delight  thine  cares.

21

But  whom  blame  I?  itwasmyfonddcfire.

That  firft  entift  me  to  this  killing  call.

And  made  me  pall  my  reach  fo  far  afpire.

That  now  I fcelc  the  greater  is  my  fall:

For  when  aloft  my  wings  be  toucht  with  fire.

Then  farewell  flight  and  T am  left  to  fall:

But  dill  they  fpring.and  dill  I upward  tend.

And  ilill  1 fee  my  fall, and  fladc  no  end.

S J3tSr4


Stnttnut-
ioinfl  UvOf


THE  XXXir.  BOOKE


/

It

Dcfirc  quoth  I?  niy  fclfc  1 was  too  liglif,
Togircdclircan  cntranccin  my  brcft.

Who  when  he  had  my  reafoa  put  to  flight,

And  of  my  heart  himfclfc  was  full  pofltft,

No  roonic  for  joy  is  lefr,or  hearts  delight.

Since  I do  harbour  this  umuly  guefl,

Who  though  he  guide  me  to  my  certainefal!.

The  long  expciSance  grieves  me  woift  of  all.

Then  mine  the  fault  be,  if  it  be  a fault.

To  love  a Knight  dclervcstobe  beloved.

With  all  good  inward  parts  fo  richly  fraught,
Whofe  vettues be  fo  kriOwne,and  well  approved;
And  more,  whom  would  not  his fwcet  face  hauc
jM  y fclf,l  muft  coDfcficjhis  bcautic  moved;  (caught?
What  blind  unhappie  wretch  were  fhc  would  (liuo.
The  plcaCng  piofpcd  of  the  precious  Sun?

X4

Befidemy  dcftinicwhichdicw  me  on.

By  others  fugred  fpecch  I was  entrained.

As  though  I tljould  by  this  great  match  anon,
Another  Paradice  on  earth  have  gained;

But  now  their  words  ir\to  the  wind  be  gon.

And  I in  Piirgatorie  reftrained:

V.'cll  may  I Merlin  ciirfc  the  falfc  deceiver.

Yet  my  Rogero  1 fliall  love  for  ever.

>5

I hop*t  of  Merlins  and  Melijfas  promifes,

VVho  did  fuel)  ftorics  M our  race  foretell;

Is  this  the  profit  of  bcleeving  propbefies,

And  givingcrcdit  to  the  fpritesof  hell?

Alas  they  might  have  found  them  better  offices.
Then  me  to  float  that  ttufted  them  fo  wtlli
But  all  for  cavic  have  they  wrought  me  this.

So  to  bereave  me  of  my  former  blis.

26

Thus  fighs  and  lamentations  are  not  fained.

Small  place  was  left  for  comfort  in  her  brcft:

Yet  fpitc  of  forrows  hope  was  entertained.

And  though  with  much  a do, yet  in  it  preft;

To  cafe  her  mourning  heart  when  fhc  complained.
And  giving  her  fomctimcSjfomc  little  reft.

By  fwcet  remembrance  of  the  words  he  fpakc.
When  he  was  forft  of  her  his  leave  to  take.

*7

The  minding  of  thofc  words  did  Co  rccure

Her  wounded  heart  that  fire  v;as  well  content.

Foe  one  months  fpace  hiiabfcncc  to  endure,

Yea  when  hi*  d ayes  of  promife  quite  were  fpentj
Yet  ftill  flic  lookt  for  him  you  may  be  furc.

And  many  a time  that  way  flic  came  and  went.

Till  by  the  way  at  laft  fucb  news  flie  hard.

That  all  the  hope  flic  had  bcforc,was  mard.

28

For  flic  by  chancedid  meet  a Gafeoigne  Knight,

That  in  the  ytixTtiof  Affrica  was  caugh  tj
One  that  was  taken  captive  iii  that  fight.

Then  when  fore  Paris  the  great  field  was  fought.
What  flit  requires  to  know,he  could  recite.

But  carclcflcof  the  other  news  he  brought.

Of  her  ift^ere  chiefly  flic  enquires.

To  heart  of  him  it  all  tliat  flic  dcfixcc.


S9

Of  whom  the  Knight  could  let  her  underflard,

(For  in  tl.at  Court  hcl  iu;  his  life  had  led)

Hovt  Mandricuul  and  hefought  hand  to  hand.

And  how  much  bIcod  on  either  part  was  flird*?

And  though  by  wounds  imiifelfe  in  peniU  lUnd,

That  he  (ubdew’d  his  foe, and  left  hi.m  dtd,  '

Now  if  with  this,  his  I'ioiy  he  hjdcr.dcd,

Roger  vs  feufe  had  very  v/cll  bin  mended.

50

Blithe  proceeds  to  tell, how  one  was  theare
A Ladie  hight  ^ti/^yainthefedd,  *

Whofe  fame  for  martiail  ads  did  IhiBcmort  clcair
Whole  beauty  rare  to  few  or  none  did  yccld,  *

Rngero  her,fl.c  held  P.ftgcro  dcarc,  ^

They  never  were  afundcr  or  but  fecid.

And  that  (hey  two, as  ev’rie  one  chcie  fail  h,

1 he  tone  the  tether  plighted  have  their  faith.

31

And  if  Rogeroonce  were  wholcand  found.

Their  wedding  fliould  be  celebrate  with  fpced<

That  fuch  a pane  as  yet  was  never  feund,^

And  happie  they  fliould  come  of  fuch  a Iced;

How  much  it  joy’d  the  Pagan  Princes  round.

To  ihinkc  upon  the  race  they  two  fliould  breed.

Which  likely  were  all  others  to  cxccll
In  feats  cf  arms  that  erft  on  cauh  did  dwell.

51

T he  GafcojgneX.Mg\n  of  all  that  he  bad  fed,

Himlclfc  had  rcalon  to  bclccvc  was  footh.

So generall  a famcthcrcofwasfprcd.

There  were  but  few  but  had  it  in  their  mouth.

Some  lit  tic  kindneffc  flic  did  ufc,had  fed
Their  foolifli  humors  of  t his  falfc  untrowthj
Still  fame  will  grow  ifonecabroade  it  flic,

Although  the  ground  be  troth  or  be  a lye.

33

They  came  indeed  together  to  this  fight.

And  many  times  together  they  were  feenc.

For  he  was  warlike,  flout  and  worthy  Kntghr,

And  (lie  a gallant, f3irc,and  dainticC^ccnc,

By  which,lurpitioD  never  judging  right.

Did  gather  ftraight  they  had  aflured  beenc;

And  fpecially  becaufewhen  flic  departed.

To  viiitchim  flic  was  fofboncicvcrtcd.

34

Of  juft  fufpeft  their  rcafon  was  but  (lender,
if  they  had  weighed  well  their  vcrtucs  rare.

Though  of  his  wounds  flic  feemd  tobclotcnderj
And  ofhis  danger  had  fo  great  a carcj
Againft  bad  tongues  no  goodnci  can  defend  her.

For  thofc  moft  free  from  faults,thcy  Icaft  wilfpare,  Simuiu^
But  prate  of  them  whom  they  have  fcantly  knownc.

And  judge  their  humors  to  be  like  their  owne.

55

Now  tv  hen  the  Knight  avowd  the  rale  he  told,

(And  yet  in  tiuth  you  know  t’was  but  a talc)

The  damfcls  heart  was  toucht  with  fliivcting  cold.

The  little  hope  fliehadaway  it  ftalc,

Almoft  in  found  herfeate  fbcfcarcc could  bold;

With  mourning  chcare,and  face  both  wan  and  pale.

She  (aid  no  more : but  mad  wkhgiiefeand  ite^

Her  hotfc  flic  turn*d,»iid  homeward  did  retire.


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


2<(l


36  4J


And  all  in  armour  on  her  bed  flic  I jes.

She  wiflit  a thoufand  times  (lie now  wciedcd,

She  bytes  thefheets  lodampc  her  fobsand  cries
1hc.Gafcoigns  news  dill  bearing  in  her  bed:

Her  heart  is  fwolnc,and  blubberd  be  her  eyes.

With  trickling  tcarcs  bedewed  is  her  bed,

When  gricfcwould  be  no  longer  holden  in,

H ceds  out  It  mnd^and  thus  it  doth  begin.

?7

Ah  wretehed  me,whom  might  a maiden  Hnde,

In  whom  flie  might  be  bold  to  put  her  truft?

Since  you  Kogero  mine,  become  unkinde.

And  tread  your  faith  and  promife  in  thediiftj
You  only  you, mine  eye  fo  farre  did  blinde,

I fiill  cflcem’d  you  faithfull,true  and  juft;

Ah  never  wench  that  loved  I'o  finccrcly,

W'asin  reejuitallpuninurofeverely.

38

Why  (my  Rogero)  why  do  you  forget?

(Sith  you  ill  bcautie  pafTc  each  other  Knight,

And  do  in  feats  of  armcsfuch  honor  get.

As  none  can  match  yourchivalriein  fight)

This  golden  vertue  with  the  reft  to  fet.

By  which  your  glorious  name  will  fhinemorc  bright
If  as  in  other  graces  you  abound.

So  in  ycur  promife  conftancic  were  found  ? ^

39

This  is  the  rertue  breeds  moft  eftimation.

By  which  all  other  rertucs  fliew  morccleare.

As  things  moft  faire  do  loofc  their  commendation ,
Which  by  the  want  of  light  can  not  appcarc;

What  glory  v/as  it  by  falfc  proteftation.

Her  to  deceive  whofc  Saint  and  God  you  were?
Whomyonr  fair  fpecches  might  have  made  bcicevc
9rtvmit»  That  water  would  be  carrid  in  a feevc.

40

From  any  haynousaft  wouldft  tliourefraine.

That  murdicft  her  who  beaies  thee  fogood  will?.
How  wouldft  thou  ufc  thy  foe,that  thus  in  paine
Doft  let  thy  fiend  to  be  tormented  ftill?

Thou  that  with  breach  of  faith  thy  heart  doft  ftaine,
N o doubt  thou  doft  not  care  for  doing  illj
W'cll  this  I knowjthat  God  is  ever  juft.

He  will  ere  long  revenge  my  wrongs  I truft.

41

For  why,unthankfulnefteis  that  great  fin.

Which madetheDivclIand  hjtangels  fall.

Loft  him  and  them  the  joyes  ihat  they  wcicin,’

And  now  inhclldctaincs  them  boundand  thrall;
Sntncti  Then  maikc  the  guerdon  thou  art  like  to  winj
For  why  like  faults  like  punifiimcntdo  call.

In  being  thus  uiithankfull  unto  me,

7 hatalwayes  wasfo  faithful!  unto  thee.

4*

Bcfidcs  of  theft  thy  fclfc  thou  canft  not  quit.

If  theft  it  be  to  take  that  is  not  thinc;

The  keeping  of  my  hcart;no  that’s  notit.

That  thou  fhouldft  have  it  I do  not  repine.

Thy  fclfc  thou  ftalft,which  lean  not  remit,

^ Thy  felfe  thou  knowftthou  art,orf]iouIdftbeinine
Thou  knowft  damnation  doth  to  them  belong.
That  dokcepa  backc  anothcis right  by  wrong.


Though  thou  Rogero  do  foifake  me  fo,

I can  not  will  nor  cluifc  but  love  thee  ftiflj
And  fince  there  is  no  mcafurc  of  my  wo.

Death  is  theonly  way  to  end  mine  ill;

But  thus  to  cut  of  lifc,and  thou  roy  fo
It  makes  me  do  it  withaworfctwill;

Yec  had  I dyde  when  beft  I did  thee  pIca/e,

I fiiould  have  counted  death, no  death  but  cafe.

44

When  with  thefe  words  fiic  was  refolv’d  to  dy.

She  tooke  her  fword  in  hand  for  that  intent.

And  forft  hci  fclfc  upon  the  point  to  ly-.

Her  armour  then  htr  purpofc  did  prevent,

A bcticrfpiritchcckt  herby  and  by;

And  inher  hcait  this fccfctrcaron  went,

O noble  Ladic  borne  to  fo  great  fame.

Wilt  thou  thus  end  thy  dayes  with  fo  great  fliamc?

Nay  rather  if  thou  beeft  refolv’d  tody,

Vnto  thccampc  why  doft  1 hou  not  repaire.

Where  bodicsof  brave  Knights  in  heaps  do  ly?

Lo  there  to  honour  the  direfteft  ftairc,

The  lofleof  life  wuli  glory  thou  mayft  buy.

To  die  in  thy  Rogeros  fight  were  faire,

And  happily  by  him  thou  mayft  be  ftaine.

So  he  that  wrought  thy  wo  may  rid  tby  paine.

46

Thou  mayft  be  furc  Marfifa  there  to  fee.

Who  hath  fo  falfly  ftolnc  away  thy  fi  end ;

If  firft  on  her  thou  couldft  revenged  be.

With  moicccntcmcd  mind  thy  dayes  would  end.
Vnto  this  counfcll  file  doth  beft  agree.

And  onward  on  this  journey  ftraight  doth  tend.

She  cakes  a new  device  that  might  implic
A dciperation,and  a will  to  die.

47

The  colluur  of  her  bafes  was  almoft.

Like  to  the  falling  whitifti  leaves  and  dric.

Which  when  the  moifturc  of  the  branch  is  loft,'
Forfakcniy  about  the  tree  doth  lye.

With  Ciprefletrunkscmbrodeid  and  emboft,

(For  Ciprcficonce  but  cut  will  alwaics  die)

A fine  conceipt,  file  thinks  to  reprefent
In  fccrct  fort  her  inward  difeontent.

48

She  tooke  Afiolfos  hotfe  and  OoUelance,

Asfitteft  both  for  thisherpicfcnt  feat.

That  fpcarc  could  make  the  braveft  Knight  to  dance.
And  caper  with  a tuch  befide  hisfeate.

But  v/heteAfiolfo  had  it, by  what  chance.

Of  why  he  gave  it, need  I no:  rcpcate.

She  tooke  it,nocwithftanding  her  elcAion,

Not  koowingof  that  magicall  confe^iion,

49

Thus  all  alone  without  both  Squire  and  Page*

Thus  furnifiied  fiic  ftt  her  fclfc  in  way,

To  Farii  ward  fiic  travcld  in  a rage.

Whereas  thecampe  oiSar-^ins  lately  lay.

And  (as  fiic  thought)  kept  up  King  Charles  in  cage,
, Notunderftandiog  how  before  that  day,

Renaldo  aiding  Charles  v/hhMalageege,

Had  forced  them  from  thence  to  raifc  thdi  feegc.

Z a Noyv


THE  XXXII.  BOOKE


50

Now  had  fhe  left  mount  23orion  at  her  backe^

VVlicn little  vvay  behind  hci  fhcdcfcridc,

A gallant  Damfell  following  of  her  tracke,

A fliicld  of  gold  unto  her  faddlc  tide.

Of  Squires  and  other  ferrants  none  did  lacke.

And  three  brave  Knights  were  riding  by  her  CdCj
But  of  the  Squires  that  OTcitooke  her  laft,
Sheasktone  what  thofc  were  that  by  her  paft.

51

And  flraight  the  worthie  Ladieit  waitold.

How  from  Po/e  Artil^e  that  fame  damfell  came.

Sent  from  a Quecnc,with  that  faire  fliicld  of  gold,
Vnto  King  Cf)iar/ex(thac  there  was  knowneby  fame)
But  fo,as  he  muff  thiscondicioa  hold.

That  on  a Knight  hemuft  bdflow  the  fame.

Such  one  as  he  in  his  imagination,
Forprowefiedeemd  molt  worthy  reputation.

5»

For  file  of  Ifland  He  that  holds  the  raigne.

And  is  (and  knows  it)  that  (he  is  molt  faire.

Doth  thinkc  fire  fliould  her  worth  not  little  ftaine.
And  her  great  fame  and  honour  much  impaire.

If  any  Knight  her  He  and  her  fliould  gaine.

Except  he  flood  fo  high  on  honors  ftaire.

As  that  he  were  adjudg’d  in  feats  of  warre.

The  prymer  man,and  palling  others  fane.

5?

Wherefore  the  caufe  flie  fends  to  France  is  this.

She  thinks  if  Hie  fhall  finde  one  any  where,

Thar  inthe  Court  of  France  he  furely  is;

And  therefore  Hie  doth  fend  to  greet  him  there.

A s for  thofc  time,becaufe  you  Hiall  not  miffe.

To  know  the  trutbjlle  tell  you  what  they  were;
They  wcre3  Kings, ofwhom  great  fame  there  goth.
Of  fionvaj  one, one  Swethlandjom  of  Goth.

54

Thcfe  t hrec,though  far  1 hey  dwell  from  Ifland  He,

Yet  love  of  that  (amcQucenc  hath  brought  them  hi-
T hisl Ic  iscall’d  Peruuta otherwhile,  (ihei,

Becaufe  the  feamen  Icefe  it  in  foule  weather:

Thcfe  Kings  liv'd  from  their  country  in  exile.

And  to  rhisQueene  were  futers  all  together:

And  fbc  that  knew  not  well  how  to  forbid  them.
With  this  fame  pretie  fliift  from  thence  fhc  rid  them.

55

She  faith, flic  minds  to  wed  for  her  behoofe.

That  wight  that  mofl  excels  in  warlike  adion,

A nd  though  (quoth  nie)you  fhew  no  little  proofe.
Of  valcw  b^erc  (astwere  in  piivat  faflion)

Yet  I mufi  have  you  tride  more  far  aloofc,

Before  my  mind  can  have  full  fatisfa^lion;
Wherefore  I meane  my  fclfc  and  crowne  to  yeeld
Alone  to  him  that  bringeth  backemy  fliceld.

56

This  is  the  caufe  that  thcfe  three  Kings  did  move
Euhonc  to  come  from  fb  remote  a nation,

\Vith  purpefefirme  their  utmoft  force  to  prove.

To  winthe  golden  fliitld  with  reputation.

Or  leefe  thcir  lives, for  that  faire  Ladies  love.

If  thatthey  failed  of  their  expeftation.

When  he  had  told  herthus,he  her  foifooke.

And  foonc  his  company  hcortrtookc.


57

The  Damfell  rode  a fbfterpaee  behind.

And  fb  as  in  a while  flic  loft  their  fight.

And  often  fhe  revolved  in  her  mind,

T he  tale  the  fellow  told,with  fmall  delight.

She  doubts  this  fhield  beftow’d  in  fuch  a kindj'

Will  be  in  France  a caufp  of  brail  and  fight.

That  this  will  be  a mcancs  fhe  gready  fcarcf.

To  fet  her  kin  together  all  by  th'eares.

5*

This  fancie  mov'd  her  mucb,but  more  then  this.

That  former  jealous  fancie  did  her  move.

That  her  Rogeros  kindncflc  alteid  is,

T hat  on  Marfifa  he  had  plaft  his  love;

This  fo  pofTcH  herfcncc  that  fhedid  mifle
Her  way, nor  never  thought  as  did  behove.

Till  night  was  almoft  come.and  Sunne  nigh  fet.
Where  Ihe  a lodging  for  her  felfc  may  get.

Ev  n asan  emptie  veftcll  that  was  tide,

Vnto  the  whaife,with  feme  old  rotten  cable.

If  that  the  knot  do  hap  to  breake  or  Hide,

So  that  to  hold  it  be  no  longer  able.

Is  borne  away , as  pleafe  the  wind  and  tide:

So  Braiamanty  with  mind  and  thoughts  uoftable.
Was  in  fuch  mufc,as  fhe  the  right  way  mift,

And  fo  was  boinc,where  Rahicano  lift,
do

But  when  fhefaw  the  Sunne  was  almoft  fcf.

She  tooke  more  hcede,  and  asking  of  a clowae,

(A  fhepherd  that  by  hap  there  by  flic  met)

Where  fhe  might  lodging  get  cr  Sunne  went  dov\u«
The  fhepherd  made  her  anfwer,that  asytt
She  was  almoft  a league  from  any  towne.

Or  other  place  where  Hie  might  eatc  or  lodge.

Save  at  a Caftic  cald  fir  Trifirams  lodge.
di

But  cv'ricone  that  lift, is  not  afTured,

Though  he  do  thit  her  tome, to  ftay  therein,'

To  maitiall  fcatsthey  muft  be  well  inured,

With  fpcarcand  fhield  they  muft  their  lodging  win?
Such  ciiftomc  in  the  place  hath  long  indurcd.

And  many  years  ago  it  did  begin.

Wherefore  cis good  that  ohe  be  well  advifed.

Ere  fuch  an  aft  by  him  be  entcrprifcd.

62

In  briefe  thus  is  their  order,  if  a Knight

Do  finde  the  lodgings  void,thcy  him  receave.

With  promife,that  if  morearivc  that  night.

Either  he  fliall  tp  them  his  lodging  leave.

Or  elfc  with  each  of  them  fliall  prove  in  fight,
Which  ofthem  can  oflodgiKgtothcr  reave;

If  none  do  come  that  night  he  fliall  in  quiet.

Have  both  hi$horfcmcat,Iodging,and  bis  diet.

If  foure  or  five  docomc  together  firft.

The  Caftic  keeper  rhem  muft  entertafne.

Who  commet  h fi  ngic  aftcr,bath  the  w orft.

For  if  he  hope  a lodging  there  to  gaine.

He  muft  (acc  ■■rding  to  that  law  accurft)

Fight  withall  thofc,that  did  therein  remaine:
Likewife  if  one  come  firft,and  more  come  later,

He  muft  go  fight  with  them  yet  ncrc  the  later.

The


Tbt  critr  of
SirTrifirnr%t
iaigt.


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


64.


Thclikc»afcij,  if  any  maid  or  dame
Do  come  aloncjortlfc  accompanied.

Both  they  chat  Bifl,and  they  that  iatcdcame,
Muftbya  luric  have  their  beauties  tried;

Then  fliall  the  faircll  of  them  hold  the  fame,
Hutto  the  rell  that  come  (liall  bedenied:
Thusmnehthe  fliephcard unto  herdid  fay.

And  with  his  finger  fliewd  to  her  the  way.

65

About  three  miles  was  diftant  then  theplaee,
Thedamfcll  thither  hafts  with  gieatdcfite  j
And  though  that  Rahicano  trot  apace.

Yet  was  the  w.iy  fb  deepe  and  full  of  mire,
Thefnow  and  uriftftill  beating  in  cheirface.

She  later  came  then  manners  good  requircj
But  though  it  were  as  then  both  darke  and  late.
She  boldly  bounced  at  the  caftlcgate.

66

T he  porter  told  her  that  the  lodgings  all

Were  fild  by  Knights  t hat  late  before  them  looke.
Who  now  flood  by  the  fire  amid  the  hall.

And  did  ere  long  to  hare  their  fuppci  looke;

Well  (anfwcrsfhc)  then  hare  they  caufc  butfinall
(If  they  be  fupperlcflc)  to  thankc  ihccookc}

I know  (quoth  fijej  thccuftome,  and  will  kccpcif.
And  mcanc  to  win  their  lodging  etc  I fleepe  yet,

67

Tlie  Porter  went  and  did  her  meflage  bold.

To  thofc  great  ftatesthen  (landing  hy  the  fire.
Who  tooke  fmall  plcafurc  when  they  heard  it  told,
Yor  thence  to  part  they  bad  fo  fmall  defirej
Now  chiefly  when  twas  rainic,darkc  and  cold;

But  fb  their  othnnd  order  did  require.

That  they  muft  do  it,wcre  it  cold  or  warmc.

And  therefore  quickly  they  thcmfclrcsdid  arme.


7*


Now  when  thofe  Knights  and  fome  few  of their  traine.
Were  paft  the  bridge,  the  dame  her  horfc  doth  tumc
To  take  the  field, and  then  with  fpecd  agaioc.

With  full  careerc  (he doth  on  them  rctui  ne.

And  coucht  that  fpeare,yet  never  coucht  in  raine.
For  whom  it  bitsitftill  dothorerturne;

This  fpsarc  bcrcofin,when  he  went  from  /ranee.
Cave  unto  hcr,thc  name  was  GoldeUme.

The  valiant  King  ef  Swetllandyrti  the  firft
That  met  her, and  the  next  the  King  ofGothf
The  ftafFe  doth  bit  them  full,and  nerei  burft.

But  from  then  faddlcsitdrd  heave  them  both;

But  yet  the  King  of  Nonray  fped  the  worft.

It  feem'd  to  leave  hisfaddle  he  was  loth,

Hisgirfes  brake.and  he  fcllupfidedowne.

In  danger  with  the  mire  to  choke  and  drowne.

7i

Thus  vvith  three  blows, three  kings  (he  down  did  hearc,
And  hoift  their  heels  full  hie,  their  head*  full  low.
Then  enterd  fhe  thecaftlc  voyd  of  feare.

They  ftand  without  that  lught  in  raine  and  fnoW)
Yet  ere  Ifiecould  get  in,one caus’d  her  fweare
To  keepe  the  cuBome,which  they  made  ker  knOW;
And  then  the  mafter  doth  to  her  great  honor.

And  entertainment  great  beftowed  on  her.

74

New  when  theLadiediddifarme  her  head.

Off  with  her  helmet  came  her  little  caul.

And  all  her  haire  her  (Tiouldcrs  oreifpred.

And  both  herfex  and  name  was  knownc  withal).
And  wonder  great  and  admiration  bred
In  them  that  faw  her  make  three  Princes  fall;

For  why  fhedicwd  to  be  in  all  their  fight.

As  fairc  in  face  as  /he  was  fierce  in  fight.

7J


Tbefc  wet  e thofc  three  great  kings  whom  that  fame  day  Ev*n  as  a ftagefet  forth  with  perope  and  pride.


Dame  Bradamant  had  fccnc  but  few  hourcs  paft.
Though  they  had  fooncr  finifli  cd  their  way,
Bccaufe  (lie  rode  fb lbft,and  t*^  cy  fo  faft.

Now  when  they  were  all  arm’d, they  make  no  ftay.
But  all  on  horfebackc  mount  themfelvcsat  laft:
No  doubt  hut  few  in  ftrength  thefc  three  did  palTc,
Yet  of  thofc  fcwjfurc  one  this  damfcll  was,

69

W'hn  purpos'd  (as it  fccracth)nothing Icfte,

Then  info  wet  and  info  cold  a night.

To  lack  a lodging  and  flceperuppeticiro
Now  thofe  within  at  wiadowes  fee  thefight.

The  men  themfelvcson  horfebackc  do  addrclle,
Tolookethercon,fot  why  the  Moone  gave  light;
And  thus  at  laft , though  fi  1 ft  t were  fomewhat  late,
They  did  abafe  the  bridge  and  ope  the  gate.

70

Ev’n  as  a fecret  and  lafcivious  lover,

Rejoyceth  much, when  after  loug  delayer,

And  many  fearcs,in  which  his  hope  did  hover,
Heheaicsat  laft  the  noifeofpretiekayes:

So  Mradaraant  that  hopes  now  to  recover
A lodging, for  the  which  fo  long  (lie  ftayes.

Did  in  her  mind  in  fuch  like  fort  rejoyce.

When  as  (he  heard  the  waKhfiill  porters  rojcc*


Where  rich  men  coft  and  cunning  art  beftow.

When  curtaines  be  remov’d  tbft  all  did  hide.

Doth  make  by  light  of  torch  a glittering  Oiow;

Or  as  the  Sunne  that  in  a cloud  did  bide.

When  that  is  gone, doth  clearer  feeme  to  grows
So  Bradamant  when  as  her  head  was  bareft.

Her  colour  and  her  beautic  feemed  rareft.

76

Now  ftood  the  guefts  all  round  about  the  fire,

Expefting  focd,with  talke  their  cares  yet  feeding.
While  cr’ry  enedoth  wonder  and  admire,

Her  fpeech  and  grace,tbe  others  all  exceeding.

The  while  her  Iwft  to  tcllfhedotb  deCie,

From  whence  and  who  this  cuftome  was  proceeding.
That  men  were  driv’n  unto  their difquiet.

To  combat  for  their  lodging  and  their  diet,
r?

Faire  dame  (faid  he)  fbmetime  there  rul'd  in  France^
King  Feratnont,wi'QCc  fonne  a comely  Knight,
Clodion  by  name,by  good  ot  evill chance,

Vpon  a lovely  Ladic  did  alight:]

But  as  we  fee  it  oftentimes  dot  h chance.

That  jealoufie  in  lore  matrei  mans  delight;

Thus  he  of  her  in  time  (b  jealous  grew,

He  durft  aet  let  her  go  out  of  his  Tcw«

Z I Nor


Sinih,


THE  XXXII,  BOOKE


Sivtilu


26x

7*

Nor  ever  Argus  kept  the  milkwhitecow

More  ftraighr,  then  Clodian  here  did  keepe  his  wife.
Ten  Knights  eke  to  this  place  he  doth  allow.
Thereby  for  to  prerent  all  cafuall  ftnfej
Thus  hope  and  feare  betweene,!  know  not  how.

As  he  piolong*  his  fclfe-tormenting  life.

The  good  fir  Trifiram  thither  did  repaire.

And  in  his  company  a Ladie  fairc.

79

Whom  he  had  refeude  but  a little  fince,

From  Giants  hand, with  whom  he  did  her  find.

Sir  T Ttftram  fought  for  lodging  with  the  Prince,

For  then  the  Sunnewasrery  low  declin’d;

But  as  a horfe  with  galled  backe  will  wince,

Ev’n  fbour  Clodian  with  as  galled  mind:

For  calling  doubts  and  dreading  cv’ry  danger,
WoiJd  by  nomeanes  be  won  to  lodge  a Granger.

80

When  as  fir  Trifiram  long  had  prayd  in  raine.

And  dill  denide  the  thing  he  did  demaund.

That  which  I cannot  withyour  willobtaine.

In  fpiteofyou  (faid  he)  I willcommaundj
I here  will  proreyour  villaniemofl  plaine,

With  launce  in  i-elljand  with  my  fword  in  hand:
And  Araight  he  challenged  the  combat  then,

To  fight  with  Cljdian  and  the  other  ten.

81

Thus  onely  they  agreed  upon  the  calc.

If  Clodian  and  his  men  were  overthrowne.

That  all  then  prcfently  fliould  voyd  the  place.

And  that  fir  Trifiram  there  fhould  lie  alone:

Sir  Clodian  to  avoid  fo  great  dilgrace.

The  challenge  tookc,for  why  excufc  was  none:

In  fine, both  Clodian  and  his  men  well  knockr.

And  from  thecaftle  that  fame  night  were  lockt.

8a

Triumphant  Trifiram  to  the  Caftle  came.

And  for  that  night,as  on  his  owne  he  feafed.

And  theie  he  faw  the  Princes,  lovely  dame.

And  talktwith  her,  who  him  not  little  plealed:
This  while  fir  Clodian  was  in  part  with  mame.

And  more  with  thought  and  jealous  fcaic  diftafed,
Difdainingnotin  humblelort  to  woo  him.

By  melTage  mild  to  fend  his  wife  unto  him.

S3

But  he,though  her  he  do  not  much  elleeme,

For  why  ,by  mcanes  of  an  inchanted  potion,

J/otta  faircll  unto  him  did  feeme.

To  whom  he  vowed  had  his  whole  devotion;

Tet  for  he  did  the  jealous  Clodian  deeme
Some  plague  to  mcrit,he  denide  his  motion;

And  fwca  esit  were  no  manners  nor  no  rcafon,
ALadic  to  unlodge  at  fuch  a fealbn.

H

But  if  (faith  he)  it  do  bis  mind  offend.

To  lie  all  night  alone  and  eke  abreide.

Tell  him  I will  this  other  Ladie  fend
To  him, that  lhall  with  him  make  her  abode:

Now  tell  him  that  to  keepe  this  I intend.

The  which  to  win,  I have  fuch  painc  bellow’d^
Tis  rcafon  that  the  faireft  fhould  rcmainc
With  him  that  isths  ftiongcll  of  ustwaino.


Clodian  in  mind  was  wondrous  malcontent,

V s*d  fo  not  like  a Prince  but  like  a patch.

That  puffingjblowing  up  anddownc  he  went

All  night,asonc  wcic  fet  to  keepe  a watch;  XjWA,

But  whether  he  do  chafe  or  clfe  lament,

He  found  the  Knight  for  him  too  hard  a match.

Next  day  fir  Trifiram  let  him  have  his  wife,

And  fo  for  that  time  finifli  t was  the  firife.

86

For  openly  he  on  his  honour  fworc.

That  he  her  honour  had  that  night  preferved.

Although  difeourtefies he  had  before
H ad  at  his  hands  a great  revenge  dclcrvcdj
Yet  in  that  Clodian  had  lod’gd  out  of  dote.

He  was  content  that  penance  lliotild  have  fervedj
He  nathelcllc  tookcic  for  nogood  cxcufc.

To  fay  that  love  wascaulc  of  fuch  abufe.

*7

For  love  fliould  gentle  make  rude  hearts  and  bafe,  StmtKeo.
And  not  in  gentle  mind  breed  humoisvilc:

Now  when  fir  Trifiram  patted  from  the  place.

Sir  Clodian  meant  to  Hay  there  but  a while.

But  to  a Knight  that  flood  mucli  in  his  grace,

Hegrauntsthe  keeping  of  this  flatcly  pile*

Keeping  one  law  for  him  and  for  his  hcircs.

With  cv’ry  one  that  te  the  place  repaircs.

8g

That  namely  ever  he  that  was  mofl  flrong.

Should  there  be  lodg’d,  and  flie  that  was  mofl  fairc.

And  that  the  tcfl  fliould  take  it  for  no  wrong.

To  walkc  abroade  into  the  open  aire;

This  is  the  law  which  hath  endured  long.

And  no  man  may  the  flrcngth  thereof  impairc;

Now  while  the  man  this  floric  did  rcpcatc.

The  flcward  on  the  boord  did  fee  the  mcatc.

89

The  boord  was  coveid  in  a flatcly  hall,

Whofc  match  was  fcarcc  in  all  the  country  fccne.

With  goodly  pifllnes  drawnc  upon  the  wall.

All  round  about,but  chiefly  on  the  fcrccncj
Thefc  they  did  looke  on,  with  delight  not  fmall,

A nd  would  have  quite  forgot  their  mcatc  I weene.

Save  that  their  noble  hofldid  them  advife.

To  feed  their  bellies  firfl,and  then  their  eyes.

90

Now  as  they  downc  did  at  the  table  fit,

Thcmaflcrofthe  houfc  bcgantolowre.

And  faid  theydid  an  error  gicatcommir.

To  lodge  two  Ladies  come  in  fundry  howrc;

Needs  one  mull  be  put  out,whcrccrc  it  hir.

And  go  abrodc  into  the  cold  andfhowre;

The  faircfl  (fith  they  came  not  both  together)

Mull  bide, the  foulefl  mufl  go  trie  the  wether.

91

Two  aged  men  and  women  more  bclldc
He  cald,and  bad  them  quickly  take  a vcw,

V\  hich  ofthctwainc  fhould  in  the  place  abide.

And  namely  which  of  twainc  had  faircfl  hew;

This  luric  do  the  matter  foonc  decide.

And  gave  their  vcrdit,as  it  was  moll  trew.

That  Bradamant  pall  her  in  hew  as  farre.

As  (he  cxccld  the  men  in  fcatc  s of  warre.

Then


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


Sifltil*.

* fortthtH
$bi  vapors
tfctnd  as
btjb  ti  tbt
msddU  rt^i~
onfiraijbs
tbty  grove  S9
have  a grot
(oncavitit  it
$bcBi,  wbseb
malfe}  she
wind  Uari
tbtm  tsp,
tboitghtiiiy
befmU  of
water  or
btiUtOe  ve*
Jet  many
times.


^Massee,


92  «8

Thcnfpakc  the  Knight  onto  the  Ifland  dame,

Whofc  mind  was  full  oftimoroBsfufpition,

I pray  you  thinkeit  nota  fiorneor  fhamc^

Forhcncc  you  muft,  there  can  be  no  remifllon.

Poore (fo  was  the  damfcls  name)

Doth  thinkc  Hie  now  is  driv*n  to  hard  condition.

Yet  in  hcrconfcicnce  true  file  knew  it  was.

That  Bradarmnt  in  beauty  her  did  pafle.

95

Ev’n  as  we  fee  the  Sunne  obfcui*d  fbmetime.

By  fudden  rifingof  a miftie  cloud,

Engendrcd  by  the  vapor- breeding  flime.

And  in  the  middle  region  then*  embow’d*

So  whenihcdamfcll  plainly  faw that  time.

Her  prefence  in  t he  place  was  not  allow’d.

She  wasfochang’d  in  countenance  and  in  chcarc.

That  cy*n  unlike  her  felfc  flic  did  appearc,

9+

But  much  aftonyd  with  the  fudden  paflion.

She  readic  was  to  found  in  all  their  fight;

But  Bradaiwawt  that  would  not  for  cotnpafllon
Permit  that  flie  fliould  go  abroade  that  night.

Did  fay  .this  ttiall  was  of  no  good  tafliion,

And  that  the  judgement  hardly  could  be  right,

When  mcnobfervenot  this  lame  chiefe  regard.

As  not  to  judge  before  both  parts  be  hard,

95

I,that  on  me  do  take  her  to  defend.

Say  thus, that  be  1 fairc,or  leflcorraorc,

1 came  not  as  a woman,nor  intend
As  woman  now  to  be  adjudg’d  thereforej
Who  knowes  my  fex, except  I condefeend
To  fliew  the  fame?  and  one  fliould  erermore
Shun  to  con  fi rmc  things  doub»  full,or  deny  it.

When  chiefly  others  may  be  harmed  by  it,

96

Yet  who  can  fay  precifely  what  1 am?

For  many  men  do  weare  their  haire  as  long.

And  you  do  know  that  as  a man  I came.

And  all  my  gcfiurcs  to  a man  belong;

Wherefore  in  giving  me  a womans  name.

To  both  of  us  perhaps  you  may  do  wrong;

Your  law  points  women  (if  their  right  bedonne)

By  women, not  by  warricis  to  bcvvonnc.-
97

But  yet  admit  it  were  as  you  do  goeffe.

That  I indeed  were  of  the  female  gender.

Though  1 hat  it  is  fo,l  do  not  confeflc;

Should  I to  her  my  lodging  then  furrender.

If  that  my  beauty  of  the  two  were  lefle?

No  furCjin  that  the  reafon  were  but  flenderi'

The  price  that  unto  vertue  longs  of  dewtie.

Should  not  be  tanc  away  for  want  of  bcwtic.

T he  frft  fftie  fluves  of  this  bool^e  I may  call  mine,eu  the  Poet  Martiall  faith  in  a little  Epigram  ofhis,oJ  a Gentlt^

ivoimns  periivigfifteenc  hundredyeares  fince^l  thinlie  the  verfe  teat  thii,or  fitch  another,

EfTe  fuos  jurat, (juos  emit  Galla  capillos.

Die  rodes,numquid  pejerat  rlla  mihi?

T 0 thii  effect  in  EngUfh  :

The  goodly  haire  that  GdiKswea res,  ‘

Is  hcrSjwho  would  have  thought  it?

She  fweares  it  is,and  true  fiie  fwearcs.

For  I know  where  fhc  bought  it.

Z4


And  ifyour  law  were  Arch, that  needs  offeree,

Vntothc  faircft lodging  fl.ould  begiven.

Yet  at  this  fcaft  1 taty  would  perforce.

And  from  my  lodging  I would  not  be  driven;

W herefore  mine  argumewt  I thuscnforce,

Tliat  this  fame  match  bctwccncusiknot  even,

For  ftiiving  here  with  me,thc  cafe  isplainc.

She  much  may  lccfc,and  little  fhc  may  gaine.

99

And  where  thegainc  and  loflc  uncquall  is.

The  match  is  cvill  made  in  common  fcncc;

Whcicfoic  I thinkc  it  were  not  much  amifle.

With  this  fame  law  for  thistime  todilpencc;

And  if  that  any  dare  miflikc  of  this.

Or  feeme  to  take  the  matter  in  offence,

1 will  with  fword  be  readic  to  inaintaine.

That  mine  advice  is  good,  and  his  is  vainc-

I oo

Thus  noble  Ammons  daughter  mov’d  with  pittic
In  her  bchalfc,who  to  her  great  difgracc
Should  have  bin  fcnt,whcic  neither  towocnor  cius
Was  nearcalmofl  in  three  Icagucsof  the  place.
Fram’d  her  defence  fo  flout  and  ekefo  witcic.

That  to  her  reafon  all  the  reft  gave  place;

Butchiefc  the  perill  great  and  hazard  waying.

That  might  have  grown  to  them  by  her  gainfaying.

SOI

As  when  the  Sunne  in  fommer  hath  moft  powrc.

And  that  the  ground  with  hcatc  thereof  is  rived.

For  want  of  rainc  the  dric  and  parched  flowrc
Doth  fade, and  is  as  twcrc  of  life  deprived.

But  if  in  fcafon  come  a fruitfull  fliowrc.

It  rifeth  up  and  is  againe  tevivedt
So  when  the  damfcll  this  defence  did  hcare.

She  waxed  fairc  againe, of  better  chcarc.

ioa

And  thus  at  laft  they  fell  unto  their  fcaft
In  quiet  fort,fornonc  did  come  that  night,

T o challenge  any  of  thcm,or  molcft.

No  traveller,  nor  any  wandring  Knight;

All  merry  were  but  Bradamante  Icaft,

Fell  jcaloufic  bard  her  of  all  delight.

Her  ftomacke  fb  diftcmpring,and  her  raft.

She  tooke  no  plcafurc  of  that  fwcet  repaft,

lOj

When  fupper  ended  was,thcy  alt  arife,

Although  perhaps  they  would  have  longer  fate,

Sauc  for  defire  they  had  to  feed  their  eyesj
And  now  the  night  was  fpent  and  waxed  late.

The  maftcr  of  the  houfe  in  fecmly  wife,*

Doth  call  for  torches  to  fet  out  bis  ftatcj
And  ftraight  with  torch  light  filled  was  the  hall,

But  what  they  faw,hcreaftcr  flicw  I fliall-


Simkt


^66  THE  XXXII.  BOOKE

Ani  fo  may  I as  truly  frreare  tlefeare  mine, for  they  were  given  me‘bymybrotber(Ttincis'HauBpQn)‘»hov:a^ts}:cT^

I for  a proo^  e o;  hn  veine  tn  thii  l(ind-,  and  ij  his  Jloi  h had  not  bin  as  blame-rvortky,  as  bis  sl^ill is pratfc-'ttOTthy,he  had  ea~

fedmeo]  much  oj  the  paine  that  J toohe  rvith  the  rejl : andme  ihinhy  nhtn  / reade  his  and  mhte  otvne  together, the  phra/i
I ttgrces  fo  rveH,as  it  reeTe  two  brothers. T hough  he( m his  modef  k)would  nee^lsgive  his  elder  brother  leave  to  tahe  alt  t he

I pat  lies, and  praifc  (if  there  were  any ,)  ^oilowiitg  herein  t he  example  of  divers , indeed fludioxs  and  learnedG  cntlemen,

that  have  either  difdained  tobeflow  fomuch  paines  on  another  mans  worfic,  or  at  leaf  wouidnotleefejoimch  time
' from  more  grave  or  more  prof  table  fudics , or  (whuh  perhaps  is  the  chiefe/l  rcafon)  becaufe  they feelc, that  though  it  is

but  ajport  to  write  now  and  thena  little  odde  fonetyet  it  is  fme  labour  t o write  a longand/etledjiile:  as  TuMie  faith
ojTrn/i'_gr»^royf;Stiluscftoptimusdiccndi  magillcr,fcd  laboiismagwi  cftjqucm  plcriquc  fugimu$  lyriting  is  the
heft  fchoolmafer  for  eloquence, but  (faithhe)  it  is  a paineJuU  thing,and  that  moft  of  us  cannot  away  witha/t.  Andy  et  /
findyhaving  written  in  both  Ifinds  now  and  then, as  my  fender  capacity  would ferve  me ) that  prole  is  lil^e  a fane  gtecne
way  whertn  a man  may  travel  a great  jorney  and  not  he  weary  s but  verfe  is  a mhy  lane,  in  which  a mans  horfe  puls  out
one  eg  ajter  another  with  much  ado^and  ojien  drives  his  majt er  to  light  to  helpe  him  out;  but  / Jhall travellav.on  fofar
in  thiigrccnc  way, that  l JI).rl  be  out  of  my  right  way, or  at  leaf  befiae  my  matter, and  therfore  I now  come  to  the  moial.
jorall.  Inthe  Moral!  of  thisxxxi'}  .beohe,  in  ,he  pcrfonof  Agramam  we  «o/e,  how  aCinerail  muf  not  upon  onejoyle
or  one  ill  day  (as  they  call  it)  dejpaire  o'  his  affaires,  or  abandonhis  enterprife,  but  betaine  him  to  fome  Jt  rang  place  of
advantage,  till  they  may  matie  headagaine.  /n  which  hind,  the  old  Romanes  (conquerors  of  the  world ) above  all  other
Things  jijewed  the  r unconquered  minds  ■,  andjpccially  then,  when  Ttsem'wsi'Vinohadreceivedibat  greatfoilc  ani
overthrow  by  Hannibal  l.ivienoteth  in  the  end  oj  the  xxtj.boohc.  Quo  in  tcmpoic  ipfojadeo  magi, o ammo  civi-
tas  fiiitjUt  Confiili  cx  tanta  cladc^cujusipfc  magna  cau(a  fuiflct)rcdcunti3&  obviamitum  frequenter  ab  omnibuj
ordinibus  fit gratiae  a<nx,qubd  dc  rcpublica  non  dcfperaflet.Cui  fi  Caitliaginienfiumdufloi  fuifTet,nihiI  rccu-
fandiim  fijpplicii  foicr.  fyhat  time  (faith  Lit'ie)  the  citie  was  of fo  great  courage,  that  the  Confulireturningfrom  fo
mightie  an  overthrow  (of  which  himfelfe  had  bin  a great  occapon)  yet  was  publthly  and  fulemnly  met  by  all  the  compa-
nies,and  had Jpeiiall  thanks  given  him  becaufe  he  dejpairednot  of  the  common  fate;  who  had  he  bin  captain  of  the  c<jr-
thagtnians ,no  punijhment  had  bin  too  muchjor  him.  Further, in  Bruncllo  that  had  fomtimes  bin  A gramants  fierttay,
anuyet  now  was  hanged j'or  juf  ice  fahy.we  may  note, that  wicked  me, though  they  be  fumiimc  advanced  by  their  Princes
togreat  honors  and  wealth,  yet  when  their  opprejftons  and  thefts  Jhall  be  plainly  boulted  out  and  manifejlly  proved,law
wiS have  his  courfe,and  ju/lice  muft  be  done.Andyct  we  fee  alfo  in  this  boohc,m  Bradamant*  defence  0/ Vllany  againfi
the  law  of fir  Triftrams  lodge,!  hat  jor  the  mofl  part  lawes  are  but  lih,e  Spiders  webs, talking  the  fnallGnats , or  perhaps
fometime  tkejat  fefh  flics,  hut  Hornets  that  bavejbarpc  flings  andgreaier  flrength,breah,e  through  them.

! iftoric.  0/Iofuas  day,  which  he  toucketh  in  thexi.  flaffe,  the  holy  Scripture  Jpeaifs  of,  how  he  made  tbeSunnt  flanifliH.
But  )or  th  jalfe  Amphitrios  night, though  it  feeme  meerejabulous  as  it  is  told,that  lupiter  made  the  night  three  nights
long,  to  ta\e  the  more pleafure  of  Wcmcneyet  me  thinl^e  it  is  worth  the  ahfeivation,  how  the  very  prophane  ard  vaine
writings  if  old  times  do  concurre  with  the  facred  Scriptures  for  whenfoever  the  birth  c^HcrcuIcs  was, which  I dare  net
affirme  to  have  bin  at  that  time,andyet  by  compulation  it  wil  not  jail  long  alter.  For  Heiculeswas  agreat  while  before
the  lafl  Trojan  warres,  and  many  old  writers  agree,  that  Priamus  tivedin  Davids  time, and fent  to  him  for  fliccortbut
howfoever  that  may  be  proved  for  the  certaine  time  Oj  bis  birth,  certain  it  is,wben  the  Sunr.c  flood  fliUm  one  part  of  the
world,  then  in  reafon  at  their  Antipodes  and  in  the  other  Hemijpheare  it  mufl  needs  benight  alt  that  while.  Andif  the
Sunne  were  almofl  downe  when  lofua  Jpalie  (as  it  may  be  conjclfuretl)  bccaufe  he  would  not  f ease  want  of  light  to  pur-
flue  his  enemies  untill  the  Sunne  were  neare  fetting,  tlen  it  might  be  night  even  in  the  fame  Hemijpheare  within  a jew
degrees.  As  for  example,  it  is  night  one  hundred  miles  Eaflward  foonerthen  itisfo  farre  IVcfl  ward  agood  while  :
( as  they  that  are  Afro  omerscan  eafily  refolve  the  fmplefl  that  is.jBut  to  be  fhort, it  isveri fed  by  many  writers  that
tberewas  one  night  obfervedto  be  lo/gerthen  her  fellowcs, which  night  etAter  Hercules  w as  borne  upon, or  clfi  was  fai-
nedto  be  brgottenupon,  and  therefore  they  firnamedhim  Tfntixriec  oj  that  night  that  was  as  long  as  three  nights.  But
this  / Jiibrn’t  to  the  judgement  of  learned  ‘Divines.

Vllegorie.  The  colour  and  embrodery  oj  Bradamants  bafes  in  the  qr  .flaffe, he  I opening  defferation  is  there  JJtewcd,/  need  not  long
to  (land  upon:  for  as  for  thofe  hidden  my  fifties  of  colours,  with  their  applications, of  blue  to  ionflancic,tawnie  forfalient
white  to  virginity,  and  the  re fl, they  are  very  well  l^nawnc  to  all  our gaMant  Gentlemen,  who  ojten  have  more  cofl  in
their  clothes, andwit  in  their  colours, then  coine  in  their  coffers, or  learning  in  their  heads
r'i’ufior.  Of  the  Jfland  ffueene  that  fent  thefrieldej  goldto  Fra-  cc,  which  Bradamant  thou^it  would  but  bieedquarrels,

Fornariiis  no.'t'h.that  mine  Author  did  therein  covertly  allude  to  a matter  betweene  England  and  France, jor  Aiiofio
lived  in  Hcniy  the  eight  his  time,  and  maheth  very  honorable  mention  of  him.  But  thus  it  was.  After  the  death  o/Lcwes
of  Francc,Mnic theyoHger fifler  of  J(.\\entie  the e'ghtremaininghis‘D /wager, our  KJngfcntjorhis  fiflcrtocome  into
England ; hut  Francis  t he  firfl,  loth  Jltefrouldgo  out  o'  France, in  rejpelf  oj  the  great  dower  Jhe  fhould  carry  with  her,
which  by  the  cuflomc  of  that  country  was  a thirapart  of  tie  revenue  oj  the  CrownCi  andyet  fearing  to  have  warres  with
/Ciltg  Hcnric,  ntade  this  o&r,  that  if  he  would  fend  fame  brave  man  at  armes  that  couldwin  her  in  the  field,  he  Jbould
have  be/ : our  Ring  nni^o  dainties  to  accept  the  offer,  and  rnahfing  it  Ipiowne  to  bis  Court,  Sir  Chailci  Brandon
tooke  the  matter  on  I tin,  and  in  fine  overcomrntngfoure  Frenchmen,  with  the  franfe  con  fent  of  both  Rings  married  the
^’’uecne  Dowager, and  was  here  in  England(aswe  all  friow)  made  Du(e  of  SuffoRiofwhofe  ofjpring  there  remameyet
fomemofl  worthy  branches, hut  the  lil^e  to  him  ‘or  armes  and  cavallary(  as  we  terme  it)  is  try  noble  good  Lord, the  Lord
•trange^^oye  value  and  vertue  need  not  this  my  barren  and  brief e teflimonie.


Tbeend  of  ti  e annotations  upon  the  xxxij  Booket


'Mbss


!H

IMf

26%


THE  XXXIH.  BOOKE.


Of  thtfi  ft.
PKiu  drtwtri
ttkf  t»thi

htftotyaftbit


95g


THE  ARGVMENT.


Faire  Bradamant  feesgravn  hj  J>ajp»gartj
T he future  rears  of  France  upon  a jcreeney
Bayardos  flight  the  combat  fierce  doth  part^
Rcnaldo«»^r/;^Scricanc  betrreene.
Aftolfo  having  pafl  the  greater  part
Of  ail  the  rvoridy  and  many  countries  feene,
Vnto  S enaposkin^donte  lafl  arrives,

/Ind  from  his  board  thefonle  Harpiae  drives,


Ymagoras,  Parrhafuu,


Po.

I Ignore,

Tirnant,  Protogenes,  Apof
/or/orc.

With  Zeuxis,  one  for  skill
offpcciall  note:

^^rf<;?s  jipeaes  eke y paftallthc  reft


Strange  hiftotiesingraved  on  the  wall.
Which  (as  I laid)  theoueftsdefir’d  to  fee.
Now  when  they  were  from  fupper  rifcn  all,

T he  pages  lighted  torches  two  or  three.
Making  the  roomc  to  fiiinc  as  bright  as  day.
When  to  his  gueff  s the  owner  ihusdid  fay.

f


V^n:  jipe/ies  eKe

^4^  VVho^e  sLil  ="  =-~  ^ (quoth  he)  my  gucjls.that  you  fliculd  know*


/ '■  'jv  VVhofe  skill  in  drawings  all

the  world  doth  note.

And  talkeof  flill  (to  writers  thanks  therefore)

Whofc  works  and  bodies, time  and  death  did  waft.
Yet  fpite  of  time  and  death  their  fames  do  laft.

. a

With  others  that  in  thefe  our  lateridaies
Hareliv’d,as  Leonard in^  John  BeUine,

And  he  that  carves  and  drawes  with  equal!  praife,
Michell  more  f hen  a man,  Angell  divine.

And  f/erefjwhom  the  Flemmings  greatly  praife.
With  Raphael  and  T itian  pa  fling  fine.

Wit  h divers  01  hers  that  by  due  defart.

Do  merit  in  this  praife  to  have  a pare.

3

Yet  all  thefe  cunning  drawers  with  their  skill.

Could  notattaine  by  piAurc  to  exprefle.

What  ftrange  events  fliould  happen  well  or  ill.

In  future  times.iK)  not  fo much  as  guefle;

Thisart  is  proper  unto  Magikeftilli
Or  to  a Prophet, or  a Prophereffe.

By  this  rare  art, the  Biittifh  Malm  painted
Saange  things,with  which  our  age  hath  binacquain*

4 (ted
He  made  by  Magike  art,that  ftately  hall,

And  by  the  feife  fame  art  he  caus’d  to  be.


That  thefefame  fturics  that  here  painted  aic.

Of  future  warres  the  fcquclsfad  do  fliow.

That  fliall  to  Italic  bring  wo  and  care;

Whereas  the  French  full  many  a bloodic  blow
Shall  lakc.whilc  others  they  to  harmc prepare.

As  Merlin  here  hath  layd  downe, being  fent
From  Engltjb  Arthur, cluete  for  this  intent.

6

King  Feramont  that  was  the  firft  that  part

The  ftreame  of  Rhine  with  armie  great  of  France
And  being  in pofTcflion  quiet  plaft
Ofallthofe  parts,fturd  withlbluckicchance,
Straight  in  ambitious  thought  began  to  caft.

His  rule  and  feepter  higher  to  advance.

W hich  tha  t he  might  to  pafTc  the  better  bring,

He  made  aleaguc  with  Arthur  Englijb  King.

7

Informing  him  how  that  his  meaning  was,
Of//fl//e  the  rule  and  crownctogcr.

And  askt  his  ayd  to  bring  the  fame  to  pafle.
Which  never  had  atchieved  bin  as  yet.

Now  Merlin  that  did  all  men  far  furpallc
In  Magike  an,hispurpofc  fought  to  let,

For  Merlin  had  with  Arthur  fo  great  credit.

He  thought  allGorpell  was, if  once  hefedit.


Thitfm  i
hut  tfiSitni
fir  VirtmtUt
wu  mtnjr
yrttntfin
virtbmf.


This


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


Till' /fcriirt  then  did  firft  to  Arihir  fliow,

And  then  by  Arthur  was  of  purpofc  (cnr.

To  f icramont  of  France, to\ct  him  know
The  caufe  why  he  miOikcd  his  intent.

As  namely,  many  milchicfsthat  would  giow.

To  all  that  new, or  t liar  hcieaftcr  nicnt
The  like  attempt, advifing  him  abftaine.
Fromccrtainc  tioub)c,foiuncertaine  game,

9

lurctf  And  that  he  might  his  courage  more  appall,
ttthibi(l4rr  j rcir.OTC  him  from  this  enterpt  il'c,
iithmb»»lie,  ffcmadcby  Magickc,  this  (o  (lately  hall.

Adorned  as  you  fecinfumptuouswife.

And  drew  thefe  hiftories  upon  the  wall.

That  what  he  faw  in  mind,rhcy  might  with  eyes.
And  thereby  k;iow,that  in  Italian  ground
The  Flour  dc  luce  can  near  take  root  profound,
to

A nd  how  as  often  as  tlie  French  (lull  come.

As  (rends  to  aid  and  free  them  fromd:ftic(rc,

St  of:  they  (liall  their  Acs  all  overcome,

..  And  fight  with  honor  grcat.and  good  fuccclTe;

But  be  they  furc  to  have  that  place  their  toome,

] f fo  they  come  their  ficedome  to  opprefic;

\ Thus  much  the  owner  of  the  houfc  them  told.
And  fo  went cn, the  (loric  to  unfold.

1 1

Signiiru  Lo  fil'd  hovr  Sigiibert  in  hope  ofgnine,

' And  proniifesofEmperour  Afujincias,

UothpafTctlfc  mountaineswitha  mighty  tr.ninc.
With  mind  to  Lomkardk  to  be  pernicious:

But  £jj»/ar  drives  him  backe  by  force  againc.

When  he  of  fuch  attempt  is  Icaft  fufpicicus.

So  that  his  entcrpiife  is  quite  reverfed,
Himfclfcdoth  flie,and  leave  hismendifpetfed.

I z

Kext  after  him  the  proud  Clodovem  went,

And  had  witli  him-cne  hundred  thoufand  men.
But  himdoth  meet  the  Dukcof  Benc'uetfh,

W’ith  fcarfe  for  ev’ric  hundred  fouldicvs,tcn,

' Who  doth  intrap  him  in  anambufliment,

So  as  the  Jrcxcili  might  well  be  lik*ncd  then,  '
tht  While Lowiiai'dwinestoogrecdilythcy  took,
v®*7-  To  fifii  beguikd  with  a baited  bookc.

13

ChilJihtrut  Straight  Childibcrtia  with  a mighty  hofi,

Both  come  with  mind  to  wipe  away  this  blot:
^^*”**^  * Put  of  h:s gainings  he  may  make  fmallboft.

For  of  hispiirpofc  he  prevailed  not;

Hisenrerprife  by  hcav’nly  fword  isciofi.

The  plaguedoth  grow  among  his  men  fo  hot.
What  wkh  tlic  burning feaver, and  theflixe.

Of  fixtie  mcDjthcrc  fcancrcturncth  fixe.

14

Another  pi£lure lively  doth  cxprefTc,

How  that  King  Pepin  and  King  Charier  his  fonne.
Fought  both  in  Italic  with  good  fuccefiej
Not  with  intent  that  Rcalmc  to  overrunne,

But  to  fet  free  Pope  yreoj’w  from  (Iiarpc  diftrclle,

^ And  wrongs,  that  by  A/lolfo  were  him  done,

''  tames  Aftolfo  that  was  Stev'm  opprclTor,
^LtnUrdf  Tothet  takes  27e);ier(i<»hisfuccc(rot.


15

Behold  another  Pepin  yet  a yomli,

Not  like  his  fat  her, dot  lit  I at  h ealmc  invade.

And  thinking  to  pi ncuie  their  woful.  imh.

Of  fiiipsand  boats  a mighty  bridge  he  made;

But  markc  what  ill  I'ucccfleto  him  ciifuth,

Ear  be  through  Ins  great  emerprife  could  wade,

A temped  did  hismafllc  worke  confound.

His  bridge  was  broken, and  ins  iouldiers  drownd.

16

Lo Lewr  of  Burgttndie,  defeending  thearc
Whcrcjas  it  Iccmcs  he  taken  is  and  bound.

And  he  that  tajees  him,makcth  him  to  fwcare.

That  lie  fliall  nearc  bcaro  arms  gainll  Latian  ground
Low  how  he  biccke s his  oth  without  all  (care,

Lo  how  agaire  his  foes  do  him  confound.

And  like  a mold  wnrpc, make  him  loo/c  his  eyes;

A juft  reward  for  fuihasochsdcfpirc.

17

See  heic  how  Hugh  of  Arly  doth  great  feats,

Driving  the  Beringais  from  native  foilc.

Forcing  them  twile  or  tbrife  to  change  their  (eats,
And  caufethe  Hunues  and  B.iviers  hackc  tccoilc;
Bur  greater  force  at  laft  his  adsdefcats,

Firft  he  compourds,and  aficr  all  Ins  toile,
Hcdics,nor  after  long  hisheire  doth  tarie,'
Butyccldcthup  his  crownc  10  Berivgarie.
id

Lo  hcare another  that  byperfwafion.

Of  cvill  nicphcrdjlcts  on  fire  the  fold.

And  kills  two  Kings  in  this  his  fierce  invafion,
Manfred  and  Corradin,  which  makes  him  bolds
But  his  owocfaultsofhisfallgavc  occafioiij  .

His  cruchie  was  fuch,  fo  uncontrold.

That  he  and  hiswcicall  laid  (as  they  tcJl)

Ev'n  at  the  ringing  ©fan  cv’nfong  bell.

Now  after  thefe  about  one  hundred  yeares.

For  fb  the  fpacc  bctwcencdid  feeme  to  fay.

From  France, one  fliallinvadc  thofe  famous  pccrcs,
The  VicountGd/fdj^x -and  fliflii  lay
Siege  unto  Alexandria  as  appc.ircs.

By  thofe  that  licie  do  (land  in  battdJ  ray.

Lohow  the  picucntingcv’riedoubt,
Providctli  ftrength  wiihin,dcccipt  without,
ao

And  with  thiswaricp'.ilicic  proceeding.

He  doth  the  Frenchmen  at  advantage  take,’

Not  finding  his  ambunimcnr,and  nothceding.
Together  with  the  Lord  of  Arminal^e,

Whodiethof  his  hurts  with  ovetblccding;

Lo  flow  the  ftreamc  of  bloud  there  fpilt  doth  make
A fanguin  colour  in  the  ftreamc  of  Poe,

By  meancs  Tanariu  into  it  doth  goc.

ai

After  all  thcfc.onccomcsthat  Marca  hight.

And  three  that  do  of  Aniore  houfc  proceed,

AH  thefe  to  thofe  of  Napier  do  much  fpite,

Tct  none  of  thefe  can  hi  ag  of  their  good  (peed;

For  though  to  French  they  joyncfbmc  Latian  might.
Of  prccdiefortjthat  with  their  crowncs  they  feed:
Yet  ftillforall  their  paine  and  their  expcnce,

Alfon/e  iad  Ferdinando  d?ivc  them  thence.


Tkti  hsfftnd
aUhtpegt  ef
Kiiha  at
JUiid  neer*
f-'en$ct,

H here  he
n-ruld1iavt
MTtde  thu


LewitfBHU
’ guvdie  had
huijtei  pat
cut  ferbia


Hugo  of
,Arly  oTJer-
ttrownr  tf
the  Beriagart


Loo\t  of  thu
in  the  biftorjt


Thi  13140
that  itta/a-
deth  the  Gx»
Utjfte,na$
the  Erie  of
•^rmianhy.


Lo'^_ofkUr'
caiaditih- '


THE  XXX.  BOOKE


270


t%


Ciar'ti  the

in

thebiJlQtj,


Thu'ulfo\tn
tnpnije  ef
the  bouftt-f

•Aivn,


4iftiefe  loc\
in  tie  Inblt,


Jupittr  ne-
phew It  €*•
(net


htdeveikp
Sfirfetht
H'  ubiefi  diC-

fembltr  and
MathiiveUi  <
»n  that  tvir
vai^btuj^h
before  Ma-
(btavehume
lte{eibtbi‘
fitr/.


Lo  Charles  the  eight  defeending  like  a thunder,
Downc from  the  Alps  with  all  the  flourc  of  f ranee.
And  conqu'iingall  (to  all  mens  palling  wonder)
Not  drawing  once  a (word, nor  breaking  lance,
(Except  that  rockc  that  Typheia  lycth  under
While  he  too  high  himfclfc  ftiavc  to  advance)

This  He  and  caftlc  both.that  Islila  bight.

Defended  was  by  Da//o gallant  Knight.

Now  as  th«  mallei  of  the  caftlc  told.

And  pofmed  out  each  ft  otic  10  his  place.

It  came  into  his  fancy  to  unfold.

The  woithy  praifeof /i/ros  noble  race;

Which  (asforcei'taintig  they  all  did  hold)
WifcA/er/i«  prophefidc,who  had  the  grace
To  Ihew  before  hand, both  with  tongue  and  pen.
What  accidents  ftiould  hapjand  where, and  when.

And  namely  that  this  Knight  whom  here  you  fee.
Defending  fo  thccaftleand  the  rocke.

As  though  he  feard  not  thofc  fame  fires  that  flee.

As  far  as  fare, but  them  did  Icorne  and  mcckc.

From  this  fame  Knight  theicftial  dcfccnd(quoth  he)
Out  of  the  root  of  this  moft  worthy  ftocke,

A Knight  fliall  win  fuch  fame  and  reputation.

As  all  the  world  Hiall  hold  in  admiration.

as

Though  Nere.w  were  faire,y(lchi//6fftrong,

Though  Ladas  I'wift, though  Ney?or  was  moft  wife.
That  knew  fo  much, and  lived  had  fo  long;

Though  bold  Vlyjfes  could  both  well  dcvile,
And-cxfcutc  what  doth  to  warre  belong,

Though  Cxfars  boontie  prais’d  be  to  the  skies.

Yet  place  togivcall  thefe  may  thinkcno  Icorne,

To  one  that  Hiall  in  lsl(ia  lie  be  borne.

26

Andifthat  ancient  Creta  may  be  prowd,

Bccaufc  that  Celus  nephew  fprang  therein:

\f  Thebes  of  Bacchia  birth  doth  vant  folowd^

And  Hercules  itfDeh^  oftheir  twin;

Then  may  that  Uc  no  Icflc  be  well  allowd.

To  rant  it  felfe,that  hath  fo  happie  bin.

To  have  thatMarquefle  borne  within  that  place.

On  whom  the  heav'ns Hiall  powrefo  great  a grace.

Thus  Merlin  us’d  to  tell  and  oft  repeat.

How  he  flioiild  be  for  luch  a time  referved,

VVhen  Roman  Empires  high  and  ftatcly  feat.

At  Icwcft  cb  Hiould  be, and  wclnigh  ftarved;

That  his  rare  parts  againe  might  make  it  great.

And  that  by  him  it  might  befafepreferved.

Which  that  you  may  fee  plainly  to  his  glory,

Maikc  in  this  table  the  enfuing  ftory.

28

Lo  here  (faid  he)  how  Loiveichy  doth  repent.

That  he  had  thither  brought  King  Charles  the  eight.
Which  at  the  firft  he  did  but  with  intent
To  wca  ken,  not  to  preftc  with  fo  hard  weight
His  ancient  foc;  for  now  gainft  Charles  he  went.
Making  ncwicaguesaccoidingto  his  Height,

He  thinks  to  take  him  prifner  by  the  way,

But  Charls  by  force  through  the  doth  make  his  way.


L»o\e in tbt
fiiUtrj  vf

ibu.


Of  Lewi  tbt
ay  laek^tin
the  b’fterj.


>9

Butyetthefouldiersthat  bchiiidchim  ftald.

Had  not  the  like  good  fortune  nor  fticccflc,
for  Fcrdtnande  grew  by  Mantuan  aid
So  ftrongjthat  fbonc  he  did  the  fremb  diftreffe;

To  whole  great  giiefc,this  Marqucfic  was  bettaid
By  Gyp/on  vile,whcn  he  fcai’d  nothing  Icftc,

Which  doth  in  Ferdinand  fo  great  gucic  breed.

As  doth  his  joy  of  vicftoiic  exceed.

30

Next  after  thcfc,he  Hiewi  them  Lem  thctwclfth,

That  puls  out  Lodivici^c  Sfor/e  with  mighty  hand.

And  gets  by  force,  what  he  had  got  by  fleltb.

And  plants  the  Flour  dc  luce  in  MiStn  land;

Yet  he  no  long  time  there  in  quiet  dwclth,  ’

The  great  Confalvo  with  a Spanijl}  hand,

HisCaptainesand  Lievtenantsoftrepulfcs,

And  in  the  end  from  MiUen  quiteexpuifes.

3«

Lo  here  (which  I forgat  before  to  Hiow)

How  Lodxpicf^s  frends,and  his  own  men  betray  him
One  fells  h-is  caftcll  never  fttiking  blow;

The eke  that  might  away  convay  him.

And  had  his  pay, and  did  him  fcrviccow.

For  filthy  lucres  fake  they  do  bewray  him;

Whereby  without  once  breaking  ofa  lance.

Two  viilorics  came  to  the  King  of  France.

5^

Lohow  by  favour  of  this  mighty  King,

The  baftard  Ctefar  Borgta  grew  full  gicar.

And  doth  the  necks  of  many  nobles  wring*

Of  Italie, thit  had  mofi  ancient  feat.

Lo  how  this  King  doth  eke  thcakornes  bring
To  Bulloign,lo  how  with  another  feat
Hedoth  the  Genonais  in  fight  fubdue.

And  maketh  them  tfecir  late  revolt  to  rue.

33

•Lo  here  net  far  from  thence,  how  all  the  feeld
With  dead  mens  bones  is  held  at  Gcriadad,

Howall  the  cities  unto  Lewr  do  ycc  Id,

How  Dcnice  to  fhut  up  her  gates  is  glad;  ,,,

And  fcarle  hcrfclfc  from  thisgrcatftormccan  Hiecld;

Lohow  the  Popc(his  part  that  herein  had)  letkeintit

Doth  take  a way  unto  hii  great  rebuke,

Modone, and  more,frcm  good  Ferrarai  Duke.

34

At  vvbicb  King  Lcwj(with  rightfullcboller  moved)

Gives  BuUoign  to  t^c  Bentivols  againe.

And  thence  to  Bres\ie  all  his  force  removed,

A nd  fuccours  to  Fe/ylna  dothordaine,'

What  time  the  Churches  fbuldicrs  felt  and  proved.

The  French  mens  force  unto  their  mickle  painc;

Lo  after  where  both  armies  meet  to  fight,

Ncarc  Chajfse  fhcK, to  me  their  utraoft  might.

On  this  fide  France, on  that  thepowreof
Vnited  is,and  deadly  blows  enfew.

The  ditches  all  fccrad  fild  with  bodies  Haine,

A hap  to  make  a ftonic  heart  to  rewj
Long  time  indoubt  doth  vidforicrcmainc,

Which  way  thefway  would  carry  no  man  knew.

Till  by  the  vertuc  of  viZ/wiyc  alone.

The  Fr$nci  pseYaile^theSpaniJh  (foift)  arc  gone.


Sferfejtyini
in  a etmuom
fouiiitn
fartU  Up  M
Sxn\xer,wtg
betrsyedm

Cafer  "Sergis
Da{e  yaltn^
tine  a aeU.

bl*  wicked
van
By  the
akornei  A
neatil  tbt
Tope  wha
gave  them
fw  their
armet,
ThiibatieS
at  Geriidad,
and  tbedi-
flreJfedRau

tfyenk
letke  in  I

H>pto>


Lo


OfAhhet
fiak^befW
in  the  14.


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


Lo  how  the  Pope  hislip  doth  bite  for  griefe,

Bccaufc  the  Frenchmen  do  R.ivenna  fack  j
Lo  how  he  fent  to  Sivi^^ers  for  reliefc,

Lo  how  they  come  and  drive  the  iftnchnen  back  j
And  they  that  with  their  tieafon  caufed  chitfc
Of  Loiiowi/^e  the  overthrow  and  wrack,
Toipakefome  mends  for  that  theyerft  had  done,
Vnto  the  fathers  place  reftorc  the  fonne.

37

Ti'tnfii  tbt  ^ Prince  of  France  then  new  created.

Meets  with  theS'wr^^crf  to  their  mickle  coft,

And  fo  theircouragcc]uaird,andforceabated.

As  all  the  nation  feemed  vvelnigh  loft ;

And  cf  their  title  that  them  animated,

Thofc  villens  vile  hereafter  need  not  boft.

Defend ersof  the  Church, tamers  of  Kings,

They  cleaped  were, now  clipped  arc  their  wings.

38

Lo  how  the  French  king  Francis  in  defpite
Of  all  the  leagiK’jfairc  AfiiSfcn  doth  furprife.

Bourbon  defending  it  from  Genoai  might ;

Lo  while  this  king  doth  praftife  and  dcvlfe.

Some  great  cxploit^while  by  foulc  overfight.

His  lawleflc  men  the  town  did  tyrannize  j
Tht  Truub  Their  having  too  much  pride  and  want  of  pitie,
tut  of  Doth  caufc  them  fuddenly  to  lofc  the  city.

MfUm  far  I ^

tbsit  anbther  Francis  Sforfe,i  man

Like  to  his  grandfirc  both  in  a£ls  and  name.

Who  to  drive  out  the  Frenchmen  well  began.

And  MiUenA'id  recoverwith  great  fame;

Lo  France  againe  endeavour  all  they  cah.

To  win  with  praife  that  they  had  loft  with  fliame,
worthy  Duke  on  T^cran  ftreame.

Cuts  ofFhis  way, and  kept  him  from  that  Rcalmc.

40

Tong  Fre/krid;e,yei  bur  a bcardleflcboy.

Scant  having  on  hischin  a little downe,

Lo  how  he  faves  Pavia  from  annoy.

When  furioufly  the  French  befiege  t he  townc  t
Hemakes  their  earneft  p'ots  turn  to  a toy,

Viftiaacdl-  The  Lion  of  chcfca  he  beatctb  down

Marquefles  bdrf/of  one  blood,

•/  Bothborntodothcircoumry  cndlelTcgood.

41

The  fiift  of  thefeis  that  Mfonfutfonne,

That  by  the  Negro  erft  you  faw  betraid.

Behold  what  feats  of  armes  by  him  dre  done,  ‘ ^
How  at  their  greateft  need  he  them  doth  aid,  ’ ,
How  oft  he  hath  otsFrenchmeft  glory  wortnc,
Thatofhisverynamethcyfecm afraid  t
The  tocher  that  fo  mild  doth  look  in  fight.

Is  Lord  of  L’3y?o,and  Alfen/g  hight.

4*

This  is  that  worthy  knight,ofwhom  I told.

Then  whenTdjd  the  llcof  Jsl^ia  fliow,

?f  whom  1 faid  that  Merlin  had  fotetolti
o Feramoiit  what  he  by  skill  did  know,

That  when  tins  world  wereworn  and  vvaxcnbld.
And  Rorrie  ailtf  tiafy  were  brought  tnoft  low,

T hen  he  flionld  fpring,who  'to  hi's  end Icftc  praife
Their  foes  fliould  overthrow,  and  them  fhould  raife.


43


Franca  in-
njijiortaf  Ua
ly  otmtifa
iri/uci.


Fanitntt


Lo  how  he  with  hiscoufin  of  Pc/?4re,

And  with  Colonnas  profproiis  aid  no  Icfle,

The  French andTiulch  that  at  Bjrcocca  aie.

Do  foilc  and  llay,and  drive  to  great  diftrcflc  j
Lo  !iow  againe  the  Frenchmen  do  prepare.

With  new  attempts  to  mend  their  bad  fuccefle.

One  camp  the  king  in  Lombardie  doth  make.

And  with  another  Naples  he  would  take.

44  y

But  file  that  ufeth  men  as  wind  dothduft,^

Pirft  take  it  up  and  blow  it  very  high.

And  from  that  higheft  place  ftraight  when  fiic  luft.

She  throwes  it  down  whereas  it  firft  did  he ;

She  makes  this  king  devoid  ofallmiftruft.

Think  he  hath  men  an  hundred  thoufand  nie  FiiniFitt:cit

At  Pavie  fiege,  believing  others  m.iifter,  ovtrthroraite

(But  wo  to  kings  whofcfcivantsarcno  iuftcrA  <•*  Pavw,*,.

f livid  by  h»

So  while  this  noble  Prince  miftruftsno  harmc,  ftminthr

His  wicked  Captaitres  grcodygaincto  win,  numbenf

Caus’d  that  thcfoldicrs  in  the  night  alarm,  bu Jaliurti

Came  to  their  colours  flow  and  vciy  thin,

Within  their  tents  they  feel  their  skirtnifli  wartne  j
Thcwdric Spaniards  foon  had  entred  in
Withthofctwoguidcs,withwhomthcydurft  affay
la  bell  or  ch  in  heav’n  to  break  a way.

Lo  how  the  chiefc  nobility  of  France

Lie  dead  on  ground, a caufc  of  many  tearcs.

How  many  an  hargabiifh,a  fword  and  lance
This  ftoutking  hath  alone  about  liis  cares ;

His  horfe  flainc  under  him  by  hard  mifchance.

And  yet  he  nothing  ycelds,nor  nothing  fcarcs,

Thougball  the  hoft  affaultcd  him  alone,

And  alkthcrefcuciand  fupplisswcre  gone.

47  . .

The  valiant  King  defends  him  on  his  feet,  TriecuU-

Bathing  his  bladclong  time  in  enemies  blood,  hf'-* f«/«>irr.

But  vertue  that  with  too  much  force  doth  meet,

Muft  yccldat  laft.itcannotbewithftood  j
Lo  him  here  prtfncr.Io  how  in  a fleet
Hi  j^afleth  \mo  Spaine  the  fait  fca  flood,

Whence  "Day/odoth  thcchicfeft  honour  hiirg
Of  the  field  won, and  of  the  prifner  king.

48

Thus  both  that  hoaft  the  kiug  had  thither  broughr.

And  that  he  meant  to  Naples  to  have  fent.

Were  bothdirperfed  quite, and  came  to  nought.

Much  likealampwhcnalltheoylcisfpint
Lo  how  the  King  againe  fo  well  hath  wrought,
leaves  his  fonnes  for  plcdge,and  homeward  went,

Lo  how  abroad  he  doth  new  quarrels  pike,

Lo  how  at  home  fomc  do  to  him  the  like,  ^Uaviuftit

King  af

49  iugtdrU,

Lo  hcrethcwofull  murders  and  the  rapes

That  Rome  doth  fufferin  the  cruel!  fiick,

Where  neither  thing  prophanc  nor  holy  fcapcJ,  Tbtfackof


But  all  alike  do  go  tofpoile  and  wrack ;


Romi  by


The  league  that  fltouldrelievc,fitsftill  and  gapes,  ^^***' .
And  whcrcthcy  fhould  ftepforward, they  flirinkc  *

Thus  Peters  fucceflbr  by  them  forfaken,  (bac!^  ihat  xru  bjl.
Is  ftrarghc  bcficged,and  at  length  is  taken.  lt<k

A a The


THE  XXXIII.  BOOKE.


371


ThiftfiUent
mertadlj
ireof  bjifoy-

ttrneart  to
Uaftts,aad
thtn  Jiopf,v!g
the  CBurjt  if
$$,miuie  It  »-
VtrfitW  all
lhtvu.Tnfl}
gri.uadi,tnd
Jowfeitid
tht  mrt,  that
Lamitl{  uui
Mllbu  IMIM

tUsdcJ  it.


<0

The  King  fends  Laiilret{  new  fupplics  to  gather.

Not  that  he  iliculd  10  Lombar die  do  ought j
But  that  he  might  (et  free  the  holy  father.

That  to  fo  low  an  ebb  fo  foon  was  brought :

Hut  Lctutre^  fliould  have  come  a little  rather.

The  Popes  own  coy  n hath  hisownfrecdome  bought,
L2utrei{  attempts  to  conquer  Naples  town.

And  foon  turncs  all  the  country  upfldc  down*

Lo  how  a fMc  imperial!  navy  bends

HiscouiTe^o  luccourthc  diftrefl'ed  town.

But  'Dona  back  wivh  heave  and  ho  them  fends.

And  fome  of  them  doth  burn,and  fomc  doth  drown  i
Lo,ficklc  fortune  once  againc  intends
Tochangc  hei  chcare.and  on  the  French  to  frown.
With  agues  not  with  fwords  they  all  are  flaine.
Scarce  of  an  hundred  one  turncs  home  againc.

Thefeand  fuch  ftoiies  had  the /lately  hall
In  marble  rich  ingraved  on  the  skrecn.

As  were  too  ted  ions  to  recite  them  all.

Though  then  by  them  they  were  perus’d  and  feen  j
Their  wonder  great,their  pleafurc  was  not  fmall.
And  oft  they  read  the  writings  were  between.

That  in  faire  letters  all  of  gold,

Thccircumftanceofcv’ry  pifturctold.  -

>5

Now  when  the  Ladiesfaircand  alltherefl,  ’

Had  feen  and  ask’d  as  much  as  they  defir’d,.

Their  holf  doth  bring  them  to  their  roomsof  reft.
Where  deep  renewts  the  ftrength  of  bodies  tir’d,
Onely  Duke  daughter  coaid  notic/l.

Though  bed  werefoft,room  waim,and  well  attir’d,
Tet  ftill  Hie  toft  from  left  fide  to  the  right,^.  ^

And  could  not  fleep  one  wink  all  that  fame  night.


54

tnianumu  With  much  ado  her  eyes  at  laft  flic  clos’d,  . r,
dreamt*/  Not  much  afore  the  dawning  of  the  day.

And  as  flic  l1ept,nic  in  her  fleep  fuppos’d
Rogero  prefent  was,and  thus  did  fay,

Aiy  dcarc.what  ailcsthec  to  be  thusdifpos’d.

That  falfc  bclicfc  in  thee  doth  bcate  fuch  fway  1
Firft  fliall  the  rivers  to  the  mountaincs  clime,

Ere  I will  guilty  be  offuch  a crime.

55

Bcfidc  flic  thought  flie  heard  him  thus  to  fay,

Lo  I am  come  to  be  baptiz’d  my  love.

And  that  I feem'd  my  comming  todelay,

Another  wound, and  not  a wound  of  love.

Hath  been  the  caufc  of  my  conftrained  ftay,
Sufpitions  vaine,and  cauflefle  fcaic  remove  ;

With  this  the  damfcll  wait’d, and  up  flic  flatted,
But  found  her  dtcamc  and  lover  both  departed.

56

Then  freflily  flic  doth  her  complaints  renew.

And  in  her  mind  thus  to  her  fclfc  flic  fpakc,

Lo  wharl  likc,arcdieames  vainc  and  untrue.

And  in  a moment  me  do  quite  forfakc.

But  ah, what  me  offends  is  too  too  true,
Idrcamofgoodjbutnoncifind  awake,

How' arc  mine  eyes  alas  info  ill  taking,

^hatclos  d fee  good  ,and  nought  but  crill  mking  ?


57

Sweet  dream  did  promife  me  a quiet  peace.

But  bitter  waking  turncth  all  to  wane  j
Sweet  dicamc  deluded  mc,and  foon  did  ccafe,

Bnt  bitter  waking  plagucs,and  doth  not  arte  ;

If falfliood  cafc,and  truth  my  painc  incrcafc,

1 wifli  my  fclfc  from  troth  I ftill  might  barre.

If  dreames  breed  joy, and  waking  caufc  my  painc.

Ay  might  I dream,and  never  wake  againc.

58

Oh  happy  wights  whom  fleep  doth  fopoflefle.

Asm  fix  moncthsyou  never  open  eye.

For  fure  fuch  fleep  is  like  to  death  I guefle.

But  waking  thus,is  not  like  Iifc(think  I)

How  ftrangc  arc  then  the  pangs  that  me  opptclTc,

T hat  fl  cepi  ng  feem  to  livc,and  waking  die  ?

But  if  fuch  fleep  rcfcmblancc  be  of  death.

Come  death  and  clofc  mine  eyes, and  ftopmy  breath.

5?

Now  were  thofc  Eaftern  parts  of  hcav’n  made  red.
Where  Phoebus  beames  do  firft  begin  appearc.

And  all  the  thick  and  rainic  clouds  were  fled.

And  promifed  a morning  faircand  clearc ;

When  Bradamant  forfook  her  rcftleflc  bed.

And  giving  for  her  lodging  and  good  chcaie.

Bight  courteous  thanks  unto  her  noble  hoft.

She  leaves  hishoufc,and  minds  to  pait  in  poft.

60

But  firft  file  found  how  that  the  damfcll  faire
The  mclTcngcr  that  fup’d  with  her  laft  night.

Was  gone  bcfore,with  purpofc  to  lepaire
To  thofc  tince  knights  that  lately  felt  her  might.
When  flic  did  caufc  them  caper  in  thcaire,

Drir’n  without  ftyrups  from  theit  ftecds  to  light.

She  found  they  had  all  night  to  their  grcatpaine
Abid  the  windjthc  tempe/f  and  the  raine.

61

And  that  which  greatly  did  incrcafc  theirgriefe.

Was  that  while  thofc  within  had  chearc  great  ftore,
They  and  their  horfc  lack’d  lodging  and  rcliefc;

But  that  which  did  offend  their  ftomacks  more.

And  was  indeed  of  all  their  forroweschiefe.

Was  left  the  maid  (of  wiiomi  fpakc  before)

Would  tell  thdrmi/Uc^c  of  their  hard  mifchaucc.
They  had  at  their  arrirall  firft  in  France.

And  having  fullrcfblved  anddefign’d,

T o die  or  venge  the  foile  receiv’d  laft  night.

To  th’cnd  the  meffenger  might  change  her  mind,
(The  mc/fenger  that  VUania  hight)

Who  thought  their  force  and  value  far  behind
The  Vaunts  that  they  had  made  of  their  great  oiigbt.
Therefore  as  foon  as  Bradamant  they  fpi’d,

' Straight  each  ofthem  to  combat  her  defi’d*

6?

Not  thinking  though  fliefliould  a damfcll  be.

For  of  a damfcll  gefturenonc  fheus’d  j
The  Lady  gently  fpakc  unto  them  three.

And  thought  her  haft  the  fight  might  have  excus’d.
But  they  aid  urge  her  ftill  fo  farrc,that  fbe
Without  difgracccould  not  have  it  refus’d  j
Wherefore  flic  coucht  the  goldcn-hetdcd  lance.

And  from  their  faddlcs  made  them  all  to  dance.

A|id


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


64


H«  turnti  ti
’Vtlaw  *•
gaiHt »» tit
}7  ba<,l(,iht

iojiagit


tie  eavuita
Bradimant
in  the  55/

(ieji.


And  for  th.n  tmc  thus  ended  was  that  fray,

For  file  fet  fpurs  to  hovfe.and  rode  fo  poft.

That  ere  they  lofcifiic  rjuitc  was  gone  away  :

They  that  their  feats  had  twice  together  lofi,
V'crcfoafiiam'djthey  knew  notwhar  tofay;

For  why  they  wonted  were  to  make  their  boft,
Noknightof  Fr.e»ie  fiioulJ  able  be  to  fiand
Aoainlt  ctic  worfi  ofthcoijwith  fpcarc  in  hand.

6s

Eiit  VU'inh  further  them  to  taunt.

That  Brdiiitmnt  a Lady  was, them  told.

Now  lir?(faid  fiic)you  that  were  w'ont  to  vauntj
From  Pa/ladins  to  win  the  fliield  of  gold,

Lo  how  a womans  forces  can  you  daunt.

Now  is('I  hopc)yoor  lofty  courage  cold  ;

Sure  for  thofc  knights  you  be  too  weak  a matchi
VVJicn  one  pooic  damfcll  you  can  ovcrniatch.

What  need(faid  fiie)bc  further  triall  had.

You  have  already  that  for  w hich  you  came,

Fxcep:  that  any  of  you  be  fo  mad*,

To  joync  a future  loflc  to prefent  fiiame ;

Or  if  perhaps  ye  would  be  fainc  and  glad.

To  end  your  lives  by  men  of  worthy  fame  »

Trow  you  that  vanqurfiit  arc  by  womans  hand,
Rcnaldo  or  Orlando  to  vvithftand  i

Now  w'hcn  AsVUanie  declared  had,

How  that  a damfcll  them  had  overthrown.

With  griefe  and  with  difdainc  t hey  weit  fo  mad ,
That  fcarcc  their  wits  and  fenfes  were  their  own.
Each  one  himfelfe,of  armour  all  unclad,  (thrown,

Their  horfe  turn’d  loofc,  their  fwords  away  weic
A nd  vow’d  for  penance  of  fo  great  difgracc,

To  touch  no  armour  in  a twelve-moncthsfpacc.

68

They  furthervow  they  ne’er  will  ridcagainc.

No  not  when  that  fame  ycare  fiiould  be  expir’d,
Althoi’gb  the  way  were  mountanic  or  platne.

And  though  the  wav  were  gravelly  or  mir’d,

Vntill  they  could  by  force  of  armes  regainc
Such  horfes,as  for  fervicearc  requir’d,

A "d  furniture  for  three  fuch  champions  meet  5
Till  then  they  vow’d  to  travcll  on  their  feet.

69

Thus  wilfully  they  walk’d  while  others  rode,

Eur  Bradamant  went  on,and  that  fame  night,

She  at  a caftle  maketh  her  abode,

Nearc  to  the  way  thatleads  to  Paris  right  J
FIcic  by  her  hoft,thc  Lady  fairc  wasfiiow’d,

H6w  wasvanquifht  in  the  fight;

Good  meat, good  lodging, and  good  newes  flic  had.
Yet  cat  flic  not,nor  flcpt,nor  was  flie  glad.

. 7*f'

But  now  of  her  Co  much  I rouft  not  fay.

That  I forget  my  ftory  out  to  tell,

Ofthofetwo  knightsthat  met  this  other  day,

And  ti'd  tbeir  hprfcsar the yunning well:

Nolands  nor  rownes  wcfccaufe*  of  their  fray.

Nor  who  fri  ride  nor  office  fh  ould  cxccll.

But  cv’n  t hat  he  that  ftrongefl  was  of  twaine.

Should  rvin,and  'Durindam  gaine.


71


There  needs  no  figne  of  war, not  trumpet:  found.

To  warn  them  when  to  fttikeor  when  to  pawfe.

No  Heralds  need  to  limit  out  ihe  ground.

Nor  read  them  Icfluics  of  their  warlike  lawes.

They  met  asthey  by  promife  firm  were  bound.

And  each  his  weapon  at  one  inftantdiawcs.

And  then  they  laidabout  them  firong  and  nimble,
Blowcs  bred  their  Imart ; and  fmart  t heir v\rath  did
7t  I*  (kinA.

Two  blades  mere  firm  in  triall, and  more  fore.

Could  not  in  all  the  world  have  been  prepar’d.

That  havingbcen(asthcfcwcrc)pitt  in  urc.

Would  not  have  been  in  pccccs  burfl  and  mat’d  :

Em  both  thefe  blades  wcrcoffuch  remper  puic.

So  kecn.fo  tough, and  t/icrcwithall  fo  hatd,

They  might  a thoufand  tiire?  athard-edge  met.

And  neither  blade  tbcieby  3 gap  would  get.

7?

Renaldo  quick  hither  and  thither  goes.

And  ottentime  wasforc’d  to  charge  his  place.

And  travcifc  ground,  for  why  the  weight  be  knowes
Oi^Durindana,  that  would  cut  apace;

Gradajfu  ever  gave  the  ftronger  blowcs,
Buttothdrftill  tofeape  them  had  thcgiaccj
Ofif  they  hit, they  hit  in  feme  fitch  pan.

Where  though  they  madegreat  found,they  caus’d  no

74-  (fmart.

Renaldo  withlcfTc  ftrcngth.but  far  more  art,

Strakc  once  or  twice  the  Pagan  on  the  arm.

And  with  a tliruflhad  furciy  pierc’d  his  heart,

Save  that  his  armour  ftrengthened  washy  chaim.

So  that  no  mailc  out  of  his  place  would  fiart ;

But  while  each  fought  to  do  the  other  harm,
Afodainerioife  did  part  their  carneft  quancll.

They  look’d  and  faw  Bayardo  in  great  parell.

75

I fav  they  look’d  about, and  fpi’d  at  length
Bi^ardo  fighting  with  a monftrous  fowle.

Bigger  then  hc,her  beak  three  yards  of  length.

In  other  fliapc  and  making  like  an  owle.

Her  talents  huge  and  fliarp,and  ofgreat  firengtb.
The  feathers ofherwingsall  blackand  fowle,

Her  eyes  like  fire, a long  and  hideous  taile.

Her  wings  fo  huge, they  fccir.cd  like  afailc.

76

Perhapsit  wasa  fowle,hutT  think  not.

Nor  ever  heard  I erfl  offuch  a bird  j
Onely  foTHr/t/wcallsitwell  I wot,

Ifany  willcrcdittoliimaffoord
Rathn  I deem  that  Malagigi  got
Somcrpritcinfcrnall.that  himfcifehad  ftir’d.

To  comctnfliape as!  did  flicw before,

Eccaufe  thcchampions  fierce  might  fight  no  more,

77

Renaldo  eke  himfclfc  believ’d  the  fame,

And  with  hiscoufin  Malagtge  fell  out,

And  to  hischargclaidnota  little  blame,

And  gavchim  cvilllanguagcthcrcabout.

The  tother  fwarc  by  film  that  hcav’ns  did  frame.

It  was  not  hcjto  put  him  out  of  doubt,

But  were  it  fowle,or  were  it  a foulcdcvill,

Ccrtainc  to  Bayardit  did  work  much  cvill,

A«  # Tbs


drtd^fo.\nii

jiict.


f‘l

■III


I


Tbarfsttsst^


l'e\t  ♦»
Mtrall,


*74  /


THE  XXXIII.  BOOKE


7t  »S

Thchorfc  that  was  puiflantjbrakc  hisriinci  As  fafcas  France  hath  beer,  from  me  now  twice.

When  as  the  fliaipDcfTc  of  hcrclawes  he  feels,  Sofafefroni  him  fiiall  he  my  Scryrane,

And  what  with  tcirour  movld,  and  what  withpaine,  I thither  wiili  him  come  if  he  be  wife,
Heycrketh  at  hci  fiercely  with  his  heels  { ■ Els  of  Bayardo  now  his  leave  is  tanc;


She  foar’d  aloft, and  downe  flie  comes  againc.

And  fteikes  him  fo,that  Bayard  almoft  reels.

And  fithofothcr  fence  no  mcanc  he  bad.

He  runs  away  as  if  he  had  been  mad.

► 79

Vnto  the  neaieft  wood  he  right  doth  run

And  rtill  the  feather’d  bcaft  him  he-ld  in  chafe.

Till  the  thick  boughs  holp  him  her  gripes  to  fliun,
^o  that  file  gave  him  over  in  fliort  ipacc.

And  feeing  that  herfport  with  him  was  donc>

She  fored  upon  high,and  left  this  place.

And  to  another  coaft  her  flight  doth  frame,

Where  as  flic  thought  to  find  fome  other  game.

80

GTadaffb  and  Renal, lo  whcnjthey  law,

Thehorfc  was  fled  tint  caufedall  the  fray.

Do  by  confent  themfclvcsfrom  thence  withdraw.
To  find  Bayardo  om  and  if  they  may ;

But  firft  each  promis’d  to  obferve  thislaw.

That  he  that  found  him  firft  ofboth,(]iould  ftay
At  this  fame  well,till  tot  her  fliould  come  thither.
And  then  againc  to  figHt  it  out  together.

81

Thus  when  each  had  his  word  toth’otherpaft.

That  they  would  meet  there  at  their  comming  back.
They  after  go, but  Bayard  ran  fo  faft.

As  foonc  they  loft  the  fight  of  any  track :

Gradajfo  rode,  and  therefore  made  more  haft,

The  Palladine  that  his  good  horfe  did  lack.
Remain’d  behind, all  fad  and  grieved  more.

And  malccontent  then  ere  he  was  before.

8a

And  when  hetraverd  had  about  in  vaine.

In  body  wcaric.dilcontent  in  mind.

With  loflcofallhistravell  and  hispaine.

He  turneth  to  the  place  they  firft  ailign’d.

In  hope  the  cother  would  return  againc.

And  bring  the  horfe, iffo  he  could  him  find :

But  when  hefaw  hitlooking  did  not  boot.

He  trarel’d  back  unto  the  camp  on  foot.

Bur  yet  Gradaffos  painc  fuccceded  well.

For  why, a while  before  the  lights  decaying,

He  paflTcd  ncarc  the  placc.as  it  befell.

Where  in  a cave  be  found  him  by  his  naying,  •-
Still  fearing  that  famemonftrous  impofhcll;

He  takes  him  thcnce,and  then  but  little  waying
His  promifemadcjbcturnes  another  way,

And  toliimfclfc  in  fccrct  thus  doth  fay.

X4

Let  them  that  lift  hold  things  in  ftrife  and  war,

I mean  to  hold  mine  own  with  peace  and  cafe ;
Oncly  to  get  this  horfe  I came  fo  far.

And  paft  fo  many  lands, and  many  fcas;

My  promife  breach  to  me  (hall  be  no  bar.

To  keep  that  I fo  quietly  do  feafe  :

If  he  defire  to  win  his  horfe  againc.

To  come  to  Wialet  him  take  the  painc.


Ifhc  will  havehim  he  fliall  know  the  prife,

Now  mine  Bayardexs  and  ’Durindane  ;

This  faid, he  mounted  on  the  ftced  lo  waily.

And  by  anothci  way  went  back  to  Arly.

86

Where  finding  fliips  new-rigg’d  to  fca-ward  bent.
Though  then  at  anker  in  the  harbour  lying.

With  thofe  rich  fpoilcSjto  pafle  the  fcas  he  meant.

In  all  poll  haft  into  his  country  hying  :

Hereafter  you  fliall  hcarc  which  way  he  went,
Andofhislaftconfli£I  and  of  hisdying  :

Now  him  1 lcave,RenaWo,and  all  France,

And  tell  you  what  did  t o chance.

*7

Who  mounted  on  hisdately  winged  ftced.

Well  tamed  late  by  Loge/lillaivnt,

' Took  pcifeft  view  of  France  with  paflingfpeed,

And  faw  how  ev’ry  town  of  worth  did  fit.

Which  having  well  obferv’d  and  mark’d  with  heed.
From  Rhine  to  Pyren  mount  he  thought  it  fit.

In  manner  like  all  over  Spaine  to  ride.

And  many  countries  of  the  world  bcfidc.

81

To  he  pafled  through  Nawr,

Each  man  that  faw  him  wondungat  the  fight,
'Th.enTaracen  he  did  defery  notfar
Vpon  his  left  hand,Bii^/e  on  bis  right.

Where  €aftUl.Luben,3nd  Galicia  arc.

And  Corditve  ncare,and  SiviU  fee  he  might.

With  diverfccrowncs  now  joynccl  in  one  laignf.

Arc  govern’d  by  the  mighty  khxgof Spaine.

«9

■ There  faw  he  Gadcs  where  erft  by  Herder  hand.

Two  pillars,  marks  for  Mariners  were  plac’d.

Then  over  Atlant  Cea, to.  Egypt  land,

And  oTcr  Affrica  forthwith  he  paft.

And  faw  where  Balearici{  lies  do  ftand.

Then  travcl’d  to  Evi^a  with  like  haft.

And  to  Ar\illa-watA  he  thence  departeth.

Quite  ore  that  fca  that  it  from  Spagna  parteth.

90

Oran  he  faw,/ppon,Marocco,  Fejpt,

Algier,Bu^ea,aad  thofe  (lately  townesj
Whofc  Princes  with  great  pomp  and  pride  polTcflc
Ofdi verfe  Provinces  the  (lately  crowncs.

He  faw  By ferta, and  Ttmigi  no  Ic(Te,

And  flying  over  many  dales  and  downcs,

Hefaw  Capijfe  and  Al^erhee  He,

And  all  the  cities  to  the  flood  of  Nyle.

91

TTipolit,Beriiul{,TQlomit, and  all

Between  the  Tea  and  Atloi  woodie  fides.

Then  on  the  Cereueys  he  right  doth  fall ,

And  paft  Carem  mounts,and  more  bcfides ;

Then  crofting  ov’r  the  barren  fields  and  pall.

Where  fands  with  wind  doebb  and  flow  like  tides,
The  tombe  of  Battus  he  doth  leave  behind.

And  Ammons  temtdenow  worn  out  of  mind.

Ttea


E'ctmri  It
Gr»Upy»iH

tht^o

Mflaffi,


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


Jtne  begim

the  uleof
SiHJpt  Md
til  Htrfi<u,


S Mtxthtw

tnyrtcd
tkii  ceun:ry
U tht /tub,
tndtetaaje
i»lbe  Gaf-
ftO  htfaiib
(btJhaUb^-
wilb

the  Holy
Cbafi  tad
with  fin)
tberftrt  tbty
ufett  burn*
tbefignt  of
tbt  in-
to fart
y‘‘^eir  bod/.


C*Tr,fom*

» tk*t
tbatwJi  Sa-
tylon-.
Staafoor
Cuuytl/tti
laftf  ia  titir
Unrtugt
mgbtTi  it‘
ttmftit
rtmmando
•».  hfiflft


Then  came  he  by  another  Ttmtfia,

That  followcs  eke  of  Mahomet  the  law,

Vnto another  «/£th'.opiathcn
He  went.the  which  before  he  never  faw,

That  differs  both  in  language  and  in  men :

From  thence  he  toward  Nubia  doth  dcaw^
7)obada».nd  CoaUce  juft  between.

Of  which  thcfcChrtftcn’d,and  thofc  Tiirkifti  been.

9?

The  bordVers  ftill  are  arm’d  in  heat  and  cold,

Senapo  vetofiEthiop  is  the  chief.

And  hath  great  ftoic  of  jewels  and  of  gold.

And  much  bevancs  notfrom  our  belief }

For  hethofc  principles moft  firm  doth  hold,

That  can  defend  from  ever  lafting  grief .

Here  it  it(if  mine  author  be  no  lier)

Where  they  do  ufc  to  be  baptiz’d  with  ficr.

94

The  Duke  here  lighted  after  travel!  long ,

And  to  Senapos  ftatcly  Court  was  led  j
The  caftlc  was  more  fumptuous  then  ftrong^

A nd  admiration  more  then  terrour  bred  j
The  iocks,bars,chaines,and  all  that  did  belong
Vnto  the  bridge  and  gatesftom  foot  to  head,

\\  hich  we  make  here  ofiren  to  endure.

Was  there  fairc  wrought  in  mafQc  gold  tcofl  pure.

9J

And  though  they  have  great  ftore  of  metals  fine,

Tct  were  the  chambers  and  the  lodgings  here
Born  up  with  cryftall  collumns.that  did  fliinc
All  ov’r the  ftatcly  court  moft  bright  and  clcaic
A ftatcly  border,  caus’d  unto  the  cyne
Rcd,whitc,grcen,blew,and  yellow  to  appeare.
Enriched  with  divifions  for  the  nones.

Of  Ruble, Smarag,Zaphyr,TopatAones.

96

Moft  orient  pearls  and  gcmsofpallTngpiice

Were  fptinltlcd  on  the  pavements  here  and  there.
Hence  balmc  doth  come,hencc  other  precious  fpicc,
Which  from  lerufalem  men  wont  to  bcaicj
Hence commeth  musk,for  odours  fwcet  and  nice.
And  amber  purc,that  fome  in  bracelets  weatc  •

And  finally  allthingtgrow  therein  plenty.

That  in  thts^puntty  arc  efteem’d  onoftdeintie.

\ 9?

Moft  true  it  is, els  fome  have  written  lies.

The  Sorvdan  to  this  King  doth  tribute  pay.

For  that  in  this  Kings  power  alone  it  lies.

Great  Cayre  and  fettileE^y^r  to  decay,

Becaufe  that  by  tbofe  meant  he  may  devife,  ,

He  may  tarn  Nyle  from  them  another  way  t
ThisPrincc^eiw/iothcreiscardof  many,  1
Wccall  him  Frejter  John  or  Pre/er  lany.

9%

Of  all  the  Kings  that  ever  there  did  raigne.

This  King  cxccld  in  riches  and  in  ttcafure.

But  Ioffe  of  fight  made  all  his  comforts  vaine,

And  bard  hina  ev*ry  taft  of  worldly  pleafurc.

And  this  did  much  iocreafe  his  care  and  patne.

And  grieved  him  indeed  beyond  alt  meafurc.

That  all  biswealth  and  treafurcnotprcvcBted,

But  tint  with  famine  he  was  aye  tormcaied.


For  when  this  Princc(a$  hunger  meet  him  drew)

Did  but  prepare  himfclf  to  drink  or  cat.

Straight  of  Harpias  came  a curfed  crew.

With  mighty  wings,bugcpawcs,aRd  bellies  great
And  all  tlicdifhes  quite  they  overthrew.

And  giecdily  devoured  all  the  meat  j
And  tluf  they  left  they  did  fo  file  and  flaver,

As  few  could  brook  the  fight,but  none  thefaver.

100

The  caufe  was  this,why  hisgieat  plague  wa^fuch,
Becaufe  in  youth(whcn  men  moftcarclcffc  arc)
Finding  himfclf  to  be  ex  told  fo  much.

And pafliog  other  Kingsin  wealthfo  far.

So  foul  a pride  his  lofty  bcartdid  touch,

Againft  his  maker,he  would  needs  move  war,

T o which  intent  a mighty  power  he  led,

Vnto  that  mount  whence  hath  bis  head.

101

He  had  been  told, and  did  it  firm  believe.

That  on  t hat  mount, whofe  top  did  touch  the  skie,
Wasthatfame  place  where  Adamdwdt  and  Eve,
Before  their  fall  did  caufc  them  thence  to  flie .

He  hoping  fome  rare  conqueft  to  atchieve,

A mighty  hoft  prepared  by  and  by.

With  mind(fo  high  his  heart  with  pride  did  fwcll)
To  make  them  tribute  pay  that  there  did  dwell.

ici

But  high  lehova their  foulc  pride  repreft.

And  down  he  fent  bis  Angcll  that  fame  night.
Who  flue  an  hundred  thoufand  for  the  Icaft,

And  him  condemn’d  for  aye  to  lofe  hit  fight  ^
Then  fent  he  monfters  vile  him  to  moleft,

Tbofe  ugly  monfters,that  Harptar  hight.

Which  fo  devoure  and  fo  fpoilc  all  his  meat.
Scarce  they  permit  him  once  to  drink  or  cat.

103

And  that  which  drave  him  into  mcerederpairc.

Was  that  one  told  by  way  ofprophccie.

How  tbofe  foulc  creatures  ever  fliquid  repaire
Vnto  that  placCjtill  time  they  might  cfpie
A galianr  knight  all  armed  in  the  airc,
Vponawieged  bcaft  aloft  to  flie;

And  for  that  this  unpofliblc  hedeem’d,

Pall  hope  of  help  himfclfc  he  then  efteem’d.

104

Now  when  the  people  faw  from  cv’ry  wall.

And  from  each  towrc  the  ftrangely  flying  knigbt,-
Hc  happy  thought  bimlclfc,thatfirftof  all
Could  tell  the  king  of  this  unufed  fight  j
Whoftraightthepropheeieto  mind  did  call.

And  with  the  fudden  joy,forgctting  quite
His  tniftie  ftafFe,wcnt  groping  with  his  band,

T o welcome  him  that  now  came  down  to  land.

>05

Afiolfo  being  lighted, nearerdrew.

And  as  he  was  the  gicatcourtentring  in,

Behold  the  King  flood  ready  in  his  vew.

And  kneeling  down, to  fpeak  did  thus  begin,

O heav’iily  Angell,  O Afej/iax  new.

Though  I deferve  not  pardonformy  fin,

Tct  think  to  us  is  proper  to  oftend,

T 0 you, to  pardon  tbofe  that  wiU  amend,

Aa  5


IT  6


THE  XXXIII.  BOOKE


lo6


My  guilt  fo  heavy  on  my  confciencelies,

1 dare  notfue  thou  fliouldfl  my  fight  reftore.
Though  well  I wot  that  thou  couldfl  heal  minecycj,
Thatart  ofthofc  that  aye  ftand  God  before.

Let  then  this  plague  my  want  of  fight  fuffice.

And  Jet  me  not  be  fterv’d  thus  evermore.

At  Icaft  from  me  thefe  filthy  monfters  drive.

And  let  me  cat  with  quiet  while  1 live.

A nd  I do  vow  a temple  unto  thee,
nttt  com  Ofmarblefairc  to  build  herein  this  place,

VVIiofe  gates  and  cover  all  of  gold  fiiall  be.

Adorn’d  withcoflly  jewels  in  like  cafe.

Nam’d  by  thy  name, and  grav’d  that  men  may  fee
Thy  miracle,  which  no  time  fiiall  deface  .*

Thus  faith  the prortrate  King  that  nothing  fees,
And  gropes  to  have  embrac’d  Afioljos  knees,
lo*

The  Duke  to  him  thus  friendly  doth  reply,

Nor  Angcll  I, nor  new  Mejftcmm,

Nor  come  from  heav’n,bur  morta'I  man  am  I,

And  thrall  to  finne, unworthy  fo  high  name;

But  for  ycur  fake  my  beft  skill  I willtric.


mm  com

Ma.

bi  Hamtm,
ircbuam  ttbi
tburu  bong,
res :

but  tbii  ie Jpo-
fieu  tsuro
Cbttjltvt

^Ifo  SitiUiu
nnfiseritmt
unlike  tiii.
I^ec  d;a[ifn
cerii,mc ft-
eri  tbutis  bo-
mere

Humtnum

digntrecit-

fUt  HI  He.

/ciia  srrif.


The  Duke  with  blade  of  mettall  (harp  and  keen.
Strikes  at  the  monfttrs, thinking  them  to  quell ;
But  all  in  vaine,his  bootlrfie  blade  turn'd  back,
Ashehadfmitcenona  woollen  fack.

.

Somctav’noufiy  devour’d  the  fweet  repaft.

And  did  fo  eager  fill  their  greedy  gorge.

That  by  and  by  they  were  conipdd  as  fa  ft.

The  fame  in  beaftly  manner  to  difgorgc :

The  wofull  King  thinks  now  allfucccur  palf.

Till  good  Afioijo  fwarc  by  fwcetSaint  George,
Sith  foice  was  vaine,he  vvould  anotlier  way
Todrivethefemonfters  from  the  King  aflay.

>«4

The  born  which  ever  be  about  him  beares.

He  means  agaifift  thtfc  monfters  to  employ,

He  caus’d  the  King  and  bis  to  fiop  their  cares
With  molted  waxc,  that  no  noife  them  may  noy>
Els  might  his  blafi  have  bred  in  th«m  fucli  (cares,
Todtive  them  thence,  and  all  the  land  dclfroy  ;
Then  caus’d  he  them  prepare  another  feafti
And  up  he  gets  him  on  his  winged  bcaft.
in


To  kill  or  drive  tbofcfowlc  from  whence  they  came,  The  ftew'ard  that  did  know  his  mind  by  figney.


The  itferif-
uonot  tbt
Harpioi,


Which  tf  I dojgive  God,not  me  the  praifc,

That  for  your  help  did  hither  guide  my  waics,

109

For  him  your  Churches  and  youraltars  make,
Thatmuft  of duty  Church  and  altars  have;

This  faid.hc  up  from  ground  the  King  doth  take.
And  went  with  him  and  other  Barons  grave :
Straightwaics  of  meat  provifion  new  they  make.

For  fo  the  hungry  King  in  haft  doth  crave.

In  hope  that  now  the  monfters  would  be  quiet.

And  not  to  interrupt  hits  at  his  diet.

no

Forthwith  a fumptuousdinner  was  prepai’d.

In  (lately  fort  great  ftorc  and  of  the  beft,

Senapo  hopes  Aftolfo  can  him  guard

From  thofc  foulc  fowlcs  that  did  him  fo  molcft  j

But  lo  a fodain  noife  forthwith  was  heard.

The  fent  of  t hofe  fame  viands  that  were  died
Had  brought  them  thither, ere  the  men  were  able
To  fet  down  all  the  di(hes  on  the  tabic.

lit

Of  them  came  fev’n  togcther|in  a knot.

With  womans  faces, wan  with  deadly  cold.

So  hunger-ftarv'd,  as  death  it  felfe  might  not
Be  at  firft  fight  more  hideous  to  behold,  (wot.
Their  wings  wercgreat,but  foule  blacke  wingsGod
T licir talents  (h arp  to  gripe,but  ftrong  to  hold,

A large  foulc  paunch, a filthy  taileand  long.

From  whence  there  came  an  odour  mighty  ftrong.

1 1 z

As  fodaine  heard,  fo  fodaine  were  they  feen.

For  on  the  cable  all  at  once  they  fell ,

And  fpoil’d  the  meat,  and  from  their  wombs  «nclcen
Gaft  lothfbme  filth  to  (ce,irkfome  to  fmcll ;


Straightwaics  another  diiinci  doth  addrclTc,

With  ftorc  ofdainiy  meats  and  coftly  wines ;

Butin  a trice  more  foon  then  enc  could  guelTe,

The  filthy  flock(asfaminc  them  inclines)

Came  down, and  fcaz’d  upon  the  coftly  mc(Tc,

But  ftraight  AfloljO  blew  them  fuch  a blaft.

As  on  the  (bdaiac  made  them  all  agaft.

I |6

The  noife  into  their  open  cares  (b  enter’d,

That  had  no  means  to  flop  them, nor  defence.

As  fo  their  ftomacks  and  tlicir  tafts  diftcmpci 'd,
They  fled,asfcarc  cxpeld  all  other  (cnce;

The  Englifl}  Duke  to  follow  them  advcntci’d.

And  winding  ftiil  bis  horn,  he  chas’d  rficm  thence.
To  that  hils  foot, whence  Nylus  fiift  doth  fail.

If  rb  that  Nyle  have  any  head  at  all.

117

About  the  bottomcof  thismighiy  mount
There  is  a cave  defeending  like  a well.

By  whichfasdwcllers  by  dooft  recount)

A fpeedy  paflage  one  may  have  to  hell  j
To  this  the  monfters  fled, and  madcaccount
Within  this  cave  fafe  from  the  noife  to  dwell.

Which  feen,  aftolfo  from  his  bcaft  allighted,

And  ceaft  the  blowing  that  them  fo  affrighted.

It  8

And  for  he  did  with  heed  the  caves  mouth  mark.

He  nearer  doth  approch  unto  the  fame.

And  with  a lifining  care  he  then  doth  hatk
If  any  found  from  thence  unto  him  came ;

The  entrance  lookt  all  like  a dungeon  dark.

With  fmoke  that  feem’d  tocomedrom  fmothc/d
But  more  of  this  hereafter  I will  treat,  (flame  ;

For  now  this  book  begins  to  be  too  great.


Moral!*  In  thuxxxt^»bool^  there  are  mary  things  worth  tie  oh/ervatierij  both  for  hi/ioticaS  matter  j atalfo  inAffegoricaB
Jinee,and  therefote  I would  not  fiarid  tong  in  the  Moral/:  Only  this  note  IwiUtale  of  Gradaflb/or  breach  oj  hi^t  omife,
in  not  bringing  the  horji  bacl^  to  the  fountaint^atwo*  (ovenonted  between  them .-  that  mary  hraxe  and  vamr.t  men.

fuel


.Afloifo
faeaees  af-
ter the  maa-
neret  the
Englijhaihim
lsttt,if  iaim
Seorgi.


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


27;


/uch  as  he  is  here  Jeferibed  to  beybow  ever  th^ (land  upon  termes  oj  honour  and  value.yet  if  they  mry  ob'aine  rl  eh pui~
pofe  roithout  blortes,  they  will  tn.vy  times  diife/ic-e  both  with  honour  and  hoHtJiit:  whiihyet  I judge  rat  I cr  an  examilo
lojltun.then  aprefident  to  bee  fo/lorved.  Andsn  Senaptt,  that  through  riches  and  abundance  grew  foiufolenty  tiatl.ee
would  needs  tbini^e  to  conquer  Paradife ; wee  may  fee  the  courfe  o' young  carelejfe  men,  that  being  left  rti  h ty  fhetr  pa-
rent s,  or  els  adva?ued( unworthiy  in  their  own  eonfciencesjto  fome  cxtraordirtaiy  fortunes ,/lraigHt  in  cone,  its  bigmio
dejpife  tke  divine pTovidence(as  Senapo ajfuulted  Paradife janddijpute  with  their prophane tongues, not  again/l  this  or
that  religion , but  again/l  all  religion,  having  no  argument  fo  probable  indeed  and  Jo  jurcible,  as  iLuwoich  the  Poet
Mamall  reciicth  oj  one  i>«Iius ;

NulloseflTc  D(os,  inane  cerium
AfUrmat  Silius,  probatque  ijuod  fe
Faftum,dum  ncgatbxcjvida  beatum,

Th'os  in  EngliJIj  :

Tbachcav’n  is  void,  and  that  no  gods  there  arc,

Silius  affirmes,  and  all  his  proofe  is  this,

That  wliilcfuchblafphcmicspronouncchcdare,

Heliveth  herein  eafe and  earthly  bliffe.

But  this  matter  iPtaUtoucb  more  at  large  in  the  Allegoric.

T or  the  hi/lories  touched  in  this  boo{,tbey  are  many  and  divers, hut  the  (pedal  drift  that  mine  author  hath  in  this  bool^,  pjj/j  qj
is  to  note  how  thofe  hjngs  of  France  that  have  come  to  invade  Italy, and  to  mafe  a conqxtefl  tkereoj,vr  oany  part  thciof,
have  had  ever  ill fucccjfe,  and  been  either  fallen  or  (oiled;  and  of  the  other  fide,  thofe  that  have  come  to  re  feat  them,  and
ta\e  their  parts, hi:-  c many  times  brought  bacl{  honour  and  vidory.  No'wfir/l  mine  author  for  tbefner  bringing  in  of
the  matter  fat  hers  it  upon  Merlin  ourEngliJh  Prophet,  (as  they  termebimjofwhom  I have  (pollen  before  in  the  notes  of
the  third  booli,  alledging  that  he  by  Magtcl[  framed  that  fumptuaus  ball,  and  therein  painted  upon  the  slireyn  thereof  ail
thtfefloriesofthetirnctocome.

Firfl  he  recites  allthc  cxceticnt  drawers  of  the  time  pafl,  talking  by  that  occafion  to  praife  the  excellent  worl^man/bip
tf  foiTK  of  his  own  time ; their  names  be  reciteth  hudling  fogetker,tut  here  I wik  particularly  touch  them  j or  their  falxes
that  have  not  read  of  them,  and  are  defirous  to  l^now  oj  whence  they  are.

Timagoras  was  a Calcydonian,and  was  the  firfl  that  is  JpeciaUy  noted  to  have  compared  bis  cunning  with  another  of  "T  imago*
the  fimefcience,  and  to  have  had  the  glory  from  him.

PaTfbtiCius  an  Ephefian,notedJpecially for  his  exceUent Jhadowingandgivi/ggood propoi tion  to  the  countenance, and  Panhafi-
in  the  outermofi  lines  of  theface, which  is  afreciall  point  of  that  art.  _

Polygnotos  I find  no  extraordinary  thing  to  Jpeal^e  of,  enely  / read  that  bee  ufed  firfl  to  draif  •women  in  white  gar-  Polignc-
mnts,and  had  a jpeciallgraoe  in  mailing  the  opening  of  the  mouth.  tus-

Timant, th^  praife  bu  wit  as  much  as  his  worfi,jor  mailing  in  a great  table  thepilfure  of  lphigcnia,y?ijnf/r»^  at  tie  Timant.
altar  to  be  facrijiced;and  having  drawn  all  thefanders  by  very  fad,andwith  wojuU  countenances,  andjpecially  her  tin-
ilUiWhcn  he  came  to  her  father  (he  made  bimwith  a fcarfe  afore  his  face,  figniiying  tbeieby  that  his  grief  wasgreater  tlen
could  be  ften  in  his  countenance.

Piotogenesw<w  borne  in  Sycaunum  a country  fubjedto  tie  Rhodians,  he  was  noted  for  fomewhat  too  much  curio fi-  Protoge-
ty  andtedioufrsejfe  (a  fault  our  cauntrimen  be  much  noted  of , that  they  linow  not  when  their  worlic  is  well; ) howbeit  nes.
hisworhewasheld  in  filch  price, that  Demetrius the  fiege  of  Rhodes  , and  having  opponunitic  off'ered  him  to
have  fierd  the  townc  on  that  fide  where  a table  oj  his  drawing  did  hangfe  raifcdhis  fiege  rather  then  he  would  burn  that
table.

ApoWodose'was  fb  excellent  {as  Pliniewriteih  of  him  tbuijthat  he  opened  thedoorcof  lunningin  that  art,  bywhich  Apnollo-
Zeuxesafterwardentredinto  it  intke  citie  oj  Heraclia.The  /lory  of  the/lrife  betweene  Zeuxesand  Pnrrhafius  itwc/l
linown  1 thinti  to  all,butyet  I will  briefly  fet  it  down:  Zeuxes  tofrtew  I is  worl^manfitip, brought  a table,  n herein  he  had  zeuxes
paintedgrapes  fo  naturally, that  the  birds  came  andpeci^t  at  them,  thinhjng  them  to  be  grapes  indeed : the  other  bad
dramm  onely  a curt aine, filch  as  they  ufe  to  have  before  pilfures  to  hyep  them  from  the  duft-,  niiih  curtaine  looked  folil^e
a true  curtaine,  thatZeuxa  being  proud  of  the  judgement  of  the  birds,  bad  him  now  to  remove  his  curtaine  tojbtw  his
pUlure ; but  being  quiclfy  aware  of  his  errour  ,with  a^ind  of  noble  bafhfulnejfe  granted  the  prife  to  bis  adverfiiy,  con-
fejftng  it  was  more  to  deceive  a workman  then  a bird.

Appelles  born  at  Coas,was  held  in  fuch  reputation  for  his  drawing,  that  Alexander  the  great  ga:e  co'nrnandement  Appfllcs
that  none fbouldma\e  bis  pilfure  but  onely  ApeUes.He  began  the  image  ot  Venus,  and  died  ere  it  was  done,  leaving  the
imperfeffworlifo  full  ol the  perjeHion  of  his  art, that  no  mandurfi  ever  ta\e  upon  him  to  end  it  : fo  as  even  to  this  day  tf
any  bcgina  worl^inany  l-indwilhany  felicity , and after  leave  ft  unfinijl}’d,they  fraigkt  lifen  him  10  ApJles.  Now  ha-
vingfpohen  fo  much  oj  all  the  fe  famous  men  of  old  times,  it  were  an  envious  part  to  fay  nothing  oj  thofe  of  this  age,  that
have  been  famous, and  are  named  by  mine  author  alfo  ; wherefore  / would  touch  one  or  two  of  uem.

Leonard  Vtnei  was  a Florentine , a goodly  man  of  per  fan, and  fo  excellent  in  the  idea  or  the  conceived  forme  of  his  Leon,
if  orl{,that  though  he  could  fimjh  hut  few  worl;^syet  thofe  he  did  hadgreat  admiration.  Vinci.

.jdlfo  there  was  Andrew  Mantinea('wi>o?n  Ijorgot  to  put  inhy  overfight  inlis  due  place , but  I will  mahelim  amends  Andr.
herejwbo  being  hut  of  mean  parentage  andverypoore.yet  his  aptnejfe  to  this  !(ind  being  made  linowne  to  tke  Narqusfe  ^iant-
of  Mantua,  and  encouraged  !y  his  liberality  (the  jpecia/lnurfe  of  aU  good  arts  (grew  mofr  excellent  in  it:  andbefide  0-
ther  rare  worl{S  that  are  feen  andjhowne  of  his  in  Rome  and  in  Mantua,  he  is  faidte  be  the  fir/}  that  devifed  cutting  in
(trajfe, which  how  (uriotss  a thing  it  is, the  piftures  in  this  bto\e  may  partly  te/lifie.

Aa  ^ Gian


378  THE  XXXIII.  B^OOKB

6'nnBcl-  Clin  "BcWinewas aVenetia)t,anJ WO! th  more famoui  becaufe  Mahomet  (liifgoftle  Turhj)  vat  fofavre  inloz:

hac.  vith  a taile  of  his  drarvivg.that  he  font  for  him,but  the  Venetians  vouU  not  fparc  him:  marie  they  fent  a hroi  her  of  his,

a 'Vctygoodrvorhtnan.Nm  (albeit  theTnrhs  are  hy  their  lawes  forbidden  images)  yet  vat  this  Prince  Join  Itje  te:tk
that pidure  I Jpalieo},that  when  the  other  drawer  came  to  him,  he  made  him  draw  both  his  own piiiure  afidti.e  Turf^s,
and  fo  after  fent  him  bach,  againefboth  highly  commended  and  rewarded.

WicliacI  Michael  Agnolofwe  pronounce  it  Michel  AngeIo)wtf4  the  rare  man  of  his  age  for  drawing  andcarvinghoth,  aitci-

Agnoio,  to  the  excellency  of  the  art  veryyi,ng,and  doing  many  notable  worlds : but  thee  be  mo(ljamous,onewai  carving  of  an

Image  ofPitie  in  Rome, another  was  a Giant  in  Florence, the  third  was  a picture  0}  certain  nahed  men  that  went  towajh
them  [elves  in  Arno,andhearing  ojafiidden  alar  me  inthe  camp,they  made  ha/l  to  put  on  their  clothes:  in  which  piSue
were  contained  all  the geftures ^looly  and  motions  that  men  could  imagine  would  happen  in  fitch  an  accident:  Usja'ler
firnamed  hmAnge\o  in  his  cradle, as  a prefage  of  fame  great  excellency  above  ordinaty  that  I efhouldgrow  /o.Raplad
and  Sebaftian  were  hut  his  fehoUers, though  both  very  perfclf : all  which  I have  the  morewiUingty  noted,  and  at  mote
length  then  I waswont  in  the  former  boolies  in  life  matters  fo  lightly  touched , both  becaufe  my  Jelje  (/  nujt  confejje)
tafe  great  pleafure  in  fitch  worfes  (as  pleafing  ornaments  of  a houje^  and  good  remembrances  o>  ourfiicnds ) as  aljo  to
fhew  tnwhat  great  reefnirg  that  fcience  lath  been  with  Emperours  andgreat  Primes,  and  with  Prelates  andreligms
per  fans  i kowfoever  fomeaujlere  or  rather  uncivill  perfonsyviU feeme  either  to  condemne  it  or  contemne  it.  Andttougb
indeedthis  Realms  hath  not  bredany  Miclicl  Angelcs.nor  men  of  fitch  rare  perfcHion  as  may  deferve  bts  title :

Michel(moreihen  a man)  Angcll  divine.

Ter  I may  fay  thus  much  without  partiality  for  the  honour  of  my  countny,  as  mine  author  hath  done for  thehotmro'bit,
that  we  have  with  us  at  this  day  one  that  for  limnwg(which  l tafe  to  hethevery  perfeliion  of  that  art)  is  comp^ablt
with  any  of  any  other  ccuntrey.  And  for  the  prat fe  that  I taldyou  of  PatthaCws  jor  tafing  the  true  lines  of  the  jace,  /

M Hilli-  \}urcouniTyman(ImeanM.U\l\iar6)is  inf eriour  to  none  that  lives  at  this  day  : as  among  other  things  0^  his  do^

3rd.  ivg,my  felj  have  feen  him  in  white  and  blacfe  infmire  lines  onlyfet  downe  the  feature  oj  the  ^uecnes  Map  flits  counte-

nance,that  imeas  even  thereby  to  bee  fnewne;  and  he  is  fo  pet  fell  therein  (as  t have  heard  others  tell)  dat  hee  can  fetit
downe  by  the  idea  he  halhiWttkout  any pattetneyvUch(foraU  Apc\\esprivtledge)was  more  ( I believe ) then  hee  could
have  done  for  Alexander.  But  I am  entredfofar  into  piff  tic  es, that  I fnow  not  how  toget  out  againe.-and  though  there
he  fo  much  other  fiory  in  this  xxxifboof  as  will  asf  fume  time,yet  I thought  better  to  (et  down  this  of  thefe  notable  mem
here  altogether, for  thofe  that  have  a mind  to  read  it, then  to  hav  e turned  them  over  to  the  T able,  where  they  nuft  loo  ft
one  in  one  place, and  another  in  another, according  as  the  names  would  fall  out  in  the  order  of  the  Alphabet.  But  now  to
the  French  fiory.

1 a flaffc.  Clodovcus»is«  thefrfl  Ring  of  Francc,after  that  Clodoveus  thatfirfl  receivedthe  Chriflian  Religion.Thu  Prince
what  time  Giimoildoitufe  of  Benevent  bad  civill  wars  in  Lombardy  with  Pcrderitea?.’dGondibcrto  twobrothert,
taftng  this  opportunity, made  war  o»  Grimoaldo;  hut  Grimoaldo  doubting  his firength  to  meet  them  in  the  field,  with
a notable  flratagern  vanquifhed  them,  hefained  at  if  he fled  and forfoof  his  tents, leaving  them  full  of  vitall  and  flrorg
wines, which  the  French  men  fo  eagerly  devourtd,and  dranf  fo  devoutly  of  the  wine, that  it  made  them  fleep  more foOnd-
ly  that  night  then  was  for  their  fafety.-for  the  Thife  of  Benevent  fet  on  them  in  the  dead  of  the  night,  and fa  more  by  force
of  his  wine  then  of  his  weapons  vanquifhed  them.

I S (laiFc,  In  the  time  afPopeVroan  thefourth,mentionedcovertly  in  the  1 8 flaflc, one  Charles  T>u\e  ofAnieu  was  called  into

Italy  by  the  faid  Pope, andpronounced  Ring  of  Sicily.  But  in  afJsort  time  having  done  many  great  feat  $,  the  SicULzjts
confpiredagainfi  him  by  the  meaner  of  one  lohn  of  Procida,  andmiiTderedthetnaH  with  great  cruelty  at  the  found  (fan
evenfong  bell:  fo  as  it  is  to  this  day  a ly^word  ufed  in  Italy, if  any  notable  cruelty  be  done,  that  is  withaU fodainly  exccu-
ted,they  call  it  the  Sicilians  even fong : for  they  didat  one  evenfong  IfiU  not  only  all  the  Frenchmen,  hut  alfo  all  thewt-
nen  they  thought  to  be  with  child  by  them.

St  llafFc,  The  Earle  of Marcamentionedinthe  21  fl  affe, marie  dSfd^f^^^hoan  of  Naples  (lie  matter  for  the  flrangenejfe  of  the

‘ pre fidtnt,!  thought  worth  the  noting) this  loan  being  fijler  to  C harlcs  the  ih'rd,and heire genet aU  to  tie  Crown  of  Na-
ples,was  contented,for  avoiding  the f wle  infamiethatjhe  had  by  her  over  great familtari/y,andthe  too  much  itward  ac-
quaintance of  one  Pando!fo,a  mean  man,  to  marry  with  one  lames  Earle  ofMatca,  and  of  the  blood  royaU  of  France  :
tut  firfi  fhe  indented  with  him, that  hefhould  only  have  the  bare  title  of  Ring,  butjhe  would  have  the  government  whol-
ly in  her  hands:  he  being  once  in  pofleflton,bral^e  bis  covenant, and  wouldneedsgoveme  all:  but  fhe  ly  the  help  (^Francis
Sforfcjtn  the  end  deprived  himofihe  whole, and  fent  him  bacl^e  into  bis  countrey  againe, where  the poore  Gewleman  wsu
gladtomahythimfelfe  an  Hermit.

\ g ftaSe.  Lodwike  Sforfe  Jpoljen  of  in  the  »8  flafft,  for  emulation  of  the  Ring  of  Naples,  firfi  brought  Charles  the  eight  inta

Jtaly,andmadehimfoflrong,thatinthecndhe  was  not  able  to  get  him  out  againe.  rfcwLodwikc  his  manner  was  (hit
to  he  plotting  of  new  devices,  to  fet  other  Princes  at  variance ; now  tabingpart  with  one  fide  openly,  andfeedingthe  0-
ther  with  money  fesretly;  never  jafi  friend  to  any,  never  fo  proud  as  when  with  his  fmooth  tongue  andfaire promifes  het-
had  beguiled  fame  plaine  and  open  man,  not  fo  fine  headed  as  Umfelfe.  Now  though  we  mi^t  perhaps  note  fume  men
afensr  time  held  for  notable  wife  men,  and  leaning  much  to  this  Ifind  of  courfe,  yet  l fee  fmali  incouragement , either  b^
his  h(ginning,or proceeding, or  ending,wly  anyfhould  rhinlys  him  worth  the  foUmivg ; hee  began  an  ufurper,  lee  lived-
adiflembler,hediedaheggar,and(whichisworfe)aprifoneT.  Further  it  is  notedinGuichiaidine,  thatheefpeni  (as  /
remember)  eight  hundred  thottfand  'Budgets  in  that  h,ind  I Jpal^e  of, fitting  Princes  together  by  1 he  eases:  and  he  gat  thU
for  bis  labour, that  no  Prince  lovedhm,as  appearedwlenbeing  ttnytares  a prifiner  tn  France,  no  man  ever  made  furs
in  a manner  for  his  liberty.  tVlerefereTuUy  faith  to  Anthonie  inone  of  his  Philippilis,  Tcmiior  Anteri«  tjuorum
idiixatteuseofumesiitusaouperiiosfekete.Imarvell  (faith  heffriendAnthooie,  that  you  are  not  afiaid  of  then


OF  ORLANDO  rVRIOSO.  279

enlt  yvhofe  eviU  aCfsyou  do  follow.  So  furely  /wouUniJl)  none  oftnj  friends  neitJa  injoivatc  nor  pur  li'\c  ajf'aircs,to
follow  thefe  billing  conrfes, but  holditfor  a nuxrm.fint  he  that  il  nor  a true  friend  Jh.ll  no:  harsc  a true  friend.

The Marqtiisof  l^eCcasitoucbedinthexxix./lalfc  at  tI.  eaJfduU  of  Caflcllnozo  in  Naples,  hcirg  impatient  o‘'all  iu  fiaffe.
flay,bargainedwithan  Ethiopian  Jlavc  to  burn  tic  French  na".ie,and  to  let)  im  in  at  the  t lurch  called  oanta  Ciclc,
but  the  jlave  havinggreater  rewards  givenhim  of  tic  Frcnclmeii,bctrayedkim,  and  foot  him  in  with  aforlyd.nrow,
and  fo  filled  him.

In  the  xxxiif  .fl ajfe  where  hejpcal;cs  of  Gerhdod, where  Livinno  the  Venetian  Captair.e  was  taken,  I wiH refer  the  j j flaffc .
reader  to  Gmcc\3rdine  for  the  whole  di  fcourfe  of  the  matter,  beginning  at  the  league  of  Cambray.  But  tlcfrbjlancc  of
the  m.ttter  briefly  is  /fc«.M3ximillian//)c  Emperour, Lewes  >;_ing  of  Ft  ante, andall  the  Ictrgs  oj  Europe  in  EjflCi , toge-
ther with  Pope  luVio.made  a league  at  Cambi  ay , combining  theinfelves  againfl  theVcneiians,  and  indeed  p^cvailcu/o
fane  againfi  thcm.that  they  left  them  almoft  noihirgtn  tena  firma  as  they  call  it , dividing  all  their  toirnes,  fometo
hhe  king  ot  Spaine,fome  to  the  Pope. fime  to  Lewes  himfclfe,diiers  to  the  Empcrour,.  and  two  or  t hrec  to  the  oj
Ferrara  But  in  the  end(  as  commonly  in  fongs  of fo  many  parts  they  cannot  long  hyep  perjtli  harrriony  ,but  that  fomefng
our  of  tune)  fo  it  fell  out, that  in  patting  the  fpoiles,thiy  of  the  league  could  not  weH  agree  among  the  mjclvts, and  fog.ix  e
breath  to  the  Venetians, who  thereby  recovcredmiich  of  their  flat  cagaine.

In  the  xxxvij.flajfe  he  fltealys  of  the  overthrow  of  the  Swi^i^ers,  that  hadhcenheforewonderfttH  proudoftbeirglor  57  AafFc.
rioustitlcgiventhcm  by  the  Pope,w.ho  fent  them  the  pontificall  banner,with  this  titleunto  it.  Defenders  of  the  liber-
ty of  thcChu-rch  againft  the  pride  of  Princes.  But  after  that  IJngPr  Ancis  came  into  Italy  and  bcfieged  MiUan,  the
Swi\y:TS  that  were  in  the  towne  refuftng  to  m.t{c  a peace  with  him , which  he  offered  them,  camming  after  to  b.itiell>
were  overcome, and feventhoufandofthemflainc.  '.'f  /

In  the  xliiij.flaffe  and fojorwardfor  three  orfourc  morc,he  mentions  the  hatiell  of  Pavia, wheri  the  hfng  of  France  44  flaffc.
Wat  tal(en,a  thing  Jb  generally  kjiown  as  I need  not  ft  and  long  on  it-  only  mine  author  touches  one  chief  e over  fight  of  this
lyng,  whichwas,that  hisma/ler-maflers  deceivedhim  tnthe  number  of  his  men;  but  how  foever  it  was,  feircit  isthts
Prtnee  was  a mofi  worthy  man,and  wanted  no  quality  of  an  excc/lcnt  king,  valiant  and  boiintifull,  and  fuch  afavouret
O'  learned  men,that  the  Italians  termed  him  Padre  c mAite, the  father  and  mother  of  learning  and  libcrall  fcienccs.

In  the  xlix.ftaffe  he  toucheih  the  facli  of  Home, which  the  T/ulyjof  Burbon  was  ringleader  of, though  himjelfe  was  at  „ ^

theveryfir/l  affaultflaine.withaharguebtifhfhotinthehead,  but  the  other  Captames  fachyd  the  town,  and in  flue  ^ ^

drave  the  Pope  to  his  ranfome.  And  thus  much  for  the  fiory  ofthisbook:  now  1 come  toihe  Allegory.

'Diver fe  excellent  good  Allegories  may  be  taken  out  oft  bis  prettie'fltiion  o/Pre/ier  \3ns\'c, called  Scnapos.One  is, as  Allegory,
I partly  touched  in  the  meraH,when  men  through  wealth  and  honour  grow  proud,  anddejpifers  of  God  and  religion,
whofeflate  is  damnable  and  incurable, except  afyifg  knight  come  downefiem  heaven,!  meant  fome  Avgcltof  God,  or
fpeciaU grace  of  G»d,to  remove  thefe  ntonffers  and  monflrom  opinions  out  of  their  minds.  T he  punifhment  ofbUndneffe
Laid  upon  him  for  that  his  prefiimptuous  affaulting  Paradice,  fhewes  that  no  men  are  indeed  more  blind,  then  thofe  '
jh.tt  think  they  fee  fo  much  more  then  other  men-,Jpccially  when  they  enter  into  that  wilfuU  blindneffe,  of  not  feeing  ihe
way  to  their  own  falvation.Italy  had  been  noted  long  to  have  had  many  irreligious. men  in  it:  and  no  marvell,for  our.  olf
Englijh  proverb  is, the  nearer  the  Church, thefurther  from  God. : yet  furely  thofe  de/pifers  of  religion,  are  thcmfelves
dclpifed  ofm\vy;  infomuch  as  it  is  grown  for  aby-word  among  them-,  when  thy  jpeake  of fuch  a man, they  will fay, Oh,
he  is  grown  a profound  wife  man,he  begins  now  not  to  believe  in  Chrift,  tlercly  ip  onically  noting  his  pajfingfol/y.'  1
•would  ft  and  longer  in  applying  the  particulars  oj  this  Allegory,  ■ but  that  1 doubt  1 am  fomewhat  too  tedious  in  thefe
sijtes  already.  ' - .

In  the  Harpias  that  fnatch  away  the  meat  from  the  mouth  of  \}]isping,heaHudcs  ( as  himfelfe  expoundetb  plainl}/  in
thebeginningof  thenext  book)tothcSwii\ers  andother  ftrdnget^  that  Jpoite  Italy.  But  a lilieftory,  which  this  muy  Allufion.


jfeem  to  allude  unto,  is  told  of  C?}o\and  Zet,  fonnes  6f  OrUlty  3.  daughter  to  Eriftheus  hjngof  Athens,  who  are  fa'idii^
uave  delivered  Phincus  of  Thrace  from  the  H.trpias  in  fuel)  a fort.  '


Here  end  the  annotations  upon  the  xxxiiij.  bookc.


- ■

“4


\


xx\


R

^^ilfo

k — " '■’  1^'

«

%^/?J|g[^

^J!

THE  XXXIIII.  BOOKE


281


«&t  f~va  VT  :^')  Va  IT  fv*  (V?i  ^ Pv*V^>gi  *r  ^*^>TVa  *T  fv*  if^^ra  *T  is.*  (\a  VC  ]v*  QtUi


THE  ARGVMENT.


Aftolfo  hearei  of  hydi^s p/a^ae  i»  helf
Until  I ti)e  [moke  annoid  and  fouled  him  ft,

T hat  he  wxjfaine  to  wap)  him  at  a well ;
ff^htch  done^to  Paradife  he  fraight  dothgo^

Inhere  he  doth  meet  Saint  lohn^who  doth  him  tell
Strange  thine  j^and  as  frange  things  to  him  doth  pow :
ty4nd  there  Orlandos  wit  be  doth  receave,
ty^nd fees  the fatall  t breeds  the pflers  weave.


|H  foulc  Harpias^gcecdjy  bun-
> gcrftarv’dj

'Whom  wrath  diyinc  for  juft
revenge  hath  fent
To  blinded that  hath
’ deferv’d

'For  finnes  both  old  and  late
' fb  to  be  fhentc
^Thc  fiiftenancc  that  fliould
_ _ j for  food  have  ferv’d.

For  widowes  poore  and  orphans  innocent,

Thcfc  filthy  monfters  doconfume  and  waft  it
Oft  at  one  mcalCjbcfore  the  owners  tail  it.

%

He  dqubtlelTc  guilty  ii  of  grievous  fin.

That  firft  fet  openthatlong  doled  cave.

From  which  all  filth  and  g.  ccdincfle  came  in

To  /w^,and  it  infefted  have  j

Then  ended  good  then  did  bad  dayes  begin.

And  difcord  foulc  fo  fane  off  all  peace  drave.

That  now  in  warrcs.jn  poverty  and  painc.

It  long  hath  tari*d,and  fliall  long  remame.

Vntill  flic  can  her  flothfull  fonnesawake,

From  drowfie  flccpjthat  now  thcmfclvesforgct.

And  fay  tothcm,for  fliamc  example  take.

Let  others  valiant  deeds  your  courage  whet :

Why  fliould  not  you  the  like  afts  undertake.

As  in  time  paft  did  Calai  and  Zet  ?

That  erft  like  aid  to  Phineas  did  bring.

As  did  Afolfo  th*Ethiopian  king.

4-

Wh«  having  driv*n  away  thcfc  monfters  feP,

From  blind  Sendpos  boord,as cift  1 told,


And  chafed  them  fb  farre,untill  they  fell
Into  the  cave  moft  fearfull  to  behold  5
That  fearfull  cave  that  wasthc  mouth  of  hell.

To  hearken  at  the  fame  he  waxed  bold.

And  heard  moft  wofull  mourning, plaints  and  cries.
Such  as  from  hell  were  likely  to  arife.

5

Apolfo  minds  into  the  place  to  enter.

And  yifit  thofc  that  have  forgone  thislight.

And  pierce  the  earth  cv’n  tothe  middle  center.

To  fee  if  ought  may  t here  be  worth  the  fight  j
For  why  he  thought, what  need  I feare  to  venter.
That  have  this  horn, with  which  I can  affright
Foulc  Sathan,CerbcriM  with  triple  chaps,

And  fafely  keep  ray  Iclfc  from  all  mifliaps 2

6

He  tics  his  flying  bcaft  fall  by  the  rcines.

With  mind  to  bell  itfelfe  tobid  defiance.

His  horn  fall  ti’d  about  his  neck  rcmaincs.

In  which  much  more  thenTword  he  puts  affiance:
But  at  his  very  entrance  hecomplaines
Of  that  fame  fmokc  that  bred  him  much  annoyance,
Thatfavoui*d  llrong  ofbrimflonc  and  of  pitch,

• Yet  flill  Apolfo  goeth  thorow  flitch.

7

But  ftill  the  further  that  he  foiwaid  goes.

He  feels  the  fmoke  more  noifomc  and  more  thick,
That  in  himfclfche  gan  now  tofuppofe.

If  further  he  fliould  wade  he  fliould  be  fick.

When  lo  a fliadow  feemed  to  difclofc
It  felfc  to  him.of  fbmwhat  that  was  quick,

A nd  to  his  thinking  hither  wav’d  and  thither.

Much  like  a carcaffe  hanged  long  in  weather.

Tk


THE  XXXIIII.  BOOKE.


lAmxtrite,
Isv*  of
mham  yphif
hanged  hin-
Jelfe  in  the
IleefCyfrM,
Daphne  in
the  firH  boo\
ofOvidi  Mlm
tmorfhefts.

^Thifeiafer.

^riain

ne.

Jafm  fer-
fook  fiipfi-
fhile,and  af-
ter Medea.

“ t/£neai
ferfoo^  Dido,
-Amman  (on
teDivid,  de-
fleured  Tha-
mar, and  af-
ter dts^tfed
her,a»dfut
her  away,  fer
taliich  be  teat
fit  mby  -rib-
folon  •


i32

s

The  E>tglijh  Duke  that  had  defire  to  know,

Iffo  hefaw  a body  ora  Tidon,

Strake  with  his  fword  thcrcatlo  fierce  a blow,

As  would  iudeed  thereof  have  made  divifion.

If  It  had  been  as  it  did  feem  in  fhow  :

But  when  hefaw  his  fword  madcnoincifion,
Heguefied  that  it  was(by  that  blowes giving)

A paflcafpiritjiiot  a body  living.

9

Then  heard  he  how  thuswofuilylt  faid.

Oh  you  that  to  tlicfe  lower  partsdefeend,

Bring  us  no  hurr,though  you  can  bring  no  aid.

And  be  not  fo  to  thofe  whom  none  can  friend.

The  Duke  amaz’d, both  hands  and  footflepsflaid.
And  faid  unto  theghoft,foGod  thee  fend
Some  fpeedy  cafe  of  this  thy  painfull  fmart,

As  thou  wilt  dciac  to  tell  me  who  thou  art.

10

And  if  to  work  your  grod  lay  in  my  lot.

Above  or  here  I fiiould  be  glad  to  do  it.

Ah(faid  theghofi)my  plague  with  fuch  a knot
Is  ti’d,as  mottall  ftrength  cannot  undo  it.

Yet  your  requeft  deny  you  will  1 not,

Bccaufc  you  have  fb  great  a mind  unto  ir,

I will  declare  to  you  iny  flock  and  name.

And  eke  the  caufewhy  tothisplaccicamc.

II

My  n.imc  is  Iyd/«,born  of  piinccly  birch,

And  bred  tn  pomp  and  folaccsdclightfull.

Though  now  in  place  excluded  from  ail  mirthj
I lie  condemn’d  by  Gods  high  doom  and  rightful!,
Becaufe  while  I did  live  above  on  earth,
Vntomylovel  fhew’d  my  fclfcfofpightfull  j
And  many  more  be  here  for  like  offences.

As  he  that  all  dot  h I ule, their  plague  difpcnccs.

it

Here  lies  that  faire,but  ccuell  Anaxaritee,

Whofe  corps  a ftonc  divine  revenge  did  make,

Her  ghoft  in  fm®ke  that  no  light  ay  fhallclarific.
Doth  moft  fcvere.but  moft  juft  penance  take,
Becaufe  flie  could  withoutall  fenfe  of  chaiity.
Behold  hcrlover  hanging  for  herfakc :

Here  "Daphne  lies, that  now  repents  her  fliunnicg
Oi Pheebus, whom ClicCcapd  with  over-running.

I?

Too  tedious  it  would  be  for  me  to  tell
The  fcvVall  names  of  ev’ry  female  fjiirir.

That  for  reward  of  their  hard  hearts, in  hell
Appointed  arefneh  portions  to  inherit.

Yet  farre  more  arc  the  men  that  there  do  dwell,
For!ikcofFencc,whoforthcirevill  meiit  (them.

Are  placed  much  more  low, though  fomwhat  nigh.
Where  fume  doth  fmotlicr  them,  and  flame  doth  fry

14  (them.

And  reafon  good, for  fith  oiirfcx  is  weak.

The  greater  finne  it  is  us  to  deceive,

As  * fhefeui  and  lafon  well  can  fpedk.

And  hethat^f  JLamjdid  of  rule  bereave.

With  him, on  whom  fairc  Ahfolondid  wreak
The  wrong  that  raviflit  Tharnar  did  receive,
Withdiverfc  that  of  tone  and  tocher  gender.

Refus’d  or  left  tbcirloves  for  caufes  flcndcr.


Butthatlmayparticul.irly  touch

Thccaufcth.1t  brought  me  to  this  cndlcfTc  palne,

My  beauty  while  I liv*d,and  pride  wasfuch.

As  none  or  few  did  to  the  like  attainc,

And  both  of  them  in  me  cxccl’d  fo  much,

’Twashard  to  fay  whichgreater  wasoftwainc;

But  this  I know  full  well,niy  proud  mind  grew
Out  ofconccit  of  my  well  plealing  hew-

16

It  hapned  that  a valiant  knight  o( Thrace
In  ftatc  and  living  of  the  better  fort.

And  hearing  praifcofmypraifc-worthy  face.

Confirmed  oft  by  more  then  one  report,

Hcpurpos’d,and  perform’d  itin  flioitfp.icc,

Vnto  my  fathers  kingdomc  to  refort.

That  he  might  fuc  to  me,and  only  ferve  me.

In  hope  by  his  great  value  to  deftt  re  me.

>7

In  gallant  fort  when  he  to  Lydia  came,

A nd  fa  w with  eye  what  he  had  heard  with  care,  '

He  callcth  leant  reporr,and  niggard  fame,

That  did  to  him  fo  barren  tidings  bcare  :

And  raviflit  with  my  look, he  ftraightdoch  frame
Himfdfc  to  wait  in  courr,and  tairic  there,

And  fliew’d  fuch  worth,and  ufed  fuch  behaviour.

As  juflly  might  dclcrvc  ray  fathers  favour.

18

Exceeding  was  his  fervice  and  dcfei  t,  l»i^  Is  th»

ifeo  a grateful!  Prince  it  had  been  done,  larraS  aftks

So  pcrfcdly  he  had  of  warretlieart,  iwatitni*

ThatforrnyfirCjby  hiscondiidlhewoa  '*■**•*.

All  Caria,and  of  Cilicia  part,

And  after  thefe  cxploi  ts,hc  then  begun,

For  recompence  of  thefe  bis  merits  rife.

To  pray  my  father  I might  be  his  wife.

19

My  father  him  repuls’d  with  anfwcr  fowre,

Becaufe  to  match  me  higher  was  bis  wiP„

Not  to  a piiv.itc  knight, whcfechitftfcdowre
Was  vcrtuCjof  whole  worth  he  co’jld  no:  skill,

His  greedy  thoughts  did  nought  bucgainfdcvoure.

And  covctijfc  the  branch  anfl  root  of  ill,

Made  him  no  more  rcgaid  his  vettuous  lute.

Then  doth  an  Affc  the  (bund  of  fwceteft  Lute.  Simik»

20

jilcefie(fo  was  nam’d  the  worthy  Knight)

Took  thisfo  foul  rcpulicin  gieac  difdainc.

Proceeding  thcrce,fiom  whence  he  ought  of  tight
Esptift  great  itCompencc  for  his  great  painc  j
Wherefore  he  parted  thence  in  great  defpighr.

And  vow’d  revenge, nor  was  his  vow  in  vainc.

Vnto  th’^jr»je»w«  king  be  thence  doth  go.

My  fathers  emulous  and  ancient  foc<

at

Him(rcady  to  accept  each  light  occa  lion)

He  foon  pcrlwadesjwithout  all  intermiflion,

To  make  upon  my  father  ficiceinvaCon,

And  make  hitnehiefe  Lievtcnanc  by  commillion;

And  having  won  him  thereto  by  pcifwafion.

They  thus  agreed  of  fpoiles  to  make  partition.

As  namely  all  the  towns  he  won  fliould  be
ThekiDgi.and  for  himfelfc  he  ask’d  but  roe.

Thif


\AVr$vtrbi
uftd  in  £»<
lUjh,


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


22


Tfaii  league  thus  made,  what  woes  my  flic  he  wrought,
I know  not  how  iii  fpccchcs  to  cxprcfTc,

Fourc  royall  armies  quickly  came  to  nought,
Difpcrftor  dead  inhalfaycarcand  IcfTcj
In  fine  Alcefte  by  his  value  brought
Mt  fjthcrand  his  friends  to  fuehdiftrefTc,

They  took  them  to  a fort  with  fuch  fmall  treafufCy
As  info  Scarbrow  warning  they  had  leafurc.

When  here  a while  he  us  befieged  had.

To  fuch  dcfpaire  he  then  my  fatherdravc.

To  yeeld  me  up  he  would  have  been  full  glad.

To  be  his  wife,yea  ev’n  to  be  his  Have  5

Nor  would  my  fire  have  thought  the  bargainebad.

If  halfe  the  Realme  with  me  for  dowre  he  gave.

So  fore  he  fear’d,erc  long  to  leefe  it  all.

And  die  in  wofull  bands  a captive  thrall.

Whertfoie  in  feafon  to  prevent  the  worft.

Me  that  had  been  the  caufc  ofall  this  ill.

He  minds  to  offer  to  Alcefle  firft.

To  win  thereby  bis  favour  and  good  will  .*

I went  (for  why  none  other  do  I truft)

With  mind  herein  my  fires  mind  to  fulfill.

And  offermineown  felfa  this  devotion.

With  halfe  the  Realme,if  he  accept  the  motion.

*5

AlceJH  hearing  1 came  him  to  look,

Againft  me  forth  he  comes  allpalc  and  trembling.
Not  like  a conqueror  was  then  hislook, ' '

But  rather  a captived  man  rcfcmbling ;

Which  when  1 found,my  fii  fl  plot  I forfook.

For  well  1 faw  that  this  was  not  diffcmbling.

With  lowring  look  1 held  my  peace  a while,

T hen  fi  t for  his  eftatc  I fram’d  my  ftilc.

25

I waxed  bold  the  more  1 fee  him  faint.

And  firft  I cuiied  this  unluckic  love.

And  of  hiscTuelty  1 made  complaint.

Which  harm’d  my  friends, and  chiefe  that  he  would
Againft  my  will  to  have  me  by  confiraint,  (prove
I further  did  moft  fliarply  him  reprove.

That  he  fo  parted  with  the  firft  dcniall.

And  never  fought  to  make  new  friendly  ttiall,

I told  him  that  his  manners  were  too  fierce,

Tliat  though  my  father  his  juft  fuit  deny’d,

Bccaufe  perhaps  his  nature  isperverfe.

And  would  not  at  the  firft  attempt  be  ply*d.

He  fhould  not  though, all  his  good  deeds  rcvcrfc.
But  rather  ought  with  conftancy  have  try’d.

By  patient  fuffi-ing,and  by  painfull  ftrving.

To  come  unto  reward  of  well  deferving,

2S

And  if  my  father  would  not  have  been  won,

I would(i  faid)his  favour  have  procur’d.

And  would  have  praid  him, to  make  him  his  fonne,

^ If  I had  found  his  love  to  me  haddur’d  j
Or  elft  in  fccret  I would  that  have  done.

By  which  of  me  he  fliould  have  been  affur’d  j
But  (ith  he  needs  would  trie  another  mean,

1 told  him  plaine,my  love  was  ahet’d  clean*


And  though  I now  came  in  this  humble  fort,

To  yccld  my  body, as  the  price  of  peace,

Becaufc  my  fathcr,whom  he  held  fofhort,

Intrcatcd  me  to  fuc  for  his  rclcafc  j
Yet  did  I vow  to  mane  bis  hoped  fport.

And  if  to  offer  force  he  would  not  ccafc,

I fwarc  that  rather  I my  fclfc  would  kill.

Then  grant  fuch  joyes  conftrain’d  agamft  my  will.

JO

Thcfc  words  and  fuch  as  thefe  to  him  I fpake.

Finding  my  power  was  over  him  fo  great.

Wherewith  1 did  him  as  repentant  make,

A sere  was  Saint  in  Hermits  defart  feat  i
He  fell  down  at  ray  fcet,and  praid  me  take
His  naked  dagger,  and  did  me  intrear.

To  ftab  him  with  the  lame  into  his  heart.

To  take  juft  vengeance  of  his  lewd  defart.

31

Now  when  I faw  him  at  this  paffe,!  thought
Tofollow  this  great  conqueft  tohis  end.

And  ftraight  a little  hope  to  him  I brought,
Offavour,if  hiserrour  he  would  mend.

And  if  my  fathers  frccdomc  might  be  v\roughr,-
And  ftatc  reftor*d,and  he  continue  friend.

And  not  attempt  hereafter  to  conftrainc  me.

But  wit  h his  fervkcablc  love  to  gainc  me.

3*

He  promifed  hereof  he  would  not  mifle*

And  back  unto  my  fire  mefafe  did  fend.

Nor  once  prefumed  he  my  mouth  to  ki^j
Think  you, how  he  unto  my  yoke  did  bend  ;

1 think  that  love  plaid  well  hispart  in  this.

And  needed  not  for  him  more  arrowes  fpend  j '
Hence  ftraight  unto  tW Armenian  king  he  went,'
Whole  all  the  winnings  fliould  be, by  confent.

33

A nd  in  the  mildeft  manner  that  he  could.

He  praycth  him  to  grant  his  good  affent.

That  my  poore  fire  might  Lydia  quiet  hold.

And  he  would  with  Armenia  be  content.

The  king  Alcefte  fharply  then  controld.

And  in  plainetermsbc  told  he  never  meant
To  ccafc  that  bloudy  watre  at  any  hand.

While  that  my  father  had  a foot  of  land.

, 3+

What  if  (faid  he)  Alceftes  wav’ring  braine
Is  turn’d  with  womans  words?  hisdamniage  be  itj
Shall  I therefore  lofe  all  a whole  ycarcs  gainc
Athisrequeft?  I never  will  agree  it:

Againc  Alee  ft  i prayes  him,and  againe,

Butall  in  vaine.he  fees  it  will  not  be  yet ;

And  laft  he  waxed  angry, and  did  fwcarc.

That  be  fhould  do  it, or  for  love  or  feare.

, 55

Thus  Wrath  ingendred  many  a bitter  word.

And  bitter  words  did  breed  more  bloudy  blowes,
Alcefte  in  that  fury  drew  his  fword.

And  ftraight  the  guard  on  each  fide  himinclofe,

But  he  among  them  fo  himfclfcbcftir’d,

Ife  flue  the  king,and  by  the  help  of  thoft
Of  Thrace, of  Cilicia  in  his  pay,

’IW Armenians  all  be  put  to  flight  that  day.

Bb  An^


2»4


THE  XXXIIII.BOOKE


3<5.


And  then  his  happy  vlitory  piufuing,

Firft  he  my  fathers  fricndsdid  all  inhrge,

And  nest  the  Rcalme  vvithi'none  month  enfuingi
He  gat  again, without  my  fatlieis  charge  j
And  for  the  better  flnmning  and  efehuing
Ofall  unkindhdTe,with  amends  moll  large,
Foriecompenccof  all  harm*  he  had  done.

He  gave  him  all  the  fpoilcs  that  hehad  won>

37

Yea  fully  to  content  him  to  his  asking,  ,

In  all  thecountrics  that  did  neare  confine.

He  rais’d  fiich  rummesofcoine,by  curfed  tasking.
As  made  them  grieve  and  greatly  to  repine.

The  while  my  hate  in  loves  Faire  vizar  masking,

V In  outward  fiiow,I  Teem’d  him  to  incline  j
Yet  fecretly  I ftudi’d  to  annoy  him.

And  many  wayesdevifed  todeftroy  him.

38

In  Head  of  triumph  by  a privy  train.

At  his  return  to  kill  him  we  intended.

But  from  fiich  faff  feare  forc’d  us  to  refrain,

Becaufe  wc  found  he  was  foftrongly  friended  ;

I feemed  cf  his  comming  glad  ahd  fain.

And  promis’d  when  our  troubles  all  were  ended?
That  I his  faitbfull  yokefellow  would  be.

In  wo  or  wealcjto  take  fuchpart  as  he.

, 39

, Wherefore  I praid  him  firft,that  formy  fake.

He  would  fubduc  fome  of  our  private  foes.

And  he  each  hard  exploit  doth  undertake.

And  now  alonc,and  then  with  few  he  goes.

And  fife  rcturns,yct  oft  1 did  him  make,

T o fight  with  ciucH  Giants, and  with  thofc
That  paft  hisftrength,oft  with  fome  monftrous  bead.
Or  Dragon  fell, that  did  our  Rcalmc  molcft.

40

Don  Mercies  never  by  his  cruel!  Aunt,

Menaces'  Eurifteta  was  fo  wrought

hturs affein-  lnLerna,Thrace,\n  Memea Ercrrtatint,

ted  by  ha  Numid, Etolia, Tebriis  whcrchcfoaghty

aunt  June,  spaine jiios  no  where  c!s,as  I might  vaunt,

Vbei/fhu'  With  mild  perfwafion,butwith  murdring  thought,

biift  intlier,  ^ made  my  lover  ftill  to  put  in  urc.

In  hope  hereby  his  mine  to  procure.

41

But  as  the  Palm  the  more  the  top  is  prcll.

The  thicker  do  the  under  branches  grow,

Ev’n  fo.the  more  his  vertue  was  oppreft
By  hard  attempts, the  brighter  it  did  fliow :

VVhich  when  I found, forthwith  I thought  it  bed,
Anotherway  to  work  his  overthrow,

A way  by  which  indeed  1 wrought  the  feat.

Which  yet  I fhamc  and  forrow  to  repeat.

4»

Againft  all  fuch  as  bare  him  bell  afftdljon,

I fecretly  did  ftill  his  mind  incenfe.

And  ever  oneand  one  by  «iy  direffion,

I made  him  wrong,  till  all  were  driv’n  fromthence;
So  was  his  heart  and  foul  in  my  fubjeffion.

So  had  my  beauty  blinded  all  his  fence.

Had  I but  wink’djor  up  my  finger  hild.

He  bad  not  car’d  whom  he  had  hurt  or  kild«


48


TbendtF'

UdiMUUi


Sisai  be,


Now  when  I thus  had  foil’d  my  fathers  foes.

And  by  Alcefii,\\a6.  Alcefte  won.

And  made  him  for  my  fake  fotfakc  all  thofc.

That  for  his  fake  no  high  attempt  would  fliu'n  j
I then  began  my  fclf  plam  to  difclofc ;

And  let  him  know  what  wife  thred  hehad  fpun,

With  bitter  fpitcfullwoi-ds  I all  to  rated  him.

And  told  him  plain  that  in  my  heart  I hated  him.

44

And  that  I wifh’d  hislifeanddayes  were  ended.

And  vvould  have  kild  him,ifl  could  for  fhamc.

Save  then  1 fliould  of^ll  men  be  condemned,

Becaufe  his  high  deferts  were  of  fuch  fame  j
Yet  him  and  them  I utterly  contemned,

And  loath’d  to  fee  his  face,or  hcarc' his  name.

And  fwarc  I would  wifi)  him  thcncefotth  no  better.

Nor  hcarc  his  mcflagc,tior  receive  his  later.

45

At  this  my  crucll  ufage  and  ungrate

He  tookfuch  grief, thatin  a while  he  di’d  :

Now  for  thisfin,he  thatall  fin  did  hate,

CoHdemnes  me  here  in  this  fmoke  to  be  ti’d.

Where  I in  vain  repent  my  fclf  too.latc.

That  I his  fuit  fo  cauflefly  dem’d.

For  which,in  fmakc  ctcrnall  I muft  dwell,

Sith  no  redemption  can  be  had  from  hell.

46

Here  Lidia  this  her  wofull  talc  doth  end.

And  faded  thcnccj  now  when  her  fpecch  did  ccafe,

The  Duke  a farther  pafTage  did  inteud.

But  this  tormenting  fmoke  did  foincrcafc.

That  backward  he  was  forc’d  hisfiepstobend.

For  vitall  fprites  already  did  dccrcafe.

Wherefore  the  fmoke  to  fluin,and  life  to  favc.

He  clammerd  to  the  top  of  that  fame  cave,

47

And  left  thofc  woman-faced  monfters  fell

Might  after  come  from  cut  that  lot  hfomclcdge,

Hedig’d  up  ftoncs,and  great  trees  down  did  fell,

(His  fword  fufficing  both  for  axe  and  fledge)

He  hew’d  and  brake, and  labour’d  it  fo  well.

That  gainft  the  cave  he  made  a thick  ftrong  hedge.

So  ftop’d  with  ftones,and  many  a ragged  rafter.

As  kept  th*Harptas  in  a great  while  after.

48

But  now  the  Duke, both  with  his  prefent  toile,

That  did  with  dirt  and  duft  himalltodafli.

And  with  the  fmokethat  cift  did  him  fb  fcile.

As  black  aifoot,wasdriv’n  to  feck  fome  plafli.

Where  he  himfclf  might  of  his  clothes  dtfpoile.

And  both  his  raiment  and  his  armourwafh.

For  why  the  fmoke  without  and  eke  within,  iaib*

Did  taint  his  cIothcs,hisarmour,and  his  skin.

49

Spon  after  he  a chryflall  ftream  efpylng,

Fiom  footto  head  he  waflTd  himfclf  therein.

Then  up  he  gets  him  on  his  courfer  flying,  ^

And  oftheaire  he  morcand  more  doth  win,

AflTeTling  heav’n,all  earthly  thoughts  defying  t
Asfifhescut  thciiqiiidflreamc  with  fin,  Simih^

Socutteth  hctheairea.>id  doth  not  flop,

Till  he  was  come  unto  that  mountaincs  con.

This


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO:


Th»  dtfirip-
iijt.


50

This  bill  nigh  touch’d  thccircle  ofthe  Mooae,

The  top  was  alia  fruitfull  plcafant field,

And  light  at  night,as  ouis  i.«  here  at  noooe.

The  i'weeteft  place  that  ever  man  beheld  j
(There  would  I dwel!ifGcdga*cme  my  hoone)
The  foylc  thereof moft  fragrant  flowres  did  yceld.
Like  Rubies, G old,  Pearles,Saplyrs,T epos  Hones,
Chryfolites,’DlAmonds,licints  for  the  nones.

5*

The  trees  that  there  did  grow  were  crer  green.

The  fruits  that  thereon  grew  were  never  fading,
The  fundry  colour’d  birds  did  fit  between,

And  fing  moH  fweet,  the  fruitfull  bought  them  fha-
The  rivers  clcare  as  cry  Hall  to  be  feen,  (ding  ;

The  fragrant  fmcll  the  fenfe  and  Ibule  invading.
With  aire  fo  temperate  and  fo  dclightlbmc.

At  all  the  place  befide  wascleare  and  lightlbme.

Amid  the  plaine  a pallace  palling faire

There  Hood. above  conceit  of  mortall  men,

Euiltof great  height, unto  the  cleareH  aire.

And  was  in  circuit  twenty  mileandten  j
To  thisfaire  place  the  Duke  did  flraight  repaire.
And  viewing  all  that  goodly  country  then.

He  thought  this  world,  compared  with  that  pallace,
A dunghill  vile, or  prifon  void  of  folace.

But  when  as  nearer  to  the  place  he  came.

He  was  amazed  at  the  wondrous  fight;

The  wall  was  all  one  precious  Hone,the  lames
And  then  the  carbuncle  more  fanguine  bright  s
O workman  rare, O moH  Hupendious  frame^

What  Deialus  oftbis  had  overfight  ?

Peace  ye  that  wont  to  praife  the  wonders  ftav’n,
Thofe  earthly  kings  made,thisthe  King  of  heav’n.

54

Now  while  the  Duke  his  eyes  with  wonder  fed.

Behold  a faire old  man  in  th’entrie  Hood,

Whofe  gown  was  white, but  yet  his  jacket  red.

The  tone  as  fnow,thc  tocherlook’d  as  blood,

His  beard  was  long  and  whitc.lbwas  his  head.

His  countnance  was  fo  grave, his  grace  fb  good,

A man  thereby  might  at  firH  fight  furpeft.

He  was  a Saint,andoneofGodseled.

55

He  comming  to  the  Duke  with  chearfull  face,

Who  now  alighted  was  for  rev*reftcefake.

Bold  Baron(faid  the  Saint)by  fpeciall  grace.

That  fufFcr’d  waH  this  voyage  Hiaage  to  make,

And  to  arrive  at  this  moH  bleHcd  place.

Not  knowing  why  tboudidH  this  journey  take.

Yet  know  that  not  without  the  will  ccleHiall,

Thou  commeft  here  to  Paradije  terreftriall.

56

The  caufe  you  came  a journey  offuch  length.

Is  hereof  me  to  learn  what  muH  be  done.

That  Charles  3ttd  holy  Church  may  now  at  length
Be  frecd,ihat  crH  were  wclnigh  overrun.

Wherefore  impute  it  not  to  thine  own  Hrcngth,

Nor  to  thy  couragc,not  thy  wit,my  Ton,

Por  neither  could  thy  horn  nor  winged  Heed
Without  Gods  help  Hand  thee  in  any  Heed.


57

But  at  moreleifiire  hereof  we  will  rcafon.

And  more  at  large  I mind  with  you  to  fpeak.

Now  with  fomc  mcaticfrcHi  you,  as  is  rcafon,

LcH  faHing  long  may  make  your  Homack  weak;
Our  fruits(raidhc)be  never  out  of  fcafon  :

The  Duke  rcjoyccd  much, and  maivcl’d  eke ;

Then  chiefewben  by  hisfpcechesand  his  coat
Heknew’twas  he  that  the  fourth  Gofpcll  wrote.

J*

That  holy  /ohn  whom  Chrift  did  hold  fodcare.

That  others  thought  be  death  fliou Id  never  fee.
Though  in  the  Gofpcll  it  appearcs  not  clcare.

But  thus  he  faid,  What  ifit  plcafcd  me,

O Peter,tbat  thy  fellow  tarry  here
Vntillmy  comming,  what  is  that  to  thee  ^

So  though  our  Saviour  not  diieHIy  fpakc  it.

Yet  furc  it  was.fo  cv’iy  one  did  take  it.

S9

He  here  aflTumed  watin  happy  houre.

Whereas  before  £noch  the  Pattiaik  was.

And  where  the  Prophet  bides  of  mighty  power.
That  in  the  fierie  coach  did  thither  paHc:

Thcfc  three  in  that  fo  happy  facied  bowic
In  high  felicity  their  dayes  did  paOe;

Where  in  fucb  fort  to  Hand  they  ar  c allow’d.

Till  Chri^  return  upon  the  burning  cloud.

, 60

Thcfe  Saints  him  welcome  to  that  facrcd  feat.

And  to  a Hately  lodging  him  they  brought}

And  for,fais  horfe  likewife  ordained  meat.

And  then  the  Duke  himfclfe  by  them  was  taugh^
The  dainty  fruits  of  Faradi/e  to  eat.

So  delicate  in  taH,as  furc  he  thought
Our  firH  two  parents  were  to  be  excus’d.

That  forfuch  fruit  obedience  they  refus’d.

6l

Now  when  the  Duke  had  nature  fatisfi’d,

With  meat  and  drink,and  with  his  due  repofe,

(For  there  were  lodgings  faire,and  all  befide
That  needful!  for  mans  ufe  man  can  fuppofe)

He  gets  up  early  in  the  morning  tide,

Whattime  with  us  alow  ,theSun  aro^.

But  ere  that  he  from  out  his  lodging  mov’d.

Came  that  DifcipJe  whom  our  Saviour  lov’d.

6*

And  by  the  hand  the  Duke  abroad  he  led.

And  faid  Tome  things  to  him,  I may  not  name.

But  in  the  end  (I  think)my  fonheftd.

Although  that  you  from  France  fo  lately  came.

You  little  know  how  thofe  in  France  havefped.
There  your  Orlando  quite  is  out  of  frame,

PoiGod  his  finne  moH  Hiarply  now  rewardeth.
Who  moHdoih  punifh  whom  be  moH  rcgardcth.

63

Know  that  the  champion  your  Orlando,  whom
God  fo  great  Hrcngth  and  fo  great  courage  gave.
And  fo  rare  grace,that  from  his  mothers  wombe.

By  force  of  Heel  his  skin  no  hurt  might  have.

To  th’cnd  that  he  might  fight  for  his  own  home.
And  thofe  that  hold  the  ChriHian  faith  to  fare  ;

As  Sampfon  erH  enabled  was  to  Hand,

AgainH  FUlifiins  for  the  Hebrm  land.

2 b 3 QTiii/


Tltpttthi
j/om  OtUn'
d»,betaujibt
VOS  kit

Stmtntf,


)


THE  XXXItll.  BOOKE


s8^


l|

ll


Tht  Mttnt
the

, TUnn,


<4.

This  your  Orlartio  hath  bin  fo  ungrate

(Foi  ft)  grc.it  grace iccciv’d)unto  his  maker.

That  when  his  country  was  inweakeft  ftate.

And  needed  fuccour  moft,hedid  forfake  her,

For  Iorc(0  wofull  love  that  breeds  Gods  hate)

To  woo  a Pagan  wench, with  mind  to  take  her.

And  CO  fuch  (in  this  love  did  him  imice,

He  would  have  kild  his  k i nfman  once  or  twice.

61

For  this  fame  caufe  doth  mightyGod  permit
Him  mad  to  run,with  belly  bare  and  breaft,

An-i  fo  to  daze  hisreafon  and  his  wit.

He  knowes  not  others,and  himtclfc  knowes  leall :
So  in  times  pad  ourLord  did  deem  it  fit.

To  turn  the  king  of  Babel  to  a bcaft,

In  which  efiatehf  fev’n  whole  ycarcs  did  pafle.

And  like  an  oxedid  feed  on  hay  andgcalTe.

«6

But  for  the  Paliadini  offence  is  not

3o  great  as  was  the  King  of  Babels  crime.

The  mighty  Lord  of  mercy  doth  allot
Vnto  his  punifliment  a fhorter  time.

Twelve  weeks  in  all  he  mull  remainc  a fot.

And  for  this  caufe  you  fuffer’d  were  to  clime
To  this  high  place ,t  hat  here  you  may  be  taught
How  to  his  v/hiOrlando  may  be  bi ought.

67

Here  you  fh  .ill  learn  to  work  the  feat  I warrant,

But  yet  before  you  can  be  fully  fped

Of  this  your  grcat,but  not  forci  bought  on  arrant>

You  mufl  with  me  a more  ftrange  way  be  led,

Vp  to  the  Planet  that  of  all  ftarres  errant
Is  neared  us, when  fhc  comes  over  head.

Then  will  1 bring  you  where  the  medicine  HeSj
That  you  mud  have  to  make  Orlando  wife.

6g

Thus  all  that  day  they  fpent  in  divers  talk,

With  folace  grcat,as.nevcr  wanteth  there.

But  when  the  Sun  began  this  earth  to  balk.

And  pafTcinto  the  tofher  hcmifphcare.

Then  they  prepar’d  to  fetch  a further  walk.

And  draightthc  firiecharet  that  did  bearc
£lio6,  when  he  up  to  heav’n  was  cari’d.

Was  ready  in  a u:icc,and  for  them  tari’d.

Fourc  horfcsfiercc,asicd  as  flaming  fire,

Th*Apo/He  doth  into  thecharut  let.

Which  when  he  framed  had  to  his  defire,

Aftoljo  in  the  carre  by  him  he  fet.

Then  up  they  went, and  dill  afeending  higher.
Above  the  firic  region  they  did  get,

Whofc  nature  fo  ih'ApoJile  then  did  turn.

That  though  they  went  tbreugh  fire, they  did  not

70  (burn,

I fay  although  the  fire  were  wondrous  hot.

Yet  in  then  palfagethcy  no  heat  did  feel.

So  that  It  burn’d  them, nor  offends  them  not }

Thence  to  the Moone  be  guides  the  running  wheel.
The  Moone  was  like  a glade  all  void  of  fpot.

Or  like  a pecce  of  purely  burnifht  ficcJ,

And  look’d, although  tousitfeem’d  fodnall,

W clnigh  as  big  as  earth  and  Tea  and  all.


vttbwe  ufit
that  mtHs
mti  are  tf.
joud  the
Mootie,ioi4
they  have
latd  up
thiagi  IV  the
arete  of  tba
Mean*.
Looky  i«
AUegprjtt


71

Here  had  Aftoljo  caufe  of  double  wonder.

One,  that  1 hat  region  fr  cmetb  there  fo  wide.

That  unto  us  that  are  fo  farre  afundcr.

Seems  but  a little  cicclc,and  befide.

That  to  behold  the  ground  that  him  lay  under,

A man  had  need  to  have  been  fhai  ply  ey’d.

And  bend  his  btowes,and  mark  cv*n  all  they  might,'

It  feem’d  fo  fniall,now  chiefly  wanting  light.

7»

'Twcrc  infinite  to  tell  what  wondrous  things  TbufiRiauU

He  raw,thatpaffed  ours  not  few  degrees,  agreeing

What  towns, what  hils,what  rivers, and  what  fprings,  ”’>>ha»  £,.
What  dales, what  pallaces^what  goodly  trees  ^

But  to  be  fliort,at  lad  bis  guide  him  brings
Vnto  a goodly  valley ,whcre  he  fees
A mighty  maffc  of  things  ftrangcly  confus’d.

Things  that  on  earth  were  Iofl,or  were  abus’d.

73

A florc-houfc  ftrange,»hat  what  on  earth  is  loft.

By  faultjby  time, by  fortune,!  here  is  found.

And  like  a merchandize  is  theic  ingroft.

In ftranget fort  then  ^ can  well  expound  j
Nor  fpcak  1 foie  ofwcalth,or  things  of  coft.

In  which  blind  fortunes  pc  Wer  doth  raoft  abound.

But  ev’n  of  t hings  q rite  out  of  fortunes  power.

Which  wilfully  we  waft  each  day  and  houre.

74

The  precious  time  that  foolesmif-fpcnd  in  play.

The  vainc  attempts  that  never  take  cffcfl,
Thcrowcsthatfinncrsmakc,and  never  pay.

The  coanfcls  wife  that  carelefTc  men  ncgleft,

The  fond  defircs  that  lead  us  oft  aftray.

The  praifes  that  with  pride  the  heart  infcift.

And  all  we  lafe  with  folly  and  mif-fpending,'

May  there  be  found  unto  this  place  afeending^
vf

Now  as  Aftoljohy  thofe  regions  paft.

He  asked  many  queftionsof  his  guide.

And  as  he  on  tone  fide  his  eye  did  caft,  '

A wondrous  hill  of  bladders  hccfpi’d  •

And  he  was  told  they  had  been  in  time  paftj
The  pompous  crowns  and  feepters  full  ofpride,

Of  monarchsef  A£yria  and  of  Greece,

Of  which  now  fcaotly  there  is  left  a pcece.

76

He  faw  great  ftore  of  baited  hooks  with  gold,

And  thofe  were  gifts  thatfaoUni  men  preferd
To  give  to  Princes  covetous  and  old,

Withfondeft  hope offuturevainc reward  •

Then  were  there  ropes  all  in  fweet  garlands  rold,

And  thofe  wcic  all  falfe  flatteries  he  hardi
Then  heard  hccrickeisrongs,liketo  theverfes
Tbefervant  in  bis  mal’cispraifc  reherfes.

77

There  did  he  fee  fond  loves, that  men  purfue.

To  look  like  golden  gives  with  flonrs.'ill  fet,

Then  things  like  Eagles  Talents  hedid  view,

Thofe  offices  that  favourites  do  get ;

Then  faw  hcbellowcs  large 'hat  much  wind  blew.

Large  promifesthat  Lords  makc^nd  forget,

Vnto  their  Ganimeds  in  flewre  oT youth,

But  after  noughr  but  beggery  cnfu’th.


Tride  of
VrttKn,an4

vanity  of

tbiiriitUfo


Gifts  livin'^
to  Prtacet  i>^
hope  of  rt*

ward.

Canning

flaueren,

7Safeflatt»i

rtri.

Tondlovlti

/

Tavoteriut

rewardt.

Great  ttmi

ftomi/tu


I


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


iSj


tcuj^irdciii.


Pi!re  eaurti-
•rf.


^ [ten  and
(hxTUabU
dsedi  dm*
tfo  Ut*.

By  that  ft  ft  i
vnder/lt»d
the  City  of
Rome,  which
Confiantine
gave  Pop*
iflvtfter,

V hub  he
faith  near
/ii»{<ti,6e-
caufeof  their
fianai
The  beauty
tftromm.


Mant  rvit
keftittiarriy
M{e  ojit,


78

Hefaw  great  cities fcated  in  faire  places.

That  overthrowne  t^uitc  topiic  turvic  ftood.

He  ask’d  and  lcatn’d,the  caiilc  of  their  defaces
Was  trcafon,that  dotir  never  turneto  good  ;

He  iaw  foule  ferpents  with  faiie  womens  faces,
Ofeoynersand  of  theevcsthccurfed brood.

He  taw  fine  glafics  all  in  pccces  broken.

Of  fctvicc  lort  in  Court,a  wofull  token.

?9

Ofmingled  broih  he  fiw  a mighty  mafic
That  to  no  ufe  all  fpilt  on  ground  did  lie.

He  ask’d  his  teachcr,and  he  heard  it  was
The  fiuitleflealmcsthatmen give  when  thcydic  :
Then  by  a fairegreen  mountaine  be  did  pafie,
That  once  fmelt  fweet,biit  now  it  ftinks  peidyc.
This  wasrhatgift  (bc’tfaid  without  offence)

That  ConftantiHe  give  Silvefier  long  fincc.

80

Of  blidlimc~rods  he  faw  no  little  ftorc.

And  thefe  (O  Ladies  fairc)your  beauties  be,

I do  omit  ten  thoufand  things  and  more
Like  rnto  thefe, that  thcrcthe  Duke  did  fee;

For  all  that  here  is  lofi^thcre  evermore
Is  kept, and  thither  in  a trice  doth  flee,

Howbeit  more  nor  lefle  there  was  no  folly.

For  ftill  that  here  with  us  remaineth  wholly.

81

He  faw  fomeof  hisown  lofi  time  and  deeds.

But  yet  he  knew  them  not  to  be  hisoyvn.

They  feem’d  to  him  difguis’d  in  fo  ftrange  weeds.
Till  his  inftru£ler  made  them  better  known  ;

But  laft.thc  thing  which  no  man  thinks  he  needs,
Yet  each  man  needeth  mofl:,to  him  was  fiiown.

By  name  mans  wit, which  heic  we  lecfe  fo  faft.

As  that  one  fubfiance  all  the  other  pad.

St

It  feem’d  to  be  a body  moift  and  fofr,

And  apt  to  mount  by  ev’ry  exhalation.

And  when  it  hither  mounted  was  aloft.

It  there  was  kept  in  potsof  fiich  a fafliion.

As  we  call  jarrs,wheteoyleiskeptinoft  :

The  Duke  beheld.(with  no  fmall  admiration)

The  jarrs  of  wit,amongft  which  one  had  writ
Vpon  the  fide  thereof  Or/a»doi  wit.

8?

This  vcficll  bigger  was  than  all  the  reft,

And  ev’ry  reficll  had  ingrav’n  with  art
His  name  that  erft  the  wit  therein  pofieft  .*

Thereof  his  own  the  Dukedid  find  a part.

And  much  he  mus’d, and  much  himfelfche  bleft,

T o fee  feme  names  of  men  of  greatdefert.

That  think  they  have  great  ftore  of  wit,and  boaft  it.
When  here  it  plainc  appear’d  they  quite  hadfoft  it.

84  ..  . .

Some  lofe  their  wit  with^ove,fomc  with  ambition.
Some  running  to  the  rea,great  wealth  to  get.

Some  following  Lords.andraen  of  high  condition.
And  feme  in  faire  jewels  rich  and  coftly  fet  .*

One  hath  defire  to  prove  a rare  Magician,

And  fomc  with  Poetrie  their  wit  forget,
Anotherthinkstobcan  Alcumift,

Till  allbcfpent.aiid  he  his  number  mift.


Aftoljo  takes  his  own  before  he  goes,

For  fo  tWEvangelifi  doth  him  permit ;

He  fet  the  veficls  mouth  but  to  his  nofc.

And  tohisplacchcrnuftvpall  his  wit :

Long  after  wife  he  liv’d,asrHrp.'«  fiiowes,

Vntili  one  fault  he  after  did  commit;

By  name  t he  love  of  one  faire  Northernc  lafle.

Sent  up  his  wit  into  the  place  u was.

86

The  veficll  where  Orlandos  wit  was  clos’d,

Jftoljo  took,and  thence  with  him  did  bearer
It  was  far  heavier  then  he  had  fuppos’d.

So  great  a quantity  of  wit  was  there  j
But  yet  ere  back  their  iourncy  they  difpos’d.

The  holy  Prophet  brought  A/ioljo, where
A pn!lacc(fcldomcfeen  by  moitall  man)
Wasplac’djby  which  a thick daik  riverran

87

Each  room  therein  was  full  of  diverfc fleeces.

Of  wooll,of  lint.offilk,orelsof  cetten.

An  aged  woman  fpun  thcdiyerfcpccccs,

Whofc  look  and  hew  did  flicw  her  old  and  rotten:
Not  much  unlike  unto  that  labour,this  is^

By  which  in  Sommer  new  made  filk  isgotten.
Where  from  the  filk  wormc  his  fine  gauTicnttaking,
They  reave  him  of  the  clothes  of  hisown  making.

88

tor  firft  in  one  large  loomc  a woman  fpan
ThrcdsinfinitCjOfdiverfc  ftuffeand  hew  ^

Another  doth  with  all  the  fpeed  flie  can.

With  other  fiuffc  the  diftaves  ftill  renew  j
The  thirdin  feature  like,and  pale  and  wan,

Doth  fever  faire  from  foule, and  old  from  new :

Now  who  bethefe?  the  Dukedemands  his  guide,.
Thefe  bcthcfatallfiftcrs,hc  repli’d  5

89

The  Parcecs  that  the  thred  oflifedofpin  .

To  mortall  mcn,hcncc death  and  natpreknovy
When  life  muft  end, and  when  it  muft  begin  :
Nowjfiic  that  doth  divide  them, and  befiow
The  courfe  from  fincr,and  the  thick  fiom  thin.

To  thatend  works, that  thofc  that  fineft  grow.

For  ornaments  in  Paradi/eimy  dwell.

The  courfe  are  curft  to  be  confirm’d  in  hell,

90

ThcDukc  did  further  in  the  place  behold.

That  whcR  the  threds  were  fpent  that  had  been  fpun,
Their  names  >n  bra|Te,in  filver,or  in  gold
Were  wrote,and  fointo  great  heapes  weredone  j
From  which  a man  that  feemed  wondrous  old.

With  whole  loads  of  thofc  names  away  did  run.

And  turn’d  againe  as  faft  the  way  he  went.

Nor  ever  wcaric  was, nor  ever  fpent.

91

This  aged  man  did  hold  his  pace  fo  fwifr.

As  though  to  run  he  oncly  had  been  born.

Or  had  icgiv’n  him  as  a fpcciall  gift !

And  in  the  lappet  of  hisclokc  were  boin.

The  names  of  mcn,with  which  he  made  fuch  fiiift  ’
But  now  a while  I crave  to  beforborn.

For  in  the  book  enfuing  fiialbe  fiiow’d.

How  this  old  fire  his  cariage  ill  beftow’d.


Tbit  it  writ,
ten  m the
fourth  bookt
of  thifiit
Cantos  added
to  /irtoHo,
rvbicb  many
thinky  nert
nneofhu  '
doing  > and ,
ate  very  urt  • ■
pirfeSi.  I


Simile,


Bb


fa


j88  THE  XXXIIII.  BOOKE

Morail.  /« thii  xxxiitj.bool^e  U to  he  noted  intle  tale  of  Lydia,  tic  punijlment  of  ingratitude  , *‘arjrvl;at  an  odious  finne  the
fame  h in  the  fight  of  God  and  the  world.alfo  here  are  to  be  obferved  many  hfnds  of  ingratiiuiks asfrf  her  dclhifncr
of  Ake([cslong  fcrzice,and  approvedgoodwi/land  fecondly.ofthcfathcrs  ingrate  rccompenccs , for  his  ereat  licferts
by  fervices  in  tlx  tparsihi  rvhtch  hjnd.tt  is  not  onelyfandcrous  but  dangeromjor  a Prince  to  faorv  a niggardly  mind  and
7?iuch  more  a (ontemptuom  diJpofition.For  though  indeedno  fubkilf  rightly  con fidering  his  duiy]ought  to  be  moxedbya
ry  ingratitude  or  injury  of  his  fovera'gne,to  forget  his  aflcgianccyct  feeing  the  nature  ofmofi  men,andjpecia/lyef  brave
and  refolute  m nlcd  men.  is  fubjeif  to  the  pafion  of  revenge  , and  can  hardly  bridle  the  fame  when  they  fhaUfind  them-
felvcsf  as  theythinf)  difdained,or  their  fervices  not  well  regarded  ••  therefore  thewifef  and  fafefl  nay,  and  fittejlfor
the  Maje/l  'e  of  a Prince, is  to  be  libera//  in  rewar  ding,or  at  leaf  thanhfu/lin  accepting  fuch  mens  fervices,  andtqcon-
fidcr  that  love  and  bounty  are  flronger  bands  oja/legiance, than  feare  and  duty.

HiiloVie.  Con  ecnig  the  Hiflory  of  this  boolie,/  have  quoted fome  briefly  by  the  fde,  andfome  isfoplaine  it  expounds  it  fel'e ;

oncly  Imcanc  to  addawordortwowhat  / have  read,concerning  that  which  ishere  delivered  by  mineawlor,  abounhe
AJfumption  o/S  lobr . rirf,h(rwfar  the  Scripture  toucheth  the  fame  in  theGo/pe/l,  every  one  l^noweth,  andhow  upon
the  Ipcech  of  our  Saviour  ( If  I wi/l  he  tarie  ti/l  1 come, what  is  that  tothee)it  was  noifed  among  the  Difciples  that  that
'D  fcipleftould  never  fee  death.  After  this, smother  of goodcredit  have  delivered,  S.loha  lived  tt/l  hewas  anhundred
yeare  old, and  then  made  hirnfelfc  a tombe,and  entred  thereinto  alive  in  pre fence  of  many, and  on  the  fadame.a  light  Jhone
a/t  about  the  place, and  tooje  the  tombejor  the  time  quite  from  their  fghts-,  but  the  light  beinggone,the  cojjin  was  found
empty, and  the  body  of  that  Saint  was  no  more  feene  upon  the  earth.  IVhercupon  it  was  certainly  thought  that  he  was  ta
l^en  up  into  heaven  or  par  adife,  as  Enoch  and  Elias  were.  Though  this  of  S lohn  he  not  recorded  in  the  Scripture,  (nor
no  more  is  the  affumption  of  the  bleffed  virgin) andconfequenlly, no  man  is  bound  to  believe  it  as  an  article  of  our  Creed:
Tet  for  mine  owne  opinion,!  thinlie  it  may  be  very  true  : and/ would  in  fuch  cafeshelicve  agreat  deale  more  than/
need,rathcr  than  any  thing  lefle  than  I otght  j for  the  tone{if  it  he  a finne ) is  fiirely  pardonable, hut  the  other  doubtlefle
is  very  d.imnabk.  But  1 wi/l  briefly  note  the  Allegory  that  is  meant  herefy.

Allegoric.  Firfl, where  as  AOolfo  waflteth  himfelfe  in  a chriflall  well  of  cleare  water  before  he  canflie  up  to  Paradife,it  ftgni-

fieth,th.xt  afteramanjballby  remorfe,  and  devout  con fideration,  weigh  and  behold  the  filthinefle  of  his  finne,  hemufl
then  waf!}  himfelfe  with  the  cleare Jpring-watcr  of  prayer  and  repentance ;and  then  and  not  before,  he  may  mount  to  Pa-
rad: fe, which  may  here  be  underflood  the  comfortable  peace  of  confcience,  the  onely  true  Paradife  of  this  world.  .And
whereas  Adolfo  commeth  to  SAchnfwhofename  fignifieth grace) to  receive  hy  his  help  Otlandos  lofl  witts , for  fpit  u
fet  downc  that  that  was  the  fecret  caufewhy  he  was  guidedthither, though  unawares  to  himfelfe:  therely  it  is  ta  be
under floodythat  no  hope  nor  meanes  is  left  for  any  man  that  hath  lofl  his  wit,  withfoUowing  the  vanities  and  plcafures
of  this  worldf as  d verfc  carelejfe  Chriflians  d->,in forgetting  and  omitting  their  duties  to  God,  which  is  the  very  high-
efl  point  of , oily)  l fay  there  is  no  meane  for  them  to  recover  their  wit  againe,but  onely  by  the  help  of  this  S.lohR,thdt  is
this  grace  o' G od,which  can  miraculoufly  reflore  it  againe.

/n  the  defeription  of  S.lohns  apparel/,  (His  gown  was  wbitCjbut  yet  his  jacfcftrcd,  Thetonc  wasfnow,  the
tothcr  look’d  as  blood, &c.)^  t he  red  is  fignified  charily, which  ^rneth  with  \eale  and  ferventnejfe  of  love ; by  the
white  is  me.int  virginity  and pureneffe  oflije.

A ll  i hofe  things  that  he  fames  to  have  been  fhowed  A dol  fo  in  the  circle  of  the  Moone,  are  hut  fimilitudes,  and  li\e-
tiejfe  of fuchfoUies,as  he  that  will  marine  them  weH,fhall  eafitlp  difeerne.

The  old  man  that  ran  away  fofafl  with  the  printed  names  of  men, and flang  them  in  the  darf^e  flreame  ,figureth  time,
as  in  the  next  bool^e  mine  author  very  artificially  explaneth  it ; affirming  in  the perfon  ofS- lohn,  as  J it  were{  as  out
proverbe  faith ) as  true  as  the  GoJpell,that  the  onely  defence  agahfl  the  malice  oj  time,is  the  pen  of  the  learncd.and  that
fame  oiitlafleth  andoutflyeth  all  things,  as  the  well  learned  Gcntleman,and  my  very  good  fi'iend  M . Hemy  Conflablc
wrote  m bis  Sonnet  to  the  now  fling  oj  Scotland.

Where  others  hooded  with  blind  love  do  flic
Alow  on  p.round,  with  buzzard  Cupidswings,

A heav’iily  love  from  love  of  love  thee  bringSi
And  makcsihy  Mufeto  mount  above  the skic.

Young  Mufes  be  not  wont  to  fliefo  hie.

Age  taught  by  time  fuch  fbbei  dittie  fings.

But  thy  youth  flics  from  love  of  youthfull  things.

And  fo  the  wings  of  time  doth  over-flic.

Thus  thou  difdaiii’il  all  worldly  wings  as  flow,

Bccaufethy  Mufe  with  Angels  wings  doth  leave
Times  wings  behind,and  Cupids  wings  below;

But  take  thou  hccd,left  Fames  wings  thee  dcccavc  j
With  all  thy  fpced  from  fame  thou  canft  not  flee.

But  more  thou  flees, thcmorcit  followes  thee,

AUuHon.  the  punijlment  o/Lydias  ingratitude  by  ha'-ging  in  the  eternal/  fmol^e, maizes  me  call  to  mindafiory  of  the  Eni-

perour  Severus  as  1 remember,  who  hearing  that  Apavourite  of  his  accuflomed  to  promife  many  men  great  furtherance
intheir  fails  ,ly  his  favour  with  the  Prince,  andhaving  ta{en  their  reward,  his  promife  vanifhedinto  the  airelil^a
vapaur.and  left  the  poore  (alters  nothing  but  his  vaine  breathed  words : the  jufl  Emperour  caufed  him  to  be  fmothered
to  death  with  jfmolie, faying,  Fumo  peicat,quifurrum  vendidit  Let  fumehim  choafl, that felleth  fmofl:.

Here  cad  the  annotations  upon  thcxxxiiij-  Booke.


THE  XXXV.  BOOKE


2p<


mm
m:


Saint  John  the praife  of  rtritcrs  doth  recount :
Bradamant  doth  mthgoodfuccefe  recover
The  prifters  that  were  ta»e  by  RodomounC  :
Thii  done^pje fends  a challenge  to  her  Iqver^
.■Ind fends  rvithallan  horfe  of  good  account^
which  makes  Rogero  long  in  doubt  to  hover  ;
The  rvhile  before  his  face  the fallhe  faw^
0/Serpentinc,Grandomo,<i»«i  Ferraw^.


m


'mm

QC^OO  <*!L*


1


Tbt  leldtn
fitccr,


I

Aire  miftrcflc  who  for  me  to
heav’n  fliall  flie.

To  bring  againe  from  thcncc
my  wand  ring  wit.

Which  I ftill  lofi: , fincc  from
that  piercing  eye
Thedart  came  forth  that
my  heart  did  hit  ?

Nor  of  my  loflc  at  all  com-^
plainc  would  I,

Might  I but  keep  that  which  rcmainctbyet :

But  ifit  ftilldccrcafcjwithin  flioitfpacc
1 doubt  i fliall  be  inOr/tan^or  cafe.

a

Yet  well  I wot  where  to  recover  mine.

Though  not  in  Paradifcnor  CynthiasCphcief
Yet  doubtlciTc  in  a place  no  Icflc  divine.

In  that  fwect  face  of  yours,in  that  faire  heare,
Thatrubielipjin  thofe  twoQarhkeeyne,

There  is  my  wit,I  know  it  wanders  there  j
And  with  my  lipsfifyou  would  give  me  leave)

I there  would  fcarch,!  thence  it  would  rcccave.

3

But  to  returne  unto  that  Enolijh  Prince,

Whom(if  youdo  rcmeniDer)with  S.lobttt
By  ugly  ftreame  I left  a little  fince.

The  fatall  fiftcr  fpinners  looking  on,
Whofomtimedo  prolong,and  fbmtimemince
Ourthred  oflife,l  fay  hefaw  anon,

Among  a million  more, one  pafling  fleece.

More  fine  than  that  that  lafon  brought  to  Greece.

4

So  fiione  the  thred  that  from  that  fleece  out  came.

No  geld , nor  orient  pearlc  could  look  fo  bright.


jifolfo  much  defir’d  to  know  his  name.

And  timeof  birth,that  to  that  thred  hadjight-
Siraightwaycs  this  anfwcr  unto  him  doth  framCj,

He  that. the darkc^^poca/ypr  did  write  j
The  number  of  his  name  fhall  noted  be.

When  twenty  fliall  be  tanc  from  M and  D.

' . 5

And  as  the  fleece  which  herd  fo  faire  doth  fliow.

In  fineft  fubflancepafleth  all  the  reft  J
So  fliall  the  perfon  that  the  fame  doth  owe.

Make  that  fame  age  in  which  he  livcth,blcft  j
For  all  the  gifts  that  nature  can  beftow,

Ot  with  which  ftudy  can  a man  inveft.

Shall  powred  be  on  him  with  large  proportion,

Alligned  from  above  to  be  his  portion.

There  ftands(faidhe)neare  to  the  banka  of  Poe  Ftnerti

A villagCjnow  of  fmall  or  none  account,

Whofcmoorifli  feat  the  ftreame  doth  overflow.

But  in  that  time  thatl  to  you  recount,

Vnto  a City  of  fuch  ftate  fljall  grow.

As  all  the  neighbour  towncs  it  fliall  furraount  j
Norfolcin  walls,and  buildings  fine  and  ftately.

But  in  good  arts  of  old  found  out,or  lately.

7

Nor  think  you  this  preferment  to  proceed
By  perad  venture, or  as  ’twere  by  chance.

But  ev’n  as  a thing  by  God  himfclfe  decreed.

For  one  mans  fake  his  nativefoilc  t’advanccj

As  ftill  we  fee  thofe  that  good  fruit  will  breed,  Simdit,

Do  graffe  the  ftock,and  prune  and  pick  the  branch.

Or  as  the  goldfmith  polliflicth  the  mettell,  SimiU.

In  which  he  means  a gemme  of  price  tofettell.

Never


^ OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


8

For  ncrc  flull  foulc  that  /hall  to  earth  defircnJ,

With  mcrr.\ll  "armcnt  be  raorccomlj  clad.

Never  did  Goa  a foul*  from  hence  down  fend.
That  FBOie  choice  gifts,nor  more  rare  vcrtues  had

' Then  this,  whichunto  him  hedothintend.

That  fliall  bis  country  and  his  friends  make  glad,
Htppotitg  of  e/1  his  name  Ihall  be.

To  whom  thchcav’nsfuch  favours  do  deace*

9

For  all  thofe  vertues  great  that  wonted  are.

To  fet  forth  divcrfc,diverfly  divided,

Shall  joyned  be  in  this  fame  man  moft  rare,

Vnto  fuch  placcjby  heav’ns  appointment  guided  j
Maintain*d(IialI  ftudiesbe  by  his  great  care,

All  quarrels  ceafe,and  broiles  fliall  be  decided,
Whofe  venues  all,if  I to  tell  prolong,

Orlando  fliould  expcfl  bis  wit  too  long.

10

Thus  tiiuch  the  follower  of  lefwi  fpake.

The  while  thofe  fame  webs  doth  view.
From  whence  our  lives  end  and  beginning  take :
One  fpun,onc  cut,the  third  doth  ftuife  renew*
Then  came  they  t©  the  foul  and  lothfomelake>
Dark,deep,and  miry, of  a de.  dly  hew.

Where  was  the  aged  man  that  never  flinted
To  carie  bundels  of  the  names  imprinted.

1 1

This  was  the  man,whom(as  I told  before)

Both  ufe  and  nature  fo  fvrift  pac’d  had  made,

He  never  reftcd,but  ran  evermore.

And  with  his  running  he  did  ufe  this  trade  |

' A heap  of  names  within  hiscloke  hebore,

And  in  the  river  did  them  all  unlade,
Or(plainetofpeak)away  he  call  them  all
Into  this  llr<am,which  Lethe  we  do  calK
It

This  prodigallold  wretch  no  Ibonercame
Vnto  r his  curfed  rivers  barren  bank.

But  dcfp’rately, without  all  fcare  of  blame.

Or  caring  to  defervo  reward  or  thank.

He  burld  therein  full  many  a precious  name.

Where millioDsfoon  into  the  boctomefank.

And  leant  in  ev’rythoufand  one  was  found.

That  was  not  in  the  gulf  quite  loft  anddrownd.

yet  all  about  great  ftorcofbtrds  there  flew.

As  vultures, carren  crowes,and  chattring  pics.

And  many  more  of  fundty  kinds  and  hew.

That  made  lewd  harmony  wrth  their  lowd  cries  t
Thcfe  when  the  carclefle  wretch  the  trclbr  threw
Into  that  fticam,did  all  they  could  devife.

What  With  t heirtalent  s fomc,and  fame  with  beak,
To  fave  thofe  names, bat  find  thcmfclves  too  weak,
«4

For  ever  as  they  fought  thcmfclves  to  raife,

T © beareaway  thofe  names  of  great  renown.

The  weight  of  them  fb  heavy  downward  waies.
They  in  the  ftream  were  driv*n  to  caft  them  down.
Only  two  fwans  fuftain’d  lb  great  a praife.

In  fpitc  of  him  that  fought  them  all  to  drown,
Thefetwodoftill  take  up  whofe  names  they  lift.
And  bare  them  fafe  away,and  aever  mift.


15

Somtime  all  under  that  foulc  lake  they  div*d.

And  took  up  fome  that  were  with  water  cover’d.
And  thole  that  fceir’d  condemned  they  rcptiv’d.
And  often, as  about  the  bank  they  hover’d,

T hey  caught  them  etc  they  to  the  ftream  arriv’d  :
Then  went  they  with  the  names  they  had  recover’d
Vp  to  a hill  that  Hood  the  water  nigh.

On  which  a ftately  Church  was  built  on  high.

16

This  place  is  facred  to  immortall  fante.

And  cvermorta  Nymph  Anads at  the  gate.

And  took  the  names  wherwith  the  two  fwans  came,
(Whether  they  early  come, or  whether  late)

’Then  all  about  the  Church  flie  bang’d  the  fame.
Before  the  facred  image  in  fuch  rate.

As  they  might  then  well  be  afliir’d  for  ever.

Spite  of  that  wretch  in  fafety  to  perfever.

17

Afiolfo  had  a great  deflrc  to  know

The  myftcricsmoft  high,and  hidden  fence
Of  that  old  man, that  ftill  ran  to  and  fro.

And  precious  things  fo  lewdly  did  difpcncc.

And  of  the  birds,and  of  the  nymph  alfo.

That  from  thefwans  took  names, and  bare  them
And  therefore  asked  what  they  fignifi’d,  (thence.
To  whom  the  man  of  God  thus  wife  repli’d :

18

Know  firft(faid  he)  there  cannot  wag  a ftraw
Below  on  carth,but  that  the  figne  is  here ; ,

And  each  fmall  afl  doth  corrcfponJcncc  draw,
Although  in  ether  flicw  it  doth  appeaic  :

That  aged  man,that  running  erft  you  faw.

And  never  baits, nor  refteth  all  theyeare,

T o work  the  like  efiefts  above  is  bound.

As  time  doth  work  below  upon  the  ground.

'When  here  the  fatall  threed  ofUfc  isfpuh.

Then  doth  below  the  life  of  man  decline.

There  fame,and  here  thcii  names  in  metall  done.
Would  make  them  both  immcttall  and  divine.

Save  here  this  aged  fire  that  fo  doth  run.

And  there  below ,timcdoth  thercaticpinc.

He  here  flings  all  their  names  into  a puddle.

Time  there  doth  all  in  dark  oblivion  huddle,

20

And  cv’n  as  here  Rav’ns,Vulturcs,Pies,and  crowes.

And  fuch  like  birds,cndcavour  all  they  may
To  favc  thofe  names  that  worthieft  they  fuppofe.

But  wanting  ftrength,the  names  ftil  downward  fwa jt
So  there  promootcrs,tuffins,bawds,and  thofe
That  can  the  pamfites  and  jefters  play,

That  by  great  Lords  are  oft  more  madcof,then
The  true, and  plainc,and  vertuous  minded  mcri.

And  thefc(forfboth)good  fcllowes  call  you  muft,
Bccaufc  they  Jearn  like  A fle  and  i*ork  to  be.

But  whentheir  Lords  be  laid  full  low  in  dull.

Their  line  of  life  cut  off  by  fillers  three,

Yea  oft  by  their  own  furfetting  an'^  lull.

Then  thcfe  fame  goodly  fquircs  of  bafe  degree,

^ In  their  vile  mouthes  their  names  bcare  up  and  down
A while, and  after  in  oblivion  drown.

But


Tht  expo/ki^
»n  of  tbt  for-
mtr  utUrsf-
rif»


hare  ttf
thing, tbt
’Pork.tfeedt
hiajil/efa,


THE  XXXV.  BOOKE


2^  a


• 11

But  as  tlic  fwans  that  here  ftill  flying  arc.

With  wiiitcn  names  unto  the  fa'cred  portj
S®  there  Hijlorians  Icarn’d  and  Poeti  rare
Preferve  t^  * m i n clcarc  fa  me  and  good  report ;

0 happy  1 r met  Sjwhofc  forefight  and  care
Can  win  the  Jove  of  writers  in  fuch  fort.

As  as  you  need  not  dread

The  laltc  of  Lethe  after  ye  be  dead.

But  furcly  God  their  reafon  fo  doth  blind,

And  takes  from  them  all  fence  of  wit  and  skill.

That  when  their  rooms  on  earth  they  haverefign’d.
Death  both  their  bodies  and  their  fames  might  kill ;
Where  at  the  lead  fotMcfamc  would  flay  behind,
(Admit  in  part  their  manners  were  butill)

Had  they  but  wit  to  get  fome  grace  with  Cirra,

>a  thefidt  of  i-hcit  fame  fliould  Tweeter  fmcl  then  nard  or  minha.

akttfirtht  *4-

Mujtt.  Perhaps  a/£ nests  was  not  fo  devout,

Nor  Heifor  nor  Achilles  were  fo  brave.

But  ihoufands  have  as  honed  been  and  ftouf.

And  worthy  by  defert  more  praife  to  have  j
But  thofc  faite  lands  and  ca  flies  out  of  doubt.

That  their  fucccflors  unto  writers  gave.

Made  them  fo  famous  over  forraigne  lands.
Canoniz’d  by  the  Pms  facred  hands.

»5

Augu/lus  Cefar  was  not  fuch  a Saint,

As  Virgil  maketh  him  by  hisdeftription,

His  love  of  learning  feufeth  that  complaint.

That  men  might  juflly  make  of  his  profeription*

Nor  had  the  lhame  that  Neros  name  doth  taint.
Confirm'd  now  by  a thoufand  yearesprefeription,'
Been  as  it  is,if  he  had  had  the  wit.

To  hare  been  frank  to  fuch  as  Poems  writ.

26

Blind  Homer  writ  how  Agamemnon  fought.

And  wan  at  laft  great  r toy  that  long  lefiflcd  ,

And  how  Pe»e/ope, though  greatly  fought
By  many  futcrs,yct  in  faith  perfifled  .

Yet  furc(forouglu  you  know)  he  might  have  taught
The  contrary  to  this,if  he  had  liflcd.

That  Troy  prevail*  J,that  Greel^s  were  conquer’d
And  that  Pe»e/ope  was  but  a quean.  (clean,

»7

On  tothcr  (idc,wc  fee  Queen  7)idos  name
That  worthy  was  indeed  to  be  commended.

Is  fiibjc^f  now  to  flandcr  and  to  fhame,

Becaufe  that  flic  by  Virgil  is  not  friended.

But  on  this  point  1 now  more  tedious  am
Then  I was  warCiOr  then  I had  intended.

For  I love  writers  well,and  would  not  wrong  them.
And  I my  felf  do  count  my  fclf  among  them.

i8

I wrate  a volume  of  my  maflers  praife.

For  which  to  me  he  hath  not  been  ungrate.

But  to  this  height  of  honour  me  doth  raife,
Wherc(asyou  fce)l  live  in  happy  ftate;

1 pitic  thofc  that  in  thefe  later  dayes

Do  writCjwhcn  bounty  hath  flmt  up  her  gate.

Where  day  and  night  in  vainegood  writers  knock.
And  for  tbeirlaboursofthave  hut  aroock.


>9

So  as  indeed  this  reafon  is  the  chief.

That  wits  decay, becaufe  they  want  their  hire.

For  where  no  fuccour  is,nor  no  relief.

The  very  beads  will  from  fuch  place  retire.
Thusfaid  the  Saim,and(as  it  were  with  grief
Of  (uch  offence) his  eyes  did  flame  like  fire.

But  turning  to theDukewith  feberUftcr,

He  pacifi*d  himfclf  a little  after.

3°

Buthere  I leave  Afiolfo  Cafe  and  found
With  holy  Iohn,foi  ftmhwith leap  muft  I,

As  far  asfroin  t he  Moon  unto  the  giound  j
M y wings  would  faile,if  I flill  (bar’d  fo  hie  ;

Now  come  I unto  her  that  had  the  wound.

That  cverfmaiting  wound  of  jealoufie,

1 told  fhchadjwhen  laflofher  I fpoke,

V nhoifl  three  kings  with  goldelaunccs  ftroke.

31

And  how  file  lay  all  at  a caflle  fad.

Although  in  vainc  flic  fought  her  grief  to  fmot  her.
How  at  that  place  flic  pcrfcft  knowledge  had.

That  Agramant  was  foiled  by  her  brother.

And  that  to  flic  to  Arlic  he  was  glad.

With  good  Rogero  and  with  many  other  j
This  made  her  unto  Provence  then  to  haft,

Becaufe  flic  heard  that  Charles  purfu'd  him  faft.

3*

N*w  unto  Provence  onward  as  flic  went,

A comely  damicll  in  her  way  flie  view’d.

Who  though  flic  lookt  like  one  that  did  lament^
Yet  could  not  griefe  her  comly  grace  exclude  j
This  dame  bad  travcl’d  long,with  this  intent.

To  find  fome  knight  that  from  the  Pagan  rude,
(Fierce  Rodomont^ihzt  prifner  held  her  lover)

By  force  of  arms  againc  might  him  recover.

33

How  when  the  comfortleffe  dame  Bradamant
Had  met  a dame  as  comfortleffe  as  flic,
Suchfympathy  flic  felt  of  gricfc,that  fcant
She  kept  in  tcarcs,fo  fad  a fight  to  fee.

She  ask’d  her  whar  misfortune  or  what  want.

Of  her  fad  plight,unworthy  caufe  might  be :

Faire  Fiordeltege  that  for  a knight  did  hold  her.
The  citcumflancc  of  all  the  matter  told  her.


And  in  mofl  rufull  fort  flic  did  recount,

Bothofrhe  tombeand  bridgethe  wofullflorie.

And  how  the  cruel!  Pagan

Had  taken  him,for  whom  flic  w.is  fo  forie,

Not  tRat  he  could  in  value  hjm  furm'^unt.

That  for  bis  value  had  obtain’d  much  glory.

But  that  the  Pagan  not  to  ftrength  did  truft,

But  to  a bridge,and  va  n rages  unpifl.

35

Wherefore  mofl  noble  minded  knight(faid  flie)

If  fuch  you  bc,as  by  your  fpccch  I guclTc,

Help  my  deare  fpoufc  from  bondage  vile  tofreei
And  plague  the  Pagan  that  doth  him  opprefle  ;
Or  if  you  cannot  fo.yctcoonfcll  me,

Whcrcl  may  find  fomeaid  formydiftrefle.

Some  knight  fo  flout  of  heart, and  flrong  of  hand.
As  may  this  ciucll  Sarazen  withfland.


Stnuntt,  *


Tbkihtlikit
fuch  an

ftHCSOS

would  irnfft
a Sain$.


Tie  returm  OO

Aflolfoiu

$bei%


Canto

ftafft


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


So  /liall  you  do  a brave  and  noble  deed,

That  wandring  knights  do  think  they  ought  of  due.
So  might  you  aid  a worthy  man  indeed.

And  oncin  love  mod  faithfulland  moft  true:

As  for  his  other  praife,it  is  no  need
For  me  to  tcllinincowngricfcsto  renew,

Sithwell  I know  they  plainly  ate  appearing.

To  all  that  have  their  fenfeoffight  and  hearing.]

?7  .

The  worthy  Dame  that  thirfted  ftill  for  prailc.

Agrees  to  take  this  hard  exploit  in  hand.

As  one  that  ready  Was  at  all  aiTaies,

On  horfe,on  foot, by  n ater,orby  land  ;

For  either  tliiis  flic  fliallhci  glory  raife.

If  fo  flic  fliall  the  Pagans  force  withftand.

Or  die  flic  fliall,  which  danger  Icffe  doth  move  her,
Bccaufe  flic  thinks  doth  not  love  her.

38

And  thus  flic  faid, moft  lovely  loving  Dame,

Gladly  I fliallmy  utmoft  forces  prove,

Tofuccour  one  that  merits  fo  great  fame.

Yet  of  hispraifcschicfly  me  doth  move,

Bccaufe  you  give  him  fucb  a noble  name,

That  be  is  true  and  faithfull  in  his  love  ;

Which  fithyoufpeak  by  ttiall,!  muft  ween  fo,

Els  1 durft  fwcarc  no  man  alive  had  been  fb.

|9

Thefelaft  words  ending  with  a fcaldingflgb,

A figh  that  came  indeed  from  grievous  thought.
Then  OH  they  went, till  they  approched  nigh
The  parIousbridge,that  Rodomont  had  wrought  j
And  ftraighc  the  watch  dcfcri’d  them  from  on  high,
And  blew  a horn,by  which  the  Pagan  thought.
That  travellers  were  come  the  bridge  to  paiTc,
Came  out  allarmed,as  his  manner  was.

40

But  when  that  he  one  all  in  armour  faw.

He  greets  them  lowd  wi  t h this  lewd  falutation  l
Ho  flay, and  ere  you  pafleobferve  this  law,

Vnto  this  tombe,liumbly  to  make  oblation.

Of  horfe and  armes,with feareand  rev*rcnt  aw;

Els  with  thisfpeareexpea  fliarpcafligation.

She  that  before  had  heard  of  /riefr  death.

And  ofthis  tombe  thus  ftouiJy  to  himfeth.

41

Ah  damned  wretch,why  fhould  the  innocent
Indure  the  penance  of  thy  grievousguilt  \

Thy  felf  fliouldft  dic,orfufrcipunifhment.

That  killedft  hcr,if  pleafe  her  ghoft  thou  wilt:
Hcrfoulc(upon  my  foule)  would  be  content.

If  by  my  hand  thy  guilty  blood  were  fpilt,

More  then  with  all  the  annors,meD,and  horfej.
That  theud  oft  win  by  thy  unlawfull  forces.

4»

And  fb  much  more  it  will  accepted  be

To  hcr,if  thou  by  my  right  hand  maift  die,

Bccaufe  I am  a woman  as  was  flic.

And  onely  come  on  thee  my  force  to  trie:
Butlctusfirftupoiithcfc  pointsagrccj
Thatifyou  hap  to  vanquifli  mc,thenl
Shall  fuffer  at  your  hands, fo  and  no  more.

Then  other  prifoners  have  done  before.


43


But  if  I ranqtiifli  you  (as  furel  truft^

Then  1 will  have  the  fpoilc  of  all  t he  reft.

And  make  your  hoifc,and  arnnes,fl  gift  more  juft^
Vpon  the  tombe  ofher  for  ever  bleft  :

And  then  withaIl,(o  me  you  promife  niuft.

That  all  your  prifncrsllraiglit  fliall  bercleaft.

When  thus  the  Dame  her  mind  had  fignifi’d.

Thus  the  fierce  T urk  mildly  to  her  rcpIPd.

44

Fairc  Dame, you  feem  to  me  to  fpeak  but  rcafon^

And  thereto  i my  frank  aflent  affoerd  :

But  true  it  is, that  I for  fcarc  of  trcafbn,

My  prifners  all,havc  lent  from  hence  aboord.

So  as  I cannot  free  them  at  thisfeafon.

But  firmly  here  to  you  I pafTc  my  word.

If  you  foilcmcjof  which  there  is  fmall  jeoberty,

1 will  fend  yvord  to  fet  them  all  at  liberty.

43

But  if  I conquer  you,asfure  I fliall,

(For  fb  it  is  moft  likely ,and  moft  meet)

1 will  not  hang  your  armour  on  the  wall.

Nor  fend  you  hence  a prifner  in  my  fleet,

I will  remit  to  you  my  conqueft  all.

For  that  fairc  f aces  fake,and  look  fofweet  5
Suffice  it  that  thiscurtefic  may  move  thee,

Whtie  now  thou  fccm’ft  to  hate  mc,thcn  to  love  me,

46

Be  not  (fairc  Damc)m  your  own  ftrcngth  beguil’d,

I offer  not  fuch  grace  to  cv’ry  ftrangcr,

For  I am  ftrongj  at  this  the  damfcll  fmil’d.

But  fuch  a fmilc,as  flicw’d  not  mirth, but  anger ^

And  whcthcrcouragc  bad  ail  fcarc  exil’d.

Or  that  dcfpairc  made  her  to  doubt  no  danger  •

She  fpur’d  her  borfc,nor  other  anfwcr  made  Kim,

But  with  herfpeare  in  red  flic  doth  invade  him.

47

This  fodid  move  the  cmell  Rodomount,

-Vpon  his  horfe  hedoth  himfclf  advance,

Not  making  doubt, but  that  he  would  difmouni
Out  of  her  feat,  the  noble  Dame  of  France  j
But  he  was  quite  deceiv’d  of  his  account,

" No  fooner  was  he  toucht  with  Goldelance,

But  cv’n  as  if  of  ftrcngth  he  had  bin  rcav’d.

Quite  from  thcfaddlc  backward  he  was  heav’d.

48

But  yet  the  Dame  her  felf  in  danger  was,

To  fall  into  the  ftreame  fo  fwift  and  fleet.

By  mcaiies  t he  bridge  fb  narrow  was  to  pafle.

That  haidly  two  atonccthcrconcould  meet-.

But  Rabic an, whofe  fwiftnefle  did  furpaffc
All  foure  foot  beaftf,did  firmly  keep  his  feet  ;
Although  fo  ftraight  and  narrow  was  the  biidge.

He  was  conftrain’d  to  run  upon  the  tidge.

49

Kow  when  the  Pagan  lay  thus  overthrown.

She  turn’d  to  him, and  fporting,thui  flic  fpake.
Now  fir(faid  flic)  I hope  it  maybe  known.

Of  us  two  which  the  worfer  caufe  did  take.

But  hcjlike  one  whofc  wits  were  not  his  own,

He  cither  could  or  would  no  anfwcr  make ;

But  ftill  hcftood,Iookingon  ground  and  iDuGag,
^either  his  foile  denying  nor  excufing.

And


294


THE  XXXV.BOOKE


he  cotnit
not  to  him
tilitlu  Utter
end  of  the
la(l  Bool^e,
where  Re-
fere^iUeth
inn.


'Sraniimert
fen  to  Meno-
dantt.


he  (Pe*h  09
mart  of
trapant.


iO

And  having  walk'd  fomc  half  a dozen  paces,
Hcfuddcniy  call  all  his  armour  off.

And  hurlcs  it  gainft  the  ftoncs.and  it  defaces.

That  fcant  he  left  uabrokc  one  pecce  thereof ;
Determining  after  fuch  foule  difgraces.

To  hide  himftlfe,and  go  a great  way  off :

But  ere  he  wcnt,hc  granted  full  commiffion,

T o free  his  prifners  without  intcrmiflion,

S*  . ,

So  thence  he  wcnt,and  whatof  him  became.

Or  what  he  did,EO  notice  clcarc  I have.

But  onely  this, that  ev’n  for  very  fliamc.

He  long  liv'd  clofe  within  a fecret  cave  ;

The  while  his  armes  by  that  viftorious  Dame,

Were  hang’d  up  at  the  tombe  for  triumph  brave.
The  tothcr  armes  and  furnitures  among.

That  erft  to  Pagan  Princes  did  belong.

52

But  for  all  thofe  that  were  from  Chriftens  won.

She  laid  them  up, and  did  in  fafety  fet,

A mong  the  which  was  Monodantes  fon,

And  Olivero  and  flout  Sanfonet,

Wholate  before  with  ill  iucccflcdid  run.

So  that  the  Pagan  did  their  armour  get.

And  them  themfclvesaspiifnersdid  convay
Vino  jdlgtrie,  fine  from  thence  away.

. 5J

Among  thereft  thathad  their  armour  lofl.

Was Sacrapant  the  fierce  CircaJfcn?Tincei
Who  fought  for  Frantlet, to  his  painc  andcoft.

And  with  the  Pagan  fought  but  little  fince ;

But  being  foil’d, he  quite  forlbok  that  coaft.

Where  men, of  ffchdilgracemight  him  convince,
And  with  great  fliame,but  whatcouldfliamehim
He  camcon  horsback,&  went  thence  on  foot  fhootJ
5 +

Wherefore  afiiam’d  in  fuch  fort  to  return.

He  minds  to  follow  that  his  former  queft
Of  hcr,whofc  love  long  fince  his  heart  did  burn,
Although  her  love  he  p.ever  yet  poffefl  :

Forftill  herfroward  mind  did  ever  fpurn,

A gainft  his  earneft,and  moft  juft  requeft.

Of  her  return  he  late  had  heard  the  newes,

(I  know  not  how) but  now  he  herpurfucs.

55

And  let  him  her  puifiie,for  I proceed.

Of  noble  Braiamantes  afts  to  tell.

Who  having  done  this  brave  and  worthy  deed,

T o free  the  paffage  where  fb  many  fell.

She  wrateitjfo  as  ev’iy  one  might  read.

How  all  the  circumftance  thereof  befell .

Which  having done,then  Hie  demandsto  know.
Which  way  Dame  FiordcUege  did  mind  to  go,

5«

Whoftraight  herpurpofeunto  her  unfolding.

Told  her,to  pafl'e  the  fea  by  Ihip  flie meant,
Aty4r/y,!cafttJieT‘t;r/|;c  his  word  not  holding,

Might  keep  her  froufe  too  long  in  prifbri  pent :
Then  flial!  yoiiCfaith  the  Dame)  be  mord  beholding
To  me,foi  fu  re  (fa  id  (he)tis  mine  in  tent,

Vnto  that  town  to  guard  you  in  your  paflage,

So  you  will  do  for  me  but  one  embaffage.


5»

And  that  withall,you  me  this  grace  affoord.

To  give  Rogero  this  fame  horfe  for  me.

And  fay  an  unknown  champion  fends  him  word.
To  challenge  him,that  all  the  world  may  fee
He  hath  been  falfc  of promife  and  of  word  j
Of  which  our  combat  (liall  the  trial!  be ;

And  tell  him  plainly  there  is  no  denial!.

But  that  by  challenge  1 will  make  this  trial!.

58

Thisfay,and  fay  nomorejand  if  he  ask

My  name, then  tell  him  plainc  you  may  not  tell  j
T he  while  mine  armes  ftiall  fcive  me  for  a mask.
This  I defire,do  this,and  fo  farewell ;

Thisis(faid  Fiordelicgejaneafie  task
From  yoUjthac  have  of  me  deferv'd  fo  well.

As  binds  me  both  to  this  that  you  demand  me,

And  to  what  ever  els  you  would  command  me.

59

This  faid,fhe  takes  the  bridle  in  her  hand.

And  with  herleads  Frontino  on  the  way,

Vntill  they  both  came  to  the  fait  fea  fand.

That  next  unto  the  town  of  Arly  lay ;

But  Fiordeitege  goes  to  the  town  by  land.

And  Bradamant  doth  in  the  fuburbs  flay.

To  th’cnd  flic  may  convenient  refpit  give  her.

To  him  the  horfe  and  meffage  to  deliver.

60

Who  when  the  bridge  and  gate  flic  quite  had  pall.

She  prayeth  one  of  thofe  that  kept  the  ward,

To  bring  her  to  Rogero  in  great  haft.

And  through  the  town  of  curtfie  her  to  guard  j
ThisdooCjflie  to  Rogero  came  at  laft.

And  did  her  meffage  with  moft  due  regard.

And  gave  Frofttine,and  then  went  her  way.

Nor  would  fhe  once  to  heare  hit  anfwer  ftaj.

61

Rogero  ftandeth  ftillall  in  a mufc.

The  mcffengei  and  meffage  fo  beguile  him.

He  wonders  who  it  is,that  both  doth  life

Such  curtefie,and  yet  withall  revile  him,  •'’>

He  thinks  the  partie  doth  him  much  abufc.

With  fowled  blot  of  breach  of  word  to  file  him :
And  of  all  othcrs,Ieaft  of  all  he  thought.

That  Bradaraint  of  him  the  combat  fought.

62

To  think  it  Rodomont  he  was  inclin’d.

But  yet  it  could  not  fink  into  his  reach.

Why  of  a hidden  he  fhould  be  fo  kind.

And  wherein  he  could  blame  his  promife  breach;
And  favc  with  him,  he  cannot  call  to  mind.

With  whom  he  had  of  friendfiiip  any  breach :

The  while  the  Lady  with  a ftately  fcorn.

In  token  of  defiance  blew  her  hom.

Straightwayes  the  newes  to  Agramant  doth  fly.

That  one  without  did  challenge  Come  within.

And  Serpenfine^that  then  by  chance  was  by.

Ask’d  leave  to  fight,with  hired  hope  to  win.

And  fwears  the  knight  fliould  yeeld  or  els  fhould  dy.
And  then  the  people  flockt  bothlhick  and  thin.

And  flood  upon  the  wals  with  young  and  old.
Between  theft  two  the  combat  to  behold.


Out


f


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO:


64


7t


Out  Ser^cntir.t  came  in  brarc  arrar.

And  bravely  with  bis  fpcarc  in  icd  he  ran ^

But  at  ihefitft  encounter  dowoc  hclay>

The  horfe  lufincs  Iccrc  away  without  the  man^

But  noble  Bradamant,  the  horfe  doth  ftay,

A nd  backc  reftoie ; then  finely  a»  flic  car.

She  prayeshim  to}^\ng  Agramant  tofpeake.

To  fend  a ftrongcr  Kmghc,fith  he  was  w cake.

6$

"I  he  mightic  Kings  of  Ajfricl^e  and  of SpainCj '

That  from  the  wall  the  courteous  aft  did  vcw.
From  praifing  of  the  famecould  not  refraine.
Though  none  of  thcm,thercof  t he  iuthor  knewj
Now  Serpentina  backc rcturnd  againe.

And  to  his  Prince  he  told  his  meflagetrew,

, How  that  fame  championdiddefirc  to  fight.

With  fomc  more ftout  and  inoieicnowncd  Knight.

66


Next  (lout  Fenvrw  de fir’d  to  hate  the  place.

Not  that  he  hop't  the  coot]ue(l  to  have  wonne,
Butthat  thcfcKnightsmay  havethc Icficdifgrace,
If  I ((juothhe)  flialldoasthcy  havedonne:

A ftrong  fwift  horfe  he  takes,and  lure  of  pace.
Well  made  to  bearc  the  niecke,and  free  to  runne',
The  choifefiof  an  hundred  that  he  kept,

And  thus  all  arm’d  upon  the  bcaft  he  Icpt.

7»

Againft  the  femall  champion  forth  he  goes,

And  fiift  they  interchangeably  fslutc,

Plcafeit  you  (faid  the  Ladic)  to  difclofe
Your  name  to  me?  that  fiiall  bcall  myfutc:

He  (that  what  longs  to  civill  manners  knowes,)
Tofatisfic  her  therein  was  not  mute.

And  I rcfu/c  you  not,tbcn  faid  the  tothcr,
Altiiough  I rather  would  have  had  another.


And  then  Granionia  fierccof  Volaternc,  Whom?  ( quoth  Ferraw)  Rogero  (flic  rcplyed)

The  proudeft  Knight  chat  5'pai)ie  long  time  bad  bred  And  fcaifc  flic  fully  could  bring  forth  hisnamC;


StmrpMi  it
m Utft  tbt$
lit  ttmhCtfi
mft  I*  ctjl
tbtmfilvii

fmxttti  tbair

iult  trutr
abthbtti.


Obtain’d  next  placc,and  with  a vifage  fterne,

A nd  thicatning  voice  thus  to  the  datnfcll  fed;

Your  curtfic  fmall  reward  for  you  fliall  caine^

For  either  here  in  fightyou  muft  be  ded.

Or  at  the  lcafi,I*wiJl  you  piifnci  bring,

Vnto  Marfilie,  of  gteat  Spaine  the  King.

67

\Vell.(an^ety  flic)  kccpethcrcyourthrcatsin  ftere,
Your  vnlany  my  curtfic  fiiall  not  let.

But  that  ilc  frcndly  monifh  you  before.

That  backc  agaioe  unto  your  King  you  get,®'

£rc  chat  your  fall,may  make  your  body  forc;

And  fay  that  I defired  to  have  met
A man  indeed  of  courage,  and  of  worth.

And  nor  your  fclfc,nor  him  that  laft  came  forth.

6g

Tbit  her  replicfomild,and  yet  fo  bitter,  ^

The  Pagan  with  morefuric  did  enflamc;

Withfpcarc  thcnfpecch,  he  thought  an  anfwcr  fitter
And  toward  her  in  full  ca  freer  he  came,

Intending  furc,fomc  deadly  blow  to  hit  herj
But  flic  that  was  accuftom’d  to  thisgamc,

Bare  well  his  blow,and  with  her  Goldelance,

She  taught  him  bow  the  fbmerfaut  to  dance.

69

But  yet  his  hoifc.thatloofc  about  did  runne,

She  brought  him  backe,and  thus  to  him  flic  faid,
Loe  fir,you  had  bin  better  te  have  donne
My  mcffage,when  I curteouflic  you  praydj
Yet  here  I will  releafe  my  pnfncr  wenne.

So  you  will  tell  your  King  that  I have  ftayd.

To  combat  with  a man  in  fight  well  fecne.

And  not  with  novicct,of  skill  fo  grccnc.

70

The  lookers  on  that  fure  thought  nothing  lelfif.

Then  that  a virgin  fo  could  guide  a fpeare.

With  murmuiiftgs  their  wonder  great  cxpicflcj
Still  ayming  with  fuimifes  who  it  wercj
Some  Brandimarr,ind  fomc  Renaldo  gueSe,

Or  others  whom  the  Turl^t  hadcaufe  tofeare.

But  moll  they  would  Orlando  have  fufpefted.

Save  they  had  hcatd  bis  fences  were  diftcafted,


But  that  a blufli  with  rofic  colour  dyed
Her  lovely  chcckcs,with  fecrct  honefi  fhame;

(Further flicaddcth)  him  whofc  vallcw  tryed.

And  fe  much  pray s*d,  was caufc  1 hither  came,

None  clfcl  fcckc,noi  for  none clfe  care  I,

Onely  his  manhood  I defire  to  try.

7+

She  fpakc  the  weid  inplaineand  fimplc fence.

Which  feme  perhaps  will  fubtlic  wreft  awry.

Well  (faid  Ferraw)  yet  now  ere  I go  hence.

Let  me  with  you  havclcaveon  courfe  totryj
T c fee  if  I can  make  no  more  defence.

Then  thefe  whom  laft  you  made  on  earth  to  ly.

If  I fall  as  did  tbey,tben  I will  fend

That  gentle  Knight,that  may  our  errour  mend*

75

Her  beaver  open  was  while  they  confard,

Ac  whichjwhcn  her  the  Spaniardvrel\  had  vewedj
And  raarkt  her  bcwtic  worthy  of  regard.

He  was  ali-cadic  more  then  halfc  fubdewed:

He  thought  an  Angcll  of  the  hcav’nly  guard.

Could  not  with  greater  bcwtic  beendewed}

Againft  her  fpcarcjwhatfcncecan  hedevife,

T hat  is  already  conquetd  with  her  eyes?  1

76

Now  tooke  they  field,and  ran  with  all  their  force.

And  now  Ferraro  is  from  hisfaddlc  borne,^

T he  damfcil  doth  of  curtfic  ftay  his  horfe.

The  Spaniard  lyech  like  a man  forlorne,  ,

But  backc  be  muft  unco  the  King  perforce.

Nor  true  to  do  his  raefTage  doth  hcfcoroej
He  ids  Rogero  plaine  before  them  all.

How  this  fame  Knight  onely  for  him  doth  call.

Rogero  who  it  is  yet  little  knowing.

In  haft  to  make  him  readiedoth  begin,

A feticd  hope  of conqueft  plainly  fhowing.

Willing  to  fight,  with  mind  aflin’d  to  win.*

As  for  their  foy  Ics,  and  their  fowicoverthrowingj
That  went  bcforc,hc  weigh’d  them  not  a pinj
But  bow  they  mct,how  kindly  him  flic  foivcd,

Vnto  the  bookccDfuinsitrcfhvcd,

C c Hi


7p6  THE  XXXV.  BOOKE

Moral!.  In  the  beginning  of  thiihoo\e,  after  the  exccjjtvepu^jei  of  Hippolito,  he  rcturnes  to  the  former  matter  of  the  force
eftimejhe  AUegoryrt>hercof  I vili  continue  in  this  place:  enetyfor  the  Morall,  1 wi/l  touch  m>o  Jpecialljaults  .which
mine  author  reprove  t in  men  of  the  better  fort,  one  is  the  great  account  they  malyof  Farafites,  Fromoters,  and
left ets, and fuen  lil^efor  their  bafenes  and  filthines .liiiened  to  the  ajfe  anporf^e.-and  other  in  their  venerie  O'  drunhynes,
which  he  noteth  by  thefc  words ; anzi  venerc  c bacco;  / Englijh  it.bj  their  ownc  fiirfctting  and  \u!k^becaufe  Jitrjeting
contains  both  hfreds  ofexccjfe  in  meat  and  drin^e.  And Jureiy  I muft  grant,  that  our  Kealme  oj  England  hath  bin  noted
jorriotin  meats. many yeares  fince,  and  not  without  taufe  (though  not  alone)  for  Vhto  found  the  lU;e  fault  with  Italie
in  his  time.  But  for  this  other  vice  ofdrinliing,  which,  with  the  name  of  a health,  overthrowes  all  health  and  fobrietie,
it  is  nowgrowne  as  ufuatt  and  more  odious  then  the  tother,  and  I doubt  it  will  not  fo  eafily  be  driven  out, as  it  is  fodainly
crept  in-I  havehcardaprettie  tale  not  impertinent  to  this  matter,  ofaGentleman  that  had  his  fmneatthe  Vntverftty,
who  being  belike  of fogoodaconfcience  ( as  mojl  of  us  are  in  that  l^ind)  to  fahje  but  a little  for  hU  mono/, and  growing  (at
it  feemedj  more  inyearcs,  then  either  in  learning,  or  good  manners ; his  tutor  to  difeharge  his  duty,fent  his  father  word,
how  he  mifdoubted  theyoung  mans  well  doing,  becau/e  he  found  him  given  to  dicing  and  gaming  : thefalhcr  was  firry,
hut  yet  anfwered,that  he  hopedwhen  his  finnegrew  to  have  more  wtt,  he  would  leave  that, or  at  leaf  notlofi  ly  it. The
next  news  he  heard  of  his  amendment, was  that  now  he  began  to  follow  women:  this  touched  the  father fimewhat  nearer,
yet  he  replied  againe,  that  he  made  no  quefiion  but  he  would  leave  that  ere  long  for  his  gwne  eafi,  and  tberri  oreyet  he
would  notdifpaire  of  him.  The  laft  news  he  heard,  was  that  he  began  to  mend  his  former  two  faults  i but  that  now  he  fell
to  bibbing  and  drinliing.Out  upon  the  villan(faid  the  father)  I will furely  difinherit  / im.-for  that  fault  the  elder  he  wax-
ethythe  more  he  will  be  fubjelfto  it.  Wherefore  I concluik  this  Morall  with  this  exhortation  : that  if  wit  cannot  ma{e
men  leave  play,  nor  their  owne  ealemal^c  them  efehew  venerie  i at  leaf  lettheuglines,  opcnnejfe, and  bea/l  lines  of  this
fin  ma\e  them  leave  it^which  hath  no  defence,  nor  no  praife:!  fay  pratfe,  becaufe  the  Scripture  faith, The  wicked  man
ispraiied  in  hi$  wk)scdnes,But  I ticverheardpraife  aferibed  to  a drinl;^er, but  the  well  bearing  of  drinl^Ci  whichmigbt
be  agoodpraifefoT  a brewers  horfi.or perhaps  a brewers  man,  but/urc  it  is  a fmallboflfor  a Gentleman.

AuguAusCxfarwas  notfuch  a Saint.&c.

HiAorle.  of  Aoguflus  Cxfits faults  both  Suetonius,<j«i  Plutarkc  have  written  at  large,und  1 am  lot^  to  renew  the  memo-

tie  of  them.cxcept  I did  alfo  recite  his  many  venues,  which  made  large  re'compcncefor  his  few  vices : fuficeth  it  to  af-
firmc  tbatwhich  mine  author  faith,  that  his  hountie  and  love  to  learned  men  coveredhis  faults  .-and  of  his  bounty, among
other  things  witnejfetb  the  fake  F allace  he  gave  Virgil,  with  agoadly  Manner,  or  rather  indeed  rerritorte, in  the  field
called  Ager  Crcmoncnfis ,nearc  Mantua.

Stafie  26.  Whereas  it  isfaid.intheperfin  of  S.lohn.

But  yet  (for  ought  you  know)  he  have  taught
Thecontraric  to  this,if  he  had  lifted.

That  Troy  prcrayld,  that  Greeks  wercconquerd  clcane.

And  that  Pe»e/ope  was  but  a queane.

True  it  is  that  one  Tilonan  Hift  oriographer,  writeth  to  that  ejfelf,  and  infer  ceth  very  far  to  prove,  that  tic  Greeks
ladtheworfeendof  theftaffe,  and  onely  that  Eiomex favoring  the  Greely,  wratethe  contrary,  further  fame  have
carped  at  Penelopes  cbafitie  (for  what  may  not  a malicious  wit  carpeatr),  and  they  fay  Homer  himfelfe  infinuatetb
fimewhat  of  her  tightnejfe  j where  he  faith  in  his  Odifleas,  that  Jhe  objeSed  unto  her  filters  that  none  of  them  could
Jhoot fi  firong  a Jbaot  as  her  husband : but  lowfiever  it  is,  for  my  part,  feeing  it  hath  becne  received  fo  long  for  a truth,
that  Penelope  was  a chaft  and  vertuous  wife,  I will  mt  ta{e  upon  rve  (by  S.lohi»)  to  write  the  contrarie,  though  mine
authourmaheS.lohntocafi  adoubtofit.

Allegoric.  Of  the  Allegory  I have  not  much  to  fay,  Iccaufi  mine  authour  himfelfe  expounds  it  fo  plainly;  onely  / prayyou  mar\

how  rightly  and  with  what  decorum, he  likens  Fromoters , and  Farafites, to  vultures ,carren  crowes,and  chattering pyes,
at  liliewifi intbe beginningofthe  i^.boohe,be lih^neth  them  toHarpias.

Thcfuftenance  that  ftiould  for  food  have  ferved.

For  widowes  poore,  and  orphancs  innocent,

Thefc  filthie  monfteis  doconfumc  and  waft  it,

O ft  at  one  mcale,before  the  owners  taft  it-

As  if  one  would fy,thegfts  and  rewards  that  belong  to  old  fervitours,  andweSdefervingfiuldiert,  arecatchedat
the  vollielythefe  ravenous  birds,  andnever  come  to  the  ground,  oriftheydoe,  theymabefofalfeabound,  thataman
fihall  male  a fault  {n  of  ring  at  them,  and  marry  times  hazard  both  game  and  fit  for  them.

Allufion.  Bradamant  a womn  overcomming  Kodomomamofi  terribleTur{e,  alludes  to  tbenotahleH'iftoryof\\iiith,that
cut  ofHolofcrneshead:  which  flory, the  Lord  Tiu  Bertas,  and)rare  French  Foet,  contrivedintoan  excellent  Foeme
in  French, and  the  fame  is  tranfiated  into  averie  good  and  fiveet  fnglifljverfi,  by  one  M.ThomasHudfon,  which
worhe  I the  rather  mention,  becaufe  in  the  6.  boohe  of  the  vice  of furfeting,  which  i reproved  afore  in  the  Morall,  it  is
notably  deferibed  andwithalljbarply  rebu^pd  as foUoweth:

O plague, O poyfoii  to  the  wariiour  ftate,  •

Thou  mak’ft  the  noble  hearts cfFcminatc.

While  Rome  was  ruldc  by  Curioes  and  Fabricet,

Who  fed  on  rootes,and  fought  not  for  dcliccs.

And  when  the  onely  CrefonvtiS  the  food,

Moft  delicate  to  Pcifia,ihcn  they  ftood,&c.

Here  end  the  annotatioBSupon  the  XXXV.  Booke,


ip8


THE  XXXVI.  BOOKE.


Z^gfinflem


THE  ARGVMENT.

*D$t^e  Ammons  daughter  veith  rt'vengefull  heart
*I>oth  meet  her  to  killy

Untill  the  battels  jojnd  OH  either  forty
t^ndfo  did  funder  them  againU  their  willi

Bradamant  and Kogerotali^ apart:

Marfifa  gets  of  both  great  evill  willy

'Bj  troubling  them : but  when  fhe  knew  her  brother ^

She  reconciled  uto  tone  and  t other.


When  Co  far  Hcgcd  Padoa,i%  they  knew  well.
And  biought  it  to  low  cbbc  and  woful!  Hate,
He  bot  h wi  t hd  rew  t he  m a ttcr  a 1 1 a nd  fewel  I ,
And  qucnchtthe  fires  kindled  by  deadly  hate,
PrefciTing  many  a Church  and  many  a village
By  his  rare  clemency  from  fire  and  pillage.


SittaKet.


- , , _ a man  fliall  know

sy  churJi/7i  parti  and  afts  of  incivility,
Whofenatureapt  to  take  each  lewd  infcAion,
Cuftomcconfirmcs,and  makes  ill  in  perfeiiion.


hiftrr  eftbm
6oebr,canttr-
ibu  CTM'
f&t  ht  cent-
pltfint!  ef.


Ofeurteous  afts,o!d  rtorics  he  that  reads.

In  ancient  times  fliall  find  there  hath  been  fiore
But  inourdaycsofbloudycruelldecds
Is  greater  plenty  then  hath  been  before  •

For  charity  brings  forth  but  barren  feed/.

And  hatred  ftill  is  fow’d  in  fi>  great  ftore.

That  when  the  fruits  of  both  come  to  be^eap’d,
The  tone  isfcarcc,the  totherovcr-heap’d.

What  fierce  Sarharian, Tartar, Moore, ox  Tur\ey
Could  ufcmorecriielty  then  now  of  late
iaLatian  land  Venetian foice did  work  i
Not  by  confent  of  the  wife  menof  fiatc.

But  by  the  filthy  nature  that  did  lurk
In  wicked  hirelings, and  a hidden  hate;

I fpeak  not  of  the  dammage  and  defaces,

They  did  by  fire  in  all  our plcafant  places.

4

Though  that  revenge  was  fonlc  and  too  too  cruclt,
And  chiefe  3gainft  Hip^p/;Va,who  late.


Is  meet  a gentle  heart  Ctould
ever  fiiow

Bycurtcfic  the  fruits  of  tiue
gcmilitic,

Which  vvill  by  praftketoan
habit  grow.

And  make  men  do  the  fame

I urn  Li  j Not  thofe  I mcane,nor  many  actions  more,

Likcw.fe  the  dunghill  blood  ^hat  cannot  be  cxcufed  or  defended.

But  fuchan  aft  as  ftones  might  weep  therefore.
As  oft  as  it  is  talk’d  of  or  rcmembied :

Then  when  my  Lord  his  houfliold  fent  before.
There  where  bis  foes  were  fccrctly  aflcmblcd.
And  left  their  vcfTcls  on  the  faltifli  fand.
While  in  ambunimcnt  clofc  they  lay  on  land.

6

As  Helfor  and  ^^neas  did  by  fire

AfTaultthcGreekini  flcetwith  hardy  fighr.

So  faw  1 1 wojwhofc  hearts  to  fame  afpirc,
fOnc  Alexander ^tothet  fierclcs  hight)

AfTauIt  their  foes, and  drive  them  to  retire
Vnto  their  trenches, nay  within  them  quite ;
Butoncof  them  leturncd  thence  full  hard,
Thctothcrof  returning  clean  was  bar'd.


For  Teru$ne  Cay'd^Cantelmo  fiaid,

O Duke  of i’arCjWhat  great  fore  didft  thou  find.

To  fee  thy  noblcfonnc  fb  foulc  betraid.

Among  a thoufand  blades  left  there  behind  I
His  naked  neck  on  fide  of  gaily  laid.

And  chopped  off ; now  finely  in  my  mind.

When  that  fame  bloiidy  firoke  his  neck  fmit  off.

You  felt  like  ftrokc,cv*n  with  the  fight  thereof

SlavoMian


Thtfrjlpen
e/lka
Utbiuntb
fiaffiyuatii
vert  an  Efi
taphoHCoH,
Uiaiia,
Vauhu
mi  both
^*tb  bit
mamt,md
further  faitk,
that  CattuU
emu  htrfe  cam
ritdhmuam
danger  4*
gaimfl  bii
wiOJbmret
bt  reffevet
their  CTueltf
that  put  btfm
li  death,
inga  tree
dene,  Tnfgni
De/rniatarum
fivma.


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


"^99


tmunt*


Slavonian  vilcjwhcre  didft  thou  Icarnc  to  Icnow
Such  lawcs ofvrirre?  within  that  Scithianlandj
Vfc  men  to  kill  a prifner  taken  fb.

That  yeelds,and  hath  no  weapon  in  his  hand^

Or  was  it  fuch  a grievous  finne  you  trow.

The  focsofhisdearecountry  to  withftand?

Why  hart  thou  Sunnc,fo  long  on  this  age  fliinde,
That  breeds  of  Atrerps  and  Thiejles  kindc?

9

Barbarian  vile,tfeat  kild  fo  fweet  a youth.

To  fattsfie  thy  rancor  and  thy  rage.

So  rare  a youth, as  to  confcflTc  the  truth.

His  nnatch  could  not  be  found  in  this  our  age,

Whoft  beaiitie  might  have  bred  fufficient  ruth.

Fierce  PoliphemM  anger  to  aflvvagc.

But  not  fierce  thee,  more  cruell  and  more  fell.

Then  any  monfters  that  in  deferts  dwell.

10

The  valiant  men  did  rtudic  in  time  part.

With  clemencie  their  honors  to  incrcafc,

And  hate  no  longer  then  the  fight  did  lart.

With  vi£ioric  revenge  d id  ever  ceafe:

So  Bradamant,  of  whom  I tolJ  you  laft,

The  prifners  (lie  had  tanc,did  ftill  releafe.

And  flaid  their  horfeswhen  themfelveswcredowne,
And  fent  them  backeagaiaeinto  the  townc.

1 1

And  praidthem  but  herchallengeto  deliver,

Vnto  Rogero,  and  to  call  him  out,

Who  meant  with  fpeare  in  reft  her  anfwergive  her,
Vnto  her  challenge  that  (he  fent  fo  ftout.

Now  when  the  other  Knights  were  all  togither.

In  piefcnce  of  the  Kings,  they  cart  a doubt,

W'ho  this  Diould  bc,and  then  they  askc  ferratv.
That  talift  with  hcr,and  her  bare  v^ifage  faw.

12

Sure  (faid  Ferraw)  it  is  not  tone  nor  tother,

Ofthofeon  whom  before  your  thoughts  werefetj
I tooke  it  firft  it  was  Remldes  brother,
Whoisinyearcs  a very  youth  as  yet.\

But  new  1 rather  judge  it  is  another.

For  fo  much  force  is  not  in  Richardetf
I thinkeitishisfifter  by  her  ufage.

Who  I have  heard  is  like  him  much  in  vifage.

She  hath  ere  this  of  value  had  great  fame,

Renaldt  and  rhc  Falladins  among,

I muft  confefle  I found  it  to  my  fhamc,

Her,thcn  her  brothers  to  be  farre  moreftrong.*
Rogero,  when  he  heard  them  her  to  name,

Was  guiltiertraight  that  he  had  dene  her  wrong.
And  bluflit  in  countenance  with  baflifull  grace.
And  oft  lus  heart  Hiot  blood  into  hk  face.

14

Tea  fcarc  invaded  hIm,notfcare  of  danger.

For  force  he  feared  not  ofany  wight,

0(Tur\e  nor'C/;ri/?e»,countryman  or  ftrangerj
Thev  veaufe  ofthis  his  dolefull  plight
Was  iovc,for  love  feares  nothing  more  then  anger,
Hedoubtslcart  flieconcciv’d  not  of  him  right;
Thus  waving  thoughts  hismind  do  both  waics  cary^
If  fo  he  better  were  to  go  or  caiy«


15

The  while  Mar^fa  that  was  prefent  there.

And  ever  had  a forward  will  lo  juft.

Could  now  no  longer  from  the  fame  forbcarc.
Though  feeing  fomc  befoie  her  licon  duft.

For  all  iheii  faJsdid  breed  in  hernofearc.

So  much  in  hci  gicat  value  ftic  did  truft,

W'herefore  leaft  good  Rogero  might  prevent  her,

Fuft  flic  rides  forth,and  in  the  lifts  doth  enter.

\6

And  mounted  on  her  hoi  fc  came  fwiftly  running,

V nto  the  place  whac  Bradamant  did  flay.

With  panting  heart  to  wait  Rogrros  comming.

With  mind  to  take  him  pnfncrif  flic  may.

She  thinks  how  flic  might  guide  her  ftafFc  with  cun-
As  with  her  ftrokc  do  him  leaft  hurt  flic  may;  (ning,
Thus  commeth  out  j^far^yi.nothing  fearing,

Vpon  her  loftic  creft  rhe  Phenix  bearing.

17

Or  that  thereby  to  boft  her  ftrength  flic  ment.

Of  her  rare  ftrcngfh,of  which  flic  tooke  fomc  pride,
Or  clfc  thereby  to  note  herchaft  intent
She  had,  a warlike  virgin  ftill  to  bidcj
But  Bradamant firft  to  meet  her  went,

And  not  to  be  Rogero  now  cfpide,

Dida^ke  her  name,  and  by  her  name  (he  knew
That  ibis  was  flic  that  made  her  love  unticw.

Or  to  fay  bcttrr,whom  flic  did  furmife.

To  bcthefolc  withholdcrof  her  dcaic.

Her  whom  flie  hates,  gainfl  whom  her  blood  doth
And  minding  now  to  make  her  buy  it  dcarc,  (rife,
With  furic  great  and  rage  at  her  flic  flies;

And  that  flic  may  make  all  fufpitions  clcare.

With  couched  (peaie  flic  fiercely  runneth  on  her.
And  Qicancs  to  kill  hcr,r)r  to  die  upon  her.
ly

Marfifa  wasconftraioed  with  the  Ifroke,

1 okifle  the  ground  as  tho'c  before  her  had.

Which  to  fuch  rage  her  courage  did  provoke.

That  with  difda  inc  fli  c feemd  as  one  halfc  mad.

Nor  knowing  howfogreata  foiletoclokr.

She  d:awcs  her  fword  with  an  intention  bad.

But  Bradamnr cry*th  out  with  loftic  hart.

What  doft  thou  traitor?  thou  my  prifner  art.
so

And  though  I ufed  curtfie  to  t he  reft.

To  ufc  It  unto  thee  I am  not  tide,

Whofe  mind  (as  1 have  hcard)iscv'n  a neft,
Wherinis  bred  all  villanicand  pride;

Looke  how  great  waters  rage  and  do  not  reft.

When  as  the  winds  do  ftnve  againft  the  tide.

So  rag’d  Marfifa  rather  more  t hen  lefl'c.

And  for  mecrc  fpitc  could  not  a word  exprefle.

21

But  buries  about  her  blade  with  all  her  force.

Not  caring  what  flic  rtcikes,norwherc,nor  how,
Vpon  the  hoifcman  or  upon  the  horfe.

Her  rage  in  her  no  reafbn  did  allow:

And  Bradamant  as  void  of  all  rcmoric.

With  mind  to  breake  that,  that  refus’d  to  bow,
Ranneather  with  the  fpeare  that  would  not  mifle.
And  made  her  once  againe  the  ground  to  kific,

C c 2 But


The  device
oftbe?iHnix
mey  be  *p-
fUtd  tuber
to  f ride  tr
cha^iUt,


Simkt


THE  XXXVI.  BOOKS


22


But  once  againeupon  her  feet  fhe  gettetb.

And  with  her  fword  revengemem  flic  intends.

Each  fall  flic  hath,  her  furic  fliaipcrwhcttcthj
Yet  ftill  flic  fals,and  can  have  no  amends.

Nor  goldclancc  his  wonted  force  forgetteth.

For  all  it  touchcs,to  the  ground  it  fendsj
Had  not  the  fpeare  bene  (ai  it  was)inchauntcd.

It  could  not  io  Marfifas  force  have  daunted.

Some  of  our  men  were  hither  come  the  while,

I mcanefomeof  the  Chriften  hoft,that  Jay
Encamped  nearc  the  towne  within  a mile.

So  as  the  wals  of  Arlie  fee  they  may, '

And  thinking  (for  her  fex  did  them  beguile)

Some  Knight  of  theirs  maintain*d  fo  great  a frayj
They  thither  came  with  will  and  with  delight.

To  fee  fo  fierce  and  well  maimaiad  a fight.

Whom  when  as  Jgramant  from  far  erpide.

And  thinks  they  came  to  bring  their  knight  afliflance
He  thought  it  beft  in  wifedomc  to  provide.

If  they  fliould  offer  force  tomakcrcfiftancc^

W hcreforc  he  pointed  fomc  that  of  their  fide.

May  fland  from  that  fame  place  a little  diflancffj
Of  this  laft  crew  Kogero  was  the  firft.

With  whom  the  damfcll  fo  to  fight  did  thirfl.

25

'And  feeing  now  how  fierce  tbccombat  gro'th.

Betwixt  thefe  two,to  whom  he wiflit  none  ill.
Although  in  fundry  kinds  he  favour'd  both.

For  tone  was  love,  the  tothcr  bare  good  will j

^ To  fuffer  them  to  fight  he  was  full  loth,

Although  for  honors  fake  he  muft  be  flill,

Elfc  fure  he  could  have  found  it  in  his  barr,

(To  ftep  bctwccnethem,and  the  fray  to  part,

26

But  they  that  with  him  trora  the  citic  came.

And  faw  the  Chriften  champion  wasfo  ftrong,^

Stept  in  betwixt  her  and  the  tot  her  dame.

And  fo  withdrew  Marjifa  than  among.

Which  aA  the  other  C btiftens  did  inflame.

So  that  with  mind  to  venge  fo  foulc  a wrong.

They  fteptin  toorthus  both  fidcs  cridc  alarme.

And  foonc  the  ikirmifli  waxed  ftcfli  and  warmC»

27

Such  as  before  were  armed, out  do  runne,

They  that  unarmed  vdcre,  their  armor  take.

And  fomc  runneout  on  foot, on  horfcbackc  fbme,
lach  to  his  ftanderd  doth  himfclfc  bctakc;

The  dirers  found  of  trumpet  and  of  drum,

That  doth  the  horfcmcn.this  the  footmen  wake,l
^ut  Bradamant  is  malcontent  and  wrath,

Ta  thinke  Mar^/h  thus  efcaped  bath,

28

Then  lookt  /he  wiflily  all  about  the  place.

To  findc  out  him  that  caufed  all  her  care.

At  laft  flic  knew  him,though  not  by  his  ftce^'

Yet  by  the  ardent  that  he  bare,

And  viewing  well  his  perfonand  good  grace.

His  goodly  ftaturc  and  his  feature  rare.

She  rag'd  to  thiokc  another  fliould  po^ftc

And  M thelcfcctet  words  fhc  doth  exficSe  it^


20


Shall  any  other  then  that  fwcet  lip  kifle?

And  I in  love  thcrof  ftill  mournc  and  pincJ
Shall  any  other  then  poflefle  my  bliffc;

Shalt  thou  anothers  bc,if  none  of  mine?

No  certes,  rather  then  to  fuffer  this.

Thou  by  my  hand  flialt  die,or  I by  thine.

If  in  this  life  wc  fliall  be  joyned  never.

Death  onely  be  the  meanc  to  joyhc  us  ever.

30

Although  that  thou  fliouldft  fortune  me  to  kill.

Thy  death  by  right  fliould  pacific  my  fpirit,

For  lawes  appoint, who  guilt  lefTc  blood  do  fpill.
Shall  for  reward  thedoome  of  death  inheritj
Yet  ftill  I fliall  fuftainc  the  greater  ill.

For  I fliould  guiltlcfle  dic,b^ut  thou  by  merit,

I killing  thee, kill  one  th.it  hates  me  mcerdy,

Thou  killing  mcjkilft  one  that  loves  thecdccrly.’

31

Why  fliouldft  not  thou  (my  hand)  be  ftrong  and  bold.
That  by  thy  ftrokc  his  hard  heart  may  be  riven?

Who  unto  me  fliarp  wounds  and  manifold.

In  time  of  loves  fwcet  peace  and  truce  hath  given.
And  doth  cv’n  now  with  ftonic  heart  behold
The  wofullfiatc  to  which  poorelamdrivcn.

Heart  now  be  fttnit  to  take  ihy  juft  revenge.

Let  this  one  death  thy  thoufand  deaths  avenge.

32

With  that  at  him  flicruns,but  firft  aloud.

Defend  thyfclfc  (i?tf^erofaIfc)flicfaid,

And  think  not  thou  lhalt  feape  with  fpoilesfopreiid
Of  heart  fubdued  of  a filly  ma'id.

who  to  her  himfclfc  had  vow’d.

And  to  offend  her  greatly  was  afraid.

Held  up  his  gantlet  unto  her  in  token.

That  he  with  herdefired  to  havclpoken,

33

He  would  her  wrath  with  kind  words  Iiavc.a ppeafed.
And  flicw'd  herhovV  thccaufc  he  brake  his  day.
Was  that  with  grievous  W’olinds  belay  difeafed.
Which  forced  himagainft  his'will  to  flay-
But  at  this  time5flic  was  fo  fore  difpleafcd’.

She  would  not  hearken  what  he  had  to  fay.

But  with  her  fpeare  in  rcft,on  him  flic  runneth.

Who  fucii  Unkind  encounter  greatly  fliunacth.

34

But  when  he  faw  flic  wasforafli  and  head le.

And  that  her  cholcr  now  fo  great  did  grow.

That  flic  was  in  her  full  carccrc  alreadic.

He  puts  his  fpeare  in  reft,  at  Jeaft  for  fliow.

And  forward  fets,  but  when  flie  was  ev’nrcadie.
Him  to  have  giv’n  a fliarpcdirgraccfull  blow,

(Or  that  it  were  that  flic  cv’n  then  recanted.

Or  that  her  heart  to  harmc  him  courage^aated^

35

She  bare  her  launce  aloft  quite  ore  his  creft.

And  foof  putpofc  that  iarhc  comfc  flic  mift.

Yet  fo,as  by  the  manner  might  be  gueft.

She  could  ha  vc  hit  him  furer,had  fli  c lift.

And  wrath  and  rage  ftill  boiling  in  her  breft,

To  bend  her  force  gainft  him  fliedrd  defift.


Sradirntxli
(cmplaini.
freperum
ka$!i
af  a man,
PoJJiim
iu  aitertua
fr[Utra(pt.
ittrt  iaterlmi
tJii  mta  di-
CHUT  qua
Widedtita
tnea  (Jt,


Shiealiihfai

f:rfido  Ra^f,

rt,u  Didatu

ty£unu.

tUtm  Jpiraflk
ftTjidt  tdhiij


But  io  that  mood  no  little  harme  flic  workcf,
Vato  th«  other  fculdicis  of  the  Turfifs,


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO:


jot


?<5  .

In  little  timcjnicwltli  hci  gilded  lance

Had  caus'd  three  hundred  men  on  ground  to  lie.

So  that  the  com^ueft  to  the  part  of  France,

Was  thought  to  hare  bene  gained  foie  t heiebys
Jio^ero  I'cekes  herout,and  la  ft  by  chance,

He  fpeakes  to  her, and  faith,my  dcarc  I die,

But  1 may  tslke  with  you,  what  have  I done
Alas,that  you  my  cotifcrcocc  (hould  Hiunne.

37

/.» when  the Southcinc  wind  with  lukc-warme  blaft^
jboth  breathon  liilswhcrc(Vihterlonghad  dwelt,
Rcfolves  the  rocks  of  ice  that  hung  fo  faft,

Ar^d  all  the  new  made  mounts  of  fnow  doth  mcltf
Sotviihrhisgentlc  prayre, though  fpokcin  haft,
Thedatnfcll  fuch  an  inward  motion  felt.

That  fodairily  her  hardned  heart  did  foften.

As  unto  women  kind  it  chanceth often.

58

iTct  anfwcr  made  fhe  nnne,but  held  her  peace.

She  onely  turned  Rabican  afide.

And  hafting  to  get  out  of  that  fame  preafe.

She  beckned  him  that  after  her  he  ride:

Thus  went  flic  thence,with  mind  inclind  to  peace,
Vnto  a valley,  where  on  either  fide,

A grove  of  Cypres  fo  cv*s  fet  wasfeene.

As  if  they  all  of  one  fclfe  ftampe  had  beenc*

Amid  this  grove  a goodly  fepultutc

Was  builtjwhich  thclc  rairc  Cyprcs  trees  did  fhidCj
OfPorpbyric  and  marble  white  and  pure.

And  fairc  engrav'n,  to  flicw  why  it  was  madc^

But  of  the  tombe  flie  tooke  no  care  nor  cure.

But  there  expefted  in  the  open  gladc,<

Vntill  Rogero  having  made  good  haft,  ’

Approcht  the  wood  and  damfell  at  the  lafto
Ao

Sut  ofMarfifa  now  1 muft  you  tel!.

Who  having  got  by  this  herhorfe  againe,

Herloftic  heart  with  rancor  great  did  fwcll.

To  be  revenged  of  this  foule  fiifFcrd  ftainc.

And  feeing  where  flic  wcnt,as  it  befell.

And  how  Rogero  follpwd  her  amainc.

She  little  thinketh  that  it  is  for  love.

But  rather  that  they  may  the  combat  prove.

4*  ...

therefore  to  follow  them  fhe  thinks  it  beft,
Soasfhccamealmoftasfooncasthcy,  ,

But  what  a tedious  and  unwelcome  gueft
She  feem’d  to  both, one  fooneconjeaure  mayj
Much  furcitdid  the  Bari/ou  dame molcft.

Who  foie  to  her  Rogeros  faults  did  lay.

She  deemd  that  to  come  thither  nothing  mov’d  her,
But  that  Rogero  in  ill  fort  had  lov’d  her.

4»

Aad  falfe,Rogero  the  againc  doth  name.

And  was  it  not  enough  falfc  man,faid  (her
That  of  thy  falfhood  I Qiould  hcare  by  famej
But  that  I with  thefe  eyes  thefame  fbould  (cef
But  fitblfind  thoudoft  thy  afiions  frame,

T o drive  me  with  unkindnefTesfrom  thee,

1 am  content  to  die, but  ere  I die  yet,
ihe  that  cauTc  it, dearly  fhall  abuy  is^


43


Thus  as  a Viper  angric  and  malicious,

With  mind  indeed  to  do  her  bell  to  kill
Hci'jthat  was  come  in  manner  fo  fuTpitiouS;

(T  hough  fhe  came  more  for  wrath,thc  for  good  wilj
With  gilded  launce  flic  gives  a blow  pernicious.

That  quite  unhorfed  her  for  all  her  skill.

Backward  MarfifafeW,  and  in  the  durt.

Her  beaver  ftucke,  but  had  no  further  hurt.

44

Duke  Ammons  daughter  that  rcfolves  to  die.

Or  kill  hetfo,  fomuch  her  fclfe  forgcttctb.

That  thinking  to  difparch  her  by  and  by.

Before  her  head  out  of  the  mire  flic  getteth,

The  golden  launce  flic  will  no  farther  trie,  (tetfij

Buttnrowcsitdownc,  as  wrath  her  courage  whet.
And  to  pe iFormc  the  featc,  her  fwoid  flic  drawes.
Therewith  of  fcarctocut  away  the  caufc,

45

But  ere  flie  came  fo  ncarc,  Marfifa  met  her.

Like  one  with  ragCjWub  Ipi tc  and  fcorne  halfc  madj
To  thinkc  that  now  againe  flic  fped  no  better.

And  that  a while  before  fticfpcdfo  bad  j
So  that  Ao^ero  could  by  no  racancslct  her
From  fishtirig,  which  to  ftop  great  will  he  had.

But  both  of  them  with  cholcr  were  fo  blinded.

They  fought  like  bedlcm  folk.aud  defprat  minded^  j

46

They  came  unto  the  halfc  fword  at  the  firft.

And  with  their  rage  forgetting  rules  of  skilf.

Their  overmuch  defire  to  do  their  worft.

Was  only  caufe  that  they  could  do  none  II’ s
Their  hearts  were  ready  for  defpite  to  buift.

And  cither  porpoflng  to  die  or  kill.

Did  leave  her  fword  afldc,in  mind  ftippefiiig^

With  ftab  to  kill  each  other  at  the  clofing.

47

Rogers  funders  them, and  both  intreatetb.

To  pacific  thcmfelvcs,  but  all  in  vainc.

Then  of  their  daggers  he  them  boili  dcfcatcthj
And  bv  petfwafions  mov’d  them  both  againc;
Sometimt  hefpeaketh  fairc,fomtimc  he  thieatcth^
Except  they  wil  at  bis  requeft  abftaincj
Sut  thefc  Viragoes  will  not  thoe  defift.

Though  weapons  want,thcy  fight  with  feet  and  fiftj

.48

Me  fteps  betweene  againe,and  back  he  drawes.

Now  one,  and  then  the  tother  by  the  fleeves.

And  makes  them  both  againft  their  wils  topaule^

At  which  Marfifa  not  a little  greevesj
Her  fclfe  too  greatly  wronged  in  the  caufe,

And  him  to  be  too  partial!  flie  bclccvcsj
Wherefore  his  fricndfliip  flie  doth  quite  difclaimcj
And  openwarres  with  him  fhe  doth  prodaime.

Ana  taking  up  her  fword ,in  termes  moft  vile.

She  faith  heplaicsthechurlifh  villcnspart,

And  that  he  greatly  doth  himfelfe  beguile.

To  thinkc  her  fight  againft  her  will  to  part.

She  fweares  fhe  will, within  a little  while.

Of  his  9wne  folly  make  him  fcelethcfmartj
‘And  that  fhe  will  henceforth  fofhort  biro  cuibc^

Hi  fhall  not  dare  her  combat  to  diftuibc,

€ e ♦ Ro£er^


J02


THE  XXXVI.  BOOKE


Tkiftturt  fi.
\ Hts  htnmmtt
thttflyit-
' tauft  ty

I ntMnui/tb*

:ji  rctj  Utr~

I $Kd  men,  ihty
. hid  tnany
; tiblt  dsvicts
preftmtd  an
ibtir/iigts
*nd  Ibtilirf


50

Rogtro  ftill  bare  all  her  wor<Js  as  words.

And  fought  byfpeech  her  to  have  pacified j
But  feeing  that  it  needs  muft  come  to  fwords.
And  that  with  blovvcSjBOt  fpccches  Qje  replied.
No  longer  time  to  walking  he  affords.

But  to  his  weapon  he  himfclfe  applied,

A nd  being  moved  now  with  rightfull  anger.
To  favc  himfclfcjhe  oft  put  her  in  danger.

But  nere  did  fpeftacle  breecr  moVd  delight,

1 n ftatcly  Rome  or  Athens  fo  well  learned.

Then  Bradamant  did  take  to  fee  this  fight,

1 n which  fire  now  .apparently  difeerned.

That  oft  heir  love  fhe  had  not  judged  rightj
Now  jcaloufie,and  all  that  it  concerned,
Sufpitioti,fearc,miftrnft,and  wrath, and  franzie.
Art  of  the  fodaine  quite  put  from  her  fancic.

52

And  taking  up  her  fword,fhe  flands  not  farre.
With  mind  not  yet  awhile  the  fray  to  part.

She  thinkes  in  him  fliefecs  theGod  ofwarre.
Such  grace  Regero  us’d,fuch  skill,  fuch  art:

And  totherfeem’d  in  thatunpleafant  jarre,
Somehellifii  furie,(fb  flieplayd  her  part)
Yctti-ueitisthat  he  a while  forbare  her.

Not  did  his  worft,but  did  ofpurpofe  fparc  her.


55

He  knew  the  fccret  vertue  of  this  blade.

Which  he  had  tridc  in  many  battels  well.

That  evermore  a way  and  entrance  made,

Whoft  charme  all  charmed  armes  did  far  excclf}
Wherefore  he  doth  not  fiercely  her  invade,

With  bloudy  blowcs.nor  fearfuil  thiufts  and  full.
But  flatting  ftill  hccaus’d  his  blowes  to  light,

T ill  once  he  was  of  patience  put  out  quite.

For  once  Af^tr/i/Sjtvith  intention  fhrowd,

Strake  with  fuch  furie  at  Rogcros  beaver,

That  with  that  blow  flie  very  plainly  fliowd.

That  to  have  kild  him  fhe  did  her  endever,
with  his  argent  Ec^le  trowd.

From  danger  of  the  ftrokc  himfclfe  to  fever,

But  though  the  fliield  brake  not,gramcrcy  ebarnae,
Yet  underneath  the  fliield  it  ftound  bis  armc.


Jht  like  it
y.Tfl  »f
Ttlide'tu.
Ctmtttu  U.

cbryPuitUu

imaiudnnr
titmula  &
i ex  redditM
f rtur  id
Mires.


55

ft  bappie  was  Don  Heitors  fliield  was  there,

Elfc  had  flic  put  him  unto  further  paine.

Scarce  could  he  now  the  maflie  target  bearc,
Scarce  now  the  film  bird  hr  could  fliftainc;
Now  he  intends  no  longcrto  forbeare.

But  burlethout  a foyne  with  force  fomainc,
r 1 n rage  with  that  late  blow  fb  fierce  and  bitter,
Wo  untopoorcMdr^yd.hadithither.
s6

1 know  not  what  good  Angcll  did  her  keepej
The  thruft  mift  her,and  in  a tree  it  ftrake.

And  enterd  inthefamcafliaftmandeepc.

And  on  the  fodaine  all  the  h ill  did  quake;

A fccret  horror  on  them  all  did  crccpc.

They  fee  the  hill, the  trees  and  tombe  to  fliake.
Till  from  that  fcpulchcr  a voice  proceeding.
Spake  unto  them  all  humane  voice  exceeding.


The  voice  to  them  with  no  flnall  terror  cride.

File  not  your  hands  and  hearts  wiihfo  great
It  isa  kinde  ofcrucll  parricide,

Tofeckc  to  kill,  and  befo  ncareofkin:

Wherefore  I charge  you  lay  all  hate  afidc,

And  markemy  fpeccb,and_allcontaind  therein,

I fay  you  both  were  gotten  of  one  feed.

One  wombe  you  barc,onc  breft  y ou  bo  t h did  fr  cd.
58

My  dcarc  Rogero.my  Mar fifa  dare  ^

Let  not  the  filler  fcckc  ro  kill  the  brother.

But  learne  of  me  fome  things  that  touch  you  ncerc.
Which  former  times  in  ignorance  did  fmothcr-
Your  fnCyRogero  hightjwho  that  fame  ycarc
He  gat  jouof  dame  Gallacefl yoat  mother.

Was  by  y cur  uncles  of  his  life  deprived.

Who  alfo  your  dcftruflion  thus  contrived.


They  putyour  mother  in  a ftecrleflc  bote.

Who  was  as  then  of  you  twainc  great  with  child.
And  in  the  Ocean  wide  they  let  herflote,
Thcrctobeftarv*d  or  drown’d  in  waters  wildct
But  lo  hew  fortune  holpc  the  lucklcflc  lot,

A nd  ere  you  yet  were  boriic,upon  you  fmild.

For  why  agairft  all  hope  orcxpcdlation.

Your  iWothcr  made  a happic  navigation.

60

And  being  fafe  arriv’d  at  fliorc.

There  at  one  burden  flic  brought  forth  both  you,
An,d-then  (as  if  flie  ought  this  world  nomorc^

Ht’r  blcfled  foulc  to  Paiadife  up  flewj

But  there  by  hap  (to  God  be  thanks  therefore)

Was  lat  hand,and  when  thccaufel  knew,

1 did  as  much, ere  T the  place  did  leave.

As  filch  a barren  fbilc  would  give  me  leave.

61

Your  mother  then  in  dull  of  earth  I lapt^

(Our  auncictit  mother)  whereto  all  muft  go.

And  111'  myclokcyourlittlcfclvcsl  wrapt.

To  fcckc  feme  mcanes  tonourifli  you,  when  lo,

A Lionellc  that  late  had  whclpttiicre  hapt.

To  come  in  fight  while  I went  to  and  fro.

Her  did  1 make  to  leave  her  proper  whelpes.

And  give  you  ruckc,thcn  wanting  other  helpes.

62

Ten  months  and  ten  in  forrefts  wildeand  meorifli,’
The  Lions  tets  you  ufed  were  to  fuckc,'

I after  Icarnd  with  wildc  flcfli  youto  nourifli.

Such  asl  could,ofBcares,or  Stag  and  Buckc]

But  when  you  now  began  in  ftrength  to  flourifli.
One  day  while  I was  lacke,by  cvill  liicke,

A band  of  fierce  Arabians  comraing  thither.

Would  have  convaid  you  both  from  thence  togither.

But  thou  Rogers  when  thou  fawft  them  comming,
Didlt  lave  thy  Yclfe  from  that  mifliap  by  flight.

Bui  thou  Marfijcijnct  fo  fwiftly  running,

Wert  i;  nc,and  quickly  earn'd  out  of  fight.

To  fetch  thee  barkc  againe  1 wanted  cunning.

For  which  I foride  many  day  and  night.

But  as  the  lofTc  of  tone  did  make  me  fad.

So  of  the  tothci  greater  care  I had.


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


303


«4


ChtrMuht
iriam  ib*
fan*
tobt  Firri~
^nefktU,


ftmrwriu

wukfUti

VfVCyiTtKtf

tbu  th*
Stmj  tnd
iba  Mujiin.


X«av  tdUti
fit  tiiji  of
Viau


Ah  my  ilo^-«‘0jthou  thy  fcifecanft  tell
If  thine  lov’d  thee  while  he  liv’d,

I favv  the  ftarics  fome  evjll  haps  foretell,

, That  thou  Hiouldft  have,which  me  no  little  griev’d
Yet  I endeavour’d  ftill,as  thou  know’ll  well.

That  by  my  meins  thou  inightll  have  been  reliev’d  ;
But  finding  thee  Hill  connuy  inclin’d,

Foi  very  gricfcaclall  Idl’d  and  pin’d.

65

But  here  I built  this  tomhc  aforel  di’d.

Where  I forefaw  you  two  fiiould  make  this  fray  j
And  being  dead, to  Charon  lowd  I cti’d.

To  fuffei  in  this  wood  my  gholl  to  ftray,

Vntill  thisfightjtomc  forcfignifi’d.

Should  happcn,VN'hich  was  done  this  prefent  day.
Now  Ihall  my  foulcfrovn  hence  depart  in  peace.
Now  Bi  Adamant  thy  jcalpiific  may  ccafe.

6(>

Thus  faid  the  voice, and  left  them  all  amaz’d.

With  wonder  great,  and  ftrangenelTc  of  the  cafe.
And  when  a while  each  had  on  other  gaz’d,

They  met  in  kindc(lmanncr,and  embrace  y
Not  Bradarriant  her  fclfcjwho  cift  wascraz’d
With  jcaloufie,now  took  it  in  d ifgracc,

T o fee  her  fpoufe,when  he  moll  kindly  kill  her.
Now  well  alTmcd  that  flic  was  his  filler.

67

Thus  they  agreed  atlafl,and  either  twin
Do  call  CO  mind  feme  a£ls  of  childifh  yearcs,

What  they  had  faid  and  done, where  they  had  bin.
Which  ev’n  with  tender  heart  did  move  their  tcarci  j
A t la/l  the  worthy  brother  doth  begin
To  tc.Il  Marfifa  what  great  love  he  beares
To  Bradamant, whom  he  to  wed  intends.

And  fo  at  length  he  made  them  faiihfuLl  friends.

68

Then  all  parts  pacifi’d  fo  well  at  length,

Marfjadoth  intreat  her  noble  brother,

T o tell  to  her  the  ftoiy  more  at  length,
Ofthatibllrange  exiling  of  her  mother.

And  if  their  fire  were  flame  by  fraud  or  llicngth.
And  who  it  was  that  wrought  the  tone  or  tother.

For  fuie(ltiid  flic)I  think  I never  heardit.

Or  childiflincITe  did  make  me  not  regard  it.

69

Rogero  tcis  her, how  of  Trojan  race,

From  Heffor  they  be  lineally  defeended.

By  meancs  yifliaruix  (of  fpcciall  grace.

That  fcap’d  Vlyjfet  and  the  fnares  intended)

Did  leave  a child  oflikeycares  in  his  place.

And  from  that  country  to  the  fea  defeended.

And  came  to  i’/ci/.laftcr  travcll  long.

And  took  Mejiiia  and  grew  very  llrong.

77

Hisof*rpiing  Hill  tnercafing  in  renown,

Calabriarul’d  in  part, and  thence  to  Phare,

And  came  at  laft  to  dwell  in  Mars  his  town.

And  many  a noble  Empercur  and  r are
In  {lately  Roms  have  worn  th’Impcriall  crown.

Of  fuch  as  from  this  flock  defeended  ar  c.

From  Conflance  and  from  Conftantine  accounting,

T o Pipin  and  his  fonne,:hcra  all  fiiimounting.


71


Rogero  firlljanJ  /ambaronofthcCcy
Rovui,Rambaldus, and  Rogero  againe,
Ofwliom(as  ^ilantto\d)i3v‘d  from  the  leas,

Our  mother  by  the  fliorc  brought  forth  us  twainc,
Their  alls  in  ancient  {lories  they  that  picafe
To  look, may  find  them  there  recorded  plaine  y
Then  teJs  he  how  there  came  king  Agolant,

With  ^Imont.and  the  lire  of  Agramant.

7»

How  that  Kings  danghtetja  moll  noble  maid.

In  feats  of.irmcsfo  valorous  did  prove,
Thatdivcrfc  PaUadiner  flic  ovciliid  y
And  then  with  that  Rogero  fell  m love,

And  of  her  fathers  anger  net  afraid.

Did  match  in  Chriften  llatc,as  did  behove,

How  after  this  one  Bcl/ram  fought  by  trcaibn,
Inccfluouslovc  cf  her  without  allrcafon.


lutbinat^
rmon  my
•Author  foi-
lowti  not  d.

nytrmt  fiery »
but « wtrby
inutuird^t,
r»onie,wbicb
ttotwitnjlditm
ding  both
[omt  cridtt,
tbougu  not
muttt.


7?


And  for  that  caiilc  h:s  brothers  and  his  fire.

And  Iiisownnativcfoilchcdid  betray,
AndopcnAiyaathis  foesdefirc;

Which  being  tanc,and  feiz'd  on  as  a pray,

Picicc  Jgolant  and  his  inflam’d  with  ire.

Took  Gallacell  our  mother  where  fli  c lay
Six  months  with  child, and  put  her  in  a boar.

And  in  the  Otean  wide  they  let  her  float.

74

Marjifa  all  this  while  with  gladfbmc  chcare,

Vnto  her  new  known  hrothers  tale  attended.

And  in  her  mind  rcjoyccd  much  to  hcare,
Thatoffonoblchoufelhc  was  defeended.

From  whichAro»^r<j«ijcame,asdoth  appeare.

And  that  of  Clarmountfo  much  commended.

Which  houfes  both  long  in  great  fame  had  flourilh-
For  divers  noble  perfons  they  had  nouiiflied.  (cd,
7>

But  when  of  Agramant  flic  heard  him  fay.

How  both  hisgrandllre,uncle,and  fome  other,
Confented  had  their  father  to  betray.

And  in  fo  crucll  fort  to  ulc  their  mother.

She  could  noefuffer  any  longer  flay.

But  breaking  of  his  talc, faid, noble  brother,

(With  your  good  favoHr)you  have  too  much  wrong
“To  Icavcyour  father  unreveng’d  folong.

If  not  in  Almont  nor  T rajanos  blood,

You  can  avenge  this  ill  fith  they  be  gone.

Yet  ought  you  to  avenge  it  on  their  brood  ;
Livcyou,and  let  you  Agramant  alone  I
This  blot. except  it  quickly  be  withflood.

Will  lhamc  you  CTcr,ifit  once  be  known,

T hat  he  that  did  this  wrong  not  oncly  li  veth.

But  that  to  you  he  entertainment  giveth.

77

But  for  my  pareffaid  lhe)by  Chrtfi  I vow,

(Whom  as  my  father  did,fo  ferve  I will)

That  I will  not  leave  armcs..tillIknow  how
T o venge  my  fathers  and  my  mothers  ill  y
And  much  I Ihall  lament, and  do  ev’n  noWs
If  in  that  Pagancamp  you  tarry  flill.

Or  ever  fliould  be  fccnc  therein  hereafter.

Except  it  were  to  worktheirbarm  and  {laughter.


KifditStilf
of £ood  IM.
fiortdHCtim
ibecouatiyof
Rbegttm,
mtdrt  mount
Affiitimm^


3®4


THE  XXXVI.  BOOKS.


7«

Oh  how  did  B radamant  at  this  icjoyce,

Advifing  him  to  follow  that  dircftion^

And  to  give  care  unto  his  fillers  voice.

To  leave  fo  vile  a place  and  bafe  fubjeftion.

And  cleave  to  Charles  as  to  the  better  choice.

Who  gladly  would  receive  him  in  ptotedion.

Of  which(nic  raid)one  fure  figne  (he  did  gather.
She  heard  nim  often  fo  extoll  his  father,

79

Bolero  anrvvcrs  thus  wit  h great  regard,

(^My  tiearc)to  ha  vedone  this  at  firlt  I ought.

But  then  indeed  the  troth  I had  not  heau^
Whereby  I might  my  duty  have  been  taught;

Now  fith  that  jgramemt  hath  me  prefcr’d.

If  his  deflruflion  fiiould  by  me  be  foughti
Thatam  hisfervant  and  4,daily  waiter.

The  world  might  juftly  deem  I were  a aaiter.

80

Ijut  this  my  meaning  was,and  fo  it  is.

To  find  fome  means!  may(with  honeurjpart,
W'hicb  when  I hava,thcnfnrcl  willnotmilTe,

To  come  and  to  requite  your  great  defert ;

And  that(quoth  lic)I  had  perform’d  ere  this.
Save  that  a caufe(of  which  1 felt  the  fmatt)
Enforc’d  my  flay, the  wounds  the  Tartar  gave  me,
So  as  my  fncnds  had  much  to  do  to  fave  me.


If

As  /he  knowes  well  that  holp  me  at  my  need.

And  cv’ry  day  did  fit  by  my  beds  fide :

Thus  much  he  faid,but  they  that  took  good  heed
To  ail  he  faid,inearne/l  fort  lepli’d,

Howbeit  at  the  laft  it  was  agreed,

That  he  fo  long  with  Agramant  fhould  bide,

Till  he  fome  honourable  caufe  might  find
To  leave  his  mailer  and  to  change  his  mind
8a

Well  (quoth  Marfifa ) if  he  needs  will  go.

Then  let  himgo,biitIwillyoua(ruie,

That  ill  only  I will  ufe  the  matter  fo,

Heihall  not  long  with  Agramant  endure :

This  faid  ihe  unto  BraJamant, but  tho
She  told  not  how  flic  would  the  fame  procure «
Thus  for  that  time  Rogero  brake  thisparlic.

And  turn’d  his  horfc  to  turn  againe  to  Arlie,

8?

When  lo  they  chanc’d  a fodden  eric  to  hcare.
Proceeding  from  the  next  adjoyning  vale.

The  voice  did  fecm(whcn  they  approached  neare)
To  be  fome  damfels  that  for  help  did  call ;

Bu;  who  it  was.hcreafter  you  (hall  hearc.

For  now  of  force  I mud  cut  off  my  tale.

And  pray  you  my  abruptnefle  to  excufe.

For  in  the  next  you  (hall  hearc  further  newel.


Merall.  beginning  ef  thit  Canto,ke ogainfi  cruelty, tie  mo/i  unnoble  thing  that  can  be  ujed  in  peace  or  rear for

though  tear  of  it  (elfe  it  andmufl  needs  be  bloudy  inthebeatthereefyethathit  ever  been  detefied,  and  contrary  toaU
rparlihe  difcipline,to  l{iU  thoji  that  have  no  rteapons  in  hand.  fVherefore  noble  Princes  niS ever  nait^faire  rvarres,cii
Pyrrhus/iid  i«  Ennius :

Q^rum  virtuti  belli  fortuna  pepercit,

Horundem  mclibertati  parcerecertum  cfl.

Whofe  life  the  fortune  of  the  warres  doth  fave,

Frankly  1 grant  that  they  their  freedome  have.

Cruelty  ever  proceeds  from  a vile  mi^e  , and  (^tenfiom  a cowardly  heart,  that  have  nothing  in  their  min  Jet  nor
tnouthesjmt  Mortui  non  mordent . which  bepie  it  is  unchrifien,is  alfhfalfe : for  the  Scripture  faith.  The  blood  of
Abel  cried  for  vengeance;  andit  isabetterapprovedproverbin  England,bloodwill  have  blood.

In  Bradamant  we  further  note  the  badcjfeiis  ofjealoupe.  In  Rogcio,i liar  after  hUlongjorhcarance,at  lafl  thought
to  be  revenged  on  Matfifa.irc  may  fee  that  Lxfa  paticmia  fit  furor ; Patience  provof^ediurnes  to  fury.

Killorie  Cantelmus  whofe  death  he  fo  much  bewailed,  was  ta^en  in  art  ambufirnent  by  the  Venetian  array,  having  very  cou-
ragioufy  fillied  out  {though  lovius  writer  it  was  againft  his  will /With  another  companion  of  his, who  feaped  very  hard-
ly.Cantelmus  had  his  head  chopt  of  on  the  pdc  of  agallty  in  fight  of  his  father,  againft  which  cruelty  Arioilo  juftly  in-
veyeth.  Aftianax  fonne  of  Uefkot  (at  the  moft  credible  authors  write}  was  thrown  down  from  ahigh  tower  fyVUffes,
who  in  his  bloudy  policy  thought  good  that  none  of  the  race  ofVriamus/hould  he  left  aliue : hut  my  author  here  \y  Pocti-
catl licence  (for  I \now  no  hiftoricaU ground  oj  it) faith  that  hewat  faved,andaboy  putinhis/tead  j and  that  thence
(forfooth )are  defended  many  houfes  of  great  account.  But  this  is  not  credible, and  tbeprepdent  thercoj  is perillout,  as
I will jhew  in  the  Allupon.

Ancporic  ^'^^'■'^ptirting  the  fray  between  the  brother  andpfter,  we  may  in  Allegoricall  fenfe  underftand,  that  when  di-
^ * vers  that  are  neare  oj  f^in  fall  at  variance,  t here  is  nothing  fo  availeable  for  reconciling  of  t hem , as  the  memory  of  fome

of  their  worthy  anceft  or  s, which  in  well  dijpofed  minds  will ftirre  agreat  reverence,  and  be  a ftrong  motive  unto  them
togtvc  over  their  umuiturall  contentions.

Allupon  Concerning  the  fiving  of  A fliana  x,it  puts  me  in  mindof  one  or  two  perillous  examples  recorded  in  our  Chronicles  ,of

the  lih^e  device  oj  one  Peikin  ^arbeci:, who  jained  him/elf  e to  be  Richard  theyonger  fonne  of  Edward  the  fourth,  that
was  murdered  in  the  Tower.  But  what  a trouble  grew  by  that  puppet  for  a time,may  there  be  fecn, which  the  Chronicles
fri  out  'Jcy  largdy.


Here  end  the  annotations  upon  the  xxxvj.booke.


lo6


THE  XXXVII.  BOOKE.


THE  ARGVMENT.


Rogcro  with  hU  JlHer  and  his  fpoufe^

Find  Vllanie  halfe  fiript  and  ftrangely  nfed^
Straight  each  of  them,  hut  chiefe  Marfifa  vowes
To  he  avengd  on  him  that  her  mifufed:

She  heares  t^e  law  that  women  none  allowes\

She  finds  the  man  that  hath  the fex  refufedi
She  plagues  the  tyrant,  for  his  proud  behaviour ^
iy^nd  makes  another  law  in  womens  favour.


Tbtfrtifiof

rtmtn.


F worthic  Ladies  would
but  takcfuchpaine.

In  ftudics  that  immortall
gloric  raife.

As  they  do  often  take  in
matters  vaine,
Beferving  none  at  all>ot
little  praife.

Which  notwithftanding
thacthey  mightobtain.


Enforcing  cv’iie  il  report  for  fpitc.

That  may  their  credit  (lander  and  deface,
W'eftill  (ball  find  their  gloric  fliioing  bright.
We  (lill  (hall  fee,  it  keepcs  a worthie  place.
Though  wanting  of  that  height  the  greater  part.
To  which  it  (hould  attainc  to  by  dcfait.


They  have  employed  many  nights  and  dayesj
To  have  thereby  (bmc  trifli.g  want  fupplied.
That  niggard  nature  had  to  them  denied.


^nd  further, if  they  could  with  their  ownc  pen.

Set  forth  the  worthie  praife  of  their  ownc  kind^'
And  not  to  be  beholding  unto  men.

Whom  hate  and  cnvic  often  fo  doth  blind.

To  make  us  hcarc  the  good  but  now  and  tben^
But  ev*rie place fulloftheii  ill  we  findj
Then  furc  I judge,their  praifes  would  be  fuch.

As  hardly  men  fliould  have  attaindfo  much.

For  many  writers  do  not  onely  drive.

Too  highly  to  extoll  our  fexes  fame.

But  that  they  thinkc  they  mufl  withall  contriue,
To  publilh  womcnsblemifh  and  their  blames
As  fearing  haply,  left  they  might  arrive.

By  their  moft  due  dcfart,to  greater  name;

And  fo  they  might  thereby  obfeure  our  prailc.

As  doth  a cloud  the  Sunnes  bright  (hining  laycs.

4

But  yet,for  all  (lich  fparing  pent  do  write,

Ot  lavifli  tongues  can  fpeake  in  their  difgraccj


>Harpalice  andThomerisbeGde,

With  thofc  that  r urnus  did  and  Hell  or  aydj
Bclidcs  that  dame  that  in  an'Oxer  hide,

The  firft  foundation  of  fairc  Carthage  Uyd,
Zenobia  ckc,and  flic  that  qiiayld  rhepridc
Of  AJJvlt,  and  both  Inde  and  Perfia  f-ayd;

J fay  there  have  bin  many  more  then  thefe,  ■
That  have  bin  famous  both  by  land  and  Teas.


Nor  only  Rome  and  Greece  have  bred  fuch  (lore,
Offaithfullmatrons,chaft,and  (lout,and  wife,'
But  all  the  world  bcfidc,fomc  le(re,fotnc  moi  c.
From  whence  it  fetSjto  where  the  Sun  doth  rife.*
Though  now  their  names  obfeured  arefo  fore.
That  few  or  none  arc  laid  beforeour  cyn
And  all  becaufethatth^y  in  thofc  day  eswrate.
Were  envious, and  falfc,and  full  ofi^tc.


Yet  ccafc  not  Ladies,  ye  that  verttic  love.

To  folloiv  that  your  courfe,and  fo  good  way.

And  let  not  fcarc  }*our  minds  from  it  remove.

That  your  great  fame  hcieaficr  may  decayj
For  true  it  is,as  we  do  day  lie  prove,

Ko  good  nor  ill  can  flill  (land  at  a ftay^

Though  wtitcisin  time  pafl  were  not  your  frends.
The  prefent  tunc  fliall  make  you  large  amends.

Tire


Stiamtj


viHafitM.


JtMugnitr
tHvtti  ,A
thiUts,  ht
tau'f  ' t had
ftch  /*-■»
^dfHaur,


9


OF  Orlando  fvrioso.


The  worthie  writers  of  this  prefent  time,

P.nc  fet  your  worthy  prjifcsfo  to  vcw,
iomcin  grave  profe.and  fomc  in  learned  rime,
As  none  null  need  this  wan:  hereafter  rew;

And  though  they  were  infeaed  with  this  crime,
let  in  I his  age,  fo  learn  d arcibme  of  you.

So  well  acquainted  wirhthc noble  mufes.

You  could  your  /elves  remedic  Oich  abufes.

9

And  if  I fliould  recite  the  names  of  thofe,

7 hat  by  the  writers  of  our  times  arc  prais’d.

Or  that  ihcmfeivts  have  wrorcin  vctfc  or  profe,
have  I heir  ''wncand  others  gloiy  rais’d.

As  i m.g.u  pl-arcfomcfew,fo  I ruppofe,'

I might  be  blam’d  of  others  and  difpiaifd.

Or  in  omitting  fome,to  do  them  wrong.

Or  reckning  all,too  ttdious  wax  and  long,

10

Shall  I then  allomit?  that  were  nor  well,

Sith  that  to  plearothem  all  I do  defire:

TK  " 'n'** ' oncjthat  doth  exccll

i*7L  fane, as  none  may  dare  envic  her:

Whofenamedoth  in  fu.h  height  of  honor  dwell,
AS  hard  It  i5,tor  any  to  come  nye  her,

Whofe  learned  pen  fuch  pnvilcdgc  can  give.

As  It  can  makcev’u  thole  arc  dead  to  live.

For  ev*n  as  Phebm  fh  mes  op  cv’tic  liar.

Yet  on  hi,  ( litriafis  hisfnrcft'ight,
bo  clcquenet  and  grace  ay  filming  are,

Wuch  'l  ore  on  her,  then  any  other  wight.

Her  l.ght  fo fplendent  ,s,aM  fo  divine.

As  makes  another  Suunc  on  earth  to  fliine.
iz

Vittoria  is  her  name,  a moft  fit  name.

For  one  in  triumphs  bort.e,in  tiiumohs  bred
That  pafleth  Animcfia  in  the  fame  * *

Of  doing  honor  to  her  husband  ded-'

For  though  fhc  did  creft  a wondrous  frame.

For  her  Mau'ilio, with  a Pyramed,

Tet  which  IS  more,  to  lay  the  dead  in  grave.

Or  clfc  from  death.with  learned  pen  to  fave.

t J

Jf L^ailamie.and if  B'um  wife,

Ar^ta,Ania,at\ii  Evad^echztty
Be  tobepuilcd.astheyaic  foiife,

Bccaufc  when  as  their  husbands  dayes  were  pal!.

They  willngly  forfookc  this  mortall  life  ;

Then  in  whar  heighr  mufi  Ihe  of  right  be  plaft?

T hat  filch  4 g, f,  unto  her  fiH)ufc  doth  give.

That  being  dead  (he  fi.ll  doth  make  him  live.

And  if  the  great  iVdcenWenvie  bare
Vnro  AtMtie  r foi  Meoman  Lyre,  '

M lien  morr  ,o  ,,ob)e  Francis  iyf  Pefcarea

by  fi.'  '>  a wifedc  verruoiis,cb.ft,and  rare
/*/''  if  Wfe  could  not  defire

f Alou<  'fU'^ih-thypraifes  out  to  found,  '

^ Sith  hardly  can  a match  to  this  be  found.


M


307


But  to  conclude  both  thefcand  others  prayfe
1 hat  I may  lollow  on  my  prefent  fiorie  *

I fay  that  both  in  thefe  and  forma  dayes
Faire  dames  have  merited  great  fame  and’gloric:

\\  hiJi  though  by  writers ciivie  much  decayes,
let  need  you  not  therefore  now  to  be  foric,

Bccaufc  amongfi  us  all  it  is  ,ntt  nded.

That  ibisfoulc  fault  hereafter  fiial!  be  mended.

' \6
New  of  Afarjifa  and  o f Bradamant ,

I meanc  to  tdl,that  ftill  u ere  fo  vidforicus
As  both  my  voice  too  faint,  and  skill  toofeant
Would  be, 10  count  their  famous  deeds  a.  d glorious:
let  111  all  go  d Will  fo  faire  fupply  my  want.

As  I will  reckon  thole  weremoft  notorious.

And  were  niy  might  agreeing  to  my  mind,

I would  deferve  as  well  of  all  their  kind.

*7

If  you  remember,  1 declared  cifi,

How  good  Kogero  purpos’d  lorcturne.

And  how  he  heard  the  found  I then  reherft
Of  fo.nc  thac  feemed  wofully  co  irioiunc  j
Which  wayling  fo  his  mind  with  pittie  1 icrft,

As  he  a while  his  journey  did  adjournc,

Both  thatto  know  the  panics  he  defited.

And  ment  ro  fuccour  them, if  came  reguirei,

>8

'With  him  thofe  dames  t he  roble  cofins  went.

And  when  they  nearer  can  c unco  the  pLcc,

They  faw  tbtcedamleis  wofully  lament,

Appartld  ftrangely  and  in  foric  cafe,

Their  clot  hing  all  had  bcr.c  dipt  off  and  rent,

Vp  to  their  navels,  to  their  foulcdifgracc.

They  fitting  on  the  ground  and  duift  not  rife.

To  hiue  their  fecrct  parts  from  fltangerscycs.

AiVulcans Tonne  (by  Pailat  pointment  nuift)

Whom  (witheut  mother)  got  of  earth  be  fad,

(For  whom  Aglaur  was  plagu’d  .bccaufc  flic  durft
Lookenn  him  when  thcGoddeffe  bad  forbad)

Sat  in  a coach  (by  him  deviled  fu  ft)

To  hidehis  lc<*gs,  that  were  deform’d  and  bad:
bo  far  the  wofull  maids  theirfccrcis  hiding,
jScarfc  from  the  greund  ro  lift  them  look*  abidino.

'

Thcfouleprofpeftjdid  with  great  wrath  inflame
The  worthiedames  when  they  did  plainc  it  vcw
And  in  the  maids  bcbalfs,ihcy  bluflit  foi  fliamc’

As  do  in  o3:dens  refes  new;

But  B.adimant , w h*n  as  more  ncarc  flic  came,

W as  grieved  mor'  f 'r  one  ofthem  flic  knew,

Whofe  name  was  that  fincea  while.

Was  unto  Franct  1cm  from  the  IJlandWic,  .

1 1

Shcalfo  knew  both  tothcrin  eff

Fo  fhe  had  met  them  trav’ii  ig  nn  that  coft.

But  vet  her  fpcech  fhe  emefly  did  ditcih.

To  Z^^i2ity,whom  flic  regaided  moft.

And  askr  her  wha'  vile  wight  did  fo  negleii
All  law, and  hadall  burtane  nature /oft.

As  that  without  remorfe  he  could  abide,

Tolcayethat  bare.that  nature  feekes  to  bide?


Nt

tb<iH  ctjint
ihaugb  ve*f
far  af,trbicb
wrtetuHtiKa
det  i iht
bUJl  ,
tbtUfh  nat
lit  Itindt^

EriSbauitu
fanafyu/cS,
dev  fed  a
(each  ta  bidt
bu  i/favared
Ogginbicb
ware
/erftnu.
^glaurt

iea\ibeuttt


'P'dai  gar  a
dent  treat  a
cafile  fa  cab
led  in  Luca,
via,  er  be  art
rafeitmfes0
tbejean.


D d


Poore


joS


the  XXXVII.  BOOKS


22


29


bt  apfCic*
itnwjtbu,


TooTC.  V/Ianie,ihit  both  by  fpeccb  and  fight.

The  wortbjc  damfcll  Bradamant  did  know.

To  be  2 Ladle, whom  flic  faw  laft  night.

To  give  three  iVinctsluch  an  oumhiowj

' When  firft  a while  file  fobbed  had  and  fight.

The  Hianncrand  the  matter  plaine  doth  lliow.

How  people  ncare  that  place,  did  ill  intrcat  them.

And  clippe  their  cloths,and  alio  whip  and  beat  them

Fafl  by  (faid  flie)  the  Caftlc  you  may  fee,

W'hcrc  they  do  kccpe,that  us  fo  ill  did  ufe.

As  for  the  fhield  of  gold  and  Princes  three.

That  came  to  win  it, flic  could  tell  no  newes;

We  only  ment  to  trudge  on  footc  (faid  flie)

To  make  complaint  of  thofe  aid  us  abufe,

Vnto  theroble  Chriflen  Emp’tout  CharleSf
Who  punifli  will  I truft  fuch  lawlclTc  carles.

2 +

Brave  Bradamant  and  flout  Marfifa  longs,

Togo  immediatly  unto  this  place,

Aod  be  aveng’d  on  fuch  enormous  wrongs.

Done  as  they  decmc,to  all  the  fexc  d ifgraccj
jRoFcro  eke,  that  knowswell  what  belongs,

Vnto  the  law  of  Knight  -hood, in  fuch
(Tofiiccourall  thatarc  by  wrong  oppreft,
Butchicflic  women)  goes  without  requeft.

as

.,o\ei»thi  With  one  confent,they  all  put  off  their  bafes,

^litgory  6f  -Which  ferv’d  the  maidens  very  fit  to  hide
The  fccrct  pavts,of  thofe  fame  privie  places.

That  modeftie  to  fiiow  cannot  abide.

Then  Bradamant  flraightway  behind  herpuccs
Faire  V/dany,  and  makes  her  fo  toridc,

Marfifa  and  Kogero  take  the  painc.

Behind  thcmfelves, to  place  the  other  twamc.

26

The  dame  of  TDor dan  led  them  all  the  way,

Thetother  two  do  follow  with  great  haft,
'RwiVUary  fliow'd  where  the  Caftlc  lay.

To  which  they  many  a hill  and  valley  pall.  ,

But  now  fo  much  was  fpent  of  that  fame  day.

That  they  were  quite  benighted  at  the  laft.

At  night  to  take  a village  they  were  glad,  ^

Whcic  they  good  meat,  good  drinkc,  good  lodgmg

But  when  to  lookc  atolit  thCnuhcy  bcg.1D,

They  none  could  (ee  but  women  in  the  place.

The  women  dreft.  brought  all,and  not  a man.

In  all  the  village  that  did  fh  ow  his  face:

Among  thcmfelves,  they  on  the  matter  fcan.

And  much  they  mufed  at  fo  ftrange  a calc.

Among  fo  many,  fayre,foule,  yo«ng.and  old,

A $ there  they  faw, not  one  man  to  behold.

28

t tbinke  that  lafon  never  marvcld  mote.

Not  thofe  his  Jrgonauts,t\\2X  with  him  came,

T hen  when  they  fit  ft  arriv’d  at  LmnOt
VVhere  they  found  none  but  women  void  of  Uiame,
That  bad  their  fires, and  brethren  flainc  before.
And  did  a '•ommcin  wealth  of  women  franKt
Then  did  Rogero  with  the  Ladies  wonder.

To  fee  no  mcn,but  women  Inch  a noffibci.


flirt  hegiat

;ht  Utlt  of
idargHHor
tb/it  made  tbt
(sot  agaifi

wmtit.


lafont  mm
toert  ealied

^rgonaulat
btcaufe  ihtf
rrhtn  alhip
ttSid


VMicrcfoTc{wlicn  firfl  they,  had  in  fcemly  fort.

Provided  raiment  for  thcdamiels  three,

If  not  fo  furoptucusjccrtcs  not  fo  fliert.

But  to  conccalc  that  which  men  fhciild  not  fee)

Then  they  defil’d  fomc  dweller  thcrc,tepoit
Tothcro,what  nughtthc caufeand  icalon  be,

"Why  in  this  townc  there  were  allow'd  no  men.

And  in  thisfett  the  woman  anfwad  then.

30  j

This  Older  at  the  which  youfeeme  to  wonder.

Was  by  a tyrant  pointed  for  our  pafne,

A tyrant,wholc  fubjeflion  we  arc  under.

Who  by  his  proclamation  doth  ordaine,

From  mothers  fons, from  husbands  wives  to  fundwi
And  in  fuch  hard  exile  we  muft  rcmainc.

And  fuffci  not  by  meiit.but  by  force.

From  our  dcare  lpoufcs,fuch  a long  divorce.

Thrifc  have  the  trees  with  winter  bene  deleaved.

Since  we  have  bene  into  this  place  confi nd,
Ofhusbands,faibers..and  oflonncs  bcicaycd.

So  fore  the  tyrant  hateth  all  our  kindc;

And  if  that  any  chance  to  be  pcrccavcd,

(As  feme  perhaps  there  bc,thac  arc  fo  kinde)

_ To  come  but  once  to  lookc  upon  his  wife,

The  man  and  woman  both,fhall  loofc  their  IiT%

32

The  lawleflcwretch,that  makes  this  ciuell  law,

Dwels  two  leagues  hence, and  isoffuchbehaviouT^  -
As  from  his  purpofc  no  man  can  him  draw,  ^

' How  much  fo  ever  he  be  in  his  favour.

He  doth  all  vvomcn  from  hisland  withdrawj
As  if  he  were  infc£lcd  with  their  favour,

Heis  fofietccjfo  fturdic,and  fo  ftrong.

That  none  dare  onc.s:  protea,whom  he  will  wrong,
And  which  is  ftrange  he  ufeth  ftrangers  worft,

Ifany  happen  to  Iris  houfe  arrive,

(It  feems  he  hath  of  womens  blond  fome  thurlt/

For  though  he  let  them  part  from  thence  alive.

Yet  firft  with  whipping,and  with  ufage  curft.

He  doth  their  torment,  and  icproch  contrive.  ^

Whercfoic  if  you  your  fafctics  do  regard,  .

I wifli  you  not  to  travcll  thithcr-ward.

34

Jiit  this  Marfifa  2nd  the'Dbrdon  dame.

Were  much  inccnft,and  did  defire  to  knfrty.

How  he  was  cald,and  vvhence  his  furic  came,  ^

Thar  made  him  firfl:  to  fuch  a mad nes grow?
Thewoman  maketh  anfwcr  thu$,hisname
Is  Marganor, and  if  you  pleafe  lie  fiiow
The  whole difcourfc  tothis  they  all  agreed.

And  file  then  on  her  talc  did  thus  proceed.

This  ,\/<2)^4«or,thac  makes  full  manT  vKcpc,

Was  bloodic  from  his  birth  bv  difpofition,

Butycta  while  he  did  diflemblcdeepc.

That  of  the  fame  there  was  but  fome  lufpitiollj
Hisfonncidid  make  him  it  the  clolct  keepe,

Bccaufc  they  were  of  contrary  condition,  ....

Both  bounteous, fiank,&  curtcous,of  good  qna'iti^.
Of  dangers  loTcis  and  of  hofpitalitie.


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


sop


3®

Fjfi-c  dames  and  Knigins  that  hapt  to  paflc  this  way.
Were  ftill  by  them  fo  frcndly  entt  rtaincd,

Thatby  (luh  kind  of curtcrus  iifagCjthay
The  love  and  praifeof  ev’ric  one  had  gained;

7 heir  honors alfo  farther  todifplay,

7 he  facred  right  of  Knighthood  they  obtained;
Both  flout,  both  flrong,comly  and  of  good  ftature,
Not  wantiiig  ornaments  of  art  or  nature.

?7

Cylandro  and  Tanacro  nam’d  they  are,

.And  long  tiiey  liv’d  with  oodiflionorflained,

And  longer  liad,ifthey  had  bene  fo  ware,

A snot  in  Cupids  fnares  to  have  bene  trained;
Thisfoolilh  pafiion  foyldall  their  welfare.

The  paflion  men  call  lovc,thisthemconftrained,
Tochangetheworthiccourfe  they  had  begonne.
And  do  that  by  the  which  they  vvereundonne.

3*

It  happend  that  there  thither  came  a Knight,
Belonging  to  this  Emperour  of  Greece,

Who  brought  with  him  a Ladie  fairc  and  bright.
Of  good  behaviour, and  a lovely  pecce.

With  whom  CylinJ.ro  fell  in  love  that  night.

And  fully  bent  of  her  to  have  a fleece.

He  thought  her  beautie  (b  pofTeft  his  hart.

That  he  Ihould  furely  dye, if  (lie  depart.

?9

. Andjfor  he  deemd  it  labour  lo(t  to  pray.

To  open  force  he  doth  himfelfc  difpofe.

And  iccretly  allarm’d.untothe  way
Where  tot  her  needs  niuft  pafle,  afore  he  goes.

And  feeing  him  he  would  no  longer  flay,

But  trufting  to  his  manhood, comes  to  blocs.

Not  feeking  vantage ,but  with  lance  to  lance.

He  minds  to  trie  of  fight  the  doubtfiill  chance.

40

Not  thinking  though  but  with  his  fuer  running,
Tobcachimdowne,and  beareaway  hiswife,

But  this  fame  Knight, that  in  this  art  was  cunning.
Hid  pierce  his  fliicld,and  reft  him  ofhislife;

The  newes  hereof  unto  his  father  comming,

Fild  all  the  court  with  plaints  and  (brfows  rife;

At  lafljwhen  long  the  time  had  benedeferred.

By  his  great  anceftors  they  him  interred.

Nor  did  this  foiilc  mifltap  and  illfuccefle.

Make  Marganor  to  minifh  ought  his  port,'

Tanacro  ftill  did  courteficprofifTc,

To  ftrangersall,and  us’d  them  in  good  forts  ^
But  loe,'tchanc’t  within  a ycatcand  iefle,

A noble  Baron  thither  did  refort,

A comely  man  of  perfonage  to  fee.

With  him  a Ladie  fairc  as  fa  ire  might  be.

41

And  to  her  beautie  her  behaviour  fitted,

Her  looks  are  modeft,manner$fober  are.

Her  words  arc  ware, and  (hew  her  (harply  witted;
Likewife  her  Lord  ,himfclfe  moft  comely  bare.

As  fit  to  whom  the  charge  fhould  be  committed,
Ofone  in  fhape  and  qualities  foraiC!

He  bight O/rndre ,Lord  of  Longavilla,'

The  lovely  Lady  named  was  'DruftUa.


No IcfTcraiucre  doted  on  this  Hame,

7'hcn  had  his  brother  done  on  that  before.

But  that  foule  end  to  which  his  brothci  came.

Made  him  more  warie.thoiigh  noi  honeft  more;

By  former  good  icpcrt  that  bred  him  fame.

And  all  his  pafled  praife.hc  fets  no  ftoiC!

Be  famc,bc  venue  troden  in  the  duft-.

So  he  maybutfulfill  hisprefem  lull.

Thuscaring  oncly  toavoid  thedanger.

In  which  hefaw  before  his  brother  dyde,

Hcfccrctly  that  night  way-laid  the flranger.

There  as  he  knew  next  day  he  needs  muft  ride,

Not  meaning  his  ownc  perfon  to  endanger;

In  fine, the  Baton  that  tofa*c  his  bride,'

Hid  ftouily  give  and  take  full  many  a wound.

At  laft  they  left  foulc  murdcid  on  the  ground.

45

‘DnifiUa  fc’ing  her  dean  Olindroded,

In  deadly  found  unto  the  ground  (he  fanke.

But  thence  incuncousfort  the  men  her  led.

Whom  to  have  kild  hcr,nic  would  give  more  thankci
But  griefe  in  her  fuch  will  to  die  had  bred.

That  wilfully  (lie  leapt  downc  from  a banke.

To  kill  her  fcife,  hut  poorc  fbulecould  not  dy.

But  all  her  head  and  face  was  brus*d  thereby.

46

Tanacro  getsfbme  fiirgconsand  Phificions,
Tolookeunto  her  health, and  hurts  to  cure.

He  caufeth  hei  to  hcarc  moft  rare  miificions.

To  cheaic  her  heart,and  (blace  top'ceure;

He  makes  great  brags  of  her  fochaft  conditions.
With  mind  by  marriage  to  make  her  lure-.

He  thinks  a woman  of  fo  vertuous  life,

Muft  not  be  term’d  a lcmman,but  a wife.

47

To  marrichei  he  inwardly  intends,

This  outwardly  in  flicw  he  doth  make  knowne.

And  evermore  he  highly  hci  commends;

And  though  her  griefe  was  by  his  doings  giowne.
He  faith  he  will  foi  this  make  large  amends.

And  that  he  will  her  love,  and  be  her  ownc:

But  ftill  the  more  that  on  that  point  he  grateth.

The  more  in  heart  fhchimdcteftsand  hateth.

48

But  yet  her  hate  dicfnotfb  blind  her  wit.

But  that  to  keepe  it  clofe  flic  tookc  good  heed;

She  knew  full  well  (lie  muft  difiemble  it.

If  file  will  be  reveng’d  of  him  indeed?
WhcicforcURtill  the  time  may  ferve  her  fit.

She  feemes  unto  his  meaning  halfe  agreed.

And  did  in  fttew  the  fame  fo  fmoothly  catrie.

That  laftly  (be  confented  him  to  martie.

49

Sweet  peace  and  love  were  written  in  her  eyes,
Rcrcngc  and  hate  were  in  her  heart  engraved.

To  kill  him, in  her  thought  fiie  doth  devife.

When  with  moft  kindnefle  fhc  her  fcIfe  behaved;
He  needs  muft  dic,needs  die  in  any  wife,
Butevnthus longtolivc  of God  fhecravedi
How  can  1 better  end  my  lifc(fhefcth)

Then  in  revenging  my  deare  husbands  dethl


THE  XXXVII.  BOOKE

57


Thus  r«minf;  to  foigct  all  former  wrong,

She  chearfully  cxpcAs  the  wedding  dajr,

Ai  though  that  flic  did  for  this  mauiage  long.

And  Co  (hedid, although  another  vray.

She  fliortcns  all  i hat  might  the  time  prolong,

And  paints  her  rdfe,and  tricks  her  trim  and  gay:
She  onely  crat’d  thus  much  for  Chri/l  his  PalTion,
She  might  be  marry’d  of  hei  country  fafliion.

SI

Net  that  her  fpeech  herein  indeed  was  trew,

'I  bat  fuch  the  cuflomc  was  as  flic  pretendedj
But  fhe  doth  mind  to  forge  a cuflomc  new ,

With  tiuftafTurcdly  to  be  revenged
On  him,that  her  beloved  husband  flew;

Revenge, revenge  was  all  that  flic  intended:

She  pray’tli,  flic  might  obferve  her  countric  guife.
Which  in  this  fort,  fhe  doth  to  themdevife,

U

T he  widdow  that  to  marrie  new  intends.

According  as  ourcountrielaw  allows,

Mufl  firft  appeafe  thegheft  whom  flicofFcndf,

I mcanc  (faith  flic)  that  of  herformciTpoufc,

And  make  unto  hisfpirit  feme  amends.

By  Dirges,trcntals,mafres,pray’rs  and  votvs,

In  that  fame  Church.whertas  his  bones  be  refling.
Then  may  flic  marrie  new,without  molcfliog.^

5?

]|ut  when  of  her  new  fpoufc  flic  takes  the  ting.

The  Priefl  in  fight  of  all  that  fland  about.

Of  hallowd  winc,a  bottle  then  mufl  bring.

And  in  thcChallice  he  mufl  powreitoutj
Then  over  it  he  mufl  both  fay  and  fing,

EflPcftual  prayri,and  Pfalmcs,and  hymnes devour.
Then  mufl  the  woman  take  it  of  the  Vickei,

And  drinkcunto  herTpoufethe blcflcd  lickcr,

54

Tan.icro  Uketh  well  of  this  her  motion,

Rrfpcfting  little  how  much  it  imported.

To  let  her  marrie  with  Co  flrangc  devotion.

He  onely  wifht  to  have  the  feafon  fliorcedj
A nd  not  miflrufliRg  that  fame  hallow’d  potion,
Tocutof  all  delays  he  her  exhorted,

Each  makes  like  hafl,though  fundry  in  conflruflion
He  to  her  wcdding,flie  to  his  deflrudion,

55

Among  her  women  ferrants  that  were  theare,

DrufiUa  had  one  old  ilfavord  trot.

She  callcth  her, and  bad  her  in  hereate.

That  fomc  firong  fodainc  poyfon  may  be  got.

You  know  (faid  flic)  to  get  it, how  and  wheare,
Convay  itfafe  into  fome  pretic  pot.

Fori  (quoth  fhc)have  found  the  way  and  skill.

The  wicked  Tonne  of  Margarm  to  kill,

i6

And  doubt  not, I know  bow  to  fa ve  us  both.

As  I will  let  thee  know  at  better  Icafure,

The  woman  doth  the  feat  though  feeming  loth.
Save  oncly.thatit  was  her  miftres  pleafurc:

Then  for  a cup  of  Canr/te  wine  flic  goth.

And  mingles  this  and  thatin  (bducmcafute.

As  madcit  with  but  little  alteration,

Hot  fowre  in  tafl,yct  furc  ia  operation.


NowcameZfrH^^'rfon  tiic  wedding  day.

With  gorgeous  gowns  and  coflly  jewels  deft.

There  where  Olindroi  corps  intombed  lay,

Rais’d  high  on  collumns  as  flic  did  direft;

The  Piicft  beganthe  folemnc  Mafle  to  fay.

To  whichcame  great  refort,without  fufpeft.

And  ^farganor  himfclfe  now  moft  contenting,
Came  with  hisfon  and  fiends  the  place  frequentiDg

58

When  all  the  folcmnc  rites  to  end  were  brought,'
ThcninacupofmalTiegoldand  fine,

The  Priefl  powrd  out,asflic  before  had  taught,
Thccurfcd  poyfon, with  the  blcflcd  wincj
She  fobcrly  drinks  a convenient  draught,

Inough  to  do  the  feat  flic  did  defigne,

Then  toTanacro  with  a lovely  chcare.

She  gave  it,who  fupc  up  1 he challicc  clcace.

59

And  rendringtben  the  challicc  to  the  Frire,

He  thought  in  open  arms  her  to  embrace,

But  then  fliefodainiy  began  retire.

Then  her  fweetlookf,and  words  fo  full  of  grace.
Were  gone, her  eyes  did  feeme  to  flame  like  fire.
Then  wrath  and  fpitc  were  written  in  her  face.

She  cries  with  grifly  looke,and  voice  unpleafant,
Avaunt,and  touch  not  me  thou  traitor  peafant.  '
Co

Thoughtfl  thou  of  me  folacc  to  have  and  fport.

And  bring  me  caufc  of  torment, tcarcs,and  woe,
No,now  I trow  that  I have  cut  thccfliort,

T hat  drinkc  was  poyfon,if  yoiido  not  know:

But  ah  this  death  is  of  too  gentle  fort.

And  I too  noble  hangman  am  I trow,

A hangman  ought  with  halter  flop  thy  breath,

This  was  for  thee,  too  lionora bic  dca t h .

61

My  onely  forrow  is  that  ere  I dyde,

Jdy  factifice  was  not  in  full perfeftion.

And  that  thy  wicked  fire  and  morebefide,'

Did  not  with  thee,  taft  of  that  flrong  confcftiniU
But  pardon  me  (my  dearc  dead  fpoufc)  flie  ctidc.

If  1 have  fayld  forfiaultof  good  direftion.

, If  I perhaps  harenotdoneall  I fliould  do.

Yet  furc  1 have  pcifbrmed  all  I could  do.

6a

A nd  lookc  what  I do  want  in  all  or  part,

In  working  him  torture  condigne,  and  fli  ame,

I hopethe  world  to  come,with  greater  fmart.

Will  pay  it  him,and  I fliall  fee  the  fame.

Thus  much  flic  faid, and  then  withchcarfull  htit,

St  ill  calling  on  her  former  fpoufes  name.

Take  herein  worth  (Paid  flic)  thisfacrifice.

That  thy  poore  wife  did  for  thy  fake  devife.

«3

Aod  of  our  Lord  for  me  a place  obtaine.

In  Paradifc.with  thy  moft  blcflcd  fpirir.

And  if  he  fay  that  none  mufl  thcic  remaine,

But  they  that  by  good  works  the  fame  inherit^

Tell  him  I have  a crucll  tyrant  flaine.

Of  tyrants  death  I bring  with  me  the  merit;

To  kill  a tyrant,what  can  be  more  glorious^

Or  in  the  light  of  God  more  mei  itotious?

• TKo#


t)raf,!Ui
Jpeecb  at

ktr  4et^


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


3M


Oii-iititit
dtithej  Lit-
emu.

lem  mtrient

mutttfre-
eumbtt  be-

neuinJfKtt.


nr(u  *fi  ew

renUttit

fttrtri.


64.

Thus iruch  nicfaiJ,and  fell  dead  thcicwithalJ,

.And  being  dead,  fhc  kept  a chearfull  lookc,

And  furc  to  bei  the  comfort  waj  not  fmaJl,

That  for  her  fpoufe  fo  flrarpe  revenge  flic  tooke.

1 know  not  if /‘.wdcre  in  his  fall.

Did  follow  hcr,orelfc  hcrovertookc.

He  overt  ookc  herfure,as  may  be  thought.

That  drankc  the  bottome,  and  the  greater  draught.

<5S

Fell  Marganor  that  heard  his  fonnes  laft  gronc.

And  feeing  him  he  dead  pafl  all  rcliefc.

Made  at  the  hrfiro  great  and  grievous  mone.

As  though  he  would  have  didc  of  very  giiefc:

T wo  foos  he  had  of  latc,now  hath  he  none.

Two  women  had  hereof  bin  caufeschiefe.

One  mo»*d  the  firft  to  hazard  lifc,thctothcr
With  her  ownc  hands  gate  poifon  to  his  brother .

66

Love, pitie,gricfc,difdaine, and  hate,and  wratb|

Dcfirc  of  death  and  of  revenge  together.

The  doleful!  parent  fo  imaged  hath.

Like  to  tlic  roaring  feas  in  fowleft  wether;

Faine  to  ‘Drufi/I.i  he  would  do  feme  fcath.

But  fhe  was  dead  before,  yet  goes  he  thether.

As  blinded  hate  did  him  flill  forward  ptickc.

He  fecks  to  harinc  thecerfe  that  was  not  quicke.

67

E»*n  as  a fnakc  whom  fpeare  to  ground  doth  nailc.

Doth  bite  the  flcclc  and  wood  that  (enfc  bath  none.
Or  as  a dog  that  doth  a man  affaile.

If  one  do  fling  at  him  a ftickc  or  flone.

Doth  uinnc  and  bite  the  fame  without  availe.

Till  he  chat  hurled  it  is  paft  and  gone:

So  Marginor  more  fierce  then  dog  or  fnake.

Seeks  on  the  fenflefle  corfe  rcTcngc  to  take.

6S

And  when  that  harrying  it, and  all  to  tearing.

Could  not  in  any  part  his  wrath  aflwage,

Er’n  in  the  Church  on  us,no  fuch  thing  fearing.

He  drawes  hisfwoid,and  in  his  fenflefle  rage
Doth  hew  and  mangle  women,  none  forbearingi
For  dignity ,for  beautie,not  for  agcj
While  we  crideout,and  at  hisfuiie  wondred^

He  thirtie  kild,and  hurt  and  maimd  an  hundred.

69

So  forelyof  his  people  he  is  dreaded,  •

That  no  man  dare  againfl  hisa^fsoppofe  him,

Vnto  his  will  he  is  foflrmely  wedded.

That  for  the  time  ftarke  mad  ye  would  fuppofe  him  ;
Who  would  reformc  him,hang’d  (hall  be  & headed.
For  guerdon  of  his  paine,when  once  he  knows  him;
His  fcrvancs  do,  as  doth  the  proverbe  fay.

When  futie  runs,lct  futic  bare  her  fway .

70

But  when  at  lafl  himfelfe  was  almofl  dred
With  killing  us,though  voyd  of  all  rcmorce.

Then  by  his  friends  requeft  he  was  deflred,

Aod  as  it  were  conftiaind  by  honeft  fotccj
And  to  hiscaftle  be  himfelfe  retired.

Appointing  there  this  law  of  our  dirorce.

And  clemcocic  forfboth  he  doth  it  call.

In  that  be  did  fotbearc  to  kill  us  all.


71


Thus  whether  they  obeyd  or  elic  repined,

>Icn  arc  from  wives,  babes  fto  their  dames  devideJ,

A nd  hither  all  t!ic  women  be  confinedj
This  towne  of  purpole  is  for  us  provided.

Where  if  that  any  man  to  love  inclined.

And  by  a good  and  kind  afTeffion  guided,

Come  but  to  fee  his  wile,  and  thereby  fliow  it.

Wo  be  to  him  if  M.'irganor  may  know  it.

And  vvorfe  then  this,  he  hath  ordaind  an  order.

Such  one  I thinke  was  never  heard  before.

All  women  that  arc  tanc  within  his  border,

Muft  firft  bewhipt  with  rods  till  they  before.

And  then  he  doth  their  veftiments  difordcr.

By  clipping  them  behind  and  ckc  before-  '

And  foaway  he  fendeth  them  lialfc  ftripped.

When  firft  they  have  bin  beaten  well  and  whipped.

73

And  if  that  any  hope  to  have  afliftance,

Ot  bring  fomc  Knights  them  to  defend  and  fare.
Forthwith  he  killcth  them  and  their  afllftancs.

As  facrificcs  on  his  childrens  grave:

So  as  no  hope  there  is  to  make  refiftance.

Forevermore  he  if  he  lift  can  have

At  his  commanndjof men  a mighty  powte.

By  name  one  choufand  cv'n  within  an  hourc.

7+ '

And  further  all  men  in  hisrealme  he  takes.

By  either  fairc  perfwafions  ot  by  fcatc,

Vpon  the  Sacrament  to  fwcare  he  makes,

Thar  ay  they  fhall  to  women  hatred  bearc*

How  for  your  ownc  and  ihefc  faire  Ladies  Cakes,
Judge  you  if  you  have  rcafon  to  fotbearc,

Vnto  his  caftlc  nearer  to  appioch,

Exceptyouwill  be  foam'd  withfoulereproch.

7i

This  talc  fo  much  did  move  the  wartlers  three,
Witb'pitic  fiift,and  then  with  high  difdaine.

That  favcic  wasfo  darkc  they  could  not  fee.

They  would  have  gone  cv’n  then  him  to  have  (laid!
Now  for  that  night  they  reft, but  they  decree.

So  foone  as  Phebus  foould  returne  againe.

To  arme  thcmfclvcs,  and  boldly  to  ad  venter,  ,
Vpon  thetyrants  hold  by  force  to  enter.

76

Now  as  they  were  about  their  horfc  to  take.

They  faw  before  them  at  the  mountaines  root.

Some  twentie  men,that  no  great  haft  did  make.

But  fomc  on  horfcback  were, and  fomc  on  footc,
Allarm*d,thefe  three  them  foone  did  overtake.
Before  they  full  had  rode  an  arrow  fooot.

And  then  they  faw  how  they  did  faearc  by  force.

An  aged  beldam  on  a fompter  horfe.

77

This  was  forfooth  ’DnifiUas  chambet  may  d.

That  to  her  miftris  that  fame  poifon  gave.

And  being  then  miftmftfull  and  afrayd.

What  ftrangeeffcft  it  fortune  might  to  hare,

Vpon  the  wedding  day  from  Church  foa  ftaid.

And  fo  by  fccrct  flight  her  fclfc  did  lave.

And  kept  her  fclfc  three  ycarcs  from  law  and  triall.
Till  Marganor  had  found  her  by  efpiall.

^ D d 3 What


Mtygattars
law  againfi


THE  XXXVII.  BOOKE


Stmnch


SiwiiA,


/

imilt.


3li


78

What  cannot  game  and  hope  of  money  workc?

Firft  by  bis  coy  nc  he  learned  whetcfhelay.

Then  with  his  coync  he  fet  thefc  men  a workc.
Who  in  this  fort  did  fetch  her  thence  away.

And  of  a Lord  (in  vvhofe  land  fire  did  lurkc.

With  promifc  that  file  fafely  there  fhould  ftay)

With  coync  of  that  fame  Baron  her  he  boughtj
Ah  noble  mcn^can  nobles  make  you  nought  i
79

Lookc  how  the  great  and  ftatcly  flreame  of  Pfic»

The  nearer  he  unto  the  feadefeends,

When  Lambra,  Tycin,Jdda,  with  fome  mo.

Fall  into  him, and  their  due  tribute  fends.

The  breadcrand  thedeeper  ftilldoth  gtowt
E»*n  fo  the  more  that  Marganor  offends.

The  greater  will  in  thefc  three  champions  breeds.

To  be  avenged  on  fo  vile  mifdccds.

80

Tet  firfl  to  free  this  woman  they  intend,

Whoclfc(at  leafl) fhould  have  bin  bang’d  in  cliaines,
Straight  on  thofclowts  all  three  their  forces  bend,

T hey  couch  their  fpeares  and  flacke  their  horfes  rainsj
An  hoft  of  men  could  fcarcc  fuch  force  defendj
Much  Icfle  a fort  of  daftard  hireling  fwaines:
Wherefore  they  caft  away  their  warlike  toolcs.
Their  cariage  left,  and  went  away  like  fooles.

81

Ev’nas  a greediewolfe  that  runneth  lodcQ
With  his  defired  pray  unto  his  den,

That  finds  unwares  the  way  to  himfoibodcn.

By  hunting  dogs,or  by  the  hunting  men,
Hurlcsdownc  hispray,and  by  the  paths  uatroden
Doth  flic  for  lifctfo  did  thefc cullions  then,

Notonely  that  their  prifoncr  enlarge,

But  Icare  their  horfes  and  their  other  charge*

Some,  others  force ,fbme,  t heir  ownc  fcare  unhoi fes.

By  mcancs  whereof  they  did  at  cafe  provide.

For  thofc  three  damfcls good  conTcnient  herfes.
That  vefterday  behind  them  three  did  ride;

Alfo  Rogero  tnatold  trot  inforccs,

(Though  flic  in  rainc  refufed  and  denide)

Togo  with  them,  lamenting  fore  and  wailing.

But  all  her  lamentation  nought  availing.

Now  were  they  come  unto  the  towne  at  length.

About  the  which  there  was  no  ditch  nor  wall,

Yet  were  the  houfes  built  in  bredth  and  length
Both  orderly  and  very  ftrong  withall;

A cafllc  in  the  midft  of  mightie  fliengtb,

Stood  on  a rockc  that  ovcrlookt  them  all :

To  this  they  march  with  great  defire  and  longing,
Becaiifeit  was  to  Marganor  belonging.

«4

Within  this  towne  no  fooner  fet  they  feet.

But  that  the  guard  that  kept  the  watch,begaa
Behind  them  ftep^and  chained  faft  the  ftracti
Some  orhers,wi th  the  greateft  haft  they  can,

Cald  Marganor, thit  ftraight  came  them  to  meet.
With  guard  ofmanyatalland  fturdieman.

Who  wi  th  a fpecch  but  fhort  yet  full  of  pride.

The  Icud  law  of  hit  Citie  flgnifldc.


83

Marjifa  who  before  hand  had  agreed,

Vpon  the  matter  with  the  other  two,

Sets  fpurs  to  hcife,and  galloping  in  fleed
Of  making  anfvver, makes  no  moic  ado.

But  being  of  her  perfbn  ftrong  indeed.

Employing  neither  iaunce  nor  fword  thereto.

With  bended  fill  flic  gives  him  fuch  a boxc.

As  ftonid  bimj  and  would  have  fcld  an  oxe.

86

Nor  doth  Rogero  f nor  the  dame  of  Trance,

Grant  totlic  others  any  time  of  cafe.

But  chiefe  the  damfcll  that  with  GoUelance,

Doth  throw  to  ground  as  many  as  flic  picafc;
Nomanthcic  wasthat  duvft  himfclfeadvance.

To  ftand  unto  the  fhocke  with  one  of  thefcj
Rogero  fcren,fhe  threw  downc  feren  times  feaven,
Ev'ii  as  if  thunder  had  falnc  downc  from  hcavea.

87

The  hui'tUfle  people  to  their  houfes  fled,

The  hartlcflo  fouldtcrs  followd  them  as  faft,
Noneflayd  behind  but  thofc  were  maimdordcad.
And  Marganor  alone  was  left  at  lafl.

And  by  now  is  captive  led.

Who  (witli  hii  armes  behind  him  piniond  faft)
Gave  him  Dmyii^asmaidto  be  tormented,

And  would  have  burnd  the  town, had  they  conlcntcd,

8S

But  all  coafent  the  law  to  abrogate.

The  people eaflly  were  wonne  thereto.

And  to  accept  one  of  anothei  rate.

Which  there  was  ratiflde  with  fmall  ado.

His  law  and  him  they  did  deteft  and  hate.

Yet  as  him  lift  they  were  content  to  do.

As  ftiU  we  fee  ihefoolifli  common  ufe.

Obey  him  bell  that  dot  h them  moll  abufe.

89

And  why, they  dare  not  one  another  truft.

Nor  tell  to  one  another  their  complaints,^

They  let  him  kill  and  banifli  whom  he  lull)

Ones  goods  he  takcs,anothers  houfe  he  taints.

The  filent  foulc  yet  cries  for  vengeance  juft
Vnto  the  mighty  God  and  to  his  Saints,

Who  though  they  feeme  in  punifhing  butfloir.

Yet  i^y  they  home  at  lafl,  with  heaveand  how.

• so

So  now  thefc  filly  foules  inflam*d  with  ire,  (knowne,
With  fpecch  and  deeds  do  make  their  ftomacks
And  (as^the  proverbe  faith)  each  man  beares  fire.

To  burne  the  tree  the  wind  hath  overt hrowne.

Ye  Prmcesthat  to  tyrannize  defire,

Markc  this  mans  end, and  make  his  cafe  your  ownCti
Beleevc  it  well,that  God  doth  ever  (cod
Vntoa  wicked  life  a wretched  end.

91

Out  came  the  yong  and  old,thegrcat  and  fmall.

Id  words  and  worket  to  do  him  great  dilgracc:

He  that  fb  terrible  was  erft  to  all,

Is  now  dcfpifdc  of  all  (a  wondrous  cafe)

Yea  thofc  t hi  cc  warriers  had  ado  not  fmall.

To  kcepe  him  oow  from  killing  in  the  places
Not  that  they  car’d  to  have  his  life  preferved.

But  unto  greater  painei  they  him  seferred


%n^u^hei,


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


3IJ


5>

THct  g.ivchim  bound  unto  that  womanaged^

That  crU  upon  ‘DjufiUa  did  attend.

And  to  thoie  chicc,wbofc  minds  were  jet  inraged,
W’boniwhipt  and  flript  he  lately  thence  did  fend;
Thefe  with  fliarp goads  and  knives  his  body  gagedj
And  to  torment  hiin,all  their  witsdid  bend,  (himj
Kow  Tome  cart  Aoncs,and  fome  with  needles  prickc
Some  (cratch,forne  bitc,witlr  feet  fomerpurn  & kick

93  (him.

SimUr>  Ev*n  as  a brooke  new  fwolnc  with  rage  ofrainc,

’ Or  with  a fodainc  thaw  of  melting  fnow.

Oft  beaisdown  rocks  and  tices  with  force  fo  maine,
As  hcardsdoth  diowne  and  houfesoverthrow,

A drouth  doth  come, and  then  that  brooke againc
Abates  his  pride, and  is  at  lad  fo  low,

A woman. yea  a child  withfmall  adoe,

May  pafTe  the  famc,and  nerer  wet  their fIioe«

94

So  Mar£anor  that  erA  in  pompc  and  pride.

Made  hearts  of  men  to  quake  when  he  was  named.
To  loweA  ebb  now  turned  fees  his  tyde,

Niscombe  now  cut,hisfurienow  irtamed;

Kow  kennel-rakers  I'corne  hifn,and  deride.

To  lookc  men  in  the  face  hcisaniamcd,

Small  childrcn,yea  the  babcs,be  not  afTcard,

To  pull  away  his  bairc  from  head  and  beard.

95

The  while  Romero  with  tbofechampionstwaine.

The  ca  Ale  fummon’d  that  did  gladly  yccld.

Here  ZfUanit  recovered  againc,

Which  lately  Aic  had  loA,her  golden  fhield;

Here  mrt  they  thofe  three  kings,which  to  theirpain.
Dame  Bradamant  had  twifcor’rthrownc  in  field,

Ac  the  fame  caQlc,w  here  before!  told

She  wan  their  lodging, and  made  them  liccold.

9<i

Since  which,  on  forte  unarm’d  they  Tow’d  to  go,'
Which  want  fairc  VllAnie  from  death  did  favc,

For  alt  that  went  with  arm’d  men  gardedfb.

Were  faciificed  on  T anacros  gra  vC;

Yet  better  ofthetw^inc  it  was  to  fliow.

The  parts  that  modeAieconccald  would  hare,
iMtrwa.  For  why  both  this  and  cv’ry  other  Aiamc,

Is  halfc  excus’d,if  force  procure  the  fame.

97

Mdrfifa  Aiaight  a Parliament  did  call

Qf  aIltbctownc,and  made  them  take  an  oth.

Of  high  and  low,rich,poore,and  great  and  fmalt.
Although  they  were  content, or clfe were  loth.

That  to  their  wives  they  Aiould  be  fubjeft  all;

That  in  their  houfes  and  the  Citic  both.

The  women  fhould  have  rule,  fuch  powre,  fuch  gra-s.
As  men  arc  wont  to  have  in  other  placet.  (cci,


9t


She  further  made  this  notable  decreed

That  lodging, mcatc  and  drinkc  fhould  beforbode
To  travcllcrijof  whatfoercdegrcc.

Admit  they  go  on  footc,oi  that  they  rode,

(Within  that  townc)  except  they  firA  agree
To  fwearc  by  fome  great  Saint,  orelfc  by  God,

That  they  Aiould  evermore  be  womens  friends.

And  foe  unto  their  foes  to  their  lives  ends.

99

And  whatfoever  ftrangcr  there  arrivci,

MuA  further  rwcare,bcforc  they  go  their  way,
lf,or  they  havc,oi  mcane  to  marry  wives.

That  evermore  they  fliall  their  wilsobay:

This  muA  they  keepe  on  perill  of  their  lire*.

For  why  flic  Yowcstocomecretwelvc>montbs  day,
And  if  flic  find  her  law  broke  in  that  Citie,

T o fackc  and  buruc  the  fame  without  all  pitic.

ICO

Thi$donc,thc  warriersthreedid  haAcn  hence.

But  yet  their  going  they  fo  long  deferred,

V 011112) rufi Has  corfc  wastane  from  thence,

Where  (as  it  feem'd)  it  was  but  homely  berred,
Aiid4?rdcr  tanc,with  coA  and  good  cxpcncc,
Herfpoufe  and  flic  might  nobly  bc  intetrcd.

With  Epitapbs,by  which  was  (ignificd,

^iiow  gccathonoui  they  bothliv*d  and  died.

'i.  w,

made  her  law  in  marble  faire,

Vpoji  a pillar.to  b^yvritten  downe,

And  then  Rogeto  with  the  warlike  paire
Of  damfcls,took  their  leaves  of  all  the  towncs .

But  VUunh  her  garments  doth  repaire.

And  Aayesto  m^kc  fome  new  and  coAly  gowae.

She  thinks  to  come  to  Court  were  great  difhoncr.
Except  (he  had  fome  fumptuous  clotliing  on  her.

I 30^

Therefore  ITie  Aaid  bchind,and  in  her  powre
Was  d^arganor, by  thofe  fame  warriers  given.

Who  had  new  torments  taught  him  cv’ry  howre.
And  was  at  la  A by  his  (harpe  judges  driven.

To  icape  downe  headlong  fronta  mighty  towre,
Wfaercall  his  bones  and  flcfii  were  brokcand  riven}
Of  hirn  nor  thefe  I have  no  more  to  fay.

But  of  thofe  three  that  went  the  tother  way.

lOJ

The  rcA  of  that  fame  day  together  riding.

And  halfe  the  next  in  company  they  fpent,

Vntill  they  found  a way  in  twaine  dividing.

One  to  the  campe,tother  to  Ar//e  went j
Here  oft  they  take  theirlcaves,yet  Aill  abiding.

For  ever  parting  makes  friends  ill  content;

In  fine  the  Knight  the  way  to  j^rlie  tooke.

They  to  thecampe,and  thus  I end  this  booke.


0»i4  dttri-

filha.

diciarwfm

fummuU*

ioymawt


In  thii  xxxvij,  hoo\e,  the  praifes  of  women  art  fet  downe  to  the  encouragement  of  allvtttuoui  mindedyongtadiet,
undlU^ewifethemiferable  endof  Marganorandhn  twofonnet,  for  their  unbridled lu/l  and cmehy,  toiheterrijying
of  all  great  men  that  dijpofe  themfelvet  to  lawlejfe  and  tyramaia  behaviour,  haftly  in  the  law  made  for  women,  we
nay  fee  that  that  fexe  n capable  of  rule  and  governement,  and  not  to  be  excluded  fiom  the  bighefi  degree  thereof  (as  a
noble  learned,  and  learned  noble  man  hath  mofi  amply  and  excellently  proved  in  a difiourfe  afhuy  which  J happened^  Ini  fitHrii
fortune  to  light  upon,  though  asyet  Ithinhe  imparted  lofetv.)  Htvtni.

Concerning  the  hiflorie  of tbU  boolie,firjff  it  fhould  feeme  that  the  whole  boohe  it  felfe  wai  infetted  into  the  reft  of the  HiAoric.
fvoT\iy  mine  author  t to  ta^eoccafon  thereby  to  ^ealfe  in  prai/eoj  women,  and^eehUy  of  the  LaditYiitomfWife

2>  d4  r»


AlI«goty.


AUuHon.


Tktftun
dmghufs  •/
Sn  ^Hthvy

Ladjr  ’Surlie,
'Ltdy'RuffiUi

"Ltii


514


THE  XXXVII.  BOOKE


tothefantiUiVtinciSofPe/cara:  but  concerning  the. famomvf  omen  by  him  briefly  touclti,  IWiUherefctdotvne  as
briefly  at  / can  their fioric.

Arpalicf  or  Harpaliccc  of  Thrace, whofe  father  being  ta\en  prifhner  by  the  Getict,a  nation  ofsmhia  with

great  courage  andexpedition  recovered  him  from  their  hands  ^oj  whom  Virgil  Jpeal^es  in  his  iEncadi;  '*

Vcl  qualis  cquos  Threiffa  fatigat
Harpalicc  volucrcmqj  fuga  prjrertitiii  Hxbrum.

T omeiis  ^ueene  of  the  Maflagetians.Cym%  became  a filter  to  her  to  maty  her, hut  fse  thinhing[af  it  was  mofi  lil^ely)
le  wooednot  her,  butfier  liingdgme,refufed  him;  hereupon  Cyrus  made  warre  on  her.  Tomcris  feni  her  fan  agatnft  him,
who  was  tahen  ly  Cymswith  an  ambujhment ,and flaine.But  fhefaining  as  though  Jhefledforfeare,drew  Cyrus  to  the
(halts  of  tie  hits  yvhere  (they  rente  )Jhe  flue  his  whole  army, being  two  hundred  thoiifknd  men,and  lejt  not  a man  alive  ta
tarry  newes;and  after  in  revenge  oj  her  fun  Jbe  put  Cyrus  head  into  agreat  boule  oj  bloud,ufngtkatwel  hinmrx  Jfeecht
Sana  tcfanguinc  qui  fangulncm  fitijftU  FiUthy  felfe  with  bloud  that  didft  thirfl  for  blond.  In  the  sflajfe.

With  thofc  that  did  Tumm  and  Heffor  ayd .

T hofe  two  were  Camilla  and  PcnthefclcajOjfi'ofi  which  V'lrgil  writes  in  the  kneads;

Pcnthcfclca  furenSjmedijfque  in  millibus  ardet
BcUatrix,  ardctquc  viris  concurrere  Virgo.

ShcthatincompaflTcofbulshidCj&c.

Thatwas  'Didoithe  fdorie  isweli  l^nowne  o/PigmalionscrHe/r/e  in  rmrderingZy  cherts  for  hope  of  his  money, hut  Did®
warnedin  a dreame  by  ihegift  of  Sycheus, tooke  away  allthegold.and fled  with  divers  confederates  to  Lybia  in  AJfrik^,
and  there  bargained  to  buy  as  much  ground  as  Jhe  could  compile  with  a buls  hide.-which  bargain  being  wade  Jbe  cut  t he
bide  into  an  inf  nit  cdpany  of  final  thongs, and fo  built  the  famorn  city  of  Carthage  within  that  copaJfe,at  Virgil  noteths
• Mcrcattquc  locum  faflidc  nomine  Birfcn,

T aurino  quantum  potcrunt  circundarc  tergo.

Zenobia  ^eene  of  the  Palmirens,  widow, or  aswe  caS  it,  dowager  o/Odenatus:  fhe  rebetledagainfl  the  Romane
£mpire,andfought  many  battels  veiyprofpehuflyi  bur  c^erwardby  AmeWzms  fhe  wasb.  feged  inlhecitieof  Fal-
mira,and  in  her  flight  fiom  thence  fhe  was  taf{en  and  brought  to  Rome  in  Triumph.

Shethatindeanj  Aflmc  frayd  Scmiraml?w(/eo/  t^ynas,whowas  a notable  warrier.hadnot  her  un~

bridled  lufd  of  the  flefh  ftained  the  honour  of  her  other  ve-ntes,  which  as  it  became  her  owne  defiruclionSo  it  bath  left  a
noiable  example  to  aU.  other  Princes  of  her  flex,  to  tahJXAedand  efichew  the  lil^e  infamie,  and fpeciaily  (though  thn  be
above  all pofitive  lawes )yet  not  topoffurc  the  tawes  of  nature.

inthatitisfatd  U.zxfiQ!i  and'Qxzdittnzm  put  off  their  iafes,  therewith  to  hide  tie  privities  of  the  dam/els, it  may
thereby  he  underflood,  that  the  vertues  of fome  excelledi  women  are  fo  great,  as  not  oncly  flerve  themfelves  to  maf^e
them  famous  and  mofl  honorable,  but  atfa  extendthCmfelves  fo  farre,  as  to  ferve  to  hide  and  cover  the  deformitie  of.  0-
thers  not  fo  wellapparelledwith  thegaments  of  honor ,and  fo  (as  it  were  with  worlds  offiipererogarionfbeautife  thofc
that  had  defeSls  of  their  owne.  ""

Concerning  the  great  praific  mine  author  aferibeth  to  Madam  Vittoriai
Whofe  learned  pen  fuch  priviledge  can  give.

As  it  can  caufc  thofc  that  are  dead  to  live.

And  for  that  caufe  preferreth  her  before  Porcia  wife  of  Brutus^  and  divers  others  that  diedvoluntarie foone  after  tleit
, husbands, it  was  becaufejhe  wrote  fome  verfes  in  manrxr  of  an  Epitaph  upon  her  husband  after  his  decea/e ; in  which
bind,  that  honourable  Ladie  {widow  of  the  late  LordXohnKufffW)  defervethnoleffe  commendation,  havingdone  as
much  for  two  husbands.  And  whereas  my  author  ma\eth  fogreat  bofl  onely  of  one  learned  woman  in  Italie,  I may  com-
pare (befides  one  above  all  compart fon,  that  1 have  noted  m the  twentieth  boobe ) three  orfoure  in  England  out  of  one
'family,  andnamely  the  ftflers  of  that  learned  Ladie,  as  witneffc  that  verfewritten  by  the  meanefl  oj  thej'oure  to  the
[ Ladie  BmUcyvhtch  I doubt  if  Cambridge  or  Orford  can  mend.  ^uxHi,  t»

Si  mihiquemeupio  cures  MrWredaremitti,  feHda\inf.

Tu  bona  ,tu  melior,  tu  mihi  fola  foior;  <’/ htr»

Sinmalc  ccflandoretincs,  & trans  mare  mittis,

Tu  mala,tu  pcjor,m  mihi  nulla  Ibror.

Is  n Cornubiam^tibi  pax  lit  Sc  omnia  lasta,  andufiop

Sin  mate Ciciliae  nuncio bella.  Vale.  hu  geiniitt

Inthe  lA.flaffe.

And  if  the  great  Macedon  envie  bar^

Vnto  for  Meonian  lyrCj&c.

This  place  Af.  Alexander  Ncvcll  imitatedjn  his  verfes  upon  Sir  Philip  Sidneys funerals, with farre Jbarper  emeeipt
then  mine  author  here  ufeth  it.  For  whereas  the  nm>  l^ing  of  Scotland  had  written  among  others,  that  pretie  Epitaph
ff  theforefaidKjiight :

Vidit  vt  extinftum  nuper  Citherea  Philippum,

Flcvit j&  hunc  Martem  credidit  cUcfuutn.

Abripnit  digitis  gcmmasjColItJquc  monile,

Marti  iterum  nunquam  feu  placituia  forct:

Mortuus  humana  qui  luHt  imagine  divam.

Quid  faccret  jam  (I  videiit  illc^rogo^


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


315


I a thif  tjjcfl  tn  Erfghjb,

When  l;fr»5  faw  the  noble  dying,  -

She  thought, it  her  beloved  Mars  had  bceoc;

And  with  the  thought  thereof  fhc  fell  a crying.

And  calf  away  her  rings  and  carknetciccne.

He  that  in  death  a goddeiTe  mockt  and  grieved.

What  had  hedone  (trow  you)  if  he  had  lived?

rhtvtTfehuth  afinecoHceipt,  andperbaps  better  ihcnirjhowesfor.  No»  (ai  J/ay)  M.}J<\'tllpraiJi>tgSirI>hilip
Sidney  in  the  lH^e  manner,  ufeth  the  li^e  application,  as  mine  author  doth  tntbu  place,  preftrritig  hufortunaientjjfe  irt
tbu  l^tnde, before  his,  whom  Alexander  envtetb  ; for  he  faith  (as  I rememberj
PleSra  canantalio?,cccincnint  feeptra  Fhilipputn,
lita  coronatis  flint  cannioa  dignacothurnis.


Harps, other  praife ; a feepter  his  doth  png,

Oj  crowned  Poet, and of  Laareat  I(i>tg.

Concerning  therale  ofDruriUi,  it  is  ta\en  out  of  PimatkCy  and  thought  atrueStOty;  itHhthitl  the  Ctttrikftf
CaflagUon  and  in  Apulejus  j but  fomewbat  amplified  by  mine  author.

The  end  of  the  annotations  upon  the  jy.Booke.


I


THE  XXXVIII.  BOOKE.


Marfifa  prefent  her  felfe  before

King  Chari es,<i»<^  in  hup  refence  it  baptiz.edi
Aftolfb  doth  Scna^os  fight  rcji  ore,

*Bj  Tvhom  finch  bar  die  feats  are  enterprifiedf
That  Agramant  tbereroith  moieHed fore.

Is  by  Sobrino finally  advi/ed.

To  make  a challenge  on  Rogcros  hed.

To  end  the  troubles  that  the  warre  had  bred.


w&mmm


AircLadics,you  with  gra-
cious care  that  bcarc
My  prcfcnt  ftorie,  now  me  '
feemes  I fcca

By  this  unwonted  changing
ofyourchcarc,

" That  with  Rogero  you  of-
fended be,

lot  thusagainc  departing
from  his  deare.

And  thatyou  take  theftme  as  ill  as  flic.

As  though  you  thoughtj  and  diirft  affirrac  it  boldly^
(That  fircofloTC  in  hinrdid  burne  but  coldly,
a

And  fure  had  he  bin  moved  hereunto.

By  any  other caufc, then  that  I told.

No  though  thereby  he  had  attained  to
Bich  Craj/isswcalthjor  richer  Crefia  gold,

Yet  would  I thinke  (as  now  it  feemes  ye  do)

I Loves  darts  in  him  had  tane  but  {hallow  hold:

( For  fb  fweet  joy,as  this  was  to  be  thought.

With  gold  nor  filvci  never  could  be  bought.

But  when  ones  honour  fliall  thereon  depend.

Then  fhoiild  it  merit  not  ercufe  buepraife.

And  chiefe  when  one  fo  truly  may  pretend.

He  cannot  favc  his  honor  otherwayes;

And  that  fame  woman  that  her  felfe  fhould  bend.
To  flop  the  lame  by  prayrc,ot  by  delay c$.

Should  give  juft  caufc  to  cv’ric  one  togucftc.

Her  love  wcrclittlc,or  hci  wit  wcrelcflc.

, * 4 '

Forifa  woman  (hould  of  him  fhe  loves,

Iftccmc  thclifeand  fafetie  as  h«  ownej


(1  fpeakc  of  fuchjwhofc  choice  no  change  temorcij
And  whofc  afTeftions  are  not  raflily  growne)_

Then  fure  much  more  in  rcafon  it  behoves.

That  of  his  honour  fhould  more  care  be  fliownCj
By  how  much  morc,it  fliould  irt  due  account.

Both  picafurcs  all,andlifcit  felfe  fuimount.

In  following  of  his  Lord  Ib  faithfully,

Rogero  did  but  ev’n  as  be  was  bound.

And  if  he  fhould  have  left  him  then, thinke  I,

He  fliould  have  doneit  butonflcndci  groundl
VVhat  though  Almonte  made  his  father  die  ?

On  Agramant  that  fault  could  not  tcdound.

Who  had  for  all  Lis  anceftors  offences  j
Giv’n  to  Rogero  many  rccompcnccs.

6

He  did  but  well  in  going  to  his  Lord,

And  fhc  as  well  (itcannot  be  denied)

In  tliat  flic  thereto  granted  her  accord,

W'hich  flic  might  hap  have  Itoptjhad  flie  replied.
That  from  the  fame  her  liking  had  abhoidj
What  now  flic  wants, henceforth  may  be  fupplied.
But  if  that  honor  have  one  minutes  ftainc.

An  hundred  ycaies  fcant  can  it  cleanfc  againc.

7

Now  while  Rogero  unioArly  went.

As  duty  bound  him  to  T rajanos  hairc,
VntotneChriflcncampc  incontinent,
jRtigewfpoufcand  fiftcr  (noble  pairc)

AsToving  friends  and  coflns  now  they  wCnt,

And  unto  Charles  his  tent  they  did  repaiic;

Who  minds  by  lIegc,or  battels  doubtfull  chaneCt
To  drive  thefc  tedioitf  troubles  out  of  f ranee,

> Wbeti


Jlttflpu

trauoH,


ibtmttnn
tin  vottt  out
thrt,nbt,
in  I hr  I CUT
end  of  the  Itf


|i8  THE  XXXVIII.  BOOKE


t

When  in  the  campe  it  was  made  knowne  and  bi  uted.
That  BraduiHont  was  come,her  noblcft  brot hers
Came  forth  to  her,  and  kindly  her  fainted.

With  Guidon,  tf^ough  they  came  of  hindry  motheis;
And  fhc,asforherfexeand  calling futed.

Did  refalutc  both  thcm,and  divers  others.

By  kifling  fomc,and  fpcaking  to  the  beft.

And  making trendly  gefluics  to  thereif.

9

But  when  Marfifas  name  was  heard  and  knowne,
Whofc  noble  afts  ev*n  from  Catay  to  Sfaiue,

And  over  all  the  world  befide  wei  c blowne,
Tolookeon  herall  were  fo  glad  and  fame,

Wiih  pi  efle  and  thruff  not  few  were  overthrownCj
And  (carfc  a man  could  in  the  tents  temaine.

But  heavinQ,nioving,hither-ward  and  thither.

To  fee  fo  brave  a pane  as  thefe  togither.

to

Now  when  to  Charles  his  prefence  come  they  be,

Vpon  her  kn<eAfjr^y2t  did  decline,

And  (as  Turpinon  writes)  no  man  did  fee
Her  knee  to  touch  the  ground  before  that  time.

To  none  cf  anVcilhng.or  degree.

Nor  unto  tjbWy/c«  Prirce  os Sara^ine:

She onirly  doth  effeeme  King  Pef  ins  fbnne,
Aswortbic  whomfuvh  honor  fhould  bedonne,

1 1

But  Charles  -Tofc,and  mcthcrhalfetheway.

And  in  kindeftately  fort  did  her  embrace.

And  fee  her  bv  his  ii  c that  prdent  day.

Above  the  l-ri.iccsall,and  gave  her  place.

Then  voided  was  the  roomc  that  none  might  ftay.
But  T ords  and  Knights  wellwotthic  fo  great  grace.
Excluding  all  thefawcicbafci  foit.

And  then  Marfifa fpake  in  fuch  like  ibrt.

IS

Moft  mighty  Cxfar,  high  renownd  and  glorious.

That  from  our  Indies, to  Tyrinthian  fhore,
From5’(yrfc/a,fiolcn  ftill  with  breath  of  BoretW,

To  s,^thiopia  fcoiching  eTcrmorc,

Mak’ft  thy  w hire  ciofTejfo  famous  and  viSoriou*.

By  value  niuch.but  by  thy  jufliccmorc;

Thy  praite  (O  Prince)  and  thy  renowned  name.
Were  caufc  from  countries  farre  I hither  came.

I }

And  to  fay  trothjflatcnvie  mov’d  mcchiefc,

Becaufc  thy  powreto  reach  fo  fane  I faw,

1 muft  confefle  1 tookcdifdainc  and  griefc.

That  any  Pt  ince  that  favord  notour  law,

And  was  tous ofcontraric beliefc,

Should  grow  fo  grcatjto  kcepe  us  all  in  awj
Whf rt-fore  I came  with  mind  to  have  deflroid  thee.
Or  •vy  all  mcanes  I could, to  have  annoyd  thcc.

14  / ....  ..

For  this  T came, for  this  I ft ayd  in  Trance,  ^

To  reekey<-urruinc  and  yourovctthiow,

V\  hen  lo  a chance  (if  fiicb  a thing  canchance)

Made  mea  ffcnd  and  fubjeft  cfa  fo,

1 , ll  notftay  loiell  fathcircimiftance,

^it  this  infubftancc.it  did  make  me  know,
lat  l,yourbloodicrncmicAfaryiyj,  ' ^ >

VVaidaughtci  to  iio^cro late  of


He  by  my  wicked  uncles  was  betraid.

And  Ic ft  my  wofull mot hci  big  with  chiKJ,

VV  ho  ncarc  toSyrti downc  ha  belhc  laid.

As  ftnngclyfav*d, as  w rongfully  fxildj
She  brought  a t win,a  man  t hild  and  a maid,

Wc  fofterd  wcrc.fcvcn  yeares  in  forreft  wilc^

By  onethat  had  in  Magickc  art  great  skill.

Bud  was  ftolne  from  Inmagainft  his  will-
|6

For  (ome  Arabians  fold  me  for  a flavc,

Vntoa  Ferrari King,whom  (grownc  in  yeares)
Becaufc  be  my  vi.ginuy  wcold  h wc,

1 kilicd  him  and  all  his  Lords  and  i ceres
And  then  luch  hap,God  and  good  fortune  gave,
1 gat  hisciowncand armes, as  yeeappearesj
And  ere  . fulli  wastwiie  ten  vcarc  old,
Scvcncrowncs  1 gat  befidc,which yet  i hold.

And  being  envious  of  your  cndicftc  fame,
(AscrltJ  told)  1 came  with  finne  intent.

By  all  the  meaner  Icou1d,toquailrthcfame,
And  haply  might  liavedonctbc  huit  I irciitj
But  new  a bctteimindcAhat  mindc  doth  tame.
Now  of  my  mahet  Ido  much  repent.

Since  by  good  hap,I  lately  und<  rftood.

That  1 wasnearcalhdctoyou  in  blood.

I s

And  fifh  I know  my  father  was  your  man,

1 mcanc  nolcffethen  hcdid,youtofcive.

As  for  the  hate  and  cnvic  I bcgan,j
To  beaic  you  1 now  do  the  famcrclcrve.

For  Agramant all  the  barme  I can.

To  all  nis  kin,that  do  the  fame  deferv^

Becaufc  1 now  do  kncw,and  amaftured.

His  anceftorsmy  parents  death  procured.


19


This  faid  Marjifa,  and  withall  did  adde.

That  ILe  would  be  bapiizcd  out  cf  hand.

And  when  that  ytgramant  the  vznquUl.thsi,
Betutne  (if  Cbanes  lo  plcas’dj  to  her  owne  land.
And  Chnftent|icm,and  faithcr  wouL  bt  glad,
Againftall  thole  that  would  chri/ls  «»w  withftand,
Ayio  oearcarmes  wnh  vow  thar  all  hcrg.vinc
To  Charles  and  holy  Cburc'n  fhould  ay  icmaine,
lo

The  nrblc  Ci^ar/exoftongiieasclocjiieiit,

As  wi.c  in  head,  as  valorousu.  heart.

Did  much  cxtoll  the  Lad ic  excellent.

And  all  her  * in  and  fire  by  juft  drfart:

And  of  her  former  Iptech  im  OTiii'-nt,

Moft  gracioiiflie  ncar.fwcid  cv*riepart,

Concludii  g that  hfc  would  for  cvcrafier.

Accept  hci  as  ms  coufin,and  his  daughter*

2 I

And  hci  trgainc  hedid  ernbraceof  new;

And  kift  her  feihead  as  his  child  ludecd:

It  long  wr  1.1  Id  be  to  td'  how  brave  a ctiw.

From  clarimount ,\i.d Mongrant  d id  proveed,

T o w<-  Icoinc  iictjOr  when  Kenuldo  k new
Marfifas  namc.what  joy  in  himd'cf  b'e.J,

He.. ills fO  mind  wha  for  ember  ht  found.

Then  when  Albracta  he  bcflcgcd  round.


tt  v>m  the
menirt  itt
the'd  ttmri
for  nrete
\i(fe  llifir
cht'-tren  ee
ej  Heart  a
kut,fn  the
f rthead,  tedt
eitbi  rnomi


Long


1


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


3i<?


22


It  long  would  be  to  tell  of  Giitdont  joy.

With  Griffin,  Aquilant  and  SAnfonet,

That  leapt  with  her  their  Jand,that  do  deftroy.
Thole  men  that  in  their  Rcalmc  they  hap  to  gets
No  leflc  did  Malagi^e  and  Vivian  joy,
Remembnog  how  llic  joynd  with  Richardetj
To  refcucthem,as  long  before  I told.

When  unto  Bcrtolage  they  had  bene  ibid.


S9


2?


Kow  was  prepard  againft  th’enfuing  day,

A placc,as  was  by  Charles  himfelfcdcvifcd.

Set  (lately  forth,and  hang’d  with  rich  aray,

W’herc  this  moft  worthy  dame  (liould  be  baptifed.
Then  BtOiops  were  employd  by  whom  (he  may
Re  taught  the  Chrifien  faith  and  Catechifed,

And  all  that  day  a learned  Clarke  and  Preacher,
The  princtplcsof  Chrifien  faith  did  teach  her.


L»a\  in  the


2 +


Kttunuits
UttfiftA-
fltinithe  if,
I*.


Ofihtua^M-

ill

intlufitty.


Then  Turpin  Archbifhopof  chiefe  account.

In  his  robes  pontificiall  doth  baptife  her,

Charles  with  great  rev’tcncc  (landeth  by  the  fount.
And  what  to  anfwcr,he  dtd  Rill  adstfe  her<

But  now  tis  time  that  to  the  Moonc  I mount.

For  that  reccit  muR  make  OrlandovriCcSf

From  whence  the  Duke,  defeending  by  ftrangc  byas.

Came  with  S./ehn  in  charret  of  Elyas.

25

And  by  his  guide  he  backcagainc  wasled.

And  keeps  Rill  in  hishandthat  pot  orlarre,

, That  fliould  againc  make  wi(c  the  mafed  hed.

Of  tha|  fame  Pa/ladin  well  fcenc  in  wane.

Likcwifc  the  Saint  unto  ,4y?o(/i>  fed,

Adboncasthry  alligbtedhom  the  carrej

That  with  an  herbefof  which  there  grew  great  Rote)

He  Ihould  againc  Senapos  light  rcRore.

26

For  which.and  for  his  former  great  defart,'

He  (hould  have  men  t*aRaulc  B/yer/a  land.

He  teacheth  him  thofc  people  unexpart.

He  fhould  fo  traine,to  make  them  to  his  band;

He  further  learned  him  the  way  and  art.

How  he  might  fafely  palTc  th’unRablc  fandj
And  plainly  thus  S./ol>«,froro  point  to  point,

What  th’EngliRi  DukcRiould  do, did  him  appoint.

17

Then  did  Afiolfo  fake  his  winged  Reed,’

A nd  of  the  Saint  devoutly  tookc  his  leave.

And  foaring  downe,  he  makes  no  little  fpeed.

To  do  that  whichin  charge  he  did  rcccavc;  i w(

So  farre  by  Myhu  bankes  he  doth  proceed,.

Vntillthat  Afa&Mhedid  plaincpcrceave;  -i.

And  following  the  courlc  of  that  fame  ftream^;

Came  to  Stnapo,hc».d  of  that  fame  Reame.  : >
iS

Great  was  the  picafute,triumpfa, and  the  joy,  * ’
i'e»<2p9  tookc  when  he  thereof  Had  woord, . . .r
Rcmcmbring  w ell  the  trouble  and  annoy,

. The  foulcHtnyiiAS  brought  him  at  bitboord:

But  when  he  made  himeke  his  fight  enjoy,
Anddidfbrare  a graceto  himafFoord,  ,,  s • •
That  by  bis  meanes  his  eye  fightwas  rcRord  him.

He  worHiipt  him  and  like  a Qod  ador'd  him* . .


Noronclydid  he  give  him  fouldiers  then.

Wherewith  he  might  Biferta  townc  invade.

But  for  each  one  he  askt  he  gave  him  ten,
Thatfoonc  two  hundred  thoufand  mtn  he  made;
Scarfehad  the  fields  roonic  for  fo  many  men.

But  footmen  allifo  is  thatcoumrycstiadc.

For  horfes  in  that  Region  are  but  deiitic,

But  Elephants  2itd  Camells  they  bavcplcntie,

50

Now  that  fame  day  that  went  before  the  day.

In  which  the  men  of  Nubia  madcaccount.

To  march  on  forwardjfomc  part  of  their  way’,
A/loljo  on  hisGiiffith  horfc  doth  mount;

And  Southward  he  doth  paflc,and  doth  not  flay,
Vniill  he  came  ncare  to  a mighty  mount;

At  footc  whereof  a vaR  cave  he  doth  finde,

Which  was  the  lodging  of  the  Sotherne  windc.

The  mighty  cave  had  but  a narrow  mouth.

At  which  the  Duke  (as  Chri/ls  ApoRlc  taught)

Did  watch  fo  long,untiil  the  wind  of  South,

Came  home  to  cafe  his  (pirits  overwrought.

To  enter  in  A/loljo  him  allowth.

But  w hen  anonc,to  have  come  out  he  t bought.
Within  a leather  fackc  the  Duke  had  plaR
At  thatcaves  moutb,hc  caught  and  tyde  him  fafl;

The  Palladin,f\A\  proud  of  Rich  a pray,

Rcturnes  to  Nubia  ward,bcforc  twas  night.

And  to  ihc  Ne^rof  then  he  fhow’d  the  way.
Appointing  them  how  they  fhould  travcll  rightj
He  vifluallsdoth  and  cariagcsconvay.

All  fafe  unto  that  hill,tbat  Atlas  bight;

Quite  orotjiofc  fields  where  many  have  bene  found,
With  wind  for  lyant  ef  watcr,moicthcn  drownd.

And  beiijgcomc  unto  the  mountaincs  fide,
Therc,whcrc  he  mjightdifeover  all  the  plainc,
Hedoth  his  bands  and  companies  devide.

And  chuteth  thole  thatatemoR  apt  to  trainc.

And  thofc  he  parts  and  putteth  them  afidc.

And  orders  for  the  rcR  hedoth  ordaine.

Then  hein  fightofall  the  hillalcendctb.

And  lookt  like  one  that  fomc  great  feat  intendeth.
5+

And  kneeling  downe  (as  one  that  did  bclcevc,
Hisprayre  fliouId  giantcd  bc,3swcllas  hard)
Heprayd  his  maRcr  their  great  vvantrcleevc:

Then  cafling  Rones  that  were  before  prepard,

(What  cannot  fiimcbclccfc  in  6'hny/ atchcevc?)
The  very  Rones  (a  thing  to  credit  Jjajd)

Did  grow,and  live, and  more  by  hidden  caufc.

And  had  both  bcllyes,l?ggcs,and  acckc,and  jawes.
«S

And  naying  lowd,fild  all  the  place  with  found.

Of  horfcjfomc  bay,  feme  rcanc, fomc  daplc  gray,

And  of_ail  them  wcrcicadic horfes  found,
ThcfpurrCjthc  wand, the  leg  and  voyce  t'obay;

To  Rop,toftart,to  pafle  caricr,to  bound.

To  gallop  Rraight,orrotind,orany  way;

Thus  were  the  men  well  horfl,with  little  paiacs.

For  ev'rtc  horfc  bad  raddlc,bic  and  raincs.

E c ' Thus


wind  was
ironita  raiji
tbi  /'and  font-
umet  in  fuck
fart  as  it
ei.emhetm'd
the  men  that
wen  iwii.


Ovid,Meta.j
Saxa  quis
koccreUatf
X'fifit  pro
tejlt  vetu/lru


I


320


THE  XXXVIII.  BOOKE


3*  , 4?

Thus  by  this  vfi  tuous  Dukc,within  one  houre.  What  ever  fame  doth  bring, of  good  or  ilJ,

Were  fourefcorc  thoufafid  footmen,  horfemen  made^  To  make  it  greater  it  doth  ever  uie,
With  which  fo great  and  unexpeQed  powre.


UtiurMti  t»
in

the  next  b«c{^

lipf*.


Full  fiercely  he  all  Affril{C  did  invade.

And  burnt  and  fpoildfull  many  a towneand  towre.
All  giving  way  to  his  viftonous  blade,

Vntill  three  Piinces,  Agramann  vicegerents.

Made  head  againft  the  Duke,with  their adhcrenti.
37

The  King  of  AUyier, ind  he  of  Ferfc,

W'lth  flout  Branpirdo,  all  three  mighty  Kings,  .
That  find  their  enemies  to  grow  fo  fierce,

I>o  (end  their  Lord  by  fca, word  of  thefir things.

A littlefncket  flraight  the  wavesdoth  pierce.


hlnfUtt
tTMtieti  r«
ferfxreit
btm  Iff  r««.
tixut  the
rrttrn  ia

fr/mu


OrMut,


And  of  thefe  evill  newes  quicke  notice  brings
To  Agramant  that  lay  that  time  in  ^r/ie,

Befiegcd  by  an  army  fttong  and  warlie.

38

VVho  hearing  of  his  countries  wofull  cafe.

And  by  hisabfcnce  whatdid  them  betide.

He  cald  his  Lord?  and  Pi  incest©  the  place,
Confulting  how  for  t his  harmc  to  providej
And  looking  once  or  twife  with  flarely  grace.

Now  on  the  tone,then  on  the  tothet  fide.

But  on  Marfilio  and  Sobrino  cliiefe.

In  fuch  like  words  he  told  to  them  his  griefe.

?9

Although  I wOt  it  worfl  befeemesofall,

A Generali  to  (ay,  lhad  notthoiighr,

Yet  fofay  I, for  when  a harmc  doth  fall,  ' ’ ’
Beyond  the  reach  of  humane  fcncf  orthoughti
Then  furc  the  blame  is  either  none  orfmall,

And  in  this  compafie  may  my  fault  be  brought;
My  fault  u vnt,Affric\e  to  leave  unarmt'd.

If  of  the  Nubians  now  they  could  be  harmed/  ■

40

But  who  could  ihinke  (bur  God  tbit  underftand*

The  things  to  come  as  well  as  thofc  are  paft)

So  great  an  boft  could  pafle  fo  many  lands.

That  were  from  us  fo  great  a diflance  plafl,

Twixt  whom  and  us  lies  thofc  unflablcfands.

That  dangeroufly  arc  mov’d  with  Southerne  blafi^
Yet  ate  t hey  come,and  have  fo  farre  prevailed,^
Biferta  felfc  is  now  by  them  alTailed.

4»  ; ,

Now  on  this  point  your  counfcls  here  I crave.

If  fo  I (Iiall  all  fruitlcfic  hence  retire,

Or  trie  before  I go, if  1 can  have

The  crowncof  France,  to  which  Ido afpire.

Or  how  I may  at  home  my  country  fa  ve.

And  this  deftroy,  which  is  my  moft  dcfirC;

Ifany  know  the  meane,  then  fpeake  he  toit,

To  th’cnd  that  we  may  know  the  bcft,and  do  ii;

42

Thus  much  the  fonneof  great  Trajano  fpake.

And  on  Marfilio  fixt  histyes,  that  he
As  chiefe  in  place,  thereby  might  notice  take.

That  firft  by  him  he  would  advifed  be;

Who  when  he  had  flood  up  for  revVcncc  fake,  ^
And  bow’d  his  body,  and  withall  hit  knee,
Downefate  him  in  his  hcnorabliffcatc,-
And  (pakc  fuch  words  as  1 fliall  here  repeat^-  •


Wherefore  (my  fovcraignc  Lord)  1 never  will
Beholder  baflit  with  hearing  flying  newes.

But  inovcfuch  doubt  and  fuch  afluiancc  ftill,

Asthough  I would  not  all  reports  refufc.

Yet  would  I thinkc  the  truth  of  other  fort.

Then  as  fb  many  moutlies  (hall  make  report.

44

And  I bclctveeich  talcfo  much  thelcfle.

By  how  much  more  from  likelihood  it  dotharre;

Now  in  this  prefent  caufe  let  any  guclTe,

If  like  it  be, a King  that  dwcUfo  farre.

Could  coHicvvith fuch  an  hofl,as  they  erprcllc,

T o AffricaSo  of [cn  us’d  to  wane,

A nd  pa (Tc  thofc  parlous fands, where  to  his  cofl,

Cambi  fes  erft  did  Iccfc  his  mighty  hoft.

^5

But  they  be  Nubians, let  it  be  allowd.

By  miracle  come  in  a fhowreof  raine.

Or  clofcly  carrid  thither  in  feme  clowd,

Sith  by  the  way  none  faw  fo  large  a trainc?

Hath  ^Jfril^e  ever  to  fuch  people  bow’d,

Muft  they  have  aide  to  drive  them  home  agalne!

I furc  may  think  you  kept  a foriegarifon.

If  them  and  yout  s bctwecnc  there  be  comparifbn,

46

Irathcr  thinkc  th* Arabians  are  come  downe,

From  thofc  their  hi ls,and  done  feme  fpoile  or  waft.

And  tancfbmemen.and  burntfomc  baggage  towne«

But  fmallrcfiflancc  finding  as  they  paft,  ,

And  that  Branfardo  for  his  ownc  renownc.

Whom  asyourdcputicyou  there  had  plaft.

For  one  fets  downe  one  hundred  in  his  letter,

Toth’end  that  biscxctifcmayfccmcthc  better.

47

But  if  you  will  but  fend  (bmc  fliip  or  twainc.

That  but  your  ftandard  may  therein  appeare.

No  doubt  but  they  will  hie  them  homeagainc.

By  that  time  thefe  but  weigh  their  ankers  herc^
if  they  Arabians, ih3t  can  bide  no  paine.

Or  if  they  Nubians  bc,t  he  cafe  is  clearc,

Who  onely  taken  have  this  heart  of  grace.

To  know  yourperfon  abfentfiom  tbeplaee.

48

This  therefore  it  the  fum  of  my  perfwafion.

Make  furc  the  conqueft  here  ere  you  go  hence,

Charles  can  no  more  endure  yciir  fliarpc  evafiou.

Now  that  his  nephew  is  diflraught  of  frncci
Now  by  the  forehead  let  us  take  Occafon^

Leaft  after  all  ourtravcll  and  cxpence.

He  hide  away  his  haire,and  turnc  his  bald.

And  we  unprovidem  be  thought  and  cald.

49

With  thefe  fo  waric  words,and  fuch  as  thefe,

ThefubeJe  ipan/ard labour’d  to  perfwade.

The  King  of  Affrih^e  not  to  pafle  the  fcas,

Till  of  tnc  wartes  in  France  an  end  were  mader  rjjrirn^

, But  fagc5’cinso,thaterpidc  with  cafe,

How  deepe  he  feemd  in  (hallow  flreames  to  wade,  infenti
Bc^c Aing privat more  thcnpublikccaufe,

Bkwtafwcr  thus  after  a little  paufi»

My


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


33*


sc


SeiriMnora-
tun  toptr
jwtdtl.imtt
itavt  frarut
ttiU  Ittkf
hu  a jcu  (tH»-
tij.


Sf^tiAn

hajiem,.


My  LicgCjWlicn  firft  topcacci counfcJd  you,

1 >uld  I had  not  bin  fo  true  a Prophet,

Or  if'my  layings  needs  muft  prove  fo  true,

1 would  you  had  bclce»*d  them  foi  your  profitj
Not  Kodomont that  rafli  youthful!  crue
Of  Al(yrd,MaTb.'ilufl ,i\\M  then  did  fcoffe  it.

Whom  now  1 wifli  here  prcfcm,face  to  face.

But  chiefly  Rodomont  I wifli  in  place.

S»

He  that  then  undertooke  to  make  all  Trance^

But  like  the  dull  that  flics  before  the  wind.

He  that  did  tow,  in  heav’n  or  hcll,your  lance
Tofollow,nay  to  leave  it  farre  behind.

Now  when  he  fliould  the  matter  moft  advance,
Vnprofitably  lurkesin  corners  blind,  j

And  I that  then  (becanfe  I told  you  true)

Was  cald  a coward, flill  abide  with  you.

ja

And  flrll  I will  nbide,what  ere  enfutb.

During  this  li  fc, which  though  made  wcake  with  age,
I will  not  feare,agaiHft  the  ftrongeft  youth
That  lives  in  France,ia  your  defence  to  gagej
Nor  yet  can  any  charge  me  with  untruth.

Not  from  theproudeft  Prince  to  pooteft  page.

And  well  I wot, I have  done  more  then  fome.

That  promift  much  ere  they  were  hither  come.

51

Thus  much  I lay, thereby  more  plaine  to  prove.

That  what  I then  did  fay, or  now  impart.

Came  from  true  fervice,and  of  loyall  love.

And  not  offaintjmuchlclTc  of  hollow  hart:

Now  I advifeyou  hence  with  fpeed  remove.

And  that  you  homeward  in  all  haft  depart.

For  well  you  wot,that  wilcdome  it  is  none.

In  winning  other  mcns,rolcelc  oncsowne.

54

Yet  know  not  I why  we  fliould  call  it  winning,
Ifnfourloflesjuft  account  we yecld,

Thirtic  two  Kings  we  were  at  the  beginning,

A third  part  now  fcarce  tarries  in  the  ficldj
And  wcourfelves  here  up  in  corners  pinning.

Scant  fafe  within  thefe  rampicts  can  us  fliicld,

Wefo  decay , except  in  time  we  ceafe,

At  laft  wefliall  be  driv’n  to  fue  for  peace.

55

Orlando  is  not  there,  tis  true,  what  tho?

Had  be  bin  there,we  had  all  dide  ere  this.

His  want  doth  but  prolong  ourouerthrow.

By  other  men,our  ftate  ia  danger  is:

They  have  Renaldo  there,that  plaine  doth  fliow
His  force  and  courage'not  much  lellc  then  his.

There  arc  his  coufins,  all  the  Palladins,

Etcrnall  terror  to  our  Sara\ins»

56

They  further  have  a man  in  ftrength  and  hart,

( 1 need s muft  praifc  my  foe  agai  nft  my  will )

A fccond  Mars,\  meanc  King  Brandiman,

Whofc  great  puiftance  joynd  to  afti  vc  skill.

My  Iclfc  in  (ingle  fight  have  found  in  part,

-And  further  proofe  have  fcenc  by  others  ill:
Bcfidcs,Or/d»db  wanted  long  ago.

Since  which  we  more  have  loft  then  won  you  know,


57


Now  ifwefjjcd  no  better  in  timepaft.

We  fliall  fpeed  woifc  hereafter  I do  dread.

We  fee  Gradajjo  over  fca  is  paft.

And  that  the  valiant  Afaniricard  is  dead;

Marfifa  hath  forfaken  us  at  laft.

And  Rodomont, of  whom  it  may  be  fed.

Were  but  his  faith  with  force  to  be  compared.

The  reft  might  in  a manner  have  bin  fpared.

5«

Now  when  as  fo  great  hcipcs  and  fuccors  failc  us.

So  many  thoufands  of  our  fouldicrs  flaine.

And  all  fupplics  that  (hould  at  all  availe  us.

Already  come  from  and  from  Spaine;

They  have  of  late  got  fourenew  Knights  to  quailc  us,
Compard  with  any  of  the  Chtiften  trainc,

Fourc  Knights,that  if  you  (earch  from  hence  to  Jnde^
f ourc  Knights  to  match  thefe  fouic  you  fhal  not  find

59

I know  not  if  you  ever  heard  before.

Of  Oliveros  fons,and  Sanfonet,

With  Guidon  favage,  whom  I value  more
Then  all  their  other  fuccors  that  they  get.

From  Almanie  the  higher  or  the  lower.

Although  fuch  aids  at  nought  we  cannot  fet.

And  we  do  plainly  fee  before  our  eyes.

That  cv*ry  day  they  may  have  frcfli  fupplics.

60

We  may  afllliie  our  fclvci  if  any  more
We  take  the  ficld,our  fide  goes  to  the  pot.

For  if  when  wc  were  two  for  one  before.

Yet  wc  muft  nccdsconfcifc  wc  gained  nor.

Now  they  f©  much  incrcafcd  have  tbeir  ftore.

With  forrainepowrcjboth  Englifl),  ’Dutch  and  Scor^
What  can  we  hope  but  after  all  our  toyle.

To  have  badrccompenccoffliamc  and  foyle.

61

Tct  all  is  welljifyou  will  part  betime.

And  hie  you  home  before  it  prove  too  late3
But  if  you  tairy  any  longer  time.

You  here  will  Iccfc  your  men,at  home  your  {facet
Now  if  to  leave  Marplio  feeme  a crime.

For  fcare  the  world  condemne  you  for  ungrate.

To  favc  him  harralclTe  you  for  peace  muft  fue.
Which  they  will  fo  accept,  if  fo  will  youi.

62

But  if  you  thinkc  fuch  motion  may  not  (land.

With  honour  of  your  ftate  and  high  degree,

A nd  hope  by  fight  to  make  a furcr  hand.

Which  yet  how  it  fuccccded  hath  you  fee  •

Yet  feckc  at  lead  to  have  the  upper  hand
By  this  device,and  herein  follow  me;

Put  all  the  (juarrcls  triall,if  you  can.

To  one,and  let  Rogero  be  the  man.

I know, and  you  do  know,and  fo  we  all
Do  know, that  our  Rogero  bath  fuch  might.

No  Chriften  can  fo  fturdie  Be  ot  tall,

As  band  to  hand  to  conquer  him  in  fight;

But  if  you  meanc  to  make  wartcgcncrall.

Though  he  in  ftrength  far  pa(Tc  each  other  Knight,
Yet  in  the  fight  he  but  for  one  can  (land.

And  what  ixeocagainftamightic  band?  ,

£ ca  I


THE  XXXVIII.  BOOKE


$21


(4


i dinvid
frumaGrtt^
wrdfigni
fjmg  HH  di
t/erfarit
$Uat  fighti
h(md  {«  b<uti>


Httlct  btUa
imxftfd.


I t^inke  it  bcft,if  fi>  you  thinkc  it  good.

To  offer  this  to  Charles,  that  if  he  will.

If  with  his  worthy  courage  fb  it  flood.

For  Taring  thofc,whomyou  on  both  fiderkill,

-And  fliunning  of  the  flicdding  guiltlclTc  blood.
Which  both  of  you,on  each  fidcdayly  fpill.

Each  fide  to  chufc  one  champion  at  whofe  parrcll.
To  make  a fullconclufion  of  the  quarrcll.

65

Provided  firft,that  which  fo  ere  of  thefc

Shall dyc,his  I'rince  fliall  pay  the  rother  tribute;

I know  this  motion  will  not  Charles  difplcafcj
For  all  his  Lords^will  t hcre-unto  contribute;

>\nd  this  would  woikr  ouiTafctie,and  our  cafe.

For  to  RogerOy  fo  much  I attribute,  ^

That  fuch  his  rallew  is,thiscaiifc  fo  jufl-,

Wtec  Mars  Jntagonifi, yet  yccld  hemufl.

60

Thefc  wordi  Sobrino  fpakc  with  fuch  cfFeft,

As  ^gramint  thereto  gave  his  ronfent.

And  then  in'c  prefers  hedid  dire£l.

Who  ftraight  to  Charles  with  fuch  a challenge  wenti
Charles  meant  s not  fuch  occafioti  to  ncglefl,  ^

He  thinks  the  combat  wonne  incontinenr.

He  had  fuch  (lore  of  champions, nere  the  Utter,

Vnro  Jtena/dohe  commitsthe  matter.

67

Glad  were  both  armies  of  this  new  accord.

Henceforth  to  live  in  quiet  they  intend.

And  firher  partdoth  pradc  his  foveraigneLord,
That  of  thefc  broyles  would  make  fo  fpeedie  end,
Each  one  in  mind  thefc  foolifli  brails  a bhord
That  rnadctbem  thusin  wairestheirdavestofpcod,
£ach  man  could  fay,  and  no  man  then  denyd  it.

That  warre  is  fweet  to  thofethat  have  net  tryd  it,

68

RenaldOyhe  »n  mind  doth  much  rejoyfe,

To  thirkehis  Prince  had  done  himjuch  a grace,

To  make  of  him  above  fo  many  choyfe,

Fortnallcf  fo  great  imponingcafe

itnd  though  Ao^cro  were  by  common  vovee,

Thechiefeman  deemd  ofalltheFnrf;/ybracc,

And  hand  to  band  had  killed  Mandruard,  .
iieiMfdo  this  but  little  did  regard.  . *

69

Jut  good  he  was  nothing  glad,

Tboughoffo  many  gallant  men  and  flout.

His  King  to  his  great  praife,him  chofen  had.

Above  all  othci  Knights,and  pikt  him  out;

His  heart  vvasheavic,  and  hislooke  wasfad,

Hot  that  in  mind  hcoughtdid  dicad  or  doubt,
Rcnaldos  forces,oi  Orlandos  eir  her,

No  fcarfe  and  if  they  had  bcene  both  togitber.

• o

But  this  procur’d  his  griefe,  becaufe  he  knew,  1
Renaldo  brother  was  unto  hisdcare,

Who  did  her  plaints  with  letters  oft  renew,
Andcharecd  him  fod cepe ,astoucht  him  ncare;

Now  f hr  (hould  to  old  wrongs,add  this  new.

To  kill  Renaldo, r\\en  the  cafe  isclcare,

She  fhruld  have  fo  great  rcafon  to  reprove  him.

He  doubts  fbc  never  will  bcieaf  ter  love  hun.


7*


Now  if Rogero  do  in  filent  fort,

Lamtnt  this  combat  tancagainfl  his  will.

No  doubt  his  fpoufe  which  heard  this  fad  report.
Was  worfe  appaid  then  hc,at  lead  as  ill;

She  beats  her  bred, and  breakesher  trcffcsfiiort.
And  many  tcarcs  with  forrow  fhe  did  fpill.

And  calls  Rogero  oftentimes  ungrate.

And  curfeth  evermore  hcrcrucll  fate.


7i


i.  t


It  needs  mud  turnc  unto  her  griefe  and  paine.

Who  ere  isoveicomc,who  ever  win.

She  dare  not  thinkc  Rogero  can  be  flaine.

Her  heart  fiKhanguifli  doth  conceive  therein;

And  if  K plcafcd  Chrifi  fo  to  ordainc.

For  cbaflifing  his  wretched  peoples  fin.

That  man  fiioulddye,  that  of  her  houfc  tvas  chiefe,
Bcfidcs  his  death,that  brought  a further  griefe.

a • f t .

A griefe  that  was  indeed  beyond  all  mcafurc.

To  thinkc  flic  never  might  henceforth  for  fiiamr.
Go  to  hcrfpoufCjWithout  ihc  flatdirpleafurc.

Of  all  her  kin  and  houfc  of  whence  fhe  came.

And  when  flic  weigh’d  ihc  cafe  at  better  Ica^urC,
Each  thing  to  her  feemd  worfeand  worfeto  frame.
For  why  (he  kncw,her  tongue  that  knot  had  tyde,  ^
That  while  flic  liv’d,might  never  loofc,nor  Aide.

^ , 74

Fur  that  dcarc  fie.nd  of  hers,thatncverfaild.

To  helpc  at  chiefed  needs, the  ncblc maid,

I mcane  the  fage  MeliffdSo  prcvaild.

That  Bi  adamantes  giiefc  was  part  alaid,

Forwh.n  flic  knew  the  caufe, and  what  fhe  aild,

Againft  the  time,fhc  promifed  her  aid-

And  undcrtoekc,that  of  that  bloudy  quarrcll*

To  her  nor  hcrs,therc  fliould  aiitc  no  parrcll.

7f

This  while  the  gallant  Knights  againd  the  fight,  ’
Thcmfelvcs,and  eke  tkcir  weaponsdo provide,’

The  choife  whereof  did  appe-  taine  in  right,

Vnto  thcchampionof  ihc  Chiiden  fide.

Who, as  a man  that  tookc  but fmall delight,

(^ince  he  had  loft  bis  famous  horfe)  to  ride.

Did  chufc  to  fight  on  foot,a'id  in  this  fort.

All  arm  d,with  axes  long, and  daggers  fhorV.

76  ^

Or  were  ir  chance,  or  were  ir  in  regard,

T hat  Malagige  ad vifcd  him  thereto.

Becaufe  he  knew  the  force  of  B.;/yy2ir</,

Of  powrcall  charms  of  armour  to  undoe,

(Of  whofe  fliarpc  edge  you  haveerethistimehard)
But  this  they  did  appoint  hetweene  them  two.
About  the  place  likewife  they  do  agree,

A plaine  ncare  Arlte  walls, the  fame  to  be.
f7

Now  when  Aurora^eft  thelothcd  bed.

Of  7^r4«(unto  whom  fhe  hath  no  lift)

To  th*cnd  that  no  difrrdcr  may  be  bred,

Onciiher  fdc  ihcmarniallspait  the  lift.

At  e d whcreof,wcte  rich  parillionsfprcd.

Where  nothing  that  belongs  to  date  wasmift.

And  didaot  horn  each  »ent  a Irrlc  fpacc.

On  cither  fide, they  did  an  alto'  place.


raik


K«i


H 7»en  if

vtrft


W’-itn  that,
iin^et  are
made,  the
DiuUe  a^-
pain  t that
the  patlie
fb aUen^ed
tartf  name,
tni  brings
the  vreapani,
and  the  chal-
lenger milt
choife
*f  tbifebe
hrtujjit.


OF  ORJ.ANDO  FVRIOSO.


. 7*

Not  long  time  after  thisj  in  battcll  ray,

ThcTurl^’jh  arniic  with  thcirKingcameout,
Glirtiing  ingolii,and  ftately  rich  aray.

In  niowjwith  all  Barhdrianfoivpc  ict  our,

‘ A fwife  Arabian  horl'c, of  colour  bay
KcioHc,and  by  his  fide  Regcro  flout,
llodcchecKc  by  cheeke,and  to  lus  greater  fame.

On  him  to  vv3ir,3fa>yi/tothoughtnoflianK.

79

His  helmet  (for  the  which  the  Tartardydc,

Slaine  by  Rogcro  as  I did  rchcarfc)

(Which  fintca  tboufand  ycares^  and  more  befide.
Was  celebrated  in  more  flatcly  veric)
Marfiitoc»nid,by  Rogeros  fide,

Well  meunted  on  a ipanijh  genet  fcarce,

His  arms,  and  all  that  did  thcicto  belong,
Someother  ftates  divided  them  among.

80

On  tother  fide  came  worthic  Charlemaym,

From  out  his  tents, fttongly  intrcnchr,  anone.

And  all  his  bands  of  men  he  did  ordaine.

So  as  iftobatrcllhc  fliould  then  have  gone;
About  him  wasof  I'ecrsa  noble  trayne,

RenaUo  in  the  mids,with  armour  on.

That  oncly  helmet  erft  from  Mambtyn  tanc.

Was  by  Vggero  borne,thc  noble  'Dmc,

Si

Tvvo  axes, both  alike  in  each  refpeff,

Sakmonand  Duke  Meimiis  beare  before.

The  Chiefcaineson  each  fide  their  men  dirc^f*

To  kcepc  within  their  limitsevcrmoiCj
And  in  the  midfl  was  lefta  laigcpiofpeft,

Bet  weene  each  company,and  roome  good  ftorc>
For  prefent  death  it  was,if  any  venter,

Save  thofc  two  champions, in  the  lift  to  enter.

8a

Whenfecond  choifcofweapon  (as  was  fit)

Wasgiv’ii  Rogero  to  avoid  fufpt£f.

Two  Piiefts  before  the  reft  came  forth,to  wit,
Ofeach  fide  cnc,and  one  of  cither  feft.

Each  had  a booke,ourshad  Chrifis  holy  writ,
Then'S  Alcoran, wiih  errours  foulc  infcfl:.

With  ours  came  forth  the  Chrifien  Prince  devout.
With  that  of  thcirs,the  King  of  came  out.

83  •

Now  firft  King  Charles  ncarc  to  his  altar  ftands.

And  this  great  protcftation  there  did  make.

And  lifts  to  heaven  both  heart, and  eyes  and  hands,
O God,0  Cfcriy?,that  fuft'erdft  for  our  fake,

O bicflcd  Ladle, that  in  fwaching  bands,

Hcldft  him  that  mortall  flcfli  oft  bee  did  take.

And  didft  nine  months  inclofc  that  high  divinitie,
infacred  \\ombc,ftill  keeping  true  virginitie*

■’  84

Be  witneflesjt hat  here  I make  it  knowne.

And  promilc  faitlifully  for  mcand  mine,'

To  AgrantantyUnd  whofo  ere  fiiall  ownc
The  ccowacoif  Affiril^e  in  enfuing  time,

T hat  if  my  champion  fliall  be  overthrowne.

To  pay  to  them,eachycare  of  gold  moft  fine.

Ten  l>orfiodc,and  forthwith  the  warresto  ccafe.
And  evermore  hereafter  to  have  peace.


And  if  I faylcjthcn  let  the  fearfiill  wrath
Of  both, on  meat  once  this  folly  wreake.

And  workc  unto  my  led  all  wo  and  fcath,

Thatall  infuing  ages  plainc  may  fpeake,

Loe  what  a pljguc,and  juft  reward  he  hath,

'i  hatdi  rll  his  oth  to  you,  and  promife  bicakci
Tliis  faidjhis  hand  he  laid  upon  the  booke,

And  up  on  heaven  befixt  hisflcdfaft  looke.

86

When  this  was  donCjthen  all  departed  thence.

There  where  the  Tur{s  bad  with  much  fupctflitioil
Adorn’d  their  altar  with  no  fmall  cxpcncc;

And  their  King  Agra/»an/,with  like  condition.
Vow’d  never  after  this,to  do  offence
To  Charles,  But  pafle  thcfcas  with  cxfiedition.

And  ay  keepe  peace,  and  cquall  tribute  pay.

If  that  Rogero  vanquiflit  were  that  day.

And  in  like  fort  he  did  proteft  alowd.

And  cald  on  Malomei, his  Idol  gicat.

And  by  that  booke,  that  his  Pneft  held,he  vow’d
To  keepe  moft  duly  ail  he  did  repeat;

This  done, to  part  from  thence  were  all  allow’d.

And  cither  Prince  retired  to  his  fcatj

Then  in  like  fort  they  fwcaic  the  champions  both,

And  thus  much  in  effeft  containd  their  oth.

88

Rogero  promifethjthat  if  the  fight,

By  Agramant  fliall  be  difturb’d  or  parted.

That  iicvcraftcr  he  will  be  his  Knight,

But  ferve  King  Charles, znd  be  to  him  true  hatred.
Renaldo  in  like  fort  his  faith  doth  plight.

That  if  CO  him, Charles  any  aid  imparted.

Before  that  one  of  them  were  overcome,

That  then  himfelfc  to  Agramant  would  come.

89

Now  when  thefc  ceremonies  all  were  ended.

That  evVie  man  departed  to  his  fide.

And  then  the  warriours  oncly  now  attended.

The  trumpet  sfound,that  battcll  fignifidc5
Which  when  both  hcard,thcn  each  of  them  intended,
To  fliow  thciitmoftofhisvallcw  tridc:

Now  founds  the  ftccic  with  blows,not  few  nor  fofc,
Now  they  themfclvcs,ftrikelow  and  now  aloft,

90

Sometime  they  would  beguile  the  tone  the  tother.

With  mind  unto  their  ftrcngtb,to  ad  their  art.

They  proferatone  placc,and  ftrikeanother.
Invading  ftilJ  the Icafi  defended  part;

But  good  Rogero,thnt  againft  the  brother.

Of  hetdid  fight, thatdid  poflefle  his  hart,

3^id oft  beftow his blows,with  futh regard,

Mofl:  thoiight  Renaldo  was  for  him  too  hard.

91

He  feemed  readier  to  ward  then  ftrike.

For  he  himfclfc  well  knew  not  what  he  menr.

To  kill  Renaldo,xhit  he-did  not  like.

To  dy  himfclfc  that  was  not  his  intent;

But  now  I hope  that  none  will  it  miflike,

Sith  in  this  booke  fo  much  time  hath  benefpent.

And  Icaft  my  tcdioufncfTc  may  fome  raolcft.

In  thisenfuing  booke  to  hcarc  the  reft.

E c 3'  /«


MoiaU.


HiSoric*


Allegory,

/IKifion,


324  THE  XXXVIII.  BOOKE

Jnthe  beginning  of  this  hool^e  is  fit  Jorpnehorv  great  a regard  a man  ought  to  have  of  true  honor  indeed,  namely  to  do
nothing  wherein  it  maybe  juftly  touched : not  at  our  young  gallants  in  the fe  day  es, that  flandupon  their  puntosm  frr-
fingmatters,  havingneither  honor  in  their  heart  s^  nortruth  in  their  mouths.  No  doubt  but  to  a noble  nature  and  di~
^option,  honor  is  the  tendcrefl  thing  that  may  be : And  therefore  it  may  well  of  them  be  [aid:

Ma  j1  honor  chi  niancha  in  vn  momentOj  But  ifthat  honor  have  one  minutes  flainc.

Non  puo  in  cento  anni  fatisfar,nc  in  cento.  An  hundred  ycares  leant  can  it  clenfe  againc.

But  as  in  Religion, the  true  ufage  thereof  is  rt}oft  necejfarytothegood  of  the  foule,but  herefies  and  fuperfiition  be  mofl
damnable;  fo  in  this  define  ofworldly  reputation,  thegoodand  confiderat  regard  thereof,  is  the  mofl  wortlyand  Gentle-
manly thing  that  can  be  ; but  the  vaine  and  frivolous  maintenance  thereof  is  as  ridiculous  and  to  be  fcorned.  For  ex-
ample, imagine  fome  man  fo  chafl,  ( as  CxCsiwas  called)  omnium  muliemm  vir,  or  to  ufe  our  homely  Engltfh  phrafe
(as  the  townc  Bull  of  the  PaiiHi)  fo  true  of  his  word, as  he  that  Hey  wood  writes  of  that  hypt  all  the  commanuements,
and  namely  that  concerningfalfe  witnejfe'.

With  witnefl'efalfe  thou  hurteft  nonCjforwhy,  Each  word  thou  fpak’ftjCach  man  doth  know  a ly.

So  temperat  in  eating  and  drinhjngthat  he  fiirjet  shut  once  aweely,  viz.  fiom  Saterdayto  Saterday;  andendewed
with  0:  her  magnificall  qualities,  as  fwearing  and  gaming,  and  now  and  then  ( of  thegcntlenes  of  his  nature ) not  fcorn-
inga  Banders  occupation. Canyou  marvell  ( I fayfiffuchamanfiandfomewhat  nicely  upon  his  honour, ij  he  he  touched
thereinr  but  the  true  honorable  perfon  indeed,  will  neither  give  jufi  caufeof  offence,  nor  beareany  wrong  or  difgrace ;
andwhofoeverfailes  either  in  t hefrft  ofthefe,]or  want  of  f ay  d government,  or  faints  in  the  later  ofthefe,jor  wayii  of
true  courage,  let  him  hyiow  his  honour goeth  lame  on  one  Irgge,  onely  tie  fnfi  of  thefc  two  may  ms  may  be  cured,  but  the
father  is  caUcda privie  maime,andis  utterly  incurable.

Concerning  the  Orations  of  AgramantjMarfiliOji6t"  Sobrinojfl  man  might  mahy  along,(tF  not  unncceffary  difeourfe
of  the  matter, but  that  I have  tahynupon  me  to  note,and  not  to  difeourfe:  Firfl  therefotein  Agramant  we  may  ohferve
lowyoung  ceuragious  Princes  ( fuch  as  he  is  defenbed  to  have  bin ) are  egged  on  by  t heir  grand  minions  ( to  whom  peace
is  a penance ) to  warre  upon  other  mens  countreys,  and  many  times  leave  their  owne  unguarded ; In  which  lynd,fooles
fometimesgivewifer  ceunfeli  th.nthey.  As  in  the  time  of  that  good  Ring  of  France  bxzneisthe  firfl,  they  report  that
when  he  invaded  Italy, he  confultcdwith  his  com feU,  where  he  werebe/l  to  enter  Lombardy  ; fome  advifwg  one  way,
fome  another,  a foolc  /landing  by,  andhearing  their  confultation,  came  inamong/l  them  and /ware  that  they  were  all
fooks: for  (faith  he)here  is  every  man  that  advifeth  the  Ringhow  to  enter  into  Italy, but  none  ojyou  talys  care  how  he
fha/lget  outagainc:  this  though  accounted  (as  it  was ) hut  afooles  bolt  for  the  time, yet  proved  too  true  afterward:  for
in  thar  journey  the  Ritg  was  tahyn,and  w as  fent  pri finer  to  a Ca/llc  in  Spaine  called  Madrillo.

In  Marfilio  a«^Sobrino,»c  may  ftc  the  qualities  of  agood  counfeller  to  a Prince, emda  bad, one  having  only  a regard
to  his  owne privatyhe  tothcr plaine  and  laithfull,and  carejullforhis  Princes  bc/l  fafetie.  In  that  Sobrino  thegoodand
faithfuU  counfellcr, advifeth  to  maty  an  end  of  the  war  one  rpay  or  other,  either  by  talking  or  paying  tribute,  one  may  ob-
ferve  that  indeed  it  is  no  policy  for  Princes, but  the  utter  ruinc  (3"  beggering  ofthc-ir  Rcalmes,to  prolong  their  wars,  (f"
to  trifle  away  money  time  in  fitch  ferious  caufes,  he  as  uncertain  in  the  end  as  in  the  beginntng.The  faying  of  a no-

ble and  wife  coimceUor  f another  Sobnno^  in  England, is  worthy  ro  be  remembred,  that  with  a prpiy  tale  he  told, utterly
condemned  fuch  Ungring proceedings.  The  talc  was  this,apoorc  widow  ( faid  he ) in  the  country , doubting  her  provifion  of
woodwould  not  lajl  all  the  winter,  andyet  de firing  to  rojt  a joynt  ofmc.%t,and  a hen  one  day  to  welcome  her  fiends ; laid
on  twoflicly  on  the  fire,  but  when  that  wouldnot  /'car fe  heat  it,  fhe  fetched  two  more,  and  foflill  burning  them  out  by
two  and  two  ( whereas  one  fagot  laid  on  at  t he  firfl  would  have  tofleditjfhe  jpentfoure  or  five  fagots  more  then  fhe  nee-
ded ; andyet  when  all  was  done,  her  meat  was  fcorchcd  of  one  fide,  and  raw  of  the  tothcr  fide:  her  fiends  ill  content  with
their  fare,  andJJoe  enforced  ere  winter  went  about , to  borrow  wood  oj  herpoore  neighbours,  becaufefomany  of  her  owne
fagots  were  Jpent.

Ciefus  was  the  Ring  of  Lydia,  who  thought  Mmfelfe  happie  for  his  riches  : hut  Solon  was  of  another  opinion,  anct
therefore  thought  ajoole  by  him,  ti/lintheendCseius  beingbound  at  aflaly,  tobcburnedbyhisv'.clorioxsenemy,hc
cryed  out  on  the  name  0/ Solon,  and  through  that  thicly  and  darly  fnol^  he  could fee  that  wifedomc,  which  before  his
eyes  da\ledwith  faolijh  worldly fclicitie  could  not  fee.

Cralfus  called  afi  the  rich  CrafluSjfl  Citii^en  of  Rome,  his  fayingwas,  that  no  manwas  rich  that  couldnot  with  his
hare  revenue  maintaine  a Royall  army : which  iJ  it  be  a true  faying,  / doubt  whether  any  Prince  Chri/lened  at  this  day
Joe  rich.  C raflus  in  reproch  oj  his  covetoufneffe,  had  molten  gold  poured  into  his  mouth  by  the  Parthians,who  tooly  him
prifoner  and  flew  him.  Cambifes  fonne  of  Cyrus  Ring  of  Perfia  having  conquered  Egypt,  invadedthe  Ammonians
with  a great  army, hut  for  wantofvUfuals  was  forced  to  give  over  his  enterpri/e. Further  he  fent  an  army  before  him  of
fifty  thou  (and  men,  with  commandement  to  defiroy  the  Temple  of  la  finer  Amon,  andthey  cntringthedefcrtsofthat
country  were  never  feene  againc,fo  as  it  was  thought  that  while  they  fate  at  dinner  in  the  field, a furious  S'oiitherne  wind
rayfed fuch  fore  ofduftandfand,  as  overwhelmed  them  andquite  covered  them.

Jnthe  miracles  done  by  Aftolfo,  is  ment  AUegorically,  that  amanguidedbyverlue,  and  afftfled  by  grace,  mahys  all
Jfinde  of  creatures  to ferve  his  turne.

His  turning  off  ones  to  horfes,  alludes  to  the  lily  thing  in  Ovids  Metamorphofis,  where  Prometheus  and  Epime-
theus  made  men  of fiones.  Inc]ue  bicvi  fpaciofupcrorumnumine  faxa,
lafta  viri manibusfaciem  traxerc  virorum,

Et de  fcemineorcparata  eft  focmina  jaftu.

In  his  talking  the  Soutbernewinde  inabagge,  it  alludes  to  alily  thinginEiomersOAytCezs  o/VlifleSj/h^rf  had  the
•xi'indi  houndin  abagge ,andfome  fay ,fhc Sorcerers  ncare  the  North fea,  ufe  to  fed  thewinde  to  faylers  inglaffes,  and
it  is  fo  common  among  them, that  they  will  laugh  as  muih  at  thofe  that  bcleeve  it  not,  as  we  would  be  to  heare  one  ted  it.

The  end  of  the  annotations  upon  the  3 8.  Bookc.


<16


THE  XXXIX.  BOOKE.


-


King  Agramant  (^reakes  oth,and  U cenJlrAtned^
Vnto  ills  native  foile  by Jea  to flye, .
ff^htre  then  Aftolfo  many  torencs  had  gained^
zyfnd at  Bifcrca  jiegeoithendid  lyei
Orlando  thither  commeth/nadly  brained,

Bm  ffe’EngliHi  Duke  did  cure  him  by  and  by  :
Brave  Dudon,  mith  his  navie  made  of  leaves^
Olfeets  Agramant f and  hotly  him  receives.


jHattonguccan  tell,  or
learned  pen  expreffe
The  woes, to  which  Roge~
ro  now  did  lunnc?

In  mind,and  body, driven
to  fuch  diftrefTc,

That  of  two  deaths,  the
tone  he  cannot  fliun:

If  he  be  Haine,aud  i f he
kill  no  lefle,

Both  wayes  he  fees  he  fhall  be  quite  undonnej
By  Hiamc  in  death,  and  if  he  win  and  live.

By  that  offence  he  fliall  his  true  love  give  •

2

Rtntid},  The  tothcr  Knight  whom  no  fuch  thought  ecncombrcd
Lets  frankly  fly  his  blows  withoutregard,

Tn  fb  great  flore  as  was  not  to  be  numbred.

No  time,  no  place,  nor  no  .advantage  fpard.*

Rogero  feem’d  to  him^asif  he  flumbred.

Small  lifl  he  had  to  flrikc.but  all  to  ward.

And  if  he  did, in  fuch  a place  he  Brake,

His  blow  great  (bund, but  little  figne  did  make.

The  Fagan  Lords  now  doubt  it  will  go  wrong.

They  fee  the  combat  fo  unequall  grow,

Retu-ildo  feem’d  too  luftic  and  too  ftrong,
Rogerofecm'6  too  lafic  and  too  flow.

Buty^^r^xmnf  that  fate  the  reft  among.

Doth  fret,and  fume, and  chafe,and  fwcat,  and  blow.
Doth  blame Sobrino  chiefly,  whofc  pcrfwaflon.

Was  of  this  combat  chiefe  and  foie  occaflon.

4

iUliJfa,  This  while  Mdijfa  ragc,whofc  skill  wasgreat

In  Magicke  art,repaired  to  the  place.


And  with  fome  fecrct  words  Are  did  repeat.

She  chang’d  her  voice,hcr  flature,  and  her  face.

In  mind  hereby  to  workc  a wondrous fcatj
She  feetn’d  all  armed  in  a Dragonscafe,

In  fword,in  fliicld,in  fliewjinev’ric  thing.

She  feemed  Rodomont  the  Sar\an  King.

5

To  wofull  flic  ftraight  doth  ride,

( I n likenefle  of  an  horfe,flie  rede  a fpritc)

And  comming  to  his  picfcncc,Iowd  Ihecride,

(My  Licgej  thiswastoofowleanoverfight,

*1  o match  a bcardlcflc  boy  fo  meanly  tridc.

With  fuch  a famous  and  renowned  Knight,
Aiidchicfcin  mattertbat  imports  fo  much,

Asdotb  the  whole eftate  of  Ajfncke  tuch.

6

wherefore  that  you  in  time  this  lofle  may  fare.

Permit  thccombat  to  proceed  no  more.

Let  Rodomont  the  blame  and  blemifh  have.

Of  breaking  that,whichyou  fo  raflily  fwoicj
Now  each  man  fhew  how  well  his  fword  can  fliare.
Now  I am  hcrc,cach  man  is  worth  a fcore.
Thefewords  in  Agramant  had  fo  much  force.

That  without  more  advice,  heftraight  tookc  horfe.

7

And  thinking furc  fierce  Rodomont  wastheare.
Forthwith  the  Chriflens  holl  hedoth invade.

Of  oth  nor  promife  he  hath  now  no  feare.

This  one  mans  prcfcncehim  fo  bold  had  madet
Bach  man  doth  in  a moment  couch  his  fpeare,
Orcharge his pikc.or draw  hisglittcring blade;
Melijfi  having  fet  them  thus  togii her.

With  thisilluL'on  raniflit  (God  knows  whither.)

The


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


3»7


SimiUt


Uivwttmaf
ht  I'oOk'ltd^
•r  hunun,

hictufiht
was  a actabU
bsmiJnsoM.


Thf  two  flout  chair  pions  when  they  plainly  faw.

Their  combat,that  all  quanell  fliould  defeide,
Dillurb’d  agaiiiil  allpromife,and  all  law.

They  ceafe  allforcc,and  lay  all  wrath  afidc.

And  by  conrent,themfclvcsthey  do  withdraw,
Vntill  it  might  more  plainly  bedefende.

In  whether  Prince  of  faith  were  found  fuch  want;

In  aged  Charles, ot  youthfull  Jgramant.

9

And  each  of  them  of  new  doth  vow  and  fweare.

That  unto  him  that  firft  did  ccv’nant  bieake.

They  w ill  for  ever  endleflc  hatred  beare,

A nd  joy ne  together  fuch  offence  to  wreakc;

The  whilethe  hoftsof  neither  fideforbearc
To  make  quickctriall  who  beftrongor  weake.

For  lightly  at  the  firft  confliil  they  fhoe.

Their  hearts  if  they  be  refolutc  or  no.

lO

Even  as  a grewnd  which  hunters  hold  in  flip.

Doth  ftriveto  breake  the  firing, or  flidcthecollcr,
(That  fee*  the  fearful!  Dearr,Scfore  him  skip,
Putfewd  belike  with  fomc  A£l^ons  fchollcr)

And  wlwn  he  fees  he  can  by  nomeanesflip.

Doth  howle, and  whine, and  bites  the  firing  foicholei
In  fuch  like  cafe  wirbin  thetentsdid  flay,

Marfija  with  dame  Braiamant  that  day.

1 1

All  that  fame  day  unto  that  prefent  howre.

They  had  beheld  with  great  defpitcand  paine.

Such  tempting  baites,yerhad  they  not  thcpowrc,
Tofcttheir  foote  in  that  foi  bidden  plainer
But  now  they  do  the  field  on  each  fide  Aowre,
Though  erft  for  duties  fake  they  did  abflainc.

Now  firdint?  fneh  a true  and  juft  cxcufe.

That  Agramant  had  lewdly  broke  the  trufc.


*5


Simiit,


viai

v<  fira/i  I*
fa*  flrivnt
which  (hoi
gtfajitr.


ran  the  firft  quite  through  the  breft.

And  made  the  fpcaie  come  forth  a yaid  behind}
Then  with  crfwordflie  fliesamongthcreft.
There  chiefe  where  moft  ref  fiance  fliedothflndc;
And  Bi adamant  puts  Goldilance  in  reft.

With  like  cfFcdis,  but  of  another  kind,

For  all  (he  toucht  therewith  flic  overthrew,

And  yet  not  one  among  them  all  flic  flew.

Thus  thefe  two  warriours  ever  as  they  went,
Subdewd  their  cnemies.and  kept  them  under,
"Who  ever  met  them  furely  fliould  be  flient,

A nd  each  ofthem  at  tothers  force  did  wonder;

But  being  both  to  fliarpc  revengement  bent.

At  la  ft  they  part  thcmfelves,  and  wentafunder.
Each  by  her  felfe,fuch  high  exploits  performing.
As  gave  the  Turl^s  long  after  caufe  of  mouining.

14

As  when  theSoutherne  winds  do  melt  the  fnow,
Congcald  on  tops  of  mountaiaes  many  dayes.

It  often  happens  that  two  flreatrcsdoflow.

And  taking  in  their  courfc, two  fundnewayes.

At  la  ft  fo  violent  and  furious  grow.

That  bearing  downc, and  breaking  ufuall  bayes.
They  waft  the  fieldi,aad  feeme  on  vyc  to  runac.

By  which  of  them  raoft  damage  may  be  donne.


Ev*n  fo  thefe  twaine,inccnft  withrageand  wrath,  i
And  each  in  fev’rall  afls  their  forces  trying.

Do  worker  he  Turlis^no  little  woe  and  Icatb,

A nd  leave  them  ovcrthrownc,or  maymd^or  dying;
Scatfc  Agramant  the  pnwrc  by  this  time  hath,

(Say  what  he  lift)  to  keepe  his  men  from  flying,
Himfelfc  not  fhrinking  though, nor  onccrctiiing,
Buccvcrmorc  (osRodsmont  enquirmg,

|6

By  oncly  his  advife  and  exhortation,

(For  fo  the  unadvifed  prince  doth  thinkc)

He  broken  had  his  (olemne  proteftation.

He  marvelt  now,to  find  him  to  to  flninkc;

Like  wife  Sobrino  with  great  lamentation,

(Religion  in  his  mindlo  deepe  did  fluke)

Rctyid  to>dr^,cvcrmorc  protcfting)

His  faultlcflc  mind,tbat  perjurie  dctcfting.  ! •

eke  unto  his  countrie  fled.

The  fliamefull  promife  breach  of  Agramant  j
Strakc  in  his  mind  fuch  (upci  ftitious  dred,

Heleaveth  him  to  beare  the  brunt,  who  fcant
Againft  the  Chi  idea  fouldiers  could  make  hedt
That  nofiippliesof  forren  powresdid  want.

With  PaUadines  among  them  fierce  and  bold,

Mixt  like  rich  gemmes  in  faire  etubrodetd  gold.

1 i

But  now  a while  I linquifli  thisconfii^

And  paftc  beyond  the  Teas  without  a barke.

For  to  this  tale  1 am  not  tyde  fo  ftrid.

But  that  1 will  repeat  (if you  willharkc)

Aflolfos  a£ls,who  forward  dayly  prickt.

With  new  made  horfcmcn.as  (ifyou  did  marke)

I told  you  crftjand  did  all  Affrilie  waft,

Vntill  three  Kings  refiftrd  him  at  laft.

19

The  King  of  A'ga\er, and  flout  Branfari,

Did  levy  powrcs,fuch  as  in  haft  they  could.

And  put  them  all  in  armes  without  regard.

That  fomc  too  young  were  found  and  fomc  too  olJj
Yea  from  the  iruftets, women  fcant  wcrcfpar*d.

For  Agramant  (as  hath  before  bene  told)

With  hope  of  vainc  rcvcngc,without  advife,

Of  able  men,unpcoplcd  Affril^e  t wife.

20

Thus  few  were  thcrc,and  of  thofc  few  were  theare,

(So  quite  his  countrie  wcalc  he  did  ncgle^l)

The  greater  part  unskilftdl,.irmcs  to  beare.

As  was  more  plaiiJy  proved  in  cffc£l.

For  at  firft  brunt  they  fled  from  thciKcforfcare,

In  hope  B’ferta  walls  (hould  them  pre-teft:

Brave  Bueijer  was  taken  in  the  fighr,

Branjardo  fcaptjindfit*d  himfclfc  by  Sight*

2 I

For  Bucifer  alone,he  tookc  moregriefe.

Then  all  the  rcft(hcdid  him  fo  cftccme)  •

Bccaufr  Btferta  asked  great  rclicfe,  ^

For  which  this  moft  fit  did  feeme.

Who  was  in  all  thofc  parts  ofcrcdit  chicfc}

Wherefore  Branfardo  faine  would  him  redeeme,'

He  many  wayesdoth  caft,but  noncconcludeoa.

Till  at  (be  laft  he  did  ;cmembc;

Tki#


Simik,


He  twMotti

w^gramaul
iutbu  ioo^i

tke6s^,^Uf€^


-ll


3*8


THE  XXXIX.  BOOKE


22


This  “Dudon  wai  bj  blood  and  birtb  a Dane,

But  yet  cftcemd  the  Fallaiins  among.

He  lately  at  the  Bridge  was  prifner  tane,

Where  Rodmont  the  Hurdle  Turkc  and  flrong.
Brought  many  worthy  men  unto  their  bane:

To  AfFrike  Dudon  then  he  Tent  ere  long.

Now  Branfard  thinkes  (nor  was  histhought  amiflc)
Stout  Bucifer  by  change  to  get  for  this.

23

He  perfcfl  notice  had,by  one  efpiall,

The  Nubians  leader  was  an  Englijb  Lord,

“ Wholovea2)(iae  (there  can  bcnodcniall)

^ And  once  were  Danes, as  writersdo  record.*
Wherefore  he  fends  a melicnger  for  triall
Vnto  AfiolfOj  who  doth  (bone  accord.

To  free  his  kinfman,  whom  he  lov*d  fo  dearly.

And  joyned  was  in  blood  to  him  fo  nearly.

24

Thus  Dudon  by  the  Englijb  Duke  was  freed.

Who  afterward  hisfciTicedid  employ.

Now  (as  Saint  lohn  had  wild  him  to  proceed)

He  fought  to  worke  the  T url^s  (bme  more  annoy}
And  that  he  might  fct  Provence  free  with  fpecd.
Which  Agramant  and  his  did  then  enjoy,

He  maketb  of  his  men  a new  eleftion.

Whom  he  may  fend  to  free  them  from  fubje^ioat

25

And  having  choicn  forth  fome  men  of  thefe.

As  beft  from  his  huge  arraie  might  be  mift,

Whofe  number  was  fo  great,a$  heat  ealc
With  halfeofthem  three  Affric}{S  might  reddj
He  caus’d  thetti  to  be  trained  for  the  (eas.

And  prayingGod  his  purpofctoadlft.

That  night  was  fliew’d  AJlolfo  in  a vidon.

How  he  of  (hips  might  make  a large  provifion*

26

Next  day  the  weather  being  faire  and  calme,

Aftoljo  walkcth  to  the  fait  fca  fiiorc.

And  holding  in  his  hands  in  either  palmc.

Great  ftore  of  leaves  that  he  had  tane  befortf
Of  Bayes, of  Cedar  trees,  of  Oke,of  Palme,

Into  the  fea  he  flang  them  in  great  ftorcj
O metamorphofis  beyond  all  credit,

O admirable  powre  divine  that  bred  it !

27

No  (boner  had  the  water  wet  the  leaves.

But  prefently  they  chang'd  their  former  hue.

The  veinesthat  were  in  them,each  man  paceaves
To  grow  to  ribs  and  polls  in  orderdue.

And  (lill  at  each  end  (harp  each  leafe  receaves,
Ev’nof  a failing  (hip  proportion  mte:

And  of  the  (hips  at  many  (brts  there  weare.

As  there  were  trees  that  tho(c  fame  leaves  did  bcare.


29


n«[itvo

lUndt  b4*t
9«r*»/^§4d
'diUrt,


2i

A miracle  it  was  to  fee  them  growne

To  (hips  and  barks,with  gallies.bulksand  crayes.
Each  vellcll  having  tackling  of  tbeirowne.

With  failes  and  oares  to  heipe  at  all  alTayes.

The  Duke  provided,  when  it  once  was  knowne^
Both  marriners  and  maftersin  few  dayes.

For  with  his  prefent  pay  he  (bone  allured
TxomSardznd  Corfte  menxo  feat  inured*


Tho(c  that  take  (hipping  then, were  counted  more
Then  fix  and  twentie  thoufand  (Irong  of  hand
Great  Admirall  was  Dudon, who  before  *
Had  Icarnd  the  fcrvice  both  of  fea  and  land;

Now  while  they  lay  at  anker  nigh  the  (hore.

To  wait  when  wind  would  for  their  purpo(e  (land
It  fortuned  a man  of  warrecame  by  them,  *

Full  lode  with  ptifners,aod  call  anker  nic  them.

30

Thefe  were  thofe  prifners  whom  fierce  Rodomount,

( As  oft  I hsTC  dccljr  diddiilygct^

When  at  the  bridge  he  did  them  fo  difmount.

And  fometime  backward  in  the  river  fct;

Here  were  (among  fome  more  of  good  account)
Brave  Brandimart  and  worthy  San fonet.

With  Oliver, and  fome  I now  not  tutch.

Both  French, Italianfiafcoigne  Knights  and  Dutch.

3 1

The  maflcr  of  the  barke  had  firft  alfign’d.

His  prifoners  at  Atgier  to  unlodc.

But  beingdriv’n  by  overblowing  wind,

Farre  paft  the  place, he  thought  to  make  abode
Nearc  great  Biferta,  where  he  thinks  to  find
None  but  his  countrimen  within  the  rode-
T o which  he  thinks  himfelfe  as  welcome  sued.

As  Progne  is  unto  her  chirping  ncH.

3*

But  after,when  th'Imperiall  bird  he  faw,

ConjoynedtotheP ardaad  (lowrc  of  France,
Hewasaba(ht,and  looked  pale  for  aw.

Much  like  to  him  that  waking  new,  doth  chance
On  poifond  ferpent  trcd,and  faine  would  draw
Himlclfe  from  thence, for  feare  of  more  mifchancC}
He  quaJccs,and  from  the (crpent  doth  retire,

Whofe  poifon  fwels,  and  eyes  do  flame  like  firC*

33

But  now  the  wretched  Pilot  could  not  flic.

And  IclTc  could  kcepe  the  prifners  he  had  caught.
For  both  himfclfc^nd  all  they  by  and  by,

Vnto  the  placeagainft  bis  will  were  brought.
Whereas  the  Duke  and  Dudon  then  did  lie.

Who  welcom’d  well  the  Cbrijlens  as  they  ought.
And  be  that  brought  them  thithcr,for  his  paincs.
Was  made  a gaily  fla  ve,and  bound  in  chaines.
id-

Thus  were  the  Knights  mo(l  frcndly  entertained.

And  greatly  welcomed  by  Otons  fonne.

Who  hor(c  and  furniturefor  them  ordained.

And  caus’d  to  them  great  honor  to  be  donne:

Eke  Dudon  with  the(e  Knights  fome  days  remained.
And  thinks  the  time  fofpent.not  loft  but  wonnc:

His  journey  purpolcly  three  dayes  deferring.

To  (pend  the  fame  with  thc(c  brave  knights  confer-
3 5 (ring*

By  their  relation  he  doth  underftand.

In  what  cftateKing  Charles  and  th’empire  ftood.
What  arc  the  hav*ns,where  he  may  (afely  land.

And  where  thev  thought  f fame  would  be  withftood.
Thus  while  difcreetly  on  each  point  they  (candj
And  each  man  told  what  he  thought  ill  or  good.
There  fuddenly  rofe  in  the  campe  alarme.

The  caufi:  unknowa«biu  ech  man  cride,arme,armc.

The


Similt,


Simitt:
9'trfil.  tm:
frvvifirm
dffn-vtlmd
f w fintthm


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.'


ViadtUtit,


6vHjU  fie-

flu.  De^ut
%mi  ttOa
iulet  ptftt-
mm-


Tlic  Duke  A/lol  o with  his  noble  crew,

Thatat  that  time  conferring  were  together.

Straight  arm’d  thcmfelves,and  out  their  (words  thej
^nd  went  enquiring  hither  flill  and  thither,  (dicw
T o learne  of  whence  thisfudden  tumnlt  grew,
Biityet  nocaulc  they  couldfufpcft  orgether,

At  lail  they  faw  a madman  (iarc  and  (lampc.

That  nak’t  alone  did  trouble  all  thccampc.

37

Thofe  that  had  fcenc  him  fii  ft  belike  did  flout  hint.

But  when  feme  few  unto  thcii  coft  had  found,

That  with  a bat  he  lb  did  play  about  him.

His  blowcs  mademany  fall  in  deadly  found:

They  now  began  fo  much  to  dread  and  doubt  him.
That  they  hadgit’n  to  him  no  little  ground.

And  none  of  them  to  meet  him  bad  the  harts-.

They  oncly  ftiot  at  him,orcaftfomc  darts.

The  noble  Duke,and  thole  with  him  did  fee.

The  wondrous  force  and  moft  ftupcpdious  wracke.
The  madman  wrought,  and  marveld  much  that  he
Alone  could  drive  fo  many  fouldicrs  backc:

When  lo,a  Ladie  of  no  meanc  degree,

Rode  towards  them  atty  red  all  in  blacke,

And  unto  Brandimart  flic  came  in  haft.

And  clafpt  her  arms  a bout  bis  neckc  full  faft.

$9

I know  you  know, without  my  further  fhow'i.ng.

This  was  the  fpoufe  of  noble  Brandimarty
Who  ever  fince  his  wofull  overthrowing.

By  Rodomont,  did  with  a penf  ve  hart,

Seeke  his  releafe,till  at  the  laft  fheknowing,

(As  I before  did  more  at  large  impart)

How  he  beyond  the  feas  was  prifner  fent,

Hcrfclfc  at  Arly  to  take  ftiipping  ment-

40

But  while  that  loving  purpofefhc  purfewth,

B-irdino  met  with  her,an  Eafternc  Knight,

Who  brought  up  Bra»dimarr  in  tendcryouth.

And  kept  him  at  a Caftell  (Silvan  higbt)

He  hearing  at  her  mouth  at  large  the  truth.

And  how  in  tea  they  find  him  might,

They  foone  agreed, no  long  time  overflipping,

T o (ecke  him  out  and  fo  forthwith  tookc  fliippiDg*

41

^olboner  they  on  Aff'ril^e  ftiorcdid  land,

(Bardimo  fage,  and  (atthfull  Fiordeliege)

But  firft  the  people  let  t hem  undetftand,

A/i olfa  great  Biferta  did  befiege,  '

With  many  a Caprainc  brave,and  gallant  band;
Likewife  a brute  of  Brandimart  their  liege
Wasfprcd,that  he  was  there  arived  newly.

But  none  wasable  to  confiimc  it  ttuly.

41

ntill  lb  long  they  traveld  on  the  coft.

At  laft  flic  found  and  fa  whim  with  her  eyes.

Among  thofe  Lords, amid  the  Nubian  hoft.

With  which  fuch  joy  did  in  her  thoughts  anfe.

As  vitall  fprites  did  faile  in  hei  almoft,

Norany  word  to  fpeake  could  flic  devife.

But  bang’d  about  hitnecke  a burden  fweet.

And  he  aslovingly  his  Ipoufc  did  greet.


32?

Full  glad  was  he  to  fee  her,and  as  glad
1 o(cc  hisancicnt  tutorand  his fnend.

And  further  lalkc  with  them  he  would  have  had.

But  he  was  forft  to  make  a fpecdic  end.

By  meanes  the  man  that  naked  tan  and  mad.

Did  keepc  fuch  rule  as  did  them  all  offend.

Fa-re  Fiordeliege  that  looktwitheyc  more  curious,
Clide, ab  my  deaic,this  is  Orlando  f^urious.

44

^y7o//b  eke  when  as  he  did  behold  him,

And  faw  how  madly  he  about  did  range.

And  no  mandurft  him  meet,  nor  none  could  hold
He  wonderd  greatly  at  the  fight  fo  ftrange,  (him,
And  by  the  marks  that  erft  S./ofc»had  told  him.

He  knew  it  was  the  man;  but  fuch  .i  change
There  was  in  all  his  fliapcjtrom  top  toioc,

He  rather  feemd  a bcaft,more  then  a man  in  fliow*

4>

Aflolfo  ftralghtdidcall  unto  the  reft.

And  faid  my  Lords, this  man  that  you  had  vewd,
Orlando  \s- at  this  thcmftlves  they  blcft.

And  e v’ric  one  his  wofull  pickle  1 cwdi
Well  (faid  thcDukc)  to  hcipcourfricnd  isbeft,

A nd  not  to  way  Icjand  t hcrcfoic  to  conclude.

Come  joyne  your  force  to  mine,  and  let  ustakc  him
And  1 do  hope  ere  long  lie  fober  make  him.

46

To  this  they  foone  affent,and  B-andimart,

With  Sanfontt  and  Oliiero  jolly.

And  7)udonclc^d  him  round,oncv’rieparfj
But  he  as  full  of  ftrcngth,as  foolc  of  folly.

At  Dudon  ftrake,and  fare  the  blow  in  part  *

Was  broke  by  Oliver,  and  fell  not  wholy
On  2?ud«»,fure  I thinkc  that  ftaftc  accurft.

His  fhicld,his  hcadpccce,hcad  and  all  had  burfl^

47

His  fliield  it  brake,and  thuaderd  on  hisfeuil.

That  noble  ’Dudon  thcrewitball  fclJ  back^.

But  Sanfonet  ftrakc  with  his  fword  fb  full.

That  of  the  ftaffc  three  yards  he  made  him  lacke:
Now  Brandimart  thinks  backward  him  to  pull.

And  leaps  bchind,a  pick  pack,  on  his  backc.

And  holds  his  armcs.'t  he  Duke  doth  then  derife,

To  hold  his  lcgs,and  Oliver  his  thyes.

48

Orlando  fliakes  himfclfe,and  with  a fprihg,

Ten  paces  off, the  Englifb  Duke  he  caft.

But  Brandimart  from  him  he  could  nocfling>

That  was  behind  him,and  did  hold  hirnfaft^

But  yet  with  0/trer  be  waste  bring.

For  with  his  fid  hefmotchimashepaft,
Thatdownc  he  fcll,and  hardly  fcaped  killing.

From  inouth,nofc,eyes,tlic  bloud  apace  diftillioj’

49

Ofheadpecce  ftrong  he  ntfver  had  mere  need.

For  furc  he  could  not  have  cfcaped  death.

Except  it  had  a good  one  bene  indeed.

This  while  Afiolfernovr  had  taken  breath.

And  Dudon  both  who  late  for  wantof  heed.

Were  by  Orfonda  tumbled  on  the  heath.

With  Sanfmetithtt  pai*d  his  ftaffc  lb  wcU,

All  tbefc  at  once  upon  OrUndo  fell.

Good


35®


THE  XXXIX.  BOOKE


so

Good  ‘Dudon  thatenderors  him  tocaft.

With  Brandimart.ihout  his  Hiouldeis  hangSj
Aftolfo  and  the  reft  hisarmsJioid  faftj
He  fecks  to  loofc  himfclfc  with  fuddcn  pangs;
iimilt*  Who  fo  hath  fcenc  a Bull  with  maliivcs  chad.

That  in  his  cares  hare  fixt  their  crucll  fangs.

How  he  doth  runne,and  rore,andwith  him  bcarcs
T he  eager  doggs,that  ftili  hold  faft  his  cares.

SI

Let  him  imagine  that  Orlando  now,

Infuchforc  drew  thewarriours  on  the  plainer
But  Oliver,  that  had  the  broken  brow,

Againe  on  foote  rccovcrd  up  againc.

Did  call  within  his  mind  a realon  how.

To  do  with  cafcjthat  they  did  fccke  with  painei
He  doth  bethinke  a way, that  will  not  miuc.  •

To  do  the  feat.and  his  device  was  this.

5i

Maulftrtm  Full  many  a halfer,and  full  many  a cord,

Ung  roft  With  Aiding  knots  all  knit  he  doth  provide,

^^gg*  armesof  this  mad  Lord,

Jbifi  ttUni,  Hcmadcthcmonthcfuddcntobetydc-,

, And  then  their  end  son  each  fide  by  accord.

They  allofthcniamongAthemfclrcsdcvide,

Thus  were  thofc  Princes  fainc  to  do  unto  him,
Simik,  As  Smiths  do  to  an  oxe,when  they  do  (hoe  him.

53

Then  fell  thcy.on  him  when  he  lay  on  ground,  ' '
And  then  they  bind  him  furc,both  hand  and  footet
Orlandavfhcn  hcfclt  himfclfc  thus  bound,

/Doth  Alive  in  vaine,for  Aiiving  will  not  bootc.

that  doth  mcanc  to  make  him  (bund,  '

And  faw  his  skin  Inokc  blacke  as  any  (bote,
Rec^ueAcd  them  unto  the  (liorcrobearc  him.

Which  foone  was  done,  for  now  they  need  not  fcare

54  (him.

Then  feav’n  times  was  he  wa(hed'in  the  place.

And  fcav’n  timesdipped  over  cares  and  hed.

To  get  thc(cur(r  from  of  his  skin  and  face.

Which  with  his  naked  going  had  bene  brcdi
Then  with  feme  hcibs,the  Duke  gat  m this  fpace.

He  made  them  Aop  his  mouth, for  why  he  fed,
Forcerraine  fecrctrcafbns  that  he  knowes,

He  mu  A not  fetch  his  breath  bnt  at  hisno(e.

Thenkncclingdewneas  ifheasktfbmcboonc
Of Godjor  fomc  great  Saint, that  pot  he  brought.
Which  he  had  carridefrom  beyond  tbcMoonc^
TheIarrc,inwhichOr/<i»dof  wit  was  caught,  '

And  clos’d  it  to  bisnoArills,and  eftfoone,  .•  i;i
He  drawing'breath,  thismiracle  was  wroughtjj  •

The  larrc  was  void,and  empty’d  ev’ric  whit,  .1 '

And  he  rcAord  unto  his  per  Arfl  wit.  ? f;r;

5«

SimiU,  Afonethatin  fomedreamcorfeaifullTifiotr,

Hath  dreamt  ofmonArous  bcaAs,and  ugly  fenda
Is  troubled  when  he  wakes  whh  fupcrAition,  ^

And  fcarcth  what  (bch  ugly  fght  intends.

And  lying  wake,thinksof  thatapparition.

And  long  time  after  in  that  fancie  fpendi;

So  now  Or/ando  lay, not  little  muAng,

At  this  his  prefetn  ftate,aad  uncouth  uAog.

■ V


57

He  holds  his  pcacc,but  lifting  up  his  eyes.

He  fees  his  ancient  frends  King  Brandmart^

And  O/mr, and  him  that  made  him  wile.

All  whom  he  kncw,and  loved  from  his  hart;

He  thinks, but  canv.ot  with  him(clfc  devife.

How  he  (liould  come  to  play  fo  mad  a part.

He  wonders  he  is  nak*r,  and  that  he  fccles
Such  Acre  of  cords  about  his  hands  and  hcelcs.

At  laA  he  faid^as  erA  Sileno  fajd.

To  thofc  that  tookc  him  napping  in  the  cave,
Solvile  me:  with  countenance  fo  Aayd,

And  with  a chcaic  fo  (ober  and  (o  grave.

That  they  unloofcd  him,as  he  them  prayde,

A nd  fufferd  him  his  liberty  to  have.

And  clothed  him,  and  comforted  his(adne(Ic,

T hat  he  conceived  of  bis  former  mad  ociTc.

Thus  being  to  his  former  w its  rcAord,

He  was hkewife  delivered  cleancfrcm  Ibvcj
The  Ladie  whom  he  crAfo  much  adord.

And  did  cAecme  all  caithly  joyes  above.

Now  he  dcfpifdc,yca  rather  quite  abhordf!

Now  oncly  he  applies  bis  wits  to  prove,

1 hat  fame  and  former  glory  to  recover.

Which  he  bad  loA,the  while  be  was  a lover.

60

This  while  Bard/no  told  to  Brandimart,

How  that  his  faihcT  Mono dant  was  dead.

And  how  his  brother  Gylyant  on  the  part
Ofall  that  thofc  EaA  lies  inhabited.

Him  fern  of  purpofe  thefc  news  to  impart.

And  pray  him  (as  hcougbt)tobetheirhcad:

Sith  all  the  world  had  not  a Rcalmemorcwcalthy^
Nor  any  Prince  could  wiAi  a fcatc  more  healthy.

61

Wherefore  (faith  hc)deare  fir, it  is  moA  meet ,

T hat  you  (h  ould  now  rcpaiic  to  your  ownc  home,
F6(  home  though  homely  twcre,yctisit  fwcet.

And  native  (bile  IS  bcA;  you  would  not  romc
About  ibe  world, did  you  once  taA  and  fcc’t.

Thus  much  he  faid,buc  Brandimart  in  whomc
True  love  and  great  renown  were  bands  more  Arong
Thenprivat  pro(it,anfwcrd  thiscrclong.

62

^ly  brothers  mclTagCjand  your  frendly  paine
I kindly  take,  but  lo;my  word  is  pa(l.

With  Charles  and  with  Or/<*»do  to  remainc.

And  them  to  ferve  while  thefc  garboylcs  do  laA;
Now  ininy  Accd,l  willmy  brother  raigne.

Let  him  bcmyvicc-roy,andIwillhaA,

When  oa«:  the(c  wanes  arc  at  a finall  end,

T o comc,and  thcre.my  life  with  them  to  fpend.

6J

Thus  thefc  did  part,  and  ncxtenfiiing  day.

Went  DudOn  with  his  Acet  to  Provence  ward,  •
Orlando  with  the  Britifh  Prince  doth  Aay;

And  whCnthe  Aatcofthofcfamcwarrcshchard,
Vnto  Biferta  Araight  a fiege  they  lay.

But  cvctmoic  Or/nndo  had  regard ,

That  (as  Aftolfo  follow’d  his  ad  vife)

To  give  him  th'honoc  of  each  cutcrprilo*


furtt.


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


33t


Blit  ^ow  they  did  ilicgrcat  B'-ferTawln,

Hi  fdi  if  allauheJ  it, and  on  which  /idcj

atthc fiirtaflau!t,thcincn  within
n At  Did  y{cld,and  diiitt  no  longer  trjall  byde,

lUt  ii  i-tlJi,  1 cannot  farther  now  proceed  hcicin.

But  muft  dcfcrrc  it  to  anothertyde; '

Now  I do  purpofc  unto  you  to  fliovr.

How  Jgram.'int  receiv’d  an  overthrow.

6s

Who  was  wcinyc  abandond  of  his  men,

Ev*n  in  the  very  furic  of  the  fight.

For  why  Murfilio  and  Sobrino  then
VVere  gonc,tn  mindc  to  favc  theinfelvcs  by  flighty
In  walled  towncsthey  fcaid  thcmfclvestopen,.
But  went  to  fca  with  all  the  haft  they  miglit,
iH  nd  iTiany  Princes  of  t he  7" url^'Jh  trayne,
Thclamplcfallow  giv’n  them  by  thcletwayne,
66

Yet  Jgramant  did  bearc  it  out  a fpace.

But  when  he  faw  there  was  no  other  fhifr,

1 hen  from  his  enemies  he  turnd  his  face.

To  get  into  the  tow ne  was  all  his  drift;.

H im  Biadamant  putfew’d  a wondrous  pace.

Still  fporring  Rabican,thit  ran  full  fwift.

She  wifli  t upon  his  corps  to  venge  the  wrong.

In  keeping  of  her  dcare  from  her  fo  long.

67

On  tother  fide  rode  as  faft.

To  venge  though  latCjher  fathers  wofuH  end.

She  makes  her  horfc  to  fccle  fh  c is  in  haft,

But  each  of  them  doth  mifi'e  that  they  intend;

He  got  within  the  gates  and  made  them  faft.

And  then  tofea  he  doth  bimfclfc  commend.

He  fees  he  was  not  able  to  withftand.

The  forces  of  his  enemies  by  land.


71

Twat  infinite  the  number  that  was  fiaine,

In  this  fame  Jaft  confliift,  nor  fewer  drownd.

While  they  attempted  defpratly  in  vainc.

To  pafle  the  ftrcame,fo  biode  and  io profound;

Of  which  great  flaughtci  yet  the  (ignes  remainej
For  dayly  ncarc  to  ^rtie  walls  aic  found.

Huge  heapesof  dead  mens  bones,  and  of  their  feuKs,
W’hofcflclh  was  then  devouid  by  ciows  and  gulls.

71

How  Jgramant  made  fpcedic  preparation.

And  caus’d  bis  ftiipsfoi thin  ihcdcepe  tolanch.
Providing  all  that  longs  to  navigation.

In  mind  for  ay  to  bid  fjrvvell  to  trance:

T wo  dayes  the  winde  Itopt  his  determination.

The  third  it  fctv’d,and  then  he  did  advance
His  fayles,and  cv'nc  one  did  fliip  his  ore.

And  fo  away  they  parted  ftom  the  flioic.

7J

MarfUio  doubting  Icaft  hisRcalmc  of Spatne,

Should  now  be  dri v’n  to  pay  t his  cohly  fiiot.

And  fcai  ing  to  be  forced  to  fuftainc

That  ftorme  alone, which  fell  in  France  fo  hot.

Doth  land  at  L’j/f«ce,whcrc  he  did  ordainc
All  furniture,  that  might  for  warre  be  got,-
Bcpairingall  his  towncs  againft  that  warre.

That  after  him,and  all  his  ficndsdid  marre.

.74

But  Jgramant,  his  fii ips  to  Ajfrih^e  bent,

111  atm’d,halfc  void  of  men, but  full  ofgricfe.

For  moft  of  them  werefad  and  malcontent.

Three  pans  of  fourc  were  loft  paft  all  rclicfe;

And  though  for  fearc  perhaps,  of  being  fiient.

None  dare  in  publikc  fpcake  to  his  repriefe,

Yet  feactly,  their  burning  hate  to  code,

Somccald  him  proud, feme  cruclljfomc  a foolc*


SiKeiit,


6g

As  two  couraoioiisPards,  that  held  in  chalc
An  Haitjor  bearded  Goat  upon  a plaine.

That  feaped  then  by  fwift  ncfl'c  of  his  pace.

With  no  fmall  wrath,  and  chafctiiinc  backcagainc.
As  though  they  thought  they  had  a great  difgracc.
In  that  they  follow’d  had  the  prey  in  vainc,

Sodid  the  damfcls  chafe,  and  figh,  and  fret.

That  they  to  Agrarnant  ho  ncare  could  get.

69

But  though  hcfcap’tthcirhands.yctfurcthcrcft
Efcaped  not, full  dcarciv  then  abuying,

Some  wounded  in  the  fidc,in  backc,and  breft,
Someflaine  outright,fome  worfc  then  dead  a dying,
How  fbrily  (poorc  foulcs)  had  they  bene  dreft,
W'hofefafetic  was  not  wrought,nonoc  by  flying.
For  Agrarnant,  himfclfc  more  furc  to  favc.

To  fiiut  the  Citic  gates  commandment  gave.

70

He  made  the  bridges  eke  to  be  cut  downt;.

On  Aodon  ftreame,  that  was  both  large  and  deepe.

Ah  wofull  fubjefts  unto  tyrants  crownc.

Who  that  they  may  their  pcrfonsfafcly  keepe.
Regard  not  if  their  people  fwim  ordrowne.

But  deeme  of  them  like  bcafts,or  filly  fhcepe.

That  fo  thcmfclvesthey  pamper  may  and  thcrifJi,
They  care  nocifthdr  men  in  millions  perjfli.


But  (as I fay)  they  fpcake  this  in  their  ficcvcj.

For  fearc  of  blame,  except  fbmc  two  or  three.

That  each  to  other  open  dare  their  greeves.

Yet  wretched  Agrarnant,  he  doth  not  fee.

How  he  IS  feorned;  but  he  ftill  bclccvcs.

That  he  islov’d,and  why,becau(c  that  he.

Saw  never  lockcs  but  favyningly  difguifed.

Heard  never  words,but  fainingly  dcvifcd.

76

Now  he  was  fully  purpos’d  in  his  landing,

To  Icaue  Biferta  and  feckc  harbour  nyer,

Bccau/c  hclate.had  perfcfll  underftanding.

The  Nubians  [poy Id  thofc  pairs  with  fword  and  fict
Wherefore  for  doubt  of  dangerous  withftanding.
He  meant  to  (Inin  that  port,and  land  fane  hycr.
And  thence  withall  unto  his  parts  addided.

To  bring  rclicfe  unto  the  townc  afHtftcd.

77

But  lot  his  cruell  fate  doth  overthrow

HiscounfcllfagCjand  quite his  hopcdcccavcs.

For  whilcfcam  windcdidmakc  him  faylc  but  llowj
Stout  2?«do»  with  that  naviemade  of  leaves,

Met  him  full  butt,  that  nofuch  thing  did  know,

And  with  a fierce  alTaulc  him  there  rcccavcs.
Enforcing  him  to  unexpefted  fight.

In  that  darkc,cloudie,and  tempeftuous  night.

f f Pot


Lmlitin  the
M trail’


152


THE  XXXIX.  BOOKE


78

lot  AgrarnAnt  no  Tpyall  had  till  now.

Of  thd'c  fame  fhif>s,and  would  hare  deemd  a fable,
Jf  one  had  told  him  of  a little  bow.

To  make  a bundled  (hip*,a  man  was  abici
Wherefore  he  faylcd  on  he  car’d  not  how,
.AnddoubtSflofoe  but  wave, and  wind  undable.
And  not  pxpefting  fuch  flrange fodainc flops,

' He  never  fet  his  watchmen  in  his  tops.

79

On  tocher  fidc,oiir  men  that  had  efpydc
Their  enemies  at  fea,qn  home  ere  night.

Came  with  great  fjpeed,  although  all  undefciide.

For  er’ry  fliip  kept  clofe  their  fire  and  lightt
At  lafl  when  as  they  faw  their  time, they  tryde
Their  utmofl  forcc,and  with  full  fayles  they  light
On  their  foes  (hipping, that  at  firft  did  flirinkc.

And  many  did  unto  thebottome  finke.

So

Kow  Diidrns  men  began  to  play  their  parts.

Some  ufing  firc,fomc  hearie  ftoncs,fomc  flecle,
Vpon  the  Ftir^r  fell  fuch  a ftornie  of  darts.

As  they  before,  the  like  did  never  feele;

On  oiir  iidcGod  with  couragcfill’d  their  hart;.

On  their  fidc,cachmans  hart  was  in  hishccle,

They  flood  amazd  with  firare,  and  quite  aftoHidied,
T he  ti  me  now  come  their  eld  fins  fliould  be  puniflicd

8 1

7bt  Jtferif-  Thus  Agrammt  was  clos’d  on  ev’rie  fide,
titn  tf  M With  many  a pikc,and  fword,and  hooke,and  axe,
llouinfca  jjip  {^ones  that  fell  from  high, made  breaches  wide.

And  much  fca  enterd  at  the  new  made  cracks.


But  moft  the  fire,which  they  could  Icaft  abide.

That  takes  in  pitched  bootds,  and  wreathed  flay,

T o kindle  very  quicke,but  flow  to  quench,

Annoyd  them  fore  with  heat,  and  fmoke,and  flench*

_ 8a

Some  over  boord  do  fall  in  water  cold.

And  there  arc  drownd.-fomc  take  them  to  theu  fwim-
But  on  another  bark  while  they  take  hold,  (ming.
They  now  fullfraught,and  fearing  ovci  trimming,
Withcrucll  fword  (a  foule  fight  to  behold)

Cut  oftheir  bdds,with  which  they  now  were  diming
The  bleeding  flumps  all  mingled  their  remained.
And  with  frcfli  blood,thc  watci  fait  was  flamed.

*3

Some  few  to  fave  tbeir  lives  that  had  defier.

Or  at  the  lcafl,to  Icefe  them  with  lead  paine,
Doleapein  water  toelcapc  tlicfier.

Till  with  new  fcarcofdrowning,thcyagainc,

Vnto  the  flaming  (Iripwracks  do  rcticr.

And  there,  with  much  ado  arc  glad  and  fainc.

To  catch  fome  burning  boord.and  being  loth
To  dye  of  either  death,thcy  dye  of  both.

84

Some  one  for  fearc  of  fv;ord,or  axe,or  pike.

Doth  all  in  vaine,umo  thefca  betake  him.

For  why  feme  flone,or  arrow,or  fuch  like,

Ere  he  befarre  from  thcncc,doth  overtake  him:

But  Icaft  the  leader  haply  may  miflike.

My  too  long  ulc,this  motion  I would  make  him,

7 hat  to  another  fcalbn  hedefarre.

To  hearcthc  fcqucll  of  this  bloudy  warre.


Woiall.  Rogeros  irrefolute  fghting,  may  le  notedhow  necejfaiy  it  U for  a man  before  hegoe  tofghtj  to  put  on  a goodand

firme  refolution,  and  chiefly  of  the  goodntjfe  of  hU  caufe.  In  Agramants  breach  of  the  oth  andpromife,we  may  fee  how
odio'M  a thing  it  is  before  God  and  man  to  be  Feedifragi,  Tiucc-breal^crs  j -which  mal^etb  them  indeed,  to  beforfafien  of
their  fronds  ,profecuted  with  great  malice  of  their  enemies, lathed, 'idetefled, and /corned  of  their  owne jfiibje(is,and  in  the
end  breeds  their  utter  confufon.  In  that  Agramants  fouldicrs  doc  mutine  againfl  him  and  revile  him  fecrctly,  andhee
r.otwit  hfl  anding  thinlies  himfclfe  to  be  well  beloved  of  them,  and  well  thought  of,  we  may  fee, in  what  a lamentable  cafe
thofe  Princes  are, that  (as  is  ftid  of  them)

Nevci  feclookesjbut  fawningly  difguifed.

Never  heare  word*,but  fayningly  devifed,

Hifloric.  of  the  Hiflory  of  this  hoo\e,firfl  for  Sileno  that  was  Vu^\hSchoolcmafler,it  is  written  ofhim,he  was  one  day  laid  to

fleep,ajrer  he  hadbene  madcdninf^e  with  wine, and  his  fchollcrs  mcrily  bound  himiwhcrupon  he  waiting  fatd  that  verfe,
Solvitc  me  pucrijfatiscfl  pociiiflc  vidcri.

Concerning  this  great  halt  ell  at  Arlie,  certaine  it  is  (as  divers  Hifloriographers  have  noted  it ) that  there  remaine
to  this  home  great  heapes  oj  bones,  bet  oldening  fome  great  flaughtcr  of  men  in  that  place : but  when  it  JhouLl  be  done,  I
cannot  precifclyafjirmc.

Allegoric,  in  that  Mclifla  by  the  helpe  of  the  dcvill,  talking  upon  her  afalfc  image  o/Rodomont,  wiooicd  Agraraant  to  hreahe
trnce,the  Allegoric  thereof  is,  that  they  be  divcls  or  diveUiJh  pcrfbns,  that  wiH  move  Princes  to  breahje  their  word  and
their  prontife.

Of  Qtlandos  refioring  to  his  wit, which  indeed  is  the  chiefe  Allegoric  of  aH  tie  boo\e,  andwhere-upon  the  bool^e  ta-
J^eth  this  name,  Orlando  Foriofo,/h/imtWe/c  is  the  meaning  thereof.

Orlando  a man  of  noble  birth,  Erie  of  Anglant,  nephew  ro  C harlcs  lie  great,  falls  fofarre  in  love  with  Angelica,
by  which  (as  I have  often  noted ) is  meant  plea  fare, or  honor ; that  he  leefeth  his  wits  and  becomes  mad ; by  which  may
be  meant  anyfoHy  thatyoung  men  fall  intowith  love,  with  prod'gality,  with  ambition  or  vainc  fludies  ; (which  areat
large  recited  in  the  i^.boohc.)  A (lolfowiththercccit  he  had  oj  S.Iohn,w<i^r  him  wife  againe,rhar  is,  by  the  grace  of
God  and  ly  the  Gofpell,  which  teacheth  us  how  to  dcjpife  aUthefe  worldly  things,  and  cither  quite  leave  them  or  turne
ihemto  ourgoodandhenefiic.

Alliifion.  Tlefcajightwhichisinthc  latcrcndof  thisboolie  deferibed,  is  lilic  that  which  Lucan  fits  forth  in  the  civill  wars
betweene  CaefarWl'oinpcy  : et  rather  indeed,  totharhcJpeafesofintbenextboolicofCardina/lHippoVuoagainfi
the  Venetians^

HcrccP.d  the  annotations  upon  the  j^.Bookc,


354


THE  XL.  BOOKE.


^rtat  AgramanC  doth  fl/^and  in  hit  flight
Would  kill  himfelfe^hut  Sobrin  himforbodf,

Biferta  hetKgfir  d,  a TvofuUfghti
At  lafi  they  meet  Grada{Toi«  4 rode^

T hey  fend  a challenge , three  to  three  to  fight ^

ZJnto  Orlando, he  then  abode  j
Rogero  fights  with  Dudon  to  fet  free
S ev’n  Ktngs^tfhem  hound  in  chaines  he  channfi  t$  fee.


L*«\eintht
Htfiery  of
tbiJiodUutdei


,4ruP.t  veu
jmt pofl  to

tific  Ptft
yulit  the

fettndiwhicb
he ttucheth
in  entof  hu
S tty  ns.

The  L'osts
tnib  and
pawti  mea-
fsing  the  f'e-
mtciam,  cai
(edibeLyani
of  tbefea.


Were  long  (my  Lord)  to
^ tell  ©fall  that  fought,
t In  that  lea  fight, and  ccites
{fc  all  the  while,

That  I fiiould  tell  it  yon,  I
Ihould  be  thought.

To  bcaic  pots  (as  they  lay)
toSamos  He,

Where  earthen  vcffcls  in
great  fiore  arc  wrought.
Or  Owlesto  ^//;e;zr,CrocodiIs  to  Nyle,

For  more  then  can  of  this  by  me  be  told,
Yourfclfchavccaulcd  many  to  behold,
a

Your  faithful!  people  had  a longprofpeA,

When  all  a day  upon  the  ftreamc  of  P(?e,

Your  mcn^as  your  great  vallew  did  direft,

T he  Hi  ipping  of  your  foes  afiaul  ted  fo.

That  with  their  blood  the  ftreamc  they  did  infeft.
And  brought  upm  them  all, a world  of  woc;

Then  both  your  felfe,and  others  plaincdid  fee,
Howfundry  dcaths,in  fights  of  fca  there  be.

It  wasnot  then  indced,my  haptofee’t,

(Sent  then  to  Pome  fix  dayes  before  inpoft.

To  crave  then,  at  the  holy  fathers  feet,

Reliefcand  aid  againftfo  great  an  hoft)

And  in  that  time  your  grace  with  them  did  meet.

In  fuch  a fort,fo  forely  to  their  coft.

And  fo  you  pai’d  the  Lyons  teeth  and  pawes.

That  fince  that  time  to  fcarc  wc  bad  nocaufe.

4

But  Alfonfm, And  Moore  that  faw  the  fame,
Affra,nio,Anmhall, And  ZerHnet,


Albert, And  B.tygn, And  three  that  bcare  my  nacnej
Declar’d  tome  theconqueftyou  did  gets
Alfo  their  banncrs,monumentsoffame.

Which  offerd  in  theChurchesyou  did  fet.

With  fifteene  Gallics  tanc  a theufand  botes.

Of  that  rich  conqueftjgivc  us  open  notes.

5

He  that  had  fcencthc  fire  and  wondrous  wrcalce.
That  at  that  time  was  wrought  upon  your  foes.
When  for  your  few,thcir  many  were  too  wcakc.
He  might  deferibe  the  deaths  and  divers  woes.

Of  Agramantes  hoft,of  which  I fpeake,

And  of  their  great  and  grievous  overthrowes,

Then  when  amids  the  forging  waves  and  fair.

Stout  Dudon  in  the  night  did  them  aftault.

6

When  firft  the  fight  began,  the  night  was  darfcc.

But  when  the  flame  upon  the  pitch  tookc  hold.

The  fire  gave  Iigbt,and  did  fo  clearly  fparkc.

That  Agramant  might  plainly  now  behold
His  enemics,and  their  great  number  marke,
Incredibicjif  any  had  it  told^

Wherefore  in  feafon  to  prevent  theworft,

He  chang’d  the  coutfc  he  had  intended  furft.

7

And  chufing  out  a veflell  fwift  of  fayle,

A nd  placing  there  his  things  of  greateft  price.

With  Srigliadore  (fith  ail  hope  now  doth  fajlc)

To  ftcalc  from  thence  hf  cloflic  doth  dcvifcj
And  while  thatDWowdoth  his  men  aflaylc.

In  all  the  haft  hccan^away  hcflyci.

His  men  thefword,  thcfta,thc  firedeftroyes.

And  heisflcdthatcaufcd  their  annoyes.

Aai


Three  »f  lU

tumicf

Ariefit,


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


335


Ueurnei  u

tn  tbt  }4

fitfeifibi

it'Ht


And  in  that  Barke,with  him  Joinno fled.

Who  much  complain’d  and  wat  not  little  greeved^
That  that  which  he  before  fotiuly  fed.

Yet  then  by  Agramant  was  not  bcleeved:

But  tell  we  now  how  good  Afiolfoi^icd,

And  what  exploits  Orlando  had  atcheeved.

Who  counfeld  fo  to  raze  Biferta  towne,

T hat  It  might  never  noy  th'lmpcriall  crownc.


Tht  ifftuh  -And  To  it  was  in  publicke  fort  proclaym’d,

(ffBtftrt*,  That  the  third  day  th’alTault  they  fliould  expc^>
Aftoljo  had  fomc  fhips  before  ordayn’d,

(For  Z)tr</onha«l  not  ail)  for  this  efFc&,

. And  tbefefamc  fhips  with  i'a»yonc/ remayn’d,

> A man  that  could  by  fea  and  land  dired,,

Who  rode  at  anker  neere  Biferta  fhore.

But  diflant  from  the  hav’n  a myle  and  more.

10

The  Brittijf)  Duke, and  valiant  Palladine,

That  like  good  Chriflensufcd  evermore.

To  pray  to  God  for  grace  and  aide  divine.
Proclaimed  in  the  campe,  three  dayes  before.

That  to  aflault  the  towne  they  did  afligne,
TfHtdnitti*  By  fall  and  publike  prayre,  Cbrijl  to  adore.

And  crave  his  aid  againfl  that  wicked  towne,

T hat  they  might  raze  it  quite  and  beat  it  downe.

1 1

And  having  ended  that  their  folemne  faft.

And  made  their  vow’es,accuftom’d  in  fuch  cafe.
Then  frendly  they  together  take  repaft.

And  each  his  ftend,and  parent  doth  embrace.

And  fpake  as  if  thofe  words  fhould  be  their  iaft.
The  kindly  tears,  oft  trickling  downe  their  face.
And  ev’ric  onerefblved  by  and  by.

Either  to  win  the  towne,  or  in  the  place  to  dy •
iz

Sm$t  Hitism.  Alfo  the  wretched  Priefls  within  the  towne.

With  fayned  fliow  offoolifli  fuperftition.

Pray  unto  Macon,xhstt  he  do  not  fiowne
On  them:  and  vow  to  him  on  that  condition.

Great  HoIocaufts,with  coft  of  many  a crowne.

Of  him  they  feeke  to  have  their  finnes  remiHIon,
And  as  if  he  the  fates  could  mend  or  alter.

They  ofFct  facriflees  on  his  alter.

Tbt  "^wrir/Then  when  they  were  by  their  great  Cady  blefl,

Mtew  They  went  (but  faintly)  to  their  Citie  wail,
tritft.  Yet  did  the  fayre  Aurora  take  her  reft.

And  fcarce  the  Efterne  coafl  yet  looked  pale.

When  Sanfontt,  Aftoljo,  and  the  reft.

That  had  the  needfull  things  provided  all,

^The  noble  enterprife  did  take  in  hand ,

And  did  aflault  the  towne  by  Tea  and  land.

Biferta  hath  this  manner  fltuation.

Two  parts  thereof  with  water  are  enclofed.

Two  parts  with  goodly  wall  of  ancient  fafhion,'
But  not  fo  fitoBg,  as  one  would  have  fuppofdd:
Arid  though  to  make  new  flrength  and  reparation,'
The  King  Branfardo  all  the  towne  difpofed.

Hit  time  and  warning  were  fo  fiiort  and  fmall,

H e could  do  little  goM,or  none  at  all.


I i

Aftoljo  did  appoint  the  Nubian  King
Such  wife  to  noy  the  keepers  cf  the  wall.

With  darts,and  Turkifli  bowes,and  many  a fling.
That  from  ihe  battlements  hedrave  them  all.

That  now  he  might  both  horfe  and  foOtmen  bring,
Vpon  thedirch  in  peiill  none  or  ftHall{

And  each  according  to  his  powic  and  skill.

Brought  matter  wberewitballtheditch  to  fill.

1 6

Some  fagots  brought,and  feme  brought  ftore  of  hclme
Some  heavy  flones,and  feme  light  planks  and  boords
And  left  the  flreame  their  worke  might  overw hclme.
They  turned  it  away  by  other  foords^

Great  ftore  of  wood  there  grew  in  that  famcRealme
The  which  to  them  great  ftore  of  ftuffc  aftoords.
And  now  that  Proverbe  fee  performd  you  might.
That  many  hands  make  hcavic  works  but  light.

The  Nubians  fierce  impatient  of  all  ftay.

And  by  defire  of  gainc  all  headlong  led.

Tbeperill  great  and  danger  do  not  way.

But  each  man  clapps  his  target  on  his  hed;

And  then  their  battric  to  the  walls  they  lay.

With  rammes,and  engines  ftronoly  furnifhed.

With  which  to  ftiake  the  walls  they  do  begin.

Nor  were  they  all  unfurniflicd  within.
iS

Darts,ftoncs,and  planks,yca  cv’n  their  houfes  tyle.
They  flang  down  on  thc,whc  they  drew  more  ncaic
By  which  they  brake  and  pierced  other  while.

Their  engines  huge,foas  it  might  appeare.

Dame  Fortune  feem’d  at  firft  on  T url{S  to  fmile.

But  aftciToonc  againe  fhc  chang’d  her  cheare.

No  fboner  night  was  gORC.and  Sun  once  up.

But  that  they  rafted  ofanothcr  cup.

*9

Then  on  each  fide  they  had  fb  hot  a charge.

At  hardly  they  were  able  to  fuftainc;

Sanfonetof  thcfhipping  had  the  charge.

And  he  by  fea  aflaultsthcm  to  their  painc,-'

And, for  their  powrc  was  great, and  place  was  large,
EachCaptainc  tooke  with.him  afevcrall  trainc.
Thereby  the  more  to  trouble  all  their  foes.

And  of  their  vcrtuc,to  make  larger  flioes.
ao

Aiidforthat  fpeciallcaufejtheydo  divide.

Their  mightie  hoft  into  foure  fcv’rall  parts.

To  th’end  that  by  that  meanes  it  might  bcfpide.
Which  men  had  flout,  and  which  had  fainang'  harts.
Great  towreson  mighty  whcelcsdid  feeme  to  ride,
Drawnc  with  great  force  like  ordinary  carts,

And  Elephants  did  canic  rowres  fotall.

As  did  in  height  furpafle  the  Citic  wail.

21

A fcaling  ladder  Brandimart  doth  beare.

And  clymes  himfelfe  and  caufeeb  others  clymc:

For  Whatman  having  fuch  a guide, could  fcare?

Each  man  to  ftay  doth  thinke  it  haynous  crime:

The  ladders  ftrcngtb  was  weigh’d  by  no  man  there.
Each  roung  a man,and  fome  bcares  two  fbmetime:
Noyi  Bandimart  to  conqueft  wholy  bent.

Gets  to  the  top,  and  winnesa  battlement*

F Witfc


titlmt  k tht
befltftb*
firt  vw$k
whitb  fhtr
toM(b  btufit


THE  XXXIX.  BOOKE


fjitlietiiibi


It

With  hand  and  footc  heclanimerd  in  fuch  fort.

He  wan  a baclcmcnt  and  did  it  kccpcj
T hen  with  his  fword  he  made  them  all  fuch  fport.
As  caus’d  the  lookers  on,not  laugh,buc  weepe:

The  ladder  now  charg’d  with  too  great  refoit.
Standing  aflopc,and  not  upright  and  fteepe.

Brake  in  the  midft,fo  that  fa  vc  Brandimart ,

Ail  of  them  fclI,unto  their  paine  and  fmart.

Their  Captainc  though,  with  this  no  whit  difmayd,
Kcepes  Hill  his  place  though  he  the  hap  did  marke.
Although  he  favr  his  men  him  could  not  ayd.
Though  healonc  were  all  their  fliooting  marke)

His  men  below  aiydcoutto  him,and  piayd
Him  to  ietire,but  he  no  whit  could  harke.

Bat  boldly  from  the  wall  into  thetowne.

Which  was  thrifc  ten  foote  dcepe,hc  leaped  downe.

Ai  if  the  pav’ment  had  bene  draw,  not  done.

So  Icpt  he  downe, fo  nimble  and  fo  lights
And  being  there,  layd  fo  about  alone.

He  made  them  all  give  place  unto  his  might:

Of  thofe  that  fought  he  killed  many  a one,

The  reft  thought  beft  to  favc  themfclvcs  by  flight.
But  they  that  (aw  him  Icapc  downe  from  without,
Within  theit  minds  were  full  of  dread  and  doubt.

*5

Strsightwayet  about  the  campe  a itimor  fpred.

From  mouth  to  mouth, and  man  to  man  doth  come.
And  fame  doth  fly,  and  flying  gathers  hed.

Of  that  hard  fcat,tbat  Brandimurt  had  done)

And  comes  at  laft  whereas  Orlando  led
His  band,and  afcci  to  King  Otons  fonne.

And  thcntoO/mro,neverceafing,

Butin  her  going  ftill  her  tale  incrcaflng.

26

Allthcfe.butchiefc  Orlando  tW  among,

That  Brandimart  in  mindedid  dcarcly  love.

And  hearing  it  from  thence  they  tairid  long.

It  would  be  hard  hisdanger  to  remove;

Vnto  the  walls  fet  fcaling  ladders  flrong,

Refolvcd  now  their  utmoft  force  to  prove;

And  up  they  mount,with  looks  fo  grim  and  bold,
Asfeant  their  enemies  durft  them  behold.
i7

A s w hen  the  Teas  are  wrought  with  fturdie  wi nd.

The  ventrous  vcflcll  ton  with  many  a wave,
Isfbractimc  fmotc  bcfore,fometimc  behind.

And  each  furge  ftrives  a paflage  free  to  hauCji
The  fearfull  Pilot  with  aftonifht  minde,

Knowes  not  which  way  himfcife  he  Hiould  behave,
Till  at  the  laft  one  fiirgc  the  whole  poftefletb,

And  fo  both  Pilot,(hip,and  allopprcflcth.
at

$9  when  thofe  three, of  whom  before  I fpake.

Had  got  the  wall, they  did  the  fouldiers  teach.

To  follow  tbem,and  fo  large  pathdid  make.

At  thoufands  of  them  sow  the  wall  did  reach:

This  while  the  monftrous  rammes  the  walls  did  /hake
In  ether  places,and  made  fuch  a breach,

That  now  in  many  part*  without  rcfiftance,

T hey  might  to  Brandimart  bring  good  aflifttnee;]


>9

Lookc  how  that  ftreame  furnam’d  of  ftreams  the  king  simil,

With  damage  great  above  his  bankes  doth  grow,

When  fomc  ftrong  wind  or  t vdc  of  higheft  (pring  9f

Wakes  him  beyond  accuflom’d  bounds  to  flow,  ^

And  thereby  hurt  untothc  ficldsdoth  bring.

And  drownetb  flockcs,and  houfes  overthrow,

T hen  trees  do  harbour  fi fli.as  new  come  gueftr,

Whcic  flying  birds  were  wont  to  build  their  nefls,

30

So  now  Biferta  walls  were  farre  too  wcakc
To  favc  the  Citie  from  both  fword  and  fire-
The  valiant  Captainesfirft  thclccdo  breake.

To  follow  whom,  the  fouldiers  do  afpirc;

• And  v'vhat  with  will  their  ancient  wrongs’to  wtoike,  '

And  what  with  hope  of  booties, and  defire  *

They  mind  foonc  that  Citic,that  had  bccne
Of  Africa  foie  triumphant  Quccnc.


Now  multitudes  lay  flainc  in  cvVy  flreet.

And  with  the  blond  that  of  their  wounds  did  runne,
The  channels  flow’d  vcrmillion  under  feet;

But  when  the  fire  to  take  had  once  begunne.

Nod  oubt  it  was  a wofull  fight  to  feet.

What  fpoile  upon  thetowne  by  fire  was  donct
Such  cryes/uch  plaints  were  over  all  the  Citic,

As  might  have  moved  any  hearts  to  pitic.

32

Their  hclplcs Gods  now  underfoot  were  troden,
Thcir,facicd  jewels  taken  all  for  pray.

The  conquerers  come  forth  of  houfcs,lodcn.

With  goidjwith  plate,  with  fairc  and  rich  arayi
And  though  the  (ouldicrs  flatly  were  forbodca
Foulc  byaftly  luft,this  was  to  them  no  ftay.

Young  children  and  old  matrones  could  not  ftape,
Deflouring  forced,  nor  ungodly  rape.

Stout  Olivero  with  a found  blow  flew.

King  Bucifer,  and  bromght  him  to  his  end,

Branfardo  kild  himfclfc,whcn  as  he  knew,

T he  Citic  could  not  now  it  fclfe  defend)

Afiolfo  did  in  Angle  fight  fubdew
FulvOjiVii  tookc  him  prifnerin  the  end.*

Thcfc  three  were  thofe, whom  (as  before  you  hard)
King  Agramant  thofe  countryes  left  to  guard.


34

But  Agramant iV/ho  as  before  I told.

Stole  from  his  men,  and  fo  away  did  fayle.

When  as  he  did  thefe  flames  from  fane  behold,
Muchdidthe  ftatc  ofthatfametownc  bcwaifc)
But  when  a meflenger  did  plainc unfold.

How  farre  his  foes  in  Affricf^ediA  prcvaile.

He  would  have  flainc  himfcife,  of  woes  to  rid  him,
Save  that  the  fage  Sohrino  did  forbid  him.


iigtuiani


3f

Ah  fit  faid  he(in  frcndly  fort  him  chiding)  (thought,
Dnvc  from  your  worthy  minde  fuch  wretched
What  could  be  to  your  foes  more  welcome  tiding,
Then  that  your  folfe,your  owne  dcfti  uftion  fought?
T hey  doubt,while  you  in  fafetie  are  abiding.

But  hard  to  kcepc,tkat  they  have  eaflic  caught.

Nut  dne  of  them  but  dreads,and  greatly  fcares.

That  Affritlfp  while  you  lire,  cannot  be  theirs,

Your


StUinti

CrMUH  $0

ttpirftfddi
him  mt$  u
/(Htbmfitjt,


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


^^7


3«


Yf.iir  would  all  your  fiends  of  hope  deprive,

(The  onely  hclpc  thatinoui  cafc  is  left)

All  they  have  got,whileyou  remaine alive,

They  can  but  count  it  robbcric  and  theft;

But  ifyou  die,who  fliall  againft  them  ftrivcJ
Both  Affric\f.  loll, and  we  of  hope  are  reft;
VVhcrefoie  though  for  your  felfe  you  life  abhord.
Live  for  our  fake  (at  leaft)  my  foreraigne  Lord.

?7

TheSouldan  fure  will  hcipeyourcauftt’advance.

To  him  you  may  for  men  and  money  fend.

Be  fure  he  will  tc  loth  the  King  of  France
Should  nefl  in  Affrid^e, bein^not  hisfrendi
If  Norandino  knew  ofyourmifchance.

He  would  both  men,  and  horfc,and  monie  fend.
The  Aites  of  Media, Perfia,ini  Armnie,

With  Arabia, will  helpc  you  with  their  mcnie.

38

Thefc  words  then  fpake  the  grave  wilfc  man  and  old.
To  move  his  Prince  a better  mindeto  carrie,

And  bad  him  chearc  himfe1fe,and  flill  he  told.

What  hopes  there  werc(tho  fure  he  thought  couaiy)
He  faw  and  knew  their  comfort  was  but  cold.

That  long  they  ufc  copray,andfue,and  tarie,
StMUati.  Who  having  loft  their  ctowncs,to  fue  arc  fain*

T o other  Kings, to  hclpe  them  home  againc^

39

Ztok*  ^tJu0  Both  Hannibafiini  lugurthfim^\e%  be,
tiitMa-  To  Princes  all,that  tiuft  in  forren  ayd,

TtSmad  Hi-  With  Lodwicl{e  Sjorce  whom  this  laft  agedid  fee.


43


Satuan.


Vote  a ftronger  Lodwicl^e  foulc  becraidt
Wheieforc  unto  that  femence  I agree.

The  Duke  Alfonfe  of  Ferrara  faid,

A greater  figne  of  folly  is  not  fhowne,

Then  trufting  others  force,diftruft  onesowne.

40

Wherefoje  in  that  conflift  and  bitter  warre.

In  which  he  found  Chrifls  Vicar  not  his  frend.

And  that  the  Venice  ftate  with  him  did  jartc,

And  he  that  promifed  him  to  defend.

From  Italic  wasdriv*n  and  abfent  farre.

Yet  never  would  Alfon/d  condifeendy
To  put  himfclfc  in  other  mensfubjeftion.

And  leave  his  ftate  to  forren  powrcsprotcflion.

41

But  Agramant  of  comfort  all  bereft,

Forlookc  the  fkoic,and  lanched  to  the  deepe,
Totbinke  in  what  eftate  his  Realm*  was  left.

Docs  make  him  bitterly  to  wayle  and  weepe.

From  right  hand  now  they  fayld  unto  the  left,
And  Baft  ward  all  the  night  their  courfedid  kcepc,
Vntill  a ftorme  that  lofe  within  a while.

Did  caufe  them  harbour  in  a little  lie.

41

A iirtlc  lie  Toydeof  inhabitants.

But  full  of  Harc8,and  Conies,and  of  Dcare,

With  corerts  great, of  trees  and  flender  plants.
That  had  not  bene  cut  downe  in  many  aycare;
Elfc  there  was  nothing  to  fupply  their  wants,
Onely  fbme  tokens  plainly  did  appeare.

That  ftfticrs  ufed  there  their  netttodrye.

The  while  the  fi(h  in  fca  do  quiet  lyc.


Here  onely  in  the  harbour  they  did  find,

A fliip  that  had  bene  weatherbeaten  fore,

Gradajfo  foiccd  by  contrary  wind.

Came  in  that  fliipfrom  Arly  late  before.

With  princely  gcftuie, and  behaviour  kind.

Each  King faluics  the  toiheron  the  flioro;

For  well  they  lov’d  togcther,and  were  late.

Fellows  in  arms  t\eire  Paris  wallciand  gate.

. 44

The  King  of  ^rViSire  with  nofmall  griefe.

Did  hcarcchc  ftorieof  thcirlatcdiftrcfrc.

And  which  did  comfort  Agramanre  chief Cy
Hispeifon  offerd  thefc  harms  to  redrefle.

But  that  he  fliall  in  e/£gypt  findc  rcliefc.

He  greatly  doubts, and  thinketh  nothing  Icffe,

P ompeys  example  tcachcth  yon  (he  faid)

That  banifht  men  finde  there  but  foncaid.

45

But  fith  the  cafe  fb  ftands,and  that  you  faj,

Englifh  Aflolfo  with  a Nubian  hoft.

And  mad  Orlando,  who  thisotherday
As  I did  heaie,forlovc  his  wit  had  loft,

Flavc  done  fiich  hntt  ,1  have  bethought  a vvay.

That  at  this  time  1 thinkc  will  profile  moft:

1 will  Orlando  challenge  hand  to  hand,

Who(furc  I am)  in  my  hands  cannot  Hand.

46

Wae  he  once  dead , the  reft  I count  as  ftraw.

And  for  the  Nubians,  though  1 cannot  dream*

How  they  fliould  comc,y  ct  know  I how  to  draw
Them  backe  agaiae  from  yours,to  their  ow*  Ream*
Thofc  other  Nubians , whom  a divers  law
Sunders  fiom  thcfe,as  well  as  NylM  ftreame.

Shall  with  Arabian  ecad.  Macrobian  forces
Aftailc  them,(thcfe  have  gold,  & tbofegood  horfes)

, -

The  King  of  Jlffric\e  prais’d  this  offer  kind.

And  called  it  a good  and  bleffcd  ftorme.

That  caus’d  him  fuefa  a frend  as  this  to  find.

And  thanks  him  for  his  offer.but  the  forme
Of  it  (he  faid)  doth  no  whit  plcafemy  mind.

No  though  thereby  I might  all  harmes  icforme.

And  that  I might  Biferta  townc  regainc,

I would  not  do  mine  honor  fuch  a uainc.


If  any  man  muft  challenge  him,then  I
ltis,thacamin  honor  tide  unto  it.

And  whether  I fliall  kill  or  elfc  fliall  die,

I amrefolved,rurelyl  will  do  it
Nay  then  fir  (faid  Gradajfo)  I will  tri*

Another  way, if  you  affent  but  to  it.

We  two  will  make  one  challenge  thus:  to  fighl
Againft  Orlando  and  fomc  other  Knight.

49

So  I be  one  (then  Agramant  replidc)

1 care  not,though  I fccond  be  or  furft.

For  in  the  world  is  not  a man  befide.

To  truft  whofe  courage  nore  then  yours,I  durft.
Sobrino  that  ftood  all  the  while  afide.

Into  fuch  fpeech.upon  the  fudden  burft.

Hath  age  (quoth  he)  brought  me  in  fuch  contempt.
To  be  excluded  fromfo  brave  attempt!

F f 4 PJfgrac^


G*4iia^4,


it*

trastd  IQ


TitUratitUU
kor/t  utf
X>V4i4e(««ot


in  the
MtrM  tf
thy.


OSvnt  eify
u OrUyiUi


338


I

THE  XL.  BOOKE


50


Difgracc  me  not  fo  much,  to  leave  out  me,

Age  hath  not  tanc  away  my  vigor  clccne.

Skill  and  experience  good  companions  be.

Age  knowceh  whatfoerer  youth  hath  bccnej
Wherefore  let  me  be  one, and  you  (hail  fee,

That  I am  ftrongcr,thcn  perhaps  you  wcene:

To  this  reejueft  of  his  they  foonc  agree.

And  fo  they  fend  their  challenge  three  to  three.

51  -

ThcyfcndaHerald.asitisthcule,  ^
ThechallcngtoOr/rwid/oftout  tobeare.

With  number  like  to  meet  at  Lippadufe^

And  ib  by  combat, end  all  matters  tliearc?

The  while  each  fide  fliould  grant  the  other  trufe.
And  all  aftsofhoftiliticfoibearC}

Thif  Lippadufa  is  a little  He,

Dillant  horn  Ajfricfic  fliore  feme  twentie  mile.

The  Herald  made  good  haft, and  went  apace.

And  us’d  all  helpe  ofoaresand  failcs  he  could.
And  comming  to  Orlando  widi  good  grace.

His  meftage  and  the  challenge  plainc  he  told;
Amids  Biferta  in  the  market  place.

He  found  him  parting  fummesofeoyne  and  gold,
(Of  that  fame  lacked  towne  the  many  fpoiles)
Vato  his  men  for  guerdon  of  their  toilcs.

51

Now  when  Orlando  this  brave  challenge  hard.

He  did  accept  it, and  did  much  rejoyce.

And  gave  unto  the  Herald  in  reward.

Of  many  fumptuous  gifts  great  ftore  and  choife^
He  knew  before  the  death  of  Mandricardi  »
And  heard  of2)Hrind<»»  by  common  voice,
HowthatGr<jddj^hadit,whom  to  find,  ’’

A voiage  unto  th’/»dref  he  aflign’d.

But  knowing  that  he  need  not  go  fb  farre.

And  that  his  great  good  fortune  fo  had  wrought.
That  he  ftiould  fend  to  offer  finglc  waire.

Whom  he  farre  of  had  purpos’d  to  have  fought  j
He  now  doth  hope  that  long  they  (hould  not  barre
Him  ofhisfwordjthat  he fodeare  had  bought,  -
Eke  Brigliadore  he  hopes  now  to  regaine.

That  did  in  hands  remaine.  r

He  chufeth  for  his  frends rotate  his  part,  ' -
In  this  fo  great  and  dangerous  a fray,  c*’
Hiscoufin,and  that  faithful!  Brandimarty
Both  whom  he  oft  faw  tride  before  that  dayj
Armours  and  hor(e,and  fwords  on  ev*ry  part.

He  feekes  to  get  for  them  the  beft  he  may,

For  none  of  them  had  armour  of  hit  ownc;

As  I beforetbis  time  have  made  it  knewne.

56

Orlando  when  he  firft  of  all  fell  mad.

Loft  both  his  fword  and  armour  that  fame  hoWie,
The  tothers  t waine,  the  Sar\an  taken  had ,

And  now  they  wctc  fafe  lockt  up  in  a towre:

In  Affrica  their  armour  was  but  bad.

The  warres  in  Trantt  did  dayly  theirtderowte;
They  fcldome  had  in  thole  parts  any  ftore.

And  Agramant  wbot  wa$,ud  had  before.


57


Such  at  he  could, though  it  were  old  and  ruflie,

Hccaufcd  to  be  fcowrd  and  fiirbuflit  new.

And  cv’ricday  with  his  companions  truftic.

He  talked  of  the  fight  that  fhould  enfew.

One  day, as  in  a morning  frclh  and  luftic.

They  walkt  upon  the  fliorc,they  ft w in  vcw
A great  fliip  under  fade  with  treble  top,

Sailc  to  the  fliorcjwithout  all  ftav  <»r  ftop.

r S«

No  fayIers,paffcngers,nor  anic  guide,  '

Within  the  Ihip  to  be  difeoverd  were.

But  as  the  tempeft  dravc  her  and  tbfc  tide,

Shecame,and  fafely  fo arired  theres  *•

But  here  a while  the  emptie  fliip  ftiall  bide,

And  thcfethrccKnighttjbccaufe  the  love  1 beare

Vnto  Kogero  2nd  Renaldo  both y *

To  overpaffe  them  longer  makes  me  loth.

59

You  heard  how  they  themftivesafidedid  diaw.

And  of  their  owne  accords  their  combat  ccafe.

When  as  they  ftw,againft  all  right  and  law.

On  either  fide  the  battcll  to  incrcafc;

They  were  foearneft,  neither  of  them  ftw
Which  fide  was  firft, chat  brake  their  vowed  peace:

Wherefore  they  askc  of  thofc  that  neare  them  came.

Which  King  of  this  foule  breach  fliould  have  the

« ....  (blame.

Rogtro  had  a valiant  truftic  man.

That  lerved  him  with  faithfulnellcand  care.

Who  never  fince  the  combat  firft  began.

Had  loft  the  fight  of  him,and  being  ware
Of  this  new  breach,  with  all  thefpeed  he  can.

He  did  his  mafters fword  and  horlcpieparc.

And  brought  it  him,  and  wiflicd  himtoufeit,
Butforthatdayiio^erodid  refufeit.

61

Howbe’t  from  thence  he  did  hiscourfc  direft.

And  promifc  with  Renaldodoih  renew.

That  if  his  King  were  firft  did  oath  neglcft.

And  flicw’d  himfclfc  in  promifc  fo  untrue.

That  he  would  leave  him  and  his  wicked  ftfrj
This  ftid,hc  bad  Renaldo  then  adew.

Demanding  all  he  met, who  was  in  fault.

Of  this  ungodly  and  unjuftaffault.

62

Ofall  the  world  hehearcs  it  plainly  fpoken.

How  that  of  youthful!  Agramantes  part.

The  law  ofarmes,  and  late  fwornc  truce  was  broke#

Which  now  was  turnd  unto  his  Joffc  and  fmart:

Yet  thinks  he, men  would  deeme  it  were  a token
In  him  of  faint  or  of  unfaithfull  hare,

T o leave  bis  Mafter  in  fo  great  diftrefte,

Although  his  falfliood  had  dcfrrv’d  no  Icflc.

<53

The  thought  thereof  drave  him  to  no  fmall  mufc,‘

If  better  twere  for  him  to  goe  or  tarrie,

If  hcdogo,hemuch  fliall  herabufe
Whom  he  fo  oft  had  promiicd  to  marric;

Againehethinkcch  that  be  cannot  chufr)

In  bis  returncto  Affricl^e  but  mifearic.

He  knoweshow  peijuticoffcndctb  God,

How  over  it  ay  hangs  a hea  vie  rod.  Snumti

On


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


33P


«♦


^fhrafi  »f

AttcbtkMt

fiif'  fin>d
fatkickf  4
m4»  tauld
toulduotcafi
4ft4fttntO
t^wtur  f«r
tktm.


On  fothcr  fiiic,he  feaies  the  great  diTgrace^

Men  ivould  impute  to  him  his  Lord  to  leave,

>\nd  thuikc  it  comes  of  fearfuil  heart  and  bale;
\Vhat  if  fomc men  perhaps  hisfeufe  reccavcj
VVhen  they  do  know,  and  underhand  the  cafe?

Yet  moft  will  fa y^he  doth  bis  Lord  deceavC;

And  that  a man  fuch  promife  may  forfakc.

As  at  the  iitff  jUnUwfnll  was  to  make.

65

All  that  fame  day,  and  all  that  night enfiiing,

Hcdid  the  matter  with  himfelfc  debate.

His  love,  bisLord,on  cither  fide  renewing
The  doubt  full  qucftioDjCach  m divers  rate;

But  noble  minde,  t he  greater  fhamc  efehewing,
Chofc  lafily  to  rcleevc  his  mafters  ftate.

Much  lov’d  he  Bradaynant,  much  thought  he  on  her,
But  more  he  lov’d  his  duty  and  his  honcr.

66

Wherefore  refolved  to  depart  the  Reame,

He  fought  atyJr/y,fhipshim  to  tranfport.

But  ncithcrat  the  fea, nor  in  the  flreame.

Could  he  there  find  a fliip  of  any  fort,

Vor  Jgramant  in  haft  and  fcarc  extreame.

Had  all  from  thencc,or  buind  them  in  the  poit,
VVhich  when  Rogero  once  did  underftand.

He  went  unto  ward  by  land«

6?

In  >4r/y,nor  from  Arly  all  the  way,

He  law  no  living  Turl^e,\!>m  many  a corfc.

He  mindeth  atMarfilia,  if  lie  may,

To  get  a fiiip,by  faire  meanesor  by  force.

That  into  y^J^riciifliallftralght  convay
Him  and  Froniino,  his  well  tried  horfe;

But  while  fuch  thoughts  he  in  his  mind  contrived.
Great  ’Dudon  with  his  navic  there  arrived.

68

That  IDitiait, whom  King  Agramant  on  feas
Met  tohiscoftjwhen  erft  his  men  wcicflaine:

He  fled, his  frends  tanc  prifners,  and  in  tbeafe
Seaven  Kings  that  erft  in  Affricaiii  raigncj
A man  as  then, might  hardly  call  a peafe
Into  that  ftrcame.or  any  little  graine,

The  Navic,and  the  prifcs,in  fuch  number.

Did  fo  thcrivcr  pefter  up,and  cumber.

6o

But  ‘Dudon  fclfe  was  newly  come  on  land,

And  his  chiefc  pnfncrs  he  had  fet  on  fhore.

And  as  in  way  of  triumph  made  them  (land.

The  chiefe  bchiod,the  meaner  fet  before,
Withfouldicrs  garded  of  hischoifeft  band.

Who  with  their  warlike  voices  evermore.

Made  that  fame  townc.  and  all  the  places  round,
OfDudons  praifc,and  Dudons  name  to  found.

70

Rogero  when  he  faw  thefe  bands  appeare,

Firft  thought  it  was  the  fleet  of  Agramant,

But  when  as  he  approched  now  more  ncarc.

He  faw  how  much  his  gucftc  of  truth  did  want}

He  fees  his  captive  frends, with  hcaviechcarc,
Batnbyragc,Agricalt,and  Ferurant,
BAafiro^Riimdont, and  Munilard,

And  Nafiman,  that  wayle  their  hap  fo  hard.


7»


Rogero  could  by  no  mcancsit  endure,

1 o fee  in  miicry  his  noble  frends.

He  doubts  his  pray  re  nofiiccourcan  piocure.

And  therefore  he  to  trie  liii  force  intendii
Hislancc heprcfcntly  doth  put  in  uic.

With  which  not  few  unto  the  ground  he  fendsj
Hisfword  hcdrawes,and  therewith  in  ftiortfpace,
Hedoth'an  hundred  hurt,kiil,maimc,difplacc.

71

Now  Dudon  heares  the  noifCjthe  hanne  doth  fee.
Done  by  Rogero,  yet  to  him  unknowee,

Hcfcci  hismen  difplac’t  and  foylcd  be.

And  by  onconcly  man  their  hurt  is  grownci
He  takes  his  hoi(c,and  to  that  end  that  he
May  venge  thefe  harms,or  joync  thereto  his owne.
He  fctccth  in  hisrcft,a  inigliric  lance.

To  prove  himfqlfca  FaUadine  of  France.

He  bids  his  men  in  order  to  retire.

That  of  the  field  they  two  may  have  good  fcopc:
Atjgcro, that  torcfcucdiddcfirc
His  fiends,and  now  had  put  them  in  fomc  hope:
And  feeing  TcrtuousZ>H</e«  did  afpirc,

In  combat  hand  to  hand  with  him  to  cope.

Did  deemc  he  was  the  Captaine  chiefe  and  guide,
And  with  great  courage  coward  him  did  ride.

74

Firft  Dudon  came,but  when  lie  nearer  came.

And  faw  Rogero  had  nofpearcin  fight.

He  call  away  his  owne, as  counting  lliame
To  ufe  advantages  in  any  fight.

Then  faith  Rogero  to  himfclfe,  this  fame
Is  token  of  a moft  brave  minded  Knight;

And  furc,  except  mine  aime  be  much  amifte.

One  of  the  Falladines  of  France  he  is.

75

Wherefore  he  minds,erc  any  more  enfew.

Or  any  force  of  cither  part  were  donne,

Tolcarnc  his  name;  and  asking  him, he  knew
How  that  he  was  the  DaneVggeroi  fonnCj
Now  (faith  good  Dudon)  let  me  know  of  you
Your  namc,bcforc  our  combat  be  begonne;
Rogero  in  like  fort  him  fatisfied,

And  fo  they  both  each  other  then  defied.

76

Now  Dudonhzd  that  Axe  or  iron  Mace,

Wherewith  he  wonne  fuch  fame  in  many  fights.
As  proved  him  to  be  of  that  fame  race
Of  Falladines,  fohiaye  and  worthic  Knights!
Rogero  hath  the  fword  that  cuts  apace.

And  fruftrateth  all  charms, where  ere  it  lights.

So  that  he  had  the  vantagc.had  he  us’d  it, '

But  for  that  time, it  fccemcd  he  refus*<i  it.

77

The  caufe  wasthis,hc  was  afr  ard  perchance.

It  would  offend  his  loving  Bradamanr,

For  being  skilful)  in  the  lines  of  France,

He  knew  that  Dudons  mother  v;as  her  Ant;

So  though  hisconqueft  might  his  namcadvance,
He  doubts  her  love  it  may  nor  little  daunt;
toxTurpin  thinks, this  was  the oncly  rcafon.

That  Dudon  leaped  killing  at  that  fcafbn.


34®


THE  XL.  BOOKE


78

Rogero  never  foynd  ,and  fcldomc  ftiakc,

iiutflatling,and  hisfword  wasfogood  Aeelc,
T he  backe  fo  thickcjas  it  no  hurt  did  take.

Yet  oft  therewith  he  made  good  Dudon  fcelc


Such  thundtingknocksj3scau»*d  his  head  foake.
And  made  him  rcadic  many  times  to  reelc.

But  Icaft  much  reading  may  annoy  your  eyes,
Tolay  thisbookeandc  I you  advife.


Moral!.  Agramant  thatfiom  being  fo  uinoriou4  ,jel  into  fo  great  extremity  ^ Princes  may  con fider  the  great  mutability  of

Tortune:or  to  fpeal^e  more  truly  and  Chrifianly,they  may  feehow  Godian  overthrtrtv  them.when  inihcir  orrn  coceipts
they  are  at  the  leiy  htghefl.ln  that  their  folly  is  difpraifed  that  trtifl  to  others  protedietiyand  /land  nor  upon  their  awne
frengthythe  lamentable  examples  of  many  Princes  that  tve  have  heard  of  in  this  age,  and  fome  that  me  have  feene^may
prove  the  truth  o>  that  principle inor  doth  it  only  hold  in  Princes  affairsfhut  eve  in  the  cafe  oj  meaner  fubjecis, according
as  agood  fiend  of  mine. perhaps  upon  fomegoodiOr  (peradventure)  badexperience  oj  his  owne,mrote  manyyeares  fime:

if  you  be  wife,  this  rule  well  minde,

T ruft  none  for  you  to  fue  or  pray,

I Not  fiend  moft  faltjHor  kin  moft  ktnde,

^ In  thatyourfelfecandoorfay.

Tiirther  vcheras  Sobrino  nottvitl/landing  his  age, is  chofen  to  be  one  of  the  three  in  the  challenge, off  ring  himfelfe  therto,
■memay  note  therhy,  that  old  men  are  not  only  to  be  honored]  or  their  wifdomes , but  alfo  imployedm  fervtce  for  their
confiant  courage, ijthemfilves  be  willing  therto, and  not  to  be  contemned  or  fcojfedfavice  that  our  time  is  toe  much  gi-
ven unto ) fpeciaiiy  byyoung  men  that  thence  they  l^now  allthings,  and  indeed  hyow  lejfe  then  nothing-  It  is  a tale  well
hnownc,and  worthy  to  be  well  marked,  how  one  day,  thepeople  of  Athens  being  fet  in  their  theater  to  behold  playes,two
old  men  came  in, (3“  no  man  once  ojferd  togive  the place,til  they  camewhere  the  Lacedemonian  Ambajfadors  fate: they
ftraight  rofe,and  in  reverence  of  their  gray  heads, not  Ipiowing  the  men,they  gave  them  place, which  all  when  the  people
commendedwith great  app'aufe,thejorcnamed  Ambajfadoursgave  them  that pretie  tuch,  which  hath  ex er  ftnce/luche
fy  them;Thtn  the  Athenians  knew  what  washoneft  andcoinmendable,but  would  give  others  leave  to  do  it.

Hiftorie.  I^ihefir/l  flaffe  of  this  booli,hc  iifeth  three  fmilitudes  to  this  effc6i,as  we  fay  in  Englifh,to flirgwater  into  the  T earns

l o Dcarcpots  (asisfaid)  to  Samos  He,

(Where  earthen  veflels  in  great  ftoic  arc  wrought)

OrOwlesto  Athcns,Crocbdylcsto  Nile.

0/Samos  vcjfcls  1 will  recite  oncly  that  verfetbat  was  made  o/Agathotles;

Fama  cft,fiftilibusorna(Te  Agathoclea  legem
Aiquc  abacum  Samio  faepe  onetafle  luto,

Fercula  gc'mmatis  cum  poncret  horrida  vafis,

,•  Et  mifccrct  opes,paupcricmqjfimul.

Quarrenti  caufam,rcfpondit,rcxego  qui  fum
Sicanias,figuIo  lum  gtnitoie  natus.

Fortunam  reverenter  habe,quicunquc  rcpentc
Dives, ab  cxili  progrcdicic  loco-

Concerning  the  Owles  of  Athens,T\sWy  ufetb  thephrafe,BoctA  Athenas  noftuam  muxsvn.Butthc  fiymgrofe  not  fo
much  fur  the  plenty  ofthof  birds,  as  hccaufe  they  had  a loigne  fiampedwith  the  fame:  as  appeares  m Plutarkc  in  the
lije  ofLy(:inCcr,where  it  was  laid  to  the  charge  of  agreat  ojficer.  named  G\]ip^us,that  he  roo/lcd  too  many  Owles  in  the
penthoufc  of  his  houfe, which  was  indeed,money  that  he  had  fiollcn  in  that  Ifnde  oJcorgne,and  hidden  there.

The  Crocodiles  oj  Hiltos  ate  famous, neither  are  ary  of thbfc  beafl  s in  any  other  river, but  one  in  Africa  called  Senega
that  falls  into  the  Atlanticl^e  Ocean:  andbecaufe  it  hat  b Crocodiles , fume } oldit  for  an  arme  of  Nilusithough,in  my  opi-
nion,with  as  little  rcafon,  as  fome  fay  Lundy  the  lie  beiweene  C ornwa/l  and  fVals,  to  be  part  of  lreland,bccaufe  it  bat  b
no  fnahys  in  it-Oj  the  Crocodile  I count  this  worth  the  noting^!  hat  bcirgbredoj  ancgge,hcgrowcthtobeiwelue  or  four-
teenefoot  long, which  no  creature  doth  be  fide.  Hanniball  bang  overcome  ly  Sciyio,fedto  Annochus,  and  doubling  oj
his  fial{le  difpofiition  went  to  Pru  fi  a Kjng  of  Bithinia,  who  ly  his  cotmfcll and policie  overcame  Eumenes  in  a fca  fight,
which  benefite  andfervice  notwithflanding,  the  faidPiuria  would  have  betrayed  him  to  the  Romanes,  but  Hanniball
feeing  no  meanes  c/  efcape,tool{C  poyfon  rA.ich  he  carriedaboui  him  of purpofc  in  a ring, and  fo  made  away  himfiij'e.

IvguxlhLUiewifc  bctahfnghimjehe  tothe  proiedionoj  Eoecus /ingot  Mauritania  htsfonne  inlaw , was  byhimta/en
and  bounfand  delivered  to  by  11a,  »l;o  carted  him  to  Marius,  in  whoje  triumph  hew  as  ajtcr  led  at  Rome, and  forced  (ai
fome  write ) to  leape  off  an  high  arch, or  as  other  will  have  it,fl.'irvedafter  in prifon-
Pompey  being  vanquifijed  by  CxCor, fled  to  Egypt  to  Vtolomey , who fe  father  ha.ibcne  much  beholding  in  times  p.%fi
to  Pompey,  but  hejorjeare  ofCxfors  d'Jpleafiirc  made  his  head  to  be  cut  off.

Allegorle.  /«  Rogcro  that  notwithflanding  all  hts  oths  andpromifes  to  manic  Brndamant,  and  become  a Chrifii.an,yct  with
aregardof  worldly  reputation  is  cariedaway,  and  ta/ethfbipping  into  Affrica,  may  be  alltgoricaHy  underfl  ood,  how
our  fence  and  underft  anding,  not  having!  he  kelpe  of  grace  to  confirmcit,  is  tan  tedaway  into  the  feaof  errors,  and
toffed  with  waves  oj  divers  pafjions,  and  in  the  end  fuffers  jbipwrac/e  as  here  R ogci  o d:d,  though  after  delivered  by
prayer  andfaiih,as  ts  Jbewed  in  the  next  boo/e.

Allufion.  The  great  pcrill  that  Etondify^n  was  in, leaping  of  the  wall  of  Bifertaintathe  towne,  alludes  to  the  li/efaH  of  A~

Ic){andcr,K  howas  in  the  lily  pcrill  at  the  Citic  ojOfjidrciacs  in.india-,where  alfufas  luAiatefifiethjke  reoeheda  ve-
ry dangerous  wouU.

The  end  ofthc  annotations  upon  the  40  Bookc.


J\vGGie’l\o


THE  XLL  BOOKE.


Simiitt


SSitKiU.
Thu  Jciftu
vet  net  fit
»/  Dedahu,
but  oj 'Set-
tbut.


Smile,


Horace  ftith,
Tertes  ertan-
turfertibiUi
EfitH  Tuvttf’
(u,efline-
quit  patTUm
e/irttui&c.
That  vertue
it  tlemtHcie
tiud  grate-
julBtJftt


341


THE  ARGVMENT.

Hii  yri'fners  Dudon  to  Rogero^^*z'<’j',

H^oittA  ternpefl  aU  xvere  drowned  ejuite^

Rogero  onely  fcApes  the  florme^and  lives,
ty^nd  then  is  Chriflend^  And  beleevts  Aright.

NeAre  Lippadufas  fieepe  and  crag^ie  cl)ves,

Sixe  VAliant  Knights, a comb  At  fierce  do  fight,

J'V here  ^oht'mz  hurt,  the  CMarejueffe  lAwe  onground.
Good  Bi  andimarC  receives  a deadly  wound.


1

Hit  odor  fweet  v/ficrc\vith
an  amorous  youth
Of  either  fcxCj  their  gat*
ments  do  perfume,

Oi  head  or  beard,  when
(full  of  loving  ruth)

In  flames  of  Cupids  fiic
they  docenfume:

We  fay  thacodor  pet^feft
was  in  truth.

And  of  his  goodnefle  we  do  much  prefume.

If  fo  a good  while  after  it  be  felt.

And  that  thefwcctnclle  be  long  after  fmclt.

2

That  pleafant  juyeethat  /carusnnwiCe,

Did  caufc  his  men  (to  his  great  harme)  to  taft.
And  did  the  Oauls  to/t<r//eentife.

Where  they  committed  fo  great  fpoile  and  waft.
Was  doubt  leflc  perfc£l  good,  and  of  great  price,
Iffbattwclvemonthscnd  it  pleafant  Inft.

The  tiec  that  doth  his  leaves  in  winter  nourifh,
Without  all  quefticn  did  in  fommer  florini.

3

The  bountic  that  fo  many  hundred  ycare.

In  youi  moft  Princely  flockedid  ever  fliine,

Is  to  the  world  an  open  pioofe  and  cicare.

That  he,fiom  whom  wasfirft  deriv’d  yourline,
Wasfuica  great,aod  worthie  minded  Peare,

And  bad  that  noble  venue  and  divine,

Which  chiefly  makes  a man  fo  rare  and  od.

As  in  that  one,they  moft  rcfcmblc  God.

4 '

I flrcw’d  you  in  the  bockc  that  went  before,

How  good  Rogero  tookc  great  care  and  heed.


That  as  mother  aflshcfhcw*d  great  florc
Of  vertucs  rare,  that  other  men  exceed.

So  in  this  fight  he  foewd  as  much  or  more,

1 hen  he  had  done  in  any  other  deed;

With  noble  mind  ambitious  to  all  good.

For  glory  thirfling  ftill  ,buc  not  for  blood.

y

Good  ZJiidott  found  (for  wclldifcernc  be  might)

How  that  Rogero  him  to  hurt  forbare.

How  though  he  had  great  vantage  in  the  fight.

Yet  that  to  ufe  the  fame  he  ftill  did  rparc;

Wherefore  though  he  wereovermatchtin  mighty
Yet  therewithal!  he  flicw’d  his  Ipeciall  care.

That  though  Rogero  were  in  force  fupctiour,
Himlclfc  in  couttltc  would  not  bcii.fcriour.

6

Perdiefir  let  (faith  he)  our  combat  ccafe,  *
Yourcourtfic  hath  alreadieconquerd  me,

1 cannot  winne,  and  therefore  feeke  I peace;

And  I (faith  tothcr)  will  to  peace  agree:
lonely  ciavc  thisgrace,that  you  rclcafc
Thofe  rcav*n,whom  Handing  there  in  bonds  I fee,
Tbofcweic  the  Kings, whom  late  rteots  Affri^  fIjor«
Had  taken  bene  a day  or  two  before.

7

At  his  requeft  thus  ’Dudon  gave  remiflion,

Butcrcthcy  went, he  trade  them  firft  tofwcaie.
That  neither  they, nor  none  by  their  permillion,
Gainft  any  Chriften  ftatc,fhould  armour  bcarc;

He  gave  them  alfo  Icaveon  like  condition.

To  take  the  choifeft  vcftcll  that  was  thcarc,
WlronoconvenicntfcafonoTerflipping,

For  Affrkct  umccdutly  tookc  /hipping,

Tiuf


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


ThuS^had  thofc  kings  their  ranfomcs  all  remitted,'  '

And  with  i?^eroniiptthcmfclvcithatdjy,

And  then  to  ^rfuhlcflc  wind*  themftlres  committed,
T key  weigh  t bcir.ankers,and  their  failes  difplayi
Africndly  galcatfitfltbcir journey  fitted.

And  bare  tbenn  from  thcTliore  full  fai
But  afterward  within  a Jittlc  feafbn.

The  wind  difeoverd  his  deceit  and  ttcafont


IS


ar  away


Thediferif


ritft  from  the-poopi  it  changed  to  the  fide.

Then  to  the  jirorc,at  laft  it  turned  round.

In  one  placelong  it  never  would  abide,

’ Which  doth  the  Pilots  wit  and  skill  confound  j
■ The  furging  waves  fwcll  ftill  in  higher  pride,
While  Frofw>flock  did  moie  and  more  abound.
And  feem  to'bim  as  many  deaths  to  threaten ,
Asthat  fli  tps  fides  with  divers  waves  arc  beaten,

lO

Now  inthciiTacethcvvindjftrarghtin  their  back,
And  forward  this,and  backward  that  it  blowes.
Then  on  the  fide  it  makes  the  fliip  to  crack,
Amongthc  Mariners  confufion  growes ;

The  Maftcrruin*doubts,and  prefent wrack.

For  none  his  will, nor  none  his  meaning  knowci.
To  whiftle,bccken,cric  it  nought  availcs,
Somtime  to  Alike, fomtime  to  turn  their  failcs.


II


But  none  there  was  could  hcaic,nor  fee, nor  mark.

Their  cares fo  ftopt,fo  dazeJd  were  their  eyes,

With  weather  fo  tempeftuous  and  fo  dark.

And  black  thi^  clouds  that  with  the  ftotme  did  rife,
^rom  whence  fomtime  great  gaAIy  flames  did  fpark.
And  thunderclaps  that  feem'd  to  rend  the  skies  •
Which  made  then]  in  a manner  deaf  and  blind.

That  no  man  undciftoed  the  Mailers  mind.


It'


Nor  lcflc,nor  much  Icfle  fearfull  is  thefound
The  crucll  tempeft  in  the  tackle  makes,

Yet  each  one  for  himfel fe  fbmc  bufinefle  found.
And  to  feme  fpeciall  office  him  betakes  ;

One  tbisunti’d, another  that  hath  bound.

He  the  Main  bowling, now  ieAraines,now  Hakes;
Seme  take  an  oare,fomc  at  the  pump  rake  painc.
And  powic  the  fea  into  the  Tea  againci

Virg  Vilum  Behold  a horrible  and  hideout  blaft,


ao


mlvtrpi  ft-
rit  fluSm^
fydva
uBit :
frtniuUar
rim.


That  B areas  from  hii  frozen  lips  doth  fend.

Doth  backward  force  the  failcagainA  the  mail.

And  makes  the  waves  unto  the  skies  afeend :

Then  brake  their  oarcs  afld  rudder  eke  at  la  A,

Now  nothing  left  from  tcmpcA  to  defend.

So  that  the  fhip  was  fwaid  now  c^uite  afide.

And  to  the  waves  laid  ope  her  naked  fide.  -
14

Then  all  afide  the  Aaggring  fhip  did  reel.

For  one  fide  quite  beneath  the  water  lay.

And  on  the  tothcr  fide  the  very  keel.

Above  the  water  cleare  difeern  you  may.

Then  thought  they  all  hope  paA,  & down  they  kneel,
.4nd  unto  God  to  take  their  foulcithey  pray,

Woifc  danger  grew  then  this,when  this  was  part.

By  meant  th%  (hip  gan  after  leak  fo  faft<


vffif

tn:effUH$

tem.


The  wind,thc  waves  to  them  no  refpiic  gave.

But  ready  ev*ry  tiourc  to  overthrow  tlxm,

Oftihey  were  hoifl  fo  high  upon  1 lie  wave.

They  thought  the  middle  region  was  below  them.

Oft  times  fo  low  the  fame  their  VI  Hell  drave,  ,

As  though  that  Caron  there  his  boat  would  fliow  the  vir.t,  ui-
■Scant  had  they  t iuic  and  power  to  fetch  their  breath,  MtdSrtl*».
All  things  did  threaten  them  foprefentdeath.

16

Thus  all  that  night  they  could  have  no  relcafe.

But  when  the  morning  fomwhat  nearer  drew,

Andthat  by  courfc  ihc  furious  wind  fiiould  ccafe,

( A Arangc  nii(hap)rhc  wind  then  fiercer  grew.

And  vvhilc  their  troubles  more  and  more  incrcafe.

Behold  a rock  Aood  plainly  in  thtir  view,

And,right  upon  the  fame  the  fpitefull  bla  A
Bare  them  pcrforcc,which  made  them  allagaA.

17

Yet  did  the  maAer  by  all  means  afTay
To  Acarc  out  roomer,or  to  keep  aloof.

Or  at  the IcaA  to  Arikcfailcsifthey  may,

As  in  fuch  danger  was  for  their  behoof.

But  now  the  winddid  bearefo  great  a fway,

His  enterprlzeshad  but  little  proof ;

At  laA  with  Ariving  yard  and  all  was  torn.

And  part  thereof  into  the  fea  was  born.

18

Theneach  manfaw  all  hope  offafety  paA,

No  means  there  was  the  vefTcIl  to  dirciA,

No  help  there  was,but  all  away  are  ca  A,

, Wherefore  their  common  fafety  they  neglciA,

But  out  they  get  the  Hiip-boatiand  in  ha  A
Each  man  therein  his  life  Ari  ves  to  proteff.

Of  King, nor  Prince  no  man  takes  heed  nor  note.

But  well  was  he  could  get  him  in  the  boat.

19

Among  the reA, ifo^ero doth fuppoft
The  fafefi  way  to  bc,to  leave  the  fliip.

And  being  in  hisdubletand  his  hofe.

He  nimbly  down  into  the  boat  did  iki'p.

But  after  him  fb  great  a number  goes.

Before  they  could  the  ropeunwind  or  flip.

The  boat  at  length  did  fink  with  over-lading.

And  to  the  bottomc  caii’d  all  her  lading .


Thtf  iht$
havt  bun  A
ibi  fit  d»

nitJerfttnd
ibtft  thrajii.


»T was  lamentable  then  t«  hearc  the  cries.

Of  companies  of  cv’iy  fbit  confus’d.

In  vainc  to  hcav*n  they  lift  their  hands  and  eyes.

And  make  late  vowes,as  in  fuch  cafeisus'd.

For  over  them  the  wrathfull  fea  doth  rife.

As  though  to  give  them  care  it  had  lefu/d.

And  made  them  hold  their  peace  by  hard  conAiaintj
And  fjopt  the  pafTage  wbcacc  caiac  out  the  plaint.

21

Some  fwam  a while, feme  to  the  bottome  Tank,

Some  flote  upon  the  wave, though  being  dead,

Rogero  for  the  matter  ncucr  fliranke.

But  All  about  the  water  keeps  his  head,
Andaotfarre  off  he  fees  that  rockic  banke.

From  which  in  vainc  he  and  bis  fcllowei  fled  ;

He  thither  labourcth  to  get  whh  fwimming,

I A hope  t«  get  rpon  the  feme  by  diming.

G g With


?44


THE  XLI.  BOOKE


1

t


Het  iBfHM  ta
Rtgtro  *■
gatae  it  the
47  fl-  «/  tbil
boo!{f.


Orfa»do,


tbu  hath
rtferanct  to
Botardoi


22

With  Ifgs  and  antics  he  doth  him  (o  behare.

That  rtill  he  kept  upon  the  floods  aloft.

He  blowcsout  from  his  face  the  boiilrout  wave
That  ready  was  to  overwhelm  him  oft.

This  while  the  wind  aloof  the  vcflcll  drave.

Which  huld  away  with  pace  but  flow  and  foft,

Fro  thofcjthat  while  they  thought  their  deth  to  fljutt
Now  di*d  perhaps  before  their  glaflTe  was  run.

O hopes  ofmcnuncertaine,vaineand  frailc.

The  fliip  that  all  forfook,as  cjuite  forlorn.

When  all  her  wonted  guides  and  helps  did  faile.

Her  failers  drownd,and  all  her  tackle  torn,

A fafe  couifc  held  with  broken  maft  and  faile.

And  by  an  Eddie  ftom  the  rock  was  born.

And  ev’n  as  if  the  florm  had  chang’d  his  mind.

It  went  with  merry  gale  afore  the  windi
»4

And  where  with  mariners  it  went  awry;

Now  wanting  them  it  went  to  Affridit  right.

And  came  on  land  unto  Biferta  ny.

And  gently  on  the  fands  it  did  alight,
\VhattimeOr/<»»i^o  then  was  walking  by.
Conferring  with  his  fellowcsof  their  fight/

The  which  was  undertaken  by  them  three,

Againft  three  Princes  of  no  mean  degree.

45

And  for  they  faw'  the  fliip  was  faft  on  ground.

They  took  a boat,and  went  on  her  aboord.

With  mind  to  queftion  whither  fhe  was  bound.

Or  what  good  mercbandifcfhe  canafFoord  }

But  under  hatches  lading  none  they  found.

Save  good  iio^erof  armour, horfe, and  fword.

Which  he  behind  him  left, when  in  bad  taking.

He  took  the  boat, the  fhip  it  felf  forfaking.
a6

Orlando  view'd  them  well  with  good  regard.

And  having  chiefly  mark’d  the  noble  blade.

He  knew  it  was  that  famous  Baflifard,

With  which  he  did  fomcycatcs  before  invade
TaUarim  garden,fpitc  ofall  her  guard.

Who  by  ftrong  charms,  the  fword  and  garden  made.
It  may  be  you  ere  this  have  heard  the  talc.

And  how  this  fword  from  him  Brumllt  ftale.

47

And  after  fo  the  good  Roger o gave  it,'

Who  late  had  left  it  in  this  wofull  wrack.

Glad  was  Orlando  now  againc  to  have  it.

That  oft  had  triall  both  of  edge  and  back  j
He  deem’d  that  God  did  cv’n  of  purpofefave  it>

Now  to  fupply  therewith  his prefent  lack  :

And  after  ofthcfaid,and  thought  indeed.

That  God  did  fend  it  him  at  fo  great  need.

2S

At  fo  gitat  nced,when  as  he  was  to  fight,

Againft  Gradajfo  king  of  Sericane,

Who  had  ,befidc  his  great  and  pa  fling  might,
Renaldos  horfojand  fcarfull  ’Duriniane.

Rogeros  armour  though  it  looked  bright.

Yet  was  it  not  as  thing  fo  precious  tane.

At  being  priz’d  more  for  tbcfumptuousfliow.

Then  for  the  goodnefle, which  they  did  not  know.


39

And  fith  himfclfc  for  armour  did  not  care.

And  never  did  the  dint  of  weapon  fcarc.

He  doth  that  armour  to  his  cofin  fparc.

But  not  the  fword, for  that  himfel/ doth  wcarc :

The  horfethatwasof  fliapc  and  good ncflTc  rare.

Had  Brandimart, and  thus  divided  were.

Among  thefe  three, in  guerdon  of  their  paines.

An  equall  fliare  and  portion  in  the  gaincs.

?o

Now  each  prepar’d  againft  the  day  of  fight
Brave  furniture,  with  coft  of  many  a crown !

Orlando  on  hit  quarter,  bare  in  fight
High  Babels  tower  with  lightning  ftrtcken  down  ;
His  cofin  had  a Lyme  hound  argent  bright.

His  Lyme  laid  on  his  back, he  couching  down.

The  word  or  mot  was  i \\\$,iintill  he  commeth.

The  reft  wasricb,and  inch  as  him  bccommcth,

3'

But  Brandimart,who  as  I erft  mademention.

Had  heard  his  fathers  death,wcntall  in  black:

Of  braveries  he  now  had  no  intention.

Left  men  might  think  he  did  difcrction  lack.

He  car’d  for  no  dcvicc,nor  new  invention.

Nor  ware  be  fumptuous  clot  hing  on  his  back.

He  only  had  one  border  richly  fet
With  ftoncsjbut  darkned  over  with  a net-

A net  that  Fiordeltege  his  deareft  Q^ecnc

With  her  own  hands  againft  that  day  did  make.

But  neither  thcn,nor  all  the  time  between
That  firft  fhe  undertook  it  for  hisfakc.

Till  fhe  had  done  it,  was  die  ever  feen
T o laugh  or  rmile,or  any  joy  to  take  ;

Her  heart  ftill  heavy  was,her  look  ftill  faef.

And  yet  her  felf  did  know  no  caufc  flic  hid.

But  ftill  in  fcare,and  ftill  in  doubt  flie  is,

Her  (poufc  by  death  fh all  now  from  her  befundctelj
Oft  times  her  lelf  hath  feen  him  bc/rc  this
In  greater  fights  an  hunderd  and  an  bunderd,

Tct  never  did  her  heart  fo  give  amifle,  <

Wherefore  at  her  own  fearc  fhe  greatly  wonder’d  J
And  ev’n  that  rcafon  made  her  fearc  the  more,
Bccaufc  flic  was  not  us’d  to  fcare  before.

34

Now  when  each  thing  in  order  fit  was  fet,

Thechampions  three  were  fliippcd  with  their  borfev
Vnto  Aftolfo  and  to  Sanfonet,

The  charge  was  left  ofall  thofc  Chriften  forces,

But  doleful!  F/o?"de/rc^e,althoughasyct
To  hide  her  rorrow,fhc  her  felf  inforecs.

Yet  when  the  wind  away  the  vcfTell  beater.

She  burfteth  out  to  open  cries  and  tcarcs.

With  Sanfonet  Afiolfo  took  much  paine,  .?

To  bring  her  to  her  chamber  from  the  fhore^

Who  lying  on  her  bed  ,flie  ftill  doth  plaine.

That  fhe  hath  loft  hctfpoufcfor  evermore  f
To  feck  to  comfort  her  it  was  in  vaine.

For  talking  made  her  fearc  incrcafc  the  mote.

But  now  the  worthy  champions  in  this  while
Were  Cafe  arriv’d  at  lie.

Ne


tt*ki  in  lit

AUtijfitif,


fitrdrlitif.


UrtniimirV
Jptteb  t»  A-
pMmtia,


CrUnit  fim


StHUaet-
Ad  ccaj!li’

\ um  He  Kdf-
ftrU  aau-
futat  vK«*
tu.


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.'


3«

No  fboncr  fct  tlicy  foot  upon  the  land,

But(on  the  EaQcrn  fidc)thcy  pitcht  a tent,

Bccaufe  perhap  that  part  was  nearef^  hand.

Or  els  upon  fome  politick  intent ;

, On  tothcc  fide, with  fuch  an  cquall  band,

Cimi  Agramant : butfuhthisday  waslpcnt,
They  all  agreed  all  fight  to  bcfoiborn,

Vmill  the  very  next  enfuing  morn.

57

A watch  wascharged  then  on  cither  part.

That  neither  fide  the  toihcr  may  dcceire.

But  ere  it  yet  wasdark,king  Brandimarr,

(Though  not  without  0rl4«</or  fpcciall  leave)
Doth  mean  a wondrous  favour  to  impart
To  Agramant,\fhe  the  fame  receive  :

Tor  why  the  tone  the  tot  her  oft  had  feen
Ai  fiicBd$,and  had  in  Trance  together  been.

58

Now  after  jovning  hands  and  falutation.

The  noble  minded  Bravdimart  begun
Toufe  unto  the THrijeanflxhortationj
That  with  0?7i*»do  he  the  combat  fliunr
Affirming  unto  him  wiihpiotcftation.

Would  he  Ijelicve  but  in  the  Virgin!  Son,  ^

That  he  both  prefent  peace  would  then  afliire  him.
And  all  h;t  Rcalmci  in  Affridie  fafe  procure  him.

39

Bccaufe  you  arCjand  have  been  dcarc  to  me,
Thcrcfore(hefaith)thiscounfc!l  1 you  gi»e.

And  fith  1 follow  it  my  fclf  you  fee,

T hereby  you  may  be  fuic  I it  believe  j
Chrifi  isa  God,a  God  indeed  is  he.

An  Idol  Mawmet  is,that  doth  not  lire  •.
Wherefore  dcarc  fir,I  dodefiretomore
Trom  erronrs  foulc,ycur  fclf  and  all  1 love.

40

This  it  indeed  the  way  of truth  and  life.

All  other  wayet  but  this  do  lead  aSiay ;

Why  fliould  you  live  in  error  and  in  ftrife.

When  in  true  peace  and  knowledge  live  you  may  J
Tempeftuous  cares  this  world  hath  ever  rife.

And  if  your  prefent  fiatc  you  would  but  way.

You  plainly  may  perceive  your  venter  fucb,

Asyeu  to  win  but  little  hazard  much.

41

What  if you  could  thefonntofA/i/o  kill  ?

Or  us  that  come  with  him  to  wiojor  die  ?

Think  you  that  then  you  ffiall  have  all  you  will  i
Think  you  your  flate  you  can  reftore  thereby  J
No  furcjthcftatc  ef  Charlc!  is  not  fo  ill.

But  that  he  quickly  can  our  lack  fupply ;
Wherefore  dcarc  Sir  unto  my  counftll  lificn.

All  would  be  well,if you  would  be  a Chtiilen.

42

Thus  much  faid  Brandimart, and  more  befide
Hcwould  havcfaidjto peace  himto exhort,

Save  that  with  fccrnfull  fpcech  and  full  of  pride.
Fierce  Agramant  this  wife  did  cut  him  (hoit  ^

A madncflcmccr  itis(thus  herepli’d)

In  yoUjOr  any  man  that  in  fuch  fort
Will  counfell  and  advife  men  what  to  do,

N«t  being  cal’d  ef  ceunfcll  thereunto.


43

And  where  you  fay, to  this  love  mov’d  you  chief.

That  you  have  born,and  ftill  do  beatc  to  me.

Herein  you  pardon  muft  my  hard  belief.

While  in  Orlando!  company  vou  be ;

1 rather  think  dcfpairCjand  I pitc,and  grief
Hath  mov’d  you  hcrcuiuo^bccaufc  you  fee
Yourfoule  is  damned  toctcriiall  fire.

To  draw  us  thither  withyou,youdcfirc.

44

What  viftorics.ot'  els  what  ovcithrowcs
I ffiall  hereafter  h.ivc,Ged  onely  knowceh.

Nor  you  nor  I, nor  yet  Or/unde  knowes,

God  onely  where  he  lift  the  fame  beftoweth  ;

But  as  for  mc,no  fcarc  nor  fooliffi  ffiowes
Shall  daunt  my  couiagejhowfocic  it  goeth.

Die  firft  I will  with  torment  and  with  painc,

Much  rather  then  to  yccld,my  ftock  to  ftaine.

45

Now  when  you  lift.depart  from  hence  you  may,

Aslittlc  thankt,atid  flcndcrly  rewarded.

And  if  to  morrow  you  the  Champion  play
No  better, nor  no  more  to  be  regarded.

Then  you  have  plaid  the  Orator  to  day,

Orlando  furc  will  be  but  weakly  guarded  j
And  thefe  laft  words  in  manner  fuch  heiaid^

As  that  thereby  much  cholcr  he  bewraid.

45

Thus  patted  they,and  refled  all  that  night,

But  ready  they  were  all  by  break  of  day.

All  arni*d,and  ready  for  the  future  fight,

Small  fpcech  was  us’d, no  Iingfing  nor  no  ftay.

They  couch  their  fpcars,  ^ run  with  all  their  might  j
But  while  I tell  you  of  this  bloiidy  fray,

I doubt  I do  unto  Rogero  wrong.

To  leave  him  fwimming  inthcfcalblong.

47

The  gallant  youth  had  labour’d  many  an  houre  ;
Tofwim,andfavehimfclf  from  being  drownd.

The  fuiging  wave  ftill  threats  him  to  dcrouic.

But  guilty  confcicnce  raoredoth  him  confound  ^

He  thinks  that  God  will  of  his  mighty  power
Sith  he  forefloed  when  he  was  on  ground
To  he  baptiz’d  in  waters  frcffi.and  fitter,

T®  fowfc  him  now  in  waves  both  falc  and  bitter.

48

He  now  remembers  he  had  plighted  troth
To  Bradamant , nor  done  as  he  had  fpoken.

How  to  Renaldo  he  had  made  an  oath,

And  that  the  fame  by  him  was  foully  broken  j
Moft  earneftly  he  now  repents  them  both.

And  cals  to  God  for  mercy,and  in  token
Of  true  contrition  voweth  out  of  hand.

To  be  baptiz’d, if  ere  he  come  to  land,

49

And  that  he  would  renounce  all  Turkiffi  lawes,'

Nor  gainfl  a Chriften  Prince  once  weapon  cariic.

But  ferve  king  Charle!,anda\d  the  Churches caule.
And  from  the  fame  hereafter  not  to  vatic,

And  never  feck  delay  or  farther  paufe.

His  vertuous  Ipoufc  Dame  Bradamant  to  manic.
(’Twasftrangc)no  fooncr  he  this  vow  had  ended.
But  that  his  flicngth  iccreaft.Sc  fwimming  mended.

G I * And


I


THE  XLI.  BOOKS


»/ the  Ape-


StHttuce,

siti

itvctitn

teek.  i"  *bl

MereB,


Juiutn  Cbri'
fiifuavt.


?4^

50

And  wlicic  before  be  greatly  was  affraid.

That  thofc  fame  furging  waters  him  would  drovrOj
He  thinketh  now  they  do  Iiisfwinimingaid :

And  fomtimc  rifing/onatime  goingdown.

He  pallcth  on  with  courage  undifroaid,

A nd  fcarce  kc  feemed  once  to  wet  his  crown ;

That  fo  with  cunning  partjand  part  with  ftrcngtb.
He  reached  to  the  little  He  at  length.

5«

The  reft  of  all  his  company  was  drownd.

Nor  cTcr  wasa  man  of  them  feen  more.

But  by  Gods  oncly  grace  Regero  found
This  little  llcjandclammcrd  up  the  fliore  >

And  finding  it  a fmaW  and  barren  ground,

A new  fcarercfc.nolcfrc  then  that  before,

. Left  in  a place  of  needfull  things  too  fcant.

He  fliculd  be  fiatv’d  with  penury  and  want .

S»

But  yeewith  conftant  mind  and  unappal’d ,

BcfolvM  to  fufiper  all  that  God  would  fend,

Vpon  therock  with  much  ado  hccr«rd.

And  gat  upon  the  Icvell  ground  in  th’cnd  j
When  lo  an  aged  man  whofc  head  was  bald,

And  beard  below  hisgirdlc  did  defeend.

That  was  an  Hermit  that  did  there  inhabit.

Came  forth  to  him  in  godly  rcv’rent  habit.

And  comming  neare  he  cn*d,0  Sdul,0  Saul^

Why  perfccuteft  thou  my  people  fo  ?

As  erft  our  Saviour  fpakc  unto  Saint  Vaulf
Then  when  he  gave  to  him  that  blcflcd  blow,-
Behold  how  God  when  plcafeth  himcancall.
From  fea,from land, from  places  high  and  low,
When  you  did  ween  him  fartheft  he  was  nighefi.
So  fiioag  an  atm,fo  long  reach  hath  thehighefi.

5+

Thus  fpakc  this  Hermit  fo  devout  and  old.

Who  by  an  Angellin  his  llecp  that  night
Of  good  Rogeros  comming  was  foretold.

And  o^all  chances  fliould  on  him  allight.

With  all  his  valiant  aflionsmanifold,

That  he  had  done,and  fliould  perform  in  fight,
And  of  his  death,  and  of  his  noble  race.

That  fliould  fuccccd  him  after  in  his  place.

55

How(as  I faid)thi$  wife  this  Hermit  fpoke.

And  part  doth  comfort  bim,and  part  doth  check.
He  blameth  Iiini,thacin  that  plcafant  yoke
He  had  folongdcfcrd  to  put  hisneck.

But  did  to  wrath  his  maker  fiill  piovoke.

And  did  notcomcat  hisfirftcalland  beck.

But  flill  did  hide  himfclf away  from  God,

Vntill  befaw  him  comming  with  his  rod.

53

Then  did  he  comfort  him, and  make  him  know,

Thar  grace  isnercdcniM  tofuchasask:

^Asdo  the  workmen  ofthc  Gorpcll  fliow.
Receiving  pay  alikcfqrdircis  task)

Provided  thatourprayrofzcaldogrow^

And  Ici  VC  not  as  a vifer  or  a mask :

Thisdid  ilicmanofGod  Roger$  tell.

And  fo  from  thence  he  led  him  to  hisccll.


57

The  cell  a chappell  had  on  th’Eaflcrn  fide,

Vponthc  Weftern  fide  a grove  or  bcric.

Forth  of  thcwhich  hcdid  hisfood  provide.

Small  cheat  God  wor,wherwith  to  make  folk  merle.
Yet  forty  ycarc  he  had  that  living  ui’d,

And  yet  thereof  it  feem'd  he  was  not  wearic  ;

But  eating  berries, drinking  water  clcarc.

He  had  in  ftrength  and  health  liv’d  fourfcorc  ycarc.

58

Now  kindled  had  the  man  of  God  feme  wood.

And  on  his  boord  he  fet  a little  fruit.

The  youth  to  drie  his  clothes  not  fat  off  ftood.

For  why,  to  change  he  hath  no  other  fine  j
Then  he  by  th*old  mans  teaching  underfiood
The  faith,and  how  to  Chrifi  he  muft  impute
The  pardon  of  his  finsj  yet  ncre  the  later.

He  told  him  he  mufb  be  baptiz’d  in  water.

59

And  fo  he  was  the  next  enfuing  day.

And  afterward  he  icftcd  in  that  place
A while,and  with  the  manof  God  did  flay,
RcfolviPghimofev’ry  doubtfull  cafe  ;

■ Somtime  of  bcav’n,and  of  the  later  day,

Somtime  of  cartb,and  of  his  noble  rave.

That  fliould  in  time  to  come  hold  mighty  Rcaincs,
As  was  reveal’d  to  him  in  former  drcamci.

60

And  further  unto  him  he  doth  repeat.

How  his  chief  houfe  fliould  be  firiiamcd  E/fi,
Bccaufcintime  to  come  king  Charles  the  great
Should  fay  to  them  in  Latin  words, Hie  ey?e.

Which  is  as  much  to  fay,be  here  thcfcat.

In  which  you  fhall  hereafter  cverreft  ye.

And  many  future  things  to  him  he  told,  ,

Which  were  too  long  for  me  now  to  unfold.

61

This  while  Orlando  and  king  Brandimart
With  Marqueffe  OUvcro^(z%  1 told)

Met  with  thofc  three  of  the  contrary  part,

Yong  Jgramarueand  Gradajfa  bold.

With  good  Sobrino,w\\o  for  valiant  heart.

Gives  place  to  few  of  thcm,thougli  being  oU  ,

£ac  h fpurs  his  horfc,that  ran  a wondrous  pace.

And  of  their  blowcs  refbunded  all  the  place.

61

In  this  fame  courfc  each  plaid  his  part  fo  well,

Thatup to  hcav’nflew  fliivcr’dcv’rylancc.

The  hideous  noife  did  caufe the  feas  to  fwcll.

And  fomereportj’twas  heard  as  far  as  France  j
Gradajfo  and  Orlando  (asbcfcll)

Did  meet  together, were  it  choiccorchance ;

The  match  was  ct*n,fave  that  their  horfes  differ,

And  made  Gradajfo  feem  to  tun  the  differ.

The  weaker horfc  on  which  Orlandoroie,

Was  bruifed  fo  with  thisfbfcarfull  fliock.

As  now  he  could  no  longer  bearc  hislodc.

But  finking  down,lay  fenflcffc  with  the  knock
Orlando  then  did  make  but  fmall  abode.

His  courfer  lying  fcnflcffc  like  a dock,  _

Sith  that  with  neither  raincs  nor  fpurs  he  flurd.

He  left  his  raddle,and  drew  forth  bis  fword.


The  h»[e  4


He  tttimeih

lire  IK  the
4ihil^e  tl8

The  eembm

ef  thejixt
hj^Lha,


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


simile.


Orlanh
tvcn  affyed
tothehou/e
cf  Clati-
mont.


<4

With  Jgramj.nt  the  MatquciTc  hand  to  hand
Did  moll,  bctwecnc  themcquall  went  the  game,
Sobiino  was  by  Brandimartes  hand.

Cart  from  his  horfe,  I know  not  how  it  came.
But  at  that  time  it  could  not  well  be  fcand,

Iffo  the  horfe  or  horfeman  were  to  blame;

But  whether  beaft  or  rider  wanted  force,

Sobriiio  cei  tainc  downe  was  from  his  horfe.

• f

King  Brandimart  nereofFerd  once  to  tuch
Sobrino,  when  he  faw  him  downe  in  vew.

But  to  that  had  done  as  much

Vnto  Orlando,  in  great  haft  he  flew.

The  Marquefle  fight  with  Agramant  was  fuch,

A s which  fide  had  the  rantage  no  man  knew.

For  when  their  flares  were  fliircrcd  all  and  rent.
Their  axes  then  they  ufd  incontinent.

0 rlando  who  by  hap  a horfe  did  lacke,  ’

And  faw  GradaJJo  bent  another  way.

Whom  Brandimart  did  hold  fo  hardly  tacke.

That  he  enforced  him  theieby  to  flay  |

I fay  the  PaUadine  then  looking  backc.

Saw  old  Sobrino  flanding  in  his  way.

And  toward  him  he  go*th  with  looke  fo  fierce,'

As  though  his  eye,  as  well  as  fword  could  pierce.

67

Sobrino  gainfl  the  forceof  fuch  a man.

Sought  with  his  furefl  ward  himfclfc  to  fare.

And  as  a Pilot  doth  the  beft  he  can.

To  Ihunnc  the  fury  of  the  forging  ware,

Er’n  fo  this  well  experienc’t  Turl^e  began,]
Himfelfein  this  great  danger  to  behave,

With  fword  and  fliield  his  beft  defence  he  made,
Agdinft  the  fearefull  edge  of  that  fame  blade.

68

Which  blade,  of  fuch  an  edge,  in  fuch  an  arme.

No  marrell  if  to  pierce  it  feld  om  faile,

Againft  the  which  invainc  was  any  charme.

For  though  hisfhicld  was  flecld,  his  cote  of  male.
Yet  quite  through  fhield  and  armour  it  did  harmc,
To  fare  his  /boulder  ail  could  not  availe.

But  he  to  wound  Orlando  was  not  able,

ForGod  had  made  bis  skin  impenetrable.  ^

69

The  valient  Earle  redoubled  flill  his  blow.

And  thinks  from  (houiders  off*  to  cut  his  head,  ,
He,  that  the  force  of  Clarimont  did  know,

Gare  backward,or  his  ground  flill  traverfed,

But  in  his  trarer/ing  he  was  fo  flow.

That  with  one  blow  he  laid  him  downe  for  dead,
The  blow  fell  flatling,  but  with  force  fo  mainc.
As  citi/bt  his  helmet,  and  amaz’d  bis  brainc.
fo

Downe  fell  Sobrino  backward  on  the  ground.

From  whence  long  time  it  was  ere  he  arofe,
Orlando  thinks  that  he  was  fafe  and  found.

And  that  he  was  flatke  dead  be  do^h  foppofe :
Whcicfore  fince  Angle  foe  he  no  white  found,
Vnto  Gradajfo  prefently  he  goes.

To  whom  King  Brandimart  in  armet,  and  horlcs
Ia  fword,  inferiout  was,  pctbaps  in  force.


Hr

71

But  yet  the  noble-minded  Brandimart,

Vpon  Rogcros  bor/c  Frontino  mounted.

With  that  fame  Sarafinfo  plaid  his  part.

As  if  his  forces  he  but  little  counted  ;

And  fore  Gradajfo  not  in  skil  nor  hr  aiT,

But  in  his  fword  and  armour  him  (urmounteJ ;
Enforcing  him  oft  times  to  ftand  a locfc,

Bcoaufe  his  armour  was  of  no  good  proofe.

7»

But  good  Frontino  bare  away  the  bell.

For  being  ready  to  the  riders  band.

It  feem’d  where  ever  Tturindana  fell,

Frontino  had  fuch  wit  to  undei  ftand.

That  evermore  he  did  cfcapeit  well ;

But  all  this  while  it  hardly  could  be  frand.

In  tother  twaincon  which  fide  foitunc  works,

In  OliverOi  or  the  King  of  T url^t.

7i

Orlando  had  (as  late  before  I told)

Left  good  Sobrino  on  the  ground  for  dead.

Wherefore  on  foot  he  goes  with  courage  bold.

To  foccour  Brandimart  if  ill  he  fped  j
But  in  the  way  by  hap  be  did  behold
Sobrinos  horfe  that  without  cider  fled,

Orlando  flraight  Into  the  faddlc  valtcd ,

Not  looking  if  he  went  upright  or  halted  .*

74

One  hand  his  fword,  the  tother  bolds  his  raine.

And  fo  he  rideth  to  Gradajfowardf
Who  when  he  faw  him  come,  did  not  rcfrainc,
flut  to  encounter  with  him  flraight  picpai’d  t
To  fight  with  one  of  them,  or  clfe  with  twaine,
Itfcem’d  he  little  reckoned  nor  car’d  j /

He  minds  and  hopeth  to  cfFefl  it  foonc.

To  make  them  both  to  think  it  night  ere  nooflc.

75

Yet  for  a while  King  Brandimart  he  leaves,

And  turnes  him  to  the  Earlc,and  with  a thruft
Whereas  his  armour  wcakeft  hi  perceives.

There  doth  the  fierce Oradaj/fo  hit  him  juft.

And  enter  d,  but  his  cunning  him  deceives,

Orlandos  skin  be  pierced  never  muft.

But  when  with  BaUifard Orlando  flrakc,

His  helmet,  coat  of  maile,  and  fhteld  he  brake. ,

76

So  that  both  in  his  face,  his  breafl,  and  fide.

He  wounded  fore  the  King  of  Sericane,

- Who  marvels  much  what  flrangc  chance  did  betide.
For  never  erft  fuch  fore  hurt  he  had  tane  .*

He  thought  there  could  not  be  a blade  befide
To  pierce  his  coat,  he  having  25«ri«dd»e
And  fore  that  blow  had  him  difpatched  clearely.

If  it  had  had  more  flrengtb,  or  come  more  nccrely.

77

He  fees  that  sow  he  mufl  take  better  heed.

And  not  tnift  armour,  but  a furcr  ward.

To  feck  tofave  himfclfc  he  now  hath  need,

And  looke  unto  his  linbs  with  more  regard ;

Now  while  twixt  them  the  fight  did  thus  proceed.
Good  Bradimart  did  fee  he  might  befpar’d.

Wherefore  to  breath  himfclfe  be  then  retired.

Still  ready  t’ayd  each  part,  if  caufe  required.

Ogl


THE  XLI.  BOOKE.


Now  had  Sohrino  long  lainc  in  a trance.

With  that  fame  brulc,  and  with  that  bloody  wound,
Giv’n  him  by  that  great  Falladim  of  France,

That  at  two  blowes  had  laid  him  on  the  ground.
With  much  ado  he  doth  himfclfe  advance.

And  (landing  on  his  feete,  and  looking  round,

He  tliought  his Maftcr  wasin  vvcakeilcafc.

And  to  his  ayd  he  moves  his  filent  pace,

79

AtO/ivcrorbackc  becomes unfpide.

Who  foie  on  Agra  nant  did  fixe  his  eyes,

A nd  that  fame  liorfe  that  Oliver  did  ride.

He  bought  behind  in  fuch  defpitefull  wife,

That  wanting  (Ijength,  hefelldowne  on  hisfidc.
And  wasnot  ableanv  more  torife:

And  which  was  woifc  then  his  unlookt  for  fall.

His  foot  hung  in  the  ftiiop  theiewithall.

80

Sohrin'i  doubled  then  his  blowes  againe,

Thinking  from  fliouldeisofFhis  head  to  pare.

But  yet  the  (leele  made  that  attempt  butvainc.

That  Vulcan  tempted  erft,  and  Heilor  ware ;

King  Brandimart  at  5'oir/« runs amaine.

When  of  his  doings  he  was  well  aware.

And  overthrew  him  quite,  and  (loutly  fmote  him.
But  th’old  fierce  man , foonc  on  his  feet  up  got  him,

t 8i

And  once  againe  at  Oliver  he  flies.

And  once  againe  he  thinketh  him  to  kill.

Or  at  the  lead  caiife  him  he  fliall  not  rife  ;

But  he  that  had  his  better  aime  at  will,

Layd  with  hisfword  about  him  in  fuch  wile.

As  that  he  kept  himfclfe  from  further  ill :

And  made  his  foe,  that  was  of  no  great  ftrength
Stand  dillant  from  him,almoft  twife  his  length,

82

The  MarqueflTe  hopes  ere  long  to  eafe  his  paine.

If  he  can  caiiCeSobrino  (land  aloofc.

Who  bled  fo  fall,  as  now  from  fight  t’abflaine
He  thought  it  would  be  bed  for  his  behoofe ;

Now  OliveroaW  his  force  doth  ftraine.

And  to  get  loofehemakethmany  a proofe,

But  (lill  hisfoot  wasfaft  tohisgreat  hurt.

And  dill  the  horfe  lay  tumbling  in  the  durci

This  while  King  Brandimart  doth  goc  tofind
Traianot  (bn,  and  now  he  hath  him  found,

Frentino  now  before,  and  dtaight  behind  :

That  good  Frontino  that  can  turnc  fo  round :

The  horfe  was  fuic  and  of  a pa(fing  kind.

The  Sothernc  kings  was  ready  drong,  and  found :
He  had  ihatfamouicourfeiBrigliadore,

The  which  Rogero  gave  him  late  before,

84

But  fure  thcTurkc  greatods  in  armour  had,
for  he  had  one  of  proofe,  well  rridc,and  fure.

And  Brandimartes  was  indeed  but  bad.

Such  as  he  could  in  warning  fliort  procure.
Wherefore  to  change  it  now  he  would  be  glad.

And  that  he  (hall,  his  heart  doth  him  a(Ture  t
So  that  he  waxed  dourer  dill  and  bolder.

Though  Agramant  had  hurt  him  in  thcihouldci'.


85

Tradajfo  further  had  about  his  thye.

Him  giv’n  a blow,  not  to  betane  in  (port,

But  yet  the  king  did  fo  the  fight  apply.

And  laid  on  lode  in  focouragiousforr.

As  that  he  wounded  his  left  armc  thereby.

And  pricked  tiis  right  hand  (thus  they  report)

But  all  this  was  but  May-game  and  delight,

Vmo  Gradajfos and  Orlandes  fight.

Gradajfo  hath  Orlando  halfedifarm’d.

And  made  him  with  one  blow  bis  (Tiield  forfakc.

He  could  not  wound  him,for  his  skin  was  charm’d.
But  yet  hishead-pccccon  bothfideshe  brake ^

But  him  Orlando  hath  in  worfe  fort  harm'd,

Bcfidc  that  hurt  of  which  before  I fpake.

He  hathdrawnc  blood  cf  him  in  many  a place.

As  namely  in  breaO,  in  thioatc,  and  in  bis  face.

8?

Gradajfo  fees  himfclfe  with  blood  befmeard.

And  fmaiting  paine  in  many  places  found,

And  fcesthatEailc-likeonc  that  nothing feaid,
Stand  whole,and  quite unwounded  fafeand  found  j
Wherefore  with  both  his  hands  his  fwerd  he  reard  ,
With  mind  toclcavc  him, rather  then  to  wound.
And  cv’nas  hedefir’d,  with  all  hisftrength.

He  drake  him  on  his  head,  at  haife  fwutd  length.

88

And  fare  had  clov’d  him  to  the  faddle  bnw.

Had  It  another  then  Orlando  becne,

But  now  as  if  It  had  falnc  flailing  thoc.

The  blade  rebounded  from  him  bright  and  cleene.
But  yet  that  Earle  was  daz’d  fo  with  the  bloc,

I thinkefomeflarreson  ground  by  him  wcic(ccns,
He  lod  his  bridle,  and  hts  (word  had  mid.

Save  that  a chainedid  bind  ittohiswrid*

89

The  horfe  on  which  the  good  Orlando  rode.

Was  eke  (b  feared  with  the  fearcfull  found.

As  there  he  durd  no  longer  make  abode.

But  on  the  fands  at  randon  runneth  round.

And  bcates  Orlando  as  a fenfleiTe  lode.

That  with  the  paine  dill  flood  as  in  a found.

And  had  little  haidcrfpurred.

He  might  have  tane  the  Earle  ere  he  had  durred.

90

But  as  he  rode  he  faw  king  Agramant,

Vnto  cxticmed  point  of  danger  brought,)

For  why  the  valiant  fonneof  Monodant,

Had  loofd  bis  bever,  and  fuch  hold  had  caught
Vpon  his  gorget,  that  but  fmall  did  want,

Kv’n  with  one  dab  his  lad  end  to  have  wrought;
For  why  the  noble-minded  Chridiaii  Prince,

Had  won  hit  fword  from  him  a good  while  fiace.

Gradajfo  doth  no  more  that  Earle  puifcw.

But  maketh  hifl  king  Agramant  to  ayd.

And  unto  Brandimart  that  nothing  knew.

Nor  of  no  fuch  misfortune  was  a(Frayd,

He  comes  behind  his  backe  quite  out  of  rew.

And  both  his  hands  at  once  on  fword  he  layd.

And  to  that  fort,  be  drake  with  all  his  might.

Full  on  the  bcliQCt  of  the  noble  knight.


Oh


34?


OF  ORLANDO  FV;RIOSO.


92

oh  hcav’flly  Father  granta  icfting  place
In  Paradiccj  foi  this  thy  Martyrs fpirit.

That  hartngjun  all  liistcmpcQuousrace,
He  may  with  rhee  an  harbour  (afe  inherit.

A h Durindan,  badft  thou  lb  Mttlc  graccj
So  ill  to  quire  thy  nobicft  Mahers  merit,
Thatir.'  hishght  thou  could  of  life  deprive,
His  bell  and  kiiidefl  friend  he  had  alive  I
9'-

Thefword  did  pierce  a double  plate  of  fle’cle.
That  111  tic  lefTe  was  then  two  fingers  thick.
Good  Bcandimirt  gin  with  the  blow  to  rccle,
Itpicrccihad  fo  deepe  umo  the  quickc.


His  braines  all  cut  therewith  he  plair.ely  fcele,

And  downc  he  fell  like  one  moil  deadly  fickc ,

A ftreatne  of  blood  out  of  the  g.  ievous  wound.

Ran  forth,  and  dydewith  crimfon  all  thegrcui.d.
f4

By  thisOrfjtit/o  waked,  and  behild

His  Braridomrt  that  lay  now  a la  mort  :
Hcfcesthcd'cricdrie  that  lum  had  kild.

This  angetd  him,  and  griev’d  him  jo  fuch  f >rr,

Twas  hard  to  fay  which  morchis  flbr.iackc  fid.

His  wrath  or  griefe,  but  time  to  niournc  was  fliort.
That  griefe  gave  place  and  wrath  bare  chicfcll  fwiV,
But  nOw  I thinkc  it  beft  a while  to  ftay


In  thisbioli  mny  be  noted  the  notable fondnes  oftbofc  men,  that  in  avoiding  ofthelejfer  danger, faU-into  a gica'er,  at
they  did  thit  forfool{e  thejhip,  and  leapt  into  the  botepvhere  they  ner(>  all caft  a'xCiy,and  the Jltip  lf  /ilfe  faved.  In  that  ’

Rogero  in  bit  extremity  of  danger,  jeelcth  a remorfe  of  confeience,  ^ ftradgbt  hath  ucourfe  to  God  ly  prayer  von,

it  isagood-prefidentjor  others  todoethelif^c,  though  indeed  moji  men  are  apt  to  doe  fo, hut  all  the  matter  u,  to  perfome
theeffeit'of  their  von  promifeto  Godajter  for  that  Jen  carejor, according  to  that  faying,made  a provab  in  ttalian

• Scampado  il  pcricologicbbatoil  fanto,

If^hen  dagger  h fiapcd,  the  Saint  is mochyd.  .

But  the  example  ofRcgeromay  move  us  to  more  true  devotions  and  this  Jpecch  of  the  good  old  Hermit,  let  every  one  ap-
ply to  him/ejjc  t bat  hath  neeu  of  it , and  it  may  fortune  doe  him  as  muchgeod  as  a fermon  s for  indeed  it  is  wo/t  fivect
andcomfortable  andvery  true  dohrine,  andnell  befeemingthe  per/on  oj  a devout  old  man  ( as  I called  Urn  in  the  a.
ftnJfe)jor  feldome  gqeih  devotionnithyouth,be  it  Jpol^e  nithout  oj^ence  of  our  Peckcd<  vamed  Miniflers  attheregoes
an  old  tale  of  three  things  that  a blind  man  could  fee  for  tvhen  bis  boy  told  him  that  therenai  brought  a vny  brave  I orfe,
then  faith  the  blindman,  J fee  he  is  fat ; the  boy  marvelled  how  he  (yen  it  s next  hetoldhioi,  u:cre  cameby  apajjing
faire  woman  , then  J fee  fhe  isyoung  (qtioththc  blindman)  wellguejfed  Mafier , faidhis  b(y.  Lflly,  came  ly  a depput
Preacher : Sir  quoth  the  boy,  here  comes  agood  Prtefl,  t^n  he  is  old  ,faid  the  blind  man,  and  that  gttejfe  was  < 0 right,
the  boy  was  affraid  his  Maffer  had  had  his  eyes  ataine.  For  indeed  age  and  boiies  chaftijedwithfajting  and  /ludie',are
companions  oj  deuotton ; as  a friend  oj  rnine  was  wont  to  fay  in  Italtan,^

C Da  medico  rognofo,

Dio  miguarda  Da  alctimifia  ftracciato.

Da  montcjioihgroffaio.

Coddefendmefiemamangie  Phyfitien,  (forthe  Phyfttton  tbdf  cannot  cure  the  itch  in  himfelfe , willhardly  cure  other
greater  difeajes  in.another.)  From  a ragged  or  beggerfy  Alcumifijor  he  that  cannot  get  himfelfe  good  cloths,  will  hard-
ly turne  lea  • into  gold  From  a corpulent  or  fat-fc'a’Frkt : for  he  that feeds  his  owne  body  fat,  is  not  nicely  to  give  0 the
icjt  {ptrituallfeoJofthcfoule.  ''  ' ' "

/n  Brandimart  that  lahoreth  to  per/wade  Agramant  to  peace, we  may  note  a noble  dijpofition,an  ! excellentgoodna-
ture,that  btingvery  flout , and  treating  oj  peace  ( as  they  fay  ) with  his  fwordinhishand , yet  cndevotired  to  tahyup
the  quarrel  before  it  came  to  blood,  which  though  it  be  at  hanhjejfe  office  many,  times  (as  here  it  hapned  1 0 Brandimart
tobef  ornedjbr  his  labour)yet  ought  not  that  to  terrific  agood  mind  from  fo  hohefi  an  office.  And  jure,  the  caufewly
great  quarrels  rife  upon  f mall  matters,  betweene great  perfonages,and are  aiterwar  ;jo  long  ere  they  be  reconciled,  and
fo'hoUowly  reconciled  at  lafi  ; is  that  f'ome  of  a wiclyd  policy,  feel^  to  lyepe  them  at'variance,thinliing  it(  as  she  proverb
faith)  befi  fijhingin  traubledwaters  ; but  neither  S.  Veter  that  was  thsgoodfifijer  of  men  nor  his  Mafter,  were  ojthat
opinion,  but  do  fay  contrarily, Se^ti  pacific!.

Ofthehoufe  of  Efie, it  was  fir/l  called  Atefie,  but  after  (as  rnine  Author  hath  delivered)  it  was  turned  to  E fie  , by  Hiftoiie,
real  Jpeech,  Hie  eftc  Domini , and  Fornarius  writing  upon  this  place  affirmer  the  fame.

In  the  devijes  or  impreifes  t»/OrIando,d«d Olivero,?B(jy  be  noted  the  decorum  they  uf  id,*  or  Orlando  heingalyowne  Allulion.
end  approve.,  warrior, gives  a more'jerrible  device, yet  rf erring  the  honor  to  Go  l,in  mofi  Chrifiia  >. manner  of [trilling
downe  and  conjounding  bis  enemies  with  lightning  Olivcro  wbbfe  device  is  the  dpanieUjyr  lyaru  hound  couching  with  the
jrordfin  che  vegMydoth  with  great  modefiy  [hew  thereby,  that  the  fpanieUor  hounithat  is  at  com.nandcment , waiter  b
till  thefowle , or  deartbeftrilyn,  and  then  boldly  leapeth  into  thewater,  or  draweth  af  erithyland:  fohe  beingyet  a
yong  man,  waiteth  orangccafiontojhew  hUvalew  ,whic  being  come,  heewottli  no  longer  touch,  (but  (hew  the  fame.

In  this  lyndwe  have  had  many  in  our  time, as  the  happte  i ' -day  oj  Move  nber  can  witnejfe,rhai  haveexcellcdjor  ex-
cellency of  device : 01  which  i]  l fhould  ^ealy  at  large,  it  would  as  'y  a vo  lume  ly  it  fcl  e My  cLe  have  choyn  this  of
Olivrro  or  mine  owne,  partly  Itlimg  the  modefiy  thereof,  partly  (for  I amnot  afhamedto  cojijejfeit)  becaufe  Ijancythe
fpaniefffo  much,whoje  pilfure  is  in  the  device,  and  ij  any  mahy^  merry  at  it  ( as  / doubrnot  buifemewiU  ) iJhaUnotbe
forrieforit  :for  one  end  oj  rny  trave  din  this  worhy,  is  to  mahymy  rien  Ismerrygandbefiiles  I can  alledgc  many  exam-
ples 01  wile  men  ,and  ome  very  (rrear  ,nen,  thathaue  not  onely  talynpiilures  , but  'built  Cities  in  remembrance offer-
viceahlebeafis  Ant  as  or  dogges , "Dotfor  Cayncs  a learned PhyfitioHan4ago»dman,wroteatreatifeinpraife of
them^  and  the  Scripture  it  felje  hath  vouchfajed  to  commend  T obias  dogge,

Hercende theannotationtof  ihc4i. booke.  ^ Si


J^nt^tfae'
B rndamnnU


loltinrro


RADAgSO


oaiu:


HSZLlLLUia  ii^:i'u:nu±iidiLLiii  UW  t


THE  XLil.  BOOKE


351


CfwTMU.


(X

Hi  ny  »f


THE  ARGVMENT.

Orlando  pfhu  coMqttej}  takes  fmalljojy
IP'hich  CAHfedhim  his  dearejl  friemd'to  vs  ant :
Loves  divers  paffians  breed  mo  fmall  annoy  y
7'«/?fl»rRcnaIdo<jW(j«or^Bradamanc ;

She  vifhing  her  Rogero  to  enjoy  y
He  th^  Indian  Quccnc,^*r  foone  he  did  recant y
T anght  by  difdasne : at  laU  in  Latian  ground^
The  Palladine  ki>fd  entertainment fonnd.


1

Hat  non  l^and,orwr^at  fliarp
hard  month’d  bir.

What  chaine  ofdiamond  (if
■ fuch  mipht  be)  ‘
Can  bndle  wrathfulneflTc
and  conquer  it,

And  keep  it  in  his  bounds  and
due  degree  ?

When  one  to  us  in  bonds  of
friend  fliip  knit,

A nd  dearly  lov’d jbefore  our  face  we  fee.

By  violence  or  fraud  to  fuffer  wrong.

By  one  for  hinn  too  crafty jOr  too  Urong.

2

And  if  before  we  can  fuch  pang  digeft,

We  fwerve  fomtime  from  law, and  run aftray.

It  may  be  well  excus’d, fith  in  oncsbreft
Pure  reafon  at  fuch  time  bcarcs little  fway  ,

Achilles  when  with  counterfeited  creft.

He  faw  PatrocL's  bleeding  all  the  way.

To  Icill  his  killer  was  notfatisfi’d,

Ixccpt  he  hal'd  and  tare  him  all  befide,

3

Sonow  a littlefincewhcn  in  hisbrow,

Alfonfo  wountfed  was  with  cutfed  ftonf.

And  all  his  men  and  fculdicrs  thought  that  now
Hisfoulcfiom  earth  to  heav'n  had  beenupflowne,  ^
They  kild  and  fpbil‘d,they  cai’d  not  whom  nor  how,
Strong  rampiers,waIs,to  them  defence  were  none,
Butin  that  firy  they  put  all  to  wrack,

Both  old  and  yong.and  all  the  town  tofack.

4

Our  men  were  fo  enraged  with  this  fall,

To  think  they  had  ebeir  Captaioc  left  Tor  aye.


Thatto  thefword  they  put  both  greatand  finally
That  happen’d  then  to  come  within  their  way :

And  Ib^heii*  fortune  did  prevaile  withall.

That  they  theCaftledidrcgainethatday,

In  fewer  houtes  to  their  great  fame  and  praife^

Then  hadihci’panidri/f  got  iterft  indayci.

5

It  may  be, God  ordained (as  I guefle)

That  he  t!.it  time  fliould  wounded  be  fo  (brc.

To  punifli  that  fame  fin  and  foule  cxccfle,

His  Idescommittcd  had  a while  before.

When  Peyff/cii^ forlorn  and  indifitefle

Did  yecldjand  fiiould  have  had  his  life  therefore  j

Yet  was  he  kild  when  they  had  him  furpris’d.

By  mcB  whofe  greater  part  were  circumcis’d.

6

Wherefore  I juftly  may  conclude  thus  much,

Thar  nothing  can  more  hotly  kindle  wrath,
Thenifoncihall  the  life  and  honour  touch.

Of  our  ccarc  friend,nr  do  him  wrong  or  fcath.
Now(asl  faid)Or/Wtfx  grief  isfucb.

And  fuch  occafion  of  juft  griefe  he  hath.

He  fees  his  fiiend,for  lack  of  better  heeding,

Lie  Hat  on  ground,and  alraoftdcad  with  bleeding.

7

As  the  Momadian  Shepheard,that  a Snake
Alongthegrafleand  herbeshath  Aiding  feen,

Which  late  before  with  tooth  moft  poyfon’d  ftrikt
His  little  Ton, that  plaid  upon  the  green,

Doth  bruife  and  beat,and  kill  him  with  a ftake :

So  goes  this  Earle  with  blade  moft  fharp  and  kcen^
And  yet  far  more  wiih  wrath  and  choler  whet  j
And  Agramant  was  then  tbcfitft  be  met.

Viihappy


fimm


THE  XLII.  B,OOKE


s

Viihappy  he  that  in  hii  pafTagc  flood.

His  (word  was  gone, as  I declar’d  before,
Himfcife  bcrmcared  all  with  his  own  blood,
Brave  Brandimart  had  wounded  him  fo  fare,
Orlando  comes in  his  wrathfull  mood.
With  Ballifard, r\\it  payes  home  evermore.

He  fliikcsf  by  fortune  were  it  or  by  Srt)
lufl  where  the  flioulders  from  the  head  do  part,

9

Loos’d  was  his  helmet,as  1 erft  did  tell.

That  like  a Poppic  quite  fell  off  his  head ,

The  carkasofthc  Lybian  Monarch  fell
Down  to  the  ground  and  lay  along  flark  dead,
Hisfcule  by  C'il'<xr8n,ferric-manofhcll,

T o Flutos  houfe  or  Stygian  lake  was  led.
Orlando  flaid  no  whit, but  flraigbt  prepar’d
To  find  Gradajfo  eke  with  BaUifard.

10

But  when  Gradajfo  plain  beheld  and  favrj
Of  Agramant  the  wofull  end  and  fall.

He  felt  an  unaecuflom’d  dread  and  aw.

Who  never  wonted  waste  fcareatall  j
And  cv*n  as  if  his  own  fate  he  forefaw,

He  made  the  FaUadine  rcfiflancc  fmall :

Feare  had  fo  maz'd  bis  head, and  daz’d  his  fence.
That  for  the  blow  he  quite  forgat  his  fence.

1 1

Orlando  thrufl  Gradajfo  in  the  fide.

About  the  ribs, as  be  before  him  flood.

The  fword  came  forth  a fpan  on  totherfidc.
And  to  the  hilt  was  varniflit  all  with  bloody
By  that  fame  thrufl  alone  it  might  be  tri’d.
That  he  that  gave  it  was  a warriouVgood,

That  with  one  thrufl  did  vanquifli  and  fubdue
The  flouted  champion  of  the  Turf^ijh  crew.

I a

Orlando  of  this  conquefl  nothing  glad,

Doth  from  bis  faddle  in  great  haft  alight.

And  with  a heavy  heart  and  count’nancc  fad.

He  runs  unto  his  dcare  beloved  knight.

He  fees  his  helmet  cut, as  if  it  had

' Been  cloven  quite  with  axc(a  wofull  fmht)
Andcv’nasifit  had  been  made  of  glaflc.

And  notofflecl,and  plated  well  with  brafle.

The  FaUadine  his  helmet  then  unties,

And  finds  the  fcullelov’n  down  unto  the  chin,
And  fees  the  brainc  all  cut  before  his  eyes  j
Yet  fb  much  breath  and  life  remain’d  within.
That  he  is  able  yet  before  he  dies,  ,

To  call  toGod  for  mercy  for  his  fin.

And  pray  Orlando  joync  with  him  in  praying.
And  ufeto  him  this  comfortable  faying.

>4

My  dearc  Orlando,  fee  that  to  out  Lord,

Thou  in  thy  good  devotions  me  commend :
Likcwifc  to  thee  commend  I my  deare  Fiorde-
And  liege  he  would  have  faid,but  there  did  end  ,
Straight  Angels  voices  with  moft  fwcet  accord,
Wcic  heard  the  while  his  fpirit  did  afeend.

The  which  diffolvcd  from  this  flcflily  mafle,
la  Iwcctcfl  melody  to  hcav’n  did  pafle.


15

Orlando  though  he  fliould  rcjoyce  in  heart.

Of  this  his  end  fo  holy  and  devout,

Becaufc  he  knew  his  loving  Brandimart
Was  taken  up  to  hcav’n, without  all  doubt.

Yet  flcfli  and  bloud  in  him  fo  plaid  their  part.

That  without  teares  he  cannot  bcarc  it  out.

But  that  be  needs  mufl  fhew  fomc  change  in  chcatc.
To  Iccfc  one  more  then  any  brother  dcarc.  ■

16

This  while 5'oi^ri»o  bruifed  m his  head.

And  wounded  forcly  in  his  fide  and  thyc,

Vpon  the  ground  fo  great  a flreamc  had  bled,
feem’d  his  life  in  pmll  was  thereby}

And  Olivero  little  better  fped,

On  whom  his  horfe  flill  overthrown  doth  lie.

He  ftriving,bMC  his  ftri  ving  did  not  boot.

To  get  at  liberty  his  bruifed  foot*

17

And  furc  It  feems  he  had  been  woifc  apaid.

Had  not  his  dolcfull  cofin  quickly  come.

And  brought  to  him  both  quick  and  necdfullaid.
Before  the  painc  had  him  quite  overcome ;

His  foot  that  long  had  in  the  flirop  flaid,

Was  therewithal!  fo  void  of  fence  and  numme.

That  when  he  flood  upright  he  was  nor  able
To  touch  the  ground, much  Icflc  tred  firm  and  flable.

18

So  that  indeed. Orlando  in  his  heart.

But  little  joy  of  fo  great  conquefl  had.

He  wailes  the  death  of  his  deare  Brandimart,

And  that  his  kinfman  was  in  flatc  fo  bad:

Now  lay  d'eir/«o,though  alive  in  part.

Yet  with  a look  fo  chcarlcflc  and  fo  fad.

And  fo  much  blood  his  aged  veincs  had  bled.

That  doubtlaflc  in  few  howres  he  bad  been  dead.

19

Sane  that  Orlando  with  compafTion  mov'd.

To  fee  him  lie  fo  lorn, and  fo  difticfTed,

Gate  him  fuch  nccdfull  things  as  beft  behov’d.

And  charitably  made  his  wounds  be  dtefled  ;

So  kindly ,thatfome  kinfman  deare  bclov’d,

And  not  his  foc.a  man  might  him  have  guclTcd  t
Such  was  this  Earles  good  naturc,fiercc  in  fight.

But  fight  once  done, from  malice  free  or  fpight,

lO

ThehoifCjand  bodies  of  the  other  twaine
He  took  away,and  left  theit  men  the  reft.

To  be difpos’d  to  theirown  piivate  gaine.

Or  to  interre  their  Lords,as  they  thought  beft.

But  hcre,that  in  my  ftory  Ido  faine,

Fredericl^e  Fulgofo(as  I hcarc)hath  giyfl,

Sith  at  this  He  he  late  arriving  found
Inall  thcTansc  no  Icvcll  foot  of  ground,

ai

Nor  doth  he  probable  it  deem  or  take.

That  fix  fuch  knights  as  bad  in  aimcs  no  pecre.

On  horfcback  fliould  a combat  undertake.

Where  no  one  foot  of  plainc  ground  doth  appeare*
To  which  objeflion  I thisanfwcr  make,

That  tbcn,in  times  now  part  fev’n  hundredyeare,
rlaine  ground  there  was.  but  now  fomc  inundation.
Or  earthquake  might  procure  this  alteration.

Wherefore


I4trut
fr si  ft  if  a

mbUmind,


Itthf  in

Mr-


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSOJ


tb  emtt  (9

Crltndt  sm
fitfft  144.


StMUttl


it

Wherefore  /uf^s/ojhonourofthy  namet
Blight  /tt/gor,caufing  all  thy  (lock  to  (hinCj
If  in  this  point  thou  hadd  imputed  blame
To  me, perhaps  before  tha’t  Prince  divine.

From  whom  thy  countries  good  and  quiet  came.
And  did  it  firft  tokjvcand  peace  incline.

Inform  him  now, that  cv’n  perhaps  in  thii
My  taleof  truth  or  likelihood  doth  not  millc.

This  while  Orlando  looking  from  the  iTiore,

A little  Frigot  did  far  off deferie.

That  both  with  failc  and  with  the  help  of  ®rc,
Vnto  that  He  feem’d  in  great  haft  to  flie  j
But  ere  of  this  I tell  you  any  more,

1 muft  to  France  as  faft  as  1 can  hie,

Tofceifthcy  be  merry  thcreorfad,

Now  they  from  thence  the  T urlis  cxpulfcd  had-
24.

Firft  let  ns  fee  how  faithfull  Bradamant

Doth  take  his abfence  whom  flieloveth  moft,
Whoin  hisoathduccare offaithdid  want,
Which  he  had  tane  in  fight  of  either  hoft  i
Now  Aire  flic  thinks  his  love  and  faith  too  feast,

T o hcare  he  quite  had  left  the  Chiftren  coft  t
If  in  his  publikc  oath  he  be  urjuft.

Whereto  alas, then  whereto  can  Ihe  trull  ?

And  ftill  returning  to  her  former  plaints,
Andftiilbemoning  her  unluckie  fate,

Withwhith  he  • fclfc  flic  too  too  well  acquaints,  ,
She  cals  her  fclfc  accurft,and  him  ungrate,
lea  blaming  God  himfelf,and  all  his  Saints,

Fcr  not  redrcfling  this  her  vvofull  ftate,

She  fcarce  abftaincs  high  bUrphcmic  to  fpcak.
That  God  unjuft,aad  that  Saints  powers  are  wcaki

Then  fhc  Ajfc//^(abfent)doth  reprove.

And  curft  that  Oracles  perfwafion  blind.

That  lapt  her  inthis  Lobyriotl;  of  love,

\Vlicncc  fhe  her  fclf  by  no  means  can  unvvinde.
But  to  Marfifa  all  the  reft  above,

Shcopenlayes  herftomack  and  her  mind.

With  her  fhe  chides  and  utters  all  hcrcholcr.

And  yet  flic  prayes  her  comfoEt  this  her  dolsr.
v>

Mar f fa  comforts  her  in  all  Ihc  may.

And  tcls  herwhat  a vertue  patience  is.

And  partly  doth  cxcufe  Rogeros  flay ;

And  further  giveth  her  her  faith  in  this.

That  if  file  find  he  wilfully  delay.

She  willconftiainc  him  mend  all  is  amiffe,

Orif  flic  find  that  herefufe  to  do  it.

To  fight  with  him,and  fo  compell  him  to  it.
a8

With  this  fhc  did  in  part  her  paincaffWage,

For  why  it  is  in  forrow  great  rcHcfj
T o thofe  of  either  fex  or  any  age.

To  have  fome  friend  to  whom  to  tell  their  grief.
But  now  if  Bradamant  be  in  fuch  rage,

Nolcflcis  he  that  of  her  houfc  was  chief,

I mcanc  Ae»aido,that  cannot  cxpulfe  '

Loves  fire,  from  cv’ry  fincwiveiae  and  pulfe.


ays

I think  I need  not  now  to  you  repeat
A thing  by  me  fooften  told  before.

By  name  that  love  and  that  affcdlion  great,'

That  to  Angelica  RenaUo  bore ;

Nordid  hcrbeautycaufcfo  much  his  hear,  '
As  did  that  fpringofwKich  he  drank  fuch  ftore,
Now  all  theother  FaUadines  were  free
From  all  theic  foes, now  Cupids  thrall  is  he.

JO

An  hundred  meffcngeis  be  fends  about,

Himfelfc  the  while  an  hundred  wayes  more  riding.
To  ask  of  lier.or  els  to  find  her  out.

Who  hath  her  now,or  where  is  her  abiding.

At  laft,bccaufe  he  thinketh  out  of  doubt.

That  Malagige  of  her  can  learn  fome  tiding.

He  asketh  inm(but  blufhing fore  with  fhaine)

If  he  knew  what  of  tW Indian  Quccnc  became.

J*

His  cofin  wonders  at  rpftrangcacafe,

And  in  his  mind  thereon  long  time  he  mufed.

That  when  Renaldehai  both  time  and  place.

Her  offers  large  and  kind  he  ftill  refufed.

When  both  her  fclf  did  fuctohavc  his  grace.

And  many  of  his  friends  perfwafions  ufed :

And  ATij/d^/ge  himfclf  among  the  reft,

Hadprov*d  him  oft  with  prayer  and  withrequeft.

The  rather  eke,  bccaufc  Renaldo  then
By  taking  hcr,had  fet  his  cofin  free,

VVho  then  was  kept  clofc  prifner  in  a denj
And  for  thatcaufe  in  peiill  llainc  to  be  j
He  marvels  that  he  now  would  feck  hcr.wlicn
No  hope  nor  caufc  there  was, and  further  he
With  angry  look  did  bid  him  call  to  mind.

Hew  in  this  point  be  had  been  too  unkind .

Slit  good  Renaldo  now  quite  out  of  tune,

Pray’th  him  old  quarrels  from  his  mind  to  more,

And  doth  moft  carncftly  him  importune
Vnto  his  hclp,his  skill  and  books  to  prove.*

Which  made  his  cofin  fo  much  more  prefume
Vpon  hit  reconcilement  and  true  love,

And  promift  to  aflift  him  if  he  may.

And  for  his  anfwcr  he  prefi  xt  a day.

J4

And  ftraigbtfrom  thence  he  go’thunto  the  place,

I Where  he  was  wont  the  fpirits  to  conjure,

A ftrong  vaft  cavcjin  which  there  was  great  fpace.
The  precepts  of  his  art  to  put  in  urc :

One  fpritc  he  cals, that  of  each  doubtful’  cafe
Of  CH^ii/rcourc,could  give  him  ncticefure:

Of  him  he  askt  what  bred  Ronaldos  change.

By  him  he  heard  of  thofe  two  founutincs  ftrang^

35

And  how  Renaldo  by  misfortune  led,

Firft  happen’d  of  that  hatefull  fpiing  to  drink.
Which  hisdiftikeofthat  faire  Lady  bred.

And  made  her  love  and  proferd  fervice  ftink  ;

And  howagainc  by  fomcillftarmifled.

He  drank  ofth'othcrfpring,  which  caus’d  him  think
Her  only  to  be  loved  and  admir’d.

Whom  erft  he  hated  more  then  caufc  requir’d.

Moi'eoret


354


THE  XLII.B  00KB


IM  ihi

fiiry.


3**

Moreover  he  to  Malo£igU  (lio  w’d.

How  that  fame  famous  /ndian  Qaccn(nay  quean)
Had  on  a Pagan  youth  her  fcl'f  beftow’d.

Of  parentagCjof  ftate, of  living  mean :

A nd  how  from  Spainc  they  in  a galley  row’d,

All  Chriftendme  and  Spaine  forlaking  clean,

And  pafllng  both  withfafety  and  with  cafe,

(In  Tcmrous  barkof  Catalya)  the  Teas.

Now  when  for  his  anfwer  came,

Hts learned  cofin  feeks  him  to  perfwadc,

Vnto  fomc  better  thought  his  mind  to  frame,

Nor  fuithcr  in  this  gulf  of  love  to  wade;

Allcdging  what  a (lander  and  a fliamc.

It  was  to  Fancy  one  her  fclf  had  made,

Not  like  a Q^een, but  like  a vile  maid  Marian,

A wifc(nay  lIavc)unto  a bale  Barbarian.

3*

In  fine  he  faid,(Iie  was  to  th’/«i/er  gone.

With  her  Afcdoro,and  was  wclnigh  there  :

Ronaldo  not  a little  musM  thereon,

Yet  all  the  reft  he  could  with  patience  beare.

And  for  the  paine,he  counts  it  fmall  or  none.

So  he  at  laft  might  find  her  any  where  •

Wherefore  of  it  he  had  no  care  nor  keep.

Nor  could  that  make  him  once  to  break  his  deep.

39

But  when  he  heard  that  one  ofbirthfobafc  '

Had  with  his  mifiris  laid  his  knife  aboord.

It  Teem’d  this  ftrakc  him  fpeechlelTe  in  the  placej
He  was  not  able  to  pronounce  a word  ;

His  heart  did  quake  within,his  lips  like  cafe
So  trcmbled,anfwer  he  could  none  afford  j
Butovcrcome  with  anguifh  of  thcpaflion.

He  dang  away  from  thenecin  caiclclTc  fafliicn.

And  much  lamenting  this  her  foulc  abufc.

He  rowes  to  follow  her  what  ere  enfue.

But  yet  to  Charles  hefaincththiscxcufc.

That  fithGr<2di^,of  his  word  untrue.

Had  tanc  his  hoifc  contrary  to  the  ufc
Of  valiant  knights,he  means  him  to  purfue  j
Allcdging  that  it  were  hisgreat  difhoncr,

T o let  Bayardo  have  a forren  owner.

And  that  a Turkc  fliould  boaft  another  day.

That  he  by  fight  did  him  thereof  bereave :

King  Charles(though  loth)yet could  not  fay  him  atj
T o fuch  an  honed:  (uit,but  gave  him  leave  j
Which  tanc,aIone  from  thence  he  goes  his  way,
And  all  his  friends  in  Paris  he  doth  leave :

With  Guidon, ’Dudon  flout  to  him  do  prefer
T heir  company , but  he  refus’d  tlicir  offer.  ,

42

Away  he  goes  alonc,yct  not  alone,

Grief8,teares,and  plaints  dill  hiscompantoniarc:
And  oft  in  heart  he  bitterly  doth  grone,

To  think  that  crdhcfhould  fo  little  care
For  her  grcatlovc,which  wilfully  forgone.

He  now  edeemes  at  rate  fo  high  and  rare.

He  could  have  wifh'd (thus  was  his  mind  perpIcKt)
But  OQC  day  to  enjoy, and  die  the  next.


.4?

Then  he  bethinks  with  no  Idle  gticf,nay  itge,  •
How  flic  could  find  in  that  her  lofty  heart,

Tofet  her  love  on  fuch  a forric  page.

The  merits  all,and  fcrvicc  put  apart.

Done  unto  her  c v’n  from  her  tender  age.

By  men  of  high  renown, and  great  dcfcrt ;

Thus  with  a fired  heart  and  watred  cyne
He  rede  until!  he  toucht  the  banks  of  Rhyne.

Ere  long  into  Ardenna-rvoaii  he  enters.

Scone  after  he  Bajylea  quite  had  pad  :

woods, whence  many  come  repenters.

And  in  that  forrefthave  been  fore  agall.

To  travcll  through  the  fame  Renaldo  venters.

When  fuddcnly  the  skie  did  ovcrcad.

And  there  arofc  a black  and  hideous  dorm.

And  then  appear’d  a monder  ofdrangcform.

45  '

She  feem’d  of  womans  fliapc,but  in  her  head
A thoufand  eyes  fire  bad,that  watAdid  keep.

As  many  cares,with  whrch  fhc  harkened.

Her  eyes  warftiid$,and  tbeieforc  never  deep.

In  dead  of  hairc  har  crown  fnakes  overfpred.

Thus  marched  (lie  forth  of  the  darkoededeep.

Her  tatlc  one  Serpent  bigger  then  the  red,

W^hich  flic  with  knots  had  ti’d  about  her  bred.

..  .4^

This  fight  Ronaldos  mind  appald  fb  fore.

He  feels  his  heart  already  gan  to  failchim.

And  fith  it  never  had  done  fo  before.

He  marvels  very  much  what  now  fliould  ailc  him  f
Yet  dill  his  mied  mifgavc  him  more  and  more.

To  fee  the  monder  comming  to  adailc  him,
Hcnathledc  counterfeits  his  wonted  boldncfTe,
Though  quaking  hands  bewr^jd  hrs  inward  cold  no#

47

The  monder  draight  adaulted  hiir,much  like
Toonc  thatperfc£l  was  and  skildm  fence.

And  when'agarnc  he  with  hisfword  did  drike.

He  miffed, and  could  do  her  none  offence.

M uch  doth  Rendldo  this  ill  match  miflike.

And  little  wants  to  quite  didraft  his  fenfe,  )

Right  blowes  and  reardcmainc  he  driketb  many.

But  yet  he  cannot  hit  her  right  with  any.

48

The  monder  dicks  a Serpent  in  his  bred.

That  drake  his  heart  into  a freezing  cold.

Another  fixed  is  below  hiscred.

And  on  his  neck  and  fhouldcrstaketh  hold;

Rcnaldb  thinks  to  get  him  gone  is  bed,

And  fpurs  away  with  all  the  fpeed  he  could,

But  that  vile  monder  was  not  lame  to  find  him.

But  overtook  bim^and  leapt  up  behind  Itim.

49

And  whether  he  go  draight, or  go  he  wide.

The  monder  fitteth  fm«  and  holds  him  fad.

He  knowes  not  how  to  be  from  her  unti’d.

Nor  any  mean  within  his  mind  can  cad.

His  heart  ev*n  quakes  within  him, and  befide
That  he  was  with  this  hideous  plague  agad.

He  fonow’d  fo  not  knowing  how  to  mend  it.

He  loth’d  hit  lifc,and  did  dcfiic  to  ead  it.


LoA^imAt


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO,


m


fo

]ffe  fpurs  amainc,«n<!  purpofcly  he  takes

Theruggcd  vvayes,tiie  worft  that  he  could  find.

By  craggie  rocks,and  hil$,through  biyers  and  brakes
Through  copfies  thick, by  narrow  paths  and  blind.
But  furc  t be  knight  the  matter  much  tnifiakes.

He  cannot  from  the  monfict  him  unwind  .■

And  like  it  was,grcac  harme  had  iiim  betided.

Had  not  for  him  been  help  in  time  provided.

51


57


TH  jtqj  jj,  g knight  unto  his  fuccour  went,
rr«*  expum-  finning  fieel,and  on  his  Oiield


dfdia'he
it  a/ibu  iao\


Thtprtptrti
aj  itaUafii,


He  bare  a yoke  in  fundry  peeces  rent.

And  flames  of  fire  all  in  a yellow  field.

So  wcaponed  he  was,as  if  he  meant
To  make  all  that  encountred  him  to  yceld
A fwoid  and  fpeare  he  had, and  to  the  fame,

A Mace  from  whence  he  threw  continual!  flame.

• a

His  Mace  was  ftoi’d  with  cvcriafling  fire,

Thitever  burned,and  did  never  wall.

No  other  weapon  needed  onede"rc,

To  makegood  way  with,whcrcfoev*r  hepafl,
And  furc  RcmUos  danger  did  require
Qinck  iemcdy,whcrefoic  the  knight  doth  haft;
And  when  he  Aw  tbismonftcr.and  did  view  her.
With  his  ftiffc  fpeare  forthwith  be  overthrew  her.

5«

But  this  fame  fall  did  her  no  whit  annoy.

Wherefore  to  ufc  bislpcare  he  now  mifliketh.

He  one'v  wils  his  fiery  Maccimploy,

And  with  that  lame  the  monfler  foule  he  ftriketh  i
Then  fhe  no  longer  could  her  force  enjoy  j
Renaldo  while  fhc  fled,occafii.n  piketh
To  feape  away , as  him  that  knight  perfwaded,
Whik  he  this  monfter  more  and  more  invaded.

54

Now  when  the  knight  had  with  hi*  fiery  Mace
Diiv'n  back  this  mon:’cr  to  er  datkfomc  den.
Where  (he  for  fpite  doth  beat  her  head  and  face.
Repining  at  the  good  of  other  men.

Then  to  Remldo  he  doth  iide  apace,

And  when  be  had  (bon  overtanc  him,then
He  ofFcrd  in  kind  fort  with  him  to  tide.

From  out  the  dailfome  places  him  to  gntde.

55

But  when  Renaldo  was  from  danger  free.

And  that  fame  knight  by  whom  h;s  fafety  came.
So  courteoufly  to  come  to  him  did  fee,
Hisfpecchto  him  in  kind  words  he  did  fiame.

And  gave  him  many  thanks  in  high  degree.

And  then  befought  him  he  might  know  hit  name.
That  t h'Emperour  and  all  bis  court  might  know.
What  knight  did  fo  great  grace  on  hiuvbeftow.

The  knight  in  coartcous  manner  thus  repli’d,

1 would  not  you  fhould  take  it  in  difpleafure.
That  I my  name  from  you  a while  fiiall  hide.

But  ere  the  fliadow  grow  a yard  by  meafuie,

1 fiiall  you  tell  • thus  onward  ftill  they  ride,
Renaldo  being  pleas’d  to  ftay  hislcafure.

So  long  they  went  together  till  they  found
A chryfiaUipring  that  ran  along  the  ground.


At  which  full  oft  the  herdmen  that  did  dwell
Nearc  thofe  fame  woods, have  in  their  loving  fits
Diunklovr  away,with  tafting  ofth.it  well.

And  ofthofc  patfiouspuiged clean  cheir  wits.*
Now  (for  1 1-i  I II  ioht  t ha  t rode  with  him  cculd  tell
■ That  for  Af/?4kor  ill, this PhyCck  fiis^

He  doth  advife  him  thereto  ftdy  a fpace.

And  make  that  well  their  bait  and  itfting  place*

58

Renaldo  of  the  motion  well  allowthi

And  liplitcth  ftraighr,and  totht  well  doth  go.
Both  fort  hit  heat  and  travcll  bred  hisdrowth.
And  I hat  the  monfter  h?d  difturb’d  him  fo ,
VntothcChivftall  well  be  puts  his  mouth,  ?

And  greedily  drinksdown  five gulpsor  mo,

And  f um  his  hteft  doth  with  onedraught  remove
His  burning  thii  ft  and  his  mote  burning  love.

59

Now  when  that  ocher  knight  chat  with  him  went,  ’
Saw  h;m  lift  up  himfclffrom  that  fame  brook.
And  found  he  did  his  foolifii  love  repenr.

And  chat  ho  now  chat  humour  quite  forfook,

Then  to  declare  his  name  he  was  content.

And  looking  with  a grave  and  lofty  look.

He  CaidyRenaldo,kuow  I higlu  2>s/^r»e,

That  came  to  loofc  thee  from  loves  foohlh  chaine.

60

Thisfaidjhe  vanifii’d  from  Remldo  quite.

His  horfe  nor  him  he  could  not  after  fee,

Renaldo  marvels  at  this  wondrous  fighr.

And  looks abou', and  faith, vvhat  whci-c  is  he  ?
Ailaft  he  thinks  *tis  fomc  familiar  fprighr.

That  by  good  Mala^i^h  fent  migbtbe  ;

Ton’d  him  of  that  tedious  care  and  wo.

That  many  months  had  bi.-n  affl'dlcd  fo,

61

Or  elsthat  God  to  him  this  help  did  lend,  -
Of  hisefpcciall  grace  and  lo'  ing  kindnefle,

A s erft  he  did  u nto  Tobias  fend

His  AngcJI  to  dell  vet  him  from  blindncflcr

But  let  it  Angell  bc,or  be  it  fiend.

Renaldo  takes  againft  him  no  unkindneffe ; \

He  thanks  and  praifesit,and  doth  acknowledge
To  ha  VC  receiv’d  of  him  grace,  wit>and  knowledge.

Now  that  fame  great  miflike  and  hate  returned
Of  fairc  Angeltca,whom  late  helov'd.

Now  hcdefpiled  hcr,aud  gicatly  feomed
To  think  that  he  for  her  one  foot  lad  mov'd  1
Yet  onward  into  India  wacd  he  journed.

As  for  Bayardos  fake  it  him  behov’d  .*

Bccaufcboih honourdid  tompcll  himtoir,

And  to  his  Prince  he  undertook  to  do  it.
et

He  tides  to  Bafile  next  enfoing  night.

Where  very  la.e  before  fomc  newes  were  heard.
How  that  Orlando  challeng’d  was  to  fight.

And  for  that  fight  how  he  himfrlfprcpar’d,
Notjtbat  Orlando  newts  hereof  did  write.

But  one  thatcame  fromi^/ct^thitherwaid.

Affirmed  he  had  heard  the  fame  reported.

By  many  that  loSidlyttfoned,

Hb  Tfccfij


oftki  mu

f ou  it  atdim
it*  /irjt


THE  XLII.  BOOKE


64


taMrtud

(Ufi


Thffir  nevves  do  fet  on  edge  RenaUot  heart.

He faine would  prefent  beat  thisconfljft.

He  fame  would  take  therein  Orlandos  parr.

To  whom  he  botinden  was  in  bonds  moft  drid},
Offriendfliip,of  alliance,and  defert :

Whcrcfcdc  he  takes  poft  horfe,and  fpBi’dand  prickt.
And  chang’d  both  beaffs  & guides  each  tc  miles  end
And  toward  Italy  he  ftill  doth  bend.

«5

At  Conpance  he  did  pafle  theftream  of  Rhine,

And  then  beyond  the  yllpes  he  foon  doth  go.

To  Af<j«/o<t,and  erethe  Sun  decline,

He  paiTcd  ore  the  (lately  dream  of  Poe,

Here  he  did  doubt,and  did  not  foon  dedgne.

If  he  fliould  travcll  all  the  night  or  no  i
^*/?*^**  u ^ bchaviour’d  knight

ofcurtcfic,  came  in  his  fight.
efthtMan-  66

tuta  knight  This  knight  forthwith  unto  Renaldo  went,
that  bad  tb*  ask’d  him  if  he  were  a marri’d  man,

Renaldo  marvels  what  the  qoedion  meant.

But  anfweid  yea, then  tothcr  ftraight  began.

And  praid  him, that  he  would  he  then  content
To  be  bis  gued,at  fuchchcare  as' he  can ;

Offringto  fhow  him,whilcwith  him  hetarri'd,

A fight  well  pleafing  unto  all  wci'ctnarri'd.

67

Renaldo  glad  Co  good  a bait  to  make.

And  no  Icffc  willing, haps  mod  rare  to  heare.

Would  not  the  offer  of  this  knight  forfakc.

Of  cfltcrtainment  good  and  friendly  chearc.

But  onward  with  him  doth  his  journey  take,

Vmill  be  faw  a goodly  place  a ppcarc.

So  well  fet  forth  both  for  the  flicw  and  fence,

As  feem’d  not  for  a private  mans  cxpence.

6t

The  porch  was  all  of  Porpberic  and  Tuch,

Of  which  the  fumptuous  bailding  raifed  was.

With  images  that  feem’d  to  move,fce,tach,
Somchew’d  in  done,fomecaiVd  andcu^in  btafle,
Likewift  within  the  beauty  was  as  much;

Beneath  a dately  arch  they  draight  did  pafTe
Vnto  a court  that  good  proportion  bare.

And  was  each  way  one  hundred  cubitet  fquare.

And  cither  fide  a Porch  had  palling  faire.

That  with  an  arch  is  on  two  collumns  plac’d,
of  equallfizcthcy  feemed  cr’ry  paire.

Yet  fundry  worksjwhich  them  the  better  grac’d.

At  each  of  thefe  a widc,large,eafic  daire.

Without  the  which  all  buildings  arc  defaced,
Andthorefame  daires,fo  dately  mounting,lcd
Each  to  a chamber  richly  furniflied  t
70

The  collumns  high,thcchaptcr$  built  with  gold.

The cornifiics enrich’d  with  thingsof  cod.

The  Marbles  fet  from  far, and  dearly  fold.

By  cunning  workmen  carved  and  imbod.

With  Imagcs,and  antikes  new  and  old,

(Though  now  the  night  thereof  concealed  mod )
Shew  that  tl\at  work  fr*  rich  beyond  all  mcafurc.
Could  (cant  be  huilded  with  a Princes  aeafurc.


71

But  nothing  did  Co  much  the  fight  enrich,

Asdtd  the  plenteous founcainCjthat  did  dand
lud  placed  in  the  middle,unde,  which
The  Pages  fpred  a table  out  of  hand,

And  brought  forth  napry  rich, and  plate  more  rich.

And  meats  the  cboicell  of  the  fea  or  land :

For  though  the  houfe  had  dately  loomes  full  many.

In  fummer  feafon  this  was  bed  of  any.

This  fountaine  was  by  curious  workmen  brought
To  anfwcr  to  the  red  with  double  fquarc.

Eight  fcmall  ftatucs  of  white  marble  wrought.

With  their  left  hands  an  azure  skie  up  bare,

Which  raining  dill,expellcd  beat  and  drought,

From  all  that  under  it,or  neare  it  are,

In  their  right  hands  was  liorn  Thathornt

By  cvVyoncot  thole  eight  datues  born.  fignijifih

' ° flemt  Ctfut

7 * camu

Each  of  thefe  datues  reded  both  their  feet  OfAmat-

V pon  two  images  of  men  below,  thta,/etkiu

That  feem’d  delighted  with  the  noife  fo  fwcet  obtubk.
That  from  the  water  canic,thac  there  did  dow.

They  alfo  Teem’d  the  Ladies  low  to  greet.

As  tliough  they  did  tbcir  names  and  vcrtucsknotv  S
And  in  their  hands  they  hold  long  fcrolcsof  writings
Of  their  own  pennings  and  their  own  enditings.

And  in  fait c golden  letters  were  the  names
Both  •f  the  women  wrote,and  of  the  men.

The  women  were  eight  chad  and  fober  dames.

That  now  do  live, but  vf  etc  unborn  as  then  t
The  men  were  Pocts,that  t heir  worthy  fanaet
Intimctocome  fliould  praife  with  learned  pea:

Thefe  Imagesbareupa  brazen  treflell.

On  which  there dood  a large  white  Marble  vefTell.

71

This  took  the  watei  from  the  azure  skie,

Fiom  whcncc.with  turning  of  Tome  cock  orvice.

Great  dure  of  water  would  mount  upon  high.

And  wet  all  that  fame  court  cv’n  in  a trice  ,

With  fight  of  thefe  Renaldo  fed  his  eye.

So  that  his  hod  could  fiaiccly  him  intice.

To  feed  his  domack, yet  he  oft  him  told.

His  meat  would  matte, and  fallcts  would  be  cold,

7^  taUan^Mfb,

Then  down  at  lad  they  fate  them  at  the  boord.

And  pleafant  talk  did  helpdiged  their  meat.

His  hod  that  was  no  niggard,did  affoord
Great  dote  of  delicates  to  drink  and  eat,

A nd  all  this  while  Renaldo  fpske  no  word.

Although  hedid  it  oft  in  mind  repeat.

And  though  his  tongue  did  itch,lGprav  him  tell,
What’twaMbat  would  plcafcmarn’d  men  (b  well.

77

At  lad  he  put  him  mannerly  in  mind
Of  that  he  firddid  ptomifehimto  fliow,

Ev’n  then  be  plainly  faw  his  hod  inclin’d
To  inward  grief, and  did  more  penfive  grow.

With  fccrct  fight, and  leaving  half  behind ,

Atlaft  a Page  cameinwithcurtficisw.

And  bearesa  dandmgcopofgold  mod  fine.

Without  of  gemmcs,and  full  within  of  wine.

With


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


357


Wlth'thiSjtfic  Maftcrof thefeaftdid  finilc,

And  on  Renaldo  look’d  with  pleafant  chcarc.

But  one  that  well  had  marked  him  that  whilCj
Might  fee  more  giicfc  tiun  mirth  in  him  appearc :
Now  noble  giicft(quoth  hc)within  a while
You  fiiall  fee  prov’d  a ftrange  conclufion  here.

That  necdsmuft  be  full  welcome  to  betri’d,

By  all  that  are  in  bonds  of  wedlock  ti*d.

p8

For  furcl  think(hefaid)cach  husband  ought,
Makefcarchiffo  hisw'fceftccm  him  dearly.

If  fame  or  fliamc  by  her  to  him  be  brought.

If  man  or  bcaft  be  be  reputed  mecrly  ;

The  burthen  of  the  home  though  it  be  thought
To  weigh  fo  heavie,and  to  touch  fo  nearly.

No  doubt  but  many  get  them  in  their  mariage,

Yet  feel  them  not,thcy  be  fo  light  in  cariage.

5 9

But  if  a man  by  certaine  fignes  may  know.

How  that  bis  wife  to  him  is  true  and  jufl-.

He  hath  more  caufc  more  kindnefle  her  to  fliow.
Then  be  that  lives  in  right  or  wrong  miftruft :

For  fome  without  a caufc  do  jealous  grow,
Whofc.wives  ate  chart, and  free  from  lawlertelurt  :
And  fome  that  foi  their  wives  truth  dui  rt  bavertwin.
Have  for  their  labours  in  their  head  a horn.


go

Now  fir, if  you  believe  your  wife  is  true.

As  fure  till  one  do  find  contrary  proofe,

I think  both  you  and  all  men  oughtofdue,
forthat  no  doubt  is  bert  for  their  bchoofe.

Here  you  fliall  fceit  tn*d  within  your  view.

For  which  I praid  you  harbour  in  my  roofe  ;
Thi»cup(faid  he)if  you  defire  to  know  it.

By  drinking  in  the  fame, will  cIcatJy  rtrow  it.

8i

Now  drink  hcreof,and  prove  this  parting  skill.

For  if  A£fems  armes  be  on  your  crert,

Dowhat  youcan,you  rtiall  the  liquor  fpill
Befide  your  mouth,upon  your  lapand  breft:

But  if  your  wife  bechafl, then  drink  yourfill,
Nofuch  mifchanccyuur  draught  will  thcnmolcft.
Thus  much  he  faid,and  fixt  on  him  his  eyne.

And  thinks  Renaldo  fure  would  fpill  the  wine.

82

Renaldo  halfc  allured  to  artay

Tofind  a thing, which  found  hemight  repent.

Did  take  in  hand  thcgoldcn  cup  rtraight  way.

As  if  to  quaffcit  ofF,wtrc  his  intent ;

Yet  firft  hedoth  thecertainedangcr  way.

To  which  by  tarting  fuch  a cup  he  went.

But  giveme  leave  a while  fome  breath  to  take,
Beforcyou  heare  what  anfwer  he  did  make.


A&um
arutt%  tpert
hornet  livtM
him  by  Did-
Hditphereief-
iHdfleafant
feUovc  vrrot*
thu  diHicl{  of
ineihot  btd
moried  4
li^ht  but.
wiftiTlidid*
te  credit
duxiffiifed
iUnDidad

eft,  ^

’Nd.m^  A-
(leoneum
ddttibiGaU'
re  cdput.


Thu  hoo\e  begins  rcith  a morall againfl  wrath,  andrevenge,  cxcufing  rather  then  allowing  them  thatyeeld  to  that  Morall.
lloudy  paJfton:biic  let  all  noble  minded  men  ( I Jpeal^e  to  men  of  the  fwora ) if  they  do  as  Orlando  did,  revenge  the  death
of  their  deare  friend, yet  after  taf^e  example  oj  Orlandos  clemency  towards  Sobrino,  whom(after  the  fury  of  the  combat
was pafl )he  made  to  be  cMred.Tully  in  his  Oration  pro  Marcello,  hath  many  excellent  fayings  to  this  effcfl,  to  praife
Cxfat^andall  fuch  as  being  able  to  revenge, yet  rather  chufe  to  forgive  : as  in  one  place  he  faith,  verum  animum  via-
cere,iracundiam  cohibcre,  viftoriam  temperare,6cc,  Haccqui  faciat,non  egoeumfummis  viriscomparo,fed  fi-
milltmum  Deo  judico.  Toovercome  the  paffions  of  the  mind,  to  bridle  ones  anger,  to  moderate  the  vUlory,  tiT'c.  wha
doth  thefe  things  compare  not  him  to  the  befi  fort  ofmen,but  i lil^en  him  to  God  himfelfe. further  in  the  fame  oration
Ite  cals  wrath  an  enemy  to  wifdome-,and  our  common  Englijh  proverbe  faith,  thehafiie  mannever  wantethwoe : aH
which  I alledge  is  rather  to  prove  mine  authors  faying  true:  that  it  is  hard  to  bridle  wrath, and  to  temper  revenge;  and
tonfequently  the  more  commendable  for  thofe  that  can  do  it:  according  to  the  faying, pvdehsn  qua:  difficiliajiznd  therfore
the  more  noble  and  great  a man  is  either  in  birth  orfortune,the  more  honorable  it  is  for  him  to  be  jpare  and  not  bloudy  in
revenge;  Porte  & nolle, nobilc.  And  even  in  this  lafl  hooheyou  read  how  hurtfull  defire  of  revenge  falleth  oft  time  to
him  that  defireth  it ; jor  Agramant  came  ofpurpofe  into  France  to  be  revenged  upon  Charles, aizd  was^asyou  fie )firfi
expelled  out  of  that  Realme,and  after  bereft  of  bis  life.  ,

0/ Alfonfos  hurt  you  may  read  r»  Gujcchardin,«nt/ho»  his  men  recovered  the  Bafiiafrom  the  Spaniards,  who  had  HtltotiC.
eertaine  Moores  with  them  at  that  timc;and  therefore  he  faith  f of  men  whofe  greater  part  were  circumcifed.)  Fulgofo
or  Fregofo,w««  Archbifhop  ofSaleme,and as  it fiemes,had  carpedat  Ariortos  verfi  o/Lyppadufa ; but  he  defends  the
matter  prettily,  alledging  that  an  earthquake  or  inundation  had  defireyed  all  the  levell  ground.  T he  lilie  reproofe  had
Virgil  about  the  haven  of  Mongibe  llo, which  he  deferibes  at  the  root  of  that  hid,  where  indeed  there  was  none  : and  the
lilie  excufi  is  madefor  him,that  it  filled  with  the  continuall  cafiing  up  effiones  out  of  the  burninghiU.  Catalani  art  the
chiefe  houfi  of  Spaine,alledged  here  ly  the  PocA,/or  their  fucceffe  in  difeoveringthe  Indies,  though  indeed  the  Fortu-
gals  Lufitani  not  CataUnidefirve  the  praife  of  it.

The  monfier  that  ajfaulted  Renaldo,  fignifies  jealoti fie  that  he  had,that  another pojfefi  his  love:  the  Ipiight  that  de-  Allegoric.
livered  himwas  difiaine,that  with  the  heat  of  noble  courage, fignified  by  thefierie  Mace , overthrew  the  monfier , and
drave  him  quite  away  : it  is  fo plaine  in  the  verfe  it  needs  no  expofition.

The  cup  that  RenMowas  ojfer’d,puts  me  in  mindojthe  lilie  fancie, in  the  Hifiorie  of  Herodotus  in  the  ficondbool{,  Allufioib
hriefiy  it  is  thus.Vharao  Ringof  E^pt, having  by  illhap,lofi  bis  eye-fight, was  advifid  (by  fome  Oracle)  to  bath  his  eyes
in  the  urine  of  a chafi  woman.  Ivherefore  firfi  heproved  his  wives, andafter  diver  fe  other  great  Ladies,  but  he  found
none  didhimgoodbut  one  poore  gentlewoman,  wherefore  being  recovered  of  his  fight, he  put  all  the  other  to  death , and
married  that  one:  but  becaufi  the  matter  of  the  cup  is  continued  in  the  next  boofie,/ fbaU  jpea\e  more  to  this  ejfcUfin  my
notes  upon  the  fame.

Here  end  the  notes  of  the  xlij-  Bookc.

Hha


jt-

%mrKu


hiKb/emtn


h UtTHtd
min.


t»  wuriifi^


Jmfimt  b».
n>«*


THE  XLHI.  BOOKE.

m


THE  ARGVMENT.

Rettaldo  hearestwo  talcs  to  like  effeSly
Tone  ef  a Bargcman,fWi&tfr  0/4  Knight :

Both  proving  that  rewards  trill foont  inf eH
T he  minds  of  chajlefi  dames ^and make  them  light  t
To  Lippadufe  he  doth  his  cottrfe  dired,

But  fir  ft  Orlando  fintfilft  had  bis fight :

That  Hermit  that  Rogero^iiW  hapti^e.

Heal'd  Oliver,  4»<^Sobritie  in  liktwife.


X

Cutftj  6 greedy,  ounfatia-
blc

Defirc  of  gaine^l  do  not  mar-
vcll  furc.

If  thou  the  bafe  and  61thy
minds  art  able

Tocau(c  to  floopc  unto  thy
caircn  lure.

Sit  h oft  we  {cclbme  perlbns
honorable.

Can  fcarcc  thy  weak  and  bafe  aflTaults  endure.

Who  ifthey  could  thy  foulc  inticements  Oiar,

No  doubt  but  they  great  glory  Ihould  hare  won.
a

Some  men  can  meafure  carth^and  lea,and  skie.

And  tell  the  change  and  caufe  of  c v’ry  feaibn.

And  wade  fo  far  with  wit,and  mount  fb  hie.

They  fcarch  both  heav’n  & hel  with  depth  of  rcafon.
But  when  thou  corn’ll  in  platc,thcn  by  and  by
Thou  patft  their  dainty  tads  lb  out  of  (cafon.

They  place  their  whole  delight,  their  hope,  their
In  onely  feraping  and  in  heaping  wealth.  (health

. i

Another  man  in  wars  hath  great  renown.

And  gets  the  coequeft  in  each  bloudy  ftrife.

And  wins  this  fottrclTeand  that  walled  town,
Oppofing  hisfloiit  bred  to  nerilsrifc.

Thou  onlycpnquerd  him, and  thiudshim  down.
And  kcepeft  him  thy  prifner  all  his  life :

Some  men  excelling  in  each  art  and  dudie,

Thou  dod  obfcurc,with  bafedelircs  and  muddle.

4

What  fbould  I fpcak  of  dames  of  w ort  h not  fmall,
That  having  loverSimen  of  great  dcfcits.


Oppofe  their  honours  as  a brazen  wall,

Againd  their  Ants  with  unrelenting  hearts  ?

But  come  fome  mifcr.bafc  dcfoimed  fquall.

That  fayc  his  riches  hath  no  worthy  parts.

They  break  the  wall,and  make  therein  a gap.

To  take  the  Ihowrcihat  fcllinZ).}K4ei  lap.

5

Nor  without  caufe  hereof  complainc  do  T,

Take  me  thatcan,for  I do  rightly  takeir.

Nor  from  my  matter  do  1 fweivcawry.

Or  by  a vainedigreilion  do  forfakc  it;

Yet  to  my  former  fpecch  I not  apply.

But  tendrng  to  a future  tale  I fpake  it ;

Now  let  me  tell  youof  j?e«a/</o  fiid,

That  w itlr  one  draught  would  fwage  his  double  third

6

But  whether  that  his  courage  did  him  faile,

Or  that  on  more  advice  he  changed  mind.

He  thought  and  faid.what  flrould  it  one  a varle.

To  feek  a thing  he  would  be  loth  to  G nd  ?

My  wife  a woman  is, their  fex  is  frailc,

I yet  am  to  believe  the  bed  inclin’d  j
I know  I cannot  better  my  belief,

And  if  I change  it, it  will  be  my  grief.

7

What  good  may  come  by  fuch  a draight  cfpiaJl,

Into  my  fences  furcly  cannot  fink.

Much  hurt  may  come,thcrC  can  be  nodeniall.

Let  nothing  fever  thofe  whom  God  doth  link  i
Wherefore  to  make  founaccudom’d  tnall,

Were  fin, and  tempting  God, as  I do  think :

Then  drink  thiscup(quoth  hc)thai  lid, not  I,
lamnot,norI  mind  not  to  bed  tie.

H h 3 Cod


Ov-J,

nune

Vtti  fuM

ftcuU-.flttri-
mu  auro
Venii  henes,
aurt  eenciUo
Mtur  amor.
Dinar  bada
Jhivrre  of
loldftUia
brr  l*f.
Liottinth*


tbr  leibir  t»
i^Hom  bU
xoivit  tba.
Jlilit.

6enti»c*,ec’
cording  to
that  fating.
Malum  ttni
pojitum  m
ma-unu.
irnUKct,


SttiKaci,


THE  XL1II.B00KE


SimUt.


Tbiin’oswti
tmfidtrtd  of

VfUtitit,


Sauacai

Cddmm  fin

•f

$nrwn  $nu  A
Dragput
kuit*  the
Utfite  ef

Ththu


SeitiDictl

Tutlyfeiti,

lautpreprto

fir dt felt  in

ert,*ndCA-

tet  old  f'erfft

KeeucoUattm

del  Hte  ti

nlpaveri

Ifje.


Stminer,


8

God  would  fuch  skill  from  moitall  men  be  hid.

And  cr’n  as  Adam  wrought  his  oTcrthrow,

By  rafting  fruit  that  God  did  him  forbid.

So  hcthatcurioufly  will  fcarch  to  know
All  that  his  wife  hath  faid,or  what  flie  did,

May  fortune  at  the  laft  hirofclf  benirow,

And  fli  all  confound  himfclf  (this  think  I verily)

And  live  in  forrow,that  did  erft  live  mcriily.

9

Thus  much  faid  good  Renaldo, znd  withal!

He  thruft  away  that  hatefull  cup  of  wine,

And  then  he  faw  of  teares  a ftream  not  fmall.

Flow  from  the  mafter  of  that  houfe  his  eyne :

Which  paft,he  faid, now  foule  may  them  befall.
That  firft  procutM  this  mifeiy  of  mine :

To  provc(which  I niallforrow  all  my  life)
Tbatjwhich  bereft  me  of  my  deareft  wife.

10

Why  wasnotI(faid  he)withyou  acquainted.

Ten  ycares  ere  this,to  take  advice  fb  found,

Before  my  heart  was  thus  with  forrow  tainted.

Of  which  no  eafeean  now,nor  end  be  found :

But  that  you  may  (as  in  a table  painted)

Behold  my  gricfSjI  will  to  you  expound.

What  caus^  this  my  incomparable  woe.

And  then  you  fure  will  pitie  me  1 knew.

11

Not  far  from  hence  you  left  a little  town.

About  the  which  there  runs  a pretie  lake.

That  fals  into  this  ftream  of  great  renown^

But  from  Sanaco  firft  his  head  doth  take,

Ere^fed  when  thofc  wals  were  beaten  down,

That  erft  Agenors  dragon  there  did  make  j
There  was  1 born  of  houfe  and  ftock  not  bale,
Thoughof  mean  wealth  inferiour  to  my  race.

la

But  though  to  me  dame  Fortune  was  but  fparc.

That  by  my  birth  fmall  wealth  to  rue  there  grew.

Yet  nature  did  with  bounty  great  and  cate
Supply  that  want,byfaire and  comly  hew.

My  fccmly  pctfonage,my  beauty  rare.

To  me  the  liking  offiill  many  drew  :

My  qualities  thereto  were  quaint  and  jolly.
Although  I know  to  praife  ones  fclf  is  folly,

H

Within  this  town  a great  rich  man  did  tarie.

Well  learn’d  and  wife,and  old  beyond  all  credit.
For  ere  he  di’d,he  on  his  back  did  caric
Fullfixlcorcyeares  and  eight  at  lcaft,hc  fed  it ;

An  hundred  yeares  he  lived  folitarie.

But  after  that(you  know  what  humor  bred  it)

He  lov’d  a dame,  & with  hiswealth  fb  wrought  her*
That  at  the  laft  he  gat  of  her  a daughter.

*4

And  left  thcdaughterfhould  prove  likethe  mother,
Tofcll  herchaftity  for  filthy  pelf.

Which  whofoever  fcls.it  quite  undoth  her.

Although  flic  thinks  flic  doth  enrich  her  fclf.
Therefore  he  bred  her  far  from  fight  of  other.

And  by  the  help  of  many  a hcllifli  elf,

Which  by  his  skill  in  Magick  he  could  mafter.

He  built  this  houfe  of  Tutch  and  Alablafter,


IJ

He  caufed  chaft  old  women  her  to  nourifli
In  this  fame  houfe, in  which  flic  grew  fo  faire.

And  in  thofc  years  when  youth  d^oth  chiefly  flourlfl;
He  let  not  any  thither  to  repaire.

That  were  in  look$,or  fpeechjor  mainets  whotifli.
But  contrary ,hc  caus'd  in  marble  faire.

Or  els  on  tables  to  be  drawnand  catv’d.

All  fuch  whofcchaftities  bad  ptaife  deferr’d.

|6

Nor  only  fuch  as  have  in  ancient  times.

Been  patterns  true  of  mannerschaft  and  pure.

And  have  oppos’d  againft  all  flcflily  crimes,

Moft  chaft  and  vertuous  thouglns(a  buckler  fure)
By  which  their  name  to  fuch  high  honour  climes.
As  their  great  praife  fliall  evermore  endure  ;

But  fuch  as  fliall  excell  in  times  to  conic,

Of  which  thofc  eight  that  cift  you  faw  be  fbme.

17

Now  when  this  aged  fire  had  with  his  skill
PrcKur’d  his  daughter  be  thus  choicely  bred.

It  was  my  hap,  (flialll  fay  good  or  ill  ? )

That  I was  deem'd  moft  worthy  her  towed  •

And  tbatold  man  bare  her  fb  great  good  will.

He  gave  to  me  this  houfe  thus  furniflicd
With  need  full  things  within  it  and  without  tt.

And  all  the  lands  in  twenty  mile  about  ic.

18

But  her  own  fliape  fb  pleas’d  my  heart  and  eyne.

That  for  the  reft  I did  but  little  care,

For  needle  works  and  for  embroidries  fine,

I think  her  skill  with  Pallas  may  compare  ^

To  hearc  her  play  or  (ing,a  thing  divine
It  was, her  ftroke  fo  fwect.hcr  voice  fb  rare  J
In  other  fcienccs  her  skill  was  fuch
Aswas  hcrfathcrSjOralmoftasmucb.

Great  was  her  wK,no  Icflc  then  wit.hct  favour.

As  might  in  fcnflcfTc  ftones  affection  move.

To  this  flic  had  a fweet  and  kind  behaviour.

As  more  then  all  the  reft  ingendred  love,

Itfccm’d  her  foie  delight  was  in  my  favour,

Out  of  my  fight  flic  was  moft  loth  to  move :

So  lived  I,and  ft  ill  had  lived  fo.

But  that  my  fclf  did  work  my  fclf  this  wo.
ao

For  when  hci  father  finlfli’d  had  hislife.

Full  five  ycares  after  I had  got  his  daughters
Then  grew  the  caufesof  this  wofull  ftrife.

That  unto  fbrrow  turncth  all  my  laughter  j
For  when  I doted  moft  upon  my  wife.

And  of  the  world  the  chiefeft  jewell  thought  her,

A dame  of  noble  birth,of  perfon  fccmly.

Did  hap  to  fall  in  love  with  me  extremely.

zt

This  dame,for  pafllng  skill  in  Magick  art.

Was  comparable  to  the  beft  Magicion,

But  yet  for  all  her  skill,  my  conftant  heart,

Shecould  not  move  nor  turnon  noconditions
Tocurc  her snalady,ot cafe  her  fmart,

I ftill  refufed  to  be  her  PhyfitLon,

Bccaufe  the  med’einc  that  of  me  fhe  foughti
As  injurie unto  my  wifcl  thocghci


Cb»f!  old  ir«.
tnenfo,  if
ihiy  bove
i bn  ft  u>tcb»li

in  tbeir
jomhjthty  be
but  lU
ntjftti


Theft  eight ;
iMre  tboje
tbit  fufper-
led  ihr  fin*'
teiH  in  lit
41  leilie.


ttWMA
fain  dt'

md*t.


VeObeteti
txctiUni  ^

«S  enrioM  '
»iritt.Ltel(
ibibt  Taill/


SiHtVKt,


tocl(inHn


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO:  351


12  '

Tct  was  her  beauty  mucbj  iruft  confefle.

And  greater  offers  flic  to  me  did  make,

Befide  the  love  flic  did  to  me  profefTe,

Would  moue  a man  fome  care  of  her  to  take  ;

But  my  wives  love  did  me  fo  firm  poflefle,

Smnet.  I all  rejcfted,only  for  her  fake.

And  that  which  moft  to  her  my  likingdrew.

Was  that  1 found  her  fiill  fo  kind  and  true.

a?

The  good  opi’nion,and  the  ftiongfurtnife,

I had  of  my  wives  chaftity  and  truth.

Would  without  doubt  have  made  me  to  defpife
Vrffrv.  The  Dame,whofe  beauty  bred  to  Troy  foch  ruth.

And  all  the  wealth(though  laid  before  mine  ey  es)
r*iu.  That  /uno  offer’d  to  the  Trojan  youth,

Tet  my  refufall,and  her  oft  repulfcs.

No  part  of  her  great  love  from  her  cxpulfes.

*4

Mcli£aS6v/ii  this  inchantreffe  name.

Perceiving  fiill  in  vame  to  me  flie  fewed.

Once  finding  me  at  leifure,to  me  came.

And  in  moftcunning  fort  her  fuit  renewed.

And  feciecly  flic  kindled  jealous  flame
Within  my  breft,whichoft  I fince  have  rued.

She  Uith,I  do  but  well  fo  true  to  be
Vnto  my  wife, if  flic  were  fb  to  roc.

But  how  know  you(faith  flic)  your  wife  is  true.

That  of  her  faith  as  yet  no  proof  have  made.

You  never  let  her  go  (cant  from  your  view.

When  none  can  come  to  vice  her  to  perfwadc.
When  none  can  fee  her, none  to  her  can  fuc,
‘Tiseafic  to  refift  where  none  invade,

Topraife  her  truthuntri’d,is  too  much  haft,
Yourcare,and  not  her  vertuc  keeps  her  ebaft.

2<S

But  get  yon  but  from  home  fome  little  while.

That  men  to  fue  to  her  might  take  occafi on.

And  thinking  you  are  abfent  many  a mile.

With  letters  and  with  gifts  to  makeinvafian.

And  then  if  you  fliall  find  in  her  no  guile.

Except  file  yecld  to  gifts  and  to  perfwaCon,

So  flic  have  hope  to  do  it  unefpi’d.

Then  think  your  wifeischafi  when  that  is  ui'd<

With  thefc  and  fuch  like  words  th’Inchantreflc  fly
Did  m.'ike  me  do  that  that  hath  me  undone.

By  name, to  give  confent  my  wife  to  tty,

Iffoflie  could  by  fuch  aflTaultt  be  won :


VirgsitM
iroiBtr  <*€i
Mtreu
Carnvatt.
Thu  4 •«  ik*
«/

ibur  aud
hanttUt-
in  tit
Tablt.


But  how  fliall  1 be  well  a^ur’dffaid  I )

To  know  at  my  return, wnat  flic  hath  done.

And  whether  flic,  with  thefc  fo  great  affayes,
Haveat  my  handsdcfeivcd  blame  or  praife  ^
as

Forfooth  (faith  flic)I  will  on  you  beflow
A d'inking  bowlc,not  much  unlikcthat  cup
With  which  Morgana  made  her  btothcr  knovV
Genavrat  fraud, when  he  thereon  did  fup.
Whodrinks  hereof, bis  wives  truth  plain  fliall  know,
If  flie  bcchafijhc  drinks  the  liquor  up.

But  if  a cuckold  to  carrowfc  doth  think,
Heflicddethin  his  bofome  all  (hedrink.


^9

Now  creyou  gothccup  1 wifli  you  tafi.

And  you  fl]alldrirk,perhaps  and  fliall  not  fplll,
Becaufe  as  yet  I think  your  wife  is  chad.

As  nevei  being  tempted  unto  ill ;

But  try  againc  when  as  a month  is  paft.

And  you  (hall  fee  (I  trow)aprettic  skill.

For  then  I grantjthat  if  you  drink  it  cleanly,

A bouc  all  men  you  blcffed  ate  not  meanly.

30

J took  her  offcr,and  I took  the  fay
Of  that  famccutfed  cup,  with  fwcet  fuccefTc,

I find  my  wife  unfpotted  to  that  day.

As  I my  felfwas  (ure,and  flic  did  guefie ;

Now  fitaight(quotIi  fhe)to  part  from  hence  away,
Foroncor  two  months  fpace,yburfelf  addreffe,
Then  try  at  your  return  how  you  have  ed.

If  you  drink  clean,  or  if  the  drink  you  fhed.

31  *

But  now  this  parting  fuch  a penance  feem’d.

As  I indeed  could  by  no  means  indurc.

Not  that  of  my  dearc  wife  I ought  roifdccm'd.

For  her  of  all  the  rcfi,I  thought  cockfutcj
But  that  her  company  I fo  efteem'd  :

Well  thcn(;^fd^^  faith)!  will  procure.

If  you  will  do  but  what  I fliall  you  teach.

That  you  fliall  change  your  clothes,  your  fliape,  and

3*  (fpccch.

And  fb  you  fliall  your  fclf  to  herprefent.

And  make  your  fclfa  plaine  and  petfeft  proof,

I foolifhly  to  this  deviceaflent,

And  fo  it  faapt  that  hence  not  far  aloof,

A knight  of  large  revenue  and  of  rent
Dwelt  at  G iabana,fit  for  this  behoof.

His  perfonage  was  bravc,his  purfc  well  lin’d,

His  ycares  but  young,to  Venin  all  inclin’d.

33

That  gallant  youth  had  one  day  been  a balking,

His  hawke  by  hap  into  my  garden  flew,

He  comming  thither,fou^  my  wife  a walking.

And  much  he  lik’d  her  at  the  very  view  j
But  when  he  had  a while  with  her  been  talking,

T o burning  love  his  warm  aficAion  grew.

That  after  that  full  many  waies  heprov’d  her,
Ifhisiequeft  to  grant  he  could  have  mov’d  her.

34

But  having  fiill  fuch'fliort  and  fliarp  repulfcs.

He  means  no  more  in  that  fond  fiiit  to  wadej
But  from  histhought  her  fliape  he  not  cxpulfes,
Thatfirft  to  give  the  bold  attempt  him  made;

So  well  Mdijfa  knew  to  touch  my  pulfes.

To  take  bis  form  flic  doth  me  foon  perfwade,

I ftraight  was  chang’d  I know  not  how  nor  where,
In  facCjin  clothes,in  fpccch,in  eyes,in  hcare.

3J

Now  having  to  my  wife  a tale  devis’d.

As  though  toth’Eaft  I then  my  journey  toot.

And  being  like  this  youth,fofirangedifguis’d.

In  gaiCjin  voice, apparell,and  in  looTc,

I came  as  flic  Melina  me  advis’d.

And  flic  did  like  my  Page  or  7>ackie  loot,

Vpon  her  arm  flic  bearcs  a little  flasket.

In  which  ofjcv/clsrich  flie  had  a casket,

I


Citkttujti

tebeprt-

neunetd

ian4,utav*

upon  the  r*>

vtf'i/fm.


Stuunct,


Stintnei.


THE  XLIII.B  OOKE


I that  well  knew  each  room,came  in  fecurely
Into  the  houfcjOiy  Page  and  I together ;

There  where  my  Lady  fate  alone  demurely.

For  neither  groome  as  then, nor  maid  was  with  her,
Then  I expound  my  fuit,and  that  more  furely
She  might  believe  my  words,  I needs  would  give  her
Pearles, Rubies. Diamonds  of  pafling  price.

The  wicked  baits  to  draw  good  minds  to  vice.

17

I b.nd  fhe  fliould  efteem  this  gift  but  fmsll.

To  that  flic  might  of  me  in  time  expcdl:

] faid  her  husbands  abfenccflt  did  fall,

And  wifdomc  bidsoccafions  not  ncgleft  '■

I praid  her  weigh  my  conftant  love  wtthall.

Which  'ong  had  laftcd, though  without  cfFc^^,

And  laftjl  (ware  1 had  fome  grace  deferv’d^

That  had  ib  long,that  had  fo  truly  ferv'd.

At  firfl  flic  blufli*d,and  look’d  with  lowring  cheare.
And  would  not  hcarkenjbut  did fttll retire.

But  th*Oiient  Pearls  and  ftones  that  flionc  fo  clcare.
Did  mollific  her  heart, to  my  defirc  ;

Shefcftly  faith, but  fo  as  I might  hcare.

That  for  the  thing  which  I fo  oft  rcquii  e.

She  grant  it  would, and  would  on  me  bedow  it.

So  flic  were  fine  that  none  befide  might  know  iL

39

Thisanfwer  was  to  me  a poyfon’d  dart.

To  ftrike  my  foule  indefperatc  difeafe.

And  flraightmy  hcart,my  head, and  ev’ry  part
1 felt  a frozen  jcaloufle  to  feize :

And  prefently  Mdijfahy  her  art

Reftor’d  my  fliape(as  flie  could  do  with  cafe.)

Hew  look’d  my  wifc(think  you)whc  by  my  trapping
She  found  her  fclf  thus  foully  taken  napping.

40

We  bothdo  look  like  afliesjpale  and  wan.

We  both  (land  dumb,we  both  caft  down  our  eye.
Scarce  able  was  my  voiccfdo  what  lean)

Tofervemy  turn,whilcldid  think  tocry  .*

Then  wouldft  thou  wife  tint®  another  man
Wine  honour  fcll,ifhe  the  fame  could  buy  ?

She  held  her  peace, and  anfwer  made  me  none.

But  onely  wcpt,and  made  a piteous  monc.

4>

The  fhame  was  much.but  much  more  thedifdaine.
That  of  my  foolifli  ufage  tanc  fiie  hath.

Within  due  bonds  flie  could  not  it  containc.

But  that  it  brake  to  fpite,to  hate,to  wrath,

Rcfolv’d  with  me  no  longer  to  remaine.

When  Phxbifi  charretttoa  his  Weftern  path,
Thatev'ninginafmall  barge  of  her  own,

Dowd  flieam  flic fwimnicthasif  flie  had  flown.

4*

Betimes  next  day  flie  doth  unto  that  knight
Hci  fclf  prefcBtjthat  her  before  had  lov'd,
Inwhofcdifguifcd  fliape,lhcrlafl  night
Both  gainft  mine  own,and  gainfl  her  honour  prov*d,
Yonwcllmay  judgeitwasa  welcome  fight
To  him, that  long  before  fuch  fuit  had  mov’d,

From  thence  fiic  fends  to  me  this  mefiage  pJainc,
That  flic  would  never  come  at  me  againc.


43


Ah  wo  was  mc.for  from  that  hourcto  this.

She  bides  with  him, where  me  they  lout  and  florn.

And  I that  could  not  fee  my  fugicd  bliflc.

Now  by  forgoing  it  am  quite  fbflorn  j
Nor  can  I fay  but  juft  my  penance  is.

Which  ftill  growes  mere, and  will  till  I be  worn.

And  fore  oncyeareof  life  had  quite  bereft  me.

Save  foi  one  only  comfort  that  was  left  me.

44

This  only  comfort  brought  me  fome  relief,  ^ fmtnm-

Thatfor  tlicfpaceof  ten  years  all  my  guefts,  /“'»•

(Though  many  of  their  wives  had  grcatbclief)

Yet  ftill  they  flicd  thcdnnk  upon  their  farefts-
To  find  fomany  partners  in  my  grief,

AfTwageth  much  the  painc  thatiucmolefts,

Youronly  felfhath  bcenthconely  flranger,

1 list  hath  refus’d  a draught  of  fo  gieaidangcr.

45

}Ay  overmuch  defirc  to  fift  my  wife
In  fo  prccifc  and  in  foiftraiglit  a fort.

Doth  caufo  that  now  1 (liall  not  all  n.y  life
Live  one  good  hourc,cndurcitlong  orfliortj
Glad  Mdijfa  that  procur’d  this  ftiife.

But  foon  1 turn’d  and  marred  allbcrfpcrt,

Foi  fi  nding  flic  was  of  my  harm  procurer,

1 luted  her  and  could  no  more  endure  her.

46

But  flic  that  finds  her  fcife  difdamed  mcarly.

Where  flie  had  hoped  to  have  found  reward.

And  me, whom  flic  piofcft  to  love  fo  dearly,

Hci  love  and  kindnefle  nothing  roregaad,

Tfcc  grief  hereof  did  touchher  mind  foncarly.

To  leave  this  country  flie  .forthwith  prepar’d,

A nd  ever  finre  fame  hence  flic  is  abiding.

Whereas  of  her  we  hcare  no  ncives  nor  tiding.

4‘>

Thus  told  the  wnfull  knight  in  dolcfull  wife,

Thisrufull  rale  unto  his  noble  gueft.

Who  with  compaflion  moved, thus icplics,

Mdijfai  coutifcll  cc ncs  was  not  beft.

That  did  without diferetion  you  advifo,  ,

ToangcrwafpSjOi  fotoftii  theirneft,  StKHHttit

And  you  your  fclf  did  greatly  ovci-flioot  you,

To  feck  a thing, whofe  finding  would  not  boot  you.  Utrritart

4 g CrthvMii,

What  marvelh’sitjif  your  wife  were  won  ,

With  gifts, and  were  to  lightncfic  foon  alltiiM  f
l8flictlicfirft(thinkyou)that  hathfodonc  ?

No,nor  the  fiftieth  be  you  wellafliiiM,

Tca,mindsfull  found  havtwanted  power  tofliun
Such  baits, and  have  not  fuch  affaults  endur’d :

Have  you  not  heard  of  men  that  have  for  gold
Their  mafters  and  their  friends  moft  deareft  fold  t

49

You  fliould  not  with  a dart  fo  fierce  aflailc,

I f to  fee  her  defend  her  felf  you  fought,

What.know  you  not  ftonc  wals  cannot  availe.

Nor  ficcljif gold  be  to  the  batt’ric  brought  ?

Now  fure  your  felf  of  duty  moie  did  failc.

In  tempting  her, then  flic  in  being  caught.

Perhaps  if  flic  had  tempted  you  fo  fore.

Your  folly  would  have  been  as  much,or  more.


fterdCi,

mHlmirt
ftulUut^
ptrrmttftr*
*m»t  /4X4.


Thus


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


3<^3


yidtUcti  ft(t-
»tn  hundred
yenret  He
mamet  tbit
Jline  bectuft
it  is  March,
wbitb  font
bald  the  firli
wteneib  af  tbt
yaare
Naulic*
daughter  if
vdki<ttuithat


JO

Thus  fpakc  Renaldo,  and  withall  he  rote,

And  prajd  he  might  betake  him  to  his  rcQ,

He  minds  a while  himfclfc  there  to  repol'c.

And  aftet  to  depart  he  doth  re^cilj
Small  time  he  hath^  and  that  he  would  dif^fe
Withgreatregard,  for  fo  he  thinks  it  beft;

The  gentle  knight  doth  tel  him  when  it  pleafchitn
He  may  within  his  chamber  reft  and  eafe  him.

51

But  if  you  will  vnto  my  counfell  harke.

And  that  you  haue(as you  prctendjfuch  haft,

1 will  appoint  for  you  a little  barkc.

That  fttall  with  oaresconucy  you  fafe  and  faft.
There  may  ycu  lleepe  the  while  you  finde  it  darke>
And  when  your  ftomakc  femes  you,  take  repaft:
Thus  may  you,downe  the  ftreame  in  fafty  Aiding,
Win  one  whole  night, & faue  a whole  daics  riding.

SI

RcnalJo  this  good  offer  doth  accept.

And  gaue  him  haitie  thanks,thcn  tooke  his  barge:
He  found  his  hoft  with  him  had  promife  kept.

And  makes  of  necdfull  things  prouifionlargej
No  fooner  was  he  fetled,  but  he  ftept,

But  yet  before  hegauetheftcarman  charge.

If  t hat  to  Aeepc  too  long  it  did  befall  him,

W'hen  became  ncare  Ferrara^xhea  to  call  him.

Now  did  the  knight  of  France  in  quiet  Aeepc,

And  paft  by  dmerstowncsofeount  the  whiles.
And  ftill  the  barge  a pace  moft  fwift  doth  keepe,
Vpon  that  hand,  where  Foe  makes diuers lies:

And  now  the  Rofie  colour  gan  to  creepe
T o th’fifteine  skie,  when  hauing  paft  fbmc  milcf,
Bandano  then  the  fteatsman  wakt  Remldoy
When  they  difeouered  both  rocks  of  Tealdo.

. 54

Whereon  when  as  the  knight  his  eye  had  fixr.

He  faith,  O happie  place  that  I behold.

Of  wh’ch,  by  vcw  of  wandring  ftarres  and  fist.
My  CO  An  Malagigis  oh  foietold.

How  that  by  hcau’nly  doomcit  waspicfixt.

On  thee  to  lay  fuch  bleflings  manifold.

As  that  thy  glotie  to  fuch  height  fhould  rife.

Of  /talk  to  bold  the  chiefeft  prife.

55

Thus  good  Renaldo  rpakc,thc  while  his  bote

Down  that  fame  ftreame  did  fwim,  01  rather  Ay,
And  when  the  knight  came  nearer  he  did  note
The  place,  that  feemed  then  all  waft  to  ly.

And  witha  mooiifli  water  allon  Hote:

Yet  did  he  much  reioicc  thereof,  for  why.

He  knew  th.nt  that  fame  towne  in  future  time,
Orda i ned  was  to  great  renowne  to  clime.
s«


57


^rfes  in  the  ^ Matdgige  and  he  while  eare
lhaf  Corfu:  Had  paft  that  way,what  time  his  coGn  told.

That  when  the  Ram  had  tane  the  golden  fpheare.
That  fourth  is  plac’d  in  beight,feT*n  hundred  fold.
Then  fhould  there  be  the  braseft  Hand  there.

That  ever  fea,or  ftrcame,or  lake  did  hold.

So  well  replenifhedjthat  none  fhould  dare
With  this  fiaupcas  lland  to  compare.


af  which
einaiu  Horace
,4!eU
Mw'j^  in  cult
turanda  flu*
mqua  ofiraaa
iu»emut.


Ofihiiyom  '
tnaf  looi^  th*
tablejjyam
hi  not  tnfirmr
{ltd
hifitiy.


Ancftliat  it  fhould  for  building  faire,di(gtace
T/icriw  Ile,that  Capry  they  do  call.

And  that  th’HeJperides  fhould  gire  it  place,
for  palling  fruiis,and  fundiy  forts  withall:

BcAdc,more  ftoic  of  bcaft$,for  ufe  or  chafe.

Then  Circes  erft  did  keep  in  Acid  or  ftall.

That  Venus  with  her  foEnc,and  all  the  Graces,

Should  chufe  this  feat, and  leave  all  other  places.

5*

And  that  a certaine  Prince  fliouH  this  fulftll.

So  providentjfo  ftout, fo  wife,f9  ftaid.

As  having  power  united  to  his  will.

Should  with  ftrong  Rampires  fence  the  town.hefaid.

That  foes  Aiould  have  no  force  to  work  her  ill.

Nor  file  fhculd  ocTcrfccd  of  forraincaid  :

And  that  the  man  by  whom  this  muft  be  done,  Thu  u faid

Should  be  both  Mercies  Sire.and  Mercies  fonne.  *»»<’»■

59  ofMfanfa

Thus  while  the  knight  of  Francev/'nh  greatdclight  *-^*’*^*

Did  call  to  mind  what  Aiould  a nother  day
Vpon  that  happy  City  iherc  alight,

His  water-men  did  give  fo  lufty  way,

That  of  the  place  he  foon  had  left  the  fight.

And  keeping' on  the  right  hand  all  the  way , .

They  went  beyond  Saint  Georges  inan  hour^

And  palled  by  Grahanas  ditch  and  Tower.

€0

And  now  RenaldOyis  doth  oft  befall.

That  one  conccipt  anotlier  out  doth  drive.

Began  the  knight  to  memorie  to  call.

Thatlaft  did  him  kind  entertainment  giue,

Thathad  iuft  caufc  this  City  more  then  all
To  hate,  and  Aiould  haue  ftill  while  he  did  liue:  lutbuCt^

The  curfed  cup  he  further  cald  to  mind,  i -.

In  which  men  may  their  fpoiifcs  falflrood  find.

61

And  laft  of  his  hofts  later  fpeech  he  thought.

Concerning  that  famccup,and  bow  they  fped,  ’

I meane  hisj;uefts,that  that  fame  triall  fought.

Into  their  bofoms  ftill  the  liquor  Aicd  :

Now  he  doth  half  repent  he  mift  the  draught.

Yet  washc  glad  thcrcof,for  why  (he  faid)

Had  it  fain  wcll,what  had  I got  thereby  /

If notjin  what  a cafe  had  then  been  I f

I now  believe  fo  well.as  having  tri’d

With  good  fi'ccelTc  believe  I better  Aiould  notj
So  that  I might  have  well  beendamnlfi'd.

But  by  my  tryall  mend  my  ftatc  I could  not »

But  what  grief  bad  it  been  if  I had  fpi'd.

By  my  moftdeare  C/urfce,that  I would  not  ?

Much  may  they  lcefc,but  gains  get  fmall  or  none,  Claritt  wife
That  willinplayathoufand  lay  toone.  “ “

64

Thefe  later  words  fb  lowd  and  plainehe  fpake,

(Though  to  himfelfe)that  he  that  Heard  the  boat.

Who  to  his  fpeech  and  geftutes  faced  did  take.

The  words  and  meaning  of  his  words  did  note;

Wherefore  a further  caufc  of  fpeech  to  make,

Ag  one  that  though  he  ware  a liv’ry  coat.

Yet  was  well  fpokcn,and  of  good  bold  fpritr,
Heftraightdotbfal)  toicafon  with  the  knight.

la


(tbt  that
huwtf**


la  Xenaldo,
Saaturt,,


3^4


THE  XLIII.BOOKE


54

In  finCjihc  fummc  of  all  their  argument.

Was  that  his  wit  was  much  te  be  controld.

That  fought  to  make  too  great  experiment.

Of  womens  tnethsjmore  then  their  force  can  hold  i
For  flie  that  can  with  chaft  and  firm  intent,
Maintaine  her  truth, againft  aflault  of  gold.

Might  ev*n  as  eafily  defend  the  fame,

Againfl  a thoufandfwordsin  midff  offlamc.

.

To  this  the  Bargeman  faid,you  furc  may  fwearc  it.
They  muff  not  be  aflail’d  with  darts  fo  fierce,

For  their  fbfc  breafts  too  tender  are  to  bearc  it,
Sitb  coats  of  founder  proofefach  fliot  will  pierce :
I could  (faith  he)  to  this  effect  rehearfe.

And  furea  pictie  tale(ifyou  would  heareit)

Of  one  who  though  his  wife  had  fore  offended.

By  her,in  greater  finne  was  apprehended.


66

I meane  the  tale  of  that  Adonio,  which
T he  great  gift  gave  unto  the  fudges  wife,

A litiledoggc  that  made  hisownerrich,

A thing  that  in  thefe parts  is  known  fo  rife,

The  knight  repli’d,mine  eares  to  heare  it  itch.
For  never  yet  1 heard  it  in  my  life ;

Thenifit  pleafc  you, heare  itnow  you  fliall,
TheStears-manfaid,and  thus  began  his  tale.

Here  ocfw  There  was  a learned  Lawyer,cal’d  by  name
thiSttarf  Anfdmuiybotnt  here  in  our  neighbour  towne.
That  folong  fiu-lied  Vlpian,t\W  he  came
To  be  a Iudge,and  wcarc  a fcarlet  gowne.

And  having  won  great  wcaltb,he  woo’d  a damc
For  beauty  and  for  fiatc  of  great  renowne ;
They  wedded  were, for  better  and  for  Worfc,

So  he  her  perfon  Iik’d,fo  (he  his  purfe.

68


mans  taie.

rvroH  afthe
tiyiU  law.


Of  Mtnto
loak,a  in  tht
Htfiarie,


ThuTibtri-
tuwas  a ]ufi
ttdaChn-
Qaan  Pfince,
ho{a  M til
railt.


Her  qualities  and  haviour  part  the  reft.

She  feemed  all  of  loveltncflc  compos’d.

Not  fit  indeed  for  him,  that  was  to  refi.

And  to  his  bookcs,morc  then  tofportsdifpos'd  .*
Wherefore  foule  jealous  thoughts  his  mind  poflelf.
And  that  his  wife  plaid  falfc,hc  ftill  fuppos’d,

Yet  caufe  was  nonc,of  her  fo  to  mifdeem,

Save  that  toofaire,and  wittie  fhedid  feem.

Now  in  the  felfc  fame  City  dwelt  a knight,
(Toonearc  a neighbour  to  this  manoflaw)

That  was  of  that  (hmefiock  defeended  right.

That  had  thfir  off-fpring  from  the  ferpents jaw,
From  whence  the  Faiiy  ekc,that  A/a«te  hight.

And  built  our  City, doth  her  linage  draw,  -
This  knight  that  was  Adoiio  cal’d  by  name.

Was  much  enamor’d  on  the  lovely  dame.

70

And  that  he  might  attainc  this  Ladies  love.

He  doth  begin  tofpend  beyond  allmeafure.

In  clothes, in  fcafts,hiscalling  farre  above.

In  fIiovves,in  pIayes,to  do  his  mifiris  plealure :

To  bearc  the  charge  thereof  itwould  behove
To  have  that  Emperour  Tib  erius  treafure.

So  as  I wccR  ere  winters  tw  a inc  were  part.

His  lands  were  quite  confum(d,hc  fpent  fofaft.


71

Wherefore compeld  to  ftrike  his  lofty  fades,

He  fuddcnly  furccaft  his  flatcly  port,

The  houfc(now  that  the  Lords  icvcnuc  failcs)
Stood  felitary,quite  without  refort :

There  were  no  Fcafants,Partridgcs,nor  Quilts,
Hispittancenofk  was  grown  but  bare  andHiort,
And  he  that  erfi  was  king  of  all  this  feafiing.

Plaid  Icaft  in  fight, bow  doubting  of  arrefiing*

7*

And  therefore  lothing  to  be  known  or  feen.

He  purpos’d  in  his  place  not  long  to  tarie.

But  with  a mind  to  leave  his  country  clean.

He  Hale  away  from  thence  all  folitane  ;

Her  oncly  love, that  of  his  heart  was  Queen,

In  all  his  woes  he  fiill  with  him  doth  cane.

But  lo,when  as  his  Ebb  did  feem  mod  low.

Good  fortune  made  his  tide  mod  high  to  flow.

7S

For  as  he  wander’d  here  and  there  abroad.

He  faw  how  that  a d'.irdy  clown  and  dour.

With  dordy  daffc,laid  on  no  little  load
Vpona  buHisdill  beating  thereabout  ;

Adonio  in  the  place  makes  feme  aboad.

And  ask’d  the  caufe  of  that  fame  country  lout,
Who  told  him  that  a mondrous  fnakc  and  huge
Had  taken  that  fame  bufh  for  a refuge,

74

And  told  him  further  he  that  dir  did  make.

With  mind  to  find  and  kill  it  ere  he  part.

Adonio  for  his  cred  did  give  the  Snake,

And  therefore  lov’d  and  favout’d  Snakes  in  hart.
As  from  whofe  kind  he  did  his  gentry  take ;
Wherefore  unto  the  clown  he  doth  impart
His  mind  fo  farrc,at  lad  he  him  perfwaded.

To  let  alone  the  Snake  hefo  invaded.

75

This  done, he  went  as  he  was  bent  before,

Fanefi  om  his  country, whcic  he  was  unknown,'
And  fo  indur’d  till  fev’n  M’holc  ycarcs  and  more
Of  woe  and  want  quite  ore  his  head  were  blown  :
But  that  great  love  he  to  his  midris  bore.

Him  forc’d,though  now  all  out  of  fadiion  grown.
With  bufhie  beard, lean  chccks,and  ragged  clothes.
To  turtle  unco  the  place  that  mod  he  lothes.

76

In  this  mean  time,our  town  had  caufe  to  fend
Some  fage  AmbafTadour  unto  the  Pope,

That  mud  upon  his  HoIincfTe  attend.

And  for  his  fuit  to  take  a whole  yearcs  fcope :

The  Judge  by  lotwaschofcn  to  that  end,

(O  curfed  lot  that  killed  ail  his  hope)

To  fliun  this  office  he  tries  many  diifts.

By  fcufcs,promifcs,by  prai’rsand  gifts.

77

But  finding  that  hedraveagaind  thedreame.

At  lad  againd  his  will  he  takes  the  place,

Though  to  depart  into  another  Rcamc,

It  feemed  u mo  him  a grievous  cafe. •

His  jcaloufic  therewith  grew  modextreame,

M ifdoubting  his  wives  truth,fo  long  a fpace,

Yet  nath’lefTe  her,in  grave  and  fricndlcflcfpcech,

To  have  great  care  thereof  he  doth  bcfeech.


Ovid  in  tht
third  of  the
met«mtpbl\
fis.batb  a
tala  of  Tire-
pas,lbalwttb
ftniting  af
two  fnak/et
changed  bit
fl>»pe.


He


OP  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


36$


7*

Itsuft  woman  cannot  take  upon  hff,

W n h beauty, riches, nor  with  high  Nobility,
Toilaimc  the  triiedcfcrved  praintofhonour^

If  cbaftitr  do  failc  by  her  fragility.

Tbit  isihe  vcrtiic  that  defends  her  owner,

And  now  fhe  may  (he  fail  hj  with  great  facility
Attainegieat  jnaifc,and  (Iicw  thereof  great  proof,
NS  hi Ic  he  IS  forc’d  today  fo  far  aloof.

I 79

Thcfc  wordshc  fpakc.and  many  fuch  as  thefe,

T hereby  to  move  her  to  continue  true.

And  flie(poorcfoulc_)yct  free  from  fuch  difeaft,

M is  parting  ihcncc  did  much  lament  and  rue*.

She  fwears  that  foonermen  fhould  draine  thefeas,
Tlien  draw  her  mind  fo  to  forget  her  due*

Yea  fill!  /he  will  cv’n  die  the  death  fhe  faith.

Much  rathci  then  to  fahihe  her  faith.

Ko

The  lodge  appeas’d  with  this  her  pioteftaiion,

Began  to  have  of  her  the  Ic/TemiSrud,

But  yethis  fond  and  jealous  inclination
So  moves  fi  n,that  (earch  furthci  needs  he  raufti
He  had  a fiiend  that  conld  by  conjuration
Foretell  of  future  matters  true  and  juft :

That  were  It  skill  inMagick,orin  ftarret.

His  guefle  was  fuch,as  that  it  fcldomctrrcS.

8i

He  fpcaketh  to  that  friend  to  this  efFcft,

That  he  his  wives  nativity  would  caft,

To  learn  if  he  did  right  or  wrong  fufpeft*

Thai  fhe  would  in  hisabfcnce  live  unchaft  i
The  man  thus  praid,the  figuredoth  ereff.

And  in  their  place  the  Planets  all  he  plac’d^
^ny5//»;is  leaves  him  buflc,and  next  day
Doth  come  to  faearc  him  what  he  hath  to  fay.

'Twaslong  before  th’Aftronomcr  would  fpeak.

As  loch  to  fpeak,that  would  the  fudge  offend.
With  many  feufes  frivolous  and  weak,
Hefluftshim  off.  but  urged  by  his  friend,

Hetcld  him  flatly  (he  would  wedlock  break.

And  that  fhe  would  to  him  prove  fa  ife  in  tb*eod,
Hot  mov’d  by  beamy, nor  by  fuit  defir’d.

But  cv’n  for  lucres  fake  direftly  hir’d.

How  when  Anfdnm  former  bad  belief

Was  newly  rcconflrm’d  by  Sphcarcs  fupernall.

It  doubtlcflcdid  fo  much  augment  his  grief,

1 think  his  toi tme  paft  the  paines  infanall :

And  more  then  all  the  rcft,thisgricv’d  himchicf.
And  to  his  heart  acotfive  waseternall.

To  think  that  Avarice  fliould  her  entice,

Vpon  her  chaftity  to  fet  a price.

84


85


tmwHU’


Yet  to  prevent  all  that  fuch  mind  might  breed,
Moft  earncftly  be  bendcthall  his  power,
Foi(asthcy  fay)man  iscompeld  by  need


Urn  mctjjt.  To  rob  the  Church,and  hallow’d  things  devoutCS


His  jewels,platc,and  ftock  that  did  exceed.

He  put  all  in  her  hands  that  prefent  houic,

A nd  made  it  all  hcrown  by  deed  of  gift.

And  told  hei  plaine  what  was  bacin  his  diife»


He  fail  h he  gives  it  her  on  this  condition.

Not  that  /he  fhould  ftrivc  to  incrca/'c  or  mend  ir.
For  why(hc  faid)n)c  (hould  have  free commiftlon.
To  fclljto  give, caft  it  away  and  fpend  it,

* But  only  that  flic  fliould  avoid  fufpition  .
of  wedlock  breach, and  by  no  means  offend  it.

On  tbiscondition,all  he  then  bequeaths  her,

T ha  t he  may  fi  nd  her  fucli  a s no w he  lea ves  her.

He  further  doth  her  carneflly  cxhon.

That  prcfcntly  when  he  is  gone  away.

She  fliould  for  raorecfchuing  of  refort)

Not  any  longcrintheClty  flay,

But  at  his  countrey  houfc,  where  in  good  lore
Till  his  return  the  I'eafon  paircfliemay :

Belikcihc  thought  in  tillers  of  ihcground.

And  country  fwainrs.inticemcntsnonc  are  found.

87

His  loving  wife  Argia  all  this  fpacc

Still  hanging  on  his  neck  while  hcdi'd  fpeak.

With  kindly  teares  bcdcawcd  all  his  face.

And  much  ic  griev’d  her  to  be  judg’d  fo  weak,

A nd  to  be  deemed  fo  devoid  of  grace.

That  in  his  abrchcc  fhe  would  wedlock  break.

Her  manners  liave  not  been  fo  light  and  vicious,
(She  faith)  to  move  him  to  be  thus  fufpicious.

88

I fhould  too  long  in  this  one  matter  dwell.

If  all  that  paft  between  them  two  at  large.

When  he  departed,!  to  you  fhould  tell.

Still  iterating  that  his  fornier  charge  :

Now  on  his  way  hcgocs,God  fpeedhim  well.

The  grief  was  great  that  did  his  heart  furcharge,
Buttnusthey  parc,ber  eyes  all  full  of  teares.

His  mind  of  jcaloufies  and  thoufand  fcarci.

89

This  while  Adenio  looking  pale  and  wan,

Aserft  I told,and  overgrown  with  baire#

To  travell  to  his  country-ward  began.

In  hope  that  no  man  now  would  know  him  there,
He  travels  in  thefircrct’ft  fort  he  can,
Vnfcen,unknown,tillhcariived  where
He  refeu’d  had  the  fnakc  fev’n  ycares  before.
That  by  the  clown  purfued  was  fo  fore.

/ 90

Aniviog  at  this  place  by  break  of  day,

He  raw  a Lady  walking  ncare  the  lake.

Who  though  fiicfccm’d  attir’d  in  ftrangc  array.
Yet  for  fome  great  eftatc  one  would  her  take.

Her  count’nancc  did  fuch  ma jelly  bewray  :
Shetoward  him  with  (lately  galcdid  make.

And  looking  on  him  with  a gracious  chcare,
Shefpakc  thcfc  words  fo  loud  as  he  might  heart,

91  ,

Gentleman, though  you  do  not  know  my  face.

Yet  am  I bound  to  you,and  am  your  friend,
lamyo\itco(in,andof  Cadmmxaee
Our  royall  ftock  doth  lineally  defeend,

1 am  that  Af4nto,thatin  yond  fame  place
T o build  that  town  did  firft  begin  and  cad,

A nd  Mantmtaccordiog  to  my  name,
’liscaldjasyou  perhaps  bare  beard  by  fame.


THE  XLIII.  BOOKE


C/  Farritf,  I * /dyric,>nd  tO  make  you  know,

/M*  w«Ae  To  be  a fayrie  what  it  doth  import,
fiiflorj.  We  cannot  die  how  old  fo  cre  we  grow  J
Ofpalnc  and  harmes  of  cv’ry  other  fort
We  taftjbut  yet  no  death  we  nature  ow  j
But  which  is  woifc  than  ifour  lives  were  fhort.
Each  fev*nth  day  we conftraiiicd  are  to  take
Vpon  our  fclves  the  perfon  of  a fnake.

9}

Tobcaansform’d  toSerpentmgly  hew.

That  ciccpcth  ftilljand  on  his  belly  go*th.

Is  fuch  a griefto  us,to  tell  you  true,

Kot  one  of  us  but  then  to  live  doth  loth.

Now  that  1 further  may  declare  to  you,
from  whence  thiskindnelTe  that  I rpeakof,grotb,
JCnow  this,what  day  we  have  t his  curfed  fliapc.
We  hardly  dangers  infinite  cfcape.

94-

?h*neietmti  No  living  thing  is  lothed  mo.e  then  they,
faring,  (boner  one  of  usisfpi’d,

Butwe  are  chas’d  and  homed  out  ftraightwayj
^ And  if  we  find  no  pUce  our  (elves  to  hide.

They  lay  on  load, and  bear  us  fo  that  day.

That  we  the  painc  thereof  long  after  bide,

And  whowould  not  rather onedeath  havcchus'd.
Then  beaten  evermore  to  be  and  bius'd  I


95

NowSii,the  benefit  that  I confi  fie
I have  receiv’d ,m  which  your  merit  Hands,

Was  thisjfome  fcv’n  yearc s fince,  or  not  much  IclTe,
As  you  did  waijderov’rthefc  woods  and  lands.

You  faved  me  from  danger  and  difirclTc,

I fliould  have  fufFerd  at  a villens  hands  i

V\‘ho  though  he  could  not  flay  irc,ncare  the  latter,

Did  feck  with  cudgill  me  to  bruifc  and  batter.

96

For  why  thofedayesthat  we  bcfnakes(flicfaiih)

And  creeping  groveling, bellies  on  the  ground,

The  heav’nSjthat  other  times  our  heft  obay’th.
Denies  their  aid,in  us  no  force  is  found  ;

Somtimes  the  Sun  at  our  commandment  ftay’ih.
The  fteadie  earth  doth  move  and  turneth  round.

As  we  can  by  ourpowcrcaulcina  trice.

Ice  turn  to  fiame,and  fire  congeal  to  icc.

97

Now  here  I come  your  curtfie  to  reouite.

Which  fcv’n  years  fince  I tome  aone  did  note.

Now  to  reward  you  J have  power  and  might.
While  I am  free  from  ferpemsaufed  coat.

Three  times  your  fathers  wealth  you  fhallcre  night
PoflelTc,and  1 will  fet  you  foaftote.

You  never  fliall  be  poorc,to  your  lives  end.

But  ever  have  the  more, the  more  you  fpend,

98

And  (for  I know  that  in  your  formci  knot

In  which  love  bound  you  firft.you  ftillareti’d)

I will  diicd  you  fo.by  wayes  ( wot.

Your  futeftrall  not  be  unto  you  deni’d.

Now  that  the  jealous  Judge  at  home  is  not,
Cothithci  ftraight,and  1 will  beyourguidcf
She  now  it  at  her  husbands  country  village.
Attending  there  good  hufwifric  and  tillage.


99

She  further  doth  at  large  to  him  devile.

How  he  fliall  go,in  what  apparell  clad.

How  he  fliall  tempt  ber,m  what  manner  wife.

And  how  to  grant  hisfuit  flic  fliould  be  glad  ^

Then  told  (he  how  flic  would  her  fcJf  difguife,

Forwhy,for  ever  in  her  power  flic  had.

Except  the  dayes  in  which  flic  was  a fnake.

What  lliapc  flic  lift  upon  her  felf  to  take.

100

Thus  flicdifguis’d  him  like  a Pilgrim  poore,  ’

That  on  his  fliculdeis  doth  a wallet  bcare.

And  doth  for  Gods  fake  beg  from  doorc  to  doore,

A gown  of  Fryers  gray  flic  madebim  vvcarc,

A flrange  apparell  for  a gallant  woerj
Into  an  Ifland  dog, with  fliaggcd  hairc.

As  white  as  Ermin,apd  the  prettieft  clf.

That  ever  nature  made, flic  chang’d  her  felf-
lot

And  thus  unto  they  reforr,

Firft  to  feme  utter  rooms,in  which  were  biding
The  Hinds  and  Labouretsof  meaner  fort.

Here  he  with  certaine  pipes  of  his  providing,

Hisdog  madedance,and  makciuchprcttic  fporr,

Thatglad  was  he  could  bung  bismiftres  tiding.

Who  needs  would  fee  as  much  as  they  had  feen.

Such  was  the  Dolors  dcftinic  1 ween.

102

jidonio  to  bet  prefence  thus  admitted,  ^

Commands  the  dog, which  in  all  points  obayd,  Mujifm,

His  turnsjhis  danccs,and  hisgcfturcs  fitted,

Sodueaad  juft, to  all  the  Pi  grim  (aid.

They  mus’d  to  fee  a dog  (b  rarely  witted.

And  marking  ftilltbc  qualities  he  plaid,

In  feeing  them  they  take  great  mirth  and  pleafutc.

And  prais’d  the  little  dog  beyond  all  mcafiirc.


loj

Much  wonder  fii  ft,but  after  much  defire
Bred  in  the  ludgcswifcjthcdogtogct.

She  bids  thenurfe  thedog  to  buy  or  hire.

And  try  v^hat  price  the.manthcrcof would  (etr
Dame(faid  the  Pilgrim)  bad  your  miftrcs  by  her
Incoyned  gold,  as  much  aseveryet
A womaps  thought  did  wifli,it  would  not  boot.

Of  this  fame  dog  of  mine  to  buy  one  foot.

104

And  plaine  to  fliew  that  that  was  true  hefaid.

And  that  it  rather  better  was  then  worfe,

Hetook  her  ftraightafidc  with  him, and  praid
The  dog  to  give  two  duckats  to  the  nuife.

The  dog  but  fliook  his  cares, and  out  belaid
The  gold  J tberctake  and  put  it  in  thy  purfc,

Adonio  faith,and  think  what  price  isable
Tobuy  adogthatisfoprofitabie.

105

What  ere  I ask  this  dog  to  me  will  bring,

Embroider’d  gowns  and  kirtlcs, cloth  ofgolJ,

A chainc  of  pearlc,a  jcwelI,or  a ring.

In  fliortrr  time  then  it  can  well  be  told  •

Yctttll  my  Lady  this, flic  hatha  thing,

For  which  alone  my  Spanicll  can  be  (bid.

To  pay  me  gold  or  coy  nc  I count  it  dodging.

But  I will  fell  it  her  for  one  nights  lodging.

This


natrm

fUiHtdtdr


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


lo5

THii  faid,  he  fetu  by  her  as  for  a token,

A gem  of  parting  price,  then  newly  madcj
The  nurfc  rewarded  thus, and  fairely  fpoken.

And  vCd  (perhaps)  to  trafficko  in  fuch  trade.

Went  backc  thercwith,and  hairing  filly  broken
Themaner  fiift,her  miftres  doch  perfwade.

To  buy  tlicdog,andfaid  rtic  might  atcbicue  it,
VVithfuch  a price,  asis  nolcflic  togiueit,

107

At  fir  ft,  the  fayre  Argia  backward  drew.

As  partly,  being  loth  to  breake  her  faith,

And  partly  doubting  all  could  not  be  trew,

The  which  the  tailing  nurfc  before  her  laithi
But  fire  witboathesdoth  her  firft  talc  renew.

And  that  fuch  offers  fcldomc  come  fhe  faith,

3 n fine  Cic  wan  her  miftres  to  agree,
ext  day  more  priuatly  the  dog  to  fee.

108

next  apparanee  inthcpiace.

Became  thcDoftois  mine  and  confufion.

Such  duckets, fuch  fpur  Ryalsinlike  calc.

Such  gemsherticw’d  indeed,  or  by  illufion,
Hcmollifi’d  thereby  my  Ladies  grace.

And  mov’d  her  matke  the  bargame  inconclufion.
And  this  did  (then  perhaps)  the  rather  mouc  her.
When  as  fhe  knew  he  was  her  ancient  louer.

109

T hus  her  true  louers  prefence,  a nd  his  prayer ,

The  comforts  of  her  nurfc,  that  whoriflr  drudge,
The  great  rewards  he  prcfcmly  did  pay  her.

The  abfcncc  long  of  that  fame  icalous  ludgCj
And  laftly  hopcthatfuie  none  would  bewray  her,
Wip’t  from  her  confciencc  fcrupic  all  and  grudge.

So  that  flic  tooke  his  dog,  and  for  his  laber,

Gauc  him  frcclcauc  to  play  vpon  hertaber.

1 10

Thus  now  Adonio  frankly  rcapt  the  fruit,
of  that  faire  Ladicsloucthat  he  bad  wonne.

The  which  he  followd  ftill  with  fwcet  purfuit,

Vnto  their  likings  both : this  while  the  Sun,

Before  the  iudg  full  ended  had  his  fuit.

Through  twice  fix  fignes  hisyearly  courfc  had  tun.
And  home  he  came  at  laft,fufpedingforc.

That  which  tli’Aftronomer  had  told  before,

1 1 1

But  ere  vnto  bis  ownc  houfe  he  would  go,

Firft  of th’ Aftionomcr  to  aske  he  ment,

Iffo  his  wife  had  taryed  chaft  or  no.

Since  he  from  home  on  his  Ambaflagc  went?

The  cunning  man,  that  meant  the  troth  to  fliow.
Doth  calculate,  to  fee  how  ftarret  wcrcbcm.

And  when  that  he  the  planets  well  had  vewd.

That  fhe  bad  plaid  the  quean,he  doth  conclude.

112

And  that  it  was  befalnc  as  he  forfhowed.

How  flic,  with  mightie  gifts  and  bribes  allured.
Her  felfe  vpon  another  had  beftowed .

The  wretched  ludge,with  no  fmall  griefeindured.
To  hcarc  thefenewes,  & though  too  true  he  trowed
The  fame,  yet  fecking  to  be  more  artured.

He  cals  the  nuife  afidc.at  his  homecommiag,

Andieckcsto  fife  her  with  no  little  cunniogt


'3*^7


113


With  diuerscircumquaqucs  and  deuifes
He  fecketh  of  the  nurfc  tofinde  the  trace.

But  rtic  in  fpeech  fo  warie  and  fo  nice  is.

As  one  belike  well  ftudied  in  the  cafe.

That  all  hiscunning  fpcech  her  notintices.

But  that  fhe  ftill  denide  with  fbamclcftcface.

That  which  fhe  kncw,snd  whereof  her  perfwafion
Had  bene  in  part,  though  not  the  chief eoccaflon.

When  as  the  iealous  Judge  long  time  in  vaine.

Had  tempted  her  with  promifes  and  gifts.

And  that  hcfawforall  hisfcarch  and  painc.

He  found  lefle  ccrtcmic,the  mote  he  fifts,
Hedothexpeft  to  try  a further  trainc.

As  one  not  vnacquaintcd  with  fuch  drifts.

He  watchta  time, when  they  fhould  fall  to  bralling,
As  ftill  where  women  are,  is  oft  befalling.

11$

And  as  be  thought  indeed  fo  fell  it  our.

The  teftic  nurfc  one  day  not  pleafed  well.

Came  vnto  him  at  their  next  falling  out.

And  of  her  ownc  accord  the  trath  doth  tell :
Thinkeyou,  when  asthe  Judge  had  heard  her  out,
How  he  did  chafe,  and  fret  and  fume,  and  fwcll.

So  nearc  vnto  his  heart  and  braineitfits.

It  little  wanted  to  haue  reau’d  his  wits.

IlS

And  in  this  agunie  refoIuM  to  dye.

And  finirti  both  his  owne  dayesand  his  wive^'
And  fb  his  griefe,and  her  great  rtiamc  thereby
To  wipe  away,  with  ending  both  their  lives.

He  turncth  to  the  Citie  by  and  by,
Asthaefamedefperat  defirehim  driues.

And  thence  a truftieferuant  wiihinftiu^ton,

He  fends  of  purpefc  forhiswiues  deftruAion.

"7

He  bids  himtell  v^r^fisin  his  name.

That  on  the  fodamc  he  was  falne  fo  rteke.

That  but  CO  him  without  dcla  v fhecame,  '

The  doubt  was  great  fhe  could  not  find  him  quick.
Wherefore  her  iourncy  with  more  fpecd  to  frame.
To  ryde  behind  this  man,  who  in  a thicke.

That  was  right  in  the  way  vnto  the  Citie,

Had  charge  to  kill  her  t here  without  all  pi  tie.

f 1 8

And  ftraight  accordingly  the  fervant  went,

T o fay  and  do,  as  much  as  he  was  bidden.

But  file  foretold  of  that  their  fell  intent,

(For  nothing  from  her  little  dogge  was  hidden)
And  taught  .wichalli  the  fame  for  to  preueot,

Away  with  this  fame  fervant  fhe  is  ridden.

And  in  few  houres  arived  at  the  wood.

Where  he  was  purpofd  to  have  rtied  her  blood,
no

Then  did  he  tell  to  her  his  mafters  will.

And  drew  his  fword  a fpeedie  death  to  giue  her.

He  oncly  offered,  ere  he  would  her  kill.

To  grant  her  time,  to  pray  God  to  forgive  her,

I cannot  tell  you  by  what  manner  skill,

Shedid  her  felfe  forth  of  hishandsdeliucr,
Butgonfhe  was,  he  fecking  all  about,

And  for  his  life  he  could  not  find  berou.t,
li


Stnuacih


I


THE  XLIII.BOOKE


Prouerb:


Hitmager
wai  tht
^Higbt  ef
Mantea,
at  <3iha(t
hoafe  Rc‘
riaUafu/ftd


120

Backc  w.ent  the  fellow, with  aftonied  face,

With  trcmblir.g  heart,  and  courage  all  difmavd,
And  made  his  mailer,  at  the  wondrous  cafe,

No  lelTc  then  he  had  bene  afore  afrayd.

He  knew  not  hotv;  by  Faery  Matitos  grace.

His  wife  could  when  Qielill,  haucheipeand  ayd,
Joi  why  the  nurfc  that  did  the  reft  vnfold,

I knew  not  why,  but  this  ftie  neucrtold.
izi

The  Doiftor  now  was  plaguM  with  griefe  extieame.
Far  more  then  cuer  lie  had  felt  before.

What  erft  was  but  a mote,  is  now  a bcame,
Norhconciotrcueogcd  is  the  more  j
His  fTiamewill  nowbcblazd  overall  the  P<.camc,
And  all  men  now,  will  laugh  at  him  therefore.

The  former  errour,  might  hauc  bene  concealed.

But  this  to  all  the  world  will  be  revealed.

He  thinks  that  fure,  vpon  this  plainc  deteftion,

Ofhis  fcllonious  mind,of  winch  I fpakc.

She  will,  to  keepe  her  out  ofhis  fubicdliori.

To  fomc  great  Lord,  forthwith  hci  fclfe  betake,
And  Hue  in  fpiteof  him,  with  fucTi  proteftion,
Andfo  a mocking  ftocke  of  him  to  make.

But  moft  he  doubt  s,lcaft  to  fomc  man  flie  go’th.

As  is  a Icachcr,  and  a rufti n both.

Wherefore  fo  foulc  a mifehiefe  to  preuent.

He  fpares  no  paihe,  no  traucll  nor  no  coft,

Tocv’ric towne, in Lombardie  he  fent.

With  letters  and  with  meftages  in  poft  ;

And  further  he  bimfelfe  in  perfbn  went
To  fcckc  his  wife  that  was  fo  ftrangely  loft.

But  all  in  vainc,  forwhy  of  her  abiding,
Noincklinghecould  hearenorany  tyding.

124

And  to  conclude,  at  laft  he  cald  his  man,

Thatmanthatmadeto  himtheftrangc  report.

And  bids  him  fliow  the  place,  and  ifhc  can.

Where  his  lewd  miftres  vanifht  in  fuch  fort :
Thcferuantftraigiutoleadthc  way  began.

And  to  the  place,  together  they  refort.

But  (which  was  ftrangc)  where  crfthelcfta  wcod,
A wondrous  ftatcly  Palace  now  there  flood.

1*5

The  fay  re  Argia  caufed  had  this  fpacc,
HcrFrteij/toctca  therefor  her  plcafurc,
Anhoufeof  Allabliftetin  the  place,

Adornd  and  guilt,  with  coft  beyond  all  mcafure:
Twcrc  hard  to  thinkc,  muchlelTe  to  tell  with  grace.
What  bcautic  waswitheut,  within  what  treafurcj
My  mafters  houfc,  fio  whence  laft  night  you  came.
Was  but  a paltric  Alehoufc  to  this  fame.

126

of  coftly  Aitas.  therewas  fo  great  plentie,

Ofb^s  of  Clke,  imbroidred,  frcfli  and  new,
AsfuiDifluchambers,  more  then  ten  times  rtventie,  •
A nd  lialls,  and  what  focuerwas  invew,
Ciipsjcandlefticks,  and  bowls  of  ftones  moft  dentie,
Ofpreciousfubftancc,aDd  of  fundric  hew,

To  be  imploid  for  eating,  and  for  drinking,
Andftorc  of  gold,  and  hike  beyond  all  thinking.


>17

Now  fir,  the  wretched  ludge,  as  I faid  earft.

That  out  to  feckc  hiswife  had  here  aftignd,

And  findes  this  houfc,  in  ftatc  as  1 rchcarft.

Where  he  had  nothing  thought,  but  woods  to  find,’
With  wonder  great  liis  mazed  head  was  pcaift.

And  doubted  not  a litticin  hismind,  “

If  fo  himfclfc  were  ficeping  then  or  wakinw,

Oi  if  his  troubled  farayne,  were  in  due  takine.  ^

laS

He  fees  a G ibfen  ftanding  at  the  doore.

All  blab-ljpt,  beetle  browd,  and  bottle  noztd,

Moft  greafic,  naftic,  hisappatcll  poore.

His  other  parts,  as  Painters  arc  difpcfcd,

Togiuc  to  Efbp,  fuch  a Blackamorc
Could  not  be  fccnc  clfcwhcrc,  as  he  fuppofed,
Sovilca  vifage,  and  fo  bad  a grace,

T o make  cr’n  Paradife  a lokthfbmc  place.

129

Anfclmtis  feeing  none  but  this  fame  drudge.

Went  vmo  him,  and  praith  him  make  it  knowne,
Whofc  houfc  isthis : the  Gipfen  tcls  the  Judge,
That  he  himfelfc,  t he  ftatcly  houfcdoih  ownc  :
ThcIudgCjthit  he  doth  mockchim  fure  doth  iudgo.
And  prayes  the  ecrtaine  truth  to  him  be  fliownc,*
The  Negro  doth  affitme  with  many  an  oth.

That  that  which  he  bad  faid  beforc,was  troth,

130

And  that  he  plainly  might  the  truth  pcrccaue.

He  prayes  hi  m vcw  the  houic  at  better  IcafurC,

And  offreth  him  free  Iibcrtieand  Icaiie,

Of.any  thing  was  there,  at  his  owne  plcafurc.

For  him  or  for  his  fricnds,to  take  and  Icauc,

And  cu’n  asof  his  owne,  to  make  frcefcafure,’

The Doftor  maruels  that  fuch  libcralitie
Could  be  in  one,  of  fo  bafe  fiiow  and  qualitie.

13*

Butyctlbc  Judge,  fofayre  and  kind  intreated.

In  frcndly  fori,  doth  from  his  herfe  alighr.

And  fees  the  houfc  at  I before  1 cheated,
Withwondergreat,  and  with  as  great  delight.

So  richly  furnifticd,  fo  I’rinccly  feated,

Sobrauely  bwilt  for  vfe,aswcll  as  fight.

And  cu’ric  part  with  other  fo  agreeing.

He  could  not  fatiffic  bis  eyes  with  feeing.

’ *3*

Now  when  thcludgecame  backe  againe,  he  told
Hcncrcfaw  houfc,  fo  plcafing  to  his  eye,

And  (wcarcs  he  thought  that  ten  times  Crsfus  gold,
Wercfcanra  price,  fo  rare  a houfeto  buy:

Yet  may  (the  Nf^ro  faith)  this  houfc  be  fold.
Though  not  for  coync  (for  not  for  coync  card)

Yet  for  fomcothcr  ware,  w hich  fine  I gnefle.

You  will  cftccmc  at  price  a gicat  dealc  Icffc.


>3?

In  fine,  he  made  to  him  the  like  requeft,

AsSodomits  did  make  forgueftsof  r,of|

The  ludge  his  motion  doth  and  birndeteft.

Who  thoughfiuc times  repulft.yetccafcth  not.

But  him  witbfo  large  offers  ftill  he  preft.

That  in  conclufion,like  a bcaftly  fot,
Soasitmightbc  done,  in  hugger  mugger.

The  lodge  agiccd,  the  Negro  him  niou1d(  ).•

Argia


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO:


TJrihltU  ufti
Mingu

«/<  Prrierbi
ufid  in  Ea-

lUjh.


* Tbii  Uk*  it
Taduft,  of
vbicb  Virgil
fpt<tk.ti,prii‘
finrthtjltrt
of]4^,  but
novitittd-

moftuity.
*Tbituctd-
ltd  tht  TtMCb
nfLtngtfiri-
yioEilOiwbtrt

P„r  runt
firtigkfix
milt  long.

Hog  ditch  ^
gpttu  Rave-
na  xx  mjle
leal g,  but  nnr
it  it  leant  HM-

vigobit.

T.inii  writf
tfit,  and  eats
itVeJjfa  Mef-
Janitia,


134

tl'.attlicteby  unfetnehad  ftayd,

^\nd  fccnc  him  filne  into  the  finne  fbrenamed,
Bifclos’d  herfclfe,and  fliarply  did  upbiayd
His  filthy  faftjthat  juftly  might  be  blamed;

A ludge (faid  flie)  icpuccd  wife,  and  ftayd,
Sinnethus?  whci^TiththeDoSorwas  fofliamcd,
He  wiflu  the  earth  would  cleave  unto  the  center,  .
That  he  to  hide  himfclfcjthcicin  might  enter.

13V

But  flic  cxclaiinethon  him  Ihll  anew.

For  his  mote  fliame.and  for  her  more  excufe.

And  faid,  what  puniflimcot  were  fit  for  you,

Tor  this  foule  finne,againft  all  natures  ufe?

That  did  nolefl'e  then  death  to  me  ihinkcdcw.

For  fuch  a fmall  and  naturall  abufc.

With  one  that  lov’d  me, and  whofegift  was  fuch,

As  ten  fuch  houfes  are  not  worth  fo  much.

I3«

If  oned  cath  did  unto  my  fault  belong.

One  hundred  deaths  were  fit  to  tbinc  to  give.

And  though  my  felfc  am  in  this  place  fo  ftrong.
That  if  I lift,  thou  fliouldft  no  longer  live.

Yet  will  I do  to  thee  no  further  wrong.

But  pardon  thee, and  thou  fiialt  me  forgive.

And  quite  each  othcr,all  old  debts  and  driblets.

And  let  the  hates  head  againfi  the  goofc  gyblcts.

13?

And  let  henceforth  peace  follow  in  cfFe  A,

As  oH<»ht  to  be  betwccnc  the  man  and  wife.

Nor  evertone  to  cot  her  once  objeft.

Our  formcrfaulein  all  our  future  life;

The  ludgc  was  glad,and  did  it  not  neglcA,

To  take  This  frcndly  end  of  cutfed  ftrifcj
Thus  as  good  frcnds,thcy  lived  many  ayearc.

And  while  they  liv’d,thcy  lov’d  each  other  deare.
13*

And  there  the  fleers-man  did  hisftory  end.

With  which  he  mov’d  the  worthy  knight  to  laftcr.
Who  blam’d  the  Do£lor,that  did  fo  offend.

And  talked  of  the  fame  a good  while  after;

But  much  hedid  wit  commend.

Or  at  the  lcaft,the  wit  of  her  that  taught  her.

To  make  the  ludge  into  that  net  fall  in.

In  which  her  fclfe  was  falne  with  far  Icflc  fin.

139

Now  when  the  Sunne  gan  mount  unto  theSoutb,

A little  Table  in  the  Barge  was  fpred ,

And  then  the  knight  began  to  feed  his  mouth.
When  fleepe  hiscyes,aiil  talke  his  earcs  had  fed;
The  Mantuan  at  hischarges,him  allowth.

All  fine  Acates  that  that  fame  country  bred.

The  while  hisfwimmingvcflell  dothforfake

* The  plcafant  country, and  unplcafam  lake.

140

From  thencc.be  held  hiscourfc  ftill  forward  right,

* The  river  running  (Iraightas  any  lync.

Which  when  they  palTcd  had  with  fpccdic  flight,
Vpon  the  tothet  hand  they  did  decline;

* And  by  a ditch,  and  (landing  poole  in  fight.

Etc  of  thatday.were  fpent  full  bowers  nine,

Vnto  Ravenna  as  they  were  commanded.

They  went,and  there  the  braye  RenaUohadeit


141


Although  RenaUo  cou\d  but  fcldomcbc/t
Of  (lore  of  coync,  yet  now  fiich  (lore  he  had.

As  to  the  Bargemen  of  his  frcndly  hofl,

He  gave  a Urgcfl'cfuch,as  made  them  glad:

From  thcncc  to  Rimini, he  went  in  port.

And  changing  horfcsftill,now  good, now  bad.
That  night  at  Mountefer, he  did  but  flip.

And  fo  fVibynOjCie  next  Sunne  was  up.

14a

Then  Caghe,  and  from  thcncc  the  Alpes  he  pad.

Then  t h’ Vmbrys  and  ElrufcianSythenteto  Komg^
And  fo  by  Baike,toP/?r<i  in  great  haft
He  went, and  to  thacCitie  he  doth  come.

Which  good  @/€incas  mafty  agespaft.

Ennobled  with  his  fiteAnchy/es  tooane:

Then  ifaight  by  fca  he  went  unto  this  lie,

W'hcrc  Idid  leave  OrlandOyCinee  a while,

143

I meanc  thatTlc,thattrp/><ti/«/4hiehr,

Wherein  the  famous  waniors,thrce  to  three.

The  combat  that  I fpakc  of  cift  did  fight.

The  which  Renaldo  longing  fore  to  fee.

With  ores  and  fayles.madc  all  the  haft  he  might.
But  yet  for  all  his  haft,it  would  not  be.

The  wind  did  for  bis  purpofe  ferve  (b  flacke.

More  then  an  houretoolateitkepc  him  backc.

S44

So  that  cv’n  much  about  that  time  he  came.

When  as  Orlando  had  that  conqueft  wonne,  ‘

In  which  unto  his  cvcrlafting  fame.

Two  Turkifli  PrinceSjUnto  death  were  donnc;

Yet  was  foraeforrow  mingled  with  the  fame.

Both  for  the  death  of  Monodantts  fonne.

And  Oliveros  hurt,  of  which  he  found

Such  gricfc,hc  could  not  fet  his  foote  to  ground.

»4S

Now  as  the  Earle  Renaldo  did  imbrace.

He  could  notchufc,  but  flicd  a ftreame  of  tcaies,’
When  as  he  fliow’d  him,in  the  prefent  place.
Good  Brandimart yto  whom  fucli  love  he  beares,]
Lye  newly  flainc,with  pale  and  livelclTc  face;
Likcwifcto  wccpc.iicnit/i/snotforbcares.

To  fee  hisdcath,and  eke  hit  cofins  brufe,

. So  grievous, that  his  foote  he  could  not  ufe.

14S

Renaldo  comforts  them  in  all  he  may,

Although  himfcifeof  comfort  tailed  lead.

And  ch^efe  to  thinkc  by  his unluckic  ftay.

He  wascomc  tardic,to  fo  great  a fcaft;

This  while  the  wofuU  fcrvancs  did  convay.

Their  maftciscoarfes,to  the  townediftrefl;,

I mcane  Bifcrta,wherc  t hey  made  it  knownc.
Which  fide  prcvaild,and  which  wasorettbrowne,
147

of  thisfame  conqueft  thatOr/<zniovvonne,

Afiol^o  and  ftout  Sa  'fonet  were  gUd }

Yet  joy’d  they  not,fo  as  they  would  bavedonne.
If  Brandimart  his  death  then  had  not  badt
The  fall  of  noble  Monodanres  fonoe,

Strakc  them  into  adurape  and  made  them  fad.
But  who  fliall  now  impart  to  Fiordeliege,

The  wofnll  loflc  of  her  dearc  Lord  and  liege?

I i X


That  Citit  it
caked  FrafOa
nia

OrtOMia,


fitnUHrit
iir  ittgtt,


t>ert  thty
th*l  fdcr$j(.
ttdtdTSdt*
tka.


THE  XUII.BOOKE


'570

Ml

Herfclfhad  dream'd  a fttange  dream  ®?cinight,

Which  did  her  mind  in  fearfull  fort  difmay,
Shedream’d  the  bafeiofhcrlered knight.

Which  (he  embroidred  black  this  other  day.

With  rpots  of  red  were  powdied  all  in  light,

A nd  00  the  fame  like  ftorm  of  haiKf ones  lay  1
That  (he  had  done  it  fo  (he  fare  belie?’d.

And  with  the  thought  thereof  was  greatly  gricv*d.

149

She  further  thought,that  to  her  felf  (he  fed.

Did  not  my  Lord  command  me  black  to  make  it.
What  meant  I then  to  mix  it  fo  with  red,

And  in  fo  (Irange  a manner  to  mill ake  it !

An  ill  prefage  in  herthis  fancy  bred.

And  for  an  evill  token  (he  did  take  it,  (her.

Then  came  thcfcncwcs  which  none  imparted  with
Till  t\xEngliJh  Duke  and  Sanfonet  amt  thither*

150

When  they  came  in, and  that  (he  well  had  heeded
Their  count*nances,in  (uch  a conqueft  fad.

No  further  newes, no  further  notice  needed.

To  make  her  know, they  brought  her  tidings  bad  ;
Forthwith  her  grief  and  (briow  fo  exceeded.

Scarce  any  power  her  vicall  fpirits  had.

But  prefently  in  pale  and  deadly  found
She  (ell  in  wofull  trance  upon  the  ground*

But  when  that  life  came  to  his  courfe  againcj
Her  tender  cheeks  and  her  faire  bairc  (he  tare.

Oft  calling  on  his  lovcjd  name  in  raine.

Whole  lefiehad  bred  in  her  (uch  wofull  care,

She  fcreecbes  and  cries  out  with  giicf  and  painC,

Like  thofe  with  Devils  that  pofTelTed  are,

Oi  as  t\it  Meruides  with  found  of  hern
In  furious  mannei  allabout  were  born.

1

This  man  and  that  to  lend  (he  doth  intreat
A knife  jwherewith  her  felf  (he  murder  may.

Straight  to  the  hav'n  (he  runs  with  fury  great.

There  where  the  bodies  of  tbedead  kings  lay,

With  mind  to  mangle  them, and  bruife,and  beat  i
Then  to  the  Tea  (he  will,therc  it  no  nay.

And  pa(Tc  to  LtpM.^»/e,and  there  abide.

And  end  her  life  by  Brandimarts  dcarc  (Ide.

Ah  Brandimart  my  loved  Lord  ((he  faid^

What  meant  1 without  me,to  let  thee  parti
Ay  mcunluckic  wretch, in  that  I ftaid.

And  was  not  prefent  there  to  take  thy  part*

Mine  eye  might  untothcchave  been  an  aid.

My  voice  might  have  adifted  thee  in  part.

And  HGradaJfo  thee  behind  had  dricken.

One  cry  of  mine  might  thee  both  warn  and  quiclcca.
154

Or  els  perhaps,(b  well  I might  have  fped  me.

As  to  have  ftept  the  blow  and  thee  between.

If  thou  hadft  (cap’d, although  it  did  behead  me,

1 would  have  faid  that  it  had  happy  been  :

Now  die  1 will,theugh  death  no  whit  can  (led  me.
And  though  > know  my  death  it  fhiicleffc  clean  j
Whereat  if  I had  di*d  in  thy  defence.

My  death  had  piQ^t  bred, and  not  oficnce*


155

And  iftheheav'ns  had  been  (b  hard  in  this,

That  I could  not  have  holp  ihee  in  the  place.

At  lead  my  lad  farewell  and  folemne  ki(Tc,

Idiould  have  giv'n  thee, and  thy  lovely  face.
Bedew'd  with  teates,and  ere  to  hcav'nly  bJi(fc
Thy  feulchad  down,  I (liould  have  had  thefpace
To  fay,deparc  fiom  hence  in  peace  ray  dcare.

And  kuow,I  have  net  long  to  taric  here.

Is  this(dcarc  Brandimart ) is  this  thy  raigne.

Of  2?tfnJia^re,wbofc(ccpter  I diould  take  ?

Is  this  tbcdowrc  thou  dod  to  me  ordainc  i
Is  this  the  royal!  (eat,ofwhicb  you  fpakc  ?

Ah  fortune  hard, how  frivolous  and  raine
Dod  thou  my  hopes  and  my  dcflgncmcnts  make  ?
Ah  why  ccafcliiithfo  great  good  isiefcoie.

To  cad  away  what  ever  els  is  left  me  ?

157

With  this,againefogreat  her  fury  grew.

She  made  upon  her  fcK  a frc(h  a^ult.

And  her  faire  hairc  (lie  rent, and  tare  anew.

As  if  her  hairc  had  been  in  all  the  fault,

Ev*n  from  her  tender  checks  the  bloud  (he  drew.
Still  dewing  them  with  warry  tearcs  and  falc ;

But  let  her  here  a while  lament  and  mourn.

For  to  Orlando  I mud  now  return.

Who  with  his  kinfman  that  did  now  require
Same  cunoino  Icach  hisgrievous  wound  to  cure,
And(fot  to  Brandimart  he  did  defire
To  givean  honourable fcpulrure)

To  that  hill  went  that  doth  the  night  with  fire
Make  cleare,  and  doth  the  day  with  finoke  obfcurci
And  (b  the  wind  did  favour  his  intent.

In  twenty  houres  he  came  to  Agringent.

1 59

Here  when  they  weredown  from  their  (hips  alighted.
The  Sun  cv’n  then  preparing  to  go  down.

They  fent  abroad  and  in  great  had  invited
The  chicfNobility  of  all  the  town  :

Straight  at  the  (liorc  of  torches  dote  was  lighted.
And  many  men  of  honour  and  renown,

Whenas  Or/andvtothc  (horc return’d.

Went  With  him  to  the  corps, and  with  him  mourn'd
leo

There  Bardyn  dood,a  man  well  drick  in  yeaiet
And  in  fucb  fortto  waile  he  did  perfever.

That  with  abundant  flieddingof  his  tcares.

Men  thought  he  would  have  (oft  his  eresfor  ever  j
To  blame  the  heav’nsand  darshc  not  foibeares.
But  roaring  like  a Lion  in  a fever.

Tare  his  gray  haire,and  all  about  it  fprinkled.

And  (pared  not  his  aged  skin  and  wrinkled.

I6l

When  as  the  Talladint  approched  neare.

Straight  doubled  was  the  mourning  noiieandcry.
Each  fti  iv'd  who  (hould  mod  forrowfull  appeare.
And  ev'ry  onchftup  his  voice  on  high;
Orlandovrith  more  heavy  heart  thencheare.

Still  keeping  fixed  on  thebcarehiseye.

When  filence  fird  by  (Ignes  procur'd  he  bad,
Pionounc'd  thefe  words  with  mourning  voice  5c  (ad


DdMdgyrt
tie  Ridlatt
tf  Tifucb


*/£tlU  IM

Sieiti*.


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


37*


trltitiai
JunrtBO-
ttttwn  tf
B/mdiraart,


24  Curtw,
/aak.  h Livit
LmI{  in  $be

Jitrj.


i6i

O flout, o deare  champion  mine, and  fiiend.

That  here  art  dcad,hut  liv’ft  in  licav’niy  /eat,

Where  chy  great  joyes  fliall  never  have  an  end.

Nor  ever  bcenipaii’d  with  cold  or  heat;

Yet  pardon  me  in  that  I do  offend.

To  waile  my  v\oe,and  mifcryfo great,

A'ly  forrow  is  not  fiar  thy  parting  hence,

But  that  my  fclfe  am  fo  long  abfent  thence.

16J

To  think  that  he  is  fever’d  now  fo  far,

In\-vhom  I )oy*d, this  doth  my  paincincrcalc,

I was  with  thee  in  tempefts  and  in  war  j
Why  am  not  I with  thee  in  calm  and  peace  ?

0 miric  flcfli,that  me  from  bliffc  doth  bar,

Why  cannot  I obtaiiicalikcrclcafe,

Sith  ftill  I waicopartnerof  thy  paine,

Why  ami  kept  from  part  of  fo  great  gaine?

1 64.

Toyou  the  happy  guerdon  and  the  gaine.

To  us  the  Ioffe  and  dammage  all  is  left,

France, Ger many, 3nd  Italy  complaine.

Their  chiefc  defence, and  their  chiefe  buckler  reft  i
How  fliall  my  Prince  and  uncle  now  fuflaine,
(Depriv’d  of  fo  good  help)ro  great  a hefr,

T hy  Ioffe  of  fuccour  hat  h bereaved  vvholy
Both  holy  Church, and  eke  the  empire  holy.

The  Pagans  whom  thou  damedfl  In  thy  life.

How  will  they  gather  heart  now  with  thy  death  ?
How  will  they  ftir  newflerms  offearfull  ftrife.

Now  having  fo  good  meancs  to  gather  breath  ?

But  how  great  forrowwill  thy  deareft  wife
Suflaine  ? me  thinks  I hearccv’nnow  flic  feth

1 am  to  blame,and  that  flie  hates  me  moft,

■And  faith  by  me  fhc  hath  her  worlds  joy  loft.

16b

3Tct  Tiordelicge, sh\s  comfort  may  revive

Both  thcc,and  all  that  for  his  death  are  forie.

That  all  the  valiant  knights  that  him  furvive.

Have  caufc  to  envy,  and  admire  his  glory  ;

T he 2Jccy,nor  the  knight  thaticapt  alive
In  Curtian  lakc,fo  prais'd  in  Latin  ftory.

Nor  Codrus  by  the  Gree\s  fo  magnifi’d.

With  greater  praife,nor  honour  never  di’d,

167

Thcfc  words, and  fuch  as  tbefe  Orlanh  fpake.

The  while  the  Fryies,both  whitc,and  black, and  gray
A folcmnc  and  a long  proceflion  make.

In  goodly  rank,and  in  devout  array:

That  GocUo  hcav'n  the  dead  mansfpirit  take,

' Requiem  ceternam  for  hisfoule  they  pray.

And  tapers  in  the  mtdft,beforc,bchind.

Did  caufc  that  knight,likc  to  the  noone  day  fliin’d.

168

Then  diverfe  Earles  and  fcnighti  the  hcaife  uphold.

All  over  which  a mantle  rich  was  fpread^

Of  purple  filk, embroider'd  brave  with  gold.

And  with  faircpcarle,and  ftone  well  garnifhed,
Ofequall  coft  and  beauty  to  behold,

The  coffin  was  that  held  the  body  dcad^

Provided  by  the  Pallaiine  to  be.

Fit  for  his  calling  and  his  high  degree,


169

Three  hundred  people  of  the  poorer  fort
Of  dwellers  that  inhabited  the  town,

Vmo  the  funcralsdtd  then  refotc.

And  unto  each  wasgiv'n  a mourning  gown  {

An  hundred  Pagcs,mount;d  in  good  lort.

On  warlike  fleeds,cIocb’d  to  the  ground  adown.

And  both  the  Pagv.s,and  the  gallant  flecds
Fiom  top  to  toe  were  clad  inmomning  wcedi.

170

Then  bare  they  divers  banners  fairedifplaid.

And  painted  divers  armes,that  he  obtain’d
From  armed  bands alone,without  all  aid.

And  had  to  Cafar  and  to  Peter  gam’d  i
With  hundreds morc,all  in  black  oQwni  arraid.

To  whom  were  divers  offices  ordain’d.

And  lafl  Renatdo  and  Orlando  came ^

Hut  Olivero  flaid(forhcwaslame.)

17t

It  long  would  be  ere  I could  it  reheat  f«.

And  tell  what  ceremonies  ufed  were.

Nor  can  I comprehend  them  wcl  in  verfc,
Howordcily  they  were  accomplifli'd  thcie  :

Vmo  the  chiefeft  Church  they  bare  a hcarfe,

The  while  nor  old  nor  young  towcepfoi  bcare.

His  nobleneffe,his  value,  and  bis  youth
Did  breed  in  all  their  heart  s fo  wondrous  tuth.

171  ^

Now  when  the  women  finifli’d  had  and  done

Theit  bootlcffc  weeping, and  theit  fruiilcffc  paine^
ThcPrieft  had  faidtheii  Ryrieleifonne,

And  all  the  rites  that  thcieumo  pertaine  ;
Thccarkaffc  of  great  Monodantes  fonne,

So  chcflcd,oatwoco*lumns  to  remaine
Or/dnde caus’d, till  time  he  might  procure
Acoflly  and  moreflately  fepiUiurc.

From  Sicilie  Orlando  not  departs,

Till  he  forTutch  and  Porphetiehad  fenf.

And  all  that  were  moft  skilfull  of  thofe  arts.

Had  talk'd  withalfand  told  them  his  intent ;

Then  Fiordeliege  comming  to  thofe  parts,

Her  time, her  travel!, and  her  treafuic  fpent.

To  make  the  tombemuft  flatcly  for  her  fpoufo^-
At  which  to  fpend  her  future  time  flic  vowci.

174

And  fith  her  plaints  and  tcarcs  were  never  tir’d,

In  that  fclf  place  flie  means  her  day  cs  to  p^ffc^

And  for  her  husbands  foule  fheflill defil'd
ContinuallDirges,and pcrpetuall  vlaffc)

From  company  her  felfc  flic  quite  retir’d.

And  to  the  place(fuch  her  devotion  was)

That  by  the  tombe  flic  built  a little  cell;

In  which  till  death  flie  purpofed  to  dwell.

17  5

Orlando  d i vers  meffa  gesdidfcnii

T o her,and  after  that  in  perfon  vvent
To  fetch  her  into  France, and  did  pretend
That  her  to  place  with  Galtran  he  meant,

Or  if  the  time  in  prayer  flie  ftill  would  fprad.

He  would  a Num y build  for  that  intent,

Or  that  he  would, if  fo  fhc  fo  had  rather.

Attend  her  to  her  country, and  her  father.

Xi  I Bi!


0f£wdn

■Mitey


37»


THE  XUII.  BOOICE


l?6

But  at  the  tombe  Hie  tari*<l  obftinate.

And  would  from  thence  by  no  mean  be  remov’d.
Still  doingjfaying.boih  betime  and  late.

Penance  and  prayrs^for  him  that  flic  fo  lo»*d,

Till  death  in  th*cndcutofFhci  dolcfull  date.

And  Tent  her  foon,to  find  her  dcarc  bclov'd  ;

But  now  the  knights  of  Prawce  from  fici)? parteJ,
For  lofl'c  of  their  companion  heavy  hearted.

177

And  Oliver  ftill  of  his  foot  complain’d.

For  why , no  falvc  nor  furgery  prevail’d.

But  that  he  was  with  griefe  fo  greatly  pain’d.

They  doubted  that  his  life  would  then  have  fail’d  <
Thus  while  they  sll  in  doubtful!  dump  remain’d.
The  manthatftcar’d  the  bark  in  which  they  fail’d.
Did  make  to  them  this  motion  fageand  wife.

And  they  agreed  to  follow  his  advife.

178

He  told  them  that  not  far  from  thence  there  dwelled
An  Hermit  in  a folitary  plaee.

That  fo  in  fanflity  of  life  excelled.

That  he  could  remedy  each  doubtful!  caft,

Difeafcs  divers  were  by  him  expelled,

Dumbe,  blind,  and  lame  were  heal’d  (fiichwashii
And  that  he  could  with  one  figneof  thecrofle
Allay  the  waves  when  they  do  highcft  tolle.

17P

In  fine, he  told  them  furc  there  was  no  doubt.

To  find  icliefjcv’n  prefent  at  the  hand*

Of  that  fame  man,fo  holy  and  devout.

As  fcarce  his  match  was  found  in  many  lands.
Orlando  having  heard  the  Pylot  out,

Ini^uircd  of  the  place, which  way  it  flaadf.

And  prefemly  the  place  to  him  was  (how’d.

And  toward  it  in  haft  they  fail’d  and  row’d.

I So

Wext  morning  they  difeover’d  all  the  He,

But  kept  aloof, fo  as  their  fbip  might  float.

And  there  they  call  thciraiKhor,and  the  while
Convaid  the  wounded  Marquefle  in  a boat,

Vpon  the  fliallow  waves, fcant  half  a mile,

Vnto  the  blclTcd  Hermits  fimplc  coat.

That  very  Hermit  that  before  but  late
Had  brought  Aogero  unto  Chriftianflate.

iSi

The  man  of  God  that  had  his  d wclliag  here.

Came  fotth,and  met  Orlando  at  the  gate.

And  welcom’d  him  with  kind  and  friendly  chcare,
Inquiring  of  his  arrant,and  their  flate,

(Although  t«  him  it  wasapparant  cleare:

For  God  that  night  had  fent  his  Angcll  late
To  tell  thoSaint  thereof  )Or/<»»dofaid,

His  arrant  was  to  get  his  kinfinan  aid.

1 8a

Who  had  a great  and  grievous  maimcieccav’d.

In  fighting  for  the  Empire  and  thefaitb.

And  wasof  hopcand comfort  quite  bcrcav’d.

Be  of  good  cheare(thc  godly  Hermit  faith)

Who  truft  in  God  fli all  never  be  dcccav’d.

Yet  ointment  none  unto  hi*  hurt  he  layth.

But  firft  to  Church  he  go’th,and  laakcs  his  prayre.
Then  with  great  boldnclls  doth  to  theta  icpayio.


i8j

And  calling  on  that  trcblcfov’raigReniine,

Of  God  the  Fdthcr,Sonnc,and  Holy  Ghoft,

He  blcfl  the  knight  chat  maimed  wai  and  lame,

(Oh  wodiout  grace, of  which  Gods  Saint*  may  boA)

Straight  to  his  ufe  each  vcine  and  finew  came,

No  part  of  all  his  former  fticngth  was  loft.

And  as  it  pleafed  God  of  his  great  grace,

Sobrim  prefent  was  then  in  the  place.

184

And  being  now  fo  weak  with  bleeding  broiigh*.

That  ev’n  his  vitall  fpiitcs  were  almoft  fpcni.

And  feeing  plainly  fuch  a wonder  wrought.

So  great, fo  gracious, and  fo  evident.

To  leave  his  Macon  he  thereby  was  taught.

And  to  confefle  our  Chrift  omnipotent,

He  praid  in  moft  contrite  and  humble  manner.

To  be  a feuldier  under  C hriflian  banner.

185

The  juft  old  man  did  grant  him  his  requeft,

And  tbriflen’d  him, and  did  his  health  reftorr,

At  which  Orlande  flout  and  all  the  reft  ,

Bejoyced  rruch  and  praifcd  God  therefore.

Romero  eke  as  joy  full  as  the  beft
Incrcafed  in  devotion  more  and  more.

To  fee  thofe  my  fteiies  divine  and  Oracle*,
Confirmed  fo  by  plaineapparantnuiaclc*.

186

Thu*  all  this  company  in  fwcet  confort
In  this  fame  blcfTcd  Hermits  houfc  do  ftay.

Who  doth  them  all  moft  fatherly  exhort,

To  bend  their  whole  endeavours  all  they  m«y,

That  in  this  Inne  where  mans  abode  is  fliort.

They  feck  to  wafli  away  the  dirt  and  clay.

That  fbmccalilifc,and  greatly  dacommencf.

And  foie  to  hca  v’n  their  eyes  and  heart*  to  bend.

1*7

ThenfentOr/i2«</o  to  his  fliipin  haft
For  bread  and  wine, and  other  dainty  difliff.

And  this  old  man  whom  abflinencc  and  fad
Had  made  forget  the  taft  of  beafts  and  fiflicr.

Of  charity  they  praid  fomc  flefli  to  taft.

And  he  therein  confented  to  their  wiflics.

And  when  thcy'had  all  eat  to  their  con  tents.

They  found  difeourfe  of  fundry  argument*.

188

And  as  in  fpt  ech  it  often  doth  befall.

That  one  thing  doth  another  bring  to  lights
Rogerowai  at  laft  known  to  them  all.

For  that  Rogtro  that  cxccld  in  fight.

The  firft  tliat  him  to  memory  did  call,  *

Was  i’oi'rin, who  did  know  him  well  b^figbt »

The  next  that  knew  bis  lovely  look  and  ftately,'

Was  good  Renalde  that  fought  with  him  lately.

189

They  all  do  come  to  him  with  friendly  face.

When  of  his  chriftendome  they  underftand.

And  fome'do  kifle  him,ochers  him  embrace
In  kindefl  fort, fomc  take  him  by  the  hand,  >

And  chiefe  Renaldo  ftrives  to  do  him  grace  1 "

Tetif  that  you  defire  to  underftand.

Why  mote  then  all  the  reft  Renalde  fought  if,  ^

Turn  ore  the  leaf,aod  there  yen  lhall  be  taught  It'.


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.  575

In  the  tdle  tf  the  MavtUMt  \ivght  niuy  bcgailered  this  good  msrall,  that  it  is  no  wifJotne  to  fearch  for  that  a tnan  HcrjU,
yuould  not  find : and  hoiv  thefir/i  breach  commonly  of  the  jreeet  concord  oj  matrimory  grorteih  oj  jcalotifici  / mtt/l  con-  '

fcjfe,  theft  be  two  t^navifl)  take  that  beherein  thisbeol^ , andyet  the  Beewi/i  pief^e  out  homy  out  oj  the  w or fl  of  them.

For  mine  ownc  part,/  have  ever  been  of  opinionithat  this  tale  of  the  Mantuan  h^tiight.is  fmply  the  worft  apainjl  women
in  aSthe  boo!^,  or  rather  indeed  that  ever  waswritten.  The  hofls  tale  in  the  xxxviij.bool^  0}  this  worl^Js^a  bad  one:  M.

Spencers  ra/c  ofthefqtiire  ofDames,inhis  excellent  Poem  of  the  Faery  ^ucene,  in  the  end  of  the  vij.  Canto  of  the  third
tool^e,  ii  to  the  /i^e  effe3.  fbarpe  andwell  conceited  ■,  tn  fubfiance  thus,  that  his  Squire  oj  'Dames  could  in  thrceycarcs
traveUfind  but  t hree  women  t hat  denyed  his  lewd  defire  : oj  which  three, one  was  a cmirte  fan,  that  rejc3cd  him  bccaufe
le  wanted  coynejor  her:  the  fecond  a Nun, who  refufed  him  becattfe  he  would  not  fwcare  fccrccie,the  thirda  plain  coun-
trey Gentlewoman,  that  oJ  good  hone/d  fmplicity  denyed  him.-which  alfo  hath  forne  lihjtnes  with  that  oj  Pliaiao  llpalpt
»f  in  the  notes  upon  the  boo^.but  this  of  the  Manttcan  l^rtigbt  pafj'ththem  aifijyou  marl(  the  fccret  drijt  of  it:  jbe-v-

ing  how  a woman  of  fo  excellent  education,  fo great  learning, fo  rare  beauty  ,fofintwit,fo  choice  qualities  fo  f.i  eet  beha-
viour,fo  abundant  wealth,  ft  dearly  belovcdfyher  husband,couldfo  eafily  be  conquer  il  with  the  fight  of  three  orfoure
jewels  ; and  then  for  his  comfort  how  for  tenyeares  after,  he  being  agreat  hou/e-lteeper,  all  his  married  guefts  that
came  tohimjpilt  the  drinli  in  their  boJomes.This  tale  ( admitting  it  to  be  true  or  probable ) would  argue  women  to  be  of
exceeding  covetotifnes  ,but  lo  how  eafily  all  this  is  not  onely  to  be  excufedfor  them  but  retorted  upon  men : for  ajfuredly,
it  is  not  only  the  covetoufnes  of  men  thatmal^ethwomen(as  we  interpret  it)  to  fell  their  chaftities: for  women  indeed  care
for  nothing  but  to  he  loved,  andwkere  they  ajfure  thcmfclves  they  are  loved,  thereof  their  Iqtnfiandfwcet  dtjjrofitions
theybeflorv  love  againe.Now  bccaufe  men  can  protejl  and  fwcare, and  vow  that  which  they  thini{  not,  therefore  no  mar-
vellif  women  are  cardfif  belief, and  tbiclilifled  to  hearc  them:  but  when  they  come  tegive  things  that  cofi  money,  and
that  the  coyne  begins  to  wa'lii,wbich  they  are  fare  men  efteeme  fo  dearely,  as  t hey  venter  both  body  and  futile  for  tt  many
times, then  no  marvell  if  they  believe  them, and  thinly  them  to  be  in  good  earneft,and  confeqiientlyyecldio  that  they  deni-
ed before.  But  to  go  forward  with  the  refl  of  the  morall,  both  men  andwonien  may  gat  her  this  morall  our  oj  both  thefe
tales  i that  as  all  vice  is  odious  and  bafe,fo  that  which  a body  is  hired unto,is  mofl Jhanuftifl and  deteflabk.  ^

Of  the  Faery  Manto  1 cannot  afflrrne  any  thing'of  truth  , whether  fioewete  a Faery  or  a Prophetejfe , but  this  l find  Hiflor’e,
rerittenofher,thatwhen  Thebes  w as  ra\ed  by  A\ex2u6er,ihU  Uamo  daughter  oj  TyteCra,  hcitg  learned  in  Magief^as
well  as  her  faihcr, came  unto  that  part  of  Italy  where  Mantua  is  now-,and  there  her  fonne  OcnuJ((«  Virgil  will  have  it)
built  a City, and  called  it  after  his  mothers  name.

lllectiam  patrijs  ignem  cletOeWKi  aboris,

TitidlcK Manila,  & rtw/ci  films amnis,

Qui  muros,  matrif  juededit  tibi  Mantua  nomc«.

€»nctrningthofe brave menwitb whornOAnndo compareth  Brandimart , the Dccij. M.  Ciiftini,  and Codru? ofth$
T)zc\),oneofthertihadaclreameorvifiion,  that  toldbimbow  inthebatteU  which  hewas  to  fght  next  day  withiheLa-
tins, the  Captain  of  one  fide  and  the  army  of  the  other  fidefhould  ptrijh  ,wherupon  he  being  then  Conful,ran  wilju/ly  on  hU
enemies, andw  as  jflain,and fogat  tbevi3ory  j'or  the  Romans. His  /o»  Decius  did  the  life  after  ii/M;  Curtins  leapt  into  the
gulf, that  was  prophecyedfhould  never  be  fi  opt, till  the  mo  ft  precio'/A  jewell  the  Romans  had  were  thrown  into  the  fame.

Codrva  dkdthiartke  Dorians  havingwarre  with  the  u4tbenians,  the  Oracle  told  them  of  .Athens,  that  if  Codtut
werejlainely  the  enemies, then  the  Athenians  Jhouldhave  theviffory:  thU  newts  beingnoi fed  in  the  Dorians  campe,
they  gave  ftraight  charge  that  none  JhcnildfillCcdrut-,  but  he  minding  to  dieforthe  dej'enceof  his  countrey,  coanter-
jetted  bimfelfe  life  a Pedlar, or  fiich  life, and  came  to  the  camp  of  the  enemies,  andpiefinga  quarreU  there  ofpurpofe
with  fame  of  the  fouldiers,was  ftaiae  am.ng  themr

The  cup  prefentedto  Kena\do,is  allegorically  tobeunderftoodfor  fujpition,whichwhofoeverdrinfeih  of,  it  is  great  Allufion.
tds  he  jheds  it  fo  in  his  bo  fame, as  hefhaU  drinf  the  worft  after  it  while  he  lives, and  therejore  Rcnaldo  faidweU,

Drink  of  thecup(quoth  hc)that  liftjnot  I,  I am  not,  nor  I mind  not  to  bedric.

For  the  Mantuans  tale, it  is  not  unlife  to  that  of  Cephalus  in  Ovids  Met  amorpho fits,  in  the feventh  boofe,  where  he  Allcffory.
tels  bow  in  the  life  fort  changed  by  negromaneyfe  tempted  hu  wife  fo  farre,  °

Dum  cenfus  date  me  promit to,  loquendo
Muneraqueaugendo,  tandem  dubitarecoepi.

jhave  hoardofaGentlemanthatwouldneedscourthis  ofwnewifeinamasfe,caufingher  tohe  toldhewas  fame  other
moHiani  made  love  fo  long  to  her  y ill  he  found  bimfelfe  more  gractouswith  her, then  he  hadcaufe  toboaft  of

As  jer  the  Faer^  M aniof  whether  there  he  ary  Faeries  or  no,!  will  not  diftute  the  matter,  but  I have  I ear  dprange
talcs  reported  by  cred'bk  per  fans,  of  theft  witches  andfpirits  whatfoever  they  be;  and  I have  heard  it  often  among  the
fimpkr  fort, that  he  that  can pkafe  the  ^ueene  of  F aeries,  fhall never  want  while  he  lives ; and  it  ftemes  the  lU^ opi-
nion hath  crept  int  0 other  countries, though  tafen  hut  as  a fable, or  as  the faying  is.

It  may  be  in  my  Pater  nofter  indeed.

But  fureit  never  (Iiallcomcinmy  Creed.

Carrie  for  the  fhaghaird  dog, that  could  dance  to  pkafe  Ladies  ft  wtU,  and  had fitch  pretie  qualities,  I dare  tmdertafe
$»y  ftrvant  Bungy  (who ft  pilfureyou  may  fee  in  the  fir  ft  page  of  the  boofe,  and  is  fnownc  to  the  heft  Ladies  of  England )
jnay  compare  with  any  Pilgrims  dog  that  ftrved fueba  faint  this  ftvenyeanonlyhewants  that  quality  tofhafe  due  fats
tut  of  bis  eares.  tut  now  to  leave  theft  toying  tales, and  fall  to  the  fobercrmatter,the  fokmne  junerals  o/Brandiman
#ndOrIandoa  mour«i»^,  alludesto  the  burial!  of  PzWa^  or  PtWameinVirgsV.  Bardinolo  Acetei ; andOdtndo  tp
JS,aciii  but  this  hers  is  fttjorth  with  devout  and  Chriftian  termes,atnd  therefore  more  to  be  commended.

Here  end  the  notes  of  the  45  bookc*  I i 4


THE  XLIIII.  BOOKE.

THE  ARGVMENT.


Renaldo  t$  Kogero  givts  hujifter^

Ag»inH  Duke hfX\moVL  andtharmotberswiH  :
Rogero  doubting  lefl  he  Jhoutd  hnve  mtjl  her^
Vones  Leon  nnd  hii  father  both  to  kill :

He  leaveth  France,<*«<^  to  tbeftreame  o/Iftcr,
He  rides  and  travtls  in  thofe parts yUntiS
He  found  thcBalgits  fighttng  »uh  ttt  Greeks,
And  aideth  thofe ybectiuje  he  the femtJUkes*


fruni’


Ft  times  vve  fee  in  faoufe  of  Thenot!icisniouldIi*ve!iadinPrinc*lybo\ftc;

mcaneftate,  An^RtorCjthis  friendfhipwatoffuchakiBd,

In  fortune  bad , and  chances  That  ever  after  from  that  prefeot  houre
ovmhwart,  Ev’ntothcirendithejrallagreedintnind :

That  men  dofoonerlayaGde  Appearing  to  this  old  nan  and  devout,
debate.  As  white  wichin,atfwans  arc  white  withoUt«

r And  joyne  in  found  accord  ^

' , He  found  them  all  both  gentlc,kind, and  meek,

en  etneesCourts,  where  And  not  in  fort  of  which  i erft  complained.

Of  thofe  that  never  think  and  fpeak  alike.

But  ever  go  with  fpeceb  and  vifage  fain*d.

They  c leare  forgac  all  grudge  and  old  tnifHli^e »
No  figne  nor  memory  thereof  remain’d  :

But  love  together, as  if  they  had  come
All  of  one  l,eed,and  laine  all  in  one  wotnbe.


_ riches  gender  hate.

And  vile  fuTpcil that  loving  mind  doth  parr.
Where  charity  is  clean  confum’d  and  vanifh’d.
And  fricndniip  firm  is  quite  cafi  out  and  banilird.


Hence  comes  it  that’twixt  Princes  and  great  Lords,
Agreements  all  and  cov’nantsarcfo  frailc.

To  day  Kings, Poprs,add  Emp’rors  make  accords.
To  morrow  deadly  wars  with  tooth  and  nailc :

And  why?  their  thoughts  ftill  varie  from  their  words.
They  keep  not  oaths  but  for  their  own  availe :

Nor  weigh  they  wrong  or  right,or  reckon  of  it,
Butas  the  fame  may  turn  to  their  own  profit.


Eutgood  iie»d/da could  by  no  meanj  red.

To  fhew  Rogero  kindnefle  great  and  love,

Both  for  his  proweffe  great,and  valiant  breff.
Which  hand  to  hand  in  fight  hclatedid  pioTC;
And  for  hit  courtfie,that  did  pafTc  the  reft.

And  was  praife-worchy  all  the  re<I  above  :

Now  though  fuch  men  as  yet  were  never  taught,  ® 4*^^*'^* caufc  was  this, becaufc  he  found

What  frirndfiiip  is, nor  ever  knew  thefame,  Hjifricndsto  him  bad  fundry  wayes  been  bcund

(For  fiicndfljip  never  growes  where  there  is  abught  7

Butfliewesdifguis’djinearneftoringame)  He  kncw,fof  often  he  had  heard  it  told.

Yet  if  ill  fortune  them  fo  low  have  brought,  HowfirA  Rogero  faved  Ricbardet,

To  meet  in  meaner  pUcc,thcy  Araight  do  frame  Whom  then  Marfiliokept  in  crucll  bold.

Their  proud  high  minds  to  fricndAiip  true  and  plaine,  Becaufc  whh  child  be  did  his  daughter  get;

Which  ctA  they  knew  not, or  they  did  difdaine.

♦

The  (aintlike  man  had  in  bisCell  mere  power.

His  gucAs  in  firm  and  found  accosd  do  bind.


And  furtheiiBova;  font  (heuld  have  been  fold.
But  them  RegeroAti  atfreedomefet.

Thefe  things  in  honour  trueand  reputation.
He  knew  were  matters  of  great  obligation


And


THE  XLIir.  booke:


37^


And  though  before  he  could  noklndnclTc  fliow
To  him,while  he  profeft  himfcif  a Turtle,

Yet  DOW  that  him  a Chrifiian  he  did  Jenowj
He  would  now  let  his  love  no  longer  lurk :

Which  when  the  Hermit  faw,he  was  not  flow,

A farther kindnes  them  between  to  work.-  (them)
He  moves  thcm(fith  he  fogood  friends  hadfcenc
That  he  might  make  affinity  between  them.

9

He  faid  it  was  forcfliow'd  him  from  on  hie,

That  by  the  joyning  their  two  lines  in  one.

Such  ofspring  fliould  aiilc,as  under  skie
To  pafTc  or  raatchthc  fame, there  fliouId  be  none  5
Wherefore  he  wiflieth  ihem'that  by  and  by
By  his  advice  they  would  agree  thcrcoa  ;

Rcnaldo  at  bis  motion  flraight  allowcs
That  Bradantant  fliould  be  Ro^eroy  fpoufe.

10

Orlando, Olivero  fben  to  that
Gave  their  good  will.and  favour,and  aflTent,
Affirming  that  all  France  may  joy  thereat  j
T /icy  little  knew  how  good  Duke  Ammon  meant
To  match  bis  daughter  higher  far,and  that
King  Charley  therctodid  willingly  confent ;

To  Leo«  namely  Cor?y?dBtwof  heire,

Emp'roar  of  Greece,  who  fought  the  Lady  fauev

11

Duke  Ammon  meant  not  fuch  a match  to  Hiun,

But  yet  his  anfwcr  he  a while  defer’d
Vntill  fuch  time  as  with  his  abfent  fon
He  had  on  fuch  a weighty  caufc  confer’d  :

Not  doubling  but  he  thereto  would  be  won^

And  glad  tohavc  hisfifler  foprefer’d  j
But  yet  jthough  herein  he  did  nothing  doubt  himi
Tct  would  he  not  rc/blve  thereon  without  him.


ly


12

But  BOW  Renaldo  ibfeat  from  his  father.

And  ignorant  of  that  imperiall  plot,

Vnto  Rogero  premifl  her  the  rather,
Bccaufchisprcrcnt  friends  miflik’d  it  net  j
But  chief  that  he  by  th’Hcrmitsfpcech  did  gather.
That  God  ordain’d  it  by  ctcrnall  lot  j
And  of  his  father  firmly  he  believ’d.

At  fuch  alliance  he  could  not  be  griev’d.

All  that  fame  day  and  night, and  half  the  next.

They  made  abode  with  that  fame  faintlikc  fire.
Still  prcachingjtcaching  them  the  blcfled  text.
Expounding  cv’ry  place  at  their  defirc ;

The  mariners  with  their  long  tarrying  vext.

Oft  fent  to  pray  them  to  the  fliip  retire,

Bccanfe  t he  wind  blew  well  to  fer vc  their  turn,
Compelling  them  in  fine  to  make  return.

14

Rogero  that  had  liv’d  in  long  exile,

(Now  glad  to  do  as  that  old  man  had  told  him)
Doth  bid  farcwcll,and  Icftthat  bappy  He,

When  he  had  Icarnd  that  faith  that  foie  mufffave  him
Orlando  unto  him  hisfword  this  while,

Ano  Hefiforr  armcs,and  good  Trontino  gave  him,
Both  10  declare  his  love  fo  much  the  more.

And  that  he  knew  they  had  been  his  before.


And  though  the  PaUadine  in  common  fence
Had  jufiei  clairae  unto  the  Wade  inchaunted.

As  having  won  it  in  his  own  defence,

Forth  of  the  garden  with  foultfpiriti  haunted,

Wlicrcas  Rogcroy  title  and  pretence

Came  from  B/a«e//ff,that  of  theft  was  taunted.

Yet  gave  he  it  of  his  good  nature  mccrly.

Although  his  tight  thereto  appeared  clearly.

16

Then  by  the  holy  man  they  were  all  blcfled,

And  to  their  fliip  they  made  their  back  repaire,
Their  oarcs  for  waveSjtiieir  fails  for  wines  addrcCtc
Which  then  blew  very  temperate  and  fairc;

No  fearc  of  wradc,no  doubt  to  bediftreflcd ,

No  need  tiierc  wflsof  vowcs,oi  yetof  praier ;

But  here  I leave  them  failing  in  faire  weather.

Till  ih* Englijh  Duke  and  them  I bring  together.

>7

Who  when  the  viflory  he  underftood
Or/d»io  got, of  which  he  waslclfc  glad,

Becaufe  the  fame  was  won  with  fo  much  blood.
And  fitk  now  Frame  no  fcarc  of  Ajfrich^e  had ;

^ o fend  Senapo  home  be  thought  i 1 good.

And  therefore  vvith  a countnarcc  grave  and  fad,
Tc:  kind  and  fiicndly  he  did  give  him  thank.

For  lending  him  bss  aid  fo  free  and  frank.

And  "DudonCetn  a little  while  before.

All  thathis  great  triumphant  navy  back.
Wherewith  he  plagued  had  the  T urhj  fo  fore,

A nd  bioughc  them  all  to  mine  great  and  wrack :
Which  fhips  no  foonci  touch’d  that  Affrich^  fliorc.
And  quite  disburden’d  of  the  people  black.

But  cv’ry  niipbisfliapefoifakcsandleavcs.

And  all  oftheni  were  turn’d  againc  to  leaves.

19

And  now  on  parting  were  the  bards :

So.-ne  mounted, fome  on  foot  pcM  mcll  togrtlier.

The  wind*  that  wont  10  move  the  troublous  fands,
Afioljo  gave  their  king  i b bags  of  leather,

So  firmly  ti’d,and  in  ib  fured  bands.

As  fearc  they  need  notanychar.geof  weather.'

And  will’d  liim,whcn  they  were  paft  all  jcopei  ty,
Tliat  they  fliould  grant  unto  the  wind  hts  liberty.
10

Turpino  writes  that  they  no  fboncrcamc
Vnto  the  mountaine  Atlai  ftony  root.

But  that  their  horlcs  flonesagainc  became,

A nd  fo  t hey  all  went  home  againc  on  foot  :

But  after  how  each  thing  with  them  did  frame,
Intliisdifcourfctotellitflial]  not  boot;

Now  tell  we  of  your  Englijh  Dukes  proceeding,
O/his  return  to  France, and  of  hislpccding.

21

Who  having  rulers  for  thofc  parts  ordain’d,

Thatmight  as  pleas’d  them  mine  01  repaire.

No  longer  then  in  Affrica  remain’d,

Bur  umO  France  he  quickly  did  repaire.

By  land  oi  fca  to  travell  hedifdain’d,

But  with  his  winged  bcallhccuts  the  aire,

And  quickly  casrc  to  Province  where  hedid
As  much  as  erfl  th’Evangclifl  did  bid.

Which


Loa\e  in  tSt
%/lUegBrt,«f


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO:


12

Which  was  that  entred  into  Frouince,he
Should  take  awaj  his  faddlc  and  hisraincs.

And  grant  him  libr-ny  and  fct  him  free.

And  put  him  now  rntono  further  paincs;

For  Cintbiat  (phciTC,  in  which  our  loitvrits  be.

That  maketh  of  our  Ioffes  grcatcll  games
Had  made  his  home  long  lince  to  loafc  his  found.
That  now  no  yertuc  in  the  fame  was  found.

Now  th’Englifli  Duke  rnto  Marfdio  ca  me.

And  iuA  at  that  fame  time  arriued  there,

When  thofe  three  Patladines,  of  vrortby  fame,

Vf  it\iS$brtn  and  Rigtra  landed  were ;

>luch  w«s  their  ioy,  yet  Icffon’d  was  the  fame.
And  outward  lliowesthercofthey  dofoibearc;

So  great  afadnes  in  them  all  it  bred.

To  thinke  their  friend  king  Bmndimart  was  dcd.

2+

But  Charles  that  from  Sicilia  notice  had.

How  thofe  two  kings  were  HaiDe,and  Sobrine  t^ikeo.
And  Brandimart  deceaft(which  made  him  fad )

And  that  Rogero  had  the  Turlies  forfakenj
Was  in  his  niinde  now  well  apaid  and  glad.

That  fuch  a peife,  he  from  his  neck  had  fhaken.
Which  for  a long  time  had  fo  grieuous  wayed.

As  he  therewith  was  welny  oucrlaycd.

IS

Wherefore  to  do  them  honour,  as  was  mccte,

Thar  with  their  courage  did  hiscrowne  fuAaine,
Hefenthis  Peeres  and  nobles  them  togrecte,

Vnto  the  vcric  confi ncs  of  his  raigne  ;

Himfelfcin  perfon,  after  did  them  mccte,

With  Lords  and  Princes  of  his  chiefeft  traine  :

And  nearc  the  town,  tbcQuccne  withmanyaLadh
Camcfeitb,  to  do  them  honor  all  that  may  be.


ao

In  triumph  and  in  feaifs  they  fpent  the  day.

And  riding  through  the  towiicat  fundry  hourcs.
Some  ftraw  grecne  leaues,  orrulhcs  in  t.hc  way.
Some  call  downc  garlands  madeef  fundry  flowies.
The  flrceiH  were  hangCQ  all  with  rich  anay.

And  damfcls  horn  the  windowes  high  and  lowers,
Togratulate  thtii  profperoui  deedsand  haps,
CaAfliowrcs  of  Rofes  from  their  tender  laps.

. Jf'.

At  cu’ry  corner,  tnarket-crcfl'cor  gate.

High  arches  triumph-like  were  new  creifrd.

Some  of  Biferras  fall  and  wofuh  date,

Which  they  had  ouerthrowne  and  quite  deleted;

Some  oftUccombatc  that  was  fought  fo  lace.

With  playes  and  new  dcuifes  vnexpe^cd ;

Thus  dedicate  and  thus  entitled  wholly.

To  thofe  Redeemers  of  the  Emplrcboly.

?i

With  gratcfull  found,  of  inffniments  and  voice.

With fundiief»vcct and  muficall  conlorts.

The  people  flicvv  how  greatly  they  reioyce.

With  Iubi!cs,and  (houts, and  pla’yes  and  fports.
Then  Charles  and  all  his  knights,  and  Saronschoife
To  hisowne  houfc,  and  his  owne  court rd'orts;

And  there  with  tilting,  turneis,and  with  playes.
They  (pent  a few  of  then  enfuing  dayes.

32

Renaldo  taking  time,  r pon  a day,

Thcmariagc  mattei  to  hisfather  brake.

And  told  him  he  had  proinift  by  the  way.

His  fiftei  fliould  foi  fpouic,  Rogero  take  ;

By  which, al’yancc  ftich  procure  they  may.

As  men  may  count  great  folly  to  forfakc;

! In  which  himfcife  the  further  did  proceed,

Becauic  Grlanjo  was  thereto  agreed.


‘S.tnsli*
milt  s thi
maritgt  for
TeiaUtmivif:


25

King  Charles  himfcife  with  chcarfull  friendly  face.
The  FaUjiincr,  their  kiDStolkc  and  their  friends.
The  noble  men,and  people  mcinc and  bafe.

To  make  them  for  their  merits  fome  amends.

With  friendly  {hours  did  fillvp  all  the  place.

Each  man  and  euery  child  his  voice  extends.

And  cridc  on  thofe  two  houfes  of  account.

That  of  Mongrand,  and  of  Clarimunt.

27

New  to  the  Prince  Rogero  they  did  bring.

And  told  him  how  he  was  apparent  hairc
To  Rifa,  and  of  that  great  houfc  did  (jpiing ;

And  while  they  fpake  thefe  vwotds^Marfi/a  fairc
Saluted  him  in  prcfcnce  of  the  King,

But  Bradamantl  who  thither  did  repaire)

Yet  kept  her  fclfc  aloofc  with  more  refp  .ft,

Leaft  openly  flic  fliould  her  louc  deteft.

28

Then  Charts  doth  welcom  him  with  words  mofl  fwcetj
And  vfd  himlikea  man  of  rare  account.

And  for  he  wasalligbtcdon  his  feet.

For  teu*rence  lake,  againf  hemade  himmountj
And  cht'ckc  by  chcekc,to  ride  through  cv’ry  ftrect ;
He  knew  and  ioy*d,  that  at  the  racred  fount,
by  the  hermit  was  baptffed.

As  he  by  fotm.et  letters  was  aduifed.


With  much  difdaine  this  fpeech  Duke  Amman  hard.
Affirming  he  prcfimptuoufly  hao  domic.

To  promife  fojfith  he  had  now  prepar’d  ,
Tomatchherto  theGrccl^iJh  Emp'rors fbnne.

And  not  this  priuatc  knight,  who  he  bad  hard.

Had  Botonc  foorc  of  land  fcant  voder  Sunnci
Alas  (quoth  he)  pcorc generic  fmall  auailes.

And  vertue  lcffe,if  land  and  riches  failcs.

?4

But  chiefly  Ammons  wife,  dame  Beatrice,

Dothcall  her  (oancvngratc and  arrogant.

And  thinks  to  workefo  by  her  wifcad^i/e.

To  make  an  Empreffe  ofher  Bradamani:

Renaldo  rmszh  condcmneththacdeuicc.

Nor  will  not  of  his  word  one  title  want;

Butfaidjhis  lifter (vndcr  thetrcorrc£lion)

Would  therein  ruled  be  by  hisdircftion.

The  mother  (in  her  daughter  much  beguild)

Pcrfwadcs  with  her, and  comforts  her  to  fay.

That  (lie  will  rather  dye  and  be  exild.

Then  match  fo  meane,  when  higher  match  flic  may.
She  faith,  flic  will  not  take  her  for  her  child,
ifflie  will  let  her  brother  bcarefochfway;
Wherefore  (faith  flic)  be  bold,anddodcnicir,
APdwuh  your  brothergiue  me  Icaue  to  try  it.

Poors


1


Stnttne*.
Tbe  ttntmeH
opsnitn  of
ibc  fnfU.


of tin

tutbtMtrtl


THE  XLini.BOOKE


.5*

Foore  BraJanunt  doth  {ilent  ftand  and  (Vill,

She  dares  not  fcaifc  in  choughc,for  reu’rence  (akej
Gainfay  her  mother, or  withtland  her  will^

On  (Other  (ide,  (he  dare  not premifc  make,

OF  that,  which  to  peiforme  did  pa(Te  her  skill,

And  was  aboue  her  power  to  vndertake:

No  power  flic  had  in  this  nor  great  nor  fmall,

Fer  long  ere  this,  loue  feaied  on  it  all.

S7

She  dares  not  giuc  confent,  nor  yet  deny.

She  OBcly  dghes,  and  anfwer  maketh  none,

But  when  (he  is  alone  that  none  are  by,

Vnto  her  fclft  (he  makes  a piteous  monc ;

She  makes  her  breth  and  her  faire  haiie  to  trie
In  part  her  griefe,  for  why  (lie  beates  the  tone.

In  fpitefull  wife,  the  tothcr  fliort  (he  tearcs.

And  thus  Hie  fpeakes  amid  her  plaints  and  fcares.

Wo  me,  fliall  then  my  will  and  fancie  varie
From  hers,whofe  will  (Tiould  rule  and  gouernc  mine?
Shall  my  will  to  my  mothers  bccontraric.

Or  that  difdaine,  my  mother  doth  defigne  ?

Shall  I prefumc  with  fuch  a man  to  marrie.

At  whom  my  parents  both  do  fo  icpine  J
StHlrntj  What  fowler  blot  can  ftainc  a damfcis  praife.

Then  when  her  parents  will  (he  drfobayes  ?

I ?9

Shall  then  my  mothers  revVence  and  my  fires,

Make  me  my  dearc  Rogero  toforget  ?

And  to  new  loues,  new  hopes,and  newdefiret
Betake  my  felfe,  and  himat  nought  to  (ct?

Or  (hall  the  rcv’rcncc  which  their  age  rcc^uires,

And  which  my  felfe  hath  borne  them  cucryct.

Be  now  forgot, and  I be  wholly  bent.

To  mine  owne  ioy,  and  folace,and  content  ?

40

1 know  (alas  I know)  my  dutie  well.

But  powrc  I have  not  to  performe  the  fame,

Dtinl^a  My  ftncic  rcafons  rule  doth  quite cxpcll,
ftinw  wcllordrcd  thoughts,  put  out  of  frame;

And  tyrant  Love.gainft  whom  who  dare  rcbell.
Makes  me  caft  off  ail  fearc  of  others  blame  j
My  fpcech,  my  deeds,  my  thoughts  he  doth  difpofe.
And  rulcth  them,  againfi  my  will  God  know'cs.

41

To  Ammon  daughter,  and  to  Beatrice
I am,  but  vnto  Loue  I am  a fiaue.

Though  I do  now  refufe  their  wife  advice.

Of  them  I may  hereafter  pardon  haue  1
But  if  I Love  refift,  who  knowes  the  price.

Or  who  can  me  from  his  great  furiefaue  i
He  Will  notftay  to  harken  to  my  feufes,

But  flay  me  prcfcntly,  for  fuch  his  vfc  is.

4*

With  much  adoe,and  with  long  time  I drew
My  dcarc  Rogero,  to  the  Chriflian  faith,

What  profit  doth  thereof  to  me  enfew.

If  fill]  ill  bap  my  purpofe  good  gainfaith  ?

Similt',  Sodoth  the  Bee,  not  for  himfelfc  renew.

The  honv  that  in  combes  he  fafely  laitb  :

But  fooncr  of  my  life  they  lliall  me  reauc.

Then  fotcc  me  my  Rogm  dcarc  to  Icauc.


♦5

But  though  herein  I difobey  my  mother.

And  father  too,  which  I to  do  am  loth?

What  though  ? yeti  1 herein  obey  my  brother.

That  1$  reputed  wifer  then  they  both:

Orlando  ckc,fonnc  fpeakes  tone  and  tother.

And  favour  will  this  match,  how  ere  it  goth-
And  fure  1 am,  the  world  dothof  them  twainc.

Make  mote  efleeme  then  all  out  houfeagainc.

44

Sith  then  the  world  eftcemes  and  calleth  thofc.

The  gloric  and  the  flower  of  Clarimount,

LcfTc  fiiamc  it  is  formc,as  I fuppofc,

Ifthat  IfufFcr  men  of  fuch  account.

Of  me  in  marriage  mitrets  to  difpofe.

That  all  rny  km  in  credit  do  furmount;

Befidc  they  bane  the  word  diicflly  fpoken.

But  to  the  Greelie  the  matter  is  but  broken.

« 4S

But  now  if  Bradamant  her  felfe  torment.

And  doth  her  cuill  hap  bewaile  and  blame.

No  doubt  Rogero  is  as  malcontent,  ,

Who  had  fomc  pri  vie  inckling  of  the  fame  ,*

He  fccretly  doth  his  ill  flatc  lament.

And  curfeth  fortune  that  vneonftant  dame.

That  had  for  wealth, fo  fparinglcft  hislot.

Which  diuers  bafe  vnworchy  men  had  got.

46

In  each  thing  clfc  that  nature  man  can  graunt.

Or  that  is  get  by  induftric  orart,

Heknowtb,  and  each  man  faith  thaf  none  can  vaunt
To  haue  a greater  no  nor  fuch  a part:  (daunt.

His  fliength  wtsfiich,  no  fticngth  the  fame  could
His  perfon  paft  his  ftrength  i his  noble  hart,

His  Princely  mannn  s,and  his  brauc  bchaiiiour.

Wan  each  mans  love,  each  mans  applaufc  & favour.

47

But  this  fame  vulgar  foi:  vntanght  and  rude.

That  as  them  lifldiflributc  praife  and  (harne.

And  (fauc  the  wife  and  ic.trred)  I include
All  men  thatliucon  earth,  within  that  name;

For  Myters,  ftates,  nor  crowncs,  rriay  not  exclude.
Popes,  mightie kings 5 nor Keyfars from  the  fame;
Butonely  wifdcmc  graue.  and  Icaining  dcarc,
Qiftsgivenfrotn  bcav’n,  that  atenot  common  here.

48

Thisvrilgar  fort  (to  tell  my  meaning  out)

That  fauing  weslrh  and  riches  nought  admyre.
And  nothing  thinke  praife  worthy  them  without.
And  in  their  bafe  conceits  can  lookc  nobyret
That  be  one  nev'r  fo  learned  fo  wife,  fo  flout,
Wcllfliap’t  as  eye  can  fee,  or  heart  defirc,

Well  borne, well  qualitcd  of  fobci  cariage.

They  nought  cftccmcall  thefein  cate  of  manage,

49

Well  (faith  Rogero  ) if  that  Ammon  needs

Will  make  an  Eitipreflc  of  his  daughter  dcarc.

At  leaft  this  hafl;  he  makes,  is  more  then  needs,

Let  him  yet  giue  me  rffpite  hut  one  yearc :

And  if  in  that  fame  yeare  f do  fuch  deeds.

That  both  the  fonne  and  fire,  J vanquifli  cleare  1
When  both  their  crowns  * conquer’d  haue  & wonne
Then  1 may  worthy  be,  to  be  bis  foone.

But


Smmt,


Smtsce.


Smtnet.
0/  the  eewe-
rmnepinieV


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


^79


so

But  ifbc  ftraight  the  mariage  do  cfFcA,

With  Con^anttKos  heiie  in  fo great  haft.

And  will /ieru/dox  promifc  quite  neglcdl.

And  eke  his  Cofens,  which  fo  few  dayes  paft.
Before  that  bicftcd  mm  of  Gods  cleft.

And  that  good  Marques,  they  did  bindfofaft;
Ifthcy  fliall  wrong  mefo.wbatthennialll.

What  can  1 do  in  fitch  a cafe  but  die?

5t

What  fhouid  I do?  flial!  I then  be  auenged
Of  him  that  mecontraiics  in  this  wife  ?

Lctme  be  blamed  herein,  or  commended.

Let  me  therein  bedeemd  afooleor  wife ;

But  would  my  ftate  alas,  be  then  amended
Byth’old  mans  death?  no,  no,  farotherwife;

1 doubt  this  would  not  worke  my  morecontent.
But  rather  contrarie  myfirft  intent.

\iy  ftrft  intention  was,  and  yet  is  ftill.

That  Bradamant  (hould  bcare  me  Joue,  not  hate.
Now  then  iff  her  father  here  (Iiould  kill.

Or  ought  attempt  againft  her  brothers  ftate;

Had  file  not  caufeof  mo  tothinke  then  ill.

And  to  refufe  me  for  her  fpoufe  arid  mate  ?

What  fhall  I do  ? alas  then  fliall  I bearc  it?

Ah  noperdy,firftI  willdpol  fwcare  it.


Tdriu

*/P/.

riitiits  in
ibtfitrf


Si

And  yet  I will  not  die,  but  He  deftroy
That  Lean  that  procur'd  my  harme  and  wOj
And  isdifturberofmy  chiefeft  ioy,
him  and  his  father  I will  kill  alfo;

Faire  Helen  totht  louerlewd  of  Troy,

Notcoft  fo  dearc,  nor  longer  fat  ago,

Broferpine  coft  Peytbout  price  fo  hyc,

As  1 will  caufe  them  this  my  griefe  to  buy.

54

But  were  it  pollible  (my  deare)that  thou,

Canft  leaue  thine  owne  Rogerotot  thisGreeke?
Yea  though  that  all  thy  brothersdid  allow
This  match,  which  Ammon  doth  fo  fondly  feeke?
Yes  yes,  I fearc  that  thine  owne  minde  doth  bow
To  his  defirc,  and  could  far  better  leeke.

When  with  thy  fcife,  thoudoftthefc  offers  fcan,
To  hauc  a Cxfar  then  a priuateman.


- SS

Can  then  thedigniticand  glorious  name
Of  pompous  fiiewes,  and  of  tmpeiiall  feat.

The  noble  heart  of  Brai/^mantfo  frame.

Her  vallew  rare,  and  vertue  to  defeat.

And  go  from  her  firft  pron?ife,to  her  fliamc.
Which  me  fhc  made  with  many  vowes  and  great?
No  fure  I know  (lie  will  them  all  forfake.

Much  rather  then  vnfay,  that  once  flic  fpake.

56

Thcfe  words  Rogero  fpake, and  many  fuch.

And  oftentimes  he  fpake  them  in  fuch  fort.

That  diuers  ouerheard  him, in  fo  much
That  they  were  told,  by  more  then  one  report
To  B I adamant iTfhom  they  did  chiefly  tuch,
Whotookc  them  not  (you  maybe  fure)  tnfport;
But  as  her  priuate  griefe  was  great  before.

So  this  report  of  him  did  grieuc  her  more.


1 /

But  ntoft  it  griv’d  her  and  aboue  the  reft,

That  he  miftrufted  flic  would  him  forfake.

At  any  mans  commandment  orrequeft.

And  fpecially  for  this  fame  Grecians  fake ;
Wherefore  to  moue  this  fcruple  from  his  breft,

And  this  foiilc  error  from  his  minde  to  take,

Shegat  her  pen  and  inkc  one  nigfn  full  late.*

And  to  Rogci  o fuch  like  words  llie  vvratc
58

My  dcare,  as  erft  1 was  1 ftill  will  bide.

While  life  lliall  dure, yea  cv’n  when  life  is  paft.
Though  toward  me,  louefticwhis  grace,  or  pride,
Or  fortune  raifemevp,  or  downward  caft;

My  ftable  faith  fliall  nciier  fai;c  nor  Aide,

For  calmr,  nor  ftoi  me,  but  as  a Rocke  ftand  faft,
Againft  thcfurging  waucs  ftill  vnrcmoucabJc,

So  fliall  my  faith  ftand  fitmc  and  vnrcproueablc,

50


> ittur,
Rogier  jaii
Jtmftt  jui
tattjftr
le.


Firft  fliall  a file,  or  knifeof droflie  lead.

The  Dyamondto  fundric  figures  came.

Ere  any  chance  by  Fortunes  frailtic  bred.

Or  powerofloue  fliall  caufe  my  couife  to  fwarue*
Firft  fliall  the  ftreames  riinnc  backevnto  their  hed.
Ere  I will  iuftly  fuch  a blame  defauej
Or  ere  I fliall,  for  chances  good  or  ill,

Giuc  myconfent  tochangmy  (cilcd  will.

60

TO  thee  JJogers mine,  a good  while  fince,

Ofme,and  of  my  heartigaue  dominion,

I fliouldmyfclfeoflightncs  great  couince.

If  I fofodainly  could  change  opinion  .*

As  for  my  true  allegca nee,  fin  e no  Prince,
Isfaithfuller  belov’d  of  deareft  minion  •

Fotmeyou  need  no fortreffe norno  towre.

To  be  defences  againft  forren  powre.

(SI


You  need  no  bands  of  men  to  entertaine,

T o kcepc  this  forties,  fticngt  h enough  haue  I,
Forriches  makeonmeaffault  but  vainc.

So  bale  aprice  no  gentle  heart  can  buy;

Nornoblc  birth  nor  name  ofciowncoi  raigne,'
Which  oft  doth  dafe  the  common  peoples  eye,
Norbeautic,  tothe  which  light  minds  incline.
Though  greater  fee  I ncuer  fliall  then  thine.

63

No,rcarc  not,no  man  powre  fliall  euer  hauc.

My  heart  to  other  figure  to  transfoimc,

Louc  did  your  fliapc  therein  I'odeepcingrauc,

As  now  it  can  rccciue  none  other  forme :

My  heart  is  not  of  wax,  for  why  Loucg.iue,

(When  to  his  worke  he  did  it  firft  confbrme)

An  hundred  ftrokeswithchccffellard  with  male.
Ere  he  could  fetch  therefrom  one  little  fcale.

6j

I'urc  Iuoric,gcmmcs,andcv’ric  hardeft  ftone,

That  moft  withftandeth  ftecl,a  man  may  burft.
But  other  figure  yet  rccciue  they  none.

Then  tlut  to  which  they  formed  were  at  furftr
My  heart  isnotvnlikc  a precious  ftone.

Or  Adamant,  or  what  fo  cutteib  worft;
Louefooner  fliall  it  breake in  thoufand  fplints
Ereothct  beauties  bring  it  to  new  prints.

K k ■ Tiicfi


I


5«o  THE  XLIIII.BOOKE


H

Theft  words  HiC  wrotCjAnd  many  more  to  thcfe,
That  him  with  faithjWith  Ipuc,  with  hope  fo  fed,
Offeree tocurc each  defperate  dtfcafc>

Or  ratha  to  truinc  him  being  ded :

£ut  when  they  thought  them  fafefi  from  the  ftas«
And  in  thchav’n  fccurely  harbored,

A new  and  fbdaine  tempeft  toft  fo  fore,
Asdraucthem  backetofea  from  fight  offhore.

6s

For  worthy  Bradatnant  that  had  aflign’d,

Tofliewher  meaning  pininc  was,anddire£f,
Andcalling  wonted  courage  to  hei  minde.

And  quite  reicfting  womanly  refpeft.

Came  vnto  Charles,  and  fpake  in  fuch  a kind  j
My  Liege,  if  ere  myfctuicedid  effed,

Ought  worth  your  highacs  thanks,at  youreonaand
Let  not  your  grace  deny  meonedemand.

C6

^But  promife  me,  vpon  your  Princely  faith
And  royall  word,  which  I may  furcly  truft,
Tograntont  fuit,what  eic your  handmaid  praith
Audi  will  promife  that  it  fliall  bciuft.

(Beloued  worthy  mayd.the  Emp’rorfaith^
Ycurmany  ftruicesconfcfTc  I muft,

Deftrue  no  Icffe,  and  frankly  here  1 tow  it.

If  of  my  ReaJme  you  aske  part, He  allow  it.

67

My  fuit  is  that  your  higbnes  will  not  yeeld.

That  I (faid  flic)raay  any  husband  haue,

That  fliall  not  firft  of all,with  fpcarc  and  fliccld.
Or  elfc  with  fwordin  hand  him  fo  behaue,
Ajthachecan  withffand  mein  the  field.

Behold  the  only  fauoiir  that  I craiicj
1 would  be  his  that  proues  himfelfe  fb  flout.

The  reft  may  be  content  to  fland  without.

eS

Mofl  noble  maid  (tlic  Erap’ror  flraightreplide)

Thy  flout  demand,  well  to  thy  miadc  doth  futc,
Wherefore  by  me  it  may  not  be  denyde.

It  IS  fo  noble  and  foinflafuitc;

Now  (for  fhc  fought  not  this  her  fuit  to  hide)

All  they  that  beard  thereof,  furc  were  not  mute.
But  cu*n  ere  night  it  piiblifht  was  fo  rife.

As  it  was  knownc  to  y^f?»rtio»and  his  wife.

69

And  thereupon  they  preftntly  conccaii’d

Againftthcir  daughter, great  difdainc  and  wrath,
Forby  fuch  motion  plainly  they  percciued.

She  to  Rogero  mod  devotion  hath :

Wherefore  to  th’end  flic  might  be  quite  bereaued
All  hope, to  follow  that  forbidden  path.

From  out  the  courtthey  traind  her  by  a flight,
Andfenthertotheir  cafllc  that  fame  night.

70

This  was  a forti  efTe  that  but  few  dayes  part.

The  Prince  had  giu’n  to  them  vpon  reqiicfl,
Betwecnc  Perp'gmn  and  Cittajfo  plafl.

And  nearethc  lea  not  of  importance  leaflj
Hercasa  piifncr  they  did  keepcher  fafl.

With  mindetofend  her  one  day  vnto  th’Eafl,
Thevpiirpofe,  will  fhe, nil  fhc,flic muft  take
Don  and  quite  fotftke,


71

The  Damfell,  though  not  kept  with  watcher  guard.
Yet  bridled  with  the  Parents  awfull  raine,

Did  keepe  her  clofc,  with  good  and  ducicgard,

A nd  of  their  rigor  did  no  whit  compUinc :

But  yet  to  this  her  thoughts  were  full  prepar’d.

To  bide  imprifonment  or  any  paine.

Or  death  it  fclfc,  by  torture  or  by  racke.

More  rather  then  from  promife  to  go  backc.

7*

Renaldo  finding  that  his  futtlc  fire.

Had  tanc  his  fifter  thus  from  out  hisfift,

Nor  able  as  his  promife  did  require,

/io^erof  fuit  to  further  andaftift.

Forgets  he  is  hisfonnc,and  in  his  ire.

Rebukes  his  Parents,  but  fay  what  he  lift.

They  are  content  to  giue  the  words  tolooftrs,'

But  in  their  daughters  match  they  will  be  eboofers  1

Rogero  hearing  this,  and  greatly  fearing,
l eaft  Leon  fliould  by  loue,or  by  conflraint,
PofTtfle  his  Udie  by  his  long  forbearing.

He  minds  (but  none  he  doth  therewith  acquaint,)
To  giucafp'cdic  death  toLeo»,fwearing
That  hcof  Cmfar,  will  make  him  a faint.

And  that  he  will,  except  bis  hope  deceiue  him.

Of  feepter,  life,  and  louc,  and  all  bercauc  him,

74

And  in  hismindc  refoliied  full  thei  con,

Don  Heifors  armor  that  from  Mandricard
He  late  had  wonne, forthwith  heputtethon,
Frontinoeke  hefecrcrly  prepat’d  :

But  Eagle  on  his  fhield  he  would  haue  none,

I cannot  tell  you  well  in  what  regard  ^ '

In  ftced  thereof  an  argent  Vnicornc,

In  field  of  Gewls  by  him  as  then  was  borne.

75

One  oncly  tiuftie  feruant  and  no  mo,

Hetakeswith  him  his  purpofctocoiKcale,

He  giucth  him  in  charge  where  ere  he  go.

That  he  his  name  to  no  mandoreueale;

Thus  Mofa,  Rhyne,  he  paft  with  pace  not  flow.

And  Aufiriato  th'Vngarian common  wcalc;

And  vpon  lftcrsbankc,fuchfpced  he  made.

That  in  a while  became  rnto Belgrade.

75

Where  doth  wtoTianubia  fall.

And  all  along  that  ftreame  he  might  difeouer
Enfignesand  banners  allimpenall.

That  nyc  the  ftreame  in  numbers  great  did  houer;
Great  was  the  multitude,  and  Grecians  all.

Who  with  a hope  that  citic  torccouer.

Which  late  before  from  them  the  Bitlgars  wonne.
Were  thither  brought  by  th’Emperor  and  hii  fonne.

77

Twixt  Bclgradc,3nd  the  ftreame  in  warlike  rankes.
The  Bulgars  flood  cu’n  to  the  mountaincs  ridge.
Both  aimies  watted  at  the  riucrs  bankes.

The  GreeJ^s  cndcuord  there  to  caft  a bridge;

And  forrhat  end  prepared  boats  and  plankes.

The  Bulgars  fought  t heir  purpoft  to  abridge  s
Scarfc  had  Rogero  vewd  them  well, and  fccnc  them.
But  that  there  fell  a skirmifli  hot  betwecnc  them.

The


StmtHte


Tart  Ah  ‘

gu'l»
€Uut,frr
rvhtn  tit
Emftrtrt
vert  dead,
tbn  deified
them  end
ealed  them
Ditrinbub
ttn^ertf  ta
tau(b  tt

Jaimt,


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.’


7*

Tlic  Greef^s  were  foure  to  onc,bcfide  they  haue

Good  Acre  ofboacs  with  man;  a plankcand  boord,

/.  nd  to  the  place  a {harp  afTauit  they  gaue.

And  meane  to  pafle  although  there  wnc  no  foord :
But  this  was  but  a policie,and  biaue.

Tor  Leon  To  this  while  himfclfc  beAurd,

That  withacompaflethat  about  hefet
Both  he  and  his  the  Areame  paA  without  Ict-
79

With  little  Icffe  then  twentie  tboufand  men.

Along  the  banks  he  fccretly  doth  ride.

And  gaue  to  them  a ftefli  alarum  then,

Vnlooked  forjtnwareSj  and  vnefpi’d  :

K o IcA'e  the  Emp*roi  Conjlantino^  when
Hefaw  hisfbnnCjOn  land  on  tothcrfide.

By  loyning  planke  to  planke,  and  boat  to  boat,

VVitli  all  his  power,  an  eafie  paAisge  got.

8o

The  Bulbar  Captainc  that  TjAtrano  bight.

And  vvasa  valiant  warrior  and  a wife,
Endcuouredbotb  by  policie  and  fight
To  beare  the  bront,  but  nothing  could  fufSec:

Foi  Leo«  both  by  nmltitudc  and  might,

Vnln.rfcd  him,  and  ere  he  could  ariftj
Sith  hetoyeeld  him  piifnei  diddifdaine.

Among  a thoufand  fwords  he  there  wasflaine*

8i

Tillthen,  the  valiantly  made  bed.

But  when  they  faw  their  king  and  Captainc  flainc,
So  great  a tenor  in  their  minds  was  bred.

In  their  fainthearts  no  courage  did  remaine.

Rogcro  feeing  how  the  Bulgars  fled.

And  none  to  flay  or  bring  them  backcagainCJ
To  helpe  the  weaker  part  tefolucth  briefly,

For  bate  of  Con/lantinct  but  Leon  chiefly.
sz

He  fpurreshis  horfe  that  like  the  witidc  doth  runne.
And  makesthem  fland.that  fled  with  fainting  brcA,
Andhauingfpidconebrauer  then  theSunne,

A gallant  youth, more  forward  then  the  rcA;

(This  fame  was  Confiantinos  fiAersfonne)

At  him  Rogero  runnes  with  fpearc  in  refl  :

He  brake  his  fhield  and  coat  like  brittle  glafle,

And  through  bis  bodic  made  the  fpearc  to  pafle.

He  IcauGshim  dead,  and  he  dr avses

And  with  that  blade  he  fliewd  himfclfc  fo  flout.
Who  mecteth  with  him,  to  repent  haue  caufc,
HeprelTethin  among  the  thickeft  routj
Onesskn.il  he  cleaucth  to  thcvcric  iawes,

Heads, lcggs,and  armes  flew  all  the  field  about  e
Thcfireamc  that  ei  A did  run  asChriAallcleare,
Vermillion  now  doth  to  the  fight  appcarc.

84

No  man  that  faw,  much  Icflc  that  felt  his  blowes,
Dace  once  make  head  againA  them,  or  refifl  them,
Rogero  in  the  field  triumphant  goes,

TheBulgars  now  march  freely  where  it  lift  thcmi
Nor  was  there  one  amongft  them  all  that  knowes,
What  wight  it  was  that  did  fo  well  aflift  thcn\,
Tbischange  they  faw  procur’d  in  little  fpacc.

Who  lately  fled,  now  held  ihcu  foes  in  chafe.


8(


35*


Sinilt',


Tbit  vas
a irut  mbit


The  yong  Auguflus  ftantUng  on  a hill,

A place  about  the  reft  much  cminenr.

Seeing  one  man  his  men  to  flay  and  kill.

And  that  their  loflc  and  flight  was  cuidcnt :

He  wonders  athis  courage  and  his  skill.

And  thinkes  that  God  had  furc  fume  Angel  fent.

To  plague  the  Grecians  for  iheit  old  cffenccsj
And  ioT  the  Bulgars  luccours  and  defcncct.

He  fees  both  by  his  armes  and  Vnicornc-

Thacfurehewitaknighi  offoir.tine  Nation,

And  wheicas  fomc,  more  bate  would  him  haue  born,
Heiather  held  him  in  more  admiration  :

His  heart,  whom  vertuous  thoughts  did  ftill  adornc
And  evet  wasof  noble inclinaiion.

Made  him  extoil  him  for  his  deeds  of  armes.

Although  his  men  by  him  leceiu’d  fuchharmes.

•8.7

Eu’nas  a babe,  whom  fomtime  inou'd  with  ire.

The  mother  beats  with  rod  j or  with  itchafeth,

Runnes  not  vnto  the  fiAcr,  nor  the  fire
But  to  the  Mam,  and  Iwcctly  her  imbiaccth  •

So  now  though  Leons  men  arc  made  retire.

And  though  Rogero  killeth  them  and  chafeth.

Yet  his  great  valew  maketh  L?o»  louchim.

Much  more  then  bate  him, for  the  harme  he  doth  him  **^’*'*‘-
88

But  if  that  Leon  louc  him  and  admire,

Me  thinks  he  hath  but  fortic  rccompence.

For  why  Regeros  hope  and  foie  dcfirc.

Isto  do  Leon  damageand  offence;

He  lookes  for  him,and  oft  he  doth  enquire.

Which  way  he  was,  but  ftill  the  diligence.

And  long  cxpcricnccof  the  waiie  Greei^e,

Do  caufc  iio^ero  himin  vainedid  feck.

Don  Leon  faw  his  foldiers  flee  fo  faft.

He  founds  retreit  and  to  his  father  fent
A meflenger  forthwith,  in  all  poll  haft.

And  ofhis  mclTagethij  waschicfccontentj
To  let  him  vndeifland  how  things  had  pift.

And  wifli  him  flie  for  fcarc  of  being  flicnt :

Likewifc  himfclfc  and  his. haft  allthcymay,.

Back  ore  the  fircame  thcmfclucsthcn  to  conuayi

so

But  yet  for  all  his  haft,  his  men  were  flainc.

And  fomc  with  baft  were  drowned  in  the  ftrcamCj
Tlic  Bulgars  now  did  conquerots  remaine.

That  crAin  pcrill  were  to  loofe  their  Rcamc  i
The  knight  of  th'Vnicorne,thcy  all  fee  plaine,

Cauf’d  all  their goodjwhcrcforc  with  ioy  extreame^

To  him  they  go  acknowledging  indeed.

That  all  their  gloric  did  fiom  him  proceed.

91

Some  kilTc  his  hands,  and  Ibmc  do  kifle  his  fcetc.

And  in  mofl  humble  manner  him  faluie.

They  thinkc  for  him  a praife  diuine  were  mcetc.

And  power  diuinc  they  do  to  him  impute;

• They  fend  tbcircbicfcft  Captaincs  him  to  mcete,

And  all  of  them  to  him  do  make  this  fute :

And  vp  to  heau’n  their  ioyfull  voices  ring,

That  he  would  be  their  Captainc,  guide,  and  king.

Kk  i Rogere


O


THE  XL  IIII.BOOKE


91


95

V)^artlo.ont  of  leckning  'good  and  flatf,

Held  this  fame  ttxwne  to  Conftantino  deare,

And  footmen  had,  and  hotfemcn  got  of  late.
Since  ofthefc  wanes  he  did  fiift  tidings  hearc:
Kogero  finding  none  to  watch  the  gate,

Merc  boldly  entred  finding  paflage cicaie.

The  townc  it  fclfc  within  he  like  wife  found.
With  meat  and  drinke,  and  lodging  to  abound.

96  ,

Now  where  Rogero  lodged  that  fame  night.

One  of  i?o/wa»irt.  happened  there  to  ofle,
Thatprefent  was  at  that  precedent  fight.

When  as  Rogero  holpc  the  Bulgars  heft ;

And  at  at  that  time  did  him  fo  fore  afFrighr,
That  though  of  bis  efcaping  he  might  boft  |

Yet  ftill  he  feated  him, and  Hill  did  doubt  him.
And  ftill  he  thought  thatVmcorne  about  him,

97

Wherefore  when  as  he  faw  that  fliicid,  he  knew
This  was  the  man  that  cv’n  before  lo  late.

So  many  of  the  Grecfan  armit  flew,
Stiaightvvay  Ijc  hafttd  to  the  caftlc  gate;

And  that  he  may  bane  audience  he  doth  few.

For  matter  that  concernes  the  Rcalmc  and  ftate;
But  when  he  was  admitted,  what  he  told.
Within  the  bookc  infuing  ilcrnfold.


Aomo  vnto  them  this  aefwcr  made,

1 hat  he  will  be  their  guide  as  they  thinkebeft.

But  that  he  will  not  come  into  Belgrade,

Nor  IhfFc  nor  feepter  touch  at  noicqueft,

Vntill  that  Leon  that  did  them  invade.

He  hauc  once  flaine,  or  tanc  him  at  the  leaft  *

Far  why  a tbcufand  miles  for  this  alone.

He  ridden  had,and  other  caufc  had  none.

93

This  faid,  forthwith  he  biddeth  them  adew.

And  would  no  longer  ftay  at  their  defiling.

But  that  way  Leon  ified,  did  him  puifcw,

(For  flight  it  was  indeed,  and  not  rctyring)

Howbeit  Leon  and  his  men  that  knew.

What  in  fucb  cafe  for  fafctic  was  requiring,  (paft
Brake  downe  the  bridge,  when  they  the  ftreame  had
And  fo  as  then  they  made  the  palTagc  faft.

94

Rogero  failing  of  his  firftintent.

Hid  fetke  feme  place  to  pafTc  tototherfide.

Along  that  ftreame  till  all  that  day  wasfpcnt.

And  al!  that  night  vnccfTantly  doth  ride  :

' Bctime  next  mornevnto  a townc  he  went,

To  cafe  his  wearied  bodic,  and  befide.

To  make  his  horfc.a mends  for  fb  great  wrong.

In  keeping  him  without  a bait  fo  long.

»aS  l,Xig  0-  iLue!  (h,  /»q,  ncm, iMs  mmfm  nrn^.  u u kpdt,

ofuhm  , Una/m  .sfkm,

■’  •'  They  weigh  not  wrong  nor  right,  nor  rcckcn  ot  it.

Further  then  it  may  tend  to  their  ownc  profit.  ^

And  as  the  fault  is  ticks, fo furc  they  ham  a great  fmijhmentj  or  it,r»hch  is,  that  they  hue  tn  perpetuall  feare  ere  of

anothcr,a>Uemr  one  iealoL  ifanoihersgreatnesktwas  a happietimeff  euer  there  rvac  a timcjrphen  ttjas
in  dame  Bea  trice  we  may  Zte  the  notable  ambitious  humor  ofr,omen,jPccially  in  matching  their  children  aboue  their

for  it  they  may  match  then  daug  ers,fo  ^.iueU  by  the  claw:  but  thoje  that glorie  fo  to  mah^e  their

Serum  tc  dicis  natum  ingenueque  taterif,

Cumdicis  dominumSofibiane  patrem.

A flauc  thou  art  by  birth,  of  thtsi  gather,

' For  eiicrmotc  thou  faift,  my  Lord  my  father.  i /v

H-aori.

a.ga«,fe  alU,„c^lMy  cj  l»gy  <3.»-

Mlufion.  jnany  ef  hts  adherents.


Here  end  the  notes  of  the  44.booke«


e>


• AXXXV  •


Corner


Corner


'itej^ier


m

m^m

fv<"5

fm

!i

i- 1

ft  t

KCQ^

THE  XLV.  BOOKE


The  Ytoble  Leon  doth  Rogcro//»v^,

7«  Theodoras  pri  fan  pent ;

Seen  after  Leon  doth  Rogero  crave,

T 0 rvin  him  Bradamarit ; he  doth  a feat ;

/i»d fought  with  her  xij.  houres  a combat  brave  ;
Of  which  be  after  did fo  fore  repent  y
la forrove great  bethought  to  end  hu  life^

To  thinl^e  another  foould  pojfefe  h.  s wife.


Tht  mull*,
Utmjftef
ftrume.


lM\iMiio

fiorit.


t

Ookc  how  much  higher  For-
tune doth  crc£t
The  diming  wight , on  her
unftable  wheel.

So  much  the  nighei  may  a
manexpeft,

Tofec  hisbeadjwherelate  he
faw  his  heeler

Polycrates  hath  prov’d  it  in
efted,

And  ’Dionyfm  that  too  true  did  feel;

Who  long  were  lul’d  on  high  in  Fortunes  lap.

And  fell  down  fodainly  to  great  milliap.

2

On  tother  fide  the  m.orc  a man  is  prelTed,

And  utterly  ov’ithrown  by  Fortunes  lowre.

The  fooner  comes  his  (late  to  be  ledrefled.

When  wheel  fh'all  turn,and  bring  the  happv  houre;
Some  from  the  block  have  grown  to  be  fo  bleflcd.
Whole  realmes  have  been  fubjefted  t©  tht ir  power.
As  Marius  and  Venrtdius  fample  is
In  former  age, and  Lcn;r  of  France  in  this.

3

That  Lews  of  France(thc  ftory  well  is  known)

That  to  ^Ijonfosfonnedtd  give  his  daughter.

Who  wasat  Saint  Albinos  overthrown.

And  ev*n  with  much  ado  cfcaped  flaughterj
A like  misfortune  by  like  danger  grown,

Cervino  fcaped  but  a little  after ;

And  having  paff  that  moment  by  good  chance  •

One  ruled  Hur^ary,the  tother  France,

' ris  manifeft  in  Tories  new  and  old.

That  good  and  ill  each  other  do  fucceed.


And  worldly  blilTc  hath  but  a flender  hold,

W hertfotc  a m» n of  wi (dome  will  take  heed  j
And  on  his  fortune  never  be  too  bold.

Although  his  Aatcand  riches farre exceed  :

Nor  yet  in  fortune  i!l,defpairc  ordoubt.

For  evermore  her  wheel  doth  turn  about*

5

Rogero  (as  I lately  did  repeat)

Now  having  both  rcpu  lft  thefonneand  fire,

Grew  lo  fuch  pride  therewitb,and  fuch  coiiceir,
(Ambition  everniore  afpiiing  hier,)

He  thinks  by  fortune  and  his  force  fo  great.

To  kill  Don  Leon,wIiich  was  htschief dcfiie.

And  for  that  purpolcaid  heasketh  none.

But  thiuketh  furc  to  do  the  feat  alone.

6

But  Hie  that  cannot  fufTcr  nor  abide.

That  any  long  Oiould  of  her  favour  boft.

Now  in  the  midft  c fall  hfs  praife  and  pride*.

When  in  her  favour  he  affied  moft,

Did  caufc  him  of  this  knight  to  be  dcfcii*d  ,

Who  went  unto  Vngardo  ftraight  in  port.

And  told  him  how  that  man  that  put  to  flight
The  Grcel^ifl)  hofljwonild  lie  in  town  that  night,

7

He  faid,*was  happen’d  ev*n  asonecouid  wifli,

Iffo  they  mat'd  nota'I  by  ill  contriving.

That  he  was  taken  now  as  is  a fifli,

Thattorhc  netapDrochctli  without driviogi
Or  rather  layts  it  felfinto  the  dilh,

And  makes  rcfiftanccnonc  nor  any  lliiving,

Much  did  the  Captainc  at  thefc  newes  rcjoyce,

And  fhew’d  tbeiame  by  gcfturcand  by  voice.

And


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


s

And  prefcntly  prov.fion  fuch  he  made.

That  good  Rugero  taken  wasthat  night.

And  kept  aspril'ner  now  in  Novengrude,

(Foi  fo  the  town  wheie  he  was  taken  hight)

What  fliould  he  do?  when  arm’d  men  did  inrade
Him  naked  and  aflccp,with  fo  great  might  ;
VngUjrdo  ftraightdoth  fend  thisjoyfull  tiding
To  ConJlantinc,i\ Beltrhb  nowabidmg.

9

For  fince  his  forces  late  were  beaten  down.

He  thought  it  fafefl,quitkly  to  withdraw
Vnto  fbme  ft'cngth.or  to  fbmc  walled  town,

(For  of  the  Bulgars  now  he  had  fuch  aw)

He  doubted  they  would  hazard  cv*n  his  crown,
Now  having  fuch  a guide  as  erfthefaw.

And  this  fame  town  was  Arons,and  did  pertaine
To  him,whofc  fonne  was  by  Rogero  Aaiac.

10

But  when  this  mefTageof  their  Captains  taking.

By  letters  and  by  port  was  brought  to  him.

He  was  therewith  in  fuch  a joyfull  taking.

He  thought  he  now  in  leas  of  milk  did  fwim  >

His  face  that  palc,his  heart  that  erft  wasquaking,
Vpon  thisnewesit  chearfull  was  and  trim  j
The  Bulgarsnow  he  counts  as  overthrown.

The  viftory  he  judgethfurehisown.

1 1

As  doth  the  father  joy>fodoth  the  Ton,

Of  this  good  hapjthoughfora  further  end.

He  hopeth  this  brave  knight  may  now  be  won
By  cuitcfiCjto  be  his  faithfull  friend,

He  needeth  notenvie(if  that  weredone)

King  Charles  the  gieat(he  thinks)but  ev’n  contend
Both  with  Wis  PaUadines  and  allhis  ganfon.

For  flowrc  of  Chivaliy,to  makecomparifon.

j*

But  TifOi/ona  was  of  other  mind,

Don  Leons  Ant ,whofc fonne  Rogero  flew.

For  (lie  with  cholcr  earn’d  headlong  blind.

And  for  hisIolTe,whofc  death  fhemofl  did  rew.

To  Confiantine  her  Lord,and  brother  kind
She  wcnt,and  at  his  fiet  herfelfc  fhe  threw,

And  when  (lie  Arfl  had  made  a piteous  plaint.

She  with  her  fuit  this  wife  did  him  acquaint.

• 3

I will  not  rife  from  thefe  your  feet(flie  feth)

M y liege, untill  you  grant  me  power  to  wreak
My  felfeon  him,that  brought  my  fonne  to  death.
And  did  with  cruel!  fpcare  his  bowels  break  :
Befidcs  he  was  your  nephew, while  his  bieath
Did  dure, you  faw  his  love,and  fciTicecke,

Your  highnefle  knowes  it  were  too  great  a wrong.
To  let  his  death  be unrevenged  long.

Tou  further  fee,that  God  ofgoodncfTemeare
Had  caus’d  that  wretch  the  camp  thus  to  forfakc.
And  come  like  bird  to  baitfthe  cafe  is  cicarc)
Whereas  Vngardo  did  him  prifner  take,

Becaufc  my  only  fonne  1 lov’d  fo  dcare,

Wight  not  gounreveng’d  to  Stygian\ikc  :

Then  give  mehim(my  Lotd)aad  be  content,

3 fwage  my  giicf^with  hisfliarp  puniOimem«


M

Her  plaints  and  monc  fo  well  fhe  doth  devife.

So  forcibly  and  hcarnly  fhe  praid.

Nor  would  not  Airrc  from  thence  in  anv  wife,
(Although  the  noble  Emp'ror  did  and  (aid
Ev’n  all  he  could, to  make  her  thence  an(e)

That  fith  flic  would  by  no  means  be  dcnaid.

But  ftill  renew’d  her  fuit,wiih  piteous  weeping.

He  granteth  her  the  prifner  in  her  keeping.

i6

And  thusatlaft.tomakcthcmatfer  fliort,

He  fendeth  for  the  knight  of  th'Vnicorn,

And  gave  him  hciswliofcchicfcdclight  and  fpori
Was  to  devife  to  work  him  woe  and  fcorn  5
All  commondcathsvvcrcof  twomild  a foir.

To  have  him  bang’d, and  allia  pccccsiorn.

And  on  each  gate  to  let  a quarter’d  lim.

She  thought  it  was  not  plague  enough  for  him,

‘7

Chain’d  hands  and  feet,and  neckjfhe  lockt  him  up
Indungcon  void  of  light, but  full  offtink.

With  mouldic  bread  flie  made  him  dine  and  fup^

And  gave  him  puddle  water  for  his  drink ;

She  fliortly  mcans,that  be  a forriecup
Shall  taftjbut  till  flic  may  her  fclfc  bethink
The  kind  of  death, flic  giveth  him  a keeper,

Whofc  rancor  was  as  deep  as  hcrs,or  deeper.
iS

Oh  had  Duke  Ammons  nobicdaughter  known
Of  her  Rogeros  now  diftrefled  ftate,

Or  if  it  had  been  to  Marfifa  fiiown,

Who  lov’d  him  deaie,though  in  another  rate,

But  tone  and  tothcr  thither  would'havc  flowng
And  would  not  ccafc  to  ride  betimes  and  late.

To  refeuegood  Rogero  and  afllft.

Let  Ammon  and  his  wifefay  what  they  lift.

19

Now  Charles  the  great  began  to  call  to  mind
His  promifcjby  the  which  himfelfwas  bound.

That  husband  none  fliould  ever  be  aflign’d
To  Bradamant,  but  he  in  fight  were  found
Hci  match,and(askingsufc  in  fucha  kind)
Hcpubliflicd  the  fame  by  trumpets  found,

Ov’rall  his  Empire  fending  proclamations,

T hat  Toon  the  fame  did  flie  to  foirain  nations. '
to

Thus  much  the  writing  mademen  underftand.

That  no  man  Bradamant  towife  fliould  get.

But  one  that  would  attempt  with  fword  in  hand
From  lifing  of  the  SunjUntill  it  fet,

Her  force  in  Angle  combat  to  withftand  |

Which  if  that  any  could, there  was  ro  let.

But  fhcagiccsjand  Charles  himfelfcallowes,

That  fuch  a one  fliould  have  her  for  his  (poufe,

21

This  Article  was  likewifc  there  fet  down,

That  they  fliould  name  the  weapon  if  they  lift.

For  why  hervalew  wasofg'cat  lenown.

To  fight  on  horfc,on  foot, in  fieldjn  lift.

Duke  Ammon  now  that  to  withftand  thecrowo,
Wants  force  and  will,nolonger  doth  reflft,

But  after  long  difcouifeiwith  bisdaughter,
Compeld  in  fine,back  to  the  C ourt  be  brought  hcf .
* Kk4


THE  XLV.  BOOKE


Shstiih


Swtiltt


58d

H«  mother  eke, though  wroth  and  maiccontent.

Yet  hot  h for  nature  and  for  honours  fake.

Good  ftorc  of  coftly  clothes  incontinent,

Both  gownesand  kittles  flic  for  herdoth  makC)
ThusBraiimant  with  both  her  parents  went
Vntothe  Court,wbereniefmall  joy  did  uke.

She  fcarce  eftcemed  it  a Court  to  be.

When  that  her  lover  there  (he  could  not  fee.

, n

intone  that  faw  in  AprillonnMay

A picafant  garden  full  of  fragrant  flowrev,

Then  when  frcfli  earth  new  clad  in  garments  gay.
Decks  ev*iy  wood  and  grove  with  pleafant  bowres,
And  ccmei  againeon  fome  Decembers  day.

And  fees  it  mat’d,  with  winters  Aoims  and  (Iiowrcs,
Su  did  this  Court  to  Bradamant  appearc,

When  as  (he  faw  Rogert  was  not  hcic.

*4

She  dares  not  ask  of  any  man  for  feare.

Left  fuch  a queftion  might  her  love  accufe,

Howbeit  fecretly  (he  lendeth  caic.

Toothers  talk,as  in  fuch  cafe  men  ufe :

Each  ma n fan  h gone  he  is,  but  none  knowes  where.
For  to  the  Court  of  him  there  came  no  newes.

And  he  himfelfe,when  as  he  thence  departed.

His  purpofe  unto  no  man  thereimpatted.
as

Oh  in  what  feare  and  rage  thefe  newes  do  fet  her.

To  heare  Rogero  was  in  manner  fled.

She  thinks  that  furc,bccaufc  he  could  not  get  her.
And  that  her  father  nay  to  him  had  fed.

That  now  he  fought  of  purpofe  to  forget  her,

And  fluin  her  fight,  that  all  hisforrow  bred  ,

She  thinks  that  he  from  thence  himfclfc  withdrawes.
For  this  alone, and  for  none  other  caufe>

2G

But  more  then  all,thisdoubt  her  heart  aflailes.

That  he  was  gone  to  feek  fome  forrain  love.

And  fith  that  of  his  purpofe  here  he  failcs.

To  fpeed  fome  otherwhere  he  ftraight  would  prove.
As  from  a booid  men  drive  out  nailes  with  nailes,
Sowiih  new  love  he  would  her  love  remove;

But  ftraight  another  thought  that  thought  gainfaith,
Shethinketh  her  ito^ero  full  of  faith.

17

And  thereupon  her  felfe  (lie  reprehends.

That  flic  her  lover  fliciild  fo  much  abu(e.

Thus  in  her  mind  one  fancy  him  defends.

And  then  another  doth  him  fore  accufe.

And  flic  her  thoi  ghttoeitliei  fancy  lends,

And  in  great  doubt  (he  is  which  part  tochufe  j
But  when  a while  fhc  had  her  fclf  bethought,
Shelcancth  moft  unto  beft  plcafing  thought.

Then  chiefjwhen  in  her  mind  (lie  doth  repeat
Rf^erof  piomifejwhich  he  bad  her  truft.

She  thinks  to  him  the  injury  is  great.

That  cauflcflv  Hie  now  flioiild  him  miftruft.

And  cv’n  as  he  were  prefent, flic  doth  beat
FlcrbfC^ft  thatftill  doth  harbour  thoughts  un  juft,
Wyfelfhith  (in’dfniefaith)whtcb  now  1 curfc.

But  he  that  caufed  it  is  caufc  of  woife.


le

Love  was  the  caufc  (quoth  (he) chat  in  my  hea;t
Tour  face  and  grace  ingraved  hath  fo  fcemly,

A nd  therewith  hath  fet  forth  each  vertuous  part,
fiefeeming  thee  fo  fweetly  and  (b  trimly.

That  furc  no  dame,  that  knowes  well  what  thou  artg,
Can  chufc  but  fall  in  lore  with  thee  extremely,

Aad  thcrcwithall  with  all  her  power  mdever
To  win  thy  leve,and  make  thee  hers  for  evri  i
30

Oh  if  that  love  had  grav'd  thy  thoughts  fo  well.

As  it  hath  grav'd  thy  vifage  in  my  mind.

In  how  great  joy  and  bh^e  (hould  I then  dwell.

For  well  1 know  that  they  be  true  and  kind  ,

Then  jcaloufie  the  omly  plague  of  hell,

(To  which  alas  I am  too  much  inclin'd)

Should  quickly  ceafe,and  I (hould  free  me  from  it,
Nor  would  I in  my  heart  once  think  upon  it.

J*

But  as  a miferhoordingup  histreafiire.

Doth  doubt  in  abfcnce  ftill  that  theeves  be  there.

So  I when  thou  that  art  mine  oncly  plcafure.

Art  abfent  farrefrom  me  (I  know  not  where)

I ftraight  fufpcd,and  ftraight  I doubt  falfc  meafure.
And  ftraight  my  hope  growslc(rc,and  mote  my  fear.
Which  chough  I think  both  bootlcfleand  unJuft,

Fet  ftill  I doubt, and  ftill  I do  miftruft.

3»

But  yet  no  fooner  (hall  the  plcafing  light

Of  thy  fweet  countnance  come  unto  mine  eyes,

O thou  my  joy,  O thou  my  lives  delight,

(Though  where  thou  art  I cannot  now  devife)

But  that  true  hope  falfe  fearc  (liall  put  to  flight.
And  knowledge  plainc  all  doubts  (liall  facisfie,
Come  then  my  dcare,and  haften  thy  returning.

Ere  hope  and  fear  dial  waft  me  quite  with  mournings

33

As  when  the  night  hath  fpread  her  mantle  black.

Faint  hearccil  folk  arc  wont  to  be  afFraid,

But  when  again  the  day-light  doth  come  back.
They  feem  of  better  chearc  and  well  appaid  ;

So  I do  faint.whcn  as  my  dcarc  1 lack.

But  in  his  prcfcncc  I am  undifmatd  .*

Come  then  my  dearc  Ao^ero,cotnc  unto  me,

Before  that  hope  and  doubt  do  quite  undo  me.

34

As  in  the  night  each  little  ficric  fpaik
May  plainly  bcdifccrncd  withoureyfte,

Butwben  the  day '^oth  come  we  then  (liall  mark.
That  ail  3rcdamp*d,and  do  no  longer  (Iiinc,

So  kindles  feare  in  mind  with  doubt  made  dark,

Vntill  my  Sun  in  my  Horizon  fliinc,*

Turn  then  my  dcare,and  with  thy  light  illume  me,
And  drive  away  this  care  that  doth  confumc  me.

As  when  the  Sun  declines  to  South  moft  low.

The  land  doth  Iccfc  the  beauty  that  (lie  had,

And  winter ftormes  breed  raine.and  ice,andfaow.
The  pleafant  birds  all  filent  (Icand  fad :

So  when  as  thou  from  me  far  off  doft  go,

O (hining  Sun, whole  beams  do  make  me  glad,

A thoufand  fearcs  but  all  unjuft  and  vaine.

Make  winter  in  my  heart,to  my  great  painc4

Shine


Simik.


timiii,


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


5«

ShinethcnonmCjOrnydcaicSun,  and  bring
Thy  bcamcsmoic  jiyc,  ibisfnow  and  j(c  to  thi«r,
RcficHithcrc  branches  w'ithrcd  in  their  (pring,

Aad  do  no  more  thy  fclf  fo  fart  withdraw  :

As  Pbilomcnadoldxiily  doth  lino.

When  as  her  young  ones  all  dcltroy’d  fliefaw
Oi  as  the  Turtle  caily  mourns  and  late.

When  flic  hath  loft  her  dcaic,bcloued  mate.

?7

So  noble  ftill  mournes  and  plainer.

With  fcare  R->gcro  had  her  louc  rcKiled,

And  with  lalt  tearesher  loucly  cheeks  oiftaines.
Yet  fetrctly,  for  fearc  to  bedetefled  ;

O had  (he  knownc  that  he  was  bound  in  chaines.
And  cu’ne  hoiirc  a cruell death  expeded,

W’hat  griefcof  mindc  thinkc  yoti,flioufd  flic  then
That  was  fo  gricu’d  alrcadic  for  his  lake!  (take,
' 38

But  locjthc  heau’nly  goodnes  fo  erdaines.

That  Theodoras  rage, and  crucllfpight,

Againft  her  pnlncr,  whom  flic  keeps  in  chaincsj
Andmeansto  kill  with  torture  all  flic  might,
Referuing  him  aliuc  for  greater  paines.

Came  to  thccarcof  t'(c/<*rrfoDneoncnight,

And  put  into  his  heart  to  laue  and  chciiihj
And  not  tofuffer  fo  great  vallcw  perifli.

■«5>

The  noble  Leo»  that  Rogcro  loucs,

(Mot  knowing  thothat  this  Bolero  was)

Whom  bis  rare  rertue,  and  great  vallew  moucs,
Which  he  did  thinkc  all  humane  farre  to  pafle,
Deuiling  fundiy  wayes,this  one  he  prones,

, And  by  the  fame,  he  brought  the  feat  to  pafle.

So  that  liiscruell  Aunt  could  not  efpy  him.

Nor  once  complainc  that  flic  was  wronged  by  him.

He  fpeaketh  in  the  fccretft  fort  he  can,

Vnto  the  b'oudy  wretch  that  kept  the  kayes.

And  pray'thhim  fliow  him  the  condemned  man.
For  why  he  muft  cxamki  him  he  fayes  s
A knight  a valiant  man  that  was  his  m.in,
Hctakcfwith  himfitfor  all  bold  aflayes,
ThecruelHayler,  that  no  fraud  fiifpcflcd.

In  all  points  did  a Leon  him  diicdfed.

41

He  leads  him  fccirtly  vnto  the  den.

Where  good  Rogcro  was  in  prifbn  pent.

Nor  tookchewith  him  any  ofhi«.  men,

But  as  their  guide,  ihc  formoft  of  them  went;

Who  when  they  faw  the  time  beft  feruedthea
No  longer  to  defer  th*occafion  ment.

Bat  vnawarcs  they  ataduantage  c.itch  him,
Andwichafodaioc  ftabthey  dodifpatch  him.

4»

Then  open  they  the  trap  doorc  our  of  band.

And  downc  they  let  the  ladder  that  was  by.

And  Lcanwitha  lantcrncinhishand,

Oflight  conccaldjwcnt whcrcthc  knigbtdidly,
Faft  bound  vpon  a grate  wich  bitter  band,

Not  in  the  water,  but  thereto  fo  ny.

The  very  dampe  was  fucb,  that  one  iright  gucfic,
That  foie  would  kill  him,  ia  a momh  oilc£c.


3^7

With  great  compafllon  Leon  him  iraLlJ^^?,

And  fayd.  lit  knight,  tit  vertue  you  hauc  fliawne

With  lored  knots  my  louc  hath  knit  and  laced
Toyou.finccfitftthrfamcto  me  was  knownc,
^asmy  ncaiTandtliougUtsa.evrhollv  placed,

fo  leckc  your  fatetic.  rather  tinrn  mine  owne,

Ventring,yourwcIfareaPdyour  Icuetowm,  .

* o Iccic  my  lltcsgooi  will,  and  all  my  kin.

,,  44

To  tell  yoiitme,  the  Emp'iouis  foiine  I am.

Lean  by  i\ainc,as  yet  to  you  a fteaii-rcr,
lolct  you  (rcc,of  purpoie  now  Uamc,

And  put  my  pcrlon,and  iny  Hate  in  danger.

That  both  my  father  grcaJy  me  may  blame.

And  lookc  vpon  me  cocrmorc  with  anger  j
The  Ioffe  at  Belgrade  which  voii  wrought  liira  late
Makes  him  to  bcarc  to  youfo  fliarp  an  h-tc.

45

Thtfe  fugled  words, and  many  morcbefi  e.

Which  vvcie for  mctootcoious  to  repeat.

He  fpake,  and  then  his  bands  he  all  vmyde,
Andfccrcfly  hccjul’d  himmouchis  feat  ;

Bolero  in  this  wife  to  him  rcpiydc,

Yourcourtefic  is  fuch,  your  gift  fogreat,

Togiue  me  life,  that  you  fliall  ay  command  if,
Whencucrit  fliall  plcafc  you  to  demand  it.

Thus  Leon  in  thisfccrer  fort  vnlcnownc,

RogeroP.om  the  prifon doth convay.

And  fend  him  toacaftleof  hisowne.

Whereas  he  might  fccure in fllencc  flay,

Vntil  this  tumult  all  wercouctblowne,

And  till  againc  for  him  rrgainc  he  may
His  amies  and  gallant  hotfe,  and  famous  blad^,
Kept  by  ZingardOy  Lord  of  NouengraJe.

4?

The  keeper  flainethe  nrstenfuingraorne.

The  prifon  gates,  from  off  the  hinges  hcaued.

The l)ingcs,and  the  maniclcs  in  pieces rornc
Each  man. Tiight  fee,  but  none  by  whom  pcrceaucd;
All  thought  that  Lca»  had  him  ha  tied  borne.
Wherefore  of  liim  they  no  miftruft  conceaued.

The  caufc  he  Imd  of  hate,  each  man  doth  know.

By  name  Ins  late  tcccaued  ouerthrow.

4,3  I

At  this  great  curtcflc  that  Lcck  vfed,

Bolero  wonders  much,  and  thinksir  ftrange.

And  fore  he  was  in  rnindeand  thought  confufeJ,
And  fbdainly  he  fcelsa  wcndrousinaijoc,

Hisheart  relented,  and  all  hatercfufcd,  *

And  turndcitall  toloue,  by  fwcet  cxchang.

What  erft  malicious,  ciucll'.v.is,  and  hateful!.

Is  turned  new  tokindc,  and  mildc,  andgratefuU.

40

Sodeepe  into  his  head  and  heart  it  finks.

That  itpofTcfTcd  all  hisfoulc  and  fenfe.

On  thislic  fludies  when  he  wakes  or  winkes.

How  he  may  do  to  him  fomc  rccompcnce ;
Tofpend  eii’n  a 1 his  future  dayes  fhe  chinkes,)
Solein  hisfcruicc.and  in  hisdcfcncc.

Could  net  rcouite,  no  fcaioc  the  twentith  part
Of  fogreat  cuunc,  and  fogreat  defart.


Is


$8S


THE  XLV; BOOKE


50  S7

InthismMnewhilCjthencwcswascomefiom  FrancCi  And  then  himfelfccfpromifccStc/Tiould  faylc


Which  Charles  had  notifi’d  to  many  a nation,

Of  her  that  would  bcwoo*dby  fword  andlanccj
In  finglc fight  (fofaidthc  prcciamation; )

7)o>i  Leon  was  quite  out  of  countenance,
Toheareofthis  her  firange  determination,'

And  as  a man  that  wel  his  owne  ftrengt  h knowcs.
Ilimfelfetpo  weakeforher  he  dothfuppofe.

And  long  debating  how  he  might  fupply.

His  want  of  force  and  courage,  by  his  wit.

In  fine  he  purpof’d  withhimfelfc  to  try,

This  ntw  made  fccd,whofc  name  he  knowes  notyctj
Although  he  well  could  witneffewith  hiseyc.
That  for  no  braue  exploit  he  was  vnfit.

He  hopethbjr  his  manhood  and  his  aid,

T o conquer  and  to  haue  that  haidie  maid.  ,

But  two  things  he  mull  do  before  he  goes.

One  isthe  mindeof  this  fame  vnknowne  knight,
Vnto  this  haidie  enterprift  dil'pofe.

The  tolher  is,  to  bring  him  to  the  fight
So  fccretly,  as  none  might  it  difclofe.

And  all  that  while  to  kccpchimfclfc  from  fight ;
Firftthcn,  incarneft  fort  he  doth  intreat
ito^ero  take  on  him  this  haidie  feat.

53

Much  might  the  Greece  preuaile  by  eloquence.

The  which  he  vl'd  to  lead  him  thereunto.

But  more  prevail’d  the  bond  of  rccompencc,’
Sofirmeasnotimceueicould  vndo,

That  though  the  motion  bred  him  great  offence,
Aadfccmd  a thing  vnpofliblc  to  do.

With  gladder  lookc  then  heart  he  doth  reply,
Deate  fir,  I nothing  may  to  you  deny.

54

Though  he  no  fooner  had  this  word  pronounced.

But  that  he  felt  fuch  griefe  did  gripe  his  hart,

A s if  damnation  were  to  him  denounced  ,

Such  pangs  he  had,  fuch  torture  and  fuch  fmau :

But  yctbispromifc  giu  nhenot  renounced.

Nor  from  the  fame  once  purpof’d  to  depart.

For  firft  a thoufand  deaths  hement  to  chuft.

Then  oncreqeeft  of  Leons  to  rcfufCi
55

Dye  fmc  he  fliali  (he  thinks)  for  if  he  Icaue
His  louc,  he  knowes  he  cannot  byde  aliuc.

For  either  fbrrow  wil  of  life  him  teaue.

Or  if  that  nature  (Iiall  withfotrow  ftriue.

Of  his  owne  hands  he  will  his  death  rcccauc.

And  fohis  foulc  from  hated  harbor  driue.

Each  other  thing  on  earth  to  him  feems  poffible,
But  milUng  her,  to  Hue  he  thinks  impoflible.

5<5

Thendie  hemuft,  onely  he  doubts  what  kindc
Of  death,  were  for  his  ftatc  and  fancic  beft.

Once  this  conceit  did  come  into  hisminde.

To  lay  in  fight  his  naked  open  breft  :

Mightfhe  himflay,  hedeemethinhis  minde,

That  fuch  a death,in  death  might  n akc  him  blcfl,
Butlhcn  he  fees  whar  follow  would  of  this.

That  coble  Leon  fliculd  his  purpofe  milTc.


which  was  not  to  dilTemblc,  but  indever
That  Leon  in  bis  wooing  might  preuaile.

And  makedame  BraJamant  hisownc  for  euer  ?

Thus  though  that  diuers  thoughts  his  minde  affayle.

Yet  wholly  in  that  thought  he  doth  perlcuer.

That  moucth  him  mcfl  plaine  to  dcale  and  trew.

And  to  all  other  thoughts  he  bidsadcw.

58

This  while  Dor  Leon  with  his  fathers  Icaue,

With  fuch  retiaiie  ashisfiatc  required.

Of  knights  and  fouircs,  bisnatiuefbyledidleauc>

And  went  io  feethedame  hefo  defired  t
Rogero  did  of  him  before  rcccauc,

Hisarmesandhorfe,  and  in  ftrangc  clothes  attired.

Day  after  day  they  fo  their  iourncy  frame.

That  at  tliclafl  to  Paus  waU  they  came.

59

DonLfoutothc  Citicwould  notgo,  ,

But  ncarc  vnto  the  fame  he  pitcht  a tent ;

And  by  AmbafTagemadc  the  king  to  know.

How  hcwascomc,  and  vnto  what  intent:

King  C’bartex  was  glad  and  did  hisgladnes  fliow
With  gifts,  and  vnto  him  in  perfon  went ;

Don  Leon  tcis  what  did  his  comming  breed.

And  prayes  hcmaydifpatched  be  with  fpccd.

60

And  that  King  Charles  that  noble  maid  would  caufe.

To  come  the  day  enfuing  to  the  field,

.That  would  (againft  all  common  wedlocks  lawes)

Be  wood  and  wenne,  with  onely  fword  and  fliield;

King  Cfdr/cx  her  cals, and  fhethatasktno  paufc,

Vnto  the  motion  willingly  did  yceld.

And  fo  accordingly  next  day  flic  came,

Vnto  the  liftsprepared  for  the  fame.

6 I

Tbatday  that  went  before  the  day  of  fight,

Rogero  pafled  with  as  great  content,

Asdothaman  condemned fpend  thenight.

The  which  before  bis  cxecimon  went.

He  chuf’d  to  fight  alidad  in  armour  bright,

Becaufe  as  then  robe  vnknowne  hement.

And  (for  to  hurt  her,  was  not  his  pretence)

Saue  fword,  he  vfd  no  weapon  of  offence.

62

Lance  he  would  none,  not  thay  he  fcard  thelance
Which  firfl  Argalia,  then  Afioljo  bare.

Which  forced  men  befide  their  fear  to  dance.

And  vnto  many  men  procurdc  great  care.

For  neither  he  that  vf’d  it  firft  in  Tranezy  '

Nor  any  of  tbofc  other,  was  aware.

How  all  thofc  feats  were  by  inchantmentdonoe,

Saue  that  fame  king,  that  gauc  it  cohisfonnc.

Likewife  Aftolft  inithe'DorhnAimey

That  with  thatfpeare  full  many  did  vnhorfe.

Thought  not  that  it  from  Negromancy  came,  - ^

But  from  their  flcight.and  their  owne  proper  force,  ^ **X*'*<'
They  thought  with  anyfpeareic  do  the  fame;

Bur  now  A'gfro,  did  both  fpearc  and  horfc
Befufc,  becaufe ifhe  had  vfde  hisownc,

, He  thought  it  wotild  by  Bradamant  be  krev.  ne.

t’ceds


Sifr.iSyi


Thiftim

Limit

iSoreyvrai

fomatntt

ftens  /tthit


W-V.


Simil*


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


«4

Needs  mad  the  damfell  call  to  miiidc  the  fteedj
For  whf  (lie  kept  him  long  at  Clarimount,

And  vfed  him  with  her  ownc hands  to  feed.

And  made  of  him  a fpeciall  dcarc  account*
Wherefore  Rogero  that  took  fpeciall  iKcd
To  go  vnkno  wne  refuf'd  on  horlc  to  mount.

Or  any  other  thing  by  which  he  may,

Vnto  ins  deareft  loue  himfclfc  bewray.

6s

He  further  needs  another  fword  would  take.

For  well  he  knew  againft  his  Balli/ard,

No  fteele,  nor  armour  none,  defence  could  make.
Whole  edge  fo  kccne,  whole  metrall  was  fo  hard  ,
Of  that  new  fword  likewife  he  (foi  her  take)
Rebates  the  edge,  fo  great  was  his  regard.

And  thus  bimfelfc  both  wcakning  and  difguifing.
He  came  into  the  field  at  Pfceliar  nfing.

O

66

And  that  each  one  for  Leon  mfght  him  note,

Vntill  the  controuerfic  were  decided,
HewcarcsTpon  his  backe  Don  Lco«x  cote.

The  golden  Eagle  with  the  head  diuided,

(their  making  both  was  like,  from  foote  to  throte)
Thus  when  all  things  were  readily  prouided.

The  tone  ptefents  him  in  the  open  greene.

The  tothcr  kept  him clofe,  aod  wasnot  fccae.

67

But  Bradamant  now  farre  in  other  rate,

Herfclfe  in  readines  for  fight  doth  fet.

And  ifthe  knight  do  his  fwotds  edge  rebate.

As  fafi  the  damfcl  her  fwords  edgedoth  whet:

She  wiflieth  with  a heart  mofi  full  of  hate,
Herfworda  paflage  to  the  quicice  would  get.

Yea  comfort  her  it  would  and  doe  her  good,

If  (he  with  euVic  blow  could  draw  the  blood.

68

Ev’n  as  a Rarbrye  horfe  that  runnes  a race.

And  forthefigne  thereof  hath  long  expefted,
Againfl  his  will,  doth  (lay  his  running  pace.
With  fwelling  noftrils  and  with  cares  erefled  :

Fu  n fo  the  noble  damfell  in  like  cafe,

That  of  Rogerot  prcfcncc  naught  fufpeiled.

Did  Pwcll  with  wrath, and  burnes  like  flaming  fire;
Vato  the  combat,  fuch  was  her  defire.

65

And  as  ofiimcs  vpon  (bme  fcarefull  clap

Of  thunder,  ftraight  a hurlewiode  doth  aiifc.

And  lifts  the  wanes  aloft,  from  Thc/yr  lap,

Er’n  in  a moment  rp  rntothe  skyes.

The  Heardman  doubting  of  fomc  great  mifliap,
Ab'^ur  fome  tree,  or cauc,clofe  hidden  lyes.

So  Bddamant  with  rage  of  anger  driuen,

Afiayld  Rogero  when  the  figne  was  giuen.

70

But  newer  did  a ftifFe  and  aged  oake,

Againft  the  Noithern  blaft  more  firmclyftand.

Nor  better  doth  a roeke,indurc  the  ftroke,
Offurging  waues,ftill  wallowing  to  the  land.
Then  good  Ra^ero,  guarded  inthecloke
OfHeflort  armcs,hci  forces  did  withftand.

Though  (he  ftilllayd  on  loade  with  fpitc  and  hate
Vpon  his  armes,  his  fidcs,liis  bieft,  and  pate.


Sometimes  (lie  giuesa  blow.fomciimca  thruft.

According  at  her  ramage  moft  flic  fpidc,  *

Andftill  flicwatcht,if  (he  could  hit  him  iuft
Betwcenc  the  plates  or  where  t he  fame  were  tide,

Twas  well  the  toate  was  fuch  as  one  might  ttuft.

For  flic  dcthftarchit  Hill  on  ev'ry  (idc.

And  inwaidly  flic  fretreth  In  her  minde.

That  nought  fell  out  of  that  flic  had  afliend.

So  fliall  you  fee  fooie  men  hefirge  a rownc,  Hg^,,

walld,and  fttongly  fiankt  with  rampicrs  mayne.
AlTault  itofr.and  ftriuc  to  batter  downe
Some  towers  or  gates,  with  perill  great  and  payne.

And  waft  their  time,  and  fpendingmany  actowuc
'I  o lofc  their  men  about  the  fame  in  vaynr,  ’
Nomorcthc  damicis  forcedid  new  prcuailc
To  pierce  a plate,  or  to  vnriuct  naylc.

Sometime  fonhef  hisliclmctand  liis  fliceld
She  made  the  fjiarkcs  of  fire  fly  out  in  fight,

Still  fmiting  him  with  blowes  not  fofr.noi  fecld
Somtimeat  reaidemaine,and  oft  downe  right.

As  tliicke  as  haylcflones  that  vpon  the  ftcld,  *
Oronthctylcd  lioiift  s do  alight  t
But  ftill  Rogero  clofe  lyes  to  his  ward,

A nd  net  to  hurt  her,  flill  he  hath  regard.

74

Oft  ftanding  ftill,  now  turning,  then  retin'nft
He  makes  his  foote  accompanic  his  fift.

With  fwoidjwith  fliicld,witli  flip(caufc  fo  requirin")

He  wards  the  blowes.or  fliunnes  them  as  him  lift-
And  eucr  not  to  damage  her  defiriiig,  '

When  he  liiight  hir,of  purpofe  ftiU  fceirift.

Yet  in  fuch  wife,  that  flic  her  felfe  was  ware.

And  all  the  reft,  that  he  the  fame  forbarc.

75

But  BraJamant  when  flic  her  fclfc  betliouglit,
Whatwascontain’d  in  th’Empeiors  Eclifi,

That  whofoeu*r  with  licra  whole  day  fought.

Should  haue  her  atthernd  of  fuch  conflift,

\^'lth  all  her  force  cndcuord  ftill  and  fought,
Togallheraductfaiic  ar.daffltftj
And  now  the  more  flic  troubled  was  in  minde,
TofectheSnn  to  Weft  fo  low  declinde.

75

Andas  Iiei  hope  flill  Icfleand  IclTer  grew.

So  hn  defire  incrcaft  ftill  more  and  more.

Her  louing  aduerfancro  fubdew.

That  flic  had  fought  withafl  theday  btforet
Aslabourcrswhofcworkcby  taskc  was  dew,

That  loytred  haue  and  now  are  fad  therefore,

When  night  drawes  on  beftur  their  laficboncs,

Vntill  their  ftrcngtli,  and  light  faylcboth  at  once,

7?

Alas  good  Bradamant,  if  theu  didft  know.

The  man  to  whom  thou  wiflicft  fo  much  ill.

That  in  this  fight  hath  becne  thy  friendly  foe.

And  winneth  thee  (perhaps  againft  his  will)

Thou  wouldeft  firft  haue  kild  thy  felfe  1 trow.

Then  of  his  blood  one  Intle  drop  10  fpilJ,

Thou  that  didft  BOW  fo  ciirfc  himand  beflirow  him
Wouldft  neither  of  them  do,>f  thoudidft  knew  him.

But


390


THE  XLV.BOOKE


SiituHet


78

But  Charles  and  all  hisLords,  with  full  pcffwaHoa
That  thisfo  raliant  champion,  Leon  was.

To  praift  him  highly  now  they  take  occaGoO)
AndGthhisGrengthdid  hers  fo  greatly  paGc,

They  think  for  her  there  now  wasnoenaGon,

The  matter  brought  to  fuch  a narrow  paGie.

Each  man  cGectns  this  match  for  her  moG  Gt,

Each  man  allowes,  each  mao  commendeth  it«

79

Now  ganDon  Pbebus  di^his  golden  rays,

(To  fwagetheir  burning)  in  the  Wefterncfcas,
When  Charles  himfclfe  comes  to  them  both  & prays
Thedamfell  now  her  furie  to  appeafe.

And  giueth  fentence,  that  without  delayes,

Don  Lean  may  her  marrie  when  hepleafe;

Rogero  doth  himfelfe  no  whit  difclofe.

But  armed  Gill  backe  to  the  tent  he  goes.

80

Don  Leoriy  brotherly  doth  him  imbiace.

And  then  he  holpe  him  to  vntie  hisbeauer.

And  with  great  kindnes  kiffed  all  his  face.

And  faid  that  he  was  bound  to  him  for  eucr,

And  that  no  time  fuch  merit  could  deface.

Which  to  reward  he  would  for  ayindeuer.
Affirming  frankly  of  his  owne  meere  motion.

That  all  he  had,fliould  beat  his  deuotion.

■ St

I neuercan  fuch  curteGe  requite.

Scant  in  this  life  (he  faith)  or  in  the  next,
Nothough  I ffioold  furrender  all  my  right
Vnto  my  crownc.  and  all  thereto  annext.

Rogero,  that  in  fpeech  tooke  fmall  delight.

And  was  with  inward  paffionfoperplext,

ReGo’rd  to  him  his  armcs,that  he  had  wornc.

And  tooke  againchis  fliield  of  th’Vnicornc.

8s

Pretending  (as  he  truly  might  pretend)

He  wearie  was,  and  would  himfclfe  repofe.

And  therefore  to  his  tent  vnto  that  end,

Allpriuat  vnaccompanyM  hegoesj
At  midniehthorfe  to'take  he  doth  intend.

At  midnight  primly  from  bed  he  roft.

And  atmd,  and  mounted  thence  away  departed.

But  why  nor  whither,  he  to  none  imparted.

8j

/\nd  thus  away  he  fccrctly  doth  ride,

Andgiues  leaue  to  chufc  the  way.

Now  ncere  a wood,  then  by  the  riuer  fide,

(He  ucuer  looking  to  what  coaG  it  lay)

Hefaine  would  die,  and  Gill  come  death  he  ciide.

He  thought  death  onely  could  his  paine  allay.

He  onely  wiffieth  death  to  end  hisgriefc,

That  while  he  hues,  is  furepaGall  reJiefe.

84

Ah  wretch  (faid  he)  of  whom  can  I complarne,
Forfodain  reauing  me  of  all  my  bliffie?

Shall  I fo  great  an  iniune  fuGaine  ?

Of  whom  clfefhall  I be  aueng’d  for  this?

I did  the  fault,  and  now  I fceic  the  paine.

Nor  can  I fay,  but  iuG  the  torment  is,

For  puniffimem  doth  properly  belong
To  him  that  is  the  author  of  the  wrong.


85

But  had  I done  »y  felfthe  wrong  alone,

I might  perhap  fergiue  rty  fclfc  the  fame,'

Though  furcly  caufc,  nor  rcafon  there  is  non*.

To  pardon  fuch  a fa£f,fo  woithic  blame;

But  now  1 haue  to  her  bene  caufe  of  mone,  1

Tofuffcrthat.it  were  pcrpctuall  fliamc;
SothoughI  fhould  noiuG  rcuengment  take
For  mine  owne  caufc,  yet  muG  1 for  her  fake,

86

This  wrong  revenge  1 may,  I will,  I rauG,

By  onely  death,  Gth  this  offence  was  fuch  j
To  dye,  I foone  fhall  Gndc  the  way  I truG,

The  care  thereof  my  mindc  no  whit  doth  tuch;
Oh  that  I had  long  fince  bene  layd  in  duG,

Ere  that  I iniured  my  dcare  fb  much,

I would  I had  bene  put  to  death  before.

When  I was  prifner  vnto  Theodore.

.87

If  I had  then  bene  mattyi’d  and  tormented,

With  all  the  plagues  her  malice  could  deuife,
AtIcaG  my  dearc  my  death  would  haue  lamented
VVrth  tearcs,  from  out  hcrchriGallGrcamingcycsJ
Now  when  fijc  knows,  that  1 haue  thus  conl'entcd
To  Leon, 10  bc:ray  her  in  this  wife.

My  part  of  her,  vnto  a Granger  giiiing.

She  will  hauccaufc  to  hate  me  dead  and  liuieg.

Now  while  the  knight  did  thus  lament  and  plaice.
The  fcaGern  partsof  heau*n  with  light  were  cleared
And  Fhebus  from  his  golden  houfc  againc.

Lift  vp  his  head,  wherewith  all  creatures  cheated.
Betake  them  to  their  ordinarie  paine  t
And  then  vnto  Rogero  it  appeared.

That  he  was  in  a wood,  a moG  Gt  place.

For  one  of  fuch  a mind,in  fuch  a cafe.

89

He  lights,  and  off  he  takes  Frontinhs  fadle.

And  giueshim  Iibcrtie,and  thus  he  faycj,

My  gallant  beaG  fo  good,  fbferuiccablc.

As  I haue  found  thee  Gill  at  all  affayes.

Go,  here  I fet  thee  f nee,  and  were  I able.

As  I am  willing,  to  fet  forth  thy  prayft.

Thou  doubtleffcfhouIdG  not  need  that  horfeenuie
That  was  tanc  vpfrona  earth  vnto  the  skyc.

90

Nor  Grould  Arions  prayfes  make  thee  fory.

Nor  CiUarus  that  Cajlor  did  beGryde,

Nor  any  praifd  in  Greche,  or  Latin  Gory,

For  why  (thy  fliapc  and  tcadincsbcGdc)

Of  all  thefe  famous  Gecdsnot  one  can  glorie,
AsthoumaiG  do,  it  cannot  be  decide.

Of  them  none  paffeth  thee  in  commendation.

Nor  iuGly  challenge  can  fuch  reputation.

91

Thou  haG  bene  cherifhed  and  loued  derre.

By  fuch  a Nymph,fo  faireand  fo  diuine
As  all  theworld  can  hardly  Grow  her  pecre.

She  hath  thee  fed  with  that  fayre  hand  and  Gne,

I meane  my  louc,  but  ah  why  liuc  I here,

Sith  now  I may  no  longer  call  her  mine?

No  longer  mine  flic  is,  ah  cruell  word.

Why  end  not  I my  dayes  by  mine  owne  Cword  t

Nov/


StMteae^

intktTnil*,


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


S9t

- . 9»

Now  if  ifo^cre thus  himfclfc  tormented.  This  Bfad<2»M«rvnro  her  Idfcdoth  f»f,

And  cauPd  the  birds  and  bcails,to  mone  his  plaint,  And  oft  flic  breaks  her  fpccch  with  fighsand  teare*
For  none  but  biids  and  hearts  the  place  frequented,  And  that  night  that  cnfu*d  that  lutklefle  day,  *
Whom  he  with  his  great  foirow  might  acquainti  r’ ■ ' •


No  doubt  thcdamfcll  wasas  ill  contented,

And  made  a greater,  ot  as  great  complaint,

Sith  for  her  fclfe  flic  nothing  hath  to  fay,

Why  flic  to  Lca»  longer  fliould  fay  nay.

9?

* Yet  all  meaner  poiliblc  flic  mcanes  totrye.

Before  that  flic  will  her  Bo^cre  leave.

And  makckingCfcar/crandallhis  Lords  to  lye,
AndLcotfofhis  promife  to  deceauc:

Orifthc  werrt  fliall  hap,  flic  meanesto  dye.

And  with  her  hands  of  life  her  fclf  beieauc.

For  prefcnt  death  flic  rather  ment  to  chufc,

'I  hen  hcrbclou'd  R»£cro  to  refufe.

' 94

SrttUmtnu  fommeth  it  to  pafle  (laid  flic)  my  dcarc
nmfUim,  That  at  this  time  thou  art  fo  farre from  hence?

How  can  a thing  which  all  tlicwoilddid  heare.

So  ftrangely  be  concealed  from  thy  fence  f
Ifthou  hadft  heard  it,  furc  thou  wouldft  appearc;
For  that  my  drift,  that  was  my  foie  pretence.

Ah  my  ill  fortune  cuemioreaccurft.

What  can  Idecmc,butcu’n  tbcTcry  wotrt.

95

NVhy  then  Rogcro  minc,ean  you  alone,

Notknoir  that  all  the  world  doth  know  beflde.
For  had  you  known  it  rtraight  you  would  bane  flown
Of  purpofc  hither  combateto  hauc  tridc  j
Thou  furcart  tame, or  flainc,  for  third  is  ndne;

It  may  be  Lconthat  thy  praife  enuide.

Hath  like  a tray  tor,  fet  for  thee  a trap,

An.d  thou  act  tanc  therein  by  fomcmifliap*

9<5

I gat  tbisgraceof  Charier  to  marynone.

But  one  thatwcrc  in  fightfor  me  too  hard,

Aflured  thou  fliouldrt  be  that  onely  one.

For  no  mans  force  but  thine  Idid  regard;

I thought  none  clfe  could  vanquifli  me  alone,

Butlo  how  God  doth  this  my  pride  reward,

That  he  that  never  erft  in  all  his  life
Did  manly  deed,  hath  wonne  me  for  his  wife.

97

If  1 be  won  and  vanquiflied,  becaufe
He  matched  rtill  my  force  at  all  aflayes,

V But  Cfiisr/er  doth  not  iudge  lightly  of  thecaufe,

' And  therefore  I murt  fccke/bmc  new  delayesj
Ah  if  I now  put  in  fbme  baffling  claufc,

3 fliall  be  cild  vneonftant  all  my  dayes,

But  fickicnes  in  maids  isfcldomc  wondied.

Noram  1 firrt  that vfdc  it,  by  an  hundred.

Suffiecthme  that  in  the  being  trew
Vntomylouc,!  others  all  excel].

And  pafle  the  paterns  either  old  or  new,

Or  ncarc  or  far,eu’n  whcrcfocu’r  they  dwell:

Then  will  I bid  that  coaftancic  adew.

That  may  be  hindrance  to  my  doing  well.

So  I and  Leon  may  not  match  rogccher,

Lee  mcbcdccmdaswau'iuigas  thcmcheri


Sttuttet


To  fleepe  or  clofe  her  eye  lids  flic  forbc.ircs,

But  when  Af  olios  beames  had  diiu’n  away
Molfurnui  (hades,  then  lo  rupcrnall  fphearcs.

By  which  all  humane  affionsarediredfed,

Brought  hclpc  to  her,  when  Uaft  it  was  expedted.

ICO

Forwhy  Marfifa,i\\»i  brauc  minded  dame,

The  next  day  came  and  fowd  new  feeds  of  rtrife,

A Hedging  that  it  was  great  wrong  and  fliamc,

A forrener  fliould  hauc  her  brothers  w ife  j
And  fwcaresher  fclfe  could  not  endure  the  famcj
And  that  flic  would  by  corabatc  gagehcr  life,
Accordingas  the  law  of armes  allows,

To  prouc  Rogero  was  her  lawfull  Ipoufc.

lOI

And  if  dame  BraJamant  would  it  deny.

She  faid,  flic  will  it  to  bei  face  aucr,

Ashauing  witnesbenc  with  care, and  eye,

That  good  Bolero  w-as  a flu  r’d  to  her
With  words,asfolkcsin  mariages apply.

And  adding  fliec  would  viito  law  refer,
Iffbthedamfcllto  her  noble  brother
Affianced,  might  iurtly  take  another.

loa

Now  whether  this  flic  fpakc  were  falfc  or  true,

I know  not,  but  flic  fpakc  it  with  intent.

To  flop  the mariage  likely  to  enfew
With  Leon,  which  flic  fludi’d  to  preuent  •

Some  thought  perhaps  mat  Brij<fiii??<jnr  it  knewi
And  that  twasdonc  in  part  by  herconfent,
Ashauingno  more  fafenot  honeft  way,

Vritohcr  left,  to  fay  Don  Lconnaj,

iOi

In  euill  part  thefc  newes  the  Emp’ror  tookc,
Andcallcd  forthc  damfcllbyand  by,

And  told  her  what  Marfi/a  vndenooke,

( And loc  by  hap,  Duke  Ammon  then  flood  by  )

She  fixed  on  the  ground  her  filent  lookcj
And  tothc  qucrtion,faid  nor  no  nor  I,

That  by  her  geflurc,  cu’ric  one  did  take.

That  that  was  true,  that  erfl  Marfifa  fpake.

, '*  IO+

Tbis  made  Orlando  and  RenaUo  glad,

In  hope  that  this  might  prouc  a lawfiill  meane.

To  make  thcmatchw  hich  they  forepromirt  had,’
And  hinder  this  new  match,  and  dafli  it  cleanc;

For  Cth  Duke  Ammon  thofe  firfl  banes  forbad.

And  vntoLcortf  fide  did  whoJy  Icanc,

To  vfe  pretence  of  law,  they  both  had  rather.
Then  take  by  force,  the  damfcil  from  her  father.

1 05

For  if  that  this  pretence  may  fland  for  good.

The  neck  of  Lconr  match  it  then  would  breakc,  '
And  moucnocaufcofwarrc,  or  fliedding  blood:
B\k  Ammon  in  great  wrath,thiis  wife  doth  fpcakc;
This  is  a talc  indeed  of  Robinhood,

Which  to  bclccue,  might  fliow  my  wits  but  wcakc.
But  thinkc  not  that  I will  befo  befotted,

Though  this  were  true,  that  you  hauc  vainly  plotted,
Li  ••  Foe


Ntnurnui
f’’i<ied  10  H
tbt  ^0d  of
tbt  Hilb*


THE  XLV.  BOOKE.


Simile.
Ovid.  S!ut.
ti*  fuciinilis
•vbitrux  /H'
JtbiUx  Eurut
Murmura
fXHtwfiuot,
vt  ijuafict
jluHtex,
t^quxrti
factum fi
qmt  procul
audiat  iUot
.A  wonder
laflt  nine
drtpes.


10^

Tor  pi«fuppo/c,  which  yet  I not  confeffc,

Mydaughter  was  by  folly  fo  allured,

And  that  they  are,  which  noncof  wit  could  gUclTe,
Each  vnto  other,  man  and  wife  alTured;

I pray  you  yet,  the  time  more  plainc  cxpicflc.

When  this  was  done, how  long  it  hath  induced.
This  (furc  I am)  tis  but  a taledeuifed.

Except  it  were  before  he  was  bapt  iftd.

1 07

And  iftwere  done  before  his  Chiflen  ffate,

Tolland  vnto  the  fame  1 am  not  tyde.

Wherefore  this  caucac  is  put  in  too  late,

Hisowne  defire  flie  hath  not  had  denyde;

Now  tis  not  fit,  a Prince  of  fuch  ellate.

As  for  her  fake,  aduentur’d  to  hauedyde.

Should  by  our  Empr*ours  promife  be  deluded.

And  by  luth  craft,  be  from  his  right  excluded,

108

You  fliould  haue  fpoken  then  of  this  contraft,
JBefoieout  king  had  fent  his  proclamation,

I mcanc  not  thus  to  haue  my  credit  crakt.

For  more  then  fo  I weigh  myieputationi
Thus  pleaded  heagainft  that  precontrafl.

The  which  to  breake  was  his  determination.

To  cither  part  his  care  the  Emperor  lends.

Yet  partially,  to  neither  fide  he  bends,

I op

Lookc  what  a murmure  winds  do  make  in  woods.

When  Zeplyrui  mild  blafts  among  them  arc.

Or  when  one  heats  from  farr  the  falriQi  floods.

When  Eolus  and  Neptune  arc  at  fquarc :

Sodid  the  common  pcoplcia  their  moods,
Talkcofthefe  matters,  and  the  fame  compare.

And  as  the  manner  is  (for  nincdayesfpace)

This  was  the  newes  and  talkc  in  cu*ric  place.

110

This  man  Rogero  Leon  that  defends.

According  to  the  fancies  of  the  men.

But  yet  it  feemd  Rogero  had  moQ  friends,

Scarfehad  the  llrangcr  one,fortotherstcn.


Butaslfaid,tljc  king  to  no  fide  bends.

And  hauing  duly  weigh’d  the  matter  then.

He  points  the  mariage  day  to  be  deferred.

The  cafe  vnto  his  Parliament  referred.

1 1 1

Next  day  MarJI/d  made  another  offer,

Sith  th.it  none  could,  duiing  her  brothers  life.
Wed  Bradamanty  and  be  aflured  of  her.

Her  brother  fliould  (for  ending  ofthellrifc)

To  £co«  hand  to  band,  thccombatc  proffer.

So  fliemightbe  the  laflfuruiucrswifej
And  he  that  tothcr  could  in  battcilkil),

Enioy  her  might  alone  at  his  ownc  will.

1 iz

Charier  vnto  £co«,doth  impart  theft  nev/esy
As  he  before  the  other  did  impart,

Thatoffei  tco«  ment  not  to  refuft.

But  faiihhctakcit  would,  with  all  hishart.

He  minds  again  thematter  fotovft.

The  knight  of  ch’Vnicornc  fliould  play  his  part.
He  little  knew  that  in  great  care  and  anguifli.

The  noble  knight  did  now  confumc  and  laijguilh.
nj

But  mifTTng  him,  he  quickly  did  repent.

That  he  accepted  had  that  floiit.defiance.

And  thcrcfotcftraight  to  feeke  the  knight  he  ftnt.
In  whofc  tiyde  force,  he  put  his  whole  affiance^
Him  to  Rogero  to  oppofe  he  mcnr.

And  all  his  friends  and  all  his  flrcng  alliance:
Wherefore  to  fiiun  both  danger  great  and  fcornc,
Hefcnt  to  feeke  the  Knight  of  th’Vnicorcc.

114

To  al  the  Cities,  and  the  towns  he  fends.

And  all  the  Villages  were  thereabout.

And  mounting  on  his  horfchimfelfe  intends
To  go  in  perfon  and  to  feeke  him  out.

But  neither  he  nor  all  Rogero t fT'^e!^dSy
In  Trancchad  euerlighton  him  1 doubt.

Had  not  Melijfa  holpc  him  at  his  need.

Asm  the  booke  infuing  you  may  reed.


MoralJ.  This  hoo\  began  with  an  excellent  Morall,  of  the  vnfiahlencjfc  and  varictie  of  Fortune  ^ which  as  it  is  plainly  fit
downe  and  notably  protied  by  examples, fo  if  a man  will  rightly  apply  it  1 0 his  owne  /late,  / hnow  not  whether  a>y  thing
in  this  whole  worh,  hath  bent, yea  or  can  he  faid  to  better  purpofe,  not  onclyfor  humanitic,  but  in  fame  fort for  diuinity.
For  in  matters  of  the  worldwho  h,noweth  not,  that  the  wifeft  counfell  a man  cangiue,  and  thewifeft  courfe  a man  can
tal^e  is  this,  Vt  ncc  oppreflus  fis  aduerfis  rebus  ncc  clatus  fecund  is, neither  to  be  abafht  with  adiierfitie,nor  puffed  vp
with profperitk:and  indiuinitie  {as  the  mofl  learned diwnes  bavewritten)  the  iW'i  onelyrochy  at  which  oui  vejfells
ma\e  fi}ipwrac\e, the  S\\a  and  Caribdis  that  drowne  fo  manythouf odChriflians  in  this  their  worldly  pajfage,are  thefi.
two  extreames,  of  prefumption  and  difpaire ; betweene  which  two,  he  t hat  can  hyepe  his  courfe  eueny  it  is  impoftble  be
fhould  mifearrie,  but  by  wonderjull,  andeuen  mofl  willjull  negligence.

In  thegreat  curtefic  ifed by  I con  toward  Rogero  and  a'teiward  by  Rogero  reward  him, as  is  jhewed  both  in  this
hoohe  and  the  next,  we  may  note  fir f thewonderfuUcffcRs  ofvertue,that  breeds  loue,  not  in  flravgcrs  onely.  butcuen
in  enemies,  fecondly  we  may  fee  that  a man  of  atrue  noble  nature,  things  himfelfe  more  bound  to  requite  a benefit,  then
toreuenge  aniniurie. For  to  jayle  inreuenge  often  proceedetho^  isertuc, hut  tobc  vnthanh,juU,is  amo/l  hateju.l  thing
tuen  in  thegreateft  ,and  can  neuer  proceed  bur  from  a mofl  vile  nature.

In  Chancs  may  be  noted  the  iujl  and  moderate  proceeding  of  a wife  and  difcrect  Prince,  who  when  the  controller  fie
about  Bradamant  began  to  grow  fo  intricate,  that  it  was  hard  to  difioucr  where  tie  right  was,  in  the  hearing  of  the
matter,  he  Jhewed  no  manner  ol  partialitie,andin  theendreferred  it  to  the  detet  mining  o]  the  free  Court  0 Pail'ament,
thereby  fhewing,that  he  pre  fumed  not  too  Jarre  of  his  owne  wit,  and  that  he  ment  to  haue  the  matter  heard  openly  and
indiff'ctentlyiandyethe  did  wifely  remouefrom  bimfelfe,the  enuy  and  grudge  that  might  grow  to  him  by  giuing  a
definite  fentence  in  a caufe  fo  ambiguous,  which  a Wife  Prince  will  efihue  as  much  as  may  be,fpcciaUy  when  the  mat--
terjhall  concernt  great  perfenages,

Poiicrates,


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


theieby  to  frame  10  himfcle  a caiife  offurroiv : hut  his  good  joriunewouU  not  fufferit  i ^or  ajijherman  notlongaUcr
bw^gn-g  him  afairefijh  orapreJcnt.ihisjeneU  was  found  in  tie  hcHy  of  that  fill), and fu  mofl  jha>  gdy  reioieiedTct
bcldd,  ihislorturalc  Poljetitrsgoingivith  an  army  again/^  DaiW^rras  tal^enprt/ontr  fyorcOicnus  one  of  Dariuf
Captains, and  after  hanged  upon  the  top  of  a high  mountainc.doubtlejfi  a notable  example  of  fuck  as  ma!,e  jonune  their
God.tejfc(ifany  fuch  there  bcjrrbo  ha^eindeedno  reafon  tothinlithey  are  advanced  by 'joriune . but  evcnihcguUiinejfe
ot  their  otvn  bafe  and  vUio'as  minds, worthy  of  no  part  of  Polycrotes  advancement, but  even  his  laft.

Dionyfiusa  tyrant  of  Sicilie{andfon  of  that  tyrant  that  Jpoiled  the  Clurches,andioo{awayaclol;e(ifgoldfromlu~
fizcT,  faying, acloth  dof^e  was  lighter  for  fummer,andwat  merforrvinter;  and  toeliawayJEkuhpwisgoluenbeardifay-

ing,it  was  u faweie  part  for  him  to  haie  along  beard,and  his  father  Apollo  to  have  none.)  This  Dionyllus{that  we  may
fee  how  well  the  children  of  them  proper, that  /corn  thefalfcgods  ,es’believc  not  in  the  true ) continued  his  fathers  tyran  -
wc  in  Syracufa  and  was  by  them  ertjorcedtofiiethc  Realmefb  as  beingtt  runnagate  having  no  means  to  live,hewent  to
Conmh^and  lived  there  a private  and  a mean  lije:  as  in  the  hfe  o/TymoIcon  tn  Plutarkc  is  fit  down  at  large,  and  is
very  well  worth  the  reading,  for  the  many  prettie  fayings  and  plcafant  fcofifngs  that  were  given  him,  andfome  retur-
ned ky  him  againe  : as  that  of  one  that  in  derifioncommtng  into  the  roome  where  Dionyflus  fat  (inablindtavcrn  orale-
houfe)Jhool{  bis  gown,  (ft  they  ufedtodo,that  came  to  the  prcfence  oj  tyrants, to  fl)ow  they  hadno  weapons  about  them )
tujh  faith  Diony  fius,  this  was  needlejfe  at  ymr  camming  in,  but  at  your  going  out  it  would  not  beamijfe,  to  fee  i'you
flealenothingwithyou  Tet  this  vertue  Tsionyriuihad,  (if  a tyrant  can  have  any  venue ) that  he  bare  bis  adverfity  not
only  patient  ly  but  even  pleafantly, which  is  furelyprai/e-wortly, according  to  that  I ffiahe  before  in  the  MoraU,not  lO  be
abajhed  with  evi/l  fortune, which  alfo  Diony  fius  himjelfe  confe^ed  he  had  gotten  by  Philofophy:  and  fire  it  is  a point
efgooiiourage  to  be  able  to  bcareadverfiiy, according  to  that  fay  ine  :

Fortitci  illcfacif,  quimifirr  cfTcpotcft.

0/' Marius  I need  not  fi>eal{  much, confidering  bow  largely  his  whole  life  is  fetdownin  the  forenamed  Plutarks  lives,
enely  Iwilladdaword  o/ Valerius  Uiximui  his  opinion  of  hisfortune.  Nothing  in  the  world  (faith  he)  could  be  more
variable  then  the  fate  oj  Marius.  Tor  ifyou  will  place  him  among  the  mfortunate,youJhaU  find  him  mofi  mtferable,  if
among  the  happy, you fJjallfind  him  m'of  fortunate.

Two  examples  are  atledged  by  mine  author  of  this  age.  Lewes  the  i * of  France,  and  Mathia  Corvino  of  Hungary.
Of  thefe  two  a word;  Charles  the  i hfing  of  France , conceiving  fome  dOfilea/iire  againf  the  'Du\e  of  Orleans  .father  ta
this  Levtes,cut  off  his  head,  and  was  in  fame  doubt  and  mammering  if  be  Jhouldnot  do  as  much  to  his  fonneyet  after  ma-
ny hard  adventures, it  was  his  hap  at  lafl  to  be  f^ing  of  France.

IdaihiaCox^inowas  hept  ihclofeprifonby  Vladiflaus^w^  ofHUngarie,  becaufc  his  elder  brother  had Jlaine  the
Earle  of  Cyglia,  unde  to  the  faid  l^ing ; but  the  king  cjytngyoung  and  without  ijfue,this  M ar  hia  Wi«  made  of  a prifoner
a Prince:  but  of  this  h}nd  offodaine  cbavge,our  Realrae  hath  one  example,  that  pajfeth  not  one'y  thefe, but  all  (I  thinly)
that  have  been  heard  of, or  writ  ten:  and  that  is  the  %teens  mof  excelhmt  Majefie  shat  now  is,  who  from  the  expedati-
onofa  mof  undeferved  death,  came  to  thepofiffmof  a mof  renowned  hjngdomc  ; for,  what  greater  extremitie
could  one  come  from?  or  what  greater  felicitie  might  one  come  to  ? She  that  was  fentjor  from  Ajhridge,with  comman-
dement  to  be  brought  either  alive  or  dead,  Jhe  that  was  committed  to  the  Tower  oJ  London,  Jhe  that  was  fa  often  and  fa
fira’ghtly  examined : Jhe  that  demanded  if  the  La/ty  lines  fiaffoldwere  tahyn  dawne.  doubting  to  play  on  the  fame
fitch  another  Pageant ; Jhe  that  doubted  murdering  if  her  t^eeper  had  been  an  ill  dipofed  man.Jfje  that  fent  wordtoher
fervants  that  came  to  ipiim  how  Jhe  did  (tinquitn  uvii:)  laflyfhe  thatwrate  in  thcw'tjidow  at  Woodfoilie  witha
'^'^‘^rnond:  Much  fufpefted  by  me,  ? ^ .

Nothing  proved  can  be.  5 ^ ^ ^


Became  of  tic  foJaine  a crowned  ^cene, with  greater  applaufe  then  either  Lewes  in  France, or  C orvino  in  Hungarie,
and  not  only  hath  raigned, hut  doth  raigne  mof  happily . ^iEwhichher  Highnejfe  troubles,  my  felf  have  the  better  caufe
to  remember, becaufe  the  fir f wor^  I did  after  I couldwrite  L itin,was  to  tranfate  thatfoiy  out  of  the  bool;  of  Martyrs
into  Latin.as  M. Thomas  Arundcll  and  Sir  Edward  Hobby  can  teli.who  had  their  parts  in  the  fame  tefshe,  being  then  imU
fcbotlers  in  Eaton  as  I was,  and  namely  that  laf  verfe  / remember  was  tranjlated  t

Plurimi  dc  me  malcifufpicantur,  *"»  »•  her

Atcamcn  de  me  mala  non  probanturi  Mapflie,

Elizabetha
caiccreclaufa.

And  thus  much  for  ex.mple  of  the  charge  of  fortunes.

/n  Endamants  fight  againf  Rogcto,we  may  feebow  ouropinion  hlindedwitbafalfefufiiticn,ftiveth  oftentimes  av
mof  vehemently  againf  that  it  would  be  loth  to  overthrow, if  it  were  rightly  informed.  fgonft

The  cruell  mind  ofTheodota  alludes  to  the  cruelty  of  another  Theodosa  wfe  to  luftlnianuij  who  a\]ua

thofe  CTuelties(thatthuiniendedagainf  Rogeso)upon PopeVigWm.  ^ A oa.

Here  end  the  notes  of  cbexly.book.

LU


THE  XLVI.  BOOKE,


^95


THE  ARGVMENT.

Leon  fearch  tiath  Kogcro  fitted,
tyfnd  having  learn*d  the  caufe  of  hu  annoy.
He  grants  to  him  hu  love  in  manner  ktnd,
whom  now  RogCro  fweetlj  doth  enjoy  i
Onely  the  Sarzan  king  wuhhatcfull  mtnd
Comes  to  diHurbe  Rogsros  eafe  and  joy,
Nathel'ffehe  it  deceiv’d  of  his  acconnt.

In  finef^oqzxo  kjls  fierce  Rodomounr.


I

Ovrif  mj  compafTcarKi  my
card  be  true,

lam  not  fat  from  that  dcH-
red  coft.

Where  I (hall  pay  my  tow
and  promifeduc
Vmo  my  Saint,  of  whofe
great  grace  I boft  .•

I looked  ctft  with  pale  and
cheatlcfTc  hue.

For  feare  in  this  wide  Ocean  to  be  loft.

But  now  me  think  I fcc,I  now  fccfurely
The  hav*Q,io  which  I harbor  (hall  fecurely.

a

Haik,hark,what  pcalsof  Ord'nance  great  and  Guns,
Are  (hot  in  token  of  congratulation.

Hark  how  they  (ound  the  Trumpets  and  the  Drums,
To  gratulatemy  happy  navigation;

See  how  on  cither  fliotc  the  people  runs.

To  fee  me  after  r»y  long  per’grination.

Behold  a acw  of  pterleftfc  knights  and  dames.
Now!  difeero  them,now  I know  their  names.

3

But  leaft  my  (hip  (hould  perifti  in  the  port.

As  oft  it  doth  befall  for  want  of  heed,

1 will  go  forward  in  my  fiift  report.

And  tell  to  you  how  well  the  Prince  did  (peed
That  (ought  ii«^erti,whoin  wofullfort
Did  pine  and  lanauifhcd,and  wifh’d  indeed,

Sitb  that  dame  Bradamant  he  might  not  marie,
Todic  all  comfurdciTe  and  folitaue*

4

But  fage  Mel^Jfa  that  had  ever  fought.

To  make  that  tnatch(as  often  bath  been  fed)


And  evermore  did  take  great  cate  and  thought;
Thatgoo>l  Rogero  Biadamant  might  wed,

By  her  great  skill  in  Magick  att  fo  wrought,

She  had  continuall  notice  how  they  fped  j
T wo  fprites  (lie  did  imploy  for  that  intent,

And  ftill  as  one  carnc  home, another  went.

5

By  them  flic  quickly  had  intelligetice.

How  he  had  tanc  fb  inward  grief  and  great.

He  tari’d  in  a wood  with  firm  pretence,

To  pine  himfclf  away  with  want  of  meat  t
Melyjfa  parteth  prcfcntly  fiom  thence.

And  wtthfotncfccrct  woids  ftic  did  repeat^

In  likcncfTe  of  a horfe  a fpiitc  (he  rook.

And  fo  me;  Leonyhzt  for  him  did  look.

6

And  thus  fhc  faid  to  him, fir, if  you  be

So  gracious,as  your  fcmblancc  makes  me  ween,

If  your  good  mirxi  with  your  good  looks  agree.

Iffo  you  have  not  loft  all  pitieclcen^

Come  then, 6 come  and  help,and  joyne  with  mC,

To  aid  the  braveft  knit,htthat  ere  was  feen,

Who  foronc  curfeous  part  that  he  hath  done,
(Except  you  hclp)is  like  to  be  undone.

7

The  noblcft,ftoutcft,and  the  proweft  knight.

That  ever  cari*d  fliicid.or  blade  form  drew.

The  feemlieft  and  moft  worthy  minded  wight.

That  ever  was  magc.oroldjOr  new.

It  like  to  pendi  in  moft  wofull  plight.

Except  he  may  relieved  be  by  you  i
Come  quickly  then  unto  his  aid  perdye.

And  fufferoot  fo  braye  a man  to  die.

L 1 } Bcr.


I


THE  XLVI.  BOOkE


Don  Lem  ftraight  Aippofcci  in  his  miodc,

That  this  fame  knight,of  whom  the  ftraoger  fpake, .
Was  hewhom  long  he  fought  and  cctild  netfindC)
And  hefoi  whom  fuch  care  himfcifedtd  take;
Mtlijfx  leads  the  wajtjhc  clofe  behind
Doth  follow  her,and  (bgood  (hift  they  make,'

That  in  fometwaine,  at  moft  io  three  hours ryding
They  came  there  where  Rogtrt  was  aisyding.

9

Now  being  at  the  place  to  which  they  haAcd,

They  both  alighted  there,  with  mindc  to  Hay:

There  fa  w they  how  hepindcaway  and  wafied^

For  in  two  dayes  before, not  all  that  day.

No  liquor  he  had  drunke,nor  meat  had  tafied.

But  in  his  armor  on  the  ground  he  lay,  <

And  made  a pillow  of  that  noble  fliecld.

With  th'Vnicornc  upon  vermillion  feeld.

10

Hereasifaid,  he  lay  along  and  muled
On  his  owne  miferie,and  on  that  wrong.

With  which  he  had  his  love  fo  much  abufed,

And  bites  for  gricfe,his  hands,and  lips,and  tong;
And  his  conceits,  and  wits  were  fo  confufed.

To  let  his  thoughts  upon  one  thing  fo  long.

And  having  on  his  griefe  fo  hrmely  h xt  them.

He  faw  not  them,  although  he  were  betwixt  then,

II

Den  Lean  batkned  to  his  lamentation.

And  heard  him  often  eall  hitnfelfe  unkind.

And  fa w him  vexe  himfclfc  in  fuch  a falhion.

As  unto  pittie great  his  heart  indind;

He  findsthat  lore  bred  all  this  molcHation,

But  yet  whofe  love  it  was  he  did  not  find.

He  heard  how  fundry  times  bimfelfe  he  blamed.

But  all  that  while  bis  love  he  ncrer  named.

IX

And  therefore  pitying  much  hit  wofull  cafe.

Although  awhile  he  lllentftood  and  mute.

Yet  after  flood  before  him  face  to  face.

And  with  great  loringncfTc  doth  him  falute.

And  with  affedion  great  doth  him  imbrace.
Intreating  him,and  making  fpcciall  fute.

That  he  would  tell  him  plaint, and  make  him  know,
Wbatcaufc  had  bred  him  fo  great  griefc  and  woe.

Jtogeraloth  tolive.refblv’d  to  dye,

Prayes  Lean  now  to  trouble  him  no  more.

But  he  meft  fwcctly  doth  to  him  reply,

That  God  hath  made  a faire  for  ev’ry  fore.

If  men  would  Icarne  the  fame  how  to  apply.

And  that  no  one  thing  may  araylc  man  more.

To  cure  a giicfe,and  perfedly  to  healc  it.

Then  if  he  do  unto  fome  fread  rercale  it.

, *4

And  fare  (faid  be)  I take  it  in  ill  parr,

Becaufe  you  tiuft  not  me,that  am  your  fiend.

Not  oncly.fince  with  yeur  late  frendly  part.

You  bound  me  unto  you, to  my  livcsend,

. But  was  ev*n  thcn,when  you  with  hatef ull  hart.

At  0r/gm<f!rfiege  did  me  and  mine  offend,

Thinkc  not  but  I will  Hill  procure  your  good.

Both  with  my  laodt,my  ftends.and  with  my  blood.


Why  fliould  it  grieve  you  to  declare  ycurgriefe.

To  one  that  may  perhaps  your  Ioffe  repayre:

Bad  haps  arc  hclpc  with  hope,ar.d  good  bcliefe,
Whereforea  wife  man  never  will  difpayrc;

1 hope  my  fclfc  fliall  bring  you  feme  relicfe.

By  force, by  poIicie,or  clfc  by  prayre.

When  all  mcanes  have  bene  trydc,and  all  hopepaft
Then  dye,at  Icafl  keepe  that  unto  the  laft-

16

Thcfc  words  fo  carncftly  Don  Lean  fpakc.

And  with  fuch  cfficacic  him  he  piaid,

Bcfceching  him,hi$  frendly  counfcll  take,
Thattothci  now,  with  kind neffe overlaid.

Was  forft  an  anfwcr  unto  him  to  make;

But  in  his  anlwer,fbdainty  he  flaid.

And  Hammcrd  twife,  ere  he  could  bring  it  out,
Defpairc  ftill  moving  him  to  cauflefle  dcu  bt.

17

Good  fii  (hcraid)  when  I my  name  fball  fhow.

As  I do  mcane,and  that  cv’n  by  and  by,

Yeu  will  be  then  full  well  content  I trow.

To  grant  me  leave  and  liberty  to  dye:

I am  Rogero  (if  you  needs  will  know)

That  went  from  France  (and  if  I flvsll  not  lyc)

M ine  arrant  was,your  flic  and  you  to  kill.

And  would  havcdooeit.had  1 had  my  will.

I S

And  all  becaufe  indeed  I then  fuppofed.

Your  only  Iife,did  let  me  of  my  love,
idan  purpofes,but  all  things  arc  difpofed.

By  that  great  Ged,that  fits  and  roles  above:

Behold  it  hapt  I was  in  piifon  clofed.

And  there  I did  your  noble  courtfle  prove.

For  there  you  did  me  fuch  a great  good  turnt,

As  all  my  hatred  into  love  did  turne.

19

And  having  bound  me  with  fo  great  defart.

And  ignorantjthat  1 Rogero  was.

You  did  y onr  fecrets  unto  me  impart.

And  praid  me  win  for  you, that  wailikelafle.

W bich  was  all  onc,as  to  have  atkt  my  haitj
Yet  loe  for  you,  I brought  the  fame  to  pafic.

Now  take  her  to  your  felfc, and  much  gooddoyouj
More  good  then  to  my  fclfc,!  wifb  unto  you,

20

But  yet  withall  fbrbid  me  not  to  dye,

Asnowl  truft  I niall,ercmany  boures.

For  live  as  well  without  a fbulc  can  I,

As  without  her, that  holds  my  vitall  powi'cit
And  furetisbefl  for  your  behoefe, for  wky
While  I dolive,  flic  is  not  lawfullyours,

Foi  we  two  arc  betrotht,andlawallowes.

One  woman,but  of  one  to  be  the  fpoufe.

21

Don  Leon  with  t hefe  newes  was  fo  accrazed.

He  feemed  in  a traunce,hc  knew  not  how^

And  on  Rogero  fledfaftly  he  gazed.

Nor  ever  moving  lip, nor  hand, not  brow,

Butlike  an  Image  long  he  Hood  amazed,

That  fome  hath  hallowd  to  perfornic  hU  vow.

This  a A of  his,fb  curtcous  he  doth  wcenc,

He  thinks  the  like  befort  had  ncvcjt  becae.

y*


Sinttwet,


itranct.


^97


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


t%

So  that  heJiJ  notfnrhen  he  knew  his  name)

Repent  him  of  the  good  he  had  him  done.

But  rather  greatly  did  increafe  the  fame,

Proceeding  in  the  coutfe  be  had  begun  ;

Wherefote  to  fhew  from-how  great  ftock  he  came.
And  that  he  was  indeed  an  Emperors  fonne  :
Although  in  other  things  he  was  inferiour.

In  curtcilc  be  means  to  be  fuperiour.

a|

And  thus  (be  faid)my  deaie  Rogers  know.

As  if  I well  had  known  your  perfbn.whcn
At  by  your  meant  I had  an  overthrow,

And  that  you  foiled  me  and  all  my  men  i
let  that  great  venue  chat  you  there  did  fhnw.

Should  cv*n  in  mannn  like  have  mov’d  me  then,

A nd  fo  I would  all  malice  have  remov’d ,

And  To  I would  vour  venue  great  have  lov’d.

*4

That  once  I did  dilT-.ke  Rogeroi  name.

Before  I knew  you  I muif  needs  confelTe,

But  that  1 now  continue  (hould  the  fame,

AlTure  your  fclf  I purpofe  nothing  IciTc  .*

And  if  when  firft  1 to  the  pnfoncame
To  let  you  free  from  danger  and  diArede,

1 known  had  all  the  truth, yet  then  I vow,

1 would  have  done  the  fame  1 will  do  now.

And  nircly,ifl  wouM  have  done  it  then.

When  1 had  reafon  to  have  born  you  hate.

Much  rather  now  I ought  todo  it,wbcn
KotdoingitI  (hould  be  mod  ungrate.

And  moft  unthankful!  of  all  other  men ;

Sith  you  your  IoTC,yoiu' 1 ife, and  whole  cAate
Have  freely  giv’n  for  mc,but  as  you  gave  it.

Of  me  againe  fo  freely  you  Hi  all  have  it.

More  duetoyouthenmetheDamfellis,

Whom  though  I much  aAcem  of  duedeftrt.

Yet  not  fo  much, that  if  I her  do  miffc,

Straightwayes  the  grief  thereof  fhould  kill  my  heart:
Nor  ihall  your  death  avantage  me  in  this,

Sitbyou  in  her  already  claime  fuchpart.

That  lawfully  whilcyou  abidcinlife.

She  can  by  no  meansbe  anothers  wife.

27

As  for  my  part, fir  A I will  quite  fnrfake
Both  her, and  all  my  worldly  joyes  befide,

Then  it  fball  once  be  (aid, that  for  my  fake
A noble  knight  of  fo  great  worth  had  di’d  t
This  only  thing  I could  unkindly  take.

That  you  that  had  before  my  kindnefietri’d.
Would  rathcrchufe  to  end  your  dayes  with  grief^
Then  at  my  hands  have  comfort  and  relief.

28

ThefewordiDon  Leon  fpake,and  many  more.

Which  now  would  be  too  tedious  to  recite.
Refuting  good  Roger o evermore.

That  in  conclufion  being  vanquifii'd  quite :
Hefaid,Iyeeld,and  IlerefiA  nomore,

I will  net  dic;  but  when  I fliall  requite
Your  currefie,that  twice  to  me  hath  given
My  life,when  1 to  grcateA  wo  was  driven.


19

Now  had  MeliJf<iC2\xM  to  be  brought

fiothcordiall  mcats,and  wines  ot  her  purvaying.

And  made  him  take  the  lamciwhn  now  with  thought
And  faAing  long  was  cv’n  almoA  decaying :
Misliorfc  likewifc(as  nature  hath  them  taught)
Came  where  he  heard  the  other  horfes  naying  i
Don  Leon  caus'd  his  lackics  him  to  get.

And  then  his  faddlc  on  his  hack  to  ^t.

, .

And  fo  Rogers  with  Don  Leons  aid.

With  much  ado  did  clammer  to  his  (ear,

So  greatly  was  bis  foimcr  Aiength  decaid,

With  which  he  overthrew  an  army  great ;

And  lately  did  witbAand  that  wailikc  maid.

So  weakly  weapon*d,as  I did  repeat ;

And  thus  with  all  convenien  t fpeed  they  mighf,

T hey  brought  him  to  an  Abbey  that  fame  night.

Where  all  the  night, and  thieedayes  that  enfew’d.

They  Aaid,and  had  of  ncedfull  things  good  Aorc,
Vntill  Rogers  bad  bis  Arength  renew’d.

Which  had  with  faAing  long  been  wcakned  fort*
Then  privily  among  them  they  conclude.

To  turn  to  ParM,whetcthc night  before
A few  Bulgdrians  came  with  an  cmbalfage.

And  this  was  all  the  fubAance  of  their  mefTage.

it

They  (aid  how  that  the  people  of  their  Nation,

To  whom  Rogers  late  (uch  aid  did  bring,

Beyond  all  hopc,beyend  allexpcftation.

Had  therefore  chofen  him  to  be  their  king  !
Rcjcding  all  their  own  kings  gencratioRt
And  all  hisroyall  race(nou^all  thine)

So  much  they  loved  hiro,(b  well  they  like  hint.

And  therefore  fent  to  Charles  bis  Court  to  feek  him.

S3

Rsgerss  lackey  that  had  been  their  guide.

Told  eke  his  maAeis  friends  how  he  had  fped.

As  namely  how  the  Creei^r  hedamnifi’d.

And  how  the  Bulgars  having  loA  their  bead,

Chofe  him  for  king, how  be  alone  did  ride,

To  Nsvengrade,  where  he  was  tanc  ia  bed.

And  unto  Tbesdsra  was  prefented.

Who  purpofed  to  have  him  fore  tormented.

34

And  how  he  heard  itcommonly  was  fpoken.

That  he  his  cruell  keeper  clofcly  Acw,

And  that  the  Prifon  gates  were  rent  and  broken.
And  he  was  gone, but  whither  no  man  knew  ;

Now  while  Ao^erox  man  fuch  things  did  open,
Aogero  clofcly  cut  of  all  mens  view.

Did  come  to  town,and  there  that  night  did  Aay,
And  he  and  Lean  came  to  Charles  next  day.

35

Dan  Lean  aim  in  arm  Regers  led,

(Thus  it  was  then  devifed  them  between)

With  that  (elfcoteand  arms  apparelled.

That  were  of  late  by  all  the  people  feen.

Then  when  dame  Bradamant  had  combated
With  Lean(ai  they  falfly  then  did  ween)

That  batter’d  fword,thar  coat,that  plume  all  tora^
That  hcadpeece  now  was  by  Rogers  worn.

LI  4 B;


3^8


THE  XLVI.  BOOKE


36

B j vrliich  each  man  ev’n  at  firA  (igbt  furmis'd.

This  wat  that  knight  thathad  the  Lady  wonj
Don  Leon  felf  bare  faccd^undifguij'd ^
f , Came  richly  clothcdjlikc  an  Emp’rorsfon«

And  with  retinue  not  to  be  d;elpis’d :

And  when  he  had  to  Charles  due  rcv’rence  donci
Rogeroby  the  hand  he  then  did  take.

On  whom  all  eyes  were  fixt^and  thus  he  (pake.

37

This  is  that  ftout  and  well  approved  knight>

That  did  with  Bradamant  fight  hand  to  hand.
Whom  fith  (he  never  took  nor  put  to  flight,

But  that  he  did  twelve  houres  her  force  withAand,
(MoA  worthy  fir)to  have  her  ought  of  right,
Ifyonredi  A we  rightly  under  Aand  .

And  therefore  now  accordingly  hecommetb.

To  lay  bis  ilaime  to  her,as  bcA  becommeth>

. 38

Befides  bit  right  by  proclamation  known.

That  juAly  doth  all  others  claime  debar,

I think  the  value  that  he  now  h^thihown.

Proves  his  fufficiency  in  feats  of  war:

If  love  may  win  her,fheisfurc  his  own.

His  love  to  her  doth  pafife  all  others  far  t
And  here  he  Aands  prepared  to  aver
By  law  or  force,tbat  be  hath  right  to  her.

39

King  Charles  and  all  bis  court  did  greatly  mufe
At  this.for  why  till  then  he  little  thought.

That  hebeforedid  thenafbmuchabufe.

But  that  bimfclf  had  that  fame  combat  fought :
This  while  Marjifa, ih»t  with  flying  oewes
Of  this  fame  Arange  report  was  thither  brought,
Scant  him  to  end  bis  fpeech  flic  would  permit,
Butprefently  this  wife  Hie  anfvrerdit.

40

Sith  now  Rogero  abfent  is  from  hence.

That  might  his  right  againA  this  knight  defend.
And  prove  that  this  is  but  a vainc  pretence,

Secaufe  the  Arife  fliall  not  fo  eafely  end;

I that  his  fiAer  am, in  his  defence.

And  in  defence  of  this  fame  caufe  intend.

To  fight  with  whomfbever  in  this  place,
AS'fhalldcay  histitlc,ordifgracc.

And  thefe  laA  words  fhe  fpaltc  with  fuch  difdaine.
That  fome  that  knew  her  nature(hafiy  ever)

Did  feare  (he  fcantly  would  ev’n  then  rcfraine,
But  without  leaveto  kill  him  Araighc  cndcvei :
How  Leon  thinks  it  beA  no  longei  fainc  j
And  forthwith  pulling  off  Rogeros  beaver,

Lo  here  himfclf  now  ready  prcA(hc  faid^

To  anfwer  all  fhall  to  his  charge  be  laid.

At

At  old  e/EgCM  at  his  curfed  boord
Amazed  fatc,to  find  bis fpoufes  wile.

When  to  his  fonne  flie  poyfon  did  afibord.

And  ifhelingred  had  alittle  while.

And  had  not  known  the  handle  of  his  fwotd
Had  kild  bis  (bnne  he  gat  by  Fithetu  guile  ;

So  Aood  Marfi/a  mazed  in  the  place,

Wbenas  Hic  faw  and  knew  Rogeros  face.


And  Araight  he  runs, and  on  his  neck  doth  fall,

And  long  it  were  ere  from  him  fhe  could  part
Renald  ,Orland»,Charles,3forethem  M *

Embraced  him,and  welcom’d  from  their  heart;

Good  T>udonyOliver,Wtth]oy  notfmall.

And  old  j'sfrina,  health  to  him  impart,

Eke  all  thcothcr  Lords,  andKnigbts,and  Squires
To  bid  him  welcome  lliew  moA  prompt  dcfircs.

44

Don  Leon  that  in  fpeech  was  eloquent,

When  cv’iy  one  had  done  hisgratulation.

Begins  to  tell  to  incontinent.

And  all  the  rcA,  Rogeros  commendation  ;

And  how  he  to  the  Bulgars  fuccour  lent,

(To  no  fmalldammagc  ef  the  Gretliijh  nation)

And  fhew’d  fuch  noble  courage  and  luch  foicc.

As  him  to  love  Rogerodtd  enforce.

4^

Soaswhen  he  was  after  taneand  brought
To  her  that  vow’d  with  toimciitshim  to  flay,

Himfclf  in  fpitc  of  hcr,tnd  all  that  fought
To  hurt /Jo^erOjbrought  him  lafcaway;

For  which  kind  part  of  Im  Rogero  tb&ugh:

Himfclf  fo  bound  to  him, that  he  laA  day
Did  him  that  curtcfic  that  lure  doth  paiTc
The  gteatcA  cuttcflc  that  ever  was.

Me  further  doth  from  point  to  point  declare
What  for  his  fake  Rogero  hath  atchicv’d.

But  after  this, with  anguifh  great  and  care.

The  Ioffe  of  his  bclov’d  fo  fore  him  griev’d.

As  he  to  pine  away  did  Araight  ptepair.

Had  not  his  fortow  been  in  time  reliev’d  :

All  which  fo  lufully  Don  Leon  fed.

Scarce  was  an  eye  but  tearcs  with  bhndneflc  (lied.

A7

Then  fpake  he  to  that  ob Ainate  old  man,

1 mcancDukc  Ammon  that  fane  Ladies  fire.

And  with  all  skill  and  Rhetoiick  he  can.

He  wooes  his  love,tnd  pacifies  his  ire .

That  by  entreaty  at  the  laA  he  wan
Himfclf  to  go  in  pcrfon,and  defire
Rogeros  paidon : praying  him  in  th’eod
To  take  him  for  his  fathcr-in»law  and  friend.

4*

This  while  to  Bradamant  the  joyfull  tiding
Was  quickly  bro«ght,by  mote  then  onercport.

Who  in  herchambci  ail  her  fortow  hiding,

Efehew’d  all  fblace,fhunning  all  lefoi t :

Whereby  the  blood  about  the  heart  abiding  *

Was  drawn  now  thence  in  fuch  a fbd  aine  fort.

And  this  unlock'd  for  joy  fo  ovetfild  her.

That  ey'n  the  fuddenneffe  had  aInv:>A  kild  her.'

49

Quite  fpeechlcirc,livclcflejfinking  to  the  ground,

(So  Atong  a qaalme  her  tender  heart  did  feel)

And  flic  in  whom  fuch  force  was  lately  found.

For  want  ofArrngthdid  here  and  tbitherreci}

But  nev’r  did  thief  with  hands  to^  ether  bound,  Umik.

Condemned  to  the  rope, the  axe,or  wheel.

And  blindfold, looking  ev'ty  hoiire  to  die,
loy  more  to  hearc  fome  mao  a pardon  crie.


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO,


The  houfes  ofMongrane  and  Montalbane,

Rejoyce  at  thefe  their  branches  newly  knit.

But  by  Magan\a comfovt  fmall  is  tane,

Forin  their  hearts  they  forrie  were  for  it  s
Anfdmut, Falcon  fiytutmutjtni  Gant,
Diiremblingyct  their  thoughts  with  crafty  wit  s
But  for  a time  off  engea  nee  they  do  watch,

> As  doth  the  Fox  the  hurtleflc  Hare  to  catch.

S«

Befide  old  cjuarrelsand  their  ancient  bate.

New  mattersdone  of  late  did  themdifplcafe,
Although  the  king  and  wife  men  of  the  ftasc,

For  common  cjuiet  did  the  fame  appeafe :

The  death  of  ^iwfceii^oflaine  but  late.

And  Bcrtolage  did  much  their  minds  difeafe  ;

Yet  now  in  fhew  they  do  diflcmble  deep.

And  clofein  mind  they  do  their  malice  keep.

S*

In  this  meanc  time  th*Ambafladouis  that  came
T G Charles  his  court  by  thofe  Bulgarians  fent,
Rejoycing  now  that  things  fb  well  did  framej
In  humble  manner  to  Rogero  went ;

And  did  falute  him  king, as  in  the  name
Ofall  their  countrimen  incontinent.

And  fo  accordingly  did  lowly  greet.

Their  new  made  Piince,and  kneeled  at  his  feet.

53

They  told  him  how  their  Scepter  and  their  Crown
Was  fafely  kept, alone  for  his  behoof.

In  Adrianopolis  their  chkfeft  town  ;

And  for  they  knew  by  many  a former  proof,

That  Confiantino  ftrave  to  keep  them  down.

They  pray  him  not  to ftay  fo  far  aloof  j
Affirming  boldly  that  if  he  were  there.

The  forces  of  all  Greece  they  would  not  feare.

54

Rogero  grantet  h them  their  juft  requeft,

And  promis’d  to  defend  them  from  the  Gree/^r,

And  vowes(if  God  permit)to  do  his  beft.

To  be  with  them  within  fomc  thirteen  weeks  ;

But  Leon  bids  them  fet  their  hearts  at  reft.

He  tels  them  that  their  choice  fo  well  he  likes.

He  on  bis  Princely  woid  will  undertake,

' ’Twixt  Confiantine  and  them  firm  peace  to  make.

IJ

Thus  each  thing  framed  now  in  Co  good  forr,

A s could  be  wifh  t by  thought  or  by  device.

But  neither  did  Ro^erof  good  report.

Get  favour  with  ambitions  BeamVe,

Nor  perfbnage  that  paft  the  common  ibrt.

Nor  feats  of  armes.in  which  he  wan  the  piuc  5
tuki  in  ibt  And  of  the  which  all  Europe  now  doth  ring,
wuul.  But  onely  this  to  fee  him  made  a king.

56

In  royall  fort  this  manage  they  prepare,

( Whofe  charge  it  was, the  ftate  will  make  it  known)
Charles  bare  thecharge,and  took  thereof  fuch  care.
As  if  (he  were  a daughter  of  his  own ;

Of  her  and  hers  fo  great  the  meritsare.

And  had  to  her  Co  many  wayes  been  (hown  {

Me  thought  thecoft  had  not  exceeded  meafHre,

Ifbe  had  ipent  upon  them  half  his  ucafurc.


He  kept  an  open  com  t by  proclamation.

Where  nine  dayes  fpaee,who  hft  may  freely  haiinr,

Wen  of  their  own,and  men  of  forren  nation.

To  all  of  them  hcdidfafccondu^f  grant;

And  all  that  ftaod  upon  their  reputation,

T hat  fought  their  forsm  lingic  fight  to  daunt.

Had  licence  frank  to  challenge  whom  they  lifls,
Forevcimore  prepared  were  the  lifii.

58

In  open  fields  they  pitched  tent  sgreat  ftnrc,

Befide  with  Oken  boughs  they  made  fuch  bowres,

Strawing  t he  pavements  of  them  evermore.

With  fragrant  Rofesand  rwcctfmclling  flowres  j
That  never  had  the  like  been  feen  before.

Nor  never  fince,from  that  famcage  to  ours;

Befides  the  furnitures  of  filk  and  gold.

Was  moic  then  can  conveniently  be  told.

59

Tb’innumcrable  people  of  each  fort,

From  Greece,f:om  England, Italy, ond  Spaine,
Th’Ambaffadoiitsthat  thither  did  refort,

Befide c.ich  fererall  Prince  a feverall  traine.

Did  caufe  the  city  walls  to  feem  too  fliorr.

To  lodge  them  alI,fo  they  in  fine  were  faine
In  hovcls,booths,in  tents, and  in  pavillions.

To  lodge  fome  thoufands,if  1 fay  not  millions,

£0

Onely  Melijfasezte  was  to  forefte,

The  marriage  chamber  ftiould  be  well  attyr’d.

Which  by  her  skill  ffiemeant  ffiould  furniffit  be.

For  long  to  make  the  match  fhe  had  afpir’d  :

Which  now  that  fficaccomplifficd  did  fee.

She  thought  flie  had  the  thing  flic  moftdefir’d  1
For  by  her  skill  in  magick  ffie  did  know
What  paffing  fruit  forth  of  thatbiancb  ffiould  g.ow.

Wherefore  fhe  plac’d  the  fruitfull  wedding  bed
Amid  a faircand  large  pavilIion,which
Was ev’n  the fumptuofeft  that cre was fpred.

Of  filk  and  beatengold  wrought  cv’ty  ftitch  .*

And  more,from  over  Conflantinos  head.

At  Tkracyan  ffiore, where  he  his  tents  did  pitch
Faft  by  thcfea.forhismorerecieatiwn.

She  took  the  fame  to  his  great  admiration.

6Z

Were  it  that  Leon  gave  confent  thereto,  '

Or  that  file  did  t he  fame  her  skill  to  vauar,

Toffiew  whatoneby  Magick  art  can  do.

That  have  the  skill  the  fiends  of  hvll  to  daunt :

(For  what  cannot  their  power  atchieve  unto.

When  for  our  plague  God  leave  to  them  will  grant?)

From  Thrace  to  Farts  in  twelvehoures  it  tame,

I trow  fticfenionc  inthedivelsname.

63

She  caus’d  it  to  becari’d  atnooneday
from  Confiantino  Emp’ror  then  of  Greece,

The  beam,thc  ftaves.t  he  cords  they  brought  away.

The  pins,the  hoops,and  cv'ry  littlepccce  ;

She  placed  it  whereas  ffie  mtant  to  Jay

Atlantas  Nephew, with  his  new  made  Neecc  ; V/.

In  this  pavillion  ffie  did  place  their  bedding,

And  fent  it  back  when  finiffit  was  the  wedding,

Two


Thu  fiAita
ejfuvtlhutt
uutuha
(tfif  nto
fru'lt  Hip,
ptUt;


I


THE  XLVI.  BOOKE


400


«4


Ort,Jti  ]uf»
Jtt^onun-
quim  crtdi^
M Ttitcrit.


Picttiu  U»kt

in  the  table.


Two  thoufand  yeare  before, or  not  much  Icfle,

This  rich  pavillion  had  in  been  wrought.

By  fairc  Cdjfandrn  that  fame  Prophetefle,

That  had'butall  in  vaine)in youth  been  taught.

Of  futuie  things  to  give  nioft  certaine  guefle.

For  her  true  fpeech  was  ever  fet  at  naught  :
Shewrought  this  famCjwithhelp  of  many  other,

And  gave  it  Hcffor,het  beloved  brother.

«5

Hifptlite  cf  The  worthieft  wight  that  evVmandid  behold,
HeHtrtract.  That  (hould  proceed  forth  of  his  noble  line,

She  here  porirayd  in  work  of  filk  and  gold.

Of  precious  fubftance,ard  of  colour  fi  nc  ;

Alfo  the  time  and  fcafon  was  foietold,

Boi  h of  his  birtb,and  of  his  piaifc  divine  .*

Don  Hedor  of  this  gift  great  count  did  make,

Both  for  the  work  and  for  the  workers  fake.

66

But  when  himfelfc  by  tteafon  foule  w as  flainc,

And  Try/ was  by  thcGreei^f  defaced  quite.

Who  enterd  it  by  Synons  fubtill  traine,  /

And  worfe  enfew’d  thereof  then  Poets  write:

Then  Menelam  did  this  great  rclick  gainc.

And  after  on  king  Proteui  hapt  to  light.

Who  gave  to  him  dame  Helen  ere  he  went.

And  for  reward  receiv’d  of  him  this  tent.

«7

And  thus  to  at  that  time  it  came,

Where  with  the  Ptolomeys  it  long  remain’d.

Till  Cleopitra  that  lafcivicus  dame
As  by  inheritance  the  fame  obtain’d  :
yigrippas  men  by  Tea  then  took  the  fame,

What  time  in  Rome  Augufitu  Ctfar  raign’d  t
And  then  tn  Rome,  while  Rome  was  th’Einpires  feat.
It  flaid  till  time  of  Conflantine  the  great.

6%

That  weshe  ■phat  Emp'ror  Conftantine  I mean, of  whom

* Fairc  Italy  for  ever  fliall  lament.

Who  w hen  he  lothcd  T ibrii  banks  and  RonUy
Vnto  the  city  o\  By\antium  went,

A place  of  more  receipt  and  larger  roomc.

And  thither  this  pavillion  then  he  fent :

Of  which  the  cords  were  golden  wyre  and  filk.

The  flares  and  pins  were  I v’ric  white  as  milk.

In  this  wrought  fuch  divers  faces.

More  then  Apelles  erft  with  penfill  drew,

A quern  in  child'bed  lay, to  whom  the  graces
With  pleafant  grace  perform’d  Lucynas  dew  ;
Iove,Mercuric,»t\d  Mars  in  other  places.

And  Venus  do  receive  the  babe  born  new  ;

The  fweeteft  babe  that  to  the  world  came  forth.
From  mans  firfl  age,cv’n  down  unto  the  fourth.

70

Hippolito  thetf  namehim,asappearcs

Wrote  in  fmall  letters  on  hisfwathing  bands,

And  when  he  is  a little  grown  in  yearcs;

On  one  Ode  fortune, tother  vertue  flands.*

Then  in  another  pifture  divers  Peeres,

Clad  in  long  raiments, fent  from  forren  lands.

Veto  the  fat  her  and  the  mother  came,

To  beg  the  babein  great  Corvinos  name.


71


that  gave
Rtaitelh*

Pft.


The  I agt

ield.

The  tfiUep.
Tbeibrafe.
Tbe^irett,


Thife  were

Mmbejfa-

flat  I fent  if

^trvinote

bring  Hipfi.

litaltHuM.

gmit.


They  part  from  Mercies  with  great  re  v’rcncc  then.

And  from  thatinfants  mother  £/i«orr,

Vnto  TJanubia  ward,  and  there  the  men
Still  run  to  fee  that  infant  and  adore  .*

Alfo  the  king  Cornua,  wonders  when
He  fawinhtm  both  wit  and  judgeircnt  more,

In  thofc  his  tender  childifTi  y cares  and  giccn.

Then  many  times  in  older  men  had  been.

7S

One  doth  endeavour  in  hischildifli  band,

Of  the  Strigonian  Rcalmc  to  piic  ihc  mace.

But  evermore  the  tender  youth  doth  flaiid
So  high  in  that  fame  noble  Princes  grace.

That  if  he  war  in  manly  Almansfindj,

Or  in  the  T url^s  or  any  other  place ;

Hippoltre  is  ever  by  his  fide.

And  Icarneth  vertue  under  fuch  a guide,

Another  plate  fli ewes  how  h e d or  h d i fpence.

His  youtlifull  time  in  difciplinc  and  art,

Tiifio  inflrudls  him  in  the  hidden  fence
Of  ancient  writs,and  precepts  doth  impart.

What  adions  praife,what  a^Iions breed  offence.
What  be  rewaid  of  good  and  ill  defert :

All  which  the  pifluic  did  fo  well  exprefle.

That  at  the  meaning  cv’ty  one  might  guefle.

74

Lo  where  as  yet  a boy  inVatican

Among  the  gravell  Card’nals  he  doth  fit.

And  fpeaks  fo  wifely  that  they,  all  began
To  wonder  at  histowardnefle  and  wit  j
What  manner  man(if  once  he  were  a man)

Would  this  man  prove  ? for  Peters  ebaite  how  fit  ?
They  feem  to  fayj  oh  if  he  thither  clime.

What  holy  age  were  that?  what  happy  time  ?

75

Within  another  partdeferibed  were

His  youthfuli  fportSjwhen  he  more  flrong  did  grow
Oft  in  the  mountaineshedotb  meet  a Beare,

Oft  times  a Bore,in  uiarifli  grounds  and  low  :

He  tides  his  Genet  ficrce,aiid  void  of  feare,
Hechafethoftthe  Buck,thc  Hart  and  Roe,

And  by  hisborfcfwift  pace  doth  over-ride  them.
And  then  doth  with  his  fwoid  in  twatnc divide  then.

76

Of  Poets  thcn,aiid  of  Philofophcrs,

About  him  you  fliall  fee  a worthy  band,

To  make  him  know  the  courfeof  vvandring  flats,
How  heav’n  dothmovc,&  why  the  earth  doiliflanJ,
Or  reading  of  Elcgics,or  verfe  of  wais.

Fine  Epigrams,Odcs  hard  to  underfland  :
Orfomtime  inftrumcnisof  Mufick  hearing.

In  all  hisafisa  fpociali  grace  appearing.

77

Then  on  another  part  waste  be  view’d
His  vertuesjcacn  one  by  it  felfdiftinfh,

Firft  Prudcnce,Temperancc,and  Fortitude,

And  juflice,and  a fift  unto  them  linkt
So  nigh,that  who  with  It  isnotindcw’d.

The  reft  may  feem  or  blottcd,or  extinft ;

Good  bouniy,fhew*d  in  giving  and  in  fpending,

A fpecu{l  grace  to  all  the  other  lending.

One


faftef.fml*

rrtafterta

Uiffakiat


ir^:mheit9
made  a

dimS,


OfhhaBi-

viue.


Of  hi*

and  cga^gMj


hie  vtntttM


Hit  leustf.


/


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


<}0I


7*


Hit  trut
/rei$dl>jip.


Hit  ctrt»f
hit  (euittrtt.


Fattrpatrit,


his  expl.is
in  varit.


C^fars  tear  is

vtm,vtin

vicL


This  one  place  flicwes  he  aids  vnluckic  Sforfi,

Him  cuermo.c  mod  faithfully  ainfting,

Sometime  »vitlj  policic,  fomctinie  with  force.

Him  helping, and  hiscnemiesicfiding  :

Of  Fortuncschange  hedoth  but  little  force,

In  woe  and  wcale,  inonc  faith  dill  perfiding  :

He  comforts  him  when  euill  hapsdogiicuc  him,
Indangers  hedoth  faue,  in  want  rclieuehim.

79

Then  dands  he  dudying  at  a nothei  feafon.

And  for  his  countries  fafetie  taking  care.

He  fcarchcth,and  he  finds  by  depth  of  rcafbn.

And  finding,  to  his  brother  doth  declare
Their  mod  vnnaturall  and  filthy  treafon.

That  fomcof  hisownc  blood  for  him  prepaire.

By  which  hedoth  defeiue  luch  name  tohaue.

As  Rone  yet  free,  to  famous  T ully  gauc,

8o

Fad  by  he  dands  all  clad  in  armour  bright.

And  to  rclicuc  the  Church  he  runs  in  poft,

With  fodaiuefouldiers,raw  and  armed  light,

Againd  a fctled  and  wel  ordicdhod;

Yttdid  hisoncly  prefence  fo  affright
The  adverfe  part,  that  one  may  rightly  bod,
Itqucncht  thefire,ere  it  to  burne  began.

So  he  may  fay,  / came,  1 fawj  wan.

8 1

Here  dands  he  by  his  natiue  nuers  fide.

And  draight  encounters  with  the  dronged  fieete,
That  eucT  yet  Venetians  did  prouide,

Caind  Greci^e,  Turf^e,but  hedoth  boldly  meet.
And  ranquiflit  themjand  took  them  at  one  tide.

And  though  the  bootie  and  thegaine  was  fweet.
All  (faue  the  praife)  he  left  vnto  his  brother.

For  only  that  cannot  begiu’n  another.

Thus  this  Pauillion,  as  before  I told,

The  which  Melijfa  brought  fo  far  from  thence.

Did  pleafc  the  knights,  and  dames  that  did  behold
The  goodly  imag’rie,  and  rich  ex  pence ;

Although  they  had  not  any  to  vnfold
The  meaning  of  the  fame  and  hidden  fcnccj
But  yet  by  good  Melijfas  wife  indruflion
Dame  Bradamant  did  know  their  whole coftruftion.

Rogert  markt  liktwife  with  great  attention,

T hofe  goodly  figures  calling  to  his  minde.

That  oft  his  vnckle  of  that  Prince  made  mention,
Hippolito  the  flnwrc  of  all  his  kinder
But  now  king  Cfcar/er,  whole  care  is  and  intention.
To  giue  to  all  men  enrertainmenr  kindc.

Made  playes  and  feads  with  fundiy  fports  and  great,
Andeucrmorc  the  tables  fild  with  meat-
84

There,  men  might  plainly  fee  and  vnderdand.

The  courage  and  the  drength  of  eu*rie  knight.
Sometimes  in  fingle  wife,  now  band  to  band,

In  iuds,  and  turnaments  refembling  fight.

But  dill  Rogeroy  had  the  vpper  hand,
Inallhisexercifeofday  and  night:

In  leaping,  running.  Wradling,  and  in  dancing,

All  men  him  farabouethc  red  aduancisg.


if


But  on  the  lad  of  thefc  dayes  feftluall,

Then  when  to  take  away  they  did  prouide.

What  rime  king  Charles  walet  amid  them  all,

Eu'n  lud  bccwccnche  Bridegroomcand  the  Bride,
Behold  they  faw  a goodly  man  and  tall.

That  feemd  direflly  toward  1 hem  to  tide.

Mod  proudly  mourned  on  a courfrrs  b.ickc,

But  yet  hts  hoifc  and  he,  all  clad  in  blacke.

86

This  was  fierce  Rodomorit yking  of  Algyre,

Wheat  hishte  rcccned foilc, and  iconic
Of  BraJumaut,  inflam'd  with  fpire and  ire.

All  vfeof  hoilc  and  armor  had  foilwornc.

Till  one  whole  ycarCjOnc  month, oneday  expire.

But  liuc  that  while  an  Hermit  all  foilnrne;

For  foihc  knights  were  wont  in  ancient  times.

Of  thcitownclclucs,topunifh  their  owne crimes.

87

And  though  this  while  he  oft  had  notice  how

King,  yigramant,  and  how  king  Cbar/er  had  fped.

Yet  nathclcfTc  for  not  breaking  of  his  vow,

Forth  of  the  doores  he  neuer  put  his  hed  ;

But  when  the  yeare  and  month  were  ended  nowy
And  day  befidc,  himfelfc  he  furniflied,

With  armour  new,new  horfc,  new  fword,new  lance.
And  came  therewit  h vnto  the  court  ef  France.

88

Not  once  allighting'nor  fo  much  as  lifing.

For  rru’rcncc  fake,  to  bow  his  head  o>  knee,
Hebarethecount’nance  of  a man  derpifing
Both  CharleSyand  ail  thofc  feeres  of  great  cegree;

At  this  each  man  amazed  dandsdeuifing,

What  proud  and  fawey  fellow  this  might  be,

From  talking  and  from  eating  each  man  dayes.

To  hearken  what  this  loftie  warricr  fayes.

89

Now  when  he  waste  th*  Emp’ rot  come fbnyc.

That  he  Rogero  fully  did  confront.

With  datcly  voice,  and  withdifdainfullaie,

(He  faith)  I am  the  kingofi’dr^a  Rodemont,

That  thee  Rogero  daily  here  defie.

And  ere  theSunne  go  downe  make  full  account.

To  prouc  thou  had  bene  falfe  vnto  thy  Prince,

And  openly  of  treafon  thee  conuincc.

90

For  though  thy  trechery  be  knownefo  cleare.

In  being  Chrifinedythoxi  cand  not  deny  it.

Yet  that  to  all  the  world  it  may  appeare,

1 ofFct  here  in  fingle  fight  to  trie  ft :

Or  if  thy  courage  fade,  if  any  here

Will  take  on  them  thy  quairell, to  fupply  it,

1 will  acceptof  any  one  ormoie,

Ycaiiot  tofaile,of  fix  or  halfc  a fcore.

91

Rogero,  when  he  fird  had  licence craued
Of  Charles,  this  wife  to  Rodomont  replidej
(And  faid)  he  cuerhad  hishonouiTaued,

And  who  10 faid  contraric  lowdly  lidci
For  he  had  to  his  Prince  himfelfc  behaued.

Mod  loyally  cu*n  to  the  day  he  diJes
And  faid  be  there  was  rcadic  to  mainratnc,

That  yee  his  faith  bad  neuer  fuderd  dain.

And


Thnt  tens  »>s
tbt


THE  XLVI.BOOKE


SimUt,


Smen:e.


Stwitnct.
1.(1  rts  foiU'
ftu  plena
I imm>  am»r


itniit.


401

91

And  that  himfclfc  was  bold  enough  and  ftrong.

With  him  to  buckle  hand  to  hand  alone,

And  that  he  hop'tto  make  him  feelc  etc  long.

He  had  enough  perhap  too  much  of  one ;
Straighiwayes  Kenaldo  to  aueng  this  wrong,
Orlando,  and  the  Marquis  would  haue  gone,
with  the  brothers  white  and  blacke.

And  ‘Dudon  would  been  the  Pagans  iackc.

93

AlleJgingjthat  fith  he  was  newly  mari’d.

For  him  to  fight,  it  was  againft  all  tfe.

But  from  their  fpcechcs  his  opinion  vaii*d.

And  fwears  chat  that  for  him  wasnoexcufc »

Thole  aimes  that  erft  the  famous  Farrar  cam*d,
He  takes,  nor  Will  he  make  onehourcof  trufci
To  arme  him,  allthofe  dates  their  aids  afford.

King  Charles  himfelfe,  holpc  to  put  on  his  Iword.

94

His  wife  takes  cate  his  Curats  well  may  fit,

Orlando  tycs  his  fpurtes,  Marfifa  bold
Doth  fad  vpon  his  head  his  beaver  knit,

^y?oi/o  is  content  his  horfe  to  hold  r
His  dinop,  'Dudon}  othersthinkc  if  fit,
Toridthelvds  and  driucout  yongaad  old:
RenAdo,  Namui,  Oliaer,  take  charge
To  martiall  it,  and  make  it  cleare  and  large.

95

Faire dames  and  dam  zelsdand  with  lookes  difmaid,

, Withfeare  and  trembling,like to  fcaifull Doties.
Who  fome  biackc  teped-bringing  cloud  hath  fraid.
And  diiu’n  from  fields,  to  flirowd  in  houfes  rooucs  .*
(Downcfals  the  hade  with  which  the  come  is  laid.
And  profitlefTc  vnto  his  owner  proues)

So  do  they  this  fierce  Pagans  forces  fcare.

Which  furcthcyiudgCjKqgero  cannot  bcare.

96

Nor  onely  do  faint  people  fofurmife.

But  many  knightsof  worth,  thefamedid  weeue,
That  cald  to  mind  what  erd  before  their  eyes.

To  their  giicfe  they  had  in  Parrr  feene:

When  he  with  fire  and  fwoid  in  fearfull  wife.

Did  welny  fpoile  the  towne,  and  wad  it  clcane;

Of  which  the  wofull  fignes  did  dill  appeare.

And  Would  rcmainc  yet  many  a month  and  yearc.

97

But  Bradamant  mote  featd  then  all  the  red.

Not  that  (lie  thought  in  drength  or  skill  well  tride,
The  pad  herfpoufc,BOi  raliant  bred.

Or  that  he  had  more  reafon  of  his  fide,

( Which  vnto  viftoric  availes  not  lead,

When  men  by  combat  quarrels  do  difcide)

Yet  dill  her  minde  is  fad,  her  lookes  vnchcarfull.

Nor  blame  her  though,for  louc  is  eucr  fearfull.

98

Great  fuit  flic  makes,  great  labour  to  procure.

That  vpon  her  flic  may  the  quarielltake,

Yea  ifto  haue  bene  flainc  flic  had  bene  fine.

To  faueh;rfpou(c,butaIl  in  vaine  die  fpakc:

The  champions  now  their  lances  put  in  vre.

And  each  with  couched  fpearc  the  tothcr  drake;

The  daucslikelfcin  Olivers  fmall  did  flic.

The  fplints like  Wids  did  mount  vnto  the  skie.


99

The  Pagan  that  his  lance  did  full  dire^,

Againd  the  middle  of  Fo^erof  fhccld,

Didfmite  on  it  tofmallor  none  tfTcA,

For  Vulcan  had  the  fame  mod  firmly  decide
The  tothers  Targctjiad  no  knownedefeft,

Yettofhc  drokeitdid  a pafTage  yeeld;

Yet  wasitthickc  a quarter  ofa  footc
Of  bone,  and  lindc  with  plated  deelc  to  boot.

1 00  •

j\ndfaucthe  lance  fudained  not  the  blew.

But  at  the  fird  did  break  and  was  difpeifcd.

So  that  the  pieces  of  it  feem'd  in  fhovv,

To  haue  beenc  feathered  foulcs  (as  I rehcaifcd,)

That  droke  had  finiflicd  that  drife  I trow.

And  bad  his  Curats  and  hisbodic  pearced  :

But  now  it  brake,  and  bothgaue  drokes  Tofousd,

As  made  both  horfes  cruppciskide  the  ground.

1 01

The  riders  nearethc  Icflc  fate  firmc  and  dedie.

And  laboured  fo  well  with  fpuirc  and  raine.

Their  hotfcswerc  gotvp  on  footealrcadic.

The  men  to  fight  addrefle  thcmfclucsagainc
With  fwordsjthcii  horfes  both  were  drongc  & redk
And  each  with  skill  fome  vantage  fought  to  gainc.

And  where  they  thought  their  armors  were  mod
With  force  they  draue  to  pierce  5c  enter  in,  (ihin„

1 01

Fierce  Rodomonr  had  not  thatSerpentshide
He  vfd  to  wcarCjBoi  yet  that  fliauing  blade.

That  he  was  wont  to  carnc  by  his  fide,

For  Nimrod  his  great  anccdoi  fird  made;

He  lod  thofc  aimcs,  and  many  more  befide,

Then  when  as  Bradamant  did  him  invade.

At  that  fiime  church,  where  he  a twelvemonth  llnce,

Entombed  /rM/,  with  that  pcctlefTc  Prince.

lOi

He  bad  another  armor  good  andfure.

But  not  like  that  fo  padiiig  tough  and  hard.

But  neither  this,  nor  any  clfe  could  dure,

Againd  the  piercing  edge  of  BAlifard:

No  mixtu-  c fiich,  no  mctall  was  fo  pure.

No charmc  fo  drong,  but  that  this  blade  tlic  mird*

RogcTo(o  bedurd  him  with  this  blade,  -
More  then  one  hclc,  in  tothers  coatc  he  made,

104

Now  though  a little  while  the  Pagan  c\oVes
His  hurts  rccciu’d,  with  vnappalcd  minde.

Yet  when  be  faw  his  blood, and  felt  the  drokes
So  f'Tiart,that  ftill  they  feem*d  the  quick  to  findc:

Tofo  great  wrath  and  rageit  him  prouokes,

Eu’nlike  the fea  turmoyld  with  bludiing  windc,

He  hurlesavvay  his  fliicid,  and  doth  endeucr.

With  both  his  hands  to  clcaucife^em  beaucr.
los

With  force  as  g'cat  he  drikes, and  as  exticame,  SiniV.

Asdofb  thatenginin  the  RiuerPoe,  TbtlUtugi

Borne  twixt  two  fhippes  vp  in  the  dately  dreame,

Enforcing  downe  with  many  a hcauic  bloc,  *

Some  piece  ofrimber.or  fome  fharpned  bcamc:

I fav  the  Pagan  fmote  Rogero  fo,

Had  not  fb-  charmed  helmet  bene  of  force,

He  doubtlcdc  would  haue  clou’a  him  & his  horle.

Rogert


OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO.


Ic?<

Rogero  fitteth  daggering  in  his  feat,

His  hand  the  btidiclcft^histhighes  their  hold,
Rodomont  giucs another  blow  as  great.

To  maze  him  more  by  all  the  mcanes  he  could;
And  laft  a third,  but  now  he  To  did  beate
His  blade  of  mctial  free,  it  would  not  hold.

But  burft  in  twaine,with  his  continual!  hatnntcring,
And  left  the  Pagan'inno  little  tnammeiing,

107

But  yet  fonhistheT'ar^edoth  not  refraine.

But  ftill  inuades  the  knight  that  wantsdefence,
Sohad  the  blow  amaz’d  his  head  and  braine,  '

So  dazed  had  the  blow  his  witt  a nd  fenfe:

The  minds  to  waken  himagame,

Fitft  he  doth  clnfe  with  him,  and  fofrom  thenee.
Wringing  him  by  the  necke  with  all  hit  force,
Tolcauc  the  faddle  he  doth  him  inforce.

loS

He  felli  bat  yet  the  ground  he  touched  fcanr.

But  he  that  rofe, inflam’d  with  wrath  and  fliamei
For  looking  vp,  he  faw  faire  Bradamant,

Whofc  bluHi  did  fJiew  how  ill  Hiecrooke  the  lame;
Tcacu’nof  founding  flit  did  little  want.

And  ftill  hci  fainting  colour  went  and  camcj
Which  fccnc,  iio^ere  with  his  fwoid  intends.

For  this  fo  great  difgrace  to  make  amends.

109

The  Pagan  with  his  horfe  would  ouer-runne  him.
And  lullleshim.buthe  with  little paine.

Doth  (Icp  a(ide,and  warily  doth  (hunne  him.

And  with  his  left  band  takes  the  horfesrainet
( So  as  the  Turtle  thereby  no  hurt  hath  done  him)
The  while  he  puts  in  ure  his  fword  againe.

And  with  two  thiufls,he  did  the  Pagan  haime.

One  in  hit  thigh,  another  in  hisarmc,
no

Thcrari^e  withwhomapcccedid  yet  remaine.

Of  that  fame  blade  that  was  in  pieces  flownc,
Smote  on  Rogeros  headpiece  fo  againe,

A t had  wcll-oy  againe  him  ouetthrowne  :

But  good  Regero  now  perceiuingplaine.

His  vantage  that  was  ctft  to  him  vnknowne.

Takes  him  by  his  left  arme  with  all  his  force
And  (will  he  Bill  he)  puls  him  from  hit  horfe.

Ill

Were  it  his  ftrength  or  flight,!  cannot  tell.

But  fo  he  fell,  no  ods  was  them  betweene,

My  meaning  isthatonhis  feetehe  fell.

For  in  the  fword  s,/f(jgerof  odds  was  feene:

Rogero  that  did  know  his  vantage  well.

To  keepe  him  now  at  bay  hit  beft  doth  weencj
It  is  not  bell  for  him  hedotbruppofe.

With  fuch  a flrong,and  big  bon’d  man  to  clofe*

lit

He  further  faw  what  ftore  of  blood  he  fpilt.

So  now  he  hopes  by  warily  proceeding,

To  force  hit  foe  to  yecld,and  Icaue  the  tilt,  ding  :
Whofe  flrengthdecaid.flillmore  flt  more  with  blec-
The  Tur/^e  then  takes  the  pomell  and  the  hilt
Of  hiiowaefword,and  with  force  fo  exceeding
Did  hurle  the  fame,  be  fmotc  the  knight  fo  fore.

He  Auqd  Jum  more  then  cu’r  he  was  before.


HI


It  ftrake  him  tw’iKt  ihe  fliouldcri  and  the  head.

And  giuc  to  him  a blow  fo  firme  and  found*.

That  good  «o^ero  therewith  ftaggered.

And  fcant  could  keepe  his  feet  vpon  the  ground.
The  rur^eto  clofe  with  him  then  hiftencd.

But  loc  his  foote  did  failc  with  former  wound.

So  that  bis  too  much  had  (as  oft  we  fee )

Did  hurt,  and  made  him  fall  vpon  his  knee.

114

J?<geroloft  no  time  in  manfullwife,

1 o ftrike  fierce  Rodomont  in  breft  or  face,

And  bolds  him  fhort,  and  fo  his  force  ipphci.

He  laid  him  on  the  ground,  but  in  fliort  fpacc  ;

In  fpyte  of  him,  the  Pagan  dotharife,

And  with  fmallkindncfTehedoth  him  embracer
And  then  they  ftnuc.heaue,  fhouc,thruft  to  and  fto.
And  either  feekes  the  tethers  ouerthrow.

II  s

Each  ftriues  with  all  bis  skill,  and  hiiabilitie,
Byforcetolay  thetother  on  the  ground.

Now  Rodomont  was  growne  to  feme  debilitie.

By  mcanesof  more  then  one  rcceiucd  wound,
Rogero  had  great  praffife  and  agilitic.

And  vf  *d  to  wrafUc,  and  he  quickly  found
His  vantage,  which  he  did  not  oucrOip,

But  on  bis  weakefi  fidchisfoe  dothtrip.

116

The  Tnr^e  moft  full  of  wrath  and  ofdcfpite,

Vpon  /{o^cror  necke  tooke  fledfaft  hold.

Now  drawing  toward  him  with  all  his  might,
Nowthiufling  him  backc  from  him  all  he  could.
And  by  and  by  he  heau*d  him  quire  vpright.

As  AtoBg  Antheus  was  in  time  of  old:
notwithftanding  fure  doth  ftand.

And  labord  ftill  to  haue  the  vpper  hand .

117

Full  oft  the  valiant  knight  his  hold  dothfliifr.

And  with  muebprettie  Height,  the  fame  did  flippe.*
In  fine  hedoth  applia  one  fpcciali  drift.

Which  was  to  get  theP<j^<2;i  on  the  hippe  ;
Andhauing  caught  him  right,  hedoth  him  lift.

By  nimble  Height,  and  in  fuch  wife  do:h  trippe:
Thatdowne  be  threw  him,and  his  fall  was  fuch,
Hishcad-peicewas  thefirft  that  ground  did  tuch.

1 1 S

The  with  fuch  an  bard  andheauic  fall.

Was  fore  perplext,  and  bruifed  in  fuch  wife.

His  wounds  fell  frefh  on  bleeding  thercwiihall.
And  make  the  place  Vermillion  where  be  lyes.
Rogero  giucs  him  refpitc  very  fmall,

But  kcepeshimdowneand  will  not  let  himiifei
And  prefently  prefents  his  dagger  point
Vnto  bis  thioat,and  to  his  chiefeft  ioy  nt.

II*

Asthofethatdigge  and  fearcb  for  golden  ore.

Within  Pannonian  or  liberian  hils.

Not  vnderpropping  fiire  the  ground  before,'

Oft  for  a plague  of  their  toogreedie  wills*
Withr*daiBcruine,are  furprird  fbfbrc.

As  to  get  forth  againe,  doth  pafle  their  skills  s
So  was  the  tur\e  held  downe,  and  preftedfo.

By  braue  Rogero  his  triumphant  foe.

Mm  Who


4®4


THE  XLYI.  BOOKE.


ISO

Who  now  his  naked  dagger  did  prefer
Vmo  the  others  vizcr  at  his  eye.

And  with  fliarpe  words  he  told  him  that  he  ment.
Except  he  yctid,  to  kill  him  by  and  by;

But  Kodomont,  that  rather  then  relent,

Or  (hcv\  bafe  mindea  thoufand  deaths  would  dy.
Noword  doth  Ipeakc,  but  f>raue  himfclfc  tofundet
From  hiniiOr  if  he  could  to  get  him  vnder.

121

5i/«ife,andEu'n  asa  Maftiuefcll,  whom  G re wnd  more  fell,
every  apt  Hathtyrde, andinhisthroatnowfaftned  hath
compa-  His  cruell  fangs,  yet  doth  in  vainc  rcbcll.

Though  vnder  him,  andfeckcstodoc  fome  skath;
For  ftill  the  Gicwnd  prcuailcs,and  dothcxccll
In  force  of  breath,  though  not  in  rage  and  wrath;
So  doth  the  cruell  Pagan  flriue  and  flraine.

To  get  from  vnder  him,  but  all  in  vaiac.


ri  fan, for  a
grehound
feiU  ouer-
comea
jnafliue  in
eontinudee

•>f

hath  bene
tried.


Ill

But  with  long  ftriuing  and  with  wondrous  paines.
He  freed  his  better  arme,  and  void  of  aw.

His  dagger  that  in  bis  right  hand  remaines.
Which  in  this  later  bick’nng  hediddraw,
Hefcckes  toftabbe  into  Rogeros  rawes  ^

But  now  the  valiant  youth  the  perillfaw.

Then  for  his fafctics  fake  he  was  confliained.

To  kill  the  cruell  that  grace  difdained.

IS3

And  lifting  his  victorious  hand  on  hie,

In  that  Turi{S  face  he  ftabd  his  dagger  twife
Vp  to  the  hilts,  and  quickly  made  him  die.

And  lid  himfelfeof  trouble  in  a trice:

Downeto  the  lake,  where  damned  ghoflsdo  lie,
Sunke  his  difdaintull  foulc,  new  coldaslfc,
Elarphcmtngasit  went, and  curfing  lowd.

That  was  onearthfo  loftie  and  ib proud.


This  lafi  bool^e  0/ Ariofto  is  fo  full  of  examples  of  courtefie,  as  me  thin^e  irejhoitld  offer  it  great  difceiirtefie  if  ive
Jlsouldnot  pid^e  out  fame  good  Moral  fromit, 10  recommendtoyouT  confiderations  thai  haue  peiufed  and  readouer  the
hooheithe  frft  and  chiejejt  courtefie  is  in  Leo  jhat  manageth  the  whole  matter  fo  well  for  Rogero,  f^nitttng  the  confent
of  all  parties  lil^e  a well  deuifed  Comedie : thenMssBlis  fiindnes  isto  bepraifed , that  would  haue  ] ought  in  ae,er,u
Moral!.  Oj  her  brothers  honor. Thirdly  A mmon  doth  well  to  ashe pardon  o/Rogcro/or  hts  hard  1 fage  : then  the  Bulgars  are  to

be  allowedjor  the'^r  thanffulnes  to  mahe  him  hingfer  his  good  feruice:  Further  Charles  the  Emperor  is  to  be  exrolledjor
his  Princely  regard  in  honoringandfeajlingthem  fo  bountijuUy  at  the  manage  ; Lafi ly  BnAamint  and  the  whole
crew  that  would  haue  euerie  one  haue  talien  vpon  them  Rogeros  defence  againjt  B odomont,  and  Rogero  net  permit-
. . ting  it, yet  if  they  dif darned  not  to  do  him  the  feruice  to  help  to  arme  him, to  put  on  his  fpurres,to  fiay  his  horfejo  hold  hit

fieropnn  all  which  I doubt  not  hut  the  noble  mindedreaders  willfindefufiicient  matter  both  to  commend, and  to  imitate
without  my  further  labouring  to  Jet  forth  the  fame.Onely  one  note  1 m.iy  not  omit,  yea  though  I wcrefurcto  be  chidden
^ fome  ojyou  (jaire . Ladies ) for  my  labor  ^namely,  the  ftrong  ambition  ojyour  fex,  which  we  call  weahy , For  you  fee
tow  my  author  in  the  5 s.ftajfe  of  this  Canto  hath  deliuered  to  vs,  that  Eeatncc  ike  mother  of  Bradamani,n-o«W  neuer
be  wonneto  accept  Rogciojor  her  fonne  in-law,  neither  for  hisgentrie,  nor  his  perfonage,  nor  his  valew,nor  his  wit,
nonoryet  her  daughters  ownc  choife  and  affedion,  till  fee  heard  he  was  chofen  a-hing:  with  which  afinnng  humour  of
woni,it  feemedhow  that(  neuer  too  much  praified)Sir  Philip  Sidney  wel  acquainted  with, matting  inhis  Arcadia

r.ot  onely  the fiately  Pamela,  to  reieSi the  naliedvertue of  SAuCidosus,  tilljbefoundit  well  cloihedwiih  the  titletoet
fcepler,bitt  euen  Mifires  Mopfa,  whenji*efathoodedinthetreetobegabooneofApo\[o,toashe  nothing  but  to  haue.
a l^ingto  her  husband, and  a lufiy  one  too, and  when  her  pitiful  father  Dametas  (for  want  of  a better ) plaid  Apollospart,
and  told  her  fhejhould  haue  husbands  enough  Jhe praid devoutly  they  might  he  all  hings.-and  thus  much  for  the  MoraU.
Hifloric.  Ageus  \ing  of  Athens, hauing  no  if  tie, went  to  the  Oracle  of  A polio,  to  know  how  he  might  do  to  haue  a fonne,and

receiuing  a doubtfullanfwcr,  asfed  cuunfeU  o/py  t heus  Lord  ofTro\enes,  that  was  in  thofie  dayes  counted  a deepe  wife
man,  who /canning  the  meaning  of  the  ob/cure  verfie,  whicbwasthis,

Opnirevirnon  an»c  pcdemdilToJueris  vtii
Exfcrtumclarasquamtu  icmcaris  Athenas.

In  Englijh  not  verie  cleanly  thus.

Good  fir  take  heed  how  car  it  falls,  what  vellcllyou  do  broch.

Before  vnto  thccitie  walsof  Athens  you  approch.

/ fay  Py  theus  found  out  fitch  a myfierie  in  the/e  verfes,that  he  per  (waded  him  ear  he  departed  thecc,to  ta\e  the  paints
(or  I might  haue  faidthepleafurefto  lie  with  his  daughter  Eihra..figeus  having  done  the  feat  ,and  being  belih^e(  as  ma-
ny men  are)  forie  whenhe  had  done, too  fe  his  leave  to  be  gone  ihu  ear  he  went  hetool^e  Eihta  afide, and  jhewed  her
where  he  had  hidden  his  fword  and  his  fltoes  vnder  a hollow  fione  of  great  weight,  charging  her  that  ij  fee  hare  a fonne,
fofoone  as  he  were  offlrengthto  remove  thatfone,fbeJhouldfendhimwith  thofie  tokens  to  him  as  priuily  as  maybe.
Jn  fineflte  bare  that  famous  Thffeus,w^o  camming  to  Athens  as  a firanger  Medea  thenwtfe  0)  JLgevis,  perfwadeJ
her  husband  to  poyfon  him  at  a banquet,  to  which  the  old  man  afentedibutwbileTheCuswas  readieto  drin\e,  ^Egeus
faw  the  /words  handle, and  calling  it  to  mind,ouerthrew  the  cup  and faued  the  life  of  his  fonne;  of  which  who  fo  pleafe
better  to  informe  bimfielje,  may  reade  more  at  large  in  the  life  oJ  Thefeus  written  by  Pluraikc.

.j  . In  that  mine  author  brings  in  for  the  conclufion  of  his  whole  worfie,  /fcat  Rogero  immediatly  vponhis  rrariage  t»
Arlcgonc,  Bradamant,^i//e/fi  Rodomont;  this  is  the  AllegoricaU fence  thereof, that  ’RoAomottxwhick  is  to  be  vnderfood  the
vnbridled  heat  and  courage  ojyoutb  (for  in  all  Rodomontf  allions  you  JJjallfnde  him  dejerihed,  cwr  mofjurious,
hafiie,  and  impatient)  Rodomont  I fay,  is  filled  and  quite  vanquijhediy  mariage,  andlowfoiuer  the  vnrulinejfe  of
youth  is  excufable  in  diuers  h.inds,yct  after  that  holy  fiateoj  matrimomy  is  entredinto,  aUycutl'Mllwildnes  of  aA
Ifndsrmf  be  caf  away ; which  the  common  faying  doth  prove,  dif  inguijh  ing  in  ordinarie/pceck,  abacheltrfront
a married  man,  by  thefe  names,  agoodjellow,  and  an  honef  man.

In


A hrtefi  AHt^me  of  OrUndo  Fttriofi,  ^ c 5

^4\ol9m9»ltf'.tiiJbh^  $^him^df,hy'or(‘nnATing  the  vfe  Qfarmor.ayeare.ami^eth  in.laday.be allu lei  .11  r
(/thin{e)  to  tne  iacfcilds  a Frendun rt.^^ouernoar  of  Geneui,  tvho  beinga^ooilj/  u/Lnioof  pcrfb>uge.ivat
•utnhrowne  and  vanquijhediy  Galcxzzo  Gonztgi a little  man  of fiature,  but  of^reat  fptrit.andioT  rbat  caufe
he  vowed  never  to  b:art  ar  net  a^atne  ••  but  in  the  dtatb  ol  Ro iooiont  to  jbew  bmfelfe  a pe.fea  imhatar  t><  Vitgil,
he  citJeth  iujt  Virgil  ends  hit  <e/Siieais  with  the  death  o/Turnus.  "*

Vitaque  cum  gemitu  fugit  indignata  fub  rmbra  j.

Here  cad  the  aotei  of  the  4S.  aad  laft  Canto  of  Orlando  Tu>  iofo.


ABRIEFE  AND  SVM  MARIE

ALLEGORIE  OF  ORLANDO  FVRIOSO,

NOT  VNPLEASANT  NOR  VNPROFITABLE
for  thol'c  that  hauc  read  the  former  Pocmc.


iHenlhad  finifhed  this  tranflation  of  Orlando  and  being  al-

'oioft  proud  in  mine  owne  conceit,  that  I had  in  chefc  my  young
y cares, employed  my  idle  hourcs  to  the  good  liking  of  many,  & tho/c
ofchc  better  fort,  I hapned  to  rcadcin  a graue  and  godly  bookc
thefc  words  i So  ditiines  do  hold  (for  examples  fake  that  the  glory  of  Intie  Ks-
Patti  is  iitcreafed  daylj  i»  heanen^and (hall  be  to  the  rvodds  endfj  reafon  ion, of
\of  them  that  day  Ij  do  profit  by  hismriting  and  rare  exemplar  Itfevpon
earth,  as  alfoon  the  contrarie part,  that  the  torments  of  Arius.^abclliiis,  [uy“’^
and  other  wicked  heritickf,  Fre  continually  augmented  by  the  numbers  of  them,  who  from  time
to  time  are  corrupted  with  their  feditious  and  pefiilent  writings;  If  it  had  Rayed  there, it  would
neuer  hauc  troubled  me,  but  immediately  followes,  likg  they  hold  of  diffolute  ^aett,  and
other  loofe  writers,  which  haue  left  behind  them  lafciuious,wanton,  and  carnall  deuices,as  alfo  of
negligent parents,mafiers,teachers,  ^e.This faying  (gentle Reader)  was  fuch  a cooling  card
to  me,  and  did  lo  cut  the  combe  of  that  plcafing  conceit  ot'mine,  that  I could  not  tdl  whe-
ther I fhould  repent  me  ornot  of  my  former  taken  paine  For  this  was  nota  malicious
taunt  of  a vrry- looking  but  a graue  reprehenfion , and  commination  of  adenout

and  diuine  writer; Now  though  the  Eplthctons of Difolute  and  Loofe,  make  me  part:y
prefmnc,  that  mine  authouris  out  of  the  fore  fa  id  danger,  whofe  work  cannot  iuflly  be  dee-
med lalciuions, wanton,  nor  carnal,  and  though  I hauefpoken  as  I thinkefuRicicntly  in  my
Apolof^ie,  to  fatifiie  all  indifferent  readers,  both  for  mine  authors  defence  and  mine  owne
excafe;  yetbccaufe  I know  in  mine  owne  confcience,  that  all  the  verfesinthis  workebe
not  fo  full  weight,  but  ifthey  fhall  be  tryedin  fo  feuerc  a balance, fome  will  be  found  ma-
ny grainestoolight;  I would  indeiiour  all  I might  to  fupply  that  defect,  with  the  more
weightieand  fober  conSderation  ofthe  Allegoric  ; which,  as  I haue  partly  touched  in  eiic-
ry  (cucrall  book?,  fo  now  I intend  to  prefentto  your  confiderarion  the  whole  bodic  of
the  fame, to  make  as  ityv’crcarchcarfal  Oration  ofit,  which  I haue  placed  in  the  latter  end.

Mm  2


I


Jrmes.

Love.


4oi>  A brief  ASegme  ef  OrUndi)  Furioft.

sim-ic  of  a ^ farewell,  as  men  do  at  a great  dinner, in  which  they  Iiauc  almoft  fiirfct-

funt.  vponiundric  forts  of meats, more  dclicatechenwholiome,  yet  in  the  end  clofevp  their
^ ^ ftotnakes  witha  peecc  ofaQmnce,  oritrengthenandhelpc  tlicirdigeftion  with  acuppe
ofSackc ; whereas  to  a temperate  feeder  vpon  whoUbme  meats, both  of  them  arefuperflu-
ous.  Alfoldo  the  rather  place  it  in  theendotmy  booke,becaufc  commonly,that  which
men  readc  laft  ftickes  befl:  in  their  memories,  and  fo  1 wirh  this  to  do,  being  as  it  were  the
verie  kirnell  and  principall  part,  or  as  the  marrow,  and  the  reft  but  the  bone  or  vn-
profitable  fhell,  or  according  (as  I faid  in  my  Apologia , vfing  Taffoes  comparifon}
like  to  the  pill  that  is  lapped  i i fuger,  and  giuen a child  fora  medicine,  who  otherwifs
would  not  bedrawne  to  take  the  litnpledrugge  though  it  were  to  faue  his  life.  Buc
to  come  to  the  matter,  mine  author  (as  you  may  fee  nom  the  beginning)  apply eth  hia
whole  workc,  and  referreth  all  the  parts  thereof  to  two  principall  heads  and  common
places  ; namely  Armes  and  Laue'.m  both  which,  men  commit  great  ouerfights,  and
from  both  which,  proceed  many  great  enormous  diforders,  both  in  publique  and  priuatc*
For  thefc  two  faults  of wantonnefl'e  and  wilfulne{fc,arc  fo  coupled  commonly  with  youth,
that  they  feeinc  to  be  b me  at  a burthen  therewith,  and  as  it  were  accidentsinfepara-
blc;  and  a man  might  slmoft  canonize  him  fora  Saint,  that  hath  paiTed  the  heat  of  his
youth,  and  not  clFended  in  one  of  thefetbut  many  doubtlcfle  offend  in  them  both.
And  this  is  the  caulc  that  mine  author  hath  propounded  many  examples,  but  fpcci-
ally  two,  in  the  which  men  may  lee  their  frailtie  in  the  latter  of  Jhefc  (which  I will
Oihnio.  handle  firft)  namely  in  the  paflion  ofloue.  As  firft  Orlandd,  who  with  a long  and  te-
dious voyage , guardeth  ffem  the  Indies ; then  hath  her  taken  from  him  a-

niong  his  fjicnds, after  looieih  her,  and  by  fundrie  aduentures  purfuing  her,  and  yet
milTrngmofl  narrowly  of  his  purpofe,in  the  end  fallcth  ifarkc  madde  for,  her,  till  b)f
Saint  iohM\\\s  wits  ore  lent  himagaine:  which  is  as  much  to  fay,  till  by  the  grace  of  God
and  the  light  of  the  Gofpell,  he  difcoucrcth  the  darknes  he  walked  in, and  fo  comes  againc
to  himfelfe.

Secondly  and  principally  in  Rogero^  whom  he  faineth  to  hauc  bcue  a man  of  infinite
value,  and  of  courage  able  to  oucrcome  a thoufand  of  our  common  worldly  miferics,  but
yctouercome  himfelfe  of  this  pafTion  ofloue,  wit  hour  any  refiftance  :this  is  thcreafon
that  he  is  borne  away  vpon  a horfc  with  wings(  which  would  not  be  gouerned)vp  into  the
aire,  to  the  countrey  of  Alcjna^  (which  we  may  eafily  conceiue  to  be  the  court  of  pleafiirc:)
by  which  mine  author  giues  vs  to  vnderftand  that  the  principall  occafion  of  our  cuill  pro-
0i  ftafure  ceedeth  of  this, when  our  appetite  not  ruled  by  reafonjuleth  vs, as  Horace  wriceth  of  anger,
and  may  be  apply  cd  to  any  paflion  that  ftriueth  with  reafon :

Jr  a furor  hrtuk  efianimum  rege^qui  niji  paret
JmperatjhuKcfroinij,  huuc  tu  compefet  catena*


Kogtro.


AUynay
the  court


Wherefore  this  fame  appetite  is  that  paflionate  defire  ofthe  minde  that  we  arefb  of-
ten coanfellcd  to  reftraine.  Now  to  this  defirc, to  this  inordinate  luffing,  is  ioyaed  idle-
nefle,  as  an  afliflant  and  great  furthercr ; as  I partly  noted  in  the  fourth  bookc  out  of
Hlcnet  fi  idlenes  is  fayned  by  the  Poet,  verie  grofle  and  corpulent, dran-

captaine  of  and  drowfic,  riding  vpon  a TortefTe  in  token  offloth,and  he  (forfooth)is  ring-leader
afi  other  of  3 monflrous  band,  of  which  fbme  haue  heads  like  dogges,fomc  haue  neckes  like  cranes,
fithie  fomc  are  mounted  vpon  Oxen  or  Aflcs,  fbme  haue  countenances  and  geflures  of  Apes,
fomearcarmed  with  ptongs.with  forkes,  with  hookes,  with  broches(all  out  ofthe  Kit-
chen ) of  all  which,  what  other  meaning  can  be  gathered  but  this,  that  idlenes  and  floth,
' and  the  not  betaking  oncsfelfe  tofomc  honefl  trauell,caufcth  men  to  prone  drunkards,

gluttonsjbackbyters,  rcprochcrs,  icflcrs,  parafites  and  promoters,  with  other  monftrous
and  filthie  faults,  though  worthie  to  be  nunifbed , yet  not  worthic  to  be  named.

Where-


A Mtfc  A’Ugmc  ofOrUi$dt  Furiofi,  437

Whercfiirc  thcanncicnt  fathers  hauen^t  without  great  iudgcintnt  and  iuft  caufc  placed
floth  among  the  feauen  deadly  linnes,  being  loprccilb  in  the  conlideration  thereof,  that
they  hauedeliuered  their  opinion  thus  farreofit,  that  chough  fimply  to  be  idle  is  n jta
mortall  finne  (as  they  terme  it ) yet  fo  to  be  idle  as  to  be  kept  thereby  from  feme  good  cx-
creife,  as  hearing  of  Gods  word, or  helping  our  brother  that  wanted  our  alTiftancc,  may
make  it  mortall.  But  now,  becaufc  in  common  fence  it  had  not  bcenc  fit  nor  probable,  that
a man  of  a high  fpirit  and  noble  courage  (as  his  Rogero  is  deferibed  to  be)  fhould  be  daun-
ted with  fucha  fliamcfull  andbafe  companic  asthefe  were,  therefore  you  fee  he  defends
himfelfc  agaioft  themmoft  rcfolutely,  though  their  aflault  iceme  terrible,  and  their  num-
ber infinite,  and  in  defpight  ofthem  he  proceedeth  towards  the  houfc  of  (by

which  is  meant  vertue  ) by  that  craggy  and  painfull  way,  and  fliunneth  the  otiier  way  to
Al  ynay  by  meanes  of  the  good  warning  Afiotfo  had  giuen  him  of  the  danger  thereof,
Butloctwo  faircyong  Ladies  font  from  which  as  I noted  in  the  feuenth  booke,

carried  a fhew  of  honourable  and  chad  loue ; thefe  wanne  him  without  any  rcfidance.and
make  him  ofarefolutc  vvarriour,  a diflblute  loner : but  trow  you  he  can  come  to  AIcjh4
with  the  bare  name  of  a louer  ? no,  if  he  be  poorc,  there  is  no  place  for  hitn  in  dame  Plea-
fures  courtjhc  mult  fpcnd,he  mud  giue.hc  mud  lada  it  out.  £n)5/4,a  couetous  wrctch,keeps
the  bridge, by  which  is  vnderdood  that  many  men  arc  ftopt  from  this  courfc  of  tolly,  in  re-
gard  of  the  great  charge  and  cxpence  thereof, and  fo  day  at  this  bridge;  and  though  no  con-
lideration of  vertue  withold  them,yctfearc  of  the  charge  dothterrifie  them.  But  when  £-
once  ouerthrowne,  then  they  are prefently  receiued  into  the  bofomcof  Atcyud^
then  all  the  checre,  (porting,  dauncing  and  courting  that  can  be  imagined  is  applied  to  the
welcoming  ofthis  youchfuK  Rogero.'^'nw^  he  is  drowned  and  vtterly  oucrwhelmedinthi*
gulfe  of  pleafurc,  which  mine  author  hath  fet  downc  fo  liuely,  as  it  were  the  very  piedure
of  the  Prodigall  fonne  fpokenofin  the  Scripture,  giuen  oucr  to  all  vnthrifcinelTe,  all  loofc-
nefleof  life  and  conuerfation  But  becaufc  the  Poet  knew  very  well, that  youth  of  it  fclfc
hath  many  good  gifts  of  nature,  ifrhc  fame  were  applied,  and  that  many  yong  men  com-
ming  to  themfelues  againe,  haue  become  notable  members  of  their  countreys,  and  worthy
patterns  of  proweff-'and  vertue ; therefore  he  deuifethraod  excellently  amcane  whereby
vnwindeth  himfelfc  ojc  of  rhe  bonds  of  die  wing  how  one  day  being  got-
ten from  her  (a  thing  that  feldome  happco'’d  vnto  him)  recalled  him  againe, and

gauc  him  thatRing  that  difcoucrcd  all  AlcynAs  trumperief,and  made  her  odious  in  hisfighti
lb  as  now  he  curled  her  in  his  hcart,and  was  afhamed  that  euer  he  had  fet  his  loue  fo  balcly.

This  is  to  bcvnderftood,  that  a man  befotted  inthc  fond  plcafurcs  of  this  world,  entring
into  godly  confideration  with  himlelfe  of  his  owne  cftace  heareth  Alelyffsy  which  is  to  be
vndcrftood  the  diuinc  inspiration  of  the  grace  ofGod,calling  him  from  the  damned  coarlc
of  life,  to  an  honefl:  and  vertuous  courfc  ; and  by  that  Ring  which  fignifieth  rcafon,  he
difeouereth  the  odious  filthinclTc  of  that  which  feemed  to  him  before  moftpU-alanc  and
amiable.

Therefore  not  without  very  good  caufc  doth  the  notable  writer  (I  recited  in  the  be-
ginning ofthis  treatife)  lay  downe  inthevery  firft  chapter  of  his  booke  the  danger  and
inconucnicnccs  that  grow  ro  men  forlackcof  confideration,  vfing  alfo  in  another  place
among  many  his  diqine  fimiliti^dcs  this  one,  that  men  arc  caried  by  inconfideration  to
their  cuerlafling  ruins  without  any  ftriuing;cucn  as  Hawkes  arc  caried  hooded  very
n\y  , which  iftheir  fight  were  free,  would  neuer  leaue  bating  till  they  had  broken  their  '
lines,  or  vtterly  tyred  themfelues  .*  but  notwichftanding  that  the  Ring  of  Rcafon  ma-
keth  himdifeerne  theft  foulc  deformities  of/7/p7w4,yctitismaruel!oustofcc  what  won-
derfull  impediments  be  fet  in  his  way,  ere  he  can  difeharge  himfcife  of  his  late  receiued  ini-
ftrefle.

The  Faulkner,  the  horft,  the  hawke,  the  dogge,  that  do  all  alTaile  h ira  after  a ftrange  fa-
fliion,  theparticular  Allegoric  whereof,!  touched  in  the  eighth  booke,  though  to  lay  truth

Mm  3 I


4^8  A brief  AHegorie  of  Orlaado  Ftirhfo.

I needed  not  fo  cnricufly  to  haue  foeght  for  Inch  a hidden  meaning  in  them,  when  as  the
verie  things  themfclucs  are  fo  vntemperately  vfed  by  many,  that  they  keepe  them  from  ver-
tucs  and  more  honorable  actions  : How  many  men  giue  themfclucs  fo  extreameiy  to  thefe
hunters,  haulces,hounds,aid  horfes,  that  they  cannot  fcarfe  affoord  an  home  to  the  ftudic
of  wifdome  and  temperance?  though  I doc  not  vtterly  condemnethe  honorable  vfeofthcni
all,  for  recreation,  fo  as  a man  would  remember,  Ne  quid  or  as  our  Englifh  Proaerbe
faith,  Too  much  of  one  thing  is  good  for  nothing.

Now  when  thefe diflicirlties  bcouercome,  then  yet  fora  great  while  the  wayispaine-
full,  the  weather  is  hot,  the  Sunne  parcheth,  Romero  rideth  folitarie  without  compa-
hie  or  good  fcllowfhip;  and  by  and  by  another  temptation  afiailcs  him:  Three  Ladies
Iporting  themfclucs  by  the  fea  fide  would  ftayhimjone  offers  him  wineincreafing  his
thirft  with  the  fight  ofic,  another  invites  him  to  alight,  the  third  railcs  vpon  him  for  his
inciuilitie ; The  firft  ofthefe  isour  concupifcence,  tliat  withaperpctuall  thirft  ftill  ma-
keth  ys  couet  things  hurtfull  for  our  felues  : the  fecond  iseafe,  that  is  lothtofullainetoo
much  labour,  but  is  ftill  perfwading  vs  to  giue  ouer  vertuous  workes,  becaufe  they  are
jpamfull ; the  third  is  the  mockery  and  lewd  vfe  of  the  world , asihauealfo  noted  in  his
place,  to  ieft  at  fuch  as  Hue  auftcrely  and  vertuoufly,  as  though  it  were  a toke  ofa  bafe  mind;
whereas  indeed,  it  is  the  only  noble  difpofition  that  may  be,  to  follow  vertuc,  and  to  dc-
Ipife  pleafiire.

Thefe  three  women,thoughi?ff^(rro  fled  away,yer they  followed  him,  which  fignifieth,’
that  our  owne  impetfedions  cuermore  follow  vs, neither  can  wc  be  ridde  of  them,  and  it
fufliccth  nottoouercoraethem  once,  but  that  wc  muft  wage  continuall  battel  with  them.
Now  againft  this  pcrpetuall  miferie  we  arc  ftrengthned  by  difcipline,&  made  able  to  with-
ftand  them,  whichisfignifiedby  the  wife  and  grauc  Pilot,  that  tranfports  by  fea,
from  Alcjn^  to  LogefttUa  j and  in  footh  it  may  well  be  called  a fea,  in  which  cucric  wauc  h
leadie.to  ouer  whelme  vs,  and  eucrie  ftorme  able  vtterly  to  difeourage  vs,  if  we  had  not  a
good  Pilot  both  fafely  to  guide  vs, and  chearcfully  to  encourage  vs, by  telling  vs  what  cntcr-
tainementweftialifindcjifwccome  once  into  her  harbour.

40

There  is  thtf$ode  that  filt  and  Metier  clojeth^

In  the  ten?b  There  is  the  loue^  the  heautie  and  the  grace,

booke.  That  maketh  him  mofl  blefl  that  them  eniojeth^

To  which  compar'd  ad  other  ioyes  are  bafe :

There  hope  nor  feare,  nor  care  the  minde  annoy eth^

Refpebd  of per  fans,  nor  regard  of  place.

The  minde  fid  finding  perfeEl  coutentation,

RefUng  it  felfe  in  vertsteus  contemplation,

41

There  are  (faith  he)  fame  better  le fans  taught,

Then  dancings,  dally  wgs,  and  daintie  dyet.

There  {had  you  learneto  frame  jour  minde  and  thought,

* Frcmwillto  wityto  temperance  from  ryet :

This  is  the  path  by  which  you  may  be  brought
Into  the  perfect  paradifeof  ejuiet:

This  tale  the  Pilot  to  Rogero/oA/,

And  ad  the  while  their  courfe  they  forward  hold,

. This  enconragement  and  comfort  was  fotnc  what, but  by  and  by  they  difeouered  a great
*Sauic  fentfrom  4/<rT«<f,  which  vndoubtcdly  had  furprifed  them, had  not  Logo flida  (which

" drawn®


A brltfe  Allegorie  of  OrUaJo  Phriofi.  405?

drawnc  from  the  Grecke,is  to  fay  \vircdorae)f<::t>c  a whole  armic  in  their  ayde:  which  figni-
fieth  writings,cxhortations,inftrii .lions,  examples, and  preccpts,that  hauc  power  in  them
both  to  confound  Alcyna^  and  to  reebuer  all  that  had  becne  wonne  by  force, in  former  times
from  LogtflUlA.

Thefoure  vertnous  Ladies  that  arc  Tent  to  guard  as  appearcth  by  their  names  and

by  their  Epichetons  giueathemby  mine  author,  att  the  fourc  cardinall  vertues , iufiice,
pradcnce,tempcrance,and  fortitude.Which  chough  it  be  well  deferibed  in  the  aforefaid  x.
book, yet  in  my  fancic,thatin  the  laft  bookc, where  he  prayfeth  a Cardinals  vertucs.I  meanc
where alfo  he  adds  a fife  vnto  them, and  mikes  them  fiu:,ic  doth  much  better ;

77

Then  cnanother  part  was  tote  vewd,

His  vertrses,  each  one  t>j  themfelues
Pradence,  and  temperance,  and  far  tit  tide ,

And  ItiUice,  and  a fife  fo  neerelj  /inh
. To  thefe,  that  who  with  it  is  not  endu'd,

ThereU  may  feente  blotted,  or  ^nite  extinUj
Bountie implojain gitiing  and  infipeniing,

A Jpeciafl grace  to  all  the  other  lending.

Thefe  be  the  Captaincsofehat  Armie  Royal!,  that  canouercome  legions,  nay  millions
oFvices : and  fiirc  if  you  will  not  allow  the  lafi:  of  them  for  a principall  leader, yet  you  mufl
at  Icaft  make  him  treafurer  and  paymafter,  or  ctf2  it  i5  great  doubt  that  for  lacke  of  pay,
you  will  be  driuen  to  CifTyre  your  bands.  But  to  proceed  , perhaps  it  will  feeme  ftrangc
to  fome,  as  it  did  to  my  fclfeac  thefirft  reading,' hoiv  it  comes  lo  thzt  LogefiiHazt^d
Aicjrtaztt  fifters,  the  one  legitimate,  the  other  a baflard, and  that  the  baftard  hath  vfurped
vponthe  others  ftace,and  hathfcarce  left  hcraboueoneftrpng  hold.Thccxpofitionisthis.

The  nature  ofman{"by  which  is  vnderlloodpiir  appetite  or  affedion ,)  which  ought  to
be  fiibicd  to  reafon  and  to  be  gouerned  thereby,'this  nature  (I  fay)was  at  the  fii  ft  a la  wfull
child  ofGod,  and  was  by  the  fpirit  ofGod  framed  fo  his'  o wne  likenefTc,  there  to  gouerne
and  rule  by  reafon  and  wildomc,  fo  that  afore  nattlre  was  corrupted,  all  the  parts  of  our
mindc  were  in  a perfect  accord  and  harmonic,  vnder  the  gouerncraent  of  reafon, or  rather
eucry  one  fetting  forward  it  felfe  covercuous  actions:  but  when  thisfirft  perfcft:ioa  Was
loft,  and  that  the  fame  great  rebellion  was  made,  to  the  ouerthrow  of  that  quiet  and  fotled
ftate,the  heart  became  fo  weakc,  asic  wasnotable  coindurcchc  coatinuallaflaultsofthc
paflions  that  aflaylcd  it,  and  in  the  end  was  cantenc  to  take  part  with  them.againft  the  rea-
fonablcpart  ofthc  mindc.  And  now  eucry  part  of  the  body  engenders  fuch  feeds  ofeon-
cupifccnce,  that  nature  is  become  a baftard  fifter  to  reafon,  and  vfiirps  that  gouernement
that  is  due  onely  to  her,  and  leaueth  heronly  onecaftle,  which  was  fo  ftroiigly  ficuated
that  it  was  impregnable  ; fo  that  now  reafon  is  retired  as  it  were  to  her  principall  fortrefte,
to  the  head, the  reft  of  this  kingdome  being  poftclTcd  (by  Alcyna)  by  plcafureand  fond  dc-
lights.Now  then,  what  maruell  is  it, if  this  new  deferibed  by  mine  author, do  with

fo  great  diiiicultie,  and  through  fo  many  impcdiments,clamincr  vp  to  this  ftately  feate  of
hogefiina^hixWt  with  fuch  rare  workemanftiip,  and  offuch  pure  ftufie,  thata  man  may  in  the
walls  thereof,  fee  cuen  into  his  very  foulc  and  confcicnce ;

/« thefe  men  fee  the  virtue,  and  the  vice.

That  cleaueth  to  their  inward foule  and  minde,
who  looses  in  fuch  a glaffe  may  grow  fo  wife,

.As  neither  fiaPring  praifes  fha/l  him  blind.

With  tickling  words,  nor  vndeferued  blame,
with  forged  faults,  fkadworke  him  anjfkamei

M m 4 A/


410  A brief  AHegorie  tf  OrUnd^  Furiofe.

As  forthofeguiliings  and  paintings,  that  were  in  the  Palace  of  Alcjna^  though  the
Ihovyof  it  were  glorious , thcfubftanceof  it  wasdrofle,  and  nothing  but  Alcumie,  and
cofenage : but  theie  of  LogefiUU,  be  precious  ftones  indeed  , cfineftimable  value  : Th«
looking  glalTe  and  mirrour,that  will  flie  w vs  how  our  foule  and  our  mind  ii  (potted;  oh  be
that  would  vie  fuch  a glalTc,  what  a notable  Antidoton  it  would  bcagainftchc  poyibaof
flatterie  1

Youfaire  Ladies,  thatfpend  fomany  hourcsin  looking  and  prying  in  a gIa(Tc  to  fee
if  this  lliadow  fit  handlomcly,  if  your  rebatoes  be  well  fer,  ifyour  wyers  (land  cuen  vp*
on  your  heads,  and  the  pendant  iuft  in  the  middle  ofyour  forheads,andin  the  lead  of  chefe
matters  you  will  notbJeeuc  your  maides  eyes,  but  you  will  fee  it  your  (elues,  why  are  you
fo  credulous  to  belcciic  lyars  and  flattercrs,that  tell  you  your  chaftiries  and  other  womanly
vertues  be  extolled  and  prayfed,  and  will  not  looke  in  that  trueglairc,to(ccifyoudderu:ic
«r  no  ?

It  is  true , that  men  arc  no  fit  iudges  of  therofelucs,  bccaufc  commonly  they  are
partiall  in  their  ownc  caulc  ; yetis  it  as  true  ,thac  he  that  will  difpofe  him  to  iudge
indifferently  of  himfdfc  , can  doit  better  then  any  bodic  clfc , becaufeaman  can  fee
further  into  his  ownc  mindc  and  heart , then  any  one  clfc  can.  But  now  , to  come  to
this  fairc  houfeof  Logefliila,  to  which  I would  (o  faine  inuite  you  all,  both  Lordci
and  LadieSjthatrcadethisdifcourfe,  herebe  fwcet  gardens , here  be  wholclbmc  hcaibi,
here  is  the  coniinuall  fpring.’Hcrc  that  vnbridlod  horfe,  that  bare  away  fo

farre  out  of  Europe,  is  taught  to  obey  the  roddeandthe  rayne,  and  made  fcruiceablc  and
at  commandtment.  Further,  by  the  help  of  the  ring  (as  was  touched  befor.)  manic
that  had  bccne  tranfformed  into  brute  bcofts,  were  rcltored  to  their  fhape  againc  ; thefe
were  fuch  as  were  fo  drowned  in  vice,  and  in  b.alllie  pleasures,  that  no  part  of  the
rc-'<fbnablc  man  was  left  in  them . A^»l[o  was  reftored  to  his  fiiapc,  that  had  beene  turned
into  a myrde(now  the  myrtle 'was  faid  cuer  to  hauc  bccnc  Verms  treej  and  bccaufc  ha
was  fo  entangled  m Vencrie,that  he  could  not  get  himleife  out  of  it, therefore  he  is  fayned
to  haue  taken  rooce  in  the  ground  as  the  tree  doth,  and  fb  was  faftued,  that  without
Afeljffas  afiiftance  he  could  not  haue  ftirred  fro?n  thence.  Thus,  at  you  fee  mine
Author  vndcr  a prcitic  fiction  .hath  brought  yo.i  to  behold  the  whole  roilerie  of  the
life  of  man,  and  there  in  the  beginning  of  thefeuenth  bookc , he  exhorteth  men  to  coali-
der  the  meaning  of  his  talc,

H'herefore  to  fomf^  mj  tAe  feeme  a fahte,

fVhofe  rvits  tovude^JiAsdit^  Are  net  able.

But  no\V  becaufs  there  arediuers  kindsoferrours , in  this  labyrinth  of  lone,  afld  as
diuers  meancs  by  which  men  offend,  as  there  arc  diuers  forts ofrnen  that  offend;  there-
fore you  may  percciue  how  my  author  hath  filled  the  whole  booke  with  fundry  exam-
ples both  of  men  and  women  ; as  befide  OrUnio  of  whomc  I fpakc  before,  whofe  mad-
neffe  gaue  the  name  to  bis  worke,  calling  it  OrUndr  Furiofe^  there  is  SacrApavt^  that
followes  Angelica  from  the  Indies , and  is  ftill  foded  out  by  her  with  faire  words;There
is  Renal  Jo  ^ that  is  cxtreamely  in  louc  with  her,  till  the  water  of  difdainc  drauc  away,
and  cooled  the  hcate  of  hisaffedion  ;and  the  wholebooke  is  full  of  examples  of  mea
and  women,  that  in  this  matter  oflouc  , haue  bene  notable  in  one  kinde  or  other;  of
which  I will  touch  fomc  fpeciall  ones,  and  omit  the  reft,  as  not  fo  much  worth  the  ftanding
vpon.

The  ordinarickindcs  ofloue  arc  fet  downc  to  vs  of  the  good  and  the  bad  in  two
couples  : Angelica  and  FiorAlice  of  the  worfe  kinde,  and  Olympia  and  Bradama*t
of  the  better  fort.  In  ^Aagelica^  the  cxcellentncffe  of  her  besutic  bred  fuch  an  cx-
thac  difdayning  the  greataft  and  worthy  eft  Princes  that  liued  in  that


cecding  pride.


A (>rtefe  AUt^orit  of  OrUrnio  Futiojo',  4 1 r

age,  flic caft  herfelfeaway  at  lift  vpona  oo^rc^feruing  fmn,foratuft  recotnpenccof  her
too  liaughtie  conceipt.  In  Doralfce,  is  fee  dovvne  a pattern  t of  great  lightncfte  ol  manners
andbthauiour,  that  firft  louing  and  being  forciblie  taken  by  Mj$»clric*rd,  yet

in  one  night  was  l o well  pacified  toward  h'm, that  flic  was  content  totarric  with  him,  and
in  the  end  refufed  w«r,openlie  for  him,  ( though  in  lb  doing  one  might  make  a rcalo-
nable  excufe  for  her:  ) but  after  when  A/.W>"'-<’'<^wasflaine,  flaccouldhau:  found  in  her
heart  to  haae  loued  Rogero  alfo.  In  OljmftA  contrarie,  we  fee  an  honeft  chaft  loue,  though
very  hardly  rcquited.yethath  it  in  my  opinion  fomereproofe.nacly  that  it  was  too  fodainc
and  violent.  But  in  the  worthy  is  a perfeft  patternc  oftriic  honorable  loue  to

Rogero^  moued  firft  by  his  value,by  his  courage,by  his  behauiour,by  his  worth, which  made
him  worthie  ofher  loue.  In  her  you  fliall  findc  no  raflincfte^no  want  ofconftancie,  offaith,
of  all  otherdne  regards;  for  neither  could  her  inndry  oiierthwarr  chances  neither  the  expe-
dation  and  length  oftime,which  is  wont  to  breed  alterations,)  nor  the  obftinatc  couetouf-
nefle  ofher  father,  nor  the  vain  ambition  ofher  mother,  nor  the  ftate  and  Empire  of  Leon^
with  all  the  promifed  riches  and  treafures  his  Fatherand  he  poflefledjoncc  withdraw  her
mindc  from  her  firft  loue.  Further, did  not  raflalyfall  in  loue,  as  did  Oljm~
/wjbut  the  Prophetefle  and  tokens  from  aboue,  did  encourage  her  to  her  honeft

louejfor  llae  wing  her  of  her  noble  pofteritic,and  of  all  thofe  bleflings  that  accompanic  the
fame  *.  Ib  as  indeed,  in  her  oncly  w'C  haue  a patteme  of  honeft  and  commendable  loue  be-
fore mariage.

Now  there  are  in  like  manner  two  paire  of  naarryed  women,  one  worthie  all  re-
proch,  the  tother  meriting  all  praife.  The  ihamelcfle  and  her  filthic^4r;4»»,

arcapaternc  of  bale  and  filthy  loue,  grounded  vpon  ribauldrie,  and  continued  with  all-
fraudulent  pradifes  that  may  be;  in  which  alfo  the  fond  affcdion,and  doting  fancie  ofGrif-
fino  is  to  be  p.tiedjthat  could  not  fee  her  treacharie,  till  with  notable  fhame  and  Icornc,  h«
felt  the  fruits  of  it.

Another  paterne  of  lewdnefle  in  all  kindes , is  the  tragicall  life  of  the  abhomi-
nable  that  for  her  filthy  luft,  brake  all  the  lawcs  of  hofpicalitic  and  huma-

nitie  : Firft  tempting  FjUndra  moft  impudentlie  , then  aceufing  him  moft  falfelic,
laftlie  circurnuenting  him  moft  fubtillic , and  making  him  with  a moft  rare  crncltio
to  kill  her  husband,  and  marrie  her  felfc  ; and  finallie  when  llie  grew  wearie  of
him,  fhe  found  the  meanes  to  poyibn  both  him  and  the  Phyfition,  and  not  re-
fting  there , fpent  all  her  life  after  in  working  all  kinde  of  treafon  and  mifehiefe,
cuentoher  laft  gafpe,  which  Ihe  fetcht  on  the  gallows.  Such  Gabrinai  and  Medcas  as
this  perhaps  there  are  in  the  world,  that  to  efied  their  dcuillifli  purpofe.  will  not
ftickc  to  pradifeany  kinde  of  trecheric  and  poyfoning,  yea  and  cake  a pride  and  felicitia
whifn  they  can  ouerthrow  noble  houfes,  fet  great  m'*n  tog-.-thcr  by  the  cares,  caufe
bloud-fhed,  and  mine,  and  hurlyburlic  in  Cities  and  common  wc^ilrhs  and  caufe  bro-
thers to  cut  off  one  anochers  head;  whereupon  that  old  verfe  may  Icemc  to  haue  bccnc  made
ypon  feme  ground :

^ 7^n4udet  Stygiu:  Pinto  tentnre,  ynod  undet

* Presbyttr^  effrenis  ^nudis  anas.

But  now  in  recompenfc  ofthefe  two  parting  leWd  women,wc  haue  two  excellcnf  vertn-
ous  women : Fiordetiege  married  to  'Bran'dimxrt,  and  Ifabel efpoufed  to  Zerbino.  Which, I
thinke  mine  author  hath  deuifed  to  haue  great  aduerficies,  and  to  haue  loft  their  husbands
moft  vnforrunati/,  to  the  end  to  lay  before  all  chaft  and  vertuous  matron es  an  example,
how  the  troubles  chat  happen  to  their  husbands  muft  beameaneCo  fet  forth  their  praift
the  more.  And  indeed,  to  attribute  to  them  the  higheft  point  ofglorie  in  this  kinde  chac
may  bc,you  fee  how  he  maketh  theaaleefe  there  husbands  cuen  in  the  prime  of  their  ownc

ycarca


4’  2 A brief  AHegorie  of  Or  Undo  Furiefo.

yeares ; flainc  in  France,  and  3ra>idimart  m'&nhznc  y and  both  of  them  naming

their  wiucs  at  the  lall  hourc , to  Ihew  how  dearely  they  loued  them  ; which  caukth  them
to  breake  into  fuch  piteous  lamentations, as  would  moue  not  onely  a tender  hearted  Ladie,
but  eucn  a valiant  hearted  man, to  fhed  tearcs  with  companion.Further,thc  deaths  of  both
thefe  Ladies,  in  fundry  kindes  are  moft  admirable  : Fiordrliegehm\^%  her  a little  lootnc  in
the  fepulcher  of  her  husband,and  there  becomes  an  Anchorite; falling  into  the  band
of  the  barbarous  RodomontyZVid  hauingno  way  to  fauehcr  chaftiiie  from  his  violence,
deuifed  a meaneto  redeeme  it  with  the  price  ofher  lifezOh  worthy  ^^e//-f,thatdelerucft
to  be  painted  in  Tables,  and  fet  forth  in  clothes  of  Arras,  for  an  example  to  all  yong  Ladies
ofconftant  chaftitic.

But  now  togoc  forward,  wchaueto  confider  likewife  of  the  inchanted  Pallace,  in
which  as  it  were  in  an  infinite  labyrinth,  fo  many  braue  yong  men  ofgrcat  vallour,  loofe
thcmfelucs  infeeking  their  loucs,  and  when  they  would  depart  thence,  they  hcarcthem-
felucs  called  backc,  and  thinke  they  fee  their  faces  ; but  when  they  come,  thinking  to  finds
them,they  vanifir  out  oftheirfights,andturne  to  lhadowes.  This  inchantmenc  is  likewife
referred  to  loue,thatpaintcth  forth  in  our  fancie,the  Image  of  the  party  loued,rcprcfcnting
to  vs  the  fweetlpcech,thefeemely  behauiour,the  gracious lookes  of our  Idol  thatwewor-
Ihip  : but  neither  can  we  finde  it  when  wefeeke  for  it, neither  doth  the  heart  take  any  re-
pofe,  ftil  labouring  to  attainetothcend,whichnaoredomiflethen  hit,  and  yet  whenthey
do  attaine  to  it,for  the  moft  part  they  grow  as  wcaric,  as  before  they  grew  fond.  W e may
fty  t\atDido  was  in  this  labyrinth,  when  as  Virgil  deferibeth  her ;

ex/if  Regina  grani  iamdttdum  putcia  cur  Ay

' VhIhus  Alit  venis^  ft  coecoCArfitur  igniy

AffiltA  viri  virtus  AnimOy  recarrit

Gentis  honos  : harent  infixipeHore  vnliHs,

V*rbA^\  n-.c pUcidAm  membrisdAtcurA  quitt:m.

wherefere  this  pafTIon  may  well  be  called  That  tickling  T»a$tnd,  that  flat'rimg  erntll fae^u
it  is  in  the  firft  booke.  And  no  maruell  if  Ragero  once  againc,hauing  loft  his  ring  of  reafon,
bedrawne  into  this  inchanted  Pallace.  OncIy  j^^folfo  zbookz^LogefttQa  g«ua

him  to  take  away  a fantafticall  Image,or  fomc  fuch  witchcraft  as  lay  vndcr  the  thrcfhold)
diflblued  the  inchantment.  But  whereas  iris  (aid  that  Atlanta  did  build  it  thereby  to
kecpci?(j/frflin  au  idle  life,  therein  he  toucheththe  fond  tendemes  of  diuers  parents  ouer
their  children,  who  bringing  them  vp  in  wantonncire,eafc  and  piidc,  make  them  the  mora
apt  to  fall  into  this  inchanting  labyrinth. Many  more  examples  arc  allcdged  by  mine  authors
as  that  pretty  Comicall  tsXc  of  Ariodant  and  Genevfra'Xht  fantafticall  talc  of  Nor  andinooioA
Lucinay  that  were  lapt  in  goates  skinnes : the  death  of  Marganorres  two  Tonnes : the  talc  of
the  Mantuan  knight  that  had  the  married  mens  cup.  All  which  hauc  good  Moralities,  and
may  be  fitlic  applycd  to  this  common  place  of  loue.

Now  the  other  commonplace  is  ofarmes,  which- indeed  is  morcpertinciit  to  matfcra
of  ftate  (as  tother  is  to  priuatc  life  and  manners, }and  in  this  mine  author  hath  carried  his  in-
ueation  vcric  daintilie  , and  well  worth  the  marking.  For  he  propoundeth  to  vs  the  ex-
ample of  two  migbtie  Emperours  , one  of  which  dircefteth  all  his  counfcls  by  wirdome,
learning,  and  Religion  ; Bur  the  other  being  rafli,  and  vnexperienced,  ruined  himfclfc  and
his  countric  :andin  this  ftorie  though  much  of  it  be  fayned,  yctarc  fet  downe  the  vc-
ric ordinaric  caufes,  and  the  vfnall  fequelsofall  fuchgarbojls  and  troubles.  Ithalmoft
an  vfuall  matter  to  rcadcof  young  Princes,  that  being  left  in  peace  and  prolperitie,  and
hauingfo  much  wealth  they  know  not  what  to  doc  withall,  ftraight  follow  their  youth-
fall  humour  of  rcuenging  fome  (I  knownot  what)  old  iniuries,  and  be  put  in  hope
by  fuch  hare-braync  Counfdlours  as  Rodoment  and  his  fcllowes,  of  great  conquefta


of  Orlando  Furicfo.  U j

and  in  the  en  J ouerthrow  indeed  great  armies,  not  of  their  enemies,  but  of  their  owne,  as
the  Oracle  mocked  Cr^fus:  *

Cr<efht  Halim  penetrans  ma^nam  peruirtet  opum  vim.

So  did  Hannibal  m Italic  (though  indeed  he  preuailcd  a great  while)  led  thereto  by  a
dreamc  ,as  fomc  write.  Now  in  thefe  matters  of  warres,  the  chiefe  fault  commonly  is,
in  thofe  Counfellors  that  put  afword  into  a mad-maiis  hand  , by  putting  fucli  conceits
into  Princes  heads . Yet  we  fee  hath  his  graue  5£>^n«o,  thataduifed  hiraac

the  firft,  not  to  inuadc  other  mens  countryes,  but  to  kcepc  his  ownc ; that  aduifeth  him
topreuent  mifehiefein  time,  and  tofue  for  peace  cthacaduifeth  him  to  put  the  matter  to
a combate  of  one  man,  and  the  partie  oucrcomc  to  pay  yeercly  tribute  : and  finally  that
. not  oncly  with  faithfull  counfell,  but  with  valiant  feruice,  fticketh  to  him  to  the  laft  ; but
Agramants  owne  rafhneficand  follie  ouerthrowesall  the  good  that  could  be  done  liim.
Further,  thefe  youchfull  Counfellours,  on  whom  Agramant  did  fo  much  relye  , did  not
onely  hurt  him  by  their  fond  perfwafions  to  his  ill  fucceeding  warres,  but  alfo  in  the
middeftofthe  heate  thereof, when  their  feruice  fhould  haue  flood  him  in  moft  ftced,  an-
noyed him,  and  in  a manner  quite  confounded  him  with  their  continuall  iarring  and  fljua-
ring among  themfelues  about  matters  of  fmallorno  importance ; So  that,  as
«<7«waswontto  wifh  for  ten  and  could  haue  beene  content  to  haue  fpared  4^

chilles ; fo  Agramant  had  iuft  caufe  to  haue  wifhed  for  ten  Sebrinos  and  to  haue  fpared
and  the  other  great  champions.  And  by  the  way  it  is  to  be  noted,  how  Poe-
tically mine  author  fendeth  Difeord  among  them, and  where  flie  was  found,  as  you  might
readc  in  the  fourteenth  bookc.  Now  to  Agramant  is  oa  the  other  fide  oppofed  Charles^
a graue  and  well  flayed  Prince,  wife  and  valiant,  not  partiall  in  doing  iuflice,  bountifull
in  rewarding  fcruiccs,  and  which  is  all  in  all,  deuout  without  hypocrifie,  and  putting  in-
deed his  alliance  in  God,  and  confequently  in  his  extremities  is  ayded  by  God  ; and  in
the  end  obtaining  a moft  happie  vifloric,driuing  both  his  enemies  out  of  his  countrie,
and  gayning  from  them  a great  part  of  theirs.  Further  my  author  hath  fet  downe  diuers
formes  (as  I may  call  it)  of  valiant  men,  though  not  all  in  a fort  to  be  imitated,  butfome
rather  greatly  robe  •,  Mandricard  is  deferibed  to  be  exceeding  full  of  cou-
rage, and  wichall  verie  quarelforae,  and  yet  with  good  fuccefferHe  cakes  Doralyce
from  herguard,  he  fights  with  Orlando^  with  Roiomont,  with  and  ftill  he  holds

his  owne.  But  this  good  fortune  is  a caufe  to  fooles  of  their  ouerthrow ; for  (as  our  En-
glifii  Prouerb  faich)i’o  oft  goes  the  pitcher  to  the  water ^at  ia^  it  comes  broken  home.Alandric^rd
would  needs  quarrell  with  Rogero  about  their  cognifance,  and  by  himisnaincafeer  a’l  his
brauerie.  This  is  written  for  a warning  to  fuch  as  arc  of  M-mdricardos  difpofition,  to  take
‘ heed  of ^-^andricardos  end.

Likewife  in  Rodomont  there  was  exceeding  ftrength  ofbodie,as  wel  as  courage  of  minde,
but  the  fame  was?ouerncd  with  no  delibsrationjwhich  caufed  him  to  attempt,  and  togiue
oucr  things  attempted  very  fodainly,  which  finally  turned  to  be  hurcfull  to  himfclfc  as  well
as  toothers.

On  the  other  Cx^z^Renaldo  was  a franke  natured  man, valiant  & courteous; ftour,but
too  full  ofcracking.and  thereby  procuring  himfclfc  enmities  : full  of  clemencie  as

wellas couragc:^tfr^i«ijapatterneof  amofl  noble  and  chankfull nature,  and  thoughnoc
fortunate, yet  moft  famous  in  defpite  of  fortune.

Rogero,  the  vericldea  and  perfeA  example  ofa  true  knight,thatwillby  nomcancs  break
his  fiith  and  his  honour,that  feekes  no  aduaiicage  of  the  inchanted  fhield,that  to  be  grate-
full  to  Don  Leon  Angujhfs, would  leefe  both  louc  and  life;  and  finally,  that  in  defence  of  his
honour  kWltlh  Rodomont.

Further,  as  I haue  often  noted  in  the  feuerall  bookes,  itisa  veric  pleafing  thing  to  fee
the  due  punifhment  of  the  wicked  doers, and  the  procurers  of  cuill,  as  befides  thofe  I haue

noted,  you  may  fee  that  none  fcapeth  of  thexxxij.  kings  that  came  out  of  Afirkkebut

' " Rogero


11^  Thtlife  tf  Ariofto,

Rt£^er»  and  Sohrino,  the  one  a perfwader  to  peace,  tkc  other,  a iuft  vrarriour,  and  true  of
hii  word.

Befida  in  i^/7#//<»,isa  praife  of  learning, who  with  his  founding  home,  by  which  is  meant
eloquence,  and  with  his  booke  (betokening  wifdome)  both  the  gifts  of  LogtftilU^  becom-
meth  a tamer  of  monflers,as  well  as  a conquerour  of  men, and  accompUHieth  greater  mat-
ters alone,  then  all  the  refl:  do  with  their  force  and  armes.

Furthcr,in  the  praife  of  learning, and  to  moue  Princes  to  fauour  learning,  he  (hewes  how
onely  the  pen  of  the  learned  is  that  that  preferucs  the  good  fame  of  Princes;  as  for  the  com-
mon foolifli  Pamphlet-writershexondemneth  them,  likening  them  to  Vultures,  carren
Crowes,  and  chattering  Pyes, that  are  not  able  to  faue  their  friends  names  fiom  the  lakeof
obliuion,  becaufe  their  writings  arc  not  durable.  Thus  much  I thought  good  to  note  of  the
gcncrall  Allcgorie  of  the  whole  worke,to  giue  you  occafion  to  ruminatc^as  it  were,  & bet-
ter to  difgcft  that,which  you  before  in  reading,  did  perhaps  f wallow  down  whole  without
chcwing.Now  me  thinke  it  is  cuen  high  time  to  take  away,  & bid  much  good  do  it  you, or
at  lead  noharme  do  it  you,or  ifyouthiukc  it  will  foral  this, the  bed  phyfickc  I cau  preferibe
yau,is  to  takealcafe  or  two  ofS.  Matthewes  CofptllfOt  S.  Pauls  Epidles,  anditlliall
redorc  you  to  your  perfed  health.


THE  LIFEOF  ARIOSTO  BRIEF-


LY AND  COMPENDIOVSLY  GATHERED
OVT  OF  SUNDRIE  ITALIAN
writers, by  John  Harington.


avt

tvorthie  to
hatte  their
Hues
mitten.


PhitatliS
Hues.  The
xij.  Cxf-
ars.The  x.
£mpe-
rours.  Tie
Mirror  of
Mofil-
firatts.


<!^j£^7^Hofe  that  performed  anynotablc  workc  in  their  Hues,  cither  for
the  profiteof  their  countrey,  or  for  the  aduancement  of  learning,
or  in  any  other  thing  that  hathmade  them  worth  the  talkingof  af-
ter their  dcccafcs,  haue  for  the  mod  part  both  bene  recorded  inthc
Hidorics  of- their  times,  andalfohad  theirnames  eternized  by  fpe-
ciall  Treatifes  written  of  their  liues  ;by  which  the  enfuing  ages
might  know  their  country,  their  parentage,  their  timcofbiith,  their
education,  their  difpofition,  their  adions,  and  their  end : Whether  ic
be  that  men  are  willing  to  profecutc  their  deferts  with  a thankfoll
remdjrancc  after  their  deaths, as  it  were  for  a kind  of  recompcncc  of  their  trauell  in  this  life,
whether  for  the  incouragement  of  thofe  that  Hue,  to  make  them  by  vertuc  hunt  after  fame
Neither  onely  haue  men  ofgood  deferts  bene  praifed  for  their  vermes,  but  alfo  the  wicked
haue  bene  blazed  for  their  faults,  that  thofe  whomedefircoffame  cannot  allure  to  well  do-
ing, yet  fcare  of  fhame  and  ignominie,may  terrific  from  lewd  adions.  In  both  which  kinds
diuerfehaue  employed  their  pennes,  both  in  former  ages  and  now  of  late,  to  the  great  good
and  delight  of  the  dudious  reader.  Witnefle  Plutarks  liues  called  his  Parallels,  comparing
the  notable  men  of  Romcand  Cr eccciSuetonins booke  of  thetwelue  C<t/<«r/:anothcrsaftcr
him  often  Emperours  Ccxcellcntly  written  in  Italian)  And  of  our  ownecountricand  in
ourowne  language,  theMirrour  ofMagidrates,  in  which  the  life  and  foil  of  many  great
perfoBs  is  very  well  fet  downe,and  in  a good  verfe.Now  (as  I fay)this  being  a common  cu-
doDic,and  as  it  were  a due  reward  to  men  ofgood  defcrt,nomarucllif  thisPoct,whofc

workc


Thtltfeof  %^rhflo»

'worke  hath  beenc  acceptable  tofo  many  thoufands,  haue  alfo  found  this  fauour  to  haue
his  life  written,  which  hath  bene  done  by  three  Italians  that  I haue  read,  namely
Umo  f*oro  of  Pado,  gieroUmo  Garofala  of  Ferrara,  and  by  Stmon  For»Ar%  oI  Rhtgjio:
out  ofwhofe  three  reports  I haue  gathered  this  compendious  trcatiIe,to  fatUfic  iuch  as
are  defirous  to  know  who  this  yfrwi?®  was,  whom  1 haue  lo  greatly  extolled  inmv  Apo-
logie,as  a benefaftor  of  all  ftiidious  miodes,  and  on  whole  workc  1 haue  employed  lo  much
time,  to  put  it  into  Englilli  verfe,  and  to  bellow  lb  many  notes  as  i haur  done  vpon  tnc
expounding  of  his  Allegories, and  whatlocucrclfe  1 iudged  lit  for  the  readers  of  w».akei  ca-
pacities.

Firil  therefore  you  mud  know,  thatthe  houfc  or  name  of  the  Ariafli  came  firfl:  out  of
Bologna , (not  as  lomc  haue  vainely  lurmilcd  dcriued  of*  the  Andtj  or  Art  nifU ) for  yet
their  name  is  remaining  in  Bologna  in  good  account  and  reckning,  and  was  long  fince
of  chat  reputation  for  gentrie  and  wcalt.i , that  U/arf^u's  Olfjfe  the  third  of  the  houfc  of
Eftc,  thought  it  no  dilparagetnenc  to  nim  to  marriea  wife  out  of  that  ftocke,  called  Lipp4
jirtoflu.  This  Ladie  was  of  excellent  bcawtir  and  wit,  and  bringing  with  her  vnto  Ferra-
ra (oine  of  the  Arioftiof  her  kin  and  followers,  by  her  fauour  and  countenance,  they  lb
■Well feathered  their  neftsin  Ferrara  in  n^rlife,  diatthey  hcldcuer  fincc  thcaccount  of
Gentlemen  of  the  better  fort;  But  (admit  their  familic  were  of  good  reckning  before)
yet  thccxcellencicof  this  famous  man  we  now  create  of,  by  theconfent  of  all  tliac  write
of  it,  hath  greatly  increaled  thcaccount  and  credit  thereof.  His  fathers  name  was  2^-  Wsfather.
coUi  Ario,h  and  both  his  father  and  vncles  bare  oidicesin  their  countrey  of  goodva-
lew:  his  mothers  name  was  Art4  of  the  houfe  of  Alala^utRe  inRvggio,  as  appearcth  Hhmotltt
in  one  of  his  Satvres  where  he  namethher.  Now  though  this  Lodsvrtke  Arioflo  were
his  fathers  eldcft  lonne,  yet  he  bad  foure  brothers  and  fiuc  lifters  : the  names  of  his  bro-
thers himfclfe  let  downs  in  his  lecond  Satyre,  Charles^  Alexander,  and  gubritl^  Hit  bro-

where  alfo  he  complaincth  that  Mercttrie  was  no  great  friend  to  his  houfe,  meaning
that  their  wealth  was  but  fmall,  becaufe  none  of  them  had  vfed  to  incrcafe  it  by  traf-
ficke  or  merhandizc.  Now  though  his  father  were  a mm  of  good  rccicning,  as  ha-
uing  bene  in  his  youth  a companion  ofDake  Borfe^  and  after  that  an  olficcr  to  Duke

in  a good  place,  namely  his  A/aiord«mo yVnbich  hike  to  lignificas  much  a*  great
mifter  or  ftewardofhis  houfe,  and  often  employed  as  Ambafladour  from  him  to  the
Pope,  and  to  the  King  of  France,  and  confequcntly  receiued  of  him  great  preferments,
aswell  indignities,  asreuenewes  and  fees,ycc  itlcemeth  chic  he  liued  euer  foatthevre-
termoftof  his  abilitie,  that  he  purled  vp  little  to  the  incrcafe  ofhis  ftocke,  and  cherby
left  his  heireno  verierich  man.Butto  fpcake  of  thcfonneofwhom  i chiefly  intend  my  Hu  to-
difeourfe,  certaine  it  is  that  from  his  verie  childhood,  he  flicwed  great  tokens  of  for  ward  ^^^dnejfe
nesinall  ftudie,  but  fpecially  inPoetri  ,in  fo  much  that  his  father  yet  liuing  he  ^^anf- .
latedthc  tale  of  Pyramw  znd  Thisbe  into  verfe,  making  in  a manner  a Comcdic  of  it,
and  fo  caufed  his  brothers  and  fifters  to  play  it.  Howbeithis  father  being  vtterlv  vn-
learned,and  rather  regarding  what  ftudie  would  be  moft  profitable  to  be  followed  by  his
fonne,then  what  his  nature  and  inclination  didbeft  feruc  him  to,  compelled  him  to  ftudie
the  ciuill  law,  in  which  hauing  plodded  fome  ycarcs  verie  difpleafantly,and  with  no  great
’ proofe,  at  laft  he  left  it  vtcerly,  and  fell  to  more  fweete  ftudies;for  the  barbarournefl'e  of  the
phrafeagreed  notwiththefharpnesofhis  conceit, in  fo  much  thathc writcthofhimfcirc
(though  rather  perhaps  of  his  modeftic,  then  that  it  wasfb)

Pnffar^  vent'dmi  mi  troUMMy  e vopt

Hauer  di  PedagopiOy  ch'afatica

JutefebaureitjuAchetraduffe  Bfepo»

That  is  Co  fay,  that  being  twentic  ycarc  old,  he  had  Deed  ofafchoolcmafter  c6  conft^

Nn


Mis  fev-
uice  of
Cardinali
Mippolfto.


416  The  life  of  Ariofo.

Sfopes  fables  j though  I fee  not  how  that  could  be,  coafideBiog  that  being  vcrlo  young,
they  fay  be  madeand  openly  pronounced  an  Oration  in  Latine,  that  gaueeuen  then  great
hope  of  him  : the  beft  likelihood  is , that  when  his  father  fet  him  to  the  Law,  which  he
hadnominde  vnto,  that  then  he  loft  his  Latine  againe,  which  is  foonc  done,  and  fo
was  glad  to  fall  to  itfrefhly,  after  hec  came  to  mans  eftate,  which  he  did  veiy  ftudiouf-
ly,  reading  many  bookes,  and  cfpecially  H9r^ce  whom  he  fludied  lo  thorowly.  chat
he  was  able  to  expound  diuers  hard  and  obfeure  places  in  his  Odes,  which  were  then  not
vnderftood;  and  it  is  obferned,  that  when  Ze^tlie  tenth  was  Pope,  both  his  holinefic
and  diuers  great  Prelates  in  Rome  fauoured  him  greatly , cuen  in  that  refpc(ft.  Thus  as
I laid  , his  naturall  inclination  carrying  him  chiefly  to  Poctrie,  hegauc  himfelfe  torcade
thoie  Poets  that  were  of  beft  account,  both  in  Latine  and  Italian,  as  his  wotke  well
fhewes,  in  his  oft  and  excellent  imitations  Gfthcm,ar.d  his  gift  wasfuch,  that  though
his  youngeft  brother  wrote  reafonable  well,  and  by  meancs  of  a lameneflc  he

had,  gauc  himfelfe  wholly  to  ftudie,  yet  he  came  fb  farrefliort  of  him,  that  there  was
no  comparifon : fb  that  as  one  faid  of  Tullj^  Satis  eji  ntn  modo  in  vnafamilia^fedin  vna
esuitate  ejft  vnum  Rhetorem  \ il  is  enough  to  Iwue  one  good  Orator  hot  onely  in  a fa-
mily, but  euen  in  a whole  Citic;So  one  may  fay  of  Ariofie^it  is  cncjugh  that  all  Italy  had  one
fo  excellent  a Poet.  Yet  he  was  often  wont  to  lament  as  before  him  Petrarkey  and  before
them  botht?«^is  noted  to  haue  done,  that  his  father  ftilldraue  him  from  Poetrie, as  chat
verft  witnefTcth,

Ahilajfcy  quando  hehhial  Pegafeo  tuclo
L'etadifpofia,  echelefrefcbeguancicy
Ncm  Ji  videan  anchor  fiorir,  d'vn  peh
JUio  padre  mi  eaccio  con  fpiedi  e lancie
Non  cbe  eon  fproni,  a volger  tefii  e chiofi,

Etnoccupe  cin^  antti  in  ^ueSe  ciancie.


But  to  proceed,  when  he  had  prettily  entred  himfelfe  in  Poctrie,  and  was  of  the  age  of
foureand  tv«xntie,  his  father  departed  his  life,  and  as  1 in  pate  noted  before,  left  him
no  rich  man , whether  that  the  inheritance  was  diuided  among  all  the  brothers , as  in
fome  places  of  England  and  Wales,  the  enftomeof  tbcGauel!  icinde  allow  eth , or  that
his  lining  ftood  moft  vpon  ofliccs  and  fees  that  dyed  with  him  ; but  thus  they  write,  ^
that  he  was  then  greatly  perplexed  with  the  charge  of  fo  great  a familie , and  with
beftowing  his  lifters,  aadprouiding  for  his  brothers,  that  he  was  euen  rcadietohaue
giaea  ouer  all  his  ftudie,  had  not  the  emulation  that  he  had  with  a Gentleman  of
his  ownc  name  andkinne,  called  Pandolfo  Ariofloy  ftill  renewed  in  him  his  former
difpoficion:  but  in  procefleof  time  this  Pamdolfo  dyed,  with  which  his  friend  and
colin  were  guatly  difeouraged  , and  for  a rime  againe  difcontinucd  , but  yet  C)  as  the
world  before  that  time  had  fomc  conceit  of  his  fharpnefle  of  wit , and  of  his  gift
in  well  writing  : In  the  end  being  toward  thirtic  yearcs  old,  he  was  for  his  good  parts
entertained  into  the  feruice  of  Don  Hippo/tto  Cardinali  of  Efte,  a great  fauourer
of  learning  and  good  wits,  and  one  that  kept  continually  m his  court  great  ftorc
of  excellent  learned  men,  among  whom  driofio  was  receiued  in  veric  honoura-
ble fort  : and  yet  to  this  time  he  had  not  written  any  workof  fame,  but  fome  few  Son-
nets ; forbearing  belike  to  write  till  he  were  well  ftufFcd  with  matter  ; as  wife  buil-
ders beginne  not  their  buildings  till  they  haue  brought  their  Lime  and  ftonc  and  timber
in  place,  Icaft  one  (hbuld  ftay  for  the  other.  At  his  very  entrance  into  this  Cardinals  fer-
uice,he  determined,  as  it  fiiould  feeme,  to  make  fb.ne  Poem,  finding  his  ftrength  to  feme
him  to  it, and  though  he  could  haue  accomplifbed  it  verie  well  in  latine, yet  he  chofe  rather

' " hia


7 he  life  of  Arioso.  ^17

his  natiue  tongue,  cither  becaufc  ho  thought  he  could  not  attaineio  the  highcR  place  of
praife,  the  fame  being  before  occupied  by  diueri,  and  fpecially  t^ir^i/and  0 > i,  ..r
caufehefound  it  belt  agreed  with  his  matter  and  with  thctimc,or  becaufc  he  h.n  3 dclirc
(asmofttnen  haue)to  inrich  their  owne  language  withfuch  writings  as  may  make  it  in
more  account  with  ocher  nations:  buctlicfirllof  thefc  was  the  true  caalc  indeed,  for  when
would  hauediflTwaded  him  from  writing  Italian,  alledging  that  he  fhciild  wu:nc
more  praileby  writing  Latine,  his  anfwcr  was,chachc  had  rather  be  one  of  tiie  princi-
pal! and  chiefe  Thufean  writers, then  fcarle  the  fecond  or  third  among  the  Latincb:  addin^,
that  he  found  his  hum  ur  (his  Genius  he  called  ic)heft  inclining  to  it.  VVhercfbr;  going  fir-
ward  with  thac  rcfolution.ofall  the  Poems  that  were  then  in  tnat  kind  in  manner  of  hn>ory
(they  were  called  Romatiii,  which  in  French  ■'iguitieth  briefe  notes  ofoccurrents)  he  cnole
Boyardo^vpon  whole  workc  he  would  ground,  botn  became  lie  laid  Boynrdot  woikc  was  j j
frelh  in  '.u;rymansininde,  asalfo  became  he  would  Ihunne  the  bringing  in  of  new  names,
and  of  new  matter,  which  he  thougne  would  be  nothing  fo  plealanc  vnto  his  country-  Huuhr  I >ir
men,  as  chat  of  which  ciiey  had  fome  taft  alreadic,  and  yet  withall  a dehreto  know  fur-
thcrofbeing  by  Bojardo  left  vnperfetft.  Thus  (as  I faid)hc  began  this  work:  of  his  cn-
titiikd  Or/aado  being  about  theageofthirtie  ycares,  and  being  entred  into  the

feruiceofCardinall  HippahtOy  howbeic  he  did  not  fo  wholly  giue  himlelfc  cither  to  rea-
ding, for  the  inriching  of  his  owne  wic,or  to  writing, far  the  pleafure  and  profit  of  others,
that  he  withdrew  himfelfe  from  fuch  honorable  leruiccs  as,  he  was  called  to.  For  when  .
Pope  lulia  the  fecond  had  intended  to  mike  warre  vpon  the  Duke  of  Ferraraf  whofe  bro-  piny  f fats
thcrCardinill  , was)  andet  L^dwtekf  Ariojlo  was  chofenas  amoft  fit  man  to

goofAmbalTagetohim,  topacide  his  wrath;  the  which bulines  he  managed  lb  well,  that  uaam-
he  wan  great  reputation  of  wifdome  and  diferetion  at  his  returning  : Howbeic,  it  was  not
long  after  his  retornc,  but  that  the  forenamed  Pope,  bein^  indeed  a man  of  an  vnquicc
Cpiric.and  giuen  all  to  the  warrcs,leuicd  a great  power  agaioft  the  Duke,  and  flaipped  ma-
ny of  his  fouldiers , to  fend  them  oucr  Poe  the  great  riucr  that  runnes  by  Fcrrarar  thefe
were  metby  the  forces  of  the  Duke  vpon  the  water,and  in  that  fcruice  Ariojla  himfelfe  dc-  ^
meaned  himlclfe  verie  valiantly  , and  cookc  one  ofthe  beft  fhippas  and  bell  ftored  with  utccby  fea
vicTuall  and  in.inition  in  all  the  flecte.  15uc  thefe  armies  being  dilFolued.thc  Duke  thought
good  once  againe  to  fend  to  pacific  that  fame  ouer  terrible  PreUt;  and  euery  man  ihuu-
ning  the  oiiice , knowing  the  furious  nature  of  IttUo^  Arioflo  againe  for  the  fcruice  and
fafetie  ofliiscountric,  aduentured  to  go,  indeed  an  exceeding  aduenture, for  neither  were
thewayesfafe  intime  of  warresto  go  fo  weakly  guarded;  neither  vvas  that  Popes
fare  fupportable  where  he  placed  the  lame;  yet  through  both  thefe  dangers  he  waded,  '
and  prefented  himfelfe  to  the  Pope ; but  finding  by  fomc  priuie  intelligencc.that  the  place
was  too  hot  for  him,  begat  home  againe  with  great  perill  to haue  mard  alibis  fine  in-
iiention,with  thelofieof  that  head  from  whence  it  came.  For  this  fcruice  notwichftan-il"^f«
ding  he  was  greatly  both  praifed  and  fauoured.  Now  when  things  alter  by  the  goodfuc-
celfe  ofthe  Duke,grew  to  more  quiet, then  he  alfo  betooke  him  to  his  quiet  ftudies,
fequently  did  proceed  in  his  excellent  Poem  : But  fodainly,  when  he  had  made  fi)  much
thereof,  as  gaue  great  hope  to  all  men,that  it  would  prouc  ati  excellent  piece  of  works, he
happened  to  fall  into  the  Cardinals  di( pleafure,  by  ineanesthathcrefufedtogoe  with  him
into  Hungarie:  which  though  the  laid  Cardinall  took  very  diipleafantly  ;yct  knowing
the  valcw  of  the  man, and  his  worth,  he  would  notdifgrace  him  op. *nly,  though  he  wan  bUs.
tedtio  enemies  to  feed  and  further  that  ill  conceit  in  him;  which  mailer  £.5^ir;r  ^4-  fin-
ding.wasfogreatly  dlfcouraged,  that  he  intermitted  his  writing  man/  yearcs : and  to
mend  the  matter,  one  taking occafion  ofthis  eclipfe  of  the  Cardinals fauour,  puchim  in
fuice  for  a piece  of  land  of  his  ancient  inheritance,  which  was  notonely  a great  vexa-
tion to  his  minde,  but  a charge  to  his  purfe,  and  trauellto  his  bodic  ;for  vndoubtcdly,
the  clattering  of  armour,  thenoifeof  great  Ordinance,  the  found  of  trumpet  and  drumrac,

Nq  a the


4i8  The  life  ofArieflo.

the  ncying  of  horfes  do  not  fo  much  trouble  the  fweete  Mufes , as  doth  the  bfabling  of
Lawyers,  the  paltering  of  Attorneys  and  the  ciuill  warr  or  rather  mofi:  vnciuill  dna-
greeing  of  forfworne  Jurors.  Thus  was  good  inafler  Lodwicke  interrupted  of  his  couric
of  writing  fourteene  whole  ycares,  cuen  to  the  death  of  the  Cardinall ; after  which  time
he  had,  or  rather  he  tooke  to  himfelfc  more  libertie  or  leafurc  to  follow  his  owne  humor  ,
and  priuatc  ftudic  and  in  procelTe  of  time  finilhed  to  great  perfedicn  that,  which  he  had
hhfauour  begun  with  great  cxpcdlation;yet  did  the  Duke  iy^lfonfo  allure  him  by  all  meancs  he  could
cr  credit  to  his  court,  vfing  him  like  a companion  rather  then  like  a (eruant,  and  offering  him  great
ojilices  and  preferments  if  he  could  haue  made  him  Icruc  him  inordinarie  j but  he  louing
^ •'  his  libertie  more  then  any  preferment  , refufed  both  his  and  other  great  offers  of
great  Princes  and  Cardinalls,  asalfo  ofPopcL^®  the  tenth,  a great  faucurer  of  learning
and  good  wits,  of  all  whom  notwithftanding  he  receiued  many  graces,  and  fome  good
gifts; but  for  countries  fake  , and  of  his  gratefull  nature  he  was  cucr  relying  of  the
Duke  of  Ferrara ; and  finding  that  the  Duke  did  delight  in  his  writings,  and  fpeci-
HisCme-  ally  in  fine  Comedies,  he  made  fine  : LaCafferi*  , I J**fpoJitiy  la  Lena^  il  Nigromante^
mde^  /d  Scholaflica:  but  of  thislaft  he  made  but  three  ads,  and  it  was  finifned  by  his  bro-
ther gabriel . Thelc  Comedies  the  Duke  did  fo  highly  efteeme  , that  he  built  a veric
furaptuous  ftage  inafaire  large  hall  at  Ferrara,  of  purpofe  for  a place  to  haue  them
plaid  and  reprefented  in  his  court  : and  he  vfed  other  great  tokens  of  fiuour  to  him,  but
Ipccially  ( which  is  indeed  the  onely  true  token  of  fiiuour  in  a Prince  ) he  gaue  him
great  rewards,  enabling  him  thereby  to  build  a conuer.icnt  houfe  in  Ferrara,  with
a delicate  garden  to  it , in  which  be  vfed  often  to  fit  and  walke,  and  make  verfes,  and
writing  diuers  other  both  wittie  and  pleafant  difeourfes,  or  tranflations  out  of  French
Hhfelici-  orSpanifh,  with  fuch  felicitie  and  good  grace  in  the  Italian , that  his  doings  were  in
j/c  rn  ft  great  account  with  all  the  Princes  of  Italy  , and  they  fent  him  manie  giftes  for  copies
• but  office  ofchargehe  was  exceeding  loth  to  take,  faying,  that  he  would  not
other  his  libertie  for  the  befl  Flat  in  Rome,  meaningaCardinals  Hat; further  he  would
tongues  confefle  of  himfelfethat  he  was  variable  in  his  defires,  and  in  his  difpofition,  and  there-
Histem-  fore  would  be  tide  to  nothing.  For  his  dyet  he  was  verie  temperate,  and  a great  enemic
perance  ofexcefle  and  fiirfetting,  andfo  careleffe  of  dclicates,as  though  he  had  had  no  pcrfcuerance
tndtet.  thetaft  of  tneates,  infomuch  as  one  day  a friend  of  his  in  fport,  caufed  a Muskite  tobe  let
before  himinffeed  of  a Partrich,  butby  miftaking  of  theferuingma  that  fet  it  on  theboord,
another  Gentleman  hapnedto  taftit,  and  lothe  left  was  difeouered,  & he  writeth  ofhini-
Iclfcin  one  place,

Jo  nonho  troppo  g»flo  de  •viuande^

Che  Scalco  degno  ejferal  ntondo

Qj^ndo  vineAttgli  httomini  digiande.


Uis  mart-
ape  doubt-
full.

His  fonnes
hafiards.


That  is  to  fay,  that  his  taft  was  not  delicate,and  that  he  was  fit  to  haue  lined  in  the  world
when  they  fed  on  Akorns ; howbeit,  for  women  I cannot  fo  much  praife  his  tempe-
rance, for  he  is  loted  to  haue  had  difhoneft  companie  with  one  Alexandra  , though
fome  fay  he  was  married  to  her  priuily  , and  durft  not  be  acknowne  of  it  for  fearc
to  leefc  fome  fpirituall  liuings  that  he  had,  which  were  not  lawfull  to  beheld  by  a mar-
ried man:  but  howfoeuer  it  was,  his  two  lonnes  were  counted  but  bafe  borne,  though
both  of  them  profpered  reafonable  well  in  the  world:  their  names  were  Virginio  and
Tattifla.  Virginia  became  a fpirituall  man,  and  his  father  furrendred  fome  of  his  liuings
vnto  him;  the  other  became  Captainc  ofa  band  of  the  Dukes,  and  a man  of  good
account  with  the  Duke.  AUb  there  wasaLadie  called  genevpta  a faire  and  modeft  La-
dle, whom  he  made  great  profefllon  of  lone  vnto;  but  whether  he  enioyed  her  or  no,
itisnotknownc,  and  therefore  wc  may  imagine  the  beftrhefell  in  loue  with  one  (whe-
ther


The  life  of  o/  riofo.  ^ j p

ther  that  were  this  Genervra  or  no, I know  not,)in  Florence  i i the  houfe  o?V,fpncci,n  kins-
woman ol  his  finding  her  one  day  drelTing  of  a cote  like  an  armour  for  one  of  her  lonncs.a-
gainft  he  lliould  go  into  the  great  fhew  that  they  haue  there  onmidloracrceue(a»thcy
were  wont  to  haue  here  in  London,)whcrcupon  he  made  that  comparifon  in  the  54  Ihnle
ofthexxiii/.bookc  of  Orlando  F«ri<7/&,ofthe  wound  that  the  noble  Zsrbim  Prince  of  Scot,
land,  had  recciued  of  miandricario  :

The  Prince  fo  eager  rvat  he  felt  no  fmart^
let  ran  the  hloud  out  of  his  hrefl  a’naine^
j4»d  of  his  armour  all  the  former  part,

IPith  crimfon  Hreame  of  blond  it  diddijlaine:

So  haue  J feene  her  hand,that  to  mine  hart
Hath  bene  a canfe  of  anguifh great  and paine,
when  [he  a purple  feame  or  flowre  bath  dranne,

In  fitter  kirtle,  or  in  fleette  of  lawne.


Alfo  his  prettie  fantafticall  beginning  of  the  fine  and  thirtieth  Canto  in  the  fiilland  fecond
ftalFe,  with  the  firft  and  fccond  and  third  of  the  fixteenth  Canto,  do  proue  that  he  was  fub-
iet^  to  the  palfion  ofloue,but  withall,that  his  loue  was  placed  vpon  women  of  good
worth  and  of  great  modeftie.  Now  though  I dare  not  excufe  him  in  this  fb  great  a fault,
yetpartly  inrefped  he  was  vnmarried, partly  becaule  thefe  white  diucls  haue  fuch  a temp-
ting power  vpon  the  earth  , me  thinkes  1 fhould  eafily  obtainc  a pardon  for  him,  cf  all
youthat  reade  this  fliort  difeourfe  ofhis  life.  But  omitting  this  one  peccadiliofm  all  his
ocher  proceedings  he  was  very  modeft,  and  iuft,  and  affable,  and  very  graue  andd|(crcct,  peeieof
as  he  well  approued,  when  after  the  death  o( Leo  the  tench,  he  was^though  halfe  againft  liruicein
1ii»  will)  employed  by  the  Duke,  as  a Lieutenant  or  high  iLricuc,  in  thccountric  called
Graidignana,  being  then  full  of  fadions  and  diuifions,  which  he  fb  orderly  gouerned,  and
fo  well  quieted,  chat  he  left  them  all  in  good  peace  and  concord,leauing  among  them  a vc-
liegood  report  ofhis  wifdome  and  equitie,  and  winning  not  onely  the  loue  of  the  better
fort,  but  alfo  a wonderfull  reuerence  of  the  wilder  fort  of  people,  and  a great  awe  euen  in
robbers  and  cheeues:  as  appeared  one  day  by  a chance  that  happened  to  him  in  the  time  of
that  forenamed  office. For  as  he  rode  one  day  with  fine  or  fix  horfes,  in  oneofehe  m..ll
licentious  and  diforderly  partsof  tbecountrie,  he  was  to  paffcneereRhodeabyacompa-  Lmofthe
nie  ofarmed  men  that  lay  difperfed  inthefliade,  andbymeanes  ofthe  dificntionandfal-?<’o/»/f»/d/
ling  out  of  two  men  of  fome  reckoning  in  that  coiintrey,  called  Domenico  Morotto,  and
Philippa  Pacchione,  there  weredayly  diuers  ryots  and  outrages  committed  thereabout  vpon
the  paffengersby  fuch  kindeofmen,  fo  as  he  rode  by  them  not  without  fome  doubt  to
haue  bene  aflaultcd:  but  being  pafl:  them  abouta  ftoiies  caft,  the  chicfeofchc  companie
demaunded  ofhis  man  that  rode  hindermoft,  what  his  mafters  name  \vas,hc  told  him
Matter  Lodorvike  Arioflo,  whereupon  ftraight  the  partie  armed  as  he  was,  ran  after  him;

Ariofo  ftayed  his  horfc  feeing  him  come  after  him,  doubting  in  his  mindc  to  what
purpofe  he  came,  but  when  he  came  nearer,  hecraued  pardon  of  him,  that  he  had  not
done  his  dutie  vnto  him  in  his  going  by,  fhewinghim  how  he  was  PhtU’po  Pacchiane,
defiring  his  acquaintance,  and  offering  to  be  at  his  commandementwi  hall  humilitie  and
courtefie.

Not  long  after  this,  hauing  occafion  about  fome  matter  ofhis  office,  to  liaiie  forac  con-
ference with  one  of  the  principal!  Gentlemen  of  Lurca,  and  appointing  the  fame  Gen-
tleman to  meete  him  atatowne  called  San  Pellegrino; at  his  comming  thither,  he  found
notonely  the  faid  Gentleman  there  ready  to  attend  him,  but  alfo  divers  others : withLa-
diesaad  gentlewomen  that  came  of  purpofe  to  fee  him,  drawne  by  the  found  of  his  lear-
ning and  wit,wher«  they  featted  him  and  entertained  him  vcricaobly,  cuericone  ftriumg

Nn  5 w'ho


420  Thtlift  ofAmIto,

who  could  do  him  moft  courtefic.  Immediately  after  this  commiQionof  his  was  expi-
red, he  was  earneftly  dealt  with  to  hauebene  Ambafladour  to  Pope  Clement y but  he
would  by  no  meancs  accept  it.  At  his  comming  home  giuing  himlclfc  ftill  to  writing,  the
Menechm  Duke  intrcattd  him  to  tranflatethe  Mcnechmiof  PUrnu*  into  Italian,  which  he  did
of  Plautus  with  io  fit  phfrafes  of  fpeech,  and  fo  agreeable  to  the  Italian  tongue,  that  it  was  not  coun-
tcdamongthelcaftofhispraifes:  and  as  for  all  the  other  Comedies  of  his  making,  they
were  of  lucheftimation,  that  they  were  often  reprefentedvp^jn  the  ftage, and  for  the  moft
part  by  Gentlemen,  in  fo  much  that  Don  Ffanci/eo  of  Elie,  that  was  after  Marques  of
Mafla,  the  firft  time  that  the  Lena  was  plaidj  to  grace  it  the  more,  rehearf  ed  the  Prologue
thereof  himfelfein  publike.

One  of  his  Comedies  called  Cafleria,  hebeganin  the  life  time  of  his  father  (though
he  intermitted  it  many  ycares  after)and  one  prettie  accident  they  hauc  noted  about  it  which
' Ihe  wes  his  notable  gift  that  he  had  to  apply  to  imitation  in  his  Poctrie,all  that  might  with

^pretty  good  iudgmenc  be  vfed  in  it.  It  fortuned  his  father  one  day  grew  into  fome  choller  with
ihMce.  him,  and  rebuked  himvefyfharpcly,  and  with  a long  fpcech  and  many  words,  for  fbmc
matter  that  he  laid  to  his  charge, imputing  to  him  very  great  blame  for  it, and  all  the  while
he  made  him  no  anfwer,  but  gaue  him  full  fcopc  and  libcrtic  to  take  his  |51eafurc  with  him:
foone  after  his  brother  when  his  father  had  turned  his backe^ began  to  reafon  with

him  vpon  the  fame  fubietft,  and  to  lay  to  his  charge  the  fame  arguments ; but  he  cafily  re-
futed him,  and  with  verie  good  and  found  reafons  iuftified  his  doing.  W hy  then?  ( quoth
his  brother)  what  meant  you,  you  did  not  fatisfie  my  father  at  thchrft,as  you  might  cafily
hauedone  with  foreafbnable  an  anfwer?  In  troth  (faid  to  tell  you  true,

I was  thinking  of  Erofilos p2vt  in  my  Comedie  I haue  begunue  of  Cafferta,md  me  thought
my  fathers  fpeech  to  me,  was  fofit  tobe  affigned  to  that  part  of  an  old  man  chiding  his
fonne,  that  1 forgat  while  I was  thinking  to  make  fiich  a part  in  fport,  that  I heard  fiich  a
Jn  early  part  plaid  in  earneft.  In  making  his  Furiofoy  he  would  rife  fometime  at  one  or  two  of
theclocke  in  the  morning,  when  he  lay  at  his  friends  houfes,as  well  as  when  he  was  at
home  , and  then  he  would  caufean  old  feruant  of  his,  one  lohnde  PefcUiohxin^  him
pen  and  inke,  and  fo  would  write  many  verfes  when  he  found  himfelfe  well  dif^fed
to  it,  and  then  he  had  a great  pleafurc  to  read  them  to  his  friends , both  Gentlemen  and
fairc  Ladies,  among  whom  by  the  pleafantncfle  of  his  wit  and  his  good  grace, he  was  eucc
Jgool  well  accepted.  The  Dukeof  Ferrara  tooke  him  for  fo  good  a companion,  that  when  he
Compania  rodcany  ioiirney,  he  would  defire  to  haue  him  with  him, and  at  idle  times  he  tooke  great
’ipontbe  pleafure  to  haue  him  read  to  him,as  well  other  bookes  as  his  own,hc  had  fogoodagraca
in  reading,  and  fo  fweet  a pronunciation,  and  yet  not  delighting  toheare  himfelfe  (a
fault  that  many  other  hauc  bene  noted  of)  but  alwayes  giuing  a fpirit  to  that  which  he
read,  whether  it  were  his  own  writing  or  other  mens,  and  as  he  himfelfe  could  pro-
Hisgoo.i  nounce  verie  well,  fo  was  it  a great  penance  to  him  to  heare  others  pronounce  ill,  chat
which  himfelfe  had  written  excellent  well.  Info  much  as  they  tell  of  him  how  com-
Q,,  j^ay  by  a Potters  fhoppe  that  had  many  earthen  vefi'cls  readic  made  to  fell  on  his
j ttie  Potter  fortuned  at  that  time  to  fing  fome  ftaffe  or  other  out  of  Orlando  Furiofo^

taubon  I thinke  that  where  Renaldo  requeftetk  his  horfe  to  tarrie  for  him,  in  the  firft  booke,  th«
hevfeda  3 j.  ftaffe:

Porter.

Ferma  “Baiardo  mio : Deh  ferma  il  piede  -
Che  P effer  fenn^a  te  troppo  mi  nnoce.

Or  fome  fuchgrauc  matter  fit  for  a Potter,  but  he  plotted  the  verfesoBtfo  ilfauourcdly
(as  might  well  befeeme  his  durtie  occupation ) that  t^riofto  being,  or  at  leaft  making  fem-
blance  to  be  in  a great  rage  withall,  with  a little  walking  ftickc  he  had  in  his  hand,
brake  diuers  of  the  pots  ; the  poore  Potter  put  quite  befide  his  long , and  almoft

bcfidei


The  life  of  Kyirioflo.  421

beddc  hioifclfe/o  fee  his  market  halfc  mard  before  it  was  a quarter  done, in  a pitiful  fowrc
manner  .between  railing  and  whyning, asked  what  he  meant  to  wrong  a poorc  man  that  had
neuerdone  him  iniury  in  all  his  life:ycs,Varlct, quoth  Ari»(lo,l  am  yet  fcarcc  eiien  with  thee
for  the  wrong  thou  hall  done  me  here  afore  my  face,  for  1 haue  broken  but  halfe  a dozen
bale  pots  of  thine,  that  arc  not  worth  fo  many  halfc  pence  j but  thou  hall  broken  and  man-
gled a fine  ftanza  of  mine  worth  a marke  of  gold.

He  built(as  I partly  touched  before)  a prettie  conuenient  houfe.and  being  demaunded
why  he  did  not  build  it  in  more  ftatcly  manner, confidering  what  lumpmous  pallaccs,  what
ftatcly  porches,  what  goodly  fountaines  hedeferibed  in  hrs  fmrtofffihc  aalwcred,tliac  words
were  cheaper  laydtogether  then  ftones.  Vpon  the  front  ofhis  doore  he  wrotca  vcrlc,t[Tat
few  ofthe  builders  of  this  latter  age  can  truly  vvrite,  or  at  kaft  if  they  could,  I would  (ay
rheir  houfes  were  ftrongly  built  indeed,  for  more  then  the  third  heirc;

Parua,fedapta  mihi^fed  nulli  o^ftoxUy/ed  non
Sord(da,petrtameo/ed  t<im:n  <Lre  domns.

That  is  to  fay;

This  honfe  is  fmitlly  btit  fit  for  me,  but  hterffttU  vtUo  none,

Et*t  pet  not  flmtifh,asjou  feCypet  payd  for  tvith  mine  orrne.

One  fiult  in  his  building  was,hc  would  often  fet  vp  and  pall  downe  many  parts  thereof,
and  he  would  lay  of  himfelfe,  that  he  vfed  his  houle  as  he  did  his  verfes,  mend  them
fo  much,  that  he  mard  them  quite.  For  indeed,  as  a tree  planted  in  an  orchard,  if  it  be  once
or  twice  well  pickt  and  pruncd,it  doth  further  the  growingTjf  it,  but  if  a min  be  cucr  fid-
ling  about  it,  it  will  Icefe  the  naturall  beauty,  and  hardly  keepelife:foisit  with  one  of  his
ftanzes  or  ftaues,  as  we  call  them,  at  the  firll  concerning  ofit,one  may  mend  that  which
he  fliall  fbdainly  fet  downe,  but  if  one  will  flill  be  turning  and  wrefting  of  it,  he  may
make  it  leefe  the  grace  it  had  at  the  firft.  But  what  fault  focucr  himfelfe  did  finde
with  his  owne  Verfes,  certaine  it  is  that  to  all  the  great  Princes  of  Italic  they  were
moft  acceptable,  as  witnefieth  the  diuers  great  and  honourable  gifts  they  gauehim,  as
namely  a penfion  of  twentic  pound  by  tiae  yeere  in  Millan  with  an  oiKce  to  it  giucn  him
by  HtppoiptOytnany  futes  graunted  him  by  the  Duke  of  with  great  rewards

from  Pope  Lto  the  tenth,  from  Cardinall  Farntfe,  from  Cardioall  Tybiemt,  and  chiefly
from  Marquefie  and  diuers  other  meaner flatcs  that  for breuities  fakcare  omitted.
Andbccaufe  now  I would  alfo  draw  to  an  end,  I will  a little  runne  cucr  that  that  hath
bene  fayd,with  fomewhat  that  hath  bene  forgotten,  and  fb  conclude,  beginning  from
his  birth.  He  was  borne  the  yeerc  1474  in  the  Gallic  ofRheggio,  his  father  being  then  Herest
gouernour  ofthe  Caftle,ic  Hands  in Lombardic ; he  was  tall  ofperfon,  of  complexion
melancholy,  giuen  much  to  lludie  and  mufing,  and  would  therewith  f'ometime  forget
himfelfe,  he  was  of  colour  like  an  Oliue,  fomewhattawnie  in  his  face,  but  fairc  skinned
otherwile,  his  haire  was  blacke,  bathe  quickly  grew  bald,  his  forehead  was  large,  his
eye-browesthinne,  his  eye  a little  hollow  but  very  full  oflifeand  very  blacke.his  nofe  was
large  and  hooked,  as  they  fay  the  Kings  ofPerfia  were,  his  teeth  palling  euen  and  white,
his  checks  but  leane,  his  beard  vcrythin,hisnccke  well  proportioned,  hislhouldersfquarc
and  well  made,but  fomewhat  Hooping,  as  almoH  all  that  looke  much  on  bookes  in  their
youth  are  inclined  to  be,  his  hand  fomewhat  drie,  and  a little  bow-legged.  His  counter-
feit was  taken  by  Tytiano  that  excellent  drawer  fb  well  to  the  life,  that  a man  would  thinke
yet  it  were  aliuc  j he  was  honoured  with  the  Lawrcllby  the  hands  ofthe  renowned  Em-
perour  CW/wthe  fifr,  intheyeare  153a.  which  was  a yeere  before  hee dyed . Now  for
hisdifpofition  as  we  haue  partly  touched  before, he  was  of  nature  affable,  not  proud,  ta-
king Icffe  vpon  him  then  others  didyeeld  vnto  him,  yet  putting  vp  no  knowne  iniurie
notofhis  betters  i fomewhat  amorous  in  his  youth,  very  fecret,  pafTing  Hudious,  by  na-
ture


His  wri-
tings do
/hew  he
had  great
si(iU  m
Cofmo-
grafhjf.


422  life  efArioflo,

tore  fearefull  vpoti  the  water,  and  therefore  whenhec  went  out  ofa  flaippeatany  time
he  would  fee  others  goe  before  him,  vfing  that  faying, .-though
for  mine  owne  part  I fee  no  great  reafon  for  it.  Further  he  was  not  very  venturous  oa
horie-backe,  for  they  fay  he  would  light  at  euery  place  of  danger,  though  others  rode  o-
uer  it.  He  loued  not  to  go  much  abroad  out  of  his  owne  countrey,  in  fo  much  as  he  writes
in  one  of  his  Satyres,

Che  VHol  Andare  a tornoy  a ter  no  vada
Vtgga  Jngleterra^  ZJngheriay  Francin  eSpagna^

Ame  piace  hahtur  U mia  contrad*
yi/fa  ho  Thofantty  Lombardia  Romagna
^gtel  monte  che  diuide,  e quel  che  (err a
ItalUy  e vn  mare  e Paltro  che  la  bagna
^ue/io  mi  baft  Ay  il  refto  della  terra
Senz,a  maipagar  Rheficyandro  cercando
Con  Tolomeoy  fia  il mondo  in paceo  inguerra*

Tothiseffedl  in  Englilh:

fVho  lift  to  ride  about y about  may  ride y
See  England y Vngherjy  and  France  and  Spainc'y
I lone  in  mine  owne  country  ftill  to  bidcy
In  viewing  which,  I furehauetane  fomepaine.

Thofcaity  Romagna  Lombardieybeftde
The  hils  that  Italie  clofe,  and  diuide,

Sufticetb  me,  the  reft  oft  all  the  maine
WithTolemej  tofearchand  eurj  coft.

In  peace  or  warrey  and  neuer pay  mint  hoft.


For  his  workes,!  haue  touched  them  bcforcjas  for  the  Hue  Cantoes  that  follow  Furiofby
I am  partly  ofopinion  they  were  not  hisjbothbecaufeme  thinkc  they  differ  in  fweetnefle
of  ftilc  from  the  other,  and  befide  it  is  not  likely  that  a man  of  his  iudgment,  hauing
madefo  abfolutc  a pcccc  of  woikeas  his  Furiefto  is yzx\d  hauing  brought  eucry  matter  to
agood  and  well  pleafing  conclufion,  would  as  it  were  marre  all  againe,  and  fet  them  all
by  the  cares,  and  bring  Rogero  'n\to  the  Whales  bellie,and  Aftelfto  with  himforcompa-
nie,  that  a little  before  were  conquerours  of  the  world,  and  vnmatchable  for  courage  and
learning:  butto  proceed  to  his  end, he  lined  tilhe  was  39.  yearcs  old,  and  toward  his  later
end  he  grew  fickly,and  by  much  Phy  ficke  marred  his  ftomakc;  his  ficknefle  grew  fir  ft  as  they
write  by  meanes  of  ill  digeftion,  he  being  a groftc  fceder,and  not  chewing  his  racate  well,
fo  that  in  the  end  it  wcakned  him  very  much.  That  very  night  that  he  fickned  and  tookc  his
bed,  there  hapnedagreat  mifchancc,  that  was  (in  the  opinion  of  moft  men)  a prefage  of
his  death. The  goodly  Hall  that  Alfonfo  hzd  beautified  with  the  moft  fumptuous  Stage
that  had  bene  fcencin  Ferrara,  (purpofely  for  Arioflos  Comedies) was  ficred  by  mifchancc,
and  confumed  a great  part  of  the  Dukes  pallace  befide.  Now  if  fire  (as  one  Artimederut
writeth  jbetokeneth  fame  and  greatnefle,  then  this  vnfortunate  fire  fortuning  at  fuch  a time
as  it  did,  may  yetf^ueasa  meanc  to  ennoble  themorcthis  famous  mans  death  .-and  as  Co-
mets arc  find  toforcfticw  the  death  of  Princes,  fo  this  terrible  fire  lading  fo  many  dayes  as
it  did, might  be  thought  to  foretell  his  death  chiefly  fince  it  confumed  that  worke  that  was
built  for  his  great  fame  and  honour.  He  tookehis  ficknefle  not  onely  patiently  but  euen
ohearfuIIy,afiirmingthat  he  was  willingto  die,  and  fb  much  the  rather  bccaulehc  heard
that  the  greateft  Diuines  were  ofopinion,  that  after  this  life  we  fhosld  know  one  another,
affirming  to  his  friends  that  were  by,  that  many  his  friends  were  departed,  whom  he  had  a
very  great  defire  to  vifitc,and  that  eucry  houre  feemed  to  him  a ycare  til  he  might  fee  them.
In  fincjhc  dyed  19  Ferrara  the  eight  of  Iuly,i  533  .and  though  he  were  wprthy  of  all  honor.


The  life  of  riojloi  ^ 2 j

yec  this  was  all  the  honour  he  had  done  at  chat  time, that  theMonIces  ofS. 'Benet  buried  him  in
their  Ch  irchi'and  contrary  to  their  cuftome, which  is  never  to  go  to  burials)  went  with  him
to  his  buriall,and  that  there  was  Icarcea  imn  that  could  write, bucdkl  honour  him  withan  b-
pitaph:  his  bones  were  after  taken  up  by  one  Sy  ^nyr  4ugnjlino,  and  laid  in  a very  faire  tombe.
With  his  ftatue  from  the  girdle  upward,  m the  forenam^d  Church  of  S.  Tfewer.  And  now  to
dole  up  this  whole  difeourfe  of  hii  life,  with  the  grcatell  praife,  he  was  a moft  charitable  and
honed  man  , as  appeared  both  by  his  great  cart  he  liad  of  his  aged  mother  ( whom  alio  he
ipeakes  of  often  in  his  Satyrs  and  other  writings)laying  in  one  place,

Vet*  di  car  a ntadre,  mi  pcrcHo  te^  Depict  a il  c store.

And  alfo  by  this  example  that  is  recited  of  him,of  an  aged  Fried  that  having  three  or  fourc
fat  benefices,  was  in  great  doubt  to  be  poyfoned  for  greedineflc  of  them,  by  (ome  that  had  the
next  Advowfbns,  and  in  refped  of  the  great  honedie  of  M.Lodorvike  Arioso,  he  chofc  him
bcforeall  his  own  kin  or  friends  with  whom  he  would  fo;ournc,  as  himfclfc  boadeth,  and  in-
deed it  was  a good  boad,

tJMa  ne  di  zu>i  ne  de  puigiunti a Itti
T>' amiciti*  fidar  untjua  ft  voile
Jo  dtfHortsttti  fcielto  vinco  ftti.

To  conclude,  his  learning,  his  good  behaviour,  his  honefty,  made  him  both  beloved  of  all
good  men  in  his  life, and  bewailed  of  all  honed  men  in  his  death , fo  as  me  think  reading  over
his  life , 1 could  find  in  my  heart  to  wifh  (faying  for  fome  very  few  things)

Sic  mihi  comingat  vivercj  jic^  mori.


I


AN  EXACT  AND  NECESSARIE

Table  in  order  of  Alphabet,  wherein  you  may  readily

find  the  names  of  the  principall  perfons  treated  in  this  work,

with  the  cbictc  matters  that  conccrnthcm.


A


Creon,pag,  a notable
hunter  and  a cuckold  , and
for  that  caufc  fein^  to
have  had  homes  for  the
latter  of  the  two  proper-
ties, and  to  have  beene  de-
voured with  his  ovvne  dogs
for  the  former,  bccaufehe
was  beggeted  and  confu-
med  by  them.

307. daughter  of  Eriffhein  kingof  Athens,
fheisfaid  to  have  beene  turned  to  a ftone,  and  her  fault
was  this,  bccaufe  flie  prefumed  tolookeupon  Eriffho^
nius,  that  was  committed  to  her  cudodie  by  PaU/u  with
charge  not  to  prcfumc  to  open  the  basket  he  was  kept
in.

Agramant  Emperourof  theTurkes,  fonneof  Tra-
jano.alioi  kingof  Affricke^o/i^M  theSoutherneking.He
came  into  France  to  avenge  hi*  fathers  death  , pag.  i.
He  belicgeth  Paris  very  firaightly,  6i.muiTers  his  men,
loj.  aflaulceth  Paris,  I lo.contieueth  hisaflaulc,  1 13.
1 ta.isrepulfed  and  beheged  in  his  tents,i4a.isrercued,
217. is  troubled  with  thccontention  of  his  PtiDces,and
labours  to  compound  them, ibid,  isdifeomfited  by  K$~
naldo,  254.  flieth  to  Arly,  af  j.  heares  of  the  fiegc  of
Biferta,  310  his  Oration  to  Marfilio,Sobri>to, and  theo-
ther  Princes,  ibidem,  his  challenge  on  Rogerot  head,
31a.  takes  an  oath  of  truce, 323.  breaks  the  truce,  326.
difcomfitcd  by  land,  331.  flies  to  Tea,  ibidem,  his  men
mutinous, ibid,  difcomfitcd  at  fea  by  Dudon.^iX.  flies
and  would  killhimfclfe,336.mcetsGrisid^,337.feods
a challenge  to  Orlando, titrcc  to  three,} 37.  his  flout  an-
fwer  to  BrandimaTti  34}.  flghts  and  is  difarmed  by
Brandimart,^^i,K  flainc  by  0r/<j«do,3$a.

Agricane  king  of  T artarie.and  father  to  Mandricard,
pag.7.

Albracca  a town  in  thcEaft  Indics,pag  y.

Alcyna  a famous  witch  or  Faerie.  She  took  Aftolfo^
and  transformed  him  to  a mirtIe,pag.44.entcnainsXo-
£ero,50.thcdcfciiptionof  hci  bcaut7,ib.thedercnption
of  her  deformity,  5 J flie  purfues  Rogero  by  land,5  S .by
fca,59  fbc  itdifcomflted  by  LogefiiUa,ih\d.

Aldiger  baftard  fonne  of  Bovo  entertaineth  Rogcro
the35  Mok flaffe 63,huitby AT(isndrfVari,pag.2io.
Almonii  4 Scot,  (cirant  wZerbinOt  fared  in  the  tern*


pcfl  with  //aif/!^<z,sd.goe$toRocbcll,97.fiods2fr^/«a,
1 94. brings Oier/c^e prifoncr,\biduii.  cxccutcshim and
Gtfiri>/a,book.24.flafFe36.

Al\ird,a  gallant  yong  man  king  of  Trcniifcnkild  by
Orlando,

Arnalthca  was  lupiters  nurfe.  By  Amaltheat  home  is
fignified  plenty.

AmaionSflook  tales, i 53,

yintd^onra  nationof  warlike  women,  fo  named  of
<i,and  which  is  to  fay,  without  papps,or  of<«ac<i
f/e(^«,without  brcad,becaufe  they  feed  on  flcfli  only.

Angelica  called  alfo  the  Indian  Quecne,dau^hta  of
Galafionjcame  from  India  with  Orlando,  and  is  t.ikcn
from  him  by  thcEmpcrour  Charles,p3g.t.  gitento  the
Duke  of  Bavier  to  keep,  and  fcapeih  out  of  his  tem,  ib«
meets  vrith  Renaldo  and  tuns  fre  m him,  ibidem,  flie
meets Sacrapant  andgoeswith  him,  pag  s.heJpes  him
to  takcBayatdo,pag.6.mccts  iiciraWo  againc,  pag-/-
leaves  Renaldo  anA  Sactapant,  and  meets  wiibanHer*
mit,pag.  lo.flics  from  him  and  is  purlued  by  him,  pag.
59. her  hoifc  pofl'efl  with  a fpmt, caries  her  into  the  fea,
and  after  to  land,ibid . her  lamentation,  ibid  (he  is  call
into  a fleopby  the  Hctmitjbut  yet  be  is  notable  10  win
her  maiden- head, pag.io.  niciscaricd  to  the  lleofE-
buda,6i.  tied  naked  at  the  niorc,ibid.  is  found  hy  Ro-
and  dclivered,79.  vanifhcth  from  him  by  help  of
thcringjgi,  her  beautic,83.  fhecoiscs  to  yitlantier\~
chanted  pallace,and  by  the  ring  would  difeiofe  her  feif
onely  to  Sacrapant,')o,  flic  is  fecn  and  followed  by  Or~
Undo  and  Ecrra»,9i  .Tanilhcihfronithem,  ibid  takes
away  Orlandos  bclmcr,  C2.  fhe  is  fonc  bccaufe  FtrraVf
gat  it, ibid. Die  fi nds  Medore  wounded,  1 47.  hcale s him,
woes  him.wcds  him, 148  gives  her  bofl  the  bracelet  Or-
landa  had  given  herjibid.mcetsOr/ondoin  hismadnefle,
23  S.fcapcs  from  him,and  goes  to  the  Indus,  and  gives
her  whole  flatc  to  Medore, 242.

Anglant  the  place  of  Orlandos  Earldome.

Anfclnm  Enrlc  of  Magan\a  father  of  Pinabellhvaiex
his  foD,i 79  condemnes Zeriino wrongfully, if o.

uinfelmuA  a Do£i,«f  law,Iock  tales, . flaff'edy.

Antheia,a  giant  of  great  flier  gt  hard  ftaturc,  fornc
of  Neptune  and  the  cartb,look  in  the  hiflory  of  the  zj,
book.

Aquilant  hiothier  to  Griffinofnnnes  of  MarquesO-
livero.- the  cider  fights  wiihOri/i'0,1 17 . gc«  to  Irrsfa-

ICDl,


THE  TABLE.


Ietn,li  S.meecsv'vith  TJ9.  beats  him,  briogs

himin^OrigiUexo  Daniafco,i4C.gocs  towards  Fiance
I4a,isin  a tcmo:{l,ibid.camc  to  the  country  of  the

149.  fcapet!  ihence,  157.  taken  prifoncr  by
Fitu^eUiXyi.ooef,  wii  i Renal  Jo  torefeue  Cbarlet,t)2,
is  at  Bradamantf  ma:;agc,402.

w/4rac^ine,anexccllcrt  woman  in  oecdle-worke,  and
weaving, and  isfained  o have  compared  with  Patiaiin
that  kind, and  there "^orc  to  beturnrd  toa  Ipider.

Ar  Jenna  a huge  for  eft  or  thicket  in  Fiance, where  he
fainccb  thctwofouniainesof  love  and  difdaine,  pag.
7-

Arethu/a  daughter  of  Nereids  and  Doru^one  ofDiu-
c mpanions  tilwf/pfceij  ravitucd  her,  and  ga.  her
wuhv-bild,  whereupon  7)iana  turned  her  into  a river
beating  her  name.

Argalia  fonne  of  Galajron  brother  to  Angelica  flain
by  JerraWjhisghoft  appearcs  to  him,pag.j.

Argta  wife  of  Polinyfe ,her  husband  being  killed, and
the tyraicCreon  forbidding  on  paine  of  death  to  buiic
him,  yet  flie  buried  him,  and  lived  ever  after  a widow,
J07-

Argia,\ocV  tales,  s/4.

Artodant,a  gentleman  of  Italy,  a lover  of  Genetvra,
Bghts  whhLm4nro,and  i*paited,)8.  is  known  to
the  king  ofScots,4i . is  married  to  Genewra,ii.  refeues
ZerkinoinFrance,U).andunomore  fpokenof  by  the
author.

Arria  wife  of  Petoof  Padon,  her  husband  being  con-
demned kild  her  fclfe  in  his  fight,  protcfHng  that
death  was  pleafant  to  her  folong  as  fhcleft  him  alive,
307.

Arrimefia  wife  of  Maufoltus,  fiie  built  that  famous
iepulcher  for  her  husband,  thatwatcountedoncofthc
wonders  of  the  world  , in  honour  of  which  all  fumptu-
ous  tombes  fincc  arc  called  Mauflka.

Aftolfo  king  of  Lombardie.look  tales,aa5.

Aflolfo  ezMed  the  Englifli  Dukc,fonncof  O/0»  king
©f  England  turned  intoa  mirtf  ,45.  waroea  Rogeroot
Alcinujibid  comes  v'>Logeftilla,st  geesfeomLogefiU-
la,  114.  receives  a bookof  herand  ahorn,ibidi  takes
Calligorant,  1 1 6,ovcrcomci Ori/fo,  118.  goes  to  Damaf-
co,i40.mects  MarpjUA^i.tz^es  her  part, ibid . goes  to-
ward France,!  is  i ~ a tempcft,ibid.  comes  to  the  A~
country, 149.  with  huhorn  fcarethtbe  Ama-
i{0ttr,iS7.turn8ioEng'and,i49.  difTolvei  theinchao-
ted  pallace,!  ,0  gets  the  GtifFcthhorfc, 17 1 mccti
damant,  1 77.leavcs  his  horfe  Rabiean,his  armor  and  the
inchantedfpeare  withher,i78.  goes  about  the  world,
174.  comes  to  Sempo,  17 f.  drives  awav  the  Harpias,
281.  hearts  the  wofull  tale  of  ibid,  flops  the
snouth  of  the  cave, 2 *4.  wafhes  himfclfc  at  a well,ibid.
goes  up  to  Paradife,tS  j.conftf  res  with  S«/ofcn,ibid.  re-
ceives by  hismeansOr/tfudof  wit,  187.  fees  the  river  of
Lcthc,292.comes  from  9'b*alcs5'eiMpa,ibid.

takes  the  windina  bag, ibid,  turnea  ftonestohorfes,
ibid.goestoBifcrta,;28.  redeems 2)aio», ibid,  makes
fli i ps  of  leaves  ibid .releafcs divcrfc  C hnflia n prifoners,
ibid.reflores  Orlando  to  his  wit,  3 3 6.  takes  Bifcrta,ibid.
fends  home  iS’e/wpo,3  7 b.lcavesAffrica, 377.  lets  go  the
GrifFethhorfe,ibid.cGmestoFrancc,ibid.  is  at  Brada^
mdnrrmariagc,40i.

Afirtea  daughter  of  Apram  a juft  king,  and


therefore  flie  was  called  Tufticc,  114.

.rf/Zaw  uncle  to  Bolero,  a ^rcat  Magician,  makes  a
Pallaccbyinchantmcntjii.  lights  with  Gralijjliznd
Bo^erv.ovcrcomcs  them  and  carries  them  priioncis  into
the  faid  Caftle, I s.figlits  with  B^adamjnr  and  is  over-
come by  her  ,16.  ovcithrriwcshisirHlMntcdCafllc,  and
fets  free  Bo^cro,with  the  reft  of  his  prifoners, 1 7 makes
another  incliantcJ  Pallace  for  Rogao.^o  dies  and  his
ghofl  paricih  Rogcro  and  Marfifa, ^oi,

Aurora  is  feined  by  ibc  Pocis  to  have  loved  Tytlonas
fon  of Laomedon,znt\  to  have  mai  ied  l.i  n:  but  he  grow-
ing old  fhe  fell  in  lore  with  CephaUi.

B

Ballifard  Rogeros  ftvord  that  had  been  fomtime
Orlandos ,zni  flollcn  by  Brw  cl^o, given  to  Rogtro,  was
found  by  Orlando  in  the  Ihip,  3 »4.  iclloted  to  Rogcro,
376.

Bard'.no  finds  Brandimart  perfwadeshim  to  go
home, 3 30.bewailc  shisdcath,37o.

Bjyardo  Renaldos  hotfe  ran  from  bis  mafler  twice,
pag.i.  and  3.  is  found  by  Sacrapant,  pag  • recovered,
pag  to. is  found  by  GradaJfd,p3g,z74,ieco\cicd  zgaiuc
by  Renatdo.

Ber/olage  one  of  the  houfe  of  Afagania  flaine  by  RU
chardetyZo/.

Bireno  taken  prifoncr  by  Cimofeo,  7 1 . delivered  by
Or/Wo, ibid.married  to  Olympia,ibid,  izU in  love  with
the  king  of  Friflands  daughter,  and  betray cth  Olympia^
74.is  hanged  by  Oberto,  80.

Bifcrtaa  townin  Batbary  aftaulted  by  Orlando^znd
afy?o//b,33s.istakcn,3}6,israckcd,338.

Boreas  the  Korchern  wind  , is  fained  to  have  ta-
vidicd  Oritbia,  and  to  have  begotten  of  her  Calai  and
2et.

Bradamant  meets  vthh  Sacrapant  znd  ovcrthiowes
him, pag. 6. betrayed  by  PinnabeU,pzg.i^.meetetbMe-
lijfa  in  Merlins  czycypzg.  I i,  is  flicwcd  all  herpofteri-
ty,i  9.20.inflru£lcd  how  to  take  the  ring  from  Biunil  •
lo,zi,aieetsBrwieJlOyibidem.{end$Rngero  the  ring,  ja.
ttieets  MetiJ^a  zgziDCf  99.  isinflrudcd  of  her  femall
poftcrity.ioo.  is  warned  ofthc  inchammem,  yet  can-
not avoid  it,i  01.  IS  freed  by  Adolfo  17  c.  meets  Pina-
ici5f,i73.kilshim,i74.  meeisAftoljo,  and  of  him  hath
Rabycano  and  goldelance,  ibid,  goes  to  .‘.JonialbaBo,
i78.fcndsFiomiooto  Rogero  by  H<ppalca,i7g  flie  re-
ceives Rogeros  lctter,-.47.1icr complaint, ibidem.jcalous
of Marfi/a,*t9-  another complaint,ibil  and  26:.  her
dcfpaiiCjibidcm.  fbe meets wi.hZ;^(j,>ue  the  Qtiecnc  cf
Iflinds  mc(rcnger,a6a.  fhcwiRiic;  a lodging  at  Sir
rr^ruiBf  Caftlcjibid.  flic  makes  a ffout  Oiaiion  for
Z>Uante,i6  5.  flie  ovcithrowes  three  kings  againc,  Z7Z4
fhe  meets  Fiordeliegettoi  overthiowcs  Rodomount,og$.
fends  a challenge  lo  Rogero,  zg^.  ovcrthiowcs  divcrfc
knights,a9S.  figbtswithiVfar^yi,a99.  angry  with  Bo
gero  and  makes  another  compiainr,3oo.  pacificdjoi .
zgzine  fights  with  Mar fifa,  but  is  reconciled,!  03.  af-
(zuhs  Morganory  312  dclivcrccb  him  toVUanieiobe
put  to  dcath,3 13  goes  to  the  camp, ibid  enters  into  the
battaile,327  chafeth./dgrijnja'in,*3i.  complainstoi^fur-
fifa of  Rogero.^i^.  refufeth Leon, 378.  hercoinplainr,
ibid.fucsto  C/jar/er,  and  obiainestohavc  a Proclama-
tion for  the  combat  witb  whomfocvci  wciild  narrie

her.


THE  table:


iieijjog  wTites  to  to  comfort  fii'mj375  hcrcom-
plaint  ofhisdbfencC}3  80.  flic  fights  with  Rogerotz-
king  himforLroif,  389.  anothcrcompIaint,39i.  flic  is
married  to  R$gero3<^oz.

Brandimart  Coaae  of  Monodant,  king  of  Damagyrc,
husband  to  Fiordelieget  goes  out  of  Paris  to  fcckchii
friend  . is  m^f/a»rxpallace,  90.  fet  free  by

AfiolJo,\‘jo.  meets Fiordeliege,  and  gocih  with  her  to
Rodomonts  biidg'c,i54. is  taken  prifoncr  by  Rodomont,
ass  icleafcd  by  found  againc  hj  Fiorde-

lkge,i  19.  feesOrlanio  mad  and  helpestotakchim,j50.
aflaults  Byfcitaand  isthcfiift  that  enters  {1,535.  is  one
ofthe  three  in  the  challenge,  538.  hath  Fromino  given
him,ibid.his  Oration  to  Jgramant,^nS-  he  fights  with
yigrcimdnt  and  difarmes  him,348  he  is  deadly  woun-
ded hy  G radajp),i^<).  hisfpccch  at  his  death,  351.  his
ftatcly  funeralljat  which  makes  a funeral!  Ora“>

tion,570.histombc  built  by  hiswife,37i .

BranJardLievtenznt  to  Jgramant  in  Barbary/erds
newesof  thedanger  AfFiica  wav  in,3xo.icdecmeth  Bu-
cifer  with  7)ud«n, ^zy.kih  himfelf,  j 36.

Briarrus  a Giant,faid  to  have  an  1 00  armes : Virgil
faynshim  tobeinhellfor  his  confpiracy  againft /«p/-
ter.Et  centum geminuA  Briarcits  & hdlua  lernte;  it  isde-
rived  of  the  6rcck.^6we?»  they  call  afirongman.

Brigliadore -3s  much  to  fay.Biidlc  of  gold,  the  name
of  Orlando  shorfe,t  7 cafl  offby  Orlando  in  hismadnes,
184. found  by Mandricar do, 100. givenhy  Rogero  (who
had  flain  Mandricard)to  Agramant  ,x\7  ,Vi  on  by  Orlan-
do,xyi,

BninelloUmetby  Bradamant,  deferibed  by Melijfa
tohet,x\.\sBradama  rr guideto  j^r/^znfrCaftlei,.  is
bound  by  hei  unto  a tree,  and  hath  the  inchanted  ring
takeft  from  him,2S  mufters  his  men  before  Agramanf,
and  was  unbound  by  I folir,  104..  is  arrefted  by  Mar f fa
and  carried  away  by  ber,?ao.i$  brought  back  by  Marfi-
fa  at  ten  dayes  end  to  Jgramant ,znd  there  delivered  to
a bafe  villaine  to  be  hanged ,zs  8

BrutuA  his  wife  was  Porcia:  this  Brum  was  the  flout
Roman  thathild  Cafarfovhh  tyranny,  married  the
daughter  of  Cato  Vticenfis  ,(lte  hearing  of  her  husbands
dea  threat  hot  coles  andkild  her  fclffo,whcrcupon  Mar-
zm// faith,

Conjugis  audijfetfatum  cum  Porcia  Bruti,

Kt /ubtraSfa  fibi  quereret  arma  dolor,

Nondum  feitisait  mortem  non pojfe  negari?
Credideram  fatis  hoc  vos  docuijfe  patrem,

Dixit, ((jF  ardentes avidohibit  orefavidas,

I nunc  (^‘ferrum  turba  mole  fa  nega.

Bulgars  a people  of  Europe  in  part  of  Mxfia  upon
the  river  Danubium,whcrc  it  is  called  Ifter,afraulted  by
Leon,i2o.  put  to  flight, j8i.  refeued  by  Romero,  ibid,
they  make  Rogero  king,  jSa-  fend  EmbalTadors  to
Fiance  to  Rogero, ^97-

BuUigant  goveraes  thofc  of  Lyon,  1 04.  Ptolomie  cals
thatCity  Gcrmanica.

Budjer  king  of  A igazer  takcn,3  ty  • ledccms  Dudotij
3 >8  flame  by  0liver0j^^6.

c

Calaizod  2et  were  (onnesofBoreas.and  had  wings,
or  fo fam'td,bccnufe  they  failed  in  fwift  fliips.

CaHigorant  a Giant  taken  by  Afidfo,  1 1 6.  is  carried


about  the  country  by  him,i  y y.ccnies  wheceOriSo  war,
ibid,  and  from  thence  goeth  with  to  lerulalcm,

1 1 iiAfolfo  giveth  him  to  Sanfonct  governour  of  Iciu-
falcrn,!  1 9.

CaftoT  and  Pollux  fbnnes of  Ivpittr  and  Leda, gotten
of  her  in  likeneflcof  afwanne,  brothers  to  Helena,  cal-
led they  delivoedthe  fca  of  Fyrates,  and

therefore  arc  counted  Gods  of  the  fca.  1 hry  fainc
that  Po/?«3c  was  immortall,  and  when  Caflor  died  be-
fought  Jupiter  that  ho  might  part  his  immortality  with
him , whereupon  they  arc  an  example  of  brotheily
love.

Catalynes  the  chiefeft  family  of  Spainc,  of  the  houfc
of  Arragcn,and  aieoften  put  by  mine  author  for  the
whole  ftatcofSpainc,j04.

Cerex  called  the  Goddeffeofeorn,  mother  of  Profei-
pirn.

Charlemaine  fonne  of  Pipin  gathers  his  forces  togc-
thcragainft  the  Turks, pag.i.  takes  upthe  quarrclla-
bout  ^«^e/i(:4,pag  isoverthrownc  by  theTurkes,

ibid.  Charles  befieged  in  Paris  fends  Renaldo  into
England,  pag.i  i-  Heexpefts  theaflault  and  maketh
publikc  prayersunto  Gcdjiov-his own  prayer^  ibid. re-
ceives the  Englifli  fuccours  into  Paris,t *5  -hcarcs  newes
of  thcfpoiles  Podomo«xdid,ix6  hiiOration,  128,129.
fets  on  Podomo«Z,ibid.  diives  him  away  out  of  Paris,
1 38.isdifcomfitcd againe by  Pmaw,  and  maderctirc,
ibid  is  reftued  by  254.  Chriflened

jiS.takcsanothof  truce,  523.  welcomes  Rogero  into
france,3'’6  makes  a ProclamationatrequcflofBrsda-
nj.i»f,385  hisuprightneflc  in  judging  the  controvcifics,
^9>.he  makes  a fumptuous  fcafl  at  the  mariage  of  Bra-
damant,^9  2,

Cimofeo  kingofFreezland  flaine  by  Orlando, 70.

Circe  a notable  inchantrcflcjdaughterof  the  Sun  and
a Nymph  called  PerfeSy  flic  turned  Vlyjfes  men  into
bcafts.

Cleopatra  Quyen  of  .Sgypt,being  fca  fled  by  Antho-
wre.bad  him  to  a banket, and  diflblving  one  huge  pcarlc
in  vinegar,  fire  drank  it,  and  it  was  thought  in  that  ic-
fpeft  8 banket  of  incflimablccoft.

Clytemnefira  wife  of  plaid  the  whorein

hisabfcncc,  and  killed  him  at  his  return ; it  is  faidflie
had  a Mufitian  plaid  chaff  tunes  to  her.  and  fo  long  flic
continued  honeft,  but  when  he  died,  corrup-

ted her:  her  fon  Orefies  in  revenge  of  his  fathers  death
flue  her.

Cloridan  a companion  of  Medore  goes  to  fccke  the
catcafle  of  TFardanello,  ■ 45.  kiJs  divers  Chriftians,  ibid.
kilstwoScots,l46-iskihi,i46.

Corebo  one  of  Zerbins  men  hurt  in  defence  of  Ifabella,
97.1s  faved,  194.

D

Dalinda,  Genervras  maid  faved  from  killing  by  Re-
naldo,i9  difcoveis  Po/j/«Cj^x  trcchcric,3x.  is  pardoned
and  goc8toaNunric,*2.

Z»4n<2f  daughtci  of^friyitfi,  mother  to  Perfeuij  Ihe
being  lockt  up  in  a tower  by  her  fat  her, that  none  might
accompany  her, it  isfaid  that  Jupiter  rained  a fliower  of
gold  though  thetilcsof  the  houfc  inre  her  lap,  with
help  of  which  fliower  h»  gat  her  with  child.

Diuibm  the  greattft  river  of  Europe  farre  North

begins


A


THE  table:


begin*  in  Germanie,  and  in  long  running  it  iscallcd  I-
ftcr,6o.nvers  fall  into  it^and  halfc  of  them  naviga  blc.

7)ArdaneUo  (on  of  ^Imont  mwReis  zf ore  Agramanr,
105.  hurtetb  LurcamOi\.i%.  is  killed  by  RenaUo,  141,
found  dead  by  ii/eiore,  143.  is  buried  by  him  and  the
help  of  Angelica,

“Oii/o Qiisenc  of  Carthage  famous  for  ilie  fabulous
loveof  e/£nc<w.

Z»i/itfr</foughtbytlie  Angell  Michael,io9,  found  in
an  Abbey,  ibid,  fern  to  the  Pagans  camp,  ibid,  beaten
andfcntagame.iiy.

‘Doralice  commingfromSpaine  is  taken  by  Mandri-
card,io9,  fendsprivily  toitof/owolrf,  ibid,  agrees  vvcll
wUhMandricardyioy.  parts  Zethino  and  Mandricard,
Roiomont  and  Mandricard,V\h.  24.  ft.9  ».  borne
away  by  a fpirit  in  her  hoife,2i3.rejefls  Rodomont,c\\u-
feth  MandricardyZt  1 . her  fpeech  to  diffwadc  him  fiom
£ght,2  4r  her  lightncilc,t46.

’DrufiUadook.  tales  of  Marganor,‘ioi.

T>udontek3fed  by  Aflolfos  mcans.and  made  Admi-
rz\iziA'Seomfuti)aAgramant  by  fca.3}2. fights  with
Rogero  on  land,3  a o giveth  him  feven  kings, 342.  comes
into  PanSjtye  isat  Bradamantr mztia^Cy^oi.

Durindane  Orlandos  fword  taken  by  Mandricard,  24.
book  49. ft. won  for  GradaJfo,Z4.i.  loft  by  Gradajfb  in
battaile  with  Orlando, giren  to  Rogero  by  Orlando,

£

Ebuda,  I find  no  fuch  He,  but  Ehudi  be  lies  in  our
Brittifli  fea.

Encdladui  the  greateft  of  all  the  Giantsthat  rebelled
againft  /upiter,for  this  caufe  t hey  fai ne  that  he  was  laid
under  mount  @AEtna , and  that  thccaufe  of  the  cartb~
quakes  theic,is  when  he  ftirsto  change  fides.

ErUihonm  fonne  of  Vulcan  had  feet  like  a Serpent,
anddevifed  a coach  to  hidethcm,3o7.

Euadne  wife  of  Cdpa«c»s  kild  with  lightning  at  the
aflault  of  Tbebes , his  body  burned  as  the  manner  of
buiiallwrasinthoredaycs,  biswife leapt  into  the  fire
with  it  and  died, 3 07.

F

ferraav  a Spanifh  knight  fights  with  RenaUo  for  An-
^«lrcis,pag.2.1oft  his  helmet  in  the  water,ibid. takes  Rc-
naldo  up  behind  him,3.mcets  with  the  ghoft  of  Argali-
d,ibid  vowes  to  winOrlandos  helmet, ibid. is  in  ^tlants
Pallace,90. freed  by  Angelica, 91-  fights  with  Orlando,
9*.purfucs  Angelicaznd  fees  her,ibid.getsOr/andor  hel-
met,ibid.muftcr8  his  band  of  the  king  of  Spaincs  guard,
i04.rcftores  the  battcll  loft,  1 38ihis  Oration,ibid.  ovcr-
throwne  by  Bradamant,Z9s.

Fiordeliege  wife  of  Brandimart  goeth  to  feek  him,S3
hearcs  ofOr/andw madndrejib.24.ft  4<5.fees  the  bat-
tcll between  Mandricard  and  Zerbin,goethtow3rd  Pa-
ris,ibid  ft  sn.eomes  to  Rodomonts  bridge,  2x7.  tels  Re-
naldo  of  Orlandos  madncfrc,*j3.finds  Brandimart,zf^
feeshira  overthrown  and  taken, ibid,  meets  Bradamant
and  fhowes  her  Rodomonts  bridge, tpj*  dclivcis  Rogero
a challenge  from  294-  tuccts  Bardino  And

and  goeth  with  him  to  AfFrica,}29-  finds  Brandimart,
ibid  fees  and  defcrics  him,  ibid,  flic  makes  a

black  Caparifon  for  Brandimart her  dreamc  and
fp  ecchjsyo.her  death, 37i«


Fiametta,\ooV  tiles.

Fiordel^ina, look  tales.

Frontino  the  name  of  Rtgeros  horfc  1s  kept  by  Bra-
damantyZS  fent  by  her  w Rogero, i7i,  is  takcnbyA^-
doOTon/,i  79.rccovcrcd  by  193.  fent  .igaine

to  Atjgcro,294  found  byOr/a/rdoina  (}iip,344.rtaorci
to  Rogero,^7 r his  prairc,*^ 9.

Fuiberta  Renaldos  fword, 10.

G

Gabrina,look  talcs,  fhc  flies  from  Orlando,  99,  meets
^fdr^yrtjisR.isccmmitlcd  toZerbinos  proteftion,  159.
lobs  P/rwjj&cif  coarfc,i79,  betrayes  and  atcufes  Zerbi-
no, iSo  Hies  and  ismiUifcd  by  Mandricard,  182.  is  par-
doned of  life  by  Zerbino,  194.  commuted  to  Otirifijf
prote^fion  and  by  him  hanged, lib. 24. ft  38.

Ganmedis  fainedbythe  Poet  s to  be /wpiVrrf  cup-
bearer,and  to  have  been  carried  up  by  an  Eaglc,it  is  ta-
ken generally  in  the  word  part  for  Batdajfos,

Genavra, look  tales.

GihbcUins, look  Giiclfs.

Gradajfo  king  of  Scrycane  taken  by  Atlant  into  the
inchanted  Caftlc,i3.isdclivcrcd  by  Bradamant  ,27  is  in
AtlantsV3ll3ee,90.  freedbj  Afioljo,  170.  cometoaid
Agramant,tif.helpstoaimMandricard,2iH.  fals  out
with  him,ib.rcccives  ’Durindane  of  Rogero,  la'l.  fights
with  Bend/do,25S. fights againc, 27  3.  parted  and  Hods
BayardOi274.niips  at  Arlic,  2 -4.  meets  Agramant  in
grcatdiflrcflc,337.is  one  ofihe  challenge  three  to  three
and  kits  349  iskilled  by  Otlando,3t2.

Grandonio  the  governourof  the  Algarbics,  which
dwell  in  promontory  cald  Celticum  Prom»ntorium,\oa

Griffin  fights  with  Orr/Za,  1 17.1s  in  lore  with  Orr^r//j,
ij8  goeth  with  y4y?o//o  to  the  holy  land, ibid,  heaiesof
Orrgii?«,i  lo.hcfinds  her,i2l,  goeth  toDamafeo,  129.
heares  his  hofts  tale, 1 30.  wins  the  prize  there,  133.  dc-
paru  thenccjbid.  is  betrayed  by  Ortgill  and  Martano,
ibid. iscarted, 134.  kils  and  beatsthc  people  of  Damaf-.
CO,  13 7-is reconciled  to  Horandino,li9.  meets  his  bro-
ther Aquilant yia’^.teceists  a coftly  armour  of  the  king,
ibid.is overthrown  by  Affolfo,tm.  friended  by  him,  he
goeth  with  him  and  othcrstowardsFrancc,ibkl.(ofton
the  fea  with  a tcmpeft,i42.  comes  to  the  fliorcofthe
yfma\ons  and  hearcs  their  law,  i49.fcapech  thence,iy8
is  betrayed  and  taken  by  PtmubeUo  to  obferve  his  law,
1 7 2.fights  In  defence  thereof,  173.  is  ovcrth'ownc  by
Bolero,  1 74.gocth  toward  France, ibid.mccts  withBe-
aaido  and  is  entertained  into  his  band, 25  a.  isat  Brada,
wants  mariage,402.

Orijfeth  horfe  brought  up  by  Atlant,  and  loft  by  him
26.flicsaway  with  Rogero,Z7 -cicics  him  to  Alcinoi  He
4}  caric.s  Melijfa  Sc  A/ieljo  from  Alcinai  He, 58.  brings
them  to  Ltjge////ya,77.is  brought  by  Melijfa  to  Rogeres
riding, ibid  Bolero  is  caried  by  him  over  the  world,  ib.'
breakes  his  bridle  and  Rtesxo  Atlanr,  83.  it  gotten  by
Aftolfo,  171  ilicsi'vitb..4y?(»ijooverthc  world,274.  ca-
ries him  up  to  Paradifc,283.bringt  him  back  again, 31 9
islctloofc  by  Aflolfo,i7d.

Guelfs  and  GibheUins  two  notable  fiBions  rifing
firftof  two  brothers  in  Italy  and  fpreading  very  far.

Guidon  Savage  in  the  Amazons  land  fights  with
Marfifa,i  jo.entertaincs  her  and  her  company,!  5 3»tcls
the  talc  of  the  /imaxonSi  I54  fcapeththence  having
O o made


T H E T

Ejadcprovifion,!  59Lomchrowcs  Richardette,  Alarda,
and  Guicchiardoft  51.  fights  with  Renaldo  till  Sun  fct,
ibid. makes  himfclfc  knowoe  unto  Renaldo,*a,  gocth
with  him  to  aid  Charles,  ibid>  is  at  Bradamants  mari-
agc,40i.

H

Hecuha  wife  of  PriamiM  fell  mad  for  fbrrowoithc
death  of  her  ion  FoIUotm,  and  is  fained  to  here  been
turned  to  a dog.

Helena  daughter  of  Leda,  fhe  that  was  taken  bj
Parii.

Hercules  fonne  of  Jupiter  and  Alcmene,h\i  twelve  la-
bours be  known,  howbeiti'repl^enin  bisHiftoricallDi-
dlionary  fetsdown  34  labours.

HiUarion  a palling  devout  Hermit.

Hippalca  Bradamants  maid  caries  Frontino  towards
ilo^cro, I79.meets  Rodomont  and  is  robd, ibidem,  meets
Rogero  at  jWer/wr cave,ao9.returnes  to  Bradamant,%i  i
delivers  Rogeros  letter  and  comforts  her^Z4 6.

Ho;nerl^iiDce  of  Greek  Poets.

I

Jafon  Con  of  o/^fonand  Alcmene  eomroing  fb  Lem-
nos was  entertained  by  Hrp/ipr/ejaBdaftcr  wan  the  gol-
den  Fleece.

Jndat  or  Jnde  a river  of  the  Eaft*  a very  huge  river  of
which  India  taketh  name.

Jroldo  a CbrillenCaptaine.

Ifahella  fouod  by  Orlando  in  a cave.  94.recites  to  him
thecaule  of  her  being  therc,96. is  delivered  by  Orlando,
9i.  prayes  him  to  be  her  protc£h>r,99u  finds  Zerbino,
180.  departs  with  Zerk/no  from  Orlando,  i8a,  helps  to
githev Orlandos  armor,Iib.a4.ft.43.  intreateth  Doralice
to  part  the  fray, ibid. ft.  57.1amemsZerti»or  death  and
becomes  a Chriftcn,ibid.ft.  73.  meets  Rodomont,  S31 .
is  wooed  by  him  j X3$.  faves  her  chaftitywith  lofteof
bet  life^ayd-hcr  praife,ibid.her  tombcjibid-

L

Lada  one  of  Alexanders  fouldicrs,  fo  fwift  and  light
of  foot, that  fcarcc  the  print  of  his  foot  was  fecn  in  the
fand,a7o.

LaodemiaWife  to  Protefilaus  loved  him  fo  dearly, that
hearing  efhisdcath,flicpined  away  with grief,3 07.

Leon  fonof  Conflantine  rcpulfcd  by  Rogero,  581 . de-
livers Rog&o  not  knowing  him  from  prifon,387.fgoeth
into  France  to  wooe  Bradamant , and  wins  hej  by  Roge-
zos  means,  calling  himftlf  cheknight  of  the  Vnicorne,
389  diOurbed  and  challenged  by  Marjifa,f9t.  mifleth
Jlflgerfl,3  91. finds  him  and  recomforts  him,  396  brings
him  to  Ci<ir/ef,398.  his  fpcech, ibid,  frees  the  Bulgars
from  further  war  by  promifc,ibid.  is^at  Rogeros  mari-
age,49*.

L(d/4,look  talcs, all.

LogelHtladefeadetb  Rogeroapain^AUina,  76.  the
deftription  of  her  houfc,  by  which  ismeanc  vertue,  77.
entertaincs  Afiolfo, and  delivers  him  a book  and  a horn
and  lets  him^parr,ii4.

Lweina, look  tales,  129.

Lurcanio  brother  to  Ariodant  an  Italian  Gentleman
accufeth  Gencwra,jd  .fights  With  hjs  br9tber,384s  hurt
by  ‘DardaneUoji  3 8.


ABLE.

M

Malagige  rcfcacd  by  Rogero  and  others,  atSy.  ex-
pounds the  pifturcs  at  Merlins  wcll,ao8.  makesa  fpirit
carie  away  2?or<jltce,  at  3.  gocth  with  Renaldo  to  aid
Charles, conjureth  to  find  the  caufc  of  Renaldos
difeafe.t  5 3 .1$  at  the  wcdding,40».

Mandricard  fonne  of  Agrtcane  king  of  Tartaric  had
wonne  Heitors  armes,i  oj.hcfcekesOr/ij7!(/o,ibid,  wins
’Doralice, caries  hex  away  and  wooes  hcr,io6.  lies  with
hcr,i07.fights  with  Orlando, 1 8 1 parted, 1 8 t.mccts  Ga-
iri«<»,ibid.fighrs  whb  Zerhino  and  hurts  him, lib.  24.(1.
49.winsDurindanc,ibid.fights  with  Rodomont,  ibid.ft,
8o.it  parted,  ft.  93.  overthrowes  Richardetto  and  his
brotherf,2ic,fightiwith  Af<jrJ?y4,ibideni.quarrcls  with
Rogero, \\i  reproved  by  JiOifo»2on/,ibid.fightswithiio-
^ero,ai2,fights  with  Mar^/<i,ibidem.  parted,  213.  rc-
Lcues  Agramant, zi  6.  quarrels  with  Rodotnont , Rogero
and  Arar^ya,2l7.with  Grai/a^,ii8.  ischofen  by  2?o-
ralicesZzi-dUfwaded  from  fight  by  Doralice,i^y  fiobis
with  Rogero,%a4  is  kild,i46.

Mamlardoyerthtown  by  Orlando,^^.

Marfilio  kiug  of  Spainemuftcis  his  men  of  armes,
1 04.his  Oration  to  Agramant,]  20.  he  flics  into  Spainc.
J17.

Marpjd  lifter  to  Rogero  meets  Afiolfo,  and  gocth  t®
Daraafco,i4o,  cakesaway  the  prize,  ibid,  is  reconciled
and  honoured,  1 4 1,  ^oetb  with  Aft olfo  andodicrsto-
ward  Francc,and  are  toft  with  tempcft,t42  arrives  With
them  at  the  Ama\ons  City, 149. fights  with  Guidon,x%o
fcapeth  hence,  i jy,  parts  from  her  companions  in  Mar-
lilia,l58  meets and  caries  her  behind  her, ibid,
overthrowes  PinnaJue  Uforlaugbxng  at  her,  1 59.  meets
Z erhine  a nd  commits  G abrina  to  his  enftody , i $ pimeets
Regero,  ic6,  aids  him  torefeue  Malagige  and  Vivian,
aoj.dincsat  Merlins  cavc,io8,  fights  with  Mandricard,
xio.  aids  Agramant, zi 6.  craves  battailcwith  iVawdri-
eard,Z\7-  aircftcth  Br«ne>tfo,  brings  him  backc  to
Agramant, xs%,  fights  with  Bradamant  and  is  over-
thrown,i99.fightsagaiD,joo.  fights  with  Rogero,  30a.
parted  by  Atlants  ghoft,ibid.  friends  with  Bradamant,
503.  gocth  with  Bradamant  and  Rogero,r,o7  axdsVlia-
weand  hercompanions,3o8.hcarcs  the  tale  of  Marga-
nor,ic9  leads  captive,!  I a.  cals  a Parliament

and  make.sa  law  for  women,  313,  gocth  with  Brada-
mant  to  Charles  ,\X7  .meets  Charles  and  makes  an  Orati-
on,3ig.  fticisChrillcnd,  31 9.  fights  with  Agramant,
317  chalcth  him,33T.difturbcth  Don  Leon  from  many^
ing  with  Bradamant,3  97  makes  a challenge  to  Leon  on
Bogeror  bchalfc,  391  was  about  to  ftiikc  Rogero  not
knowing  him,398.i.sat  the  wedding, 40a.

Marganor^ook  tales,309.  his  law,  3 1 1 • he  is  killed,
JI3.

Martano  a w horc-mafter  keeps  OtigiUa,  t Z7.  lliames
himlelf,r33,hctraycs  Griffin,  ibid,  incenfeth  Nerandino
againit  him,i34.bcatca by  Atjuilant, punilhede-
pcnly,i40.

Maufeleo  the  tombe of  a king  (b  named,  one  of  the
feven  wondiTs.

Media  a cmell  woman,  a notable  witch,  fhe  killed
herownc  brodicr  and  herownefonnes,  flicfent  Creufa
a little  boxefor  a token,  in  which  was  clofcd  fueb  arti-
ficial! fire,  that  as  (bon  as  it  was  opened,  it  burned  her,

and


THE  T

anJ  all  the  pallace  fhe  was  in .

Mtdore^igt  o{T>j,)daHtU  goethto  feck  his  mafters
caikastoburicit,i4)  kilsmany  Chrtftiansallecpjibid.
canes  his  mafters  coarfc  and  is  putfncd  by  Scots,  144,
hurt  by  a Scot  againft  Zerbinos  will,  47.  found  by  An-
gelica and  healed, wooed  and  maned  by  Atigdtca,  147.
his  Epigram,  148  .cfcapesOr/.a  .'</o  hardly.  139. made  kiog
ofEaft  India, 241.

Melyffa  nicwcthBrai/aiTwnf  all  Rogtros  ponerity,i  9
ao.inftruflcrh  her  how  to  take  the  ring  fiom  Brunello,
»i  gocth  to  deliver /?o^cr«,5a  herfpccch  lo  Rogeroyfi
comfons Bradamant in  Boismo/irxhkcncilc breaks
the  truce,  }26.  mcctcth  Leon  and  ftiowcs  \\im  Rogero,
395.bringcth  the  rich  I’avillionby  Ncgromancy,jv9  is
at  Bradlzmn/r  maciage,4oa.

Memphis  the  chiefe  city  of  i^gypt , ncare  to  w hich
the  huge  Pyramidcs  were  made

Mcrlint  Fountain,*o8.his  ball  in  Sir  Tri/frams  lodge
and  thcftoiies  thcrof,i68.ihe  Englilli  Prophcr,of  him
you  /hall  read  in  the  notes  of  the  third  bookc,pag.ra.

Morgana  a palling  witch  much  fpoken  of  in  Boyar-
doe  bookoi Orlando  Inamorato.

N

Nere'M  fonof  Caropem  and  Agtaia,a  palling  beauti-
full  young  man,witncirc  Hower,onc  of thofc that  came
againft  Troy,i69.

Ne/lor  is  faid  to  hare  lired  three  ages,  which  Icmc
count  VO  ycarcs,and  fomc  300.

HU'm  I he  famous  river  of  ^gy  pt  Ibcallcd  of  king  H't-
las.oT  as  lbmcv\'ill  have  it  of  the  Grceke  »**'ii^i!t,that  is,
ncwllimc,  for  with  the  flime  thereof  it  enricheth  all
£gypt;fotnc  doubt  whet  her  it  have  any  head  at  all  but
runsoutof  thegreat  lake,it  fals  divided  into  the  fca  in
fevcnbranchcs,whereforc  Ovid  cals  it  in  the  1 Met.Sep-
temfluui.

Horandino,\ook  in  tbc  talcs,makcsa  great  fcaft,i29.
tcceivcth  Gr//^nintofavoui,i  39.

O

Odericl^isfenthj  Zerhino  for  /fibetia, 97,wou\d  have
ravifh’d  hcr,9*-.woundcth  Corcbo,ibid.  is  brought  by
Almonio  to Zcrbino.hb  24.ftaft' i ^.ispardoned  by  him,
ib.ft. 3 5 , breaketh pio.nife and  is  hangeddb.ft. 3 8 .

Oberto  king  of  Ireland  comes  to  Ebuda  and  meets
Orlando  thcic,8  5.fals  in  love  withO/y»ipia,86.  marries
hrr,ibid.

O(j/mpii*,looktalcs:  flicisdclivcrcd  hyOrlando,  and
married  to  Byreno,  71.  betrayed  by  him  and  left  on  the
iliorc,7  5.1s  found  by  Orlando  at  the  IlcofEbuda;  and
her  beauty  deferibed,  llic  delivered,  8).  Of erfo  fals  in
love  with  her,8 S.marries  her,ibid .

0/ivero  Cent  prifonei  toBilerta,  fetfiee  by  Afiolfo,
Sag.aflaultsBilcita, 335. flue  Bucifar.,^%6.  ieoncofthc
three  in  the  challcngc,ti  8.  hath  Bolero;  armour  given
him,344  his  imprryfe  a lymehound  with  the  word  (till
hccommctb)ibid.hc  is  hurt  hy  his  horfcfall,348. is  hea-
led by  the  Hcrmit,372.  comes  into  France  with  Orlan-
doand  Rogao,^7t,is  at  Bradimants  mariagc,402.

Ori^Ue  a ftrumpet  loved  by  Griffin,  1 19*  is  found
with  Martan.0, CKcufetb  it,  t iz.

Orilha  Nigromanccr,look  tales,ii4.

Orlando  comes  from  the  Eaft  Indies  with  Angelica


ABLE.

and  hath  her  taken  from  him,  pag.  i,  troubled  in  his
llccp  by  a dream, 61. he  leaves  Pans, 63  . comes  upon  the
Pagans  camp,05  pafteth  intoHriranic  and  isptit  bseke
to  Antwcrpe,<6.hcarcsthc  llatcof O^i/ip/a, ibid. ehal-
jengeth  CimoJco,6^  kils  bim,7o  flings  the  h.injuebtilh
intothefea,/!.  comesto Ebuda,84.  kilsanOtkc,ibid.
fets  free  Olympia  againe,8s.goeth  back  to  Britanic,87.
iliudcd  \\  ith  the  likenell'cof  Angelna.io-  purfucs  An-
^#l/ra, 9 1. fights  with  ferraw,  91.  loft  his  helmet,  ibid,
foyld  two  bands  of  Pagans,93.finds  IfaheUa . 94  deli-
vcrslier598.  hangs  the  outlawcs  ibid,  delivers  Zrrf/no,
iSo.fightswith  MandTicard,\%\.  is  parted,  182.  hcares
newes of /Itgcl/ca, I »3  fals  ftark  mad,i  8 j.  fomc  mad
parts  of  his, i93.wraftlcs  with  RoJomonr,ii7,measAii-
^el/ca and  almoftcatchcih  her,  239.  comes  toBiferta,
?.4*'  troubles /ly?eiybr  army  in  his  madnelTe , 319.  is
bound  and  made  wife  by  A/lolfo,  330.  alTaulis  Biferta,
Brandimart  at  Bifcita,33(S.racks  tlie  towne,
338.acccpts  challcnaeubid  fiiidsBa/liy2irdin

a void  lhip>344.  fights  thecombat  three  t®  three,  348.
kils  Gradaffiband  Agramant,^ia.  meets  Rcnaldo,itg.
cemesto  Sici!ic,37o  he  makes  Brundnrurts  funerall,
37 1 hisOration,ibid  tomes  to  the  Hermit  and  meets
Roger 0 thcre,372  gocth  back  into  Fraacc  wi*hhini,376
isat  Bradamants  mariagc,40t.

Or^e  a monfttous  fill] .

P

Paris  fonne  to  Priamut  lover  of  Helena.

Park  fieted  by  Agramant , and  quenched  by  rainc
from  hcaven,6i.allaulccd  by  Agramant, \ lo.tnticd  by
Rodomont  and  fee  on  fire,  1 1 1 .

Paule  thefirft  Hermit  or  Anchorit,  it  is  faid  of  him
that  a crow  brought  him  every  day  half  a loaf  of  bread,
and  that  a devour  man  going  to  fee  him,  the

crow  brought  him  tbatday  a whole  loaf,

Penelope  wife  of  Vlyffies,  famous  for  her  chaftity  in
the  long  abfence  of  her  husband : having  many  impoi-
tunatefutors  in  her  husbands  abfenco.  Hie  praid  them
to  refpite  her  till  flic  had  ended  a web  which  flic  had
begun  to  W'C3vr,and  that  being  granted, look  what  ftic
wore  allday, fhe  undid  at  night.

Pega/ks  a horfe  that  had  wings,  this  horfe  is  faid  to
be  bred  of  the  blood  of  Medufa  : and  that  BeUcrophon
thinking  to  ride  him  up  to  heaven, fell  from  iim,buithc
korfcheld  onhiscourle  ftill,and  wasmadc  a flar.

Pbeebas  or  ApoUo  taken  for  the  Sun.

P innabcU fonof AnfehnM  of  Magan\a  meets  with
Brahmoiit,\a  \euBradamant  faW  \nio Malim  pit,i4-
Heals  her  horfe,  1 7. overthrown  hy  Mar  ji/d,i}S.  take?
Griffin,  Aquilant,  Guidon  Savage,  and  Sanpmtt  prifon-
cis,  1 7 2. makes  them  fweare  to  his  law,  ibid,  it  met  and
killed  by  Bra  lamant, 17%.

Po^ynejfo  Duke  of  Athany  betrayeth  Genewra  by
27ali/zdas  means,3f.iskillcd  by  RenalJo,^t.

Polidorm  fonof  PriamxiMled  by  Poltmnefter  for
covctoufnelTe  of  the  gold  that  Pna?»;<sfcnt  with  him.

Poliux,\ook  Caftor.

Prafldo  a Chriften  Captaire.

Prague  killed  her  fonne  /f«,and  isfitncd  to  have  bin
turned  into  a fwallow.

Proffitt  counted  a God  of  the  fca  called  ’VeTtumnus,
becaufc  he  it  faid  to  turn  bimfclfinto  all  fhapes.

O o a Proteus


THE  T A B L E.


Fratcui  king  of  Egypt  fpokcn  of  ir\  the  46  book.

Puliano  a king  mufters  afore  AgramAnt,  105.  flainc
by  RenaldOy  \ 54.

Fyramidet  ccitAmc  towers  of  incredible  height  built
by  the  Princc*of  Egyptjof  this  look  tn  the  feven  won-
deis  of  the  world.

R

Rabican  AfiolfoshoxCstS^..

Renaldo  fell  out  with  Orlando  for  Angdicayi.loA  hii
horre,and  inlecking  of  him  found  Angelica,  ibidem,
fought  with  ferrawjib.iidcsbchind  him,;,  partsfroni
him  and  finds  his  horfejibtd.  he  finds  Angelica  againe,
7,^ghtswith  Sacrapant,  10  isparted  by  theillufion  of
an  Hermitjibidem  he  takes  his  hoife  againe,iljidem.hc
goeth  to  Parisji  I.  isfentin  EmbalTagc,  ibid,  arrives  in
Scotland,  tS. goeth  toward  the  Court >ibid.  isenteitai-
ned  by  an  Abbot  and  his  Monks,ibidem.hearc$ofGc-
«e»r4i  dan  get,  ibid  is  guided  to  the  Court, 19.  meets
with  2?j//nd4)ibid.hearsthe  taleof  Gene»'ra,ja.33>*4>
3S-36  fights  with  and  kilshim.38.  fuesfor

aid  to  tire  Scotcifli  king,  s8.  goeth  by  fea  to  England
and  isfeafied  there,  $9,  brought  by  filence  to  t'aris,
I£j  ■ hisOration,ibidem.he  encourageth  the  Scots, 1 15 .
V\\%’DardaneU,i^t.uo\xh\zd  with  ]z3.\o\iCvco{ Orlando,
ate. comes  to  Mounralbano,  247.  goeth  to  fuccour
C/;<jr/cf,ibid.meets  GwidoM^a 5 ». fights  again  with  Gra-
157- fights againc,27j.  loleth  Bayardo,  274.  a
champion  for  Cli4Wef,ia a.  fights  with  i?p^era,i2j.  is
troubled  with  bis  old  love, 3 53  . hears  of  where

Angelica  is,344.askethlcaveof C^ar/ef  togotolndia,
ibid.  alTailed  by  a monfter  and  delivered  by  a knighr,
J45,  comes  to  the  knight  of  Mantua,  3 f6.  refufethto
tail  the  cup  to  trie  cuckolds,  360.  goeth  by  water  to
Ravenna, 3<9  meets  Or/dndo at  Lyppadufc,tbid  meets
Rogero  at  the  Hermits, 3 71.  promifeth  him  Bradama  t,
376.comcs  with  him  into  Francc,377.  falsoutwith  his
father  about  R6gero,\\oii.  and  391.  is  at  Bradamants
marriage, 402.

Richardet  gat  Fkrde^nna  with  child, and  Ihould  have
dicdjdc  islet  free byR<gcro,i99.ielsJi9geroatalc,20o
comes  to  Aldigers  houfCyioi.  goeth  with  him  to  tclcoe
MaXagige  and  ljivian,\oi.  meets Marffa,  *04.  refcuei
Vivian  and  MaUgige^ioj. dines  at  Merlins  cave,2o8.  is
overthrowne  by  Rodomont,%\ o.  by  Guidorr^zsi,  is  at
Bradamants  marriage, 40a.

Rifee  or  Riphe  mountains  in  Scythia.

Roiomont  king  of  Algier,  a man  of  pafljng  ftrength,
■mudeisafote  Agramanr,ioi.  enters  Fans,  1 to.  doth
much  l]^oiIe,t2a.leavcsParts,i38.meetsDifcord,Pride,
and  jealoufic  with  Doralices  mclTcnger,  ibid,  takes
Fiontino  from  Hippalca,i79.  fights  with  Mandricard,
Lib.i4.ftafFc8o.  parted,  ftaffe  93.  fights  with  Rogeroy
ai». parted,!  1 3.refcues  Agramant,\i7.  fals  at  variance
with  Mandricard  and  with  Sacrapant,  z\9.  tefufed  by
Doralme,  goeth  away  malccontent,  ati.  his  invcAive
againfi  women, »2. his  hods  entertainment,s33. meets
yy^fc«i!ld,iti.kils  the  Prieft,234.  isdrunkeand  cutsofF
Jfahellat  head,t35.makesa  tombe,a  vow  and  a bridge,
is  cart  by  Or/dndo  into  the  water,  137.  Overcomes
Bra>idimart,zi4.  is  overthrowne  by  firadamn/,  19).
enters  into  a cell  for  lliamcof  hisfovlc  received  by
Bradamant,zg^  challenges  Rogero  at  Bradamants  ma~


iiagc,40i . is  killed  by  Rogero, AO\.

Rogero  taken  by  Atlant,i  ^.delivered  by  Bradamant,
27  . carried  away  by  the  Grificth  horle,  ibid,  comes  to
Alcinas  lle,42.is  warned  by  Afioljo,^i.  fights  with  the
mon(lcrs,46.  isrefeuedby  two  Ladies,  ibidem,  over-
throwes  Eriffila.r^g  is  entertained  by  Alcina,'iO.\%WK-
ned  by  MeliJfa,i^.d\ko\'C\s  Alcinoi  iIlufions,ibid.  de-
ceives and  flics,  s 7.  is  impeacht  by  a Fawlkncr,
5*.  tempted  in  his  way  by  three  Ladies,  76.  alTauJtcd
by  fea.ibid. delivered  by  Logefiilla,  ib.  parted  from  to-
geftiUa  on  the  winged  horle,77  kes  the  mufteisin  En-
glaod,7  * goes  to  Ireland, 79.  fees  Angelica  tied  to  the
lockc,  ibidem,  overcomes  the  Otke  by  helpe  of  his
niicld,8o,lcnds  Angelica  his  ring,ibid.  kefeth  Angelica
83.lccfcth  his  horfe,  ibid,  iscaried  by  a traine  toano>
thcr  inchanted  Pallacc  of  Atlanr,ao,  freed  from  the  in.,
chanted  Pallacc, 170  goes  with  17 1 . van-

quiflirth  Pinnabels  fourc  knights  by  his  fliield,  173,
throwesaway  the  (hield,t  74.fet$ficc  Richardet,i\b.z$
ft.  I o comes  to  Aldiger, 301.  writes  to  Bradamant,  •-  03.
mentt  Marfifa,\o^  xdcuesMalagtgezndVivian,  207,
dines  in  A/erk«x  cave,  208  goes  with  Wppalca,  aop,
finds  Rodomont,zi  1.  fightswith  him  and  Mandricarjy
212  partcd,2i4.rcfcuesv4^i2nJ4«r,2i7.  offers  combat
to  Rodomont  and  Mandricard,ihtd  ki\sMandricara,i^  5;
is  fore  hurt  by  him, ibid,  is  challenged  by  Bradamant,
294  parts  Marjifa  and  hf  1,300  fights  with  Marfifa  and
ispartcd,3ue.  tcls  Afar^yi  of  his  iace,3c|,  promifeth
maria gc  to  Bradamant ,^or^  zffav\is Marganor ,iii,^oes
back  tothe  campe,  3 13.  chofen champion  foxAgra-
mant,%zz  fights  with  Renj/do,^ 23. is parted,326.  fights
with  2)«ddn,339.takci  ftiipping,343  ruffersHiipwrack
344  ComrstoanHermit,  ,46.  is  chriftcnd,ibid.  meets
Orlando  And  Renaldo,^7z  hath  zpxomifeoi  Bradamant,
J76.  comes  into  Franca  with  them,  377.  i*  refufed  by
Bradamants  p3rcnts,hiivempIaint,?7?,vowstokillLe«
on,OBd  cals  himfclf  knight  of  the  VnicornCjyPo.is  wade
king  of  thcBulgars,?  81 . is  prifonerto  Theodora,  iiv-
delivered  b)  Lco«, }87,fights  with  him  for  Bradamant
and  wins  her,'j89.  hiscomplaint,  andwouldpinehim-
felfevo dcath,c  9o,is  relieved  by  Leo», 3 9 e,inarrics  Brttri
damant  ,199. Vdieth  Rodomont,  404.

S

Sacrapant  makes  great  lamentation  for  Angelica, his
complaint  begins, 4.  ft  41.  ./Iw^e/tca  difclofcth  hcrfelfc
to  him,ibid.hccncou*tcrs  whhBradamant,  y.  is  over-
thrownc,4.  his  horfe  being  flame  takes  Bayardo,  ibid,
fights  vvith  Renaldo  so,  isparted  by  an  illufion,  ibid-  is
delivered  from  the  inchanted  Pallacc,27.  is  inanother
inchanted  k*allacc,i;o.fracd  by  Angelica, 9s  .ieefeth  her
and  fecks  her,ibid  falsoutwith  Rodomont, zzo. follows
him,222.taken,and  goes  h0me,294'

Sampfon  3 man  of  great  ftrength , fpoken  of  in  the
Scripture,  his  vertuc  was  in  his  haiie,  he  One  i oop  men
with  the  jaw  bone  of  an  Affc,io6.

Sanfonet  governour  of  Icrufalem,«itert ains  Aflolfot
1 1 9. goes  toDamafco,i40.wins  the  prize, i4i<comes  to
the  Amazons  land,  149.  fcapeth  thence,  i S7.  freed  by
^y?9//i?,32  8 . helpcs  to  t aicc  Or/rjndo,  3 j o.affaults  Biferta ,
335.remai-nesin  Affrica,ibid.

Scipio  a famous  Captaine  of  the  Romans.

Senapo  blind ,Iook  tales  27  5. healed  ofhis eyes, 390.

Icndf


THE  T

lends  Adolfo  meaind  money, ibid,  bis  meRaiTauItSi-

ferta.^jf.

S$hrino  a Prince  and  grave  cnunfcllour  to  Agramant,
muftcrs  before  him,  r 04  hngood  counfcl  to  jigramant,
lit. kisinCwcT to Marfilio,  a gocdOiaiion,  ^*1.  flies
with./4^riiwa«/bjfea,3J4  iniflikcth  of  the  breach  of
truce,j27.  withholds y4^raw<J«r  from  killing  himfelfe,
and  comforts  him,3? 7.  isoncof  the  challenge  3.  to  3.
3?  8. wounded  by  Or  Undo, ^ 47  hoghs  0/rvcrr  horfc,3  48
if  chriflendj373. comes  to  Franccj37  7.1$  at  the  manage
of  Bri(Limant,\ox.

Stordilano  father  of  T)  oral  ice, Ving  of  Granada  a rich
province  of  Spainc^being  watered  with  the  tiver  of  Bc-
tica  orBcthiji04.

T

Tagus  arircr  in  Lufitania  or  Pottngallj  it  hath
golden  faiid  in  Tome  places;  by  thistiveritisthat  P/t-
nji  writes  that  Mares  conceive  with  the  wind, and  bring
forth  colts  cxcecdiog  fwift,  but  they  live  but  three
ycarcs.

Tiberius,t6i  there  were  many  ©f that  name,  one  fuc-
ceeded  Augi(lm,^r^d  built  wonderfull  fiimptuousbuil-
dings'in  the  lie  of  Capri,and  gave  himfclfc  to  drink  and
fUrhinefTcoflife,  infomuch  that ,*'eing  aamedTiberius
NcrOjthey  nicknamed  him  Biberius  Mero.

Tiberiuiji  64.W3S  a good  Empeioui  and  aChriftian,
it  iswTittenof  him,  that  having  fpent  much  money  to
good  and  Chriftianufes,and  beginning  to  want, he  faw
a crofTe  of  (lone  lying  on  the  ground ,and  for  rercrence,
thatit  fhould  not  be  troden  on,  caufed  itto  be  digged
up,  and  under  that  another,  and  fo  a third,  tillatthc
lafl  he  found  an  infinite  treafurc  that  had  been  there
bidden,  wbichr  he  took  as  a thing  fent  by  Q od,  and  em-
ployed tt  to  very  good  and  nancely  works.

Tithonas  husband  to  Amora, and  had  by  her  a gift  of
longlife.

Trajano  father  of  Agramant  flaineby  Fypin  king  of
Prance  as  is  mentioned  in  the  fife  page,

Trifoly  a city  in  Affrica,  (b  called  becauft  three  fun-
dty  people  did  joyncin  the  inhabiting  ofil , the  Tyri-
aos,Sidonians  and  Arabians.

Trijlramt  lodge.lookc  T ales,  1 03 .

Turpin  Aichbifhop  of  France  alledged  often  by
mine  Author, an  ancient  Hiftonographec.

V

’Virgil  eaWtd  the  Prin  ce  of  the  Latine  Poets.

'Vlyjfes  fon  of  Laertes  the  famous  Grecian  Captainc,


ABLE.

a notable  traveller,  !^ui  mores  hom'.num  rmUorum  vidit
(S'  urbes,  a man  of  great  policir,p.i  fling  eloquent  the
notable  exploits  that  aic  attributed  to  him  would  be
too  long  to  fet  down, but  in  hi s Oration  i n OtnJr  Mcra-
morphofis  they  be  repeated  by  him.  Si  meacumvejhii
valuijj'tnt  vet  a Felafgi,(s'c.

Vllany  fent  by  the  Q^ccnof  Ifland  with  the  golden
fliieldjiOa.  defended  by  Bradamant,  zuj.  is  found  by
Braiamant  halfc  ftrippcd.and  goes  to  Marganors  town
with  her,  308  puts  Margantr  to  death, 3 1 3 .

’Vidcanto  isfainedby  the  Poets  to  keepa  fhopin
the  liollowneflcofthc  mount  e/£'rna,and  there  to  work
thundci bolts  fox  lupiter.

z

2cnorrflfera  Stoickc,  a man  ofno  great  wit,  butof
wonderfull  continency,  for  when  feme  youths  of  A-
thens  had  covenanted  with  a ballot  to  tempt  him  to
her  company,  and  the  laid  ZeaotMfrr  having  fupped
with  them,  and  drunk  well  that  uighr,  which  is  a pro-
voking to  venerif,yctthc  harlot  w as  notable  to  tempt
him,  notwithftanding  that  (lie  was  her  crafts  mafler,
or  at  Icaft  miftrc{rc,wherfoie  they  demanded  their  mo-
ney againe, but  (he  avoided  themtbut,that  bet  bargain
was  to  tempt  a man, and  net  an  image.

Zerbin  Pn'ficc  of  Scotland  mufters  his  men  by  the
Thcams,78.hisarmes  the  Lyon,ibid  bis  comely  fliape,
ib\d.loyet  JfabeUa.g't.  fends  Oderre/je  foi  her,  ibid  go-
vcrneithc  vawardof  JtenaWor  battcll,  24.  fights  vali-
anrly,ibid  kils  two  Spaniards.  115.  in  penllto  be  (lain  it
refeued  by  y4rtod<jnf,i  ij. after  by  /(cuaWojibid.chafcth
his  enemies  all  nigbt,t44.fpares  Medoro,  .and  purlucth
him  that  did  hurt  him,t4<i,  1 4 r. takes  old  Gabrina  into
proicftion,T54.heatsncw5  of  /faheUahy  G abrina, 1 60,
fights  with  Hermonide  for  her,  1 6 t.  is  betrayed  by  her,
1 80. delivered  by  Or/a 'do,ibid  finds/yaiciSfa,!  81.  par-
donethOder/ci^e  with  Angular  clemency,  1 94  commits
Gafcr/na  to  his  keeping,  lib  14- ft  45.  gathers  Orlandos
aimour,lib.eodein  fl,4/,  fights  with  Mandricardtn  dc-
fenceofZ)«rtnda«,codem,ft.5 1 .deadly  hurt,  ft. 36.  his
laft  lamcmaciOB,67.hr  dies6o.  his  ftatcly  toinbe  made
by  Rodomont  yyhete  JfabeUa  .and  he  arc  laid,pag.i3  6.

Zeuxes,  ofhim  1 havefpokenin  the  hotes  of  thc33
Booke,  onely  1 will  add  this  that  I fpake  not  of  theie  •
how  he  painted  a boy  bearing  a bunch  cf  grapes,  and
the  birds  pecking  at  the  grapes,hc  found  fault  wit  h his
ownc  workcjfaying,  the  boy  was  not  well  drawnc,  for
if  he  had,  the  birds  would  have  been  afllaid  to  have
conic  foncarc.


The  principall  tales  in  OrUndo  Furiofo  that

may  be  read  by  thcmfclves.  ,

1 Tale  of  Gene  wra  ffegint  8 4 2 .

2 Taleof  Allolfbs  iHrningto  a tree.pag  16.

3 Tale  of  Rogeros  camming  to  Alcina,^4g  45  .^ajfe  54.

4 Tale  «>/Proteus  and  the  Orl^e^pag.6o.fiaffe  46.

5 Tale  of  Olympia, 66.Jiafe  1 6.

6 TaleefU'abcWiijPag  9/^.ftaffe  6j.

7 Tale  of  fending  Dtfeord  and  Silence^pag.  i oy.fiajfe  5 p.

8 Tale  of  Calligorant,p4j^.  1 1 5 flaffe  3 o.
p Taleof  On\\OjVag.l\6.ftajfe^g.

I o Tale  of  Origille,p<*^.  121.fi.  '

I I Tale  of  Lucina  and  Norandino,p<i^  1 29.fiaffe  20.

12  Tale  of  the  dmaz.ons^fag.  153  .fiaffe  5 .

1 3 Tale  (7/Gabrina,p4£.  1 62.fi.

14  Tale  of  Orlandos  madnefe^pag.  183  .fiaffie  78.

1 5 Tale  of  Fiordofpina, p4j^.  199.fi,

1 6 Tale  of  mine  Hofi,n>ith  Kodomotitsinv'ilive  againfi  yoome»)pag.222.fiafft  pj,

17  Tale  tf/^Triftrams  lodge ^pag.26'^.pafe 77.

1 8 TaleofScnaTpo,pag.  275  .flaffe  P3 .

I p Tale  of  Lydia, pag. 2S1  .fiaffe  6.

20  Tale  of  Aftolfb  to  Paradice  and  finding  Orlandos  mt,pag,2%^.fiafi‘e  4P.

2 1 Tale  of  Morganor,'>4^.  3o8.y?4jf<r  26.

22  Tale  of  the  • Hantaan  kpigbt^pag.  3 5 6. fiaffe  66.

23  Tale  of  Adonio called  the  Stears~mans  tale.pag.  3 6/\.fiafft  66,

24  Tale  ofLtons  onrtefieto  Rogero,pag.  385  .fiafie  1 1 .

For  other  thingfy  ae  OrationSyLetterSyComplaintSyand  thelikgyyonfhaHi^ndthtonfitht  T^ili  M
the  name  of  thofe  fohom  they  do  moJi  cone  erne,

\

FINIS.'
