Essays in Criticism, First Series (Matthew Arnold, 1865)
==========================================================
Invents modern literary criticism: disinterestedness and 'the best that has been thought'. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (essaysincritici00gugoog).

Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



T*J^!L/.^; 



y 




" ■ 'n 



• f • 



• » 



ESSAYS IN CRITICISM 



ESSAYS IN CEITICISM 



FIRST SERIES 



BY 

MATTHEW AENOLD 



%antian 
MACMILLAN AND CO., Limited 

NEW YORK : THE MACMIJiLAN COMPANY 

1903 

A a rights reserved 



V 






' 



First Edition (Extra Fcap. ivo) 1865 

Second 1868, Third (Crown %vo) 1875, Fourth 1884 

Reprinted 1886, 1888, 2891, 1894 

First printed in the Eversley Series 1895 

Reprinted 1896, 1898, 1900, 1902, 1903 



PREFACE. 

(1865.) 

Several of the Essays which are here collected and 
reprinted had the good or the bad fortune to be 
much criticised at the time of their first appearance. 
I am not now going to inflict upon the reader a 
reply to those criticisms ; for one or two explanations 
which are desirable, I shall elsewhere, perhaps, be 
able some day to find an opportimity; but, indeed, 
it is not in my nature, — some of my critics would 
rather say, not in my power, — ^to dispute on behalf 
of any opinion, even my own, very obstinately. To 
try and approach truth on one side after another, not 
to strive or cry, nor to persist in pressing forward, on 
any one side, with violence and self-will, — it is only 
thus, it seems to me, that mortals may hope to gain 
any vision of the mysterious Goddess, whom we shall 
never see except in outline, but only thus even in 
outline. He who will do nothing but fight impetu- 
ously towards her on his own, one, favourite, parti- 
cular line, is inevitably destined to run his head into 
the folds of the black robe in which she is wrapped. 



ri PEKFACT. 

So it is not to reply to my critics that I write tihis 
preface, but to prevent a miBUnderstanding, of which 
certaiD phrases that some of them use make me 
apprehensiva Mr. Wright, one of the many trans- 
latois of Homer, has published a letter to tbe Dean 
*of Canterbury, complaining of some remarks of mine, 
uttered now a long while ago, on his version of the 
Iliad. One cannot be always studying one's own 
worka, and I was really under the impression, till I 
saw Mr. Wright's complaint, that I had spoken of 
bim with aU respect The reader may judge of my 
BStoniBhment^ therefore, at findin^^ from Mr. Wright's 
p^nphlet, that I had " declared with much solemnity 
that there is not any proper reason for his existing." 
That I never said; but, on looking back at my 
LectuMffi on translating Homer, I find that I did say, 
not that Mr, Wright, but that Mr. Wright's versioD 
of 'the Iliad, repeating in the main the merits and 
defects of Cowper's version, as Mr. Sotheby's repeated 
those of Pope's version, had, if I might be pardoned 
for saying so, no proper reason for existing. Else- 
where I expressly spoke of the merit of his version ; 
but I confess that the phrase, qualified as I have 
shown, about its want of a proper reason for existing, 
I used. Well, the phrase had, peritaps, too much 
vivacity ; we have all of ns a right to exist, we and 
our works ; an unpopular author should be the last 
person to call in question this right. So I gladly 

Bse, and I am sorry for 
however, would perhaps 

ivacity, if he considered 



PBEFACB. Tli 

that we are none of us likely to be lively much longer. 
My vivacity is but the last sparkle of flame before 
we are all in the dark, the last glimpse of coloiir 
before we all go into drab, — the drab of the earnest, 
prosaic, practical, austerely literal futura Yes, the 
world will soon be the Philistines'! and then, with 
every voice, not of thunder, silenced, and the whole 
earth filled and ennobled every morning by the 
magnificent roaring of the young lions of the DaUy 
Telegraphy we shall all yawn in one another's faces 
with the dismallest, the most unimpeachable gravity 
But I return to my design in writing this Preface. 
That design was, after apologising to Mr. Wright for 
my vivacity of five years ago, to beg him and others 
to let me bear my own burdens, without saddling the 
great and famous University to which I have the 
honour to belong with any portion of them. What 
I mean to deprecate is such phrases as, "his pro- 
fessorial assault," " his assertions issued ex caihedrd" 
"the sanction of his name as the representative of 
poetry," and so on. Proud as I am of my connection 
with the University of Oxford,^ I can truly say, that 
knowing how unpopular a task one is undertaking 
when one tries to pull out a few more stops in that 
powerful but at present somewhat narrow -toned 
organ, the modem Englishman, I have always sought 
to stand by myself, and to compromise others as 
little as possibla Besides this, my native modesty 
is such, that I have nJways been shy of assimiing the 

^ When tho above was written the author had still the Chair 
of Poetry at Oxford, which he has since vacated. 



honourable style of Professor, because this is a title 
I share with so many distinguished men, — Professor 
Pepper, Professor Anderson, Professor Frickel, and 
others, — who adorn it, I feel, much more than I do. 

However, it is not merely out of modesty that I 
prefer to stand alone, and to concentrate on myself 
as a plain citizen of the republic of letters, and not 
as an office-bearer in a hierarchy, the whole responsi- 
bility for all I write ; it is much more out of genuine 
devotion to the University of Oxford, for which I 
feel, and always must feel, the fondest, the most 
reverential attachment In an epoch of dissolution 
and Ixansformation, such as that on which we are 
now entered, habits, ties, and associations are inevit- 
ably broken up, the action of individuals becomes 
more distinct, the shortcomings, errors, heats, dis- 
putes, which necessarily attend individual action, are 
brought into greater prominence. Who would not 
gladly keep clear, from all these passing clouds, an 
august institution which was there before they arose, 
and which will be there when they have blown over 1 

It is true, the Saturday Review maintains that our 
epoch of transformation is finished; that we have 
found our philosophy; that the British nation has 
searched all anchorages for the spirit, and has finally 
anchored itself, in the fulness of perfected knowledge, 
on Benthamism. This idea at first made a great 
impression on me ; not only because it is so consoling 
in itself, but also because it explained a phenomenon 
which in the summer of last year had, I confess, a 
good deal troubled me. At that time my avocations 



PBEFACE. UC 

led me travel almost daily on one of the Great Eastern 
Lines, — the Woodford Branch. Every one knows 
that the murderer, MiQler, perpetrated bis detestable 
act on the North London Railway, close by. The 
English middle class, of which I am myself a feeble 
unit, travel on the Woodford Branch in large numbers. 
Well, the demoralisation of our class, — ^the class which 
(the newspapers are constantly saying it, so I may 
repeat it without vanity) has done all the great things 
which have ever been done in England, — the demoral- 
isation, I say, of our class, caused by the Bow tragedy, 
was something bewildering. Myself a transeenden- 
talist (as the Saiurday Beview knows), I escaped the 
infection; and, day after day, I used to ply my 
agitated fellow-travellers with all the consolations 
which my transcendentalism would naturally suggest 
to ma I reminded them how Csesar refused to take 
precautions against assassination, because life was not 
worth having at the price of an ignoble solicitude for 
it. I reminded them what insignificant atoms we aU 
are in the life of the world. " Suppose the worst to 
happen," I said, addressing a portly jeweller from 
Gheapside ; '' suppose even yourself to be the victim ; 
U fCy a pas cFhomme nScessaire, We should miss you 
for a day or two upon the Woodford Branch ; but 
the great mundane movement would still go on, the 
gravel walks of your villa would still be rolled, 
dividends would still be paid at the Bank, omnibuses 
would still nin, there would still be the old crush at 
the comer of Fenchurch Street" All was of no 
avail Nothing could moderate, in the bosom of the 



X PREFACE. 

great English middle-class, their passionate, absorb- 
ing, almost blood-thirsty clinging to life. At the 
moment I thought this over-concern a little un- 
worthy ; but the Saiurday Beview suggests a touching 
explanation of it What I took for the ignoble ding- 
ing to life of a comtortable worldling, was, perhapB. 
only the ardent longing of a faithful Benthamite, 
traversing an age still dimmed by the last mists of 
transcendentalism, to be spared long enough to see 
his religion in the full and final blaze of its triumph. 
This respectable man, whom I imagined to be going 
up to London to serve his shop^ or to buy shares, or 
to attend an Exeter Hall meeting, or to assist at the 
deliberations of the Marylebone Yestry, was even, 
perhaps, in real truth, on a pious pilgrimage, to obtain 
from Mr. Bentham's executors a secret bone of his 
greats dissected master. 

And yet^ after all, I cannot but think that the 
Sahtrday Beview has here, for once, fallen a victim to 
an idea, — a beautiful but deluding idea, — and that 
the British nation has not yet^ so entirely as the 
reviewer seems to imagine, found the last word of its 
philosophy. No, we are all seekers still! seekers 
often make mistakes, and I wish mine to redound to 
my own discredit only, and not to touch Qxf (urd. 
Beautiful city ! so venerable, so lovely, so unravaged 
by the fierce intellectual life of our century, ao 
serene! 

** There an our joong httbaikiis, all at play ! " 

And yet steeped in soatiment as she lies, spreading 



J 



PREFACE. XI 

her gardens to the moonlight, and whispering from 
her towers the last enchantments of the Middle Age, 
who will deny that Oxford, by her ineffable charm, 
keeps ever calling us nearer to the true goal of all of 
us, to the ideal, to perfection, — to beauty, in a word, 
which is only truth seen from another side 1— nearer, 
perhaps, than all the science of Tiibingen. Adorable 
dreamer, whose heart has been so romantic ! who hast 
given thyself so prodigally, given thyself to sides and 
to heroes not mine, only never to the Philistines ! 
home of lost causes, and forsaken beliefs, and un- 
popular names, and impossible loyalties! what ex- 
ample could ever so inspire us to keep down the 
Philistine in ourselves, what teacher could ever so 
' save us from that bondage to which we are all prone, 
that bondage which Goethe, in his incomparable lines 
on the death of Schiller, makes it his friend's highest 
praise (and nobly did Schiller deserve the praise) to 
have left miles out of sight behind him ; — ^the bond- 
age of " toas Wis dUe bdndigt, das gbmeinb /" She will 
forgive me, even if I have unwittingly drawn upon 
her a shot or two aimed at her unworthy son ; for 
she is generous, and the cause in which I fight is, after 
aU, hers. Apparitions of a day, what is our puny 
warfare against the Philistines, compared with the 
warfare which this queen of romance has been wag- 
ing against them for centuries, and will wage aft^r we 
are gone^ 



CONTENTS. 



PAGE 



I. The Function of Criticism at the Present 

X IKE . . . . . • 



II. The Literary Influence of Academies 



III. Maurice de GuArin 

IV. Eugenie de Qu^rin 
V. Heinrich Heine 

YI. Pagan and Medijkyal Religious Sentiment 



VII. A Persian Passion Play 



VIII. Joubert . 



IX. Spinoza and the Bible 
X. Marcus Aurelius 



42 
80 
121 
166 
194 
223 
265 
307 
844 



f 



THE FUNCTION OF CEITICISM AT THE 

PEESENT TIME. 

Many objections have been made to a proposition 
which, in some remarks of mine on translating Homer, 
I ventured to put forth; a proposition about criticism, 
and its importance at the present day. I said : " Of 
the literature of France and Germany, as of the 
intellect of Europe in general, the main effort, for 
now many years, has been a critical effort; the 
endeavour, in all branches of knowledge, theology, 
philosophy, history, art, science, to see the object as 
in itself it really is.'' I added, that owing to the 
operation in English literature of certain causes, 
"almost the last thing for which one would come 
to English literature is just that very thing which 
now Europe most desires, — criticism ; " and that the 
power and value of English literature was thereby 
impaired. More than one rejoinder declared that the 
unportance I here assigned to criticism was excessive, 
and asserted the inherent superiority of the creative 
effort of the human spirit over its critical effort 

VOL. h & B 



2 ESSiLTS IN CSmCISM. Il 

And the other day, haying been led by a Mr. ^laiip's 
excellent notice of Woidsworth ^ to turn again to his 
biography, I found, in the words of this great man, 
whom I, for one^ mnst always listen to witli the pro- 
fonndest respect^ a sentence passed on the critic's busi- 
ness, which seems to justify every possible disparage- 
ment of it Wordsworth says in one of his letters : — 

" The writers in these publications " (the Beviews), 
** idiile they prosecute their inglorious employment^ 
can not be supposed to be in a state of mind very 
&YOurable for being affected by the finer influences 
of a thing so pure as genuine poetiy." 

And a trustworthy reporter of his conversation 
quotes a more elaborate judgment to die same effect : — 

^Wordsworth holds the critical power very low, 
infinitely lower than the inventiye; and he said 
to-day that if the quantity of time consumed in 
writing critiques on the works of others were given 
to oiiginal composition, of whatever kind it might 
be, it would be mudi better employed; it would 
make a man find out sooner his own levd, and 
it would do infinitely less mischiel A false or 

i I cannot help thinking that a practice, common in "RwglmTyl 
during the last oentniy, and still followed in France^ of print- 
ing a notice of this kind, — a notice by a competent critic, — to 
ierre as an introdoction to an eminent author's in»ks, might 
bo levired among ns with advantage. To introduce all 
ig editions of WwdswcHih, Mr. Shairp*s notice might. 



it seems to me^ ezeellentlj serve ; it is written from the pcnnt 
of view of an admira*, naj, of a disciple, and that is right ; 
b«t ihm the disciple mnst be also, as in this case he is, a critic, 

a nan of letters, not, as too <rflen happens, some relation or friend 
m\h BO onalificatioii for his taa^ except affection for his 



£.] FUNCTION OF CRITICISM AT PRESENT TIMB. 3 

malicioiis criticism may do much injury to the mindfi 
of others, a stupid invention, either in prose or verse, 
is quite harmlesa" 

It is aknost too much to expect of poor human 
nature, that a man capable of producing some effect 
in one line of literature, should, for the greater good 
of society, voluntarily doom himself to impotence and 
obscurity in another. Still less is this to be expected 
from men addicted to the composition of the " false 
or malicious criticism " of which Wordsworth speaks. 
However, everybody would admit that a false or 
malicious criticism had better never have been written. 
Everybody, too, would be willing to admits as a gene- 
ral proposition, that the critical faculty is lower than 
the inventive. But is it true that criticism is really, 
in itself, a baneful and injurious employment ; is it 
true that all time given to writing critiques on the 
works of others would be much better employed if 
it were given to original composition, of whatever 
kind this may be 1 Is it true that Johnson had better 
have gone on producing more Irenes instead of writing 
his lAves of the Poets; nay, is it certain that Words- 
worth himself was better employed in making his 
Ecclesiastical Sonnets than when he made his cele- 
brated Preface, so full of criticism, and criticism of 
the works of others 1 Wordsworth was himself a 
great critic, and it is to be sincerely regretted that he 
has not left us more criticism ; Goethe was one of 
the greatest of critics, and we may sincerely con- 
gratulate ourselves that he has left us so much 
criticism. Without wasting time over the exaggera- 



4 ESaATS IN GRITIGISIL [i 

tion which Wordsworth's jndgmeDt on criticism 
clearly contains, or oyer an attempt to trace the 
causes, — ^not difficult, I think, to be traced, — ^which may 
have led Wordsworth to this exaggeration, a critic 
may with advantage seize an occasion for trying his 
own conscience, and for asking himself of what real 
service at any given moment the practice of criticism 
either is or may be made to his own mind and spirit, 
and to the minds and spirits of others. 

The critical power is of lower rank than the crear 
tiva True ; but in assenting to this proposition, one 
or two things are to be kept in mind It is undeni- 
able that the exercise of a creative power, that a free 
creative activity, is the highest function of man ; it is 
proved to be so by man's finding in it his true happi- 
ness. But it is undeniable, also, that men may have 
Oie sense of exerciEting this free creative activity in 
other ways than in producing great works of litera- 
ture or art ; if it were not so, all but a very few men 
would be shut out from the true happiness of all men. 
They may have it in well-doing, they may have it in 
learning, they may have it even in criticising. This 
b one thing to be kept in mind. Another is, that 
the exercise of the creative power in the production 
of great works of literature or art, however high this 
exercise of it may rank, is not at all epochs and under 
all conditions possible ; and that therefore labour may 
be vainly spent in attempting it, which might with 
more fruit be used in preparing for it, in rendering 
it possibla This creative power works with elements, 
with materials; what if it has not those materiala 



I.] FUNcnoK OF cirnciSM at present tool 

those elements, ready for its oset In that case it 
must surely wait till they are ready. Now, in 
literature, — ^I will limit myself to literature, for it 
is about literature that the question arises, — the 
elements with which the creative power works are 
ideas; the best ideas on every matter which litera- 
ture touches, current at the time. At any rate we 
may lay it down as certain that in modem literature 
no manifestation of the creative power not working 
with these can be very important or fruitful And I 
say current at the time, not merely accessible at the 
time; for creative literary genius does not princi- 
pally show itself in discovering new ideas, that is 
rather the business of the philosopher. The grand 
work of literary genius is a work of S3mthesis and 
exposition, not of analysis and discovery; its gift 
lies in the faculty of being happily inspired by a 
certain inteUectual and Bpiritual atmosphere, by a 
certain order of ideas, when it finds itself in them ; 
of dealing divinely with these ideas, presenting them 
in the most effective and attractive combinations, — 
making beautiful works with them, in short But it 
must have the atmosphere, it must find itself amidst 
the order of ideas, in order to work freely ; and these 
it is not so easy to command. This is why great 
creative epochs in literature are so rare, this is why 
there is so much that is unsatisfactory in the produc- 
tions of many men of real genius ; because, for the 
creation of a master-work of literature two powers 
must concur, the power of the man and the power of 
the moment) and the man is not enough without the 



6 ESSATS IN CBITICISM. [l. 

moment ; tbe creative power has, for its happy exer- 
cise, appointed elements, and those elements are not 
in its own control 

Nay, they are more within the control of the 
critical power. It is the business of the critical 
power, as I said in the words already quoted, '* in 
all branches of knowledge, theology, philosophy, 
history, art^ science, to see the object as in itself it 
really is.'' Thus it tends, at last, to make an intel- 
lectual situation of which the creative power can 
profitably avail itself. It tends to establish an order 
of ideas, if not absolutely true, yet true by com- 
parison with that which it displaces; to make the 
best ideas prevail Presentiy these new ideas reach 
society, the touch of truth is the touch of life, and 
there is a stir and growth ever3rwhere ; out of this 
stir and growth come the creative epochs of literatura 

Or, to narrow our range, and quit these considerar 
tions of the general march of genius and of society, — 
considerations which are apt to become too abstract 
and impalpable, — every one can see that a poet^ for 
instance, ought to know life and the world before 
dealing with them in poetry ; and life and the world 
being in modem times very complex things, the crea- 
tion of a modem poet, to be worth much, implies a 
great critical effort behind it ; else it must be a com- 
paratively poor, barren, and short-lived affair. This 
is why Byron's poetry had so littie endurance in it, 
and Groethe's so much ; both Byron and Goethe had 
a great productive power, but Goethe's was nourished 
by a great critical effort providing the true materials 



1.1 FUNCrnON OF CRITICISM AT PRESENT TIME. 7 

for it) and Byron's was not; Gk>ethe knew life and 
the world, the poet's necessary subjects, much more 
comprehensively and thoroughly than Bynm. He 
knew a great deal more of them, and he knew them 
much more as they really are. 

It has long seemed to me that .the burst of creative 
activity in our literature, through the first quarter of 
this century, had about it in fact something pre- 
mature ; and that from this cause its productions are 
doomed, most of them, in spite of the sanguine hopes 
which accompanied and do still accompany them, to 
prove hardly more lasting than the productions of far 
less splendid epochs. And this prematureness comes 
from its having proceeded without having its proper 
data, without sufficient materials to work with. In 
other words, the English poetry of the first quarter 
of this century, with plenty of energy, plenty of crea- 
tive force, did not know enougL This makes Byron 
80 empty of matter, Shelley so incoherent, Words- 
worth even, profound as he is, yet so wanting in com- 
pleteness and variety. Wordsworth cared little for 
books, and disparaged Gk)ethe* I admire Wordsworth, 
as he is, so much that I cannot wish him different ; 
and it is vain, no doubt, to imagine such a man 
different from what he is, to suppose that he could 
have been different. But surely the one thing want- 
ing to make Wordsworth an even greater poet than 
he is, — ^his thought richer, and his influence of wider 
application, — was that he should have read more 
books, among them, no doubt, those of that Goethe 
whom he disparaged without reading him. 



8 ESSAYS Df CBITIGISIL [i 

Bat to speak of books and reading may easQy lead 
to a misimdeiBtanding here. It was not reaQy books 
and reading that kcked to onr poetiy at this epoch i 
Shelley had plenty of reading, Coleridge had immense 
reading. Pindar and Sophocles — as we all say so 
glibly^ and often with so little discernment of the 
real import of what we are saying — had not many 
books ; Shakspeare was no deep reader. Tme ; bnt 
in the Greece of Pindar and Sophodes, in the Eng- 
land of Shakspeare, the poet lived in a current of 
ideas in the highest degree animating and nourishing 
to the creative power; society was, in the fullest 
measure, permeated by fresh thought^ intelligent and 
aliva And this state of things is the true basis for 
the creative power^s exercise, in this it finds its data, 
its materials, truly ready for its hand ; all the books 
and reading in the world are only valuable as they 
are helps to this. Even when this does not actually 
exist, books and reading may enable a man to con- 
struct a kind of semblance of it in his own mind, a 
world of knowledge and intelligence in which he may 
live and work This is by no means an equivalent 
to the artist for the nationally diffused life and thought 
of the epochs of Sophocles or Shakspeare; but, be- 
sides that it may be a means of preparation for such 
epochs, it does really constitute, if many share in it, 
a quickening and sustaining atmosphere of great 
value. Such an atmosphere the many-sided learning 
and the long and widely-combined critical effort of 
Germany formed for Goethe, when he lived and 
worked. There was no national glow of life and 



I.] FUNCTION OF CRITICISM AT PRESENT TIME. 9 

thought there as in the Athens of Pericles or the 
England of ElizabetL That was the poet's weak- 
ness. But there was a sort of equivalent for it in 
the complete culture and unfettered thinking of a 
large body of Germans. That was his strength.^ In j 
the England of the first quarter of this century there 
was neither a national glow of life and thought, such 
as we had in the age of Elizabeth, nor yet a culture 
and a force of learning and criticism such as were to { 
be found in Germany. Therefore the creative power 
of poetry wanted, for success in the highest sense, 
materials and a basis ; a thorough interpretation of < 
the world was necessarily denied to it 

At first sight it seems strange that out of the 
inmiense stir of the French Eevolution and its age 
should not have come a crop of works of genius equal 
to that which came out of the stir of the great pro- 
ductive time of Greece, or out of that of the Eenas- 
cence, with its powerful episode the Reformation. 
But the truth is that the stir of the French Eevolu- 
tion took a character which essentially distinguished 
it from such movements as these. These were, in 
the main, disinterestedly intellectual and spiritual 
movements; movements in which the human spirit 
looked for its satisfaction in itself and in the increased 
play of its own activity. The French Eevolution 
took a political, practical character. The movement 
which went on in France under the old rigime^ from 
1700 to 1789, was far more really akin than that of 
the Eevolution itself to the movement of the Eenas- 
cence; the France of Voltaire and Eousseau told 



' 



10 ESSAYS IN CRITICISM. [i 

far more powerfully upon the mind of Europe than 
the France of the Bevolution. Goethe reproached 
this last expressly with having " thrown quiet culture 
back." Nay, and the true key to how much in our 
Byron, even in our Wordsworth, is this ! — ^that they 
^ had their source in a great movement of feeling, not 
in a great movement of mind. The French Revolu- 
tion, however, — that object of so much blind love 
and so much blind hatred, — ^found undoubtedly its 
motive-power in the intelligence of men, and not in 
thdr practical sense; this is what distinguishes it 
from the English Eevolution of Charles the First's 
tima This is what makes it a more spiritual event 
than our Revolution, an event of much more powerful 
and world-wide interest, though practically less 
successful ; it appeals to an order of ideaa which are 
universal, certain, permanent 1789 asked of a thing, 
Is it rationall 1642 asked of a thing, Is it legal 7 or, 
when it went furthest. Is it according to conscience 1 
This is the English fashion, a fashion to be treated, 
within its own sphere, with the highest respect; for 
its success, within its own sphere, has been prodigious. 
But what is law in one place is not law in another ^ 
what is law here to-day is not law even here to- 
morrow; and as for conscience, what is binding on 
one man's conscience is not binding on another ^& 
The old woman who threw her stool at the head of 
the surpliced minister in St Giles's Church at Edin- 
burgh obeyed an impulse to which millions of the 
human race may be permitted to remain strangers. 
But the prescriptions of reason are absolute, unchang- 



l] FUNCnON OF OKinOISM AT PKESBNT TIME. 11 

ing, of universal validity ; to cov/ni by tens is the easiest 
way of tmmtvng — ^that is a proposition of which every 
one, from here to the Antipodes, feels the force ; at 
least I should say so if we did not live in a country 
where it is not impossible that any morning we may 
find a letter in the Times declaring that a decimal 
coinage is an absurdity. That a whole nation should 
have been penetrated with an enthusiasm for pure 
reason, and with an ardent zeal for making its pre- 
scriptions triumph, is a very remarkable thing, when 
we consider how little of mind, or anything so worthy 
and quickening as mind, comes into the natives 
which alone, in general, impel great masses of men. 
In spite of the extravagant direction given to this 
enthusiasm, in spite of the crimes and follies in which 
it lost itself, the French Bevolution derives from the 
force, truth, and universality of the ideas which it 
took for its law, and from the passion with which it 
could inspire a multitude for these ideas, a unique 
and still living power; it is — it will probably long 
remain — the greatest, the most animating event in 
history. And as no sincere passion for the things of 
the mind, even though it turn out in many respects 
an unfortunate passion, is ever quite thrown away 
and quite barren of good, France has reaped from 
hers one fruit — the natural and legitimate firuit, 
though not precisely the grand fruit she expected: 
she is the country in Europe where the people is most 
alive. 

But the mania for giving an immediate political 
and practical application to all these fine ideas of the 



I 



12 ESSJLT8 Of CRrndSlf. [x 

reason was lalaL Here an Kngljahman is in hia 
element : on this theme we can all go cm for hours. 
And all we are in the habit of saying cm it has nn- 
doobtedly a great deal of truth. Ideas cannot be too 
much prized in and for themselyes, cannot be too 
much Kved with ; but to trani^(»i them alMnptl j into 
the world of politics and practice, violently to revida- 
tiomse this world to their bidding, — that is qnite 
another thing. There is the world ol ideas and there 
is the world ol practice; the Frcoich are often for 
suppressing the one and the Engtish the other ; bat 
neither is to be saj^ireBsed. A member ol the House 
of Commons said to me the other day : ''That a thing 
is- an anomaly, I consider to be no objection to it 
whatever." I yentore to think he was wrong ; that 
a thing is an anomaly is an objecti<m to it^ but abso- 
lutely and in the sjdiere ol ideas : it is not necessarily, 
under such and such dreumstances, or at such and 
such a mcMnoit^ an objection to it in the sphere ol 
politics and ^actica Joobert has said beautxfully : 
** Cost la force et le droit qoa r^ent toutes choses 
dans le monde; la force en ^t^^yndant le droit.'' 
(F<»ce and right are the goivenkon d this world; 
force tin ri^t is ready.) Fares till rigki is readw; and 
tin ri^t is ready, fi»ce, the existing order of things, 
is justified, is the legitimate ruler. But right is aome> 
tlung mora), and implies inward recognitioD, free 
assent d the wiQ ; we are not ready for rights — ^^^^ 
80 far as we are concerned, ts wd raoJjr, — until we have 
attained this sense of seong it and wilHng ik The 
waj in iHiich for us it may change and transform 



I.] FUNCTION OF CKITICI8M AT PRESENT TIME. 13 

force, the existing order of things, and become, in its 
torn, the legitimate ruler of the world, should depend 
on the way in which, when our time comes, we see it 
and will it Therefore for other people enamoured 
of their own newly discerned rights to attempt to 
impose it upon us as ours, and violently to substitute 
their right for our force, is an act of tyranny, and to 
be resisted. It sets at nought the second great half 
of our maxim, foru Hil right is ready. This was the 
grand error of the French Eevolution ; and its move- 
ment of ideas, by quitting the intellectual sphere and 
rushing furiously into the political sphere, ran, indeed, 
a prodigious and memorable course, but produced no 
such intellectual fruit as the movement of ideas of the 
Renascence, and created, in opposition to itself, what 
I may call an epocih of coneerUratian, The great force 
of that epoch of concentration was England ; and the 
great voice of that epoch of concentration was Burke. 
It is the fashion to treat Burke's writings on the 
French Bevolution as superannuated and conquered 
by the event; as the eloquent but unphilosophical 
tirades of bigotry and prejudice. I will not deny 
that they are often disfigured by the violence and 
passion of the moment^ and that in some directions 
Burke's view was bounded, and his observation there- 
fore at fault But on the whole, and for those who 
can make the needful corrections, what distinguishes 
these writings is their profound, permanent^ fruitful, 
philosophical truth. They contain the true philosophy 
of an epoch of concentration, dissipate the heavy 
atmosphere which its own nature is apt to engender 



14 BS8AT8 IN GBinCISM. [i. 

round it^ and make its resistance rational instead of 
mechanicaL 

But Burke is so great because,^ almost alone in 
England, he brings thought to bear upon politics, he 
saturates politics with thought It is his accident 
that his ideas were at the seryice of an epoch of con- 
centration, not of an epoch of expansion ; it is his 
characteristic that he so Uved bj ideas, and had such 
a source of them welling up within him, that he could 
float even an epoch of concentration and English Tory 
politics with them. It does not hurt him that Dr. 
Price and the Liberals were enraged with him; it 
does not even hurt him that George the Third and 
the Tories were enchanted with him. His greatness 
is that he lived in a worid which neither English 
Liberalism nor English Tfuryism is i^ to enter; — the 
world of ideas, not the woild of catchwords and party 
habits. So far is it from being really true of him that 
he **to party gave up what was meant for mankind," 
that at the very end of his fiote stmg^ with the 
French Revolution, after all his invectives against its 
false pretensions, hoUowness, and madness, with his 
sincere conviction of its mischievoosness, he can dose 
a memorandum on the best means of combating it^ 
•ome of the last pages he ever wrote, — the Tlurngkb 
M fWndk Jflur^ in Decembw 1791, — with these 
striking words : — 

**The evil is stat<\l, in my opinion, as it ezisAs 
Tlie r^nedy must be wh«« power, wi$d<Hn, and in- 
fonnatkN\ I hope, are more united with good inten- 
Ima than they can be with ne. I have done widi 



I.] FUNCTION OP CKinCISM AT PRESENT TIME. 16 

this subject, I believe, for ever. It has given me 
many anxious moments for the last two years. If a 
great change is to he made in human affairs^ the minds of 
men tDtU befitted to it ; the general opinions amd feelings 
wiU draw that way. Every fear, every hope will forward 
it ; and then they who persist in opposing this mighty 
current in human affairs, toUl appear rather to resist the 
decrees of Providence itself than the m^re designs of mm. 
They wUl not he resolute and firm, Imt perverse and 
obstinaieJ^ 

That return of Burke upon himself has always 
seemed to me one of the finest things in EngHsh 
literature, or indeed in any literature. That is what 
I call living by ideas : when one side of a question 
has long had your earnest support, when all your 
feelings are engaged, when you hear all round you no 
language but one, when your party talks this language 
like a steam-engine and can imagine no other, — still 
to be able to think, still to be irresistibly carried, if so 
it be, by the current of thought to the opposite side 
of the question, and, like Balaam, to be unable to 
speak anything lut what the Lord has put in your mouth 
I know nothing more striking, and I must add that I 
know nothing more un-EnglisL 

For the Englishman in general is like my friend 
the Member of Parliament, and believes, point-blank, 
that for a thing to be an anomaly is absolutely no 
objection to it whatever. He is like the Lord Auck 
land of Burke's day, who, in a memorandum on the 
French Eevolution, talks of "certain miscreants, 
assuming the name of philosophers, who have pre- 



16 S88A7S nr GRinCISlL [I. 

gamed ihemselYeB amiable of establiahiiig a new S3r8tein 
of society. " The EngUahman has been called a politi 
cal animal, and he yalaea what is political and practical 
so mnch that ideas easQy become objects of dislike in 
his eyes, and thinkers ^^ miscreants," because ideas and 
thinkers have rashly meddled with politics and practice. 
This would be all yery well if the dislike and n^lect 
confined themselyes to ideas transported out of their 
own sphere, and meddling rashly with practice ; but 
they are inevitably extended to ideas as such, and to 
the whole life of intelligence ; practice is ererything, 
a free play of the mind is nothing. The notion of the 
free play of the mind upon all sobjects being a pleasure 
in itself, being an object of desire, bdng an essential 
provider of elements without which a nation's spirit, 
whatever compensations it may have for them, mu8t> 
in the long run, die of inanition, hardly enters into 
m Englishman's thoughts. It is noticeable that the 
word cmiotxty^ which in other languages is used in a 
good sense, to mean, as a high and fine quality of 
man's nature, just this disinterested love of a free 
play of the mind on all subjects, for its own sake, — it 
is noticeable, I say, that this word has in our language 
no sense of the kind, no sense but a rather bad and 
disparaging one. But critddsm, real criticism, is essen- 
tially the exercise of this very q[uality. It obeys an 
instinct prompting it to try to know the best that is 
known and thou^t in the worid, irrespectively of 
pnu^tice, politics, and everything of the kind ; and to 
value knowledge and thought as they approach Uiia 
bestk without the intrusion of any other oonsider»- 



I.] FUNCTION OF CRITICISM AT PRBStolT TIME. 17 

tions whatever. This is an instinct for which there 
is, I think, little original sympathy in the practical 
English nature, and what there was of it has under, 
gone a long benumbing period of blight and suppres- 
sion in the epoch of concentration which followed the 
French Eevolution. 

But epochs of concentration cannot well endure 
for ever ; epochs of expansion, in the due course of 
things, follow them. Such an epoch of expansion 
seems to be opening in this country. In the first 
place all danger of « hostile forcible pressure of foreign 
ideas upon our practice has long disappeared; like 
the traveller in the fable, therefore, we begin to wear 
our cloak a little more loosely. Then, with a long 
peace, the ideas of Europe steal gradually and ami- 
cably in, and mingle, though in infinitesimally small 
quantities at a time, with our own notions. Then, 
too, in spite of all that is said about the absorbing 
and brutaUsing influence of our passionate material 
progress, it seems to me indisputable that this pro- 
gress is likely, though not certain, to lead in the end 
to an apparition of intellectual life; and that man, 
after he has made himself perfectly comfortable and 
has now to determine what to do with himself next, 
may begin to remember that he has a mind, and that 
the mind may be made the source of great pleasure. 
I grant it is mainly the privilege of faith, at present, 
to discern this end to our railways, our business, and 
our fortune-making ; but we shall see if, here as else- 
where, faith is not in the end the true prophet. Our 
ease, our travelling, and our unbounded liberty to 

VOL. L o 



18 ESSAYS IK CBmCISM. [i. 

hold just as hard and securely as we please to the 
practice to which our notions have given birth, all 
tend to beget an inclination to deal a little more freely 
with these notions themselves, to canvass them a 
little, to penetrate a little into their real nature. 
Flutterings of curiosity, in the foreign sense of the 
word, appear amongst us, and it is in these that criti- 
cism must look to find its account Criticism first ; 
a time of true creative activity, perhaps, — which, as I 
have said, must inevitably be preceded amongst us by 
a time of criticism, — thereafter, when criticism has 
done its work. 

It is of the last importance that English criticism 
should clearly discern what rule for its course, in 
order to avail itself of the field now opening to it^ and 
to produce fruit for the future, it ought to take. The 
rule may be summed up in one word, — dwnieresUdness. 
And how is criticism to show disinterestedness 1 By 
keeping aloof from what is called " the practical view 
of things ; '' by resolutely following the law of its own 
nature, which is to be a free play of the mind on all 
subjects which it touches. By steadily refusing to 
lend itself to any of those ulterior, political, practical 
considerations about ideas, which plenty of people 
will be sure to attach to them, which perhaps ought 
often to be attached to them, which in this country 
at any rate are certain to be attached to them quite 
sufficiently, but which criticism has really nothing to 
do with. Its business is^ as I have said, simply to 
know the best that is known and thougiht in the 
world, and by in its turn making this known, to create 



t.] FUNCTION OP ORinOISM AT PRESENT TIME. 19 

a current of true and fresh ideas. Its business is to 
do this with inflexible honesty, with due ability ; but 
its business is to do no more, and to leave alone all 
questions of practical consequences and applications, 
questions which will never fail to have due prominence 
given to them. Else criticism, besides being really 
false to its own nature, merely continues in the old 
rut which it has hitherto followed in this country, and 
will certainly miss the chance now given to it For 
what is at present the bane of criticism in this country 1 
It is that practical considerations cling to it and stifle 
it It subserves interests not its own. Our organs 
of criticism are organs of men and parties having 
practical ends to serve, and with them those practical 
ends are the first thing and the play of mind the 
second ; so much play of mind as is compatible with 
the prosecution of those practical ends is all that is 
wanted. An organ like the Bevtie de$ Deux Mandes, 
having for its main function to understand and utter 
the best that is known and thought in the world, 
existing, it may be said, as just an organ for a free 
play of the mind, we have not But we have the 
Edinburgh JReview, existing as an organ of the old 
Whigs, and for as much play of the mind as may suit 
its being that ; we have the Quaaierly Beview^ existing 
as an organ of the Tories, and for as much play of 
mind as may suit its being that ; we have the British 
Qmrterly Review, existing as an organ of the political 
Dissenters, and for as much play of mind as may suit 
its being that; we have the Times, existing as an 
organ of the common, satisfied, well-to-do English- 



20 ESSAYS IN GRrndSM. [l 

man, and for as much play of mind as may suit its 
being that And so on throngli all the yarious frac- 
tions, political and religions, of onr society; every 
fraction has, as such, its organ of criticism, but the 
notion of combining all fractions in the common plea- 
sure of a free disinterested play of mind meets with 
no favour. Directly this play of mind wants to have 
more scope, and to forget the pressure of practical 
considerations a little, it is checked, it is made to feel 
the chain. We saw this the other day in the extinc- 
tion, so much to be regretted, of the Home and Foreign 
Beview. Perhaps in no organ of criticism in this 
country was there so much knowledge, so much play 
of mind ; but these could not save it The Dublin 
Beview subordinates play of mind to the practical 
business of English and Irish Catholicism, and live& 
It must needs be that men should act in sects and 
parties, that each of these sects and parties should 
have its organ, and should make this organ subserve 
the interests of its action ; but it would be well, too, 
that there should be a criticism, not the minister of 
these interests, not their enemy, but absolutely and 
entirely independent of them. No other criticism 
will ever attain any real authority or make any real 
way towards its end, — ^the creating a current of true 
and fresh ideas. 

It is because criticism has so little kept in the pure 
intellectual sphere, has so little detached itself from 
practice, has been so directly polemical and contro- 
versial, that it has so ill accomplished, in this country, 
its best spiritual work ; which is to keep man from a 



I.] FUNCTION OF OBITIOISM AT PRESENT TIME. 21 

self-s&tisf action which is retarding and vulgarising, to 
lead him towards perfection, by making his mind 
dwell upon what is excellent in itself, and the abso- 
lute beauty and fitness of things. A polemical prac- 
tical criticism makes men blind even to the ideal 
imperfection of their practice, makes them willingly 
assert its ideal perfection, in order the better to secure 
it against attack ; and clearly this is narrowing and 
baneful for them. If they were reassured on the 
practical side, speculative considerations of ideal 
perfection they might be brought to entertain, and 
their spiritual horizon would thus gradually widen. 
Sir Charles Adderley says to the Warwickshire 
farmers : — 

"Talk of the improvement of breed! Why, the 
race we ourselves represent, the men and women, 
the old Anglo-Saxon race, are the best breed in the 
whole world. . . . The absence of a too enervating 
climate, too unclouded skies, and a too luxurious 
nature, has produced so vigorous a race of people, and 
has rendered us so superior to all the world." 

Mr. Eoebuck says to the Sheffield cutlers : — 

" I look around me and ask what is the state of 
England 1 Is not property safe ) Is not every man 
able to say what he likes f Can you not walk from 
one end of England to the other in perfect security 1 
I ask you whether, the world over or in past history, 
there is anything like it ) Nothing. I pray that our 
unrivalled happiness may last" 

Now obviously there is a peril for poor human 
nature in words and thoughts of such exuberant self* 



22 ESSATS IN OBinCISM. [l 

satisfaction, uutil we find onrselyes safe in the streets 
of the Celestial City. 

'* Das wenige yerschwindet leicht dem Blicke 
Der Yorwarts sieht, wie viel noch ilbrig bleibt— '* 

says Goethe ; '' the little that is done seems nothing 
when we look forward and see how much we have yet 
to do." Clearly this is a better line of reflection for 
weak humanity, so long as it remains on this earthly 
field of labour and trial 

But neither Sir Charles Adderley nor Mr. Soebuck 
is by nature inaccessible to considerations of this 
sort They only lose sight of them owing to the con- 
troversial life we all lead, and the practical form 
which all speculation takes with us. They have in 
view opponents whose aim is not ideal, but practical ; 
and in their zeal to uphold their own practice against 
these innovators, they go so far as even to attribute 
to this practice an ideal perfection. Somebody has 
been wanting to introduce a six-pound franchise, or 
to abolish church-rates, or to collect agricultural statis- 
tics by force, or to diminish local self-government 
How natural, in reply to such proposals, very likely 
improper or ill-timed, to go a little beyond the mark 
and to say stoutly, '' Such a race of people as we stand, 
so superior to all the world ! The old Anglo-Saxon 
race, the best breed in the whole world ! I pray that 
our unrivalled happiness may last ! I ask you whether, 
the world over or in past history, there is anything 
like it V* And so long as criticism answers this dithy- 
ramb by insisting that the old Anglo-Saxon race 



i] TUNCnON OF CRITICISM AT PRESENT TIME. 23 

would be stiD more superior to all others if it had no 
ehurch-rates, or that our unrivalled happiness would 
last yet longer with a six-pound franchise, so long will 
the strain, "The best breed in the whole world!" 
swell louder and louder, everything ideal and refining 
will be lost out of sight, and both the assailed and 
their critics will remain in a sphere, to say the truth, 
perfectly unvital, a sphere in which spiritual pro- 
gression is impossible. But let criticism leave church- 
rates and the franchise alone, and in the most candid 
spirit, without a single lurking thought of piuctical 
innovation, confront with our dithyramb this para- 
graph on which I stumbled in a newspaper immedi- 
ately after reading Mr. Eoebuck : — 

"A shocking child murder has just been committed 
at Nottingham. A girl named Wragg left the work- 
house there on Saturday morning with her young 
illegitimate child. The child was soon afterwards 
found dead on Mapperly Hills, having been strangled. 
Wragg is in custody." 

Nothing but that; but, in juxtaposition with the 
absolute eulogies of Sir Charles Adderley and Mr. 
Koebuck, how eloquent^ how suggestive are those few 
lines ! " Our old Anglo-Saxon breed, the best in the 
whole world!" — how much that is harsh and ill- 
favoured there is in this best ! Wragg ! If we are 
to talk of ideal perfection, of " the best in the whole 
world," has any one reflected what a touch of gross- 
ness in our race, what an original shortcoming in the 
more delicate spiritual perceptions, is shown by tlie 
natural growth amongst us of such hideous names. - 



24 ES8ATS JN CBITIGISM. Dl 

Higginbottom, Stiggins, Bugg ! In Ionia and Attica 
they were luckier in this respect than '* the best race 
in the world ; " by the Ilissus there was no Wragg, 
poor thing I And " our unrivalled happiness ; " — 
what an element of grimness, bareness, and hideous* 
ness mixes with it and blurs it ; the workhouse, the 
dismal Mapperly Hills, — how dismal those who have 
seen them will remember; — ^the gloom, the smoke^ 
the cold, the strangled illegitimate child ! ^' I ask 
you whether, the world over or in past history, there 
is anything like it t " Perhaps not^ one is inclined to 
answer ; but at any rate, in that case, the world is 
very much to be pitied. And the final touch, — short, 
bleak, and inhuman : Wragg is in custody. The sex 
lost in the confusion of our unrivalled happiness ; or 
(shall I say 1) the superfluous Christian name lopped 
off by the straightforward vigour of our old Anglo- 
Saxon breed ! There is profit for the spirit in such 
contrasts as this ; criticism serves the cause of perfec- 
tion by establishing them. By eluding sterile conflict, 
by refusing to remain in the sphere where alone nar- 
row and relative conceptions have any worth and 
validity, criticism may diminish its momentary im- 
portance, but only in this way has it a chance of 
gaining admittance for those wider and more perfect 
conceptions to which all its duty is really owed. Mn 
Roebuck will have a poor opinion of an adversary 
who replies to his defiant songs of triumph only by 
murmuring under his breath, Wragg is in custody ; 
but in no other way will these songs of triumph be 
induced gradually to moderate themselves, to get rid 



I.] FUNCTION OP CRITIOISM AT PRESENT TIMB. 25 

of what in them is excessive and offensive, and to 
fall into a softer and truer key. 

It will be said that it is a very subtle and indirect 
action which I am thus prescribing for criticism, and 
that, by embracing in this manner the Indian virtue 
of detachment and abandoning the sphere of practical 
life, it condemns itself to a slow and obscure work. 
Slow and obscure it may be, but it is the only proper 
work of criticism. The mass of mankind will never 
have any ardent zeal for seeing things as they are ; 
very inadequate ideas will always satisfy them. On 
these inadequate ideas reposes, and must repose, the 
general practice of the world. That is as much as 
saying that whoever sets himself to see things as they 
are will find himself one of a very small circle ; but 
it is only by this small circle resolutely doing its own 
work that adequate ideas will ever get current at all 
The rush and roar of practical life will always have a 
dizzying and attracting effect upon the most collected 
spectator, and tend to draw him into its vortex; 
most of all will this be the case where that life is so 
powerful as it is in England. But it is only by re- 
maining collected, and refusing to lend himself to the 
point of view of the practical man, that the critic can 
do the practical man any service ; and it is only by 
the greatest sincerity in pursuing his own course, and 
by at last convincing even the practical man of his 
sincerity, that he can escape misunderstandings which 
perpetually threaten him. 

For the practical man is not apt for fine distinc- 
tions, and vet in these distinctions truth and the 



26 ESSAYS m CBITICISM [l 

highest culture greatly find their accouni But it is 
not easy to lead a practical man, — ^unless you reassure 
him as to your practical intentions, you have no 
chance of leading him, — ^to see that a thing which he 
has always been used to look at from one side only, 
which he greatly values, and which, looked at from 
that side, quite deserves, perhaps, all the prizing and 
admiring which he bestows upon it, — ^that this thing, 
looked at from another side, may appear much less 
beneficent and beautiful, and yet retain all its claims 
to our practical allegianca Where shall we find 
language innocent enough, how shall we make the 
spotless purity of our intentions evident enough, to 
enable us to say to the political Englishman that the 
British Constitution itself, which, seen from the prac- 
tical side, looks such a magnificent organ of progress 
and virtue, seen from the speculative side, — with its 
compromises, its love of facts, its horror of theory, its 
studied avoidance of clear thoughts, — ^that, seen from 
this side, our august Constitution sometimes looks, — 
forgive me, shade of Lord Somers ! — a colossal machine 
for the manufacture of Philistines 1 How is Cobbett 
to say this and not be misunderstood, blackened as he 
is with the smoke of a lifelong conflict in the field of 
political practice 1 how is Mr. Carlyle to say it and 
not be misunderstood, after his furious raid into this 
field with his Latter-day Pamphlets ? how is Mr. Euskin, 
after his pugnacious political economy? I say, the 
critic must keep out of the region of immediate prac- 
tice in the political, social, humanitarian sphere, if he 
wants to make a beginning: for that more free specu- 



L] FUNCTION OF CRITICISM AT PRESENT TIME. 27 

lative treatment of things, which may perhaps one 
day make its benefits felt even in this sphere, but in 
a natural and thence irresistible manner. 

Do what he will, however, the critic will still re- 
main exposed to frequent misunderstandings, and 
nowhere so much as in this country. For here people 
are particularly indisposed even to comprehend that 
without this free disinterested treatment of things, 
truth and the highest culture are out of the question. 
So immersed are they in practical life, so accustomed 
to take all their notions from this life and its pro- 
cesses, that they are apt to think that truth and 
culture themselves can be reached by the processed 
of this life, and that it is an impertinent singularity 
to think of reaching them in any other. " We are 
all terrtE JUii," cries their eloquent advocate; "all 
Philistines together. Away with the notion of pro- 
ceeding by any other course than the course dear to 
the Philistines ; let us have a social movement, let us 
organise and combine a party to pursue truth and new 
thought, let us call it the liberal party, and let us all 
stick to each other, and back each other up. Let us 
have no nonsense about independent criticism, and 
intellectual delicacy, and the few and the many. 
Don't let us trouble ourselves about foreign thought ; 
wo shall invent the whole thing for ourselves as we 
go along. If one of us speaks well, applaud him ; if 
one of us speaks ill, applaud him too ; we are all in 
the same movement, we are all liberals, we are all in 
pursuit of truth." In this way the pursuit of truth 
becomes reallv a social, practical, pleasurable affair, 



28 ISSAYS IN CBinOISlC. [i. 

almost requiring a chairman, a secretary, and adver- 
tisements; with the excitement of an occasional 
scandal, with a little resistance to give the happy 
sense of difficulty overcome ; but^ in general, plenty 
of bustle and very little thought. To act is so easy, 
as Gk)ethe says; to think is so hard! It is true that the 
eritic has many temptations to go with the stream, to 
make one of the party movement^ one of these terrcR 
filii; it seems ungracious to refuse to be a terra JUius, 
when so many excellent people are ; but the critic's 
duty is to refuse, or, if resistance is vain, at least to 
cry with Obermann : P^rissons en risisUmt. 

How serious a matter it is to try and resist^ I had 
ample opportunity of experiencing when I ventured 
some time ago to criticise the celebrated first volume 
of Bishop Golenso.^ The echoes of the storm which 
was then raised I still, from time to time, hear grumb- 
ling round me. That storm arose out of a misimder- 
standing almost inevitable. It is a result of no little 
culture to attain to a clear perception that science and 
religion are two wholly different things. The multi- 

1 So sincere is my dislike to aU personal attack and contro- 
rersy, that I abstain from reprinting, at this distance of time 
fW>m the occasion which called them forth, the essays in which 
I criticised Dr. Colenso's book ; I feel bound, however, after aU 
that has passed, to make here a final declaration of my sincere 
impenitence for having published them. Nay, I cannot forbear 
repeating yet once more, for his benefit and that of his readers, 
this sentence from my* original remarks upon him : There ia 
tnUh of science a/nd truth of religion; truth of science does not 
heoome truth of religion tiU U is made religious. And I will add : 
Let us have aU the science there is from the men of sdenoe ; 
from the men of religion let us have religion. 



l] function of ORinOISM AT PBBSBNT TIME. 29 

tade will for ever confuse them ; but happily that is 
of no great real importance, for while the multitude 
imagines itself to live by its false science, it does . 
really live by its true religion. Dr. Colenso, however, 
in his first volume did all he could to strengthen the 
confusion,^ and to make it dangerous. He did this 
with the best intentions, I freely admits and with the 
most candid ignorance that this was the natural effect 
of what he was doing; but, says Joubert, "Ignorance, 
which in matters of morals extenuates the crime, is 
itself, in intellectual matters, a crime of the first order." 
I criticised Bishop Colenso's speculative confusion. 
Immediately there was a cry raised : " What is this 1 
here is a liberal attacking a liberal. Do not you be- 
long to the movement? are not you a friend of truthi 
Is not Bishop Colenso in pursuit of truth? then speak 
with proper respect of his book. Dr. Stanley is an- 
other friend of truth, and you speak with proper 
respect of his book ; why make these mvidious differ- 
ences? both books are excellent, admirable, liberal; 
Bishop Colenso's perhaps the most so, because it is 
the boldest, and will have the best practical conse- 
quences for the liberal causa Do you want to 
encourage to the attack of a brother liberal his, and 
your, and our implacable enemies, the Church and 
State Review or the Record^ — the High Church rhino- 
ceros and the Evangelical hysena ? Be silent, there- 

^ It has been said I make it "a crime against literary criti- 
cism and the higher culture to attempt to inform the ignorant." 
Need I point out that the ignorant are not informed by being 
oonfirmed in a confusion f 



30 ESSAYS IK CRITIGISM. [l 

fore ; or rather speak, speak as loud as ever 70a can 1 
and go into ecstasies over the eighty and odd pigeons." 
But criticism cannot follow this coarse and indis- 
criminate method. It is unfortunately possible for a 
man in pursuit of truth to write a book which reposes 
upon a false conception. Even the practical conse- 
quences of a book are to genuine criticism no recom- 
mendation of it, if the book is, in the highest sense, 
blundering. I see that a lady who herself, too, is in 
pursuit of truth, and who writes with great ability, 
but a little too much, perhaps, under the influence of 
the practical spirit of the English liberal movement, 
classes Bishop Colenso's book and M. Kenan's to- 
gether, in her survey of the religious state of Europe, 
as facts of the same order, works, both of them, of 
" great importance ;" " great ability, power, and skill ;** 
Bishop Colenso's, perhaps, the most powerful; at 
least. Miss Cpbbe gives special expression to her 
gratitude that to Bishop Colenso ''has been given 
the strength to grasp, and the courage to teach, truths 
of such deep import" In the same way, more than 
one popular writer has compared him to Luther. 
Now it is just this kind of false estimate which the 
critical spirit is, it seems to me, bound to resist It 
is really the strongest possible proof of the low ebb 
at which, in England, the critical spirit is, that while 
the critical hit in the religious literature of Germany 
is Dr. Strauss's book, in that of France M. Kenan's 
book, the book of Bishop Colenso is the critical hit 
in the religious literature of England. Bishop Co- 
lenso's book reposes on a total misconception of the 



I.] FUNCTION OF CRITICISM AT PRESENT TIME. 31 

essential elements of the religious problem, as that 
problem is now presented for solution. To criticism^ 
therefore, which seeks to have the best that is known 
and thought on this problem, it is, however well 
meant, of no importance whatever. M. Kenan's book 
attempts a new synthesis of the elements furnished to 
us by the Four Gospels. It attempts, in my opinion, 
a synthesis, perhaps premature, perhaps impossible, 
certainly not successful. Up to the present time, at 
any rate, we must acquiesce in Fleury's sentence on 
such recastings of the Gospel-story : Quicangue ffimor 
gine lapowmr mieux icrire^ ne Ventendpas. M. Kenan 
had himself passed by anticipation a like sentence on 
his own work, when he said : " If a new presentation 
of the character of Jesus were offered to me, I would 
not have it; its very clearness would be, in my 
opinion, the best proof of its insufficiency." His 
friends may with perfect justice rejoin that at the 
sight of the Holy Land, and of the actual scene of 
the (^ospel-story, all the current of M. Kenan's 
thoughts may have naturally changed, and a new 
casting of that story irresistibly suggested itself to 
him; and that' this is just a case for applying Cicero's 
maxim : Change of mind is not inconsistency — nemo 
dodus imquam rmUaiianem coTisUii inconsta/nUam dixU 
esse. Nevertheless, for criticism, M. Kenan's first 
thought must still be the truer one, as long as his 
new casting so fails more fully to commend itself, 
more fully (to use Coleridge's happy phrase about 
the Bible) to find us. Still M. Kenan's attempt is, 
for criticism, of the most real interest and importance, 



32 ESSATS IK CRITICISM. [l 

since, with all its difficulty, a fresh synthesis of the 
New Testament daia, — not a making war on them, in 
Voltaire's fashion, not a leaving them out of mind, in 
the world's fashion, but the putting a new construction 
upon them, the taking them from under the old, 
traditional, conventional point of view and placing 
them under a new one, — is the very essence of the 
religious problem, as now presented; and only by 
efforts in this direction can it receive a solution. 

Again, in the same spirit in which she judges 
Bishop Colenso, Miss Cobbe, like so many earnest 
liberals of our practical race, both here and in 
America, herself sets vigorously about a positive re- 
construction of religion, about making a reUgion of 
the future out of hand, or at least setting about 
making it. We must not rest^ she and they are 
always thinking and sa3ang, in negative criticism, we 
must be creative and constructive; hence we have 
such works as her recent Beligiom Dtdy^ and works 
still more considerable, perhaps, by others, which will 
be in every one's mind. These works often have 
much ability; they often spring out of sincere con- 
victions, and a sincere wish to do good; and they 
sometimes, perhaps, do good. Their fault is (if I 
may be permitted to say so) one which they have in 
common with the British College of Health, in the 
New Eoad. Every one knows the British College of 
Health; it is that building with the lion and the 
statue of the Goddess Hygeia before it; at least I 
am sure about the lion, though I am not absolutely 
certain about the Groddess Hygeia. This building 



I.] FUNCmON OF CRITICISM AT PKESENT TIME. 33 

does credit^ perhaps, to the resources of Dr. Morrison 
and his disciples; but it falls a good deal short of 
one's idea of what a British College of Health ought 
to be. In England, where we hate public inter- 
ference and love individual enterprise, we have a 
whole crop of places like the British College of 
Health; the grand name without the grand thing. 
Unluckily, creditable to individual enterprise as they 
are, they tend to impair our taste by making us for- 
get what more grandiose, noble, or beautiful character 
properly belongs to a public institution The same 
may be said of the religions of the future of Miss 
Cobbe and others. Creditable, like the British Col- 
lege of Health, to the resources of their authors, they 
yet tend to make us forget what more grandiose, 
noble, or beautiful character properly belongs to 
religious constructions. The historic religions, with 
all their faults, have had this ; it certainly belongs to 
the religious sentiment, when it truly flowers, to 
have this ; and we impoverish our spirit if we allow a 
religion of the future without it What then is the 
duty of criticism here 9 To take the practical point 
of view, to applaud the liberal movement and all its 
works, — ^its New Eoad religions of the future into the 
bargain, — ^f or their general utility's sake 1 By no means ; 
but to be perpetually dissatisfied with these works, while 
they perpetually fall short of a high and perfect ideal 
For criticism, these are elementary laws ; but they 
never can be popular, and in this country they have 
been very little followed, and one meets with immense 
obstacles in following them. That is a reason for 

VOL. I. V 



34 ESSAYS IN CRITICISM. [l. 

asserting them again and again. Criticism must 
maintain its independence of the practical spirit and 
its aims. Even with well-meant efforts of the practical 
spirit it must express dissatisfaction, if in the sphere 
of the ideal they seem impoverishing and limiting. 
It must not hurry on to the goal because of its 
practical importance. It must be patient, and know 
how to wait ; and flexible, and know how to attach 
itself to things and how to withdraw from them. It 
must be apt to study and praise elements that for the 
fulness of spiritual perfection are wanted, even though 
they belong to a power which in the practical sphere 
may be maleficent It must be apt to discern the 
spiritual shortcomings or illusions of powers that in 
the practical sphere may be beneficent And this 
without any notion of favouring or injuring, in the 
practical sphere, one power or the other; without 
any notion of playing off, in this sphere, one power 
against the other. When one looks, for instance, at 
the English Divorce Court, — an institution which 
perhaps has its practical conveniences, but which in 
the ideal sphere is so hideous ; an institution which 
neither makes divorce impossible nor makes it decent, 
which allows a man to get rid of his wife, or a wife 
of her husband, but makes them drag one another 
first, for the public edification, through a mire of 
unutterable infamy, — ^when one looks at this charm- 
ing institution, I say, with its crowded trials, its 
newspaper reports, and its money compensations, tins 
institution in which the gross unregenerate British 
Philistine has indeed stamped an image of himself, — 



l] yC/NCnON OF CRITICISM AT PRESENT TIME. 36 

one may be permitted to find the marriage theory of 
Catholicism refreshing and elevating. Or when Pn> 
testantism, in virtue of its supposed rational and 
intellectual origin, gives the law to criticism too 
magisterially, criticism may and must remind it that 
its pretensions, in this respect, are illusive and do it 
harm ; that the Kef ormation was a moral rather than 
an intellectual event ; that Luther's theory of grace 
no more exactly reflects the mind of the spirit than 
Bossuet's philosophy of history reflects it ; and that 
there is no more antecedent probability of the Bishop 
of Durham's stock of ideas being agreeable to perfect 
reason than of Pope Pius the Ninth's. But criticism 
will not on that account forget the achievements oi 
I^testantism in the practical and moral sphere ; nor 
that, even in the intellectual sphere. Protestantism, 
though in a blind and stumbUng manner, carried for- 
ward the Eenascence, while Catholicism threw itself 
violently across its path. 

I lately heard a man of thought and energy con- 
tra^mg the want of ardour and movement which he 
now found amongst young men in this country with 
what he remembered in his own youth, twenty years 
ago. " What reformers we were then I " he ex- 
claimed; "what a zeal we had! how we canvassed 
every institution in Church and State, and were pre- 
pared to remodel them all on first principles ! " He 
was inclined to regret, as a spiritual flagging, the lull 
which he saw. I am disposed rather to regard it as 
a pause in which the turn to a new mode of spiritual 
progress is being accomplished. Everything was 



38 EBSATB IN OBrnOISM. [l 

long wen, hy the young and ardent amongst ub, in 
inseparable connection with politics sod practical life. 
We have pretty well exhausted the benefits of ae^ng 
things in this connection, we have got all that can 
be got by so seeing them. Let ns try a more die- 
interested mode of seeing them; let ns betake our- 
selves more to the serener. life of t^e mind gjid spirit. 
lliiB life, too, m^ have its excesaes and Ssngers ; 
but they are not for us at present. Let us think of 
quietly enlarging onr stock of true and fresh ideas, 
and not, as soon as we get an idea or half an idea, be 
running out with it into the street, and trying to 
make it rule ^ere. Our ideas wUl, in the end, shape 
the world all the better for maturing a little. Per- 
haps in fifty years' time it wiU in the English Honse 
of Conmions be an objection to an institution tiiat it 
is an anomaly, and my friend the Member of Parlia 
ment will shadder in his grave. But let us in the 
meanwhile rather endeavour that in twenty years' 
time it may, in English literature, be an objection to 
lion that it is absurd. That will be a change 
bat the imaginalion almost fails to grasp it. 
J sadorum nasoiiar ordo. 
ave insisted so much on the course which 
must take where politics and rehgion are 
I, it is because, where these burning matters 
estioD, it is most likely to go astray. I have 
ibove all, to insist on the attitude which 
should adopt towards things in general ; on 
bone and temper of mind. But then comes 
questaon as to the subject-matter which 



l] function of OBinOISM AT PBESENT TIME. 37 

literary criticism should most seek. Here, in general, 
its course is determined for it by the idea which is 
the law of its being ; the idea of a disinterested en- 
deavour to learn and propagate the best that is 
known and thought in the world, and thus to estab- 
lish a current of fresh and true ideas. By the very 
nature of things, as England is not all the world, 
much of the best that is known and thought in the 
world cannot be of English growth, must be foreign ; 
by the nature of things, again, it is just this that we 
are least likely to know, while English thought is 
streaming in upon us from all sides, and takes ex- 
cellent care that we shall not be ignorant of its 
existence. The English critic of literature, therefore, 
must dwell much on foreign thought, and with par- 
ticular heed on any part of it, which, while significant 
and fruitful in itself, is for any reason specially likely 
to escape him. Again, judging is often spoken of as 
the critic's one business, and so in some sense it is ; 
but the judgment which almost insensibly forms itself 
in a fair and clear mind, along with fresh knowledge, 
is the valuable one; and thus knowledge, and ever 
fresh knowledge, must be the critic's great concern 
for himsell And it is by communicating fresh 
knowledge, and letting his own judgment pa^ss along 
with it^ — ^but insensibly, and in the second place, not 
the firsts as a sort of companion and clue, not as an 
abstract lawgiver, — ^that the critic will generally do 
most good to his readers. Sometimes, no doubt^ for 
the sake of establishing an author's place in literature, 
and his relation to a central standard (and if this is 



38 ESSAYS IK CBITIGISM. [l 

not done, how are we to get at our best m the world f) 
criticism may have to deal with a subject-matter so 
familiar that fresh knowledge is out of the question, 
and then it must be all judgment; an enunciation 
and detailed application of principles. Here the 
great safeguard is never to let oneself become abstract^ 
always to retain an intimate and lively consciousness 
of the truth of what one is saying, and, the moment 
this fails us, to be sure that something is wrong. 
Still, under all circumstances, this mere judgment 
and application of principles is, in itself, not the most 
satisfactory work to the critic ; like mathematics, it 
is tautological, and cannot well give us, like fresh 
learning, the sense of creative activity. 

But stop, some one will say ; all this talk is of no 
practical use to us whatever ; this criticism of yours 
is not what we have in our minds when we speak of 
criticism ; when we speak of critics and criticism, we 
mean critics and criticism of the current English 
literature of the day ; when you offer to tell criticism 
its function, it is to this criticism that we expect you to 
address yoursell I am sorry for it^ for I am afraid I 
must disappoint these expectations. I am bound by 
my own definition of criticism : a disinterested endea- 
vofwr to learn a/nd propagate the lest that is known and 
thought in the world. How much of current English 
literature comes into this " best that is known and 
thought in the world?" Not very much, I fear; 
certainly less, at this moment^ than of the current 
literature of France or Germany. Well, then, am 
T to alter my definition of criticism, in order to meet 



I.] FUNCTION OF CRITICISM AT PRESENT TIMB. 39 

the requirements of a number of practising English 
critics, who, after all, are free in their choice of a 
business 1 That would be making criticism lend itself 
just to one of those alien practical considerations, 
which, I have said, are so fatal to it. One may say, 
indeed, to those who have to deal with the mass — so 
much better disregarded — of current English litera- 
ture, that they may at all events endeavour, in dealing 
with this, to try it^ so far as they can, by the standard 
of the best that is known and thought in the world ; 
one may say, that to get anywhere near this standard, 
every cri J'should 4 ^^Isso^ one great litera- 
ture, at least, besides his own ; and the more unlike 
his own, the better. But^ after all, the criticism I am 
really concerned with, — the criticism which alone can 
much help us for the future, the criticism which, 
throughout Europe, is at the present day meant, when 
so much stress is laid on the importance of criticism 
and the critical spirit,— is a criticism which regards 
Europe as being, for intellectual and spiritual pur- 
poses, one great confederation, bound to a joint action 
and working to a common result ; and whose members 
have, for their proper outfit^ a knowledge of Greek, 
Roman, and Eastern antiquity, and of one another. 
Special, local, and temporary advantages being put 
out of account, that modem nation will in the intel- 
lectual and spiritual sphere make most progress, which 
most thoroughly carries out this programme. And 
what IB that but saying that we too, all of us, as in- 
dividuals, the more thoroughly we carry it out, shaU 
make the more progress ) 



40 ESSAYS IN OKinCISBC [l 

There is so much inviting us I — ^what are we to 
take ? what will nourish us in growth towards perfec- 
tion 1 That is the question which, with the immense 
field of life and of literature lying before him, the 
critic has to answer; for himself first, and after- 
wards for others. In this idea of the critic's business 
the essays brought together in the following pages 
have had their origin ; in this idea, widely different 
as are their subjects, they have, perhaps, their unity. 

I conclude with what I said at the beginning : to 
have the sense of creative activity is the great happi- 
ness and the great proof of being alive, and it is not 
denied to criticism to have it; but then criticism 
must be sincere, simple, flexible, ardent, ever widen* 
ing its knowledge Then it may have, in no con- 
temptible measure, a joyful sense of creative activity ; 
a sense which a man of insight and conscience will 
prefer to what he might derive from a poor, starved, 
fragmentary, inadequate creation. And at some 
epochs no other creation is possible. 

Still, in full measure, the sense of creative activity 
belongs only to genuine creation; in literature we 
must never forget that But what true man of letters 
ever can forget it 1 It is no such common matter for 
a gifted nature to come into possession of a current 
of true and living ideas, and to produce amidst the 
inspiration of them, that we are likely to underrate 
it The epochs of ^schylus and Shakspeare make 
us feel their pre-eminence. In an epoch like those is, 
no doubt, the true life of literature ; there is the pro- 
mised land, towards which criticism can only beckon 



l] function of ORinOISM AT PRBSBNT TIME. 41 

That promised land it will not be ours to enter, and 
we shall die in the wilderness : but to have desired 
to enter it, to have saluted it from afar, is already, 
perhaps, the best distinction among contemporaries ; 
it will certainly be the best title to esteem with 
posterity. 



II 



THE LITEEAEY INFLUENCE OE 
ACADEMIES. 

It is impossible to put down a book like the historj 
of the French Academy, by Pellisson and D'Olivet, 
which M. Charles Livet has lately re-edited, without 
being led to reflect upon the absence, in our own 
country, of any institution like the French Academy, 
upon the probable causes of this absence, and upon 
its results. A thousand voices will be ready to tell 
us that this absence is a signal mark of our national 
superiority; that it is in great part owing to this 
absence that the exhilarating words of Lord Macaulay, 
lately given to the world by his very clever nephew, 
Mr. Trevelyan, are so profoundly true: "It may 
safely be said that the literature now extant in the 
English language is of far greater value than all the 
literature which three hundred years ago was extant 
m all the languages of the world together.'' I dare- 
say this is so; only, remembering Spinoza's maxim 
that the two great banes of humanity are self-conceit 
uid the laziness coming from self-conceit, I think it 



n.] LITERABT INFLUENCE OF ACADEMIES. 43 

may do us good, instead of resting in our pre-eminence 
with perfect security, to look a little more closely 
why this is so, and whether it is so without any 
limitations. 

But first of all I must give a very few words to the 
outward history of the French Academy. About the 
year 1629, seven or eight persons in Paris, fond of 
literature, formed themselves into a sort of little club 
to meet at one another's houses and discuss literary 
matters. Their meetings got talked of, and Cardinal 
Bichelieu, then minister and all-powerful, heard of 
them. He himself had a noble passion for letters, 
and for all fine culture ; he was interested by what he 
heard of the nascent society. Himself a man in the 
grand style, if ever man was, he had the insight to 
perceive what a potent instrument of the grand style 
was here to his hand. It was the beginning of a 
great century for France, the seventeenth; men's 
minds were working, the French language was form- 
ing. Sichelieu sent to ask the members of the new 
society whether they would be willing to become a 
body with a public character, holding regular meet- 
ings Not without a little hesitation, — for apparently 
they found themselves very well as they were, and 
these seven or eight gentlemen of a social and literary 
turn were not perfectly at their ease as to what the 
great and terrible minister could want with them, — 
they consented. The favours of a man like Bichelieu 
are not easily refused, whether they are honestly 
meant or no ; but this favour of Bichelieu's was meant 
quite honestly. The Parliament, however, had its 



44 SSSATS m CBinoiSll [n. 

doubts of this. The Parliament had none of Riche- 
lieu's enthusiasm about letters and culture; it was 
jealous of the apparition of a new public body in the 
State ; above all, of a body called into existence by 
Bichelieu. The Song's letters-patent^ establishing 
and authorising the new society, were granted early 
in 1635 ; but, by the old constitution of France, these 
letters-patent required the verification of the Parlia- 
ment It was two years and a half — towards the 
autumn of 1637 — ^before the Parliament would give 
it ; and it then gave it only after pressing solicitations, 
and earnest assurances of the innocent intentions of 
the young Academy. Jocose people said that this 
society, with its mission to purify and embellish the 
language, filled with terror a body of lawyers like the 
French Parliament, the stronghold of barbarous jargon 
and of chicane. 

This improvement of the language was in truth 
the declared grand aim for the operations of the 
Academy. Its statutes of foundation, approved by 
Bichelieu before the royal edict establishing it was 
issued, say expressly : *' The Academy's principal 
function shall be to work with all the care and all 
the diligence possible at giving sure rules to our lan- 
guage, and rendering it pure, eloquent, and capable 
of treating the arts and sciences." This zeal for 
making a nation's great instrument of thought, — ^its 
language, — correct and worthy, is undoubtedly a sign 
full of promise, — a weighty earnest of future power. 
It is said that Bichelieu had it in his mind that French 
should succeed Latin in its ^^encral ascendency, as 



fl.] LITBRABT INFLX7ENGE OF ACADEMIES. 40 

Latin had succeeded Oreek; if it was so^ even this 
wish has to some extent been fulfilled. But^ at any 
rate, the dhical influences of style in language, — ^its 
close relations, so often pointed out^ with character, 
— are most important Bichelieu, a man of high 
culture, and, at the same time, of great character, 
felt them profoundly; and that he should have 
sought to regularise, strengthen, and perpetuate 
them by an institution for perfecting language, is 
alone a striking proof of his governing spirit and of 
his genius. 

This was not all he had in his mind, however 

The new Academy, now enlarged to a body of forty 

members, and meant to contain all the chief literary 

men of France, was to be a Uierary tribunal. The 

works of its members were to be brought before it 

previous to publication, were to be criticised by it, 

and finally, if it saw fit, to be published with its 

declared approbation. The works of other writers, 

not members of the Academy, might also, at the 

request of these writers themselves, be passed under 

the Academjr's review. Besides this, in essays and 

discussions the Academy examined and judged works 

already published, whether by living or dead authors, 

and literary matters in general. The celebrated 

opinion on Comeille's Cid, delivered in 1637 by the 

Academy at Bichelieu's urgent request, when this 

poem, which strongly occupied public attention, had 

been attacked by M. de Sciid^ry, shows how fully 

Bichelieu designed his new creation to do duty as a 

lopreme court of literature, and how early it in fact 



46 ESSAYS m CRITICISM. [iL 

began to exercise this function. One^ who had known 
Sichelieu declared, after the Cardinal's death, that he 
had projected a yet greater institution than the 
Academy, a sort of grand European college of art, 
science, and literature, a Prytaneum, where the chief 
authors of all Europe should be gathered together in 
one central home, there to live in security, leisure, 
and honour; — that was a dream which will not bear 
to be pulled about too roughly. But the project of 
forming a high court of letters for France was no 
dream ; Bichelieu in greal measure fulfilled it This 
is what the Academy, by its idea, really is ; this is 
what it has always tended to become ; this is what it 
has, from time to time, really been; by being, or 
tending to be this, far more than even by what it has 
done for the language, it is of such importance in 
France. To give the law, the tone to literature, and 
that tone a high one, is its business. "Bichelieu 
meant it," says M. Sainte-Beuve, "to be a hatUjury" 
— ^a jury the most choice and authoritatiye that could 
be f oimd on all important literary matters in question 
before the public ; to be, as it in fact became in the 
latter half of the eighteenth century, "a sovereign 
organ of opinion." " The duty of the Academy is," 
says M. Benan, ^^maintenir la delicatesse de VesprUfran- 
fais " — ^to keep the fine quality of the French spirit 
unimpaired ; it represents a kind of " mattrise en faii 
de bon ton " — the authority of a recognised master in 
matters of tone and taste. " All ages," says M. Benan 
again, "have had their inferior literature; but the 

I Ia Meaoardiere. 




II.] LITERARY INFLUENOE OF ACAl^EMIEa 47 

great danger of our time is that this inferior literature 
tends more and more to get the upper place. No one 
has the same advantage as the Academy for fighting 
against this mischief;" the Academy, which, as he 
says elsewhere, has even special facilities for " creating 
a form of intellectual culture which shall impose itself 
on all aromidy M. Sainte-Beuve and M. Benan are^ 
both of them, very keen-sighted critics; and they 
show it signally by seizing and putting so prominently 
forward this character of the French Academy. 

Such an effort to set up a recognised authority, im- 
posing on us a high standard in matters of intellect 
and taste, has many enemies in human nature. We 
all of us like to go our own way, and not to be forced 
out of the atmosphere of commonplace habitual to 
most of us ; — " was uns alle hdndigt" says Groethe, " das 
Oememey We like to be suffered to lie comfortably 
in the old straw of our habits, especially of our intel- 
lectual habits, even though this straw may not be very 
dean and fine. But if the effort to limit this freedom 
of our lower nature finds, as it does and must find, 
enemies in human nature, it finds also auxiliaries in 
it. Out of the four great parts, says Cicero, of the 
honestum, or good, which forms the matter on which 
offidvmy or human duty, finds employment, one is the 
fixing of a modus and an ordo^ a measure and an order, 
to fashion and wholesomely constrain our action, in 
order to lift it above the level it keeps if left to itself, 
and to bring it nearer to perf ectioiL Man alone of 
living creatures, he says, goes feeling after *^qidd sii 
ordo, quid sit quod deceat, in fadis didisque qui modus 



48 E8SATS IN CBITIGISM. [iL 

— the discovery of an wdier^ a law of gwi tusU^ a 
fMoam^ for his words and actions" Other creatures 
submissively follow the law of their nature; man 
alone has an impulse leading him to set up some other 
law to control the bent of his nature. 

This holds good, of course, as to moral matters, as 
well as intellectual matters : and it is of moral matters 
that we are generally thinking when we affirm it. 
But it holds good as to intellectual matters too. Now, 
probably, M. Sainte-Beuve had not these words of 
Cicero in his mind when he made, about the French 
nation, the assertion I am going to quote; but, for 
all that, the assertion leans for support^ one may say, 
upon the truth conveyed in those words of Cicero, 
and wonderfully illustrates and confirms them. *' In 
France," says M. Sainte-Beuve, " the first consideration 
for us is not whether we are amused and pleased by 
a work of art or mind, nor is it whether we are 
touched by it What we seek above all to learn is» 
whether we were right in being amused with it, and in 
applauding it, and in being moved by it" Those are 
very remarkable words, and they are, I believe, in the 
main quite true. A Frenchman has, to a considerable 
degree, what one may call a conscience in intellectual 
matters ; he has an active belief that there is a right 
and a wrong in them, that he is bound to honour and 
obey the right, that he is disgraced by cleaving to the 
wrong. All the world has, or professes to have, this 
conscience in moral matters. The word consdence has 
become almost confined, in popular use, to the moral 
sphere, because this lively susceptibility of feeling is, 



n.J LITERAKY INFLUENC£ OF ACADEMIES. 49 

in the moral sphere, so far more common than in the 
intellectual sphere ; the livelier, in the moral sphere, 
this susceptibility is, the greater becomes a man's 
readiness to admit a high standard of action, an ideal 
authoritatively correcting his everyday moral habits ; 
here, such willing admission of authority is due to 
sensitiveness of conscience. And a like deference to 
a standard higher than one's own habitual standard 
in intellectual matters, a like respectful recognition 
of a superior ideal, is caused, in the intellectual sphere, 
by sensitiveness of intelligence. Those whose intelli- 
gence is quickest, openest, most sensitive, are readiest 
with this deference ; those whose intelligence is less 
delicate and sensitive are less disposed to it Well, 
now we are on the road to see why the French have 
their Academy and we have nothing of the kind. 

What are the essential characteristics of the spirit 
of our nation 1 Not, certainly, an open and clear 
mind, not a quick and flexible intelligence. Our 
greatest admirers would not claim for us that we 
have these in a pre-eminent degree ; they might say 
that we had more of them than our detractors gave 
us credit for; but they would not assert them to 
be our essential characteristica They would rather 
allege, as our chief spiritual characteristics, energy 
and honesty ; and, if we are judged favourably and 
positively, not invidiously and negatively, our chief 
characteristics are, no doubt, these: — energy and 
honesty, not an open and clear mind, not a quick and 
flexible intelligence. Openness of mind and flexibility 
of intelligence were very signal characteristics of the 

VOL. L K 



50 ESSAYS IN CBITICISM. [iL 

Athenian people in ancient times ; everybody will feel 
that. Openness of mind and flexibility of intelligence 
are remarkable characteristics of the French people in 
modem times ; at any rate, they strikingly characterise 
them as compared with us; I think everybody, or 
almost everybody, will feel that I will not now ask 
what more the Athenian or the French spirit has than 
this, nor what shortcomings either of them may have 
as a set-off against this ; all I want now to point out 
is that they have this, and that we have it in a much 
lesser degree. 

Let me remark, however, that not only in the 
moral sphere, but also in the intellectual and spiritual 
sphere, energy and honesty are most important and 
fruitful qualities ; that, for instance, of what we call 
genius energy is the most essential part So, by 
assigning to a nation energy and honesty as its chief 
spiritual characteristics, — by refusing to it, as at all 
eminent characteristics, openness of mind and flexi- 
bility of intelligence, — we do not by any means, as 
some people might at first suppose, relegate its im- 
portance and its power of manifesting itself with eflect 
from the intellectual to the moral sphere. We only 
indicate its probable special line of successful activity 
in the intellectual sphere, and, it is true, certain im- 
perfections and failings to which, in this sphere, it 
will always be subject. Genius is mainly an afliEdr of 
energy, and poetry is mainly an aflair of genius; 
therefore, a nation whose spirit is characterised by 
energy may well be eminent in poetry ; — and we have 
Shakspeare. Again, the highest reach of science is. 



n.] UTERART INFLUENCE OF AGADEMIE& 51 

one may say, an inyentive power, a faculty of diyina. 
tion, akin to the highest power exercised in poetry ; 
therefore, a nation whose spirit is characterised by 
energy may well be eminent in science ; — and we have 
Newton. Shakspeare and Newton : in the intellectual 
sphere there can be no higher names. And what that 
energy, which is the life of genius, above everything 
demands and insists upon, is freedom; entire inde- 
pendence of all authority, prescription, and routine, — 
the fullest room to expand as it will Therefore, a 
nation whose chief spiritual characteristic is energy, 
will not be very apt to set up, in intellectual matters, 
a fixed standard, an authority, like an academy. By 
this it certainly escapes certain real inconveniences 
and dangers, and it can, at the same time, as we have 
seen, rea^h undeniably splendid heights in poetry and 
science. On the other hand, some of the requisites 
of intellectual work are specially the affair of quick- 
ness of mind and flexibility of intelligence. The 
form, the method of evolution, the precision, the pro- 
portions, the relations of the parts to the whole, in 
an intellectual work, depend mainly upon them. And 
these are the elements of an intellectual work which 
are really most communicable from it, which can most 
be learned and adopted from it, which have, there- 
fore, the greatest effect upon the intellectual per- 
formance of others. Even in poetry, these requisites 
are very important ; and the poetry of a nation, not 
eminent for the gifts on which they depend, will, 
more or less, suffer by this shortcoming. In poetry, 
however, they are, after all, secondary, and energy is 



52 ESSAYS IN CKITIGISK. [n 

the first thing ; but in prose they are of first-rate im- 
portance. In its prose literature, therefore, and in 
the routine of intellectual work generally, a nation 
with no particular gifts for these will not be so suc- 
cessful These are what, as I have said, can to a 
certain degree be learned and appropriated, while the 
tree activity of genius cannot Academies consecrate 
and maintain them, and, therefore, a nation with an 
eminent turn for them naturally establishes academies. 
So far as routine and authority tend to embarrass 
energy and inventiye genius, academies may be said 
to be obstructive to energy^d inventive geiuB, and, 
to this extent^ to the human spirit's general advance 
But then this evil is so much compensated by the 
propagation, on a large scale, of the mental aptitudes 
and demands which an open mind and a flexible in- 
telligence naturally engender, genius itself, in the 
long run, so greatly finds its account in this propaga- 
tion, and bodies like the French Academy have such 
power for promoting it, that the general advance of 
the human spirit is perhaps, on the whole, rather 
furthered than impeded by their existence. 

How much greater is our nation in poetry than 
prose ! how much better, in general, do the produc- 
tions of its spirit show in the qualities of genius than 
in the qualities of intelligence ! One may constantly 
remark this in the work of individuals ; how much 
more striking, in general, does any Englishman, — of 
some vigour of mind, but by no means a poet, — seem 
in his verse than in his prose ! His verse partly 
suffers from his not being really a poet, partly, no 



o.] LITERARY INFLUENCE OF ACADEMIES. 53 

doubt^ from the very same defects which impair his 
prose, and he cannot express himself with thorough 
success in it. But how much more powerful a per- 
sonage does he appear in it, by dint of feeling, and of 
originality and movement of ideas, than when he is 
writing prose ! With a Frenchman of like stamp, it 
is just the reverse : set him to write poetry, he is 
limited, artificial, and impotent; set him to write 
prose, he is free, natural, and effective. The power 
of French literature is in its prose-writers, the power 
of FiUglish literature is in its poets. Nay, many of 
the celebrated French poets depend wholly for their 
fame upon the qualities of intelligence which they 
exhibit) — qualities which are the distinctive support 
of prose; many of the celebrated English prose- 
writers depend wholly for their fame upon the quali- 
ties of genius and imagination which they exhibits- 
qualities which are the distinctive support of poetry. 
But, as I have said, the qualities of genius are less 
transferable than the qualities of intelligence; less 
can be immediately learned and appropriated from 
their product ; they are less direct and stringent in- 
tellectual agencies, though they may be more beauti- 
ful and divine. Shakspeare and our great Elizabethan 
group were certainly more gifted writers than Comeille 
and his group ; but what was the sequel to this great 
literature, this literature of genius, as we may call it, 
stretching from Marlowe to Milton ) What did it lead 
up to in English literature f To our provincial and 
second-rate literature of the eighteenth century. 
^hit on the other hand, was the sequel to the literar 



64 ESSAYS IM CfilTICISH, [ii. 

tnre of the French " great centmy," to this literature 
of intelligence, as, hy comparison with our Elizabethan 
literature, we may call it; what did it lead up tol 
To the French hterature of the eighteenth century, 
one of the most powerful and perrasire intellectual 
agencies that have ever existed, — the greatest Euro- 
pean force of the eighteenth century. Li science, 
again, we had Newton, a genius of the very higher 
order, a type of genius in science, if ever there was 
ona On the continent, as a sort of counterpart to 
Newton, there was Leibnitz ; a man, it seems to me 
(though on these matters I speak under correction), 
of much leas creative energy of genius, much less 
power of divination than Newton, but rather a man 
of admirable intell%ence, a type of intelligence in 
science, if ever there was one. Well, and what did 
they each directly lead up to in science t What was 
the intollectual generation that ^rang from each of 
them t I only repeat what the men of science have 
themselves pointed out. The man of genius was con- 
tinued by the English analysts of the eighteenth 
century, comparatively powerless and obscure followers 

master. The man of intelligence 
successors like Bemouilli, Euler, 

>lace, the greatest names in modem 

:e reader to see is, that the question 
)f academies to the intellectual life 
settled when we say, for instance : 
Ever had an academy, and yet we 
a very great literatura" It still 



n,] UTEBABT INFLUENCE OF ACADEMIES. 55 

remains to be asked : *' What sort of a great literature 1 
a literature great in the special qualities of genius, or 
great in the special qualities of intelligence 1" If 
in the former, it is by no means sure that either our 
literature, or the general intellectual life of our nation, 
has got already, without academies, all that academies 
can give. Both the one and the other may very well 
be somewhat wanting in those qualities of intelligence 
out of a lively sense for which a body like the French 
Academy, as I have said, springs, and which such a 
body does a great deal to spread and confirm. Our 
literature, in spite of the genius manifested in it, may 
fall short in form, method, precision, proportions, 
arrangement^ — all of them, I have said, things where 
intelligence proper comes in. It may be comparatively 
weak in prose, that branch of literature where intelli- 
gence proper is, so to speak, all in all. In this branch 
it may show many grave faults to which the want of 
a quick, flexible intelligence, and of the strict standard 
which such an intelligence tends to impose, makes it 
liable ; it may be fuU of hap-hazard, crudeness, pro- 
vincialism, eccentricity, violence, blundering. It may 
be a less stringent and effective intellectual agency, 
both upon our own nation and upon the world at 
large, than other literatures which show less genius, 
perhaps, but more intelligence. 

The right conclusion certainly is that we should 
try, so far as we can, to make up our shortcomings ; 
and that to this end, instead of always fixing our 
thoughts upon the points in which our literature, and 
our intellectual life generally, are strong, we should, 



56 ESSATS IN CRITICISM. [a 

from time to time, fix them upon those in which they 
are weak, and so learn to perceive clearly what we 
have to amend. What is our second great spiritual 
characteristic, — our honesty, — good for, if it is not 
good for this 1 But it will, — I am sure it will, — more 
and more, as time goes on, be found good for this. 

Well, then, an institution like the French Academy, 
— an institution owing its existence to a national bent 
towards the things of the mind, towards culture, to- 
W9,rds clearness, correctness, and propriety in think- 
ing and speaking, and, in its turn, promoting this 
bent, — sets standards in a number of directions, and 
creates, in all these directions, a force of educated 
opinion, checking and rebuking those who fall below 
these standards, or who set them at nought. Educated 
opinion exists here as in France ; but in France the 
Academy senres as a sort of centre and rall3dng-point 
to it) and gives it a force which it has not got here. 
Why is all the joumeynuwrwork of literature, as I may 
call it) so much worse done here than it is in France 1 
I do not wish to hurt any one's feelings ; but surely 
this is so. Think of the difference between our books 
of reference and those of the French, between our 
biographical dictionaries (to take a striking instance) 
and theirs ; think of the difference between the trans- 
lations of the classics turned out for Mr. Bohn's library 
and those turned out for M. Nisard's collection ! As 
a general rule, hardly any one amongst us, who knows 
French and German well, would use an English book 
of reference when he could get a French or German 
one ; or would look at an English prose translation 



n.] LTTSRAJRY INFLX7ENCE OF AOADEMIEa 57 

of an ancient author when he could get a French oi 
German ona It is not that there do not exist in 
England, as in France, a number of people perfectly 
\^ell able to discern what is good, in these things, from 
what is bad, and preferring what is good ; but they 
are isolated, they form no powerful body of opinion, 
they are not strong enough to set a standard, up to 
which even the journeyman-work of literature must 
be brought) if it is to be vendibla Ignorance and 
charlatanism in work of this kind are always tiying 
to pass off their wares as excellent^ and to cry down 
criticism as the voice of an insignificant, over-fastidious 
minority; they easily persuade the multitude that 
this is so when the minority is scattered about as it 
is here ; not so easily when it is banded together as 
in the French Academy. So, again, with freaks in 
dealing with language ; certainly all such freaks tend 
to impair the power and beauty of language; and how 
far more common they are with us than with the 
French! To take a very familiar instance. Every 
one has noticed the way in which the Times chooses 
to spell the word " diocese ;" it always spells it diocess,^ 
deriving it^ I suppose, from Zeus and census. The 
Jowmal des D&xUs might just as well write " diocess " 
instead of " dioc^e," but imagine the Jowmal des DibcUs 
doing so ! Imagine an educated Frenchman indulg- 
ing himself in an orthographical antic of this sort^ in 
face of the grave respect with which the Academy and 
its dictionary invest the French language! Some 

1 The Times has now (1868) abandoned this spelling and 
adopted the ordinary one. 



58 ESSATS IK CRITICISM. [ii, 

people will say these are little things ; they are not ; 
they are of bad example. They tend to spread the 
baneful notion that there is no such thing as a high, 
correct standard in intellectual matters; that every 
one may as well take his own way ; they are at vari- 
ance with the severe discipline necessary for all real 
culture ; they confirm us in habits of wilfulness and 
eccentricity, which hurt our minds, and damage our 
credit with serious people. The late Mr. Donaldson 
was certainly a man of great ability, and I, who am 
not an Orientalist, do not pretend to judge his Jashar: 
but let the reader observe the form which a foreign 
Orientalist's ' judgment of it naturally takes. M. 
Benan calls it a teniaiive malhetMreuse, a failure, in 
short; this it may be, or it may not be; I am no 
judge. But he goes on: ''It is astonishing that a 
recent article" (in a French periodical, he means) 
"should have brought forward as the last word of 
German exegesis a work like this, composed by a 
doctor of the University of Cambridge, and univer- 
sally condemned by German criticgf.*' You see what 
he means to imply: an extravagance , of this sort 
could never have come from Germany, where there is 
a great force of critical opinion controlling <a learned 
man's vagaries, and keeping him straight; it comes 
from the native home of intellectual eccentricity of 
all kinds,^ — from England, from a doctor of the 

^ A critic declares I am wrong in saying that M. Kenan's 
language implies this. I still think that there is a shade, a 
miance of expression, in M. Renan's language, which does imply 
this ; but, I confess, the only person who can really settle such 
a Question is M. Renan himsell 



n.J UTERART INlTLinSNCE OF ACADEMIES. 59 

ITniversity of Cambridge ; — and I daresay he would 
not expect much better thmgs from a doctor of the 
TTniyersity of Oxford. Again, after speaking of what 
Grermany and France have done for the history of 
Mahomet: "America and England," M. Eenan goes 
on, " have also occupied themselves with Mahomet." 
He mentions Washington Irving's Life of Mahomet^ 
which does not, he says, evince much of an historical 
sense, a sefnimeni Mshrigue fori Hev^; "but," he pro- 
ceeds, "this book shows a real progress, when one 
thinks that in 1829 Mr. Charles Forster published 
two thick volumes, which enchanted the English 
r^&ends, to make out that Mahomet was the little 
horn of the he-goat that figures in the eighth chapter 
of Daniel, and that the Pope was the great horn. 
Mr. Forster founded on this ingenious parallel a 
whole philosophy of history, according to which the 
Pope represented the Western corruption of Chris- 
tianity, and Mahomet the Eastern ; thence the strik- 
ing resemblances between Mahometanism and Popery." 
And in a note M. Eenan adds : " This is the same 
Mr. Charles Forster who is the author of a mystifica- 
tion about the Sinsiitic inscriptions, in which he 
declares he finds the primitive language." As much 
as to say : "It is an Englishman, be surprised at no 
extravagance." If these innuendoes had no ground, 
and were made in hatred and malice, they would not 
be worth a moment's attention ; but they come from 
a grave Orientalist, on his own subject^ and they 
point to a real fact ; — the absence, in this country, of 
any force of educated literary and scientific opinion, 



60 ESSATB m CRinGISM. [n. 

making aberratioiis like those of the author of The 
One Prmeval Language out of the question. Not only 
the author of such aberrations, often a very clevei 
man, suffers by the want of check, by the not being 
kept straight, and spends force in vain on a false road, 
which, under better discipline, he might have used 
with profit on a true one ; but all his adherents, both 
« reverends " and others, suffer too, and the general rate 
of information and judgment is in this way kept low. 
In a production which we have all been reading 
lately, a production stamped throughout with a liter- 
ary quality very rare in this country, and of which I 
shall have a word to say presently — urbcmUy; in this 
production, the work of a man never to be named by 
any son of Oxford without sympathy, a man who 
alone in Oxford of his generation, alone of many 
generations, conveyed to us in his genius that same 
charm, that same ineffable sentiment which this ex- 
quisite place itself convejrs, — I mean Dr. Newman, — 
an expression is frequently used which is more 
common in theological than in literary language, but 
which seems to me fitted to be of general service; 
the note of so and so, the note of catholicity, the note 
of antiquity, the note of sanctity, and so on. Adopt- 
ing this expressive word, I say that in the bulk of 
the intellectual work of a nation which has no centre, 
no intellectual metropolis like an academy, like M. 
Sainte-Beuve's " sovereign organ of opinion," like M. 
Benan's ** recognised authority in matters of tone and 
taste," — there is observable a note of pravindalUy. 
Now to get rid of provinciality is a certain stage of 



n.] UTERABT IN7LUSNCE OF AGADEMDSS. 61 

culture ; a stage the podtiYe result of which we must 
not make of too much importance, but which is, 
nevertheless, indispensable, for it brings us on to the 
platform where alone the best and highest intellectual 
work can be said fairly to begin. Work done after 
men have reached this platform is classical; and that 
is the only work which, in the long run, can stand 
All the scoria in the work of men of great genius 
who have not lived on this platform are due to their 
not having lived on it Genius raises them to it by 
moments, and the portions of their work which are 
immortal are done at these moments ; but more of it 
would have been immortal if they had not reached 
this platform at moments only, if they had had the 
cidture which makes men live there. 

The less a literature has felt the influence of a 
supposed centre of correct information, correct judg- 
ment, correct taste, the more we shall find in it this 
note of provinciality. I have shown the note of pro- 
vinciality as caused by remoteness from a centre of 
correct information. Of course the note of provin- 
ciality from the want of a centre of correct taste is 
still more visible, and it is also still more common. 
For here great — even the greatest — powers of mind 
most fail a man. Great powers of mind will make 
him inform himself thoroughly, great powers of mind 
will make him think profoundly, even with ignorance 
and platitude all round him; but not even great 
powers of mind will keep his taste and style perfectly 
sound and sure, if he is left too much to himself, with 
no ''sovereign organ of opinion" in these matters 



62 ESSATS IN CRITICISM. [ii. 

near hinL Even men like Jeremy Taylor and Burke 
suffer here. Take this passage from Taylor's funeral 
sermon on Lady Carbery : — 

'* So have I seen a river, deep and smooth, passing 
with a still foot and a sober face, and paying to the 
fiscuSy the great exchequer of the sea, a tribute large 
and full ; and hard by it a little brook, skipping and 
making a noise upon its imequal and neighbour 
bottom ; and after all its talking and bragged motion, 
it paid to its common audit no more than the revenues 
of a little cloud or a contemptible vessel : so have I 
sometimes compared the issues of her religion to the 
solemnities and famed outsides of another's piety." 

That passage haa been much admired, and, indeed, 
the genius in it is undeniable. I should say, for my 
part, that genius, the ruling divinity of poetry, had 
been too busy in it, and intelligence, the ^ruling 
divinity of prose, not busy enougL But can any 
one, with the best models of style in his head, help 
feeling the note of provinciality there, the want of 
simplicity, the want of measure, the want of just the 
qualities that make prose classical) If he does not 
feel what I mean, let him place beside the passage of 
Taylor this passage from the Panegyric of St. Paul, 
by Taylor's contemporary, Bossuet : — 

"II ira, cet ignorant dans Tart de bien dire, avec cette 
locution rude, avec cette phrase qui sent I'^tranger il 
ira en cette Gr^ce polie, la m^re des philosophes et 
des orateurs ; et malgr^ la r^istance du monde, il y 
6tablira plus d'Eglises que Platon n'y a gagn^ '^ 
disciples par cette eloquence qu'on a crue divine." 



r 



/ 



n.] LITKR.\RT fflyLUBHCK OF ACAJJKMIEfl. 63 

There we have prose without the note of provm- 
dality — classical prose, proee of the centra 

Or take Burke, our greatest English prose-writer, 
as I think ; take expressions like this : — 

"Blindfold themselves, like bulls that shut their 
eyes when they push, they drive, by t^ point of 
their bayonets, their slaves, blindfolded, indeed, no 
worse than their lords, to take their fictions for cur- 
rencies, and to swallow down paper pills by thirty- 
four millions sterling at a dose." 

Or this :— 

"They used it" (the royal name) "as a sort ot 
navel-string, to nourish their unnatural offspring from 
the bowels of royalty itself. Now that the monster 
can purvey for its own subsistence, it will only carry 
tlie mark about it, as a token of its having torn the 
womb it came from." 

Or this:— 

" Without one natural pang, he " (Rousseau) " casts 
away, as a sort of offal and excrement, the spawn tA 
his disgustful amours, and sends his children to the 
hospital of foundlings." 

Or this:— 

"I confess I never liked this continual talk of 

resistance and revolution, or the practice of making the 

lily bread 

ily valetu- 

mercnry 

ovocatives 

too much 



64 ESSAYS m CRITICISM. [n. 

suffered to indulge its caprices ; prose at too gi^eat a 
distauce from the centre of good taste; prose, in 
shorty with the note of provincialiiy. People may 
reply, it is rich and imaginative ; yes, that is just it^ 
it is AsioHe prose, as the ancient critics would have 
said; prose somewhat barbarously rich and over- 
loaded. .But the true prose is Attic prosa 

Well, but Addison's prose is Attic prosa Where, 
then, it may be asked, is the note of provinciality in 
Addison f I answer, in the commonplace of his ideas.^ 
This is a matter worth remarking. Addison claims 
to take leading rank as a moralist To do that^ you 
must have ideas of the first order on your subject — 
the best ideas, at any rate, attainable in your time — 
as well as be able to express them in a perfectly 
sound and sure style. Else you show your distance 
from the centre of ideas by your matter; you are 
provincial by your matter, though you may not be 

^ A critio says this is paradoxioal, and uiges that many 
tecond-rate French academicians haye uttered the most common- 
place ideas possible. I agree that many second-rate French 
academicians haye uttered the most commonplace ideas possible : 
but Addison is not a second-rate man. He is a man of the 
order, I will not say of Pascal, but at any rate of La Bruy^re 
and Yauyenargues ; why does he not equal them t I say be- 
cause of the medium in which he finds himself^ the atmosphere 
in which he liyes and works ; an atmosphere which tells un- 
fayourably, or rather tends to tell unfayourably (for that is the 
truer way of putting it) either upon style or else upon ideas ; 
tends to make eyen a man of great ability either a Mr. Carlyle 
or else a Lord Macaulay. 

It is to be obseryed, howeyer, that Lord Macaulay's style has 
in its turn suffered by his failure in ideas, and this cannot be 
said of Addison's. 



n.] LITERARY INFLUENCE OP ACADEMIES. 65 

provincial by your style. It is comparatively a small 
matter to express oneself well, if one will be content 
with not expressing much, with expressing only trite 
ideas ; the problem is to express new and profound 
ideas in a perfectly sound and classical style. He is 
the true classic, in every age, who does that Now 
Addison has not, on his subject of morals, the force 
of ideas of the moralists of the first class — the classical 
moralists ; he has not the best ideas attainable in or 
about his time, and which were, so to speak, in the 
air then, to be seized by the finest spirits ; he is not 
to bo compared for power, searchingness, or delicacy 
of thought to Pascal or La Bruy^re or Vauvenargues ; 
he is rather on a level, in this respect, with a man 
like Marmontel Therefore, I say, he has the note of 
provinciality as a moralist; he is provincial by his 
matter, though not by his styla 

To illustrate what I mean by an example. Addison, 
writing as a moralist on fixedness in religious faith, 
says : — 

" Those who delight in reading books of controversy 
do very seldom arrive at a fixed and settled habit of 
faitL The doubt which was laid revives again, and 
shows itself in new difficulties ; and that generally for 
this reason, — because the mind, which is perpetually 
tossed in controversies and disputes, is apt to forget 
the reasons which had once set it at rest^ and to 
be disquieted with any former perplexity when it 
appears in a new shape, or is started by a different 
hand." 

It may be said, that is classical English, perfect in 

VOL. T. F 



66 



ESSAYS m CRITICISM. 



tii. 






\, 






lucidity, measure, and propriety. I make no objec- 
tion ; but, in my turn, I say that the idea expressed 
is perfectly trite and barren, and that it is a note of 
provinciality in Addison, in a man whom a nation 
puts forward as one of its great moralists, to have no 
profounder and more striking idea to produce on this 
great subject Compare, on the same subject, these 
words of a moralist really of the first order, really at 
the centre by his ideas, — Joubert : — 

'* L'ezp^rience de beaucoup d'opinions donne h 
Fesprit beaucoup de flexibility et raffermit dans cellea 
qu'il croit les meilleures." 

With what a flash of light that touches the subject ! 
how it sets us thinking ! what a genuine contribution 
to moral science it is ! 

In shorty where there is no centre like an academy, 
if you have genius and powerful ideas, you are apt 
not to have the best style going ; if you have pre- 
cision of style and not genius, you are apt not to have 
the best ideas going. 

The provincial spirit, again, exaggerates the value 
of its ideas for want of a high standard at hand by 
which to try them. Or rather, for want of such a 
standard, it gives one idea too much prominence at 
the expense of others ; it orders its ideas amiss ; it is 
hurried away by fancies; it likes and dislikes too 
passionately, too exclusively. Its admiration weeps 
hysterical tears, and its disapprobation foams at the 
mouth. So we get the eruptive and the aggressive 
manner in literature; the former prevails most in 
GUI* criticism, the latter in our newspapers. For, not 



n.] LITEKABY INFLUENCE OF ACADEMIES. 67 

having the lucidity of a large and centrally placed 
intelligence, the provincial spirit has not its gracious- 
ness ; it does not persuade, it makes war ; it has not 
urbanity, the tone of the city, of the centre, the tone 
which always aims at a spiritual and intellectual effect, 
and not excluding the use of banter, never disjoins 
banter itself from politeness, from felicity. But the 
provincial tone is more violent^ and seems to aim 
rather at an effect upon the blood and senses than 
upon the spirit and intellect; it loves hard-hitting 
rather than persuading. The newspaper, with its 
party spirit^ its thorough-goingness, its resolute avoid- 
ance of shades and distinctions, its shorty highly- 
charged, heavy -shotted articles, its style so unlike 
that style lenis rnmimkque jsertmaa — easy and not too 
violently insisting, — which the ancients so much ad- 
mired, is its true literature ; the provincial spirit likes 
in the newspaper just what makes the newspaper such 
bad food for it^ — ^just what made Groethe say, when he 
was pressed hard about the immorality of Byron's 
poems, that^ after all, they were not so immoral as 
the newspapers. The French talk of the brutalUt des 
jowmavjx cmglais. What strikes them comes from the 
necessary inherent tendencies of newspaper-writing 
not being checked in England by any centre of in- 
telligent and urbane spirit, but rather stimulated by 
coming in contact with a provincial spirit Even a 
newspaper like the Saturday Beview, that old friend of 
all of us, a newspaper expressly aiming at an immunity 
from the common newspaper-spirit^ aiming at being a 
sort of organ of reason, — and, by thus aiming, it merits 



68 ESSATS IN CBinCISM. [u 

great gratitude and has done great good, — even the 
Saturday Beview, replying to some foreign criticism on 
our precautions against invasion, falls into a strain of 
this kind : — 

" To do this " (to take these precautions) *' seems 
to us eminently worthy of a great nation, and to talk 
of it as unworthy of a great nation, seems to us 
eminently worthy of a great fooL" 

There is what the French mean when they talk of 
the bnUalUd des joymaux anglais; there is a style 
certainly as far removed from urbanity as possible, — 
a style with what T call the note of provinciality. 
And the same note may not unfrequently be observed 
even in the ideas of this newspaper, full as it is of 
thought and cleverness : certain ideas allowed to be- 
come fixed ideas, to prevail too absolutely. I will not 
speak of the immediate present, but^ to go a little 
while back, it had the critic who so disliked the 
Emperor of the French ; it had the critic who so dis- 
liked the subject of my present remarks — ^academies ,* 
it had the critic who was so fond of the German 
element in our nation, and, indeed, everywhere ; who 
ground his teeth if one said Charlemoffne instead of 
Charles the Oreat, and, in shorty saw all things in 
Teutonism, as Malebranche saw all things in Grod. 
Certainly any one may fairly find faults in the Em- 
peror Napoleon or in academies, and merit in the 
German element ; but it is a note of the provincial 
spirit not to hold ideas of this kind a little more 
easily, to be so devoured by them, to suffer them to 
become crotchets. 



II.] LITERABY INFLUENCE OF ACADEMIES. 69 

In England there needs a miracle of genius like 
Shakspeare's to produce balance of mind, and a miracle 
of intellectual delicacy like Dr. Newman's to produce 
urbanity of style. How prevalent all round us is the 
want of balance of mind and urbanity of style ! How 
much, doubtless, it is to be foimd in ourselves, — ^in 
each of us ! but^ as human nature is constituted, every 
one can see it clearest in his contemporaries. There, 
above all, we should considc r it^ because they and we 
are exposed to the same influences ; and it is in the 
best of one's contemporaries that it is most worth con- 
sidering, because one then most feels the harm it does, 
when one sees what they would be without it. Think 
of the difference between Mr. Ruskin exercising his 
genius, and Mr. Ruskin exercising his intelligence; 
consider the truth and beauty of this : — 

" Go out, in the spring-time, among the meadows 
that slope from the shores of the Swiss lakes to the 
roots of their lower mountains. There, mingled with 
the taller gentians and the white narcissus, the grass 
grows deep and free ; ajid as you follow the winding 
mountain paths, beneath arching boughs all veiled and 
dim with blossom, — paths that for ever droop and rise 
over the green banks and mounds sweeping down in 
scented undulation, steep to the blue water studded 
here and there with new-mown heaps, filling all the 
air with fainter sweetness, — look up towards the 
higher hills, where the waves of everlasting green roll 
silently into their long inlets among the shadows oi 
the pines " 

There is what the genius, the feeling, the tempera* 



70 ESSAYS m CRITICISM. [u 

ment in Mr. Euskin, the original and incommunicable 
part, has to do with ; and how exquisite it is ! AD 
the critic could possibly suggest^ in the way of objec- 
tion, would be, perhaps, that Mr. Euskin is there 
trying to make prose do more than it can perfectly 
do ; that what he is there attempting he will never, 
€zcept in poetry, be able to accomplish to his own 
entire satisfaction : but he accomplishes so much that 
the critic may well hesitate to suggest even thia 
Place beside this charming passage another, — a passage 
about Shakspeare's names, where the intelligence and 
judgment of Mr. Euskin, the acquired, trained, com- 
municable part in him, are brought into play, — and 
see the diflference : — 

'* Of Shakspeare's names I will afterwards speak at 
more length ; they are curiously — often barbarously — 
mixed out of various traditions and languages. Three 
of the clearest in meaning have been already noticed. 
Desdemona-r'8vcr8at/*ovta,' miserable fortune — is also 
plain enough. Othello is, I believe, *the careful;' 
all the calamity of the tragedy arising from the single 
flaw and error in his magnificently collected strengtL 
Ophelia, *serviceableness,' the true, lost wife of Hamlet, 
is marked as having a Greek name by that of her 
brother, Laertes; and its signification is once ex- 
quisitely alluded to in that brother's last word of her, 
where her gentle preciousness is opposed to the use- 
lessness of the churlish clergy : — * A ministering angel 
shall my sister be, when thou liest howling.' Hamlet 
is, I believe, connected in some way with * homely,' 
the entire event of the tragedy turning on betrayal 



il] literary influence of academies. 71 

of home duty. Hermione (Jpi^\ * pillar-like ' (^ cJSos 
IX€ XP^'^V^ *A(l>po8tTr}s) ; Titania {rtn/jvYj), *the queen;* 
Benedick and Beatrice, ' blessed and blessing ; ' Valen- 
tine and Proteus, 'enduring or strong' (valens\ and 
< changeful.' lago and lachimo have evidently the 
same root — ^probably the Spanish lago, Jacob, 'the 
supplanter.' " 

Now, really, what a piece of extravagance all that 
is ! I will not say that the meaning of Shakspeare's 
names (I put aside the question aa to the correctness 
of Mr. Euskin's etymologies) has no effect at all, may 
be entirely lost sight of ; but to give it that degree of 
prominence is to throw the reins to one's whim, to 
forget all moderation and proportion, to lose the 
balance of one's mind altogether. It is to show in 
one's criticism, to the highest excess, the note of 
provinciality. 

Again, there is Mr. Palgrave, certainly endowed 
with a very fine critical tact: his Golden Treasury 
abundantly proves it. The plan of arrangement which 
he devised for that work, the mode in which he fol- 
lowed his plan out, nay, one might even say, merely 
the juxtaposition, in pursuance of it, of two such 
pieces as those of Wordsworth and Shelley which 
form the 285th and 286th in his collection, show a 
delicacy of feeling in these matters which is quite 
indisputable and very rare. And his notes are full of 
remarks which show it too. All the more striking, 
conjoined with so much justness of perception, are 
certain freaks and violences in Mr. Palgrave's criticism, 
mainly imputable. I think, to the critic's isolated pod- 



72 ESSAYS m CRinciSH. [n 

tion ID this countiy, to his feeling himself too much 
left to take his own way, too much without any central 
authority representing high culture and sound judg- 
ment, by which he may be, on the one hand, confirmed 
as against the ignorant, on the other, held in respect 
when he himself is inclined to take liberties. I moan 
such thing* as this note on Milton's line, — 

" Ths great Emathian conqueror bade spare " . , , 

" When Thebes was destroyed, Alexander ordered the 
house of Pindar to be spared Se was at incapabk oj 
appreciating ike pod, as Louis XIV. of appreaaivn^ Radne ,- 
bvt mm iht narrow and barbarian mind of Alexander 
touid vadersland the advamiage of a thovn/ act of homage 
io poetry." A note like that I call a freak or a violence; 
if this disparaging view of Alexander and Louis XIV., 
90 unlike the current view, is wrong, — if the current 
view is, alter all, the truer one of them, — the note is 
a freak. But, even if its disparaging view is right, 
the note is a violence ; for, abandoning the true mode 
of intellectual action — persuasion, the instilment of 
conviction, — it simply astounds and irritates the hearer 
by contradicting without a word of proof or prepara- 
tion, his fixed and familiar notions; and this is mere 
violence. In either case, the fitness, the measure, the 
centrality, which is the soul of all good criticism, is 
lost, and the note of provinciality shows itself. 

"" 'i the famous Han^xiok, marks of a fine 
erception are everywhere diecemible, but 
marks of the want of sure balance, of the 
support afiorded by knowing one apeaki 



II.] UTERABT INFLUENCE OF ACADEMIES. 73 

before good and severe judges. When Mr. Palgrave 
dislikes a thing, he feels no pressure constraining 
him either to try his dislike closely or to express it 
moderately ; he does not mince matters, he gives his 
dislike all its own way ; both his judgment and his 
style would gain if he were under more restraint 
" The style which has filled London with the dead 
monotony of Gower or Harley Streets, or the pale 
commonplace of Belgravia, Tybumia, and Kensing- 
ton; which has pierced Paris and Madrid with the 
feeble frivolities of the Eue Eivoli and the Strada de 
Toledo." He dislikes the architecture of the Eue 
Bivoli, and he puts it on a level with the architecture 
of Belgravia and Gower Street ; he lumps them all 
together in one condenmation, he loses sight of the 
shade, the distinction, which is everything here ; the 
distinction, namely, that the architecture of the Eue 
Eivoli expresses show, splendour, pleasure, — unworthy 
things, perhaps, to express alone and for their own 
sakes, but it expresses them; whereas the architec- 
ture of Gower Street and Belgi'avia merely expresses 
the impotence of the architect to express anything. 
Then, as to style : " sculpture which stands in a 
contrast with Woolner hardly more shameful than 
diverting." . . . ^'passing from Davy or Faraday to 
the art of the mountebank or the science of the spirit- 
rapper." ... "it is the old, old story with Maro- 
chetti, the frog trying to blow himself out to bull 
dimensions. He may puff and be puffed, but he will 
never do it." We all remember that shower of 
imenities on poor M. Marochetti Now. here Mr 



74 ESSAYS IN CRITIOISM. [u 

Palgrave himself enables us to form a contrast which 
lets us see just what the presence of an academy does 
for style ; for he quotes a criticism by M. Gustave 
Planche on this very M. Marochetti. M. Gustave 
Planche was a critic of the very first order, a man of 
strong opinions, which he expressed with severity; 
he, too, condemns M. Marochetti's work, and Mr. 
Palgrave calls him as a witness to back what he has 
himself said ; certainly Mr. Palgrave's translation will 
not exaggerate M. Planche's urbanity in dealing with 
M Marochetti, but, even in this translation, see the 
difference in sobriety, in measure, between the critic 
writing in Paris and the critic writing in London :— 

" These conditions are so elementary, that I am at 
a perfect loss to comprehend how M. Marochetti has 
neglected them. There are soldiers here like the 
leaden playthings of the nursery : it is almost im- 
possible to guess whether there is a body beneath the 
dress. We have here no question of style, not even 
of grammar ; it is nothing beyond mere matter of the 
alphabet of art To break these conditions is the 
same as to be ignorant of spelling." 

That is really more formidable criticism than Mi. 
Palgrave's, and yet in how perfectly temperate a 
style ! M. Planche's advantage is, that he feels him- 
self to be speaking before competent judges, that 
there is a force of cultivated opinion for him to appeal 
to. Therefore, he must not be extravagant, and he 
need not storm ; he must satisfy the reason and 
taste, — that is his business. Mr. Palgrave, on the 
other hand, feels himself to be speaking before a pro- 



IL] LITERARY INFLUENCE OF ACADEMIES. 75 

miscuous multitude, with the few good judges so 
scattered through it as to be powerless ; therefore, 
he has no calm confidence and no self-control; he 
relies on the strength of his lungs; he knows that 
big words impose on the mob, and that, even if he is 
outrageous, most of his audience are apt to be a great 
deal more so.^ 

Again, the first two volumes of Mr. Kinglake's 
Invasion of the Ormea were certainly among the most 
successful and renowned English books of our time. 
Their style was one of the most renowned things 
about them, and yet how conspicuous a fault in Mr. 
Kinglake's style is this over-charge of which I have 
been speaking ! Mr. James Gordon Bennett, of the 
New York Herald, says, I believe, that the highest 
achievement of the human intellect is what he calls 
" a good editoriaL" This is not quite so ; but, if it 
were so, on what a height would these two volumes 
by Mr. Einglake stand 1 I have already spoken of 
the Attic and the Asiatic styles ; besides these, there 
is the Corinthian styla That is the style for " a 
good editorial,'' and Mr. Kinglake has really reached 
perfection in it It has not the warm glow, blithe 
movement, and soft pliancy of life, as the Attic style 
has ; it has not the over-heavy richness and encum- 
bered gait of the Asiatic style ; it has glitter without 
warmth, rapidity without ease, effectiveness without 

^ When I wrote this I had before me the first edition of Mr. 
Palgraye's Handbook, I am bound to say that in the second 
edition much strong language has been expunged, and what 
remains, softened. 



76 ESSATS IN CRITICISM. La 

chann. Its characteristic is, that it has no soul ; aU 
it exists for, is to get its ends, to make its points, to 
damage its adversaries, to be admired, to triumph. A 
style so bent on effect at the expense of soul, simplicity, 
and delicacy ; a style so little studious of the charm 
of the great models; so far from classic truth and 
grace, must surely be said to have the note of provin- 
ciality. Yet Mr. Kinglake's talent is a really eminent 
one, and so in harmony with our intellectual habits and 
tendencies, that, to the great bulk of English people, 
the faults of his style seem its merits ; all the more 
needful that criticism should not be dazzled by them. 
We must not compare a man of Mr. Kinglake's 
literary talent with French writers like M. de Bazan- 
court. We must compare him with M. Thiers. And 
what a superiority in style has M. Thiers from being 
formed in a good school, with severe traditions, 
wholesome restraining influences ! Even in this age 
of Mr. James Gordon Bennett, his style has nothing 
Corinthian about it, its lightness and brightness make 
it almost Attic. It is not quite Attic, however; it 
has not the infallible sureness of Attic taste. Some- 
times his head gets a little hot with the fumes of 
patriotism, and then he crosses the line, he loses 
perfect measure, he declaims, he raises a momentary 
smile. France condemned * k 6tre I'efi&oi du monde 
domt dlejmirraU Ure Vaimmr^ — Caesar, whose exquisite 
simplicity M Thiers so much admires, would not 
have written like that. There is, if I may be allowed 
to say so, the slightest possible touch of fatuity in 
such language, — of that failure in good sense which 



n.] UTERABY INFLUENCE OF ACADEMIES. 77 

oomes from too warm a self-satisfaction. But com- 
pare this language with Mr. Kinglake's Marshal St 
Amaud — "dismissed from the presence" of Lord 
Raglan or Lord Stratford, " cowed and pressed down " 
under their " stem reproofs," or under " the majesty 
of the great Elchi's Canning brow and tight, merciless 
lips!" The failure in good sense and good taste 
there reaches far beyond what the French mean by 
fatuxty ; they would call it by another word, a word 
expressing blank defect of intelligence, a word for 
which we have no exact equivalent in English, — hUe. 
It is the difference between a venial, momentary, 
good-tempered excess, in a man of the world, of an 
amiable and social weakness, — ^vanity ; and a serious, 
settled, fierce, narrow, provincial misconception of the 
whole relative value of one's own things and the 
things of other& So baneful to the style of even the 
cleverest man may be the total want of checks. 

Li all I have said, I do not pretend that the 
examples given prove my rule as to the influence of 
academies; they only illustrate it. Examples in 
plenty might very likely be found to set against them ; 
the truth of the rule depends, no doubt, on whether 
the balance of all the examples is in its favour or 
not ; but actually to strike this balance is always out 
of the question. Here, as ever3rwhere else, the rule, 
the idea, if true, commends itself to the judicious, and* 
then the examples make it clearer still to them. This 
18 the real use of examples, and this alone is the pur 
pose which I have meant mine to serve. There is 
also another side to the whole question, — as to the 



78 ESSAYS m CBinCISM. [n. 

limiting and prejudicial operation which academies 
may have; but this side of the question it rather 
behoves the French, not us, to study. 

The reader will ask for some practical conclusion 
about the establishment of an Academy in this coun- 
try, and perhaps I shall hardly give him the one he 
expects. But nations, have their own modes of acting, 
and these modes are not easily changed; they are 
even consecrated, when great things have been done 
in them. When a literature has produced Shakspeare 
and Milton, when it has even produced Barrow and 
Burke, it cannot well abandon its traditions ; it can 
hardly begin, at this late time of day, with an institu- 
tion like the French Academy. I think academies 
with a limited, special, scientific scope, in the various 
lines of intellectual work, — academies like that of 
Berlin, for instance, — ^we with time may, and probably 
shall, establish. And no doubt they will do good ; 
no doubt the presence of such influential centres of 
correct information will tend to raise the standard 
amongst us for what I have called the jowmeyman- 
work of literature, and to free us from the scandal of 
such biographical dictionaries as Chalmers's, or such 
translations as a recent one of Spinoza^ or perhaps, 
such philological freaks as Mr. Forster's about the one 
primeval language. But an academy quite like the 
'French Academy, a sovereign organ of the highest 
literary opinion, a recognised authority in matters of 
intellectual tone and taste, we shall hardly have, and 
perhaps we ought not to wish to have it. But then 
every one amongst us with any turn for literature 



il] litekaky influence of academies. 79 

will do well to remember to what shortcomings and 
excesses, which such an academy tends to correct, we 
are liable; and the more liable, of course, for not 
having it. He will do well constantly to try himself 
in respect of these, steadily to widen his culture, 
severely to check in himself the provincial spirit; 
and he will do this the better the more he keeps in 
mind that all mere glorification by ourselves of our- 
selves or our literature, in the strain of what, at the 
beginning of these remarks, I quoted from Lord 
Macaulay, is both vulgar, and, besides being vulgar 
retaitling. 



III. 



MAURICE DE GUEEIN. 

I WILL not presume to say that I now know the 
French language well ; but at a time when I knew it 
even less well than at present, — some fifteen yean* 
ago, — I remember pestering those about me with this 
sentence, the rhythm of which had lodged itself in 
my head, and which, with the strangest pronunciation 
possible, I kept perpetually declaiming: "Les dieux 
jaioux ont enfoui qudque part Us idmoignages de la de- 
scendance des (hoses ; mats au bord de quel Ocdan oniAh 
rovli la pierre qui les cowvre, 6 Macar4e I " 

These words come from a short composition called 
the Centaur, of which the author, Georges-Maurice de 
Gu^rin, died in the year 1839, at the age of twenty- 
eighty without having published anything. In 1840, 
Madame Sand brought out the Centa/u/r in the Bevue 
des Devx Mandes, with a short notice of its author, and 
a few extracts from his letters. A year or two after- 
wards she reprinted these at the end of a volume of 
her novels ; and there it was that I fell in with them 
I was 80 much struck with the CentoMr that I waited 



ni.] MAURICE DE GU&IN. 81 

anxioasly to hear something more of its author, aud 
of what he had left ; but it was not till the other day 
— twenty years after the first publication of the Cerir 
taur in the Bevue des Leva Mondes, that my anxiety 
was satisfied. At the end of 1860 appeared two 
volumes with the title Maurice de Quirin^ RdiquicBy 
containing the Centaur, several poems of Gu^rin, his 
journals, and a number of his letters, collected and 
edited by a devoted friend, M. Trebutien, and pre- 
ceded by a notice of Gu6rin by the first of living 
critics, M. Sainte-Beuve. 

The grand power of poetry is its interpretative 
power ; by which I mean, not a power of drawing out 
in black and white an explanation of the mystery of 
the universe, but the power of so dealing with things 
as to awaken in us a wonderfully full, new, and inti- 
mate sense of them, and of our relations with them. 
When this sense is awakened in us, as to objects with- 
out us, we feel ourselves to be in contact with the 
essential nature of those objects, to be no longer be- 
wildered and oppressed by them, but to have their 
secret, and to be in harmony with them; and this 
feeling calms and satisfies us as no other can. Poetry, 
indeed, interprets in another way besides this ; but 
one of its two ways of interpreting, of exercising its 
highest power, is by awakening this sense in us. I 
will not now inquire whether this sense is illusive, 
whether it can be proved not to be illusive, whether 
it does absolutely make us possess the real nature of 
things ; all I say is, that poetry can awaken it in us, 
and that to awaken it is one of the highest powers ol 

VOL. t Q 



82 ESSAYS m CBinCISM. [IIL 

poetry. The interpretations of science do not give 

us this intimate sense of objects as the interpretations 

of poetry give it ; they appeal to a limited faculty, 

and not to the whole man. It is not Linnaeus or 

Cavendish or Cuvier who gives us the true sense of 

animals, or water, or plants, who seizes their secret 

for us, who makes us participate in their life ; it is 

Shakspeare, with his 

"daffodils 
That come before the swallow dares, and take 
The winds of March with beauty ; " 

it is Wordsworth, with his 

"voice .... heard 
In spring-time from the cuckoo-bird, 
Breaking the silence of the seas 
Among the farthest Hebrides ; " 

it is Keats, with his 

" moving waters at their priestlike task 
Of cold ablution round Earth's human shores ; ** 

it is Chateaubriand, with his, " dime indSterminSe des 
forSts ; " it is Senancour, with his mountain birch-tree : 
" Cette dcorce blanche, lisse et crevassie ; cetU tige agreste ; 
ees branches qui s'indinent vers la terre ; la mobUiU des 
feuiUes, el tout cet abandon^ simplicitd de la nature^ aitUude 
des deserts." 

Eminent manifestations of this magical power of 
poetry are very rare and very precious : the composi- 
tions of Gu6rin manifest it^ I think, in singular emi- 
nenca Not his poems, strictly so called, — ^his verse, 
— so much as his prose ; his poems in general take 
(pr their vehicle that favourite metre of French poetry, 



ni.] MAIJBICE DE GU^BIK. 83 

the Alexandrine; and, in my judgment, I confess 
they have thus, as compared with his prose, a great 
disadvantage to start witL In prose, the character 
of the vehicle for the composer's thoughts is not de- 
termined beforehand; every composer has to make 
his own vehicle ; and who has ever done this more 
admirably than the great prose-writers of France, — 
Pascal, Bossuet, F6nelon, Voltaire 1 But in verse the 
composer has (with comparatively narrow liberty of 
modification) to accept his vehicle ready-made ; it is 
therefore of vital importance to him that he should 
find at his disposal a vehicle adequate to convey the 
highest matters of poetry. We may even get a deci- 
sive test of the poetical power of a. language and 
nation by ascertaining how far the principal poetical 
vehicle which they have employed, how far (in plainer 
words) the established national metre for high poetry. 
Is adequate or inadequate. It seems to me that the 
established metre of this kind in France, — ^the Alex- 
andrine, — is inadequate; that as a vehicle for high 
poetry it is greatly inferior to the hexameter or to 
the iambics of Greece (for example), or to the blank 
verse of England. Therefore the man of genius who 
uses it is at a disadvantage as compared with the man 
of genius who has for convepng his thoughts a more 
adequate vehicle, metrical or not Bacine is at a dis- 
advantage as compared with Sophocles or Shakspeare, 
and he is likewise at a disadvantage as compared with 
Bossuet 

The same may be said of our own poets of the 
eighteenth century, a century which gave them as the 



84 BSSATS IN CRITICISM. [ill. 

main vehicle for their high poetry a metre inadequate 
(as much as the French Alexandrine, and nearly in 
tihe same way) for this poetry, — the ten -syllable 
couplet It is worih. remarking, that the English 
poet of the eighteenth century whose compositions 
wear best and give one the most entire satisfaction, 
— Gray, — hardly uses that couplet at all : this absti- 
nence, however, limits Gray's productions to a few 
short compositions, and (exquisite as these are) he is 
a poetical nature repressed and without free issue. 
For English poetical production on a great scale, for 
an English poet deplopng all the forces of his genius, 
the ten-syllable couplet was, in the eighteenth century, 
the established, one may almost say the inevitable, 
channel. Now this couplet, admirable (as Chaucer 
uses it) for story-telling not of the epic pitch, and 
often admirable for a few lines even in poetry of a 
very high pitch, is for continuous use in poetry of this 
latter kind inadequate. Pope, in his Essay on Man^ 
is thus at a disadvantage compared with Lucretius in 
his poem on Nature : Lucretius has an adequate 
vehicle. Pope has not Nay, though Pope's genius 
for didactic poetry was not less than that of Horace, 
while his satirical power was certainly greater, still 
one's taste receives, I cannot but think, a certain 
satisfaction when one reads the Epistles and Satires 
of Horace, which it fails to receive when one reads 
tihe Satires and Epistles of Pope. Of such avail is 
the superior adequacy of the vehicle used to compen> 
sate even an inferiority of genius in the user ! In the 
$ame way Pope is at a disadvantage as compared with 



Ul.] MAURICE DE GUJ^RIN. 85 

Addison. The best of Addison's composition (the 
"Coverley Papers " in the Spectator, for instance) wears 
better than the best of Pope's, because Addison has 
in his prose an intrinsically better vehicle for his 
genius than Pope in his couplet But Bacon has no 
such advantage over Shakspeare; nor has Milton, 
writing prose (for no contemporary English prose^ 
writer must be matched with Milton except Milton 
himself), any such advantage over Milton writing 
verse: indeed, the advantage here is all the other 
way. 

It is in the prose remains of Ou^rin, — his jour- 
nals, his letters, and the striking composition which 
I have already mentioned, the Centaur, — that his 
extraordinary gift manifests itself. He has a truly 
interpretative faculty ; the most profound and delicate 
sense of the life of Nature, and the most exquisite 
felicity in finding expressions to render that sense. 
To all who love poetry, Gu6rin deserves to be some- 
thing more than a name ; and I shall try, in spite of 
the impossibility of doing justice to such a master of 
expression by translations, to make English readers 
see for themselves how gifted an organisation his was, 
and how few artists have received from Nature 4i more 
magical faculty of interpreting her. 

In the winter of the year 1832 there was collected 
in Brittany, around the well-known Abb^ Lamennais, 
a singular gathering. At a lonely place, La Ghdnaie, 
he had founded a religious retreat, to which dis- 
ciples, attracted by his powers or by his reputation. 



86 ESSAYS m CRinOISM. [in. 

repaired. Some came with the intention of preparing 
themselves for the ecclesiastical profession; others 
merely to profit by the society and discourse of so 
distinguished a master. Among the inmates were 
men whose names have since become known to all 
Europe, — ^Lacordaire and M. de Montalembert ; there 
were others, who have acquired a reputation, not 
European, indeed, but considerable, — the Abb6 G^r- 
bet, the Abb6 Eohrbacher; others, who have never 
quitted the shade of private life. The winter of 
1832 was a period of crisis in the religious world of 
France : Lamennais's rupture with Eome, the con- 
demnation of his opinions by the Pope, and his revolt 
against that condemnation, were imminent. Some of 
bis followers, like Lacordaire, had already resolved 
not to cross the Subicon with their leader, not to go 
into rebellion against Eome ; they were preparing to 
separate from him. The society of La Ch^naie was 
soon to dissolve ; but, such as it is shown to us for a 
moment, with its voluntary character, its simple and 
severe life in common, its mixture of lay and cleric^ 
members, the genius of its chiefs, the sincerity of its 
disciples, — ^above all, its paramount fervent interest 
in matters of spiritual and religious concernment, — 
it offers a most instructive spectacle. It is not the 
spectacle we most of us think to find in France, the 
France we have imagined from common English 
notions, from the streets of Paris, from novels; it 
shows us how, wherever there is greatness like that 
of France, there are, as its foundation, treasures of 
fervour, pure-mindedness, and spirituality somewhere, 



HI.] HAUBIGE DE GXJ^RIK. 87 

whether we know of them or not ; — a store of that 
which Goethe calls HaU ; — since greatness can never 
be founded upon frivolity and corruption. 

On the evening of the 18th of December in this 
year 1832, M. de Lamennais was talking to those 
assembled in the sitting-room of La Chtoaie of his 
recent journey to Italy, de talked with all his usual 
animation; " but," writes one of his hearers, a Breton 
gentleman, M. de Marzan, " I soon became inattentive 
and absent, being struck with the reserved attitude 
of a young stranger some twenty-two years old, pale 
in face, his black hair already thin over his temples, 
wit^ a southern eye, in which brightness and melan^ 
choly were mingled. He kept himself somewhat aloof, 
seeming to avoid notice rather than to court it. All 
the old faces of friends which I found about me at 
this my re-entry into the circle of La Ch^naie failed 
to occupy me so much as t^e sight of this stranger, 
looking on, listening, observing, and saying nothing." 

The unknown was Maurice de Gu6rin. Of a noble 
but poor family, having lost his mother at six years 
old, he had been brought up by his father, a man 
saddened by his wife's death, and austerely religious, 
at the ch&teau of Le Cayla, in Languedoc. His child- 
hood was not gay ; he had not the society of other 
boys ; and solitude, the sight of his father's gloom, 
and the habit of accompanying the cur6 of the parish 
on his rounds among the sick and dying, made him 
prematurely grave and familiar with sorrow. He 
went to school first at Toulouse, then at the College 
Stanislas at Paris, with a temperament almost as unfit 



.<. - 



-^v^.. 



88 ESSATS IN CBinCISM. [in 

as Shelley's for common school life. His youth was 
ardent, sensitive, agitated, and unhappy. In 1832 
he procured admission to La Chdnaie to brace his 
spirit by the teaching of Lamennais, and to decide 
whether his religious feelings would determine them- 
selves into a distinct religious vocation. Strong and 
deep religious feelings he had, implanted in him by 
nature, developed in him by ihe circumstances of his 
childhood ; but he had also (and here is the key to 
his character) that temperament which opposes itself 
to the fixedness of a religious vocation, or to any 
vocation of which fixedness is an essential attribute ; 
a temperament mobile, inconstant, eager, thirsting for 
new impressions, abhorring rules, aspiring to a 
" renovation without end ; " a temperament common 
enough among artists, but with which few artists, 
who have it to the same degree as Gu^rin, unite a 
seriousness and a sad intensity like his. After leav- 
ing school, and before going to La Ch^naie, he had 
been at home at Le Cayla %vith his sister Eugenie (a 
wonderfully gifted person, whose genius so competent 
a judge as M. Sainte-Beuve is inclined to pronounce 
even superior to her brother's) and his sister Eugenie's 
friends. With one of these friends he had fallen in 
love, — ^a slight and transient fancy, but which had 
already called his poetical powers into exercise ; and 
his poems and fragments, in a certain green note-book 
(le Cahier Vert) which he long continued to make the 
depository of his thoughts, and which became famous 
among his friends, he brought with him to La ChSnaie. 
There he found among the younger members of the 



ni.] MAUBICE DE GU]£RIN. 89 

Society several who, like himself, had a secret passion 
for poetry and literature ; with these he became inti- 
mate, and in his letters and journal we find him occu- 
pied, now with a literary commerce established with 
thJ. friends, now wiZhe fortunes, f a^ conung to 
a crisis, of the Society, and now with that for the 
sake of which he came to La ChSnaie, — his religious 
progress and the state of his souL 

On Christmas-day, 1832, having been then three 
weeks at La Ch§naie, he writes thus of it to a friend 
of his family, M. de Bayne : — 

" La Cb^naie is a sort of oasis in the midst of the 
steppes of Brittany. In front of the chateau stretches 
a very large garden cut in two by a terrace with a 
lime avenue, at the end of which is a tiny chapeL I 
am extremely fond of this little oratory, where one 
breathes a twofold peace, — the peace of solitude and 
the peace of the Lord. When spring comes we shall 
walk to prayers between two borders of flowers. On 
the east side, and only a few yards from the ch&teau, 
sleeps a small mere between two woods, where the 
birds in warm weather sing all day long ; and then, 
— right, left, on all sides, — woods, woods, everywhere 
woods. It looks desolate just now that all is bare 
and the woods are rust-colour, and under this Brittany 
sky, which is always clouded and so low that it seems 
as if it were going to fall on your head ; but as soon as 
spring comes the sky raises itself up, the woods come 
to life again, and everything will be full of chann." 

Of what La Chenaie will be when spring; comes he 
has a foretaste on the 3d of MarcL 



90 ESSAT8 m GRITIGISM. [ni. 

" To-day " (he writes in his journal) ^* has enchanted 
me. For the first time for a long while the sun has 
shown himself in all his heauty. He has made the 
buds of the leaves and flowers swell, and he has waked 
up in me a thousand happy thoughts. The clouds 
assume more and more their light and graceful shapes, 
and are sketching, over the blue sky, the most charm- 
ing fancies. The woods have not yet got their leaves, 
but they are taking an indescribable air of life and 
gaiety, which gives them quite a new physiognomy. 
Everything is getting ready for the great festival of 
Natura" 

Storm and snow adjourn this festival a little longer. 
On the 11th of March he writes : — 

" It has snowed all night. I have been to look at 
our primroses; each of them has its small load of 
snow, and was bowing its head under its burdea 
These pretty flowers, with their rich yellow colour, 
had a charming effect under their white hoods. I saw 
whole tufts of them roofed over by a single block 
of snow; all these laughing flowers thus shrouded and 
leaning one upon another, made one think of a group 
of young girls surprised by a shower, and sheltering 
under a white apron." 

The burst of spring comes at last, though late. 
On the 6th of April we find 6u6rin " sitting in the 
sun to penetrate himself to the very marrow with the 
divine spring." On the 3d of May, " one can actually 
see the progress of the green; it has made a start 
from the garden to the shrubberies, it is getting the 
upper hand all along the mere; it leaps, one may say, 



III.] MAUBIGE DE 6U£rIN. 91 

from tree to tree, from thicket to thicket, in the fields 
and on the hill-sides ; and I can see it already arrived 
at the forest edge and beginning to spread itself over 
the broad back of the forest. Soon it will have over- 
ran everything as far as the eye can reach, and all 
those wide spaces between here and the horizon will 
be moving and sounding like one vast sea, a sea of 
emerald." 

Finally, on the IQih of May, he writes to M. de 
B&jhq that '' the gloomy and bad days, — ^bad because 
they bring temptation by their gloom, — are, thanks 
to Grod and the spring, over ; and I see approaching a 
long file of shining and happy days, to do me all the 
good in the world. This Brittany of ours," he con- 
tinues, " gives one the idea of the grayest and most 
wrinkled old woman possible suddenly changed back 
by the touch of a f air3r's wand into a girl of twenty, 
and one of the loveliest in the world ; the fine weather 
has so decked and beautified the dear old country." 
He felt, however, the cloudiness and cold of the " dear 
old country " with all ihe sensitiveness of a child of 
the South. " What a diflference," he cries, " between 
the sky of Brittany, even on the finest day, and the 
sky of our South ! Here ihe summer has, even on 
its highdays and holidays, something mournful, over- 
cast, and stinted about it. It is like a miser who is 
making a show; there is a niggardliness in his mag- 
nificence. Give me our Languedoc sky, so bountiful 
of light, so blue, so largely vaulted ! " And somewhat 
later, complaining of the short and dim sunlight of a 
February day in Paris, "What a sunshine," he ex- 



92 BSSATS IN CBinGISM. [m 

claims, *' to gladden eyes accustomed to all the wealth 
of light of the South ! — aux larges dUUrales^ffusumide 
lumihre du del du Midi"* 

In ihe long winter of La Chdnaie his great resooroe 
was literature. One has often heard that an educated 
Frenchman's reading seldom goes much beyond French 
and Latin, and that he makes the authors in these 
two languages his. sole literary standard* This may 
or may not be true of Frenchmen in general, but 
there can be no question as to the widt^ of tlie reading 
of 6u6rin and his friends, and as to the range of their 
literary sympathies. One of the circle, Hippolyte la 
Morvonnais, — a poet who published a volume of verse, 
and died in the prime of life, — ^had a passionate ad- 
miration for Wordsworth, and had even, it is said, 
made a pilgrimage to Bydal Mount to visit him ; and 
in Gu^rin's own reading I find, besides the French 
names of Bemardin de St. Pierre, Chateaubriand, 
Lamartine, and Victor Hugo, the names of Homer, 
Dante, Shakspeare, Milton, and Goethe; and he 
quotes both from Greek and from English authors in 
the original His literary tact is beautifully fine and 
true. *' Every poet," he writes to his sister, " has his 
own art of poetry written on the ground of his own 
soul; there is no otlier. Be constantly observing 
Nature in her smallest details, and then write as the 
current of your tlioughts guides you ; — ^that is alL" 
But with all this freedom from the bondage of forms 
and rules, Gu^rin marks witli perfect precision the 
faults of ihefiree French literature of his time, — ^the 
iUteratwre facile, — ^and judges the romantic school and 




in.] MAURICE DE GU^RIK. 93 

its prospects like a master : " that youthful literature 
which has put forth all its blossom prematurely, and 
has left itself a helpless prey to the returning frost, 
stimulated as it has been by the burning sun of our 
century, by this atmosphere charged with a perilous 
heat, which has over-hastened every sort of develop- 
ment, and will most likely reduce to a handful of 
grains the harvest of our age/' And the popular 
authors, — those " whose name appears once and dis- 
appears for ever, whose books, unwelcome to all 
serious people, welcome to the rest of the world, to 
novelty-hunters and novel-readers, fill with vanity 
these vain souls, and then, falling from hands heavy 
with the languor of satiety, drop for ever into the gulf 
of oblivion;" and those, more noteworthy, "the writers 
of books celebrated, and, as works of art, deserving 
celebrity, but which have in them not one grain of 
that hidden manna, not one of those sweet and whole- 
some thoughts which nourish the human soul and 
refresh it when it is weary," — these he treats with 
such severity that he may in some sense be (described, 
as he describes himself, as " invoking with his whole 
heart a classical restoration." He is best described, 
however, not as a partisan of any school, but as an 
ardent seeker for that mode of expression which is 
the most natural, happy, and true. He writes to his 
sister Eugenie : — 

" I want you to reform your system of composition ; 
it is too loose, too vague, too Lamartinian. Your 
verse is too sing-song ; it does not talk enough. Form 
for yourself a style of your own, which shall be your 



94 ESSAYS IK GBITICISM [m. 

real expression. Study the French language by 
attentive reading, making it your care to remark 
constructions, turns of expression, delicacies of style, 
but without ever adopting the manner of any master. 
In the works of these masters we must learn our lan- 
guage, but we must use it each in our own fashion.'' ^ 

It was not, however, to perfect his literary judg- 
ment that Gu^rin came to La Ch^naie. The religious 
feeling, which was as much a part of his essence as 
the passion for Nature and the literary instinct, shows 
itself at moments jealous of these its rivals, and 
alarmed at their predominance. Like all powerful 
feelings, it wants to exclude every other feeling and 
to be absolute. One Friday in April, after he has 
been delighting himself with the shapes of the clouds 
and the progress of the spring, he suddenly bethinks 
himself that the day is Good Friday, and exclaims in 
his diary : — 

" My God, what is my soul about that it can thus 
go running after such fugitive delights on Good Friday 
on this day all filled with thy death and our redemp- 
tion 1 There is in me I know not what damnable 
spirit, that awakens in me strong discontents, and is 
for ever prompting me to rebel against the holy exer- 
cises and the devout collectedness of soul which are 
the meet preparation for these great solemnities of 
our faith. Oh how well can I trace here the old 

^ Part of these extracts date from a time a little after Gn^rin'a 
residence at La ChSnaie ; but already, amidst the readings and 
conversations of La ChSnaie, his literary judgment was perfectly 
formed. 



ni.] HAURIGE D£ GUlSRIN. 95 

leaven, from which I have not yet perfectly cleared 
my soul ! " 

And again, in a letter to M. de Marzan : '* Of 
what, my God, are we made," he cries, " that a little 
verdure and a few trees should be enough to rob us 
of our tranquillity and to distract us from thy love V 
And writing, three days after Easter Sunday, in his 
journal, he records the reception at La Ch^naie of a 
fervent neophyte, in words which seem to convey a 
covert blame of his own want of fervency : — 

" Three days have passed over our heads since the 
great festival One anniversary the less for us yet to 
spend of the death and resurrection of our Saviour ! 
Every year thus bears away with it its solemn festi- 
vals ; when will the everlasting festival be here ? I 
have been witness of a most touching sight ; Fran9ois 
has brought us one of his friends whom he has gained 
to the faith. This neophyte joined us in our exercises 
during the Holy week, and on Easter day he received 
the communion with us. rran9ois was in raptures. 
It is a truly good work which he has thus done. 
Fran9ois is quite young, hardly twenty years old ; M. 
de la M. is thirty, and is married. There is some- 
thing most touching and beautifully simple in M. de 
la M. letting himself thus be brought to God by quite 
a young man; and to see friendship, on Fran9ois'8 
side, thus doing the work of an Apostlel, is not less 
beautiful and touching." 

Adndration for Lamennais worked in the same 
direction with this feeling. Lamennais never appre- 
ciated Gu^rin } his combative, rigid, despotic aature, 



/ 



96 ESSAYS IN CBinCISlI. IDI 

of which the characteristic was energy, had no aflSnitj 
with Gu^rin's ehisiye, undulating, impalpable nature, 
of which the characteristic was delicacy. He set little 
store by his new disciple, and could hardly bring 
himseU to understand what others found so remark- 
able in him, his own genuine feeling towards him 
being one of indulgent compassion. But the intui- 
tion of Gu^rin, more discerning than the logic of his 
master, instinctiyely felt what there was commanding 
and tragic in Lamennais's character, different as this 
was from his own ; and some of his notes are among 
the most interesting records of Lamennais which 
remain. 

'''Do you know what it is^' M. F^^ said to us 
on the evening of the day before yesterday, ' which 
makes man the most suffering of all creatures 1 It is 
that he has one foot in the finite and the other in t^e 
infinite, and that he is torn asunder, not by four 
horses, as in the horrible old tunes, but between two 
worlds.' Again he said to us as we heard the clock 
strike : ' If that clock knew that it was to be destroyed 
the next instant, it would still keep striking its hour 
until that instant arrived. My children, be as the 
clock; whatever may be going to happen to you, 
strike ^ways your hour."' 

Anotlier thne Gu^rin writes : 

"To-day M. F^li startled us. He was sitting behind 
the chapel, under the two Scotch firs; he took his 
stick and marked out a grave on the turf, and said to 

' The familiar name given to M. de Lamennais by his foL« 
lowers at La ChSnaie. 



ni.J MAURICE D£ GUfiKIN. 97 

Elie, * It is there I wish to be buried, but no tomb- 
stone ! only a simple hillock of grass. Oh, how well 
I shall be there !' Elie thought he had a presentiment 
that his end was near. This is not the first time he 
haa been visited by such a presentiment ; when he 
was setting out for Some, he said to those here : * I 
do not expect ever to come back to you; you must 
do the good which I have failed to do.' He is im- 
patient for death." 

Overpowered by the ascendency of Lamennais, 
Gu^rin, in spite of his hesitations, in spite of his 
confession to himself that, " after a three weeks' close 
scrutiny of his soul, in the hope of finding the pearl 
of a religious vocation hidden in some comer of it," 
he had failed to find what he sought, took, at the end 
of August 1833, a decisive step. He joined the re- 
ligious order which Lamennais had founded. But at 
this very moment the deepening displeasure of Eome 
with Lamennais determined the Bishop of Eennes to 
break up, in so far as it was a religious congregation, 
the Society of La Gh^naie, to transfer the novices to 
Ploermel, and to place them under other superintend- 
ence. In September, Lamennais, " who had not yet 
ceased," writes M. de Marzan, a fervent Catholic, " to 
be a Christian and a priest, took leave of his beloved 
colony of La Ch^naie, with the anguish of a general 
who disbands his army down to the last recruit, and 
withdraws annihilated from the field of battle. " Gu6rin 
went to PloermeL But here, in the seclusion of a real 
religious house, he instantly perceived how alien to a 
spirit like his, — a spirit . which, as he himself says 

VOL. h H 



/ 



98 E8SATS IK GRITIGISM. liii. 

somewhere, " had need of the open air, wanted to see 
the sun and the flowers," — ^was the constraint and 
monotony of a monastic life, when Lamennais's genius 
was no longer present to enliven this life for him. 
On the 7th of October he renounced the novitiate, 
believing himself a partisan of Lamennais in his 
quarrel with Eome, reproaching the life he had left 
with demanding passive obedience instead of trying 
'^ to put in practice the admirable alliance of order 
with liberty, and of variety with unity," and declaring 
that, for his part, he preferred taking the chances of 
a life of adventure to submitting himself to be ^^garotU 
pa/r un riglementy — tied hand and foot by a set of rules." 
In real truth, a life of adventure, or rather a life free 
to wander at its own will, was that to which his nature 
irresistibly impelled him. 

For a career of adventure, the inevitable field was 
Paris. But before this career began, there came a 
stage, the smoothest, perhaps, and the most happy in 
the short life of Gu^rin. M. la Morvonnais, one of 
his La Ch^naie friends, — some years older than Gu6rin, 
and married to a wife of singular sweetness and charm, 
— had a house by the seaside at the mouth of one of 
the beautiful rivers of Brittany, the Arguenon. He 
asked Gu^rin, when he left Ploermel, to come and 
stay with him at this place, called Le Val de TArgue- 
non, and Gu6rin spent the winter of 1833-4 there. I 
grudge every word about Le Val and its inmates 
which is not Gu6rin's own, so charming is the picture 
he draws of them, so truly does his talent find itself 
in its best vein as be draws it 



ni.I MAURIOE DE GUfiRIN. 99 

" How full of goodness " (he writes in his journal 
of the 7th of December) " is Providence to me ! For 
fear the sudden passage from the mild and temperate 
air of a religious life to the torrid clime of the world 
should be too trying for my soul, it has conducted me, 
after I have left my sacred shelter, to a house planted 
on the frontier between the two regions, where, with- 
out being in solitude, one is not yet in the world ; a 
house whose windows look on the one side towards 
the plain where the tumult of men is rocking, on the 
other towards the wilderness where the servants of 
God are chanting. I intend to write down the record 
of my sojourn here, for the days here spent are full 
of happiness, and I know that in the time to come I 
shall often turn back to the story of these past felicities. 
A man, pious, and a poet ; a woman, whose spirit is 
in such perfect sympathy with his that you would say 
they had but one being between them ; a child, called 
Marie like her mother, and who sends, like a star, the 
first rays of her love and thought through the white 
cloud of infancy; a simple life in an old-fashioned 
house ; the ocean, which comes morning and evening 
to bring us its harmonies ; and lastly, a wanderer who 
descends from Carmel and is going on to Babylon, 
and who has laid down at this threshold his staff and 
his sandals, to take his seat at the hospitable table ; — 
here is matter to make a biblical poem of, if I could 
only describe things as I can feel them ! " 

Every line written by Gu6rin during this stay at 
Le Yal is worth quoting, but I have only room for 
one extract more : — 



100 B88ATB a CRinCISlI. [m. 

" Never " (he writes, a fortnight later, on the 20th 
of Decemher), "neyer have I tasted so inwardly and 
deeply the happiness of home-life. AH the little 
details of this life, which in their saccession make up 
the day, are to me so many stages of a ccmtinnoos 
charm carried from one end of the day to the other. 
The morning greeting which in some sort renews the 
pleasure of the first arriyal, for the words with which 
one meets are almost the same, and the separation at 
night, throogh the hours of darkness and uncertainty, 
does not iU represent longer separations ; then break- 
fast, during which yon have the fresh enjoyment of 
having met together again; the stroll afterwards^ 
when we go out and bid Nature good-m<»ii]ng ; the 
return and setting to work in an old panelled chamber 
looking out on the sea, inaocessible to all the stir of 
the houses, a perfect sanctuary ol labour; dinno*, to 
which we are called, not by a bell, which reminds one 
too much of school or a great house, but by a pleasant 
voice; the gaiety, the merriment, the talk fiitting 
from one subject to another and nev^ drop|Hng so 
long as the meal lasts; the crackling fire of dry 
branches to which we draw our diairs directly after- 
wards, the kind words that are spokai round the 
warm fiame which sings while we talk ; and then, if 
it is fine, the walk by the seaskle, whoi the sea has 
for its visitors a mother with her child in her arms, 
this diilds father and a stranzer, each of these two 
last with a stick in his hand ; the rosy Hps ol the 
little girl, which keep talking at the same time with 
the wavea^ — bow and then tears shed by hsr and 



UI.] AfAUBIOB DE OU^RIN. 101 

of chfldish flight at the edge of the sea ; our thoughts, 
the father's and mine, as we stand and look at the 
mother and child smiling at one another, or at the 
child in tears and the mother trying to comfort it by 
her caresses and exhortations; the Ocean, going on 
all the while rolling up his waves and noises; the 
dead boughs which we go and cut, here and there, 
out of the copse-wood, to make a quick and bright 
fire when we get home, — ^this little taste of the wood- 
man's calling which brings us closer to Nature and 
makes us think of M. F^li's eager fondness for the 
same work; the hours of study and poetical flow 
which carry us to supper-time; this meal, which 
summons us by the same gentle voice as its pre- 
decessor, and which is passed amid the same joys^ 
only less loud, because evening sobers ever3rthing, 
tones everything down ; then our evening, ushered in 
by the blaze of a cheerful fire, and which with its 
alternations of reading and talking brings us at last 
to bed-time : — ^to all the charms of a day so spent add 
the dreams which f oUow it, and your imagination will 
still fall far short of these home-joys in their delight- 
ful reality." 

I said the foregoing should be my last extract, but 
who could resist this picture of a January evening on 
the coast of Brittany ? — 

"All the sky is covered over with gray clouds just 
silvered at the edges. The sun, who departed a few 
minutes ago, has left behind him enough light to 
temper for awhile the black shadows, and to soften 
down, as it were, the approach of night The windi 



102 ESSAYS m CBinCISM. 

are hushed, and the tranquil ocean sends up to me, 
when I go out on the doorstep to listen, only a melo- 
dious murmur, which dies away in the soul like a 
beautiful wave on the beach. The birds, the first to 
obey the nocturnal influence, make their way to- 
wards the woods, and you hear the rustle of their 
wings in the clouds. The copses which cover the 
whole hill-side of Le Yal, which all the day-time are 
alive with the chirp of the wren, the laughing whistle 
of the woodpecker,^ and the different notes of a 
multitude of birds, have no longer any sound in their 
paths and thickets, unless it be the prolonged high 
call of the blackbirds at play with one another and 
chasing one another, after all the other birds have 
their heads safe under their wings. The noise o! 
man, always the last to be silent, dies gradually out 
over the face of the fields. The general murmur 
fades away, and one hears hardly a sound except 
what comes from the villages and hamlets, in which, 
up till far into the night, there are cries of children 
and barking of dogs. Silence wraps me round: 
everything seeks repose except this pen of mine, 
which perhaps disturbs the rest of some living atom 
asleep in a crease of my note-book, for it makes its 
light scratching as it puts down these idle thoughts. 
Let it stop, then ! for all I write, have written, or 
shall write, will never be worth setting against the 
sleep of an atom." 

On the 1st of February we find him in a lodging 

^ ''The woodpecker laughs" sa]^ White of Selbome ; and 
here is Gudrin, in Brittany, confirming his testimony. 



m.] SiAURICE DE GU^RIN. 103 

at Paris. "I enter the world" (such are the last 
words written in his journal at Le Val) "with a 
secret horror." His outward history for the next 
five years is soon told. He found himself in Paris, 
poor, fastidious, and with health which already, no 
doubt, felt the obscure presence of the malady of 
which he died — consumption. One of his Brittany 
acquaintances introduced him to editors, tried to 
engage him in the periodical literature of Paris ; and 
so unmistakable was Gu^rin's talent that even his 
first essays were immediately accepted. But 6u6rin*s 
genius was of a kind which unfitted him to get his 
bread in this manner. At first he was pleased with 
the notion of living by his pen ; "y« iCai qiib, icrire,* 
he says to his sister, — " I have only got to write." 
But to a nature like his, endued with the passion for 
perfection, the necessity to produce, to produce con- 
stantly, to produce whether in the vein or out of the 
vein, to produce something good or bad or middling, 
as it may happen, but at all events somethvng, — ^is the 
most intolerable of tortures. To escape from it he 
betook himself to that common but most perfidious 
refuge of men of letters, that refuge to which Gold- 
smith and poor Hartley Coleridge had betaken them- 
selves before him, — ^the profession of teaching. In 
September 1834 he procured an engagement at the 
College Stanislas, where he had himself been educated. 
It was vacation-time, and all he had to do was to 
teach a small class composed of boys who did not go 
home for the holidays, — in his own words, " scholars 
left like sick sheep in the fold, while the rest of the 



104 ESSATS IN OBITICISM. [in. 

flock are frisking in the fields." After the yacadon 
he was kept on at the college as a supernumerary. 
" The master of the fifth class has asked for a month's 
leave of absence ; I am taking his place, and by this 
work I get one hundred francs (£4). I have been 
looking about for pupils to give private lessons to, 
and I have found three or four. Schoolwork and 
private lessons together fill my day from half-past 
seven in the morning till half-past nine at night 
The college dinner serves me for breakfast, and I go 
and dine in the evening at twenty-four sous, as a 
young man beginning life should." To better his 
position in the hierarchy of public teachers it was 
necessary that he should take the degree of agrig4 hs- 
UHreSj corresponding to our degree of Master of Arts ; 
and to his heavy work in teaching, there was thus 
added that of preparing for a severe examination. 
The drudgery of this life was very irksome to him, 
although less insupportable than the drudgery of the 
profession of letters ; inasmuch as to a sensitive man 
like Gu6rin, to silence his genius is more tolerable 
than to hackney it Still the yoke wore him deeply, 
and he had moments of bitter revolt ; he continued, 
however, to bear it with resolution, and on the whole 
with patience, for four years. On the 15th of Novem- 
ber 1838 he married a young Creole lady of some 
fortune. Mademoiselle Caroline de Gervain, " whom," 
to use his own words, "Destiny, who loves these 
surprises, has wafted from the farthest Indies into 
my arms." The marriage was happy, and it ensured 
to Gu6rin liberty and leisure ; but now " the bb'nd 



ni.] 1LA.UBICE DE OU^RIN. 105 

Fury with the abhorred shears " was hard at hand. 
Consumption declared itself in him: "I pass my life/' 
he writes, with his old playfulness and calm, to his 
sister on the 8th of April 1839, "within my bed- 
curtains, and wait patiently enough, thanks to Garo's^ 
goodness, books, and dreams, for the recovery which 
the sunshine is to bring with it" In search of this 
sunshine he was taken to his native coimtry, Langue- 
doc, but in vain. He died at Le Cayla on the 19th 
of July 1839. 

The vicissitudes of his inward life during these 
five years were more considerable. His opinions and 
tastes imderwent great, or what seem to be great, 
changes. He came to Paris the ardent partisan of 
Lamennais: even in April 1834, after Eome had 
finally condemned Lamennais, — " To-night there will 
go forth from Paris," he writes, " with his face set to 
the west, a man whose every step I would fain follow, 
and who returns to the desert for which I sigh. M. 
F6li departs this evening for La Ch^naie." But in 
October 1835, — "I assure you," he writes to his 
sister, " I am at last weaned from M. de Lamennais ; 
one does not remain a babe and suckling for ever ; I 
am perfectly freed from his influence." There was a 
greater change than this. In 1834 the main cause of 
6u6rin's aversion to the literature of the French 
romantic school, was that this literature, having had 
a religious origin, had ceased to be religious : " it has 
forgotten," he says, '' the house and the admonitions 
ol its Father." But his friend M. de Marzan tells us 

^ His wif#c 



106 BSSAYS IN CRITICISM. [iiL 

of a "deplorable revolution" which, by 1836, had 
taken place in him. Gu^rin had become intimate 
with the chiefs of this very literature ; he no longer 
went to church ; " the bond of a common faith, in 
which our friendship had its birth, existed between 
us no longer." Then, again, " this interregnum was 
not destined to last" Beconverted to his old faith 
by suffering and by the pious efforts of his sister 
Eugenie, Gu^rin died a Catholic. His feelings about 
society underwent a like change. After '^ entering 
the world with a secret horror," after congratulating 
himself when he had been some months at Paris on 
being " disengaged from the social tumult, out of the 
reach of those blows which, when I live in the thick 
of the world, bruise me, irritate jne, or utterly crush 
me," M. Sainte-Beuve tells us of him, two years after- 
wards, appearing in society "a man of the world, 
elegant, even fashionable; a talker who could hold 
his own against the most brilliant talkers of Paris." 

In few natures, however, is there really such 
essential consistency as in Gu^rin's. He says of him- 
self, in the very beginning of his journal : " I owe 
everj^thing to poetry, for there is no other name to 
give to the sum total of my thoughts ; I owe to it 
whatever I now have pure, lofty, and solid in my 
soul ; I owe to it all my consolations in the past ; I 
shall probably owe to it my future." Poetry, the 
poetical instinct, was indeed the basis of his nature ; 
but to say so thus absolutely is not quite enough. 
One aspect of poetry fascinated Gii^rin's imagination 
and held it prisoner. Poetry is the interpretress of 



m.] MAURICE DE OU^RIK. 107 

the natural world, and she is the interpretress of the 
inoi*al world ; it was as the interpretress of the natural 
world that she had Gu^rin for her mouthpiece. To 
make magically near and real the life of Nature, and 
man*s life only so far as it is a part of that Nature, 
was his faculty; a faculty of naturalistic, not of 
moral interpretation. This faculty always has for its 
basis a peculiar temperament^ an extraordinary deli- 
cacy of organisation and susceptibility to impressions ; 
in exercising it the poet is in a great degree passive 
(Wordsworth thus speaks of a wise passiveness) ; he 
aspires to be a sort of human ^olian harp, catching 
and rendering every rustle of Nature. To assist at 
the evolution of the whole life of the world is his 
craving, and intimately to feel it all : 

. . . ''the glow, the thrill of life, 
Where, where do these abound < " 

is what he asks: he resists being riveted and held 
stationary by any single impression, but would be 
borne on for ever down an enchanted stream. He 
goes into religion and out of religion, into society 
and out of society, not from the motives which impel 
men in general, but to feel what it is all like ; he is 
thus hardly a moral agent, and, like the passive and 
ineffectual Uranus of Keats's poem, he may say : 

'* I am bnt a voice ; 

My life is but the life of winds and tides ; 
No more than winds and tides can I ayaiL" 

He hovers over the tumult of life, but does not really 
put his hand to it 



I 



108 BS8ATS IK ORinOISM. [in 

No one has expressed the aspirations of this tem- 
perament better than Gu6rin himseli In the last 
year of his life he writes ; — 

"I return, as you see, to my old brooding over 
the world of Nature, that line which my thoughts 
irresistibly take; a sort of passion which gives me 
enthusiasm, tears, bursts of joy, and an eternal food 
for musing; and yet I am neither philosopher nor 
naturalist, nor anything learned whatsoever. There 
is one word which is the God of my imagination, the 
tyrant, I ought rather to say, that fascinates it, lures 
it onward, gives it work to do without ceasing, and 
will finally carry it I know not where; the word 
life," 

And in one place in his journal he says : — 

"My imagination welcomes every dream, every 
impression, without attaching itself to any, and goes 
on for ever seeking something new." 

And again in another :— 

"The longer I live, and the clearer I discern 
between true and false in society, the more does the 
inclination to live, not as a savage or a misanthrope, 
but as a solitary man on the frontiers of society, on 
the outskirts of the world, gain strength and grow in 
me. The birds come and go and make nests around 
our habitations, they are fellow-citizens of our farms 
and hamlets with us; but they take their flight in 
a heaven which is boundless, but the hand of God 
alone gives and measures to them their daily food, 
but they build their nests in the heart of the thick 
bushes, or hang them in the height of the treea. 



m.] MAUBICB DK GUfiBIN. 109 

So would I, too, live, hovering round society, and hav- 
ing always at my back a field of liberty vast as the sky." 

In the same spirit he longed for travel " When 
one is a wanderer/' he writes to his sister, " one feels 
that one fulfils the true condition of humanity.'' And 
the last entry in his journal is, — " The stream of travel 
is full of delight. Oh, who will set me adrift on this 
Nile ! " 

Assuredly it is not in this temperament that the 
active virtues have their rise. On the contrary, this 
temperament, considered in itself alone, indisposes 
for the discharge of them. Something morbid and 
excessive, as manifested m Gu^rin, it undoubtedly 
has. In him, as in Keats, and as in another youth 
of genius, whose name, but the other day imheard of, 
Lord Houghton has so gracefully written in the his- 
tory of English poetry, — ^David Gray, — the tempera- 
ment, the talent itself, is deeply influenced by their 
mysterious malady; the temperament is devouring; 
it uses vital power too hard and too fast, paying the 
penalty in long hours of unutterable exhaustion and 
in premature death. The intensity of Gu^rin's de- 
pression is described to us by Gu^rin himself with 
the same incomparable touch with which he describes 
happier feelings; far oftener than any pleasurable 
sense of his gift he has "the sense profound, near, 
immense, of my misery, of my inward poverty." 
And again: "My inward misery gains upon me; I 
no longer dare look within." And on another day oi 
gloom he does look within, and here is the terrible 
analysis : — 



110 ESSAYS IN CRITICISM. [in. 

''Graying, unquiet, seeing onlj by glimpses, my 
spirit is stricken by all those ills which are the sure 
fruit of a youth doomed never to ripen into manhood 
I grow old and wear myself out in the most futile 
mental strainings, and make no progress. My head 
seems dying, and when the wind blows I fancy I feel 
It, as if I were a tree, blowing through a number of 
withered branches in my top. Study is intolerable 
to me, or rather it is quite out of my power. Mental 
work brings on, not drowsiness, but an irritable and 
nervous disgust which drives me out, I know not 
where, into the streets and public places. The 
Spring, whose delights used to come every year 
stealthily and mysteriously to charm me in my re- 
treaty crushes me this year under a weight of sudden 
hotness. I should be glad of any event which de- 
livered me from the situation in which I am. If I 
were free I would embark for some distant country 
where I could begin life anew." 

Such is this temperament in the frequent hours 
when the sense of its own weakness and isolation 
crushes it to the ground. Certainly it was not for 
6u6rin's happiness, or for Keats's, as men count happi- 
ly ness, to be as they were. Still the very excess and 
predominance of their temperament has given to the 
fruits of their genius a unique brilliancy and flavour. 
I have said that poetry interprets in two ways; it 
interprets by expressing with magical felicity the 
physiognomy and movement of the outward world, 
and it interprets by expressing, with inspired convic- 
tion, the ideas and laws of the inward world of man's 



in.] MAURICE DB GXnfellN. Ill 

moral and spiritual nature. In other words, poetry 
is interpretative both by having natwral magic in it/ 
and by having moral profwndUy, In both ways it 
illuminates man ; it gives him a satisfying sense of 
reality • it reconciles him with himself and the uni- 
verse. Thus -^Eschylus's " Spoo-avrt TraStlv " and his 
" dirqpi,6fwv yeXaa-fw. " are alike interpretativa Shak- 
speare mterprets both when he says, 

** Full many a glorious morning have I seen, 
Flatter the mountain-tops with sovran eye ; *' 

and when he says, 

^ There's a diyinity that shapes our ends, 
Rough-hew them as we will." 

These great poets unite in themselves the faculty ol 
both kinds of interpretation, the naturalistic and the 
moral But it is observable that in the poets who 
unite both kinds, the latter (the moral) usually ends 
by making itself the master. In Shakspeare the two 
kinds seem wonderfully to balance one another ; but 
even in him the balance leans ; his expression tends 
to become too little sensuous and simple, too much 
intellectualised. The same thing may be yet more 
strongly affirmed of Lucretius and of WordswortL In 
Shelley there is not a balance of the two gifts, nor 
even a co-existence of them, but there is a passionate 
straining after them both, and tliis is what makes 
Shelley, as a man, so interesting : I will not now in- 
quire how much Shelley achieves as a poet, but what- 
ever he achieves, he in general fails to achieve natural 
magic in his expression ; in Mr. Palgrave's charming 



112 ESSAYS IN GRinCISM. [llL 

Treasury may be seen a gallery of his failures.^ But 
in Keats and 6u6rin, in whom the faculty of natural- 
istic interpretation is overpoweringly predominant^ 
the natural miagic is perfect ; when they speak of the 
world they speak like Adam naming by divine in 
spiration the creatures; their expression corresponds 
with the thing's essential reality. Even between 
Keats and Gu^nn, however, there is a distinction to 
be drawn. Keats has, above all, a sense of what is 
pleasurable and open in the life of nature ; for him 
she is the Alma Parens : his expression has, therefore, 
more than Gu^rin's, something genial, outward, and 
sensuous. Gu6rin has, above all, a sense of what there 
is adorable and secret in the life of Nature ; for him 
she is the Moffna Parens; his expression has, there- 
fore, more than Keats's, something mystic, inward^ 
and profound. 

So he lived like a man possessed; with his eye 
not on his own career, not on the public, not on 
fame, but on the Isis whose veil he had uplifted. He 
published nothing: "There is more power and 
beauty," he writes, " in the well-kept secret of one's- 
self and one's thoughts, than in the display of a 

^ Compare, for example, his *' Lines Written in the Euganeao 
Hills," with Eeats's " Ode to Autumn ** {Golden Treasury ^ pp. 
266, 284). The latter piece renders Nature ; the former tries to 
render her. I will not deny, however, that Shelley has natural 
magic in his rhythm; what I deny is, that he has it in his 
language. It always seems to me that the right sphere for 
Shelley's genius was the sphere of music, not of poetry ; the 
medium of sounds he can master, but to master the more diffi- 
cult medium of words he has neither intellectual force enou^i? 
nor sanity enough 



ni.] MAUaiCE D£ OtJ£RIN. 113 

whole heaven that one may have inside one." "My 
spirit^*^ he answers the friends who urge him to write, 
"is of the home-keeping order, and has.no fancy for 
adventure ; literary adventure is above all distasteful 
to it; for this, indeed (let me say so without the 
least self-sufficiency), it has a contempt The literary 
career seems to me unreal, both in its own essence 
and in the rewards which one seeks from it, and 
therefore fatally marred by a secret absurdity." His 
acquaintances, and among them distinguished men of 
letters, full of admiration for the originality and de- 
licacy of his talent, laughed at his self-depreciation, 
warmly assured him of his powers. He received their 
assurances with a mournful incredulity, which con- 
trasts curiously with the self-assertion of poor David 
Gray, whom I just now mentioned. "It seems to 
me intolerable," he writes, " to appear to men other 
than one appears to Grod. My worst torture at this 
moment is the over-estimate which generous friends 
form of me. We are told that at the last judgment 
the secret of all consciences will be laid bare to the 
universe; would that mine were so this day, and 
that every passer-by could see me as I am ! " " High 
above my head," he says at another time, " far, far 
away, I seem to hear the murmur of that world of 
thought and feeling to which I aspire so often, but 
where I can never attain. I think of those of my 
own age who have wings strong enough to reach it, 
but I think of them without jealousy, and as men on 
earth contemplate the elect and their felicity." And, 
criticising his own composition, "When I begin a 

VOL. L I 



114 ESSAYS IN CRITICISM. [m. 

subject, my self-conceit " (says this exquisite artist) 
"imsLgines I am doing wonders; and when I have 
finished, I see nothing but a wretched made-up imita- 
tion, composed of odds and ends of colour stolen from 
other people's palettes, and tastelessly mixed together 
on mine." Such was his passion far perfedim, his 
disdain for all poetical work not perfectly adequate 
and felicitous. The magic of expression, to which by 
the force of this passion he won his way, will make 
the name of Maurice de 6u6rin remembered in litera- 
ture. 

I have already mentioned the Centaur^ a sort of 
prose poem by Gu^rin, which Madame Sand published 
after his deatL The idea of this composition came 
to him, M. Sainte-Beuve says, in. the course of some 
visits which he made with his friend, M. Trebutien, a 
learned antiquarian, to the Museum of Antiquities in 
the Louvre. The free and wild life which the Greeks 
expressed by such creations as the Centaur had, as 
we might well expect, a strong charm for him ; under 
the same inspiration he composed a Baccha/rUe, which 
was meant by him to form part of a prose poem on 
the adventures of Bacchus in India. Seal as was the 
affinity which Gu^rin's nature had for these subjects, 
I doubt whether, in treating them, he would have 
found the full and final employment of his talent 
But the beauty of his Centaur is extraordinary ; in its 
whole conception and expression this piece has in a 
wonderful degree that natural magic of which I have 
said so much, and the rhythm has a charm which 
bewitches even a foreigner. An old Centaur on his 



iil] MAURICE DE GUfiRIN. 115 

mountain is supposed to relate to Melampus, a human 
questioner, the life of his youth. Untranslatable as 
the piece is, I shall conclude with some extracts from 
it:— 

" The Centaur. 

'* I had my birth in the caves of these mountains. 
Like the stream of this valley, whose first drops 
trickle from some weeping rock in a deep cavern, the 
first moment of my life fell in the darkness of a re- 
mote abode, and without breaking the silence. When 
our mothers draw near to the time of their delivery, 
they withdraw to the caverns, and in the depth of 
the loneliest of them, in the thickest of its gloom, 
bring forth, without uttering a plaint, a fruit silent as 
themselves. Their puissant milk makes us surmount, 
without weakness or dubious struggle, the first diffi- 
culties of life; and yet we leave our caverns later 
than you your cradles. The reason is that we have 
a doctrine that the early days of existence should be 
kept apart and enshrouded, as days filled with the 
presence of the gods. Nearly the whole term of my 
growth was passed in the darkness where I was bom. 
The recesses of my dwelling ran so far under the 
mountain that I should not have known on which 
side was the exit, had not the winds, when they 
sometimes made their way through the opening, sent 
fresh airs in, and a sudden trouble. Sometimes, too, 
my mother came back to me, having about her the 
odours of the valleys, or streaming from the waters 
which were her haunt Her returning thus, without 






116 ESS ATS IN OBinGISM. [m. 

a word said of the valleys or the riyera, but with the 
emanations bom them hanging about her, troubled 
my spirit, and I moved up and down restlessly in my 
darkness. • What is it,' I cried, *this outside world 
whither my mother is borne, and what reigns there 
in it so potent a9 to attract her so often ) ' At these 
moments my own force began to make me unquiet. I 
felt in it a power which could not remain idle ; and 
betaking myself either to toss my arms or to gallop 
backwards and forwards in the spacious darkness of 
the cavern, I tried to make out from the blows which 
I dealt in the empty space, or from the transport of 
my course through it, in what direction my arms 
were meant to reach, or my feet to bear me. Since 
that day, I have wound my arms round the bust of 
Centaurs, and round the body of heroes, and round 
the trunk of oaks ; my hands have assayed the rocks, 
the waters, plants without number, and the subtlest 
impressions of the air, — ^for I uplift them in the dark 
and still nights to catch the breaths of wind, and to 
draw signs whereby I may augur my road ; my feet, 
— ^look, Melampus, how worn they are ! And yet, 
all benumbed as I am in this extremity of age, there 
are days when, in broad sunlight, on the mountain-tops, 
I renew these gallopings of my youth in the cavern, 
and with the same object, brandishing my arms and 
employing all the fleetness which yet is left to ma 
• . • • • 

" Melampus, thou who wouldst know the life of 
the Centaurs, wherefore have the gods willed that 
thy steps should lead thee to me, the oldest and moat 






ni.] MAUBIOE DE GU^BIN. 117 

forlorn of them all ) It is long since I have ceased to 
practise any part of their Ufa I quit no more this 
mountain summit, to which age has confined me. 
The point of my arrows now serves me only to uproot 
some tough-fibred plant ; the tranquil lakes know me 
still, but the rivers have forgotten me. I will tell 
thee a little of my youth; but these recollections, 
issuing from a worn memory, come like the drops of 
a niggardly Ubation poured from a damaged urn. 

" The course of my youth was rapid and full of 
agitation. Movement was my life, and my steps 
knew no bound. One day when I was following the 
course of a valley seldom entered by the Centaurs, I 
discovered a man making his way up the stream-side 
on the opposite bank. He was the first whom my 
eyes had lighted on: I despised him. 'Behold,' I 
cried, * at the utmost but the half of what I am ! 
How short are his steps 1 and his movement how full 
of labour ! Doubtless he is a Centaur overthrown by 
the gods, and reduced by them to drag himself along 

thus.' 

• . • • 

" Wandering along at my own will like the rivers, 
feeling wherever I went the presence of Cybele, 
whether in the bed of the valleys, or on the height 
of the mountains, I bounded whither I would, like a 
blind and chainless life. But when Nighty filled with 
the charm of the gods, overtook me on the slopes of 
the mountain, she guided me to the mouth of the 
caverns, and there tranquillised me as she tranquil- 
Uses the biUows of the sea. Stretched across the 



118 SSSATS IN ORinCISlL llU. 

threshold of my retreat, my flanks hidden within the 
cave, and my head under the open sky, I watched 
the spectacle of the dark. The sea-gods, it is said, 
quit during the hours of darkness their palaces under 
the deep ; they seat themselves on the promontories, 
and their eyes wander over the expanse of the waves 
Even so I kept watch, having at my feet an expanse 
of life like the hushed sea. My regards had free 
range, and travelled to the most distant points. Like 
sea-beaches which never lose their wetness, the line of 
mountains to the west retained the imprint of gleams 
not perfectly wiped out by the shadows. In that 
quarter still survived, in pale clearness, mountain- 
summits naked and pure. There I beheld at one 
time the god Pan descend, ever solitary ; at another, 
the choir of the mystic divinities ; or I saw pass some 
mountain n3rmph charm-struck by the night Some- 
times the eagles of Mount Oljrmpus traversed the 
upper sky, and were lost to view among the far-off 
constellations, or in the shade of the dreaming f oresta 
" Thou pursuest after wisdom, Melampus, which 
is the science of the will of the gods ; and thou roam- 
est from people to people like a mortal driven by the 
destinies. In the times when I kept my night-watches 
before the caverns, I have sometimes believed that I 
was about to surprise the thought of the sleeping 
Cybele, and that the mother of the gods, betrayed by 
her dreams, would let fall some of her secrets ; but I 
have never made out more than sounds which faded 
away in the murmur of night, or words inarticulate 
48 the bubbling of the rivers. 



En.] BfAUKICB DB OUSRIN. 119 

" * Macareus,' one day said the great Chiron tG 
me, whose old age I tended ; * we are, both of us, 
Centaurs of the mountain ; but how different are our 
lives 1 Of my days all the study is (thou seest it) the 
search for plants; thou, thou art like those mortals 
who have picked up on the waters or in the woods, 
and carried to their lips, some pieces of the reed-pipe 
thrown away by the god Pan. From that hour these 
mortals, having caught from their relics of the god a 
passion for wild life, or perhaps smitten y^ih some 
secret madness, enter into the wilderness, plunge 
among the forests, follow the course of the streams, 
bury themselves in the heart of the mountains, rest- 
less, and haunted by an unknown purpose. The 
mares beloved of the winds in the farthest Scythia 
are not wilder than thou, nor more cast down at 
nightfall, when the North Wind has departed. Seeb 
est thou to know the gods, Macareus, and from 
what source men, animals, and the elements of the 
universal fire have their origin 1 But the aged Ocean, 
the father of all things, keeps locked within his own 
breast these secrets; and the njrmphs, who stand 
around, sing as they weave their eternal dance before 
him, to cover any sound which might escape from his 
lips half-opened by slumber. The mortals, dear to 
the gods for their virtue, have received from their 
hands lyres to give delight to man, or the seeds of 
new plants to make him rich; but from their in- 
exorable lips, nothing ! ' 

• . • • • 

'* Such were the lessons which the old Chiron gave 



120 ESSAYS IN CRITICLSM. [liL 

ma Waned to the very extremity of life, the Gentaui 
yet nourished in his spirit the most lofty discoursa 
• • • • • 

"For me, Melampus, I decline into my last 
days, calm as the setting of the constellations. I still 
retain enterprise enough to climb to the top of the 
rocks, and there I linger late, either gazing on the 
wild and restless clouds, or to see come up from the 
horizon the rainy Hyades, the Pleiades, or the great 
Orion ; but I feel myself perishing and passing quickly 
away, like a snow-wreath floating on the stream ; and 
soon shall I be mingled with the waters which flow 
in the vast bosom of Earth." 



IV. 



EUGENIE DE GU^KIN. 

Who that had spoken of Maurice de Gu6rin could 
refrain from speaking of his sister Eugenie, the most 
devoted of sisters, one of the rarest and most beautif u] 
of souls) "There is nothing fixed, no duration, no 
vitality in the sentiments of women towards one 
another ; their attachments are mere pretty knots of 
ribbon, and no more. In all the friendships of women 
I observe this slightness of the tie. I know no instance 
to the contrary, even in history. Orestes and Pylades 
have no sisters." So she herself speaks of the friend- 
ships of her own sex. But Electra can attach herself 
to Orestes, if not to Chrysothemis. And to her 
brother Maurice, Eugenie de Gu^rin was Pylades and 
Electra in one. 

The name of Maurice de Gu6rin, — that young man 
so gifted, so attractive, so careless of fame, and so 
early snatched away ; who died at twenty-nine ; who, 
says his sister, " let what he did be lost with a care- 
lessness so unjust to himself, set no value on any 
of his own productions, and departed hence without 



122 ESSATS IN CRITICISM. lir. 

reaping the rich harvest which seemed his due;" 
who, in spite of his immaturity, in spite of his fragility, 
exercised such a charm, " famished to others so much 
of that which all live by," that some years after his 
death his *sister found in a country-house where he 
used to stay, in the journal of a young girl who had 
not known him, but who heard her family speaik of 
him, his name, the date of his death, and these words, 
*' U etait km vie " (he was their life) ; whose talent, 
exquisite as that of Keats, with much less of sunlight, 
abundance, inyentiveness, and facility in it than that 
of Keats, but with more of distinction and power, had 
" that winning, delicate, and beautifully happy turn 
of expression " which is the stamp of the master, — ^is 
beginning to be well known to all lovers of literature. 
This establishment of Maurice's name was an object 
for which his sister Eugenie passionately laboured. 
While he was alive, she placed her whole joy in the 
flowering of this gifted nature; when he was dead, 
she had no other thought than to make the world 
know him as she knew him. She outlived him nine 
years, and her cherished task for those years was to 
Lue Uie fragmente of her brother's composition, to 
collect them, to get them published. In pursuing this 
task she had at first cheering hopes of success ; she 
had at last baffling and bitter disappointment Her 
earthly business was at an end ; she died. Ten years 
afterwards, it was permitted to the love of a friend, 
M. Trebutien, to eflFect for Maurice's memory what 
the love of a sister had failed to accomplish. But 
those who read, with delight and admiration, the 



IT.] EUGENIE DE GUISRIN. 123 

journal and letters of Maurice de Gu^rin, could not 
but be attracted and touched by this sister Eugenie, 
who met them at every page. She seemed hardly 
less gifted, hardly less interesting, than Maiirice him- 
self. And presently M. Trebutien did for the sister 
what he had done for the brother. He published the 
journal of Mdlle. Eugenie de Gu^rin, and a few (too 
few, alas !) of her letters.^ The book has made a pro- 
found impression in France ; and the fame which she 
sought only for her brother now crowns the sister also. 
Parts of Mdlle. de Gu^rin's journal were several 
years ago printed for private circulation, and a writer 
in the Naiumai Beview had the good fortune to fall in 
with them. The bees of our English criticism do not 
often roam so far afield for their honey, and this critic 
deserves thanks for having flitted in his quest oi 
blossom to foreign parts, and for having settled upon 
a beautiful flower found there. He had the discern- 
ment to see that Mdlle. de Gu^rin was well worth 
speaking of, and he spoke of her with feeling and 
appreciation. But that, as I have said, was several 
years ago ; even a true and feeling homage needs to 
be from time to time renewed, if the memory of its 
object is to endure ; and criticism must not lose the 
occasion oflered by Mdlle. de Gu^rin's journal being 
for the first time published to the world, of direct- 
ing notice once more to this religious and beautiful 
character. 

^ A Toluine of these, also, has just been brought oat by M. 
Trebutien. One good book, at least, in the literature of the year 
1865 t 



12i ESSATS DT CBinOISK. [it 

Eogteifl de Qnirin wu bom in 1805, at th« chitean 
of Le CayU, in Languedoc. Her isnaiy, thoii|^ re- 
duced in OTcanuUticea, was noble; and even vhen 
one is a sunt one cannot quite forget that one comes 
of the stock of the Gnarini of Italy, or that one connta 
among one's anceston a Biahop of Senlis, who had tlie 
nurshalling of the French order of battle on the day 
of BouTines. Le Cayla waa a solitary place, with its 
terrace lookiiig down upon a stream-bed and valley ; 
" one may pass days there withoat seeing any living 
IhiDg but the sheep, without hearing any living thing 
bat the birds." M. de Gu^rin, Eugenie's fatlier, lost 
his wife when Eugenie was thirteen years old, and 
Maurice eeveo ; he was left with four children, — 
£ug6nie, Marie, Erembert, and Maurice, — of whom 
Eugenie waa the eldest, and Maurice was the youngest 
This youngest child, whose beauty and delicacy had 
made him the object of his mother's most anxious 
fondness, was commended by her in dying to the care 
of his sister Eugenie. Maurice at eleven years old 
went to school at Toulouse ; then he went to the 
Oolldge Stanislas at Paris ; then he became a member 
of the religious society which M. de Lamennais had 
formed at La GhSnaie in Brittany; afterwards he 
lived chiefly at Paris, returning to Le Cayla, at the 
age of twenty-nine, to die. Distance, in those days, 
was a great obstacle to frequent meetings of the 
separated memberB of a French family of narrow 
rice de Gudrin was seldom at Le Cayla 
uoe quitted it, though his few visits to 
I long ones ; but he passed five yean, — 



nr.] BUGAniB DE GUJBRm. 125 

the period of his sojourn in Brittany, and of his first 
settlement in Paris, — without coming home at all 
In spite of the check from these absences, in spite of 
the more serious check from a temporary alteration in 
Maurice's religious feelings, the union between the 
brother and sister was wonderfully close and firm. 
For they were knit together, not only by the tie of 
blood and early attachment, but also by the tie of a 
common genius. **We were," says Eugenie, "two 
eyes looking out of one head." She, on her part, 
brought to her love for her brother the devotedness 
of a woman, the intensity of a reduse, almost the 
solicitude of a mother. Her home duties prevented 
her from following the wish, which often arose in her, 
to join a religious sisterhood. There is a trace, — ^just 
a trace,— of an early attachment to a cousin ; but he 
died when she was twenty-four. After that, she lived 
for Maurice. It was for Maurice that, in addition to 
her constant correspondence with him by letter, she 
began in 1834 her journal, which was sent to him by 
portions as it was finished. After his death she tried 
to continue it, addressing it to " Maurice in heaven." 
But the effort was beyond her strength; gradually 
the entries become rarer and rarer ; and on the last 
day of December 1840 the pen dropped from her 
hand : the journal ends. 

Other sisters have loved their brothers, and it is 
not her affection for Maurice, admirable as this was, 
which aloue could have made Eug^e de Gu6rin cele- 
brated. I have said that both brother and sister had 
genius : M. Sainte-Beuve goes so far as to say that 



126 ESSAYS m CMTICISM. [nr. 

fche sister's genius was equal, if not superior, to her 
brother's. No one has a more profound respect for 
M. Sainte-Beuve's critical judgments than I have^ 
but it seems to me that this particular judgment needs 
to be a little explained and guarded. In Maurice's 
special talent, which was a talent for interpreting 
nature, for finding words which incomparably render 
the subtlest impressions which nature makes upon us, 
which bring the intimate life of nature wonderfully 
near to us, it seems to me that his sister was by 
no means his equal She never, indeed, expresses 
herself without grace and intelligence ; but her words, 
when she speaks of the life and appearances of nature, 
are in general but intellectual signs ; they are not 
like her brother's — syiubols equivalent with the thing 
symbolised. They bring the notion of the thing de- 
scribed to the mind, they do not bring the feeling of 
it to the imagination. Writing from the Nivemais, 
that region of vast woodlands in the centre of France : 
'* It does one good," says Eugenie, " to be going about 
in the midst of this enchanting nature, with flowery 
birds, and verdure all round one, under this large and 
blue sky of the Nivemais. How I love the gracious 
form of it, and those little white clouds here and 
there, like cushions of cotton, hung aloft to rest the 
eye in this immensity !" It is pretty and graceful, but 
how different from the grave and pregnant strokes of 
Maurice's pencil ! *' I have been along the Loire, and 
seen on its banks the plains where nature is puissant 
and gay ; I have seen royal and antique dwellings, all 
marked by memories which have their place in the 



I 



HE.] BUGJfiNIE DE GTTfelN. 127 

mournful legend of humanity, — Chambord, Blois, 
Amboise, Chenonceaux ; then the towns on the two 
banks of the river, — Orleans, Tours, Saumur, Nantes ; 
and at the end of it all, the Ocean rumbling. From 
these I passed back into the interior of the country, 
as far as Bourges and Nevers, a region of vast wood- 
lands, in which murmurs of an immense range and 
fulness " {ce beau torrent de ru/meurs, as, with an ex- 
pression worthy of Wordsworth, he elsewhere calls 
them) "prevail and never cease." Words whose 
charm is like that of the sounds of the murmuring 
forest itself, and whose reverberations, like theirs, die 
away in the infinite distance of the souL 

Maurice's life was in the life of nature, and the 
passion for it consumed him; it would have been 
strange if his accent had not caught more of the soul 
of nature than Eugenie's accent, whose life was else- 
where. "You will find in him," Maurice says to 
his sister of a friend whom he was recommending to 
her, " you will find in him that which you love, and 
which suits you better than anything else, — Vonction^ 
V effusion^ la mystidU*' Unction, the pouring out of 
the soul, the rapture of the mystic, were dear to 
Maurice also ; but in him the bent of his genius gave 
even to those a special direction of its own. In 
Eugenie they took the direction most native and 
familiar to them ; their object was the religious life. 

And yet, if one analyses this beautiful and most 
interesting character quite to the bottom, it is not 
exactly ajs a saint that Eugenie de Gu^rin is remark- 
able. The ideal saint is a nature like Saint Fran9oi8 



128 ESSilTS IN CRITICISM. [rr 

de Sales or F^nelon ; a nature of ineffable sweetness 
and serenity, a nature in which struggle and revolt is 
over, and the whole man (so fax as is possible to 
human infirmity) swallowed up in love. Saint Ther- 
esa (it is Mdlle. de Gu^rin herself who reminds us of 
it) endured twenty years of unacceptance and of re- 
pulse in her prayers ; yes, but the Saint Theresa 
whom Christendom knows is Saint Theresa repulsed 
no longer 1 it is Saint Theresa accepted, rejoicing in 
love, radiant with ecstasy. Mdlle. de Gu^rin is not 
one of these saints arrived at perfect sweetness and 
calm, steeped in ecstasy ; there is something primitive, 
indomitable in her, which she governs, indeed, but 
which chafes, which revolts. Somewhere in the 
depths of that strong nature there is a struggle, 
an impatience, an inquietude, an ennui, which en- 
dures to the end, and which leaves one, when one 
finally closes her journal, with an impression of pro- 
found melancholy. *' There are days," she writes to 
her brother, " when one's nature rolls itself up, and 
becomes a hedgehog. If I had you here at this mo- 
ment, here close by me, how I should prick you ! hoiv 
sharp and hard ! " " Poor soul, poor soul," she cries 
out to herself another day, '* what is the matter, what 
would you have f Where is that which will do you 
good 1 Everything is green, everything is in bloom, 
all the air has a breath of flowers. How beautiful it 
is 1 well, I will go out No, I should be alone, and 
all this beauty, when one is alone, is worth nothing. 
What shall I do thenf Eead, write, pray, take a 
basket of sand on my head like that hermit-saint^ aud 



fv.] EUGltNIE DE GU^BIN. 129 

walk with it t Yes, work, work ! keep busy the body 
which does mischief to the soul ! I have been too litUe 
occupied to-day, and that is bad for one, and it gives 
a certain ennui which I have in me time to ferment/' 
A certain emmi which I ha/ve in me : her wound is 
there. In vain she follows the counsel of F6nelon : 
"If God tireayou, tell him that he tires you,*^ No 
doubt she obtained great and frequent solace and 
restoration from prayer : " This morning I was suffer- 
ing ; well, at present I am calm, and this I owe to 
faith, simply to faith, to an act of faith. I can think 
of death and eternity without trouble, without alarm. 
Over a deep of sorrow there floats a divine calm, a 
suavity which is the work of God only. In vain have 
I tried other things at a time like this : nothing 
human comforts the soul, nothing human upholds 

it:— 

' A Tenfant 11 faat sa m^ 
A mon &me il faut mon Dien.' " 

Still the ennui reappears, bringing with it hours of 
unutterable forlomness, and making her cling to her 
one great earthly happiness, — ^her affection for her 
brother, — ^with an intenseness, an anxiety, a despera- 
tion in which there is something morbid, and by 
which she is occasionally carried into an irritability, 
a jealousy which she herself is the first, indeed, to 
censure, which she severely represses, but which 
nevertheless leaves a sense of pain. 

Mdlle. de Gu^rin's admirers have compared her to 
Pascal, and in some respects the comparison is just 
But she cannot exactly be classed with Pascal, any 

VOL. I. K 



130 ESSAYS IN CBITIGISSf. [IT. 

more than with Saint Fran9ois de Sales. Pascal is a 
man, and the inexhaustible power and activity of his 
mind leave him no leisure for ennui. He has not the 
sweetness and serenity of the perfect saint; he is, 
perhaps, **der strenge, kranke Pascal — ths severe^ 
morbid Pascal,'* — as Goethe (and, strange to say, 
Groethe at twenty-three, an age which usually feels 
Pascal's charm most profoundly) calls him. But the 
stress and movement of the lifelong conflict waged in 
him between his soul and his reason keep him full of 
fire, full of agitation, and keep his reader, who wit- 
nesses this conflict, animated and excited ; the sense 
of forlomness and dejected weariness which clings to 
Eugenie de Gu^rin does not belong to Pascal Eu- 
genie de Gu^rin is a woman, and longs for a state of 
firm happiness, for an affection in which she may re- 
posa The inward bliss of Saint Theresa or F6nelon 
would have satisfied her ; denied this, she cannot rest 
satisfied with the triumphs of self-abasement, with 
the sombre joy of trampling the pride of life and of 
reason underfoot, of reducing all human hope and joy 
to insignificance ; she repeats the magnificent words 
of Bossuet, words which both Catholicism and Pro- 
testantism have uttered with indefatigable iteration : 
" On trouve au fond de tout le vide et le n^ant — ai the 
bottom of everything one finds emptiness <md nothingness,^ 
but she feels, as every one but the true mystic must 
ever feel, their incurable sterility. 

She resembles Pascal, however, by the clearness 
and firmness of her intelligence, going straight and 
instinctively to the bottom of any matter she is deal* 



!▼.] EUGENIE DB GdfellN. 131 

ing with, and expressing herself about it with incom- 
parable precision ; never fumbling with what she has 
to say, never imperfectly seizing or imperfectly pre- 
senting her thought And to this admirable precision 
she joins a lightness of touch, a feminine ease and 
grace, a flowing facility which are her own. " I do 
not say," writes her brother Maurice, an excellent 
judge, " that I find in myself a dearth of expression ; 
but I have not this abundance of yours, this produc- 
tiveness of soul which streams forth, which courses 
along without ever failing, and always with an infinite 
charm." And writing to her of some composition of 
hers, produced after her religious scruples had for a 
long time kept her from the exercise of her talent : 
" You see, my dear Tortoise," he writes, "that your 
talent is no illusion, since after a period, I know not 
how long, of poetical inaction, — a trial to which any 
half-talent would have succumbed, — ^it rears its head 
again more vigorous than ever. It is really heart- 
breaking to see you repress and bind down, with I 
know not what scruples, your spirit, which tends with 
all the force of its nature to develop itself in this 
direction. Others have made it a case of conscience 
for you to resist this impulse, and I make it one for 
you to follow it." And she says of herself, on one 
of her freer days : " It is the instinct of my life to 
write, as it is the instinct of the fountain to flow." 
The charm of her expression is not a sensuous and 
imaginative charm like that of Maurice, but rather 
an intellectual charm ; it comes from the texture of 
the style rather than from its elements ; it is not so 



132 E88A7S IN OBinOISM. [iv. 

much in the worda as m the torn of the phrase, m 
the happy cast and flow of the sentence. Becluse as 
she was, she had a great correspondence : every one 
wished to have letters from her ; and no wonder. 

To this strength of intelligence and talent of ex.- 
pression she joined a great force of character. Religion 
had early possessed itself of this force of character, 
and reinforced it : in the shadow of the Cevennes, in 
the sharp and tonic nature of this region of Southern 
France, which has seen the Albigensians, which has 
seen the Camisards, Catholicism too is fervent and 
intense. Eug^e de Gu^rin waa brought up amidst 
strong religious influences, and they found in her a 
nature on which they could lay firm hold. I have 
said that she was not a saint of the order of Saint 
Francois de Sales or F^nelon ; perhaps she had too 
keen an intelligence to suffer her to be this, too for- 
cible and impetuous a character. But I did not mean 
to imply the least doubt of the reality, the profound- 
ness, of her religious life. She was penetrated by the 
power of religion ; religion was the master-influence 
of her life; she derived immense consolations from 
religion, she earnestly strove to conform her whole 
nature to it ; if there was an element in her which 
religion could not perfectly reach, perfectly transmute, 
she groaned over this element in her, she chid it, she 
made it bow. Almost every thought in her was 
brought into harmony with religion ; and what few 
thoughts were not thus brought into harmony were 
brought into subjection. 

Then she had her affection for her brother ; and 



IT.] EnG]£NIE DE GUiBm. 133 

this, too, though perhaps there might be in it some- 
thing a little over-eager, a little too absolute, a little 
too susceptible, was a pure, a devoted affection. It 
was not only passionate, it was tender. It was tender, 
pliant^ and self-sacrificing to a degree that not in one 
nature out of a thousand, — of natures with a mind 
and will like hers, — is found attainable. She thus 
united extraordinary power of intelligence, eztraor^ 
dinary force of character, and extraordinary strength 
of affection ; and all these imder the control of a deep 
religious feeling. 

This is what makes her so remarkable, so interest- 
ing. I shall try and make her speak for herself that 
she may show us the characteristic sides of her rare 
nature with her own inimitable toucL 

It must be remembered that her journal is written 
for Maurice only; in her lifetime no eye but his ever 
saw it. " Ced iCed pas pour le ptAlic,*' she writes ; 
"c'es^ de VMvme^ t^est de VAme, (lestpovr vmJ* " This 
is not for the public; it contains my inmost thoughts, 
my very soul ; it is for (m«." And Maurice, this one^ 
was a kind of second self to her. " We see things 
with the same eyes ; what you find beautiful, I find 
beautiful; God has made our souls of one piece." 
And this genuine confidence in her brother's sympathy 
gives to the entries in her journal a naturalness and 
simple freedom rare in such compositions. She felt 
that he would understand her, and be interested in 
all that she wrote. 

One of the first pages of her journal relates an in- 
cident of the home-life of Le Cayla, the smallest detail 



134 ESSAYS m CBinciSM. [nr. 

of which Maurice liked to hear ; and in relating it she 
brings this simple life before us. She is writing in 
November, 1834 : — 

" I am furious with the gray cat. The mischievous 
beast has made away with a little half-frozen pigeon, 
which I was tr3dng to thaw by the side of the fire. 
The poor little thing was just beginning to come 
round ; I meant to tame him ; he would have grown 
fond of me ; and there is my whole scheme eaten up 
by a cat 1 This event, and all the rest of to-day's 
history, has passed in the kitchen. Here I take up 
my abode all the morning and a part of the evening, 
ever since I am without Mimi^ I have to superin- 
tend the cook; sometimes papa comes down, and I 
read to him by the oven, or by the fireside, some bits 
out of the ArUiquUies of the Anglo - Saaon Church. 
This book struck Pierril^ with astonishment ^Qus 
de mouts aqui didms I What a lot of words there are 
inside it !' This boy is a real original. One evening 
he asked me if the soul was immortal ; then after- 
wards, what a philosopher was % We had got upon 
great questions, as you see. When I told him that a 
philosopher was a person who was wise and learned : 
'Then, mademoiselle, you are a philosopher.' This 
was said with an air of simplicity and sincerity which 
might have made even Socrates take it as a compli- 
ment ; but it made me laugh so much that my gravity 
as catechist was gone for that evening. A day or two 
ago Pierril left us, to his great sorrow : his time witb 

* The familiar name of her sister Marie. 
' A teryant-hoy at Le Cayla. 



nr.] EUOISnIE DE GUJ^RIN. 135 

OS was up on Saint Brice's day. Now he goes about 
with his little dog, truffle-hunting. If he comes this 
way I shall go and ask him if he still thinks I look 
like a philosopher." 

Her good sense and spirit made her discharge with 
alacrity her household tasks in this patriarchal life of 
Le Cayla, and treat them as the most natural thing 
in the world. She sometimes complains, to be sure, 
of burning her fingers at the kitchen-fire. But when 
a literary friend of her brother expresses enthusiasm 
about her and her poetical nature: "The poetess," 
she says, " whom this gentleman believes me to be, 
is an ideal being, infinitely removed from the life 
which is actually mine — ^a life of occupations, a life 
of household-business, which takes up all my time. 
How could I make it otherwise t I am sure I do not 
know ; and, besides, my duty is in this sort of life, 
and I have no wish to escape from it" 

Among these occupations of the patriarchal life of 
the chatelaine of Le Cayla intercourse with the poor 
fills a prominent place : — 

"To-day," she writes on the 9th of December 
1834, " I have been warming myself at every fireside 
in the village. It is a round which Mimi and I often 
make, and in which I take pleasura To-day we have 
been seeing sick people, and holding forth on doses 
and sick-room drinks. 'Take this, do that;' and 
they attend to us just as if we were the doctor. We 
prescribed shoes for a little thing who was amiss from 
having gone barefoot; to the brother, who, with a 
bad headache, was Ijong quite flat, we prescribed a 



136 ESSATS IN CBinCISM. [lY. 

pillow ; the pillow did him good, but I am afraid it 
will hardly cure him. He is at the beginning of a 
bad feverish cold : and these poor people live in the 
filth of their hovels like animals in their stable ; the 
bad air poisons them. When I come home to Le 
Gayla I seem to be in a palaca" 

She had books, too ; not in abundance, not for the 
fancying them ; the list of her library is small, and it 
is enlarged slowly and with difficulty. The Letters oj 
Saint TheresOy which she had long wished to get^ she 
sees in the hands of a poor servant girl, before she 
can procure them for herself. " What then ? " is her 
comment : " very likely she makes a better use of 
them than I could." But she has the ImHation, the 
Spintuai Works of Bossuet and F^nelon, the Lives of 
(he Saints, GomeiUe, Eacine, Andr6 Ch^nier, and 
Lamartine; Madame de StaeFs book on Germany, 
and French translations of Shakspeare's plays, Ossian, 
the Vicar of TFakefietd, Scott's Old Mortality and Bed- 
gatmtlet, and the Fromessi Sposi of Manzoni. Above 
all, she has her own mind; her meditations in the 
lonely fields, on the oak-grown hill-side of "The 
Seven Springs ; " her meditations and writing in her 
own room, her chambrette, her dUideux chez nrn, where 
every nighty before she goes to bed, she opens the 
window to look out upon the sky, — the bahny moon- 
lit sky of Languedoc. This life of reading, thinking, 
and writing was the life she liked best^ the life thai 
most truly suited her. " I find writing has become 
almost a necessity to me. Whence does it arise, this 
impulse to give utterance to the voice of one's spirit. 



IV.] suGJ^NiB DE onitRm 137 

to pour out my thoughts before God and one human 
being) I say one human being, because I always 
imagine that you are present, that you s^e what I 
write. In the stiUness of a life like this my spirit is 
happy, and, as it were, dead to all that goes on up- 
stairs or downstairs, in the house or out of the house. 
But this does not last long. * Gome, my poor spirit,' 
I then say to myself, ' we must go back to the things 
of this world.' And I take my spinning, or a book, 
or a saucepan, or I play with Wolf or Trilby. Such 
a life as this I call heaven upon earth." 

Tastes like these, joined with a talent like Mdlle. 
de Gu6rin's, naturally inspire thoughts of literary 
composition. Such thoughts she had, and perhaps 
she would have been happier if she had followed 
them; but she never could satisfy herself that to 
follow them was quite consistent with the religious 
life, and her projects of composition were gradually 
relinquished : — 

" Would to God that my thoughts, my spirit, had 
never taken their flight beyond the narrow round in 
which it is my lot to live 1 In spite of all that people 
say to the contrary, I feel that I cannot go beyond 
my needlework and my spinning without going too 
far : I feel it, I believe it : well, then, I will keep in 
my proper sphere ; however much I am tempted, my 
spirit shall not be allowed to occupy itself with great 
matters until it occupies itself with them in Heaven." 

And again : — 

*' My journal has been untouched for a long while. 
Do you want to know why t It is because the time 



138 ESBATS IK CBinClSM. [iv, 

Boems to me misspent which I spend in writing it. 
We owe God an account of every minute ; and is it 
not a wrong use of our minutes to employ them in 
writing a history of our transitory days 1 " 

She overcomes her scruples, and goes on writmg 
the journal ; but again and again they return to her. 
Her brother tells her of the pleasure and comfort 
something she has written gives to a friend of his in 
auction. She answers : — 

" It is from the Cross that those thoughts come, 
which your friend finds so soothing, so unspeakably 
tender. None of them come from me. I feel my 
own aridity ; but I feel, too, that God, when he will, 
can make an ocean flow upon this bed of sand. It is 
the same with so many simple souls, from which pro- 
ceed the most admirable things ; because they are in 
direct relation with God, without false science and 
without pride. And thus I am gradually losing my 
taste for books ; I say to myself : ' What can they 
teach me which I shall not one day know in Heaven ? 
let God be my master and my study here ! ' I try to 
make him so, and I find myself the better for it I 
read little ; I go out little ; I plunge myself in the 
inward Ufa How infimte axe the sayings, doings, 
feelings, events of that life ! Oh, if you could but 
see them ! But what avails it to make them known ? 
God alone should be admitted to the sanctuary of the 
soul." 

Beautifully as she says all this, one cannot, I think, 
read it without a sense of disquietude, without a pre- 
sentiment that this ardent spirit is foicing itself from 



IT.1 lSt76£Nl£ DE GXJ^IN. 139 

its natural bent, that the beatitude of the trae mystic 
will never be its earthly portion. And yet how simple 
and charming is her picture of the life of religion 
which she chose as her ark of refuge, and in which 
she desired to place all her happiness : — 

"Cloaks, dogs, umbrellas, all the apparatus of 
winter, went with us this morning to Andillac, where 
we have passed the whole day; some of it at the 
curb's house, the rest in church. How I like this life 
of a country Sunday, with its activity, its journeys to 
church, its liveliness ! You find all your neighbours 
on the road ; you have a curtsey from every woman 
you meet, and then, as you go along, such a talk 
about the poultry, the sheep and cows, the good man 
and the children ! My great delight is to give a kiss 
to these children, and see them run away and hide 
their blushing faces in their mother's gown. They 
are alarmed at las dawmaisAos} as at a being of 
another world. One of these little things said the 
other day to its grandmother, who was talking of 
coming to see us : ' Mvnmo^ you mustn't go to that 
castle ; there is a black hole there.' What is the 
reason that in all ages the noble's ch&teau has been 
an object of terror) Is it because of the horrors 
that were committed there in old times t I sup- 
pose so." 

This vague horror of the chateau, still lingering in 
the mind of the French peasant fifty years after he 
has stormed it, is indeed curious, and is one of the 
thousand indications how unlike aristocracy on the 

1 The young lady. 



140 ESSATS IK GfiinGISM. [rr 

Continent haa been to aristocracy in England. But 
this is one of the great matters with which Mdlle. de 
Gu^rin would not have us occupied; let us pass to 
the subject of Christmas in Languedoc : — 

*^ Christmas is come ; the beautiful festival, the one 
I love most, and which gives me the same joy as it 
gave the shepherds of Bethlehem.- In real truth, 
one's whole soul sings with joy at this beautiful 
coming of God upon earth, — a coming which here is 
annoimced on all sides of us by music and by our 
charming nadcUd,^ Nothing at Paris can give you a 
notion of what Christmas is with us. You have not 
even the midnight-mass. We all of us went to it^ 
papa at our head, on the most perfect night possible. 
Never was there a finer sky than ours was that mid- 
night ; — so fine that papa kept perpetually throwing 
back the hood of his cloak, that he might look up at 
the sky. The ground was white with hoar-frosty but 
we were not cold ; besides, the air, as we met it^ was 
warmed by the bundles of blazing torchwood which our 
servants carried in front of us to light us on our way. 
It was delightful, I do assure you ; and I should like 
you to have seen us there on our road to church, in 
those lanes with the bushes along their banks as white 
as if they were in flower. The hoar-frost makes the 
most lovely flowers. We saw a long spray so beauti- 
ful that we wanted to take it with us as a garland for 
the communion-table, but it melted in our hands : all 
flowers fade so soon! I was very sorry about my 

1 A peculiar peal rung at ChriBtmas-time by the church belli 
of Langaedoc 



IT.] eugIEnie DE GU^RIN. 141 

garland; it was mournful to see it drip away, and 
get smaller and smaQer every minuta" 

The religious life is at bottom eyer3rwhere alike ; 
but it is curious to note the variousness of its setting 
and outward circumstance. Catholicism has these so 
different from Protestantism 1 and in Catholicism 
these accessories have, it cannot be denied, a noble- 
ness and amplitude which in Protestantism is often 
wanting to them. In Catholicism they have, from 
the antiquity of this form of religion, from its preten- 
sions to universality, from its really widespread pre- 
valence, from its sensuousness, something European, 
august^ and imaginative : in Protestantism they often 
have, from its inferiority in all these respects, some- 
thing provincial, mean, and prosaic. In revenge, 
Protestantism has a future before it, a prospect of 
growth in alliance with the vital movement of modem 
society; while Catholicism appears to be bent on 
widening the breach between itself and the modem 
spirit, to be fatally losing itself in the multiplication 
of dogmas, Mariolatry, and miracle-mongering. But 
the style and circumstance of actual Catholicism is 
grander than its present tendency, and the style and 
circumstance of Protestantism is meaner than its tend- 
ency. While I was reading the journal of MdUe. de 
Gu^rin there came into my hands the memoir and 
poems of a young Englishwoman, Miss Emma Tatham; 
and one could not but be strock with the singular con- 
trast which the two lives, — ^in their setting rather than 
in their inherent quality, — ^pritoent. Miss Tatham had 
Qot^ certainly, Mdlle. de Gu^rin's talent, but 49he had 



143 HBATS nr CKITTCISIL [iv. 

ft aiDcne vein of poetic feeling & gennine ^ititade f<n 
eompodtJon. Both were forvent ClmBtiuis, and, so 
far, the two liTes hire a real resemblance; bat, in 
the setting of them, what a difference ! The French- 
woman is a Catholic in Lar^;aedoc; the Englishwoinan 
is % Protestant at Mai^te ; Margate, that brick-and- 
mortar im^e of KngHil' ProteBtantism, representing 
it in aU its [HDse, all its nncomelinee^ — let me add, all 
its salabrity. Between Uie external fonn and fashion 
of these two lives, between the Cath<^c MdUe. de 
GQ^rin's nadaiet at the Langaedoc Christmas, her 
chapel of moss at Easter'time, her daily reading of 
Uie life of a saint, carrying her to tJie most diverBe 
timee, places, and peoples, — her quoting, when she 
wants to fix her mind i^n the Btannchnees which 
the religions aspirant needs, the words of Saint 
Hacedoniua to a hnnt«r whtaa he met in the moon- 
tain^ " I puisne after Giod, as yon porsoe after game," 
— her quoting, when she wants to break a village girl 
of disobedience to her mother, Uie story of the ten 
disobedient children whom at Hippo Saint Angostioe 
saw palsied ; — between all this and the bare, blank, 
narrowly English setting of Miss Tatham's Protes- 
tantism, her "union in church-fellowship with the 
worshippers at Hawley Square Chapel, Margate ; " h» 
"dsging with soft, sweet voice, the anim&tii^ lines — 
blood Bow, 

Wow;'" 

ng to the Sunday- 
xtm, a Tenerable 
! In the groond 



CT.] EUG^IE DE GXT^IN. 143 

of the two lives, a likeness ; in all their circumstance, 
what unlikeness ! An unlikeness, it will be said, in 
that which is non-essential and indifferent Non- 
essential, — ^yes ; indifferent, — no. The signal want 
of grace and charm in English Protestantism's setting 
of its religious life is not an indifferent matter ; it is 
a real weakness. This (mgfU ye to have dom, and not to 
ham left the other tmdone. 

I have said that the present tendency of Catho- 
licism, — the Catholicism of the main body of the 
Catholic clergy and laity, — seems likely to exaggerate 
rather than to remove all that in this form of religion 
is most repugnant to reason; but this Catholicism 
was not that of Mdlle. de Gu6rin. The insufficiency 
of her Catholicism comes from a doctrine which Pro- 
testantism, too, has adopted, although Protestantism, 
from its inherent element of freedom, may find it 
easier to escape from it; a doctrine with a certain 
attraction for all noble natures, but, in the modem 
world at any rate, incurably sterile, — ^the doctrine of 
the emptiness and nothingness of human life, of the 
superiority of renouncement to activity, of quietism 
to energy ; the doctrine which makes effort for things 
on this side of the grave a folly, and joy in things on 
this side of the grave a sin. But her Catholicism is 
remarkably free from the faults which Protestants 
commonly think inseparable from Catholicism; the 
relation to the priest, the practice of confession, as- 
sume, when she speaks of them, an aspect which is not 
that under which Exeter Hall knows them, but which, 
—unless one is of the number of those who prefer 



144 ISSATS m OBinOISM. [rr 

regarding that by which men and nations die to re- 
garding that by which they live,— one is glad to study. 
"Za eonfesdorii" she says twice in her journal, "n'esi 
qu^tme esBpamion du repmdvr da/ns ramour;" and her 
weekly journey to the confessional in the little church 
of Gahuzac is her " cher pAermage ; " the little church 
is the place where she has ^^laissd twrU de miskes.'^ 

" This morning/' she writes one 28th of November 
" I was up before daylight, dressed quickly, said my 
prayers, and started with Marie for Cahuzaa When 
we got there, the chapel was occupied, which I was 
not sorry for. I like not to be hurried, and to have 
time, before I go in, to lay bare my soul before God. 
This often takes me a long time, because my thoughts 
are apt to be flying about like these autumn leaves. 
At ten o'clock I was on my knees, listening to words 
the most salutary that were ever spoken ; and I went 
away, feeling myself a better being. Every burden 
thrown off leaves us with a sense of brightness ; and 
when the soul has laid down the load of its sins at 
God's ieet, it feels as if it had wings. What an 
admirable thing is confession ! What comfort, what 
light, what strength is given me every time after I 
have said, I ha/ve smTied" 

This blessing of confession is the greater, she says, 
** the more the heart of the priest to whom we con- 
fide our repentance is like that divine heart which 
* has so loved us.' This is what attaches me to M. 
Bories." M. Bories was the cur6 of her parish, a 
man no longer young, and of whose loss, when be 
was about to leave them, she thus speaks :— 



nr.] EUGENIE DE GUJ^BIN. 145 

" What a grief for me ! how much I lose in losing 
this faithful guide of my conscience, heart, and mind, 
of my whole self, which Grod has appointed to he in 
his charge, and which let itself be in his charge so 
gladly ! He knew the resolves which God had put 
in my heart, and I had need of his help to follow 
them. Our new cur6 cannot supply his place : he is 
so young! and then he seems so inexperienced, so 
undecided ! It needs firmness to pluck a soul out 
of the midst of the world, and to uphold it 
against the assaults of flesh and blood. It is Satur- 
day, my day for going to Cahuzac ; I am just going 
there, perhaps I shall come back more tranquil 
God has always given me some good thing there, in 
that chapel where I have left behind me so many 
miseries." 

Such is confession for her when the priest is 
worthy ; and, when he is not worthy, she knows how 
to separate the man from the office : — 

" To-day I am going to do something which I dis- 
like ; but I will do it, with God's help. Do not think 
I am on my way to the stake ; it is only that I am 
going to confess to a priest in whom I have not con- 
fidence, but who is the only one here. In this act of 
religion the man must always be separated from the 
priest, and sometimes the man must be annihilated." 

The same clear sense, the same freedom from super- 
stition, shows itself in all her religious lifa She tells 
us, to be sure, how once, when she was a little girl, 
she stained a new frock, and on prapng, in her alarm, 
to an image of the Virgin which hung in her room, 

VOL. I. L 



146 ESSAYS nr criticism. [it. 

Mw the stains yanish : even the ansterest Protestant 
win not judge soch Mariolatry as this yery harahly. 
Btit^ in general, the Virgin Mary fills in the religions 
parts of her journal no prominent place ; it is Jesos, 
not Mary. *' Oh, how well has Jesns said : * Come 
onto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden.' It 
is only there, only in the bosom of God, that we can 
rightly weep, rightly rid ourselves of our burden." 
And again : '' The mystery of suffering makes one 
grasp the belief of something to be expiated, some- 
thing to be won. I see it in Jesus Christ, the Man of 
Sorrow. It was necessary that the Son of Man should 
suffer. That is all we know in the troubles and cala- 
mities of life.'' 

And who has ever spoken of justification more 
impressively and piously than Mdlle. de Gu^rin speaks 
of it, when, after reckoning the number of minutes 
she has lived, she exclaims : — 

''My God, what have we done with all these 
minutes of ours, which thou, too, wilt one day reckon 1 
Will there be any of them to count for eternal life 1 
will there be many of them? will there be one of 
themi 'If thou, Lord, wilt be extreme to mark 
what is done amiss, Lord, who may abide it!' 
This close scrutiny of our time may well make us 
tremble, all of us who have advanced more than a 
few steps in life ; for GU)d will judge us otherwise 
than as he judges the lilies of the field. I have never 
been able to understand the security of those who 
placed their whole reliance, in presenting themselves 
before God, upon a good conduct in the ordinary 



■^QH.mM l iv w^^^fmma^l^m^ ut m ^^mJ l l l ■ ^un ia— ^i^i^^at^^aNw* 



IV.] BUGiNIE DB GUfelN. 147 

relations of human Ufa As if all our duties were 
confined within the narrow sphere of this world ! To 
be a good parent, a good child, a good citizen, a good 
brother or sister, is not enough to procure entrance 
into the kingdom of heaven. God demands other 
things besides these kindly social virtues of him whom 
he means to crown with an eternity of glory." 

And, with this zeal for the spirit and power of 
religion, what prudence in her counsels of religious 
practice ; what discernment^ what measure ! She has 
been speaking of the charm of the Lives of the SaiiUs, 
and she goes on : — 

" Notwithstanding this, the Lkes of the Samts seem 
to me, for a great many people, dangerous reading. 
I would not recommend them to a young girl, or even 
to some women who are no longer young. What one 
reads has such power over one's feelings ; and these, 
even in seeking God, sometimes go astray. Alas, we 
have seen it in poor 0.'s case. What care one ought 
to take with a young person ; with what shet^reads, 
what she writes, her society, her prayers, — all of them 
matters which demand a mother's tender watchful- 
ness 1 I remember many things I did at fourteen, 
which my mother, had she lived, would not have let 
me do. I would have done anything for God's sake ; 
I would have cast myself into an oven, and assuredly 
things like that are not Gk)d's will ; He is not pleased 
by the hurt one does to one's health through that 
ardent but Ul-regulated piety which, while it impairs 
the body, often leaves many a fault flourishing. And, 
therefore, Saint Fran9ois de Sales used to say to the 



148 B8SAT8 m CBinCISM. [it. 

nuns who asked his leave to go bare-foot : Change 
your brams and keep your shoes.' " 

Meanwhile Maurice, in a five years' absence, and 
amid the distractions of Paris, lost, or seemed to his 
sister to lose, something of his fondness for his home 
and its inmates : he certainly lost his early religious 
habits and feelinga It is on this latter loss that 
Mdlle. de Gu^rin's journal oftenest touches, — ^with 
infinite delicacy, but with infinite anguish : — 

" Oh, the agony of being in fear for a soul's salva- 
tion, who can describe it ! That which caused our 
Saviour the keenest suffering, in the agony of his 
Passion, was not so much the thought of the torments 
he was to endure, as the thought that these torments 
would be of no avail for a multitude of sinners ; for 
all those who set themselves against their redemption, 
or who do not care for it The mere anticipation oi 
this obstinacy and this heedlessness had power to 
make sorrowful, even unto death, the divine Son of 
Man. And this feeling all Christian souls, according 
to the measure of faith and love granted them, more 
or less shara" 

Maurice returned to Le Cayla in the summer of 
1837, and passed six months there. This meeting 
entirely restored the imion between him and his 
family. "These six months with us," writes his 
sister, " he ill, and finding himself so loved by us all, 
had entirely reattached him to us. Five years with- 
out seeing us, had perhaps made him a little lose 
sight of our affection for him ; having found it again, 
he met it with all the strength of his own. He had 



IV.] EUG^nS DE 6U£BIN. 149 

BO firmly renewed, before he left us, all family-ties, 
that nothing but death could have broken them." 
The separation in religious matters between the 
brother and sister gradually diminished, and before 
Maurice died it had ceased. I have elsewhere spoken 
of Maurice's religious feeling and his character. It is 
probable that his divergence from his sister in this 
sphere of religion was never so wide as she feared, 
and that his reunion with her was never so complete 
as she hoped. " His errors were passed," she says, 
" his illusions were cleared away ; by the call of his 
nature, by original disposition, he had come back to 
sentiments of order. I knew all, I followed each of 
his steps ; out of the fiery sphere of the passions 
(which held him but a little moment) I saw him pass 
into the sphere of the Christian life. It was a beauti- 
ful soul, the soul of Maurice." But the illness which 
had caused his return to Le Cayla reappeared after 
he got back to Paris in the winter of 1837-8. Again 
he seemed to recover ; and his marriage with a young 
Creole lady, Mdlle. Caroline de Gervain, took place 
in the autumn of 1838. At the end of September in 
that year Mdlle. de Gu^rin had joined her brother 
in Paris ; she was present at his marriage, and stayed 
with him and his wife for some months afterwarda 
Her journal recommences in April 1839. Zealously 
as she had promoted her brother's marriage, cordial 
as were her relations with her sister-in-law, it is evi- 
dent that a sense of loss, of loneliness, invades her, 
and sometimes weighs her down. She writes in her 
journal on the 4th of May : — 



150 ESS ATS m 0RITI0I8M. [it. 

*' Grod knows when we shall see one another again i 
My own Maurice, must it be our lot to live apart, to 
find that this marriage which I had so much share in 
bringing about^ which I hoped would keep us so much 
together, leaves us more asunder than ever 1 For the 
present and for the future, this troubles me more than 
I can say. My sympathies, my inclinations, carry me 
more towards you than towards any other member of 
our family. I have the misfortune to be fonder of 
you than of an3rihing else in the world, and my heart 
had from of old built in you its happiness. Youth 
gone and life declining, I looked forward to quitting 
the scene with Maurice. At any time of life a great 
affection is a great happiness ; the spirit comes to take 
refuge in it entirely. delight and joy which will 
never be your sister's portion ! Only in the direction 
of God shall I find an issue for my heart to love as 
it has the notion of loving, as it has the power of 
loving." 

From such complainings, in which there is un- 
doubtedly something morbid, — complainings which 
she herself blamed, to which she seldom gave way, 
but which, in presenting her character, it is not just 
to put wholly out of sight, — she was called by the 
news of an alarming return of her brother's illness. 
For some days the entries in the journal show her 
agony of apprehension. " He coughs, he coughs still ! 
Those words keep echoing for ever in my ears, and 
pursue me wherever I go ; I cannot look at the leaves 
on the trees without thinking that the winter will 
come, and then the consumptive die." She went to 



IT.] EUGENIE DE GU^BIN. 151 

him, and brought him back by slow stages to Le 
Cayla, dying. He died on the 19th of July 1839. 

Thenceforward the energy of life ebbed in her; 
but the main chords of her being, the chord of affec- 
tion, the chord of religious longing, the chord of in- 
telligence, the chord of sorrow, gave, so long as they 
answered to the touch at all, a deeper and finer sound 
than ever. Always she saw before her, ** that beloved 
pale face ; " " that beautiful head, with all its different 
expressions, smiling, speaking, suffermg, dying,'' re- 
garded her always : — 

" I have seen his cofi^ in the same room, in the 
same spot where I remember seeing, when I was a 
very little girl, his cradle, when I was brought home 
from Graillac, where I was then stajring, for his 
christening. This christening was a grand one, full 
of rejoicing, more than that of any of the rest of us ; 
specially marked. I enjoyed myself greatly, and went 
back to Gaillac next day, charmed with my new little 
brother. Two years afterwards I came home, and 
brought with me a frock for him of my own making. 
I dressed him in the frock, and took him out with me 
along by the warren at the north of the house, and 
there he walked a few steps alone, — his first walking 
alone, — and I ran with delight to tell my mother the 
news : * Maurice, Maurice has begun to walk by him- 
self ! ' — ^Recollections which, coming back to-day, break 
one's heart" 

The shortness and suffering of her brother's life 
filled her with an agony of pity. "Poor beloved 
soul, you have had hardly any happiness here below ; 



152 ESSATS IN CRITICISM. [iT. 

your life has been so shorty your repose so rare. 
God, uphold me, establish my heart in thy faith! 
Alas, I have too little of this supporting me ! How 
we have gazed at him and loved him, and kissed him, 
— ^his wife, and we, his sisters ; he lying lifeless in his 
bed, his head on the pillow as if he were asleep ! Then 
we followed him to the churchyard, to the grave, to 
his last resting-place, and prayed over him, and wept 
over him ; and we are here again, and I am writing 
to him again, as if he were staying away from home, 
as if he were in Paris. My beloved one, can it be, 
shall we never see one another again on earth 1" 

But in heaven ? — and here, though love and hope 
finally prevailed, the very passion of the sister's long- 
ing sometimes inspired torturing inquietudes : — 

" I am broken down with misery. I want to see 
him. Every moment I pray to God to grant me this 
grace. Heaven, the world of spirits, is it so far from 
usi depth, mystery of the other life which 
separates us ! I, who was so eagerly anxious about 
him, who wanted so to know all that happened to 
him, — wherever he may be now, it is over ! I follow 
him into the three abodes ; I stop wistfully before the 
place of bliss, I pass on to the place of suffering, — to 
the gulf of fire. My God, my God, no ! Not there 
let my brother be ! not there ! And he is not : his 
soul, the soul of Maurice, among the lost . . . horrible 
fear, no ! But in purgatory, where the soul is cleansed 
by suffering, where the failings of the heart are ex- 
piated, the doubtings of the spirit, the half-yieldings 
to evil ? Perhaps my brother is there and suffers, and * 



nr.] EUGENIE DE OUfiRIN. 153 

calls to us amidst his anguish of repentance, as he used 
to call to us amidst his bodily suffering : ' Help me, 
you who love me.' Yes, beloved one, by prayer. I 
will go and pray ; prayer has been such a power to 
me, and I will pray to the end. Prayer ! Oh ! and 
prayer for the dead ; it is the dew of purgatory." 

Often, alas, the gracious dew would not fall ; the 
air of her soul was parched ; the arid wind, which 
was somewhere in the depths of her being, blew. 
She marks in her journal the 1st of May, " this return 
of the loveliest month in the year," only to keep up 
the old habit ; even the month of May can no longer 
give her any pleasure : " Toui est changi — all is changed. " 
She is crushed by " the misery which has nothing good 
in it, the tearless, dry misery, which bruises the heart 
like a hammer." 

" I am djiag to everything. I am dying of a slow 
moral agony, a condition of unutterable suffering. 
Lie there, my poor journal ! be forgotten with all this 
world which is fading away from me. I will write 
here no more until I come to life again, until God 
re-awakens me out of this tomb in which my soul lies 
buried. Maurice, my beloved ! it was not thus with 
me when I had you I The thought of Maurice could 
revive me from the most profound depression: to 
have him in the world was enough for me. With 
Maurice, to be buried alive would have not seemed 
dull to me." 

And, as a burden to this funereal strain, the old 
rufe ei TiSant of Bossuet, profound, solemn, sterile : — 

" So beautiful in the morning, and in the evenings 



154 ESSATS IN CRITICISM. [iT. 

fhai/ how tibe thoaght disenchants one, and tunu 
one from the world 1 I can understand that Spanish 
grandee who, after lifting up the winding-sheet of a 
beautiful queen, threw himself into the cloister and 
became a great saint. I would have all my friends at 
La Trappe, in the interest of their eternal welfara 
Not that in the world one cannot be saved, not that 
there are not in the world duties to be discharged 
as sacred and as beautiful as there are in the cloister, 
but . . . ." 

And there she stops, and a day or two afterwards 
her journal comes to an end. A few fragments, a few 
letters carry us on a little later, but after the 22d of 
August 1845 there is nothing. To make known her 
brother's genius to the world was the one task she set 
herself after his death ; in 1840 came Madame Sand's 
noble tribute to him in the Befvue des Deux Mondes ; 
then followed projects of raising a yet more enduring 
monument to his fame, by collecting and publishing 
his scattered compositions; these projects I have 
already said, were baffled ; — ^Mdlle. de Gu^rin's letter 
of the 22d of August 1845 relates to this disappoint- 
ment. In silence, during nearly three years more, 
she faded away at Le Cayla. She died on the 31st 
of May 1848. 

M. Trebutien has accomplished the pious task in 
which Mdlle. de Gudrin was baffled, and has estab- 
lished Maurice's fame; by publishing this journal 
he has established Eugenie's also. She was very 
different from her brother; but she too, like him, 
had that in her which preserves a reputation. Her 



IT.] EUG^IE DE GUSRIK. 155 

soul had the same characteristic quality as his 
talent^ — distmctwn. Of this quality the world is im- 
patient; it chafes against it^ rails at it, insults it, 
hates it ; — it ends by receiving its influence, and by 
undergoing its law. This quality at last inexorably 
corrects the world's blunders, and fixes the world's 
ideals. It procures that the popular poet shall not 
finaUy pass for a Pindar, nor the popular historian 
for a Tacitus, nor the popular preacher for a Bossuet. 
To the circle of spirits marked by this rare quality, 
Maurice and Eugenie de Gu^rin belong; they will 
take theit" place in the sky which these inhabit, and 
shine close to one another, lv4Ma sidera. 



V. 



HEnmiCH HEINE. 

^* I KNOW not if I deserve that a laurel-wreath Bhoold 
one day be laid on my coffin. Poetry, dearly as I 
have loved it^ has always been to me but a divine 
plaything. I have never attached any great value to 
poetical fame ; and I trouble myself very little whether 
people praise my verses or blame them. But lay on 
my coffin a sword ; for I was a brave soldier in the 
Liberation War of humanity." 

Heine had his full share of love of fame, and cared 
quite as much as his brethren of the gmus irrUoMle 
whether people praised his verses or blamed them. 
And he was very little of a hero. Posterity will 
certainly decorate his tomb with' the emblem of the 
laurel rather than with the emblem of the sword. 
Still, for his contemporaries, for us, for the Europe 
of the present century, he is significant chiefly for 
the reason which he himself in the words just quoted 
assigns. He is significant because he was, if not pre- 
eminently a brave, yet a brilliant, a most effective 
soldier in the Liberation War of humanity. 



r.J HEINRICH UEISE. 157 

To ascertain the master-current in the literature 
of an epoch, and to distinguish this from all minor 
currents, is one of the critic's highest functions ; in 
discharging it he shows how far he possesses the 
most indispensable quality of his office, — justness of 
spirit. The living writer who has done most to make 
England acquainted with German authors, a man of 
genius, but to whom precisely this one quality of 
justness of spirit is perhaps wanting, — I mean Mr. 
Carlyle, — seems to me in the result of his labours on 
German literature to afiford a proof how very neces- 
sary to the critic this quality is. Mr. Carlyle has 
spoken admirably of Goethe ; but then Goethe stands 
before all men's eyes, the manifest centre of German 
literature ; and from this central source many rivers 
flow. Which of these rivers is the main stream) 
which of the courses of spirit which we see active in 
Groethe is the course which will most influence the 
future, and attract and be continued by the most 
powerful of Goethe's successors 1 — that is the question. 
Mr. Carlyle attaches, it seems to me, far too much 
importance to the romantic school of Germany, — 
Tieck, Novalis, Jean Paul Eichter, — and gives to 
these writers, really gifted as two, at any rate, of 
them are, an undue prominence. These writers, and 
others with aims and a general tendency the same as 
theirs, are not the real inheiitors and continuators of 
Goethe's power ; the current of their activity is not 
the main current of German literature after Gk)ethe. 
Far more in Heine's works flows this main current ; 
Heine, far more than Tieck or Jean Paul Richter, is 



158 E8SATS IN CRITICISM. [y 

the continuator of that which, in Groethe's varied 
activity, is the most powerful and vital; on Heine, 
of all Grerman authors who survived Gk)ethe, incom- 
parably the lai^gest portion of Goethe's mantle fell. 
I do not forget that when Mr. Carlyle was dealing 
with German literature, Heine, though he was clearly 
risen above the horizon, had not shone forth with all 
his strength ; I do not forget, too, that after ten or 
twenty years many things may come out plain before 
the critic which before were hard to be discerned by 
him ; and assuredly no one would dream of imputing 
it as a fault to Mr. Carlyle that twenty years ago he 
mistook the central current in German literatui*e, 
overlooked the rising Heine, and attached undue im- 
portance to that romantic school which Heine was to 
destroy ; one may rather note it as a misfortune, sent 
perhaps as a delicate chastisement to a critic, who, — 
man of genius as he is, and no one recognises his 
genius more admirably than I do, — has, for the func- 
tions of the critic, a little too much of the self-will 
and eccentricity of a genuine son of Great Britain. 

Heine is noteworthy, because he is the most im- 
portant German successor and continuator of Groethe 
in Goethe's most important line of activity. And 
which of Goethe's lines of activity is thisi — EQs line 
of activity as " a soldier in the war of liberation ci 
humanity." 

Heine himself would hardly have admitted this 
affiliation, though he was far too powerful-minded a 
man to decry, with some of tibe vulgar German 
liberals^ Groethe's genius. "The wind of the Paris 



y. HEIKBICH HEINE. 159 

Revolution," he writes after the three days of 1830, 
** blew about the candles a little in the dark night of 
Germany, so that the red curtains of a (rerman throne 
or two caught fire; but the old watchmen, who do 
the police of the German kingdoms, are already 
bringing out the fire engines, and will keep the 
candles closer snuffed for the future. Poor, fast- 
bound German people, lose not all heart in thy bonds ! 
The fashionable coating of ice melts off from my 
heart, my soul quivers and my eyes bum, and that is 
a disadvantageous state of things for a writer, who 
should control his subject-matter and keep himself 
beautifidly objective, as the artistic school would 
have us, and as Goethe has done ; he has come to be 
eighty years old doing this, and minister, and in good 
condition : — poor German people ! that is thy greatest 
man!" 

But hear Goethe himself : " If I were to say what 
I had really been to the Germans in general, and to 
the young German poets in particular, I should say I 
had been their liberaior" 

Modem times find themselves with an immense 
sjTstem of institutions, established facts, accredited 
dogmas, customs, rules, which have come to them 
from times not modem. In this system their life 
has to be carried forward ; yet they have a sense that 
this system is not of their own creation, that it by no 
means corresponds exactly with the wants of their 
actual life, that, for them, it is customary, not rational. 
The awakening of this sense is the awakening of the 
modem spirit. The modem spirit is now awake 



160 ESSAYS IN CBITIOISM. [t. 

almost eyer3rwhere ; the sense of want of correspond- 
ence between the forms of modem Europe and its 
spirit, between the new wine of the eighteenth and 
nineteenth centuries, and the old bottles of the 
eleventh and twelfth centuries, or even of the six- 
teenth and seventeenth, almost every one noMr per; 
ceives ; it is no longer dangerous to affirm that this 
want of correspondence exists; people are even be- 
ginning to be shy of denying it. To remove this 
want of correspondence is beginning to be the settled 
endeavour of most persons of good sense. Dissolvents 
of the old European system of dominant ideas and 
facts we must all be, all of us who have any power 
of working ; what we have to study is that we may 
not be acrid dissolvents of it. 

And how did Goethe, that grand dissolvent in an 
age when there were fewer of them than at present, 
proceed in his task of dissolution, of liberation of the 
modem European from the old routine 1 He shall 
tell us himsell "Through me the German poets 
have become aware that, as man must live from 
within outwards, so the artist must work from within 
outwards, seeing that, make what contortions he will, 
he can only bring to light his own individuality. I 
can clearly mark where this influence of mine has 
made itself felt ; there arises out of it a kind of poetry 
of nature, and only in this way is it possible to be 
original." 

My voice shall never be joined to those which 
decry (roethe, and if it is said that the foregoing is a 
lame and impotent conclusion to Goethe's declaration 



r.] HEmRICH HEms. 161 

tihat he had been the liberator of the Germans in 
general, and of the young German poets in particular, 
I say it is not Groethe's profound, imperturbable 
naturalism is absolutely fatal to all routine thinking; 
he puts the standard, once for all, inside every man 
instead of outside him; when he is told, such a 
thing must be so, there is immense authority and 
custom in favour of its being so, it has been held to 
be so for a thousand years, he answers with Olympian 
politeness, ''But is it sol is it so to me?" Nothing 
could be more really subversive of the foundations on 
which the old European order rested ; and it may be 
remarked that no persons are so radically detached 
from this order, no persons so thoroughly modem, as 
those who have felt Goethe's influence most deeply. 
If it is said that Goethe professes to have in this way 
deeply influenced but a few persons, and those per- 
sons poets, one may answer that he could have taken 
no better way to secure, in the end, the ear of the 
world; for poetry is simply the most beautiful, im- 
pressive, and widely effective mode of saying things, 
and hence its importance. Nevertheless the process 
of liberation, as Goethe worked it, though sure, is 
undoubtedly slow; he came, as Heine says, to be 
eighty years old in thus working it, and at the end 
of that time the old Middle-Age machine was still 
creaking on, the thirty German courts and their cham- 
berlains subsisted in all their glory ; Goethe himself 
was a minister, and the visible triumph of the modem 
spirit over prescription and routine seemed as far off 
as ever. It was the year 1830: the German sove- 

VOL. I. M 



162 ESSAYS IK CRITIOISM. [▼. 

reigns had passed the preceding fifteen years in 
breaking the promises of freedom they had made to 
their subjects when they wanted their help in the 
final struggle with Napoleon. Great events were 
happening in France; the revolution, defeated in 
1815, had arisen from its defeat, and was wresting 
from its adversaries the power Heinrich Heine, a 
young man of genius, bom at Hamburgh and with all 
the culture of Germany, but by race a Jew; with 
warm sympathies for France, whose revolution had 
given to his race the rights of citizenship, and whose 
rule had been, as is well known, popular in the Rhine 
provinces, where he passed his youth ; with a pas- 
sionate admiration for the great French Emperor 
with a passionate contempt for the sovereigns who 
had overthrown him, for their agents, and for their 
policy, — Heinrich Heine was in 1830 in no humour 
for any such gradual process of liberation from the 
old order of things as that which Goethe had fol- 
lowed. His counsel was for open war. Taking that 
terrible modem weapon, the pen, in his hand, he 
passed the remainder of his life in one fierce battle. 
What was that battle ? the reader will ask. It was a 
life and death battle with Philistinism. 

Philistinism / — we have not the expression in Eng- 
lish. Perhaps we have not the word because we have 
so much of the thing. At Soli, I imagine, they did 
not talk of solecisms; and here, at the very head- 
quarters of Goliath, nobody talks of Philistinism. 
The French have adopted the term Spicier (grocer), to 
designate the sort of being whom the Germans desig- 

^ Heine's birthplace was not Hamburg, but Dus&eldorf. — Ed 



T.] HEINBICH HEINE. 163 

nate by the term Philistine ; but the French term, — 
besides that it casts a slur upon a respectable class, 
composed of living and susceptible members, while 
the original Philistines are dead and buried long ago, 
— is really, I think, in itself much less apt and ex- 
pressive than the German term. Efforts have been 
made to obtain in English some term equivalent to 
PMlister or Spicier; Mr. Carlyle has made several such 
efforts: "respectability with its thousand gigs," he 
says ; — well, the occupant of every one of these gigs 
is, Mr Carlyle means, a Philistina However, the 
word respectable is far too valuable a word to be thus 
perverted from its proper meaning; if the English are 
ever to have a word for the thing we are speaking of, 
— and so prodigious are the changes which the modem 
spirit is introducing, that even we English shall per- 
haps one day come to want such a word, — I think we 
had much better take the term FhUistiTie itself. 

Philistine must have originally meant, in the mind 
of those who invented the nickname, a strong, dogged, 
unenlightened opponent of the chosen people, of the 
children of the light. The party of change, the would- 
be remodellers of the old traditional European order, 
the invokers of reason against custom, the representa- 
tives of the modem spirit in every sphere where it is 
applicable, regarded themselves, with the robust self- 
confidence natural to reformers as a chosen people, as 
children of the light They regarded their adversaries 
as humdrum people, slaves to routine, enemies to 
light; stupid and oppressive, but at the same time 
very strong. This explains the love which Heine. 



164 ESSAYS IN CRITICISM. [t 

that Paladin of the modem spirit, has for France ; it 
explains the preference which he gives to France ovei 
Germany: "the French," he says, "are the chosen 
people of the new religion, its first gospels and dogmas 
have been drawn up in their language; Paris is 
the new Jerusalem, and the Bhine is the Jordan 
which divides the consecrated land of freedom from 
the land of the Philistines/' He means that the 
French, as a people, have shown more accessibility to 
ideas than any other people; that prescription and 
routine have had less hold upon them than upon any 
other people ; that they have shown most readiness 
to move and to alter at the bidding (real or supposed) 
of reason. This explains, too, the detestation which 
Heine had for the English : " I might settle in Eng- 
land,'* he says, in his exile, " if it were not that I 
should find there two things, coal-smoke and English- 
men ; I cannot abide either." What he hated in the 
English was the " achtbrittische Beschranktheit," as he 
calls it, — ^the gemme British na/rrorvness. In truth, the 
English, profoundly as they have modified the old 
Middle-Age order, great as is the liberty which they 
have secured for themselves, have in all their changes 
proceeded, to use a familiar expression, by the rule of 
thumb ; what was intolerably inconvenient to them they 
have suppressed, and as they have suppressed it, not 
because it was irrational, but because it was practically 
inconvenient, they have seldom in suppressing it ap- 
pealed to reason, but always, if possible, to some pre- 
cedent, or form, or letter, which served as a convenient 
instrument for their purpose, and which saved them 



v.] HEINBIOH HEINB. 165 

from the necessity of recurring to general principles. 
They have thus become, in a certain sense, of all 
people the most inaccessible to ideas and the most im- 
patient of them; inaccessible to them, because of their 
want of familiarity with them; and impatient of them 
because they have got on so well without them, that 
they despise those who, not having got on as well as 
themselves, still make a fuss for what they themselves 
have done so well without But there has certainly 
followed from hence, in this country, somewhat of a 
general depression of pure intelligence : Philistia has 
come to be thought by us the true Land of Promise, 
and it is anything but that ; the bom lover of ideas, 
the bom hater of commonplaces, must feel in this 
country, that the sky over his head is of brass and 
iron. The enthusiast for the idea, for reason, values 
reason, the idea, in and for themselves; he values 
them, irrespectively of the practical conveniences 
which their triumph may obtain for him ; and the 
man who regards the possession of these practical 
conveniences as something sufficient in itself, some- 
thing which compensates for the absence or surrender 
of the idea, of reason, is, in his eyes, a Philistine. 
This is why Heine so often and so mercHessly attacks 
the liberals ; much as he hates conservatism he hates 
Philistinism even more, and whoever attacks conser- 
vatism itself ignobly, not as a child of light, not in the 
name of the idea, is a Philistine. Our Cobbett is thus 
for him, much as he disliked our clergy and aristo- 
cracy whom Cobbett attacked, a Philistine with six 
fingers on every hand and on every foot six toes, four- 



166 ESSAYS IK CBITIGISM. [v 

and-twenty iir number: a PhUistine, the staff of whose 
spear is like a weaver's beam. Thus he speaks of him : — 

" While I translate Cobbett's words, the man him- 
self comes bodily before my mind's eye, as I saw him 
at that uproarious dinner at the Crown and Anchor 
Tavern, with his scolding red face and his radical 
laugh, in which venomous hate mingles with a mock- 
ing exultation at his enemies' surely approaching 
downfall He is a chained cur, who falls with equal 
fury on every one whom he does not know, often 
bites the best friend of the house in his calves, barks 
incessantly, and just because of this incessantness of 
his barking cannot get listened to, even when he barks 
at a real thiol Thei*efore the distinguished thieves 
who plunder England do not think it necessary to 
throw the growling Oobbett a bone to stop his mouth. 
This makes the dog furiously savage, and he shows 
all his hungry teetL Poor old Cobbett ! England's 
dog ! I have no love for thee, for every vulgar nature 
my soul abhors ; but thou touchest me to the inmost 
soul with pity, aa I see how thou strainest in vain to 
break loose and to get at those thieves, who make off 
with their booty before thy very eyes, and mock at 
thy fruitless springs and thine impotent howling.'' 

There is balm in Philistia as well as in Gilead. A 
chosen circle of children of the modem spirit, per- 
fectly emancipated from prejudice and commonplace, 
regarding the ideal side of things in all its efforts for 
change, passionately despising half-measures and con- 
descension to human folly and obstinacy, — with a 
bewildered, timid, torpid multitude behind, — conducts 



v.] HEINRICH HEINE. 167 

a country to the govemment of Herr von Bismarck. 
A nation regarding the practical side of things in its 
efforts for change, attacking not what is irrational, 
but what is pressingly inconvenient, and attacking 
this as one body, " moving altogether if it move at 
all," and treating children of light like the very 
harshest of stepmothers, comes to the prosperity and 
liberty of modem England. For all that, however, 
Philistia (let me say it again) is not the true promised 
land, as we English commonly imagine it to be ; and 
our excessive neglect of the idea, and consequent in- 
aptitude for it, threatens us, at a moment when the 
idea is beginning to exercise a real power in human 
society, with serious future inconvenience, and, in the 
meanwhile, cuts us off from the sympathy of other 
nations, which feel its power more than we do. 

But, in 1830, Heine very soon found that the fire- 
engines of the German governments were too much 
for his direct efforts at incendiarism. '* What demon 
drove me," he cries, " to write my EeisebUder, to edit 
a newspaper, to plague myself with our time and its 
interests, to try and shake the poor German Hodge 
out of his thousand years' sleep in his hole f What 
good did I get by it ? Hodge opened his eyes, only 
to shut them again immediately ; he yawned, only to 
begin snoring again the next minute louder than ever ; 
he stretched his stiff ungainly limbs, only to sink 
down again directly afterwards, and lie like a dead 
man in the old bed of his accustomed habits. I must 
have rest ; but where am I to find a resting-place 1 
In Germany I can no longer stay." 



168 ESSAYS IN CRITICISM, Fv. 

This is Heine's jesting account of his own efforte 
to rouse jGrennany : now for his pathetic account of 
them ; it is because he unites so much wit with so 
much pathos that he is so effective a writer : — 

" The Emperor Charles the Fifth sate in sore straits, 
in the Tyrol, encompassed by his enemies. All his 
knights and courtiers had forsaken him; not one 
came to his help. I know not if he had at that time 
the cheese face with which Holbein has painted him 
for us. But I am sure that under lip of his, with its 
contempt for mankind, stuck out even more than it 
does in his portraits. How could he but contemn the 
tribe which in the sunshine of his prosperity had 
fawned on him so devotedly, and now, in his dark 
distress, left him all alone ? Then suddenly his door 
opened, and there came in a man in disguise, and, as 
he threw back his cloak, the Kaiser recognised in him 
his faithful Conrad von der Eosen, the court jester, 
This man brought him comfort and counsel, and he 
was the court jester ! 

" German fatherland ! dear German people ! I 
am thy Conrad von der Rosen. The man whose 
proper business was to amuse thee, and who in good 
times should have catered only for thy mirth, makes 
his way into thy prison in time of need ; here, under 
my cloak, I bring thee thy sceptre and crown ; dost 
thou not recognise me, my Kaiser 1 If I cannot free 
thee, I will at least comfort thee, and thou shalt at 
least have one with thee who will prattle with thee 
about thy sorest affliction, and whisper courage to 
thee, and love thee, and whose best joke and beat 



v.] HEINBICH HEINE. 169 

blood shall be at thy servica For thou, my people, 
art the true Kaiser, the true lord of the land ; thy 
will is sovereign, and more legitimate far than that 
purple Td est notre plaisir, which invokes a divine 
right with no better warrant than the anointings of 
shaven and shorn jugglers ; thy will, my people, is 
the sole rightful source of power. Though now thou 
liest down in thy bonds, yet in the end will thy right- 
ful cause prevail ; the day of deliverance is at hand, 
a new time is beginning. My Kaiser, the night is 
over, and out there glows the ruddy dawn. 

" * Conrad von der Rosen, my fool, thou art mis- 
taken ; perhaps thou takest a headsman's gleaming 
axe for the sun, and the red of dawn is only blood.' 

" 'No, my Kaiser, it is the sun, though it is rising 
in the west ; these six thousand years it has always 
risen in the east ; it is high time there should come a 
changa' 

" * Conrad von der Rosen, my fool, thou hast lost 
the bells out of thy red cap, and it haa now such an 
odd look, that red cap of thine ! ' 

'* * Ah, my Kaiser, thy distress haa made me shake 
my head so hard and fierce, that the fool's bells have 
dropped off my cap; the cap is none the worse for that' 

" * Conrad von der Rosen, my fool, what is that 
noise of breaking and cracking outside there 1 ' 

" * Hush ! that is the saw and the carpenter's axe, 
and soon the doors of thy prison will be burst open, 
and thou wilt be free, my Kaiser ! ' 

" ' Am I then really Kaiser t Ah, I forgot, it ii 
the fool who tells me so ! ' 



170 ESSAYS IN CRITICISM. [v 

* * Oh, sigh not, my dear master, the air of thy 
prison makes thee so desponding! when once thou 
hast got thy rights again, thou wilt feel once more 
the bold imperial blood in thy veins, and thou wilt 
be proud like a Kaiser, and violent, and gracious, and 
unjust, and smiling, and ungrateful, as princes are.' 

" * Conrad von der Eosen, my fool, when I am 
free, what wilt thou do then 1 ' 

" * I will then sew new bells on to my cap.' 
" * And how shall I recompense thy fidelity 1 * 
" ' Ah, dear master, by not leaving me to die in a 
ditch!'" 

I wish to mark Heine's place in modem European 
literature, the scope of his activity, and his valua 
I cannot attempt to give here a detailed account of 
his Ufe, or a description of his separate works. In 
May 1831 he went over his Jordan, the Bhine, and 
fixed himself in his new Jerusalem, Paris. There, 
henceforward, he lived, going in general to some 
French watering-place in the summer, but making 
only one or two short visits to Germany during the 
rest of his life. His works, in verse and prose, suc- 
ceeded each other without stopping; a collected 
edition of them, filling seven closely-printed octavo 
volumes, has been published in America;^ in the 
collected editions of few people's works is there so 
little to skip. Those who wish for a single good 
specimen of him should read his first important 
work, the work which made his reputation, the 
BeisebUder, or "Travelling Sketches:" prose and 

^ A complete odition has at last appeared in Gennany. 



v.] HEINRICH HEINE. 171 

verse, wit and seriousness, are mingled in it, and 
the mingling of these is characteristic of Heine, and 
is nowhere to be seen practised more naturally and 
happily than in his BeisebUder. In 1847 his health, 
which till then had always been perfectly good, gave 
way. He had a kind of paral3rtic stroka His 
malady proved to be a softening of the spinal 
marrow: it was incurable; it made rapid progress. 
In May 1848, not a year after his first attack, he 
went out of doors for the last time ; but his disease 
took more than eight years to kill him. For nearly 
eight years he lay helpless on a couch, with the use 
of his limbs gone, wasted almost to the proportions 
of a child, wasted so that a woman could carry him 
about; the sight of one eye lost, that of the other 
greatly dimmed, and requiring, that it might be 
exercised, to have the palsied eyelid lifted and held 
up by the finger ; all this, and, besides this, suffering 
at short intervals paroxysms of nervous agony. I 
have said he was not pre-eminently brave; but in 
the astonishing force of spirit with which he retained 
his activity of mind, even his gaiety, amid all his 
suffering, and went on composing with undiminished 
fire to the last, he was truly brave. Nothing could 
clog that aerial lightness. "Pouvez-vous sifflerl" 
his doctor asked him one day, when he was almost 
at his last gasp ; — " siffler," as every one knows, has 
the double meaning of to whistle and to hiss : — " H6las ! 
non," was his whispered answer ; " pas meme une 
com^die de M. Scribe!" M. Scribe is, or was, the 
favourite dramatist of the French Philistine. ' Mj 



172 ESSAYS IN GRinGISM. [v 

nerves,'' he said to some one who asked him about 
them in 1855, the year of the great Exhibition in 
Paris, "my nerves are of that quite singularly 
remarkable miserableness of nature, that I am con- 
vinced they would get at the Exhibition, the grand 
medal for pain and misery." He read all the medical 
books which treated of his complaint " But,'' said 
he to some one who found him thus engaged, " what 
good this reading is to do me I don't know, except 
that it will qualify me to give lectures in heaven on 
the ignorance of doctors on earth about diseases of 
the spinal marrow." What a matter of grim serious- 
ness are our own ailments to most of us ! yet with 
this gaiety Heine treated his to the end That end, 
so long in coming, came at last. Heine died on the 
17th of February 1856, at the age of fifty-eight By 
his will he forbade that his remains should be trans- 
ported to Germany. He lies buried in the cemetery 
of Montmartre, at Paris. 

His direct political action was null, and this is 
neither to be wondered at nor regretted; direct 
political action is not the true function of literature, 
and Heine was a bom man of letters. Even in his 
favourite France the turn taken by public affairs was 
not at all what he wished, though he read French 
poUtics by no means as we in England, most of us, 
read them. He thought things were tending there 
to the triumph of communism; and to a champion 
of the idea like Heine, what there is gross and 
narrow in communism was very repulsive. "It is 
aU of no use," he cried on his death-bed, " the future 



HiPIB>WHPW^ilWliW>i^^^g^^p^^— iBWW—iW^^— — ^w— — a— ^— a^— aBa«Mi , ift> ■ ir. j t i».<»».«j. *■, r,f 



T.l HEINRICH HEINE. 173 

belongs to our enemies, the Communists, and Louis 
Napoleon is their John the Baptist" "And yet," 
— ^he added with all his old love for that remarkable 
entity, so full of attraction for him, so profoundly 
unknown in England, the French people, — "do not 
believe that God lets all this go forward merely as 
a grand comedy. Even though the Communists 
deny him to-day, he knows better than they do, that 
a time will come when they will learn to believe in 
him." After 1831, his hopes of soon upsetting the 
Grerman Governments had died away, and his pro- 
pagandism took another, a more truly literary, char- 
acter. It took the character of an intrepid applica- 
tion of the modem spirit to literature. To the ideas 
with which the burning questions of modem life filled 
him, he made all his subject-matter minister. He 
touched all the great points in the career of the 
human race, and here he but followed the tendency 
of the wide culture of Germany; but he touched 
them with a wand which brought them all under a 
light where the modem eye cares most to see them, 
and here he gave a lesson to the culture of Grermany, 
— so wide, so impartial, that it is apt to become slack 
and powerless, and to lose itself in its materials for 
want of a strong central idea round which to group 
all its other ideas. So the mystic and romantic 
school of Germany lost itself in the Middle Ages, 
was overpowered by their influence, came to ruin by 
its vain dreams of renewing them. Heine, with a 
far profounder sense of the mystic and romantic 
charm of the Middle Age than Gkerres, or Brentano, 



174 ESSAYS m CRITICISM. [v. 

or Amim, Heine the chief romantic poet of Germany, 
is yet also much more than a romantic poet ; he is a 
great modem poet, he is not conquered by the Middle 
Age, he has a talisman by which he can feel, — ^along 
with but above the power of the fascinating Middle 
Age itself, — the power of modem ideaa 

A French critic of Heine thinks he has said enough 
in saying that Heine proclaimed in German countries, 
with beat of drum, the ideas of 1789, and that at the 
cheerful noise of his drum the ghosts of the Middle 
Age took to flight But this is rather too French an 
account of the matter. Germany, that vast mine of 
ideas, had no need to import ideas, aa such, from any 
foreign country ; and if Heine had carried ideas, as 
such, from France into Germany, he would but have 
been carrying coals to Newcastle. But that for which 
France, far less meditative than Germany, is eminent, 
is the prompt, ardent, and practical application of an 
idea, when she seizes it, in all departments of human 
activity which admit it And that in which Germany 
most fails, and by failing in which she appears so 
helpless and impotent, is just the practical application 
of her innumerable ideas. "When Candide," says 
Heine himself, "came to Eldorado, he saw in the 
streets a number of boys who were playing with 
gold-nuggets instead of marbles. This degree of 
luxury made him imagine that they must be the 
king's children, and he was not a little astonished 
when he found that in Eldorado gold-nuggets aro of 
DO more value than marbles are with us, and that the 
schoolboys play with them. A similar thing happened 



T.] HMNRICH HEINE. ' 175 

to a friend of mine, a foreigner, when he came to 
Germany and first read German books. He was 
perfectly astounded at the wealth of ideas which he 
found in them ; but he soon remarked that ideas in 
Germany are as plentiful as gold-nuggets in Eldorado, 
and that those writers whom he had taken for intel- 
lectual princes, were in reality only common school- 
boys." Heine was, as he calls himself, a "Child of 
the French Revolution," an "Initiator," because he 
vigorously assured the Germans that ideas were not 
counters or marbles, to be played with for their own 
sake ; because he exhibited in literature modem ideas 
applied with the utmost freedom, clearness, and origin- 
ality. And therefore he declared that the great task 
of his life had been the endeavour to establish a 
cordial relation between France and Germany. It 
is because he thus operates a junction between the 
French spirit, and German ideas and German culture, 
that he founds something new, opens a fresh period, 
and deserves the attention of criticism far more than 
the German poets his contemporaries, who merely 
continue an old period till it expires. It may be 
predicted that in the literature of other countries, 
too, the French spirit is destined to make its influence 
felt, — as an element, in alliance with the native spirit, 
of novelty and movement, — as it has made its influ- • 
ence felt in German literature; fifty years hence a 
critic will be demonstrating to our grandchildren how 
this phenomenon has come to pass. 

We in England, in our great burst of literature 
during the first thirty years of the present century, 



176 ESSATS IN GBinCISM. [v. 

had no manifestation of the modem spirit, as thi& 
spirit manifests itself in Groethe's works or Heine's, 
And the reason is not far to seek. We had neither 
the German wealth of ideas, nor the French enthu- 
siasm for applying ideas. There reigned in the mass 
of the nation that inveterate inaccessibility to ideas, 
that Philistinism, — ^to use the German nickname, — 
which reacts even on the individual genius that is 
exempt from it. In our greatest literary epoch, that 
of the Elizabethan age, English society at large was 
accessible to ideas, was permeated by them, was 
vivified by them, to a degree which has never been 
reached in England since. Hence the unique great- 
ness in English literature of Shakspeare and his con- 
temporaries. They were powerfully upheld by the 
intellectual life of their nation ; they applied freely 
in literature the then modem ideas, — ^the ideas of the 
fienascence and the Eef ormation. A few years after- 
wards the great English middle class, the kernel of 
the nation, the class whose intelligent sjnnpathy had 
upheld a ShakspearO) entered the prison of Puritisaiism, 
and had the key turned on its spirit there for two 
hundred years. He enlargeth a nation^ says Job, wnd 
straiteneth U agairu 

In the literary movement of the beginning of the 
nineteenth century the signal attempt to apply freely 
the modem spirit was made in England by two mem- 
bers of the aristocratic class, Byron and Shelley. 
Aristocracies are, as such, naturally impenetrable by 
ideas; but their individual members have a high 
courage and a turn for breaking bounds ; and a man 



F.] HEINRIOH HEINB. 177 

of genius, who is the bom child of the idea, happening 
to be bom in the aristocratic ranks, chafes against the 
obstacles which prevent him from freely developing 
it But Byron and Shelley did not succeed in their 
attempt freely to apply the modem spirit in English 
literature ; they could not succeed in it ; the resistance 
to baffle them, the want of intelligent S3rmpathy to 
guide and uphold them, were too great. Their liter- 
ary creation, compared with the literary creation of 
Shakspeare and Spenser, compared with the literary 
creation of Goethe and Heine, is a failure. The 
best literary creation of that time in England pro- 
ceeded from men who did not make the same bold 
attempt as Byron and Shelley. What, in fact, was 
the career of the chief English men of letters, theii 
contemporaries ] The gravest of them, Wordsworth, 
retired (in Middle- Age phrase) into a monastery. I 
mean, he plunged himself in the inward life, he 
voluntarily cut himself off from the modem spirit 
Coleridge took to opium. Scott became the historio- 
grapher-royal of feudalisuL Keats passionately gave 
himself up to a sensuous genius, to his faculty for 
interpreting nature ; and he died of consumption at 
twenty-five. Wordsworth, Scott, and Keats have 
left admirable works; far more solid and complete 
works than those which Byron and Shelley have left 
But their works have this defect, — they do not belong 
to that which is the main current of the literature of 
modem epochs, they do not apply modem ideas to 
life ; they constitute, therefore, minor currents^ and all 
other literary work of our day, however popular, 

VOL I. N 



178 ESSAYS m GBinOISM. [v. 

which has the same defect, also constitutes but a 
minor current. Byron and Shelley will long be re- 
membered, long after the inadequacy of their actual 
work is clearly recognised for their passionate, their 
Titanic effort to flow in the main stream of modem 
literature; their names will be greater than their 
writings ; siat magni nominis vmbra. 

Heine's literary good fortune was superior to that 
of Byron and Shelley. His theatre of operations was 
Germany, whose Philistinism does not consist in her 
want of ideas, or in her inaccessibility to ideas, for she 
teems with them and loves them, but^ as I have said, 
in her feeble and hesitating application of modem 
ideas to life. Heine's intense modernism, his absolute 
freedom, his utter rejection of stock classicism and 
stock romanticism, his bringing all things under the 
point of view of the nineteenth century, were under- 
stood and laid to heart by Germany, through virtue 
of her immense, tolerant intellectualism, much as 
there was in all Heine said to affix)nt and wound 
Germany. The wit and ardent modem spirit of 
France Heine joined to the culture, the sentiment, 
the thought of Germany. This is what makes him so 
remarkable; his wonderful clearness, lightness, and 
freedom, united with such power of feeling, and 
width of range. Is there anywhere keener wit than 
in his story of the French abb^ who was his tutor, 
and who wanted to get from him that la religion is 
French for der Glaube : " Six times did he ask me the 
question : ' Henry, what is der Glavhe in French ) ' 
and six times, and each time with a greater burst of 



r.l HEINBIOH HEINE. 179 

tears, did I answer him — *It is le cr^U.' And at 
the seventh time, his face purple with rage, the in- 
furiated questioner screamed out : ' It is ^ religion ; * 
and a rain of cuffs descended upon me, and all the 
other boys burst out laughing. Since that day I have 
never been able to hear la religion mentioned, without 
feeling a tremor run through my back, and my cheeks 
grow red with shame." Or in that comment on the 
fate of Professor Saalfeld, who had been addicted to 
writing furious pamphlets against Napoleon, and who 
was a professor at Gottingen, a great seat, according 
to Heine, of pedantry and Philistinism : " It is 
curious," says Heine, " the three greatest adversaries 
of Napoleon have all of them ended miserably. 
Castlereagh cut his own throat ; Louis the Eighteenth 
rotted upon his throne; and Professor Saalfeld is 
still a professor at Gottingen." It is impossible to go 
beyond that. 

What wit, again, in that saying which every one 
has heard : " The Englishman loves liberty like his 
lawful wife, the Frenchman loves her like his mistress, 
the German loves her like his old grandmother." 
But the turn Heine gives to this incomparable saying 
is not so well known ; and it is by that turn he shows 
himself the bom poet he is, — full of delicacy and 
tenderness, of inexhaustible resource, infinitely new 
and striking : — 

"And yet, after all, no one can ever tell how 
things may turn out The grumpy Englishman, in 
an ill-temper with his wife, is capable of some day 
putting a rope round her neck, and taking her to 



180 ESSAYS m OMTIOISM. [v 

be sold at SmitMeld. The inconstant Frenchman 
may become unfaithful to his adored mistress, and be 
seen fluttering about the Palais Eoyal after another. 
But the German wUl never quite abandon his old grand- 
mother ; he will always keep for her a nook by the 
chimney-comer, where she can tell her fairy stories 
to the listening children." 

Is it possible to touch more delicately and happily 
both the weakness and the strength of Germany ; — 
pedantic, simple, enslaved, free, ridiculous, admirable 
Germany ] 

And Heine's verse, — his Lieder 9 Oh, the comfort, 
after dealing with French people of genius, irresistibly 
impelled to try and express themselves in verse, 
launching out into a deep which destiny has sown 
with so many rocks for them, — the comfort of coming 
to a man of genius, who finds in verse his freest and 
most perfect expression, whose voyage over the deep 
of poetry destiny makes smooth ! After the rhythm, 
to us, at any rate, with the German paste in out 
composition, so deeply unsatisfying, of — 

** Ah I que me dites-vous, et que vous dit mon Ime ? 
Que dit le ciel h, I'aube et la flamme k la flamme ? " 

what a blessing to arrive at rhythms like — 

** Take, oh, take those lips away, 
That so sweetly were forsworn — " 

or — 

'* Siehst sehr sterbeblasslich aus, 
Doch getrost ! du bist zu Haus — " 

in which one's soul can take pleasure ! The magic 
of Heine's poetical form is incomparable ; he chiefly 



I 



I II.I-I I til a m. iii^jLL -w tLW^^m^mmmr^^^^^^^^^^^ma^ 



T.] HEINKIOH HEINB. 181 

uses a form of old German popular poetry, a ballad- 
form which has more rapidity and grace than any 
ballad-form of ours; he employs this form with the 
most exquisite lightness and ease, and yet it has at 
the same time the inborn fulness, pathos, and old- 
world charm of all true forms of popular poetry. 
Thus in Heine's poetry, too, one perpetually blends 
bhe impression of French modernism and clearness, 
with that of Glerman sentiment and fulness ; and to 
give this blended impression is, as I have said, Heine's 
great characteristic. To feel it, one must read him ; 
he gives it in his form as well as in his contents, and 
by translation I can only reproduce it so far as his 
contents give it But even the contents of many of 
his poems are capable of giving a certain sense of it 
Here, for instance, is a poem in which he makes his 
profession of faith to an innocent beautiful soul, a 
sort of Gretchen, the child of some simple mining 
people having their hut among the pines at the foot 
of the Hartz Mountains, who reproaches him with not 
holding the old articles of the Christian creed : — 

" Ah, my child, while I was yet a little boy, while 
I yet sate upon my mother's knee, I believed in God 
the Father, who rules up there in Heaven, good and 
great ; 

" Who created the beautiful earth, and the beau- 
tiful men and women thereon ; who ordained for sun, 
moon, and stars their courses. 

"When I got bigger, my child, I comprehended 
yet a great deal more than this, and comprehended, 
and grew intelligent ; and I believe on the Son also ; 



182 ESSAYS IN CRITICISM. [v, 

" On the beloved Son, who loved us, and revealed 
love to us ; and, for his reward, as always happens, 
was crucified by the people. 

"Now, when I am grown up, have read much, 
have travelled much, my heart swells within me, and 
with my whole heart I believe on the Holy Ghost. 

" The greatest miracles were of his working, and 
still greater miracles doth he even now work; he 
burst in sunder the oppressor's stronghold, and he 
burst in sunder the bondsman's yoke. 

" He heals old death-wounds, and renews the old 
right ; all mankind are one race of noble equals before 
him. 

"He chases away the evil clouds and the dark 
cobwebs of the brain, which have spoilt love and joy 
for us, which day and night have loured on ua 

" A thousand knights, well harnessed, has the Holy 
Ghost chosen out to fulfil his will, and he has put 
courage into their souls. 

"Their good swords flash, their bright banners 
wave ; what, thou wouldst give much, my child, to 
look upon such gallant knights 1 

" Well, on me, my child, look ! kiss me, and look 
boldly upon me ! one of those knights of the Holy 
Ghost am I." 

One has only to turn over the pages of his 
Romancero, — a collection of poems written in the first 
years of his illness, with his whole power and chann 
still in them, and not, like his latest poems of all, 
painfully touched by the air of his Mairazzefi-gruft^ 
his "mattress-grave" — ^to see Heine^s width of range; 



r.] HEINBICH HEINE. 183 

die most varied figures succeed one another, — ^Rhamp- 
sinitus, Edith with the Swan Neck, Charles the First, 
Marie Antoinette, King David, a heroine of Mabilley 
Melisanda of Tripoli, Eichard Coeur de Lion, Pedro 
the Cruel, Firdusi, Cortes, Dr. Dollinger; — ^but never 
does Heine attempt to be Jmbsch objediv, " beautifully 
objective," to become m spmt an old Egyptian, or an 
old Hebrew, or a Middle-Age knight, or a Spanish 
adventurer, or an English royalist; he always remains 
Heinrich Heine, a son of the nineteenth century. To 
give a notion of his tone, I will quote a few stanzas at 
the end of the Spanish AtridcB, in which he describes, 
in the character of a visitor at the court of Henry of 
Transtamare at Segovia, Henry's treatment of the 
children of his brother, Pedro the Cruel. Don Diego 
Albuquerque, his neighbour, strolls after dinner 
through the castle with him : 

" In the cloister-passage, which leads to the kennels 
where are kept the king's hoimds, that with their 
growling and yelping let you know a long way off 
where they are, 

'* There I saw, built into the wall, and with a strong 
iron grating for its outer face, a cell like a cage. 

" Two human figures sate therein, two young boys; 
chained by the leg, they crouched in the dirty straw. 

"Hardly twelve years old seemed the one, the 
other not much older ; their faces fair and noble, but 
pale and wan with sickness. 

" They were all in rags, almost naked ; and their 
lean bodies showed wounds, the marks of ill-usage ; 
both of them shivered with fever. 



184 ESSAYS IN CRITICISM. [v. 

" They looked up at me out of the depth of theii 
misery ; * who,* I cried in horror to Don Diego, * axe 
these pictures of wretchedness?' 

"Don Diego seemed emharrassed; he looked round 
to see that no one was listening; then he gave a deep 
sigh ; and at last, putting on the easy tone of a man 
of the world, he said : 

" * These are a pair of king's sons, who were early 
left orphans; the name of their father was King 
Pedro, the name of their mother, Maria de Padilla. 

" * After the great battle of Navarette, when Henry 
of Transtamare had relieved his brother, King Pedro, 
of the troublesome burden of the crown, 

" * And likewise of that still moire troublesome 
burden, which is called life, then Don Henry's victo- 
rious magnanimity had to deal with his brother's 
children. 

" ' He has adopted them, as an imcle should ; and 
he has given them free quarters in his own castle. 

" * The room which he has assigned to them is 
certainly rather small, but then it is cool in summer, 
and not intolerably cold in winter. 

" * Their fare is rye-bread, which tastes as sweet 
as if the goddess Ceres had baked it express for her 
beloved Proserpine. 

" * Not unfrequently, too, he sends a scullion to 
them with garbanzos, and then the young gentlemen 
know that it is Sunday in Spain. 

" * But it is not Sunday every day, and garbanzos 
do not come every day ; and the master of the hounds 
gives them the treat of his whip. 



f.] HEINRICH HEINE. 186 

*' * For the master of the hounds, who has undei 
his superintendence the kennels and the pack, and the 
nephews' cage also, 

" * Is the unfortunate husband of that lemon-faced 
woman with the white ruflF, whom we remarked to 
day at dinner. 

" 'And she scolds so sharp, that often her husband 
snatches his whip, and rushes down here, and gives 
it to the dogs and to the poor little boys. 

" ' But his majesty has expressed his disapproval 
of such proceedings, and has given orders that for the 
future his nephews are to be treated differently from 
the dogs. 

"'He has determined no longer to entrust the 
disciplining of his nephews to a mercenary stranger, 
but to carry it out with his own hands.' 

"Don Diego stopped abruptly; for the seneschal 
of the castle joined us, and politely expressed his 
hope that we had dined to our satisfaction.'' 

Observe how the irony of the whole of that, finish- 
ing with the grim innuendo of the last stanza but one, 
is at once truly masterly and truly modem. 

No account of Heine is complete which does not 
notice the Jewish element in him. His race he 
treated with the same freedom with which he treated 
everything else, but he derived a great force from it, 
and no one knew this better than he himself. He 
has excellently pointed out how in the sixteenth 
century there was a double renascence, — a Hellenic 
renascence and a Hebrew renascence, — and how both 
have been great powers ever since. He himself had 



186 ESSAYS m CBinCISM. [t. 

in him both the spirit of Greece and the spirit oi 
Judaea ; both these spirits reach the infinite, which is 
the true goal of all poetry and all art^ — ^the Greek 
spirit by beauty, the Hebrew spirit by sublimity. By 
his perfection of literary form, by his love of clear- 
ness, by his love of beauty, Heine is Greek ; by his 
intensity, by his untamableness, by his "longing 
which cannot be uttered," he is Hebrew, Yet what 
Hebrew ever treated the things of the Hebrews like 
this?— 

" There lives at Hamburg, in a one-roomed lodging 
in the Baker's Broad Walk, a man whose name is 
Moses Lump; all the week he goes about in wind 
and rain, with his pack on his back, to earn his few 
shillings; but when on Friday evening he comes 
home, he finds the candlestick with seven candles 
lighted, and the table covered with a fair white cloth, 
and he puts away from him his pack and his cares, 
and he sits down to table with his squinting wife and 
yet more squinting daughter, and eats fish with them, 
fish which has been dressed in beautiful white garlic 
sauce, sings therewith the grandest psalms of King 
David, rejoices with his whole heart over the de- 
liverance of the children of Israel out of Egypt, 
rejoices, too, that all the wicked ones who have done 
the children of Israel hurt, have ended by taking 
themselves off; that King Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar^ 
Haman, Antiochus, Titus, and all such people, are 
well dead, while he, Moses Lump, is yet alive, and 
eating fish with wife and daughter; and I can teU 
you, Doctor, the fish is delicate and the man is happy, 



7.] HEINBICH HEINE. 187 

he has no call to torment himself abont culture, he 
sits contented in his religion and in his green bed- 
gown, like Diogenes in his tub, he contemplates with 
satisfaction his candles, which he on no account will 
snuff for himself ; and I can tell you, if the candles 
bum a little dim, and the snuffers-woman, whose 
business it is to snuff them, is not at hand, and 
Eothschild the Great were at that moment to come 
in, with all his brokers, bill discounters, agents, and 
chief clerks, with whom he conquers the world, and 
Rothschild were to say: 'Moses Lump, ask of me 
what favour you will, and it shall be granted you ; ' — 
Doctor, I am convinced, Moses Lump would quietly 
answer: 'Snuff me those candles!' and Rothschild 
the Great would exclaim with admiration : * If I were 
not Rothschild, I would be Moses Lump.' " 

There Heine shows us his own people by its comic 
side ; in the poem of the Princess Sdbbaih he shows it 
to us by a more serious side. The Princess Sabbath, 
" the trcmquU Princess^ pearl and flower of all beauty, 
fair as the Queen of Sheba, Solomon's bosom friend, 
that blue stocking from Ethiopia, who wanted to 
shine by her esprit^ and with her wise riddles made 
herself in the long run a bore " (with Heine the sar- 
castic turn is never far off), this princess has for her 
betrothed a prince whom sorcery has transformed 
into an animal of lower race, the Prince Israel 

" A dog with the desires of a dog, he wallows all 
the week long in the filth and refuse of life, amidst 
the jeers of the boys in the street 

" But every Friday evening, at the twilight hour« 



188 £SaATS IN CRITICISM. [y. 

suddenly the magic passes off, and the dog becomes 
once more a human bemg. 

'*A man with the feelings of a man, with head 
and heact raised aloft, in festal garb, in almost clean 
garb, he enters the halls of his Father. 

" Hail, beloved halls of my royal Father I Ye tents 
of Jacob, I kiss with my lips your holy door-posts ! " 

Still more he shows us this serious side in his 
beautiful poem on Jehuda ben Halevy, a poet belong- 
ing to ''the great golden age of the Arabian, Old- 
Spanish, Jewish school of poets," a contemporary of 
the troubadours : — 

" He, too, — the hero whom we sing, — Jehuda ben 
Halevy, too, had his lady-love; but she was of a 
special sort. 

" She was no Laura, whose eyes, mortal stars, in 
the cathedral on Good Friday kindled that world- 
renowned flame. 

" She was no ch&telaine, who in the blooming glory 
of her youth presided at tourneys, and awarded the 
victor's crown. 

"No casuistess in the Gay Science was she, no 
lady dodrinaire, who delivered her oracles in the 
judgment-chamber of a Court of Love. 

"She, whom the Rabbi loved, was a woe-begone 
poor darling, a mourning picture of desolation . . 
and her name was Jerusalem." 

Jehuda ben Halevy, like the Crusaders, makes his 
pilgrimage to Jerusalem ; and there, amid the ruins, 
sings a song of Sion which has become famous among 
his people : — 



T.] HEIKRICH HEINE. 189 

"That lay of pearled tears is the wide-famed 
Lament, which is sung in all the scattered tents of 
Jacob throughout the world. 

" On the ninth day of the month which is called 
Ab, on the anniversary of Jerusalem's destruction by 
Titus Yespasianus. 

" Yes, that is the song of Sion, which Jehuda ben 
Halevy sang with his dying breath amid the holy 
ruins of JerusalenL 

" Barefoot, and in penitential weeds, he sate there 
upon the fragment of a fallen column ; down to his 
breast fell, 

"Like a gray forest, his hair; and cast a weird 
shadow on the face which looked out through it, — his 
troubled pale face, with the spiritual eyes. 

" So he sate and sang, like unto a seer out of the 
foretime to look upon ; Jeremiah, the Ancient, seemed 
to have risen out of his grava 

" But a bold Saracen came riding that way, aloft 
on his barb, lolling in his saddle, and brandishing a 
naked javelin ; 

" Into the breast of the poor singer he plunged his 
deadly shaft, and shot away like a winged shadow. 

" Quietly flowed the Rabbi's life-blood, quietly he 
sang his song to an end ; and his last d3dng sigh was 
Jerusalem ! " 

But, most of all, Heine shows us this side in a 
strange poem describing a public dispute, before King 
Pedro and his Court, between a Jewish and a Christian 
champion, on the merits of their respective faiths. 
In the strain of the Jew all the fierceness of the old 



190 ESSAYS IN CRITICISM. [t. 

Hebrew genius, all its rigid defiant Monotheism, 
appear : — 

, '* Our God has not died like a poor innocent 
lamb for mankind ; he is no gushing philanthropist, 
no declaimer. 

" Our Grod is not love, caressing is not his line ; 
but he is a God of thunder, and he is a God of 
revenge. 

"The lightnings of his wrath strike inexorably 
every sinner, and the sins of the fathers are often 
visited upon their remote posterity. 

" Our God, he is alive, and in his hall of heaven 
he goes on existing away, throughout all the 
eternities. 

" Our Gk)d, too, is a Grod in robust health, no myth, 
pale and thin as sacrificial wafers, or as shadows by 
Cocjrtus. 

" Our God is strong. In his hand he upholds sim, 
moon, and stars; thrones break, nations reel to and 
fro, when he knits his forehead. 

" Our God loves music, the voice of the harp and 
the song of feasting ; but the sound of church-bells he 
hates, as he hates the gruntmg of pigs.'' 

Nor must Heine's sweetest note be unheard, — his 
plaintive note, his note of melancholy. Here is a 
strain which came from him as he lay, in the winter 
night, on his "mattress-grave" at Paris, and let his 
thoughts wander home to Gormany, " the great child, 
entertaining herself with her Christmas-tree. " " Thou 
tookest," — ^he cries to the German exile, — 

"Thou tookest thy fiight towards sunshine and 



?.] HEINBICH HEINE. 191 

happiness ; naked and poor retumest thou back. 
German truth, German shirts,— one gets them worn 
to tatters in foreign parts. 

" Deadly pale are thy looks, but take comfort, thou 
art at home 1 one lies warm in German earth, warm 
as by the old pleasant fireside. 

"Many a one, alas, became crippled, and could 
get home no more! longingly he stretches out his 
arms ; (Jod have mercy upon him ! " 

God have mercy upon himl for what remain of 
the days of the years of his life are few and evil 
" Can it be that I still actually exist t My body is so 
shrunk that there is hardly anything of me left but 
my voice, and my bed makes me think of the melodi- 
ous grave of the enchanter Merlin, which is in the 
forest of Broceliand in Brittany, under high oaks 
whose tops shine like green flames to heaven. Ah, I 
envy thee those trees, brother Merlin, and their fresh 
waving ! for over my mattress-grave here in Paris no 
green leaves rustle ; and early and late I hear nothing 
but the rattle of carriages, hammering, scolding, and 
the jingle of the piano. A grave without rest, death 
without the privileges of the departed, who have no 
longer any need to spend money, or to write letters, 
or to compose books. What a melancholy situation ! " 

He died, and has left a blemished name ; with his 
crying faults, — ^his intemperate susceptibility, his un- 
scrupulousness in passion, his inconceivable attacks on 
his enemies, his still more inconceivable attacks on 
his friends, his want of generosity, his sensuality, his 
incessant mocking, — ^how could it be otherwise f Not 



192 ESSAYS m CRITICISM. [v. 

only was he not one of Mr. Carlyle's " respectable " 
people, he was profoundly (^isrespectable ; and not 
even the merit of not being a Philistine can make up 
for a man's being that To his intellectual deliver- 
ance there was an addition of something else wanting, 
and that something else was something immense ; the 
old-fashioned, laborious, eternally needful moral de- 
liverance. Goethe says that he was deficient in love ; 
to me his weakness seems to be not so much a defici- 
ency in love as a deficiency in self-respect^ in true 
dignity of character. But on this negative side of 
one's criticism of a man of great genius, I for my 
part, when I have once clearly marked that this negar 
tive side is and must be there, have no pleasure in 
dwelling. I prefer to say of Heine something posi- 
tive. He is not an adequate interpreter of the modem 
world. He is only a brilliant soldier in the Liberation 
War of humanity. But^ such as he is, he is (and 
posterity too, I am quite sure, will say this), in the 
European poetry of that quarter of a century which 
follows the death of Goethe, incomparably the most 
important figure. 

What a spendthrift, one is tempted to cry, is 
Nature! With what prodigality, in the march of 
generations, she employs human power, content to 
gather almost always little result from it^ sometimes 
none ! Look at Bjrron, that Byron whom the present 
generation of Englishmen are forgetting ; Byron, the 
greatest natural force, the greatest elementary power, 
I cannot but think which has appeared in our litera- 
ture since Shakspeare. And what became of thii 



tr.] HEINRICH HEINE. 193 

wonderful production of nature ? He shattered him- 
self, he inevitably shattered himself to pieces against 
the huge, black, cloud-topped, interminable precipice 
of British Philistinism. But Byron, it may be said, 
was eminent only by his genius, only by his inborn 
force and fire ; he had not the intellectual equip- 
ment of a supreme modem poet ; except for his genius 
he was an ordinary nineteenth-century English gentle- 
man, with little culture and with no ideas. Well, 
then, look at Heine. Heine had all the culture of 
Germany; in his head fermented all the ideas of 
modem Europa And what have we got from Heine ? 
A half-result, for want of moral balance, and of noble- 
ness of soul and character. That is what I say; 
there is so much power, so many seem able to run 
well, so many give promise of ranning well ; — so few 
reach the goal, so few are chosen. Many curt called, 
few chosen. 



YOL.I O 



VI. 

PAGAN AND MEDIEVAL EELIGIOUS 
SENTIMENT. 

I REAB tiie other day in the DvUin Bemew .- — " We 
Catholics are apt to be cowed and scared by the lordly 
oppression of public opinion, and not to bear onr- 
■elves as men in the face of the anti-Catholic society 
of England. It la good to have an habitual conscioos- 
□ess that the pubhc opinion of Catholic Europe looks 
upon Protestant England with a nurture of impatience 
and compassion, which more than balances the arro- 
gance of the English people towards the Catholic 
Church in these countries." 

The Holy Catholic Church, Apostolic and Roman, 

can take very good care of herself, and I am not going 

to defend her against the scorns of Exeter HalL 

Catholicism is not a great visible force in this conntry, 

and the mass of mankind will always treat lightly 

even things the most venerable, if they do not pro- 

8 visible forces before its eyes. In 

, as the Dublin Review itself says with 

ke very little account of the great- 



vi,] PAGAN & MEDIiEVAL RELIGIOUS SENTIMENT. 195 

ness of Exeter HalL The majority has eyes only for 
the things of the majority, and in England the im- 
mense majority is Protestant And yet, in spite of 
all the shocks which the feeling of a good Catholic, 
like the writer in the Dublin Review^ has in this Pro- 
testant country inevitably to undergo, in spite of the 
contemptuous insensibility to the grandeur of Rome 
which he finds so general and so hard to bear, how 
much has he to console him, how many acts of homage 
to the greatness of his religion may he see if he has 
his eyes open! I will tell him of one of them. Let him 
go in London to that delightful spot, that Happy 
Island in Bloomsbury, the reading-room of the Bri- 
tish Museum. Let him visit its sacred quarter, the 
region where its theological books are placed. I am 
almost afraid to say what he will find there, for fear 
Mr. Spurgeon, like a second Caliph Omar, should give 
the library to the flames. He will find an immense 
Catholic work, the collection of the Abb6 Migne, 
lording it over that whole region, reducing to insigni- 
ficance the feeble Protestant forces which hang upon 
its skirts. Protestantism is duly represented, indeed : 
the librarian knows his business too well to sufifer it 
to be otherwise; all the varieties of Protestantism are 
there ; there is the Library of Anglo-Catholic Theo- 
logy, learned, decorous, exemplary, but a little unin- 
teresting ; there are the works of Calvin, rigid, mili- 
tant, menacing ; there are the works of Dr. Chalmers, 
the Scotch thistle valiantly doing duty as the rose of 
Sharon, but keeping something very Scotch about it 
all the time ; there are the works of Dr. Channing, 






V-' 



196 ESSAYS m CRinOISBL [tl 

the laat word of religious philosophy in a land where 
every one has some culture, and where superiorities 
are discountenanced, — the flower of moral and intelli- 
gent mediocrity. But how are all these divided against 
one another, and how, though they were all united, 
are they dwarfed by the Catholic Leviathan, their 
neighbour 1 Majestic in its blue and gold unity, this 
fills shelf after shelf and compartment after compart- 
ment, its right mounting up into heaven among the 
white folios of the Ada Sandorumy its left plunging 
down into hell among the yellow octavos of the Law 
Digest. Everything is there, in that immense Patra- 
loguB Owrsus Compldus^ in that Encydopidie ThMogique^ 
that NovmLU Encydopidie Thiologvjue^ that Troisikne 
EncydopidU ThMogique; religion, philosophy, history, 
biography, arts, sciences, bibliography, gossip. The 
work embraces the whole range of human interests ; 
like one of the great Middle-Age Cathedrals, it is in 
itself a study for a life. Like the net in Scripture, 
it drags everything to land, bad and good, lay and 
ecclesiastical, sacred and profane, so that it be but 
matter of human concern. Wide-embracing as the 
power whose product it is ! a power, for history at 
any rate, eminently the Chwrch; not, perhaps, the 
Church of the future, but indisputably the Church of 
the past and, in the past^ the Church of the mul- 
titude. 

This is why the man of imagination — nay, and the 

^ philosopher too, in spite of her propensity to bum 

him — ^will always have a weakness for the Catholic 

Church ; because of the rich treasures of human life 



vX 



VI.] PAGAN k MEDI^SYAL BRLIGIOUS SENTIMENT. 197 

which have been stored within her pale. The mention 
of other religious bodies, or of their leaders, at once 
calls up in our mind the thought of men of a definite 
type as their adherents ; the mention of Catholicism 
suggests no such special following. Anglicanism sug- 
gests the English episcopate ; Calvin's name suggests 
Dr Candlish ; Chalmers's, the Duke of Argyll; Chan- 
ning's, Boston society; but Catholicism suggests, — 
what shall I sayl — ^all the pell-mell of the men and 
women of Shakspeare's plays. TIus abundance the 
Abb6 Migne's collection faithfully reflects. People 
talk of this or that work which they would choose, if 
they were to pass their life with only one ; for my 
part I think I would choose the Abb^ Migne's collec- 
tion. Quicguid agwni honmesy — everything, as I have 
said, is there. Do not seek in it splendour of form, 
perfection of editing ; its paper is common, its type 
ugly, its editing indifferent, its printing careless. The 
greatest and most baffling crowd of misprints I ever 
met with in my life occurs in a very important page 
of the introduction to the Didiannavre des Apooryphes, 
But this is just what you have in the world, — quan- 
tity rather than quality. Do not seek in it impar- 
tiality, the critical spirit ; in reading it you must do 
the criticism for yourself ; it loves criticism as little 
as the world loves it Like the world, it chooses to 
have things all its own way, to abuse its adversary, 
to back its own notion through thick and thin, to put 
forward all the pros for its own notion, to suppress all 
the contras ; it does just all that the world does, and 
all that the critical shrinks frouL Open the Didum' 



198 ESSAYS IN CKinCISM. [vi. 

naire du Errewrs Socides : " The religious persecutions 
of Henry the Eighth's and Edward the Sixth's time 
abated a little in the reign of Mary, to break out 
again with new fury in the reign of Elizabeth." 
There is a summary of the history of religious per- 
secution under the Tudors! But how unreasonable 
to reproach the Abb6 Migne's work with wanting a 
criticism, which, by the very nature of things, it can- 
not have, and not rather to be grateful to it for its 
abundance, its yiy:iety, its infinite suggestiveness, its 
happy adoption, in many a delicate circumstance, of 
the urbane tone and temper of the man of the world, 
instead of the acrid tone and temper of the fanatic ! 

Still, in spite of their fascinations, the contents of 
this collection sometimes rouse the critical spirit within 
one. It happened that lately, after I had been think- 
ing much of Marcus Aurelius and his times, I took 
down the DicHanfnaire des Origines du Christianismey to 
see what it had to say about paganism and pagans. 
I found much what I expected. I read th« article, 
BSv^lation Evcmgdlique, sa NScessUd, There I found 
what a sink of iniquity was the whole pagan world ; 
how one Roman fed his oysters on his slaves, how 
another put a slave to death that a curious friend 
might see what djmg was like ; how Galen's mother 
tore and bit her waiting-women when she was in a 
passion with them. I foimd this account of the re- 
ligion of paganism: ''Paganism invented a mob of 
divinities with the most hateful character, and attri- 
buted to them the most monstrous and abominable 
orimea. It personified in them drunkenness, incest^ 



n.] PAGAK k MEDLfflVAL RELIGIOtTS SENTIMENT. 199 

kidnapping, adultery, sensuality, knavery, ciiieltyi 
and rage." And I found that from this religion there 
followed such practice as was to be expected ; " What 
must naturally have been the state of morals under 
the influence of such a religion, which penetrated with 
its own spirit the public life, the family life, and the 
individual life of antiquity?" 

The colours in this picture are laid on very thick, 
and I for my part cannot believe that any human 
societies, with a religion and practice such as those 
just described, could ever have endured as the societies 
of Greece and Eome endured, still less have done what 
the societies of Greece and Eome did. We are not 
brought far by descriptions of the vices of great cities, 
or even of individuals driven mad by unbounded 
means of self-indulgence. Feudal and aristocratic life 
in Christendom has produced horrors of selfishness 
and cruelty not surpassed by the grandee of pagan 
Eome ; and then, again, in antiquity there is Marcus 
Aurelius's mother to set against Galen's. Eminent 
examples of vice and virtue in individuals prove little 
as to the state of societies. What, under the first 
emperors, was the condition of the Eoman poor upon 
the Aventine compared with that of our poor in Spital- 
fields and Bethnal Green ? What, in comfort, morals, 
and happiness, were the rural population of the Sabine 
country under Augustus's rule, compared with the 
rural population of Hertfordshire and Buckingham- 
Bhire under the rule of Queen Victoria ? 

But these great questions are not now for ma 
Without ttyiag to answer them, I ask myself, when I 



200 ESSAYS IN CRinCISliL Lti 

read such declamation as the foregomg, if I can find 
anything that will give me a near, distinct sense of 
the real difference in spirit and sentiment between 
paganism and Christianity, and of the natural effect 
of this difference upon people in general I take a 
representative religious poem of paganism, — of the 
paganism which all the world has in its mind when it 
speaks of paganisuL To be a representative poem, it 
must be one for popular use, one that the multitude 
listens to. Such a religious poem may be found at 
the end of one of the best and happiest of Theocritns's 
idylls, the fifteentL In order that the reader may 
the better go along with me in the line of thought I 
am following, I will translate it ; and, that he may see 
the medium in which religious poetry of this sort is 
found existing, the society out of which it grows, the 
people who form it and are formed by it^ I will trans 
late the whole, or nearly the whole, of the idyll (it 
is not long) in which the poem occur& 

The idyll is dramatic. Somewhere about two 
hundred and eighty years before the Christian era, 
a couple of Syracusan women, staying at Alexandria, 
agreed on the occasion of a great religious solemnity, 
— ^the feast of Adonis, — ^to go together to the palace 
of T^JTig Ptolemy Philadelphus, to see the image of 
Adonis, which the queen Arsinoe, Ptolemy's wife, had 
had decorated with peculiar magnificence. A hymn, 
by a celebrated performer, was to be recited over the 
image. The names of the two women are Gorgo and 
Praxinoe; their maids, who are mentioned in the 
poem, are called Eunoe and Eutychis. Gorgo comes 



"*^'"«'*^>**^^^"^"W^i^^n«Ml«M«BnHB«OTBi^HiHHHHPi^HVa*OTI 



VI.] PAGAN k MEDIEVAL RELIGIOUS SENTIMENT. 201 

by appointment to Praxinoe's house to fetch her, and 
there the dialogue begins : — 

Gargo. — Is Praxinoe at home 1 

Fraainoe. — ^My dear Gtergo, at last ! Yes, here I 
am. Eunoe, find a chair,— get a cushion for it 

Oorgo. — ^It will do beautifully as it ia 

Fraxi/noe, — ^Do sit down. 

Gorgo. — Oh, this gad-about spirit ! I could hardly 
get to you, Praxinoe, through all the crowd and all 
the carriages. Nothing but heavy boots, nothing but 
men in uniform. And what a journey it isl My 
dear child, you really live too fej^ ofL 

Fraxmoe. — ^It is all that insane husband of mine. 
He has chosen to come out here to the end of the 
world, and take a hole of a place, — foi a house it is 
not) — on purpose that you and I might not be neigh- 
bours. He is always just the same; — anything to 
quarrel with one ! anythmg for spite ! 

Gorgo. — My dear, don't talk so of your husband 
before the little fellow. Just see how astonished he 
looks at you. Never mind, Zop3rrio, my pet^ she is 
not talking about papa. 

Fraxmoe. — Good heavens! the child does really 
understand 

Gorgo. — ^Pretty papa ! 

Fraamoe. — That pretty papa of his the other day 
(though I told him beforehand to mind what he wa^ 
about), when I sent him to a shop to buy soap and 
rouge, brought me home salt instead ; — ^stupid, great, 
big, interminable animal 1 

Qorgo. — Mine is just the fellow to him. . . . But 



202 ESSAYS m CRITICISM. [yi 

aever mind now, get on your things and let us be ofi 
to the palace to see the Adonis. I hear the Queen's 
decorations are something splendid. 

Praxinoe. — In grand people's houses eveiything is 
grand. What things you have seen in Alexandria ! 
What a deal you will have to tell to anybody who has 
never been here ! 

Oorgo. — Come, we ought to be going. 

Praaitwe. — Every day is holiday to people who 
have nothing to do. Eunoe, pick up your work ; and 
take care, lazy girl, how you leave it lying about 
again ; the cats find it just the bed they like. Gome, 
stir yourself, fetch me some water, quick ! I wanted 
the water firsts and the girl brings me the soap. 
Never mind ; give it me. Not all that, extravagant ! 
Now pour out the water; — stupid! why don't you 
take care of my dress t That will da I have got 
my hands washed as it pleased Grod. Where is the 
key of the large wardrobe 1 Bring it here ; — quick ! 

Gorgo, — ^Praxinoe, you can't think how well that 
dress, made full, as you have got it^ suits you. Tell 
me, how much did it cost 1 — ^the dress by itself, I 
mean. 

Proidnoe, — ^Don't talk of it^ Gk)rgo: more than 
eight guineas of good hard money. And about the 
work on it I have almost worn my life out 

Gorgo, — Well, you couldn't have done better. 

Praainoe. — ^Thank you. Bring me my shawl, and 
put my hat properly on my head ; — properly. No, 
child (to her lUUe hoy), I am not going to take you ; 
there's a bogy on horseback, who bites. Cry as much 



n.] PAGAN k MEDIEVAL RELIGIOUS SENTIMENT. 203 

as you like ; I'm not going to have jou lamed for 
lifa Now well start. Nurse, take the little one and 
amuse him ; call the dog in, and shut the streetnioor. 
(They go out,) Good heavens! what a crowd oi 
people 1 How on earth are we ever to get through 
all this 1 They are like ants : you can't count them. 
My dearest Gorge, what will become of us ? here are 
the royal Horse Guards. My good man, don't ride 
over me 1 Look at that bay horse rearing bolt up- 
right ; what a vicious one 1 Eunoe, you mad girl, do 
take care ! — that horse will certainly be the death of 
the man on his back. How glad I am now, that I 
left the child safe at home ! 

Gorgo. — ^All right, Prazinoe, we are safe behind 
them; and they have gone on to where they are 
stationed. 

Fraamoe. — Well, yes, I begin to revive again. 
From the time I was a little girl I have had more 
horror of horses and snakes than of anything in the 
world. Let us get on ; here's a great crowd coming 
this way upon us. 

Gargo {to cm old woman). — Mother, are you from the 
palace f 

Old Womcm, — Yes, my dears. 

Gorgo. — Has one a tolerable chance of getting there 1 

Old Woman, — My pretty young lady, the Greeks 
got to Troy by dint of trying hard ; trying will do 
anything in this world. 

Gorgo, — The old creature has delivered herself of 
an oracle and departed. 

PraoMioe. — ^Women can tell you everything about 



204 ESSAYS DC CRinOISM. [yi 

everything, Jupiter's marriage with Juno not ex 
cepted. 

Ghrgo. — ^Look, Praxinoe, what a squeeze at the 
palace gates 1 

Prasoinoe. — ^Tremendous ! Take hold of me, Goigo j 
and you, Eunoe, take hold of Eutychis ! — ^tight hold, 
or you'll be lost Here we go in all together. Hold 
tight to us, Eunoe! Oh, dear! oh, dear! Gorgo, 
there's my scarf torn right in twa For heaven's 
sake, my good man, as you hope to be saved, take 
care of my dress ! 

Strcmger. — I'll do what I can, but it doesn't depend 
upon me. 

Praxinoe. — ^What heaps of people 1 They push 
like a drove of pigs. 

Strcmger, — ^Don't be frightened, ma'am, we are all 
right 

Praadnoe. — ^May you be all right> my dear sir, to 
the last day you live, for the care you have taken of 
us 1 What a kind, considerate man ! There is 
Eunoe jammed in a squeeze. Push, you goose, push ! 
Capital 1 We are all of us the right side of the door, 
as the bridegroom said when he had locked himself in 
with the bride. 

Gorgo, — ^Praxinoe, come this way. Do but look at 
that work, how delicate it is ! — ^how exquisite ! Why, 
they might wear it in heaven. 

Praamoe, — ^Heavenly patroness of needlewomen, 
what hands were hired to do that work 1 Who de- 
signed those beautiful patterns 1 They seem to stand 
up and move about, as if they were real ;— as if they 



VI. J PAGAN k MIDLEVAL RELIGIOUS SENTIMENT. 200 

were living things, and not needlework. Well, man 
is a wonderful creatnre ! And look, look, how charm- 
ing he lies there on his silver couch, with just a soft 
down on his cheeks, that beloved Adonis, — ^Adonis, 
whom one loves even though he is dead ! 

Another Stranger. — You wretched women, do stop 
your incessant chatter ! Like turtles, you go on for 
ever. They are enough to kill one with their broad 
lingo, — nothing but a, a, a. 

Gorgo, — Lord, where does the man come fromi 
What is it to you if we are chatterboxes? Order 
about your own servants! Do you give orders to 
Syracusan women 1 If you want to know, we came 
originally from Corinth, as Bellerophon did ; we speak 
Peloponnesian. I suppose Dorian women may be 
allowed to have a Dorian accent 

Praxinoe, — Oh, honey-sweet Proserpine, let us have 
no more masters than the one we've got ! We don't 
the least care for you ; pray don't trouble yourself for 
nothing. 

Oorgo, — Be quiet, Praxinoe ! That first-rate singer, 
the Argive woman's daughter, is going to sing the 
Adonis hymn. She is the same who was chosen to 
sing the dirge last year. We are sure to have some- 
thing first-rate from her. She is going through her 
airs and graces ready to begin. — 

So far the dialogue ; and, as it stands in the ori- 
ginal, it can hardly be praised too highly. It is a 
page torn fresh out of the book of human life. What 
freedom ! What animation ! What gaiety ! What 
naturahiess ! It is said that Theocritus, in composing 



206 ESSATS IN CKinCISM. [VL 

this poem, borrowed from a work of Sophron, a poet 
of an earlier and better time ; but, even if this is so, 
the form is still Theocritos's own, and how excellent 
is that form, how masterly ! And this in a Greek 
poem of the decadence ! — ^f or Theocritus's poetry, after 
all, is poetry of the decadence. When such is Greek 
poetry of the decadence, what must be Greek poetry 
of the prime 1 

Then the singer begins her hymn : — 

'' Mistress, who loveth the haunts of €k>lgi, and 
Idalium, and high-peaked Eryz, Aphrodite that play- 
est with gold ! how have the delicate-footed Hours, 
after twelve months, brought thy Adonis back to thee 
from the ever-flowing Acheron! Tardiest of the 
immortals are the boon Hours, but all mankind wait 
their approach with longing, for they ever bring some- 
thing with them, Cjrpris, Dione's child! thou 
didst change — so is the story among men — Berenice 
from mortal to immortal, by dropping ambrosia into 
her fair bosom ; and in gratitude to thee for this, 
thou of many names and many temples 1 Berenice's 
daughter, Arsinoe, lovely Helen's living counterpart, 
makes much of Adonis with all manner of braveries. 

" All fruits that the tree bears are laid before him, 
all treasures of the garden in silver baskets, and ala- 
baster boxes, gold-inlaid, of Syrian ointment ; and all 
confectionery that cunning women make on their 
kneading-tray, kneading up every sort of flowers with 
white meal, and all that they make of sweet honey 
and delicate oil, and all winged and creeping things 
%f^ here set before him. And there are built for him 



71.] PAGAN k MEDLffiVAL RELIGIOUS SENTIMENT. 207 

green bowers with wealth of tender anise, and little 
boy-loves flutter about over them, like young night- 
ingales trying their new wings on the tree, from bough 
to bough. Oh, the ebony, the gold, the eagle of white 
ivory that bears aloft his cup-bearer to Cronos-bom 
Zeus ! And up there, see ! a second couch strewn 
for lovely Adonis, scarlet coverlets softer than sleep 
itself (so Miletus and the Samian wool -grower will 
say) ; Cypris has hers, and the rosy-armed Adonis has 
his, that eighteen or nineteen-year-old bridegroom. His 
kisses will not wound, the hair on his lip is yet light 

" Now, Cypris, good-night, we leave thee with thy 
bridegroom ; but to-morrow morning, with the ear- 
liest dew, we will one and all bear him forth to where 
the waves splash upon the sea-strand, and letting 
loose our locks, and letting fall our robes, with bosoms 
bare, we will set up this, our melodious strain : 

" ' Beloved Adonis, alone of the demigods (so men 
say) thou art permitted to visit both us and Acheron ! 
This lot had neither Agamemnon, nor the mighty 
moon-struck hero Ajax, nor Hector the first-bom of 
Hecuba's twenty children, nor Patroclus, nor Pyrrhus 
who came home from Troy, nor those yet earlier 
Lapith88 and the sons of Deucalion, nor the Pelasgians, 
the root of Argos and of Pelop's isle. Be gracious to 
us now, loved Adonis, and be favourable to us for the 
year to come ! Dear to us hast thou been at this coming, 
dear to us shalt thou be when thou comest again.' '' 

The poem concludes with a characteristic speech 
from Grorgo : — 

*' PnPTOoe, certainly women ^e wonderful things 



208 ESSAYS IN OKinCISM. [VL 

That lucky woman to know all that ! and luckier still 
to have such a splendid voice ! And now we must 
see about getting home. My husband has not had 
his dinner. That man is all vinegar, and nothing 
else ; and if you keep him waiting for his dinner, he's 
dangerous to go near. Adieu, precious Adonis, and 
may you find us all well when you come next year ! ** 

So, with the hymn still in her ears, says the incor- 
rigible Gorgo. 

But what a hymn that is ! Of religious emotion, 
in our acceptation of the words, and of the comfort 
springing from religious emotion, not a particle. And 
yet many elements of religious emotion are contained 
in the beautiful story of Adonis. Symbolically treated, 
as the thoughtful man might treat it, as the Greek 
mysteries undoubtedly treated it, this story was cap- 
able of a noble and touching application, and could 
lead the soul to elevating and consoling thoughts. 
Adonis was the sun in his summer and in his winter 
course, in his time of triumph and his time of defeat ; 
but in his time of triumph still moving towards his 
defeat, in his time of defeat still returning towards 
his triumph. Thus he became an emblem of the 
power of life and the bloom of beauty, the power of 
human life and the bloom of human beauty, hasten- 
ing inevitably to diminution and decay, yet in that 
very decay finding 

"Hope, and a renoyation without end." 

But nothing of this appears in the story as prepared 
for popular religious use, as presented to the multitude 



n.] PAGAN k MEDLEVAL RELIGIOUS SENTIMENT. 209 

in a popular religious ceremony. Its treatment is 
not devoid of a certain grace and beauty, but it 
has nothing whatever that is elevating, nothing 
that is consoling, nothing that is in our sense of the 
word religioua The religious ceremonies of Christ- 
endom, even on occasion of the most joyful and 
mundane matters, present the multitude with strains 
of profoundly religious character, such as the Kyrie 
eleison and the^ Te Deum, But this Greek hymn to 
Adonis adapts itself exactly to the tone and temper of 
a. gay and pleasure-loving multitude, — of light-hearted 
people, like Gorgo and Praxinoe, whose moral nature 
is much of the same calibre as that of Phillina in 
Goethe's WUhdm Meister^ people who seem never 
made to be serious, never made to be sick or sorry. 
And, if they happen to be sick or sorry, what will 
they do then? But that we have no right to ask. 
Phillina, within the enchanted bounds of Goethe's 
novel, Gorgo and Praxinoe, within the enchanted 
bounds of Theocritus's poem, never will be sick and 
sorry, never can be sick and sorry. The ideal, cheer- 
ful, sensuous, pagan life is not sick or sorry. No ; 
yet its natural end is in the sort of life which Pompeii 
and Herculaneum bring so vividly before us, — a life 
which by no means in itself suggests the thought of 
horror and misery, which even, in many ways, grati- 
fies the senses and the understanding; but by the 
very intensity and unremittingness of its appeal to 
the senses and the understanding, by its stimulating 
a single side of us too absolutely, ends by fatiguing 
and revolting us ; ends by leaving us with a sense 

VOL. L P 



210 ESSATS m CRITIGISM. [yi 

of confinement, of oppression, — with a desire for an 
utter change, for clouds, storms, effusion, and relief. 

In the beginning of the thirteenth century, when 
the clouds and storms had come, when the gay sensu- 
ous pagan life was gone, when men were not living 
by the senses and understanding, when they were 
looking for the speedy coming of Antichrist, there 
appeared in Italy, to the north of Rome, in the beau- 
tiful Umbrian country at the foot of the Apennines, 
a figure of the most magical power and charm, St 
Francis. His century is, I think, the most interesting 
in the history of Christianity after its primitive age, 
more interesting than even the century of the Refor- 
mation; and one of the chief figures, perhaps the 
very chief, to which this interest attaches itself, is St 
Francis. And why? Because of the prof ound popular 
instinct which enabled him, more than any man since 
the primitive age, to fit religion for popular use. 
He brought religion to the peopla He founded the 
most popular body of ministers of religion that has 
ever existed in the Church. He transformed mona- 
chism by uprooting the stationary monk, delivering 
him from the bondage of property, and sending him, 
as a mendicant friar, to be a stranger and sojourner, 
not in the wilderness, but in the most crowded haunts 
of men, to console them and to do them good. This 
popular instinct of his is at the bottom of his famous 
marriage with poverty. Poverty and suffering are 
the condition of the people, the multitude, the im- 
mense majority of mankind ; and it was towards this 
f9opU that his soul yearned. "He listens," it was 



VI.] PAGAN k MEDIiEVAL RELIGIOUS SENTIMENT. 211 

said of him, " to those to whom God himself will not 
listen." " '>>u>-re^ '^*^^ hp'-^^ 

So in return, as no other man he was listened to. 
When an Umbrian town or village heard of his 
approach, the whole population went out in joyful 
procession to meet him, with green boughs, flags, 
music, and songs of gladness. The master, who 
began with two disciples, could in his own lifetime 
(and he died at forty-four) collect to keep Whitsun- 
tide with him, in presence of an immense multitude, 
five thousand of his Minorites. And thus he found 
fulfilment to his prophetic cry : " I hear in my ears 
the sound of the tongues of all the nations who shall 
come unto us; Frenchmen, Spaniards, Germans, 
Englishmen. The Lord will make of us a great 
people, even unto the ends of the earth." 

Prose could not satisfy this ardent soul, and he 
made poetry. Latm was too learned for this simple, 
populaT n^ure, and he composed in his motL 
tongue, in Italian. The beginnings of the mundane 
poetry of the Italians are in Sicily, at the court of 
kings ; the beginnings of their reUgious poetry are in 
Umbria, with St. Francis. His are the hiunble upper 
waters of a mighty stream ; at the beginning of the 
thirteenth century it is St Francis, at the end, Dante. 
Now it happens that St Francis, too, like the Alex- 
andrian songstress, has his hymn for the sun, for Adonis. 
Ccmtide of the Sirn^ Canticle of the Creatvres, — the 
poem goes by both names. Like the Alexandrian 
hymn, it is designed for popular use, but not for use 
by King Ptolemy's people; artless in languagOt 



212 ESSAYS m CRITICISM. [n 

irregular in rhythm, it matches with the childlike 
genius that produced it, and the simple natures that 
loved and repeated it : — 

" most high, almighty, good Lord God, to thee 
belong praise, glory, honour, and all blessing ! 

" Praised be my Lord God with all his creatures ; 
and specially our brother the sun, who brings us the 
day, and who brings us the light; fair is he, and 
shining with a very great splendour: Lord, he 
signifies to us thee ! 

" Praised be my Lord for our sister the moon, and 
for the stars, the which he has set clear and lovely in 
heaven. 

"Praised be my Lord for our brother the wind, 
and for air and cloud, calms and all weather, by the 
which thou upholdest in life all creatures. 

" Praised be my Lord for our sister water, who is 
very serviceable unto us, and humble, and precious, 
and clean. 

" Praised be my Lord for our brother fire, through 
whom thou givest us light in the darkness ; and he is 
bright, and pleasant, and very mighty, and strong. 

"Praised be my Lord for our mother the earth, 
the which doth sustain us and keep us, and bringeth 
forth divers fruits, and flowers of many colours, and 
grass. 

"Praised be my Lord for all those who pardon 
one another for his love's sake, and who endure weak- 
ness and tribulation ; blessed are they who peaceably 
shall endure, for thou, O most Highest, ahalt give 
them a crown ! 



▼l] pagan & MEDI-ffiVAL REUGIOUS SENTIMENT. 213 

" Praised be my Lord for our sister, the death ol 
the body, from whom no man escapeth. Woe to 
him who dieth in mortal sin ! Blessed are they who 
are found walking by thy most holy will, for the 
second death shall have no power to do them harm. 

" Praise ye, and bless ye the Lord, and rive thanks 
unto him, aid serve Wm vnth great humilhy." 

It is natural that man should take pleasure in his 
senses. But it is natural, also, that he should take 
refuge in his heart and imagination from his misery. 
And when one thinks what hiunan life is for the vast 
majority of mankind, how little of a feast for their 
senses it can possibly be, one understands the charm 
for them of a refuge offered in the heart and imagina- 
tion. Above all, when one thinks what human life 
was in the Middle Ages, one understands the charm 
of such a refuge. 

Now, the poetry of Theocritus's hymn is poetry 
treating the world according to the demand of the 
senses; the poetry of St. Francis's hymn is poetry 
treating the world according to the demand of the 
heart and imagination. The first takes the world by 
its outward, sensible side ; the second by its inward, 
symbolical side. The first admits as much of the 
world as is pleasure - giving ; the second admits the 
whole world, rough and smooth, painful and pleasure- 
giving, all alike, but all transfigiu'ed by the power of 
a spiritual emotion, all brought under a law of super- 
sensual love, having its seat in the soul. It can thus 
even say: "Praised be my Lord for ow sister, the 
deaih of the bodyJ' 



214 ESSAYS IN CBITIGISM. [yl 

But these very words are, perhaps, an mdication 
that we are touching upon an extrema When we see 
Pompeii, we can put our finger upon the pagan senti- 
ment in its extrema And when we read of Monte 
Alvemo and the digmaJta; when we read of the 
repulsive, because self-caused, sufferings of the end of 
St Francis's life ; when we find him even saying, '* I ' 

have sinned against my brother the ass," meaning by 
these words that he had been too hard upon his own 
body; when we find him assailed, even himself, by 
the doubt ''whether he who had destroyed himself 
by the severity of his penances could find mercy in 
eternity," we can put our finger on the medisBvaJ 
Christian sentiment in its extrema Human nature 
is neither all senses and understanding, nor all heart 
and imagination. Pompeii was a sign that for 
humanity at large the measure of sensualism had 
been overpassed; St Francis's doubt was a sign « 

that for humanity at large the measure of spirit- 
ualism had been overpassed. Humanity, in its 
violent rebound from one extreme, had swung from 
Pompeii to Monte Alvemo; but it was sure not to 
stay thera 

The Renascence is, in part, a return towards the 
v^ pagan spirit, in the special sense in which I have been 
using the word pagan ; a return towards the life of 
the senses and the understanding. The Reformation, 
on the other hand, is the very opposite to this; in 
Luther there is nothing Greek or pagan ; vehemently 
as he attacked the adoration of St Francis, Luther i 

had himself something of St Francis in him ; he was »< 



71.] PAGAN k MEDLEYAL RELIGIOUS SENTIMENT. 215 

a thousand times more akin to St. Francis than to 
Theocritus or to Voltaire. The Eeformation — I do 
not mean the inferior piece given under that name, 
by Henry the Eighth and a second-rate company, in 
this island, but the real Eeformation, the German 
Eeformation, Luther's Eeformation — was a reaction 
of the moral and spiritual sense against the carnal 
and pagan sense ; it was a religious revival like St. 
Francis's, but this time against the Church of Eome, 
not within her ; for the carnal and pagan sense had 
now, in the government of the Church of Eome her- 
self, its prime representativa But the grand reaction 
against the rule of the heart and imagination, the 
strong return towards the rule of the senses and 
understandrng, is in the eighteenth century. And 
this reaction has had no more brilliant champion than 
a man of the nineteenth, of whom I have already 
spoken ; a man who could feel not only the pleasur- 
ableness but the poetry of the life of the senses (and 
the life of the senses has its deep poetry); a man 
who, in his very last poem, divided the whole world 
into " barbarians and Greeks," — Heinrich Heine. No 
man has reproached the Monte Alvemo extreme in 
sentiment, the Christian extreme, the heart and 
imagination subjugating the senses and understanding, 
more bitterly than Heine ; no man has extolled . the 
Pompeii extreme, the pagan extreme, more raptur- 
ously. 

" All through the Middle Age these sufferings, this 
fever, this over-tension lasted ; and we modems stilT 
feel in aU our limbs the pain and weakness from them. 



i^ 



o 



216 ESSAYS IN CRITICISM. [vi 

£ven those of us who are cured have still to live with 
a hospital-atmosphere all around us, and find ourselves 
as wretched in it as a strong man among the sick. 
Some day or other, when humanity shall have got 
quite well again, when the body and soul shall have 
made their peace together, the fictitious quarrel which 
Christianity has cooked up between them will appear 
something; hardly comprehensible. The fairer and 
happier fenerations. oJspring of unfettered unions, 
that will rise up and bloom in the atmosphere of a 
religion of pleasure, will smile sadly when they think 
of their poor ancestors, whose life was passed in 
melancholy abstinence from the joys of this beautiful 
earth, and who faded away into spectres, from the 
mortal compression which they put upon the warm 
and glowing emotions of sense. Yes, with assurance 
I say it^ our descendants will be fairer and happier 
than we are ; for I am a believer in progress, and I 
hold God to be a kind being who has intended man 
to be happy." 

That is Heine's sentiment^ in the prime of life, in 
the glow of activity, amid the brilliant whirl of Paris. 
I will no more blame it than I blamed the sentiment 
of the Greek hymn to Adonis. I wish to decide 
nothing as of my own authority ; the great art of 
criticism is to get oneself out of the way and to let 
w humanity decide. Well, the sentiment of the " reli- 
gion of pleasure" has much that is natural in it: 
humanity will gladly accept it if it can live by it ; to 
live by it one must never be sick or sorry, and .the 
old, ideal, limited, pagan world never, I have said, 



VI.] PAGAN k MEDLfiVAL RELIGIOUS SENTIMENT. 217 

mi.* sick or sorry, never at least shows itself to us sick 
or sorry : — 

'* What pipes and timbrels ! what wild ecstasy ! " 

For our imagination, Gorgo and Praxinoe cross the 
human stage chattering in their blithe Doric, — like 
turtles, as the cross stranger said, — and keep gaily 
chattering on till they disappear. But in the new, 
real, immense, post-pagan world, — in the barbarian 
world, — the shock of accident is unceasing, the 
serenity of existence is perpetually troubled, not even 
a Greek like Heine can get across the mortal stage 
without bitter calamity. How does the sentiment of 
the " religion of pleasure " serve then 1 does it help, 
does it console 1 Can a man live by it 1 Heine again 
shall answer ; Heine just twenty years older, stricken 
with incurable disease, waiting for death : — 

" The great pot stands smoking before me, but I 
have no spoon to help myself. What does it profit 
me that my health is drunk at banquets out of gold 
cups and in most exquisite wines, if I myself, while 
these ovations are going on, lonely and cut off from 
the pleasures of the world, can only just wet my lips 
with barley-water ? What good does it do me that 
all the roses of Shiraz open their leaves and bum for 
me with passionate tenderness 1 Alas ! Shiraz is some 
two thousand leagues from the Eue d' Amsterdam, 
where in the solitude of my sick chamber all the 
perfume I smell is that of hot towels. Alas! the 
mockery of God is heavy upon me! The great 
author of the universe, the Aristophanes of Heaven, 
hafi determined to make the petty earthly author, the 



218 BSSATS IN GBinCISM. [vi. 

so-called Aristophanes of Grermany, feel to his heart's 
core what pitiful needle-pricks his cleverest sarcasms 
have been, compared with the thunderbolts which his 
divine humour can launch against feeble mortals ! . . . 

"In the year 1340, says the Chronicle of Limburg, 
all over Grermany everybody was strumming and hum- 
ming certain songs more lovely and delightful than 
any which had evei' yet been known in German coun- 
tries ; and all people, old and young, the women par- 
ticularly, were perfectly mad about them, so that from 
morning till night you heard nothing else. Only, the 
Chronicle adds, the author of these songs happened 
to be a young clerk, afflicted with leprosy, and living 
apart from all the world in a desolate place. The 
excellent reader does not require to be told how hor- 
rible a complaint was leprosy in the Middle Ages, and 
how the poor wretches who had this incurable plague 
were banished from society, and had to keep at a dis- 
tance from every human being. Like living corpses, 
in a gray gown reaching down to the ieet, and with 
the hood brought over their face, they went about, 
carrying in their hands an enormous rattle, called 
Saint Lazarus's rattle. With this rattle they gave 
notice of their approach, that every one might have 
time to get out of their way. This poor clerk, then, 
whose poetical gift the Limburg Chronicle extols, was 
a leper, and he sate moping in the dismal deserts of 
his misery, whilst all Germany, gay and tuneful, was 
praising his songs. 

" Sometimes, in my sombre visions of the night, I 
imagine that I see before me the poor leprosy -stricken 



\n.l PAGAN k MEDIiGVAL RELIGIOUS SENTIMENT. 219 

clerk of the Limburg Chronicle, and then from undei 
his gray hood his distressed eyes look out upon me 
in a fixed and strange fashion ; but the next instant 
he disappears, and I hear dying away in the distance, 
like the echo of a dream, the dull creak of Saint 
Lazarus's rattle." 

We have come a long way from Theocritus there ; 
the expression of that has nothing of the clear, posi- 
tive, happy, pagan character ; it has much more the 
character of one of the indeterminate grotesques of 
the suffering Middle Age. Profoundness and power 
it has, though at the same time it is not truly poetical; 
it is not natural enough for that, there is too much 
wa3rwardness in it^ too much bravada But as a con- 
dition of sentiment to be popular, — ^to be a comfort 
for the mass of mankind, under the pressure of cala- 
mity, to live by, — ^what a manifest failure is this last ^ 
word of the religion of pleasure ! One man in many 
millions, a Heine, may console himself, and keep him- 
seK erect in suffering, by a colossal irony of this sort, 
by covering himself and the universe with the red 
fire of this sinister mockery ; but the many millions 
cannot,— cannot if they would. That is where the 
sentiment of a religion of sorrow has such a vast 
advantage over the sentiment of a religion of pleasure j 
in its power to be a general, popular, religious senti- 
ment, a stay for the mass of mankind, whose lives are 
full of hardship. It really succeeds in conve3ring far 
more joy, far more of what the mass of mankind are 
80 much without) than its rival I do not mean joy 
in prospect only, but joy in possession, actual enjoy- 



1 



1 



220 ESSAYS IK CRITICISM. [vi. 

ment of the world. Mediadval Christiamty is re- 
proached with its gloom and austerities; it assigns 
the material world, says Heine, to the deviL But 
yet what a fulness of delight does St. Francis manage 
to draw from this material world itself, and from its 
commonest and most universally enjoyed elements, — 
sun, air, earth, water, plants ! His hynm expresses a 
far more cordial sense of happiness, even in the mate- 
rial world, than the hymn of Theocritus. It is this 

' which made the fortune of Christianity, — its gladness, 
not its sorrow ; not its assigning the spiritual world 
to Christ, and the material world to the devil, but 
its drawing from the spiritual world a source of joy 
so abundant that it ran over upon the material world 

\ aad transfigured it l^-'- 

I have said a great deal of harm of paganism; and, 
taking paganism to mean a state of things which it is 
commonly taken to mean, and which did really exist, 
no more harm than it well deserved. Yet I must not 
end without reminding the reader, that before this 
state of things appeared, there was an epoch in Greek 
life, — in pagan life, — of the highest possible beauty 
and value. That epoch by itself goes far towards 
making Greece the Greece we mean when we speak 
of Greece, — a country hardly less important to man- 
kind than Judsea. The poetry of later pagaiiism 
lived by the senses and understanding; the poetry 
of mediaeval Christianity lived by the heart and 
imagination. But the main element of the modem 
spirit's life is neither the senses and understanding, 
nor the heart and imagination ; it is the imaginative 



/ 



71.] PAGAN k MEDLaSVAL RELIGIOUS SENTIMENT. 221 



reason. And there is a century in Greek life, — the 
century preceding the Peloponnesian war, from about 
the year 530 to the year 430 B.C., — in which poetry 
made, it seems to me, the noblest, the most success- 
ful effort she has ever made as the priestess of the 
imaginative reason, of the element by which the 
modem spirit, if it would live right, has chiefly to 
live. Of this effort, of which the four great names 
are Simonides, Pindar, ^Eschylus, Sophocles, I must 
not now attempt more than the bare mention ; but 
it is right, it is necessary, after aU I have said, to 
indicate it No doubt that effort was imperfect 
Perhaps everything, take it at what point in its exist- 
ence you will, carries within itself the fatal law of its 
own ulterior development Perhaps, even of the life 
of Pindar's time, Pompeii was the inevitable bourne. 
Perhaps the life of their beautiful Greece could not 
afford to its poets all that fulness of varied experience, 
all that power of emotion, which 






* . . . the heavy and the weary weight 
Of all this unintelligible world ' 

affords the poet of after-times. Perhaps in Sophocles 
the thinking-power a little overbalances the religious 
sense, as in Dante the religious sense overbalances the 
thinking -power. The present has to make its own/ 
poetry, and not even Sophocles and his compeers, any 
more than Dante and Shakspeare, are enough for it 
That I will not dispute ; nor will I set up the Greek 
poets, from Pindar to Sophocles, as objects of blind 
worship. But no other poets so well show to the 



o 



r 



4 



/ ' 



222 ESSAYS IK CBinCISM. [yi 

poetry of the present the way it must take ; no othei 
poets have lived so much by the imaginative reason ; 
no other poets have made their work so well balanced ^ 
no other poets, who have so well satisfied the thinking- 
power, have so well satisfied the religious sense : — 

" Oh ! that my lot may lead me in the path of holy 
innocence of word and deed, the path which august 
laws ordain, laws that in the highest empyrean had 
their birth, of which Heaven is the father alone, 
neither did the race of mortal men beget them, nor 
shall oblivion ever put them to sleep. The power of 
Grod is mighty in them, and groweUi not old.'' 

Let St Francis, — nay, or Luther either, — bea4 
that! , , 



^a 



fl ^ - 4 -- »- ^.^tV^-fiZ-l J 



f\,i- r^ 






9. ^"' 






VII 



A PERSIAN PASSION PLAY. 

Everybody has this last autumn^ been either seeing 
the Ammergau Passion Play or hearing about it ; and 
to find any one who has seen it and not been deeply 
interested and moved by it, is very rare. The pea- 
sants of the neighbouring country, the great and 
fashionable world, the ordinary tourist, were all at 
Ammergau, and were all delighted ; but what is said 
to have been especially remarkable was the affluence 
there of ministers of religion of all kinds. That 
Catholic peasants, whose religion has accustomed 
them to show and spectacle, should be attracted by an 
admirable scenic representation of the great moments 
in the history of their religion, was natural; that 
tourists and the fashionable world should be attracted 
by what was at once the fashion and a new sensation 
of a powerful sort, was natural ; that many of the 
ecclesiastics present should be attracted there, was 
natural too. Eoman Catholic priests mustered strong, 
of course. The Protestantism of a great number of 

* 1871. 



224 ESSAYS m CRITICISM. Lvii 

ike Anglican clergy is supposed to be but languid, 
and Anglican ministers at Ammergau were sympa- 
thisers to be expected. But Protestant ministers of 
the most unimpeachable sort, Protestant Dissenting 
ministers, were there, too, and showing favour and 
sympathy ; and this, to any one who remembers the 
almost universal feeling of Protestant Dissenters in 
this country, not many years ago, towards Rome and 
her religion, — the sheer abhorrence of Papists and 
all their practices, — could not but be striking. It 
agrees with what is seen also in literature, in the 
writings of DissenteA of the younger and more pro- 
gressive sort, who show a disposition for regarding 
the Church of Eome historically rather than polemic- 
ally, a wish to do justice to the undoubted grandeur 
of certain institutions and men produced by that 
Church, quite novel, and quite alien to the simple 
belief of earlier times, that between Protestants and 
Rome there was a measureless gulf fixed. Something 
of this may, no doubt, be due to that keen eye for 
Nonconformist business in which our great bodies of 
Protestant Dissenters, to do them justice, are never 
wanting; to a perception that the case against the 
Church of England may be yet further improved by 
contrasting her with the genuine article in her own 
ecclesiastical line, by pointing out that she is neither 
one thing nor the other to much purpose, by dilating 
on the magnitude, reach, and impressiveness, on the 
great place in history, of her rival, as compared with 
anything she can herself pretend to. Something oi 
this there is, no doubts in some of the modem Pro- 



^^ 



ni.] A PERSIAN PASSION PLAY. 225 

testant sympathy for things Catholic. But in general 
that S3anpathy springs, in Churchmen and Dissenters 
alike, from another and a better cause, — from the 
spread of larger conceptions of religion, of man, and 
of history, than were current formerly. We have 
seen lately in the newspapers, that a clerg3nnan, who 
in a popular lecture gave an account of the Passion 
Play at Ammergau, and enlarged on its impressive- 
ness, was admonished by certain remonstrants, who 
told him it was his business, instead of occupying 
himself wiiii these sensuous shows, to learn to walk 
by faith, not by sight, and to teach his fellow-men to 
do the same. But this severity seems to have excited 
wonder rather than praise; so far had those wider 
notions about religion and about the range of our 
interest in religion, of which I have just spoken, con- 
ducted us. To this interest I propose to appeal in 
what I am going to relate. The Passion Play at 
Ammergau, with its immense audiences, the serious- 
ness of ita actors, the passionate emotion of its spec- 
tators, brought to my mind something of which I had 
read an account lately ; something produced, not in 
Bavaria nor in Christendom at all, but far away in 
that wonderful East, from which, whatever airs of 
superiority Europe may justly give itself, all our 
religion has come, and where religion, of some sort or 
other, has still an empire over men's feelings such as 
it has nowhere else. This product of the remote 
East I wish to exhibit while the remembrance of 
what has been seen at Ammergau is still fresh ; and 
we will see whether that bringing together of strangers 
VOL. L Q 



226 ESSAYS IN CRITIGISM. [vii 

and enemies who once seemed to be as far aa the 
poles asunder, which Ammergau in such a remarkable 
way effected, does not hold good and find a parallel 
even in Persia. 

Count Gobineau, formerly Minister of France at 
Teheran and at Athens, published, a few years ago, 
an interesting book on the present state of religion 
and philosophy in Central Asia. He is favourably 
known also by his studies in ethnology. His accom- 
plishments and intelligence deserve all respect, and in 
his book on religion and philosophy in Central Asia 
ho has the great advantage of writing about things 
which he has followed with his own observation and 
inquiry in the countries where they happened. The 
chief purpose of his book is to give a history of the 
career of Mirza Ali Mahommed, a Persian religious 
reformer, the original Bdb, and the founder of Bdhism, 
of which most people in England have at least heard 
the name. B4b means gate, the door or gate of life ; 
and in the ferment which now works in the Maho- 
metan East, Mirza Ali Mahommed, — who seems to 
have been made acquainted by Protestant missionaries 
with our Scriptures and by the Jews of Shiraz with 
Jewish traditions, to have studied, besides, the reli- 
gion of the Ghebers, the old national religion of 
Persia, and to have made a sort of amalgam of the 
whole with Mahometanism, — presented himself, about 
five-and-twenty years ago, as the door, the gate of 
life ; found disciples, sent forth writings, and finally 
became the cause of disturbances which led to his 
being executed on the 19th of July 1849, in the 



VII.] A PBBSIAN PASSION PLAY. 227 

citadel of Tabriz. The B4b and his doctrines are a 
theme on which much might be said; but I pass 
them by, except for one incident in the B&b's life, 
which I will notice. Like all religious Mahometans, 
he made the pilgrimage to Mecca; and his medita- 
tions at that centre of his religion first suggested his 
mission to him. But soon after his return to Bagdad 
he made another pilgrimage ; and it was in this pil 
grimage that his mission became clear to him, and 
that his life was fixed. " He desired " — I will give 
an abridgment of Count Gobineau's own words — " to 
complete his impressions by going to Kuf a^ that he 
might visit the ruined mosque where Ali was assas- 
sinated, and where the place of his murder is still 
shown. He passed several days there in meditation. 
The place appears to have made a great impression 
on him; he was entering on a course which might 
and must lead to some such catastrophe as had hap- 
pened on the very spot where he stood, and where 
his mind's eye showed him the Imam Ali lying at his 
feet, with his body pierced and bleeding. His fol- 
lowers say that he then passed through a sort of 
moral agony which put an end to all the hesitations of 
the natural man within him. It is certain that when 
he arrived at Shiraz, on his return, he was a changed 
man. No doubts troubled him any more: he was 
penetrated and persuaded ; his part was taken." 

This Ali also, at whose tomb the B&b went through 
the spiritual crisis here recorded, is a familiar name 
to most of us. In general our knowledge of the East 
goes but & very little way ; yet almost every one has 



228 BSSATS m CBinciSM. [m 

at least heard the name of Ali« the Lion of Grod, 
Mahomet's young cousin, the first person, after his 
wife, who believed in him, and who was declared by 
Mahomet in his gratitude his brother, delegate, and 
vicar. Ali was one of Mahomet's best and most 
successful captaina He married Fatima, the daughter 
of the Prophet ; his sons, Hassan and Hussein, were, 
as children, favourites with Mahomet, who had no 
son of his own to succeed him, and was expected to 
name Ali as his successor. He named no successor. 
At lus death (the year 632 of our era) Ali was passed 
over, and the first caliph, or vicar and lieidenani of 
Mahomet in the government of the state, was Abu- 
Bekr ; only the spiritual inheritance of Mahomet, the 
dignity of Imam, or Primate, devolved by right on 
Ali and lus children. Ali, lion of God as in war he 
was, held aloof from politics and political intrigue, 
loved retirement and prayer, was the most pious and 
disinterested of men. At Abu-6ekr's death he was 
again passed over in favour of Omar. Omar was 
succeeded by Othman, and still Ali remained tran- 
quil Othman was assassinated, and then Ali, chiefly 
to prevent disturbance and bloodshed, accepted (a.d. 
655) the caliphate. Meanwhile, the Mahometan 
armies had conquered Persia, Sjrria, and Egypt ; the 
Governor of Syria, Moawiyah, an able and ambitious 
man, set himself up as caliph, his title was recognised 
by Amrou, the Governor of Egypt, and a bloody and 
indecisive battle was fought in Mesopotamia between 
Ali's army and Moawiyah's. Gibbon shall tell the 
rest : — '' In the temple of Mecca three Charegites or 



711.] A PERSIAN PASSION PLAT. 229 

enthusiasts discoursed of the disorders of the church 
and state ; they soon agreed that the deaths of Ali, 
of Moawiyah, and of his friend Amrou, the Viceroy 
of Egypt, would restore the peace and unity of re- 
ligion. Each of the assassins chose his victim, 
poisoned his dagger, devoted his life, and secretly 
repaired to the scene of action. Their resolution 
was equally desperate; but the first mistook the 
person of Amrou, and stabbed the deputy who 
occupied his seat; the prince of Damascus was 
dangerously hurt by the second; Ali, the lawful 
caliph, in the mosque of Kufa, received a mortal 
wound from the hand of the third." 

The events through which we have thus rapidly 
run ought to be kept in mind, for they are the ele- 
ments of Mahometan history : any right understand- 
ing of the state of the Mahometan world is impossible 
without them. For that world is divided into the 
two great sects of Shiahs and Sunis. The Shiahs are 
those who reject the first three caliphs as usurpers, 
and begin with Ali as the first lawful successor of 
Mahomet ; the Sunis recognise Abu-6ekr, Omar, and 
Othman, as well as Ali, and regard the Shiahs as 
impious heretics. The Persians are Shiahs, and the 
Arabs and Turks are Suni& Hussein, one of Ali's 
two sons, married a Persian princess, the daughter 
of Yezdejerd the last of the Sassanian kings, the 
king whom the Mahometan conquest of Persia ex- 
pelled; and Persia, through this marriage, became 
specially connected with the house of AIL " In the 
fourth age of the Hegira," says Gibbon, ** a tomb, a 



230 ESSATS m CBinCISM. [til 

temple, a city, arose near the ruins of Kufa. Many 
thousands of the Shiahs repose in holy ground at the 
feet of the vicar of Grod ; and the desert is yivified by 
the numerous and annual visits of the Persians, who 
esteem their devotion not less meritorious than the 
pilgrimage of Mecca." 

But, to comprehend what I am going to relate 
from Count Grobineau, we must push our researches 
into Mahometan history a little further than the 
assassination of AIL Moawiyah died in the year 
680 of our era^ nearly fifty years after ihe death of 
Mahomet. His son Yezid succeeded him on the 
throne of the caliphs at Damascua During the 
reign of Moawiyah All's two sons, the Imams, 
Hassan and Hussein, lived with their families in 
religious retirement at Medina, where their grand- 
father Mahomet was buried. In them the character 
of abstention and renouncement, which we have 
noticed in All himself, was marked yet more 
strongly; but, when Moawiyah died, the people of 
Kufa, ihe city on the lower Euphrates where Ali 
had been assassinated, sent offers to make Hussein 
caliph if he would come among them, and to support 
him against the Syrian troops of Yezid. Hussein 
seems to have thought himself bound to accept the 
proposal. He left Medina, and, with his family and 
relations, to the number of about eighty persons, set 
out on his way to Kufa. Then ensued ihe tragedy 
90 familiar to every Mahometan, and to us so little 
known, the tragedy of Kerbela. ''0 death," cries 
the bandit-minstrel of Persia, Kurroglou, in his last 



VI].] A PERSIAN PASSION PLAY. 23] 

song before his execution, "0 death, whom didst 
thou spare ? Were even Hassan and Hussein, those 
footstools of the throne of God on the seventh heaven, 
spared by thee. No/ thou modest them ma/rtyrs ai 
Kerbela,'' 

We cannot do better than again have recourse to 
Gibbon's history for an account of this famous tragedy 
*' Hussein traversed the desert of Arabia with a timc^ 
rous retinue of women and children ; but, as he ap- 
proached the confines of Irak, he was alarmed by the 
solitary or hostile face of the country, and suspected 
either the defection or the ruin of his party. His 
fears were just; Obeidallah, the governor of Kufa, 
had extinguished the first sparks of an insurrection j 
and Hussein, in the plain of Kerbela^ waB encom- 
passed by a body of 5000 horse, who intercepted his 
communication with the city and the river. In a 
conference with the chief of the enemy he proposed 
the option of three conditions: — that he should be 
allowed to return to Medina, or be stationed in a 
frontier garrison against the Turks, or safely con- 
ducted to the presence of Yezid. But the commands 
of the caliph or his lieutenant were stem and abso- 
lute, and Hussein was informed that he must either 
submit as a captive and a criminal to the Commander 
of the Faithful, or expect the consequences of his 
rebellion. "Do you think," replied he, "to terrify 
me with death V* And during the short respite of a 
night he prepared, with calm and solemn resignation, 
to encounter his fate. He checked the lamentations 
of his sister Fatima, who deplored the impending 



232 ESSAYS m CBITICISM. [yii. 

ruin of his house. **Our trust,'' said Hussein, ^'ifi 
in God alone. All things, both in heaven and earth, 
must perish and return to their Creator. My brother, 
my father, my mother, were better than I, and every 
Mussulman has an example in the Prophet." He 
pressed his friends to consult their safety by a timely 
flight ; they unanimously refused to desert or survive 
their beloved master, and their courage was fortified 
by a fervent prayer and the assurance of paradise. 
On the morning of the fatal day he mounted on 
horseback, with his sword in one hand and the Koran 
in the other ; the flanks and rear of his party were 
secured by the tent-ropes and by a deep trench, which 
they had filled with lighted fagots, according to the 
practice of the Arabs. The enemy advanced with 
reluctance; and one of their chiefs deserted, with 
thirty followers, to claim the partnership of inevit- 
able deatL In every close onset or single combat 
the despair of the Fatimites was invincible ; but the 
surrounding multitudes galled them from a distance 
with a cloud of arrows, and the horses and men were 
successively slain. A truce was allowed on both sides 
for the hour of prayer ; and the battle at length ex- 
pired by the death of the last of the companions of 
Hussein." 

The details of Hussein's own death will come 
better presently ; suffice it at this moment to say he 
was slain, and that the women and children of his 
family were taken in chains to the Caliph Yezid at 
Damascus. Gibbon concludes the story thus: ''In 
a distant age and climate, the tragic scene of the 



ni.] A PERSIAN PASSION PLAY. 233 

death of Hussein will awaken the S3anpath7 of the 
coldest reader. On the annual festival of his martyr- 
dom, in the devout pilgrimage to lus sepulchre, his 
Persian votaries abandon their souls to the religious 
phrenzy of sorrow and indignation." 

Thus the tombs of Ali and of lus son, the Meshed 
A.U and the Meshed Huflsein, standing some thirty 
miles apart from one another in the plain of the 
Euphrates, had, when Gibbon wrote, their yearly 
pilgrims and their tribute of enthusiastic mourning. 
But Coimt Grobineau relates, in his book of which I 
have spoken, a development of these solemnities 
which was unknown to Gibbon. Within the present 
century there has arisen, on the basis of this story of 
the martyrs of Kerbela, a drama, a Persian national 
drama, which Count Gobineau, who has seen and 
heard it, is bold enough to rank with the Greek 
drama as a great and serious affair, engaging the 
heart and life of the people who have given birth to 
it; while the Latin, English, French, and German 
drama is, he says, in comparison a mere pastime or 
amusement, more or less intellectual and elegant. 
To me it seems that the Persian tazyas — ^for so these 
pieces are called — find a better parallel in the Am- 
mergau Passion Play than in the Greek drama* 
They turn entirely on one subject — the sufferings of 
the Family of the TerU, as the Imam Hussein and the 
company of persons gathered around him at Eerbela 
are called. The subject is sometimes introduced by 
a prologue, which may perhaps one day, as the need of 
variety is more felt, become a piece by itself ; but at 



234 ESSATS IN CRITICISM. [vii. 

present the prologue leads invariably to the martyrs. 
For instance: the Emperor Tamerlane, in his con- 
quering progress through the world, arrives at Da- 
mascus. The keys of the city are brought to him by 
the governor; but the governor is a descendant of 
one of the murderers of the Imam Hussein ; Tamer- 
lane is informed of it, loads him with reproaches, and 
drives him from his presence. The emperor pre- 
sently sees the governor's daughter splendidly dressed, 
thinks of the sufferings of the holy women of the 
Family of the Tent, and upbraids and drives her 
away as he did her father. But after this he is 
haunted by the great tragedy which has been thus 
brought to his mind, and he cannot sleep and cannot 
be comforted. He calls his vizier, and his vizier tells 
him that the only way to soothe his troubled spirit is 
to see a tazya. And so the tazya commences. Or, 
again (and this will show how strangely, in the re- 
ligious world which is now occupjdng us, what is most 
familiar to us is blended with that of which we know 
nothing) : Joseph and his brethren appear on the 
stage, and the old Bible story is transacted. Joseph 
is thrown into the pit and sold to the merchants, and 
his blood-stained coat is carried by his brothers to 
Jacob; Jacob is then left alone, weeping and be- 
wailing himself; the angel Gabriel enters, and re- 
proves him for his want of faith and constancy, 
tailing him that what he suffers is not a hundredth 
part of what Ali, Hussein, and the children of Hus- 
sein will one day suffer. Jacob seems to doubt it ; 
Gktbriel, to convince him, orders the angels to per- 



m.] A PERSIAN PASSION PLAT. 235 

form a taaya of what will one day happen at Kerbela. 
And so the tazya commences. 

These pieces are given in the first ten days of the 
month of Moharrem, the anniversary of the martyr- 
dom at Kerbela. They are so popular that they now 
invade other seasons of the year also ; but this is the 
season when the world is given up to them. King 
and people, every one is in mourning } and at night 
and while the tazyas are not going on, processions 
keep passing, the air resounds with ihe beating of 
breasts and with litanies of " Hassan ! Hussein ! " 
while the Seyids, — a kind of popular friars claiming 
to be descendants of Mahomet, and in whose incessant 
popularising and amplifjdng of the legend of Kerbela 
in their homilies during pilgrimages and at the tombs 
of the martyrs, the tazyas, no doubt^ had their origin, 
— ^keep up by their sermons and hymns the enthusi- 
asm which the drama of the day has excited. It 
seems as if no one went to bed ; and certainly no one 
who went to bed could sleep. Confraternities go in 
procession with a black flag and torches, every man 
with his shirt torn open, and beating himself with 
the right hand on the left shoulder in a kind of 
measured cadence to accompany a canticle in honour 
of the martyrs. These processions come and take 
post in the theatres where the Seyids are preaching. 
Still more noisy are the companies of dancers, strik- 
ing a kind of wooden castanets together, at one time 
in front of their breasts, at another time behind their 
heads, and marking time with music and dance to a 
dirge set up by the bystanders, in which the names 



236 ESSAYS IN CRinOISM. [tii. 

of the Imams perpetually recur as a burden. Noisiest 
of all are the Berbers, men of a darker skin and 
another race, their feet and the upper part of their 
body naked, who carry, some of them tambourines 
and cymbals, others iron chains and long needle& 
One of their race is said to have formerly derided the 
Imams in their affliction, and the Berbers now appear 
in expiation of that crime. At first their music and 
their march proceed slowly together, but presently 
the music quickens, the chain and needle-bearing 
Berbers move violently round, and begin to beat 
themselves with their chains and to prick their arms 
and cheeks with the needles — ^first gently, then with 
more vehemence ; till suddenly the music ceases, and 
all stops. So we are carried back, on this old 
Asiatic soil, where beliefs and usages are heaped 
layer upon layer and ruin upon ruin, far past the 
martyred Imams, past Mahometanism, past Chris- 
tianity, to the priests of Baal gashing themselves 
with knives and to the worship of Adoni& 

The tekyas, or theatres for the drama which calls 
forth these celebrations, are constantly multiplying. 
The king, the great functionaries, the towns, wealthy 
citizens like the king's goldsmith, or any private 
person who has the means and the desire, provide 
them. Every one sends contributions; it is a reli- 
gious act to furnish a box or to give decorations for a 
tekya ; and as religious offerings, all gifts down to the 
smallest are accepted. There are tekyas for not more 
than three or four hundred spectators, and there are 
tekyas for three or four thousand. At Ispahan there 



. i 



TO.] A PERSIAN PASSION PLAT. 237 

are representations which bring together more than 
twenty thousand people. At Teheran, the Persian 
capital, each quarter of the town has its tekyas, 
every square and open place is turned to account for 
establishing them, and spaces have been expressly 
cleared, besides, for fresh tekyas. Count Gk)bineau 
describes particularly one of these theatres, — a tekya 
of the best class, to hold an audience of about four 
thousand, — at Teheran. The arrangements are very 
simple. The tekya is a walled parallelogram, with a 
brick platform, sakm^ in the centre of it ; this sahm 
is surrounded with black poles at some distance from 
each other, the poles are joined at the top by hori- 
zontal rods of the same colour, and from these rods 
hang coloured lamps, which are lighted for the pray- 
ing and preaching at night when the representation 
is over. The sakou^ or central platform, makes the 
stage ; in connection with it, at one of the opposite 
extremities of the parallelogram lengthwise, is a 
reserved box, tdgnvmd, higher than the sakotu This 
box is splendidly decorated, and is used for peculiarly 
interesting and magnificent t>ableaux, — the court of 
the Caliph, for example — which occur in the course 
of the piec& A passage of a few feet wide is left 
free between the stage and this box ; all the rest of 
the space is for the spectators, of whom the foremost 
rows are sitting on their heels close up to this passage, 
80 that they help the actors to mount and descend 
the high steps of the tdgrmmd when they have to pass 
between that and the sakou. On each side of the 
idgnv/mA are boxes, and along one wall of the en- 



238 ESSAYS m CRITICISM. [vii. 

closure axe other boxes with fronts of elaborate wood- 
work, which are left to stand as a permanent part of 
the construction ; facing these, with the floor and 
stage between, rise tiers of seats as in an amphi- 
theatra All places are free ; the great people have 
generally provided and furnished the boxes, and take 
care to All them ; but if a box is not occupied when 
the performance begins, any ragged street-urchin or 
beggar may walk in and seat himself there. A row 
of gigantic masts runs across the middle of the space, 
one or two of them being fixed in the sakou itself ; 
and from these masts is stretched an immense awning 
which protects the whole audience. Up to a certain 
height these masts are hung with tiger and panther 
skins, to indicate the violent character of the scenes 
to be represented. Shields of steel and of hippo- 
potamus skin, flags, and naked swords, are also at- 
tached to these masts. A sea of colour and splendour 
meets the eye all round. Woodwork and brickwork 
disappear under cushions, rich carpets, silk hangings, 
India muslin embroidered with silver and gold, 
shawls from Kerman and from Cashmere. There are 
lamps, lustres of coloured crystal, mirrors, Bohemian 
and Venetian glass, porcelain vases of all degrees of 
magnitude from China and from Europe, paintings 
and engravings, displayed in profusion everywher& 
The taste may not always be soberly correct, but the 
whole spectacle has just the eflect of prodigality, 
colour, and sumptuousness which we are accustomed 
to associate with the splendours of the Arabian 
Nights. 



VII.] A PERSIAN PASSION PLAY. 239 

In marked contrast with this display is the povert^i 
of scenic contrivance and stage illusion. The subject 
is far too interesting and too solemn to need them 
The actors are visible on all sides, and the exits, en- 
trances, and stage-play of our theatres are impossible ; 
the imagination of the spectator fills up all gaps and 
meets all requirements. On the Ammergau arrange- 
ments one feels that the archaBologists and artists of 
Munich have laid their correct finger; at Teheran 
there has been no schooling of this sort. A copper 
basin of water represents the Euphrates ; a heap of 
chopped straw in a comer is the sand of the desert of 
Kerbela, and the actor goes and takes up a handful 
of it, when his part requires him to throw, in Oriental 
fashion, dust upon his head. There is no attempt at 
proper costume ; all that is sought is to do honour 
to the personages of chief interest by dresses and 
jewels which would pass for rich and handsome things 
to wear in modem Persian life. The power of the 
actors is in their genuine sense of the seriousness of 
the business they are engaged in. They are, like the 
public around them, penetrated with this, and so the 
actor throws his whole soul into what he is about, the 
public meets the actor halfway, and effects of extra- 
ordinary impressiveness are the result " The actor 
is under a charm," says Count Grobineau; "he is 
under it so strongly and completely that almost 
always one sees Yezid himself (the usurping caliph), 
the wretched Ibn-Said (Yezid's general), the infamous 
Shemer (Ibn-Said's lieutenant), at the moment they 
vent the cruellest insults against the Imams whom 



240 KSSATS IN CRITICISM. [yn. 

they are going to massacre, or against the women of 
the Imam's family whom they are ill-using, burst into 
tears and repeat their part with soba The public is 
neither surprised nor displeased at this ; on the con- 
trary, it beats its breast at the sight, throws up its 
arms towards heaven with invocations of Grod, and 
redoubles its groans. So it often happens that the 
actor identifies himself with the personage he repre- 
sents to such a degree that, when the situation carries 
him away, he cannot be said to act, he t^ with such 
truth, such complete enthusiasm, such utter self-for- 
getfulness, what he represents, that he reaches a 
reality at one time sublime, at another terrible, and 
produces impressions on his audience which it would 
be simply absurd to look for from our more artificial 
performances. There is nothing stilted, nothing false, 
nothing conventional; nature, and the facts repre- 
sented, themselves speak." 

The actors are men and boys, the parts of angels 
and women being filled by boys. The children who 
appear in the piece are often the children of the prin- 
cipal families of Teheran; their appearance in this 
religious solemnity (for such it is thought) being 
supposed to bring a blessing upon them and their 
parents. "Nothing is more touching," says Count 
Grobineau, " than to see these little things of three or 
four years old, dressed in black gauze frocks with 
large sleeves, and having on their heads small roimd 
black caps embroidered with silver and gold, kneeling 
beside the body of the actor who represents the 
martjrr of the day, embracing him, and with their 



^^g^^m^^ign 



ni.] A PERSIAN PASSION PLAY. 241 

little hands covering themselves with chopped straw 
for sand in sign of grief. These children evidently," 
he continues, "do not consider themselves to be 
acting ; they are full of the feeling that what they 
are about is something of deep seriousness and im- 
portance ; and though they are too young to compre- 
hend fully the story, they know, in general, that it is 
a matter sad and solemn. They are not distracted 
by the audience, and they are not shy, but go through 
their prescribed part with the utmost attention and 
seriousness, always crossing their arms respectfully 
to receive the blessing of the Imam Hussein; the 
public beholds them with emotions of the liveliest 
satisfaction and sjrmpathy." 

The dramatic pieces themselves are without any 
author's name. They are in popular language, such 
as the commonest and most ignorant of the Persian 
people can understand, free from learned Arabic 
words, — free, comparatively speaking, from Oriental 
fantasticality and hyperbole. The Sejdds, or popular 
friars, already spoken of, have probably had a hand 
in the composition of many of them. The MooUahs, 
or regular ecclesiastical authorities, condemn the whole 
thing. It is an innovation which they disapprove and 
think dangerous ; it is addressed to the eye, and their 
religion forbids to represent religious things to the 
eye ; it departs from the limits of what is revealed 
and appointed to be taught as the truth, and brings 
in novelties and heresies; — for these dramas keep 
growing under the pressure of the actor's imagination 
and emotion, and of the imagination and emotion of 

VOL. I. R 



242 JB8SATS IN OmTIOlSM. [Til. 

ihe public, and receive new developments every day. 
The learned, again, say that these pieces are a heap 
of lies, the production of ignorant people, and have 
no words strong enough to express their contempt for 
them. Still, so irresistible is the vogue of these 
sacred dramas that, from the king on the throne to 
the beggar in the street, every one, except perhaps 
the Moollahs, attends them, and is carried away by 
them. The Imams and their families speak always 
in a kind of lyrical chant, said to have rhythmical 
effects, often of great pathos and beauty ; their per- 
secutors, the villains of the piece, speak always in 
prose. 

The stage is under the direction of a choragus, 
called oostad, or " master," who is a sacred personage 
by reason of the functions which he performs. Some- 
times he addresses to the audience a commentary on 
what is passing before them, and asks their com- 
passion and tears for the martyrs; sometimes in 
default of a Seyid, he prays and preaches. He is 
always listened to with veneration, for it is he who 
arranges the whole sacred spectacle which so deeply 
moves everybody. With no attempt at concealment, 
with the book of the piece in his hand, he remains 
constantly on the stage, gives the actors their cue, 
puts the children and any inexperienced actor in theii 
right places, dresses the martyr in his winding-sheet 
when he is going to his death, holds the stirrup for 
him to mount his horse, and inserts a supply of 
chopped straw into the hands of those who are about 
to want it I^et us now see him at work. 



ni.l A PERSIAN PASSION PLAT. 243 

The theatre is filled, and the heat is great ; young 
men of rank, the king's pages, officers of the army, 
smart functionaries of State, move through the crowd 
with water-skins slung on their backs, dealing out 
water all round, in memory of the thirst which on 
these solemn days the Imams suffered in the sands of 
Kerbela. Wild chants and litanies, such as we have 
already described, are from time to time set up by a 
dervish, a soldier, a workman in the crowd. These 
chants are taken up, more or less, by the audience ; 
sometimes they flag and die away for want of support, 
sometimes they are continued till they reach a par- 
oscysm, and then abruptly stop. Presently a strange, 
insignificant figure in a green cotton garment, looking 
like a petty tradesman of one of the Teheran bazaars, 
mounts upon the sakou. He beckons with his hand 
to the audience, who are silent directly, and addresses 
them in a tone of lecture and expostulation, thus : — 

" Well, you seem happy enough, Mussulmans, sit- 
ting there at your ease under the awning ; and you 
imagine Paradise already wide open to you. Do you 
know what Paradise isl It is a garden, doubtless, 
but such a garden as you have no idea of. You will 
say to me : * Friend, tell us what it is like.' I have 
never been there, certainly ; but plenty of prophets 
have described it, and angels have brought news of it 
However, all I will tell you is, that there is room for 
all good people there, for it is 330,000 cubits long. 
If you do not believe, inquire. As for getting to be 
one of the good people, let me tell you it is not 
enough to read the Koran of the Prophet (the salva- 



244 ESSAYS m CBinCISM. [til 

tion and blessmg of God be upon him!); it is not 
enough to do everything which this divine book en- 
joins ; it is not enough to come and weep at the tazyaSy 
as you do every day, you sons of dogs you, who know 
nothing which is of any use ; it behoves, besides, that 
your good works (if you ever do any, which I greatly 
doubt) should be done in the name and for the love 
of Hussein. It is Hussein, Mussulmans, who is the 
door to Paradise; it is Hussein, Mussulmans, who 
upholds the world; it is Hussein, Mussulmans, by 
whom comes salvation ! Cry, Hassan, Hussein ! '' 

And all the multitude cry : '^ Hassan ! Hus- 
sein!" 

"That is well; and now cry again." And again 
all cry : " Hassan ! Hussein ! " " And now," the 
strange speaker goes on, " pray to Grod to keep you 
continually in the love of Hussein. Come, make your 
cry to God." Then the multitude, as one man, throw 
up their arms into the air, and with a deep and long- 
drawn cry exclaim : " Ya AUah I God ! " 

Fifes, drums, and trumpets break out ; the TcemaSy 
great copper trumpets five or six feet long, give notice 
that the actors are ready and that the tazya is to com- 
mence. The preacher descends from the salcov,^ and 
the actors occupy it 

To give a clear notion of the cycle which these 
dramas fill, we should begin, as on the first day of 
the Moharrem the actors begin, with some piece re- 
lating to the childhood of the Imams, such as, for 
instance, the piece called The Children Digging, Ali 
and Fatima are living at Medina with their little sons 




WLimiBuwajjiuunM I I jjLj ■ WJULLJ -I JH^^^*^^.'';. ■■^5V^ftT^T'^g?^^Wgg^BffBi^WBgggq^w5^^^^^^q| 



ni.] A PEBSIAN PASSION PLAT. 245 

Hassan and Hussein. The simple home and occupa- 
tions of the pious family are exhibited ; it is morning, 
Fatima is seated with the little Hussein on her lap, 
dressing him. She combs his hair, talking caressingly 
to him all the whila A hair comes out with the 
comb ; the child starts. Fatima is in distress at hav- 
ing given the child even this momentary uneasiness, 
and stops to gaze upon him tenderly. She falls into 
an anxious reverie, thinking of her fondness for the 
child, and of the unknown future in store for him. 
While she muses, the angel Gabriel stands before her. 
He reproves her weakness : *' A hair falls from the 
child's head," he says, " and you weep ; what would 
you do if you knew the destiny that awaits him, the 
countless wounds with which that body shall one day 
be pierced, the agony that shall rend your own soul ! " 
Fatima, in despair, is comforted by her husband Ali, 
and they go together into the town to hear Mahomet 
preach. The boys and some of their little friends 
begin to play; every one makes a great deal of 
Hussein ; he is at once the most spirited and the most 
amiable child of them alL The party amuse them- 
selves with digging, with making holes in the ground 
and building mounds. Ali returns from the sermon 
and asks what they are about ; and Hussein is made 
ibo reply in ambiguous and prophetic answers, which 
convey that by these holes and mounds in the earth 
are prefigured interments and tombs. Ali departs 
again ; there rush in a number of big and fierce boys, 
and begin to pelt the little Imams with stones. A 
companion shields Hussein with his own body, but he 



246 ESSAYS IN CRITICISM. [yii, 

is struck down with a stone, and with another stone 
Hussein, too, is stretched on the ground senselesa 
Who are those boy-tyrants and persecutors) They 
are Ibn-Said, and Shemer, and others, the future 
murderers at Kerbela. The audience perceive it with 
a shudder ; the hateful assailants go off in triumph ; 
AH re-enters, picks up the stunned and wounded 
children, brings them round, and takes Hussein back 
to his mother Fatima. 

But let us now come at once to the days of martyr- 
dom and to Kerbela. One of the most famous pieces 
of the cycle is a piece called the Mwrriage ofKassem, 
which brings us into the very middle of these crown- 
ing days. Count Gobineau has given a translation of 
it, and from this translation we will take a few ex- 
tracts. Kassem is the son of Hussein's elder brother, 
bhe Imam Hassan, who had been poisoned by Yezid's 
instigation at Medina. Kassem and his mother are 
with the Imam Hussein at Kerbela; there, too, are 
the women and children of the holy family, 0mm- 
Leyla, Hussein's wife, the Persian princess, the last 
child of Yezdejerd the last of the Sassanides ; Zeyneb, 
Hussein's sister, the offspring, like himself, of Ali and 
Fatima, and the grand-daughter of Mahomet; his 
nephew Abdallah, still a little child; finally, his 
beautiful daughter Zobeyda. When the piece begins^ 
the Imam's camp in the desert has already been cut 
off from the Euphrates and besieged several days by 
the Syrian troops under Ibn-Said and Shemer, and 
by the treacherous men of Kufa. The Family of the 
Tent were suffering torments of thirst. One of the 



ni.] A PERSIAN PASSION PLAT. 247 

children had brought an empty water-bottle, and 
thrown it, a silent token of distress, before the feet 
of Abbas, the uncle of Hussein; Abbas had sallied 
out to cut his way to the river, and had been slain. 
Afterwards Ali-Akber, Hussein's eldest son, had made 
the same attempt and met with the same fate. Two 
younger brothers of Ali-Akber followed his example, 
and were likewise slain. The Imam Hussein had 
rushed amidst the enemy, beaten them from the body 
of Ali-Akber, and brought the body back to his tent ; 
but the river was still inaccessible. At this point the 
action of the Marriage of Kassem begins. Kassem, a 
youth of sixteen, is burning to go out and avenge his 
cousin. At one end of the sakou is the Imam Hussein 
seated on his throne ; in the middle are grouped all 
the members of his family ; at the other end lies the 
body of Ali-Akber, with his mother Omm-Leyla, 
clothed and veiled in black, bending over it The 
Jcemas sound, and Kassem, after a solemn appeal from 
Hussein and his sister Zeyneb to God and to the 
founders of their house to look upon their great dis- 
tress, rises and speaks to himself : 

Kassem. — "Separate thyself from the women of 
the harem, Kassem. Consider within thyself for a 
little ; here thou sittest, and presently thou wilt see 
the body of Hussein, that body like a flower, torn by 
arrows and lances like thorns, Kassem. 

" Thou sawest Ali-Akber's head severed from hia 
body on the field of battle, and yet thou livedst ! 

" Arise, obey that which is written of thee by thy 
father ; to be slain, that is thy lot, Kassem 1 



24b ESSAYS IK CRITICISM. [vu 

"Go, get leave from the son of Fatima, most 
honourable among women, and submit thyself to thy 
fate, Kassem.'' 

Hussein sees him approacL " Alas," he says, " it 
is the orphan nightingale of the garden of Hassan, my 
brother ! " Then Kassem speaks : 

Kassem, — " Grod, what shall I do beneath this 
load of affliction 1 My eyes are wet with tears, my 
lips are dried up with thirst. To live is worse than 
to die. What shall I do, seeing what hath befallen 
Ali-Akber 1 If Hussein sufifereth me not to go forth, 
oh misery ! For then what shall I do, God, in the 
day of the resurrection, when I see my father Hassan 1 
When I see my mother in the day of the resurrec- 
tion, what shall I do, Grod, in my sorrow and shame 
before her? All my kinsmen are gone to appear 
before the Prophet : shall not I also one day stand 
before the Prophet ; and what shall I do, God, in 
that day ? " 

Then he addresses the Imam : — 

"Hail, threshold of the honour and majesty on 
high, threshold of heaven, threshold of God 1 In the 
roll of martyrs thou art the chief; in the book of 
creation thy story will live for ever. An orphan, a 
fatherless child, downcast and weeping, comes to 
prefer a request to thee." 

Hussein bids him tell it, and he answers : — 

" light of the eyes of Mahomet the mighty, 
lieutenant of Ali the lion ! Abbas has perished, Ali- 
Akber has suflFered martyrdom. my uncle, thou 
hast no warriors left, and no standard-bearer 1 The 



L 



▼n.] A PEBSIAN PASSION PLAT. 249 

roses are gone, and gone are their buds ; the jessamine 
is gone, the poppies are gone. I alone, I am still left 
in the garden of the Faith, a thorn, and miserable. 
If thou hast any kindness for the orphan, suffer me to 
go forth and fight" 

Hussein refuses. "My child," he says, "thou wast 
the light of the eyes of the Imam Hassan, thou art 
my beloved remembrance of him ; ask me not this ; 
urge me not, entreat me not ; to have lost Ali-Akber 
is enougL" 

Kassem answers : — " That Kassem should live and 
Ali-Akber be mart3a:ed — sooner let the earth cover 
me ! king, be generous to the beggar at thy gate. 
See how my eyes run over with tears and my lips are 
dried up with thirst Oast thine eyes toward the 
waters of the heavenly Euphrates ! I die of thirst ; 
grant me, thou marked of God, a full pitcher of 
the water of life ! it flows in the Paradise which awaits 
me. 

Hussein still refuses ; Kassem breaks forth in com- 
plaints and lamentations, his mother comes to him 
and learns the reason. She then says : — 

"Complain not against the Imam, light of my 
eyes ; only by his order can the commission of mar- 
t3a:dom be given. In that commission are sealed 
two-and-seventy witnesses, all righteous, and among 
the two-and-seventy is thy nama Know that thy 
destiny of death is conmianded in the writing which 
thou wearest on thine arm." 

This writing is the testament of his father Hassan. 
He bears it in triumph to the Imam Hussein, who findi* 



250 BSSAYS m GBITICISM. [til 

written there that he should, on the death-plain ol 
Kerbela, suffer Kafisem to have his will, but that he 
should marry him first to his daughter Zobeyda. 
Kassem consents, though in astonishment "Con- 
sider," he says, "there lies Ali-Akber, mangled by 
the enemies' hands ! Under this sky of ebon black- 
ness, how can joy show her face? Nevertheless if 
thou commandest it, what have I to do but obeyl 
Thy commandment is that of the Prophet, and his 
voice is that of Grod." But Hussein has also to over- 
come the reluctance of the intended bride and of all 
the women of his family. 

" Heir of the vicar of Grod," says Kassem's mother 
to the Imam, " bid me die, but speak not to me of a 
bridal If Zobeyda is to be a bride and Kassem a 
bridegroom, where is the henna to tinge their hands, 
where is the bridal chamber?" "Mother of Kassem," 
answers the Imam solemnly, "yet a few moments, 
and in this field of anguish the tomb shall be for 
marriage-bed, and the winding-sheet for bridal gar- 
ment!" All give way to the will of their sacred 
Head. The women and children surround Kassem, 
sprinkle him with rose-water, hang bracelets and 
necklaces on him, and scatter bon-bons around ; and 
then the marriage procession is formed. Suddenly 
drums and trumpets are heard, and the Syrian troops 
appear. Ibn-Said and Shemer are at their head. 
" The Prince of the Faith celebrates a marriage in 
the desert," they exclaim tauntingly ; " we will soon 
change his festivity into mourning." They pass by, 
and Kassem takes leave of his bride. "Grod keep 



Til.] A PERSIAN PASSION PLAT. 251 

thee, my bride/' he says, embracing her, ** for I must 
forsake thee ! " " One moment," she says, " remam 
in thy place one moment 1 thy coimtenance is as the 
lamp which giveth us light ; suffer me to turn around 
thee as the butterfly tumeth, gently, gently ! " And 
making a turn around him, she performs the ancient 
Eastern rite of respect from a new-married wife to 
her husband. Troubled, he rises to go : " The reins 
of my will are slipping away from me ! " he murmurs. 
She lays hold of his robe : " Take off thy hand," he 
cries, " we belong not to ourselves 1 " 

Then he asks the Imam to array him in his wind- 
ing-sheet. " nightingale of the divine orchard of 
martjnrdom," says Hussein, as he complies with his 
wish, "I clothe thee with thy winding-sheet, I kiss thy 
face ; there is no fear, and no hope, but of God ! " 
Kassem commits his little brother AbdaUah to the 
Imam's care. Omm-Leyla looks up from her son's 
corpse, and says to Kassem: "When thou enterest 
the garden of Paradise, kiss for me the head of Ali- 
Akber ! " 

The Syrian troops again appear. Kassem rushes 
upon them and they all go off fighting. The Family 
of the Tent, at Hussein's command, put the Koran on 
their heads and pray, covering themselves with sand. 
Kassem reappears victorious. He has slain Azrek, a 
chief captain of the Syrians, but his thirst is intoler- 
able. " Uncle," he says to the Imam, who asks him 
what reward he wishes for his valour, "my tongue 
cleaves to the roof of my mouth ; the reward I wish 
is water.** " Thou coverest me with shame, Kassem, " 



252 ESSAYS m GRITIGISM. [yn 

his uncle answers; "what can I dof Thou askest 
water ; there is no water ! " 

Kassem, — " If I might but wet my mouth, I could 
presently make an end of the men of Kufa." 

Hiissem. — "As I live, I have not one drop of 
water ! " 

Kassem. — " Were it but lawful, I would wet my 
mouth with my own blood." 

Hussein, — " Beloved child, what the Prophet for- 
bids, that cannot I make lawful" 

Kassem, — " I beseech thee, let my lips be but once 
moistened, and I will vanquish thine enemies !" 

Hussein presses his own lips to those of Kassem, 
who, refreshed, again rushes forth, and returns bleed- 
ing and stuck with darts, to die at the Imam's feet in 
the tent So ends the marriage of Kassem. 

But the great day is the tenth day of the Mohar- 
rem, when comes the death of the Imam himself. The 
narrative of Gibbon well sums up the events of this 
great tenth day. " The battle at length expired by 
the death of the last of the companions of Hussein. 
Alone, weary, and wounded, he seated himself at the 
door of his tent He was pierced in the mouth with 
a dart He lifted his hands to heaven — ^they were 
full of blood — and he uttered a funeral prayer for the 
living and the dead. In a transport of despair, his 
sister issued from the tent, and adjured the general of 
the Kufians that he would not suffer Hussein to be 
murdered before his eye& A tear trickled down the 
soldier's venerable beard ; and the boldest of his men 
fell back on every side as the dying Imam threw him- 



yn.l A PERSIAN PASSION PLAT. 253 

self among them. The remorseless Shemer — a name 
detested by the faithful — reproached their cowardice; 
and the grandson of Mahomet was slain with three 
and thirty strokes of lances and swords. After they 
had trampled on his body, they carried his head to 
the castle of Kufa, and the inhuman Obeidallah (the 
governor) struck him on the mouth with a cane. 
* Alas 1 ' exclaimed an aged Mussulman, ' on those 
lips have I seen the lips of the Apostle of God ! * " 

For this catastrophe no one taaya suffices ; all the 
companies of actors unite in a vast open space; booths 
and tents are pitched round the outside circle for the 
spectators ; in the centre is the Imam's camp, and the 
day ends with its conflagration. 

Nor are there wanting pieces which carry on the 
story beyond the death of Hussein. One which pro- 
duces an extraordinary effect is The Christian Damsel. 
The carnage is over, the enemy are gone. To the 
awe-struck beholders, the scene shows the silent plain 
of Kerbela and the tombs of the martyrs. Their 
bodies, full of wounds, and with weapons sticking in 
them still, are exposed to view ; but around them all 
are crowns of burning candles, circles of light, to 
show that they have entered into glory. At one end 
of the sahm is a high tomb by itself ; it is the tomb of 
the Imam Hussein, and his pierced body is seen 
stretched out upon it. A brilliant caravan enters, 
with camels, soldiers, servants, and a yoimg lady on 
horseback, in European costume, or what passes in 
Persia for European costume. She halts near the 
tombs and proposes to encamp. Her servants try to 



254 ESSATS IN CRITICISM. [til 

pitch a tent ; but wherever they drive a pole into the 
ground, blood springs up, and a groan of horror 
bursts from the audience. Then the fair traveller, 
instead of encamping, mounts into the tdgntmid, lies 
down to rest there, and falls asleep. Jesus Christ 
appears to her, and makes known that this is Ker- 
bela, and what has happened here. Meanwhile, an 
Arab of the desert, a Bedouin who had formerly re- 
ceived Hussein's bounty, comes stealthily, intent on 
plunder, upon the sakou. He finds nothing, and in a 
paroxysm of brutal fury he begins to ill-treat the 
corpsea Blood flows. The feeling of Asiatics about 
their dead is well known, and the horror of the audi- 
ence rises to its height Presently the ruffian assails 
and wounds the corpse of the Imam himself, over 
whom white doves are hovering; the voice of Hussein, 
deep and mournful, calls from his tomb : " There is 
no God bid Ood/" The robber flies in terror; the 
angels, the prophets, Mahomet, Jesus Christ, Moses, 
the Imams, the holy women, all come upon the sakou, 
press round Hussein, load him with honours. The 
Christian damsel wakes, and embraces Islam, the 
Islam of the sect of the Shiahs. 

Another piece closes the whole story, by bringing 
the captive women and children of the Imam's family 
to Damascus, to the presence of the Caliph Yezid. It 
is in this piece that there comes the magnificent 
tableau, already mentioned, of the court of the caliph. 
The crown jewels are lent for it, and the dresses of 
the ladies of Yezid's court, represented by boys chosen 
for their good looks, are said to be worth thousands 



ni.] A PERSIAN PASSION PLAY. 255 

and thousands of pounds; but the audience see them 
without favour, for this brilliant court of Yezid is 
cruel to the captives of Kerbela. The captives are 
thrust into a wretched dungeon under the palace 
walls; but the Caliph's wife had formerly been a 
slave of Mahomet's daughter Fatima, the mother of 
Hussein and Zeyneb. She goes to see Zeyneb in 
prison, her heart is touched, she passes into an agony 
of repentance, returns to her husband, upbraids him 
with his crimes, and intercedes for the women of the 
holy family, and for the children, who keep calling for 
the Imam Hussein. Yezid orders his wife to be put to 
death, and sends the head of Hussein to the children. 
Sekyna, the Imam's youngest daughter, a child of 
four years old, takes the beloved head in her arms, 
kisses it, and lies down beside it Then Hussein 
appears to her as in life: "Oh! my father," she 
cries, ♦* where wast thou t I was himgry, I was cold, 
I was beaten — where wast thou ? " But now she sees 
him again, and is happy. In the vision of her happi- 
ness she passes away out of this troublesome life, she 
enters into rest, and the piece ends with her mother 
and her aunts bur}ang her. 

These are the martyrs of Kerbela ; and these are 
the sufferings which awaken in an Asiatic audience 
sympathy so deep and serious, transports so genuine 
of pity, love, and gratitude, that to match them at aU 
one must take the feelings raised at Ammergau. 
And now, where are we to look, in the subject- 
matter of the Persian passion-play, for the source of 
all this emotion 1 



256 ESSAYS IN CKinCISM. [nh 

Count Grobineaa suggests that it is to be found in 
the feeling of patriotism; and that our Indo-European 
kinsmen, the Persians, conquered by the Semitic Ara- 
bians, find in the sufferings of Hussein a portrait 
of their own martyrdom, "Hussein," says Count 
Gobineau, " is not only the son of Ali, he is the hus- 
band of a princess of the blood of the Persian kings ; 
he, his father Ali, the whole body of Imams taken 
together, represent the nation, represent Persia, in- 
vaded, ill-treated, despoiled, stripped of its inhabit- 
ants, by the Arabians The right which is insulted 
and violated in Hussein, is identified with the right 
of Persia, The Arabians, the Turks, the Afghans, — 
Persia's implacable and hereditary enemies, — ^recog- 
nise Yezid as legitimate caliph ; Persia finds therein 
an excuse for hating them the more, and identifies 
herself the more with the usurper's victims. It is 
patriotism therefore, which has taken the form, here, 
of the drama to express itself." No doubt there is 
much truth in what Count Gobineau thus says ; and 
it is certain that the division of Shiahs and Sunis has 
its true cause in a division of races, rather than in a 
difference of religious belief. 

But I confess that if the interest of the Persian 
passion-plays had seemed to me to lie solely in the 
curious evidence they afford of the workings of 
patriotic feeling in a conquered people, I should 
hardly have occupied myself with them at all this 
length. I believe that they point to something much 
more interesting. What this is, I cannot do more 
than simply indicate ; but indicate it I will, in con- 



riL] A PERSIAN PASSION PLAT. 257 

elusion, and then leave the student of human nature 
to follow it out for himself. 

When Mahomet's cousin Jaflfer, and others of his 
first converts, persecuted by the idolaters of Mecca, 
fled in the year of our era 615, seven years before the 
Hegira, into Abyssinia, and took refuge with the King 
of that country, the people of Mecca sent after the 
fugitives to demand that they should be given up to 
them. Abyssinia was then already Christian. The 
king asked Jaffer and his companions what was this 
new religion for which they had left their country. 
Jaffer answered : " We were plunged in the darkness 
of ignorance, we were worshippers of idols. Given 
over to all our passions, we knew no law but that of 
the strongest, when God raised up among us a man 
of our own race, of noble descent, and long held in 
esteem by us for his virtuea This apostle called 
us to believe in one God, to worship God only, to 
reject the superstitions of our fathers, to despise 
divinities of wood and stone. He commanded us to 
eschew wickedness, to be truthful in speech, faithful 
to our engagements, kind and helpful to our relations 
and neighbours. He bade us respect the chastity of 
women, and not to rob the orphaa He exhorted us 
to prayer, alms-giving, and fasting. We beUeved m 
his mission, and we accepted the doctrines and the 
rule of life which he brought to us from God. For 
this our countrymen have persecuted us; and now 
they want to make us return to their idolatry." The 
king of Abyssinia refused to surrender the fugitives, 
and then, turning again to Jaffer, after a few more 

VOL. L s 



258 ISSATS m CBinGISlf. [th 

explanations, he picked up a straw from the groiind, 
and said to him : ** Between joar religion and ours 
there is not the thickness of this straw difference." 

That is not quite so; yet thus much we may 
affirm, that Jaffer's account of the religion of Mahomet 
is a great deal truer than the accounts of it which are 
commonly current amongst us. Indeed, for the credit 
of humanity, as more than a hundred millions of men 
are said to profess the Mahometan religion, one is 
glad to think so. To popular opinion everywhere, 
religion is proved by miracles. All religions but a 
man's own are utterly false and vain ; the authors of 
them are mere impostors ; and the miracles which are 
said to attest them, fictitious. We forget that this is 
a game which two can play at ; although the believer 
of each religion always imagines the prodigies which 
attest his own religion to be fenced by a guard 
granted to them alone. Yet how much more daf e is 
it, as well as more fruitful, to look for the main con- 
firmation of a religion in its intrinsic correspondence 
with urgent wants of human nature, in its prof oimd 
necessity 1 Differing religions will then be f oimd to 
have much in common, but this will be an additional 
proof of the value of that religion which does most 
for that which is thus commonly recognised as salutary 
and necessary. In Christendom one need not go 
about to establish that the religion of the Hebrews is 
a better religion than the religion of the Arabs, or 
that the Bible is a greater book than the Koran. The 
Bible grew, the Koran toas made; there lies the im- 
mense difference in depth and truth between them ! 



^baaa^ 



Til.] A PBBSIAN PASSION PLAT. 269 

This very inferiority may make the Koran, for certain 
purposes and for people at a low stage of mental 
growth, a more powerful instrument than the Bible. 
From the circimistances of its origin, the Koran has 
the intensely dogmatic character, it has the perpetual 
insistence on the motive of future rewards and punish- 
ments, the palpable exhibition of paradise and hell, 
which the Bible has not Among the little known 
and little advanced races of the great African con- 
tinent, the Mahometan missionaries, by reason of the 
sort of power which this character of the Koran gives, 
are said to be more successful than ours. Neverthe- 
less even in Africa it will assuredly one day be mani- 
fest, that whereas the Bible-people trace themselves 
to Abraham through Isaac, and the Koran-people 
trace themselves to Abraham through Ishmael, the 
difference between the religion of the Bible and the 
religion of the Koran is almost as the difference be- 
tween Isaac and IshmaeL I mean that the seriousness 
about righteousness, which is what the hatred of 
idolatry really means, and the profound and inex- 
haustible doctrines that the righteous Eternal loveth 
righteousness, that there is no peace for the wicked, 
that the righteous is an everlasting foundation, are 
exhibited and inculcated in the Old Testament with 
an authority, majesty, and truth which leave the 
Koran immeasurably behind, and which, the more 
mankind grows and gains light, the more will be felt 
to have no fellows. Mahomet was no doubt acquainted 
with the Jews and their docimients, and gained 
something from this source for his religion. But his 



260 ESSATS IN CBinCISM. [yii. 

religion is not a mere plagiarism from Judea, any 
more than it is a mere mass of falsehood. No ; in 
the seriousness, elevation, and moral energy of him- 
self and of that Semitic race from which he sprang 
and to which he spoke, Mahomet mainly found that 
scorn and hatred of idolatry, that sense of the worth 
and truth of righteousness, judgment, and justice, 
which make the real greatness of him and his Koran, 
and which are thus rather an independent testimony 
to the essential doctrines of the Old Testament, than 
a plagiarism from them. The world needs righteous- 
ness, and the Bible is the grand teacher of it, but for 
certain times and certain men Mahomet too, in his 
way, was a teacher of righteousness. 

But we know how the Old Testament conception 
of righteousness ceased with time to have the fresh- 
ness and force of an intuition, became something 
petrified, narrow, and formal, needed renewing. We 
know how Christianity renewed it, carrying into these 
hard waters of Judaism a sort of warm gulf-stream of 
tender emotion, due chiefly to qualities which may 
be summed up as those of inwardness, mildness, and 
self-renouncement Mahometanism had no such re- 
newing. It began with a conception of righteousness, 
lofty indeed, but narrow, and which we may call old 
Jewish ; and there it remained. It is not a feeling 
religion. No one would say that the virtues of 
gentleness, mildness, and self-sacrifice were its virtues ; 
and the more it went on, the more the faults of its 
original narrow basis became visible, more and more 
it became fierce and militant, less and less was it 



mv^^^ wtjmm M itijmw'JB im j ^^ww ■■ p ,. y.^.^^ 



▼U.] A PEBSIAN PASSION PLAT. 261 

amiable. Now, what are Ali, and Hassan, and 
Hussein and the Imams, but an msurrection of noble 
and pious natures against this hardness and aridity of 
the religion round them ? an insurrection making its 
authors seem weak, helpless, and unsuccessful to the 
world and amidst the struggles of the world, but 
enabling them to know the joy and peace for which 
the world thirsts in vain, and inspiring in the heart 
of mankind an irresistible sympathy. " The twelve 
Imams," says Gibbon, "Ali, Hassan, Hussein, and 
the lineal descendants of Hussein, to the ninth gen- 
eration, without arms, or treasures, or subjects, suc- 
cessively enjoyed the veneration of the people. 
Their names were often the pretence of sedition and 
civil war ; but these royal saints despised the pomp 
of the world, submitted to the will of Grod and the 
injustice of man, and devoted their innocent lives to 
the study and practice of religion." 

Abnegation and mildness, based on the depth of 
the inner life, and visited by unmerited misfortune, 
made the power of the first and famous Imams, Ali, 
Hassan, and Hussein, over the popular imagination. 
" brother," said Hassan, as he was d3dng of poison, 
to Hussein who sought to find out and punish his 
murderer, "0 brother, let him alone till he and I 
meet together before God ! " So his father Ali had 
stood back from his rights instead of snatching at 
them. So of Hussein himself it was said by his suc- 
cessful rival, the usurping Caliph Yezid : " God loved 
Hussein, btU he would not suffer him to attain to anything,'^ 
They might attain to nothing, they were too pure, 



262 ESSATS m CRinGISH. [Tn 

these great ones of the world as by birth they were ; 
but the people, which itself also can attain to so little, 
loved them all the better on that account, loved them 
for their abnegation and mildness, felt that they were 
dear to Gknl, that Gk)d loved them, and that they and 
their lives filled a void in the severe religion of 
Mahomet These saintly self-deniers, these resigned 
sufferers, who would not strive nor cry, suppUed a 
tender and pathetic side in Islam. The conquered 
Persians, a more mobile, more impressionable, and 
gentler race than their concentrated, narrow, and 
austere Semitic conquerors felt the need of it most, 
and gave most prominence to the ideals which satisfied 
the need ; but in Arabs and Turks also, and in all the 
Mahometan world, Ali and his sons excite enthusiasm 
and affection. Eound the central sufferer, Hussein, 
has come to group itself everything which is most 
tender and touching. His person brings to the 
Mussulman's mind the most himian side of Mahomet 
himself, his fondness for children, — ^for Mahomet had 
loved to nurse the little Hussein on his knee, and 
to show him from the pulpit to his people. The 
Family of the Tent is full of women and chil- 
dren, and their devotion and sufferings, — blamdess 
and saintly women, lovely and innocent childreQ. 
There, too, are lovers with their story, the beauty 
and the love of youth; and all follow the attrac- 
tion of the pure and resigned Imam, all die for him. 
The tender pathos from all these flows into the 
pathos from >>wn and enhances it, until finally thov 
arises for the popular imagLoation an immense idea] 



Mm( 



VII.] A PBKSIAN PASSION PLAY. 263 

of mildness and sell-sacrifice, melting and overpower- 
ing the souL 

Even for us, to whom almost all the names are 
strange, whose interest in the places and persons is 
faint, who have them before us for a moment to-day, 
to see them again, probkbly, no more for ever, — even 
for us, unless I err greatly, the power and pathos of 
this ideal are recognisable. What must they be for 
those to whom every name is familiar, and calls up 
the most solemn and cherished associations ; who have 
had their adoring gaze fixed all their lives upon this 
exemplar of self-denial and gentleness, and who have 
no other 1 If it was superfluous to say to English 
people that the religion of the Koran has not the 
value of the religion of the Old Testament, still more 
is it superfluous to say that the religion of the Imams 
has not the value of Christianity. The character and 
discourse of Jesus Christ possess, I have elsewhere 
often said, two signal powers : mildness and sweet 
reasonableness. The latter, the power which so puts 
before our view duty of every kind as to give it the 
force of an intuition, as to make it seem, — to make 
the total sacrifice of our ordinary self seem, — the most 
simple, natural, winning, necessary thing in the world, 
has been hitherto applied with but a very limited 
range, it is destined to an infinitely wider application, 
and has a fruitf ulness which will yet transform the 
world. Of this the Imams have nothing, except so 
far as all mildness and self-sacrifice have in them 
something of sweet reasonableness and are its indis- 
pensable preliminary. This they have, mildness and 



m4 



264 ESSAYS m CRITICISM. fTii. 

tdf-sacrifice ; and we have seen what an attraction it 
exercises. Could we ask for a stronger testimony to 
Christianity ? Could we wish for any sign more con- 
vincing, that Jesus Christ was indeed, what Christiana 
call him, the desire of all nations f So salutary, so 
necessary is what Christianity tontains, that a religion, 
— a great, powerful, successful religion, — arises with- 
out it, and the missing virtue forces its way in ! 
Christianity may say to these Persian Mahometans, 
with their gaze fondly turned towards the martyred 
Imams, what in our Bible Grod says by Isaiah to Cyrus, 
their great ancestor : — ^^ I girded thee, though thou heist 
not known me.** It is a long way from Kerbela to 
Calvary; but the sufferers of Kerbela hold aloft to 
the eyes of millions of our race the lesson so loved by 
the sufferer of Calvary. For he said : "Leam of ma 
that I am mt^ and lavlp of heart; and ye shall find 
rmt wnio your tmdi.** 



VIII. 



JOUBERT. 



Why should we ever treat of any dead authors but 
the famous ones ? Mainly for this reason : because, 
from these famous personages, home or foreign, whom 
we all know so well, and of whom so much has been 
said, the amoimt of stimulus which they contain for 
us has been in a great measure disengaged; people 
have formed their opinion about them, and do not 
readily change it One may write of them afresh, 
combat received opinions about them, even interest 
one's readers in so doing; but the interest one's 
readers receive has to do, in general, rather with the 
treatment than with the subject ; they are susceptible 
of a lively impression rather of the course of the dis- 
cussion itself — ^its turns, vivacity, and novelty, — than 
of the genius of the author who is the occasion of it 
And yet what is reaUy precious and inspiring, in all 
that we get from literature, except this sense of an 
immediate contact with genius itself, and the stimulus 
towards what is true and excellent which we derive 
from it ? Now in literature, besides the eminent men 



266 ESSAT8 IN CRITIGI8M. [vuL 

of genius who have had their deserts in the waj ol 
fame, besides the eminent men of ability who have 
often had far more than their deserts in the waj of 
fame, there are a certain number of personages who 
have been real men of genius, — bj which I mean, that 
thej have had a genoine gift for what ia true and 
excellent^ and are therefore capable of emitting a life- 
giving stimulus, — ^but who, for some reason or other, 
in most cases for very valid reas<ms, have remained 
obscure, nay, bejcmd a narrow circle in their own 
country, unknown. It ia salutary from time to time 
to come across a genius of this kind, and to extract- 
his honey. Often he has more of it for us, as I have 
already said, than greater men ; for, though it is by 
no means true that from what ia new to us there is 
most to be learnt^ it ia yet indisputably true that from 
what ia new to us we in general learn most 

Of a genius of this kind, Joseph Joubert^ I am 
now going to speak. His name is, I believe, almost 
unknown in England ; and even in France, his native 
country, it ia not famous. M. Sainte-Beuve has given 
of him (me of his incomparable portraits; but, — besides 
that even M. Sainte-Beuve's writings are hr lees known 
amongst us than they deserve to be, — every country 
has its own point of view from which a remarkable 
author may most profitably be seen and studied. 

Joseph Joubert was bom (and his date should be 
remarked) in 1754, at Montignac, a little town in 
P^rigord. His father was a doctor with small means 
and a large family ; and Joseph, the eldest, had hie 
own way to make in the world. He was for ^ebt 



Till.] JOUBBRT. 267 

years, as pupil first, and afterwards as an assistant- 
master, in the public school of Toulouse, then managed 
by the Jesuits, who seem to have left in him a most 
favourable opinion, not only of their tact and address, 
but of their really good qualities as teachers and 
directora Compelled by the weakness of his health 
to give up, at twenty-two, the profession of teaching, 
he passed two important years of his life in hard study, 
at home at Montignac; and came in 1778 to try his 
fortune in the literary world of Paris, then perhaps 
the most tempting field which has ever yet presented 
itself to a young man of letters. He knew Diderot, 
D'Alembert, Marmontel, Laharpe; he became intimate 
with one of the celebrities of the next literary genera- 
tion, then, like himself, a young man, — Chateaubriand's 
friend, the future Grand Master of the University, 
Fontanes. But, even then, it began to be remarked 
of him, that M. Joubert " 8*inqui^U de perfection bien 
plus qtis de gloire — cared far more about perfecting 
himself than about making himself a reputation." 
His severity of morals may perhaps have been rendered 
easier to him by the delicacy of his health ; but the 
delicacy of his health will not by itself account for his 
changeless preference of being to seeming, knowing 
to showing, studying to publishing ; for what terrible 
public performers have some invalids been! This 
preference he retained all through his life, and it is 
by this that he is characterised. " He has chosen," 
Chateaubriand (adopting Epicurus's famous words) 
said of him, "to hide his life" Of a life which its 
owner was bent on hiding there can be but little to 



268 E88ATS IN CRITICISM. [yui. 

tell. Yet the only two public incidents of Joubert'a 
life, slight as they are, do all concerned in them so 
much credit that they deserve mention. In 1790 the 
Constituent Assembly made the office of justice of 
the peace elective throughout France. The people of 
Montignac retained such an impression of the character 
of their young townsman,— one of Plutarch's men of 
virtue, as he had lived amongst them, simple, studious, 
severe, — that, though he had left them for years, they 
elected him in his absence without his knowing any- 
thing about it. The appointment little suited Joubert's 
wishes or tastes ; but at such a moment he thought 
it wrong to decline it He held it for two years, the 
legal term, discharging its duties with a firmness and 
integrity which were long remembered; and then, 
when he went out of office, his fellow-townsmen re- 
elected him. But Joubert thought that he had now 
accomplished his duty towards them, and he went 
back to the retirement which he loved. That seems 
to me a little episode of the great French Bevolution 
worth remembering. The sage who was asked by the 
king, why sages were seen at the doors of kings, but 
not kings at the doors of sages, replied, that it was 
because sages knew what was good for them, and 
kings did not But at Montignac the king — ^for in 
1790 the people in France was king with a vengeance 
— ^knew what was good for him, and came to the door 
of the sage. 

The other incident was this. When Napoleon, in 
1809, reorganised the public instruction of France, 
founded the University, and made M de Fontanes 



mm^m 



VIII.] JOUBERT. 269 

its Grand Master, Fontanes had to submit to the 
Emperor a list of persons to form the council or 
governing body of the new University. Third on 
his list, after two distinguished names, Fontanes 
placed the unknown name of Joubert " This name," 
he said in his accompanying memorandum to the 
Emperor, "is not known as the two first are; and 
yet this is the nomination to which I attach most 
importance. I have known M. Joubert all my life. 
His character and intelligence are of the very highest 
order. I shall rejoice if your Majesty will accept 
my guarantee for him." Napoleon trusted his Grand 
Master, and Joubert became a councillor of the 
University. It is something that a man, elevated to 
the highest posts of State, should not forget his 
obscure friends ; or that^ if he remembers and places 
them, he should regard in placing them their merit 
rather than their obscurity. It is more, in the eyes 
of those whom the necessities, real or supposed, of a 
political system have long familiarised with such 
C3niical disregard of fitness in the distribution of office, 
to see a minister and his master alike zealous, in 
giving away places, to give them to the best men to 
be found. 

Between 1792 and 1809 Joubert had married. 
His life was passed between Villeneuve-sur-Yonne, 
where his wife's family lived, — a pretty little Bur- 
gundian town, by which the Lyons railroad now 
passes, — and Paris. Here, in a house in the Eue 
St.-Honord, in a room very high up, and admitting 
plenty of the light which he so loved« — a room from 



270 ESSATS IK 0EITIGI8M. [yiii. 

which he saw, in his own words, " a great deal of sky 
and very little earth," — among the treasures of a 
library collected with infinite pains, taste, and skill, 
from which every book he thought ill of was rigidly 
excluded, — he never would possess either a complete 
Voltaire or a complete Eousseau, — the happiest hours 
of his life were passed. In the circle of one of those 
women who leave a sort of perfume in literary his- 
tory, and who have the gift of inspiring successive 
generations of readers with an indescribable regret 
not to have known them, — Pauline de Montmorin, 
Madame de Beaumont^ — he had become intimate 
with nearly all which at that time, in the Paris world 
of letters or of society, was most attractive and pro- 
mising. Amongst his acquaintances one only misses 
the names of Madame de Stael and Benjamin Con- 
stant. Neither of them was to his taste, and with 
Madame de Stael he always refused to become 
acquainted; he thought she had more vehemence 
than truth, and more heat than light 

Years went on, and his friends became conspicuous 
authors or statesmen ; but Joubert remained in the 
shade. His constitution was of such fragility that 
how he lived so long, or accomplished so much as he 
did, is a wonder : his soul had, for its basis of opera- 
tions, hardly any body at all : both from his stomach 
and from his chest he seems to have had constant 
sufTering, though he lived by rule, and was as ab- 
stemious as a Hindoo. Often, after overwork in 
thinking, reading, or talking, he remained for days 
together in a state of utter prostration,— <x>ndemned 



Yin.] JOUBERT. 271 

to absolute silence and inaction; too happy if the 
agitation of his mind would become quiet also, and 
let him have the repose of which he stood in so much 
need. With this weakness of health, these repeated 
suspensions of energy, he was incapable of the pro- 
longed contention of spirit necessary for the creation 
of great works. But he read and thought immensely j 
he was an unwearied note-taker, a charming letter- 
writer ; above all, an excellent and delightful talker. 
The gaiety and amenity of his natural disposition 
were inexhaustible; and his spirit^ too, was of 
astonishing elasticity; he seemed to hold on to life 
by a single thread only, but that single thread was 
very tenacious. More and more, as his soul and 
knowledge ripened more and more, his friends pressed 
to his room in the Eue St.-Honor6 ; often he received 
them in bed, for he seldom rose before three o'clock 
in the afternoon; and at his bedroom-door, on his 
bad days, Madame Joubert stood sentry, trying, not 
always with success, to keep back the thirsty comers 
from the fountain which was forbidden to flow. Fon- 
tanes did nothing in the University without consult- 
ing him, and Joubert's ideaa and pen were always at 
his friend's service. 

When he was in the country, at Villeneuve, the 
young priests of his neighbourhood used to resort to 
him, in order to profit by his library and by his con- 
versation. He, like our Coleridge, was particularly 
qualified to attract men of this kind and to benefit 
them: retaining perfect independence of mind, he 
was a religious philosopher. As age came on, hie 



272 ESSAYS m OEinciBM. [Tin. 

infirmities became more and more overwhelmiug j 
some of his friends, too, died; others became so 
immersed in politics, that Jonbert, who hated politics, 
Eaw them seldomer than of old ; but the morosenesa 
of age and infirmity never touched him, and he never 
quarrelled with a friend or lost one. From these 
miseries he was preserved by that quality in him of 
which I have already spoken ; a quality which is best 
expressed by a word, not of common use in English, — 
alas, we have too little in our national character of 
tlie quality which this word expresses, — his inborn, 
his constant amenity. He lived tiU the year 1824, 
On the 4th of May in that year he died, at the age 
of seventy. A day or two after his death M. de 
Chateaubriand inserted in the Jowiuil des Dibaia a 
short notice of him, perfect for its feeling, grace, and 
propriety. On m mi dtms la memoirs du mcnde, he 
saya and says truly, ^ par dea travaue four le mmde, 
— " a man can live in the world's memory only by 
what he has done for the world." But Chateaubriand 
used the privilege which his great name gave him to 
assert, delicately but firmly, Joubert's real and rare 
merits, and to tell the world what manner of man 
had just left it 

Joubert's papera were accumulated in boxes and 
drawers. He had not meant them for publication; 
it was very difficult to sort; them and to prepare them 
for it Madame Joubert, his widow, had a scruple 
about giving them a publicity which her husband, she 
felt, would never have permitted. But, &b her own 
end approached, the natuial desire to leave of so 



mL] JOUBSBT. 27S 

remarkable a spirit some enduring memorial, some 
memorial to outlast the admiring recollection of the 
living who were so fast passing away, made her yield 
to the entreaties of his friends, and allow the printing, 
but for private circulation only, of a volume of his 
fragments. Chateaubriand edited it ; it appeared in 
1838, fourteen years after Joubert's death. The 
volume attracted the attention of those who were 
best fitted to appreciate it^ and profoundly impressed 
them. M. Samte-Beuve gave of it^ in the Eeime des 
Deux Mondes, the admirable notice of which I have 
already spoken ; and so much curiosity was excited 
about Joubert, that the collection of his fragments, 
enlarged by many additions, was at last published for 
the benefit of the world in general. It has since been 
twice reprinted. The first or preliminary chapter 
has some fancifulness and affectation in it ; the reader 
should begin with the second. 

I have likened Joubert to Coleridge ; and indeed 
the points of resemblance between the two men are 
numerous. Both of them great and celebrated talkers, 
Joubert attracting pilgrims to his upper chamber in 
the Eue St-Honor6, as Coleridge attracted pilgrims 
to Mr. Gilman's at Highgate ; both of them desultory 
and incomplete writers, — here they had an outward 
likeness with one another. Both of them passionately 
devoted to reading in a class of books, and to thinking 
on a class of subjects, out of the beaten line of the 
reading and thought of their day; both of them 
ardent students and critics of old literature, poetry, 
and the metaphysics of religion ; both of them curious 

VOL. L T 



▼III.] JOUBERT. 275 

his matter in hand, whether that matter were literary, 
or philosophical, or political, or religious ; and this in 
a country where at that moment such an effort was 
almost unknown; where the most powerful minds 
threw themselves upon poetry, which conveys truth, 
indeed, but conveys it indirectly; and where ordi- 
nary minds were so habituated to do without think- 
ing altogether, to regard considerations of established 
routine and practical convenience as paramount, that 
any attempt to introduce within the domain of these 
the disturbing element of thougli^t, they were prompt 
to resent as an outraga Coleridge's great usefulness 
lay in his supplying in England, for many years and 
under critical circumstances, by the spectacle of this 
effort of his, a stimulus to all minds capable of profit- 
ing by it ; in the generation which grew up around 
him. His action will still be felt as long as the need 
for it continues. When, with the cessation of the 
need, the action too has ceased, Coleridge's memory, 
in spite of the disesteem — ^nay, repugnance — ^which 
his character may and must inspire, will yet for ever 
remain invested with that interest and gratitude 
which invests the memory of founders. 

M. de E^musat, indeed, reproaches Coleridge with 
his jvgememts saugrmvs ; the criticism of a gifted truth- 
finder ought not to be somgremi, so on this reproach 
we must pause for a moment Saugrenu is a rather 
vulgar French word, but, like many other vulgar 
words, very expressive; used as an epithet for a 
judgment^ it means something like irrvpvdenily absurd. 
The literary judgments of one nation about another 



276 ESSAYS IN OBinOISM. [vm. 

are very apt to be saugrmus. It is certainly true, as 
M. Sainte-Beuve remarks in answer to Goethe's com- 
plaint against the French that they have undervalued 
Du Bartas, that as to the estimate of its own authors 
every nation is the best judge ; the positive estimate 
of them, be it understood, not, of course, the estimate 
of them in comparison with the authors of other 
nations. Therefore a foreigner's judgments about 
the intrinsic merit of a nation's authors will gener- 
ally, when at complete variance with that nation's 
own, be wrong ; but there is a permissible wrongness 
in these matters, and to that permissible wrongness 
there is a limit When that limit is exceeded, the 
wrong judgment becomes more than wrong, it be- 
comes saugrenUy or impudently absurd. For instance, 
the high estimate which the French have of Eacine 
is probably in great measure deserved ; or, to take a 
yet stronger case, even the high estimate which 
Joubert had of the Abb6 Delille is probably in great 
measure deserved ; but the common . disparaging 
judgment passed on Eacine by English readers is not 
saugrenu, still less is that passed by them on the 
Abb6 Delille scmgrenu, because the beiauty of Eacine, 
and of Delille too, so far as Delille's beauty goes, is 
eminently in their language, and this is a beauty 
which a foreigner cannot perfectly seize; — this 
beauty of diction, apicibus verhorum ligata, as M. 
Sainte-Beuve, quoting Quintilian, says of Chateau- 
briand's. As to Chateaubriand himself, again, the 
common English judgment^ which stamps him as a 
mere shallow rhetorician, all froth and vanity, is 



vni.] JOUBEKT. 277 

certainly wrongs one may even wonder that we 
English should judge Chateaubriand so wrongly, for 
his power goes far beyond t>eauty of diction ; it is a 
power, as well, of passion and sentiment, and this 
sort of power the English can perfectly well appre- 
ciate. One production of Chateaubriand's, Bend, 
is akin to the most popular productions of Byron, 
— to the ChUde Harold or Mcmfred, — in spirit^ equal 
to them in power, superior to them in form. But 
this work, I hardly know why, is almost unread in 
England. And only consider this criticism of 
Chateaubriand's on the true pathetic! "It is a 
dangerous mistake, sanctioned, like so many other 
dangerous mistakes, by Voltaire, to suppose that the 
best works of imagination are those which draw most 
tears. One could name this or that melodrama, which 
no one would like to own having written, and which 
yet harrows the feelings far more than the jEndd. 
The true tears are those which are called forth by 
the becmty of poetry ; there must be as much admira- 
tion in them as sorrow. They are the tears which 
come to our eyes when Priam says to Achilles, hXrjv 
8\ oV oiwro) . . . — * And I have endured, — the like 
whereof no soul upon the earth hath yet endured, — 
to carry to my lips the hand of him who slew my 
child;' or when Joseph cries out: 'I am Joseph 
your brother, whom ye sold into Egjrpt'" Who 
does not feel that the man who wrote that vras no 
shallow rhetorician, but a bom man of genius, with 
the true instinct of genius for what is really admir- 
able) Nay, take these words of Chateaubriand, aD 



978 KsaiTS IH CBrncKif. [-nn. 

old man of eighty, dying, amidst the noise ftnd 
bustle of ^e ignoble rerolation of Febm&iy 1848 : 
"Mod IMen, mon Pien, qnand done, qcand done 
■ra«i-je d^vrt de tont ce moude, ce bruit; qnand 
done, qnand done eela finira-t-ill" Who, with any 
ear, does not feel that those aie not the accents oi 
a trampery rhetorician, bat of a rich and puissmnt 
nature, — the cry of the dying lion I I repeat it^ 
Chateaubriand is most ignorantly ondeiratad in 
England ; and we English are capable of rstiag him 
far more correctly if we knew him better. Still 
Chateaubriand has such real and great faults, be 
falls so deddedly benea^ the rank of the truly 
greatest anthers, that the depreciatory judgment 
passed on him in England, though ignorant and 
wrong, can hardly be said to tran^resa the limits 
of pemussible ignorance ; it is not ^jugemeid saugreniu. 
Bnt when a critic denies genioa to a literature whicfa 
has produced Bosenet and Moliire, he passes the 
bounds ; and Coleridge's judgments cm Freecb 
literature and the French genius are undoubtedly, 
as M. de B^muaat calls them, taagremu. 

And yet^ such is the impetuosity of our poor 
human nature, such its proneness to rush to & deci- 
sion with imperfect knowledge, that his having de- 
Uvered a aat^etm judgment or two in his life by do 
means proves a man not to have had, in comparlsoD 
with his fellow-^nen in g^ieral, a remarkable g;ift for 
truth, or disqualifies him for being, by virtue of tliat 
gift, a source of vital stimulus for us. Jonbert had 
far less amoke and turbid vehemence in him than 



vm.] JOUBEBT. 279 

Coleridge; he had also a far keener sense of what 
was absurd. But Joubert can write to M. M0I6 (the 
M. M0I6 who was afterwards Louis Philippe's well- 
known minister): "As to your Milton, whom the 
merit of the Abb6 Delille" (the Abb6 Delille trans- 
lated Paradise Lost) "makes me admire, and with 
whom I have nevertheless still plenty of fault to find, 
why, I should like to know, are you scandalised that 
I have not enabled myself to read himi I don't 
understand the language in which he writes, and J 
don't much care to. If he is a poet one cannot put 
up with, even in the prose of the younger Eacine, am 
I to blame for that 1 If by force you mean beauty 
manifesting itself with power, I maintain that the Abb^ 
Delille has more force than Milton." That, to be 
sure, is a petulant outburst in a private letter ; it is 
not, like Coleridge's, a deliberate proposition in a 
printed philosophical essay. But is it possible to 
imagine a more perfect specimen of a saugrenu judg- 
ment ? It is even worse than Coleridge's, because it is 
saugrenuwiih. reasons. That^ however, does not prevent 
Joubert from having been really a man of extraordinary 
ardour in the search for truth, and of extraordinary 
fineness in the perception of it; and so was Coleridge. 
Joubert had around him in France an atmosphere 
of literary, philosophical, and religious opinion as 
alien to him as that in England was to Coleridge. 
This is what makes Joubert, too, so remarkable, and 
it is on this account that I begged the reader to 
remark his date. He was bom in 1754 ; he died in 
1824. He was thus in the fulness of his powers at 



280 BSSATS IN OKinOISM. [vm. 

the beginning of the present centiuy, at the epoch of 
Napoleon's consulata The French criticism of that 
day — the criticiBm of Iiaharpe's EuccesaorB, of Qeoff- 
roy and his coUeaguea in the Jovmai da Dubois — 
had a dryness very unlike the telling Tivacity of the 
early Edinbuigb reviewers, their coDtemporariea, but 
a fondamental narrowness, a want of genuine indghl, 
much on a par with theirs. Joubert, like Coleridge, 
has no respect for the dominant oracle ; he treats his 
GeofiVoy with about as little deference as Coleridge 
treats his Jefiey. " Geoffrey ," he says in an article 
in the Journal des D&xUs criticising Chateaubriand's 
Gitiie du Ckrislianisme — "Geoffroy in this article 
begins by holding out his paw prettily enough ; but 
he ends by a voUey of kicks, which Iet£ the whole 
world see but too clearly the four iron shoes of the 
four-footed animal." There is, however, in France a 
sympathy with intellectual activity for its own sake, 
and for the sake of its inherent pleasurableness and 
beauty, keener than any which exists in Ekigland ; 
and Joubert had more effect in Paris, — though hia 
conversation was his only weapon, and Coleridge 
wielded besides hia conversation hia pen, — than Cole- 
ridge had or could have in London. I mean, a more 
immediate, appreciable effect ; an effect not only upon 
the young and enthuaiastic, to whom the future belongs, 
butupon formed and important personages to whom the 
present belongs, and who are actually moving society. 
He owed this partly to his real advantages over 
Coleridge. If he had, as I have ahready said, less 
power and richness than his English parallel, he had 



r 



TOi.] JOUBBKT. 281 

more tact and penetration. He was more possible 
than Coleridge; his doctrine was more intelligible 
than Coleridge's, more receivable. And yet with 
Joabert) the striving after a consummate and attrac- 
tive clearness of expression came from no mere frivo- 
lous dislike of labour and inability for going deep, but 
was a part of his native love of truth and perfection. 
The delight of his life he found in truth, and in the 
satisfaction which the enjoying of truth gives to the 
spirit ; and he thought the truth was never really and 
worthily said, so long as the least cloud, clumsiness, 
and repulsiveness hung about the expression of it. 

Some of his best passages are those in which he 
upholds this doctrine. Even metaphysics he would 
not allow to remain difficult and abstract: so long 
as they spoke a professional jargon, the language of 
the schools, he maintained, — ^and who shall gainsay 
him) — that metaphysics were imperfect; or, at any 
rate, had not yet reached their ideal perfection. 

" The true science of metaphysics," he says, " con- 
sists not in rendering abstract that which is sensible, 
but in rendering sensible that which is abstract ; ap- 
parent that which is hidden ; imaginable, if so it may 
be, that which is only intelligible; and intelligible, 
finally, that which an ordinary attention fails to seize." 

And therefore : — 

" Distrust, in books on metaphysics, words which 
have not been able to get currency in the world, and 
are only calculated to form a special language.'* 

Nor would he suffer common words to be em- 
ployed in a special sense by the schools : — 



283 KSSATS IH CRinCISIt [Tm, 

"Which is the best, if one wanta to be naefn] 
and to be really understood, to get one'e words in 
the world, or to get them in the schools. I nuin- 
tain that the good plan is to employ words in their 
popular lense rather than in their philosophical 
sense ; and the better plan still, to employ them in 
their natnral sense rather than in their popular sensei 
By their natnral sense, I mean the popular and imi- 
rersal acceptation of them brought to that which in 
this is essential and invariable. To prove a thing by 
definition proves nothing, if the definitioii is purely 
philosophical; for such definitions only bind him 
who makes them. To prove a thing by definition, 
when the definition expresses the necessary, inevit- 
able, and clear idea which the world at lai^ attaches 
to the object, is, on the contrary, all in all ; because 
then what one does is simply to show people what 
they do really tliinlr, in spite of themselves and with- 
out knowing it. The rule that one b free to give to 
words what sense one will, and that the only thing 
needful is to be agreed upon the sense one gives 
them, is very well for the mere purposes of argumen- 
tation, and may be allowed in the schools where this 
sort of fencing is to be practised ; but in the sphere 
of the true-bom and noble science of metaphysics 
and in the genuine world of literature, it is good tor 
nothing. One must never quit sight of reaUties, and 
one must employ one's expressions simply aa media, 
— as glasses, through which one's thoughts can be best 
made evident I know, by my own experience, how 
bard this rule is to follow ; but I judge of its import 



r 



Tm.] JOUBEBT. 283 

ance by the failure of every system of metaphysics. 
Not one of them has succeeded ; for the simple reason, 
that in every one ciphers have been constantly used 
instead of values, artificial ideas instead of native 
idea^, jargon instead of idiom." 

I do not know whether the metaphysician will ever 
adopt Joubert's rules ; but I am sure that the man 
of letters, whenever he has to speak of metaphysics, 
will do well to adopt them. He, at any rate, must 
remember : — 

'^ It is by means of familiar words that style takes 
hold of the reader and gets possession of him. It is 
by means of these that great thoughts get currency 
and pass for true metal, like gold and silver which 
have had a recognised stamp put upon them. They 
beget confidence in the man who, in order to make 
his thoughts more clearly perceived, uses them ; for 
people feel that such an employment of the language 
of common human life betokens a man who knows 
that life and its concerns, and who keeps himself in 
contact with them. Besides, these words make a 
style frank and easy. They show that an author has 
long made the thought or the feeling expressed his 
mental food; that he has so assimilated them and 
familiarised them, that the most common expressions 
suffice him in order to express ideas which have 
become every-day ideas to him by the length of time 
they have been in his mind And lastly, what one 
says in such words looks more true ; for, of all the 
words in use, none are so clear as those which we call 
common words ; and clearness is so eminently one of 



281 ESSAYS IN CBinOISH. [Tin 

the charact^riBticB of trutli, that often it even passes 
for truth itself." 

These are not, in Joubert, mere counsels of rhetoric ; 
they come from his accurate sense of perfection, from 
hia having clearly seized the fine and just idea that 
beauty and light are properties of truth, and that 
truth is incompletely exhibited if it is exhibited with- 
out beauty and light : — 

"Be profound with clear terms and not with 
obecnre terms. ^Vhat is difBcnIt will at last become 
easy; bat as one goes deep into things, one must 
still keep a charm, and one must carry into these 
dark depths of thought, into which speculation has 
only recently penetrated, the pure and antique clear- 
ness of centuries less learned than ours, but with 
more light in them." 

And elsewhere he speaks of those " spirits, lovers 
of light, who, when they have an idea to pat forth, 
brood long over it first, and wut patiently till it 
shines,.aa Buffon enjoined, when he defined genius to 
be the aptitude for patience; spirits who know by 
experience that the driest matter and the dullest 
words hide within them the germ and spark of some 
brightness, like those fairy nuts in which were found 
diamonds if one broke the shell and was the right 
person ; spirits who maintain thaj^ to see and exhibit 
things in beauty, is to see and show things as in their 
essence they really are, and not as they exist for the 
eye of the careless, who do not look beyond the out- 
side ; spirits hard to satisfy, because of a keen-sighted- 
neas in them, which makes them discern hut too 



^^^^•^^^^^^^^^^mi^^mmmmmmmmtmmmmmmmmmmmmmmi 



Tin.] JOUBERT. 286 

clearly both the models to be followed and those to 
be shunned j spirits active though meditative, who 
cannot rest except in solid truths, and whom only 
beauty can make happy; spirits far less concerned 
for glory than for perfection, who, because their art 
is long and life is short, often die without leaving a 
monument^ having had their own inward sense of life 
and fruitfulness for their best reward." 

No doubt there is something a little too ethereal 
in all this, something which reminds one of Joubert's 
physical want of body and substance ; no doubt, if a 
man wishes to be a great author, it is to consider too 
curiously, to consider as Joubert did ; it is a mistake 
to spend so much of one's time in setting up one's 
ideal standard of perfection, and in contemplating it 
Joubert himself knew this veiy well : " I cannot 
build a house for my ideas," said he; "I have tned 
to do without words, and words take their revenge 
on me by their difficulty." " If there is a man upon 
earth tormented by the cursed desire to get a whole 
book into a page, a whole page into a phrase, and this 
phrase into one word, — that man is myself." " I can 
sow, but I cannot build." Joubert, however, makes 
no claim to be a great author; by renouncing all 
ambition to be this, by not trying to fit his ideas into 
a house, by making no compromise with words in 
spite of their difficulty, by being quite single-minded 
in his pursuit of perfection, perhaps he is enabled to 
get closer to the truth of the objects of his study, and 
to be of more service to us by setting before us ideals, 
than if he had composed a celebrated work. I doubt 



386 EBBATB IH OBITIOISU. [vui. 

whether, in an elaborate work on the philosophy of 
religion, he would h&ve |^t his ideas about religion 
to thine, to use his own expression, as they shine when 
h« utters them in perfect freedouL Penetration in 
these mattere is valoeless without soul, and soul' is 
valueless without penetration ; both of these are deli- 
cate quaUties, and, even in those who hare them, 
eadly lost ; the charm of Joubert is, that he has and 
keeps both. Let ns try and show that he does. 

" One should be fearful of being wrong in poetry 
when one thinks differently from the poets, and in 
religion when one thinks differently from the saints. 

"There is a. great difference between taking for 
idols Mahomet and Luther, and bowing down before 
Rousseau and Voltaire. People at any rate imagined 
they were obeying God when they followed Mahomet, 
and the Scriptures when they hearkened to LuUier. 
And perhaps one ought not too much to disparage 
that inclination which leads mankiod to put into the 
hands of those whom it thinks the friends of God 
the directaon and gOTemment of its heart and mind. 
It is the subjection to irreligious spirits which aloae 
is fatal, and, in the fullest sense of the word, 
depraving. 

"May I eay iti It is not hard to know God, 
provided one will not force oneself to define him. 

" Do not bring into the domain of reasoning that 
which belongs to our innermost feeling. State truths 
of sentiment, and do not try to prove them. There 
is a danger in such proofs ; for in arguing it is nece»- 
■ary to treat that which is in qnestion as something 



viiij JOUBBRT. 287 

problematic : now that which we accustom ourselves 
to treat as problematic ends by appearing to us as 
reaQy doubtful In things that are visible and palp- 
able, never prove what is believed already ; in things 
that are certain and mysterious, — ^mysterious by their 
greatness and by their nature, — ^make people believe 
them, and do not prove them; in things that are 
matters of practice and duty, command, and do not 
explain. 'Fear God,' has made many men pious; 
the proofs of the existence of Grod have made many 
men atheists. From the defence springs the attack ; 
the advocate begets in his hearer a wish to pick 
holes ; and men are almost always led on, from the 
desire to contradict the doctor, to the desire to con- 
tradict the doctrine. Make truth lovely, and do not 
try to arm her ; mankind will then be far less inclined 
to contend with her. 

" Why is even a bad preacher almost always heard 
by the pious with ' pleasure ? Because he talks to them 
aibovi what they love. But you who have to expound^ 
religion to the children of this world, you who have 
to speak to them of that which they once loved per- 
haps, or which they would be glad to love, — ^remember 
that they do not love it yet, and to make them love 
it take heed to speak with power. 

" You may do what you like, mankind will believe 
no one but God ; and he only can persuade mankind 
who believes that God has spoken to him. No one 
can give faith unless he has faith ; the persuaded per- 
suade, as the indulgent disarm. 

" The only happy people in the world are the good 



388 KSSAT8 m CBrncisu. [nn 

man, the sage, and the Haint ; but the saint is happier 
than either of the others, ho much is man by his nature 
formed for sanctity." 

The same delicacr and penetration which he here 
shows in speaking of the inward essence of religion, 
Joabert shows also in speaking of its outward form, 
and of its manifestation in the world : — 

" Piety is not a religion, though it is the soul of 
all religions. A man has not a religion simply by 
having pious inclinations, any more than he has a 
country simply by having philanthropy. A man has 
not a country until he is a citizen in a state, until he 
undertakes to follow and uphold certain laws, to obey 
certain magistrates, and to adopt certain ways of living 
and acting. 

"Religion is neither a theology nor a theosophy ; 
it is more than all this; it is a discipline, a law, a 
yoke, an indissoluble engagement" 

Who, again, has ever shown with more truth and 
beauty the good and imposing side of the wealth and 
splendour of the Catholic Church, than Joubert in 
the following passage ) — 

"The pomps and magnificence with which the 
Church is reproached are in truth the result and the 
proof of her incomparable excellence. From whence, 
let me ask, have come this power of hers and these 
excessive riches, except from the enchantment into 
which she threw all the world I Ravished with her 
beauty, millions of men from age to age kept loading 
her with gifts, bequests, cessions. She had the talent 
of making herself loved, and the talent of making men 



Tin.] JOUBEBT. 289 

happy. It is that which wrought prodigies for her ; 
it is from thence that she drew her power." 

^'She had the talent of making herself fmred^ — 
one should add that too, in order to be perfectly just; 
but Joubert, because he is a true child of light, can 
see that the wonderful success of the Catholic Church 
must have been due really to her good rather than to 
her bad qualities ; to her maJdng herself loved rather 
than to her making herself feared 

How strildiig and suggestive, again, is this remark 
on the Old and New Testaments : — 

" The Old Testament teaches the knowledge of good 
and evil; the Gospel, on the other hand, seems written 
for the predestinated; it is the book of innocence. 
The one is made for earth, the other seems made for 
heaven. According as the one or the other of these 
books takes hold of a nation, what may be called the 
rdigiouB hwnumrs of nations differ." 

So the British and North American Puritans are 
the children of the Old Testament^ as Joachim of 
Flora and St. Francis are the children of the New. 
And does not the following maxim exactly fit the 
Church of England, of which Joubert certainly never 
thought when he was writing it 9 — '^ The austere sects 
excite the most enthusiasm at first; but the temperate 
sects have always been the most durable." 

And these remarks on the Jansenists and Jesuits, 
interesting in themselves, are still more interesting 
because they touch matters we cannot well know at 
first-hand, and which Joubert^ an impartial observer, 
bad had the means of studying closely. We are apt 

VOL. L u 



390 ES8ATS Df CRinOISH. [tul 

to thiiik of the Janseniata aa having failed by reason 
of their merita; Joubert ahowa ua how far th^failuie 
was due to their defects : — 

" We ought to lay stress upon what is clear in 
Scripture, and to pass quickly over what is obscure ; 
to light up what in Scripture is troubled, by what is 
serene in it ; what puzzles and checks the reason, by 
what aatisfiea the reason. The Jansenista have done 
juat the reverae. They lay atreas upon what is un- 
certain, obacure, afflicting, and they pass lightly over 
all the rest ; they eclipse the luminous and consoling 
trutha of Scripture, by putting between ua and them 
its opaque and dismal trutha. For example, ' Many 
are called;' there ia a clear truth: 'Few are choeen;* 
there is an obacnre truth. 'Wearechildren of wrath;* 
there is a sombre, cloudy, terrifying tmtb : 'We are 
all the children of God;' 'I came not to call the 
righteous, but ainners to repentance ;' there are truths 
which are full of deamess, mildness, serenity, light. 
The Janaeniats trouble our cheerfulness, and shed no 
cheering ray on our trouble. They are not, however, 
to be condemned for what they say, because what they 
say is true ; but they are to be condemned for what 
they fail to aay, for that is true too,- — truer, even, than 
the other ; that is, its truth ia easier for us to seize, 
fuller, rounder, and more complete. Theology, aa the 
Janaenista exhibit her, has but the half of her disk." 

Again ; — 

" The Janseniats erect ' grace ' into a kind of fourth 
person of the Trinity. They are, without thinking or 
intending it, Quatemitariaaa. St Paul and St Angus- 



VIII.] JOUBERT 291 

tine, too exclusively studied, have done all the mis< 
chief. Instead of ' grace,' say help, succour, a divine 
influence, a dew of heaven ; then one can come to a 
right understanding. The word ' grace ' is a sort of 
talisman, all the baneful spell of which can be broken 
by translating it. The trick of personifying words is 
a fatal source of mischief in theology." 

Once more : — 

''The Jansenists tell men to love Godj the Jesuits 
make men love him. The doctrine of these last is full 
of loosenesses, or, if you will, of errors 3 still, — singu- 
lar as it may seem, it is undeniable, — they are the 
better directors of souls. 

*'The Jansenists have carried into Religion more 
thought than the Jesuits, and they go deeper ; they 
are faster bound with its sacred bonda They have 
in their way of thinking an austerity which incessantly 
constrains the will to keep the path of duty ; all the 
habits of their understanding, in short, are more 
Christian. But they seem to love God without 
affection, and solely from reason, from duty, from 
justice. The Jesuits, on the othei hand, seem to 
love him from pure inclination; out of admiration^ 
gratitude, tenderness; for the pleasure of loving 
him, in short In their books of devotion you find 
joy, because with the Jesuits nature and religion go 
hand in hand. In the books of the Jansenists thei^ is a 
sadness and a moral constraint, because with the Jan- 
senists religion is for ever trying to put nature in bonds. " 

The Jesuits have suffered, and deservedly suffered, 
plenty of discredit from what Joubei*t. gently callA 



292 BSSATB IN OBITICISU. |viu. 

their "looseneBses;" let them have the merit of theii 
uniabilitf. 

The most chancteiutic thoo^ts one can quota 
from any writer are always his thoughts on matters 
like these ; but tlie "m-riniH of Joubert are purely 
literary subjecte also, have the same pui^ed and 
subtle delicacy ; they show the same sedulonsness in 
him to preserve perfectly true the balance of his sonl. 
Let me b^in with this, which contains a truth too 
many people fail to perceive : — 

" Ignorance^ which in matters of morals extenuates 
the crime, is iteelf, in matters of literature, a crime of 
the first order." 

And here is another sentence, worthy of Goethe, 
to clear t^e air at one's entrance into the region of 



"With the fever of the senses, the delirium of the 
passions, the weakness of the spirit ; with t^ storms 
of the passing time and with the great scourges of 
human life, — ^hunger, thirst, dishonour, diseases, and 
death, — authors may as long as they like go on mftVing 
novels which shall harrow our hearts ; but the soul 
says all the while, ' You hurt ma' " 

And again : — 

"Fiction has no business to exist unless it is more 
beautiful than reality. Certainly the monstrositieB of 
fiction may be found in the booksellers' shops ; yon 
buy them there for a certun number of franca, and 
you talk of them for a certdn number of days ; but 
they have no place iu literature, because in litera- 
ture the one aim of art is the beautiful Onoe 



M 



?III.] JOUBERT. 293 

lose sight of that, and you have the mere frightful 
reality." 

That is just the right criticism to pass on these 
"monstrosities:'' (hey ha/ve no place in literature^ and 
those who produce them are not really men of letters. 
One would think that this was enough to deter from 
such production any man of genuine ambition. But 
most of us, alas ! are what we must be, not what we 
ought to be, — not even what we know we ought to be. 

The following, of which the first part reminds one of 
Wordsworth's sonnet^ " If thou indeed derive thy light 
from heaven,"excellently defines the true salutary func- 
tion of literature, and the limits of this function : — 

"Whether one is an eagle or an ant, in the intel- 
lectual world, seems to me not to matter much ; the 
essential thing is to have one's place marked there, 
one's station assigned, and to belong decidedly to a 
regular and wholesome order. A small talent, if it 
keeps within its limits and rightly fulfils its task, may 
reach the goal just as well as a greater one. To 
accustom mankind to pleasures which depend neither 
upon the bodily appetites nor upon money, by giving 
them a taste for the things of the mind, seems to me, 
in fact, the one proper fruit which nature has meant 
our literary productions to have. When they have 
other fruits, it is by accident^ and, in general, not for 
good. Books which absorb our attention to such a 
degree that they rob us of all fancy for other books, 
are absolutely pernicious. In this way they only 
bring fresh crotchets and sects into the world; they 
multiply the great variety of weights, rules, and 



294 ESSAYS im GBXTICISM. [viii. 

meajBures already existmg; they are morally and 
politically a nuisance." 

Who can read these words and not think of the 
limiting effect exercised by certain works in certain 
spheres and for certain periods; exercised even by 
the works of men of genius or virtue, — ^by the works 
of Eousseau, the works of Wesley, the works of 
Swedenboig t And what is it which makes the Bible 
so admirable a book, to be the one book of those who 
can have only one, but the miscellaneous character of 
the contents of the Bible ? 

Joubert was all his life a passionate lover of Plato ; 
I hope other lovers of Plato will forgive me for saying 
that their adored object has never been more truly 
described than he is here : — 

''Plato shows us nothing, but he brings brightness 
with him; he puts light into our eyes, and fills us 
with a clearness by which all objects afterwards be- 
come illuminated. He teaches us nothing; but he 
prepares us, fashions us, and makes us ready to know 
alL Somehow or other, the habit of reading him 
augments in us the capacity for discerning and enter- 
taining whatever fine truths may afterwards present 
themselves. Like mountain-air, it sharpens our organs, 
and gives us an appetite for wholesome food." 

'' Plato loses himself in the void " (he says again) ; 
''but one sees the play of his wings, one hears their 
rustle." And the conclusion is : "It is good to breathe 
his air, but not to live upon him." 

As a pendant to the criticism on Plato, this on the 
French moralist Nicole is excellent : — 



Tin.] JOUBERT. 295 

" Nicole is a Pascal without styla It is not what 
he says which is sublime, but what he thinks; he 
rises, not by the natural elevation of his own spirit, 
but by that of his doctrijie*). One must not look to 
the form in him, but to the matter, which is exquisite. 
He ought to be read with a direct view of practice." 

English people have hardly ears to hear the praises 
of Bossuet^ and the Bossuet of Joubert is Bossuet at 
his very best ; but this is a far truer Bossuet than the 
'^declaimer" Bossuet of Lord Macaulay, himself a 
bom rhetorician, if ever there was one : — 

'^Bossuet employs all our idioms, as Homer em- 
ployed all the dialect& The language of kings, of 
statesmen, and of warriors; the language of the 
people and of the student, of the country and of the 
schools, of the sanctuary and of the courts of law ; 
tiie old and the new, the trivial and the stately, the 
quiet and the resounding, — he turns all to his use ; 
and out of all this he makes a style, simple, grave, 
majestia His ideas are, like his words, varied, — 
common and sublime together. Times and doctrines 
in all their multitude were ever before his spirit, as 
things and words in all their multitude were ever 
before it He is not so much a man as a human 
nature, with the temperance of a saint, the justice of 
a bishop, the prudence of a doctor, and the might of 
a great spirit" 

After this on Bossuet, I must quote a criticism on 
Racine, to show that Joubert did not indiscriminately 
worship all the French gods of the grand century : — 

" Those who find Racine enough for them are poor 



9M SSSATS IN CRITICISM. lyni 

iOwd«i and poor wits ; they are souls and wits which 
hi^Y« never got beyond the callow and boarding-school 
•tuge. Admirable, as no doubt he is, for his skill in 
hi^ving made poetical the most humdrum sentiments 
and the most middling sort of passions, he can yet 
•tand us in stead of nobody but himself. He is a 
•uperior writer ; and, in literature, that at once puts 
a man on a pinnacle. But he is not an inimitable 
writer." 

And again : *^ The talent of Bacine is in his works, 
but Sacine himself is not there. That is why he 
himself became disgusted with thenu" "Of Bacine, 
as of his ancients, the genius lay in taste. His ele- 
gance is perfect) but it is not supreme, like that of 
VirgiL'' And, indeed, there is something siipreme in 
an elegance which exercises such a fascination as 
Virgil's does ; which makes one return to his poems 
again and again, long after one thinks one has done 
with them; which makes them one of those books 
that, to use Joubert's words, "lure the reader back to 
them, as the proverb says good wine lures back the 
wine-bibber." And the highest praise Joubert can 
at last find for Bacine is this, that he is the Virgil of 
the ignorant ; — " Bacme est le FirgUe des ignarants" 

Of Boileau, too, Joubert says : "Boileau is a power- 
ful poetj but only in the world of half poetry." How 
true is that of Pope also ! And he adds : " Neither 
Boileau's poetry nor Bacine's flows from the fountain- • 
head." No Englishman, controverting the exag- 
gerated French estimate of these poets, could desire 
to use fitter words. 



mi.] JOUBERT. 297 

I will end with some remarks on Voltaire and 
Rousseau, remarks in which Joubert eminently shows 
his prime merit as a critic,— the soundness and com- 
pleteness of his judgments. I mean that he has the 
faculty of judging with all the powers of his mind 
and soul at work together in due combination ; and 
how rare is this faculty 1 how seldom is it exercised 
towards writers who so powerfully as Voltaire and 
Bousseau stimulate and call into activity a single side 
in us! 

''Voltaire's wits came to their maturity twenty 
years sooner than the wits of other men, and remained 
in full vigour thirty years longer. The charm which 
our style in general gets from our ideas, his ideas get 
from his style. Voltaire is sometimes a£9dcted, some- 
times strongly moved ; but serious he never is. His 
very graces have an effix>ntery about them. He had 
correctness of judgment^ liveliness of imagination, 
nimble wits, quick taste, and a moral sense in ruins. 
He is the most debauched of spirits, and the worst 
of him is that one gets debauched along with him. 
If he had been a wise man, and had had the self- 
discipline of wisdom, beyond a doubt half his wit 
would have been gone ; it needed an atmosphere of 
licence in order to play freely. Those people who 
read him every day, create for themselves, by an in- 
vincible law, the necessity of liking him. But those 
people who, having given up reading him, gaze 
steadily down upon the influences which his spirit 
has shed abroad, find themselves in simple justice and 
duty compelled to detest him. It is impossible to 



298 ESSAYS IN CRITICISM. Ivill. 

be satisfied with him, and impossible not to be fasci* 
nated by him." 

The literary sense in us is apt to rebel agamst so 
severe a judgment on such a charmer of the literary 
sense as Voltaire, and perhaps we English are not 
very liable to catch Voltaire's vices, while of some of 
his merits we have signal need; still, as the real 
definitive judgment on Voltaire, Joubert's is un- 
doubtedly the true one. It is nearly identical with 
that of Goethe. Joubert's sentence on Bousseau is 
in some respects more favourable : — 

''That weight in the speaker (avdorUas) which 
the ancients talk of, is to be found in Bossuet more 
than in any other French author ; Pascal, too, has it, 
and La Bruy^re ; even Eousseau has something of it^ 
but Voltaire not a particle. I can understand how a 
Eousseau — I mean a Bousseau cured of his faults — 
might at the present day do much good, and may 
even come to be greatly wanted ; but under no cir- 
cumstances can a Voltaire be of any use." 

The peculiar power of Bousseau's style has never 
been better hit off than in the following passage : — 

'' Bousseau imparted, if I may so speak, bowels oj 
feeling to the words he used (donna des erdraiUes h Urns 
les mots\ and poured into them such a charm, sweet- 
ness so penetrating, energy so puissant^ that his writ- 
ings have an effect upon the soul something like that 
of those illicit pleasures which steal away our taste 
and intoxicate our reason." 

The final judgment, however, is severe, and justly 
severe : — 



vin.] JOUBEET. 299 

*' Life without actions ; life entirely resolved into 
affections and halfHsensoal thoughts ; do-nothingness 
setting up for a virtue ; cowardliness with voluptuous- 
ness ; fierce pride with nullity underneath it ; the 
strutting phrase of the most sensual of vagabonds, 
who has made his system of philosophy and can give 
it eloquently forth : there is Bousseau 1 A piety in 
which there is no religion ; a severity which brings 
corruption with it ; a dogmatism which serves to ruin 
all authority: there is Eousseau's philosophy! To 
all tender, ardent^ and elevated natures, I say : Only 
Bousseau can detach you from religion, and only true 
religion can cure you of Rousseau." 

I must yet find room, before I end, for one at least 
of Joubert's sa3rings on political matters ; here, too, 
the whole man shows himself; and here, too, the 
affinity with Coleridge is very remarkable. How 
true, how true in France especially, is this remark 
on the contrasting direction taken by the aspira- 
tions of the community in ancient and in modem 
states : — 

" The ancients were attached to their country by 
three things, — their temples, their tombs, and their 
forefathers. The two great bonds which united them 
to their government were the bonds of habit and 
antiquity. With the modems, hope and the love of 
novelty have produced a total change. The ancients 
said ofwt forefatherSy we say posterity: we do not, like 
them, love our paMa, that is to say, the country and 
the laws of our fathers, rather we love the laws and 
the country of our children ; the charm we are most 



300 SSSATS IN CRITICISM. [viii. 

sensible to is the charm of the future, and not the 
charm of the past" 

And how keen and true is this criticism on the 
changed sense of the word " liberty" : — 

'* A great many words have changed their mean- 
ing. The word liberiy, for example, had at bottom 
among the ancients the same meaning as the word 
domimon, I would be firee meant, in the mouth of the 
ancient) / looiUd take part m gavernmg or administering 
the State ; in the mouth of a modem it means, / would 
be ijidependent. The word liberty has with us a moral 
sense; with them its sense was purely political" 

Joubert had lived through the French Eevolution, 
and to the modem cry for liberty he was prone to 
answer : — 

''Let your cry be for free souls rather even than 
for free men. Moral liberty is the one vitally im- 
portant liberty, the one liberty which is indispensable ; 
the other liberty is good and salutary only so far as 
it favours this. Subordination is in itself a better 
thing than independence. The one implies order 
and arrangement; the other implies only self-suffi- 
ciency with isolation. The one means harmony, the 
other a single tone ; the one is the whole, the other 
is but the part" 

" Liberty 1 liberty! " he cries again; "in all things 
let us have justice, and then we shall have enough 
Uberty." 

Let us have justice, and then we shall have enough 
liberty 1 The wise man will never refuse to echo 
those words ; but then, suob is the imperfection of 



Yin.] JOUBEKT. 301 

human gOTemments, that almost always, in order to 
get justice, one has first to secure liberty. 

I do not hold up Joubert as a very astonishing and 
powerful genius, but rather as a delightful and edify- 
ing genius. I have not cared to exhibit him as a 
sayer of brilliant epigranmiatic things, such things as 
*' Notre vie est du vent tissu . . . . les dettes abr6- 
gent la vie ... . celui qui a de Timagination sans 
Erudition a des ailes et n'a pas de pieds (OiMr life is 
woven wind .... debts take from life , , , , the man 
of imagination wUhoui Ua/tnmg has wings and no feet)" 
though for such sayings he is famous. In the first 
place, the French language is in itself so f ayourable a 
vehicle for such sayings, that the making them in it 
has the less merit ; at least half the merit ought to 
go, not to the maker of the saying, but to the French 
language. In the second place, the peculiar beauty 
of Joubert is not there ; it is not in what is exclusiyely 
intellectual, — ^it is in tibe union of sotU with intellect^ 
and in the delightful, satisfying result which this 
union produce& '^Yivre, c'est penser et sentir son 
kme . . . . le bonheur est de sentir son &me bonne 
.... toute Y6nt6 nue et crue n'a pas assez pass^ par 
r^me .... les hommes ne sont justes qu'envers 
ceux qu'ils aiment (The essence of life lies in thinkmg and 
being conscious of one^s soul .... happimess is the sense 
of one's sold being good .,.,ifa truth is nude mid 
crvde, that is a proof it has not been steeped long enough 
in the soul; «... man cannot even be just to his neigh- 
hour, v/rdess he loves Aim) ;" it is much rather in sa3rings 
like these that Joubert's best and innermost nature 



302 ESSAYS IN OBITICIBM. [▼!» 

manifests itsell He is the most prepossessing and 
convincing of witnesses to the good of loving light. 
Because he sincerely loved light, and did not prefer 
to it any little private darkness of his own, he found 
light; his eye was single, and therefore his whole 
body was full of light. And because he was full of 
light, he was also full of happiness. In spite of his 
infirmities, in spite of his sufferings, in spite of his 
obscurity, he was the happiest man alive ; his life 
was as charming as his thoughts. For certainly it is 
natural that the love of light, which is already, in 
some measure, the possession of light, should irradiate 
and beatify the whole life of him who has it. There 
is something unnatural and shocking where, as in the 
case of Coleridge, it does not. Joubert pains us by 
no such contradiction; "the same penetration of 
spirit which made him such delightful company to his 
friends, served also to make him perfect in his own 
personal life, by enabling him always to perceive and 
do what was right ; " he loved and sought light till 
he became so habituated to it^ so accustomed to the 
joyful testimony of a good conscience, that^ to use his 
own words, " he could no longer exist without this, 
and was obliged to live without reproach if he would 
live without misery." 

Joubert was not famous while he lived, and he will 
not be famous now that he is dead. But^ before we 
pity him for this, let us be sure what we mean, in lite- 
rature, hy famous. There are the famous men of genius 
in literature, — the Homers, Dantes, Shakspcares: 
of them we need not speak ; their praise is for ever 



nil.] JOUBBRT. 303 

and ever. Then there are the famous men of ability 
in literature : their praise is in their own generation. 
And what makes this difference ? The work of the 
two orders of men is at the bottom the same, — a crUi- 
asm of life. The end and aim of all literature, if one 
considers it attentively, is, in truth, nothing but that. 
But the criticism which the men of genius pass upon 
human life is permanently acceptable to mankind; 
the criticism which the men of ability pass upon 
human life is transitorily acceptable. Between Shak- 
speare's criticism of human life and Scribe's the differ- 
ence is there ; — the one is permanently acceptable, 
the other transitorily. Whence then, I repeat, this 
difference? It is that the acceptableness of Shak- 
speare's criticism depends upon its inherent truth: the 
acceptableness of Scribe's upon its suiting itself, by 
its subject-matter, ideas, mode of treatment, to the 
taste of the generation that hears it. But the taste 
and ideas of one generation are not those of the next 
This next generation in its turn arrives; — ^first its 
sharpshooters, its quick-witted, audacious light troops ; 
then the elephantine main body. The imposing array 
of its predecessor it confidently assails, riddles it with 
bullets, passes over its body. It goes hard then with 
many once popular reputations, with many authorities 
once oracular. Only two kinds of authors are safe in 
the general havoa The first kind are the great 
abounding fountains of truth, whose criticism of life 
is a source of illumination and joy to the whole human 
race for ever, — ^the Homers, the Shakspearea These 
are the sacred personages, whom all civilised warfare 



304 KSBATS nt tmrnOIBH. [vta. 

reBpects. The second uv those whom the ont-eldii- 
miaheis of ihb new genention, its forenamerei, — quick- 
witted Boldiera, aa I have said, the select of Hie army, 
— recognise, though the bnlk of their comrades be- 
hind might not, as of the same family and character 
with the sacred perBooagea, exercising like them an 
immortal function, and like them inspiring a permanent 
interest They snatch them up, and set them in a 
place of shelter, where the on-coming multitude may 
not overwhehn Utem. These are the Joaberta. They 
will never, like the Shakspeares, command the hom- 
age of the mnltitude ; but tJiey are safe ; the multi- 
tude will not trample tiiem down. Except these two 
kinds, no author is safe. Let ns consider, for example, 
Joobert's famous conten^nrary. Lord Je&ey. All 
bia vivacity and accomplishment avful him nothing ; 
of the true critic he had in an eminect degree no 
quality, except one, — curiosity. Curiosity be had, 
but he bad no gift for truth; he cannot illuminate 
and rejoice us; no intelligent out«kirmisher of the 
new g^ieration cares about him, cares to put him in 
safety ; at this moment we are all passing over his 
body. Let us consider a greater than Jeffrey, a critte 
whose re^tation still stands firm,— will stand, many 
people think, for ever, — the great apostle of the 
Philistines, Lord Macaulay, Lord Macaulay was, as 
I have already said, a bom rhetorician ; a splendid 
rhetorician doubtless, and, beyond that, an Englitk 
Aetorician also, an honest rhetorician ; still, beyond 
the apparent rhetorical truth of things he never could 
penetrate ; for their vital truth, for what the Frenoli 



Till.] , JOUBBKT 305 

call the ffraie vSrM, he had absolutely no organ; 
therefore his reputation, brilliant as it is, is not secur& 
Bhetoric so good as his excites and gives pleasure ; 
but by pleasure alone you cannot permanently bind 
men's spirits to you. Truth illuminates and gives 
joy, and it is by the bond of joy, not of pleasure, that 
men's spirits are indissolubly held. As Lord Mac- 
aulay's own generation dies out, as a new generation 
arrives, without those ideas and tendencies of its pre- 
decessor which Lord Macaulay so deeply shared and 
so happily satisfied, will he give the same pleasure f 
and, if he ceases to give this, has he enough of light 
in him to make him last ? Pleasure the new genera- 
tion will get from its own novel ideas and tendencies ; 
but light is another and a rarer thing, and must be 
treasured wherever it can be found. Will Macaulay 
be saved, in the sweep and pressure of time, for his 
light's sake, as Johnson has already been saved by 
two generations, Joubert by one) I think it very 
doubtful. But for a spirit of any delicacy and dig- 
nity, what a fate, if he could foresee it ! to be an 
oracle for one generation, and then of little or no 
account for ever. How far better, to pass with scant 
notice through one's own generation, but to be singled 
out and preserved by the very iconoclasts of the next, 
then in their turn by those of the next) and so, like 
the lamp of life itself, to be handed on from one 
generation to another in safety 1 This is Joubert's 
lot, and it is a very enviable on& The new men of 
the new generations, while they let the dust deepen 
on a thousand Laharpes, will say of him : " He lived 

VOL. L X 



in the Philisliiie's Aa.y, in a place and tiine irhea 
almoat every idea coirent in literature had the maxk 
of Dagott upon it, and not the mark of the children 
of light. Nay, the children of light vera as yet 
hardly ao much as heard of : the Canaanite was then 
in the land Still, there were even then a few, who, 
nouriahed on some secret tradition, or iUtimined, 
perhaps, by a divine inspiiatiOD, kept aloof from the 
r eigning Buperatitioiis, ueTer bowed the knee to the 
gods of Canaan ; and one of tbeae few was 9«lled 
Touberi" 



IX. 



SPINOZA AND THE BIBLE. 

'* By the sentence of the angels, by the decree of tht 
saints, we anathematise, cut ofif, curse, and execrate 
Banich Spinoza, in the presence of these sacred books 
with the six hundred and thirteen precepts which are 
written therein, with the anathema wherewith Joshua 
anathematised Jericho ; with the cursing wherewith 
Elisha cursed the children ; and with all the cursings 
which are written in the Book of the Law : cursed be 
he by day, and cursed by night; cursed when he 
lieth down, and cursed when he riseth up; cursed 
when he goeth out, and cursed when he cometh in ; 
the Lord pardon him never ; the wrath and fury of 
the Lord bum upon this man, and bring upon him all 
the curses which are written in the Book of the Law. 
The Lord blot out his name under heaven. The 
Lord set him apart for destruction from all the 
tribes of Israel, with all the curses of the firmament 
which are written in the Book of this Law. . . , 
There shall no man speak to him, no man write 
to him, no man show him any kindness, no man stay 



308 ESSAYS IN CRITIGISM. [iz. 

onder the same roof with him, no man come nigh 
himu" 

With these amenities, the current compliments of 
theological parting, the Jews of the Portuguese S3mar 
gogue at Amsterdam took in 1656 (and not in 1660, 
as has till now been commonly supposed) their leave 
of their erring brother, Baruch or Benedict Spinoza. 
They remained children of Israel, and he became a 
child of modem Europe. 

That was in 1656, and Spinoza died in 1677, at 
the early age of forty-four. Glory had not found 
him out. His short life — a life of unbroken diligence, 
kindliness, and purity — ^was passed in seclusioa But 
in spite of that seclusion, in spite of the shortness of 
his career, in spite of the hostility of the dispensers 
of renown in the 18 th century, — of Voltaire's dis- 
paragement and Bayle's detraction, — in spite of the 
repellent form which he has given to his principal 
work, in spite of the exterior semblance of a rigid 
dogmatism alien to the most essential tendencies of 
modem philosophy, in spite, finally, of the immense 
weight of disfavour cast upon him by the long- 
repeated charge of atheism, Spinoza's name has 
silently risen in importance, the man and his work 
have attracted a steadily increasing notice, and bid 
fair to become soon what they deserve to become, — 
in the history of modem philosophy the central point 
of interest An avowed translation of one of his 
works, — ^his TrackUus Theohgica-Politicus, — ^has at last 
made its appearance in English. It is the principal 
work which Spinoza published in his lifetime; his 



IX.] SPINOZA AND THE BIBLE. 309 

book on ethics, the work on which his fame rests, is 
posthumous. 

The English translator has not done his task well 
Of the character of his version there can, I am afraid, 
be no doubt; one such passage as the following ia 
decisive : — 

" I confess that, while wUh them (the theologians) 1 
have never been dUe sufficiently to adnme the wifathomed 
mysteries of Scn^twre^ I have stiU found them giving 
uttera/nce to nothmg but AristoteHian amd Platonic specih 
lotions, artfully dressed up and cunningly accommo- 
dated to Holy Writ) lest the speakers should show 
themselves too plainly to belong to the sect of the 
Grecian heathens. Nor was U enough for these men to 
discourse with the Oreeks; they have further taken to 
raving wUh the Hebrew prophets." 

This professes to be a translation of these words 
of Spinoza: "Fateor, eos nunquam satis mirari 
potuisse ScriptursB prof undissima mysteria ; attamen 
prsBter Aristotelicorum vel Platonicorum speculationes 
nihil docuisse video, atque his, ne gentiles sectari 
viderentur, Scripturam accommodaverunt. Non satis 
his fuit cum Graecis insanire, sed prophetas cum iis- 
dem deliravisse voluerunt" After one such specimen 
of a translator's force, the experienced reader has a 
sort of instinct that he may as well dose the book at 
once, with a smile or a sigh, according as he happens 
to be a follower of the weeping or of the laughing 
philosopher. If, in spite of this instinct^ he persists 
in going on with the English version of the Tractatus 
TheologicO'PoliHcus, he will find many more such 



310 ESSAYS IN GRinCISM. [ix 

Bpecimens. It is not, Jiowever, my intention to fill 
my space with these, or with strictures upon their 
author. I prefer to remark, that he renders a service 
to literary history by pointing out, in his preface, how 
" to Bayle may be traced the disfavour in which the 
name of Spinoza was so long held;" that, in his 
observations on the system of the Church of England, 
he shows a laudable freedom from the prejudices of 
ordinary English Liberals of that advanced school to 
which he clearly belongs ; and lastly, that, though he 
manifests little familiarity with Latin, he seems to 
have considerable familiarity with philosophy, and to 
be well able to follow and comprehend speculative 
reasoning. Let me advise him to unite his forces 
with those of some one who has that accurate know- 
ledge of Latin which he himself has not, and tiben, 
perhaps, of that union a really good translation of 
Spinoza wiU be the result And, having given him 
this advice, let me again turn, for a little, to the 
Tradatus Theologtco-PoliHcus itsell 

This work, as I have already said, is a work on 
the interpretation of Scripture, — it treats of the 
Bible. What was it exactly which Spinoza thought 
about the Bible and its inspiration 1 That will be, at 
the present moment, the central point of interest for 
the English readers of his Treatise. Now, it is to be 
observed, that just on this very point the Treatise, 
interesting and remarkable as it is, will fail to satisfy 
the reader. It is important to seize this notion quite 
firmly, and not to quit hold of it while one is reading 
Spinoza's work. The scope of that work is thia 



tx] SPINOZA AND THE BIBLE. 311 

Spinoza sees that the life and practice of Christian 
nations professing the religion of the Bible, are not 
the due fruits of the religion of the Bible ; he sees 
only hatred, bitterness, and strife, where he might 
have expected to see love, joy, and peace in believing ; 
and he asks himself the reason of this. The reason 
is, he says, that these people misunderstand their 
Bibla Well, then, is his conclusion, I will write a 
TradahLS Theologico-FolUiaus, I will show these people, 
that, taking the Bible for granted, taking it to be all 
which it asserts itself to be, taking it to have all the 
authority which it claims, it is not what they imagine 
it to be, it does not say what they imagine it to say. 
I will show them what it really does say, and I will 
show them that they will do well to accept this real 
teaching of the Bible, instead of the phantom with 
which they have so long been cheated. I will show 
their governments that they will do well to remodel 
the national churches, to make of them institutions 
informed with the spirit of the true Bible, instead of 
institutions informed with the spirit of this false 
phantonL 

The comments of men,* Spinoza said, had been 
foisted into the Christian religion ; the pure teaching 
of God had been lost sight of. He determined, there- 
fore, to go again to the Bible, to read it over and 
over with a perfectly unprejudiced mind, and to 
accept nothing as its teaching which it did not clearly 
teach. He began by constructing a method, or set of 
conditions indispensable for the adequate interpreta- 
tion of Scriptura These conditions are such, he 



312 ESSATS IN OBinOISM. [ix 

points out, that a perfectly adequate interpretation of 
Scripture is now impossible. For example, to under- 
stand any prophet thoroughly, we ought to know the 
life, character, and pursuits of that prophet, under 
what circumstances his book was composed, and in 
what state and through what hands it has come down 
to us ; and, in general, most of this we cannot now 
know. Still, the main sense of the Books of Scrip- 
ture may be clearly seized by us. Himself a Jew 
with all the learning of his nation, and a man of the 
highest natural powers, Spinoza had in the difficult 
task of seizing this sense every aid which special 
knowledge or pre-eminent faculties could supply. 

In what then, he asks, does Scripture, interpreted 
by its own aid, and not by the aid of Rabbinical 
traditions or Greek philosophy, allege its own divinity 
to consist 1 In a revelation given by God to the 
prophets. Now all knowledge is a divine revelation ; 
but prophecy, as represented in Scripture, is one of 
which the laws of human nature, considered in them- 
selves alone, cannot be the cause. Therefore nothing 
must be asserted about it, except what is clearly 
declared by the prophets. themselves; for they are 
our only source of knowledge on a matter which does 
not fall within the scope of our ordinary knowing 
faculties. But ignorant people, not knowing the 
Hebrew genius and phraseology, and not attending to 
the circumstances of the speaker, often imagine the 
prophets to assert things which they do not. 

The prophets clearly declare themselves to have 
received the revelation of God through the means of 



[X.] SPmOZA AND THE BIBLE. 313 

words and images ; — ^not, as Christ, through imine* 
diate communication of the mind with the mind of 
Gk)d. Therefore the prophets excelled other men by 
the power and vividness of their representing and 
imagining faculty, not by the perfection of their 
mind. This is why they perceived almost everything 
through figures, and express themselves so variously, 
and so improperly, concerning the nature of God. 
Moses imagined that God could be seen, and attri- 
buted to him the passions of anger and jealousy ; 
Micaiah imagined him sitting on a throne, with the 
host of heaven on his right and left hand ; Daniel as 
an old man, with a white garment and white hair ; 
Ezekiel as a fire ; the disciples of Christ thought they 
saw the Spirit of Grod in the form of a dove ; the 
apostles in the form of fiery tongues. 

Whence, then, could the prophets be certain of the 
truth of a revelation which they received through the 
imagination, and not by a mental process ? — ^for only 
an idea can carry the sense of its own certainty along 
with it, not an imagination. To make them certain 
of the truth of what was revealed to them, a reason- 
ing process came in ; they had to rely on the testi- 
mony of a sign ; and (above all) on the testimony of 
their own conscience, that they wc^re good men, and 
spoke for God's sake. Either testimony was incom- 
plete without the other. Even the good prophet 
needed for his message the confirmation of a sign^ 
but the bad prophet, the utterer of an unmoral 
doctrine, had no certainty for his doctrine, no truth 
in it, even though he confirmed it by a sign. The 



314 ESSAYS IN CRITICISM. [iz. 

testimony of a good conscience was, therefore, the 
prophet's grand source of certitude. Even this, how- 
ever, was only a moral certitude, not a mathematical ; 
for no man can be perfectly sure of his own goodness. 
The power of imagining, the power of feeling 
what goodness is, and the habit of practising good- 
ness, were therefore the sole essential qualifications 
of a true prophet But for the purpose of the 
message, the revelation, which Grod designed him to 
convey, these qualifications were enough. The sum 
and substance of this revelation was simply : Believe 
in Ghd, cmd lead a good life. To be the organ of this 
revelation, did not make a man more learned ; it left 
his scientific knowledge as it found it This explains 
the contradictory and speculatively false opinions 
about God, and the laws of nature, which the patri- 
archs, the prophets, the apostles entertained. Abra- 
ham and the patriarchs knew God only as El Sadai, 
the power which gives to every man that which 
suffices him; Moses knew him as Jehovah^ a self- 
existent being, but imagined him with the passions of 
a man. Samuel imagined that God could not repent 
of his sentences; Jeremiah, that he could. Joshua^ 
on a day of great victory, the ground being white 
with hail, seeing the daylight last longer than usual, 
and imaginatively seizing this as a special sign of the 
help divinely promised to him, declared that the sun 
was standing stilL To be obeyers of God themselves, 
and inspired leaders of others to obedience and good 
life, did not make Abraham and Moses metaphysi^ 
cians, or Joshua a natural philosopher. His revelation 



IX.] SPINOZA AND THE BIBLE. 316 

no more changed the speculative opinions of each 
prophet, than it changed his temperament or style. 
The wrathful Elisha required the natural sedative of 
music, before he could be the messenger of good 
fortune to Jehoram. The high-bred Isaiah and 
Nahum have the style proper to their condition, and 
the rustic Ezekiel and Amos the style proper to 
theirs. We are not therefore bound to pay heed to 
the speculative opinions of this or that prophet, for 
in uttering these he spoke as a mere man : only in 
exhorting his hearers to obey God and lead a good 
life was he the organ of a divine revelation. 

To know and love God is the highest blessedness 
of man, and of all men alike ; to this all mankind are 
called, and not any one nation in particular. The 
divine law, properly so named, is the method of life 
for attaining this height of human blessedness : this 
law is universal, written in the heart, and one for all 
mankind. Human law is the method of life for 
attaining and preserving temporal security and pro- 
sperity : (Ms law is dictated by a lawgiver, and every 
nation has its own. In the case of the Jews, this 
law was dictated, by revelation, through the prophets ; 
its fundamental precept was to obey God and to keep 
his commandments, and it is therefore, in a secondary 
sense, called divine ; but it was, nevertheless, framed 
in respect of temporal things only. Even the truly 
moral and divine precept of this law, to practise for 
God's sake justice and mercy towards one's neigh- 
bour, meant fgr the Hebrew of the Old Testament 
his Hebrew neighbour only, and had respect to the 



concord and stability of the Hebrew ctunmonwealth 
The JewB were to obey God and to keep his com- 
^|a^l^lllfln^J^J that they might condnne long in the land 
given to them, and that it might be waU witli them 
there. Their election was a temporal one, and lasted 
only BO long u their State. It ia now orer ; and the 
only election the Jews now have ia that of the pioiu, 
the remnant which takes place, and has always taken 
place, in every other nation also. Scripture itself 
teaches that there is a universal divine law, that this 
is common to all nations alike, and is the law which 
truly confers eternal blessedness. Sdomon, the wisest 
of the Jews, knew tins law, as the few wisest men in 
all nations have ever known it ; bat for the mass of 
the Jews, aa for the mass of mankind everywhere, 
this law vras hidden, and they had no notion of its 
moral action, its vera vtia which conducts to eternal 
blessedness, except so far as this action waa enjoined 
apon them by the prescriptions of their temporal law. 
When the ruin of their State brought with it the rain 
of their temporal Jaw, they would have lost altogether 
their only clue to eternal blessedness. 

Christ came when that fabric of the Jewish State, 
for the sake of which the Jewish law existed, was 
about to fall ; and he proclaimed the universal divine 
law. A certain moral action is prescribed by this 
law, as a certain moral action was prescribed by the 
Jewish law : but he who truly conceives the universal 
divine law conceives Giod's decrees adequately as 
eternal truths, and for h ii" moral action has liberty 
ud self-knowledge ; while the prophets of the Jewish 



IX.] SPIKOZA AND THE BIBLK 317 

law inadequately conceiyed €rod's decrees as mere 
rules and commands, and for them moral action had 
no liberty and no self-knowledga Christ, who beheld 
the decrees of Grod as God himself beholds them, — 
as eternal truths, — proclaimed the love of God and 
the We of our neighbour as commatids^ only because 
of the ignorance of the multitude : to those to whom 
it was " given to know the mysteries of the kingdom 
of God," he announced them, as he himself perceived 
them, as eternal truths. And the apostles, like Christ, 
spoke to many of their hearers " as unto carnal not 
spiritual ; ^ presented to them, that is, the love of God 
and their neighbour as a divine conmiand authenticated 
by the life and death of Christ, not as an eternal idea 
of reason carrying its own warrant along with it. 
The presentation of it as this latter their hearers 
"were not able to bear." The apostles, moreover, 
though they preached and confirmed their doctrine by 
signs as prophets, wrote their Epistles, not as prophets, 
but as doctors and reasoners. The essentials of their 
doctrine, indeed, they took not from reason, but, like 
the prophets, from fact and revelation ; they preached 
belief in God and goodness of life as a catholic religion 
existing by virtue of the passion of Christ, as the pro- 
phets had preached belief in God and goodness of life 
as a national religion existing by virtue of the Mosaic 
covenant: but while the prophets announced their 
message in a form purely dogmatical, the apostles 
developed theirs with the forms of reasoning and 
argumentation, according to each apostle's ability and 
way of thinking, and as they might best commend 



818 ESSATS IS CRITIOISM. [ix. 

their message to their hearers; and for their reasonings 
they themselves claim no divine authority, submitting 
them to the judgment of their hearers. Thus each 
apostle built essential religion on a non-essential 
foundation of his own, and, as St. Paul says, avoided 
building on the foundations of another apostle, which 
might be quite different from his own. Hence the 
discrepancies between the doctrine of one apostle and 
another, — ^between that of St. Paul, for example, and 
that of St. James ; but these discrepancies are in the 
non-essentials not given to them by revelation, and 
not in essentials. Human churches, seizing these dis- 
crepant non-essentials as essentials, one maintaining 
one of them, another another, have filled the world 
with unprofitable disputes, have " turned the Church 
into an academy, and religion into a science, or rather 
a wrangling," and have fallen into endless schism. 

What, then, are the essentials of religion according 
both to the Old and to the New Testament 1 Very 
few and very simple. The precept to love God and 
our neighbour. The precepts of the first chapter of 
Isaiah : " Wash you, make you clean ; put away the 
evil of your doings from before mine eyes ; cease to 
do evil ; learn to do well ; seek judgment ; relieve the 
oppressed; judge the fatherless; plead for the widow." 
The precepts of the Sermon on the Moimt, which add 
to the foregoing the injunction that we should cease 
to do evil and learn to do well, not to our brethren 
and f eUow-eitizens only, but to all mankind. It is by 
following these precepts that belief in God is to be 
shown : if we believe in him, we shall keep his com- 



IX.] SPINOZA AND THE BIBL£. 319 

mandment ; and this is his commandment, that we 
lore one another. It is because it contains these pre- 
cepts that the Bible is properly called the Word of 
God, in spite of its containing much that is mere 
history, and, like all history, sometimes true, some- 
times false; in spite of its containing much that is 
mere reasoning, and, like all reasoning, sometimes 
sound, sometimes hollow. These precepts are also 
the precepts of the universal divine law written in 
our hearts ; and it is only by this that the divinity of 
Scripture is established ; — ^by its containing, namely, 
precepts identical with those of this inly-written and 
self-proving law. This law was in the world, as St 
John says, before the doctrine of Moses or the doctrine 
of Christ. And what need was there, then, for these 
doctrines ? Because the world at large " knew not " 
this original divine law, in which precepts are ideas, 
and the belief in God the knowledge and contempla- 
tion of hiuL Reason gives us this law, reason tells 
us that it leads to eternal blessedness, and that those 
who follow it have no need of any other. But reason 
could not have told us that the moral action of the 
universal divine law, — followed not from a sense of 
its intrinsic goodness, truth, and necessity, but simply 
in proof of obedience (for both the Old and New 
Testament are but one long discipline of obedience), 
simply because it is so commanded by Moses in virtue 
of the covenant, simply because it is so commanded 
by Christ in virtue of his life and passion, — can lead 
to eternal blessedness, which means, for reason, eternal 
knowledge. Season could not have told us this, and 



S20 ESSAY9 IN CSmCIBM. (n. 

tiui u what the Bible tells as. Thia is thst " thing 
trhich had been kept secret since the foundation of 
the world." It is thus that by means of the foolish- 
ness of the world God confounds the wise, and with 
things that are not brings to nought thmgs that are. 
Of the tmth of the promiae thus made to obedience 
without knowledge, we can have no mathematical 
certain^ ; for we can have a mathematical ceiiainty 
only of tiungs deduced by reason from elements which 
she in herself possesses. But we can have a moral 
certainty of it ; a certainty such as the prophets had 
themselves, arinng out of the goodness and purenesa 
of those to whom this revelation has been made, and 
rendered possible for us by its contradicting no prin- 
ciples of reason. It is a great comfort to believe it ; 
because "as it is only the very small minori^ who 
can pursue a virtaons life by the sole guidance of 
reason, we should, unless we had this testimony of 
Scripture, be in doubt respecting the salvation of 
nearly the whole human race." 

It follows from this that philosophy has her own 
independent sphere, and theology hers, and that 
neither has the right to invade and try to subdue the 
other. Theology demands perfect obedience, philo- 
sophy perfect knowledge : the obedience demanded 
by theok^ and the knowledge demanded by philo- 
sophy are alike saving. As speculative opinions about 
God, theology requires only such as are indispensable 
to the reality of this obedience ; the belief that God 
IB, that he is a rewarder of them that seek him, and 
that the proof of seeking him is a good life. These 



nL] SPINOZA AND THE BIBLK 321 

are the fundamentals of faith, and they are so clear 
and simple that none of the inaccuracies provable in 
the Bible narratiye the least affect them, and they 
have indubitably come to us uncorrupted. He who 
holds them may make, as the patriarchs and prophets 
did, other speculations about €rod most erroneous, 
and yet their faith is complete and saving. Nay, 
beyond these fundamentals, speculative opinions are 
pious or impious, not as they are ,true or false, but as 
they confirm or shake the believer in the practice of 
obedience. The truest speculative opinion about the 
nature of God is impious if it makes its holder re- 
bellious ; the falsest speculative opinion is pious if it 
makeshim obedient Grovemments shouldnever render 
themselves the tools of ecclesiastical ambition by pro- 
mulgating as fundamentals of the national Church's 
faith more than these, and should concede the fullest 
liberty of speculation. 

But the multitude, which respects only what 
astonishes, terrifies, and overwhelms it, by no means 
takes this simple view of its own religion. To the 
multitude, religion seems imposing only when it is 
subversive of reason, confirmed by miracles, conveyed 
in documents materially sacred and infallible, and 
dooming to damnation all without its pale. But this 
religion of the multitude is not the religion which a 
true interpretation of Scripture finds in Scripture. 
Beason. tells us that a miracle, — ^understanding by a 
miracle a breach of the laws of nature, — is impossible, 
and that to think it possible is to dishonour God ; for 
the laws of nature are the laws of Qod, and to say 

VOI^L T 



that God violates the lavs of nature ia to eay that 
he Tiolatea his own nature. Beason sees, too, that 
miracles can never attain their professed object, — 
that of bringing ua to a higher knowledge of God ; 
since our knowledge of God is raised only by perfect- 
ing and clearing our conceptions, and the alleged 
design of miracles is to baffle theuL But neither 
does Scripture anywhere assert, as a general truth, 
that miracles are possible. Indeed, it asserts the 
contrary ; for Jeremiah declares that Nature follows 
an invariable order. Scripture, however, like Nature 
herself, does not lay down speculative propositions 
(Scripltira dejmiumes non iradii, ul nee etiam mUvra). 
It relates matters in such an order and with such 
phraseology as a speaker (often not perfectly instructed 
himself) who wanted to impress his hearers with a 
lively sense of God's greatness and goodness would 
naturally employ ; as Moses, for instance, relates to 
the Israelites the passage of the 'Red Sea without any 
mention of the east wind which attended it^ and 
which is brought accidentally to our knowledge in 
another place. So that to know exactly what Scrip- 
ture means in the relation of each seeming miracle, 
we ought to know (besides the tropes and phrases of 
the Hebrew language) the circumstances, and also, — 
since every one is swayed in his manner of presenting 
facts by his own preconceived opinions, and we have 
seen what those of the prophets were, — the precon- 
ceived opinions of each speaker. But this mode of 
interpreting Scripture is fatal to the vulgar notion of 
its verbal inspiration, of a sanctity and absolute tnttli 



IZ.] BPmOZA AND THE BIBLE. S2S 

in all the words and sentences of which it is com- 
posed. This vulgar notion is, indeed, a palpable 
error. It is demonstrable from the internal testimony 
of the Scriptures themselves, that the books from the 
first of the Pentateuch to the last of Kings were put 
together, after the first destruction of Jerusalem, by 
a compiler (probably Ezra) who designed to relate 
the history of the Jewish people from its origin to 
that destruction; it is demonstrable, moreover, that 
the compiler did not put his last hand to the work, 
but left it with its extracts from various and conflict- 
ing sources sometimes unreconciled, left it with errors 
of text and unsettled readings. The prophetic books 
are mere fragments of the prophets, collected by the 
Rabbins where they could find them, and inserted in 
the Canon according to their discretion. They, at 
first, proposed to admit neither the Book of Proverbs 
nor the Book of Ecclesiastes into the Canon, and only 
admitted them because there were found in them 
passages which commended the law of Moses. Ezekiel 
also they had determined to exclude; but one of 
their number remodelled him, so as to procure his 
admission. The Books of Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, 
and Daniel are the work of a single author, and were 
not written till after Judas Maccabeus had restored 
the worship of the Temple. The Book of Psalms 
was collected and arranged at the same tima Before 
this time, there was no Canon of the sacred writings, 
and the great synagogue, by which the Canon was 
fixed, was first convened after the Macedonian con- 
quest of Asia. Of that synagogue none of the pro- 



S24 BSSA7S IN OBinOISM. [xz. 

phetB were members ; the learned men who composed 
it were guided by their own fallible judgment. In 
like manner the uninspired judgment of human coun- 
cils determined the Canon of the New Testament. 

Such, reduced to the briefest and plainest terms 
possible, stripped of the developments and proofs 
with which he delivers it, and divested of the meta- 
physical language in which much of it is clothed by 
him, is the doctrine of Spinoza's treatise on the inter- 
pretation of Scripture. By the whole scope and 
drift of its argument, by the spirit in which the sub- 
ject is throughout treated, his work undeniably is 
most interesting and stimulating to the general culture 
of Europe. There are errors and contradictions in 
Scripture ; and the question which the general culture 
of Europe, well aware of this, asks with real interest 
is : What then 1 What follows from all this ? What 
change is it, if true, to produce in the relations of 
mankind to the Christian religion f If the old theory 
of Scripture inspiration is to be abandoned, what 
place is the Bible henceforth to hold among books f 
What is the new Christianity to be like ? How are 
governments to deal with National Churches founded 
to maintain a very different conception of Christianity 1 
Spinoza addresses himself to these questions. All 
secondary points of criticism he touches with the 
utmost possible brevity. He points out that Moses 
could never have written : '^ And the Canaanite was 
then in the land," because the Canaanite was in the 
land stiU at the death of Moses. He points out that 



XX.] SrmOZA AND THE BIBLE. 325 

Moses could never have written : " There arose not a 
prophet since in Israel like unto Moses." He points 
out how such a passage as, " These are the kings that 
reigned in Edom before there reigned any Ung over the 
chMren of Israd^^ clearly indicates an author writing 
not before the times of the Kings. He points out 
how the account of Og's iron bedstead: "Only Og 
the king of Bashan remained of the remnant of 
giants ; behold, his bedstead was a bedstead of iron \ 
is it not in Rabbath of the children of Ammon?" — 
probably indicates an author writing after David had 
taken Sabbath, and found there " abundance of spoil," 
amongst it this iron bedstead, the gigantic relic of 
another aga He points out how the language of 
this passage, and of such a passage as that in the 
Book of Samuel : " Beforetime in Israel, when a man 
went to inquire of Grod, thus he spake : Come and 
let us go to the seer ; for he that is now called pro- 
phet was aforetime called seer" — is certainly the 
language of a writer describing the events of a long- 
past age, and not the language of a contemporary. 
But he devotes to all this no more space than is 
absolutely necessary. He apologises for delaying 
over such matters so long : wm est our circa hcec diu 
detmear — nolo tcediosd lecHone lector em detinere. For 
him the interesting question is, not whether the 
fanatical devotee of the letter is to continue, for a 
longer or for a shorter time, to believe that Moses 
sate in the land of Moab writmg the description of 
his own death, but what he is to believe when he 
does not believe this. Is he to take for the guidance 




826 ISSATS IN CRITICISM. [ix 

of his life a great gloss put upon the Bible by theo- 
logians, who, " not content with going mad themselves 
with Plato and Aristotle, want to make Christ and 
the prophets go mad with them too," — or the Bible 
itself 1 Is he to be presented by his national church 
with metaphysical formularies for his creed, or with 
the real fundamentaLs of Christianity f If with the 
former, religion will never produce its due f mits. A 
few elect will still be saved ; but the vast majority of 
mankind will remain without grace and without good 
works, hateful and hating one another. Therefore 
he calls urgently upon governments to make the 
national church what it should be. This is the con- 
clusion of the whole matter for him ; a fervent appeal 
to the State, to save us from the untoward generation 
of metaphysical Article - makers. And therefore, 
anticipating Mr. Gladstone, he called his book The 
Church m Us Belaiums wUh the State. 

Such is really the scope of Spinoza's work. He 
pursues a great object^ and pursues it with signal 
ability. But it is important to observe that he 
nowhere distinctly gives his own opinion about the 
Bible's fundamental character. He takes the Bible as 
it stands, as he might take the phenomena of nature, 
and he discusses it as he finds it. Eevelation differs 
from natural knowledge, he says, not by being more 
divine or more certain than natural knowledge, but 
by being conveyed in a different way ; it differs from 
it because it is a knowledge " of which the laws of 
human nature considered in themselves alone cannot 
be the cause." What is really its "cause, he says, we 



ix] SPINOZA AND THE BIBLE. 327 

need not here inquire {verwm nee nobis jam opus est pro- 
phetkce cognitionis causam scire), for we take Scripture, 
which contains this revelation, as it stands, and do not 
ask how it arose (documenitarvm causas niMl curamus). 

Proceeding on this principle, Spinoza leaves the 
attentive reader somewhat baffled and disappointed, 
clear, as is his way of treating his subject, and re- 
markable as are the conclusions with which he pre- 
sents us. He starts, we feel, from what is to him 
a hypothesis, and we want to know what he really 
thinks about this hypothesis. His greatest novelties 
are all within limits fixed for him by this hypothesis. 
He says that the voice which called Samuel was an 
imaginary voice ; he says that the waters of the Eed 
Sea retreated before a strong wind ; he says that the 
Shunammite's son was revived by the natural heat of 
Elisha's body ; he says that the rainbow which was 
made a sign to Noah appeared in the ordinary course 
of nature. Scripture itself, rightly interpreted, sajrs, 
he affirms, all this. But he asserts that the divine 
voice which uttered the commandments on Mount 
Sinai was a real voice, vera vox. He says, indeed, that 
this voice could not really give to the Israelites that 
proof which they imagined it gave to them of the 
existence of God, and that God on Sinai was dealing 
with the Israelites only according to their imperfect 
knowledge. Still he asserts the divine voice to have 
been a real one ; and for this reason, that we do 
violence to Scripture if we do not admit it to have 
been a real one {nisi Soriptfwrcs vim inferre velimns, 
omnino concedendvm ed^ Isrdelitas veram vocem cmdivisse). 




The attentive reader vonta to know vhat Spinosa 
himseli thought about this vera vox and ite possibility ; 
he is mnch more interested in knowing liaa than in 
knowing what Spinosa considered Scriptore to affirm 
about the matter. 

The feeling of peiplexit^ thai caused is not dimin- 
ished by the language of the chapter cm miracles. 
In this chapter Spinoza broadly affirms a miracle to 
be an impossibility. But he himself contrasts Uie 
method of demonstration ii priori, by which he dainu 
to have established this proposition, with the method 
which he has pursued in treating of prophetic revela- 
tion, " TluB revelation," he says, " is a matter out of 
human reach, and therefore I was bound to take it as 
I found it" Monere mlo, tne olid pronus mdhodo area 
nwraouia procasute, qaam area propheUam . . . quod 
etitim amttiUo fed, quia de prophdid, quatiAipiidem ipta 
copfun) bamanwn gaperat ei gtuitiu) mere thtologiea est, 
nihil i^rmare, neque diam tare poUram m quo ipsa 
poUssinmm eofutUerii, ntn tx fwadameatit raxlatxt. The 
reader feels that Spinoza, proceeding on a hypothesis 
has presented him with the assertion of a miracle, 
and afterwards, proceeding A priori, has presented 
him with the assertion that a miracle is impoasibia 
He feels that Spinoza does not adequately reconcile 
these two assertions by declaring that any event really 
miraculous, if found recorded in Scripture, must be " ■ 
spurious addition made to Scripture by Bacrilegiooa 
men." Is, then, he asks the vera vox of Mount Sinai in 
Spinoza's opinion a spurious addition made to Scripture 
by sacrilegious men ; or, if not, how ia it not miracnlou* t 



XZ.] 8FIK0ZA Aim THE BIBLE. 329 

Spinoza, in his own mind, regarded the Bible as a 
vast collection of miscellaneous documents, many of 
them quite disparate and not at all to be harmonised 
with others; documents of unequal value and of 
varying applicability, some of them conveying ideas 
salutary for one time, others for another. But in 
the Tradatus Theologieo-PolUicus he by no means 
always deals in this free spirit with the Bible. Some- 
times he chooses to deal with it in the spirit of the 
veriest worshipper of the letter; sometimes he chooses 
to treat the Bible as if all its parts were (so to speak) 
equipollent; to snatch an isolated text which suits 
his purpose, without caring whether it is annulled by 
the context, by the general drift of Scripture, or by 
other passages of more weight and authority. The 
gr«at critic thus becomes voluntarily as uncritical 
as Exeter HalL The Epicurean Solomon, whose 
Ecdesiastes the Hebrew doctors, even after they had 
received it into the canon, forbade the young and 
weak-minded among their community to read, 
Spinoza quotes as of the same authority with the 
severe Moses ; he uses promiscuously, as documents 
of identical force, without discriminating between 
their essentially different character, the softened 
cosmopolitan teaching of the prophets of the capti- 
vity and the rigid national teaching of the instructors 
of Israel's youth. He is capable of extracting, from 
a chance expression of Jeremiah, the assertion of a 
speculative idea which Jeremiah certainly never en- 
tertained, and from which he would have recoiled in 
dismay, — ^the idea, namely, that miracles are impos* 



sible; jnat as the ordinary Englishman can extract 
from Qod's words to Noah, Be fmUfui and mal^ply, 
an exhortation to himself to have a large family. 
Spinoza, I repeat, knew perfectly well what tlus 
verbal mode of dealing with the Bible was worth : 
but be sometimes uses it because of the hypothesis 
from which be set out ; because of his having agreed 
" to take Scripture as it stands, and not to ask how it 
arose." 

No doubt the sagacity of Spinoza's rules for 
Biblical interpretation, the power of his analysis of 
the contents of the Bible, the interest of his reflec- 
tions on Jewish history, are, in spite of this, very 
great, and have an absolute worth of their own, in- 
dependent of the silence or ambiguity of their author 
upon a point of cardinal importtuice. Few candid 
people will read his rules of interpretation without 
exclaiming that they are the very dictates of good 
sense, that they have always believed in them ; and 
witliout adding, after a moment's reflection, that 
tliey have passed their lives in violating them. And 
what can be more interesting, than to find that per- 
haps the main cause of the decay of the Jewish polity 
was one of which from our English Bible, which en- 
tirely mistranslates the 26th verse of the 20th chapter 
of Ezeldel, we hear nothing, — the perpetual reproach 
of impurity and rejection cast upon the priesthood of 
the tribe of Levi! What can be more suggestive, 
after Mr. Mill and Dr. Stanley have been telling us 
how great an element of strength to the Hebrew 
nation was the institution of prophets, than to hear 



Ul] SPINOZA AND THE BIBLE. 331 

from the ablest of Hebrews how this mstitution 
seems to him to have been to his nation one of 
her main elements of weakness 1 No intelligent 
man can read the Tradakts Theologico-PolUicus without 
being profoundly instructed by it: but neither can 
he read it without feeling that^ as a speculative work, 
it is, to use a French military expression, m the air ; 
that, in a certain sense, it is in want of a base and in 
want of supports ; that this base and these supports 
are, at any rate, not to be found in the work itself, 
md, if they exists must be sought for in other works 
of the author. 

The genuine speculative opinions of Spinoza, which 
the TractcUus Theohgteo-PolUicus but imperfectly re- 
veals, may in his Ethics and in his Letters be found 
set forth clearly. It is, however, the business of 
criticism to deal with every independent work as with 
an independent whole, and, instead of establishing 
between the Tradakis Theologico-PolUicus and the 
Ethics of Spinoza a relation which Spinoza himself 
has not established, — to seize, in dealing with the 
Tradaim Theologico-PoUtious, the important fact that 
this work has its source, not in the axioms and defi- 
nition of the Ethics, but in a hypothesis. The Ethics 
are not yet translated into English, and I have not 
here to speak of them. Then will be the right time 
for criticism to try and seize the special character and 
tendencies of that remarkable work, when it is deal- 
ing with it directly. The criticism of the Ethics is 
far too serious a task to be imdertaken incidentally, 
and merely as a supplement to the criticism of the 



Tractaiia Theologico-Polittwe. Neverthelesa, on certain 
goveming ideas of Spisoza, which receive their syste- 
matic expression, indeed, in the Ethics, and on vhich 
the Tradaivs Theohgico-PoliHcui is not formally based, 
but which are yet never absent from Spinoza's mind 
in the composition of any work, which breathe 
throt^h all his works, and fill them with a peculiar 
effect and power, I have a word or two to say. 

A philoBOpher's real power over mankind resides 
not in his metaphysical formnlaa, but in the spirit 
and tendencies which have led hi™ to adopt those 
formulas. Spinoza's critic, therefore, has rather to 
bring to light that spirit and those tendencies of his 
author, than to exhibit his metaphysical formulas. 
Propositions about substance pass by mankind at 
large like the idle wind, which mankind at large 
regards not ; it will not even listen to a word about 
these propositions, unless it first learns what their 
author was driving at with them, and finds that this 
object of his ia one with which it sympathises, one, at 
any rate, which commands its attention. And man- 
kind is BO far right that this object of the author is 
really, as has been said, that which ia most important, 
that which sets all his work in motion, that which is 
the secret of his attraction for other minds, which, 
by different ways, pursue the same object 

Mr. Maurice, seeking for the cause of Goethe's 
great admiration for Spinoza, thinks that he finds it 
in Spinoza's Hebrew genius. " He spoke of Qod," 
says Mr. Maurice, " as an actual being, to those who 
had fancied him a name in a book. The child of tho 



IS.] SPmOZA. AKD THE BIBLE. 333 

circumcision had a message for Lessing and Goethe 
which the pagan schools of philosophy could not 
bring." This seems to me, I confess, fanciful An 
intensity and impressiveness, which came to him 
from his Hebrew nature, Spinoza no doubt has ; but 
the two things which are most remarkable about him, 
and by which, as I think, he chiefly impressed 
Goethe, seem to me not to come to him from his 
Hebrew nature at all, — I mean his denial of final 
causes, and his stoicism, a stoicism not passive, but 
active. For a mind like Groethe's, — a mind pro- 
foimdly impartial and passionately aspiring after the 
science, not of men only, but of universal nature, — 
the popular philosophy which explains all things by 
reference to man, and regards universal nature as 
existing for the sake of man, and even of certain 
classes of men, was utterly repulsive. Unchecked, 
this philosophy would gladly maintain that the 
donkey exists in order that the invalid Christian may 
have donkey's milk before breakfast ; and such views 
of nature as this were exactly what GU)ethe's whole 
soul abhorred. Creation, he thought^ should be 
made of sterner stuff; he desired to rest the donkey's 
existence on larger grounds. More than any philo- 
sopher who haa ever lived, Spinoza satisfied hm here. 
The full exposition of the counter-doctrine to the 
popular doctrine of final causes is to be found in the 
Ethics ; but this denial of final causes was so essen- 
tial an element of all Spinoza's thinking that we 
shall, as has been said already, find it in the work 
with which we are here concerned, the TraekUus 




39i ISaiTB OT OHniOIBM. •■ 

Theoloffico-PMieiu, and, indeed, permeating ^lat -work 
and all his works. From the Tradaius Theoloffieo- 
PoUtiau one may take as good a general statement of 
tliiB denial as any which is to be f oTind in the Etliics : 

" DeuB naturam dirigif^ prout ejue leges univor- 
salea, non autem prout humante n&tune particulare" 
legee exigimt, adeoque Deua non aoliuB hamaJ" 
generis, sed totiue natnne rationem habet (_Ood 
directs naftwe, according as the universal laas of naittrCf 
hvi not according as ihe patiiaUar laws of himan fiaiura 
require ,■ and so God has regard, not of tke haman race 
(nUy, hui of enftre nature.)" 

And, as a pendant to this denial by Spinoza aA 
final causes, comes his stoicism : — 

" Non studemu^ ut natura nobis, sed contra at nos 
Qatune pareamus. (Oiw deme w no( ttaf luOam mag 
obei/ its, but, on the contrary, that tee may obey nature.)" 

Here la the second source of hia attraetivenoBe for 
Goethe ; and Goethe is bat the eminent representa^ 
tive of a whole order of minds whose admiration haa 
made Spinoza's fame. Spinoza first impreeaea Goethe 
and any man like GoetJie, and then he composes him ; 
firat he fills and satisfies his imagination by the width 
and grandeur of his riew of nature, and then he 
fortifies and stills his mobfle, straining, passionate, 
poetic temperament by the moral lesson he drawE 
from his view of nature. And a moral lesson not oi 
mere resigned acquiescence, not of melancholy qmet- 
ism, but of joyful activity within the limits of man's 
true sphere : — 

" Ipsa hominis enentia est conatus quo nunaqui* 



IZ.] SPINOZA AlO) THE BIBLE 335 

que samn esse conservare conatur. , . . Virtus homi* 
nis est ipsa hominis essentia, quatenns a solo conatu 
Buum esse conservandi definitur. . . . Felicitas in eo 
consistit quod homo suum esse conservare potest . . . 
LsBtitia est hominis transitio ad majorem perfectionem 
. . . Tristitia est hominis transitio ad minorem per- 
fectionem. {Man's very essence is the effort wherewith 
each mm sM^ves to maintain his oum bdng. . . . Man's 
virtue is this very essence^ so far as it is defined by this 
single effort to maintain his own being, . . . Happinsss 
consists in a man*s being aibU to maintain his oum being. 
. . . Joy is mmis passage to a greater perfecHon, . . . 
Sorrow is man's passage to a lesser perfection,)" 

It seems to me that by neither of these, his grand 
characteristic doctrines, is Spinoza truly Hebrew or 
truly Christiaa His denial of final causes is essenti- 
ally alien to the spirit of the Old Testament^ and his 
cheerful and self-suj£cing stoicism is essentially alien 
to the spirit of the New. The doctrine that " (rod 
directs nature, not according as the par^cular laws of 
human nature, but according as the universal laws of 
nature require," is at utter variance with that Hebrew 
mode of representing God's dealings, which makes 
the locusts visit Egypt to punish Pharaoh's hardness 
of heart, and the falling dew avert itself from the 
fleece of Gideon. The doctrine that " all sorrow is a 
passage to a lesser perfection " is at utter variance 
with the Christian recognition of the blessedness of 
sorrow, working "repentance to salvation not to be 
repented of;'' of sorrow, which, in Dante's words^ 
*' remarries us to Gkxi" 



338 X88ATS nr cRrnGnoi. iix. 

Spinoza's repeated and earnest assertions that the 
love of Gk>d is man's mmmum bonwn do not remove 
the fundamental diversity between his doctrine and 
the Hebrew and Christian doctrines. By the love of 
Grod he does not mean the same thing which the 
Hebrew and Christian religions mean by the love of 
God. He makes the love of God to consist in the 
knowledge of Gk>d; and, as we know God only through 
his manifestation of himself in the laws of all nature, 
it is by knowing these laws that we love God, and 
the more we know them the more we love him. This 
may be true, but this is not what the Christian means 
by the love of God. Spinoza's ideal is the intellectual 
life; the Christian's ideal is the religious life. Be- 
tween the two conditions there is all the difference 
which there is between the being in love, and the 
following, with delighted comprehension, a reasoning 
of Plata For Spinoza, undoubtedly, the crown of 
the intellectual life is a transport, as for the saint the 
crown of the religious life is a transport ; but the two 
transports are not the same. 

This is true; yet it is true, also, that by thus 
crowning the intellectual life with a sacred transport, 
by thus retaining in philosophy, amid the discontented 
murmurs of all the army of atheism, the name of God, 
Spinoza maintains a profound affinity with that which 
is truest in religion, and inspires an indestructible 
interest One of his admirers, M. Van Yloten, has 
recently published at Amsterdam a supplementary 
volume to Spinoza's works, containing the interesting 
document of Spinoza's sentence of ezcommunicationi 



IX.] SPINOZA AND THE BIBLE. 337 

from which I have already quoted, and contaming, 
besides, several lately found works alleged to be 
Spinoza's, which seem to me to be of doubtful authen- 
ticity, and, even if authentic, of no great importance. 
M. Van Vloten (who, let me be permitted to say in 
passing, writes a Latin which would make one think 
that the art of writing Latin must be now a lost art in 
the country of Lipsius) is very anxious that Spinoza's 
unscientific retention of the name of God should not 
afflict his readers with any doubts as to his perfect 
scientific orthodoxy : — 

"It is a great mistake,'' he cries, "to disparage 
Spinoza as merely one of the dogmatists before Kant 
By keeping the name of God, while he did away 
with his person and character, he has done himself 
an injustice Those who look to the bottom of things 
will see, that, long ago as he lived, he had even then 
reached the point to which the post-Hegelian philo- 
sophy and the study of natural science has only just 
brought our own times. Leibnitz expressed his ap- 
prehension lest those who did away with final causes 
should do away with God at the same time. But it 
is in his having done away with final causes, aiid 
with God along with them, that Spinoza's true merit 
consists." 

Now it must be remarked that to use Spinoza's 
denial of final causes in order to identify him with 
the Coryphaei of atheism, is to make a false use of 
Spinoza's denial of final causes, just as to use his as- 
sertion of the all-importance of loving God to identify 
him with the saints would be to make a false use of 

VOL. L z 



hia aasertion of the «ll-iinporUiice of loring Qod. He 
is no more to be identified with the post-H^elian philo- 
■ophen than he is to be identified with St. Angostiiia. 
Unction, indeed, Spinoza's writii^ have not; Uut 
name does not precisely fit any qaality which they 
exhibit. And yet, so aU-importtmt in the sphere of 
religioas thonght is the power of edificatirai, that in 
this sphere a great fame like Spinosa's can never be 
founded without it A conrt of lituatore can never 
be very severe to Voltaire : with that inimitable wit 
and clear sense of hi% be cannot write a page in 
which the fullest head may not find something 
snggeetive ; still, because, handling religfoas ideas, 
he yet, with all his wit and clear sens^ handles 
them wholly without the power <^ edification, hia 
fame as a great man is equivocaL Strauss has treated 
the question of Scriptnre miracles with an acnteness 
and fulness which even to the most informed minds 
is instructive ; but becaosa he treats it almost wholly 
without the power of edification, his fame as a serioos 
thinher is equivocal But in Spinoza there is not a 
trace either of Voltaire's passion for mockery or of 
Stranss's pasdon for demolitioa Hia whole sool was 
filled with derire of the love and knowledge of God, 
and of that only. Philosophy always proclaims herself 
on tba way to the wmntum boiwm; but too often on 
the road she seems to foi^et her destinatioD, and 
aaffers her hearers to forget it also. Spinoza never 
foi^ets his destination: "The love of God is man's 
highest happiness and blessedness, and the fin^ end 
and aim of all human actions;" — "The supreme re- 



IX] SPINOZA AND THE BIBLE. 339 

ward for keeping Grod's Word is that Word itself — 
namely, to know him and with free will and pure 
and constant heart love him:'' these sentences are 
the keynote to all he produced, and were the inspira- 
tion of all his labours. This is why he turns so 
sternly upon the worshippers of the letter, — the 
editors of the Masora, the editor of the Record, — 
because their doctrine imperils our love and know- 
ledge of Qod. " What ! " he cries, " our knowledge 
of God to depend upon these perishable things, which 
Moses can dash to the ground and break to pieces 
like the first tables of stone, or of which the originab 
can be lost like the original book of the Covenant^ 
like the original book of the Law of Gk>d, like the 
book of the Wars of God! . . . which can come 
to us confused, imperfect, mis-written by copyists, 
tampered with by doctors ! And you accuse others 
of impiety ! It is you who are impious, to believe 
that Grod would commit the treasure of the true 
record of himself to any substance less enduring than 
the heart I " 

And Spinoza's life was not unworthy of this elevated 
strain. A philosopher who professed that knowledge 
was its own reward, a devotee who professed that the 
love of God was its own reward, this philosopher and 
this devotee believed in what he said. Spinoza led a 
life the most spotless, perhaps, to be found among the 
lives of philosophers ; he lived simple, studious, even- 
tempered, kind ; declining honours, declining riches, 
declining notoriety. He was poor, and his admirer 
Simon de Yries sent him two thousand florins ; — he 



refused them. Hie same friend left him his f(»rtiiiie ; 
— he returned it to the heir. He was asked to dedi- 
cate one of his works to the magnificent patron ot 
letters in his century, Louis the Fourteenth ; — he 
declined. TTjb great work, hia Ethics, published after 
his death, he gave injonctioDB to his friends to publish 
anonymously, for fear he should give his name to a 
school Truth, he thought, should bear no man's 
name. And finally, — "Unless," be said, "I had 
known that my writings would in the end adyanca 
the cause of true religion, I would hare suppressed 
them, — iMuissem." It was in this spirit that be lived ; 
and this t^irit gives to all he writes not exactly unction, 
— I have already said so, — but a kind of sacred so- 
lemnity. Not of the same order as the saints, he yet 
follows the same service : Doubtlett thou art our Father, 
though Abraham be ignorant of its, and Israel acknoicUdge 
tunof. 

Therefore he has been, in a certtun sphere, edifying, 
and has inspired in many powerful minds an interest 
and an admiration such as no other philosopher has 
inspired since Plato. The lonely precursor of German 
philosophy, he still shines when the light of his suc- 
cessors is fading away ; they bad celebrity, Spinoza 
has fama Not because his peculiar system of philo- 
sophy has had more adherents than theirs ; on the 
contrary, it has had fewer. But schools of philosophy 
arise and fall ; their bands of adherents inevitably 
dwindle ; no master can long perauade a large body 
of disciples that they give to themselves just the same 
BGOoont of the vrorld as he does ; it is only the very 



IX.] SPINOZA AND THE BIBLE. 341 

young and the very enthusiafitic who can think them* 
selves sure that they possess the whole mind of Plato, 
or Spinoza, or Hegel, at alL The very mature and 
the very sober can even hardly believe that these 
philosophers possessed it themselves enough to put it 
all into their works, and to let us know entirely how 
the world seemed to them. What a remarkable 
philosopher really does for human thought, is to 
throw into circulation a certain number of new and 
striking ideas and expressions, and to stimulate with 
them the thought and imagination of his century or 
of after-timea So Spinoza has made his distinction 
between adequate and inadequate ideas a current 
notion for educated Europe. So Hegel seized a single 
pregnant sentence of Heracleitus, and cast it, with a 
thousand striking applications, into the world of 
modem thought But to do this is only enough to 
make a philosopher noteworthy ; it is not enough to 
make him great To be great, he must have some- 
thing in him which can influence character, which is 
edifying ; he must, in short, have a noble and lofty 
character himself, a character, — to recur to that much- 
criticised expression of mine, — in the grand style. 
This is what Spinoza had ; and because he had it^ he 
stands out from the multitude of philosophers, and 
has been able to inspire in powerful minds a feeling 
which the most remarkable philosophers, without this 
grandiose character, could not inspira " There is no 
possible view of life but Spinoza's," said Lessing. 
GU>ethe has told us how he was calmed and edified by 
him in his youth, and how he again went to him for 



343 ffiSATs m CBinoiait '* 

mpopt m hi. mturity. Heine, the mm (in "pi" <>' 
hi. fault.) of tnieet genin. thet Gemmy h«. ptoduoefl 
.ine. Goethe,-, man with fault., .. I h.ve md, im- 
meneo fanlte, the greeteel of them being lh.l he ooaJd 
roreronce .o hltle, - reverenced Spinoza. ^'S"; 
influence rm off him like water ; " I ham .sen Hegel, 
h. crie4 "Mated with hi. doleful ait of a h.td™_S 
hen upon hi. unhappy egg., Bd I have hea«l hw 
di«nd clncUng—How oaalyone c«i cheat ouobU 
into thinking that one underrtand. cveiTthing, wMn 
one ha. learnt only how to conduct dialectical for- 
mula. I " But of Spmoa, Heme «iid : " His Me '«^ 
a copy of the lif e of hi. divine kinman, J.™ Chn.t 

Li therefore, when M. Tan Vloten vrolently 
pre«>e. the paiellel with the poat-Hogeliin., one feel. 
that the paralld with St Auguetine is the '" t™" 
one. CompuedwiththemiaierofirrehgionM. van 
Vloten would have him to be, Spino.a ia rehgioue, 
"It i. true," one may say to the ™e and devout 
Ohriitian, "Spmoza'e conception of beatitude n not 
yon.., uid cannot utdrfy you , but who.e """P"" 
of beatitude would you accept •» «iti.fyingl Hot 
even that of the dovoutest of your fellow-Obiietiain. 
Fra Angelico, the aweeteet and moat inapired of devout 
muU, has given u., in hi. great picture of tio Last 
Judgment, his conception of beatitude. The elect 
are going round in a ring on long grass under laden 
fruit-trees; two of them, more rasUess than the otherfl, 
ar« Sying up a battlemented street, — a street blank 
with all the ennui of the Middle Ages. Across a gull 
is vfaibi^ for the delectation of the saints, a hhwing 



rx.1 SPINOZA AND THE BIBLK. 343 

caldron in which Beelzebub is sousing the damned 
This is hardly more your conception of beatitude than 
Spinoza's is. But 'in my Father's house are many 
mansions;' only, to reach any one of these mansions, 
there are needed the wings of a genuine sacred trans- 
port, of an 'immortal longing.'" These wings 
Spinoza had; and, because he had them, his own 
language about himself, about his aspirations and hie 
course, are true : his foot is in the vera vUa^ his eye 
on the beatific vision 



MAECUS AURELIUa 

Mb. Mux sajB, in his book on Libert;, that " Cimsr 
dan moT&litf is in great part merely a protest agajost 
paganism ; ite ideal is negative rather than poaitivB, 
pasdre ratlier than activa" He says, that, in certWB 
most important respects, " it falls far below the beet 
morality of the ancients." Now, the object of 
systems of morality is to take poeseedon of human 
life, to save it from being abandoned to passion cr 
allowed to drift at hazard, to give it happiness by 
eatabliahing it in the practice of virtue; and this 
object they seek to attun by prescribing to human 
life fixed principles of acdon, fixed rules of conduct. 
In its uninspired aa well as in its inspired moments, 
in its days of languor and gloom as well as in its 
days of sunshine and energy, human life has thus 
always a clue to follow, and may always be making 



I 



X.] MARCUS AUBEUna 345 

after those of the New Testament^ of all the docu- 
ments the Christian spirit has ever inspired, — the 
Imitaiiony — ^by no means contains the whole of Chris- 
tian morality; nay, the disparagers of this morality 
would think themselves sure of triumphing if one 
agreed to look for it in the Jtmiaiian only. But even 
the Imiiation is full of passages like these: "Vita 
sine proposito languida et vaga est;" — "Omni die 
renovare debemus propositum nostrum, dicentes: nunc 
hodi6 perfects incipiamus, quia nihil est quod hactenus 
fecimus;" — "Secundum propositum nostrum est cursus 
profecttts nostri;" — "Baro etiam unum vitium per- 
fects vincimus, et ad quotidicmum profectum non ao- 
oendimur;" — "Semper aliquid certi proponendum est;" 
— " Tibi ipsi violentiam frequenter fac : " {A life tvUhr 
mt a purpose is a languid, drifting thing / — Every da/y 
toe ought to renew our purpose, saying to ourselves : This 
day let us make a sound beginning, for what we have 
hitherto done is nought ; — Owr improvemeni is in propor- 
tion to our purpose; — We hardly ever manage to get com- 
pletely rid even of one fault, and do not set our hearts on 
daily improvement; — Always place a definite purpose 
before thee ; — Get the habit of mastering thine inclination, ) 
These are moral precepts, and moral precepts of the 
. best kind. As rules to hold possession of our con- 
duct^ and to keep us in the right course through out- 
ward troubles and inward perplexity, they are equal 
to the best ever furnished by the great masters of 
morals — Epictetus or Marcus Aurelius. 

But moral rules, apprehended as ideas first, and 
then rigorously followed as laws, are, and must be. 



346 ESSAYS IN GRinOISM. [x 

for the sage only. The mass of mankind have neither 
force of intellect enough to apprehend them clearly as 
ideas, nor force of character enough to follow them 
strictly as law& The mass of mankind can be carried 
along a course full of hardship for the natural man, 
can be borne over the thousand impediments of the 
narrow way. only by the tide of a joyful and bound- 
ing emotion. It is impossible to rise from reading 
Epictetus or Marcus Aurelius without a sense of con- 
straint and melancholy, without feeling that the 
burden laid upon man is well-nigh greater than he 
can bear. Honour to the sages who have felt this, 
and yet have borne it ! Yet, even for the sage, this 
sense of labour and sorrow in his march towards the 
^1 goal constitutes a relative inferiority; the noblest 
^[t^^*' /souls of whatever creed, the pagan Empedocles as 
^ •'' ^ .^-' I well as the Christian Paul, have insisted on the necea- 
.»' \' . ^Isity of an inspiration, a jojrful emotion, to make 
'^' 4'* . ^<^' •\^moral action perfect; an obscure indication of this 
'!> *<^^ necessity is the one drop of truth in the ocean of 
V . ^ ^ ^ ' verbiage with which the controversy on justification 

. ^ ' ' by faith has flooded the world. But, for the ordinary 

' * man, this sense of labour and sorrow constitutes an 

absolute disqualification ; it paralyses him ; under the 
weight of it^ he cannot make way towards the goal at 
alL The paramount virtue of religion is, that it has 
y lighted v/p morality ; that it has supplied the emotion 

and inspiration needful for carrying the sage along 
the narrow way perfectly, for carrying the ordinary 
man along it at all. Even the religions with most 
dross in them have had something of this virtue ; but 



X.] MARCUS AURELmS. 347 

the Ghristian religion manifests it with unexampled 
splendour. " Lead me, Zeus and Destiny !'' says the 
prayer of Epictetus, *' whithersoever I am appointed 
to go ; I will follow without wavering ; even though 
I turn coward and shrink, I shall have to follow all 
the same." The fortitude of that is for the strong, 
for the few ; even for them the spiritual atmosphere 
with which it surrounds them is bleak and gray. 
But, "Let thy loving spirit lead me forth into the 
land of righteousness;" — "The Lord shall be unto 
thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory ; " — 
" Unto you that fear my name shall the sun of right- 
eousness arise with healing in his wings,'' says the Old 
Testament ; " Bom, not of blood, nor of the will of 
the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God ^J' — . 
" Except a man be bom again, he cannot -tee-^the ^^ 
kingdom of God;" — "Whatsoever is bom of God, 
overcometh the world," says the New. The ray of 
sunshine is there, the glow of a divine warmth ; — ^the 
austerity of the sage melts away under it^ the paralysis 
of the weak is healed ; he who is vivified by it renews 
his strength ; " all things are possible to him ; " " he 
is a new creature." 

Epictetus says : " Every matter has two handles, 
one of which will bear taking hold of, the other not. 
If thy brother sin against thee, lay not hold of the 
matter by this, that he sins against thee ; for by this 
handle the matter will not bear taking hold o£ But 
rather lay hold of it by this, that he is thy brother, 
thy bom mate ; and thou wilt take hold of it by what 
will bear handling." Jesus, being asked whether a 



man is bound to forgive his brother as often as eeren 
dmes, answers : " I say not unto tbee, until seren 
times, but until seventy times seven." Epictetus 
here suggests to the reason grounds for forgiveness of 
injuries which Jesus does not ; but it ia VEun to a&y 
that Epictetus is on that account a better moralist 
than JesuB, if the warmth, the emotion, of Jesus's 
answer fires his hearer to the practice of forgiveness 
of injories, while the thought in Epictetns's leaves 
him cold. So with Christian morality in general : its 
distinction is not that it propounds the Tnnyim, " Thou 
sbalt love God and thy neighbour," with more de- 
velopment^ closer reasoning, truer sincerity, than 
other moral systems; it is that it propounds this 
maxim with an inspiration which wonderfuUy catches 
the hearer sod makes him act upon it. It is because 
Mr. Mill has attained to the perception of truths of 
this nature, that he is, — instead of being, like the 
schocd from which be proceeds, doomed to sterility, — 
a writer of distinguished mark and influence, a writer 
deserving aU attention and respect ; it is (I must be 
pardoned for saying) because he is not sufficiently 
leavened with them, that he falls just abort of being 
a great writer. 

That which gives to the moral writings of the 
Emperor Marcus Aurelius their peculiar character 
and charm, is their being suffused and softened by 
something of this very sentiment whence Christian 
morality draws its best power. Mr. Long iam 
recently pabliabed in a convenient form a trans- 
lation of these writings, and has thus enabled English 



Z.] MABCT76 AUBEUna 349 

readers to judge Marcus Aurelius for themselves 3 
he has rendered his countrymen a real service by 
SO doing. Mr. Long's reputation as a scholar is a 
sufficient guarantee of the general fidelity and accu- 
racy of his translation ; on these matters, besides, I 
am hardly entitled to speak, and my praise is of no 
value. But that for which I and the rest of the 
unlearned may venture to praise Mr. Long is this ; 
that he treats Marcus Aurelius's writings, as he 
treats all the other remains of Greek and Eoman 
antiquity which he touches, not as a dead and dry 
matter of learning, but as documents with a side of 
modem applicability and living interest^ and valuable 
mainly so far as this side in them can be made clear ; 
that as in his notes on Plutarch's Soman Lives he 
deals with the modem epoch of Caesar and Cicero, 
not as food for schoolboys, but as food for men, and 
men engaged in the current of contemporary life and 
action, so in his remarks and essays on Marcus 
Aurelius he treats this truly modem striver and 
thinker not as a Classical Dictionary hero, but as 
a present source from which to draw "example of 
life, and instruction of manners." Why may not a 
son of Dr. Arnold say, what might naturaUy here be 
said by any other critic, that in this lively and fruit- 
ful way of considering the men and affairs of ancient 
Greece and Eome, Mr. Long resembles Dr. Arnold f 

One or two little complaints, however, I have 
against Mr. Long, and I will get them off my mind 
at once. In the first place, why could he not have 
found gentler and juster terms to describe the trans- 



lation of hia predecessor, Jeremy Collier, — the re- 
doabtable enemy of stags plays; — than these: "a 
moat coone md rnlgar copy of the original t" Aa a 
t '''^.•^. [matter of taste, a translator should deal leniently 
,'' ., '' ' with hia piedecessor; but putting that out of the 
A \ . qoostion, Mr. Long's langoage is a great deal too 

f * han). Moat English people who knew Marcus 

Anrelina before Mr. Ltmg appeared as his intro- 
dncer, knew him through Jeremy Collier. And 
the acqoamtanoe of a man like Marcus Aurelius is 
such an imperishable benefit, that one can nerer 
lose a peculiar sense of obligation towards the man 
who confers it Apart from this claim upon one's 
tenderness, howerer, Jeremy Collier's veroioD de- 
serves respect for its gennine spirit and vigour, 
, , . ■ ' ', ^^e spirit and Tigonr of the i^ of Dryden, Jeremy 
, ^" .■Collier too, like Mr. Lon^ regarded in Marcus 
•- t|' A ^ Aurelins the living moralist, and not the dead 
' ,^■' classic; and bis warmth of feeling gave to his style 

an impetuosity and rhythm which from Mr. Long's 
style (I do not blame it on that account) are absent. 
Let OS place the two side by side. The impressiye 
opening of Marcus Aurehos's fifth book, Mr. Long 
translatea thus : — 

"In the morning when then risest unwillingly, 
let this thought be present: I am rising to the 
work of a human being. Why then am I dissalie- 
fied if I am going to do the things for which I 
exist and for which I was brought into the vrorldt 
Or have I been made for this, to lie in the bed- 
clothes and keep myself warm ! — But this is more 



X.] MAROUS AURELIUS. 351 

pleaaant — Dost thou exist then to take thy pleasure, 
and not at all for action or exertion V* 

Jeremy Collier has : — 

*' When you find an unwillingness to rise early in 
the morning, make this short speech to yourself : " I 
am getting up now to do the business of a man ; and 
am I out of humour for going about that which I was 
made for, and for the sake of which I was sent into 
the world f Was I then designed for nothing but to 
doze and batten beneath the counterpane f I thought 
action had been the end of your being.'" 

In another striking passage, again, Mr. Long 
has: — 

"No longer wonder at hazard; for neither wilt 
thou read thy own memoirs, nor the acts of the 
ancient Eomans and Hellenes, and the selections 
from books which thou wast reserving for thy old 
aga Hasten then to the end which thou hast 
before thee, and, throwing away idle hopes, come 
to thine own aid, if thou carest at ail for thyself, 
while it is in thy power." 

Here his despised predecessor has : — 

"Don't go too far in your books and overgrasp 
yoursell Alas, you have no time left to peruse 
your diary, to read over the Greek and Soman 
history: come, don't flatter and deceive yourself; 
look to the main chance, to the end and design of 
reading, and mind life more than notion: I say, if 
you have a kindness for your person, drive at the 
practice and help yourself, for that is in your own 
power." 



It seema to me that here for style and force 
Jeremy Collier con (to say the least) perfectly stand 
comparison with Mr. Long. Jeremy Collier's real 
defect as a translator is not his coarseness and vul- 
garity, but hia imperfect acquaintance with Greek; 
this is a serious defect, a fatal one; it rendered a 
translation like Mr. Long's necessary. Jeremy 
Collier's work will now be forgotten, and Mr. Long 
stands master of the field ; but he may be content, 
at any rate, to leave his predecessor's grave un- 
harmed, even if he will not throw upon it, in passing, 
a handful of kindly earth. 

Another complaint I have against Mr. Long is, 
that he is not quite idiomatic and simple enough. 
It is a little formal, at least, if not pedantic, to say 
Ethic and JXaiectie, instead of Ethies and Dialedics, 
and to say " HeUena and Komans " instead of 
"Oreeh and Homans." And why, too, — the name 
of Antoninus being preoccupied by Antoninus Pius, 
— win Mr. Long call his author Marcus Aidonin/M 
instead of Marcus Avrdiua f Small as these matters 
appear, they are important when one has to deal 
with the general public, and not with a small circle 
of scholars; and it is the general public that the 
translator of a short masterpiece on morals, such as 
is the book of Marcus Aurelius, should have in 
view ; his aim should be to make Marcus Aurelius's 
work as popular as the Imiia^oh, and Marcus Anre- 
lius's name as familiar as Socrates's. In rendering oi 
naming him, therefore, punctilious accuracy of phrase 
is not so much to be sought as accessibility and cur- 



X.] MARCUS AURELIUS. 353 

rency ; everything which may best enable the Em- 
peror and his precepts vditare per ora virHrru It is 
essential to render him in language perfectly plain 
and unprofessional, and to call him by the name by 
which he is best and most distinctly known. The 
translators of the Bible talk of jpen/^e and not denarii^ 
and the admirers of Voltaire do not celebrate him 
under the name of Arouet. 

But) after these trifling complaints are made, one 
must end, as one began, in unfeigned gratitude to 
Mr. Long for his excellent and substantial reproduc- 
tion in English of an invaluable work. In general 
the substantiality, soundness, and precision of Mr. 
Long's rendering are (I will venture, after all, to give 
my opinion about them) as conspicuous as the living 
spirit with which he treats antiquity; and these 
qualities are particularly desirable in the translator of 
a work like that of Marcus Aurelius, of which the 
language is often corrupt, almost always hard and 
obscura Any one who wants to appreciate Mr. Long's 
merits as a translator may read, in the original and 
in Mr. Long's translation, the seventh chapter of the 
tenth book ; he will see how, through all the dubious- 
ness and involved manner of the Greek, Mr. Long has 
firmly seized upon the clear thought which is certainly 
at the bottom of that troubled wording, and, in dis- 
tinctly rendering this thought^ has at the same time 
thrown round its expression a characteristic shade of 
painfulness and difficulty which just suits it. And 
Marcus Aurelius's book is one which, when it is ren- 
dered so accurately as Mr. Long renders it^ even those 

VOL. L 2 a 




who knoir Greek tolenbly weD may choose to read 
rather in the translatioD than in the originaL For not 
only are the contents here incomparably more valuable 
than Hie external form, but this form, the Greek of a 
Boman, ia not exactly one of those styles which have ■ 
physiognomy, which are an essential part of their 
aathor, which stamp an indeUble impression of him on 
the reader's mind. An old Lyons commentator find^ 
indeed, in Marcus Anrelius's Greek, something charac- 
teristic, lomething specially firm and imperial ; but 1 
think an ordinary mortal will hardly find this : he will 
find crabbed Greek, without any great charm of distinct 
physiognomy. The Greek of Thucydides and Plato 
has this charm, and he who reads them in a trans- 
lation, however accurate, loses it, and loses much in 
losing it; but the Greek of Marcus Aureliue, like the 
Greek of the New Testament, and even more than 
the Greek oi the New Testament, is wanting in it 
If one could be assured that the English Testament 
were made perfectly accurate, one might be almost 
' content never to open a Greek Testament again ; and, 
Mr. Long's version of Marcus Aurelius being what it 
IS, an Enghshman who reads to live, and does not 
live to read, may henceforth let the Greek original 
repose upon its shelf, 

The man whose thoughts Mr. Long has thus faith- 
fully reproduced, ia perhaps the most beautiful fignre 
in history. He is one of those consoling and hope- 
inspiring marks, which stand for ever to remind our 
weak and easily discouraged race how high human 
Jfoodness and perseverance have once been carried. 



X.] MARCUS AURBLIUS. 366 

and may be carried again. The interest of mankind 
is peculiarly attracted by examples of signal goodness 
in high places; for that testimony to the worth of 
goodness is the most striking which is borne by those 
to whom all the means of pleasure and self-indulgence 
lay open, by those who had at their command the 
kingdoms of the world and the glory of them. Marcus 
Aurelius was the ruler of the grandest of empires ; 
and he was one of the best of men. Besides him, 
history presents one or two sovereigns eminent for 
their goodness, such as Saint Louis or Alfred. But 
Marcus Aurelius has, for us modems, this great supe- 
riority i^ interest over Saint Louis or Alfred, that he 
lived and acted in a state of society modem by its 
essential characteristics, in an epoch akin to our own, 
in a brilliant centre of civilisation. Trajan talks of 
" our enlightened age " just as glibly as the Times 
talks of it Marcus Aurelius thus becomes for us a 
man like ourselves, a man in all things tempted as we 
are. Saint Louis inhabits an atmosphere of mediaeval 
Catholicism, which the man of the nineteenth century 
may admire, indeed, may even passionately wish to 
inhabit, but which, strive as he will, he cannot really 
inhabit Alfred belongs to a state of society (I say 
it with all deference to the Saturday Review critic who 
keeps such jealous watch over the honour of our 
Saxon ancestors) half barbarous. Neither Alfred nor 
Saint Louis can be morally and intellectually as near 
to us as Marcus Aurelius. 

The record of the outward life of this admirable 
man has in it little of striking incident. He was 




356 SSSATS IN CBinCISlL [z. 

bom at Borne on the 26th of April, in the year 121 
of the Christian era. He was nephew and son-in-law 
to his predecessor on the throne, Antoninus Pius, 
When Antoninus died, he was forty years old, hut 
from the time of his earliest manhood he had assisted 
in administering public affairs. Then, after his uncle's 
death in 161, for nineteen years he reigned as emperor. 
The barbarians were pressing oil the Roman frontier, 
and a great part of Marcus Aurelius's nineteen years 
of m^was passed in campaigning. His absLces 
from Rome were numerous and long. We hear of 
him in Asia Minor, Syria, Egjrpt^ Greece ; but, above 
all, in the countries on the Danube, where the war 
with the barbarians was going on, — in Austria^ 
Moravia, Hungary. In these countries much of his 
Journal seems to have been written ; parts of it are 
dated from them ; and there, a few weeks before his 
fifty-ninth birthday, he fell sick and died.^ The 
record of him on which his fame chiefly rests is 
the record of his inward life, — ^his Jov/mcHy or Com- 
menkmeSj or MedUcUions, or Thoughts, for by all these 
names has the work been called. Perhaps the most 
interesting of the records of his outward life is that 
which the first book of this work supplies, where he 
gives an account of his education, recites the names 
of those to whom he is indebted for it, and enumerates 
his obligations to each of them. It is a refreshing 
and consoling picture, a priceless treasure for those, 
who, sick of the " wild and dreamlike trade of blood 
and guile," which seems to be nearly the whole of 

^ He died on the 17th of March* a.d. 180. 



Z.J MARCUS AURELIUS. 357 * 

what history has to offer to our view, seek eagerly for 
that substratum of right thinking and well-doing 
which in all ages must surely have somewhere existed, 
for without it the continued life of humanity would 
have been impossible. '' From my mother I learnt 
piety and beneficence, and abstinence not only from 
evil deeds but even from evil thoughts ; and further, 
simplicity in my way of living, far removed from the 
habits of the rich.'' Let us remember that, the next 
time we are reading the sixth satire of JuvenaL 
"From my tutor I learnt" (hear it^ ye tutors of princes !) 
" endurance of labour, and to want little, and to work 
with my own hands, and not to meddle with other 
people's affairs, and not to be ready to listen to slander." 
The vices and foibles of the Greek sophist or rhetori- 
cian—the GrcBCulus esMrwJTW— are in everybody's mind ; 
but he who reads Marcus Aurelius's account of his 
Greek teachers and masters, will understand how it 
is that, in spite of the vices and foibles of individual 
QroBculi, the education of the human race owes to 
Greece a debt which can never be overrated. The 
vague and colourless praise of history leaves on the 
mind hardly any impression of Antoninus Pius : it is 
only from the private memoranda of his nephew that 
we learn what a discipUned, hard-working, gentle, 
wise, virtuous man he was ; a man who, perhaps, in- 
terests mankind less than his immortal nephew only 
because he has left in writing no record of his inner 
life, — ca/rd quia vote sacro. 

Of the outward life and circumstances of Marcus 
Aurelius, beyond these notices which he has himself 



supplied, there are few of much interest and import- 
ance. There is tha fine anecdote of his speech when 
be heard of the assasainatioo of the revolted Avidiiu 
Gasnus, against whom he was marching ; he teas torry, 
he eaid, to he deprived of thepleaatre of pardoning him. 
And t^ere are one or two more anecdotes of him 
which show the same spirit But the great record 
for the outward life of a man who has left such a 
record of his lofty inward aspirations as that which 
Marcus Aurelius has left, is the clear consenting voice 
of all his contemporaries, — high and low, friend and 
enemy, pagan and Christian,— in praise of his sincerity, 
justice, and goodness. The world's charity does not 
err on the side of excess, and here was a man occupy- 
ing the most conspicuous station in the world, and 
professing the highest possible standard of conduct ; — 
yet the world was obliged to declare that he walked 
worthily of his profession. Long after his death, his 
bust was to be seen in the houses of private men 
throngh the wide Soman empire. It may be the 
vulgar part of human nature which busies itself with 
the semblance and doings of living sovereigns, it is 
its nobler part which busies itself with those of the 
dead ; these busts of Marcus Aurelius, in the homes 
of Gaul, Britain, and Italy, bear witness, not to the 
inmates' frivolous curiosity about princes and palaces, 
but to their reverential memoiy of the passage of a 
great man upon the earth. 

Two things, however, before one turns from the 
outward to the inward life of Marcus Aurelius, force 
themselves upon one'e notice, and demand a word of 



&] MABGT7S AUTtELlUS. 359 

comment ; he persecuted the Christians, and he had 
for his son the vicious and hrutal Commodus. The 
persecution at Lyons, in which Attains and Pothinus 
suffered, the persecution at Smyrna, in which Polycarp 
suffered, took place in his reign. Of his humanity, 
of his tolerance, of his horror of cruelty and violence, 
of his wish to refrain from severe measures against 
the Christians, of his anxiety to temper the severity 
of these measures when they appeared to him indis- 
pensable, there is no doubt : but^ on the one hand, it 
is certain that the letter, attributed to him, directing 
that no Christian should be punished for being a 
Christian, is spurious ; it is almost certain that his 
alleged answer to the authorities of Lyons, in which 
he directs that Christians persisting in their profession 
shall be dealt with according to law, is genuina Mr. 
Long seems inclined t6 try and throw doubt over 
the persecution at Lyons, by pointing out that the 
letter of the Lyons Christians relating it^ alleges it 
to have been attended by miraculous and incredible 
incidents. " A man," he says, " can only act consist- 
ently by accepting all this letter or rejecting it all, 
and we cannot blame him for either.". But it is con- 
trarv to all experience to say that because a fact is 
related with incorrect additions, and embeUishments, 
therefore it probably never happened at all ; or that 
it is not, in general, easy for an impartial mind to 
distinguish between the fact and the embellishments. 
I cannot doubt that the Lyons persecution took place, 
and that the pimishment of Christians for being 
Christiana was sanctioned by Marcus Aurelius. But 



then I must add that nine modem readers out of ten, 
when they read thie, will, I believe, have a perfect!; 
false notion of what the moral action of Marcus 
Aurelius, in sanctioning that punishment, really was. 
They imagine Trajan, or Antoninus Pins, or Marcos 
Aurehus, fresh from the perussl of the Gospel, fully 
aware of the spirit and holiness of the Christian saints, 
ordering their extermination because he loved dark- 
ness rather than light Far from this, the Christianity 
which these emperors aimed at repressing was, in 
their conception of it, something philosophicaUy con- 
temptible, poUtically subversive, and morally abomin- 
able. As men, they sincerely regarded it much as 
weU-conditioned people, with us, regard Mormonlsm ; 
as mlers, tbey regarded it much aa Liberal statesmen, 
with us, regard the Jesuits. A kind of Mormoniam, 
constituted as a vast secret society, with obscure aims 
of political and social subversion, waa what Antoninus 
Pius and Marcus Anrelius believed Uiemselves to be 



1 



z.] MABOUS AURELIUS. 36J 

educated class also. One asks oneself with astonish- 
ment how a doctrine so benign as that of Jesus Christ 
can have incurred misrepresentation so monstrous. 
The inner aud moving cause of the misrepresentation 
lay. no doubt, in Hu8,-that Christiaonty was a new y ,j^!t, 
spirit in the Eoman world, destined to act in that 
world as its dissolvent ; and it was inevitable that 
Christianity in the Eoman world, like democracy in 
the modem world, like every new spirit with a similar 
mission assigned to it, should at its first appearance 
occasion an instinctive shrinking and repugnance in 
the world which it was to dissolve. The outer and 
palpable causes of the misrepresentation were, for the 
Roman public at large, the confounding of the Chris- 
tians with the Jews, that isolated, fierce, and stubborn 
race, whose stubbornness, fierceness, and isolation, 
real as they were, the fancy of a civilised Boman yet 
further exaggerated ; the atmosphere of mystery and 
novelty which surrounded the Christian rites; the 
very simplicity of Christian theism. For the Roman 
statesman, the cause of mistake lay in that character 
of secret assemblages which the meetings of the 
Christian community wore, under a State-system as 
jealous of unauthorised associations as is the State- 
system of modem Franca 

A Roman of Marcus Aurelius's time and position 
could not well see the Christians except through the 
mist of these prejudices. Seen through such a mist, 
the Christians appeared with a thousaud faults not 
their own ; but it has not been sufficiently remarked 
that faults really their own many of them assuredly 



I-*'**'/ 



862 ESSATS IN CBmGISM. [x. 

appeared with besides, faults especially likely to 
strike such an observer as Marcus Aurelius, and to 
confirm him in the prejudices of his race, station, and 
rearing. We look back upon Christianity after it has 
proved what a future it bore within it, and for us the 
sole representatives of its early struggles are the pure 
and devoted spirits through whom it proved this; 
Marcus Aurelius saw it with its future yet unshown, 
and with the tares among its professed progeny not 
less conspicuous than the wheat Who can doubt 
that among the professing Christians of the second 
century, as among the professing Christians of the 
nineteenth, there was plenty of folly, plenty of rabid 
nonsense, plenty of gross fanaticism ? who will even 
venture to affirm that, separated in great measure 
from the intellect and civilisation of the world for one 
or two centuries, Christianity, wonderful as have been 
its fruits, had the development perfectly worthy of its 
inestimable germ 1 Who will venture to affirm that, 
by the alliance of Christianity with the virtue and 
intelligence of men like the Antonines, — of the best 
product of Greek and Roman civilisation, while Greek 
and Eoman civilisation had yet life and power, — 
Christianity and the world, as well as the Antonines 
themselves, would not have been gainers? That 
alliance was not to be. The Antonines lived and 
died with an utter misconception of Christianity ; 
Christianity grew up in the Catacombs, not on the 
Palatine. And Marcus Aurelius incurs no moral 
reproach by having authorised the punishment of the 
Christians ; he does not thereby become in the least 




Z.] IfABGUS AU&RLnj& 363 

what we mean by a persecutor. One may concede 
that it was impossible for him to see Christianity as 
it really was ; — as impossible as for even the moderate 
and sensible Fleury to see the Antonines as they 
really were; — one may concede that the point of 
view from which Christianity appeared something 
anti-civil and anti-social, which the State had the 
faculty to judge and the duty to suppress, was in- 
evitably hi& Still, however, it remains true that 
this sage, who made perfection his aim and reason his 
law, did Christianity an inunense injustice and rested 
in an idea of State-attributes which was illusiva 
And this is, in truth, characteristic of Marcus Aurelius, 
that he is blameless, yet^ in a certain sense, unfor- 
tunate; in his character, beautiful as it is, there 
is something melancholy, circmnscribed. and in- 
effectual 

For of his having such a son as Commodus, too, 
one must say that he is not to be blamed on that 
account, but that he is unfortunate. Disposition and 
temperament are inexplicable things; there are 
natures on which the best education and example are 
thrown away; excellent fathers may have, without 
any fault of theirs, incurably vicious sons. It is to be 
remembered, also, that Commodus was left^ at the 
perilous age of nineteen, master of the world ; while 
his father, at that age, was but beginning a twenty 
years' apprenticeship to wisdom, labour, and self- 
command, under the sheltering teachership of his 
uncle Antoninus. Commodus was a prince apt to be 
led by favourites ; and if the story is true which says 



f ^ 



364 ESSAYS IN CRITICISM. [x. 

that he left) all through his reign, the Christians un- 
troubled, and ascribes this lenity to the influence of 
his mistress Marcia, it shows that he could be led to 
good as weU as to evil But for such a nature to be 
left at a critical age with absolute power, and wholly 
without good counsel and direction, was the more 
fatal. Still one cannot help wishing that the example 
of Marcus Aurelius could have availed more with his 
own only son. One cannot but think that with such 
virtue as his there should go, too, the ardour which 
removes mountains, and that the ardour which re- 
moves mountains might have even won Commodus. 
The word vaeffedual again rises to one's mind ; Marcus 
Aurelius saved his own soul by his righteousness, and 
he could do no more. Happy they who can do this ! 
but still happier, who can do more ! 

Yet, when one passes from his outward to his in- 
ward life, when one turns over the pages of his 
MediiaHons, — entries jotted down from day to day, 
amid the business of the city or the fatigues of the 
camp, for his own guidance and support, meant for 
no eye but his own, without the slightest attempt at 
style, with no care, even, for correct writing, not to 
be surpassed for naturalness and sincerity, — all dis- 
position to carp* and cavil dies away, and one is over- 
powered by the charm of a character of such purity, 
delicacy, and virtue. He fails neither in small things 
nor in great ; he keeps watch over himself both that 
the great springs of action may be right in him, and 
that the minute details of action may be right also. 
How admirable in a hard-tasked ruler, and a ruler, 



X 



X.J MARCUS AURELIUS. 366 

too, with a passion for thinking and reading, is such 

a memorandum as the foUowing : — ^,* 

" Not frequently nor without necessity to say to ^ *"' 

any one, or to write in a letter, that I have no ^"^ 
leisure ; nor continually to excuse the neglect of 
duties required by our relation to those with whom 
we live, by alleging urgent occupation." 

And, when that ruler is a Eoman emperor, what 
an " idea " is this to be written down and meditated 
by him : — 

" The idea of a polity in which there is the same 
law for all, a polity administered with regard to equal 
rights and equal freedom of speech, and the idea of a 
kingly government which respects most of- all the 
freedom of the governed." 

And, for all men who " drive at practice," what 
practical rules may not one accumulate out of these 
Meditations : — 

" The greatest part of what we say or do being 
unnecessary, if a man takes this away, he will have -^^^ 

more leisure and less uneasiness. Accordingly, on ^.^'^ 

every occasion a man should ask himself: * Is this >>«^vy'** 
one of the unnecessary things V Now a man should ^J^' 
take away not only unnecessary acts, but also un- 
necessary thoughts, for thus superfluous acts will not 
follow after." 

And again :— ^^f^ 

" We ought to check in the series of our thoughts \ >i>*^' 
everything that is without a purpose and useless, but 1 ^* 
most of all the over curious feeling and the malignant ; | 
and a man should use himself to think of those 



^ / 



366 ESSAYS m CBITIGISM. [x. 

things only about which if one should suddenly ask, 
* What hast thou now in thy thoughts V with perfect 
openness thou mightest immediately answer, ' This or 
That ;' so that from thy words it should be plain that 
everything in thee is simple and benevolent, and such 
as ^efits a social animal , and one that cares not for 
thoughts about sensual enjoyments, or any rivalry 
or envy and suspicion, or anything else for which thou 
wouldst blush if thou shouldst say thou hadst it in 
thy mind" 

So, with a stringent practicalness worthy of 
Franklin, he discourses on his favourite text. Let 
nothing be done ivithotU a purpose. But it is when he 
enters the region where Franklin cannot follow him, 
when he utters his thoughts on the ground-motives 
of human action, that he is most interesting ; that he 
becomes the unique, the incomparable Marcus Aurelius. 
Christianity uses language very liable to be misunder- 
stood when it seems to tell men to do good, not, cer- 
tainly, from the vulgar motives of worldly interest, or 
vanity, or love of human praise, but "that their 
Father which seeth in secret may reward them 
openly." The motives of reward and punishment 
have come, from the misconception of language of 
this kind, to be strangely overpressed by many Chris- 
tian moralists, to the deterioration and disfigurement 
of Christianity. Marcus Aurelius says, truly and 
uobly : — 

** One man, when he has done a service to another, 
is ready to set it down to his account as a favour con- 
ferred. Another is not ready to do this, but still in 



X.] MARCUS AURELIUS. 367 

his own mind he thinks of the man as his debtor, and 
he knows what he has done. A third in a manner 
does not even know what he has done, hdhe is like a 
vine which has produced grapes^ amd seeks for nothing 
more after it has once produced its proper fruit. As a 
horse when he has run, a dog when he has caught the 
game, a bee when it has made its honey, so a man 
when he has done a good act, does not call out for 
others to come and see, but he goes on to another act, 
as a vine goes on to produce again the grapes in 
season. Must a man, then, be one of these, who in a 
manner acts thus without observing it ] Yes." 

And again : — 

"What more dost thou want when thou hast done 
a man a service 1 Art thou not content that thou 
hast done something conformable to thy nature, and 
dost thou seek to be paid for it, just as if the eye 
demanded a recompense for seeing, or the feei for 
walUng ?" 

Christianity, in order to match morality of this 
strain, has to correct its apparent offers of external 
reward, and to say : The kmgdom of God is toithin 
you, 

I have said that it is by its accent of emotion that 
the morality of Marcus Aurelius acquires a special 
character, and reminds one of Christian morality. 
The sentences of Seneca are stimulating to the intel- \ 

k 

lect ; the sentences of Epictetus are fortifying to the 
character; the sentences of Marcus Aurelius find . 
their way to the souL I have said that religious 
emotion has the power to light up morality: the 



368 ESSAYS IN CRinClSlL [x 

amotion of Marcos AareUiu does not quite light np 
his morality, hut it soflfdses it ; it has not power to 
melt the clouds of effort and austerity quite away, but 
it shines through them and glorifies them; it is a 
spirit^ not so much of gladness and elation, as of 
gentleness and sweetness; a delicate and tender 
sentiment^ which is less than joy and more than 
resignation. He says that in his youth he learned 
from Maximus, one of his teachers, " cheerfulness in 
all circumstances as well as in illness ; and a just ad- 
miadure in the moral character of sweetness and dignity ." 
and it is this very admixture of sweetness with his 
dignity which makes him so beautiful a moralist. It 
enables him to carry even into his observation of 
nature, a delicate penetration, a sympathetic tender 
ness, worthy of Wordsworth; the spirit of such a 
remark as the following has hardly a parallel, so far 
as my knowledge goes, in the whole range of Greek 
and Roman literature : — 

" Figs, when they are quite ripe, gape open ; and 
in the ripe olives the very circumstance of their being 
near to rottenness adds a peculiar beauty to the fruit. 
And the ears of com bending down, and the lion's 
eyebrows, and the foam which flows firom the mouth 
of wild boars, and many other things, — though they 
are far from being beautiful, in a certain sense, — still, 
because they come in the course of nature, have a 
beauty in them, and they please the mind ; so that if 
a man should have a feeling and a deeper insight with 
respect to the things which are produced in the uni- 
verse, there is hardly an3rthing which comes in the 



t^ 



Z.1 MARCUS AUBEUUS. 369 

course of nature which will not seem to him to be in 
a manner disposed so as to give pleasure/' 

But it is when his strain passes to directly moral 
subjects that his delicacy and sweetness lend to it 
the greatest chann. Let those who can feel the 
beauty of spiritual refinement read this, the reflec- 
tion of an emperor who prized mental superiority 
highly : — 

" Thou sayest, ' Men cannot admire the sharpness 
of thy wits.' Be it so; but there are many other 
things of which thou canst not say, ' I am not formed 
for them by nature.' Show those qualities, then, 
which are altogether in thy power, — sincerity, gravity, 
endurance of labour, aversion to pleasure, contentment 
with thy portion and with few things, benevolence, 
frankness, no love of superfluity, freedom from trifling, 
magnanimity. Dost thou not see how many qualities 
thou art at once able to exhibit, as to which there is 
no excuse of natural incapacity and unfitness, and yet 
thou still remainest voluntarily below the mark ? Or 
art thou compelled, through being defectively fur- 
nished by nature, to murmur, and to be mean, and 
to flatter, and to find fault with thy poor body, and 
to try to please men, and to make great display, and 
to be so restless in thy mind ) No, indeed ; but thou 
mightest have been delivered from these things long 
aga Only, if in truth thou canst be charged with 
being rather slow and dull of comprehension, thou 
must exert thyself about this also, not neglecting nor 
yet taking pleasure in thy dulness." 

The same sweetness enables him to &k his mind, 

VOL. 1. 2 b 






370 ESSAYS IN CEITICISM. [x. 

when he sees the isolation and moral death caused by 
sin, not on the cheerless thought of the misery of this 
condition, but on the inspiriting thought that man is 
blest with the power to escape from it : — 

" Suppose that thou hast detached thyself from the 

natural unity, — for thou wast made by nature a part^ 

but now thou hast cut thyself off,— yet here is this 

beautiful provision, that it is in thy power again to 

unite thyself. Gk)d has allowed this to no other part, 

- — after it has been separated and cut asunder, to 

^ ' come together again. But consider the goodness with 

^ which he has privileged man ; for he has put it in his 

^^ power, when he has been separated, to return and to 

^ \ be united and to resume his place." 

It enables him to control even the passion for 
retreat and solitude, so strong in a soul like his, to 
which the world could offer no abiding city : — 

" Men seek retreat for themselves, houses in the 
country, seashores, and mountains; and thou, too, 
art wont to desire such things very much. But this 
is altogether a mark of the most common sort of men, 
for it is in thy power whenever thou shalt choose to 
retire into thyself. For nowhere either with more 
quiet or more freedom from trouble does a man retire 
than into his own soul, particularly when he has 
within him such thoughts that by looking into them 
he is immediately in perfect tranquillity. Constantly, 
then, give to thyself this retreat, and renew thyself ; 
and let thy principles be brief and fundamental, 
which, as soon as thou shalt recur to them, will be 
sufficient to cleanse the soul completely, and to send 



r 



X.] MARCUS AURELIUS. 371 

thee back free from all discontent with the things to 
which thou retumesf 

Against this feeling of discontent and weariness, 
so natural to the great for whom there seems nothing 
left to desire or to strive after, but so enfeebling to 
them, so deteriorating, Marcus Aurelius never ceased 
to struggle. With resolute thankfulness he kept in 
remembrance the blessings of his lot; the true bless- 
ings of it, not the false : — 

" I have to thank Heaven that I was subjected to 
a ruler and a father (Antoninus Pius) who was able 
to take away all pride from me, and to bring me to 
the knowledge that it is possible for a man to live in 
a palace without either guards, or embroidered dresses, 
or any show of this kind ; but that it is in such a 
man's power to bring himself very near to the fashion 
of a private person, without being for this reason 
either meaner in thought or more remiss in action 
with respect to the things which must be done for 
public interest. ... I have to be thankful that my 
children have not been stupid nor deformed in body ; 
that I did not make more proficiency in rhetoric, 
poetry, and the other studies, by which I should per- 
haps have been completely engrossed, if I had seen 
that I was making great progress in them ; . . . that 
I knew Apollonius, Eusticus, Maximus ; . . . that I 
received clear and frequent impressions about living 
according to nature, and what kind of a life that is, 
so that, so far as depended on Heaven, and its gifts, 
help, and inspiration, nothing hindered me from forth- 
with living according to nature, though I still fall short 

VOL. T. 2 B 2 



of it through 1117 own fault, and through not observing 
the admonitions of Heaven, and, I may almost say, its 
direct instructions ; that my body has held out bo long 
in Huch a kind of life as mine ; that though it was my 
mother's lot to die young, she spent the last yeu« of 
her life with me ; that whenever I wished to help any 
man in his need, I was never told that I had not the 
means of doing it; that, when I had an inclination to 
philosophy, I did not fall into the hands of a sophist" 

And, as he dwelt with gratitude on these hedps and 
blessings vouchsafed to him, his mind (so, at leasts it 
seems to me) would sometimes revert with awe to tiie 
perils and temptations of the lonely height where he 
stood, to the lives of Tiberius, Caligula, Nero, Domi- 
tian, in their hideous blackness and ruin ; and then 
he wrote down for himself such a warning entry as 
this, significant and terrible iu its abruptness : — 

" A black character, a womanish character, a stub- 
born character, bestial, childish, animal, stupid, counter- 
feit, scurrilous, fraudulent, tyrannical I " 

Or this :— 

" About what am I now employing my soul 1 On 
every occasion I must ask myself this question, and 
enquire, What have I now in this part of me which 
they call the ruling principle, and whose soul have I - 
now t — that of a child, or of a young man, or of a 
weak woman, or of a tyrant, or of one of the lower 
iLiiimBla in the service of man, or of a wild beast I" 

The character he wished to attain he knew well, 
and beautifully he has marked it, and marked, too 
his sense of shortcoming : — 



Z.] MABCUS AUSEUUS. 373 

"When thou hast assumed these names, — ^good, 
modest, true, rational, equal-minded, magnanimous, — 
take care that thou dost not change these names ; and, 
if thou shouldst lose them, quickly return to them. 
If thou maintainest thyself in possession of these 
names without desiring that others should call thee 
by them, thou wilt be another being, and wilt enter 
on another life. For to continue to be such as thou 
hast hitherto been, and to be torn in pieces and defiled 
in such a life, is the character of a very stupid man, 
and one overfond of his life, and like those half- 
devoured fighters with wild beasts, who though 
covered with wounds and gore still entreat to be 
kept to the following day, though they will be ex- 
posed in the same state to the same claws and bites. 
Therefore fix thyself in the possession of these few 
names : and if thou art able to abide in them, abide 
as if thou wast removed to the Happy Islands." 

For all his sweetness and serenity, however, man's 
point of life " between two infinities " (of that expres- 
sion Marcus Aurelius is the real owner) was to him 
anything but a Happy Island, and the performances 
on it he saw through no veils of illusion. Nothing is 
in general more gloomy and monotonous than declama- 
tions on the hollowness and transitoriness of human 
life and grandeur : but here, too, the great charm of 
Marcas Aurelius, his emotion, comes in to relieve the 
monotony and to break through the gloom ; and even 
on this eternally used topic he is imaginative, fresh, 
and striking : — 

"Consider, for example, the times of Vespasian 



] 



374 ESSAYS IN CMTICISBL [x 

Thou wilt see all these things, people marrying, 
bringing up chHdren, sick, dying, warring, feasting, 
trafficking, cultivating the ground, flattering, obstin- 
ately arrogant, suspecting, plotting, wishing for some- 
body to die, grumbling about the present^ loving, 
heaping up treasure, desiring to be consuls or kings. 
Well then that life of these people no longer exists 
at all. Again, go to the times of Trajaa All is again 
the sama Their life too is gone. But chiefly thou 
shouldst think of those whom thou hast thyself known 
distracting themselves about idle things, neglecting to 
do what was in accordance with their proper constitu- 
tion, and to hold firmly to this and to be content 
with it" 

Again : — 

"The things which are much valued in life are 
empty, and rotten, and trifling ; and people are like 
little dogs, biting one another, and little children quar- 
relling, crying, and then straightway laughing. But 
fidelity, and modesty, and justice, and truth, are fled 

' Up to Olympus from the wide-spread earth.* 

What then is there which still detains thee here ? " 

And once more : — 

" Look down from above on the countless herds of 
men, and their countless solemnities, and the infinitely 
varied voyagings in storms and calms, and the differ- 
ences among those who are bom, who live together, 
and die. And consider too the life lived by others in 
olden time, and the life now lived among barbarous 
nations, and how many know not even thy name, and 





Z.] IIABGUS AURELinS. 375 

how many will soon forget it^ and how they who per- 
haps now are praising thee will very soon blame thee, 
and that neither a posthumous name is of any value, 
nor reputation, nor anything else." 

He recognised, indeed, that (to use his own words) 
"the prime principle in man's constitution is the 
social ;" and he laboured sincerely to make not only 
his acts towards his fellow-men, but his thoughts also, 
suitable to this conviction : — 

"When thou wishest to delight thyself, think of 
the virtues of those who live with thee ; for instance, 
the activity of one, and the modesty of another, and 
the liberality of a third, and some other good quality 
of a fourth." 

Still, it is hard for a pure and thoughtful man to 
live in a state of rapture at the spectacle afforded to 
him by his fellow-creatures; above all it is hard, 
when such a man is placed as Marcus Aurelius was 
placed, and has had the meanness and perversity of 
his fellow-creatures thrust, in no common measure, 
upon his notice, — ^has had, time after time, to expe- 
rience how " within ten days thou wilt seem a god to 
those to whom thou art now a beast and an ape." 
His true strain of thought as to his relations with his 
fellow-men is rather the following. He has been 
enumerating the higher consolations which may sup- 
port a man at the approach of death, and he goes 
on: — 

" But if thou requirest also a vulgar kind of com- 
fort which shall reach thy hearty thou wilt be made 
best reconciled to death by observing the objects from 



376 ESSAYS IH OBinCISM. Ix 

wbich thou art going to be removed, and the morals 
of those with whom thy Bonl will no longer be mingled. 
For it is no v&j right to be offended with men, but 
. it is thy duty to care for them and to bear with them 
gently ; and yet to remember that thy departure will 
not be from men who have Hie same principles aa 
thyself. For this is the only thing, if there be any, 
which could draw us the contrary way and attach na 
to life, to be permitted to live with those who have 
the same principles as ourselves. But now tliou seest 
how great is the distress caused by the difference of 
those who live together, so that thou mayest say: 
'Come quick, death, lest perchance I too should 
forget myself.' " 

faithless ami perverse generaHm / how long shail I 
be ioUh yoa f how long shoO / suffer you t Sometimes 
this strain rises even to passion : — 

" Short is the little which remains to thee of life. 
Live as on a mountain. Let men see, let them know, 
a real man, who Uvea as he was meant to live. If 
they cannot endure him, let them kill him. For that 
is better than to live aa men do." 

It is remarkable how httle of a merely local and 
temporary character, how little of those soma which 
a reader has to clear away before he gets to the pre- 
cious ore, how little that even admits of doubt or 
question, the morality of Marcus Aurelius exhibits. 
Perhaps as to one point we must make an exception. 
Marcus Aurelins is fond of urging as a motive for 
man's cheerful acquiescence in whatever befalls him, 
that " whatever happens to every man it for the m- 



terest of the wtwersal ;" ih&t the whole contains nothing 
wAuA is not for its advantage ; that everything which 
happens to a man is to be accepted, " even if it seems 
disagreeable, beaaiae U leads to the hedltk of the aniverse." 
And the whole courBe of the uniTerse, he adds, has a 
providential reference to man's welfare : "all other 
ihings have hem made for the sake of raiiffnaJ beings." 
Religion has in all ages freely used this language, and 
it is not religion which will object to Marcus Aurelius'a 
use of it ; but science can hardly accept as severely 
accurate this employment of the terms inUeresl and 
advaniage. To a sound nature and a clear reason the 
proposition that things happen " for the interest of 
the universal," as men conceive of interest^ may seem 
to have no meaning at all, and the proposition that 
" all things have been made for the sake of rational 
hnines" mav seem to be faJae. Yet even to tbia Ian- 



[deasure, auch ahall be to thee, in evei; matter which 
presents itself, the doing of the things which are 
conformable to man's constitiition ; for a man ought 
to consider as an enjojment everything Trhich it is in 
his power to do according to his own nature, — and it 
ia in his power everywhere." In this sense it is, in- 
deed, moat true that "all things have been made for 
the sake of rational beings;" that "all things work 
together for good." 

In general, however, the action Marcus Aurelius 

prescribes is action which every sound nature must 

recognise as right, and the motives he assigns are 

motives which every clear reason must recognise as 

valid. And so he remains the especial friend and 

V (, comforter of all clear-headed and scrupulouB, yet pure- 

.•j'' •t'" hearted and upward striving men, m those ages most 

,- especially that walk by sight, not by faith, but jet 

1^0 no_ open vision. He cannot give such souls, 

perhaps, all they yeam for, but he gives them much; 

and what he gives them, they can receive. 

Yet no, it is not for what he thus gives them that 
such souls love him most ! it is rather because of the 
emotion which lends to bis voice so touching an accent, 
it is because he too yearns as they do for something 
unattained by him. What an afSnity for Christianity 
had this persecutor of the Christians I The effusion 
of Christianity, its relieving tears, its happy self- 
sacrifice, were the very element, one feels, for which 
hia soul longed ; they were near him, they brushed 
him, he touched them, ho passed them by. One feels, 
too, that the Marcus Aurelius one reads must still 



X.] MARCUS AUKELIUS. 379 

have remained, even had Christianity been fully 
known to him, in a great measure himself ; he would 
have been no Justin; — ^but how would Christianitj- 
have affected himi in what measure would it have 
changed him t Granted that he might have found, 
like the Alogi of modem times, in the most beautiful 
of the Gospels, the Gospel which has leavened Chris- 
tendom most powerfully, the Gospel of St. John, too 
much Greek metaphysics, too much gnosis; granted 
that this Gospel might have looked too like what he 
knew already to be a total surprise to him: what, 
then, would he have said to the Sermon on the Mount, 
to the twenty-sixth chapter of St Matthew 1 What 
would have become of his notions of the exitidbilis 
superstUio, of the "obstinacy of the Christians"? 
Vain question! yet the greatest charm of Marcus 
Aurelius is that he makes us ask it We see him 
wise, just, self-governed, tender, thankful, blameless; 
yet, with all this, agitated, stretching out his arms for 
something beyond, — tendentemque manus ripcB ulterioris 
amor 9, ^j 

THE END 



Printed by R. & R. Clark, Limited, Edinburgh. 



r 



\ 



r 

• a 



^-r 




6, A- 



/ 



^W6 9 • 1976 



'^Ai - : 



■^ 



mvst'i'^ 



Stanford University Lliirary 

Stanford, California 



In order that others may use this book, 
please return it as soon as possible, but 
not later than the date due. 




