The Ascension of Isaiah (R. H. Charles translation, 1900)
=========================================================
Anonymous (early Christian pseudepigraphon) — The Ascension of Isaiah, translated from the Ethiopic by R. H. Charles (London: A. & C. Black, 1900), public domain. The ancient martyrdom-and-vision text — Isaiah's ascent through the seven heavens; Charles's 1900 translation is the standard English version. Staged as the public-domain edition for the restricted Ascension of Isaiah entry. Scan via Internet Archive.

THE ASCENSION
OF ISAIAH


CORNELL
UNIVERSITY
LIBRARY


UNDERGRADUATE LIBRARY


a


scension of Isaiah


Tani


Cornell University


Library


The original of this book is in
the Cornell University Library.


There are no known copyright restrictions in
the United States on the use of the text.


THE


ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


OTHER WORKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR.


ee Oe


The Apocalypse of Baruch. Translated from the
Syriac: Chapters I-LXXVII, from the Sixth Century MS. in
the Ambrosian Library of Milan, and Chapters LXXVIII-
LXXXVII—The Epistle of Baruch.—From a New and
Critical Text based on Ten MSS. and published herewith.
Edited, with Introduction, Notes, and Indices. 7s. 6d. net.


The Assumption of Moses. Translated from the
Latin Sixth Century MS., the unemended Text of which is
published herewith, together with the Text in its restored and
critically emended Form. Edited, with Introduction, Notes, and
Indices. 75. 6d.


A Critical History of the Doctrine of a Future
Life in Israel, in Judaism, and in Christianity ; or Hebrew,
Jewish, and Christian Eschatology, from pre-Prophetic Times
till the Close of the New Testament Canon. 155.


_A. & C. BLACK, SOHO SQUARE, LONDON.


The Book of Enoch. Translated from Dillmann’s
Ethiopic Text (emended and revised in accordance with
hitherto uncollated Ethiopic MSS. and with the Gizeh and
other Greek and Latin Fragments), with Introduction, Notes,
and Indices. 8vo, 16s.


The Ethiopic Version of the Hebrew Book of
Jubilees. Edited from Four MSS. and critically revised,
emended, and restored in accordance with the Hebrew, Syriac,
Greek, and Latin Fragments of this Book. 4to, 125. 6d.


The Book of the Secrets of Enoch. Translated from
the Slavonic by W. R. Morriiy, M.A., and’ Edited, with
Introduction, Notes, and Indices, by R. H. CHARLES, M.A.
8v0, 75. 6d.


THE CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD.


THE


ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


TRANSLATED FROM THE ETHIOPIC VER-
SION, WHICH, TOGETHER WITH THE NEW
GREEK FRAGMENT, THE LATIN VERSIONS
AND THE LATIN TRANSLATION OF THE
SLAVONIC, IS HERE PUBLISHED IN FULL


EDITED
WITH INTRODUCTION, NOTES, AND INDICES


BY


R. H. CHARLES, D.D.


PROFESSOR OF BIBLICAL GREEK, TRINITY COLLEGE, DUBLIN


LONDON
ADAM AND CHARLES BLACK


1g00


nN


TO MY FRIENDS
N. BONWETSCH, B. P. GRENFELL, A. S. HUNT


TO WHOM I AM SO MUCH INDEBTED
IN THE PRESENT WORK


PREFACE


A NEw edition of the Ascension has long been
needed. That of Dillmann was in its time a most
helpful and meritorious work, though his commen-
tary is too brief, and his Ethiopic text less good than
it might have been, owing to his somewhat faulty
collation of the MSS. and his failure to use for
critical purposes the Latin versions at his disposal.

For the present edition accordingly the Ethiopic
MSS. have been collated and the text edited anew.
Full account has therein been taken of the Latin
versions and the Greek Legend, as well as of the
new textual authorities now accessible—Grenfell
and Hunt's fragmentary Greek text,and Bonwetsch’s
translation of the Slavonic version. Indeed, to make
the textual evidence complete I have arranged
the Greek text, the Latin versions, and the Latin
translation of the Slavonic in parallel columns with
the Ethiopic, and appended at their close the Greek
Legend, which, being built on the Ascension, is an
important witness to its text. The genealogical
relations subsisting between these authorities are
set forth in the Introduction.

Before leaving this subject I must record my
deep obligations to Messrs. Grenfell and Hunt for
placing at my service the proofs of their critical
and admirable edition of the valuable Greek frag-
ment which they have recently discovered; to
Professor Bonwetsch for his most helpful translation


viii PREFACE


of the Slavonic version, and to Father Mercati for
a new and more accurate collation of the Vatican
Latin fragments. For Father Mercati’s help I am
beholden to the kind offices of Mr. C. H. Turner,
Fellow of Magdalen College. Finally, my best thanks
are due to Messrs. A. & C. Black for generously
undertaking the publication of the above texts.
The Ascension is a composite work, partly of
Jewish, partly of Christian origin. The former
element, which is derived from a Jewish work, the
Martyrdom of Isaiah, possesses a value of its own,
but it is the Christian element, which is based on
two originally independent writings, the Testament
of Hezekiah and the Vision of Isaiah, that chiefly
engages our attention in the present work. These
latter, particularly the Testament of Hezekiah, cast
an illuminating, though at times lurid, light on
certain outlying provinces of Christian belief and
conduct towards the close of the first century. It
bewails the fewness of the prophets, the prevalence
of heresies,the sad declension in Christian character.
It touches incidentally on the fact that there were
Church Guilds, whose sole object was to keep be-
lievers in a state of readiness for the Advent of
Christ, but expecting withal to experience first the
dreaded coming of the Antichrist. Since the account
it furnishes of the Antichrist is in some respects
unique, I have brought the Introduction to a close
with a Critical Essay on the Antichrist, Beliar,
and Neronic myths as they appear in Jewish and
Christian literature between 200 B.c. and 120 A.D.


17 Brapmore Roan, Oxrorp.
September, 1900,


CONTENTS


PAGE
InTRoDUCTION P a . ‘ ; * . xi-lxxiv


§ x. Short account of the Book (xi-xii). § 2. Various
Titles of the Book (xii-xiv). § 3. The Ethiopic
Version (E) and its MSS. (xiv-xvi). § 4. Editions
of the Text (xvi-xvii). § 5. Translations of the
Ethiopie Version (xvii-xviii). § 6. The Latin
Versions L! (ii. 14 - iii. 13, vii. 1-19) and L? (vi.-
xi.) (xviii-xxi). § 7. The fuller text of @' asa
rule derived from G (xxi-xxiv). § 8. The Slavonic
Version (S) (xxiv-xxvii). § 9. The Greek Legend
(= Gk, Leg.) (xxvii-xxviii). § 10. The newly re-
covered Greek Text of ii. 4-iv. 4 and its relation
to E and L? (xxviii-xxxi). § 11. The Archetype
of G and its Descendants (xxxi-xxxiii). § 12.
Critical Inquiries (xxxiv-xxxvi). § 13. Different
Elements in the Book (xxxvi-xliii). § 14. Dates
of the various Constituents of the Ascension
(xliv-xlv). § 15. Martyrdom of Isaiah and the
Oriental Influences apparent in it (xlv-xlix).
§ 16. Value of the Ascension for the History of
outlying Religious Thought (xlix-li). § 17. The
Antichrist, Beliar, and Neronic Myths and their
subsequent Fusion (li-lxxv).


Symzots aND BRACKETS USED IN THIS EDITION . a lxxiv
TRANSLATION AND NoTES : . } : . ‘ 1-82


Eruroric VERSION . : : 4 i . 4 . 83-139


x CONTENTS


PAGE
Greek Text . . : ; 3 « & F ‘ 84-95
Latin Versron (L') : . . . oo 87-92, 102-108
Latin Verston (L’) 4 é é . 7 - - 98-139
Latin TRANSLATION OF SLAVONIC VERSION. e - 98-139
APPENDIX ON THE Names ‘THE BELovED,’ ‘ BER,’
© SaMMAEL ” a 3 ‘ ‘ ‘ . . 140
‘Greek LecEenD’ . 2 : ‘ ‘ : s - 141-148
Inpex I . ‘ 7 3 : 2 ‘A . . 149-150


Inpex II. : ‘ . : 7 . 2 « I5I-155


INTRODUCTION


§ 1. Sort Account or THE Book.


THE Ascension of Isaiah is a composite work of
very great interest. In its present form we cannot
be sure that it existed earlier than the latter half
of the second century of our era. Its various
constituents, however, and of these there were
three, circulated independently as early as the first


1 From the third century onward the Ascension had an
extensive circulation amongst Christian ‘heretics. Thus it was
used by Hieracas and the Archontici (see quotations from Epi-
phanius, p. 67); by the Arians, to whom we owe the preservation
of the Vatican fragments ; by the Massalians or Bogomils in the
East, and the Cathari in the West. Its presence amongst the
Massalians is attested by Euthymius Zigabenus (cire. 1100),
*Edeyxos kat OplapBos tis. . . aipécews ray abéav Macoadavay, in
Tollius, Insignia Itinerarii Italici, 1696, 116-117, érépav tivd elvat
tpidda, 7) cat Swepwepévny efovolav, thy te bmeprdtw Tov éntd
ovpavav émxabnuérny, Kata rv BdeAupdy wevdeniypapoy map’ abrois
tod ‘Hoatov Spacw (see Migne, Patrol. Graec. cxxxi. col. 44); and
amongst the Cathari by Moneta, Adversus Catharos et Waldenses
(ed. Riechinius), 1742, p. 218, ‘Omnes (prophetas) damnabant
praeter Isaiam, cuius dicunt esse quemdam libellum, in quo
habetur, quod spiritus Isaiae raptus a corpore usque ad septi-
mum caelum ductus est, in quo vidit et audivit quaedam arcana,
quibus vehementissime innituntur.’


xii INTRODUCTION


century. These were the Martyrdom of Isaiah, the
Vision of Isaiah, and the Testament of Hezekiah.
The first of these was of Jewish origin, and is of
less interest here than the other two, which were
the work of Christian writers. The Vision of
Isaiah is important for the knowledge it affords us
of first-century beliefs in certain circles as to the
doctrines of the Trinity, the Incarnation, the
Resurrection, the Seven Heavens, &c. The long lost
Testament of Hezekiah, which is, I think, to be
identified with iii. 13° to iv. 18 of our present work,
is unquestionably of great value in the insight it
gives us into the history of the Christian Church
at the close of the first century. Its descriptions
of the worldliness and lawlessness which prevailed
among the elders and pastors, i.e. the bishops and
priests, of the widespread covetousness and vain-
glory as well as of the growing heresies among
Christians generally, agree with similar accounts
in 2 Peter, 2 Timothy, and Clement of Rome (ad
Cor. iii, xxiii), This work, moreover, is the first and
oldest document that testifies to the martyrdom of
St. Peter at Rome, Finally, it supplies us with
indispensable materials for the history of the
Antichrist.


§ 2. Various TiTLzs oF THE Book.


"Anékpudov “Hoatov is the name assigned to it by
Origen in his commentary on Matthew xiii. 57
(Lommatzsch, iii. 49), Kat ‘Hoatas 88 wenploOar ind


INTRODUCTION xiii


Tod Aaod tordpyra’ el S€ ris od Mpoolerar Thy ioroplay
did 7d ey TO droKpthe ‘Hoag aitiy dépecbar morev-
adrw tois éy tH mpds ‘EBpatovs obrw yeypaypevors
(Heb. xi. 37). See also Ep. ad Afric. 9 (Lom-
matzsch, xiii. 31), and the Constitutiones Apostolicae,
vi. 16.

In Epiphanius, Haer. xl. 2, it is termed 76 ’Ava-
Barixéy ‘Hoatov, which he says was used by the
*Addoyevels. AapBavovor d? AaBas axd Tod *AvaBarixod
‘Hoatov éri 5% cal GAAwy tidy aroxptoov. And in
Ixvii. 3 Bodderas 3% (‘Iépaxas) rv redclay abrod
ototacw moreioba. dnd tod ’“AvaBarixod “Hoatov, d40ev
Os ey TH ’AvaBarixd Aeyouevw edreyev exeice Ort (the
quotation which follows will be found in the
notes on p. 67). In like manner Jerome calls
it the Ascensio Isaiae. See quotation in notes
on p. 81.

Thirdly, it was known as the “Opacts ‘Hoatov.
This we infer from the texts of E S and L?
of vi. 1. This designation actually appears in
Montfaucon’s and Pitra’s list of Canonical and
Apocryphal Books. It belongs specifically, and
probably originally, only to vi-xi. 40. —

Finally, it is named the Avaéjxn "E¢exlov by
Cedrenus i. 120-121 (see pp. 2, 29, notes). That
such a work was incorporated in the Ascension
might also be inferred from i. 2°-5* which describe
the contents of Hezekiah’s Vision (see also Greek
Legend, i. 2). This description is applicable to the
Christian Apocalypse, iii. 13°-iv. 18, and to it alone
in the Ascension. The fact, too, that Cedrenus


xiv INTRODUCTION


quotes partially iv. 12, 14, and refers to iv. 15-18
of this very section, points to the conclusion that
such a book existed independently (see i. 2-4,
notes).


§ 3. Tue Ernioric Version (E) anp its MSS.


The Ethiopic version, which we shall henceforth
denote by E, is on the whole a faithful reproduc-
tion of the Greek (G?).

As we shall see later, there were at an early
date two recensions (G! and G?) of the original
Greek of vi-xi, which presented very divergent
texts in a large number of passages. It is from
the former of these (G") that E is derived.

E is, as we have said, a faithful reproduction of
the Greek. So closely as a rule does it follow the
latter that it can almost always be retranslated
without difficulty. Like every version, however,
with a long history behind it, it has its defects.
Thus there are additions made to the text in ii. 5,
vii. 4, Vili. 12, 34, ix. 18, and losses sustained in
ii. 13, Vil. 13, 15, 17, X1.19. Manifest dittographies
are found in iii. 22, 26, v. 3, Vili. 20, ix. 22, xi. 24,
and mistaken renderings of the Greek in vii. 21,
ix. 3, 5. Corruptions too are not infrequent, as in
i. 5, lil. 1, 10, 14, 31, iv. 1, vii. 2, 3, 8, viii. 2, 7, 14,
1X. I, 30, 33, X. I, 12, Xi. 24, 40, but most of these
are obvious and admit of easy emendation.

Other defects in E are not native to it, but go
back to G1, Thus the omission in iii. 5 is trace-


INTRODUCTION XV


able to this source: and likewise the addition in
vii. 18.

The corruptions, moreover, in vi. 17, vii. 9, ix. 14,
are simply reproductions of corruptions already
existing in the Greek.

A discussion of the critical affinities of E to
the other versions must be adjourned to the later
sections.

The Manuscripts. Of E only three manuscripts
a, b, c, have come to Europe; two of these are in the
British Museum, 0 and ¢. These belong to the
fifteenth and eighteenth centuries respectively, and
appear on the British Museum Catalogue as Nos.
501 and 503.

¢ is much less trustworthy than b, and yet in
certain passages, particularly in xi. 2-24, we are
obliged to follow it against a and 6 on the ground
of external or internal evidence. For the sake
of brevity I have not infrequently omitted its
readings.

In 6 there are frequent omissions through
homoioteleuton, and likewise many misleading cor-
rections of the text. Notwithstanding, these two
manuscripts are of indispensable worth for estab-
lishing the text of E. They were first used by
Dillmann in his edition of the Ascension in 1877.
His collation, however, of these manuscripts is
defective and inaccurate, as we shall discover later
(see p. Xvi).

b and ¢ are much inferior in value to a, which
belongs to the Bodleian Library, Oxford. This


xvi INTRODUCTION


manuscript, which may be assigned to the fifteenth
century, was published as it stands in 1819 by
Laurence. I have followed it in the main in my
text.


§ 4. Eprtions or THE Eruioric TrExv.


Lavrencsr. Ascensio Isaiae Vatis, Opusculum
pseudepigraphum . . . cum Versione Latina Angli-
canaque publict Turis factum, Oxoniae, 1819.

Laurence, as we have above mentioned, edited
the text found in a. This he reproduced on the
whole with great accuracy, and combined with it
a Latin and an English translation. These transla-
tions, however, are often untrustworthy.

Ditimann. Ascensio Isaiae Aethiopice et Latine,
cum Prolegomenis Adnotationibus criticis et exege-
ticis, additis Versionum Latinarum Reliquiis edita,
Lipsiae, 1877.

In this edition, by means of the manuscripts b
and ¢ (p. xvi), Dillmann made a vast advance on
his predecessor. This advance, however, might
have been somewhat greater if he had consulted
the Latin fragments which he published pari passu
with the construction of his text on a, b,c. On
the other hand, his insight is shown by not a few
happy emendations, and his translation is all that
is admirable.

On the other hand, a very serious blemish dis-
figures the text and his apparatus criticus in the
footnotes. Dillmann’s collation of a, 6, and ¢ is
occasionally inaccurate and defective. Thus, as


INTRODUCTION xvii


regards one of the proper names in ii. 5, and of
two in iv. 22, his text represents none of the manu-
scripts. He wrongly collates a in iii. 2, vi. 13, xi.
37; bin i. 2, 4, iii. 5, iv. 18; and a, b, ¢, in vii. 8, 27,
and ix. 39. The above inaccuracies are, it is true,
of no great moment, but the same is not true of
the following passages: iii. 16 (twice), vii. 3, 14, 24,
Vili. 5, X. 1, where the readings of the manuscripts
differ, and not only is the wrong variant adopted
in the text, but the right reading is not even
collated in the footnotes. Sometimes the omitted
variant merely upholds the order of the Greek as
against the adopted one, as in ii. 9, but even this is
of some value. j

Finally, Dillmann’s reduction of the orthography
to one fixed norm is not desirable. It is better that
the student should be presented with the forms
that occur so commonly in the manuscripts.


§ 5. TRANSLATIONS OF THE ETHIOPIC VERSION.


Laurence. This translation, which has already
been referred to (p. xvi), was reprinted by Gfrorer
in his Prophetae veteres pseudepigraphi, 1840, and
was done into German by Jolowicz, Die Himmel-
fahrt und Vision des Propheten Jesaja, aus dem
Aethiopischen (2) und Lateinischen ins Deutsche
tibersetzt, 1854.

Ditimann. See p. xvi.

Basszt. This scholar has translated Dillmann’s
text into French: Les Apocryphes Ethiopiens, tra-
duits en francais, III. L’Ascension dIsaie, 1894,

b


xviii INTRODUCTION


and aimed at smoothness rather than exactness of
expression.

Brrr. Apokryphen und Pseudepigraphen des Alten
Testaments, 1900, ii. 124-127. We have here an


of Dillmann’s text.


§ 6. Tue Latin Versions L? (ii. 14 -iii. 13,
vii. I-19) AND L? (vi—xi).

There were two Latin versions, one of which L?
embraces vi—xi., the other L? only ii. 14-iii. 13,
vii. 1-19. The former was printed by Antonius
de Fantis at Venice, in 1522, from a manuscript
now unknown, and reprinted by Gieseler in a
Gottingen program (Vetus Translatio Latina Vi-
sionis Iesaiae, 1832), and by Dillmann as an
appendix in his edition of 1877.

As I have been unable to get access to the
Venice edition, I have re-issued the version, as it
appears in Dillmann’s edition, with certain correc-
tions and critical notes.

Now as regards the two fragments of L', these
were first discovered and edited by Mai in 1828
(Scriptorum Veterum Nova Collectio, III. part ii. 238,
239) from the codex rescriptus of the Acts of
Chalcedon, Vat. 5750, the original writing of which
belongs to the fifth or sixth century. His work
unhappily was somewhat inaccurate and defective,
but these shortcomings are now set right in the
texts presented on pp. 87-92 and 102-108. For
the corrections in question I am indebted to the


INTRODUCTION xix


assistant Librarian in the Vatican, Father Mercati,
whose kind services were secured for me by
Mr. C. H. Turner of Magdalen College.

When we proceed to compare L! and L? and E
together in chapter vii, the agreement of L! and E
against L? at once springs to light. Even within
this limited portion of the text it becomes clear
that L! and E on the one side, and L? on the other,
are not directly derived from one and the same
Greek text, but only indirectly through the medium
of two distinct recensions, G! and G?, which in
nine-tenths of their matter presuppose a common
parent G.

Although I had arrived at the above conclusion
through a study of E, Lt and L?, it was impossible
to prove it beyond question till the Slavonic ver-
sion (= 8S) was made accessible to me through the
kindness of Professor Bonwetsch.

If the reader will now turn to the versions of
chapter vii. on pp. 102-108, having first acquainted
himself with the meaning of the symbols (see
p. lxxiii, sq.) which I have used for critical purposes
in this edition, he will see that E L!! agree against
S L’ in presenting a fuller text in vii. 5,12, 15, 16,17,
and likewise in the same corrupt addition in vii. 18,

On the other hand, S L? agree against EL} in
presenting a fuller text in vii. 4, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14,

17, There are many other less obvious though not


1 In vii. 12, L? stands alone against E § L?, but this is due, as
I have shown on p. 106, to its translator finding «aGapice in his
text instead of xaParpyce,
b2


XX INTRODUCTION


less weighty divergencies between EL! and SL’, that
is, between G! and G? in this chapter, but the above
instances are sufficient to establish our contention.

_ We have now to show that throughout the rest
of vi—xi, where L! fails us, SL? agree against E
alike in their additions and their omissions. Only
the more important passages will be noticed. Thus
S L? agree in more or less large additions in vii.
37, Vill. 3, ix. 15, 16, 17, 20, 23, 29, 36, 42, X. 15, Xi.
34, 36, 40. Again, they agree in giving short sum-
maries instead of the Ethiopic text of x. 25-28,
xi. 27-30, and especially in omitting the very im-
portant passage in E, i.e. xi. 2-22, with the excep-
tion of a single phrase in xi. 19.

The above divergencies have in some instances
assumed such vast proportions that it may occur to
the reader that these were possibly developed on
Abyssinian soil. But such a supposition is pre-
cluded by the fact that many of the most suspicious
passages are supported by an independent Greek
authority. This authority which we must now
invoke is the Greek Legend, which is printed on
pp. 141-148, and of which a short account will be
found on pp. xxvii-xxviii. This work was based on
the same form of text that is preserved in E and L,
It does not, indeed, make a continuous use of our
text, but yet uses it sufficiently to show beyond
possibility of doubt that its writer had before him
not G? but Gt.

The evidence is as follows. In vii. 17 where we
have all five authorities, E L! and Greek Legend


INTRODUCTION XXi


agree in giving a text (= gloriae) against that of
S L? (= magnae gloriae). Next, in viii. 5 E and
Greek Legend = cdvidovdds cov etal, whereas S L?= odp-
Bovdos eiul. Here odpBovdos is corrupt. In vi. 2,
9, ix. 7-8, 12, 13, x. 7, 12, 31 E has clauses which
are supported by the Greek Legend but omitted by
SL*. Finally, the Greek Legend has preserved a
clause (xi. 19, 20) out of the large section peculiar
to E. To the above we might add that Greek
Legend, ii. 10, has preserved a phrase found in LI,
vii. 11, but lost in E.

We have now shown that in chapters vi—-ai.
EL! and the ‘Greek Legend’ go back to a definite
Greek text which we have named G1, and that S L?
go back similarly to G?.

The main differences of G' from G are due to the
editor of the entire work: whereas those of G?
from G are due to the editor of this independent
edition of vi-xi.

We have not as yet dealt with the first Latin
fragment of Mai, ii. 14-iii. 13, but this need not
delay us long; for it clearly belongs to the same
form of text as the second fragment and agrees
very closely with E. For a detailed treatment of
its relations to E and the new Greek fragment, the
reader should consult pp. xxvili-xxxi.


§7. Tae Fuuier Text or G! As A RULE Is
DERIVED FROM G.


In certain passages S L? present a shorter text
than E. If § L’, in other words G?, represent faith-


xxii INTRODUCTION


fully the text as it stood in the archetype G, then
it is clear that in such passages the fuller text of
E or G! is the work of the editor of G.. This is no
doubt true in a few cases. Thus we may be fairly
confident that certain clauses in vi. 1-13 are addi-
tions from the hand of the editor of G. It has been
thought also that certain phrases in ix. 5,13, 17,X.7
which give the definite name of the Messiah are
from the same source, on the ground that they
are against a definite statement in the context which
declares that this name cannot be heard by Isaiah
till he has left the body (see, however, ix. 5 note).
On the other hand, we cannot suppose that the short
summaries which S L? offer of x. 25-28 and xi. 27-
30 are original, and that the fuller text in E is an
expansion of these; for the text of E observes a
due proportion which is wanting inSL?. Here un-
doubtedly the editor of G? abridges the text of G.

We must next deal with the very important
passage xi. 2-22. This passage which is found in
E goes back to G1, since phrases from verses 19, 20
reappear in the Greek Legend, ii. 39. But it goes
back further still and is derived from the arche-
type G. We must now give the grounds for this
view. First its subject-matter is quite in keeping
with the context before and after; for from x. 8
to xi. 19 the concealment of the teal nature of
Christ is the underlying thought of the entire
passage.

Next from the command which Isaiah hears
given to Christ to descend to the earth and to


INTRODUCTION xxiii


Sheol (x. 8), and afterwards to ascend therefrom
(x. 14), we naturally expect Isaiah to witness these
events in the vision in xi, seeing that he witnesses
all else that is mentioned in x. 8-14. But the
genuineness of xi. 2-22 is still more apparent, if
we consider that in the short account of G? in xi.
there is not a single reference to the crucifixion,
descent into Sheol, and resurrection on the third
day, though from ix. 12-17 we cannot do other-
wise than expect a definite portrayal of these
events in the vision. Thus in the latter passage
it is told that Christ will descend to earth and
assume human form ; that owing to the instigation
of the prince of this world men will rise up against
Him and crucify Him, ‘not knowing who He is.’
Thereupon He will descend into Sheol (this clause
is peculiar to SL?) and rise again on the third
day—and send out His Twelve Apostles (this last
clause is peculiar to S L?)—and ascend into heaven.
Now if we turn to xi. 2-22 this is just what Isaiah
sees in vision: Christ is born of the Virgin, but
the nature of the birth is to be told to none (xi.
2-16). Then He works great miracles and the
Jews roused by the adversary crucify Him in
Jerusalem, ‘not knowing who He is.’ Thereupon
He descends into Sheol (xi. 18-20). And on the
third day He rises again and sends forth His Twelve
Apostles and ascends into heaven (xi. 21, 22)}.


1 We should observe also that xi. 14 is quoted in the Actus
Petri, xxiv, xi, 16, by Ignatius ad Ephes., and xi. 11 most probably
by Protev. Iacobi, xx. 4.


xxiv INTRODUCTION


In the light of the above facts the genuineness
of xi, 2-22 as an original constituent of G can
hardly be disputed. And now if we turn to the
passage which the editor of G? has substituted in
its stead, our convictions are, if possible, further
strengthened. It runs: ‘ Missus sum a Deo "omnia
tibi ostendere. Nec enim ante te quis vidit, nec
post te poterit videre quod tu vidisti et audisti.
Et vidi similem filii hominis et cum hominibus
habitare et in mundo™ 1g. Et non cognoverunt
eum. 23. Et vidi ascendentem in firmamentum.’
The words enclosed in brackets are peculiar to S L?.
Of these the greater part, i.e. ‘Nec enim ante te...
vidisti et audisti, appears to be based on viii. 11.

In the next place the words ‘ Et non cognoverunt
eum’ have occurred before (ix. 14) in all versions
in reference to those who crucified Christ, and in
xi. 19 in E this significance is preserved where the
same phrase recurs. In S L?, however, this phrase
is given a setting and a relation which are
foreign to it so far as our authorities go. We have
already dwelt above on the thorough inadequacy
with which the earthly life and destinies of the
Messiah are treated in SL*. We conclude, therefore,
that xi. 2-22 are derived from G, the archetype,
and that here, as in x. 25-28, xi. 27-30, the editor
of G? has abridged the text of G.


§ 8. THe Stavonic Version (= 8).


For a short account of this version I will simply
reproduce Professor Bonwetsch’s note which he


INTRODUCTION XXV


appends to the translation which he has been so
good as to make for this edition }:—

‘The manuscript from which A. Popov published
this Vision of Isaiah (Bibliograf. Materialy, i. 13-
22) is No. 175 (18) in the Library of the Uspen-
schen Cathedral in Moscow, and belongs to the
close of the twelfth century.. It consists of 304
leaves, of which two towards the. beginning are
lost. The manuscript is written in two columns,
each of thirty-two lines. Popov has added like-
wise the variants of a fourteenth-century manu-
script of Servian origin, from which he had at an
earlier date published the Vision of Isaiah (Opis
rukop. Chludova, 414-419). The readings of this
latter authority, which have not been accessible to
me, I denote by ch, and those of the former by u.
In the Latin translation of the text I have followed
the phraseology of the Latin version, published at
Venice, so far as it corresponds to the Slavonic text.
Accordingly I often use the form of the imperfect
where, according to S, the perfect could stand.’

I have already shown (p. xxi) that S is made
from the same Greek text as L?, ie. G% It is,
however, more faithful and full than L%, Thus
where L? omits words, phrases, or even whole
sentences ”, as in vii. 29%, 30, viii. 28, ix. 2, 20, X. 14,
18, 29, Xi. 23, the lacunae are supplied by S in

1 On the Slavonic texts see Kozak, Jahrbiicher f. prot. Theologie,
1892, pp. 138-139; Bonwetsch in Harnack’s Gesch. der altchr.
Litteratur, i. 916.

2 Such words, phrases, &c., in S are enclosed in brackets
thus 1,


xxvi INTRODUCTION


agreement with E. Thus, these passages that are
lost in L? go back to the archetype G.

As regards the phrases and passages peculiar to
SL?! vii. 12, 33, 37, vill. 28, ix. 2, 4, 20, X. 15,
29, xi. 1, 34 it is impossible, in most cases, to say
categorically whether they appear for the first
time in G? or went back to G.

Of these the phrase ‘angelos innumerabiles’ in
SL? vii. 33 appears to be derived from G; for
though wanting in E it is found in Greek Legend,
ii 19. In SIL? ix. 5 ‘filius Dei’ is likewise primi-
tive since, though replaced by a different phrase in
EH, it is found in Greek Legend, ii. 25. Again, in
SL? ix. 17 ‘et mittet suos praedicatores, &c., may
also be primitive, since the clause though not found
in E in this passage is supported by E in xi, 22.
Finally, the phrase ‘cum hominibus habitare’ in
SL? xi. 1 reappears in Greek Legend, ii. 11 rots
avOpdrois cvvavactpepecbat. Hence this phrase,
though lost in E, was most probably in G? and
therefore in G. The phrase in SL? xi. 1 that
immediately precedes, ‘vidi similem filii hominis,’ ?
may also be primitive though unattested by any
derivative of G!. The exclusion of such a phrase
by the editor of G1 is quite intelligible; for, from
the close of the first century A.D., its use as a
Messianic title was avoided, no doubt because it


1 Such phrases and passages peculiar to S L’ are enclosed in
brackets thus T 1,

2 Cf. Rev. i, 13; xiv. 14; 4 Ezra vi. 1 (Syriac and Ethiopic
versions).


INTRODUCTION xxvii


was thought to imply the exclusive humanity of
Christ.

Though the four passages just dealt with are
in all probability derived from the archetype, it is
hardly possible that the peculiar text of SL? in
xi. 34, which is in reality 1 Cor. ii. 9, can be
derived from the same source. There is no reason
for the omission by E or G! of such a striking
statement, but rather every reason for its inclusion.
The interpolation was made by the editor of G?.


§9. Tue Greek Lecenp (=Gn. LEc.).


The following Isaiah legend was found by Dr. O.
von Gebhardt in a Greek manuscript of the twelfth
century, which is numbered 1534 in the National
Library in Paris, and published with certain intro-
ductory remarks and notes in the Z. f’ W. T., 330-
353, 1878. The manuscript consists of 337 folios.
with two columns on each page, and the above legend
is given on fol. 2457-251. Its division into chapters
and verses, in our reprint on pp. 141-148, is due to
Gebhardt. Of the four chapters into which he.
divides it, the last, having no relation to the.
present work, is not here reproduced. It will be.
found in the Z. f. W. T., 350-353, 1878.

Gebhardt remarks that the iota subscript is
wholly wanting in the manuscript, but that the
breathings and accents are generally rightly added.
The accentuation of the manuscript in the matter
of proper names is. followed in the printed text.

The critical affinities of the Greek Legend have


XXvili INTRODUCTION


already been discussed. It has been shown (p. xx)
that, together with E and L, it is derived from G’.
In a few passages, however, we have had occasion
to remark that it attests the text of S L? where it
stands alone, and by such attestation makes it more
than probable that the passages in question belong
to the archetype (see p. xxvi).

I have printed the Greek Legend as it stands in
Gebhardt, save that I have emended two voces
nullae that appear in it. The phrases that are
taken directly from G! are printed in thick type,
and the chapter and verse from which they are
drawn placed in the margin.


§ 10. THE NEWLY RECOVERED GREEK TEXT OF
IL 4-IV. 4, AND ITS RELATION To E anv L},


This very important Greek fragment of the text
is written, according to Grenfell and Hunt, on a
papyrus of the fifth or sixth century. ‘The
papyrus is in book form and consists of three
nearly complete sheets, measuring 23 x 26-5 cm.,
and part of a fourth, containing in all seven leaves
and fourteen pages. The writing is in single
columns on each side of the leaf, the pages, with
the exception of the first two, being numbered
continuously from 9 to 20. From the numbering
and from the strip of parchment designed to pre-
vent the cord, which runs down the centre of the
margin between pages 12 and 13 (cols. vi. and vii.),
from tearing through the papyrus, it is clear that
our fragment consists of the second half of the


INTRODUCTION XxiX


third, and the whole of the fourth, fifth, and sixth
sheets of a quire of six sheets. Six pages are
therefore lost at the commencement of the quire.
The missing beginning of the Ascension must have
occupied not less than four pages. Probably, there-
fore, the first page, perhaps the first leaf, was left
blank or had only the title’ (Grenfell and Hunt’s
Ascension of Isaiah, p. 2). For other details
relating to the papyrus and its orthography, the
reader must consult the work of the scholars just
cited.

The value of this fragment is very great. It
supports L! in supplying gaps in E in ii. 16, iii. 2,
and in emending iii. 1. Where L? fails, it helps to
emend Hin iii. 14, 24, 31,iv.1,2. Itis true that some
of these defects of E were so obvious that they were
already remedied on internal evidence. Possibly its
greatest contribution to our knowledge of the book
is its clear text of the very important passage iv.
2°-4, where, owing to the variations in the manu-
scripts of E, it was difficult to determine which
Manuscript should be followed.

On the other hand there are additions, omissions,
and corruptions in the text. The chief corruptions,
which are more deep-seated as a rule than in E,
and omissions are in ii. 4, 12, ili. 2, 3, 6, 10, 14,
and the chief addition in iii. 7.

But what is of more moment than an exhaustive
list of the excellencies and failings of this fragment
is to determine its textual relations with E and L’.
Now even a cursory examination shows that L';


XXX INTRODUCTION


notwithstanding the very imperfect form in which
it exists, is more nearly related to E than to the
Greek fragment which we shall call G2. Thus,
whereas L' and G? agree against E in preserving
‘et dimidiam’ (jjy.ov) in iii. 2, and a correct reading
in iii, 10, their points of divergence are very
numerous and more weighty. This L! agrees with
E in attesting three phrases which are lost by G?
"in iii. 6, and in preserving a proper name in iii. 10
which has disappeared from G*. Again, they agree
in rejecting additions of G? in iii. 7, 8, and in
presenting the undoubtedly true readings in iii, 2,
10, where G? is at fault.

We have seen in an earlier section (see pp. xviii.—
xxi) that in vi—xi. there were, at an early date, two
distinct forms of the Greek text G! and G?, and
that the second Mai Latin fragment vii. 1-19 (= L")
and E were derived from the former, and L? and S
from the latter. Now, from the close affinities
existing between E and the first Mai Latin frag-
ment L, as against the Greek fragment, it might
be concluded that in i-v. also there were two
Greek texts as in vi—xi. and that as E and Li
belong to G1, so the papyrus Greek fragment is
a representative of G2.

Thus it is characteristic of G? in vi—xi. to sum-
marize shortly the primitive text as in x, 25-28,
xi. 27-30, and in so doing to introduce confusion
as in the latter passage. Now, in iii. 6 we find
a similar (accidental ?) abridgement of the text
—the omission of three phrases or clauses—with


INTRODUCTION xxxi


very disastrous results. Again, it is no less charac-
teristic of G? in vi—xi. to make additions to the
text as in vii. 37, viii. 3, &. (see p. xx). Now
in iii, 7 there is an undoubted (2) addition.

Notwithstanding we must explain, I think, the
differences between EL and the Greek fragment
as due tothe errors and variations incidental to
the process of transmission, whereas the differences
between EL’ and SL? in vi-ai. are due to a
deliberate recension. Thus all the differences be-
tween EL' and the Greek fragment arose subse-
quently to the formation of the complete work of
the Ascension, whereas the substantial differences
between EL! and S L? were the result of delibera-
tion, and had practically attained finality on the
publication of these distinct recensions.

Accordingly, though we may term the Greek
fragment G*, and the Latin fragment L', these two
forms were not related to each other as were G!
and G? in vi—xi. Thus G? has one significance
when used in reference to i—v., and another when
used in reference to vi.—xi.


§ 11. THE ARCHETYPE G AND ITS DESCENDANTS.


We are now in a position to summarize the re-
sults of our inquiries. First of all we are obliged to
presuppose the existence of an archetypeG for vi.—xi,

Some form of this archetype was still in exist-
ence early in the fourth century; as we must
conclude from the quotation made by Epiphanius


XXxil INTRODUCTION


(Haer. lxvii. 3) from the Ascension of Isaiah, ix.
35, 36, which was used according to his testimony
by the Ophites and Hieracites. This quotation
contains in loose form factors peculiar in part to
G? and in part to G’, and accordingly presupposes
their common source G (see note on p. 67). The
text of G was, in every probability, in the hands
of Ignatius, and the writers of the Protevangelium
Iacobi and the Actus Petri.

Two editors at an early date edited G afresh.
Each pursued his own aims independently, and in
some cases added to the text, in others abridged it.

Their methods can be studied in vi—xi., the
chapters common to both, where in EL! and S L?
we have very faithful reproductions of G! and G?
respectively. The editor of G!, who was the editor
of the entire work, has undoubtedly taken fewer
liberties with the text before him, and has preserved
important passages excised by the editor of G? (see
pp. Xxi.-xxiv.).

The actual text of G' was used by the author
of the Greek Legend, and some hundreds of its
phrases are literally reproduced in this work (see
pp. 141-148), and that of G? was used by Jerome
when writing his commentary on Isaiah Ixiv. 4.

Of G?, owing to the happy discovery of last year,
we are now in possession of two complete chapters,
ii. 4-iv. 4. We must bear in mind that G!, G2, LI
have not the same significance when used in refer-
ence to i—v. as when used in reference to vi.—xi. (see
Pp. XXxi).


INTRODUCTION xxxiii


From G1 were made the Ethiopic, and a Latin
version, EK and L', and from G? the Slavonic, and
a Latin version, S and L2.

The following table will show at a glance the
affinities of all the textual authorities on the Vision
of Isaiah, vi—xi. 1-40.

G (= Greek Vision of Isaiah before its
| incorporation in the ‘ Ascension.’
Used by Ignatius, and the writer


of the Actus Petri ix. 35, 36, and in
part preserved in Epiphanius.)


G! (Recension of G in the ‘Ascen- G? (= lost recension of G in


sion.’ Some hundreds of its independent form) (lost
phrases preserved in Gk. Leg.). parent of S 1’).
| |

{ | | |

E Lt s Lv


And on the Martyrdom of Isaiah:


G (=Greek Martyrdom of Isaiah as
edited in the ‘ Ascension’: known
in its original form to writer of the
Opus Imperfectum; see pp. xl-xlii.)


| |
G@ (lost parent of E L') G? (Newly recovered frag-
| ment, ii, 4 -iii. 12).


|
E I? (ii. 14 - iii. 12).


And on the Testament of Hezekiah:


G@ (= Greek Testament of Hezekiah as
edited in the ‘Ascension’; see
p. xlii.)


| |
G (lost parent of EL) G@* (Newly recovered fragment,
| iii. 13-iv. 4).


|
L! (iii. 1).


fi—


XXXIV INTRODUCTION


§ 12. CriticaL Inquiries.


Under this heading I shall content myself, for
the most part, with enumerating the critical in-
quiries of scholars on the subject of this book.

Laurence. Ascensio Isaiae Vatis, 1819, pp.
141-180. This the earliest editor of the Ascension
of Isaiah regarded it as the work of one hand, and
as ‘composed towards the close of the year 68, or
in the beginning of the year 69.’

Gxsenius, Commentar tiber den Jesaja, Bd. i,
1821, pp. 45-56.

Nrrzscu, Stud. und Krit., 1830, pp. 209-246.

GIESELER, Géttinger Pfingstprogramm, 1832, distin-
guishes i—v. and vi—xi. as two independent writings,
of Jewish and Christian origin respectively.

ENGELHARDT, Kirchengeschichtliche Abhandlun-
gen, 1832, pp. 153 sqq.

GrrorER, Das Jahrhundert des Heils, 1838, i.
65-69, ii. 422 sqq.

Horrmann, A. G., art. ‘Jesajas’ in Ersch and
Gruber’s Allg. Encyklop., sect. ii, Bd. xv. 387-390
(1838).

Movers-KavuLen. Wetzer’s and Welte’s Kir-
chenlexikon, 1847, i. 338.

Lions, Hinleitung in die Offenbarung des Johan-
nes’, 1852, pp. 274-302, regarded i.—v. as a Jewish
writing which was interpolated by a Jew before
Origen, and after his time, in the fourth century, by a
Christian in i. 5, iii. 13-iv. 24. vi-xi. was written
in the second half of the third century or earlier.


INTRODUCTION XXXV


BuEEK, Studien und Kritiken, 1854, pp. 994-998.

EWALD, Gesch.des Volkes Israel 3, 1868, vii. 369-373.

Lanaen, Das Judenthum in Palistina, 1800,

Ppp. 157-167.

DILLMann, Ascensio Isaiae, 1877, pp. v.-xviii. ;
art. ‘Pseudepigrapha’ in Herzog’s Real-Ene. xii.
359, 360. I will deal with this scholar’s work
under § 13.

Renan, L’église chrétienne, 1879, pp. 528, 529.

JELLINEK, Bet ha-Midrasch, vi., 1877, pp. XXXvii.
sq. This writer makes no contribution to the ex-
planation of our book.

BisseLi, Apocrypha of O. T., 1880, pp. 669, 670.

StokgEs, art. ‘Isaiah, Ascension of, in Smith and
Wace’s Dictionary of Christian Biography, 1882,
lil. pp. 298-301. This is a most excellent piece of
work, but hardly trustworthy as to its conclusions.

Deane, Pseudepigrapha, 1891, pp. 236-275, sum-
marizes well the results of previous research.

Tuomson, ‘ Books that influenced our Lord,’ 1891,
PP. 451-455-

ZOCKLER, Die Ayokryphen des alien Testaments,
1891, pp. 439, 440.

Harnack, Gesch. der altchristl. Litteratur, i. 854-
856, i. 573-579, 714 8q-

Cuemen, ‘Die Himmelfahrt des Jesaja, ein altes-
tes Zeugnis fiir das rémische Martyrium des Petrus,’
Z. f. W. T., 1896, 388-415. This is a learned
article of Clemen. Few, however, will be prepared
to accept his critical analysis of the book, and still
fewer the date he assigns to the Jewish Christian

C2


Xxxvi INTRODUCTION


Apocalypse, iii. 13-iv. 22. On the other hand, the
balance of evidence appears to be in favour of his
main thesis, that we have in this work the oldest
testimony to the martyrdom of St. Peter at Rome.
ZELLER, ‘Der Martyrertod des Petrus in der
Ascensio Jesaiae, Z. f. W. T., 1896, 558-568.
CuemeEn, ‘Nochmals der Martyrertod des Petrus
in der Ascensio Jesaiae, Z. fi W. T., 1897, 455-465.
Scutiner, Gesch. des Jiidischen Volks, 1898, iii.
280-285, gives a short account of our book, and
the references to it in ‘Patristic literature.’ He
appends a very full bibliography.
Rosrnsov, ‘ The Ascension of Isaiah,’ in Hastings’
Bible Dictionary, ii. 499-501. A splendid article.
Buer, Apokryphen und Pseudepigraphen des alten
Testaments, 1900, ii. 119-123. An excellent introduc-
Barret, The Apostolic Age, 1900, pp. 521-524.
This scholar assigns iii. 13-v. 1 to the years
64-66 A.D.


§ 13. DirFrERENT ELEMENTS IN THE Book.


All writers on the Ascension, save Laurence,
recognise a plurality of authorship. For the most
part they agree in assigning i—v. to one source
and vi-xi. to another. Ewald was the first to
distinguish the works of three different authors :—

i, vi. I—Xl. I, 23-40.

ii, xi. 2-22, ili, 13 —iv. 22.

ili, i, I-iil. 12, v. 1-16, Xi. 41-43.

This analysis has undoubtedly much to recom-


INTRODUCTION XXXvii


mend it. Dillmann remodelled it and put forward

the following hypothesis, which is in some respects
superior, in others inferior, to that of Ewald.

i. The history of the Martyrdom of Isaiah, of
Jewish origin: ii. 1-ili, 12, v. 2-14.

ii, The Vision of Isaiah, of Christian origin:
vi, I~Xi. I, 23-40.

iii, The above two constituents were put together
by a Christian writer, who prefixed i. 1, 2,
4°-13, and appended xi. 42, 43.

iv. Finally, a later Christian editor incorporated
the two sections iii. 13-—v. 1 and xi. 2-22,
and added as well the following verses,
i, 3, 4%, V. 15, 16, Bi. 41.

Dillmann’s view has, on the whole, been accepted
by Harnack, Schiirer, Deane, and Beer. Harnack,
it is true, is in doubt as to the unity of the Christian
Apocalyptic Vision iii. 13-—v. 1, xi. 2-22. All these
scholars have been influenced by Gebhardt’s state-
ment that in the Greek Legend there is not a trace
of iii. 13 —v. 1, xi. 2-22, and that, accordingly, these
sections were absent from the text when the Greek
Legend was composed. Thus, according to Geb-
hardt, Dillmann’s analysis is confirmed by external
evidence.

But Gebhardt’s statement is wrong. Thus in
Greek Legend, ii. 6, the words ri Spacw tip éai BaBv-
AGva are derived from iv. 19. Again in ii. 38 jets
éopev Geol, kal TARY HuGv odk gaTw GAXos Geds are More
nearly related to iv. 6, 8 than to x. 13. Again,
il, 11 6 xpatijoas rod xéopou comes from iv. 2 of our


XXXViii INTRODUCTION


book, and eis dmwAclas éxmépwes Bvddv in the same
passage appears to be founded on iv. 14. But the
most striking passage is ii. 39 where the corrupt text
karaBion Kal mpds rov dyyehov Tod dou év ‘lepoveadrp
is drawn literally from xi. 19, 20 of the Ascension.

The writer of the Greek Legend, therefore, was
acquainted with the two sections in question.
Furthermore, since elsewhere (pp. xxii.—xxiv.) we
have shown that xi. 2-22 was an original constituent
of vi—xi., we are obliged to deny the validity of
divisions ii. and iv. in Dillmann’s theory.

Clemen, on very different grounds, has attacked
Dillmann’s hypothesis and sought to replace it by
a much simpler one. According to this scholar
the earliest part of the Ascension was a Jewish
Christian Apocalypse, consisting of iii. 13-iv. 22,
and written between the years 64-68, and the rest
of the Ascension originated under the guidance of
this passage. This theory of Clemen does not solve
the problem.

We shall now attempt to discuss the problem de
novo. In the first place the work is composite.
This is obvious, and has been all but universally
recognized from the fact that ii. 1 -iii. 12 has been
forcibly sundered from v. 1>-14 by a piece of
writing alien to it, iii, 13-iv. 22,

But the arbitrariness and disorder are not con-
fined to this passage. This will be best shown if
we compare the chronological order of the events
narrated in the book with the order in which they
are actually narrated.


INTRODUCTION XXxix


Testament of Hezekiah}, iii. 13°—iv. 18—fifteenth
year of Hezekiah (i. 4).

Isaiah’s Vision, vi.— xi. 1-4o—twentieth year of
Hezekiah (i. 6, vi. 1).

Hezekiah gives commands to Manasseh in the
presence of Isaiah, &c.: Isaiah’s prophecy, i. 1-2°,
6>-13—twenty-sixth year of Hezekiah (i. 1).

Manasseh becomes king and puts Isaiah to death,
ii, I ill. 12, v. 1%-14—at least four years later than
the date last mentioned.

A writer could hardly arrange his work in this
topsy-turvy manner if he were writing it first-
hand?. On the other hand, if he was dealing with
existing materials which did not admit of dis-
integration (such as vi—xi., and in a less degree
iii. 3°-iv. 18) and easy incorporation into his work,
the present disorder of the work becomes more
intelligible.

Having recognized the general fact of the com-
positeness of the work, we must now proceed to

1 See pp. xiii-xiv, xliv. 2, 29.

2 Though modern scholars have not, so far as I am aware,
noticed this strange medley, the writer of the Greek Legend
was conscious of it, and recast the whole work. In order to
avoid manifest inconsistencies he changed or omitted the dates
before him. Thus Hezekiah’s admonition to Manasseh he puts
in the twenty-fifth year (twenty-sixth in Ascension), and
omitting the date of Isaiah’s vision (the twentieth year, i. 6,
vi. 1) he represents it as subsequent to the admonition referred
to. Hezekiah’s vision belonging to the fifteenth year is almost
without a reference. The date would have been in the way,
but the reason more probably is that its contents were only
remotely connected with the purpose the author of the Gk. Leg.
had in hand.


xl INTRODUCTION


details, and here, to some extent, we find ourselves
at variance with our predecessors in this field.

The Martyrdom of Isaiah =i. 1, 25, 6°-13%, ii.
1-8, 10-iii. 12, v. 1*-14. With Dillmann, Gebhardt,
Schtirer, and many other scholars, it is clear that
we must assume the section on the Martyrdom as
having been originally an independent work. The
limits of this section, according to Dillmann, are ii.
i-ili. 12, v. 1-14. Dillmann rightly pointed out
that the reasons assigned for Isaiah’s martyrdom
in these sections are quite different from those
given in their adjoining contents, ili. 13, v. 1%, v.
15, 16 (xi. 41). The last three have the appearance
of editorial additions.

But the extent of the Martyrdom in our book is
greater than that attributed to it by Dillmann.
Other fragments survive in chapter i. Thus in
ii, 1 the words ‘he did not remember the com-
mands of Hezekiah’ suggest the questions, What
commands were these? and when were they given ?
Now we find the probable answer to the latter
question in i. 1, 2°, in which Hezekiah summons
Manasseh before him in the presence of Isaiah and
Josab. The answer to the former question is still
preserved in our text, though obscurely, owing to
editorial additions, Thus in i. 6° we learn that
Isaiah gave certain commands to Manasseh. These
are referred to in i. 7, ii. 1. What these commands
were is not recorded in our book, but they are found
in the Latin fragments preserved in the Opus Imper-
Jectum (quoted in notes on pp. 8, 9), which go back


INTRODUCTION xii


not to our text but to the original Martyrdom. There
we find the explanation of many difficulties in our
text. Thus in the first place we discover the reason
for Isaiah summoning Manasseh in the twenty-sixth
year, for the Latin supplies it: ‘cum aegrotasset Eze-
chias in tempore quodam.’ In the next place, the
object with which Hezekiah summoned Manasseh is
not,as in our text,to become the depositary of certain
visions (i. 2°-6*), but to receive certain directions
as to his religious duties, the government of the
kingdom, &e.: ‘Vocavit Ezechias filium suum
Manassen et coepit ei mandare, quod debeat Deum
timere, quomodo regere regnum et alia multa,’
Now the final editor of our book, whose interests
were centred in the visions, omitted these words,
and attributed quite a different object to Hezekiah’s
summons of Manasseh. Hezekiah, he tells us, in
i, 2, 6, summoned Manasseh ‘in order to deliver
unto him the words of righteousness which the
king himself had seen’ (i.e. iii. 13>-iv. 18), ‘and
also those which Isaiah the son of Amoz had
given to him’ (i.e. vii-xi. 40). Hence we con-
clude that i. 2°-6* are editorial additions.

Thus the Latin passage referred to confirms a
conclusion we should have arrived at independently.
The Latin passage goes back apparently to the
Martyrdom when existing in an independent form.

We have already seen that i. 1, 28, 6° are derived
from the original Martyrdom, but still more of this
chapter comes from this source, indeed from 6° to
the close. This follows from the Latin passage


xlii INTRODUCTION


which either quotes or implies a knowledge of i. 7,
10, 12,13. The term ‘Beloved’ in i. 13° is most
probably an editorial change; for the Latin quotes
the words and gives ‘Deus.’ The last clause ‘and
I shall inherit the heritage of the Beloved’ is no
doubt from the editorial hand, and likewise a clause
in verse 7. It brings the Jewish work on the
Martyrdom into some connexion with the Christian
elements of the Ascension.

The Testament of Hezekiah = iii. 1 3>-iv. 18, and the
Vision of Isaiah = vi.-xi. 1-40. With these two re-
maining constituents of our text we have now to deal.

We have elsewhere given reasons (pp. Xlli—xiv,
2,29) for regarding the former as having at one
time existed independently. As it stands in the
Ascension it is certainly mutilated, and without
beginning or end.

The evidence is still stronger for the original
independence of vi.-xi. 1-40. Thus the archetype
of this section existed independently in Greek,
inasmuch as the Latin and Slavonic versions L?S
presuppose the independent circulation of G? in
Western and Slavonic countries. Thus G?, which
preserved the independence of its archetype, differs
in many notable respects, for better or worse, from
G', which represents the form in which it was
republished by the editor of the entire work.

Between the Testament of Hezekiah and the
Vision of Isaiah there are so many similarities of
thought and diction that it is not unreasonable to
assume that, though they appear to have been


INTRODUCTION xiii


independent works, they were the work of one
and the same writer, or the work of two closely
related writers.

Thus the following expressions and ideas are
common to the two works:—The mention of the
‘seven heavens,’ ili. 18, iv. 14, 16, and passim in
vi.—x1. ; ‘garments’ (= the spiritual body), iv. 11, vii.
22, Vill. 17, 26, &e.; ‘angel of the Holy Spirit,’ iii.
16, vii. 23, &e.; the blasphemous claim of the Anti-
christ, iv. 6, 8, x. 12, 13; judgement of the angels,
and destruction of the world, iv. 18, x. 12.

On the other hand, it is not improbable that the
Christian Testament of Hezekiah was based on
an earlier Jewish work; for Hebrew or Aramaic
idioms survive in the Greek, as efs xal efs kal efs év
témois kal rémos in iii, 27. This Semitic idiom
is reproduced, so far as possible, literally in the
Ethiopic. The wodAol kat wodAol in iii. 19 seems to
be simply a mistake for modAoé. It has not the
support of the Ethiopic.


To sum up: the conditions of the problem are
sufficiently satisfied by supposing a single editor, who
had three works at his disposal, the Martyrdom of
Isaiah of Jewish origin, and the two independent
works, the Testament of Hezekiah, and the Vision of
Isaiah, of Christian origin. These he reduced or
enlarged as it suited his purpose, and put them
together as they stand in our text. Some of the
editorial additions are obvious, as i. 2°-64, 19%, ii. 9,
iii, 13%, iv. 19, iv. 19-v. 1°, 15, 16, Xi. 41-43.


xliv INTRODUCTION


§ 14. Toe Dates oF THE VARIOUS CONSTITUENTS
OF THE ‘ ASCENSION.’


The Martyrdom (=i. 1, 23, 6°-13%, ii, 1-iii. 12,
v. 16-14). The martyrdom is quoted by the Opus
Imperfectum (pp. 8, 9 notes), Ambrose (p. 40 note),
Jerome (p. 18 note), Origen (pp. xii, xiii, xlvi,
xlvii, 17 note), Tertullian (p. 41 note), and it can
hardly be denied by Justin Martyr (p. 14 note).
It was probably known to the writer of the
Epistle to the Hebrews (xi. 37). This brings us, if
the last reference is true, to the first century A.D.
And this is no doubt the right date; for it is most
improbable that works written by Jews in the
second century should attain to circulation in the
Christian Church.

‘The Testament of Hezekiah (= iii. 13>-iv. 18).
This vision, or testament, was written between 88—
100 A.D. The terminus ad quem we have arrived at
on pp. 30, 31, the terminus a quo on pp. lxxi, lxxii.

The Vision of Isaiah (= vi.—xi. 1-40). The later
recension of this vision (G?) was used by Jerome (p. 81
note),a more primitive form of the text by Hieracas
(p. 67 note), according to Epiphanius (Haer. lxvii.
3), by the Archontici (Haer. xl. 2). This shows
that the book was in circulation towards the close
of the third century. But it is much earlier at-
tested by the Actus Petri Vercellenses (p. 77 note).
This takes the Vision back to the second century,
or at latest to early in the third, The Protevangel
of James was apparently acquainted with it (see


INTRODUCTION xlv


notes on xi. 4, 8, 11), and I do think it is reason-
able to explain the agreement between Ignatius,
ad Ephes. xix. and xi. 16 (see note), otherwise than
that the former is dependent on the latter. Thus
the composition of the Vision in its primitive form
G belongs to the close of the first century.

When the final editor put these works together
in the form in which we now have them, it is
impossible to say with any definiteness. Since the
Greek papyrus fragment, which supposes the com-
pleted work, belongs to the fifth or sixth century,
and presents many corruptions and variations
from the text presupposed by E Li, the work of
editing is thrown back to the third century or
earlier. The Latin version, which is found on
a fifth or sixth-century palimpsest, and repre-
sents a corrupt and traditional form of L!, demands
such a date or an earlier one. When we consider
also that the probable date of the Ethiopic version
is the fifth century, it is probable that the work of
editing goes back to early in the third century, or
even to the second.


§ 15. Tae Martyrpom or ISAIAH, AND THE
ORIENTAL INFLUENCES APPARENT IN IT.


The legend of the Martyrdom took its origin, no
doubt, in 2 Kings xxi.16. Although Josephus does
not mention it, it was certainly a Jewish tradition.
That Isaiah was put to death by Manasseh is
mentioned in the Talmud (Jebam, 49°). Simeon
ben Azzai found a statement to this effect in the


xlvi INTRODUCTION


genealogical roll which he discovered in Jerusalem
(Strack, Einleitung in d. Talmud’, p. 82). In the
Babylonian Talmud (trad. par M. Schwab, xi. 49)
we have a tradition that shows traces of Hastern
influences, and in some respects approaches the
account in the Ascension. It is there recounted
that Isaiah concealed himself from Manasseh in
a cedar tree, but that the end of his cloak pro-
jecting from the tree betrayed his hiding-place,
and thereupon Manasseh had the tree sawn in two
with Isaiah in it.

The legend was known to the Apostolic age, if,
as is generally assumed, we have in Heb. xi. 37
énploOncay, a reference to the specific mode of
Isaiah’s martyrdom. But, even if this be doubtful,
there is the evidence of the Ascension (i. 1, 2°, 6°—iii.
12, v. 1*-14) which cannot be much later than the.
middle of the first century a.p. In the next
century Justin Martyr quotes from our text (see
p- 41, note), though without naming it, and like-
wise Tertullian (see same reference). When we
come to Origen we find many references to the
account of Isaiah’s martyrdom in the Ascension.
Thus in his Epistle to Africanus, ix (Lommatzsch,
Xvii. 31) kal rovrov mapddevypa Sdcouey ra wept Tov
*Hoatay toropovpeva, kal tnd ths mpos “EBpatovs ém-
oroAfs paprupovpeva (Heb. xi. 37) .. . apes 8 Gre ab
mapaddéces Adyovot menpicOat "Hoatay rov apopyrny’
kal éy tit dmoxpipw tobro peperar’ Smep rdxa enlrndes
td “lovdalwv pepadiovpynrat, A€Eets Twas Tas pr TpE-:
noboas tapeuBeBAnkdtwy TH ypagy Wh Sdn amornOH.


INTRODUCTION xlvii


Again, on Matt. xxiii. 37 (Lommatzsch, iv. 237,
238) Origen appeals to the testimony of our book:
‘Propterea videndum, ne forte oporteat ex libris
secretioribus, qui apud Iudaeos feruntur, ostendere
verbum Christi, et non solum Christi, sed etiam
discipulorum eius . . . Fertur ergo in scripturis
non manifestis serratum esse Iesaiam’ (see also
ad Matt. xiii. 57, quoted on p. xii, and in Jesajam
homil. i. 5, quoted on p. 17 note).

Now that we have shown that the tradition of
Isaiah’s martyrdom was familiar to Jew and
Christian from the first century onward, it is note-
worthy that the form in which it is recorded
appears to be derived from Eastern sources. What
I refer to particularly is to martyrdom by means
of a wooden saw at the instigation of Satan. To
explain what I mean, I will make use of Larionoff’s
translation from the Persian of the ‘Histoire du
Roi Djemchid et des Divs’ (Journal Asiatique,
pp. 59-83, Juillet-Aofit, 1889), and his learned
notes on this legend.

Larionoff regards the Zend Avesta as the source
of the various legends of this nature which re-
appear in Jewish, Persian, and Arabic works. The
hero’s name, according to the Zend Avesta, is Yima
Khsaéta, i.e. Djemchid. The story is summarized
by Darmesteter (Zend Avesta, traduction nouvelle,
1892, i. 86, ii. 17, 18):—After a reign of 1000, or
according to other authorities 616} years, Yima
was dethroned for his blind pride in accepting
divine worship, and sawn in two by the serpent of


xlviii INTRODUCTION


three heads, Azhi Dah4ka, and Spityura (Yashé,
xix. 34 sqq. 46). Dahaka then ruled and laid
waste the land for 1000 years, at the close of
which he was overthrown and cast into chains.
Before the end he was to be set free for a period
(Yasht, xiii. 61). .

Turning now to the above Persian writing trans-
lated by Larionoff, we find that when Djemchid’s
throne was seized by Zohak, the man of serpents,
he fled into the wilderness. One hundred years
later, Ahriman and Biver (Zohak) having come
upon him there, God caused a tree to open itself
in order that Djemchid might conceal himself
therein. Ahriman and Zohak accordingly failed
to find him till Iblis informed them. Thereupon
they ordered the tree to be sawn in twain. After
several failures, this attempt succeeded on the
third day, and Djemchid was killed. Again, in
the Shah-nameh (trad. par J. Mohl, i. 47) this
legend reappears, where it is told that, after having
remained hidden for 100 years, Djemchid was dis-
covered on the borders of the Chinese sea, and
sawn asunder by Zohak.

From Jewish and Christian sources the legend
passed over to the Mohammedans. The historian
Tabari (Journal Asiatique, p. 64) tells how that
when Isaiah admonished Joakim, the successor of
Amon, on account, of his evil deeds, the Israelites
sought to slay him. Thereupon Isaiah fied, and
took refuge in a tree which had opened at God’s
command to receive him, But Iblis seized his


INTRODUCTION xlix


cloak, and, when the tree closed, a piece of the
cloak remained outside and betrayed Isaiah’s hiding-
place to his pursuers (cf. Jerusalem Talmud above),
who thereupon sawed the tree in which Isaiah was
(Chronique de Tabari, traduite par M. Zotenberg,
i. 490, 491).


§ 16. VALUE OF THE ‘ASCENSION’ FOR THE HisToRY
OF OUTLYING RELIGIous THOUGHT.


Seeing that in § 16 I deal at length with the
question of the Antichrist Legend, of which a special
development appears in the Ascension, I can only
briefly draw attention to a few other points that
cannot be omitted in this connexion.

1. The Seven Heavens. The conception of the
seven heavens which prevailed in certain sections
of Judaism is here abandoned. No evil is allowed
to enter any of the heavens. Satan is cast down
to the Firmament under the first heaven. On
the other hand, the five lower heavens are only
in partial communication with the sixth and
seventh, For a comparison of the various descrip-
tions of the Seven Heavens in Judaism and Early
Christianity, see my edition of the Slavonic Enoch,
pp. xxx-xlvii.

a. Rise of Docetism. Traces of this appear in
xi. 7-11, where the birth of Christ is represented
as taking place without any natural pangs. ix. 13
does not necessarily fall under this head.


1 For an admirable and concise note on this question see
Beer (Apoc. u. Pseudepig. des Alten Testaments, ii. 122, 123).


d


1 INTRODUCTION


3. Peculiar conception of the Trinity. The Son
and the Holy Spirit receive adoration and worship,
ix. 27-36, but they in turn worship God, ix. 39, 40.
Moreover, the Holy Spirit is spoken of as an angel,
the Angel of the Spirit, or the Angel of the Holy
Spirit, just as, in the De Principiis, i. 4, Origen
writes that, according to his Hebrew teacher, the two
Seraphim seen by Isaiah in the vision (Is. vi.) were:
the only begotten Son and the Holy Spirit (‘duo
illa Seraphim, quae in Esaia senis alis describuntur
clamantia adinvicem et dicentia: Sanctus, Sanctus,
Sanctus Dominus Deus Sabaoth: de unigenito Filio
Dei et Spiritu Sancto essent intelligenda’).

The Holy Spirit is often designated, either as
the Angel of the Spirit, iv. 21, ix. 39, 40, X. 4, xi. 4,
or the Angel of the Holy Spirit, iii. 16, vii. 23;
ix. 36, xi. 33. In two of these passages, iii. 16 and
xi. 4, He is identified with Gabriel, the angel of
the Annunciation. This certainly is the case in
xi. 4, and all but certainly in iii. 16.

4. The use of the phrase ‘ One like a Son of Man’
This phrase, with a Messianic meaning, is found
in the addition peculiar to S L? in xi. 1, but, as we
have shown elsewhere (see p. xxvi), is most probably
derived from the archetype G; for the use of
such an expression subsequent to the first century
of the Christian era is hardly conceivable. It is
easy to understand its rejection by the editor of G},
as he shows signs of early Docetism. For other
instances of its use see Rev. i. 13, xiv. 14.

5. Doctrine of the Resurrection. This doctrine is


INTRODUCTION li


very spiritually represented on the later Pauline
lines in iv. 15-17, viii. 14, ix. 17,18. Immediately
after death the faithful receive their ‘garments’ or
spiritual bodies (as in 2 Cor. v. 1-8); their ‘thrones’
and ‘crowns, which signify the consummation of
their blessedness, they do not receive till after the
ascension of Christ (ix. 17, 18). This date of the
consummation of the righteous would not agree
with the Pauline teaching.


§17. Tae AnTIcHRIST, BELIAR, AND NERONIC
MyTus, AND THEIR SUBSEQUENT FousIoN.


The actual significance of the Antichrist, Beliar,
and Neronic myths, and the dates of their fusion
with each other, as attested by the Ascension of
Isaiah, present us with the most difficult question
in Jewish and Christian Apocalyptic literature.

It fairly bristles with problems. Many of these,
it is true, have already been solved, and others are
on the way to solution. Nevertheless, a large
number still bid defiance to the student and inves-
tigator. This failure, hitherto, is largely to be
attributed to the erroneous views which have
prevailed on the nature of Apocalyptic and the
Antichrist Legend, as Gunkel and Bousset have
shown at some length. In this field the services
of these scholars have been truly epoch-making.
It is with the writings of the latter scholar that
we are here more immediately concerned ; particu-
larly with his Antichrist Legend, his Commentary

da


li INTRODUCTION


on Revelation, and his article ‘Antichrist’ in the
Encyclopaedia Biblica. These works, while most
. helpful and stimulating in many directions, do not
deal, satisfactorily with the relations of Beliar and
the Antichrist, and their account of the fusion of
the latter with the Neronic Saga is wanting in
lucidity and consistency. The aim of the present
chapter is to touch briefly on the history of the
Antichrist, Beliar, and Neronic myths, before the
fusion of any one of them with another, or of each
with all, and next to mention the various passages
where such fusion is attested, with their approxi-
mate dates. Thus I shall deal with

I. The independent development of the Antichrist,
Beliar, and Neronic myths.

II. The fusion of the Antichrist myth with that of
Beliar, and subsequently, and independently, with the
Neronic myth.

III. The fusion of all these myths together.


I. The independent development of (i.) the Anti-
christ, (ii.) Beliar, (iii.) Neronic myths.

(i.) The Antichrist myth. The term ‘ Antichrist’
is comparatively late, though the thought signified
by it is early. Thus it was not coined till far on
in the first century of our era; for it is found only
in the Johannine Epistles—1 John ii. 18, 22, iv. 3;
2 John 7. The idea, however, is expressed in
Dan. xi. 36, ‘he shall exalt himself . . . above the
God of gods’ (spoken of Antiochus), and in 2 Thess.
ii. 4, ‘he that opposeth himself (6 dvrixetwevos) .. .


INTRODUCTION Viti


against all that is called God.’ This idea, before
its fusion with that of Beliar, implies a being of
human origin, whereas Beliar, who came subse-
quently to be identified with the Antichrist, was
originally a superhuman or Satanic being.

That Antichrist denotes a god-opposing being of
human. origin, we shall now proceed to prove. The
earliest historical personage identified with him
was Antiochus Epiphanes. The language applied
to this king by the writer recalls, though it may
be unconsciously, the old Babylonian Saga of the
Dragon’s assault on the gods of heaven. Thus in
viii. 10 it is said of him: ‘It waxed great even
to the host of heaven; and some of the host and
of the stars it cast down to the ground and
trampled upon them.’ These words describe in
symbolical terms Antiochus’ attack on the heathen
deities. This attack is mentioned again in xi,
36, 37 in plain, unfigurative language. The same
verses describe the god-opposing character of Antio-
chus: ‘He shall magnify himself above every god
and shall speak marvellous things against the God
of gods (LXX iwwbycera: emt mdvta Oedv, kal emt roy
Oedv Tdv Oey &Eadda AaAjoe) ... neither shall he
regard the gods of his fathers.’

The next historical character to whom epithets
befitting the Antichrist are applied is Pompey the
Great, who committed the unpardonable act of
profanation, by entering the Holy of Holies after
his conquest of Jerusalem. Thus, in the Psalms
of Solomon (48-40 B.c.) he is called ‘the Dragon’


liv INTRODUCTION


(6 Spdxwv), ii. 29. Is there an allusion here to the
Dragon myth!? If so, it is at most only an
unconscious survival. Pompey is described as ‘the
sinner, ii. 1 (6 éuaprwAds), the personification of sin
(cf. 2 Thess. ii. 3, 6 dvOpwros ris Guaptias—the reading
of the inferior uncials). He is also called ‘the
lawless one’ (6 dvoyos), xvii. 13, an attribute of
Beliar. But since his soldiers are designated ‘the
lawless ones’ (of dvoyo1), Xvii. 20, the epithet may
mean no more than heathen as in 1 Cor. ix. 21,
and probably in Acts ii. 23, ‘by the hand of lawless
men’ (51a xetpds dvdywv). ‘Lawlessness’ (dvopia)
in 2 Cor. vi. 14 is specifically heathen. The epithet
‘lawless’ is, if technically used, proper to the Beliar
myth (see below).

The next reference to the Antichrist is to be
found in the Apocalypse of Baruch xxxvi—xl. (date
uncertain, before 70 a.D.). The rise of the Fourth
Kingdom (= Rome) is referred to xxxix. 5, and sub-
sequently the head of the Roman Commonwealth
or Empire, xxxvi. 5, xxxix. 3, xl. 1. After all his
hosts have been destroyed he is brought before the
Messiah to Mount Zion to receive his sentence of
destruction, xxxvi. 5-11, x11, 2. In 4 Ezra v. 1-6
we have the signs of the last times recorded in
great fullness. Amongst these the rise of the Fourth
Empire (= Rome) is foretold, v. 3,4, and subsequently
the reign of Antichrist under the enigmatical words
‘He shall rule, whom they that dwell upon the


1 On the mythological origin of this expression see Cheyne’s
art. ‘Dragon’ in the Encyclopaedia Biblica, i.


INTRODUCTION lv


earth look not for.’ It is not improbable that the
Antichrist in this passage, also, is to be regarded
as of Roman origin.

In all the above passages the Antichrist is a god-
opposing being of human not of superhuman origin,
of Gentile not of Jewish descent.

In the Johannine Epistles of the New Testament
(1 John ii. 18, 22, iv. 3; 2 John 7) the Antichrist
is a collective name for the false teachers! who
have gone forth from the bosom of the Church.
Neither this nor any other conception of Antichrist
is to be confused with that of the pseudo-Christ
(evddxpicros) of Matt. xxiv. 24, Mark xiii. 22:
the Antichrist in these Epistles is a deceiver
(wAdvos). The personal Antichrist is most prob-
ably referred to in John v. 43, ‘If another shall
come in his own name, him ye will receive.’

(ii.) The Beliar myth. In the Old Testament
Beliar does not appear as a proper name: see
Bennett and Cheyne’s article ‘ Beliar, in vol. i. of
Encyclopaedia Biblica. For Beliar conceived as a
person we must come down to pseudepigraphal
literature. In this literature Beliar, for the first
time, attains to personality. Thus in Jubilees,
i. 20, we read: ‘Let Thy mercy, O Lord, be lifted
up upon Thy people... and let not the spirit
of Beliar rule over them to accuse them before
Thee. Since, elsewhere, Satan is conceived as the


1 Closely allied to this conception is that of the false prophet
in Rev. xvi. 13, who is described at length in xiii. 11-17. Of
this characterization of the Antichrist, however, we shall treat
subsequently.


Wi INTRODUCTION


accuser of the brethren (cf. 1 Chron, xxi. 1; Eth.
En. xl. 7; Rev. xii. 10), Beliar is to be regarded
as a Satan, or the Satan? In the last passage,
Rev. xii. 10, Satan is identified with the Dragon
which stormed the heavens, and Beliar, who has
his abode in the firmament, Ase. Is., vii. 9, appears
to be a Jewish transformation of this monster of
Babylonian mythology. Thus it is through the
Beliar constituent of the developed Antichrist myth
that the old Dragon Saga? from Babylon gained
an entrance into the eschatologies of Judaism and
Christianity. To return, Beliar like Satan possesses
authority in the world of evil agencies; thus it is
he that sends seven evil spirits against man to work
his undoing, Test. xii Patriarchs Rub. ii. Possibly
in 2 Cor. vi. 15,‘ What concord hath Christ with
Belial, Beliar may be identified with Satan; see,
however, below. Again, just as the name Satan be-
longed to a number of evil spirits (see Eth. En., xl.
7), So apparently did Beliar. Thus in Test. xii


1 This identification appears throughout the Christian pseud-
épigraph The Questions of Bartholomew, ed. Bonwetsch, 1897. It
will be sufficient to quote iv. 25, droxpiOels 5 6 BeAtap Aéyer’ El
6éAas padely 7d dvopd pov, mpdrov éheydunv Saravana, 5 epunveverar
éfdyyedos Oeod' Ste 58 dréyvew aytirutov rod Oeod [Kal] exrHOn 7d
Svopd pou Zaravas, 8 éorw dyyedos raprapodxos. This tradition is
attested before 7o 4.p.:; see the Slavonic Enoch, xviii. 3; xxix.
4,53 xxxi. 4. According to this last and other Jewish writings
Satan was originally regarded as an angel of God, and thus
quite different from the Babylonian Dragon. Hence we have
here a syncretism.

2 See Cheyne’s art. ‘Dragon’ in Encyclopaedia Biblica, i. ;
Bousset, The Antichrist Legend, 155.


INTRODUCTION Wii


Patriarchs Levi 3, it is said ‘the spirits of deceit
and of Beliar ’ will be punished, and in Levi 18 that
Beliar himself will be bound. For other references
see notes on i. 8 of our text and below. From the
above evidence we may conclude that at the begin-
ning of the Christian era, if not much earlier, Beliar was
regarded as a Satanic spirit. In the sequel we shall,
I think, recognize that Beliar was never regarded as
aught else than a Satanic spirit, until the Beliar
myth was amalgamated with that of Antichrist.

(iii.) The Neronic myth. Since we have here to
deal only with the early and independent develop-
ment of the Neronic myth, our present task is
simply to show that soon after the death of Nero
the myth became current that (a) Nero had not
really died, but was still living; and (6) that he
would soon return from the far East to take ven-
geance on Rome.

(a) When Nero, with the help of a freedman,
committed suicide and was cremated (Suetonius,
Nero 49), so great was the public joy that the
people thronged the streets in holiday attire (Nero
57). All, however, did not share in the general
rejoicing, nor yet in the belief of Nero’s death.
Thus Tacitus writes that there were many who
pretended and believed that he was still alive
(Hist. ii. 8, ‘vario super exitu eius rumore eoque
pluribus vivere eum fingentibus credentibusque’),
and Suetonius declares that edicts were issued in
his name, as though he were still alive and would
return speedily to destroy his enemies (Nero 57,


i


viii INTRODUCTION


‘edicta quasi viventis et brevi magno inimicorum
malo reversuri’). That this belief gained a wide |
currency very soon after Nero’s decease, is shown
by the fact that within a year after it (69 a.D.) an
impostor had already appeared under his name.
The pretender in this movement was put to death
in Cythnus by Calpurnius Asprenas (Tac. Hist. ii.
8, 9, Dio Cassius, Ixiv. 9).

(b) That Nero had taken refuge in the far East
probably formed a constituent of the myth from
the outset!; for we are told that prophecies made
during his lifetime had pointed to the East as
the scene of his future greatness. Some of these
declared that he would make Jerusalem the seat
of his empire, and others that he would finally
recover the sovereignty of the world (Suet. Nero
40, ‘Spoponderant tamen quidam destituto Orientis
dominationem, nonnulli nominatim regnum Hiero-
solymorum, plures omnis pristinae fortunae restitu-
tionem’). It was, probably, such vaticinations as
these, combined with the fact that Nero had already
established friendly relations with the Parthian king
Vologeses I (Nero 57), that led Nero, as the end drew
nigh, to think of fleeing to the Parthians (Nero 47).

In conformity with this expectation we find that
the second pseudo-Nero appeared under Titus on
the Euphrates, about 80 a.p., and was recognized
by the Parthian king Artabanus (Zonaras xi. 18).
Finally, in the reign of Domitian, about 88 4.D., a


1 See further evidence for this statement ‘below in the
Sibylline Oracles, pp. lix-lx.


INTRODUCTION lix


third pretender came forward among the Parthians,
and all but succeeded in hurling Parthia against
Rome (Tac. Hist. i. 2, ‘mota prope etiam Parthorum
arma falsi Neronis ludibrio’; Suet. Nero 57).
Even as late as 100 a.p. the belief was current
’ that Nero was still alive. Thus Dio Chrysostomus,
Orat. xxi. 10, cal viv &ru wdvres emOvpoior Chy, of 8%
mActorot olovrat. But this statement is hyperbolical.
The Nero myth was thus firmly rooted among
the common folk of the Gentile world within the
first decade after his death. Within the same
decade it had established itself in the eschatology
of Hellenistic Judaism. This statement can be
proved from the following passages in the Sibyl-
line Oracles. Thus in v. 143-147, which belongs
to the oldest sections of the book, and was written
71-74 A.D. (see 155-161) as Zahn (Zeitschrift fir
kirchliche Wissenschaft und Leben, 1886, 337 sqq.)
and Bousset rightly assert, the flight of Nero from
Babylon (= Rome) to the Parthians is mentioned—


Ded€crar éx BaBvddvos dvak hoBepds xat dvatdys,
dv mdvres otvyéover Bporol kal pares dpioror"
ddece yap ToAAovs Kal yaorépt Xelpas epijxey,

eis GAdxous jjmapre Kal ex prapOy érérv«ro.

hfe. 8 és Mijdov xal TepoGv wapBacidjas .. .
Nero’s return is foretold in 361 sqq.—
éooetat torario Kaip@ mept Tépua veAquns
Koopopavys méAeuos Kal émlkAomos év SoAdTyTL.
Hier & éx wepdreov yains pytpoxrdvos avyp .. .
bs aacay yatay Kaede? kal mavra Kpatioe.


Ix INTRODUCTION


Early in the next decade! we find other testi-
monies to the prevalence of this myth. Thus in
iv. I1g-122 (circ. 80 A.D.) Nero is described as a
fugitive to Parthia—

cal ré7’ da "Iradlns Bacirebs peyas old re Spyotys

ever’ &avtos dmvetos rep mépov Edppyrao,

bs more 87) pnTpoov ayos aTvyepoio pdvoto

TAnoeTat GAda Te TOAAG Kaxlory xewpt mOHoas.


and in iv. 137-139 as returning to assail the West
at the head of a vast host—


és 8& Svow TdreE velKos eyetpsuevoy TOAEHOLO,
éer cat ‘Pdyns 6 puyds, peya eyxos delpas,
Etdpirny d:aBds TodAais dua. pupidderow.

In the New Testament. This widespread expecta-
tion has left its memorial also in the New Testament.
The first passage referring to the embattled might
of the kings of the East marching against Rome
is Rev. xvi. 12, ‘And the sixth poured out his
bowl upon the great river, the Euphrates; and the
water thereof was dried up, that the way might
be made ready for the kings that come from the
sunrising. But in xvii. the traces of this myth
are far more abundant and unmistakable. Indeed,
as very many scholars have already observed, this
chapter in original form was a symbolic description
by a Jewish writer of Nero’s returning at the head
of the Parthian kings. Nero is the eighth king


1 With later testimonies from the Sibylline Oracles as to the
Neronic Myth in this stage we are not here concerned: they
will be found in v. 93 sqq., viii. 7o, 71, 145, 146.


INTRODUCTION Ixi


mentioned in xvii. 11, yet he is one of the seven
spoken of in the same verse, the last of whom was
Vespasian. The chapter, however, was subsequently
worked over and adapted to the form of the later
Neronic Myth. Thus verses 8, 11%, 14, 1 5 tell of
Nero redivivus. He is ‘the beast’ ‘that was and
is not and is about to come up out of the abyss’
(verse 8), and again, in the same verse, the beast
which ‘ was and is not and shall have his parusia’
(mapéora). Similarly in verse 11% By excising,
with Bousset, 6°, 8, 115, 14, 15, we can in large
measure recover the original form of the Jewish
document which prophesied the destruction of Rome
by Nero and the Parthian kings. These kings are
symbolically described in verses 12, 13, ‘And the
ten horns that thou sawest are ten kings, which
have received no kingdom as yet; but they receive
authority as kings, with the beast, for one hour.
These have one mind and they give their power
and authority unto the beast.’


Il. The fusion of the Antichrist myth (i.) with that of
Beliar before 60 a.D.; and (ii.) independently
with that of Nero redivivus, 88-100 A.D.


(i) As a result of this fusion the Antichrist is
regarded as (a) A Grod-opposing man armed with
miraculous powers. This appears to have been
effected on Christian soil before 50 a.p. (6) A
purely Satanic power, before 70 A.D.

(a) 2 Thess. ii, 1-12, according to the usual
interpretation, presents an indubitable instance of


Ixii INTRODUCTION


this fusion. Thus, on the one hand, we have Beliar.
‘The man of lawlessness’ (6 av@pwz7os ris dvoulas) is
all but certainly a translation of Beliar ; for dvéunpa
is the LXX rendering of it in Deut. xv. 9, and
dvopia in 2 Kings xxii. 5, and mapdvoyos is fre-
quently found as its equivalent, when it is used
as an epithet: Deut. xiii: 13; Judges xix. 22, xx.
13; 2 Kings xvi. 7, xx. I, xxiii. 5, &e.

In the next place it is Beliar appearing as the
Antichrist ; for the words ‘he that opposeth him-
self . . . against all that is called God’ (6 dvtixel-
pevos ... eal mdvTa Aeyduevoy Oedv) form an excellent
definition of the Antichrist. If 2 Thess. is an
authentic writing of St. Paul (and the evidence
appears to me to point decidedly in this direction),
we have here the earliest evidence for the fusion of
these myths (circ. 50.a.D.1),and also for the humaniza-
tion of the Beliar myth through its fusion with
that of Antichrist; for hitherto Beliar had been con-
ceivedas a Satanic or superhuman being”. The Anti-
christ thus comes to be conceived as a God-opposing
man armed with miraculous or Satanic powers.

We should next observe that in 2 Thess. ii. 1-12
the myth appears to have a purely religious signi-
fication and not a political one as in Rev. xiii. 1-10,
xvii. Thus in 2 Thess. ii. 6, 7 the Roman empire

1 Schmiedel’s view which regards 2 Thess. ii, 1-12 (see his
most excellent Commentary in loc., p. 43) a8 a Beliar-Neronic
myth (68-70 4..) is at conflict with the law of development as
well as with all the evidence accessible on the subject.


? The passage in the Sibylline Oracles, iii. 63-74, will be dis-
cussed later,


INTRODUCTION xiii


is referred to as the power which checks the mani-
festation of the Antichrist, whereas in Rev. xiii.
I-10, Xvii., it is the Roman empire itself that is the
Antichrist. In no case could 2 Thess. ii. 1-12 have
been written after 70 a.p, This section, whether
of Pauline authorship or not, is in its main features
a Christian transformation of a current Judaisti¢
myth:

In 2 Thess. ii. 1-12 the Antichrist appears as
a human sovereign armed with miraculous powers.
In Rev. xiii. 11-17 he is a false teacher rather ;
hence this conception is more akin to that which
prevails in the Johannine Epistles. Though both
in Jobn and Rev. xiii. 11-17 the Antichrist is
human, in the latter passage he is armed with
Satanic powers and ‘deceiveth them that dwell
on the earth by reason of the signs which it was
given him to do in the sight of the beast’ (xiii. 14).
His task is to make the inhabitants of the earth
worship the first beast (ie. Beliar Nero), whose
death-stroke had been healed (xiii. 12). The refer-
ence in this passage is most probably to the priest-
hood which was attached to the cultus of the
Caesars (Holtzmann, Pfleiderer, Bousset), and had
as the chief seat of its activity the province of
Asia. This Antichrist is designated ‘the false
prophet’ in xvi. 13.

Again, it is possible, as Bousset says, that ‘the
abomination of desolation’ in Matt. xxiv. 15, which
belongs to the Judaistic Apocalypse introduced
among the genuine utterances of our Lord, is to be


Ixiv INTRODUCTION


interpreted as the Antichrist taking his seat in the
temple of Jerusalem ; ef. 2 Thess. ii. 4. This would
constitute the original sense of the Apocalypse: its
application to Rome would be an afterthought.

The same fusion of these conceptions may be
attested also in the Testaments of the XII Patri-
archs. Thus in Dan. 5 the Messiah is represented
as making war on Beliar and stripping him of his
captives (oijoe: mpds tov BeAlap méAeuov ... kal Thy
alxyakwotay AdBn (sic) awd Tod BeAlap Wuyas dyiwv).
Both the date and the nationality of this writer
are uncertain. In this passage, however, as well as
in Levi 18, where the Messiah is represented as
binding Beliar, Beliar may be conceived merely
as Satan (cf. Eph. iv. 8).

Sibylline Oracles, ii. 167, 168 (circ. 200 A.D) should
probably be cited under this head—


kal BeAlap 0° i£et kat ojpara ToAAG wroujoet
dvOpadrots


(b) The Beliar Antichrist=a purely Satanic power
before 70 A.D. (or 30 A.D.?). This stage of the myth
is found in Rev. xi. 7, ‘And when they shall have
finished their testimony, the beast that cometh up out
of the abyss shall make war with them and over-
come them and kill them.’ The Antichrist in this
instance makes his advent in Jerusalem (see verse
8), therefore before 70 a.p. This form of the myth
js quite independent of that which appears in Rev.
xiii. and xiv., where it is amalgamated with the
Neronic Myth and assumes a political character.


INTRODUCTION Ixv


It is not clear whether 2 Cor. vi. 15, ‘what
concord hath Christ with Beliar?’ should be
reckoned under this head or under i, 2. On the
other hand it may not be wrong to recognize in
the Assumption of Moses, x. 1. 2, an instance of
this compound conception.


‘And then His (God’s) Kingdom will appear
throughout creation

And then Satan will be no more

And sorrow will depart with him.

Then the hands of the angel (Michael) will be
filled

And he will be appointed chief

And he will avenge them of their enemies.’


If this passage comes rightly under this head,
then the fusion of the ideas of Beliar and Anti-
christ must be anterior to 30 A.D.

"(ii.) Fusion of the Antichrist Myth with that of
the Nero redivivus’. This fusion could hardly
have taken place before the first half of Domitian’s
reign, when the last Neronic pretender appeared.
As soon, however, as the hope of the return
of the living Nero could no longer be enter-


1 It is quite possible that the passages which I have classed
under this head might on equally cogent grounds be reckoned.
under III. The course adopted in the text has been followed
owing to the appearance of the Dragon (i.e. Satan or Beliar)
and the Neronic Antichrist on the same canvas in Rev. xiii.
1-10. But this fact is in itself far from decisive. Moreover, the
simple Neronic myth appears to need some infusion of the
Beliar myth in order to develop the expectation of Nero
redivivus, or Nero as a semi-demonic power.

e


Ixvi INTRODUCTION


tained, the way was prepared for this transfor-
mation of the myth. The living Nero indeed
was no longer expected to return from the East,
but Nero! was to be restored to life from the
abyss by the Dragon, ie. Satan. This expecta-
tion is recounted in Rev. xiii. First the beast that
comes up out of the sea with ten horns and seven
heads is clearly to be identified with the Roman
empire (xiii. 1). To this beast the Dragon gives
his power and his throne (xiii. 2). But one of his
heads (i.e. Nero) had been as it were smitten unto
death, but the death-stroke was healed, that is,
Nero was restored to life, xiii. 3, 14. Nero,. so
restored, spoke ‘ great things and blasphemies,’ and
authority was given to him to reign for ‘forty and
two months,’ that is the three and a half years for
which, according to universal tradition, the Anti-
christ was to rule (see p.2gnote). Further references
to Nero redivivus as the Antichrist will be found in
xvii. 8 : ‘The beast, that thou sawest, was, and is not,
and is about to come up out of the abyss and to go


1 That Nero is referred to under the mystical number 666
(Rev. xiii. 18) may be regarded as established. This interpreta-
tion was arrived at nearly seventy years ago. We obtain the
number 666 by transliterating Nepdy Kaicap into Hebrew, and
adding together the sums denoted by the Hebrew letters. Thus
3p yD G=50, 1=200, 1=6, ]=50, p=100, D=60, 1= 200) = 666,
This solution is confirmed by the fact that it is possible to
explain by it an ancient (Western ?) variant for the number
666, i.e. 616. This latter, which is attested by Irenaeus
(V. 30. 1), the commentary of Ticonius, and the uncial C, can be
explained from the Latin form of the name Nero, which by its
omission of the final » makes the sum total 616 instead of 666.


INTRODUCTION Ixvii


into perdition’; and again, ‘when they beheld the
beast, how that he was, and is not, and shall come.’
Finally, in verse 11 of the same chapter the
identification of Nero redivivus with the Anti-
christ is inevitable. ‘And the beast that was, and
is not, is himself also an eighth, and is of the seven,
and he goeth to perdition.’

In the above passages Nero redivivus and the
Roman Empire are identified. The former is re-
garded as an incarnation of all the might and
horror of the latter.


III. Fusion of the Antichrist, Beliar, and Neronic
myths in various degrees and forms.


From this fusion the myth emerges in three
forms, which owe their diversity in the main to
the three variations of the Neronie myth which
enter into the combination. These forms are: (i.)
Incarnation of Beliar as the Antichrist in Nero
still conceived as alive. The Antichrist has here
a political significance, and is human. (ii.) Incarna-
tion of Beliar as the Antichrist in the form of the
dead Nero. The Antichrist has here no political
significance, and is a Satanic being. (iii.) Incarna-
tion of Beliar as the Antichrist in Nero redivivus.

(i.) Incarnation of Beliar as the Antichrist in
Nero still conceived as living—before 90 a.p. We
have seen above, from documentary evidence, that
before 80 A.D. the myth had gained wide circula-
tion both among Gentiles and Jews, that Nero

e2


Ixviii INTRODUCTION


was still living in the East, and would speedily
return to avenge himself on Rome. We have
further seen that long before 80 a.D. the minds of
both Jews and Christians were familiar with the
expectation of the Antichrist pure and simple, and
of the Antichrist possessing the attributes of Beliar
or Satan, and so denoting a, God-opposing man
armed with miraculous powers, or a truly Satanic
being. So strong was the tendency of such mythical
currents to merge in a common stream that it is
not surprising to find this coalescence achieved in
the Sibylline Oracles, iii. 63-74. This passage is
unhappily of uncertain date, though no doubt
before go a.D., since Nero is still regarded as alive.
Its significance, however, cannot be mistaken.
Beliar comes as Antichrist, and is descended from
Augustus (é ZeBacrnvdv)1, That this descendant
of Augustus is Nero there is no room for doubt.
The lines in question are


éx 5& SeBaornvar fet BedAlap perdmicGev

kal orjoe dpéwv thpos, orjcet 8& OdAacoay

27 , t ee

HéAtoy mupdevta péyay Aawmpay Te oTEeARVHY

kal véxvas oThoer Kal orpara moAAG Tolnoet .. .
kat ddvauis pdoyderoa 8: olduaros és yatav *&e
kat BeAlap prc£er kal imepgiddovs avOpdzovs,
mavras, Sco. tolrw wictw eveToijoayto.


To assign these lines to 30 B.c., as Gfrorer, Hilgen-


1 The excision of 61>-63" as an interpolation by Bleek,
Liicke and Schiirer only serves to aggravate the confusion of the
text.


INTRODUCTION Ixix


feld, Bousset, and other scholars have done, is
impossible unless the S<«Bacrnvof=the inhabitants
of SeBacry, ie. Samaria. In that case the passage
would come under II. i. (6).

(ii.) Incarnation of Beliar as Antichrist in the
form of the dead Nero. In due time the belief that
Nero was still alive in the East began to die. The
time of its extinction must naturally have varied
according to temperament and locality. It is ac-
cordingly difficult to assign definite dates. Since,
however, the latest pretender to the Neronic réle
came forward in 88 A.D., we may not unreasonably
infer that from that year the belief began to lose
its grip on the common folk—on none others had
it ever any real hold—and to decline steadily till
it finally disappeared. No doubt during the next
twenty to forty years it crops up sporadically, but
even during that period its place has been taken
by two rival and stronger forms of the same saga.

These new forms of the saga may have already
been evolved in the later years of Vespasian. The
older form, with which we have now to deal, is at
all events not later than go—100 a.D. This phase
of the Antichrist Myth is found in the present
work, the Ascension of Isaiah, iv. 2-4, * And
after (the world) is consummated, Beliar, the great
ruler, the king of this world, will descend, who
hath ruled it since it came into being; yea he will
descend from his firmament in the likeness of
a man, a lawless king, the slayer of his mother:
who himself (even) this king 3. Will persecute


eo


Ixx INTRODUCTION


the plant which the Twelve Apostles have planted.
Of the Twelve one will be delivered into his hand.
4. This ruler in the form of that king will
come, &e.’

From this passage it is manifest that the belief
in Nero being still alive had already been abandoned.
Nero’s history belongs to the past. It is recorded
in iv. 2-3. In such a case, if the Apocalyptic
writer is bent on retaining the Neronic element,
one of two courses is open. Either Beliar must
come in the form of the dead Nero, or Nero must
be recalled to life by a Satanic miracle. The first
course is adopted by the writer of the Ascension,
the second by the author of Rev. xiii, xvii. 8, 11%.
The latter representation we have discussed already.
Our present concern is with the former, and par-
ticularly with its probable date. This is a question
of importance; for it has been objected on the one
hand by Zeller that this form of the myth belongs
to the second century (Z.f. W. T., ‘Der Martyrertod
des Petrus in der Ascension Jesaiae,’ 1896, 558-568),
and on the other by Harnack that it cannot be
earlier than the third (Gesch. d. altchristl. Litteratur,
i. 573-579)»

Zeller is moved to make this assertion on grounds
really foreign to the subject at issue, such as the
date of the Simon Magus romance, and the dis-
tinction which is already drawn in iii, 24, 29,
between bishops and presbyters, a distinction that,
in his opinion, was not established before the
second half of the second century. Into the merits


INTRODUCTION Ixxi


of these questions it is needless to enter at present.
We must rather turn to Harnack, who backs up
his view with the statement that it cannot be
proved that the conception of the returning Nero
as the Antichrist prevailed in Christian circles of
the second century. In the face of Rev. xiii, and
Rev. xvii. 8, 119, and certain passages in Sibylline
Oracles, v, which severally belong to various years
of the period 88-150, we cannot understand on
what grounds such a statement can be maintained.

In pages 714-716 of the same work, Harnack
has rightly recognized that the Antichrist con-
ception in the Ascension is compounded of two
ideas: (xr) that Nero would return as the Anti-
christ; (2) that the devil is Antichrist. Now we
have seen above, in II. i. (6), that the latter expec-
tation did prevail, most probably before 3o a.D.,
and certainly before 7o a.D., and also that the
former expectation is in all likelihood attested in
the Sibylline Oracles, iii. 63-74 (see III. i. above),
before go a.D., and certainly in Rev. xiii, xvii. 8,
11, not later than 100 A.D., and possibly as early
as go A.D. There is thus no real difficulty in the
evolution of such a myth as appears in the Ascension
before 100 A.D.

Seeing, therefore, that, probably as early as the
close of Vespasian’s reign, the materials were at
hand for the formation of the myth, we may very
reasonably set down 88 a.p. as the earliest probable
date for the form of the myth, which is presented
in the Ascension of Isaiah. We have found else-


Ixxii INTRODUCTION


where (see pp: xliv, 30, 31) that the section in which
the form in question occurs cannot be later than
100 A.D. Hence 88-100 is the approximate date
for this phase of the Antichrist legend.

(iii.) Incarnation of Beliar as the Antichrist in
Nero redivivus. It is quite possible that the phase
of the Antichrist myth which I have given under
heading II. (ii.) should appear here (see note on
p. Ixv). In that case this development would
belong to the reign of Domitian.

In the Sibylline Oracles, v. 28-34 (written in the
reign of Hadrian), the enigmatical account of Nero
appears to involve all the above elements. Thus it
is Nero redivivus that is described; for the author
of the lines is writing two generations after Nero’s
death. In the next place he is called in semi-
mythological language ‘the serpent’ (herein we
have the Beliar element), and finally he makes
himself equal to God. The lines bearing on our
subject in this book are 28, 29, 33, 34:—


mevtnkovta 8 6 tis Kepainv Adxe, Kolpavos grat
dewds dpist ...

GAN Etat kat dioros 6 Aolyios* el’ dvaxduyer
iodo Oe adrov' édéy€er 8 ob pu edvra.


Book v. 214-227 belongs more clearly to the above
classification. According to this passage, Nero is
to return aloft through the air, upborne by the
Fates. His achievements are portrayed in 219-225.


' This designation of Nero recurs in xii. 81, 264. See also
ix. 41, where the reference is obscure. ;


INTRODUCTION Ixxiii


In Book viii, of which lines 4-429 belong to the
close of the second century, the various myths have
so thoroughly coalesced that Nero is no longer
regarded as a man but as a Satanic monster.

He has himself become the Dragon, viii. 88
(mupépos doce Spdkwv), and assumed the monster's
form, viii. 157 (6@fpa péyav).

It is needless here to pursue the ramifications of
this myth further, than to state that so thoroughly
did the Neronic element in the composite Antichrist
saga gain the upper hand in the East, that in
Armenian the word Nero became the equivalent
for Antichrist (see Conybeare in Bousset’s Antichrist
Legend, p. 282).


SyMBOLS AND BRACKETS USED IN THIS
EDITION.


u, b, ¢, denote the Ethiopic MSS. described on p. xv.

u, ch, denote the Slavonic MSS. described on p. xxv.

G denotes the lost Greek archetype of G' G?.

G' denotes the lost Greek text from which E L' were translated,
and on which the Gk. Leg. was based. See pp. xxxi-xxxiii.

G? denotes the Greek text from which S L? were translated, of
which II. 4-IV. 2 has now been recovered. See pp. xxviii-
xxxiii.

E denotes the Ethiopic Version based on a, }, c.

S denotes the Slavonic Version.

L' denotes the Latin Version from G! (consisting of II. 14-
III. 13; VII. 1-19).

L? denotes the Latin Version from G? (consisting of VI-XI).

Gk. Leg. denotes the Greek Legend printed on pp. 141-148.
See also pp. xxvii-xxviii.

hmt =homoioteleuton.

C The use of these brackets in S L? means that the words so
enclosed, though only in one of these authorities, are also
found in E, and therefore go back to G.

[ ]The use of these brackets in G?L' L? or S means that the
words so enclosed are found only in one of these authorities,
and may or may not go back to G.

T 1 The use of these brackets in the English translation of E
or in L? means that the words so enclosed are found in G',
and not in G?: the words so enclosed in SL’ are found in
G, but not in G'. In certain cases the words peculiar either
to G! or G? are derived from G.

( ) The words or letters so enclosed are supplied by the editor
in EL'L?§, but in the Greek fragment they are restorations,
being undecipherable in the papyrus,

< > These brackets are used only in the Greek fragment.
Words or letters so enclosed were omitted in the papyrus.

* * The words so enclosed are emendations of the text.

+ + The words so enclosed are corrupt.

{ ] The words so enclosed are interpolated.


THE


ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


THE
ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


TRANSLATION


i. 1, And it came to pass in the twenty-sixth year i. x, 2*=
of the reign of Hezekiah king of Judah that he (or


dom of
called Manasseh his son. Now he was his only one. Isaiah.


2, And he called him into the presence of Isaiah


i. a. In the Greek Legend it is the twenty-fifth year.

Of the reign. Lit. ‘in the reign’; but I take the phrase to be
equal to ém rod BaciAéws ‘ECexiov. Cf. 1 Mace. xiii. 42, xiv. 27;
Prol. of Eccles. ; Hag. i. 1, ii. 1, &e.

2. Isaiah the son of Amoz the prophet. The word prophet here is
no doubt to be taken with Isaiah and not with Amoz. Amoz
is mentioned in the Old Testament in 2 Kings xix. 2 and
Isa. i. 1, ii, 1, &. In iv. 22 he is wrongly identified with
Amos, the eighth-century prophet—a confusion that the writer
shares in common with many of the Greek and Latin Fathers.
This mistake on the part of the latter may be due to the fact
that the LXX inaccurately represents DY the prophet and
YON the father of Isaiah by one and the same form “Apés,
One and the same form also is used in Ethiopic for the two
names, On the other hand there wasan old Talmudic tradition
to the effect that Amoz, the father of Isaiah, was a prophet also.
In Megilla, 10°, the writer seeks to prove by a very obscure line of
argument that Amoz, the father of Isaiah, was a prophet. If


B


i, 20-69 =
editorial
addition.


2 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


the son of Amoz the prophet, and into the presence
of Jésib the son of Isaiah, in order to deliver unto
him the words of righteousness which the king
himself had seen: 3. And of the eternal judgements
and the torments of Gehenna, and of the * prince *


this was even a current tradition, the confusion in iv. 22
becomes still more intelligible.

Jéséb, This name is found in Isa. vii. 3: TAWA, "Iacov8. In
the Ethiopic version of our book, it is found variously as Jéséb,
Josib, Jdsab, Joséb.

2b_s5* describe the vision of Hezekiah which he saw in the
fifteenth year of his reign. These verses were inserted by the
editor to prepare for the vision which is recounted in iii, 13-iv.
22. They give a brief description of it. This vision may in all
probability be taken to be the testament of Hezekiah (see
below). The evidence for this conclusion we shall now
give. The vision is definitely ascribed to Hezekiah in verse 2:
‘which the king himself had seen.’ In verse 4 the same idea
recurs: ‘words... which he himself had seen in the fifteenth
year of his reign during his illness,’ and most probably in verse
5: ‘the written words which Samnas the scribe had written’;
and again later in the same verse according to MS. a:
‘words ... which only the king had seen.’ That this idea
is not an invention of the Ethiopic translation is clear from
the Greek Legend, i. 2, which speaks of ‘The words which
Hezekiah the king himself had seen during his illness’ (see
p. 139). Nay, more, Georgius Cedrenus (see p. 29) quotes iv. 12
of our book as derived from the ‘Testament of Hezekiah’
(Ataéqen ‘ECexiov). Though little value need be attached to the
evidence of Cedrenus individually, yet the rest of the evidence,
when combined with it, is sufficient to show that the final editor
of our apocrypha had seen and used a book purporting to be
a work of Hezekiah, and iii. 13-iv. 22 appears to be the
Testament in question.

3. This verse gives the contents of Hezekiah’s vision or
prophecy.

Of the eternal judgements. be read, ‘of the judgements of this
world.’ MSS. do not give genitive here but the accusative.

Gehenna. Mentioned only in iv. 14.


CHAPTER I. 2-4 3


of this world, and of his angels, and his authorities
and his powers, 4. And the words of the faith
of the Beloved which he himself had seen in the


And of * the prince* of this world. So Dillmann proposes. a
reads, ‘ which is the eternal place of punishment’: bc ‘and
of the place of punishment of this world.’ For phrase see ii,
4, iv. a, x.29. The reference is to the Antichrist in iv. 2.

Angels .. . authorities .. . powers, i.e. “Ayyedot, éfovoiat, Suvdpes.
The very same list is found in 1 Pet, iii. 22 imorayévrory abr
dyyAov Kal eovordy wai duvdpewv. Cf. Eph. i. 21, iii. 10, vi. 12;
Col. i. 16, ii. 10, 15.

4. The Beloved. This Messianic title is found throughout most
of the book: i. 4, 5, 7, 13; iii. 13, 17, 18; iv. 3, 6, 9, 18, 27;
v. 153 vil. 17, 23; viii. 18, 25; ix. 12. There are good
grounds for believing this title pre-Christian. These are so
excellently given by Canon Robinson in Hastings’ Bible Dictionary,
ii. 501, that I take the liberty of reproducing them here.
(1) ‘It is used in the Old Testament (6 #yarnpévos, LXX) as
a title of Israel; e.g. Deut. xxxii. 15, xxxiii. 5, 26, where it
renders ‘Jeshurun,” as it does also in Isa. xliv. 2; again in
Isa, v. 1, 7 6 iyanquévos and 6 dyamqrdés render J) and WwW
respectively. It was natural, therefore, that, like “the titles
“Servant” and “Elect,” it should be transferred from the people
to the Messiah. (2) At the period when the Gospels were
written “the Beloved” and ‘‘the Elect ” were practically inter-
changeable terms, for Matthew writes 6 dyamyrés pov (xii. 18) in
citing Isa. xlii. 1, where the Hebrew is ‘1a (LXX, 6 éxAekrds
vov); and Luke (ix. 35) substitutes 6 enhereypevos for 6 dyannrés
in the words spoken in the Transfiguration. (3) These two
substitutions suggest that, whatever may have been the original
meaning of the phrase 6 vids you 6 dyanyrés (Mark i. 11, ix. 7),
both Matthew and Luke regarded 6 dyamnrés as a separate title,
and not as an epithet of vids. And it is interesting to note that
the old Syriac version emphasized this distinction by rendering
“My Son and My Beloved.” (4) In Eph. i. 9 St. Paul uses év 79
Hyennpévy as equivalent to é& 7$ Xpiord in a context in which
he is designedly using terms derived from Jewish sources,
(5) Certain passages of the LXX where 6 dyarnrés occurs were
explained by Christian interpreters as Messianic (Ps. xliv. (xlv.)


BQ


4 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


fifteenth year of his reign during his illness. 5.
And he delivered unto him the written words
which Samnas the scribe had written, and also those
which Isaiah, the son of Amoz, had given to him,
and also to the prophets, that they might write and
store up with him what he himself had seen in the


tit. ; Zech. xii. 10). (6) Lastly we have several passages in
early Christian writings in which 6 7yarnpévos is used as a title
of Christ, e.g. Barn. iii. 6, iv. 3,8. Cf Clem. Rom. lix. 2, 3;
Ign. Smyrn., inser. ; Herm. Sim. IX. xii. 5; Acts of Thecla, c. 1 ;
6 dyarnrés is also used, but usually with vids or vais (Herm.
Sim. V. ii. 6; Mart. Polyc. 14; Ep. ad Diogn. 8; Acts of Thecla, vu.
aq; in the last three cases in a liturgical formula).’

Fifteenth year of his reign during his illness. See a Kings xx.
1-6; Isa, xxxviii. r-20. According to the Old Testament text
Hezekiah reigned twenty-nine years, and his illness fell out
fifteen years before he died. Hence the date harmonizes with
the Old Testament chronology. This verse is almost wholly
réproduced in the Greek Legend : see i. 2 (p. 141).

5%. The written words which Samnas the scribe had written. These
words appear to relate to the vision of Hezekiah which was
written out by Shebna the scribe after declaration of the king.
The writing (AND) composed by Hezekiah during his illness
(Isa. xxxvili. 9) may have suggested the idea in our text.

Samnas. See also vi. 17. In Greek Legend, i. 3 Zwpvds. In
the LXX the Hebrew form maw is reproduced by Swpvds or
Zofvas. See 2 Kings xviii. 18, 26; Isa. xxii. 15, XXXVI. 3, II, 22,
XxXXvVii. z.

5°-6 describe the vision of Isaiah, vi—xi. 40, which he
saw in the twentieth year of Hezekiah’s reign, vi. r.

Those which Isaiah... had given him. This is evidently the
vision which Isaiah saw in the twentieth year of Hezekiah.
See next verse.

Which Isaiah, the son of Amoz, had given to him and also to the
prophets. Sobe. areads, ‘which Isaiah the son of Amoz and
the prophets also had given to him.’

Store up with him what he himself had seen in the king’s house.
Cf. Greek Legend, i. 2, The vision is that of Isaiah recorded


CHAPTER I. 4-7 5


king’s house regarding the judgement of the angels,
and the destruction of this world,and regarding the
garments of the saints and j their ¢ going forth, and
regarding }their} transformation and the persecution
and ascension of the Beloved. 6. In the twentieth
year of the reign of Hezekiah, Isaiah had seen the
words of this prophecy and had delivered them
to Jésib his son. And whilst he (Hezekiah) gave i. 6°-13*=


AA . . M ty -
commands, Jésib the son of Isaiah standing by, fox af


7. Isaiah said to Hezekiah the king, but not in the Isaiah.
presence of Manasseh only did he say unto him:
‘ As the Lord liveth, whose name has not been sent
into this world, and as the Beloved of my Lord


in vi.-xi. It is specially mentioned that this vision was experi-
enced in the king’s palace ; see vi. 10-15. a@ reads, ‘store up
with him what the king alone had seen’; bd (with a gram-
matical correction), ‘store up with him the vision which had
been in the king’s house.’

Judgement of theangels. The only references to this judgement
are found in x. 12, iv. 18,

Destruction of this world. See x. 12, iv. 18.

Garments of the saints. See vii. 22, viii. 14, 26, ix. 9, 24, 25 (xi.
35), iv. 16, 17.

+ Their+ going forth, and regarding + their + transformation. The
pronouns are all but certainly wrong. The words should refer
tothe Messiah. Cf. iii. 13 of the Greek [7] éféAevors [rod dya}nyrod
«+» [Kal 4] perapdppwors adrod ; also Greek Legend, i. 2. Thus
these words could refer to iii. 13 as well as the account in vi.-xi.

The persecution and ascension of the Beloved. The former is men-
tioned in iii. 13 (cf. iv. 13, ix. 14, xi. 19,20). The ascension in
ix. 16, X. 14, xi. 23-32, iii. 18, iv. 13.

q. Manasseh was barely more than eight in the twenty-sixth
year of Hezekiah’s reign.

As the Lord liveth, &c. The familiar Hebrew idiom 93 min'"N,
The Greek is to be found in Greek Legend, ii. 8, iii. 13.

The Spirit which speaketh in me. Cf. ix. 36.


6 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


liveth, and the Spirit which speaketh in me liveth,
all these commands and these words will be made of
none effect by Manasseh thy son, and through the
agency of his hands I shall depart mid the torture
of my body. 8. And Sammael Malchira will serve


And as the Beloved. . . in me liveth. Editorial addition.

These commands. Referred to in the close of i. 6 and in ii. 1.

I shall depart, dc. There seems to have been a loss of the
words ‘from this life’ or ‘ from life’ in his Ethiopic text. See
Greek Legend, i. 8, 13.

8. Sammael = DNOD, Sammael was originally one of the
chief archangels. But with a view to make the earth his
kingdom he tempted Eve (Jalkut Shim Beresh. 25). Thence-
forward he appears as the chief of the Satans (Debarim rabba, 11),
and as the angel of death (Targ. Jer. on Gen. iii. 6). Moreover,
just as Michael was the angelic patron of Israel, so Sammael
was its special foe (Shem. rabba, 18). See Weber’s Jiidische
Theologie?, 169, 218, 219, 253, from which these statements have
been drawn.

Sammael is mentioned also in i. 11; ii. 1; iii. 19; v. 15, 16;
vii. 9; xi. 41. On the various activities of Sammael and his
relation to Beliar, see later notes on this verse,

Malchiré. Whence this name is derived I know not. It
appears here to be a surname of Sammael. The name recurs in
v. 8 (MS. a) as Milchiras, where see note. In xi. 41 Sammael
has the surname Satan.

And he will become a follower of Beliar. Since these words most
probably go back to a Hebrew original, we shall render: ‘so
that he will become,’ &. Cf. ii. 4.

Beliar. Mentioned also in i.g; ii. 4; iii. 11, 13; iv. 2, 14, 16, 18;
v. 1,4 (ac), 15. The form Berial is simply a corruption of the
Ethiopie version ; for in the Greek version on iii, 11, 13 we have
BeAlap, and in the Latin version in the same verses Beliac, a slip of
the scribe for Beliar. In many cases the Ethiopic MSS. still retain
the correct form : ¢ always right except in v. 1: aright ini. 9 and
v.4:biniv.16. In v. 4, however, this reading seems corrupt.
In Jubilees, i. 20, we find Belchér, and in xv. 33 of the same work
Béléar and Biliar in the two best MSS. All these forms point


CHAPTER I. 7, 8 7


Manasseh, and execute all his desire, and he will
become a follower of Beliar rather than of me:


to BeAlap. Beliar is spoken of also in 2 Cor. vi. 15; in Jubilees,
as we have already noticed, the Sibylline Oracles, and the Test. XII
Patriarchs. In Jubilees the references are i. 20, ‘spirit of Beliar’;
XV. 33, ‘sons of Beliar.’ In the former passage Beliar is conceived
as an evil spirit. In the Sibylline Oracles, ii. 167, Beliar is to come
as the Antichrist and work many signs: while, according to
iii. 63-73, he is to proceed from the emperors of Rome, and after
working many great signs and deceiving even the elect he and
his followers are to be burnt up. In the Testaments of his
II Patriarchs, Beliar appears at times as the source of im-
moral deeds and at times as the Antichrist. Thus he is the
source of impurity, Reub. 6, and of lying, Dan. 5. He cannot
overcome a chaste man, Reub. 4, and flees from men who
beware of wrath and lies, Dan.5. He sends seven evil spirits
against man, Reub. 2. His works are to the Law of the Lord
as darkness unto light, Lev. 19 (ef. 2 Cor. vi. 15). The spirits
of Beliar will be punished, Lev. 3. The Messiah will war
against him and wrest from him his captives, Dan. 5, and bind
him, Lev. 18. Beliar is closely connected with the tribe of
Dan: see.5, also Bousset, Antichrist Legend, 26, 171, 172. On
the derivation and Old Testament meanings of the words, see
Encyclopaedia Biblica, cols. 525-527.

Relation of Sammael to Beliar. In some respects their functions
are identical, but in others they are clearly distinguishable.
They are identical in the following respects. Both Sammael
and Beliar dwell and rule in the firmament, vii. 9, iv. 2: both
take possession of Manasseh, Sammael, ii. 1; Beliar, i. 9, iii. 11,
v. 1: both are wroth with Isaiah for his visions, Sammael, v. 15 ;
Beliar, iii. 13, v. 1, both have Isaiah sawn in sunder through
Manasseh, Sammael, xi. 41; Beliar, v.15: both are ultimately to
be overcome, Sammael, to be destroyed, v. 15 ; Beliar to be cast
into Gehenna, iv. 16. But in certain respects they are to be
differentiated, and Sammael herein appears to be the inferior of
Beliar. Thus Sammael exerts himself to make Manasseh the sub-
ject of Beliar, i.8 (ii. 4). Beliar, moreover, has his subordinate
kings (Satanic or human ?), iv. 16; he is the prince (or king) of
this world, i. 3, iv. 2; and, as in the Sibyllines, he is the Anti-


8 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


g. And many in Jerusalem and in Judea he will
cause to abandon the true faith, and Beliar will
dwell in Manasseh, and by his hands I shall be
sawn asunder. 10. And when Hezekiah heard
these words he wept very bitterly, and rent his
garments, and placed earth upon his head, and fell
on his face. 11. And Isaiah said unto him: ‘The
counsel of Sammael against Manasseh is consum-
mated: nought will avail thee.’ 12. And on that
day Hezekiah resolved in his heart to slay
Manasseh his son. 13. And Isaiah said to


christ, iv. 2. This earth will be the scene of his parusia, iv. 2,
and of his manifestation, iv. 18.

9. True faith. Literally, ‘ faith of truth’ or ‘ of righteousness.’

Beliar will dwell, dc. In the Greek Legend Beliar is replaced
by Satan, just as Sammael in verse 11 : see i. 9, where much of
this verse is reproduced.

ro. See Greek Legend, i. 10.

Ir. Counsel of Sammael .. . is consummated. The Greek Legend, i.
11, is clearer: Sef yap mAnpwOfvat tiv Bovddy rod Sarava rd.
Observe that the familiar term Satan replaces Sammael.

Nought will avail thee. Cf. Greek Legend, i, 11 ode dpedqous
ceavroy obdéy.

12, And on that day. Emended from be = ‘on this day and’:
a = ‘on those words,’ See Critical Note, where Greek Legend is
quoted. These words have hitherto been wrongly connected
with the preceding verse.

1g. I shall inherit the heritage, dc. See viii. 12.

i-ii. 1. The sense and partly the diction of many clauses
in i-ii, 1 are reproduced in the Opus Imperfectum in Matthaeum
Homil. i. (printed among the works of Chrysostom, vol. vi.
xx-xxi, Montfaucon). See also Fabricius, Codex Pseud. p. 10943
Laurence, 149; Dillmann, p. 65. ‘Providentia autem Dei sic
eum dispensavit vocari, quia (ii. 1) obliturus fuerat omnem con-
versationem patris sui sanctam et omnia beneficia Dei pro merito
eius collata in ipsum, et (i. 8, ii. 4) stimulatus ab insurgente
diabolo, qui solet insurgere super genus humanum ad evertendum,


CHAPTERS I. g—II. I 9


Hezekiah : ‘the Beloved hath made of none effect
thy design, and the purpose of thy heart will not be


accomplished, for with this calling have I been called i. 13'=
editorial


and I shall inherit the heritage of the Beloved.’ addition.
ii, 1. And it came to pass after that Hezekiah ii. 1-iii. 12

died and Manasseh became king, that he did not oe

remember the commands of Hezekiah his father Isaiah.


gesturus omnia, quae Deum ad iracundiam provocarent. Denique
cum aegrotasset Ezechias in tempore quodam, et venisset ad eum
Esaias propheta visitandum, (i. 1, 6") vocavit Ezechias filium suum
Manassen et coepit ei mandare, quod debeat Deum timere, quaomodo
regere regnum et alia multa. (i. 7) Et dixit ad eum Esaias : vere”
quia non descendunt verba tua in cor eius, sed et me ipsum oportet per
manum eius interfict (i. 10, 12) Quod audiens Ezechias volebat filium
suum interficere, dicens: quia melius est me sine filio mori quam
talem filium relinquere, qui et Deum exasperet et sanctos eius
persequatur. Tenuit autem eum vix Esaias propheta, dicens :
(i. 1g) irritum faciat Deus consilium tuum hoc, videns Ezechiae
religionem, quia plus amabat Deum quam filium suum.’ I have
italicized the words that are drawn from our book and added
the references. On value of this text see Introd., pp. xl.-xli.

8-12. A somewhat different account of this interview of
Isaiah and Hezekiah is found in the Talmud Berachoth, 10°.
‘What is the meaning of the words ‘Thou shalt die and not
live”? ‘Thou shalt die in this world and not live in the next
world.” He said: ‘Wherefore is all this?” He answered
him: ‘Because thou hast not practised fruitfulness and in-
crease.” He rejoined : “ Because it was revealed to me by the
Holy Spirit that unprofitable children would spring from me.”
He replied : “What concern hast thou in the secrets of the
All Merciful? Thou shouldest have done what was com-
manded thee, and the Holy One, blessed be He, may do what
pleases Him.” He replied thereto: ‘“‘Give me thy daughter :
perhaps my merits and thine together will bring it about that
profitable children may spring from me.” Then replied he:
‘“‘The judgement is already determined regarding thee.” ’

ii. 1. Manasseh ... forgat. These words represent a parono-
masia in Hebrew, nw m2, This was observed by the author


10 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


but forgat them, and Sammael abode in Manasseh
and clung fast to him. 2. And Manasseh forsook
the service of the God of his father, and he served
Satan and his angels and his powers. 3. And he
turned aside the house of his father which had
been before the face of Hezekiah (from) the words
of wisdom and from the service of God. 4. And
Manasseh turned aside his heart to serve Beliar ;


of the Opus Imperfectum in Matthaewm. See p. 8. ‘Providentia Dei
sic eum (i.e. Manasseh) dispensavit vocari, quia obliturus fuerat.’
See Greek Legend, iii. 2. The same play on words is found in
Genesis xli. 51.

Commands of Hezekiah. See i. 6, 7.

Sammacel abode, dc. See note on i. 8. x

2. This verse is found in its entirety in Greek Legend, iii. 2.

3. Turned aside the house of his father which had been before the
Jace of Hezekiah. Such is the obvious and literal translation of
the Ethiopic text. The Ethiopic verb (rendered ‘turned aside’)
is used in this sense in the next verse and in iv.9; v. 8. This
rendering is supported by the Greek Legend, iii. 3 eféAwe mévra
tov olxov Tod narpds adrod. Dillmann (followed by Beer) trans-
lates : ‘mutavit in domo patris sui ea, quae coram facie Ezechiae
fuerant.’ This rendering is based on a rare idiom, in accordance
with which the word ‘house’ can stand in a locative sense
without a preposition after verbs meaning ‘sojourning,’ &c.,
as in Gen. xxiv. 23; xxxviii. 11 ; Luke xix. 5. Such a verb is
not indeed expressed in Num. xxx. 11; the sense, however,
implies it. Since, however, our text neither expresses nor
admits of such a verb, Dillmann’s rendering is very questionable,
even if the Greek Legend was not decisive on this point.

(From) the words of wisdom and from the service of God. The text
makes these words the object of the verb. I have supplied the
preposition in accordance with the Greek Legend, iii. 3 dad ris
Tov Geod Aatpelas Kal npookyycews.

4. Beliar, the angel of lawlessness, See on iv. w.

Beliar .. . the ruler of this world, Cf. i.3; x. 29; John xii. 31;
xvi. 11 6 dpxav Tod Kécpov Tovrou: 2 Cor, iv. 4 6 eds Tov aldvos


CHAPTER Il. 1-7 II


for the angel of lawlessness, who is the ruler of this
world, is Beliar, whose name is Matanbfichts. And
he delighted in Jerusalem because of Manasseh,
and he made him strong in apostatizing (Israel)
and in the lawlessness which were spread abroad
in Jerusalem. 5. And witchcraft and magic in-
creased and divination and auguration, and forni-
cation, [and adultery], and the persecution of the
righteous by Manasseh and [Belachira, and] Tobia
the Canaanite, and John of Anathoth, and by
(Zadok) the chief of the works. 6. And the rest
of the acts, behold they are written in the book of
the Kings of Judah and Israel. 7. And, when
Isaiah, the son of Amoz, saw the lawlessness which
was being perpetrated in Jerusalem and the worship


rovrov : Eph. vi. 12 mpds rods xocpoxpdropas rod oxdrous rovrou :
ii, a rdv dpxovra ris efovotas Tob dépos.

Matanbichis. So MSS. ac. b reads ‘Matanbakas.’ In v. 3
it appears as Méchémbéchis. It has been conjectured to be
derived from NP {FD = worthless gift: see Liicke, i, 282.

Made him strong. So rightly emended by Dillmann.

In apostatizing. See 2 Kings xxi. 9, which gives this idea.
G* less good : ‘in apostasy.”

5. See 2 Chron. xxxiii. 6 (LXX) é#Andovifero nai édappakevero
kat olwvi{ero. Also 2 Kings xxi. 6. See Greek: also Greek
Legend, iii. 3.

[And adultery], Bracketed as an addition on the Ethiopic.
Wanting both in G@ and Greek Legend, iii. 3.

Persecution. See 2 Kings xxi. 16.

(Belachird and], I have bracketed these words as they are
absent from the Greek. Moreover the name is evidently
introduced for the first time in ii. 12. Z

Anathoth. See Encyclopaedia Biblica in loc.

(Zadok). Supplied from the Greek.

6. a Kings xxi. 17; 2 Chron. xxxiii. 18.


Us =
ditorial
ddition.


12 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


of Satan and his wantonness, he withdrew from
Jerusalem and settled in Bethlehem of Judah.
8. And there also there was much lawlessness,
and withdrawing from Bethlehem he settled on
a mountain in a desert place. go. And Micaiah
the prophet, and the aged Ananias, and Joel and
Habakkuk, and his son Jésib, and many of the
faithful who believed in the ascension into heaven,
withdrew and settled on the mountain. 10. They
were all clothed with garments of hair, and they
were all prophets. And they had nothing with
them but were naked, and they all lamented with
a great lamentation because of the going astray
of Israel. 11. And these eat nothing save wild
herbs which they gathered on the mountains, and
having cooked them, they lived thereon together
with Isaiah the prophet. And they spent two


7. His wantonness. Greek has nopriy atrot : Greek Legend, iii.
8 dowriay.

g. This verse, which could not have appeared as it stands in
the Jewish Martyrdom of Isaiah, is an editorial addition drawn
largely and almost verbally from vi. 7. The clause ‘withdrew
and settled on the mountain’ is repeated from ver. 8 ; the mis-
leading phrase ‘his son’ and the clause ‘many of the faithful

. . ascension into heaven’ are the editor’s own.

Habakkuk. Eth. has Enbiqdm = Greek ’Apfaxovp.

11. Herbs. Dillmann refers to 2 Kings iv. 38sqq. This living
on herbs may be designed to prepare them to receive super-
natural disclosures. A similar preparation was made by Daniel,
x. 2,3. In4 Ezra ix. 26, Ezra, when preparing for a divine
revelation, declares : ‘ De herbis agri manducavi.’ Similarly in
xii. 51 ‘Sedi in campo septem diebus ... et manducabam de
fioribus solummodo agri, de herbis facta est esca mihi in diebus
illis.’ See Clemen, Z. /, W. T. 1896, p. 396.


CHAPTER II, 7-12 13


years of days on the mountains and hills. 12. And
after this, whilst they were in the desert, there was
a certain man in Samaria named Belchira, of the
family of Zedekiah, the son of Chenaan, a false


12-16 introduce Belchiraé and give certain details of his
history. The subject of verse 11 is resumed in iii. x.

12. Belchird, See ii. 5, 12, 16; iii. 1,6, 12; v. 2, 3, 4, 5, 12, 15.
There are many difficulties connected with this name in our
book. The first is concerned with the form of the word. Thus it
has four forms in the Greek Papyrus Fragment : ii. 12 BeAryetdp ;
iii. ra BeAyeipd; and Bexepa ii. 16; iii. 1; and MeAxepd iii. 6.
The first appears to be merely a variant of the second. Next the
form Beyxerpds occurs once in iii. 10 of the Greek Legend. In
the Latin Fragment iii. 1, 11 only Bechira is attested. The
same variance prevails within the Ethiopic version. Thus we
find Belchira attested by a in ii. 1a; ili. 11; v. 2: Balchira by
all MSS. in iii. 1,6; v. 3, 5, 15; and by be in ii. 5, 135 iii.
Ia; v. 2, 12; and by bin v. 4; Belachiré by « in ii, 5:
Melachiré by a in v. 1a: Milchiras by a in v. 8; fbchira by a,
Abchira by bin ii. 16. Nowas regards Ibchira it is clear that it
goes back to Bexepé. Balchira is simply a later orthographic
variant of Belchira, which, though only found in a, is clearly
the olderform. Belachira is very closely akin to Greek forms of
the name in ii, 12 and iii. 12 of the Greek Fragment. Thus with

the exception of Melachiré in v. 12 (a), Milchirds in v. 8 (a), and
MeAxe:pd in ii. 6, G’, all the above forms go back to Bexerpé and BeAxerpa.

But what are we to make of MeAxerpa in iii, 6, of Melachtra
in v. 12 (a) and the closely related forms—Malchira in i. 8,
Milchiras in v. 8? We may dismiss Malchira i. 8 from con-
sideration as a surname of Sammael. As regards the rest they
are clearly variants or equivalents of Belchira ; for over against
MeAxeipa in iii. 6 all MSS. of E give Balchira, and rightly ac-
cording to the context. In like manner Milchirds and Mela-
chira are equivalents of Balchira, for whereas the former are
attested only by a, the latter is read by tc. They are, however,
ancient variants, for if we turn to the Greek Legend, we find
frequent mention of a false prophet MeAxias. It is this Melchias
in the Legend who addressed to Isaiah the words attributed to
Milchirasin a in v.8 (a) of our book. And just as Milchiras clearly


14 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


prophet, whose dwelling was in Bethlehem. Now
fHezekiahf the son of Chandni, who was the brother
of his father, and in the days of Ahab, king of
Israel, had been the teacher of the 400 prophets
of Baal, had himself smitten and reproved Micaiah
the son of Amada the prophet. 13. And he, Micaiah,


stands for an impersonation of the devil (see v. 9) and is actually
so designated by Ambrose on Ps. cxviii, so Melchias is in the
Legend called A:dBodos by Isaiah. Melachira in v. 12 is the same
as Milchirds in v. 8, and as MeAxias in the Greek Legend. Thus
at an early date in the tradition the name of the false prophet
was sometimes written as Belchiré (with its variants) and
Melchira (with its variants). From the presence of 7 in the great
majority of the variants, it follows that Bexepd is a secondary
form of BeAxepd. Gesenius, Studien und Kritiken, 1830, pp.
244-246, derives Belchira from mopba= mp bya =lord of
the world. i ; ®

Zedekiah, the son of Chendan = Xedexias vids Xaavé (B Xavava A) =
MIYIS"}2 MPT, Seer Kings xxii. 11, The Greek Fragment
gives =. v. Xavavi.

Bethlehem. Bethany in the Greek.

Hezekiah the son of Chandni. Undoubtedly the same as the
Zedekiah just mentioned. Indeed, as the Greek Fragment
shows, for Hezekiah we should read Zedekiah. This is not a
mere slip of the Ethiopic translation; for it appears from the
Chron. Pasch. (p. 98 B joav pevdorpopijrat ECexias .. . nai ddA v’
and 96 C Pevdonpopijrat Sedexias . . . at GAA: rerpaxdorcoci—quoted.
by Dillmann, p. 66) that these two different Greek translitera-
tions of the same Hebrew name were current. As the Greek
proves, however, they have no right in our text.

Brother of his father. This Zedekiah was an uncle of Belchira.

Of Baal. This is an error on the part of the writer. He has
confounded the prophets mentioned in 1 Kings xxii. 6 with
those mentioned in 1 Kings xviii. 22.

Smitten. 1 Kings xxii. 24.

Son of Amdadd, Son of Imlah. Various forms assumed by
this name in Greek MSS. are Iepaa, IeuiAa, IexAa, See Holmes
and Parsons, LXX on 2 Chron, xviii. 8,


CHAPTER II, 12-16. 15


had been reproved by Ahab and cast into prison.
(And he was) with Zedekiah the prophet: they
were with Ahaziah the son of * Ahab, king in
Samaria*. 14. And Elijah the prophet of Tébén of
Gilead was reproving Ahaziah and Samaria, and
prophesied regarding Ahaziah that he should die
on his bed of sickness, and that Samaria should
be delivered into the hand of Leba Nasr because he
had slain the prophets of God. 15. And when the
false prophets, who were with Ahaziah the son of
Ahab and their teacher Jalerjas of Mount } Joel t, had
heard—16. Now he was a brother of Zedekiah—


13. (And he was). Supplied from G’.

*Ahab, king in Samaria*. See Critical Note in loc.

14. Of Tébon of Gilead. Cf. 1 Kings xvii. 1 (LXX) 6é OecBeirns éx
@coBav Hs Tadadd. Here we observe that our text takes
‘awn in 1 Kings xvii. 1 as signifying é« GecBéy or ‘from
Thisbe,’ a town of Naphtali. So also Josephus, Ant. viii. 13. 2
mpophryns . . . é wbdews @eceBdvns ris Tadadiridos xwpas. This
Thisbe (@:c24) is mentioned in Tobit i. 2. Further, it omits
6 @ecBeirnjs, as does MS. A of the LXX. The above Hebrew
word, according to the Massoretic punctuation, = ‘of the
sojourners of.’

Prophesied regarding Ahaziah. See 2 Kings i. 1-6.

Leba Nésr. Corrupt for Salmanassar. Cf. Apoc. Bar. Ixii. 6
and 4 Ezra xiii. 40 (Dillmann).

.15. tJoel t+. See note 16, p. 87.

16. Now he was o brother. For ‘he’ E has fbchira (a), G?
Bexepd. I have followed L, which omits this name. But
the more natural rendering of E would be: ‘Now that
Belchira was a brother,’ &. Inverse 12 Belchira is said to be
a nephew of Zedekiah. Grenfell and Hunt appear to be right
in relating the ‘he’ to Jalerjas.

+Aguarén}. Corrupt for Gomorrha. Gomorrha used con-
temptuously for Samaria. See iii. 10.

(Slew). Supplied from G?L',


16 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


when they had heard, they persuaded Ahaziah the
king of ¢ Aguarén + and (slew) Micaiah.

iii. 1. *And Belchira* recognized and saw the place
of Isaiah and the prophets who were with him ;. for
he dwelt in the region of Bethlehem, and was an
adherent of Manasseh. And he prophesied falsely in
Jerusalem, and many belonging to Jerusalem were
confederate with him, and he was a Samaritan.
2. And it came to pass when Alagar Zagar, king
of Assyria, had come and captured Samaria and
taken the nine (and a half) tribes captive, and
led them away to the * mountains * of the Medes
and the rivers of Tézén; 3. This (Belchira), whilst
still a youth, had escaped and come to Jerusalem
in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah, but
he walked not in the ways of his father of
Samaria; for he feared Hezekiah. 4. And he was
found in the days of Hezekiah speaking words of
lawlessness in Jerusalem. 5. And the servants of
Hezekiah accused him, and he made his escape to


iii. 1. *.And Belchird* recognized. Text corrected from G? Li.

Confederate with him. According to G? we should have the
same verb here as in the preceding sentence: ‘was an
adherent of.’

2. Alagar Zagér, i. v. Salmanassar.

(And a half). The words in brackets are supplied from the
Greek and Latin. Israel is so designated also in the Apoe. Bar.
lxii. 5, Ixxvii. 19, lxxviii. 1; also in the Syriac and Arabic
versions of 4 Ezra xiii. 40 and in John of Malalas, p. 158. See
my Apoc. Bar., p. 124.

*Mountains*. E = dpa, ‘boundaries,’ corrupt for épy, as in
G'L*, yet see note on p. 89.

Taz6n, i.e. Gozan. See a Kings xvii. 6, xviii. 11.


CHAPTER III, I-10 17


the region of Bethlehem. And * they * persuaded
... 6, And Balchira accused Isaiah and the pro-
phets who were with him, saying: ‘Isaiah and
those who are with him prophesy against Jerusalem
and against the cities of Judah that they shall be
laid waste and (against the children of Judah and)
Benjamin also that they shall go into captivity,
and also against thee, O lord the king, that thou
shalt go (bound) with hooks and iron chains’: 7.
But they prophesy falsely against Israel and Judah.
8. And Isaiah himself hath said: ‘I see more than
Moses the prophet.’ 9. But Moses said: ‘No man
can see God and live’; and Isaiah hath said:
‘I have seen God and behold I live.’ 10. Know,


5. *They* persuaded... E reads, ‘he persuaded,’ but G?
gives plural. As Grenfell and Hunt propose, we should most
probably supply Belchira as object of the verb and the false
prophets as its subject.

6. Those who. The Greek and Latin give ‘the prophets who.’

(Against the children of Judah and). Supplied from L'.

(Bound) with hooks and iron chains = év yadedypas nat év médaus.
The words are clearly based on 2 Chron. xxxiii. 11, ‘The
captains. . . took Manasseh in chains (or with hooks) and bound
him with fetters.’ Since the LXX renders xaréAaBov Mavacc?
év Secpois wai einoav airdy év mésas, our text is independent
of it. Tadedypa is a LXX rendering of O'NM in Ezek. xix. 9.

q. G? makes an addition here against E and Lt.

8-9. These verses are referred to by Origen, In LIesaiam
Homil. i. 5 (Lommatzsch, xiii. 245, 246) ‘ Aiunt ideo Isaiam esse
sectum a populo quasi legem praevaricantem et extra scripturas
annuntiantem. Scriptura enim dicit: ‘nemo videbit faciem
meam et vivet.” Iste vero ait: ‘Vidi Dominum Sabaoth.”
Moses, aiunt, non vidit et tu vidisti? Et propter hoc eum
secuerunt et condemnaverunt eum ut impium.’

9g. No man can see God, &e. Exod. xxxiii, 20.

I have seen God, &c. Isa. vi. 1.


c


18 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


therefore, O king, that *heislying*. And Jerusalem
also he hath called Sodom, and the princes of Judah
and Jerusalem he hath declared to be the people of
Gomorrah. And he brought many accusations
against Isaiah and the prophets before Manasseh.
13. But Beliar dwelt in the heart of Manasseh and
in the heart of the princes of Judah and Benjamin
and of the eunuchs and of the councillors of the
king. 12. And the words of Belchira pleased him
[exceedingly], and he sent and seized Isaiah. 13.


Testament For Beliar was in great wrath against Isaiah by


of Heze-
kiah =iii,
13>—iv.
18.


reason of the vision, and because of the exposure
wherewith he had exposed Sammael, and because
through him the going forth of the Beloved from
the seventh heaven had been made known, and His
transformation and His descent and the likeness


to. *Heislying*. Emended with L'G?. See Crit. note. Text =
‘they are lying prophets.’ But verses 8-10% refer to Isaiah only.

Jerusalem also he hath called Sodom, &c. Based on Isa. i. 10:
‘Hear the word of the Lord, ye rulers of Sodom ; give ear unto
the law of our God, ye people of Gomorrah.’ Cf. Jerome’s
Comm. in Ies. i, 10 ‘ Aiunt Hebraei ob duas causas interfectum
Isaiam': quod principes Sodomorum et populum Gomorrhae
eos appellaverit, et quod, domino dicente ad Mosen Non
poteris videre faciem meam, iste ausus sit dicere Vidi dominum
sedentem super thronum excelsum et elevatum.’ The same
tradition is found in the Talmud, Jebam. fol. 49°.

11. Beliar. See note oni. 9.

1a. I have connected ‘and the words... exceedingly’ with
verse 12 and not with rz asin preceding editions. ‘Exceedingly’
is an addition of E.

13. The exposure. G® has here the word deypariopés which is
only found once elsewhere. Cf. Matt. i. 19 for the verb.

The going forth of the Beloved, &c. These words describe the
contents of vi.-xi.


CHAPTER III. 10-16 19


into which He should be transformed (that is) the
likeness of man, and the persecution wherewith
He should be persecuted, and the tortures where-
with the children of Israel should torture Him,
and the coming of His twelve disciples, and the
teaching, and that He should before the Sabbath
be crucified upon the tree, and should be crucified
together with wicked men, and that He should be
buried in the sepulchre, 14. And the twelve who
were with Him should be offended because of Him:
and * the watch of * those who watched the sepul-
chre: 15, And the descent of the angel of the
Christian Church, which is in the heavens, whom He
will summon in the last days. 16, And that (Gabriel)


The coming of His twelve disciples, and the teaching. The terser
form of G’ may be right: 7 ray dbbexa pabnreia. Here the
words appear to mean the instruction given to the Twelve, but
in verse 21 the instruction given by the Twelve.

Before the Sabbath be crucified upon the tree, and should. These words
are not found in G*, but are supported by our text in xi. 20.

14. Offended because of Him. Matt. xxvi. 31.

* The watch of * those who were watching. So emended with G?
by a slight change of vocalization from corrupt text of (a) ‘ those
watchers also were watching’; bc attempt to emend: ‘the
watchers also watching.’ Cf. Matt. xxviii. 4.

15. Angel of the Christian Church. Of. Rev. ii. 1, 8, 12a, &e.
G? has simply ‘Church,’ but the Ethiopic phrase means nothing
more,

Whom He will summon. The text may also be rendered ‘who
will summon.’

16. And that (Gabriel) the angel of the Holy Spirit. I have with
the Greek connected these words with those that follow rather
than with those that precede, as earlier editions, and accord-
ingly have placed them in verse 16. This angel is, as Grenfell
and Hunt assume, Gabriel. This name fills the lacuna in the
G? (see also next note). He and Michael, according to the


C2


20 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH |


the angel of the Holy Spirit, and Michael, the chief
of the holy angels, on the third day will open the
sepulchre: 17. And the Beloved sitting on their
shoulders will come forth and send out His twelve


Greek, open the Sepulchre. This agrees with the Gospel of
Pet. 9, which tells that two angels descended and stood on
the tomb. In Matt. xxviii. 2 only one angel is mentioned as
descending, but in Luke xxiv. 4, John xx. 12 two angels
appeared after the Resurrection. In E the verb ‘will open’ is
in the singular, but the Greek is decisive, and its evidence is
supported by verse 17.

Angel of the Holy Spirit. Cf. iv. at, vii. 23 (viii. 14), ix. 36, 39,
40, X. 4, xi. 4, 33; Herm. Mand. xi. g 6 dyyedos rod mpopyrixot
mvedpatos, Here and in xi. 4 this angel appears to be Gabriel,
but elsewhere in the book to be the Holy Spirit.

Michael, the chief of the holy angels. The mention of Michael in
this connexion points to the writer being a Jewish Christian.
Michael is not again referred to in this book save in the Latin
version ix. a3, 42.

17. The Beloved. The Ethiopic has ‘that Beloved.’ Here as
frequently the Ethiopic has rendered the definite article by the
demonstrative.

Sitting on their shoulders, i.e. of the Angel of the Holy Spirit
and of Michael. Cf. Luke xxiv. 4; John xx. 12; Gospel of
Pet. 10 rods Sto rév Eva tropotvras.

Will come forth and send out His twelve disciples. These words
are loosely quoted in the Rest of the Words of Baruch ix. 18
Abrds yap édedoerar wat &fedevoerar Kal emadggerar éavr@ dkdexa |
aroordéAous iva ebayyeriCovra: év trois éévectv. In the work cited
these words are put into the mouth of Jeremiah. When the
people heard them they were enraged, and said ix. 20 raira
nddw éori ta phyata 7a ind ‘Hoalov rod viod ’"Apds cipnuéeva, AéyorTos
Sr, Eidov rdv @edv wat Tov vidvy tov @eov. See Rendel Harris’
edition, pp. 20-21, 64.

His twelve disciples. ‘The Twelve’ are mentioned elsewhere in
13, 14, 21,iv.3,and xi.2a, The expression is a stereotyped one.
This usage of course springs from the Gospels. It does not include
St. Paul. Cf. Acts vi. 2; Rev. xxi. 14. In this sense it is used
by St. Paul himself, 1 Cor. xv. 5. In the above passage it cannot


CHAPTER III. 16-21 21


disciples: 18. And they will teach all the nations
and every tongue of the resurrection of the Beloved,
and those who believe in His cross will be saved,
and in His ascension into the seventh heaven
whence He came: 19. And that many who believe
in Him will speak through the Holy Spirit: 20.
And many signs and wonders will be wrought in
those days. 21. And afterwards, on the eve of His
approach, His disciples will forsake the teaching of
the Twelve Apostles, and their faith, and their love


include St. Paul; for the reference is to the commission given
to the Apostles before the Ascension. The very next words
iii, 18a are based on command given in Matt. xxviii. 19. Even
as late as the third century, in the list of the Twelve given
by the ‘ Ecclesiastical Canons of the Holy Apostles,’ the name
of St. Paul is not included. On the other hand he figures as
one of the Twelve in the Greek of the Apology of Aristides
(ch. xv).

18. Cf. Matt. xxviii. 19, where the Ethiopic rendering of
pabnredw is the same as here, though the meaning of pabyretw
is here different.

Believe in His cross. Of. ix. 26.

Ascension. The Ethiopic word means rather ‘ resurrection.’

ar. On the thought of the verse cf. Acts xx. 29, 30; 1 Tim.
i. 6, iv. 4, 12; 2 Tim. iii, 1; a Pet. ii. 1.

Afterwards. Not in Greek.

Teaching. Gk. mpopnteia, See verse 13, where the same
thought is expressed by yaéyreia. It is noteworthy that the
word here is not day. Yet if this portion of the Ascension
of Isaiah were late, there could hardly fail to be here the
stereotyped expression 5:dax7) ray Sd5exa.

Their faith. G? reads ‘the faith.’ In this case wiorts should be
taken objectively as equivalent to ‘the Christian faith,’ as in
the Pastoral] Epistles, 1 Tim. i. 19 (see Bernard in loc.), iv. 1, 6,
v. 8, &c. ; Jude iii. 20.

Their love and their purity. These words relate to the inward
disposition, and connote respectively a man’s duty to his


22 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


and their purity. 22. And there will be much con-
tention on the eve of [His advent and] His approach.
23. And in those days many will love office, though
devoid of wisdom. 24, And there will be many
lawless elders, and shepherds dealing wrongly by
their own sheep, and they will ravage (them) owing
to their not* having* holy shepherds. 25. And many
will change the honour of the garments of the
saints for the garments of the covetous, and there
will be much respect of persons in those days and


neighbour and to himself. The latter is more than chastity, and
signifies purity of life and motive (see Bernard, 1 Tim. iv. 12).

It is noteworthy that the above three substantives are found
together though not in the same order in 1 Tim. iv. 12, where
Timothy is bidden to be a pattern for believers év dydng, év
miore, év dyvela.

22. Much contention. The Ethiopic translator is far afield here
as he not unfrequently is when he meets the word aipeas.
Instead of ‘much contention’ read ‘many heresies.” Compare
2 Pet. ii. 1 ‘Among you also there shall be false teachers
who shall privily bring in destructive heresies.’

[His advent and]. These words I have bracketed as a duplicate
rendering of év 7@ éyyilew abtrdv.

24. They will ravage (them) owing to their not having holy shepherds.
Instead of ‘ holy’ the Greek gives ‘pure.’ The above rendering
is based on an emendation of a, which as it stands = ‘they will
ravage owing to their not... the holy shepherds.’ The dots
indicate a vox nulla, which however by a change of one letter =
dia 7d ph yew as we actually have in G’. The words ‘holy
shepherds,’ which in a is in the nominative, should be in the
accusative as G’? has it. G* = ‘who will be ravaged through
not having pure shepherds.’

25. Garments of the saints. A special form of dress is here
designated. Harnack (Chronol. d. Alichristlichen Litteratur, 575) con-
jectures that the dress here referred to is that of the ascetics.

Covetous. Cf. 2 Tim. iii. 1, = & éoxdrats Hyépas ... €oovra...
guddpyupot.


CHAPTER III. 22-30 23


lovers of the honour of this world. 26. And there
will be much slander and vainglory at the approach
of the Lord, and the Holy Spirit will withdraw
from many. 27. And there will not be in those
days many prophets, nor those who speak trust-
worthy words, save one here and there in divers
places, 28. On account of the spirit of error and
fornication and of vainglory, and of covetousness,
which shall be in those, who will be called ser-
vants of that One and in those who will receive that
One. 29. And there will be great hatred in the
shepherds and elders towards each other. 30. For
there will be great jealousy in the last days; for


26. Much slander. There is here a dittography in E which
= ‘slanderers [and slanderers] much,’ i. e. two different plural
forms in E of the same singular, or rather the first word means
‘slander.’ See Crit. Note.

27. Prophets. There is no mention of the apostles. Their age
therefore seems past, and that of the prophets to have taken
their place as in Rev. where the apostles are only mentioned
once as living contemporaries xviii. 20 (ii. 2 ?) but the prophets
throughout : cf. x. 7, xi. 18, xvi. 6, xviii. 24, &e.

Trustworthy words. Since G* here is merely icxvpa and E is
a literal rendering of that word, we are forced by the context
to give it an unnatural meaning. It is hardly possible to
believe that Aadodvres ioxupa is aught else than a bad rendering
of a Semitic original. The rest of the verse points also in this
direction. I find that icxvpds is used once as a rendering of
JONI by Aquila and Theodotion in Deut. vii. 9.

Save one here and there in divers places. G? shows that the
idiom is thoroughly Semitic: 4 ¢fs wat ef(s) nat eis év tézo1s Kal
Térots.

28, The spirit of error. This phrase is found in 1 John iv. 6.
Cf. 1 Tim. iv. 1. ,

Covetousness. See verse 25.

Receive that One, i.e. the Beloved. Cf. iv. 9.


24 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


every one will say what is pleasing in his own eyes.
31. And they will make of none effect the prophecy
of the prophets which were before me, and *these*
my visions also will they make of none effect, in
order to speak after the impulse of their own heart.

IV. 1. And now Hezekiah and Jésib my son,
*these* are the days of the *completion of the
world*, 2. After it is consummated, Beliar the great
ruler, the king of this world, will descend, who hath
ruled it since it came into being ; yea, he will descend
from his firmament in the likeness of a man,


30. Every one will say, dc. Of. Hermas, Sim. ix. 22,

gi. *These*. MSS. give At: = ‘which’ corrupt for an: = ~
‘these.’

iv. 1. See Critical Note, p. 95.

Hezekiah and Jéséb my son. Editorial addition.

2. Beliar, the great ruler. See note on ii. 4. The Ethiopic
may be rendered ‘angel’ or ‘archon’ or ‘ruler.’ From iv. 4,
however, where the same Ethiopic word is a rendering of
apxav, it is obviously a rendering of the same word here.

King of this world. In ii. 4 he is called ‘the ruler of this
world’: in x. 29 ‘ the prince of this world.’ The two latter =
6 dpxwv robrou Tod Kécpov. See note on ii. 4.

From his firmament. This firmament is subsequently referred
to in vi. 13, vii. 9-12, x. 29, as the dwelling-place of Sammael
(and probably of Beliar). Unlike St. Paul, who in some way
conceived evil powers to have their abode in heaven—Eph. vi.
12 7d. mvevparixd Tis Tovnplas év Tots émoupaviois—the writer of this
book admits them to no higher place than the firmament which
lies immediately below the first heaven. See my edition of |
the Slavonic Enoch, xxix. 5 note.

Lawless king. In ii. 4 ‘the angel of lawlessness.’ In 2 Thess.
ii. 3 the Antichrist is ‘the man of lawlessness.’ Lawlessness is
the characteristic of Antichrist : see Introduction, pp. liv, lxii.

Slayer of his mother. For other references to the matricide
see Sibyll, Or. iv. 121, v. 145, 363, viii. 71, &e.

2-3. Who himself (even) this king 3. Will persecute the plant, ce.


CHAPTERS III. 30—IV. 3 25


a lawless king, the slayer of his mother: who
himself (even) this king 3. Will persecute the
_plant-which the Twelve Apostles of the Beloved


We must here follow the Greek (seep.95). MS. dof E, itis true,
comes very near to this : ‘who himself (is) the king of this world
and he will persecute the plant.’ See Critical Note in loc.

It is quite clear that these words and the rest of verse 3
belong to the historical Nero. The rest of the passage has to do
with the Antichrist only.

3. Will persecute. It is of importance to observe that, just as
in Revelation (xvii. 6; xix. 2), the persecution under Nero is
the only persecution known to this writer. Hence he was
not acquainted with that of Domitian, Tacitus, Agric. 44: this
persecution extended to Palestine: Hegesippus in Eusebius,
Hist, iii. 19-20.

The plant which . .. have planted. From the Greek riv gureiay
dv putevcovow we seem bound to conclude that the writer was
acquainted with Matt. xv. 13 réca pureia jy ode ipdrevcer 6 maTnp
pou, where ¢uteia is used apparently for the first time in existing
literature as the equivalent of the classical Greek gu7réy or
gdrevya. It naturally means ‘a planting.’ The idea goes back
to the Old Testament. Judah was ‘the plant’ of God’s delight,
Isa. v. 7. This thought is adopted by the Enochic writers and

ghoreloped t in various directions. Thus Israel is ‘the plant o
ighteousness’ (Eth. En. xciii. 5), ‘the plant of Uprightness’
Cet En. xclii, 2), &c. See my edition of Enoch, x. 16 note.
The writer in the text has taken over this idex trom, Fudaisin
and applied it naturally to the Christi an Church. _Itis only, —
therefore;-in-point of diction and not of thought | that our text is
dependent on Matt. xv. 13; for there the phrase is applied to
Siero pera eerste

The Twelve Apostles. St. Paul is not included in the Twelve by
this writer, though the doctrine of the resurrection taught in
iv. 16-17 is certainly derived from 2 Cor. v. See note on iii. 17.

Of the Twelve one will be delivered into his hands. The Greek is
peculiar, 7av dudena . . . rails xepolv abrov mapadotycera. The
missing word of three letters I have supplied by eis in the Greek
text, p. 95. Thus we have ray dwdexa els. From E, however,
we should expect é# ray Sddexa (cf. Acts xxi. 8 dvros tx trav énra


26 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


have planted. Of the Twelve one will be de-
livered into his hands. 4. This ruler in the form
of that king will come and there will come with
him all the powers of this world, and they will
hearken unto him in all that he desires. 5. And
at his word the sun will rise at night and he will


and Rey. xxii. 11 é« TOv énrd = ‘one of the seven’). This idiom
is found in Ethiopic, though not so frequently as in Hebrew.

Of the Twelve one will be delivered up. It is probable that it is
St. Peter whose martyrdom is referred to here. The reference
can only be to St. Peter or St. Paul; for the martyrdom took
place under Nero. That it is St. Peter rather than St. Paul
appears to follow from the inference drawn on iii. 17 that our
writer does not include St. Paul in the number of the Twelve.
I am not aware of any writer who does so till half a century later.

4. This ruler. MSS. ad add ‘ Berial’ against c and Greek.

With him all the powers of this world. In Rev. xx. 7-9 Satan
assembles the nations from the four corners of the earth to
attack the camp of the saints and the holy city. A closer
parallel is to be found in Rev. xvi. 14, where the kings of the
whole world are gathered together ‘unto the war of the great
day of God.’ This expectation that all the kings and nations
of the earth should combine against Israel goes back as far as
Ezekiel xxxviii. 2—xxxix. 16. See also Zech. xiv. 2sq.; Eth.
En. lvi, xe. 13, 16; Sibyl. Or. iii. 319-322, 663-674. By early
Christian writers this expectation was transformed so that the
assault of the world powers was conceived as directed against
the young Christian Church.

5. The sun will rise at night and he will make the moon to appear at
the sixth hour, Similar portents are attributed to the Beliar
Antichrist in Sibyll. Or. iii. 64-66, which may be a contem-
porary work of a Hellenistic Jew. It is quoted on p. lxviii of the
Introduction. The same idea as one of the signs of the end of
the world is reproduced by the author of 4 Ezra v. 4 ‘Si autem
tibi dederit altissimus vivere, et videbis post tertiam turbatam,

Et relucescet subito sol noctu
Et luna interdie.’
The Antichrist will make fire come down from heaven (Rev.


CHAPTER IV. 4-9 27


make the moon to appear at the sixth hour. 6.
And all that he hath desired he will do in the world:
he will do and speak like the Beloved and he will
say: ‘I am God and before me there has been
none.’ 7. And all the people in the world will
believe in him. 8. And they will sacrifice to him
and they will serve him saying: ‘This is God and
beside him there is no other.’ g. And the greater


xiii. 13), and perform signs and lying wonders (Rev. xiii. 14, xix.
20; 2 Thess. ii.9). For later Christian references to such magical
wonders of the Antichrist see Bousset’s Antichrist Legend, 175 sqq.

6. He will do and speak like the Beloved. So ac. b reads ‘He
will make himself like to the Beloved.’ The Antichrist is the
caricature of Christ. Like Him he is to have his advent and
his manifestation and to be a worker of miracles: and as
Christ is at the head of the kingdom of God, so he is supreme
over the kingdom of evil.

I am God and before me there has been none. See iv. 8, x. 13.
Cf. 2 Thess. ii. 4 where the Antichrist ‘exalteth himself above
all that is called God . .. setting himself forth as God.’ In
Sibyll. Or. v. 33, 34 (=xii. 85, 86) it is said of Nero redivivus:
ez’ dvaxdppe | icdfov OG airév. This no doubt is the blas-
phemy on the part of the Neronic Antichrist mentioned in Rev.
xiii. 5, 6: ‘And there was given to him a mouth speaking great '
things and blasphemies, and he opened his mouth for blasphemy
against God.’ The impious claims of Caligula were never for-
gotten by the Jews. Philo writes (Leg. ad Caium, ii. 569) 6 Tdios
éaurdv éferupucey ob éyav pdvoy, dAAd Kal oldpevos elvat Beds.
The claims of the Caesars are most probably answerable for this
particular feature in the Antichrist Legend. Domitian went to
still greater lengths in this direction, Suetonius, Domit. 13 ‘Domi-
nus et Deus noster hoe fieri iubet. Unde institutum posthac,
ut ne scripto quidem ac sermone cuiusquam appellaretur aliter.’

q, 8. Cf. Rev. xiii. 4, 8, 12.

9. This deceiving of the faithful is attributed to false Christs
in Matt. xxiv. 24; Mark xiii.22. Only those who were faithless
in their lives according to 2 Thess. ii. 10-12 should succumb to
the deceits of the Antichrist.


28 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


number of those who shall have been associated
together in order to receive the Beloved, he will
turn aside after him. io. And there will be the
power of his miracles in every city and region.
11, And he will set up his image before him in
every city. 12. And he shall bear sway three


Associated . . . to receive the Beloved. Thus the Christians had
organizations designed to keep them ready for the Parusia.
Cf. iii, 28 ; iv. 13.

Io, See verse 5. The lying wonders spoken of here contain an
allusion probably to the trickery of the priesthood devoted to
the worship of the emperors throughout the cities of the East,

II. Set up his image before him in every city. In Rev. xiii. 14 the
false prophet commanded those ‘that dwell on the earth, that
they should make an image to the beast, who hath the stroke
of the sword and lived, i.e. Nero redivivus. In both these
passages the image is set up with a view to the divine worship
of the Antichrist. The historical ground for such an expecta-
tion is furnished by the command of Caligula that his statue
should be placed in the temple and sacrifices offered to it. See
Philo, De Leg. ad Caium, §§ 44 sqq.; Josephus, Ant. xviii. 8. 2.
Images of the Roman emperors were erected in various cities
of the East, and to these divine honours were paid. Caligula
ordered Petronius, the Governor of Syria, to compel the Jews to
join in the worship paid to him by the other provinces of the
empire. The attempt to enforce such worship in the syna-
gogues of Alexandria, though carried out at the cost of much
bloodshed, failed finally, and the altar raised at Jamnia to the
emperor was actually razed to the ground. This defiance of
the imperial authority led to the above-mentioned orders of
Caligula for the erection of his statue in Jerusalem,

12. Three years and seven months and twenty-seven days. Computed
according to the Julian reckoning this period amounts, as
Liicke (Einleitung in die Offenbarung, ii. 285) has pointed out, to
1335 days, the actual number found in Dan. xii. 12 and adopted
therefrom by our writer. This period points back to the ‘time
and times and half a time’ in Dan. vii. 25; xii. 7; Rev. xii.
14, in other words three and a half years. The same period is


CHAPTER IV. 9-13 29


years and seven months and twenty-seven days.
13. And many believers’ and saints having seen


otherwise described as forty-two months in Rev. xi. 2, xiii. 5,
or as twelve hundred and sixty days in Rev. xi. 3, xii. 6, in
which case the month is reckoned at thirty days, or as 1290
days in Dan. xii. 11 and the Arajxn ’E{exiov (see Clemen in
the Z. f. W. T., 1896, pp. 404 8q.).

The above three and a half years has a special significance in
apocalyptic literature as the period of the reign of Antichrist,
or the period of the last and worst woes; cf. Rev. xiii. 5, xii.
6,14. Itis referred to as ‘the times of the Gentiles’ in Luke
xxi. 24, which belongs to the interpolated Jewish Apocalypse.
This apocalyptic period has affected also Luke iv. 25 and James
v. 17. For though the famine in Elijah’s time lasted, accord-
ing to 1 Kings xviii. 1, three years, it is said in Luke iv. 25
and James v. 17 to have lasted three anda half years. The same
period is mentioned in 4 Ezrav. 4 ‘Thou wilt see it (the Roman
Empire) troubled after the third (time).’ The Latin is ‘ post
tertiam’ which =yerd tiv tpirnv. With this we should under-
stand dpay rather than 7pépay as Blass.

This verse is reproduced in Cedrenus (ed. Bonn. i. 120-121) :
ey 7H SiadnKn "ECextov Bacidéas “Iovéa Aéyer ‘Hoalas 6 mpophrys
kparioa tov dyrixpioroy ern > Kat phvas éwrd, ywopeva hpépas agg’,
wai pera 7d Tov dvtixpioroy BAnOfvar év TG Taprapy, édciv tov
Sdeondrny rav Srov Xpicrdv roy Gedy Hydv, yevéobac Be nal dvdoraow
kat dytandéiocw xaddv re kal xaxdv. Two difficulties present
themselves here. The first concerns the name which Cedrenus
assigns to our book, the Testament of Hezekiah, though attributing
the Vision to Isaiah. The name we take to be rightly transmitted,
see pp. xiii-xiv. 2 note.. The attribution of the words recorded
to Isaiah may refer to Isaiah’s interpretation of Hezekiah’s Vision
or may be a mere error of Cedrenus. The statements made
in i. 2, 4 undoubtedly convey the idea that the book relates to
the visions of Hezekiah. See note on i. 2.

The second difficulty has to do with the number 1290. This
number is not found elsewhere with a like meaning except in
Dan. xii. 11. I cannot discover any satisfactory solution of
this difficulty, nor yet which of the two authorities has pre-
served the number correctly.

13. Dillmann renders differently ; ‘Et multi(quidem erunt)


30 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


Him for whom they were hoping, who was cru-
cified, Jesus the Lord Christ, [after that I, Isaiah,
had seen Him who was crucified and ascended]


fideles et sancti quum viderunt eum quem ipsi sperabant.. .
et credentes quoque in eum—ex iis pauci, &c.’ Thistranslation
appears to be doubly erroneous. It is against the sense of the
context and against the grammar. It is against the context ;
for this recounts the triumphs of the Antichrist at the close of
the Christian era and not the conversion of men to Christianity
who had personally seen Christ. Hence the words which
Dillmann adds ‘quidem erunt’ are to be rejected. But even if
he were right, the text would be senselessly tautological. The
thought of ‘credentes in eum’ is already given by ‘fideles.’ It is
against the grammar ; for the literal rendering of the Ethiopic
should be not ‘et credentes quoque in eum’ but ‘et ii quoque qui
eredebant in eum.’ The equivalent of ‘quoque’ in the Ethiopic
is a particle, and is suffixed to the relative and not to the verb.
In other words we have here a second class, distinct from that
just mentioned. The first is composed of believers who had
seen Christ, the second of believers who had not. To this
question we shall return presently.

The words ‘And many believers and saints... believers in
Him’ represent a nominativus pendens in E, which reflects in
all likelihood a similar phenomenon in G; for in the Greek
Legend, which was built on the Greek of the Ascension, this
anomaly is found in the following passages: ii. 1; iii. 11, 19.
Hence we may restore the Greek as follows: xal woAAol pey
morot kai boro iddyres els dv adrol FAm ov Tov oravpwHévra Incovv
rov Kupioy Xpiorov [pera 76 eve ‘Hoalay ideiy abrdv tov cravpabévra
xat dvaBavra), of 8¢ cat morevorres eis abrév—dAlyor & abr&v, K.7.A.

We see that two classes of the faithful are discriminated in
this verse; believers who had seen Christ personally and
believers who had not. That this distinction was afamiliar one
in the first century of our era is clear from the New Testament.

Thus in St. John xx. 29, ‘Because thou hast seen Me, thou
hast believed : blessed are they that have not seen, and yet
have believed’; and 1 Pet. i. 8, ‘whom not having seen ye
love.’ A kindred thought appears in St. Luke x. 23, ‘ Blessed
are the eyes which see the things which ye see; for I say


CHAPTER IV. 13 31


and those also who were believers in Him—of
these few in those days will be left as His servants,


unto you, that many prophets and kings desired to see the
things which ye see and saw them not.’

Of the above two classes our text declares that few will be
left. We have therefore, here, a guide to the date of this
section of the book. Though somewhat vague, it is sufficiently
definite to enable us to conclude that the author cannot have
written later than 100 a.p, Eusebius (H. £. iii. 32. 8) holds
that with the martyrdom of Simeon, bishop of Jerusalem,
the last of those who had seen and heard Christ had passed
away. (mapednAdvda re % yeved éxeivy Tov abrais dxoais THs évOéou
copias émaxotca Karynfiwpévov.) Simeon’s death, which took
place under Trajan (H. £. iii. 32. 3 éi Tpaiavod Kaicapos),
has been assigned to various years between 102 and 110 A.D.
Hence only a few, as our text has it, of those who had been
personal followers of Christ could have been living between 90
and too a.p. Another passage in Eusebius (H. £. iii. 39. 4, 7)
should be adduced here as bearing on the present question.
In this passage Papias, who is quoted by Eusebius, claims to
have met two men, Aristion and John the Elder, who had
been personal followers of our Lord. Papias was bishop of
Hierapolis in the first half of the second century. His book
(Aoyiow kuptaxdv éfnyqoes) may be set down to the third or
fourth decade in that century; that his meeting with John
and Aristion was in the first we may reasonably infer if we
combine this passage of Papias with that quoted above.

Thus we conclude that our text points to 100 a.p. as the
terminus ad quem. We have elsewhere seen that the form of
the Antichrist myth attested in the text could hardly have
arisen earlier than 884.p. Hence the composition of the above
section goes back to 88-100 A.D.

We must deal now with individual points of interpretation
in this verse.

For whom they were hoping. See second note oniii.g. For this
idea compare Luke ii. 25, where Simeon is described as ‘ waiting
for the consolation of Israel’; also 1 Tim. i. 1, ‘ Christ Jesus
our hope’; Col. i. 27; Ignatius, Magn. 11. In St. John v. 45 we
have an exact parallel in diction, Mwajjs, eis dv bpeis jAmixare.

[After that I, Isaiah ... who was crucified and ascended]. This


32 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


while they flee from desert to desert, awaiting the
coming of the Beloved. 14. And after (one thou-
sand) three hundred and thirty-two days the Lord


awkward clause is an editorial addition made to adapt the
Testament of Hezekiah to its present context.

Few will be left. Cf St. Luke xviii. 8, ‘when the Son of man
cometh, shall he find the faith on the earth ?’

Flee from desert to desert. This flight of believers before the
Antichrist is a familiar feature in Jewish Apocalypses. Thus
this flight is enjoined in the Jewish Apocalypse interpolated in
Mark xiii. 14-16, ‘ when ye see the abomination of desolation
standing where he ought not (i.e. the Antichrist) . . . letthem
that are in Judaea flee unto the mountains,’ &c. In Rev. xii. 14
it is said that the stay of believers in the wilderness, whither
they had fled (xii. 6) would be for ‘a time and times and half
a time,’ that is for three and a half years, the period during
which Antichrist should be supreme, as we have already seen.
For references in later Christian writers to this subject see
Bousset, Antichrist Legend, pp. 212-217.

For instances of such flights to the desert owing to persecutions
in the past see 1 Kings xviii. 4, 13, xix. 4, 8,9, 13; 1 Mace. ii.
28, 29; 2 Macc. v. 27, vi. 11, x. 6; Pss. Sol. xvii. 19; Heb. xi.
37, 38.

Awaiting the ing of the Beloved = dmexbeydpevor THy mapovolay
airov. Cp. 1 Cor. i. 7; Phil. iii. 20; Heb. ix. 28; also 1 Thess.
i, ro.

There is thus in this verse no occasion for resorting to heroic
measures with Bousset (Antichrist Legend, p. 138), who proposes
to excise ‘who was crucified, Jesus the Lord Christ... His
servants while they,’ to insert a negative before ‘were hoping.’
The text would in this case contain a reference to the Anti-
christ ; ‘And many believers and saints having seen him for
whom they were (not) hoping will flee from desert,’ &e«. Such
a eryptic reference to the Antichrist as the personage ‘for
whom they were not hoping,’ after such a lengthy and explicit
account as precedes would indeed be an anti-climax. The
whole context is against Bousset’s proposal.

14. It will be observed that the text reads merely ‘three
hundred and thirty-two days.’ I have with Liicke, Gfrérer,


CHAPTER IV. 13-15 33


will come with His angels and with the armies of
the holy ones from the seventh heavén with the
glory of the seventh heaven, and He will drag
Beliar into Gehenna and also his armies. 15. And
He will give rest to the godly whom He shall find


and Dillmann inserted ‘one thousand.’ Dillmann is probably
right in regarding ‘two’ as an Ethiopic corruption of ‘ five.’
The text would then agree with iv. 12.

The Lord will come with His angels and with the armies of the holy
ones from the seventh heaven. Of. 2 Thess. 1. 7, ‘At the revelation
of the Lord Jesus from heaven with the angels of His power.’
See also Eth. En. i. 4,9; Jude 14; 1 Thess. iii. 13.

Drag Beliar into Gehenna. In Rev. xix. 20 the two forms of the
Antichrist are cast into the lake of fire = Gehenna. Cf. Apoc.
Bar. xl. 2, where the Antichrist is slain by the hands of the
Messiah ; 2 Thess. ii. 8, where he is slain by the word of Christ.
Destruction (amwAcia)is the destination of the Neronic Antichrist,
Rev. xvii. 8, 11.

15-17. The first resurrection.

15. Give rest to the godly. So also in 2 Thess. i. 6, 7, ‘If so be
that it is a righteous thing with God to recompense those that
afflict you with affliction and you that are afflicted with rest at the
revelation of the Lord Jesus Christ from heaven’ (dvramodotvat
».. bpiv rots OAtBopévors dveow). This rest, which is connected
with the parusia, is synonymous with ‘the times of refreshing’
which are to ‘come from the presence of the Lord,’ Acts iii. 19
(Saws Av ZAOwor Keupot dvayitews dnd mpoodrov Tod Kupiov). Cf. also
Heb. iv. 1.

Whom He shall find in the body. Cf. 1 Thess. iv. 17, ‘Then we
that are alive that are left shall be caught up together with
them in the clouds.’ In earlier literature a special blessing is
pronounced on those who survive the coming of the kingdom.
Dan. xii. 12; Sibyll. Or. iii. 371 © paxapiords, éxeivoy bs és ypdvov
éocera: avnp (so most though not the best MSS.) ; Pss. Sol. xvii.
50 paxdpior of yvdpevor év tais Hpépats éxelvas. But according
to certain writers those who were to participate in this blessing
must be found in Palestine on the advent of the kingdom. See
my note on xxix. 2 of the Apocalypse of Baruch, The idea
goes back to Joel ii. 32.


D


34 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


in the body in this world, [and the sun will be
ashamed]: 16. And to all who because of (their)
faith in Him have execrated Beliar and his kings.
But the saints will come with the Lord with
their garments which are (now) stored up on high
in the seventh heaven: with the Lord they will
come, whose spirits are clothed, they will descend


[And the sun will be ashamed]. Though these words are not
found in the chief MSS. of the LXX which presuppose a different
text to the Massoretic, they are in one uncial and seventeen
cursives, which add them after the ordinary text of the LXX
according to Parsons and Holmes’ edition. Since the Ethiopic
version of Isaiah xxiv. 23 agrees exactly with the LXX, the
interpolation is not due to an Ethiopic scribe, but was made
in the Greek text.

16. Beliar and his kings, Have we here a reminiscence of the
intermediate stage of the Neronic myth which is partially
preserved in Rev. xvii? See Rev. xvii. 12-13 : also Introduc-
tion, pp. lx-Ixi.

The saints will come with the Lord. Cf. 1 Thess. iii, 13, ‘At
the coming of our Lord Jesus with all His saints’ : iv. 14, ‘Even
so them that are fallen asleep in Jesus will God bring with Him.’

With their garments which are stored up on high in the seventh heaven.
This idea goes back to 2 Oor. v. 1, ‘If the earthly house of our
tabernacle be dissolved, we have a building from God, a house
not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.’ In the Slavonic
Enoch xxii. 8-10, the garments of the blessed are said to be
composed of God’s glory. They are ‘ garments of life,’ Eth. En.
lxii. 16; eviii. 12. Compare also Rev. ili. 4, 5,18; iv. 43 vi.
Iz; vii. 9, 13, 143; 4 Ezra ii. 39, 45; Herm. Sim. viii. 2. In
the next place since according to the Ascension of Isaiah the
final abode of the blessed is heaven, the spiritual bodies, or
garments of the faithful, are said to be already there.

Whose spirits are clothed. Only the righteous shall have spiritual
bodies. This is the Pauline doctrine : see my Eschatology, pp.
390 sqq. It is to be observed further that as their spirits are
already clothed (see also ix. 9, where the departed righteous
are represented as already vestured in these garments or


CHAPTER IV. 15-18 35


and be present in the world, and He will strengthen
those, who have been found in the body, together
with the saints, in the ¢ garments of the-saints, and
the Lord will minister to those who have kept
watch in this world. 17. And afterwards they
will turn themselves upward in their garments,
and their body will be left in the world. 18. Then


spiritual bodies), they have in reality already attained to the
resurrection. This is also the later Pauline teaching: see
above-quoted work, pp. 395, 399 sqq-

Will descend and be present in the world. This view is contrary
to all the teaching of the New Testament, save of Rev. xx. 1-6;
for it implies a stay, whether long or short, on earth of the
saints who have descended from heaven with Christ. There is
no reference to this event in vi.-xi. Apparently a feast is to be
celebrated ; for it is said that Christ will minister to the faithful.

He will strengthen those, who have been found in the body... in the
garments of the saints. If the text is right, it may be best taken
as follows : ‘He will strengthen those who have been found in
the body together with the saints (who are) in the garments of
the saints’; i.e. He will bless together the living saints who
are on earth, and the departed and glorified saints who have
come down from heaven. But the text maybe corrupt. Thus
the clause ‘those who have been found in the body’ is mis-
leading if taken by itself. It is not ‘the living’ that will be
blessed, but ‘the living saints.’ Hence omit ‘ together with’
before ‘the saints,’ and read ‘the saints who have been found
in the body.’ But again the verb ‘will strengthen’ seems wrong.
It = éuoxdoa, which may be a corruption of évvce: or émevdtces,
Then we should have: ‘He will clothe the saints who have
heen found-in.the. body, Sith. the e garments of the Saints,” ar ee

The Lord will minister to those who have kept wat watch, che dc. From Luke
xii. 37. Our text does not agree with the Ethiopic version of
Luke. The words ‘minister’ and ‘ kept watch’ go back to the
Luean Saxovqce and ypryopotvras.

17. The words ‘and their body will be left in the world’
show that this verse does not refer to the saints that had
accompanied the Lord, but to the saints ‘who had been found


DZ


36 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


the voice of the Beloved will inwrath rebuke the
things of heaven and the things of earth and
the mountains and the hills and the cities and the
desert and the forests and the angel of the sun
and that of the moon, and all things wherein Beliar
manifested himself and acted openly in this world,
and there will be [a resurrection and] a judgement


in the body.’ The awkwardness of the clause ‘ will turn them-
selves upward’ belongs to the text. It could also be translated
‘will return above’; but this could not be said of those who
had not yet been above, Or again, if instead of AQ(\; = ‘ above’
we read HAOA« = ‘from above,’ as in ix. 9, the first half of the
sentence could be rendered: ‘And afterwards they will be
transformed in their garments from above.’ With this we
might compare Phil. iii. 21, ‘who shall fashion anew the body
of our humiliation that it may be conformed tothe body of His
glory’: also 1 Cor. xv. 52, 53, ‘We shall all be changed ... for
this corruptible must put on incorruption.’

18. Angel of the sun. Cf. Rev. xix. 17, ‘An angel standing in
the sun.’ See Eth. En. lx. ra-21, on the angels or spirits of the
thunder, hoar-frost, mist, rain, &c. : Ixxv, xxx, on the angels
of the stars. Also Rev. vii. 1, 2, on the angels of the winds;
xiv. 18, the angel of fire ; Jubilees, ii, on the angels fire, hail,
hoar-frost, thunder, &c.

That of the moon. So be. a reads ‘the moon.’

Beliar manifested himself. The Antichrist reveals or manifests
himself (2 Thess. ii. 3) just as the Christ.

The second resurrection and the judgement of the wicked.

There will be [a resurrection and] a judgement in their midst. This
statement, if genuine, is peculiar. It seems to identify the
resurrection with the raising of wicked men to judgement.
The righteous dead have already been raised; for they
accompanied the Lord at His parusia, iv. 14-16: the living
righteous have been transformed and removed from this
world, iv. 15-17. Accordingly, if the text is authentic, there is
taught in iv. 14-17 a resurrection to life in which only the
righteous have part, and in iv. 18 a resurrection to condemna-
tion which does not take place till all the risen and glorified


CHAPTER IV. 18-21 37


in their midst in those days, and the Beloved will
cause fire to go forth from Him, and it will con-
sume all the godless, and they will be as though
they had not been created. 19. And the rest of iy, 19-v. 14
the words of the vision is written in the vision ~ditorial
~ addition.
of Babylon. 20. And the rest of the vision regard-
ing the Lord, behold, it is written in the parables
according to my words which are written in the
book which I publicly prophesied. 21. And the
descent of the Beloved into Sheol, behold, it is


righteous have been raised to heaven. Such a view of the
first and second resurrections would be unique. It does not
agree with Rev. xx. 4, 11-13, the only passage where these two
resurrections are mentioned in the New Testament. For in
Revelation the first resurrection is that in which only the
martyrs participate, and the second is the general resur-
rection, in which the rest of the departed righteous and all the
wicked dead are raised to judgement. Nor does it harmonize
with the interpolated (?) verses in John v. 28-29, where the
general resurrection is spoken of as a resurrection of life to
the righteous, and a resurrection of judgement to the wicked.
Nor, again, does it agree with the Pauline doctrine of the
resurrection, though the writer has undoubtedly assimilated
some of the chief elements of that doctrine, as we have seen
above. I have therefore bracketed the words ‘a resurrection
and.’ The text then would deal only with the judgement of
the wicked.

Will cause fire to go forth, &c. Cf. 2 Thess. i. 8, ii. 8; Is. xi. 4;
4 Ezra xii. 33, xiii. 38, 49: see my Apoc. Baruch xxix, 3, note.
The Ethiopic is literally ‘will cause fire to ascend.’ I have
taken it to be an awkward rendering of dvjce nip.

As though they had not been created. From Job x. 19 (Dillmann),.
The text seems to teach annihilation.

19. The vision of Babylon. Of. Isa. xiii. 1 (LXX) Spacis jy eldev
*Hoalas vids ’Apds xara BaBvAdvos.

2x. The descent of the Reloved into Sheol... is written in the
section, where the Lord says: ‘Behold, my Son will understand.’


38 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


written in the section, where the Lord says:
‘Behold, my Son will understand.’ And all these
things, behold they are written [in the Psalms] in
the parables of David, the son of Jesse, and in the
Proverbs of Solomon his son, and in the words
of Korah, and Ethan the Israelite, and in the
words of Asaph, and in the rest of the Psalms
also which the angel of the Spirit inspired, 22.
(Namely) in those which have not the name written,


This quotation is taken from Isa. lii. 13, where the LXX has
"180d ouvfioe 6 mais pov. Tais has been rendered ‘son’ by the
Ethiopie translator. It is hard to recognize in Isa. lii. 13-liii.
any reference to his Descent in Hades. Perhaps it isin the
LXX of liii, 8 dwd tév dvopi@v. Tod Aaod pou HxOn cis Odvarov.
The last three words imply myab 22, which Cheyne accepts as
the original text over against. the Mass. 105 you. The LXX
phrase may have been interpreted in this way by early
Christians.

[in the Psalms] in the parables. ‘In the Psalms’ may be
regarded as an explanatory marginal gloss on ‘in the parables’
(=& rais napaBodais), which was subsequently incorporated in
the text ; mapaBorn goes back of course to wD and must bear
in such cases the meaning of the latter. In the present instance
‘parable’ (= wD) means ‘song’ or ‘poem,’ as in Pss, xlix. 4 ;
Ixxviii. 2; Job xxvii. 1; xxix. 1.

Dillmann, on the other hand, takes the words ‘in the Psalms’
as a general title embracing ‘the parables of David’ and ‘the
proverbs of Solomon.’

Ethan, the Israelite. Here the text shows dependence on the
LXX. See titles of Pss. lxxxviii. and lxxxix, where Ethan is
called 7 "IopanAciry ; and 1 Kings iv. 27, where he is surnamed
tov "ECpanhirny (A, Zapeirnv B).

Inspired literally = caused to speak,

22. In those which have not the name written. I.e. the Psalms
to which no author’s name is prefixed. For ‘in those’ (bc), a
reads ‘and in those.’


CHAPTER IV. 21-22 39


and in the words of my father Amos, and of Hosea
the prophet, and of Micah and Joel and Nahum
and Jonah and Obadiah and Habakkuk and Haggai
and Zephaniah and Zechariah and Malachi, and


in the words of Joseph the Just and in the words
of Daniel.


My father Amos. See note on i. 2.

Amos, and of Hosea, dc. We have here a list of the twelve
Minor Prophets, The order in which they are enumerated is
neither that of the Hebrew nor of the LXX, but comes nearer to
the latter. The list of these prophets in 4 Ezra i. 39, 40 follows
the order of the LXX. It is remarkable that there is no
mention of Isaiah and Jeremiah in our text. The prophecies
of the former, it is true, have been referred to elsewhere (see
iii, 31, iv. 19, vi. 1), and as the writer claims to be Isaiah, such
an omission may seem natural. The same peculiar phenomena,
however (as Nitzsch has remarked), are attested by 4 Ezra i.
39, 40, where not only are Isaiah and Jeremiah omitted but
also Daniel.

Words of Joseph the Just. This book is probably with Dillmann
to be identified with the pseudepigraph Ipocevx?) rod Iwanp (see
Fabricius, Cod. Pseud. V. T. i. pp. 761-769; Schiirer, Gesch. d.
Jiidischen Volkes, iii. 265, 266). It appears on several lists of
extra-canonical books and is said to have consisted of 1100 o7rixor.
Marshall (Hastings’ Bible Dictionary, ii. 778) has drawn attention
to its antichristian character. The only existing fragments of
this work, for the preservation of which we are indebted almost
exclusively to the writings of Origen, clearly betray this
animus. See In Joan. tom. ii. c. 25 (Lommatsch, i. 147, 148),
Fragm. Comment. in Genes. tom. iii. ¢. 9 (Lommaitsch, viii. 30, 31)
Philocalia, ¢. 23 (Lommatsch, xxv. 223, 224), In all these passages
it is not Joseph, however, but Jacob who is the speaker. Jacob
claims in these to be ‘an angel of God,’ ‘the first servant in God’s
presence’ (6 év mpoawmg Set Aerroupyos mpHTos), whereas the angel
who wrestled with Jacob and who was identified by Christians
with the Messiah was only eighth in rank. But, most remark-
able of all, Jacob declares himself to be the ‘first-begotten of
every creature animated by God’ (mpwréyovos mavrds (wou (wov-


Martyr-
dom of
Isaiah =v.
r>-14,


40 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


v. 1. On account of these visions, therefore,
Beliar was wroth with Isaiah, and he dwelt in the
heart of Manasseh and he sawed him in sunder
with a wooden saw. 2. And when Isaiah was
being sawn in sunder Balchira stood up, accusing
him, and all the false prophets stood up, laughing:
and rejoicing because of Isaiah. 3. And Balchira,
with the aid of Mechémbéchtis, stood up ‘before
Isaiah, [laughing] deriding; 4. And Balchira said to
Isaiah: ‘Say: “I have lied in all that I have spoken,


pévov b1d Geov). This phrase undoubtedly recalls Col. i. 15
mpuwrdétokes Taans erigews,

On the other hand, Nitzsch (Theologische Studien und Kritiken,
1830, pp. 228, 229) thinks that the Joseph referred to in the
text is Joshua the son of Josedek, mentioned in Sir. xlix. 12, or
Joseph the husband of Mary, Matt. i. 19 (@v Siatos),

v. 1. And he sawed him in sunder. With these words the
martyrdom of Isaiah is resumed which broke off at ii. 12.

3. Balchird, with the aid of Mechémbéchis. So allMSS. There is
no asyndeton as Beer supposes. So Zohak acts with the aid of
Ahriman. See Introd. pp. xlvii-xlviii. Dillmann emends into
‘Belchira and Mechémbéchis,’ because the verbs ‘stood up’ and
‘deriding,’ are in the plural. We must rather change the verbs
into the singular. Balchira is the tool of Beliar, and is identi-
fied with him in verse 9. This identification appears also in
Ambrose: see on verse 4. For Mechémbéchis see ii. 5.

[Laughing] deriding. ‘Laughing’ is a doublet: there is no
copula in ab. It is added in the late MS. c.

4-8. Balchira (0. Beliar ac) tempts Isaiah.

4. Say: ‘I have lied in all that I have spoken.’ These words and |
part of verse 8 are quoted (as Laurence, p. 148, discovered) in
the Commentary of Ambrose on Ps. exviii (ed. Bened. vol. i.
1124): ‘Fertur prophetae cuidam, et plerique ferunt, quod
Esaiae, in carcere posito, cum mole imminentis urgeretur
exitii, dixisse diabolum; Dic quia non a Domino locutus es, quae
dixisti, et omnium in te mentes affectusque mutabo, ut quiindignantur
injuriam absolutionem in te conferant,’


CHAPTER V. I-II 41


and likewise the ways of Manasseh are good and
right. 5. And the ways also of Balchiré and of
his associates are good.”’ 6. And this he said to
him when he began to be sawn in sunder. 7. But
Isaiah was (absorbed) in a vision of the Lord, and
though his eyes were open, he saw them (not).
8. And Balchira spake thus to Isaiah: ‘Say what
I say unto thee and I will turn their heart, and
I will compel Manasseh and the princes of Judah
and the people and all Jerusalem to reverence thee.
g. And Isaiah answered and said: ‘So far as I
have utterance (I say): Damned and accursed be
thou and all thy powers and all thy house. 10.
For thou canst not take (from me) aught save the
skin of my body.’ 11. And they seized and sawed
in sunder Isaiah, the son of Amoz, with a wooden


7. Saw them (not). The negative must be supplied as in
vi. Io.

8. Balchiré. So be. a ‘Milchirdés.’ See notes on ii.
12, v. 3. Balchira, the tool of Beliar, again proceeds to
tempt Isaiah. See quotation from Ambrose in note on
verse 4.

9. So far as I have utterance (I say): Damned and accursed. So
b. ais secondary: ‘So faras I am concerned, accursed—that is
to say—.’ The curse is directed against the false prophet as
a man: hence ‘all thy house,’ and also against him as a pleni-
potentiary of Satan: hence ‘all thy powers.’ Both these
aspects are recognized in the Greek Legend: nardOepd oo, Medxia
pevdonpopijra, 5idBore.

11, With a wooden saw. Greek Legend, iii. 16 év mpiom fvdivy
mpiobjva ai’rév. Hence the passage in Justin Mart. cum Tryph.
CX. 14, 15 wept rdov Odvarov ‘Hoalov, dv mpion fvdivw éenpicare, is
all but certainly derived from our text. Cf. also Tertullian, De
Patientia, 14 ‘His patientiae viribus secatur Esaias et de domino
non tacet’ ; also Scorpiace, 8; Ps.—Tertullian, Adv. Mare, iii. 177.


42 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


saw. 12. And Manasseh and Balchira and the
false prophets and the princes and the people [and]
all stood looking on. 13. And to the prophets
who were with him he said before he had been
sawn in sunder: ‘Go ye to the region of Tyre and
Sidon; for for me only hath God mingled the cup.’
14. And when Isaiah was being sawn in sunder,
he neither cried aloud nor wept, but his lips spake
with the Holy Spirit until he was sawn in twain.

v. 15, 16= 15. This Beliar did to Isaiah through Balchiraé and

oditerial Manasseh ; for Sammael was very wrathful against
Isaiah from the days of Hezekiah, king of Judah, on
account of the things which he had seen regarding
the Beloved, 16. And on account of the destruction
of Sammael, which he had seen through the Lord,
while Hezekiah his father was still king. And he
did according to the will of Satan.


Tur VISION WHICH ISAIAH THE SON OF
AMOS SAY.


vi-xir-4o Vi. 1. In the twentieth year of the reign of
bran Hezekiah, king of Judah, came Isaiah the son of
Amoz, and Josab the son of Isaiah to Hezekiah to


For later references see Otto’s note on Justin Mart. cum
Tryph. cXX. 15. On the legend see Introd., pp. xlv-xlix.

12. Balchiré. So bc. a reads Melachira. See note on ii. 12.

[And]. I have bracketed ‘and’ as it seems an intrusion.

13. The cup. On the meaning of the phrase cf. Matt. xx. 22,

14. Neither cried aloud nor wept. See quotation from Tertullian
on the endurance of Isaiah in note on v. 11.

vi. Title. I have with S connected the words ‘in the twen-
tieth year . . . king of Judah’ with what follows, rather than
with what precedes as E and L’*,


CHAPTERS V. I2—VI. 5 43


Jerusalem "from Galgal4™ 2. And (having entered)
he sat down on the couch of the king, "and they
brought him a seat, but he would not sit (thereon)".
3. "And when Isaiah began to speak the words of
faith and truth with King Hezekiah" all the princes
of Israel were seated and the eunuchs and the
councillors of the king. And there were there
"forty" prophets and sons of the prophets: they had
come from the villages and from the mountains
and the plains when they had heard that Isaiah
was coming from Galgalé to Hezekiah. 4. "And
they had come"to salute him "and to hear his words.
5. And that he might place his hands upon them,"
and that they might prophesy and that he might


1. From Galgaléd. These words are supported by Greek Legend,
i. 3, but omitted by S L?.

2. (Having entered). I have restored these words since they
are found in Greek Legend, ii. 1, S and L’,

And they brought him a seat, but he would not sit (thereon). Though
these words are omitted by SL’, they are no doubt genuine,
since they have the support of the Greek Legend, i. 5, see
p. 141. Isaiah chooses the couch of the king and not a stool
orseat torecline on. Isit because he is going to have a vision?

3. And when Isaiah. So ab. c ‘And then.’

All the princes. MSS. insert ‘and’ before these words after
a Semitic idiom; but if reading of « above is followed, the
‘and’ must be read.

Forty prophets. ‘Forty’ is omitted by S L’, but Greek Legend, i. 3,
supports text.

Villages. I take the Ethiopic to be a rendering of «dupa in
accordance with S L?.

Galgaié. On the various forms of this proper name see
Critical Notes, 8, 12, 17, p. ror.

4, 5. These verses are very much curtailed in S L?.

That they might prophesy and that he might hear their prophecy.
This reading of ac is supported by SL’: ‘annunciare ei


44 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


hear their prophecy: "and they were all before
Isaiah." 6. And when Isaiah was speaking "to
Hezekiah" the words of truth and faith, they all
heard ta door which one had opened and f the voice
of the Holy Spirit. 7. And the king summoned
all the prophets and all the people who were found
there, and they came. And Micaiah and the aged
Ananias and Joel "and Josab" sat on his right hand
(and‘on the left), 8. And it came to pass when
they had all heard the voice of the Holy Spirit, they
all worshipped on their knees, and glorified the God
Tof truth", the Most High "who is in the upper
world and who sits on High the Holy One and" who
rests among His holy ones. g. "And they gave glory
to Him™+ who had thus bestowed a door in an alien


quae ventura erant.’ 0’s text is therefore secondary:
‘that he might prophesy, that they might hear his pro-
phecy.’

6. A door which one had opened. According to verse 9, this
door is in the world. Hence Liicke’s idea that it is in heaven—
as in Rev. iv. r:—seems to be wrong. E seemscorrupt. See note
on verse 9, S runs: ‘ When he was speaking [all] the words of
truth, the Holy Spirit came upon him and all heard and saw
the words of the Holy Spirit.’ L? is practically the same, see
PP. 99-100.

q. And they came. b omits, but SL? support a.

Aged. LI? and S connect this adjective also with Micaiah.

And Josab. Omitted by S L*.

(And on the left), Added from 8; cf. L*.

8. The Most High... who rests among His holy ones. So
LXX of Isa. lvii. 15 "Yynoros év dyiow dvanavépevos. The words
that immediately precede in’ the LXX may have been in the
mind of the writer: 6 tiioros éy ipndois xaroumdy tov aidva*
dytos év dyios dvopa aitG. See on x. 6.

9. Who had thus bestowed... onaman. Text corrupt. Read


CHAPTER VI. 5-14 45


world, had bestowed (it) on a mant. 10. And as
he was speaking in the Holy Spirit in the hearing
of all, he became silent "and his mind was taken
up from him™ and he saw not the men that stood
before him, 11. Though his eyes indeed were open.
Moreover his lips were silent "and the mind in his
body was taken up from him.” 12. But his breath
was in him; "for he was seeing a vision, 13. And
the angel who was sent to make him see was not
of this firmament, nor was he of the angels of
glory of this world, but he had come from the
seventh heaven." 14. And the people who stood
near did (not) think, but jthe circle of the prophets
(did)}, that the holy Isaiah had been taken up.


‘who had bestowed such an excellence of words on a man in
the world.’ See Critical Note.

10. And his mind was taken up from him. Omitted by SL*.
The passage however is genuine. It was before the writer of
the Greek Legend, i. 14 7p0n 6 &taroyopes abrov.

Saw not. See v. 7.

11. And the mind... from him. This is practically a repeti-
tion of the clause in verse 10. Though S L’ omit, it is pro-
bably genuine ; for the three versions contain the repetition :
‘he became silent’ (verse 10), ‘his lips were silent’ (verse 11).

12. His breath was in him. L? gives: ‘inspiratio sancti spiritus
erat cum illo.’ So S but that it omits sancti. But the Greek
Legend, ii. 2, supports our text and rendering. It reproduces
this clause: fv év airé éuptonpa (whs. “Eupionpya is used by
Symmachus in Job xxxvii. ro to render now. The text of L?
is secondary. It is an explanatory gloss on the other meaning
of éuptonpa =‘ inspiration.’

1g. Firmament. Cf. iv. 2, viii. 9-13.

14. The people... did (not) think. Negative is restored in
accordance with S L?.

+ The circle... (didyt. Read with SL’: ‘the prophets recog-
nized.’


46 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


15. And the vision which the holy Isaiah saw was
not from this world but from the world which is
hidden. from the flesh. 16. And after Isaiah had
seen this vision, he narrated it to Hezekiah, and to
Josab his son "and to the other prophets who had
come. 17. But the leaders and the eunuchs and
the people did not hear, but only Samna the scribe,
and + {jéaqém, and + Asaph the recorder; for these
also were doers of righteousness, and the + sweet
smellt of the Spirit was upon them. But the
people had not heard; for Micaiah and Josab his
son had caused them to go forth, when the wisdom
of this world had been taken from him and he
became as one dead.


Had been taken up. E gives ‘had been taken away.’ By,
changing the vocalization of one letter we get the proper sense
which is attested by SL’.

15. The flesh, E, which I have rendered idiomatically ‘the
flesh’ means more usually ‘his flesh.’ S$ L? give ‘all flesh,’

16. Andafter Isaiah had seen this vision. Morefully inSL?*. See inloc.

Josab his son. From these words to their recurrence in vii. 1,
SL’ are wanting through homoioteleuton.

17. Samna. See note oni. 5.

Ejéagém, that is Joaqem or Joachim. Is this Joah (MN) LXX
‘Iwax) the son of Asaph mentioned in Isa. xxxvi.3? If so, we
should emend the text and read: ‘Zjoaqém the son of Asaph.’
Dillmann identifies him with Eliakim mentioned in the same
passage, but the form of the word is slightly more in favour of
the former view.

These also were doers of righteousness. According to be ‘These
also had deeds of righteousness.’

The +sweet smell}. E here = eiwdia, which may be a corruption
of edSoxia. The same corruption is found in the Greek MSS. of
Ecclesiasticus xliii.26, Thus we should have: ‘The good pleasure
of the Spirit was upon them,’ Or is edwiia corrupt for evodia ?

And he became. a omits,


CHAPTERS VI. 15—VII. 7 47


vii. 1. And the vision which Isaiah saw, he told
to Hezekiah and Josab his son" and Micaiah and
the rest of the prophets, (and) said: 2. * At this
moment*, when I prophesied according to the
(words) heard which ye heard, I saw a glorious
angel not like unto the glory of the angels which
I used always to see, but possessing such glory and
tpositiont that I cannot.describe "the glory" of that
angel’. 3. And having seized me by my hand * he
raised me on high *, and I said unto him: ‘ Who art
thou, and what is thy name, and whither art thou
raising me on high? for strength was given me to
speak with him.’ 4. And he said unto me: ‘When
I have raised thee on high [through the (various)
degrees| and made thee see the vision, on account
of which I have been sent, then thou wilt under-
stand who I am: but my name thou dost not
know: 5. Because thou wilt return into this thy
body, but whither I am raising thee on high, thou
wilt see; "for for this purpose have I been sent.”
6. And I rejoiced because he spake courteously to
me. 7. And he said unto me: ‘ Hast thou rejoiced


vii. 2, *At this moment*, Emended. See Critical Note. Text
= ‘and this was.’

2. +Position+. E, which = function, administration or order
(rafts), seems corrupt, How is this to be reconciled with the
reading of the L?and S: which is ‘lumen’? L! has ‘sanctam
(claritatem).’ See, however, Greek Legend, ii. 6.

3. * He raised me on high*. Emended. See Critical Note,

5. Whither. See verse 3. Land S have ‘ quando.’

For for this purpose have I been sent. Observe that L' has these
words, though S L? omit them. :

7. This verse appears at much greater length in the S L’, but
our text agrees with L',


48 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


because I have spoken courteously to thee?’ And
he said: ‘And thou wilt see how a greater also
than I am will speak courteously and peaceably
with thee. 8, And +His Father also who is greater
thou wilt see; for for this purpose have I been
sent from the seventh heaven in order to explain
all these things unto thee.’ 9. And we ascended to
the firmament, I and he, and there I saw Sammael
and his hosts, and there was great fighting therein
and the *angels* of Satan were envying one another.
zo, And as above so on the earth also; for the like-
ness of that which is in the firmament is here on the
earth. 11. And I said unto the angel (who was with
me): ‘(What is this war and) what is this envy-
ing?’ 12, And he said unto me: ‘So has it been since
this world was made until now, and this war (will
continue) till He, whom thou shalt see will come


Will speak. SL? = ‘wish to speak.’ Cf. note on verse 5.

8, +His Father also who is greatert. Corrupt. L'=eminentiorem
ipsius majoris. So practically S save that it has a doublet.
Hence read: ‘One more eminent than the greater Himself.’

9. The firmament, dc. See x. 29-31, where the domain of the
evil angels embraces two provinces, the firmament and the air.

Sammael.and his hosts. So also Li, S L? agree in presenting
a slightly different text, and apparently less original. These
two versions together with Greek Legend, ii. 9, give Satan instead
of Sammael. For the presence of evil beings in the heavens
or on their outskirts see my edition of the Slavonic Enoch,
Introd. pp. xxx-xlvii.

*Angels*, E has ‘words’ =Adyot, which I take to be a corrup-
tion of dyyeAo, which is the reading presupposed by L',

11. (What is this war and). Supplied from Li, SL? = ‘What
is this war and envying and battle?’ See x. 29.

12, So it has been since this world was made. S L’ avoid this state-
ment: see p. 106,


CHAPTER VII. 7-15 49


and destroy him. 13. And afterwards he caused
me to ascend (to that which is) above the firma-
ment: which is the (first) heaven. 14. And there
I saw a throne in the midst, and on his right and
on his left were angels. 15. "And (the angels on
the left were) not like unto the angels who stood’
on the right", but those who stood on the right had
the greater glory, and they all praised with one
voice, "and there was a throne in the midst", and
those who were on the left gave praise after them ;


Destroy him. Of. x. 12. S L? add ‘with the breath of His
power.’

1g. (To that which is), Here we have exceptionally to follow
L? § against E L', and insert these words.

(First). Omitted by L' E : inserted from L’ S.

14. A throne, i.v. an angel belonging to the order called
‘Thrones,’ @pévor, mentioned in Col. i. 16; Test. Lev. 3; and in
vii. 15, 21, 27, viii. 8 and xi. 25 of our present text, and Greek
Legend, ii. 40. So the text of E L', and Greek Legend, ii. 12, in
the present passage. S L’ on the other hand, require the term
to be construed in its ordinary sense; for they add ‘and on
it there sat an angel in great glory.’ These words may belong
to the original text; for they recur in vii. 19, 27, 29, 31, 33,
35, 37-

15. The angels on the right are superior to those on the left.
Cf. vii. 29, 30, 33, 34. This difference prevails till the sixth
heaven : see viii. 6-7.

(The angels on the left were). These words are supplied from L',
L? S omit the words ‘ And (the angels on the left were) not like
unto the angels who stood on the right.” The omission seems
due to homoioteleuton.

And there was a throne in the midst. The throne here may be an
angel as in the preceding verse. The entire clause is omitted
by S L’, but L' supports our text,

And those who were on the left gave praise after them. Here
E, which reads ‘and they praised him and those who were
on the left after them,’ has inverted the order of the words.


E


50 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


but their voice was not such as the voice of those
on the right, nor their praise like the praise of
those. 16. And I asked the angel who conducted
me, and I said unto him: ‘To whom is this praise
sent?’ 17, And he said unto me: ‘(It is sent) to
the praise of (Him who sitteth in) the seventh
heaven: to Him + who rests in the holy world f,
and to His Beloved, whence I have been sent to
thee. [Thither is it sent.] 18. And again he made
me to ascend to the second heaven. Now the
height of that heaven is the same as from the
heaven to the earth [and to the firmament].
19. And (I saw there, as) in the first heaven, angels
on the right and on the left, "and a throne in the
midst, and the praise of the angels in the second


The true order is preserved in L' which I have followed in text.
L' is here supported by S. LL? is corrupt.

17. To the praise of (Him who sitteth in) the seventh heaven. I have
emended the text. See Critical Note 3, p. 107. See also vi, 8.
The subject is revived in x. 2.

tWho rests in the holy world}. So a. 0b gives ‘who rests
among the holy ones of the world.’ Both are certainly wrong.
L' has ‘qui est perpetui saeculi.”’ L?S omit. The word ‘rests’
may have been borrowed from vi. 8, Lis here to be preferred.
The original may have been 70d xaroxodvros Tov aidva = ‘who
inhabiteth eternity.’ See Isa, lvii. 15 quoted on vi. 8.

18. Of that heaven. L'S omit ‘that,’ which is probably a
rendering of the Greek Article, as is frequently the case,
Better therefore render ‘of the heaven’ as in L' §,

(And to the firmament]. Though this phrase goes back to G,
for it is found in L', I have bracketed it as it is against the
sense and is omitted by L’ S.

19. (I saw there, as). Supplied from L! L? §.

19-20. And the praise of the angels ... in the second heaven. Though
.L! is wanting from this verse forwards, our text has the support


i)


CHAPTER VII. 15-23 51


heaven; and he who sat on the throne in the
second heaven was more glorious than all (the
rest)" 20, And there was great glory in the second
heaven, and the praise also was not like the praise
of those who were in the first heaven. 21. And
I fell on my face to worship him, but the angel
who conducted me did not permit me, but said
unto me: ‘ Worship neither throne nor angel which
belongs to the six heavens—for for this cause I was
sent to conduct thee—until I tell thee "in the seventh
heaven", 22. For above all the heavens and their
angels has thy throne been placed, and thy gar-
ments and thy crown which thou shalt see.’ 23. And
I rejoiced with great joy, that those who love the


of Greek Legend, ii, 14. On the words ‘ he who sat on the thronein
the second heaven,’ see note on vii. 14.
ar. I fell on my face to worship him. See Rev. xix. 10, xxii,


8, 9.

Worship neither throne nor angel. See vii. 14 note.

Which belongs to the six h s. L’, ‘ofthat heaven’: S, ‘from
heaven.’


For for this cause. Text reads ‘whence.’ But since the angel is
from the seventh heaven (cf. vi. 13, vii. 8, 27), this cannot be
right. The right text is supplied by L? ‘ propter hoe,’ and S ‘nam
propter hoc.’ All three renderings can be explained as equiva-
lents of 8ev, as Dillmann conjectured.

Uniil I tell thee. The text could also be rendered, ‘except Him
whom I tell thee of.’ This would agree with L’, ‘sed tantum
quem ego dixero tibi.’ On the other hand, Greek Legend, ii. 22,
appears to support the rendering given above.

22. § L? (see p. 109) are clearly inferior to Ein this verse. E
alone gives the sense required by the next verse.

Thy throne. See viii. 26 note.

Thy garments. See iv. 16 note.

23. See the somewhat different version of S L’, p. 110.


EQ


52 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


Most High and His Beloved will afterwards ascend
thither by the angel of the Holy Spirit. 24. And
he raised me to the third heaven, and in like
manner I saw those upon the right and upon the
left, and there was a throne there in the midst;
but the memorial of this world is there unheard of.
25. "And I said to the angel who was with me ;" for
the glory of my 2 appearance was undergoing trans-_
formation as I ascended to each heaven in turn : ‘No-
thing Tof the vanity" of that world is here named.’

26. And he answered me, and said unto me: ‘ Nothing
is named on account of its weakness, and nothing is
hidden there of what is done.’ 27." And I wished to
learn how it is known, and he answered me saying:
‘When I have raised thee to the seventh heaven
whence I was sent, to that which is above these,
then thou shalt know that there is nothing hidden
from the thrones and from those who dwell in the
heavens and from the angels.” And the praise
wherewith they praised and the glory of him who


24. There was a throne there in the midst. So b. ac add against b
and L’S, ‘and one who sat.’

Memorial: practically =‘ name,’ as in Prov. x. 7, Eccles. ix. 5.

Is there unheard of: lit.‘is named.’ This sense of évopa{w is
found in Eph. v. 3.

25-27. The more remote each heaven is from the earth, the
smaller is the impression made upon it by the things of earth.
Yet none of the things of earth can escape the knowledge of
the inhabitants of the heavens.

25. Slightly different order in L?S.

Glory of my appearance. S L? ‘glory of my spirit.’

a7. SL’ are very defective here. Greek Legend, ii. 17, supports
our text, See also ix. 19-23.


CHAPTER VII. 23-35 53


sat on the throne was great, "and the glory of the
angels on the right hand and on the left was
beyond that of the heaven which was below them™.
28. And again he raised me to the fourth heaven,
and the height from the third to the fourth
heaven was greater than from the earth to the
firmament. 29. And there again I saw those who
were on the right hand and those who were on
the left, "and him who sat on the throne was in the
midst", and there also they were praising. 30. And
the praise and glory of the angels on the right was
greater than that of those on the left. 31. And
again the glory of him who sat on the throne was
greater than that of the angels on the right, and
their glory was beyond that of those who were
below. 32. And he raised me to the fifth heaven.
33. And again I saw "those upon the right hand
and on the left, and him who sat on the throne
possessing greater glory than those of the fourth
heaven". 34. And the glory of those on the right
hand was greater than that of those "on the left
[from the third to the fourth]. 35. And the glory


29. Him who sat on... midst. These words may be inter-
polated by a scribe who did not understand the technical
meaning of ‘throne.’ See Greek Legend, ii. 18, also L’S.

29-30. Omitted by L? through homoioteleuton.

32. He raised me. SL?=‘TI ascended.’

32, 33. Cf. fragment of Zephaniah Apocalypse in Clem.
Alex. Strom. v. 11. 77 «al dvédaBév pe mvedyua kat dvqveyrév pe eis
obpavdy méuntov Kat ePedpouw dyyédous Kadoupévous xupious .. .
ipvodvras Ody dppyrov tynorov.

g2-36. Very defective in SL’, verse 35 being wholly omitted.

34. [From the third to the fourth]. A disturbing gloss,


54 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


of him who was on the throne was greater than
that of the angels on the right hand". 36. And
their praise was more glorious than that of the
fourth heaven. 37. "And I praised Him, who is not
named and the Only-begotten" who dwelleth in the
heavens, whose name is not known to any flesh,
who has bestowed such glory on the several
heavens, "and who makes great the glory of the
angels, and more excellent the glory of Him who
sitteth on the throne™.

viii. 1. And again he raised me into the air of
the sixth heaven, and I saw such glory as
I had not seen in the five heavens. 2. *For I saw*
angels possessing great glory. 3. And the praise
there was holy and wonderful. 4. And I said to
the angel who conducted me: ‘ What is this which
I see, my lord?’ 5. And he said: ‘Iam not thy

36. See Slav. En. evi 9, on the singing of the angels in the


fifth heaven.

37. SL’ give a widely divergent text from the above. See
pp. 112-113.

Who is not named =dppyros. See quotation from Clem. Alex.
under vii. 32, 33.

The Only-begotten. This phrase, though not here in SL’, is
found in viii. 7 of S and viii. 25 of both S and L?. Our text
presupposes John i. 16, 18, iii. 16, 18.

Such glory on the several heavens. L?S=‘such glory on the
angels over the several heavens.’

viii. 1. Glory. SL*=‘ great glory.’

In the five heavens. SL?=‘in the fifth heaven.’

2. *For Isaw*. For this emendation under guidance of S and
L’, see Critical Note. MSS. give ‘when I ascended’ and con-
nect these words with verse 1. At the close of this verse S L?
add an additional clause: see p. 113.

5. I am... thy fellow servant. The word rendered ‘fellow


CHAPTERS VII. 35—VIII. 9 35


lord, but thy fellow servant.’ "6, And again I asked
him, and I said unto him: ‘Why are there not
angelic fellow servants (on the left)?" 7. And
he said: ‘From the sixth heaven there are no
longer *angels* on the left, nor a throne set in
the midst, but (they are directed) by the power
of the seventh heaven, where dwelleth He that is
not named "and the Elect One, whose name has not
been made known, and none of the heavens can
learn His name. 8. For it is He alone to whose
voice all the heavens and thrones give answer.
T have "therefore been empowered and" sent to raise
thee here that thou mayest see this glory, 9. And
that thou mayest see the Lord of all those heavens


servant’ more usually means ‘ companion,’ but occasionally it is
a rendering of cdvdovAos (Matt. xviii. 28, 31) as here. Of. Greek
Legend, ii. 11, where these words are found: obm éya Kiptos, dAAG
odviovdds cou cipi. See Rev. xix. 10, xxii. 8, 9. j

6. Angelic fellow servants. Literally =‘ fellow servants of the
angels.’ ;

q. *Angels*. See note 10, p. 113. MSS.=‘and upward.’

(They are directed). I have supplied these words under guid-
ance of L?S. The former gives ‘ordinationem habent’; the
latter =‘administrati sunt.’

Where dwelleth He that is not named =8nov éoriv 6 dppnros. This
appears to be correct. L?S, which are corrupt, may in part be
explained from it. S=‘ubiest celeber ille’=dzov éoriy 6 pyrés.
L?=‘ubi est dives.” ‘Dives’ may represent dp@ovos, corrupt for
dppnytos (?). oa

And the Elect One. S =‘ et unigenitus filius ejus.’ L? has merely
‘filius Dei.’ The ‘unigenitus’ in S does not seem to be primi-
tive, though the term occurs in vii, 37 of our text. See note
on i. 4.

8. Thrones. S L? give ‘angels '—a general for a specific term.

g-10. See SL’, which omit 10 and give another turn to 9.
Verse 10 anticipates what is recounted in x. 8 sqq.


56 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


' and these thrones, 10. "Undergoing (successive)
/ transformation until He resembles your form and


likeness? “11. I indeed say unto thee, Isaiah; No
man about to return into a body of that world has
ascended or"seen what thou seest or perceived what
thou hast perceived and what thou wilt see. 12. For
it has been permitted to thee in the lot of the Lord to
come hither [and from thence comes the power of
the sixth heaven and of the air]. 13. And I mag-
nified my Lord with praise, in that through His lot
I should come hither. 14. And he said: "Hear,
furthermore, therefore, this also from thy fellow
servant"; when from the body by the *will of
God* thou hast ascended hither, then thou wilt
receive the garment "which thou seest, and like-


11. See viii. 23. E=‘Noman...hasseen this or ascended or
perceived what thou seest and what thou wilt see.’ I have trans-
posed ‘has seen’ and ‘ascended’ under guidance of Greek Legend, ii.
29. Next from S we see that the clause ‘ what thou seest’ should
follow after ‘seen’ and ‘what thou wilt see’ after ‘ perceived.’

12. In the lot of the Lord=through sharing in the lot of the
Lord. Seei.1g. Eadds against S L? ‘in the lot of the cross,’
which I have taken to be a marginal explanatory gloss subse-
quently embodied in the text.

Hither, i.e. the seventh heaven.

[And from thence &c.]. I have bracketed these words as the
interpolation of an Ethiopic scribe, based on viii. 7, not quite
rightly apprehended.

13. Should come hither. S=‘am departing, L?=‘am walking.’

14. Hear. . . fellow servant. SL? omit.

From the body by the *will of God*. Emended. See Critical Note,
p. 115. ac=‘from the alien body by the angel of the spirit
thou hast ascended.’ b= ‘in an alien body the God of the spirit
has made thee to ascend.’

Which thou seest .. . wilt see. L?S omit.


CHAPTER VIII. 10-21 57


wise other numbered garments laid up (there) thou
wilt see", 15. And then thou wilt become equal
to the angels of the seventh heaven.’ 16. And
he raised me up into the sixth heaven, and there
were no (angels) on the left, nor a throne in the
midst, but all had one appearance and their (power
of) praise was equal. 17. And (power) was given
to me also, and I also praised along with them and
that angel also, and our praise was like theirs.
18. And there they + all named the primal Father +
and His Beloved, "the Christ” and the Holy Spirit,
all with one voice. ig. And (their voice) was not
like the voice of the angels in the five heavens,
20. [Nor like their discourse] but the voice was
different there, and there was much light there.
21. And then, when I was in the sixth heaven
I thought the light which I had seen in the five


Garment. See viii. 26; ix. 9, 24, 25; xi. 3. 5.

16. No (angels) on the left. SL? have ‘no angels on the right
or on the left,’ but our text is correct: see above, viii. 7.

All had one appearance. This statement appears to be derived
from Slav. En. xix. 1, ‘There is no difference in their counten-
ance,’ where the angels of the sixth heaven are described.

17. See S L? for slight variations of the text.

18. + All named the primal Father}. So ab. c omits ‘primal.’ We
should emend and read with S L’, ‘they praised the Father of all.’

Christ. This title, which goes back to G' and possibly to G (see
x. 7 note), is found likewise in ix. 5, 13, 17, X. 7, in all of
which passages it is absent from L’S.

His Beloved. So a, be ‘the Beloved.’

19. The five heavens. S L? preferably ‘in the fifth heaven.’

20. [Wor like their discourse]. A doublet. S L? omit.

21. The light. Text could be translated ‘that light,’ but the
Greek article is frequently rendered by the demonstrative in
Ethiopic.


58 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


heavens to be but darkness. 22. And I rejoiced
and praised Him who hath bestowed such lights
on those who wait for His promise. 23. And
I besought the angel who conducted me that I
should not henceforth return to the carnal world.
24. I say indeed unto you," Hezekiah and Josab my.
son and Micaiah" that there is much darkness here.
25. And the angel who conducted me discovered
what I thought and said: ‘If in this light thou
dost rejoice, how much more wilt thou rejoice,
when in the seventh heaven thou seest the light,
where is the Lord and His Beloved [whence I have
been sent, who is to be called “Son” in this world.
26. Not (yet) hath been manifested He who shall
be in the corruptible world] and the garments,
and the thrones, and the crowns which are laid
up for the righteous, "for those who trust in that
Lord who will descend in your form. For the


Five heavens. L?S=‘ fifth heaven.’

22. Such lights. L? ‘such joy,’ S ‘such things.’

Wait for His promise. & L'=‘ receive His mercy.’

23. See viii. rz.

24. SL? omit the proper names.

25. Discovered what I thought and. L?S omit.

The Lord... in this world. SL?=‘the heavenly Father and
His Only-begotten Son.’

25, 26. I have bracketed the words ‘whence I have been
sent... in the corruptible world.’ They are omitted by
SL? and introduce confusion into the context. By excising
them we restore unity to these verses. The interpolation is
most probably due to an Ethiopic scribe. The unusual form
of the Ethiopic in verse 26 supports this suggestion. In ix. 5,
13, 17, &c., the kindred phrases are derived from the Greek.

Who is to be called ‘Son’ in this world. Cf, ix. 5.


CHAPTERS VIII. 22—IX. 5 59


light which is there is great and wonderful
27. And as concerning thy not returning into the
body thy days are not yet fulfilled for coming
here.” 28. And when I heard (that) I was troubled,
and he said: ‘Do not be troubled.’

ix. 1. And he took me into the air of the seventh
heaven, and moreover I heard a voice saying:
‘How far will he ascend that dwelleth *in the
flesh *?’ and I feared and trembled. 2. And "when
I trembled, behold” * I heard * from hence another
voice "being sent forth, and" saying: ‘It is per-
mitted to the holy Isaiah to ascend hither; for here
is his garment.’ 3. And I asked the angel who was
with me "and said": ‘Who is he who forbade me
and who is he who * permitted * me to ascend?’
4. And he said unto me: ‘He who forbade thee,
this is he * who is over* the praise-giving of the
sixth heaven. 5. And He who * permitted * thee,

ix. 1. *In the flesh*, E here reads ‘among aliens,’ which’
I have taken to be corrupt as S L’ give in carne and Greek Legend,
ii. 23, év capxi.

2. And when I trembled, &c. Eis corrupt, but admits easily of
emendation. See Critical Note, p.118. As it stands, it runs:
‘And he said unto me when I trembled: Behold, from hence
another voice has come, being sent forth, and it says.’

From hence. This gives the wrong sense. Greek Legend, ii. 23,
has é¢ vv dyw. This is right in meaning, for the second voice
is from the seventh heaven, the first voice being from the
sixth: see verses 4, 5.

3. Who *permitted*. E has here ‘turned to,’ which gives
a wrong sense of 6 émtpérav. The verse is found in Greek in
Greek Legend, ii. 24.

4. * Who is over*, Unemended text=‘on whomis.’ A slight
change gives ‘who is over’=6 égeoras éni, Greek Legend, ii. 25.

5. *Permitted*, See on verse 3.


60 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


this is "thy Lord God, the Lord Christ, who will
be called “ Jesus” in the world", but His name thou
canst not hear till thou hast ascended out of thy
body.’ 6. And he raised me up into the seventh
heaven, and I saw there a wonderful light and
angels innumerable. 7. And there I saw all the
righteous "from the time of Adam. 8. And there
I saw the holy Abel and all the righteous. 9. And
there I saw Enoch and all who were with him,
stript of the garments of the flesh, and I saw them
-in their garments of the zpper world, and they
ware "Tike angels", standing there in great glory.


Thy Lord. So a. c¢ gives ‘our Lord.’ Greek Legend, ii. 25, has
6 Kupios, L?S ‘filius Dei.’

God, the Lord Christ . . . world. In deference to Dillmann’s
opinion I formerly regarded these words and certain phrases in
ix. 13, 17, X. 7 as interpolations, on the ground of the state-
ment that follows: ‘His name thou canst not hear,’ &c. Inow
think that they go back to G. For in the first place they spring
not from the Ethiopic scribe, but existed already in G’. Thus
x. 7 is found in the Gk. Leg. ii. 37. In the next, the words
‘His name,’ &c., do not refer to the earthly name of Christ, but
to some secret name known only to the blessed. Cf. vii. 7. A
similar idea is found in Rev. xix. 12 ‘He hath a name written
which no one knoweth but He Himself.’

Thy body. SocandS. band L? give ‘body,’ and a‘ this body.’

q-10. We should observe that though all the righteous from
the time of Adam are already possessed of their spiritual or
resurrection bodies (see notes on iv. 16) as in Rev. vi. 11, they
are represented as not yet enjoying perfect blessedness. They
are not as yet crowned, nor have they as yet sat down on their
thrones. These verses are very defective in L?S, which speak
only of certain righteous individuals being already in heaven.
That our text goes back accurately to the older Greek recension
is proved by the Greek Legend, ii, 27, which reproduces the clauses
which are missing in LS,

g. Like angels. Cf. Eth. En. li. 4 (see note in my edition),


CHAPTER IX. 5-13 61


1o. But they sat not on their thrones, nor were
their crowns of glory on them. 11. And I asked
the angel who was with me: ‘ How is it that they
have received the garments, but have not the
thrones and the crowns?’ 12,13. And he said
unto me: ‘Crowns and thrones of glory they do
not receive, till the Beloved will descend in the
form in which you will see Him descend "[will
descend, I say] into the world in the last days the


civ. 4; Matt. xxii. 30; Apoc. Bar. li. 5, 9, 12. L’S omit this
phrase.

11. Who was with me. L?S give instead ‘and I said.’

Thrones. Cf. Rev. iii. 21; Luke xxii. 29, 30; Matt. xix. 28;
1 Cor. vi. 3.

Crowns. Cf. Rev. ii. 10, ili, 11, iv. 4; Jas. i. 12; Herm. Sim.
viii. 2, 3. The idea is derived from the custom of crowning
the victors in the games, as in 1 Cor, ix. 25; Phil. iii. 14;
2 Tim. ii. 5; 1 Pet. v. 4. It is the reward for martyrdom,
2 Tim. iv. 7, 8.

Have not the thrones, &c. Text is very doubtful here, but the
sense is as clear as in SL,

12-13. The angel replies that the righteous in the seventh
heaven will not receive their thrones and crowns till the
Beloved descends and becomes man on earth. From verse 18
it appears that it is not till Christ reascends into heaven that
they receive them. See note on verse 18.

The text of E is almost unintelligible as it appears in the
MSS. and in Dillmann’s text. This is owing to a simple
blunder on the part of a scribe, who transferred the words
‘Nevertheless they see and know whose will be the thrones
and whose the crowns’ from their right position at the close of
the sentence ‘till the Beloved will descend in the form in
which you will see Him descend [will descend, J say] into the
world in the last days the Lord, who will be called Christ’
to an impossible position immediately preceding it, That this
restoration is right is established by S: see p. 120. L? is here
corrupt though also helpful. :

Will see Him descend .. . into the world in the last days, These words


62 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


Lord, who will be called Christ". Nevertheless
they "see and™ know whose will be thrones, and
whose the crowns when He has descended, and
been made in your form, "and they will think that
He is flesh and is a man™ 14. And the god of
that world will stretch forth * his hand against the
Son,* and they will crucify Him on a tree, and will
* slay * Him not knowing who Heis. 15. And thus
His descent, "as you will see, will be hidden even
from the heavens, so that it will not be known
who He is%. 16. And when He hath plundered the
angel of death, He will ascend on the third day,


are wanting both in L? and 8; but they are original; for they
appear in Greek Legend, ii. 25; see p. 143. |

Will think that He ts flesh and is a man. ‘Is flesh’ and ‘is
a man’ are parallel expressions, His divine nature will not
be recognized.

14. * His hand against the Son*. So Dillmann rightly emends
text. See Critical Note.

Wiil * slay* Him. So I have emended text with the guidance
of SL, MSS. = ‘and will lay hands upon Him,’ and transpose
these words before ‘and will crucify Him.’ See Critical Note.

15-17. The above verses in E vary so widely from those in
L’ and §, that it is impossible to reconcile them save in a few
phrases. L? = ‘And He will descend into Hades and make it
and the phantoms (visiones = gavrdopara) of hell desolate.
16. And He will seize the prince of death, and will plunder
him, and will crush all his powers, and He will rise the third
day, 17. Having certain righteous persons with Him, and
He will sénd forth His preachers into the whole world and
will ascend into the heavens,’ § in the main agrees with L’,
but is very corrupt.

16. Plundered the angel of death. These words are found alsoin
L*, They have to do with the rescue of certain souls out of the
hand of the angel of death. Christ holds the keys of it, Rev.
ix. 1. The angel of death is again referred to in x. 8, xi. 19.
The next verse states explicitly the deliverance of righteous


CHAPTER IX. 13-17 63


[and he will remain in that world five hundred and
forty-five days]. 17. And then many of the right-
eous will ascend with Him, whose spirits do not
receive their garments till the "Lord Christ" ascend


souls from Hades. See Ignatius, ad Magn. ix; Matt. xxvii. 52,
53; Evang. Nicodemi, i. 1, xi. 1 (ed. Tischendorf). The above
statement confirms the genuineness of the mention of the
descent into Hades in ix. 15 of L?S. Sheol, where the angel
of death abides (x. 8), is thus an intermediate abode; Haguel
or Abaddon (x. 8) is the final abode of the lost.

[Remain in that world five hundred and forty-five days). This
clause is wanting in SL*. It is of course no creation of Ethiopic
seribes. The Ethiopic translator found it already in his Greek
text. The idea is a Gnostic one. It was held by the Valenti-
nians and the Ophites (see Irenaeus, adv. Haer. i. 3. 2, 30. 14) as
Liicke has already remarked (Einleitung in d. Offenbarung, i. 290).
It was, nevertheless, an intrusion in the Greek text; for the
many righteous mentioned in verse 17 are none other than the
souls delivered from Hades, and the ascent mentioned in that
verse is the ascent from Hades. This is clear from S L’, which
bring the resurrection of Christ and the deliverance of the
souls from Hades together : 1x. 16. ‘surgettertiadie. 17. habens
quosdam iustos secum.’

17. And then many of the righteous will ascend with Him, i.e. from
Hades, as I have shown in the preceding note. Yetthe present
form of the Ethiopic implies that the ascension here designed is
not from Hades but from earth to heaven after the resurrection,

Whose spirits do not receive their garments, &c. Soa. b omits nega-
tion against ac. c=‘ who in their spirit have not received their
garments.’ L’S omit. Sinceallthe righteous according toix. 7(E),
and according to ix. 7 (L?S) a certain class of righteous men, are
already in the seventh heaven arrayed in their garments or
spiritual bodies, the spirits delivered from Hades can only
have been the imperfectly righteous. As such they do not receive
their spiritual bodies till Christ’s ascent to the seventh heaven.

SL? add at the close of this verse: ‘et mittet suos prae-
dicatores in universum orbem terrarum et ascendet in coelos.’
The former statement is made elsewhere in our text; see iii,
17, 18, xi, 22.


64 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


and they ascend with Him. 18. Then indeed they
will receive their[ garments and ]thrones and crowns,
when He has ascended into the “seventh” heaven.
19. And I said unto him that which I had asked
him in the third heaven: 20. ‘*Show me how *
everything which is done in that world is here
made known.’ 21. And whilst I was still speaking
with him, behold one of the angels who stood nigh,
more glorious than the glory of that angel, who
had raised me up from the world, 22. Showed me
a book, [but not as a book of this world] and he
opened it, and the book was written, but not as
a book of this world. And he gave (it) to me and
I read it, and lo! the deeds of the children of Israel
were written therein, and the deeds of those whom


18. Then indeed they will receive their [garments and] thrones and
crowns, ‘Garments and’ should be omitted with SL%2 The
class mentioned here are really the righteous already referred
to in ix. 11-13, who, though clad in their garments, do not as
yet possess their thrones and crowns. According to this verse
they attain to these on the ascension of Christ.

Then. This mark of time is explained by the concluding
clause of the verse.

19. See vii. 27. See p. r22 for slightly different and fuller
forms of L? and S.

20. * Show me how*. Emended in accordance with SL? See
Critical Note. MSS. = ‘And he said unto me.’

22, [But not as a book of this world). SL? omit. A doublet. E
‘books.’ See two lines later.

On the heavenly books see my note on Eth. En, xlvii. 3.

Children of Israel. SL? = ‘Jerusalem.’

Of those whom * I* know (not). MSS. = ‘whom thou knowest.’
I have emended in accordance with S ‘quos ego non scivi.’
The negative is not infrequently lost in Ethiopic MSS. L? and
Greek Legend, ii. 31, speak of all men being judged.


CHAPTER IX, 18-28 65


*I* know (not), my son Josab. 23. And I said:
‘In truth, there is nothing hidden in the seventh
heaven, which is done in this world” 24. And I
saw there many garments laid up, and many thrones
and many crowns. 25. And I said to the angel:
‘Whose are these garments and thrones and crowns?’
26. And he said unto me: ‘These garments many
from that world will receive, believing in the words
of That One, "who shall be named” as I told thee,
Tand they will observe those things, and believe
in them, and believe in His cross: for them are
*these* laid up™’ 27. And I saw a certain One
"standing, whose glory surpassed that of all," and
His glory was great "and wonderful. 28. And after
I had seen Him’, all the righteous whom I had seen
Tand also the angels whom I had seen™ came to


23. This world. Greek Legend, ii. 32, ‘that world’; SL? ‘world.’
SL? add after ‘this world,’ ‘And I asked the angel : who is
he yonder who excels all (S omit) the angels in his glory?’
And he answered and said unto me: ‘He yonder(S ‘the pre-
eminent angel yonder’) is the great angel Michael ever praying
on behalf of humanity.’ These words go back to the second
Greek recension. SL? again refer to Michael in ix. a9.

26, Will receive. L? ‘ammittunt’: S = ‘destituuntur.’ If
the reading implied by SL? is not an error, the editor of G?
meant the verse to refer to the Antichrist. But in that case
verse 26 would be no answer to verse 25.

AsI told thee. Better in SL?: ‘regarding whom I told thee.’

*These*. Emended. ac read ‘but for them are laid up’;
b ‘which for them are laid up’ or ‘for whom they are laid up.’

27-32. Vision and worship of the Second Person of the
Godhead.

27. See S L’ for a shorter version.

28, And the angels... Abel, Seth, and. SL’? omit. Adam‘and
Abel have already been mentioned in ix. 7.


F


66 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


Him. "And Adam and Abel and Seth, and all the
righteous first drew near” and worshipped Him,
and they all praised Him with one voice, "and I
myself also gave praise with them", and my giving
of praise was as theirs. 29. And then all the
angels drew nigh and worshipped and gave praise.
jo. And *I* was (again) transformed and became
like an angel. 31. And thereupon the angel who
conducted me, said to me: ‘ Worship this One, and
I worshipped and praised. 32. And the angel said
unto me: ‘This is the Lord of all the praisegivings
which thou hast seen.’ 33. And whilst *he* was
still speaking, I saw another Glorious One who
was like Him, and the righteous drew nigh and


My giving of praise was as theirs. S = ‘their giving of praise
was as that of those.’ L? = ‘the voice was as that of those.’

29. All the angels drew nigh. SL? = ‘and then (L? omit them)
Michael approached and worshipped and with him all the
angels.’

30. *I* was (again) transformed, According to vii. a5 Isaiah
underwent transformation as he ascended into each heaven in
turn. Accordingly he was transformed on entering the seventh
heaven, :and before he joined in its worship, ix. 28. When,
however, he was brought before the Second Person of the
Godhead, he was again transformed and became like an angel.’
I have accordingly with SL? emended E, which read : ‘He
(i.e. Christ) was transformed.’ On the other hand, the text of
ES L? on verse 33 supports E in verse 30. But as we shall see,
they are all corrupt in that passage.

gi. Worship. L?’S add, and no doubt rightly, ‘and praise.’

33-36, Vision and worship of the Third Person of the
Godhead.

33. *He*. SoS. Ewrongly, ‘I’; for it is the angel that has
been speaking. L? omits clause.

Like Him. L?S add ‘in all things.’


CHAPTER IX. 28-36 67


worshipped and praised, and I praised together
with them. But * my * glory was not transformed
into accordance with their form. 34. And there-
upon the angels drew near and worshipped Him.
35. And I saw the Lord and the second angel, and
they were standing. 36. And the second whom
I saw was on the left of my Lord. And I asked:
‘Who is this?’ and he said unto me: ‘ Worship
Him, for He is the angel of the Holy Spirit, who


I praised. L?S = ‘he praised.’

* My * glory was not transformed into accordance with their form. E
reads ‘ His’ instead of ‘ my,’ and has the support of SL’, We
have here, however, a primitive error. In verse 30 Isaiah was
transformed into the likeness of the angels and could thereby
enjoy certain visions, but he was not transformed into the
likeness of the righteous, and was on that account excluded
from steadfastly beholding the ineffable vision in verse 37,
which angels could not behold but only the righteous,
verse 38,

34. At the close of this S adds : ‘and the angel said unto me:
“Worship Him and praise.” And I worshipped Him and
praised.’ L? contains only the last sentence.

35-36. These verses were used by the heretic Hieracas. They
are drawn dan6 70d ’AvaBarixod ‘Hoatov according to Epiphanius,
Haer. lxvii. 3. In this work the quotation appears as follows :
*Edaté pot 6 dyyedos mepimaray Eumpooder pov, kal eke por, rat ele,
Tis éoriy 6 év 5efG Too Oeod" nal elma, Sb ofbas, Kipie; Aéyer, Obrés
éorw 6 dyanntés. xal ris éorw 6 dAdos 6 Gpoos ait 2 dprorepav
€rAGdv ; Kat daa, Sd ywuoreas, Trouréote 7d Gyov mvedua 7d Aadody
év oot, nat év Tois mpopyrais. It will be observed that this account
is much fuller than that which is given in E or L’S, and that
it preserves details which are only found separately in E and
L7S. Thus E speaks of the Holy Spirit being ‘on the left,’ and
this statement discovers itself in the above quotation. On the
other hand the word ‘ambulantem’ in S (‘ ambulans’ in L’*)
has its counterpart in wepirarav in the quotation. Thus the
above text is more primitive than either E or S L’, and may in
some respects represent the lost archetype G.


¥F2


68 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


* speaketh * in thee and the rest of the righteous.’
37. And I saw the great glory, the eyes of my
spirit being open, and I could not thereupon see,
nor yet could the angel who was with me, nor
all the angels whom I had seen worshipping my
Lord. 38. But I saw the righteous beholding with
great power the glory of that One. 39: And my
Lord drew nigh to me and the angel of the Spirit
Tand He said: ‘See how it is given to thee to see
God, and on thy account power is given to the
angel who is with thee. 40. And I saw how my
Lord and the angel of the Spirit" worshipped, and
they both together praised "God". 41. And there-
upon all the righteous "drew near and" worshipped.
42. And the angels "drew near and" worshipped
and all the angels praised.

x. 1. And thereupon I heard the voices and the


ix. 36. *Speaketh*, SoS L’ andi. 7, Greek Legend, ii. 13, in-
stead of ‘ has spoken ’ as in E.

37-42. Vision and worship of the First Person of the
Godhead.

37. Isaiah says that he saw and that forthwith he did not
see. That is, he beheld for a moment but could not steadfastly
behold. SL’ give quite another idea. They declare that
Isaiah did not see God at all, but this is against verse 39.
Neither Isaiah nor the angels could steadfastly behold God :
ef, Eth. En. xiv. a1, ‘None of the angels could... behold the
face of the Honoured and Glorious One, and no flesh could
behold Him.’ Only the glorified righteous could steadfastly
behold Him, verse 38; Rev. xxii.4. The Divine Being is so
named in Eth, En. xiv. 20, ‘The Great Glory sat thereon,’ and x.
16 (note) ; xi. 32 of our text, 39. Cf. viii. 8-9.

41-42. After ‘all the righteous drew near and worshipped ’
ac add ‘and all the righteous.’ § L? insert a reference to
Michael as in verse 23.


CHAPTERS IX. 36—X. 7 69


giving of praise, which I had heard in each of the
six heavens, ascending * and being heard * there: 2.
And all "were being sent up to that Glorious One”
whose glory I could not behold. 3. "And I myself
was hearing and beholding the praise (which was
given) to Him. 4. And the Lord and the angel of
the Spirit were beholding all and hearing all™ 5.
And all the praises which are sent up from the six
heavens are not only heard but seen. 6. And
"T heard" the angel "who conducted me and" he said:
‘This is the Most High of the high ones, dwelling
in the holy world, and resting in His holy ones,
who will be called by the Holy Spirit through the
lips of the righteous "the Father of the Lord™’ 7,
And I heard the voice of the Most High "the Father
of my Lord” saying to my Lord "Christ who will be


X. 1. Ascending * and being heard* there. Emended with L?, E
= ‘which I had heard ascending hither’ (6) or ‘when
ascending hither ’ (ac).

z. Sent up, dc. See vii. 16-17.

Whose glory, dc. ix. 37.

6. And I heard... said. L?S = ‘And the angel said unto
me,’

The Most High of the high ones... holy ones. Based on Isa. Ivii.
15 6 tioros év bymAois xaroKav Tov aldva...év ayios dvanavd-
pevos. See on vi. 8. S L? which give a different form of the
earlier clauses (see p. 128) = efs aldmios Tov iynAdv aldiva xaroKdy.

Called. L?S = praised.

q. Christ who will be called Jesus. Though this and similar
expressions in ix. 5, 13, 17 are omitted by SL’, there are no
valid grounds for regarding them as interpolations, as I have
shown in the note on ix. 5. They go ‘back to’ G!. This
follows from the fact that the excised words are found in the
Greek Legend, ii. 37, where indeed all this verse is found : see


pp. 145-146.


7oO ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


called Jesus": 8. ‘Go forth and descend through
all the heavens, and thou wilt descend to "the firma-
ment and" that world: to the angel in Sheol thou wilt
descend, "but to Haguel thou wilt not go" 9. And
thou wilt become.like unto thelikeness_of all who _
are in the five heavens. 10. "And thou wilt be care-
iil to become like the form of the angels of the
firmament [and the angels also who are in Sheol].
iz. And none of the angels of that world shall
know "that Thou art Lord with Me of the seven
heavens and of their angels. 12. And they shall not
know that Thou art with Me, * till * with a * loud *


om


8. Angel in Sheol. This is the angel of death already referred
to in ix. 16. The angels in Sheol are mentioned in x, 10, and
the ‘angels’ of death in x. 14. We might compare the
expression in Rev. ix. 11, ‘the angel of the abyss.’

Haguel = Abaddon or Gehenna in the sense of being the final
abode of the lost. Cf. ‘the abyss’ in Rev. ix. 1, 2, xi. 7, xvii.
8, XX. I, 3.

g-10. His descent was not to be concealed from the sixth
heaven, x. 19, but from the five lower heavens and from the
angels of the firmament, and from the angels in Sheol. This
last statement I have bracketed, as the release of the souls in
Sheol could not have been effected without a recognition of
Christ on the part of the angels of Sheol.

1o. L?S omit. |

11. None of the angels of that world shall know, dc. Evidently
based on 1 Cor. ii, 8, ‘which none of the rulers of this world
knoweth ; for had they known it, they would not have crucified
the Lord of glory.’

That thou art Lord, &e. L?S omit, but Greek Legend, ii. 40,
reproduces these words ; see p. 146.

12. The angels of that world (i.e. the earth) will not learn
that Christ is with God till the final judgement. For the
emendation of this verse see p. 129. The text as it stands is
unintelligible: ‘And when with the voice of the heavens


CHAPTER X. 8-15 vi!


voice I have called (to) the heavens, and their
angels and their lights, (even) unto the sixth
heaven, in order that you mayst "judge "and destroy”
the + princes + and angels "and gods" of that world,
and the world that is dominated by them: 13. For
they have denied Me and said: “We alone are and
there is none beside us.” 14. And afterwards from
the *angels* of death Thou wilt ascend to Thy place,
and Thou wilt not be transformed in each heaven,
but in glory wilt Thou ascend and sit on My right
hand. 15. And thereupon the princes and powers


T have called both to their angels and their lights: and when
I have made great the sixth heaven (or to the sixth heaven).’
Soa. 6 omits ‘and’ before ‘when’ (twice) and inserts ‘thee’
after both verbs. L?S omit this passage.

Called (to) the heavens. Cf. Ps. 1. 4, where these words are used
with reference to judgement as here.

Mayst judge ... the +princes+ .. . of that world. For ‘princes’ read
‘prince,’ as in SL?, L?=‘ wilt judge the prince of that world and
his angels.’ Cf. John xvi. 11, ‘the prince of this world is judged.’

Destroy. Of. vii. 12.

Gods of that world. 2 Cor. iv. 4, ‘God of this world.’

And the world that is dominated by them. L?S omit, but the
elause is implied by Greek Legend, ii. 38 rév wécpoy éxeivov Tov
bd Tay eiddAwy . . . kuptevdpevov.

1g. Alone are. Greek Legend, ii. 38, adds ‘ gods,’ but L? S support
text. See note on iv. 6. ‘

14. * Angels* of death. See on x.8. Emended from ‘gods of
death’ by a slight change of vocalization. See Critical Note.
The converse change was required in vili. 14.

From the * angels* of death Thou wilt ascend. Soac. b= ‘and
when Thou hast died and risen Thou wilt ascend.’ L? omits
clause but S gives ‘quando e terra elevaberis.’

15. Princes and powers... will worship Thee. Cf. Phil. ii. 10;
Heb. i. 6: see also Deut. xxxii. 43 (LXX).

Princes and powers + of that world +. From a comparison of L?S
and Greek Legend, ii. 40 (see p. 144), it is clear that our text is


72 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


tof that world + will worship Thee. 16. These/
commands I heard the Great Glory giving to
my Lord. 17. And +sot+ I saw my Lord go forth
from the seventh heaven into the sixth cages
18, And the angel who conducted me [from thi

world was with me and] said unto me: ‘Under

stand, Isaiah, and see how the transformation and
descent of the Lord * will appear *. 19. And I saw,
and when the angels saw Him, "thereupon thos

in the sixth heaven" praised and lauded Him ; for
He had not been transformed after the shape o

the angels there, "and they praised Him™ and I
also praised with them. 20. And I saw when He:
descended into the fifth heaven, that in the fifth
heaven He made Himself like unto the form of the
angels there, and they did not praise Him (nor
worship Him); for His form was like unto theirs.


defective and the words ‘of that world’ are corrupt. We
should read in their stead, ‘and angels and all principalities,’
So far we have the support of Greek Legend, ii. 39, and L? S, that
is of G! and G? and therefore of the archetype. L?S add ‘ which
are in heaven and on earth and under the earth.’

16, These commands. So Greek Legend, ii. 41 Tatra, S read rotrov
or rather éxeivov.

The Great Glory. The text here (which is that of bc and L’S
and Greek Legend, ii. 41) upholds our rendering on ix. 37.

17. +Sot. L?S = ‘then’; Greek Legend, ii. 41 = ‘after these
things.’

18. From this world, was with me and. I have bracketed these
words : they are omitted by S L’.

How the transformation .. . of the Lord * will appear *. Emended ;
a reads ‘in order that thou mayst see the transformation of the
Lord.’ Soa. 6 = ‘in order that thou mayst know, &.’ SL? =
‘ quae (or quid) est transfiguratio eius.’

20. (Nor worship Him). I have added these words because being


CHAPTER X. 16-27 73


21. And then He descended into the fourth heaven,
and made Himself like unto the form of the angels
there. 22. And "when they saw Him", they did not
praise "or laud Him"; for His form was like unto
their form. 23. And again I saw when He de-
scended into the third heaven, "and He made Him-
self like unto the form of the angels in the third
heaven. 24. And those who kept the gate of the
(third) heaven demanded the password, and the
Lord gave (it) to them in order that He should not
be recognized. And when they saw Him, they did
not praise or laud Him; for His form was like
unto their form. 25. And again I saw when He
descended" into the second heaven, "and again He
gave the password there; those who kept the gate
proceeded to demand and the Lord to give. 26.
And I saw when He made Himself like unto the
form of the angels in the second heaven, and they
saw Him and they did not praise Him; for His
form was like unto their form. 27. And again
I saw when He descended" into the first heaven,
Tand there also He gave the password to those who
kept the gate, and He made. Himself like unto the


found in Greek Legend, ii. 42, they go back to G’ and should
therefore appear in E. S L? likewise attest them.

23-28, These verses are shortly summarized in L?S. With
the exception of a few phrases Greek Legend fails us from this
point forward.

aq. b omits.

Password, or ‘passport.’ Since L? gives ‘character’ as the
equivalent of the rare Ethiopic word here we may perhaps
assume that yapaxryp stood inthe Greek. S = ‘signa.’ Possibly
the word ‘sign’ would best represent the sense.


74 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


form of the angels who were on the left of that
throne", and they neither praised nor lauded Him;
for His form was like unto their form. "28, But as
for me no one asked me on account of the angel
who conducted me". 29. And again He descended
into the firmament "where dwelleth the ruler of
this world", and He gave the password "to those on
the left," and His form was like theirs, and they
did not praise Him there ; "but they were envying
one another and fighting ; for here there is a power
of evil and envying about trifles" 30. And I saw
v when He descended "and made Himself like” unto
the angels of the air, and He was like one of them.
31. And He gave no password ; "for one was plun-
- dering and doing violence to another."

xi. 1. After this "I saw, and" the angel "who spoke
with me, who conducted me", said unto me: ‘Under-
stand, Isaiah son of Amoz; for for this purpose
have I been sent from God.’ 2. "And I indeed saw

29. Where dwelleth the ruler of this world. So also S, but L?
omits.

go. The angels of the air are distinguished here from those
of the firmament in verse 29. It is otherwise in vii. 9-10.

gt. Everything is in disorder inthe air. Hence no guardians
of the gates.

One was plundering... another. So Greek Legend, ii. 9.

xi. 1. Who spoke with me, who conducted me. L?S omit. One
of the phrases (if not both) seems to be a marginal gloss.

2-22, These verses, save a clause of verse 19, are wanting
in L?S, which omit all reference to Mary and Joseph and
the birth of Christ, His work and crucifixion, and speak only
of His life on earth. See pp. 133-135. This section, neverthe-
less, goes back to G. See Introd. pp. xxii-xxiv.

z. Of the family of David... Mary. Whether Mary as well as


CHAPTERS X. 27—XI. 4 5


a woman of the family of David the prophet,
named Mary, a Virgin, and she was espoused
to a man named Joseph, a carpenter, and he also
was of the seed and family of the righteous David
of Bethlehem Judah. 3. And he came into his
lot. And when she was espoused, she was found
with child, and Joseph the carpenter was desirous
to put her away. 4. But the angel of the Spirit
appeared in this world, and after that Joseph did
not put her away, but kept Mary and did not


Joseph was descended from David as is here asserted it is
impossible to establish conclusively from the New Testament.
Several passages, however, could lend themselves to this inter-
pretation as Luke i. 32, 69; Acts ii. 30; Rom. i. 3, 4; 2 Tim. ii.
8. However this may be, it can be proved that the belief
was early established. Thus Julius Africanus (Eusebius, Hist.
Eccl. i. 7.17) and Tertullian (Adv. Jud. g) at the beginning of the
third century taught it : Irenaeus (Haer. iii. 21. 5) in the latter
half of the second century : Justin Martyr (Dial. c. Tryph. chaps.
43) 45, 67, 100, 120) at the close of the first half, and Ignatius
(Ad Ephes. xviii. 2) at its beginning. It was thus an accepted
fact in the first half of the second century. But this evidence,
eombined with that of the apocryphal Nativity of Mary and the
very early Protevangel of James, is sufficient to make it very
probable that this view prevailed towards the close at all events
of the first century. The evidence of the Testaments of the XII
Patriarchs cannot be adduced here as the date of the passage in
question is still undetermined.

3. Came into his lot, C£. Protev. Iacobi, ix. 1 wat elwev 6 iepets
78 ‘Iwahp' ob rexdAfpwoa tiv mapSévov Kuplov mapadaBeiv els rapyow
éau7r® ; xix. 1 éxAnpwodpny adriy yuvaira.

3, 4. Cf. Matt. i. 20 sqq.

4. Appeared in this world, Soac. b reads ‘appeared to him.’

Kept Mary. Cf. Protev. Iacobi, ix. 3, xiii. 1, for the use of this
word in regard to Mary: in xiv. 2 we have an exact parallel
to our text. There it is told that after the angel of the Lord
had appeared to Joseph, the latter ‘arose from his sleep and


76 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


reveal this matter to any one. 5. And he did
not approach Mary, but kept her as a holy virgin,
though with child. 6, And he did not live with
her for two months. 7. And after two months of
days while Joseph was in his house, and Mary his
wife, but both alone, 8. It came to pass that when
they were alone that Mary straightway looked
with her eyes and saw a small babe, and she was
astonied. g. And after she had been astonied, her
womb was found as formerly before she had con-
ceived. 10. And when her husband Joseph said
unto her: ‘What has astonied thee?’ his eyes were
opened and he saw the infant and praised God,
because into his portion God had come. 11. And
a voice came to them: ‘Tell this vision to no one.’
12. And the story regarding the infant was noised
abroad in Bethlehem. 13. Some said: ‘The Virgin
Mary hath borne a child, before she was married
glorified the God of Israel, who had given him this grace and
kept her’ («at épvaacoey airqy).

And did not reveal this matter to any one. In Protev. xv-xvi Joseph
refuses to answer the questions of the priest regarding Mary’s
condition: Kat ‘Iwahp éotynoev (xv. 4).-

q- His house. Soa. be read ‘the house.’

His wife. Soc. b reads ‘his espoused wife’—evidently a cor-
rection.

8. A somewhat less marvellous though kindred account is
found in Protev. Iacobi, xix. 2.

9. Her womb was found. Soa. be read ‘she found her womb,’

Conceived. a adds ‘Him.’

10. Her husband Joseph. 6 omits for the same reason that it
corrected verse 7. In a ‘her husband’ is erased.

11, This verse is undoubtedly related to Protev. Iacobi, xx. 4
wat idod pwr?) Aéyouta Zardpy, Zarmpy, ph dvaryyelays doa eldes
napadofa,


CHAPTER XI. 5-16 77


two months.’ 14. And many said: ‘She has not
borne a child, nor has a midwife gone up (to her),
nor have we heard the cries of (labour) pains.’
And they were all blinded respecting ‘Him ‘and
they all knew regarding Him, though they knew
not whence He was. 15. And they took Him, and
went to Nazareth in Galilee. 16. And I saw,
O Hezekiah and Josab my son, and I declare to
the other prophets also who are standing by, that
(this) hath escaped all the heavens and all the


14. This verse is practically cited in the Actus Petri, ch. xxiv.
(p. 72, ed. Lipsius): ‘Et alter propheta dicit honorificatum
patrem: Neque vocem illius audivimus neque obstetrix subit.’

15. In Galilee. b omits.

16. (This) hath escaped, dc. What escaped the princes of this
world is the virginity and the child-bearing of Mary. This
being so, it is hard to avoid concluding that our text is the
source of Ignatius, Ad Ephes, xix wat Aabev tov dpxovra Tov
aigvos rovrov 4 mapSevia Mapias nal 6 roxerds abrijs, dpuotws nal 6
Oavaros tov Kupiov. Throughout x. 8-xi. 19 the concealment of
the real nature of Christ is the entire theme, and as a sub-
ordinate factor of this the concealment of Mary’s virginity. In
the Epistle of Ignatius, on the other hand, the subject is
introduced abruptly and obviously forms part of a received
doctrine, such as is presented in our text. While Ignatius’
words summarize admirably the teaching of our text, para-
graph 9 of his letter to the Romans forms a protest against the
Docetic tendency which was already at work and could perhaps
appeal to xi. 17 of our author in supporting its claims.

The source of the above speculation is to be traced no doubt
to zr Cor. ii. 7, 8, ‘The wisdom of God... which none of
the rulers of this world knew; for had they known it, they
would not have crucified the Lord of glory.’ This statement
involves the application made by our author to the Incarnation.
The words of Ignatius formed a favourite quotation with the
Fathers. Thus it is cited by Origen (Hom. in Luc., Op. iii.
p- 938 A; Eusebius, Quaest. ad Steph, i., Op. iv. p. 88t; Ambrose


78 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


princes and all the gods of this world. 17. And
I saw: In Nazareth He sucked the breast as a
babe and as is customary in order that He might
not be recognized. 18. And when He had grown
up He worked great signs and wonders in the land
of Israel and of Jerusalem. 19. And after this the
adversary envied Him and roused the children of
Israel against Him", not knowing who He was,
Tand they delivered Him to the king, and crucified
Him, and He descended to the angel (of Sheol).
20. In Jerusalem indeed I saw Him being crucified
on a tree: 21. And likewise after the third day
rise again and remain days. 22. And the angel
who conducted me said: ‘ Understand, Isaiah :’
and I saw when He sent out the Twelve Apostles
and ascended 23. And I saw Him, and He
was in the firmament, but He had not changed


on Luc. i, 27, Op. i. 1281 (‘Non mediocris quoque causa est ut
virginitas Mariae falleret principem mundi’). For other refer-
ences see Lightfoot on the Ignatian Epistles,

Ig. Descended to the angel (of Sheol). The words ‘of Sheol’
I have supplied from Greek Legend, ii. 39, where the words are
quoted: xaraByoy nal mpds Tov ayyeAov Tod qdou év “TepovoaAqp.
The last two words form the beginning of the next verse,
See also x. 8, 10 (ix. 16), For ‘descended to the angels’ (a), be
read ‘made him descend to the angels.’

21. Days. ab have simply ‘days,’ c ‘forty days.’ Dill-
mann is of opinion that originally the number 545 stood here,
as in ix, 16 (see note), The phraseology at all events is the
same. ;

2a, The sending forth of ‘The Twelve’ is recounted also in
iii, 17, and in ix. 17 in L?S. Cf. Mt. xxviii. 18, 19; Acts i.
8,9. There is a further mention of ‘The Twelve’ in our text
in iv. 3.

23, Saw Him. Soa, bc ‘Saw.’


CHAPTER XI. 17-26 719


Himself into their form, and all the angels of the
firmament "and the Satans™ saw Him and they
worshipped. 24. And "there was much sorrow
there, while" they said: ‘How did our Lord descend
*in our midst *, and we perceived not the glory
[which has been upon Him], which we see has been
upon Him from the sixth heaven?’ 25. And He
ascended into the second heaven, and He did not
transform Himself, but all the angels who were on
the right and on the left and the throne in the
midst 26. Both worshipped Him and praised
Him and said: ‘How did our Lord escape us whilst


And worshipped. b omits.

23, 24. There is some difficulty connected with these verses.
They ought to contain an account of the ascent through the
firmament and the first heaven, for verse 25 describes the
ascent into the second heaven. Our text confines the events
to the firmament, whereas L? could be interpreted as referring
only to the first heaven, for it speaks of ‘the angels above the
firmament.’ Sis doubtful. In any case the text of all three
is defective. See L?S, p. 135.

24. *In our midst*, Emended with L?(S). See Critical Note.
E=‘upon us.”

[Which has been upon Him]. Bracketed asa doublet. The verbs
translated ‘has been’ differ in the Ethiopic.

Which we see... from the sixth heaven. Christ possessed the
divine glory in His descent through the five heavens, i.e. from
the sixth downward, though it was concealed, For ‘we see’
c reads ‘thou seest,’ an easier reading.

25, 26. Ascent into the second heaven.

25. And He ascended into the second heaven. L?S=‘And from
the first heaven He ascended more glorious.’ The comparative
in L?S seems inconsistent with the context.

Who were on the right and on the left... midst. So S save
that for ‘the throne’ it reads ‘he that sat on the throne.’ L?


wrongly omits.


80 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


descending, and we perceived not?’ 27. And in
like manner He ascended into the third heaven,
Tand they praised and said in like manner." 28. And
in the fourth heaven and in the fifth "also they
said precisely after the same manner. 29. But
there was one glory, and from it He did not change
Himself. 30. And I saw when He ascended" into
the sixth heaven, "and they worshipped and glorified
Him" 31. But in all the heavens the praise in-
creased (in volume). 32. And I saw how He
ascended into the seventh heaven, and all the
righteous and all the angels praised Him. And
then I saw Him sit down on the right hand of that
Great Glory whose glory I told you that I could
not behold. 33. And also the angel of the Holy
Spirit I saw sitting on the left hand. 34. And this
angel said unto me: ‘Isaiah, son of Amoz, * it is
enough for thee *; "for these are great things"; for
thou hast seen what no child of flesh has seen.


26. Perceived not. L?S add ‘nor worshipped.’

27. L?S both err in adding ‘into the second and’ before ‘into
the third’

27-30. Since both these versions compress verses 27-30 into
three lines, it is clear that herein they represent exactly G’ or
the second recension of the Greek. Our text represents G1.

32. All the angels. L?S add: ‘et omnes virtutes.’

And then... Glory. Soalso8. L? wrongly omits.

The Great Glory. So b. ac omit, but S supports. See also
ix. 37 (note), x. 16 where it rightly appears in the text,

I told you that. L?S omit.

33. See ix. 36.

34. *Iiis enough for thee*, Emended with L?S. Text corrupt
= ‘I preserve thee.’

No child of flesh has seen. After these words L’S (see p. 137)


CHAPTER XI. 27-41 81


35- And thou wilt return into thy garment (of the
flesh) until thy days are completed. Then thou
wilt come hither. 36. These things Isaiah saw
and told unto all that stood before him, and they
praised. And he spake to Hezekiah the King "and
said": ‘I have spoken these things.’ 37. Both the
end of this world; 38. And all this vision will be
consummated in the last generations. 39. And
Isaiah made him swear that he would not tell (it)
to the people of Israel, nor give these words to any
man to transcribe. 40....*Such things * ye will
read. And watch ye in the Holy Spirit in order
that ye may receive your garments and thrones
and crowns of glory which are laid up in the


Tgeventh” heaven. 41. On account of these visions Se =
edltoria.


give what is really 1 Cor. ii. 9. Jerome, as we know, writes in naan.


his Comment. in Isaiam, Ixiv. 4 (Vallarsi iv. 760): ‘Ascensioenim
Isaiae et apocalypsis Eliae hoc habent testimonium.’ Since
this passage is attested by L? and §, it therefore goes back to
G’, and it was a MS. of G? most probably that Jerome used.
But since it is absent from E, it does not belong to G@. Thus
the textual evidence confirms Zahn’s judgement, Gesch. der
Neutestamentlichen Kanons, ii.801-810. The passage runs: ‘What
eye hath not seen nor ear heard, nor hath it entered into the
heart of man, how great things God hath prepared for all
(S om. ‘ all’) that love Him.’

35. Thy days are fulfilled. See viii. 27.

36. These things Isaiah saw and told. I have emended text in
accordance with L?S. The text=these things I saw. And
Isaiah told.

And they praised, L?S=‘ And hearing these (L? omit ‘ these’)
wonderful things they all praised and glorified.’

40. * Such things * ye will read. Emended with S from reading
of ac, which=‘and then ye will read.’ Before these words
such a clause as thatin S is lost: ‘quantumcumque intellegitis
a rege dicta in prophetis.’

G


82. ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


and prophecies Sammael Satan sawed in sunder
Isaiah the son of Amos, the prophet, by the hand
of Manasseh. 42. And all these things Hezekiah
delivered to Manasseh in the twenty-sixth year.
43. But Manasseh did not remember them nor
place these things in his heart, but becoming the
servant of Satan he was destroyed.

Here endeth the vision of Isaiah the prophet
with his ascension.


OCTT: FALL:


TO ANABATIKON HCAIOY
ASCENSIO ISAIAE


OCTT: AALLM: WL:


I. wht 0n2I"t: PROF: NavyIyr"E: AAPL: Few: LVS:
O20-9; APS: OAS: Ala: OAT: NACE: Fs: 2. O%w-9:
AP200; ANLLD: DAL: APR: WL: ONPLav: ALA?
MAL: KALLD: haw: COGS: PAT: 2b: HAA: FP: CAL:
3. OFBLTE HAMS OP PLTE HUF: OHovie WH: WI:
MHA DLUs OHNANGIUs OHILALU: 4. OF44: TLE
NG2C: HAAUs Cat: 04a TL OE: 077 EY ALB: 5, DavmMP;
PAT: Fh4h? HAh!s’s 17'S BAS: WAAL: OVO: AALL:
OAL: APR: OFV4LLTL: nav: 2&hss Ohad: LPG: Ls
HOA: AGT TH: CA? ATT: WH: olan: ONATT:
TLPACE AH: IAI: ONATT: ANAT: APSA ORR Fa04
ONT: ToOAmMtar;® ONL: OOCTE AGC: 6. AFa0T:


2 be. aH. 2 b. a AL (PM: such generally or APTN: 5 We
should expect genitives dependent on #A'T: instead of accusa-
tives: see however Gk. Leg. i. 2 for a similar construction.
4 a, be HH: 9A9": 5 Em. by Din. from WHITH: be. a
WP RT: 5 &c.aHAGAI™: 7 Sobsave that I have omitted
fi before av}: a NGa0T: a0}7"K:; Nrwoe: Atovt: aI":
5 ac.b Rd4ath: 9a. b AEST: © @ omits. 16a NTE:
6 OT: ® ac. b GAL: 8 6.a ToAmav,

G2


84 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


o7y7PrE: AdhHPLN: CAS: AALS: PATH: TIA: waomy:
AAPA: DAS: OWE: AIH: LAW: ATH: 240-9"; 7M
MAS: AAALLD: 7. Lie? AALLD: AdhneL: TH: WAN:
NaLE: APL; P40: HL: hlos ATHANHC: HATO:
feo: AH: AI": Ohlo: Eb? NATHALY: Oho: avzé2:
HMA008 24C7C: nav: tie: AYE! TAHH: WAM: $4:
LAC5: WIN: FG: DAL: ONE: ALPUS 0°H%; 7°72:
*Aho-d: A>’ 8. OLTAAR: ATTRA: aPAnds 09°S0: wirde:®
692 LING: ODA: Lnw-}: TAU: ANALE! AIRE:
9. ONT: NARA: ONLUA: Lbwo-Pav, AP7LIIPT:
REP: ONALCE LEC: WA: PS: ONALBV: Ai ATOACH
ro. MACLP: MHPLA: HTT: PA: Ahk: ON: 2.242: owmm:
AANA: OOLE: aeot: ONT: CA: OO.LP: VIR 11. OLMbie:
AO2L20: Té.200: Jha AATHA: AA: 9°90: *A4L0E-Ohe
12. ONHRE: OAT! HAG HAPLA: OAK: hav: 2LE Tie: ASH:
DAS: 13. OL: ANLLN: AMNPLM: ARC: GC: AIPAC:
O4095: MONE: £220: Allao: Ai: OH: FoO-2” T2P0hs ONCE:
AGG! Ab ATodds” Il, OME AT724: PT: DUPLA: Wi7w:
GN: OMFATHNE: TAHA: MAPLE: AUVs AA: 2dPav+ wld:
ATTA: AOA: PCA: OMI: WKF: 2. OFLT: PS: THI:
NATHANMC: HAUS OTP: AALM): ObarMntu: wove
Ati 3. O72: Ot: AGU Ad: bk: D200; 722 AdnPLA:
*AP UPL: PAM: OTP: AAT!

4. o72m: AM: 7° Gb: hav; Gruzx Fragment rrom AMHERST
LTPL: AAS Ce! Alav; oon Barrer = GF,
én: 0009; HY AMTH: FAI": | rr 41. 4. (Soe Introd., pp. xxvili-
OVE: NACC:” Hla: ami ‘i airs sa

nh: O8-AE: Led: NARZA | IL. 4. (.. Myavacoq, cat xare-
OF: AOA: F°CO: OLELM:® | (8v)\vduov abrov ey | (77) droord-


1 b.a ALM: such generally or A.M: 2 be. a WLI:
8 a. b GPC: * bom. 5 a. b &30-C: Sha OW:
7 ¢. ab ANCLA: 5 ac. b ONCLA: ® Em. from (HE:
OAT: @ of be: cf. Gk. Leg. i. 12 év cxeivy 88 rH Spa StedoyiCero, 7d.
a NH: PAT: ow. 0 a. b ®P0: 1 a. b AGRE:
2a. beAaTeedi “aom. “abe TAHH: * 6. a OMIM:
6 Supplied in accordance with Gk. Leg. iii. 3. 7 ¢, ab NCLA:
18 Em. by Din. from ©2320: so G? kare(Sv)udpov. ;


CHAPTER
0474: wN0ord: HHCA:
NARA: 5. ONE: *A


TA: OF 622 OTMLC: wAT
PPP wort: Odea Nat:
NAL]? OAL: R2H% NAL:
PC: (ONAL: ANné:]* on
ALY MILs niGP: ONAL: Sch
WO: HAP ASE: ONAL: HAP?
VL: 6. OTe4T: TIC: YP:
She Aor TE: O-AT: Bh
6: YIP! LUA: OANA:
7. DANLL: OAL: APR: AN:
Gat: 0009;° HLTING: NAL4
AA: Ord: NAL: OH
OP F740; ATARI:
OMd OT:" Ads": HLA:
8. MOVER: Vir: * 0009: NH”
OTP? AF* bt: Adwg?:4
2:5 wt: ANC: Naval:
TEP 2 9, MOLL: WL:
*MADIE: ACIB” WALPAA®
MAING: DALAM” DAR:
ONHS3: AN: FAI: a7 27°
Gh” OCTH: AVL: T2740:
ones oT: SNC: 10, tie


la. b ONHD:


5 a. bom. 5 6. ac MOL:
8 a. be YEO.
© g. b OHM-O: ¢ OHMw-4:
reads (lt: for Hh:

B a. bc WiNd:

8 g. b WALHM:
21 has an active sense here.


Xetppapavacon,


1. 6—II. 10 85
G2
oat” kat 77 | (dv)opia, ris” éordpn


ev | (TepovoaAnp. 5. Ka(t) érdij-
Ouver | (4) Pappaxeta cal 7 palyeta
kat % pavreta Kat | of kAnSoviopol
Kat | 4 wopveta Kat 6 Swwypos | rév
dixatwy év | xepot™ Mavacoy | Kat
év xepoty tod Tov|Bi tod Kava-
virov | kat év xepolv “Iwvav | rod
Nad nat év xeploiy Zadmx Tod
elzt Trav zpaypate|av. 6. Kal of
Aovrot dd|-you iSod yeypappé|vor
cio(ty ev tots Bi| BAows Tay (B)a-
o(tAdwv | “Tov8a xal *I(cpayaA)
J. «+ 04| (Kat Thy ropary(y ad)rod |
dvexopyoev da(d ‘T(epovoaA)ihp |
kat éxdOicey év B(yO)Ac|eu ris
Tovdaias. 8. (kat) | éxet 8& fv
dvop{ia m)oA|Ay, Kal dvaywpy-
oa(s) | dard ByOActu éxa(O)|cev
év T@ pet ev Td|7w Epypw. Q. Kal
Mixdlas 6 rpopyrys xat *Alvavias
5 yépov kai CI)w|}A Kat “ApBa-
kovp kat |*I[c]lacovd 6 vids ad-
tov | kal 7oAAol ray mio | Tov TOV
motevdr|rwv™ eis odpavors dva-|
Bivar dvexdpycay, Kai é|kdOicav


2 a, b NIN: Wanye;
because wanting in G? and Gh. Leg. iii. 3
cause wanting in G: name appears first in ii. 12.


6 g.b avn’: 1400;
® 6.4 ATOM:

2 Em. with E from os.

* Em. by Grenfell and Hunt from morwv ovtwr.


els 76 pos, 10. wdv|re{s) odKKov


3 Bracketed

* Bracketed be-
b reads NANG:
7 Em. from HAS: of be. a HAP;


° a adds NH: against be and Gh. Leg. iii. 8.
" a, bc Abt:
8 a. be OTT chv:


2 gq, btrs. and

4 ae. b ARZANI":
Y a. be DATED: ACDL:
2” @ trs. aft. A772:

3 MS.


86


apy Fy; 2024: wlirars)
LT: AoOKYE: FUL: AY:
AANav: PAAWavrs: AA? OG
an; Aah E; witivaes 2AM:
*Ad: 008 NATH: hath: an
GhAH 1. WA: AANo: He
QAO: HATA: hI°A: T4I":
LET APRANC: OPN
trav: BAAS: FAA: AALLI:
TOL: ws oO: ALAC: wo
oi: A0-7C: DAR Ga0t:
ab0A: $12. DAI°24ACH: UA.
Pav, wT: 787°: OVA@: ih
R25 Nad: NAV: Hier: NA
nda? AP°RHIVR: NASPLN: w
AL: NGAk HAIL: Hav Ng:
NOT: Ads ORLA oA
2: nh: HOWE A’: AU:
ONarPon: Ahel: Feo: ANd
AA: OD F°YCav«? w-A'E: AGM.
LT: HAI: OW-AE: AGP: O8
Ade? AoDned: WAL: AF7R:*
LL: 13. OO-WE: TAA: AI?
Anan: OTOL ODD Ln wt:
Ped PAA: ALPLD: ULL:
UA@.: FAA: An-HL: = wdAL;


2b. a AN:


1a, 6.0m.


5 a. b&. 5 OB.


7 oNAne:


ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


fer)
mrepiBeBAnpevor, | kal révres Hoay
mpopirat, | ovdey zxovres pet’ ad-
TOV | GAAG yupvol Hoar, revOodv-|
tes wévOos péya wept THs 7A(A)-|
vys tov “lopoyA. II. Kat ovror
odk jo|Acov et py Bordvas TiAdov-
(re)s | éx TOV dpéwy Kal*........005 |
2628 pera "Hoa(io)u™ *oixodv-|
tes. kal ée(t) joav® ev z(o)is
dpeloww Kat év tois Bovvois (8)u(o
2)rn | qepav™ 12. Cert) tod
e(Z)var abrovs (év) | rots épnu(o)es
KL nsins 4|va'sived aise va aris ev Japapig
3 (6)vopa | jv Bedrxeip éx ris |
ovyyevias Zedexiov| viod Xavavitot —
Yev|Sorpopyrov 8s Fv | KaTouxdy
€v Bybalvig™. Kat Sedexias vids |
Xavavi ds qv ddeA|hds Tod ratpds
ail|rod, év 88” rais pugpaus|’AxadB
Bacidéwst0d| "Iopaya jv™ dddo-|
kaXdos Tay Tetpa|kooiwy zpopyTav |
tot Bada, kai aird(s) | épdarucev
kal BBpilcev tov Meyalay vidy leu-
pada Tov mpopyryv’ 13. Kal adtos
8 bBp(ic)|On bad *AxaaP xal |
€BryOn Mixatas | cis pudakiy.
Feat Fv" | u(e)ra. Zedexdov rod | pev-
3 b trs. 4 a. b LIPO:
On the various forms of this


name of which the most, primitive form appears to be that in the


text, see note, p. 13.


® See exegetical note, p. 14.


9 @ avUCav:


6 om. be WRACr: 2 a. cf. G?"leupadd. 6 AOD:
* bom.  ™ Add WUA@: in accordance with G? kai fv. = For
Ab-HE: (6), a reads ANH&: =’ E=&pavres érpépovro. ™ E adds
6 mpopnrns. ®% E=kal olxoivres foav. 19 Es adds kat pera
TovTO. 20 B= ByOnecu. 1 Above the line in MS. 2 MS.


topanindnv. Grenfell and Hunt explain 7A as a dittography of yA.


°3 MS, tue.


CHAPTER II. 10-16


*ANTZ SI”: ANAVAD-::)


14, OAALN: LL:
H “EA? HAI
Ade: LAA: Adn-
He:* wo nner Ce:*o*
O-aAE: THe: AAT:
AnH: hoo: *0I7A
AN: LEU. 2oow-t;
*ONT7CL: Nal: vA
a: GAC: TroOUN: a
hoo: PA: eT: AT
HAN Cs 15. 000:
A790: 1b: hat:
aA: F°NA: Abe H.e:7
WAL: Anal: *wav
PVCas ALACLAE
aAPLened: AA:
16. O@-AE: [A-4h.
G1)? VEU ANLDL?


' For ANAM (a), b reads NNAws


87
qi


Sorpogyro(v)| dvros’*- joav pers |


’Oxolelov viov "ANA(w)" | ev Beu-


paopia.
14. kat’Hyelas (6 mpo-
dileys & colar)"
...|[ kal THv Zapapiav,

kal aids émpody|revev
mept Oxolelov ore ev
khivy dp|pworias daro~
Oavetlrax cai 4 Sapapia
eis | xeipas “AAvacdp
ma|padoOycerat avO dv|
eddvevev Tors | tpopy-
tas ToD @(co)d. 15.
(xa)t dxotcayres of
apopyrat + (o)i pera
’Oyolfefov viod "Ady
kat | (6) S8doxados
abrév | “IadAapias™ é&
dpous + Io|Aad t®
16. xai abrés Fv [o |


Fragment or THE First
Lari Version = Lt.


TI, 14—III. 13.


(See Introd., pp. xxi,
xxix-xXxXxi.)


14. (pro)fetas Dei.
‘15. Et cum audis-
sent  pseudoprofe-
tae qui erant cum
Ochodiam filium
Achab, *qui fuerat
doctor eorum Ga-
marias” de monte
Efrem, 16. Et ipse
fuit frater Sedeciae,


The phrase A” NN” is


clearly a transliteration=Alamerem balala’aw. Alam in the first
word=’Ayé§; for’Axd@ is so written in ii.1g of G2. Again balala’aw
was probably basala’aw (i.e. BacvAéws), since M and fi are some-
times confused in Ethiopic. Thus we have ‘Ahab... king.’ The
intervening letters érém may be corrupt and defective for <v
Seppo, itself corrupt for év Sapapig: cf. 1 Kings xxi. 1 ‘ Ahab,
king of Samaria.’ 2 @ om. 3 be ‘HOt: “6 om.
Fa AP Aah: NAP: 6 Em. with G: E wrongly Af.


7 6 Ane: 8 T have with L bracketed this word: 6 reads
anh: 2 a AAPL: 10 MS. wevdorpodnro ovres. 1 See
note! above. 12 Remainder of this line and the next two
undecipherable. 3 E adds airov. 4 EL! = pevdorpopirat.


6 EH =Jalergés, L! Gamarias. 16 Corrupt possibly for Iopayr.
In that case Efrem would be simply an equivalent in thought
though not in letter. J6él or {j6él of E could arise from Iona.
17 Should be et Gamarias qui fuerat doctor eorum.


88


AAaD yp:
th


fod Pav.
AawHe: TE:


PCht oO NoLnLa:


III. 1. ONAne? AN
Or OCA: avn: 4.4
LON: OHI HAN:
PRA: Alia: w-4F;
*2PNC: 00d-C) HO
Tt: Ad: OTAIP Ks:
APC oOw-AE: 2
Be: HAT: NAk4-A
A: OHI: a7"
ASSAM AN: PS
PAV: Dwo-wWE:
APACE: OWE:
2, Wk: AH: apa:
anic: HDC: FR:
AACE: w20FP; Nhe?
Ck: O14: TOYEU:
mH: 029; owhse


1b AIO:
abe ONNARSE:


aman:
note, ii. 16.


% Defective and corrupt.


G
Bexerp(a)]7 ddeAdds
tov | Sedexiov, dxov-
cay|(r)es® perémecay
tov | Oxo€eiay Bacirca.|
Topudppwy «at édpd-|
(v)evoay tov Muxai-|
(av. TIT. 1. xai Be-
xeipa eyvo, | (K)at e-
dev tov 76|(r)ov tod
*"Hoaiov | (kat 7a)y
mpody|(tav tav) per”
ai|(Tov. otro)s yap jv
oi|Kav év TH xopa
Bybrcép, Kat éxodAy-|
On TG Mavacop. Kai |
aitos fv Wevdorpo|py-
tevwv ev ‘Tepovoal|Ajp,
kai oAAot é& “Ilepov-
cod  ékoddy|Oyoav
mpos aurdv. | Kal at-
tos 8¢ Fv dad | Sapa-
plas. 2. Kat éyévelro
év TO edOeiy AX yacdp
*Agovpiny Baci|d€a
kal aixpadwrilra. THY
Sapapiay | cal daBely
Tas év|(ve)a tyuov®


PvAds ély aixpadwoia


* Add rt: with GL.
* ¢. ab whl:
LPNALC: (a vow nulla). b OfdyC:


® So Li


ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


Li
suasit’® Ochodiam
regem Gomorrae, et
occidit ® Micheam.


ITI. 1. Et cognovit
Bechira, et vidit
locum Eseiae et pro-
fetarum qui cum
illo erant ; ipse enim
habitabat in Beth-


||Jem™ ; tet abiit Hie-


rosolima, ett? con-
juncti sunt et *ipse
a Samaria“. 2, Et
factum est cum ve-
nisset Salmanassar
rex Assyriorum, et
accepisset Samari-
am, et abduxisset
novem™ et dimi-
dia(m) tribus in cap-
tivitatem et per-


3 Em, with G? L' from
5 Em. with G? from a
6 Em. from a @ Hi:
* Is an intrusion, though supported by E: see exegetical
® So EB. Lom.
be in plural as in EG?


be


E om. ” Should


1 MS. Beclem. EG?=regione Bethlehem.


EG = et conjunctus est Manassi


et ipse prophetabat mendacium in Hierosolyma et, multi ex


Hierosolyma.
from nomen.


% Em. by Nitzsch from ipsi Asamaria.


4 Em.


CHAPTERS II, 16—III. 5


ave wT: NAW-CT:
BEE OAGAT OEY?
3. HOWE: DoH: T
STA: WavKA: ALLA
07°:* NavPod: mH
PLA: Vw: LU-R: wo
ahd: AEST: AV:
Hd°7CeL: Ada: mH
PELNTILECU: 4.0
tTZnl: Narvon: mh
ped: AW: LYTIC:
¥1&4T:5 0ar4: NALZA
09: 5. *wkITPL
LP: Ob: MUPLI:
OTrita: Idd Ot:
AdLI*; WARD}... 28


@
kat | darevéyxat adtods |
eis 6pn® Myduv xat |
rorapav ? [xai] 4! To-|
fdv, 3. obros Hy veld-
Tepos, Kal épuyev | Kai
WrVeveis Te(pov)|caAjp
nep)as — (Efe) |xéou
Bao(tréus"I)|ovSa. kali
obk élrdre?t+* eis Sa-
papilay ev 686+ tod7a-|
tpos airov™, dri Toy
“Efexiay épofeiro. | 4.
kal eipéOn ev 76|xpove
‘Efexiov dalAGv Adyous
dvo|uias ev ‘Iepovca-
Phy | 5: kat KaTyyo-
pnOy [76 Tay zaiSur |
“E€exiou Kat epvyer |
eis tiv x@pov By|6-
Ace. Kal erecav™. |


89
ui
duxisset eos in mon-
tem Medorum et
ad flumen Gozan:
3. Bechira fuit ju-
venior, et fugit et
pervenit Hierosoly-
mam in diebus Eze-
ciae regis Judeae:
non ambulabat in
via Samaritani ©
patris sui, quoniam
timebat  Ezeciam.
4. Et inventus est in
tempore Ezeciae lo-
quens v(erba) injus-
titiae in Hierusa-
lem, 5. Ht spretus
est a pueris Eze-
ciae et fugit in
regione(m) Beth-


' Ga (?). Ifso, this may be a corruption of épy as in G? (and
L’); if not, then our text agrees with the Massoretic text of


2 Kings xvii. 6 (1Y) against LXX which imply
3


OH. 4 6 om.
on G? in loc.


® be ¥1d:


§ Text defective. Better read pl. with G’.


loc.


(e)warets.


gives: in via Samariae patris sui.


matpos avrov.


© Corrupt for worapous.


1 Should be excised.
8 Corruption can be understood from L!} which:
Thus L'=év 686 ev Sapapia tov
Since this was unintelligible, some scribe of G?


".


26 MH}:


5 6 HavCe; E alone is right here: see note
7b O@ AT: AAT: OLLLP: LP:


» See note on E in
2 MS.


transposed év 686 and é Sapapig (cis Zapapiavy being probably his
correction). From E we see that ¢v Sayapia should be Sapapetrov.
The error can be explained by the Hebrew: &v 686 ev Sapapia
rod marpos atrov= YIN DWI TIA where “v3 is corrupt for


ww. Thus the Greek should be: ey 686 rod Sapapeirov marpis
avrov. 4 Text defective. See exegetical note in loc. ® MS. .
Samariae. See note ™ above. 16 —xarehpovndy corrupt for xary-


yopnén as contempsit (ver. 6) = xareppdrncev (Turner).


‘gO


6. MANTPLE? OA
nés AAALLA: wont
LT: *AA: FAA?
ATH: 2A: AAL LD:
MAN: FAV: LTS
NF: AOA: FLSA":
MANA: AVEC: LUA:
nap; LOVAG?? ON
LI°%: hav: &dho-C:
AZP: MANNE: 47
HL.&: "YE?": hav: fav
ATAT: Oa Pe ht:
42%:ThO-Ci 7.0
Acme TEN: hAt: 21s
Ot: AANGAA: we.
US: 8. OAAU £4
LL: 20: Adotis 2.
42: Aarth: 1025
9. Darth: 2th: Ad
O: NAt: H2oAt:


16 WANT: OL8:
a om.
abrov.


4


Kvpie Bacided Sri.
u ED =eni.

3 MS. Beclem.
but G? om.
18 MS. Beniami-.
21 MS. galea grec.
with EG’,

* Corrupt for videre.


ASCENSION


‘@
6. kal Karyydpyoer |
MeAxeipa tov "Hoallov
kal tov mpody|rav®
Aéywr ért "Hoalias cat
* ot apopyrat® | of pe-
7a. ’"Hoaiov™ zpolpy-
revovow émt ‘Ielpovea-
Ajp Kat éxt | (ra)s 176
Aes “Tovda® | (xa)i
Be(vi)apety dru | (zo)-
P 9 2
pev(co\vrar® év -yare-|
(dy)p(a1s xa)t ev rédars|
dareXevoy,| 7. Kat
airol wevdo|rpopyret~
hs + a, NA
ovow | kat” roy "lopar
kat | rév "Tovdav * Fxat
\ fl > *
tov | Bertapely adrot |
pucotow, Kat 6 ddlyos
aitay Kaxds | émt tov
a ff XN si. >
Tovday | kat tov “Io-
ayAT?. 8. Kat | airs
"Hoadas etrev|[atrots],
Brera mAKLlov Mavoyj
a 4 2
70d rpo|pyrov. Q. elev
‘ fal Lf a
yap | Mavoyjs dru ob


2 G om. but L' supports.
5 EL! add rév per’ adrod.
5 G? om. through hmt. the following words: ére épnpwOn-
govrat Kal emt rods viods “Tovda,
® Here G? is again defective.


So Li


6


E om. «ai ém..
Add with E L! aiypddore: kai eri oe,


OF ISAIAH


aA
lem*. 6. Et contem-
sit'* Bechira Eseiam
et profetas * qui cum
eo erant', dicens,
quonia(m) Eseias et
profetae, qui cum
illo sunt, profetabant
in Hierusalem et
a(d) civitatis Judeae,
*quoniam deseren-
tur® *et in filios
Judeae” et Benja-
min", quoniam cap-
tivi® ducentur™: *et
in te”, *domine rex,
quoniam * *galeagra
et” per ferrum dedu-
ceris, 7. Ipsi profe-
taverunt” in Istra-
hel et in Juda * et in
Hierusalem™. 8, Et
ipse Esaias dixit se
plus quam Moysen
profetare™. 9. Dixit
enim Moyses quo-


56 wn.
7ELD=


E om.


- Tovda.


1 The missing word may be éécptos,


2 EF om., L' gives only et in Hierusalem.
™ See note on preceding page.
16 So E, but G2 om. MS. deseruntur.

MS. ducuntur.
Niebuhr em.


8 So also E,
Y EG? om.


20 MS. et inde. G? om.
2 Read pseudoprofetaverunt
3% Eom. G? has a large divergent addition.


AATHANAC: Och
& wAAelh: £0:
ak CAnP: AAT
aC:O4F: hlOs Abs
to, YH": 447°Chi
nao: *10.2T: mhOT:


Aah TE? OAALS-AN | dy(s)


4: ASI": Havl: wo


AarAant: LUAL: @ | (


ARZAGI": HO: 77°
é: ZAP: ON:
ATPL? AAALL
a: one r: 1:
PG: m1. wind:
NMALC: oft: AN:
PG: owit: AN:
wnant: £04: on
409°; OH40P): oO
Hao Ped: VRP s
12, DALI: 6.2542:
¥12: NAR: W650;
wad: AsALLA:
13. Adov; NALC:*
*lovSt: ONL: Utes’
NOA: AALLI: AI


16 om.
ANTP LES:


EL.

11 EG om.
cum.
18 MS, consiliario.


% Added from EG’.
Mai em.


CHAPTER III. 6-13


q@

dlWerar dvOpwros | tov
Gedy Kat Lacerta),
*Hoaias 5é eter ef[Sov
tov (Bedv) K(a)t ib |
Ca. ro. Bacr{A)ed
(yi)vo(o)|Ke bre ev-
H(s) éolrw. Kal rH
‘I(e)pov|cadjpy 3d80-
pa e|kdAccev, (at
tous) |dpxovra(s’lovda.|
cal IopayX! (Aadv To-)|
péppas mp(oo7ys)|pev-
cev. (x)a(t oAdée |
Karrpydpet emt Tod | Ma-
vacon® Kal TaY 7Tpo-
dyrov. II. Kat é|xd-
Oicey Bersdp ev | rH
xap(8)ia. rod Malvacoy
kat év TH Kap|dia Tov
2 Ca FS 4 he
apxovTwv | *TovSa Kai
Bentapety | kat rv ed-
votyov | kat rOv coupe
Bod|Awv* rod BacrAé-|
ws? I2. kal jpecav ad-|
7@ of Adyou TOD Bed-|
xerpa. kal dméoredey |
kal éxpdrycey Tov |
*Hoaiav. 13. qv yap
5 Bel\cap ev Oupe


mo lAG (é)ri ’Hoaiav


2 Since L? has mendax est
the text is corrupt; we should read hAG: OAT:
4 ab NCLA:
7 BL! =‘lepovoadty rightly: cf. Isa. i.
9 MS. rév Baotréov.

2 Should be excised.
16 MS. Beliac.
1 EG? give sing.


10.
10 Add


5b NAnds:


8 Add rod ’Hoaiov from


13 MS. nominavit.


ol
Rm
niam homo non po-


), || test videre Deum” ;


dixit autem Eseias
Vidi. Deum et ecce
vivo. 10, Tu, rex,
intellige quoniam
mendax est: et ecce™
Hierusalem Sodom-
am dixit, et pri(n)ci-
pes [ejuset] Judeae
et Hierusalem popu-
lum Gomorrae nom-
inavit™, Et coram™
(Manasse)* in mul-
tis detradixit Eseiae
et profetis, 11. Et
supersedit Beliar “in
corde Manasse, et
corde”  principum
Joudaee et Benjamin
et spadonum et con-
siliariorum™ regis.
12.Etplacueruntei(s]
sermones Bechire,
et mandavit rex et
adprehenderunt”
Eseiam. 13. Fuit
enim Beliar’® bilem
habens in Eseiam


and G? wevd9(s) éorey
3 be
5 6 ¥7°0:


et vivere with EG’.
4 MS.
WY MS. corda.


g2


AL: DAIMLT: Hh
vet: ANTA: wha;
QATEAU: ANTCAY:
PRE? AGRO AI®
And: 0°72: orod
OE? OCVE: OA
€4: 1H: Udw: 2-+tw
APT! GAe: OA:
ONZE: HLAL2: w
OP CTLs Hie Lbs:
ANGAA: LIP L9:5
OPRAT: LOCACK
4s OTPUCT:’ On
av}: UAS: Pan: (F
ar: *N06: LAPA:
OFAN: OLM: 7M
Ct: 0a09; LAPA: wo
nov: \ooP-Nci;: 2T
PIC:


14 OLMS* AN: PHU: LO
4: OE: wo OPAT” AM: WOPH:


'¢ PRAT: So L' adventum.
ANTCA: could be translated actively = revelavit.
4 ac OP PLOT


TtoOAmys:


ASCENSION


3b wL-TBAT:
° 6 ODLAPLS: VAP:


° Em. from a Atty. bc read ATH: a manifest correction.


Gq?
dar6 | rijs (6pd)oews Kat
dxé | to(d 8et)yparic-
a Lf P) 4
pod | dre (e)derypdri-
ce | tov (S)apaya,
‘. g 2 2 col
cal 6|(rx 8 a)érod
eave|(pwOy 4) e€éAcv-
ots | Tov dya)ayrod ék |
(rod €88)dp0u oipa-|
(vod kal 4) perapdp-|
gucis avrov, kal 7
tA > cel ®
katéBaows airod, Kat |
€ 27 a Lal ;
4 da Hv Sel aibrér |
~ 2.
petapoppobfvar | ev
<iSer dvOpwrrov, | Kat 6
Stwypds by diwlyOyoe-
Tat, Kal at KoAd|oes als
def rods vilods 70d *Io-
‘ aN Z
payrA abrév | KoAdcat,
kal 4 Tov dadexa pa-
Onreia™, wat | ds Set
atrov™ pera | dvdpav
Kaxoroilav cravpwh7-
vat, | kat Ore ev pvy-
3 ta
pe(2)o | rapjoerat,
14. k(a)i


OF ISAIAH


Li
propter (visionem et
propter)® quod *in
se“ ostenderit Sam-
ael, et quoniam ipse
nuntiavit™adventum
dilectissimi de sep-
timo caelo et trans-
figurationem™ ejus
et discensum et for-


|}mam in qua trans-


figuraretur esse hom-
inis, et persecutio-
nem, quam passurus
est, et contumeliam
quam patere(tur)


da|Sexa of per’ a{d)-


tod | bx adtot oxavdal\ucOyoov-


tat, ka(t) | 7 TApyots” Toy 7(y)-|
pytav rod prypolveiov,


7 be OT PVCT:


from ab OPATL: in accordance with G?,


paénreia.
Cf.ix.14, xi.20 of E.


rupt for ostensione(?),


a verb that = revelatus est or revelavit.


quem. Dn. em.


7 See note » above.


E shows leanings to text of L':


2 ac
5 6 om.
56 LADA: 000:
10 Em,


NE =zapovoia cal 7


® Add with E mpd rod coBBdrov oravpabivas emi EvAov.
* Lost by hmt. Supplied from EG’.
* G? has a passive construction.


4 Cor-
E has
6 MS. transfigurati


CHAPTER


oPdi 15.0024: warn?
HOT: ACOELE Att: ANCL tT:
UA@t: Ho-2'F: 0.2756:* a0 POA:
£2.0-0;3 16. MavAKn: Hav}
6.0: PLA: WTOLARA: *avAAn:4
amnant: P2071: navy MIAN:
OAT: 0%: avPNd: = 17.
@'o-AE: GEC: IC: £0: ava
Gav CORA: OL44: TOS
ACS4.U: 18. OLBU4: ther:
Ahn: otic: AA: ATYIA:
GC: WAN: Thook: NoviPas:
LE OTP A010:
A972: AIH: aPRA: 19. *O
hav; VAM. 1K: Ad: LTA
ov: WE: Nav: PS. LTS
145 20. *ONi4: T4I°C: Wav
Face? Lnw-r: Nw-ak: ave
OA: 21. DAI°.242: ADSOFE:
S427: ACKAU TPUCT: H
IWEHPCLT: OF LAVP+a04


16 @Ct: ° bc Mant:
@hap;
atnd Wave Add A:


1 @ wrongly AJ”.


wav tnd:
8 a O7L0F°T:
Tapia. 8 E adds 8ddexa.


Ill. 13-21 93


q?
15. kal &s 4 K(ardéBa)|ois tod
dyye(Aov ris) | éxxAnoias 75(s ev
oipa)|vG .... pe Tos év Tals
(oxdraus) |(pu)€(pous), 16. xa(t)”
6 dyyedos tod Tvetpa-
tos | Tov dyiov Kal Muyalir
apxwv tov pet eee tov dyiov |
ore Ty TpiTy Hpue|pa abrod dvot~ov-|
ow TO pyynpovetov, | 17. Kat 6
dyarntés xalPicas émt trois dp-|
ous abrav eeAe| vera, kal as
droote|Aet tovs"® —prabytas |
airod 18. Kal pabyted|covow
mdvra, te GOvn Kal wacav yAdo-|
cay eis rHv dv(d)otalow Tod dya-
a()rob, | Kat of (2)ioredoar|res
(9) cravpd ailrod cwO(4)cov-
tat kal | ev 7H dvaBdoet ail (r)od
eis tov EBSopor | (0)d(p)avov dOev
kat |(7AGe\v. 19. Kat ds x(o)A|
(Aoi x)ai oAAot (7) Gr | (xreore)vdy-
tov eis | (airov) ev rd dyi Ivev-
pari|(AaAjoour)w, 20. Kai dis |
TOAAG onpeta Kal | tépata. &o)-
ror év | Tails Hucpas éxetvais,
ar. cal” éy 7h éyyilew | adr(d)v.
(d)pyoovew ot (p)aPnral airod
Thy mpodyteiay tov bade|Ka dro
ordAwv abrod™ | Kal tiv rior


enecone


3 q@ avPo:
® So be. a aDP4{IC:
Sa Ach: a0
2 & wNhoo: UAw-:

4 g adds N@?: a vow nulla.


kal | viv dydaryy airév | cal rhv
‘bm.
7 6 om. 3


> 6 wrongly
a wrongly
a wrongly om.
3% ONHD: T4I°C:

® 6 HAC LAU:


7 Grenfell and Hunt supply lacuna with


19 E adds pera ravra. 2 Eom.


21 6 adds atrav. Possibly the atrod in the preceding phrase should


be read as atray after rior.


94 ASCENSION


O'EPCav: OFF ha04? 22,02
no}; Mad: Nit: (AT RAE:
OPAPEOE: 23. ONW-A'F: ap
POA: NHI: AA: L6.P42 "Lot:
ATH: *049%: PANY 24, OL
NO MEI ASST: 009°:
wPirt: *140b: AN2Pav« wL.
nwo: wm: *NAcn.Otrav: &
it: P2.0in7 25. O2PAM:
OHI Ble: dNirravs *VeP
S.A MANAT: EPL OCP:


OLNO-): PLA: T9: NHR” low-
AE: ar POA: WOPGbe4 *HNC: |...


ew all... ev éxeivy | 7B xpdvy
ie


H7H: 9A? §=26. OLw-4: ch
aoey:8 [Mh°? 20%; ame (1 t we chad
OO6k: HNc:” A“b2at: AT
HA: O27 7TH: ovIZR: PF2:
APM: 27. OALZAG:


oA: oP POA: 10.27: MHS: |


ORAM: LTS, *R IT: At
HA? SEN Nanas: 28. NAT:
ond: dah Tt:” wHoe-t: OH


VAw*T? Thek *07An: 2 TOU
:" ADNICH AHhs OAAA:*
LTO: Hat: 29. OLNw-};


cee He)|va


OF ISAIAH
q


' dyvelay airav. | 22. Kal érovrar
_ aipéoets | roAAal év To éyyi|fev


airdv, 23. Kab écor|ra éy Tals
€. VA ¥ * . t
Heépats élxeivars moddol 6édov-|


LA x * ‘4
tes Gpxew kat xevol | codias.


24. Kal €covra: woAlAot apecBu-
Tepot dvo|pou a(t) croupéves | ddixou
e(x)t 7a zpoBara | atrav.......
% Sid 7d yy €xewv | ar(o1)=
pévas ayvous.. 25. Kali aires
éy-:
wees (7)8(v) dyd(v).


HAD 2 were cveee |


nae
.
kat
of dulAotvres THY dd€(av)|Tod Kéo-
pou Tovrov. | 26. kal évovrat Ka-
taXa|\al zoAdal Kal xelvodogia
‘ 2. lol 7 4 “ ,
mokAy ev | 7B eyyiLew Tov Kv-
pov, | Kal dvaxwpyoe TO | wved-:
oy > 4 cal a
pa TO ayov dad | Tov ToAdGv.


27. Kat od|« éoovra: év éxeivais |
5 - ee a \ 27
tails hucpars rpopy|rar aodAol


O69: DNC: ONE: OCP: *H® |


AaAodr|res ioyupa H efs kal ei(s) |
N Jf. og , XN tL

kal els év téros Kal | Térots 28.

dd. 76 aveDpo. | ris wAdvys K(at

t)Rs | wopveias kat Tis KelvoSogias


N7Aieav; *RAA: ONL” NP |, cai rhs | drrapyup({)a(s .. .* |

1@ om. 2 6 om. 3 A manifest doublet. Cf. G?.
46 O49h PON: 5b Adw-TT: 5 6b 14ALT: ANTE Pav:
7 Em. with G from a NMaOnNtor: Pir: PEA: For these
words 6 offers a mere correction: a0C¢T: P$.0h Aw” is a vox
nulla, * bE "oH. 6 a0GbC2: = © bis:
* bane: © chav-t; an alternative(?) form of dh7ZT: as hPL:


of ch®:; if not then it must be changed into h?Zt:
a reads MhUMVLL};


fest doublet.


y wd: BoA.
att: 2. @ OH.
4b wath: > 6 RANA: ONL:


27 E adds oie oi.


1 6 RE-9b: HATO: a
26 nny:


4 A mani-
6B WOES:
a wrongly

3 @ adds AOE:
° Read (dpraynod)peva.


© 6 Mi:


8 Here several lines are lost.


CHAPTERS II. 22——-IV. 5 95


er: ONASOH-Ft: NNLG LV ave:
30. Ahan; Put: 01.2: Ln}:
AL756: avPOA: Aloo: tak: HA
GTP: APLav; ROLL: LTS
1G: 31. DLAC: THOT: 10.
LT: HAA: AF°P.27R: OGAL
TOL: AA? £2C0* nav: BA
Obs Alors VCE: IV. w®
LAWLE: HHPLA: OAL ON: w
AL: AAS AST TE: aeons’ +%
O7:°+ DAI 2. DAFA:
Té.200: COCR: MALC: awa
An: 00.2: FH: AT? HA
AZ hav: 12: OLOCL: AIR
50+ AGAg: Mat: Tho Oav4;
WE: 3 thd: 3 Hind: Iweh
PCLT: Eec: LNA LT AT°LME
NAS: L2YOVN: 4. Har
An? AGAg Hae: F227": av
RA: OLa%i PN: ti:
LATHE! AF": OLNF OP:
Nit: HPL:


q@
30. (f)fiAdos yap éorau| oaelh é&v
Tals, éoxalrais Hpepats , Exac|ros
yap 70 dperrov ev Tots bpGan-
pots | abrod dakioe. 3I. kal -|
é~adyoovow” tas [mpoyretas Tov
mpo|dyrév Tay ™po eluod Kal ras
épdoes ; pov Tatras cw ”)-|
covow iva, a. (6)péyp(a)r(a) Vs
kapdias atrav Aadjowow..

kat vilv | “E(e)xéa kat secon
u(i)|€ plov) abraf iow ad(e)
(ipé)pa() tis tAnp(d)|(cew)s
7 (ob k)dopou ... 2. Tos av-
Tov ey cider) | dvOparov Baoré-|
ws dyépou pntpa.|Agou domes
ards” | 6 Pacrreds ob70s | 3- Tv
gur(e)iav 7 nv | ureicovow ot 8a-|
deka dardorohou | rod dyamyrod:
Sui Ee(c) kal (r)av 8ddexa, | (cis)
tats xepoly avrod | (7)apado64--
cera. 4. od|ros (6 dp)xwv ev rH
i\Sea rod BaotAéws elkeivou éded--
cerat | (x)at af dvvdues aca. |
(2A)evo(or)rax t(o)dr(ov) | (7)od


kd(o,


5. "DONS: LwCh: OAL: NANT: OOC4L: LTC: hap;


1} om.
Afi: a mere scribal correction..
5 a@om. 5 Em. from Af:


Tedécews ?
G? has probably wAnpaceas.,
on: 27974:


7 Em. from appoa:
an unusual form of #'00-9:(?) = krqoeus.
Otherwise correct *W% into W&A: = ‘completion.’
For &” 6 reads &@;
© ab NCLA:


? Em. with G? from Af: 6 gives AM: instead of


*b TACO: 4b 20:
5 wt:
Is this corrupt for


* 6 adds


) a Hach: 2 ah.


3 Em. from 6 FRO: HF: 909°: wrah: For wt’ ac read.
@tna: I regard the corruption as due to the phrase YEw'H:


509": two lines before.
with c. 6 be DLaDKA:


19 E = kcarapyjoovew,


“6H.
7 6 DLAT: UTE:
20 MS. pytpodaou,


® ab add MGA; but G? ae
86 2TNA
21 — KB. MS. airov.


96 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


OODLE ATT: CAC 6. wot: H2b2: LINC: *19AI1
LINC? OF LTCIG: VIN? EC: OLA: Ah O-VE: ATLA:
DATEL: KUN: DK.OOLZ:: 7. ORI: Has Oa: * O90":
8. 2200-0; PE OLE: te ATH: Lt: Howe ATA
fid-C: OHAMAUs AA: NOLn* 9. WaP-NHyravs NAA: PN
hoo: 2rone?: AGRC: LLP! 242 10. OLN):
420; ov Va LU: 00: AVEC: ONAO-CT: 11. OLPO-7; AFA:
Peap; 12s Nits AVEC 12, OLATH: want. Got:
oo Onot:® oC worPdh: FOZ: 13. ONS): a7 LI°G):
OPS}: AN: Caf: How rE: £04.01: ATAPA: AO: ATH:
acith: 24d: CAP: A BALD: (AH: TAA: OOCT:) WAN Z:?
CAF: CE: 48a: AoE tals AO-WE: aPPOA: LTS: aE?
A7NCE? AW: LP” AF°IAI: OO: TAI’: AW LR:
PRAT: 14. DAP Lach: *iO"EZ*wawe aor: Lav%a:
ATA: FA: aAAntUs OF AA: FLAT PEAT: AF°AN00:
hove: PAA: Port: 10: ACT 2: OLA: NALCZ: wt:
THF: ODLAEU LE” 15. DLOCRaP: Aah: £2nNavs 0747;
Aw-NTH: WAI": AcPAnLh wTe: [wOALM: L-76.C:]*
16. Ottivaves AA: OAT! FLAPPER ZIPP” ANALG
ONDE: OPEAT: FAA: ATA: Lav%hs FAA: ANNU avs:
H40A: LEC: with: 400: A°7L1 FAA: ATLA: LopRis Ad:
an%7é.0a0; AA: AovrTK: £OC8: OLA: wit: 909":
OL9, 19003” AAA: 0D: Teh: FAA: PEA AANA:
APSA: OLTAAnOD: ATHA: AAA: O00: O@-NTH: GA9%s
17. DAPLACH: L£rackar: w-Nt: AANA avs 1A: OL THL7:
PIPam: ONT: AF: 18. AZ: Pls AGC: LLR: Nave:
*AH: 0°72:" DAH: G2: OAAGNCL: ONAW-7CL: OAAVECL:
ONILw-+L; ONNID-1:* *wOhardah: BALL OAHOCAL:® OAT


"BA. 2 bom. 3b 2-T7Zha: hav: * be NOL:
‘6mLaLmon, °F. 7 Bracketed as an Ethiopic inter-
polation. a ° 6 APNCTUS © be LPL " be


Mai: ” Added totext. Cfiiv.12. “bc H¥. “a RAK!
€ may be corrupt for B as Din. supposed.  “ 6 BLATT: 6 ab
MCLAZ: “Yaom. * AnEthiopicinterpolation. 672079:
2 ab add AN before this word. 2 a4 ANCeA: Here be uphold
right orthography. 2b OLAPar; % Em, from a WH:
N97 2; and c AHAN®7L: 5b reads ANPTL: % So be. a@ reads
an: > ¢ ONOM-41: % ¢ OAMWC4:


CHAPTERS Iv. 6—Vv. 8 97


AZ? (HN: ANTCAL: WATVL: NALC? Aw-WVH: 9099: OLhnw-}:
(THA: @)) Hi: Nw-tt-tor: AHh: oP POA: OER CH OC:
*AOT: ATAU WO LNAI: He: CAI OLN: nav: HATES:
19. OTE4T: 112: GAL: RHE AowOTE wrt: GA ALTE
20. OTé4&T: GAY ATWA: HP: &dh&h Kooy: *OP-AALT:
OPATE: AH: Fah: wot: awRhE: WI7LE TL: — 21.
OCLELY AGRC: wot: (aA: IP: Raa: AowTE: w-t:
ao F-E CT: NH: NA: ATHA: TP: LAO” OAS: Ole HE
HY RAE ONT: FUP CT: APAALT APT: OAL: aANL:
DAXYPAALT: AT: OAS: ONE: do: OFF" ANEAAP:
MONET: ANG: *o'w-At: Té"444: OUPCTL: HoPARh: a0'3é.0:
A100 = 22. WAT AA: AANOs 1.99" RAGE” OWT TET”
OTR: AGL: OVAO: 10.2: OHOneA: OHALAA: OHI:
OUTSH: OHARA: OHAINGI®: OHA: *OHAE LL: OHHA
CLM? DHF ARLAY ONet: COE: A2E: OAV: KAAS
V. OATH: ATE: Ath: GALT TIO: NCLA AOA: 4.42.00:
wind: wit: Ad: °C: Mowe: AAALLA: NPwCr: Ob:
2. DAA LC: ATH: 2Taowl: av; Ar P2e:2 NA: oer:
attr: Hivos: bon: ATH: LAE: OLE ds Wl: FALL:
3. ONAN: 1F°RF Mh: bav:* PL-a0; .ANL CN: a TH: | LNaheb:]*
Laas” 4. O20: AAnd:*® AAALCA: AA: dhiw-n”
Bie: ATSIC: OESRUL: APSA: WS lt: OCF” AF7TE:
5. E6804; ANA: wS2*Ts! OAF OHAA FOU:
6. OHI: £0*t:' AN: ATH: L2rowls: 7. OAALLA: Ule:
NGA: ATLA: Dav FT: AOL TEU: O(A.)"L0*A' For: 8. ONA
née® WT: TTIC: AKALLT: NA: HaNAn: WALT: Afavs:
DaLNC:* APC: whardant: £04: OAH: ONT: 484


1b OAUAZ: 2 ab NCLA: 3 Bracketed as an inter-
polation : see exegetical note, p. 36. ‘6b om. 5 be §9C7:
© be trs. 7 bc NF°AM: APAL: 5 bH772: 56%.
10 Em. by Din. from ac o0F°¢ CT: b avHarcrT: 1 6 £obtr:
2 @ PHP CT: 0FALT: Bh OCF 4b ANN:
% @ worht: 6 ab hav: 7 @ Rav; (sic): b Rdvet:
8 be FIG: ° 5 OHF-AnELN: a GALT: 1 abe.


2B conTPet 3 ONAN: *}b PRI Onl: % Em.
from a0; ™ Bracketed asa doublet. 7 Em. from nit:
3 ac MALL: * & repeats this word. » 6 OCEOT: 3B
@HAIA: * Must be supplied asin vi. 10. 8 « OOLARED:
“6 @MALNCOD; © a adds ONISA:

H


ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


98


ARF? hav: LAM: Ans 9. WhO: KAL LH: O20: Aovh:
AIF Ch: *O-AE: VLA: OFH: OCIS Arh: Os FLAT:
ort: Btn: 10. Alav: AMM: 6.2428: ATA: APVAN: PDEs
Il. OWTHF: OMOWCP:; AKALLI: OAL: APR: ATwWCT: O8#
12. O9°Gh: ONAnE:* OWE: hot: wahaAnt: On:
Oi: fo0"® ATH: LAT: 13. OMOLT: AA: POA: 20:
HAINA: Lrowe: bf. Add: aLCh: WILLS: Adov: Ach:
Ana@ert: Tod: *aA7HANAC: HPOnS 14. OAALLI: ATH;
LToOwl: ARCH: O40: 4A: APU LISP: Nave: PSD:
adh: towd: AnAA: 15. HYt: Td: NMALC! AAALLD:
NAL: OAnd: ONAL: 7°90: Ahao: Var: ATA: NOLL: avers?
AOA: FALL: Aeon: HULA: The: LUG: OATH Yet:
HCAt: NATH: GRC: 16. OAATT: UPA: ATTA: HCAS: NATILA:
AM: 92: 2197": MADLY: AU: OPE: Ahav: 2.955 Aka:


OGALA: HCAS:
AAC: OAL:
APRs


VI. 400%: a077
PE ADAP LO: YEO:
LUG: Fh” ANS
£0: OAL: ATR: WA.
Tin: OAL: aAAe
Ot: FN: HHPLN: AL
EAAP ATOINTA
2. O(AN: NA)” Nd:


Taz Srconp Latin
Vursion (= L?),
VI—XL
(See Introd., pp. xviii-
xxvii.)


Visto, QUAM VIDIT
Ysaras "propHeE-
TA" Frnrus Amos”.


VI. Anno XX reg-
nante Ezechia, rege
Judae, venit Ysaias
[prophetal, _filius


‘Amos, ad Ezechiam


in Hierusalem™,
2. Et intrans sedit


1 @ repeats. 2 6 om.
* So be. a OF>Aes 5° g dav;
*ba00T: AMA: © a warKE:


om. Gk. Leg. i. 3 supports text.


SL’.


Latin TRansuaTIon OF
THE Suavonic VERSION, BY
Prorrssor Bonwersca. .


VI—xI.
(See Introd., pp. xxiv—
XXvii.)


VIsIo QUAM VIDIT
Tsancrus! Isaras
"Propoera™ Fr-
Lius Amos.

VI. Anno XX reg-
nante Ezechia, rege
Judae, venit Isaias
filius Amos, ‘et Ja-
sus, filius Isaiae! ad
Ezechiam in Hieru-
salem. 2. Et cum


3b. a OH: AO-AE: WV:
5 be trs.


7 ab NCLA:
1 ab AF°TAA: S L?


® Added from Gh. Leg. ii. 1;
8 The following late title prefixed to the above appears


in the printed edition of the lost MS.: Visio mirabilis Isaiae pro-
phetae in raptu mentis, quae divinae trinitatis arcana et lapsi


generis humani redemptionem continet.


* Defect. here. See note.


CHAPTERS ‘V. 9—VI.


£M: O6-T VE: wo
aNd: APRA: WF:
OEP * 22 2£30CH
3. MAN: AH: AOL
LA: VLESIC: FUN:
MHPLD: FHP: V1:
FLV T: O22: w
Wivavs avAant: Al
GAA: 2b: 040
PF}: woP hdd: YE
Ps: DUAGL: Ul: FH0,
Li: OO-WL: LT:
OR APRLLI:
DAP ELEN OAT"
adea: AY A705
hav: ZALCN: aR
A: AJPINTAS "HO:
MAPLD: 4. WoVR He
nan; 849°4P; whav:
LNT 0: Pdeks9
whoo: OPAC: aAkU:
AOMV ar: whan; * Zz
TIOk: Whoo; £2770:
TI0-ba;” witirars
UAa@.: Pea0; RAL


lL?
supra lectum regis.
3. Et omnes prin-
cipes Israel et consili-
arti regis et eunuchi
stabant ante illum.
3-4. Veneruntque ex
omnibus villis et
agris et montibus
prophetae, et filii
prophetarum audi-
entes quod Ysaias
venerat a Galgatha”
ad Ezechiam, salu-
tare eum, 5. Et
annunciare ei, quae
ventura erant.' 6.
Tune”  loquebatur
verba veritatis. Spi-
ritus Sanctus super-


5. | venit in eum, et om-


6 99


s
intrasset sedit supra
lectum regis. 3. Et
omnes principes tJe-
rusalemit’ et con-
siliarii regis et eu-
nuchi stabant ante
illum. 3-4. Vene-
runtque ex omnibus
villis® et “ex! agris
et montibus prophe-
tae et filii propheta-
rum, cum audivis-
sent, quod Isaias
venerat a Galgal’® ad
Ezechiam, salutare ”
eum, 5. [Simul au-
tem! et annuntiare™®
ei [de iis] quae ven-
turaerant. 6.Cum”®
loquebatur -verba
Tomnial veritatis,
Spiritus Sanctus su-
pervenit in eum et


Lit: 6.000: T9712:
AOL LI: PON: hb
PLA? Ft: RAP:
07 £999 T ONF°O

1b Fh: 2 bom. 5 ¢ whh7: ‘aAaAed:
5 bc om. § @¢ DAP ALLI: 7 bc ON: 8 a AIPA:
® be FIAT: 06 STEN: Mhov; 2NI°0s TIA: "$6 072.
ayer: ® Corrupt for Galgal as in S. 8 Should be cum


as in SE, and full stop after veritatis should be comma.


4 Corrupt for Israel as in L? E.
vjs’=-omnis and vicus.


tavit.
but L? tune.


H2


8 Ot vsi ch: viizvésjai w:
iT? Galgatha.
® Blgovéstiti : blgovéstit [annuntiat] u, ch.


MY y et salu-


1% So E,


100


wieaws +044: HA
Cio: +@nvA: av?
6.0: 8.2? 7. OR
w-0; TE: 1b: it
teow: wit: dH:
UT2al: 0%; wave
a> MOLNLD: WAT
Lt: ACDL: OAL AA:
OALAN:* WEN:
N27. 8. mn): AD:
AI°O: Hivavs® APA:
a7: PL: ARs
dtiram: (Chav:
oOnh?: AAT°An:
LP: AACA: AHo-
ar: AGA: 9097: wo
AH: 400: 2ENC: 8.
th: WAH: APSA): £0
C&: 9. OMOUM: 2-0
abt: AH: +hov'H: 47
O:-P 4b: AAI: Th.
CG: 21m: + ANAS
Io. OATH: L2TGIC:
Noord: PA: AH:
iraD: 27°90: AC
avan: 040.905 TH”
a: AT°A0NU:® wo-
AEL: ALAR aD: A
020+ AA: Lbo-.004,


1b Pat:


* a WALT TMN: b adds MAR:


7 Seems corrupt.


* Corrupt for enim ?


® Corrupt. S right = E.
% 1? om.
" L? ex iis inventi sunt.
70 T? adds in.


trs. wrongly.


verborum.


ASCENSION


ra
nes videbant et au-
diebant verba Sancti
Spiritus. 7. Convo-
cavit eum® rex [et]
prophetas, et omnes
introierunt, quot-
quot inventi sunt
ibi, insimul. Erant
autem Micheas et
Ananias senes, Joel
Tet quotquot ex eis
inventi sunt” a dex-
tris eius "et a sinis-
tris". 8. Cum autem
audierunt vocem
SanctiSpiritus, flexe-
runt genua et canta-
verunt deo altissimo
requiescenti in sanc-
tis, 9g. Et talem vir-
tutem verborum"” in
mundo donanti.
to. Loquente vero
eo'in'SpirituSancto
in auditu omnium
statim tacuit, et ex-
inde +videbant stan-
tem quendamt” ante


2


ab om. but SL? support.
5 a 2ENC:
I propose &7@: havi: 44-4: 00: AGA: =
L? talem virtutem verborum in mundo donanti.
” Less corrupt text in S.
3 prorocy: MSS. proroci. —
 E om., and no doubt rightly.
18 L? adds ejus.
| J? videbant stantem quendam.


OF ISAIAH


Ss
omnes videbant au-
diebantque  verba
Sancti Spiritus. 7.
Convocavit ‘enim!
rex [et] prophetas™
*omnes et introie-
runt, quotquot eo-
rum inventi sunt
ibi, insimul. ‘ Erant
autem Micheas et
Ananias senes ‘et?
Joel “et quotquot™®
sederunt”™ a dextris®
“et asinistris™, 8, Et
cum audierunt vo-
cem Sancti Spiritus
flexerunt genua et
cantaverunt Deo al-
tissimo requiescenti
in sanctis, 9. Et
talem virtutem *in
verbo” in mundo
donanti. Io. Lo-
quente vero eo”
Spiritu Sancto in
auditu omnium sta-
tim tacuit, et ex-
inde 'non' *videbat
stantes” ante eum.


> 6 om.
6 « adds A784


* 6 AON:
1 See note
4 LV?


® § originally=


CHAPTER VI. 6-17


PLR 11. DAOL
FIO: Dw: ATT
YE! WAFL: 229°
7: O405: DV
TPR: APAAU:
12. ONE: Alriry4
the Am T:? 4000:
Afiao: GAG: Looks
13. Mav) AD HTEO;:
nav: 2CAT:! Anh:
HAs: 9°X90: WADE
Aodant: haere
HH: 9AI": A494: APA
10:° NOT 2: Rin
14. O AAO: OH
 H2E?o-7: HAt
Ad: ahh: WLeT:
HY?°'R? O8.0:; AAL
2s: 15. OGALM:
HCA&: *PS.0: AAR
2? Ani: AIH:
GOI: AA: AI°9NI?:
H404: 497° De”
16. DANLL AF
240: Cat: HY: GA
&: WEP: Ach” HW Pen:
ONAL AN? OAS: O
ANOSTZ: LT: aN:
OR: = 17. wavy]


L2
eum. 11. Oculi au-
tem eiuserant aperti,


os vero clausum,
12. Sed _ inspiratio
(Sancti |Spirituserat
cum illo. 14. Etnon
extimabant, quod
elevatio accepisset
Ysaiam, prophetae
vero cognoscebant,
quod revelatio” erat.
15. Visio, quam vi-
debat, non erat de
seculo hoc, sed de
abscondito "omni"
carni. 16, Et cum
cessavit a visione,
Treversus* "notifica-
vit [visionem] Eze-
chiae et filio tejus
Nasonit”,


10I


S


11. Oculi autem ejus
erant aperti, os vero
clausum, 12. Sed in-
spiratio spiritus erat
cum illo 14. Et
non __ existimabant
fomnes! quod ele-
vatus esset Isaias,
prophetae vero co-
gnoscebant, quod * in
revelatione™ _ erat.
15. Visio’ vero'quam
videbat non erat de
saeculo hoc, sed de
absconditoab" omni"
carni. 16, Et cum ces-
savit a visione "et?!
reversus est in se,
[et] notificavit Eze-
chiae et filio tejus
Nasonit™.


PITA? O4%F%: OHA: 4.07°0: HATA:


APG” BhS: DALAL MANAG: AE: THAC: Aloo:


) @ repeats. 3


5b AAaht:


a &FNA: in accordance with SL? non existimabant.


PAN:
11 @ om.
% @ DALPRI:


in se from S.


2 onat in:

6 a Aché,:
1 See note *.
7 Corrupt for suo Jasobi: so E.


b ANTI40:
§ a AI?-NO: (sic).
® dom.


8 6 HT" A:


> b Ut:


3 6 many rith:
” § in revelatione.

30 L? revelatio.
ch reads Nasudi for Nas.


4b OCAT:
7 Em. from
6 reads
0 6 ATH: AY DU:
4 6 AOLGD:

w’ Add
2 TL? om.
After


Jasobi S L? i.e. G? om. through homoioteleuton vi. 16°, 17; vii. 1%


102 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


aowWTEZ: WC! RSP: twa00k:? +o0Id: Nad wmWAh:
A970: Ahov: AD-RAPaOS? oLneth: OFFA: DAR: An:
TIA: PAA: HIF: AF'4U: On? hao: HPT:


VIL. wé-A8h:
HCAGAAL LI:
LO AHAP LI:
ONAL AN: oA
Rs ONOLLN:
MANDAL: 10.
Lr: of:
2. 0094! HE:
ON: TiNLh: A
nao; 19°0:; HA
a70nor: = Ca.
ne® adah: 2
Ke: OFAN th
an: PN: aeda
mt: HHAd: &
BARD; KA:
pnd: On8:"
@wryLavt:” +0


Li
VII. 1-19.
(See Introd.,
pp. xviii-xxi.)


VII. Filio.
suo et Mich-
aeae et reliquis
profetis,  di-
cens: 2. Ineo
in quo*profeti-
am meam au-
distis", vidian-
gelum _glorio-
sum nonsecun-
dum gloriam
angelorum,
quos ego sem-
per videbam,
sed clarita-
te(m) magnam
et sanctam ha-
bentem, quam


L2


VII. et Mich-
eae caeterisque
prophetis  di-
cens: 2. Quan-
do prophetavi
auditum,quem
[vos] +vidis-
tist“ vidi an-
gelum glorio-
sum non se
cundum glor-
iam
um, quos sem-
per vidi, sed
quandam
*magnam glor-
iam” ‘et! lu-
men _ _haben-


angelor-,


VIL. et Mich-
eae et ceteris
prophetis di-
cens: 2, Quan-
do prophetavi
[in] auditum
quem audistis,
vidi angelum
gloriosum, non
secundum glor-
iam angelorum
quos semper
vidi; sed quan-
dam *gloriam
magnam™ lu-
men” haben-
tem, quod non
possum" noti-


"F: HAk AA: | ego claritatem | tem, quod non
Ht: 21%: | exponere non | possum __ noti-

1 be PNT: 2 6 aPQHT: Text seems corrupt. See exe-
getical note. 3b A@-Riav: 4b woth: 5 a om.
6 Em. from 6 &f: acom. Cf. L'L?S ‘dicens.’ 7 Em. from


ont: Cf. Lt in ‘eo. In ab whtr: Hh: are marked off by
punctuation from what precedes and connected with what follows.
5 6 HCANs Ah: @. ° 6 adds MNS: 0b PooAt av;
UB trs. =dpyny (cf. iii. 23) corrupt(?) for dyiavx,  ™ Fuller
and more original text in ES L?, 4 Corrupt for audistis as in
SE. 6 § trs. 6 L? = magnam gloriam et. 7 = svet :.
uw sto sanctum: ch stu sanctam. 8 ch mogu: u mogoch potui.


CHAPTERS VI.


AH: = oPAah:
3. WAOLTL:!
AN: AHL: 0A
RE: WABI: ao
ki ATT: wav};
O-AE: AI-n: wo
424: FOCI?
Aho: 5LA:
*“to-on: Acre
hop; ATTIC:
PRU: 4.0
LOL: AN: AO
2¥h: [009C7:]*
DAChLirh: &
at: AW: T2.Ph-:
0O7:> Tah
av}. Ari wong
CA: ATAIPCS
5. allan: UAm@h:
OH: "hn: +


1 Em. from be @C4.2:


ruption in viii. 1.


36 tw-UNi:


5b &TIPC: (sic).


rt
possum. 3.
*+Et accessitt
et tenuit ma-
num meam'’,
et *dixi ei°:
Quis es tu, et
quod tibi no-
men est, et quo
me tolles? Ac-
cepi enim viris
loquendi cum
eo. 4. Etdixit
mihi : *Cum te
imposuero” et
ostendero tibi |
visionem, prop: |
ter quod ad te
missus sum,
tune intelliges
quisim, nomen
autem meum
non dicam
tibi", 5. Eo
quod reverta-
ris in carnem.
Cum” enim


76 om.


a reads CAs
SL? support emendation.
4 L' om., also SL*. Hence bracketed.
Is et accessit =


17—VII. 1-5


L?

3. Ac-
cipiens** me
manu  duxit
me in altum,
et ego dixi:
Quis es? quo
modo tibi no-
men est? et
quo [modo]
tave™+ super-
fers? Virtus
enim data est
mihiloquicum
illo. 4. Tune
Trespondens"
dixit ‘mihi’:
Quando te fer-
am in altum®,
ostendam tibi
visionem, pro
qua missus
sum [ego, et]
tune scies, quis
sum ego. Et
nomen meum
nescis, 5. Ideo
quia vis iter-
um reverti in


ficare.


8 Corrupt.


103


Ss
ficare. 3. Et!
cum accepisset
memanu duxit
me in altum”™.
Egoque dixi:
Quis es 'tu’?
quomodo tibi
nomen est ? et
quo me super-
fers? virtus
enim mihi
data est lo-
qui cum illo.
4. Tunc "cum
respondisset"
dixit’”: Quando
*feram te® in
altum ‘et! o-
stendam  tibi
visionem pro
qua missus
sum, tuncscies,
quis sum ego.
Et nomen me-
um nescis. 5.
Quia” vis ite-
rum reverti in


Contrast the cor-


2 ab TOCTL:
5b ATZ7:


kat dvjdbe corrupt for «ai dynyaye? S preserves true text: et cum
accepissit me manu duxit me in altum = kal AaRov pe xeupt dviryayev


He.


S (= E) is literal.


with SE.
8 ch alta.


Cf. Gh. Leg. ii. 9.


°=E, SL? om. ei.
where the last word is corrupt for dvaydyo,
2 SoSL?, E=quo.
™ Corrupt for me.
7 EL? add mihi.


% TL? trs.


10


Gray oe évaydyo


1A free rendering.
3 Read et accipiens
%% Add et with SE.


1 Za ne= 8.


104


INA: WN: A
OCTa: TAs
*allan; A: Té.
Phas 6. oT
é%7chns Ahao:
Uovr T7
chu 7. OL0
A: Téa
Allan; &?U;? F
FIChnioO LO:
@AH: {O-NRLZ:
TdoAs nav; &
OU: w0%6:
Ute: *27S1C:
Phin! 8.0
ANU-1:> AH: §0
"toh: Aha:
AH: T2i0-nA
PONY: NATL:
nao: ACU: An:
Htt: irs og.
woe? w-tt:


ASCENSION
Li
sustolero te,


tune videbis,
*Tpropter hoe


sum ™*, 6.
Quoniamn’
simpliciter
mihi respon-
dit®: 7. Et
ait mihi:
(*Gavisus es,
quia hilariter
respondi tibi ?
et ait mihi)°
et majorem”
me videbis.
Hilariter et
simpliciter lo-
quetur" tecum.
8, *Et eminen-
tiorem ipsius
majoris” vide-
bis. Propter
hoe enim mis-
sus sum a sep-
timo caelo ut
omnia tibi os-
tendam. 9. [Et


* SL? om. but L) supports.


* 6b trs.


majus.


*% Add mihi with S E,


phrase in S.


rupt for majorem as in L?,


nat cddpova,


> b MANUEL:
sum lost by hmt. before quoniam.
clause lost through hmt.


% Za ne=S.


OF ISAIAH
L?
corpus tuum,
et quando te
elevabo, ‘pos-
tea' videbis.
6. Et gavisus
sum, quia man-
suete respon-
dit®. 7. Et dixit
mihi: Gavisus
es, quia humil-
iter™ respondi
tibi, et major-
em me videbis
fet] *humili-
oremet sapien-
tiorem® volen-
temloquitecum
8. ™Meliorem
et: dulciorem™;
in hoc enim
missus sum, ut
notificem tibi
omnia _haee.
g. Ascendimus


26 §m-7:


6 Sok. SL? om.
8 MS. respondet.


I have restored from E.
MS. loquitur.


8
corpus tuum.
Et quando te
elevabo vide-
bis, 6, Et ga-
visus sum quia
mansuete __re-
spondit! mihi.
7. Kt dixit mi-
hi: Gavisus es
quia’ mansu-
ete” respondi
tibi? Ett me-
lioremt® me
videbis humi-
liorem et sapi-
entiorem” vo-
lentem loqui
tecum. 8, "Et
Majorem ma-
joris, 'lucidio-
rem et modes-
tiorem™; in
hoc enim mis-
sus sum, ut
notificem tibi
*haec omnia”,
g. Ascendi au-


3b SPD;
7 Et gavisus
® This
10 MS.


2 E = patrem ipsius majorem.


4 SE = mansuete.
W [2 = humiliter.
 Mistranslations (?) of rarewéppova


» Seems corrupt. L? = et meliorem et dulciorem.
7 So E. Ltrs,


% See note on
8 Cor-


IRC: *k: w
O-AE: wnve:
CanP: Ane?


a? one | [


tus: oUt: 00.
L:PTA0N00
us tweet:
ALO FE Aa
AAs 2ASOOL:
ro. onan: 4A
Ot: N70? 0
I°LCh: Ala:
AF°-hd: AH: 1
I°RGZO: HE: wD
Ob: F°.2C: w-
AEF: 11. OA
ic: AavaAaAn:
ort: OWE:
HL 12.0
LOA: hav'H:
AE AT hav;


1 } trs. bef. w-2rh:


CHAPTER


Lt
sustulit me]?
et ascendi ego
(et)* ipse in
primum]®
solidamentum,
et ibividi Sam-
ael et fortitudi-
nem ejus: et
fuit in eo bel-
lum grande, et
angeli satanae
simul inviden-
tes. 10. Sicut
enim susus(s)ic
et in terra (for-
maeenim ejus,
quod in firma-
mento, hic
sunt in terra)”,
tr, Et  dixi
angelo, "qui
fuit mecum™";
Quid est bel-
lum hocet quae
invidia haec?
12, Et dixit
mihi : "Sie est
*ex quo secu-


2a NhO7 2a:


VII. 5-12


i
egoetillesuper
firmamentum,
et vidi ibi proe-
lium magnum
sathanae et
virtutem ejus
Tresistentem
honorantiae”
dei", et unus
erat praestan-
tior alio invi-
dendo;10.Quia
sicut est in ter-
ra tanto" estin
firmamento,
formae enim
firmamenti
hic sunt in
terra. 11. Et
dixi angelo:
Quid est hoc
bellum et in-
vidia "et proe-
lium™? 12. Et
"respondens"
dixit mihi:


= «ali Adyor, where Adyot corrupt for dyyedo.


6 reads Wilé:
exegetical note.


as a doublet of et ascendi ego.


° ESL? om.


S here agrees with E L} against L’.
though lost in E.

4 L? virtutem.
6 L? erat praestantior alio invidendo.
dens dixit mihi.


as in S.
Dei.


5 a MAAS


3 6 om.


® Text defective.


105


Ss
tem let] ego
et ille super
firmamentum.
Etvidiibi proe-
lium magnum
satanae et
virtutes“ ejus
[et] “resisten-
tem pietati*™
et unus *alium
invidentes*,
Io. (Quia)sicut
est in terra ita
est et in firma-
mento. For-
mae enim eo-
rum in firma-
mentohic sunt
in terra. II.
Et dixi angelo:
Quid est hoc
bellum et in-
vidia "et proe-
lium™? 12. Et
Tyespondit mi-
hi et" dixit”:


4 Corrupt
So L! angeli.
See


7 ESL? om. I have bracketed the words
8 Supplied from ES L’.
Lost through hmt, and restored from E.


15


" Found in Gk. Leg. ii. 10
12 = onoranza = auctoritas,
= blagoéjstiju.


18 Read ita
L? honorantiae
7 L? respon-


106


102: HIAI": &
tin: 2Alb: OH
ra; Ath: 2
0%: HUA@h:
TCAL: O22
aviifis:! 13.0
AP? 2400 40
214? aOAOAT:
PECO: Waa
"F:4AO7 2s: 14.
One: Cane
avind: An
ASS ONk77}.:'
@NeDar; avA
ant: vUAda®
15. Dé.nk; (ap
Nant: aA: 008
Jad«;)° hap; aD
Nant: aA: 0&8
oF}. @dep.a0+
a4” AA: 1847
hs 2dbo.go?


1g o2£Lavnn:
3 6 Hh:


as in SL?
7 6 8: (sic).


ASCENSION


Lt
lum" factum
estusquenunc"™
{est]™*, sic erit
bellum quoad
usque veniat
quem visurus
es ef emun-
dabit*eum. 13.
Et postea po-
suit me super
solidamentum;
*et fuit™ eae-
lum. 14. Et
vidi ibi sedem
in medio, et ad
dexteram ejus
etadsinistra(m)
angeli erant.
15. *Et non
tales erant an-
geli ad_ sinis-
tra(m)'”quales®
ad dextra(m),


OF ISAIAH
L


‘istud bellum


"diaboliest,et™
non quiescet
donec veniet,
quem vis vi-
dere, et inter-
ficiet eum" spi-
ritu _ virtutis
ejus*", 13.Pos-
tea levavit me:
in ea, quae
sunt super
firmamentum,
quod est “pri-
mum" coelum.
14, Et vidi
thronum inme-
dio, "desuper
sedebat ange-
lus in magna
gloria", et a
dextris ejus se-
debant angeli
et a sinistris.
15. Aliam ha-
bebant — glor-


5 @ om.


Ss
istud bellum
Test diaboli”et™
non quiescet
donec veniet
quem vis vi-
dere et inter-
ficiet (eum)”!
"spirit vir-
tutis suae “7,
13. Postea ele-
vavit me in ea
quae sunt su-
per firmamen-
tum, quod est
"primum" cae-
lum. 14. Et
vidi ‘ibi’ thro-
num in medio
"*et in eo” se-
debat angelus
in magna glo-
ria "eta dextris
ejus sedebant*
et a sinistris
angeli. 15
Aliam® vero*


2 We should add wTH: = in id quod
4a ott:
8’ bom. this and next three words.


5 6 TAN:
° I have


added these words in accordance with L! (the context requires


them), and changed the preceding verb from hh to nk:
8 MS. ex qua oculum.

8 = xabapice: corrupt for xabapyoer ‘ will

6 Should be quod est primum as in SL’.

“ Here Lt supplements E by supplying


1b wah:


destroy.’


2 6 om.
with ESL? be excised.
So ES L?,

E = quod est caelum.


© 6 0897:
4 Should


its lost clause ‘angeli ad sinistram.’ MS. reads talis for tales.
SL’ agree in a different text.


suae as in S.
% L? desuper.


20 L? trs.


* yy sedens.


8 MS. qualis.


2. Added from L' L? E'.
% wy et majorem.


® Should be
2 TL? ejus.
% [2 om.


*EC& 2: ll
2 avy O20,
Ach: iravs: 0
*hhS? PA:
@wav7NC: Vir:
Wn: One
Us 20fidhe wo
an: N0D9°%:
LALolP ad+; WP
frao(): Ani: hh
av: PA; Ad: Nt
o7y; MANA
tan: hav: ill
At: AAE:
16.0TNAADP:
Ace A: H LoD
Chi: WADir:
Avs HAT:
LTEPs 17.0
LAL: o-ft:
ant: (Hn)>
And: A972: A
H: 0P3.2:* 4A
FF; LO CE:
ONG: Aap
10: réJ@-n:
"in: (Ve £5
6éP]n° 18. @0
nO0: A02TL: w-
fr: 879°; hey


1 6 Pld: NH:
See exegetical note.


with L.


CHAPTER VII. 12~18


Lt
ad dextram
enim  clarita-
tem magna(m)
habuerunt: et
laudabant om-
nes una voce:
Tet sedes erat
in medio, eta
sinistra postea
benedicebant.
Fuit autem vox
a sinistro non
sicut(adextro)’
"nec hymnus®
erat illis simi-
lis". 16, Et ro-
gavi angelum
qui me duce-
bat, "et dixiei™:
Cuimittuntan-
geli hymnos"*?
17. Et  dixit
mihi: Gloriae
sedentis septi-
mi caeli, "qui
est perpetui
saeculi," et di-
lecto ejusaquo
missus sum ad
te. 18, Et im-
posuit me (in)
secundum cae-


7b.


® Bracketed since L'S L? om.


from iymnus.


canticum in both cases.
1 Corrupt for cantabant as in S.


4 L? qui.


L?
iam, qui erant


a dextris, et’


cantabant una
voce, et illi qui


erant a sinis-.


tris post illos
tcum eis?
canticum  eo-
rum non erat
sicut dextro-
rum. 16. Et
interrogavi an-
gelum ducen-
tem me: Cui
canticum istud
missum est ?
17. Et" respon-
dens" dixit mi-
hi: "Magnae®
gloriae Dei, qui
est super sep-
timum coelum,
et filio ejus
dilecto, unde
Tego] missus
sum ad te,
18 Et iterum
elevavit me in


107

Ss
*gloriam ha-
bebant”, qui


erant a dex-
tris, et canta-
bant una voce;
et illiqui erant
a sinistris post
illos cantabant,
eanticum au-
tem™ eorum
non erat sicut
dextrorum.
16, Interroga-
vi autem ange-
lum ducentem
me: Cui can-
ticum _istud
missum est ?
17. Et "cum
respondisset"
dixit mihi:
"Magnae "glor-
iae Dei quae
est super sep-
timum caelum
et filio ejus


dilecto, unde
missus sum
ad te. 18. Et


iterum  eleva-
vit me in se-


3 Supplied in accordance


46 P84:
7 Supplied from E.
Cf. next verse where hymnos appears.
* So E. SL? om.


2 L? trs.


> @ om.


8 Em.
SL? give


20 MS. hymnus.


BT? om.


108


L: ONOASU-A:
Aw-AE: Ae 2:
Lho-}: hoo;
*APrieTe!: A
P°2:C:3[ OA?
#G0]2° 19.
(Cans UG h
av; wit: &
R77 2.5 07 B:
*29%: WRT
av:* *aphaht:
@MaviNd:’ 7
na: w*inr
tT: aqAantry
HNA77"; fez
f&: *OHEPAIC:
£0: anc: a
AIF": NATL:
MN: 6.042:
OF AP hh”


ASCENSION


aA

lum, et fuit
altitudo caeli
qualis a caelo
usque ad ter-
ram [et ad fir-
mamentum]™.
19. Et vidi ibi
quomodo vide-
ram in primo
caelo angelos
dextros et sin-
istros et sedes
media,


OF ISAIAH
L?
*secundo coe-
lo®, *altitudo
ejuserat™sicut
a primo coelo
usque ad ter-
ram. 19. Et
vidi ibi, sicut
in primo coelo,
dextros et sin-
istros angelos.


2


s
cundum  cae-
lum; *altitu-
do autem caeli
erat® sicut a
primo caelo
usque ad ter-
ram". 19, Vi-
di autem ibi,
sicut in prime
caelo dextros
et sinistros

18
angelos™.


Ss


20. ON: DNC: Ul 20. Et *gloria isto-(20. Et (gloria isto-
te: w-T: £29": Ne7| rum angelorum™ et|rum angelorum et)"
&: oll-rtao4;" 4%} canticum excelsiora|canticum excelsius


1 6 om.


> GAP LC: NAVEL:


in L' must be excised. SL? rightly om.


accordance with context, L'S L?,


wone77”;


6 &79:


owing to change made in preceding line.


5 b OVAnA:
before 0°F:


excised from both.


note 1°,


> be MNT:
16 ONNATL:


> Though found also


‘ Supplied in
§ ber:


7 These words in nom. in MSS. but put in acc.


ac om, apa”.


0 6 AI"4WPav: which it reads
® So also E, but should be


8 Should be ace. as in LS.
*® S wrongly om.


16


of L'(E). L? defective: altitudo ejus erat.


addition of et ad firmamentum in L' BE.


38 § defective.


4 See


= et fuit altitudo caeli


1 Obs. wrong
See


what is required by text in E(L'). ‘Throne’ should be mentioned
-as in EL’ and probably he that sat on it, as in E, for the former is
referred to in ver. 21 of S L? and the latter probably in same ver.
in L? adorarem eum, ” Supplied from L?,


CHAPTER VII. 18-23


Ti: hav: DAT: AA
NE: AHO: $2279: A
72. 21. OD LR:
Q7TRT naw: ANIL:
ie: OAL: ad
aa: H&ooCdi: 44:
LOA: &107.2: *w
AAa NC: DA.AaA
ah? AH: AF°OASTE:
ATL: AIPM! T23
On: APéth: HAT
AA: Ai AI7Ch: 04
N0: A972: 22. An
ap: aA0AT: itt:
A972: warMaAnlLv
ane aoNCh: WC:
MAAN: OARAA
hi: H0A@h: TCAL:
23. wFé"lhne’ GP”
hi O08: Allan: AA:
LEPCP: NAGA: OA


6 om.
translation of dev.
5 6 mANDHL:


2 a trs.


L?
erant quam primo-
rum. 21. Et cecidi
in faciem meam, ut


adorarem eum’, Et
non dimisit® me


angelus, qui me in-
struebat, *et dixit
mihi®: Noli adorare
angelum, neque
thronum istius coe-
li*; *propter hoc”
missus sum instru-
ere te, *sed tantum,
quem ego dixero
tibi”, [Adora simili-
tereum quiest |". 22.
Super omnes ‘ange-
los ', thronos et super
vestes et coronas,
quas videbis dein-
ceps*. 23, Et gavi-
sus sum gaudio mag-
no valde, quia talis
est consummatio


So L?, but S upholds 8.
See exegetical note.


§ a OTE ch:


109
Ss

erant quam primo-
tum; 21. Et *cum
cecidissem in faciem
meam adoravi eos”
et non dimisit® me
angelus, qui me in-
struebat” : Noli ado-
rare *neque thro-
num neque ange-
lum *e caelo”,nam™”
propter hoc missus
sum instruere te;
*quem tibi ego dix-
ero” tantum —22.
Super omnes thro-
nos et vestes et
coronas, quem
videbis deinceps.
23. Et gavisus sum
gaudio magno valde,
quia talis” est con-
summatio scientibus


3 A mis-
4 6 mavPADATV ar:


7 So E. S inferior text.


3 =dgixe, which, however, the translator should have rendered by


permisit.


%3 Interpolated.


® S wrongly om.
which E renders ‘ whence.’


© See note ™.
2 Agrees with E.
4 Verse corrupt : E= nam supra omnes coelos


1 So S = déev
S corrupt.


eorumque angelos thronus tuus positus est, et vestes quoque tuae


et corona tua quae videbis.
Y Add et dixit mihi with L? E.


note °.
neque thronum.
qui e sex caelis.
sounder text.


2 T? om.


2 Taka: ta ch.


1% a = cum cecidissem.


6 See
8 I? angelum


1 L? istius caeli. But E alone seems right =
3 Corrupt.


L’ gives


IIo


Eko! L6tar: 0
anh An: 0072.2: P30:
*O0CH Ul? 24. Di
Oct: wit: Wd:
A°7 2: on°7 Cans:
Ad: 08273; OND”:
ON Si: aD NC: 77
ana: * @bc:*® on
aE: Hats: WH: 3A
a”: ALNae: 0
G3 25, DADir: hap
Aah: HIPAA: Aloo:
LTBATY aNd: 12%:
An: A0C7:" AAA?
2: Allav: AAO: 9°
TL AZURE: FAI":
nF: NWN LA e.::
26. DAD- AL: OL
AL AAQ: HEfove:;
OAT: 22004 wWKAN:
H2TINA: *NUe: H?
LTC: 27. 06.7
Lh: aANne?: AG: &
ThorC: Wiw-PrKi:
ath 2A: AN: w-
dtr: 400: 972: Ag
40: Téi0-n: AOC?
nn” wit: HavaAd
"ht: Ads ALY: TK


1b ONGC:
* ac OHLENC:
° a HN: ‘HY:
SE from angeli.
add et.


* onogo u, togo ch.


5 b LravkP;
0 @ AOCT:
BSE trs.
% Si tamo:
L? is largely supported by E.
corrupt for yécor (?) as in E.
So E. L’ trs.


2
scientibus _altissi-
mumetaeternalem"


et™ dilectum filium
ejus, "quia sicut®
*(ab) angelo” Sancti
Spiritus sic hi ascen-
dunt in illum. 24. Et
elevavit me super
tertium coelum, et
similiter vidi par-
vum thronum, et
dextros et sinistros
angelos. Memoria
autem istius mundi
illic non nominaba-
tur. 25.Sedtransfor-
mabatur gloria mei
spiritus, cum ascen-
debam in coelum, et
dixi: de illo mundo
nihil *nominatur
hic®. 26. Et respon-
dens mihi angelus


‘ait: nihil nominatur


propterinfirmitatem
ejus, et nihil abscon-
ditur “illic de illis,
quae“ facta sunt.


2 6 trs. 8


ch sila.


2 So L?,


a om,
7b AO’TL:
1S om.

14 So E. See note ™.

7 L? better : ascendunt in illum.
1? E om.


ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


s
altissimum et "aeter-
nalem™® dilectum
filium ejus: "et si-
cut "abangelo Sancti
Spiritus hi illic’ ex-
eunt”. 24, Et ele-
vavit me super ter-
tium caelum,et illic™®
similiter vidi par-
vum" thronum et
dextros et sinistros
angelos. Memoria
tamen mundi istius-
illic non nominaba-
tur. 25. Sed trans-
formabatur gloria
Spiritus” mei, cum
ascendebam in cae-
lum et dixi: nihil
de illo™ mundo
*hic nominatur”?
26. Et  respondit
mihi angelus et ait
mihi: nihil nomina-
tur propter infirmi-
tatem ejus nihilque ~
hic® absconditur *de
illis quae illic” facta
sunt”,


4 6 OFAN:
5 GAM: 2A;
2 Em. with
5 L?


© So L? = puxpdy
E = faciei or formae.


8 L? (E) illic de illis quae.


* Greater part of vii. 27 in E is wanting in SL?.


CHAPTER VII. 23-31


#°C: hav: FAQ: HLT
Na: AawGACT: OA
ad: | 2104: wir:


Hever? w*A2Aavh


ants: obaaAt! H
LONd: Ons: AH
LENG: £0: aN:
Gon: = whordant:
HA: ¢973:; wAH: 00
IF: DNS: E242:
Oavs> AI°097,2: Ha
SHE PaD: 28.0
nON: AOZTL: wit:
10: A972: DADA
GU AFAR Aen:
N72: LLL A
PLC ala FF
G0: 29. ONE: 2d
0: Cain: AA: 08977;
wah: N0D7"; DHL


L?
27. Et canticum
*cantabant, et glori-
ficabant sedentem®,
et iste” angelus erat
major secundo. 28.
Et iterum elevavit
me in quartum coe-
lum, Altitudo *ter-
tii coeli” usque ad
quartum coelum
major erat. 29. Et


‘ibi vidi thronum et


dextros et sinistros
angelos”;


31. Gloria vero se-


Iii


Ss
27. Canticum-
que ‘quod’ canta-
bant et glorificatio
sedentis et angelus
major erat secundo.
28. Et iterum ele-
vavit me in quartum
caelum. *Altitudo
autem a tertio usque
ad quartum caelum
Tmulto] major erat",
29. Et ibi iterum”™
vidi thronum et dex-


_|tros et sinistros an-


gelos et hi iterum
cantabant. 30, Et
gloria et cantus an-
gelorum (dextrorum)
major erat eorum a
sinistris'™, 31. Et


NC: *£0: avyNC:’|dentis melior erat | gloria sedentismajor
Ute: F7AnA:? ONVEL:| quam angelorum,|erat quam angelo-
98: 2OMdes: 30. 0
Ont: wPNc: H
aAAnt: 87%: (00:
AF7"*HOII"i 31.0
ON: DO4: AH: £4

1b AoE; 2 bom 3 6 wiicht: * 6 wah:
5a tt: a bP: 7b O7AnN: 5 6 wand:
® Corrupt. See 8. 0S om. 1 § E=a tertio. 12 Verses
29%, 30 lost through hmt(?). They are found in S. 3 y% om.


4S L? defective.
mentum.


8 So E. .L? wrongly om.


I have supplied dextrorum from E.


E supplies omission: quam a terra ad firma-
© L? om. through hmt (?).


TI2


NE: £0: av Nc: £2.
LGL: AaDNMAnT:
anh: 0897): whe
ant}: 6.242: AIH:
ThE 32. OHO"
Te: ot: BIN: ATF
Ls 33. wrndn:?
Cain: HA: 897": w8
IF"; OHLPNC: £0:
an: 6.2:42: Nd:
OE: AIH: e010: 177
£5 34. ODACarh:
NAA: 1897): 6.242:
A7PAN: NOII": (AF
WAR: ath: df0:)°
35. O'nl4s AH: w-

T: av7NC:* 800: Aap
Nant: HN? §97:
36. OP-Arrars *hnN
a: O08: OF Ae
10: N72: 37.00
Nibhh- AH: 4.2Nave;
ONdyt: HAY A77e
T: LPNC: Hhevs AT
Om-P:? Ait: HD:
AH: hov'H: Dnd: wou
0: AF°AeVL: AAT
&: *oW lon: nnd:


1 6 AaPNAdT:


ASCENSION


2 6 om.


a
qui erant a dextris,
et gloria eorum
similiter superabat
gloriam inferorum.
32. Et ascendi in
quintum coelum.
33. Et ibi vidi "an-
gelosinnumerabiles",
34. Et gloria eorum
36. Et canticum glo-
riosius erat quarti
coeli®. 37. "Et ego
miratus sum, tantam
multitudinem ange-
lorum videns diver-
sis bonitatibus ordi-
natorum™, et sin-
guli gloriam haben-
tes glorificabant™ ex-
istentem inalto,cujus
nomen non est reve-
latum omni carni,
quia tantam gloriam
dat angelis super
singulos coelos. "Et
respondens angelus
dixit mihi: quare


3b thIL:


OF ISAIAH


Ss
rum, qui erant a
dextris”, gloriaque
eorum similiter su-
perans (gloriam)
eorum qui infra.
32. Et ascendi in
quintum = caelum.
33. Et ibi iterum™
vidi "angelos™ innu-
merabiles", 34. et
gloria eorum 36. et
canticum glorio-
sius® quarto caelo.
37. "Egoque mira-
tus sum, tantam
magnam* multitudi-
nem cum vidissem
angelorum diversis
bonitatibus ornato-
rum", singuligloriam
suam ™ habentes, et®
glorificabant™ exist-
entem in altitudini-
bus cujus nomen
non” est revelatum
omni carni, quia tan-
tam gloriam dat an-
gelis super singulos
caelos. "Et cum re-
spondisset angelus
dixit mihi: quare


* 6 wh: (sic).


* Thave bracketed these words with Din. For Adh: b reads WAN:


5 6 av 3NCk:


(Gesenius).
13 L? om. BC
torum. ” ch om.


7 be DAC: 00.2:
© Mistranslation of tod rerdprov odpavod.
4 § ornatorum.
u legiones.


8b AL TOM?


° 6 waH.


Should be quarto caelo
® Sustich: suich a sinistris ch.
8 TL? adds erat.


6 L? ordina-


CHAPTER VII. 3I—VIIL. 7


mndant: *wnnd:
LELGC AH: 24
NC: £0: omc:


VIII. w98: A0271:
wit: A&C: HAG:
AeVe: wo’ CAs: 2
At: WAR CAs: w-0
tT: 27 rR hee;
2. *aflav: Cin ap
AAT: NO0L: PAC:
ATH: UAGLI = 3.*o0?
Oe: Ab: P82:
Ue: wa0?[nlC1’
4. WAlb* i: AaAA
hn: Hoh: J3r
5H: Hada: ATILASs
5. OLGA: ANT
ah ATHAn: AA: 0%
hi Ain 6. 092: THA
Ane? MARY: FFT
BAS LA: ONMRT:
7. OL0: APALD:
N72: Nant: *H
ODF": AACE AFL
Alb: WA.00 NE: VAR


16 Wnts 62:42:


we


L2
miraris de hoc, quod
non sunt unius spe-
ciei? non enim vi-
disti insuperabiles
virtutes et” millia
millium angelorum."
VIII. Et postea as-
sumpsit me in aérem
sexticoeli,et vidiibi™®
gloriam "magnam"™,
qualem non vidi in
quinto coelo. 2. Et
aspexi angelum™ in
gloria magna, 3. "Et
facta virtutum erant
honorabilia et prae-
cedentia", canticum
eorum sanctum et
mirabile erat. 4. Et
dixi ad angelum du-
centem me : Quidest
quod video, domine


mi? 5. Et dixit
mihi: Non sum tibi
dominus, sed con-


siliator®. 7. Et dixit
mihi: De sexto coe-
lo, et hic jam thronus


2b Whi.


5 Em. with S nam aspexi from Afb: 027:


vii. 3.
of MSS. 5 @ om.
accordance with S L.
4 Read angelos with S


ouvdovdos which E rightly represents: see note on p. 54.
7 So also E. L# et postea assumpsit.
8 So also HE. L? et.
22 See note ¥.


adds quod.
om.
2 TL? om.


6 Em. from wapMant:


° b adds Al
1 6 DANCE:
E.


I


113
8


miratus es de hoc,*
non isti unius spe-
ciei? Non enim vi-
disti insuperabiles
virtutes millia mil-
lium angelorum.”
VIII. *Iterum vero
elevavit” me in aé-
rem sexti caeli, et
vidi gloriam "mag-
nam" [super id]*,
qualem non _ vidi
in quinto  caelo,
2. Nam” aspexi an-
gelos” in gloria
magna, 3. "Ordines
virtutum horrenda-
rum et praeterfluen-
tes", canticum vero”
eorum sanctum et
mirabile erat. 4. Et
dixi angelo me du-
centi: Quid est, quod
video, domine mi?
5. Et dixit mihi:
Non sum tibi domi-
nus, sed consiliator™.
7. Et [iterum] dixit
mihi de sexto cae-
lo*: Thronus non est


3 6 om. 46 E.


Contrast corruption in
7 Em.
Em. from WAON:; in
2 S om.
® TL? and S=ovpBovdos a corruption of


by Din. from av 7NC:
8 SE om.


16 L?
18 VB


So also E. L? angelum.
* L? adds et hic jam.


114


ANTE ATORLA:
HAN0: Ae72: FN:
LONG: HaALAave:
o4e:) Hhao: 410
o-b;? wa.tivas 177
LT: NI: AATPHC: AL
nahi 8.ANav: 0-A'F:
*Ute: Aah E? H*0':
Pt: ivavs A727:
MOGICT: LO As
THAR: Al ore.
Phe: nav: 40C7:° HE:
nov; TCAL: At:
OAT: 9. OTCAL:
ATH. AG0: \* hae PE;
A°7 Lr: *tdeavs MH
At: GNCT: 10.4
3H: L£Teayr: ah:
Lho-}: Vhav: GAL.
ov; ONnav: AJ°AN.
hoo: rr. Ah:
anan: AALL: Aa
av; 0"): ‘Ark’ aA
7: HUA@: Nat:
LIN: *WOK.0CT: ©
ACA? wanda:
Hatt: Afiw-n: wo
*HUAOh” TCAL:

16 O446.21
5b AOCT:


Ll?

non est, nee sinistri
angeli, sed de virtute
septimi coeli ordina-
tionem habent, ubi
esttdives” tfilius dei.
8. Et omnes coeli et
angeli ejus audiunt
eum, et ego missus
sum assumere te hue,
ut videas gloriam is-
tam 9g. Et domi-
num omnium coelo-
rum et angelos eius
et virtutes. 11. Di-
co autem tibi, Ysaia,
nemo in carne illius
mundi volens con-
verti, vidit, quae tu
vides, neque videre
potest, quae™ tu vi-
disti™,


2 be KL-TOMP;
5b oni: wn.


5 6 trs.
76 HVE:


ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


Ss

nec sinistri angeli,
sed de virtute sep-
timi caeli * adminis-
trati sunt® ubi est
celeber™ lille et uni-
genitus |” filius ejus®
8. Et omnes caeli et
angeli ejus audiunt
(eum). Egovero mis-
sus Sum assumere te
hue, ut videas glor-
jam istam 9g. Et
dominum omnium
caelorum et angelos®
et virtutes. 11. Di-
co” tibi, Isaia, nemo
in carne *mundi il-
lius” volens  con-
verti homo” +visio-
nem, quamt® tu vi-
des neque videre
potest quod tu *vi-
surus es”,


46 om.
§ T have


trs. HA.CA&: WA.0C7: as above, changing H into @ after Gk. Leg.


ii. 29 oddcls... dvéBn ob8e elder. 6 0m. H before ACAT:


» Should


be trs. to beginning of verse 12 and take the place of @.


© b Teoh: cChn 4 badds98: See note,p.54. ™ Ed.
Ven. que. S quod. ™ § (E) visurus es. © L? ordinationem
habent. * ch imenityi: u imenimyi. L? dives. ” L? om,
8 L? Dei. 1° L? adds ejus. 2° TL? adds autem. | TL? Ei trs.
22 So also E. L? om. 3 Read vidit quae with L? E. 4 So


also E. L? vidisti.


CHAPTER VIII. 7-16


12. Aap: UA@h: Nao
néAt:? ATA: [0
nEA: 06:)? TI°RA:*
HY: [WAI VUE: W-A'E:
420: AOS: A972:
MAAC): 13. 0A
OnLnP: ANAT:
AATILAS: Aflav: Nao
NEAT: HAU= ‘HE:
APRA: 14. O20:
Q°70n: 98: HIT:
AJ: On: AN:
*AIOUN: 7D: A
N2AT Na? O27: He:
*AOZ7: AAA: THA:
Hatt! TA: ond
YL ENP EY UE:
AAN: Tai 15.0
A727: O48: Thw-h:
*Maphant: * AH:
*AANnd: ACVL: 16.
OAOZT: OAT ALT:
ACT 2: DAAC: HN:
099°: Dé.av Nd; 97
and: &4: iirav:
ahS.:" GAPae: wo


1a MnéAT: (sic).
tory gloss.
standing of viii. 7.


1OoT


L2
12, Ideo quia tibi
est in sorte domi-
ni venire hue. 13.
*Et ego magnificavi
mecantans domino”,
quia in sorte ejusam-
bulo, 14. Et dixit
mihi : quando rever-
sus fueris per volun-
tatem patris, tunc
vestem tuam reci-
pies, 15. Et tunc
eris aequalis angelis,
qui sunt in sexto™
coelo. 16. Et as-
sumpsit me in sex-
tum coelum, et thro-
nus jam non erat
illic necdextri™ nec
sinistri angeli, sed
habebant omnes
unam speciem et


2b ATHAAC:
CORA:
® } om.


115
s

12. Ideo quia tibi

est in sorte


domini venire huc.
13. *Magnificavi au-
temdominum meum
cantans", quia in
sorte ejus abeo™.
14. Et dixit mihi:
quando*ecarne huc’®
reversus fueris per
voluntatem patris,
tune *recipies ves-
tem”, 15. Et tunc
[tul eris aequalis
angelis, qui sunt
in septimo caelo,
16. Et assumpsit me
in sextum caelum.
Et thronus illic jam
non erat "nee dex-
tri™”° nec sinistri an-
geli, sed omnes habe-
bant unam speciem


3 An explana-


5 A gloss based on misunder-
7 Em. from YC: AI°Ah:


av72.0i: (= alieno Deus Spiritus) of 6 in accordance with S L? =
per voluntatem Dei. a reads Mn.C: AaPAAh: av'3é.0: (= alieno ab
angelo Spiritus). The form of the middle word of a is secondary,
due to a wrong insertion of ov'}é.0: (= Spiritus). 5 6 AOLT:
96 nao: TPA HIT: WH. Ma PAP: b PA: This and the
adjoining words should be in the acc. as the object of TAs
16970: 6%. ™ SE have the better text. ™ Corrupt
for septimo.  Interpolated(?). See note So also E.
1 T? ambulo. % So also E. L? om. 19 E = vestem accipies
quam tuvides. ™ Interpolated(?). Eom. rightly. See viii. 7.
12


116


ANAto: 9425
17. OFO-VNE: wna
chins AYZ: PAA a:
OUD: oAAn: On:
yk: hav; LAP
avn §=18. ONUE: ti
drav: LAI": APR
O78: Fo: PONG EE3
NaOH aoe tee

: PSD: ivads 0*%
ahh PA: 19. Wh.
NE Mhap; Sivan: AH:
ot: 1PVE Ae7L
TiaPAAnT:> 20. [wo
&*0'nav; 30,Qav-;]®
AA: 10.2: PA: Ver:
Ue: ws: NC7h?
Ur: Ves 21. OAT:
41H: Uirh: o-itt:
FAL: NOT 2:9 Ag
Aan: At: Whe
NC7¢b: HCAs w-
tr: FPR: OTT:
22. OFé1 hn: wf
chins AH: hoo: 1G


1b woah tTe:


glorificabant patrem omnium of S L?.


La
canticum aequale.
17. Et datum est
mihi, ut ego cane-
rem cum eis, et an-
gelus, "qui erat me-
cum”, et ego fuimus
tales, sicut gloria
eorum, "et gloria
eorum erat una".
18. Et glorificabant
patrem omnium et
dilectum filium ejus
et Sanctum Spiritum.
Omnes uno ore
tg. "Cantabant, " sed
non tali voce quali
in quinto  coelo,
20. Sed alia voce, et
lumen magnum erat
“ibi, 21. Et quan-
do eram in sexto
coelo, existimabam
lumen, quod erat!
in quinto coelo, tene-
bras esse. 22. Gavi-
sus sum valde et


ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


Ss
et canticum eorum™
aequale. 17. Et da-
tum est mihi ut et”
ego caneremcum eis,
et angelus, "qui erat
mecum", (et ego)?
fuimus® sicut gloria
eorum, "(et gloria
eorum)* erat una",
18. Et glorificabant
patrem omnium et
dilectum filium® et
Sanctum Spiritum.
Omnes uno _ ore
19. "Cantabant,” sed
non tali’® qualem
habebant in *quinto
caelo”, 20. sed alia
voce et lumen mag-
num erat’, 21. Et
quandoeram in sexto
caelo, existimabam
lumen, quod in quin-
to caelo, tenebras
esse. 22. Et” gavi-
sus sum valde et


? The passage obelized seems corrupt for


b trs.


ihtrad; ZAI Es We


should with c om. APS77@:: next for LAI: read LAMde: and
placing térav: after ffl: we should read 2O-Mds NAN: Hirao:


‘they praised the Father of all.’


as in ix. 5, on which see exegetical note.


before (1H: and prefixes A.


10.” b reads 3NNav+:
but E supports.

™ Supplied from L?.
6 TL? adds voce.
with L? E.


7 6 om.
° 0 trs.
” Supplied from L’.


Lost through hmt.
7 E has ‘five heavens.’
9 L? om. against S E.


3 be ONGC:


© be & AVL T:


‘ Interpolated
5 OR. | 6 6 trs.
8 A doublet? For
u T? om.
3 T? adds tales.
8 L? adds ejus.

%8 Add ibi


CHAPTER VIII. 16-26


7ST: 21M: AAA: 22
Ph TN40: 23.
ANTALODP: NavrdAd
am: H&avCchi: hav;
AP LAW: ALINA:?!
ONT: FAI9: HDs:
24. afithomn: dH
Pe: OATON: oA
LE: OOLnen: hav:
NH: RAavrTP: Vir:
Hl?) = 25. wavdAh:
HLovCahi: Kaavd:
SP Ft: OAL: OLA:
Maa F2dhh':
OH: NC7E4 *48.77
mn AGS 6.042:
*NOn0: 07724: An:
Tk: NCTC: FO:
ATLA: Ui: OG] RE!
[Am HO: Teton: H
Ot: LAVA: wT:
GAI?: DAL: 26. a
Tht: HU: Lh:
ot: HLA: FA
I”:)? MAAN: wav
GNCt?! oAnar:?
*HIOGT: ARGH:
AAA: 2 riavks Hh:


2 a ALTNAL:
a slip of the scribe.


(sic).
an loc.
32 See note 17.


rupt for septimi caeli as in L*.
© HE = Dominus et Dilectus ejus.


ia
cantavi donanti*tale
gaudium”™ recipien-
tibusmisericordiam"™
ejus. 23. Etrogavi an-
gelum instruentem
me, ut exinde non re-
verterer ad mundum
illum carnalem.
24. Dico autem vo-
bis, quod multae
tenebrae sunt hic.
25. Angelus vero
instruens me dixit
mihi: Quod es gavi-
sus de isto lumine,
quanto magis gau-
debis et exultabis,
quando videbis lu-
men septimi coeli,
in quo sedet coelestis
pater et unigenitus
filius ejus, 26. Ubi
exercitus”? et throni


2 a adds WRAaT: Nis:
5b MCTET:
Aé: after the verb it introduces is found in Mt. vi. 23.
b reads T4.chin: We should emend into TT46.% ch:

® Bracketed as an interpolation.
® badds kL.
3 T? tale gaudium.


46 om.


0S = talia.


4 @’to jako.
E = lumen in septimo caelo.
7 = orddoe corrupt for


117

}
cantavi donanti ta-
lia® —_recipientibus


misericordiam ejus.
23. Et rogavi an-
gelum instruentem
me, ut exinde non
reverterer in mun-
dum istum carna-
lem. 24. Dico au-
tem vobis, quod mul-
taetenebrae sunt hic.
25. Angelus vero
instruens me dixit
mihi: Quod ™ es ga-
visus de isto lumine,
quanto magis gau-
debis et exultabis
quando videbis lu-
men teaeli justo-
rum+® ubi _ sedet
*caelestis pater et
unigenitus ejus
filius®, 26. Ubi ex-
ercitus” et throni et


5 @ adds (YH:
§ This order of
For Té.”
7b ONGC:
See exegetical note
0 Ed.Ven. miam.
8 Cor-


oroal = vestes as in E. See ix. 2. (So already Gesenius.)


118


ATILA: AH: 1é6A27
am: £OC2: Af:
1C7% HVE: Oe:
wmavyac: 27. on
ALATA: w-0b: 2
2: 92: POA: iT
6.299;' AavR.A: He:
28. wloZ08: dH Ths:
OL0: ATHHTs


IX. owhei: wort:
atc; HON: Ac7e:
O78: O970hn: PA:
At: THA? Ath:
ALE: UAP: £027:
HOA +e) +25
NC: O4£.60n-: OCO
LNs = 2. Of 20
AL:)° AN: COR: Ths
IP: AFUS:® *HAAT:
PA! 1970n® ATH:
TTZ?: OLNA: LT
427: £027": HE: PS.


16 K.Té.200;


See exegetical note in loc.
being against S L? and context.
See exegetical note in loc.


La
et coronae jacent
justis. 27. Et de


illo te non reverti in
carnem tuam, non
est tempus expletum
veniendi hue. 28.
Et: audiens haec tris-
tatus sum valde”.


IX. Et assumpsit
me in aérem septimi
coeli, et audivi vocem
dicentem "mihi":
Usque quo volens in
carne vivere *venis
hoc"? Et timui
valde et tremefactus
sum. 2."Iterum "que
audivi'-vocem dicen-
tem: noli prohibere
eum, ut intret, "dig-


2b Pola:


3 6 ‘HHA:
* Bracketed as an interpolation,
6 Text gives wrong sense.


7 MSS. RAAT: PA:


ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


s
coronae jacent justis
27.Et *de illo te non
reverti® in carnem
tuam, nondum™* est
tempus expletum™®
veniendi hue.
28. (Et)'® *haec au-
diens” tristatus sum
valde. ‘Et dixit mi-
hi: Ne tristaris'®
[neve sis morosusl.
IX. Et assumpsit’
me in aérem septimi
caeli. Et audivi vo-
cem dicentem "mi-
hi": *Usque quo in
carne volens vivere
ascendit™”? Et timui
valde et tremefactus
sum. 2. Et iterum"
Taliam | vocem audivi
dicentem: Nolite
prohibere (eum)”


* Corrupt.


8 Em. with


SL? audivi from av%A't: Cf. for this and next three words


Gh. Leg. ii. 23 yrovoa pavijs .. . wepmopérns Kat Neyovons.
See S in loc.
owing to interpolation of preceding mihi.
dvaBaive &3e of Gk. Leg. ii. 23.
against L? Gk. Leg. ii. 23.


10 T? defective here.


, . > in
Tov oe py avedOetv.
catisja u.


but see L?.


© Added from L? E.
8 So E but that it om. mihi.


14 —E


> 6 om.


1 Venis corrupt for venit
Venit huc goes back to
Thus SE here agree together
© Add aliam from S E. 8


a
= rept


%® konéasja: expleri kon-

Vv L? trs.
19 viiznese :
2 4Aded from L?,


E om. haec.
wzved ch. » —H,


CHAPTERS VIII. 26—IX. g


a: AA2.eR: Ana:
Hi: @AE: Alte:
3. OTHAADP: AavdA
an: HFA: DAD:
ov}; * OWE: WNAAL:
@av}y) O-AFH: HT
aemi:? nav: Ad
27: 4. OLE:
HnAan? Ho-A'F: H
£0: DAT: NEVE:
NeVL5 5. w*Htap
Lan: Ho-AE: Az
Hah: [A7WANdC:
ATHLA! nCOTA: HU
a: LTAUA: *w-At:
GA: KLE]. on
Ph: AAA: 1020:
adn: 47°: 2:
TOC7: $6. OK02TL:
wit: 40: Ae7 2:
OCA: NU: C7
avynad: wahanti:
HANA: “PAD
q. ONVE: Cé.ns &2
Pr irae: HATA
a0; 489"; 8. one:
CARP: NADA: PRD:
ONitivravh: AGPIy
9. ONVE: CADP: AZ
Pa: ONitirae: Ah:
PRU: AA: OC:


1} om.
ii, 24.


3 6 HhAnAh:


ii. 25 6 éfeotas trav Tyrer.


2
nus est enim gloria
dei," hie enim est
stola. 3. Et inter-
rogavi angelum, qui
erat mecum: Quis
est prohibens mihi?
et quis est praeci-
piens mihi ascen-
dere? 4. Et dixit
mihi: Prohibens’
est, qui est super
cantantes angelos
sexticoeli,"angelus".
5. Et praecipiens®
est filius Dei, et no-
men ejus non potes
audire, donec de
carne’ exibis. 6.
Quando nos ascendi-
mus in septimum
coelum, vidi ibi
lumen mirabile "et
inenarrabile" et an-
gelos innumerabiles.
7. Etjustosvidi quos-
dam. g. Exutos stolis


2 A false rendering of 6 émrpérov.
4 Em. from HROU:
5 An interpolation: see exegetical
5 a reads R29: and


note in loc. 6b trs. AZHLAN: A7HANALC:


trs. after Hirav+:

® Add tua from S E.
11 Added from L’,
according to EH.


7 Add tibi from E.
© See longer form in L’.
We should have tibi est


12 L? est.


33 'T? exutos.


119
Ss

ut intret, "“dignus
Deo"; hic enim est
stola. 3. Et inter-
rogavi angelum, qui
erat mecum: Quis
est prohibens mihi ?
(et) quis estliterum |
praecipiens mihi a-
scendere? 4. Et dixit
mihi: Prohibens igi-
tur”, qui(est)" super
cantantes (angelos)"
sexticaeli,"angelus,"
5 Et praecipiens
tibi iste! est filius
Dei, et nomen ejus
non potes audire,
donee de carne [tual
exibis 6. "Et! ut
ascendimus in sep-
timum caelum, ‘et!
vidi ibi lumen mira-
bile "et inenarra-
bile™ et angelos in-
numerabiles, 7. Et
iustos vidi quosdam
g.*Exeuntes e™ stolis


See Gk: Leg.
Cf. Gk. Leg.


8 Add tibi from S E.
Cf. Rev. iii. 4.


I20


aPAMAT: 2);
OCAnPar:; NANAT
oo: HAOK: waar}
"FA: UAM: hav; a4
ant: at: Vt: £bo-
ao: NONAT: ONL:
Io. ONE: o-trb:
aeGNCrar:? Ass
oOAn.At? Alert
an Fie: WAP avs:
11. OTNAADP: Nava
an: HIPAA: AE: HA
ANA: Aa *oNavg
NCTA: oONAnAAVT:
A.UAGLS: 12-13. 0
LOA: ANOLAT: wo
GACT: ANGE a4
PA: LAY Alh:
LOCA: ERC: 6A
£2; HTGAC: ATH:
LOC LL: [LOCLh:
*ot: WF a2
36: PPOA: [ATHLA:
HU&: 2TAVA: ACH
Thi] ONGE: LAC:
OLAPS: aGnctr:
&2: LAPao: wah


NAT ALYMARP O42:

OZL:" wn Mhan;

2 a@om. ? be OGNCTVar-():
56 HAMA:

7 a ADAAT: ® 6 bid:
ond'F: . .


ASCENSION


iA
carnalibuset existen-
tes in stolis excel-
sis, et erant in glo-
ria magna stantes.
to. Sed in thronis
suis non sedebant,
coronae autem glor-
iae™ non erant super
eos. Ir. Et inter-
rogavi angelum "et
dixi": quare stolas
receperunt? et
thronos et coronas
Tgloriae” non rece-
perunt”? 12-13.
Dixitque mihilange-
lus!: Non receperunt”
modo, donec* filius
hic primum tistos
introducet thronos


] | et coronas, quando+*


> be MARA:
°b @OGNCTH: OARAAT: AU: AAWor:
® After there follows in the MSS.
-- MFNAAT: AL: but wrongly as this sentence has its


OF ISAIAH


s
carnalibus et exis-
tentes in stolis excel-
sis, et erant in glo-
ria magna stantes:
to, Sed in thronis
suis non sedebant,
coronae autem glor-
iae ‘eorum' non™
erant super eos. IT.
Et interrogavi ange-
lum "et dixi™: Quare
stolas receperunt, et
thronos "gloriae" et
coronas non recipi-
unt*®? 12-13. Et
dixit mihi: Non re-
cipiunt eos nune,
donec descendet
filius Dei hic pri-
mum: sciunt tamen
quorum sunt throni
eorum et cujus” coro-
nae quando descen-


4b adds £.


right place after £TNUA: ACHTN: In the above text I have


restored it to its right position.


See exegetical note for details.


The bracketed clauses are interpolations. ©} om. u Add
eorum from SE. 22 § recipiunt. 8 Add descendet
from SE. “ Corrupt and defective. See S and E. by
om. 16 H=receperunt. 7 koego: koe u, ch.


CHAPTER IX. 9-17


CAL; wo Lahr
P: PD: ONNA: O-A
Fs 14. OLAGH:
a7: WHhs 9A":
*aP: £0: DAS?
*DLAPAP; 20: 06:
*OLOCk: [ALP
ov; AOMU:]|* *ATH:
ALAI Ss: adh: OA
F315. Whoo: C
LE: Nav: AFT: Te
A: ANV LTE: CPA
oo: hav: ALTOOP:
00}: O-AE: 16.0
: A2#: AaPAAN:
T: W80C7: AAR:
MLPNC: wot: Whe
FAP: (PRT: PAT:
DACA Ort: ]*
aoPOAl 17. WAZ:
{OCH APRLPI:
123k: SHOU: Hay
é.fiaps> *KANA: &.’
hs Alth: 8007: AT


* 6 C&h:


i
erit in specie vestra,
14. Et  princeps
mundi illius exten-
det manum suam
in filium 'dei!, [et
occidet illum)’ et
suspendet illum in
ligno et occidet ne-
sciens, qui sit. 15.
Et descendet "in in-
fernum, et eum de-
sertum ponet et om-
nes visiones inferni,
16. Etapprehendet™
principem mortis, et
depraedatum eum
ponet, "et conteret
omnesvirtutesejus",
et surget tertia die,
17. Habens quos-
dam justos secum,
Tet mittet suos prae-
dicatores in univer-


2 Em. by Din. from Naf: WAR:


I2I


8
det et erit in specie
vestra". 14. Et prin-
ceps mundi illiust
propter filium ejus
extendet manus suas
in eumt” et sus-
pendent® illum in
ligno, et* occidet eum
nesciens* qui sit.
15. Et descendet in
infernum et nuda
et deserta ponetur
visio, 16. Appre-
hendetque™* prin-
cipem mortis cap-
tivum'’® "et con-
teret omnem virtu-
tem ejus" et surget
tertia die, 17. Ha-
bens quosdam justos
*secum "et mittet
suos praedicatores


3 6 om.


4 I have trs. these words from their place in the MSS. before
OLNPAP: £0: 06: to their right place after it, as in SL? Further
LOCK: = exrevodor (cf. 2 Kings vi. 7; Ecclus. xxxiv. 18), a
manifest corruption of sxrevodor: cf. SL? occidet. Whether
ALB av: ANU: was added by the Ethiopic translator or
already found interpolated in G' we cannot say. 5 b BYWHE.
An interpolation : see exegetical note in loc. ° a Hav'}é-Fad+: be
HNavyé.av; 7} WAAL av (sic), c AANAGDs &. * An obvious


interpolation. ® Gives excellent sense. Visiones= davtdcyara.
io


10 Ed.Ven. conterret.
2 Corrupt.
seems right: cf. E.
implied by E.


depraedatum eum ponet.


L? here correct: cf. E.


1 See fuller form in E of verses 12-13.


15 'L? suspendet.


Plural


4 Better read occident eum nescientes as


1 Very corrupt. L? very superior.
This is right: cf.


6 L? et


E. Vy om.


122


HA: [nCaTa:] @80C
%: PRU: 18.472
Thi £4 Aa [AANA
am; @}aoGN Ctra?
MARAATWar:; § AN:
ont: 400; e772;
001: OAF: I9. 0
Abi: HThANn?: w-
ar: WAd: Ae e:


20. TOL OAL Pid:


OHWE: 9097": HLT
AG: OH: L£TOOP:
21. MWAH: 98: AT
*S91C: FOUOU: FP:
AhS.5 Aon: A
A: £bo-004° Aken:
6L4L: APUNAE:
Ath: opAAa: AH:
APINF?: KOZIL:
22. DACARL: aPAh®
tT: [WAn; hav; aA
Gt: WI07:)* O45
chavs MOE HAET:
RavG, Ul’ WAT:
nav; aoRhE-TH: In
2 OOUNL WAI
ANnAFE? wiP: J°7
AZLVa: = Nw-2:;


1 Interpolated: see exegetical note in loc.


"EW av;
mihi quomodo.
4 @ om. 568.


a doublet : hence bracketed.
1 ¢ OFO-ONL:

14 Should be cum eo or illo.
to in iii. 17 and xi. 22 of E though not here.


HH:
See S.


L2
sum orbem terra-
rum" et ascen-


det in coelos; 18.
Tune recipient isti
thronos suos et coro-
nas. 19. Et "post
haec verba" dixi
illi: De quo te in-
terrogavi in primo
coelo, 20. Ostende
mihi, "hoc enim
mihi promisisti™*.
21. Adhuc me lo-
quente secum™, ecce
quidam angelus de
astantibus, gloriosior
ducente me "omni-
busque angelis", 22.
Et ostendit mihi
librum et aperiens
dedit [eum] mihi, et
vidi scripturam non
sicut istius saeculi,
et legi eam, et ecce
actus Hierusalem


° 6 adds AIPA:


This should be tertio as in E.


° a adds Ut:
2 § OANA:


ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


Ss
in universum orbem
terrarum™® et ascen-
det [iterum]'® in
caelos: 18. Tunc re-
cipient isti thronos
suos et coronas.
19. Et "post haec
verba" dixi illi: De
quo te interrogavi
in primo” caelo,
20. Ostende mihi,
Thic enim promisisti
mihi ostendere"
Tquomodo quae in
illo mundo fiunt hic
sciuntur'. 21. Ad-
hucme loquentecum
illo ecce quidam an-
gelus de stantibus
gloriosior multo
ducente me "et om-
nibus angelis", 22.
Et ostendit mihi
librum et cum aper-
uisset dedit mihi, et
vidi scripta, erant
non sicut istius sae-
culi. Et legi eam,
et ecce actus Hieru-


2 6 Mog NC


* Corrupt. Read AMNLPL: AG: with S L? = ostende
Ver. 21 shows that it was Isaiah was speaking.


7a HH. 8 a4
10a aDAmEt:
18 L? defective.


%® This subject referred


%6 Tnterpolated.


CHAPTER IX. 17-26


ANGAA: *U% UAP?
Rat: OF°INCa
Q: *HALAPC! od
LE ALAM: 23.
Ath: 497: AN: HE
TNA: 040; N97 L:
HETINC: *o-2+
*H: WAI: 24.06
an: A0e: AAQM: 1
Wk: *t0d: wooo
tT: er WARAAT:
MH 25. WA: A
aan: Hav}: HAA
Ah: OnGACT: wi
nOoATs 26. O20
AL: HM: AANO: VAG:


1 6 trs.
a om.

See S. 7 $ om.
et coronae with S E.


3


4 6 om.


L?
erant ibi scripti, tet
omnium hominum
opera erant ibi, de
quibus et ego
eramt®, 23. Vidi
in veritate, quia ni-
hil absconditur in
septimo coelo, quod
est in mundo fac-
tum. "Et interro-
gavi angelum: Quis
est iste praeeminens
omnes’ angelos in
gloria sua? Et re-
spondens dixit mihi:
Iste est magnus an-
gelus Michael depre-
cans semper pro hu-
manitate * et humili-
tate”. 24. Vidi
stolas multas et
thronos et coronas®
jacentes. 25. Etdixi
angelo: Istae stolae
et coronae quibus
servantur *et thro-
ni®? 26. Et dixit
mihi: Istas coronas


123


Ss
salem” erant  ibi
scripti et quorundam
hominum vidi opera,
quos ego non scivi.
23. *Cognovi iterum
in veritate, quia ni-
hil absconditur™ in
septimo caelo *eo-
rum quae in mundo
fiunt”. "Et interro-
gavi angelum: Quis
igitur™ est iste prae-
eminens angelos in
gloriasua? Et cum
respondisset _dixit
mihi: Praeeminens
angelus iste est
magnus archangelus
Michael deprecans
semper pro humani-
tate." 24. Vidi ‘au-
tem! stolas multas
et thronos et coro-
nas ‘multas!' jacen-
tes, 25. (Et dixi)™
angelo: Istae stolae
*et thronietcoronae
quibus® servantur ?
26. Et dixit mihi:


2 Em. from HIAIC: Cf. S quos ego non scivi.
5 a adds H&avCaAh:
8 SE add multas.

0 E = filiorum Israel.


§ Corrupt.
® Trs. before
1 Here


SL? agree against E which = Et dixi: Re vera, nihil est quod


abscondatur. So also Gk. Leg. ii. 32 xai..
2 — Gk. Leg. ii. 32 rev eis... Tov kéopov mparro-


AavOdver x.7.A,
pévov.
“4 Added from L’E.
16 kim; tém w, ch.


L? = quod est in mundo factum est.


. cimov *AAnOGs obdev


3 L? om.


% I? wrongly trs. after servantur.


124


Ned: ATH: 4A
MP: Al Lhe Th
07 a0, PVE? AH
ne = Hnao? AGA:
[L£hare:|* worn
7’ OLTha: N
av’ ML av}; av
Ob: A494? wave
WCs 27. OCA
ahbS2 AH: £Po.
7: * WANA LT
020: AF ih: ON
AyEU: ONL: O-A'F:”
Moon: 28. 000:
CADP Hirao: 2.2:
2h: AN: Cine wavA
Ant! AN: Cane
ODP hs FU: WARSI":
WADA: OUT: witir
aD: ROP); Pe-ap:8
PCO: ONS: te:
@OONh?: Hiravs 0


a
multi ammittunt de
illo mundo credentes
verba illius, de quo
locutus sum tibi.
27. Et "conversus"
vidi dominum in
gloria magna," et ex-
pavi valde". 28. Et
appropinquaverunt
ad eum omnes justi
et adoraverunt eum
una voce cantantes,
et erat vox" sicut
illorum. 29. Et*
"Michael appropin-
quans adoravit, et
cum eo” omnes an-
geli adoraverunt et
cantaverunt. 30. Et


ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


8
*Istarum stolarum
multi destituuntur “
de illo mundo cre-
dentes verbo illi*,
de quo locutus sum
tibi. 27. Et "con-
versus" vidi domi-
num in gloria mag-
na" et expavi valde";


28, Et appropinqua-


veruntad eum omnes
quos vidi! justi” et
adoraverunt eum
cantantes una voce,
fet ille erat similis
eis! et *erat gloria”
eorum sicut illorum.
2g. Et tune "Michael
appropinquavit et
adoravit et cum eo”
omnes angeli adora-
verunt et cantave-


*AhRS: PA: ONAL: runt. 30. Et trans-
UAo-hs FAW av:
Abo: ont Mth
JER hav: LAPD:
29. OAD: $C: av
Nant: itiravs oli
Ts Odea: 30.0T

1 BN: LavRKs w. 2 be NSA: 3} Mhan; ‘ Inter-
polated: see exegetical note on ix. 5. 56 wOPN: TAH:
® be OF: 7 Em. from 6 Afi: @ AM: 5 OR. ba.
be LAT: " bc CALS: 2 @ om, 3% om.
46 ANHTE: ® Should be gloria mea. 6 Add tunc
with SE. “ L? Istas coronas multi ammittunt. Destituuntur


= lisajutsja. SL? both wrong; for the context requires the


mention of those who receive the garments.
8 L7H illius.
*° L? vox: better gloria mea as in E,


multi accipient.
in E.


E = Has vestes


Observe large addition


CHAPTER IX. 26-34


OATh: onthe: hav:
aAAR: 31.0AR7:
LAL: aaah: HE
anGhi: AH: 07.2:
ON1eh: wltidh:
32. DLGAL: avn:
HO-WE: ATHA: *H?
wa: hat: ACA
33. DATH: 92: 25S
1CH Cans AAA: AO
ah’ HLaviie: we:
$i: FOU: FCO: oh
18 Of Ndy: OAL:
Man: FAdGWas:
OONATe:® AToOA
M:; (hav; Catron":
34. OAL; SCO: av
Naat: ONTR« bok:


1 Em. in accordance with SL? from wtwdm: whi:
3 badds ('E: L2T& io
5 6 cht:


getical note in loc.


from A'T¢7C: in accordance with S.

See exegetical note in loc.
° SE use sing.

M1 See notes 1? and *.


on:
angelus.
SE.


i?
transfiguravime' ite-
rum", et fui sicut
angeli®. 31. Tune
dixit mihi angelus
qui me _ ducebat:
Hunce adora et canta.
Et adoravi eum et
cantavi. 32. Et dixit
mihi angelus, [qui
me ducebatl: Iste
est dominus *omni-
um gloriarum, quas®
vidisti. 33. Et” vidi
alium _gloriosissi-
mum similem ejus
Tin omnibus et justi
appropinquaverunt
Tad eum! et adorave-
runt "eum" et canta-
verunt, et tille can-
tabatt™ cum eis et
non ttransfiguravit
set" in visu illorum.
34. tCum eis, ett
venerunt angeli et
adoraverunt eum," et
ego adoravi eum et


2 OH.


we should read ego cantabam with E.
for transfiguravi me. Cf. ver. 30, and see exegetical note on ix. 33.


4 po vidom: w po vidomy.
E = kai pera raira.


.
kal,


125


8
figuravi me" iterum™
et fui sicut angelus
gi. Tune dixit mihi
angelus qui me du-
cebat: Hune adora
et canta; Et adora-
vi eum et cantavi.
32. Et dixit mihi an-
gelus: Iste est dom-
inus omnis gloriae,
quam vidisti. 33. Et
Tadhue illo dicente!
vidi alium gloriosis-
simum similem ejus
Tin omnibus", et
justi appropinquave-
runt et adoraverunt
fet] "eum™ et canta-
verunt; ettille canta-
bat +"cum eis et non
ttransfiguravit set*
secundum visum™
illorum, 34. Et
+ceum eot” venerunt
angeli et adorave-
runteum. [Et dixit
mihi angelus: Ado-
ra eum et canta. |
TEt adoravi eum et


See exe-
4 Em.
§ Km. from


7 @ om. ® SE


10 Add illo dicente with
2 So also L? but in both


3 A primitive error


16 TL? cum eis et = pera trovray


126


35-OCA-DP: NATHLA:
ONS7I": AAT OA
oo FE*Z; UNG: PM.
O73 36. WF7F:
HCA: N0Da0; 47H.
Als OThAAn: ah:
O-WE: UTE: © 20:
07.2: dF: Ata; H
O-AE: aah: 00}
a0: P22: HOA:
ONAL: ALPh
H2TSIC’: 37.*o
Cih: ONT: O18:
THLE: AV LIT: av?
20% Wh AY: A
DA: ACAL:? wWA.cd
AAD: HIPAA: wrA!
iva: aAAnt: At:
Cin: AV: £0286
ars AATHAS:
38. ONdE: *Cain:
ALLH): VELA: O
*A52: AVH: 2dcoaks


BAL


is strange.


? Em. from HT972:
It might be emended OADY: ONT: OM: Ther:


L?
cantavi. 35. Et Tite-
rum” vidi alium "in
gloria magna". 36.
Et "ambulans™ in-
terrogaviTangelum":
Quis est? et dixit
mihi: Adora eum;
iste enim est ange-
lus Sancti Spiritus
loquens in te et in
omnibus justis. 37.
Et "post haec™ alia
quideminenarrabilis
[et ineffabilis] reve-
labatur gloria, quam
ego apertis oculis
mei spiritus non
poteram videre, nec
qui me  ducebat
Tangelus', neque om-
nes angeli, quos vi-
deram adorantes do-
minum. 38. Nisi
tantummodo justos
vidi in gloria magna
aspicientes gloriam®.


See exegetical note.


ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


s
cantavi". 35. Et
Titerum” alium "in
gloria magna" vidi.
36.Et" ambulantem™
interrogavi' "ange-
lum": Quis iste est?
et dixit mihi: Adora
eum ; iste enim est
angelus*SanctiSpiri-
tus” loquentis™ in te
et in omnibus iustis,
37. Et" post haec"alia
quaedam"” = inenar-
rabilis revelabatur
gloria *quam ego
apertis oculis spiri-
tus mei non poteram
videre™ nec qui me
ducebat (angelus)"
neque omnes angeli
quos videram ado-
rantes dominum,
38. Nisi tantummo-
do justos vidi in
gloria magna aspi-
cientes gloriam


3 Text


HA: THLE: AOL TH: oI: AVA: ACAL:= ‘And thereupon
the Great Glory was revealed which, though the eyes of my spirit
were open, I could not see.’ This would agree with SL*, But text
is no doubt right and SL? wrong. For av'}é.0%; a reads 10%; and
trs. ANDAR: 00,7: 4 bom. 5 6 Adohia REPL 5 @ om.
7 See note *. 8 Add illius with E or ejus with S. ° Part.
Pret. u,chaddet. L? reads ambulans, but wrongly: see quota-
tion from Epiphanius in exegetical note on ix. 35-36. 10 angel’
stago: angel’skago w, ch. [vel Popov errore typograph. | a 6
loquens. % T? quidem. ® See different idea expressed
in E. “ Added from L?S.


CHAPTERS IX. 35—X. I


at: AAhe
MOPCa: 408: ATTA
*@; wWarPAéh; av}
6.0: O20: Cé&: hav:
TOVAN: TCA: AA
MLANHC! ONAL
an: AcoAan: HIP
Ah: Tw-U0: FLAS
40. OCA.*h*; hav;
(12: *A7HLA: wav


La


39. | 39. Et appropinqua-


vit "primum" domi-
nus meus et angelus
spiritualis®, 40. Et
adoraverunt [eum]
et cantaverunt se-
eundo“insimul, 41.
Tune omnes _ justi
adoraverunt [eum],
42. Et "cum eis


Aa&h:' HavtZi:® w)| Michael et™ angeli
Ofidhs RAZWa: 4|/ omnes adoraverunt
Od: AATHANdCrlet cantaverunt.
41. OAN7: Kiran; %
LP OCH: OTR
42. *wiavhant: *?
CO: O178. witirao:
mnaAat: Ade:
X. wfB7: 0970n+|X. Postea audivi
PAT: OPNAIT: HA | vocem™ibi", et*canti-


o70n-: Nhe7eT: Ha
LYE: 09722? ATH:


16 om.


26 AATHANAC:
5 be NATHLAR: WAoPA A:


cum, quod” audivi
tin sexto coelot™,
ascendehat et ‘audie-


® @ adds


3 bBadds CNRch: He: 4
PS:


127


Ss
Tejus’. 39. Et ap-
propinquavit Feist.
"primum" dominus
meus et angelus
spiritualis®, 40. Et
adoraverunt et can-
taverunt duo” ae-
quale’, 41. "Et!
tune omnes  jus-
ti adoraverunt
42. Et "cum eis
Michael et” angeli
omnes adoraverunt
et cantaverunt.


X. Postea audivi vo-
cem “ibi" et cantica,
quae™ audivit in cae-
lo ascendentia in


@om.
7 a wttivav:


RPE: oO. 5 ¢ om. 9 6 adds HA°72: which I take
to be a corruption of @£N%0O: removed by an error from the
following clause where it followed 8005: a reads HAC70nPav+


a mere correction, which however points to 2°70:  ° Ed.Ven.
specialis. So note * for passage lost by hmt. here. 1 Cor-
rupt. Read duo with SE. 2 S cantica quae. 8 Corrupt


for in singulis sex caelis. See E and S. 4 L?om. E= mihi.
% SL? om. through hmt. et dixit: Vide ut tibi permissum sit
aspicere Deum et propter te angelo qui tecum, datum est robur.
Et vidi quod adoravit Dominus meus et angelus spiritualis. On
the other hand this passage may be peculiar to G' and therefore not
goback toG. SoalsoE. L? corruptlysecundo. ™ tiikimo.
L? insimul which is better. So E. 18 ize: ze u, eze quod ch,


128


80073! o £0970: Ve:
2. wittraes AHhs
ANtOch: HAVA: 0
Nar: CAk LEP:
3. WAAS: ANIO:
ANA: WAbiil
4. DATA: *wtavA
ah: o07é.0: tie: 20
Po: ott: LAs
5. ods: DT: HH
LTEP: APREVE:
AV, Cr: Ah: hav; WL
0°70: AA: LATCH
6. ONF7nP: Narr
an: H2avCAhh: oF
O: HoO-AE HAGA:
ELL: APA:
OPSDAY FAI: HEI
NC: ONPLAT: LOC
&: HU: LZTAUA:
Aare: P22: ARE:
RLPY: AU: AAT.
An 7. of970n: $
AT! HAGA: 2.24.2:
AU: AATHLAS: ATH:
L-Nlde: AATILAL: [AC
Ota: HUd: £AUA:


1 @ AOC?:
46 om.


a doublet.


5 a@ repeats.
text, reading ibi however for in septimo caelo.
° Since E = in caelis sex caelorum ascendentia,


L?
batur in septimo co-
elo”, 2. Etomnes


glorificabant illum,
cujus ego gloriam
non poteram videre.
5. Et omnium. sex
coelorum canticum
non solum audieba-
tur sed videbatur.
6. Et dixit mihi
angelus: Hic est
lvivusl unus_ aeter-
nus in excelsa aeter-
nitate vivens, et in
sanctis requiescens,
Tcujus nec nomen
nec visionem possu-
mus sufferre", qui
*est laudatus a Sanc-
to Spiritu. in ore
{sanctorum |* justo-
rum. 7. Et "post
haec" audivi vocem
aeterni dicentem


? See note ® on preceding page.


5 b Ptr: A.


ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


Ss
sextum caelumt+’.
2. Et omnes glorifi-
cabant illum cujus
non poteram ego
gloriam videre.
5. Omnium autem
sex caelorum canti-
cum non solum au-
diebatur sed ‘et!
videbatur. 6. Et
dixit mihi angelus:
Hic est *unus aeter-
nus” in excelso sae-
culo" vivens et in
sanctis requiescens,
cujus nec nomen
*nec donum”™ possu-
mus*® sufferre; qui
*cantatusest'aSanc-
to Spiritu in ore jus-
torum. 7. Et "post
haec™ audivi vocem
aeterni dicentis®


5b CAL:


7 S om., but E supports


8 Bracketed as


it is probable that in caelo and in sextum caelum are corrupted
from some expression like that in E. Hence text = ‘ which I had


heard ascending in each of the six heavens.’
0 E = altissimus altorum.
See exegetical note on x. 6.


and E.
aeternitate in L?


See fuller text in L?
n = aidan. So
2% om.


S = ofze déow corruption(?) of o&re spaow, which is the reading


of L?, 8
tur.


ch potest quis.
© L? dicentem.


“4 L? = est laudatus.


E = vocabi-


ARMM] 8. da: w2
A hie: A972: wr
OC: *9°SG0: OH
he: SAan;? Ath: “40:
ods Hot: (LAA:
TOCS: ond: an
MmAHPEA;: A-b*dh'w-
Cx go. OTTZhA:
Anav: 47°: wiv:
*AA: Woot: 770
ES AVL: ~=10. 0
hav: Cattav: (ap
Nant: 7°%S0: ATH:
THIPN: TTeZAA:
[wmdalant*L: an:
wt: Laat]? xr.
DLAI ® ira:
omnt: HHh: 70


I”: nov; ATT: ATH.A: |.


PRE: HONOLU:?
hover: w* Hanan
tari 12. OLA
9h nao; AIT: J?
OAS: *A0: AXA: AT
£5: 2POh: wharAA
ntVar: OANCTSLE
Wars AN: AONL |"
A*O.20: 097 2:" *h


: Interpolated. See exegetical note on ix. 5.


CHAPTER X. I-I2


L2
domino filio: 8. Exi
et descende de omni-
bus coelis et sis in
mundo etvade usque
ad angelum, qui est
in infernum™; 9.
Transfigurans te se-
cundum formam
illorum. 11. Et non
cognoscent te, neque
angeli neque princi-
pes seculi illius:
12. Et judicabis
principem ‘illius se-
culi! et angelos ejus
ettmundirectorest™:


129


Ss
domino filio: 8. Exi
et descende de om-
nibus caelis et sis in
mundo et vade® us-
que ad angelum,
qui est in inferno,
g. Cum  transfigu-
rasses te secundum
formam illorum.
ir. Et non cognos-
cent te neque an-
geli neque princi-
pes saeculi illius:
12. Et judicabis
principem”™ et ange-
los ejus et mundum
regnatum ab iis:


> 6 AIR:


"HGAZ": Text follows a save that AJ": is corrected into $(Aa0:


ec reads PRGA: Hhe FAI":
§ 6 om.


For Ati: b reads Hi:


5 be B.
an loc,


0 ge DALAaDhs


Adh: 00: APA: AONLD: APOR: ANCTLT: war” wn’.
QM; of b, a reads twice AN:
13 Read inferno.
regnatum ab iis as in SE. See Greek on p. 71 note.
16 Add illius saeculi from L? E.


2 be trs.


daze i wu.


3 @ om.


46 Haina:


7 Interpolated. See exegetical note


u Text very corrupt.


6 adds


K


5 a DALAI 44


56%.
I emend as follows:
For
n after both verbs.


4 Corrupt for mundum


® di:


130


a; Terr oT 27°
Qt: Noe? TTF; wha
NAVE: *ONATNaT:
Hh? FAI": OAT":
HAI"4W ar: 2 ravh
a 13. Allav: ah
Ri: OLO0: hk:
noo: MHAINAE WH.
avhZ: 14. DAIL:
4é: sooner?! Pr:
TOC?: Aarnth: wh.
TTEAT: AFM: 1978:
he e2: Ad: ANAT:
TOC?: OTENC: NI27
15. DWA2Z7: LA
82 Nn: av KTrh: Oo
SOOT: WAN: WAP:
16. Heb: A770n: *0
Nh: 00.8:5 ATH:
LAH: VATA?
17. O* non? Can:
ha: wb: *AI°AN0:
Ne7 2: ATHLAG:? o-N
T4220: 09722 18.
wovhan: HOA:
[AFP H: FAI: PAA:


16 om.
from AF°ATADT:


ASCENSION


? be ONKOTANE: WH:
Cf. x. 8. See exegetical note im loc. For


lL

13. Ideo quia" ne-
gaverunt me et dixe-
runt: Nos sumus et
sine nobis nemo est.
14. Postea Iverol
non transfigurabis
te per coelos in
magna gloria ascen-
dens et sedebis a
dextris meis; 15.
Tune adorabunt te
prinetpes et virtutes
et [omnes] angeli et
omnia initia coelo-
rum et terrae et in-
fernorum"™, 16. Et”


raudivit magna gloria


praecipiendot™* do-
mino meo. 17. ‘Et!
tune exivit dominus
de septimo coelo et
descendit in sextum
coelum. 18. Et an-
gelus instruens me


3 a wToaAn


OF ISAIAH


Ss

13. Ideo quia™ nega-
verunt me et dixe-
runt: Nos sumus et
*praeter nos® nemo
est [aliusl. 14. "Et
quandoautem e terra
elevaberis'*, postea”
non transfigurabis te
per caelos, “sed! in
magna gloria ascen-
des et sedebis a dex-
tris meis. 15. "Et?
tune adorabunt te
principes et virtutes,

et angeli et omne in-
itium eorum in caelis
et in terra et in infer-
nis"®, 16. Istam™au-
divimagnam gloriam
praecipientem domi-
nomeo, 17. Tunc”
exivit dominus de
septimo caelo_ et
descendit in sextum
caelum. 18, Et an-
gelus instruens me


4 Em.


APA” PT: of a, b reads Tn: OTPIAN: an arbitrary(?) change.


* be ATH:
THs peyadns.


See S. a


ascendens.


should have ista. LL? et.


a Hint: 00.2:
5 $ L? = ‘then’ which is right.
is a mistranslation of peré raira.
1 Kd. Ven. id qa (sic).
za ne.
See different text of E.


§ So bc and Gk. Leg. ii. 41 radra iovov ris ddéns
7 q@ adds AF°4N0: 097.2:
Cf. Gk. Leg. ii. 41.
5 be trs.
2 SE = istam.
% Or sine nobis.
Y ktomu, doerdy,
% Tnitium = dpyq ‘ principality.’
4 TL? et tune rightly.


Here hav'H:
? bce H&avCchh:
8 Corrupt.
16 L? om.
18 L?


” siju. We


Ut: @/ LOA: AN:
ANLLA: OCK: nav:
*272AL: TOA EE?
AATHA: OCLE
19. OCAn: MOAN: C
ALP: aoNAant: OD):
Hat: AG Ase:
ONdh?: OM LAP: Ad
av; ATOM: Mao:
Cath*ao; Aavdan
T: HVS: DANY: w
a¥Z: Adan: AAW
om: 20. OCA: ft
0: O22: w-irt: 39°
a? (972: oravhn:
OAT: 3FN:> ATL:
/*('nav: CARrars A
anant: HUE: WA.
Oacdh?: Afao: Ca
SE: nao: WaAWPao::7
21. DAL7: O2ZL: w-
at: 00: 097 2: oF
apf: Ahoo: Catt
am: Aavdant: HVE:
22. WAN: CALP: 7.0
NMhP: OAMDLAP: A


1 An interpolation ?
2 Em. from TCAL: twAm: of a.


CHAPTER X. 12-22


L2
dixit mihi: Intel-
lige® et vide, quae®
est _transfiguratio
ejus et descensio?
Ig. Cum viderunt
Teum! angeli, lauda-
verunt et glorificave-
runt eum, non enim
transfiguravit se in


figura eorum, et ego


cantavi cum eis.
20. Cum descendis-
set in quintum coe-
lum, ibi statim trans-
figuravit se secun-
dum formam ange-
lorum illorum, et
non cantaverunt ei
et non adoraverunt
eum, erat enim for-
ma sicut illorum.
21. Et descendit in
quartum coelum, et
apparuit illi(s)" se-
cundum formam il-
lorum, 22. Et non
cantaverunt ei, erat
enim forma  sicut


SL? om.


I3t
S
dixit™: Intellige, .
Isaia', et vide quae
fit transfigurationem.
et descensionem ejus,
1g. Cum viderunt”
angeli, cantaverunt
Teum! et laudave-
runt eum ; non enim
transfiguravit se *se-
cundum figuram”™
eorum, et ego au-
tem cantavi cum eis.
2o. 'Et' cum descen-
disset in quintum
caelum, et* trans-
figuravit se secun-
dum formam ange-
lorum illorum, et
non cantaverunt ei
etnonadoraverunt”,
erat enim ejus for-
ma sicut illorum.
21. Descendit autem
in quartum caelum
et apparuit illis *se-
cundum formam”™
illorum 22. Et non
cantaverunt ei, erat
enim *sicut secun-


b reads H before J>NA®:
6 reads FAI": TOAM;:


Perhaps for TCA: we might read £2ofL: = ‘He accomplishes, &c.’


See S L?.

7 a CAStav;
with S E.
with L’?E.
4 T? ibi statim.


3 MSS. OCA:
Gk, Leg. ii. 42 and SL? support 0.
9 Ed.Ven. q. 10 Ed.Ven. illi.

2 Add eum with L’E.


1 T? add eum. See note on p. 72.


46 om.


obrazu: po viizoru [sec. visum] w.


K 2


56%. 6 OE.
5 Add Isaia
n Add mihi
3 LT? in figura.
16 po


¥32


dav; CaF: fav:
Calta: 23.0798:
CAN: AN: O22: o-0
tT: MAR: 0°72: or
avin: Anav: Catt
@; Naodant: *H’ow-
Ot: *9A0: 97,22:
24. *OO74AGT: AA:
GOPK: AIPA: N97 2:
"ww DATILA: OU
Ooo: nov; i.LTAaD
Ci wan: CALP: AA
ADP: DADLAP: A
fav: CATE: nav; CA
Stam: = 25. OI8: C
ane AQ: 022: 0-2


ASCENSION


L2

23. Venit
autem in tertium
coelum, 25-28, Et
in secundum et in
primum _ transfigu-
rans se in singulos
eorum. Ideo non
cantabant ei”, nec
adorabant, apparebat
enim illis” similis
eorum, ostendebat
enim  characterem
per singulos coelos
custodibus _ porta-
rum.


illorum.


OF ISAIAH


s

dum formam™ illo-
rum. 23. Venit au-
tem in tertium cae-
lum, 25-28. Et in
secundum et in pri-
mum, transfigurans
se in singulos eorum.
Ideo non cantabant
nec adorabant eum",
apparebat enim simi-
lis eorum, ostende-
bat autem signa’
per singulos caelos
custodibus _porta-
rum.


TT: 8979; he7 2: OF: OVA: NYT: F74AGlT:S Ahao: Ad: C0PH:
ACPA: CP Py OATILA: LUA 26. OCA: AN: TapAn: Nha;
CAattar; Noohanit: AH: 08°79": 972: OCALP: DAN:
Alav: CATE Nhav:’ CARtoo: 27. O98: CARP: ON: O22:
wont: P27P: NOVL: OAV: OU: 74AGT: AAA: OPO:
AGPR: MavAd: Vhav: CALrar: AaAAnT: AA: 062a00: ‘Hh:
aN: OAONAP: DAMWLNP: Aloo: CATE: Nnav;? CAttao:
28. oneeh: 4A0; HTNAAL: QA4?T: oPAdn: Hoa:


29. O98: O22: wl)
T: a0&G0: HN: *avhe
WHE FAI: LENCE
*o'oun: T74Agh:’
AAA: 08DI7"; OCAL
*F: hav: HAWad: w*


29. Descendit autem
in firmamentum ® et
ibi dedit signa, et
forma erat ejus sicut


29. Descendit autem
in firmamentum! ubi
princeps saeculi is-
tius sedet' et ibi
dedit signum, et for-
ma erat ejus sicut


AONHY: AVE" AA:
0.27%: 0UAMs *AhSs


‘ona: 7 b AAS H. ‘bom. * be C&P;
§ 6 adds han; AL-TAaoC; 7 6 Hhap; 8 ¢ PHS: WH:
°b 2bNSG a TWANG: " be trs. To AVE: 6 adds 4.
2S om. 8 Add with SE ubi princeps saeculi istius
sedet. “4 L? forma sicut. 6 LT? om. © gnamenija.


L? characterem.


> OHV:


CHAPTERS X. 23—XI. 3


ADS to LPT
a: Ahan: *Ue: Vie?
9 LAY AN L: OLR:
*HA44AT Ee: 30.0
Cin: Al: O22: oF
avid: NarAant: At
C: w-4'F:; Vir: hav:
ahha’ aAPotnrert
ap: §=3r. MA.oun:


T4AGT: Aloo: 4
aS Nth S:|
Uee: o2£1G01'


XL WAP ZACH: C
an: @av\An: HTS
12: PUNE: Haw Cah:
LOA Ad: 442
Lt: WAL: APR: AN
ao: AH: T2.Pns: AF
710: ATHANMCH
2. WAL: Cine ag?
TOAL! KOT: 10,
2:9 Natt: ath: a
OF; T9029: OLA'L:
LVN: OTTec7ic:
ANAC: Hlavs SAG:
NACL: 829B:" Ow-A
"EZ: ATPHCA: WAI"


TOALS SET: LP: HATO: AdvI?: HLA:


L2
illorum, et non glori-
ficaverunt eum", "et
non cantaverunt ei."
30. Et descendit ad
angelos, qui erant in
hoe aére, sicut unus
ex eis. 31. Et non
dedit "eis" signum
[etnon cantaverunt].


XI. Et post haec
dixit mihi angelus:
Intellige, Ysaias fili
Amos; in hoc mis-
sus sum adeo" omnia
tibi ostendere. Nec
enim ante te quis
vidit, nec post te
poterit videre, quod®
tu vidisti et audisti.
Et vidi similem filii
hominis, etcum hom-
inibus habitare et in
mundo,”


133

Ss
illorum et non
glorificaverunt*" ne-


que ei cantaverunt".
30. Descendit autem
et ad angelos *aéris
hujus” et erat! sicut
unus ex eis. 31. Ht
non dedit "eis" sig-
num [neque interro-
gaverunt enim eum|/®.


XI. Et post haec
dixit mihi angelus :
Intellige, Isaia, fili
Amos! inhoc' enim!
missus sum a do-
mino” "omnia tibi
ostendere. Nee
enim ante te quis
vidit, nec post te
videre poterit, si-
cut™ tu vidisti et
audivisti. Et ecce”
vidi similem *ut
filium” hominis ; et
cum hominibus*cum
habitasset in mundo"
3. DLR:


Non2AT: WAR ohh: TEhCT: Tren: OWT OLLPL:


M09; tah: HAZ OT:
8 6 Ott:
eum with L? BE.
represent G?.


quite a different version.
2 TL? filii.


2 TL? om.


2 ac om.
7 The clause DAA: . .
Leg. ii. g but not in SL’,


4S om.
7 TL? qui erant in hoc aére.
L?=et non cantaverunt.
’ L?E deo.


8 be trs.


© ¢ om.
8 Ed. Ven. q.


1 OFLA:
. 0O£.1G0; is found in GA.
56 OLOML:
0 6 O4Nu


5 6 om.


9 ¢ hLne:
2 @ HAT:
6 Add

8 This may


S sicut.


G (E and Gk. Leg.) give


70 L? quod.


I34 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


TOE: R2NG? L42I31 4, wavdan: avI2l:? CNTCA: OH:
5AF9; MATH: ALIZD: SALE: OLOPNY ATICLIW: wow:
AO: AH: 2h": HET 1d 5. OALPCO: AG7TCLI™: MOON:
hav; 277A: BENT: ONdE: OF: AIH: VE: 6. OALPIC
PRAY: *AD-Ceh: DABBLE J DAP? 42: DAA Aw-d7h: aPoan:’
OTAE: 220s wit: GEE | DOT Ce I: NAF: ONcrE: nA ao:
Ndhtto; 8. OLhw-r: AN: LAG: AhEta; OTE:
TICLP: NOLL: AGT: OFA: 49: Vad: OF L170: 9. WA
PLA LYCT: THEA” nF: hav: Laos” HATA: TOW”
to. MAN: 24: *99: SOG 27°F LOVIN: Lhe
AOLTLU OLA: ATE OLN” AATHANdC: Ada:
*QavndNE: avehi® ATWA: 1. OPA: Lhw-?:; trove HTT:
GAR: ae ATG 12. DETKIC: PA: NATT: 49h AGT:
Adz? 3. MAN: Lh: OAL: AVIA: F7CLI°: $L-a0;
nha:” hook: Htroanr 7 14. ONHDI: Lh: AwNLT:
OA0CTH: WODALT:? OAR bP ENV: OLA:
ihivavs; niflart OLKI°%s* ivads WE: ORLA PS: APALE
O-AE:: 5. WLI AP; OLa0 es *ATHST: HILAL = 16. OCA
aiden: SRR HN: OVAL8: DANORTZ: WT: AI7C: AAA:
L£Po0-00% hav: PNA: Hee: AOVlT: wie: av RATTh: w* tir:
AF°An:! HH: GAF98s 17. OCAhs AGHST: Vir:® &mos hao;
AV: oNhav: PCI: be: noo: %.LTAaPC: §=§=618. WAN: AVE:
LINC: T4I°S: ONL: Wav Yad: 079. Ge: ANA: *O"ALZANIP


1 6 OGM: 2 6 adds PSN: 3 So be. Soa read, but the
first three letters are erased and the fourth almost wholly.
46 WAIN: ® 6 trs. and for nA&: reads &. 5 6 iNd: €
7 bom. 8 be (bt: ® ¢ and also originally a but the
word is erased save the first letter: 6 reads @4C'F: ” be T2N:
be HPLav4 2g TR: 8 ¢. a originally had this
phrase twice, but subsequently 99%: was erased in both in-
stances. 6 omits phrase. 4 bo PUT: © be OL Tw Tt:
6B adds ATILG: 1 6 MLA: 8b NE LavRA:
9 be trs. 0b &. 2 Erased in a, but two first letters
decipherable: all erased but first in 0. 2 @ aoMAL: (sic).
% 6 ARCI: hav; * 6b WAKA}: 3 6 GHST:
% % 40.4: Perhaps we should read @PMA: 7 @ om.
=> bAT: ™ b adds Wha; CTT: Vie: Ont: ° 6 ONLT:
3. 6 on.


CHAPTER XI. 4-24


19. DAP LACH: LP
‘ya: OFS Pn.2-2: OL
Pfa0y, Aw- 2: Ale
A: VOU ATH: AL
49% 00}, O-4'E: WO
L°2P OP; AYE: w
LAPAP: *OLO0CL:
"W:a00AAn:? =§=20.0
BRAD h: Zin:
AW: LOPAP: £.0:00:
21. OnoPL: AI 242:
WANT: OAT: Lr
A: OLPNC: arPon::3
22. ODL0AL: aA:
H2acCai: At: 44
Leh: OCA: A:
é47an;* *AOWCE:
ondi't: A4C%a:> wo
OCT: 23. WA CA
nP wh 097°XG0:
@A-tonm: na; C
altar: OCALP: i
dro: aPAAnT: HI?
£40: *onemk: oA
Th57 = 24. ONS:
abo}: Di: NUE: ATH:
Lh: AG: O22: a
MA: TWanit:®
Midi: 4.004: PN


L?
Ig. Et non cognove-
runt eum.


23. Et vidi ascenden-
tem in firmamen-
tum, qui’ non erat
secundum formam
transfiguransse. Et
videntes omnes an-
geli, qui erant super
firmamento, "expa-
verunt et” adorantes
24. Dicebant: Quo-
modo” fascendistiin


135
s


ig. Et non cogno-
verunt eum.


23. Et vidi ascenden-
teminfirmamentum,
*etjam™ non erat se-
cundum formam' eor-
um!" transfigurans
se. Cum autem vidis-
sent eum omnes an-
geli * qui erant super
firmamento” "expa-
verunt et” adorantes
24. Dicebant :- Quo-
modo *latuit nos


At: (HUA@T: 400.| medio nostri domi-|dominus in medio”
Us]? Hidés HT2hN: | ne?t” et non cogno-/et non cognovimus

1 5 om. 2 be DLOCLP: "IN: arAant: 3 ¢ adds 4.
4 be 24m: 56 YWEACLAE: ATA: 5 be CAN
76 @MNLOi: 8 Em. in accordance with L? in medio nostri
from 100: ® A doublet. 0 =etis. Ed. Ven. q.
Ed. Ven. quo. 2 Corrupt. If second sing. is retained,
we must read descendisti. 8 L? qui (q). “ L? om.


b y om.


16 T? corrupt here.


136


NAN: A277AL: A
OF 2: 25. 00CT: w-
ab: £797: A77L: w
ATOAM: AA: tira:
anhant: Al: 0897)
onedg”: wav:
*Manh: AED
26. OLNIS? bE:
OLiNah?: O21:
AG: ATA‘: PN
A AH: LOGS: wo
ANNoi: 27. 0n77
Us OCT: wit: WAR:
on: Ofidhe® o£
Oe: 28. *ow-lt:
0: A972: W3IPN
Z:° no70:: navy? 2
i 29. ONE: IN
ATH: AcdhSa’ O-A'FE:
*DAI°.U: ATOAN
Mz 30.0CAn-: An:
ot: 1.20: Age:
OCT: MONIES: wE: wo
ANhPi 21. ona:
Oot: tas: 097.26:
Anat: L2TBMax:
32. OCANP: AG: OC
1: wT: 0: APL:
MUN ch?: Hivavs 2.2:
Ph Oltivav: ahah


1 6 VAN ira:
5 6 cP:
5 a@om.
sed.
throno sedet.
note “.


porro.
note on xi. 27.


® See note "7,


8 Ed. Ven. qué.


* Corrupt. S (=E) preserves true text.
“ E in secundum caelum.


12
vimus regem glor-
jae? 25. Et *primo
coelo® +gloriosiort”
ascendebat et non
transfigurabat se.
Porro" omnes an-
geli? 26. Adora-
verunt, et cantave-
runt dicentes: Quo-
modo® transisti per
nos domine? et non
vidimus, "neque ado-
ravimus te™? 27-30.
Ita ascendit [in se-
cundum coelum et |*
in tertium et in quar-
tum et in quintum
et insextum 31.+Us-
que ad omnes coelos,
et gloriae suae con-
jungebat set™. 32.
Quando " ascendit in
septimum  coelum,
cantaverunt ei om-


2b OHTA .


5b wit: W610: OFF°N: 197 L+

1 Corrupt or interpolated.
® Add with SE et dextri et sinistri et is qui in medio
™ Wrong addition.


*® Corrupt or interpolated.
* Both SL? err in adding these words.
L? adds caelum after sec.


ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


Ss
regem gloriae?
25. Et *ex primo
caelo” ascendebat
+gloriosior +, et non
transfigurabat se.
Sed” omnes angeli
Tet dextri et sinistri
et is qui in medio
throno sedet' 26.
Adoraverunt ‘eum!
et cantaverunt di-
centes : Quomodo
transisti praeter nos,
domine,et non cogno-
vimus "neque adora-
vimus te"? 27-30.
Et! ita ascendit [in
secundum et in ter-
tium et in quartum
et in quintum et
in sextum caelum.
31. In omnibus ta-
men caelis gloria
ejus adjecta est.
32. "Et? ut ascendit
in septimum caelum
cantaverunt ei om-


* be 40h:
7 bc &.


ngs


6 om.


See
1 § et ut.
19 L?
See exegetical


CHAPTER XI. 24-36


Tr OAD: CaN: h
ap: 302: N77: AN
AT? O08: Hh: HA
OAnav: hav: AnVA
he OMA CAR?
33. Wand Ani: Hav}
at: P80: Chins *h
ap; 1N42:° NOD:
34. *woavAtin: *H
LAL: AALLA: OA
2: APR: AA all
apy? ONET: ANTE:
Alan: meP: HAM:
OAL: 79: 35. OF
MA: oT: dnih:
adn: cPO0Ah: LTE,
2.9973 AZT: TaoKA:
Hi: 36. Arh C
Al av 20: AALLN:
Aiticavs AA: 24o0-
om: $272); OLN


1a HnNAT:


2 be CALL:


L2
nes justi et omnes
angeli "et omnes vir-
tutes™, quas® non
potui videre. 33.
Angelum _mirabi-
lem™ vidi sedere a
sinistris [ejusl, 34.
Qui dixit mihi: Suf-
ficit tibi Ysaia ; vi-
disti ‘enim,' quod
nemo falius] vidit
carnis filius, "quod
nec oculus vidit, nec
auris audivit, nec in
cor hominis ascen-
dit, quanta praepar-
avit deus omnibus
diligentibus se™.
35. Dixitque mihi:"
Revertere in stolam
tuam, donec tempus
dierum tuorum adim-
pleatur "et" tunc ve-
nies huc. 36. Haec
videns Ysaias dixit
circumstantibus se,
et "audientes mira-


3 6 om.


137
s


nes justi et omnes
angeli et omnes vir-
tutes". "Et tune vidi
eum ut sedit a dex-
tris Magnae Gloriae |,
quam non potui vi-
dere; 33. ‘Et! an-
gelum Spiritus vidi
sedentem a sinis-
tris, 34. Et dixit
mihi: Sufficit tibi,
Isaia! cognovisti®
quod nemocognovit*
e carnis filiis, "nec™
oculusvidit nec auris
audivit nec in cor
hominis _ascendit,
quanta praeparavit
Deus __ diligentibus
eum”™.—35. Et dixit
mihi": Revertere in
stolam tuam, donec
tempus dierum tuo-
rumadimpleatur™ et"
tune venies [mihil
hue. 36. Haec cum
vidisset Isaias dixit
circumstantibus
eum, "et cum audis-


4aom. ‘ce. adli.


6 Em. in accordance with SL? sufficit tibi from 4.@4%n: - Din.


proposes &h-Th:


2 Should be quam;


3 Should be spiritualem. SE = spiritus (gen.).


8 L? (E) vidisti.


7 be Ah:
10 Em. from Gé&in in accordance with S L?.
crept into be two lines later.


8a LTERI:


nT? defective.


9 a ATT:


The same error has
See S.


change due to loss of preceding words.


6 T? (B) vidit.


this passage see exegetical note on xi. 34.


4 § eum.
7 L? quod nec. On


18 L? se.


138


dhe: OL-TS1C: AH
PL: FP: OL)
nao; ANtT? TTICh:
37. OTE2ZES AT:
5A", 38. wit: H
tt: GAL: TERI:
*NL6T: TOAL:
39. DAI" hi: KALL
Q: hav; 2770: Ach
HO: ANGAA: W1.AN
yr: PAT: nav: *48U
f: AAOAP: WANA:

o. *... NOW: Ft
OPI MATa: UV
Ad: Navid: bE:
hao; 134s AANA


16 WAR:
3 ae OTE272 7:
N00A@T:


8 Corrupt.


2 T? om.


ASCENSION


c Wahir:


LT?
bilia = cantaverunt
omnes et" glorifica-
verunt "dominum’
dantem talem gra-
tiam hominibus".
Et dixit Ezechiae
regi: 37. Consum-
matio seculi hujus,
38. Et topera imple-
bunturt* in novissi-
mis generationibus.
39. Et prohibuit eis,
ut non annunciarent
populo Israel, nec
verba haee darent
ad scribendum omni
homini. 40. Sed
tquanta intelligen-
tur a rege et dicta®
in prophetist®. *Ita
et vos estote™ in
Sancto Spiritu, ut
recipiatis stolas ves-
tras et thronos et
coronas gloriae in
coelisjacentes. "Ces-
savit autem loqui et


26 AA: HT:
“6 A246: avPoa:
° Em. in accordance with S talia intelligite
from @ WATT; TPP: (JPOP: c; LEMP: 5).
See S for right version.
Corrupt and defective. Better in S.
® L?E populo.


OF ISAIAH


Ss
sent haec” mirabilia
glorificaverunt et”
cantaverunt "Deum,
dantem talem gra-
tiam hominibus®
Dixit autem Eze-
chiae regi: 37. Con-
summatio —_saeculi
hujus, 38. Et om-
nis haec visio im-
plebitur in novis-
sima §_ generatione.
39. Et prohibuit eos,
he annunciarent
filiis* Israel, nec ver-
ba haec darent ad
scribendum omni ho-
mini, 40. Sed tquan-
tumcunque _intelli-
gitis a rege dicta in
prophetist, talia in-
telligite omnes. Vos
autem vigilate“* in
Sancto Spiritu, ut
recipiatis stolam
vestram et thronos
et coronas gloriae in
caelis jacentes. "Et
cessavit loquens et


ce Airit:
5b ALUN:


7 S deum.
9 Ed. Ven. dca.


" Corrupt. See note ™.
+ “So E. L? corrupt.


CHAPTER XI. 36-43 139


L? Ss
an: MOGACT: MAN|exivit ab LEzechia|exivit ab Ezechia
AAT: HAOAT: HO: rege.7 rege", [Ipsi autem
0: A972: OCs Deo nostro gloria
Explicit visio Ysaiae|nunc et semper et
prophetae. in saecula saeculo-


rum. Amen. |®
4I. NATH: Ad? GALT? OTIATT? Owe: AWA: Nea:
OAL: P90: AKALLD: OAL: APR ULL 42. OTT: hie:
OVUM: HHPLA: APG: Atak: FOR 43. OATHNE: PCA:
DELOLL: ODT: Ads *NAA A: TELE: ANLO: TURN:


Té.Ra00: HE: *HAAL LN: LL: FA: OCTE:S


1 @ AM: 2 @ puts in ace. 3 6 adds Nav}2"E:
“beom. *¢GA&: © 60m. entire subscription. 7 Possibly
this sentence belonged to original form of Vision. 8 An


addition of the Slavonic scribe.


APPENDIX


Tur Use of THE Names ‘Tur Benoven,’ ‘Briar,’ AND
‘SAMMAEL,’ IN THE VARIOUS CONSTITUENTS OF
THE ‘ ASCENSION.’


The Beloved. This title of the Messiah is peculiar to the
Testament of Hezekiah iii. 13, 17, 18; iv. 3, 6, 9, 18, and to
the Vision of Isaiah vii. 17, 23; viii. 18, 25; ix.12. Its presence
in i. 4, 5, 7,13 in the Martyrdom of Isaiah is due to the editor of
the Ascension, as well as in iv. 21.

Beliar. This designation is wholly absent from the Vision of
Isaiah. It is found both in the Martyrdom of Isaiah and in
the Testament of Hezekiah, but in two quite different meanings.
Thus in the Testament he appears as the Beliar Antichrist mani-
fested in the flesh in the form of Nero iv. 2, 14, 16, 18, whereas
in the Martyrdom he is a purely Satanic immaterial being i. 8, 9;
ii. 4; ili. rr. In this latter sense he is introduced in his editorial
additions in iii. 13%; v. 1, 15.

Sammael. This name is absent from the Testament of Hezekiah.
It is also absent from the Vision of Isaiah; for in vii. 9 it is due
to the editor of the Ascension, since it is wanting in SL? (see
p. 105). It was, therefore, peculiar to the Martyrdom i. 8, 11;
ii. 1, but appears also in the editorial additions, iii. 13%; v. 15,
16; Xi. 41.

To sum up, the name ‘Sammael’ was originally peculiar to the
Martyrdom, Beliar to the Testament of Hezekiah in one sense,
and to the Martyrdom in another, and the title ‘ Beloved? common
to the Testament and the Vision, but absent from the Martyrdom.


It is needless to add that these facts confirm our critical analysis
of the Ascension.


Uy > 4 4 ¢
IIpopnreia, amoxaduiis Kat paprupioy
Tod aylov cal edddfou Kal peylatov tv mpopytav


*Hoatov rod apodirov.


[See Introd. pp. vee)
; Ascension

of Isaiah,

"Eyévero év To wéumty Kal eikoore Eret Baowhedovros j iyi


“Eleion ev ‘lepovoadiy kahéoat Mavacahy Tov vidy adroé,

dvta érav evSexa,, Eumpoobev “Hoatou tod mpopyrou kat “lacodp.

Too uiod abtou. 2. Kal éAGdyros airod mapéduxer abte ods i. Bs
Néyous ris mpopyreias ods adrds 6 paxdptos ‘Hoaias efSev, kat Thy x. 8 (iii.
xaTéBaow kat é&Aevow Tod dyamnrod ék 10 EBSdpou odpavod 13)

eis Tov Gdqy, Kal Thy perapdppucr F iv HeTepopaby Eumpoobey iii. 13; x.
Trav padntav abrod, kat Tods Aéyous ols adrds 6 Baordeds 18
"E&exias eidev ev 7H dppwotig abroG. 3. Kal ds qrovoen Zopvas | i Shh,
6 “Ypoppareds kat “Agodp 6 Srropynparoypddos épxdpevov Tov 17. eae
péyay “Hoatay dé Tadydduv els ‘lepougad tp, kal per adrod vi. 1, 3.
teooepdxovra uiods mpopyTav kat “lacodp tov uidy adtod,
dmizyyerkav r@ "E€exia epi tis édetoews airév, 4. ‘O d€
Baaihevs "Bexias dkxovoas tadra éxdpn xapav peyddAnv oddédpa,

kat eferddv els ouvdyrnow Tov paxapiov ‘Hoaiov érehdBero Tis

xetpos avrou kat elonyayev avrov eis Tov otkoy Tis BaoiXeias abroi,

5. Kat éxedevoev Tebfivar adto Bidpov" obk éxdOtoev Sé eri vi. 2.
tov Sidpov, GAN émt thy Kdlvqv Tob Baowdws. 6. Tére
emthaBépevos "Eexias 6 Baoiheds Mavacony tov vidy adrov

Fyayev abroy mpos tov paxdptoy ‘Hoaiav roy mpoparny, tva
emOijon Tas xetpas abtoo én’ adrdv Kai eddoynon airdv, ds Vi. 5.


i. x. Instead of dvra éraiv évdexa, Gebhardt proposes éyra atte
éa as in Ethiopic. ‘“Iagotp LXX. "IacovB. Ethiopic = Jéséb,
Joséb or Jdsab. 2. cdev twice iiev in MB. 3. “Acovp cor-
rupted from ’Acd¢: see note on vi.17.


i.


. It.


. 12,


i. 13


te


a


vi. 2.


vi.


Jo.


142 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


08 eldey 6 péyas mpoyrns “Hoalas tov Mavacany, éyéhacey én’
aire kat eimev 76 "Eexigr Od Sivapat eiAoyjoa Tov Mavaooyp
Tov “paddovrd pe Typwpeiv peydhats Bacdvous kal mxpais. 7.
Kai eimev "Efexias rp dyin mpopitn * Hoaia’ Ethbynaoy, mdrep,
Mavacaip rév vidy pov. 8, “O dé elzev' Zi KUpios 6 Oeds pou
Kal é vids abrod 6 dyamntés Kal 73 mea Td Nadoiv év enol,
ru év Tals xepol Mavacoy Tod vi0d cou Bagdvors mxpais rot
Cay drahhayfropat, 9. Karorxyjoet yap 6 garavés ev Th
xapdia Mavacoy Tov viod cov, Kat improbjcopor b bn’ abtod mpiwvt
udivy did kepadjijs ews moddv eis BUo, Kal amoddods ef
‘lepovoadyp Kat @& *lodda amocrice dd Oeod Cavros kat
mpookvynoovow eldddos. 10, "AxoUoas Sé taita “EfLexias 6
Bacieds édumnby oddpa Kat Eoxicev TA ipdtia adtod Kat
éxXaucev miuxpas, Kal EBadev xoov emt thy kepadty adtod Kal
cdkkov Kat onodév bmectrpdoaro, Kal emevey ent mpodcwmov
adtod doel vexpés, 1. Kat elwev 6 péyas rod Geod mpopyrns
‘Hoatas rG Baoidel "Efexia’ Odn dhedjoes ceauTdv obdév
KAaiov xal ddupdpevos’ det yap wAnpwOfvar thy Boudhy Tob
catava, év TO vid cov To Mavacoy. 12. Ev éxetvy S€ 7H Spa
StedoyiLeto “ELextas 6 BaowAevs too droxreivar Tov uldv abrod
Mavacoyy. 6 5¢ Sopvas 6 tropynparoypddos cimev rh dyio
mpo pnt ‘Hoaia ore ’Efextas 6 Bacthebds Bodderat dmoxreivar roy
vidv airod bid oé. 13. Kat etrev 6 péyas “‘Hoatas ampés
"ELexiav rév Baoihéa’ Karipynoev xiptos 6 beds xal & dyamnrés


. abrot Thy Boudhy cou ob ph ydp Zotar rodro. Set ydp pe ek


mavros éy Taig xepot Mavacoy Tov viod cov tipwpybévra
é€eOelv did rod Biov rovrov.

14. “Opvgev Sé 6 peéyas ‘Hoaias év ‘Iepovoahip év th yR
oikeiats xepoin, kat edpev Bap wodt, kat emavdpacev adrd mryyy
Zodp, 6 épunveverat ameoraApevos,

ji, Mera d€ raira mpookaheadevos "Efexias 6 Bacihets Top
dyioy *Hoaiay rov mpoprrny els 7a Baoidea elo Oev Tmpos adtéy’
Kai KabeLopevou Tov peyddou mpoijrou * Hoaiov émt thy Kdivny
700 Bacidéws cyévero ev exordcet, kai ApOy 6 Sradoyiopas
adtoé dé Tod kdopou Tovtov. 2. Kai as rovro yéyouev, iipbaro
déyew Sopvas 6 irropynparoypages 6 Gre dméObavev 6 dytos Heaias.


Eira eiceAOav "Efexlas 6 Baotheds kai Kparnoas airov tis


vi. 14. xetpos eyo Ste otk dméGaver, add’ dvedyhbn, iyow peréory’
vi. 12. ru fy ev aire eutonna Luis. 3. Ezoinoey d€ obras xeipevos emt


CHAPTERS I. 6—II. 14 143


tis Kdivns tod Bacthéws ev rj cxotdoet adrod jucpas rpeis Kab

vixtas tpeis. 4. Kat dre eldev 6 péyas mpopyrns ‘Hoalas ra

é€aiota kai dearavéyta Kai mapddo£a tod pidavOpamov Geod epya

év rois ovpavois, Thy Te marpiyy Sdfav Kai Tov ayarnTod viod

xal Tod mveiparos, thy te Trav dyiov dyyéAwy rdafw Kal xopo-

otagiay’ qeovcev 8é Kal ra ppyta kal dadppyta Tov Ocov pyyara®

tére énéorpeypev Kat 4) Wuxi) adtod évy ré oapart airov. 5. Kal

ToUrou ‘yevouevou exddecey 6 péyas ‘Hoatas “lacodp tov uidy adtod vi. 16, 17.
xai Lopvay tov ypappardéa kat *ELeriay roy BactAéa Kai mavras

rods mept(e)aT@ras, oirwes Kai Hoav d£toe Tov dovoat dmep cidey

6 dyos “Hoaias 6 mpopyrns. 6. "Eyévero, yciv, év TO vii. 2; iv.
Tpodytevew pe Thy Spacw thy ént BaBudGva, kat eldov Gcod 19; Vii. 2
Gyyedov Se8ofacpevov’ of Kata rhy rdf Sé Tay dyyédwv dv

eldov téte eyh EBderov viv, GNAG TAelova Kal mepiccorépay

elyev S6fav. 7. Kai elev mpds pe’ “Axovody pov, ‘Hoaia vie

"Apas’ ets ToUTo yap dweotdéAny Tod dveveyKat ve ws EBdduov vii. 4, 5.
ovpavod, Eras tdys ra pvornpia Tov Oeod Kal rov Kiptov ris ddEns

kai toy vidy adtod tov dyamyrdy. 8. Kat edppdvOnv mavu tt vii. 6, o.
mpatws édadyoev por. 9. Kal AaBdv pe cdOdws dvijyayev év

TO oTepedpatt tov obpavod. al elBov exet tov cuTavév

nade Coy év TG orepedpart Tov odpavod, kal OédpuBov troddv

wept adrdv, cat dxaracraciay peyddnv’ els yap Tov éva, dpwdLeww X- 31.

wat &Siceivy €Sovrero, rov KaOnevov xaipovros mavy emi rais
xaxonpaylais ravras. 10. Kat eltrov 1H Oeig dyy€hw 7G pret’ pod vii. rr.
Bvt Kopue, tis oti obtos bs xalper emt ro POdve kai 7H ddicig

kat 7G dondvde wohéu@ ; 11. Kal elev mpés pe’ Odk ey Kuptos, viii. 5
GAAS advBoudds cou eipl. obros 8é cori 6 KpaTioas TOG Kdopou, iy, 2,
év xaraBadel éx rod orepedparos rovrov kai els drwdeias Exrémrper iy. 4.
Buddy 6 peddAwy xaraBaivew ee rov odpavay Kai tots dvOpdmos SL?xi, 1(?)
cuvavacrpépeobar kata Tas Hpetépas eiddas, 6 vids rod Ged, viii. 10, 26,
12. Kai wédw dvijyayér pe els rév mprov odpavév, kat eidov éxet vii, 13, 14.
kata 7d péoov Tov odpavod Opdvov, Seftods te kal dpiorepots

€otGtas Oclovs dyyéAous cal Gpvoivras dovyjro wri. 13. vii, 15, 16,
Kat elwov 7G Ocig dyy&Xo 7O Svre per’ epod Tie & tuvos 17.

otros dvamréparerat; Kat elmév pour Obros 6 duvos eis Bdgav

kat Tipsy dvaréprerat Tod KabeLoudvou év TG EBSduw odpavd,

peyddou kal dxaradnrov Oeod. 14. Kal ef6 otras dvijyayév pe vii, 18, 19.
eis Tov Sevrepov obpavdv, kai eiSov exet Opdvov Kard 73 pécov

rod odpavod, Seftods Te Kat dprotepods dowpdrous, ipvoivras


vii. 20.
vii. 24.


(ix. 19.)
iX. 203 vii.
27.

vii. 27.


vii. 25, 28.
vii. 29.


vii. 32, 33.
SL? vii.33.
viii. 16.


vii. ar.


Ix. 4.


ix. 5.


144 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


exeivoy rév péyav xat dxatddywrov Oedv. Kat whetos fy 6 Spvos
év 7O Seutépw obpavd Swép tov mpOrov. 15. Kat perd radra
dvityayéy pe eis Tov Tpirov odpardy, kal eldov Kdxet Opdvov
kara TS péoov rod olpavod Kat mA_Oos dvapiOunrov adyyéhov
kat dpxayyéhwv tuvotvrear exeivov Toy péyav Kal dkatdAnmrov’ Kat
5 tpvos 6 ev te tpire oipavg peilav iv brép robs Aouvois. 16."Ere
3é dvros pou év TS Tpity oUpavg cdoyoduny év éaurg@ Kal eto"
7Apd te Sbvarat yruoOivar Gde tav ev TEKdTH Kdopw ywopevar
épywv ind trav avOpdrav movnpéy Te Kat dyabav 3 17. Kat elev
& Ocios dyyedos 6 pet’ En0d dv" "Eyvav ti edoyiow év rf Siavoig
cov, ‘Hoaia. apes viv Srav yap dvevéyxw oe eis Tov EBSopor
obpavdy, téTe yvdon dxpiBas Ste obBev NavOdver 76 Ociov éx THY
ev ekxelve 7O pOapTd Kéopo ywoprdvev. 18. Kal addy
évityayév pe cis Tov Téraptov obpavey, Kal elSov Kdxel Kara
pécov Tod odpavod Opdvoy, Kal Kix rod Opdvou ayyeor Kai
dpydyyedot Guvoivres ekeivoy rév péyay Kat dxardywrov Kat Tov
vidv airod rév povoyeri, Tov KUptoy nudv "Incotv Xpiordy, 19.
Kat «if obras dvipyayév pe els tov méparov odpavdv, kai eldov
kdxel Opdvov xara 7d pécov rod odpavod Kai whHOos dvapiOyntov
dyyé\ov kal dpxayychov. 20, "Hoay 8¢ eis rév wéprrov obpavdy Kai
trobpéma (Ga dvapeptypéva peta tev dyyéhov, bpvobvra éxeivoy TOV
péyav kai dkatddqrrov, 21. Kat déviyayev pe eis Tov Extov obpavév,
kat obxért nOuvduny tmoorjvar THY AaympéryTa Kal Ta Para’ Kai
epoBnOnv mdvu Kat éwecov ért mpdcwmov, 22. Kat etmrév poe 6
Oeios &yyedos 6 per’ pod dv* “Axovoor, ‘Hoaia mpopijra, vie "Apas"
p} mpookurjoys pyre Gyyédous pire dpxayyédous pire Kupid-
TyTas pate Opdvous, Ews dv eyd cou etw. cal xparjoas pe ek
Tis xeipds évicxvoe Td myeipa TO év enol, 23, Kat dvepyouéver
huav év th EBSSpo odpave Heovoa gwviis ek tav Kéro TepL-
Tropévns kat Neyovons’ “Ews wéte ro mvedpa TS péANov depiy
év capki oixety dvaBatver Ode; Kat pera taira madd iKovea
govis érépas ck trav ava eyotons’ *ApeOtw dvaBaivew 6
Bixatos “Hoatas’ Se yap Kai 6 Opdvos avrov, Hde xal 6 arépavos
avrod, &de kal } dvdmavots aitod éoriv, 24. Kat etwov 10 beip
dyyého Th per” nod vt Adouai cov’ tis éoTw 6 KwAdwv pe
1) avaBatvew, Kal ris dorw 6 emitpémwy por dvaBatvew ;
25. Kat elev pou 6 dyyedos 6 per cuod dv’ “O pév kwddous oe
dvaBaivew Eotw 6 ayyedos 6 épeotas ent tdv uve tov wévte
odpavay, & Sé emitpémwy cor dvaBaive ~otw 6 Kbpios tis


CHAPTER II. 14~37 145


d6£qs, 5 vids rod Bcod rod LGvros, bv kal i8€o0ar Eyes KaTEpXs- ix. 12, 13.
Pevov ek Tév obpavay év TH yi] Kata Tas tpepas exeivas, Toitov ix. 31.
rote mpogkuvygoy Kal Guvycov Kal ddgacov, 26. Kal ds
dvityayey pe cis tov EBSopoy odpavdv fovea ovrijs érépas ix. 6.
Aeyovans pou "Evicyuooy, “Heaia, vie ’Apads, nai dOéas evicyvoer

He TO myedpa Td Aadodv ev cuol. 24, Kal elBov éxet mdvras ix. 7, 8.
Tods Bixaious dd Tod "Addy: “ABed Tov Sixaiov Kal EHO rdv ix. 28,
Bixacov, “ldped rav Sixatov Kad Evdy tov Sixcuov, kat mévras Tod's ix. 9.

€& exelvwv trav Stxatwy yeyevynpévous. 28. Kat eldoy ds
Tpocexivouy, Kai Erecov Kayo pet adrav Kal mpocekdvyca. ix. 28.
kai dvéorqy émi rots médas pov. 29. Kal dre ray detAouermy
mpookiynow dmédaxay, cxdOyro 6 Kipios ex dekiav, Kal mpooKane-

odpevds pe cimév por’ “Axouoov d4, ‘Haata, vié Apds, kat Zoo viii. 11.
cidds ds obdeis Sde tov avOpdmav dvéBy, olde elBev Erepos &

od eles, pANNov Groorpépew eis 7d ZvSupa THs capKds. 30.

Kai mpés rotrous 28axe BiBdiov ev rais xepaiv pov, kat elev por ix. 20.
Acar roiro kat dvdyvott & édoyiow év 7G .tpitw odpavd, dvep- ix. 19, 20.
XGpevos evOdde, kat yrdon Ste ob8ev AavOdver é« Tov ywopevav

Epyav ev exeiva tH Kdopw movmpdv te Kai dyabdy. 31, Kat (vii. 27.)
EhaBov 75 BiBAlov ek ris xetpds adrod Kat dvéyywv" Kal 80d maca ix. 22.
drroypady mavrés dvOparov did aidvos ws alévos fv év adta, Tay Te

dyabéy Kal rdv rovnpay, pexpi kal adray rév évOupjoear. 32. Kat ix. 23.
dvayvous 76 BiBAlov etmov' “Ay Gas, Séomora, ob8éev avOdver dd_

Tav eis éxetvov Tov Kéopov mpaTTopevwy. 33. Kal 26’ obras elev Xi. 35 (viii.
6 xipios mpds pe’ ‘Yadotpede adéis, ‘Hoaia, eis 73 ris capkds cou 1)
evBupa" dei ydp ce Tov THs Lwfs cou xpdvor ev 7h HOaprd kdopp _
TAnpGoa, 34. Kaya EerOnv airod Aéyov' A€omora, ph dodu- viii. 23.
ons pe eis tov kéopoy exetvoy Tov pdratov. 6 dé mddw droxpibeis

cirev* Tlopevou éxeioe’ ol yap 6 Tis Lats cou xpdvos memArpw- xi, 353
TAL, 35. Kai éreca cis ros wddas abrov Seduevos pu) Grootahivat viii. 27.
pe eis tov Kéopov. Kal ere mpoobeis 6 Kiptos elpneey por Ti viii. 23.
kNaies, “Hoaia; ide 6 réros cou, iSe 6 Opdvos aov, ie 5 créhavds

gov, ie kat Ta evBupypatd cou mdvra & mponroipacd oo, 36. ix. a.

Aci ydp ce thy paprupiay év KAnpe Eddov rehécavta dvaBnvat Bde.
mpicovow ydp ce of mapdvopor év piri Eudivy Kai Sixdcoucw CV: It.)
did Kepadijs fos roddv eis BUo. 37. Kal ds raira édéyerd por

kouca Tis puvijs tod peydAou xal emnppdvou Oeod Kat matpds ¥- 7:

700 Kuptou pay ‘Incot Xpiorod, 06 Thy Ségav yd odk ABur|Oqv x. 2.
iSeiv, Aeyovons TE Kuplw pou Kal Xpiorg, 5 KAnOxjoeran ix. 5; x. 7.


L


x. 8
x. 12,


x. 13 (iv.
6,8). (x.8);
xi. 19, 20.
‘K. 14, 15.


x Er,
x. 16.


x. 17, 19.


xX. 20.


ii. x,


ii. 4.


146 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


*noois év 7G Kéopw toute’ 38.”EfeNOe, rékvov, kat KaTd yO
kat’ olpavdy Kal obpaviv jpéya. KataBhon 8& Kai eis Tov
kéopov éxetvov tov bd Tov elSddwv Exmada Kupreudpevov Kat
Tay WpookuvodvTwy aitois, oiTwes ApyicavTd pe Kat elmov’
“Hpets éopev Oeot, kat why fuav odx Zotw dAdos Oeds. 30.
‘Qoaites KataByjon Kat mpds Tov &yyedov Tod adou év
‘lepoucadyp mAjy ews Tod TedeuTigai oe py dwedevon. 40.
Kai gorac év 75 Oavarwliival oe in’ aitav dvoPjon be.
tére Kabhoy éx Sefav pou, Kal mpookuvygoucl ce mdvres
Gyyedor, dpydyyehor, Opdvot, kupidrytes, dpxat, éfouctat, cai
maoat tev olpavey ai Suvdpers, kal yvdoovta. maga: ai ray
otpavéy otpariai Stu ob et KUpLos peT nod Tav érrd odpavav
Tovrev Kal wdons Ths Suvduews. 41. Taira HKovov THs Sdéy5
THs peyddys Aeyodons Te Kupiw pou Kal Xpiorg. kal perd
Taira KaTHAGev 6 KUpios Ex Tol EBSdpou odpavod, Kai HAGev eis
tov Exrov otpardy’ Kael €d6facav, Spvnoay, mpovexivycay macat
T&v ovpavay ai duvdpets roy Kuptov. 42. Kat etdov ds c&p\Gev
6 Kiptos ék rod [ékrov] odpavod, kai HAOev eis tov mréymrov
odpavdy. kei otk eddfacay, ody Turnoav obd€ mpocexivycay'
iv yap % cidda abtol ds H abtav. dyivero yap ev dyyéAos
yyedos, év dpyayyédous dpydyyedos kai év duvduece Sivapis. 43.
Kai otras bipdOev npéua xabefis Kat rods Aotrods odpavots év
TotoiT@ oXjpart, Kal KaTiAGey eis Tov yivov Kal Ovyrdv Kéopov
eidoxia rod mwatpéds, &s adrds pdvos 6 Kiptos OeAnoer.

lii. "Erededrycev 82 "ELexias 6 Bacideds Kal mpocerébn mpds
robs marépas abrod, Kat Mavacays 6 vids airod mapédaBey Thy
Baovdelay abtoG. 2. ‘O d& BaciAeds Mavaccis obk épyhoby
tav évtohGv Tob tmatpds adtod, GAN’ émeddbeto mdvrav. Kat
Gbijkey thy Natpetay tod Oeod Kai emoincey xara 1d OéAnua
abot cidwda xpvoa Kal dpyupa, kal éddrpeucey TO caTava Kat
tots Gyyédous adtoi kat tats Suvdpeow adrod. 3. Kat
eféxdwve mdvra toy olkov Tod watpds adrod ard ris Too Oeod
Aatpeias kal mpookwyceas. kai éddtpeucav 7 SiaBédo xat
Tois dyyéAous abrod pera kal ray BeBnhov Kal dkabdprav ciddrav,
kat érdyOuvOn ev abrois f dappakia Kai 4 mopvela Kal i
enaoBia Kal & KySovopds cai 7d weidos, Kal eSidKovTo
mdvres ot edoe Bas LOvres kara Gedy, 4. Tére obv mpoepijreucev


iii. 3. xAvdwnopéds MS. It is to be observed that the writer
uses éraoidia instead of pavreia,


o


CHAPTERS Il, 37—IIl. 13 147


© a « a
6 péyas “Hoatas wept tis médews “lepoucadthp Aéyor Tade
-. Es
Reyes xdptos 6 Oeds* ‘H wédus arn 7 iryamnpevn Kal ékdexrH
, alee
TwapadoPycerat els xetpas Lahpavaccdp Bacthéws BaSvdavos, i. 14.
kal Mavagonjs 6 Bagheds kal 7 yur) abrod Kal of viol abrod kal iii. 6.
of dpxovres abrod dx Oyjcovras aixudAror eis BaBvddva. 5. Kat
‘ ‘i .
as iikovoev Medxias 6 WevSonpopyrns Taira mpopyrevovros Tod
* a : a
peyddov ‘Hoaiov kai Aéyovros mepi Tis ‘IepovaaAnu Kal Tay év
A * aan i 2 =
aitj KatouKovvtav cimev tH Bactkei Mavacoj 6. Bacrded,
xadrera kat mavu Sewa mpopyteter 6 “Hoaias emt ‘lepovoadtyp iii. 6.
‘
Kai wdcas Tas médets “lovda, Aéywr Sti 7 wéALS adTn mapadoby-
aerat eis xeipas BaBvAdvos, kai Mavacojs 6 Bacideds kal 7
yur) abrod kat of viot adtod Kat mdvres of dpxovres abrov
aixpddaro: dxOjoovrat eis BaSvAGva év wédats Kal yadedypais,
uy © ‘ & ig 2 a nm i
kai orau 6 Bacideds Mavacons Séopios ev TG otk TaY BaBudavior.
4. Tére Gupod modAod kai dpyis wAnoOels 6 BactAeds Mavaco's iii. ra.
dxotcas raira éxéhevoev MeAxiav rov Wevdorpogyrny cuhdaPéobar
A i? « o 4 ld \ ‘ A an
tov péyay “Hoatay, didre mpoedyrevcev Sewd kai yarena emi
‘Iepovcahip. 8. "Hv Sé 6 péyas mpoparys ‘Hoatas dvaxwpijoas ii. 7.
nd ‘lepoucadyp, 81d 73 uy dmopepety adrév épav thy ywopévny
, a
dvopiay év airy Kat doutiav, kal rhy mpookivnow kai Natpetav
tod carovad. Kat dmeOdv éxdOyto dmwévavtTe ByOdeep. 9.
Kéxet 82 Fv dvopia woAdh d6er dvaxwpyoas mad éxeiBer ii. 8.
a ma , c a ~ ,
éxdroev é& Sper tut, Tome fotxe kat xabapg, Bokaton
adiarelrres rév pirdvOpwrov Ody. Kai ob pdvov airéds, GAAG Kai
Mixatas 6 mpodiirys Kat "ApBaKodp kai “lacodp 6 vids adrod 11. 9.
9 7 a 2 a 2
kat “Avvas & yépwy, kat moddot erepoe Tay moTeudvTuw eis
odpavods dvehOetv, 10. "Exeioe ovy Aourdy avehOdvres MeAxias
kai Bexeipas of yrevdorpopirat auvéXaBov tov yiov ‘Hoaiay rév (iii. 12.)
mpopirny, 1. Kal dyaydvres adrov mpds Mavacoiy rév Bacthéa,
* AY 2 ¢. - t bd A 2 Ne. ‘
elev mpas airév' “Hoaia, Stari mpopyrevers rovmpa emt lepovoadnp,
(
kai émi eu kal r& réeva pov; 12. Kai etwev 6 péyas mpopnrns
« + a a. ~ 2 4 9 ? y ,
Heaias r@ Mavacoy BaaiAeu, ¢y@ ob mpodntréva movnpa rept
tis médews tavrns, GANG Ta péAdovra airf cupBaivety Aadd.
13. Zi yap Kipios 6 Beds pou kal & dyamnrés adrod vids Kat i. 7.
75 TveGpa adrod Td Aadody ev pol, dre adry H modus fj KaAAoTH
kai peydAn mapadobycetat els xelpas dvOpdmev duapraddy cai ii. 14.
dvaday 31d ras dvopias Tod Aaod rod Karouxodvtos ev airy, Kal Ge ili. 6.


iii, 6. yadatdypus MS, 8 éed&70 MS. 13, dmevév MS.
La


v. IT.
v. I, 2, 3.


v.93; i. 7.


iii. 6.


148 ASCENSION OF ISAIAH


8é, Backed Mavaccy, év wéSaig Kal yadedypats dmdgovew
aixpddwrop cis BaBvddva. 14. Tére Oupabeis opddpa 6 Bacideds


_Mavacoys ep ols ifeovoev mpois pnuaow éxéhevocey mapevdd


apicOivat rév dyov ‘Hoaiav év mpiwve otdypd. 15. Kat rovrov
éy rdxet ywouevov Kai mpifouevou adrod enti Spas txavds, od®
ddas Frreto adrod 6 cidnpos. 16. Tdre Aéyet 6 dyos ‘Hoaias 6
mpopatys 76 Mavacaf Baotded, Zon cldds Sri eyo ev mplwn
Evrive ékAnpoOny mpioOqva, kal Gdws todo yevérOar ddvvarov.
tére 6 Baoweds Mavacois mpocéragey ev mpiwn gvdive
mprcOijvor adtév. 17. Kat mpilopdvou adrod éorn MeAxlas 6
yevdorpopytns Kata mpdowmoy attod Aéywy' Eime dre ovk
érpogpyrevoa taira repli ‘lepovoaAnp, kat dpOncovrar dad cod ai
Bdoavor abrat, 18. Kat eivev ait 6 dywos ‘Hoaias’ Karddepd
got, Medyia pevdorpopira, diaBore’ Zi yap Kvpwos 6 Beds pov
kat bi 7d mvedpa a’rod Td Nadody ev epol, dre ‘epovoadnp
airn  peyddn médts Kal evpixwpos Tédeov epnpwljcetar, Kal
Mavacots Kal ra réxva adrod Kal 9 yur) avrod Kal of dpxovres
atrod kal 6 dads THs wédews TavTHS aiypddwro. dyOnoovra év
BaBvAGu, 19. Kai raira elroy 6 paxdpios “Hoaias émpicoy
abtav Six mpion Evdrivg.


iii, 13. yaAaudypars MS. 16, éxAnpwén MS.


INDEX I


Passages from the Scriptures and other ancient books directly
connected or closely parallel with the Text.


Exopvs. ASCENSION OF 1 THESSALONI- ASCENSION OF
TsataH. ANS. IsartaH.
xxiii. 20. ili. 9. iii. 13. iv. 16.
Jos. 2 THESSALONI-
x. 19. iv. 18. one
\ i, 7. iv. 15.
Tsaran. ii. 4. iv. 6.
i. 10. iii. 10,
vi. 1. iii. 9. a CORT ESAS: ;
xiii. 3. iv. 19. ii. 9. (xi. 34 G?).
lii. 13. iv. 21.
a . 2 CORINTHIANS.
Ivii. 15. vi. 8, x, 6. oe iy. x6.
2 Kines. 1 Trmorny.
cre ii, 6. iv. 12. iii. 21.
2 GampNILEs . 1 PETER.
es 6. Me 5: ili. 22. i. 3.
xxxili. 11. iii. 6.
xxxili, 18. ii. 6. REVELATION.
Matruew. ii, 1. iii. 15.
ae xiii. 14. iv. 11.
xii, 18 (My abe, £4) ye ith
‘ xix. Io. viii. 5.
Beloved). i. 4. ears ae
XV. 3. iv. 3. TR B02 ead
MAINS ED: iif. 18. Ascension or — Ienattvs.
Isaran. Ad Ephes.
LUKE. . , és
xii, 37. iv. 16. xi. 16. xix.
PRorEVANGELI-
JouN. um Lacost.
i. 16, 18. (vii. 37 G3 ; .
viii. 25 G*). xi. 3,4, 11. ix. 1,3,XV. 4,
xvi. 1. ii. 4. XX. 4.


L 3


150 INDEX I


Ascension oF JusTIN Martyr. ASCENSION oF Rest or Worps
Isaran. Dial. c. Tryph. TsalaH. or Barucn.
Vv. I. exx. iii. 9. ix. 20.

iii, 17-18. ix. 18.
Aorus Perri
VERCELLENSES. TERTULLIAN.
xi. 14. / xxiv. v. 14. De Pat. 14.


Note 1. For references to later writers see ‘Ambrose,’ ‘ Epi-
phanius,’ ‘Jerome,’ ‘Origen’ in Index IT.

Note 2. From the echoes of the New Testament in the Testa-
ment of Hezekiah we may safely conclude that the writer of the
latter was acquainted with Matthew, Luke, and 2 Corinthians,
and probably with 2 Thessaloniansand Revelation. The writer
of the Vision of Isaiah was acquainted with Revelation or some
portion of it.


INDEX II


Names and Subjects.


Abel (ix. 8, 28, G").

Actus Petri Vercellenses, pp.
xxiii, xxxii, xliv, 77.

Adam (ix. 7, 28, G').

Advent, the Second, iii. 23,
26,

Aguarén, corrupt for Gomor-
rha, ii. 16.

Ahab, ii. 12, 13.

Ahaziah, ii. 13, 14, 15, 16.

Ahriman, p. xlviii.

Alagar Zagar=Salmanassar,
iii. a.

Amida (=Imlah), ii. 12.

Ambrose referred to or quoted,
pp. liv, 40, 78.

Amos, iv. 22.

Amoz, i. 2; ii. 7 ; vi. 1; xi. 1, 34.

Ananias, i ii. 9; vi. 7.

ange - the Christian Church,


kage of the Holy Spirit, iii.
16; vil. 23; ix. 36; xi. 33.
Angel of the Spirit, iv. 21; ix.
39, 40; X. 4; xi.4.

Angel of lawlessness, ii. 4.

— death, ix. 16; x. 14.

— Sheol, xi. 19.

— the moon, iv. 18.

— the sun, iv. 18.

Antichrist, the, iv. 2-14.

Antichrist Myth, the, pp. lii-lv.

Antichrist Myth, Fusion of the,
with that of Beliar, pp. lxi-
Ixv.


Antichrist Myth, Fusion of the,
with that of Nero redivivus,
pp. lxv-lxvii.

Antichrist Myth, Fusion of the,
with both the Beliar and
Neronic myths, pp. Ixvii-
lxxiii.

Archontici, pp. xi, xliv.

Asaph, iv. 21; vi. 17.


Baal, ii. 12.

Balchira : see ‘ Belchira.’

Bartholomew, Questions of,
quoted, p. lvi.

Bartlet, Vernon, p. xxxvi.

Baruch, Apoc. of, p. liv.

— Rest of Words ‘of, quoted on
iii. 17.

Basset, p. xvii.

Beer, pp. xviii, xxxvi sq., xlix.

Belchira, ii. 5, 12 (note), 16
(note) ; iii, 1, 6, 12; v. 2, 3,
4, 5, 12, 15.

Beliar, i. 8 (note), 9; ii. 4; iii, 11,
13; lv. 2,14, 16, 18; v. i. 15.

— Myth, the, W-Ivii. See
‘ Antichrist Myth’ ; also note
on p. 140.

Beloved, Tehe, p. xlii; i. 4
(note), 5, 7, 13; ili. 13, 17,
18; iv. 3, 6, 9, 18, 22; v.15;
vii. 17, 23; Viil. 18, 25 ; ix. 12.
See note on p. 140.

Beloved, Ascension of the, i, 5 ;
iii, 18 5 ix. 17; xi. 22.


152


Beloved, Crucifixion of the, iii.
13; ix. 143 Xi. 19, 20.

Beloved, Descent of the (viii.
26, G'), ix. 12-13; x. 8, 17-


31.
Beloved, Going forth of the,


i, 5.

Beloved, Persecution of the, i.
55 iii. 13.

Beloved, Resurrection on the
third day of the, iii, 16, 18;
ix, 16-17 ; xi, 21,

Beloved, Transformation of
the, i. 5; iii. 13 (viii. 10, G).

Benjamin, iii. 6, 11.

Bethlehem, ii. 7, 8, 12; iii. 1,
5; Xi. 2, 12.

Bissell, p. xxxv.

Bleek, p. xxxv.

Bonwetsch, pp. xix, xxiv, xxv,
Ivi, 98.

Book in which the deeds of men
were written, ix. 22.

Bousset, pp. li, lix, 1xi, lxiii,
lxix, 7, 27, 32.


Cathari, p. xi.

Cedrenus referred to or quoted,
pp. xiii, 2, 29.

Chenaan, ii. 12.

Cheyne, pp. liv sq., 38.

Christ (ix. 5, 12-13 ; x. 7, G').

Chronicon Paschale quoted on
ii. 12,

Clemen, pp. XxxV sq., XxxvViii,
12, 29.

Cross, Belief in the, iii. 18 (ix.
26, G').

Crowns, the reward of the
righteous, vii. 22; viii. 26;
ix. 10-13, 18, 24, 25; xi. qo.


Dahaka, p. xlviii.

Daniel, iv. 22.

Darmesteter, p. xlvii.

David, the son of Jesse, iv. 2t ;
x1. 2

Deane, p. Xxxv.


Dillmann, pp. xvi sq., xviii,


INDEX II


XXXV, XXXvii sq., xl, 14, 15,


29, 32,40.
Docetism, p. xlix.


Elders (= Presbyters), iii. 24.
Elect One, the (viii. 7, G").
Elijah, ii. 14.0

Engelhardt, p. xxxiv.

Enoch (ix. 9, G*).


| — the Slavonic, referred to


or quoted, pp. xlix, lvi, 34.
Epiphanius referred to or
quoted, pp. xiii, xliv, 67.

Ethan the Israelite, iv. 21.

Eusebius quoted, 31.

Euthymius Zigabenus quoted,
p. xi.

Ewald, pp. xxxv sq.

Ezra, Fourth, quoted, pp. liv,
26, 29.


Father, the, the First Person of
the Trinity, viii. 18 (vii. 8 ;
x. 6, 7, G4),

Firmament, the abode of Beliar
or Satan, iv. 2; vii. 9-12;
X. 29.

Flight of believers before the
Antichrist, iv. 13.


Gabriel, iii. 16.

Galgala, vi. 1, 3.

Galilee, xi. 15. ;

Garments=spiritual bodies of
the blessed, iv. 16; vii. 22;
viii. 14, 26; ix. 9, 17, 24-26;
xi. qo.

Gebhardt, O. von, pp. xxvii sq.,
xxxvii,

Gehenna, i. 3; iv. 14.

Gesenius, pp. xxxiv, 14.

Gfrérer, pp. xvii, xxxiv.

Gieseler, pp. xvili, xxxiv.

perc One, the, ix. 33 (x.
2, G4),

Glory, the Great, x. 16; xi. 32.

God of that world, ix. 14 (x.
12, G4).


INDEX II


Gomorrha, ii. 16; iii. ro.

Greek Legend, the, based on the
Ascension, Pp. XX sqq., xxvi
8qq., XXXViisq. ,&e., 140-148.

eerie pp. xxviii, xxix, 15,


Guilas> formed to keep be-
lievers ready for the Second
Advent, iv. 9, 13.

Gunkel, p. li.


Habakkuk, ii. 9; iv. 22.

Hades. See Sheol (ix. 15, 8 L’).

Haggai, iv. 22.

Haguel (x. 8, G').

Harnack, pp. xxxv, XxxVii,
lxx sqq.

Heaven, the first, vii. 13-17;
xX. 27.

— the second, vii. 18-23; x.
25, 26.

— the third, vii.
X. 23, 24.

— the fourth, vii. 28-31; x. 21.

— the fifth, vii. 32-37; x. 20.

— air of the sixth, viii. 1-15.

— the sixth, viii. 15-28; ix. 4;
X. 17, 19.

— air of the seventh, ix. 1-5.

— the seventh, ili. 13; iv. 14,
16; vi. 133 Vii. 17, 213 viii. b
15, 25; ix.6sqq. ; X. 17; Xi.
40.

Reavers; the aye! p. xlix.

Hezekiah, i. 1, 6, 7, 10, 12, 135
ii. a, 3 (2 corrupt); iii. 3, 4,
53 V. 15, 16; vi. 1,3, 16 (vii.
I, viii. 24, a); xi. 36, 42.

— Testament of (a lost work


24-27 ; ix. 19;


153


Hosea, iv. 22.
Hunt, pp. xxviii, xxix, 15,
17, 19.


Ignatius referred to or quoted,
pp. xxili, xxxii, 77.

Ijéaqém (= Joah), vi. 17.

Image of Antichrist set up,
iv. 11.

Isaiah, L 2, 5, 7, 1%, 13; ii.
7; lil. 1,6, 8-10, rasq. ; v.

1-4, 71-9, 11, 14 8q.; Vi. 1,
3B, 58Q-, 14-163 vil. 1; ix.
2; xi. I, 34, 36, 39; 43.

Isaiah, Ascension of, its various
titles, pp. xii-xiv.

— Ascension of, its various
constituents, pp. xxxvi-
xliii. (see ‘Martyrdom of
Isaiah,’ ‘Testament of Heze-
kiah,’ ‘ Vision of Isaiah’).

— Ascension of, its various
constituents, their dates,
pp. xliv-xlv, lxxi-lxxii, 30,
31 (notes).

— Ascension Of;
Version of, pp.
83-139.

— Ascension of, EthiopicVersion,
Texts of Laurence and Dill-
mann, pp. xvi-xvii.-

— Ascension of, Greek Text of,
pp. xxviii-xxxi, 84-95.

— Ascension of, Greek Text oi,
edited by Grenfell and
Hunt, pp. xxviii-xxix.

— Ascension of, Latin Versions
of, pp. xviii-xxi, 87-92,
102-108, 102-139.

—A ion of, Slavonic Ver-


Ethiopic
xiv-xvi,


incorporated in the Ascen-
sion=ii. 13°—iv. 18), pp. xii
sqq., xxxiii, xlii sqq., lxix
8qq-, 2, 29-31 (notes), 150.
Hieracas, pp. xi, xliv, 67.
High, the Most, vi. 8 ; vii. 23 ;
x. 6, 7.
Hoffmann, p. xxxiv.
Holtzmann, p. 1xiii.
Holy One, the, vi. 8.


sion of, pp. xxiv-xxvii.

— Ascension of,SlavonicVersion,
Bonwetsch’s Latin transla-
tion of, 102-139.

— Ascension of, Value of, for
history of religious thought,
pp. xlix-li.

Isaiah, Martyrdom of (a lost
work incorporated in the


154


Ascension =i. 1, 2%, 6°
13°; ii. 1-8, ii. ro-iii. 12;
v. 1°14), pp. xii, xxxiii, xl-
xlii, xliv.

Isaiah, Martyrdom of, Oriental
influences apparent in, pp.
xlv-xlix.

— Vision of (an originally
independent work incorpo-
rated in the Ascension = vi-
xi. 40), pp. xii, xiii, xxxiii,
xlii-xlv.

Israel, iii. 7.


Jalerjas, ii. 15.
' Jellinek, p. xxxv.

Jerome referred to or quoted
on iii. 10; xi. 34.

Jerusalem, i. 9; ii. 4, 7; iii. 1,
4, 6, 10; xi. 18, 20,

Jesus (ix. 5; x. 7, G').

Joel, ii. 9, 15 (corrupt for
Israel ?), iv. 22; vi. 7.

John of Anathoth, ii, 5.

Jolowicz, p. xvii.

Jonah, iv. 22.

Josab, i. 2, 6; ii.g; vi. 1, 7,16
(173 vii. t viii. 24, G').

Joseph, the husband of the
Virgin, xi. 2-4, 7, 10.

— the Just, iv. 22.

Josephus quoted on ii. 14.

Jubilees quoted on i. 8.

Judah, iii. 7, 11.

— cities of, iii. 6.

Judgement of the world, iv. 18;
xX, 12,

Justin Martyr referred to or
quoted, pp. xliv, xlvi, 41.


Korah, iv. 21.
Kozak, p. xxv.


Langen, p. xxxv.

Larionoff, p. xlvii.

Laurence, pp. xvi, xvii, xxxiv.

Leba Nasr (= Salmanassar),
ii, 14.

Licke, pp. xxxiv. 28, 32, 63.


INDEX II


Mai, pp. xviii, xxi, xxx.

Malachi, iv. 22,

Malchira, i. 8.

Manasseh, i. 1, 7-9, 11, 12 ;
ii. 1, 2, 4, 53 lil. 1, 10, 11 5 v.
1, 4, 8, 15 5 Xi. 41, 43.

Marshall, 39.

Mary the Virgin, xi. 2, 4, 5, 7,
8, 13.

Matanbichis, ii. 4.

Méchémbéchis, v. 3.

Medes, iii. 2.

Mercati, p. xix.

Micah, iv. 22.

Micaiah, ii. 9, 13, 16; vi. 7, 17
(vii. 1; viii..24, G").

Michael, iii. 16 (ix. 23, 29, 42 in
SL’).

Milchiras, v. 8 note.

Mohl, p. xlviii.

Moneta quoted, p. xi.

Moses, iii. 8, 9.

Movers-Kaulen, p. xxxiv.


Nahun, iv. 22.

Nazareth (xi. 17, G!).

Nero referred to, iv. 2.

Neronic Myth, pp. lvii-Ixi
(see ‘ Antichrist Myth’).

Nitzsch, p. xxxiv.


Obadiah, iv. 22,

Only-begotten, the (vii. 37 G',
viii. 7 in 8, viii. 25 in S L?).

Ophites, the, pp. xxxii, 63.

Opus Imperfectum referred to
oe quoted, pp. xl-xli, xliv,

9.

Oracles, Sibylline quoted, pp.
lix-lx, lxviii, lxxi, 7, 27.

Origen referred to or quoted,
pp. xii, xiii, xliv, xlvi-xlvii,
J, 17.


Patriarchs, Testaments of the
XII, quoted or referred to,
pp. lvi, 7.

Peter, Martyrdom of, referred
to, iv. 3.


INDEX II


Philo, quoted, 27.

Popov, p. xxv.

Prince of this world, i. 3.

Prophets, Disappearance of the,
iil, 27.

Protevangelium Iacobi quoted
or referred to, pp. xxiii,
xxxii, xliv, 75, 76.

Psalms of Solomon quoted, 33.


Renan, p. xxxv.

Resurrection, Doctrine of the,
pp. 1-li.

Robinson, Canon, pp. xxxvi,
3 (note).

Ruler of this world, ii. 4.


Samaria, ii. 13, 14 ; ili. 2.

Sammael, i. 8, 11; ii. 1; iii. 13;
v. 15, 16 (vii. 9, G'), xi. 41.
See note on p. 140.

Samnas, i. 53; vi. 17.

Satan, il. 2, 7; vii. 9 (xi. 23, G4),
xi. 41, 43.

Schmiedel, p. Lxii.

Schiirer, pp. xxxvi, xxxvii, xl.

Schwab, p. xlvi.

Seth (ix. 28, G').

Sheol, x. 8 (10) (xi. 19, G').

Shepherds (= bishops ?), iii.
24.

Sidon, v. 13.

Sodom, iii. 10.

Solomon, iv. 21.

Son of Man, One like the, pp.
xxiv, 1 (xi. 1 of S L*).

Souls rescued from. Hades,
ix, 16.

Spirit, the Holy, iii. 19, 26;
vi. 6, 8, 10; viii. 18; x. 6;
xi. 40.

Stokes, p. xxxv.


pa


155


Suetonius referred to or quot-
ed, pp. vii, Iviii, 27.


Tabari, p. xlviii.

Tacitus referred to or quoted,
pp. Ivii, Iviii, lix.

Talmud quoted on i. 8-12.

Tazon (= Gozan), iii. 2.

Teaching of the Twelve, iii, 13,
ar.

Tebon, ii. 14.

Thomson, p. xxxv.

Throne (= angel), vii. 14 (see
note).

Thrones = rewards of the right-
eous, Vii. 22; viii. 26; ix, 10-
13, 18, 24, 25; xi. 4o.

Tobia, ii. 5.

Tribes, nine and a half, iii. a.

Trinity, peculiar doctrine of
the, p. 1.

Turner, pp. xix. 89.

Twelve Disciples or Apostles,
the, iii. 13, 14, 17, 213 iv. 3
(xi. 22, G').

Tyre, v. 13.

Valentinians, 63.


Weber’s Jiidische Theologie, 6.
World, king of this, iv. 2.

— prince of this, i. 3.

— ruler of this, ii, 4; x. 29.


Years, three and a half, rule
of Antichrist, iv. 1a.


Zadok, ii. 5.

Zahn, pp. lix, 81.
Zechariah, iv. 22.
Zedekiah, ii. 12, 13, 16.
Zeller, pp. xxxvi, lxx.
Zephaniah, iv. 22.
Zockler, p. XXxv.
Zohak, p. xlviii.


OXFORD: HORACE HART
PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY


Now sneye
RE


ca a
ae
eee
Ee


esiengvemnenezapenaairensiane


é
e2
a
2
&
:


woniense
