I


1

i

I


i
j


I

I

i
I

I


FACTS  IN  CLAIRVOYANCE.


1


*


FACTS  IN  CLAIRVOYANCE,


EXTRACTED  FROM  THE  ZOIST.


WITH

OBSERVATIONS  ON  MESMERISM,

AND  ITS

APPLICATION  TO  THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  MEDICINE,

AND  TO

THE  CURE  OF  DISEASE.


BY

JOHN  ASHBURNER,  M.D.


LONDON:
H.  BAILLIERE,  219,  REGENT  STREET.

1848.


LONDON  :

WALTON  AND  MITCHELL,  PRINTERS,  WARDOUR  STREET,  OXFORD  STREET.


FACTS  IN  CLAIRVOYANCE,

EXTRACTED  FROM  THE  ZOIST.


"  Drs.  Winslow,  Browning,  Hodgkin,  and  other  medical  gentlemen,  were  then  examined
as  to  the  present  state  of  mind  of  the  alleged  lanatics,  and  agreed  that  they  were  insane,  and
incapable  of  managing  their  affairs.  On  being  cross-examined  by  Mr.  Miller,  several  ad-
mitted that  there  was  no  unsoundness  of  mind  except  as  to  the  above-mentioned  delusions.
Dr.  Hodgkin  said,  'A  person  who  believed  that  any  one  under  the  influence  of  mesmerism
could  read  a  hook  in  the  next  room,  would  be  labouring  under  a  delusion,  although  he  might  be
able  to  take  care  of  himself  and  property.'  " — Extract  from  a  Newspaper.


"  Mr.  Macaulay.  You  mentioned  as  a  remarkable  instance  that  a  person  of  great  rank
in  Ihe  state  was  a  patron  of  the  mesmeric  hospital. — Dr.  Seymour.  Yes.  I  have  seen  a  pro-
posal going  round  with  his  name  at  the  end  of  it.

"  Mr.  M.  Do  you  conceive  that  in  patronizing  the  mesmeric  hospital,  he  shewed  a  dis-
regard to  the  College  of  Physicians? — Dr.  S.  I  think  he  shewed  a  great  disregard  to  our
acquirements,  to  common  sense,  and  to  everything  else  !

"  Mr.  M.  Is  not  the  principal  of  the  mesmeric  hospital  a  fellow  of  the  Royal  College  of
Physicians'? — Dr.  S.  That  I  cannot  help.  He  became  a  fellow  before  he  took  up  his  apos-
tolic mission.

"  Mr.  M.  Has  he  been  allowed  by  the  college  to  make  a  public  appearance  upon  an
occasion  of  great  interest?* — Dr.  H.  He  was  not  passed  over  :  that  was  all.  1  think  it  was  a
bad  measure,  but  I  cannot  help  it."  (Report  from  the  Select  Committee  on  Medical  Registra-
tion ;  together  with  the  Minutes  of  Evidence,  pp.  1300 — 1303.)


"  There  are  more  things  in  heaven  and  earth,  Horatio,  than  are  dreamt  of  in  your  phi-
losophy."—iS'Aaiespere.  1.


Physicians  who  know  little  of  metaphysics^ — almost  nothing
of  the  physical  facts  relating  to  the  philosophy  of  mind ;  who
are  grossly  ignorant  of  the  splendid  truths  developed  by
the  brilliant  discoveries  of  Gall, — many  of  them^  perhaps,
unable  to  appreciate  the  knowledge  of  these  from  the  habits
of  illogical  reflection  in  which  they  indulge,  or  may  be  from  a
deficiency  in  the  organization  of  their  brains,  continue  to
chatter  before  courts  of  justice,  and  before  committees  of  the
legislature,  on  subjects  which  they  do  not  understand,  and

*  Dr,  Elliotson's  delivery  of  the  Harveian  Oration.

A


2


FACTS  IN  CLAIRVOYANCE,


wLich  should  be  studied  and  comprehended,  in  some  ele-
mentary fashion  at  least,  before  they  are  ventured  upon  in
public.  Dr.  Hodgkin  cannot  be  ignorant  of  the  existence
of  the  quarterly  publication  issuing  from  No.  219,  Regent
Street,  entitled  The  Zoist.  As  a  physician,  he  ought  not  to
be  ignorant  that  many  things  important  to  the  best  interests
of  humanity  are  to  be  found  in  that  work.  No  physician
should  practice  his  profession  who  is  ignorant  of  the  facts
contained  in  Petetin's  book  on  Animal  Electricity.  The
diflPerent  works  of  Mesmer,  De  Puysegur,  Tardy  de  Mon-
travel,  Foissac,  Deleuze,  Mialle,  Townshend,  Colquhoun,
Reichenbach,  not  to  speak  of  the  Harveian  Oration  of
Elliotson,  should  have  had  some  attentive  consideration,
before  a  man  ventures  to  commit  himself  solemnly  in  a  court
of  justice,  or  before  an  assembly  of  members  of  the  House
of  Commons  on  the  subjects  on  which  these  persons  have
recorded  most  important  truths.  To  say,  as  some  physicians
have  said,  that  they  will  not  go  to  school  again,  is  to  ac-
knowledge that  having  been  negligent  in  learning ;  having
omitted  to  acquire  knowledge,  they  yet  claim  to  practice  on
a  par  with  those  who  have  the  knowledge.  Being  ignorant
themselves,  they  will  brand  those  as  quacks  who  know  more
than  they  do.  What  is  a  quack,  in  the  common  acceptation
of  the  term,  but  a  doctor  ignorant  of  that  which  he  professes
to  practice  ?  And  men  will  pretend  to  talk  of  their  acquaint-
ance with  diseases  of  the  mind,  while  yet  they  know  nothing
of  mesmerism !

Before  an  opinion  is  hazarded  in  a  solemn  court  of  justice
concerning  the  views  or  the  belief,  on  any  of  the  physical
phenomena  of  nature,  entertained  by  contemporary  phy-
sicians, a  man  should  have  made  himself  master,  at  least,  of
the  description  of  evidence  they  can  adduce  in  favour  of
facts  apparently  improbable  to  narrow  intellects.  The  pro-
position is  quite  correct  that  the  truth,  having  been  esta-
blished by  consecutive  series  of  facts  to  the  satisfaction
of  severely  enquiring  minds,  should  be  regarded  with  some
respect  by  all  advanced  and  philosophical  thinkers.  It  is
quite  impossible,  without  some  great  deficiency  of  intellect,
that  any  man  or  set  of  men  having,  with  due  philosophic
humility,  examined  the  facts  that  have  been  received  as  truths
by  persons  with  intellectual  cerebral  organs  of  more  than
average  size  and  activity,  can  treat  them  with  contempt  or
even  with  want  of  ordinary  attention.  When  we  hear  of
men  exposing  themselves  before  courts  of  justice,  or  before
committees  of  the  House  of  Commons,  by  attempting  to  de-
preciate the  intellects  of  those  who  study  mesmerism,  and


WITH  OBSERVATIONS  ON  MESMERISM.


3


who  believe  in  the  existence  of  the  occult  phenomena  known
now  to  thousands  of  persons  in  all  quarters  of  the  globe,  may
we  not  pity  them  for  the  absence  of  that  self-control  which
allows  of  a  silly  exhibition  of  ignorance,  conceit,  and  arro-
gance. Poor  Dr.  Seymour's  large  organs  of  Self-esteem  and
Love  of  Approbation  overcame  his  wisdom,  albeit  not  over-
abundant, if  the  size  of  his  forehead  be  examined  for  intel-
lectual power,  when  he  appeared  as  a  champion  for  the  vast
acquirements  of  those  who  despise  that  knowledge  which  they
refuse  to  study.  His  answer  on  the  "  disregard  that  a  person
of  great  rank  in  the  state  (simply  by  advocating  mesmerism)
shewed  to  the  acquirements  of  the  College  of  Physicians,  to
common  sense,  and  to  everything  else  !"  evinces  the  confusion
of  intellect, — the  impertinent  and  inordinate  vanity  that  cha-
racterizes low  mental  power  with  large  posterior  parietal  deve-
lopment. Dr.  Hodgkin's  reputation  will  not  be  increased,
among  reflecting  men,  by  his  classing  the  phenomena  of  clair-
voyance among  delusions.  May  be,  he,  like  some  other
medical  practitioners,  may  assume  that  it  is  competent  for
him  to  say  what  is  and  what  is  not  in  the  course  of  nature, —
that  the  Almighty  has  it  not  in  his  power  to  shew  us  facts
which  may  militate  against  the  preconceived,  the  prejudged
convictions  of  what  is  called  an  accomplished  physician,  proud
of  his  own  acquirements.  Either  the  phenomena  of  clairvoy-
ance are  in  the  course  of  nature, — happen  and  fall  out  into
the  light  of  this  world  by  God's  permission  and  will,  for  they
are  truths, — or  the  physicians  who  declare  them  to  be  against
the  course  of  nature,  deny  to  him  the  power  of  bringing  to
pass  things  which  are  daily  existent,  and  are  proved  to  be
truths  by  those  who  humbly  and  diligently  seek  for  them.
The  god  of  these  prejudging  physicians  is  but  an  idol!  and
they  are  idol-worshippers.  They  would  have  God's  will  bend
to  their  limited  determinations,  and  are  angry  at  the  truth  of
clairvoyance,  as  those  sailors  were  angry  with  their  deity,  an
idol  whom  they  whipped  and  threw  overboard  because  their
prayers  to  him  did  not  succeed  in  securing  propitious  weather.
Their  carpenter  could  make  them  a  new  god, — but  Dr.  Hodg-
kin's  carpenter  cannot  construct  for  him  a  deity  who  shall  get
rid  of  the  Almighty's  will,  that  the  truths  of  clairvoyance  are
as  firmly  established — are  as  fully  correct — as  the  truths  re-
lating to  the  diurnal  changes  which  it  has  pleased  that  Being
to  ordain.

And  whose  is  the  right  to  declare  his  brother  a  lunatic  for
believing  in  such  truths  ? Is  it  Dr.  Hodgkin's  ?

If  religion  or  philosophy  can  teach  him  humility,  he  would
do  well  to  study  The  Zoist ! He  would  do  well  to  learn  what

A  3


4


FACTS  IN  CLAIRVOYANCE,


Gall  has  written  !  .  He  would  do  well  to  enquire  practically
about  mesmerism,  which  would  teach  him  how  valuable  was
that  knowledge  which  Gall  obtained  from  the  book  of  nature,
and  which  that  gifted  man  threw  out  for  the  benefit  of  the
world,  before  he  could  be  allowed  to  know  through  mesmerism
of  the  almost  mathematical  demonstration  that  all  he  had  said
on  the  functions  of ,  the  brain  and  nerves  was  absolute  truth  !
Above  all.  Dr.  Hodgkin  would  do  well  to  find  out  that  by  the
aid  of  mesmerism  he  may  be  enabled  to  understand  far  more
than  he  knows  relating  to  the  subject  of  delusions,  and  by
God's  blessing  to  a  physician, — the  truly  humble  mind  of  the
real  philosopher, — to  cure  mental  diseases.

Good  heaven !  that  men  professing  to  practice  among
their  fellow-beings  afflicted  with  lunacy  should  be  arrogantly
ignorant  of  mesmerism  !  No  man  can  do  justice  to  his  fellow-
man,  as  a  medical  practitioner,  while  he  remains  ignorant  of
mesmeric  science  !  If  he  have  common  powers  of  reflection,
the  facts  in  The  Zoist  will  teach  him  that  new  things  are  ap-
pearing which  must  change  the  whole  practice  of  physic;
that  the  polarities  of  crystals  lead  to  reflections  on  the  princi-
ples involved  in  the  modus  operandi  of  all  the  substances  era-
ployed  in  medical  art ;  that  the  analogies  between  mesmerism
and  electricity  are  so  close  as  to  demonstrate  the  gross  igno-
rance and  absolute  folly  of  deriding  the  facts  which  belong  to
these  twin-sister  sciences.  Sneers  and  boastings  of  acquire-
ments are  not  the  class  of  arguments  to  make  converts  in  these
days,  and  the  votaries  of  truth  fear  not  the  fool's  weapon  of
ridicule.  For  myself,  notwithstanding  the  position  assigned
to  me  by  Dr.  Hodgkin  in  the  category  of  the  "  deluded,"  I
will  shew  that  I  am  a  firm  believer  in  clairvoyance  by  a
statement  of  facts,  which,  I  doubt  not,  will  be  interesting
to  the  readers  of  The  Zoist.


On  Saturday,  1.2th  February,  1848,  Major  Buckley,  well
known  as  an  ardent  and  powerful  mesmeriser,  and  among
his  brother  officers  as  possessing  a  high  character  for  truth-
fulness and  integrity,  brought  to  my  house,  at  half  past  eight
o'clock  in  the  evening,  two  young  women  who  had  arrived
at  Paddington,  about  three  hours  before,  from  Cheltenham.
The  one,  A.  B.,  aged  26  years,  is  of  a  shght  figure,  above
the  middle  height,  of  a  nervo-lymphatic  temperament,  with
dark  hair  and  grey  eyes.  It  appeared  that  she  had  been
mesmerised  occasionally  since  the  27th  December,  1846.
She  works  as  a  dress  maker,  is  a  person  of  excellent  cha-
racter, was  formerly  said  to  be  consumptive  and  delicate,
but  has  latterly  enjoyed  good  health,  notwithstanding  very


WITH  OBSERVATIONS  ON  MESMERISM.


5


assiduous  attention  to  her  occupations,  which  sometimes
obhge  her  to  sit  up  at  her  needle  till  very  late  in  the  dark
hours  of  night.

The  other,  E.  L.,  is  21  years  of  age.  She  is  slightly  em-
bonpoint, of  middle  stature,  lymphatic  temperament,  with
dark  hair,  hazel  eyes,  of  most  interesting  expression.  She
has  been  mesmerised  occasionally  for  three  years.  She  is  a
dress  maker,  and  the  intimate  friend  and  companion  of  A.  B.
In  her  feelings  she  is  more  sensitive  than  her  friend.  Both
have  amiable  cerebral  developments.  A,  B.  has  better  Con-
structiveness,  Size,  Individuality,  Music,  Time,  and  Mirth  ;
but  as  a  whole,  the  head  of  E.  L.  indicates  Causality,  Com-
parison, Colour,  and  other  organs  of  taste  and  judgment,
better  than  that  of  her  friend.  Her  head  is  larger.  Both  are
well  formed  for  affection  and  the  social  feelings  of  our  nature.
Both  have  a  delicacy  of  nervous  fibre  that  produces  a  highly
sensitive  condition  of  mind.  Each  is  susceptible, — both  are
impressionable.  The  phenomena  exhibited  by  these  young
women  were  to  me  most  extraordinary.  I  had  corresponded
with  Major  Buckley  on  their  cases  long  before  I  saw  them,
and  had  proposed  that  a  committee  should  be  appointed
to  examine  into  the  facts  so  often  alleged  to  have  been  com-
pleted by  these  young  women.  The  objection  to  such  a
committee  exists  in  the  truths,  elicited  by  much  experience,
concerning  the  utter  failure  of  the  phenomena  in  the  pre-
sence of  severely  doubting  minds.  It  would  seem  as  if  the
fluid  emitted  by  the  brains  of  persons,  who  are  severely — and
to  clairvoyantes — disagreeably  sceptical,  was  sufficient  to  suf-
focate and  to  destroy  the  developing  events.  It  was  conse-
quently agreed  that  on  the  evening  of  the  arrival  in  town  of
these  young  women,  nobody  should  be  present  besides  them-
selves, at  first,  but  Major  Buckley  and  myself.  We  assembled
in  my  little  library.  I  had  provided  myself  with  a  dozen
walnut-shells,  bought  at  Grange's,  in  Piccadilly,  containing
carraway  comfits,  and  as  I  thought  a  motto  each,  and  two
ounces  of  hazle  nut-shells,  containing  comfits  and  printed
mottos.  These  were  in  two  packets  of  an  ounce  each,  and
had  been  purchased  by  me  about  two  hours  before,  at  Law-
rence's, in  Oxford  Street,  at  the  corner  of  Marylebone  Lane.
One  of  the  young  women  was  seated  at  either  side  of  the
fire  place.  Major  Buckley  placed  himself  at  the  apex  of  a
triangle,  of  which  they  formed  the  basial  angles.  He  made
a  few  slow  passes  from  his  forehead  to  the  pit  of  his  stomach,
on  his  own  person.  The  girls  said,  after  he  had  made  eight  or
ten  of  these  passes,  "  that  they  were  sufficient."  They  saw  a
blue  light  upon  him ;  and  A,  B.,  having  taken  up  one  of  the


6


FACTS  IN  CLAIRVOYANCE,


nut-shells  provided  by  me,  placed  it  upon  the  chimney  piece
above  her  head.  E.  L.  then  did  the  same  thing  with  one  of  the
nut-shells  allotted  to  her.  I  was  fully  aware  of  the  objections
of  sceptics,  that  a  possibility  existed  of  changing  these  shells
by  sleight  of  hand  ;  I  watched  the  proceedings  anxiously  and
accurately,  to  avoid  the  possibility  of  being  deceived.  The
movements  of  these  young  women  were  slow  and  deliberate,
not  like  the  hocus  pocus  quick  jerk  of  the  conjurer.  A.  B.
first  announced  her  readiness  to  read  the  motto  in  her  nut-
shell. She  said  that  the  words  were,

"  The  little  sweetmeat  here  revealed,
Lays,  as  good  deeds  should  lay,  concealed."

I  wrote  down  to  her  dictation,  then  I  cracked  the  shell,
emptied  out  the  comfits,  and  found  among  them  a  little  strip
of  paper,  several  times  folded,  on  which  were  printed  the  very
words  she  had  spoken.  Remember,  reader,  she  was  not
asleep;  both  the  girls  were  wide  awake,  and  joined  in  the
conversation  with  Major  Buckley  and  myself,  in  the  intervals
of  the  phenomena  which  they  were  exhibiting.

Then  E.  L.  read  the  motto  in  her  hazle  nut-shell.  It  ran
thus,

"An  honest  man  may  talce  a  knave's  advice.
But  idiots  only  will  be  cheated  twice."

After  I  had  written  this  down,  and  before  I  opened  the  shell
by  the  aid  of  the  nut-crackers,  she  said,  "  At  the  top  above
the  first  line  is  part  of  another  motto,  it  runs  thus,

"  Who  smiles  to  see  me  in  despair.

The  word  despair  is  cut  close.'^  When  the  nut-shell  was
opened,  and  the  motto  unfolded,  the  description  given  by
E.  L.  was  found  to  be  quite  correct.

A.  B.  then  took  another  shell,  and  in  a  very  short  time
read  these  words,  which  I  wrote  down,

"  She's  little  in  size

Has  bright  speaking  eyes.
And  if  you  prove  true.
Will  be  happy  with  you."

The  shell  was  broken  open,  and  the  words  printed  on  the
little  slip  of  folded  paper  found  among  the  sweetmeats  within,
were  word  for  word  with  those  written  down  by  me.

E.  L.  took  her  turn  at  reading,  the  words  she  read  out
were,

"  In  every  beholder  a  rival  I  view,
I  ne'er  can  be  equalled  in  loving  of  you."

Having  written  down  these  words,  the  shell  was  opened  and
it  was  found  that  E.  L.  had  read  the  motto  quite  correctly.


WITH  OBSEllVATIONS  ON  MESMERISM.


7


The  servant  announced  that  Mr.  Arnott  wished  to  see  me.
He  had  come  on  professional  business,  and  with  no  view  of
witnessing  these  phenomena.  I  asked  Major  Buckley's  per-
mission to  introduce  him.  He  came  in  and  sat  down.  A.  B.
proposed  that  he  should  take  up  a  nut- shell  from  the  table,
and  she  offered  to  read  the  motto  while  he  held  it  in  his  hand.
He  seemed  hardly  to  be  aware  of  what  wonder  he  was  to  wit-
ness. He  took  up  a  nut,  held  it  in  his  closed  hand,  and  A.  B.
read  thus,

"  The  pangs  of  absence,  how  severe,
Have  they  ne'er  waked  thy  bitter  tear  ?"

Mr.  Arnott  took  the  nut-crackers,  broke  his  nut-shell,  and
found  that  A.  B.  had  read  quite  correctly.  His  laugh  and
look  of  surprize  told  enough  of  the  conviction  of  his  mind.
The  event  had  become  a  fact.  How  to  account  for  it  was
another  matter.  He  could  not  deny  that  he  had  witnessed
the  fact.

Major  Buckley  adjourned  our  meeting  to  Tuesday,  15th
of  February.

This  time  he  brought  the  young  women  by  day-light.
They  arrived  at  my  house  about  a  quarter  past  one.  I  pro-
posed that,  as  at  our  last  meeting  the  mottos  had  been  read
in  hazle  nut-shells,  the  walnut-shells  should  now  be  offered.
A.  B.  took  one,  and  after  a  while  said  there  was  no  printed
paper  within,  though  there  were  some  carraway  comfits  and
other  sugar  plums.  The  nut-shell  was  cracked,  and  she  was
found  to  be  quite  correct.

She  took  up  another  walnut  and  read,

"  If  you  were  man,  as  man  you  are  in  shew,
You  would  not  use  a  gentle  lady  so."

Above  the  top  line,  she  added,  near  the  commencement,  there
were  the  two  letters.  My,  clipped,  part  of  another  motto  that
had  been  cut  by  the  scissors  in  separating  the  mottos  for  use.
The  shell  was  broken,  and  it  was  found  that  she  was  quite
right  in  every  particular.

E.  L.  read  her  first  walnut-shell  motto  thus,

"  Beneath  your  bounteous  smile  to  live.
Is  joy  that  splendour  ne'er  can  give."

The  shell  was  opened,  she  was  quite  correct.

In  the  next  shell  she  said  the  slip  of  paper  contained  a
conundrum. It  began  with  a  capital  Q.  for  question,  thus,

"  Q.  Why  is  a  young  swan  like  a  seal  ?
A.  Because  it  is  a  cygnet."

She  added  that  there  was  another  word  signet  spelled  differ-
ently, and  placed  between  brackets,  thus,  (Signet.) In  all


8


FACTS  IN  CLAIRVOYANCE,


this,  upon  opening  the  walnut-shell,  she  was  found  to  be  quite
correct.

A.  B.  then  read  her  third  motto  in  the  walnut-shells.  It
was  exactly  the  same  as  the  last,  read  by  E.  L.,  and  quite
as  accurately  described.

A.  B.  then  read  from  the  fourth  of  her  walnut-shells,  and
here  she  made  a  mistake,  attended  by  some  remarkable  cir-
cumstances. I  wrote  down  her  words,  thus,

"  'Tis  love,  like  the  sun,  that  gives  light  to  the  year.
The  sweetest  of  blessings  that  life  can  endear."

She  added,  underneath  the  printing  of  this  motto  is  the  top
part  of  a  capital  T,  and  of  two  small  t's.  At  the  com-
mencing side  there  appears  to  be  half  of  an  "N  and  a  small  e,
belonging  to  another  motto.  All  this  was  quite  true  that  she
added,  but  she  had  mistaken  the  motto,  which  ran  thus,

"  My  love's  too  great,  you  may  perceive,
And  clearly  see  I  don't  deceive."

That  she  should  be  able  to  perceive  the  letters  accidentally
clipped  by  the  hasty  scissors  from  another  motto,  and  yet  not
be  able  as  usual  to  read  the  whole  of  what  was  on  the  printed
slip  of  paper,  is  quite  unaccountable.

Another  walnut-shell  was  given  to  E.  L.,  and  she  said
there  was  a  large  sweetmeat  in  it,  but  no  motto,  which  on
opening  was  found  to  be  quite  true.

The  next  taken  up  by  E.  L.  contained  a  conundrum.  She
said  it  began  with  letter  Q.,  thus,

"  Q.  Why  is  a  person  who  steals  a  noted  newspaper  like  Cain  ?"

She  was  rather  joyous,  laughed,  and  said,  "  Do  you  give  it
up  ?"  and  then  went  on,

"  A.  Because  he  takes  a  Bell's  Life."

Abel's  life,  she  added,  was  in  brackets,  (AbeFs  life.)  I  opened
the  walnut-shell,  and  found  that  she  was  quite  correct.

E.  L.  took  up  another  walnut-shell,  and  said,  "There  is
no  motto  in  this  which  when  it  was  opened,  was  found  to
be  quite  true.

A.  B.  had  been  a  little  damped  in  spirits  by  her  mistake,
but  was  encouraged  to  take  another  walnut-shell ;  the  conun-
drum in  which  she  read  perfectly  correctly,

"  Q.  Why  was  Titian's  fat  daughter,  Mary,  like  William  Cobbett  ?
A.  Because  she  was  a  great  Polly  Titian."

Quickly  A.  B.  read  the  next  conundrum,  inside  of  a
walnut,  thus,

"  Q.  Why  is  tea,  bought  at  the  corner  of  Devereux  Court

in  the  Strand,  like  a  rope  ?
"A.  Because  it  comqs  from  Twiniug's."


WITH OBSERVATIONS  ON  MESMERISM.


9


The  walnut-shell  on  being  opened,  allowed  us  to  unfold  and
read  the  slip  of  paper,  and  it  was  found  that  A.  B.  was  quite
correct.

E.  L.  next  read  the  slip  of  paper  in  the  walnut-shell,  which
fell  to  her  lot.

"  Q.  When  is  it  dangerous  to  walk  by  the  side  of  a  river  ?
A.  When  the  bull-rush  is  out."

"  Between  brackets,"  she  added,  "  are  the  words  (bull  rushes
out)."  The  accuracy  of  her  clairvoyance  was  proved  by  the
opening  of  the  nut-shell.

At  two  o'clock  Mr.  Ashhurst  Majendie  was  announced.
All  the  walnuts  were  exhausted,  but  I  found  the  remainder  of
my  hazle  nuts  in  a  drawer,  where  I  had  secured  them.  With
Major  Buckley's  permission,  Mr.  Majendie  assented  to  the
proposal  of  A.  B.,  that  he  should  hold  a  hazle  nut  in  his  hand.
She  noticed  that  on  the  top  of  the  folded  paper  slip  there
were  three  capital  letters,  C.  A.  L.,  part  of  the  C.  cut  off,
the  motto  running  thus,

"  Come  kiss  and  forgive,
In  love  let  us  live."

Mr.  Majendie  cracked  the  nut,  and  found  that  all  she  had
said  was  quite  true.

Then  A.  B.  proposed  to  read  a  motto  while  the  nut  was
held  in  my  hand. She  said,

"  In  spite  of  your  indifference,
I  still  have  hopes  of  your  compliance."

She  proved  to  be  quite  right.

E.  L.  took  up  the  cue,  and  read  from  a  nut  on  the  chimney
piece,

"  Trifling  presents  preserve  friendship."

On  opening  the  hazle  nut  it  was  found  that  she  was  quite
right.

She  next  read  a  motto  in  another  nut,

"  Love  is  the  greatest  blessing  given
To  pilgrim  man  by  pitying  heaven."

She  first  read  under  heaven,  and  then  corrected  herself,  the
unfolding  proved  that  the  words  were,  "  by  pitying  heaven."

E.  L.  had  not  read  a  motto  from  a  nut  held  in  a  person's
hand ;  Mr.  Majendie  wished  her  to  try  and  read  one  in  his
hand,  and  he  took  one  from  the  table. She  read.

"  How  few  like  you  possess  a  mind.
Where  all  the  virtues  are  combined."

Mr.  Majendie  on  opening  the  nut-shell,  found  that  she  was
quite  correct.


10


FACTS  IN  CLAIEVOYANCE,


Major  Buckley,  having  an  appointment,  was  obliged  to
break  up  our  seance.

On  Wednesday,  16tli  February,  at  about  one  o'clock,  my
friends,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Gutch,  were  with  me,  when  Major
Buckley  arrived  with  his  clairvoyantes.  The  sight  of  strangers
produced  a  little  nervousness,  and  Mr.  Gutch  went  for  a  while
into  another  room. A.  B.  read  her  first  motto, —

*'  Make  much  of  precious  time  while  in  your  power,
Care  full  well  and  husband  every  hour."

The  shell  being  opened,  it  was  found  that  her  reading
had  been  quite  correct.

Finding  that  the  girls  were  reassured,  I  asked  permission
to  bring  back  Mr.  Gutch.  When  he  came  in  E.  L.  read  a
motto  in  a  hazle  nut-shell, —

"  Banish  care,  and  welcome  glee.
Accept  this  motto,  love,  from  me."

A.  B.  then  read, —

"  Believe  me,  in  good  as  well  as  ill,
Woman  is  a  contradiction  still."

She  said  that  on  the  slip  of  paper  containing  these  lines  there
were  a  capital  T.  and  some  parts  of  letters  not  legible.  Mr.
Gutch  opened  the  shell  and  found  that  she  had  given  a  per-
fectly correct  account  of  the  matter.

The  next  motto  in  a  hazle  nut-sheU  was  read  correctly  by
E.  L.,  as  Mr.  Gutch,  who  opened  the  shell,  has  testified.

"  Breath  for  life  I  less  require.
Than  you,  the  object  of  my  heart's  desire."

The  fifth  was  read  by  E.  L.,—

"  My  heart  ordains  this,
All  women  to  kiss."

Mr.  Gutch  opened  the  shell,  and  found  that  the  lines  had
been  read  correctly.

The  sixth  was  read  by  E.  L., —

"  Beauty  and  modesty  combine.
To  make  my  heart  entirely  thine."

Found  by  Mr.  Gutch  to  have  been  read  accurately.
The  seventh  was  read  by  A.  B.

"  If  I  feared  not  to  offend,
A  thousand  vows  of  love  I'd  send."

Mr.  Gutch  opened  this  shell  and  found  that  what  I  had  written
down  corresponded  accurately  with  the  words  read  by  A.  B.

On  Thursday,  24th  February,  Lord  Adare  came  by  ap-
pointment at  half-past  three  to  witness  the  clairvoyance  of
these  young  women. Major  Buckley  having  made  the  passes


WITH  OBSERVATIONS  ON  MESMERISM.


11


down  his  own  face,  the  girls  said  they  saw  a  blue  light  on  his
forehead  and  cheeks.  They  were  nervous  at  the  presence  of
Lord  Adare,  and  it  was  a  long  time  before  either  of  them
felt  able  to  read.  A.  B.  trembled  and  could  not  read  at  all.
E.  L.  at  last  said  she  could  see  the  last  line  of  the  motto  iu
her  nut,  and  she  read  thus, —

"  He  seeks  for  thorns  and  finds  his  share."

I  had  written  a  for  his,  and  when  I  read  out  before  the  nut
was  cracked,  she  corrected  me.  Lord  Adare  opened  the
shell  and  read, —

"  Man  blindly  follows  grief  and  carej
He  seeks  for  thorns  and  finds  his  share."

The  last  line  was  just  as  E.  L.  had  seen  it  before  the  shell
was  opened.

In  conversing  with  Dr.  Elliotson  on  the  subject  of  these
experiments,  he  suggested  to  me  that  notwithstanding  the
conviction  I  had  of  the  nut-shells  being  identical  with  those
I  had  bought  myself,  there  might  be  a  possibility  of  some
jugglery.  It  was  possible  that  each  nut  might  be  changed
for  one  the  motto  of  which  was  well  known.  It  was  not
right  to  be  content  with  probabilities.

Lord  Adare  presented  a  nut,  the  motto  of  which  had  been
previously  taken  out  and  marked.  E.  L.  said  there  was  some-
thing in  that  nut-sheU  which  gave  her  a  severe  head-ache.
She  was  sure  it  was  marked,  and  the  very  suspicion  of  her
being  guilty  of  fraud  made  her  feel  very  ill.  She  began  to
read, —

"  Thy  charms,  my  love,  can  make,"

but  could  not  proceed.  She  went  away,  and  both  girls  passed
a  restless  night,  so  keenly  hurt  were  they  from  having  failed,
and  from  having  been  thought  capable  of  trick  and  deceit.
The  next  day,  they  came  again,  and  Lord  Adare,  Major
Buckley,  and  I  were  the  only  persons  present.  The  first
part  of  the  motto  read  yesterday  proved  to  be  correct.  I  had
procured  some  nuts  at  M.  Coeuret's  in  Drury  Lane,  and  had
taken  out  the  mottos,  cut  them  carefuUy  with  scissors  so  that
I  should  know  them  again,  and  had  moreover  written  my
initials  on  each  slip  of  paper  before  I  refolded  and  replaced  it
in  the  nut-shell.  I  ought  to  observe  that  I  put  back  the
sugar-plums  and  closed  the  shells  so  carefully  with  chocolate,
I  am  certain  no  person  could  detect,  the  day  after,  that  they
had  been  opened.  The  number  I  treated  in  this  manner
prevented  my  remembering  the  lines  of  the  mottos,  so  that
the  phenomena  could  not  be  dependant  on  thought-reading.
E.  L.  laboured  under  a  head-ache,  and  said  she  was  too  con-


13


FACTS  IN  CLAIllVOYANCE,


fused,  she  feared;  to  read  accurately.  At  last  she  said,  "  I  see
J.  A.  at  one  end  of  the  motto  wi-itten  in  ink — that's  a  marked
nut  I  know then  she  proceeded, —

"  Love  not  governed  by  sense  or  reason,
Is  like  a  chance  bird  out  of  season."

Lord  Adare  broke  the  shell,  and  on  examining  the  paper
found  the  letters  J.  A.  I  recognized  my  marks.  The  words
printed  were, —

"  Love  not  guided  still  by  reason,
Is  the  chance  bird  of  a  season."

So  that  the  clairvoyante  had  been  confused  in  her  reading.
A.  B.  then  tried  to  read  a  marked  nut, —

"  Fair  maiden,  hear  my  loving  vow."

She  remarked  that  the  sugar-plums  were  all  white,  instead
of  being  of  several  colours.  She  was  quite  correct.  The
illness  of  the  clairvoyantes  prevented  our  going  on  with  the
experiments.

Major  Buckley  asked  me  to  go  to  the  Opera  on  Tuesday,
the  29th  February,  and  he  said  a  young  lady  would  be  in  his
box  who  was  able  to  read  in  nut-shells  while  she  was  wide
awake,  quite  as  well  as  the  two  clairvoyantes  he  had  exhibited
to  me.  Accordingly,  I  accepted  his  invitation,  and  had  the
good  fortune  to  pass  a  very  agreeable  evening.  Clairvoyance
is  always  witnessed  to  greater  perfection  if  the  subject  be  not
agitated  or  depressed.  M.  Marcillet  often  said  that  Alexis
Didier  exhibited  the  phenomena  best  when  the  "  entourage'^
was  favourable :  "  9a  va  mieux  en  riant,"  he  said ;  and  his
observation  was  just.  The  young  lady  at  the  Opera  could
see  no  motto  until  she  felt  relieved  of  her  first  embarrassment
at  seeing  a  stranger.  She  read  a  motto  in  a  nut-shell,  which
I  held  in  my  hand,  accurately.  Then  I  presented  one,  the
motto  in  which  was  marked  with  my  initials.  She  detected
the  mark  in  ink,  which  was  blotted,  and  she  read  the  lines  in
print  quite  correctly.

On  Friday,  the  3rd  March,  this  lady  was  at  Major
Buckley's,  when  I  called ;  the  two  clairvoyantes  from  Chel-
tenham were  there  too.  I  had  some  marked  nut-shells  with
me.  I  had  marked  the  shells  as  well  as  the  mottos.  The
lady  said  of  the  first  motto  that  she  could  see  it  was  very
dirty,  it  appeared  stained  all  over ;  it  was  notched  in  two  or
more  places.  This  was  all  true.  It  was  stained  with  choco-
late, notched  with  a  pair  of  scissors  in  two  places,  and  torn
in  another. She  read  the  motto, —

"  Oh  !  whate'er  my  fate  may  be,
I  will  ever  think  of  thee."


WITH OBSERVATIONS  ON MESMEllISM.  IS

AVlieu  I  opened  this  shell  I  found  she  was  quite  correct.  I
asked  this  lady  to  give  me  an  account  of  how  she  managed
to  read  the  words  on  a  piece  of  paper  folded  up,  as  these
mottos  are  known  to  be  in  the  shell.  She  said  the  paper  ap-
peared before  her  in  space  unfolded,  and  she  had  only  to  read
on  as  in  a  book.  The  two  girls,  A.  B.  and  J.  L.,  had  pre-
viously told  me  the  same  thing,  before  they  knew  this  lady.

E.  L.  volunteered  to  read  a  motto  in  any  shell  marked  or
otherwise.  I  produced  one  from  my  pocket,  marked  by  my-
self. "  I  see,"  she  said,  "  the  capital  letter  A.  written  in  ink,
now  I  see  J.,  J.  A."  Then  she  read  the  motto  before  the
shell  was  opened, —

"  Her  eye  discourses,
I  will  answer  it."

When  I  cracked  the  shell,  I  found  this  was  correct,  except
in  the  word  Her,  which  was  read  for  Your,  and  this  error  was
attributed  to  haste  and  carelessness.  I  believe  that  I  have
tested  the  clairvoyance  of  these  subjects  as  carefully,  as  watch-
fully, and  as  severely  as  the  nature  of  the  subject  will  warrant.
If  the  greatest  delicacy  be  not  observed  in  these  experiments,
they  fail.  The  human  brain  is  not  to  be  examined  harshly,
and  he  who  wishes  to  arrive  at  the  truth  must  not  here  tor-
ture nature.  She  will  yield  to  positive  persuasion,  but  nega-
tive violence  has  no  charms  for  her.  Address  may  gain  her
affections,  but  a  doubt  that  she  possesses  the  virtues  of  her
sex  aflPronts  her  sense  of  propriety.  In  chemistry  and  in
electricity,  nature  is  often  in  a  delicate  mood,  and  the  arrival
at  truth  is  by  arts  of  great  nicety.  But  in  the  examination
of  clairvoyance,  the  tenderest  management,  most  extreme
delicacy  of  investigation,  is  absolutely  necessary.

Figurative  language  is  hardly  allowable  in  severe  science,
but,  in  the  present  retarded  state  of  our  civilization,  it  is
difficult  to  avoid  the  vvdgar  errors  of  the  society  in  which  we
move,  and  to  refrain  from  adopting  the  most  unphilosophic
tendency  to  explain  ourselves  by  personifications  and  figures
that  are  not  quite  warranted  by  the  rules  of  severe  analysis.
New  points  on  the  functions  of  the  brain  and  nerves  are  daily
brought  into  notice,  and  we  must  leave  those  who  come  after
us  to  chasten  our  expressions,  and  to  sift  the  evidences  we
offer  for  those  truths  which  will  remain  long  after  our  labours,
anxieties,  and  names  are  forgotten.  We  say  that  in  the
operations  of  the  mind  a  fluid  emanates  from  the  brain,  be-
cause the  phenomena  of  thought  and  mutual  interchange  of
ideas  between  individuals  are  accompanied  by  rays  of  colours,
visible  to  persons  who,  asleep  or  awake,  happen  to  be  in  an


14


PACTS  IN  CLAIRVOYANCE,


exalted  condition  of  clairvoyance.  Analogies  are  our  only
■warrants  for  calling  these  rays  fluids.  We  have  strong  evi-
dence of  their  presence  being  attended  by  an  attractive  force.
Some  of  Major  Buckley's  subjects  require  occasionally,  in
addition  to  the  blue  colour  perceived  on  his  countenance,  a
few  passes  on  the  nut-shells,  to  enable  them  to  read  the
mottos,  and  these  passes  are  described  as  being  accompanied
by  the  emission  from  his  fingers  of  a  blue  stream  that  en-
lightens the  objects  within  the  shells.  These  passes,  however
attractive,  fail  to  produce  clairvoyance  in  subjects  who  happen
to  be  in  an  agitated  condition  of  mind,  or  who  are  placed  in
circumstances  where  their  feelings  are  not  agreeably  affected.
Very  careful  observations  have  led  rae  to  coincide  with  other
experienced  students  of  mesmerism  in  this  conviction.  To
say  that  these  facts  are  not  truths,  because  they  do  not  tally
with  the  preconceptions  of  those  religionists  who  personify
their  deity  and  construct  an  idol  of  their  false  imaginations,
to  represent  a  being  of  whom  we  limited  mortals  can  form
no  notion,  is  to  say  that  the  progress  of  philosophy  shall  be
arrested  until  these  arrogant  idol  worshippers  shall  control
and  comprehend  the  Power  which  pervades  time,  space,  and
eternity.*

Dr.  Hodgkin  is  at  perfect  liberty  to  say  now  that  I  am
under  a  delusion.  I  forgive  him.  I  pity  him.  I  had  hoped
better  things  of  the  philosophic  power  of  his  brain.  If  he
really,  sincerely,  humbly,  loyally,  piously,  wishes^  to  study

*  Eminent  physicians,  with  whom  I  have  conversed  on  these  points,  remind
me  of  a  passage  in  Lardner's  Manual  of  Electricity,  in  the  Cabinet  Cyclopedia,
vol.  i.,  p.  47.  I  wish  the  following  extract  could  lead  them  to  reflect  on  their
weak  and  silly  want  of  candour  ;  on  their  most  unphUosophical  desire  to  cling  by
their  rooted  prejudices. — "  When  these  and  other  papers  (proposing  that  an  iron
rod  should  be  raised  to  a  great  height  in  the  air,  to  convey  electricity  from  the
clouds  to  the  earth)  by  Franklin,  illustrating  similar  views,  were  sent  to  London,
and  read  before  the  Royal  Society,  they  are  said  to  have  been  considered  so  wild
and  absurd,  that  they  were  received  with  laughter,  and  were  not  considered
worthy  of  so  much  notice  as  to  be  admitted  into  the  '  Philosophical  TVansac-
tions.'  They  were,  however,  shewn  to  Dr.  Fothergill,  who  considered  them  of
too  much  value  to  be  thus  stifled :  and  he  wrote  a  preface  to  them  and  published
them  in  London.  They  subsequently  ivent  through  five  editions.  After  the
publication  of  these  remarkable  letters,  and  when  pubUc  opinion  in  all  parts  of
Europe  had  been  expressed  upon  them,  an  abridgment  or  abstract  of  them  was
read  to  the  Society  on  the  6th  of  June,  1751.  It  is  a  remarkable  circumstance
that,  in  this  notice,  no  mention  whatever  occurs  of  Franklin's  project  of  drawing
lightning  from  the  clouds.  Possibly  that  was  the  part  which  before  excited
laughter,  and  was  omitted  to  avoid  ridicule." — Lardner's  Cabinet  Cyclopedia:  a
manual  of  Electricity,  8fc.,  vol.  i.,  p.  47.

t  If  the  doctor  has  any  desire  to  read  the  lucubrations  of  a  non  sequitur  phi-
losopher, who,  like  other  men  that  slip  away  from  sound  logic,  commit  themselves,
let  him  turn  to  pages  143,  144  of  the  third  volume  of  The  Zoist,  and,  having
studied  the  text,  he  may  possibly  gain  some  improvement  by  the  lesson  on  pre-
judice, in  the  note  by  the  translator  of  Dr.  J.  B.  Mege's  discourse.


I


WITH  OBSERVATIONS  ON  MESMERISM.


15


the  subject  of  hallucinations,  let  him  turn  to  the  third,  or
1845  volume  of  The  Zoist,  where,  at  pages  365  and  471,  he
will  find  some  most  valuable  facts  and  observations  by  Dr.
EUiotson.  If  Dr.  Hodgkin  be  capable  of  large  views,  and
have  the  faculty  of  philosophical  reflection,  he  may  learn  by
the  aid  of  mesmerism  to  do  that  which  has  already  been  done
by  this  holy  power,  to  cure  hallucinations,  instead  of  talking
nonsense  about  them.


The  number  of  The  Zoist  for  April,  1848,  the  first  of  the
sixth  volume  of  that  important  work,  contains  the  preceding
notice  of  facts  in  Clairvoyance.  A  set  has  been  made  against
this  quarterly  periodical,  and  one  meets  with  observations
against  it  by  persons  who,  on  most  subjects,  entertain  just
and  liberal  ideas.  I  am  told  it  is  a  great  pity  that  some
writers  in  it  advocate  the  cause  of  materialism,  and  folks
mean  thereby  that  this  word  is  synonymous  with  irreligion.
I  say  it  is  a  pity  men  do  not  so  study  the  philosophy  of  the
mind,  as  to  understand  clearly  the  meaning  of  terms.  Their
intellects  would  be  then  in  a  more  favourable  state  to  appre-
hend the  value  of  justice  between  man  and  man,  and  as  we
all  love  fair  dealing,  injurious  motives  and  opinions  would  not
be  attributed  to  our  neighbours  without  ample  cause.  The
meaning  of  the  word  irreligious  is  applicable,  I  trust,  strictly
to  few  in  the  civilized  portions  of  a  Christian  land.  The  bonds
of  civil  society  would  soon  be  rent  asunder,  if  many  refused
a  faith  in  things  sacred.  But  whatever  may  be  the  creed  of
our  brother,  above  all  is  charity ; — and  I  should  hold  it  to  be
very  immaterial  what  were  the  speculative, — metaphysical  views
of  an  honourable  man  on  the  subjects  of  materialism  or  spirit-
ualism. To  quarrel  about  the  husk  and  to  neglect  the  essential
kernel  of  the  fruit  is  folly  :  but  alas  !  it  is  folly  too  common
in  this  world.  Instead  of  attending  to  the  practice  of  pure
religion, — the  adoption  of  sincere  humility, — the  hearty  libe-
ration to  Christian  charity,  we  find  men  blaming  each  other,
shy  of  each  other,  or  hating  each  other  for  slight  difi^er-
ences  of  opinion  on  questions  of,  at  best,  shallow  metaphysics.
Perhaps,  could  they  biit  see  the  truth  in  the  same  point
of  view,  for  both  intend  to  be  in  the  right,  they  would
agree  perfectly ;  and  it  is  a  fact,  that  their  perfect  agreement
would  shew  to  each  that  he  was  originally  in  the  right.  The
difiference  is  only  whether  spiritual  essence  or  ethereal  un-
particled  matter  be  an  entity.  Both  mean,  whatever  the
limited  imaginative  capacity  of  the  one  may  be,  that  there  is


16


FACTS  IN  CLAIRVOYANCE,


a  Being,  pure,  holy,  and  perfect.  But  however  metaphysical
writers  may  differ  on  the  doctrines  of  matter  and  no  matter,
one  looks  not  into  The  Zoist  for  the  relations  between  meta-
physics and  theology.  What  is  sought  for  in  that  work  is  a
record  of  most  curious  facts  relating  to  the  highest  subjects
of  philosophy.  No  such  facts  can  possibly  injure  the  cause  of
religion.*

Religion  is  a  holy  subject.  It  has  its  own  place ;  it  governs
the  highest  aspirations  of  mortal  men.  From  persons  of
well-constituted  minds,  its  sacred  impressions  receive  the
profoundest  attention,  and  it  ought  not  to  be  lightly,  unrea-
soningly,  irreverently  introduced  into  questions  of  ordinary
science.  It  can  stand  its  own  ground  by  its  own  strength.
The  organ  of  Veneration  is  placed  on  the  highest  part  of  the
human  head ;  Benevolence,  Hope,  Firmness,  Conscientiousness
belong  to  the  federal  compact  over  which  it  presides,  and  the
organs  of  the  reasoning  faculties  direct  the  laws  by  which  the
truly  religious,  the  really  humble  character  holds  sacred  the
principles  of  humility,  justice,  and  universal  charity.  True
religion  reposes  on  an  intellectual  basis,  and  nothing  which
is  abhorrent  to  reason  can  belong  to  it.  It  would  be  well,
if  instead  of  being  taught  by  many  to  become  the  nurse  of
bigotry,  and  the  agent  for  debilitating  the  understanding,  by
impressing  thoughts  and  convictions  at  variance  with  common
sense, — by  introducing  the  worship  of  fanciful  idols  of  the
imagination,  it  could  be  used  as  a  means  for  the  cultivation

*  An  excellent  note  has  appeared  in  the  last  page  of  the  April  Number  of
The  Zoist,  which  is  added  here,  as  it  applies  with  much  force  to  the  above  obser-
vations. "  So  uninformed  are  most  persons,  that  we  every  day  hear  men  spoken
of  with  horror  as  materialists.  Now  a  man  may  be  not  only  most  conscientious,
but  most  devout ;  nay,  be  a  sincere  and  fervent  Christian,  aye,  and  a  trinitarian
Christian  too,  and  most  evangelical,  and  yet  be  a  materialist.  That  is,  a  man
who  believes  that  the  matter  of  bis  organized  and  living  brain  is  endowed  with
such  properties  that  it  wills,  feels,  and  thinks,  and  that  these  by  nature  decay
and  cease  for  ever  with  the  brain  at  its  decay,  death  and  disintegration,  may  also
believe  that,  by  the  will  of  God,  by  an  additional  and  miraculous  grant,  they  will
exist  again  with  a  brain  reproduced  but,  however  glorified,  still  matter  ;  according
to  the  Fourth  Article  of  the  Church  of  England,  which  asserts  that  Christ,  the  first
fruits  of  them  that  slept,  sits  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father,  with  '  his  body,
with  flesh,  bones,  and  all  things  appertaining  to  the  perfection  of  man's  nature.'
We  urge  this,  because  we  know  that  many  excellent  persons  who  take  such  a  view
of  a  future  state  are  vilified  and  called  atheists,  infidels,  sceptics,  and  cruelly
injured,  from  the  total  ignorance  of  the  majority  of  people,  even  of  the  higher
ranks,  that,  though  the  term  materiaUst  is  sometimes  used  to  signify  an  atheist,
it  has  another  and  most  innocent  signification,  relating,  not  to  supernatural  things,
but  to  an  innocent  opinion  on  a  natural  thing.  Yes ;  a  man  may  be  a  true  Chris-
tian, of  any  protestant  denomination,  though  not  of  the  Roman  Catholic  per-
suasion, and  yet  be  a  materialist.  We  beg  those  who  have  not  reflected  much  on
this  subject,  but  think,  as  parrots  talk,  by  imitation,  to  read  Bishop  Law's
Theory  of  Religion,  Bishop  Sherlock's  Discourses,  Bishop  Watson's  Anecdotes
of  his  own  Life,  and  Archbishop  Tillotson."


WITH  OBSERVATIONS  ON  MESMERISM.


17


and  expansion  of  those  organs  which  establish  a  just  estimate
of  things  holy  and  sacred the  practice  of  a  piety  which
eschews  cant  and  all  hypocrisy.  What  parent  would  delibe-
rately wish  to  educate  a  child  to  become  an  idiot  ?  and  yet
the  course  of  education  which  leads  to  a  weakening  of  the
reasoning  faculties  is  the  race-course  to  the  goal  of  idiocy.
Thanks  to  that  great  Power  which  has  so  arranged  the  human
brain  as  to  decree  the  natural  alliance  between  Religion^  Con-
science, Benevolence,  Sympathy  for  our  fellow  beings,  and
the  Reasoning  Faculties, — the  race  for  the  intoxicating  cup  has
not  been  won,  and  the  world  is  awakening  from  the  compli-
cated frauds  by  which  it  has  been  jockeyed.  The  plea  of
«  irreligion  as  against  good,  sincere,  and  honest  men  for  inves-
tigating the  phenomena  of  natural  science,  has  been  raised
in  all  times  by  fraudulent  persons  for  their  base  ends.  There
have  always  existed  men  who  have  found  it  their  interest  to
assume  the  cloak  of  righteousness  in  order  to  blind  weak
people  dishonestly,  and  to  take  advantage  of  ignorant  preju-
dices for  the  unworthy  purpose  of  some  selfish  advantage,  or
to  divert  attention  from  their  own  cunning  arts.

The  duty  of  The  Zoist  is  to  pursue  the  line  indicated  by
Gall,  and  to  cultivate  the  knowledge  of  that  science  which
has  verified  his  splendid  discoveries.

Read  the  concluding  sentence  of  Gall's  great  work,  and
let  any  one  ask  himself  if  the  pursuits  of  such  a  philosopher,
or  of  those  who  are  proud  to  tread  in  his  steps,  can  be  irre-
ligious. "  Finally,"  he  says,  "  Man,  that  inextricable  being,
is  made  known ;  organology  composes  and  decomposes,  piece
by  piece,  his  propensities  and  talents ;  it  has  fixed  our  ideas  of
his  destiny  and  the  sphere  of  his  activit}^  and  it  has  become
a  fruitful  source  of  the  most  important  applications  to  medicine,
philosophy,  jurisprudence,  education,  history,  &c.  Surely  these
are  so  many  guarantees  of  the  truth  of  the  physiology  of  the
brain, — so  many  titles  of  gratitude  towards  Him,  who  has
made  them  known  to  me."

He  who  is  afraid  of  the  bad  influences  of  a  work  like  The
Zoist,  should  give  up  the  power  of  reasoning  and  of  judging
for  himself,  and  then  be  content  to  sneer  at  God's  choicest
gift  of  reason, — pinning  his  faith  to  the  sleeve  of  some  human
master,  and  conclude  all  men  to  be  wicked  and  unholy,  who,
in  any  way,  differ  from  his  standard  of  belief.

Clairvoyance  is  said  by  weak,  or  by  cunning  and  canting
persons,  to  be  the  work  of  Satan.  Brutal  and  barbarous
ignorance  could  be  the  only  excuse  for  thus  treating  mental
philosophy.  The  phenomena  either  are  or  are  not  true.  If
not  true,  there  is  an  end  of  the  matter. If  true,  the  subject

B


18


FACTS  IN  CLAIRVOYANCE,


should  be  investigated.  To  deny  belief  to  well-authenticated
facts  is  silly, — to  attribute  the  cause  to  the  devil  is  worse  than
foolish.  It  is  calling  in  question  the  attributes  of  all  that  men
hold  sacred :  it  is  allowing  the  bad  part  of  humanity  to  master
the  better.  The  stupid  pretender  to  religion,  who  calls  the
pure  and  honest  philosopher  an  ally  of  the  devil,  decides
against  the  further  cultivation  of  science.  He  would  arrest
the  progress  of  knowledge  in  order  to  pander  to  the  jjrejudices
and  wilful  blindness  of  those  who  are  benighted  in  fear  and
ignorance, — of  those  by  whom  the  blessings  of  science,  in-
tended for  the  alleviation  of  human  suffering,  are  received  in
a  spirit  of  real  infidelity — a  want  of  trust  in  the  mercies  of  a
benevolent  Being, — and  a  bigotted  determination  to  reject
truth,  although  it  arrives  in  the  shape  of  a  benefit.  Such  a
wicked  advocate  of  sham  piety  would  appear  to  be  typified  by
the  almost  monster,  which  the  human  being  resembles  when
labouring  under  a  form  of  mania,  that  presents,  to  the  visitor
of  an  asylum,  a  picture  of  brutal  expression  with  pouting
lips,  spasmodically  closed  eyelids,  the  furious  firmness  of  un-
reasoning obstinacy,  portrayed  in  a  countenance  swollen
with  the  vain  anger  and  determination  of  "  I  won't,"  against
an  imaginary  evil  that,  in  reality,  is  an  approaching  good.
So  do  many  of  those  who  would  be  considered  religious,
receive  God's  blessing  of  mesmerism  !

I  study  the  truths  of  clairvoyance,  because  I  believe  them
to  be  important  to  ray  pursuits  as  a  physician.  I,  through  a
knowledge  of  them,  obtain  a  clearer  insight  into  the  pheno-
mena of  the  human  mind.  I  know  there  is  nothing  in  mes-
merism which  does  not  exist  in  nature.  The  discovery  of
artificial  modes  of  producing  natural  phenomena  is  not  a
wickedness,  or  all  our  ingenious  devices  in  the  art  of  cookery,
said,  by  an  ingenious  philosopher,  to  be  imitative  of  the  com-
position of  milk,  would  be  supremely  flagitious.  If  I  were
at  liberty,  I  could  state  cases  in  which  remarkable  natural
clairvoyance  has  occurred  in  ladies,  who  have  been  under  my
care  for  insanity,  some  of  whom  have  been  completely  cured
by  mesmerism.  Unobserving,  unreasoning  medical  men  have
overlooked  the  fact,  in  instances  where  this  phenomenon  con-
stituted a  prominent  symptom  of  disordered  health.  I  have
repeatedly  met  with  clairvoyance  in  insanity,  and  it  had  been
previously  stupidly  confounded  with  fancy  and  hallucination.
So  little  have  eminent  physicians  studied  this  part  of  their
profession,  that  I  lately  witnessed  two  cases  in  which  doctors
spoke  of  horsewhipping  and  of  throwing  buckets  of  water  over
females,  who  were  absolutely  insane.  Could  they  but  lend
their  attention  to  be  convinced  of  the  blessings  conferred  by


WITH OBSERVATIONS  ON  MESMERISM.


19


the  mild  practice  of  mesmerism  on  such  afflicted  beings,  their
better  feelings,  as  gentlemen,  would  yield  to  the  touching
appeal  of  humanity.  No  time  is  ill  spent — no  patience  is
too  great  which  promises  relief  to  mental  disease.  Some  phy-
sicians have  been  low  enough  in  feeling  to  ascribe  to  me
unworthy  motives  for  practising  mesmerism.  I  pity  them
for  that  which  they  cannot  help ;  and  I  could  sometimes  wish
that,  notwithstanding  the  wearying,  extreme  patience  which
is  required,  it  were  my  lot  to  do  that  which  I  have  repeat-
edly effected, — the  cure  of  mania,  in  cases  that  had  been
shockingly  aggravated  by  opium  and  other  poisons  adminis-
tered by  pig-headed  physicians,  who  contemptuously  sneer  at
the  truths  of  clairvoyance.  If  there  were  no  higher  object  in
investigating  these  facts,  there  is  a  deep  interest  attached  to
all  truths  connected  with  mental  philosophy.  I  consider  the
world  much  indebted  to  Major  Buckley  for  the  mass  of  facts
he  has  collected.  There  is  no  knowing  where  these  discoveries
may  lead.  Nothing  which  can  produce  material  for  reflection
can  be  justly  considered  as  trifling.  The  nut-shell  experiments
illustrate  a  curious  and  most  remarkable  condition  of  brain  j
that  which  gives  the  power  of  shedding  light  into  dark  recesses
protected  by  apparently  opaque  media.

Do  they  not,  by  analogy,  give  us  some  idea  of  the  flash
with  which  the  poet's  genius  illuminates  a  hidden  truth  ?
May  they  not  at  some  future  period,  teach  how  the  distri-
bution of  nervous  fluid  can,  in  an  exquisite  organization,  im-
plying a  highly  sensible  condition  of  nervous  arrangements,
account  for  the  charms  of  delicacy  of  sentiment  and  of  natu-
rally refined  taste  !  The  extent  and  the  limits  of  the  power
of  producing  the  phenomena  of  clairvoyance  are  interesting
subjects  of  enquiry.  They  must  lead  to  a  more  just  appre-
ciation of  the  difficulties  in  the  treatment  of  affections  of  the
nervous  system  generally,  and  consequently  of  the  mind  in
particular.  Since  my  paper  was  communicated  to  The  Zoisf,
Major  Buckley  has  favoured  me  with  the  letter  I  subjoin.  It
is  an  important  document,  communicating  much  interesting
information.

"Dear  Dr.  Ashburner. — I  rejoice  to  find  that  I  have  con-
vinced you  and  those  of  your  friends  who  believe  on  the  evi-
dence of  their  own  senses,  that  it  is  possible  to  produce  a
waking  state  of  clairvoyance,  enabling  those  placed  in  it  to
state  correctly  the  words  of  a  motto,  while  rolled  up  within  a
nutshell.  Thirteen  persons  have  done  this ;  three  of  them  in
your  presence.  I  tried  the  experiment,  for  the  first  time,  in
a  private  box  at  the  Lyceum,  on  the  16th  of  last  August,  when

B  2


20


FACTS  IN  CLAIRVOYANCE,


the  mottos  in  ten  shells  were  correctly  stated  by  three  young
ladies.  On  the  following  night,  at  the  Opera,  they  told  me
the  mottos  in  seven  more.  On  this  occasion,  the  shells  were
purchased  while  on  my  way  to  the  Opera ;  each  shell  was  held
in  my  own  hand, — each  opened  by  me,  the  motto  taken  out,
unrolled,  read,  proved  to  be  correct,  and  then  (and  not  until
then)  touched  by  the  party.  Up  to  this  date  the  mottos  in
1512  shells  (the  words  amount  to  22,195)  have  been  read.
In  many  cases,  (some  of  which  you  have  witnessed),  the  shells
have  not  only  been  brought  by  strangers,  but  held  in  their
hands,  and  never  touched  by  me,  nor  by  the  clau'voyantes.
I  have  mesmerised  319  persons,  of  whom  115  have  been
clairvoyant :  out  of  this  number  13  have  read  words  placed  on
the  head,  back,  under  the  foot,*  &c.,  &c.,  and  96  in  boxes.
42  persons  have  thus  read  while  awake.  This  includes  three
ladies  and  one  young  gentleman,  who  were  never  put  into
the  mesmeric  sleep,  and  two  ladies  who  first  read  in  the
waking  state,  and  were  subsequently  mesmerised.  Even  to
you,  who  have  admitted  the  efficacy  of  my  passes  in  removing
pain,  I  fear  to  state  how  many  I  have  thus  relieved.  You  are
practically  aware,  in  your  own  person,  of  the  truth  of  the  exist-
ence of  this  power  in  me,  and  know  full  well  that  different
persons  possess  this  faculty  in  very  various  degrees.  A.  B.
and  E.  L.,  during  their  stay  in  town,  read  the  mottos  in  223
shells  in  presence  of  26  strangers,  some  of  them  marked  by,
as  well  as  opened  by  16  others.  The  young  lady  you  saw  with
me  at  the  Opera  has,  during  the  same  time,  read  the  mottos
in  22  shells  in  the  hands  of,  or  marked  by,  several  strangers.
WhOe  I  have  the  satisfaction  of  knowing  that  one  at  least
among  my  cases,  whose  life  was  despaired  of,  has  returned
thanks  to  her  Maker  for  her  restoration  through  mesmerism. f

*  My  friends,  Captain  James  and  Mr.  Topham,  being  at  Cheltenham,  had  the
opportunity  of  seeing  a  young  gentleman,  who  at  the  request  of  Mr.  Topham,  read
a  word  placed  under  his  foot  with  the  writing  towards  the  carpet.  The  eyes  had
been  bandaged  carefully.  Strict  precautions  were  taken  that  there  could  be  no
possibility  of  seeing  by  the  ordinary  organs  of  vision.  The  word  was  M^'olf,  it
was  written  by  Mr.  Topham,  and  the  somnambule  described  with  the  aid  of  his
finger  the  peculiarities  in  the  form  of  the  W.  This  same  clairvoyant  had  re-
peatedly read  words  carefully  concealed  from  him  and  placed  under  a  thick  cushioned
foot  stool  upon  which  his  feet  rested.

t  The  case  alluded  to  by  the  worthy  Major  is  one  of  a  poor  woman  in  Chel-
tenham, who  was  afflicted  with  severe  epileptic  fits.  Her  name  is  Elizabeth
Hookham ;  she  had  been  subject  to  fits  for  three  years.  These  at  first  occurred
about  twice,  and  latterly  they  came  on  every  other  day.  In  August,  1845,  she
became  so  ill  that  her  life  was  considered  in  danger.  On  the  '29th  of  that  month
Major  Buckley  first  visited  her,  and  made  passes  down  her  back,  which  strength-
ened her  greatly  ;  he  saw  her  again  in  a  week,  and  found  her  much  improved.
On  Wednesday,  10th  September,  and  four  following  days,  he  mesmerised  her.
On  Sunday  she  drank  a  glass  of  water  which  had  been  mesmerised  on  the  pre-


WITH OBSERVATIONS  ON  MESMEllISM.


The  ridicule  of  sceptics  shall  never  deter  me  from  using  it.
You,  I  know,  have  made  the  same  resolution ;  and,  with  greater
skill,  have  been  more  useful  to  your  suffering  fellow  creatures.

"  Wishing  you  continued  success  in  the  cause  of  truth
and  humanity,

"  Believe  me,  very  sincerely  yours,

"W.  Buckley.

''London,  April  13th,  1848."

Mesmerism  is  full  of  these  wonders.  But  let  not  people
be  led  away  to  gape  like  fools  at  things  which  astonish  the

ceding  day,  and  fell  asleep  immediately ;  she  was  mesmerised  on  the  three  fol-
lowing days.  Since  that  time  she  gained  strength,  and  was  able  to  attend  to  her
usual  occupations.  On  the  1st  September  she  had  a  very  sUght  fit,  which  was
her  last.  She  has  written  at  the  conclusion  of  the  statement,  from  which  this
account  is  extracted,  "  I  know  that  this  is  true.  I  returned  thanks  to  God  in
the  Church,  29th  October.  Elizabeth  Hookham."  Up  to  the  1st  of  March,
1848;,  she  has  contmued  in  good  health.  Major  Buckley,  not  being  a  medical
man,  would  not  have  undertaken  the  ti-eatment  of  so  serious  a  case  as  this,  had
he  not  been  assured  of  success  by  a  clairvoyante,  of  whose  powers  of  inti-ovision
and  prevision  he  had  had  most  ample  experience.

To  corroborate  such  statements,  I  select  from  among  my  own  cases  a  striking
instance  of  a  cure  of  epilejjsy.

William  Skinner,  aged  16,  tall,  brown  hair,  a  swarthy  complexion,  large
prominent  hazel  eyes,  smaU-sized  head  ;  is  the  son  of  a  time-keeper,  attached
to  an  omnibus  establishment  in  Portman  Place,  Edgware  Road.  He  was  brought
to  me  by  his  mother  on  Friday,  19th  January,  1844.  This  lad  was  a  melancholy
object ;  he  was  paralyzed  on  the  whole  of  his  left  side,  and  was  very  oflfensive,
from  utter  inability,  to  control  any  of  his  excretions.  He  had  been  afflicted
with  severe  epileptic  fits  for  about  eight  years.  Sometimes  he  had  ten  or  eleven
of  these  in  the  course  of  four  days,  and  then  he  might  have  an  interval  of  seven
or  eight  weeks  ;  more  commonly  they  occurred  about  once  in  ten  days  or  a  fort-
night. Any  sudden  impression  upon  his  mind  was  apt  to  produce  an  epileptic
attack;  a  dog  unexpectedly  running  past  him  would  occasion  a  paroxysm.  A
widening  of  the  face  and  a  sense  of  choking  or  ball  in  the  throat  were  observed
to  precede  the  insensibility  and  convulsion.  The  fits  varied  in  intensity,  occa-
sionally accompanied  by  much  foaming  at  the  mouth, — sometimes  without  any  :
occurred  often  during  sleep,  and  he  was  found  on  the  floor,  having  in  his  struggles
fallen  out  of  bed.  Fits  terminated  in  a  heavy  deep  sleep.  My  notes  were  made
for  a  medical  study ;  they  contain  details  that  bring  to  my  mind  so  much  want  of
philosophical  judgment  in  many  cases  of  epilepsy  treated  by  medical  men,  that
the  reflection  upon  them  is  sickening.  Epilepsy  is  a  disease  occasionally,  but
very  seldom,  cured,  and  the  pretension  and  quackery  displayed  by  men  who
ought  to  behave  better  is  lamentable.  Epilepsy  is  sometimes  relieved  by  very
strict  attention  to  the  digestive  functions.

I  pointed  out  in  1834,  that  an  abnormal  course  of  dentition  was  a  fre-
quent source  of  this  disease,  and  many  cases  have  since  then  been  success-
fully treated,  by  either  cutting  freely  the  gums,  or  by  extracting  the  wise  teetli.
Cure  is  the  object  of  the  honest  physician.  Mesmerism  has  cured  many  cases,  as
remarkable  pages  of  five  volumes  of  The  Zoist  testify.  I  completely  cured
William  Sldnner  by  the  patient  and  persevering  use  of  this  power.  It  is  not
magic.  It  is  not  collusion  with  the  devil !  Let  him  who  diabolically  asserts  this
falsehood,  for  the  devil  is  the  father  of  lies,  ask  himself  if  the  alarming  gentleman
in  black  ever  sanctioned  the  patience  and  the  perseverance  of  238  and  327  sittings
of  one  hour  each,  devoted  to  the  successful  treatment  of  two  patients,  afflicted


22


FACTS  IN  CLAIRVOYANCE,


weak  in  mind.  The  phenomena  of  nature  are  for  reflexion
and  for  use,  to  be  recorded,  noted  for  the  good  of  our  fellow
beings,  not  to  be  played  with  only, — to  be  regarded  as  toys,
— or  to  be  looked  upon  as  objects  merely  to  excite  the  senses
for  the  passing  moment.  Too  many  have  regarded  this  sub-
ject in  an  idle,  unphilosophic  spirit,  and  an  attempt  is  now
made  to  force  more  steady  and  more  serious  attention  to  con-
siderations too  important  for  the  levity  or  the  unreasonable
scepticism  with  which  they  have  hitherto  been  met.  It  is
remarkable  that  mesmerism  should  have  been  so  received  by
even  deep-thinking  philosophers.  The  wide  ramifications  of
this  science  into  the  depths  of  the  most  occult  phenomena,

with  epilepsy  ?  Did  Satan  ever  spend  so  much  time  in  endeavours  to  do  good  ?
The  Spirit  of  Evil  may  have  often  prompted  patients  and  their  relatives  to  halt
in  their  course  of  mesmerism.  Tired  of  reiterated  sittings,  they  judge,  without
experience,  of  what  is  called  a  fair  trial.  In  the  effort  to  cure  disease  of  a  serious
character,  patience  ought  never  to  flag.  The  question  is  one  of  confidence  in
the  honesty  of  the  medical  man.  The  nature  of  medical  opposition  to  mesmerism,
the  history  of  the  treatment  its  honest  advocates  have  met  with,  have  inflicted  a
severe  blow  on  the  character  of  our  profession.  Patient,  unwearying,  philoso-
phical investigstion  have  characterized  the  study  of  this  subject.  It  is  sickenuig
to  reflect  on  the  flood  of  wickedness  which  has  been  poured  out  on  the  simple
desire  to  elucidate  most  important  phenomena  of  nature.  The  honest  truth
is  scouted.  Interested  knaves  are  found  to  invent  and  give  circulation,  by  the
most  cunning  arts,  to  most  atrocious  calumnies.  Mesmerism  requires  an  amount
of  perseverance  that  few  will,  in  these  days,  bestow  upon  it ;  but  when  the
requisite  time  has  been  given,  the  reward  to  the  sufferer  is  abundant.  The  truth
on  this  matter  must  prevail.  A  cunning  dodge  of  the  medical  men  who  try  to
oppose  the  progress  of  that  which  an  honest  sense  of  duty  should  impel  them  to
study,  is,  that  they  decline  the  responsibility  of  having  mesmeric  practice  admi-
nistered to  their  patients ;  and  so  they  work  on  the  timidity  of  the  public  !  This
may  be  mistaken  for  honesty,  but  in  my  mind  it  is  ignorance  fraudulently  taking
advantage  of  position,  to  operate  upon  the  most  pitiable  passion  of  our  nature —
fear.  Responsibility,  forsooth,  from  which  the  same  knave  will  not  shrink  when
the  question  is  of  administering  a  poison,  of  the  principle  of  whose  action  he  is
profoundly  ignorant.  Another  mode  of  operating  on  the  fears  of  women  is  to
assert  that  mesmerism  excites  to  ungovernable  sexual  passion.  An  ignorance  of
phrenology  encourages  this  gross  mis-statement ;  so  disgustingly  libellous  and
offensively  insulting  to  the  moral  capabilities  of  self-control  among  the  females
of  our  country.  A  few  are  found  with  undue  developments  of  the  organ  of  Ama-
tiveness,  and  the  opposers  of  mesmerism  would  insinuate  that  our  proverbially
delicate-minded  women  are  all  too  large  in  the  lower  back  part  of  the  head,  and
that  they  necessarily  forget  the  functions  of  those  other  organs  of  their  brains  whose
duties  are  to  encourage  the  purest  thoughts,  and  to  check  improper  amatory  feel-
ings. If  their  averment  were  true,  no  woman  should  take  a  glass  of  wine  or
of  any  exciting  drink,  for  they  induce  a  state  of  brain  that  encourages  passion,
and  an  abandonment  to  such  ideas  as  are  most  apt  to  prevail  with  the  presence
of  large  posterior  cerebral  organs.  Far  more  immoral  mischief  may  be  done,
and  has  been  done,  with  intoxicating  liquors — chloroform  and  other  drugs,  than
with  mesmerism.  The  real  and,  perhaps,  instinctive  fear  of  the  bad  spirits  of
this  world,  is,  that  mesmerism  of  a  necessity  leads  on  to  a  philosophy  of  the
mind  which  must  ensure  the  establishment  of  true  instead  of  false  Christianity  !

 a  consummation  hated  by  a  far  larger  jjroportion  of  mankind  than  in  their

greedy  selfishness  would  choose  to  confess  it.


WITH  OBSERVATIONS  ON  MESMERISM.


23


the  power  of  knowing  events  passing  in  another  hemisphere  of
this  planet,  second  sight,  the  prevision  of  disease,  the  faculty
of  introvision  and  of  seeing  into  the  earth  for  minerals  and
springs  of  water,  the  will,  the  interchange  of  thought  be-
tween man  and  man,  the  relations  between  wakefulness
and  sleep,  the  power  of  suspending  ordinary  sensibility  to
alleviate  and  to  cure  the  most  agonizing  pain,  the  cure  of
diseases,  even  those  involving  alteration  of  structure,  the
establishment  of  the  truth  of  GalFs  organology  of  the  brain,
and  all  the  consequent  numerous  considerations  of  mental
philosophy.  These,  and  more,  form  a  subject  as  important
to  investigate  as  some  portions  are  magnificent  and  sublime
to  contemplate.

I  propose  to  take  an  early  opportunity  of  laying  before  the
pubhc  a  sketch  of  some  of  my  ideas  on  the  philosophy  of
medicine,  and  the  relation  which  mesmerism  bears  to  it.  In
The  Zoist,*  I  have  already,  in  detailing  curious  and  striking
phenomena,  endeavoured  to  shew  that  the  views  of  those
who  had  about  seventy  years  ago  written  of  an  imponderable
coloured  fluid,  emanating  from  the  nerves  of  living  beings,
were  quite  correct.  Whatever  we  may  deduce  from  the  facts
that  have  been  placed  before  us,  it  is  quite  certain  that  these
facts  have  been  observed  by  different  persons^  in  different
places,  and  at  different  periods  of  time.  Numbers  of  persons
have,  in  all  the  quarters  of  the  globe,  put  patients  into  a
state  of  somnambulism  numbers  of  these  patients  have  exhi-
bited the  phenomena  of  clairvoyance  :  some  in  a  low  degree,
others  to  a  more  exalted  extent.  Some  have  seen  the  room
in  which  they  happened  to  be,  enlightened  as  if  by  the  rays
of  the  sun ;  others  as  if  by  all  the  colours  of  the  rainbow.
Others  have  been  able  to  see  through  media,  commonly  known
as  opaque,  into  an  adjoining  room,  or  even  to  a  great  distance.
The  varieties  in  the  degree  of  this  phenomenon  are  very  remark-
able, I  have  testified  that  I  have  been  present  where  persons,
in  sleep,  have  declared  to  events  passing  in  other  places,  which
have  been  found,  on  investigation,  to  have  been  most  accu-
rately recounted.  Often  have  I  witnessed  most  accurate  and
minute  descriptions  given  by  somnambules  of  the  furniture
and  inhabitants  of  rooms,  into  which  they  had  never  in  their
lives  set  their  feet.  The  visual  sensibility  of  these  clairvoy-
antes  must  have  been  extraordinarily  augmented,  as  it  enabled
them  to  see  light  through  media,  which  to  us,  in  an  ordinary
state  of  sensibility,  would  be  considered  quite  opaque.  The
degree  of  augmentation  of  visual  sensibility  must  vary  exceed-


*  Zoist,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  124  and  p.  254.


24.


FACTS  IN  CLAIRVOYANCE,


ingly.  1  have  met  with  several  persons  who  could,  in  their
ordinary  state,  see  flames,  not  visible  to  most,  in  broad  day-
light ;  and  I  have,  in  the  papers  in  The  Zoist,  mentioned  that
some  patients,  in  their  ordinary  state,  could  see  blue  light,
or  grey,  emanating  from  the  ends  of  my  fingers  when  I  was
engaged  in  the  act  of  mesmerising.  I  could  enumerate
twenty  persons,  who,  in  their  ordinary  waking  state,  could
see  these  emanations  from  my  fingers,  and  some  of  them
from  my  eyes  and  my  forehead.  I  have  known  many  more
who  could  see  these  coloured  emanations  when  they  have
been  in  a  mesmeric  sleep.  To  my  mind  the  fact  is  sufficiently
established,  that  from  the  functional  extremities  of  the  nerves
of  living  beings,  a  fluid  bearing  some  analogies  to  the  mag-
netic fluid,  emanates ;  the  more  abundant,  as  thought  and
will  are  more  intensified.  I  think  I  have  adduced  facts  enough
to  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  this  fluid  is  either  attractive  or
repulsive,  according  to  phrenological  conditions ;  that  it  can
be  accumulated  in  water  or  on  other  bodies,  and  that  the
phenomena  produced  by  its  reiterated  impingement  on  sus-
ceptible living  bodies  are  analogous  to  those  produced  by
magnetic  currents  received  by  the  same  bodies,  under  the
same  or  similar  circumstances.  I  have  said  that  I  had  myself,
after  having  continuously  exercised  my  will  upon  an  obstinate
subject,  seen  "  lier  covered  with  a  violet-coloured  halo.^^  Since
that  time,  I  have  frequently  observed  modifications  of  the
same  thing.  In  mesmerising  with  the  exertion  of  intense
will,  I  have  seen  portions  of  the  face  of  the  patient  covered
with  a  violet,  and  sometimes  with  a  blue  cloudy  atmosphere,
which  has  vanished  upon  my  having  recourse  to  dispersing
passes.  The  philosophical  researches  of  Baron  Von  Reichen-
bach  have  established  concurrent  truths,  and  the  logical  dis-
tinctions which  he  has  introduced  into  the  examination  of
the  facts  connected  with  the  emission  of  light  from  magnets
and  from  crystals,  render  it  highly  probable  that  the  impon-
derable agent  he  has  indicated,  however  analogous  to  the
electric  or  magnetic  fluid,  has  characters  that  entitle  him  to
place  it  under  a  new  category.  The  instruments,  in  common
use  for  testing  the  presence  of  the  electric  or  magnetic
agencies,  do  not  enable  us  to  be  aware  of  the  mesmeric  fluid,
or  to  measure  its  quantity  or  intensity.  The  human  frame
in  a  highly  susceptible  condition,  is  at  present  our  only
mesmerometer,  and  the  series  of  phenomena,  with  identical
characters,  exhibited  by  various  crystalline  bodies  on  several
subjects,  leave  no  doubt  that  laws  exist  which,  notwith-
standing the  varieties  ofliered  by  individual  idiosyncracies,
may,  by  continued  investigation,  be  traced  to  their  source.


WITH  OBSERVATIONS  ON  MESMEllISM.


25


The  appearance  of  Vori  Reiehenbach's  work  is  an  era  in  the
history  of  mesmerism ;  for  the  existence  of  an  agency  with
two  poles,  residing  in  the  principal  axis  of  all  crystals,  has
enabled  ns  to  draw  important  inferences  on  the  nature  of  sleep
and  of  vigilance.  My  attempt  at  a  theory  of  sleep  is  grounded
on  these,  together  with  other  facts ;  and  much  experience  has
coiToborated  the  accuracy  of  my  views.  One  pole  of  a  crystal
is  found  to  encourage  sleep,  the  opposite  pole  has  the  effect
of  producing  wakefulness.  A  current  from  the  positive  pole
of  Mr.  Noad's  Electro  Dynamic  Coil,  in  a  direct  course  from
the  head  to  the  feet,  has  a  tendency  to  induce  sleep ;  a  cur-
rent in  the  inverse  course  from  the  feet  to  the  head,  or  from
the  pit  of  the  stomach  to  the  head,  immediately  awakens  the
person  put  to  sleep.  The  direct  mesmeric  passes  produce
sleep, — the  inverse  passes  produce  vigilance :  all  attractive
currents  or  agencies  produce  sleep, — all  repulsive  agencies
awaken.  The  human  will  exercised  intensely  upon  a  suscep-
tible subject,  if  with  attractive  feeling,  causes  a  tendency  to
sleep  :  if  with  repulsive  characteristics,  the  opposite  effect.*
These,  with  numerous  other  facts,  establish  the  correctness
of  the  general  proposition  I  have  adduced.  It  was  an  object
then  in  view,  to  ascertain  the  condition  of  the  nervous  system
under  the  two  opposite  states  of  sleep  and  vigilance.  I  knew
— ^for  I  had  seen  in  animals,  and  by  observations  in  cases
where  I  had  removed  portions  of  the  bone  of  the  skull — that
the  human  brain  was  more  compact  dimng  sleep,  than  when
the  patient  was  awake.  Boerhaave  had  recorded  this  fact ;
and  when  I  have  opened  the  head,  in  cases  where  persons  had
recently  died  of  hypertone,  the  brain  and  spinal  cord  have
been  observed  to  be  extraordinarily  firm,  and  were  hard  and
compact,  if  a  dog  or  a  rabbit  be  killed  by  inducing  too  deep
a  sleep — a  hypertonic  state — by  a  strong  current  of  magnetism
from  the  positive  pole  of  an  electro  dynamic  coil,  the  brain
and  spinal  cord  are  found  in  a  state  of  compact  integration,
so  that  all  the  facts  concur  in  establishing  the  idea  that  the
nervous  fibre  is  more  compact  in  sleep  and  in  tonic  spasm,
and  less  so  in  vigilance  and  in  clonic  spasm.  Now  if  we
enquire  into  the  nature  of  spasm,  we  shall  find  that  it  is
merely  a  condition  of  muscle  actuated  to  contract  regularly

*  Nothing  so  strikingly  illustrates  the  protective  power  of  self-control  derived
from  a  good  education,  as  the  facts  connected  with  the  exercise  of  intense  will
on  somnambules  with  different  moral  habits.  A  somnambulc,  with  a  very  strict
sense  of  propriety,  may  be  commanded  by  the  silent  will  to  do  an  act  repulsive
to  her  feelings  ;  to  kiss  one  on  the  cheek,  for  instance.  She  resists  tlio  mandate,
although  the  resistance  produces  severe  head-ache.  In  some  cases  I  liave  known
the  patient  to  waken  up  suddenly.  A  woman  with  facile  morals,  is  attracted  by
the  same  order,  and  performs  the  bidding.


26


FACTS  IN  CLAIRVOYANCE,


or  steadily  under  tone,  and  irregularly  or  unsteadily,  with
intermissions,  under  clone.  Tonic  and  clonic  spasm  may  be
considered  the  types  of  all  the  various  forms  of  disease.  The
degrees  of  depth  in  healthy  sleep  are  but  degrees  of  tone.
The  degrees  of  vigilance,  from  the  opening  of  the  eyes  in
the  morning  to  the  full  activity  of  healthy  exercise,  are  degrees
of  clone,  with  alternations  of  tone.  When  clone  prepon-
derates, a  disease  supervenes.  These  two  conditions  may  be
compared  to  the  conditions  of  polarity,  and  it  will  be  found
that  the  analogies  have  closer  relations  to  the  phenomena  of
poles  than  appear  at  first  sight.  Common  sleep  in  one^s  bed
at  night  is  the  more  refreshing  in  proportion  to  the  degree  to
which  the  system  is  toned.  A  healthy  sailor,  when  he  turns
in  to  his  berth,  often  packs  his  sleep  of  four  hours  with  so
much  tone,  that  he  obtains  the  refreshment  of  a  mesmeric
sleep,  which  is  in  fact  only  common  sleep  multiplied  by  itself,
if  the  expression  be  allowable.  The  sailor  having  had  strong
exercise,  feels  the  fatigue  that  brings  on  a  reversal  of  polarity.
The  clonic  state  of  nerve  yields  to  the  tonic,  and  he  sleeps
with  an  intensity  in  a  ratio  to  his  previous  fatigue.  The
mesmeric  sleep,  a  multiple  of  common  sleep,  is  the  more
refreshing  to  the  patient,  as  it  is  more  intense.  If  no  modi-
fying circumstances  intervene,  the  mesmeric  sleep  may  be
further  multiplied,  the  brain  and  nerves  being  rendered  more
compact.  In  some  cases,  the  continuance  of  downward  passes
will  effect  this ;  in  others,  the  application,  to  the  nape  of  the
neck,  of  gold,  or  of  platinum,  of  rhodium,  of  nickel,  but
above  all,  of  cobalt,  will  have  a  striking  effect  in  producing
this  state.  It  is  the  presence  of  a  more  profound  sleep  with
a  rigid  condition  of  the  whole  voluntary  muscular  system.
When  the  patient  returns  to  the  waking  state,  he  finds  him-
self amazingly  refreshed  by  his  deep  nap.  No  tonic  medicine
can  be  compared  to  this  power ;  it  induces  healthy,  vigorous,
buoyant  sensations  ;  but  if,  instead  of  waking  up  the  patient,
a  sufficiently  powerful  positive  magnetic  current  were  passed
in  a  direct  course  down  the  spinal  cord,  the  effect  would
probably  be  hypertone  and  death.  Ether  and  chloroform,
which  are  well  known  to  produce  some  of  the  phenomena  of
mesmerism,  when  they  produce  death  do  not  kill  by  means
of  hypertone.  The  two  opposite  poles  of  magnets  and  of
crystals,  and  the  opposite  effects  produced  by  them  on  the
living  system,  lead  us  to  inferences  relating  to  the  operation
of  narcotic  poisons,  that  explain  much  of  the  obscurity  of
their  modus  operandi.  The  pointed  extremity  of  a  crystal,
say  of  nitrate  of  potass,  being  offered  to  the  face  of  a
highly  susceptible  patient,  sleep  instantly  ensues.  Reverse


WITH OBSERVATIONS  ON  MESMERISM.


37


the  polarity — offer  the  other  extremity  of  the  crystal — the
patient  immediately  wakens.  If  we  could  so  dispose  the
crystals  of  morphia  as  to  be  able  to  present  to  the  face  only
the  extremities  that  produce  the  hypnotic  effect,  we  should,
in  all  probability,  have  a  delicious,  refreshing  sleep  ; — but  in
administering  this  drug,  we  put  into  the  stomach  the  poi-
sonous, as  well  as  the  Ijenignant  pole,  and  thus  defeat  the
object  we  have  in  view.  It  is  the  recoupe, — the  contrecoup, —
the  blow  with  the  bit,  that  is  the  inevitable  consequence  of
a  simultaneous  exhibition  of  both  poles ;  and  so  it  is  with
all  narcotics  that  act  on  the  nerves.  We  have  not  suf-
ficiently studied  mesmerism.  We  have  not  arrived  at  the
art  of  separating  the  two  poles.  Ether  and  chloroform  in
excess  exemplify  the  pernicious  agency  of  the  repulsive  pole,
that  of  clone,  and  kill  by  inducing  a  condition  of  brain  and
lungs  amounting  to  disease, — asphyxia,  with  a  venous  con-
gestion, like  that  produced  by  a  beastly  dead-drunkenness, —
the  opposite  of  the  effects  attendant  on  temperance,  and  its
health-giving  influence,  a  prerogative  of  the  mild  positive  pole
of  mesmerism.

It  is  to  be  hoped  that  these  views  may  tend  to  remove
some  of  the  confusion  that  embarrasses  the  minds  of  medical
men  on  the  subjects  of  spasms, — of  the  influence  of  narcotics
and  of  the  distinctions  between  health  and  disease.  Those
who  talk  glibly  on  hysteria  and  its  Protean  forms,  should  learn
the  use  of  terms.  If  they  have  reflective  power,  they  will
strive  to  wash  out  of  their  minds  the  confused  ideas  of  hys-
teric diseases  of  parts  that  have  no  relation  to  the  womb.
The  study  of  the  phenomena  of  mesmerism  would  clear  away
the  mist  which  envelopes  the  minds  of  many  medical  men,
not  only  on  so  called  nervous  diseases,  but  would  open  up
more  correct  principles  of  pathological  reasoning  in  general ;
for  whatever  relates  to  the  better  comprehension  of  innerva-
tion, must  be  confessed  to  be  very  important.  The  two  oppo-
site kinds  of  delirium ; — the  two  opposite  kinds  of  fever ;

the  hot  and  cold  stages  of  which  are  so  strikingly  and
wonderfully  coincident  with  full  or  the  reverse  states  of  the
arterial  or  venous  systems,  those  phenomena  which  were  so
elaborately  shewn  by  the  late  Professor  Macartney  to  illus-
trate the  opposite  conditions  of  inflammation  and  congestion,
will  appear  to  be  closely  connected  with  the  tonic  and  clonic
polarities  of  the  nerves;  in  fact,  with  the  distribution  of
nervous  influence ; — innervation ; — mesmerism  !

All  maladies  in  which  nerves  are  in  a  clonic  condition
are  successfully  treated  by  restoring  these  organs  to  a  tonic
state. Here  is  the  great  secret  of  the  astounding  cures  by


FACTS  IN  CLAIRVOYANCE,


the  agency  of  mesmerism,  of  which  The  Zoist  offers  so  many
instances.  Consumption  arrested  ! — cancer  cured  !  If  no
other  boon  had  been  vouchsafed  to  man  by  this  discovery,
here  is  a  sufficient  plea  for  the  gratitude  of  mankind.  But  the
simple  induction  of  sleep  rather  deeper — more  intense  than
that  which  we  covet  as  a  blessing  when  we  lay  the  head  on  a
pillow  for  the  night,  after  a  humble  aspiration  towards  per-
fection,— is  a  cure  for  a  long  list  of  diseases,  many  of  which
have  baffled  the  experience  and  the  ingenuity  of  the  best
practitioners.  Dr.  EUiotson,  who  has  cured  cancer,  and
whose  experience  has  been  most  extensive,  is  a  man  of  no  or-
dinary talent ;  he  could  never  have  imagined  that  it  would  be
his  destiny  to  lead  on  to  such  wonderful  results  as  he  has  ob-
tained ;  and  I,  who  have  from  my  boyhood  enjoyed  the  most
extensive  opportunities  of  hospital  practice,  know  that  men
do  not  ordinarily  cure  what  it  has  been  my  lot  to  eradicate
by  mesmerism.  Disbelief  in  these  statements  becomes  a  folly.
I  assert  that  I  have  repeatedly  arrested  the  progress  of  tuber-
cular consumption :  I  assert  that,  by  mesmeric  agency,  I  have
cured  insanity  repeatedly  in  cases  unsuccessfully  treated,  nay,
much  aggravated  by  the  exhibition  of  the  ordinary  so-called
remedies.  Hysteria,  grave  cases  of  epilepsy,  chorea  or  St.
Vitus's  dance, — all  examples  of  clonic  spasm,  have  yielded,  in
several  cases,  to  the  deep  mesmeric  sleep  I  have  induced  in
the  patients.  Paralysis  has  often  been  treated  unsuccess-
fully by  a  hit  or  miss  application  of  electricity,  adopted  with-
out any  scientific  principle ;  the  analogies  to  mesmeric  treat-
ment aff'orded  by  Mr.  Noad^s  electro-dynamic  coil,  have  en-
abled Mr.  Bagshaw  and  Mr.  Tylee  of  Bath  to  perform  some
really  wonderful  cures ;  and  my  own  success  with  the  more
powerful  agency  of  mesmerism  itself,  entitles  me  to  urge  its
claims  for  efficacy  on  the  serious  attention  of  the  medical
community  not  only  as  a  curative  agent  in  hemiplegia,  but
in  all  varieties  of  this  intractable  malady.  Extraordinary
beneficial  changes  have  taken  place  in  cases  of  paraplegia
where  medical  opinions  had  decided  that  the  cause  was  a
softening  of  the  spinal  cord.  In  organic  diseases  of  the
kidneys  and  of  the  bladder,  marvellous  relief  has  been  ob-
tained through  mesmerism.  I  was  called  some  months  ago
to  a  case  which  was  described  to  me  by  the  physician  in
attendance  as  one  of  saccharine  diabetes,  with  softening  of
the  spinal  marrow  and  paraplegia.  This  was  his  view  of  it,
and  he  said  it  was  impossible  the  patient  could  survive  eight
days.  M.  Laurent  has  continued  to  act  as  the  mesmeriser,
and  notwithstanding  very  many  untoward  events,  calculated
to  thwart  the  practice,  large  sloughs  and  deep  ulcers  on  the


WITH OBSERVATIONS  ON  MESMERISM.


29


sacrum  and  close  to  each  trochanter  have  healed  under  the
influence  of  mesmerised  water  dressing,  and  the  gentleman
is  better  in  every  respect.

When  a  disease  of  the  spine  advances  to  a  point  at  which
an  experienced  physician  declares  that  the  patient  is  in  a  con-
dition without  hope,  and  mesmeric  practice  snatches  him  from
the  grave,  persons  will  no  doubt  be  found  to  declare  that  the
fact  is  not  at  all  extraordinary  !

In  ordinary  cases  of  lateral  curvature  of  the  spine,  and
in  wry  neck,  this  agency  has  been  attended  with  the  most
marked  efficacy.  Lateral  curvature  is  a  spasmodic  disease.
It  is  in  fact  a  disorder  of  the  brain  and  spinal  cord,  and  the
attractive  force  of  mesmerism  is  its  most  philosophical,  its
surest  and  best  cure.  I  need  hardly  allude  to  the  success  of
mesmerism  in  the  treatment  of  various  organic  as  well  as
functional  diseases  of  females.  In  some  malignant  cases,
where,  by  the  experienced  physician,  all  idea  of  relief  by  ordi-
nary means  has  been  abandoned,  it  has  eflPected  a  complete  cure.

Physicians,  who  now  sneer  at  mesmerism,  will  soon  be
found  taking  advantage  of  the  discoveries  which  this  science
has  suggested,  and  which  it  has  enabled  its  cultivators  to  in-
troduce to  the  notice  of  the  public.  Acting  on  the  knowledge
obtained  from  the  abstract,  by  Dr.  Gregory,  of  the  Baron  Von
Reichenbach's  researches,  I  have  long  been  in  the  habit  of
using  the  benignant  pole  of  the  crystals  of  nitrate  of  potass,
as  a  powerful  and  very  harmless  agent  in  communicating  tone
to  the  system  in  numerous  cases  of  chronic  disorder,  as  well
as  in  those  of  serious  organic  disease.  Mr.  Rouse,  of  1,
Wigmore  Street,  and  Mr.  Garden,  of  372,  Oxford  Street,
make  up  bundles  of  crystals,  which  are  used  by  placing  them
with  their  pointed  ends  within  half  an  inch  of  the  face.  The
patient  should  be  seated,  either  on  a  couch  or  easy  chair,
and  a  table  or  convenient  stand  should  be  placed  in  such  a
manner  as  to  allow  of  the  crystals  being  approximated  to  the
face.  This  process  should  be  continued  for  half  an  hour  or  an
hour  twice  a  day  :  and  care  should  be  taken  not  to  use  the
crystals  too  soon  after  a  meal.  In  cases  of  obstinate  dys-
pepsia, I  have,  with  great  advantage,  recommended  an  ad-
ditional bunch  of  crystals  to  be  placed  with  the  points  near
the  pit  of  the  stomach.  I  have  been  glad  to  find  that  Mr.
Chandler,  of  Rotherhithe,  has  been  adopting  the  practice  as
well  as  myself.  If  I  mistake  not,  he  will,  in  the  course  of
time,  discover  that  the  sulphates,  the  muriates,  and  the  car-
bonates are  not  nearly  so  agreeable  to  patients,  especially  to
very  susceptible  persons,  as  the  nitrates.  The  great  objection
to  the  nitrate  of  potass  is  the  ready  friability  of  its  crystals.


30


PACTS  IN  CLAIRVOYANCE^


Another  application  of  mesmeric  theory  to  medical  art,
consists  in  the  application  of  the  electric  current  through
bodies  of  water,  in  which  certain  saline  ingredients  have  been
dissolved.  If  a  bath  of  this  kind  be  used,  I  must  give  the
warning  that  great  care  should  be  taken  not  to  develope  the
Reichenbachod  from  chlorides  or  oxides  that  are  poisonous.  I
have  known  very  pernicious  results  from  oxides  of  mercury
and  of  copper,  and  I  should  infer  that  compounds  of  arsenic
or  of  cobalt  might  prove  fatal.

My  experiments  were  contrived  with  a  view  to  the  develop-
ment of  the  new  imponderable  agent,  by  means  of  the  de-
composition of  an  innocent  saline  fluid,  the  patient  being
placed  in  a  warm  bath  with  the  head  to  the  lode  and  the  feet
to  the  Cathode.  I  have,  in  so  many  cases,  induced  sleep  by
introducing  the  fingers  of  patients  into  finger  glasses  contain-
ing a  solution  of  either  Nitre,  Epsom  salt,  Glauber^s  salt,
Salpolychrest,  Common  Salt,  Carbonate  of  Soda,  or  Carbonate
of  Potass,  through  which  I  have  passed  currents  of  electricity,
that  I  feel  assured  of  the  development  of  an  attractive  force,
during  the  process ;  and  I  believe  that  in  due  time,  with  a
sufiiciently  powerful  galvanic  arrangement,  any  person  might
thus  be  put  to  sleep.  If  this  be  so,  then  the  views  I  have
given  of  the  application  of  the  philosophy  of  sleep  to  the
cure  of  disease,  may  be  more  extensively  adopted  than  the
physicians  of  the  slow-coach  school  would  approve  of.  I  have,
by  mesmerism  alone,  unaided  by  the  mesmerism  given  out
by  the  drugs  which  medical  men  administer,*  cured  large
ovarian  tumors,  and  a  case  of  anasarcous  dropsy,  complicated
with  ascites  resulting  from  renal  disease,  in  which  the  patient,
who  now  measures  32  inches,  had  an  abdominal  girth  of  48
inches.  I  trust  that  the  hints  I  am  now  communicating  may
lead  to  further  successful  treatment  of  similar  cases.  If  the
stupid,  not  to  say  the  wicked,  prejudice  against  mesmerism
be  destined  to  continue,  I  care  not  under  what  inferior  agency
of  the  same  power,  the  cure  of  serious,  hitherto  intractable
diseases  is  eflFected.  People  who  oppose  mesmerism,  reflect
not  that  the  Being,  who  allows  them  to  exist,  has  impressed
upon  them  a  law,  by  which,  at  every  instant  of  their  lives,
they  are  shedding  forth  mesmeric  fluid  from  all  their  surfaces,
and  that  they  cannot  speak,  think,  or  act  in  any  way  withoiit
the  aid  of  mesmerism ; — that  the  various  functions  of  their
bodies  are  carried  on  by  mesmeric  agency.  Time  must  ensure
the  victory  for  Truth. That  which  is  now  opposed  by  folly  as

*  Ignorant  physicians  are  not  aware  that  they  administer  mesmerism  with
every  dose  they  get  their  patients  to  swallow.


WITH OBSERVATIONS  ON  MESMERISM.


31


theoretical,  will,  at  some  future  date,  be  inevitably  adopted
as  practical.

Notwithstanding  the  stupid  parrot  notes  of  ignorant  men
on  the  value  of  practical  knowledge  as  contradistinguished
from  theory,  I  mean  to  uphold  the  proposition,  that  no  man
can  be  a  good  practical  physician  who  is  not  well  versed  in
physiological  theory.  He  who  despises  theory,  should  be  con-
tent with  his  station  as  an  empiric.  Where  mind  is  deficient,
where  reasoning  power  is  weak,  men  contemn  theory,  and
babble  about  practice.  Nearly  forty  years  of  famOiarity  with
practice  in  hospitals,  have  taught  me  that  the  want  of  theo-
retical knowledge  has  led  many  a  man  into  awful  blunders,  I
exemplify  this  when  I  say  that  in  a  public  infirmary,  where  I
for  some  years  acted  as  a  physician,  I  have  been  obliged  to
interfere  in  the  case  of  an  amputation  of  the  leg, — where  the
operation  had  been  done  for  more  than  an  hour, — in  order  to
take  up  and  tie  every  artery  myself,  the  practical  man,  par
excellence,  surrounded  by  assistants  and  pupils,  having  failed
in  the  attempt  to  complete  his  duty.  I  have  reduced  a  dislo-
cation of  the  shoulder  of  eight  day's  standing,  in  a  case  where
some  practical  men,  abhorring  theory,  would  have  left  the
patient  without  the  use  of  his  right  arm  for  the  rest  of  his  life.
I  have  known  great  boasters  about  their  own  superiority  of
practical  knowledge,  as  well  as  of  their  attendance  on  patients
of  high  rank,  talk  absurd  nonsense  about  contagion  and  in-
fection, whose  confusion  of  intellect  and  want  of  judgment, —
while  they  sneered  at  theories  and  abhorred  mesmerism, —
have  produced  havoc  among  their  cases  of  fever.  I  have
known  accoucheurs,  who  are  by  themselves  and  their  puffing
friends  considered  eminent,  such  dunderhead  impostors,  pre-
tending to  practical  knowledge,  yet  so  ignorant  of  theoretical
principle,  as  to  blunder  egregiously  and  most  maladroitly  in
their  application  of  instruments,  leaving  some  of  their  patients
miserable  objects  for  life,  while  other  victims  of  their  ignorance
have  not  lived  long  enough  to  tell  much  of  their  sufferings.*

*  Poor  women  !  Are  there  in  this  world  any  professional  men  who  have  a
just  and  honourable  pity  for  you  :  who  would  rather  stir  up  the  foulest  prejudices
of  ignorance  than  that  you  should  be  subjected  to  the  practice  of  mesmerism  ;
who  would  rather  that  you  should  be  protected  by  the  dead  drunkenness  of  chlo-
roform, than  by  the  tonic  and  health-giving  sleep  of  mesmerism,  from  knowing
the  injuries  that  are  to  be  inflicted  upon  you  in  order  that  wiseacres,  without  clear
principles  in  their  heads,  may  learn  practice  !  Poor  women  !  Your  real  per-
manent sufferings  find  no  pity,  but  let  innovations,  intended  for  your  benefit,  be
introduced,  then  how  the  lovers  of  cant  pour  forth  their  floods  of  spurious  charity
to  prevent  your  being  cured  1  Poor  women  !  If  you  should  happen  to  be  torn
incurably  by  the  clumsy  application  of  instruments  ;— if  you  should  be  bled  by
some  fool,  when  a  rapid  decline  was  hastening  you  in  a  few  hours  to  an  inevitable
death,  there  might  be  contrived  ways  and  means  of  concealing  the  matter  so  that
the  world  should  not  be  shocked,  but  the  thought  of  mesmerism  for  you  would


32


FACTS  IN  CLAIRVOYANCE,  ETC.


These  are  the  folks  who  belong  to  a  class,  that,  in  public  insti-
tutions, abet  falsehood  and  dishonourable  conduct.  These  are
they,  who  spread  slanders  of  their  competitors,  and  fear  the
publicity  of  their  own  proceedings.  Being  themselves  below
par  in  knowledge,  talent,  ingenuity,  judgment,  they  would
exert  their  influence  among  governors  to  keep  up  a  system
of  favoritism  and  of  nepotism,  to  the  detriment  of  science,
and  to  the  most  unjust  exclusion  of  the  best  medical  advice
for  the  poor.  Partisan  subscribers  to  medical  charities  are
sometimes  found  to  be  such  gowks  that  there  are  not  want-
ing instances  in  which  they  have  come  down  to  board  rooms
to  vote,  at  the  instigation  of  friends,  without  due  enquiry,
and  become  the  tools  of  a  system  of  humbug,  of  which,
could  they  guess  the  object,  the  concealment  of  the  real  cir-
cumstances attendant  on  fatal  stupidity,  they  would  perhaps
gape  at  their  own  gullibility.  And  mesmerism,  the  science
through  which  alone  can  physicians  and  physiologists  obtain
a  correct  knowledge  of  the  actions  of  the  nervous  system,
is  to  be  defended  not  only  against  wiser  and  more  accom-
plished men,  banded  together  they  best  know  why, — but
against  the  prejudices, — the  ignorance, — the  arrogance, — the
blackguard  slander  and  calumny, — the  low  cunning  of  such
opponents.

be  so  atrocious,  that  should  a  qualified  physician  think  of  the  practice,  your
champions  would  invoke  the  portentous  thunders  of  the  Royal  College  to  crush
him.  Immortality  should  be  the  lot  of  that  briUiant  genius  who  could  propound
so  noble  and  wise  a  quietus  for  mesmerism  !  Science  to  be  smothered  by  order
of  a  Royal  College  !  !


FINIS.


Wallon  aud  Mitchell,  Priulcis,  34,  Wardour-street.
