Henry Hudson the Navigator (George M. Asher (ed.), 1860; public domain)
===============================================================================
The Hakluyt Society edition of Hudson's journals, containing the 15 June 1608 mermaid sighting off Novaya Zemlya — the classic Arctic mermaid account, witnessed by Thomas Hilles and Robert Rayner. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/henryhudsonnavig27ashe).

^g^|:liyBl^Sffi|p|py:g:|J|;^


Hibrarg
ImuFrHtlg  of  PtttBburglj

Darlington  Memorial  Library

OIlaBB .V3t...VQ...l

Soak O....V.5!


REPOUT     FOR     1860,


The  Hakluyt  Society  has  now  completed  the  thirteenth
year  of  its  existence,  and  has,  during  that  period,  issued
twenty-five  valuable  volumes  relating  to  early  voyages  and
travels  in  every  part  of  the  world.  The  number  of  sub-
scribers has  been  steadily  maintained  at  a  point  which  has
enabled  the  Council  to  ensure  the  efficiency  of  the  Society  ;
and  they  now  have  the  satisfaction  to  report  that  the  funds
continue  in  a  prosperous  condition.

The  Council  have  given  their  best  consideration  to  the
price  at  which  new  subscribers  during  the  present  year
should  be  allowed  to  receive  the  past  publications  of  the
Society,  the  earlier  series  of  which  have  become  scarce,  and
have  fixed  it  at  Nine  Guineas,  that  sum  not  including  the
subscription  for  the  year.

Since  the  last  General  Meeting  the  following  volumes
have  been  delivered  to  members  :

"  Expeditions  into  the  Valley  of  the  Amazons  during
the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries;"  containing  the
Journey  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  from  the  Koyal  Commentaries
of  Garcilasso  Inca  de  la  Vega ;  the  Voyage  of  Francisco  de
Orellana,  from  the  General  History  of  Herrera ;  and  the
Voyage  of  Christoval  de  Acuha,  from  a  narrative  written  by
himself  in  1641.  Edited  and  translated,  with  an  Introduc-
tion and  a  descriptive  list  of  the  principal  Tribes  in  the
Valley  of  the  Amazons,  by  Clements  E,.  Markham,  Esq^.


2

"  Early  Voyages  to  Australia/'  a  collection  of  documents
showing  the  early  discoveries  of  Australia  to  the  time  of
Captain  Cook.  Edited  by  E.  H.  Major,  Esq.,  of  the  British
Museum,  F.S.A.

Two  volumes  will  be  delivered  to  members  during  the
course  of  the  present  year,  one  of  which  is  completed  and
will  be  issued  immediately,  and  the  other  is  in  a  very  for-
ward state,  viz. :

*''  The  Narrative  of  the  Embassy  of  Ruy  Gonzales  de
Clavijo  to  the  Court  of  Timour  at  Samarcand,  a.d.  1403-6."
Translated  for  the  first  time,  with  Notes,  a  Preface,  and  an
Introductory  Life  of  Timoui-,  by  Clements  R.  Markham,
Esq.

"  A  Collection  of  Documents  forming  a  Monograph  of
the  Voyages  of  Henry  Hudson."  Edited,  with  an  Intro-
duction, by  George  Asher,  Esq.,  LL.D.

In  addition  to  the  above  works,  five  others  have  been
undertaken  by  Editors,  and  some  of  them  are  now  in  pro-
gress, viz, :

The  Fifth  Letter  of  Hernando  Cortes  ;  being  that
describing  his  Voyage  to  Honduras  in  1525-6.  To  be
translated  and  edited  by  E.  G.  Squier,  Esq.

The  Voyage  of  Vasco  de  Gama  round  the  Cape  of
Good  Hope  in  1497  ;  now  first  translated  from  a  contem-
poraneous manuscript,  accompanied  by  other  documents
forming  a  Monograph  of  the  Life  of  Do  Gama.  To  be
translated  and  edited  by  Eichard  Garnett,  Esq.,  of  the
British  Museum.

The  Travels  of  Ludovico  Vartema,  in  Syria,  Arabia,
Persia,  and  India,  during  the  sixth  century.  To  be  trans-
lated and  edited  by  Count  Pepoli.

Narrative  of  the  Voyage  of  the" Tyrant  Agiirre,"
DOWN  the  river  OF  THE  Amazons,  by  Fray  Pedro  Simon.
To  be  translated  for  the  first  time  by  W.  BoUaert,  Esq.


3

The  Voyages  of  Mendana  and  Quiros  in  the  South
Seas,  in  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries.
To  be  translated  from  Figueroa's  "  Hechos  del  Marques
de  Canete/'  and  Torquemada's  "  Monarquia  Indiana,"  and
edited  by  Clements  R.  Markham,  Esq.

The  following  six  Members  retire  from  the  Council,  viz. ;

The  Right  Hon.  Lord  Broughton.

John  Barrow,  Esq.,  F.R.'S.

Lord  Alfred  Spencer  Churchill.

Egerton  Harcourt,  Esq.

The  Right  Hon.  Lord  Taunton.

His  Excellency  the  Count  de  Lavradio.

Of  this  number,  the  three  following  are  recommended  for
re-election,  viz.  :

Lord  Broughton.

Lord  Alfred  Spencer  Churchill.

The  Count  de  Lavradio.

And  the  names  of  the  following  gentlemen  are  proposed
for  election,  viz,  :

Sir  John  Bowring,  LL.D.

The  Right  Hon.  Lord  Wensleydale

The  Rev.  W.  Whewell,  D.D.

The  Council  have  also  to  report  that  the  Honorary
Secretary,  Mr.  Clements  R.  Markham,  having  been  sent  to
South  America  on  a  Government  Mission,  which  will  entail
an  absence  of  a  year  and  a  half,  Mr.  Major  has  kindly
undertaken  to  perform  the  ordinary  duties  of  Honorary
Secretary  during  that  period.  As  Mr.  Markham  has  pre-
pared works  for  publication,  which  will  meet  the  demands
of  subscribers  during  his  absence,  the  Council  have  resolved


4

that  he  shall  retain  the  Secretaryship,  if  his  duties  do  not
detain  him  from  England  later  than  April  1861.


Statement  of  the  Accounts  of  the  Society  for  the  year  1859-60.


f

s.

d.

Balance

It  last  Audit

420

12

«

Received

by  Bankers

during

the

year..

yo3

10

i)

,«C30    2     8


Mr.  Richards,  for  Printing  three
Works  ....' 292  14

Mr.  J.  E.  Richard,  for  Paper

Translations  and  Transcriptions  . .

Advertisements

Map

Index

Gratuity  to  Agent's  Foreman    ....

Stationery,  Parcels,  Postage,  and
Sundries 4    0    C

3.^2     5    0

Present  Balance  at  Bankers 239    6    3

Ditto  in  Petty  Cash 8  11     5


!92

14

0

43

0

0

20

7

0

2

1

0

12

2

0

3

0

0

5

0

0

Examined  and  Approved,  March  5th,  1860.

W.  B.  RYE,
RICHARD  GARNETT.


WORKS     ISSUED     BY


Clje  ?^afelugt  ^onetK.


HENRY  HUDSON,  THE  NAVIGATOR.


jr.nccc.i.x.


HENEY   HUDSON


THE


NAVIGATOR.


THE     ORIGINAL     DOCUMENTS

IN   WHICH    HIS    CAREER    IS    RECORDED
COLLECTED,  PARTLY  TRANSLATED,  AND  ANNOTATED,

With

AN    INTRODUCTION,

G.     M.     ASHER,     LL.D.      ''>]':    V''


LONDON:  ;/.■

PRINTED     F  <J  R     THE     II  A  K  L  U  Y  T     SOCIETY,


.M.DCCC.I.X.


<


LONDON :
T.    RICITAUDS,   07    GREAT    IJUEEN    STIiEET.


THE     HAKLUYT     SOCIETY.


SIR  RODERICK  IMPEY  MURCIIISON,  G.C.St.S.,    F.R.S.,  D.C.L.,  Coir.  Mom.  lust.  F,
Hon.  Mem.  Imp.  Acad.  Sc.  St.  Petersburg,  &c.,  &c.,  Pkesident.

The  marquis  OF  LANSDOWNE  )

I  Vice-Presidents.
Bear-Admiral  C.  R.  DRINKWATER  BETHUNE.C.B.  '

Sir  JOHN  BO\VRING,  LL.D.

Ut.  Hon.  LORD  I5R0UGHT0N.

The  lord  ALFRED  SPENCER  CHURCHILL,  M.P.

CHARLES  WENTWORTH  DILKE,  Esq.

Rt.  Hon.  Sir  DAVID  DUNDAS.

Sir  henry  ELLIS,  K.H.,  F.R.S.

JOHN  FOSTER,  Esq.

Lieut-Gen.  CHARLES  RICHARD  FOX.

R.  W.  GREY,  Esq.

JOHN  WINTER  JONES,  Esq.,  F.S.A.

His  Excellency  the  COUNT  DE  LAVRADTO,

R.  H.  MAJOR,  Esq.,  F.S.A.

The  EARL  OF  SHEFFIELD.

The  IlT.  Hon.  LORD  WENSLEYDALE.

The  Rev.  ',V.  WTIEWELL.

CLEMENTS  R.  MARKHAM,  Esq.,  Honorary  Secretary.


THE    ILLUSTRIOUS    FRENCU    GEOaRAPIIKK,

MONSIEUR         D  '  A  V  E  Z  A  C  ,

Tins     BOOK     IS      DEDICATED,

AS     A     MARK     OF     AFFECTIONATE      REGARD,

AND     AS     A    TOKEN     OF     GRATITUDE     FOR    MUCH     KIND

ENCOURAGEMENT.


TABLE     OF     CONTENTS.


TAOE

i


Introduction        .  -  _  .  .

Notes  to  Introduction  -  -  _  .    ccxvi

Divers  voyages  and  northerne  discoveries  of  that  worthy
discoverer  Henry  Hudson,  from  Purchas'  Pilgrims,
vol.  iii,  pp.  567-610  :

First  Voyage,  his  discoverie  towards  the  north  pole
in  1607,  written  partly  by  John  Playse,  one  of  the
crew,  and  partly  by  Hudson  himself  -  -  1

Second  Voyage  or  employment  of  Master  Henry
Hudson  in  1008,  written  by  himself  -  -         23

Third  Voyage  of  Master  H.  Hudson  in  1G09,  written
by  Robert  J  net  of  Limehouse       -  ~  -         45

Fourth  Voyage  in  1610.  An  Abstract  of  the  Jour-
nal of  Master  Henry  Hudson        -  -  -  93

A  larger  Discourse  of  the  same  Voyage  and  the  success

thereof,  written  by  Abacuk  Pricket  -  -         98

A  note  found  in  the  deskc  of  Thomas  AVydowse,  student
of  mathematics,  one  of  them  who  was  put  into  the
shallop  -  -  -  -  -        136

b


TABLE    OF    CONTENTS.

PAGE

Purchas    his    Pilgrimage,    folio,    London,    1626,    p.    817.

VI.   Of  Hudson's  discoveries  and  death  -  -       139

Hudson's  first  voyage  (1607),  from  Edge's  brief  discoverie

of  the  Muscovia  merchants  (Purchas,  v.  iii,  p.  464)     -       145

Captain  Fotherby's  statement  concerning  Hudson's  Jour-
nal of  his  first  voyage  (Purchas,  v.  iii,  p.  730)  -       146

Hudson's  third  voyage    (1609)  from  Van  Meteren's   His-

torie  der  Nederlanden.    Folio,  Hague,  1614,  fol.  629a       147

Extracts  relating  to  Hudson's  third  voyage  (1609),  from
John  de  Laet's  Nieuwe  Werelt,  fol.,  Amsterdam,  1625,
1630-1  (from  book  iii,  chapter  7)  -  -       154

(From  book  iii,  chapter  10)  .  .  .       159

Extracts  containing  some  original  information  about  Hud-
son's third  voyage,  from  Mr.  Lambrechtsen  van
Ritthem's  "  History  of  New  Netherland"    -  -       164

Extracts  concerning  Hudson's  third  voyage  (1609),  from
Adrian  van  der  Donck's  "  Beschryvinge  van  Nieuw
Nederlandt,"  4to.,  Amsterdam,  1655,  1656  -       167

American  traditions  concerning  the  third  voyage  (1609)     -       173

An  Extract  from  Captain  Luke  Foxe's  description  of  Hud-
son's fourth  voyage  ("  North- West"  Fox)  p.  70  -       180

Hessel  Gerritz's  various  accounts  of  Hudson's  two  last
voyages,  from  the  Latin  and  Dutch  edition  of  the
"  Descriptio  ct  Delineatio  Geographica  detectionis
Freti  ab  H.  Hudsono  invcnti."     Amst.,  1012,  1613:

I.  Hudson's    fourth   voyage.     A   summary  printed
on  the  back  of  the  chart.     An  account  of  the  voyage

and  new  found  strait  of  Mr.  Hudson  -  -        181

II.  Hudson's   third    and    fourth    voyage,    from  the
Prolegomena  to  the  first  Latin  edition  -  -       1'83


TABLE    OF    CONTKNTS.

PAiiK

III,  Hudson's  third  and  fourth  voyage,  from  the
Latin  edition  of  1612.  An  Account  of  the  Discoveric
of  the  North- West  Passage,  which  is  expected  to  lead
to  China  and  Japan  by  the  north  of  the  American  con-
tinent, found  by  H.  Hudson         -  -  -       185

IV.  Hudson's  tliird  and  fourth  voyage,  from  the
second  Latin  edition  of  1613,  with  notes  indicating  the
variations  of  the  Dutch  edition.  A  description  and
chart  of  the  strait  or  passage  by  the  north  of  the
American  continent  to  China  and  Japan       -  -       189


Appendix.


Voyage  of  John  de  Verazzano  along  the  coast  of
North  America  from  Carolina  to  Newfoundland  (con-
taining the  first  discovery  of  Hudson's  river)  a. d.  1524.
Translated  from  the  original  Italian,  by  Joseph  G.
Cogswell,  Esq.     Preliminary  notice  by  the  translator  -       197

Voyage  of  Captain  John  de  Verazzano.  Letter  to
His  Most  Serene  Majesty  the  King  of  France  (together
with  the  original  Italian  text)       -  -  -       199

"Writings  of  William  Barentz  (Barentson)  in  Hud-
son's possession  (Purchas  his  Pilgrims,  vol.  iii,  pp.
518-620)      -  -  -  -  -       229

A  treatise  of  Iver  Boty,  a  Gronlander       -  -       230

Van  der  Donck's  observations  about  the  Wampum
or  bead  money  of  the  Indians,  mentioned  by  Hudson.
(From  the  N.  Y.  Hist.  Soc.  Collection,  New  Series,
vol.  i,  p.  206)  -  -  -  -       235

Title  and  Prolegomena  to  the  first  edition  of  the
"  Detectio  Freti"  -  -  -  -       236

Title  and  Prolegomena  to  the  second  edition  of  the
"  Detectio  Freti"         -  -  -  -       242


TABLE    OF    CONTENTS.


PAOE


A  letter  from  President  Jeannin  to  Henry  IV  of
France,  containing  an  account  of  his  Negociation  with
Henry  Hudson,  through  Isaac  Le  Maire  (with  the
original  text  in  French)  _  _  -       244

Extracts  concerning  a  shipbook  found  at  Amster-
dam, by  John  Romeyn  Brodhead,  Esq.        -  -       254

Extracts  from  a  charter  granted  to  the  Company  of
the  Merchants  Discoverers  of  the  North-West  Pas-
sage.    Apud  Bledsoe,  July  26th,  1612         -  -       255

Two  Extracts  from  Rafn's  "  Antiquitates  Ameri-
canse"  ......       257

Other  names  of  Hudson's  Strait:  Hudson's  Bay,
Hudson's  Touches,  Hudson's  Point,  and  Hudson's
River  - 257

Bibliographical  List,  containing  the  books,  maps,
etc.,  etc.,  mentioned  in  the  present  work     -  -       258

Index  -  -  -  -  -       279


TABLE    or    CONTENTS,

PAOE

A  letter  from  President  Jeannin  to  Henry  IV  of
France,  containing  an  account  of  his  Negociation  with
Henry  Hudson,  through  Isaac  Le  Maire  (with  the
original  text  in  French)  _  -  ,       244

Extracts  concerning  a  shipbook  found  at  Amster-
dam, by  John  Romeyn  Brodhead,  Esq.        -  -       254

Extracts  from  a  charter  granted  to  the  Company  of
the  Merchants  Discoverers  of  the  North-West  Pas-
sage.    Apud  Bledsoe,  July  26th,  1612         -  -       255

Two  Extracts  from  Rafn's  "  Antiquitates  Ameri-
canse"  -  -  -  -  -       257

Other  names  of  Hudson's  Strait :  Hudson's  Bay,
Hudson's  Touches,  Hudson's  Point,  and  Hudson's
River  -  -  -  -  -  -       257

Bibliographical  List,  containing  the  books,  maps,
etc.,  etc.,  mentioned  in  the  present  work     -  -       258

Index  -  -  -  -  -       279


liNTRODUCTION.


Hudson's  river,  Hudson's  strait,  and  Hudson's  bay,
remind  every  educated  man  of  the  illustrious  navi-
gator by  whom  they  were  explored.  But  though
the  name  of  Henry  Hudson  possesses  these  preserva-
tives against  oblivion,  little  more  has  been  done
on  its  behalf,  and  few  persons  have  any  accurate
notion  of  the  real  extent  of  his  merits.  By  con-
sidering Hudson  as  the  discoverer  of  the  three
mighty  waters  that  bear  his  name,  we  indeed  both
overrate  and  underrate  his  deserts.  For  it  is  certain
that  these  three  localities  had  repeatedly  been  visited
and  even  drawn  on  maps  and  charts  long  before  he
set  out  on  his  voyages.  Nor  did  he  himself  claim  the
discovery  of  the  strait  and  bay.  He  was  fully  aware
that  he  was  but  proceeding  further  on  a  track
opened  up  by  his  predecessors.  On  the  other  hand,
we  may  perhaps  be  too  ready  to  overlook  those  parts
of  Hudson's  achievements  that  have  left  their  marks
less  strikingly  on  the  geographical  delineations  of  our
globe.  They  are  very  important  nevertheless.  The
mere  extent  of  his  voyages  is  sufficient  to  place  him


11  INTRODUCTION.

very  high  among  the  explorers  of  the  north.  He
surpasses  in  that  respect  all  other  arctic  navigators,
except  one  or  two  of  our  own  clays,  who  have  en-
joyed immense  advantages  over  him.  Besides  his
own  original  discoveries,  he  visited  during  the  four
last  years  of  his  life  very  nearly  all  the  northern
shores  of  Europe  and  Eastern  America,  which  had
been  visited  by  his  predecessors  during  the  previous
century,  and  everywhere  his  presence  left  at  least
some  traces.

To  fill  up  the  gap  in  geographical  literature  here
pointed  out,  no  plan  seems  to  be  better  fitted  than
the  one  generally  adopted  in  the  publications  of
the  Hakluyt  Society.  The  original  records  of  a
navigator's  or  traveller's  exploits,  if  properly  eluci-
dated by  notes  and  introductory  remarks,  constitute
the  most  authentic  portraiture  of  him  that  can  be
ofi'ered  to  the  geographical  reader.  The  example  set
by  Marsden's  Marco  Poh^  shows  how  very  much  may
be  accomplished  in  this  manner.  The  editor  of  the
present  volume  has  tried  to  follow  this  great  model  ;
but,  besides  his  too  evident  inferiority  to  the  scholar,
whom  he  has  been  trying  to  imitate,  he  has  had  difii-
culties  to  encounter,  almost  greater  than  those  over-
come by  Mr.  Marsden.  The  history  of  early  northern
discovery  is  both  intricate  and  obscure,  and  it  has
not  been  thoroughly  lighted  up  by  anterior  research.
Many  new  investigations  have  thus  become  necessary ;
and  the  editor  has  also  to  present  a  most  complicated
subject  in  a  clear  and  readable  form  ;  and  this  too  in
a  language  foreign  to  him.     He  hopes  therefore  not


INTRODUCTION.  Ill

to  be  judged  too  severely,  if  he  partly  fail  in  accom-
plishing his  aim.

The  records  of  Hudson's  voyages  which  are  here
collected  were  originally  noted  down,  and  have  been
preserved  by  various  hands.  They  are  not  all  of
equal  authenticity.  They  even  sometimes  contradict
each  other ;  and  it  is  in  these  cases  not  easy  to
elicit  the  truth.  We  must  tlierefore  examine  each
record  with  close  attention  to  ascertain  what  reliance
may  be  placed  in  it.  But  as  we  purpose  to  render  such
a  review  of  our  records  perfectly  clear  and  intelligible
to  every  reader,  it  is  necessary  first  to  give,  as  briefly
as  possible,  a  summary  of  Hudson's  career.

The  whole  period  of  his  life  known  to  us  extends
over  little  more  than  four  years,  from  April  19,
1607,  to  June  21,  1611.  The  greater  part  of  this
time  is  filled  up  by  four  voyages,  all  of  them  under-
taken in  search  of  a  short  northern  passage  to  the
eastern  shores  of  Asia.  The  first  voyage  was  per-
formed in  1607,  for  the  Moscovy  Company.  Its
purpose  was  the  search  of  a  north-eastern  passage  to
China.  The  principal  explorations  made  in  the
course  of  it  were  along  the  coast  of  Spitzbergen.

The  second  voyage  took  place  in  1608,  also  in
search  of  a  north-eastern  passage,  and  likewise  for  the
Moscovy  Company.  In  the  course  of  it,  part  of
Nova  Zembla  was  explored.

The  third  voyage  was  undertaken  in  1609,  at  the
expense  of  the  Dutch  East  India  Company.  Its
starting  place  was  Amsterdam,  its  original  purpose
still    the    search    of  a   north-eastern    route.      But,


IV  INTRODUCTION.

meeting,  near  Nova  Zembla,  with  an  unbroken
barrier  of  ice,  Hudson  went  to  tlie  west,  and
attempted  the  search  for  a  north-western  passage.
The  principal  locality  explored  during  this  voyage  is
the  North-American  stream  which  we  still  call
Hudson's  river.

In  1610,  Hudson  again  sailed  to  the  north-west,
in  search  of  a  passage.  The  expenses  of  the  ex-
pedition were  borne  by  three  English  gentlemen.
Hudson  explored  the  strait  and  part  of  the  bay
which  bear  his  name.  He  passed  the  winter  1610-
1611  in  one  of  the  most  southern  harbours  of  the
bay.  On  the  21st  June,  1611,  a  few  days  after  he  had
again  left  that  harbour,  a  mutiny  broke  out  among
the  crew,  and  Hudson,  with  eight  companions,  was
set  adrift  on  the  waves  in  a  small  boat,  and  has  never
since  been  heard  of.  Tlie  ship  and  part  of  the
mutinous  crew  reached  England  in  safety.

For  the  bulk  of  our  information  respecting  Hud-
son's career  we  are  indebted  to  Purchas.  The  third
volume  of  his  Pilgrims  contains  accounts  of  all  tlie
four  voyages,  written  in  part  by  Hudson  himself,
partly  by  some  of  his  companions.  The  authenticity
of  these  documents  is  beyond  all  question.  Purchas
states  in  his  Pilgrimage}  that  he  received  the  ac-
counts of  the  three  first  voyages  from  Hakluyt,  the
various  papers  relating  to  the  fourth  voyage  from  Sir
Dudley  Diggs,  the  principal  promoter  of  that  expedi-
tion.

The  account  of  tlie  first  voyage,-  to  Greenland  and

'   S(c  ivjia,  ])p.  lo9,  110.  -    Pp.  1  (o  22  of  the  present  vol.


INTRODUCTION.  V

Spitzbergen  is  a  log-book,  beginning  with  the  depar-
ture from  Gravesend,  May  1,  1607,  and  concluding
with  the  return  to  Tilbury,  September  15,  of  the  same
year.  This  log-book  is  described  by  Purchas  as
"  ivritten  partly  hij  John  Playse}  one  of  the  comj^ani/,
partly  hy  Hudson  himself^  Such  a  divided  authorship
seems,  however,  very  singular  ;  and  on  closer  examin-
ation we  discover  that  it  restsnipon  a  conjecture  made
with  some  hesitation  by  Purchas. ^  He  seems  to  have
found  the  name  of  John  Playse  expressly  mentioned
as  that  of  the  author,  on  the  manuscript  he  used.  But
whilst  he  could  thus  not  doubt  that  at  least  the
beginning  of  the  log-book  was  due  to  that  sailor,  he
was  at  a  loss  to  explain  the  occurrence  of  some  pas-
sages, more  numerous  at  the  end  than  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  account,  which  no  one  but  Hudson  could
have  written.^  Purchas,  therefore,  ascribes  nearly
one  half  of  the  log-book  (from  the  11th  of  July  to
the  end)  to  Hudson.  This  explanation  of  the  diffi-
culty is,  however,  far  too  bold ;  and  there  are,  besides,
some  positive  reasons  for  considering  it  as  unsatisfac-
tory. No  difference  exists  between  the  general  tone
and  style  of  the  part  undoubtedly  written  by  Playse,
and  that  attributed,  on  the  above  grounds,  to  Hudson
himself.  Even  the  occurrence  of  passages  from  Hud-
son's pen  does  not  form  so  distinctive  a  feature  as
would  at  first  sight  appear ;  for  in  the  first  part  some

^  The  logbook  itself  calls  him  John  Plcyce.
^  See  his  side  note,  p.  12.

■"*  P.  12,  1.  12  to  16,  1.  29;  p.  11,1.  17,  31;   p.  15,  1.  24;  p.  16,
1.  2,  1.  1-1;   p.  19,  1.  7;   p.  21,  1    2;   p.  22,  1,  31.


VI  INTRODUCTION.

sentences  occur  which  decidedly  owe  their  origin  to
Hudson  ;^  while  there  are  many  others,  the  origi-
nal cast  of  which  must  have  been  furnished  by  our
navigator,  which  Playse  probably  made  his  own  by
merely  turning  an  I  into  a  we?  Nor  is  it  at  all  sin-
gular that  a  sailor,  in  composing  for  himself  a  log-
book of  the  voyage  he  was  engaged  in,  should  make
use  of  his  captain's  journal,  which  was  most  probably
accessible  to  the  crew  of  the  vessel.  That  he  should
sometimes  adopt,  sometimes  forget  to  make  the
slight  alteration  above  referred  to,  and  that  he  should
in  this  respect  be  more  negligent  in  the  latter  part  of
his  log-book,  was  natural  enough  in  a  sailor  writing
for  his  own  use  a  journal,  the  publication  of  which,
eighteen  years  after  it  was  written,  he  could  not  fore-
see, and  would  probably  not  have  desired.

Under  these  circumstances  it  would  seem  most
likely  that  the  whole  account  of  the  voyage  was
written  by  Playse,  but  owes  the  greater  part  of  its
value  to  the  notes  which  Playse  derived  from  Hud-
son's journal.  Any  one  who  reads  the  log-book  with
attention  will  find  this  conjecture  far  more  consistent
than  the  one  adopted  by  Purchas.  Besides,  there
exist  two  authentic  extracts  from  Hudson's  own
journal  of  the  first  voyage.'^  Both  these  very  short
papers  contain  facts  not  mentioned  in  the  log-book,
some  of  which  at  least  took  place  after  the  11th  of

>  P.  2,  1.  15,  1.  IG.

■  For  instance,  nearly  tlic  whole  of  p.  4  and  p.  6,  besides  many
other  passages.

3  See  pp.  145,  14G.


INTRODUCTION.  VU

July,  the  date  where  Hudson's  share  of  the  log-book
is  said  to  begin.  If  the  log-book  was,  indeed,  partly
his  work,  he  must  have  purposely  omitted  some  of
his  most  important  explorations.

As  to  John  Playse  or  Pleyce,  the  probable  writer
of  the  whole  log-book,  next  to  nothing  is  known
about  him.  His  name  occurs  only  once,  as  one  of  the
crew  of  the  ship  in  which  the  first  voyage  was  per-
formed. There  he  ranks  very  low.  Among  Hudson's
eleven  companions  (one  of  whom  was  a  boy),  Playse's
name  stands  seventh.  He  must  therefore  have  been
a  common  sailor ;  and  it  would  be  impossible  to  attri-
bute to  Jiim  the  observations  of  the  needle  recorded
m  the  first  person  on  page  2  of  his  journal.^  These
observations,  like  all  the  other  important  parts  of
Playse's  account,  are  evidently  due  to  Hudson  him-
self.

The  log-book  was  probably  intended  only  for
Playse's  private  use,  or  perhaps  also  for  some  other
sailor's.  It  is  entirely  of  a  professional  nature.  It
contains,  however,  many  passages  of  interest  for  the
general  reader,  and  principally  those  which  reveal
Hudson's  ideas  and  plans.  The  descriptions  of  coasts,
capes,  harbours,  and  seas,  are  without  any  literary
pretension.  Still  they  are  striking  enough  in  their
simplicity.  For  the  history  of  geography,  the  log-
book is  of  the  very  highest  value,  although  it  unfor-
tunately lacks  some  important  information  but  imper-
fectly supplied  by  other  sources.

The  account  of  the  second  voyage  (to  Nova  Zem-

1  P.  2,  li.  5,  1.  16.


Vlll  INTRODUCTION.

bla)  is  likewise  a  log-book.^  Henry  Hudson  himself
is  its  author.  It  commences  with  the  departure  from
London,  April  22,  1608,  and  concludes  with  the  re-
turn to  Gravesend,  August  26  of  the  same  year.  Its
character  is,  in  almost  every  respect,  like  that  of
Playse's  journal.  Some  of  the  descriptions,  however,
are  more  detailed,  and  therefore  more  interesting  to
the  general  reader.  This  log-book  also  contains  a
curious  account  of  a  mermaid'^  seen  by  two  of  the
sailors,  which  has  often  been  quoted  and  reprinted.
As  a  geographical  record,  the  journal  of  the  second
voyage  is  of  less  importance  than  that  of  the  first ;
it  is  nevertheless  of  great  value.

Purchas  says  (in  a  footnote  to  p.  25)  that  he  also
had  a  journal  of  the  second  voyage,  written  by  Hud-
son's mate,  Robert  Juet.  Of  this  Journal  only  two
very  small  fragments  remain.  The  first,  in  one  of
Purchas'  side-notes  to  Hudson's  journal  of  the  second
voyage,  on  p.  30 ;  the  other,  in  the  following  line  of
*'  Hudson's  Discoveries  and  Death"  in  Purchas'  Pil-
grimage.  "  They  met,  as  both  himself  and  Juet  have
testified,  a  mermaid  in  the  sea."^

The  account  of  the  third  voyage  (to  Hudson's  river)
is  a  journal  kept  by  Robert  Juet,^  who  had  been
Hudson's  mate  in  the  second  voyage,  and  who  was
one  of  his  companions  in  the  third.  It  begins  with
the  departure  from  Amsterdam,  March  25th  (April
4th,  new  style),  1609  ;  it  ends  with  the  arrival  in
Dartmouth,  November  7th  of  the  same  year.     Juet's

'  Present  volume,  pp.  23-14.  -  P.  28.

^  Sec  infra,  p.  139.  ■*  Present  vol.,  pp.  45  to  93.


INTRODUCTION.  IX

journal  is  the  most  satisfactory  of  all  the  remaining
records  of  Hudson's  career.  The  indications  of  lati-
tudes are  generally  more  minute  than  those  in  the
other  papers,  and  most  of  them,  when  tested,  prove
to  be  as  correct  as  the  state  of  science  in  those  times
would  allow.  The  descriptions  are  full  enough  to
assist  materially  in  identifying  the  localities.  The
style,  though  concise,  is  pleasant  throughout,  and  the
circumstance  that  during  this  voyage  alone  Hudson
came  frequently  in  contact  with  natives  of  unknown
regions,  furnishes  the  opportunity  for  narrating  in-
teresting incidents.  The  most  important  as  well  as
the  most  pleasing  part  of  the  journal  is  the  descrip-
tion of  the  journey  up  and  down  Hudson's  river.
There  is,  however,  in  Juet's  paper,  one  less  agreeable
feature,  which  ought  not  to  remain  unnoticed.  He
speaks  of  the  North  American  Indians  always  with
distrust  and  often  with  animosity,  and  looks  very
complacently  on  the  acts  of  injustice,  nay,  of  bar-
barity, practised  against  them  by  some  of  the  crew.
AVith  these  views  Hudson's  very  hearty  and  kindly
appreciation  of  the  qualities  of  the  natives  forms  a
most  happy  contrast,  and  it  is  quite  certain  that  in
this  part  of  Juet's  journal  Hudson  had  no  share.
How  far  the  astronomical  observations,  and,  in  fact,
any  other  part  of  the  journal  may  be  attributed,
either  directly  or  indirectly,  to  Hudson,  we  have  no
means  to  ascertain.  It  is,  however,  probable  that
Juet's  journal  was  in  most  respects  an  independent
production.  The  scanty  extract  from  a  passage  of
the  journal  kept  by  Juet  during  the  preceding  voy-


X  INTRODUCTION.

age,  which  has  been  preserved  in  a  side  note  to  p.  30,
is  quite  sufficient  to  prove  that  he  made  observations
of  his  own,  independent  of  those  of  Hudson.  We
have,  besides,  but  too  abundant  proofs  of  his  conceit,
and  of  his  independence  of  character.  Also,  when
comparing  Juet's  journal  of  the  third  voyage  with  the
scraps  of  information  respecting  the  same  expedition
that  can  be  traced  back  to  Hudson,  we  cannot  believe,
as  some  authors  have  done,  that  Juet.  merely  acted  as
Hudson's  secretary.  We  must,  on  the  contrary,  award
to  Juet  himself  most  of  the  praise  and  all  the  blame
due  to  his  journal.

The  reader  may  perhaps  be  curious  to  know  what
position  Juet  held  on  board  the  vessel  the  journal
of  which  he  has  left  us ;  and  this  question  is,  in  fact,
of  double  importance,  as  it  happens  to  involve  that
of  Juet's  nationality.  Juet  was  Hudson's  mate  in
the  second  and  in  the  early  part  of  the  fourth  voy-
age. It  would  therefore  be  natural  enough  to  sup-
pose, as  some  writers  have  done,  that  he  also  had
the  rank  of  mate  in  the  third  voyage,  which  inter-
vened between  the  two  other  ones.  His  own  journal
furnishes  no  clue.  It  only  calls  him  Robert  Juet,
of  Limehouse,  without  stating  what  office  he  held.
But  Van  Meteren,  an  excellent  authority,  informs  us
that  the  mate  on  board  the  Half  3Ioon,  the  yacht
that  performed  the  third  voyage,  was  a  Dutchman.
Thus,  if  Juet  was  that  mate,  he  was  a  Dutchman.
Now,  strange  to  say,  there  are  arguments  of  about
equal  strength  for  and  against  this  double  supposition  ;
and   though    they   cannot   of  course   lead    us   to  a


INTRODUCTION.  XI

positive  conclusion,  we  think  it  right  to  state  them
here.  And,  first,  as  regards  the  question  whether
Juet  was  the  mate  or  no,  it  might  seem  singular  that
a  man  should  accept  a  lower  rank,  after  having  the
year  before  held  the  highest  next  to  the  captain.
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  only  probable,  but
almost  certain,  that  when  the  Dutch  East  India
Company  entrusted  Hudson,  a  foreigner,  with  the
command  of  one  of  their  vessels,  they  obliged  him
to  employ  at  least  some  of  their  own  Dutch  sailors.
Hudson  could  then  fill  only  the  vacant  places  with
his  English  friends.  The  mate  may  have  been  among
those  servants  of  the  company,  and  Juet  would  then
have  been  obliged  to  be  satisfied  with  an  inferior
position.  As  to  the  question  of  nationality,  Juet
says  that  he  is  of  Limehouse.  His  journal  is  also
thoroughly  English,  without  a  shade  of  foreign  idiom.
But  many  Dutchmen  were  then  living  in  England,
and  their  nation  possesses  a  wonderful  facility  in
acquiring  foreign  languages,  especially  English.
After  carefully  weighing  these  arguments  pro  and
contra^  the  writer  of  the  present  observations  inclines
to  think  that  Juet  was  an  Englishman,  and  that
he  was  not  the  mate  on  board  the  Half  Moon,  but
held  some  other  position  in  that  ship.

Juet's  career,  after  the  termination  of  the  third
voyage,  may  be  told  in  a  few  lines.  He  again  acted
as  mate  in  Hudson's  fourth  and  last  voyage,  which
commenced  April  17th,  1610.  Scarcely  more  than
six  weeks  after  leaving  home,  in  the  beginning  of
June,  he  already  showed  a  mutinous  disposition,  and


Xll  INTRODUC'lION.

threatened  to  turn  the  shi})'s  head  homeward.  In
tliis  conduct  he  persisted,  often  "  using  words  tend-
ing to  mutiny,  discouragement  and  slander  of  the
action,  which  easily  took  effect  in  those  that  were
timorous,"^  and  trying  to  persuade  some  of  the  crew
to  keep  swords  and  loaded  muskets  ready  in  their
cabins.  These  facts  having  been  reported  to  Hud-
son, Juet  declared  them  to  be  untrue,  and  demanded
a  trial,  which  took  place  the  10th  of  September,
1610.  Juet  was  found  guilty  and  deposed  from  his
ofRce.  AVhen  the  seed  of  mutiny  thus  sown  by  Juet
had,  nearly  a  year  afterwards,  taken  effect,  and  Hud-
son had  been  set  adrift  on  the  waves  by  his  mutinous
crew,  the  command  of  the  captainless  vessel  was  not
entrusted  to  Juet,  but  he  was  often  consulted  by  his
companions.  He  died  from  sheer  want,  when  near
the  end  of  the  dreadful  return  voyage,  and  almost  in
sight  of  the  Irish  coast,  early  in  September,  1611.^
One  of  his  companions  calls  him  "  an  ancient  man."^
He  must  therefore  have  been  past  middle  age  at  the
time  of  his  death.

Purchas  has  preserved  four  documents  illustrating
Hudson's  last  voyage  (to  Hudson's  Strait  and  Hud-
son's Bay).  He  calls  the  first  of  them  An  Abstract
from  Henry  Hudson  s  Journal.^  This  paper  must,  in-
deed, be  a  mere  fragment  of  the  original  journal,  for
it  extends  only  over  about  three  months  and  a  half
from    the    day   of  departure,   April    17th,    1610,   to

'  See  Wydhouse's  note,  pp.  136-138.
2  P.  133  ;   for  the  date,  see  p.  144.
=*  P.  118.  »  Pp.  93  to  97.


INTRODUCTION.  XUl

August  3i'd  of  the  same  year.  We  have  no  reason
to  think  that  Hudson  ever  failed  in  his  duty  of  keep-
ing a  regular  logbook  as  long  as  he  was  on  board  his
ship,  that  is  to  say,  to  the  21st  of  June,  1611.  More
than  ten  months  of  his  journal  are  therefore  wanting.
The  origin  of  the  deficiency  is  easily  explained.  The
logbook  undoubtedly  contained  many  disclosures
which  the  mutinous  crew  of -the  vessel  had  strong
motives  to  suppress.  The  paper  which  they  brought
home  and  handed  to  their  employers  seems,  indeed,
most  fully  to  deserve  the  name  of  an  abstract.  Omis-
sions seem  to  have  been  made,  not  only  at  the  end,
but  also  in  other  parts  of  the  original.  The  almost
complete  silence  about  the  sojourn  in  Iceland,  during
which  Juet's  evil  disposition  began  to  show  itself,
looks  very  suspicious.  Our  regrets  about  the  irre-
parable loss  of  the  main  part  of  Hudson's  journal  are,
however,  in  vain,  and  we  must  seek  some  conso-
lation in  the  very  great  value  of  what  is  left  us.

The  abstract  reaches,  as  has  already  been  observed,
down  to  the  3rd  of  August,  1610.  It  ends  with  a
short  description  of  Cape  Wolstenholme  and  its
neighbourhood,  and  embraces,  therefore,  the  whole
voyage  through  Hudson's  Strait  to  the  very  point
where  Hudson's  Bay  opens.  Unfortunately  the  whole
abstract  forms  less  than  five  pages,  the  three  last  of
which  contain  the  description  of  the  strait.  Under
these  circumstances  it  is,  perhaps,  a  matter  rather  of
congratulation  than  of  regret  that  these  pages  offer
but  little  interest  to  the  general  reader,  and  are  filled
with  dry  details,  observations  of  latitudes,  indications


XIV  INTRODUCTION.

of  the  ship's  course,  and  short  descriptions.  Such  as
they  are  they  furnish  us,  with  the  assistance  of  Hud-
son's chart,  the  means  of  tracing  Hudson's  voyage
through  the  strait  almost  better  than  any  other  part
of  his  explorations.

The  second  document,  A  Larger  Discourse  of  the
same  Voyage,  hj  AhacuJc  Pricket}  is  of  a  very  different,
and,  in  fact,  of  an  almost  unique  nature.  The  author
was  a  servant  of  Sir  Dudley  Diggs,  the  principal
promoter  of  the  expedition,  and  formed  part  of  Hud-
son's crew.  According  to  Purchas,  Pricket's  life  was
spared  by  the  mutineers  that  he  might  intercede  for
them  with  his  master.^  He  seems  to  have  been  very
anxious  to  fulfil  this  engagement.  Though  the  paper
he  has  left  us  is  in  form  a  narrative,  the  author's  real
intention  was  much  more  to  defend  the  mutineers
than  to  describe  the  voyage.  As  an  apologetical
essay  the  "  Larger  Discourse"  is  extremely  clever.  It
manages  to  cast  some,  not  too  much,  shadow  upon
Hudson  himself.  The  main  fault  of  the  mutiny  is
thrown  upon  some  men  who  had  ceased  to  live  when
the  ship  reached  home.  Those  who  were  then  still
alive  are  presented  as  guiltless,  some  as  highly  de-
serving men.

Pricket's  account  of  the  mutiny  and  of  its  cause
has  often  been  suspected.  Even  Purchas  himself^  and
Fox  speak  of  it  with  distrust.  But  Pricket  is
the  only  eye-witness  that  has  left  us  an  account
of  these  events,  and  we  can  therefore  not  correct
his  statements,  whether  they  be  true  or  false.     Be-

'  Pp.  'JS  to  l;35.  -  See  p.  lo8.  ''   W  135.


INTRODUCTION.  XV

sides  being  an  apology  for  the  mutineers,  the  "  Larger
Discourse"  is  not  without  value  as  a  narrative.  It  was
evidently  written  quietly  at  home  ;  not  during  the
turmoil  of  a  voyage.  The  author's  special  purpose
induces  him  to  dwell  at  great  length  on  some  scenes
of  real  life  that  passed  on  and  near  the  ship.  By  far
the  greater  part  of  his  discourse  is  devoted  to  these
scenes,  which  have  always  been,  and  will  always  be,
perused  with  interest.

As  a  geographical  record  the  "  Larger  Discourse"
is  most  unsatisfactory.  Its  statements,  which  must
in  greater  part  have  been  put  down  from  recollection
only,  without  any  reference  to  notes  made  during  the
voyage,  are  mostly  vague  in  the  extreme.  Here  and
there,  however,  some  more  precise  statement  adds
something  to  the  store  of  reliable  information  sup-
plied by  Hudson's  journal  and  chart.  For  the  voy-
age and  wintering  in  the  bay,  and  for  the  voyage
home,  the  Discourse  is,  unfortunately,  the  only  docu-
ment of  any  value  that  is  left  us.

The  two  remaining  documents  are  of  but  minor
importance.  The  first  is  a  letter  from  Iceland,  re-
printed by  Purchas  without  the  author's  name  •}  but
apparently  written  by  Hudson  himself.  This  letter,
dated  May  30,  1610,  speaks  of  the  sojourn  in  Iceland
and  of  the  good  shooting  they  got  there.  It  men-
tions incidentally  the  number  of  Hudson's  crew,  but
contains  no  other  valuable  information.

'  Purchas  speaks  of  the  authorship,  on  p.  135,  in  so  confused  a
manner,  that  it  is  impossible  to  see  whether  he  attributed  it  to
Hudson,  to  Juet,  or  to  Wydhouse.


XVI  INTRODUCTION.

The  last  of  the  documents  pubhshcd  in  the  Pil-
grhns,  is  a  note  found  in  the  desk  of  Thomas  Wyd-
house,^  a  mathematical  student.  The  note  records
the  trial  of  Juet,  to  which  we  have  already  alluded,
and  the  changes  among  the  officers  of  the  ship  which
Hudson  made  in  consequence  of  it.  Wydhouse's
name  is  also  spelled  Woodliouse,  Wydowse,  and
Widowes.  Of  his  personal  history  nothing  is  known,
beyond  the  fact  that  he  was  one  of  the  unfortunate
men  who  were  set  adrift  with  Hudson.

Purchas,  in  publishing  the  above  documents  in  his
Pilgrims,  adds  to  them  some  side  notes,  foot  notes,
headings,  and  observations,  the  responsibility  of  which
belongs  to  him  alone.

Two  of  the  headings^  and  the  only  important  foot
note^  have  already  been  discussed ;  tlie  others  may
safely  be  taken  on  trust  as  correct.  As  to  the  side
notes,  by  far  the  greater  part  of  them  form  merely
a  running  index  to  the  contents  of  the  text,  accord-
ing to  a  custom  usual  in  those  times,  and  which  some
writers  of  our  days  have  very  properly  revived.  Of
the  remaining  side  notes,  some  are  references  to
other  sources  of  geographical  information,  some  are
explanations  of  nautical  terms  used  in  the  text,  whilst
two  are  moral  reflections  on  the  events  narrated  by
Pricket.  Only  two  of  the  side  notes  deserve  a  more
particular  mention.  They  occur  on  pp.  13  and  40,
and  both  express  in  strong  terms  Purchas's  opinion
respecting  the   discovery   of  Spitzbergcn  and  Nova

'   Pp.  I0G-I08.  ^  Play.sc's  Journal — IIiulsou's  Abstract.

•'  Tlie  note  to  p.  23.


INTRODUCTION.  XVII

Zembla.  This  opinion  is  so  very  far  from  correct,  that
we  almost  wonder  how  it  could  have  arisen.  Some
explanations  of  its  origin  will  be  offered  in  another  part
of  these  paaes.  We  may,  however,  here  observe,  that
Purchas  soon  became  conscious  of  having  been  some-
what severe  towards  the  Dutch,  the  real  discoverers
of  Spitzbergen,  whom  his  notes  represent  as  inter-
lopers. He  says,  in  the  introduction  to  the  third
volume  of  the  Pilgrhns,  that  his  judgment  was  biassed
by  the  influence  of  Englishmen,  who  took  an  inter-
ested view  of  the  question  at  issue  ;  that  is  to  say,
by  the  Company  of  Merchant  Adventurers.  Con-
sidering the  great  number  of  important  documents
furnished  to  Purchas  by  this  society,  we  can  hardly
blame  him  for  listening  for  a  moment  to  their  insinu-
ations, and  it  is  highly  creditable  that  he  acknow-
ledges his  error.

A  short  postscript^  is  added  by  Purchas  to  Pricket's
discourse.  Purchas  there  expresses  his  distrust  in
the  narrator's  faithfulness,  and  says  that  for  this
reason  he  reprints  the  letter  from  Iceland  and  Wyd-
house's  statement,  by  which  Pricket's  account  may
in  some  degree  be  tested.

Another  short  notice  is  appended  to  Wydhouse's
paper.2  This  notice  contains  some  additional  facts
concerning  the  fourth  voyage,  obtained  from  a  source
which  Purchas  considers  as  authentic.  They  are,
however,  not  very  reliable,  and  part  of  them  seem
to  be  derived  from  Hessel  Gerritz's  book,  of  which
we  shall  have  ample  occasion  to  speak.

'  P.  135.  2  P.  138.


XVlll  INTRODUCTION.

Purchas'  Pilgrimage,  a  work  which  is  often  con-
sidered as  the  fifth  volume  of  the  Pilgrims,  contains
a  remarkable  chapter  entitled,  Of  Hudson  s  Discoveries
and  Death.  This  chapter  is  reprinted  in  the  present
collection.^  It  is  mainly  a  summary  of  the  materials
published  in  the  Pilgrims,  and  as  such  it  is  not  even
very  complete.  Its  real  importance  consists  in  the
additional  information  it  furnishes.  It  names  the
source  from  which  the  documents  printed  in  the
Pilgrims  were  obtained,  it  gives  a  very  small  frag-
ment of  Juet's  lost  journal,  it  mentions  the  names  of
the  gentlemen  at  whose  expense  the  last  expedition
was  undertaken,  and  it  tells  us  on  what  day  the  mutin-
ous crew  of  the  vessel  reached  the  Irish  shore  on  their
home  voyage.  It  also  clears  up  some  questions  of
minor  importance.

Purchas  has  again  added  some  side  notes  to  this
chapter.  Only  two  of  them  are  remarkable.  They
show  how  earnestly  he  persisted  in  the  belief  that
Hudson  had  discovered  a  passage  to  the  South  Sea.

After  having  examined  the  chapters  in  Purchas'
Pilgrims  and  Pilgrimage  which  are  devoted  to  Hud-
son's life,  we  must  now  review  a  certain  amount
of  fragmentary  intelligence  collected  from  various
Bources.  These  fragments  enable  the  student  to  fill
up  many  gaps  left  by  the  more  detailed  records  ;  they
also,  in  more  than  one  instance,  throw  a  new  light  on
some  of  the  most  important  events  of  Hudson's
voyages.

The  two  first  fragments  are  again  due  to  Purchas.
1  Tp.  i;?'.)-H  1.


INTRODUCTION.  XIX

They  do  not,  however,  form  part  of  those  pages  of  his
work  where  he  treats  specially  of  our  navigator,  but
occur  accidentally  in  two  papers  not  directly  bearing
upon  Hudson's  career.  Two  captains  in  the  service
of  the  Muscovy  Company,  Edge  and  Fotherby,  have
left  short  accounts  of  their  own  and  of  some  other
voyages  to  Spitzbergen.  Both  made  use  of  the  manu-
scripts deposited  in  the  archivjes  of  their  employers,
and  among  them  of  the  Journal  kept  by  Hudson
during  his  First  Voyage.  Each  of  them  gives  a  short
extract  from  this  document,  of  which  all  other  traces
are  lost.  These  extracts,  of  a  few  lines  each,  are
reprinted  in  our  collection.^  They  are  fortunately  of
very  great  importance,  in  spite  of  their  brevity,  espe-
cially the  one  due  to  Edge.  The  naming  of  Whale
Bay  and  of  Hakluyt's  Headland,  on  the  north  coast
of  Spitzbergen,  as  well  as  the  discovery  of  Jan  Mayen
Island  (Hudson's  Tutches),  are  here,  and  only  here,
recorded.  Fotherby's  extract  throws  some  light  on
Hudson's  explorations  along  the  shore  of  Greenland.

The  authenticity  of  the  two  extracts  is  unques-
tionable. Edge  and  Fotherby  were  in  the  service  of
the  company  for  whom  the  first  voyage  was  per-
formed, and  which  was,  as  a  matter  of  course,  in  pos-
session of  Hudson's  logbook.  Both  captains  wrote
a  few  years  after  Hudson's  first  voyage  ;  and  Pur-
chas,  who  printed  their  accounts,  was  in  the  habit  of
receiving   documents   from   the  Muscovy   Company.

The  remaining  fragments  are,  with  only  one  excep-
tion, of  Dutch  origin,  as  are  also   the  two  maps  in

^  Pp.  145,  146.


XX  INTRODUCTION.

our  collection.  To  make  the  nature  of  these  papers
understood  we  shall  have  briefly  to  relate  some  events
of  Dutch  history  that  are  but  little  noticed,  even  in
the  Netherlands,  and  with  which  we  can  therefore
not  expect  all  our  readers  to  be  fully  acquainted.
These  events  had,  besides,  a  direct  and  strong  influ-
ence on  Hudson's  connexion  with  the  Dutch  East
India  Company,  and  serve  to  explain  some  of  the
consequences  of  his  third  voyage.  We  believe
therefore  that  we  are  justified  in  adverting  to  them
here.

The  Netherlands,  and  more  especially  the  southern
provinces,  were,  during  the  latter  part  of  the  middle
ages,  the  centre  of  European  commerce.  In  their
ports  the  ships  of  the  north  and  the  caravels  of  the
south  met  to  exchange  their  cargoes.  The  trans-
atlantic discoveries  which  mark  the  beginning  of  the
modern  era,  and  which  produced  such  important
changes  in  the  roads  of  trade,  did  not  afi'ect  the
central  position  of  the  Netherlands.  As  the  streams
of  wealth  had  long  poured  into  Ghent  and  Bruges,
so  they  now  began  to  pour  into  Antwerp  ;  and  this
town  was,  in  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century,  by
far  the  most  important  emporium  in  Europe.  The
whole  country  shared  these  advantages,  as  is  always
the  case  under  such  circumstances  ;  and  learning,
art,  literature,  but  before  all  industry,  flourished  on
the  favoured  spot.

The  writings  of  many  eminent  historians  have
rendered  all  of  us  familiar  with  tlie  terrible  events
which  put  an  end  to  this  prosperity,     ^^^e  all  know


INTRODUCTION.  XXI

liow  the  Spanish  veterans,  the  German  mercenaries,
the  French  sokliery,  pillaged  the  towns,  burnt  the
villages,  devastated  the  open  country ;  and  how  thou-
sands suffered  martyrdom  by  Alba's  hand.  To  escape
this  persecution  nearly  three  hundred  thousand  fami-
lies left  their  homes,  an  almost  incredible  efflux  from
so  small  a  country.

It  is  surprising  that  so  few  writers  have  asked
themselves  the  q.uestion,  "  What  became  of  all  this
multitude  V  This  question  is,  indeed,  not  readily
answered.  We  can,  however,  trace  the  steps  of  some
of  the  emigrants  to  England,  of  some  to  Sweden,
of  some  to  Russia,  and  of  one  even  so  far  as  the
Azores.  They  went  to  every  part  of  the  world.  The
immense  majority  seem  to  have  escaped  for  a  while
to  the  neighbouring  parts  of  Germany,  and  then  to
have  streamed  into  the  seven  northern  provinces  of
the  Netherlands,  as  these  were  gradually  being  freed
from  the  Spanish  yoke.

Most  of  the  riches,  the  energy,  the  enlightenment
of  the  Netherlands  thus  became  concentrated  in  the
northern  provinces,  more  especially  in  Holland  and
Zealand.  Amsterdam  became  the  heir  of  Antwerp,
and  the  new-born  republic  of  the  seven  provinces,
with  its  few  square  miles  of  land  and  its  few  millions
of  inhabitants,  soon  took  its  place  among  the  leading
European  powers.

It  has  never  been  well  ascertained  how  much  the
emigrants  contributed  to  this  sudden  growth  of  Hol-
land and  Zealand  ;  nor  is  there  much  hope  that  the
question  will  ever  be  ansv/ered.     Besides  the  great


XXU  INTRODUCTION.

difficulties  of  the  inquiry,  there  is  no  one  to  whom  it
properly  belongs.  We  cannot  expect  the  Dutch  to
invite  jealous  rivals  to  a  share  in  their  glory,  and  the
Belgians  of  the  present  day  seem  hardly  to  remem-
ber that  the  illustrious  Protestant  emigrants  of  the
sixteenth  century  were  their  compatriots.  The  fol-
lowing stray  facts,  though  bearing  on  this  great  ques-
tion, are  not  intended  as  an  answer  to  it.  Their
purpose  merely  is  to  throw  light  on  our  own  subject.
Among  the  emigrants  who  settled  in  the  northern
provinces  there  were  many  merchants,  especially  from
Antwerp,  who  had  brought  with  them  part  of  their
riches,  all  their  knowledge  and  experience,  and  even
more  than  their  usual  energy.  They  gave  an  im-
mense impulse  to  Dutch  trade.  The  names  of  many
of  them  are  necessarily  forgotten,  and  even  of  those
which  are  remembered  a  few  only  can  be  mentioned
here.  The  most  illustrious  of  them  is  Balthasar  de
Moucheron.  He  may  almost  be  called  the  father  of
Dutch  commerce.  Before  any  other  Dutch  vessels
ventured  out  of  the  well-known  waters,  we  find  his
ships  showing  the  way  to  Russia  and  to  the  xlrctic
Ocean.  He  was  also  the  principal  originator  of  the
three  expeditions  to  the  north,  which  made  the  name
of  the  Dutch  celebrated  all  over  Europe.^  He,  before
all  others,  sent,  on  private  account,  ships  to  the  East
Indies.  The  great  name  which  we  have  tried  to  ren-
der familiar  to  our  readers  will  meet  them  again  in

^  The  expeditions  described  by  De  Veer,  of  which  an  excellent
edition  by  Dr.  Bckc  forms  part  of  the  collections  of  the  Hakluyt
Society.     See  the  Introduction  to  that  work,  p.  Iv.


INTRODUCTION.  XXlll

these  pages.  It  also  occurs  in  Lambrechtsen's  ac-
count of  Hudson's  life,  printed  among  the  papers  of
our  collection.^

It  would  lead  us  too  far  were  we  to  dwell  on  the
merits  of  some  other  emigrants  who  rendered  distin-
guished service  to  the  advancement  of  trade  in  the
Netherlands,  but  whose  career  is  not  directly  con-
nected with  our  subject ;  such  as  Isaac  and  Jacob
Le  Maire,  Jacques  Mahu,  Pieter  des  Marees,  Samuel
Godyn,  Jacques  I'Heremite,  and  many  others.  We
must,  however,  introduce  to  our  readers'  notice  one
more  great  man,  whose  name  has  hardly  yet  been
heard  in  England.

William  Usselincx,  like  Le  Maire  and  Moucheron,
an  Antwerp  merchant  who  settled  in  Zealand,  was
the  founder  of  the  Dutch  West  India  Company.
This  company,  though  mighty  enough  in  its  day,  is
now  very  nearly  forgotten.  It  was  established  in
1621,  and  obtained  the  privilege  of  trade  to  America.
It  thus  inherited  the  discovery  of  Hudson's  river,
and  peopled  its  banks  with  industrious  colonists.
Usselincx  himself  was  a  man  of  extraordinary  genius.
As  early  as  1591,  at  a  time  when  the  power  of  Spain
overshadowed  the  world,  he  alone  among  millions
saw  the  real  weakness  of  the  seeming  giant.  He
proposed  to  the  Dutch  to  attack  Spain  in  her  colo-
nies, especially  in  America,  and  thus  to  undermine
her  power.  His  keen  eye  perceived  that  the  Dutch
could  successfully  undertake  this  task,  but  they  would
not  believe  him.     He  had  to  struggle  thirty  years

^   See  infra,  p.  164.


XXIV  INTRODUCTION.

before  his  great  idea  was  partly  realized,  before  the
West  India  Company  was  established.  The  fate  of
the  banks  of  the  Hudson  depended  upon  the  issue
of  these  struggles,  and  we  might  therefore,  perhaps,
be  allowed  to  devote  a  few  more  lines  to  them.  But
we  are  afraid  of  losing  sight  of  our  main  object,  the
review  of  our  records,  and  we  must  therefore  leave
Usselincx  for  the  present.

The  first  of  the  Dutch  fragments  which  we  "were
going  to  review,  is  an  extract  from  Emanuel  van  Mete-
ren's  chronicle  of  the  great  war  between  Spain  and  the
Netherlands.^  Van  Meteren  was,  like  most  of  the
men  we  have  just  spoken  of,  an  Antwerp  merchant.
Like  them  he  left  his  country  for  the  sake  of  his
religion.  But  he  did  not  settle  down  in  Holland  or
Zealand.  He  went  to  London,  and  tried  there  to
serve  the  cause  of  his  country.  He  was  a  man  of
unflinching  energy  and  of  great  mental  powers ;  he
seems  also  to  have  possessed  considerable  means.
The  young  republic  of  the  Netherlands  made  there-
fore an  excellent  choice  when  it  appointed  him  its
consul  for  England.  This  official  position,  as  well  as
his  extensive  business  transactions,  brought  him  into
contact  with  many  eminent  personages.  He  was
thus  enabled  to  collect  by  various  means  an  astound-
ing amount  of  information  on  contemporary  events.
He  seems  to  have  at  first  accumulated  his  notes  with-
out any  settled  purpose  :  this  at  least  is  his  own
statement.  He  adds  that  his  cousin,  the  celebrated
Abraham  Ortelius,  suggested  to  him  the  idea  of  pub-

'  Pp.  145  to  153.


INTRODUCTION.  XXV

lisliing  these  memoirs.  Howsoever  this  may  be,  the
work  itself  does  not  bear  the  stamp  of  an  assemblage
of  loose  papers.  It  is  written  with  great  care,  is  better
connected  than  any  one  of  the  numerous  contempo-
rary chronicles,  and  is  teeming  with  life.  It  has  de-
servedly obtained  a  place  among  the  historical  master-
pieces of  all  ages.  Not  that  the  book  is  well  known
to  the  public.  But  whoever  reads  it  for  the  first  time,
is  surprised  to  find  how  familiar  every  page  is  to  him.
The  admirable  portraiture  of  the  principal  characters
in  the  great  drama,  the  wonderful  descriptions  of
preachings,  pillages,  sieges,  and  battles  have  been  bor-
rowed by  the  most  eminent  writers,  and  the  statements
of  facts  have  passed  into  the  current  history  of  the
sixteenth  century.  They  are  contained  in  all  our
handbooks.  It  is  perhaps  not  too  much  to  say,  that
the  great  favour  which  the  events  in  the  Netherlands
during  Philip  II's  reign  have  found  in  the  eyes  of
historians,  poets,  and  artists,  may  be  mainly  ascribed
to  the  ease  with  which  materials  can  be  borrowed
from  Van  Meteren's  inexhaustible  store.  The  nu-
merous modern  researches  which  form  a  brilliant
superstructure  on  this  solid  foundation,  prove  that
the  general  confidence  in  Van  Meteren's  accuracy  is
very  deservedly  bestowed.

Van  Meteren's  history,  such  as  we  now  have  it,
consists  of  two  very  unequal  parts.  The  first,  the
main  work,  embraces  the  whole  of  Philip  II's  reign,
ending  with  the  year  1598.  It  was  written  when  the
author  was  yet  in  full  possession  of  his  great  powers,
and  it  was  published  under  his  care.    The  second  part,


XXVI  INTRODUCTION.

a  supplement,  brings  the  chronicle  down  to  the  year
1611.  It  bears  the  most  evident  marks  of  the  old
man.  The  author,  then  seventy-six  years  of  age,
hurried  to  finish  it,  feeling,  as  he  himself  says,  the
call  to  another  world  pressing  upon  him.  He  was
not  even  to  see  it  in  print.  He  died  in  1612.  The
supplement  was  published  for  the  first  time  in  1614.
The  great  beauties  to  which  we  have  alluded  are  to
be  found  only  in  the  main  work ;  but  conscientious-
ness and  accuracy  belong  to  both  parts  alike.  The
supplement  has  a  character  of  its  own,  which  makes
the  description  of  Hudson's  voyage  contained  in  it
all  the  more  valuable  as  an  historical  source.  The
latter  part  of  Van  Meteren's  history  is  more  like  a
collection  of  documents  and  notices  chronologically
arranged,  and  very  slightly  connected  among  them-
selves, than  like  a  regular  narrative.  Most  of
the  pieces  are  evidently  in  the  original  state  in
which  they  were  first  inserted  among  the  author's
notes.

This  is  more  especially  the  case  with  regard  to  the
account  of  Hudson's  voyage.  The  account  bears  the
stamp  of  having  been  rather  hastily  translated  from  a
verbal  or  written  communication.  Its  real  author  is
most  probably  Hudson  himself.  This  supposition  is
borne  out  by  the  circumstances  in  which  Van  Mete-
ren  and  Hudson  were  placed,  and  by  some  curious
internal  evidence.  Van  Meteren,  when  speaking  of
Hudson  and  of  his  companions,  very  naturally  uses
the  words  "  theij  left,"  '■Hliey  feared,"  etc.  But  all  on  a
sudden  we  meet  with  the  following  passage:  "Thence


INTRODUCTION.  XXVU

they  sailed  along  the  shore  until  we  reached  40°  45'."^
Can  there  be  any  more  natural  supposition  than  that
the  old  man  here  committed  an  oversight  similar  to
those  pointed  out  by  us  in  Playse's  logbook  ^  He
probably  had  an  account  of  the  voyage  written
by  Hudson,  and  in  translating  it  he  once  forgot  to
turn  ive  into  iliejj.  All  attentive  readers  of  early
voyages  will  remember  that  this  is  a  very  common
oversight.  The  old  merchant  was,  besides,  in  Lon-
don at  the  time  of  Hudson's  return  from  his  voyage.
We  learn  from  him  that  our  navigator  was  pre-
vented, by  the  commands  of  the  English  govern-
ment, from  going  to  Holland  and  laying  his  reports
before  his  employers.  It  is  but  natural  that  Hudson
should  in  this  difficulty  have  applied  to  the  Dutch
consul,  and  it  is  probable  that  the  correspondence
between  Hudson  and  the  East  India  Company,  which
is  mentioned  by  Van  Meteren,  passed  through  Van
Meteren's  own  hands.

But  even  if  we  hesitate  to  ascribe  this  origin  to
Van  Meteren's  account  of  the  third  voyage,  it  still
remains  a  document  of  great  importance.  It  cannot
have  been  written  down  much  more  than  a  year  after
Hudson's  return.  The  excellent  opportunities  which
the  author  enjoyed,  and  his  justly  celebrated  con-
scientiousness, are  a  sufficient  guarantee  for  the  accu-
racy of  the  facts  related  by  him.

The  contents  of  the  account  coincide  in  many
points  with  the  statements  made  by  Juet,  and  serve  so
far  to  confirm  them.    Van  Meteren  is  the  only  source

>  P.  150.


XXVlll  INTRODUCTION.

that  throws  light  on  the  events  which  happened  be-
tween the  5th  and  the  19th  of  May,  1609,  on  Hud-
son's voyage  from  the  North  Cape  to  the  neighbour-
hood of  Nova  Zembia,  the  mutiny  of  the  crew,  Hud-
son's propositions  made  to  them,  and  the  final  deter-
mination to  sail  to  the  west  instead  of  the  east.  Juet
preserves  a  suspicious  silence  on  all  these  matters.
His  journal  contains  no  entry,  from  the  first  arrival
of  the  vessel  at  the  North  Cape  until  its  return  to  the
same  point.  Van  Meteren  further  informs  us  that
Hudson  was  a  friend  of  Captain  Smith,  the  cele-
brated explorer  of  Virginia,  and  that  the  idea  of
searching  for  a  passage  under  40°,  was  in  a  great
measure  due  to  the  advice  of  this  illustrious  man.
We  could  hardly  venture  to  enumerate  here  all  the
other  important  facts  which  can  be  gathered  from
this  account  of  the  third  voyage.  We  must  in  this
respect  refer  the  reader  to  the  observations  on  the
voyage  itself,  which  we  shall  offer  in  anotiier  part  of
the  present  introduction.

Two  more  remarks  have,  however,  yet  to  be  made.
Van  Meteren's  account  opens  with  a  reference  to  the
preceding  (the  30th)  book  of  his  chronicle.  The
notice  to  which  he  alludes  must  have  dropped  out  of
his  papers  before  the  work  was  sent  to  the  press.  It
is  not  to  be  found  in  any  of  the  printed  editions.
The  second  remark  is,  that  the  whole  account,  from
the  words,  "  this  Henry  Hudson"  [Desen  Ilerrij  Ilidson)
down  to  the  end,  has  been  reprinted,  but  without  the
author's  name,  by  Commelijn,  in  his  celebrated  work
Begin  en  Voorigang  van  de  Ncderlandsche  Oost  ludische


INTRODUCTION.  XXIX

Compagnie^  and  has  thence  passed  into  Constantin  de
Reneville's  still  more  celebrated  Voyages  enirepris
pour  la  Compagnie  des  Indes,  etc.  The  latter  work  is
therefore  often,  but  quite  erroneously,  quoted  as  an
original  source  for  the  biography  of  Henry  Hudson.^

The  next  fragments  that  come  under  our  con-
sideration,- are  taken  from  De  Laet's  description  of
America.  Before  speaking. of  them  more  especially,
we  have  to  make  some  general  observations  bearing
as  well  on  this  as  on  other  parts  of  our  subject.

John  De  Laet  was  one  of  the  Directors  of  the
Dutch  West  India  Company.  He  was  of  Belgian
origin,  like  Willem  Usselincx,  the  founder  of  the
association,  and  like  most  of  the  men  who  took  a
leading  part  in  it.  The  Company  itself  may,  in  fact,
be  considered  as  having  emanated  from  the  Belgian
emigrants  settled  in  the  northern  provinces,  and  as
the  principal  representative  of  their  aims  and  views.
By  the  war  between  Spain  and  the  Netherlands  the
trade  of  central  Europe  was  forced  out  of  its  wonted
channels.  The  Belgian  towns,  the  theatre  of  so  much
A'iolence,  became  unsafe  depositories  for  the  riches  of
all  nations,  many  of  the  most  industrious  merchants
fled,  the  harbour  of  Antwerp  was  almost  deserted,
and  the  mouth  of  the  Scheldt  was  made  inaccessible

^  The  editor  of  the  present  booh  has  refrained  from  introducing
long  titles  into  his  text.  But  knowing  the  great  imjiortance  of
exact  bibliographical  descriptions,  he  is  going  to  append,  at  the
end  of  the  volume,  a  list  of  all  the  works  mentioned  in  it,  with  the
necessary  bibliographical  details.

-  Pp.  154-166.


XXX  INTRODUCTION.

by  vigilant  cruisers,  long  before  it  was  entirely  closed
by  international  treaties.  By  far  the  greater  part  of
the  commerce  thus  lost  to  Belgium  found  its  way
to  Holland  and  Zealand.  The  Belgian  emigrants,
whose  activity  greatly  contributed  to  this  change,
saw  it,  however,  with  the  utmost  regret.  They  had
never  fairly  adopted  Holland,  Zealand,  and  the  other
northern  provinces  as  their  permanent  abode,  but
continued  to  look  to  the  south  as  to  their  own  dear
home.  They  even  shrank  from  matrimonial  alliances
with  the  original  inhabitants  of  the  north,  and  formed
in  every  respect  a  separate  body,  closely  knit  toge-
ther by  common  interests  and  common  longings.
They  felt  the  yoke  which  was  pressing  on  the  Bel-
gians almost  as  heavily  as  if  they  had  themselves  still
been  groaning  under  it,  and  they  longed  with  all
their  hearts  to  drive  the  Spaniards  from  their  ancient
homesteads,  to  return  in  triumph,  and  to  introduce
the  Protestant  religion  into  their  native  country.
The  plan  by  which  they  intended  to  effect  this  noble
purpose  is  so  grand  that  it  hardly  deserves  the  obli-
vion with  which  history  has  punished  its  failure.
They  proposed  to  attack  the  Spaniards  in  all  their
colonies,  to  destroy  their  resources,  and  thus  to  dis-
able them  from  holding  Belgium  any  longer.  The
events  of  after  times  have  clearly  proved  that  this
might  have  been  done,  had  the  Hollanders  and  Zea-
landers  not  been  prevented  by  opposite  interests
from  joining  heartily  in  these  generous  efforts.

Among  the  means  which  the  emigrants  devised  for
the  realization  of  their  scheme,  there  is  one  which  de-


INTRODUCTION.  XXXI

serves  in  the  highest  degree  the  attention  of  the  geogra-
phical student.  It  was  evident  that  a  body  of  men  who
proposed  to  themselves  an  object  like  the  one  they
had  in  view,  must  needs  first  possess  a  thorough
knowledge  of  the  configuration  of  the  earth,  so  as  to
direct  tlieir  steps  safely  to  any  point  on  its  surface.
The  emigrants  counted  in  their  ranks  a  number  of
men  of  high  scientific  acquirements,  and  among  these
the  idea  sprang  up,  more  distinctly  in  some,  less  dis-
tinctly in  others,  to  assist  by  scientific  research  and
geographical  labours  in  the  deliverance  of  their
country.  The  names  of  these  men  are  familiar  to  the
geographical  student.  Mercator,  the  De  Brys,Hulsius,
Bertius,  De  Laet,  Cluverius,  Peter  Plancius,  Jodo-
cus,  and  Henry  Hondius,  are  known  to  us  all  as
being  among  the  fathers  of  modern  geography  ;  but
it  seems  to  be  forgotten  that  a  nobler  aim  than  mere
scientific  research  animated  their  efibrts.

The  Dutch  West  India  Company  was,  first  as  a
scheme,  afterwards  as  a  reality,  the  centre  point  of
all  these  endeavours.  They  disdained  the  peaceful
arts  by  which  other  privileged  associations  of  the
same  class  have  grown  mighty  and  rich.  Their  aim
was  to  attack  the  Spaniard  in  his  transatlantic
strongholds ;  to  sink  or  take  the  ships  in  which  he
transported  his  silver  and  gold  ;  to  cut  him  ofi",  if
possible,  from  all  connections  with  the  New  World.
All  the  other  aff'airs,  which  the  nature  of  their  posi-
tion and  the  extent  of  their  privileges  forced  upon
them,  were  treated  as  minor  matters,  hardly  worthy
of  their  attention.     But  their  main  object  was  pur-


XXXU  INTRODUCTION.

sued  with  an  energy  beyond  all  belief.  In  spite  of
all  the  difficulties  they  had  to  contend  with,  they
long  maintained  a  war  fleet  of  more  than  seventy
sail,  and  almost  succeeded  in  driving  the  Spaniards
from  the  American  seas.

John  de  Laet  was  one  of  the  earliest  and  most
eminent  directors  of  the  "West  India  Company.  His
description  of  America,  the  work  from  which  our
extracts  are  taken,  is  marked  by  the  same  features
which  distinguish  the  company  itself  and  the  body
of  men  from  which  that  association  sprang.  As  a
geographical  compilation  it  is  one  of  the  finest  even
among  those  produced  by  the  Belgian  emigrants,  and
for  systematic  treatment,  precision,  and  general  accu-
racy, it  may  perhaps  claim  the  very  first  rank  among
the  manuals  of  the  time.  Its  main  portion,  the  de-
scription of  the  coasts  and  islands  under  Spanish
sway,  is  the  work  of  a  man  whose  eye  is  greedily-
fixed  upon  those  lands,  and  who  is  mentally  grasping
them.  But  that  part  does  not  regard  us.  Our  ex-
tracts are  derived  from  a  chapter  (the  third)  w'hich
is  principally  devoted  to  an  account  of  New  Nether-
land,  the  large  territory  in  North  America  claimed
by  the  West  India  Company  on  the  ground  of  Hud-
son's discoveries,  and  at  that  time  in  small  part  occu-
pied by  their  agents.  This  part  of  the  work  bears,
like  the  rest,  the  stamp  of  the  interests  which  the
author  pursued.  To  establish  the  company's  title
to  New  Netherland,  and  to  substantiate  it  by  all
possible  details,  this  seems  to  be  its  special  purpose.
Unfortunately  tlie  task  is  an  ungrateful   one.     The


INTRODUCTION.  XXXlll

claim  of  the  company  to  New  Netherland  was  based
upon  specious  pretences,  which  do  not  stand  the  test
of  close  inspection.  We  shall  have  again  to  insist
upon  this  fact,  because  it  is  far  from  being  generally
admitted ;  and  because  it  explains  some  curious
features  in  De  Laet's  and  Van  dcr  Donck's  accounts
of  Hudson's  third  voyage.  The  flaw  in  the  Dutch
title  has  besides  given  origin  to  an  idle  and  entirely
unwarranted  story,  which  has  found  its  way  into
more  than  one  biography  of  Henry  Hudson.  We
shall  resume  these  matters  when  speaking  of  Van
der  Donck.  For  the  present  we  have  only  to  call
the  reader's  attention  to  the  artful  manner  in  which
De  Laet  tries  to  connect  the  voyage  of  Henry  Hud-
son with  the  company's  claim.  He  endeavours  to
establish  a  chain  of  events  and  arguments  between
the  two  points  ;  and,  we  are  sorry  to  state  it,  he  does
not  scruple  to  forge  an  extra  link  which  he  believes
to  be  necessary.  lie  maJces  Hudson  return  to  Amster-
dam to  give  an  account  of  his  voyage.  AYe  know,  on
unquestionable  authority,  that  this  statement  of  De
Laet  is  false  ;  and  he  was  far  too  accurate  to  make
such  a  blunder  through  negligence.  His  special  pur-
pose becomes  therefore  the  more  evident.  Under  these
circumstances  we  must  be  extremely  cautious  in
using  any  such  statements  of  his  as  would  tend  to
strengthen  the  Dutch  title  to  New  Netherland.  This
caution  will  be  necessary  in  more  instances  than  one.
The  above  remarks  refer  only  to  one  or  two  pas-
sages. The  rest  of  De  Laet's  description  of  Hudson's
third  voyage  must  be  reckoned  among  our  most  reliable


XXXIV  INTRODUCTION.

documents.  The  description  of  the  voyage  occurs
incidentally  in  two  different  chapters,  the  seventh  and
tenth,  of  the  third  book  of  De  Laet's  Nieuive  Werelt.
The  second  of  these  passages  consists  almost  entirely
of  two  fragments,  the  only  remaining  ones,  of  Hud-
son's report  to  the  Directors  of  the  Dutch  East  India
Company.  The  short  summary  of  the  whole  voyage
contained  in  the  first  passage,  seems  for  the  most
part  to  be  derived  from  the  same  source.  No  one
will  read  these  fragments  of  Hudson's  journal  with-
out regretting  the  loss  of  the  paper  from  which
they  are  taken.  Short  as  they  are,  they  form  the
most  graphic  picture  of  the  life,  manners,  and  aspect
of  the  North  American  Indians,  left  by  any  one  of
the  early  navigators.  It  may,  perhaps,  not  be  super-
fluous to  observe  that  we  do  not  even  possess  the
original  cast  of  Hudson's  words.  As  De  Laet
gives  them,  they  are  merely  a  translation.  Hudson
himself,  though  for  a  short  time  in  the  service  of  the
Dutch,  could  not  easily  understand,  and  therefore
certainly  not  write  their  language.  He  required  the
services  of  a  friend  to  translate  for  him  some  Dutch
papers,  which  he  desired  to  make  use  of  during  this
same  voyage.

A  few  years  ago,  when  the  writer  of  the  present
pages  was  staying  in  Holland,  a  rumour  had  got
abroad,  that  a  part  of  De  Laet's  manuscript  materials
had  turned  up.  The  rumour  was  entirely  unfounded  ;
and  for  the  present  there  appears  to  be  no  chance  that
the  original  of  Hudson's  report  should  come  to  light.
Much  may  however  be  hoped   for  from  future  re-


INTRODUCTION.  XXXV

searches.  Little  is  lost  in  so  eminently  conservative
a  country  as  Holland ;  and  attention  has  lately  been
much  directed  to  these  matters.  Search  has  also  been
made  in  the  Archives  of  the  East  India  Company,  for
any  materials  relating  to  Hudson.  The  scraps  of  in-
formation gathered  from  these  archives  will  be  given
elsewhere  in  these  pages.  Hudson's  report  has  not  as
yet  been  discovered.  It  is  very  possible  that  it  was,
in  De  Laet's  time,  given  up  to  the  West  India
Company  or  lent,  and  thought  of  too  little  importance
to  be  asked  back.  There  is  also  some  chance  left  of
its  still  being  found  among  the  papers  of  the  East
India  Company.  This  immense  store  of  documents
was  till  quite  lately  without  calendars,  or  indices  of
any  kind.  It  has,  since,  been  entrusted  to  able  hands  ;
and  many  important  discoveries  will  undoubtedly  be
made  among  its  dusty  piles.

De  Laet's  Nieuwe  Werelt,  appeared  first  in  1625  ;
then  for  a  second  time  in  1630.  Copies  of  the  earlier
edition  are  rare;  and  none  was  to  be  found  in  this  coun-
try. Our  reprints  are  therefore  taken  from  the  1630
edition.  A  gentleman  in  Holland,  however,  to  whose
unostentatious  labours  historical  research  is  greatly
indebted,  has  been  so  kind  as  to  compare  for  us  the
text  of  the  two  editions,  and  has  found  them  to  agree
in  every  word  ;  as  far  at  least  as  our  extracts  are
concerned.  A  reprint  both  of  the  seventh  and  tenth
chapter  of  the  third  book,  is  to  be  found  in  a  very
rare  tract,  Beschryvinge  van  Virginia,  Nieuw  Nederlandt,
etc.  4to.,  Amsterdam,  1651,  pp.  14,  15  ;  and  20  to
22.


XXXVl  INTRODUCTION.

The  next  two  extracts  in  our  collection^  are  taken
from  the  account  of  Hudson's  voyage,  which  forms
part  of  Lambrechtsen's  history  of  New  Netheiiand.
Some  of  the  statements  in  that  account  cannot
be  traced  back  to  printed  sources,  and  there  is  every
reason  to  believe  that  they  were  borrowed  from
early  documents,  then  existing  at  Middelburg.  The
facts  in  question  all  relate  to  Hudson's  intercourse
with  the  Dutch  East  India  Company.  At  the  time
when  Lambrechtsen  wrote,  a  remarkable  collection  of
documents  belonging  to  that  Company  was  preserved
at  Middelburg :  and  Lambrechtsen,  as  might  be  ex-
pected from  his  high  standing,  had  access  to  them.  He
quotes  repeatedly  in  his  history  from  the  "•  Notulcn  van
de  xvii";  that  is  to  say,  the  minutes  of  the  proceed-
ings of  the  seventeen  East  India  directors.  It  can-
not, however,  be  positively  asserted,  that  the  state-
ments which  we  are  discussing  were  taken  from  this
important  source.  Nothing  certain  can  be  said  on
this  point,  as  long  as  the  above  mentioned  collection
of  documents  remains  inaccessible.  It  was  for  a  long
time  in  private  hands  at  Middelburg,  was  then,  about
eight  or  nine  years  ago,  surrendered  to  the  East
India  Company  in  Amsterdam  ;  and,  has  still  more
recently  been  transferred  to  the  royal  archives  at  the
Hague.  But  as  there  has  never  been  a  calendar,  or
any  other  kind  of  list  made,  there  is  but  too  good
reason  to  fear  that  some  of  the  papers  may  have  been
lost  on  the  way.  Some  inquiries  made  by  the  writer
of  the  present  pages,  both    by   correspondence  and

'   Pp.  10 1  to  IGG.


INTRODUCTION.  XXXVU

verbally,  during  a  short  sojourn  on  the  spot,  have  led
to  no  results.  We  are  thus,  for  the  present,  obliged
to  take  Lambrechtsen's  assertions  on  trust.

We  have  already  alluded  to  the  extracts  from  Van
dcr  Donck's  description  of  New  Netherland  ;  which
follow  next  in  the  order  of  our  documents.^  Van  der
Donck  speaks,  in  several  passages  of  his  work,  of
Hudson's  third  voyage,  and  he  makes  several  state-
ments respecting  it,  which  disagree  more  or  less  with
the  earlier  and  better  sources.  These  statements  miixht
seem  to  deserve  implicit  credit,  on  account  of  the
opportunities  for  obtaining  information  which  the
author  possessed ;  and  some  conscientious  writers
have  indeed  fully  trusted  them.  We  consider  all
these  statements  as  spurious,  not  only  because  they
are  not  borne  out  by  contemporary  evidence,  but  more
especially  because  they  all  tend  to  strengthen  the
Dutch  title  to  New  Netherland,  which  Van  der
Donck  had  a  strong  interest  to  defend.

The  following  was  Van  der  Donck's  position  with
regard  to  this  title.  The  title  itself  was  little  better
than  a  shadow.  It  was  entirely  founded  on  the
boldest,  the  most  obstinate,  and  most  extensive
act  of  squatting^  recorded  in  colonial  history.  The
territory  called  New  Netherland,  which  the  West
India  Company  claimed  on  account  of  Hudson's
discovery,  belonged  by  the  best  possible  right  to
England.  It  formed  part  of  a  vast  tract  of  country,
the  coasts  of  which  liad  been  first  discovered  by
English  ships,  on  which  settlements  had  been  founded
^  Pp.  1G7  to  172.


XXXVlll  INTRODUCTION.

by  English  colonists,  and  which  had  been  publicly
claimed  by  England,  and  granted  to  an  English
Company,  before  Hudson  ever  set  foot  on  American
ground.  But  the  wilds  and  wastes  of  primeval  forests,
were  thought  of  so  little  value,  that  the  Dutch  were
for  many  years  allowed  to  encroach  upon  English
rights,  without  much  more  than  passing  remonstran-
ces of  the  British  government.

Some  Dutch  adventurers,  induced  by  the  favour-
able accounts  of  Henry  Hudson,  and  of  some  Dutch
mariners  who  followed  in  his  track,  first  founded  a
factory  and  built  a  fort  on  an  island  in  the  mouth  of
Hudson's  river — the  beginning  of  New  York.  The
adventurers  afterwards  obtained,  as  a  protection
against  the  commercial  opposition  of  their  own  coun-
trymen, the  exclusive  privilege  of  trading  to  those
parts.  Both  the  privilege  and  the  settlement  passed
into  the  hands  of  the  Dutch  West  India  Company,
who  enlarged  the  fort  till  it  gradually  became  a  town,
made  vast  grants  of  land,  sent  out  colonists,  and
commissioned  some  of  their  servants  to  rule  over  the
colony.  This  rule  of  the  West  India  Company  lasted
for  more  than  forty  years.  But  it  is  a  remarkable
fact,  that  during  nearly  all  that  time  the  Dutch
government  could  not  be  induced  to  acknowledge
New  Netherland  openly  and  distinctly  as  a  Dutch
dependency.  This  singular  state  of  affairs  led,  as  may
easily  be  imagined,  to  ardent  contentions  between
the  English  and  Dutch  colonists  in  New  England  and
New  Netherland,  neither  of  which  sets  of  men  was
naturally  disposed  to  yield.    Of  these  contentions  Van


INTUODUCTION.  XXXIX

der  Doiick.  He  resided  in  New  Netherland  from
164:1  to  164:9,  first  as  a  law  officer  (schout  fiscael)
in  the  colony  of  Rensselaerswyck  ;  afterwards  as  a
settler  near  New  York.  He  quarrelled  with  the
somewhat  despotic  governor  of  the  country,  and
headed  a  faction  opposed  to  the  colonial  government.
He,  at  last,  returned  to  Holland,  as  the  leader  of  a
deputation  of  influential  settler's,  who  were  to  expose
at  home  all  the  wrongs  hy  which  they  believed  the
colony  and  themselves  to  be  oppressed.  Van  der
Donck  wrote  two  books  in  support  of  the  cause
which  he  represented,  both  of  which  contain  short
descriptions  of  Hudson's  voyage.  The  first  of  them,
called  Vertoogh  van  Niemo  Nederland^  and  published
in  1650,  is  mainly  an  account  of  the  misrule  of  the
colony,  with  a  short  description  of  the  country,  and
other  similar  matters.  It  contains  the  germs  of  the
ingenious  inventions  concerning  Hudson's  voyage,
which  are  further  developed  in  the  second  work,
BesclirijvingJie  van  Niemo  Nederland.,  from  which  our
extracts  are  taken.  Van  der  Donck's  reason  for
making  these  inventions  is  obvious  enough.  He
wished  to  induce  the  Dutch  government  to  take
strong  measures  against  the  New  Englanders  in  de-
fence of  the  pretended  right  of  the  Dutch  settlers.
His  reason  for  being  more  explicit  in  the  second
work  than  in  the  first  is  also  very  obvious.  The  war
between  England  and  Holland  (1552  to  1554)  in-
tervened between  the  two  publications.  After  its
termination  several  delegates  were  sent  out  from
Holland  to  England,  to  arrange  the  numerous  dif-


xl  INTRODUCTION.

ferenccs  which  existed  between  the  two  countries.
These  delegates  were  urged  by  the  West  India  Com-
pany to  bring  the  North  American  disputes  to  a
peaceable  arrangement.  But  they  failed,  and  wrote
to  Holland,  that  they  themselves  did  not  consider  the
claim  of  the  Company  as  substantiated  by  the  evidence
adduced ;  and  that^  unless  better  evidence  was  brought
fonvard^  they  could  not  possibly  press  the  claim  on  the
English  government.  This  correspondence  was  going
on  at  the  very  time  when  Van  der  Donck  was  en-
gaged upon  the  compilation  of  his  work.

The  fictions  in  which  Van  der  Donck  has  indulged,
are  of  so  serious  a  character,  that  we  have  been
obliged  to  make  this  digression  to  put  them  in  their
true  light.  He  represents  Hudson  as  having  taken
possession  for  the  Dutch,  of  a  tract  of  country,  which
belonged  to  England.  Nothing  however  could  be  fur-
ther from  Hudson's  intention,  and  even  from  that  of  his
employers,  the  Dutch  East  India  Company,  who  looked
with  anything  but  favour  on  the  endeavours  to  esta-
blish the  rule  of  the  Netherlands  in  the  New  World.

Hudson's  long  stay  in  Holland,  for  which  Van  der
Donck  is  the  only  authority,  seems  likewise  to  be
an  invention,  made  to  render  the  taking  possession  of
New  Netherland  for  the  Dutch  a  less  unlikely  act.
This  residence  in  Holland  is  not  an  absolute  im-
possibility. It  may,  however,  be  observed,  that  Hud-
son was  in  1607  and  1608  in  English  service  ;  and  that
he  was  not  sufficiently  acquainted  with  the  Dutch
language  to  understand,  without  an  English  transla-
tion, some  papers  of  Barents,  which  had  been  lent  to


INTRODUCTION.  xU

him.  It  was,  on  the  other  hand,  not  an  uncommon
practice  among  English  captains,  to  enter  the  Dutch
service,  as  is  shown  by  the  examples  of  Davis,  Adams,
and  Hudson  himself.  We  are  on  the  whole  inclined
to  think,  that  Van  der  Donck  possessed  no  informa-
tion concerning  our  navigator,  which  is  not  existing
at  the  present  day ;  and  that  the  startling  new  facts
which  he  adds,  had  their  origin  in  his  fertile  imagina-
tion. The  sources  which  he  made  use  of  were  De
Laet  and  Van  Meteren,  and  in  copying  the  latter
author,  he  has  made  a  most  ludicrous  mistake,  which
must  at  once  deprive  his  assertions  of  all  credit.^

Van  der  Donck,-  and,  a  century  and  a  half  after,
Dr.Heckewelder^  and  Dr.  Barton,^  noted  down  on  the
spot,  a  sort  of  legend  of  Hudson's  arrival  in  America,
handed  down  by  the  American  Indians.  There  is  a
considerable  discrepancy  between  the  earlier  and  the
later  accounts.  A  scene  of  drunkenness,  which  really
happened,  is  dwelt  on  at  great  length  in  the  more
modern  story,  without  being  even  mentioned  in  the
old  one.  We  are  not  inclined  to  attribute  much
weight  to  this  tradition,  either  in  its  simple  or  its
adorned  state.  A  tale  of  this  kind  is  very  likely  to
be  elicited  from  the  imaginative  aborigines,  by  the
eager  questioning  of  the  white  man.  The  tale,  whe-
ther true  or  false,  has  the  merit  of  being  well  told.
The  etymological  argument  by  which  Dr.  Ilecke-
welder  attempts  to  support  it,  ought  rather  to  de-
tract from,  than  to  increase  its  credit.     The  name  of

'  See  infra,  pp.  152,  note  1  ;    167,  note  1.
2  Pp.  169-170.  ^  Pp.  173-179.  >*  P.  179.

g


Xlii  INTRODUCTION.

the  island  Manhattans  is  not,  as  he  asserts,  derived
from  a  scene  of  drunkenness.  It  is  taken  from  a
tribe  of  Indians,  and  is  ah'eady  mentioned  by  Hudson
himself.

Another  American  tradition,  concerning  Hudson's
first  landing  place,  does  not  seem  entitled  to  much  more
credit.  The  early  settlers  in  those  regions  had  other
cares  than  these  historical  recollections  to  attend  to.
We  possess  several  remarkable  books  written  by  some
of  them,  and  it  does  not  seem  that  they  paid  much
attention  to  subjects  of  the  kind.  The  tradition  is
probably  of  a  comparatively  modern  origin,  having
its  source  in  a  guess.  The  locality  mentioned  is  not
by  any  means  the  most  likely  one  for  Hudson's  first
landing.

Our  next  fragment^  is  taken  from  Luke  Foxe's
North  West  Fox.  The  book  which  bears  this  singular
title  is  the  description  of  Captain  Foxe's  voyage  in
search  of  a  north-west  passage,  performed  in  the
year  1631.  Foxe  has  therein  set  an  example,  w^liich
has  been  very  generally  followed  in  later  accounts  of
north-western  expeditions.  Before  describing  his
own  voyage  he  gives  a  summary  of  the  exploits  of
his  predecessors.  Most  of  the  statements  contained
in  that  part  of  his  book  are,  however,  of  little  im-
portance, being  merely  extracts  from  sources  which
we  still  possess.  Such  is  also  his  account  of  liudson's
voyage.  The  only  notice  in  it  that  is  really  original,
is  the  one  reprinted  among  our  fragments.  It  is  not
of  a  pleasing  nature,  throwing,  as  it  does,  a  most
1  r.  173.  -  r.  ISO.


INTRODUCTION.  xliu

unfavourable  light  on  Hudson's  character.  A  certain
master  Colburne  (or  Colbert,  or  Coolbrand)  was  sent
out  with  Hudson  on  his  fourth  voyage.  Colburne
seems  to  have  been  attached  to  the  vessel  as  a  kind
of  official  adviser,  without  any  special  functions.
Hudson  soon  got  tired  of  this  control,  and  sent  Col-
burne home  asfain.  So  far  the  facts  are  authentic.
But  Foxe  adds  that  Colburne  was  a  better  man  than
Hudson,  and  insinuates  that  it  is  to  the  former,  not
to  the  latter,  that  the  plan  of  searching  for  a  passage
in  latitude  61°  was  due.  This  malicious  insinuation
is  devoid  of  all  truth.  Abundant  proof  is  still  extant
that  Hudson  had,  years  before,  matured  the  idea
here  ascribed  to  Colburne.  The  name  of  this  sailor
is  also  not  otherwise  mentioned  in  the  records  of
maritime  discovery,  and  his  having  been  a  man  of
conspicuous  merit  thus  becomes  very  doubtful.  We
can,  therefore, hardly  hesitate  to  ascribe  Foxe's  calum-
nious insinuations  to  the  desire  to  depreciate  the
merits  of  a  great  predecessor  whom  he  had  vainly
tried  to  outrival ;  an  explanation  fully  consistent  with
the  character  of  Foxe,  who  had  all  the  conceit  and
self-complacency  observable  in  little  minds.

We  have  now  to  speak  of  the  most  important
documents  in  our  collection — Hudson's  chart  of  the
fourth  voyage,  and  the  explanations  added  to  it  by
its  publisher,  Hessel  Gerritz.^  Gerritz  belonged  to  a
class  of  persons,  to  whom  geographical  science  is  very
deeply  indebted.  He  was,  like  the  Arrowsmiths,
Petermanns,  Van  der  Maelens,  and  Johnstons  of  our

1  Pp.  181-194.


Xliv  INTRODUCTION.

day,  a  geographer,  map  maker,  and  publisher  of  geo-
graphical works.  His  labours,  though  few  in  number,
are  of  the  most  genial  nature.  Fixing  his  eyes  on  the
boundaries  of  the  known  world,  he  followed  with
enthusiasm  the  first  rays  of  light  that  began  to  pene-
trate into  regions  of  darkness  and  mystery.  Hudson's
chart  of  the  fourth  voyage  was  Gerritz's  first  publica-
tion, and  around  it  grew,  in  a  very  remarkable  manner,
the  most  interesting  of  the  many  collections  of  voy-
ages and  travels  printed  in  the  early  part  of  the
seventeenth  century.

Hudson's  chart,  of  which  we  give  an  exact  fac-
simile, was  at  first  published  by  itself,  with  a  short
explanation  in  Dutch  on  its  back,^  probably  in
autumn  1612.

The  chart  was  republished  a  short  time  afterwards,
as  part  of  a  pamphlet  in  Latin,^  the  first  edition  of
the  collection  of  voyages  and  travels  to  which  w^e  have
alluded.  This  collection  also  contained  an  explana-
tion of  the  chart,  somewhat  ampler  than  the  one
given  at  first  ;^  and  besides  this  information  on  the
far  north-wTst,  it  brought  before  the  public  Fernan-
dez de  Quiros's  explorations  in  the  far  south,  and
Massa's  account  and  map  of  the  regions  about  the
mouth  of  the  river  Oby  in  the  far  north-east.  The
introduction  or  iwolegomcna  to  the  pamphlet,  which
contain  some  other  valuable  materials  and  throw  a
light  on  the  plan  of  the  work,  are  reprinted  in  the
appendix  to  the  present  volume.^

^  Pp.  181-133.  ~  Sec  appendix,  p.  L'o6.

■'  Pp.  I8r)-ir)<).  '  i»p.  L>;j(')-i2i'_'.


INTRODUCTION.  xlv

The  same  painplilet  was  again  issued  in  1(512,  with
a  new  title  page,  and  with  some  slight  changes  in
the  arrangement ;  but  without  any  additions.

In  the  same  year,  1612,  a  Dutch  edition  was  pub-
lished; being  in  almost  every  respect  a  translation  from
the  Latin.  The  explanation  of  Hudson's  chart^  is
however  both  corrected  and  enlarged,  and  is  in
several  important  points  at  variance  with  the  preced-
ing editions.

Early  in  the  year  1613a  revised  Latin  edition  was
published,  differing  in  many  important  points  from
its  predecessors.  A  new,  and  much  shorter  intro-
duction,^ took  the  place  of  the  valuable  prolegomena.
The  explanation  of  Hudson's  chart  was  translated
from  the  Dutch  edition,  with  important  additions  and
alterations  at  the  end.^  The  voyage  of  Cornelis  Nai
to  the  north-east  and  north-west,  to  which  allusion
is  made  in  the  prolegomena  to  the  first  edition,  is
here  described  in  full ;  the  navigator  having  returned
in  the  interval.  Some  corrections  of  doubtful  value
are  also  introduced  into  Massa's  map.

The  last  edition  of  the  work  was  also  published  in
1613.  It  is  in  every  respect  identical  with  the  one
just  described  ;  but  contains  at  the  end  Peter  Plan-
cius's  observations  on  the  dispute  between  the  Eng-
lish and  Dutch,  with  regard  to  the  discovery  of
Spitzbergen.     This  edition  is  extremely  rare.

The  chart  published  by  Gerritz  had  originally  been
drawn  by  Hudson  himself.    This  fact,  which  is  clearly

^  Tp.  189-193.  -  Appendix,  pp.  211-212.

3  Pp.  193-194.


Xlvi  INTRODUCTION.

stated  by  the  publisher,^  is  also  borne  out  by  other  cir-
cumstances. We  learn  from  Pricket  that  Hudson  had
drawn  a  chart  of  the  strait  and  bay,  which  the  muti-
neers consulted  on  their  home  voyage. ^  The  delinea-
tion before  us  is  evidently  based  on  a  knowledge  of
the  localities ;  and  it  contains  only  such  places  as
Hudson  himself  had  visited.  Still  it  might  surprise
us  that  the  chart  was  published  in  Holland,  not  in
England.  This  somewhat  singular  circumstance  can,
however,  be  readily  explained.  Holland  was  at  that
time  the  centre  of  all  geographical  research,  owing
to  the  impulse  given  to  these  studies  by  the  Belgian
emigrants.  These  scholars  made  ample  use  of  the
facilities  afforded  them  by  the  dispersion  of  so  many
friends  over  all  parts  of  the  civilised  world.  Tliey
entertained  more  especially  a  lively  intercourse  with
England,  as  can  be  seen  by  a  glance  thrown  on  the
labours  of  the  most  prominent  among  them.  We
can  thus  guess  how  Hudson's  chart  was  obtained,
and  we  may,  perhaps,  even  be  fortunate  enough  to
divine  the  very  channel  through  which  it  reached
Hessel  Gerritz.

The  chart  seems  to  have  been  first  sent  from  Eng-
land to  Peter  Plancius,  one  of  the  most  eminent
geographical  scholars  among  the  Belgian  emigrants,
and  who  was, like  the  late  Sir  John  Barrow,  universally
known  to  take  a  special  interest  in  the  search  for  a
short  northern  route  to  China,  a  subject  which  he
had  also  been  discussing  with  Hudson  himself.
Hessel  Gerritz's  publication  was  at  least  made  with

'  P.  194,  note  1.  '  I'p.  121  and  126.


INTRODUCTION.  xlvu

the  sanction,  and,  to  a  certain  degree,  nnder  the
auspices  of  Peter  Plancius;  as  appears  from  Plancius's
supplement  to  the  last  edition,  and  from  many  re-
marks in  Gerritz's  explanations  of  the  chart.

The  delineation  'which  we  have  hefore  us  may
seem  a  poor  work  to  modern  eyes,  and  many  persons
might  think  that  the  engraved  copy  did  not  do  full
justice  to  the  original  draught.  But  when  we  apply
the  standard  of  Hudson's  time  instead  of  our  own,  we
find  this  chart  to  be  far  superior  to  many  contempo-
rary productions,  and  decidedly  the  facile  iirinccps  of
all  the  then  existing  delineations  of  the  arctic  regions.
The  elementary  state  of  geographical  science,  the
imperfections  of  the  instruments,  the  entire  want  of
any  previous  data,  the  fogs,  the  storms,  and  the  ice
of  those  inhospitable  regions,  fully  explain  the  un-
avoidable defects  of  the  work.

The  engraving  of  the  chart  is  very  probably  by
Hessel  Gerritz's  own  hand.  The  ornamental  additions
are  in  the  same  fine  bold  style  which  distinguishes  an
exquisite  and  rare  engraving  representing  tvalrusscs
signed  by  him.  The  style  in  which  the  chart  itself
is  engraved  is  not  unlike  that  of  Hessel  Gerritz's
map  of  Russia  in  Bleau's  great  atlas.  The  fidelity
with  which  most  English  terms  are  copied,  and,  on
the  other  hand,  the  occasional  Batavianisms  (such  as
hoojje  for  hope^  Yslandt  for  Iceland,  etc.),  need,  therefore,
not  surprise  us.  Our  own  engraving  of  this  remark-
able chart  is  of  course  somewhat  inferior  to  the  origi-
nal ;  but  it  is  nevertheless  an  exceedingly  good  copy.

Lucidity  of  style  is  not  among  Gerritz's  good  points.


Xlviii  INTRODUCTION.

as  his  explanations  to  Hudson's  chart  too  well  show.
They  are  made  up  from  two  different  elements,  neither
being  presented  in  the  most  acceptable  shape.  The
explanations  contain,  first  a  summary  of  Hudson's  and
Plancius's  discussions  about  the  search  for  a  north-
western passage  in  the  locality  where  Hudson  after-
wards discovered  his  strait.  The  account  of  these  con-
versations seems  to  be  correct  in  all  main  points,  though
somewhat  confused  in  certain  details.  Far  greater,
unfortunately,  is  the  confusion  which  prevails  in  the
other  part  of  Hessel  Gerritz's  explanations.  His
account  of  the  voyage  is  confusion  itself.  The  vari-
ous versions  in  the  different  editions  even  contradict
each  other  in  some  important  points.  The  facts  in
which  all  the  editions  agree  are  of  but  minor  import-
ance. Some  of  them  seem  to  owe  their  origin  to  a
reliable  source,  some  to  be  based  on  hearsay.

The  whole  work  of  Hessel  Gerritz  has  been  re-
peatedly reprinted  in  Germany.  The  best  known  of
these  counterfeits  forms  part  of  the  great  De  Bry
collection.  It  is  easy  to  distinguish,  both  in  the
originals  and  in  the  reprints,  the  text  of  the  first
from  those  of  the  later  Latin  editions.  The  following
are  the  most  characteristic  marks.  In  the  original  edi-
tions the  date^  1612  for  the  first,  1613  for  the  others  ;
secondly,  the  greater  length  of  the  prolegomena  in
the  first  edition,  eight  pages  in  one  case,  two  in  the
other ;  lastly,  a  very  curious  difference.  George
Weymouth,  whose  expedition  is  repeatedly  referred
to  in  the  explanations  to  Hudson's  chart,  is  in  the
first  edition  called  Wtmuood,  the  name  of  the  English


INTRODUCTION.  xlix

ambassador  at  the  Hague.  This  mistake  is  corrected
in  the  later  editions.  It  is,  of  coarse,  copied  in  tlie
reprints.

The  last  one^  of  our  documents  is  another  chart,
which  serves  to  illustrate  Hudson's  two  first  voyages.
It  is  taken  from  Pontanus's  history  of  Amsterdam,
published  in  that  city  in  1611,  and  illustrated  with
maps  by  the  publisher,  the  celebrated  Josse,  or
Jodocus,  Hondius,  to  whom  we  have  repeatedly  al-
luded. Pontanus's  work  contains  in  several  of  its
chapters  the  history  of  the  voyages  of  the  Dutch,  and
among  them  an  account  of  Barentz's  three  expedi-
tions to  the  north.  The  present  chart  is  intended  to
illustrate  the  third  of  these  voyages  ;  and  it  would
thus  seem  not  to  bear  special  reference  to  Hudson.
Hondius  had,  however,  come  in  contact  with  our
navigator  in  1609,  and  appears  to  have  obtained
from  him  some  details  about  his  two  first  voyages.
The  conscientious  geographer  thouglit  it  his  duty
to  introduce  this  information  into  his  chart  of
arctic  regions,  and  this  chart  is  therefore  almost
as  much  an  illustration  of  Hudson's  as  of  Barentz's
voyages.     Colin  s  Cape^  one  of  the  localities  discovered

*  Besides  the  printed  sources  which  we  have  reviewed,  there
exist  some  manuscript  notices  among  the  documents  of  the  Dutch
East  India  Company.  Considerable  efforts  have  been  made  to
obtain  fac-similes  of  these  ;  but  as  yet  without  result.  We  have,
however,  full  reason  to  hope,  that  we  shall  be  able  to  make  this
important  addition  to  our  collection  before  we  finally  close  it.
The  printing  of  the  present  part  of  the  work  could  not  be  any
longer  delayed  ;  we  must  therefore  review  these  manuscript  docu-
ments in  another  part  of  our  introduction.

h


1  INTRODUCTION.

in  1607,  and  the  Banquise,  or  continuous  icebank,
which  hindered  Hudson's  progress  to  the  north,  are
to  be  found  in  no  other  map  or  chart,  either  old  or
new.  The  words  on  this  chart,  Glacies  ah  H.  Hud-
sono  detecta  anno  1608,  also  contain  the  first  mention
publicly  made  of  our  navigator.

The  appendix  to  our  collection  consists  of  several
pieces,  not  strictly  bearing  on  Hudson's  career,  but
illustrating  points  of  collateral  interest.  The  first
of  them  is  Verazzano's  voyage  along  the  North  Ame-
rican coasts,  and  his  discovery  of  Hudson's  river. ^  This
voyage  is  already  well  known  from  Ramusio  and
Hakluyt.  But  Verazzano's  original  letter,  preserved
in  the  Magliabecchian  library  in  Florence,  has  never
yet  been  printed  in  Europe.  It  is,  however,  of  great
interest,  not  only  on  account  of  the  verve  and  fresh-
ness prevailing  in  it,  but  more  especially  on  account
of  a  valuable  appendix,  which  Ramusio  has  not
given.  This  appendix  is  of  special  importance  for
our  subject,  because  it  restores  one  of  the  connecting
links  in  the  history  of  arctic  discovery.  The  reasons
which  we  give  for  inserting  this  somewhat  extensive
document  in  our  collection  are  not,  however,  meant
as  excuses  for  printing  it.  It  undoubtedly  deserves,
on  its  own  merits,  a  place  among  the  collections  of
the  Hakluyt  Society,  and  it  will  better  repay  an
attentive  perusal  than  any  other  part  of  the  present
volume.  We  have  purposely  adopted  Professor  Cogs-
well's excellent  translation,  which  preserves  in  most
respects  the  character  of  the  original.     We  have  also

'  Pp.  197.


INTRODUCTION.  H

borrowed  from  him  the  introduction  and  the  notes
by  which  his  translation  is  accompanied.

The  appendix  further  contains  the  English  trans-
lations of  two  papers  which  had  originally  been  writ-
ten in  Dutch  by  the  celebrated  William  Barentz,  had
then  passed  into  the  hands  of  Peter  Plancius,  and  then
into  those  of  Henry  Hudson,  who  got  them  trans-
lated into  English.^  The  translations  were  first  in
Hakluyt's,  then  in  Purchas's  possession.  The  latter
published  them,  as  he  says,  for  Barentz's  sake.  They
are  not  less  important  for  the  biography  of  our  navi-
gator, and  furnish  some  of  the  few  existing  materials
towards  his  personal  history.

The  next  piece^  in  our  appendix  is  an  extract  from
Van  der  Donck,  about  the  wampum  or  bead  money
of  the  Indians,  as  an  illustration  to  a  passage  in
Juet's  Journal,  p.  86,  note  2.

Then  follow,  as  the  concluding  pieces,  the  pro-
legomena to  the  first  and  to  the  second  Latin  editions
of  Hessel  Gerritz's  work.^  Of  this  book  we  have
spoken  at  sufficient  length,  and  on  reference  to  the
papers  themselves,  it  will  easily  be  seen  that  they
are  interesting  and  important.

Having  concluded  our  review  of  the  sources,  we
now  proceed  to  give  a  short  account  of  the  existing
researches  respecting  Henry  Hudson  that  have  come
under  our  notice.

Summaries  of  our  navigator's  career  are  contained
in  many  cyclopaedias  and  biographical  handbooks.
They  generally  convey  some  idea  of  his  purposes  and

'  P.  229.  2  p   235.  3  pp   236,  242.


lii  INTRODUCTION.    •

principal  discoveries,  but  are  inexact  in  their  details  ;
being  mostly  based  on  a  somewhat  superficial  ac-
quaintance with  the  documents  collected  by  Purchas,
without  those  preserved  by  other  hands.  Of  the
articles  examined  by  us,  those  in  the  Biographie  TJni-
versclle  and  Biographia  Britannica  are  the  best.  None
of  them,  however,  contain  anything  that  can  be  pro-
perly called  original  research.  To  the  same  class  of
labours  belongs  also  a  sketch  of  Hudson's  life,  among
the  collection  of  biographies  edited  by  Mr.  Jared
Sparks.  This  sketch  is  well  written  ;  and  one  or  two
other  sources,  besides  those  collected  by  Purchas,
have  been  made  use  of.  We  also  notice  here  and
there  an  original  observation.  But  the  research  is
not  of  sufficient  depth  to  render  it  useful  for  a  special
purpose  like  ours.

Another  class  of  short  biographies  of  Hudson  is
contained  in  general  and  special  works  on  arctic  dis-
covery ;  such  as  Adelung,  Forster,  Barrow,  etc.  The
authors  of  these  works  are  better  acquainted  with  the
arctic  regions  than  the  contributors  to  handbooks  of
a  more  general  nature.  Still,  few  of  them  have
thought  it  worth  their  while  to  inquire,  with  any-
thing like  diligence,  into  Hudson's  career  ;  and  it
may  perhaps  be  observed  without  injustice,  that  the
histories  of  arctic  discovery  arc  all  of  them  some-
what below  the  present  standard  of  critical  research.
Little,  if  anything  for  our  purpose,  can  be  learned
from  the  more  general  works.  They  contain  rapid,
and  sometimes  even  hasty,  summaries  of  the  most
accessible   sources ;    this  being,  indeed,  the  avowed


INTRODUCTION.  liu

plan  of  the  best  known  of  these  histories,  that  of  Sir
John  Barrow.  It  would  be  unjust  to  pass  the  same
criticism  on  Mr.  Rundall's  Vojjagcs  towards  the  North-
West.  But  the  purpose  of  this  diligent  scholar  is
more  to  lay  before  his  readers  as  yet  unknown
sources,  drawn  from  archives  and  libraries,  than  to
indulge  in  geographical  details.  His  sketch  of  Hud-
son's last  voyage  is,  therefore,  more  an  interesting  link
in  a  chain  of  valuable  evidence,  than  an  independent
production ;  and  we  cannot  blame  the  author  for  its
having  proved  of  little  advantage  for  our  purpose.
It  is  not  Mr.  Rundall's  fault  that  he  has  been  unable
to  find  any  new  documents  concerning  Hudson's
career.

More  satisfactory  researches  are  to  be  found  in  some
works  of  a  more  special  character.  Captain  Beechey,
in  his  well-known  appendix  to  his  arctic  voyage,
dwells  at  some  length  on  Hudson's  first  and  second
expeditions.  Captain  Beechey  has  used  only  Playse's
description  of  the  first,  and  Hudson's  description  of
the  second  voyage,  without  the  other  fragments.  But
he  is  himself  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  locali-
ties, and  his  observations  are  of  very  great  value.
They  have  often  been  quoted  and  extracted  by  more
recent  writers.

One  passage  in  Hudson's  account  of  his  second
voyage  has  also  been  examined  with  much  critical
acumen  by  Dr.  Beke,  in  the  introduction  to  his
edition  of  De  Veer.

None  of  the  four  voyages  has,  however,  been  more
specially  investigated  and  commented  upon  than  the


liv  INTRODUCTION.

third,  which  led  to  the  discovery  of  Hudson's  river.
The  inhabitants  of  the  United  States  have,  with  a
most  laudable  zeal  and  energy,  embraced  the  task  of
inquiring  into  their  own  antiquities ;  and  the  task
being  in  itself  of  a  limited  nature,  these  researches
have  already  been  brought  to  greater  completeness
than  perhaps  those  concerning  any  part  of  the  Old
World.  The  State  of  New  York  has,  in  this  respect,
been  both  more  zealous  and  more  successful  than  any
other.  The  New  York  Historical  Society,  an  associa-
tion formed  for  this  kind  of  research, has  been  flourish-
ing for  the  last  half  century;  and  it  may  look  back  with
pride  on  its  past  career.  Besides  the  labours,  both  at
public  and  at  private  expense,  which  the  society  has
encouraged,  they  have  themselves  published  in  their
collections  many  of  tlie  most  important  documents
concerning  their  national  history.  To  these  collec-
tions Ave  are  largely  indebted.  We  have  borrowed
from  them  the  translations  from  De  Laet,  Van  der
Donck  and  Lambrechtsen,  and  Dr.  Heckewelder's
observations,  as  well  as  the  original  and  the  trans-
lation of  Verazzano's  letter.  The  collections  also  con-
tain a  reprint  of  the  chapters  in  Purchas's  Pilgrimage^
which  form  pp.  1-138  of  our  volume;  so  that  by
far  the  greater  part  of  what  we  have  reprinted  is
also  to  be  found  in  various  places  of  those  American
collections.

The  collections  also  contain  the  first  special  essay
on  Hudson's  third  voyage,  written  in  1810  by  Dr.
Miller,  a  member  of  the  society.  This  essay  is  other-
wise not  very  remarkable.     Some  of  its  observations


INTRODUCTION.  Iv

seem,  however,  to  be  good,  and  have  been  approved
of  by  later  American  historians,  who  were,  like  the
author,  acquainted  with  the  localities.

Still  more  light  is  thrown  on  Hudson's  third
voyage  by  other  researches,  indirectly  connected
with  the  New  York  Historical  Society.  The  most
important  of  them,  at  least  for  our  purpose,  is  the
History  of  the  State  of  Neiv  York,  begun,  but  never
terminated,  by  Yates  and  Moulton.  This  book  de-
votes more  than  sixty  pages  to  Henry  Hudson.  The
voyage  along  the  American  coasts  and  up  and  down
Hudson's  river  is  investigated  with  great  minuteness  ;
and  so  little  seems  in  this  repect  to  be  left  undone,
that  the  more  recent  American  historians  have  added
but  little  to  Yates's  and  Moulton's  researches.

A  different  kind  of  importance  belongs  to  the  re-
searches made  in  the  European  archives  by  Mr.  John
Romeyn  Brodhead.  This  gentleman  was  charged  by
the  government  of  the  State  of  New  York,  at  the
instigation  of  the  Historical  Society,  to  collect  in
Europe  all  such  documents  as  might  be  bearing  on
the  history  of  the  state.  The  mission  was  crowned
with  eminent  success.  Partly  by  his  own  exertions,
partly  by  the  liberal  and  sometimes  enthusiastic
assistance  afforded  him  by  European  scholars,  Mr.
Brodhead  was  enabled  to  carry  home  a  most  valuable
collection  of  papers.  He  was,  of  course,  desirous  to
obtain  some  MS.  documents  concerning  Henry  Hud-
son ;  and  his  almost  complete  want  of  success  in  this
respect  might  lead  us  to  the  conclusion  that  really
nothing  exists.  We  must,  however,  hesitate  to  take  so


Ivi  INTRODUCTION.

gloomy  a  view  of  the  question.  We  have  ah-eady  had
occasion  to  observe,  that  there  are  distinct  traces  still
extant  of  papers  concerning  Hudson  ;  which  were
preserved  in  Holland,  some  in  the  seventeenth,  and
some  as  late  as  the  beginning  of  the  present  century.
We  have  also  observed,  that  a  long  time  must  elapse
before  an  insight  can  be  obtained  into  the  treasures
of  the  Dutch  East  India  archives.  Mr.  Brodhead
was  in  this  respect  still  more  unfavourably  situated
than  he  would  have  been  at  the  present  day.  He
seems  not  even  to  have  been  acquainted  with  the
Middelburg  collection,  which  was  then  in  private
hands  and  almost  forgotten.  Still  we  owe  to  Mr.
Brodhead  the  knowledge  that,  at  least  among  the
more  accessible  papers,  nothing  was  to  be  found,
except  an  entry  of  a  few  lines  in  a  ship  register.

We  are  also  under  another  obligation  to  Mr.  Brod-
head. He  has  compiled  from  the  materials  collected
by  him,  a  work  which  forms  the  first  volume  of  a
History  of  the  State  of  Netv  YorJc.  He  there  treats  of
our  navigator.  Some  of  his  observations  are  import-
ant. But  the  chief  value  of  tlie  book  for  our  sub-
ject consists  in  a  very  complete  enumeration  of  the
sources  for  the  history  of  the  third  voyage.

Between  Yates  and  Moulton's  and  Brodhead's
histories,  another  work  of  the  same  kind  made  its
appearance  in  New  York,  under  the  title  Hlstorij  of
New  Netherlands  by  Dr.  O'Callaghan.  This  book  also
describes,  in  about  ten  pages,  Hudson's  third  voy-
age. The  analysis  contains  a  few  original  observa-
tions.    We  seize  this  opportunity  for  recommending


INTRODUCTION.  IvU

Dr.  O'Callaghan's  charming  work  to  those  few  of  our
readers  who  might  feel  interest  enough  in  Henry
Hudson  to  follow  up  the  subject  of  his  splendid  dis-
covery. The  history  of  the  banks  of  Hudson  river
has  here  been  chronicled,  in  a  manner  not  the  less
attractive  for  being  entirely  unassuming  and  natural.
The  other  works  on  the  same  subject,  though  in  some
respects  more  exact,  are  somewhat  tedious  for  persons
not  specially  interested  in  this  matter.

There  are  also  two  Dutcli  treatises  on  the  IIlsto)ij
of  the  State  of  Ne IV  York.  AVe  have  already  spoken
at  some  length  of  the  first  of  them,  and  have  extracted
all  the  interesting  portions  of  the  descriptions  of
Hudson's  voyage.  The  other  one  contains  very  little
of  any  importance  for  our  subject.^

AVe  have  found  no  researches  of  any  value  for  the
investigation  of  the  fourth  voyage,  and  have,  with
regard  to  this  difficult  subject,  been  thrown  almost
entirely  on  our  own  resources.

From  the  time  of  Luke  Fox  down  to  our  days,  it
has  been  almost  invariably  the  custom  to  prefix  to
every  special  account  of  one  or  more  arctic  expedi-
tions, a  general  summary  of  what  had  been  done  by
the  predecessors  of  the  navigator  under  review.  This
custom  has  been  followed  as  well  by  autobiographers
as  by  those  who  have  described  the  voyages  of  others,
whether  living  or  dead  ;  in  order  to  place  their  heroes

^  Mr.  Ch.  Murphy,  the  United  States'  Minister  at  the  Hague,
has  recently  issued  to  his  friends  a  small  pamphlet  on  Henry
Hudson  ;  hut,  to  the  editor's  regret,  has  declined  to  afford  him  a
sight  either  of  a  printed  or  a  MS.  copy.


Iviii  INTRODUCTION.

in  their  proper  light,  by  showing  how  much  had  been
achieved  before  them,  and  how  much  new  informa-
tion they  added  to  the  old  stock.  We  have,  besides,
another  still  more  cogent  reason  to  adopt  this  method.
If  we  fail  to  do  so,  some  of  the  most  important  pas-
sages, and  often  the  whole  context  of  the  sources
■which  we  have  collected,  would  remain  obscure.  For,
Hudson  and  his  companions  could,  of  course,  not
have  been  previously  acquainted  with  the  real  fea-
tures of  the  regions  among  which  their  explorations
lay.  Had  they  been  so,  their  labours  would  have
been  superfluous.  They  entertained,  on  the  contrary,
notions  which  were  more  or  less  wide  from  the  truth.
These  notions,  though  shared  by  Hudson's  contem-
poraries, for  whom  the  various  journals  and  logbooks
were  kept,  have  long  since  given  way  to  better  know-
ledge, and  have  disappeared  from  the  memory  of  man.
Thus  the  journals  and  logbooks  are,  in  soma  respects,
as  if  they  were  written  in  an  obsolete  tongue.

To  make  them  fully  understood,  we  shall  have  to
restore  the  geographical  ideas  concerning  the  north
which  prevailed  in  Hudson's  time.  They  were  based
partly  on  arctic  expeditions,  more  or  less  imperfectly
known  ;  partly  on  rumours,  which  the  most  ancient  of
these  voyages  had  engendered  ;  partly  on  the  state-
ments of  Strabo,  Ptolemy,  Pliny,  and  other  classic
writers  ;  partly  even  on  fantastical  and  entirely
groundless  imaginations,  that  liad  sprung  up  during
the  middle  ages.  All  these  elements,  singularly
mixed  as  they  were,  had  in  some  degree  been  ar-
ranged and  digested  by  the  geograpliical   critics  of


INTRODUCTION.  llX

the  clay,  who,  unfortunately,  however,  had  hut  imper-
fect methods  of  research  at  their  disposal,  and  no  true
standard  to  guide  them.

The  object  of  the  following  pages  will,  then,  be  a
double  one  :  first,  to  assign  to  Hudson  his  proper
place  among  arctic  navigators,  by  showing  what
knowledge  he  had  received  from  his  predecessors,
and  what  he  added  to  the  store  collected  by  them  ;
secondly,  to  define  his  own  geographical  notions,  as
clearly  as  their  nature  may  allow.  For  the  sake  of
clearness  we  shall  treat  of  the  two  branches  of  this  sub-
ject separately ;  speaking  first  of  tlie  actual  achieve-
ments of  arctic  navigators  up  to  Hudson's  time,  and
tlien  of  the  results  which  science  had  drawn  from
their  labours.

In  so  doing,  it  cannot  be  our  purpose  to  give  a
complete  and  critical  history  of  arctic  exploration  up
to  the  year  1607.  Our  aim  simply  is,  to  restore  a
chain  of  events,  many  parts  of  which  are  now^  scat-
tered and  scarcely  noticed  ;  so  as  to  be  able  to  attach
to  it,  without  constraint  or  violence,  the  links  fur-
nished by  the  labours  of  our  navigator.

A  great  part  of  the  arctic  shores  that  have  been
visited  in  modern  times  were  already  known  to  the
Scandinavians  during  the  middle  ages.  The  exact
limits  of  their  discoveries  cannot  well  be  ascertained  ;
nor  would  the  present  place  be  fit  for  such  inquiry ;
but  the  great  influence  which  these  early  exploits
exercised  on  more  recent  navigators,  particularly  on
Hudson,  gives  them  a  special  claim  on  our  attention.
It  is  sufficient  for  our  purpose  to  observe,  that  the


Ix  INTRODUCTION.

Scandinavians,  sailing  from  the  regions  they  still  in-
habit, occupied  and  colonized  Iceland,  that  they  also
founded  colonies  in  Greenland,  and  that  steering  still
farther  to  the  west  they  reached  North  America.

These  discoveries,  and  the  lasting  intercourse  to
which  they  gave  rise,  were  materially  facilitated  by
the  geographical  position  of  the  localities  themselves,
which  seem  to  form  a  chain  of  stages  thus  placed  by
nature  for  the  convenience  of  human  exploration.
The  advantages  drawn  from  these  splendid  oppor-
tunities by  the  discoverers  themselves  were,  however,
but  scanty  ;  and  mainly  so  on  account  of  their  situa-
tion, which  both  confined  them  to  their  own  limited
resources,  and  precluded  any  influence  their  know-
ledge might  otherwise  have  exercised  on  more  south-
ern nations.  Fear  of  these  northmen's  savage  energy,
the  distance  and  wildness  of  their  home,  and  chiefly
the  hostile  efforts  of  the  Hanseatic  confederacy,  whose
main  purpose  it  was  to  oppose  them,  proved  so  strong
a  barrier,  that  there  seemed  hardly  to  exist  any  bond
between  them  and  the  rest  of  Europe.

Thus  it  happened  that  a  treasury  of  knowledge  the
most  important  existed  for  centuries  in  Europe  with-
out reaching  those  nations  to  whom  it  would  have
proved  the  greatest  boon.  It  cannot,  however,  be
said  that  this  knowledge  remained  entirely  without
its  effect.  The  records  of  these  early  exploits  were
carefully  kept,  and  repeatedly  translated  from  one
northern  tongue  into  another.  The  Scandinavians
also  constructed,  from  the  results  they  had  obtained,
geographical  systems  of  their  own,  which  included


INTRODUCTION.  Ixi

Iceland,  Greenland,  and  North  America.  These
records  and  systems  continued  to  be  preserved  in
Iceland  even  when  Scandinavian  navigation  had  al-
most ceased  to  exist.  Although  we  now  possess
slight  fragments  only  of  these  important  historical
documents,  we  are,  nevertheless,  enabled  to  say  with
perfect  certainty,  that  even  at  the  end  of  the  fifteenth
century  the  Scandinavians,  at  least  those  in  Iceland,
had  a  vivid  remembrance  of  the  early  achievements,
and  sufficiently  clear  notions  of  the  results,  that  had
thus  been  obtained.

It  was  not  before  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  cen-
tury that  anything  like  a  distinct  knowledge  of  these
important  materials  reached  the  more  southern  nations
of  Europe.  But  a  number  of  vague  rumours  seem  to
have  spread  through  various  channels,  and  travelled
southward,  long  before  that  time.  Many  of  the  early
and  rude  portolani  and  of  the  first  geographical  works
that  appeared  in  print  contain  indications  of  Green-
land. The  extreme  vagueness  of  the  information
thus  derived  caused  that  great  arctic  continent  to
be  variously  drawn  on  maps,  and  also  its  name
to  be  variously  spelled.  "We  ought  not  to  lose
sight  of  this  important  fact ;  for  when  the  critical
geographers  in  Hudson's  time  and  shortly  before  him
compiled  their  books,  maps,  and  charts,  they  were
thus  led  to  suppose  the  existence  of  several  vast
arctic  tracts,  with  very  similar  though  not  identical
names,  such  as  Greenland,  Greenland,  Groneland,
Engroneland,  Grocland.  Two,  sometimes  even  three,
of  these  appear  upon  the  same  maps,  in  every  kind


Ixii  INTRODUCTION.

of  shape  and  position;  to  the  north,  north-east,  and
north-west  of  Europe.  The  search  for  these  various,
more  or  less  imaginary  territories,  constitutes  one  of
the  characteristic  features  of  early  northern  voyages.
Ilenry  Iludson  suffered  greatly  under  these  delu-
sions, and  contributed  to  dispel  them.

yVe  can,  under  these  circumstances,  entertain  no
doubt  that  some  geographical  communications  re-
specting the  northern  discoveries  of  the  Scandina-
vians must  have  reached  the  south  of  Europe  before
the  time  when  the  voyages  of  Columbus,  Cabot,  and
Vasco  de  Gama  opened  a  new  era  in  the  history  of
maritime  explorations.  Nor  is  it  quite  impossible
that  the  early  discoveries  of  the  northern  nations
exercised  some  influence  on  the  ideas  of  the  great
Italians,  Columbus  and  the  Cabots,  who  discovered,
the  one  the  West  Indies,  the  others  North  America,
It  is  a  well  known  and  often  discussed  fact  that
Columbus  visited  Iceland,  the  great  storehouse  of
Scandinavian  information,  respecting  the  north-west,
fifteen  years  before  his  first  voyage  across  the  Atlan-
tic. John  Cabot  resided  for  some  time  in  Bristol,  a
town  which  then  carried  on  an  active  trade  with
Iceland,  and  wdiich  he  and  his  son  Sebastian  after-
wards made  their  starting  place  for  their  expeditions
to  the  north-west.  It  is  further  certain  that  Sebastian
Cabot  went  to  North  America  in  1-198  by  way  of
Iceland,  and  that,  some  time  in  his  life,  he  made  him-
self thoroughly  acquainted  with  that  country,  most
probably  by  personal  investigation.  Several  other
indications,  on  which  wc  cannot  here  dwell,  contri-


INTRODUCTION.  Ixiu

bute  to  make  it  probable  that  some  connexion  existed
between  the  discovery  of  North  America  during  the
middle  ages  and  that  which  constituted  the  com-
mencement of  the  modern  era  of  arctic  explorations.

This  observation,  which  an  impartial  inquiry  has
led  us  to  make,  by  no  means  implies  a  slur  on  the
memory  of  the  Cabots.  Their  merits  will  admit  of  the
most  critical  investigation  ;  and  they  would,  indeed,
shine  out  more  briglitly,  if  the  attention  which  both
geographers  and  historians  might  profitably  bestow
upon  them  were  not  withheld,  partly  from  neglect,
partly  from  prejudice.  However  tempting  the  pre-
sent opportunity  might  seem  for  paying  that  debt  of
gratitude,  both  the  nature  and  the  limits  of  this  essay
preclude  the  attempt.  It  belongs,  however,  to  our
subject,  to  take  a  short  review  of  the  efforts  and
achievements  of  the  Cabots,  the  originators  of  all
modern  navigation  in  the  north,  whose  footsteps  were
implicitly  followed  by  all  their  successors  for  more
than  a  century.  Henry  Hudson  himself  may,  perhaps
before  all  others,  be  styled  a  disciple  of  the  Cabots.

The  search  for  a  north-western  and  for  a  north-
eastern way  to  China,  the  two  schemes  upon  wliich
all  Hudson's  energies  were  engaged,  originated  with
John  and  Sebastian  Cabot.  The  various  efforts  made
in  both  directions,  from  the  time  of  the  Cabots  down
to  that  of  Henry  Hudson,  will  be  the  main  facts  for
our  consideration.

To  understand  how  these  schemes  of  the  Cabots
arose,  it  is  necessary  to  realize  for  a  moment  the  geo-
graphical notions  prevailing  at  the  end  of  the  fifteenth


Ixiv  INTRODUCTION.

century.  The  geographical  dogma  of  that  time  re-
cognized one  great  continent,  comprising  Europe,
Asia,  and  Africa,  and  surrounded  by  sea.  This  con-
tinent, with  the  Oceanus  by  which  it  seemed  to  be
encompassed,  was  believed  to  form  the  whole  surface
of  our  earth.  The  eartVi  itself  was,  by  the  great
majority,  thought  to  be  flat ;  a  few  only  knowing  it
to  be  a  globe.  Of  the  continent  no  part  had  been  in-
vestigated with  anything  like  the  accuracy  of  modern
times.  Even  the  shores  that  were  familiarly  known,
were  most  imperfectly  delineated  on  the  best  maps.
This  incorrectness  grows  with  the  distance,  and  is
often  so  great  as  to  destroy  all  resemblance  between
the  supposed  and  the  real  outline  of  the  more  distant
lands.  The  sources  from  which  these  notions  were
drawn  could,  indeed,  not  yield  any  more  accurate
knowledge.  The  systems  of  cosmography  then  recog-
nized were  almost  entirely  based  on  the  writings  of
the  ancients,  the  study  of  which  had  recently  been
resumed.  Into  these  systems  such  scraps  of  informa-
tion were  introduced  as  could  be  gathered  from  the
accounts  of  more  modern  travellers,  chiefly  Italians,
Arabs,  and  Spanish  Jews,  with  here  and  there  a  vague
indication  of  the  northern  discoveries  of  the  Scandi-
navians.

Let  us  imagine  a  terrestrial  globe  constructed  ac-
cording to  these  ideas.  We  perceive  one  great  mass  of
land,  composed  of  Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa  ;  Europe
very  imperfectly,  Asia  and  Africa  almost  fancifully
drawn.  All  the  remaining  surface  of  the  globe  con-
sists of  one  vast  expanse  of  water,  nearly  unbroken.


INTRODUCTION.  IxV

except  by  a  few  islands  near  the  continent.  The
eastern  shores  of  Asia  and  the  western  shores  of
Europe  are  separated  by  nothing  but  a  wide  sea.

The  records  of  the  intercourse  of  the  ancients  with
India  and  China,  which  were  eagerly  studied  by  the
eminent  men  of  this  age,  and  still  more  the  accounts
of  mediaeval  travellers,  especially  of  Marco  Polo,
had  long  fixed  the  attention  'of  Europe  on  the  east
and  south-east  of  Asia.  Alexander's  march  to  the
furthest  boundaries  of  the  known  world  was  a  fa-
vourite theme  of  mediaeval  poetry.  The  accounts  of
the  civilization,  population,  and  riches  of  China  and
Japan,  surpassing  anything  to  be  found  in  Europe  in
Marco  Polo's  time,  shine  forth  with  almost  fabulous
splendour  in  the  description  of  his  travels.  Some  of
the  commodities  produced  in  the  far  east  had  from
time  immemorial  formed  part  of  the  choicest  luxu-
ries of  European  magnates.  The  circuitous  channels
through  which  alone  they  could  be  obtained  still
further  enhanced  their  value.  Most  of  them  were
brought  by  the  hands  of  the  Arabs,  and  the  wonder-
ful tales  in  which  these  sons  of  the  desert  described
the  glories  of  the  land  of  spices  and  emeralds  were
carried  westward,  together  with  the  merchandise
which  formed  their  theme.  Thus  everything  con-
tributed to  make  the  east  and  south-east  of  Asia
appear  as  the  very  ideal  of  fairy  land.

It  is  therefore  very  natural  that  in  some  minds  the
idea  arose  of  crossing  the  ocean,  which  alone  seemed
to  separate  Europe  from  these  wonderful  shores ;  and
we  all  know  how  Columbus  attempted  it  and  what

k


Ixvi  INTRODUCTION.

he  found.  The  same  object  was  also  pursued  by  the
Cabots.  But  instead  of  sailing  like  Columbus  through
the  tropical  regions,  John  and  Sebastian  Cabot  di-
rected their  course  to  the  north-west.  It  would  be
interesting  to  ascertain  why  they  adopted  this  road.
The  reason  which  they  themselves  put  forth  is  suffi-
cient to  explain  their  proceedings.  They  said  that
the  iiearer  to  the  North  Pole  the  shorter  the  course  ivoidd
necessarily  he.  This  reason  has  been  powerful  enough
to  induce  so  many  hardy  adventurers  to  follow  in  the
footsteps  of  the  Cabots  ;  and  it  must  have  seemed
much  more  plausible  before  the  existence  of  the  new
continent,  which  blocks  up  the  passage,  and  before
the  difficulties  and  horrors  of  arctic  navigation  were
known.  Still  it  is  not  improbable  that  John  Cabot
had,  during  his  stay  in  Bristol,  received  some  hints
from  the  Icelanders  who  traded  to  that  port.  For,
having  this  opportunity  to  become  acquainted  with
their  records,  it  would  be  a  strange  coincidence
had  he  merely  by  chance  trodden  in  the  very  foot-
steps of  the  ancient  Scandinavians.  Like  them,
he  reached  North  America  by  way  of  Iceland  ;  and
like  them,  in  a  region  which  some  Icelandic  scholars
were,  at  the  very  time  of  his  expedition,  describing
in  their  geographical  manuals.^

But  even  if  we  suppose  Cabot  to  have  been  ac-
quainted with  the  voyages  to  Vinland,  these  events
did  not  appear  to  him  in  their  true  light.  They  did
not  lead  him  to  surmise  the  existence  of  a  continent
different  from  the  one  which  contained  Europe  and
^  See  note  A,  at  the  end  of  the  introduction.


INTRODUCTION.  Ixvii

Asia.  He  was  as  yet  completely  convinced  that
nothing  but  the  ocean  divided  England  from  China.
The  fact  that  the  ocean  had  been  crossed,  and  that
land  had  been  discovered  on  the  other  side,  would
simply  prove  to  him  that  China  might  be  reached
by  that  route.  The  Cathay  of  Marco  Polo  and  the
vaguely  described  Vinland  of  the  Scandinavians,
would  appear  to  him  as  identical ;  and  he  would
conclude,  that  by  following  in  the  footsteps  of  the
Northmen,  he  must  also  arrive  in  Cathay.  Stupen-
dous as  these  mistakes  may  appear  to  us,  they  were
natural  in  a  time  when  the  term  latitude  was  yet
almost  unknown,  and  they  form  the  simplest  expla-
nation of  John  Cabot's  first  north-western  voyage.

Some  recently  discovered  documents  serve  to  dispel
part  of  the  obscurity  which  surrounds  the  history  of
the  Cabots  ;  so  that  the  main  facts  of  their  career  may
now  be  stated  with  tolerable  clearness,  leaving,  how-
ever, still  several  very  important  points  open  to
doubt.  John  Cabot,  a  Venetian  miles  auratus,  or
gold- spurred  knight,  resided  for  some  time  in  Bristol,
following  mercantile  pursuits,  like  many  other  Italian
gentlemen  of  that  age.  He  returned  to  Venice,  and,
after  a  long  absence  from  England,  we  find  him  again
here  in  1496.

The  country  from  which  he  started  on  his  first  ex-
pedition to  America,  as  well  as  the  date  of  the  disco-
very, remain  uncertain.  Sebastian  Cabot,  John's  son
and  companion,  asserts  that  the  expedition  took  place
in  1494,  and  that  land  was  first  seen  the  24th  of
June  of  that  year.     It  is  difficult  to  conciliate  this


Ixviii  INTRODUCTION.

statement  with  some  thoroughly  reliable  details  of
the  Cabots'  expedition  to  America  in  1497,  which
appears  in  every  way  as  if  it  had  been  their  first
voyage  of  discovery.

Our  doubts  are  still  increased  by  the  following
fact.  The  statement  to  which  we  allude  was  made
on  a  large  map  or  planisphere  by  Sebastian  Cabot
in  1544  and  1549,  when  he  was  an  old  man,  perhaps
of  feeble  memory.  This  same  map  was  afterwards
copied  by  Clement  Adams,  a  geographer  of  that  time,
who  was  undoubtedly  acquainted  with  Cabot.  Adams
deliberately  alters  the  date  of  1494  into  1497.

Many  important  questions  connected  with  this  first
expedition  must  thus  remain  in  abeyance.  Sebastian
Cabot  has  described  it  in  a  few  lines,  and  from  the
description  we  learn  the  day  of  the  first  landing,  and,
perhaps,  the  locality  where  it  took  place.  Does  this
really  apply  to  a  voyage  undertaken  in  1494,  or  must
it  be  referred  to  the  expedition  of  1497  \  Further,
under  what  impressions  did  John  Cabot  act  when  he
took  out  his  letters  patent  in  1496  \

Cabot  obtained  in  March  1496,  from  Henry  VII,
letters  patent  for  the  discovery  of  new  lands,  for  him-
self and  his  sons,  Sebastian,  Ludovico,  and  Sanzio.
He  sailed  from  Bristol  in  spring  1497,  and  returned
to  England  about  the  10th  of  August  of  the  same
year.  The  voyage  is  described  in  the  following  words
by  the  Venetian  Pasqualigo,  who  was  in  London  at
the  time  of  Cabot's  return. ^

^  Extract  from  a  letter  written  by  Lorenzo  Pasqualigo,  son  of
the  late  Messcr  Filippo,  dated  London,   August  2ord,  addressed


INTRODUCTION.  Ixix

"  This  Venetian  of  ours,  who  went  with  a  ship  from  Bristol
in  quest  of  new  islands,  is  returned,  and  says,  that  seven
hundred  leagues  hence  he  discovered  '  terra  firma,'  which  is
the  territory  of  the  Grand  Cham  ;  he  coasted  for  three  hun-
dred leagues  and  landed ;  he  saw  no  human  being  whatso-
ever, but  he  has  brought  hither  to  the  king  certain  snares,
which  had  been  set  to  catch  game,  and  a  needle  for  making
nets  ;  he  also  found  some  felled  trees,  wherefore  he  sup-
posed there  were  inhabitants,  and  returned  to  his  ship  in
alarm.

"  He  was  three  months  on  the  voyage  it  is  quite  certain  ;
and  coming  back  he  saw  two  islands  to  starboard,  but  would
not  land,  time  being  precious  as  he  was  short  of  provisions.
The  king  is  much  pleased  with  this  intelligence.  He  says
that  the  tides  are  slack,  and  do  not  flow  as  they  do  here.

"  The  king  has  promised  that  in  the  spring  he  shall  have
ten  ships,  armed  according  to  his  own  fancy,  and  at  his
request  he  has  conceded  him  all  the  prisoners,  except  such
as  are  confined  for  high  treason,  to  man  them  with.  He  has
also  given  him  money  wherewith  to  amuse  himself  till  then,
and  he  is  now  at  Bristol  with  his  wife,  who  is  a  Venetian
woman,  and  with  his  sons ;  his  name  is  Zuan  Cabot,  and
they  call  him  the  great  admiral.  Vast  honour  is  paid  him,
and  he  dresses  in  silk ;  and  these  English  run  after  him  like
mad  people,  so  that  he  can  enlist  as  many  of  them  as  he
pleases,  and  a  number  of  our  own  rogues  besides.

''  The  discoverer  of  these  places  planted  on  his  new-found
land  a  large  cross,  with  one  flag  of  England  and  another  of
S.  Mark,  by  reason  of  his  being  a  Venetian  ;  so  that  our
banner  has  floated  very  far  afield."

This  letter  is  a  fit  subject  for  much  speculation.

to  his  brothers,  Alvise  and  Francisco  Pasqualigo,  in  Venice.  Re-
ceived on  the  23rd  of  September,  1497. — Collections  of  the  Philo-
hiblon  Society,  vol.  ii.


IxX  INTRODUCTION.

Only  two  of  the  questions  to  which  it  gives  rise  seem,
however,  to  belong  to  our  province.  The  country  of
the  Great  Clian^  of  which  Pasqualigo  speaks,  is  the
Cathay  of  Rubruquis  and  Marco  Polo,  that  is  to  say,
northern  China.  The  vague  terms  in  which  geogra-
phical information  was  published  in  the  middle  ages,
had  engendered  a  signal  and  very  momentous  mistake.
The  Cathay  of  the  early  travellers  was  supposed  to
lie  very  much  further  to  the  north-east  than  it  really
does,  and  densely  populated  kingdoms  were  thought
to  exist  in  the  extreme  north-east  of  Asia,  where  only
some  dreary  Kamtchadalian  village  breaks  the  soli-
tude of  a  hundred  miles  of  snow.  The  Cathay  towards
which  the  Cabots,  Verazzano,  Willoughby,  Frobisher,
Barentz,  and  Hudson  directed  their  efforts  was  an
imaginary  country,  without  any  real  existence.  It
is  worthy  of  notice,  that  the  Cabots  were  thought  to
have  reached  that  far  famed  coast.  The  existence  of
a  continent  between  Europe  and  Asia  had  thus  either
not  yet  been  understood,  or,  at  least,  not  yet  been
publicly  acknowledged  by  them  in  the  year  1497.

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  only  fair  to  observe  that
the  discovery  of  the  new  continent,  as  a  real  though
not  yet  as  an  acknowledged  fact,  must  be  numbered
among  the  results  of  the  1497  expedition,  unless  we
are  inclined  to  attribute  it  to  the  doubtful  one  of
1494.  It  is  impossible  to  sail,  as  the  Cabots  did,
three  hundred  leagues  along  the  coast  of  any  part  of
North  America,  north  of  the  tropics,  without  falling
in  with  the  terra  firma.  The  vexed  question,  wlie-
ther  Newfoundland  or  Labrador  was  the  first  land


INTRODUCTION.  Ixxi

touched  by  the  Cabots,  becomes,  therefore,  entirely
unavailing,  as  regards  the  first  discovery  of  the  main-
land of  America,  which  discovery  belongs  to  the
Cabots  beyond  all  doubt  and  cavil.  The  controversy
that  has  been  carried  on  with  much  zeal  and  some
unfairness  between  the  partisans  of  Columbus  and
those  of  John  and  Sebastian  Cabot,  may,  therefore,
at  last  be  set  at  rest.  And  this  is  the  more  desirable,
as  the  dispute  is  utterly  at  variance  wdth  the  view^s
of  those  great  men.  No  one  was  readier  than  Sebas-
tian Cabot  to  acknowledge  the  real  and  immortal
merit  of  Columbus,  namely,  that  of  having  first
crossed  the  Atlantic  Ocean.  Neither  Columbus  nor
Cabot  claimed  the  discovery  of  America.  Colum-
bus never  recognised  that  a  new  continent  had  been
found,  and  supposed  his  own  explorations  to  lie
among  the  islands  of  Japan.  Cabot  did  discover
America,  and  did  recognise  the  existence  of  a  new
continent;  but  he  only  considered  it  as  a  hateful  bar-
rier, which  he  made  lifelong  efibrts  to  break  through.
For  that  is  the  aim  of  his  voyages  in  search  of  a
north-w^estern  and  of  a  western  passage  to  Asia.

It  seems  not  to  have  struck  any  one  of  the  numer-
ous writers  on  this  topic,  that  the  search  for  a  passage
through  the  new  continent  is  an  obvious  acknow-
ledgment of  its  existence.  It  involves  the  scientific
discovery  of  the  New  World.  This  merit  belongs  to
Sebastian  Cabot.  He  was  the  first  to  recognize  that
a  new  and  unknown  continent  was  lying,  as  one  vast
barrier,  between  Western  Europe  and  Eastern  Asia.

Sebastian  Cabot's  expedition  in  the  year  1498  was


Ixxii  INTRODUCTION.

the  first  voyage  in  search  of  a  north-west  passage.
It  was  performed  by  Sebastian  alone,  without  the
companionship  of  his  father.^  We  possess  a  certain
number  of  contemporary  accounts  of  this  expedition  ;
but  all  of  them  very  short,  and  written  by  men  un-
acquainted with  the  localities.  The  fact  of  the
search  for  a  passage,  and  some  minor  details  of  the
expedition,  are  thus  rendered  perfectly  certain,  whilst
the  locality  where  the  search  was  first  made  remains
doubtful.

The  following  are  the  ascertained  facts.  King
Henry  VII  took  an  active  interest  in  the  expedition,
granted  a  new  charter  for  it,  contributed  towards  its
expenses,  and  was  to  share  in  its  gains.  Cabot  was
the  commander  of  a  small  squadron,  some  Bristol
merchants  having  joined  him,  and  he  had  three  hun-
dred men  under  his  orders.  He  sailed  from  England
about  the  beginning  of  May  1498,  and  directed  his
course  towards  North  America  by  way  of  Iceland.
He  then  attempted  the  search  for  a  north-western
passage  ;  and  having  failed  in  finding  it,  went  south-
ward along  the  North  American  coast  down  to  38°  N.

Sebastian  Cabot  afterwards  undertook  another  voy-
age in  search  of  a  north-west  passage,  at  Henry  VlH's
expense,  either  in  1516  or  in  1517.  The  failure  of
that  expedition  is  ascribed  to  the  faint-hcartedness  of
Cabot's  companion,  Sir  Thomas  Perthe.  The  records
of  these  two  voyages  are  so  mixed  up,  that  it  is  im-
possible to  make  out  what  belongs  to  the  one,  what

'  John  Cabot  is  therefore  supposed  to  have  died  in  1497  or  1498,
a  conclusion  which  is  by  no  means  necessary.


INTRODUCTION.  Ixxiii

to  the  other.  It  is,  however,  tolerably  certain  that
Cabot  discovered  the  two  straits,  one  of  which  now
bears  Davis's,  the  other  Hudson's  name.  The  west
coast  of  Davis's  strait  up  to  67°  30'  is  figured  on
Cabot's  great  planisphere  of  1544.^  The  opening  of
Pludson's  strait  seems  to  be  indicated  on  the  same
map.  This  strait  is  besides  so  minutely  described
from  one  of  Cabot's  charts  by  Ilichard  Willes,  that
we  cannot  for  a  moment  hesitate  to  attribute  that
discovery  to  the  originator  of  the  search  for  a  north-
western passage.    The  following  are  Willes'  words.

"  You  may  read  in  his  card,  drawn  with  his  own  hand,
that  the  mouth  of  die  Nordi  Western  Straight  lieth  near  the
ol8  meridian  (60  Greenwich)  between  61  and  64  degrees  in
the  elevation,  continuing  the  same  breadth  about  ten  degrees
west,  where  it  openeth  southerly  more  and  more."

Sebastian  Cabot  has,  therefore,  the  merit  of  having
not  only  started  an  idea  wdiich  has  occupied  the
efforts  of  more  than  three  centuries  ;  but  of  having
also  indicated  the  only  possible  roads  for  carrying  it
out.  To  do  more  was  beyond  the  means  which
his  time  afforded.-

Sebastian  Cabot  started  in  his  old  age  another
idea,  which  has   become   almost  equally  momentous

1  This  fact  puts  an  end  to  the  controversy,  as  to  whether  Cabot
did  or  did  not  reach  that  high  latitude.  The  observation  itself  is
due  to  Mr.  D'Avezac,  the  eminent  French  geographer,  who  was
kind  enough  to  communicate  it  to  the  writer  of  the  present  pages
a  few  years  ago,  when  examining  with  him  the  planisphere  of
Sebastian  Cabot  in  the  Paris  library.

^  See  note  B,  at  the  end  of  the  introduction,  for  a  statement  of
the  sources  from  which  the  account  of  the  Cabots  has  been  drawn,

1


Ixxiv  INTRODUCTION.

in  the  history  of  arctic  discovery — the  search  for  a
north-eastern  route  to  China.  More  than  half  a
century  ehapsecl  between  the  origin  of  the  first  and
that  of  the  second  scheme.  For  the  present  we
confine  ourselves  to  the  history  of  the  search  for  a
north-western  passage  down  to  Hudson's  time,  and
shall  afterwards  take  up  the  history  of  that  north
eastern  route.

The  early  expeditions  in  search  of  a  north-western
passage  may  be  divided  into  two  distinct  epochs.
The  aim  was  identical  in  both  ;  but  the  methods
were  difi'erent.  All  the  early  navigators  who  sought
for  a  passage  through  the  new  continent  wished  to
break  through  the  unwelcome  barrier  between  the
west  of  Europe  and  Cathay,  and  thus  to  reach  Asia
by  a  short  road.  The  diff'erence  between  the  two
epochs  consists  in  the  amount  of  knowledge  of  the  real
nature  of  that  barrier,  which  the  one  and  the  other
possessed.  The  first  attempts  may,  perhaps,  be  likened
to  a  blind  rush  at  an  obstacle,  the  extent  and  diffi-
culties of  which  were  not  yet  understood.  These  at-
tempts ended  in  despair,  and  in  a  temporary  aban-
donment of  the  grand  scheme.  But  they  also  brought
about  incidentally,  and  ahnost  to  the  regret  of  those
who  made  them,  extensive  explorations  of  the  ob-
stacle which  would  not  yield  to  their  efforts  ;  that
is  to  say,  of  the  New  World.  Some  unexpected
advantages  were  also  discovered,  and  led  to  a  regular
intercourse  with  the  shores  of  North  America,  and
by  means  of  these  voyages  a  more  accurate  know-
ledge of  the  North  American  coasts  was  obtained.


INTRODUCTION.  IxXV

The  systems  of  geographical  criticism  were  at  the
same  time  developed,  the  various  scraps  of  informa-
tion were  collected,  confronted  and  arranged  by  indus-
trious scholars,  and  an  immense  progress  was  made  in
geographical  science.  The  explorers  of  the  second
epoch,  Frobisher,  Davis,  Weymouth,  Hudson,  and
his  successors,  had  the  labours  of  Mercator,  Ortelius
and  of  other  geographers  to  guide  them.  They  had
the  means  of  knowing  the  real  shape  of  America,  at
least  in  all  its  principal  features,  and  had  thus  a
sound  basis  for  their  efforts,  and  a  more  confined
space  towards  which  to  direct  them  ;  whilst,  to  their
early  predecessors,  the  very  existence  of  a  New
World  was  a  startling  and  unexpected  fact.  This  is
the  reason  for  the  vaguer  aims  of  one  class,  and  for
the  more  distinct  aims  of  another  class  of  hardy  ma-
riners, both  of  whom  deserve  in  an  equal  degree  our
admiration  and  our  gratitude.

The  search  for  a  short  route  from  Western  Europe
to  China,  belonged  naturally  to  those  European
states  that  would  most  profit  by  its  being  discovered;
namely,  to  those  bordering  on  the  Atlantic  Ocean,  to
England,  France,  Spain,  and  Portugal.  Each  of
these  kingdoms  took  a  share  in  the  search  for  a  pas-
sage, but  the  French,  Spaniards,  and  Portuguese
only  during  the  first  epoch.  It  is  one  of  the  glories
of  England  to  have  alone  persevered  in  this  great
undertaking.

The  Portuguese  were  the  first  nation  that  followed
in  Sebastian  Cabot's  footsteps.  Within  four  years
after  his  expedition  of  1498,  two  Portuguese  voyages


Ixxvi  INTRODUCTION.

to  the  north-west  took  place,  both  under  the  evident
influence  of  the  impulse  given  by  him.  Tlie  disco-
veries made  by  the  Cabots  in  1497  and  1498  seem  to
have  engendered  a  vague  report  that  a  terra  nova^
a  land  not  to  be  found  on  maps  and  charts,  existed
somewhere  in  the  north-west.  Gaspar  de  Cortereal,
a  Portuguese  gentlemen  of  high  standing,  set  out  in
search  of  that  land  towards  the  end  of  the  year  1500.
He  returned  to  Lisbon  in  October,  1501.  But  little
satisfied  with  the  result  of  his  expedition,  he  returned
again  to  the  North  American  shores,  where  he  at  last
met  his  death.  He  seems  to  have  been  the  first  of
those  who  were  led  by  the  appearance  of  the  mouth
of  the  St.  Lawrence  river,  to  mistake  it  for  a  passage
to  the  Eastern^  Ocean.  Nothing  could  be  more  natural
for  a  man  who  approached  it  without  previous  know-
ledge. The  mouth  of  the  St.  Lawrence  is  nearly  one
hundred  miles  wide,  and  in  spite  of  the  great  quan-
tity of  fresh  water  which  it  conveys  to  tlie  sea,  it  is
almost  as  much  to  be  called  an  estuary  as  the  mouth
of  the  Thames.  Cortereal's  explorations,  as  far  as
they  can  be  ascertained  from  a  few  vague  fragments
of  intelligence,  embrace  the  mouth  of  the  St.  Law-
rence, the  gulf  into  which  the  river  falls,  with  some
of  the  islands  within  it,  and  part  of  the  eastern  shore
of  Newfoundland.

Tlie  other  Portuguese  undertaking  is  in  itself  less
important  than  Oortereal's  voyage  :  it  is,  however,  a
curious  event.  Three  Portuguese  gentlemen  formed
an  association  for  an  expedition   to   the  north-west

^  Tlie  Pacific  is  called  the  Katitcni  Ocean,  h\  Vciaz/.anu.


INTRODUCTION.  Ixxvii

with  some  Bristol  merchants,  probably  former  com-
panions of  Cabot.  If  such  was  really  their  character,
they  were  guilty  of  much  selfishness  and  ingratitude,
which  vices  were  authorized  and  more  than  equalled
by  their  king,  Henry  VII,  who  granted  away  to  them
the  very  same  advantages  that  had  been  reserved  to
the  Cabots.  The  document  which  illustrates  this
disgraceful  transaction  is  the  ©nly  remaining  record
of  the  association.  This  document  is  as  vague  as  it
is  fulsome.  It  appears  from  it  that  the  associates  had
a  very  indistinct  idea  of  the  purpose  of  Sebastian
Cabot,  that  they  wished  to  follow  it  up,  and  that  the
king  authorized  them  thus  to  rob  the  noble  adven-
turer of  his  reward.  It  is  not  certain  whether  an
expedition  took  place  or  not.  Mr.  Biddle,  the  in-
genious scholar  who  has  devoted  his  energies  to  the
investigation  of  Sebastian  Cabot's  career,  thinks  that
the  associates  did  send  out  a  ship,  which  brought
home  some  savages.  The  question  is  one  of  but
little  interest  for  our  purpose. ^

Both  these  expeditions,  and  chiefly  that  of  Cor-
tereal,  are,  however,  much  more  important  from  their
influence  than  by  their  immediate  results.  The  earli-
est Portuguese  navigators  to  the  north-west  seem  to
have  been  forcibly  struck  by  the  abundance  of  cod
fish  in  these  regions,  a  fact  already  noticed  by  the
Cabots.  The  Portuguese,  then  perhaps  the  most
active  of  maritime  nations,  soon  availed  themselves
of   this    advantage  :    they    sent    frequent,    probably

^  For  these  two  expeditions,  see  note  C,  at  tlic  end  of  the  intro-
duction.


Ixxviii  INTRODUCTION.

annual,  expeditions  to  the  fisheries  of  Newfoundland.
To  facilitate  these,  they  were  of  course  obliged  to
acquire  some  knowledge  of  the  coasts  to  which  they
repaired  ;  and,  step  by  step,  as  they  had  wended  their
way  along  the  shores  of  Africa,  they  now  explored
the  cheerless  regions  of  the  north-west.  These
unpretending  efforts  have,  unfortunately,  not  been
chronicled,  their  only  trace  being  found  on  ancient
charts.  As  far  as  this  evidence,  and  that  of  some
summaries  in  the  early  maritime  chronicles,  goes,  we
are  led  to  think  that  the  more  important  results  were
obtained  only  in  course  of  time.  We  shall  therefore
revert  to  them  at  a  future  page  of  this  inquiry.

The  nation  that  first  followed  in  the  wake  of  the
Portuguese  was  the  French.  The  fishing  popula-
tions on  the  coast  of  Brittany  and  Normandy,  hailing
the  prospect  of  a  new  opening  for  their  industry,
directed  their  course  towards  Newfoundland,  where
they  made  extensive  explorations,  and  established
themselves,  like  their  predecessors,  as  regular  visitors.
The  Basques  round  the  Bay  of  Biscay,  who  were
accustomed  to  catch  thousands  of  small  whales  in
their  waters,  also  took  part  in  the  advantageous
traffic.  These  voyages,  from  diff"erent  parts  of  what
is  now  the  empire  of  France,  began  in  150 J:,  and
seem  to  have  continued  throughout  the  sixteenth
century.  It  is  not  clearly  stated  in  the  fragmentary
records  of  these  voyages,  but  is  fiir  from  improbable,
that  some  of  them  joined  the  idea  of  searching  for  a
short  way  to  China  to  the  more  practical  purpose  of
fishing  for  cod.     Certain  it  is,  that  some  of  the  ear-


INTRODUCTION.  IxXlX

liest  of  the  French  mariners  explored  the  mouth  of  the
St.  Lawrence  ;  perhaps,  like  Cortereal,  deceived  by
its  appearance  into  the  belief  that  it  might  be  an
arm  of  the  sea  leading  into  the  Pacific  Ocean, ^

The  first  French  voyage  which  is  plainly  recorded
to  have  had  the  search  of  a  passage  for  its  object,  is
the  celebrated  one  of  Verazzano.  What  Cadamosto
had  done  for  Portugal,  Columbus  for  Spain,  John
Cabot  for  England,  that  Verazzano  did  for  France.
He  helped,  like  his  three  illustrious  countrymen,  to
transfer  the  sovereignty  of  the  seas  from  the  shores
of  the  Mediterranean  to  the  kingdoms  that  border
the  Atlantic  Ocean.  Verazzano  w^as  entrusted  by
Francis  I  of  France  with  the  command  of  a  squadron
of  four  vessels.  Of  these  he  lost  two  in  a  gale,  and
was  obliged  to  put  with  the  remaining  ones  into  a
harbour  on  the  coast  of  Brittany.  Having  refitted
them,  he  went  out  again,  directing  his  course  to  the
south,  till  he  reached  the  Azores.  There  he  a^ain
parted  from  one  of  his  two  vessels,  keeping  only  one,
the  Dolphin.  This  is  the  craft  in  which  he  performed
his  celebrated  voyage.  He  started  on  the  ITtli  of
January,  1524,  from  a  lonely  rock  near  the  island  of
Madeira.

Fie  has  himself  stated  the  purpose  of  his  voyage.
"  My  intention  was,"  says  he,  "  to  reach  Cathay,  on
the  extreme  coast  of  Asia,  expecting,  however,  to
find  in  the  newly  discovered  land  some  such  obstacle
as  it  has  proved  to  be,  yet  did  not  doubt  that  I  should
penetrate  by   some   passage   to   the   eastern   ocean."

^  Note  D,  at  the  end  of  the  hitroduction.


IXXX  INTRODUCTION.

The  geography  of  the  New  World  had  already
made  much  progress  in  the  quarter  of  a  century
which  elapsed  between  John  Cabot's  first  voyage  and
that  undertaken  by  Verazzano.  Verazzano  was  aware
that  he  would  find  a  line  of  coast,  nearly,  if  not  entirely
unbroken  ;  extending  through  120  degrees  of  latitude,
from  66°  north  to  54°  south.  By  confronting  all  the
available  pieces  of  information  he  had  even  arrived
at  the  exaggerated  conclusion,  that  America  was  of
as  large  extent  as  Europe,  Africa,  and  Asia  taken
together.  Still  he  hoped  to  find  a  passage  through
this  mighty  mass  of  land,  and  to  reach  Cathay  in  his
vessel.  His  hope,  which  almost  amounted  to  a  con-
viction, may  be  traced  back  to  a  singular  illusion,
common  to  all  the  followers  of  Sebastian  Cabot,
which  forms  a  characteristic  feature  in  the  history  of
the  search  for  a  north-west  passage.

"We  have  already  had  occasion  to  observe  that  the
first  acknowledgment  of  the  existence  of  a  new  con-
tinent, made  by  any  European  geographer,  consists
in  the  attempt  of  Sebastian  Cabot  to  break  through
this  terra  nova.  The  consciousness  that  a  new  conti-
nent existed,  and  the  wish  to  find  a  passage  by
which  it  miglit  be  traversed,  thus,  like  twin  brothers,
owed  their  origin  to  the  same  birth.  These  two
ideas  were  at  their  beginning  so  closely  entwined,
that  they  have  never  since  been  separated.  It  became
at  once,  and  through  all  the  succeeding  development
of  the  geography  of  America,  it  has  always  remained
accepted  as  an  axiom,  that  a  passage  through  this
continent  existed.     The  question  which   science  and


INTRODUCTION.  Ixxxi

enterprise  strove  to  resolve  was  not  tvhethcr  but  ivhere
that  passage  was  to  be  found.  All  the  successors  of
Sebastian  Cabot  acted,  under  this  conviction,  a  con-
viction which  has  greatly  contributed  in  producing
that  wonderful  perseverance  with  which  this  great
undertaking  has  been  followed  up  through  so  many
centuries,  till  it  has  at  last,  in  our  days,  been  crowned
with  success.

It  was  thus  Verazzano's  purpose  to  ascertain  ivhere
the  passage  to  Cathay  might  be.  He,  like  Cabot,  and
like  the  Portuguese  and  French  seamen,  sought  it  in
the  north-west,  but  began  his  search  somewhat  fur-
ther to  the  south  than  they  had  done.  He  crossed
the  Atlantic  in  one  of  its  broadest  parts,  by  an  almost
due  westerly  course,  which  was  but  slightly  deflected
to  the  north  ;  so  that  the  land  which  he  first  fell  in
with  was  under  34°,  being  part  of  the  coast  of
Carolina.  There  he  arrived  early  in  March  1524.  He
then  ascended  the  coast,  spying  out  for  a  passage  ;
and  thus  he  reached  the  mouth  of  Hudson's  river
probably  at  the  end  of  March,  or  in  the  beginning  of
April.  He  entered  this  natural  harbour,  was  struck
by  its  capacities,  and  by  the  beauty  of  the  surrounding
scenery  ;  but  was  compelled  by  a  sudden  squall  to
leave  it  in  haste.  Soon  afterwards  he  entered  Narra-
ganset  Bay  (Rhode  Island),  where  he  tarried  for  some
time,  holding  intercourse  with  the  natives,  and  ex-
ploring the  country.  Thence  he  started  again,  sail-
ing further  to  the  north.  He  did  not  enter  the
mouth  of  the  St.  Lawrence,  the  nature  of  which  was


Ixxxii  INTRODUCTION.

probably  known  to  liim  from  the  reports  of  French
sailors ;  but  steered  along  the  east  coast  of  New-
foundland, up  to  its  most  northern  point.  He  then
returned  to  France.  The  whole  voyage,  from  Madeira
to  America,  then  along  the  coast,  and  back  to  Dieppe,
lasted  but  five  months  and  a  half ;  several  weeks  of
which  time  were  spent  in  Narraganset  Bay.

Verazzano  described  his  voyage  in  a  letter  to
Francis  I,  king  of  France,  dated  Dieppe,  July  1524.
This  letter  is  well  known  to  the  geographical  student,
from  a  version  of  it  in  Ramusio's  collection  of  voy-
ages, which  has  been  translated  by  Hakluyt,  and
inserted  both  into  the  Divers  Voyages  and  into  his
greater  and  more  celebrated  work.  But  Ramusio  has
printed  not  a  faithful  copy,  but  a  version  of  his  own.
He  has  embellished  and  corrected  the  style  of  the
rough  sailor,  and  thus  given  the  whole  piece  a  new
and  factitious  colouring.  He  has  besides  suppressed
a  very  important  cosmographical  appendix,  which
throws  considerable  light,  not  only  on  Verazzano's
plans,  but  also  on  the  history  of  the  geography  of  the
New  World,  and  on  that  of  the  search  for  a  north-
west passage.  These  have  been  the  reasons  for  our
inserting  the  original  letter  in  the  present  volume.
The  above  summary  is  taken  partly  from  the  account
of  the  voyage  itself,  partly  from  the  appendix,  as
reference  to  these  papers  will  show.

The  period  when  the  Spanish  expeditions  to  the
north-west  began  is  not  quite  certain.  Projects  of
this  kind  were  entertained  by  the  Spanish  court  as
early  as  the  year  1500.     The   following  passage  of


INTRODUCTION,  Ixxxiu

Navarrete  contains  all  that  we  have  been  able  to  find
on  the  subject : —

On  the  6th  of  May,  1500,  Ferdinand  and  Isabella  wrote
from  Seville,  that  Juan  Dorvelos,  or  Dornelos,  should  come
to  court  or  depute  a  person,  with  whom  they  might  agree
upon  the  best  means  for  a  voyage  of  discovery ;  and  we  may
conjecture  (says  Navarrete),  that  the  plan  Avas  to  survey  the
seas  which  Sebastian  Cabot  had  just  discovered.  Better
authenticated,  however,  is  the  agreement  or  contract  con-
cluded in  October,  1511,  with  Juan  de  Agramonte,  a  native
of  Lerida,  for  the  discovery  of  the  seas  of  Newfoundland
f  Terra  Nova  J.  He  was  made  captain  for  this  expedition,
which  was  to  be  undertaken  in  two  Spanish  ships,  with
Spanish  sailors ;  except  two  pilots,  who  might  be  from
Brittany  or  some  other  country,  and  should  be  acquainted
with  those  seas  and  coasts.  We  do  not  know  the  result  of
this  expedition,  which  is  not  mentioned  by  our  historians.

It  is  also  stated,  by  a  doubtful  authority,  that  a  Span-
iard named  Velasco  accompanied  Aubry,  the  French
seaman  who  first  explored  the  mouth  of  the  St.  Law-
rence, in  1508.  Certain  it  is,  however,  that  the  wish  to
find  a  passage  through  the  new  continent  occupied  the
minds  of  the  Spaniards  at  a  very  early  date.  It  is  a
well  known  fact  that  Columbus'  expedition  to  the  west
was,  like  that  of  Cabot,  originally  intended  to  reach
Asia.  Columbus,  however,  believed  that  the  West
India  Islands  which  he  had  found  were  identical
with  the  Zipangu  of  Marco  Polo,  that  is  to  say  with
Japan  ;  and  he  was  thus  induced  to  think  that  he
had  achieved  his  purpose  of  reaching  Asia.  Soon,
however,  it  dawned  on  the  Spaniards,  as  well  as  on
the  rest  of  Europe,  that  the  West  Indies  were  not


Ixxxiv  INTRODUCTION.

Japan;  that  Central  America  was  not  China;  and
that  to  reach  Asia  by  a  westerly  route,  an  unexpected
obstacle  had  to  be  overcome.  The  Spaniards  devoted
themselves  to  this  new  task  with  the  obstinate  energy
that  characterized  them  in  those  days,  and  they  made
numerous  expeditions  both  by  sea  and  by  land,  to
find  a  passage  through  Central  America,  but  always
without  result.  This  want  of  success  doubled  their
eager  desire.  The  search  for  a  passage  became  more
and  more  a  national  concern,  in  which  both  Charles
V,  and  Ferdinand  Cortez,  his  great  lieutenant,  took  a
most  lively  interest.  A  new  direction  was  given  to
their  efforts  by  a  false  rumour,  that  some  other  nation
had  found  the  passage  and  were  keeping  it  secret.
This  rumour  gained  ground  at  the  same  time  in  Spain,
and  in  its  American  colonies;  as  is  clearly  proved  by
contemporary  evidence  ;  and  especially  by  one  of  the
most  important  geographical  documents  of  the  six-
teenth century.

The  document  we  allude  to  is  the  celebrated
Rclatio  Quarta  of  Ferdinand  Cortez,  one  of  the  re-
ports which  he  addressed  to  the  emperor  Charles  V.
It  is  dated  Temixtitan  (Mexico),  October  18th,  1524,
and  treats  of  all  the  various  subjects  of  local  admi-
nistration on  which  the  viceroy  could  be  expected  to
address  his  sovereign.  Mention  is  repeatedly  made
of  the  search  for  a  passage,  of  Cortez'  various  efforts
in  that  direction,  and  of  their  want  of  the  desired
result.  One  entire  chapter  of  the  report  is  devoted
to  the  discussion  of  a  project,  from  the  execution  of
which  Cortez  not  unreasonably  expected  the  solution


INTRODUCTION.  IxXXV

of  the  whole  question.  According  to  a  rumour,  in
■which  Cortez  professes  his  full  belief,  a  passage  lead-
ing out  of  the  river  Panuco,  then  trending  to  the
north,  through  Florida,  and  reaching  the  Pacific
Ocean  in  the  latitude  of  the  Baccalaos,  had  been
found  by  some  other  nation,  and  was  kept  a  pro-
found secret.  Cortez  states  his  intention  to  send
out  two  expeditions,  the  one  on  the  Atlantic  (Mar
del  Norte),  the  other  on  the  Pacific  (Mar  del  Zur),
to  search  along  the  whole  coast,  from  the  straits  of
Magellan  up  to  the  Baccalaos,  till  they  fell  in  wiih
the  passage.  The  plan  seems  never  to  have  been
acted  upon,  at  least  in  its  original  shape.  Most  of  its
suggestions  were  afterwards  carried  out  by  the  Span-
iards, but  in  isolated  efforts,  and  without  that  energy
which  would  have  marked  any  enterprise  of  such
a  man  as  Ferdinand  Cortez.  The  reason  for  his  drop-
ping the  scheme  was  simply  the  want  of  money.

The  same  rumour  which  reached  Cortez  about  the
year  1524,  had  in  1523,  or  before  that  year,  reached
Charles  V.  "  Several  geographers,"  says  Herrera,
"  had  assured  the  king  that  it  would  be  easy  to  dis-
cover eastern  Cathay  by  a  strait  between  the  Atlan-
tic and  Pacific  ;"  and  from  an  observation  of  Peter
Martyr,  we  learn,  that  this  imaginary  strait,  like  the
imaginary  one  of  Ferdinand  Cortez,  was  supposed  to
be  situated  between  Florida  and  Baccalaos.  In  order
to  understand  the  events  which  followed  from  this  ru-
mour, it  is  desirable  to  explain  what  it  referred  to  and
how  it  had  arisen.  This  can  be  done  approximately,
though  not  with  the  clearness  which  might  be  wished


IxXXvi  INTRODUCTION.

for.  Florida  and  Baccalaos  were  both  vague  terms.
The  former  of  them  served  as  a  summary  designation
for  the  then  almost  unknown  countries  of  the  North
American  mainland,  immediately  to  the  north  of  the
Spanish  possessions.  Boundary  lines  are  not  to  be
found  in  the  early  maps  of  America,  and  it  is  impos-
sible to  state  where  the  northern  frontier  of  Florida
might  have  been  thought  to  be.  All  we  can  say  is
that  the  term  is  seldom,  if  at  all,  used  for  tracts
north  of  40°.  Baccalaos  originally  means  codfish.  As
a  geographical  designation  it  was  applied  to  the  fish-
ing stations  along  the  northern  shores,  which  alone
gave  these  regions  any  importance  in  the  eyes  of
Europeans.  Baccalaos,  as  a  geographical  term,  is  of  a
still  vaguer  nature  than  that  of  Florida,  and  may  in
its  widest  meaning  be  said  to  embrace  the  coasts  from
57°  down  to  45°  N.  It  is,  however,  in  hardly  any  case
used  for  any  part  south  of  Newfoundland,  48°  being
in  some  old  geographies  expressly  mentioned  as  the
southern  limit.  Under  these  circumstances  it  hardly
allows  of  a  doubt  that  the  rumour  of  a  strait  between
Baccalaos  and  Florida,  which  circulated  both  in  Spain
and  in  Mexico,  had  originated  in  the  vain  hopes  for  a
passage,  which  the  deceptive  appearance  of  the  mouth
of  the  St.  Lawrence  afforded  to  the  early  explorers.
It  was  in  conformity  with  the  ideas  and  habits  of
those  times,  that  a  man's  or  nation's  most  positive
assertions  of  want  of  success  in  such  an  endeavour
would  be  the  most  powerful  means  of  convincing
others  that  they  had  been  successful,  but  desired  to
keep  for  themselves  all  the  advantages  of  an  import-
ant secret.


INTRODUCTION.  IxXXVil

One  of  those  who  insisted  most  strongly  on  the
possibility  of  finding  a  strait  between  Baccalaos  and
Florida,  was  Estevan  Gomez,  a  Portuguese  pilot  in
the  Spanish  service,  who  had  been  one  of  the  com-
panions of  Magellan,  and  had  gained  an  unenviable
notoriety  by  the  mutinous  spirit  shown  by  him  during
the  voyage  of  the  Victoria.  Gomez,  however,  enjoyed  a
good  reputation  for  nautical  skill  and  cosmographical
acquirements.  He  was  one  of  the  scientific  authorities
present  at  the  congress  of  Badajos  and  Gelves,^  which
met  in  152-i  to  settle  the  line  of  demarcation  be-
tween the  Spanish  and  Portuguese  claims  to  the
newly  discovered  regions.  He  must,  therefore,  have
been  considered  one  of  the  most  distinguished  cosmo-
graphers  of  the  age.  Modern  historians  seem  to  be
disposed  to  hold  Gomez  in  less  high  estimation  than
his  contemporaries  did.  In  this  respect,  they  are
influenced  by  a  passage  in  the  eighth  decade  of
Peter  Martyr's  work  De  Orhe  Novo  ;  where  Gomez'
endeavours  are  spoken  of  in  a  sneering  and  contemp-
tuous manner.  But  they  fail  to  observe  that  there  is
a  singular  change  of  language  to  be  observed  even  in
Peter  Martyr.  In  his  sixth  decade  he  speaks  of
Gomez  as  artts  maritimce  peritus ;  whilst  in  the  last
decade  he  says  of  him,  Inanes  hujiis  honi  hominis  fore
cogitationes  existimavi  semper  et prmposui.  So  difi"erently
did  the  historian  judge  of  the  Portuguese  pilot
before,  and  after  he  had  become  acquainted  with  the
details  of  his  project.     To  explain  this  change,  we

1  The  seamen  and  geographers  who  attended  the  congress  had
personally  no  voice  in  the  decision,  but  acted  as  referees.


IxXXViii  INTRODUCTION.

shall  have  recourse  to  the  suggestions  of  Mr.  Biddle,
the  ingenious  scholar,  who  has  clone  so  much  to  clear
up  the  dark  points  in  Sebastian  Cabot's  career.  Peter
Martyr  was  a  friend  of  Cabot,  and  he  may  very  natur-
ally have  considered  Gomez'  new  scheme  as  an  insult
offered  to  the  great  navigator,  who  had  in  the  year  1498
in  vain  sought  for  a  passage  in  the  locality  where  the
Portuguese  pilot  was  confident  to  discover  it.  Howso-
ever this  may  be,  Peter  Martyr's  prejudice  has  to  a
very  considerable  extent  affected  Gomez'  fame ;  so
much  so,  indeed,  that  most  of  the  early  historians
have  repeated  Peter  Martyr's  sneers,  whilst  the
modern  writers  have,  without  a  single  exception,
either  omitted  Gomez'  name  from  their  books  or
treated  his  labours  with  contempt.  This  treatment  is
entirely  undeserved.  Gomez  ought  to  occupy  a
high  place  among  early  explorers,  and  one  of  the
first  among  the  men  connected  with  the  regions
with  which  Hudson's  name  is  associated.  He  went
over  much  of  the  ground  that  Verazzano  had  ex-
plored a  few  months  before  him.  Both  have  left
charts  of  their  explorations ;  and  that  of  the  Portu-
guese pilot  is  infinitely  superior  to  that  of  the  Ita-
lian seaman.  Verazzano's  chart  has  been  preserved
merely  as  a  kind  of  geograpliical  curiosity ;  whilst
that  of  Gomez  has  served  as  the  basis  for  the  deli-
neation of  the  coasts  of  Maryland,  New  Jersey,  New
York,  and  Rhode  Island,  on  nearly  all  the  maps  of
the  sixteenth,  and  on  some  of  the  seventeenth  cen-
tury. The  charts  which  Hudson  himself  must  have
used  when  exploring  the  river  which  bears  liis  name,


INTRODUCTION.  Ixxxix

contained  the  mouth  of  that  river  and  the  neighbour-
ing parts  laid  down  from  Estevan  Gomez's  survey.

The  expedition  of  Estevan  Gomez  has  not  been
described  by  any  modern  author.  This  is  not  from
want  of  materials ;  for  w^e  know  as  much  of  him  as
of  any  early  navigators  wdio  have  not  left  us  their
own  journals.

The  following  are  the  principal  facts  to  be  gathered
from  the  maritime  chronicles  of  the  sixteenth  cen-
tury. Estevan  Gomez  made  his  offer  to  find  the
passage  in  the  year  1523.  In  the  following  year,
1524,  he  was  attending  the  congress  of  Badajoz.
Sebastian  Cabot,  who  had  twice  been  in  the  service
of  England,  and  had  twice  left  it  in  disgust,  was  at
that  time  the  pilot-major  of  Spain,  and  was  also
present  at  the  congress.  Some  kind  of  discussion  of
Gomez's  plan,  must  therefore  unavoidably  have  taken
place  between  these  two  navigators.  But  we  find
no  trace  of  Cabot's  having  either  advocated  or  op-
posed the  plan ;  and  we  are  inclined  to  believe  that
he  communicated  his  private  thoughts  only  to  such
friends  as  Peter  Martyr.  We  find  it  stated  that
Cabot  held  out,  about  this  time,  great  hopes  of  new
discoveries  among,  or  near  the  Spice  Islands  ;  and
that  this  consideration  contributed  to  render  Charles
V  favourable  to  Gomez's  proposals.  There  were  on
the  other  hand  two  strong  reasons  for  hesitating.
First,  the  opposition  of  Peter  Martyr,  who  was  a
much  respected  and  very  influential  member  of  the
council  of  the  Indies  ;  and  secondly  the  entreaties  of
the  king   of  Portugal,  that  the  expedition  might  not


XC  INTRODUCTION.

take  place.  The  conference  of  Badajoz  had  been  held
principally  for  the  sake  of  settling,  between  Spain
and  Portugal,  the  question  of  the  rival  claims  to  the
Spice  Islands.  The  king  of  Portugal  seems  to  have
thought,  that  if  a  short  way  to  those  islands  were
found  by  Spain,  the  temptation  would  be  irresistible  ;
a  speculation  in  which  he  was  perhaps  not  far  wrong.
These  difficulties  having  at  last  been  overcome,
Gomez  was,  towards  the  end  of  the  year  1524,  pro-
vided with  a  small  caravel  of  fifty  tons  burden,  fitted
out  partly  at  the  expense  of  the  king,  partly  at  that  of
some  merchants.  Provision  was  made  with  regard  to
the  possible  profits  of  the  enterprise  ;  any  trespass  on
the  king  of  Portugal's  dominions  was  forbidden  ;  and
some  other  arrangements  being  made,  Gomez  then
started.  He  intended  to  conduct  his  search  not  from
south  to  north,  as  the  Spaniards  in  Central  America
had  been  obliged  to  do  ;  but  from  north  to  south.
Where  he  began  it,  is  not  certain.  According  to
Oviedo's  extracts  from  an  official  report  on  this  voy-
age, Gomez  stated  that  he  had  made  extensive
explorations  in  latitudes  41°  and  40°,  had  become
acquainted  with  the  nature  of  the  country,  and  held
intercourse  with  the  natives.  Of  these  he  kidnapped
as  many  as  his  ship  would  hold  ;  considering  them
as  a  good  prize,  on  account  of  their  fine  stature.
Other  navigators  had  done  so  before  him  ;  and  the
Spaniards  at  home  seem  by  tliat  time  to  have  been  so
well  acquainted  with  the  general  appearance  of  the
Indians,  that  they  were  able  to  give  an  opinion  on  the
comparatively  fine  proportions  of  those  whom  Gomez


INTRODUCTION.  XCl

brought.  The  chroniclers  say  that  Gomez  acted
against  the  emperor's  orders.  But  that  monarch
seems  not  to  have  been  very  indignant ;  and  the
chroniclers  cannot  refrain  from  telling,  as  a  very
ludicrous  affair,  a  mistake  to  which  this  human
cargo  gave  rise.  It  was  reported  that  Gomez  had
brought  clavos  (cloves)  ;  that  is  to  say,  he  had  reached
the  Spice  Islands  by  a  north-west  passage,  whilst  he
had  only  brought  esclavos  (slaves).  Gomez  spoke
with  much  enthusiasm  of  the  country  which  he  had
visited ;  and  seems  to  have  been  fully  alive  to  its
natural  beauties.  Continuing  his  southern  course,
he  at  last  reached  the  West  Indies ;  and  thence  he
sailed  home,  arriving  in  Spain  ten  months  after  he
had  left  it.

Gomez  drew,  as  we  have  mentioned,  an  outline  of
the  coast  which  he  had  explored.  This  outline  has
been  preserved  ;  but  not  in  its  original  shape.  It  has
been  embodied  into  the  celebrated  planisphere  of
Juan  Ribero,  geographer  to  Charles  V.  This  memo-
rable work  was  composed  shortly  after  the  congress
of  Badajoz,  to  which  we  have  referred,  and  of  which
Ribero  was  a  member.  There  the  most  illustrious
geographers  of  Spain  and  Portugal  met,  to  settle  the
disputes  between  the  two  countries  that  had  arisen
out  of  Pope  Alexander's  famous  grant.  The  outline
of  America  was  there  fixed  for  the  first  time,  from
the  discoveries  of  both  nations.  Ribero's  chart,  which
was  composed  in  1529,  (five  years  after  the  congress),
is  not,  however,  entirely  based  on  materials  obtained
there ;  but  embraces  some  more  recent  discoveries  ;


XCll  INTRODUCTION.

such  as  those  of  Estevan  Gomez.  The  tract  of  coast
which  now  belongs  to  the  states  of  Maryland,  New
Jersey,  New  York,  and  Rhode  Island,  is  on  Ribero's
chart  called  the  land  of  Estevan  Gomez.  But  the  chart
does  not  do  full  justice  to  the  Portuguese  pilot.  We
learn  from  the  above-mentioned  report,  that  Gomez
very  correctly  placed  his  discoveries  under  40"  and
41°  N.  This  is  fully  borne  out  by  the  localities.,  the
discovery  of  which,  Ribcro  ascribes  to  him  ;  but  the
latitudes  in  which  Ribero  places  them,  are  erroneous
by  several  degrees.  This  fault  therefore  belongs
entirely  to  Ribero,  and  in  no  way  to  Gomez.  The
geographer  who  had  to  collect  and  arrange  many
discordant  data,  seems  to  have  been  influenced  by  a
feeling  similar  to  that  of  Peter  Martyr  ;  and  to  have
sacrificed  the  Portuguese  pilot  to  some  other  ex-
plorers of  less  accuracy,  but  better  repute.  It  is  to
be  hoped  that,  in  dealing  thus  unfairly  with  Gomez,
Ribero  has  confined  himself  to  placing  the  coast-line
two  degrees  two  high,  without  otherwise  altering  it.
But  for  aught  we  know  to  the  contrary,  he  may  have
introduced  other  alterations,  to  produce  the  harmony
lequired  in  a  general  map.

Under  these  circumstances,  it  becomes  extremely
diflficult  to  answer  the  question  which  presents  itself
so  naturally  to  our  minds :  Did  Gomez  explore  the
mouth  of  Hudson's  river  X  Even  the  most  reliable  maps
of  those  days,  will  give  no  answer  to  minute  historical
questions.  We  cannot  obtain  certainties  from  them,
and  must  be  satisfied  with  probabilities.  As  far  as  these
])robabilitics  go,  we  must  state  it  as  our  conviction,


INTRODUCTION.  XCUl

that  Gomez  did  explore  the  mouths  of  the  Hudson.
He  has  drawn  several  rivers,  and  one  of  them,  with
some  islands  in  its  wide  mouth,  is  so  placed  as  to
correspond  with  the  Hudson.  This  conviction  is
shared  by  Sprengel,  the  learned  German  geographer,
whose  commentary  on  Ribero's  chart  has  proved  of
great  assistance  in  this  inquiry.  "  The  great  river"
says  Sprengcl,  "  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  cape  De
Muclias  Islas,  seems  to  be  Hudson's  river".  It  was,  be-
sides, Gomez's  object  to  search  closely  along  the  whole
shore,  for  an  opening  that  might  lead  to  the  west  ;
and  during  the  ten  months  of  his  voyage,  he  had
ample  time  to  become  acquainted,  in  all  its  parts,  with
the  easily  accessible,  and  not  very  extensive,  line  of
coast  along  which  his  explorations  lay.  But  whether
Gomez  did,  or  did  not,  enter  Hudson's  river,  it  is  cer-
tain that  the  later  Spanish  seamen  who  followed  in
his  track  in  after  years,  were  familiar  with  the  river,
and  called  it  Rio  de  Gamas  ;  as  we  shall  presently
have  occasion  to  observe.

To  conclude  our  observations  on  Gomez's  voyage
we  must  answer  another  question  which  also  presents
itself  very  naturally  to  the  mind.  Verazzano  and
Gomez  went  within  a  few  months  of  each  other  over
precisely  the  same  ground.  Did  any  connection
exist  between  the  two  voyages  ]  As  far  as  the  mere
time  goes,  this  would  be  very  probable  ;  because
Gomez  started  several  months  after  Verazzano's  re-
turn. But  all  the  other  circumstances  exclude  the
supposition.  France  and  Spain  were  at  war,  and  no
friendly  communication  can  therefore  be  supposed  to


XCIV  INTRODUCTION.

have  existed  between  them.  Besides,  had  Gomez
known  that  Verazzano  liad  searched  those  same  parts
in  vain,  he  would  not  have  been  so  unwise  as  to
expose  himself  to  the  sneers  which  he  incurred  by
his  failure.

Gomez's  voyage  is  the  last  one  in  search  of  a  pas-
sage undertaken  on  the  eastern  side  of  America  by
any  other  nation  than  the  English.  The  two  con-
cluding voyages  of  the  first  epoch,  and  all  those  of
later  times,  were  performed  by  the  English  alone.

In  the  years  1523  to  1527  there  seems  to  have
been  a  general  stir  in  this  north-westerly  direction.
We  have  spoken  of  Verazzano,  of  the  rumours  that
assailed  Charles  V,  of  Cortez's  plans,  of  Gomez'
voyage,  and  we  shall  have  still  further  to  notice  some
other  movements  of  the  Spaniards.  The  English,  the
nation  whose  ships  had  first  through  storm  and  ice
sought  for  a  passage,  were  not  slow  in  following
this  general  impulse.  Two  different  symptoms  show
themselves  in  the  same  year  1527.  The  first  is  a
letter  and  a  discourse  which  Robert  Thorne,  the  son
of  one  of  Cabot's  early  companions,  addressed  to
Henry  VIII,  trying  to  persuade  him  to  engage  again
in  the  search  for  a  short  northern  route  to  China.
Thorne  has  the  merit  of  having  started  an  entirely
new  scheme,  which  has  been  acted  upon  only  by  a
few  bold  mariners,  among  whom  was  Henry  Hudson,
— namely,  that  of  sailing  right  across  the  North  Pole.
This  ingenious  plan,  and  the  arguments  by  which
Thome  supports  his  theories,  render  his  discourse  a
highly  curious  document.


INTRODUCTION.  XCV

At  the  very  time  when  this  letter  was  written,
Henry  VIII  was  ah'eady  interested  in  a  north-west-
ern expedition.  Two  vessels,  the  Samson  and  Mary  of
Guildford^  had  been  fitted  out  at  the  joint  expense  of
the  king  and  some  private  persons.  These  vessels
sailed  in  May,  1527.  They  accomplished  nothing,
and  one  of  them  was  probably  lost.  A  remarkable
circumstance  is  connected  with  the  expedition.     Ve-

9

razzano  seems  to  have  been  their  pilot,  and  to  have
lost  his  life  in  an  encounter  with  the  North  American
Indians.

The  last  expedition  of  the  first  epoch  happened
nearly  ten  years  afterwards,  in  1536.  It  is  very
characteristically  English.  When  the  search  for  a
passage  had  been  given  up  by  every  one  else,  a
lawyer,  who  had  dabbled  in  cosmography,  one  Master
Hore,  took  it  up  ;  and  persuaded  a  number  of  young
gentlemen  of  good  family,  most  of  them  members  of
the  inns  of  court,  to  join  him  in  a  north-western
voyage.  The  consequences  of  this  freak  were  even
more  distressing  than  might  naturally  have  been  ex-
pected. The  ship's  company  were  reduced  to  the  ex-
tremes of  famine,  and  several  persons  among  them  went
so  far  as  to  assassinate  their  companions,  and  then  to
commit  some  of  the  very  few  acts  of  cannibalism  that
have  ever  been  proved  against  Europeans.  The  voyagers
then  escaped  certain  death  by  a  daring  act  of  piracy,
from  the  consequences  of  which  these  well-  connected
gentlemen  were  afterwards  protected  by  the  king's
munificent  benevolence.  Thus  ends  the  first  epoch
of  the  search  for  a  north-west  passage.  Forty  years
elapsed  before  the  undertaking  was  resumed.


XCVl  INTRODUCTION.

Before  we  enter  upon  that  second  epoch,  we  mnst
first  speak  of  some  collateral  events  that  occurred  in
the  interval  of  forty  years,  and  most  of  which  are
bearing  upon  the  later  efforts  in  search  of  a  passage,
whilst  all  of  them  exercised  a  more  or  less  direct  in-
fluence on  Hudson's  doings.

The  Portuguese,  the  French,  and  the  Spaniards,
the  three  nations  that  had  followed  in  the  track  of
Cabot  and  of  his  English  companions,  and  had  thus
arrived  at  the  northern  shores  of  America  in  search
of  a  passage  to  Asia,  did  not  by  any  means  abandon
the  newly  explored  regions  when  they  gave  up  the
first  purpose  by  which  they  had  been  led  towards
them.  Each  of  the  three  nations  continued  in  its
own  manner  the  traffic  and  the  explorations  which  it
had  begun.

The  Portuguese  continued  their  surveys  of  the
northern  coasts ;  most  likely  for  no  other  purpose
than  to  discover  advantageous  fisheries.  They  seem
to  have  advanced  slowly,  step  by  step,  first  along  the
shores  of  Newfoundland,  then  up  to  the  mouth  of
Hudson's  Strait,  then  through  that  Strait ;  and  at
last  into  Hudson's  Bay.  With  a  certain  number  of
ancient  maps,  ranging  from  1529  to  1570  before  us,
we  can  trace  this  progress  step  by  step.  In  1544,
the  Portuguese  seem  not  yet  to  have  reached  the
mouth  of  Hudson's  Strait  ;  in  1558,  their  geo-
graphical knowledge  extends  beyond  the  mouth  of
the  Strait;  and  in  1570,  they  have  reached  the  Bay.
Our  authorities  for  all  this,  are  ancient  geographical
delineations,  a  source  which  is  sometimes  deceptive


INTRODUCTION.  XCVII

when  used  as  historical  evidence.  A  map  or  chart,
the  lines  of  which  agree  sufficiently  with  the  real
shape  of  the  parts  laid  down  in  it,  is,  of  course,  the
best  possible  proof  of  those  coasts  having  been
discovered  before  the  chart  was  drawn.  But  when,
on  the  other  hand,  we  conclude  from  the  silence  of
even  an  excellent  map,  that  any  part  not  drawn,  or
badly  drawn  on  it  had  not  yet  been  discovered,  we
may  be  led  entirely  wrong.  Much  geographical
intelligence  was  in  those  days  purposely  kept  secret,
and  many  discoveries  may  also,  by  chance,  have
escaped  the  attention  of  the  very  geographer  whose
w^orks  we  may  be  using.  This  is  indeed  so  natural,
that  it  occurs  quite  commonly  at  the  present  day.
None,  perhaps,  of  our  own  delineations  of  distant
parts,  are  entirely  based  upon  the  very  best  surveys
that  might  have  been  made  use  of.  With  regard  to
the  sixteenth  century,  it  is  certain  that  even  illus-
trious geographers  sometimes  overlooked  the  dis-
covery of  wide  regions,  the  surveys  of  which  were  in
their  reach.  We  can,  therefore,  state  with  the
greatest  certainty,  that  Hudson's  Bay  had  been  dis-
covered before  the  publication  of  Ortelius's  atlas,
which  took  place  in  1570  ;  but  we  are  not  equally
certain  that  the  discovery  falls  within  the  years  1558
to  1570,  because  we  have  only  the  negative  evidence
of  Diogo  Homem's  charts  to  support  the  latter  asser-
tion.   The  fact  itself  is,  however,  probable  enough.

We  must  take  this  opportunity  of  adverting  to  a
singular  historical  misconception,  which  is  to  be  found


XCVIU  INTRODUCTION.

ill  some  of  the  most  current  and  most  respectable
hand-books  of  general  information  ;  and  which  may
be  traced  back  to  the  ill-directed  efforts  of  an  ingeni-
ous mind.  It  is  stated  in  Brockhaus'  Conversations
Lexicon,  and  copied  into  many  of  the  cyclopaedias
which  place  implicit  trust  in  the  integrity  of  that
standard  work,  that  Hudson's  Bay  was  discovered  by
a  Dane,  named  Anskoeld.  Now  this  Dane  Anskoeld
is  a  myth,  the  origin  of  wdiich  may  be  traced  in  the
following  manner.  A  Polish  pilot,  named  Johannes
Kolnus,  or  John  of  Kolno,  was  sent  in  1476  by  the
kins:  of  Denmark  and  Norway  on  a  north-western  ex-
pedition,  to  a  country  which  Kolnus  called  Grocland,
and  which  most  likely  was  Groneland,  that  is  to  say,
Greenland.  Kolnus  led  out  a  number  of  emigrants,
Danes,  Swedes,  and  Norwegians,  probably  to  restore
the  settlements  in  Greenland,  to  the  entire  or  partial
destruction  of  which,  at  the  end  of  the  fourteenth  and
in  the  beginning  of  the  fifteenth  century,  various  ad-
verse circumstances  had  cooperated.  The  name  of
Johannes  Kolnus,  as  well  as  the  achievements  of  this
Polish  worthy,  have  been  singularly  disfigured  by  the
geographers  of  the  sixteenth  century.  Some  make  his
Grocland  into  the  most  western  of  all  tlie  many  Green-
lands  ;  and  as  such  it  figures  on  Ortelius'  map  of  the
world,  where  it  forms  an  island  in  latitude  80°  north
of  Labrador.  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert  places  the  dis-
coveries ftirthcr  south.  The  name  is  most  frequently
spelled  Scolvus  ;  sometimes  Scohnus.  From  this
latter  shape  of  the  name,  and  from  Sir  Humphrey's
account  of  the  discoveries,  tlic  Dane  Anskoeld  of  the


INTRODUCTION.  XCIX

Conversations  Lexicon  and  his  discovery  of  Hudson's
Bay  had  been  framed.

The  north-westerly  voyages  of  the  Spaniards  during
the  interval  of  forty  years,  are  more  momentous  even
than  those  of  the  Portuguese.  The  Spaniards  followed
up  the  idea,  indicated  by  Cortez  in  1524,  of  search-
ing for  a  passage  through  America  ;  not  from  east  to
west,  but  from  west  to  east.  For  that  purpose  they
sent  out  a  whole  series  of  expeditions,  none  of  which,
however,  reached  the  high  latitude  where  the  north-
west passage  opens  into  the  Pacific.  The  Spanish
expeditions  were  thus,  like  the  similar  undertakings
of  other  nations,  failures  as  regards  their  main  object.
Important  results,  however,  especially  surveys  of  the
western  coasts  up  to  45°,  were  obtained  by  means  of
these  voyages.  On  the  eastern  coast  no  more  voy-
ages in  search  of  a  passage  were  undertaken  after  the
unsuccessful  one  of  Estevan  Gomez.  Yet  this  ex-
pedition was  not  allowed  to  remain  without  a  result.
The  voyage  of  Estevan  Gomez  produced  in  Spain
the  same  effect  which  those  of  the  Cabots,  of  Cor-
tereal,  and  of  the  men  from  Normandy  and  Brittany
had  produced  in  England,  Portugal,  and  France —
it  conducted  the  Spaniards  to  the  north-western
fisheries.  This,  at  least,  is  the  conclusion  which
the  accurate  Navarrete  draws  from  a  stock  of  con-
temporary evidence.  The  Spaniards  now  began  to
take  a  large  share  in  this  traffic,  and  to  repair  regu-
larly to  the  shoals  and  sandbanks  off  Baccalaos.  These
new  places  of  resort  were  at  a  moderate  distance
from  their  own  American  colonies.     It  is  therefore


C  INTRODUCTION.

but  natural  to  imagine  that  the  Spaniards  some-
times included  both  points  in  the  same  voyage.  Ac-
cording to  the  custom  of  that  age  they  did  not  then
sail  boldly  over  the  broad  ocean,  but  went  timidly
along  the  coast.  It  was  in  those  days  one  of  the
principal  studies  of  geographers  to  point  out  con-
venient stages,  stations,  and  tracks  for  such  sail-
ing. This  is  the  main  purpose  of  the  so  called  Riit-
ters  or  routiers,  regular  guide  books,  which  showed  the
distances  from  place  to  place,  marked  the  convenient
stations,  described  the  entrances  to  rivers  and  har-
bours. Many  of  these  guide  books  are  still  in  exist-
ence ;  and  we  learn  from  them  that  the  Rio  de  Gamas,
the  name  then  regularly  applied  to  the  Hudson  on  the
charts  of  the  time,  was  one  of  these  stages  between
Newfoundland  and  the  colonies  of  central  America.
Nantucket  Island  also  figures  in  some  of  these  rutters
under  the  name  of  the  "Island  of  Juan  Luis,"  or  "  Juan
Fernandez,"  and  is  recommended  as  a  most  convenient
stage  for  those  who,  coming  from  Europe,  wish  to
proceed  to  the  West  Indies  by  way  of  the  Ber-
mudas.

The  French  were  yet  more  active  than  the  Portu-
guese and  Spaniards.  They  pursued  their  fishing
trade  with  such  energy,  that  the  Newfoundland
fisheries,  which  had  always  been  and  still  were  com-
mon ground  for  the  whole  civilized  world,  seemed  to
belong  more  specially  to  them.  Most  of  the  banks
and  stations  received  French  names.  The  discovery
of  these  regions,  which  was  not  then  claimed  by
England  on  account  of  the  voyages   of  the  Cabots,


INTRODUCTION.  CI

was  attributed  entirely  to  the  French.  In  the  begin-
ning of  the  seventeenth  century  that  nation  was
loudly  praised  for  its  generosity  in  having  allowed
others  to  share  in  the  Newfoundland  fisheries.

Even  more  remarkable,  and  conferring  much  higher
honour  on  the  French  name,  are  the  North  American
explorations  they  made  during  this  period,  and  their
attempts  to  colonize  that  vast  region.  Up  to  the
time  of  Jaques  Cartier,  America  had  been  visited
and  explored  only  by  navigators  who  considered  it
as  a  barrier  between  Asia  and  Europe  which  they
wished  to  force,  or  by  greedy  adventurers  attracted
by  its  riches.  It  is  with  the  French  that  the  idea
arose  of  colonizing  the  fertile  wilderness  of  the  north-
west without  violence  to  its  original  inhabitants  and
owners.  To  our  regret  it  does  not  belong  to  our
province  to  dwell  on  these  efforts.  But  it  is  only
just  to  remark,  that  Cartier,  Roberval,  Coligny,  and
the  men  he  sent  out  to  prepare  a  home  for  his  perse-
cuted brethren,  were,  in  liberality  of  ideas  and  in
elevation  of  purpose,  more  than  a  century  ahead  of
their  contemporaries  ;  and  that  France  may  here  well
claim  a  title  to  which  she  has  often  pretended  with
much  less  right,  namely,  that  of  a  pioneer  in  civiliza-
tion.

In  England  the  influence  of  the  new  discoveries,
and  of  the  consequent  changes  in  the  roads  of  trade,
developed  itself  with  remarkable  slowness.  Fifty
years  after  the  first  transatlantic  voyages  no  one
would  have  imagined  that  this  island  would  be
the   principal    heir    to    the    power    and    the   riches


Cll  INTRODUCTION.

which  then  crowned  Europe  with  an  entirely  new
glory,  very  different  from  the  gloom  of  the  preceding
centuries.  The  prosperity,  the  freedom,  and  the  self-
reliance  of  the  kingdom  went  on,  however,  steadily
increasing.  Then  there  came  a  time  when  those
recent  changes  in  the  commerce  of  the  world  made
themselves  felt  in  a  disastrous  manner.  Most  of  the
English  trade  had  always  been  in  the  hands  of  Ger-
mans and  Italians,  the  former  of  whom  enjoyed
exorbitant  privileges,  granted  them  at  a  period  when
it  was  politic  to  attract  them  to  this  country  at  any
price.  These  privileges  were  still  more  extravagantly
interpreted  by  them.  The  foreigners  were  insolent
and  proud.  Yet  all  this  was  long  borne  as  a  neces-
sary evil.  But  the  new  discoveries  made  the  power
both  of  the  Hanse  and  of  Italy  decline.  The  Medi-
terranean, the  German  Ocean,  the  Baltic,  were  no
longer  the  seas  of  Europe,  and  with  the  transatlantic
commerce  rose  the  power  of  Spain,  Portugal,  and  of
the  only  one  of  the  older  commercial  nations  that
maintained  and  even  increased  its  medieval  pro-
sperity, namely,  the  Netherlands.  Thus  it  happened
that  the  advantages  afforded  to  England  by  its  con-
nexion with  the  Hanse  were  no  longer  adequate  to
the  sacrifices  made  for  their  sake.  The  English  staple
articles  often  remained  unsold,  or  at  least  did  not  rise
in  value  in  due  proportion  to  the  general  rise  of
prices.  English  shipowners  now  began  to  feel  that
they  themselves  could  do  better  what  the  foreigners
did  so  badly,  and  it  required  but  an  opportunity  to
shake  off  the  liated  yoke.    The  opportunity  was  offered


INTRODUCTION.  Clll

to  the  nation  by  the  return  of  Sebastian  Cabot  to  this
country  in  1548.  He  had  been  for  many  years  in  the
service  of  Charles  V,  as  pilot-major  of  Spain,  and  had
there,  as  elsewhere,  met  with  the  ingratitude  which
seems  to  be  the  eternal  portion  of  the  exile  who
bestows  benefits  on  the  country  he  makes  his  tem-
porary home.

His  successful  efforts  to  shake  off  the  yoke  of  the
Hanse  Towns,  and  to  rescue  EngUsh  commerce,  form
part  of  the  history  of  the  search  for  a  north-east  pas-
sage. To  that  history  a  separate  place  in  the  present
introduction  has  been  assigned.  AVe  have  here
noticed  these  movements  on  account  of  their  vast
influence  towards  the  renewing  of  the  search  for  a
north-west  passage,  and  on  the  manner  in  wdiich  it
was  conducted.

The  events  we  have  alluded  to  seem  to  have  so
well  prepared  the  minds  for  a  resumption  of  the
search  for  a  north-west  passage,  that  it  is  impossible  to
ascertain  with  whom  the  idea  first  arose.  Three  men,
Frobisher,  Gilbert,  and  Willes,  entertained  it  simul-
taneously. They  had  each  been  led  to  it  by  a  course
of  similar  reflections,  based  on  all  the  events  we  have
narrated  ;  and  it  does  not  appear  that  these  three  men
had  held  any  communication  before  each  of  them
had  matured  the  scheme.  They  were  all  encouraged
by  the  experience  in  arctic  navigation  to  which  the
search  for  a  north-east  passage  and  the  establish-
ment and  operations  of  the  Moscovia  Company  had
led.  They  vvere  all  acquainted  with  the  geographical
labours  of  the  age,  based,  as  far  as  North  America  is


CIV  INTRODUCTION.

concerned,  on  the  explorations  of  the  Cabots,  of  the
Spaniards,  the  Portuguese,  and  the  French.

Three  diiFerent  illusions  seem  besides  to  have  ex-
ercised on  their  minds  a  much  greater  influence  than
all  the  truth  that  had  come  to  light  during  the  inter-
val of  forty  years.  The  first  illusion  was  based  on  a  map
of  Clement  Adams,  an  inaccurate  copy  of  Sebastian
Cabot's  great  planisphere;  which  copy,  however,  as  far
as  its  geographical  information  went,  seems  to  have
been  generally  considered  as  representing  Sebastian
Cabot's  own  work.  We  shall  have  to  speak  of  this  re-
markable map.  For  the  present  it  is  sufficient  to  ob-
serve, that  Sebastian  Cabot  is  there  made  to  indicate  a
passage  from  the  Atlantic  to  the  Pacific,  beginning  in
Hudson's  Strait ;  then  leading  off  for  a  short  space
through  about  the  same  latitude;  but  soon  verging  to
the  south,  so  as  to  reach  the  Pacific  in  about  40°  north.
The  second  and  the  third  delusions  were  of  a  similar
nature.  It  seems  to  have  been  agreed  among  map
makers  that  America  must  be  an  island ;  that  it
could  not  possibly  stretch  across  the  pole,  so  as  to
join  Asia ;  and  that,  therefore,  a  north-west  passage
must  exist  somewhere.  This  vague  idea  is  expressed,
on  all  the  delineations  of  the  globe  produced  in  those
days,  in  that  positive  form  which  maps  necessarily
assume.  There  is  even  a  certain  similarity  in  the
outline  and  position  assigned  by  various  maps  to  the
north-west  passage  ;  and,  what  is  most  singular,  these
random  guesses  are  not  so  far  wrong  as  might  have
been  expected.  The  third  illusion  is  very  charac-
teristic of  the   age.     The    Roman  Catholic  and  the


INTRODUCTION.  CV

Protestant  powers  watched  each  other  with  the  most
anxious  jealousy.  The  same  jealousy  prevailed  be-
tween the  different  commercial  nations  as  such.  All
were  eager  to  find  a  short  way  to  India.  Each  of  them
was  aware  that  the  others  had  searched  for  it,  and  they
would  not  believe  in  each  other's  ill  success.  It  is  thus
that  rumours  sprang  up  of  ships  having  actually  sailed
through  the  north-west  passage.  The  southern  nations
attributed  the  feat  to  the  northern,  the  northern  to
the  southern  nations.  We  find,  a  few  years  later,
a  celebrated  Spanish  writer  asserting  that  "  the  great
pirate,  Drake,"  had  accomplished  the  feat.  Much
more  eff'ect,  however,  had  a  story  told  by  a  clever
w^ag,  a  friar  named  Urdaneta,  who  described  in  full
detail  a  voyage  through  the  north-western  strait  per-
formed by  himself  in  1568.  He  has  been  rewarded
for  his  impudent  audacity  with  the  honours  of  im-
mortal fame.  Not  satisfied  with  these  traps  laid
for  him,  Gilbert,  in  his  blind  eagerness,  misinter-
preted the  lessons  of  history,  and  attributed  a  voy-
age in  search  of  a  north-west  passage  to  "  Scol-
mus  the  Dane."  It  would  lead  us  too  far  were  we
to  indulge  any  longer  in  an  analysis  of  the  specu-
lations which  led  to  the  resumption  of  the  great
search.  We  refer  the  reader  to  Hakluyt's  Collec-
tion, where  he  will  find  the  treatises  of  Willes  and
Gilbert,  with  other  similar  materials,  and  especially
the  voyages  of  Martin  Frobisher.

It  is  difficult  to  speak  of  these  voyages  with  perfect
fairness.  Their  importance  consists  much  more  in  the
impulse  they  gave  than  in  what  they  accomplished.


CVl  INTRODUCTION.

This  has  been  so  well  understood  by  the  writers  on
this  topic,  that  the  originality  of  Martin  Frobisher's
ideas  has  been  very  greatly  exaggerated.    It  was  for  a
long  time  a  fashion  to  overlook  the  whole  first  period
of  the  search  for  a  north-west  passage,  especially  to
estimate  as  low  as  possible  the  deserts  of  John  and
Sebastian  Cabot,  and  thus  to  enhance  those  of  Frobisher.
The  documents  which  recent  researches  have  brought
to  light  remove  for  ever  this  unfair  judgment.     But
we  must  not  at  the   same  time  conclude,  that   the
name  of  Martin  Frobisher  has  to  be  wiped  out  from
the  list  of  great  navigators.     The  practical  renewal
of  the  search  for  a  passage  is  no  ordinary  merit.    We
must  also  remember  that  Frobisher  had  many  dis-
advantages to  overcome  before  he  obtained,  by  the
most  unwearied  industry  and  the  most  ardent  con-
viction, the  patronage  which  he  afterwards  enjoyed.
It  is  a  matter  of  serious  congratulation,  that  he  suc-
ceeded in  bringing  all  the  most  eminent  interest  in
the  country,  political  and  aristocratic,  scientific  and
commercial,  to   bear  on  this  enterprise,  which  thus
first  received  its   truly  national   character.     Willes,
Gilbert,    Stephen    Borrough    (the    celebrated   arctic
navigator) ;  Dr.  John  Dee,  the  ofiicial  adviser  of  the
Muscovy  Company  ;   Richard  Ilakluyt,  of  the  Middle
Temple,  the  cousin  of  the  historian,  Lok,  and  other
special  men,  assisted  Frobisher  with  geographical  in-
formation.   The  queen  herself,  and  still  more  the  Earl
and  the  Countess  of  Warwick,  took  a  lively  interest  in
the  enterprise.     Commercial  men  provided  the  funds.
Gentlemen  wore  eager  to  join  the  adventure.    In  none


INTRODUCTION.  CVll

of  his  three  expeditions  had  Frobisher  less  than  three
vessels,  and  in  1571  he  had  fifteen  under  his  orders.
This  great,  perhaps  too  great,  favour,  must  be  consi-
dered as  almost  a  disadvantage  for  Frobisher  person-
ally, though  a  great  advantage  for  the  popularity  of  his
scheme.  The  vast  responsibility,  the  many  eyes  that
watched  his  movements,  made  him  more  cautious
than  was  desirable  for  his  fame.  In  arctic  explora-
tions at  least,  much  more  has  been  effected  by  modest
than  by  grand  undertakings,  by  single  small  vessels
than  by  large  fleets.

Frobisher  sailed  three  times  to  the  north-west,  in
1576,  1577,  and  1578.  In  1576  he  steered  straight
across  the  Atlantic  till  he  came  in  sight  of  Green-
land. He  then  passed  along  the  southern  and  south-
western shores  of  that  continent,  and  again  sailing
westward,  he  reached  the  coast  of  Labrador.  Here
he  sought  for  the  strait  which  his  charts  indicated,
and  which  he  at  last  believed  that  he  had  found  in
63°  8'.  The  charts  of  those  regions  are  still  so  imper-
fect, that  it  is  difficult  to  follow  him  much  further.  It
seems,  however,  that  he  entered  an  inlet  or  a  strait,
proceeded  up  it  for  sixty  leagues  without  being  land-
locked, but  at  last  found  himself  arrested  by  ice.  It  is
likely  that  he  soon  comprehended,  what  every  intelli-
gent arctic  navigator  must  have  felt,  namely,  that  the
passage,  even  should  it  be  found,  would  prove  useless
to  commerce.  Little  value  was  in  those  days  attached
to  mere  geographical  discoveries.  After  the  promises
he  had  made,  and  the  hopes  he  had  raised,  this  con-
viction must  have  been  very  painful  for  Frobisher.


CVIU  INTRODUCTION.

He  was  therefore  very  happy  to  be  able  to  direct  his
attention  to  other  objects  ;  the  taking  possession  of
those  barren  regions,  the  collecting  of  curiosities.
Among  them  he  brought  home  a  stone,  glittering  like
gold,  in  which  greedy  eyes,  deceived  by  the  love  of
lucre,  believed  they  saw  the  promise  of  rich  treasures.
The  gathering  of  this  ore,  which,  after  all,  proved  per-
fectly worthless,  was  the  only  object,  and  almost  the
only  result  of  his  two  last  voyages.  In  1578  he  seems,
however,  by  chance  to  have  entered  Hudson's  Strait;
"but  anxious,  in  obedience  to  his  instructions,  to  bring
home  as  much  ore  as  he  could,  he  postponed  the
search  for  a  passage,  and  has  consequently  incurred
the  blame  of  writers  who  looked  on  these  matters  from
the  point  of  view  of  the  nineteenth  century.  Fro-
bisher's  own  contemporaries  considered  him  as  a  de-
serving man,  and  his  companions  were  most  truly
attached  to  him.

These  voyages  were  singularly  unfortunate  in  con-
firming prevailing  geographical  mistakes,  as  we  shall
have  to  notice.  They  also  added  their  own  new  store
of  error  in  different  ways.  The  situation  of  the  country
discovered  by  Frobisher,  and  that  of  his  strait,  were
so  imperfectly  indicated  by  those  who  described  the
voyages,  that  geographers  became  perfectly  bewil-
dered. In  the  chart  which  Hudson  used,  Frobisher's
Strait  lies  across  Greenland,  not  in  America.  These
singular  doubts  have  exercised  their  influence  even  up
to  the  present  day  ;  as  for  example,  upon  Karl  von
Spruner,  the  author  of  t\\o Historical  Atlas.  They  liave,
however,  no  foundation  in  fact ;  and  the  real  locality


INTRODUCTION.  CIX

of  Frobisher's  Strait  is  certainly  where  modern  maps
place  it.  Another  mistake,  which  caused  Hudson
some  useless  pains,  is  due,  in  the  first  instance,  to  one
of  Frobisher's  ships,  that  sailed  home  by  itself,  the
Biisse  of  Bridgeivater.  An  immense  ice  field  seems  to
have  floated  out  of  Davis'  Strait  down  to  latitude  bT.
The  excited  fancy  of  a  passenger  on  board  the  vessel
mistook  it  for  an  island,  and  the  island  soon  found
its  place  on  maps  and  charts,  under  the  name  of
Busse  Island.  Hudson  searched  for  it  with  little
success,  as  may  be  imagined.  The  small  hurt  these
mistakes  could  do  was,  however,  entirely  outbalanced
by  the  beneficial  influence  of  the  correct  informa-
tion Frobisher  brought  home.  It  was  now  certain,
that  between  62°  and  63",  on  the  eastern  side  of
North  America,  a  wide  entrance  existed,  navigable
for  hundreds  of  miles.  True,  that  passage  was  some-
times blocked  up  by  ice.  But  this  had  not  yet  been
ascertained  to  be  its  almost  permanent  state.  A  still
broader  and  more  navigable  entrance  had  been  found
between  60°  and  62\  Some  of  Frobisher's  com-
panions even  recognized  the  great  fact,  that  the  re-
puted mainland  of  Labrador,  between  61°  and  63°,
was  merely  a  mass  of  islands,  separated  by  channels,
some  broad,  some  narrow,  which  led  to  unknown
seas  in  the  west.  This  information  was  more  than
sufficient  to  raise  the  most  lively  hopes  of  a  through
passage,  and  the  most  ardent  aspirations  towards  its
discovery,  especially  in  an  age  that  may  well  be  said
to  have  given  birth  to  the  buoyancy  and  elasticity  of
spirit  by  which  the  English  nation  has  since  become
so  great.


ex  INTRODUCTION.

The  required  expenditure,  vast  for  the  times,  alone
prevented  the  track  from  being  followed  up  at  once.
Frobisher  himself  made  efforts  to  obtain  the  necessary
means,  and  was  nearly  successful,  owing  especially
to  the  interest  which  the  great  Francis  Drake  took
in  the  enterprise.  This  admirable  seaman  offered  to
tax  to  the  utmost  his  already  shaken  credit,  and  to
raise  a  thousand  pounds  for  the  expedition.  More
than  five  thousand  were  expected  from  various  other
noblemen  and  gentlemen,  of  which  three  thousand
from  the  famous  Earl  of  Leicester.  But  the  enter-
prise came  to  nought,  because  it  had  been  projected
on  too  large  a  scale.  It  is  mentioned  for  the  last
time  in  1581.

Equally  without  result  were,  as  it  seems,  the  en-
deavours of  Adrian  Gylbert,  to  whom  letters-patent
for  the  search  of  a  north-west  passage  were  granted
in  February  1583.  He  does  not  appear  to  have
started  for  his  destination.

It  was  reserved  for  John  Davis,  one  of  the  greatest
of  navigators,  to  follow  up  and  develope  the  vague
indications  of  Frobisher.  Master  John  Davis  sailed
from  Dartmouth  the  7th  of  June,  1585,  with  two
small  vessels,  the  SunsJimc,  of  fifty  tons,  the  Jloonshine^
of  thirty -five.  His  course  was  north-west.  He  ex-
pected to  find  no  land  before  he  reached  America.
But  to  his  surprise  he  struck  the  south-eastern  coast
of  Greenland,  between  60°  and  61°,  the  20th  of  July.
We  shall  have  occasion  to  dwell  on  the  singular  mis-
conceptions which  prevailed  at  the  time  with  regard
to  that  great  arctic  continent.    These  misconceptions,


INTRODUCTION.  CXI

the  growth  of  centuries,  formed  a  curious  mixture  of
truth  and  error;  and  Frobisher  had  lately  contributed
to  them  his  own  large  share  of  mistakes.  Davis  was
justified  in  thinking  that  the  land  he  had  fallen  in  with
had  been  hitherto  unknown,  and  w^as  his  own  new  dis-
covery. After  a  short  hesitation  on  the  south-eastern
side  of  Greenland,  he  rounded  the  southern  point  on
the  23rd  of  July,  and  then  sailed  for  two  more  days
up  along  the  south-western  coast.  To  these  southern
parts  of  Greenland  he  gave  the  graphic  name  of
Desolation,  a  name  now  attached  to  a  small  portion
only  of  those  shores.  On  the  25th  he  left  the  newly
discovered  country,  and  steered  his  former  course  to
the  north-west,  thus  unconsciously  following  the  bend
of  the  Greenland  coast,  which  he  had  lost  sight  of.
After  four  days  sail,  the  29th  of  July  he  was  again
in  sight  of  land,  under  64°  15'.  His  course  had
brought  him  to  the  jutting  point  which  forms  the
northern  boundary  of  Gilbert's  Sound.  That  is  now
the  least  unknown  portion  of  Greenland.  Gilbert's
Sound  is  a  large  and  fair  bay,  enclosing  many  islands,
and  here  among  the  snow  and  ice  of  the  high  north
some  sunny  nook  may  greet  the  eye  of  the  weary  sailor.
The  Danish  settlement  of  Godhab,  and  the  Moravian
colony  of  Nye  Hernhut,  are  situated  in  these  parts.
They  have  been  visited  by  several  recent  navigators,
especially  by  Captain  M'Clintock,  and  their  names
are  now  familiar  to  the  ear.  Here  Davis  held  inter-
course with  the  Esquimaux,  and  it  is  delightful  to  read
how  he  employed  the  sweet  medium  of  music  to  gain
their  friendship.     Davis  left  Gilbert's  Sound  the  1st


CXU  INTRODUCTION.

of  August,  having  tarried  two  days.  He  again  steered
his  former  course  to  the  north-west,  and  thus  crossed
for  the  first  time  the  strait  that  now  bears  his  name.
Only  five  days  sail  brought  him  to  the  American
side,  which  he  reached  in  latitude  66°  40'  the  6th  of
August.  He  had  arrived  in  the  neighbourhood  of
that  remarkable  promontory,  by  him  named  Cape
Walsingham,  where  the  American  coast  makes  so
sudden  a  turn  to  the  north-west.  Not  finding  an
inlet  by  which  he  might  follow  a  western  course  and
reach  the  Pacific,  he  coasted  on  the  American
side  southward,  in  quest,  probably,  of  Frobisher's
Strait,  which  he  must  have  expected  to  find  in  lati-
tude 63°  8',  three  degrees  and  a  half  further  south.
But  before  he  reached  that  inlet  he  fell  in  with
another  more  northern  opening,  named  by  him  Cum-
berland Strait,  and  which  seemed  to  off'er  a  good
chance  of  a  passage.  He  arrived  at  the  mouth  of
that  strait  the  11th  of  August,  and  having  explored
it  for  six  days,  he  met  with  a  cluster  of  islands,  "with
many  fair  sounds  between,"  and  concluded  by  an
admirable  course  of  reasoning  that  the  strait  does
lead  to  the  Pacific.  His  opinion  has  not  yet  been
disproved,  and  further  exploration  may  show  it  to
have  been  correct.  The  charts  of  those  regions  are
still  in  the  highest  degree  unsatisfactory.  We  know
as  little  as  the  first  discoverers  did,  whether  Fro-
bisher's and  Cumberland's  Straits  do  or  do  not  com-
municate with  the  more  western  waters.  In  bare
justice  to  those  great  men,  the  information  which
intelligent  whalers  must  have  gained   in   that  long


INTRODUCTION.  CXUl

interval  might  be  collected  and  inserted  in  the  Admi-
ralty charts.  After  so  much  has  been  done  for  the
higher  regions,  something  might  be  done  for  the
west  of  Davis'  Strait,  and  for  the  channels  that  lead
into  it.  "  There  are  many  intelligent  whaling  cap-
tains," says  Captain  M'Clintock,  "  who  possess  much
valuable  knowledge  of  these  lands  and  seas  ;  and
even  in  the  terra  incognita  of  Frobisher's  Straits
whalers  have  wintered,  whilst  our  charts  scarcely
afford  even  a  vague  idea  of  the  configuration  of  these
extensive  islands. . .  A  surveying  vessel  would  be
usefully  employed  for  a  couple  of  summers  in  tracing
the  general  outline  of  these  possessions  of  Her  Ma-
jesty." Davis  sailed  homewards  the  24th  of  August.
He  brought  his  two  frail  barks  safely  home  the  30th
of  September,  1585.

Davis  sailed  again  the  7th  of  May,  1586.  He  had
with  him  four  vessels,  the  Sunshine  and  Moonshine^
which  he  had  the  year  before  ;  the  Meermaid^  a  vessel
of  a  hundred  tons  ;  and  the  North  Star,  a  pinnace  of
ten  tons  burden.  The  7th  of  May  he  was  south  of
Iceland  in  60°,  and  despatched  the  Sunshine  and
North  Star  to  search  between  Greenland  and  Iceland.
He  himself  proceeded  westward  with  the  3Iecrmaid
and  Moonshine,  and  reached  the  south  of  Greenland
the  15th  of  June.  But  he  had  arrived  too  early  in
the  season.  A  huge  mass  of  ice  encumbered  the
Greenland  shore.  To  round  it  he  had  to  stand  out
of  the  strait,  and  to  sail  as  far  south  as  57°.  The
ice,  at  present  also,  often  forms  regular  fields  and
packs  out  of  Davis'  Strait,  such  as  he  encountered  in

q


CXIV  INTRODUCTION.

the  beginning,  and  the  Busse,  of  Bridgewater,  met
with  at  the  end  of  summer,  in  latitude  57°.  Having
rounded  the  pack,  Davis  reached  Gilbert's  Sound  the
29th  of  June.  Stormy  weather,  and  the  wish  to  be-
come thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  country,  de-
tained him  till  the  middle  of  the  month  of  July.  The
17th  we  meet  him  again  at  sea,  not  far  from  Gil-
bert's Sound,  but  a  little  to  the  south,  in  63°  8'.
Davis  had  now  to  encounter  a  new  and  a  fiercer
struggle  with  the  pack.  A  fortnight's  sail  carried
him  only  a  few  degrees  farther  north  and  a  very
small  distance  farther  west.  Many  of  the  sailors  in
his  larger  vessel  had  probably  never  seen  the  arctic
regions  before.  Their  courage  fell,  and  at  last  Davis
met  with  that  obstacle,  worse  than  storm  and  ice,  a
mutiny  among  his  crew.  Subdued  by  his  imposing
presence,  his  sailors  did  not  break  out  into  the  ex-
cesses which  troubled  Weymouth  and  cost  Hudson
his  life  ;  but  they  represented  in  earnest  language
that  "  he  might  not,  through  his  over-boldness,  leave
their  widows  and  little  children  to  give  him  bitter
curses."  He  obeyed,  and  after  little  more  than  one
day's  south-eastern  sail  he  reached  land  on  the  Green-
land shore,  in  latitude  66°  33',  the  1st  of  August.
He  was  now  constrained  to  send  the  Meermaid  home,
the  crew  being  unwilling  to  encounter  any  longer
the  dangers  of  navigation  among  the  ice,  which  are
appalling  enough  even  for  those  who  have  spent
many  years  in  those  regions,  and  whose  vessels  are
specially  fitted  for  this  dangerous  navigation  by  every
contrivance   that  ingenuity  can   invent.      But  Davis


INTRODUCTION.  CXV

was  not  shaken  in  his  purpose.  He  now  entrusted
himself  to  the  Moonshine^  more  a  fishing  smack  than
a  ship.  A  few  days  were  spent  in  preparing  her  for
her  arduous  task,  and  the  5th  she  started  by  herself.
She  crossed  the  strait  in  nearly  a  due  westerly  direc-
tion. The  14th  of  August  she  was  near  Cape  AVal-
singham,  in  latitude  ^^°  19',  on  the  American  side.
It  was  too  late  for  anything  more  than  a  summary
search  along  the  coast.  The  rest  of  the  month,
and  the  first  days  of  September,  were  spent  in  that
search.  Besides  the  already  known  openings,  namely,
Cumberland  Strait,  Frobisher's  Strait,  and  Hudson's
Strait,  two  more  openings  were  found,  Davis  Inlet  in
56°,  and  Ivudoke  Inlet  in  54°  30'.  Davis  now  had  to
cross  the  Atlantic  in  his  miserable  craft,  and  he  per-
formed the  voyage  through  the  equinoctial  gales  in
little  more  than  three  weeks.  He  reached  England
again  in  the  beginning  of  October,  1586.

The  19th  of  June,  1587,  Davis  began  his  third
north-western  voyage  with  three  vessels,  one  of  which
was  the  Sunshine^  always  his  faithful  companion.  He
had  besides  brought  out,  in  frame,  a  pinnace,  intended
for  exploration  in  shallow  water.  After  he  had
reached  Gilbert's  Sound,  the  16th  of  June,  he  was
about  to  set  up  the  pinnace,  when  the  Esquimaux
of  the  neighbourhood,  seeing  the  many  fine  pieces
of  iron  which  were  used  as  nails  and  spikes,  could
not  resist  the  temptation  of  tearing  the  whole  fabric
to  pieces  to  obtain  those  treasures.  This  singular
race  exhibited  from  the  very  first  the  same  cha-
racteristics which  have  now  become  so  familiar  to


CXVl  INTRODUCTION.

arctic  explorers.  The  cheerfulness  and  good  nature
of  the  Esquimaux  are  praised  by  those  who  first  came
in  contact  with  them,  and  some  of  these  early  mari-
ners put  these  qualities  in  contrast  with  the  fierceness
and  the  gloom  of  the  Indian  warriors.  Still  such
depredations  as  those  here  noted  too  often  occur,
proving  that  low  standard  of  morality  which  belongs
to  the  savage.  These  occurrences,  and  the  partial
restoration  of  the  pinnace,  delayed  Davis  till  the  21st
of  June.  From  that  day  to  the  30th  of  the  same
month  he  sailed  to  the  north  along  the  Greenland
shore,  and  arrived  on  the  30th  of  June,  1587,  in  lati-
tude 72°  12',  nearly  four  degrees  farther  north  than
any  one  had  been  before  him  in  that  sea.  He
found  to  the  north  "  no  ice,  but  a  great  sea,  free,
large,  very  salt  and  very  blue,"  and  "  it  seemed  most
manifest  that  the  passage  was  free  and  without  im-
pediment toward  the  north."  Northern  gales  and
the  wish  to  proceed  to  the  west  prevented  his  sailing
farther  in  this  northern  direction,  or  he  would  have
forestalled  some  of  his  most  distinguished  follow-
ers. BaflEin's  Bay  would  now  bear  the  name  of  John
Davis.  A  few  days  before,  when  he  was  ofi"  the  Green-
land coast  in  latitude  67°,  he  believed  that  he  saw  the
American  shore.  But  he  was  evidently  deceived.  The
distance  is  two  hundred  miles,  and  the  feat  is  impos-
sible. None  of  the  phenomena  of  the  arctic  regions
can  render  it  likely.  What  Davis  really  saw  was
the  almost  solid  ice  field,  witli  which  he  had  soon  to
engage  in  a  most  desperate  struggle.  He  never
reached  the  latitude  of  67°  on  the  American  side,  and


INTRODUCTION.  CXVII

was  therefore  unable  to  correct  his  mistake.     To  this
mistake  Davis'  Strait  probably  owes  its  name — a  name
singularly  inappropriate  for  a  passage  of  such  im-
mense width.    Davis  now  tried  to  sail  westward  with-
out giving  up  the  high  latitude  he  had  reached.    But
this  proved  impossible.     He  met  with   the   eternal
enemy  of  arctic  exploration,  the  ice.     In  spite  of  this
obstacle  he  advanced,  on  the  1st  of  July,  forty  four
miles    in  nearly  a  western  direction,  deflecting  but
slightly  to  the  south.     But  he  was  obliged  to  give  up
that  advantage.     Westerly  and  north-westerly  winds
drove  the  ice  straight  against  him.    He  had  to  retreat
to  the  Greenland   coast.     The  13th  of  July  he  was
in  about  the  same  place  as  he  had  been  sixteen  or
seventeen  days  before,  in  latitude  67°  50 ,  off"  Green-
land.    Now  he   found  the   sea   sufficiently  open   to
proceed  at  least  in  a  south-westerly  direction.     He
crossed  the  strait  in  five  days,  from  the  14th  to  the
17th  of  July.     On  the  17tli  he  was  off"  the  American
shore,  in  latitude  65°  30'.     Remaining  in  that  neigh-
bourhood he  reached,  the  19th,  Mount  Raleigh,  the
20th,  the  mouth  of  Cumberland  Strait.     From  the
20th   to   the   23rd   he  explored   Cumberland  Strait,
hoping  to  find  there  the  passage.     But  he  met  with
a  solid  barrier  of  ice,  and  had  to  return.    This  voyage
out  of  the  strait  w^as  partly  impeded  by  calms,  and  re-
quired six  more  days,  to  the  29th  of  July.     They  now
sailed  to  the  south,  along  the  American  side  of  Davis'
Strait,  and  passed  the  30th  across  the  mouth  of  Fro-
bisher's  Strait,  the  31st  of  July  and  the  1st  of  August
across  the  mouth  of  tludson's  Strait.     "  Which  inlet


CXVni  INTRODUCTION.

or  gulfe  this  afternoone  (31st)  and  in  the  night  (31st
• — 1st  of  August)  we  passed  over,  where,  to  our  great
admiration,  we  saw  the  sea  falling  down  into  the
gulfe  with  a  mighty  overfall  and  roaring,  and  with
divers  circular  motions  like  whirlpools,  in  such  sort
as  forcible  streams  pass  through  the  arches  of
bridges."  His  further  progress  down  to  52°  40'  offers
no  new  geographical  interest.  Davis  reached  home
the  15th  of  September,  1587.

After  his  return  he  expressed  the  liveliest  hope  of
finding  a  passage  to  the  north,  beyond  the  latitude  of
73°.  But  the  attack  of  the  Armada  in  1588,  and  the
death  of  Walsingham,  which  occurred  soon  after-
wards, deprived  him  of  the  opportunity  to  follow  up
his  discoveries.

Davis'  journals  are  the  only  ones  of  all  those  left
by  early  north-western  explorers,  where,  with  a  little
attention,  every  point  can  be  clearly  made  out.  Had
they,  like  the  confused  descriptions  of  Frobisher's
voyages,  been  published  immediately  after  the  navi-
gator's return,  he  would  soon  have  found  a  successor.
They  appeared  in  print  in  1599,  and  in  1601  George
Weymouth  offered  to  the  East  India  Company  to
undertake  for  them  a  north-western  expedition.  So
confident  was  he  of  success,  that  in  case  of  failure  he
waived  all  claim  to  pay  or  remuneration.

Weymouth  sailed  the  2nd  of  May,  1602.  He
reached  the  south  of  Greenland  the  18th  of  June,
crossed  Davis'  Strait  in  a  westerly  and  north-westerly
direction,  and  arrived  the  28th  off  the  American
shore,  in  latitude  63°  53'.     Weymouth  now  sailed  to


INTRODUCTION.  CXIX

the  north,  hoping  to  find  the  open  water  indicated
by  Davis,  and  resolved  to  winter  between  68'  and
70'  shonld  it  be  reqnired.  He  had  arrived  in  hxti-
tnde  68°  53',  when  a  mutiny  broke  out  among  his
crew,  who  refused  to  advance  any  further.  Wey-
mouth had  committed  the  mistake  of  accepting  the
companionship  of  a  clergyman  named  John  Cart-
wright,  who  possessed  the  reputation  of  being  fami-
liar with  geographical  matters,  and  who  gained  great
influence  over  the  crew.  The  presumption  and
cowardice  of  this  man  have  blighted  Weymouth's
fame.  Unable  to  proceed  as  he  judged  best,  Wey-
mouth had  to  retrace  his  steps.  The  25th  of  July  he
arrived  at  Hatton's  Headland,  in  61°  40',  the  north-
ern entrance  to  Hudson's  Bay.  According  to  his
own  words,  he  sailed  "  an  hundred  leagues  west  and
by  south"  into  the  strait.  There  must  be  either  a
slight  exaggeration  in  the  distance,  or  the  statement
as  regards  the  course  must  be  slightly  incorrect.  The
latter  is,  indeed,  the  case  ;  this  the  journal  clearly
shows.  But  there  is  no  reason  to  pass  on  Weymouth
the  severe  verdict,  that  he  iwetends  to  have  done  a  thing
which  is  impossible;  a  verdict  first  pronounced  by  Fox,
whose  acquaintance  with  the  south  of  Hudson's  Strait
was  very  imperfect ;  then  confirmed  by  Sir  John  Bar-
row, who  probably  did  not  take  the  trouble  to  look
into  a  map,  and  then  repeated  by  others.  That  Wey-
mouth really  sailed  a  considerable  distance  into  Hud-
son's Strait  does  not  allow  of  a  doubt,  nor  is  it  doubtful
that  he  "lighted  Hudson  into  the  strait,"  as  Fox,  with
greater  justice,  expresses  it.  Weymouth's  later  pro-
ceedings are  not  of  any  geographical  interest.


CXX  INTRODUCTION.

After  Weymouth,  and  before  Hudson,  only  one
more  voyage  in  search  of  a  north-west  passage  was
undertaken.  It  was  performed  by  John  Knight,  in
1606.     It  led  to  no  result  whatever.

We  have  now  to  go  back  a  period  of  more  than
half  a  century,  and  to  speak  of  the  opening  and
progress  of  the  search  for  a  north-east  passage,
down  to  the  time  when  Hudson  was  engaged  in
the  realization  of  this  idea.  We  have  already  re-
peatedly had  occasion  to  allude  to  this  matter,  and
especially  to  point  out  the  principal  circumstances
which  afforded  Sebastian  Cabot  the  opportunity
again  to  exert  himself  in  behalf  of  English  com-
merce. On  a  former  page  of  the  present  introduc-
tion we  have  narrated  the  first  events  in  Sebastian
Cabot's  life.  There  we  left  him.  It  will,  perhaps,
be  best  to  give  in  a  few  lines  a  summary  of  his
career,  until  he  finally  fixed  his  residence  in  England.
We  have  seen  that  he  arrived  in  this  country  with
his  father;  that  in  1497  he  found  North  America ;
that  in  1498  he  began  the  search  for  a  north-west
passage,  and  probably  discovered  Hudson's  Strait.
From  1498  to  1512  his  movements  are  uncertain.  In
1512  he  entered  the  Spanish  service,  became  a  mem-
ber of  the  Council  of  the  Indies,  and  was  to  under-
take voyages  for  the  Spaniards.  Preparations  were
made  for  an  expedition  in  spring  1516.  But  the  politi-
cal changes  which  took  place  at  the  time  prevented  it,
and  Cabot  again  went  to  England.  He  undertook  a
second  voyage  in  search  of  a  north-west  passage,  pro-
bably in  1517,  and  then  discovered  Davis'  Strait,  up


INTRODUCTION.  CXXl

to  67°  30'.  After  his  return  Cardinal  Wolsey  wished
to  employ  him.  The  negociations  led  to  nothing,  and
he  again  returned  to  Spain,  resuming  his  old  dignity
and  becoming  in  addition  pilot-major.  In  1523,  tired
as  it  seems  of  the  Spanish  service,  he  secretly  made
overtures  to  Venice.  Though  very  anxious  to  serve
that  city,  which  he  considered  as  his  home,  insur-
mountable difficulties  preveijted  his  doing  so,  and
he  remained  the  pilot-major  of  Spain.  In  1526  he
undertook,  for  the  Spanish  crown,  an  expedition  to
the  Moluccas  ;  but  he  only  reached  the  La  Plata
river,  where  he  remained  for  five  years  exploring  the
surrounding  country.  From  1531  to  his  final  return
to  England,  no  voyages  of  his  are  on  record,  nor  does
he  seem  to  have  performed  any  during  that  time.
In  1548  he  arrived  in  England.  Edward  VI,  a
prince  of  great  promise,  who,  in  spite  of  his  youth,
fully  comprehended  that  England,  to  become  a  great
power,  must  have  its  fair  portion  of  the  world's  com-
merce, very  gladly  received  Sebastian  Cabot  into  his
service  and  granted  him  a  salary,  liberal  for  those
days,  of  £166.

When  Cabot,  in  1522  and  1523,  made  overtures
to  the  Venetian  government,  it  was  his  intention  to
point  out  to  them  what  he  then  believed  to  be  by  far
the  most  advantageous  route  to  the  Indies.  All  the
roads  to  India  which  are  followed  at  the  present  day
were  then  considered  the  special  properties  of  Spain
and  Portugal ;  and  these  two  powers,  the  most  com-
manding in  Europe,  had  the  means  and  the  will  to
defend  that  property.    The  scheme  of  the  north-west


CXXU  INTRODUCTION.

passage  had  probably  been  given  up  by  Cabot  as
hopeless,  at  least  in  a  commercial  point  of  view.  But
there  yet  remained  one  chance  of  a  short  way  to
eastern  Asia,  namely,  by  the  north-east.  Even  now,
knowing,  as  we  do,  the  great  northern  elevation
of  the  coast  of  Siberia,  the  shortest  line  across  sea
that  we  could  draw  from  any  part  of  Europe  to
China  would  pass  by  Nova  Zembla,  and  would  lead
us  to  the  north-east.  But  those  north-eastern  parts
were  absolutely  unknown  to  Cabot.  Misinterpreting
some  passages  in  Pliny,  Cornelius  Nepos,  and  other
ancient  writers,  then  the  only  available  sources  of  in-
formation with  regard  to  the  north-east,  Sebastian
Cabot  concluded  the  distance  from  Europe  to  China
by  that  route  to  be  much  shorter  than  it  really  is.
He  was,  moreover,  convinced  that  the  north-eastern
seas  were  not  only  navigable,  but  had,  in  fact,  been
navigated  by  the  ancients.  On  these  erroneous  assump-
tions, he  founded  the  plan  of  searching  for  a  route  to
China  by  the  north-east.  His  wish  thus  to  benefit
Venice  remained,  however,  a  jmim  dcsidcrium.  The
Venetian  ambassador  Contarini,  with  whom  he  en-
tered into  negociations,  plainly  told  him  that  Venice
could  not  venture  to  make  opposition  to  the  Spanish
and  Portuguese  commerce,  because  these  powers
commanded  the  Strait  of  Gibraltar,  and  could  pre-
vent both  the  departure  and  the  return  of  the  Vene-
tian vessels  should  they  attempt  any  such  under-
taking. Cabot,  therefore,  stored  up  the  idea  in  his
mind.  It  Avas  after  his  return  to  England  that  the
necessities    of    English    commerce,    which    we    have


INTRODUCTION.  CXXlll

already  described,  offered  him  an  opportunity  of
carrying  out  his  favourite  phm  :  if  not  for  Venice,
at  least  for  a  country  "which  he  viewed  Avith  less
repugnance  than  he  must  have  harboured  towards
Spain.

The  commercial  association  to  which  his  scheme
gave  rise,  that  of  the  Merchant  Adventurers,  has
passed  through  a  most  brilliant  career  and  is  still  in
existence.  Their  earliest  proceedings,  and  those  of
the  Dutch  who  followed  them,  have  met  with  more
attention  from  geographical  scholars  than  perhaps
any  other  similar  subject  has  done.  We  jDOssess  espe-
cially two  excellent  works,  one  by  Dr.  Von  Hamel,
the  other  by  Dr.  Beke  :  the  latter  among  the  collections
of  the  Hakluyt  Society.  There  is  now  hardly  left  room
for  any  new  investigations.  It  will  therefore  be  easy
for  us  to  do  what  we  shall  attempt  in  the  next  few
pages,  namely,  to  point  out  how  the  way  which  Hud-
son followed  in  his  first  voyages  had  been  prepared
by  his  predecessors.

The  first  north-eastern  expedition  which  was  sent
out  by  the  Company  of  Merchant  Adventurers  sailed
from  Ratcliff,  the  10th  of  May,  1553.  It  consisted
of  three  ships,  all  with  equally  auspicious  names,
the  Bona  Esperanza,  Bona  Confidential  and  Edward
Bonaventure.  But  the  names  of  the  two  first  ships
were  sadly  to  be  belied.  Sir  Hugh  Willoughby,
captain-general  of  the  fleet,  was  driven  with  these
two  ships  far  out  to  sea,  and  at  length  put  into  a
small  haven  on  the  coast  of  Lapland,  near  the  mouth
of  the  river  Warsina,  where  the  entire  crews  of  both


CXXIV  INTRODUCTION.

vessels,  amounting  in  all  to  seventy  souls,  perished
from  cold  and  hunger.

Before  meeting  with  his  untimely  end,  Willoughby,
on  the  14th  of  August,  "  descried  land,  which  land
(he  says  in  a  note  found  written  in  one  of  the  two
ships)  we  bore  with  all,  hoising  out  our  boat  to  dis-
cover what  land  it  might  be ;  and  the  boat  could  not
come  to  land,  the  water  was  so  shoale,  where  was
very  much  ice  also,  but  there  was  no  similitude  of
habitations  ;  and  this  land  lyeth  from  Seynam  east
and  by  north  160  leagues,  being  in  latitude  72  de-
grees. Then  we  plyed  to  the  northward."  Dr.  Beke,
whom  we  have  literally  followed  in  this  description
of  Willoughby's  voyage,  goes  on  to  show  that  the
land  discovered  by  Willoughby  was  a  part  of  Nova
Zembla,  now  called  the  Goose  Coast.  For  a  long
time  English  geographers  contended  that  Willoughby
had  discovered  Spitzbergen.  This  most  indefensible
theory  has  found  its  way  into  Purchas'  notes  to
Hudson's  voyages.  We  shall  speak  of  its  origin  in
our  geographical  review.

Richard  Chancellor,  pilot-major  of  Willoughby's
fleet,  was  far  more  fortunate  than  his  hapless  chief.  In
the  third  vessel,  the  Edtvard  Bonaventurc,  commanded
by  Stephen  Burrough,  he  succeeded  in  entering  the
Bay  of  St.  Nicholas,  since  better  known  as  the  White
Sea,  and  on  the  24th  of  August,  1553,  reached  in
safety  the  western  mouth  of  the  Dwina,  wlicnce  he
proceeded  overland  to  the  court  of  the  Emperor  of
Muscovy.  The  result  was  the  foundation  of  the  com-
mercial and  political  relations  between  England  and


INTRODUCTION.  CXXV

Russia,  which  have  subsisted  with  but  brief  inter-
ruptions up  to  the  present  day.

Shortly  after  Chancellor  liad  brought  his  section
of  Willoughby's  expedition  to  so  successful  an  issue,
the  Company  of  Merchant  Adventurers,  by  whom
the  three  ships  had  been  fitted  out,  received  a  charter
of  incorporation,  bearing  date  February  6th,  1  and  2
Ph.  and  Mar.  (1554-1555)  ;  and  subsequently,  in  the
eighth  year  of  Queen  Elizabeth  (1566),  they  obtained
an  act  of  Parliament,  in  which  they  are  styled  "  the
Fellowship  of  English  Merchants  for  Discovery  of
New  Trades,"  a  title  under  which  they  still  continue
incorporated,  though  they  are  better  known  by  the
designation  of  the  "  Muscovy"  or  "  Russia  Company."

It  is  not  here  the  phice  to  discuss  the  general  pro-
ceedings of  the  Russia  Company,  important  though
they  be,  and  highly  deserving  of  being  made  the  sub-
ject of  special  investigation  All  that  we  have  to  do
is  to  notice  the  expeditions  which  were  undertaken
under  the  auspices  of  that  company,  for  the  purpose
of  exploring  the  seas  bounding  the  Russian  empire
on  the  north,  with  a  view  to  the  discovery  of  a  north-
east passage  to  China.

Of  these  expeditions,  the  first  was  that  of  Stephen
Burrough,  who  had,  in  1555,  been  the  master  of
Richard  Chancellor's  ship,  the  Edward  Bonaventure^
and  who  was,  in  1556,  dispatched  in  the  pinnace
Searchthrift^  to  make  discovery  towards  the  river  Ob.

Dr.  Beke,  whom  we  have  again  literally  followed
for  the  whole  of  the  preceding  page,  now  goes  on  to
describe  in  detail  the  voyage  of  the  Scarchthrlft.    But


CXXVl  INTRODUCTION.

this  expedition  is  of  much  less  importance  for  our
subject  than  for  his.  The  following  summary  is  suf-
ficient for  our  purpose.  Burrough  left  Gravesend
the  23rd  of  April,  passed  the  North  Cape  the  23rd  of
May,  reached  Kola  the  9th  of  June  ;  and  then  pro-
ceeded, in  company  with  some  native  boats,  to  explore
Nova  Zcmbla.  For  the  sake  of  greater  clearness,  it
is,  perhaps,  best  to  observe,  that  Nova  Zembla,  or
Novaya  Zemlya,  is  a  group  of  islands  in  shape  of  a
crescent.  The  crescent  has  on  its  outer  (western)
side  the  Spitzbergen  Sea,  on  its  inner  (eastern)  side
the  Sea  of  Kara,  and  forms  the  boundary  between
those  two  seas.  The  southern  end  of  the  crescent
bends  towards  the  mouth  of  the  river  Petchora.  The
northern  extremity  points  towards  Cape  Taimyr.
This  northern  extremity  is  in  latitude  77°,  and  in
nearly  the  same  longitude  with  the  mouth  of  the
river  Oby.  The  Nova  Zembla  group  consists  of  four
larger  and  several  smaller  islands.  The  names  of  the
larger  ones  are,  according  to  Dr.  Beke's  nomencla-
ture, Vaigats  for  the  most  southern,^  Novaya  Zemlya
Proper  for  the  next,  Matthew's  Land  for  the  fol-
lowing, and  Liitke  and  Barents'  Land  for  the  most
northern.  These  islands  are  separated  from  each
other  by  straits,  more  or  less  narrow.  The  ex-
ploration of  the  islands,  and  the  discovery  of  the
straits  between  them,  is  the  principal  point  of  in-
terest in  most  of  the  early  north-eastern  voyages  ;
for  the  Nova  Zembla  group  forms  a  natural  barrier

^  Dr.  Bcke  does  not  consider  Vaigats  as  part  of  Nova  Zembla,
but  Mr,  Scorosby  docs.


INTRODUCTION.  CXXVU

upon  which  the  navigator  must  strike  when  he  wislies
to  penetrate  to  China  by  a  north-easterly  route,  and
his  first  efforts  must  be  towards  the  crossing  of  this
barrier.  All  the  seamen  of  whom  we  have  to  speak
were  obliged  to  make  that  attempt.  The  first  of
them,  AVilloughby,  merely  touched  Nova  Zcmbla.
Others,  like  Brunei  and  Hudson,  made  useless  efforts
to  penetrate  through  frozen  straits  and  bays,  and  then
returned.  The  most  successful  navigators  discovered
the  open  passages  between  the  islands,  and  the  bold-
est of  all,  WilHam  Barents,  sailed  along  the  western
side  of  the  whole  group,  rounded  its  northern  point,
and  wintered  on  the  north-eastern  shore.  But  even
those  who  were  fortunate  enough  to  penetrate  beyond
Nova  Zembla  and  into  the  Sea  of  Kara,  made  after-
wards but  little  progress.  That  sea  is,  by  Polar  cur-
rents, continually  filled  with  close  packed  ice.  Only
two  or  three  ships  are  known  to  have  penetrated
through  it  and  to  have  reached  the  mouth  of  the
Oby.  The  Russians  themselves,  though  at  home  in
those  waters,  and  of  notorious  courage  and  expe-
rience in  this  kind  of  navigation,  have  as  yet  been
unable  to  explore  the  whole  east  coast  of  Nova  Zembla.
Stephen  Burrough's  north-eastern  explorations  be-
gan, as  we  have  said,  the  9th  of  June,  1556.  Nothing
memorable  happened  to  him  before  the  25th  of  July,
when  he  discovered  a  small  island  between  the  main-
land of  Russia,  and  Vaigats,  the  most  southern  of  the
four  larger  Nova  Zembla  islands.  His  new  discovery
was  called  St.  James's  Island.  Then  sailing  to  the
north,  he  found  Vaigats  the  31st  of  July.  He  coasted


CXXVlll  INTRODUCTION.

along  the  western  side  of  Vaigats,  and  the  3rd  of
August  he  reached  its  northern  point.  The  4th,  he
sailed  through  the  strait  betAveen  Vaigats  and  Nova
Zerabla  Proper,  which  is  therefore  called  Burrough's
Strait.  He  had  now  entered  the  Kara  Sea.  But  there
his  success  ended.  He  could  not  advance  against  the
ice,  and  had  to  return  the  5th  of  August,  1556.  He
arrived  at  Archangel  the  11th  of  September,  1556.

A  long  time  elapsed  before  the  search  was  renewed.
The  Muscovy  Company  had  so  unexpected  a  success
in  the  country  they  were  trading  with,  that  they
found  full  employment  and  a  satisfactory  reward  for
their  labours.  Their  agents  also  learned  in  Russia
that  an  overland  route  to  China  existed,  and  carefully
noted  down  its  different  stages  and  stations.  All  this
diverted  their  minds  from  the  purpose  for  which  the
company  had  originally  been  established.  Still  the
search  for  a  north-east  passage  was  not  entirely  given
up.  In  1568  a  commission  was  issued  to  three  ser-
vants of  the  company  who  were  then  in  Russia,
Bassendine,  Woodcock,  and  Browne,  to  search  to  the
east  and  to  the  w^est  of  Nova  Zcmbla.  Nothing  is
known  of  the  success  of  this  expedition,  nor  even
vs^hether  it  started.  Twelve  years  elapsed  before  the
next  expedition  was  undertaken  of  which  we  have
any  record.

The  31st  of  May,  1580,  Arthur  Bet  and  Charles
Jackman,  two  captains  in  the  service  of  the  Muscovy
Company,  started  from  Harwich,  in  two  small  barks,
of  forty  and  twenty  tons  burden.  Having  sailed  toge-
ther as  far  as  Wardhuus  (Lapland  coast),  Pet  and


INTRODUCTION.  CXXIX

Jackman  separated  the  24th  of  June,  appointhig  the
island  of  Vaigats  as  their  meeting  place.  Pet  reached,
on  the  4th  of  July,  Nova  Zembla  Proper,  in  latitude
71°  38'.  He  then  sailed  to  the  south,  and  was,  on  the
10th  of  July,  off  Vaigats  Island.  There  he  remained
till  the  14th.  He  then  tried  for  a  passage  by  the
north  of  Vaigats,  but  failed  to  discover  the  strait
which  Burrough  had  found.  He  now  steered  to  the
south-west,  and  reached  the  mouth  of  the  Petchora
on  the  17th.  Thence  he  started  again  to  the  east.
He  kept  close  to  the  Russian  shore,  and  discovered
the  strait  between  Vaigats  and  the  mainland,  which
is  therefore  called  Pet  Strait.  The  19th  of  July,  Pet
was  in  the  Kara  Sea.  But  the  pack  was  again  as
close  as  it  had  been  in  Burrough's  time,  and  it  was
impossible  to  move  through  it.  After  five  days  of
vain  struggle  with  that  obstinate  enemy,  Pet  was
joined  by  his  companion,  Jackman,  who  had  also
found  his  way  into  the  Sea  of  Kara.  The  two  barks,
of  forty  and  twenty  tons,  now  united  their  efforts,
and  tried  to  force  their  way  onward  to  China.  Three
more  days  were  spent  in  this  vain  labour.  On  the  28th
of  July  Pet  and  Jackman  resolved  to  return  to  Vaigats,
and  then  to  deliberate  on  their  future  proceedings.
But  they  were  now  in  the  middle  of  the  pack,  some
of  the  floes  of  which  were  so  large  that  their  boun-
dary could  not  be  seen.  It  required  the  unremitting
labours  of  seventeen  anxious  days  to  carry  them  back
the  small  distance  they  had  advanced  into  the  Sea  of
Kara.  They  reached  Vaigats  on  the  15th  of  August,
and  had  passed  back  through  Pet  Strait  by  the  20th


CXXX  INTRODUCTION.

of  the  same  month.  Pet  reached  home  on  the  26th
of  December,  Jackman  wintered  in  Norway,  and
perished  on  his  homeward  voyage  the  following  spring.

This  is  the  last  well  authenticated  English  voyage
in  search  of  a  north-east  passage,  anterior  to  those  of
Hudson  in  1607  and  1608.  There  is,  however,  strong
reason  to  believe,  that  before  the  year  1584  an  Eng-
lish vessel  actually  sailed  through  the  Kara  Sea
and  reached  the  mouth  of  the  Oby,  where  she  suf-
fered shipwreck.  The  crew  are  said  to  have  been
slain  by  the  natives,  who  thought  them  to  be  robbers.
The  agents  of  the  Muscovy  Company  also  obtained
some  extremely  interesting  information  with  regard
to  the  routes  usually  followed  by  the  Russians  from
the  Petchora  to  the  Oby,  both  along  the  Russian
shore  and  across  Nova  Zembla ;  and  their  hope
of  a  passage  was  maintained,  in  spite  of  repeated
failures.

No  actual  attempt  of  theirs  is,  however,  on  record,
between  1584  and  1607.  But  almost  at  the  very
time  when  the  long  lapse  of  their  efforts  in  this
direction  begins,  another  nation  appears  on  the  scene,
namely,  the  Dutch.  This  nation  was  destined  to  be,
for  two  hundred  years,  the  rival  of  England's  mari-
time power,  and  their  rivalry  first  began  in  the  frozen
seas  off  Nova  Zembla.  The  explorations  which  they
made  there  at  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century
are  still,  and  very  justly,  reckoned  among  the  national
glories  of  the  Dutch.  Other  nations  have  not  failed  to
acknowledge  their  title  to  universal  admiration.  The
lluklnyt  Society,  in  especial,  has  devoted  to  them  one


INTRODUCTION.  CXXXl

of  its  most  remarkable  volumes.  These  explorations
were  the  principal  lights  on  Hudson's  way  to  the
north-east,  and  we  must  therefore  again  dwell  upon
them,  although  they  have  been  so  thoroughly  inves-
tigated by  Dr.  Beke  in  the  work  repeatedly  referred
to.

We  have,  on  a  former  page,  spoken  of  the  tide  of
emigration  from  the  southern  provinces  of  the  Nether-
lands, caused  by  Alba's  persecutions.  We  have  also
said  that  many  of  the  most  vigorous  elements  of  that
stream,  after  having  been  scattered  over  all  parts  of
Europe,  gathered  again  and  settled  in  the  northern
provinces,  especially  in  Holland  and  Zealand,  when
these  parts  became  free  from  the  Spanish  yoke.  One
of  the  men  who  thus  left  Belgium,  strayed  far  abroad,
and  afterwards  went  to  Holland,  was  Oliver  Brunei,
a  native  of  Brussels,  whom  we  meet,  in  1580,  at  the
mouth  of  the  river  Petchora,  bent  on  the  search  for
a  north-east  passage.

Alba's  persecutions  began  in  1567  and  lasted  till
1573.  During  the  same  period,  and  for  several  years
afterwards,  the  frontier  provinces  of  Russia  and  Swe-
den were  desolated  by  the  fierce  contentions  between
those  two  empires.  The  Swedes  called  to  their  flags
a  number  of  foreigners,  mostly,  or  perhaps  all,  Pro-
testants. Scotch  and  Germans  they  were  said  to  be,
but  under  these  names  there  were  also  comprised
adventurers  from  other  countries.  Among  these
probably  was  Oliver  Brunei.  He  was  made  a  prisoner
by  the  Russians,  and  had,  in  1580,  been  for  several
years  in  the  service  of  two  Russian  merchants,  the


CXXXU  INTRODUCTION.

one  called  Yakow,  the  other  Anikyi.  A  Swedish
shipwright,  probably  also  a  prisoner,  was  likewise
in  the  service  of  these  Russians.  At  that  time  the
factors  of  the  English  Muscovy  Company  were  con-
tinually making  inquiries  about  the  roads  to  the
mouth  of  the  Oby,  and  beyond  it  to  Cathay.  This
roused  the  attention  of  the  Russians,  and  the  two
merchants  whom  we  have  named  hurried  to  follow
the  example  as  soon  as  the  opportunity  offered.
They  employed  the  skilful  prisoners  to  construct  and
navigate  for  them  two  vessels,  fit  for  sailing  in  shal-
low water.  Oliver  Brunei,  a  man,  as  it  seems,  of  no
very  high  scientific  attainments,  but  of  good  powers
of  observation,  explored  the  whole  coast  of  Russia,
from  the  mouth  of  the  Petchora  to  the  mouth  of  the
Oby.  He  also  went  to  Vaigats  and  to  Nova  Zembla
Proper.  Having  thus  made  himself  useful  to  his
masters,  he  was  sent  by  them  to  Antwerp  to  hire  a
number  of  clever  sailors  for  further  exploration  of
the  north-eastern  route.  On  this  journey  he  arrived,
in  February,  1581,  on  the  island  of  Oesel,  in  the  gulf
of  Livonia.  In  Arensburg,  the  capital  of  that  island,
there  lived  a  man  called  John  Balak,  who  was  learned
in  geography.  Balak,  much  interested  by  Brunei's
account,  requested  him  to  call  on  Gerard  Mercator,
the  great  geographer,  a  Belgian  by  birth,  who  was
living  at  Duisburg,  in  Cleves.  Mercator  had  left  his
home  much  before  Alba's  time  ;  but  already  well
aware  that  his  liberal  opinions  in  matters  of  religion
(lie  was  nominally  a  Roman  Catholic,  but  had  singu-
lar notions  of  his  own)  would  expose  him  to  danger.


INTRODUCTION.  CXXXlll

The  letter  of  introduction  which  Brunei  received
from  Balak  was  afterwards  communicated  by  Merca-
tor  to  Richard  Hakluyt,  in  whose  collection  it  is  to
be  found.

It  is  not  clear  whether  Brunei  ever  went  to  An-
twerp for  his  employers.  He  may  not  have  known,
when  he  left  Russia,  that  Alexander  of  Parma  had
recently  made  an  end  to  the  reign  of  the  friends  of
independence  in  Belgium,  and'  that  it  would,  perhaps,
be  hazardous  to  return  there.  However  this  may  be,
we  afterwards  find  Brunei  connected  with  the  town  of
Enchuysen,  in  West  Friesland.^  He  undertook  a
voyage  to  the  river  Petchora,  in  a  vessel  from  Enc-
huysen, After  having  collected  much  valuable
merchandize,  he  lost  his  ship,  and  perhaps  his  life,  in
the  mouth  of  the  river.

The  town  of  Enchuysen  thus  became  engaged  in
the  north-eastern  scheme.  This  town  chanced  to
possess  at  the  time  a  number  of  distinguished  men,
who  required  but  an  impulse  to  engage  their  ideas
in  this  new  direction.  Among  these  were  Jacob
Valck,  the  treasurer  of  the  town;  Dr.  Francis  Maelson,
the  syndic  of  West  Friesland,  a  man  of  much  geo-
graphical learning  ;  Cornelis  Corneliszoon  Nai,  also
called  Menscheter,  or  Anthropophagus,  a  seaman  of
considerable  experience  ;  and  several  other  seamen,
whom  we  shall  have  occasion  to  notice.  Distinguished
before  all  his  fellow  citizens  was  Jan  Huighen  van
Linschoten,  whose  great  work  on  the  East  Indies  is

^  West  Friesland  borders  on  Holland,  and  forms  part  of  the
same  province  ;  it  may  almost  be  considered  as  a  part  of  Holland,


CXXXIV  INTRODUCTION.

still  a  standard  book  in  public  and  private  libraries.
Linschoten  lived  for  years  in  tbe  Portuguese  posses-
sions in  the  east,  and  made  himself  thoroughly  ac-
quainted with  their  resources.  He,  better  than  any
one  else,  was  able  to  understand  how  great  an  advan-
tage it  would  be  for  any  country  to  enter  into  com-
mercial connection  with  those  opulent  regions.

The  northern  provinces  of  the  Netherlands,  so
small  a  spot  on  the  map  of  Europe,  had  at  that  time
much  more  than  their  own  share  of  energy,  intelli-
gence, and  riches.  The  exiles  from  Belgium  and
other  refugees  were  crowded  together  in  their  new
home,  and  were  anxiously  seeking  a  vent  for  their
pent  up  energies.  Such  a  vent  the  north-eastern
scheme  aiforded.  In  the  chief  towns  of  Holland  and
Zealand  two  men  arose,  both  Belgian  emigrants,  who
led  the  minds  of  their  fellow  citizens  towards  these
ideas.  Balthasar  de  Moucheron,  an  Antwerp  mer-
chant, settled  in  Middelburg,  the  capital  of  Zealand,
had  long  been  trading  with  Russia.  The  route  to
the  White  Sea  was  familiar  to  his  captains  and  pilots.
The  above-mentioned  Enchuysen  sailors  were  all  in
his  service.  He  also  communicated  with  Maelson
and  Valck,  and  between  these  men  the  plan  of  a
north-eastern  expedition  was  brought  to  maturity.
At  Amsterdam  there  lived  the  celebrated  geographer
Peter  Plancius,  the  very  centre  of  the  Belgian  emi-
gration, an  ardent  Calvinist  preacher  and  divine,  and
one  of  the  great  geographical  scholars  of  the  age.
He,  before  all  others,  formed  with  deliberate  inten-
tion the  design   of  crippling  the  Spanish  power  by


INTROOUCTION.  CXXXV

rival  commerce,  and  for  that  purpose  he  founded  at
Amsterdam  a  school  of  navigation,  in  which  the
heroes  of  the  northern  and  of  the  first  eastern  voy-
ages of  the  Dutch  acquired  the  greater  part  of  their
theoretical  knowledge.  The  most  distinguished
among  his  pupils  were  Willem  Barents  and  Jacob
van  Heemskerk,  the  Davis  and  the  Drake  of  Holland.
It  was  in  the  year  1594  that  these  movements
yielded  their  first  great  result.  Moucheron  and  his
Enchuysen  friends  fitted  out  two  vessels,  the  Stvcm,
from  Ter  Ver,  in  Zealand  ;  the  Mercuri/,  from  En-
chuysen. Both  were  commanded  by  Enchuysen  men;
the  Swan,  by  Cornelis  Nai,  who  had  as  under-pilot
Pieter  Strickbolle.  With  them  went,  as  Mouche-
ron's  commercial  agent,  Francois  de  la  Dale,  a  rela-
tive of  Moucheron,  who  had  resided  several  years
in  Russia  ;  and  as  interpreter  a  Slavonian,  named
Splindler,  who  had  been  studying  at  Leyden.  The
Mercury  was  commanded  by  Brant  Tetgales,  with
Claes  Cornelizoon  as  mate,  both  of  Enchuysen.  Jan
Huyghen  van  Linschoten  accompanied  them  as
"  commis,"^  or  coopman,  filling,  on  board  the  Mer~

^  The  signification  of  this  word  seems  not  to  be  generally  under-
stood. Even  Dr.  Beke  has  been  somewhat  unjust  towards  Hul-
sius,  because  he  supposes  him  to  have  translated  it  very  incorrectly.
The  title  commis,  and  the  identical  one  of  coopman,  is  generally
translated  supercargo.  This  is  correct  enough  in  one  sense,  though
very  incorrect  in  another.  The  functions  of  a  commis  were  prin-
cipally commercial,  but  his  position  was  Infinitely  superior  to  that
of  a  supercargo  of  the  present  day.  When  ships  were  sent  out  to
open  commercial  intercourse  with  foreign  nations,  the  men  who  were
specially  charged  with  these  negociations  held  necessarily  a  high  rank


CXXXVl  INTRODUCTION.

curij^  the  same  position  which  De  la  Dale  held  on
board  the  Swan.  Peter  Plancius  and  his  friends  at
Amsterdam  roused  the  public  spirit  in  that  city,  and
the  Amsterdammers  likewise  fitted  out  a  vessel  for
the  north-eastern  search,  under  the  command  of
Plancius'  pupil,  Willem  Barents.

The  vessels  under  the  two  Enchuysen  men,  and
that  from  Amsterdam,  sailed  together  from  home
and  returned  home  together  ;  still  the  two  expedi-
tions may  almost  be  considered  as  distinct,  so  different
were  the  plans  which  they  followed.  Maelson  and  his
friends  seem  to  have  been  intent  on  adopting  in
every  respect  the  indications  of  Oliver  Brunei.  They
instructed  the  two  Enchuysen  captains  to  sail  through
Pet  Strait,  between  the  mainland  of  Russia  and  Vai-
gats ;  then  along  the  coast  of  the  Sea  of  Kara,  and

in  the  expedition.  Generally  they  had  full  powers  from  their  govern-
ment, and  were  diplomatic  as  well  as  commercial  agents.  They
■were  neither  the  subordinates  of  the  skipper,  nor  absolutely  his
superiors.  Each  disposed  of  the  resources  of  the  ship  for  the
special  business  with  which  he  was  entrusted ;  the  skipper  on  sea,
the  commis  in  port.  The  noble  nature  of  the  men  employed  on
the  arctic  expeditions  prevented  the  else  almost  unavoidable  con-
flicts between  these  two  kinds  of  authority.  Linschoten  and  Tet-
gales,  Nai  and  De  la  Dale,  Heemskerk  and  Barents,  always  agreed.
But  during  the  voyage  where  Cornells  Houtman  was  conwtis  on
board  the  Hollandia,  there  was  a  long  series  of  struggles  be-
tween the  two  authorities.  Cornelis  Houtman  was  at  last,  by
general  consent,  made  captain  of  the  whole  fleet.  This  fact,  with
which  Hulsius  was  acquainted,  seems  to  have  induced  him  to
translate  Linschotcn's  title  of  commis  by  Obcrster  ;  a  translation
which  is  not  quite  correct  when  applied  to  Linschoten,  but  not  by
any  means  so  erroneous  as  Dr.  Bcke  seems  to  think.


INTRODUCTION.  CXXXVll

then  to  the  Oby.  Plancius,  on  the  other  hand,
must  have  known  that  the  English  had  repeat-
edly tried  that  road  without  success.  He  consi-
dered it  as  impracticable,  and  his  pupil  was  in-
structed to  sail  along  the  Nova  Zembla  group,  then
to  round  it  by  the  north-east,  and  thus  to  reach
Cathay.  Each  party  followed  its  own  instructions.
They  all  sailed  together  to  Kilduyn,  on  the  Lapland
coast,  where  they  separated.  The  Enchuysen  captains
then  took  their  course  through  Pet  Strait,  which  they
named  Nassau  Strait,  as  if  it  had  been  a  new  discovery
of  their  own.  They  now  found  even  the  strait  pestered
with  ice,  and  had  some  difficulty  in  penetrating  through
it.  Still  greater  were  their  difficulties  in  the  Sea  of
Kara.  After  a  vain  attempt  to  follow  their  instructions
literally  and  to  keep  the  coast  in  sight,  they  had  to
return  to  the  strait.  Thence  they  afterwards  started
again,  induced  by  the  promising  aspect  of  the  ice,
and  in  fact  succeeded  in  crossing  the  Sea  of  Kara
in  a  north-easterly  direction.  They  mistook  Kara
Bay  for  the  mouth  of  the  river  Oby,  and  tried  to
convince  themselves  and  others  that  they  had  sailed
beyond  that  river.  Satisfied  with  that  imaginary  result,
and  unable  to  penetrate  any  further,  they  returned.
Near  the  Russian  coast  they  met  Willem  Barents,  who
had  also  followed  his  instructions.  He  had  sailed  along
the  whole  of  the  Nova  Zembla  group,  had  rounded
its  north-eastern  point,  and  had  reached  a  cluster  of
islands,  called  by  him  the  Orange  Islands,  off  the
north-eastern  extremity.  This  exploit  has  never  been
repeated,  except  afterwards  by  Barents  himself.    The


CXXXVlll  INTRODUCTION.

northern  and  north-eastern  parts  of  Nova  Zembla  are
yet  laid  down  from  his  surveys.  Still,  when  the  two
parties  arrived  at  home,  it  was  to  the  men  from
Enchuysen  that  the  greater  success  was  attributed ;
simply  because  they  advocated  their  claims  more
loudly  and  more  eloquently,  and  because  Linschoten,
Nai,  and  their  friends,  possessed  much  more  weight
than  Plancius  and  his  pupils,  who  were  sneered  at
as  theorists.

The  reports  brought  home  by  the  Zeeland  and
Enchuysen  ships  caused  a  general  commotion  through-
out the  country.  It  was  now  thought  certain,  that
China  could  be  reached  by  a  north-eastern  route  ;  and
a  much  larger  venture  was  made  than  the  former
one.  Seven  ships  were  fitted  out,  with  the  assistance
of  the  government ;  two  from  Amsterdam,  two  from
Zealand,  two  from  Enchuysen,  one  from  Rotterdam.
The  command  of  the  whole  fleet  was  entrusted  to
Nai.  Barents  commanded  the  two  Amsterdam  ves-
sels. The  ships  sailed  by  the  same  route,  which  had
so  often  been  followed  without  success.  They  entered
the  Kara  Sea  through  Vaigats  Straits.  After  a
protracted  struggle  with  the  ice,  they  were  obliged  to
return  without  even  having  made  any  new  discoveries.

Moucheron  and  the  Enchuysen  men  now  wisely
gave  up  the  scheme,  as  one  which  could  not  produce
any  satisfactory  result.  But  the  hopes  of  the  nation
had  been  too  much  roused  to  die  away  at  once.  Plan-
cius, at  Amsterdam,  especially,  thought  that  a  fair
trial  had  not  been  given  to  his  plan  of  sailing  much
farther  north  than  the  Enchuysen  and  Zealand  men


INTRODUCTION.  CXXXIX

had  done.  Barents  was  of  the  same  opinion.  Their
friends  at  Amsterdam  supported  them,  perhaps  in
some  degree  from  opposition  to  Enchuysen  and  Mid-
delburg.  But  the  government  were  unwilling  again
to  risk  the  resources  of  a  new  and  dangerously  placed
community,  and  refused  to  grant  them  any  assist-
ance. They  afforded  them,  however,  some  encourage-
ment in  a  new  manner,  which  has  since  been  success-
fully imitated  in  England.  Large  rewards  were  pro-
mised to  any  vessel  that  would  accomplish  the  voyage
to  China  by  the  north-east.  This  was  sufficient  to
induce  moneyed  men  to  risk  their  property,  sailors  to
risk  their  lives,  on  this  adventure.

Two  vessels  were  fitted  out  at  Amsterdam,  the  one
under  Jacob  van  Heemskerk  and  Willem  Barents,
the  other  under  John  Cornelis  Hyp.  Both  vessels  left
Amsterdam  the  10th  of  May,  1596.  In  the  begin-
ning of  June,  shortly  after  they  had  passed  the  North
Cape,  disputes  arose  between  R.yp  and  Barents.  Ryp
would  not  sail  towards  the  north  point  of  Nova  Zem-
bla,  but  kept  a  more  north-western  course ;  perhaps
with  the  intention  of  steering  straight  across  the
North  Pole,  perhaps  merely  from  opposition  to
Barents.  Barents  followed  Ryp,  and  their  course
brought  them  to  Bear  Island,  in  latitude  74°  80',
longitude  18°  40',  which  they  discovered  on  the  9th  of
June.  Their  voyage  from  the  9th  to  the  30th  is  not
very  clearly  indicated  in  the  logbook.  Indeed,  as  it  is
there  described  it  is  impossible.  According  to  Dr.
Beke's  and  Mr.  Peterman's  interpretation,  they  sailed
round   Spitzbergen    from    south-east   to    north-west,


CXl  INTRODUCTION.

then  to  the  west,  and  at  last  back  to  Bear  Island
from  north-west  to  south-east.  This  feat  seems  highly
improbable,  and  no  one  but  these  enthusiastic  ad-
mirers of  Barents  ever  imagined  it.  According  to
the  opinion  of  all  other  writers,  Barents  and  Ryp
explored  merely  the  western  side  of  Spitzbergen  up
to  its  most  northern  point,  and  perhaps  a  very  small
part  of  the  northern  shore.  Then  they  returned  to
Bear  Island.  This  view  of  the  case  is  borne  out  by
the  almost  contemporary  map  of  Hondius,  which
forms  part  of  the  present  collection.

Hondius'  map  was  specially  intended  as  an  illustra-
tion of  the  voyage  under  review.  Its  statements
were,  at  least  tacitly,  accepted  as  correct  by  Plancius
and  others,  who  had  means  of  knowing  the  facts  of
the  case.^  After  their  return  to  Bear  Island,  the  1st
of  July,  Ryp  and  Barents  separated  ;  Ryp  to  renew
the  search  from  the  north-west  of  Spitzbergen  east-
ward, Barents  to  round  the  northern  point  of  Nova
Zembla,  as  he  was  ordered  to  do ;  of  Ryp's  fur-
ther proceedings,  no  satisfactory  account  remains.
Barents  succeeded,  on  the  15th  of  August,  in  round-
ing the  north-point,  and  in  sailing  a  short  distance  to
the  south-east.     But  the  ice  of  the  Kara  Sea  soon

'  See  the  map  :  Tabula  Geogr.  in  qua  admirnnd(e  naviffationis
cursus  et  recw'sus  desujnatur.  The  admiranda  navhjatio  is  Barents'
third  voyage,  the  course  of  which  is  indicated  on  the  map.  The
work  in  which  the  map  first  appeared,  Pontanus'  Description  of
Amstej-dam,  was  first  published  in  1611;  a  Dutch  translation,
witli  the  same  maps,  appeared  in  1614.  Pontanus  himself  had  paid
very  considerable  attention  to  northern  discoveries,  and  was  one
of  the  most  strenuous  advocates  of  the  north-eastern  passage.


INTRODUCTION.  Cxli

arrested  his  progress.  On  the  26th  of  August,  he
had  to  seek  refuge  on  the  north-eastern  coast  of
Nova  Zembha  ;  and  unable  either  to  advance  or  to
return  through  the  ice,  he  was  obliged  to  winter  in
this  dreary  region.  Entirely  unprepared  for  so  highly
dangerous  an  undertaking,  both  he  and  his  crew  had
to  undergo  the  severest  sufferings,  to  which  Barents
succumbed  the  20th  of  June,  1597.  The  return
voyage  of  the  crew  under  the  abk  command  of  Jacob
Heemskerk,  is  a  deservedly  celebrated  adventure,
which,  however,  offers  no  new  fact  of  geographical
interest.

No  more  north-eastern  expeditions  were  under-
taken before  the  year  1607.  The  history  both  of
the  north-western  and  north-eastern  search  has  thus
been  brought  down  to  Hudson's  time.  We  have
now  to  sum  up  the  result  of  all  these  expeditions,
and  to  see  when  and  by  whom  the  various  coasts  had
been  discovered  and  explored.  Afterwards  we  shall
have  to  inquire  how  the  geographical  results  gained
by  these  voyages  presented  themselves  to  the  minds
of  Hudson  and  of  his  contemporaries.  The  voyages
which  we  have  recorded  were  nearly  all  directed  to
the  arctic  regions.  In  summing  them  up,  we  shall
have  to  wander  half  round  the  North  Pole.  It  seems
best  to  begin  where  our  review  of  the  voyages  ended,
namely,  on  the  north-eastern  extremity  of  Europe.

The  Nova  Zembla  group  and  the  adjoining  waters
had  formed  the  scene  of  frequent  voyages.  Some  of
the  mariners  had  penetrated  into  the  Sea  of  Kara,
and  had  fought  glorious  battles  against  its  redoubt-


Cxlii  INTRODUCTION.

able  icefields.  Oliver  Brunei  had,  about  1580,  even
passed  beyond  the  Kara  Sea,  exploring  the  Rus-
sian shore  on  the  land  side,  from  the  mouth  of  the
Petchora  to  the  mouth  of  the  Oby.  A  still  more
extraordinary  feat  is  recorded  of  an  English  vessel,
which,  about  the  same  period,  performed  the  voyage
from  the  Petchora  to  the  Oby  by  sea.  The  eastern
shore  of  the  Kara  Sea  had,  besides,  been  touched  by
the  Enchuysen  and  Zeeland  vessels  of  the  first  Dutch
expedition  in  1594.  These  are  the  explorations  in
the  southern  and  south-eastern  part  of  the  Kara  Sea.
Its  northern,  or  rather  north-western,  part  had  been
entered  in  1594,  and  still  farther  in  1596,  by  William
Barents.  Thus  a  part  of  the  south-eastern  and  of
the  north-eastern  shores  of  Nova  Zembla  had  been
visited.  The  remaining  part  of  the  east  coast  had
never  been  touched  by  Europeans.  The  only  navi-
gable strait  between  the  islands,  that  between  Nova
Zembla  Proper  and  Vaigats,  had  been  discovered  by
Burrough  in  1556.  The  strait  between  Vaigats  and
the  Russian  coast  had  become  perfectly  familiar  both
to  the  English  and  the  Dutch.  It  had  been  disco-
vered by  Pet  and  Jackman  in  1580,  and  about  the
same  time  by  Brunei.  Nine  Dutch  vessels  passed
through  it  in  1594  and  1595.  Some  vague  know-
ledge of  other  straits  and  bays  had  also  been  acquired,
mostly  by  indirect  information.  The  west  coast
of  Nova  Zembla  had  been  visited,  in  its  northern
part,  by  Burrough  and  Pet,  in  its  southern  part  by
Barents,  who  had  also  rounded  the  northern  point,
and  had,  as  already  stated,  entered  the  Kara  Sea  by


INTRODUCTION.  Cxliii

the  north-east.     He  had  there  discovered  the  Orange
Islands,  off  the  north-cast  coast  of  Nova  Zembla.

The  whole  Russian  coast,  along  the  Spitzbergen
and  White  Sea,  had  frequently  been  visited.  Kolguev
Island,  west  of  the  Petchora,  had  been  touched  by-
most  of  the  eastward  bound  mariners.  The  group  of
inhospitable  islands  on  the  boundary  line  of  eternal
ice,  between  80°  and  76°,  which  we  call  Spitsbergen,
had  been  found  in  1596,  and  the  western  shores  of
the  two  western  islands  had  been  explored.  In  the
same  year,  1596,  Bear  Island,  south  of  the  western
islands  of  the  Spitzbergen  group,  had  been  touched
on  its  western,  and  again  on  its  eastern  side.

Iceland,  the  next  country  we  fall  in  with,  had  been
colonized  by  the  ancient  Scandinavians.  In  more
recent  times,  it  had  very  frequently  been  visited  by
Englishmen  and  other  mariners  from  the  south,
though  the  expeditions  which  we  have  narrated  had
not  touched  it,  because  it  lies  out  of  the  track  both
of  the  north-western  and  the  north-eastern  search.
Two  vessels,  dispatched  on  this  special  service  by
Davis  in  1586,  had  sought  for  a  passage  to  the  North
Pole  between  Iceland  and  Greenland,  and  had  thus
sailed  along  the  east  side  of  the  great  arctic  con-
tinent. They  had,  however,  not  touched  Greenland
itself.

Greenland  had  been  colonized,  on  its  eastern  side,
by  the  Scandinavians.  These  colonies  had  been  lost,
and  their  inhabitants  had  perhaps  not  even  left
any  descendants.  They  seem  to  have  been  visited
by  John  of  Kolno,   in   1476,  and   in   the   sixteenth


Cxliv  INTRODUCTION.

century  by  their  bishops  and  by  Blefkenius.  No
recent  navigator  had  touched  any  part  of  the  east-
ern shore,  except  near  the  southern  point.  John
Davis  explored  the  south-eastern  coast  of  Green-
land, between  60°  and  61°.  He  also  rounded  the
southern  point,  and  sailed  up  along  the  western  side
to  about  61°.  This  portion  of  the  west  coast  had  also
been  touched  by  Frobisher,  ten  years  before  Davis.
Between  61°  and  64°  the  west  coast  had  never  been
seen  since  the  time  of  the  Scandinavians.  From  64°
up  to  73°  it  had  been  surveyed  by  Davis  in  1585,
1586,  and  1587.

Davis  Strait  had  first  been  crossed  by  the  ancient
Scandinavians,  at  a  very  remote  period.  It  had  again
been  discovered  by  Sebastian  Cabot  in  1517.  The
American  side  of  Davis'  Strait  was  known  to  the
Scandinavians.  Cabot  also  found  it  when  he  entered
the  strait  in  1517.  The  shore  between  64°  and
67°  30'  is  laid  down  upon  his  map.  Davis  had
reached  nearly  the  same  latitude,  at  least  within  a
degree.  He  had  also  explored  the  whole  American
coast  down  to  52°,  had  entered  three  of  the  inlets:
Cumberland  Inlet  in  63° ;  Davis'  Inlet  in  bQ)" ;  Ivuc-
toke  Inlet  in  54°  30' ;  he  had  also  surveyed  the
mouths  of  Frobisher's  and  of  Hudson's  Straits.

FroUshers  Strait  and  the  surrounding  islands  had
been  found  by  the  seaman  whose  name  the  strait  bears.

Hudson  s  Strait  had  been  discovered  by  Sebastian
Cabot  in  1498.  The  Portuguese  had  sailed  through
it  and  had  become  acquainted  with  part  of  Hudson's
Bay  between   1558  and  1569.     In   1577  Frobisher


INTRODUCTION.  Cxlv

had  by  chance  entered  the  strait.  In  1602  Wey-
mouth had  sailed  nearly  a  hundred  leagues  into  it,
from  Hatton's  Headland  to  the  neighbourhood  of
Hope's  Advance  Bay.

The  whole  cast  coast  of  North  America  from  38°
north  to  the  mouth  of  Hudson's  Strait,  had  been
surveyed  by  Sebastian  Cabot  in  1498,  and  part  of
it  before,  in  1497,  by  his  father  and  him.  Others
had  rediscovered  various  parts.  Thus  the  east  of
Newfoundland  had  been  explored  by  Cortereal  in
1501  ;  the  south  coast,  by  some  fishers  from  Nor-
mandy and  Brittany  in  1504  and  1508.  The  mouth
of  the  St.  Lawrence  had  also  been  visited  by  Corte-
real and  by  these  French  mariners.  The  river,  nearly
up  to  the  lakes,  and  all  the  surrounding  country,  had
been  thoroughly  explored  by  Jacques  Cartier  in  1534
and  1535,  and  afterwards  by  Roberval  and  Cartier.

The  sandbanks  near  the  mouth  of  the  St.  Latv-
rence^  and  the  fishing  stations  along  the  Newfound-
land coast,  were  frequented  by  the  English,  Portu-
guese, French,  and  Spaniards.  From  the  mouth  of
the  St.  Lawrence  down  to  38°  of  latitude  various
navigators  had  explored  the  coasts.  Verazzano,  in
1524,  sailed  from  latitude  34°  to  latitude  50°,  always
along  the  shore.  Gomez,  in  1525,  explored  the  coast
of  Rhode  Island,  New  York,  and  New  Jersey.  Both
Verazzano  and  Gomez  found  the  mouth  of  Hudson
River.  The  Spaniards  afterwards  sailed  along  that
shore,  and  marked  some  of  its  principal  points  as  con-
venient stations.  Two  of  the  islands  along  the  same
coast  were  also  found  ;  Martha's  Vineyard  (which  the


Cxlvi  INTRODUCTION.

ancient  Scandinavians  are  also  said  to  have  visited)
by  Verazzano  ;  Nantucket  by  the  Spaniards.

It  does  not  belong  to  our  purpose  to  proceed  any
further.  But  we  may  observe,  that  on  the  west  side
of  North  America,  the  whole  coast,  from  the  isthmus
up  to  45°,  had  been  explored  by  the  Spaniards.  It
had  also  been  satisfactorily  ascertained  that  no  strait
or  passage  across  America  exists,  between  the  Strait
of  Magellan  and  the  regions  of  which  we  have  spoken.

When  thus  reviewing  the  labours  of  the  early
navigators,  we  may  well  admire  the  activity  that  had
been  displayed  during  the  first  century  of  modern
exploration.  We  must  not,  however,  suppose  that
these  navigators  had  acquired  a  complete  knowledge
of  the  conformation  of  the  coasts  explored  by  them,
and  had  communicated  this  knowledge  to  their  con-
temporaries, making  it  the  common  property  of  the
civilized  world.  Had  they  been  able  and  willing  to
do  this,  little  would  have  been  left  for  after  times  to
accomplish.  But  their  method  and  means  of  obser-
vation were  very  different  from  those  which  have
since  been  developed,  and  the  narrow  and  selfish  ten-
dencies of  the  age  led  to  secresy  and  isolation.  The
immediate  results  which  they  themselves  obtained,
though  doubtless  of  the  very  greatest  importance,  were
not  nearly  so  satisfactory  as  would  be  imagined  by  any
one  not  acquainted  with  the  state  of  science  in  those
times.  The  principal  obstacle  against  which  all  the
early  geographers  had  to  struggle,  was  the  impossi-
bility of  observing  longitudes.  This  difficulty  has
not  even  yet  been  completely  conquered,  and  we  find


INTRODUCTION.  Cxlvil

in  this  respect  very  considerable  discrepancies  between
the  surveys  of  different  navigators  of  the  present  day.
But  in  those  times  longitudes  were  hardly  calculated
at  all.  Many  journals  of  early  voyages,  those  of
Hudson  among  others,  do  not  contain  a  single  indi-
cation of  longitudes.  Davis  made  one  or  two  calcu-
lations of  this  kind  ;  yet  even  he  committed  such
mistakes,  that  he  was  wrong  by  at  least  ten  degrees.
The  nearest  approach  to  correct  longitudes  is  to  be
found  in  some  of  Sebastian  Cabot's  surveys.  He
himself  affirmed  that  these  calculations  were  based
on  his  observations  of  the  variation  of  the  needle ;
but  his  assertion  can  hardly  be  strictly  true.  His  ex-
perience, great  though  it  was,  cannot  have  furnished
him  with  a  sufficient  number  of  facts  to  base  upon
them  complete  and  satisfactory  conclusions  with  re-
gard to  this  absorbing  question.  As  regards  his  sys-
tem itself,  he  has  left  a  few  vague  indications,  which
prove  that  he  had  observed  the  dip  of  the  needle  as
well  as  its  variation,  and  had  tried  to  account  for  both.
But  how  the  system  which  he  had  formed  could  enable
him  to  calculate  the  longitude  of  the  mouth  of  Hud-
son's Strait  correctly,  within  one  or  two  degrees,  as  he
has  done,  cannot  well  be  explained.  Perhaps  this
correctness  was  obtained  merely  by  chance.

However  this  may  be,  Cabot  certainly  did  not  im-
part any  such  knowledge  to  others,  and  even  now  the
navigator  is  unable  to  ascertain  longitudes  by  the
variation  and  dip  of  the  needle.  As  regards  lati-
tudes, the  system  of  calculating  them  is  so  simple,
that  we  find  nearly  correct  observations  made  in  the


Cxlviii  INTRODUCTION.

very  earliest  times.  Still  the  imperfect  state  of  the
instruments  which  the  early  navigators  made  use  of
caused  mistakes  of  several  minutes  to  be  committed  in
perhaps  every  instance.  Errors  even  of  half  a  degree
can  be  distinctly  proved.  Besides,  in  the  high  lati-
tudes, it  was  often  for  days  impossible  to  make  any
observations,  on  account  of  the  almost  permanent
clouds  and  fogs.  Then  we  have  only  the  dead  reckon-
ing left,  which  is  perfectly  unreliable  in  a  region  noted
for  its  strong,  varying,  and  often  unaccountable  cur-
rents. These  were  not  the  only  obstacles  to  correct
geographical  knowledge.  The  modern  discoveries
could  only  be  regarded  as  improvements  upon  the
ancient  stock  of  information.  The  vague  indications
of  classic  and  mediaeval  writers  had,  as  we  have  above
stated,  been  made  the  foundation  for  geographical  sys-
tems, for  maps  and  charts,  in  which  as  implicit  faith
was  placed,  in  spite  of  mutual  contradictions,  as  we
now  place  in  our  best  surveys.  These  medicEval  de-
lineations could  not  fail  to  exercise  their  influence  on
modern  geography.  There  are  also  to  be  found,  on
the  maps  of  the  sixteenth  century,  such  territories  as
the  Island  of  Demons^  and  other  fantastic  lands.  From
all  these  discordant  elements,  and  under  these  dis-
advantages, the  maps  that  were  current  in  Hudson's
time  had  been  made  up.  Before  we  enter  upon  our
review  of  these  delineations,  we  must  state  who  were
the  men  to  whom  they  are  due.

The  modern  system  of  map  making  may  be  said
to  have  originated  in  Belgium,  about  the  year  1550.
Jt  is  a  combination  of  two  different  methods,  both  of


INTRODUCTION.  CxHx

"vvliich  had  sprung  up  during  the  memorable  period
"vvhich  forms  the  transition  from  the  middle  ages  to
the  modern  era.  The  intellectual  movement  of  that
epoch  had,  among  other  new  births,  also  produced  the
first  majjs  and  the  first  charts.  These  two  kinds  of
geographical  delineations  were,  in  the  beginning,  as
different  from  each  other  as  they  both  differed  from
the  rude  geographical  drawings  of  the  middle  ages.
The  maps  were  the  work  of  landsmen,  the  charts  almost
exclusively  of  seamen.^  There  were  also  other  con-
siderable differences  between  the  maps  and  charts.
The  maps  answered  purposes  somewhat  similar  to
those  for  which  maps  of  towns  are  now  designed.  They
were  confined  to  limited  tracts  of  country,  and  were
intended  to  show  the  relative  positions  of  well-known
cities,  villages,  rivers,  and  mountains.  Degrees  of
latitude  and  longitude  were  not  strictly  needed,  and
w-ere  also  not  to  be  found  in  them.  They  were  all
isolated  productions,  without  any  connexion  or  har-
mony among  them.  These  maps  had  already  be-
come very  numerous ;  in  1570  nearly  a  hundred  had
been  engraved  ;  many  more  were  then  probably  in
manuscript.  The  charts,  on  the  contrary,  embraced
an  immense  expanse  of  sea  and  land.  Few  of  them
could  be  the  isolated  productions  of  single  geogra-
phers, for  they  necessarily  were  based  on  collections
of  various  materials.  In  Portugal  and  Spain,  the
two  principal  countries  to  which  we  owe  the  import-
ant early  charts,  the  profession  of  making  them  was

^  This  observation,  and  some  of  the  following  details,  are  due
to  M.  Lelewel's  Geographie  du  Moyen  Age.


Cl  INTRODUCTION

a  privilege  confined  to  a  few  highly  placed  indivi-
duals, who  were  bound  to  secresy.  They  received
from  the  arriving  explorers  such  new  communica-
tions as  might  serve  to  correct  the  charts,  and  they
made  admirable  use  of  their  opportunities.  Such  men
as  Da  la  Cosa,  Sebastian  Cabot,  E-ibeiro,  Homem,  are
among  the  Spanish  and  Portuguese  chart  makers.
Their  position  was  similar  to  that  now  held  by  the
hydrographers  to  the  European  and  American  admi-
ralties. In  France  the  position  of  chart  maker  seems
not  to  have  been  an  official  one ;  yet  there  are  also
some  great  names  among  those  of  the  French  who
followed  this  occupation.^  These  hydrographers  of
the  sixteenth  century  were  mostly  seamen.  Their
works  consist  principally  of  two  kinds,  planispheres,
and  the  so-called  portolani.  Both  of  them  were  still,
in  many  parts,  based  upon  the  system  of  Ptolemy,
of  which  they  professed  to  be  improvements.  The
planispheres  were  laid  down  upon  somewhat  uncer-
tain principles  of  projection.  The  same  may  be  said
of  the  portolani,  which  corresponded  in  their  charac-
ter, and  even,  in  some  respects,  in  their  execution,
with  the  sea  atlases  which  the  Dutch  produced  in
the  seventeenth  century.  The  portolani  consist  of
several  charts,  the  first  of  which  generally  are  plani-
spheres. Afterwards  follow  charts  of  single  coun-
tries, or  of  tracts  of  coast.     Sometimes  the  soundings

'  The  French  charts  have  the  merit  of  uniting  the  information
furnished  by  various  nations.  They  are,  perhaps,  more  important
than  any  other  class  as  sources  for  the  history  of  geography.  Some
interesting  facts  witli  regard  to  early  French  charts  are  to  be  found
in  Mr.  Major's  recent  work  on  Australia.


INTRODUCTION.  cli

are  given.  A  history  of  geographical  science  may  be
traced  by  the  comparison  of  these  charts,  which  ex-
ercised considerable  influence  upon  each  other.  Most
important  in  that  respect  are  two  delineations,  of
which  we  may  be  allowed  to  speak  in  some  detail.
The  first  of  them  is  the  planisphere  of  Diego  Ribeiro,
geographer  to  Charles  V.  This  great  work  furnished
the  foundation  for  nearly  all  the  later  delineations
of  America.  It  was  composed  in  1529;  an  earlier
draught  of  1527  is  also  in  existence;  but  there  the
outline  of  the  New  World  is  much  less  correct.  In
all  the  early  charts  which  we  have  been  able  to  com-
pare with  that  of  Hibeiro,^  America  is  either  copied
from  it,  with  or  without  improvements,  or  at  least
large  sections  from  Ribeiro  are  inserted.  This  is
especially  the  case  with  regard  to  the  neighbourhood
of  Hudson's  River,  a  region  laid  down  by  Ribeiro
from  Estevan  Gomez'  survey,  and  which  has  been
copied  from  him  by  all  the  early  map  makers  whose
works  w^e  have  been  able  to  confront  with  his  plani-
sphere, with  the  only  exception  of  Lok,  whose  out-
line of  the  same  region  is  taken  from  a  manuscript
chart  of  Verazzano.

The  other  chart  we  were  going  to  speak  of,  that  of
Sebastian  Cabot,  is  also  a  planisphere.  It  was  first
published  in  1544,  with  a  text  in  Latin  and  Spanish;
afterwards  again  in  1549,  with  a  reprint  of  the  Latin
text.  Much  later,  probably  after  Cabot's  death,  a
copy  was  made  by  Clement  Adams,  in  which  the

'  We  have  not  been  able  to  compare  Sebastian  Cabot's  map
Avith  it.


Clii  INTRODUCTION.

Latin  text  is  corrupted,  and  a  simple  and  not  inele-
gant style  turned  into  a  bombastic  and  unbearable
one.  If  we  can  at  all  trust  the  descriptions  given  of
some  parts  of  that  chart  by  Willes  and  Gilbert,  the
chart  itself  must  likewise  have  been  altered,  for
their  details  are  in  flat  contradiction  with  the  1544
edition,  a  copy  of  which  is  preserved  in  Paris.  These
alterations  exercised  a  very  considerable  influence  on
the  scheme  of  the  north-western  search,  as  we  have
had  occasion  to  notice.  The  charts^  almost  without
exception,  and  especially  those  of  Ribeiro  and  Cabot,
have  both  latitudes  and  longitudes.  Little  reliance
can  be  placed  in  the  longitudes.

It  was  by  a  combination  of  the  early  maps  and  the
early  charts,  that  some  Belgian  scholars  of  the  six-
teenth century  founded  the  modern  system  of  map
making.  Placed,  as  they  were,  in  the  centre  of  trade,
and  in  a  country  eminent  both  in  art  and  industry,
they  were  best  able  to  undertake  this  mission.  The
first  notable  man  who  distinguished  himself  in  this
manner  was  the  Frisian  Gemma,  who  passed  nearly
the  whole  of  his  life  in  Belgium.  His  works  are,
however,  of  no  importance  for  our  subject.  Far
more  celebrated  and  of  real  importance  for  us,  are
his  two  great  successors,  Gerard  Mercator  and  Abra-
ham Ortelius,  whose  method,  like  that  of  Gemma,
consisted  in  the  combination  and  arrangement  of  the
various  geographical  materials  which  they  procured
from  all  parts  of  Europe,  paying  an  equal  attention
to  charts  and  to  maps.  The  works  of  OrtcHus  and
Mercator  that  come  under  our  consideration,  are  the


INTRODUCTION.  cllii

great  planisphere,  In  mum  navigantium,  published  by
Mercator  in  1569,  and  the  maps  of  America  and
Asia,  which  form  part  of  Ortelius'  Orhis  terrarum.
first  published  in  1570.  Of  these  we  shall  presently
have  occasion  to  speak.  We  must,  however,  first
conclude  our  observations  on  the  maps  and  charts
available  when  Hudson  sailed,  by  mentioning  the
last  and  most  important  class.  Hudson's  imme-
diate predecessors  in  the  arctic  search,  Frobisher,
Davis,  Linschoten  and  Barents,  had,  during  their
voyages,  not  only  made  the  usual  written  notes,  but
had  also  made  draughts  of  the  coasts  they  had  ex-
plored. Frobisher's  draught  had  been  published
with  one  of  the  accounts  of  his  voyage.  Davis'
sketch  had  been  inserted  in  the  celebrated  Molyneux
globe,  which  is  mentioned  by  Hakluyt,  and  of  which
there  is  still  a  copy  in  existence  in  the  library  of  the
Middle  Temple.  Linschoten's  illustrations  of  Vai-
gats  Strait  and  southern  Nova  Zembla  adorned  his
descriptions  of  the  two  first  arctic  voyages  of  the
Dutch.  Barents'  chart  of  Nova  Zembla  appeared  in
the  account  of  his  voyages,  and  he  seems  also  to  have
left  a  sketch  of  Spitzbergen,  which  Hondius  after-
wards made  use  of.

Having  now  become  familiar  with  the  geographical
delineations  at  Hudson's  disposal,  we  are  able  to  ex-
amine them  as  it  were  with  his  own  eyes,  and  to  see
what  he  found  in  them.  In  doing  so  we  shall  avail
ourselves  of  the  two  charts  in  the  present  work,
the  one  of  which  was  drawn  by  Jodocus  Hondius  in
1611,  the  other  by  Hudson  himself  in  1610  and  1611.


Cliv  INTRODUCTION.

They  do  not  embrace  all  the  coasts  which  we  shall
have  to  travel  over,  and  we  must,  for  the  rest,  refer  the
reader  to  other  sources.  As  far  as  the  two  charts  do
reach,  they  furnish  a  true  and  plastic  expression  of
Hudson's  geographical  notions.

Hudson's  ideas,  as  far  at  least  as  they  are  known,
were  all  concentrated  on  the  search  for  a  short  north-
ern route  to  China.  If  we,  therefore,  wish  to  identify
ourselves  with  him  in  examining  the  geographical
delineations  that  were  at  his  disposal,  we  must,  in
doing  so,  always  keep  in  view  the  chances  of  a  north-
eastern or  north-western  passage,  which  these  maps
and  charts  seemed  to  promise.  AVe  must  principally
bear  in  mind  that  both  the  north-eastern  and  the
north-western  passage  are  in  reality  impracticable,
and  that  only  mistaken  notions  with  regard  to  the
conformation  of  the  arctic  shores  could  lead  to  hopes
of  realizing  these  schemes.

When  we  compare  the  chart  of  Hondius  in  our
collection  with  a  modern  map,  we  find  nowhere
greater  discrepancies  than  in  the  nortli-east.  These
discrepancies  are  the  worthier  of  notice,  as  they  ex-
actly represent  Hudson's  mistakes,  and  explain  why
he  tliought  the  north-eastern  passage  possible.  Hon-
dius' delineation  of  those  parts  is  so  erroneous,  that
a  minute  comparison  with  a  modern  map  could  not
be  seriously  undertaken.  The  two  most  striking
errors  are,  however,  these.  He  places,  in  latitude
73°,  a  promontory  called  Cape  Tahln^  for  the  exist-
ence of  which,  according  to  Hondius'  statement,
Pliny  is  the  only  authority.     Hondius  adds,  that  the


INTRODUCTION.  clv

real  situation  of  Cape  Tabin  is  unknown,  and  that
its  existence  is  improbable.  "  According  to  the  most
recent  information,"  says  he,  "  that  has  been  brought
from  China,  it  seems  Hkely  that  Asia  does  not  reach
farther  northward  than  to  the  fiftieth  degree  of  lati-
tude." Now,  in  reality,  there  are  two  capes  close  to
each  other  in  the  region  where  Cape  Tabin  is  here
placed,  namely.  Cape  Taimur,  about  75°  30',  and  Cape
Severo-Yostochnoi,  about  78°.  .The  whole  north  coast
of  Siberia,  with  the  only  exception  of  its  most  east-
ern part,  lies  above  the  seventieth  degree  of  latitude.
So  there  is  in  Hondius'  estimates  a  mistake  of  twenty-
eight  degrees  as  regards  the  most  northern  point,  and
a  mistake  of  twenty  degrees  as  regards  the  general
line  of  coast  of  Siberia.

Hudson's  mistakes  with  respect  to  these  regions
were  perhaps  not  so  exaggerated.  His  ideas  were
most  probably  in  conformity  with  those  of  Mercator
and  Ortelius,  who  place  Cape  Tabin  even  farther
north  than  Cape  Taimur  really  lies.  Beyond  Cape
Tabin  there  is,  however,  even  in  their  maps,  no
serious  obstacle  for  an  eastward  bound  vessel.  The
coast  slopes  rapidly  southwards  to  Japan  and  China,
and  the  whole  difficulty  of  the  north-eastern  passage
seems  therefore  conquered  when  once  Cape  Tabin  is
passed.  This  notion,  which  is  almost  as  erroneous
as  that  which  Hondius  entertained,  was  undoubtedly
shared  by  Hudson.^

The  second  glaring  mistake  consists  in  the  erro-

'  Hudson  calls  Cape  Tahin  the  North  Cape  of  Tartary ;  Ortelius
calls  it  Promontorium  Svythicum.     See  p.  36,  note  1.


Clvi  INTRODUCTION.

neous  situation  of  the  mouth  of  the  Ohij.  This  river
was  generally  considered  as  a  kind  of  first  stage  in
the  north-eastern  search,  and  to  reach  or  pass  it  was
justly  thought  a  great  achievement.  Now  Linschoten
and  his  companions  had  spread  the  erroneous  notion
that  the  mouth  of  the  Oby  is  situated  in  the  bottom  of
Kara  Bay,  at  a  small  distance  from  the  south  of
Nova  Zembla.  The  mouth  of  the  Oby  seemed,  there-
fore, to  be  in  a  recess,  which  need  not  be  touched  by
the  navigator  on  his  way  to  the  east.  This  error  has
been  adopted  by  Hondius.  Hudson  also  shared  it,
as  appears  clearly  from  an  observation  in  the  de-
scription of  his  second  voyage.^

The  place  where  the  Oby  empties  itself  into  the
Arctic  Ocean  lies,  however,  in  reality  three  or  four
degrees  eastward  from  the  Sea  of  Kara,  and  five  de-
grees farther  north  than  the  bottom  of  that  sea.  It
is  separated  from  the  Kara  Sea  by  a  peninsula,  which
none  of  the  early  navigators  was  able  to  double,  al-
though many  attempted  it.  One  of  the  most  difficult
parts  of  the  road  to  the  east  was  thus  suppressed  in
the  intelligence  which  Hudson  received.  Had  he
known  how  much  the  geographers  were  mistaken  with
regard  to  these  two  points,  he  would  scarcely  have
wasted  so  much  of  his  energies  on  his  hopeless  under-
taking.

We  now  leave  the  extreme  east  of  Hondius'  map
and  proceed  westward.  We  arrive  at  the  northern
shore  of  Russia^  the  outline  of  which  Hondius  seems
to  have  borrowed  from  Ortclius,  who  again  had  ob-

'  P.  36,  the  passage  to  which  note  1  refers.


INTRODUCTION.  clvii

tained  it  from  one  of  the  early  maps  we  have  been
speaking  of.  This  outline,  though  of  course  faulty,
is  yet  far  from  being  so  incorrect  as  to  give  rise  to
serious  errors.  Hudson,  moreover,  never  visited  this
shore.

To  the  north  of  the  Russian  coast  we  perceive,  on
Hondius'  chart,  the  Nova  Zemhla  group.  We  have
already  called  attention  to  the  fact,  that  the  ice  in  the
Sea  of  Kara  had  prevented  the  exploration  of  the
greater  part  of  the  east  coast  of  Nova  Zembla.  This
explains  the  want  of  a  coast  line  on  that  side.^  There
are,  besides,  some  other  momentous  defects  in  this
delineation,  which  is  a  reduced  copy  of  the  above-
mentioned  chart  of  Nova  Zembla  left  by  Willem
Barents.  The  principal  defect  is  that  Nova  Zembla
appears  as  one  island,  not  as  a  group  of  islands  with
straits  between  them.  The  frozen  straits  north  and
south  of  Matthew's  Land  are  not  even  indicated.
Burrough's  Strait  appears  as  a  bay  (St.  Laurent's
Bay.)  On  the  other  hand  a  real  bay,  that  of  Kostin
Shar  (here  called  Kostintsarck)  looks  like  a  partly
explored  strait.  -  If  we  would  understand  Hudson's
second  voyage,  we  must  not  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that
he  used  this  outline  of  the  Nova  Zembla  coast,  which
had  found  its  way  not  only  into  the  most  approved
Dutch,  but  also  into  the  most  accredited  English
geographical  draughts,  such  as,  for  instance,  the  cele-
brated Molyneux  globe.  It  appeared  to  Hudson  that
there  were  only  three  chances  of  passing  Nova  Zem-
bla, namely,  by  the  north,  by  the  south,  and,  perhaps^
^  This  coast  line  has  not  even  yet  been  completed.


Clviii  INTRODUCTION.

through  Kostin  Shar.  Knowing  how  often  the  at-
tempts in  the  two  former  directions  had  failed,  he
tried  a  search  in  the  third  direction,  and  then  found
Barents'  mistake.  "We  may,  perhaps,  here  say  that,  in
pointing  out  the  errors  of  Barents  which  misled  Hud-
son, we  do  not  intend  to  blame  the  great  Dutch  navi-
gator. The  mistakes  were  unavoidable,  as  must  be
seen  by  any  one  who  has  read  the  narrative  of  his
voyages  ;  and  it  is  not  certain  whether  the  chart
which  we  have  been  commenting  upon  is  the  work
of  Barents  or  that  of  De  Veer.

Proceeding  farther  to  the  west,  on  Hondius'  chart
we  fall  in  with  two  islands,  Matsfjn,  in  75°,  and
Willouglibif  s  Land^  in  72°.  Neither  of  these  islands
has  a  real  existence.  They  are,  as  it  were,  delu-
sive duplicates  of  Matthew's  Land  and  Nova  Zem-
bla  proper,  two  of  the  islands  of  the  Nova  Zembla
group.  These  duplicates  owe  their  origin  to  a
delusion,  which  the  impossibility  of  calculating  longi-
tudes necessarily  engendered.  It  was,  in  fact,  un-
avoidable, that  sometimes,  at  least,  the  same  coast
should  appear  twice  in  the  same  map,  once  farther
east,  once  farther  west,  though  in  the  same  latitude.
For  how  could  it  be  proved  that  two  points,  both  under
nearly  the  same  degree,  that  had  been  touched  by
two  different  vessels,  really  belonged  to  the  same
shore  \  Matsyn  Island  is  thus  nothing  more  than  a
western  repetition,  a  DopjJclgangcr^  as  Germans  would
say,  of  Matthew's  Land.  The  latitude  is  identical,
so  is  also  the  name.  Matsyn  is  a  corruption  of  the
Kussian  Malhiiyshiii  (Matthew's).    It  does  not  clearly


IINTRODUCTION.  cllX

appear  when  Matsyn  Island  was  first  introduced  into
maps  and  charts.

Willoiighhi/'s  Land  is  even  with  greater  certainty  to
be  considered  a  kind  of  western  duplicate  of  Nova
Zembla  Proper.  This  has  been  proved  over  and  over
again  by  recent  writers,  the  most  satisfactorily  by
Mr.  Rundall.^  On  the  chart  which  Hudson  used
during  his  second  voyage,  Willoughby's  Land  seems
to  have  been  laid  down  in  tlie  same  latitude  as  it  is
here,  but  somewhat  nearer  to  the  coast  of  Nova  Zem-
bla. Hudson  had  some  doubts  with  regard  to  the
correctness  of  this  information,  but  he  was  certainly
very  far  from  imagining  how  extraordinary  a  theory
would  soon  spring  up,  to  be  made  use  of  in  a  note  to
his  words  in  the  printed  copy  of  his  journal.  "  Wil-
loughby's Land,"  says  Purchas  in  his  note,  "  a  con-
ceit of  cardmakers,  it  seeming  to  be  no  other  than
Newland."^  Purchas  is  as  much  mistaken  as  the
cardmakers.  The  idea  that  the  country  discovered  by
Willoughby  in  1553  is  Newland  (Spitzbergen),  did
not,  however,  originate  with  Purchas.  Its  origin
must  be  placed  between  the  years  1608  and  1613.
At  the  time  of  Hudson's  second  voyage,  in  1608,  a
notion  similar  to  the  one  expressed  on  Hondius'
chart  still  prevailed  in  England.  In  1613  the  new
notion  that  Willoughby  had  discovered  Spitzbergen
had  already  become  the  foundation  of  the  claim  of
the  Muscovy  Company  to  the  exclusive  right  of  fish-

1  Introduction  to  his  Voyages  to  the  North -ivest,  edited  for  the
Hakluyt  Society,  pp.  i-viii.

-  P.  40,  and  marginal  note  to  the  same  page,  Newland  is  Spitz-
bergen.


Clx  IISTRODUCTION.

ing  along  the  Spitzbergen  coast.  The  precise  date
when  the  discovery  was  invented  seems  to  have  been
the  year  1612,  and  its  inventor^  a  man  named  Daniel,
perhaps  (?)  the  poet  and  historian,  Samuel  Daniel.

To  the  west  of  the  Russian  coast  we  find  on  Hon-
dius'  chart  the  northern  parts  of  Scandinavia.  No
better  proof  of  the  progress  which  geography  had
already  made  could  possibly  be  offered.  This  nearly
correct  outline  is  a  combination  of  various  sources,
maps  and  charts.     The  following  points  on  the  shore

^  Willoughby's  pretended  discovery  was  got  up  to  furnish  a
sufficient  ground  for  the  English  claim  to  the  exclusive  possession
of  the  Spitzbergen  fisheries.  The  abundance  of  morses  and  whales
near  Spitzbergen  bad  been  first  pointed  out  by  Hudson  in  1607.
Three  years  afterwards,  in  1610,  Poole  went  there  to  fish  for
morses.  In  the  following  year,  1611,  Edge  founded  the  whale
fisheries.  In  1612  the  Dutch  made  their  appearance  at  these
fisheries  to  have  their  share  in  them.  In  1613  the  English  Mus-
covy Company  obtained  a  royal  charter  excluding  all  others,  natives
and  foreigners,  from  the  Spitzbergen  fisheries,  on  the  ground  of
Willoughby's  pretended  discovery.  There  is  every  reason  to  be-
lieve that  the  discovery  had  been  invented  for  the  occasion.  The
following  circumstance  points  to  Daniel  as  the  inventor.  In  the
celebrated  Dutch  collection  of  voyages.  Begin  ende  Voorfgang  von
de  Oost  Indische  Compagnie,  there  is  a  copy  of  a  map  of  Spitz-
bergen by  Daniel,  published  in  London  in  1612.  Now  the  Dutch
writers,  Hessel  Gerritz  and  Peter  Plancius,  replied  in  1613  to  some
English  work  where  the  discovery  of  Spitzbergen  by  Willoughby
Avas  maintained ;  and  it  is  therefore  but  natural  to  suppose,  that
the  map  of  Spitzbergen  of  1612,  and  the  book  or  writing  replied
to  by  the  Dutch,  had  both  the  same  author,  namely,  Daniel.  How-
soever this  may  be,  it  is  certain  that  the  idea  originated  between
Hudson's  second  voyage  (1608)  and  1613.  Samuel  Daniel  died
in  1619.  He  is  not  known  to  have  written  about  Spitzbergen,  nor
about  any  similar  subject.


INTRODUCTION.  clxi

deserve  particular  notice  :  Wardhuys  (AVardhuus)  in
Lapland  ;  the  North  Kien  and  North  Cape,  the  two
most  northern  points ;  Sanien,  an  island  in  latitude
69°,  which  is  here  placed  in  latitude  70'  (it  is  gene-
rally called  Seynam  by  the  early  navigators) ;  Loifoct,
one  of  the  group  of  islands  which  we  now  call  Lof-
foden  Islands,  probably  from  a  generalization  of  the
name,  which  at  first  belonged  only  to  one  of  them.
All  these  places  are  mentioned  in  Hudson's  log-
books.

North  of  Scandinavia  we  find  Bear  Island,  and  to
the  north  of  Bear  Island,  Nieuland  (Spitzbergen).
Bear  Island,  or  t'Beeren  Island,  as  it  is  here  called,
was  discovered  by  Barents  in  1590,  and  visited  by
Stephen  Bennett  in  1603.  Bennett,  claiming  a  new
discovery,  gave  it  a  new  name,  and  called  it  Cherie's
Island,  after  his  patron,  Francis  Cherie.  Under  the
latter  name  it  is  known  to  Hudson.

The  relative  position  of  Bear  Island  and  Spitzbergen
is  faulty.  Bear  Island  ought  to  have  been  farther  east.
The  error  has  arisen  from  a  mistake  made  by  Barents
and  Ryp  in  estimating  the  course  they  were  sailing.
The  same  mistake  has  also  found  its  way  into  the  de-
scription of  their  voyage,  and  has  induced  Dr.  Beke
and  Mr.  Petermann  to  ascribe  to  them  the  circumna-
vigation of  Spitzbergen.

The  delineation  of  Spitzbergen  on  Hondius'  map  is,
for  our  purpose,  the  most  important  part  of  it,  and  for  a
double  reason.  A  number  of  passages  in  the  logbook
of  Hudson's  first  voyage,  prove  that  he  made  use  of
a  chart  of  Spitzbergen.    The  country  had,  up  to  1607,

y


clxii  INTRODUCTION.

been  visited  only  once,  namely,  by  Barents  and  Ryp
in  1596 ;  and  we  have  therefore  cause  to  think  that
there  existed  but  one  chart  of  it,  and  that  Hudson's
chart  must  have  been  like  the  one  M'hich  Hondius
has  copied.  The  second  point  of  interest  is  still
stronger.  Some  of  Hudson's  own  discoveries  have
been  introduced  into  this  part  of  Hondius'  map  ;
namely,  Colin's  Cape,  Hakluyt's  Headland,  part  of
the  northern  shore  of  Spitzbergen,  and  the  great  ice
barrier  between  Spitzbergen  and  Greenland.  There
is  so  much  vagueness  and  error  in  the  way  in  which
the  information  received  from  Hudson  has  been  em-
bodied in  the  map,  that  the  communication  between
him  and  Hondius  must  have  been  merely  oral.  The
outline  itself  embraces  but  the  western  and  part
of  the  northern  shore  of  Spitzbergen.  It  is  correct
enough  in  its  general  features,  but  sadly  defective  in
its  details.  Charles'  Island,  the  western  foreland,
seems  to  form  part  of  the  mainland.  The  strait  be-
tween the  two  lands  is  represented  as  a  bay.  These
two  principal  mistakes  had  alone  a  considerable  influ-
ence on  Hudson's  explorations.  It  would  be  an
ungrateful  task  to  dwell  on  the  numerous  minor  defi-
ciencies.

In  the  south-western  corner  of  Hondius'  chart  we
find  Denmark^  Holland,  part  of  England  and  Scotland,
the  Shetland  and  the  Faroer  Islands.  They  are  all
drawn  with  approximative  accuracy.  The  ftiults
which  do  exist  in  their  position  and  outlines  had  no
influence  on  Hudson's  movements.

We   now   arrive   at   the   north-western   border   of


INTRODUCTION.  clxiii

Hondius'  chart.  The  same  coasts  that  we  find  there
are  also  drawn  on  the  chart  of  Henry  Hudson.  Hud-
son's chart  is  only  by  a  few  months  later  than  the
one  of  Hondius,  and  yet  the  improvements  are  very
great.  They  are  mostly  due  to  Hudson's  last  voyage,
during  which  the  chart  was  laid  down.  Nowhere,
indeed,  were  improvements  more  urgently  needed.
Hondius'  draught  of  these  north-western  parts  is
combined  from  the  most  incongruous  materials.  It
represents,  however,  the  geographical  dogma  of  the
age,  and  agrees  with  the  notions  which  Hudson  him-
self entertained  before  his  own  explorations  procured
him  better  insight.  It  is  impossible  to  understand
the  meaning  of  these  indications,  and  their  influence
on  Henry  Hudson,  without  throwing  a  cursory  glance
over  the  past  history  of  the  geography  of  those  regions.
This  history  is  so  curious  that  it  deserves,  on  its  own
account,  the  reader's  attention.

We  have  before  observed  that  many  arctic  shores
had  been  visited  by  the  ancient  Scandinavians,  and
that  colonies  had  been  founded  in  Iceland  and  Green-
land. The  Iceland  colony  still  exists.  The  Green-
land settlements,  however,  on  the  eastern  side  of  the
sreat  arctic  continent  have  not  been  visited  for  cen-
turies,  and  the  last  descendants  of  the  ancient  colo-
nists are  likely  to  have  perished  many  long  years  ago.
Still  there  is  some  exaggeration  in  the  prevailing
opinion,  that  no  communication  between  those  parts
and  the  rest  of  Europe  has  taken  place  since  the  end
of  the  fourteenth  century.  There  is  reason  to  think
that  down  to  the  first  half  of  the  sixteenth  century


Clxiv  INTRODUCTION.

the  shore  of  East  Greenland  was  occasionally  visited
by  the  Scandinavians.  The  testimony  which  tends
to  prove  these  occasional  visits  has  the  appearance  of
being  reliable.  That  intercourse  was  entirely  limited
to  Scandinavians.  The  rest  of  Europe  was  little
acquainted  with  the  existence  of  the  arctic  coun-
tries, and  it  is  only  in  much  later  times  that
accurate  accounts  of  the  early  northern  discoveries
were  introduced  into  the  general  stock  of  European
knowledge.  But  these  great  facts  could  not,  even
during  the  middle  ages,  remain  entirely  hidden.
Various  rumours  respecting  Greenland  reached  the
south  of  Europe  before  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  cen-
tury. Their  influence  on  the  geographical  deline-
ations of  the  arctic  regions  and  on  early  expedi-
tions was  very  considerable.  By  far  the  most  im-
portant geographical  communication  of  this  kind  is
the  celebrated  chart  which  was  jiublished  with  the
account  of  the  voyage  of  the  brothers  Zeni.  Every
reader  of  geographical  researches  knows  that,  in
1558,  a  small  volume  was  published  in  Venice,  con-
taining a  most  romantic  narrative  of  the  voyage  of
two  Venetian  brothers,  belonging  to  the  great  Zeni
family.  They  are  reported  to  have  visited,  in  1887,
several  arctic  countries,  among  which  Frisland^  En-
groneland^  Iceland,  and  Estoiiland  are  the  most  notable.
This  curious  book  was,  as  we  have  said,  accompanied
by  a  chart,  on  which  the  above-mentioned  countries
were  drawn.  The  original  of  that  chart  was  in  ex-
istence at  a  recent  period,  and  it  is  certain  that  it
was  an  old  portolano  belonging  to  the  Zeno  archives.


INTRODUCTION.  clxV

On  its  origin,  as  well  as  that  of  the  book,  and  the
authenticity  of  both,  various  conflicting  opinions
have  been  advanced,  and  defended  with  very  consi-
derable learning  and  ingenuity.  No  very  satisfactory
result  has  as  yet  been  obtained.  For  our  purpose
this  question  of  authenticity  is  entirely  unavailing.
"What,  however,  deserves  our  most  serious  considera-
tion is  this.  The  Zeni  chart,  whether  authentic  or
not,  exhibits  a  far  better  outline  of  Greenland  and
Iceland  than  any  other  known  map  published  or
drawn  before  1558.

The  Zeni  chart  was  of  Scandinavian  origin.  It
has  never  been,  and,  indeed,  cannot  be,  considered
as  a  mere  fiction.  Of  this  the  reader  of  the  present
volume  has  the  proof  before  his  eyes.  Nearly  the  whole
north-western  part  of  Hondius'  map  is  exacthj  copied
from  the  chart  of  the  Zeni.  On  comparing,  especially
the  outline  of  Greenland  with  a  modern  map  of  that
country,  the  reader  will  be  struck  with  surprise  at
the  accuracy  of  the  ancient  delineation.  If  the  Zeni
chart  be  really  a  work  of  the  fourteenth  century,
the  delineation  of  Greenland  upon  it  can,  without
hesitation,  be  pronounced  the  best  geographical
drawing  that  was  then  in  existence.  AVhen  examin-
ing this  remarkable  production,  we  are  strongly  re-
minded of  the  narratives  of  modern  explorers,  in
which  the  wonderful  capacity  of  the  Esquimaux  for
tracing  the  courses  of  rivers  and  the  lines  of  a  coast
is  extolled.  To  this  source  we  probably  owe,  of
course  indirectly,  the  outline  of  Greenland  on  the
Zeno  chart.     This  outline  has  been  found  sufficientlv


Clxvi  INTRODUCTION.

accurate  to  serve  as  a  basis  for  later  improvements,
and  on  it  all  modern  maps  of  the  country  are  founded.
Some  parts  of  the  east  coast  are  even  now  drawn  on
all  maps  from  the  medigeval  survey,  having  never
since  been  approached.  But  the  old  Zeni  chart  seems
to  have  been  a  compilation  made  up  from  materials
of  very  unequal  value.  The  outline  of  Iceland  is  in-
ferior to  that  of  Greenland.  Frisland  is  so  strangely
drawn,  that  only  the  name  of  the  country  and  of
some  places  upon  it,  and  the  fact  that  no  other
country  can  be  meant,  have  led  geographers  to  iden-
tify it  with  the  Faroer  Islands.  The  relative  posi-
tion of  these  countries,  and  their  position  also  with
relation  to  Scandinavia,  Britain,  and  Iceland,  is  ex-
tremely defective.  When  the  Zeni  chart  was  pub-
lished, degrees  of  longitude  and  latitude  were  to  be
found  upon  it.  They  had  not  been  on  the  original,
and  had,  according  to  the  opinion  of  a  most  compe-
tent judge,  Mr.  Lelewel,  been  but  recently  introduced.
These  degrees  added  very  considerably  to  the  errors  of
the  chart.  The  influence  of  the  new  source  of  mistake
was,  however,  less  strong  in  some  parts,  stronger  iu
others.  Iceland  is  but  one  degree  too  far  north.
Frisland,  however,  is  entirely  out  of  its  place.  The
southern  point  of  Greenland  is  in  latitude  65°,  instead  of
latitude  60°.  This  last  mistake  has  had  such  singular
consequences  that  too  much  attention  cannot  be  paid
to  it.

The  chart  of  the  Zeni,  such  as  it  was,  was  received
as  perfectly  authentic  by  all  contemporary  geogra-
phers.    Ortelius  and  Mercator  made  use  of  it.     It  is


INTRODUCTION.  clxvii

also  expressly  stated  that  Frobisher  took  it  with  him
on  his  north-western  voyages.  He  was,  by  means  of
this  chart,  led  into  great  mistakes.  He  fell  in  with
Greenland,  the  4th  of  July,  1577,  and  the  20th  of
June,  1578,  both  times  under  about  61°.  Having  but
the  Zeni  chart  to  guide  him,  he  could  not  suppose
that  the  country  was  Greenland.  He  mistook  it  for
Frisland,  and  put  down,  in  1577,  after  four  days
exploration,  that  the  coast  and  the  chart  agreed  very
well.  This  he  further  confirmed  the  next  year,  and
Frisland  had  in  this  manner  acquired  a  legitimate
existence.

Davis  also  fell  in  with  Greenland  in  61°.  He  at
once  recognized  that  this  was  not  Frisland.  But
having  no  reason  to  think  that  this  country,  which
was  several  degrees  farther  south  than  the  Engrone-
land  of  the  Zeni  chart,  was  really  identical  with  it,
he  considered  it  as  his  own  new  discovery,  and  called
it  Desolation.  We  have  seen,  in  the  narrative  of  his
voyage,  that  his  course  along  the  Greenland  shore
was  always  nearly  the  same.  He  first  approached
the  coast  near  the  southern  promontory,  then  left  it,
and  again  approached  it  under  64°.  He  seems  never
to  have  been  conscious  of  the  continuity  of  coast
between  the  62nd  and  64th  degree.  He  therefore
considered  Desolation  as  an  Island  south  of  Grone-
land.

Another  source  of  mistakes,  furnished  by  the
vagueness  of  Frobisher's  accounts,  enabled  Davis  to
give  the  finishing  stroke  to  this  singular  web  of
errors.     The  finished  picture  has  been  copied  into


Clxvi  INTRODUCTION.

accurate  to  serve  as  a  basis  for  later  improvements,
and  on  it  all  modern  maps  of  the  country  are  founded.
Some  parts  of  the  east  coast  are  even  now  drawn  on
all  maps  from  the  mediseval  survey,  having  never
since  been  approached.  But  the  old  Zeni  chart  seems
to  have  been  a  compilation  made  up  from  materials
of  very  unequal  value.  The  outline  of  Iceland  is  in-
ferior to  that  of  Greenland.  Frisland  is  so  strangely
drawn,  that  only  the  name  of  the  country  and  of
some  places  upon  it,  and  the  fact  that  no  other
country  can  be  meant,  have  led  geographers  to  iden-
tify it  with  the  Faroer  Islands.  The  relative  posi-
tion of  these  countries,  and  their  position  also  with
relation  to  Scandinavia,  Britain,  and  Iceland,  is  ex-
tremely defective.  When  the  Zeni  chart  was  pub-
lished, degrees  of  longitude  and  latitude  were  to  be
found  upon  it.  They  had  not  been  on  the  original,
and  had,  according  to  the  opinion  of  a  most  compe-
tent judge,  Mr.  Lelewel,  been  but  recently  introduced.
These  degrees  added  very  considerably  to  the  errors  of
the  chart.  The  influence  of  the  new  source  of  mistake
was,  however,  less  strong  in  some  parts,  stronger  iu
others.  Iceland  is  but  one  degree  too  far  north.
Frisland,  however,  is  entirely  out  of  its  place.  The
southern  'point  of  Greenland  is  in  latitude  65°,  instead  of
latitude  60°.  This  last  mistake  has  had  such  singular
consequences  that  too  much  attention  cannot  be  paid
to  it.

The  chart  of  the  Zeni,  such  as  it  was,  was  received
as  perfectly  authentic  by  all  contemporary  geogra-
phers.    Ortelius  and  Mercator  made  use  of  it.     It  is


INTRODUCTION.  clxvii

also  expressly  stated  that  Frobisher  took  it  with  him
on  his  north-western  voyages.  He  was,  by  means  of
this  chart,  led  into  great  mistakes.  He  fell  in  with
Greenland,  the  4th  of  July,  1577,  and  the  20th  of
June,  1578,  both  times  under  about  61°.  Having  but
the  Zeni  chart  to  guide  him,  he  could  not  suppose
that  the  country  was  Greenland.  He  mistook  it  for
Frisland^  and  put  down,  in  1577,  after  four  days
exploration,  that  the  coast  and  the  chart  agreed  very
well.  This  he  further  confirmed  the  next  year,  and
Frisland  had  in  this  manner  acquired  a  legitimate
existence.

Davis  also  fell  in  with  Greenland  in  61°.  He  at
once  recognized  that  this  was  not  Frisland.  But
having  no  reason  to  think  that  this  country,  which
was  several  degrees  farther  south  than  the  Engrone-
land  of  the  Zeni  chart,  was  really  identical  with  it,
he  considered  it  as  his  own  new  discovery,  and  called
it  Desolation.  We  have  seen,  in  the  narrative  of  his
voyage,  that  his  course  along  the  Greenland  shore
was  always  nearly  the  same.  He  first  approached
the  coast  near  the  southern  promontory,  then  left  it,
and  again  approached  it  under  64°.  He  seems  never
to  have  been  conscious  of  the  continuity  of  coast
between  the  62nd  and  64th  degree.  He  therefore
considered  Desolation  as  an  Island  south  of  Grone-
land.

Another  source  of  mistakes,  furnished  by  the
vagueness  of  Frobisher's  accounts,  enabled  Davis  to
give  the  finishing  stroke  to  this  singular  web  of
errors.     The  finished  picture  has  been  copied  into


clxviii  INTRODUCTION.

Hondius'  chart  from  the  great  Molyneux  globe,  where
it  was  first  drawn  by  Davis.  On  both  delineations
we  find,  to  the  south  of  Groneland,  a  strait,  and  to  the
south  of  that  strait  the  Island  of  Desolation.  The
strait  is  called  Frobisher's  Fret,  and  on  both  sides  of
it  are  marked  the  places  which  Frobisher  had  ex-
plored. So  Frobisher's  Strait  had  been  carried  to
Greenland,  and  was  now  leading  from  the  Atlantic
into  Davis'  Strait.^  This  egregious  mistake  had  been
committed  by  one  of  the  greatest  arctic  explorers.
Can  it  be  wondered  at  that  Hudson,  when  sailing
along  the  east  coast  of  Greenland  in  63°  N.,  believed
himself  to  be  athwart  Frobisher's  Strait  X

This,  then,  is  the  shape  in  which  Greenland  ap-
peared. Between  60°  and  62°  the  Island  of  Desola-
tion ;  between  62°  and  63°  Frobisher's  Strait,  leading
from  the  Atlantic  to  Davis'  Strait ;  from  63°  to  75°,
the  Engroneland  of  the  Zeni.  Close  to  Engroneland,
Iceland.  West  of  Desolation,  Frisland.  We  have
here  again  the  same  country  (South  Greenland)  laid
down  twice,  from  modern  exploration  alone ;  as
Frisland  from  Frobisher's,  as  Desolation  from  Davis'
survey.  South  Greenland,  moreover,  appears  a  third
time  as  the  south  of  Engroneland,  from  the  misunder-
stood medieeval  survey  of  the  Scandinavians.

We  must  now  again  refer  to  the  Zeni  chart.
Hondius   has  not  copied  the  whole   of  it.      In   the

^  There  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  the  real  locality  of  Frobisher's
Strait,  which  is  where  modern  majis  place  it.  Every  doubt  must
be  removed  by  a  comparison  of  Best's  delineation  of  the  strait  with
Ortclius'  map  of  America.


INTRODUCTION.  clxix

original  delineation, the  coast  of  Engroneland  stretches
far  eastward,  to  those  regions  where  Hudson's  ice  bar-
rier and  where  the  Spitzbergen  islands  are  situated.
The  discoverers  of  Spitzbergen  w^ere  thus  induced  to
think  that  theirs  was  no  new  discovery  ;  but  that  they
had  simply  touched  a  part  of  the  Greenland  or  Engrone-
land which  they  found  indicated  on  their  charts.  Ac-
cordingly, they  called  these  coasts  Greenland.  Hudson,
who  made  use  of  a  Dutch  chart  of  Spitzbergen,  pre-
served the  appellations,  which  soon  became  general ;
though  two  other  names  were  also  received,  vSpitz-
bergen  and  Newland,  or  King  James  his  Newland.
The  two  former  names,  Greenland  and  Spitzbergen,
are  still  applied  to  the  group.  As  to  the  real,  or
western  Greenland,  Hudson  designates  it  by  a  name
nearly  identical  with  the  Engroneland  of  the  Zeni
map.  He  calls  it  Groneland.  We  cannot  understand
his  logbooks  without  bearing  in  mind  that  this  Grone-
land is  Greenland ;  whilst  his  Greenland  is  Spitz-
bergen.

To  the  south-east  of  Frisland,  we  meet  on  Hudson's
chart  Bus  Island^  the  offspring  of  an  illusion  different
from  those  which  have  occupied  us  so  long.  The
Busse  of  Bridgewater,  one  of  Frobisher's  ships,  had
met  in  latitude  57°  one  of  the  immense  icefields  which
annually  drift  out  of  Davis'  Strait.  Mistaking  it  for
an  island,  they  had  given  it  the  name  of  Busse
island.  For  this  country  both  Hudson  and  John
Knight  sought  in  vain.

When  we  round  the  southern  point  of  Greenland
and  arrive  on  the  western  side,  we  pass  from  illusions,


clxX  INTRODUCTION.

conjectures,  and  misunderstandings,  to  good,  though
perhaps  not  yet  entirely  accurate,  knowledge.  The
southern  part  of  Greenland,  up  to  61°;  and,  again,
the  west  coast  between  64°  and  73°,  had  been  explored
by  Davis,  and  drawn  by  him  for  the  Molyneux  globe.
From  this  globe,  or  from  other  copies  of  Davis'  survey,
the  outline  of  these  shores  had  passed  into  all  good
maps  and  charts.  These  shores  appeared  to  Hudson  in
the  almost  correct  shape  which  Davis  had  given  them.
The  same  maybe  said  with  regard  to  the  American  side
of  Davis'  Strait,  from  66°  southwards.  The  mouths
of  the  inlets,  and  the  configuration  of  Cumberland
Strait,  especially,  are  drawn  with  great  accuracy
on  the  Molyneux  globe.  Hudson's  Strait,  which
Hudson  had  then  not  yet  explored,  is  by  Davis  called
The  furious  overfall ;  an  allusion  to  the  currents  in  its
mouth,  which  he  likens  to  streams  of  water,  violently
rushing  through  the  arches  of  a  bridge.  Frobisher's
Strait  is  called  Lumley's  Inlet;  for  Davis  thought
that  the  real  Strait  of  Martin  Frobisher  cut  off
Desolation  from  Greenland.  Both  these  names,  The
furious  overfall,  and  Lumley's  Inlet,  are  to  be  found  in
Hudson's  logbooks.

We  would  now  gladly  pass  over  all  the  other
maps  and  charts  of  these  regions  which  were  at
Hudson's  disposal.  But  we  must  allude  to  two  of
them,  which  undoubtedly  exercised  some  influence
on  his  thoughts,  namely,  Cabot's  planisphere  and
Ortelius'  America.  Of  neither  of  these  could  we  give
a  full  idea  by  mere  description.  But  the  leading
features  can  easily  be  described.     Two  points  are  to


INTRODUCTION.  clxxi

be  noticed  in  Ortelius'  map  of  America.  The  first  is
the  great  fact  which  we  have  repeatedly  mentioned
— the  fact  that  Hudson  s  Bay  is  dratvn  upon  that
map, — very  imperfectly,  it  is  true,  but  still  clearly
enough  to  convince  contemporaries  of  its  existence
and  later  times  of  its  anterior  exploration.  It  is
called  by  Ortelius  Baia  dos  Medaos.  Out  of  it  leads,
to  the  northward,  into  a  broad  western  passage,  a
wide  strait  or  stream,  called  Rio  de  Tormenta.  The
passage  itself  runs  out  into  the  Pacific,  very  nearly
under  the  same  degree  where  the  western  mouth  of
the  real  north-west  passage  is  situated.  This,  how-
ever, has  its  origin  in  a  singularly  happy  guess.  No
vessel  had  ever  approached  so  high  a  latitude.  AVe
may,  perhaps,  also  mention  that  Grocland,  the
Greenland  of  John  of  Kolno,  is,  by  Ortelius,  drawn
as  an  island  in  the  north-west  passage.

As  to  Cabot's  planisphere,  two  facts  only  need  be
mentioned.  Part  of  the  western  shore  of  Davis'
Strait  was  drawn  upon  it,  even  up  to  a  higher  lati-
tude than  Davis  himself  had  reached  on  the  Ameri-
can side  of  his  strait.  Further,  it  appears  that  in  the
adulterated  copy  of  Cabot's  map,  which  Clement
Adams  had  caused  to  be  engraved,  Hudson's  Strait
was  indicated  as  a  passage  across  America,  opening
into  the  Pacific  under  about  40°  or  45°.  One  of  these
adulterated  maps  was,  in  Hudson's  time,  hung  up
in  Whitehall  Gallery.  It  had  been  seen  there  in
Elizabeth's  reign  by  Hakluyt,  and  was  afterwards
inspected  by  Purchas.  Attention  had  so  frequently
been  drawn  to  this  celebrated  planisphere,  by  Gil-


Clxxii  INTRODUCTION.

bert,  Haklayt,  and  others,  that  a  man  like  Hudson
would  not  lose  the  opportunity  of  examining  it.

The  coasts  oT  Lahrador,  Neivfoundland^  Canada^
Nova  Scotia,  and  Netv  Brunswick  were,  on  the  maps
and  charts  of  this  period,  laid  down  from  Portuguese
and  French  surveys.  The  importance  of  these  shores
consisted  alone  in  the  codfisheries.  Great  attention
was  therefore  paid  to  the  sandbanks  and  shoals,
many  of  which  had  French  names.  The  term  of  Neiu-
foundland  (Terre  Neuve,  Terra  Nova)  was  somewhat
vaguely  applied  to  most  of  these  fisheries.  Juet,
Hudson's  companion  in  the  third  voyage,  applies  it
to  a  part  of  coast  as  far  south  as  43°  20'.

The  New  England  shore  was  drawn  by  Ortelius
from  a  very  imperfect  Spanish  delineation,  into  which
some  French  materials  had  been  introduced,  alto-
gether a  most  unsatisfactory  combination.  Hudson
does  not  seem  to  have  had  a  better  chart  at  his  dis-
posal, although  Juet,  his  companion,  makes  mention
of  Gosnold's  voyage  (1602),  The  very  terms  in  which
he  speaks  of  it  prove  how  vague  was  his  knowledge.
Finally,  as  regards  the  shores  in  the  immediate  neigh-
bourhood of  Hudson's  river,  we  have  repeatedly
stated  that  they  had  been  drawn  by  Estevan  Gomez,
copied  by  Ribero,  and,  from  Ribero,  with  additions
by  other  geographers.  From  such  a  copy,  probably
from  a  French  compilation,  Ortelius'  outline  of  the
region  is  taken.  This  process  of  copying  from  copies,
which  is  known  to  be  dangerous  to  pictures,  could
not  fail  to  exercise  a  bad  infiuence  on  geographical
drawings  ;  especially  at  that   period,  where  all   the


INTRODUCTION.  clxxui

methods  of  mapmaking  were  yet  in  their  infancy.
Such  is,  in  fact,  the  case  here.  The  neighbourhood
of  Hudson's  river  on  Ortelius'  map  is  in  outline,  lati-
tude and  longitude  so  incorrect,  that  it  requires  the
comparison  with  the  sources  and  a  knowledge  of  its
history  to  convince  us  that  it  is  based  on  a  careful
survey.  It  could  offer  no  assistance  to  the  navigator
who  proceeded  to  these  coasts,  and  the  whole  labour
of  exploration  had  again  to  be  undergone.

Hudson  seems  to  have  had  at  his  disposal  another
chart  of  the  same  region,  which  is  not  by  any  means
of  greater  accuracy,  though  also,  and  more  directly,
based  on  an  original  survey.  In  Hakluyt's  Divers
Voyages,  is  to  be  found  a  planisphere,  drawn  by
Michael  Lok,  the  well  known  geographer,  who  aided
Frobisher  with  money  and  advice.  This  planisphere
is  partly  based  on  the  explorations  of  Verazzano,
whose  original  chart  of  these  coasts  had  fallen  into
Lok's  hands.  Verazzano  had  been  in  England  after
his  great  voyage  of  discovery ;  and  is  supposed  to
have  joined  the  two  vessels  sent  out  from  here  in
1527,  as  we  have  had  occasion  to  observe.  A  copy
of  Lok's  planisphere  is  to  be  found  in  Mr.  J.  Winter
Jones'  edition  of  Hakluyt's  Divers  Voyages.

Lok's  chart  has  one  very  remarkable  feature.  The
continent  of  America  appears,  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Hudson's  river,  as  a  mere  strip  of  land,  on  the  other
side  of  which  the  broad  Pacific  opens.  Had  Lok
heard  of  the  great  Canadian  lakes,  or  had  such
information  even  reached  Verazzano  \  This  singular
notion,  wliatever  its  origin  may  have  been,  seems  to


Clxxiv  INTRODUCTION.

have  led  to  Hudson's  voyage  along  these  shores,  and
to  the  discovery  of  Hudson's  river.

We  have  now  concluded  the  geographical  review
of  the  coasts  which  Hudson  visited,  and  have  shown
how  they  appeared  to  him  and  to  his  contemporaries,
before  his  own  explorations  increased  the  stock  of
knowledge,  and  rectified  some  of  the  numerous  errors.
We  have  only  two  more  observations  to  add  to  this
part  of  our  subject.

The  continuity  of  the  American  coast  from  35°  N.
down  to  the  strait  of  Magellan,  was  an  undoubted
and  long  established  fact.  The  search  for  a  strait
must,  therefore,  be  confined  to  the  parts  north  of  35°
on  the  eastern  side.  On  the  western  side  an  accurate
search  had  been  made  by  the  Spaniards,  up  to  45°
N.,  and  no  strait  from  west  to  east  had  been  dis-
covered. A  vague  rumour  was  current,  that  some-
where in  the  north  the  A  merican  and  the  Asiatic  shore
are  separated  merely  by  a  strait.  This  notion,  which
later  explorations  have  confirmed,  had  its  origin  in  a
misinterpretation  of  a  passage  of  Marco  Polo.  The
celebrated  Strait  of  Anian,  which  has  been  identified
with  the  real  strait  of  Cook  and  Behring,  was  originally
a  mere  delusion.  It  was  placed  much  too  far  south-
ward ;  and  the  Spanish  explorations  along  the
western  coast  of  North  America,  caused  Hondius  to
doubt  whether  there  really  was  a  Strait  of  Anian.
Some  geographers,  however,  (Frobisher  among  them),
entertained  the  very  curious  notion  that  the  arctic
parts  of  America  formed  a  continuation  of  Asia,  so
that  the  Pacific  ran   out  into  a  bay  on  its  nortliern


INTRODUCTION.  clxXV

side.  Frobisher  and  his  companions  thought,  that
Frobisher's  Strait,  which  they  identified  with  the
Strait  of  Anian,  divided  America  from  Europe.

In  the  foregoing  pages  of  this  introduction,  such
explanations  have  been  furnished  to  the  reader  as
will  enable  him  to  estimate  the  value  of  the  journals
in  which  Hudson's  doings  are  recorded.  An  attempt
has  also  been  made  to  explain  the  antiquated
geographical  terms  and  notions  which  are  to  be  found
in  these  journals,  so  as  to  render  them  fully  in-
telligible to  the  student  of  the  present  day.  We
might  then  consider  our  task  as  performed.  But
the  fragmentary  nature  of  the  intelligence  which  we
have  collected,  makes  it  binding  upon  us  to  assist
the  reader  in  arranging  these  fragments,  and  to  clear
away  for  him  the  difficulties  which  may  arise  from
their  mutual  contradictions.  We  have,  besides,
some  minor  points  to  examine,  and  to  gather  those
few  biographical  details  which  are  scattered  here  and
there  in  our  sources.  These  are  the  objects  to  which
the  last  pages  of  our  introduction  will  be  devoted.
To  give  some  kind  of  unity  to  these  various  inquiries,
we  are  going  to  connect  them  as  much  as  possible
with  Hudson's  life.  Still  we  would  request  the
reader  not  to  mistake  these  last  pages  for  an  intended
biography  of  Henry  Hudson.

The  records  which  we  have  collected  embrace
Hudson's  career,  from  the  19th  of  April,  1607,  four
days  previous  to  his  departure  on  the  first  north-
eastern voyage,  to  the  21st  of  June,  1611,  when  he
was  exposed  in  an  open  skiff  on  the  inland  sea  which


Clxxvi  INTRODUCTION.

he  had  explored.  His  ultimate  fate,  concerning
which  but  too  little  doubt  can  exist,  has  not  been
witnessed  by  human  beings  that  lived  to  relate  it.
We  know  still  less  of  his  birth  than  of  his  death.
His  doings  before  the  19th  of  April,  1607,  his  family
connections,  his  social  position,  are  equally  unknown
to  us.  Of  his  private  life  we  learn  but  one  fact,
namely,  that  a  son  of  his,  a  boy  named  John,  accom-
panied him  on  his  voyages  and  died  with  him  the
same  cruel  death.  The  name  which  he  has  made
illustrious  is  not  uncommon  either  among  the  higher
or  the  lower  classes  of  this  country.  Though  not  borne
by  any  one  of  the  great  territorial  families,  it  belongs
to  a  number  of  persons  of  good  estate,  especially  in
the  northern  counties.  There  are  clergymen  of  the
name  of  Hudson  in  almost  every  county  in  England.
We  have  no  means  of  knowing  whether  Henry  Hud-
son himself  was  a  gentleman  by  nature  only,  or  also
by  birth.  He  is  repeatedly  called  "  JNIaster  Henry
Hudson"  in  the  logbooks  ;  this  would  mean  as  much
as  "  Henry  Hudson,  Esquire,"  does  in  our  days,  were
it  used  of  any  one  but  a  seaman.  But  in  Hudson's
case  it  may,  and  probably  does,  mean  "Captain  Henry
Hudson."  The  whole  question  is,  however,  so  trivial,
that  it  is  scarcely  worth  the  space  we  have  devoted
to  it,  and  it  need  not  even  be  regretted  that  our  sources
leave  it  without  an  answer.

When  we  say  that  no  event  of  Hudson's  career,
before  the  year  1607,  is  known,  we  put  entirely
aside  the  testimony  of  Adrian  van  der  Donck.  This
author  relates  some  events  of  our   navigator's  life,


INTRODUCTION.  clxxvii

Avhich,  if  they  were  true,  must  have  taken  place
before  1607 ;  namely,  a  prolonged  residence  in  Hol-
land, and  several  years  service  on  board  Dutch  vessels.
But  we  have  above  shown  that  Van  der  Donck's
account  contains  a  whole  tissue  of  idle  inventions,
put  forward  to  prove  the  Dutch  title  to  New  Nether-
land,  and  that  the  notice  here  alluded  to  is  probably
among  the  number  of  these  inventions.

Hudson's  first  real  appearance  on  the  scene  is  in
1607.  The  position  in  which  we  first  meet  him  was  a
most  honourable  one.  He  was,  in  1607,  a  captain  in
the  service  of  the  Muscovy  Company,  an  association
distinguished  by  the  high  aims  it  pursued,  the
services  it  had  rendered  to  the  country,  and  the
eminence  of  the  men  who  commanded  its  vessels.
This  company  still  bore  the  stamp  impressed  upon  it
by  Sebastian  Cabot.  The  evils  against  which  the  aid
of  Cabot's  genius  had  once  been  invoked,  had  indeed
long  since  been  removed.  There  was  now  no  fear  of
the  privileges  of  the  Hanse,  nor  any  languor  in
English  commerce.  The  vast  enterprise  of  the
Muscovy  Company  itself,  and  other  similar  under-
takings for  w^hich  that  company  had  served  as  the
model,  were  carrying  England  rapidly  forward  in  that
glorious  career,  in  which  she  was  destined  to  outstrip
all  other  nations.  The  company  had  wisely  adhered
to  Cabot's  precepts.  All  their  enterprise  was  still
directed  towards  that  quarter  of  the  globe  with  which
the  name  of  Cabot  is  so  intimately  bound  up,  namely,
the  north.  They  had  not  even  renounced  the  idea
of  finding  a  short  northern  route  to  China,  although


Clxxviii  INTRODUCTION.

the  ample  returns  of  the  East  India  Company  which
traded  by  the  ordinary  route,  rendered  that  discovery
less  urgently  desirable  than  it  had  been  in  Cabot's
time.

The  Muscovy  Company  had  also  remained  faithful
to  the  new  method  which  Sebastian  Cabot  had,  for
their  benefit,  introduced  into  the  science  of  naviga-
tion. The  logbook^  the  most  admirable  of  all  the
inventions  for  the  furtherance  of  that  science,  owed
its  origin  and  development  to  the  Muscovy  Com-
pany. How  greatly  navigation  and  geography  are  in-
debted to  them  for  this  service,  appears  clearly  when
we  compare  Verazzano's  account  of  his  voyage  to
Hudson's  river,  with  Juet's  journal  of  Hudson's
expedition  to  the  same  coasts.  We  observe  Yerazzano,
a  man  of  great  talent,  making  painful  efforts  to
convey  a  clear  meaning,  and  succeeding  but  in-
differently ;  whilst  Juet,  a  man  of  ordinary  abilities,
furnishes  us  with  an  account  in  which  every  step  can
be  clearly  traced.  Nor  is  Verazzano's  failure,  or
Juet's  success,  at  all  isolated.  Verazzano's  narrative
is  very  nearly  the  best  maritime  record  of  its  period ;
whilst  Juet's  journal  is  in  every  respect  surpassed  by
many  anterior  logbooks.  The  difference  between
Juet  and  Verazzano,  as  far  as  it  is  to  the  disadvantage
of  the  latter,  consists  not  in  their  respective  talent,
but  in  the  methods  they  made  use  of.  Juet's  journal
is  modelled  on  the  logbooks  of  his  predecessors,  such
as  Barents,  Davis,  and  others  ;  and  these  men  are
followers  of  Willoughby,  Chancellor,  Burrough,  Pet,
and  Jackman,   and  other  captains   of  the    Muscovy


INTRODUCTION.  clxxix

Company.  The  captains  of  the  company  again  were
but  carrying  out  one  of  the  commands  contained  in
the  instructions  given  to  Willoughby  and  Chancel-
lor by  Sebastian  Cabot,^  the  real  originator  of  the
logbooJc.

One  of  the  most  remarkable  features  in  these  log-
books of  the  Muscovy  Company  was  the  attention
paid  to  magnetic  variations.  This  kind  of  research
was  first  of  all  systematically  pursued  by  the  Mus-
covy Company,  and  doubtless  at  Cabot's  instigation,
although  no  positive  proof  of  this  fact  has  been  pre-
served.

We  have  made  the  preceding  statements  in  order
to  place  Hudson's  journals  in  their  true  light.  These
journals  are  very  remarkable.  Yet  it  would  be  unfair
to  exaggerate,  at  the  expense  of  others,  Hudson's
merit  in  writing  them.  Were  we  to  look  at  Hud-
son's journals  separately,  and  not  in  connexion
with  other  logbooks  of  the  same  period  and  of  the
same    company,    we    might    consider    them    as    still

^  "  Item,  that  the  marchants  and  other  skilful  persons  in  writing
shall  daily  write,  describe,  and  put  in  memoire  the  navigation  of
every  day  and  night,  with  the  points  and  observations  of  the  lands,
tides,  elements,  altitude  of  the  sunne,  course  of  the  moon  and
starres,  and  the  same  so  noted  by  the  order  of  the  master  and
pilot  of  every  ship  to  be  put  in  writing,  the  captains  generall
assembling  the  masters  together  once  every  week  (if  winde  and
weather  shall  serve)  to  conferre  all  the  observations  and  notes  of
the  said  ships,  to  the  intent  it  may  appear  wherein  the  notes  do
agree,  and  wherein  they  dissent,  and  upon  good  debatement,  deli-
beration, and  conclusion,  determined  to  put  the  same  into  a  common
ledger,  to  remain  as  record  for  the  company." — CahoC s  Instruc-
tions, §  7.     Hakluyt  i,  p.  226.


clxXX  INTRODUCTION.

greater  achievements  than  they  really  are.  They
contain,  in  fact,  no  original  feature.  It  is  only  by
mistake  that  the  first  observations  of  the  dip  and
variation  of  the  needle,  at  least  among  arctic  navi-
gators, have  been  attributed  to  Hudson.  Such  obser-
vations are  to  be  found  in  Cabot's  chart,  in  the  log-
books of  the  men  who  followed  his  instructions,  and
also  in  the  papers  of  those  who  imitated  his  follow-
ers. The  system  of  Hudson's  logbooks  seems  to  have
been  adopted  in  obedience  to  a  standing  order  of  the
Muscovy  Company.  It  is  not,  however,  our  inten-
tion to  depreciate  these  writings  of  our  navigator.
They  possess  every  merit  except  that  of  originality,
and  are  perfect  models  of  their  kind.

Another  peculiar  feature  of  the  logbooks  of  the
Muscovy  Company  was  the  great  number  of  observa-
tions of  the  heavenly  bodies  made  by  their  captains.
In  this  respect  Hudson  offers  a  very  bright  example,
and  we  might  therefore  expect  a  very  great  accu-
racy in  his  latitudes.  But  such  accuracy  is  not  to
be  found.  This  is  owing,  not  to  any  want  of  care
on  his  part,  but  to  the  imperfection  of  the  instru-
ments he  made  use  of.  It  would  be  easy  to  describe
these  instruments  in  detail.  There  was  published  in
London,  in  the  very  year  when  Hudson  first  started,
a  mariner's  manual,  by  the  celebrated  John  Davis.
In  that  extremely  remarkable  volume  we  find,  not
only  descriptions  of  all  the  mariners'  instruments
and  explicit  directions  for  their  use,  but  also  wood-
cut figures  illustrating  tliem,  such  as  have  been
introduced    into    popular    manuals    of    the    present


INTRODUCTION.  clxxxi

day.  The  reason  why  we  have  refrained  from  giving
extracts  from  that  volume  is  obvious.  Our  intro-
duction already  exceeds  the  usual  limits,  and  that
subject  does  not  strictly  belong  to  it.  We  must
therefore  refer  the  reader  to  Davis'  work,  a  copy  of
which  is  in  the  British  Museum  Library.

As  to  the  accuracy  or  want  of  accuracy  in  Hud-
son's observations,  it  is  in  most  cases  impossible  to
test  it.  Most  of  the  shores  which  he  visited,  such,  for
instance,  as  Nova  Zembla,  Spitzbergen,  Jan  Mayen,
Greenland,  Hudson's  Strait  and  Bay,  are  even  now
very  imperfectly  known.  Even  now  errors  of  several
minutes  with  respect  to  almost  every  part  of  these
shores  may,  with  too  good  reason,  be  suspected  in
the  charts.  We  therefore  lack  the  most  important
of  all  the  means  of  testing  the  accuracy  of  anterior
statements.  A  still  greater  difficulty  is  that  nearly
all  the  points  mentioned  by  Hudson  are  for  us  little
better  than  mere  names.  The  Islands  of  God's  Mercij^
Hold  with  Hope^  Hakluyfs  Headland^  and  other  names
given  by  Hudson,  are  still  to  be  found  on  the  maps
and  charts ;  but  whether  the  places  so  named  by
him  and  those  now  called  so  are  really  identical,
cannot  be  established  by  any  satisfactory  evidence.

It  is,  moreover,  certain,  that  some  of  Hudson's  lati-
tudes which  we  can  check  are  wrong.  Such  is  the
case  with  regard  to  the  most  northern  and  most
southern  part  of  Spitzbergen,  with  regard  to  Cape
Farewell  and  Cape  Wolstenholme.  The  errors  which
must  have  been  made  in  these  instances  amount  to  at
least  seven  or  eight  minutes  in  each  case.    These  posi-


Clxxxii  TNTRODUCTION.

tive  proofs  of  incorrectness  must  render  us  suspicious
even  where  such  positive  proofs  are  wanting.  When
we  add  to  this  the  entire  absence  of  longitudes  in
Hudson's  journals,  the  deceptive  influence  exercised
on  the  dead  reckoning  by  the  varying  currents  of
the  arctic  regions,  and  the  want  of  good  modern
charts,  it  becomes  obvious  that  it  would  be  a  mere
delusion  were  we  to  trace  Hudson's  course  with  pre-
ciseness,  and  to  point  out  as  certain  the  latitude  and
longitude  of  every  locality  mentioned  by  him.

We  have,  on  this  account,  been  extremely  sparing
with  geographical  notes  to  the  text  of  Hudson's
journals.  The  precise  localities  mentioned  by  him
seem  to  us  dubious  in  almost  every  instance,  and  it
would  scarcely  have  been  right  to  enter  into  long
discussions,  with  the  conclusion  that,  after  all,  we
are  not  able  to  settle  the  matter.  It  is  not  our  in-
tention to  commit,  in  these  last  pages,  the  mistake
that  we  have  tried  to  avoid  in  our  notes  ;  and  we
shall  here  refrain  from  this  kind  of  discussion,  except
in  a  few  isolated  instances.  In  defence  of  the  some-
what exceptional  course  we  are  thus  pursuing,  we  may
perhaps  be  allowed  to  state  it  as  our  opinion,  that
the  importance  of  a  navigator's  career  consists,  not  so
much  in  the  coasts  he  touched,  as  in  the  new  know-
ledge acquired  and  conveyed  by  him.

Many  great  men  attempted,  before  and  after  Hud-
son, to  solve  the  problem  of  a  short  northern  route
to  China.  But  he  surpasses  all  his  predecessors  and
all  his  followers  in  the  variety  of  means  he  employed
to  obtain  that  great  end.     This  variety  of  devices


INTHODUCTION.  clxXXui

within  a  narrow  scope,  the  very  test  of  an  ener-
getic mind,  was  perhaps  in  part  due  to  his  singular
and  exceptional  situation.  Each  of  his  predecessors
had  confined  his  efforts  to  only  one  direction,  trying
the  chances  that  might  be  offered  within  a  com-
paratively limited  area,  and  these  chances  had  thus
been  reduced  to  a  small  number  of  seeming  proba-
bilities. The  probabilities  would  have  appeared  still
fewer,  had  the  explorations  been  made  and  chronicled
with  modern  accuracy.  As  it  was,  there  remained  in
every  direction  some  delusive  hopes,  which  it  still
required  a  renewed  search  to  dispel.  One  of  Hud-
son's many  great  merits  consists  in  having  proved
several  of  these  delusions  to  be  what  they  were,  and
thus  to  have  further  limited  the  area  of  the  search
for  a  short  road  to  China.  The  efforts  of  all  those
after  him,  like  those  of  each  of  his  predecessors,  were
then  more  confined  than  his  own.  Hudson  himself
tried  within  the  last  few  years  of  his  life,  first  the
way  across  the  North  Pole,  then  the  way  by  the  north
of  Spitzbergen  eastwards  ;  he  attempted  to  penetrate
through  the  Nova  Zembla  group,  and  having  failed
to  do  so,  undertook  another  expedition  to  the  same
quarter.  He  afterwards  tried  to  cross  what  seemed
a  narrow  isthmus,  between  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific,
in  latitude  40°.  He  at  last  sailed  far  westward
through  his  strait  and  bay,  and  perished  in  the  midst
of  his  hopes  and  plans.  It  is  curious  that  he  missed
the  only  real  chance,  namely,  the  way  through  Davis'
Strait  and  Baffin's  Bay.  But,  if  we  may  conclude
from  what  he  had  done  up  to  his  death,  it  is  proba-


clxxxiv  INTRODUCTION.

ble  enough  that  he  wouhl  not  have  left  that  way
untried  had  he  lived  longer.  He  was  one  of  those
men  who,  whether  successful  or  not,  will  not  leave  to
any  one  after  them  the  right  to  boast  of  having
accomplished  what  they  had  despaired  of.

Hudson's  first  attempt  was  to  sail  across  the  North
Pole,  a  plan  started  in  1527  by  Robert  Tliorne,  but
not  yet  acted  upon  by  any  one  during  the  eighty
years  that  had  since  passed.  The  voyage  to  which
this  idea  gave  rise  is  well  described  in  Playse's  log-
book, where  the  reader  will  find  all  its  details.  A
short  summary  of  the  main  points  may,  however,
prove  useful.

Hudson  left  London  the  23rd  of  April,  1607,  with
the  intention  of  sailing  across  the  North  Pole  to
China  and  Japan.  His  course  carried  him  to  the
Shetland  Islands.  Thence  he  sailed  to  the  north-
west, passing,  as  it  seems,  close  by  Iceland  without
perceiving  it.  He  arrived  on  the  13th  of  June  off
the  Greenland  coast,  in  latitude  67°  30',  doubting
whether  the  land  he  saw  was  an  island,  or  the  En-
groneland,  or  Groneland  of  the  Zeni.  To  this  ques-
tion he  had  received  no  satisfactory  answer,  even
after  six  days'  stay  in  that  neighbourhood.  It  does
not  appear  how  great  was  his  distance  from  the  coast
during  these  six  days ;  but  he  certainly  never  landed.
To  a  prominent  cape,  and  to  a  mountain  near  it,  he
gave  the  names  of  Young's  Cape  and  Mount  of  God's
Mercy.  These  are,  for  us,  nothing  more  than  mere
names.  The  coast  of  Greenland  in  67°  30'  has  never
been  well  explored,  and  Hudson's  own  indication  is


INTRODUCTION.  clxXXV

vague  in  the  extreme.  Hudson  himself  continued  to
be  in  doubt  as  to  the  real  nature  of  the  coast  near
him.  He  even  thought  it  possible  that  it  might  be
an  island,  at  the  north-eastern  point  of  which  he
had  arrived.  He  was  thus  exposed  to  an  error  very
similar  to  the  one  committed  by  Davis,  who  con-
sidered the  south  of  Greenland  as  an  undiscovered
island.  Hudson's  farther  course  along  the  east  coast
of  Greenland  also  offered  striking  analogies  with  Davis'
explorations  along  the  western  shore.  Davis  had
lost  sight  of  the  coast,  had  unconsciously  followed
its  bend,  and  had  again  fallen  in  with  it.

In  a  like  manner  Hudson  now  left  the  Greenland
shore  with  the  intention  of  steering  to  Spitzbergen  ;
and  his  north-eastern  course  brought  him,  after  two
days  sailing,  on  the  21st  June,  1607,  again  to  the
Greenland  coast,  which  on  its  eastern  side  trends  to
the  north-east,  as  on  its  western  side  it  trends  to  the
north-west.  He  again  reached  the  Greenland  coast
in  latitude  73°,  and  called  his  new  discovery  Hold
with  Hope^  a  name  still  to  be  found  on  maps  of  the
arctic  regions,  although  it  would  be  impossible  to
point  out  the  exact  locality  to  which  it  was  first
given.

Following  his  north-eastern  direction  Hudson  tried,
during  the  last  days  of  June,  to  sail  northwards,  wher-
ever he  might  be  able  to  do  so.  But  he  seems  to
have  been  prevented  from  progressing  towards  the
pole  by  the  well-known  ice  barrier  between  Green-
land and  Spitzbergen,  which  has  been  so  well  de-
scribed   by    Dr.    Scoresby.      This    barrier  generally


clxXXvi  INTRODUCTION.

forms  at  that  time  of  the  year  an  undulating  line
between  the  74th  and  80th  degrees  of  latitude,  reach-
ing farthest  to  the  south  near  the  Greenland  coast,
and  being  nearest  to  the  pole  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Spitzbergen.  Hudson  was  the  first  modern  navi-
gator who  sailed  along  this  barrier.  His  logbook
does  not,  however,  contain  a  sufficient  number  of
data  to  enable  us  to  trace  the  line  of  the  ice  as  it  was
in  June  1607.

"When  Hudson  was  approaching  the  Spitzbergen
coast,  he  looked  out  for  a  cape,  discovered  by  Barents,
and  called  by  him  Vogel  Hoeck,  a  point  which  was,
as  it  seems,  indicated  on  the  chart  used  by  Hudson.^
This  point  is  probably  identical  with  the  Vogel  Hoeck
of  the  later  and  more  accurate  maps  of  the  country,
though  such  identities  of  name  are  not  always  suffi-
cient proofs  of  identity  of  place.  It  would  be  inter-
esting to  settle  this  question,  but  this  cannot  be  done
from  the  materials  now  in  existence.

Supposing  that  identity  to  exist,  we  find  Hud-
son on  the  28th  of  June,  1607,  near  the  western
point  of  Charles'  Island. ^  For  the  Vogel  Hoeck  of
the  later  Dutch  maps  is  the  same  cape  which  Dr.
Scoresby  calls  Fair  Foreland,  and  which  he   places,

*  Vogel  Ilocck  is  expressly  mentioned  by  Hudson  as  the  point
he  Mas  looking  out  for.  The  point  is  also  to  be  found  on  Hon-
dius'  chart.  The  locality  where  the  Vogel  Hock  of  later  maps
(English  charts  call  it  Fair  Foreland)  is  situated,  namely,  the
north-west  point  of  Charles'  Islands,  seems  in  every  respect  to
agree  with  what  we  know  of  the  Vogel  Hoeck  of  Barents.

*  Charles'  Island  is  the  most  western  of  the  forelands  by  which
the  mainland  of  Spitzbergen  is  surrounded.


INTRODUCTION.  clxxxvii

according  to  his  own  survey,  in  78°  53'  N.,  9'  17'  E.
The  last  two  days  of  June  were  spent  off  the  coast  of
Charles  Island.  From  the  1st  to  the  6th  of  June,
Hudson  seems  to  have  sailed  backwards  and  forwards
in  the  Foreland  Fiord,  between  Charles'  Island  and
the  mainland  of  Spitzbergen.  This  at  least  is  the  most
consistent  result  that  can  be  derived  from  his  notes,
in  which  every  kind  of  vagueness  is  accumulated.
The  chart  he  used  was  very  imperfect,  he  was  con-
tending with  ice  and  fog,  and  his  observations  of
latitude,  though  there  are  three  in  five  days,  are  not
thoroughly  reliable.  But  in  spite  of  these  drawbacks,
the  above  mentioned  course  seems  to  be  marked  out
with  sufficient  certainty  and  clearness.  Hudson  then
sailed  into  the  Foreland  Fiord  on  its  northern  side,
the  1st  of  July,  and  left  it,  on  its  southern  side,  the
6th  of  the  same  month,  having  passed  the  intervening
six  days  in  the  Fiord.  From  the  9th  to  the  11th  of
June,  Hudson  sailed  back,  on  the  opposite,  or  outward
side  of  Charles' Island,  the  distance  he  had  sailed  within
the  Fiord.  He  continued  this  northern  course  on  the
12th,  and  arrived  on  the  13th,  off  the  north-eastern
part  of  Spitzbergen  ;  that  part  of  the  country,  to
which  Barents  and  his  companions  had  more  parti-
cularly applied  the  name  of  Nieidand,  or  the  land  under
80  degrees.  From  the  13th  to  the  15th  of  July,  Hud-
son sailed  eastwards  along  the  northern  coast,  explor-
ing some  of  its  fiords,  islands  and  harbours,  and  giving
the  names  of  Hakluyt's  Headland,  Colin's  Cape,  and
Whale  Bay,  to  three  localities.  Of  these  names  the
first  only  has  been  preserved  on  charts.      Whether


clxXXViii  INTRODUCTION.

the  point  now  so  called,  and  the  one  so  named  by
Hudson,  are  absolutely  identical,  cannot  be  shown
from  the  existing  evidence.  It  does  not  appear
whether  any  of  the  sailors  who  accompanied  Hudson
afterwards  revisited  Spitzbergen,  and  then  recognised
the  points  marked  out  by  him.  This  would  be  the
only  satisfactory  manner  of  establishing  such  an
identity  of  place,  as  latitudes,  longitudes,  and  dead
reckoning,  as  well  as  the  charts  based  upon  them,  are
all  equally  deceptive.

The  23rd  of  July,  Hudson  was  by  observation  in
latitude  80°  23',  the  highest  observation  ever  made
by  him.  After  two  more  days  of  north-eastern  sail-
ing, he  reckoned  himself  to  be  in  latitude  81°.  Much
doubt  has,  with  good  reason,  been  thrown  on  this
assertion  of  Henry  Hudson.  The  localities  which  he
described  do  not  bear  it  out,  and  considerable  mis-
takes are  likely  to  have  occurred  to  a  man  judging  by
his  dead  reckoning  only,  without  knowing  the
currents  that  set  in  those  parts.  Sir  Edward  Parry
vainly  tried,  in  this  very  region,  to  make  head
against  a  violent  north-easterly  current,  which
eventually  frustrated  his  boat- sledge  expedition
towards  the  North  Pole.

This  current  may  have  deceived  our  navigator.  On
the  16th  he  believed  that  he  saw  land, "trending  north
in  our  sight,  by  means  of  the  clearness  of  the  weather,
stretching  far  into  82°,  and  by  the  bowing  or
shewing  of  the  skie  much  further."  It  is  unfortunately
now  impossible  to  say  how  far  he  was  right  or  wrong-
in  these  estimates;   nor  to  point  out  the  exact  spot  he


INTRODUCTION.  clxxxix

reached,  and  it  would  lead  to  nothing  were  we  to  build
some  futile  theory  on  the  loose  evidence  at  our  dis-
posal. Hudson's  own  conclusion  was :  "  that  between
78  degrees  and  a  half  and  82  degrees  by  this  way,
there  is  no  passage";  a  conclusion  which  is  practically
correct,  though  geographically  somewhat  exaggerated.

He  returned  westwards  on  the  1 6th  of  July,  was
tlie  same  day  near  Collin's  Cape,  and  seems  to  have
rounded  the  north-eastern  peninsula  of  Spitzbergen
the  following  or  the  next  day.  The  20th  of  July,  he
had  already  sailed  some  distance  down  the  west  coast,
and  was  entering  Bell  Sound,  in  latitude  77°  26',
which  he  explored.  From  the  one-and-twentieth  to
the  five-and-twentieth,  Hudson  seems  to  have
hesitated,  and  to  have  been  uncertain  about  his
future  movements.  We  find  him  steering  in  various
directions  without  any  apparent  object ;  nor  can  this
be  wondered  at,  considering  how  new  Spitzbergen
was  to  him.  The  chart  he  had  with  him  indicated
scarcely  more  than  the  mere  existence  of  these
remarkable  islands.

On  the  five-and-twentieth  we  find  Hudson  near
the  west  coast,  in  78°.  He  then  again  sailed  north-
wards, and  was  on  the  seven- and-twentieth  near
Collin's  Cape,  one  of  the  points  of  the  north  coast,
discovered  by  him  ten  or  eleven  days  before.  The
same  day  he  again  returned  to  the  south  ;  having  first
ascertained  that  the  ice  barrier  between  Spitzbergen
and  Greenland  was  as  firm  as  it  had  been  in  June.
Otherwise  he  would  have  tried  to  pass  through  it,  and
to  return  home  by  the  north  of  Greenland,  through


CXC  '    INTRODUCTION.

Davis'  Strait.  The  latter  plan  proves  his  ignorance
of  the  real  conformation  of  Greenland  ;  a  fact  upon
which  we  have  already  had  ample  occasion  to  dwell.

Thus  hemmed  in  on  three  sides,  he  was  again
obliged  to  return  to  the  south.  He  sailed  southwards
along  the  whole  west  coast  of  the  group ;  from  80°
to  76°  30',  during  the  last  days  of  July.  Having  been
on  the  28th,  by  observation,  in  latitude  76°  36*,
Hudson  accounted  himself,  on  the  thirtieth,  in  lati-
tude 76°.  He  tells  us,  however,  at  the  same  time,
that  he  was  then  near  the  coast,  which  he  describes
as  mountainous.  Now  Spitzbergen  does  not  reach
down  farther  than  to  76°  30',  and  Hudson's  latitude
was  therefore  faulty.  This  error  was  certainly  in
part  due  to  the  currents  to  which  we  have  alluded.
Yet  it  cannot  have  entirely  arisen  from  that  source.
Had  the  observation  of  the  28th  been  correct,  and
had  Hudson  really  then  been  only  a  few  miles  from
the  southern  point  of  Spitzbergen,  this  fact  could  not
possibly  have  escaped  him  during  the  two  days  he
remained  in  that  neighbourhood.  We  then  arrive  at
the  painful  but  complete  conviction,  that  his  observa-
tion also  was  faulty.  It  is  of  the  greater  importance
to  ascertain  this  fact,  because  few  only  of  Hudson's
latitudes  can  be  tested  in  a  similar  manner.

Having  left  Spitzbergen,  Hudson  continued  his
course,  and  arrived  on  the  31st  of  July  off  Bear  or
Cherie  Island.  The  home  voyage,  after  the  departure
from  that  spot,  was  accomplished  in  a  month  and  a
half.  The  15th  of  August  Hudson  reached  the
Farocr  Islands  ;  and  exactly  a  month  afterwards  he


INTRODUCTION.  CXCl

arrived  at  Tilbury  in  the  Thames.  So  much  we
learn  from  Playse's  logbook.  But  we  find  too  good
reason  to  regret  the  loss  of  Hudson's  own  journal,
from  which  the  following  notice^  has  been  extracted  :

**  And  in  ranging  homewards  he  discovered  an  island
lying  in  seventy-one  degrees,  which  he  called  Hudson's
Tutches."

We  have,in  ournote  to  this  passage,  already  observed
that  there  is  but  one  island  in  latitude  71°  which  can
here  be  meant,  namely,  Jan  May  en  ;  and  that  Jan
Mayen  in  fact  is  identical  with  Hudson's  Touches.
This  opinion  is  still  further  confirmed  by  a  document
which  had  then  escaped  our  notice.  We  have  ad-
verted to  the  claims  to  the  first  discovery  of  Spitzber-
gen  advanced  by  the  English  and  the  Dutch.  These
rival  claims  gave  rise  to  armed  struggles  in  the
Greenland  M^aters,  and  in  consequence  of  them,  to
applications  for  protection,  together  with  bitter
protests,  and  complaints  addressed  by  the  aggrieved
persons  to  their  respective  governments.  Some  of
these  protests  of  the  Muscovy  Company  have  been  pre-
served in  the  State-paper  office ;  and  in  one  of  them
we  find  the  following  passage :

"  Further,  William  Johnsonne  Millworth,  captain  of  the
Angell  of  Home,  certified  us  that  the  States  had  given  the
country  of  Greenland  unto  the  Zealanders,  and  Hudsoi's
Touches,  and  those  islands  adjoining,  unto  the  Hollanders  to
fish  therein,  warning  them  that  they  should  not  come  within
the  privileges  of  each  other,  and  that  they  were  animated  and
urged  by  the  States  themselves  for  their  fishing  voyage  this
yeare  1618,  otherwise  they  had  not  attempted  it."

1  P.  146.


CXCll  INTRODUCTION.

This  testimony  of  Johnsonne  Millwoith  is  borne
out  by  the  facts  of  the  case.  The  States  General  of
the  United  Provinces  had,  in  1617,  granted  the
fisheries  of  Jan  Mayen  to  the  Hollanders,  excluding
the  Zealanders  from  them.  It  is,  besides,  very
remarkable  that  we  find  on  Jan  Mayen,  almost
exactly  in  latitude  71°,  a  point  called  by  Dr.  Scoresby
Hudson  s  point.  Anyone  acquainted  with  the  writing
of  the  period,  will  at  once  remember  how  easily  an
H  of  that  time  could  be  read  as  an  E,.  The  point  was,
we  may  say  certainly,  called  Hudson's  point.  Ano-
ther locality  on  Jan  Mayen,  namely,  its  north-eastern
cape,  is  called  Youngs  Foreland.  James  Young,  one
of  Hudson's  companions,  was  the  man  who  had  first
espied  the  Greenland  coast.  The  north-eastern  cape
of  Jan  Mayen,  is  the  very  point  which  must  have
first  presented  itself  to  Hudson's  crew  as  the  ship  was
sailing  home  from  Bear  Island ;  and  the  man  who
first  saw  the  Greenland  shore  was  the  most  likely  to
forestall  here  also,  his  less  zealous,  or  less  sharp -sighted
companions.  There  is  no  reason  why  the  name  of
Hudson  s  Touches  should  not  be  replaced  on  maps  and
charts  ;  and  the  now  meaningless  Rudsons  point,
might  also  be  fairly  restored  to  its  original  meaning,
and  be  called  Hudson  s  point.  The  islands  adjoining
Jan  Mayen,  are  Egg  Island  to  the  south,  and  a  num-
ber of  small  rocky  islets  scattered  along  the  coasts.

Should  the  writer  of  the  present  pages  have  suc-
ceeded beyond  his  hopes  in  placing  the  geographical
notions  of  Hudson's  time,  and  the  anterior  endeavours
in  search    of  a  passage,  clearly   before    the   reader's


INTRODUCTION.  CXCllI


eye ;  it  would  then  be  easy  to  explain  to  the  reader
the  original  plan  of  Hudson's  first  voyage,  and  the
ideas  which  the  experience  collected  in  the  course
of  it,  developed  in  his  mind.

Hudson  first  started  with  the  plan  of  sailing  straight
across  the  North  Pole,  by  the  north  of  the  Engrone-
land  of  the  Zeni.  He  found  that  land  stretching
farther  eastwards  than  he  expected  ;  and  joining  it,
he  found  a  firm  barrier  of  ice,  which  offered  no
opening  in  its  whole  breadth  between  Greenland  and
Spitzbergen.  This  barrier  Hudson  sailed  along,
vainly  spying  out  for  a  passage  to  the  Pole.  "When  he
had  reached  the  neighbourhood  of  Spitzbergen,  he
knew  well  that  he  was  near  the  country  discovered  by
Barents  in  1596,  and  he  was  looking  out  for  some  of
the  points  noted  by  that  navigator.  But  though
Barents'  explorations  had  been  so  far  useful  to  Hud-
son, they  had  not  been  chronicled  with  sufficient
accuracy,  to  enable  Hudson  to  recognize  beforehand
the  real  conformation  of  Spitzbergen.  There  seemed
to  exist  a  hope  of  passing  through  what  has  since
been  proved  to  be  a  firm  body  of  land  ;  or  at  least  by
the  north  of  it.  These  attempts  Hudson  made ;  and  he
left  no  means  untried  which  seemed  to  off'er  a  hope  of
succeeding  in  this  really  hopeless  undertaking.  When
he  had  at  last  recognized  how  hopeless  it  was,  he  once
more  sailed  northwards  to  the  great  ice  barrier,  with
the  intention  of  finding  a  way  by  the  north  of
Engroneland  to  the  west ;  and  of  thus  entering  Davis'
Strait  by  a  northern  route.  He  soon  perceived  that
this  undertaking,  too,  off'ered  no  chance  of  success,  at


CXCIV  INTRODUCTION.

least,  if  begun  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Spitzbergen  ;
so  he  sailed  again  to  the  south.  It  is  not  unlikely  that
he  renewed  the  attempt  in  a  lower  latitude,  and
nearer  Greenland,  on  his  homeward  voyage  ;  and  that
he  arrived  in  this  manner  in  the  somewhat  too
westerly  longitude,  in  which  Jan  Mayen  and  the
Faroer  Islands  are  situated.  The  discovery  of  the
former  island  was  made  by  chance.

In  the  course  of  this  voyage  Hudson  made  two
observations,  the  one  interesting,  the  other  of  the
highest  importance.  The  first  observation  is  that  of
the  changing  colour  of  the  sea  near  Spitzbergen.  He
found  it  sometimes  blue,  sometimes  green,  sometimes
dark,  sometimes  clear  and  transparent.  "The  colour  of
the  Greenland  sea  varies  from  ultramarine  blue,"  says
Dr.  Scoresby,  "  to  olive  green  ;  and  from  the  most  pure
transparency  to  striking  opacity.  These  appearances
are  not  transitory  but  permanent ;  not  depending  on
the  state  of  the  w^eather,  but  on  the  quality  of  the
water.  Hudson,  when  he  visited  this  quarter  in  1607,
noticed  the  changes  in  the  colour  of  the  sea,  and
made  the  observation  that  the  sea  was  blue  where
there  was  ice,  and  green  where  it  was  most  open.
This  circumstance,  however,  was  merely  accidental."

The  other  observation  is  that  of  the  existence  of  a
vast  number  of  whales  and  morses  in  the  waters  Hud-
son had  visited.  This  observation  raised  Spitzber-
gen and  Jan  Mayen  Island  to  the  importance  which
they  have  since  assumed.

Hudson's  second  voyage  offers  fewer  subjects  for
comment  than   tlie  first.      Its  plan   is  very  simple.


INTRODUCTION.  CXCV

Having  found  by  experience  the  impractibility  of
Robert  Thome's  scheme,  Hudson  now  followed  in
the  track  of  those  of  his  predecessors  who  had  tried
to  find  a  way  to  China  by  the  north  east.  But  he
was  acquainted  with  their  failures  as  well  as  with
their  hopes,  and  he  knew  the  difficulties  which  a
passage  through  or  beyond  the  Nova  Zembla  group,
and  then  through  the  Kara  Sea,  presented.  Three
chances  for  passing  beyond  or  through  Nova  Zembla
seemed  to  exist,  namely,  to  sail  through  Vaigats
Straits,  south  of  Nova  Zembla  ;  to  pass  by  the  north  of
the  group,  as  Barents  had  done ;  and  thirdly,  to  pass
through  the  group  by  way  of  Costin  Shar,  a  bay  which
appeared  on  Barents'  chart  as  a  strait.  Hudson  was
ignorant  of  the  existence  of  the  real  straits  between
those  islands.  His  plan  then  was  either  to  go  by
the  north  or  by  the  south  of  Nova  Zembla,  or  through
Costin  Shar.  Should  he  thus  succeed  in  entering
the  Sea  of  Kara  (which  he  calls  the  Sea  of  Tartary),
he  would,  according  to  his  notions,  have  had  two
farther  stages  to  reach  or  pass ;  first,  the  mouth  of
the  Oby ;  then  Cape  Tabin.  He  knew  that  this
would  not  be  easy,  but  he  was  fully  prepared  to
encounter  the  dangers  of  what  he  considered  as  a
short  though  severe  struggle.  Beyond  Cape  Tabin
the  way  to  China  seemed  to  him  perfectly  smooth.

The  second  expedition,  then,  consists  of  the  follow-
ing parts.  Hudson's  voyage  out  until  he  arrived  in
latitude  75°  24',  between  Spitzbergen  and  Nova
Zembla  (April  22nd  to  June  11th,  1608):  his  vain
attempts  to  pass  to  the  north-east  beyond  the  Nova


CXCVl  INTRODUCTION.

Zembla  group,  and  his  struggles  with  the  ice,  where
he  sometimes  gains,  sometimes  loses  a  few  minutes  of
latitude  (June  18th  to  23rd) :  the  voyage  south-
wards along  the  group,  but  not  always  near  its  shore
(June  24th  to  29th) :  exploration  of  Costin  Shar,
and  discovery  that  it  is  a  bay,  not  a  strait  (June  29th
to  July  6th)  :  the  voyage  home  (July  6th  to  August
26th).  As  to  the  voyage  through  the  Vaigats  Strait,
the  chance  still  left  open  in  that  quarter,  Hudson  says
that  for  it  he  was  not  "  fitted  to  trie  or  prove."

We  call  the  reader's  particular  attention  to  a
passage  near  the  end  of  the  logbook,  entered  under
the  7th  of  August.  Hudson  must  at  that  time
have  been  about  in  latitude  62°  or  63°,  not  very
far  from  the  south  of  Greenland,  and  therefore  per-
fectly able  to  enter  into  Davis'  Strait  before  the
close  of  the  season.  He  says  that  he  for  a  moment
intended  to  do  so,  in  order  to  sail  a  hundred  leagues
either  into  Lumley's  Inlet  (Frobisher's  Strait)  or  into
The  Furious  Overfall  (Hudson's  Strait) ;  but  that
he  sacrificed  his  ambition  to  his  duty.  This  notice,
curious  in  itself,  is  doubly  so  as  an  answer  to  the
calumny  of  Luke  Foxe,  who  attributes  to  Col-
burne  the  plan  for  Hudson's  fourth  voyage  ;  whilst
it  here  clearly  appears  that  already  in  1608,  two
years  before  the  fourth  voyage,  Hudson's  mind  was
bent  upon  the  schemes  which  that  undertaking  was
intended  to  realize.

The  number  and  variety  of  the  papers  which  illus-
trate the  third  voyage  make  our  task  of  introducing
them  a  somewhat  difficult  one.     Besides,  since  the


INTRODUCTION.  CXCVll

first  pages  of  the  present  introduction  were  printed,
a  most  important  addition  has  been  made  to  the
documents  in  our  collection ;  consisting  of  the  letter
of  President  Jeannin  to  Henry  IV  of  France,^  which
will  be  found  in  the  Appendix.  It  very  fortunately
happens,  that  the  observations  which  we  shall  have
to  offer  as  an  introduction  to  that  state  paper,  will  at
the  same  time  throw  a  light  on  the  circumstances  in
which  Hudson  was  placed  during  his  stay  in  Holland
previous  to  his  departure  for  the  third  expedition.

The  Negociations  of  President  Jeannin,  from  which
our  extract  is  taken,  are  reckoned  among  the  classical
Memoires  Historiques  ;  a  class  of  writings  equally
distinguished  by  the  position  of  the  authors,  the  ele-
gance of  their  language,  and  the  importance  of  the
information  they  furnish.  In  all  these  respects  Pre-
sident Jeannin's  Negociations  occupy  a  very  high
rank.  The  main  portion  of  that  work  consists  of
letters  addressed  to  Henry  IV  of  France,  in  the
years  1608  and  1609,  mostly  from  the  Hague  and
from  Antwerp.  Jeannin  had  been  sent  to  the  Nether-
lands to  negociate,  together  with  the  representatives
of  other  nations,  a  treaty  of  peace,  or  at  least  a  truce
between  Spain  and  those  of  its  revolted  provinces
which  had  long,  in  fact,  enjoyed  that  independence

'  This  document  is  indicated  in  Mr.  Berg  van  Dussen  Muilkerk's
Bijdraegen  tot  de  Geschiedenis  onzer  Kolonizatie  in  Noord- America.
We  have  above  (p.  Ivii)  adverted  to  this  book ;  but  from  memory
only,  and  not  with  sufficient  justice.  It  is  very  gratifying  to  be
able  now  to  acknowledge  our  obligations  to  that  remarkable  work,
which  compresses  a  vast  amount  of  new  research  into  an  incredi-
bly small  space.


CXCVlll  INTRODUCTION.

which  was  now  to  be  confirmed  by  a  treaty.  It  was
in  the  midst  of  this  negociation,  in  January  1609,
that  an  indirect  intercourse  was  established  between
Hudson  and  Jeannin.  To  explain  the  origin  and
issue  of  that  intercourse,  as  well  as  the  motives  of  the
men  who  acted  as  mediators  between  the  navigator
and  the  diplomatist,  we  must  throw  a  brief  glance  at
the  political  movements  in  which  Jeannin  was  mixed
up,  and  especially  at  the  difficulties  which  he  had  to
overcome  in  negociating  the  treaty.

These  difficulties  did  not  alone,  nor  perhaps  even
mainly,  consist  in  the  pride  of  the  Spaniards.  Their
foes,  the  inhabitants  of  the  northern  provinces,  were
far  from  united  in  the  wish  to  make  peace,  at  least
on  the  conditions  that  could  then  be  obtained.  The
feelings  of  the  majority  in  the  free  provinces  were
not  unlike  those  which  lately  animated  the  whole  of
Italy  during  the  negociation  of  the  peace  of  Zurich,
when  it  was  considered  a  disgrace  to  secure  Lom-
bardy  from  the  House  of  Hapsburg  at  the  price  of
the  confirmed  slavery  of  another  and  more  important
district.  But  in  the  Netherlands  the  position,  though
similar  was  not  alike.  There  existed  in  some  of  the
free  provinces  a  peace  party,  powerful  in  every  re-
spect except  in  numbers,  which  was  animated  by
selfish  motives,  such  as  have  not  come  to  light  in  the
late  Italian  struggles.  This  peace  party  consisted
principally  of  the  powerful  families  which  had  made
the  civic  dignities  in  the  towns  of  Holland  heredi-
tary among  themselves  ;  who  composed,  as  delegates
from  these  towns,  the  estates  of  Holland,  and  who


INTRODUCTION.  CXCIX

thus  swayed  the  United  Provinces.  They  were
strongly  interested  in  preventing  the  departure  of
the  rich  and  active  Belgian  emigrants,  whom  a  con-
tinued and  successful  war  might  have  carried  home
in  triumph.  They  also  wished  that  Antwerp  should
not  again  rise  to  its  former  importance.  The  resto-
ration of  the  other  parts  of  Belgium  would  likewise
have  destroyed  the  preeminence  of  Holland.  Peace
and  the  status  quo  were  therefore  their  great  objects.
This  peace  party,  which  was  headed  by  Oldenbar-
nevelt  and  counted  Hugo  Grotius  among  its  leaders,
is  better  known  as  the  Republican  or  Arminian
party.  Republican  it  was  called  because  it  desired
to  keep  the  rule  of  the  country  to  itself.  The  name
of  Arminius  had  been  adopted  a  few  years  before,
when  that  divine  had  published  some  maxims  of
church  government  suited  to  the  tastes  and  interests
of  these  Repubticans.  The  Arminian  doctrine,  which
also  contained  some  theological  principles  opposed  to
strict  Calvinism,  became  the  standard  round  which
the  RejnMicans  gathered.  It  counted  scarcely  any
adherents  except  among  them.

The  opposition  of  the  Republicans  to  strict
Calvinism,  was  no  accidental  circumstance  in  their
policy.  The  party  whom  they  opposed  was  headed  by
the  Belgian  emigrants,  who  desired  to  continue  the
war  until  their  own  country  should  be  freed  from  the
Spanish  yoke  ;  and  again,  at  the  head  of  the  Belgian
emigrants,  stood  the  Calvinistic  clergymen ;  among
whom  such  men  as  Peter  Plancius,  and  others  of  a
similar  stamp,  appeared.  These  divines  and  preachers


CC  INTRODUCTION.

exercised  a  most  powerful  influence  over  the  great
mass  of  the  people,  who  were  besides  naturally  op-
posed to  the  "  municipal  families,"  whose  tyranny
and  arrogance  they  hated.  The  Belgian  party  found
another  ally  besides  these  lower  classes,  in  the  Prince
Maurice  of  Orange,  the  most  illustrious  warrior  of  the
age,  whose  every  hope  was  connected  with  the  con-
tinuance of  the  struggle.  Thus  the  war  party  was
generally  termed  the  Calvinistic,  or  the  Orange
party.

The  two  political  parties  which  we  have  tried  to
sketch,  vied  with  each  other  to  obtain  Henry  Hud-
son's services.  This  happened  in  the  following  man-
ner. We  have  above  spoken  of  the  first  efforts  made
at  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century  by  the  Dutch,  to
establish  transatlantic  commerce  ;  and  we  have  seen
that  they  entirely  obeyed  in  this  respect  the  impulse
given  by  the  Belgian  emigrants.  A  few  years  had
been  sufficient  to  produce  the  most  important  con-
sequences from  these  beginnings  ;  and  it  was  soon
apparent  that  transatlantic  commerce  would  form  the
foundation  of  the  prosperity  of  the  Dutch  Republic.

It  was  then  most  strongly  the  interest  of  the  ruling
Arminian  party  not  to  let  so  powerful  a  lever  remain
in  the  hands  of  the  Belgians,  their  antagonists.  The
great  chief  of  the  Arminians,  John  Oldenbarnevelt,
therefore  contrived  to  place  the  direction  of  the  East
India  trade  in  the  hands  of  his  own  partisans ;  and
he  founded  for  this  purpose  in  1602,  the  privileged
East  India  Company,  the  directors  of  which  were,
almost  exclusively,  taken  from  among  the  so-called


INTRODUCTION.  CCI

Republicans,  and  wliicli,  in  after  times,  always  made
common  cause  with  them.

This  East  India  Company  had  a  privilege  to  trade
by  the  ordinary  route,  round  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope.  Many  of  the  Belgians,  on  the  other  hand,  still
adhered  to  their  own  old  scheme,  of  which  Peter
Plancius  was  the  representative,  namely,  that  of  a
short  north-eastern  route  to  China.  They  besides
endeavoured  to  establish  a  West  India  Company,
under  the  direction  of  William  Usselincx,  and  on  the
principle  of  which  we  have  spoken  above,  namely,
that  of  driving  the  Spaniards  from  America,  and  out
of  the  American  waters ;  and  so  to  cripple  their
resources.  This  idea,  and  still  more  the  aim  for  the
sake  of  which  it  was  entertained,  were  strongly  at
variance  with  the  wishes  and  interests  of  the  peace
party.

These  indications  will  enable  us  to  place  in  chro-
nological order,  all  the  data  that  are  bearing  on
Hudson's  sojourn  in  Holland.  We  must  then  leave  it
to  the  reader  to  connect  these  pieces  of  evidence,  and
to  form  out  of  them  a  complete  picture,  which  may
easily  be  done  by  supplying  such  details,  historical
and  local,  as  can  be  procured  in  abundance  from
various  sources.  As  to  our  own  chronological
arrangement,  it  will  perhaps  be  best  not  to  confine
it  to  Hudson's  stay  in  Holland,  but  to  extend
it  over  the  other  main  points  of  the  third  voyage.
We  give  for  this  purpose  the  following  synoptical
table.

del


ceil


INTRODUCTION.


FACTS.

DATES.

DOCUMENTS.

PAGES.

Hudson  called  by  the  privileged

East  India  Company

Uncertain

Jeannin

Hudson's  arrival  in  Holland

Unc.(iGOS)'

■ — .         —

247

Conferences  with  the  East  India

Uncertain

Company  begin

(1608)

Jeannin

247

Personal  intercourse  with  Plan-

Treatise  of  Iver

cius  begins          .         .         -         -

1008'

Boty

230

Conversations  with  Plancius

Uncertain

Hessel  Gerritz

181,  180,
187,  191

Intercourse    with  Jodocus   Hon-

Uncertain

Iver  Boty,  Hon-

230

dius

dius'  map

Hudson's  proposals  rejected   for

Jan.  1009

Jeannin

249

the  present  by  the E. I. Comp.  Ar-

rangements  for  employment  in

KilO           -         -         -         -         -

Belgians    seize    the    opportunity.

Jan.   1000

Jeannin

250

Le  Maire  acquainted  with  Hud-

son. Le  Maire  proposes  to  Jeannin

to  form  a  rival  E.  I.  Comp.  under

Henry    IV's    protection,   and    to

engage  Hudson  as  captain

Peter  Plancius  calls  on  Jeannin  -

Jan.   1000

Jeannin

250

E.  I.  Comp.  alarmed  by  Le  Maire's

Jan.   100!)

Jeannin

253

opposition,  determine    to    send

Hudson  at  once

Usselincx's  intercourse  with  Jean-

Jan. 1000

Jeannin

325

nin             .         .         .         .         -

Zealand  Chamber  refuses  to  send

Uncertain

Lambiechtsen

104

Hudson     -         .         -         -         -

Amsterdam    Chamber   do   so   by

Uncertain

Lambrechtsen

104

themselves         .         .         .         .

H.  starts  with  two  vessels,  thej

Apr.G,lG09

Larabrechtsen,

cciii,  254

Good  Hope  and  the  Half  Moon  i

Apr.O,100lJ

Bi-odhead

HaZ/il/ooit  a  Vlie  Boat

—     —

Van  Metereu

147

Reaches  the  North  Cape

May  5,1009

Juet,  V.  Meteren

45,147

Voyage  to  Nova  Zembla,  mutiny,

May  5-14

V.  Meteren

147,148

returns

Arrival   at   the    North    Cape    on

May  19

Juet

40

their  return        -         .         .         .

Arrival  at  Faroe  Islands

May  30

Juet,  V.  Meteren

48, 149

Arrival  near  Nova  Scotia  coast     -

June  22

Juet

53

They  land  (44°  1')  to  cut  a  fore

July  19

Juet,v.M.,DeLaet

00,  1-49,

mast;  quarrels  with  natives

155

They  arrive  at  Barnstaple  penin-

May 2

J.  V.  M.,  De  L.

04,  150,

sula  ------

155

They  arrive  in  37°  45'  (Virginia

May  13

Juet,  v.  Meteren

09, 150

Coast)

Chesapeake  Bay  -         .         -         .

Aug.  27

Juet,  De  Laet

73,  150

^  This  date  (1609)  may,  however,  according  to  the  calendar
then  in  use,  refer  to  the  iirst  months  of  1G09.  Hudson's  arrival  in
Holland  can  therefore  not  positively  be  stated  to  have  taken  place
before  January  1G09.


INTRODUCTION.


CClll


FACTS.


Delaware  Bay
Hudson's  River   -


In  latitude  42°  IS'Hudsnn  lands
Scene  of  Drunkenness

Leave  Hudson's  River
Dissensions    during    the    voyage
home  -         -        -         . "      .

Arrival  in  England
Hudson  retained  in  England
Return  of  the  Half  Moon     -


DATES.


DOCUMENTS.


Aug.  28
Sept.  2

Sept.  17

Sept.  J8
Sept.  20

Oct.  4


Nov.  7

Jan.  1010

Jufy  1.5,

1010


Juet,  De  Laet
Juet,v.M.,DeLaet

Juet,Hudson,D.L.

Juet,  De  Laet
Juet,  Heckewel-

der,  Barton

Juet,  V.  Meteren

V.  Meteren

Juet,  V.  Meteren
V.  Meteren
Brodhead


PAGES.


74,  1.57
70,150,

157

84,150,15

85, 101

W5,  174,

170
92,  151

151

93, 152

153

S.m/.p.


To  complete  our  introduction  to  the  third  vovao-e
we  have  to  add  some  remarks  on  several  isolated
points,  that  either  present  a  particular  interest  or
require  special  attention.

AVe  find  in  Lambrechtsen,  that  Hudson  was  sent
out  by  the  Amsterdam  Chamber  of  the  East  India
Company,  against  the  will  of  the  Middelburg  Cham-
ber.    The  Chamhers  of  which  the  Dutch  East  India
Company  was  composed  had  each  a  separate  exist-
ence.    The  whole  company,  in  fact,  did  not  form  so
homogeneous  a  body  as   English  companies   of  the
present  day,  but  may  rather  be  called  a  confedera-
tion of  several  societies.    Each  of  the  provinces  along
the  sea  shore  had  a  chamber  or  society  of  its  own,
governed  by  its  own   committee   of  directors.     Out
of  these  provincial  committees  a  central  council  of
seventeen  members  was  chosen,  who   are  ircncrally
termed   The  Seventeen.     The   action   of  this   general
council  resembled  that  of  the  delegates  of  a  political
confederacy,  and  did  not  destroy  the  individual  action
of  the  provincial  chambers.      To  say  more  on  this


CCIV  INTRODUCTION.

complicated  question  would  lead  us  too  far.  We
must,  however,  advert  to  another  statement  of  Lam-
brechtsen,  which  had  unfortunately  been  omitted
in  the  English  translation  we  made  use  of  for  our
extracts  from  his  book.  This  statement  is  contained
in  one  of  his  foot  notes,  and  is  couched  in  the  fol-
lowing  words  :  "  In  the  minutes  of  the  Council  of
the  xvii  this  yacht  (the  yacht  Hudson  sailed  in)
is  called  the  Good  IIopeT^  From  these  words  we
learn,  first  that  Lambrechtsen  used  an  original  MS.
description  of  Hudson's  voyage,  which  he  found  in-
serted in  the  Minutes  of  the  Seventeen.  We  further
learn  that  the  name  of  Hudson's  vessel  was  the  Good
Hope.  It  is,  however,  stated  by  an  equally  unques-
tionable authority  that  Hudson's  vessel  was  called
the  Half  Moon.^  The  most  natural  solution  of  this
apparent  contradiction  is,  that  Hudson  had  with  him
two  vessels,  the  one  called  the  Half  Moon.,  the  other
the  Good  Hope.  It  is  not  known  what  became  of  the
latter  vessel.  She  may  have  returned  after  the  mutiny
near  Nova  Zembla.  The  main  part  of  the  voyage
was  certainly  performed  in  the  Half  Moon  alone.

The  crew  of  the  vessel — or  vessels —  under  Hud-
son's orders  consisted  partly  of  Dutchmen,  partly  of
Englishmen.  As  to  the  Dutchmen,  there  is  strong
reason  to  believe  that  they  were  sailors  in  the  regular
service  of  the  East  India  Company,  whose  engage-

^  In  dc  Notulcn  van  dc  Vergadeiingc  van  de  xvii  wordt  dit
Jagt  de  Goede  Hoop  gendemt.

^  Brodhead,  from  a  sliip  book  found  in  tlio  East  India  Archives
at  Amsterdam.


INTRODUCTION.  CCV

ment  had  been  made  without  Hudson's  intervention.
We  learn  that  Hudson,  after  his  return,  requested
the  East  India  Company  to  exchange  some  of  his
sailors  for  others,  so  as  to  enable  him  to  start  again
with  a  more  obedient  crew.  This  request  would
never  have  been  made  had  these  men  been  entirely
dependent  upon  him.  Their  mutinous  spirit  and
their  quarrels  with  their  English  companions  must
be  attributed  to  his  want  .of  control  over  them.
Among  the  Dutch  sailors  was  also  Hudson's  mate,
as  Van  Meteren  expressly  states.  We  have  already
observed,  that  several  writers  have  thought,  that
Kobert  Juet  was  that  Dutch  mate;  and  we  have
added  that  this  is  not  our  opinion.  This  is  still
further  confirmed  by  the  following  fact :  Juet  always
speaks  of  himself  in  the  first  person.  He  has  more
than  once  occasion  to  do  so  ;  he  was  an  able  astro-
nomer ;  and  we  find  him  repeatedly  calculating  lati-
tudes by  the  height  of  the  stars ;  a  kind  of  obser-
vation which  Hudson  himself  seems  never  to  have
attempted.  Now  Juet  tells  us  distinctly  that  "  the
master's  mate"  explored  the  most  northern  part  of
Hudson  River,  and  that  the  "  master  and  his  mate"
"  succeeded  in  making  one  of  the  Indians  drunk.
The  person  here  twice  referred  to  was  then  not  the
author  of  the  Journal.  Juet  was,  what  he  appears
from  all  the  other  circumstances  to  have  been,
namely,  an  Englishman.  John  Colman,  also  one  of
Hudson's  former  companions,  is  the  only  other
Englishman  on  board  the  Half  Moon  whose  name  is
mentioned  in  our  sources.  It  is  unknown  what  rank
these  two  men  held  on  board  the  vessel.


CCVl  INTRODUCTION.

Hudson  in  1609  originally  intended  to  continue
the  north-eastern  search  begun  by  him  the  year
before.  His  plan  probably  was  to  pass  through
Vaigats  Strait ;  a  route  which  he  had  been  unable
to  follow  in  1608.  He  had  already  arrived  near
Nova  Zembla  when  a  mutiny  broke  out  among  his
crew.  They  refused  to  proceed  any  further  through
the  ice.  After  some  discussions,  it  was  decided  that
they  were  to  sail  westward,  and  to  search  for  a  passage
through  America,  in  latitude  40°.  "  This  idea,"  says
Van  Meteren,  from  whom  we  learn  these  facts,  "  had
been  suggested  to  Hudson  by  some  letters  and  maps
which  his  friend  Captain  Smith  had  sent  him  from
Virginia  ;  and  by  which  he  informed  him  that  there
was  a  sea  leading  into  the  Western  Ocean  by  the
north  of  the  southern  English  colony  (Virginia)."
We  have  already  stated  that,  in  Hakluyt's  Divers
Voyages^  a  map  is  to  be  found,  copied  by  Lok  from
Verazzano,  in  which  the  American  continent  in  the
latitude  here  indicated  appears  as  a  narrow  strip  of
land  separating  the  Atlantic  from  the  Pacific.  This
was  most  probably  one  of  the  maps  sent  by  Smith.
Another  one  of  his  maps  may  have  been  based  on
Ribeiro's  planisphere,  which  indicates  in  those  parts
some  broad  openings  in  the  coast.  John  Smith  had
moreover  lived  a  long  time  among  the  American
Indians.  The  tribes  of  all  these  immense  tracts  of
country  are  known  to  belong  to  the  same  stock,  and
to  entertain  friendly  or  hostile  intercourse.  By  them
Smith  must  have  been  informed  of  the  existence  of
the  great  lakes,  which   may  well  have  been   repre-


INTRODUCTION.  CCVll

sented  to  him  as  parts  of  the  ocean.  Hessel  Gerritz
at  least  received  from  that  same  source,  though  in-
directly, this  same  deceptive  intelligence.^  These
materials  seem  to  have  been  combined  in  Smith's
communications,  so  as  to  suggest  the  existence  of  an
easy  passage  through  the  American  continent,  open-
ing on  its  eastern  side  somewhere  between  the  37th
and  41st  degrees  of  latitude.  The  search  for  such  a
passage  is  the  only  purpose  4;hat  can  be  ascribed  to
Hudson's  rambling  course  along  those  shores.

Juet  makes  no  mention  of  the  voyage  to  Nova
Zembla,  nor  of  the  mutiny,  in  which  perhaps  he
played  a  part.  He  suppresses  in  a  most  artful
manner  the  events  of  the  memorable  fortnight,  from
the  fifth  to  the  nineteenth  of  May.  But  under  the
latter  date,  Tuesday,  the  nineteenth  of  Maij,  1609,  we
find  in  his  Journal  a  notice  which  amply  com-
pensates us  for  this  loss.  The  following  are  his
words :  Then  ive  observed  the  sunne  having  a  slacJce.
\\Q  have  in  our  note  to  this  passage,  tried  to  show
that  a  slucJc  means  a  spot ;  and  that  therefore  sun
spots  were  observed  on  board  the  Ilatf  Moon  more
than  a  year  and  a  half  before  what  is  generally  con-
sidered the  first  observation  of  that  phenomenon.

The  next  remark  which  we  have  to  make  applies
to  a  passage  in  Juet's  logbook,  where  there  seems  to
be  either  a  clerical  or  a  typographical  error.  We
allude  to  his  entry  under  the  eighteenth  of  Septem-
ber: "  In  the  after-noone  our  master's  mate  went  on
land  with  an  old  savage,  a  governor  of  the  countrey,

1  P.  185.


CCVlll  INTRODUCTION.

etc."  Instead  of  our  masters  viate,  we  must  read  our
master,  locality  and  circumstances  being  exactly  the
same  which  are  described  by  De  Laet  as  belonging  to
Hudson's  visit  on  shore.  Juet's  account  contains  no
other  mention  of  that  visit.  These  are  all  the  promi-
nent points  we  had  to  note.

To  conclude  this  part  of  our  introduction,  we  have
but  to  add  a  few  observations  on  what  happened
after  Hudson's  return  and  on  the  consequences  of  his
third  voyage.  The  circumstances  of  his  return,  the
strange  embargo  laid  upon  his  person  by  the  English
government,  and  his  correspondence  with  the  East
India  Company,  are  related  by  Van  Meteren.  No-
thing can  be,  nor  need  be,  added  to  the  details  which
he  furnishes.  The  Half  Moon  returned  to  Amsterdam
in  July  1610,  as  will  be  seen  in  the  note  from  Mr.
Brodhead's  work,  which  is  to  be  found  in  the  appen-
dix to  the  present  volume.

William  Smith,  the  author  of  a  very  defective  his-
tory of  New  York,  says  that  a  right  to  occupy  the
banks  of  Hudson  river  was  sold  to  the  Dutch  by  the
discoverer.  This  story,  which  is  not  only  untrue,
but  is  contrary  to  all  possibility  of  international  law,
has  been  invented  to  furnish  a  connecting  link  be-
tween Hudson's  discovery  for  the  Dutch,  and  the
colonization  of  those  very  quarters  by  that  same
nation.  Such  a  connecting  link  exists,  but  it  is  of  a
different  nature  from  the  one  imagined  by  Smith.

It  might  at  first  sight  have  been  expected  that  the
directors  of  the  East  India  Company  would  liave  fol-
lowed up  the  discovery  made  in  one  of  their  vessels.


INTRODUCTION.  CCIX

Nothing,  however,  was  further  from  their  thoughts ;
North  American  trade  was  advocated  by  the  Belgians,
their  poUtical  adversaries.  This  was  a  sufficient
motive  for  them  not  to  favour  it ;  and  the  East  India
Company  never  claimed  any  of  the  advantages  which
Hudson's  discovery  soon  began  to  yield.  But  some
other  Dutchmen,  following  in  Hudson's  footsteps,
began  to  trade  in  furs  with  the  natives,  and  then  to
build  a  fort  on  Manhattan  island,  in  Hudson  river.
The  fort  became  the  germ  of  a  village,  the  village
became  a  town.  The  town  was  first  called  New
Amsterdam.     Its  name  now  is  New  York.

The  last  events  narrated  by  Van  Meteren  took
place  in  January,  1610.  Then  already  it  was  ru-
moured that  Hudson  would  again  be  sent  out  by  an
English  company.  Soon  afterwards  an  arrangement
of  this  kind  must  have  been  definitively  made.  The
names  of  Hudson's  three  principal  employers  are  to
be  found  in  Purchas'  Pilgrimage}  They  are  all  now
inscribed  on  some  well  known  localities  in  the  Arctic
regions.  Sir  Thomas  Smith's  name  has  been  given
to  what  was  called  a  sound,  north  of  Baffin's  Bay  ;  but
is  now  known  to  be  a  strait,  leading  into  the  northern
waters.  Cape  AVolstenholme  and  Cape  Diggs  form
the  entrance  to  Hudson's  Bay.

The  plan  which  gave  rise  to  this  fourth  voyage
had  long  been  present  to  Hudson's  mind.  Already,
in  September  1608,  he  had  intended  to  search  for  a
passage  through  the  strait  which  he  was  now  going

^  The  names  of  all  his  employers  will  be  found  in  the  extract
from  the  charter  granted  to  Button's  employers,  at  the  end  of  the
appendix.


ccx


INTRODUCTION.


to  explore.  He  had  earnestly  discussed  that  same
plan  with  Peter  Plancius  in  1608  and  1609,  and  had
been  confirmed  in  his  resolution  by  George  Wey-
mouth's experience,  which  Plancius  had  communi-
cated to  him  ;  although  this  passionate  advocate  of
the  north-eastern  search  had  tried  to  dissuade  Hud-
son from  his  north-western  undertaking.  On  the
seventeenth  of  April,  1610,  Hudson  started  from
London.  As  to  the  events  of  his  voyage,  they  are
described  in  the  different  papers  that  have  come
down  to  us ;  and  we  have  tried  to  render  these  docu-
ments more  clearly  intelligible  by  our  notes.  Still
there  is  so  much  difficulty  in  the  geographical  in-
vestigation of  this  voyage,  that  we  cannot  hope  to
make  the  reader's  path  quite  easy,  even  by  the  assist-
ance which  our  notes  may  afford,  and  by  the
synoptical  arrangement  of  the  materials,  to  which  the
following  table  is  devoted.


FACTS.

DATES.

DOCUMENTS.

PAGES.
140

Names  of  Adventurers.  Vessel     -

Purchas

Departure             ....

April  17,

1010

Ap.22,1610

H.,  Pr.

98,  90

Colburn  sent  back

H.,  Pr.,  Foxe

93,98,180

Westman  Islands

May  15

H.,  Pr.

94,  98

Oflf  Iceland           .         .         .         -

Maylft,:JO

H.,  Pr.

94,  99

Breda  Bay   (Lousie  Bay),  Hud-

May 30

H.  H.'s  letter.  Pr.

94,  90,

son's  letter         ...         -

Purch.

133,  140

Departure  from  Iceland

Junel

H.,  Pr.

94,99

Greenland  E.  05°  (Groneland)    -

June  4,  5

H.,  Pr.

94,  99

Greenland    E.    03°    (Frobisher's

June  9

H.

94

Strait)       .         .         -         -         .

Cape  Farewell  (Desolation)

June  15

H.,  Pr.,  Purch.

95,99.140

Greenland  S.W.  00°  42'  (Desola-

June 20

H.

95

tion)

Eesolution  Island

June  24

H.,  Pr.

95,  100

Ungava  Bay,  S.E.  5!)°  IC    -

July  5

H.

95

^Mutiny

JubO,7(?)

Pr.

101

Akpatok  (Desire  Provoketh)

July  8

H.,  Pr.

95,  102

Saddle  Back  Islands(  God's  Mercy)

July  11

H.,  Pr.

90, 103

Jackman's  Sound

(?)

Pr.

103

INTRODUCTION.


CCXl


FACTS.

DATES.

DOCUMENTS.

PAGES.

Ungava  B.  S.W.  58°  50'

July  1  0

H.

90

Long  Island  (Hold  with  Hope)   -

Jufv  19

H.

90

Soutliern     shore     of     Hudson's

Strait,  from  Hojje  Advance  Bay

to  Deception  Bay  (Magna  Bri-

tannia,  Prince   Henry's   Cajje,

90,97,

King  James  Cape)    -

July  20-31

H.,  Pr.

104,  105

Northern  shore,  N.  of  Charles  Is.

Aug.  1

H.,  Pr.

97,105,100

Salisliury  Island

Aug.  2

H.,  Pr.

97,100

Cape  Wolstenliolme,  Cape  Diggs

Aug.  3

H.,  Pr.

97,100

Voyage  down   the   east  coast  of

Aug.  4,

Pr.

105-110

Hudson's  Bay  -         -         .         .

Oct.  31

Juet's  trial  -         -         .         .         .

Sept.'lO

Wydhouse

130-138

Wintering  in  James  Bay     -

Nov.3,]ClO,

Pr.jHess.  Gerr.

110-110,

Jue.l8,lCll

184-7,192

Antiscorbutic  medicine

Dec.  1010

Pr.,  Purch.

114, 141

Visit  of  a  savage           ...

(?)

Pr.,Purch.,H.Gr.

114,142,

187, 193

Green's  antecedents    -

—     —

Pr.

111-113

Departure  from  winter  quarters  -

Jue.l8,lCll

Pr.

116

Conspiracy — Hudson's  exposure

Jue.21,1611

Pr.,Purch.,H.Ge.

117-123,

142,  184,

193

Voyage  back  to  Diggs'  Island

June  21-

Pr.,  Purch.

123-126,

July  25

142

Fight     with     Esquimaux     near

July  29

Pr.,  Purch.

127-131,

Diggs'  Island   -        -        -        .

143

Voyage  home      ....

July  30-

Pr.,  Purch.

131-135,

Sept.  C

144

Eeturn        .....

Sept.G,]6]l

Purch.,  H.  Ger.

144, 188,
193

Imprisonment  of  conspirators     -

(?)

H.  Ger.

188, 193

Button   sent   out    in    search    of

—     —

H.  Ger.

158,189,

Hudson

193

It  will  not  be  necessary  to  add  any  long  comments
to  this  table.  On  reference  to  the  documents,  it  will  be
seen  that  the  geographical  information  is  to  be  found
almost  exclusively  in  Hudson's  own  journal,  and  in
his  chart,  whilst  the  scenes  and  events  of  the  voyage
form  the  main  portion  of  Pricket's  account.  The
few  pages  which  may  be  gathered  from  other  sources
contain  stray  facts,  the  insertion  of  which  our  table
will  facilitate.  It  will  not  be  easy,  even  with  the
assistance  of  the    maps  in  the    present   volume,  to


CCXU  INTRODUCTION.

follow  Hudson  through  the  Strait.  Few  readers  take
sufficient  interest  in  such  matters  to  attempt  this
labour.  To  those  who  wish  to  undertake  it,  we  re-
commend the  Admiralty  Chart  of  the  Arctic  regions
(1856)  as  a  very  useful  guide.

The  remaining  part  of  Hudson's  voyage,  the  ex-
ploration of  Hudson's  Bay,  the  wintering  in  James
Bay,  the  conspiracy  of  the  crew,  the  exposure  of
Hudson  in  an  open  shallop,  are  strikingly  told  by
Pricket.  But  his  account,  though  very  remarkable
as  a  narrative,  is  most  unsatisfactory  as  a  geogra-
phical record,  and  leaves  almost  every  question  of
this  kind  without  a  conclusive  answer.  We  cannot
even  fix  the  spot  where  Hudson  wintered  and  where
he  died.  The  wintering  place  which  seems  to
us  the  most  likely  is  indicated  in  the  map  of  his
voyages  which  accompanies  this  volume.  The  place
■where  he  was  exposed  cannot  have  been  at  a  great
distance  from  his  winter  quarters,  considering  the
short  time  which  elapsed  between  his  departure  and
that  tragical  event.  But  in  this  respect  our  uncer-
tainty is  still  greater.

The  conspirators  pleaded  as  an  excuse  for  their
guilty  deed,  that  Hudson  had  withheld  some  of  the
victuals,  storing  them  up  in  his  own  cabin ;  and  they
have  tried  to  throw  in  this  manner  a  blemish  on  his
character.  But  even  if  the  charge  be  a  true  one,
Hudson's  motives  were  certainly  honourable;  with
such  men  as  he  had  under  his  orders  it  was  dangerous
to  deal  openly.  Their  crime  had  no  other  cause  than
the  fear  that  he  would  continue  his  search  and  expose


INTRODUCTION.  CCXUl

them  to  new  privations ;  and  it  seems  that  in  pro-
viding for  this  emergency,  he  had  even  increased  his
dangers.  Another  cahimny  has  ah'eady  been  dis-
proved ;  and  Hudson's  character  stands  free  from  all
blemish.

Partly  to  search  for  Hudson,  partly  to  improve  his
discoveries,  an  expedition  was  sent  out  the  following
year,  under  Sir  Thomas  Button.  Allusion  is  made
to  it  by  Hessel  Gerritz  ;  and  we  have  besides  added,
at  the  end  of  the  appendix,  the  contents  of  a  charter
granted  to  the  company  by  whom  Button  was  sent
out.  Those  who  risked  their  capital  on  that  enter-
prise, firmly  believed  that  Hudson  had  found  an
opening  for  a  commercial  route  to  China  and  Japan.
Such  was  also  the  belief  of  Hessel  Gerritz,  of
Purchas,  and  of  all  those  who  first  began  to  spread
Hudson's  fame.  This  belief  has  now  vanished,  and
we  know  that  all  the  attempts  of  Henry  Hudson,  in
the  north,  in  the  north-east,  and  in  the  north-west,
have  proved  complete  failures.

Yet,  Henry  Hudson's  name  is  not  forgotten.  It
is  borne  by  his  Strait  and  by  the  Bay  in  which  he
wintered  and  died.  It  is  inscribed  on  the  vast  ter-
ritory between  the  Bay  and  the  Pacific  Ocean.  It  is
aff"ectionately  remembered  by  the  millions  of  human
beings  now  living  on  those  banks,  which  he  found
scantily  inhabited  by  savage  races.  Nor  have  his
labours  been  fruitless :  he  has  given  to  his  own
country  the  fisheries  of  Spitzbergen,  and  the  fur  trade
of  the  Hudson's  Bay  territories.  The  Dutch  owed  to
him  their  North- American  colony,  which  has  after-


CCXIV  INTRODUCTION.

wards  fallen  into  English  hands  ;  and  is  now  peopled
and  ruled  over  by  the  united  descendants  of  both
nations.  Thus,  in  spite  of  his  failures,  Hudson  has
erected  himself  a  far  prouder  monument  than  he
would  have  dared  to  hope  for.  These  successes  may
well  be  held  out  as  an  encouragement  to  those,  who,
like  him,  labour  earnestly  and  steadfastly  in  some
great  cause  that  may  seem  hopeless.  Such  labour  is
never  cast  away,  if  only  they,  like  Henry  Hudson,
prescribe  to  themselves  the  rule :    To  achieve  what

THEY  HAVE  UNDERTAKEN,  OR  ELSE,  tO  USC  Ms  OWU
words,  TO  give  reason   wherefore  it  will  NOT  BE.

Ill  laying  the  present  volume  before  the  members
of  the  Hakluyt  Society,  the  editor  owes  them  more
than  one  explanation.  The  book  has,  long  ago,  been
announced  as  nearly  ready.  Mr.  Hamilton,  of  the
manuscript  department  in  the  British  Museum,  was
then  named  as  the  editor,  whom  the  writer  of  the
present  pages  was  merely  to  assist  by  furnishing  part
of  the  introduction.  This  arrangement  was  after-
wards rendered  impossible,  by  the  present  editor's
leaving  London,  and  retiring  to  the  country.  The
present  editor  had  not  at  first  the  courage  to  ask  Mr.
Hamilton  to  give  up  his  rights.  When  he  at  last
did  so,  the  request  was  most  kindly  and  courteously
granted.  But  a  delay  of  more  than  a  year  had
before  taken  place.  It  would  be  useless  to  enume-
rate the  other  causes  of  delay,  except  the  principal
one  ;  namely  the  difficulty  the  editor  felt  in  writing
English.       This    difficulty   could   never    have   been


INTRODUCTION.  CCXV

surmounted  without  the  extreme  kindness  of  the
editor's  friend,  Mr.  R.  H.  Major,  who  has  examined
every  line  of  the  present  book  before  it  was  sent  to
the  press.  From  this  kindness,  the  editor  has  derived
more  than  passing  benefits.  The  corrections  became
fewer  as  the  work  proceeded,  and  have  in  its  latter
half  been  limited  to  a  few  minutiae  here  and  there.
Mr.  Major  has  also  taken  upon  himself  the  tedious
and  ungrateful  task  of  correcting  the  extracts  from
Purchas.  During  the  journey  which  the  editor
undertook  to  inspect  the  Cabot  map  in  Paris,  he
received  the  kind  attentions  of  the  celebrated  Mr.
Jomard,  and  of  the  equally  distinguished  scholar
to  whom  the  present  volume  is  dedicated.  Mr.
Bouillet,  the  author  of  two  justly  esteemed  manuals,
has  also  been  kind  enough  to  assist  the  editor  in
tracing  the  Anskoeld  Myth  back  to  its  origin.  In
Holland  the  editor  has  been  less  fortunate  ;  yet  he
has  there  received  some  kind  assistance  from  Mr.
Frederic  Muller  in  Amsterdam,  and  from  Mr.  Spanier,
the  lithographer,  at  the  Hague,  to  whom  the  excel-
lent copies  from  the  two  old  Dutch  charts  are  due.
He  has  especially  to  thank  Mr.  Campbell,  the  deputy
librarian  at  the  Hague,  for  an  act  of  very  great
kindness,  alluded  to  on  p.  xxxv  of  the  present  volume.


NOTES     TO     INTRODUCTION.


A.,  B.

The  questions  to  which  these  two  notes  refer  have  been  made  the
subjects  of  special  investigation,  by  the  writer  of  the  present  pages,
whilst  the  book  was  going  through  the  press,  and  by  a  new  and
more  accurate  examination  of  the  original  documents  he  has  been
induced  to  modify  very  considerably  the  opinions  expressed  in  the
text.    The  following  are  the  principal  new  views  he  has  arrived  at :

1.  That  Sebastian  Cabot  was  born  in  Venice,  not  in  Bristol;
that  he  arrived  in  England  with  his  father  when  a  child,  and  lived
here  till  he  went  out  on  his  voj'ages.

2.  That  the  voyages  of  the  Scandinavians  exercised  no  percepti-
ble influence  upon  John  and  Sebastian's  opinions.

3.  That  John  Cabot  died  most  probably  shortly  after  his  son's
second  departure.

4.  That  the  discovery  of  Hudson's  Strait  in  1496  must  be  con-
cluded from  Galvano's  account,  not  from  the  spurious  one  of
Willes.

The  editor  is  now  preparing  for  the  press  a  memoir  on  the
north-western  voyages  of  the  Cabots,  in  which  these  matters  will
be  more  clearly  explained  than  could  be  done  in  the  short  space
here  afforded.

The  notes  on  Cabot's  map  will  be  fovmd  in  the  bibliographical
list,  under  Cabot.

The  following  are  the  sources  which  the  editor  has  consulted  :

I.  As  regards  the  Scandinavians,  his  notes  are  taken  from  Rafn's
celebrated  work,  where  it  is  stated  in  various  places  that  the  re-


NOTES    TO    INTRODUCTION.  CCXVU

miiining  Icelandic  documents  respecting  the  north-western  voyages
of  the  Scandinavians  are  extremely  numerous,  and  belong  to  almost
every  age,  from  the  beginning  of  the  voyages  themselves  down  to
the  sixteenth  century ;  so  that  it  is  evident  how  very  familiar  the
Icelanders  must  have  been  with  these  matters  in  Cabot's  and
Columbus'  time.  This  seems  to  us  even  more  clearly  proved  by
the  geographical  manuals  of  the  Icelanders  than  by  the  remain-
ing fragments  of  their  ancient  records.  These  geographical  sys-
tems prove  that  the  discovery  of  America,  such  as  it  presented
itself  to  their  minds,  formed  part  and  parcel  of  their  general  ideas,
from  which  it  can  therefore  not  have  been  easily  effaced.  The
interesting  extract  which  we  give  (at  the  end  of  the  Appendix)  is
taken  from  the  Gripla,  one  of  those  geographical  manuals  which
would  seem,  if  we  understand  Mr.  Rafn  right,  to  belong  on  exter-
nal evidence  to  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  or  beginning  of  the  six-
teenth century.  We  cannot  perceive  the  weight  of  the  reasons
adduced  by  northern  scholars  for  the  fact,  that  on  intrinsic  evi-
dence the  Gripla  must  be  much  anterior  to  Columbus'  and  Cabot's
voyages.

II.  John  Cahofs  arrival  in  England. — Sebastian^s  birth.  Mis-
cellanies of  the  Philobiblon  Society,  ii.  The  paper  on  Cabot
quoted  in  our  Bibliographical  list,  p.  262.  Peter  Martyr,  p.  232.
Eden's  Peter  Martyr,  p.  255.

III.  Influence  of  the  Scandinavians.  This  idea  was  principally
based  on  Gomara,  ch.  xxxix  (p.  31),  which  we  have  since  learnt
to  consider  as  a  compilation  made  up  from  Peter  Martyr,  and  from
some  fictions  introduced  by  Gomara.

IV.  First  Voijar/e.  Charter  granted  by  Henry  VII,  Hakluyt,  iii,  4.
Extract  from  Henry  VII  Book  of  Privy  Purse,  Biddle,  Cabot,  p.
80,  note;  Miscellanies  of  Philobiblon  Society,  as  reprinted  in
the  text.  Ramusio,  Viaggi,  v.  i,  p.  414,  415.  (In  the  treatise  on
Spices,  edition  quoted  in  our  Bibl.  List).  The  History  and  Anti-
quities of  Bristol,  p.  172.  Cabot's  Map;  Chytraeus,  p.  773  ;  Hak-
luyt, iii,  5.

V.  Events  between  First  and  Second  Voijarje.  Book  of  Privy
Purse,  Cabot,  p.  86.     Ramusio,  loco  citato.

VI.  Privilege  granted  to  John  Cabot,  Biddle,  Cabot,  p.  76 ;
Hakluyt,  iii,  5.  f  f


CCXVIU  NOTES    TO    INTRODUCTION.

vii.  Second  Voyage.  Fabian's  Chronicle,  a  notice  occurring  in
three  different  shapes  :  a.  Hakluyt,  Divers  Voyages,  Appendix
specially  devoted  to  Sebastian  Cabot ;  b.  Stow,  Annals,  p.  481,
edition  quoted  in  Bibliographical  list ;  the  same  before  in  Hol-
linshed  Chronicle,  edited  by  John  Hooker,  1587  :  date  1498  ;
c.  Hakluyt,  Collections,  iii,  p.  9.  Peter  Martyr,  p.  232 ;  Galvano,
p.  32;  Gomara,  ch.  xxxix  (p.  31);   Willes  (Hakluyt,  iii,  p,  25.)

Yiii.  Third  Voyage.  Eden,  Treatise  of  New  India,  1553,  Dedi-
cation ;  Ramusio,  Viaggi,  iii,  Introduction ;  Thome's  Letter  to
Henry  VIII,  loco  citato.

C.

For  the  two  Portuguese  expeditions,  see  chapters  i  to  iv  in  the
second  book  of  Mr.  Biddle's  Cabot  (pp.  225-248)  and  the  docu-
ments quoted  there ;  and  also,  Discorso  d'un  Gran  Capitano
Francese,  Ramusio,  iii,  423  b.

D.

See  Discorso  d'un  Gran  Capitano  Francese,  Ramusio,  iv,  423  b,
and  Vincent  Le  Blanc,  Voyages  (Paris,  1648)  iii"  partie,  p.  66.


DIVERS     VOYAGES


NORTHERNE     DISCOVERIES.


DIVERS     VOYAGES     AND     NORTHERNE     DISCOVERIES     OP
THAT  WORTHY  IRRECOVERABLE  DISCOVERER,

MASTER     HENRY     HUDSON.

HIS    DISCOVERIE     TOWARD    THE    NORTH     POLE,    SET    FORTH    AT     THE     CHARGE    OF

CERTAINE     WORSHIPFULL     MERCHANTS     OF    LONDON,    IN     MAY     1(1U7.

WRITTEN    PAIITLY    BY    JOHN    PLAYSE,    ONE    OF    THE    COMPANY,

AND    PARTLY    BY    H.    HUDSON.


Anno  1607,  Aprill  the  nineteenth,  at  Saint  Ethelburgc,  iu
Bishops  Gate  street,  did  communicate  with  the  rest  of  the
parishioners  these  persons,  seamen,  purposing  to  goe  to  sea
foure  dayes  after,  for  to  discover  a  passage  by  the  North
Pole  to  Japan  and  China.  First,  Henry  Hudson,  master.
Secondly,  "William  Colines,  his  mate.  Thirdly,  James
Young.  Fourthly,  John  Colman.  Fiftly,  John  Cooke.
Sixtly,  James  Beubery.  Seventhly,  James  Skrutton.  Eightly,
John  Pleyce,  Ninthly,  Thomas  Baxter.  Tenthly,  Richard
Day.  Eleventhly,  James  Knight.  Twclfthly,  John  Hud-
son,^ a  boy.

The  first  of  May,  1607,  we  wayed  anchor  at  Gravcsend,  May.
and  on  Tuesday,  the  sixe  and  twentieth  day,  in  the  morn-
ing, we  made  the  lies  of  Shotland,-  and  at  noon  we  were  in  'i)'"„"*'V''^
60  degrees  12  minutes,  and  sixe  leagues  to  the  eastward  of

1  Sou  of  Henry  Hudson.     [Ed.]  -  Shetland.     [Ed.]

1


2  MASTKIl    IIKNRY    HUDSON.

them  :  the  compass  had  no  variation.  Wc  had  sixty-fonre
fathomcs  at  oui"  sounding,  blacke,  ozie,  sandie,  with  some
yellow  shels.  Our  ship  made  more  way  than  we  did  sup-
pose. On  Saturday,  the  thirtieth  of  May,  by  our  observa-
tion we  Avere  in  61  degrees  11  minutes.  This  day  I  found
the  needle  to  incline  79  degrees  under  the  horizon.  For
'/jl','^"}"^,'^"'^' foure   dayes   space   we   made  very   little   way   by   contrary

needle.  •      t

Winds.

June.  Qj-^  Thursday,  the  fourth  of  June,  we  Avere,  by  our  obser-

vation, still  in  61  degrees  and  14  minutes,  eight  and  twcntie
or  thirtie  leagues  from  the  norther  part  of  Shothand  :  the
land  bearing  by  our  accompt  east  and  by  north  off  us.  I
found  variation  in  five  degrees  westerly.

The  seventh  of  June,  wee  were  in  Qio  degrees  25  minutes.
The  eighth,  all  the  forenoone  we  had  a  fresh  gale  southerly;
we  steered  away  north  and  by  west :  and   by   observation

c5(iegices    y^Q  wcrc  iu  65  dc^rees  27  minutes.

2?"  minutes.  '^

The  eleventh,  wee  saw  sixe  or  seven  whales  necre  our
'ioMinutTs.  shippc  :  we  were  in  sixtie-seven  degrees,  thirtie  minutes.
About  five  of  the  clocke,  the  winde  came  up  at  north-cast
and  by  east ;  we  steered  away  north  north-west  with  a  fresh
gale  all  the  night  at  east.  The  tivclfth,  the  winde  was  at
east  north-east,  a  stifTe  gale  ;  Avee  steered  away  as  afore,  and
accounted  wee  had  runne  by  this  day  noone  thirtie  leagues.
In  the  after-noone  we  steered  away  north  and  by  west
fiftecne  leagues  ;  all  the  night  proved  a  great  fogge  with
much  wind.

The  tldrteenth,  betweene  one  and  two  in  the  morning,  we
saw  some  land^  on  head  of  us,  and  some  ice  ;  and  it  being

^  Hudson  arrives  at  the  coast  of  Greenland,  along  which  he  sails  until
the  22nd  of  .June.  So  much  we  learn  from  his  remarks.  But  it  is  im-
possible to  ascertain  with  exactness  the  situation  of  the  places  indicated,
or  even  to  identify  those  named,  such  as  Young's  Cape,  the  JNIount
of  God's  Mercy,  and  Hold  with  Hope.  His  own  statements  are  vague,
and  the  broad  ice-fields,  by  which  the  coast  has  been  encircled  since  his
time,   have  prevented    modern   investigators   from   furnishing   ns   with


FIRST    VOYAGE    (1607).  3

a  tliicke  fogge  we  steered  aAvay  northerly,  and  having  much
wind,  wee  stood  away  south  and  by  east  six  or  eight  leagues.
Our  saylc  and  shroudes  did  freeze.  At  eight  in  the  morn-
ing it  cleered  up,  the  wind  being  at  north-east  and  by  east,
Avith  much  wind  wee  were  hardly  able  to  maintayne  a  sayle.
This  was  a  very  high  land,  most  part  covered  with  snow.
The  neather  part  was  uncovered.  At  the  top  it  looked
reddish,  and  underneath  a  blackish  clay,  with  much  ice
lying  about  it.  The  part  which  we  saw  when  wee  cast
about,  trended  east  and  west ;  and  the  norther  part  which
we  saw,  trended  north-cast  and  by  north  and  north-east ;
and  the  length  which  wee  saw  was  nine  leagues  :  wee  saw
much  fowle.  Also  wee  saw  a  whale  close  by  the  shoare.
Wee  called  the  head-land  Avhich  we  saw  Younars  Caiic  ;  and  ^'o""o's

°  ^       '  Cape.

neere  it  standcth  a  very  high  mount,  like  a  round  castle,
Avhich  wee  called  the  Mount  of  Gods  Mercie.     All  the  after-  riio  Mourn,

of  Cods

noone  and  all  the  evening  it  rained.     At  eight  in  the  even-  wercie.
ing  we  cast  about,  and  steered  all  night  north  and  by  west,
and  sometimes  north  north-west.

The  fourteenth,  being  neere  the  land,  we  had  snow.  At  suow.
foure  in  the  morning,  the  wind  vering  northerly,  we  cast
about  and  stood  south-east  and  by  south.  This  day  wee  had
much  wind  and  raine  :  we  shorted  sayle,  being  neere  the
land.  T\i.Q fifteenth ,  in  the  morning,  it  blowed  so  much  wind
at  north-east,  that  wee  were  not  able  to  maintayne  any  sayle  ;
wee  then  strooke  a  hull,  and  let  our  ship  drive,  wayting  for
a  fitter  wind  :  this  night  was  very  much  raine.  The  sixteenth
was  much  Avind  at  north-east.  The  setentoenih,  we  set  sayle
at  noone,  we  steered  away  east  and  by  south,  and  east  south-
any  correct  outline.  The  contemporary  maps  give  but  little  assistance ;
the  ancient  chart  of  the  Zeni  having  been  used  as  the  basis  for  the  de-
lineation of  Greenland,  and  that  chart,  although  superior  to  the  gene-
rality of  its  time,  is  nevertheless  very  imperfect.  When,  as  in  the
account  before  us,  we  find  various  additional  places  incorporated  into
it,  we  can,  of  course,. place  but  small  reliance  upon  the  real  accuracy  of
such  materials,     [l^d.]


4  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON,

east.  The  eighteenth,  in  the  afternoone,  a  fine  gale  south-
east, which  toward  the  evening  increased,  and  we  steered
north-east  three  watches,  twelve  leagues.  The  ninetcentli,
we  steered  away  north  north-east  sixteene  leagues.  At  noone
wee  had  raine  with  foggc.  From  twelve  to  foure  we  steered
north  north-cast  eight  leagues,  and  did  account  ourselves  in
seventie  degrees  neerest  hand,  purposing  to  see  whether  the
land  which  we  made  the  thirteenth  day  were  an  iland  or
part  of  Groneland.'  But  then  the  fogge  increased  very
thicke,  with  much  wind  at  south,  which  made  us  alter  our
course  and  to  shorten  our  sayle,  and  we  steered  away  north-
east. Being  then,  as  we  supposed,  in  the  meridian  of  the
same  land,  having  no  observation  since  the  eleventh  day,
and  lying  a  hull  from  the  fifteenth  to  the  seventeenth  day,
wee  perceived  a  current  setting  to  the  south-west.  This
day  wee  saw  three  whales  neere  our  ship,  and  having  steered
away  north-east  almost  one  watch,  five  leagues,  the  sea  was
growne  every  way  :  we  supposed  wee  were  thwart  of  the
north-cast  part  of  that  land  which  we  made  the  thirteenth
day,  and  the  current  setting  to  wind-ward.  The  reason  that
mooved  us  to  thinkc  so,  was,  that  after  we  had  sayled  five  or
sixe  leagues  in  this  sea,  the  wind  neither  increasing  nor
dulling,  wee  had  a  pleasant  and  smooth  sea.  All  this  night
was  foggie  with  a  good  gale  of  wind ;  we  steered  away  north-
east untill  the  next  day  at  noone,  and  sayled  in  that  course
twentie  leagues.

The  twentieth,  all  the  morning  was  a  thicke  fogge,  with
the  winde  at  south  ;  wee  steered  north-east  till  noone.    Then

^  In  the  charts  of  this  date,  Greenland,  as  stated  in  the  preceding  note,
was  laid  down  from  the  map  of  the  Zeni,  where  it  is  called  Encjroneland,
and  from  it  the  Groneland  of  Hudson  is  derived.  We  must  not  con-
found this  with  what  he  calls  Greenland,  by  which  he  means  the
Greodand  of  Earentz,  that  is  to  say,  Spitzhergen.  In  short,  it  is  worth
remembering,  that  wherever  Hudson  mentions  Groneland,  he  intends
Greenland,  and  when  he  speaks  of  Greodand  we  must  understand  Sjniz-
berffcn.     [Kd.]


FIKST    VOYAGE    (1607).  5

wc  changed  our  course,  and  steered  away  north  north-cast,

hoping  for  an  open  sea  in  our  course  to  fall  with  the  bodie

of  Newland.'     This  day,  at  two  in  the  aftcrnoone,  it  cleercd

up,  and  M'ee  saw  the  sunne,  which  wee  had  not  scene  since

the  second  of  this  moneth.     Having  steered   north   north-  Note.

east  two  watches  and  a  halfe,  fifteene  or  sixteene  leagues,

wee  saw  land  on  our  larboord,  about  four  leagues  off  us,  lamion

trending,   as   wee  could   ghess,   north-east  and   south-west.  ^'^°'''*

AVee  steered  away  east  north-east,  the  wind  at  south  a  good

o-ale,  but  reasonable  clcere  :  wee  saw  many  birds  with  blacke  J^' 'V>

backes  and  white  bellies,  in  forme  much  like  a  ducke,  we

saw  also  many  pieces  of  ice  drivinar  at  the  sea.     We  loofed  ^^I'l'i'dnft

-     i  ~  lee.

for  one  and  went  roomer  for  another.     And  this  morning,  t^o^^^e^pdCse
about  foure,  a  thicke  fogge  we  saw  ahead  of  us.  roomw-,

mi  7  •      7      •         1  •  11       cout[i-ary].

Ihe  owe  and  twentteth,  m  the  morning,  we  steered  north-
east and  east  north-east  two  watches,  five  or  sixe  leagues.
Then  it  grew  thicke  fogge.  And  we  cast  about,  and  steered
north-east  and  east  north-east  two  w^atches,  sixe  leagues,
finding  wee  were  embayed.  The  wind  came  at  east  south-
east a  little  gale  :  we  tacked  about  and  lay  south.  All  this
night  was  a  thicke  fog  with  little  winde,  east  we  lay  with  the
stcmme.

The  two  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning,  it  cleered  up,
being  calme  about  two  or  three  of  the  clocke  :  after,  we  had
a  prettie  gale,  and  we  steered  away  east  and  by  north  three
leagues.  Our  observation  was  in  72  degrees  38  minutes  ;
and  changing  our  course  wee  steered  north-east,  the  wind  at

^  Nieuland  is  the  name  given  to  Spitzbergen  by  several  of  the  Dutch
geographers,  this  the  English  afterwards  converted  into  King  James  his
NeidaMd.  The  most  general  name  for  the  country  was,  however,  Green-
laud,  originating  from  a  mistaken  notion  respecting  the  northern  terri-
tory discovered  by  the  ancient  Scandinavians.  Tlie  first  who  fell  into
this  mistake  was  Barentz.  The  name  of  Spitzbergen  was  invented  by
flessel  Gerard,  in  1613,  possibly  on  the  authority  of  Barentz.  Gerard,
however,  refers  the  name  to  the  year  1596.  See  Dr.  Eekc's  Introduc-
tion to  De  Vecr^  p.  Ixxxvii.     [Ed.]


6  MASTER    HEMRY    HUDSON.

south-east,  a  prcttic  gale.  This  morning,  when  it  cleered
up,  we  saw  the  land,  trending  neere  hand  east  north-east
and  west  south-west,  esteeming  ourselves  from  it  twelve
leagues.  It  was  a  mayne  high-land,  nothing  at  all  covered
with  snow ;  and  the  north  part  of  that  mayne  high-land  was
very  high  mountaynes,  but  Ave  could  see  no  snow  on  them.
We  accounted,  by  our  observation,  the  part  of  the  mayne
land  lay  neerest  hand  in  73  degrees.  The  many  fogs  and
calmes,  with  contrary  winds  and  much  ice  neere  the  shoare,
held  us  from  farther  discovery  of  it.  It  may  bee  objected
against  us  as  a  fault,  for  haling  so  westerly  a  course.  The
chiefe  cause  that  moved  us  thereunto,  was  our  desire  to  see
that  part  of  Groneland,  which  (for  ought  that  Ave  know)  Avas
to  any  Christian  unknoAvne  ;  and  Avee  thought  it  might  as
well  have  beene  open  sea  as  land,  and  by  that  meanes  our
passage  should  have  beene  the  larger  to  the  Pole;  and  the
hope  of  having  a  westerly  Avind,  Avhich  Avould  be  to  us  a
landerly  Avind  if  Avee  found  land.  And  considering  Avec
found  land  contrarie  to  that  Avhich  our  cards  make  mention
of,  we  accounted  our  labour  so  much  the  more  Avorth.  And,
for  ought  that  Avee  could  see,  it  is  like  to  bee  a  good  land,
and  Avorth  the  seeing.

On  the  one  and  hventieth  day,  in  the  morning,  Avhile  we
steered  our  course  north  north-east,  we  thought  we  had
embayed  ourselves,  finding  land  on  our  larboord  and  ice
upon  it,  and  many  great  pieces  of  drift  ice  :  Ave  steered  away
north-east,  Avith  diligent  looking  out  every  cleere  for  land,
having  a  desire  to  know  Avhether  it  would  leave  us  to  the
cast,  both  to  know  the  bredth  of  the  sea,  and  also  to  shape
a  more  northerly  course.  And  considering  Avee  kncAV  no
name  given  to  this  land,  Avee  thought  good  to  name  it  Hold-
Avith-Hope,  lying  in  73  degrees  of  latitude.

The  sunne  Avas  on  the  meridian  on  the  south  part  of  the
compasse,  neerest  hand.  Hecre  it  is  to  bee  noted,  that  Avhen
Ave  made  the  Mount  of  Gods  Mcrcie  and  Youngs  Cape,  the


FIRST    VOYAGK     (IGOT).  7

land  was  covered  with  snow  for  the  most  part,  and  extreame
cohl,  when  wee  approached  ncerc  it :  bnt  this  hvnd  was
very  temperate  to  our  feeling.  And  this  likewise  is  to  he
noted,  that  being  two  dayes  without  observation,  notwith-
standing our  lying  a  hull  by  reason  of  much  contrary  wind,
yet  our  observation  and  dead-reckoning  were  within  eight
leagues  together,  our  shippe  being  before  us  eight  leagues.
This  night,  untill  next  morning,  prooved  little  winde.

The  three  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning,  we  had  an  hard
gale  on  head  of  us,  with  much  rayne  that  fell  in  veiy  great
drops,  much  like  our  thunder-showers  in  England  ;  wee
tacked  about  and  stood  east  northerly  with  a  short  sayle  ;
to  our  feeling  it  was  not  so  cold  as  before  we  had  it.  It  was
calme  from  noone  to  three  of  the  clocke  with  fogge.  After
the  winde  came  up  at  east  and  east  south-east,  we  steered
away  north-east  with  the  fogge  and  rayne.  About  seven  or
eight  of  the  clocke,  the  wind  increased  with  extreame  fogge,
wee  steered  away  with  short  sayle  east  north-east  and  some-
times east  and  by  north.  About  twelve  at  midnight  the
wind  came  up  at  south-Avest ;  we  steered  away  north,  being
reasonable  cleere  Aveather.

1l\\&  four  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning,  about  two  of  the
clocke,  the  masters  mate  thought  he  saAV  land  on  the  lar-
boord,  trending  north  north-west  westerly,  and  the  longer
we  ranne  north  the  more  it  fell  away  to  the  west,  and  did
thinke  it  to  bee  a  mayne  high  land.  This  day,  the  wind
being  westerly,  we  steered  away  north,  and  by  observation
we  were  in  73  degrees  nearest  hand.  At  noone  we  changed
our  course,  and  steered  away  north  and  by  east;  and  at  our
last  observation,  and  also  at  this,  we  found  the  meridian  all
leeward  on  the  south  and  by  west,  Avesterly  part  of  the  com-
passe,  when  we  had  sayled  two  watches,  eight  leagues.

The  fixe  and  twentieth,  the  wind  scanted  and  came
up  at  north  north-west ;  we  lay  north-east  two  watches,  8
leagues.      After   the   Avind    became   variable    betwecne    the


O  MASTER    HF.NHY    HUDSON.

north-east  and  the  north,  we  steered  away  east  and  by  north
and  sometimes  east;  we  had  thicke  fogge.  About  noone
three  granpasses  played  about  our  shippe.  This  after-noone
the  wind  vered  to  the  east  and  south-east :  we  haled  away
north  and  by  east.  This  night  was  close  weather,  but  small
fogge  (we  use  the  word  night  for  distinction  of  time,  but
long  before  this  the  sunne  was  alway  above  the  horizon,  but
as  yet  we  could  never  see  him  upon  the  meridian  north.)

75  degrees.  Xliis  night,  being  by  our  accompt  in  the  latitude  of  75  de-
forces, we  saw  small  flockes  of  birds,  with  blacke  backes  and
white  bellies,  and  long   speare  tayles.      We  supposed  that

farre  off'  land  was  not  farre  off;  but  we  could  not  discrie  any,  with  all
the  diligence  which  we  could  use,  being  so  close  weather
that  many  times  we  could  not  see  sixe  or  seven  leagues  off.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning,  was  close  wea-
ther ;  we  had  our  wind  and  held  our  course  as  afore.     This

7fi  degrees    ^.^y  q^^.  observation  was  76   degrees  o'^  minutes ;    and  Ave

38  minutes.  •'  o  ^

had  birds  of  the  same  sort  as  afore,  and  divers  other  of  that
colour,  having  red  heads,  that  we  saw  when  we  first  made
the  Mount  of  Gods  Mercy  in  Greenland,  but  not  so  many.
After  we  steered  away  north  and  by  east,  two  watches,  ten
leagues,  with  purpose  to  fall  with  the  souther  part  of
Newland,  accounting  ourselves  10  or  12  leagues  from  the
land.  Then  wee  stood  away  north-east,  one  watch,  five
leagues.

The  sei:en  and  twentieth,  about  one  or  two  of  the  clocke
or  Newlami  i^  ^^  momiug,  wc  made  Newland,  being  cleere  weather  on
discovered.  ^^  ^^^  .  |^^^  ^^^  X-dx^^  was  covcrcd  with  fogge,  the  ice  lying
very  thick   all  along   the  shore  for  15  or  16  leagues,  which
we  saw.     Having  faire  wind  wee  coasted  it  in  a  very  pleas-
ing smooth  sea,  and  had  no  ground  at  an  hundred  fathoms
foure   leagues   from   the  slioare.     This  day,  at   noone,  wee
ra  degrees,   accouutcd  Ave  were  in  78  degrees,  and  we  stood  along  the
slioare.     This  day  was  so  foggie,  that  we  were  hardly  able
to  sec  the  land   many   times,  but  by  our   account  we  were


riKST    VOVAOK    (l()OT).  9

iiearc  Vosrcl  Hooke.'     About  ci<>ht  of  the  clockc  this  cevcn-  voo,.i

~  '^  Jlooko.

ing,  we  purposed  to  shape  our  course  from  thence  north-
west. Heere  is  to  bee  noted,  that  although  we  ranne  along
neere  the  shoare,  we  found  no  great  cold  ;  which  made  us
thinke  that  if  we  had  beene  on  shoore  the  place  is  temper- T.-nMu,.,aie

ayie.

ate.  Holding  this  north-west  course,  about  ten  of  the  clocke
at  night,  we  saw  great  store  of  ice  on  head  off  us,  bearing
wester  off  us  ;  which  wee  could  not  goe  cleere  off  with  the
foresayd  course.  Then  we  tact  about,  and  stood  away  be-
tweene  the  south  and  the  south-east,  as  much  desirous  to
leave  this  land  as  Me  were  to  see  it.

The  eiffht  and  twejiiiclh  was  a  hard  gale  of  wind  all  the
fore-noone,  betweene  the  south  and  the  south-west.  We
shaped  our  course  '  ,  we  did  it  to  bee

farther  from  the  ice  and  land.  It  pleased  God  that  about
twelve  of  the  clocke  this  night  it  cleered  up,  and  we  found
that  we  were  betweene  the  land  and  the  ice  ;  Vogel  Hooke
then  bearing  nearest  hand  east  off  us.  Then  we  tacked
about  and  stood  in  for  the  shoare,  having  sea-roome  be-
tween the  ice  and  the  land.  Tlie  ?ime  and  tioejitieih,  at
foure  in  the  morning  the  wind  at  north-east,  a  pretic  gale,
we  thought  best  to  shorten  our  way  ;  so  we  tacked  about
and  stood  north  north-west,  the  •wind  a  little  increasing.
About  twelve  at  noone,  we  saw  ice  ahead  off  us  ;  we  cast
about  again  and  stood  away  east  south-east  with  ver}^  much
wind,  so  that  we  shortned  our  sayles  for  the  space  of  two

^  Vogel  Hooke,  (Vogel-hoeck) — Bird  Cape.  According  to  Dr.  Bcke
(p.  Ixxxvii),  a  point  on  the  western  coast  of  Spitzbergen.  It  is  so
laid  down  in  an  old  map,  published  in  the  "  Begin  en  Voortgang
von  de  Nederlandsche  Oostindische  Compagnie,"  4to,  Amsterdam,  1646  ;
in  the  first  part,  containing  the  Voyages  to  the  North,  1595  to  1597.
This  a  copy  of  an  English  map  by  Daniel,  published  in  London,  1612,
but  which  we  have  not  been  able  to  find.  Dr.  Petermann  assigns  to
Vogel-hoeck  quite  a  different  place;  but  the  scantiness  of  the  materials
does  not  seem  to  us  to  warrant  any  decided  opinion.     [Ed.]

^  Blank  in  the  original  edition.     [Ed.]


10  MASTKR    IlKNRY    HUDSON.

Avatclics,  Then  about  eight  this  ecvening  we  strucke  a  hull,
and  it  proved  the  hardest  storme  that  we  had  in  this  voy-
age. The  thirtieth,  in  the  morning,  was  stormie  ;  about  noone
it  ceased ;  at  seven  in  the  eevening  it  proved  almost  calme.

July.  T\veji7'st  of  Juhj,  all  the  fore-noone  the  wind  was  at  south-

east ;  we  stood  north-east  for  the  shoare,  hoping  to  finde  an
open  sea  betweene  the  shoare  and  the  ice.  About  noone
wee  were  embayed  with  ice,  lying  betweene  the  land  and  us.

rs  degrees    By  our    observation   we   were   in   78   degrees  42  minutes,

4x!  minutes.         ''

whereby  we  accounted  we  were  thwart  of  the  great  In-
draught. And  to  free  ourselves  of  the  ice,  we  steered  be-
tweene the  south-east  and  south,  and  to  the  westward,  as
we  coidcl  have  sea ;  and  about  six  this  eevening  it  pleased
God  to  give  us  cleere  weather  ;  and  we  found  we  were  shot
iiie  great    farro  into  the  inlet,  being  almost  a  bay,  and  environed  with

inlet.

very  high  niountaynes,  with  low  land  lying  betweene  them  ;
wee  had  no  ground  in  this  bay  at  an  hundred  fathoms.
Then,  being  sure  where  we  were,  we  steered  away  west,  the
wind  at  south-east  and  calme,  and  found  all  our  ice  on  the
norther  shoare  and  a  cleare  sea  to  the  sou.thward.

The  second,  it  pleased  God  to  give  us  the  wind  at  north-
east, a  faire  gale  with  cleere  weather,  the  ice  being  to  the
northward  off  us,  and  the  weather  shoare,  and  an  open  sea
to  the  southwards  under  our  lee.  We  held  on  our  course
north-west  till  twelve  of  the  clocke  ;  having  sayled  in  that
course  10  leagues,  and  finding  the  ice  to  fall  from  us  to  the
,'  we  gave  thankes  to  God  who  marvellously
preserved  us  from  so  many  dangers  amongst  so  huge  a  quan-
titie  of  ice  and  fogge.  We  steered  away  north-west,  hoping
7fif]ep;rees    to  bc  ixcQ  from  Ice ;    we  had  observation   78   degrees,  56

fit)  niimiles.

minutes  ;  we  fell  with  ice  againe,  and  trended  it  as  it  lay

betweene  the  west  and  south  south-east.     The  third,  Ave  had

TMdoRrpps    observation  78  degrees,  33  minutes.     This  day  wee  had  our

yi!  IJlililllrs.  ,  .

shrouds  frozen  ;  it  was  searching  cold  ;  we  also  trended  the
1  Blank  in  original  edition.     [Eil.]


FIRST    VOYAGE    (IGOT).  11

ice,  not  knowing  whether  we  were  cleare  or  not,  the  wind
being  at  north.

The  fourth,  was  very  cold,  and  our  shroudes   and  sayles  '''>''   ,
frozen  ;  we  found  we  were   farre  in   the  inlet.     The  wind  r,'o'^ J„.'^ ''^^
being   at  north,  we  bcare  up  and   stood   south  south-east,
and  south  and  south-west  by  west  till  ten  this  night.     The
J{fi,  was  very  niuch  wind  at  north-easterly  ;  at  twelve  we
strooke  a  hull,  havin<:j  brought  ourselves  neare  the  mouth  '^'i"  "i""">
of  the  inlet.

The  sixth,  in  the  morning,  the  wind  was  as  before,  and  the
sea  growne.  This  morning  we  came  into  a  very  greene  sea ;
we  had  our  observation  77  degrees,  30  minutes.     This  after-  77  degreps

so  minutes.

noone  the  wind  and  sea  asswaged.  About  foure  of  the
clocke  we  set  sayle,  and  steered  north-west  and  by  west,  the
>vind  being  at  north  north-east.  This  day  proved  the  clear-
est day  we  had  long  before.  The  sevetith,  at  foure  in  the
morning,  was  very  cleare  weather,  and  the  fairest  morning
that  we  saw  in  three  weekes  before ;  we  steered  as  afore,
beino^  by  our  account  in  78  degrees  nearest  hand,  and  out  of ;;";  f'sgrees

°       *'  O  '  'I  he  end  ol

the  Sacke.     We  found  we  were  compassed  in  with  land  and  ""^  ^''^''*^-
ice,  and  were  agaiue  entred  into  a  blacke  sea,  which  by  proofe  a  wucke
we  found  to  be  an  open  passage.     Now,  having  the  wind  at  ^'="-
north  north-east,  we  steered  away  south  and  by  east,  with
purpose  to  fall  with  the  southcrmost  part  of  this  land,  which
we  saw  ;  hoping  by  this  meane,  either  to  defray  the  charge
of  the  voyage,  or  else,  if  it  pleased  God  in  time  to  give  us  a
faire  wind  to  the  north-east,  to  satisfie  expectation.    All  this
day  and  night  afterward  proved  calme.

The  eight,  all  the  forc-noone  proved  calme  and  very  tliicke
fogge.      This  morning  we   saw  many  peeces  of  drift-wood  J^^^'^'^j  '•'■'""
drive  by  us  ;  we  heaved  out  our  boate  to  stop  a  leake,  and
mended  our  riggings.     This  day  wee  saw  many  scales,  and  '^'^y
two  fishes  which  we  judged  to  bee  sea-horses  or  morses.    At  ^''^''^'^^•
twelve  this  night  we  had  the  winde  at  east  and  by  south  ;
Avee  stood  away  north-east.


12  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.

The  ninth,  all  the  fore-noone  was  little  wind  at  south-east,
with  tliicke  fogge.  This  clay  we  were  in  amongst  ilands  of
ice,  where  we  saw  many  scales.

The  tenth,  in  the  morning,  was  foggie  ;  afterward  it
proved  clecre  ;  we  found  we  were  compassed  with  ice  every
Avay  about  us  ;  wee  tacked  about,  and  stood  south  and  by
west,  and  south  south-west,  one  watch,  five  leagues,  hoping
to  get  more  sea-roome  and  to  stand  for  the  north-east ;  we
had  the  wind  at  north-west.
From  hence      '^^-^Q,  eleventh,   vcrv   cleere  weather,   with    the    winde    at

it  seemeth  ''

is  taken  out  gouth-east-soutli  :  we  were  come  out  of  the  blue  sea  into  our

01  lien.  ^

rw^ne^notes.  grccne  sea  againe,  where  we  saw  whales.  Now,  having  a
fresh  gale  of  wind  at  south  south-east,  it  behooved  mee  to
change  my  course,  and  to  sayle  to  the  north-east,  by  the

Blue  and     southcr  cud  of  Ncwlaud.    But  being  come  into  a  greene  sea,

greene  seas.

praying  God  to  direct  mee,  I  steered  away  north  ten  leagues.
After  that  we  saw  ice  on  our  larboord,  we  steered  away  east
and  by  north  three  leagues,  and  left  the  ice  behind  us.  Then
wee  steered  away  north  till  noone.  This  day  wee  had  the
sunne  on  the  meridian  south  and  by  west,  westerly,  his
greatest  height  was  o7  degrees,  20  minutes.  By  this  ob-
ro  degrees    scrvatiou  WO  wcrc  in  79  degrees,  17  minutes  ;  we  had  a  fresh

17  minutes.

gale  of  wind  and  a  smooth  sea,  by  meanes  whereof  our  ship
had  out-runne  us.  At  ten  this  eevening  cleere  weather,  and
then  we  had  the  company  of  our  troublesome  neighbours,
ice  with  fogge.  The  wind  was  at  south  south-west.  Heere
we  saw  plentie  of  scales,  and  we  supposed  beares  had  beene
heere,  by  their  footing  and  dung  upon  the  ice.     This  day.

Sick  of        inanv  of  mv  companie  were  sickc  with  eating  of  bcarcs  flesh

iui«aiied.      t}^e  ([r^y  before  unsalted.

The  twelfth,  for  the  most  part,  was  thickc  fogge ;  wee
steered  betwcene  south  and  by  east,  and  south  south-east
2(5  leagues,  to  cleere  us  of  the  ice.  Then  we  had  the  wind
at  south  ;  wee  steered  till  noone  north-east  five  leagues.  This
morning  we   had   our   shroudcs    frozen.     At  noone,  by  our


FIRST    VOYAGE    (IGOT).  13

accompt,  we  were  in  80  degrees,  being  little  wind  at  west  ^'^  degrees.
south-west,  almost  calme  with  thicke  foggc.  This  after-
noone  we  steered  away  north  and  sometimes  north-east.
Then  Ave  saw  ice  ahead  off  us  ;  we  cast  about  and  stood
south-east,  with  little  wind  and  fogge.  Before  we  cast  about
by  meanes  of  the  thicke  fogge,  we  were  very  neere  ice,  being
calme,  and  the  sea  setting  on  to  the  ice,  which  was  very
dangerous.  It  pleased  God  at  the  very  instant  to  give  us  a
small  gale,  which  Avas  the  meanes  of  our  deliverance  ;  to
Him  be  praise  therefore.  At  twelve  this  night  it  cleared
up,  and  out  of  the  top  William  Collins,  our  boatswaine,
saw  the  land,  called  Newland  by  the  Hollanders,  bearing  ^-wiaud  or
south  south-west  twelve  leagues  from  us.  Hoii'and«r!f

The  thirteenth,  in  the  morning,  the  wind  at  south  and  by  lutiedis'-

covei'ie  by

east,  a  arood  srale,  we  cast  about  and  stood  north-east  and  by  Barents, as
east,  and  by  observation  we  were  in  80  degrees,  23  minutes.  d'^'iv<'ied;

^  J  O  '  but  neither

This   day  we  saw  many  whales.      This  fore-noone  proved  go  e"act  "or
cleere  weather,  and  we  could  not  see  any  signe  of  ice  out  of  nor  first, 'as

before  is  ob-

the  top.    Betweene  noone  and  three  of  the  clocke,  we  steered  served  of

^  '  Sir  H.  Wil-

away  north-east  and  by  east  five  leagues ;  then  we  saw  ice  £1"°}-^^  ^
on  head  off  us ;  we  steered  east  two  glasses,  one  league,  and  coverfes, '^"
could  not  be  cleare  of  the  ice  with  that  course.     Then  we  wh'aie  and

morse

steered  away  south-east  two  leasrues  I,  after  we  sayled  east  benefit, tbey

•'  O  "J '  ^  ./  also  enter-

and  by  north,  and  east  foure   leagues,  till   eight  the  next  ^^r®'^-
morning.

The  foureteenth,  in  the  morning,  was  calme  with  fogge.
At  nine,  the  wind  at  east,  a  small  gale  with  thicke  fogge  ;
wee  steered  south-east  and  by  east,  and  running  this  course
we  found  our  greene  sea  a2:aine,  which  by  proofe  we  found  Greene  sea

O  O  i  J    if  freest  of  ice,

to  be  freest  from  ice,  and  our  azure  blue  sea  to  be  our  icie  ?,"'i'!i!

^  0lU6  Set*

sea.     At  this  time  Ave  had  more  birds  then  we  usually  found.  '"*'
At  noone,  being  a  thicke  fogge,  we  found  ourselves  neere
land,  bearing  east  off  us  ;  and  running  farther  Ave  found  a
bay  open  to  the  Avest  and  by  north  northerly,  the  bottonie
and  sides  thereof  being  to  our  sight  very  high  and  ragged


14  MASTER    HE^'RY    HUDSON.

land.  The  norther  side  of  this  bayes  mouth  being  high  hind
coUius  is  a  small  iland,  the  Avhich  we  called  Collins  Cape,'  by  the
name  of  our  boat-swaine,  who  first  saw  it.  In  this  bay  Ave
saw  many  whales,  and  one  of  our  company  having  a  hooke
Whale  and  line  over-boord  to  trie  for  fish,  a  whale  came  under  the
keele  of  our  ship  and  made  her  held  ;  yet  by  Gods  mercie
we  had  no  harme,  but  the  losse  of  the  hooke  and  three  parts
of  the  line.  At  a  south-west  sunne  from  the  north-west  and
by  north,  a  flood  set  into  the  bay.  At  the  mouth  of  this  bay
we  had  sounding  thirtie  fathoms,  and  after  sixe  and  twentie
fathoms,  but  being  farther  in,  we  had  no  ground  at  an  hun-
dred fathoms,  and  therefore  judged  it  rather  a  sound  then
a  bay.  Betweene  this  high  ragged,  in  the  swampes  and
vallies  lay  much  snow.  Heere  wee  found  it  hot.  On  the
souther  side  of  this  bay,  lye  three  or  fourc  small  ilauds  or
rockes.
A  sound  is        In  the  bottome  of  this  bay,  John  Colman,  my  mate,  and

a  greater

Hi,(i  deeper  "William   Collins,  my  boat-swaine,  with   two   others   of  our

then  a  bay.  company  went  on  shoare,  and  there  they  found  and  brought

aboord  a  payre  of  morses   teeth  in  the  jaw  ;  they  likewise

found   whales  bones,    and   some   dosen   or   more   of  deeres

homes  ;  they  saw  the  footings  of  beasts  of  other  sorts  ;  they

also   saw   rote-geese  ;^    they   saw   much    drift-wood  on   the

shoare,  and  found  a  streame  or  two  of  fresh  water.     Here

Heat  they  found  it  hot  on  the  shoare,  and   drank  -water  to  coole

80  degrees,   their  tliirst,  which  they  also  commended.     Here  we  found

the  want  of  a  better  ship-boate.     As  they  certified  me,  they

were  not  on  the  shoare  past  half  an  hourc,  and  among  other

^  This  island  is  not  marked  upon  any  old  map  or  chart,  and  the  de-
scription here  given  of  it,  is  insufficient  to  determine  its  place  with  any
degree  of  certainty.     [Ed.]

^  Supposed  to  have  been  thus  named  from  their  peculiar  cry  ;  see  the
observations  of  Dr.  Beke  on  these  geese,  De  Veer,  pp.  79-81.  We  may
call  the  reader's  attention  to  the  fact  that  Hudson  does  not  fall  into  the
error  of  Phillip,  who,  misled  by  the  ear,  mistook  the  Dutch  rot-gansen
for  red  geese.


FIRST    VOYAGE    (1C07).  15

things  brought  aboord  a  stone  of  the  countrey,  AAHicn  they
went  from  us  it  Avas  cahne,  but  presently  after  we  had  a  gale
of  wind  at  north-east,  which  came  with  the  flood  with  fogge.
We  plyed  too  and  againe  in  the  bay,  waiting  their  com-
ming  ;  but  after  they  came  aboord  we  had  the  wind  at  east
and  by  south  a  fine  gale  ;  Ave  minding  our  voyage,  and  the
time  to  perform  it,  steered  away  north-east  and  north  north-
east. This  night  proved  cleere,  and  we  had  the  sunne  on
the  meridian,  on  the  north  and  by  east  part  of  the  compasse  ;
from  the  upper  edge  of  the  horizon,  with  the  crosse-staflfe,
we  found  his  height  10  degrees,  40  minutes,  without  allow-  i*oli"g,ees
ing  any  thing  for  the  semidiameter  of  the  sunne,  or  the  dis-  hiyh'.",Ibou1,
tance  off  the  end  of  the  staffe  from  the  center  in  the  eye.
From  a  north  sunne  to  an  east  sunne,  we  sayled  betweene
north  and  north  north-east,  eight  leagues.

The  fifteenth,  in  the  morning,  was  very  cleere  weather,
the  sunne  shining  warme,  but  little  wind  at  east  southerly.
By  a  south-east  sunne  we  had  brought  Collins  Cape  to  beare
off  us  south-east,  and  we  saw  the  high  land  of  Newland,  that
part  by  us  discovered  on  our  starboord,  eight  or  ten  leagues
from  us,  trending  north-east  and  by  east,  and  south-Avest  and
by  Avest,  eighteene  or  tAventie  leagues  from  us  to  the  north-
east, being  a  very  high  mountaynous  land,  like  ragged
rockes  with  snow  betAveene  them.  By  mine  account,  the
norther  part  of  this  land  Avhich  noAV  we  saAV,  stretched  into
81  degrees.  All  this  day  proved  cleere  weather,  little  AAand,  '"*^  ^''^^rees.
and  reasonable  warme.

The  sixteenth,  in  the  morning  warme  and  cleere  Aveathcr  ;
the  wind  at  north.  This  morning  we  saw  that  Ave  Avere  com-
passed in  Avith  ice  in  abundance,  lying  to  the  north,  to  the
north-west,  the  east  and  south-east ;  and  being  runne  toAvard
the  farthest  part  of  the  land  by  us  discovered,  which  for  the
most  part  trendeth  nearest  hand  north-cast  and  south-Avest,
Avee  saw  more  land  joyning  to  the  same,  trending  north  in  our  ^;',""'i,in
sight,  by  meanes  of  the  clecrncssc  of  the  Aveather,  stretching  'Je'^',.j


into  R2
rees.


16  MASTER    HF.XRY    HUDSON.

farre  into  82  degrees,'  and  by  the  bowing  or  shewing  of  the
skie  much  farther.  Which  when  I  first  saw,  I  hoped  to
have  had  a  free  sea  between  the  land  and  the  ice,  and  meant
to  have  compassed  this  land  by  the  north.  But  now,  find-
ing by  proofe  it  was  unpossible,  by  means  of  the  abundance
of  ice  compassing  us  about  by  the  north  and  joyning  to  the
land,  and  seeing  God  did  blesse  us  with  a  faire  wind  to  sayle
They  re-      bv  the  south   of  this   land  to  the   north-east,  we  returned,

turned.  "'  _

bearing  up  the  helme,  minding  to  hold  that  part  of  the  land
which  the  Hollanders  had  discovered  in  our  sight ;  and  if
contrary  winds  should  take  us,  to  harbour  there,  and  to  trie
what  we  could  finde  to  the  charge  of  our  voyage,  and  to
proceed  on  our  discoverie  as  soone  as  God  should  blesse  us
with  windc.  And  this  I  can  assure  at  this  present,  that  be-
tweene  78  degrees  and  ^  and  82  degrees,  by  this  way  there
is  no  passage:'  but  I  think  this  land  may  bee  profitable  to
those  that  will  adventure  it.  In  this  bay  before  spoken  of,
Abunriance   and  about  tliis  coast,  we  saw  more  abundance  of  scales  then

ofseales.

Ave  had  scene  any  time  before,  swimming  in  the  water.  At
noone  this  day,  having  a  stiffe  gale  of  wind  at  north,  we
were  thwart  of  Collins  Cape,  standing  in  81  degrees  and  a
halfe  ;  and  at  one  of  the  clocke  the  cape  beare  north-east  off
us.  From  thence  I  set  our  course  west  south-west,  Avith
purpose  to  keepe  in  the  open  sea  free  from  ice,  and  sayled
in  that  course  16  leagues.  At  ten  this  night  we  steered
away  south-west,  with  the  wind  at  north,  a  hard  gale,  untill
eight  the  next  morning,  18  leagues.

The  seventeenth,  in  the  morning,  a  good  gale  at  north ;
at  eight  we  altered  our  course,  and  steered  away  south  till

^  Captain  Beechey  {Voyage  of  Discovery,  p.  271),  supposes  this  to  be
the  Seven  Islands.  The  highest  point  reached  in  boats  and  sledges  by
Captain  Parry  in  1827,  lies  under  82°  45'.

^  Hudson  is  mistaken  in  this  respect.  It  is  not  clear,  however,  whe-
ther he  was  arrested  by  ice  only  or  by  land.  If  the  latter  were  the  case,
some  of  his  observations  with  regard  to  latitudes  must  be  incorrect.


FIRST    VOYAGE    (IGOT).  17

eight  iu  the  eevening,  and  ranne  12  leagues.  This  day
proved  reasonable  cleere  and  war  me.  The  eightcentli ,  in  the
morning,  the  wind  encreased  at  south  and  by  cast,  with
thickc  fogge.  All  this  after-noone  and  night  proved  close
Aveathcr,  little  fogge,  and  reasonable  warme.

The  nineteenth,  at  eight  in  the  morning,  the  wind  at
south,  with  thicke  fogge  ;  we  steered  south-east  4  leagues
till  noone  ;  then  the  wind  vcred  more  large  ;  wee  steered
south-east  and  by  east  four  leagues  till  foure  ;  then  wee  vered
shete,  and  steered  cast  and  by  south-easterly  15  leagues,  till
eight  the  next  morning.  This  day,  after  the  morning,  proved
reasonable  cleere  and  MMrme.

The  twentieth,  in  the  morning,  little  wind  ;  at  eight  this
morning  wee  saw  land  ahead  of  us  under  our  lee,  and  to
weatherward  of  us,  distant  from  us  12  leagues,  being  part  of
Newland.  It  is  very  high  mountainous  land  ;  the  highest
that  we  had  scene  untill  now.  As  we  sayled  neere  it,  we
saw  a  Sound  ahead  of  us,  lying  east  and  west.  The  land  on
the  norther  side  of  this  Sound's  mouth,  trendeth  neerest  hand
west  north-west,  and  east  south-east  12  leagues,  in  our  sight,
being  10  leagues  from  us  ;  and  the  land  on  the  souther  side,
being  8  or  10  leagues  in  our  sight,  at  this  time  trendeth
south  south-east  and  north  north-west '}  from  eight  to  noone
was  calme.    This  day,  by  observation,  we  were  in  77  des^'ces,  ""fiocrrees,

•^         -^  _  O  '  2C  minutes.

26  minutes.  On  the  norther  side  of  the  mouth  of  this  inlet
lie  three  ilands,^  not  farre  the  one  from  the  other,  being  very
high  mountainous  land.  The  farthest  of  the  three  to  the
north-west  hath  foure  very  high  mounts,  like  heapcs  of
cornc.  That  iland  next  the  inlets  mouth,  hath  one  very  high
mount  on  the  souther  end.  Here  one  of  our  companie  killed
a  red-billed  bird.     All  this  day  after  the  morning,  and  all

^  This  is  perhaps  the  best  description  extant  of  Bell  Sound,  on  the
west  coast  of  Spitzbergon.

^  These  three  islands  arc  not,  as  far  as  we  know,  marked  on  any  map
of  Spitzbergen.

3


18  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.

night,  proved  calme,  enclining   rather  to  heate  then  cold.
This  night  wee  had  some  warme  rayne.

The  one  and  twentieth,  all  the  fore-noone  calme  ;  at  fonre
in  the  after-noone  we  had  a  small  gale  of  wind  at  south
south-east,  with  fog ;  we  steered  away  east  to  stand  in  with
the  land,  and  sayled  3  leagues  untill  mid-night :  then  the
wind  came  at  north-east,  we  cast  about,  and  steered  south
10  leagues  till  eight  the  next  morning.  The  two  and  tioen-
tieth,  at  eight  in  the  morning  much  wind  at  east,  and  varia-
ble, with  short  sayle  wee  steered  3  leagues  south  and  by
east :  then  came  down  very  much  wind ;  we  strooke  a  hull.
All  this  after-noone  and  night,  proved  very  much  wind  with
raine.

The  three  and  twentieth,  all  the  fore-noone  was  very  much
wind  at  south,  with  raine  and  fogge.  At  foure  this  after-
noone  wee  saw  land,  bearing  north-east  of  us,  6  leagu.es  from
us.  Then  we  had  the  wind  at  south  south-west ;  wee  steered
away  south-east  and  south-east  and  by  east  4  leagues,  the  sea
being  very  much  growne.  We  accounted  we  had  hulled
north-west  and  by  north  22  leagues,  and  north  3  leagues.
Then  fearing  with  much  wind  to  be  set  on  a  lee-shoare  we
tackt  about,  and  made  our  way  good  west  and  by  north,  half
a  point  northerly  all  this  night  with  much  wind.

The  four  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning,  much  wind  as
afore,  and  the  sea  growne.  This  morning  wee  strooke  our
mayne  top-mast  to  ease  our  ship,  and  sayled  from  the  last
eevening,  eight,  to  this  noone,  15  leagues  west  and  by  north
halfe  a  point  northerly.  From  twelve  to  eight,  six  leagues
as  afore,  with  the  wind  at  south  and  by  west ;  at  eight  we
tackt  about  with  the  winde  at  south  south-west,  and  lay
south-cast  and  by  east,  with  much  winde,  and  the  sea  growne.

The  fixe  and  twentieth  was  a  cleere  morning :  we  set  our
maync  top-mast :  we  saw  land  bearing  north  of  us,  and
under  our  lee,  we  sayling  south-east  and  by  cast.  Then  the
wind  scanted  :  Ave   cast   about,  and  lay  south-west  and  by


FIRST    VOYAGE    (1607).  19

west  2  leagues  -^  till  noone.  Then  it  began  to  overcast,  and
the  wind  to  scant  againc :  we  cast  about,  and  lay  south-east
and  by  south,  the  wind  at  south-west  and  by  west,  and  saylcd
in  that  course  3  leagues,  till  foure  in  the  after-noone.  Then
the  wind  scanted  againe,  and  we  sayled  3  leagues  south.
Now,  seeing  how  contrarie  the  winde  proved  to  doe  the
good  which  wee  desired  this  way,  I  thought  to  prove  our
fortunes  by  the  west  once  again  ;  and  this  eevening  at  eight,
wee  being  in  the  latitude  of  78,  with  the  better,  and  from
land  15  leagues,  which  leagues  part  whereof  beare  from  the
north-east  to  the  east  off^  us,  we  steered  away  west,  with  the
wind  at  south-east,  and  cleere  weather.

The  sixe  mid  tweiitieth,  all  this  day  proved  rayne  with
thicke  fogge,  and  an  hard  gale  of  wind  at  east  and  by  north,
and  east  north-east.  From  the  last  eevening  at  eight  to  this
noone,  wee  ranne  ;25  leagues  :  from  noone  till  midnight  19
leagues,  the  wind  at  east  and  by  south ;  from  mid-night  till
two  the  next  morning,  2  leagues  west.

The  seveti  and  twentieth,  extreme  thicke  fog,  and  little
wind  at  east  and  by  south.  Then  it  proved  calme,  and  the
sea  very  loftie.  AVee  heard  a  great  rutte  or  noise  with  the
ice  and  sea,  which  was  the  first  ice  we  heard  or  saw  since
we  were  at  Collins  Cape  :  the  sea  heaving  us  westward
toward  the  ice.  Wee  heaved  out  our  boat,  and  rowed  to
towe  out  our  ship  farther  from  the  danger  ;  which  would
have  beene  to  small  purpose,  by  meanes  the  sea  went  so  '^'"'^;
high  :  but  in  this  extremitie  it  pleased  God  to  give  us  a  small
gale  at  north-west  and  by  west,  we  steered  aAvay  south-east,
4  leagues,  till  noone.  Here  wee  had  finished  our  discoverie,
if  the  wind  had  continued  that  brought  us  hither,  or  if  it
had  continued  calme ;  but  it  pleased  God  to  make  this  north-
west and  by  west  wind  the  meane  of  our  deliverance  :  which
wind  wee  had  not  found  common  in  this  voyage.  God
give  us  thankfull  hearts  for  so  great  deliverance.     Here  we

^  In  the  neighbourhood  of  Ice  Sound,  on  the  west  coast  of  Spitzbevgcn.


20  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.

found  the  want  of  a  good  ship-boat,  as  once  we  had  done
whiiits  Day.  j^p^Qj.g  ^^  Whales  Bay:  we  wanted  also  halfe  a  dozen  long
oares  to  rowe  in  our  ship.  At  noone  the  day  cleered  up,
and  we  saw  by  the  skie  ice  bearing  off  us,  from  west  south-
west to  the  north  and  north  north-east.  Then  we  had  a
good  gale  at  west ;  we  steered  away  south  till  foure,  7
leagues.  From  foure  to  six,  south  4  leagues,  and  found  by
the  icy  skie  and  our  neereness  to  Groneland  that  there  is  no
passage  that  Avay  :  Avhich,  if  there  had  beene,  I  meant  to
have  made  my  returne  by  the  north  of  Groneland  to  Davis
his  Streights,  and  so  for  England.^  Here  finding  we  had
the  benefit  of  a  westerly  wind,  which  all  this  voyage  we  had
found  scant,  we  altered  our  course  and  steered  to  the  east-
ward, and  ran  south-east  foure  leagues.  From  eight  this
eevening  till  noone  the  next  day,  east  south-east,  30  leagues.
All  this  day  and  night  proved  very  cold,  by  meanes,  as  I
suppose,  of  the  winds  comming  off  so  much  ice.

The  ei(//d  and  twentieth,  very  cold,  the  wind  at  west,  not
very  foggie.  At  noone  this  day  we  steered  away  south-east
and  by  east,  and  by  observation  we  were  76  degrees,  36
minutes.^  From  noone  to  eight,  10  leagues.  Then  the  wind
scanted  to  south-east  and  by  south,  we  steered  away  east
and  by  north  18  leagues,  till  the  next  day  noone.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  all  the  fore-noone  a  thicke  fog
and  wet,  the  wind  at  south-east  and  by  east,  nearest  hand,
and  raw  cold.  From  noone  to  foure  wee  sayled  three  leagues
east  and  by  north,  halfe  a  point  northerly.  Then  the  Avind
veered  more  large  ;  Ave  steered  east  and  by  south  8  leagues
till  twelve  at  night.     At  this  time  to  windward  Ave  heard

^  Greenland,  which  Hudson  alwc\ys  calls  Groneland,  was  up  to  his
time  too  imperfectly  known  to  prevent  his  entertaining  the  hope  of  re-
turning home  by  the  north  of  it.  The  fact  that  a  passage  does  not
exist,  is  one  of  tite  most  important  geographical  results  obtained  by  this
expedition.

^  About  ()'  to  the  N.W.  of  South  Cape,  on  Point  Lookout,  the  most
southern  point  of  yiiit/.bergen.


FIKST    VOYAGE    (1607).  21

the  rutte  of  land,  which  I  knew  to  be  so  by  the  colour  of  the
sea.  It  was  extreme  thicke  fog,  so  that  we  could  hardly
see  a  cables  length  from  our  ship.  We  had  ground  25
fathoms,  small  blacke  pcble  stones.  Wee  sounded  againe,
and  had  ground  at  30  fathomes,  small  stones  like  beanes  ;
at  the  next  cast  no  ground  at  GO  fathomes.  I  cast  about
againe  and  steered  south-west  six  leagues,  west  and  by  north
two  leagues,  till  the  next  day  noone.  All  this  day  and  night
extreme  thicke  fog.

The  thirtieth,  all  the  forc-noonc  very  thicke  fog.  At
noone  almost  calme  :  after  we  had  little  wind,  and  steered
north  north-west  till  two  :  then  it  cleercd  up,  so  that  we
could  see  from  us  2  leagues  with  the  wind  at  north-west.
Then  we  steered  east  south-east :  after  it  cleered.  At  south,
in  the  eevening,  we  saw  an  iland  bearing  off  us  north-west
from  us  5  leagues,  and  we  saw  land  bearing  off  from  us  7
leagues.^  We  had  land  likewise  bearing  off  us  from  east  south-
east to  south-east  and  by  east  as  we  judged,  10  leagues.  Then,
having  the  winde  at  west  north-west,  we  steered  south  and
by  east.  It  presently  proved  calme  till  ten  this  eevening  :
then  wee  had  a  little  gale  at  south-west  and  by  west ;  wee
steered  away  south  south-east  till  twelve  this  night,  and
accounted  ourselves  in  76,^  from  land  10  leagues  :  which  was
the  likeliest  land  that  wee  had  scene  on  all  parts  of  New-
land,  being  playne  riggie  land  of  a  meane  height  and  not
ragged,  as  all  the  rest  was  that  we  had  scene  this  voyage,
nor  covered  with  snow.  At  twelve  this  night  wee  saw  two
morses  in  the  sea  neere  us  swimming  to  land.  From  twelve
at  night  to  foure,  calme.

The  o?ie  and  thirtieth,  at  foure  this  morning,  we  had  the
wind  at  south-east ;  we  steered  south  south-west.     Then  it

^  This  island  seems  not  to  be  marked  on  the  maps.

^  An  evident  mistake  in  Hudson's  dead  reckoning  ;  Spitzbert^en  docs
not  extend  farther  south  than  76°  30'.  These  mistakes  frequently  occur
in  the  Arctic  regions,  and  we  must  be  careful  with  regard  to  every  state-
ment that  is  not  based  on  astronomical  observations.


Hand.


22  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.

proved  calme,  and  so  continued  all  the  fore-noone.  The
after-noone  wee  had  the  wind  at  east  south-east :  we  steered
south,  8  leagues.  Then  being  like  to  prove  much  wind,
contrarie  to  our  purpose,  and  finding  our  fog  more  thicke
and  troublesome  then  before,  divers  things  necessarie  want-
ing, and  our  time  well  nigh  spent  to  doe  further  good  this
yeere,  I  commanded  to  beare  up  for  our  returne  for  Eng-
land, and  steered  away  south  south-west.  And  this  night
proved  a  hard  gale  of  wind  at  south-east  and  by  east.  We
cheiie  were  thwart  of  Cheries  Iland^  the  next  morning,  at  foure  of
the  clocke,  being  to  windward  off  us  5  leagues  :  knowing
we  were  neere  it,  we  looked  out  carefully  for  the  same,  and
it  proving  cleere,  we  saw  it,  being  a  very  ragged  land  on
the  water  side,  rising  like  hey-cockes.

The  first  of  August,  a  very  hard  gale  of  wind  at  east
south-east ',  we  shorted  sayle  and  steered  away  south  south-
west. This  night  was  very  foggie,  with  a  hard  gale  of  wind  at
east  and  by  south  ;  we  steered  by  our  account  27  leagues  :  and
from  eight  this  eevening  till  the  next  morning  foure,  10  leagues
as  afore.     All  this  night  was  very  foggie,  wet  and  raw  cold.

The  second,  in  the  morning,  calme,  with  a  thicke  fog,  cold
and  slabbie  weather.  About  noone  we  had  a  little  gale  west
and  b)^  north  :  we  steered  away  as  afore.  The  third,  in  the
morning  calme  and  cleere  weather,  with  a  little  gale  east
and  by  south  ;  we  sayled  south  south-west :  then  wee  had
the  wind  at  south-east,  wee  sayled  as  afore.  All  this  day
and  night  proved  close  weather,  a  little  fogge  at  noone,
which  continued  not  long.  At  twelve  this  night  the  wind
vcrcd  to  the  east  and  by  north,  wee  held  our  course  south
south-west  as  afore.

The  fifteenth  of  August  we  put  into  the  lies  of  Farrc,^
standing  in  52  degrees ;  and  the  Fifteentli  of  September  I
arrived  in  Tilbcrie  Hope  in  the  Thames.

^  Discovered  by  Barcntz.     Stephen  Beuuett  visited  it  iu  1C03,  and
called  it  after  his  jtatrou,  Francis  Oheiic.
^  The  Faroe  Islands.


SECOND    VOYAGE    (1608).


A    SECOND     VOYAGE     OR    EMPLOYMENT     OP
MASTER     HENRY     HUDSON,

FOR   FINDING    A    PASSAGE    TO    THE    EAST    INDIES    BY    THE    NORTH-EAST  ;
WRITTEN    BY    IIIMSELFE.


Their  names  employed  in  this  action  are  as  followcth  :
Henry  Hudson,  master  and  pilot ;  Robert  Juet,^  the  mas-
ter his  mate  :  Ludlowe  Arnall ;  John  Cooke,  boatsonne  ;
Philip  Stacie,  carpenter ;  John  Barnes ;  John  Braunch,
cooke ;  John  Adrey ;  James  Strutton ;  Michel  Feirce  ;  Tho-
mas Hilles  ;  Richard  Tomson ;  Robert  Raynar  ;  John  Hud-
son ;  and  Humfrey  Gilby.  The  courses  observed  in  this
journall  were  by  a  compasse,  that  the  needle  and  the  north
of  the  Flye  were  directly  one  on  the  other.

Anno  1608,  the  Uvo  and  tioentieth  of  Ajml I,  heiwg  Friday,  Aprin.
we  set  sayle  at  Saint  Katherines,"  and  fell  downe  to  Blacke-
wall.

The  twentieth  of  May,  at  noone,  by  observation  we  were  i\tay.
in  6-1  degrees,  52  minutes  ;  and  at  this  time  and  place  the
needle   declined  under   the  horizon  by  the  inclinatory  81
degrees,  and  wee  had  a  smooth  sea,  by  meanes  whereof  my
observation  was  good.

The  one  and  tioentieth,  at  night,  thicke  fog ;  wee  sayled
north  north-east ;  wee  steered  north  north-east  as  afore  :  in
the  after-noone  little  wind  and  thicke  fog  ;  we  accounted  us
in  67  degrees,  the  sea  smooth,  the  needle  declined  82  de-
grees ;  this  night  was  calme  and  clecre.  The  three  and  tioen-

^  I  have  Robert  Juetts  journall  also,  for  brevitie  omitted.   [Purchas.]
2  Where  the  St.  Katherine's  Docks  now  are.


24  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.

tieth,  in  the  morning  the  wind  was  easterly,  we  stood  north
north-east,  and  north  and  by  east.  All  the  fore-noone  was
foggie :  in  the  after-noone  it  cleered,  and  the  wind  shortned
upon  us,  we  made  our  way  good  north  all  night.  TYie  foure
and  iwentieth,  the  wind  at  east  north-east,  and  east  and  by
north,  we  lay  as  neere  as  wee  could  with  a  full  sayle  ;  wee

Lowfoot.  accounted  Lowfoot^  from  us  east  northerly  16  leagues  distant
from  us  ;  at  foure  a  clockc  this  after-noone,  wee  stood  all
night  as  afore.

The  Jive  and  twentieth,  the  wind  at  east  north-east ;  we
stood  away  north  as  we  could  lie :  all  this  day  was  cleere
weather  and  searching  cold,  which  cold  begunne  the  one
and  twentieth  day,  and  then  my  carpenter  was  taken  sicke,
and  so  doth  yet  continue  ;  and  three  or  foure  more  of  our
companie  w^ere  enclining  to  sicknesse,  I  suppose  by  meanes
of  the  cold.  All  the  night  it  was  calme.  The  sixe  and
tiventieth,  cold  but  cleare  weather,  the  wind  betweeue  east
and  east  north-east ;  we  stood  north-easterly  till  twelve  a
clocke  at  night :  then  wee  had  the  wind  at  north-east  and
north  north-east,  we  stood  south-east  and  east  till  noone  the
next  day.  The  severi  and  tiventieth,  cold  and  drie  weather,
at  noone  we  had  the  wind  north  and  north  north-west;  wee
stood  away  north-east  and  east  north-east  as  we  could,  and
accounted  our  selves  in  69  degrees,  40  minutes,  and  the
needle  inclined,  having  a  smooth  sea,  nearest  84  degrees.
All  night  we  had  wind  and  weather  as  afore.

The  eight  and  tiventieth,  drie  cold  cleere  weather  ;  the
wind  betweene  north  north-west  and  north  ;  we  made  our

Sun  tmIc-     way  2ood  east  north-cast ;  wee  saw  the  sunne  on  the  north

grees  ^^  .     .

minutes  at  meridian  above  the  horizon  5  desrrees,  35  minutes.  All  this
night  we  had  much  wind  as  afore.  The  nijie  and  tiventieth,
a  hard  gale  at  north  north-west :  by  account  we  ranne  from
mid-night  to  noone  21  leagues  east  north-cast.  AVee  had
the  sunne  on  the  meridian  5  degrees,  the  latitude  73  dc-
^  The  Luffoden  Islands,  west  of  Norway.


SECOND    VOYAGE    (1608).  25

grees,  13  minutes,  whereby  wee  found  our  ship  to  have
out-runne  us.  At  mid-night  the  wind  came  to  south-east :
we  cast  about,  and  stood  cast  north-east.  This  day  partly
cleere  weather  Avith  some  snow.  The  thirtictJt,  cold  cleerc
weather,  the  -wind  betwecne  north-east  and  east  and  by
north  ;  -sve  went  cast  south-cast,  and  observing,  were  in
73  degrees,  50  minutes.  The  one  and  thirtieth,  cold  and
cleere  weather :  from  the  last  day  to  this  day  noone,  Ave
stood  south-cast  and  by  south,  in  the  latitude  of  72  degrees,
45  minutes.

The  Jirst  of  June,  a  hard  gale  at  east  north-east,  with  Juno.
snow  :  we  made  our  Avay  good  south  south-east.  The  second,
a  hard  gale  of  wind  at  north-east :  towards  night,  calme
with  fogge,  our  course  Avas  south-cast  all  day.  The  third,
in  the  morning  we  had  a  sight  of  the  North  Cape  ;'  and  at  a  North  capp.
west  and  by  north  sunne,  the  Cape  bore  oiF  us  south-Avest,
halfe  a  point  southerly,  being  from  us  8  leagues  :  and  ob-
servinar  the  variation,  I  found  it  to  the  westward  11  desfrees  :  variations

,  ,  °  west,  11

and  havinsr  a  smooth  sea,  the   needle  enclined  under  the  ^fs'ff^  .

•->  '  Needle  s  in-

horizon  84  degrees  and  a  halfe,  the  neerest  I  could  finde.  gi'degre^'s
We  had  the  wind  at  south-west,  and  Avee  stood  away  north-  '^"
east  and  by  east.     It  Avas  cleere  weather,  and  we  saAv  Nor-
way fisher-men  at  sea.

The  fourth,  ^ya.l'm.e  cleere  sun-shine,  Ave  stood  aAvay  north-
east and  by  east.  Noav,  by  God's  helpc,  our  carpenter
recovered,  and  made  a  mast  for  our  ship-boat,  and  the  com-
panie  made  a  sayle  ;  Ave  had  the  sunne  in  the  sight  on  the
north  meridian,  his  height  Avas  5  degrees,  40  minutes.  In-
clination, 23  degrees,  21  minutes  :  pole's  height,  72  degrees,
21  minutes.  The  fft,  in  the  morning,  calme  weather  :  wee
sounded,  and  had  1 40  fathoms,  sand  oze  :  here  wee  saAV  a
swelling  sea  setting  north-east  and  by  east,  and  south-Avest
and  by  west,  with  streame-leches  :  and  Ave  saw  drift  Avood.
After  we  had  Avind ;  and  Ave  sayled  and  made  our  Avay  north
^  The  most  northern  point  of  Norway.


26  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.

north-east :  towards  night  we  sounded,  and  found  ground  at
150  fathoms,  sand  oze.  This  day  cleere  weather,  and  not
cold.  The  sixt,  wee  had  cleere  weather,  the  wind  being  at
east  north-east,  from  the  last  day  till  this  day  noone ;  we
shaped  our  way  on  divers  courses  north  and  by  west,  in  the
latitude  of  73  degrees,  24  minutes.  We  found  that  our  ship
had  out-runne  us,  sounding  in  160  fathoms  :  in  the  after-
noone  little  wind.

The  seventh,  in  the  morning,  the  wind  at  south,  after  at
south  south-east :  from  the  last  day  till  this  day  noone,  wee
accounted  our  way  from  divers  courses  north-east,  15  leagues.
This  day  was  close  but  cleere  weather,  and  we  had  a  good
gale  of  Avind  at  this  time.  And  three  dayes  before  this,  our
cooke  and  one  more  of  our  companie  were  very  sicke.  In
the  morning  we  had  ground  at  150  fathoms,  and  at  night  we
had  no  ground  at  180  fathoms,  which  encreased  hope.  This
night  we  had  some  snow,  which  continued  foure  lioures  :
then  the  wind  came  at  north-east  and  by  east  with  storme ;
and  with  short  sayle  we  stood  north  and  by  west :  here  the
needle  cnclined  86  degrees.  I  accounted  that  we  were  in
74  degrees,   74  dcgrccs  and  a  halfe  at  neerest  hand.     This  night  we  saw

3U  miuutcf.  O  ....

the  sunne  on  the  north  meridian,  his  height  was  7  degrees,
40  minutes,  which  maketh  the  pole's  height  74  degrees,  23
minutes.  The  eight,  from  twelve  a  clocke  last  night  till
noone,  we  accounted  our  way  on  divers  courses,  north  and
by  east :  then  our  latitude  was  74  degrees,  38  minutes,  and
we  had  no  ground  at  200  fathoms.  In  the  after-noone  the
wind  came  at  south  south-east,  and  south-east  and  by  east.
This  day  and  night  Avee  had  cleere  weather,  and  we  were
Dark  blue    bcrc  comc  iuto  a  blacke  blue  sea.

The  ninth,  cleere  weather,  the  wind  came  at  south-east
and  by  east :  from  the  last  day  till  this  day  noone,  Avee  had
a  good  Avay  north-east,  in  latitude  of  75  degrees,  29  minutes  :
then  Ave  entred  into  ice,  being  the  first  we  saAV  in  this  voy-
age :  our  hope  Avas   to  go  through  it ;  avc  stood  into  it,  and


sea.


SECOND   VOYAGE    (1608).  27

held  our  course  betweene  north-east  and  east  north-east,
loosing  for  one,  and  bearing  roome  for  another,  till  foure  in
the  afternoone :  at  which  time  we  were  so  farre  in,  and  the
ice  so  thicke  and  firme  ahead,  being  in  it  foure  or  five
leagues,  that  wee  had  endangered  us  somewhat  too  farre  ;
wee  returned  as  wee  went  in,  and  with  a  few  rubbes  of  our
ship  against  the  ice  ;  by  eight  a  clocke  this  eevening  wee
got  free  of  it.  AVee  made  our  way  till  next  day  at  noone,
south-west  and  by  south,  18  leagues  :  in  the  middest  of  this
W'ay  wee  had  no  ground  at  180  fathoms.  The  tenth,  in  the
morning,  hasey  Aveather  ;  but  at  noone  it  cleered  up,  and
then  we  cast  about,  and  stood  away  north  and  by  east,  the
wind  being  at  east  south-east,  two  watches,  five  leagues  :
then  we  had  the  wind  at  east ;  we  cast  about,  and  stood
south  south-east,  and  made  a  south  way,  sixe  leagues.  The
eleventh,  in  the  morning,  a  hard  storme  at  east  and  east  and
by  south,  we  strooke  a  hull.

The  tivelfth,  in  the  morning,  fog,  and  all  day  after  cleere
weather,  the  wind  at  south  south-west ;  we  steered  east  and
by  north  :  at  noone  being  in  the  latitude  75  degrees,  30
minutes.  From  noone  till  foure  a  clocke,  five  leagues  east
and  by  north ;  then  we  saw  ice  ahead  of  us  and  under  our
lee,  trending  from  the  north-west  to  the  north  and  east  of
us  :  we  had  sounding  100  fathom,  greenish  oze.  Here  we
saw  divers  pieces  of  drift  wood'  by  us  driving,  and  streame
leeches  lying  south  south-west  and  north  north-east.  We
many  times  saw  the  like  since  we  saw  the  North  Cape.
The  thirteenth,  cleere  weather,  the  wind  at  east,  we  made  a
south  way  6  leagues,  two  watches  ;  then  we  cast  about,  and
made  a  north  way  one  watch,  3  leagues  h  '.  at  twelve  at
night,  much  wind  with  fog,  we  strooke  a  hull  and  laid  our
ship's  head  to  the  southward.     The  fourteenth,  in  the  fore-

^  This  wood  is  carried  along  from  the  North  American  coasts  by  the
gulf  streams.  Considerable  quantities  of  it  are  thrown  on  the  shores  of
Spitzbergen.


»»  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON,

noonc,  fog,  and  our  shroucles  were  frozen  :  the  aftcr-noone
was  cleerc  sun-shine,  and  so  was  all  the  night.

The  fifteeiith,  all  day  and  night  cleere  sunshine  ;  the  wind
at  east ;  the  latitude  at  noone  75  degrees,  7  minutes.  We
held  westward  by  our  account  13  leagues.  In  the  after-
noone  the  sea  was  asswaged  ;  and  the  wind  being  at  east  we
set  sayle,  and  stood  south  and  by  east,  and  south  south-east
as  we  could.  This  morning,  one  of  our  companie  looking
over  boord  saw  a  mermaid,  and  calling  up  some  of  the  com-
panie to  see  her,  one  more  came  up,  and  by  that  time  shee
was  come  close  to  the  ship's  side,  looking  earnestly  on  the
men  :  a  little  after,  a  sea  came  and  overturned  her  :  from  the
navill  upward,  her  backe  and  breasts  were  like  a  woman's,
as  they  say  that  saw  her  ;  her  body  as  big  as  one  of  us  ;  her
skin  very  white  ;  and  long  haire  hanging  downe  behinde,
of  colour  blacke  :  in  her  going  doAvne  they  saw  her  tayle,
which  was  like  the  tayle  of  a  porposse,  and  speckled  like  a
macrell.'  Their  names  that  saw  her,  were  Thomas  Hilles
and  llobcrt  Rayner.

The  sixteenth,  cleere  weather,  the  wind  being  at  east.
From  the  last  day  till  this  day  noone  we  made  our  way
south  and  by  east  9  leagues,  and  from  noon  to  eight  a  clocke
in  the  eevening  6  leagues  :  then  we  cast  about  and  stood  to
the  northwards.

The  seventeenth,  cleere  weather,  the  wind  at  south-east
and  by  east ;  from  the  last  day  till  this  day  noone,  our  way
was  north-east  and  by  east,  at  noone  being  in  the  latitude  of
74  degrees,  40  minutes.  At  after-noonc  we  sounded,  and
had  ground  at  86  fathom,  green  oze,  and  our  water  Avhitish
greene.  Here  we  saw  whales,  porpoises,  and  the  sea  full  of
fowles  :  from  noonc  to  mid-night,  north-east  and  by  cast ;
Ave  had  the  sunne  at  lowest,  on  the  north  and  by  east,  east-

^  Probably  a  seal.  Dr.  Kane  observes  that  there  is  something  in  the
appearance  and  the  nuncnicnts  of  this  animal  stronpjy  akin  to  those  of
human  beiims.


SECOND    VOYAGE    (1608).  29

erly  part  of  the  conipasse  :  latitude  74  degrees,  54  minutes.
Sounding  we  had  92  fathoms  water,  ozc  as  before.

The  eighteenth,  faire  weather,  the  wind  at  south-east  and
by  east ;  from  mid-night  till  this  day  noone  wee  sayled  north-
east and  by  east,  in  the  latitude  of  75  degrees  24  minutes,
and  had  ground  at  ninetie-five  fathome  ;  oze  as  afore.  Here
we  had  ice  in  our  sight  to  the  northward  off  us.  In  the
after-noone,  having  little  wind  at  north-east,  we  cast  about
and  lay  east  south-east,  and  at  sixe  a  clocke  had  ground  at
ninetie-five  fathoms  and  a  halfe  ;  o^e  as  afore.  From  noone
to  twelve  a  clocke  at  night  our  way  was  south-east,  and
south-east  and  by  east,  and  had  the  sunne  on  the  meridian
north  and  by  east  halfe  a  point  eastward.  The  sunnes  height
was  8  degrees  40  minutes.  Sounding,  ninetie  fathom.  All
this  day  we  had  ice  on  our  huboord  trending  :  and  at  this
time,  from  the  north-west  off  us  to  the  east  south-east,  I  have
some  reason  to  thinke  there  is  a  tide  or  current  setting  to  cuneut.
the  northwards  ;  the  course  wee  held  and  the  way  we  made
betweene  this  noone  and  mid-night  observations,  doe  make
mee  suspect  it  the  more.

The  nineteenth,  faire  and  Avarme  weather,  the  sea  smooth.  Needles in-
Here  the  needle  inclined  under  the  horizon  89  degrees  and  and  a^haife,
a  halfe,   being  in  the  latitude  at  noone  of  75  degrees,  22grees,22
minutes  ;  sounding  wee  had  ground  in  an  hundred  fathom.
From  twelve  a  clocke  last  night  till  this  day  at  noone,  Ave
accounted  our  way  from  east  and  by  north  to  south-east  ten
leagues,  having   ice  alwayes  in  our  sight  trending  on  our
larboord ;   wee   had   the  winde  betweene  north   and  north
north-west.     We  saw  the  sunne  at  the  lowest  on  the  north
and  by  east,  halfe  a  point  easterly ;  his  height  was  8  degrees,
10  minutes,  which  maketh  the  Pole's  height  74  degrees,  56
minutes ;   sounding,  we   had   ground   in   one   hundred   and
twentie-sixe  fathom.  From  noone  to  this  time,  wee  accounted
our  way  east  and  by  south  and  east  south-east,  twelve  leagues.

The   tioentieih,   faire    vvarme   weather ;    this   morning,  at


so  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.

foure  of  the  clocke,  wee  had  depth  one  hundred  and  twen-
iwing.  tie-five  fathom.  Heere  we  heard  beares  roar  on  the  ice ;
store  of  and  wee  saw  upon  the  ice  and  neare  unto  it  an  incredible
number  of  scales.  We  had  sounding  one  hundred  and  fif-
teen fathom,  and  after  ground  at  ninetie-five  fathom,  sandie
oze.  We  had  the  sun  on  the  meridian  north  and  by  east,
halfe  a  point  easterly ;  his  height  was  7  degrees,  20  minutes.
From  twelve  a  clocke  last  night  to  twelve  a  clocke  this  night,
our  way  was  made  good  by  our  account,  south-east  and  by
south  twelve  leagues,  and  south-east  three  leagues  and  a
halfe,  the  ice  alwayes  being  on  our  larboord.  The  wind
this  day  betweene  north  and  north-west.

The  one  a?ul  tive7itieth,  at  foure  a  clocke  in  the  morning,

wee  sounded   and  had   one  hundred  and   twentie  fathome,

green  oze,  and  the  ice  bore  off  us  east,  the  wind  variable  ;  in

divers  courses  wee   made  our  way  good   south  south-east ;

sunneat      Qur  latitude  at  noone  beinsf  7-1  decrees,  9  minutes,  we  were

''rMs'^4o'^     haled  to  the  northward  beyond  expectation.     All  this  day

""degrees"  fairc,  clecrc,  and  warme  weather,  and  ice  on  our  larboord

30  minutes.  i  i     i  ^      •  ^  t  ^  •

at  a  north  and  by  east  sunne  ;  being  tlien  at  lowest,  nis
height  was  7  degrees,  40  minutes,  which  made  the  Pole's
height  74  degrees,  33  minutes.  From  the  last  day  at  noone
till  twelve  a  clocke  this  night,  by  account  of  our  ship's  way,
wee  made  our  way  good  east  north-cast,  sixe  leagues  and  a
halfe  ;  whereby  it  doth  appeare  how  Ave  Avere  haled  to  the
northward.  Heere  wee  had  ground  at  one  hundred  and
thirteene  fathome,  green  sandie  oze.
juet's  notes      "Yh-Q  tioo  and  twentieth,  fairc  cleare  weather,  the  winde  at

tell  (it  a  HUd-  '  '

uoi'i  of'the    west  north-west.     At  eight  aclocke  in  the  morning,  we  had
fi'mil'ihr'    ground   at  one  hundred   and   fifteene  fathome,   green   oze.

iioilli  to  the     ,,  .  .    ,

cast  one       Froui  mid-nisfht  to  noone  our  course  was  north-east  and  by

Voiiit,  which  "  _  _  •'

twoime'.'      cast,  bciug  ill  the  latitude  of  74  degrees,  ob  minutes,  and  we
Wore!         found  that  our  ship's   way  and   our  observation   were   not
'}  but  there  was  carcfuU  heed  taken  of  both.      Heere
'  Gap  in  the  orij^iual.


SECOND    VOYAGE    (1608).  31

we  had  ice  a  head  off  us,  trending  to  the  south-east,  and  all
day  before  ice  on  our  larboord.  Here  we  stood  south-east
five  leagues,  then  the  ice  trended  south  and  by  west  sixe
leagues;  we  sayled  by  it,  and  doubled  it  by  eight  aclocke
in  the  eevening,  and  then  it  bore  east  off  us.  Heere,  having
a  smooth  sea,  the  needle  inclined  85  degrees  from  eight  a
clocke  to  twelve,  north  and  by  east  easterly.  Then  we  had
the  sunne  on  the  meridian,  north  and  by  east  half  a  poynt
easterly.  The  sunnes  height  was  7  degrees,  45  minutes,
which  made  the  latitude  74  degrees,  43  minutes.

The  three  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning,  thicke  fogge,
the  wind  at  north  north-west.  From  mid-night  till  foure  a
clocke  this  morning,  we  sayled  north-east  five  leagues,  and
then  we  were  among  the  ice  ;  we  cast  about,  and  stood  two
houres  south-west,  two  leagues,  and  had  no  ground  at  one
hundred  and  eightie  fathom.  Then  we  cast  about  againe,
and  stood  east  till  eight  a  clocke,  two  leagues ;  and  then  it
cleered  up,  and  we  had  ice  a  head  ofi'  us.  And  from  north
wee  stood  to  south-east,  and  our  shroudes  were  frozen.  Then
till  noone  wee  went  east  and  by  south,  foure  leagues,  and
were  neere  ice  on  our  larboord,  in  the  latitude  of  74  degrees,
30  minutes.  In  the  after-noone,  the  wind  being  at  north,
wee  stood  two  houres  and  a  halfe,  five  leagues  and  a  halfc  ;
three  houres  south  south-east,  five  leagues  ;  one  houre  south-
east and  by  south,  one  league  and  a  halfe  ;  an  houre  east,
halfe  a  league,  which  brought  eight  in  the  eevening,  alwayes
ice  on  our  larboord.  This  after-noone  wee  had  some  snow.
From  eight  a  clocke  to  mid-night  south  south-west,  foure
leagues,  with  ice  as  afore.  We  saw  the  sunne  at  the  lowest
north  north-east,  his  height  was  7  degrees,  15  minutes  ;  the
pole's  height  74  degrees,  18  minutes.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  cleere  but  cold,  and  some  snow,
the  wind  betweene  north  north-east  and  north-east ;  from
mid-night  to  foure  a  clocke  wee  stood  southward,  two  leagues,
and  south-east  and  by  east  two  leagues.     And  from  foure


d^  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.

a  clocke  till  noonc  south-east  southerly,  nine  leagues  ;  sound-
ing, we  had  ground  in  one  hundred  and  fortie  fathome.
From  noone  to  three  a  clocke,  we  stood  south-east  and  by
south,  three  leagues ;  from  three  to  foure,  south-west  and  by
south,  one  league,  and  had  ice  from  the  north-east  to  the
south-east  off  us.  From  foure  a  clocke  to  eight  we  stood
south-west,  two  leagues  and  a  halfe,  soutliAvard  halfe  a
league,  with  ice  neere  us  under  our  lead.

The  fite  and  tioentieth,  cold  and  cleare,  the  wind  at  east
south-east ;  from  eight  a  clocke  last  night  till  foure  this
morning  our  way  was  south  and  by  east,  foure  leagues  and
a  halfe  ;  sounding,  we  had  ground  in  eightie  fathome  ;  then
we  had  little  wind  till  noone  at  east  north-east,  and  the
sunne  on  the  meridian  on  the  south-west  and  by  south  point
of  the  compasse  ere  it  began  to  fall ;  wee  were  in  the  lati-
tude of  72  degrees,  52  minutes  ;  and  had  ice  on  our  lar-
boord,  and  our  hope  of  passage  was  gone  this  way,  by  meanes
of  our  nearnesse  to  Nova  Zembla  and  the  abundance  of  ice.
We  had  from  noone  to  eight  a  clocke  in  the  ecvcning  the
wind  between  north  north-east  and  north-east ;  we  stood
south-east,  three  leagues  and  a  halfe,  and  had  ice  on  our
larboord  and  shoalding  sixtie-eight  fathome.

The  sixe  and  hventieth,  faire  sunshining  weather,  and  little
wind  at  east  north-east.  From  twelve  aclocke  at  night  till
foure  this  morning  we  stood  southward,  two  leagues  ;  sound-
ing wee  had  sixtie-sixe  fathome,  oaze,  as  afore.  From  foure
a  clocke  to  noone  south-east  and  by  south,  foure  leagues  ;
and  had  the  sunne  on  the  meridian,  on  the  south-east  and
by  south  point  of  the  compasse,  in  the  latitude  of  72  de-
grees, 25  minutes ;  and  had  sight  of  Nova  Zembla  foure  or
No  passaf^'e  five  Icasfues  from  us,  and  the  place  called  by  the  Hollanders

that  way.  °  _  _  _  ^  •'

Swart ciiiiu.  Swart  ClifFe,'  bearing  off  south-east.     In  the  aftcrnoone  wee

'  According  to  Dr.  Bekc's  opinion  {l)c  Veer,  Introduction,  p.  vi)  iden-
tical with  the  Yu~Jinuy  Gnsiniiij  Muis,  or  South  Goose  Cape  of  Liitke.
This  cape  is,  however,  under  71^  '20',  wliil.st  on  De  Veer's  own  ma]>  the


SECOND    VOYAGE    (1608).  o3

had  a  fine  gale  at  east  north-east,  and  by  eight  of  the  clockc
we  had  brought  it  to  beare  ofF  us  east  southerly,  and  saylcd
by  the  shoare  a  league  from  it.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  all  the  forenoone  it  was  almost
calme;  wee  being  two  mile  from  the  shoare,  I  sent  my  mate,
Kobert  Juet,  and  John  Cooke,  my  boatswaine,  on  shoare,  '^'J®y  k"«

'  'J  '  '  ashore.

with  foure  others,  to  see  what  the  land  would  yeeld  that
might  bee  profitable,  and  to  fill  two  or  three  caskes  Avith
water.  They  found  and  brought  aboard  some  whales  finnes,
two  deeres  homes,  and  the  dung  of  deere,  and  they  told  me
that  they  saw  grasse  on  the  shoare  of  the  last  yeere,  and
young  grasse  came  vip  amongst  it  a  shaftman  long  ;  and  it
was  boggie  ground  in  some  places ;  there  are  many  streames
of  snow  water  nigh ;  it  was  very  hot  on  the  shoare,  and  the
snow  melted  apace ;  they  saw  the  footings  of  many  great
beares,  of  deere,  and  foxes.  They  went  from  us  at  three
a  clocke  in  the  morning,  and  came  aboord  at  a  south-east
sunne  ;  and  at  their  comminar  wee  saw  two  or  three  com-
panics  of  morses  in  the  sea  neere  us  swimming,  being  almost
calme.  I  presently  sent  my  mate,  Ladlow  the  carpenter,
and  sixe  others  a  shoare,  to  a  place  where  I  thought  the
morses  might  come  on  the  shoare  ;  they  found  the  place
likely,  but  found  no  signe  of  any  that  had  beene  there.
There  was  a  crossed  standing  on  the  shoare,  much  driftwood,
and  signes  of  fires  that  had  beene  made  there.     They  saw

Swarte  Klip  seems  about  a  degree  farther  north ;  72°  15'  to  72°  20',  as
far  as  appears  by  the  ancient  mariner's  vague  indications.  This  latitude
would  seem  more  in  accordance  with  Hudson's  observation.

^  Such  crosses  were  found  both  on  Nova  Zembla  and  on  the  opposite
Russian  shore  by  Barentz  and  his  companions.  They  seem  to  have  been
very  conspicuous,  for  an  island  and  a  cape  were  called  by  the  Dutch
Cross  Island  and  Cross  Point,  only  because  one  or  two  such  crosses  were
found  on  them.  It  is  a  well-known  fact,  that  the  cross  is  not  only  an
object  of  veneration  among  Christians,  but  that  it  is  also  worshipped
by  some  heathens,  quite  independently  of  all  Christian  influence.  Whe-
ther the  signification  of  these  crosses  may  be  thus  explained  we  are,
however,  unable  to  say.


.34  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.

the  footing  of  very  great  deere  and  beares,  and  much  fowle/
and  a  foxe  ;  they  brought  aboord  whale  finnesj  some  mosse,
flowers  and  green e  things  that  did  there  grow.  They
brought  also  two  peeces  of  a  crosse,  which  they  found  there.
The  sunne  was  on  the  meridian  on  the  north  north-east^
halfe  a  point  easterly,  before  it  began  to  fall.  The  sunnes
height  was  4  degrees,  45  minutes  ;  inclination,  22  degrees,
33  minutes,  which  makes  the  latitude  72  degrees,  12  minutes.
Tliere  is  disagreement  betweene  this  and  the  last  observa-
tion ;  but  by  meanes  of  the  cleerenesse  of  the  sunne,  the
smoothnesse  of  the  sea,  and  the  neernesse  to  laiid,  wee  could
not  bee  deceived,  and  care  was  taken  in  it.

The  eight  and  tioentieth,  at  foure  a  clocke  in  the  morning,
our  boat  came  aboord,  and  brought  two  dozen  of  fowle  and
some  egges,  whereof  a  kw^  were  good,  and  a  whale's  finne  ;
and  wee  all  saw  the  sea  full  of  morses,  yet  no  signes  of  their
being  on  shoare.  And  in  this  calme,  from  eight  a  clocke
last  evening  till  foure  this  morning,  we  were  drawne  backe
to  the  northward,  as  farre  as  wee  were  the  last  evening  at
foure  a  clocke,  by  a  streame  or  a  tide  ;~  and  we  chose  rather
so  to  drive,  then  to  adventure  the  losse  of  an  anchor  and  the
spoyle  of  a  cable.  Heere  our  new  ship-boate  began  to  doe
us  service,  and  w^as  an  incouragement  to  my  companie,
which  want  I  found  the  last  yeere.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning  calme,  being  halfe
a  league  from  the  shoare,  the  sea  being  smooth  the  needle
did  encline  84  degrees  ;  we  had  many  morses  in  the  sea
neere  us,  and  desiring  to  find  where  they  came  on  shoare,
wee  put  to  with  saylc  and  oares,  towing  in  our  boat,  and
rowing  in  our  barke  to  get  about  a  point  of  land,  from
whence  the  land  did  fall  more  easterly,  and  the  morses  did
goe  that  way.     Wee  had  the  sunne  on  the  meridian  on  the

^  This  part  of  Nova  Zembla  still  abounds  with  fowl,  and  has,  there-
fore, been  called  Goose  Coast  by  Liitke.
^  The  iriilf  stream.


SECOND    VOYAGE    (1608).  35

south  and  by  west  point,  lialfe  a  point  to  the  wester  part  of
the  compasse,  in  the  Lititude  of  71  degrees,  15  minutes.  At
two  a  clocke  this  after-noone  we  came  to  anchor  in  the
mouth  of  a  river,  where  licth  an  ihand  in  the  mouth  thereof,  T^^ivcr  tmci
foure  leagues  :  wee  anchored  from  the  iland  in  two  and
thirtie  fathomes,  bhacke  sandy  ground.  There  drove  much
ice  out  of  it  with  a  streame  that  set  out  of  the  river  or  sound,
and  there  were  many  morses  sleeping  on  the  ice,  and  by  it
we  were  put  from  our  road  twice  this  night ;  and  being
calme  all  this  day,  it  pleased  God,  at  our  need  to  give  us  a
fine  gale,  which  freed  us  out  of  danger.  This  day  was
calme,  cleere  and  hot  weather  :  all  the  night  we  rode  stilL

The  thirtieth,  calme,  hot,  and  faire  weather  ;  we  weighed
in  the  morning,  and  towed  and  rowed,  and  at  noone  we
came  to  anchor  neere  tiie  ile  aforesaid  in  the  mouth  of  the
river,  and  saw  very  much  ice  driving  in  the  sea,  two  leagues
without  us,  lying  south-east  and  north-west ;  and  driving  to
the  north-west  so  fast,  that  wee  could  not  by  twelve  a  clocke
at  night  see  it  out  of  the  top.  At  the  iland  where  wee  rode
lieth  a  little  rocke,  whereon  were  fortie  or  fiftie  morses
lying  asleepe,  being  all  that  it  couhl  hohl,  it  being  so  full
and  little.  I  sent  my  companie  ashoare  to  them,  leaving
none  aboord  but  my  boy  with  mee  :  and  by  meanes  of  their
neerenesse  to  the  water,  they  all  got  away,  save  one  which
they  killed,  and  brought  his  head  aboord  ;  and  ere  they
came  aboord  they  went  on  the  iland,  which  is  reasonable
high  and  steepe,  but  flat  on  the  top.  They  killed  and
brought  with  them  a  great  fowle,  whereof  there  were  many,
and  likewise  some  egges,  and  in  an  houre  they  came  aboord.
This  ile  is  two  flight-shot  over  in  length,  and  one  in  breadth.
At  mid-night  our  anchor  came  home,  and  wee  tayld  aground
by  meanes  of  the  strength  of  the  streame  ;  but  by  the
helpe  of  God,  wee  hoved  her  off"  without  hurt.  In  short
time  wee  moved  our  ship,  and  rode  still  all  night ;  and  in
the  night  wee  had  little  wind  at  east,  and  east  south-east.


36  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.

Wee  had  at  noone  this  day  an  observation,  and  were  in  the
hititude  of  71  degrees,  15  minutes.

.luiy.  The^rs^  of  July,  we  saw  more  ice  to  the  seaward  of  us;

from  the  south-east  to  the  north-west,  driving  to  the  north-
west. At  noone  it  was  cahne,  and  we  had  the  sunne  on  the
meridian,  on  the  south  and  by  west  point,  halfe  a  point  to
the  westerly  part  of  the  compasse,  in  the  latitude  of  71  de-
grees, 24  minutes.  This  morning  I  sent  my  mate  Everet,
and  foure  of  our  companie  to  rowe  about  the  bay,  to  see
what  rivers  were  in  the  same,  and  to  find  where  the  morses
did  come  on  land  ;  and  to  see  a  sound  or  great  river  in  the
bottome  of  the  bay,  which  did  alwaies  send  out  a  great
streamc  to  the  northwards,  against  the  tide  that  came  from
thence  :  and  I  found  the  same  in  comming  in,  from  the
north  to  this  place,  before  this.  When  by  the  meanes  of  the
great  plenty  of  ice,  the  hope  of  passage  betweene  Newland

His  purpose  ^^^^  Nova  Zcuibla  was  taken  away ;  my  purpose  was  by  the
Vaygats  to  passe  by  the  mouth  of  the  river  Ob,  and  to  dou-
ble that  way  the  North  Cape  of  Tartaria,^  or  to  give  reason
wherefore  it  will  not  be  :  but  being  here,  and  hoping  by  the
plentie  of  morses  wee  saw  here,  to  defray  the  charge  of  our
voyage ;  and  also  that  this  sound  might  for  some  reasons
bee  a  better  passage  to  the  east  of  Nova  Zembla  then  the
Vaygats,  if  it  held  according  to  my  hope  conceived  by  the
likenesse  it  gave  :  for  whereas  we  had  a  floud  came  from
the  northwards,  yet  this  sound  or  river  did  runne  so  strong,

stream.        that  icc  witli  the  streame  of  this  river  was  carried  away,  or

^  Hudson  seemed  to  think  that  when  he  had  once  passed  the  North
Cape  of  Tartary  (Cape  Tabin  ?),  the  rest  of  his  undertaking,  to  reach
China  by  a  north-eastern  route,  would  be  quite  easy,  and  hardly  worth
mentioning.  This  was  also  Sebastian  Cabot's  idea,  and  that  of  all  his  dis-
ciples down  to  our  navigator.  Ortelius's  maps,  the  best  expressions  of  the
geographical  dogma  of  the  age,  imply  a  similar  belief.  The  northern
coast  of  Asia,  which  is  there  drawn  almost  from  fancy,  is  everywhere
much  too  far  south.  The  voyage  from  the  Promontorium  Sa/thicuin  to
Cathay,  or  Northern  China,  appears  on  these  maps  as  quite  an  easy
matter.


SECOND    VOYAGE    (1608).  37

any  thing  else  against  the  floud  ;  so  that  both  in  floud  and
ebbe,  the  streamc  doth  hold  a  strong  course  :  and  it  flowcth
from  the  north  three  houres,  and  ebbeth  nine.

The  second,  the  wind  being  at  east  south-east,  it  was  rea-
sonable cold,  and  so  was  Friday  ;  and  the  morses  did  not  play
in  our  sight  as  in  warme  weather.  This  morning,  at  three
of  the  clocke,  my  mate  and  companie  came  aboord,  and
brought  a  great  deeres  home,  a  white  locke  of  deeres  haire,
four  dozen  of  fowle,  their  boat  halfe  laden  with  drift  wood,
and  some  flowers  and  greene  things,  that  they  found  grow-
ina^  on  the  shoare.     They  saw  a  herd  of  white  deere,^  often  Herdeof

"  "^  white  deere.

in  a  companie  on  the  land,  much  drift  wood  lying  on  the
shoare,  many  good  bayes,  and  one  river  faire  to  see  to
on  the  north  shoare,  for  the  morses  to  land  on ;  but  they
saw  no  morses  there,  but  signes  that  they  had  beene  in  the
bayes.  And  the  great  river  or  sound,  they  certified  me,
was  of  breadth  two  or  three  leagues,  and  had  no  ground  at
twentie  fathoms,  and  that  the  water  was  of  the  colour  of  the
sea,  and  very  salt,  and  that  the  streame  setteth  strongly  out
of  it.  At  sixe  a  clocke  this  morning,  came  much  ice  from
the  southward  driving  upon  us,  very  fearfull  to  looke  on  ;
but  by  the  mercy  of  God  and  His  mightie  helpe,  wee  being
moored  with  two  anchors  ahead  with  vering  out  of  one
cable  and  heaving  home  the  other,  and  fending  off  with
beames  and  sparres,  escaped  the  danger  ;  which  labour  con-
tinued till  sixe  a  clocke  in  the  eevening,  and  then  it  was
past  us,  and  we  rode  still  and  tooke  our  rest  this  night.

The  third,  the  wind  at  north  a  hard  gale.  At  three  a
clocke  this  morning  wee  weighed  our  anchor,  and  set  sayle,
jiurposing  to  runne  into  the  river  or  sound  before  spoken  of.

The  fourth,  in  the  morning,  it  cleered  up,  with  the  wind

at  north-west ;  we  weighed  and  set  sayle,  and  stood  to  the

eastwards,  and  past  over  a  reefe,  and  found  on  it  five  and  a

halfe,  sixe,  sixe  and  a  halfe,  and  seven  fathoms  water :  then

^  Sec  p.  38,  note  1.


38  MASTER    HENKY    Ht'DSON.

we  saw  that  the  sound  was  full,  and  a  very  large  river  from
the  north-eastward  free  from  ice,  and  a  strong  streame  com-
niing  out  of  it :  and  wee  had  sounding  then,  foure  and  thirty
fathoms  water.  Wee  all  conceived  hope  of  this  northerly
river  or  sound,  and  sayling  in  it,  wee  found  three  and  twen-
tie  fathomes  for  three  leagues,  and  after  twentie  fathomes
for  five  or  sixc  leagues,  all  tough  ozie  ground.  Then  the
winde  vered  more  northerly,  and  the  streame  came  down
so  strong,  that  wee  could  do  no  good  on  it :  we  came  to
anchor,  and  went  to  supper,  and  then  presently  I  sent  my
mate  Juet,  with  five  more  of  our  companie  in  our  boat,  with
sayle  and  oarcs  to  get  up  the  river,  being  provided  with
victuall  and  weapons  for  defence,  walling  them  to  sound  as
they  went ;  and  if  it  did  continue  still  deepe,  to  goe  untill
it  did  trende  to  the  eastward,  or  to  the  southwards,  and  wee
rode  still.

The  jift,  in  the  morning,  we  had  the  wind  at  west :  we
began  to  weigh  anchor,  purposing  to  set  sayle  and  to  runne
up  the  sound  after  our  companie  :  then  the  wind  vered
northerly  upon  us,  and  we  saved  our  labour.  At  noone
our  companie  came  aboord  us,  having  had  a  hard  rought ;
for  they  had  beene  up  the  river  sixe  or  seven  leagues,  and.
sounded  it  from  twentie  to  three  and  twentie,  and  after
brought  it  to  eight,  sixc,  and  one  fathome  ;  and  then  to
foure  foot  in  the  best :  they  then  went  ashoare,  and  found
good  store  of  wilde  goose  quills,  a  piece  of  an  old  oare,  and
some  flowers  and  greene  things  which  they  found  growing  :
they  saw  many  deere,  and  so  did  we  in  our  after-dayes
sayling.^  They  being  come  aboord,  we  presently  set  sayle
with  the  wind  at  north  north-west,  and  wc  stood  out  againe
to  the  south-westwards,  with  sorrow  that  our  labour  was  in

^  The  existence  of  grass  and  of  lierbivorous  animals  in  Nova  Zembla,
which  is  flatly  denied  by  De  Veer,  is  clearly  proved  by  Hudson.  Lutke's
observations  corroborate  those  of  o\ir  navigator  :  sec  Dr.  Belce's  Dc  Veer,
pp.  5,  83.


SECOND    VOYAGE    (1008).  39

vaine  :  for,  had  this  sound  held  as  it  did  make  shew  of,
for  breadth,  depth,  safenesse  of  harbour,  and  good  anchor
ground,  it  might  have  yeelded  an  excellent  passage  to  a
more  easterly  sea.     Generally,  all  the  land  of  Nova  Zembla  Novazem-

''  ''  bill  pleasftiit

that  yet  we  have  secne,  is  to  a  man's  eye  a  pleasant  land  ;  totheeye.
much  mayne  high  land  with  no  snow  on  it,  looking  in  some
places  greene,  and  deere  feeding  thereon  :  and  the  hills  are
partly  covered  with  snow,  and  partly  bare.     It  is  no  marvel
that  there  is  so  much  ice  in  the  sea  toward  the  pole,  so  many  cause  of

much  ioe  in

sounds  and  rivers  beino'  in  the  lands  of  Nova  Zembla  and  '^'1°^^  ^*'''t

c  winch  make

Newland  to  ingcnder  it ;  besides  the  coasts  of  Pechora,  Rus-  passage^."'''®
sia,  and  Groenland,  with  Lappia,  as  by  proofes  I  finde  by
my  travell  in  these  parts  :  by  meanes  of  which  ice  I  suppose
there  will  be  no  navigable  passage  this  way.  This  eeven-
ing  wee  had  the  wind  at  west  and  by  south  :  we  therefore
came  to  anchor  under  Deere  Point ;  and  it  was  a  storme  at
sea ;  wee  rode  in  twentie  fathomes  ozie  ground  :  I  sent  my
mate,  Ladlow,  with  foure  more  ashoare  to  see  whether  any
morses  were  on  the  shoare,  and  to  kill  some  fowle;  for  we
had  seen  no  morses  since  Saturday,  the  second  day  of  this
moneth,  that  wee  saw  them  driving  out  of  the  ice.  They
found  good  landing  for  them,  but  no  signe  that  they  had
beene  there ;  but  they  found  that  fire  had  beene  made
there,  yet  not  lately.  At  ten  of  the  clocke  in  the  eeven-
ing,  they  came  aboord,  and  brought  with  them  neere  an
hundred  fowles  called  wellocks  :  this  night  it  was  wet,
fogge,  and  very  thicke  and  cold,  the  winde  at  west  south-
west.

The  sixt,  in  the  morning,  wee  had  the  wind  stormie  and
shifting  ;  betweene  the  west  and  south-west,  against  us  for
doing  any  good  :  we  rode  still  and  had  much  ice  driving  by
us  to  the  eastward  of  us.  At  nine  of  the  clocke  this  ceven-
ing  wee  had  the  wind  at  north  north-west :  we  presently
weighed,  and  set  sayle,  and  stood  to  the  westward,  being
out  of  hope  to  find  passage  by  the  north-east :  and  my  pur-


bla.
Note


40  MASTER    HENKY    HUDSON.

wiiiouffh-     pose  was  now  to  see  whether  Willoughbies  Land'  were,  as  it

bies  land

a  conceit      is  lavd  in  our  cardes  :  which  if  it  were,  wee  micrht  finde

of  card-  •'  '  '  o

^!lT,!^Ji  morses  on  it,  for  with  the  ice  they  were  all  driven  from
thanVew-*'^  hcnce.  This  place  ujjon  Nova  Zembla,  is  another  then  that
Greenland    which   the   Hollanders   call   Costing   Sarch,    discovered   by

(as  is  before         _  ••-!->

observed,     OHvcr  Browncll :  and  William  Barentson's  observation  doth

cap.  2)  as

sarch"of  witnesse  the  same.-  It  is  layd  in  plot  by  the  Hollanders  out
S'^otirir's'^    of  his  true  place  too  farre  north  :  to  what  end  I  know  not.

Nova  Zem-  ,  t         •      i      i  i  •   i        i

unlesse  to  make  it  hold  course  with  the  compasse,  not  re-
specting the  variation.  It  is  as  broad  and  like  to  yeeld
passage  as  the  Vaygats,  and  my  hope  was,  that  by  the  strong
streame  it  would  have  cleered  it  selfe  ;  but  it  did  not.  It  is
so  full  of  ice  that  you  will  hardly  thinke  it.  All  this  day,
for  the  most  part  it  was  fogge  and  cold.

The  secenth,  cleere  but  cold  weather  :  in  the  morning  the
wind  was  at  the  north  ;  from  the  last  eevening  to  this  morn-
ing, we  set  saile  and  kept  our  course  west  and  by  south,
fifteene  leagues  :  from  morning  to  eight  a  clocke  in  the
eevening  it  was  calnie :  then  we  had  the   wind  againe   at

^  The  fact  we  here  learn  is  im}5ortant.  Willoughby's  land  ■was,  on  the
charts  used  by  Hudson,  laid  down  as  part  of  Nova  Zembla  ;  rather  south
than  north  of  1'2P.  When  we  consider  how  careful  Hudson  was  in  col-
lecting information,  and  further,  that  he  was  sent  out  by  the  only  per-
sons in  England  who  had  an  interest  in  north-eastern  discovery  (the
Muscovy  Company),  it  becomes  almost  a  certainty  that  Willoughby's
land  was,  in  1608,  bi/  the  English  not  thought  identical  with  Spitzbcrgen
(the  Greenland  of  Barentz  and  Hudson).  If  commercial  jealousy  of
the  Dutch,  the  real  discoverers  of  Spitzbcrgen,  had  not  a  short  time
after  Hudson's  voyage  raised  the  almost  absurd  belief  in  that  identity,
the  scholars  of  our  time  would  have  been  spared  much  labour.  Purchas
himself  is  the  most  earnest,  we  might,  perhaps,  say  the  most  insolent,
defender  of  the  erroneous  idea,  which  has  been  ably  disproved  by  ]\Ir.
Rundall,  in  his  work  on  northern  voyages.  Introduction,  p.  ix,  where  all
the  arguments  bearing  on  both  sides  of  the  question  may  be  found.

^  The  mere  amateur  reader  will  hardly  care  about  the  intrinsic  geo-
graphical questions  involved  in  this  sentence.  The  geographical  scholar
will  find  them  most  amply  and  satisfactorily  discussed,  with  special  refer-
ence to  the  present  passage,  by  Dr.  Beke  in  his  Introduction  to  Dc  Veer,
pp.  xxxii  to  I.


SECOND    VOYAGE    (1608).  41

north,  and  we  sayled  till  nine  a  clockc  next  morning  west
south-west,  eight  leagues ;  then  the  wind  being  west  and  by
south,  wee  went  north  and  by  west,  three  leagues,  and  wee
had  the  sunne  at  the  highest  south  south-west,  in  the  lati-
tude of  71  degrees,  2  minutes.  The  eight,  faire  weather  ;
at  noone  we  had  the  wind  at  east  north-east,  we  stood  north
three  leagues  till  foure  a  clocke  :  then  the  wind  being  at
west  and  by  north,  wee  stemmed  north  and  by  west  one
league  and  a  lialfe,  till  six  a  clocke  in  the  eevening  ;  then
the  wind  was  at  north-east  a  hard  gale,  and  wee  stood  till
next  day  at  noone  west  and  by  north,  by  account  three  and
twentie  leagues  :  we  had  the  sunne  on  the  meridian,  south
and  by  west,  halfe  a  point  neerest  west,  in  the  latitude  of
70  degrees,  41  minutes.  The  ninth,  cleere  weather  :  from
this  to  the  next  day  at  noone,  we  sayled  south-west  and  by
west  twelve  leagues,  and  northward  three  leagues  ;  and  in
these  courses  had  these  soundings,  41,  42,  46,  48,  and  45
fathoms  :  we  had  the  sunne  south  and  by  west,  halfe  a  point
to  the  west  part  of  the  compasse.  The  sea  was  loftie  :  our
latitude  was  70  degrees,  20  minutes.

The  tenth,  cleere  but  close  weather  :  from  this  till  next
day  noone  wee  had  little  wind  at  west  north-west :  by  ac-
count we  made  our  way  five  leagues  north-easterly.  Wee
had  the  sun  at  the  highest  on  the  south  and  by  west  point,
and  a  terce  westward,  in  the  latitude  of  70  degrees,  55
minutes,  and  I  thinke  we  had  a  rustling  tide  under  us  ;  and
in  this  time  had  sounding  betweene  fortie-five  and  fortic
fathomes,  white  sand.  The  eletenth,  cleere  weather  :  from
this  to  the  next  day  at  noone,  little  wind  at  north  north-east
and  sometimes  calme  ;  wee  sayled  west  and  by  north  by
account  five  leagues  ;  and  had  the  sunne  on  the  meridian  on
the  south  and  by  west  point  one-third  west  in  the  latitude  of
70  degrees,  26  minutes,  and  found  a  rustling  under  us.
This  fore-noone  we  were  come  into  a  greene  sea,  of  the  Greene  sea.
colour  of  the  mayne  ocean,  which  we  first  lost  the  eight  of


42  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.

June :  since  which  time  wee  have  had  a  sea  of  a  blacke  blue
colour,  which  (both  by  the  last  and  this  yeeres  experience)
is  a  sea  pestered  with  ice.

The  twelfth,  faire  weather :  from  noone  to  midnight  wee
had  the  wind  shifting  betweene  the  north  and  west ;  our
course  was  betweene  west  north-west  and  south  south-west.
Then  we  had  the  wind  at  south ;  we  sayled  till  the  next  day
at  noone,  west  and  by  north,  thirteene  leagues  ;  wee  ac-
counted our  way  from  the  last  day  till  this  day  noone  west-
ward, eighteene  leagues.  This  after-noone  wee  saw  more
porpoises  then  in  all  our  voyage  afore.  The  thirteenth,  close
weather  :  in  the  after-noone  having  much  wind  at  south,
with  short  sayle  we  stood  away  west  and  by  north,  till  eight
a  clockc  in  the  eevening :  then  we  had  the  wind  at  south,
but  most  times  calme  till  noone  the  next  day  :  wee  stood
away  as  afore,  fourc  leagues,  which  made  in  all  twelve
leagues  :  we  had  the  sunne  ere  it  began  to  fall,  south  and
by  west,  in  the  latitude  of  70  degrees,  22  minutes.

The  fourteenth,  wee  stood  west  north-Avest  till  midnight,
seventecne  leagues  :  then  the  wind  scanted  and  came  at
west,  we  stood  north  north-west,  one  league  and  a  halfe  ;
then  the  wind  being  more  southerly,  wee  sayled  west  north-
west five  leagues.  From  the  last  till  this  day  at  noone,  our
way  was  out  of  divers  courses  north-west  and  by  west,  foure
and  twentie  leagues.  We  had  the  sunne  beginning  to  fall
at  south  and  by  west,  in  the  latitude  of  70  degrees,  54
minutes.

'\l\\c  fifteenth,  fuire  ;  but  towards  night  like  to  be  stormie
with  thunder,  the  wind  betweene  south  and  south  south-
cast  ;  from  this,  till  the  sixteenth  day  at  noone,  our  course
•  was  west  and  by  north,  seven  and  twentie  Icagiies,  and  the
sunne  then  began  to  fall  at  south,  three  quarters  of  a  point
westward,  in  the  latitude  of  70  degrees,  42  minutes.  The
sixteenth,  faire ;  our  way  was  from  this  till  next  day  at  noone
north--svcst,  twelve  leagues,  out  of  divers  courses  :  and  we


SECOND    VOYAGE    (1608).  43

had  the  wind  shifting,  sometimes  at  east,  at  west  south-west,
and  west  and  by  north  ;  the  Latitude,  by  a  bad  observation,
71  degrees,  44  minutes.  The  seventeenth,  in  the  fore-noone,
faire ;  the  wind  being  at  west  and  by  north.  At  fourc
a  clocke  this  morning  wc  saw  land  beare  off  us,  west  and
south  south-west,  which  was  about  Ward-house  '}  this  after-
noone  wee  had  a  stormc  at  west  and  by  north,  we  layed  it
to  trie  till  eight  a  clocke  in  the  eevening,  and  then  set  sayle
with  the  wind  betweene  west  north-west  and  north-west :
our  course  till  the  next  day  at  noone  was  south-west  and  by
south,  twelve  leagues  :  the  Cape  HopewelP  bore  off  us  south
south-west,  and  we  were  foure  or  five  leagues  from  land.

The  eighteenth,  gusty,  with  raine  all  the  fore-noone ;  then
we  had  the  wind  shifting  till  next  day  at  noone  from  south
south-east  to  east,  and  south-east :  our  course  in  generall
was  north-west,  foure  and  twentie  leagues  :  then  did  North
Kene  beare  off  us  west  halfe  a  point  southward,  being  from
us  foure  leagues  ;  and  the  North  Cape  in  sight  bearing  west
and  by  north,  etc.

The  seve7i  and  twentieth,  cold,  with  raine  and  storme ;  this
night  we  bcofan  to  burne  candle  in  the  betacle,  which  we  ^"  "'s''''  ">

°  °  ^  teu  woekes.

had  not  done  since  the  nineteenth  of  May,  by  reason  wee
had  alwaics  day  from  thence  till  now.  The  thirtieth,  we
had  the  sunne  upon  the  meridian  due  south,  in  the  latitude
of  68  degrees,  46  minutes ;  whereby  we  found  us  to  bee
afore  our  ship,  ten  or  twelve  leagues,  and  Lowfoot^  bore  east
of  us,  but  not  in  sight.

The  seventh  of  August,  I  used  all  diligence  to  arrive  at
London,  and  therefore  now  I  gave  my  companic  a  certificate
under  my  hand,  of  my  free  and  willing  return,  without  per-
swasion  or  force  of  any  one  or  more  of  them  :  for  at  my
being  at  Nova  Zembla,  the  sixt  of  July,  voide  of  hoi^e  of  a

^  Vardoehuus  Island,  70"  35'  N.,  31°  E,  in  the  White  Sea,  close  to
the  coast  of  Finmark.

"  North-west  of  Vardoehuus  Island.  ^  The  LufFodeu  Islands.


44  :masteti  iiemry  tiudson.

north-east  passage  (except  by  the  Waygats,  for  which  I  was
not  fitted  to  trie  or  prove),  I  therefore  resolved  to  use  all
nieanes  I  could  to  sayle  to  the  north-west ;  considering  the
time  and  meanes  wee  had,  if  the  wind  should  friend  us,  as
in  the  first  part  of  our  voyage  it  had  done,  and  to  make  triall
of  that  place  called  Lumleys  Inlet,'  and  the  furious  over-fall
by  Captain  Davis,  hoping  to  runne  into  it  an  hundred
leagues,  and  to  returne  as  God  should  enable  mee.  But  now
having  spent  more  then  halfe  the  time  I  had,  and  gone
but  the  shortest  part  of  the  way,  by  means  of  contrary
winds,  I  thought  it  my  duty  to  save  victuall,  wages,  and
tackle,  by  my  speedy  returne,  and  not  by  foolish  rashnesse,
the  time  being  wasted,  to  lay  more  charge  upon  the  action
then  necessitie  should  compell,  I  arrived  at  Gravesend  the
sixe  and  tioentieth  of  August.

^  See  Hakluyt,  x,  3  (Purchas).  The  journal  of  Captain  Davis,  to
which  Purchas  refers,  is  not  clear  enough  to  allow  us  to  fix  the  situation
of  Lumley's  inlet  with  any  degree  of  certainty.  The  inlet  was  perhaps
identical  with  Hudson's  strait,  or  perhaps  somewhat  further  north,  where
modern  geographers  place  Frobisher's  sti'ait.  The  maj^s  of  these  regions
are  still  too  unsatisfixctory  to  afford  a  fair  ground  for  any  guesses  about
the  real  meaning  of  the  still  vaguer  indications  of  the  early  navigators.


THIRD    VOYAGE    (1609).  45


THE  THIRD  VOYAGE  OF
MASTEll     HENRY     HUDSON,

TOWARD     NOVA     ZEMBLA,     AND     AT     HIS     EETURNE,    HIS     PASSING     FROM     FARRE

ISLANDS    TO    NEW-FOUND    LAND,    AND     ALONG    TO    FORTIE-FOURE    DEGREES

AND    TEN    MINUTES,  AND    THENCE    TO    CAPHt  COD,   AND  SO  TO  THIRTIE-

THEEE  DEGREES;    AND  ALONG  THE  COAST  TO  THE  NORTHWARD,

TO   FOETIE-TWO    DEGREES    AND    AN    HALFE,    AND    UP    THE

RIVER   NEERE    TO    FORTIE-THREE    DEGREES.

IVrittcn  by  Robert  Juet,  of  Lime-house.


On  Saturday,  the  Jive  and  twentieth  of  March,  1609,  after
the  old  account,  we  set  sayle  from  Amsterdam,  and  by  the
seven  and  tioentieth  day,  we  were  downe  at  the  Texel :  and
by  twelve  of  the  clocke  we  were  off  the  land,  it  being  east
of  us  two  leagues  off.  And  because  it  is  a  journey  usually
knowne,  I  omit  to  put  downe  what  passed  till  we  came  to
the  height  of  the  North  Cape  of  Finmarke,  which  we  did
performc  by  the  f ft  of  May   {stilo  novo),  being  Tuesday.  May o,

siilo  novo.

On  which  day  we  observed  the  height  of  the  pole,  and  found
it  to  bee  71  degrees,  and  46  minutes  ;  and  found  our  com-
passe  to  vary  six  degrees  to  the  west ;  and  at  twelve  of  the
clocke,  the  North  Cape  did  beare  south-west  and  by  south
tenne  leagues  off,  and  wee  steered  away  east  and  by  south
and  east.

After  much  trouble,  with  fogges  sometimes,  and  more
dangerous  of  ice.  The  nineteenth,  being  Tuesday,  was  close
stormie  weather,  with  much  wind  and  snow,  and  very  cold  :
the  wind  variable  betweene  the  north  north-Avcst  and  north-
east.     We  made   our    (vay  west  and  by  north  till  noonc.


46  ^        MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.

Then  we  observed  the  sunne  having  a  slake,^  and  found  our
heigth  to  bee  70  degrees,  30  minutes.  And  the  ship  had
out-runne  us  twentie  leagues,  by  reason  of  the  set  of  the

Wdrdhou"s'e*''  stroamc  of  the  White  Sea  :  and  we  had  sight  of  Wardhouse.^
Then  at  two  of  the  clocke  wee  tackt  to  the  eastward  :  for  we
could  not  get  about  the  North  Cape,  the  wind  was  so  scant ;
and  at  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night,  on  the  one  and  tiventictJi,

They  don-    tl^e  North  Cape  did  beare   south-east  and  by  south  seven

bled  tlio  ^  •'

Norih  Cape,  igj^nrues  ofF.    And  at  mid-night  Assumption  Point^  did  beare

Assumption  c  ox

^'"""'"         south  and  by  east,  five  leagues  off  us.

The  two  and  twentieth,  gusting  weather,  with  haile  and
snow,  the  sunne  breaking  out  sometimes  :  Ave  continued  our
course  along  the  land  west  south-west.    And  at  tenne  of  the

zemim.  clockc  at  night  we  were  thwart  off  Zenam,^  The  bodie  of  it
did  beare  east  off  us  five  leagues  :  and  the  course  from  the
North  Cape  to  Zenam  is  for  the  most  part  west  and  by
south,  and  west  south-west,  fiftie-foure  leagues.

The  three  and  tiocntieth,  faire  sunshining  weather  ;  the
wind  at  east  and  by  south,  and  east  south-east ;  wee  steered
along  the  land  south-west,  and  south-west  and  by  west,
eight  leagues  a  ■\vatch,  for  so  we  found  the  land  to  lye
from  Zenam  to  Lofoote.^  And  the  distance  is  fiftie  leagues
from  the  bodie  of  Zenam  to  the  westermost  land  of  Lofoote.^
And  from  the  one  to  the  other,  the  course  is  south-west  and

^  A  spot  1  The  word  slake,  as  a  substantive,  seems  to  be  a  uorth  country
word,  meaning,  according  to  Brocket,  "  an  accumulation  of  mud  or  slime,
from  dijck,  cocnum,  lutum."'  If  Hudson  observed  a  spot  on  the  sun  the
21st  of  March,  1609,  he  was  undoubtedly  the  earliest  discoverer  of  this
most  interesting  phenomenon ;  the  observation  of  Thomas  Ilariot,  which
is  considered  as  the  first  on  record,  being  more  than  a  year  and  a  half
later  (Dec.  8th,  IGIO).  Hudson  had  the  disadvantage  of  observing  with-
out a  telescope.  "  Vardoehuus  Island.

^  Evidently  to  the  south-east  of  the  North  Cape,  probably  a  cape  on
one  of  the  neighbouring  islands,  Maasoo,  Jehnsoe,  or  Igencie.

''  Probably  the  island  of  Scnjen,  lat.  (ISP  :2o',  long.  17°  E.,  lying  west  of
Norway,  close  to  the  coast.

•'  The  Lullbdeu  Islands.     «  Vaerii  Island,  lat.  (i7^^  -10',  long.  11°  ;3(i'  E.


THIRD   VOYAGE    (1609).  47

by  west.  For  the  needle  of  our  compasse  was  set  right  to
the  north.  At  twelve  of  the  clocke  at  night,  the  boclic  of
Lofoote  did  beare  south-east,  sixe  leagues  off.  i.ofootc

The  foure  and  tioentieth,  faire  cleere  sun-shining  wea-
ther :  the  wind  variable  upon  all  points  of  the  compasse,  but
most  upon  the  south-east,  and  sometimes  calme.  We  con-
tinued our  course  west  south-west  as  before.  And  at  eight
of  the  clocke  at  night  the  souther  part  of  Lofoote  did  bearc
south-east  ten  leagues  off  us.  tion!*^™'

The  Jicc  and  twentieth,  much  wind  at  north-east,  with
some  snow  and  haile.  The  first  watch  the  wind  came  to  the
east  a  fine  gale,  and  so  came  to  the  north-east,  the  second
watch,  at  foure  of  the  clocke,  and  freshed  in  :  and  at  eight
of  the  clocke  it  grew  to  a  storme,  and  so  continued.  At
noone  we  observed,  and  made  the  ship  to  be  in  67  degrees,
58  minutes.  Wee  continued  our  course  south-west  twelve
leagues  a  watch.  At  nine  of  the  clocke,  Lofoote  did  beare
east  of  us  15  leagues  off.  And  we  found  the  compasse  to
have  no  variation.     The  wind  increased  to  a  storme.

The  sixe  and  tioentieth,  was  a  great  storme  at  the  north
north-east,  and  north-east.  Wee  steered  away  south-west
afore  the  wind  with  our  fore  course  abroad  :  for  we  were
able  to  maintayue  no  more  sayles,  it  blew  so  vehemently,
and  the  sea  went  so  high,  and  brake  withall,  that  it  Avould
have  dangered  a  small  ship  to  lye  under  the  sea.  So  we
skudded  seventy  leagues  in  foure  and  twentie  hourcs.  The
storme  began  to  cease  at  foure  of  the  clocke.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  indifferent  faire  weather,  but  a
good  stiffe  gale  of  wind  at  north,  and  north  north-east ;  wee
held  on  our  course  as  before.  At  noone  wee  observed  and
found  our  heigth  to  be  64  degrees,  10  minutes.  And  wee
loerceived  that  the  current  had  hindered  us  in  fortie-eisfht  ^^ «'"''"' <'"•"■

^  "         rent  selling

houres  to  the  number  of  16  leagues  to  our  best  judgement.
We  set  our  mayne-sayle,  sprit-saylc,  and  our  mayne-top-
sayle,  and  held  on  our  course  all  night,  having  faire  wea-
ther.


to  theiiorlh-

CflSt.


48


MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.


The  eight  and  twentieth,  fairc  Aveathcr  and  little  wind  at
north-cast,  we  held  on  our  course  south-west.  At  noone
wee  observed  the  heigth,  and  were  in  62  degrees,  and  30
minutes.  The  aftcr-noonc  was  little  wind  at  north  north-
west. The  second  watch  it  fell  calme.  At  foure  of  the
Farrfiiics    clockc  wcc  had  sio'ht  of  the  iles  called   Farre,^  and  found

set  11  o  -'

toeTest.  them  to  lye  out  of  their  place  in  the  sea  chart  fourteene
leagues  to  farre  westerly.  For  in  running  south-west  from
Lofoote,  wee  had  a  good  care  to  our  steerage  and  observa-
tions ;  and  counted  ourselves  thirtie  leagues  off  by  our
course  and  observation,  and  had  sight  of  them  sixteene  or
eighteene  leagues  off.

The  7iine  and  tioentieth,  faire  weather,  sometimes  calme
and  sometimes  a  gale,  with  the  wind  varying  at  south-west,
and  so  to  the  north-east.  Wee  got  to  the  Hands,  but  could
not  get  in.  So  we  stood  along  the  Hands.  The  ebbe  being
come,  we  durst  not  put  in.

Thirtieth,  faire  weather  ;  the  wind  at  south-east,  and  east
south-east.    In  the  morning  we  turned  into  a  road  in  Stromo,

stromo.  one  of  the  Hands  of  Farre,  betweene  Stromo  and  Mugge-
nes,  and  got  in  by  nine  of  the  clocke,  for  it  flowed  so  there
that  day.  And  as  soone  as  we  came  in  we  M'ent  to  romage,
and  sent  our  boat  for  water,  and  filled  all  our  empty  caskcs
with  fresh  water.  Wee  made  an  end  of  our  rpmaging  this
night  bv  ten  of  the  clocke.

The  one  and  thirtieth,  faire  sunshining  weather,  the  wind
at  east  south-east.  In  the  fore-noone  our  master  with  most
of  his  company  went  on  shoare  to  Avalkc,  antl  at  one  of  the
clocke  they  returned  aboard.     Then  we  set  sayle.

.lunc.  The  Jirst  of  June,  stilo  novo,  fairc  sun-shining  weather,

the  wind  at  east  south-east.  Wc  continued  on  our  course
south-west  and  by  west.  At  noone  wee  observed  the
sunnc,  and  found   our   heigth    to    be    sixty  degrees,  fifty-


eight  minutes


and   so   continued   on  our  course  all  night


1  The  Faroe  Ishuuls,  lat.  iW  40'  N.;  long.  G'  30°  W.


THIRD    VOYAGE    (1609).  49

with  faire  weather.     This  night  we  lighted  candles  in  the
bittacle^  againe.

The  second,  mystic  weather,  the  Avind  at  north-east.  At
noone  we  steered  away  west  south-west  to  find  Basse  Iland,'^  ^'^^^^^^
discovered  in  the  yeere  1578  by  one  of  the  ships  of  Sir
Martin  Frobisher,  to  see  if  it  lay  in  her  true  latitude  in  the
chart  or  no  :  wee  continued  our  course  as  before  all  night,
with  a  faire  gale   of  wind  :  this  night  we  had  sight  of  the  Their  first

o  no  sight  of

first  stars,  and   our  water  was  changed  colour  to  a  white  fu^her""^

rpi  1.      1  •    i*  north  they

greene.      i  he  compasse  had  no  variation.  hmicon-

mi  1  •     T     r   -  ^   •     •  i  i  •      ^  i       tinuall  suii-

ihe  third,  laire  sun-shinmg  weather;  the  wind  at  north-  light.

Clirtuge  of

east.     We   steered  on  our  course  south-west  and  by  west,  ^•''^er.
with  a  stifle  gale  of  wind.    At  noone  we  observed  and  found
our  heigth  to  bee  58  degrees,  48  minutes.    And  I  was  before
the  ship  16  leagues,  by  reason  of  the  current  that  held  us  so  a  strange

^  CI  '       J  current  out

strong   out   of  the  south-west.     For  it  is   eight  leagues  in  °*e''i,'i®''°""''
foure  and  twentie  houres.     We  accounted  our  selves  neere
Busse  Hand  :  by  mid-night  wee  looked  out  for  it,  but  could
not  see  it.^

The  fourth,  in  the  morning,  was  much  wind,  with  fogge

and  raine.     Wee  steered  away  soutii-west  by  west  all  the.  "

fore-noone,  the  wind  so  increasing  that  wee  were  enforced      ,  ''>>

to  take  in  our  top-sale  :  the  winde  continuing  so  all  the  after,-i , ,  ,  ; ' ' ;

noone.     Wee  steered  away  south-west  all  the  fore-part  oi  ''  ,.''

the  night;  and  at  ten  of  the  clocke  at  night  it  was  littlo     -  >>..

wind,  and  that  was  south,  and  so  came  up  to  the  south  south-  '■ .'  ! . , ,

east.                                                                                                   ■„••    .'•  ,''.''

The  _^i!,  stormie  weather,  and  much  wind  at  south  and;'  .',,,',

^  The  bittacle  is  a  close  place  in  which  the  compasse  standeth.         ',  ^  ,>

^  It  is  impossible  to  indicate  the  real  situation  of  Busse  Island,  whicJj'     '  ''  >

was  discovered  by  one  of  Frobisher's  ships  on  its  return  to  England.  Th<3> .  •'  >'  •  ,
accounts  of  this  voyage  which  have  come  down  to  us  are  even  more,'  ■'  '•**
unsatisfactory  than  most  of  the  geographical  materials  of  this  period.,  '    \

Frobisher's  discoveries  have  always  been,  and  still  are,  a  puzzle  to  geq-,  •
graphers.  •    .  ,  .

^  They  would  probably  not  have  found  it,  even  in  daylight.  '     ' ',

7  "'•-'!


50  MASTER    HKNKY    HUDSON.

south  by  cast,  so  that  at  t'ouro  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning
we  tooke  in  our  forc-saylc,  and  Lay  ^  try  with  our  mayne
corse,  and  tryed  away  west  north-west  foure  leagues.  But
at  noonc  it  was  Icsse  wind,  and  the  sunne  showed  forth,  and
we  observed  and   found   our  heigth   to  be   56  degrees,  2\

Note  well,  niinutcs.  In  the  after-noone  the  wind  vcred  to  and  fro  be-
twcene  the  soutli-west  and  the  south-east,  with  raine  and
fogge,  and  so  continued  all  night.  Wee  found  that  our  ship
had  gone  to  the  westward  of  our  course.  The  sixth,  thicke
hasie  weather,  with  gusts  of  wind  and  showers  of  raine.  The
wind  varied  betweene  east  south-east  and  south-west,  wee
steered  on  many  courses  a  west  south-west  way.  The  after-
noone  watch  the  Avind  was  at  east  south-east,  a  stiffe  gale
with  myst  and  raine.  Wee  steered  away  south-west  by  west
eight  leagues.  At  noone  the  sunne  shone  forth,  and  we
found  the  heigth  to  bee  56  degrees,  8  minutes.  The  seventh,
faire  sun-shining  weather  all  the  fore-noone,  and  calme
imtill  twelve  of  the  clocke.  In  the  after-noone  the  wind
came  to  the  north-west,  a  stiffe  gale.  Wee  steered  south-
west by  west,  and  made  a  south-west  way.  At  noone  we
-found  the  height  to  bee  56  degrees,  one  minute,  and  it  con-
tinued all  night  a  hard  gale.  The  enjlit,  stormy  weather,
-the  wind  variable  betweene  Avest  and  north-Avest,  much  Avind  :

ji.jipis fire   and  at  eight  of  the  clocke  Avee  tooke  off  our  bonnets.     At

tl.o.se  wluuu  °

IT- iH.-ed  <iioone  the  sunne  shewed  forth  and  Avee  observed,  and  our
to  ei'u,u|Je'^^  height  Avas  5J:  degrees,  oO  minutes.  The  ;^//^/A,  faire  sun-
rete'rcure  'shining  wcather,  and  little  wind  all  the  fore  part  of  the  daye
,t'io '.  ayiie   -untill   clcvcn   of  the  clocke.     Then  the  Avind   came  to   the

course,

iLioLtn        south  south-east,  and  we  steered  away  Avest  south-Avest.     At

course,  toie        _  '  •'

uTiTrstooi  T^oonc  we  found  our  height  to  bee  53  degrees  and  45  minutes,
^uj'eswitii-  iind  we  had  made  our  way  south  by  west  ten  leagues.  In
bo.ijis.        the  after-noone  the  a\  ind  increased,  and   continued  all  night

at  east  north-east  and  east.
'  UMie  tenth,  faire  Aveather,  the  wind  variable  betwerne   east

north-east  and   south-east ;    Avee   sleired   on    our   course  as


THIRD    VOYAGE    (l()()y).  51

before.  At  foiire  of  the  clock  in  the  afternoone  the  wind
came  up  at  south-east.  And  we  held  on  our  course  as  be-
fore. At  noone  M'ce  observed  and  found  our  hei"ht  to  be
52  degrees,  35  minutes.

The  eleventh,  in  the  morning,  was  thicke  and  foggie,  the
winde  varying  betweene  south  south-west  and  north  west.
At  foure  of  tlie  clocke  in  the  morning,  mcc  tackt  about  to
the  southward  :  at  eleven  of  the  clocke  the  winde  came  to
the  north-west,  and  so  to  the  west  north-west.  This  day
we  had  change  of  water,  of  a  whitish  greene,  like  to  the  ice
water  to  the  north-west.  At  noone  it  clecred  up,  and  be-
came very  faire  weather  :  wee  put  out  our  mayne  top-sayle  :
then  we  observed  the  sunne,  and  found  our  height  to  be  51
degrees,  24  minutes.  We  had  sayled  many  courses  and
found  our  ship  gone  to  the  southward  of  our  account  ten
leagues,  by  reason  of  a  current  from  the  north-ward.^     The  a  current

,  .  ,  from  tlie

compasse  varied  one  point  to  the  east.  uortb.

Variation

The  hvelfth,  faire  sun-shining  weather,  but  much  wind  at  o"e  point
the  west :  we  stood  to  the  southward  all  day,  the  wind  shift-
ing between  the  south-west  and  the  west  and  by  north.
Wee  made  our  way  south  halfe  a  point  west,  eight  and
twentie  leagues.  Our  height  at  noone  was  50  degrees,  9
minutes.  At  eight  of  the  clock  at  night  we  took  off  our
bonets,  the  wind  increasing.

The  thirteenth,  faire  sun-shining  weather  :  the  wind  vari-
able betweene  the  west  and  north  north-west.  Wee  made
our  way  south  south-west,  seven  and  twentie  leagues.  At
noone  we  observed,  and  found  our  height  to  be  48  degrees,
45  minutes,  but  not  to  be  trusted,  the  sea  went  so  high.
In  the  after-noone  the  winde  Avas  calmer,  and  wee  brought
to  our  bonets,  and  stood  to  the  southward  all  night  with  a
stiffe  gale.

T\).e fourteenth,  faire  and  clcere  sun-shining  weather:  the
winde  variable  betweene  the  north-west  and  south-west  by

^  The  .h-ctic  current,  from  Davis'  and  Iliulrion's  Straits  to  the  suuth.


62  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.

west.  At  midnight  I  observed  the  north  starre  at  a  north-
west by  west  guarde  ;  a  good  observation  49  degrees,  30
minutes.  And  at  noone  wee  observed  the  sunne,  and  our
height  Avas  48  degrees,  6  minutes.  And  I  made  account
we  ranne  betweene  the  two  observations  twelve  leagues.
At  one  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-noone,  wee  cast  about  to
the  westward,  and  stood  so  all  night :  the  winde  increased  to
a  storme,  and  was  very  much  winde  with  raine.

The  fifteenth,  we  had  a  great  storme,  and  spent*  over-
boord  our  fore-mast,  bearing  our  fore  corse  low  set.     The
sixteenth,  we   were   forced   to   trie   with  our   mayne  saylc,
'"''^'  by  reason  of  the  unconstant  weather.     So  wee  tried  foure

watches,  south-east  and  by  south  eight  leagues  and  an  halfe,
two  watches,  sixe  leagues.  The  seventeenth,  reasonable  faire
weather  :  the  wind  variable  betweene  west  south-west  aud
west  north-west.  And  a  stifFe  gale  of  wind,  and  so  great  a
swelling  sea  out  of  the  west  south-west,  that  wee  could  doe
nothing.  So  one  watch  and  an  halfe  wee  drove  north  foure
leagues  and  a  halfe,  and  foure  watches  and  an  halfe  south
and  by  east  halfe  a  point  east  twelve  leagues.  The  eigh-
teenth,  reasonable  weather  but  close  and  cloudie,  and  an
hard  gale  of  wind,  and  a  great  sea.  The  winde  being  at
the  north-west,  wee  lay  to  the  southward,  and  made  our
drift  south  and  by  west,  five  leagues.  The  after-noone
prooved  little  wind,  and  the  night  part  calme.  The  nine-
teenth, in  the  fore-noone,  faire  weather  and  calme.  In  the
morning  we  set  the  piece  of  our  fore  mast,  and  set  our  fore
corse.

The   one   and   ticenlictJt,,   faire   sun-shining   wcatlic]',   but

much  wind  and  a  great  sea.     We  split  our  fore  sayle  at  ten

i.Jt!  lu)"'^ ''''  of  the  cloche  ;  then  we  laid  it  a  trie*  with  our  mayne  sayle,

buitire'^'''    and  coulinued  so  all  day.     In  the  night  it  fell  to  be  little

biijie,  etc.     wind.     This  day  our  hcigth  was  45  degrees,  48  minutes.

The   two   and  twentieth,  very  faire   sun-shining  weather,
aiid  calme  all   the   aitcr-noonc.      At  not)nc  we   made  a  \erv


THIRD    VOYAGE    (1609).  53

good  observation,  and  found  our  heigth  44  degrees,  58  mi-
nutes. At  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night  wee  had  a  small  gale
of  winde  at  south-east.  And  wee  steered  away  west  for  New-
found Land.^     The  true  compasse  varied  one  point  east.         variaiiuu.

The  three  and  twentieth,  thicke  weather  with  much  wind
and  some  raine.  At  eight  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  the
wind  came  to  the  west  south-west  and  west  so  stiffe  a  gale,  that
we  were  forced  to  take  our  top-sayle,  and  steered  aAvay
north  north-west  untill  foure  of  the  clock  in  the  after-noone.
Then  Ave  tact  to  the  southward,  the  winde  at  west  north-
west. At  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night  wee  tooke  in  our  top-
sayles,  and  laid  it  a  trie  with  our  mayne  sayle,  the  winde
at  west.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  a  stiffe  gale  of  wind,  varying  bc-
tweene  the  west  and  north  north-west ;  we  tried  till  sixe  of
the  clocke  :  at  which  time  we  set  our  fore  saile,  and  steered
way  west  and  by  south  by  our  compasse  eight  leagues  in
foure  watches ;  and  wee  tried  away  south  in  one  Avatch  and
an  halfe.

The  Jive  and  twentieth,  faire  sun- shining  weather,  the
wind  at  north  north-west  and  north,  we  steered  away  west
by  south  by  our  compasse  till  twelve  of  the  clocke  :  at  which
time  we  had  sight  of  a  sayle  and  gave  her  chase,  but  could
not  speake  Avith  her.  She  stood  to  the  eastward ;  and  we
stood  after  her  till  sixe  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-noone.
Then  wee  tact  to  the  westward  againe,  and  stood  on  our
course.     It  was  faire  all  night,  and  little  wind  sometimes.

^  Newfoundland  was,  in  Hudson's  time,  a  very  vague  term.  The
coasts  which  it  seems  to  embrace  were  so  imperfectly  known,  that  a  strict
geographical  interpretation  of  the  term  is  quite  impossible.  It  was,  by
authors  and  seamen,  applied  to  all  the  North  American  coasts  along  which
the  codfisheries  were  established.  Hudson  himself  includes  under  the
name  of  Newfoundland  the  coast  down  to  about  43°  20',  that  is  to  say,
Nova  Scotia.  Although  Hudson's  Newfoundland  stretches  thus  much
farther  south  than  the  island  which  still  bears  that  time-honoured  name,
the  island  formed  even  then  the  main  part  of  Newfoundland.


54  mastp:r  iiknuy  hudsox.

The  six  and  twentieth,  all  the  forepart  of  the  day  very
faire  weather  and  hot,  but  at  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-
noone  it  grew  to  bee  much  winde  and  raine  :  the  winde
Avas  at  south  south-cast.  At  noone  wee  observed  and  found
our  heigth  to  bee  44  degrees,  oo  minutes.  At  eight  of  the
clocke  at  night  the  wind  came  to  the  south-west,  and  west
south-west.  Wee  steered  north-west,  one  watch,  and  at
twelve  in  the  night  to  the  west,  and  west  and  by  south,
very  much  wind.     So  we  could  lye  but  north  north-west.

'J'he  seven  and  twentieth,  very  much  winde  and  a  soare
storme,  the  wind  westerly.  In  the  morning,  at  foure  of  the
clocke,  wee  tooke  in  our  fore-corse,  and  layd  it  a  trie  with
our  mayne-corse  low  set ;  and  so  continued  all  the  day  and
night,  two  watches  to  the  northward.  At  eight  of  the  clocke
at  night,  we  tackt  to  the  southward.

The  eicjht  and  twentieth,  faire  sun-shining  weather,  the
wind  at  west  and  by  south  ;  we  lay  a  trie  to  the  southward
till  eight  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning.  Then  we  set  our
fore-corse,  and  stood  to  the  southward,  a  stiffe  gale  of  wind,
but  faire  weather  and  a  great  sea  out  of  the  wester-boord,
and  so  continued  all  night.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  faire  sun-shining  weather,  the
wind  at  west  and  by  south  ;  we  stood  to  the  southward
untill  sixe  of  the  clocke  at  night,  and  made  our  way  south
and  by  cast  foure  leagues.  Then  the  winde  came  to  the
south-west,  and  wee  cast  about  to  the  westward,  and  made
our  way  west  north-west  all  night.  At  noone,  I  found  the
height  43  degrees,  (5  minutes.  'J'hc  variation  one  point
west.

The  tJiirtieth,  faire  sun-shining  weather^  the  winde  at
south-west  and  by  west ;  we  steered  north-west  and  by  west,
and  made  our  way  so,  by  reason  of  the  variation  of  the  eom-
passe.  At  noone,  I  found  the  height  to  bee  43  degrees,  18
minutes  ;  wee  continued  our  course  all  night,  and  made  our
way  north-west  and  by  west,  luilfe  a  point  westerly,  iive  and
twentie  leasjues.


'JUIRD    VOYAGE    (1609).  55

T\\e  first  of  Jithj,  close,  mystie  and  thicke  weather,  but  a  luiy.
faire  gale  of  wind  at  south-west,  and  south-west  by  south.
We   steered    away   north-west   and   by   west  westerly,   and
made  our  way  so,  by  reason  of  the  variation  of  the  compasse.
At  ei<jht  of  the  clocke  at  niiiht  wee  sounded  for  the  banke  of '^,!'v '*""'"'
New-found  Land,^  but  could  get  no  ground.  '""'"" '"'"''

The  second,  thicke  niytitie  weather,  but  little  wind,  and
that  at  west  and  west  and  by  south.  At  eight  of  the  clocke
in  the  jnorning  we  cast  about  to  the  southward,  and  when
our  ship  was  on  stayes,  we  sounded  for  the  banke,  and  had
ground  in  thirtie  fothoms,  white  sand  and  shells,  and  pre-
sently it  cleered  :  and  we  had  sight  of  a  sayle,  but  spake
not  with  her.  In  the  night  wee  had  much  rayne,  thunder
and  lightning,  and  Avind  shifting.

The  third,  faire  sun-shining  weather,  with  a  faire  gale  of
wind  at  east  north-east,  and  wee  steered  away  west  south-
west by  our  compasse,  which  varyed   17  degfrees  westward,  variation

•'  ^  ^  •'  o  west,  ir

This  morning  we  were  among  a  great  fleet  of  French-men,  jl-'^llfXiiicii
which  lay  fishing  on  the  banke  ;  but  we  spake  with  none  of  ute  I'mik".
them.  At  noone  wee  found  our  heighth  to  bee  4-3  degrees,
41  minutes.  And  we  sounded  at  ten  of  the  clocke,  and  had
thirtie  fathoms  gray  sand.  At  two  of  the  clocke  wee  sounded,
and  had  five  and  thirtie  fathoms,  gray  sand.  At  eight  of  the
clocke  at  night  we  sounded  againe,  and  had  eight  and  thirtie
fathoms,  gray  sand  as  before.

The  fourth,  at  the  fore-part  of  the  day  cleere,  with  a  faire
gale  of  Avind,  but  variable  betweene  the  east  north-east  and
south  and  by  east ;  wee  held  on  our  course  as  before.  The
after-noone  was  mystie,  the  wind  shifting  betweene  the
south  and  the  west  till  foure  of  the  clocke.  Then  we  tooke
in  our  top-sayle  and  sprit-sayle,  and  sounded  and  had  no
ground  in  seventie  fathoms.  The  winde  shifted  still  untill
eight  of  the  clocke,  then  it  came  to  the  north  north-east  and

^  Probably  near  Cape  Sable,  the  most  southern  point  of  Nova  Scotia ;
lat.  43°  22'  N.;  long.  60°  35'  W.     See  note  at  p.  53.


56  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.

north-east  and  by  north,  and  wee  steered  away  west  north-
west by  our  varyed  compasse,  which  made  a  west  way  lialfe
point  north.  The  compasse  varyed  15  degrees  from  the
north  to  the  west.

The  J?/i{,  faire  sun-shining  weather,  the  wind  at  north-east
and  by  north ;  we  steered  away  west  north-west,  which  was
west  halfe  a  point  north.  At  noone  we  found  our  heighth
to  be  44  degrees,  10  minutes,  and  sounded  and  had  no
ground  in  one  hundred  fathoms.  The  after-noone  proved
cahne  sometimes,  and  sometimes  little  wind,  untill  nine  of
the  clocke  in  the  night.  Then  the  wind  came  to  the
east,  and  we  held  on  our  course.  At  midnight  I  observed
and  found  the  height  to  bee  44  degrees,  10  minutes,  by  the
ia^de''rees  ^lo^'th  starrc  and  the  scorpions  heart.  The  compasse  varyed
13  degrees.

The  sixth,  the  forepart  of  the  day  faire  weather,  and  a  stiffe
gale  of  wind  betweene  south  south-east  and  south-west;  wee
steered  west  and  by  north  and  west  north-west.     The  after-
Foggieand  pj^^.f;  ^f  ^\-^q  j^y   fi'om  two  of  the  clocke,  was  all  fosrcrie  and
''""'''■  thicke   weather  ;    the  wind  a  hard  gale,   varying   betweene

south-west  and  by  south  and  west  and  by  north  ;  we  made
our  way  north-west  halfe  a  point  northerly, nineteene  leagues,
upon  many  points  foure  watches.  At  night,  at  eight  of  the
clocke,  we  sounded  and  had  no  ground  at  one  hundred
fathoms.

The  seventh,  faire  sun-shining  weather,  the  wind  varying
betweene  west  and  by  north  and  west  and  by  south.  At
foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning  we  cast  about  to  the
southward,  and  stood  so  till  one  in  the  after-noone.  At
noone  we  found  our  height  to  be  44  degrees,  26  minutes.
At  seven  of  the  clocke  we  tackt  to  the  northward.  At  eight
at  night  we  tackt  to  the  southward  and  sounded,  and  had
nine  and  fiftie  fathoms,  white  sand.

The  eight,  in  the  forc-noonc  faire  weather,  but  the  morn-
wvjC  fouuic  till  seven  of  the  clocke.     At  foure  of  the  clocke


."in


THIRD    VOYAGE    (1609).  57

in  the  morning  we  sounded,  and  had  five  and  fortie  fathoms,
fine  white  sand,  and  we  had  runnc  five  leagues  south  and
by  west.     Then  wee  stood  along  one  glasse,  and  went  one
league  as  before.     Then  we  stood  one  glasse  and  sounded,
and  had  sixtie  fathoms.     Then  Me  tackt  and  stood  backe  to
the  banke,  and  had  five  and  twentie  fathoms  ;   and  tryed  for
fish,   and  it  fell  calme,  and   we   caught   one   hundred   and
eighteene  great   coddes,  from   eight  a  clocke  till  one,  and  ^d^ukeu!
and  after  dinner   wee   tooke  twelve,   and    saw  many  great
scoales  of  herrings.     Then  Avee  had  a  gale  of  wind  at  south  ;  gcoaies^or*
and  it  shifted  to  the  west  north-west,  and  wee  stood  three  •'^''""s^-
glasses  and  sounded  and  had  sixtie  fathomes,  and  stood  two  to°ti?e  the^
glasses  and  had  two  and  fortie  fathoms,  red  stones  and  shells,  ihfe  aua
So  wee  sounded  every  glasse,  and  had  severall  soundings  35,  poie.'etc.
S3,  30,  31,  32,  33  and  34  fathoms.

The  ninth,  faire  calme  weather  ;  we  lay  becalmed  all  day
and  caught  some  fish,  but  not  much,  because  we  had  small
store  of  salt.  At  three  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-noone  wee
had  a  gale  at  south-east  and  south  south-east,  and  we  steered
away  westerly;  our  compasse  was  west  and  by  south  halfe
a  point  south.  At  foure  of  the  clocke  we  sounded  and  had
but  fifteene,  seventeene,  and  nineteene  fathoms  on  a  fishing
banke  ;  and  we  sounded  every  glasse.  Then  we  could  get
no  ground  in  five  and  twentie  fathoms,  and  had  sight  of  a
sayle  on  head  off  us.  At  noone  our  height  was  44  degrees,
27  minutes.  We  stood  to  the  westward  all  night,  and
spake  with  a  French-man,  which  lay  fishing  on  the  banke  of
Sablen,^  in  thirtie  fathoms,  and  we  saw  two  or  three  more.

The  tenth,  very  mystie  and  thicke  weather,  the  wind  at
south-west,  a  faire  gale.  We  stood  to  the  south-ward,  and
made  our  way  south-east  and  by  east.  At  twelve  of  the
clocke  we  sounded,  and  had  eight  and  fortie  fathoms  :  againe
at  two  we  sounded,  and  had  fiftie  fathoms.  And  at  sixe  of
the  clocke  we  sounded,  and  had  eight  and  fortie  fathoms  on
^  Banc  des  Sables,  off  Mahoue  Bay.


68  MASTKU    HENRY    HUDSON.

the  end  of  the  bankc.     Againe  at  eight  of  the   clocke   at

night  wee  sounded,  and  had  no  ground  in  cightic  fathomes,

and  -were   over   the  banke.       So  wee  stood  along  till  mid-

variation     nigrht.     The  compasse  varyed  seventeen  degrees  to  the  west-

17  degrees.  O  I  J  ^

ward.

The  eleccnth,  very  thicke  and  mystie  weather.  At  twelve
of  the  clocke  at  night  we  cast  about  to  the  westward,  and
stood  so  all  day,  and  made  our  way  west  north-west.  We
sounded  at  twelve  of  the  clocke,  but  had  no  ground  ;  so  we
stood  to  the  westward  all  the  fore  part  of  the  night  and
sounded,  but  could  get  no  ground  in  fiftie  or  sixtie  fathoms
till  mid-night.  Then  I  sounded  and  had  ground  at  fifteene
fathoms,  white  sand.

The  twelfth  was  very  foggie,  we  stood  our  course  all  the

morning  till   eleven  of  the   clocke ;  at  which  time  we  had

[ow  white^  sight  of  the  land,  which  is  low  white  sandie  ground,  right

and'saudie.  ^^^  ^^^^^  ^^  ^^^  .  ^^^^  j^.^^^  ^^^^  fathoms.     Then  we  tackt  to  the

southward,  and  stood  off  foure  glasses  :  then  we  tackt  to  the
land  againe,  thinking  to  have  rode  under  it,  and  as  we  came
neere  it  the  fog  was  so  thicke  that  we  could  not  see ;  so  wee
stood  off  againe.  From  mid-night  to  two  of  the  clocke  we
came  sounding  in  twelve,  thirteene,  and  fourteene  fathoms
off  the  shoare.  At  foure  of  the  clocke  we  had  20  fathoms.
At  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night,  30  fathoms.  At  twelve  of
the  clocke,  65  fathoms,  and  but  little  winde,  for  it  deeped
apace,  but  the  neerer  the  shoare  the  fairer  shoalding.

The  thirteenth,  faire  sun-shining  weather,  from  eight  of
the  clocke  in  the  fore-noone  all  day  after,  but  in  the  morn-
ing it  was  foggie.  Then  at  eight  of  the  clocke  we  cast  about
for  the  shoare,  but  could  not  see  it ;  the  w^ind  being  at  south
by  our  true  compasse,  wee  steered  west  and  by  north.  At
43  dogrets,    noouc  WO  obscrved,  and  found  our  height  to  bee  43  degrees,

25  iiiiiiules.  o  i-

25  minutes  ;  so  we  steered  away  M'cst  and  by  north  all  the
aftcr-noone.  At  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-noone  we
sounded,  and  had  five    and  thirtie  fathoms  ;  and  at  sixe  of


THIRD    VOYAGK    (1609).  59

the  clocke  wee  had  sig-ht  of  the  hind,  and  saw  two  saylcs  on  i^,',^'j''J'^j


head  ofF  us.     The  hand  by  the  waters  side  is  low  land,  and  si"'/,""''"


againe,
rtvvo
lips.

white  sandie  bankes  rising,  full  of  little  hils.  Our  sound-
ings were  35,  33,  30,  28,  32,  37,  33,  and  3.^  fathoms.

The  fourteenth,  full  of  mysts,  flying  and  vading  the  wind
betweene  south  and  south-west;  we  steered  away  west  north-
west, and  north-west  and  by  west.  Our  soundings  were  29,
25,  24,  25,  22,  25,  27,  30,  28,  30,  35,  43,  50,  70,  90,  70,  64,
86,  100  fathoms,  and  no  ground.

The  fifteenth,  very  mj^stie,  the  wiude  varying  betweene
south  and  south-west ;  wee  steered  west  and  by  north,  and
west  north-west.  In  the  morning  we  sounded,  and  had  one
hundred  fathoms,  till  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-noone.
Then  we  sounded  againe,  and  had  seventie-five  fathoms.
Then  in  two  glasses  running,  which  was  not  above  two
English  miles,  we  sounded  and  had  sixtie  fathoms,  and  it
shoalded  a  great  pace  untill  we  came  to  tweiitie  fathoms.
'J'hen  we  made  account  we  were  neere  the  islands  that  lie
off  the  shoare.  So  we  came  to  an  anchor,  the  sea  being  very
smooth  and  little  wind,  at  nine  of  the  clocke  at  night.  After
supper  we  tryed  for  fish,  and  I  caught  fifteene  cods,  some
the  greatest  that  I  have  scene,  and  so  Ave  rode  all  night.

The  sixteenth,  in  the  morning,  it  cleered  up,  and  we  had
siorht  of  five  islands  lying  north,  and  north  and  by  west  from  Five

»  J       O  J  :  islands.

us,  two  leagues.  Then  wee  made  ready  to  set  sayle,  but  the
myst  came  so  thicke  that  we  durst  not  enter  in  among  them.
The  seventeenth,  was  all  mystic,  so  that  we  could  not  get
into  the  harbour.  At  ten  of  the  clocke  two  boats  came  off
to  us,  with  sixe  of  the  savages  of  the  countrey,  seeming  glad  sixesavages

'  o  ^  '  D  o  come  aboard

of  our  comming.  We  gave  them  trifles,  and  they  eate  and  *'^'^°^'
dranke  with  us  ;  and  told  us  that  there  were  gold,  silver,
and  copper  mynes  hard  by  us  -,  and  that  the  French-men
doe  trade  with  them  ;  which  is  very  likely,  for  one  of  them
spake  some  words  of  French.  So  wee  rode  still  all  day  and
all  night,  the  weather  continuing  mystic.


60  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.

The  eighteenth,  faire  weather,  wee  went  into  a  very  good

harbour,  and  rode  hard  by  the  shoare  in  foure  fathom  water.

A  large        'Y\\c  x'wcv   runucth   UD   a   srreat  way,  but  there  is  but  two

river.  l  o  .'  '

fathoms  hard  by  us.     \\e  went  on  shoare  and  cut  us  a  fore

mast ;  then  at  noone  we  came  aboord  againe,  and  found  the

44  Jegrecs,   height  of  thc  placc  to  bee  in  44  degrees,  1  minute,  and  the

1  minute.  O  l  O  '  J

sunne  to  fall  at  a  south  south-west  sunne,  AYe  mended  our
sayles,  and  fell  to  make  our  fore-mast.  The  harbour  lyeth
south  and  north,  a  mile  in  where  we  rode.

The  7imeteenth,  we  had  faire  sun-shining  weather,  we  rode
still.  In  the  after-noone  wee  went  with  our  boate  to  looke
for  fresh  water,  and  found  some ;  and  found  a  shoald  with
many  lobsters  on  it,  and  caught  one  and  thirtie.  The  people
coming  aboord,  shewed  us  great  friendship,  but  we  could
not  trust  them.  The  twentieth,  faire  sunne-shining  weather,
the  winde  at  south-west.  In  the  morning,  our  scute  went
ou^t  to  catch  fresh  fish  halfe  an  houre  before  day,  and  re-
turned in  two  houres,  bringing  seven  and  twentie  great
coddes,  with  two  hookes  and  lines.  In  the  afternoone  wee
went  for  more  lobsters  and  caught  fortie,  and  returned
aboard.  Then  wee  espied  two  French  shallops  full  of  the
country  people  come  into  the  harbour,  but  they  offered  us
no  wrong,  seeing  we  stood  vipon  our  guard.  They  brought
many  beaver  skinncs  and  other  fine  furres,  which  they  would
ule" French^  havc  chaugcd  for  redde  gownes.  For  the  French  trade
salvages,  with  them  for  red  cassockes,  knives,  hatchets,  copper,  kettles,
trevits,  beadcs,  and  other  trifles.

The  one  and  twentieth,  all  mystic,  the  wind  easterly  ;  wee
rode  still  and  did  nothing,  but  about  our  mast.  The  two
and  tioentieth,  fair  sun-shining  weather,  tlie  winde  all  north-
erly ;  wc  rode  still  all  thc  day.  In  thc  after-noone  our  scute
went  to  catch  more  lobsters,  and  brought  with  them  nine
and  fiftie.     The  night  was  cleerc  weather.

The  three  and  twentietJi,  i'aire  sun-shining  wcatlicr  and
very  hot.    At  eleven  of  tlie  clocke  our  fore  mast  Mas  finished,


THIRD    VOYAGE    (1609).  61

aiid  wee  brought  it  aboorcl,  and  set  it  into  the  step,  and  in
the  after-noone  we  rigged  it.  This  night  we  had  some  little
myst  and  rayne.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  very  hot  weather,  the  winde  at
south  out  of  the  sea.  The  fore-part  of  the  day  wee  brought
to  our  sayles.  In  the  morning  our  scute  went  to  take  fish,
and  in  two  hourcs  they  brought  with  them  twentie  great
coddes  and  a  great  holibut ;  the  night  Avas  faire  also.  We
kept  good  watch  for  fear  of  being  betrayed  by  the  people,
and  perceived  where  they  layd  their  shallops.

The^i^e  and  twentieth,  very  faire  weather  and  hot.  In
the  morning  wee  manned  our  scute  with  foure  muskets  and
sixe  men,  and  tooke  one  of  their  shallops  and  brought  it
aboord.  Then  we  manned  our  boat  and  scute  with  twelve
men  and  muskets,  and  two  stone  pieces  or  murderers,  and
drave  the  savasces  from  their  houses,  and  tooke  the  spovle  of  P'®y  ^p°J'''^

o  '  r    J  nouses

them,  as  they  would  have  done  of  us.  Then  wee  set  sayle,  salvages.
and  came  downe  to  the  harbours  mouth,  and  rode  there  all
night,  because  the  winde  blew  right  in,  and  the  night  grew
mystie  with  much  rayne  till  mid-night.  Then  it  fell  calme,
and  the  wind  came  off'  the  land  at  west  north-west,  and  it
began  to  cleere.  The  compasse  varyed  ten  degrees  north-
north-west.

The  size  and  tiventieth,  faire  and  cleere  sunne-shining
weather.  At  five  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  the  winde
being  off  the  shoare  at  north  north-west,  we  set  sayle  and
came  to  sea,  and  by  noone  we  counted  our  ship  had  gone
fourteene  leagues  south-west.  In  the  after-noone,  the  winde
shifted  variably  betweene  west  south-west  and  north-west.
At  noone  I  found  the  height  to  bee  43  degrees,  56  minutes.
This  eevening  being  very  faire  weather,  wee  observed  the
variation  of  our  compasse  at  the  sunnes  going  downe,  and  iifjg*'j."gg
found  it  to  bee  6  degrees  from  the  north  to  the  westward.       n'^^tu.Ve'st.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  faire  sun-shining  weather,  the
winde  shifting  betweene   the   south-west  and  west  and  by


62  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.

nortli  a  stiffc  gale  ;  we  stood  to  the  southward  all  day,  and
made  our  way  south  and  by  west,  seven  and  twentie  leagues.
At  noone,  our  height  was  42  degrees,  50  minutes.  At  foure
of  the  clocke  in  the  after-noone,  wee  cast  about  to  the  north-
ward. At  eiglit  of  the  clocke,  we  tooke  in  our  top-saylcs
and  our  fore-bonnet,  and  went  with  a  short  sayle  all  night.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  very  thicke  and  mystie,  and  a
stiffe  gale  of  wind,  varying  betweene  south  south-west  and
south-west  and  by  west ;  we  made  our  way  north-west  and
by  M'est,  seven  and  twentie  leagues  ;  wee  sounded  many
times  and  could  get  no  ground.  At  five  of  the  clocke  we
cast  about  to  the  southward,  the  wind  at  south-west  and
by  west.  At  which  time  we  sounded,  and  had  ground  at
seventie-five  fathoms.  At  eight,  wee  had  sixtie-five  fathoms.
At  ten,  sixtie.  At  twelve  of  the  clocke  at  mid-night,  fiftie-
sixe  fathoms,  gray  sand.

The  compasse  varyed  6  degrees  to  the  north  point  to  the
west.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  faire  weather,  we  stood  to  the
southward,  and  made  our  way  south  and  by  west  a  point
south,  eighteene  leagues.  At  noone  we  found  our  height  to
be  42  degrees,  56  minutes ;  wee  sounded  oft  and  had  these,
60,  64,  65,  67,  65,  65,  70,  and  75  fathoms.  At  night  wee
tryed  the  variation  of  our  compasse  by  the  setting  of  the
sunne,  and  found  that  it  went  downe  37  degrees  to  the  north-
ward of  the  west,  and  should  have  gone  downe  but  31  de-
grees.    The  compasse  varyed  5  and  a  halfe  degrees.

The  thirtieth,  very  hot,  all  the  fore  part  of  the  day  calme,
the  wind  at  south  south-east ;  wee  steered  away  west  south-
west and  sounded  many  times,  and  could  find  no  ground  at
one  hundred  and  seventie  fathomcs.  We  found  a  great  cur-
rent and  many  over-falls.  Our  current  had  deceived  us.
For  at  noone  wc  found  our  height  to  be  41  degrees,  34
minutes.  And  the  current  had  heaved  us  to  the  south-
ward foureteene  leagues.     At  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night  I


THIRD    VOYAGE    (1609).  63

sounded,  and  had  ground  in  flftie-two  fathomes.  In  the  end
of  the  mid-night  M'atch  wee  had  fiftie-threc  fathomes.  This
last  ©bservation  is  not  to  be  trusted.

The  one  and  thirtieth,  very  thicke  and  mystie  all  day,
untill  tcnne  of  the  clocke.  At  night  the  wind  came  to  the
south,  and  south-west  and  south.  We  made  our  way  west
north-west,  nineteene  leagues.  Wee  sounded  many  times,
and  had  difference  of  soundings,  sometimes  little  stones,  and
sometimes  grosse  gray  sand,  fiftic-sixe,  fiftie-foure,  fortie-
eight,  fortie-seven,  fortie-foure,  fortie-six'e,  fiftie  fathoms  ;
and  at  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night  it  fell  calme,  and  we  had
fiftie  fathomes.  And  at  ten  of  the  clocke  we  heard  a  great
rut,  like  the  rut  of  the  shoare.  Then  I  sounded  and  found  -^  si'^^t  rut.
the  former  depth  ;  and  mistrusting  a  current,  seeing  it  so
still  that  the  ship  made  no  way,  I  let  the  lead  lie  on  the
ground,  and  found  a  tide  set  to  the  south-west,  and  south-
west and  by  west,  so  fast,  that  I  could  hardly  vere  the  line
so  fast,  and  presently  came  an  hurlinor  current,  or  tyde  with  a  current

'  -i  •'  O  '  .'  tothesouth-

over-fals,  Avhich  cast  our  ship  round  ;  and  the  lead  was  so  ^f^t^^^est
fast  in  the  ground  that  I  feared  the  lines  breaking,  and  we  over-feia!"^
had  no  more  but  that.     At  midnight  I  sounded  againe,  and
we  had  seventie-five  fathomes  ;  and  the  strong  streame  had
left  us.

The^rs^  of  August,  all  the  fore  part  of  the  day  was  mys-  August.
tie  ;  and  at  noone  it  cleered  up.  We  found  that  our  height
was  41  degrees,  45  minutes,  and  w^e  had  gone  nineteene
leagues.  The  after-noon  was  reasonable  cleere.  We  found
a  rustling  tide  or  current  with  many  over-fals  to  continue
still,  and  our  water  to  change  colour,  and  our  sea  to  bee  very
deepe,  for  wee  found  no  ground  in  one  hundred  fathomes.
The  night  was  cleere,  and  the  winde  came  to  the  north,  and
north-east;  we  steered  west.

The  second,  very  faire  weather  and  hot ;  from  the  morn-
ing till  noone  we  had  a  gale  of  wind,  but  in  the  after-noone
little  wind.     At  noone  I  sounded,  and  had  one  hundred  and


64  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.

ten  fathomes  ;  and  our  height  was  41  degrees,  56  minutes.
And  wee  had  runne  four  and  twentie  leagues  and  an  halfe.
At  the  sun-setting  we  observed  the  variation  of  the  Tom-
passe,  and  found  that  it  was  come  to  his  true  place.  At
eight  of  the  clocke  the  gale  increased,  so  wee  ranne  sixe
leagues  that  watch,  and  had  a  very  faire  and  cleere  night.

The  third,  very  hot  weather.      In  the  morning  we  had

sight  of  the  land,  and  steered  in   with   it,  thinking   to   go

to  the  northward  of  it.     So  we  sent  our  shallop  with  five

men  to  sound  in  by  the  shore  :   and  they  found  it  deepe  five

They  goeon  fathomcs  witliiu  a  bow-shot  of  the  shoare  ;  and  they  went  on

land  iieere  •'

Cape  Cod.  jj^j-j(j^  j^j^(j  found  goodly  grapes  and  rose  trees,  and  brought
them  aboord  with  them,  at  five  of  the  clocke  in  the  eeven-
ing.  We  had  seven  and  twentie  fathomes  within  two  miles
of  the  shoare  ;  and  we  found  a  floud  come  from  the  south-
east, and  an  ebbe  from  the  north-west,  with  a  very  strong
streame,  and  a  great  hurling  and  noyses.  At  eight  of  the
clocke  at  night  the  wind  began  to  blow  a  fresh  gale,  and
continued  all  night  but  variable.  Our  sounding  that  wee
had  to  the  land  was  one  hundred,  eightie,  seventie-foure,
fiftie-two,  fortie-sixe,  twentie-nine,  twentie-seven,  twentie-
foure,  nineteene,  sometimes  oze,  and  sometimes  gray  sand.

The  fourth,  was  very  hot ;  we  stood  to  the  north-Avest,
two  watches,  and  one  south  in  for  the  land,  and  came  to  an
anchor  at  the  norther  end  of  the  headland,  and  heard  the
voyce  of  men  call.  Then  we  sent  our  boat  on  shoare,  think-
ing they  had  beene  some  Christians  left  on  the  land  :  but

Savages,  wcc  found  them  to  bee  savages,  which  seemed  very  glad  of
our  comming.  So  wee  brought  one  aboard  with  us,  and
gave  him  mcate,  and  he  did  eate  and  drinke  with  us.  Our
master  gave  him  three  our  foure  glasse  buttons,  and  sent
him  on  land  with  our  shallop  againe.  And  at  our  boats
comming  from  the  shoare  he  leapt  and  danced,  and  held  up
liis  hands,  and  pointed  us  to  a  river  on  the  other  side  :  for
we  had  made  signes  that  we  came  to  fish  there.     The  bodie


THIRD    VOYAGE    (1609).  65

of  this  headland  lyeth  in  41  degrees,  45  minutes.^  "We  set
sayle  againe  after  dinner,  thinking  to  have  got  to  the  west-
ward of  this  headland,  but  could  not ;  so  we  beare  up  to  the
southward  of  it,  and  made  a  south-east  way  ;  and  the  souther
point  did  beare  west  at  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night.  Our
soundings  about  the  easter  and  norther  part  of  this  headland,
a  league  from  the  shoare,  are  these  :  at  the  easterside,  thir-
tie,  twentie-seven,  twentie-seven,  twentie-foure,  twentie-five,
twentie.  The  north-east  point,  17  degrees,  18  minutes,  and
so  deeper.  The  north  end  of  this  headland,  hard  by  the
shoare,  thirtie  fathomes  :  and  three  leagues  off  north  north-
west, one  hundred  fathomes.  At  the  south-east  part  a
league  off,  fifteene,  sixteene,  and  seventeene  fathomes.  The
people  have  greene  tabacco  and  pipes,  the  boles  whereof  are
made  of  earth  and  the  pipes  of  red  copper.  The  land  is
very  sweet.

T\iejift,  all  mystie.  At  eight  of  the  clocke  in  the  morn-
ing wee  tact  about  to  the  westward,  and  stood  in  till  foure
of  the  clocke  in  the  after-noone  ;  at  which  time  it  cleered,
and  wee  had  sight  of  the  head-land  againe  five  leagues  from
us.  The  souther  point  of  it  did  beare  west  off  us  :  and  we
sounded  many  times,  and  had  no  ground.  And  at  foure  of
the  clocke  we  cast  about,  and  at  our  staying  wee  had  seven-
tie  fathomes.  Wee  steered  away  south  and  south  by  east
all  night,  and  could  get  no  ground  at  seventie  and  eightie
fathomes.  For  wee  feared  a  great  riffe  that  lyeth  off  the
land,  and  steered  away  south  and  by  east.

The  sixth,  faire  weather,  but  many  times  mysting.  Wee
steered  away  south  south-east,  till  eight  of  the  clocke  in  the
morning  ;  then  it  cleered  a  little,  and  we  cast  about  to  the
westward.  Theji  we  sounded  and  had  thirtie  fathomes,  grosse
sand,  and  were  come  to  the  riffe.  Then  wee  kept  our  lead,
and  had  quicke  shoalding  from  thirtie,  twentie-nine,  twentie-
seven,  twentie-foure,  twentie-two,  twentie  and  an  halfe,
1  At  the  south  side  of  Stage  Harbour,  Massachusetts.

9


This  flnn-
pei-ous  rifle
is  in  41


(36  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.

twentie,  twentie,  nincteene,  ninetccne,  nineteene,  ei^htceiie,
cighteene,  seventeene  ;  and  so  deeping  againe  as  proportion-
ally as  it  shoalded.  For  we  steered  south  and  south-east  till
we  came  to  twentic-sixe  fathomes.  Then  we  steered  south-
west, for  so  the  tyde  doth  set.  By  and  by,  it  being  calme,  we
tryed  by  our  lead;  for  you  shall  have  sixteene  or  seventeene
fathomes,  and  the  next  cast  but  seven  or  six  fathomes.  And
farther  to  the  westward  you  shall  have  foure  and  five  foot
water,  and  see  rockes  under  you,  and  you  shall  see  the  land
in  the  top.  Upon  this  riffe  we  had  an  observation,  and  found
Jfe"^*^,  10  that  it  lyeth  in  40  degrees,  10  minutes.  And  this  is  that
aiid  lyetii  off  headland  which  Captaine  Bartholomew  Gosnold  discovered

east  from

Cape  Cod     jn  the  yeere  1602,  and  called  Cape  Cod,^  because  of  the  store

into  the  sea.  •'  '■

of  cod-fish  that  hee  found  thereabout.  So  we  steered  south-
west, three  leagues,  and  had  twentie  and  twentie-foure
fathomes.  Then  we  steered  west  two  glasses,  halfe  a  league,
and  came  to  fifteene  fathomes.  Then  we  steered  off  south-
east foure  glasses,  but  could  not  get  deepe  water  ;  for  there
the  tyde  of  ebbc  laid  us  on  ;  and  the  streame  did  hurle  so,
that  it  laid  us  so  neere  the  breach  of  a  shoald  that  wee  were
forced  to  anchor.     So  at  seven  of  the  clocke  at  night  wee

^  The  real  locality  here  described  is  probably  some  rifF  near  Cape
Malabar,  for  Cape  Cod  is  under  42°  4',  130  miles  farther  north  than  the
point  mistaken  for  it  by  Hudson.  Gosnold's  explorations  were  but
vaguely  known  to  him,  and  this  accounts  for  his  mistake.  Purchas,  who
edited  Juet's  journal  sixteen  years  after  it  was  written,  had  a  better,
though  not  an  exact  knowledge  of  the  real  situation  of  Cape  Cod,  which
had  frequently  been  visited  in  the  meantime.  Struck  by  Hudson's
mistake,  he  makes,  in  his  side  note,  the  conjecture  that  the  40°  10'  of
the  journal  was  originally  meant  for  41°  10'.  This  supposition,  which
would  shake  our  faith  in  all  the  latitudes  recorded  in  that  same  paper,
is  fortunately  not  borne  out  by  the  preceding  part  of  tlie  A'oyage.  Hud-
son was,  on  the  4th  of  August,  under  41°  45'  ;  he  sailed  south  and  south
by  east  the  whole  night  of  the  r)th,  and  part  of  the  Gth,  and  it  is  there-
fore impossible  that  he  should  have  been  only  5'  (about  six  and  a  quarter
miles)  farther  south  on  the  6th  than  on  the  4th,  Besides,  41°  10'  is  still
nearly  a  degree  to  the  south  of  Cape  Cod.  We  ought  to  thank  Purchas
for  not  having  introduced  his  conjecture  into  the  text.


THIRD    VOYAGE    (1609).  67

were  at  an  anchor  in  tenne  fathomes  :  and  I  give  God  most
heartie  thankes,  the  least  Avater  wee  had  was  seven  fathomes
and  an  halfe.  We  rode  still  all  night,  and  at  a  still  water
I  sounded  so  farre  round  about  our  ship  as  we  could  see
a  light ;  and  had  no  lesse  then  eight,  nine,  ten,  and  eleven
fathomes  :  the  myst  continued  being  very  thicke.

The  seventli,  faire  weather  and  hot,  but  mystie.  Wee
rode  still  hoping  it  would  cleere,  but  on  the  floud  it  fell
calme  and  thicke.  So  we  rode  still  all  day  and  all  night.
The  floud  commeth  from  the  south-west,  and  riseth  not
above  one  fathome  and  an  halfe  in  nepe  streames.  Toward
night  it  cleered,  and  I  went  with  our  shallop  and  sounded,
and  found  no  lesse  water  then  eight  fathomes  to  the  south-
east off  us;  but  we  saw  to  the  north-west  off  us  great  breaches.

The  eight,  faire  and  cleere  weather.  In  the  morning,  by
sixe  of  the  clocke,  at  slake  water,  wee  weighed,  the  wind  at
north-east,  and  set  our  fore-sayle  and  mayne  top-sayle,  and
got  a  mile  over  the  flats. ^  Then  the  tyde  of  ebbe  came,  so  The  flats.
we  anchored  againe  till  the  floud  came.  Then  we  set  sayle
againe,  and  by  the  great  mercie  of  God  wee  got  cleere  off
them  by  one  of  the  clocke  this  afternoone.  And  wee  had
sight  of  the  land  from  the  west  north-west  to  the  north  north-
west. So  we  steered  away  south  south-east  all  night,  and
had  ground  untill  the  middle  of  the  third  watch.  Then  we
had  fortie-five  fathomes,  white  sand  and  little  stones.  So
all  our  soundings  are  twentie,  twentie,  twentie-two,  twentie-
seven,  thirtie-two,  fortie-three,  fortie-three,  fortie-five.  Then
no  ground  in  seventie  fathomes.

The  ninth,  very  faire  and  hot  weather,  the  Avind  a  very
stifle  gale.  In  the  morning,  at  foure  of  the  clocke,  our
shallop  came  running  up  against  our  sterne,  and  split  in  all
her  stemme  ;  so  we  were  faine  to  cut  her  away.     Then  wee

^  There  are  so  many  sandbanks  in  these  parts,  that  it  is  impossible  to
guess,  from  Hudson's  rather  vague  observations,  what  sandbank  he
means.


68  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.

tooke  in  our  mayne-sayle,  and  lay  atric  under  our  fbre-sayle
untill  twelve  of  the  clocke  at  mid-day.  Then  the  wind
eased  to  a  faire  gale,  so  wee  stood  away  south-west.  Then
we  lay  close  by,  on  many  courses  a  south  by  west  way  fif-
teene  leagues  ;  and  three  watches  south-east  by  east,  ten
leagues.  At  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night  wee  tooke  in  our
top-sayles,  and  went  with  a  low  sayle,  because  we  were  in
an  unknowne  sea.  At  noone  we  observed,  and  found  our
heigth  to  be  38  degrees,  39  minutes.

The  tenth,  in  the  morning,  some  raine  and  cloudie  wea-
ther :  the  winde  at  south-west,  wee  made  our  way  south-east
by  east,  ten  leagues.  At  noone  wee  observed,  and  found
our  heigth  to  bee  38  degrees,  39  minutes.  Then  wee  tackt
about  to  the  westward,  the  wind  being  at  south  and  by  east,
little  wind.  At  foure  of  the  clocke  it  fell  calme,  and  we  had
two  dolphines  about  our  ship,  and  many  small  fishes.  At
eight  of  the  clocke  at  night  wee  had  a  small  lingring  gale.
All  night  we  had  a  great  sea  out  of  the  south-west,  and
another  great  sea  out  of  the  north-east.

The  eleventh,  all  the  fore  part  of  the  day  faire  weather,

and  very  hot.     We  stood  to  the  west  south-west  till  noone.

•  Then  the  wind  shorted,  and  we  could  lye  but  south-west

and  by  south.     At  noone  wee  found  our  heigth  to  bee  39

A  current    degrees,  11  minutes,  and  that  the  current  had  laid  us  to  the

setting  to  "  '  '

theuorth.  northward  thirtie-two  minutes  contrary  to  our  expectation.
At  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-noone  there  came  a  myst,
which  endured  two  houres,  but  wee  had  it  faire  and  clccre

oue'l'ioinf.  all  night  after.  The  compasse  varied  the  north  point  to  the
west  one  whole  point.

The  tivelfth,  faire  weather,  the  wind  variable  betweene
the  south-west  and  by  south  and  the  north  :  little  wind.  In
the  morning  we  killed  an  extraordinary  fish,  and  stood  to
the  westward  all  day  and  all  night.  At  noone  we  found  our
heigth  to  be  38  degrees,  13  minutes.  And  the  observation  the

^Mi'"'i't"g  *^^y  before  was  not  good.  This  noone,  we  found  the  com-
passe to  vary  from  the  north  to  the  west  ton  degrees.


THIKD    VOYAGE    (1G09).  G9

The  thirteenth,  faire  weather  and  hot,  the  wind  at  north-
east. Wee  steered  away  west,  and  by  our  compasse  two
and  twentie  leagues.  At  noone  Avec  found  our  height  to  bee
37  degrees,  45  minutes,  and  that  our  way  from  noone  to
noone  was  west  south-west,  halfe  a  point  southerly.  The
compasse  was  T  degrees  and  a  halfe  variation  from  the  north
point  to  the  west.

lL\\e  fourteenth,  faire  weather,  but  cloudie  and  a  stifFe  gale
of  wind,  variable  betweene  north-east  and  south-west ;  wee
steered  away  west  by  south,  a  point  south,  all  day  untill
nine  of  the  clocke  at  night ;  then  it  began  to  thunder  and
lighten,  whereupon  we  tooke  in  all  our  sayles  and  layd  it  a
hull,  and  hulled  away  north  till  mid-night,  a  league  and  a
halfe.

The  fifteenth,  very  faire  and  hot  weather,  the  winde  at
north  by  east.  At  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning  we
set  sayle,  and  stood  on  our  course  to  the  westward.  At
noone  wee  found  our  height  to  bee  37  degrees,  25  minutes.  37  degrees,

iio  minutes.

The  after-noone  proved  little  wind.  At  eight  of  the  clocke
at  night  the  winde  came  to  the  north,  and  wee  steered  west
by  north  and  west  north-west,  and  made  our  way  west.  The
compasse  varyed  7  degrees  from  the  north  to  the  west.

The  sixteenth,  faire  shining  weather  and  very  hot,  the
"wind  variable  betweene  the  north  and  the  west ;  wee  steered
away  west  by  north.  At  noone  wee  found  our  height  to  bee
37  degrees,  6  minutes.     This  morning  we  sounded  and  had  ar  degrees,

,    .  .  .        ^     1  ,     .  .  ,  .  .     •;  minutes.

ground  m  ninetie  latnomes,  and  in  sixe  glasses  running  it
shoalded  to  fiftie  fathoms,  and  so  to  eight  and  twentie
fathoms,  at  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-noone.  Then  wee
came  to  an  anchor,  and  rode  till  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night,
the  wind  being  at  south  and  moone-light;  we  resolved  to
goe  to  the  northward  to  finde  deeper  water.  So  we  weighed
and  stood  to  the  northward,  and  found  the  water  to  shoald
and  deepe  from  eight  and  twentie  to  twentie  fathomes.
The  seventeenth,  faire  and  cleere  sun-shining  weather,  the


70  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.

winde  at  south  by  west ;  wee  steered  to  the  northward  till
foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning  ;  then  wee  came  to  cigh-
teene  fathomes.  So  we  anchored  untill  the  sunne  arose,  to
looke  abroad  for  land,  for  wee  judged  there  could  not  but  bo
land  neere  vis,  but  we  could  see  none.  Then  we  weighed,
and  stood  to  the  westward  till  noone.  And  at  eleven  of  the
A  low  land    docke  wcc   had   sight   of  a  low  land,  with  a  white  sandie

with  awiiitc  <->  '

shoare.  shoarc.  By  twelve  of  the  clocke  we  were  come  into  live
fathomes,  and  anchored  ;  and  the  land  was  foure  leagues
from  us,  and  wee  had  sight  of  it  from  the  west  to  the  north-

37  degrees,  wcst  bv  north.     Our  height  was   37   dearrees,  26  minutes.

2(J  miuutes.  *'  °  n  '

Then  the  wind  blew  so  stifFe  a  gale,  and  such  a  sea  Ment,
that  we  could  not  weigh;  so  we  rode  there  all  night  an  hard
rode  (sic).

The  eighteenth,  in  the  morning,  faire  weather,  and  little
winde  at  north  north-east  and  north-east.  At  foure  of  the
clocke  in  the  morning  we  weighed,  and  stood  into  the  shoare
to  see  the  deeping  or  shoalding  of  it,  and  finding  it  too
deepe  we  stood  in  to  get  a  rode  :  for  wee  saw,  as  it  were,
three  Hands.  So  wee  turned  to  windward  to  get  into  a  bay,
as  it  shewed  to  us  to  the  westward  of  an  iland.  For  the
three  Hands  did  beare  north  oiF  us.  But  toward  noone  the
wind  blew  northerly,  with  gusts  of  wind  and  rayne.  So  we
stood  off  into  the  sea  againe  all  night ;  and  running  off  we
found  a  channell,  wherein  we  had  no  lesse  then  eight,  nine,
ten,  eleven,  and  twelve  fathomes  water.  For  in  comming
over  the  barre  wee  had  five  and  foure  fathomes  and  a  halfe,
Barreof      ^ud  it  lyctli  fivc  Icagucs  from  the  shoare,  and  it  is  the  barre

virgiuia.  JO  '

of  Virginia.  At  the  north  end  of  it,  it  is  ten  leagues  broad,
and  south  and  north,  but  deepe  water  from  uintie  fathomes
to  five  and  foure  and  a  halfe.  The  land  lyeth  south  and
javor  north.  This  is  the  entrance  into  the  King's  River  in  \'\v-
ginia,  where  our  English-men  are.^     The  north  side  of  it

'  The  early  settlement  alluded  to,  the  romantic  history  of  which  every
schoolboy  knows,  was  more  than  thirty  miles  farther  south  than  the


THIRD    VOYAGE    (1G09).  71

lyetli  in  37  degrees,  2(5  minutes :  you  shall  know  when
30U  come  to  shoakl  water  or  sounding,  for  the  water  will
looke  greene  or  thicke,  you  shall  have  ninctie  and  eightic
fathomes,  and  shoalding  a  pace  till  you  come  to  ten,  eleven,
nine,  eight,  seven,  ten,  and  nine  fathomes,  and  so  to  five,
and  foure  fathomes  and  a  halfe.

The  nineteenth,  faire  weather,  but  an  hard  gale  of  winde
at  the  north-east ;  wee  stood  off  till  noone,  and  made  our
way  south-east  by  east,  two  and  twentie  leagues.  At  noone
wee  cast  about  to  the  westward,  and  stood  till  sixc  of^°'®'
the  clocke  in  the  after-noone,  and  went  five  leagues  and  a
halfe  north-west  by  north.  Then  wee  cast  about  againc  to
the  eastward,  and  stood  that  way  till  foure  the  next  morning.

The  twentieth,  faire  and  cleere  weather,  the  winde  varia-
ble betweene  east  north-east  and  north-east.  At  foure  of
the  clocke  in  the  morning  wee  cast  about  to  the  westward,
and  stood  till  noone  ;  at  which  time  I  sounded,  and  had  two
and  thirtie  fathomes.  Then  we  tackt  to  the  eastward  againe ;
wee  found  our  height  to  bee  37  degrees,  22  minutes.  We  almhuuea
stood  to  the  eastward  all  night,  and  had  very  much  wind.
At  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night  we  tooke  off  our  bonnets,
and  stood  with  small  sayle.

The  one  and  twentieth,  was  a  sore  storme  of  winde  and
rayne  all  day  and  all  night,  wherefore  wee  stood  to  the  east-
ward with  a  small  sayle,  till  one  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-
noone.  Then  a  great  sea  brake  into  our  fore-corse  and  split
it ;  so  we  were  forced  to  take  it  from  the  yard  and  mend  it :

locality  here  alluded  to  by  Hudson.  Our  navigator  was  but  imper-
fectly acquainted  with  its  whereabouts,  and  this  explains  his  failing
to  visit  his  friend  John  Smith,  though  the  opportunity  was  so  tempt-
ing. If  the  latitudes  in  the  journal  are  correct,  the  description  here
given  applies  to  the  coast  of  Northampton  (Virginia)  under  37°  26'.
The  three  islands  are  a  group  to  the  north-east  of  Prout  Island,  and
between  them  and  Prout  Island  there  is  a  sort  of  strait,  which  may  be
mistaken  for  the  entrance  of  a  river.  The  journal  shows  plainly  that
Hudson  never  attempted  to  explore  the  supposed  river,  and  thus  had  no
opportunity  for  finding  out  his  mistake.


72  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.

wee  lay  a  trie  with  our  niayne-corse  all  night.  This  night
our  cat  ranne  crying  from  one  side  of  the  ship  to  the  other,
looking  over-boord,  which  made  us  to  wonder  ;  but  we  saw
nothing.

The  two  and  twentieth,  stormy  weather,  with  gusts  of
rayne  and  wind.  In  the  morning,  at  eight  of  the  clocke,
we  set  our  fore- corse,  and  stood  to  the  eastward  under  our
fore-sayle,  mayne-sayle  and  misen;  and  from  noone  to  noone,
we  made  our  way  east  south-east,  fourteene  leagues.  The
night  reasonable  drie  but  cloudie,  the  winde  variable  all  day
and  night.     Our  compasse  was  varyed  4  degrees  westward.

The  three  and  twentieth,  very  faire  weather,  but  some
thunder  in  the  morning,  the  winde  variable  betweene  east
by  north.  At  noone  wee  tackt  about  to  the  northward,  the
winde  at  east  by  north.  The  after-noone  very  faire,  the
wind  variable,  and  continued  so  all  night.  Our  way  we
made  east  south-east,  till  noone  the  next  day.

Theybt^re  and  twentieth,  faire  and  hot  weather,  Avith  the
wind  variable  betweene  the  north  and  the  east.  The  after-
noone  variable  winde.  But  at  foure  of  the  clocke,  the  ■wind
came  to  the  east  and  south-east ;  so  wee  steered  away  north
by  west,  and  in  three  watches  wee  went  thirteene  leagues.
At  noone  our  height  was  35  degrees,  41^  minutes,  being
farre  off  at  sea  from  the  land.

The  jive  and  twentieth,  faire  weather  and  very  hot.  All
the  morning  was  very  calme  untill  eleven  of  the  clocke  ;  the
wind  came  to  south-east  and  south  south-east;  so  wee  steered
away  north-west  by  north  two  watches  and  a  halfe,  and  one
watch  north-west  by  west,  and  went  eightecne  leagues.  At
noone  I  found  our  height  to  bee  36  degrees,  20  minutes,
being  without  sight  of  land.

The  sixe  and  tioentieth,  faire  and  hot  weather,  the  winde
variable  upon  all  the  points  of  the  compasse.  From  two  of
the  clocke  in  the  morning  untill  noone  wee  made  our  way
'   Off  Nag's  Head,  South  Carolina.


THIRD    VOYAGE    (1609).  73

north  by  cast,  seven  leagues.     In  the  after-noone  tlie  wind

came  to  the  north-east,  and  vering  to  the  east  south-cast ;

wee  steered  away  north-west  fiftccnc  leagues,  from  noone  till

ten  of  the  clocke  at  night.     At  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night

wee  sounded,  and  had  eighteene  fathomes,  and  were  come

to  the  banke  of  Virginia,  and  could  not  see  the  land.     ^Vec  ^f  viry"^ia.

kept  sounding  and  steered  away  north,  and  came  to  eight

fathomes   and   anchored   there  ;    for   the  wind  was   at  east

south-east,  so  that  wee  could  not  get  off.    For  the  coast  lyeth  lyetu  south

south-west,

along  south  south-west  and  north  north-east.     At  noone  our  and  north

north-east.

height  was  37  desrrees,  15  minutes.     And  m'cc  found  that  ?;"^j'"''^

O  o  -J  37  degrees,

we  were  returned  to  the  same  place  from  whence  we  -^vere  ^''' ™""^''^'
put  off  at  our  first  seeing  land.^

The  seve7i  and  iicentieiJi,  faire  weather  and  very  hot,  the
winde  at  east  south-east.  In  the  morning,  as  soonc  as  the
sunne  was  up,  wee  looked  out  and  had  sight  of  the  land.
Then  wee  weighed,  and  stood  in  north-west  two  glasses,  and
found  the  land  to  bee  the  place  from  whence  wee  put  off
first.  So  wee  kept  our  loofe  and  steered  along  the  land,
and  had  the  banke  lye  all  along  the  shoare ;  and  wee  had  in  Jg,-ecth

1  /-fii  I'  '  •    ^  •  T  with  Robert

two  leagues  oil  the  shoare,  nve,  sixe,  seven,  eight,  nine,  and  Tjndaii.
ten  fathomes.  The  coast  lyeth  south  south-west,  and  is  a
white  sandie  shoare,  and  sheweth  full  of  bayes  and  points.
The  streame  setteth  west  south-west  and  east  north-east.  At
sixe  of  the  clocke  at  night  wee  were  thwart  of  an  harbour
or  river,  but  we  saw  a  barre  lye  before  it ;  and  all  within
the  land  to  the  northward,  the  water  ranne  with  many  ilands
in  it.  At  sixe  of  the  clocke  we  anchored,  and  sent  our  boate
to  sound  to  the  shore-ward,  and  found  no  lesse  then  foure
and  a  halfe,  five,  sixe,  and  seven  fathomes.

The  eight  and  tioentietli,  faire  and  hot  weather,  the  winde

^  Hudson,  on  his  return  from  the  south,  sailed  along  the  mainland  of
Virginia,  and  thus  entered  Chesapeake  Bay.  It  is  not  quite  clear  how
far  he  explored  it.  The  latitude  37°  15'  seems  to  be  a  mistake.  He
probably  means  37^  10' :  that  is  to  say,  Charles'  Cape,  which  he  called

Dry  Cape,  according  to  De  Laet.

10  *


74  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.

at  south  south-west.  In  the  morninfr,  at  sixe  of  the  clocke,  wee

weighed,  and  steered  away  north  twelve  leagues  till  noone,

Thepnhit    and  came  to  the  point  of  land  ;^  and  being  hard  by  the  land

of  laud.  -l  '  r>  J

in  five  fathomes,  on  a  sudden  wee  came  into  three  fathomes ;
then  Ave  bearc  up  and  had  but  ten  foote  water,  and  joined  to
the  point.  Then  as  soone  as  wee  were  over,  wee  had  five,
sixe,  seven,  eight,  nine,  ten,  twelve  and  thirtecne  fathomes.
Then  wee  found  the  land  to  trend  away  north-west,  with  a
Apreatbay  trreat  bay  and  rivers.     But  the  bay  wee  found  shoald:  and

and  rivers.     <=>  •/  J

in  the  offing  wee  had  ten  fathomes,  and  had  sight  of  breaches
and  drie  sand.  Then  wee  were  forced  to  stand  backe  againe  ;
so  we  stood  backe  south-east  by  south,  three  leagues.  And
at  seven  of  the  clocke  wee  anchored  in  eight  fathomes  water ;
and  found  a  tide  set  to  the  north-west,  and  north  north-west,
and  it  riseth  one  fathome  and  floweth  south  south-east.  And
he  that  will  thoroughly  discover  this  great  bay,  must  have

^laiTop^  ^  small  pinasse,  that  must  draw  but  foure  or  five  foote
water,  to  sound  before  him.  At  five  in  the  morning  wee
weighed,  and  steered  away  to  the  eastward  on  many  courses.

The  nortiier  for  tlic  nortlicr  land  is  full  of  shoalds.     Wee  were  among

liiud  is  lull  ^

ofshoiiius.  them,  and  once  wee  strooke ;  and  wee  went  away,  and
steered  away  to  the  south-east.  So  wee  had  two,  three,
foure,  five,  sixe,  and  seven  fathomes,  and  so  deeper  and
deeper.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  faire  weather,  with  some  thunder
and  showers,  the  winde  shifting  betweene  the  south  south-
west and  the  north  north-west.  In  the  morning  wee  weighed
at  the  breakc  of  day,  and  stood  toward  the  norther   land,

Many         wliicli  wc  fouud  to  bcc  all  ilands  to  our   sight,   and  great

ilaiids.

^  Juct's  account  of  the  explorations  marie  on  the  26th,  27th,  and  2Sth,
is  very  far  from  clear.  But  by  making  De  Laet  (see  p.  1 56)  bear  upon
it,  we  see  that  the  Half  Moon  explored  during  those  days  the  neighbour-
hood and  the  mouth  of  Delaware  River.  The  bay  described  on  the  present
page  is  Delaware  Bay.  Later  historians,  chiefly  Van  der  Donck,  have
asserted  that  Hudson  took  possession  of  the  surrounding  country.  This
seems,  however,  a  pure  invention.


THIRD    VOYAGE    (1609).  75

stormes  from  them,  and  are  shoald  three  leagues  off.     For

we  comming  by  them  had  but  seven,  sixe,  five,  foure,  three,

and  two  fathoms  and  a  halfe,  and  strooke  ground  with  our  They  strike.

rudder ;  we  steered  off  south-west  one  glasse,  and  had  five

fathoms.     Then  wee  steered  south-east  three  ghasses  ;    then

we  found  seven  fathomes,   and  steered   north- cast  by  east

foure  leagues,  and  came  to  twelve   and   thu-teene  fathoms.

At  one  of  the  clocke  I  went  to  the  top-mast  head  and  set  the

land,  and  the  bodie  of  the  Hands  did  beare  north-west  by

north.     And   at  foure   of  the  clocke,  wee  had  gone  foure

leagues  east  south-east,  and  north-east  by  east,  and  found

but  seven  fathoms  ;  and  it  was  calme,  so  we  anchored.    Then

I  went  againe  to  the  top-mast  head,  to  see  how  farre  I  could

see  land  about  us,  and  could  see  no  more  but  the  ilands.

And  the  souther  point  of  them   did  beare  north-west  by

west  eight  leagues  off.     So  wee  rode  till  mid-night.     Then

the  winde  came  to  the  north  north-west,  so  wee  waighed  and

set  sayle.

The  thirtieth,  in  the  morning,  betweene  twelve  and  one,
we  weighed,  and  stood  to  the  eastward,  the  winde  at  north
north-west  -,  wee  steered  away  and  made  our  way  east  south-
east. From  our  weighing  till  noone,  eleven  leagues.  Our
soundings  were  eight,  nine,  ten,  eleven,  twelve  and  thirteene
fathomes  till  day.  Then  we  came  to  eighteene,  nineteene,
twentie,  and  sixe  and  twentie  fathoms  by  noone.  Then  I
observed  the  sunne,  and  found  the  height  to  bee  39  degrees.  Latitude

'  °  °  ^         '  30  degrees,

5  minutes,^  and  saw  no  land.  In  the  after-noone,  the  winde  ^i^ii'iutes.
came  to  north  by  west ;  so  wee  lay  close  by  with  our  fore-
sayle  and  our  mayne-sayle,  and  it  Avas  little  winde  untill
twelve  of  the  clocke  at  mid-night ;  then  wee  had  a  gale  a
little  while.  Then  I  sounded,  and  all  the  night  our  sound-
ings were  thirtie  and  sixe  and  thirtie  fathomes,  and  wee
went  little.

The  one  and  thirtieth,  faire  weather  and  little  wind.     At
^  Off  Hereford  Inlet.


lUUlUlt


76  MASTEll    HENRY    HUDSON.

sixe  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning  wc  cast  about  to  the  north-
ward, the  wind  being  at   the   north-east,   little  wind.     At

i.atituiie      noone  it  fell  calme,  and  I  found  the  heisrht  to  bee  88  de-

DeJ^euiiu?'  gi'cos,  39  minutcs.  And  the  streames  had  deceived  us,'  and
our  sounding  was  eight  and  thirtie  fathoms.  In  the  after-
noone  I  sounded  againe,  and  had  but  thirtie  fathoms.  So
we  found  that  we  were  heaved  too  and  fro  with  the  streames
of  the  tide,  both  by  our  observations  and  our  depths.  From
noone  till  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone  it  was  calme.
At  sixe  of  the  clocke  we  had  a  little  gale  southerly,  and  it
continued  all  night,  sometimes  calme  and  sometimes  a  gale ;
wee  went  eight  leagues  from  noone  to  noone,  north  by  east.

soiiemLei-.  The  Jiist  of  September,  faire  weather,  the  wind  variable
betweene  east  and   south ;  we  steered   away  north  north-

Luiimie  west.  At  noone  we  found  our  height  to  bee  39  degrees,  3
minutes.^  Wee  had  soundings  thirtie,  twentie-seven,  twen-
tie-foure,  and  twentie-two  fathomes,  as  wee  went  to  the
northward.  At  sixe  of  the  clocke  wee  had  one  and  twentie
fathomes.  And  all  the  third  watch,  till  twelve  of  the  clocke
at  mid-night,  we  had  soundings  one  and  twentie,  two  and
twentie,  eighteene,  two  and  twentie,  one  and  twentie,  eigh-
tecne,  and  two  and  twentie  fathoms,  and  went  sixe  leagues
necre  hand  north  north-west.

The  second,  in  the  morning,  close  weather,  the  winde  at
south  in  the  morning  ;  from  twelve  untill  two  of  the  clocke
we  steered  north  north-west,  and  had  sounding  one  and
twentie  fathoms ;  and  in  running  one  glasse  we  had  but  six-
teene  fathoms,  then  seventeene,  and  so  shoalder  and  shoalder
untill  it  came  to  twelve  fathoms.  We  saw  a  great  fire,  but
could  not  see  the  land  ;  then  we  came  to  ten  fathoms,  whcre-

^  Twenty-six  minutes  farther  south  than  according  to  his  hist  observa-
tion. Un.acquainted  with  the  nature  of  the  pohir  current  along  these
coasts,  Hudson  had  been  unconsciously  drifted  back.  "The  streams  had
deceived  him,"  as  Juet  says.

'■^  Still  two  minutes  farther  south  than  they  had  been  on  the  31st  of
August.     The  polar  currents  made  them  lose  two  entire  days.


THIRD    VOYAGE    (1609).  77

upon  we  brought  our  tackcs  aboorcl,  and  stood  to  the  cast-
ward  east  south-east,  foure  glasses.  Then  the  sunne  arose,
and  Avee  steered  away  north  againe,  and  saw  the  hmd  from
the  west  by  north  to  the  north-west  by  north,  all  like  broken  ^i'.'' i';^.",'^',,,^
islands,^  and  our  soundings  were  eleven  and  ten  fathoms.""'*'
Then  wee  looft  in  for  the  shoare,  and  fliire  by  the  shoare
we  had  seven  fathoms.     The  course  alonor  the  laud  we  found  The  course

"  aloiitr  tlie

to  be  north-east  by  north.     From  the  land  which  we  had  [hemouth
first  sight  of,  untill  we  came  to  a  great  lake  of  water,  as  wee  "oUKfrnoiuii
could  judge  it  to  bee,  being  drowned  land,  which  made  it  to  noniierbay

or  lake.

rise  like  islands,  which  was  in  length  ten  leagues.  The
mouth  of  that  land  hath  many  shoalds,  and  the  sea  breaketh
on  them  as  it  is  cast  out  of  the  mouth  of  it.  And  from  that
lake  or  bay  the  land  lyeth  north  by  east,  and  wee  had  a
great  streame  out  of  the  bay  ;  and  from  thence  our  sounding
was  ten  fathoms  two  leagues  from  the  land.  At  five  of  the
clocke  we  anchored,  being  little  winde,  and  rode  in  eight
fathoms  water ;  the  night  was  faire.  This  night  I  found  the
land  to  hall  the  compasse  8  dearrees.     For  to  the  northward  variation

'■  <->  8  degrees

ofi"  us  we  saw  high  hils.^     For  the  day  before  we  found  not  j^fj^^®  "^®
above  2  desrrees  of  variation.     This  is  a  very  ijood  land  to  ~  '^^sjeea

~  JO  vanatmu  off

fall  with,  and  a  pleasant  land  to  see.  ''^^^''^

^  Sandy  Ilook,  the  well  known  island  at  the  mouth  of  the  Hudson.
The  following  extracts  from  modern  works  on  American  geography  will
show  how  minutely  this  locality  was  explored  by  its  discoverer,  and  how
well  it  is  described  in  the  Journal :  "  Sandy  Hook  Bay  is  a  sandy  beach,
extending  north  from  Old  Shrewsbury  Inlet  (New  Jersey)  and  the  south
point  of  the  highlands  of  Nevesinck,  six  miles,  and  is  from  half  a  mile
to  a  mile  wide." — Thomson's  Geogr.  Diet.  "  Sandy  Hook  Eay  runs  south
into  the  town  of  Middleton,  and  is  bounded  to  the  south-west  by  the
highlands  of  Nevesinck,  and  on  the  east  by  the  sand  beach  forming  Sandy
Hook.  Drained  by  Swimming  and  Nevisinck  rivers." — U.  S.  Gazetteer,
"  In  approaching  Sandy  Hook,  Harbour  Hill,  on  Long  Island,  and  Nevi-
sinck, on  the  Jersey  shore,  may  be  seen  at  the  distance  of  about  twenty-
four  to  twenty-five  miles.  The  first  is  319,  the  second  281  feet  above
the  water." — Mitchill,  Geology  ;  and  Akerley,  Geology  of  Ihuhon  River:
quoted  by  Moulton,  Hist,  of  the  State  of  ^ew  York,  i,  p.  209.

^  See  last  note.


78  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.

The  third,  the  morning  mystic,  untill  ten  of  the  clocke  ;

then  it  clecrecl,  and  the  wind  came  to  the  south  south-east,

so  wee  weighed  and  stood  to  the  northward.     The  Lmd'  is

ui^'haiuia  vcrv  lilcasant  and  hiyh,  and  bokl  to  fall  withall.     At  tlu'ec

bold  shoai-o.  "^    •■■  °

Tiiice  gieut  ^^f  ^\^q  clock  in  thc  after-noone,  wee  came  to  three   great

rivers.  o

The  rivers.'^     So  we  stood  along:  to  the  northermost,  thinkinsc  to

norther-  °  '  o

barred.       havc  gouc  into  it,  but  we  found  it  to  have  a  very  shoald

barrc  before  it,  for  we  had  but  ten  foot  water.     Then  we

An  pxooi-     gj^st  about  to  tlic  southward,  and  found  two  fathoms,  three

luiU  river.

fathoms,  and  three  and  a  quarter,  till  we  came  to  the  souther
side  "of  them;  then  we  had  five  and  sixe  fathoms,  and
anchored.  So  wee  sent  in  our  boate  to  sound,  and  they
found  no  lesse  water  then  foure,  five,  sixe,  and  seven  fathoms,
and  returned  in  an  houre  and  a  halfe.  So  wee  weighed  and
went  in,  and  rode  in  five  fathoms,  oze  ground,  and  saw
Liiuiuao      manv   salmons,  and  mullets,  and  raves,  very   srreat.      The

40  degrees,  ^  '  '  J       '  J     b

30  minutes,  height  is  40  degrees,  30  minutes.

liYie  fourth,  in  the  morning,  as  soonc  as  the  day  was  light,

wee  saw  that  it  was  good  riding  farther  up.     So  we  sent  our

A  very  good  boatc  to  souud,  and  found  that  it  was  a  very  good  harbour,  and

harbour.  *■

foure  and  five  fathomes,  two  cables  length  from  the  shoare.
Then  we  weighed  and  went  in  with  our  ship.  Then  our
boate  went  on  land^  Avith  our  net  to  fish,  and  caught  ten  great
mullets,  of  a  foote  and  a  halfe  long  a  pecce,  and  a  ray  as

^  The  south  coast  of  Staten  Island.

^  It  is  impossible  to  make  the  observations  of  the  3rd  fully  agree  with
the  real  localities.  Wheresoever  we  place  the  three  rivers,  some  diffi-
culties arise  which  cannot  be  explained  away.  Mr.  Brodhead's  opinion,
"that  two  of  the  three  rivers  are  unJoubtecU^  the  Rariton  and  Narrows,
the  third  i>rohahhj  Rockaway  Inlet,"  we  can  subscribe  in  neither  of  its
parts.  It  is  not  even  certain  whether  the  place  where  Iludsou  anchored
under  40°  30',  is  to  the  east  or  west  of  Staten  Island.

'  According  to  a  generally  received  American  tradition,  Coney  Island
(near  Long  Island).  This  is  quite  possible.  Only  it  seems  singular  that
the  insulated  nature  of  this  small  spot  should  have  been  cither  over-
looked, or  if  perceived,  not  noted  down  as  such,  iu  our  circumstantial
account.


THIRD    VOYAGE    (1609).  79

great  as  foure  men  could  hale  into  the  ship.    So  wee  trimmed
our  boate  and  rode  still  all  day.     At  night  the  wind  blew
hard  at  the  north-west,  and  our  anchor  came  home,  and  wee
drove  on  shoare,  but  tooke  no  hurt,  thanked  bee  God,  for
the  ground  is  soft  sand  and  oze.     This  day  the  people  of  ^i"^  iHopie
the  countrey  came  aboord  of  us,  seeming  very  srlad  of  our  ":"y  <■''"'«
comraing,  and  brought  greene  tobacco,  and  gave  us  of  it  c'viiT^
for  knives  and  beads.     They  goe  in  deere  skins  loose,  well
dressed.     They  have  yellow  copper.     They  desire  cloathes,  ^f]"^^^.
and  are  very  civill.     They  have  great  store  of  maize  or  In-
dian wheate,  whereof  they  make  good  bread.    The  countrey
is  full  of  great  and  tall  oakes.  Tail  oakes.

TX-ie  Jifth,  in  the  morning,  as  soone  as  the  day  was  light,
the  wind  ceased  and  the  flood  came.  So  we  heaved  off  our
ship  againe  into  five  fathoms  water,  and  sent  our  boate  to  ^iie  great

^       °  '  bay  in  40

sound  the  bay,  and  we  found  that  there  was  three  fathoms  ao^anutT''

hard  by  the  souther  shoare.     Our  men  went  on  land^  there,

and  saw  great  store  of  men,  women,  and  children,  who  gave

them  tabacco  at  their  comming  on  land.     So  they  went  up

into  the  woods,  and  saw  great  store  of  very  goodly  oakes

and  some   currants.      For   one   of  them   came  aboord   and  ^u'lTOnts.

brought  some  dryed,  and  gave  me  some,  which  were  sweet

and  good.     This  day  many  of  the  people  came  aboard,  some

in  mantles  of  feathers,  and  some  in  skinnes  of  divers  sorts  of  ^r^i't'os  of

'  feathers,

good  furres.      Some  women  also   came  to  us  with  hempe.  '''"'S' hempe.

They  had  red  copper  tabacco  pipes,  and  other  things   of  ^^a  copper.

copper  they  did  weare  about  their  neckes.     At  night  they

went  on  land  againe,  so  wee  rode  very  quiet,  but  durst  not

trust  them.

The  sixth,  in  the  morning,  was  faire  weather,  and  our

master  sent  John  Colman,  with  foure  other  men  in  our  boate,

^  According  to  the  American  historians,  "  in  Monmouth  County,  New-
Jersey,"  that  is  to  say,  either  on  the  mainland  or  New  Jersey,  or  some-
where near  Richmond,  on  Staten  Island.  We  should  not  even  presume
on  this  vague  assertion.  There  is  no  evidence  to  show  that  the  landing
place  was  not  still  further  east,  on  or  near  Long  Island.


80  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.

over  to  tlic  north-side  to  sound  the  other  river/  being  fourc
leagues  from  us.  They  found  by  the  way  shoakl  water,  two
fathoms;  but  at  the  north  of  the  river  eighteen,  and  twen-
tie  fathoms,  and  very  good  riding  for  ships  ;  and  a  narrow
river"  to  the  westward,  betweene  two  ilands.  The  lands,
they  told  us,  were  as  pleasant  with  grasse  and  flowers  and
goodly  trees  as  ever  they  had  seene,  and  very  sweet  smells
came  from  them.  So  they  went  in  two  leagues  and  saw  an
open  sea,  and  returned ;  and  as  they  came  backe,  they  were
set  upon  by  two  canoes,  the  one  having  twelve,  the  other
fourteene  men.  The  night  came  on,  and  it  began  to  rayne,
so  that  their  match  went  out ;  and  they  had  one  man  slaine
in  the  fight,  which  was  an  Englishman,  named  John  Colman,
with  an  arrow  shot  into  his  throat,  and  two  more  hurt.  It
grew  so  darke  that  they  could  not  find  the  ship  that  night,
but  labored  too  and  fro  on  their  oares.  They  had  so  great
a  streame,  that  their  grapnell  would  not  hold  them.

The  seventh,  was  faire,  and  by  ten  of  the  clocke  they  re-
turned aboord  the  ship,  and  brought  our  dead  man  with
them,  whom  we  carried  on  land  and  buryed,  and  named
the  point  after  his  name,  Colmans  Point.^  Then  we  hoysed
in  our  boate,  and  raised  her  side  with  waste  boords  for  de-
fence of  our  men.  So  we  rode  still  all  night,  having  good
regard  to  our  watch.

^  The  Narrows  %

-  The  hills  between  Staten  Island  and  Bergen  Neck.  JNIoulton,  Hist.
oj  New  York,  i,  p.  211.

^  According  to  the  Dutch  maps  and  charts  of  the  seventeenth  cen-
tury, Colman's  Point  (also  called  Godyn's  Point  and  Sand  or  Sant  Point),
is  identical  with,  or  forms  part  of,  Sandy  Hook.  No  great  amount  of
criticism  is,  however,  displayed  in  those  delineations ;  and  they  cannot
be  considered  as  sufficient  proofs  that  Colman  really  was  buried  on
Sandy  Hook.  We  have,  on  the  contrary,  every  reason  to  believe  that
Hudson  was,  on  the  7th  of  September,  farther  north  than  the  above  sup-
positions would  lead  us  to  assume.  Hudson's  Colman  s  Point  and  the
Cuhiuins  Point  or  Punt  of  the  early  maps,  arc  therefore  probably  not
identical.


resicljer-
0U3  savagi.


THIRD    VOYAGE    (l()09j.  81

The  eight,  was  very  faire  weather,  wee  rode  still  very
quietly.  The  people  came  aboord  us,  and  brought  tabacco
and  Indian  wheat  to  exchange  for  knives  and  bcades,  and
offered  us  no  violence.  So  we  fitting  up  our  boate  did  marke
them,  to  see  if  they  would  make  any  shew  of  the  death  of
our  man  ;  which  they  did  not.

The  ninth,  faii'e  weather.  In  the  morning,  two  great
canoes  came  aboord  full  of  men  ;  the  one  with  their  bowes
and  arrowes,  and  the  other  in  shew  of  buvina:  of  knives  to  '^
betray  us  ;  but  we  perceived  their  intent.  Wee  tooke  two
of  them  to  have  kept  them,  and  put  red  coates  on  them,  and
would  not  suffer  the  other  to  come  neere  us.  So  they  went
on  land,  and  two  other  came  aboord  in  a  canoe  ;  we  tooke
the  one  and  let  the  other  goe;  but  hee  which  wee  had  taken,
got  up  and  leapt  over-boord.  Then  we  weighed  and  went
off  into  the  channell  of  the  river,  and  anchored  there  all
night.

The  tenth,  faire  weather,  we  rode  still  till  twelve  of  the
clocke.  Then  we  weighed  and  went  over,  and  found  it
shoald  all  the  middle  of  the  river,  for  wee  could  finde
but  two  fathoms  and  a  halfe  and  three  fathomes  for  the
space  of  a  league  ;  then  wee  came  to  three  fathomes  and
foure  fathomes,  and  so  to  seven  fathomes,  and  anchored,
and  rode  all  night  in  soft  ozie  ground.  The  banke  is  •
sand.^

The  eleventh  was  faire  and  very  hot  weather.  At  one  of
the  clocke  in  the  after-noone  wee  weighed  and  went  into
the  river,  the  wind  at  south  south-west,  little  winde.
Our  soundings  were  seven,  sixe,  five,  sixe,  seven,  eight,
nine,  ten,  twelve,  thirteene,  and  fourteene  fathomes.  Then
it  shoalded  againe,  and  came  to  five  fathomes.  Then  wee
anchored,  and  saw  that  it  was  a  very  good  harbour  for  all  ^'"?'^

'  JO  harbour.

windes,  and  rode  all  night.      The   people  of  the   country

came  aboord  of  us,  making  shew  of  love,  and  gave  us  teibacco

^  East  Sandbank,  in  the  Narrows.     Moulton,  i,  p.  211.


82  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.

and  Indian  wheat,*    and   departed  for   that  night ;  but   we
durst  not  trust  thcni.-

The  twelfth,  vcrj-  faire  and  hot.     In  the  after-noonc,  at

two  of  the  clocke,  wee  weighed,  the  winde  being  variable

bctweene  the  north  and  the  north-west.     So  we  turned  into

the  river  two  leagues  and  anchored.     This  morning,  at  our

28  cauoes     first  rodo  in  the  river,  there  came  eight  and  twentie  canoes

full  uf  men.  _  °

full  of  men,  women  and  children  to  betray  us  :  but  we  saw
their  intent,  and  suffered  none  of  them  to  come  aboord  of  us.
At  twelve  of  the  clocke  they  departed.  They  brought  with
Oysters  and  thcm  ovstcrs  and  beanes,  whereof  wee  bought  some.  They
ropper  have  great  tabacco  pipes  of  yellow  copper,  and  pots  of  earth
to  dresse  their  nieate  in.  It  floweth  south-east  by  south
within.

The  tliirteentli,  faire  weather,  the  wind  northerly.  At
seven  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  as  the  floud  came  we
weighed,  and  turned  foure  miles  into  the  river.  The  tide
being  done  wee  anchored.  Then  there  came  foure  canoes
aboord  :  but  we  suffered  none  of  them  to  come  into  our
ship.  They  brought  great  store  of  very  good  oysters  aboord,
which  we  bought  for  trifles.^  In  the  night  I  set  the  varia-
vaiiation     tiou  of  the  compassc,  and  found  it  to  be  13  degrees.     In  the

13  degrees.  "■       ,  _  ,  ^

after  noone  we  weighed,  and  turned  in  with  the  floud,  two

.  leagues  and  a  halfe  further,  and  anchored  all  night;  and  had

five  fathoms  soft  ozie  ground;  and  had  an  high  point  of  land,

^  According  to  Van  der  Donck  maize  had  been  first  brought  to  these
regions  by  the  Spaniards.

^  So  says  Juet.  Hudson  himself,  in  the  few  scraps  of  his  original  log-
book preserved  by  De  Laet,  and  also  in  the  communications  which  Van
Metercn  seems  to  have  received  from  him,  always  speaks  most  kindly  of
the  North  American  Indians.  He  and  his  crew  entirely  disagreed  with
regard  to  the  treatment  due  to  the  poor  natives ;  and  his  kindness  was
rewarded  by  friendship,  their  sullen  mistrust  by  acts  of  hostility.  The
poor  Indian  has  but  too  often  been  thus  both  ill-treated  and  ill-judged  by
prejudiced  Euroiteans.

^  According  to  the  opinion  of  Moulton,  Hist,  of  N.  Y.,  i,  p.  238,  near
the  point  where  Manhattansville  now  stands.


THIRD    VOYAGE    (1609).  83

which  shewed  out  to  us,  beai-ing  north  by  cast  five  leagues
off  us.

'Yh.e  fourteenth,  in  the  morning,  being  very  faire  weather,
the  wind  south-east,  we  sayled  up  the  river  twelve  leagues,
and  had  five  fathoms,  and  five  fathoms  and  a  quarter  lesse  ;
and  came  to  a  streight  betweene  two  points,^  and  had  eight,
nine,  and  ten  fathoms ;  and  it  trended  north-east  by  north,
one  league  :  and  wee  had  twelve,  tliirteene,  and  fourteene
fathomes.     The  river  is  a  mile  broad:  there  is  very  high '''I'f  V^®"""

•'  O       mile  bruau.

land  on  both  sides. ^    Then  we  went  uj)  north-west,  a  league
and  an  halfe  deepe  water.     Then  north-east  by  north,  five
miles  ;  then  north-west  by  north,  two  leagues,  and  anchored.
The  land  grew  verv  high  and  mountainous.     The  river  is  very  hsah.
full  offish.  t«'"°"s

land.

The  JifteetitJi ,  in  the  morning,  was  misty,  untill  the  sunne
arose :  then  it  cleered.  So  wee  weighed  with  the  wind  at
south,  and  ran  up  into  the  river  twentie  leagues,  passing  by
high  mountaines.^  Wee  had  a  very  good  depth,  as  sixe,
seven,  eight,  nine,  ten,  twelve,  and  thirteene  fathomes,  and
great  store  of  salmons  in  the  river.  This  morning  our  two
savages  got  out  of  a  port  and  swam  away.  After  wee  were
under  sayle,  they  called  to  us  in  scorne.  At  night  we  came
to  other  mountaines,  which  lie  from  the  rivers  side.  There
wee  found  very  loving  people,  and  very  old  men:  where  very  loving

people.

wee  were  well  used.     Our  boat  went  to   fish,   and  caught
great  store  of  very  good  fish.

The  sixteenth,  faire  and  very  hot  weather.     In  the  moru-

^  Between  Stony  and  Verplanck  points,  according  to  Moulton's  com-
putation {Hist  of  N.  Y.  i,  p.  238).

^  Near  Peakskill.  The  land,  as  described  by  Juet,  is  high  and  moun-
tainous on  both  sides.  The  hills  rise  in  several  places  to  more  than  a
thousand  feet,  and  the  most  elevated  side  is  often  near  the  water's
edge.  Hudson  seems  to  have  sailed  on  the  14th  to  the  neighbourhood
of  West  Point,  at  present  the  site  of  the  celebrated  military  academy.

^  Hudson  now  saw  the  highest  of  the  mountains  that  border  the  river,
the  noble  range  of  the  Kaatshenge  or  Catskill  Mountains,  several  peaks
of  which  rise  above  3000',  the  highest  (the  Round  Top)  to  near  4000'.


84  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.

ing  our  boat  went  againc  to  fishing,  but  could  catch  but  few,
by  reason  their  canoes  had  beenc  there  all  night.  This
morning  the  people  came  aboord,  and  brought  us  cares
^imi'L'Hnu  °^  Indian  come,  and  pompions,  and  tabacco  :  which  wee
tabacio.  -bought  fo^.  triflcs.  Wcc  rodc  still  all  day,  and  filled  fresh
water  ;  at  night  wee  weighed  and  went  two  leagues  higher,
and  had  shoald  water  :  so  wee  anchored  till  day.^

The  secenteenth,  faire  sun-shining  weather,  and  very  hot.
In  the  morning,  as  soone  as  the  sun  was  up,  we  set  sayle,
shonids  and  qj^j  y-^xi  up  sixc  Icagucs  higher,  and  found  shoalds  in  the
iiands.  middle  of  the  channell,  and  small  Hands,  but  seven  fathoms
water  on  both  sides.  Toward  night  we  borrowed  so  neere
the  shoare,  that  we  grounded  :  so  we  layed  out  our  small
anchor,  and  heaved  off  againe.  Then  we  borrowed  on  the
banke  in  the  channell,  and  came  aground  againe  ;  while  the
floud  ran  we  heaved  off  againe,  and  anchored  all  night. ^

The  eighteenth,  in  the  morning,  was  faire  weather,  and
we  rode  still.  In  the  after-noone  our  masters  mate  went  on
land  with  an  old  savage,  a  governor  of  the  countrey  ;  M'ho  car-
ried him  to  his  house,  and  made  him  good  cheere.  'Y\ienific-
teenth  was  faire  and  hot  weather  :  at  the  floud,  being  neere
Orarc^ani  clcvcn  of  the  clocke,  Avee  weisfhed,  and  ran  hioher  up  two

pumi.i  us.  '  O  '  O  r

Beavers  and  Icagucs  abovc  tlic  slioalds,  and  had  no  lesse  water  then  five

oilers  skius.

fathoms  ;  Avee  anchored,  and  rode  in  eight  fathomes.     The

^  According  to  Moulton,  Hist,  of  N.  Y.,  i,  244,  near  the  shoal  or  marsh
iu  the  river,  between  Athens,  and  directly  opposite  that  and  the  city
that  now  bears  the  name  of  Hudson ;  according  to  Brodhead,  between
Schadak  and  Castleton  ;  a  place  situated,  according  to  Haskell  and
Smith's  Gazetteer,  in  Rensselaer  county,  New  York,  8  S.  bj'  E.  Albany,
3G2  W.,  on  the  eastern  bank  of  Hudson  river.  These  American  histo-
rians are,  better  than  we,  able  to  compare  Juet's  account  with  the  real
features  of  the  country,  and  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  decide  between
them  where  they  disagree.

"  All  this  happened  undoubtedly  at  the  distance  of  a  few  miles  from
the  spot  where  Albany  now  stands.  The  American  authors  disagree  as
to  the  exact  locality,  and  the  mutter  is  both  beyond  our  cognizance  and
(if  but  small  interest  to  us  Europeans.


THIRD    VOYAGE    (1609).  85

people  of  the  countrie  came  flocking  aboord,  and  brought
US  grapes  and  ponipions,  which  wee  bought  for  trifles.
And  many  brought  us  bevers  skinnes  and  otters  skinnes,
which  wee  bought  for  bcades,  knives,  and  hatchets.  So  we
rode  there  all  night. ^

•  The  ticentieth,  in  the  morning,  was  faire  weather.  Our
masters  mate  with  foure  men  more  went  up  with  our  boat  to
sound  the  river,  and  found  two  leagues  above  us  but  two
fathomes  water,  and  the  channell  very  narrow  ;  and  above
that  place,  seven  or  eight  fathomes.  Toward  night  they  re-
turned :  and  we  rode  still  all  night.  The  one  and  twentieth
was  faire  weather,  and  the  wind  all  southerly :  we  deter-
mined yet  once  more  to  go  farther  up  into  the  river,  to  trie
what  depth  and  breadth  it  did  bcare  ;  but  much  people
resorted  aboord,  so  wee  went  not  this  day.  Oar  carpenter
went  on  land,  and  made  a  fore-yard.  And  our  master  and
his  mate  determined  to  trie  some  of  the  chiefe  men  of  the
countrey,  whether  they  had  any  treacheric  in  them.^  So
they  tooke  them  downe  into  the  cabbin,  and  gave  them  so
much  wine  and  aqua  mice,  that  they  were  all  merrie  :  and
one  of  them  had  his  wife  with  them,  which  sate  so  modestly,
as  any  of  our  countrey  women  would  doe  in  a  strange  place.
In   the   ende   one   of  them   was   drunke,  which  had  beene

^  It  would  undoubtedly  be  of  interest  to  ascertain  the  exact  locality
of  this  point,  the  highest  reached  by  Hudson's  ships.  The  American
historians  have  spared  no  pains  to  arrive  at  a  satisfactory  result.  But
the  data  on  which  their  discussions  rest  do  not  warrant  any  positive
conclusion.  The  most  exact  statement,  that  of  Van  Meteren,  gives  42°  40'
as  the  latitude  reached  ;  it  forms,  however,  part  of  a  mere  summary,
in  which  the  latitudes  are  but  approximatively  exact.  For  us  Euro-
peans it  is  quite  sufficient  to  know  that  the  Half  Moon  reached  either
the  very  spot  where  Albany  now  stands,  or  its  immediate  neighbour-
hood. The  latitude  of  Albany  is,  according  to  Haskell  and  Smith's
Gazetteer,  42°  39'  3"  N.

^  "The  prejudices,"  says  Moulton,  "which  they  imbibed  in  Europe,
or  on  their  coasting  voyage,  against  a  people  whom  the  Europeans  de-
nominated savages,  had  given  a  tone  of  suspicion  to  their  intercourse."
See  also  note  2,  p.  82.


86  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.

aboord  of  our  ship  all  the  time  that  we  had  bcene  there :
and  that  was  strange  to  them  ;  for  they  could  not  tell  how
to  take  it.^  The  canoes  and  folke  went  all  on  shoare  :  but
some  of  them  came  againc,  and  brought  stropes  of  beades  r
some  had  sixe,  seven,  eight,  nine,  ten  ;  and  gave  him.  So
he  slept  all  night  quietly.

The  tioo  and  tioentieth  was  faire  weather  :  in  the  morning
our  masters  mate  and  foure  more  of  the  companie  went  up
with  our  boat  to  sound  the  river  higher  up.  The  people  of
the  countrey  came  not  aboord  till  noone  :  but  when  they
came,  and  saw  the  savages  well,  they  were  glad.  So  at  three
of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone  they  came  aboord,  and
brought  tabacco,  and  more  beades,  and  gave  them  to  our
Oration.  master,  and  made  an  oration,  and  shewed  him  all  the  coun-
trey round  about.  Then  they  sent  one  of  their  companie  on
land,  who  presently  returned,  and  brought  a  great  platter
full  of  venison  dressed  by  themselves  ;  and  they  caused  him
to  eate  with  them  :  then  they  made  him  reverence  and  de-
parted, all  save  the  old  man  that  lay  aboord.  Tliis  night,  at
ten  of  the  clocke,  our  boat  returned  in  a  showre  of  raine
rivei's°*^ '^"^  from  sounding  of  the  river  ;  and  found  it  to  bee  at  an  end
nelsl*  '^  for  shipping  to  goe  in.  For  they  had  beene  up  eight  or
nine  leagues,  and  found  but  seven  foot  water,  and  uncon-
stant  soundings.^

^  A  tradition  connected  with  this  scene  of  drunkenness  seems  to  have
subsisted  at  the  end  of  the  last  century  among  the  Delaware  and  ]Mo-
hican  Indians.  We  reprint  as  part  of  the  present  collection  the  observa-
tions of  the  Rev.  John  Ilerkewelder,  where  this  fact  is  noted  down.

^  These  beads  were  made  of  some  sort  of  shells,  and  strung.  The
strings  served  both  as  a  rude  sort  of  jewelry  and  as  money.  They  were
called  wampum.  The  early  travellers  in  these  regions  make  frequent
mention  of  them.  We  refer  the  reader  to  the  extracts  from  Van  der
Donck's  descrijition  of  New  Nethcrland,  which  forms  part  of  the  present
collection.

•'  We  refer  the  American  reader  to  the  interesting  observations  on
this  passage,  in  Moulton,  i,  pp.  25i)  to  2()().  To  Europeans,  who  are  un-
acquainted with  the  localities  themselves,  these  observations  are  of  less
interest.     Mr.  Brodhead  thinks  that  Hudson's  boat  reached  the  place


THIRD    VOYAGE    (1609).  87

The  three  and  twentieth,  faire  weather.  At  twelve  of  the
clocke  wee  weighed,  and  went  downe  two  leasrucs  to  a  I'lipy  re-
shoald  that  had  two  channels,  one  on  the  one  side,  and  another  ''"-'  ''^'^'"•
on  the  other,  and  had  little  wind,  whereby  the  tyde  layed
us  upon  it.  So  there  wee  sate  on  ground  the  space  of  an
houre  till  the  floud  came.  Then  wee  had  a  little  gale  of
Avind  at  the  west.  So  wee  got  our  ship  into  deepe  water,
and  rode  all  night  very  Avell.

The  foure  and  t^centieth  was  faire  weather  :  the  winde  at
the  north-west,  wee  weighed,  and  went  downe  the  river
seven  or  eight  leagues  ;  and  at  halfe  ebbe  wee  came  on
ground  on  a  banke  of  oze  in  the  middle  of  the  river,  and
sate  there  till  the  floud.  Then  wee  went  on  land,  and  ga-
thered ffood  store  of  chest-nuts.^    At  ten  of  the  clocke  yvce^l°^^°\

"  chestuuta.

came  oflf  into  deepe  water,  and  anchored.

The^'ye  a7id  iioentieth  was  faire  weather,  and  the  wind  at
south  a  stifFe  gale.  We  rode  still,  and  went  on  land-  to
walke  on  the  west  side  of  the  river,  and  found  good  ground
for  come  and  other  earden  herbs,  with  great  store  of  sroodly  okes.wai-

O  JO  n  J    ,im  trees,

oakes,  and  walnut-trees,  and  chest-nut  trees,  ewe  trees,  and  t'e'efg^e'^ve
trees  of  sweet  wood  in  great  abundance,  and  great  store  of  [reesietc."
slate  for  houses,  and  other  good  stones.

The  sixe  and  tiventieth  was  faire  weather,  and  the  wind
at  south  a  stiife  gale  ;  wee  rode  still.  In  the  morning  our
carpenter  went  on  land,  with  our  masters  mate  and  foure
more  of  our  companie,  to  cut  wood.  This  morning,  two
canoes  came  up  the  river  from  the  place  where  we  first
found  loving  people,  and  in  one  of  them  was  the  old  man
that  had  lyen  aboord  of  us  at  the  other  place.  He  brought
another  old  man  with  him,  which  brought  more  stropes  of

where  the  town  of  Waterford  now  stands  (Brodhead,  Hist,  of  New  York,
i,p.  32).

^  According  to  the  computation  of  Moulton  (i,  p.  267),  near  the  spot
where  the  town  of  Hudson  now  stands.

^  At  or  near  Catskill  Landing,  three  miles  from  Hudson,  and  about
forty  from  Albany.


8vS  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.

bcadcs  and  gave  thorn  to  our  master,  and  shewed  him  all  the
countrey  there  about  as  though  it  were  at  his  command.  So
he  made  the  two  old  men  dine  with  him,  and  the  old  mans
wife  :  for  they  brought  two  old  women,  and  two  young
maidens  of  the  age  of  sixteene  or  seventecne  yeares  with
them,  who  behaved  themselves  very  modestly.  Our  master
gave  one  of  the  old  men  a  knife,  and  they  gave  him  and  us
tabacco.  And  at  one  of  the  clocke  they  departed  downe  the
river,  making  signes  that  wee  should  come  downe  to  them  ;
for  wee  were  within  two  leagues  of  the  place  where  they
dwelt.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning,  was  faire  wea-
ther, but  much  wind  at  the  north ;  we  weighed  and  set  our
fore  top-sayle,  and  our  ship  would  not  flat,  but  ran  on  the
ozie  banke  at  half  ebbe.  AVee  layed  out  anchor  to  heave  her
off,  but  could  not.  So  wee  sate  from  halfe  ebbe  to  halfe
floud  :  then  wee  set  our  fore-sayle  and  mayne  top-sayle,  and
got  downe  sixe  leagues.  The  old  man  came  aboord,  and
would  have  had  us  anchor,  and  goe  on  land  to  eate  with
him :  but  the  wind  being  faire,  we  would  not  yeeld  to  his
request ;  so  hee  left  us,  being  very  sorrowfull  for  our  de-
parture. At  five  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  the  wind
came  to  the  south  south-west.  So  wee  made  a  boord  or  two,
and  anchored^  in  foureteene  fathomes  water.  Then  our  boat
went  on  shoare  to  fish  right  against  the  ship.  Our  masters
mate  and  boatswaine,  and  three  more  of  the  companie,  went
on  land  to  fish,  but  could  not  finde  a  good  place.  They
tooke  foure  or  five  and  twentie  mullets,  breames,  bases,  and
barbils ;  and  returned  in  an  houre.  We  rode  still  all
night.

The  ciglit  and  twentieth,  being  faire  weather,  as  soone  as
the  day  was  light,  wee  Aveighed  at  halfe  ebbe,  and  turned
downe  two  leagues  belowe  water  ;  for  the  streamc  doth  runuc

^  In  the  vicinity  of  Red  Hook  (Moulton,  267),  that  is  to  say,  fourteen
miles  from  Catskill  Lauding.


THIRD    VOYAGE    (1609).  89

the  last  quarter  ebbe  :  then  we  anchored  till  high  water. ^  At
three  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-noone  we  w^eighed,  and
turned  downe  three  leagues,  untill  it  was  darke  :  then  wee
anchored.

The  nine  and  twentieth  was  drie  close  weather ;  the  wind
at  south,  and  south  and  by  west ;  we  weighed  early  in  the
morning,  and  turned  downe  three  leagues  by  a  lowe  water,
and  anchored  at  the  lower  end  of  the  long  reach ;  for  it  is
sixe  leagues  long.  Then  there  came  certaine  Indians  in  a
canoe  to  us,  but  would  not  come  aboord.  After  dinner
there  came  the  canoe  with  other  men,  whereoff  three  came
aboord  us.  They  brought  Indian  wheat,  which  we  bought
for  trifles.  At  three  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-noone  wee
weighed,  as  soone  as  the  ebbe  came,  and  turned  downe  to
the  edge  of  the  mountaines,  or  the  northerniost  of  the  moun-  Moun-

taines.

taines,  and  anchored  :  because  the  high  land  hath  many
points,  and  a  narrow  channcll,  and  hath  manie  eddie  winds.^
So  we  rode  quietly  all  night  in  seven  fathoms  water.

The  thirtieth  was  faire  weather,  and  the  wind  at  south-
east, a  stiife  gale  betweene  the  mountaynes.     We  rode  still
the  afternoone.     The  people  of  the  countrey  came  aboord
US  and  brought   some   small  skinnes  with  them,  which  we  smaii  skins.
bousjht  for  knives  and  trifles.     This  is  a  very  pleasant  place  -^  r'easant

^  ./    X  X  place  to

to  build  a  towne  on.    The  road  is  very  neere,  and  very  good  |'",vne''on.
for  all  windes,  save  an  east  north-east  wind.     The  moun-  i-ikeiibood

of  niiuerals.

taynes  look  as  if  some  metall  or  minerall  were  in  them.    For

^  Probably  near  the  Esopus  Island,  twelve  miles  from  Red  Hook.

2  Below  Poughkeepsie  (Moulton).  Beacon  Hill,  in  the  neighbourhood
of  that  place  and  opposite  New  Windsor,  is  1685  feet  high.  This  part
of  Hudson  river  is  noted  for  its  heavy  winds.  "  The  banks  of  Hudson
river,  especially  on  the  west  side,  as  far  as  the  highlands  extend,  are
chiefly  rocky  cliffs.  The  passage  through  the  highlands,  which  is  sixteen
or  eighteen  miles,  affords  a  wild  romantic  scene.  In  this  narrow  pass,  on
each  side  of  which  the  mountains  tower  to  a  great  height,  the  wind,  if
there  be  any,  is  collected  and  compressed,  and  blows  continually  as
through  a  bellows.  Vessels,  in  passing  through  it,  are  often  obliged  to
lower  their  sails"  (Thompson,  Geogr.  Diet,  of  America).

12


90


MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.


Troaclicrio
saviigcH.


the  trees  that  grow  on  them  were  all  blasted,  and  some  of
them  barren,  with  few  or  no  trees  on  them.  The  people
brought  a  stone  aboord  like  to  an  emery  (a  stone  vised  by
glasicrs  to  cut  glasse),^  it  would  cut  iron  or  stcelc  :  yet  being
bruised  small,  and  water  put  to  it,  it  made  a  colour  like
blacke  lead  glistering  :  it  is  also  good  for  painters  colours.
At  three  of  the  clocke  they  departed,  and  we  rode  still  all
night.

'^Jih.c  Jirst  of  October,  faire  weather,  the  wind  variable  be-
tweene  the  west  and  the  north.  In  the  morning  we  weighed
at  seven  of  the  clocke  with  the  ebbe,  and  got  downe  below
the  mountaynes,  which  was  seven  leagues.  Then  it  fell
calme  and  the  floud  was  come,  and  wee  anchored  at  twelve
of  the  clocke.  The  people  of  the  moinitaynes  came  aboord
us,  wondring  at  our  ship  and  weapons.  We  bought  some
small  skinnes  of  them  for  trifles.  This  afternoone,  one  canoe
kept  hanging  under  our  sterne  with  one  man  in  it,  which
we  could  not  keepe  from  thence,  who  got  up  by  our  rudder
to  the  cabin  window,  and  stole  out  my  pillow,  and  two
shirts,  and  two  bandeleeres.  Our  masters  mate  shot  at  him,
and  strooke  him  on  the  brest,  and  killed  him.  Whereupon
all  the  rest  fled  away,  some  in  their  canoes,  and  so  leapt  out
of  them  into  the  water.  We  manned  our  boat,  and  got  our
things  againe.  Then  one  of  them  that  swamme  got  hold  of
our  boat,  thinking  to  overthrow  it.  But  our  cooke  tookc  a
sword,  and  cut  ofl"  one  of  his  hands,  and  he  was  drowned.
By  this  time  the  ebbe  was  come,  and  we  weighed  and  got
downe  two  leagues  :  by  that  time  it  was  darke.  So  we
anchored  in  foure  fathomes  water,  and  rode  well.

The  second,  faire  weather.  At  break  of  day  wee  weighed,
the  wind  being  at  north-west,  and  got  downe  seven  leagues;
then  the  floud  Avas  come  strong,  so  we  anchored.  Then
came  one  of  the  savages  that  swamme  aM'ay  from  us  at  our
going  up  the  river  with  many  other,  thinking  to  betray  us.

1  Pyrilis  I


THIRD    VOYAGE    (1609).  91

But  wee  perceived  their  intent,  and  suffered  none  of  them

to  enter  our  ship.     Whereupon  two  canoes  full  of  men,  with  i;\„f^"""^'^

their   bowcs  and   arrowes   shot   at   us   after   our  sterne  :   in  Inuc  ^'^

recompence  Avhereof  we  discharged  sixe  muskets,  and  killed

two   or  three  of  them.     Then   above  an  hundred  of  them

came  to  a  point  of  land  to  shoot  at  us.    There  I  shot  a  falcon

at  them,  and  killed  two  of  them  :  whereupon  the  rest  fled

into  the  woods.     Yet  they  manned  ofi'  another  canoe  with

nine  or  ten  men,  which  came  to  meet  us.    So  I  shot  at  it  also

a  falcon,  and  shot  it  through,  and  killed  one  of  them.     Then

our  men  with  their  muskets  killed  three  or  foure  more  of

them.^     So  they  went  their  way  ;  within  a  while  after  wee

got  downe  two  leagues  beyond  that  place,  and  anchored  in

a  bay,  cleere  from  all  danger  of  them  on  the  other  side  of

the  river,  where  we  saw  a  very  good  piece  of  ground  :  and

hard  by  it  there  was  a  cliffe,  that  looked  of  the  colour  of

a  white  greene,  as  thouarh  it  were  either  copper  or  silver  "^  "'^'""^  °^

a  ^  ^  1  i  cojilier  or

myne  :  and  I  thinke  it  to  be  one  of  them,  by  the  trees  that  ^''"^''
grow  upon  it.     For  they  be  all  burned,  and  the  other  places
are  greene  as  grasse  ;  it  is  on  that  side  of  the  river  that  is
called   Manna-hata."      There  we  saw   no  people   to  trouble  ^


The  couu-
rey  of


us  :   and  rode  quietly  all  night ;    but  had  much  wind  and  hat'u'.'


^  Moulton  (i,  271)  thinks  that  this  scene  took  place  at  the  upper  end
of  the  island  of  JManhattan  (on  which  New  York  now  stands),  near  Fort
Washington  and  Fort  Lee,  and  that  the  next  place  mentioned  (see
note  2)  was  opposite  Manhattan  island.  This  assertion  seems  doubtful,
as  will  be  explained  in  the  next  note.

^  Moulton  (i,  272)  places  this  site  nesiv  Hoboke7i,  opposite  New  York.
This  opinion  of  the  else  so  accurate  historian  is  very  improbable.  Hud-
son's words,  "  That  side  of  the  river  which  is  called  Manna-liatta''\
cannot  possibly  apply  to  anything  but  Manhattan  island  itself.  All  the
early  chroniclers,  as  well  as  the  early  maps  and  views,  agree  in  giving
to  that  island  the  Indian  name  which  it  still  bears ;  whilst  the  opposite
shore,  though,  perhaps,  also  inhabited  by  the  Manhattan  tribe,  is  never
called  Manhattan.  It  had,  on  the  contrary,  an  Indian  name  of  its  own,
Ilopogkan,  now  corrupted  into  Ilohohen.  Moulton,  indeed,  adduces  no
reason  for  his  supposition.


92  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.

The  third,  was  very  stormie  ;  the  wind  at  east  north-east.
In  the  morning,  in  a  gust  of  wind  and  raine,  our  anchor
came  home,  and  we  drove  on  ground,  but  it  was  ozie.  Then
as  we  were  about  to  have  out  an  anchor,  the  wind  came  to
the  north  north-west,  and  drove  us  off  againe.  Then  we
shot  an  anchor,  and  let  it  fall  in  foure  fathomes  water,  and
Aveighed  the  other.  Wee  had  much  wind  and  raine,  with
thicke  weather  ;  so  we  roade  still  all  night.

The  fourth,   was   faire   weather,  and  the   wind   at   north

north-west ;  wee  weighed  and  came  out  of  the  river,  into

which  we  had  runne  so  farre.^     Within  a  while  after,  wee

came  out  also  of  the  great  mouth  of  the   great  river,  that

The  great     runnctli  UD  to  the  north-wcst,~  borrowing  upon  the  norther

mouth  of  _  ^  _        _  •'  o       1

the  great      gj([g  of  the  Same,  thinking  to  have  cleepe  water  :  for  wee  had

river.  '  o  i  '

sounded  a  great  way  Avith  our  boat  at  our  first  going  in,  and
found  seven,  six,  and  five  fathomes.  So  we  came  out  that
Avay,  but  we  were  deceived,  for  we  had  but  eight  foot  and
an  halfe  water  :  and  so  three,  five,  three,  and  two  fathomes
and  an  halfe.  And  then  three,  foure,  five,  sixe,  seven,
eight,  nine  and  ten  fathomes.  And  by  twelve  of  the  clocke
Theyieave    wc  Were  clecrc  of  all  the  inlet.     Then  we  took  in  our  boat,

the  coasi  of

Virginia,  and  Set  our  mayne-sayle,  and  sprit-sayle,  and  our  top-sayles,
and  steered  away  east  south-east,  and  south-east  by  east  off
into  the  mayne  sea  :  and  the  land  on  the  souther  side  of  the
bay  or  inlet  did  beare  at  noone  west  and  by  south  foure
leagues  from  us.

The  Jifth  was  fciire  weather,  and  the  wind  variable  be-
tweene  the  north  and  the  east.  Wee  held  on  our  course
south-east  by  east.  At  noone  I  observed  and  found  our
height  to  bee  39  degrees,  30  minutes.  Our  compasse  varied
sixe  degrees  to  the  west.

Wc  continued  our  course  toward  England,  without  seeing

^  Hudson  river,  from  the  source  to  New  York  V>Ay.
-  The  mouLli  of  the  Hudson  trends  to  the  north-west,  where  Raritou
ri\cr  falls  into  it.


ABSTRACT    OF    THE    JOURNAL.  93

any  land  by  the  way,  all  the  rest  of  this  moncth  of  October  :
and  on  the  secenth  day  of  November,  stilo  novo,  being  Satur-
day, by  the  grace  of  God  we  safely  arrived  in  the  range  of
Dartmouth,  in  Devonshire,  in  the  yeere  1609.


AN  ABSTRACT  OF  THE  JOURNALL  OF
MASTER     HENRY     HUDSON,

FOR    THE    DISCOVEEIE     OF     THE     NORTH-WEST    PASSAGE,    EEGUNNE    THE     SEVEN-
TEENTH OF  APRILL,  1610,  ENDED  WITH  HIS  END,  BEING  TREACHEROUSLY
EXPOSED    BY    SOME    OF    THE    COMPANIE.


The  seventeenth  of  Aprill,    1610,    we  brake   ground,  and  April  ir.
went  downe  from  Saint  Katharines  Poole,^  and  fell  downe  to
Blackewall ;  and   so  plyed   downe   with  the   ships   to   Lee,
which  was  the  two  and  twentieth  day.

The  two  and  twentieth,  I  caused  Master  Coleburne-  to  bee
put  into  a  pinke  bound  for  London,  with  my  letter  to  the
Adventurars,  importing  the  reason  wherefore  I  so  put  him
out  of  the  ship,  and  so  plyed  forth.

The  second  of  May,  the  wind  southerly,  at  eeven  we  were  May.
thwart  of  Flamborough  Head.

The /f/if,  we  were  at  the  iles  of  Orkney,  and  here  I  set  the  xheiiesof

Orkney.

north  end  of  the  needle,  and  the  north  of  the  flie  all  one.

The   sixt,  wee   were   in  the   latitude   of  59   degrees,   22  Note.

^  Where  St.  Katharine's  Dock  now  is ;  near  the  Tower.

^  According  to  Pricket  the  man's  name  was  Colbert ;  according  to  Fox
(X.  W.  Fox,  p.  70)  it  was  Coolbrand.  The  occurrence  took  place  near
Sheppey  island,  in  the  road  of  Lee.  Fox's  curious  notice  about  this
Master  Coolbrand  is  given  in  the  present  collection.


94  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.

minutes,  and  there  perceived  that  the  north  end  of  Scotland,
Orney,  and  Shetland'  are  not  so  northerly  as  is  commonly
set  downc.-  The  eight  day  wee  saw  Farre  Ilands,^  in  the
latitude  of  G2  degrees,  24  minutes.  The  eleventh  day  we
fell  with  the  easter  part  of  Island,  and  then  plying  along  the

westmony.  souther  part  of  the  land  we  came  to  Westmony,*  being
the  ffteenth  day,  and  still  plyed  about  the  mayne  iland
untill  the  last  of  May,  with  contrary  winds,  and  we  got
some  fowles  of  divers  sorts.

June.  The  first  clay  of  June  we  put  to  sea  out  of  an  harbour,  in

the  westermost  part  Island,  and  so  plyed  to  the  westward  in
the  latitude  of  66  degrees,  34  minutes,  and  the  second  day
plyed  and  found  ourselves  in  65»degrees,  57  minutes,  with
little  wind  easterly.

The  third  day  wee  found  ourselves  in  Qih  degrees,  30
minutes,  with  winde  at  north-east ;  a  little  before  this  we
sayled  neere  some  ice.

Groneiand.  'W\c  fouvth  day  wc  saw  Gronclaud''^  over  the  ice  perfectly,
and  this  night  the  sunnc  went  downe  due  north,  and  rose
north-north  east.  So  plying  the  fift  day  we  were  in  65
degrees,  still  encombred  with  much  ice,  which  hung  upon
the  coast  of  Groneiand.

Frobishera        xhc  ninth  dav  wcc  wcrc  off  Frobishers  Streights,^'  with  the

Streights.  •'  o         '

winde  northerly,  and  plyed  unto  the  south-westwards  untill
Xhe.  fifteenth  day.

1l\\q  fifteenth  day  we  were  in  sight  of  the  land,  in  latitude

^  Orkney  and  Shetland.

^  They  are  often  laid  down  on  old  charts  nearly  a  degree  too  high.

^  The  Faroer  islands.

■*  The  Westman  or  Westnianna  islands,  south  of,  and  close  to,  Iceland.
They  belong  to  the  province  of  Iceland.

°  That  is  to  say,  the  northern  part  of  Greenland.  The  southern  part
•was  called  Desolation.  Frobishcr's  strait,  which  Hudson's  contempora-
ries believed  to  be  in  Greenland,  was  thought  to  separate  Gronland
from  Desolation.  The  origin  of  these  notions  is  most  curious.  The  reader
will  find  them  explained  in  the  Introduction  to  the  present  volume.

"  Sec  last  note.


ABSTRACT    OF    THE    JOURNAL.  95

59  degrees,  27  minutes/  which  was  called  by  Captayne  John

Davis  Desolation,  and  found  the  errour  of  the  former  laying  i^esoiation,

downe  of  that  land  :  and  then  running  to  the  north-westward

untill  the  twentieth  day,  wee  found  the  ship  in  60  degrees,

42  minutes,  and  saw  much  ice,  and  many  riplings  or  over-

fals,  and  a  strong  streame   setting   from  east  south-east  to  ^^  c"'"'ent

west  north-west.  '^^^'•

The  one  and  twentie,  tivo  and  ticcntle,  and  three  and
tioentie  dayes,  with  the  winde  variable,  we  plyed  to  the
north-westward  in  sight  of  much  ice,  into  the  height  of
62  degrees,  29  minutes.-

The  foure  and  twentie  and  five  and  tiventie  dayes,  sayling  East

^  -^  •!        '        J  ^  entrance

to  the  westward  about  midnight,  wee  saw  land  north,  which  "trei'ius.
was  suddenly  lost  againe.     So  wee  ranne  still  to  the  west-
ward in  62  degrees,  17  minutes.^

The  fift  of  July  wee  plyed  up  upon  the  souther  side,  "^"'y-
troubled  Avith  much  ice  in  seeking  the  shoare  untill  the  Jift
day  of  July,  and  we  observed  that  day  in  59  degrees,  16
minutes.^  Then  we  plyed  off  the  shoare  againe,  untill  the
eight  day,  and  then  found  the  height  of  the  pole  in  60  de-
grees, no  minutes.  Here  we  saw  the  land  from  the  north-
west by  west,  halfe  northerly,  unto  the  south-west  by  west,
covered  with  snow,  a  champaigne  land,  and  called  it  Desire  pryfcfj-gti,
Provoketh.

We  still  plyed  up  to  the  westward,  as  the  land  and  ice
would  suffer  untill  the  eleventh  day ;  when  fearing  a  storme,
we  anchored   by  three  rockie  ilands  in   uncertayne   depth,

^  This  latitude,  59°  27',  can,  unfortunately,  not  be  maintained.  The
most  southern  part,  even  of  the  islands  about  Cape  Farewell,  does  not
reach  down  farther  than  59°  35'.  The  cape  itself  is,  according  to  the
best  authorities,  under  59°  45'.  Hudson's  mistake  therefore  extends  to
eight  or  nine  minutes  at  least,  and  may  be  greater.

^  Near  Cape  Elizabeth,  coast  of  Labrador.

^  In  Hall's  sound,  south  of  Resolution  island.

*  Near  Ittimenaktok  island,  eastern  shore  of  Ungava  bay,  and  south-
east of  Akpatok  island.


96  MASTER    HENRY    HUDSON.

"betweene  two  and  nine  fatliomes  ;  and  found  it  an  harbour

unsufficient  by  reason  of  sunken  rockes,  one  of  which  was

next  morning  two  fathomes  above  water.     Wee  called  them

lies  of  Gods  the  Isles  of  Gods  Mercies.'      The  water  floweth  here  better

Mercies.

then  foure  f^ithomes.  The  floud  commeth  from  the  north,
flowing  eight  the  change  day.  The  latitude  in  this  place  is  62
degrees,  9  minutes.  Then  plying  to  the  south-westward  the
sixteenth  day,  wee  were  in  the  latitude  of  58  degrees,  50
minutes,-  but  found  our  selves  imbayed  with  land,  and  had
much  ice  :  and  we  plyed  to  the  north-westward  untill  the
nineteenth    day,   and    then    wee    found    by   observation    the

Hold  with  height  of  the  pole  in  61  degrees,  24  minutes,  and  saw  the
land,  which  I  named  Hold  with  Hope.-^  Hence  I  plyed  to
the  north-westward  still,  untill  the  one  and  txoentieth  day,

Amightie    "with  the  wiud  variable.    Here  I  found  the  sea  more  growne

growiie  sea.

then  any  wee  had  since  wee  left  England.

The  three  and  twentieth  day,  by  observation  the  height  of

the  pole  was  61  degrees,  33  minutes.     The  jite  and  ticen-

Magna        ticth  dav  WO  saw  the  land,  and  named  it  Magna  Britannia,'*

Britauuia.  •'  ■-

The  size  and  twentieth  day  wee  observed  and  found  the  lati-
tude in  62  degrees,  44  minutes.  The  eight  and  twentieth
day  we  were  in  the  height  of  63  degrees,  10  minutes,^  and
plyed  southerly  of  the  west.  The  owe  and  thirtieth  day,
plying  to  the  westward,  at  noonc  wee  found  ourselves  in  62
degrees,  24  minutes.

The^rs^  of  August  we  had  sight  of  the  northerne  shoare,
from  the  north  by  east  to  the  west  by  south  off  us  :  the  north
part  twelve  leagues,  and  the  wester  part  twentie  leagues  from
us :  and  we  had  no  ground  there  at  one  hundred  and  cightie
fathomes.     And  I  thinke  I  saw  land  on  the  sunnc  side,  but

^  Saddle  Back,  and  the  surrounding  islands,  to  the  south  of  Jack-
man's  sound,  (62°  10'  N.;  70"  25'  W.)

'^  Between  Akpatok  (59°  15')  and  Tessiujak  (58°  50'),  on  the  west
shore  of  Ungava  bay.

=•  Long  island  (Hudson's  bay);  GF  25'  N.;  70°  20'  W.

"  About  01°  25'  N.;  70°  20'  W.  •"'  To  the  N.lv  of  Charles  island.


ABSTRACT    OF    THE    JOURNAL.  97

could  not  make  it  perfectly,  bearing  east  north-east.  Here
I  found  the  latitude  62  degrees,  50  minutes.^

The  second  day  we  had  sight  of  a  faire  headland  on  the
norther  shoare,  six  leagues  off,  which  I  called   Salisburies  fn'Ssijuiiea

"  -^  I'  ore-laud.

Fore-land :-  wee  ranne  from  them  west  south-west,  fourtecne
leagues  :  in  the  midway  of  which  wee  were  suddenly  come
into  a  great  and  whurling  sea,  whether  caused  by  meeting  a  great  ana

whurliug

of  two  streames  or  an  over-fall,  I  know  not.    Thence  sayling  sea.
west  and  by  south  seven  leagues  farther,  we  were  in  the
mouth  of  a  streight  and   sounded,  and  no   ground  at  oncAstreigut

T  I        ,     ,.     I  ,  •     1        1      •  1  1  which  led  US

nunclred  latnomes  :  the  streight  being  there  not  above  two  into  the

.  ,  deepe  bay

leagues  broad,  in  the  passage  in  this  wester  part :  which,  of  goJs
from  the  caster  part  of  Fretum  Davis,  is  distant  two  hun-  ^^'■"^^•
dred  and  fiftie  leagues  thereabouts."^

The  third  day  we  put  through  the  narrow  passage,  after
our  men  had  beene  on  land,  which  had  well  observed  there,
that  the  floud  did  come  from  the  north,  flowing  by  the
shoare  five  fathomes.  The  head  of  this  entrance  on  the  south
side  I  named  Cape  Worsenholme;*  and  the  head  on  the  north-  cape  wor-
wester  shoare  I  called  Cape  Digs.''  After  wee  had  sailed  with  capeDigs.
an  easterly  winde,  west  and  by  south  ten  leagues,  the  land
fell  away  to  the  southward,  and  the  other  iles,  and  land  left
us  to  the  westward.  Then  I  observed  and  found  the  ship  at
noone  in  61  degrees,  20  minutes,  and  a  sea  to  the  westward.

^  The  land  they  saw  was  Charles  island,  the  most  northern  point  of
which  is  about  62°  47'.     (Latitude  77°  20'  W.)

2  Salisbury  island,  63°  40'  N.  ;  77°  W.

^  This  calculation  is  not  far  wrong.  The  real  distance,  as  the  crow
flies,  is  about  one  thousand  English  miles.

■*  Cape  Wolstenholme  of  our  present  maps.  The  spelling  of  the  name
was  not  settled.  That  which  now  prevails  is  taken  from  Purchas,  who
follows  it  generally,  though  not  always.

^  Not  the  cape  which  bears  this  name  at  the  present  day,  but  a  cape
on  a  small  island,  one  of  the  Diggs'  islands  group,  opposite  Cape  Wolsten-
holme, and  only  two  leagues  (about  six  sea  miles  or  knots)  from  it.  The
present  Cape  Diggs  owes  its  name,  most  probably,  to  a  mistake.  On  the
original  chart  of  Hudson's  Bay,  the  names  are  not  very  carefully  put
down  near  the  places  to  which  they  belong  ;  thus  early  geographers  were
misled,  and  their  successors  have  faithfully  copied  them.  13


98  A    LARGER    DISCOURSE    OF    THE    SAME    VOYAGR,


A  LAllGER  DISCOURSE  OF  THE  SAME  VOYAGE,  AND   THE
SUCCESSE  THEREOF,  WRITTEN  BY

ABACUK     PRICKETT.


AVe  began  our  voyage  for  the  north-west  passage,  the  seccn-

tecnth  of  Aprill,  1610,     Thwart  of  Shepey,'  our  master  sent

Master   Colbert  back   to  the  owners  with  his  letter.     The

next  day  we  weighed  from  hence  and  stood   for  Harwich,

and  came  thither  the  eight  and  twentieth  of  Apr  ill.     From

Harwich  we  set  sayle  theirs/ q/Jfr/y,  along  the  coast  to  the

Orkney,       north,  till  we  came  to  the  isles  of  Orkney,  from  thence  to

Island.  ^*'    the  iles  of  Faro,  and  fiom  thence  to  Island  :  on  which  we

fell  in  a  fogge,  hearing  the  rut  of  the  sea  ashoare,  but  saw

not   the   land   whereupon   our    master   came   to   an   anchor.

The  south-    Hccrc  wc  werc  embayed  in  the  south-east  part  of  the  land.

east  part

of  Island.  Wcc  Weighed  and  stood  along  the  coast,  on  the  west  side
towards  the  north  :  but  one  day  being  calme  we  fell  a  fish-
ing, and  caught  good  store  of  fish,  as  cod,  and  ling,  and
butte,  with  some  other  sorts  that  we  knew  not.  The  next
day  we  had  a  good  gale  of  wind  at  south-west,  and  raysed

wostmouie  the  ilcs  of  Wcstmonie,  where  the  king  of  Denmarke  hath  a
fortresse,  by  which  we  passed  to  rayse  the  Snow  Hill  foot,-
a  mountayne  so  called  on  the  north-west  part  of  the  land.

Mount        But  in  our  course  we  saw  that  famous  hill.  Mount  Hecla,

Hechi

castethout   ^yhich  cast  out  much  fire,  a  si^nc  of  foule  weather  to  come

fire.  ^  ^

in  short  time.     Wee  leave  Island  a  stcrne  of  us,  and  met  a

A  uiayne      mayuc  of  icc,  which  did  hang  on  the  north  part  of  Island,

and  stretched  downe  to  the  west,  which  when  our  master

saw,  he  stood  back  for  Island  to  find  an  harbour,  which  wc

'  Shcppey  islam!,  in  the  muutli  of  the  Tiiames.

"^  Sncefials-Jiikull,  a  luountaiu  on  the  west  coast  of  Icohiud,  in  Wost-
hunl,  ili.strict  of  Sucefieldness,  -Ij.OOO'  high.


"WRITTEN    BY    ABACUK    PRICK  RTT.  99

did  on   the  north-west   part,   called    Derefcr,*' where  wee'ornim-

ford.

killed  good  store  of  fowle.  From  hence  we  put  to  sea  againe,
but  neither  wind  nor  weather  serving,  our  master  stood
backe  for  this  harbour  againe,  but  could  not  reach  it,  but
fell  with  another  to  the  south  of  that,  called  by  our  English-
men Lousie  Bay  :^  where  on  the  shoare  we  found  an  hot  LousieBrtv.
bath,  and  here  all  our  Englishmen  bathed  themselves:  the '^"''''"'''^'''
water  was  so  hot  that  it  would  scald  a  fowle.

From  hence,  the  -first  of  June,  we  put  to  sea  for  Grone- The  first

^  J  J  '  i:  ^         of  June.

land,  but  to  the  west  wee  saw  land  as  we  thought,  for  which
we  beare  the  best  part  of  a  day,  but  it  proved  but  a  foggie
banke.  So  wee  gave  it  over  and  made  for  Gronland,  which
we  raysed  the  fourth  of  June.  Upon  the  coast  thereof  hung
good  store  of  ice,  so  that  our  master  could  not  attayne  to  the
shoare  by  any  meanes.  The  land  in  this  part  is  very  moun-
taynous,  and  full  of  round  hils,  like  to  sugar-loaves,  covered
with  snow.  AVe  turned  the  land  on  the  south  side,  as  neere
as  the  ice  would  suffer  us.  Our  course  for  the  most  part
was  betweene  the  west  and  north-west,  till  we  raysed  the
Desolations,  which  is  a  great  Hand  in  the  west  part  of  {]g"^',j^jj^,i
Groneland.  On  this  coast  we  saw  store  of  whales,  and  at  whales!
one  time  three  of  them  came  close  by  us,  so  as  wee  could
hardly  shunne  them:  then  two  passing  very  neere,  and  the
third  going  under  our  ship,  wee  received  no  harme  by  them,
praysed  be  God.

From  the  Desolations  our  master  made  his  way  north-
west, the  wind  being  against  him,  who  else  would  have  gone
more  to  the  north  :  but  in  this  course  we  saw  the  first  great
iland  or  mountayne  of  ice,  whereof  after  we  saw  store.
About  the  latter  end  of  June^  we  raysed  land  to  the  north  of

^  Dyre  fiord,  a  gulf  on  the  north-west  coast  of  the  northern  peninsula
of  Iceland,  66=  42'  N.;  24°  20'  W.

'■^  Breyde  Fiord  (mostly  called  Brede  Bay  on  English  maps),  a  large
bay  on  the  west  coast  of  Iceland,  where  some  hot  springs  rise  from  the
bottom  of  the  sea.  (65°  20'  N.  ;  23°  W.)


100  A    LARGER    DISCOURSE    OF    THE    SAME    VOYAGE,

US,  which  our  master  tooke  to  bee  that  iland  which  Master
Davis  setteth  downe  in  his  chart.*  On  the  west  side  of  his
strcight,  our  master  would  have  gone  to  the  north  of  it,  but
the  wind  would  not  suffer  him  :  so  \\c  fell  to  the  south  of  it,
into  a  great  rippling  or  overfall  of  current,  the  which  setteth
to  the  west.  Into  the  current  we  went,  and  made  our  way
to  the  north  of  the  west,  till  we  met  with  ice  which  hung  on
this  iland.  Wherefore  our  master  casting  about,  cleered
himselfe  of  this  ice,  and  stood  to  the  south,  and  then  to  the
west,  through  store  of  floting  ice,  and  upon  the  ice  store  of
scales.  AVe  gained  a  cleere  sea,  and  continued  our  course
till  wee  mcete  ice ;  first,  with  great  ilands,  and  then  with
store  of  the  smaller  sort.  Betweene  them  we  made  our
course  north-west,  till  we  met  with  ice  againe.  But,  in  this
our  going  betweene  the  ice,  we  saw  one  of  the  gri'at  ilands  of
ice  overt urne,  which  was  a  good  warning  to  us,  not  to  come
nigh  them  nor  within  their  reach. ^  Into  the  ice  wee  put
ahead,  as  betweene  two  lands.  The  next  day  wee  had  a
stormc,  and  the  wind  brought  the  ice  so  fast  upon  us,  that
in  the  end  we  were  driven  to  put  her  into  the  chiefest  of  the
ice,  and  there  to  let  her  lie.  Some  of  our  men  this  day  fell
sicke,  I  will  not  say  it  was  for  feare,  although  I  saw  small
signe  of  other  griefe.

The  storme  ceasing,  we  stood  out  of  the  ice,  where  wee
saw  any  cleere  sea  to  go  to  :  which  was  sometime  more  and
sometime  lesse.  Our  course  was  as  the  ice  did  lye,  some-
time to  the  north,  then  to  the  north-west,  and  then  to  the
west   and   to   the   south-west :    but    still   inclosed   with   ice.

^  Resolution  island.  Two  delineations  taken  from  Davis's  survey
are  still  in  existence.  The  one  is  on  an  engraved  planisphere,  in-
serted into  a  copy  of  Ilakluyt,  in  the  British  Museum  ;  the  other
on  the  celebrated  globe  by  Molyneux,  quoted  in  Davis's  summary
account  of  his  voyages,  and  still  preserved  in  the  library  of  the  Middle
Temple.

-  According  to  IJarrow,  this  overturning  is  caused  by  the  melting  and
conscijuent  splitting  of  the  icebergs.


WRITTEN    BY    ABACUK    TRICKETT.  101

Which  when  our  master  saw,  he  made  his  course  to  the
south,  thinking  to  cleere  himselfe  of  the  ice  that  way  :  but
the  more  he  strove  the  worse  he  Avas,  and  the  more  inclosed,
till  wee  could  goe  no  further.  Here  our  master  was  in
dcspaire,  and  (as  he  told  me  after)  he  thought  he  should
never  have  got  out  of  this  ice,  but  there  have  perished.
Therefore  hee  brought  forth  his  card,^  and  shewed  all  the
com  pan  V,  that  hee  was  entered  above  an  hundred  leasfues  Hudson

i         -  '  ^  O      ^     entered  100

further  then  ever  any  English  was  :  and  left  it  to  their  jher"hen"^'
choice,  whether  they  would  proceed  any  further ;  yea,  or  been!""^
nay.  Whereupon  some  were  of  one  minde  and  some  of  ano-
ther, some  wishing  themselves  at  home  and  some  not  caring
where,  so  they  were  out  of  the  ice  :  but  there  were  some
who  then  spake  words,  which  were  remembred  a  great  while
after.

There  was  one  who  told  the  master,  that  if  he  had  an  Discontents,
hundred  pounds,  hee  would  give  foure-score  and  ten  to  be
at  home :   but  the  carpenter  made  answere,  that  if  hee  had
an  hundred,  hee  would  not  give  ten  upon  such  condition,
but  would  thinke  it  to  be  as  good  money  as  ever  he  had  any,

'  There  is  an  evident  blunder  in  Pricket's  rather  vague  recollections.
The  card  here  mentioned  must  have  been  based  on  Weymouth's  explo-
rations, which  Hudson  was  made  acquainted  with  by  Peter  Plancius,
learning,  as  is  expressly  stated,  that  Weymouth  entered  100  leagues  into
the  strait.  If  Hudson  had  really  said  that  he  had  proceeded  100  leagxies
farther  than  any  Englishman,  he  would  be  guilty  either  of  an  idle  boast,
or  of  a  most  enormous  mistake.  Desire  Provokes  (Akpatok),  which  he
reached  immediately  after  the  mutiny,  is  no  more  than  60  leagues  even
from  the  north-eastern  extremity  of  the  strait  (where  he  entered  it).
Several  of  his  statements,  beside  the  chart,  prove  that  he  had  a  very  fair
idea  of  the  distances  he  had  sailed.  It  is  therefore  impossible  to  suppose
that  he  believed  himself  to  be  200  leagues  from  the  mouth  of  the  strait,
when  he  was  really  not  more  than  60.  The  following  explanation  may,
perhaps,  solve  the  difficulty.  Hudson  had,  undoubtedly,  not  sailed  200
leagues  into  the  strait,  when  the  mutiny  took  place.  He  had,  however,
most  probably  sailed  200  leagues  within  it,  exploring,  as  he  did,  both
the  northern  and  southern  shore,  which  are  in  some  places  more  than
4  degrees  (80  leagues)  distant  from  each  other.  The  scene  of  the  mutiny
is  in  Ungava  Bay,  between  the  south-eastern  shore  and  Akpatok  island.


102         A    LARCxER    DISCOURSE    OF    THE    SAME    VOYAGE,

and  to  bring  it  as  well  home,  by  the  leave  of  God.     After
many  words  to  no  purpose,  to  workc  we  must  on  all  hands,
to  get  ourselves  out  and  to  cleerc  our  ship.     After  much
labour  and  time  spent,  we  gained  roome  to  turne  our  ship
in,  and  so  by  little  and  little,  to  get  cleere   in  the   sea   a
league  or  two  off,  our  course  being  north  and  north-west.
In  the  end  we  raysed  land  to  the  south-west,  high  land  and
Dosire        covcrcd  witli  suow.     Our  master  named  this  land.  Desire
Provokes.'    Lying  here,  wee  heard  the  noyse  of  a  great  over-
fall of  a  tyde,  that  came  out  of  the  land :  for  now  we  might
see  well  that  wee  had  beene  embayed  before,  and  time  had
made  us  know,  being  so  well  acquainted  with  the  ice,  that
when  night,  or  foggie  or  foule  weather  tooke  us,  we  would
seek  out  the  broadest  iland  of  ice  and  there  come  to  anchor.
Exercises  of  and  runue,  and  sport,  and  fill  water  that  stood  on  the  ice  in
nii.i  profit     ponds,  both  sweete  and  ffood.     But  after  we  had  brou2:ht

on  the  ice.      ^    .  °  °

this  land  to  beare  south  of  us,  we  had  the  tyde  and  the  cur-

Difference    ^'^^t  to  opcu  thc  icc,  as  bciug  carricd  first  one  way  and  then

bayes.^"''"   auotlicr:  bvit  in  bayes  they  lye  as  in  a  pond  witliout  moving.

In  this  bay^  where  wee  were  thus  troubled  with  ice,  wee

saw  many  of  those  mountaynes  of  ice  aground,  in  sixc  or

sevenscore   fathome   water.     In  this   our   course   we  saw  a

bcare  ujion  a  piece  of  ice  by  itsclfe,  to  the  which  our  men

gave  chase  with  their  boat :  but  before  they  came  nigh  her,

Jce  about     the  tyde  had  carried  thc  ice  and  the  beare  on  it,  and  joined  it

lUOl'ulliunu'.       .  .  I'll

with   the   other  ice  :    so   they  lost   their  labour,  and  came
aboord  againe.

^  Akpatok  island.  There  is  again  some  confusion  in  the  course  as
given  by  Pricket.  It  lies  too  much  west  and  not  enough  south.  The  posi-
tive statement  by  Hudson,  that  he  was  in  59°  IG'  a  few  days  before
he  reached  Desire  Provokes,  in  G0°,  proves  beyond  all  doubt  that  the
scene  of  these  explorations  was  Ungava  Bay,  and  that  Desire  Provokes
is  Akpatok.  This  is  also  supported  by  Pricket's  own  statement  (see
note  2)  that  they  had  been  embayed  before  thoy  reached  Desire  Provokes.

"  Thc  bay  in  which  thoy  had  been  embayed  before  they  reached
Desire  Pruvokes  (sec  nine  Hues  higher  up),  that  is  to  say,  Ungava  Bay.


WRITTEN    BY    ABACUK    PRICKETT.  103

We  continued  our  course  to  the  north-west,  and  rayscd
land  to  the  north  of  our  course,  toward  which  we  made,  and
comming  nigh  it,  there  hung  on  the  eastermost  point  many
Hands  of  floting  ice,  and  a  beare  on  one  of  them,  which  from
one  to  another  came  towards  us,  till  she  was  readie  to  come
aboord.  But  when  she  saw  us  looke  at  her,  she  cast  her
head  betweene  her  hinde  legges,  and  then  dived  under  the
ice  :  and  so  from  one  piece  to  another,  till  she  was  out  of
our  reach.  We  stood  along  by  the  land  on  the  south  side
ahead  of  us  ;  wee  met  with  ice  that  hung  on  a  point  of  land
that  lay  to  the  south,  more  then  this  that  we  came  up  by  :
which  when  our  master  saw,  he  stood  in  for  the  shoare.  At
the  west  end  of  this  iland  (for  so  it  is)  we  found  an  har-
bour, and  came  in  (at  a  full  sea)  over  a  rocke,  which  had  Adnnyerous

^  V  /  5  rocke.

two  fathome  and  an  halfe  on  it,  and  was  so  much  bare  at  a
low  water.  But  by  the  great  mercie  of  God,  we  came  to  an
anchor  cleere  of  it :  and  close  by  it  our  master  named  them
the  lies  of  Gods  Mercie.     This  is  an  harbour  for  need,  but  uesof  coda

Mercie.

there  must  be  care  had  how  they  came  in.  Heere  our  master
sent  me,  and  others  with  me,  to  discover  to  the  north  and
north-west :  and  in  going  from  one  place  to  another,  we
sprung  a  covey  of  partridges  which  were  young  :  at  the  Partridges.
which  Thomas  Woodhouse  shot,  but  killed  only  the  old
one.

This  iland  is  a  most  barren  place,  having  nothing  on  it  but
plashes  of  water  and  riven  rockes,  as  it  were  subject  to  earth-
quakes. To  the  north  there  is  a  great  bay  or  sea^  (for  I
know  not  what  it  will  prove),  where  I  saw  a  great  iland  of
ice  aground,  betweene  the  two  lands  which  with  the  spring-
tide was  set  afloat,  and  carried  into  this  bay  or  sea  to  the
north-westward,  but  came  not  backe  againe,  nor  within
sight.  Heere  wee  tooke  in  some  drift  wood  that  we  found  Driftwood,
ashoare.

From  hence  we  stood  to  the  south-west,  to  double  the  land
^  Jackman's  sound.


104         A    LARGER    DISCOURSE    OF    THE    SAME    VOYAGE,

to  the  west  of  us/  through  much  floting  ice  :  in  the  ende  wee
found  a  cleere  sea,  and  continued  therein,  till  wee  raysed
land  to  the  north-west.  Then  our  master  made  his  course
more  to  the  south  then  before,  but  it  was  not  long  ere  we
met  with  ice  which  lay  ahead  of  us.  Our  master  would  have
doubled  this  ice  to  the  north,  but  could  not ;  and  in  the  end
put  into  it  downe  to  the  south-west  through  much  ice,  and
then  to  the  south,  where  we  embayed  againe.  Our  master
strove  to  get  the  shoare,  but  could  not,  for  the  great  store  of
ice  that  was  on  the  coast.  From  out  of  this  bay  we  stood  to
the  north,  and  were  soone  out  of  the  ice:  then  downe  to  the
south-west,  and  so  to  the  west,  where  we  were  enclosed  (to
our  sight)  with  land  and  ice.  For  wee  had  land  from  the
south  to  the  north-west  on  one  side,  and  from  the  east  to  the
west  on  the  other  ;  but  the  land  that  was  to  the  north  of  us
and  lay  by  east  and  west,  was  but  an  ilaud.  On  we  went
till  Ave  could  goe  no  further  for  ice  :  so  we  made  our  ship
fast  to  the  ice  which  the  tyde  brought  upon  us,  but  when
the  ebbe  came,  the  ice  did  open,  and  made  way  ;  so  as  in
seven  or  eight  houres  we  were  cleere  from  the  ice,  till  we
came  to  weather ;  but  onely  some  of  the  great  ilands,  that
were  carried  along  with  us  to  the  north-west.

Having  a  cleere  sea,  our  master  stood  to  the  west  along
by  the  south  shoare,  and  raysed  three  capes  or  head-lands

Three  capes,  lying  ouc  aboYC  another.  The  middlemost  is  an  iland,  and
maketh  a  bay  or  harbour,  Avhich  (I  take)  will  prove  a  good

rrince        ouc.    Our  uiastcr  named  them  Prince  Henries  Cape  or  Fore-

Ilciiries

^''^po-  land.  When  we  had  layd  this  we  raised  another,  which  was
the  extreme  point  of  the  land  looking  towards  the  north  :
upon  it  are  two  hills/  but  one  (above  the  rest)  like  an  hay-

^  The  Upper  Savage  Islands,  and  the  land  around  North  Bay.  (62''  30'
N.  ;  70'  W.)

•■»  North  Bluff.  (62°  36'  N.;  71°  26'  W.)

''  A  pretty  accurate  description  of  the  southern  sliorc  of  the  strait,
from  Cape  Hope  (or  Hope's  Advance)  to  Deception  Bay.


WRITTEN    BY    ABACTJK    PRICKETT.  105

cocke,  which  our  master  named  King  James  his  Cape.^    To  King.rnmos

his  Ctipe.

the  north  of  this  lie  ccrtaine  ilancls,  which  our  master  named
Queene  Annes  Cape  or  Fore-Land.~  Wee  followed  the  north  (lueeu
shoare  still,  iieyond  the  Kings  Oape  there  is  a  sound  or
bay,  that  hath  some  Hands  in  it :  and  this  is  not  to  be  for-
gotten, if  need  be.  Beyond  this  lyeth  some  broken  land,
close  to  the  maync,  but  what  it  is  I  know  not,  because  we
passed  by  it  in  the  night.

Wee  stood  to  the  north  to  double  this  land,  and  after  to
the  west  againe,  till  wee  fell  with  land  that  stretched  from
the  mayne,  like  a  shewer^  from  the  south  to  the  north,  and
from  the  north  to  the  west,  and  then  downe  to  the  south
againe.  Being  short  of  this  land  a  storme  took  us,  the  wind
at  west :  we  stood  to  the  north  and  raised  land,  which  when
our  master  saw  he  stood  to  the  south  againe,  for  he  was
loath  at  any  time  that  wee  should  see  the  north  shoare.  The
storme  continuing,  and  comming  to  the  south  shoare  againe,  Nntc
our  master  found  him.self  shot  to  the  west  a  great  way,  which
made  him  muse,  considering  his  leeward  way.  To  the  south-
west of  this  land,  on  the  mayne,  there  is  an  high  hill,  which
our  master  named  Mount  Charles.*    To  the  north  and  beyond  Mnnnt

Cliiirles.

this  lieth  an  Hand,  that  to  the  east  had  a  faire  head,  and

1  Probably  Cape  Weggs.    (G2'  25'  N.  ;  73°  40'  W.)

2  Evidently  north-east  of  Charles's  island  ;  about  63°  50'  N.;  73°  40'  W.
This  shore  is  very  imperfectly  known,  at  least  according  to  the  last
Admiralty  chart  of  the  Arctic  Sea  (1853) ;  and  it  would  be  hazardous  to
make  any  positive  statement  about  this  site.

^  A  skewer  1  The  rather  confused  course,  before  and  afterwards,  till
they  reached  Charles  Island,  allows  us  no  satisfactory  guess  about  the
position  of  this  s/iewer  or  skewer.  Did  they  perhaps  fall  in  with  Charles
Island,  then  sail  to  the  north,  then  a  little  to  the  west,  and  then  to  the
south,  and  thus  again  to  Charles  Island  1  The  above  description  is  in
accordance  with  the  real  aspect  of  the  northern  shore  of  the  island.

*  Charles's  Island.  According  to  Becherelle,  "  siiue  a  30  ou  35  kilo-
metres  de  la  cote  N.  du  Labrador,  dans  le  detroit  de  Hudson,  long,  de  3(i
kil.  sur  40  ;  lat.  68°  40'  ;  longit.  77°  20'."  Hudson  mistook  it  for  part  of
the  mainland.  ^


106  A    LARGER    DISCOURSE    OF    THE    SAME    VOYAGE,

beyond  it  to  the  west  other  broken  land/  which  niakcth  a
bay  within,  and  a  good  road  may  be  found  there  for  ships.
Cape  Sals-    Qyj.  niastor  named  tbe  first  Cape  Salsburie.^

bune.  '■

When  we  had  left  this  to  the  north-east,  we  fell  into  a
rippling  or  overfall  of  a  current,  which  at  the  first  we  tooke
to  bee  a  shoald  :  but  the  lead  being  cast,  wee  had  no
ground.  On  we  passed,  still  in  sight  of  the  south  shoarc,
till  we  raised  land  lying  from  the  mayne  some  two  leagues.
Our  master  tooke  this  to  bee  a  part  of  the  mayne  of  the
north  land ;  but  it  is  an  iland,  the  north  side  stretching  out
to  the  west  more  then  the  south.  This  iland  had  a  faire
head  to   the   east,   and  very  high  land,  which   our   master

Deepes  named  Decpes  Cape  :^  and  the  land  on  the  south  side,  now
fidling  away  to  the  south,  makes  another  cape  or  headland.

Worsen-       whicli  our  master  named  Worsenhams  Cape.*     AVhen  wee

linms  Cape.

were  nigh  the  North  or  Iland  Cape,  our  master  sent  the  boat
ashoare,  with  my  selfe  (who  had  the  charge)  and  the  car-
penter, and  divers  others,  to  discover  to  the  west  and  north-
west, and  to  the  south-west ;  but  we  had  further  to  it  then
we  thought,  for  the  land  is  very  high,  and  we  were  over-
taken with  a  storme  of  rainc,  thunder  and  lightning.  But
to  it  we  came  on  the  north-east  side,  and  up  we  got  from
one  rock  to  another,  till  we  came  to  the  highest  of  that  part.
Bccro.  Here  we  found  some  plaine  ground,  and  saw  some  deere  ;
as  first,  foure  or  five,  and  after,  a  dozen  or  sixteene  in  an
herd,  but  could  not  come  nigh  them  -with  a  musket  shot.

Thus,  going  from  one  place  to  another,  wee  saw  to  the
west  of  us  an  high  hill  above  all  the  rest,  it  being  nigh  us  :
but  it  proved  further  ofi^"  then  we  made  account ;  for,  when

'  Pricket's  statement  is  obscure.  Docs  he  mean  that  the  brokon  land
here  mentioned  lies  east  or  west  of  Salisbury  Island  I

2  Salisbury  Island,  (J3°  40'  N.;  7^"  W.  It  is  marked  as  an  island  (not
as  a  cape)  on  the  chart.  That  clears  up  one  part  of  Pricket's  confused
sentence,  the  other  part  remains  obscure.

'   /■''//,'A'i  "ot  Deepes.     For  the  real  locality,  see  above,  p.  !)7,note  ;">.

■'  ('.  VVolstenhclmc.


^VRITTEN  BY  ABACUK  I'RICKETT.  107

wee  came  to  it,  the  land  was  so  steepe  on  the  cast  and  north-
east parts  that  wee  couki  not  get  unto  it.  To  the  south-
west we  saw  that  Avee  might,  and  towards  that  ^lart  wee  went
along  by  the  side  of  a  great  pond  of  water,  which  lieth
under  the  east  side  of  this  hill :  and  there  runneth  out  of  it
a  streame  of  water  as  much  as  would  drive  an  over-shot
mill;  which  falleth  downe  from  an  high  clifFe  into  the  sea
on  the  south  side.     In  this  place  great  store  of  fowle  breed,  5'T"'i

I  O  '  tuule  aim

and  there  is  the  best  grasse  that  I  had  scene  since  we  came  s'''"'''"-
from  England.     Here  wee  found  sorell,  and  that  which  wee  g",','®" ""''
call  scurvy-grass  in  great  abundance.     Passing  along  wee  ^"'^'*''"
saw  some  round  hills  of  stone,  like  to  grasse  cockes,  which
at  the  first  I  tooke  to  be  the  worke  of  some  Christian.     Wee
passed  by  them,  till  we  came  to  the  south  side  of  the  hill ;
we  went  unto  them  and  there  found  more  ;  and  being  nigh
them  I   turned   off  the   uppermost  stone,   and  found   them
hollow  within  and  full  of  fowles  hanged  by  their  neckes.  ^°i7gej.
Then  Greene  and  I  went  to  fetch  the  boat  to  the  south-

side,  while  Robert  Billet^  and  hee  got  downe  a  valley  to  the
sea  side,  where  wee  tooke  them  in.

Our  mas  (in  this  time)  came  in  betweene  the  two  lands,
and  shot  off  some  peeces  to  call  us  aboord  ;  for  it  Avas  a
fogge.  Wee  came  aboord  and  told  him  what  we  had  scene,
and  perswaded  him  to  stay  a  day  or  two  in  this  place,  telling
him  what  refreshing  might  there  bee  had  :  but  by  no  meanes
would  he  stay,  who  was  not  pleased  with  the  motion.  So
we  left  the  fowle,  and  lost  our  way  downe  to  the  south-west,
before  they  went  in  sight  of  the  land  which  now  beares  to
the  east  from  us,  being  the  same  mayne  land  that  wee  had
all  this  while  followed.  Now  we  had  lost  the  sight  of  it,
because  it  falleth  away  to  the  east  after  some  five  and  twenty

'  Robert  Bylot  (thus  his  name  is  written  by  Fox  and  Purchas),  was
perhaps  the  most  active  northern  navigator  after  Hudson  had  perished.
He  was  also,  as  we  shall  see,  made  captain  of  Hudson's  ship,  after  Green's
death,  and  brought  her  safely  home.


108  A    LARGER    UISCOURSH    OF    THE    SAME    VOYAGE,

or  thirty  leagues/  Now  we  came  to  the  shallow  water,
Avhercwith  wee  were  not  acquainted  since  we  came  from
Island ;  now  we  came  into  broken  ground  and  rockes,
through  which  wc  passed  downe  to  the  south.  In  this  our
course  we  had  a  storme,  and  the  water  did  shoald  apace.
Our  master  came  to  an  anchor  in  fifteene  fathoms  water.

Wee  weighed  and  stood  to  the  south-east,  because  the  land
in  this  place  did  lie  so.  When  we  came  to  the  point  of  the
west  land'-^  (for  we  now  had  land  on  both  sides  of  us),  we
came  to  an  anchor.  Our  master  sent  the  boat  ashoare  to
see  what  that  land  was,  and  whether  there  were  any  ^vay
through.  They  soone  returned,  and  shewed  that  beyond
the  point  of  land  to  the  south  there  was  a  large  sea.  This
land  on  the  west  side  was  a  very  narrow  point.  Wee  weighed
from  hence  and  stood  in  for  this  sea  betAveene  the  two  lands,
Avhich  (in  this  place)  is  not  two  leagues  broad  downe  to  the
south,  for  a  great  M'ay  in  sight  of  the  east  shoare.  In  the
end  we  lost  sight  thereof,  and  saw  it  not  till  we  came  to  the
bottome  of  the  bay,  into  sixc  or  seven  fathomes  water.
Hence  Ave  stood  up  to  the  north  by  the  west  shoare,  till  Avee
came  to  an  iland  in  53,^  Avhere  we  tooke  in  water  and  ballast.

From  hence  wee  passed  tOAvards  the  north  :  but  some  two
or  three  dayes  after  (reasoning  concerning  our  coniming
into  this  bay  and  going  oiit)  our  master  took  occasion  to
revive  old  matters,  and  to  displace  Robert  Juct  from  being
his  mate,  and  the  boatswaine  from  his  place,  for  the  Avords
spoken  in  the  first  great  bay  of  ice.      Then  lice  made  Kobcrt

'  Somewhat  to  the  north  of  the  dccj)  recess  called  JMosc^uito  Bay,  the
eastern  shore  of  James  Bay  begins  to  trend  in  a  south-east  direction.

-  Perhaps  Charlton  Island,  in  James's  Bay,  52'  12'  N.,  the  eastern
coast  being  the  terra  firma  of  Labrador.

^  There  are  several  small  islands  in  that  latitude.  They  have  no
names  on  the  charts  the  editor  has  seen.

•*  This  description  corresponds  very  well  Avith  a  recess  in  the  south-
east corner  of  James's  Bay,  which  has  no  name  on  the  charts  I  am
ac(|uainted  witli.     There  is  an  island,  also  without  name,  at  its  mouth.


WRITTEN    BY    ABACUK    PRICKETT.  109

Billet  Ills  mate,  and  AVilliam  Wilson  our  boatswaine.  Up
to  the  north  wee  stood  till  we  raised  land,  then  down  to  the
south,  and  up  to  the  north,  then  downc  againe  to  the  south:
and  on  Michaelmasse  day  came  in  and  went  out  of  certaine  Mieimei-

masse  day

lands,  which  our  master  sets  downe  by  the  name  of  Michael-  and  bay.
masse  Bay,'  because  we  came  in  and  went  out  on  that  day.
From  hence  wee  stood  to  the  north,  and  came  into  shoald
water  ;  and  the  weather  being  thicke  and  foule,  wee  came  to
an  anchor  in  seven  or  eight  fathome  water,  and  there  lay
eight  dayes  :  in  all  which  time  wee  could  not  get  one  houre
to  weigh  our  anchor.  But  the  eight  day,  the  wind  begin-
ning to  cease,  our  master  would  have  the  anchor  up,  against
the  mind  of  all  who  knew  what  belonged  thereunto.  Well,
to  it  we  went,  and  when  we  had  brought  it  to  a  peake,  a  sea
tooke  her,  and  cast  us  all  off  from  the  capstone  and  hurt
divers  of  us.  Here  wee  lost  our  anchor,  and  if  the  carpenter  Anchor  lost.
had  not  beene,  we  had  lost  our  cable  too  ;  but  he  (fearing
such  a  matter)  was  ready  with  his  axe,  and  so  cut  it.

From  hence  we  stood  to  the  south  and  to  the  south-west,
through  a  cleere  sea  of  divers  sounding,  and  came  to  a  sea  seaoftwo

^  .  .  colours.

of  two  colours,  one  blacke  and  the  other  white,  sixteene  or
seventeene  fathome  water,  betvveene  which  we  went  foure
or  five  leagues.  But  the  night  comming  we  tooke  in  our
top-sayles,  and  stood  afore  the  wind  with  our  maine-sayle
and  fore-sayle,  and  came  into  five  or  sixe  fathomes,  and  saw
no  land,  for  it  was  darke.  Then  we  stood  to  the  east  and  had
deepe  water  againe,  then  to  the  south  and  south-Avest,  and
so  came  to  our  westermost  bay  of  all,^  and  came  to  an  anchor
neerest  to  the  north  shoare.  Out  went  our  boat  to  the  land
that  was  next  us;  when  they  came  neere  it  our  boat  could
not  flote  to  the  shoare  it  was  so  shallow  :  yet  ashoare  they
got.  Here  our  men  saw  the  footing  of  a  man  and  a  ducke  Footing  of
in  the  snowy  rockes,  and  wood  good  store,  whereof  they

^  Hannah  Bay  1

^  Probably  North  Bay,  the  south-west  corner  of  James's  Bay.


no


A    LARGER    DISCOURSE    OF    THE    SAME    VOYAGE,


tooke  some  and  returned  aboord.  Being  at  anchor  in  this
place,  we  saw  a  ledge  of  rockcs  to  the  south  of  us,  some
league  of  length  ;  it  lay  north  and  south,  covered  at  a  full
sea;  for  a  strong  tide  setteth  in  here.  At  midnight  wee
weighed,  and  stood  to  go  out  as  we  came  in  ;  and  had  not
gone  long,  but  the  carpenter  came  and  told  the  master,  that
if  he  kept  that  course  he  would  be  upon  the  rockes :  the
master  conceived  that  he  was  past  them,  when  presently  wee
ranne  on  them,  and  there  stucke  fast  twelve  houres  ;  but  (by
the  mercy  of  God)  we  got  off  unhurt,  though  not  unscarred.

Wee  stood  up  to  the  east  and  raysed  three  hills,  lying
north  and  south  :  we  went  to  the  furthermost,  and  left  it  to
the  north  of  us,  and  so  into  a  bay,  where  we  came  to  an
anchor.^  Here  our  master  sent  out  our  boat,  with  myselfe
and  the  carpenter  to  seeke  a  place  to  winter  in  ;  and  it  was
time,  for  the  nights  were  long  and  cold,  and  the  earth
covered  with  snow.  Having  spent  three  moneths  in  a
labyrinth  without  end,  being  now  the  last  of  October,  we
went  downc  to  the  east,  to  the  bottome  of  the  bay  ;  but  re-
turned without  speeding  of  that  we  went  for.  The  next  day
we  went  to  the  south  and  the  south-west,  and  found  a  place,
whereunto  we  brought  our  ship,  and  haled  her  aground  :  and
this  was  the  Jirst  of  November.  By  the  tenth  thereof  we
were  frozen  in :  but  now  we  were  in,  it  behoved  us  to  have
care  of  what  we  had ;  for  that  we  were  sure  of,  but  what  we
had  not  was  uncertainc.

Wee  were  victualled  for  six  moneths  in  good  proportion,
and  of  that  which  was  good  :  if  our  master  would  have  had
more,  he  might  have  had  it  at  home  and  in  other  places.
Here  we  were  now,  and  therefore  it  behoved  us  so  to  spend,
that  we  might  have  (when  time  came)  to  bring  us  to  the
capes  where  the  fowle  bred,*^  for  that  was  all  the  hope  wee

^  Probably  the  south-eastern  corner  of  James'  Bay.  This  bay  cor-
responds in  almost  every  respect  with  the  above  description.

■■'  Capo  Wostcnholmc  and  the  opposite  cape  on  one  of  the  Diggs'
J.shuuls  (sec  p.  107).


WUTTTEN    BY    ABACUK    PRICKETT.  Ill

had  to  bring  us  home.  AVhcrcfore  our  master  toolcc  order,
first  for  tlie  spending  of  that  Avee  had,  and  then  to  increase
it,  by  propounding  a  reward  to  them  that  killed  either  beast,
fish,  or  fowle,  as  in  his  journall  you  have  seene.  About  the
middle  of  this  moneth  of  Noccmhcr,  dyed  John  Williams, '•^o^mW''-,

'       •>  '  liams  dyeth.

our  gunner  :  God  pardon  the  masters  uncharitable  dealing
Avith  this  man.  Now  for  that  I  am  come  to  speake  of  him,
out  of  whose  ashes  (as  it  were)  that  unhappy  deed  grew
which  brought  a  scandall  upon  all  that  are  returned  home,
and  upon  the  action  itselfc,  the  multitude  (like  the  dog)  run-
ning after  the  stone,  but  not  at  the  caster  :  therefore,  uot  to
wrong  the  living  nor  slander  the  dead,  I  will  (by  the  leave
of  God)  deliver  the  truth  as  neere  as  I  can.

You  shall  understand  that  our  master  kept   (in  his  house
at  London)  a  young  man,  named  Henrie  Greene,  borne  in  Hemy

•'  '-'  '  Greenes

Kent,  of  worshipful!  parents,  but  by  his  lend  life  and  con-  Ij-'t'lo"^,"""
versation  hee  had  lost  the  good  will  of  all  his  frinds,  and
had  spent  all  that  hee  had.  This  man  our  master  would
have  to  sea  with  him,  because  he  could  write  well :  our
master  gave  him  meate,  and  drinke,  and  lodging,  and  by
meanes  of  one  Master  Venson,  with  much  adoe  got  foure
pounds  of  his  mother  to  buy  him  clothes,  wherewith  Master
Venson  would  not  trust  him  :  but  saw  it  laid  out  himselfe.
This  Henrie  Greene  was  not  set  downe  in  the  owners  booke,
nor  any  wages  made  for  him.  Hee  came  first  aboord  at
Gravesend,  and  at  Harwich  should  have  gone  into  the  field,
with  one  Wilkinson.  At  Island^  the  surgeon  and  hee  fell
out  in  Dutch,  and  hee  beat  him  a  shoare'"'  in  English,  which
set  all  the  company  in  a  rage  ;  so  that  wee  had  much  adoe
to  get  the  surgeon  aboord.  T  told  the  master  of  it,  but  hee
bade  mee  let  it  alone,  for  (said  he)  the  surgeon  had  a  tongue
that  would  wrong  the  best  friend  hee  had.  But  Tlobert
Juet  (the  masters  mate)  would  needs  burne  his  finger  in  the
embers,  and  told  the  carpenter  a  long  tale  (when  hee  was
^  A  Iceland.  ^  A  sore  ?


112  A    LARGER    DISCOURSE    OF    THE    SAME    VOYAGE,

tlrunke)  that  our  master  had  brought  in  Greene  to  cracke
his  credit  that  shouhl  displease  him  :  which  words  came  to
the  masters  cares,  Avho  when  hee  vmderstood  it,  would  have
gone  backc  to  Island,  when  he  was  fortie  leagues  from
thence,  to  have  sent  home  his  mate  Robert  Juet  in  a  fisher-
man. But,  being  otherAvise  perswaded,  all  was  well.  So
Henry  Greene  stood  upright,  and  very  inward  with  the
master,  and  was  a  serviceable  man  every  way  for  manhood  :
but  for  religion  he  would  say,  he  was  cleane  paper  whereon
he  might  write  what  he  would.  Xow,  M'hen  our  gunner  was
dead,  and  (as  the  order  is  in  such  cases)  if  the  company
stand  in  need  of  any  thing  that  belonged  to  the  man  de-
ceased, then  is  it  brought  to  the  mayne  mast,  and  there  sold
to  them  that  will  give  most  for  the  same.  This  gunner  had
a  gray  cloth  gowne,  which  Greene  prayed  the  master  to
friend  him  so  much  as  to  let  him  have  it,  paying  for  it  as
another  would  give  :  the  master  saith  hee  should,  and  there-
upon he  answered  some,  that  sought  to  have  it,  that  Greene
should  have  it,  and  none  else,  and  so  it  rested.
Greenes  Now  out  of  scasou  and  time  the  master  calleth  the  car-

penter to  goe  in  hand  with  an  house  on  shear e,  which  at  the
beginning  our  master  would  not  heare,  when  it  might  have
been  done.  The  carpenter  told  him,  that  the  snow  and  frost
were  such,  as  hee  neither  could  nor  would  goe  in  hand  with
such  worke.  Which  when  our  master  heard,  hee  ferreted
him  out  of  his  cabbin  to  strike  him,  calling  him  by  many
foule  names,  and  threatning  to  hang  him.  The  carpenter
told  him  that  hee  knew  what  belonged  to  his  place  better
than  himselfe,  and  that  hee  Avas  no  house  carpenter.  So  this
passed,  and  the  house  was  (after)  made  with  much  labour,  but
to  no  end.  The  next  day  after  the  master  and  the  carpenter
fell  out,  the  carpenter  tooke  his  peece'  and  Henry  Greene
with  him,  lor  it  was  an  order  that  none  should  goe  out  alone,
but  one  with  u  pecee,  and  another  with  a  pike.     This  did

'His  iivm.


conspiiacie.


WRITTEN    BY    ABACUK    PRICKETT.  113

move  the  master  so  much  the  more  against  Henry  Greene,
that  Robert  Billot  his  mate  must  have  the  gownc,  and  had
it  delivered  unto  him  ;  which  when  Henry  Greene  saw,  he
challenged  the  masters  promise  :  but  the  master  did  so  raile
on  Greene,  with  so  many  words  of  disgrace,  telling  him,
that  all  his  friends  would  not  trust  him  with  twenty  shillings,
and  therefore  why  should  he.  As  for  wages  he  had  none,
uor  none  should  have,  if  he  did  not  please  him  well.  Yet
the  master  had  promised  him  to  make  his  wages  as  good  as
any  mans  in  the  ship  ;  and  to  have  him  one  of  the  princes
guard  when  we  came  home.  But  you  shall  see  how  the
devil  out  of  this  so  wrought  with  Green,  that  he  did  the
master  what  mischiefe  hee  could  in  seeking  to  discredit  him,
and  to  thrust  him  and  many  other  honest  men  out  of  the  ship
in  the  end.  To  speake  of  all  our  trouble  in  this  time  of
winter  (which  was  so  cold,  as  it  lamed  the  most  of  our  com-  Their  hard

wiiitriiig.

pany,  and  my  selfe  doe  yet  feele  it)  would  bee  too  tedious.

But  I  must  not  forget  to  shew  how  mercifully  God  dealt
with  us  in  this  time  ;  for  the  space  of  three  moneths  wee  had
such  store  of  fowle  of  one  kinde  (which  were  partridsres  as  store  of

^  J.  o  partridges.

white  as  milke)  that  wee  killed  above  an  hundred  dozen,
besides  others  of  sundry  sorts  :  for  all  was  fish  that  came  to
the  net.  The  spring  coming  this  fowle  left  us,  yet  they  were
with  us  all  the  extreame  cold.     Then  in  their  places  came  other fowies

succeeding

divers  sort  of  other  fowle,  as  swanne,  geese,  duck,  and  teale, '°  '■''^'''

■^  ^  o  ^  '  ^  seasous.

but  hard  to  come  by.  Our  master  hoped  they  would  have
bred  in  those  broken  grounds,  but  they  doe  not ;  but  came
from  the  south,  and  flew  to  the  north,  further  then  we  were
this  voyage  ;  yet  if  they  be  taken  short  with  the  wind  at
north,  or  north-west,  or  north-east,  then  they  fall  and  stay
till  the  winde  serve  them,  and  then  flye  to  the  north.  Now
in  time  these  fowles  are  gone,  and  few  or  none  to  be
scene.  Then  wee  went  into  the  woods,  hilles,  and  valleycs,
for  all  things  that  had  any  shew  of  substance  in  them,  how
vile  soever  :  the  mosse  of  the  ground,  then  the  which  I  take  ^f'f  "bie

"  '  diet.


114         A    LARGER    DISCOURSE    OF    THE    SAME    VOYAGE,

the  powder  of  a  post  to  bee  much  better,  and  the  frogge  (in
his  ingcndring  time  as  loathsome  as  a  toade)  was  not  spared.
But  amongst  the  divers  sorts  of  buds,  it  pleased  God  that
Thomas  Woodhousc  brought  home  a  budde  of  a  tree  full  of
a  turpentine  substance.      Of  this  our  surgeon  made  a  dc-

budde'""''''''  coction  to  drinke,  and  applyed  the  buddes  hot  to  them  that
were  troubled  with  ach  in  any  part  of  their  bodies  ;  and  for
my  part  I  confcsse,  I  received  great  and  present  ease  of  my
paine.^

Asavnge.  About  this  time,  when  the  ice  began  to  breahe  out  of  the
bayes,  there  came  a  savage  to  our  ship,  as  it  were  to  see  and
to  bee  scene,  being  the  first  that  wc  had  scene  in  all  this
time  :  whom  our  master  intreated  well,  and  made  much  of
him,  promising  unto  himselfe  great  matters  by  his  mcanes,
and  therefore  would  have  all  the  knives  and  hatchets  (which
any  man  had)  to  his  private  use,  but  received  none  but  from
John  King  the  carpenter,  and  my  selfe.  To  this  savage  our
master  gave  a  knife,  a  looking-glasse,  and  buttons,  who
received  them  thankefully,  and  made  signes  that  after  hee
had  slcjit  hee  would  come  againe,  W'hich  hee  did.  When
hee  came  hee  brought  with  him  a  sled,  which  hee  drew  after

Tmke.  him,  and  upon  it  two  deeres  skinnes  and  two  beaver  skinnes.
Hee  had  a  scrip  under  his  arme,  out  of  which  hee  drew  those
things  which  the  master  had  given  him.  Hee  tookc  the
knife  and  laid  it  upon  one  of  the  beaver  skinnes,  and  his
glasses  and  buttons  upon  the  other,  and  so  gave  them  to  the
master,  who  received  them ;  and  the  savage  tookc  those
things  which  the  master  had  given  him,  and  put  them  up
into  his  scrip  againe.  Then  the  master  shewed  him  an
hatchet,  for  which  hee  would  have  given  the  master  one  of

^  The  decoction  here  mentioned  was  probably  an  antiscorbutic  medi-
cine. Pricket's  description  of  the  malady,  though  so  extremely  vague,
seems  to  justify  this  opinion.  The  editor  has  been  unable  to  ascertain
what  tree  Pricket  refers  to,  or  whether  it  is  still  ai>plicd  to  medical
l>urposes.


WRITTEN    BY    ABACUK    TRICKETT.  llO

his  dcere  skinnes,  but  our  master  would  have  them  both,
and  so  hee  had,  although  not  wilHngly.  After  many  signes
of  people  to  the  north  and  to  the  south,  and  that  after  so
many  sleepes  he  would  come  againe,  he  went  his  way,  but
never  came  more.

Now  the  ice  being  out  of  the  sounds,  so  that  our  boat
might  go  from  one  place  unto  another,  a  company  of  men
were  appointed  by  the  master  to  go  a  fishing  with  our  net ;
their  names  were  as  followeth  :  William  Wilson,  Henry
Greene,  Michael  Perce,  John  Thomas,  Andrew  Motor,
Bennet  Mathewes,  and  Arnold  Lodlo.  These  men,  the  first
day  they  went,  caught  five  hundred  fish,  as  big  as  good
herrings,  and  some  troutes  :  which  put  us  all  in  some  hope
to  have  our  wants  supplied,  and  our  commons  amended  :  but
these  were  the  most  that  ever  they  got  in  one  day,  for  many
dayes  they  got  not  a  quarter  so  many.  In  this  time  of  their
fishing,  Henry  Green  and  William  Wilson,  with  some  others,
plotted  to  take  the  net  and  the  shallop,  which  the  carpenter
had  now  set  up,  and  so  to  shift  for  themselves.  But  the  shallop
being  readie,  our  master  would  goe  in  it  himselfe  to  the  south
and  south-west,  to  see  if  hee  could  meete  with  the  people;  for
to  that  end  was  it  set  up,  and  (that  way)  wee  might  see  the
woods  set  on  fire  by  them.  So  the  master  tooke  the  sayne  and
the  shallop,  and  so  much  victuall  as  would  serve  for  eight  or
nine  dayes,  and  to  the  south  hee  w^ent.  They  that  remained
aboord  were  to  take  in  water,  wood,  and  ballast,  and  to  have
all  things  in  a  readinesse  against  hee  came  backe.  But  hee  set
no  time  of  his  returne,  for  he  was  perswaded,  if  he  could
meet  with  the  people,  he  should  have  flesh  of  them,  and  that
good  store  :  but  hee  returned  worse  than  hee  went  forth.
For  he  could  by  no  meanes  meete  with  the  people,  although
they  were  neere  them,  yet  they  would  set  the  woods  on  fire
in  his  sight.

Being  returned,  hee  fitted  all  things  for  his  returne,  and
first,  delivered  all  the  bread  out  of  the  bread  roome  (which


Fibbing.


1  16  A    LARGEK    DISCOURSE    OF    THE    SAME    VOYAGE,

came  to  a  pound  a  piece  for  every  mans  share)  and  delivered
also  a  bill  of  rcturne,  willing  them  to  have  that  to  shew,  if  it
pleased  God  that  they  came  home  :  and  hee  wept  when  hee
gave  it  unto  them.  But  to  helpe  us  in  this  poore  estate
with  some  reliefe,  the  boate  and  sayne  went  to  work  on
Friday  morning,  and  stayed  till  Sunday  noone  :  at  which
time  they  came  aboord,  and  brought  fourescore  small  fish,  a
poore  reliefe  for  so  many  hungry  bellies.  Then  we  wayed
and  stood  out  of  our  wintering  place,  and  came  to  an  anchor
without,  in  the  mouth  of  the  bay  :  from  whence  we  wayed
and  came  to  an  anchor  without  in  the  sea,  where  our  bread
being  gone,  that  store  of  cheese  we  had  was  to  stop  a  gap,
whereof  there  were  five,  whereat  the  company  grudged,
because  they  made  account  of  nine.  But  those  that  were  left
were  equally  divided  by  the  master,  although  he  had  coun-
sell  to  the  contrarie  :  for  there  were  some  who  having  it,
would  make  hast  to  bee  rid  thereof,  becavise  they  could  not
governe  it.  I  knew  when  Henrie  Greene  gave  halfe  his
bread,  which  hee  had  for  fourteene  dayes,  to  one  to  keepe,
and  prayed  him  not  to  let  him  have  any  untill  the  next
Munday  :  but  before  Wednesday  at  night  hee  never  left  till
hee  had  it  againe,  having  eaten  up  his  first  weekes  bread
before.  So  Wilson  the  boat-swaine  hath  eaten  (in  one  day)
his  fortnights  bread,  and  hath  beene  two  or  three  dayes
sicke  for  his  labour.  The  cause  that  moved  the  master  to
deliver  all  the  cheese,  was  because  they  M'ere  not  all  of  one
goodncsse,  and  therefore  they  should  see  that  they  had  no
wrong  done  them :  but  every  man  should  have  alike  the
best  and  the  worst  together,  which  was  three  pounds  and  a
halfe  for  seven  dayes.

The  wind  serving,  wc  weighed  and  stood  to  the  north-
west, and  on  IMunday  at  night  (the  eighteenth  day  of  JuneY

^  The  vagueness  of  Pricket's  geographical  statements,  which  pre-
cludes the  satisfactory  determination  of  the  spot  where  Hudson  wintered,
makes  it  equally  impossible  to  ascertain  his  course  during  the  few  days


WRITTEN    BY    ABACUK    PRICKETT.  117

wee  fell  into  the  ice,  and  the  next  clay,  the  wind  being  at
west,  we  lay  there  till  Sunday  in  sight  of  land.  Now  being
here,  the  master  told  Nicholas  Simnies  that  there  would  be
a  breaking  up  of  chests  and  a  search  for  bread,  and  willed
him,  if  hee  had  any,  to  bring  it  to  him,  which  hee  did,  and
delivered  to  the  master  thirty  cakes  in  a  bagge.  This  deed
of  the  master  (if  it  bee  true)  hath  made  me  marvell  what
should  bee  the  reason  that  hee  did  not  stop  the  breach  in
the  beginning,  but  let  it  grow  to  that  height,  as  that  it  over-
threw himselfe  and  many  other  honest  men  :  but  "  there  are
many  devices  in  the  heart  of  man,  hut  the  counsell  of  the
Lord  shall  stand.''''

Being  thus  in  the  ice   on  Saturday,  the  one  and  tiven-
tieth  of  June,  at  night,  Wilson  the  boatswayne,  and  Henry  wuson  and

•^  .  .  .  Green,  their

Greene,  came  to  mee  lying  (in  my  cabbin)  lame,  and  told  wicked-
mee  that  they  and  the  rest  of  their  associates  would  shift
the  company,  and  turne  the  master  and  all  the  sicke  men
into  the  shallop,  and  let  them  shift  for  themselves.  For  there
was  not  fourteen  dales  victuall  left  for  all  the  company,  at
that  poore  allowance  they  were  at,  and  that  there  they  lay,
the  master  not  caring  to  goe  one  way  or  other  :  and  that  they
had  not  eaten  any  thing  these  three  dayes,  and  therefore  were
resolute,  either  to  mend  or  end,  and  what  they  had  begun
they  would  goe  through  with  it,  or  dye.  When  I  heard  this,
I  told  them  I  marvelled  to  heare  so  much  from  them,  con-
sidering that  they  were  married  men,  and  had  wives  and
children,  and  that  for  their  sakes  they  should  not  commit  so
foule  a  thing  in  the  sight  of  God  and  man  as  that  would
bee  ;  for  why  should  they  banish  themselves  from  their
native  countrie  ?  Henry  Greene  bad  me  hold  my  peace,  for
he  knew  the  worst,  which  was,  to  be  hanged  when  hee  came

he  spent  in  his  ship  after  leaving  his  harbour  of  refuge.  The  scene  of
the  important  events  narrated  on  the  present  and  the  next  pages  was  at
no  great  distance  (N.W.)  from  the  south-eastern  corner  of  James  Bay.
It  seems  impossible  to  fix  the  locality  with  any  greater  degree  of  pre-
cision.


118  A    LARGER    DISCOURSE    OF    THE    SAME    VOYAGE,

home,  and  therefore  of  the  two  he  would  rather  be  hanged
at  home  then  starved  abroad  :  and  for  the  good  will  they
bare  me,  they  would  have  mee  stay  in  the  ship.  I  gave
them  thankes,  and  told  them  that  I  came  into  her,  not  to  for-
sake her,  yet  not  to  hurt  my  selfe  and  others  by  any  such
deed.  Henry  Greene  told  me  then,  that  I  must  take  my
fortune  in  the  shallop.  If  there  be  no  remedy  (said  1)  the
will  of  God  bee  done.

Away  went  Henry  Greene  in  a  rage,  swearing  to  cut  his
throat  that  went  about  to  disturbe  them,  and  left  Wilson  by
me,  with  whom  I  had  some  talke,  but  to  no  good  :  for  he
was  so  perswaded,  that  there  was  no  remedie  now  but  to  goe
on  while  it  was  hot,  least  their  partie  should  faile  them,  and
the  mischiefs  they  had  intended  to  others  should  light  on
themselves.  Henry  Greene  came  againe,  and  demanded  of
him  what  I  said.  Wilson  answered  :  He  is  in  his  old  song,
still  patient.  Then  I  spake  to  Henry  Greene  to  stay  three
dayes,  in  which  time  I  would  so  deale  with  the  master  that
all  should  be  well.  So  I  dealt  with  him  to  forbeare  but  two
dayes,  nay  twelve  houres  ;  there  is  no  way  then  (say  they)
but  out  of  hand.  Then  I  told  them,  that  if  they  would  stay
till  Munday,  I  would  joyne  with  them  to  share  all  the  vic-
tuals in  the  ship,  and  would  justify  it  when  I  came  home  ;
but  this  would  not  serve  their  turnes.  Wherefore  I  told
them,  it  was  some  worse  matter  they  had  in  hand  then  they
made  shew  of,  and  that  it  was  bloud  and  revenge  hce  sought,
or  else  he  would  not  at  such  a  time  of  night  undertake  such
a  deed.  Henry  Greene  (with  that)  taketh  my  bible  which
lay  before  me,  and  sware  that  hee  would  doe  no  man  harmc,
and  what  he  did  was  for  the  good  of  the  voyage,  and  for
nothing  else ;  and  that  all  the  rest  should  do  the  like.  The
like  did  Wilson  sweare.
sec'wia"'^^'  Henry  Greene  went  his  way,  and  presently  came  Juet,
nmt  who,  because  hee  was  an  ancient  man,  I  hoped  to  have  found
some  reason  in  him  ;  but  hee  was  worse  than  Henry  Greene,


WRITTEN    BY    ABACUK    PllIClvKTT.  119

for  hee  sware  plainly  that  he  would  justifie  this  deed  when
he  came  home.  After  him  came  John  Thomas  and  iVIichael
Perce  as  birds  of  one  feather  ;  but  because  they  are  not
living,  I  will  let  them  goe,  as  then  I  did.  Then  came  INIoter
and  Bennet,  of  whom  I  demanded,  if  they  were  well  advised
what  they  had  taken  in  hand.  They  answered,  they  were,
and  therefore  came  to  take  their  oath.

Now,  because  I  am  much  condemned  for  this  oath,  as  one
of  them  that  plotted  with  them,  and  that  by  an  oath  I  should
bind  them  together  to  perform  what  they  had  begun,!  thought
good  heere  to  set  downe  to  the  viewe  of  all,  how  well  their
oath   and   deedes   agreed  :    and   thus  it   was  : — "  You  shall  oaiu

"  ahused.

sweare  truth  to  God,  your  prince  and  countrie  :  you  shall
doe  nothing,  but  to  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  the
action  in  hand,  and  harme  to  no  man."  This  was  the  oath,
without  adding  or  diminishing.  I  looked  for  more  of  these
companions  (although  these  were  too  many)  but  there  came
no  more.  It  was  darke,  and  they  in  a  readinesse  to  put  this
deed  of  darkness  in  execution.  I  called  to  Henry  Greene
and  Wilson,  and  prayed  them  not  to  goe  in  hand  with  it  in
the  darke,  but  to  stay  till  the  morning.  Now,  everie  man
(I  hope)  would  goe  to  his  rest,  but  wickednesse  sleepeth
not ;  for  Henry  Greene  keepeth  the  master  company  all
night  (and  gave  mee  bread,  which  his  cabbin-mate  gave
him)  and  others  are  as  -watchfuU  as  he.  Then  I  asked
Henrie  Greene,  whom  he  would  put  out  with  the  master  ?
he  said,  the  carpenter  John  King,  and  the  sicke  men.  I
said,  they  should  not  doe  well  to  part  with  the  carpenter,
what  need  soever  they  should  have.  Why  the  carpenter
was  in  no  more  regard  amongst  them  was,  first,  for  that  he
and  John  King  were  condemned  for  wrong  done  in  the
victuall.  But  the  chiefest  cause  Avas  for  that  the  master
loved  him  and  made  him  his  mate,  upon  his  return  out
of  our  wintering  place,  thereby  displacing  Robert  Billet,
whereat  they  did  grudge,  because  hee  could  neither  write


120         A    LARGER    DISCOURSE    OF    THE    SAME    VOYAGE,

nor  read.  And  therefore  (said  they)  the  master  and  his
ignorant  mate  would  carry  the  ship  whither  the  master
pleased :  the  master  forbidding  any  man  to  keepe  account
or  reckoning,  having  taken  from  all  men  whatsoever  served
for  that  purpose.  Well,  I  obtained  of  Henry  Greene  and
Wilson  that  the  carpenter  should  stay,  by  whose  meancs  I
hoped  (after  they  had  satisfied  themselves)  that  the  master
and  the  poore  man  might  be  taken  into  the  ship  againe.  Or,
I  hoped,  that  some  one  or  other  would  give  some  notice,
either  to  the  carpenter  John  King  or  the  master ;  for  so  it
might  have  come  to  passe  by  some  of  them  that  were  the
most  forward.

Now,  it  shall  not  bee  amisse  to  shew  how  wee  were
lodged,  and  to  begin  in  the  cooke  roome  ;  there  lay  Bennet
and  the  cooper  lame ;  without  the  cooke  roome,  on  the
steere-board  side,  lay  Thomas  Wydhouse^  sicke ;  next  to
him  lay  Sydrack  Funer  lame  ;  then  the  surgeon,  and  John
Hudson  with  him ;  next  to  them  lay  Wilson  the  boatswaine,
and  then  Arnold  Lodlo  next  to  him  :  in  the  gun-roome  lay
Bobert  Juet  and  John  Thomas ;  on  the  larboord  side  lay
Michael  Bute  and  Adria  Moore,  who  had  never  beene  well
since  wee  lost  our  anchor  ;  next  to  them  lay  Michael  Perce
and  Andrew  Meter.  Next  to  them,  without  the  gun-roome,
lay  John  King,  and  with  him  Bobert  Billet  r  next  to  them
my  selfe,  and  next  to  me  Francis  Clements.  In  the  mid-
ship, betweenc  the  capstone  and  the  pumpes,  lay  Hcnrie
Greene  and  Nicholas  Simines.  This  night  John  King  was
late  up,  and  they  thought  he  had  beene  with  the  master,  but
he  was  with  the  carpenter,  who  lay  on  the  poope,  and  coni-
ming  downe  from  him  was  met  by  his  cabbin-mate,  as  it
were  by  chance,  and  so  they  came  to  their  cabbin  together.
It  was  not  long  ere  it  was  day  :  then  came  Bennet  for  water

'  The  "  student  of  mathcniatics,"  whose  "paper  t'ounJ  in  his  desk"
foiiiis  part  of  the  present  collection.
■■'  JJylut.


ABSTRACT    OF    THE    JOURNAL.  121

for  the  kettle,  hee  rose  and  went  into  the  hohl :  when  hec
was  in  they  shut  the  hatch  on  him  (but  who  kept  it  clownc
I  know  not),  up  upon  the  deck  went  Bennet.

In  the  meane  time  Henrie  Greene  and  another  went  to
the  carpenter,  and  held  him  with  a  talke  till  the  master
came  out  of  his  cabbin  (which  hee  soone  did)  ;  then  came  They  bind

tlio  master

John  Thomas  and  Bennet  before  him,  while  \yilson  bound

his  amies  behind  him.     He  asked  them  what  they  meant  ?

they  told  him  he  should  know  when  he  was  in  the  shallop.

Now  Juet,  while  this  was  a  doing,  came  to  John  King  into

the  hold,  who  was  provided  for  him,  for  he  had  got  a  sword

of  his  own,  and  kept  him  at  a  bay,  and  might  have  killed  him,

but  others  came  to  helpe  him  :  and  so  he  came  up  to  the

master.     The  master  called  to  the  carpenter  and  told  him

that  he  was  bound,  but  I  heard  no  answere  he  made.     Now

Arnold  Lodlo  and  Michael  Bute  rayled  at  them,  and  told

them   their  knaverie   would  shew   itselfe.      Then   was   the

shallop  haled  up  to  the  ship  side,  and  the  poore,  sicke,  and

lame  men  were  called  upon  to  get  them  out  of  their  cabbins

into  the  shallop.     The  master  called  to  me,  who  came  out

of  my  cabbin  as  well  as  I  could,  to  the  hatch  way  to  spcake

with  him  :   where,  on  my  knees   I  besought  them,  for  the

love  of  God,  to  remember  themselves,  and  to  doe  as  they

would  be  done  unto.     They  bade  me  keepe  myselfe  well,

and  get  me  into  my  cabbin ;  not  suffering  the  master  to

speake  with  me.     But  when  I  came  into  my  cabbin  againe,

hee  called  to   me  at  the  home  which  gave  light  into  my

cabbin,  and  told  mee  that  Juet  would  overthrow  us  all ;  nay

(said  I)  it  is  that  villaine  Henrie  Greene,  and  I  spake  it  not

softly.

Now  was  the  carpenter  at  libertie,  who  asked  them  if  they

would  bee  hanged  when  they  came  home  :  and  as  for  him-

selfe,  hee  said,  hee  would  not  stay  in  the  ship  unlesse  they  The  carpen-
ter let  gue.

would  force  him  :  they  bad  him  goe  then,  for  they  would
not  stay  him.    I  will  (said  hec)  so  I  may  have  my  chest  with

IG


122  A    LARGER    DISCOURSE    OF    THE    SAME    VOYAGE,

mee,  and  all  that  is  in  it :  they  said  hoc  should,  and  presently
they  put  it  into  the  shallop.  Then  hee  came  downe  to  mee
to  take  his  leave  of  mee,  who  persuaded  him  to  stay,  which
if  he  did,  he  might  so  worke  that  all  should  bee  well :  hee
said,  hee  did  not  thinke  but  they  would  be  glad  to  take
them  in  again c.  For  he  was  so  persuaded  by  the  master,
that  there  was  not  one  in  all  the  ship  that  could  tell  how  to
carry  her  home  ;  but  (saith  hee)  if  we  must  part  (which  wee
will  not  willingly  doe,  for  they  wovild  follow  the  ship)  hee
prayed  mee,  if  wee  came  to  the  Capes^  before  them,  that  I
would  leave  some  token  that  we  had  been  there,  necre  to  the
place  where  the  fowles  bred,  and  hee  would  doe  the  like  for
us  :  and  so  (with  teares)  we  parted.  Now  were  the  sicke
men  driven  out  of  their  cabbins  into  the  shallop  ;  but  John
Thomas  was  Francis  Clements  friend,  and  Bennct  was  the
Coopers,  so  as  there  were  words  betweene  them  and  Henric
Greene,  one  saying  that  they  should  goc.  and  the  other
swearing  that  they  should  not  goe,  but  such  as  were  in  the
shallop  should  returne.  AVhcn  Henrie  Greene  heard  that,
he  was  compelled  to  give  place,  and  to  put  out  Arnold
Lodlo  and  Michael  Bute,  which  with  much  adoe  they  did.

In  the  meane  time,  there  were  some  of  them  that  plyed
their  worke  as  if  the  ship  had  been  entred  by  force  and  they
had  free  leave  to  pillage,  breaking  up  chests  and  rifling  all
places.  One  of  them  came  by  me,  who  asked  me,  what  they
should  doe.  I  answered,  hee  should  make  an  end  of  what
hee  had  begun  ;  for  I  saw  him  doe  nothing  but  sharke  up
The  names   and  dowuc.     Nowc  wcrc  all  the  poorc  men  in  the  shallop,

of  the  com-

'!os','^r^  ti    whose  names  are  as  followcth  :  Ilenrie  Hudson,  John  Hud-
''''"^""'"   "  son,2  Arnold  Lodlo,  Sidrack  Fancr,  Phillip  Staffc,  Thomas

'  Cape  Worstcnholnic  and  Cape  Diggs.

^  Several  works  on  arctic  discovery  assert  that  this  John  Hudson  was
the  son  of  the  great  navigator.  This  is  merely  a  conjecture,  though  not
an  luilikcly  one.  It  rests  upon  the  fact  that  John  was  a  bo}'  when  he
lost  his  life  together  with  his  supposed  father.


WRITTEN    BY    ABACUK    I'RICKETT.  1J;J3

Wooclhouse  or  AVydhousc,  Adam  Moore,  Hcnric  King,
Michael  Bute.  The  carpenter  got  of  thciu  a  peece,  and
powder,  and  shot,  and  some  pikes,  an  iron  pot,  with  some
meale,  and  other  things.  They  stood  out  of  the  ice,  the
shallop  being  fast  to  the  sterne  of  the  shippe,  and  so  (when
they  were  nigh  out,  for  I  cannot  say  they  were  cleane  out)
they  cut  her  head  fast  from  the  sterne  of  our  ship,  then  out
with  their  top-sayles,  and  towards  the  east  they  stood  in  a
cleere  sea.  In  the  end  they  tookc  in  their  top-sayles,  righted
their  helme,  and  lay  under  their  fore-sayle  till  they  had
ransacked  and  searched  all  places  in  the  ship.  In  the  hold
they  found  one  of  the  vessels  of  meale  whole,  and  the  other
halfe  spent,  for  wee  had  but  two  ;  wee  found  also  two  firkins
of  butter,  some  twentie-seven  pieces  of  porke,  halfe  a  bushcll
of  pease  ;  but  in  the  masters  cabbin  we  found  two  hundred
of  bisket  cakes,  a  pecke  of  meale,  of  beere  to  the  quantitie
of  a  butt,  one  with  another.  Now  it  was  said  that  the
shallop  was  come  within  sight,  they  let  fall  the  mainsayle,
and  out  with  their  top-sayles,  and  fly  as  from  an  enemy.

Then  I  prayed  them  yet  to  remember  themselves  ;  but
William  Wilson  (more  than  the  rest)  would  heare  of  no  such
matter.  Comming  nigh  the  east  shore  they  cast  about,  and
stood  to  the  west  and  came  to  an  ilaud,^  and  anchored  in
sixteene  or  seventeene  fathome  water.  So  they  sent  the
boat  and  the  net  ashoare  to  see  if  they  could  have  a  draught ;
but  could  not  for  rocks  and  great  stones.  Michael  Perse
killed  two  fowle,  and  heere  they  found  good  store  of  that
weede  which  we  called  cockle-grasse  in  our  wintering-
place,  whereof  they  gathered  store,  and  came  aboard  againe.
Heere  we  lay  that  night  and  the  best  part  of  the  next  day,

1  Pricket's  geographical  statements  about  the  return  voyage  are  even
vaguer  than  those  about  the  voyage  out.  A  few  of  them  only  serve
as  foundations  for  guesses  at  the  real  localities  touched  by  the  returning
party.  The  statement  to  which  the  present  note  refers  is  not  of  that
number;  and  it  is  absolutely  impossible  to  guess  what  island  is  here
meant.


124  A    LARGER    DISCOUllSE    OF    THE    SAIME    VOYAGE,

i^ast  sight    in  all  whicli   time   we  saw  not  the  shallop,  or  ever   after.

ol  the  ^

Bhaiiop.  Jvfow  Hcnric  Greene  came  to  me  and  told  mce,  that  it  was
the  companies  will  tliat  I  should  come  up  into  the  masters
cabbin  and  take  charge  thereof.  I  told  him  it  M'as  more  fit
for  Robert  Juet :  he  said  he  should  not  come  in  it,  nor
meddle  with  the  masters  card  or  journals.  So  up  I  came,
and  Henrie  Greene  gave  me  the  key  of  the  masters  chest,
and  told  me  then,  that  he  had  laid  the  masters  best  things
together,  which  hee  would  use  himselfe  when  time  did  serve:
the  bread  was  also  delivered  to  me  by  tale.

The  wind  serving,  wee  stood  to  the  north-east,  and  this
was  Robert  Billets  course,  contrarie  to  Robert  Juet,  who
would  have  gone  to  the  north-west.  We  had  the  eastcrne
shoare  still  in  sight,  and  (in  the  night)  had  a  stout  gale  of
wind,  and  stood  afore  it  till  wee  met  with  ice,  into  the  which
we  ranne  from  thinne  to  thicke,  till  we  could  goe  no  further
for  ice,  which  lay  so  thicke  ahead  of  us  (and  the  Avind  brought
it  after  us  asterne)  that  wee  could  not  stirre  backward  nor
forward ;  but  so  lay  imbayed  fourteene  dales  in  worse  ice
then  ever  wee  met  to  deale  withall,  for  we  had  beene  where
there  was  greater  store,  but  it  was  not  so  broad  upon  the
water  as  this;  for  this  floting  ice  contained  miles  and  halfe
miles  in  compasse,  where  we  had  a  deepe  sea,  and  a  tide  of
flood  and  ebbe,  Avhich  set  north-west  and  south-east.  Heere
Robert  Juet  would  have  gone  to  the  north-west,  but  Robert
Billet  was  confident  to  go  through  to  the  north-east,  which

iiandl  ^^^  ^^^-  ^^  ^^^^'  being  cleere  of  this  ice,  he  continued  his
course  in  sight  of  the  eastcrne  shore  till  he  rayscd  foure
islands,  which  lay  north  and  south  ;  but  we  passed  them
sixe  or  seven  leagues,  the  wind  tooke  us  so  short.  Then
wee  stood  backc  to  them  againe,  and  came  to  an  anchor
bctweenc  two  of  the  most  northernmost.  AVe  sent  the  boat
ashoarc,  to  sec  if  there  were  any  thing  there  to  be  had,  but
found  nothing  but  cockle-grasse,  M'hercof  tlu^y  gathered
1   I'rubably  not  far  from  rortluiul  roiiit,  ,08°  50'  N.,  7!)"  W.


WRITTEN    BY    AI5ACUK    PRICKETT.  125

store,  and  so  returned  aboord.  Before  we  came  to  tliis  place,
I  might  well  see  that  I  was  kept  in  the  ship  against  Ilcnry
Greenes  mindc,  because  I  did  not  favour  their  proceedings
better  than  I  did.  Then  hee  began  (very  subtilly)  to  drawe
me  to  take  upon  me  to  search  for  those  things  which  him-
selfe  had  stolne  :  and  accused  me  of  a  matter  no  lesse  then
treason  amongst  us,  that  I  had  deceived  the  company  of
thirtie  cakes  of  bread.     Noav  they  beg^an  to  talke  amongst  pe  wicked

•'  <-'  '^       flee  where

themselves,  that  England  was  no  safe  place  for  them,  and  "uetu!'"'"
Henry  Greene  swore  the  shippe  should  not  come  into
any  place  (but  keepe  the  sea  still)  till  he  had  the  kings
majesties  hand  and  scale  to  shew  for  his  safetie.  They  had
many  devices  in  their  heads,  but  Henry  Greene  in  the  end
was  their  captaine,  and  so  called  of  them.

From  these  ilands  we  stood  to  the  north-east  and  the
easter  land  still  in  sight :  wee  raysed  those  ilands,  that  our
master  called  Rumnies  Ilands.^  Betweene  these  ilands  and
the  shallow  ground,  to  the  east  of  them,  our  master  went
downe  into  the  first  great  bay.^  We  kept  the  east  shoare
still  in  our  sight,  and  comming  thwart  of  the  low  land,  wee
ranne  on  a  rocke  that  lay  under  water,  and  strooke  but  once ;
for  if  shee  had,  we  might  have  beene  made  inhabitants  of
that  place  ;  but  God  sent  us  soone  off  without  any  harme
that  wee  saw.  Wee  continued  our  course  and  raysed  land
a  head  of  us,  which  stretched  out  to  the  north  :  which  when
they  saw,  they  said  plainly,  that  llobort  Billet  by  his  north-
erly course  had  left  the  capes  to  the  south,  and  that  they
were  best  to  seeke  downe  to  the  south  in  time  for  reliefe
before  all  was  gone;  for  we  had  small  store  left.  But  Robert
Billet  would  follow  the  land  to  the  north,  saying  that  he
hoped  in  God  to  find  somewhat  to  rclceve  us  that  way  as

^  These  islands  are  not  marked  on  Hudson's  chart ;  they  are,  how-
ever, certainly  near  the  mouth  of  Mosquito  Bay.  Perhaps  some  of  the
islands  near  Cape  Smith  are  meant.

^  Mosquito  liay.


126  A    LAltGER    DISCOURSE    OF    THE    SAME    VOYAGE,

soone  as  to  the  south.  I  told  them  that  this  land  was  the  mayne
of  Worsenhome  Cajic,  and  that  the  shallow  rockie  ground
was  the  same  that  the  master  went  downe  by  when  he  went
into  the  great  bay.  llobert  Juet  and  all  said  it  was  not
possible,  unlesse  the  master  had  brought  the  ship  over  land,
and  willed  them  to  looke  into  the  masters  card  and  their
course  how  well  they  did  agree.  We  stood  to  the  east  and
left  the  mayne  land  to  the  north,  by  many  small  ilands  into
a  narrow  gut  betweene  two  lands,  and  there  came  to  an
anchor.'  The  boat  went  ashoare  on  the  north  side,  where
we  found  the  great  home,  but  nothing  else.  The  next  day
wee  went  to  the  south  side,  but  found  nothing  there  save
cockle  grasse,  of  which  we  gatliercd.  This  grassc  was  a
great  reliefe  unto  us,  for  without  it  we  should  hardly  have  got
to  the  capes  for  want  of  victuall.  The  Avind  serving  we
stood  out,  but  before  we  could  get  cleane  out  the  wind  came
to  the  west,  so  that  wc  were  constrayned  to  anchor  on  the
north  side.

The  next  day,  wee  weighed  and  doubled  the  point  of  the
North  Land,  which  is  high  land,  and  so  continued  to  the
capes,  lying  north  and  south,  some  five-and-twentie  or  thirtie
leagues.  To  the  north  we  stood  to  see  store  of  those  foulcs
that  breed  in  the  Capes,  and  to  kill  some  with  our  shot,  and
to  fetch  them  with  our  boat.  Wc  raised  the  Capes  with  joy
and  bare  for  them,  and  came  to  the  ilands  that  lie  in  the
mouth  of  the  strcight;^  but  bearing  in  betweene  the  Rockie

^  They  were  near  the  eastern  coast  of  the  bay,  and,  as  appears  from  the
statements  on  the  next  page,  about  twenty-five  leagues  (seventy-tive
roots)  south  of  Cape  Worstenhohne.  But  they  themselves  had  entirely
lost  their  way.  We  see  them  groping  about  like  children  in  a  strange
place,  trying  to  find  some  locality  the  features  of  which  they  remember.
The  capes,  that  is  to  say  Cape  Worstenholme  and  Cape  Diggs,  were  their
great  hope.  Their  anxiety  to  reach  them  was  so  great,  that  they  actually
were  afraid  they  had  passed  them  and  were  to  the  north  of  them,  whilst
in  reality  they  were  more  than  a  degree  to  the  south  of  these  capes.

'■^  The  strait  between  Cape  Worstenholme  and  Capo  Diggs.  The
islaads  are  those  of  the  Diggs'  Islands  group.


WRITTEN    RY    ABACUK    PRTCKETT.  127

lies,  we  ranne  on  a  rocke  that  lay  under  water,  and  there  a  rocke.
stucke  fast  eight  or  nine  houres.  It  was  ebbing  water  when
we  thus  came  on,  so  the  floud  set  us  afloat,  God  guiding
both  wind  and  sea,  that  it  was  calme  and  faire  weather  :  the
ebbe  came  from  the  east,  and  the  floud  from  the  west.  When
wee  were  afloat  wee  stood  more  neere  to  the  east  shore,  and  xoie.
there  anchored.

The  next  day,  being  the  seven  and  UventietJi  of  July,  we  J"iy2~-
sent  the  boat  to  fetch  some  fowle,  and  the  ship  should  way
and  stand  as  neere  as  they  could,  /or  the  wind  was  against
us.  They  had  a  great  way  to  row,  and  by  that  meanes  they
could  not  reach  to  the  place  where  the  fowle  bred  ;  but
found  good  store  of  gulls,  yet  hard  to  come  by,  on  the  rocks
and  cliffes  ;  but  with  their  peeces  they  killed  some  thirtie,
and  towards  night  returned.  Now  wee  had  brought  our
ship  more  neere  to  the  mouth  of  the  streights,^  and  there
came  to  an  anchor  in  eighteene  or  twentie  fathom  water,
upon  a  riffe  or  shelfe  of  ground  ;  which  after  they  had
weighed  their  anchor,  and  stood  more  neere  to  the  place
where  the  fowle  bred,^  they  could  not  find  it  againe,  nor  no
place  like  it :  but  were  faine  to  turne  to  and  fro  in  the
mouth  of  the  streight,  and  to  be  in  danger  of  rockes,  because
they  could  not  find  ground  to  let  fall  an  anchor  in,  the  water
was  so  deepe.

The  eight  and  twentieth  day,  the  boat  went  to  Digges  his
Cape  for  fowle,  and  made  directly  for  the  place  where  the
fowle  bred,  and  being  neere,  they  saw  seven  boates  come
about  the  easterne  point  towards  them.  When  the  savages  savages.
saw  our  boate,  they  drew  themselves  together,  and  drew
their  lesser  boats  into  their  bigger  :  and  when  they  had  done,
they  came  rowing  to  our  boat,  and  made  signes  to  the  M'cst,
but  they  made  readie  for  all  assayes.     The  savages  came  to

^  The  northern  mouth  of  the  strait.

^  The  reader  will  rememher,  that  on  their  first  visit  to  Cape  Diggs,
they  had  found  there  an  abundance  of  liirds  and  eggs.


128


A    LARGER    DISCOURSE    OF    THE    SAME    VOYAGE,


tlicm,  and  by  signes  grew  familiar  one  with  another,  so  as
our  men  tooke  one  of  theirs  into  our  boate,  and  they  tooke
one  of  ours  into  their  boate.  Then  they  carried  our  man  to
a  cove  where  their  tents  stood  towards  the  west  of  the  place,
where  the  fowle  bred  :  so  they  carried  him  into  their  tents,
where  he  remayned  till  our  men  returned  with  theirs.  Our
boat  went  to  the  place  where  the  fowle  bred,  and  were
desirous  to  know  how  the  savages  killed  their  fowle  :  he
shewed  them  the  manner  how,  Avhich  was  thus  :  they  take
a  long  pole  with  a  snare^  at  the  end,  which  they  put  about
the  fowles  necke,  and  so  plucke  them  downe.  When  our
men  knew  that  they  had  a  better  way  of  their  owne,  they
shewed  him  the  use  of  our  peeces,  which  at  one  shot  would
kill  seven  or  eight.  To  be  short,  our  boat  returned  to  their
cove  for  our  man  and  to  deliver  theirs.  When  they  came
they  made  great  joy,  with  dancing,  and  leaping,  and  stroking
of  their  breasts  :  they  offered  divers  things  to  our  men,  but
they  only  tooke  some  morses  teeth,  which  they  gave  them
for  a  knife  and  two  glasse  buttons  :  and  so  receiving  our
man  they  came  aboard,  much  rejoicing  at  this  chance,  as  if
they  had  met  with  the  most  simple  and  kind  peof)le  of  the
world.

And  Henry  Greene  (more  then  the  rest)  was  so  confident,
that  (by  no  meanes)  we  should  take  care  to  stand  on  our
guard  :  God  blinding  him  so,  that  where  hee  made  reckon-
ing to  receive  great  matters  from  these  people,  he  received
more  then  he  looked  for,  and  that  suddenly,  by  being  made
a  good  example  for  all  men :  that  make  no  conscience  of
doing  evill,  and  that  we  take  heed  of  the  savage  people,
how  simple  soever  they  secme  to  be.

The  next  day,  the  nine  and  tivetttieth  of  July,  they  made
haste  to  be  ashoare,'  and  because  the  ship  rid  too  farre  off,

^  A  iioosc.  This  method  of  the  Hudson's  Bay  Esciuimaux,  of  catchiug
birds  with  a  sort  of  hisso,  has,  the  editor  beUeves,  not  been  mcutioned
by  any  other  voyager  in  these  regions.

"  On  Oape  Diggs'  Island.


WRITTEN    BY    AHACUK    PRICKETT.  129

they  weighed  and  stood  as  ncere  to  the  place  ■where  the
fowle  hred  as  they  could  ;  and  l^ecause  I  was  lame  T  was  to
go  in  the  boat,  to  carry  such  things  as  I  had  in  the  cabbin,  of
every  thing  somewhat ;  and  so,  with  more  haste  then  good
speed  (and  not  without  swearing)  away  we  went,  Henry
Greene,  William  Wilson,  John  Thomas,  Michael  Perse,
Andrew  Moter,  and  my  selfe.  When  we  came  neere  the
shoare,  the  people  were  on  the  hils  dancing  and  leaping :  to
the  cove  we  came,  where  they  had  drawne  up  their  boatcs  :
wee  brought  our  boate  to  the  east  side  of  the  cove,  close  to
the  rockes.  Ashoare  they  went,  and  made  fast  the  boat  to  a
great  stone  on  the  shoare ;  the  people  came,  and  every  one
had  somewhat  in  his  hand  to  barter  ;  but  Henry  Greene
swore  they  should  have  nothing  till  he  had  venison,  for  they
had  so  promised  him  by  signes.

Now  when  we  came,  they  made  signes  to   their  dog^es  savages

'J  o  on       dogges.

(whereof  there  were  many  like  mongrels,  as  bigge  as
hounds),  and  pointed  to  their  mountaine  and  to  the  sunne,
clapping  their  hands.  Then  Henry  Greene,  John  Tliomas,
and  William  Wilson  stood  hard  by  the  boate  head,  Michael
Perse   and   Andrew   Moter   were   got  up  upon  the  rock  a  savages

o  1         i.  trechene.

gathering  of  sorrell ;  not  one  of  them  had  any  weapon  about
him,  not  so  much  as  a  sticke,  save  Henry  Greene  only,  who
had  a  piece  of  a  pike  in  his  hand  :  nor  saw  I  any  tldng  that
they  had  wherewith  to  hurt  us.  Henry  Greene  and  William
Wilson  had  looking-glasses,  and  Jewes  trumps,'  and  bels,
which  they  were  shewing  the  people.  The  savages  standing
round  about  them,  one  of  them  came  into  the  boats  head  to
me  to  shew  me  a  bottle  :  I  made  signes  to  him  to  get  him
ashoare,  but  he  made  as  though  he  had  not  understood  me,
whereu2:)on  I  stood  up  and  pointed  him  ashoare.  In  the
meane-time  another  stole  behind  me  to  the  sterne  of  the
boat,  and  when  I  saw  him  ashoare  that  was  in  the  head  of
the  boat  I  sate  downe  againe,  but  suddenly  I  saw  the  legge
^  .Jew's  harps.


130  A    LARGER    DISCOURSE    OF    THE    SAME    VOYAGE,

and  foote  of  a  man  by  mcc.  AVhcrcfore  I  cast  up  my  head,
and  saw  the  savage  with  his  knife  in  his  hand,  who  strooke
at  my  breast  over  my  head :  I  cast  up  my  right  arme  to  save
my  brest,  he  wounded  my  arme,  and  strooke  me  into  the
bodie  under  my  right  pappe.  He  strooke  a  second  blow,
which  I  met  with  my  left  hand,  and  then  he  strooke  me
into  the  right  thigh,  and  had  like  to  have  cut  off  my  little
finger  of  the  left  hand.  Now  I  had  got  hold  of  the  string
of  the  knife,  and  had  woond  it  about  my  left  hand,  he
striving  with  both  his  hands  to  make  an  end  of  that  he  had
begune  :  I  found  him  but  weake  in  the  gripe  (God  enabling
me),  and  getting  hold  of  the  sleeve  of  his  left  arme,  so  bare
him  from  me.  His  left  side  lay  bare  to  me,  which  when  I
saw,  I  put  his  sleeve  off  his  left  arme  into  my  left  hand,
holding  the  string  of  the  knife  fast  in  the  same  hand  ;  and
having  got  my  right  hand  at  liberty,  I  sought  for  somewhat
wherewith  to  strike  him  (not  remembring  my  dagger  at  my
side),  but  looking  downe  I  saw  it,  and  therewith  strooke
him  into  the  bodie  and  the  throate.

Whiles  I  was  thus  assaulted  in  the  boat,  our  men  were
set  upon  on  the  shoare.  John  Thomas  and  A^'illiam  Wilson
had  their  bowels  cut,  and  Michael  Perse  and  Henry  Greene,
being  mortally  wounded,  came  tumbling  into  the  boat  to-
gether. When  Andrew  Motor  saw  this  medley,  hee  came
running  downe  the  rockes,  and  leaped  into  the  sea,  and  so
swamme  to  the  boat,  hanging  on  the  sterne  thereof,  till
Michael  Perse  took  him  in,  who  manfully  made  good  the
head  of  the  boat  against  the  savages,  that  pressed  sore  upon
us.  Now  Michael  Perse  had  got  an  hatchet,  wherewith  I
saw  him  strike  one  of  them,  that  he  lay  sprawling  in  the  sea.
Henry  Greene  crieth  Coragio,  and  laycth  about  him  with
his  truncheon.  I  cryed  to  them  to  cleere  the  boat,  and
Andrew  Motor  cryed  to  bee  taken  in.  The  savages  bctooke
them  to  their  bowes  and  arroMCs,  which  they  sent  amongst
us,   wherewith    Henry    Greene   was    slaine    outright,    and


WRITTEN    BY    ABACUK    I'RICKETT.  131

Michael  Perse  received  many  wounds,  and  so  did  the  rest.
Michael  Perse  cleereth  the  boate,  and  puts  it  from  the
shoare,  and  helpeth  Andrew  Moter  in  ;  but  in  turning  of
the  boat  I  received  a  cruell  wound  in  my  backe  with  an
arrow.  Michael  Perse  and  Andrew  Motor  rowed  the  boate
away,  which,  when  the  savages  saw,  they  ranne  to  their
boats,  and  I  feared  they  would  have  launched  them  to  have
followed  us,  but  they  did  not,  and  our  ship  was  in  the
middle  of  the  channell  and  could  not  see  us.

Now,  when  they  had  rowed  a  good  way  from  the  shoare,
Michael  Perse  fainted,  and  could  row  no  more.  Then  was
Andrew  Moter  driven  to  stand  in  the  boat  head,  and  waft
to  the  ship,  which  at  the  first  saw  us  not,  and  when  they
did  they  could  not  tell  what  to  make  of  us,  but  in  the  end
they  stood  for  us,  and  so  tooke  us  up.  Henry  Greene  was
throwne  out  of  the  boat  into  the  sea,  and  the  rest  were  had
aboard,  the  savage  being  yet  alive,  yet  Avithout  sense.  But
they  died  all  there  that  day,  William  Wilson  swearinoj  and  kicked  and

•'  "^  '  O  wretched

cursing   in    most  fearefull    manner.     Michael    Perse    lived  ^"etched
two  dayes  after,  and  then  died.     Thus  you  have  heard  the  "'^  '^  ^^^'
tragicall  end  of  Henry  Greene  and  his  mates,  whom  they
called  captaine,  these  foure  being  the  only  lustie  men  in  all
the  ship.

The  poore  number  that  was  left  were  to  ply  our  ship  to
and  fro  in  the  mouth  of  the  streight,^  for  there  was  no  place
to  anchor  in  neere  hand.  Besides,  they  were  to  go  in  the
boate  to  kill  fowle  to  bring  us  home,  which  they  did,  al-
though with  danger  to  us  all.  For  if  the  wind  blew  there
was  an  high  sea,  and  the  eddies  of  the  tydes  would  carrie
the  ship  so  neere  the  rockes  as  it  feared  our  master,  for  so  I
will  now  call  him.  After  they  had  killed  some  two  hundred
fowle,  with  great  labour,  on  the   south  cape,   wee  stood  to

^  The  strait  between   Cape   Worstenholme   and  Cape   Diggs,  in  the
neighbourhood  of  which  the  scenes  just  related  by  Pricket  took  place.
'^  Cape  Diggs.


132         A    LARGEK    DISCOURSE    OF    THE    SAME    VOYAGE,

the  cast,  but  when  wee  were  sixe  or  seven  leagues  from  the
capes,  the  wind  came  up  at  east.  Then  wee  stood  backe  to
the  capes  again,  and  killed  an  hundred  fowle  more.  After
tliis  the  wind  came  to  the  west,  so  wee  were  driven  to  goe
away,  and  then  our  master  stood  (for  the  most)  along  by  the
north  shoare,  till  he  fell  into  broken  ground  about  the
Queen's  Foreland,^  and  there  anchored.  From  thence  wee
went  to  God's  Mercies,  and  from  thence  to  E.ose  Ilands,^
which  lye  in  the  mouth  of  our  streight,  not  seeing  the  land
till  we  were  readie  to  runne  our  bosprite  against  the  rockes
in  a  fogge.  But  it  cleered  a  little,  and  then  we  might  see
our  selves  inclosed  wdth  rockie  ilands,  and  could  find  uo
ground  to  anchor  in.  There  our  master  lay  a  trie  all  night,
and  the  next  day,  the  fogge  continuing,  they  sought  for
ground  to  anchor  in,  and  found  some  in  an  hundred  and
odde  fathomes  of  water.  The  next  day  we  weighed  and
stood  to  the  east,  but  before  wee  came  heere  we  had  put  our-
selves to  hard  allowance,  as  halfe  a  foule  a  day  with  the
pottage,  for  yet  we  had  some  meale  left  and  nothing  else.
Then  they  beganne  to  make  triall  of  all  whatsoever.  "Wee
Miseriopur- liatl  flayed  our  fowle,  for  they  will  not  i)ull,  and  Robert
rest.  Juet  was  the  first  that  made  use  of  the  skins  by  burning  of

the  feathers  ;  so  they  became  a  great  dish  of  meate,  and  as
for  the  garbidge,  it  Avas  not  thrown  away.

After  we  were  cleere  of  these  ilands,  which  lie  out  with
two  points,  one  to  the  south-east  and  the  other  to  the  north,
making  a  bay  to  the  sight  as  if  there  were  no  way  through,
Ave  continued  our  course  cast-south-cast  and  south  and  by
cast,   to   raise  the  Desolations,^  from  thence    to   shape   our

^  Queen's  Cape,  a  headland  of  the  northern  shore  of  Hudson's  Strait,
to  the  north  of  Salisbury  Islands.  This  locality  is,  though  very  vaguely,
indicated  on  Hudson's  chart,  and  is  even  now  very  inaccurately  known,
so  that  it  is  not  easy  to  fix  the  exact  locality  of  the  (^ui'e)i'g  Foreland
of  Pricket.

'  Apparently  some  of  the  islands  near  Cape  Chidicy,  perhaps  Killinek
and  Kikkcrtorsoak.

•'  The  south-east  coast  of  Greenland.


WRITTEN    BY    ABACUK    PRICKETT.  133

course  for  Ireland.  Thus  wee  continued  divers  dayes  ;  but
the  wind  comming  against  us  made  us  to  alter  our  course,
and  by  the  meanes  of  Robert  Juet,  who  perswaded  the  com-
pany that  they  should  find  great  reliefe  in  Newfoundland  if
our  countrymen  were  there,  and  if  they  were  gone  before
we  came  yet  should  we  find  great  store  of  bread  and  fish
left  ashore  by  them  ;  but  how  true,  I  give  God  thankes  we
did  not  trie.  Yet  we  stood  to  the  south-west  and  to  the
west  almost  to  fiftie  seven  degrees,  when  (by  the  will  of  God)
the  Avinde  came  up  at  south-west.  Then  the  master  asked
me  if  he  should  take  the  benefit  of  this  wind,  and  shape  his
course  for  Ireland.  I  said  it  was  best  to  goe  where  we  knew
corne  grew,  and  not  to  seeke  it  Avhere  it  was  cast  away  and
not  to  be  found.  Towards  Ireland  now  wee  stood,  with
prosperous  winds  for  many  dayes  together.  Then  was  all
our  meale  spent,  and  our  fowle  restie  and  dry  ;  but  (being
no  remedie)  we  were  content  with  the  salt  broth  for  dinner
and  the  halfe  fowle  for  supper.  Now  went  our  candles
to  vvracke,  and  Bennet,  our  cooke,  made  a  messe  of  meate  Poore  diet.
of  the  bones  of  the  fowle,  frying  them  with  candle  grease
till  they  were  crispe,  and,  with  vineger  put  to  them,  made
a  good  dish  of  meate.  Our  vineger  was  shared,  and  to  every
man  a  pound  of  candles  delivered  for  a  weeke,  as  a  great
daintie.  Now  Robert  Juet  (by  his  reckoning)  saith  wee
were  within  sixtie  or  seventie  leagues  of  Ireland,  when  wee
had  two  hundred  thither.  And  sure  our  course  was  so
much  the  longer  through  our  evill  steeredge,  for  our  men
became  so  weake  that  they  could  not  stand  at  the  helme,
but  were  faine  to  sit.

Then  Robert  Juet  dyed  for  meere  want,  and  all  our  men  jjo^;^^
were  in  despaire,  and  said  wee  were  past  Ireland,  and  our  death.
last   fowle   were   in   the  steep  tub.     So  our  men  cared  not
which  end  went  forward,  insomuch  as  our  master  was  driven
to  looke  to  their   labour   as  well  as  his   owne  ;  for  some  of
them  would  sit  and  see  the  fore  saylc  or  mayne  sayle  flic  up


Ireland.


134  A    LARGER    DISCOURSE,    ETC.

to  the  tops,  the  sheets  being  cither  flowne  or  broken,  and
would  not  hclpe  it  themselves  nor  call  to  others  for  helpe,
which  much  grieved  the  master.  Now  in  this  extremitie  it
pleased  God  to  give  us  sight  of  land,  not  farre  from  the
place  our  master  said  he  would  fall  withall,  which  was  the
bay  of  Galloway,'  and  we  fell  to  the  west  of  the  Derses,'  and
so  stood  along  by  the  coast  to  the  south-west.  In  the  end  there
was  a  joyful  cry,  a  sayle,  a  sayle,  towards  which  they  stood.
Then  they  saw  more,  but  to  the  neerest  wee  stood,  and  called
A  sayle  of    to  him  ;  his  bark  was  of  Fowy,^  and  was  at  anchor  a  fishing.

Fowy.  _

}]"'^   .       He  came  to  us,  and  brought  us  into  Bere  Haven.*  Here  we

Haven  in  '  o

stayed  a  few  dayes,  and  delt  with  the  Irish  to  supply  our
wants,  but  found  no  reliefe,  for  in  this  place  there  was
neither  bread,  drinke,  nor  mony  to  be  had  amongst  them.
Wherefore  they  advised  us  to  deale  with  our  countrymen
who  were  there  a  fishing,  which  we  did,  but  found  them  so
cold  in  kindnesse  that  they  would  doe  nothing  without  pre-
sent money,  whereof  we  had  none  in  the  ship.  In  the  end
we  procured  one  John  Waymouth,  master  of  the  barque  that
brought  us  into  this  harbour,  to  furnish  us  with  money,
which  hee  did,  and  received  our  best  cable  and  anchor  in
pawne  for  the  same.  With  this  money  our  master,  with  the
help  of  John  Waymouth,  bought  bread,  beere,  and  bcefe.

Now,  as  wee  were  beholding  to  Waymouth  for  his  money,
so  were  wee  to  one  Captaine  Taylor  for  making  of  our  con-
tracts with  Waymouth,  by  whose  meancs  hee  tookc  a  bill
for  our  cable  and  anchor  and  for  the  men's  wages,  who
would  not  go  with  us  unless  Waymouth  would  passe  his
word  for  the  same :  for  they  made  show  that  they  were  not
willing  to  goe  Avith  us  for  any  wages.  Whereupon  Captaine
Taylor  swore  he  would  presse  them,  and  then,  if  they  would
not  goe,  hee  would  hang  them.

In    conclusion,  wee    agreed    for    three    pound    ten    shil-

^  Galway.  '■^  Dursey  Island,  near  the  south-west  coast  of  Ireland,

^  Fowcy,  in  Cornwall.  '  Beer  Haven,  south-west  coast  of  Ireland.


MASTER    SAMUEL    MACHINS    LETTER.  135

lings  a  man  to  bring  our  ship  to  riimonth  or  Dartmonth,
and  to  give  the  pilot  five  pound  ;  but  if  the  winde  did  not
serve,  but  that  they  were  driven  to  put  into  Bristow,  they
were  to  have  foure  pound  ten  shillings  a  man,  and  the  pilot
sixe  pound.  Omitting  therefore  further  circumstances,  from
Bere  Haven  wee  came  to  Plimouth,  and  so  to  an  anchor  a''?*i^''""
before  the  castle  ;  and  from  Plimouth,  with  faire  winde  and  '"°"
weather  without  stop  or  stay,  wee  came  to  the  Downes,  from
thence  to  Gravesend,  where  most  of  our  men  went  a  shoare,
and  from  thence  came  on  this  side  Erith,  and  there  stopped  :
wdiere  our  master  Robert  Billet  came  aboord,  and  so  had
mee  up  to  London  with  him,  and  so  wee  came  to  Sir  Thomas
Smiths  together.

Forasmuch  as  this  report  of  Pricket  may  happely  bee
suspected  by  some,  as  not  so  friendly  to  Hudson,  who  re-
turned with  that  companie  which  had  so  cruelly  exposed
Hudson  and  his,  and  therefore  may  seeme  to  lay  heavier
imputation,  and  rip  up  occasions  further  then  they  will
beleeve,  I  have  also  added  the  report  of  Thomas  Wydhouse,
one  of  the  exposed  companie,  who  ascribeth  those  occasions
of  discord  to  Juet.  I  take  not  on  mee  to  sentence,  no  not  to
examine  ;  I  have  presented  the  evidence  just  as  I  had  it ;
let  the  bench  censure,  hearing  with  both  eares,  that  which
with  both  eyes  they  may  see  in  those  and  these  notes  ;  to
which  I  have  first  prefixed  his  letter  to  Master  Samuel
Macham.


Master  Macham,  I  heartily  commend  mee  unto  you,  etc.
I  can  write  unto  you  no  newes,  though  I  have  scene  much,
but  such  as  every  English  fisherman  haunting  these  coasts
can  report  better  then  my  selfe.

Wee  kept  our  Whitsunday  in  the  north-east  end  of  Island,i
^  Iceland.


136  A    NOTE    FOUND    IN    THE    DESK

and  I  thinke  I  never  fared  better  in  England  then  wee
feasted  there.  They  of  the  countrey  are  very  poore,  and
live  miserably,  yet  we  found  therein  store  of  fresh  fish  and
daintie  fowle.  I  my  selfe  in  an  aftcrnoone  killed  so  much
iiiiiiders      fowle  as  fcastcd  all  our  company,  beini^  three  and  twentie

poore.  _  .  .

persons,  at  one  time,  oncly  with  partridges,  besides  curlue,
plover,  mallard,  teale,  and  goose.  I  have  scene  two  hot
bathes  in  Island,  and  have  beene  in  one  of  them.  AYee  are
resolved  to  trie  the  uttermost,  and  lye  onely  expecting  a  faire
winde,  and  to  refresh  ourselves  to  avoid  the  ice,  which  now
Thecauseof  |g  come  off  the  west  coasts,  of  which  we  have  seene  whole

their  stay  at  '

Island.        islands,  but  God  bee  thanked,  have  not  beene  in  danger  of
any.     Thus  I  desire  all  your  prayers  for  us.
From  Islandj  this  thirtieth  of  May,  1610.


A  NOTE  FOUND  IN  THE  DESKE  OF
THOMAS  WYDOWSE,

STDDENT    IN    THE    MATHEMATICKES,    HEE    BEING    ONE    OF    THE3I    WHO    WAS    TIT
INTO    THE    SHALLOP.

The  teyith  day  of  September,  1610,  after  dinner,  our  master
called  all  the  companie  together,  to  heare  and  beare  wit-
nesse  of  the  abuse  of  some  of  the  companie  (it  having  beene
the  request  of  Robert  Juct)  that  the  master  should  redresse
some  abuses  and  slanders,  as  hee  called  them,  against  this
Juet :  which  thing  after  the  master  had  examined  and  heard
with  equitie  what  hee  could  say  for  himselfe,  there  were
proovcd  so  many  and  great  abuses,  and  mutinous  matters
against  the  master,  and  action  by  Juet,  tliat  there  Avas  danger
to  have  suffered  them  longer  :  and  it  was  fit  time  to  punish
and  cut  off  farther  occasions  of  the  like  mutinies.

It  Avas  proovcd  to  his  face,  first  with  Bennet  Mathcw,  our


OF    THOMAS    WiDHOUSE.  137

trumpet,  upon  our  first  sight  of  Island,'  and  he  confcst,  that
hee  supposed  that  in  the  action  woukl  bee  manslaughter,
and  prove  bloodie  to  some.

Secondly,  at  our  comming  from  Island,  in  hearing  of  the
companie,  hee  did  threaten  to  turne  the  head  of  the  ship
home  from  the  action,  which  at  that  time  was  by  our  master
wisely  pacified,  hoping  of  amendment.

Thirdly,  it  was  deposed  by  Philip  StafFe,  our  carpenter,
and  Ladlie  Arnold,"  to  his  face  upon  the  holy  bible,  that  hee
pers waded  them  to  keepe  muskets  charged,  and  swords
readie  in  their  cabbins,  for  they  should  be  charged  with  shot
ere  the  voyage  were  over.

Fourthly,  wee  being  pestered  in  the  ice,  hee  had  used
words  tending  to  mutinie,  discouragement,  and  slander  of
the  action,  which  easily  took  effect  in  those  that  were
timourous  ;  and  had  not  the  master  in  time  prevented,  it
might  easily  have  overthrowne  the  voyage  :  and  now  lately
being  imbayed  in  a  deepe  bay,  which  the  master  had  desire
to  see,  for  some  reasons  to  himselfe  knowne,  his  word  tended
altogether  to  put  the  companie  into  a  fray  of  extremitie,  by
wintering  in  cold.  Jesting  at  our  masters  hope  to  see  Ban-
tam by  Candlemasse.

For  these  and  divers  other  base  slanders  against  the  master
hee  was  deposed,  and  Robert  Bylot,  who  had  shewed  himselfe
honestly  respecting  the  good  of  the  action,  was  placed  in  his
stead  the  masters  mate.

Also  Francis  Clement,  the  boatson,  at  this  time  was  put
from  his  office,  and  William  Wilson,  a  man  thought  more
fit,  preferred  to  his  place.  This  man  had  basely  carryed
himselfe  to  our  master  and  to  the  action.

Also  Adrian  Mooter  was  appointed  boatsons  mate,  and  a

promise  by  the  master,  that  from  this  day  Juets  wages  should

remaine  to  Bylot,  and  the  boatsons  overplus  of  wages  should

be  equally  divided  betweene  Wilson  and  one  John  King,

^  Iceland.  ^  Arnold  Ludlow,  or  Lodlo.

18


138  A    NOTE    FOUND    IN    THE    DESK,    ETC.

to  the  owners  good  liking,  one  of  the  quarter  masters,  who
had  very  well  carryed  themselves  to  the  furtherance  of  the
businesse.

Also  the  master  promised,  if  the  offenders  yet  behaved
themselves  henceforth  honestly,  hee  would  bee  a  meanes  for
their  good,  and  that  hee  would  forget  injuries,  with  other
admonitions.

These  things  thus  premised  touching  Hudsons  exposing,
and  God's  just  judgments  on  the  exposers,  as  Pricket  hath
related  (whom  they  reserved,  as  is  thought,  in  hope  by  Sir
Dudley  Digges  his  master  to  procure  their  pardon  at  their
returne),  I  thought  good  to  adde  that  which  I  have  fur-
ther received  from  good  intelligence,  that  the  ship  com-
ming  aground  at  Digges  Island,  in  63  degrees  44}  minutes,
a  great  flood  came  from  the  west  and  set  them  on  floate  :
an  argument  of  an  open  passage  from  the  South  Sea  to  that,
and  consequently  to  these  seas.  The  weapons  and  arts
which  they  saw,  beyond  those  of  other  savages,  are  argu-
ments hereof.  Hee  which  assaulted  Pricket  in  the  boate,
had  a  weapon  broad  and  sharpe  indented,  of  bright  Steele
(such  as  they  use  in  Java),  riveted  into  a  handle  of  morse
tooth.

'  The  latitude  assigned  by  Wj'dhouse  to  Diggs'  Island  is  incorrect,
at  least  as  regards  the  Diggs'  Island  of  Hudson,  wliich  is  undoubtedly
opposite  to,  and  therefore  nearly  in  the  same  latitude  as  Cape  Worsten-
holme  (62°  25').  It  is  impossible  to  ascertain  how  the  mistake  arose.
But  it  is  curious  to  observe  that  this  mistake,  by  which  Cape  Diggs  is
placed  so  much  too  far  north,  is  of  an  opposite  nature  to  that  com-
mitted by  Hudson  himself  with  regard  to  Cape  Farewell,  which  he  places
several  minutes  too  far  south.  Wydhouse's  mistake  has  undoubtedly
intlucnced  the  opinion  of  modern  map  makers,  who  invariably  place
Diggs'  Island  too  far  north-west,  or  rather  give  that  name  to  an  island
to  which  it  did  not  originally  belong.


139


PURCHAS     HIS     PILGRIMAGE.

FOL.,    LOND.,    1626,    817.
VI.

OF   HUDSON'S    DISCOVERIES    AND    DEATH.


Henry  Hudson,  1607,  discovered  further  north  toward  the
pole,  then,  perhaps,  any  before  him.  He  found  himselfe  in
80  degrees,  23  minutes,  where  they  felt  it  hot,  and  dranke
water  to  coole  their  thirst.  They  saw  land  (as  they  thought)
to  82,  and  further  on  the  shore  they  had  snow,  morses  teeth,
deeres  homes,  whale-bones,  and  footing  of  other  beasts,
with  a  streame  of  fresh  water.  The  next  yeere,  1608,  he
set  forth  on  a  discovery  to  the  north-east,  at  which  time
they  met,  as  both  himselfe  and  Juet  have  testified,  a  mer-
maid in  the  sea,  scene  by  Thomas  Hils  and  Robert  Rainer.
Another  voyage  he  made,  1609,  and  coasted  Newfoundland,
and  thence  along  to  Cape  Cod.  His  last  and  fatall  voyage
was  1610,  which  I  mentioned  in  my  former  edition,'  relating
the  same  as  Hesselius  Gerardus  had  guided  me,  by  his  card
and  reports,  who  affirmeth  that  he  followed  the  way  which
Captaine  Winwood  had  before  searched  by  Lumleys  Inlet,
in  61  degrees,  so  passing  thorow  the  strait  to  50,  etc.     But  Hecom-

muiiicated

having  since  met  with  better  instructions,  both  by  the  helpe  ^°^^  ""'•

C  ''  J  L         anus  ah.


SOUS  ab-


Th.

ouse,


of  my   painfull  friend   Master   Hakluit  (to  whose   labours  ly'^l^l^
these  of  mine  are  so  much  indebted),  and  specially  from  rrrck"et,  of
him   who  was  a  speciall   setter   forth   of  the  voyage,   that    ''^^°^*^®*

^  Purchas  Pilgrimage,  fol.,  Lond.,  1617,  contains  an  account  of  Hud-
son's voyages  entirely  founded  on  the  1612  edition  of  Hessel  Gerrifcsz's
Detectio  freti.


140  OF  Hudson's  discoveries  and  death.

learned  and  industrious  gentleman  Sir  Dudley  Digges  (how
willingly  could  I  here  lose  my  selfe  in  a  parenthesis  of  due
praises  !  to  whom  these  studies  have  seemed  to  descend  by
inheritance  in  divers  descents,  improved  by  proper  industry,
employed  to  publike  good  both  at  home  and  in  discoveries
and  plantations  abroad,  and  for  my  particular !  but  why
should  I  use  words,  unequall  pay  to  him,  unequall  stay  to
thee  ?)  from  him,  I  say,  so  great  a  furtherer  of  the  north-
west discoverie,  and  of  your  discoverer  the  poore  Pilgrim
and  his  pilgrimage,  having  received  full  relations,  I  have
beene  bold  with  the  reader  to  insert  this  voyage  more
largely.

Imilh"'  ^^  ^^^  yeare  1610,  Sir  Tho.  Smith,  Sir  Dudley  Digges,

and  Master  John  Wostenholme,  with  other  their  friends,  fur-
nished out  the  said  Henry  Hudson,  to  try  if,  through  any
of  those  inlets  which  Davis  saw  but  durst  not  enter,  on  the
wcsterne  side  of  Fretum  Davis,  any  passage  might  be  found
to  the  other  ocean  called  the  South  Sea.  There  barke  was
named  the  Discoverie.  They  passed  by  Island,  and  saw
Mount  Hecla  cast  out  fire  (a  noted  signe  of  foule  weather
towards ;  others  conceive  themselves  and  deceive  others
with  I  know  not  what  purgatorie  fables  hereof  confuted  by

A.ao.  ciy-  Arn^rin  Jonas,  an  Islander,  who  reproveth  this  and  many
other  dreames  related  by  authors,  saying,  that  from  the
yeere  1558  to  1592  it  never  cast  forth  any  flames)  they  left
the  name  to  one  harbour  in  Island,  Lousy  Bay  :  they  had
there  a  bath  hot  enough  to  scald  a  fowle.  They  raised  Gron-
land  the  fourth  of  June,  and  Desolation  after  that;  whence
they  plyed  north-Avest  among  Hands  of  ice,  whereon  they
might  runne  and  play,  and  filled  sweet  water  out  of  ponds
therein:  some  of  them  aground  in  sixc  or  seven  score  fadome
water,  and  on  divers  of  them  bcarcs  and  patriches.     They

^  Extracts  of  Arngrim  Jonas,  an  Islantlcr,  his  Chrymogaja  or  Ilistorie
of  Island,  published  anno  Domini  IIJOO. — Furc/ias  Pilgrims,  iii,  p.  Go4-
051).


OF  hudsom's  discovekies  and  death.  141

gave  names  to  certaine  ilands,  of  Gods  mercy,  Prince  Hen-
ries Forland,  K.  James  his  Cape,  Q.  Annes  Cape.  One
morning,  in  a  fogge,  they  were  carried  by  a  set  of  the  tide
from  N.E.  into  one  of  the  inlets  above  mentioned,  the  depth
whereof  and  plying  forward  of  the  ice  made  Hudson  hope
it  would  prove  a  through-fare.  After  he  had  sailed  herein
by  his  computation  300  leagues  west,  he  came  to  a  small
strait  of  two  leagues  over,  and  very  deepe  water,  through
which  he  passed  betweene  two  headlands,  which  he  called,
that  on  the  south  Cape  Wostenholme,  the  other  to  the  N.W.
Digges  Hand,  in  deg.  62,  44'  minutes,  into  a  spacious  sea,
wherein  he  sayled  above  a  hundred  leagues  south,  confi-
dently proud  that  he  had  won  the  passage.

But  findinar  at  lenj^th  by  shole  water  that  he  was  embayed,  Hutisons

!D  o  J  J        '  Wintering.

he  was  much  distracted  therewith,  and  committed  many
errours,  especially  in  resolving  to  winter  in  that  desolate
place,  in  such  want  of  necessarie  provision.  The  third  of
Nox)ember  he  moored  his  barke  in  a  small  cove,  where  they
had  all  undoubtedly  perished,  but  that  it  pleased  God  to
send  them  several  kinds  of  fowle  :  they  killed  of  white
patridges  above  a  hundred  and  twentie  dozen.  These  left
them  at  the  spring,  and  other  succeeded  in  their  place,
swan,  goose,  teale,  ducke,  all  easie  to  take  ;  besides  the  bless-
ing of  a  tree,  which  in   December  blossomed,  with  leaves  a  strange

"  _  race.

greene  and  yellow,  of  an  aromaticall  savour,  and  being
boyled  yeelded  an  oyly  substance,  which  proved  an  excel-
lent salve,  and  the  decoction  being  drunke  proved  as  whole-
some a  potion,  whereby  they  were  cured  of  the  scorbute,
sciaticas,  crampes,  convulsions,  and  other  diseases,  which  the
coldnesse  of  the  climate  bred  in  them.  At  the  opening  of
the  yeere  also,  there  came  to  his  ships  side  such  abundance
of  fish  of  all  sorts,  that  they  might  therewith  have  fraught
themselves  for  their  returne,  if  Hudson  had  not  too  despe
lately  pursued  the  voyage,  neglecting  this  oportunitic  of
^  See  note  to  page  138.


142  OF  Hudson's  discoveries  and  death.

storing  themselves  with  fish,  which  hee  committed  to  the
care  of  certaine  carelesse  dissolute  villaincs,  which  in  his
absence  conspired  against  him  ;  in  few  dayes  the  fish  all  for-
sooke  them.  Once  a  savage  visited  them,  who  for  a  knife,
glasse,  and  beades  given  him,  returned  with  bevers  skins,
deercs  skins,  and  a  sled.  At  Hudsons  returne,  they  set  sayle
for  England.  But  in  a  few  dayes,  their  victuals  being  almost
spent,  and  hee,  out  of  his  despaire,  letting  fall  some  words  of
setting  some  on  shore,  the  former  conspirators  (the  chiefe
whereof  was  Hen.  Greene,  none  of  their  allowed  company.
These  were  but  taken  in  bv  Hudson  himselfe  :  and  one  Wilson)  entred

the  worst,  or  •'

thTcom-"*^    his  cabin  in  the  night,  and  forced  him  the  master,  together
P'"'^'-  with  his  Sonne  John  Hudson,  Tho,  Widowes,^  Arn.  Ludlo,

Sidrach  Faner,  Ad.  Moore,  Hen.  King,  Mic.  Bute,  to  take
shallop  and  seeke  their  fortune.  But  see  what  sinceritie  can
doe  in  the  most  desperate  tryals.  One  Philip  Staffe,  an
Ipswich  man,  who,  according  to  his  name,  had  beene  a  prin-
ci2:)all  stafFe  and  stay  to  the  weaker  and  more  enfeebled
courages  of  his  companions  in  the  whole  action,  lighten-
ing and  unlightening  their  drooping  darkened  spirits,  with
sparkes  from  his  owne  resolution  ;  their  best  purveyor,  with
his  peece  on  shore,  and  both  a  skilfull  carpenter  and  lusty
mariner  on  board  ;  when  he  could  by  no  perswasions,  sea-
soned with  tears,  divert  them  from  their  divellish  desisrnes,
notwithstanding  they  entreated  him  to  stay  with  them,  yet
chose  rather  to  commit  himselfe  to  Gods  mercy  in  the  for-
lorne  shallop,  then  with  such  villaines  to  accept  of  likelier
hopes.

A  few  dayes  after,  their  victuals   being  spent,  the  ship

came  aground   at  Digges   Hand,  and   so   continued  divers

^^^^j        houres,  till  a  great  floud  (which  they  by  this  accident  tookc

'^'"'"/i'lrry  ^^^t  noticc  of)   camo  from  the  westNvard  and  set  them  on


west
probuhle


arnuiVeiJi     flotc.    Upoii  thc  cliffcs  of  tliis  Ishiud  they  found  aboundance
piiHSHKo  III    of  fowles  tame,  whereof  they  tooke  two  or  three  hundred,

tho  South

'  Woodliousc,  or  Wydhousc,  or  Wytlowcs.


OF  Hudson's  discoveries  and  death.  143

and  seeinar  a  s^reat  lonar  boat  with  forty  or  fifty  sava";es  upon  ^'''^< ""'' ""
the  shore,  they  sent  on  land ;  and  for  some  of  their  toycs  a,','i'art'|;
had  deeres  skinnes  well  dressed,  morse-teeth,  and  some  few  VJ/omi'^'^

111'  r  """'■"

furres.  One  of  our  men  went  on  land  to  their  tents,  one  oi  savages.
them  remaining  for  hostage,  in  which  tents  they  lived  by
hoords,  men,  women,  and  children ;  they  are  bigge  boned,
broad  faced,  flat  nosed,  and  small  footed,  like  the  Tartars  :
their  apparell  of  skinnes,  but  wrought  all  very  handsomely,
even  gloves  and  shooes.  The  next  morning  Greene  would
needs  goe  on  shore  with  some  of  hi^  chiefe  companions,  and
that  unarmed,  notwithstanding  some  advised  and  intreated
him  the  contrary.  The  savages  entertained  him  with  a  cun-
ning ambush,  and  at  the  first  onset  shot  this  mutinous  ring-
leader into  the  heart  (where  first  those  monsters  of  treache-
rie  and  bloodie  crueltie,  now  payed  with  the  like,  had  beene
conceivedj  and  Wilson,  his  brother  in  evil,  had  the  like
bloody  inheritance,  dying  swearing  and  cursing :  Perse,
Thomas,  and  Motor  dyed  a  few  dayes  after  of  their  wounds.
Every  where  can  Divine  Justicee  find  executioners.

The  boat,  by  Gods  blessing,  with  some  hurt  men  escaped  legation  of
in  this  manner.     One  Abacucks   Pricket,  a  servant  of  Sir  part\.'"my

T-viiT-v  1  1  •  11  I'l  Pilgrimage,

Dudley  Digges,  whom  the  mutiners  had  saved  in  hope  to  with  others

many  for

procure  his  master  to  worke  their  pardon,  was  left  to  keepe  these  parts.

■*■  ■•■  ■'A  such  they

the  shallop,  where  he  sate  in  a  gowne,  sicke  and  lame,  at  "^®  *°  "'''^''*
the  sterne :  upon  whom,  at  the  instant  of  the  ambush,  the
leader  of  all  the  savages  leapt  from  a  rocke,  and  with  a
strange  kinde  of  weapon,  indented,  broad,  and  sharpe,  of
bright  Steele,  riveted  into  a  handle  of  morse-tooth,  gave  him
divers  cruell  wounds,  before  he  could  from  under  his  gowne
draw  a  small  Scottish  dagger,  wherewith  at  one  thrust  into
his  side  he  killed  this  savage,  and  brought  him  off  with  the
boat,  and  some  of  the  hurt  company  that  got  to  him  by  swim-
ming. Being  got  aboord  with  a  small  weake  and  wounded
company,  they  made  from  this  island  unto  the  northerne
continent,  where  they  saw  a  large  opening  of  the  sea  north-


144  OF  Hudson's  discoveries  and  dkatii.

westward,  and  had  a  great  floud,  with  such  a  large  billow,
as  they  say,  is  no  where  but  in  the  ocean.  From  hence
they  made  all  possible  haste  homewards,  passing  the  whole
straits,  and  so  home,  without  ever  striking  sayle  or  any  other
let,  which  might  easily  have  made  it  impossible.  For  their
best  sustenance  left  them  was  sea-weeds  fryed  with  candles
ends,  and  the  skins  of  the  fowles  they  had  eaten.  Some  of
their  men  were  starved,  the  rest  all  so  weake,  that  onely  one
could  lye  along  upon  the  helme  and  steere.  By  God's  great
goodnesse,  the  sixth  of  September  1611,  they  met  with  a
fisherman  of  Foy,  by  whose  meanes  they  came  safe  into
England.


145


HUDSON'S     FIRST     VOYAGE,     (1007).

FUOit     edge's      I5UIEF     DISCOUERIE     OF     THE     MTrSCOUI,V
MERCHANTS.

(puRCiiAs,  III,  P.  464.)


In  the  year  1008,^  the  said  fellowship  set  forth  a  ship  called
the  Hope-well,  whereof  Henry  Hudson  was  master,  to  dis-
cover the  pole  ;  where  it  appeareth  by  his  journap  that  hee
came  to  the  height  of,  eighty-one  degrees,  where  he  gave
names  to  certayue  places  upon  the  continent  of  Greenland
formerly  discovered,  which  continue  to  this  day,  namely.
Whale  Bay^  and  Hakluyt's  Headland  ;■*  and  being  hindred
with  ice,  returned  home,  without  any  further  use  made  of
the    country,  and  in  ranging  homewards   he  discovered  an

^  The  real  date  of  the  voyage  to  Spitzbergen  is  1007.  That  of  IGOS
was  directed  to  Nova  Zembla.

^  The  log-book  of  the  first  voyage,  which  forms  pp.  l-:i2of  the  present
volume,  is  ascribed  by  Purchas  partly  to  John  Playse,  partly  to  Hudson.
According  to  a  side-note  on  p.  12,  Purchas  thinks  that  the  notes  from
the  11th  of  July  down  to  the  end  seem  to  be  due  to  Hudson.  The  log-
book contains,  however,  no  mention  of  Hakluyt's  Headland  nor  of  Hud-
son's Tutches,  both  mentioned  in  the  journal  which  Edge  saw.  The
observation  about  the  distance  from  Greenland  to  Spitzbergen,  derived
by  Fotherby  from  the  same  journal,  is  likewise  not  to  be  met  with  in
the  log-book.

*  The  naming  of  Whale  Bay  is  not  mentioned  in  the  log-book.  The
bay  is,  however,  spoken  of  as  Whalers  Bay  on  p.  20.  A  description  is  to
be  found  on  p.  14,  from  which  it  appears  that  the  bay  is  near  Collins'
Cape,  somewhere  about  the  north-west  extremity  of  Spitzbergen,  not  far
from  80°.  Hudson  saw  there  many  whales,  and  lost  part  of  his  line  in
fishing  for  one.  That  same  whale  nearly  upset  his  ship.  This  occur-
rence is  alluded  to  on  p.  20.

■*  Hakluyt's  Headland  appears  on  all  the  ancient  maps  of  Spitzbergen;

19


146  Hudson's  first  yoyagk.

island  lying  in  scventy-onc  degrees,  Avhich  he  named  Hud-
son's Tutches.'


CAPTAIN     FOTHERBY'S     STATEMENT     CONCERNING
HUDSON'S   JOURNAL  OF  HIS  FIRST  VOYAGE.

(PURCHAS,    III,    P.    730.)

Having  perused  Hudson's  journall,  writ  by  his  own  hands,
in  that  voyage  wherein  he  had  sight  of  certayne  land,  which
he  named  Hold-with-Hope,"  I  found  that  by  his  owne  reckon-
ing it  should  not  be  more  than  one  hundred  leagues  from
King  James  his  Newland,^  and  in  latitude  72°  30'.

for  the  first  time  on  that  of  the  arctic  regions,  of  Jodocus  Hondius,  in-
cluded in  the  present  collection.  Still  it  is  impossible  to  fix  the  exact
locality.  The  headland  is  very  near  Collins'  Cape  and  Whales'  Bay,  but
still  farther  north-west.  Modern  maps  place  it  on  the  north-west  extre-
mity of  Spitzbergen,  on  the  mainland,  or  on  some  one  of  the  neighbour-
ing islands.

1  A  direct  clue  to  this  important  discovery  is  not  furnished  by  the
logbook.  It  contains  no  detailed  entry  between  the  ship's  departure
from  Bear  Island  (74°  30'  N.,  19°  E.),  and  its  arrival  at  the  Faroer  Islands
in  62°.  Still  there  can  hardly  be  any  doubt  about  the  fact,  that  Hud-
sol's  Touches  is  identical  with  the  Jan  Mayen  Island  of  our  maps
(71°  20'  N.,  19°  W.)  The  number  of  European  islands  in  latitude  71°
is  very  small.  Those  to  the  north  of  Norway  were  too  well  known  in
Hudson's  time  to  be  mentioned  as  new  discoveries,  even  had  he  touched
one  of  them  ;  but  they  are  many  degrees  too  far  east  to  fall  into  his  track.
Then  only  Jan  Mayen  remained.  To  touch  it  Hudson  must  have  sailed
rather  more  to  the  west  than  was  necessary.  His  purpose  in  doing  so  is,
however,  explained  by  his  observations  on  p.  20.  (See  the  passage  to
which  note  1  on  that  page  refers.)

^  According  to  the  logbook  (p.  G)  the  latitude  is  73°.

''  Spitzbergen.  The  logbook  contains  no  calculations,  like  the  one  indi-
cated here,  as  forming  part  of  Hudson's  journal.


147


HUDSON'S     THIRD     VOYAGE    (1609).

FROM    VAN    METEREN's    IIISTOKTE    DER    NEDERLANDEN.
FOL.,    HAGUE,   1614,  FOL.  629.  a.


We  have  observed  in  our  last  book,  that  the  Directors  of
the  Dutch  East  India  Company  sent  out  in  March  last  year,
on  purpose  to  seek  a  passage  to  China  by  northeast  or  north-
west, an  experienced  English  pilot,  named  Henry  Hudson,
in  a  vlie  boat,i  having  a  crew  of  eighteen  or  twenty  hands,
partly  English,  partly  Dutch.'

This  Henry  Hudson   left  the  Texel  the  6th  of  April,^
1609,  and  having  doubled  the  Cape  of  Norway*  the  5th  of


Wy  hebben  in  t  voorgaende  Beech  gheseyt  dat  de  Oost-Indische
Bewindthebbers  in  Hollandt,  in  Meerte  lest  uytghesonden  hadden
cm  passagie  by  bet  Noordt-oosten  ofte  Noordt-westen  te  soecken
nae  China,  te  weten  een  Kloeck  Enghels  Piloot  Herry  Hutson
gbenoemt,  met  eenen  Vlieboot  ontrent  achthlen  ofte  twinticli
Mannen,  Engelsclie  ende  Nederlanders  op  hebbende,  wel  besorcht.
Desen  Herry  Hutson  is  uyt  Texel  uyt-ghevaren  den  sesten  April
1609.  ende  by  dubbelde  de  Cabo  van  Norwegben  den  vij'fden  Mey,

^  Vlie  boats  were  rather  flat  bottomed  yachts,  constructed  for  the
difiicult  navigation  of  the  sandy  entrance  to  the  Zuyder  Zee,  between
the  islands  of  Vlieland  and  Texel,  called  the  Vlie.  These  vessels  and
even  their  name  were  imitated  by  the  English,  who  called  them  fly-boats,
and  by  the  French,  who  called  them  fliUes.  (Compare  Brodhead,  Uist.
of  Neiv  York,  pp.  23,  24,  note.)

^  There  is  no  such  notice  in  the  preceding  book  of  Van  Meteren.

^  This  is  new  style.  Juet  (p.  4.5)  says  that  they  sailed  from  the  Texel
on  the  27th  of  March.  The  difi'erence  between  the  two  styles  was,  in
1609,  ten  days.  Thus  the  27th  of  March  and  the  6th  of  April  are  iden-
tical.

•*  The  North  Cape.     (Juet,  p.  45.)


148  Hudson's  third  voyage.

May,  directed  his  course  along  the  northern  coasts  towards
Nova  ZcmbLa  ;  but  he  there  found  the  sea  as  full  of  ice  as
he  had  found  it  in  the  preceding  year,  so  that  he  lost  the
hope  of  effecting  anything  during  the  season.  This  cir-
cumstance, and  the  cold  which  some  of  his  men  who  had
been  in  the  East  Indies  could  not  bear,  caused  quarrels
among  the  crew,  they  being  partly  English,  partly  Dutch;
upon  which  the  captain,  Henry  Hudson,  laid  before  them
two  propositions  ;  the  first  of  these  was,  to  go  to  the  coast  of
America  to  the  latitude  of  40°.  This  idea  had  been  suggested
to  him  by  some  letters  and  maps  which  his  friend  Capt.  Smith
had  sent  him  from  Virginia,^  and  by  which  he  informed  him
that  there  was  a  sea  leading  into  the  western  ocean,  by  the
north  of  the  southern  English  colony.  Had  this  information
been  true  (experience  goes  as  yet  to  the  contrary),  it  would
have  been  of  great  advantage,  as  indicating  a  short  M-ay  to
India.     The  other  proposition  was,  to  direct  their  search  to


cndc  hielt  sijnen  cours  na  Nova  Zcmbla  laughs  dc  Xoortschc  Kus-
ten,  maer  vondt  aldaer  de  Zee  soo  vol  ijs,  als  hy  't  voovgaende
Jaer  ghevonden  hadde,  soo  dat  sy  de  hoope  van  dat  Jaer  aldaer  den
moet  verloren  :  waer  over  cm  de  koude,  die  eenighe  die  \\e\  in
Oost-Indien  gheweest  waren,  qualijck  herduren  Konden,  zijn  sy
twistigh  gheworden  onder  den  anderen,  zijnde  Enghelsche  endc
Nederlanders,  waer  over  de  Schipper  Hutson  hun  voor  hiel  twee
dinghen,  d'  eerste  was  te  gaen  op  veertigh  graden  na  dc  custen
van  America,  hier  toe  meest  beweeght  zijnde,  door  Brieven  cndc
Cacrten,  die  een  Capiteyn  Smit  hem  uyt  Virginia  ghesondcn
hadde,  dacr  mede  hy  hem  acnwccs  ecu  Zee,  om  tc  vai on  Inui
Zuytschc  Colonic  acnde  Noordt-zijde,  cndc  van  dacr  tc  gaen  in  ecu
Wcsterlijckc  Zee  dat  wclckc  soo  alsoo  gheweest  ware,  (alsoo  de
crvarcnthcyt  tot  noch  toe  contraric  wijst,)  soo  sonde  hct  ecu  sccr
vorderlijcke  saeckc  gheweest  hcbben,  ende  ecncn  korten  wegh  om
inde  Indicn  tc  vacrcn.     Den  anderen  voorslagh  was,  den  wegh  te

'  The  probable  nature  of  these  maps  will  be  explained  in  the  intro-
duction.


HUUSOIS'S    TFIIRD    VOYAGE.  149

Davis's  Straits.  This  meeting  with  general  approval,  they
sailed  on  the  14th  of  May,'  and  arrived  with  a  good  wind  at  the
Faroe  Islands,  where  they  stopped  but  twenty-four  hours  to
supply  themselves  with  fresh*  water.  After  leaving  these
islands,  they  sailed  on  till,  on  the  18th  of  July,  they  reached
the  coast  of  Nova  Francia,  under  44°,  where  they  were
obliged  to  land  for  the  purpose  of  getting  a  new  foremast,
having  lost  theirs.  They  found  this  a  good  place  for  cod-
fishing,  as  also  for  the  traffic  in  skins  and  furs,  which  were
to  be  got  there  at  a  very  low  price.  But  the  crew  behaved
badly  towards  the  people  of  the  country,  taking  their
property  by  force  ;  out  of  which  there  arose  quarrels  among
them.'     The  English  fearing  that  they  would  be  out-num-


soecken  door  de  strate  Davis,  dat  wclcke  sy  Generalijcken  besloten,
dies  sy  den  14  Meye  derwaerts  toe  zeylden,  ende  quamen  met
goeden  Windt  den  lesten  Meye,  aent  Eylandt  van  Faro,  dacr  sy
alleenlijck  vieren-twintigh  uren  ovcrbrochten,  met  versche  Water
in  te  nemen,  vertveckende  voeren  sy  totten  18  Julij  tot  op  de  Cus-
ten  van  Nova  Francia,  op  vier  en  veertich  graden,  daer  sy  moesten
inloopen,  om  eenen  nieuwen  voor-mast  te  bekomen,  den  haren
verlooren  hobbende,  die  sy  daer  vonden  ende  opstelden,  sy  von-
den  die  plaetse  bequaem  om  Cabbeliaeu  te  vanghen,  als  cock
om  Traffique,  van  goede  Huyden  ende  Pelsen,  ofte  weyeringhe
dat  aldaer  om  een  kleyn  dinghen  te  bekomen  was,  maer  het
schipvolck  leefden  qualijck  mettet  landt-volck,  dinghen  met  ghe-
weldt  nemende,  waer  over  sy  twistigh  onder  den  anderen  werden,
de  Enghelsche  vreesende   dat  sy  vermandt  waren  ende  weeckste,

1  Juet  has  purposely  omitted  all  statements  concerning  the  voyage
from  the  North  Cape  to  Nova  Zembia,  and  back  to  the  North  Cape.
There  is  no  entry  between  the  5th  and  the  19th  of  May.  For  the  im-
portant events  which  passed  in  the  interval,  Van  Meteren  is  the  only
authority.

^  Near  Pennobscot  Bay,  Juet,  pp.  GO,  Gl.  Juet  tries  to  justify  the
conduct  of  the  crew,  saying  that  they  distrusted  the  savages,  and  that  in
robbing  them  and  firing  at  them,  they  did  so  as  the  savages  would  have
done  to  them.


150  Hudson's  third  voyage.

bcrcd  and  worsted,  were  therefore  afraid  to  make  any  fur-
ther attempt.  They  left  that  place  on  the  26th  of  July,  and
kept  out  at  sea  till  the  3rd  of  August,  when  they  were  again
near  the  eoast  in  42°  of  latitude.  Thence  they  sailed  on  till,
on  the  12th  of  August,  they  reached  the  shore  under  37°  45'.
Thence  they  sailed  along  the  shore,  until  we  (sic)  reached
40°  45',  where  they  found  a  good  entrance,  between  two
headlands,  and  thus  entered  on  the  12th  of  September,  into
as  fine  a  river  as  can  be  found,  with  good  anchoring  ground
on  both  sides.

Their  ship  sailed  up  the  river  as  far  as  42°  40'.  Then
their  boat  went  higher  up.  Along  the  river  they  found  sen-
sible and  warlike  people;  whilst  in  the  highest  part  the  people
were  more  friendly,  and  had  an  abundance  of  provisions,
skins,  and  furs,  of  martens  and  foxes,  and  many  other
commodities,  as  birds  and  fruit ;  even  white  and  red  grapes.
These  Indians  traded  most  amicably  with  the  people  from


ende  daerommc  vrecsden  sy  vorder  te  vcrsoecken,  aldus  schcydcn
sy  van  daer  den  26  Julij,  ende  hielden  de  zee  tot  den  derdcn
Augustij,  ende  quamen  by  landt  op  twee-en  veerticli  graden,  van
daer  voeren  sy  vorder  tot  den  12  Augustij,  sy  quamen  weder  by
landt,  op  de  latitude  van  seven-en  ertich  drie  quart,  van  daer
hielden  sy  by  lant,  tot  dat  wy  quamen  op  veertich  en  drie  quart
graden,  aldaer  sy  vonden  eenen  goeden  ingangh  tusschen  twee
hoofdcn,  ende  voeren  dacrinne  den  12  Septembris,  een  alsoo
schoonen  Reviere  als  men  konde  vinden,  wijdt  ende  diepe  ende
goeden  ancker  grondt,  ende  was  aen  bey  den  zijden,  eyndclijck
quamen  sy  op  dc  latitude  van  twce-en-vcertich  graden,  ende  veertich
niinuten,  met  hun  groot  schip.  Dan  haer  schips  boot  voer
hooirer  indc  Rcvicre.  V^oor  indc  Rcvicrc  vonden  sy  Kloeck  ende
wcerbacr  volck,  macr  binncn  in  t'uyterste  vonden  sy  vricndelijck
ende  bcleef't  volck,  die  vcel  lijftocht  haddcn,  ende  vccl  Vcllen  ende
Pcltcrijcn,  Macrtcns,  Yosscn  ende  vccl  andcr  commoditcytcn,  vog-
helcnvrucliten,  sclvcWijn-druyvcn,  witteendcroodc,  endehandeldcn
bclccfdclijckcn  mctten  volckc,  ende  brochten  van  als  wat  mcdc  :  als


Hudson's  third  voyage.  151

the  ship ;  and  of  all  the  above  mentioned  commodities,  they
brought  some  home.  When  they  had  thus  been  about  fifty
leagues  up  the  river,  they  returned  on  the  4th  of  October,
and  went  again  to  sea.  More  could  have  been  done,  if  the
crew  had  been  willing,  and  if  the  want  of  some  necessary
provisions  had  not  prevented  it.  While  at  sea,  they  held
council  together,  but  were  of  different  opinions.  The  mate,
a  Dutchman,  advised  to  winter  in  Newfoundland,  and  to
search  the  north-western  passage  of  Davis  throughout.
This  was  opposed  by  Hudson.  He  was  afraid  of  his  mu-
tinous crew,  who  had  sometimes  savagely  threatened  him,
and  he  feared  that  during  the  cold  season  they  would
entirely  consume  their  provisions,  and  would  then  be  obliged
to  return.  Many  of  the  crew  alt-o  were  ill  and  sickly.
Nobody  however  spoke  of  returning  home  to  Holland,  which
circumstance  made  the  captain  still  more  suspicious.  He
proposed  therefore  to  sail  to  Ireland,  and  winter  there  ;
which  they  all  agreed  to.     At  last  they  arrived  at  Dartmouth,


sy  nu  ontrent  vyftich  mijlen  hoogh  op  cle  Reviere  gheweest  hadden
zijn  sy  weder-ghekeert  den  vierden  Octobris,  ende  hebben  hun
weder  ter  zee  beglieven,  daer  hadden  meer  konnen  uyt  gherecht
worden,  hadde  daer  goeden  wille  m  t'schipvolck  gheweest,  ende
SCO  mede  ghebreck  van  eenighe  nootdruft,  sulcks  niet  hadde  ver-
hindert.  In  Zee  hebben  sy  hun  beraedtslaeght,  ende  waren  van
verscheyden  opinien,  de  Onder  Schipper  een  Nederlander,  was  van
meyninghe  op  Terra  Nova,  te  gaen  verwinteren,  ende  de  noordt-
weste  passagie  van  Davis  te  door-soecken,  daer  was  de  Schij^per
Hutson  tegen,  die  vreesde  sijn  gemuytineert  volck,  om  sy  by
wijlen  hem  rouwelijck  hadden  ghedreycht,  ende  datse  mede,  voor
de  koude  des  Winters,  hun  gheheel  souden  verterren,  ende  dan
moeten  keeren,  veel  van  't  volck  teer  ende  sieckelijck,  niemandt
nochtans  sprack  van  t'huys  nae  Hollandt  te  varen,  dat  den  Schipper
meerder-hande  achter-dencken  gaf,  dies  hy  voorsloech  nae  Irlant  te
varen  verwinteren,  daer  sy  alle  toestemden,  dan  ten  lesten  zijn  sy  in
Enghelandt,  tot  Dertmouth  den  sevenden  November  ghekomen,  van


152  Hudson's  third  voyagk.

in  England,  the  7th  of  November,  whence  they  informed
their  employers  the  Directors  of  the  East  India  Company
of  their  voyage.  They  proposed  to  them  to  go  out  again
for  a  search  in  the  north-west,  and  that  besides  the  pay, fifteen
hundred  florins  should  be  laid  out  for  an  additional  supply
of  provisions.  Hudson  also  wanted  six  or  seven  of  his  crew
exchanged  for  others,  and  their  number  raised  to  twenty.
He  was  then  going  to  leave  Dartmouth  on  the  1st  of  Marcli,
so  as  to  be  in  the  north-west  towards  the  end  of  that  month,
and  there  to  spend  the  whole  of  April,  and  the  first  half  of
May,  in  catching  whales  and  other  fish  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Panar  Island  ;^  thence  to  sail  to  the  north-west,  and  there
to  pass  the  time  till  middle  of  September,  and  then  to  return
to  Holland  along  the  north-eastern  coast  of  Scotland.  Thus
this  voyage  passed  off.


waer  sy  haer  Meesters  de  Bewindt-hebbers  in  Hollandt  hcbbcn  haer
reyse  verwittight,  voorslagh  doende  dat  sy  van  bet  noort-weste  te
gaen  versoecken,  met  vijfthien  bondert  gulden  in  gbelde  nicer  in
noordruft  te  besteden,  beneffens  den  loon,  ende  dat  sy  in  t'  scbip
alreede  badden,  dies  wilde  by  ses  ofte  seven  van  sijn  volck  verandert
bebben,  tot,  twintich  manncn,  't  geral  op  makende,  etc.,  ende  soudcn
van  Dertmoiitb  t'seyle  gaen,  ontrent  den  eersten  Meertc,  om  in,  t
noort-western  te  wesen,  tegen  t'eynde  van  Meerte,  ende  daer  de
Maendt  van  April  ende  half  Meye,  over  te  brenghen  met  Walvis-
scben  ende  Beestcn  te  dooden,  ontrent  bet  Eylandt  van  Panar,
ende  dan  nae  bet  noort-westen  te  varen,  om  aldacr  den  tijdt  over
te  brcngcn  tot  bait'   September,  en  dacr  na  door  bet  Xoortoostcn

^  No  such  name  as  Panar  Island  occurs  on  old  maps.  The  oidy  likely
explanation  is  that  the  island  meant  is  the  Ys.  de  Arena  of  Ortelius,
about  49°,  near  the  coast  of  Newfoundland,  then  a  general  fishing  sta-
tion, and  undoubtedly  a  most  fitting  starting-point  for  a  north-western
expedition.  This  Ys.  de  Arena  was  somehow  turned  into  Panar  Island  by
the  somewhat  negligent  editor  who  published  the  IMS.  of  the  last  books
of  Van  Meteren  after  his  death.  This  mistake  has  been  rendered  (juite
ludicrous  by  Van  der  Donck,  who  actually  states  that  Hudson  touched
the  ('a)i(iri/  Islands  on  his  third  voyage.


Hudson's  third  voyage.  153

A  long  time  elapsed  through  contrary  winds  before  the
Company  could  be  informed  of  the  arrival  of  the  ship  in
England.  Then  they  ordered  the  ship  and  crew  to  return
as  soon  as  possible.  But  when  they  were  going  to  do  so,
Henry  Hudson  and  the  other  Englishmen  of  the  ship  were
commanded  by  government  there  not  to  leave  England  but
to  serve  their  own  country.  Many  persons  thought  it  rather
unfair  that  these  sailors  should  thus  be  prevented  from
laying  their  accounts  and  reports  before  their  employers,
chiefly  as  the  enterprise  in  which  they  had  been  engaged
was  such  as  to  benefit  navigation  in  general.  These  latter
events  took  place  in  January  1610,  and  it  was  then  thought
probable  that  the  English  themselves  would  send  ships  to
Virginia,  to  explore  the  river  found  by  Hudson.


van  Schotlandt,  weder  te  keeren  na  Hollandt.  Aldus  is  die  reyse
afgheloopen,  ende  eer  de  Bewint-hebbers  hebben  connen  gead-
verteert  worden,  van  haer  komste  in  Enghelandt,  is  het  door  con-
trarie  wint  lange  aengheloopen,  ende  hebben  't  schip  ende  volck
ontboden  ten  eersten  t'huys  te  komen,  ende  alsoo  't  selfde  sonde
geschieden,  is  den  schipper  Herry  Hutson  van  wegen  die  Over-
heydt  aldaer,  belast  niet  te  moghen  vertrecken,  maer  dienst  te
moeten  doen,  sijn  eygen  Lant,  also  mede  de  ander  Engelsche  die
int  schip  waren,  dat  nochtans  vreemt  velen  dunckt,  datmen  de
schippers  niet  toelaten  sonde  reeckeninghe  ende  rapport  te  doene
van  haren  dienst  ende  besoingne,  &c. ;  aen  hun  Meesters,  zijnde
uytghesonden  voor  't  gemeyne  beneficie  van  alderhande  naviga-
tien,  dit  ghescliiede  in  Januario,  1610,  ende  men  achte  dat  de
Engbelsche  hem  selve  wilden  mette  Schepen  nae  Virginia  senden,
om  daer  de  voorsz  Reviere  vorder  te  versoecken.


154


EXTRACTS  RELATING  TO  HUDSON'S  THIRD  VOYAGE
(1609),  FROM  JOHN  DE  LAET'S  NIEUWE  WERELT.

FOL.,     AMSTERDAM,     1625,    1630.

I.

(from    book    III,    CHAP.    7.)


As  to  the  first  discovery,  the  Directors  of  the  privileged
East  India  Company,  in  1609,  dispatched  the  yacht,  "  Half
Moon,"  under  the  command  of  Henry  Hudson,  captain  and
super-cargo,  to  seek  a  passage  to  China  by  the  north-east.
But  he  changed  his  course  and  stood  over  towards  New
France,  and  having  passed  the  banks  of  Newfoundland  in
latitude  43°  23',^  he  made  the  land  in  latitude  44°  15',^  with
a  west-north-west  and  north-west  course,  and  went  on  shore
at  a  place  where  there  were  many  of  the  natives  with  whom,
as  he  understood,   the  French  came   every  year  to   trade.


Wat  de  eerste  ontdeckinghe  belanght,  in  den  jare  1609  sonden  de
Bewindt-hebbers  van  de  gheoctroyeerde  Oost-Indische  compagnie
het  jacht  de  halve  mane,  daer  voor  schipper  ende  koopman  op  veer
Hendrick  Hudson,  cm  in  't  noordt-oostcn  een  door-ganc  naer
China  tc  socckcn  :  dan  sy  verandcrdcn  van  Kours,  ende  staken
over  naer  Nova  Francia,  ende  de  banck  van  Tcrrencuf  ghepasseert
hcbbcnde  op  de  43  graden  ende  23  minuten  gheracckten't  landt
met  een  w.  n.  w.  ende  n.  w.  Kours  op  de  44  graden  ende  15
minuten,  ende  hmdcn  daer  by  sckere  Wilden,  by  de  wclcke,  soo  sy

'  Near  Cape  Sable,  Nova  Scotia  :  sec  p.  53,  note  1;  p.  55,  note  1.

^  On  the  coast  of  Maine,  a  few  miles  to  the  north  of  Pennobscot  Bay,
where  they  afterwards  cut  a  new  foremast  for  their  ship :  see  Juct,  July
17th,  p.  69  ;  Van  Meteren,  p.  149,  note  2.


HUDSON  S    THIRD    VOYAGE.  155

Sailing  hence,  he  heut  his  course  to  the  south,  until  running
south-south-west  and  south-west  by  south,  he  again  made
land  in  latitude  41°  •13',  which  he  supposed  to  be  an  island,
and  gave  it  the  name  of  New  Holland,^  but  afterwards  dis-


verstonden,  de  Francoysen  jaerhjckx  komen  handclen  :  van  hicr
keerden  sy  zuydt-waert  op  tot  datse  met  een  z.  z,  w.  ende  z.  w.
ten  z.  gangh  weder't  landt  ghewaer  wierden  op  de  41  graden  ende
43  minuten,  welck  sy  meynden  een  Eylandt  te  wesen,  ende  gavent
den  naem  van  Nieuvv  Hollandt,  dan  bevonden  daer  naer  dat  hct

^  It  is  a  question  of  some  moment  whether  Hudson  really  called  Cape
Cod  New  Holland.  His  doing  so  would  imply  an  intention  on  his  side
to  take  possession  of  the  country  in  the  name  of  the  Dutch.  De  Laet  is
the  only  one  of  our  authorities  who  saw  Hudson's  own  journal  of  the
third  voyage,  and  if  we  could  fully  believe  his  statements,  every  doubt
would  be  removed.  But  the  discrepancies  between  him,  Juet,  and  Pur-
chas,  and  the  mistakes  committed  by  each  of  them  with  regard  to  Cape
Cod,  render  a  satisfactory  conclusion  impossible.  De  Laet  believes
Cape  Cod  to  be  in  latitude  41°  43',  Juet  places  it  under  40°  10',  whilst
Purchas  assigns  to  it  two  different  latitudes,  41°  10'  and  41°  45'  (see  pp.
64,  66,  and  Purchas's  side-notes  to  these  pages).  On  the  other  hand  the
name  of  JVew  Holland  is  on  the  old  Dutch  maps,  not  given  to  Cape  Cod
itself,  but  to  the  peninsula  of  Barnstaple,  of  which  Cape  Cod  forms  the
extreme  point ;  and  the  mean  latitude  of  that  peninsula  is,  indeed,  about
41°  43',  whilst  Cape  Cod  lies  under  42°  4',  and  has,  on  all  the  old  Dutch
maps,  one  or  even  more  names  of  its  own,  viz.,  Cape  Cod,  Cape  James,
Statenhoek,  Withoek.  It  is  also  certain,  from  Juet,  pp.  64,  65,  that
Hudson  explored  part  of  Barnstaple  peninsula.  Under  these  circum-
stances it  might  be  thought  that  a  very  small  correction  would  set  De
Laet's  account  right,  and  that  the  peninsula  of  Barnstaple  was  indeed
called  New  Holland  by  Hudson.  But  it  is  quite  clear  from  Juet,  p.  66,
that  the  spot  mistaken  by  Hudson  for  Cape  Cod  was  in  latitude  40°  10',
a  reef  in  the  sea,  which  he  very  correctly  considered  as  an  island.  This
reef  was  probably  situated  south  of  Nantucket.  It  is,  under  these  cir-
cumstances, to  be  feared  that  De  Laet  set  the  example,  afterwards  fol-
lowed by  Van  der  Donck,  of  tampering  with  his  materials  ;  and  that  he
made  Hudson  give  the  name  of  New  Holland,  because  he  desired  it  to
be  understood  that  Hudson  wished  to  take  possession  of  the  country,  a
fact  which  is  very  improbable.  The  name  of  New  Holland  was  given  to
Barnstaple  before  the  year  1615.  It  is  to  be  found  on  a  chart  of  that
date  preserved  in  the  Archives  of  the  Hague.  (A  facsimile  in
O'Callaghan's  Hist,  of  Neio  Netherland,  vol.  i.)


156  EXTRACTS  RELATING  TO

covei'cd  that  it  was  Cape  Cod,  and  that  according  to  his
observation,  it  lay  two  hundred  and  twenty-five  miles  to  the
west  of  its  place  on  all  the  charts.  Pursuing  his  course  to
the  south,  he  again  saw  land  in  latitude  37°  15';  the  coast
was  low,  running  north  and  south,  and  opposite  to  it  lay  a
bank  or  shoal,  within  which  there  was  a  depth  of  eight,
nine,  ten,  eleven,  seven,  and  six  and  a  half  fathoms,  with  a
sandy  bottom.     Hudson  called  this  place  Dry  Cape.^

Changing  his  course  to  the  northward,  he  again  discovered
land  in  lat.  38°  9',^  where  there  was  a  white  sandy  shore,  and
within  appeared  a  thick  grove  of  trees  full  of  green  foliage.
The  direction  of  the  coast  was  north-north-east  and  south-
south-west  for  about  twenty-four  miles ;  then  north  and
south  for  twenty-one  miles,  and  afterwards  south-east  and
north-west  for  fifteen  miles.  They  continued  to  run  along
the  coast  to  the  north,  until  they  reached  a  point  from  which
the  land  stretches  to  the  west  and  north-west  where  several
rivers  discharge  into  an  open  bay.     Land  was  seen  to  the


Cap  Cod  was,  ende  dat  het  naer  hacr  besteck  wel  vijf-en  seventich
mijlen  westelijcker  leght  als  in  alle  Kaerten  ghestelt  wordt.  Van
hier  vervielen  sy  tot  de  37  graden  ende  15  minuten,  alwaer  sy
weder  landt  saghen,  ende  streckte  hem  z.  ende  n.  Is  een  vlacke
Kuste,  ende  daer  streckt  een  banck  langhs  de  Kuste  henen,  waer
binnen  het  8,  9,  10,  11,  7,  ende  6^  vadem  diep  is  sandt-grondt :
sy  noemden  dese  plaetse  de  drooghe  Caep.  Daer  naer  noordt-
waert  aen  loopende,  gheraeckten  sy  weder't  landt  op  aclit-en-
dertich  graden  en  neghen  minuten,  ende  was  een  wit  sandt-strandt,
ende  binnen  vol  groene  boomen,  streckte  daer  n.  n.  o.  ende  z.  z.
w.  ontrcnt  acbt  mijlen,  ende  dan  z.  ende  n.  seven  mijlen,  ende
voort  z.  o.  ende  n.  w.  vijf  mijlen  :  zcylden  al  langlis  de  wal  noorden
aen,  tot  dat  sy  aen  ccn  puni  quamcn,  ende  t'landt  streckte  docn  w.
n.  w.  ende  was  een  baye  daer  ccnighc  rieviercn  in  quamcn,  van

'  rrol)ably  Cape  Charles,  at  the  mouth  of  Chesapeake  Bay,  37°  10'.
^  Assatcaguc  Island,  near  the  coast  of  Maryland.


HUDSON  S    THIRD    VOYAGE.  157

east-north-east,  which  Hudson  at  first  took  to  be  an  island,
but  it  proved  to  be  the  main  land,  and  the  second  point  of
the  bay,  in  latitude  38°  54'.  Standing  in  upon  a  course
north-west  by  east,  they  soon  found  themselves  embayed,
and  encountering  many  breakers,  stood  out  again  to  the
south-south-east.  Hudson  suspected  that  a  large  river  dis-
charged into  the  bay,  from  the  strength  of  the  current  that
set  out  and  caused  the  accumulation  of  sands  and  shoals.^

Continuing  their  course  along  the  shore  to  the  north,  they
observed  a  white  sandy  beach  and  drowned  land  within,
beyond  which  there  appeared  a  grove  of  wood  ;  the  coast
running  north-east  by  east  and  south-west  by  south.  After-
wards the  direction  of  the  coast  changed  to  north  by  east,
and  was  higher  land  than  they  had  yet  seen.  They  at  length
reached  a  lofty  promontory  or  headland,  behind  which  was
situated  a  bay,  which  they  entered  and  run  up  into  a  road-
stead near  a  low  sandy  point,  in  lat.  40°  18'.^     There  they


desen  hoeck  sagen  sy  landt  naer't  o.  n.  o.  welck  sy  meynden  een
Eylandt  te  wesen,  dan  bevonden  het  vaste  landt,  ende  den  tweeden
hoeck  van  die  baye,  op  dehooghte  van  38  graden  ende  54  minuten:
ende  alsoo  sy  haer  Kours  n.  w.  ten  n.  aen  stelden,  vonden  sy  haer
selven  in  een  baye  verseylt,  ende  ghemoeten  vcel  barninghen,  soo
dat  sy  z.  z.  o.  weder  uyt-stonden :  sy  vermoeden  datter  een  groote
rievier  most  uyt-loopen,  door  dc  groote  stroom  die  daer  uytsette,
ende  vele  sanden  ende  droogten  veroorsaeckte  :  hiclent  van  hier
VGorts  langs  de  wal,  was  wit  sandt-strandt,  ende  binncn  al  ver-
droncken  landt,  ende  't  binnen  landt  al  vol  boomen,  streckte  n.  o,
ten  n,  ende  z.  w,  ten  z,  daer  naer  streckte  n.  ten,  o.  ende  was
hoogher  landt  als  sy  nocli  ghesien  hadden,  tot  aen  eenen  hooghen
hoeck,  achter  de  welcke  een  baye  leght,  alwaer  sy  op  de  reeden
lieppen,  achter  een  leeghen  sandt-hoeck,  op  de  veertich  graden

^  The  bay  and  river  are  the  Delaware  Bay  and  River.  The  second
point  of  the  bay,  in  latitude  38°  54'  (incorrect  by  a  few  miles),  is  Cape
May.

2  Hudson  river.  They  entered  near  Sandy  Hook  and  Sandy  Hook
Bay.     (See  Juet,  p.  77.)


158  EXTRACTS    KELATING    TO

were  visited  by  two  savages  clothed  in  elk-skins,  wlio  showed
them  every  sign  of  friendship.  On  the  land  they  found  an
abundance  of  blue  plums  and  magnificent  oaks,  of  a  height
and  thickness  that  one  seldom  beholds ;  together  with  pop-
lars, linden  trees,  and  various  other  kinds  of  wood  useful  in
ship-building.  Sailing  hence  in  a  north-easterly  direction,
they  ascended  a  river  to  nearly  43°  north  latitude,  where  it
became  so  narrow  and  of  so  little  depth,  that  they  found  it
necessary  to  return.

From  all  that  they  could  learn,  there  had  never  been  any
ships  or  Christians  in  that  quarter  before,  and  they  were  the
first  to  discover  the  river  and  ascend  it  so  far.  Henry  Hud-
son returned  to  Amsj;erdam  with  his  report,  and  in  the  fol-
lowing year  1610,  some  merchants  again  sent  a  ship  thither,
that  is  to  say,  to  the  second  river  discovered,  which  was  called
Manhattes  from  the  savage  nation  that  dwelt  at  its  mouth.
And  subsequently  their  High  Mightinesses,  the  States  Gene-
ral,   granted    to    these    merchants    the    exclusive    privilege


ende  achlhien  minuten ;  daer  quamen  twee  Wildcn  by  haer  in
elandts  vellen  gekleet,  die  haer  alle  teeckenen  van  vrientschap  be-
thoonden,  vonden  daer  aen't  landt  menichte  van  blauw  pruymen,
en  de  schoonste  eycken  van  lenghte  ende  dickte  die  men  sien  konde,
poplieren,  lonen,  ende  alderhande  houdt  dat  van  noode  is  tot  de
schepen  te  bouwen ;  voeren  van  hier  n.  ten  o.  aen,  ende  de  rievieren
op,  to  by  de  43  graden  by  noorden  de  linie,  alwaer  de  rievier  heel
nauw  werdt  ende  ondiep,  soo  dat  sy  te  rugghe  keerden.  Naer  alle
'tgene  sy  konden  oordeelen  ende  bevinden,  soo  en  waren  in  dit
quartier  noch  noyt  eenige  schepen  ofte  Christenen  geweest,  soo
dat  sy  dc  ccrste  waren  die  dose  rievier  ontdeckten,  ende  soo  hoog-
lie  op  vocrcn.  Hcndrick  Hudson  met  dit  raport  wedcr  ghckccrt
/ijndc  't  Amsterdam,  soo  liebbcn  eenighc  koop-liedcn  in  den  jarc
IGIO  wedcr  ecn  schip  dcrwaerts  gcsondcn,  tc  wctcn  naer  dcsc
twecde  rievier,  de  wclcke  sy  den  nacm  gavcn  van  Manhattes  ;
naer  dc  nacm  van  de  Wllden  die  acn't  begin  van  dcsc  ricvierc
^vooncn  :   ende  in  dc  volglicndc  jarcn  hcbbcn  dc  Ho.  Mog.  Hccrcn


Hudson's  third  voyage.  159

of  navigating  this  river  and  trading  there  ;^  wherenpon,  in
the  year  1615,  a  redoubt  or  fort  was  erected  on  the  river,
and  occupied  by  a  small  garrison,  of  which  we  shall  here-
after speak.  Our  countrymen  have  continued  to  make  voy-
ages thither,  from  year  to  year,  for  the  purpose  of  trafficking
with  the  natives,  and  on  this  account  the  country  has  very
justly  received  the  name  of  New  Netherlands.


Staten  Generael  aen  dese  koop-lieden  octroy  verleent  cm  alleen  op
dese  rieviere  te  mogen  varcn  ende  den  handel  te  drijven  :  waer
over  in  den  jare  1615  boven  op  de  voornoemde  rieviere  eenredoute
ofte  fortjen  wierdt  geleght  met  een  kleyn  bescttinghe,  daer  wy  hicr
naer  noch  sullen  van  spreken  ;  ende  is  dese  vaert  by  de  onse  sints
jaerlijcks  ghecontinucert,  ende  door-gaens  van  ons  volck  daer
blijven  Icgghen  om  den  handel  met  de  Wilden  te  drijven;  waer
door  dit  quartier  ten  rechten  den  naem  van  Niew-Nederlandt  beeft
verckreghen.


II.

(from    book    III,    CHAPTER    10.)


Henry  Hudson,  who  first  discovered  this  river,  and  all
that  have  since  visited  it,  express  their  admiration  of  the
noble  trees  growing  upon  its  banks  ;  and  Hudson  has  him-
self described  the  manners  and  appearance  of  the  people  that
he  found  dwelling  within  this  bay,  in  the  following  terms: —


Hendbick  Hudson  die  dese  rieviere  eerst  heeft  ontdeckt,  ende  alia
die  nacrderhandt  daer  bebben  gbeweest,  wetcn  wonder  te  seggben
van  de  scboone  boomer)  die  bier  wassen  :  de  selve  bescbrijft  ons
de  manieren  ende  ghestalte  van't  volck,  welck  by  stracx  binnen  de
baye  vondt  aldus  :  Als  ick  aent  land  't  quam,  stonde  alle  de  Swarten

^  These  facts  are  not  quite  correctly  stated.     See  Brodhead,  Ilist.  of
New  York,  pp.  60,  61.


160  EXTRACTS  RELATING  TO

"  When  I  came  on  shore,  the  swarthy  natives  all  stood
around  and  sung  in  their  fashion  ;  their  clothing  consisted
of  the  skins  of  foxes  and  other  animals,  which  they  dress  and
make  the  skins  into  garments  of  various  sorts.  Their  food
is  Turkish  wheat  (maize  or  Indian  corn),  which  they  cook
by  baking,  and  it  is  excellent  eating.  They  all  came  on
board,  one  after  another,  in  their  canoes,  which  are  made  of
a  single  hollowed  tree ;  their  weapons  are  bows  and  arrows,
pointed  with  sharp  stones,  which  they  fasten  with  hard
resin.  They  had  no  houses,  but  slept  under  the  blue
heavens,  sometimes  on  mats  of  bulrushes  interwoven,  and
sometimes  on  the  leaves  of  trees.  They  always  carry  with  them
all  their  goods,  such  as  their  food  and  green  tobacco,  which
is  strong  and  good  for  use.  They  appear  to  be  a  friendly
people,  but  have  a  great  propensity  to  steal,  and  are  exceed-
ingly adroit  in  carrying  away  whatever  they  take  a  fancy
to."

In  latitude  40°  48',  where  the  savages  brought  very  fine
oysters  to  the  ship,  Hudson  describes  the   country  in  the


en  songhen  op  hare  wijse;  haer  kleederen  syn  vellen  van  vossen
ende  andere  beesten  die  sy  bereyden,  ende  maken  kleerderen  van
vellen,  van  aller  hande  sorteringhen,  haer  eten  is  Turcxsche  tar  we,
daer  sy  koecken  van  backen,  ende  is  goet  eeten ;  quamen  al  temet
aen  boordt  d'een  voor  d'ander  naer,  met  haer  prauwen  van  een
heel  houdt  gemaeckt ;  haer  geweer  is  bogen  ende  pijlen  met  scharpe
steentjens  voor  aen,  die  sy  daer  aen  vast  maken  met  spiegel  harst;
hadden  daer  geen  huysen,  sliepen  al  onder  den  blaeuwen  Ilemcl,
sommige  op  mattijens  aen  malkanderen  ghewrocht  van  biesen,
sommighe  op  bladeren  van  boomen,  dragen  altijts  al  haer  goet  met
hour  datse  hebbcn,  als  eten  ende  groenen  toback  welck  sterck  is
ende  goet  om  ncmen ;  schijnt  vricndelijck  volck  te  zijn,  dan  is
seer  ghencghen  tot  stclen,  ende  subticl  oni  wcgh  te  halen  alles  't
gheene  haer  aenstact.  Op  de  hooghte  van  vcertich  graden  ende
acht-en  vcertich  minuten,  al  waer  de  Wilde  seer  schoone  ocstcrs
aen  syn  schip  brachten,  ghctuycht  de  voor-noemde  Hudson  van  't


hudsom's  third  voyage.  161

following  manner  : — "  It  is  as  pleasant  a  land  as  one  need
tread  upon  ;  very  abundant  in  all  kinds  of  timber  suitable
for  shipbuilding,  and  for  making  large  casks  or  vats.  The
people  had  copper  tobacco  pijies,.  from  which  I  inferred
that  copper  might  naturally  exist  there  ;  and  iron  likewise
according  to  the  testimony  of  the  natives,  who,  however,  do
not  understand  preparing  it  for  use.

Hudson  also  states  that  they  caught  in  the  river  all  kinds
of  fresh-water  fish  with  seines,  and  young  salmon^  and
sturgeon.  In  latitude  42°  18'  he  landed  : — "  I  sailed  to  the
shore,"  he  says,  "  in  one  of  their  canoes,  with  an  old  man,
who  was  the  chief  of  a  tribe,  consisting  of  forty  men  and
seventeen  women  ;  these  I  saw  there  in  a  house  well  con-
structed of  oak  bark,  and  circular  in  shape,  so  that  it  had
the  appearance  of  being  well  built,  with  an  arched  roof.  It
contained    a  great  quantity   of  maize  or  Indian  corn,  and


landt  aldus  ;  Is  soo  schoonen  landt  als  men  met  voeten  betreden
mach,  over-vloedigh  van  alderhande  houdt,  cm  schepen  te  bouwen,
ende  cm  groote  vaten  van  te  maken ;  t'  volck  hadde  daer  kojDeren
toback  pijpen,  waer  iiyt  ick  vermoede  dat  daer  koper  meet  zijn,
als  cock  yser  naer  dcr  Wilden  beduydinghe,  dan  sy  en  hebben
gheen  wetenscbap  cm  'tselve  te  bereyden.  De  selve  ghetuyght
mede  dat  sy  op  de  rievier  allerbande  rievier-visch  met  de  seghen
vanghen,  cock  jonghe  salm  ende  steur.  Op  de  booglite  van  twee-en-
veertich  graden  ende  achthien  minuten  was  dito  Hudson  acn  landt  ;
Ick  veer  (seght  hy)  met  eeu  van  haer  prauwen  aen  landt,  met  een
oudt  man  die  daer  overste  was,  van  veertich  mans  ende  seventhien
vrouwen,  die  ick  daer  sagh ;  in  een  buys  van  basten  van  eyckcn-
boomen  wel  ghemaeckt,  ende  rondtomsoo  gelijck  of  bet  een  verwelft

1  This  fact  has  been  doubted.  Dr.  Mitchell,  an  American  naturalist
informed  Dr.  Miller  the  New  York  historian,  that  no  such  fish  had  been
seen  in  Hudson  river,  as  long  as  he  could  remember.  But  this  may  be
caused  by  the  extraordinary  movement  even  then  (in  1820)  existing  in
the  river's  mouth.  There  is  no  reasonable  ground  to  doubt  that  the
Hudson  was,  at  the  time  of  its  discovery,  as  rich  in  salmon  as  many
other  North  American  rivers  are  now.

SI


162  EXTRACTS    RELATING    TO

beans  of  the  last  year's  growth,  and  there  Lay  near  the  house
for  the  purpose  of  drying,  enough  to  load  three  ships,  besides
what  was  growing  in  the  fields.  On  our  coming  into  the
house,  two  mats  were  spread  out  to  sit  upon,  and  immediately
some  food  was  served  in  well  made  red  wooden  bowls  ;  two
men  were  also  despatched  at  once  with  bows  and  arrows  in
quest  of  game,  who  soon  after  brought  in  a  pair  of  pigeons
which  they  had  shot.  They  likewise  killed  a  fat  dog,  and
skinned  it  in  great  haste,  with  shells  which  they  had  got
out  of  the  water.  They  supposed  that  I  would  remain  with
them  for  the  night,  but  I  returned  after  a  short  time  on
board  the  ship.  The  land  is  the  finest  for  cultivation  that
I  ever  in  my  life  set  foot  upon,  and  it  also  abounds  in  trees
of  every  description.  The  natives  are  a  very  good  people,
for  when  they  saw  that  I  would  not  remain,  they  supposed
that  I  was  afraid  of  their  bows,  and  taking  the  arrows,  they
broke  them  in  pieces,  and  threw  them  into  the  fire,  etc."

He    found  there  also  vines  and  grapes,    pumpkins,   and
other  fruits  :    from  all   of  which   there  is   sufficient  reason


hadde  ghewecst,  was  overvloedigh  van  Maiz  en  boonen  van  't  voor-
gaende  jaer,  ende  daer  lagh  by  het  buys  wel  soo  veel  te  drooghen,
als  dry  schepen  mochten  voeren,  sender  dat  noch  stondt  en  wies ;
by  bet  buys  komende  werden  twee  matjens  gbespreyt  om  op  te
sitten,  ende  terstondt  eenighe  ghericbten  voort  gbebracbt,  in  roode
bouten-backen  wel  gbemaeckt,  ende  sonden  terstondt  twee  mannen
uyt  met  booghen  om  wildt  te  scbieten,  brocbten  twee  Duyven  die
sy  wel  bacst  gbescbooteu  badden,  slocgben  terstondt  oock  eenen
vetten-bondt,  ende  krcgbcn  bet  vel  af  metier  baest  met  scbelpen
die  sy  uyt  bet  water  krijgbcn,  niccnden  dat  ick  die  nacbt  by  baer
blijven  sonde,  dan  ginck  terstondt  weder  naer  bet  scbip  ;  'tis  het
scboonste  landt  om  te  bouwen,  als  ick  oyt  mijn  levcn  met  vocten
betradt,  ende  oock  van  aldcrbandc  boomen  ;  ende  is  seer  goet  volck,
want  doen  sy  sagbeu  dat  ick  niet  bbjven  en  wikle,  meenden  dat
ick  van  baer  bogben  vervaert  was,  namcn  de  pijlcn,  brakcn  die
acn  stuckcn  ende  worpcn  die  int  vier,  etc.      Sy  vonden  daer  oock


Hudson's  third  voyage.  163

to  conclude,  that  it  is  a  pleasant  and  fruitful  country,  and
that  the  natives  are  well  disposed,  if  they  are  only  well
treated  ;  although  they  are  very  changeable,  and  of  the  same
general  character  as   all   the  savages  in  the  north.


wijngaerden  ende  dru3-ven,  pompoenen  ende  andere  vruchten.
Wt  welckes  alles  ghenoechsaem  is  af  te  neraen  dat  hat  een  seer
schoon  ende  vruchtbaer  quartier  is,  ende  goet  volck,  als  het  maer
wel  ghehandelt  wordt ;  docli  seer  veranderlijck,  ende  van  den
selven  aerdt  als  alle  het  volck  van  die  noorder  quartieren.


164


EXTRACTS  CONTAINING  SOME  ORIGINAL  INFORMA-
TION ABOUT  HUDSON'S  THIRD  VOYAGE.

FROM     MK.    LAMBRECHTSEN    VAN     KITTHEm's     HISTORY     OF     NEW
NETHERIiAND,    8V0.,    MIDDELBURG,     1818.


(the    extracts    ABE    REPRINTED    FROM    THE    TRANSLATION    IN    THE

COLLECTIONS    OF    THE    N.    Y.    HIST.    SOC,    NEW    SERIES,

VOL.    I,    P.    85,    FOL.)

I.

The  inclinations  of  tlie  directors  of  the  East  India  Com-
pany were  much  at  variance  upon  the  proposals  of  Hudson.
The  directors  of  Zealand  opposed  it ;  they  were  probably
discouraged  by  the  fruitless  results  of  former  voyages,  con-
cerning which  they  could  obtain  sufficient  information  from
their  colleague,  Balthasar  Moucheron,^  who  long  before  had
traded  to  the  north.  It  was  said  they  were  throwing  money
away,  and  nothing  else.  If  private  merchants  would  run
the  risk  they  had  no  objection,  provided  the  company  was
not  injured  by  it.  The  Amsterdam  directors,  nevertheless,
would  not  give  up  their  plan,  and  sent  Henry  Hudson,  in
the  same  year  1609,  with  a  yacht  called  the  Half  Moon,
manned  by  sixteen  Englishmen  and  Hollanders,  again  to  sea.

^  Balthasar  de  Moucheron  was  a  rich  merchant,  one  of  the  active
emigrants  who  had  left  the  southern  provinces  of  the  Netherlands  during
the  war  of  independance  against  Spain.  He  settled  in  Zealand,  and  was
the  principal  promoter  of  the  maritime  enterprise  by  which  the  young
republic  rose  so  fast  to  a  distinguished  place  among  European  powers.
Moucheron  sent  on  his  own  account  ships  to  Russia,  to  America,  and  to
the  East  Indies.  The  undertakings  alluded  to  by  Lambrechtsen  are  the
three  voyages  to  the  North-East,  which  De  Veer  has  described.  Mou-
cheron was  the  principal  instigator  of  these  unsuccessful  expeditions.
(See  Dr.  Beke's  De  Veer,  Introduction,  p.  lii.)


EXTRACTS    FROM    LAMBRPXHTSEN.  165

This  vessel  left  the  Texel  on  the  6th  of  April,  1609,  sail-
ing towards  the  north.  Prevented  by  the  ice  from  reaching
the  latitude  of  Nova  Zembla,  they  went  to  Newfoundland,
and  from  there  to  Acadia  or  New  France,  till  they  were
driven  into  a  bay  known  only  to  the  French,  who  arrived
there  annually  to  purchase  hides  and  furs  from  the  savages.
Hudson,  unwilling  to  approach  those  chilling  shores,  re-
turned to  sea,  and  steering  south-west  discovered  land,
which  was  first  considered  to  be  an  island,  but  which  was
soon  discovered  to  be  a  part  of  the  continent,  named  Cape
Cod.

This  industrious  navigator  felt  (although  born  in  Eng-
land) so  sensibly  his  relation  to  the  Holland  East  India
Company,  who  had  employed  him  in  discoveries,  that  he
could  not  have  hesitated  a  moment  to  give  the  name  of  his
adopted  fatherland  to  this  newly  discovered  countxy.  He
called  it  New  Holland.  But  not  wishing  to  fix  his  per-
manent residence  on  this  spot,  Hudson  preferred  the  sea,
taking  a  south-west  course  till  he  discovered  a  flat  coast  in
37°  35',  which  he  followed  in  an  opposite  direction.

At  this  time  he  discovered  a  bay,  in  which  several  rivers
were  emptying,  which,  no  doubt,  must  have  been  the  South
river,  afterwards  named  Delaware.  It  has  a  projecting
point,  which  then  or  afterwards  obtained  the  name  of  Cape
Henlopen,  probably  from  the  family  name  of  the  first  dis-
coverer. Now  the  bay  was  again  left,  and  they  steered
north-east  along  the  coast  at  40°  18',  where,  between  Barn-
degat  and  Godinspunt,  named  thus  afterwards  in  remem-
brance of  him  who  first  discovered  this  cape,^  there  was  a
good  anchorage,  to  explore  the  country,  and  to  open  a  com-
munication with  the  inhabitants.     But  Hudson's  curiosity

1  Godyn  was  one  of  the  Directors  of  the  Dutch  West  India  Company.
The  cape  was  not  discovered  by  him ;  but  received  his  name  because
he  possessed  a  large  estate  in  its  neighbourhood.  Godyns  punt  is  iden-
tical with  Colman's  Point.     See  p.  80,  note  3.


166  EXTRACTS    FROM    LAMBRECHTSEN.

was  not  so  easily  satisfied.  He  went  again  to  sea,  following
the  coast  in  the  same  direction  till  the  mouth  of  a  large  river
was  discovered,  which  then  was  named  by  the  sailors  the
North  river,  and  afterwards,  in  honour  of  the  name  of  the
first  discoverer,  Hudson's  river.


II,

The  voyage  was  prosperous.  But  when  he  approached  the
English  coast  a  mutiny  was  stirring  among  the  crew,  among
which  were  several  Englishmen.  They  compelled  the  skip-
per to  enter  Dartmouth,  from  which  the  rumour  of  his  dis-
coveries ere  long  reached  the  capital.

Nothing  was  more  averse  from  the  views  of  king  James
than  of  allowing  to  the  Netherlanders  any  advantage  from
transmarine  colonies,  while  he,  in  imitation  of  Queen  Eliza-
beth, desired  to  convert  the  whole  to  the  profit  of  his  own
subjects.  Hudson  was  considered  as  a  person  of  import-
ance, and  he  was  forbidden  to  pursue  his  voyage  towards
Amsterdam,  with  the  intention,  ere  long,  to  make  use  of  his
services.


After  the  ship,  the  Half  Moon,  had  been  detained  at  Dart-
mouth for  some  time,  it  Avas  at  length  permitted  to  return
to  the  fatherland,  where  it  arrived  in  the  beginning  of  the
year  1610.

And  now  did  the  directors  obtain  such  favourable  reports
of  the  countries  discovered  by  Hudson,  that  in  their  opinion
these  were  a  full  compensation  lor  their  disappointment  in
their  principal  aim,  the  passage  to  India  by  the  north.


167


EXTRACTS  CONCERNING   HUDSON'S  THIRD  VOYAGE
(1609),  FROM  ADRIAN  VAN  DER  DONCK'S

BESCHRYVINGE    VAN     NIEUW     NEDEELANDT,     4tO,     AMSTERDAM,

1655,   1656.

(the  original  pieces  are  taken  from  the  first  pages  of  the  volume,

THE    translations    IN    GREATER   PART    FROM*  THE    COLLECTIONS    OF    THE
NEW  YORK  HISTORICAL  SOCIETY,  NEW  SERIES,  VOL.  I.)

I.

This  country  was  first  found  and  discovered  in  the  year  of
our  Lord  1609;  when,  at  the  cost  of  the  privileged  East
India  Company,  a  ship  named  the  Half  Moon  was  fitted  out
to  discover  a  westerly  passage  to  the  kingdom  of  China.
This  ship  was  commanded  by  Henry  Hudson,  as  captain
and  supercargo,  who  was  an  Englishman  by  birth,  but
had  resided  many  years  in  Holland,  and  was  now  in  the
employment  of  the  East  India  Company.  This  ship  sailed
from  the  Canary  Islands,^  steering  a  course  north  by  west ;
and   after    sailing   twenty  days  with   good   speed  land  was


DiT  Lantschap  is  eerstmael  gevonden  en  ontdeckt  in  den  Jare  onses
Heeren  Jesu  Christi  1609.  als  wanneer  ter  koste  van  de  Geoctro-
yeerde  Oost-Indische  Compagnie  af-gevaerdight  is  het  Schip  de
Halve  Maen,  cm  by  Westen  eenen  doorgangh  naer  het  Coningrijck
van  China  te  soecken :  op  dit  Schip  was  Schipper  en  Coopman
eenen  Hendrick  Hudson,  wel  een  Engelsman  geboortig,  maer  lang
onder  de  Nederlanders  verkeert  hebbende,  ende  nu  in  dienst  en
maentgelt  van  de  Oost-Indische  Compagnie.  Dit  Schip,  van  de
Canarische  Eylanden  af  t'  zeyl  gaende,  stelde  sijne  cours  West  ten
Noorden  aen,  hebbende  so  by  de  twintigh  etmael  met  redehjcke

1  See  p.  152,  note  1.


168  EXTRACTS    FROM    VAN    DER    DONCk's

discovered,  which  by  theii*  calculation  lay  320°  by  west.
On  approaching  the  land,  and  observing  the  coast  and  shore
convenient,  they  landed,  and  examined  the  country  as  well,
as  they  could  at  the  time  and  as  opportunity  offered.


spoet  gezeylt,  ontmoeten  landt  nae  haer  gissinge  op  de  drie  hondert
en  twintigh  graden  by  Westen,  ende  merckende  aen  verscheyde
teeckenen,  dat  noyt  eenigh  Christen  daer  te  vooren  geweest  was,
maer  dat  nu  het  lant  by  geval  daer  eerst  ontdeckt  werde.  Onder
bet  landt  dan  nader  komende,  en  siende  de  cust  en  strant  bequaem,
begaven  haer  daer  na  toe,  namen  het  gesicht  en  besit  daer  van  soose
best  konde,  naer  tijdts  gelegentheydt.


The  country  having  been  first  found  or  discovered  by
the  Netherlanders,  and  keeping  in  view  the  discovery  of  the
same  it  is  named  the  New  Netherlands.  That  this  country
was  first  found  or  discovered  by  the  Netherlanders,  is  evi-
dent and  clear  from  the  fact  that  the  Indians  or  natives  of
the  land,  many  of  whom  are  still  living,  and  with  whom  I
have  conversed,  declare  freely,  that  before  the  arrival  of  the
Dutch  ship,  the  Half  Moon,  in  the  year  1609,  they  (the
natives)  did  not  know  that  there  ^vere  any  other  people  in


Soo  is  dan  cock  Nieiiw  Nederlandt,  als  eerst  van  Nederlanders
gevonden  zijnde,  mede  ten  aensien,  de  vindinge  also  genaemt.  Dat
dit  Lant  eerst  van  Nederlanders  gevonden  is,  blijckt  medc  klaer
daer  uyt,  dat  de  Indianen  ofte  Inboorlinghen  die  der  noch  veel
in  't  leven  zijn,  ende  wy  dickwils  en  verscheyden  hebben  hooren
spreken,  soo  oudt  datse  daer  van  heugen,  ront  nyt  verklaren,  dat
voor  het  aenkomen  van  ons  Neerlants  schip  de  Halve  Maen,  in  't
Jaer  1609.  sy  Inboorlingen  niet  M'isten  datter  meer  menschen  in  de
werelt  waren,  als  daer  van  haers  ghelijck  ontrent  haer,  vcel  min


BESCHRYVINGE    VAN    NIEUW    NEDERLAND.  169

the  world  than  those  who  were  like  themselves,  much  less
any  people  who  differed  so  much  in  appearance  from  them
as  we  did.

Their  men  were  without  hair  on  the  breasts  or  about  the
mouth,  like  women,  whilst  our  men  are  hairy ;  they  were
without  clothing  and  mostly  naked,  especially  in  summer,
while  we  are  always  clothed  and  covered.  When  some  of  them
first  saw  our  ship  approaching  at  a  distance,  they  did  not
know  what  to  think  about  her,  but  stood  in  deep  and  solemn
amazement,  wondering  whether  it  were  a  ghost  or  apparition
coming  down  from  heaven  or  hell.  Others  of  them  supposed
her  to  be  a  strange  fish  or  sea  monster.  When  they  dis-
covered men  on  board,  they  looked  upon  them  rather  as
devils  than  human  beings.  Thus  they  differed  about  the  ship
and  men.  A  strange  report  was  also  spread  about  the  country
concerning  our  ship  and  visit,  which  created  great  astonish-
ment and  surprise  amongst  the  Indians.  These  things  we
have  frequently  heard  them  declare,  and  we  regard  them  as
certain  proofs  that  the  Netherlanders  were  the  first  finders


menschen  so  veer  van  haer  slach  en  fatsoen  verschillende  als  hare
en  onse  Natie,  zijnde  hare  Natie  op  de  borst  ende  omtrendt  den
mont  gantsch  kael,  ende  den  Vrouwen  ghelijckt,  de  onse  heel
hayrigh,  sy  onghekleet,  ende  meest  ontdekt,  voornemelijck  des
Zomers,  en  wy  altijt  gekleet  en  bedekt,  so  dat  doen  sommige  van
haer,  ons  Schip  van  verre  eerst  sagen  aenkomen,  al  heel  niet  wisten
wat  daer  van  te  oordelen,  ende  in  swaer  beduchten  stonden,  of  het
oock  spoock  of  diergelijcke  werck  was,  dan  of  het  uyt  den  Hemel
of  uyt  de  Hel  mochte  komen,  andere  meenden  of  het  wel  een
seltsame  Vis  ofte  Zee -monster  sonde  moghen  wesen,  ende  of  die
gene  die  daer  op  waren,  beter  nae  Duyvels  of  nae  Menschen
geleken,  ende  soo  voorts  gelijck  yder  sijn  verscheyden  gevoelen
heeft :  altijt  daer  liep  een  heel  vreemt  gerucht  van  door  het  lant,
ende  't  gaf  groote  versslagentheydt  by  alle  de  Indianen,  ghelijck
my  dickwils  verscheyden  Indianen  getuyght  hebben,  dies  wy  het
oock  voor  een  seker  bewijs  houden,  dat  de  Neerlanders  de  eerste


170  EXTRACTS    FROM    VAN    DER    DONCK's

or  discoverers  and  possessors  of  the  New  Netherlands.  There
are  Indians  in  the  country  whose  memory  carries  them  back
a  hundred  years/  and  if  there  had  been  any  other  people
here  before  us  they  would  have  known  something  of  them,
and  if  they  had  not  seen  them  themselves  they  would  have
heard  an  account  of  them  from  others.  There  are  persons
who  believe  that  the  Spaniards  have  been  here  many  years
ago,  when  they  found  the  climate  too  cold  to  their  liking,  and
again  left  the  country  ;  and  that  the  maize  or  Turkish  corn,
and  beans  found  among  the  Indians,  were  left  with  them
by  the  Spaniards.-     This  opinion  or  belief  is  improbable,  as


vinders  en  besitters  van  Nieuw  Nederlant  zijn,  want  daer  zijn
Wilden  die  over  de  hondert  Jaren  heughen,  ende  soo  der  noch
eenigh  volck  voor  d'onse  geweest  waren,  daer  van  souden  sy  al
yetwes  weten  te  seggen,  soo  sy  't  selfs  niet  gesieu  hadden,  souden
ten  minsten  van  haer  Voor-ouders  gehoort  hebben.  Daer  zijn  cook
luyden  die  meenen  dat  over  veele  Jaren  de  Spangiaerts  in  dit  lant
geweest  zijn,  maer  het  voor  haer  wat  te  koiit  bevindende,  weder
verlaten  hebben,  en  dat  de  boontjcs  en  Turksche  tarwe  of  Mayes,

^  The  character  and  purpose  of  Van  der  Donck's  book  is  explained  in
the  introduction  to  the  present  volume.  He  was  anxious  to  prove  that
New  Netherland  (a  vast  tract  of  land,  of  which  the  States  of  New  York
and  Pennsylvania  form  the  principal  part)  belonged  by  right  of  dis-
covery to  the  Dutch,  Being  by  profession  a  lawyer,  he  is  not  very
scrupulous  in  his  special  pleading.  The  argument  drawn  from  the
memory  of  the  Indians  must  elicit  a  smile  in  any  one  acquainted  with
them.  They  have  no  means  of  measuring  past  time,  they  do  not  even
know  their  own  ages,  and  are  therefore  themselves  quite  unable  to  ascer-
tain how  far  their  memory  carries  them  back.

^  Notwithstanding  Van  der  Donck's  assertions  to  the  contrary,  the
whole  coast  of  New  Netherland  was  undoubtedly  known  to  the  Spaniards.
The  first  of  their  vessels  that  visited  these  shores  was  commanded  by
the  Portuguese  Estevan  Gomez,  who  seems  to  have  spent  part  of  the
spring  and  summer  of  the  year  1525  in  exploring  them.  Their  ships
frequently  visited  them  afterwards,  and  gave  names  to  the  rivers  and
islands.  Hudson's  river  was  called  by  them  Rio  de  Gamas  (Roe  river).
This  matter  is  explained  at  some  length  in  the  introduction  to  the  pre-
sent volume.


BESCHRYV[NGE    VAN    NIEUW    NEDERT.AND.  171

we  can  discover  nothing  of  the  kind  from  the  Indians.  Tiicy
say  that  their  corn  and  beans  were  received  from  the  southern
Indians,  who  received  their  seed  from  a  people  who  resided
still  farther  south,  which  may  well  be  true,  as  the  Castilians
have  long  since  resided  in  Florida.  The  maize  may  have  been
among  the  Indians  in  the  warm  climate  long  ago  ;  however,
our  Indians  say  that  they  did  eat  roots  and  the  bark  of  trees  in-
stead of  bread,  before  the  introduction  of  Indian  corn  or  maize.


daer  van  onder  de  Wilden  ghebleven^soude  zijn,  maer  't  is  niet
waerschijnelijck,  heb  het  cock  noyt  van  de  Wiklen  konnen  ver-
nemen,  ende  de  boontjes  met  het  coorn,  seggense  haer  van  de
zuydtse  Wilden  wel  eertijts  overgelevertte  zijn,  die  het  cock  voor
een  tijt,  nock  al  vry  veel  zuydelijcker  van  menschen  die  daer
woonen,  bekomen  hadden,  dat  wel  waer  kan  wesen  :  Want  in
Florida  hebben  al  over  langh  Castilianen  gewoont,  ofte  misschien  is
de  Mayes  oock  wel  eerder  in  die  warme  landen  onder  de  Indianen
geweest,  maer  onse  Wilden  seggen,  datse  van  te  vooren,  eerse  van  de
Mayes  wisten,  hasten  van  boomen,  en  wortelen  in  plaetse  van
broot  aten.


When  this  country  was,  in  1G09,  first  found  by  the  Dutch,
they  learned  from  the  natives  that  no  Christians  had  been
there  before  ;  and  considering  themselves  as  the  first  dis-
coverers they  took  possession  in  the  name  of  their  High
Mightinesses  the  States  General ;  first  along  the  South  Bay,


Doen  dan  eerstmael  in  het  Jaer  1609  by  de  Neerlandcrs  dit  landt
op-ghedaen  werdt,  ende  aen  de  Jnboorlinghen  bemerckende,  dat
sy  aldaer  de  eerste  Christenen  ende  Vinders  waren,  namen  sy  op
den  naeni  ende  van  weglien  hare  Ho.  Mog.  mijn  Heeren  de  Staten
Generael  der  Vereeniglide  Nederlanden  possessie,  eerst  by  de  Suyt-
bay  aen  Caep  Hinloopen,  die  sy  doenmael  soo  nocmdcn,  ghclijck


172         EXTRACTS  FROM  VAN  DER  DONCK.

near  the  cape,  which  they  then  called  Cape  Hinlopen/  the
name  it  still  bears.  Thence  they  sailed  along  the  coast,
giving  various  names  to  rivers  and  places,  till  into  the  great
north  river,  which  they  sailed  far  up.  The  English  on  this
account  call  it  Hudson's  river.  The  first  discoverers  called
it  Mauritius^  river,  after  Prince  Maurice,  who  was  then
Statholder.  Thence  they  sailed  to  Cape  Cod,  where  they
took  possession,  calling  it  New  Holland.^


sy  den  selven  naem  noch  heeft,  ende  voeren  so  al  voort  langlis  de
custe,  ende  op  de  Rivieren  de  plaetsen  verscheyde  benaminge
gevende  tot  aen  de  groote  Noort-rivier,  die  sy  ver  op  voeren,  soo
datse  de  Engelsche  noch  sommighe  Hutsons  Rivier,  willennoemen,
maer  sy  noemdense  doen  Mauritius  Rivier,  naer  Prins  Mauritis,
die  doenmael  in  Nederlandt  Gouverneur  was ;  van  daer  voerense
voort  tot  voorby  Caep  Codt,  daerse  oock  possessie  namen,  ende
noemden  de  selve  Nieuw  Hollandt.

■^  This  taking  possession  is  an  invention  of  Van  der  Donck.  They
never  landed  near  Cape  Hinlopen.  (See  Juet,  pp.  73  to  75  ;  De  Laet,
pp.  154,  155.)

^  This  is  also  an  invention  of  Van  der  Donck.  The  name  was
given  several  years  afterwards.

'  This  is  quite  incorrect.  They  sailed  straight  home  without
even  seeing  land.  Hudson  touched  the  coast  near  Cape  Cod  before  he
explored  Hudson  river.


173


AMERICAN    TRADITIONS    CONCERNING  THE    THIRD
VOYAGE   (1609).


I.

THE  TRADITION  ABOUT  THE  FIEST  LANDING  OF   HENRY    HUDSON

ON    THE    SHORES    OP    NEW    YORK    DURING    HIS    THIRD

VOYAGE.

(prom   TATE3   AND   MOULTON's   HISTORY   OF   NEW  YORK,   1,   P.    210.)

According  to  tradition  they  first  landed  in  Coney  Island,
opposite  Gravesend  (Long  Island),  and  now  a  part  of  King's
County,  in  this  state.


11.

the    tradition    of    the    american    indians    concerning

Hudson's  first  intercourse  with  them,  as  preserved

by  the  rev.  j.  heckewelder.

(from    new    YORK    HIST,    SOCIETY,    COLLECTIONS,   NEW    SERIES,    VOL.    I.)


THK    FOLLOWING    INTRODUCTORY   NOTE,    AS    WELL   AS     THE    EXPLANATORY   FOOT
NOTES,    ARE    FROM    THE    N.   Y.    H.    S.    COLLECTIONS.

Note.
The  following  paper  is  derived  from  the  manuscripts  deposited  among
the  collections  of  the  Society  by  the  Rev.  Samuel  Miller,  D.D.,  to  whom
it  was  communicated  by  the  Rev.  John  Heckewelder,  for  many  years  a
Moravian  missionary  to  the  Indians  of  Pennsylvania.  In  a  letter  accom-
panying it,  dated  at  Bethlehem,  Jan.  26th,  1801,  Mr.  Heckewelder  says :
"  As  I  receive  my  information  from  Indians,  in  their  language  and  style,
I  return  it  in  the  same  way.  Facts  are  all  I  aim  at,  and  from  my  know-
ledge of  the  Indians,  I  do  not  believe  every  one's  story.  The  enclosed
account  is,  I  believe,  as  authentic  as  anything  of  the  kind  can  be  ob-
tained."

A  voluminous  correspondence  of  Mr.  Heckewelder  with  Mr.  Du  Pon-


174  AMERICAN    TRADITIONS

ceau,  concerning  the  languages  of  the  Indians,  together  with  an  account
of  the  history,  manners,  and  general  character  of  the  native  tribes,  de-
rived from  personal  observation,  was  published  by  the  American  Philo-
sophical Society,  at  Philadelphia,  1819.  This  paper,  in  a  somewhat
altered,  perhaps  improved,  form  in  respect  to  his  phraseology,  was  com-
prehended in  that  publication  ;  but  as  the  original  draft  is  more  likely
to  convey  accurately  the  language  and  style  of  Mr.  Heckewelder's  Indian
informants,  there  seems  to  be  a  manifest  propriety  in  adopting  it  for
publication  in  the  present  collection.

The  following  account  of  the  first  arrival  of  Europeans  at
New-York  Island,  is  verbatim  as  it  was  related  to  me  by
aged  and  respected  Delawares,  Momeys  and  Mahicanni
(otherwise  called  Mohigans,  Mahicandus),  near  forty  years
ago.  It  is  copied  from  notes  and  manuscripts  taken  on  the
spot.     They  say  :

A  long  time  ago,  when  there  was  no  such  thing  known  to
the  Indians  as  people  with  a  white  skin  (their  expression),
some  Indians  who  had  been  out  a-fishing,  and  where  the
sea  widens,  espied  at  a  great  distance  something  remarkably
large  swimming  or  floating  on  the  water,  and  such  as  they
had  never  seen  before.  They  immediately  returning  to  the
shore  apprised  their  countrymen  of  what  they  had  seen,  and
pressed  them  to  go  out  with  them  and  discover  what  it  might
be.  These  together  hurried  out,  and  saw  to  their  great  sur-
prise the  phenomenon,  but  could  not  agree  what  it  might
be  ;  some  concluding  it  either  to  be  an  uncommon  large
fish  or  other  animal,  while  others  were  of  opinion  it  must  be
some  very  large  house.  It  was  at  length  agreed  among
those  who  were  spectators,  that  as  this  phenomenon  moved
towards  the  land,  whether  or  not  it  was  an  animal,  or  any-
thing that  had  life  in  it,  it  would  be  well  to  inform  all  the
Indians  on  the  inhabited  islands  of  what  they  had  seen,  and
put  them  on  their  guard.  Accordingly,  they  sent  runners
and  watermen  off"  to  carry  the  news  to  their  scattered  chiefs,
that  these  might  send  off"  in  every  direction  for  the  warriors
to  come  in.      These  arriving-  in  numbers,   and   themselves


CONCEKNING    HUDSOiS's    THIRD    VOYAGE.  175

viewing  the  strange  appearance,  and  that  it  was  actually
moving  towards  them  (the  entrance  of  the  river  or  bay),
concluded  it  to  be  a  large  canoe  or  house,  in  which  the
Mannitto  (great  or  supreme  being)  himself  was,  and  that  he
probably  was  coming  to  visit  them.  By  this  time  the  chiefs
of  the  different  tribes  were  assembled  on  York  Island,  and
were  deliberating  on  the  manner  in  which  they  should
receive  their  Mannitto  on  his  arrival.  Every  step  had  been
taken  to  be  well  provided  with  plenty  of  meat  for  a  sacrifice ;
the  women  were  required  to  prepare  the  best  of  victuals  ;
idols  or  images  were  examined  and  put  in  order  ;  and  a
grand  dance  was  supposed  not  only  to  be  an  agreeable
entertainment  for  the  Mannitto,  but  might,  with  the  addition
of  a  sacrifice,  contribute  towards  appeasing  him,  in  case  he
was  angry  with  them.  The  conjurors  were  also  set  to  work,
to  determine  what  the  meaning  of  this  phenomenon  was,  and
what  the  result  would  be.  Both  to  these,  and  to  the  chiefs
and  wise  men  of  the  nation,  men,  women,  and  children  were
looking  up  for  advice  and  protection.  Between  hope  and
fear,  and  in  confusion,  a  dance  commenced.  While  in  this
situation,  fresh  runners  arrive,  declaring  it  a  house  of
various  colours,  and  crowded  with  living  creatures.  It  now
appears  to  be  certain  that  it  is  the  great  Mannitto  bringing
them  some  kind  of  game,  such  as  they  had  not  before  ;  but
other  runners  soon  after  arriving,  declare  it  a  large  house  of
various  colours,  full  of  people,  yet  of  quite  a  different  colour
than  they  (the  Indians)  are  of;  that  they  were  also  dressed
in  a  different  manner  from  them,  and  that  one  in  particular
appeared  altogether  red,  which  must  be  the  Mannitto
himself.  They  are  soon  hailed  from  the  vessel,  though  in  a
language  they  do  not  understand  ;  yet  they  shout  (or  yell)
in  their  way.  Many  are  for  running  off  to  the  woods,  but
are  pressed  by  others  to  stay,  in  order  not  to  give  offence  to
their  visitors,  who  could  find  them  out,  and  might  destroy
them.     The  house   (or  large  canoe,  as  some   will  have   it)


176  AMERICAN    TRADITIONS

stops,  and  a  smaller  canoe  comes  ashore  with  the  red  man
and  some  others  in  it;  some  stay  by  this  canoe  to  guard  it.
The  chiefs  and  wise  men  (or  councillors)  have  composed  a
large  circle,  unto  which  the  red-clothed  man  with  two  others
approach.  He  salutes  them  with  friendly  countenance,  and
they  return  the  salute  after  their  manner.  They  are  lost  in
admiration,  both  as  to  the  colour  of  the  skin  (of  these  whites)
as  also  to  their  manner  of  dress,  yet  most  as  to  the  habit  of
him  who  wore  the  red  clothes,  which  shone  with  something
they  could  not  account  for.^  He  must  be  the  great  Mannitto
(supreme  being)  they  think,  but  why  should  he  have  a
white  skin  V  A  large  hockhack^  is  brought  forward  by  one
of  the  (supposed)  Mannitto's  servants,  and  from  this  a
substance  is  poured  out  into  a  small  cup  (or  glass)  and
handed  to  the  Mannitto.  The  (expected)  Mannitto  drinks  ;
has  the  glass  filled  again,  and  hands  it  to  the  chief  next  to
him  to  drink.  The  chief  receives  the  glass,  but  only
smelleth  at  it,  and  passes  it  on  to  the  next  chief,  who  does
the  same.  The  glass  thus  passes  through  the  circle  without
the  contents  being  tasted  by  any  one  ;  and  is  upon  the  point
of  being  returned  again  to  the  red-clothed  man,  when  one  of
their  number,  a  spirited  man  and  great  warrior,  jumps  up,
harangues  the  assembly  on  the  impropriety  of  returning  the
glass  with  the  contents  in  it  j  that  the  same  was  handed
them  by  the  Mannitto  in  order  that  they  should  drink  it,  as
he  himself  had  done  before  them ;  that  this  would  please
him ;  but  to  return  what  he  had  given  to  them  might
provoke  him,  and  be  the  cause  of  their  being  destroyed  by
him.  And  that  since  he  believed  it  for  the  good  of  the
nation  that  the  contents  offered  them  should  be  drank,  and
as  no  one  was  willing  to  drink  it  he  would,  let  the  con-
sequence be  what  it  would ;  and  that  it  was  better  for  one
man  to  die,  than  a  whole  nation  to  be  destroyed.     He  then

^  Lace.  ^  Their  own  expression.

^  Their  word  for  gourd,  bottle,  decanter,  etc.


CONCERNING    HUDSON's    THIRD    VOYAGE.  177

took  the  glass  and  bidding  the  assembly  a  farewell,  drank  it
off.  Every  eye  was  fixed  on  their  resolute  companion  to  see
what  an  effect  this  would  have  upon  him,  and  he  soon
beginning  to  stagger  about,  and  at  last  dropping  to  the
ground,  they  bemoan  him.  He  falls  into  a  sleep,  and  they
view  him  as  expiring.  He  awakes  again,  jumps  up,  and
declares  that  he  never  felt  himself  before  so  happy  as  after
he  had  drank  the  cup.  Wishes  for  more.  His  wish  is
granted  ;  and  the  whole  assembly  soon  join  him,  and  be-
come intoxicated.^

After  this  general  intoxication  had  ceased  (during  which
time  the  whites  had  confined  themselves  to  their  vessel),  the
man  with  the  red  clothes  returned  again  to  them,  and  dis-
tributed presents  among  them,  to  wit,  beads,  axes,  hoes,
stockings,  etc.  They  say  that  they  had  become  familiar  to
each  other,  and  were  made  to  understand  by  signs,  that
they  now  would  return  home,  but  would  visit  them  next
year  again,  when  they  would  bring  them  more  presents,  and
stay  with  them  awhile  ;  but  that,  as  they  could  not  live
without  eating,  they  should  then  want  a  little  land  of  them
to  sow  seeds  in  order  to  raise,  herbs  to  put  in  their  broth.

^  The  Delawares  calls  this  place  (New  York  Island)  Mannahattanink
or  Mannahacktaniok  to  this  day.  They  have  frequently  told  me  that  it
derived  its  name  from  the  general  intoxication,  and  that  the  word  com-
prehended the  same  as  to  say  the  island  or  place  of  general  intoxica-
tion.

The  Mahicanni  (otherwise  called  Mohiggans  by  the  English,  and
Mahicandus  by  the  Low  Dutch)  call  this  place  by  the  same  name  as
the  Delawares  do  :  yet  think  it  is  owing  or  given  in  consequence  of
a  kind  of  wood  which  grew  there,  and  of  which  the  Indians  used  to
make  their  bows  and  arrows.  This  wood  the  latter  (Mohicanni)  call
"  gawaak."

The  universal  name  the  Monseys  have  for  New  York  is  Laaphawack-
king,  which  is  interpreted,  the  place  of  stringing  beads  (wampum).  They
say  this  name  was  given  in  consequence  of  beads  being  here  distributed
among  them  by  the  Europeans  ;  and  that  after  the  European  vessel  had
returned,  wherever  one  looked,  one  would  see  the  Indians  employed  in
stringing  the  beads  or  wampum  the  whites  had  given  them.

23


178  AMERICAN    TRADITIONS

That  the  vessel  arrived  the  season  following,  and  they  were
much  rejoiced  at  seeing  each  other;  but  that  the  whites
laughed  at  them  (the  Indians)  seeing  they  knew  not  the  use
of  the  axes,  hoes,  etc.,  they  had  given  them,  they  having  had
these  hanging  to  their  breasts  as  ornaments ;  and  the  stock-
ings they  had  made  use  of  as  tobacco  pouches.  The  whites
now  put  handles  (or  helves)  in  the  former,  and  cut  trees
down  before  their  eyes,  and  dug  the  ground,  and  showed  them
the  use  of  the  stockings.  Here  (say  they)  a  general
laughter  ensued  among  them  (the  Indians),  that  they  had
remained  for  so  long  a  time  ignorant  of  the  use  of  so
valuable  implements  ;  and  had  borne  with  the  weight  of
such  heavy  metal  hanging  to  their  necks  for  such  a  length
of  time.  They  took  every  white  man  they  saw  for  a
ManittOj  yet  inferior  and  attendant  to  the  supreme  Manitto,
to  wit,  to  the  one  which  wore  the  red  and  laced  clothes.
Familiarity  daily  increasing  between  them  and  the  whites,
the  latter  now  proposed  to  stay  with  them,  asking  them  only
for  so  much  land  as  the  hide  of  a  bullock  would  cover  (or
encompass),  which  hide  was  brought  forward  and  spread  on
the  ground  before  them.  That  they  readily  granted  this
request ;  whereupon  the  whites  took  a  knife,  and  beginning
at  one  place  on  this  hide,  cut  it  up  into  a  rope  not  thicker
than  the  finger  of  a  little  child,  so  that  by  the  time  this  hide
was  cut  up,  there  was  a  great  heap.  That  this  rope  was
drawn  out  to  a  great  distance,  and  then  brought  round
again,  so  that  both  ends  might  meet.  That  they  carefully
avoided  its  breaking,  and  that  upon  the  whole  it  encom-
passed a  large  piece  of  ground.  That  they  (the  Indians)
were  surprised  at  the  superior  wit  of  the  whites,  but  did  not
wish  to  contend  with  them  about  a  little  land,  as  they  had
enough.  That  they  and  the  whites  lived  for  a  long  time
contentedly  together,  although  these  asked  from  time  to
time  more  land  of  them ;  and  proceeding  higher  up  the
Mahicanittuk  (Hudson  river),  they  believed  they  vvould  soon


CONCERNING    HUDSUN's    THIKD    VOYAGE.  179

want  all  their  country,  and  which  at  this  time  was  already
the  case.

[Here  ends  this  Relation.^]


THE    SAME    TRADITION    CONFIRMEI)    BY    DR.    BARTON.
(from    TATES    and    MOULTON's    history    of    new    YORK,    p.    257.)

Mr.  Heckewelder  received  the  tradition  about  sixty-five
years  ago,  and  took  it  down  verbatim,  as  it  was  related  to
him  by  aged  and  respected  Delawares,  Monseys,  and  Mahi-
canni.  Dr.  Barton  says  the  story  is  told  in  the  same  way
by  all  the  Indians  of  the  tribes  of  Delawares,  the  "  Monces,"
and  Mohiccans  ;  and  in  relating  the  incidents,  they  laugh
at  their  own  ignorance.  But  what  still  further  shows  (says
Dr.  B.)  that  considerable  dependence  may  be  placed  upon
the  tradition  is  this,  that  to  this  day  the  Delawares,  the
Monseys,  and  Mohiccans  call  New  York  Manahachtanienks,
that  is,  the  place  at  which  we  were  drunk,  being  the  name
they  bestowed  on  the  place  immediately  after  the  incident
related.

^  At  the  head  of  this  article  there  is  a  typographical  error  in  the
name  of  a  tribe  of  Indians — Momeys  should  be  Monseys,  often  written
Minsis.  For  an  exact  account  of  this  and  other  Delaware  nations,  see
Gallatin's  St/nopsis  of  the  Indian  Tribes,  a  work  of  extraordinary  ability,
contained  in  Transactions  of  American  Antiquarian  Society,  vol.  ii,  p.
44,  etc.


180


AN  EXTRACT  FROM  CAPTAIN  LUKE  FOX'S  DESCRIP-
TION OF  HUDSON'S  FOURTH  VOYAGE.

(north-west,  rox,  p.  70.)

In  the  road  of  Lee,  in  the  river  Thames,  he  caused  Master
Coolbrand^  to  be  set  in  a  pinke  to  be  carried  backe  again  to
London.  This  Coolbrand  was  every  way  held  to  be  a  better
man  than  himselfe,  being  put  in  by  the  adventurers  as  his
assistant,  who  envying  the  same  (he  having  the  command
in  his  own  hands)  devised  this  course,  to  send  himselfe  the
same  way,  though  in  a  farre  worse  place,  as  hereafter  fol-
loweth.

^  Hudson  (p.  93)  calls  him  Colburne  ;  Pricket  (p.  98)  calls  him  Col-
bert. Hudson's  version  of  the  name,  the  only  one  that  forms  part  of  a
logbook  written  during  the  voyage,  is  most  probably  the  correct  one.


181


HESSEL    GERRITZ'S    VARIOUS    ACCOUNTS    OF    HUD-
SON'S   TWO    LAST   VOYAGES.

FROM     THE     LATIN     AND    DUTCH    EDITIONS    OF    THE    DESCRIPTIO

ET    DELINEATIO    GEOGKAPHICA    DETECTIONIS    FRETI

AB    H.    HUDSONO    INVENTI.

4tO.,     AMSTERDAM,      1612,      1613.

The  following  accounts  are  all  due  to  the  same  hand  ;  they  even  form
part  of  the  different  editions  of  the  same  work  ;  and  the  natural  suppo-
sition would  therefore  be,  that  they  must  be  repetitions  of  each  other.
This  is,  indeed,  in  a  small  degree,  the  case.  But  the  variations  between
them  are  very  great  and  very  curious  ;  showing,  as  they  do,  the  uncer-
tainty of  Gerritz's  information,  and  how  it  was  gradually  corrected.  It
has,  therefore,  seemed  advisable  to  reprint  them  all.


I.
HUDSON'S  FOURTH  VOYAGE,

A    SUMMARY    PRINTED    ON    THE    BACK    OF    THE    CHART.

A}i  Account  of  the   Voijage  and  New  Found  Strait  of  Mr.  Hudson.

Mr.  Hudson,  who  has  been  repeatedly  engaged  in  the
search  of  a  western  passage,  long  intended  to  undertake  an
expedition  for  this  same  purpose  through  Lumley's  Inlet,
a  channel  leading  out  of  Davis's  Strait ;  as  we  ourselves
have  seen  pointed  out  on  his  map,  which  is  in  Mr.  Plancius'
hands.     He  hoped  thus  to  reach  the  Pacific  by  the  west  of


Mr.  Hudson  die  ettelijcke  malen  Westwaerts  een  doorgangh
ghesocht  lieeft,  had  zijn  oogh-merck  cm  door  Lumbleys  inlet  in
Fretum  Davis  in  een  doorgaende  Zee  te  comen,  ghelijck  wy  sulcx
in  zijn  Caerte  by  Mr.  Plantius  gesien  hebben-eii  by  v/esten  Nova
Albion  in  Mar  del  Zur  te  loope,  daer  een  Enghels  man,  soo  hy
glieteeckent  had,  door  ghepasseert  was.     Macr  nac  veel  moeytens


182  HESSEL    GEKRITZ'S    VARIOUS    ACCOUNTS

Nova  Albion, J  where  another  Englishman  had,  according  to
his  drawings^  passed  through.  Hudson  found  after  many
labours  the  way  represented  on  our  map,  and  he  was  only
prevented  from  following  it  further  up,  by  the  resistance  of
his  crew.  This  mutiny  took  place  under  the  following  cir-
cumstances. They  had  been  absent  from  home  about  ten
months,  being  provisioned  only  for  eight,  and  during  their
whole  voyage  they  had  met  but  a  single  man,  who  brought
them  an  animal  which  they  ate  ;  but  having  been  badly
treated,  the  man  never  returned.  Having  thus  left  the  lati-
tude of  52°,  where  they  had  wintered,  and  having  sailed  up
to  60°,  along  the  western  shore  of  their  bay,  they  fell  in
with  a  wide  sea  and  with  a  great  flood  from  the  north-west.
The  commanders  intended  to  proceed  further.  The  crew
then  rose  against  him,  and  put  all  the  officers  out  of  the
ship  into  a  boat,  and  sailed  home   to   England.     For  this


heeft  hy  desewech,  die  hier  op  dees  Caerte  gheteeckent  staet,  gevon-
den,  die  hy  vervolclit  sonde  hebben,  hadde  't  ghemeen  Scheeps-
volck  niet  soo  onwilHcli  gheweest :  want  also  sy  wel  10  maende
uytgeweest  hadden,  daerse  nochtans  maer  voor  8  maenden  gevict-
alieert  waren,  ende  op  de  heele  wech  maer  een  man  ghesien  heb-
ben,  die  haer  een  groot  Dier  brocht  dat  sy  aten;  die,  om  dat  hy
qualijck  ghetracteert  wiert,  niet  wear  en  quam,  soo  isset  gemeen
Scheeps-volck  (als  sy  weder  vande  hoochte  van  52  gr.  daer  sy
verwinterden,  tot  op  de  hoochte  van  60  grad.  langhs  de  West-
zyde  vande  Baye,  daer  sy  in  geloopen  waren),  op-gheclommen,
daer  sy  een  ruyme  Zee  ende  groote  baren  uyten  Noordwesten
vernamen,  endelick  tegens  haer  Meesters  op  gestaen,  die  vor-
der  voort  wilden,  ende  hebben  d'  Overheyt  altesamen  in  een
Sloep  ofto  scliuyt  buyten  scheeps  gheset,  ende  zijn  alsoo  met  het
Schip  nat  Enggelant  geseylt :   Hierom  zijn  sy,  als  sy  t'  buys  qua-

^  Nova  Albion  is  a  vaojue  term  embracing  all  the  possessions  of  the
English  in  North  America.  The  geographical  notions  involved  in  this
passage  and  in  the  rest  of  Gerritz's  various  accounts  will  be  discussed
in  the  introduction.


OF  Hudson's  two  last  voyages.  183

cause  they  have,  on  their  arrival  at  home,  all  been  put  in
prison;  and  in  the  course  of  the  present  summer  (1612)
some  ships  have  again  been  sent  to  those  regions  by  order
of  the  king  and  of  the  Prince  of  Wales/  to  discover  a  passage
and  to  look  for  Mr.  Hudson  and  his  companions.  These
have  received  orders  that,  in  case  the  passage  be  found,  two
of  them  shall  pass  through  it,  the  third  shall  be  sent  home
with  the  news,  which  we  are  expecting.


men,  altesamen  in  prison  gheset,  ende  dese  Somer  zijnder  op
nieus  schepe  ter  ordonnantie  van  den  Coningh  ende  den  Prince
van  Wallis  derwaerts  ghesonden,  cm  de  doorgangh  verder  t'  ont-
decken,  ende  Mr.  Hudson  met  den  synen  op  te  soecken  :  welcke
schepen  bevel  hebben  cm  met  hun  tween,  als  de  passagie  ghevon-
den  sal  zijn,  door  te  passeren,  ende  een  t'  huyste  senden  met  de
tydinghe  die  wy  verwachten.


II.
HUDSON'S  THIRD   AND   FOURTH  VOYAGES,

FROM    THE    PROLEGOMENA    TO    THE    FIRST    LATIN    EDITION.

But  as  even  after  these  voyages  of  William  Barentz^  the
English  had  repeatedly  tried  that  northern  way,  the  Direc-
tors of  the  East  India  Company  resolved  three  years  ago  to


QuoNiAM  vero  etiam  post  navigationes  prajdictas  Guilehiii  Ber-
nard!, viam  illam  aquilonarem  aliquoties  Angli  adhuc  tentaverant,
visum  fuit  ante  triennium  D.D.  Indicse  navigationis  prajfectis  eo

■^  Henry,  Priuce  of  Wales,  a  young  man  of  great  promise,  who  died  in
November,  1612.

^  The  preceding  passages  of  the  Prolegomena,  or  Preface  to  Hessel
Gerritz's  work,  contain  a  short  account  of  Barentz's  voyages  to  the
North-east  in  search  of  a  short  way  to  China.  The  members  of  the
Hakluyt  Society  possess  Dr.  Beke's  excellent  edition  of  De  Veer's  de-
scription of  these  voyages.


184  IlESSEL    GERKITZ'S    VARIOUS    ACCOUNTS

send  there  a  certain  Mr.  Hudson,  an  Englishman.  He,
having  found  no  way  to  the  east,  but,  instead  of  it,  the  ocean
ahnost  entirely  obstructed  by  ice,  went  to  the  west  and  re-
turned without  any  profit  to  England.  He  was  then  sent
out  again  by  the  English,  and  his  voyage  was  far  more
prosperous,  but  his  own  fortune  far  worse.  For,  having
after  many  labours  passed  beyond  the  Terra  de  Baccalaos^
for  about  three  hundred  miles-  to  the  west,  and  having  win-
tered there  in  latitude  52",  and  being  sure  to  be  able  to  go
still  farther;  then,  not  only  he  himself,  but  all  his  officers
were  put  into  a  boat  by  their  mutinous  crew  and  left  to  drift
on  the  waves.  The  sailors  returned  home  without  delay.
We  have  added  his  geographical  observations  to  the  present
book.  We  expect  more  certain  news  by  the  ships  which
have  already  been  sent  there ;  and  even  the  much  desired
report  that  they  will  have  passed  through  the  strait.  These
ships  will  thus  obtain  eternal  fame  and  glory,  .  .


mittere  quendam  M.  Hudsonum  Anglum,  qui  cum  nullam  ad
Ortum  viam,  sed  ejus  vicem  Oceanum  invenesset  glacie  prorsus
obstructum,  ad  Occasum  deflexit,  unde  sine  ullo  profectu  in
Angliam  appulit.  Emissus  auteni  de  novo  ab  Anglis,  cursu  qui-
dem  longo  prosperiore,  at  deteriore  tamen  successu  usus  est ;  cum
enim  post  varies  labores  ultra  Terram  de  Baccalaos  300  circiter
milliaria  Occasum  versus  emensus  esset,  inibique  ad  altitudinem
graduum  52  jam  hibernasset,  et  ulterius  tendere  certus  esset,  ecce
non  tantum  ipse,  sed  omnis  eius  Senatus  (ut  sic  dixerim)  nauti-
cus  scaphse  ab  importunis  nautis  impositus  et  in  undas  demissus,
ipsi  sine  mora  domum  reversi  sunt.  Nos  vero  notas  ejus  ad  cal-
cem  hujus  libelli  adjunximus,  certiora  per  naves  eo  jam  missas,
imo  optatum  de  Freto  pervio  nuntium  expectantes.  Quae  naves  hoc
ipso  seternara  sibi  famam  paraturse  sunt.

^  Terra  de  Baccalaos,  or  Codfish  land,  is  a  vague  term,  embracing
most  of  the  codfish  stations  north  of  49°.  On  the  old  maps  the  name  is
generally  written  in  latitude  55°  or  56°,  For  the  origin  and  history  of
the  term,  see  the  introduction  to  the  present  volume.

^  Probably  German  miles.     The  other  accounts  have  leucas  (leagues).


OF  Hudson's  two  last  voyages.  185

These  news  of  Hudson's  recently  found  passage  to  the
north  of  Newfoundland  and  the  hope  of  a  strait,  are  con-
firmed by  the  testimony  of  the  Virginian  and  Floridan
savages,  who  all  state  most  distinctly  that  their  country  is
washed  on  its  south-western  side  by  a  vast  ocean,  in  which
they  have  seen  ships  similar  to  those  of  the  English.


Confirmatur  hsec  nuper  invent!  ah  Hudsono  supra  Terram
Novam  transitus  sive  Freti  spes,  Virginiarum  Floridanorumque
concordibus  testimoniis,  diserte  adfirmantium,  terras  suas  ab  oc-
casu  aestivo  vasto  Oceano,  in  quo  et  naves  Anglicanarum  similes
viderunt.


HUDSON'S  THIRD  AND  FOURTH  VOYAGES,

FKOM    THE    LATIN    EDITION    OF    1612.

An  account  of  the  Discovery  of  the  North-western  Passage,  tvhich  is
expected  to  lead  to  China  and  Japan,  hy  the  North  of  the  Ame-
rican Continent,  found  hy  Mr.  H.  Hudson,  an  Englishman.

The  English  nation,  encouraged  by  previous  success,  have
grown  bolder  and  bolder  in  their  naval  enterprise.  Thus,
besides  their  frequent  voyages  to  the  east,  to  Nova  Zembla
and  to  Spitzbergen,^  they  have  made  almost  uninterrupted
efforts  to  discover  a  western  passage  or  strait  to  China  and


Felicissim^  Anglicse  gentis  espeditiones  maritimae,  et  prosper-
rimi  quibus  in  ijs  usi  successus,  eos  ad  rariores  quoque  profecti-
ones  tentandas  magis  magisque  extimularunt :  nam  prseter  crebra
suorum  ad  Ortum  et  Novam  Zemlam  Groelandiamq.  itinera,  per-
petuo   fere   laborarunt   in  investigando   ad   Occidentem,    Chinam

1  Gerritz  has  Groenlandiam.  The  curious  history  of  this  name  and
of  the  geographical  ideas  and  discoveries  connected  with  it,  will  be  found
in  the  introduction  to  the  present  volume.


186  HESSEL    GERRITZ'S    VARIOUS    ACCOUNTS

Japan.  They  expected  that  sailing  by  this  road  they  would
have  on  their  left  the  North  American  shores,  where  they
have  founded  their  Virginian  colony.

Several  of  those  who  set  out  in  search  of  that  passage
entered  Davis's  Straits.  Their  example  was  followed  by
Captain  George  Winwood/  who  sailed  in  1602  nearly  five
hundred  English  miles  up  that  strait,  but  was  then  forced
by  the  ice  to  return.  He  now  attempted  to  find  the  desired
passage  by  exploring  the  narrows  under  61°,  which  the
English  call  Lumley's  Inlet.  But  having  sailed  a  hundred
leagues  into  them  he  again  turned  back,  partly  on  account
of  the  sufferings  which  the  great  length  of  the  voyage  pro-
duced among  his  crew,  partly  because  he  desired  to  explore
two  more  bays,  situated  between  Lumley's  Inlet  and  Bacca-
laos,  whence  the  sea  was  streaming  out  with  great  might.
These  facts  are  stated  in  his  logbooks,  which  Mr.  Peter
Plancius,  a  diligent  investigator  of  such  matters,  commu-
nicated to  Mr.  H.  Hudson  during  his  stay  in  Amsterdam  in
1609,  when  Hudson  was  going  to  undertake  a  search  for  a


atque  Japonem  versus,  transitu,  sive  freto,  idque  rellcto  ad  Isevam
septentrional!  America  littore,  occupata  jam  illic  et  colonijs  suis
insessa  Virginia.  Viam  vero,  quam  eorum  plserique  in  freto  hoc
indagando  ingressi  sunt,  secutus  est  annos  1602  Capitaneus  quo-
que  Georgius  Winwood,  qui  quingentas  fere  Anglicas  leucas
in  Freto  Davis  sursum  decorsum  vagarus,  et  prse  glacie  tandem
coactus  retrogredi,  tentavit  nura  per  sinum  ilium,  quern  Angli
Lumles  Inlet  appellant,  sub  gradibus  uno  et  sexaginta  positum,
invenire  forte  posset  optatam  viam,  sed  centum  in  eo  leucas  Hypa-
fircum  versus  progressus,  pedem  et  hinc  quoque  retulit,  turn  quod
diuturna  itineris  molestia  nauticum  vulgus  esset  attritum,  turn
quod  statu isset  lustrare  et  alios  duos  sinus  inter  Lumles  Inlet  et
Bseccalaos,  jnde  exeuntem  vidisset  ingentem  fluxum  pro  ut  constat
ejus  Ephemeridibus,  quasM.Petrus  Plancius,  curiosissimus  talium
novitatum    investigator,    tradidit   M.    Henrico    Hudsono    Anglo,

^  George  Weymouth.     The  mistake  is  corrected  in  the  later  editions.


OF  Hudson's  two  last  voyages.  187

passage  to  the  north  of  Nova  Zembla  for  the  Directors  of
the  Dutch  East  India  Company.  He  did  set  out,  but
achieved  nothing  in  the  east ;  he  sailed  therefore  straight
westward,  to  attempt  again  the  way  searched  out  and  drawn
by  Captain  Winwood ;  which  way,  after  passing  for  about
a  hundred  leagues  through  a  narrow  channel,  leads  out  into
a  wide  sea.  Hudson  hoped  to  find  a  way  through  this  sea,
though  Plancius  had  proved  to  him  the  impossibility  of
success,  from  the  accounts  of  a  man  who  had  reached  the
western  shore  of  that  sea.  Hudson  achieved  in  1609  nothing
memorable,  even  by  this  new  way.  But  he  was  again  sent
out  in  1610  by  his  own  countrymen.  He  now  followed  the
way  through  Lumley's  Inlet  pointed  out  to  him  by  Win-
wood's  papers.  Having  passed  under  many  labours  through
the  strait,  he  reached  the  latitude  of  52°,  where  he  wintered.
Here  he  fell  in,  for  the  first  time  during  the  voyage,  with
one  of  the  natives  of  the  country.  This  Indian  brought
some  merchandise,  and  was  armed  with  a  Mexican  or  Japa-


Amsterodami  per  id  tempus,  anno  videlicet  1609,  agenti,  et  In-
dicse  navigationis  preefectis,  in  quaerendo  supra  Novam  Zemlam
transitu,  operam  impensuro,  qui  et  ipse  cum  ad  Ortum  nil  pro-
fecisset,  ad  occasum  recta  deflexit,  denuo  tentaturus  ilium  a  Capi-
taneo  Winwood  qusesitum  delineatumque  meatum,  post  centum
plus  minus  leucarum  angustias,  in  amplum  tandem  pelagus  desi-
nentem,  quod  ipsum  mare  hie  noster  Hudsonus  speraverat  fore
perivium,  licet  contrarium  ei,  ex  relatione  cujusdam,  qui  occiden-
tale  maris  ipsius  littus  adnavigaverat,  idem  Plancius  ostendisset.

Hudsonus,  cum  ne  hoc  quidem  itinere  quidquam  memoria  dig-
num  gessisset,  anno  proxime  insecuto  1610,  a  popularibus  suis
rursus  omissus  est,  et  secutus  ilium  in  Lumles  Inlet  sibi  a  Georgio
Winwood  ex  parte  calcatum  tramitem,  post  multas  tandem  moles-
tias  fretum  hoc  superavit,  et  ad  gradus  50,  et  51,  progressus  est.
Ubi  et  hibernavit,  atque  hie  demum,  cum  alioqui  nullos  toto
itinere  obvios  usquam  et  nescio  quid  prseterea  adferret  in  com-
meatum  crisso  Mexicano  seu  Japonensi  accinctus.     Unde  se  non


188  HESSEL    GERRITZ'S    VARIOUS    ACCOUNTS

nese  oris  ;^  fvom  which  circumstances  Hudson  concluded
that  he  was  not  far  from  Mexico.  The  native,  however,  not
being  well  treated,  never  afterwards  returned.  The  Eng-
lish thus  lost  this  only  chance  of  adding  to  their  victuals,
and  being  provided  for  eight  months  only,  they  left  the
harbour  they  had  entered  and  sailed  along  the  western  shore
of  the  bay  till  up  to  62°  or  63°  north.  Here  they  found  a
wide  sea  and  more  powerful  tides  from  the  north-west,
which  Hudson  and  the  officers  intended  to  examine  further.
But  the  crew,  who  had  already  been  two  months  longer
from  home  than  their  provisions  had  been  intended  for,  rose
against  their  commanders,  and  exposed  Hudson  and  his
friends  in  a  boat  in  the  open  air.  The  crew  then  returned
by  the  way  they  had  come  and  reached  their  home  in
September  1611,  where  they  were  thrown  into  prison.
They  are  going  to  be  kept  prisoners  till  their  captain  will
have  been  found.  In  search  of  him  three  ships  have  been
sent  out  this  summer  (1612)  by  the  Prince  of  Wales  and


procul  a  terris  Mexicanis  abesse  noster  illico  suspicatus  est.  Vir
autem  ille,  parum  comiter  tunc  exceptus,  nunquam-postea  redijt.
Quare  Angli,  cum  praeter  octimestrem  ilium,  quern  secum  advexe-
rant  commeatum,  nihil  aliunde  nanciscerentur,  e  sinu,  quern  erant
ingressi,  occidentale  legentes  littus,  septemtrionem  versus  ex-
currerunt  ad  gradus  62,  et  63,  ubi  et  mare  invenerunt  late  diffu-
sum,  et  grandiores  ab  Cauro  impulses  fluctos,  quise  Hudsono
quidem  et  senatui  nautico  animus  erat  ulterius  indagandi ;  sed
refragantes  navales  socij,  quod  bimestri  jam  spatio,  ultra  quam  de
annona  prospectum  esser,  dome  abfuissent,  insurrexere  tandem  in
sues  preefectos,  atque  Hudsonum  una  cum  suis  scapha  exposue-
runt  in  mare:  ipsi  vero  qua  venerant  navi,  anno  1611  Septem-
bri  mense,  domum  reversi  sunt,  ubi  in  carcerem  hac  de  caussa
compacti,  tantispcr  asservantur,  dum  inveniatur  Prsefectus,  quern
requirere  jussse  sunt  tres  ille  naves,  quas  emiserunt  hac  ipsa  sestate

^  Thus  the    Mexicans  call   their  flame-shaped  poniards.     (Gerritz's
notes.)


OF  Hudson's  two  last  voyages.  189

some  merchants.  They  are  to  explore  the  passage  through-
out, and  when  they  have  found  the  open  ocean,  one  of  them
is  to  return  with  the  desired  news.  This  ship  is  daily  ex-
pected home.


Sej-sim.  VVallse  Princeps  et  mercatores,  transitum  plane  perlus-
traturas,  ac  pernavigaturas,  quarum  imi  injunctum,  ut  detecto  ad
plenu  nieatu  recurrat,  nuntium  illud  tarn  diu  desideratum  feliciter
allatm'a,  quod  in  horas  nunc  expectatur.


IV.

HUDSON'S  THIRD  AND  FOURTH  VOYAGE,

FROM    THE    SECOND    LATIN    EDITION    (1613).

WITH    NOTES    INDICATING    THE    VARIATIONS    OF    THE    DUTCH

EDITION.

A  Description  and  Chart  of  the  Discovery  of  the  Strait  or  Passage
by  the  north  of  the  American  continent  to  China  and  Japan.

The  English,  stimulated  by  the  happy  success  of  their
maritime  enterprise,  undergo  without  hesitation  the  troubles
which  these  expeditions  involve  ;  and  in  spite  of  the  labori-
ous nature  of  their  voyages  to  the  east,  to  Moscovia,  Nova
Zembla  and  Spitzbergen,  they  are  still  bent  on  new  dis-
coveries. They  have  chiefly  made  uninterrupted  efforts  to
find  a  passage  in  the  west,  where  they  have  already  occu-
pied Virginia  and  peopled  it  with  their  colonists.      This


Felicissimje  Anglorum  navigationes,  et  prosperrimi,  earum  suc-
cessus,  magis  ac  magis  isti  genti  stimulum  addiderunt,  ut  facile
omnia  tsedia  devorarint  et  novas  detectiones  susceperint,  quae  licet
laboriosissimse  fuerint  in  Orientem  ad  era  Moscovise,  Novse  Zemlse
et  Groenlandice,  nihilominus  desudarunt  in  partibus  Occidentalibus
(occupata  jam  etiam  illic,  et  colonijs  suis  insessa  Virginia)  ut  sibi


190  HESSEL    GERRITZ'S    VARIOUS    ACCOUNTS

passage  they  have  sought  for  between  Greenland  and  Nova
Francia.  Their  efforts  have  as  yet  been  fruitless,  and
through  ice  and  snow  they  have  in  vain  fought  their  Avay
up  to  70°  or  even  80°  of  northern  latitude.  The  strait  which
they  have  thus  explored  bears  the  name  of  its  first  disco-
verer, John  Davis.  The  last  navigator  who  went  along
that  way  was  Captain  George  Weymouth,  who  sailed  in  the
year  1602,  and  who,  after  a  voyage  of  five  hundred  leagues,
was,  like  his  predecessors,  forced  by  the  ice  to  return.  But
on  purpose  to  draw  at  least  some  advantage  from  his  expe-
dition, he  directed  his  course  to  the  bay  under  61°,  which
the  English  call  Lumley's  Inlet,  and  sailed  a  hundred
leagues  in  a  south-westerly  direction  into  it.  Having  gone
so  far,  he  found  himself  landlocked,  and  despairing  of  a
passage,  he  was,  by  the  weakness  of  his  crew  and  by  other
causes,  forced  to  return.  He,  however,  first  explored  two
more  bays  between  that  country  and  Baccalaos,  and  found
there  the  water  wide  and  mighty  like  an  open  sea,  with  very
great  tides.

This  voyage,  though  far  from  fulfilling  Weymouth's  hopes.


transitum,  intra  GrcBnlandiam,  et  Novam  Franciam  qusererent  sed
frustra  hactenus,  seducti  via  in  Septemtrionem  obducta  nivibus  et
glacie,  elaboratum  est,  usque  ad  altitudinem  septuaginta,  aut
octaginta  graduum,  nomenque  traxit  fretum  ab  inventor e  primo
Joanne  Davis,  postremus  qui  idem  iter  instituit,  praefectus  fuit
Georgius  Weymouth,  qui  anno  millesimo  sexcentesimo  secundo
quingentas  leucas  navigando  emensus  est,  sed  glaciei  copia  coactus
est,  ut  et  alij  antecessores,  in  patriam  redire.  Sedne  irritus  plane
esset  conatus,  navigans  denuo,  ad  altitudinem  sexaginta  et  unius
gradus,  per  sinum  quera  Angli  Lumles  Inlet  dicunt,  ibi  ob  occi-
dente  in  meridiem  deflectens  centum  leucas,  postea  objectu  terrae,
transitum  non  inveniens,  imbecillitate  sociorum,  alijsque  de  causis,
coactus  est  reverti  nihilominus  et  duos  alios  sinus  lustravit,  non
sine  maxima  aquarum  copia  maris  instar,  et  maximo  fluxu  et
refluxu,  intra  terram  banc,  et  earn  quam  Baccalaos  appellant.


OF  Hudson's  two  last  voyages.  191

assisted  Hudson  very  materially  in  finding  his  famous  strait.
George  Weymouth's  logbooks  fell  into  the  hands  of  the
Rev.  Peter  Plancius,  who  pays  the  most  diligent  attention
to  such  new  discoveries,  chiefly  when  they  may  be  of  ad-
vantage to  our  own  country;  and  when  in  1609  Hudson
was  preparing  to  undertake  a  voyage  for  the  Directors  of
the  East  India  Company,  in  search  of  a  passage  to  China
and  Cathay  by  the  north  of  Nova  Zembla,  he  obtained  these
logbooks  from  Peter  Plancius.  Out  of  them  he  learnt  this
whole  voyage  of  George  Weymouth,  through  the  narrows
north  of  Virginia  till  into  the  great  inland  sea ;  and  thence
he  concluded  that  this  road  would  lead  him  to  India.  But
Peter  Plancius  refuted  this  latter  opinion  from  the  accounts
of  a  man  who  had  searched  and  explored  the  western  shore
of  that  sea,  and  had  stated  that  it  formed  an  unbroken  line  of
coast.  Hudson,  in  spite  of  this  advice,  sailed  westward
to  try  what  chance  of  a  passage  might  be  left  there,  having
first  gone  to  Nova  Zembla,  where  he  found  the  sea  entirely
blocked  up  by  ice  and  snow.     He  seems,  however,  accord-


Hsec  navigatio  licet  turn  temporis,  votis,  non  responderit,  tamen
diaria  Georgij  Weymouth,  (quae  incideru.nt  in  manus  D.  P.  Plantij
curiosissimi  rerum  novarum  investigatoris,  in  usum  patrice  hujus
reique  nautica3)  usui  fuerunt  maximo,  H.  Hudsoni,  in  investiga-
tione  hujus  faraosissimi  freti,  cum  enim  anno  millesimo  sexcen-
tesimo  et  nono,  ille  ageret  cum  Prsefectis  Indicse  navigationis,  de
via  inquirenda  in  Chinam  et  Cathayam,  supra  Novam  Zemlam,
hsec  a  D.  P.  Plantio  impetravit  Diaria,  ex  quibus  totu  istud  iter
Georgij  Weymouth  per  angustius  supra  Virginiam  didicit,  usque
ad  Oceanum  qui  eam  alluit,  hinc  ista  opinio  invaluit,  hac  via  sola
patere  aditum  ad  Indos ;  sed  quam  fallax  sit,  docuit  ilium  D.  P.
Plantius,  ex  relatu  cujusdam,  qui  in  parte  Occidentali,  terram  esse
continentem  asseverarat,  eamque  lustrarat.  Hudsonus  nihilominus
in  Oriente,  et  Nova  Zemla,  viam  sibi  a  glacie,  nivibus,  praeclusam
videns,  in  Occidentem  navigavit,  ut  quid  spei  superesset  inquireret;
non  recto  itinere  (ut  hie  fertur)  ut  patriie  huic  nostrse,  et  preefectis


192  HESSEL    GERRITZ's    VARIOUS    ACCOUNTS

ing  to  the  opinion  of  our  countrymen,  purposely  to  have
missed  the  right  road  to  the  western  passage,  unwilling  to
benefit  Holland  and  the  Directors  of  the  Dutch  East  India
Company  by  such  a  discovery.  All  he  did  in  the  west  in
1609  was  to  exchange  his  merchandise  for  furs  in  New
France.  He  then  returned  safely  to  England,  where  he  was
accused  of  having  undertaken  a  voyage  to  the  detriment  of
his  own  country.  Still  anxious  to  discover  a  western  pas-
sage, he  again  set  out  in  1610,  and  directed  his  course  to
Davis's  Strait.  There  he  entered  in  latitude  61°  the  path
pointed  out  by  George  "Weymouth,  and  explored  all  the
shores  laid  down  in  the  present  chart,^  up  to  the  height  of
63°.  He  then  sailed  to  the  south,  down  to  54°,^  where  he
wintered.  When  he  left  his  winter  quarters  he  ran  along
the  western  shore  for  forty  leagues,  and  fell  in,  under  60°,
with  a  wide  sea,  agitated  by  mighty  tides  from  the  north-
west.    This  circumstance  inspired  Hudson  with  great  hope


prodesset,  tantum  in  Nova  Francia  mercibus  suis  commutatis,  pro
pellibus,  salvus  in  Angliam  reversus  est,  ibique  accusatus  in  detri-
mentum  Patriae  Anglise  navigationes  suas  instituisse.  Iterum  iter
succepit,  non  minori  studio  de  transitu  investigando  in  Occidente,
tendens  in  Fretum  Davis,  anno  millesimo  sexcentesimo  e  decimo,
usque  ad  altitudinem  unius  et  sexaginta  graduum,  ingressus  semi-
tam  Georgij  Weymouth,  omnes  oras  lustravit,  hac  in  tabula  deU-
neatas,  usque  ad  gradus  sexaginta  tres,  deflexit  in  Meridiem  usque
ad  gradus  quinquaginta  quatuor,  sub  ijs  hybevnavit,  solvens  istinc
littus  Occidentale  leges,  ascendit  usque  ad  gradum  sexagesimu,
recta  navigans,  quadraginta  leucas,  amplu  pelagus  deprehedit,
fluctibus  a  Cauro  agitatis  superbiens  :  Ex  his  non  exigua  spes
transeundi  Hudsono  aflPulsit,  nee  voluntas  senatui  nautico  defuit,
sed  fastidium,  et  malevolentia  sociorum  scrupulum  injicere,  ob
victus  inopiam,  cum  ijs  tatum  in  octo  menses  prospectum  esset,
nihilque  toto  itinere  aHmento  dignum  in  manus  eorum  incideret,

^  His  Chart  {Zyne  Caerte),  according  to  the  Dutch  edition.
^  52  degrees  (52  ste.  graed)  Dutch  edition.


OF  Hudson's  two  last  voyages.  193

of  finding  a  passage,  and  his  officers  were  quite  ready  to
undertake  a  further  search  ;  but  the  crew,  weary  of  the  long
voyage,  and  unwilling  to  continue  it,  bethought  themselves
of  the  want  of  victuals,  with  which  they  had  been  provided
for  eight  months  only,  and  to  which  no  additions  had  been
made  during  the  voyage,  except  one  large  animal  which  an
Indian  brought.  This  Indian  was  armed  with  a  Mexican  or
Japonese  oris  (poniard),  from  which  fact  Hudson  concluded
that  a  place  which  possessed  Mexican  arms  and  productions
could  not  be  far  distant  from  that  country.^  At  last  the  ill  will
of  the  crew  prevailed.  They  exposed  Hudson  and  the  other
officers  in  a  boat  on  the  open  sea,  and  returned  into  their
country.  There  they  have  been  thrown  into  prison  for  their
crime,  and  will  be  kept  there  until  their  captain  shall  be
safely  brought  home.^   For  that  purpose  some  ships  have  been


nisi  forti  Indus  quidam,  qui  Crissio  Mexicano,  seu  Japonensi
armatus,  feram  attuht,  ex  quo  Hudsonus  conjiciebat,  se  non  longe
a  Mexicanis  abesse,  quorum  arma,  et  commercia  videret.  Tandem
prsevaluit  sociorum  malevolentia,  qui  Hudsonum,  cum  reHquisprse-
fectis  scapha  exposuerunt  in  mare,  ipsi  patriam  petiere,  quam  cum
appulissent,  ob  scelus  commissum  in  carceres  detrusi  sunt,  ibique
detinentur,  donee  prsefectus  eorum  Hudsonus  salvus  suis  resti-
tuatur,  ab  ijs,  quibus  id  negotij  superiori  anno  millesimo   sexcen-

'^  Wherefrom  it  appears  that  the  people  of  that  country  have  some
communication  with  those  along  the  Pacific  Ocean.  {Daer  wt  dattet
schijnt  die  natie  daer  te  lande  ghemeenschaj)  te  hebben  met  die  aen  de
Zuyder  Zee.)     Dutch  edition.

^  The  Dutch  edition,  published  several  months  before  the  Latin,  has
from  this  point  an  entirely  different  termination : "  He  is  being  searched
for  by  the  ships  which  have  been  sent  out  this  summer  by  the  mer-
chants and  by  the  Prince  of  Wales,  who  is  said  to  assist  them.  These
ships  are  not  expected  to  return  before  they  will  have  been  in  Mare  del
Zur.  We  wish  them  good  luck."  {Die  ghesocht  loort  van  de  scheepens
die  dese  somer  derwaert  gesonden  zijn  van  de  Coopluyden  ende  van  den
Prince  van  Wallis  die  daer  de  hand  aen  hoiit.,  soo  ghesegt  wort,  Welche
scheepens  men  meent  niet  te  sullen  weder  komen  eer  sg  al  heel  sullen  tot
in  Alar  del  Zur  geweest  hebhen,  daer  xvy  haer  gheluck  toe  u-enschen.)

25


194  HESSEL    GERRITZ'S    VARIOUS    ACCOUNTS,    ETC.

sent  out  last  year  (1612)  by  the  late  Prince  of  Wales^  and  by
the  Directors  of  the  Moscovia  Company,  about  the  return  of
which  nothing  has  as  yet  been  heard.  We  may  therefore
hope  that  they  have  passed  beyond  that  strait,  and  we  do  not
think  that  we  shall  hear  anything  about  them  before  they
return  to  England  from  East  India  or  China  and  Japan,
by  the  same  road  by  which  they  went  out.  This,  we  hope
and  pray,  may  come  to  pass.  Nor  has  the  zeal  of  our
fellow  citizens  of  Amsterdam  cooled  down.  They  have
some  months  ago  sent  out  a  ship,  to  search  for  a  passage  or
for  Hudson's  Strait,  to  try  whether  any  convenient  inter-
course can  be  established  with  those  places,  or,  if  this  should
be  found  impossible,  to  trade  on  the  coasts  of  New  France.^


tesimo  et  duodecimo,  jussu  Principis  Wallise  pise  memoriae,  et
Prsefectorum  Russice  navigationis  commissum  est;  de  quorum  reditu
hactemis  nihil  inauditum,  hinc  spes  aliqua  affulget,  eas  angustias
illas  superasse  nee  judicamus  quid  certe  nos  inaudituros  prius-
quam  ex  Indise  Orientali  redierint,  aut  ubi  cum  Chinensibus,
aut  Japonensibus  sua  transegerint,  eademque  via  in  Angliam  redie-
rint :   quod  felix  et  faustum  sit  precamur  unice.

Nee  fervor  iste  in  nostris  Amsterodamensibus  deferbuit  plane
superioribus  enim  mensibus  ab  ijs  emissa  est  navis,  eo  tantum  fine,
ut  de  transitu,  vel  Freto  Hudson!  inquireret,  et  num  commercij
locus  sit  in  istis  oris,  si  vero  eventus  votis  non  respondeat,  in  oris
Novae  Francise  negotiabuntur.

^  Henry,  Prince  of  Wales,  died  in  November,  1612,  between  the  pub-
lication of  the  first  and  second  editions  of  Hessel  Gerritz.  The  ships
sent  out  were  commanded  by  Button,  the  discoverer  of  Button's  Bay,  a
gentleman  of  Prince  Henry's  household.  Button  wintered  in  Hudson's
Bay  and  returned  in  autumn,  1613.

^  For  an  account  of  this  expedition  see  O'Callaghan,  History  of  New
Netherland,  i,  pp.  68,  69.


APPENDIX


APPENDIX.


VOYAGE    OF    JOHN    DE    VERAZZANO    ALONG    THE

COAST    OF   NORTH   AMERICA   FROM   CAROLINA

TO     NEWFOUNDLAND     (CONTAINING     THE

FIRST     DISCOVERY     O^     HUDSON'S

RIVER),    A.D.     1524.

TRANSLATED     FROM     THE      ORIGINAL     ITALIAN,      BY     JOSEPH     G.
COGSWELL,    ESQ.,    MEMBER    OF    THE    N.    Y.    HIST.    SOC,    ETC.

(from  "  N.  Y.  HIST.  SOC.  COLL,,"  NEW  SERIES,  VOL.  I,)


PRELIMINARY    NOTICE    BY   THE    TRANSLATOR.

The  following  paper  is  a  new  translation  of  the  letter  written  by
Verazzano  on  his  return  from  his  first  voyage  to  the  western  con-
tinent, giving  an  account  of  his  discoveries  to  Francis  I  of  France,
by  whose  orders  he  had  undertaken  it.  It  is  made  from  a  copy  of
the  original  manuscript  in  the  Magliabecchian  Library  at  Florence,
which  was  presented  to  the  New  York  Historical  Society  by  G.  W.
Greene,  Esq.,  now  Consul  of  the  United  States  at  Rome.  A  trans-
lation of  part  of  the  same  letter  is  printed  in  the  first  volume  of
the  Society's  "Collections",  which  was  taken  from  Hakluyt,Mvho
followed  the  original  as  given  by  Ramusio ;  but  as  that  varies  in
substance,  in  some  few  instances,  from  the  Magliabecchian ;  and
as  Hakluyt's  translation  is  throughout  obscure  and  antiquated  in
language,  it  seems  requisite  to  publish  the  one  which  has  been
made  from  the  Society's  copy.  This  letter  is  in  itself  highly  inte-
resting and  important ;  and  is  rendered  still  more  so  from  the  fact
of  its  being  the  earliest  original  account  in  existence  of  the  Atlantic

'  From  Hakluyt's  Divers  Voyages,  a  new  edition  of  which,  by  J.  Winter
Jones,  Esq.,  forms  part  of  the  publications  of  the  Hakluyt  Society.


198  VERAZZANO'S    VOYAGE,    AND    FIRST

coast  of  the  United  States,  nearly  the  whole  extent  of  which  was
visited  by  Verazzano  during  the  voyage  described  in  it.  It  is
worthy  of  remark  that  the  name  by  which  the  western  continent  is
now  known,  is  not  used  by  Verazzano  in  the  account  of  his  visit
to  it,  owing  probably  to  the  recent  and  not  universal  adoption  of
it :  it  is  possible  even  that  he  was  ignorant  of  its  having  been
applied.

With  respect  to  the  comparative  authenticity  of  the  manuscript
used  by  Ramusio,  and  that  from  which  our  copy  is  taken,  we  have
nothing  conclusive  to  offer :  we  can  only  say  that  the  internal  evi-
dence is  greatly  in  favour  of  the  latter.  Mr.  Greene,  who  took  up
the  whole  subject  in  an  article  in  the  North  American  Revieiv  for
October  1837,  remarks  that  there  are  in  Ramusio  such  variations
from  the  Magliabecchian  manuscript  as  can  only  be  accounted  for
by  supposing  that  the  editor  must  have  worked  the  whole  piece
over  anew,  correcting  the  errors  of  language  upon  his  own  autho-
rity. Something  of  the  kind  was  evidently  done  :  the  language  of
the  two  is  very  different ;  and  that  used  in  the  manuscript  from
which  the  present  translation  is  made,  has  strong  marks  of  being
in  the  very  form  in  which  it  was  moulded  by  Verazzano.  It  is
throughout  just  as  sailors  of  little  education  commonly  write  :  little
or  no  regard  is  paid  to  grammar ;  the  sentences  run  into  each
other  ;  the  subjects  are  thrown  together  confusedly  ;  parenthetical
clauses  constantly  break  the  thread  of  the  narrative  ;  and  there  are
no  points  from  beginning  to  end.  From  such  a  labyrinth  of  words
it  is  not  easy  to  affirm  that  the  precise  meaning  has  always  been
unravelled ;  but  all  possible  pains  have  been  taken  to  render  the
Italian  original  as  exactly  and  as  clearly  as  the  barbarous  style  in
which  that  is  written  would  admit.  The  cosmographical  descrip-
tion at  the  close  is  not  found  in  Hakluyt,  and  it  was  not  published
in  the  volume  of  "  Collections"  before  cited.  It  is  now  added,
rather  on  account  of  the  curious  evidence  it  furnishes  of  the  state
of  nautical  science  at  that  time,  than  of  any  valuable  knowledge

to  be  drawn  from  it.

J.  G.  C.

New  York,  Jan.  9th,  1841.

The  editor  of  the  present  volume,  whilst  acknowledging  his
great  obligations  to  Professor  Cogswell,  cannot  share  his  opinions


DISCOVERY    OF    HUDSON's    RIVER.  199

about  the  cosmographical  appendix.  Before  that  appendix  was
published,  Verazzano's  voyage  seemed  without  a  purpose.  In  the
appendix  it  is  clearly  stated  that  Verazzano,  like  the  Cabots  and
Hudson,  and  like  nearly  all  the  north-western  discoverers,  sought
a  way  to  Cathay.  This  fact,  which  connects  the  first  discoverer  of
Hudson's  river  so  closely  with  the  navigator  whose  name  the  river
bears,  is  of  paramount  importance  for  oi;r  subject.  It  is  the  prin-
cipal reason  for  inserting  the  letter  in  this  collection.


VOYAGE,

ETC.


Captain  John  de  Verazzano  to  his  most  Serene  Majesty
THE  King  of  France,  writes  :

Since  the  tempests  which  we  encountered  on  the  northern  coasts,
I  have  not  written  to  your  most  Serene  and  Christian  Majesty  con-
cerning the  four  ships  sent  out  by  your  orders  on  the  ocean  to
discover  new  lands,  because  I  thought  you  must  have  been  before
apprized  of  all  that  had  happened  to  us  ;  that  we  had  been  com-
pelled, by  the  impetuous  violence  of  the  winds,  to  put  into  Brit-
tany in  distress,  with  only  the  two  ships  Normandy  and  Dolphin  ;
and  that,  after  having  repaired  these  ships,  we  made  a  cruise  in
them,  well  armed,  along  the  coast  of  Spain,  as  your  Majesty  must
have  heard ;  and  also  of  our  new  plan  of  continuing  our  begun
voyage   with    the  Dolphin  alone.     From   this  voyage  being  now


Da  poi  la  fortuna  passata  nelle  spiagge  settentrionali,  Ser^^o  Signore
non  scrissi  a  vostra  serenissima  et  cristianissima  Maesta  quello  che  era
seguito  delli  quattro  legni  che  quella  mando  per  lo  oceano  ad  iscoprir
nuove  terre,  pensando  di  tutto  sia  stata  certificata  come  dalle  impetuose
forze  de'  venti  fummo  costretti  con  sola  la  nave  Normanda  e  Dalfina
afflitti  ricorrere  in  brettagna  dove  resturate  avia  V.  S.  M.  inteso  il  dis-
corso  facemmo  con  quelle  armate  in  guerra  j^er  li  lidi  di  Spagna,  di  poi
la  nuova  disposizione  con  sola  la  dalfina  in  sequire  la  prima  navigazione,


200  VERAZZAMO'S    VOYAGE,    AND    FIRST

returned,  I  proceed  to  give  your  Majesty  an  account  of  our  disco-
veries.

On  the  17th  of  last  January  we  set  sail  from  a  desolate  rock
near  the  island  of  Madeira,  belonging  to  his  most  Serene  Majesty
the  King  of  Portugal,  with  fifty  men ;  having  provisions  sufficient
for  eight  months,  arms,  and  other  warlike  munition  and  naval
stores.  Sailing  westward  with  a  light  and  pleasant  easterly  breeze,
in  twenty-five  days  we  ran  eight  hundred  leagues.  On  the  24th  of
February  we  encountered  as  violent  a  hurricane  as  any  ship  ever
weathered,  from  which  we  escaped  unhurt  by  the  divine  assistance
and  goodness,  to  the  praise  of  the  glorious  and  fortunate  name  of
our  good  ship,  that  had  been  able  to  support  the  violent  tossing  of
the  waves.  Pursuing  our  voyage  towards  the  west,  a  little  north-
wardly, in  twenty -four  days  more,  having  run  four  hundred  leagues,
we  reached  a  new  country  which  had  never  befoi'e  been  seen  by
any  one  either  in  ancient  or  modern  times.  At  first  it  appeared
to  be  very  low ;  but  on  approaching  it  to  within  a  quarter  of  a
league  from  the  shore,  we  perceived,  by  the  great  fires  near  the
coast,  that  it  was  inhabited.  We  perceived  that  it  stretched  to  the
south,  and  coasted  along  in  that  direction  in  search  of  some  port


dalla  quale  essendo  ritornato  dar6  adviso  a  V.  S.  M.  di  quelle  abbiamo
trovato.

Dallo  deserto  scopulo  propinquo  alia  isola  di  Madera  del  Ser'"o  re  di
Portogallo  con  la  detta  dalflna  alii  17.  del  passato  mese  di  gennajo  con
cinquanta  uomini  forniti  di  vettovaglie,  arme  et  altri  struuxenti  bellici  e
munizione  navale  per  otto  mesi  partimmo  navigando  per  zeffiro  spirando
subsolano  con  dolce  e  soavo  levita,  in  venticinque  giorni  corremmo  leghe
800,  e  11  di  14  di  Pebbrajo  passammo  una  tormenta  tanto  aspera  quanto
mai  alcuno  che  navigasse  passasse.  Delia  quale  con  lo  divino  ajuto  e
bontade  e  laude,  del  glorioso  noma  e  fortunato  fatti  atti  a  sopportare  la
violenta  ouda  del  mare,  fummo  liberi,  e  seguimmo  nostra  navigazione
continuando  verso  1'  occidente  pigliando  alquanto  del  settentrione,  e  iu
venti  cinque  altri  giorni  corremmo  piii  oltre  leghe  400,  dove  ci  apparse
una  nuova  terra  mai  da  alcuno  antico  o  moderno  vista.  Mostravasi
alquanto  bassa  al  principio,  rati  approssimatici  a  un  quarto  di  lega  conos-
cemmo  quella  per  li  grandissimi'  fuochi  facevano  al  lito  del  mare  essere
abitata:  vedemmo  correva  verso  I'Austro,  custrandola  per  trovar  alcuna
porto  dove  potessimo  con  la  nave  sorgere  per  investigare  la  natura  di


DISCOVERY    OF    HUDSON's    KIVER.  201

in  which  we  might  come  to  an  anchor  and  examine  into  the  nature
of  the  countrj' ;  but  for  fifty  leagues  we  could  find  none  in  which
we  could  lie  securely.  Seeing  the  coast  still  stretched  to  the
south,  we  resolved  to  change  our  course  and  stand  to  the  north-
ward ;  and  as  we  still  had  the  same  difficulty,  we  drew  in  with  the
land,  and  sent  a  boat  on  shore.  Many  people  who  were  seen
coming  to  the  sea-side,  fled  at  our  approach ;  but  occasionally
stopping,  they  looked  back  upon  us  with  astonishment,  and  some
were  at  length  induced,  by  various  friendly  signs,  to  come  to  us.
These  shewed  the  greatest  delight  on  beholding  us,  wondering  at
our  dress,  countenances,  and  complexion.  They  then  shewed  us
by  signs  where  we  could  more  conveniently  secure  our  boat,  and
offered  us  some  of  their  provisions.  That  your  Majesty  may  know
all  that  we  learned,  while  on  shore,  of  their  manners  and  customs
of  life,  I  will  relate  what  we  saw  as  briefly  as  possible.  They  go
entirely  naked,  except  that  about  the  loins  they  wear  skins  of  small
animals,  like  martens,  fastened  by  a  girdle  of  plaited  grass,  to
which  they  tie,  all  round  the  body,  the  tails  of  other  animals,
hanging  down  to  the  knees.  All  other  parts  of  the  body  and  the
head  are  naked.  Some  wear  garlands  similar  to  birds'  feathers.
The  complexion  of  these  peoiDle  is  black,  not  much  different


quella  in  spazio  di  leghe  50  non  trovammo  porto  prossimo  alcuno  dove
sicuri  potessimo  posare  e  visto  che  continuo  scendeva  verso  I'Austro
deliberammo  tornare  a  rigarla  verso  11  settentrione  donde  il  raedesimo
trovammo  sorgendo  alia  costa  mandando  il  battello  a  terra  avemmo  vista
di  molta  gente  che  venivano  al  lido  del  mare  et  vedendo  approssimarci
fuggirono  alcuna  volta  fermandosi  si  voltavano  addietro  con  grande
ammirazione  risguardando,  ma  assicurandoli  noi  con  varj  segni,  venivano
alcuni  di  quegli,  mostrando  grande  allegrezza  a  vederci  maravigliandosi
di  nostri  abiti  e  figure  e  bianchezza  facendene  varj  segni  dove  col  battello
dovessirao  pivi  commodamente  scendere  offerendone  di  loro  vivande :
fummo  alia  terra  e  quello  potessimo  di  loro  vita  e  costumi  conoscere  con
brevita  diro  a  V.  S.  M.  Vanno  del  tuto  nudi  salvochfe  alle  parti  pudi-
bunde  portano  alcune  pelli  di  piccoli  animali  simili  a  martori  con  una
cintura  d'  erbe  tessutu  con  code  d'  altri  animali  che  pendono  circuendo
il  corpo  seno  alle  ginocchia  il  resto  nudo,  il  capo  simile.  Alcuni  di  loro
portano  certe  ghirlande  simili  di  penne  d'  uccelli.     Son  di  colore  neri


20^  VERAZZAKO'S    VOYAGE,    AKD    FIRST

from  that  of  the  Ethiopians.  Their  hair  is  black  and  thick,  and
not  very  long ;  it  is  worn  tied  back  upon  the  head,  in  the  form  of
a  little  tail.  In  person  they  are  of  good  proportions,  of  middle
stature,  a  little  above  our  own ;  broad  across  the  breast,  strong  in
the  arms,  and  well  formed  in  the  legs  and  other  parts  of  the  body.
The  only  exception  to  their  good  looks,  is  that  they  have  broad
faces  ;  but  not  all,  however,  as  we  saw  many  that  had  sharp  ones,
with  large  black  eyes  and  a  fixed  expression.  They  are  not  very
strong  in  body,  but  acute  in  mind,  active  and  swift  of  foot,  as  far
as  we  could  judge  by  observation.  In  these  last  two  particulars
they  resemble  the  people  of  the  East,^  especially  those  the  most
remote.  We  could  not  learn  a  great  many  particulars  of  their
usages  on  account  of  our  short  stay  among  them  and  the  distance
of  our  ship  from  the  shore.

We  found,  not  far  from  this  people,  another,  whose  mode  of  life
we  judged  to  be  similar.  The  whole  shore  is  covered  with  fine
sand,  about  fifteen  feet  thick,  rising  in  the  form  of  little  hills,


non  molto  dagli  Etiopi  difForme  i  capelli  neri  e  folti  non  molto  lunghi  i
quali  legano  insieme  dietro  alia  testa  in  forma  d'  una  piccola  coda.
Quanto  alia  similitudine  dell'  uono  some  bene  proporzionate  di  mezza
statura  e  piu  presto  a  noi  eccedono  in  nel  petto  ampli,  nelle  braccia  dis-
poste  le  gambe  e  1'  altro  del  corpo  bene  composti  :  non  hanno  altro
salvo  alquanto  nel  viso  tendono  in  larghezza,  non  per6  tutti  che  a  molti
vedemmo  il  viso  profilato,  gli  occhi  neri  e  grandi  la  guardatura  fissa,
non  sono  di  molta  forza  ma  di  ingenio  acuti  agili  e  grandissimi  corri-
dori  per  quelle  potemmo  per  esperienza  conoscere.  Somigliano  per  due
estremi  agl'  oriental!  massime  a  quegli  delle  ultime  regioni.  Non  po-
temmo di  loro  costumi  molto  in  particulare  comprendere  per  la  poca
stanza  facemmo  alia  terra,  per  essere  suso  1'  onde  alia  piaggia.  Trovammo
non  lungi  di  quegli  altri  populi  de  quali  pensiamo  il  vivere  sia  con-

1  The  resemblance  between  the  nations  of  the  eastern  shores  of  Asia  and
the  aborigines  of  North  America  is  a  fact  more  and  more  confirmed  by
modern  research  and  travel.  Still  Verazzano,  the  first  man  who  asserts  it,
could  not  possibly  make  the  comparison.  His  repeated  assertions  can  only
be  taken  as  proofs  of  the  tendency  of  human  nature  strikingly  described  by
Cffisar :  "  Ho^nines  fere  libenter  quod  volant,  credunt."  He  xoished  to  reach
Cathay  ;  and,  therefore,  he  believed  himself  to  be  near  it.  Another  not  less
striking  instance  of  the  same  tendency  is  to  be  found  in  Hessel  Gerritsz's
remarks  about  the  poniard  of  a  Hudson's  Bay  Esquimaux,     (p.  188.)


DISCOVERY    OF    HUDSON 's    RIVER.  203

about  fifty  paces  broad.  Ascending  farther,  we  found  several  arms
of  the  sea,  which  make  in  through  inlets,  washing  the  shores  on
both  sides  as  the  coast  runs.  An  outstretched  country  appears  at
a  little  distance,  rising  somewhat  above  the  sandy  shore,  in  beau-
tiful fields  and  broad  plains,  covered  with  immense  forests  of  trees
more  or  less  dense,  too  various  in  colours,  and  too  delightful  and
charming  in  appearance  to  be  described.  I  do  not  believe  that
they  are  like  the  Hercynian  forest,  or  the  rough  wilds  of  Scythia ;
and  the  northern  regions  full  of  vines  and  common  trees ;  but
adorned  with  palms,  laurels,  cypresses,  and  other  varieties,  unknown
in  Europe  ;  that  send  forth  the  sweetest  fragrance  to  a  great  dis-
tance ;  but  which  we  could  not  examine  more  closely  for  the  reasons
before  given,  and  not  on  account  of  any  difficulty  in  traversing  the
woods ;  which,  on  the  contrary,  are  easily  penetrated.

As  the  "  East "  stretches  around  this  country,^  I  think  it  cannot
be  devoid  of  the  same  medicinal  and  aromatic  drugs,  and  various
riches  of  gold  and  the  like,  as  is  denoted  by  the  colour  of  the
ground.     It  abounds  also   in  animals,  as  deer,  stags,  hares,  and


forme,  e  11  lito  b  coperto  tutto  di  una  minuta  rena  alto  piedi  quindici,
estendosi  in  forma  di  piccoli  colli  largo  passi  cinquanta.  Poi  ascendendo
si  trovani  alcuni  bracci  di  mare  che  entrano  per  alcune  foci  rigando  il
lito  dair  una  all'  altra  parte  come  corre  il  lito  di  quello.  A  presso  si
mostra  la  terra  lata  tanto  eminente  che  eccede  il  lito  arenoso,  con  belle
campagne  e  province  pieue  di  grandissime  selve  ;  parte  rare  e  parte
dense,  vestite  di  varj  colori  di  abori  di  tanta  vaghezza  e  dilettevole  guar-
datura  quanto  esprimere  sia  possible,  ne  credo  quelle  sieno  come  la
ercinea  selva  o  le  aspre  solitudini  di  scitia  o  piaggie  settentrionali  prene
di  viti  e  arbori,  ma  ornate  di  palme,  lauri,  e  cipressi  e  altre  varieta  d'
arbori  incogniti  alia  nostra  Europa  quali  da  lungo  spazio  spirano  sua-
vissimi  odori  i  quali  non  possemmo  conoscere  per  la  causa  sopra  narrata
non  che  a  noi  fosse  difficile  per  le  selve  discorrere  che  tutte  sono  pene-
trabili,  ne  pensiamo  participando  dello  oriente  per  la  circumferenza

1  The  curious  reader  will  fiud  a  further  development  of  Verazzano's  geo-
graphical notions  in  his  cosmographical  appendix  to  the  letter  to  Francis  I.
It  is  easy  to  perceive  that  these  notions,  though  expressed  in  clear  and  often
very  precise  terms,  were  extremely  vague,  and  that  they  cannot,  without
violence,  be  tortured  into  a  palpable  shape.  Tliey  are,  in  this  respect,  closely
akin  to  the  contemporary  geographical  delineations.


204  VERAZZANO'S    VOYAGE,    AND    FIRST

many  other  similar,  and  with  a  great  variety  of  birds  for  every  kind
of  pleasant  and  delightful  sport.  It  is  plentifully  supplied  with
lakes  and  ponds  of  running  water ;  and  being  in  the  latitude  of
34°/  the  air  is  salubrious,  pure,  and  temperate,  and  free  from  the
extremes  of  both  heat  and  cold.  There  are  no  violent  winds  in
these  regions  ;  the  most  prevalent  are  the  north-west  and  west.  In
summer,  the  season  in  which  we  were  there,  the  sky  is  clear,  with
but  little  rain.  If  fogs  and  mists  are  at  any  time  driven  in  by  the
south  wind,  they  are  instantaneously  dissipated,  and  at  once  it  be-
comes serene  and  bright  again.  The  sea  is  calm,  not  boisterous,
and  its  waves  are  gentle.  Although  the  whole  coast  is  low  and
without  harbours,  it  is  not  dangerous  for  navigation,  being  free  from
rocks,  and  bold,  so  that,  within  four  or  five  fathoms  from  the  shore,
there  is  twenty-four  feet  of  water  at  all  times  of  tide;  and  this
depth  constantly  increases  in  a  uniform  proportion.  The  holding
ground  is  so  good  that  no  ship  can  part  her  cable,  however  violent
the  wind,  as  we  proved  by  experience ;  for  while  riding  at  anchor


sieno  senza  qualche  drogheria  o  liquore  aromatico  et  altre  divitie  oro  ed
altro  de  quale  colore  la  terra  tutta  tende,  e  copiosa  di  molti  animali
daini,  cervi,  lepre,  e  simili.  Di  laghi  e  stagni  di  viva  acqua  copiosa  con
varj  numeri  d'  uccelli  atti  e  commodi  a  ogui  dilettevole  piacere  di  vena-
gione.  Sta  questa  terra  gradi  34,  1'  aria  salubre  pura  e  temperata  dal
caldo  e  dal  freddo.  Veuti  non  impetuosi  in  quelli  regione  spirano  e  quelli
che  pill  continui  regnano  sono  coro  e  zefiiro.  Al  tempo  estivo  del  quale
noi  fummo  il  cielo  e  sereno  con  rara  pluvia,  e  se  alcuna  volta  da  venti
australi  1'  aria  incorre  in  qualche  pruina  o  caliggine  in  uno  stante  non
durando  ^  disfatta  tornando  pura  e  chiara,  il  mare  tranquillo  e  non  flut-
tuoso  le  onde  del  quale  sono  placide  ancora  che  il  lito  tutto  renda  in
bassezza,  e  nudo  di  porti  non  perd  e  infesto  a  a  naviganti  essendo  tutto
netto  e  senza  alcuno  scopulo  e  profondo  che  per  iusino  a  4  o  5  passi  si
trova  presso  alia  terra  senza  flusso  o  riflusso  piedi  venti  d'  acqua  cre-
scendo tal  proporzione  uniforme  alia  profondita  nel  pelago  con  tanto
buono  territorio  che  qualsivoglia  nave  da  tempesta  afSitta  mai  in  quelle

1  Either  this  indication,  or  the  direction  of  the  course  mentioned  next  page
(line  6),  must  be  wrong.  This  circumstance  renders  a  critical  investigation
of  Verazzano's  track  absolutely  imjiossible.  We  must  be  satisfied  with  the
rather  vague  assertions,  that  the  shore  he  first  saw  now  forms  pai't  of
Carolina.


DISCOVERY    OF    HUDSON'S    RIVER,  205

on  the  coast,  we  were  overtaken  by  a  gale  in  the  beginning  of
March,  when  the  winds  are  high,  as  is  usual  in  all  countries ;  we
found  our  anchor  broken  before  it  started  from  its  hold  or  moved
at  all.

We  set  sail  from  this  place,  continuing  to  coast  along  the  shore,
which  we  found  stretching  out  to  the  west  (east?  );  the  inhabitants
being  numerous,  we  saw  everywhere  a  multitude  of  fires.  While
at  anchor  on  this  coast,  there  being  no  harbour  to  enter,  we  sent
the  boat  on  shore  with  twenty-five  men,  to  obtain  water ;  but  it
was  not  possible  to  land  without  endangering  the  boat,  on  account
of  the  immense  high  surf  thrown  up  by  the  sea,  as  it  was  an  open
roadstead.  Many  of  the  natives  came  to  the  beach,  indicating,  by
various  friendly  signs,  that  we  might  trust  ourselves  on  shore.  One
of  their  noble  deeds  of  friendship  deserves  to  be  made  known  to
your  Majesty.  A  young  sailor  was  attempting  to  swim  ashore
through  the  surf,  to  carry  them  some  knick-knacks,  as  little  bells,
looking-glasses,  and  other  like  trifles  ;  when  he  came  near  three  or
four  of  them  he  tossed  the  things  to  them,  and  turned  about  to
get  back  to  the  boat ;  but  he  was  thrown  over  by  the  waves,  and
so  dashed  by  them,  that  he  lay  as  it  were,  dead  upon  the  beach.
When  these  people  saw  him  in  this  situation,  they  ran  and  took
him  up  by  the  head,  legs,  and  arms,  and  carried  him  to  a  distance


parti  non  rompendo  le  funi  potra  perire  e  questo  abbiamo  provato  per
esperienza.  Imperocche  per  valere  nel  principio  di  Marzo  come  sempre
ogni  regione  essere  suole  le  forze  de  venti  sendo  noi  in  alto  mare  surti
da  procella  oppress!  prima  trovammo  la  ancora  rotta  che  nel  foudo
arrasse  o  facesse  movimento  alcuno.

Partimmo  di  questo  luogo  continuo  scorrendo  la  costo  qual  trovammo
tornava  alio  occidente  veggendo  per  tutta  quella  grandissimi  fuochi  per
la  moltitudine  delli  abitatori.  Surgendo  in  quella  alia  piaggia  per  non
tenere  porto  alcuno,  per  necessita  d'acqua  mandammo  il  battello  a  terra
con  25  uomini,  per  le  grandissime  onde  gittava  il  mare  al  lito  per  essere
la  piaggia  aperta  non  fu  possibile  senza  pericolo  di  battello  che  alcuno
potesse  in  terra  scendere,  vedemmo  molta  gente  venivano  al  lito  facendo
varj  segni  d'amista  mostrando  fussimo  a  terra,  fra  quali  vidi  uno  alto
magnifico  come  intendera  V.S.M.  Mandando  noi  a  nuoto  uno  giovane
de'  nostri  mariuaria  terra  portando  a  queglialcuue  fantasie  come  sonagli
specchi  ed  ultre  geutilizze,  ed  essendo  3  o  4  giunti  prossimo  a  quegli  git-


206;  VERAZZANO'S    VOYAGE,    AND    FIRST

from  the  surf.  The  young  man,  finding  himself  borne  off  in  this
way,  uttered  very  loud  shrieks,  in  fear  and  dismay,  while  they  an-
swered as  they  could  in  their  language,  showing  him  that  he  had
no  cause  for  fear.  Afterwards,  they  laid  him  down  at  the  foot  of
a  little  hill,  when  they  took  off  his  shirt  and  trousers  and  examined
him,  expressing  the  greatest  astonishment  at  the  whiteness  of  his
skin.  Our  sailors  in  the  boat,  seeing  a  great  fire  made  up  and  their
companion  placed  very  near  it, — full  of  fear,  as  is  usual  in  all  cases
of  novelty — imagined  that  the  natives  were  about  to  roast  him  for
food.  But  as  soon  as  he  had  recovered  his  strength,  after  a  short
stay  with  them,  showing  by  signs  that  he  wished  to  return  aboard,
they  hugged  him  with  great  affection,  and  accompanied  him  to  the
shore,  then  leaving  him  that  he  might  feel  more  secure,  they  with-
drew to  a  little  hill,  from  which  they  watched  him  until  he  was
safe  in  the  boat.  This  young  man  remarked  that  these  people  were
black,  like  the  others ;  that  they  had  shining  skins,  middle  stature,
and  sharper  faces,  and  very  delicate  bodies  and  limbs ;  and  that
they  were  inferior  in  strength,  but  quick  in  their  minds ;  that  is  all
that  he  observed  of  them.

Departing  hence,  and  always  following  the  shore,  which  stretched


tando  loro  le  merce  e  volendo  adietro  tornarsi  fu  tanto  dalle  onde  rimosso
che  quasi  morto  cadde  trasportato  alia  riva  del  lito  quale  visto  la  gente
della  terra.  Subito  corsono  pigliandolo  per  la  testa  e  gambe  e  braccia
lo  portarono  alquantolontauo  onde  veggendo  il  giovane  in  tal  forma  por-
tarsi  da  terrora  spaventato  metteva  grandissimi  gridi — il  che  loro  in
loro  lingua  simile  facevano  dimostrando  non  temesse — de  poi  quello  in
terra  a  pie  d'uno  colletto  posto  facevano  grandissimi  atti  di  ammirazione
guardando  la  bianchezza  delle  sue  carni  per  tutto  lineandolo  e  spoglian-
dogli  la  camicia  ed  i  calzamonti  e  restato  nudo  feciono  appresso  di  quello
uno  grandissimo  fuoco  approssimandolo  al  calore.  II  che  visto  i  marinari
che  erano  al  battel©  restate  pieni  di  spavento  come  in  ogni  caso  nuovo  e
costume  di  quelli  pensavano  che  per  cibo  lo  volessero  arrostire,  riavuto
lui  le  forze,  con  quelli  alquanto  dimorato  per  segni  dimostro  volersi  tor-
nare  alia  nave  e  quelli  con  grandissimo  amore  teuendolo  sempre  stretto,
con  varj  abbracciamenti  1'  accompagniarno  fino  al  mare  e  per  piii  assi-
curarlo  allargandosi  in  uno  colle  emiueute  stettero  a  riguardarlo  fino  che
quello  fu  al  battello.  II  giovane  di  queste  gente  conobbe  che  tali  souo
di  colore  ncro  come  uli  altri  e  le  carue  molto  lustre  di  mediaua  statrua.


DISCOVERY    OF    HUDSON'S    RIVER.  207

to  the  north,  we  came,  in  the  space  of  fifty  leagues,  to  another
land,  which  appeared  very  beautiful  and  full  of  the  large  forests.
We  approached  it,  and  going  ashore  with  twenty  men,  we  went
back  from  the  coast  about  two  leagues,  and  found  that  the  people
had  fled  and  hid  themselves  in  the  woods  for  fear.  By  searching
around,  we  discovered  in  the  grass  a  very  old  woman  and  a  young
girl  of  about  eighteen  or  twenty,  who  had  concealed  themselves
for  the  same  reason.  The  old  woman  carried  two  infants  on  her
shoulders,  and  behind  her  neck  a  little  boy  eight  years  of  age.
When  we  came  up  to  them  they  began  to  shriek  and  make  signs  to
the  men  who  had  fled  to  the  woods.  We  gave  them  a  part  of  our
provisions,  which  they  accepted  with  delight;  but  the  girl  would
not  touch  any;  everything  we  offered  to  her  being  thrown  down
in  great  anger.  We  took  the  little  boy  from  the  old  woman  to
carry  with  us  to  France,  and  would  have  taken  the  girl  also,  who
was  very  beautiful  and  very  tall ;  but  it  was  impossible  because  of
the  loud  shrieks  she  uttered  as  we  attempted  to  lead  her  away.
Having  to  pass  some  woods,  and  being  far  from  the  ship,  we  de-
termined to  leave  her  and  take  the  boy  only.^     We  found  them


11  viso  piii  profilato,  il  corpo  e  1'  altre  membra  assai  piu  dilicati  di  molta
poca  forza  e  pivi  presto  d'  ingegno  altro  non  vide.

Di  qui  partiti  seguendo  sempre  il  leto  che  tornava  verso  settentrione
pervenimmo  in  spazio  di  leghe  50  a  un'  altra  terra  che  molto  si  mostrava
bella  e  plena  dl  grandlssime  selve.  Giugnemmo  a  quella  andando  20
uominl  circa  due  leghe  fra  terra  e  trovammo  le  gentl  che  per  paura  s'erano
fugglte  alle  selve,  cercando  per  tutto  scontrammo  una  femlna  molto
vecchia  ed  una  giovane  d'  anni  18  in  20,  le  quali  per  timore  si  erano
ascose  fra  1'  erbe.  Aveva  la  vecchia  due  fanciullette  quale  portava  sopra
le  spalle  e  dietro  al  collo  uno  fanciullo  tuttl  d'  eta  d'  anni  viil  in  circa,
giunte  nol  a  quelli  cominciorno  a  grldare  e  fame  segnl  agli  uominl
che  s'  erano  fuggite  alle  selve.  Donammoli  noi  a  mangiare  delle  uostre
vlvande  quale  con  gran  gusto  accettorno,  la  giovane  tutto  rinunziava  e
con  ira  a  terra  glttava  e  pigllammo  11  fanciullo  alia  vecchia  per  menare
In  Francia,  e  volendo  prendere  la  giovane  quale  era  di  molta  bellezza,
e  d'  alta  statura,  non  fu  mai  possibile  per  i  grandisslml  gridi  spandeva
la  potessimo  condurre  al  mare  avendo  a  passare  per  alcune  selve  ed

1  When  we  compai'e  this  conduct  ^yith  that  of  the  natives  related  in  the
last  page,  we  may  well  ask,  "  Which  are  the  savages?"    The  early  navigators,


208  VERAZZANO'S    VOYAGE,    AND    FIRST

fairer  than  the  others,  and  wearing  a  covering  made  of  certain
plants  which  hung  down  from  the  branches  of  the  trees,  tying  them
together  with  threads  of  wild  hemp.  Their  heads  are  without
covering  and  of  the  same  shape  as  the  others.  Their  food  is  a
kind  of  pulse,  which  there  abounds ;  different  in  colour  and  size
from  ours,  and  of  a  very  delicious  flavour.  Besides,  they  take
birds  and  fish  for  food;  using  snares,  and  bows  made  of  hard
wood,  with  reeds  for  arrows,  in  the  ends  of  which  they  put  the
bones  of  fish  and  other  animals.  The  animals  in  these  regions
are  wilder  than  in  Europe,  from  being  continually  molested  by  the
hunters.  We  saw  many  of  their  boats,  made  of  one  tree,  twenty
feet  long  and  four  feet  broad,  without  the  aid  of  stone  or  iron,  or
other  kind  of  metal.  In  the  whole  country,  for  the  space  of  two
hundred  leagues,  which  we  visited,  we  saw  no  stone  of  any  sort.
To  hollow  out  their  boats,  they  burn  out  as  much  of  a  log  as  is
requisite,  and  also  from  the  prow  and  stern,  to  make  them  float
well  on  the  sea.     The  land,  in  situation,  fertility,  and  beauty,  is


essendo  dalla  nave  lungi  deliberammo  lasciarla  portando  solo  il  fanciullo.
Trovammo  costoro  piii  bianchi  che  i  passati,  vestiti  di  certe  erbe  che
stavano  pendenti  k  rami  degli  alberi  quale  tessono  con  varie  cordi  di
canape  silvestra,il  capo  nude  nella  medesima  forma  degli  altri  il  rivere  loro
in  genera  e  di  legumi  de  quali  abondano  different]  nel  colore  a  grandezze
de'  nostri  di  ottimo  e  dilettevoli  sapere.  In  oltre  di  venazione  pesci  ed
ucelli  quali  pigliano  con  lacei  ed  archi  fanno  de  duro  legno,  le  freccie
di  calamo  e  nella  estremita  mettono  ossi  di  pesci,  e  d'  altri  animali.
Sono  in  questa  parte  le  fiere  piti  salvattiche  che  non  sono  in  la  nostra
Europa  per  la  continua  molesta  hanno  dei  venatori.  Vedemmo  molte
delle  loro  barchette  construtte  d'  un  solo  albero  lunghe  piedi  20  larghe
piedi  4  non  con  ferro  o  pietra  o  altro  genere  de  metallo  sono  fabbricate
imperocche  tutta  quella  terra  in  spazeo  de  fyhe  dugento  che  vi  cor-
remmo  alcuna  pietra  d'  alcuna  sorta  mai  da  noi  fu  vista.  Auitansi  del
quarto  elemento  del  legno  tale  parte  quanto  basti  alia  concavita  dela
barca  ed  il  simile  della  prora  e  poppa  tanto  che  navigando  possa  solcare
le  onde  del  mare.  La  terra  del  sito,  bonta  e  belezza  e  come  1'  altre  selve
vare  di  vario  genere  d'  alberi  piene  ma  non  di  tanto  odore  per  essere  piii

prompted  by  too  natural  a  curiosity,  and  not  respecting  men  whom  they  con-
sidered as  little  better  than  wild  beasts,  tried  to  kidnap  some  of  the  natives
whenever  opportunity  offered.  They  thus  caused  the  spirit  of  distrust  and
hostility,  which  was  afterwards  evinced  by  the  North  American  Indians.


DISCOVERY    OF    HUDSON's    KIVER.  309

like  the  other  ;  abounding  also  in  forests,  filled  with  various  kinds  of
trees ;  but  not  of  such  fragrance,  as  it  is  more  northern  and  colder.

We  saw  in  this  country  many  vines,  growing  naturally,  which
entwine  about  the  trees,  and  run  up  upon  them  as  they  do  in  the
plains  of  Lombardy.  These  vines  would  doubtless  produce  ex-
cellent wine  if  they  were  properly  cultivated  and  attended  to,  as
we  have  often  seen  the  grapes  which  they  produce  very  sweet  and
pleasant,  and  not  unlike  our  own.  They  must  be  held  in  estima-
tion by  them,  as  they  carefully  remove  the  shrubbery  from  around
them  wherever  they  grow,  to  allow  the  fruit  to  ripen  better.  We
found,  also,  wild  roses,  violets,  lilies,  and  many  sorts  of  plants  and
fragrant  flowers  different  from  our  own.  We  cannot  describe  their
habitations,  as  they  are  in  the  interior  of  the  country,  but  from
various  indications  we  conclude  they  must  be  formed  of  trees  and
shrubs.  We  saw  also  man)'-  grounds  for  conjecturing  that  they
often  sleep  in  the  open  air,  without  any  covering  but  the  sky.  Of
their  other  usages  we  know  nothing ;  we  believe,  however,  that  all
the  people  we  were  among  live  in  the  same  way.

After  having  remained  here  three  days,  riding  at  anchor  on  the
coast,  as  we  could  find  no  harbour,  we  determined  to  depart,  and
coast  along  the  shore  to  the  north-east,  keeping  sail  on  the  vessel
only  by  day,   and  coming  to  anchor  by  night.      After  proceeding


settentrionale  e  fredda.  Vedemmo  in  quello  molte  vite  dalla  natura
produtte,  quali  alzandosi  avvoltano  agli  alberi  come  nella  cisalpina
Gallia  costumano,  le  quali  se  dagli  agricoltori  avessino  11  perfetto  ordine
di  cultura  senza  dubbio  produrrebbono  ottrini  vini,  perche  pii^  volte  il
frutto  di  quello  beendo,  veggendo  suave  e  dolce  non  dal  nostro  differente
sono  da  loro  temiti  in  estimaziono  imperocche  per  tntto  dove  nascono
levauo  gli  arbuscoli  circustanti  ad  causa  11  frutto  possa  germinare.
Trovammo  rose  silvestre  e  viole  gigli  e  molte  sorte  di  erbe  e  fiori  odori-
feri  da  nostri  differente.  Le  abitazioni  loro  non  conoscemmo  per  essere
dentro  infra  terra,  estimiamo  per  molti  segni  vedemmo  sieno  di  legno  e
erbe  composte,  credendo  ancora  per  varie  congetture  e  vestigii  molte  di
quegli  dormire  alia  campagne  ed  altra  che  il  cielo  non  abbiano  per
copertura.  Altro  di  costoro  con  conoscemmo,  pensiamo  tutti  gli  altri
della  passata  terra  vivino  nel  medesimo  modo.  Essendo  in  questa  terra
dimorati  tre  giorni,  surti  alia  costa  per  la  rarita  de'  porti  deliberammo
partire  scorrendo  sempre  al  lito  infra  settentrione  ed  oriente,  il  di  sola-


210  VERAZZAN0^5    VOYAGE,    AND    FIRST

one  hundred  leagues,  we  found  a  very  pleasant  situation  among
some  steep  hills,  through  which  a  very  large  river,  deep  at  its
mouth,  forced  its  way  to  the  sea ;  from  the  sea  to  the  estuary  of
the  river,  any  ship  heavily  laden  might  pass,  with  the  help  of  the
tide,  which  rises  eight  feet.  But  as  we  were  riding  at  anchor  in  a
good  berth,  we  would  not  venture  up  in  our  vessel,  without  a  know  -
ledge  of  the  mouth  ;  therefore  we  took  the  boat,  and  entering  the
river,  we  found  the  country  on  its  banks  well  peopled,  the  inhabi-
tants not  differing  much  from  the  others,  being  dressed  out  with
the  feathers  of  birds  of  various  colours.  They  came  towards  us
with  evident  delight,  raising  loud  shouts  of  admiration,  and  show-
ing us  where  we  could  most  securely  land  with  our  boat.  We
passed  up  this  river,  about  half  a  league,  when  we  found  it  formed
a  most  beautiful  lake  three  leagues  in  circuit,  upon  which  they
were  rowing  thirty  or  more  of  their  small  boats,  from  one  shore  to
the  other,  filled  with  multitudes  who  came  to  see  us.  All  of  a  sud-
den as  is  wont  to  happen  to  navigators,  a  violent  contrary  wind
blew  in  from  the  sea,  and  forced  us  to  return  to  our  ship,  greatly
regretting  to  leave  this  region  which  seemed  so  commodious  and
delightful,  and  which  we  supposed  must  also  contain  great  riches,


mente  navigando  e  la  notte  posando  la  ancora  in  termini  di  leghe  cento
trovammo  un  sito  molto  ameno  posto  infra  piccoli  colli  eminenti  nel
mezzo  de'  quali  correva  al  mare  una  grandissima  riviera,  la  quale  dentro
alia  foce  era  profonda  e  dal  mare  all'  eminenza  di  quella  col  ricresci-
mento  delle  acque  quali  trovammo  piedi  otto  e  vi  passata  ogni  oneraria
nave  a  per  essere  surti  nella  costa  in  buono  obbligo  non  volemmo  senza
intellegenza  della  foce  aventurarci  fummo  col  battello  ed  entrando
nella  riviera  alia  terra  quale  trovammo  molto  populata  e  le  genti  quasi
conforme  all'  altre  vestiti  di  penne  d'  uccelli  di  varj  colori  venivano  verso
di  noi  allegramente  mettendo  grandissimi  gridi  di  ammirazioni  mostran-
done  dove  col  battello  avessimo  piu  securamente  a  possare,  entrammo  in
detta  riviera  dentro  alia  terra  circa  mezza  lega  dove  vedemmo  faceva  un
bellissimo  lago  di  circuito  di  leghe  tre  in  circa,  per  lo  quale  andavano
discorrendo  dall'  una  all'  altra  parte  al  numero  di  trenta  di  loro  bar-
chette  con  infinite  genti  che  passavano  dall'  una  all  altra  terra  per  ver-
derci.  In  uno  stante  come  advenire  suole  nel  navicare  movendosi  im-
petuoso  contrario  vento  dal  mare  fummo  forzati  tornacci  alia  nave
lasciando  la  detta  terra  con  molto  dispiacere  per  la  commodita  e  vaghezza


DISCOVERY    OF    HUDSON's    RIVER.  211

as  the  hills  showed  many  indications  of  minerals.  Weighing
anchor/  we  sailed  eighty  leagues  towards  the  east,  as  the  coast
stretched  in  that  direction,  and  always  in  sight  of  it ;  at  length  we
discovered  an  island  of  a  triangular  form,  about  ten  leagues  from  the
main  land,  in  size  about  equal  to  the  island  of  Rhodes,  having
many  hills  covered  with  trees,  and  well  peopled,  judging  from  the
great  number  of  fires  which  we  saw  all  around  its  shores  ;  we
gave  it  the  name  of  your  Majesty's  mother.^

We  did  not  land  there,  as  the  weather  was  unfavourable,  but
proceeded  to  another  place,  fifteen  leagues  distant  from  the  island,
where  we  found  a  very  excellent  harbour.     Before  entering  it,  we


di  quella  pensando  non  fosse  senza  qualche  facolta  di  prezzo  mostrandosi
tutte  11  colli  di  quella  minerali.  Levata  1'  ancora  navicammo  verso
r  oriente  che  cosi  la  terra  tornava,  discorse  leghe  ottanta.  Sempra  a
vista  di  quella  discoprimmo  una  isola  in  forma  triangolare  lontano  dal
continente  leghe  x.  di  grandezza  simile  alia  isola  di  Rodi  plena  dl  colli,
coperta  d'  alberi,  e  molto  populata  per  11  continui  fuochl,  per  tutto
interno  al  lito  vedemmo  che  facevano.  Battezzammolo  iu  nome  della
vostra  clarrissima  genitrice.  Non  surgendo  a  quella  per  la  opposizione
del  tempo  venlmmo  a  un'  altra  terra  distante  dalla  isola  leghe  xv  tro-
vammo  uno  belissimo  porto  e  prima  in  quello  entrassimo  vedemmo  circa

'  It  is  quite  clear,  from  the  course  of  the  vessel,  that  the  river  here  de-
scribed is  the  Hudson,  and  the  bay,  its  mouth.  The  description  also  is  per-
fectly accurate.  As  is  stated  further  on,  by  Professor  Cogswell,  an  American
historian,  Dr.  Miller  was  of  opinion,  that  not  the  bay  here  summarily  sketched,
but  the  one  more  amjily  depicted  on  a  later  page  of  Verazzano's  journal,  is
New  York  harbour.  Dr.  Miller  was  most  probably  misled  by  his  patriotism.
The  charming  description  of  the  second  bay  cannot  be  mistaken  for  that  of
the  mouth  of  the  Hudson,  by  any  one  whose  judgment  is  entirely  unbiassed.
The  mistake  has  for  a  long  time  been  generally  acknowledged  in  America.

The  second  bay,  which  Verazzano  afterwards  entered,  is  Narrangaset  Bay
(Newport  harbour,  Rhode  Island).  The  praise  given  to  it  by  its  discoverer
is  not  by  any  means  exaggerated.

2  It  may  perhaps  be  allowed  to  hazard  the  conjecture  that  this  tribe  was
descended  from  the  Welsh  emigrants,  who  had  reached  America  in  the  early
part  of  the  middle  ages  :  and  of  whom  many  travellers,  but  most  especially
Mr.  Catlin,  believe  to  have  found  some  traces.  They  need  not  hive  been
very  white  to  appear  fair  to  a  sunburnt  Italian  mariner.  The  emendation
introduced  into  the  text  by  Mr.  Cogswell,  seems  of  too  bold  a  nature.  Di
colore  bianchissimo  can  hardly  be  interpreted  into  inclining  to  a  lohite
{bronze)  colour.


212  VERAZZANO'S    VOYAGE,    AND    FIRST

saw  about  twenty  small  boats  full  of  people,  who  came  about  our
ship,  uttering  many  cries  of  astonishment,  but  they  would  not  ap-
proach nearer  than  within  fifty  paces  ;  stopping,  they  looked  at  the
structure  of  our  ship,  our  persons  and  dress,  afterwards  they  all
raised  a  loud  shout  together,  signifying  that  they  were  pleased.
By  imitating  their  signs,  we  inspired  them  in  some  measure  with
confidence,  so  that  they  came  near  enough  for  us  to  toss  to  them
some  little  bells  and  glasses,  and  many  toys,  which  they  took  and
looked  at,  laughing,  and  then  came  on  board  without  fear,  among
them  were  two  kings,  more  beautiful  in  form  and  stature  than  can
possibly  be  described ;  one  was  about  forty  years  old,  the  other
about  twenty-four,  and  they  were  dressed  in  the  following  manner  :
The  oldest  had  a  deer's  skin  around  his  body,  artificially  wrought
in  damask  figures,  his  head  was  without  covering,  his  hair  was
tied  back  in  various  knots  ;  around  his  neck  he  wore  a  large  chain
ornamented  with  many  stones  of  different  colours.  The  young  man
was  similar  in  his  general  appearance.  This  is  the  finest  looking
tribe,  and  the  handsomest  in  their  costumes,  that  we  have  found  in
our  voyage.  They  exceed  us  in  size,  and  they  are  of  a  very  fair
complexion  (  ?)  ;  some  of  them  incline  more  to  a  Avhite  (bronze?),
and  others  to  a  tawny  colour ;  their  faces  are  sharp,  their  hair  long
and  black,  upon   the  adorning  of  which  they  bestow  great  pains  ;


XX  barchette  di  genti  che  venivano  con  varj  gridi  e  maraviglie  intorno
alia  nave  non  approssimandosi  piii  che  cinquanta  passi  fermavansi
vedendo  lo  edifizio  nostro  efEgie  ed  abite  :  di  poi  tutti  insieme  spande-
vano  un  altro  grido,  siguificando  rallegrarsi  assicuratigli  alquanto  imi-
tando  loro  gesti  si  approssimurono  tanto  che  gitammo  loro  alcuni  sonagli
e  speccbj  e  molte  fantasie  quale  prese  con  riso  e  riguardandole  sicura-
mente  nella  nave  entrorno.  Erano  infra  quelli  duo  re  de  tanta  bella
statura  e  forma  quanto  narrare  sia  possibile  il  primo  d'  anni  40  in  circa
r  altro  d'  anni  24, 1'abito  de'  quali  tale  era — il  phi  vecchio  sopra  il  corpo
uudo  aveva  una  pelle  di  cervo  lavorata  artifiziosamante  alia  damaschina
con  varj  ricami,  la  testa  nuda,  li  capelli  aditro  avolti  con  varie  legature,
al  collo  una  catena  larga  ornata  di  molte  pietri  di  diversi  colori.  II
giovane  quasi  nella  medesima  forma.  Era  questa  la  piii  bella  gente  e  la
piii  gentile  di  costumi  abbiamo  trovata  in  questa  navigazione,  eccedono
noi  di  grandezza.  sono  di  colore  bianchissimo.  alcuni  peudono  piii  in
bianchizza  ma  altri  in  colore  flavo,  il  viso  profilato,  i  capegli  lunghi  c


DISCOVERY    OF    HUUSOn's    RIVER.  213

tlieir  eyes  are  black  and  sharp,  their  expression  mild  and  pleasant,
greatly  resembling  the  antique.  I  say  nothing  to  your  Majesty  of
the  other  parts  of  the  body,  which  are  all  in  good  proportion,  and
such  as  belong  to  well  formed  men.  Their  women  are  of  the  same
form  and  beauty,  very  graceful,  of  fine  countenances  and  pleasing
appearance  in  manners  and  modesty ;  they  wear  no  clothing  except
a  deer  skin,  ornamented  like  those  worn  by  the  men ;  some  wear  very
rich  lynx  skins  upon  their  arms,  and  various  ornaments  upon  their
heads,  composed  of  braids  of  hair,  which  also  hang  down  upon
their  breasts  on  each  side;  others  wear  different  ornaments,  such
as  the  women  of  Egypt  and  Syria  use.  The  older  and  the  married
people,  both  men  and  women,  wear  many  ornaments,  in  their  ears,
hanging  down  in  the  oriental  manner.  We  saw  upon  them  several
pieces  of  wrought  copper,  which  is  more  esteemed  by  them  than
gold,  as  this  is  not  valued  on  account  of  its  colour,  but  is  considered
by  them  as  the  most  ordinary  of  the  metals, — yellow  being  the
colour  especially  disliked  by  them  ;  azure  and  red  are  those  in  high-
est estimation  with  them.  Of  those  things  which  we  gave  them,  they
prized  most  highly  the  bells,  azure  crystals,  and  other  toys  to  hang
in  their  ears  and  about  their  necks ;  they  do  not  value  or  care  to


neri  nei  quali  pongono  grandissimo  studio  in  adornargli,  gli  occhi  neri  e
pronti,  la  aria  dolce  e  soave  imitando  molto  1'  antico.  Delle  altre  parti
del  corpo  uon  dird  a  V.S.M.  tenendo  tutte  le  proporzione  del  corpo  1'  ap-
partiene  a  uno  bene  composto.  Le  donne  loro  souo  della  medesima
forma  e  belleza  molto  graziose  e  di  venusta  aira  e  grato  aspetto  di  cos-
tumi  e  continentia,  nude  con  solo  una  pelle  di  cervo  ricamata  come  gli
uomini  alcune  alle  braccia  portano  pelle  di  lupi  cervieri  molto  ricche,  il
capo  con  varj  ornament!  di  treccie  composte  de'  medesimi  capegli  che
pendono  dall'  uno  e  1'  altro  lato  del  petto.  Alcune  hanno  altre  accon-
ciature  come  le  donne  d'  Egitto  e  di  Soria  usano,  e  queste  sono  quelle
che  eccedono  alia  eta  e  giunte  in  spozalizio  agli  orecchi  tengono  varie
fautasie  pendenti  come  gli  oriental!  costumano  cos!  gli  uomini  come  le
donne  a  qual!  vedemmo  molte  lamine  di  rame  lavorate  da  quell!  tenute
!n  pregio  piu  che  1'  oro  ;  il  quale  per  il  colore  non  stimano  ;  imperocche
fra  tutti  i  metalle  da  loro  per  il  piii  vile  e  tenuto  per  il  giallo  colore  che
aborrono,  lo  azzurro  ed  il  rosso  sopra  ogni  altro  esaltando.  Quello  die
da  no!  gli  fii  donato  che  piii  tenessino  in  prezzo  erano  sonagli,  cristal-
lin!  azzurri  ed  altre  fantasic  da  tenere  agli  orecchj  ed  al  collo  non  prez-


214  VERAZZA^'O'S    VOYAGE,    AND    FIRST

have  silk  or  gold  stuffs,  or  other  kind  of  cloth,  nor  implements  of
steel  or  iron.  When  we  showed  them  our  arms,  they  expressed  no
admiration,  and  only  asked  how  they  were  made ;  the  same  was  the
case  with  the  looking-glasses,  which  they  returned  to  us,  smiling,
as  soon  as  they  had  looked  at  them.  They  are  very  generous  ;  giv-
ing away  whatever  they  have.  We  formed  a  great  friendship  with
them,  and  one  day  we  entered  into  the  port  Avith  our  ship,  having
before  rode  at  the  distance  of  a  league  from  the  shore,  as  the  wea-
ther was  adverse.  They  came  off  to  the  ship  with  a  number  of  their
little  boats,  with  their  faces  painted  in  divers  colours,  showing  us
real  signs  of  joy,  bringing  us  of  their  provisions,  and  signifying  to
us  where  we  could  best  ride  in  safety  with  our  ship,  and  keeping
with  us  until  we  had  cast  anchor.  We  remained  among  them  fif-
teen days,  to  provide  ourselves  with  many  things  of  which  we
were  in  want,  during  which  time  they  came  every  day  to  see  our
ship,  bringing  with  them  their  wives,  of  whom  they  were  very
careful ;  for  although  they  came  on  board  themselves,  and  remain-
ed a  long  while,  they  made  their  wives  stay  in  the  boats,  nor  could
we  ever  get  them  on  board  by  entreaties  or  any  presents  we  could
make  them.     One  of  the  two  Kinsrs  often  came  with  his  Queen  and


zano  drappi  di  seta  o  di  oro  o  di  oltri  generi  di  drappi,  ne  si  curano
quelli  avere,  simile  de  metalli  come  acciajo  ferro,  perche  piri  volte  mos-
trandoli  delle  nostra  armi  non  ne  pigliavano  ammirazione  e  di  quelle
domandavano  solo  lo  artifizio  risguardando  delli  specchj  il  simile  facevano
subito  quelli  guardando,  ridendo  renunziavano.  Sono  molto  liberali  che
tutto  quello  hanno  donato.  Facemmo  con  loro  grande  amista  ed  uno
giorno  avante  entrassimo  con  la  nave  nel  porto  stando  per  li  tempe
adversi  una  lega  nel  mare  surti  venivano  con  un  numero  di  loro  bar  •
chette  alia  nave  puntata  ed  acconci  il  viso  con  varj  colori  mostraudoci
vero  segno  di  allegrezza  putandone  delle  loro  vivande,  facendoci  segno
dovo  per  salvazione  della  nave  nel  porto  avessimo  a  surgere  di  continue
accompagnandone  perfino  a  quello  posammo  la  ancora,  pel  quale  posam-
ma  giorni  quindici  restaurandone  di  molta  opportunita,  dove  ogui  giorno
veniva  gente  a  vedere  alia  nave  menaudo  le  loro  donne  delle  quali  sono
molto  curiosi  imperocche  entrando  loro  in  quella  dimorando  lungo  spazio
facevano  le  loro  donne  aspettare  nelle  barchette  e  con  quanti  prieghi  li
faccssimo  ofterendo  dooare  loro  varie  cose  non  era  possibile  che  lacias-
siuo  quelle  in  nave  entrare  e  molte  volte  vcnendo  uno  delli  duo  re  con  la


DISCOVERY    OF    HUDSON'S    RIVEK.  215

many  attendants,  to  see  us  for  his  amusements ;  but  he  always
stopped  at  the  distance  of  about  two  hundred  paces,  and  sent  a
boat  to  inform  us  of  his  intended  visit,  saying  they  would  come  and
see  our  ship, — this  was  done  for  safety,  and  as  soon  as  they  had  an
answer  from  us  they  came  off,  and  remained  awhile  to  look  around  ;
but  on  hearing  the  annoying  cries  of  the  sailors,  the  king  sent  his
queen,  with  her  attendants,  in  a  very  light  boat,  to  wait,  near  an
island  a  quarter  of  a  league  distant  from  us,  while  he  remained  a
long  time  on  board,  talking  with  us  by  signs  and  expressing  his
fanciful  notions  about  everything  in  the  ship,  and  asking  the  use
of  all.  After  imitating  our  modes  of  salutation,  and  tasting  our
food,  he  courteously  took  leave  of  us.  "Sometimes,  when  our  men
stayed  two  or  three  days  on  a  small  island  near  the  ship  for  their
various  necessities,  as  sailors  are  wont  to  do,  he  came  with  seven
or  eight  of  his  attendants  to  inquire  about  our  movements,  often
asking  us  if  we  intended  to  remain  long,  and  offering  us  every-
thing at  his  command ;  and  then  he  would  shoot  with  his  bow,
and  run  up  and  down  with  his  people,  making  gi'eat  sport  for  us.
We  often  went  five  or  six  leagues  into  the  interior,  and  found  the
country  as  pleasant  as  is  possible  to  conceive,  adapted  to  cultiva-


regina  e  molti  gentili  uomini  per  suo  piacere  a  vedere  in  prima  si  fer-
mava  sempre  a  una  terra  distante  da  noi  200  passi,  mandando  una
barchetta,  ad  avisarne  della  sua  venuta,  dicendo  volare  venire  a  vedere
la  nave,  questo  facendo  in  spezie  di  sicurta,  e  come  da  noi  avevano  la
risposta  subito  venivauo  e  stati  alquanto  a  risguardare  sentendo  il  nojoso
clamore  della  turba  marittima  mandava  la  regina  con  le  sue  damigelle
in  una  barchetta  molto  leggiera  a  riposare  ad  una  isola  distante  da  noi
un  quarto  de  lega  restando  in  grandissimo  spazio  ragionando  per  segni
e  questi  di  varie  fantasie  riguardando  tutte  le  sostanze  della  nave
domandando  in  particolare  la  proprieta  di  quelle  imitando  i  nostri  saluti,
gustando  i  nostri  cibi,  di  poi  benignamente  da  noi  si  partiva  ed  alcuna
volta  due  e  tre  giorui  stando  le  nostre  genti  ad  una  isola  piccola  vicina
alia  nave  per  varie  necessita  come  e  costume  de'  marinaj  veniva  con  7  o  8
de  suoi  gentili  uomini  in  quella  guardando  nostre  operazioni,  doman-
dandone  piii  volte  se  volevamo  restar  quivi  per  lungo  tempo  ofFerendone
cgni  sua  faculta,  di  poi  tirando  con  1'  arco  correndo  faceva  con  li  suoi
gentili  uomini  varj  giuochi  per  darne  piacere  fummo  piii  volte  infra
terra  v  o  vi  leghe  quale  trovammo  tanto  amena  quanto  narrare  sia  possi-


216  VERAZZANO'S    VOYAGE,    AND    FIRST

tion  of  every  kind,  whether  of  corn,  wine,  or  oil ;  there  are  often
plains  twenty-five  or  thirty  leagues  in  extent,  entirely  free  from
trees  or  other  hindrances,  and  of  so  great  fertility,  that  whatever
is  sown  there  will  yield  an  excellent  crop.  On  entering  the  woods,
we  observed  that  they  might  all  be  traversed  by  an  army  ever  so
numerous ;  the  trees  of  which  they  were  composed  were  oaks,
cypresses,  and  others  unknown  in  Europe.  We  found  also  apples,
plums,  filberts,  and  many  other  fruits,  but  all  of  a  diff'erent  kind
from  ours.  The  animals,  which  are  in  great  numbers,  as  stags,
deer,  lynxes,  and  many  other  species,  are  taken  by  snares  and  by
bows,  the  latter  being  their  chief  implement;  their  arrows  are
wrought  with  great  beauty,  and  for  the  heads  of  them  they  use
emery,  jasper,  hard  marble,  and  other  sharp  stones  in  cutting
down  trees,  and  with  them  they  construct  their  boats  of  single  logs,
hollowed  out  with  admirable  skill,  and  sufficiently  commodious  to
contain  ten  or  twelve  persons  ;  their  oars  are  short,  and  broad  at
the  end,  and  are  managed  in  rowing  by  force  of  the  arms  alone,
with  perfect  security,  and  as  nimbly  as  they  choose.  We  saw
their  dwellings,  which  are  of  a  circular  form,  of  about  ten  or  twelve
paces  in  circumference,  made  of  logs  split  in  halves,  without  any


bile,  atta  a  ogni  genere  di  cultura  frumento,  vino,  olio,  imperocche  in
quella  sono  campagne  larghe  xxv  in  xxx  leghe  aperte  e  nude  d'  ogni
impedimento  d'  arbori,  di  tanta  fertilita  che  qualsivoglia  seme  in  quella
produrebbe  ottimo  frutto.  Entrando  poi  nelle  selve  tutte  a  ogni  nume-
roso  esercito  in  qual  modo  sia  sono  penetrabili,  delle  quali  gli  arbori
sono  quercie,  cipressi,  ed  attri  incogniti  nella  Europa,  Trovammo  pomi
luculliane  prune,  avellane  e  molte  altre  frutte.  II  genere  di  esse  e  dif-
ferente  dalle  nostra.  Animali  vi  sono  di  grandissimo  numero,  cervi,
daini  lupi  cervieri,  e  di  altre  spezie  quali  nel  modo  degli  altre  pigliano
con  lacci,  archi,  che  sono  per  loro  principale  arme,  le  freice  de  quali
sono  con  molta  pulchritudine  lavorate  ponendo  nella  esfcremita  per  ferro
smeriglio,  diaspro  e  duro  marmore  ed  altre  taglienti  pietre  delle  quali  si
servono  per  ferro  nel  tagliare  alberi  e  fabricare  le  loro  barchette  di  un
solo  fusto  di  legno  con  mirabile  artifizio  concavo,  nella  quale  commo-
damente  andra  x  o  xii  uomini,  ed  il  remo  corto  nella  estremita  larga
operande  quel  solo  con  forza  di  braccia  in  pelago  senza  alcuno  pericolo,
con  tanta  velocita  quanto  a  loro  piace  e  stendendoci  vedemmo  loro  abita-
zione  in  forma  circolare  di  x  in  xii  passi  di  ambito  fabricate  di  semi-


DISCOVERY    OF    HUUSOn's    RIVKR.  217

regularity  in  architecture,  and  covered  with  roofs  of  straw,  nicely
put  on,  which  protect  them  from  wind  and  rain.  There  is  no
doubt  that  they  would  build  stately  edifices  if  they  had  workmen
as  skilful  as  ours;  for  the  whole  sea- coast  abounds  in  shining;
stones,  crystals,  and  alabaster,  and  for  the  same  reason  it  has  posts
and  retreats  for  animals.  They  change  their  habitations  from
place  to  place  as  circumstances  of  situation  and  season  may  re-
quire. This  is  easily  done,  as  they  have  only  to  take  with  them
their  mats,  and  they  have  other  houses  prepared  at  once.  The
father  and  the  whole  family  dwell  together  in  one  house  in  great
numbers :  in  some  we  saw  twenty-five  or  thirty  persons.  Their
food  is  pulse,  as  with  the  other  tribes  ;  which  is  here  better  than
elsewhere,  and  more  carefully  cultivated.  In  the  time  of  sowing
they  are  governed  by  the  moon,  the  sprouting  of  grain,  and  many
other  ancient  usages.  They  live  by  hunting  and  fishing,  and  they
are  long  lived.  If  they  fall  sick,  they  cure  themselves  without
medicine,  by  the  heat  of  the  fire ;  and  their  death  at  last  comes
from  extreme  old  age.  We  judge  them  to  be  very  affectionate  and
charitable  towards  their  relatives,  making  loud  lamentations  in
their  adversity,  and  in  their  misery  calling  to  mind  all  their  good


circoli  di  legno  separate  1'  una  dall  altra  sensa  ordine  d'  architectura,
coperte  di  tele  di  paglia  sottilmente  lavorate  che  da  vento  e  pioggia  li
difendono,  non  e  dubbio  se  avissino  la  perfezione  degli  artifizj,  noi  abi-
amo  che  conducessino  magni  edifizj,  imperocche  tutto  il  lito  marittirao
di  vive  pietre  d'  auralee  e  cristalline  e  di  alabastro  e  pieno  e  per  tale
causa  e  copiose  di  porti  e  ricettacoli  di  animali.  Perrautano  le  dette
cose  di  uno  in  altro  luogo  secondo  la  esperienza  del  cito  ed  il  tempo  in
quello  dimorati — levano  solo  ie  tele,  in  uno  stante  hauno  altre  abita-
zioni  fabricate  e  dimora,  in  ciascheduna  padre  e  famiglia  in  grandis-
simo  numero  e  in  qualche  vma  vedemmo  xxv  o  xxx  anime  ed  il  vivere
lore  e  come  gli  altri  di  legumi  i  quali  producono  con  piii  ordine  di  cul-
tura,  degli  altri  asservando  uelle  semenze  lo  influsso  lunare  il  nasci-
mento  delle  biade  e  molte  modi  dall  antichi  dati — in  oltre  di  venagione

e  pesci — vivono  lungo  tempo.     In  egritudine  incorromo  se  da

sono  oppress!  senza  flemito  col  fuoco  da  loro  medesimi  si  sanano  ed  il
fine  loro  e  della  ultima  vecchieza  quidichiamo  sieno  di  loro  prossimi
molto  pietosi  e  caritativi,  facendo  nelle  adversita  gran  lamenti,  nelle
miserie  ricordando  tutte  le  loro  felicita  ed  i  parenti  1'  uno  con  1'  altro

28


218  VERAZZANO'S    VOYAGE,    AND    FIKST

fortune.  At  their  departure  out  of  life,  their  relations  mutually
join  in  weeping,  mingled  with  singing,  for  a  long  while.  This  is
all  that  we  could  learn  of  them.

This  region  is  situated  in  the  parallel  of  Rome,  being  41°  40'  of
north  latitude;  but  much  colder,  from  accidental  circumstances,
and  not  by  nature,  as  I  shall  hereafter  explain  to  your  Majesty,  and
confine  myself  at  present  to  the  description  of  its  local  situation.
It  looks  towards  the  south,  on  which  side  the  harbour  is  half  a
league  broad  ;  afterwards,  upon  entering  it,  the  extent  between  the
coast  and  north  is  twelve  leagues;  and  then  enlarging  itself,  it
forms  a  very  large  bay,  twenty  leagues  in  circumference,  in  which
are  five  small  islands  of  great  fertility  and  beauty,  covered  with
large  and  lofty  trees.  Among  these  islands  any  fleet,  however
large,  might  ride  safely,  without  fear  of  tempests  or  other  dangers.
Tvirning  towards  the  south,  at  the  entrance  of  the  harbour,  on  both
sides,  there  are  very  pleasant  hills,  and  many  streams  of  clear
water  which  flow  down  to  the  sea.  In  the  midst  of  the  entrance
there  is  a  rock  of  freestone,  formed  by  nature,  and  suitable  for  the
construction  of  any  kind  of  machine  or  bulwark  for  the  defence  of
the  harbour.^


nel  fine  di  loro  vita  usano  il  pianto  siciliano  misto  con  canto  per  lungo
tempo  durando.  E  questo  e  quanto  di  loro  potessimo  comoscere.  Questa
terra  ^  situata  nel  paralello  di  Roma  in  gradi  41f  ma  alquanto  pi^
fredda  per  accidente,  non  per  natura,  come  in  altra  parte  narrero  a
V.S.M.  descrivendo  al  presente  11  sito  di  detto  posto  guarda  verso  lo
austro  augusta  mizza  lega  dipoi  entrando  in  quello  infra  oriente  e  set-
tentrione  s'  estende  leghe  xii  dove  allargandosi  causa  uno  amplissimo
seno  di  circuito  di  leghe  xx  in  circa  nel  quale  sono  v.  isolette  di  molta
fertilita  e  vaghezza  piene  di  alti  e  spatioso  alberi  infra  le  quali  isole
ogni  numero  di  classe  senza  timore  di  tempesta  o  di  altro  impedimento
di  fortuna  secura  pu6  quiescere.  Tornando  por  verso  meridio  alia  en-
trata  del  porto  all'  uno  e  1'  altro  lato  sono  amenissimi  colli  con  molti  rivi
che  dalla  eminenza  al  mare  soaturiscono  chiare  acque.  Nel  mezzo  della
bocca  si  trova  uno  scoglio  di  viva  pietra  dalla  natura  prodotto  atto  a
fabbricarvi  qual  si  vuole  maccbina  o  propugnacolo  per  custodia  di
quello.

^  The  above  description  ai^plies  to  Narraganset  Bay  aud  the  harbour  of
Newport  in  Rhode  Island,  although  mistaken  by  Dr.  ftliller,  in  his  discourse


DISCOVERY    OF    IIUDSOM's    RIVER.  219

Having  supplied  ourselves  with  everything  necessary,  on  the
fifth  of  May  we  departed  from  the  port,  and  sailed  one  hundred  and
fifty  leagues,  keeping  so  close  to  the  coast  as  never  to  lose  it  from
our  sight.  The  nature  of  the  country  appeared  much  the  same  as
before ;  but  the  mountains  were  a  little  highei',  and  all,  in  appear-
ance, rich  in  minerals.  We  did  not  stop  to  land,  as  the  weather
was  very  favourable  for  pursuing  our  voyage,  and  the  country  pre-
sented no  variety.  The  shore  stretched  to  the  east ;  and,  fifty
leagues  beyond,  more  to  the  north,  where  we  found  a  more  elevated
country  full  of  very  thick  woods  of  fir  trees,  cypresses,  and  the  like,
indicative  of  a  cold  climate.  The  people  were  entirely  different
from  the  others  we  had  seen,  whom  we  had  found  kind  and  gentle ;
but  these  were  so  rude  and  barbarous  that  Ave  were  unable,  by  any
signs  we  could  make,  to  hold  commvinication  with  them.  They
clothe  themselves  in  the  skins  of  bears,  lynxes,  seals,  and  other
animals.  Their  food,  as  far  as  we  could  judge  by  several  visits  to
their  dwellings,  is  obtained  by  hunting  and  fishing,  and  certain


Essendo  di  ogni  nostra  opportunita  restaurati  il  giorno  sei  di  maggio
partimino  dall  detto  porto  continuando  il  lito  non  j^erdendo  mai  la  vista
della  terra  navigammo  leghe  150,  trovandola  di  una  modesima  natura  cd
alquanto  piii  alta  con  alcune  montagne  che  tutte  si  mostravano  minerali,
non  posammo  a  quella  per  la  prosperita  del  tempo  ne  serviva  in  rigare
la  costa  pensammo  fosse  all'  altra  conforme — correva  il  lito  alio  oriente,
in  spazio  de  leghe  50  teuando  piii  al  settentrione  trovammo  una  terra
alta  plena  di  selve  molto  folte  delle  quali  li  alberi  furono  abeti,  cipressi,
e  simili  che  si  generano  in  regione  fredda,  la  gente  tutte  dalle  altre  dif-
forme  e  quanto  i  passati  erano  d'  ogni  gesto  gentili,  questi  erano  di  ruvi-
dezza  e  visi  tanto  barbari,  che  mai  potemmo  cou  quanti  segnali  li  faces-
simo  avere  con  loro  conversazione  alcuna  vestono  di  pelle  di  orsi,  di
lupi  cervieri  consocere  andando  piii  volte  dove  avevano  la  abitatazioue
stemiamo  le  piii  volte  sia  di  venagione  e  pesci  e  di  alcuni  frutti  che  sono

before  this  Society  (as  published  in  the  first  vokime  of  the  former  series  of
Collections),  for  the  bay  and  harbour  of  New  York.  The  latter  are  briefly
described  in  a  preceding  paragraph  of  this  translation  (p.  45)  witli  sufficient
clearness  to  admit  of  their  being  easily  recognized.  The  island,  "of  a  trian-
gular form,  resembling  the  island  of  Rhodes"  (wliich  Verrazzano  mentions
as  fifty  leagues  to  the  east  of  New  York, — p.  4G),  is  doubtless  Bkck  Island.
— Goijswcll.


220  VERAZZANO'S    VOYAGE,    AND    FIRST

fruits,  which  are  a  sort  of  root  of  spontaneous  growth.  They  have
no  pulse,  and  we  saw  no  signs  of  cultivation.  The  land  appears
sterile,  and  unfit  for  growing  of  fruit  or  grain  of  any  kind.  If  we
wished  at  any  time  to  traffick  with  them,  they  came  to  the  sea
shore  and  stood  upon  the  rocks,  from  which  they  lowered  down  by
a  cord,  to  our  boats  beneath,  whatever  they  had  to  barter,  conti-
nually crying  out  to  us  not  to  come  nearer,  and  instantly  demand-
ing from  us  that  which  was  to  be  given  in  exchange.  They  took
from  us  only  knives,  fish-hooks,  and  sharpened  steel.  No  regard
was  paid  to  our  courtesies.  "When  we  had  nothing  left  to  exchange
with  them,  the  men  at  our  departure  made  the  most  brutal  signs
of  disdain  and  contempt  possible.  Against  their  will  we  penetrated
two  or  three  leagues  into  the  interior  with  twenty-five  men.  When
we  came  to  the  shore,  they  shot  at  us  with  their  arrows,  raising
the  most  horrible  cries,  and  afterwards  fleeing  to  the  woods.  In
this  region  we  found  nothing  extraordinary,  except  vast  forests  and
some  metalliferous  hills,  as  we  infer  from  seeing  that  many  of  the
people  wear  copper  earrings.

Departing  from  thence,  we  kept  along  the  coast,  steering  north-
east, and  found  the  country  more  pleasant  and  open,  free  from


spezie  di  radici  quale  la  terra  per  se  medisima  produce.  Non  hanno
legumi  ne  vedemmo  segno  alcuno  di  culturse  nemmeno  farebbe  la  terra
per  la  sterilita  non  alta  a  producere  frutto  o  seme  alcuno.  Se  da  quegli
alcuna  volta  renunziando  volevamo  delle  loro  cose  ue  veuivano  al  lito
del  mare  sopra  alcune  pietre  dove,  piii  frangeva  e  stando  noi  nel  batello
con  una  corda,  quello  clie  volevan  dare  ci  maudevano,  coutinuo  gridando
alia  terra  non  ci  approssimassimo,  domandando  subito  il  cambio  alio
incontro,  non  pigliando  se  non  coltelli,  lami  da  pescare  e  metallo  tagli-
ente,  ne  stimavano  gentiliezza  alcuna,  e  quando  non  avevamo  piii  che
permutare  da  loro  partendo  gli  uomini  ne  facevauo  tutti  gli  atti  di  dis-
pregio  e  verecondia  che  puo  fare  ogui  brutta  creatura.  Fummo  contra
loro  volouto  dentro  fra  terra  due  o  tre  leghe  xxv  uomini  e  quando  scen-
devano  al  lito  ci  tiravano  con  loro  archi  mettando  gridi  grandissimi,  poi
si  fuggivauo  nelle  selve.  Non  connoscemmo  iu  questa  terra  facolta  di
momento  alcuuo  se  non  graudissime  selve  con  alcuni  colli  possono  avere
qualche  metallo  che  a  molti  vedemmo  pater  uostri  di  rame  alii  orecchi.
Partimmo  scoreudo  la  costa  infra  oriente  e  setteiitrione  quale  trovammo


DISCOVERY    OF    HUDSOn's    RIVER.  221

woods ;  and  distant  in  the  interior  we  saw  lofty  mountains,  but
none  which  extended  to  the  shore.  Within  fifty  leagues  we  dis-
covered thirty-two  islands,  all  near  the  mainland,  small,  and  of
pleasant  appearance  ;  but  high,  and  so  disposed  as  to  afford  excel-
lent harbours  and  channels,  as  we  see  in  the  Adriatic  Gulf,  near
Illyria  and  Dalmatia.  We  had  no  intercourse  with  the  people  ;
but  we  judge  that  they  were  similar  in  nature  and  usages  to  those
we  were  last  among.  After  sailing  between  east  and  north  the
distance  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  leagues  more,  and  finding  our
provisions  and  naval  stores  nearly  exhausted,  we  took  in  wood  and
water,  and  determined  to  return  to  France,  having  discovered  502,
that  is  700  (s?c)  leagues  of  unknown  land.

As  to  the  religious  faith  of  all  these  tribes,  not  understanding
their  language,  we  could  not  discover  either  by  sign  or  gestures
any  thing  certain.  It  seemed  to  us  that  they  had  no  religion  nor
laws,  nor  any  knowledge  of  a  First  Cause  or  Mover,  that  they  wor-
shipped neither  the  heavens,  stars,  sun,  moon,  nor  other  planets  ;
nor  could  we  learn  if  they  were  given  to  any  kind  of  idolatry,  or
offered  any  sacrifices  or  supplications,  or  if  they  have  temples  or
houses  of  prayer  in  their  villages ;  our  conclusion  was,  that  they
have  no  religious  belief  whatever,  but  live  in  this  respect  entirely


piu  bella,  aperta  e  nuda  di  selve  con  alte  montagne  dentro  infra  terra
diminuendo  verso  il  lito  del  mare — in  leghe  cinquanta  discoprimmo  xxxii
isole  tutte  propinque  al  continente,  piccole  e  di  grata  prospettiva,  alte
tenendo  la  verzura  della  terra  fra  le  quali  si  causava  bellissimi  porti  e
canali  come  uel  seno  adriatico,  nella  Ilirede  e  Dalmazia  fanno.  Non
avemma  cou  la  gente  conoscenza  e  stimiamo  come  le  altre  lasciate  di
costumi  e  natura  siano.  Navigando  infra  '1  subsolano  ed  acquilone  in
spazio  di  leghe  150  e  di  gik  avendo  consumato  tutte  le  nostre  sostauze
navali  e  vettovaglie,  avendo  discoperto  leghe  502  cioe  leghe  700  piii  di
nuova  terra  fornendoci  di  acque  e  legue  deliberammo  di  tornare  in
Francia.

Quanto  alia  fede  tenegono  tutti  questi  popoli  abbiamo  trovate  per
mancamento  di  lingue  non  possemmo  conoscere  ue  per  segni  o  gesti
alcuni.  Consideriamo  tenessino  legge  o  fede  alcuna,  ne  conoscono  una
per  una  causa  e  motore  ne  venerasino  cielo  o  stelle.  Sole  luna  o  altri
pianeti,  ne  manco  tenessino  spezie  di  idolatria  ne  conoscemmo  facessino
sagriflcio  o  altre  preci  ne  in  la  loro  populazione  hauno  tempj  o  case  di


222  VERAZZANO'S    VOYAGE,    AND    FIRST

free.  All  which  proceeds  from  ignorance,  as  they  are  very  easy  to
be  persuaded,  and  imitated  us  with  earnestness  and  fervour  in  all
which  they  saw  us  do  as  Christians  in  our  acts  of  worship.

It  remains  for  me  to  lay  before  your  Majesty  a  cosmograjihical
exposition  of  our  voyage.'     Taking   our  departure,    as   I   before


orazione.  Stimiamo  non  tenghino  fede  alcuna  ma  vivino  in  questa
libertk,  e  tutto  dalla  ignoranza  precede  perche  sono  molti  facili  a  persua-
dere  tutto  quello  hanno  i  cristani  circa  il  culto  divino  vendevano  fare  e
facevano  con  quello  stimolo  e  fervore  che  noi  facciamo.

Restami  a  narrare  a  V.  S.  M.  1'  ordine  di  detta  navigazione  circa  la
cosmographia.^     Come  di  sopra  dissi  partendo  dalli  prefati  scoperti  che

'  In  the  remainder  of  this  letter,  which  is  chiefly  cosmographical,  Verraz-
zano  shows  how  many  degrees  farther  westward  he  had  sailed,  than  the  kuow-
ledge  of  the  ancients  extended,  and  how  erroneous  were  their  notions  about
the  relative  proportions  of  land  and  water,  on  the  earth's  surface.  As  to  the
first  point,  the  whole  calculation  it  will  be  observed  is  based  upon  an  error  in
estimating  his  meridional  distance,  which  is  too  large  by  nearly  one  half,  and
of  course  his  difference  of  longitude  in  the  same  proportion;  but  this  is  no
disparagement  to  his  nautical  skill,  for  navigation  was  in  its  infancy  at  the
time  of  his  voyage,  and  he  had  not  the  aid  of  a  lunar  observation  or  a  chro-
nometer to  correct  his  dead  reckoning.  Nor  does  it  appear  from  the  letter
precisely  in  what  way  he  determined  his  ship's  progress  ;  hesp.ys  only  that  he
took  observations  of  the  sun  (probablj'  with  an  astrolabe  as  the  quadrant  had
not  then  been  invented),  and  that  he  kept  notes  of  his  daily  run  ;  but  the
whole  account,  and  particularly  his  deductions  respecting  the  relative
proportion  of  land  and  water,  prove  how  very  imjierfect  all  such  knowledge
then  was.  This  part  of  the  letter  is  now,  we  believe,  for  the  first  time,
translated  into  English.  In  giving  it  this  new  dress  we  have  endeavoured
to  keep  as  close  as  possible  to  the  original ;  but  such  is  its  obscurity  and
confusedness  of  expression,  that  we  do  not  venture  to  assert  we  have  derived
the  exact  meaning  of  every  passage ;  still  we  are  confident  that  no  essential
idea  has  been  omitted  or  mistranslated.  In  the  numerical  computations  the
fractional  parts  are  neglected,  as  they  were  found  to  be  often  wrong,  owing
most  likely  to  the  copyist's  carelessness,  and  as  they  are  not  important  to  the
right  understanding  of  the  statements.     Cogswell.

2  Some  very  summary  remai'ks  about  this  cosmographical  appendix  will
be  found  in  tlie  introduction.  If  it  was  the  object  of  the  present  book  to
illustrate  the  voyage  of  Verazzano,  not  that  of  Hudson,  the  cosmographical
appendix  ought  to  have  been  treated  at  great  length,  as  being  one  of  the
most  curious  monuments  of  geographical  literature.  Its  complete  elucida-
tion requires  however  a  very  a)nple  commentary  ;  and  it  would  be  un-
justifiable if  we  were  to  introduce  such  a  treatise  into  the  present  already
somewhat  ovcrgiuwn  volume.


DISCOVERY    OF    HUDSON'S    RIVER.  2"lo

observed  from  the  above  mentioned  desert  rocks,  which  lie  on  the
extreme  verge  of  the  west,  as  known  to  the  ancients,  in  the  me-
ridian of  the  Fortunate  Islands,  and  in  the  latitude  of  32  degrees
north  from  the  equator,  and  steering  a  westward  course,  we  had
run,  when  we  first  made  land,  a  distance  of  1200  leagues  or  4800
miles,  reckoning  according  to  nautical  usage  four  miles  to  a  league.
This  distance  calculated  geometrically,  upon  the  usual  ratio  of  the
diameter  to  the  circumference  of  the  circle,  gives  92  degrees ;  for
if  we  take  114  degrees  as  the  chord  of  an  arc  of  a  great  circle,  we
have  by  the  same  ratio  95  degrees  as  the  chord  of  an  arc  on  the
parallel  of  34  degrees,  being  that  on  which  we  first  made  land,  and
300  degrees  as  the  circumference  of  the  whole  circle,  passing
through  this  plane.  Allowing,  then,  as  actual  observations  show,
that  62j  terrestrial  miles  correspond  to  a  celestial  degree,  we  find
the  whole  circumference  of  300  degrees  as  just  given  to  be  18,759
miles,  which  divided  by  360,  makes  the  length  of  a  degree  of  lon-
gitude in  the  parallel  of  34  degrees  to  be  52  miles,  and  that  is  the
true  measure.  Upon  this  basis,  1200  leagues,  or  4800  miles
meridional  distance,  on  the  parallel  of  34,  give  92  degrees,  and  so
many  therefore  have  we  sailed  farther  to  the  west  than  was  known


son  situate  nel  fine  dello  occidente  alii  antichi  noto,  e  nel  meridiano  de-
scritto  per  le  insule  fortunate  in  latitudine  gradi  32  dallo  equatore  del
nostro  emisperio  navigando  alio  occidente  perfino  alia  prima  terra  tro-
vammo  leghe  1200,  che  contengono  miglia  4800,  computando  miglia
quattro  per  lega  secondo  lo  uso  marittimo  degli  navelerii  geometrice
giusta  la  proj^orzione  tripla  settima  del  diametro  alia  circonferenza  gradi
92  J,  ^,  ^,  ^,  4,  -g-,  con  cio  sla  che  essendo  la  corda  del  arco  del  massimo
circolo  gradi  114-6.  e  la  corda  del  paralello  gradi  34,  della  prima  terra
da  noi  trovata  alia  medesima  proporzione  gradi  95-2_^  S.^  A^  essere  si  nostra
r  ambito  di  tutto  il  circolo  gradi  300  3-  ii  che  dando  per  ogni  grade
come  confermano  la  maggiore  parte  di  quelli  che  hanno  specimentato
rispondere  in  terra  alia  proporzione  del  cielo  miglia  62J  fariano  miglia
18759-3  4^  quale  ripartite  in  360  perveneria  per  ciascheduno  miglio
521  -2.^  8^  B^^  e  tanto  vale  uno  grade  di  longitudine  in  detto  paralello  di
gradi  34.  Sopra  il  quale  per  la  retta  del  merideano  di  detti  scoperti  che
stanno  in  gradi  32  abbiamo  calculata  la  ragione  in  questo  che  le  dette
leghe  1200  per  retta  linea  in  gradi  34  da  occidente  in  oriente  abbiamo
trovato,  pervenia  adunque  per  quella  gradi  92.^^4^  4.  .6,^  4^  ^^  e  tanto  abbi-


S24  VERAZZANO'S    VOYAGE,    AND    FIRST

to  the  ancients.  During  our  voyage  we  had  no  lunar  eclipses  or
like  celestial  phenomenas,  we  therefore  determined  our  progress
from  the  difference  of  longitude,  which  we  ascertained  by  various
instruments,  by  taking  the  sun's  altitude  from  day  to  day,  and  by
calculating  geometrically  the  distance  run  by  the  ship  from  one
horizon  to  another ;  all  these  observations,  as  also  the  ebb  and
flow  of  the  sea  in  all  places,  were  noted  in  a  little  book,  which
may  prove  serviceable  to  navigators ;  they  are  communicated  to
your  Majesty  in  the  hope  of  promoting  science.

My  intention  in  this  voyage  was  to  reach  Cathay,  on  the  extreme
coast  of  Asia,  expecting,  however,  to  find  in  the  newly  discovered
land  some  such  an  obstacle  as  they  have  proved  to  be,  yet  I  did
not  doubt  that  I  should  penetrate  by  some  passage  to  the  eastern
ocean.  It  was  the  opinion  of  the  ancients,  that  our  oriental  Indian
ocean  is  one,  and  without  any  interposing  land;  Aristotle  supports
it  by  arguments  founded  on  various  probabilities ;  but  it  is  con-
trary to  that  of  the  moderns,  and  shown  to  be  erroneous  by  expe-
rience. The  country  which  has  been  discovered,  and  which  was
unknown  to   the  ancients,  is   another  world  compared  with  that


amo  navigato  piu  alio  occidente  e  non  fu  cognito  alii  antichi,  nel  detto
paralello  de  gradi  34,  questa  distanza  a  noi  fu  uota  per  la  longitudine
con  varj  strumente  navigando  senza  eclissi  lunari  o  altro  aspetto  per  al
moto  solare  pigliando  sempre  la  elevazione  a  qual  si  voglia  era  per  la
difFerenza  faceva  dall  uno  all'  altro  orizzonte  correndo  le  nave  geome-
trice,  ne  era  noto  lo  intervallo  dall  uno  meridiano  all'  altro  come  in  un
libretto  tutto  amplamente  notato  insieme  col  crescimento  del  mare  in
qualsivoglia  clima  ad  ogni  tempo  ed  ora  il  quale  non  inutile  stimo  abbia
a  essere  a  naviganti,  spero  meglio  per  la  teorica  conferilo  a  V.  S.  M.
Mia  intenzione  era  di  pervenire  in  questa  navigazione  al  Cathaj  alio
estremo  oriente  dell  Asia  pensando  trovare  tale  impediment©  di  nuova
terra  quale  ho  trovata,  e  se  per  qualche  ragione  pensava  quella  trovare
non  senza  qualche  futo  di  penetrare  alio  oceano  oriontale  essere  stimava
questa  opinione  di  tutti  gli  antichi  e  stata  credendo  certamente  il  nostro
oceano  orientale  di  India  uno  essere  senza  interpozeone  di  terra  queste
afFerma  Aristotile  argomentando  per  varie  similitudini  la  quale  opinione
e  molto  contraria  a  moderni  e  la  esperienza  falsa  imperocche  la  terra  e
stata  trovata  da  quegli  antichi  incognita  un  altro  mondo  a  rispetto  di
quella  a  loro  fu  noto — manifestamente  essere  si  mostra  e  di  maggiore


DISCOVERY    OF    HUDSON'S    RIVER.  225

before  knovm,  being  manifestly  larger  than  our  Europe  together
with  Africa  and  perhaps  Asia,  if  we  rightly  estimate  its  extent.
We  shall  now  be  briefly  explained  to  your  Majesty.  The  Spaniards
have  sailed  south  beyond  the  equator,  on  a  meridian  20  degrees
west  of  the  Fortunate  Islands,  to  the  latitude  of  54  ;  and  there  still
found  land.  Turning  about,  they  steered  northward  on  the  same
meridian,  and  along  the  coast  to  the  eighth  decree  of  latitude,  near
the  equator ;  and  thence  along  the  coast,  more  to  the  west  and
north-west,  to  the  latitude  of  21°,  without  finding  a  termination  to
the  continent.  They  estimated  the  distance  run  as  89  degrees,
Avhich,  added  to  the  20  first  run  west  of  the  Canaries,  make  109  •
degrees ;  and  so  far  west  they  sailed  fi'om  the  meridian  of  these
islands.  But  this  may  vary  somewhat  from  truth.  We  did  not
make  this  voyage,  and  therefore  cannot  speak  from  experience.
We  calculated  it  geometrically  from  the  observations  furnished  by
many  navigators  who  have  made  the  voyage,  and  afiirm  the  distance
to  be  1600  leagues,  due  allowance  being  made  for  the  deviations  of
the  ship  from  a  straight  course  by  reason  of  contrary  winds.  I
hope  that  we  shall  now  obtain  certain  information  on  these  points
by  new  voyages  to  be  made  on  the  same  coasts.


della  nostra  Europa,  della  Africa  e  quasi  della  Asia  se  rettamente  specu-
liamo  la  grandezza  di  quella  come  sotto  brevita  ne  faro  un  poco  di  dis-
corso  a  V.  S.  M.  Oltre  lo  equatore  distante  dal  meridiano  dalle  insule
fortunate  verso  lo  occidente  2;radi  20  A  2.  o.  _6.  o.  gU  spani  verso  lo  austro

°  47281*         ^

gradi  54,  hanno  navigato  dove  hanno  trovato  terra  senza  fine  tornando
poi  al  settentrione  giusta  la  detta  linea  meridionale  correndo  il  lito  per-
fino  in  8  gradi  propinqui  alio  equatore  pivi  alio  occidente  participando
piii  al  settentrione  giusta  la  detta  linea  meridionale  continuando  il  lito
perfino  in  gradi  21,  non  trovando  termine  gradi  89  2  4  i  0  ^  hanni  na-
vigato quali  giunti  con  gradi  20  A  2_^  6.  0^  fanno  gradi  110  A  A  8.  3  0
e  tanto  hanno  navigato  del  detto  meridiano  dalle  isole  fortunate  piii  alio
occidente  nel  paralello  gradi  21  della  altitudine,  questa  distanza  da  noi
non  fe  stata  sperimenta  per  non  avere  fatta  detta  navigazione  potria
variare  poco  piii  0  manco  abbiamo  quella  calcolata  geometrice  per  la
notizia  di  molti  navicalieri  che  la  hanno  frequentata  quali  afi'ermano
essere  leghe  1600  giudicando  per  lo  arbitrio  il  discorso  della  nave
secondo  la  qualita  del  vento  per  la  continua  navigazione  spero  in  breve


226  VERAZZ  Alto's    VOYAGE,    AND    FIBST

But  to  return  to  ourselves.  In  the  voyage  which  we  have  made
by  order  of  your  Majesty,  in  addition  to  the  92  degrees  we  run
towards  the  west,  from  our  point  of  departure,  before  we  reached
land  in  the  latitude  of  34,  we  have  to  count  300  leagues  which  we
ran  north-eastwaT'dly,  and  400  nearly  east,  along  the  coast,  before
we  reached  the  50th  parallel  of  north  latitude,  the  point  where  we
turned  our  course  from  the  shore  towards  home.  Beyond  this
point  the  Portuguese  had  already  sailed  as  far  norih  as  the  Arctic
circle  without  coming  to  the  termination  of  the  land.  Thus,  add-
ing the  degrees  of  south  latitude  explored,  which  are  54,  to  those
of  the  north,  which  are  66,  the  sum  is  120  ;  and  therefore  more
than  are  embraced  in  the  latitude  of  Africa  and  Europe, — for  the
north  point  of  Norway,  which  is  the  extremity  of  Europe,  is  in  71
north ;  and  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  which  is  the  southern  extre-
mity of  Africa,  is  in  35  south ;  and  their  sum  is  only  106.  And  if
the  breadth  of  this  newly  discovered  country  corresponds  to  its
extent  of  sea-coast,  it  doubtless  exceeds  Asia  in  size.  In  this  way
we  find  that  the  land  forms  a  much  larger  portion  of  our  globe
than  the  ancients  supposed  ;  who  maintained,  contrary  to  mathe-
matical reasoning,  that  it  was  less  than  the  water;  whereas  actual
experience  proves  the  reverse.     So  that  we  judge,  in  respect  to


ne  avremo  ottima  certitudine  dall'  altra  parte  noi  in  questa  nostra
navigazione  fatta  per  ordine  di  V.  S.  M.  oltra  i  gradi  92  che  dal  detto
meridiano  verso  lo  occidente  dalla  prima  terra  trovammo  gradi  34
navigando  leghe  300  infra  oriente  e  settentrione  leghe  400  quasi  alio
oriente  continue  il  lito  della  terra  siamo  pevenuti  per  infino  a  gradi  50,
lasciando  la  terra  che  pitl  tempo  fa  trovoruo  li  Lusitani  quali  seguimo
piu  al  settentrione  pervenendo  sino  al  circulo  artico  il  fine  lasciendo
incognito.  Giunta  adunque  la  latitudiue  settentrionale  con  la  merideonale
videlicet  i  gradi  54  con  le  gradi  66  fanno  gradi  120  che  tanto  contiene
di  latitudine  la  Africa  con  la  Europa  perche  giuugendo  lo  estremo  della
Europa  che  souo  i  limiti  di  Norvegia  che  stanno  in  gradi  71  con  lo
estremo  dell'  Africa  che  e  il  promontori  di  capo  di  Buona  Speranza  in
gradi  35,  faranno  solo  gradi  106  e  se  lo  equestre  di  detta  terra  in  parte
corrosponde  al  lito  marittimo  non  e  dubbio  di  grandezza  la  Asia  ecceda
in  tal  forma  troviamo  il  globo  della  terra  molto  maggiore  non  hanno
tenuto  gli  antichi  a  ripugnanza  matematici  quelle  rispetto  alia  acqua
sia  minima  il  che  per  esperienza  lo  opposite  veggiamo  e  quante  alio


DISCOVERY    OF    HUDSON'S    RIVER.  227

extent  of  surface,  the  land  covers  as  much  space  as  the  water.
And  I  hope  more  clearly  and  more  satisfactorily  to  point  out  and
explain  to  your  Majesty  the  great  extent  of  that  new  land,  or  new
world,  of  which  I  have  been  speaking.

The  continent  of  Asia  and  Africa,  we  know  for  certain,  is  joined
to  Europe  at  the  north,  in  Norway  and  Russia;  which  disproves
the  idea  of  the  ancients,  that  all  this  part  had  been  navigated,  from
the  Cembric  Chersonesus  eastward  as  far  as  the  Caspian  Sea.
They  also  maintained  that  the  whole  continent  was  surrounded  by
two  seas  situate  to  the  east  and  west  of  it ;  which  seas,  in  fact,  do
not  surround  either  of  the  two  continents  ;  for,  as  we  have  seen
above,  the  land  of  the  southern  hemisphere,  at  the  latitude  of  54,
extends  eastwardly  an  unknown  distance  ;  and  that  of  the  northern,
passing  the  66th  parallel,  turns  to  the  east,  and  has  no  termination
as  high  as  the  70th.

In  a  short  time,  I  hope,  we  shall  have  more  certain  knowledge
of  these  things,  by  the  aid  of  your  Majesty,  whom  I  pray  Almighty
God  to  prosper  in  lasting  glory,  that  we  may  see  the  most  import-
ant results  of  this  our  cosmography  in  the  fulfilment  of  the  holy
words  of  the  Gospel.


area  corporale,  di  spazio  non  meno  la  terre  che  la  acqua  possedere
giudichiamo  come  alia  presenza  meglio  spero  e  con  piii  ragione  espe-
rimentare  e  mostrare  a  V.  S.  M.  tutta  quella  nuova  terra  o  nuovo  mondo
che  disopra  abbiamo  narrato  contiene  Insieme  congiungeudo  alia  Asia
ed  Africa  et  che  sappiamo  certo  porria  giungere  alia  Europa  con  la
Norvegia  e  Russia  che  sarebbe  falso  secondo  gli  antichi  quali  dal  pro-
montorio  de  cimbri  quasi  tutto  11  settentrionale  decono  essere  stato
navigato  alto  oriente  circuendo  circa  il  mare  caspio  il  medesimo  afFer-
mano  resterebbe  adunque  solo  interclusa  da  due  mari  situati  dallo
orieutale  ed  occidentale,  e  equelle  due  ne  chiude  1'  uno  e  1'  altro  perche
oltre  a'  gradi  54  della  equinoziale  verso  lo  austro  s'  estende  alio  oriente
per  lungo  spazio  e  dal  settentrionale  passando  i  gradi  66.  Seque  tor-
nando  in  verso  lo  oriente  giungende  perfino  a  gradi  70.  Spero  con  lo
ajuto  di  V.  S.  M.  ne  avremo  in  breve  migliore  certitudine,  la  quale  Dio
omnipossente  prosper!  in  diuturna  fama  ad  causa  veggiarao  ottime  fine
di  questa  nostra  cosmografia  che  si  adempie  la  sacra  voce  dello  evan-


228  VERAZZANO'S    VOYAGE,    ETC.

On  board  the  ship  Dolphin,  in  the  port  of  Dieppe  in  Normandy,
the  8th  of  July,  1524.

Your  humble  servitor,

Janus  Verrazzanus.


gelio — nella  nave    Delphina   iu   Normandia   in   porto    di    Diepa    a    di

8  Luglio,  1524.

Hurailis  Servitor,

Janus  Vekrazzanus.


QQCi


WRITINGS    OF    WILLIAM     BARENTZ    IN    HUDSON'S
POSSESSION.

(PUKCHAS    HIS    PiLGKIMES,  V.  iii,  jjp.    518-20.)


I  thought  good  to  adde  hither  for  Barents  or  Barentsons  sake,
certaine  notes  which  I  have  found  (the  one  translated,  the  other
written  by  him)  amongst  Master  Hakluyts  Paper.


This  was  written  by  William  Barentson  in  a  loose  paper,

which  was  lent  mee  by  the  Reuerend  Peter  Plantius  in

Amsterdam,  March  the  seueu  and  twentieth,  1609.

The  foure  and  twentieth  of  August,  stilo  nouo,  1595,  wee  spake
with  the  Samoieds,  and  asked  them  how  the  land  and  sea  did  lye
to  the  east  of  Way-gates.  They  sayd,  after  fine  dayes  iourney
going  north-east,  wee  should  come  to  a  great  sea,  going  south-east.
This  sea  to  the  east  of  Way-gats  they  sayd  was  called  Marmoria,
that  is  to  say,  a  calme  sea.  And  they  of  Ward-house  haue  told  vs
the  same.  I  asked  them  if  at  any  time  of  the  yeere  it  was  frozen
ouer  ?  They  sayd  it  was.  And  that  sometimes  they  passed  it
with  sleds.  And  the  first  of  September  1595,  stilo  nouo,  the  Russes
of  the  lodie  or  barke  affirmed  the  same ;  saying,  that  the  sea
is  sometimes  so  frozen,  that  the  lodies  or  barkes  going  sometimes
to  Gielhsidi  from  Pechora,  are  forced  there  to  winter ;  which
Gielhsidi  was  wonne  from  the  Tartars  three  yeeres  past.

For  the  ebbe  and  flood  there,  I  can  find  none ;  but  with  the
winde  so  runneth  the  streame.  The  third  of  September,  stilo  nouo,
the  winde  was  south-west,  and  then  I  found  the  water  higher  then
with  the  winde  at  north  north-east.  Mine  opinion  is  grounded  on  ex-
perience :  that  if  there  bee  a  passage,  it  is  small,  or  else  the  sea
could  not  rise  with  a  southerly  winde.  And  for  the  better  proofe  to
know  if  there  were  a  flood  and  ebbe,  the  ninth  of  September,  stilo


330  WRITINGS    OF    WILLIAM    BARENTZ

nouo,  I  went  on  shoare  on  the  sonth  end  of  the  States  Hand,  where
the  crosse  standeth,  and  layd  a  stone  on  the  biinke  of  the  water,
to  proue  whether  there  were  a  tide,  and  went  round  about  the
iland  to  shoote  at  a  hare  ;  and  returning,  I  found  the  stone  as  I  left
it,  and  the  water  neither  higher  nor  lowere  :  which  prooueth,  as
afore,  that  there  is  no  flood  nor  ebbe.


A  Treatise  of  Tver  Boty  a  Gronlander,  translated  out  of  the  Norsh

language  into  High  Dutch,  in  the  yeere  1500.     And  after  out  of  High

Dutch  into  Low  Dutch,  by  William  Barentson  of  Amsterdam,  who

was  chiefe  Pilot  aforesaid.     The  same  copie  in  High  Dutch

is  in  the  hands  of  lodocvs  Hondivs,  which  I  haue  seene.

And  this  was  translated  out  of  Low  Dutch  by  Master

William  Stere,  Marchant,in  the  yeere  1608,  for  the

vse  of  me  Henrie  Hudson.  William  Bareutsons

Booke  is  in  the  hands  of  Master  Peter

Plantivs,  who  lent  the  same  vnto  me.

Inprimis,  it  is  reported  by  men  of  wisedome  and  vnderstanding
borne  in  Gronland,  that  from  Stad,  in  Norway,  to  the  east  part  of
Island,  called  Horn-nesse,  is  seuen  dayes  sayling  right  west.

Item,  men  shall  know,  that  between  Island  and  Gronland  lyeth  a
rifFe  called  Gombornse-skare.  They  were  wont  to  haue  there  pas-
sage from  Gronland.  But  as  they  report,  there  is  ice  vpon  the
same  rifFe,  come  out  of  the  long  north  bottome,  so  that  we  cannot
■vse  the  same  old  passage,  as  they  thinke.

Item,  from  Lono-nesse,  on  the  east  side  of  Island,  to  the  aboue-
said  Horn-nesse,  is  two  dayes  sayle  to  the  Brimstone  Mount.

Item,  If  yoti  goe  from  Bergen  in  Norway,  the  course  is  right
west,  till  you  bee  south  of  Roke-nesse  in  Island,  and  distant  from
it  thirteene  miles,  or  leagues.  And  with  this  course  you  shall
come  vnder  that  high  land,  that  layeth  in  the  east  part  of  Grone-
land,  and  is  called  Swafster.  A  day  before  you  come  there,  you
shall  haue  sight  of  a  high  mount,  called  Huit-sarke  ;  and  betweene
Whitsarke  and  Groneland  lyeth  a  head-land,  called  Hernoldus
Hooke ;  and  thereby  lyeth  an  hauen,  where  the  Norway  merchant
ships  were  wont  to  come  ;  and  is  called  Sound  Hauen.

Item,  if  a  man  will  sayle  from  Island  to  Gronland,  hee  shall  set


IN  Hudson's  tossession.  231

his  course  to  Snofnesse,  which  is  by  west  Roke-nesse  thirteene
miles  or  leagues,  right  west,  one  day  and  nights  sayling,  and  after
south-west  to  shun  the  ice  that  lyeth  on  Gombornse-skare ;  and
after  that  one  day  and  night  north-west.  So  shall  hee  with  this
course  fall  right  with  the  abouesayd  Swafster,  which  is  high  land,
vnder  which  lyeth  the  aforesayd  head-land,  called  Hernoldus
Hooke,  and  the  Sound  Hauen.

Item,  the  easter  dorpe  of  Groneland  lyeth  east  from  Hernoldus
Hooke,  but  neere  it,  and  is  called  Skagen  Ford,  and  is  a  great  vil-
lage,

Item,  from  Skagen  Ford  east  lyeth  a  hauen  called  lieare  Ford  ;
it  is  not  dwelt  in.  In  the  mouth  thereof  lyeth  a  riffe,  so  that  great
shijjs  cannot  harbour  in  it.

Item,  there  is  great  abundance  of  whales  ;  and  there  is  a  great
fishing  for  the  killing  of  them  there,  but  not  without  the  bishop's
consent,  which  keepeth  the  same  for  the  benefit  of  the  cathedrall
church.  In  the  hauen  is  a  great  swalth  ;  and  when  the  tide  doth
runne  out,  all  the  w^hales  doe  runne  into  the  sayd  swalth.

Item,  east  of  Beare  Ford  lyeth  another  hauen,  called  Allabong
Sound  ;  and  it  is  at  the  mouth  narrow,  but  farther  in  very  wide  :
the  length  whereof  is  such,  that  the  end  thereof  is  not  yet  knowne.
There  runneth  no  streame.  It  lyeth  full  of  little  iles.  Fowles
and  oxen  are  there  common  :  and  it  is  playne  land  on  both  sides,
growne  ouer  with  greene  grasse.

Item,  east  from  the  icie  mountajne  lyeth  an  hauen,  called
Fendebother;  so  named,  because  in  Saint  Olafes  time  there  was  a
ship  cast  away,  as  the  speach  hath  beene  in  Groneland,  in  which
ship  was  drowned  one  of  Saint  Olafes  men,  with  others  ;  and  those
that  were  saued  did  burie  those  that  were  drowned,  and  on
their  graues  did  set  great  stone  crosses,  which  wee  see  at  this
day.

Item,  somewhat  more  east,  toward  the  ice  mountayne,  lyeth  a
high  land,  called  Corse  Hought,  vpon  which  they  hunt  white
beares,  but  not  without  the  bishops  leaue,  for  it  belongeth  to  the
cathedrall  church.  And  from  thence  more  easterly,  men  see
nothing  but  ice  and  snow,  both  by  land  and  water.

Now  wee  shall  returne  againe  to  Hernoldus  Hooke,  where  we
first  began  to  come  to  the  first  towne  that  lyeth  on  the  east  side  of


232  WRITINGS    OF    WILLIAM    BARENTZ

Hernoldus  Hooke,  called  Shagen  Ford  :  and  so  we  will  write  the
names  of  all  that  lye  on  the  west  side  of  the  ford  or  sound.

Item,  west  from  Hernoldus  Hooke  lyeth  a  dorpe  called  Kodos-
ford,  and  it  is  well  built :  and  as  you  sayle  into  the  sound,  you
shall  see  on  the  right  hand  a  great  sea  and  a  marsh,  and  into  this
sea  runneth  a  great  streame  :  and  by  the  marsh  and  sea  standeth
a  great  church,  on  which  the  holy  crosse  is  drawne,  of  colour
white  :  it  belongeth  to  Enelnesse  de  Hokesong,  and  the  land  to
Peters  Wike.

Item,  by  Peters  Wike  lyeth  a  great  dorpe,  called  Wartsdale,  by
Avhich  lyeth  a  water  or  sea  of  twelue  miles  or  leagues  ouer,  in
which  is  much  fish  :  and  to  Peterswike  church  belongeth  Warts-
dale Boy  or  Towne  and  the  villages.

Item,  neere  this  boy  or  towne  lyeth  a  cloyster  or  abbey,  in  which
are  canons  regular ;  it  is  dedicated  to  Saint  Olafes  and  Saint
Augustines  name.  And  to  it  belongeth  all  the  land  to  the  sea-side,
and  toward  the  other  side  of  the  cloyster.

Item,  next  Godosford  lyeth  a  ford,  called  Rompnes  Ford  :  and
there  lyeth  a  cloyster  of  nuns  of  Saint  Benedicts  order.

Item,  this  cloyster,  to  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  and  to  Wegen
Nerke,  was  dedicated  to  Saint  Olafe  the  king.  In  this  ford  lye
many  small  iles.  And  to  this  cloyster  belongeth  halfe  the  ford
and  the  church.  In  this  sound  are  many  warme  waters.  In  the
winter  they  are  intollerable  hot,  but  in  the  summer  more  moderate  ;
and  many  bathing  in  them  are  cured  of  many  diseases.

Item,  between  Rompnes  and  the  next  sound,  lyeth  a  great
garden,  called  Vose,  belonging  to  the  king.  There  is  also  a  costly
church  dedicated  to  Saint  Nicholas.  This  church  had  the  king
before  this.     Neere  it  lyeth  a  sea  of  fresh  water,  called  ,

in  which  is  great  abundance  of  fish,  without  number.  And  when
there  falleth  much  rayne,  that  the  waters  doe  rise  therewith  and
after  fall  againe,  there  remayneth  vpon  the  land  much  fish  drie.

Item,  when  you  sayle  out  of  Emestnes  Ford,  there  lyeth  an  inlet,
called  South-woders  Wike ;  and  somewhat  higher  in  the  same
sound,  and  on  the  same  side,  lyeth  a  little  cape,  called  Bloming ;
and  beyond  that  lyeth  another  inwike,  called  Granwike ;  and
aboue  that  lyeth  a  garden,  called  Daleth,  which  belongeth  to  the
cathedrall  church.     And  on  the  right  hand,  as  you  sayle  out  of  the


IN  Hudson's  possession.  233

same  sound,  lyetli  a  great  wood,  which  pertayneth  to  the  church,
where  they  feede  all  their  cattell,  as  oxen,  kine,  and  horses.  And
to  the  church  pertayneth  the  sound  of  Emestnes  Ford.  The  high
land  lying  by  Emestnes  Ford  is  called  the  Ramos  hayth  :  so  called,
because  that  on  those  hills  doe  runne  many  roe  deere,  or  reyne
deere,  which  they  vse  to  hunt,  but  not  without  the  bishops  Icaue.
And  on  this  high  land  is  the  best  stone  in  all  Groneland.  They
make  thereof  pots,  because  fire  cannot  hurt  it.  And  they  make  of
the  same  stone  fattes  or  cisternes,  that  will  hold  ten  or  twelue
tunnes  of  water.

Item,  west  from  this  lyeth  another  high  land,  called  the  Long
High  Land  :  and  by  another  called  ,    whereon  are   eight

great  orchards,  all  belonging  to  the  cathedrall  church.  But  the
tenths  thereof  they  give  to  Warsedall  church.

Item,  next  to  this  sound  lyeth  another  sound,  called  Swalster
Ford,  wherein  standeth  a  church,  called  Swalster.  This  church
belongeth  to  all  this  sound,  and  to  Romse  Ford,  lying  next  it.  In
this  sound  is  a  garden  belonging  to  the  king,  called  Saint
Henlestate.

Item,  next  to  that  lyeth  Ericks  Ford ;  and  entring  therein  lyeth
an  high  land  called  Ericks  Hought,  which  pertayneth  the  one
halfe  to  Deuers  Keike,  and  is  the  first  parish  church  on  Groneland,
and  lyeth  on  the  left  hand  as  you  sayle  into  Ericks  Ford  :  and
Deuers  Kerke  belongeth  all  to  Meydon  Ford,  which  lyeth  north-
west from  Ericks  Ford.

Item,  farther  out  then  Ericks  Ford  standeth  a  church,  called
Skogel  Kerke,  which  belongeth  to  all  Medford.  And  farther  in  the
sound  standeth  a  church,  called  Leaden  Kerke.  To  this  church
belongeth  all  thereabout  to  the  sea,  and  also  on  the  other  side  as
farre  as  Bousels.  There  lyeth  also  a  great  orchard,  called  Grote
Lead,  in  which  the  gusman  (that  is,  a  chiefe  or  bayliff'e  ouer  the
boores)  doth  dwell.

And  farther  out  then  Ericks  Ford  lyeth  a  ford  or  sound,  called
Fossa,  which  belongeth  to  the  cathedrall  church :  and  the  sayd
Fossa  Sound  lyeth  as  men  sayle  out  towards  Ericks  Ford;  and  to
the  north  of  it  lye  two  villages,  the  one  called  Euer-boy,  and  the
other  Forther-boy,  because  they  lye  so.

Item,    from  thence  farther  north  lyeth  Breda  Ford,   and  after

30


234  WRITINGS    OF    WILLIAM    BARENTZ

that  Lormont  Ford  from  that  west,  and  from  Lormont  Ford  to  the
west  is  Ice  Dorpe.  All  these  are  places  built,  and  in  them  dwell
people.

Item,  from  the  easter  builded  land  to  the  wester  dorpe,  is  twelue
miles  or  leagues  ;  and  the  rest  is  all  waste  land.  In  the  dorpe,  in
the  west,  standeth  a  church,  which  in  time  past  belonged  to  the
cathedrall  church,  and  the  bishop  did  dwell  there.  But  now  the
Skerlengers  haue  all  the  west  lands  and  dorps.  And  there  are
now  many  horses,  oxen,  and  kine,  but  no  people,  neither  Christian
nor  heathen ;  but  they  were  all  carryed  away  by  the  enemie,  the
Skerlengers.

All  this  before  written  was  done  by  one  luer  Boty,  borne  in
Gronland,  a  principall  man  in  the  Bishops  Court,  who  dwelt  there
many  yeeres,  and  saw  and  knew  all  these  places.  He  was  chosen
by  the  whole  land  for  captayne,  to  goe  with  ships  to  the  west  land,
to  driue  away  their  enemies,  the  Skerlengers.  But  hee  coraming
there,  found  no  people,  neither  Christian  nor  heathen,  but  found
there  many  sheepe  running,  being  wilde,  of  which  sheepe  they
tooke  with  them  as  many  as  they  could  carrie,  and  with  them
returned  to  their  houses.  This  beforenamed  Indo  Boty  was
himselfe  with  them.

To  the  north  of  the  west  land  lyeth  a  great  wildernesse,  with
clifes  or  rockes,  called  Hemel  Hatsfelt.  Farther  can  no  man
sayle,  because  there  lye  many  swalgen  or  whirlepooles,  and  also
for  the  water  and  the  sea.

Item,  in  Groneland  are  many  siluer  hills,  and  many  white  beares
with  red  patches  on  their  heads  ;  and  also  white  hawkes,  and  all
sorts  of  fish,  as  in  other  countries.

Item,  there  is  marble  stone  of  all  colours,  also  zeuell  stone  or  the
load  stone,  which  the  fire  cannot  hurt,  whereof  they  make  many
vessels,  as  pots,  and  other  great  vessels.

Item,  in  Groneland  runneth  great  streames,  and  there  is  much
snow  and  ice  :  but  it  is  not  so  cold  as  it  is  in  Island  or  Norway.

Item,  there  grow  on  the  high  hills,  nuts,  and  acornes,  which  are
as  great  as  apples,  and  good  to  eate.  There  groweth  also  the
best  whcate  that  can  grow  in  the  whole  land.

This  sea  card  was  found  in  the  iles  of  Fero  or  Farre,  lying
betweene  Shot-land  and  Island,  in  an  old  reckoning  booke,  written


IN    HUDSON  S    POSSESSION.  235

aboue  one  hundred  yeeres  agoe  ;  out  of  which  this   also  was  all
taken.

Item,  Punnus  and  Potharse  haue  inhabited  Island  certayne
yeeres,  and  some  times  haue  gone  to  sea,  and  haue  had  their  trade
in  Groneland.  Also  Punnus  did  giue  the  Islanders  their  lawes,
and  caused  them  to  bee  written ;  which  lawes  doe  continue  to  this
day  in  Island,  and  are  called  by  name  Punnus  lawes.


VAN     DER     DONCK'S     OBSERVATIONS     ABOUT     THE

WAMPUM  OR  BEAD  MONEY  OF  THE  INDIANS,

MENTIONED  BY  HUDSON.

(from  n.  y,  hist,  soc,  n.  s.,  v.  i,  p.  206.)


That  there  should  be  no  miserly  desire  for  the  costly  metals
among  the  natives,  few  will  believe  :  still  it  is  true,  the  use  of  gold
and  silver,  or  any  metallic  coin,  is  unknown  among  them.  The
currency  which  they  use  in  their  places  to  which  they  resort,  is
called  wampum,  the  making  and  preparing  of  which  is  free  to  all
persons.  The  species  are  black  and  white  ;  but  the  black  is  worth
more  by  one  half  than  the  white.  The  black  wampum  is  made
from  conch  shells,  which  are  to  be  taken  from  the  sea,  or  which
are  cast  ashore  from  the  sea  twice  a  year.  They  strike  off  the  thin
parts  of  those  shells,  and  preserve  the  pillars  or  standards,  which
they  grind  smooth  and  even,  and  reduce  the  same  according  to
their  thickness,  and  drill  a  hole  through  every  piece,  and  string
the  same  on  strings,  and  afterwards  sell  their  strings  of  wampum
in  that  manner.  This  is  the  only  article  of  moneyed  medium
among  the  natives  with  which  any  traffic  can  be  driven ;  and  it  is
also  common  with  us  in  purchasing  necessaries,  and  carrying  on
our  trade.  Many  thousand  strings  are  exchanged  every  year  for
peltries,  near  the  sea-shores,  where  the  wampum  is  only  made,  and
where  the  peltries  are  brought  for  sale.


236  TITLE    AND    PROLF.GOMENA    TO    THE


TITLE  AND  PROLEGOMENA  TO   THE  FIRST  EDITION
OF  THE  DETECTIO  FRETI.


Descriptio  ac  delincatio  Gcngraphica  Dctectionis  Freti.  Si've
Transitvs  ad  Occasuni,  supra  terras  Americanas,  in  Chinam
atq:  Japonem  ducturi,  Recens  investigati  ab  M.  Henrico
Hudsono  Anglo.  Item,  Narratio  Ser'^°.  Regi  Hispanice  facta,
super  tractu,  in  quinta  Orbis  terrarum  parte,  cui  Avstralice
Incognitce  nometi  est,  recens  detecto,  per  Cap'itaneum  Petrum
Ferdinandez  de  Quir.  Vnd  cum  descriptioie  Terns  Sanioie-
darvm  et  Tingoesinrvm,  in  Tartaria  ad  Ortum  Freti  Waygats
sitce  nuperq :  Imperio  Moscovitarum  subactce.  Amsterodami,
Ex  officina  Hesselij  Gerardi.     Anno  1612.

Hue  quicunq.  novas  ardes  cognoscere  terras,

Hue  adeas,  atq.  isto  fonte  levato  sitim.
Hie  liber  extremes  Boreaj  Cauriq.  recessus,

Et  freta  iam  nautis  pervia  nosse  dabit.
Pervia  ;  quid  renuis  ?  possunt,  qui  posse  vidcntur.

Et  maiora  dedit  sapi  videre  Deus.
Si  tamen  addubitas,  turn  tu  te  confer  ad  Austrum,

Et  lege  queis  certam  fas  adhibere  fidera.


IN    TRACTATUS    SEQUENTES    PROLEGOMENA    AD    LECTOREM.

LvcRi  et  iitilitatis  spes  animos  hominum  numquam  non  excitavit
ad  peregrinas  regiones  nationesq'  lustrandas.  Ita  pretiosae  illse
nobis  a  mercatoribus  Russis  allatre  pelles  mercatores  nostrates  in-
flammarunt  acin  quadam  cupidine  incognitas  nobis  ipsorum  terras,
si  fieri  posset,  peragrandi.  Profuit  ipsis  quadam  tenus  hac  in
parte  iter  quoddam  a  Russis  conscriptum,  Moscovia  Colmogroviam,
atque  inde  Petzoram  (ubi  incolse  anno  Christi  1518  Christianam
fidem  amplexi  sunt),  hinc  porro  ad  fluvium  Obi,  pauloque  ulterius


FIRST    EDITION     OF    UKTECTIO    FKETl.  237

ducens.  Quod  quidem  plnrima  falsa  veris  admiscet,  puta  de
Slatibala  anu  ilia  (ut  fertur)  aurea,  eiusque  filijs,  nee  non  monstu-
iosis  illis  trans  ipsum  Obi  hominibus.  Transtulit  vero  dcscrip-
tionem  banc  Russicam,  eamque  suis  de  regionibus  Moscovitarum
libris  inseruit  Sigismundus  ab  Herberstein,  Imperatovis  Maximi-
liani  Orator.  Ediditque  postea  tabulam  Russise  Antonius  quidam
Widus,  adjutus  ab  Joanne  a  Latski,  Pi'incipe  quondam  Russo,  &
ob  tumullus  post  obituin  Magni  Duels  Joannis  Basilij  in  Russia
excitatos,  in  Poloniam  profugo.  Quae  tabula  J.  cuidam  Copero,
Senatori  Gedaensi,  dicata,  Russicisque  &  Latinls  descriptionibus
aucta,  in  lucem  prodijt  apud  Wildam  anno  Christ!  1555.  Aliam
quoque  Russite  tabulam  ediderunt  post  modum  Angli,  qui  in  tractu
illo  negotiati  fuerant.  Atque  hte  quidem  tabulae,  &  qualescunque
descriptiones,  quseque  prseterea  de  regionibus  hisce  comperta  sunt,
elicuerunt  Oliverium  quendam  Bunellum,  domo  Bruxella,  uti  con-
scenso  navigio  Euchusano,  animura  induxerit  eo  sese  conferre.
Vbi  aliquandiu  vagatus,  &  pellium  pretiosarum,  vitri  Russici,  crys-
tallique  montani,  ut  vocant,  adfalim  nactus,  omnium  opum  suarum
scaphse  commissarum  in  undis  fluvij  Perzorse  triste  fecit  naufra-
gium.  Quae  tum  Anglorum,  tum  hujus  Bunelli,  qui  &  Costinsar-
cam  Novae  Zemloe  lustraverat,  navigationes,  cum  &  Batavis  nostris,
opum  Chincnsium  Cathaicarumque  odore  allectis,  animum  accen-
dissent,  Nobiles  ac  Prsepotentes  Provinciarum  Fa3deratarum  Or-
dines,  duas  naves,  ductore  Joanne  Hugonis  a  Linschot,  versus
Fretum  quod  vulgo  We3'gats,  totidemque  ductore  Guilielrao  Ber-
nard! suasu  D.  Petri  Plancij,  recto  supra  Novam  Zemblam  cursu
Scptemtrionem  versus  ituras,  destinarunt.  Et  Gullielmus  quidem,
cum  pervenisset  ad  altitudinem  graduum  77,  ac  apud  Insulas  Oran-
gasas  terram  inter  &  glaciem  esset  obsessus,  Calendis  August!
domum  reversus  est:  Linschotanus  vero  &  Fretum  ipsum  emesus
est,  &  50  ipsa  milliaria  ultra  illud  progressus,  tandem  &  ipse,  flan-
tibus  fere  perpetuis  aquilonibus,  temporisque  oportunitate  jam
lapsa,  coactus  ad  suos  revert!.  Anno  proxime  insecuto,  qui  fuit
Christ!  1595,  iterum  uterque  eo  cursum  instituit,  animo  signa  sua
ulterius  proferendi,  vel  &  navigationem  banc  feliciter  absolvendi.
Sed  enim  fiigoris  vehementia  &  immensis  glaciei  montibus  impe-
diti  spe  sua  frustrati  sunt,  neque  vel  ipsum  Fretum  potuere  trans-
mittere,    sed    ad    Insulam   Oidinum    cum   venissent    domuitionem


238  TITLE    AND    PROLEGOMENA    TO    THE

parare  coacti  sunt,  metuentes  videlicet,  ne  totum  Fretum  glacie
tandem  obstrueretur  Gulielmus  anno  1596,  tertium  repetito  cursu
non  paulo  quam  primo  itinere  longius  progressus,  navim,  coagmen-
tatis  e  glacie  montibus  superimpositam,  eo  quo  pervenerat  loci
destituit,  in  perpetuam  extremee  ad  Septemtrionem  navigationis
memoriam.  Cuius  veri  prodigiosan!  Historiam,  dolendum  interi-
tum,  turbae  que  nauticse  in  Hollandiam  reditum,  qui  volet,  ex  ipso-
rum  Ephemeridibus  publice  extantibus  discat,

Nos,  ut  qualemcunque  illam,  quam  mercatores  nostri  ex  itine-
ribus  jam  dictis  consecuti  sunt  regionum  istarum  notitiam,  quo  ad
fieri  potest,  promoveamus,  ex  hibernis  hie  narrationem  quamdam
super  novo  Russorum  in  Tartariae  partibus  dominata,  quae  prseter
descriptionem  Siberia,  situm  quoque  exponit  regionum  longe  trans
Obij  ad  Ortum  vergentium.

Adjunximus  huic  Siberi  Septemtrionaliorisq.  Tartariae  descrip-
tioni  tabulam  quamdam  omnium  illis  adjacentium  regionum  ex
idiomate  Russico  versam,  &  multis  in  partibus  cum  accuratis  Lins-
chotani  locorum  aliquot  delineationibus  concordantem.  In  qua
Russi  delinearunt  nobis  universum  ilium  Freto  Weygats  ab  ortu
adludentem  Oceanum,  &  simul  viam  inde  Meridionalem  Cathaiam
ducentem.  Sicci  autem  ilia  ipsa  via  videbitur  aequo  Septemtriona-
lia,  pro  ut  sane  ex  ipso  tabulae  adspectu  apparet :  veri  simili  tamen
est,  usque  ad  ipsum  Obi,  vel  alium  aliquem  majorem  fluvium  mari-
timo  itinere  perveniri  posse :  cum  Russi  oras  istas  navigijs  suis
obnaviget,  inde  que  vel  scaphis,  vel  &  terrestri  itinere,  tendant  in
mediterranea,  ubi  notabilia  multa  detegi  posse,  veri  simillimum  est.
Quoniam  vero  Fretum  Weygats  per  ipsam  quoque  anni  aestatem
tantum  ad  breve  tempus  apertum  est,  ut  constat  ex  Linschotani  &
Gulielmi  navigationibus,  difficilis  admodum  foret  haec  indagatio.
Videtur  enim  natura  cupiditari  nostrae  coercendae  glaciem  ibi  &
frigus,  ceu  repagula  quaedam  opposuisse.  Nee  obstantibus  tamen
hisce  tot  peritissimorum  naucleorum,  Gulielmi  Bernardi,  Jacobi
Heemskerckij,  Joannisque  Linschotani  exemplis,  &  parum  pros-
pecte  itineris  a  Kerchovio  quodam,  nomine  Isaaci  Lemerij,  in  eas
oras  facti  eventu,  ausi  sunt  imperiti  quidam  homines  apud  illustris-
simos  ordines  ac  rerum  maritimarum  Consiliarios  instare,  pro  obti-
ncndo  itineris  ad  Aquilonem  supra  Novam  Zemlam  de  integro
reperendi  commeatu  atque  diplomate,  temere  asserentes,  remissius


FIRST    EDITION    OF    DETECTIO    FRETI.  239

esse  frigiis  ad  80  &  85,  quam  ad  72,  altitudinis  gradus,  ac  prope
convenientes  cum  Helisseo  Rostino  doctore  Hanoviensi,  qui  ad  cal-
cem  libelli,  Foederatis  ordinibus  apud  Beigas  inscripti,  palam  ad-
firmat,  sestivo  tempore,  quo  proplus  polum  accesseris,  eo  esse  cali-
dius,  neque  posse  navigijs  uUum  a  frigore  glacieve  obstaclum
adferri.  Quin  existimabant  insuper  nostri  homines,  ut  quidem  prse
se  ferebant,  solem  in  extremo  Septemtrione  salem  potuis  genera-
turum  esse,  quara  glaciem  :  obliti  videlicet,  ipsum  solem,  qui  inibi
demum  operationes  suas  efficasissime  perficit,  ubi  radios  suos  ex
alto  directe  in  terram  exerit,  in  Aquilonaribus  illis  locis  tota  hieme,
ipsisque  adeo  23  hebdomadis  nunquam  splendere  :  quin  &  bonam
sestatis  partem  usqueadeo  deprimi,  ut  non  nisi  obliquis  radijs
terram  ipsam  illustret,  neque  brevi  illo  tempore,  quo  ad  gradus  28
in  ipso  tantum  meridie  supra  terrse  crepidines  elevatur,  fieri  posse
ut  illos  e  glacie  montes  dissolvat.  Hac  itaque  opinione  imbuti,
anno  superiore  1611  anchoram  illi  solverunt,  idque  initio  statim
veris,  ne  videlicet  impedirentur  a  glacie  per  sestatem  solvenda,
magnorumque  fluminum  ostijs  evornenda ;  quae  nulla  quidem  ipsis
occurrit,  sed  enim  mare,  in  quo  salem  se  inventuros  speraverent,
prgeter  opinionem,  sua  ipsius  glacie  tam  dense  invenerunt  adstric-
tum  ut  nihil  plane  memoria  dignum  officere  potuerint.  Quare
glacie  prsepediti,  littora  Nova  Zemla3,  ubi  et  Costensarcam  lustra-
runt,  legere,  indeque  accepto  non  levi  detrimento  Kildunam,  Lappise
Insulam  pefere,  resarciendae  ruinae  coacti  sunt.  Vnde  rursus
digressi  hibernatum  profecti  sunt  ad  littora  Novae  Francis,  sub  44
graduum  altitudine.  Vbi  quidam  eorum  Praefectus,  alioqui  fere  in
triclinio  nautico  deletescere  solitus,  cum  descendisset  in  terram,
barbarorum  sagittis,  una  cum  alijs  quinque  confectus  est,  longe
quidem  extra  suam  opinionem,  qua  persuasus  erat  se  per  extremum
Septemtrionem  longinquo  supra  Novam  Zemlam  cursu,  ad  pridem
quaesitas  Cathatam  Chinamque,  levi  negotio  perventurum.  Et  ex
hoc  comitatu  altera  navium  cum  Praefecto  suo  reversa  est,  altera
vero  Joannes  Cornelij  cognomento  Antropophagus,  valde  a  peritia
rei  nauticae  commendatus,  rursus  ad  Aquilonem  profectus  est,  qui
oportuno  tempore  plura  quam  hactenus  nobis  comperta  sint,  detoc-
turus  speratur,  cuj usque  navigationis  eventum  nos  brevi  narraturos
tibi  confidimus.'  Quonia  vero  etiam  post  navigationes  praedictas
Guilielmi  Bernard!,  viam  illam  aquilonarem  aliquoties  Angli  adhuc


240  TITLE    AND    PROLEGOMENA    TO    THE

tentaverant,  visum  fuit  ante  tviennium  D.  D.  Indicse  navigationis
Praefectis  eo  mittere  quendam  M.  Hudsonum  Anglum,  qui  cum
nullam  ad  Ortura  viam,  sed  ejas  vicem  Oceanum  invenlsset  glacie
prorsus  obstructum,  ad  Occasum  deflexit,  unde  sine  uUo  profectu
in  Angliam  appulit.  Emissus  autem  de  novo  ab  Anglis,  cursu
quidem  longe  prosperiore,  at  deteriore  tamen  successu  usus  est :
cum  enim  post  varios  labores  ultra  Teriam  de  Baccalaos  300,  cir-
citer  milliaria  Occasum  versus  emensus  esset,  iniblque  ad  altitu-
dine  graduum  52  jam  hibernasset,  &  ulterius  tendere  certus  esset,
ecce  non  tantum  ipse,  sed  &  omnis  eius  Senatus  (ut  sic  dixerim)
nauticus  scaphse  ab  importunis  nautis  impositus,  &  in  undas  de-
missus,  ipsi  sine  more  doraum  reversi  sunt.  Nos  vero  notas  ejus
ad  calcem  hujus  libelli  adjunximus,  certiora  per  naves  eo  jam
missas,  imo  optatum  de  Freto  prorsus  pervio  nuntiura  expectates.
Quae  naves  hoc  ipso  seternam  sibi  fama  ac  gloriam  paraturse  sunt :
tot  potentibus  vitis,  sagacissimisque  Naucleris  tot  jam  annos  com-
pendiosam  ad  Carthaiae,  Chinse,  Moluccarum,  Pernanorumque
populorum  divitias  adfectantibus  viam  :  inter  quos,  prseter  nos-
trates  (qui  in  Aquilone  &  Oriente  sua  ediderunt  specimina)  fuere
Martinus  Forbisherus  &  Joannes  Davisius,  qui  annis  Christi  1585,
86,  87,  inter  Terram  novam  atque  Groenlandiam  Septemtrionem
versus  currentes  pervenerunt  ad  gradus  72,  sed  glacie  prsepediti,
re  plane  infecta,  ad  sues  reversi  sunt.

Confirmatur  hsec  nuper  invent!  ab  Hudsono  supra  Terram  Novam
transitus  sive  Freti  spes,  Virginianorum  Floridanorumque  concor-
dibus  testimonijs,  diserte  adfumantium,  terras  suas  ab  Occasu
ffistivo  allui  vasto  Oceano,  in  quo  &  naves  Anglicanarum  similes
viderint.  Legere  quoque  est  apud  Josepbum  Acostam  cap.  12,
lib.  3,  natural.  Indite  Occident.  Histor.  Hispanos  sibi  habere  per-
suasum,  Thomam  Candium  Anglum  certam  habuisse  Freti  istius
notitiam.  Et  feruntur  Hispani  viam  banc  sedulo  occultare,  qua
eorum  nonnulli  post  expugnatas  a  se  Philippinas  in  Hispaniam
sunt  reversi.  Atque  hinc  adeo  est,  quod  Philippus  II,  ut  ex  fide
nobis  relatum  est  extruendam  curavit  validam  illam  arcem  ad  mare,
quod  vulgo  appellant  Vermeis,  supra  Novam  Granatam,  quo  vide-
licet impediret,  ne  aut  nostrates,  aut  alij  sui  hostes,  opes  illas
immensas,  quas  ad  mare  del  Zur  pacifice  possidet,  per  banc  viam
aliquando  venirent  direptum.     Quod  si  ergo  hsec  via  responduit


TITLE    AND    PROLEGOMENA,    ETC.  241

suis  principijs,  compendium  sane  hominibus  nostris  futura  est,  non
ad  Chinas  duntaxat,  Moluccas,  atque  Peruviam,  sed  ad  eas  etiam
gentes,  quse  Australem  Maris  del  Zur  tractum  incolunt,  perlustran-
das,  explorandumque  quosnam  inibi  portus  &  merces  invenire  sit.
Neque  defuturum  est  usquam  ijs,  qui  ad  iter  hoc  se  accinxerint,
nnde  refocillentur,  nauseamque  marinam  excutiant,  sive  ad  Insulas
illas  accedant,  quas  lustravit  Antistes  Quitensis  (de  quibus  constat
nobis  ex  relatione  nautse  cuisdam  nostrates,  Episcopi  in  itinere
comitis,  qui  &  Amplissimo  Barneveldio,  &  Indicse  navigationis
Praefectis  multa  hue  pertinetia  denarravit)  sive  ad  Continentem.
De  quo  tractu  exhibemus  tibi  discursum  seu  relationem  Ducis
cujusdam  Hispani,  sperantes  id  non  futurum  ingratum  ijs  qui  ad
commercia  in  ultimis  illis  Mundi  partibus  exercenda  adspirant,
qiiive  tenentur  globi  terrestris  &  Incolarum  ejus  magis  magisque
cognoscendorum  adfectu.  Cujus  quidem  cognitionis  studium  ut  in
animo  tuo  accrescat,  donee  solide  perficiatur,  utque  &  opes  tibi  &
immortalem  gloriam  adferat,  omnibus  votis  exopto.

Hesselius  Gerardus  Assumensis
Philogeographus.


242  TITLE    AND    PROLEGOMENA    TO    THE


TITLE     AND     PROLEGOMENA     TO     THE     SECOND
EDITION  OF  THE  DETECTIO  FRETL


Descriptio  ac  delineatio  Geographica  Detectionis  Freti.  Sive,
Transitus  ad  Occasum  supra  terras  Americanas,  in  Chinam
atq :  Japonem  ducturi,  Recens  investigati  ah  M.  Henrico
Hudsono  Anglo.  Item,  Exegesis  Regi  Hispanice  facta,  super
tractu  recens  detecto,  in  quinta  Orbis  parte,  cui  nomen,  Avstra-
lis  Incognita.  Cum  descriptione  Terr  arum  Samoiedartim,  et
Tingcesiorum,  in  Tartaria  ad  Ortiim  Freti  Waygats  sitarum,
nuperq  :  sceptro  Moscovitarum  adscitarum.  Amsterodami,  Ex
ojficina  Hcsselij  Gerardi.     Anno  1613.

I.IBER     AD     LKCTOKUM.

Qui  cupis  ignotas  Lector  cognoscere  terras,

Corpore  quas  fulgens  contegit  Vrsa  suo,
Et  simul  extremes  Boreas  Cauriq.  recessus,

Et  freta  iam  nautis  pervia  fluctivagis.
Quasq.  Samojedus  commutet  vellere  merces,

Quam  late  Moschus  proferat  Imperium.
Impiger  Hudsonius  freta  quse  petretraverit,  et  quae

Restat  adhuc  Batavis  gloria  Martigenis.
Me  pretio  parvo  redimas  animoq.  revolvas,

Sim  licet  exiguus  commoda  magna  feram.


AD    LECTOREM    PROLEGOMENA,   IN    TRACTATUS    SEQUENTES.

Vt  antehac  novae  terrarum  detectiones,  laboriosissimseque  naviga-
tiones,  tarn  Hispanorum,  quam  Anglorura,  necnon  Batavorum,
maximo  novitatum  studiosorum  oblectamine,  in  lucem  editae  fuere  :
Non  alienum  a  publico  commodo  duxi,  in  Theatrum  orbis  hac
tabulam  Preefecti  H.  Hudsonis  producere  de  navigatione  ipsius
American!,  in  Chinam,  &  Japan  :  maxime  cum  viderem  earn  a
prsestantissimis  viris  magnopere  expeti :   Ne  autem  ob  brevitatem,


SECOND    EDITION    OF    THE    DETECTIO    FRETI.  243

exiguitatemque  apud  nonnullos  vilesceret  opusculum  hoc  adjunxi
historiam  Ducis  Petri  Fernandez  de  Queiros,  quam  in  libello  sup-
plici  Regi  Hispanise  exhibito,  narrat  de  regionibus  Meridionalibus,
detectis  in  mari  del  Zur ;  earn  nonnulli  magni  fecerunt,  aliqui  qui-
bus  de  certitudine  rei  constat,  veram  esse  asserunt.  Octavius
Pisanus,  in  sua  totius  Orbis  tabula,  quam  inversa  delineatione,
circulo  comprehendit,  de  Regionibus  a  Petro  Fernandez  de  Queiros
detectis,  delineationem  suam  se  coparasse  ait,  a  Nauclero  quo-
dam,  statuitque  eas  a  parte  occidentali,  Limse,  cidado  de  los  reyos
in  Peru.  Viginti  quinque  gradus  in  longitudinem,  qui  superant
tricenta,  &  quinquaginta  miliaria  Germanica,  extenditurque  secun-
dum illius  delineationem,  plus  quam  quingenta  miliaria  Germa-
nica occidentem  versus,  at  versus  Meridiem  extenditur  usque  a
octogesimum  gradum  ab  ^quatore.  Sed  cum  sujieriori  Anno  ab
Illustri  Viro  Emanuele  a  figueiredo,  Geographise,  &  Hydrographise
Professore  Vlixbonae,  nunciatum  esset,  Petrum  Fernandez  a  Quei-
ros nihil  Geographise  dignum  prodidisse,  sibiq  :  relationem  tantum
obscuram  delatam  esse,  situ,  latitudine  regionum  carentem :  in-
super  hoc  adderet,  se  diligentius  inqusesiturum,  num  quid  apud
eum  esset,  quod  usui  esse  possit ;  &  adhuc  cum  esse  in  Curia  vol
Aula  Regia  Madritij,  nee  quid  certi  de  profectione  ejus  statutum
esse ;  Exemplar  Octavij  Pisani  secutus  non  sum,  maxime  cum  hie
ex  amicis  quidam,  affirmet  apud  se  esse  delineationem  Regionum,
aut  Insularum  novitu  detectarum  in  Mari  del  Zur,  quam  brevi
impetrabimus,  eamq :  cum  Octavij  Pisani  delineatione  conferemus.
Cum  vero  apud  Batavos  ferbuerit  aliquandiu  studium  investigandi
transitum,  in  Chinam  &  Japoniam,  eumque  tentarint  nonnulli  Sep-
temtrionem  versus,  nonnulli  per  Weygats  &  mare  Tartaricum,
operse  pretium  duxi,  in  publicum  proferre,  quse  a  Russis  proxima
loca  incolentibus  detecta  sunt.  Tabula  ab  Isaaco  Massa  ex  Idio-
mate  Russorum  translata,  ut  quid  de  oris  Somojedarum  sit  sentien-
dum  certo  constet.  Assiduse  etiam  navigationes  Cantabrorum,
Batavorum,  Anglorum  in  Septentrionum,  venatione  balaenarum,  &
cuniculorum  marinorum,  gaudentium,  quos  Morsas  idiomate  pro-
prio  Russi  nominant  videntur  quid  certi  promittere,  de  oris  Novae
Semlae,  Nieulandise,  usq  :  ad  Groenlandiam  adhuc  incognitis,  sed
de  futuris  contingentibus  non  est  determinata  Veritas.


344  LETTER    FROM    PRESIDENT   JEANNIN


A  LETTER  FROM  PRESIDENT  JEANNIN  TO  HENRY  IV

OF  FRANCE,  CONTAINING  AN  ACCOUNT  OF  HIS

NEGOCIATIONS     WITH     HENRY     HUDSON,

THROUGH     ISAAC     LE    MAIRE.

DATED    THE    HAGUE,    THE    21  ST    OF    JANUARY,     1609.


Sir, — Some  time  ago,  I  made,  by  your  Majesty's  order,  overtures
to  an  Amsterdam  merchant,  named  Isaac  Le  Maire,  a  wealthy
man  of  considerable  experience  in  the  East  India  trade.  He
offered  to  make  himself  useful  to  your  Majesty  in  matters  of  this
kind,  and  intends  to  form  (for  this  purpose)  an  association  with
some  other  merchants.  He  also  wishes  to  engage  the  services  of
some  mariners,  pilots,  and  sailors,  acquainted  with  northern  navi-
gation, whose  services  he  has  provisionally  retained.  He  has  now
repeatedly  urged  me  to  give  him  an  answer,  and  I  have  always
told  him  that  your  Majesty  could  not  come  to  any  decision  in  this
affair  before  it  had  been  settled,  whether  the  present  negotiations
to  obtain  a  truce  for  the  States  General  would  be  successful  or  not.


Sire, — J'ai  ci-devant  confere  par  commandement  de  votre  Majeste,  et
sur  les  lettres  qu'il  lui  a  plu  m'ecrire,  avec  un  marchand  d'Amsterdam,
nomme  Isaac  Le  Maire,  lequel  est  homme  riche  et  bien  entendu  au  fait
du  commerce  des  Indes  d'Orient,  desireux  d'y  servir  votre  Majeste,  sur
les  ouvertures  que  je  lui  en  ai  faites,  et  de  joindre  avec  lui  d'autres
marchands,  comme  aussi  des  pilotes,  mariniers  et  matelots  experimentes
en  telles  navigations,  qu'il  dit  avoir  empeches  de  prendre  parti  des  le
temps  que  je  lui  en  parlai.  Or,  comme  il  m'en  a  presse  plusieurs  fois,  je
lui  ai  toujours  dit  que  votre  Majeste  n'y  pouvait  prendre  aucune  resolu-
tion qu'apres  celle  des  Etats,  et  le  traite  de  treve  qu'on  poursuit  h
present  fait  ou  rompu  :  ce  qu'il  juge  etre  bien  veritable,  et  s'est  aussi


TO    HENRY    IV    OF    FRANCE,  245

Le  Maire  considered  this  to  be  perfectly  fair,  and  was  satisfied  with
the  answer.  But  a  few  days  ago  he  sent  to  me  his  brother,  to  in-
form me  that  an  English  pilot,  who  has  twice  sailed  in  search  of  a
northern  passage,  has  been  called  to  Amsterdam  by  the  East  India
Company,  to  tell  them  what  he  had  found,  and  whether  he  hoped
to  discover  that  passage.  They  had  been  well  satisfied  with  his
answer,  and  had  thought  they  might  succeed  in  the  scheme.  They
had,  however,  been  unwilling  to  undertake  at  once  the  said  ex-
pedition, and  they  had  only  remunerated  the  Englishman  for  his
trouble,  and  had  dismissed  him,  with  the  promise  of  employing
him  next  year,  1610.

The  Englishman,  having  thus  obtained  his  leave,  Le  Maire,  who
knows  him  well,  has  since  conferred  with  him,  and  has  learnt
his  opinions  on  these  subjects ;  with  regard  to  which  the
Englishman  had  also  held  intercourse  with  Plancius,  a  great
geographer  and  clever  mathematician.  Plancius  maintains,  ac-
cording to  the  reasons  of  his  science,  and  from  the  information
given  him,  both  by  the  Englishman  and  other  pilots,  who  have
been  engaged  in  the  same  navigation,  that  there  must  be  in  the
northern  parts  a  passage  corsesponding  to  the  one  found  near  the
south  pole  by  Magellan.     One  of  these  pilots  has  been  there,  three


contente  de  cette  reponse  ;  mais  11  m'envoya  ici  son  frere,  il  y  a  quelques
jours,  pour  me  faire  entendre  qu'un  pilote  anglois,  lequel  a  ete  deux
fois  en  mer  pour  rechercher  le  passage  du  nord,  auroit  ete  mande  a
Amsterdam  par  la  Compagnie  des  Indes  d'Orient,  pour  aj^prendre  de  lui
ce  qu'il  en  auroit  reconnu,  et  s'il  esperoit  de  trouver  ce  passage  ;  de  la
reponse  duquel  eux  etoient  demeures  forts  contents,  et  en  opinion  que
cette  esp6rance  pouvoit  reussir.  lis  n'avoient  toutefois  voulu  pour  lors
faire  la  dite  entreprise,  mais  contente  seulement  I'Anglois,  et  renvoy^
avec  promesse  qu'il  les  viendroit  trouver  en  I'aunee  suivante  1610.  Ce
cong6  lui  ayant  ete  donne,  Le  Maire,  qui  le  connoit  fort  bien,  auroit
depuis  confere  avec  lui,  et  entendu  ses  raisons,  dont  il  a  aussi  commu-
nique avec  Plancius,  qui  est  grand  geographe  et  bon  mathematicien,  le
quel  soutient,  par  les  raisons  de  son  art,  et  de  ce  qu'il  a  appris  tant  de
cet  Anglois  que  d'autres  pilotes  qui  ont  fait  la  meme  navigation,  tout
ainsi  que  du  cote  du  midi  on  a  trouve  en  la  mer  du  Sud,  approchant  le
pole  antarctique,  un  passage  qui  est  le  detroit  de  Magellan,  qu'il  y  en
doit  pareillement  avoir  un  autre  du  cote  du  nord.     L'un  des  pilotes,  qui


246  LETTER    FROM    PRESIDENT    JEANNIN

(thirteen)  years  ago,  engaged  in  the  same  search,  and  has  gone  as
far  as  Nova  Zemla,  which  is  situated  under  the  seventy-third
degree  of  latitude,  on  the  coast  of  the  sea  of  Tartary  towards  the
north.  This  pilot  has  declared  that  he  was  at  that  time  not  suf-
ficiently experienced,  and  that  instead  of  penetrating  into  the  open
sea,  which  is  never  frozen,  on  account  of  its  depth,  and  of  the
great  force  of  its  currents  and  waves,  he  kept  near  the  coast.  He
there  found  the  sea  frozen,  and  both  he  and  his  companions  were
prevented  from  penetrating  any  further,  and  were  obliged  to
return.

The  Englishman  also  reports,  that  having  been  to  the  north  as
far  as  eighty  degrees,  he  has  found  that  the  more  northwards  he
went,  the  less  cold  it  became ;  and  that  whilst  in  Nova  Zembla,
the  land  was  barren,  and  there  were  none  but  carnivorous  animals
of  prey,  like  bears,  foxes,  and  the  like,  he  had  found  under  the
eighty-first  degree  grass  on  the  ground,  and  animals  that  lived  on
it.  Plancius  confirms  this  by  scientific  reasons,  and  says,  that
near  the  pole  the  sun  shines   for  five  months   continually  ;  and,


fut  aussi,  il  y  a  trois^  ans,  employe  en  cette  meme  recherche,  et  passa
jusqu'a  Nova-Zembla,  qui  est  a  soixante-treize  degres  de  latitude  en  la
cote  de  la  mer  Tartarique,  tirant  au  nord,  a  declare  que,  pour  n'etre  lors
assez  experimente  en  cette  navigation,  au  lieu  d'entrer  avant  en  pleine
mer,  oii  elle  n'est  jamais  gelee  h  cause  de  la  profondeur  et  de  la  grande
impetuosite  de  ses  flots  et  vagues,  il  se  contenta  de  cdtoyer  les  bords,  ovl,
ayant  trouve  la  mer  gelee,  lui  et  ses  compagnons  furent  arretes  et
contraints  de  s'en  retourner  sans  passer  outre.

L'Anglois  a  encore  rapporte  qu'ayant  ete  du  cote  du  nord  jusqu'a
quatre-vingt-un  degres,  il  a  trouve  que  plus  il  approchoit  du  nord,  moins
11  y  avoit  de  froidure,  et  au  lieu  que  vers  Nova-Zembla  la  terra  n'etoit
couverte  d'herbe  et  n'y  avoit  sinon  des  betes  qui  vivent  de  chair  et  de
proie,  comme  ours,  renards  et  autres  semblables,  il  avoit  trouve,  esdits
quatre-vingt-un  degres,  de  I'herbe  sur  la  terre,  et  des  betes  qui  en  vivent :
ce  que  Plancius  confirme  par  raison,  et  dit  que  pres  du  pole,  le  soleil
luisant  sur  la  terre  cinq  mois  continuels,  encore  que  les  rayons  d'icelui


^  This  trois  ought  probably  to  be  treize.  The  expedition  meant  by  Jeannin
must  be  that  of  Barents  in  1596,  this  being  the  last  Dutch  expedition  to  the
north-east  previous  to  1009.


TO    HENRY    IV    OF    FRANCE.  247

although  his  rays  are  weak,  yet  on  account  of  the  long  time  they
continue,  they  have  sufficient  strength  to  warm  the  ground,
to  render  it  temperate,  to  accommodate  it  for  the  habitation  of  men,
and  to  produce  grass  for  the  nourishment  of  animals.  He
compares  it  to  a  small  fire,  which  is  but  lighted,  and  then
immediately  extinguished.  He  also  adds,  that  one  ought  not  to
be  satisfied  with  the  opinion  of  the  ancients,  who  considered  the
regions  round  the  poles  as  uninhabitable,  on  account  of  their  cold,
and  that  they  may  have  been  mistaken  in  this  respect,  as  much  as
they  have  been  with  regard  to  the  tropics,  which  they  also  con-
sidered as  uninhabitable  on  account  of  their  great  heat.  For  the
tropics  have  nevertheless  been  proved  to  be  habitable,  temperate,
fertile,  and  favourable  to  the  existence  of  man :  and  there  is  more
heat  on  the  borders  of  the  tropics  than  near  the  line.  For  this
reason,  Plancius  thinks  that  the  cold  increases  (as  you  proceed
from  the  north  pole),  and  is  greatest  under  the  seventieth  degree  ;
but  that  passing  nearer  to  the  pole  it  becomes  less.  Thus  the
Englishman  and  other  pilots,  who  have  gone  to  these  regions,  have
found  it  to  be ;  and  they  conclude,  that  to  find  the  northern
passage  with  greater  ease,  we  ought  not  to  sail  along  the  coasts  in


y  soient  foibles,  neanmoins,  a  cause  du  long  temps  qu'ils  y  demeurenfc,
ils  ont  assez  de  force  pour  echauffer  le  terroir,  et  le  rendre  tempere  et
commode  pour  I'habitation  des  hommes,  produire  herbe  et  nourrir  betail;
alleguant  cette  similitude  d'un  petit  feu  qui  ne  feroit  qu'etre  allume  et
aussitot  eteint.  II  y  ajoute  aussi  qu'il  ne  se  faut  arreter  a  I'opinion  des
anciens,  qui  estimoient  la  terre  pres  des  deux  poles  inhabitable  a  cause
de  sa  froidure,  et  qu'ils  se  peuvent  aussi  bien  tromper  qu'en  ce  qu'ils  ont
dit  la  zone  torride  etre  inhabitable  a  cause  de  sa  grande  chaleur,  qu'on
reconnait  neanmoins  par  experience  etre  habitee,  fort  temperee,  fertile,
et  commode  pour  la  vie  des  hommes,  et  qu'il  y  a  aussi  beaucoup  plus  de
chaleur  sous  les  tropiques  du  Cancer  et  du  Capricorne  que  sous  la  zone
torride  ;  et  par  cette  meme  raison,  Plancius  juge  que  la  froidure  croit,  et
est  toujours  plus  grande  jusqu'au  soixante-sixieme  degres,  mais  qu'en
passant  plus  outre  devers  le  pole,  elle  devient  moindre,  et  ainsi  Font
trouve  I'Anglois  et  d'autres  pilotes,  les  quels  ont  ci-devant  fait  tela
voyages,  dont  ils  concluent  que,  pour  trouver  le  passage  du  nord  avec
plus  de  facilite,  au  lieu  de  rechercher  les  cotes  de  la  mer  a  soixante-dix,


248        LETTER  FROM  PRESIDENT  JEANNIN

the  70,  71,  72,  and  73  degrees,  as  the  Dutch  have  done;  but
that,  on  the  contrary,  we  ought  to  advance  into  the  open  sea,  and
so  go  as  far  as  to  the  81,  82,  and  83  degrees,  or  even  further,  if
necessary;  because  the  sea  not  being  frozen  in  that  latitude,  they
trust  to  be  able  to  find  the  passage  ;  and  then  sailing  eastwards,  to
pass  through  the  Straits  of  Anian,  and  then  following  the  east
coast  of  Tartary,  so  go  to  the  Kingdom  of  Cathay,  to  China,  to  the
islands  of  Japan,  and  also  to  the  Spice  islands,  and  the  Philippines.
For  east  and  west  join  on  account  of  the  spherical  shape  of  our
earth.  This  whole  voyage,  both  out  and  home,  can  be  finished  in
six  months,  without  approaching  any  of  the  harbours  and  fortresses
of  the  King  of  Spain  ;  whilst  by  the  road,  round  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope,  which  is  now  in  common  use,  one  generally  requires  three
years,  and  one  is  besides  exposed  to  meet  and  to  fight  the
Portuguese.

He  proposed  to  me  in  his  overtures  with  regard  to  the  northern
passage,  that  your  Majesty  might  undertake  the  search  openly,  and
in  your  Majesty's  name,  as  a  glorious  enterprise,  or  else  under  the
name  of  some  private  man,  whose  success,  if  good,  would  not  fail


soixante-onze,  soixante-douze  ou  soixante-treize  degr^s,  comme  les  Hol-
landais  ont  fait  ci-devant,  il  se  faut  avancer  en  pleine  mer,  et  monter
jusqu'^  quatre-vingt-un,  quatre-vingt-deux  et  quatre-vingt-trois  degres,
ou  plus,  s'il  est  besoin,  es  quels  lieux  la  mer  n'etant  point  gelee,  ils  se
promettent  qu'on  pourra  trouver  ce  passage,  et  par  icelui,  en  tirant  vers
I'orient,  passer  le  detroit  d'Anian.  et  suivant  la  cote  orientale  de  Tar-
taric, aller  au  royaume  du  Cattay,  a  la  Chine,  aux  iles  du  Japon,  comme
aussi,  attendu  que  I'orient  et  roccident  aboutissent  Fun  a  I'autre,  a
cause  de  la  rondeur  de  la  terre,  aller  par  meme  moyen  aux  Moluques  et
aux  Philippines  ;  lequel  voyage,  et  toute  cette  navigation,  tant  pour
aller  que  pour  retourner,  pourroient  etre  faits  en  six  mois,  sans  approcher
d'aucuns  ports  et  forteresses  du  roi  d'Espagne  ;  au  lieu  qu'a  le  faire  par
le  cap  de  Bonne-Esperance,  qui  est  le  chemin  ordinaire  qu'on  tient  a
present,  on  y  met  ordinairement  pr^s  de  trois  ans,  et  si  on  est  sujet  aux
rencontres  et  incursions  des  Portugois.

II  me  proposoit  done  cette  ouverture  du  passage  du  nord  pour  savoir
si  votre  Majeste  auroit  agreable  de  I'entreprendre  ouvertement,  et  en  son
nom,  comme  chose  fort  glorieuse,  et  qui  lui  acquerroit  une  grande
louange  envers  la  posterite,  ou  bien  sous  le  nom  de  quelque  particulier,


TO    HENKY    IV    OF    FRANCE.  249

to  be  attributed  to  the  king.  Le  Maire  offered,  in  the  name  of  his
brother  Isaac,  to  furnish  the  vessel  and  the  crew,  unless  j-our
Majesty  should  wish  to  employ  some  of  her  own  men,  together
with  those  whom  he  would  send  out,  and  who  are  experienced  in
this  kind  of  navigation.  He  says,  that  to  execute  this  enterprise,
he  would  require  but  three  or  four  thousand  crowns  at  the  utmost,
which  money  he  wishes  to  obtain  from  your  Majesty,  because  he,
who  is  but  a  private  man,  would  not  lay  out  so  large  a  sum  ;  nor
does  he  dare  to  speak  about  it  to  any  one,  because  the  East  India
Company  fears  above  every  thing  to  be  forestalled  in  this  design.
Therefore,  Isaac  Le  Maire  would  not  converse  about  this  matter
■with  the  Englishman  except  in  secret.  He  also  adds,  that  if  this
passage  be  discovered,  it  will  greatly  facilitate  the  means  of
forming  an  association  to  traffic  with  all  these  countries  ;  and  that
more  people  will  engage  their  capital  in  the  new  society,  than  in
the  East  India  Company,  which  is  already  in  existence.  The  East
India  Company  will  not  even  have  a  right  to  complain,  because  the
charter  granted  to  them  by  the  States  General  authorises  them  to
sail  only  round  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  not  by  the  north.  Of
this  latter  passage  the  States  have  reserved  to  themselves  the  right


dont  on  ne  laisseroit  de  lui  attribuer  I'honneur  si  le  succes  en  etoit  bon,
oiFrant  de  la  part  de  son  frere,  de  fournir  le  vaisseau  et  les  hommes,  si
non  que  votre  Majeste  y  en  veuille  aussi  employer  quelques-uns  des
siens  avec  ceux  qu'il  y  mettra,  les  quels  sont  experimentes  en  tels
voyages,  disant  que,  pour  executer  cette  entreprise,  il  ne  faut  que  trols
ou  quatre  mille  ecus  au  plus,  lesquels  il  desire  tirer  de  votre  Majeste,
pour  ce  que  lui,  qui  n'est  qu'un  particulier,  n'y  voudroit  employer  cette
somme,  et  n'en  ose  communiquer  a  personne,  d'autant  que  la  Compagnie
des  ludes  d'Orient  craiot  sur  toutes  choses  qu'on  les  previeune  en  ce
dessein,  et  qu'a  cette  occasion  son  frere  n'avoit  oser  parler  a  I'Anglois
qu'en  secret.  II  dit  encore  que  si  ce  passage  est  trouve  et  decouvert,
qu'il  facilitera  bien  fort  le  moyen  de  faire  une  compagnie  pour  aller  en
tous  les  lieux  susdits,  et  que  plus  de  gens  y  mettront  leurs  fonds  qu'en
I'autre  qui  est  deja  faite,  sans  que  la  Compagnie  s'en  puisse  plaindre,
attendu  que  I'octroi  qu'elle  a  obtenu  des  Etats  n'est  que  pour  y  aller  du
cote  du  cap  de  Bonne-Esperance,  non  de  celui  du  nord,  dont  les  Etats  se
sont  reserves  le  pouvoir  de  disposer  au  cas  que  le  passage  puisse  en  etre


250  LETTEIl    FKOM    PRESIDENT    JEANNIN

of  granting  the  privilege  in  case  it  should  be  discovered.  And  in
order  to  encourage  some  bold  j^ilots  to  undertake  this  search,  they
l^romised  a  reward  of  80,000  livres  to  the  tirst  discoverer.

I  told  the  brother  of  Le  Maire  who  had  made  me  these
overtures,  and  I  have  also  written  to  him,  that  I  would  immediately
submit  the  matter  to  your  Majestj',  to  know  your  pleasure,  and  that  I
would  inform  him  of  it  as  soon  as  possible ;  for  he  says,  that  if  one
wishes  to  engage  in  this  voyage  in  the  present  year,  one  must
begin  it  in  March  at  the  very  latest,  if  any  success  is  to  hoped
from  it.  Others  who  have  before  begun  it  in  July,  have  suffered
greatly,  and  have  been  overtaken  by  the  winter.  Having  also
been  informed  that  Plancius  had  come  to  the  Hague  two  days
after  the  above  conversation,  I  invited  him  to  call  upon  me,  in
order  to  speak  with  him.  This  I  have  done,  without,  however,
letting  him  know  that  Le  Maire  had  made  overtures  to  me,  for  Le
Maire  wishes  nobody  to  be  aware  of  it.  Therefore  I  have  spoken
to  Plancius  only  in  the  way  of  a  scientific  discussion,  on  the
northern  passage,  and  as  if  I  were  desirous  to  instruct  myself,  and
to  learn  what  he  knows  about  it,  or  what  he  concludes  on
scientific  grounds.      He  has  confirmed  to  me  all  the  above  facts.


trouve,  et  pour  inviter  quelques  pilotes  courageux  de  se  hasarder  a  en
faire  la  recherche,  promis  vingt-quatre  mille  livres  de  loyer  a  celui  qui
en  seroit  le  premier  inventeur.

J'ai  dit  au  frere  de  Le  Maire,  qui  m'en  a  communique  de  sa  part,  et
lui  ai  aussiecrit  que  j'en  donnerois  incontinent  avis  a  voire  Majeste  pour
en  savoir  sa  volonte,  et  la  lui  faire  entendre  au  plus  tot,  attendu  qu'il
dit.  si  on  veut  penser  h  ce  voyage  des  cette  annee,  qu'il  le  faut  com-
mencer  en  mars  au  plus  tard  pour  en  esperer  bon  succes,  et  que  les
autres  qui  I'ont  ci-devant  fait  en  juillet  s'en  sont  mal  trouves,  et  ontet6
surpris  de  I'hiver.  Ayant  aussi  et6  averti  que  Plancius  etoit  venu  a  la
Haye  deux  jours  apres  avoir  communique  au  frere  de  Le  Maire,  je  le
maudai  aussitot  pour  en  conferer  avec  lui,  comme  j'ai  fait,  sans  toutefois
lui  faire  connoitre  que  Le  Maire  m'en  eut  fait  parler,  ui  que  votre
Majeste  eut  aucun  dessein  d'entreprendre  cette  recherche  ;  car  le  dit
sieur  Le  Maire  ne  d6sire  pas  que  personne  en  sache  rien  :  aussi  n'en  ai-
je  parle  a  Plancius  que  par  forme  de  discours,  et  comme  etant  curieux
de  m'instruire  et  d'apprendre  ce  qu'il  en  sait,  et  juge  par  raison  pouvoir
etre  fait  ;  lequel  m'a  confirme  tout  ce  que  dessus,  et  qu'il  avoit  excite


TO    HKiXRY    IV    OF    FRANCE.  251

and  he  also  told  me  that  it  was  he  who  incited  the  late  Jacob
Heemskerk,  the  admiral  of  the  fleet  which  beat  the  Spaniards  in
the  Straits  of  Gibraltar,  to  undertake  the  above  enterprise.
Heemskerk  had  consented  to  do  so,  and  Plancius  had  expected
great  achievements  from  him,  because  Heemskerk  was  greatlj'  ex-
perienced in  navigation,  and  was  anxious  to  acquire  the  honour
of  finding  a  passage  through  the  Arctic  Regions,  like  Magellan,
who  had  discovered  the  passage  to  the  South  Sea.  But
Heemskerk  fell  in  that  battle  in  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar.

It  belongs  to  your  Majesty  to  command  me  what  I  am  to  do  in
this  affair.  The  truth  is,  that  one  cannot  guarantee  the  success
of  this  enterprise  with  certainty ;  but  yet,  it  is  also  true,  that  Le
Maire  has  for  a  long  time  inquired  into  the  chances  of  the  under-
taking, and  that  he  is  generally  considered  to  be  an  able  and
industrious  man.  Besides,  the  risk  would  not  be  very  great.
When  Ferdinand  of  Spain  received  the  offer  of  Columbus,  and
caused  three  ships  to  be  fitted  out  for  him,  to  sail  to  the  West
Indies,  the  proposal  seemed  still  more  hazardous,  and  all  the  other
potentates,  to  whom  he  had  applied,  had  laughed  at  him,  con-
sidering his  success  as  impossible,  and  yet  he  has  obtained  such
great  results.      It  is   also  the   opinion  of  Plancius,  and  of  other


feu  Amsquerque,  amiral  de  la  flotte  qui  fit  I'exploit  du  detroit  de
Gibraltar,  de  faire  cette  entreprise,  lequel  s'y  etoit  rosolu,  dont  il  esperoit
bien,  pour  ce  que  le  dit  Amsquerque  etoit  fort  entendu  aux  navigations,
et  desireux  d'acquerir  cet  houneur,  comme  Magellan  avoit  fait  de-
couvrant  le  passage  du  c6te  de  la  mer  du  Sud  ;  mais  il  mourut  en  ce
combat.  C'est  a  votre  Majeste  de  me  commander  ce  qu'il  lui  plait  que
je  fasse  en  cet  endroit.  La  verite  est  qu'on  ne  peut  repondre  du  succes
de  cette  entreprise  avec  certitude  ;  mais  il  est  bien  vrai  que  des  long
temps  Le  Maire  s'est  informe  de  ce  qu'on  pouvait  esperer  de  telle  entre-
prise, et  qu'il  est  tenu  pour  homme  avise  et  industrieux  ;  puis  on  n'y
hasarderoit  pas  beaucoup.  Quaud  Ferdinand  recut  I'avis  de  Christophe
Colomb,  et  lui  fit  equiper  trois  navires  pour  aller  au  voyage  des  Indes
d'Occident,  I'entreprise  sembloit  encore  pour  lors  plus  incertaine,  et  tous
les  autres  potentats  aux  quels  cet  homme  s'etoit  adresse  s'en  etoient
moques,  jugeant  son  entreprise  impossible  ;  et  toute-fois  elle  a  produit
un  si  grand  fruit.     Cost  aussi  I'avis  de  Plancius  et  d'autres  geographcs,


252  LETTER    FROM    PRESIDENT    JEANNIN

geographers,  that  in  the  northern  parts  there  are  many  countries
which  have  not  yet  been  discovered,  and  which  God  may  be
keeping  for  the  glory  and  the  profit  of  other  princes,  unwilling  to
give  every  thing  to  Spain  alone.  Even,  were  nothing  to  come  of
this  search,  yet  it  would  always  be  honourable  to  have  undertaken
it,  and  the  regret  will  not  be  very  great  since  so  little  is  risked.

This  letter  having  been  terminated,  and  I  being  ready  to  send  it
to  your  Majesty,  Le  Maire  has  again  written  to  me,  and  has  sent
to  me  the  memoir,  which  is  joined  to  the  present  letter,  which  also
contains  an  ample  discussion  of  the  above  subject.  He  also  writes
to  me,  that  some  members  of  the  East  India  Company,  who  had
been  informed  that  the  Englishman  had  secretly  treated  with  him,
had  become  afraid  that  I  might  wish  to  employ  him  for  the  dis-
covery of  this  passage.  For  this  reason,  they  have  again  treated
with  him  about  his  undertaking  such  an  expedition  in  the  course
of  the  present  year.  The  directors  of  the  Amsterdam  chamber
have  written  to  the  other  chambers  of  the  same  company,  to
request  their  approval ;  and  should  the  others  refuse,  the  Am-
sterdam chamber  will  undertake  the  expedition  at  their  own  risk,
Le   Maire,    nevertheless,    persists    in    advising   your   Majesty    to


qui  ont  ecrit  que  du  cote  du  nord  il  y  a  encore  beaucoup  de  terres  qui
n'ont  ete  decouvertes,  lesqvielles  Dieu  peut  reserver  a  la  gloire  et  au
profit  d'autres  princes,  u'ayant  voulu  tout  donner  h  la  seule  Espagne.
Quand  meme  il  n'en  succederoit  rien,  sera  toujours  chose  louable  de
I'avoir  entrepris,  et  le  repentir  n'en  sera  jamais  grand,  puisqu'on  j
hasarde  si  peu.

Cette  lettre  etant  achevee,  et  moi  pres  de  I'euvoyer  a  votre  Majeste,
Le  Maire  m'a  derechef  ecrit,  et  envoye  le  memoire  qui  est  ci-joint,
lequel  contient  un  discours  assez  ample,  ensemble  les  raisons  de  ce  que
dessus.  II  me  mande  pareillement  qu'aucuns  de  la  Compagnie  des
Indes,  ayant  ete  avertis  que  I'Anglois  avoit  confere  secretement  avec  lui,
sont  entres  en  apprehension  qu'il  s'en  vouloit  servir  et  I'employer  lul
meiae  pour  decouvrir  ce  passage,  qu'a  cette  occasion  ils  ont  de  nouveau
traite  avec  lui  pour  entreprendre  la  dite  navigation  des  cette  annee,
ayant  ceux  de  la  chambre  d'Amsterdam  ecrit  a  cet  effet  aux  autres
chambres  qui  sont  de  la  meme  compagnie  pour  le  faire  approuver,  avec
declaration,  s'ils  le  refusent,  qu'ils  entreprendont  eux  seuls.  Le  Maire
ne  laisse  pourtant  exhorter  votre  Majeste  a  cette  entreprise,  me  mandant


TO    HENRY    IV    OF    FRAKCE.  253

engage  in  this  enterprise,  telling  me  that  he  has  at  his  disposal
a  pilot,  who  has  already  been  engaged  in  a  similar  voyage,'  and
who  is  more  experienced  and  more  capable  than  the  Englishman.

It  belongs  to  your  Majesty  to  order  what  I  am  to  do.  I  have
had  several  conferences  with  other  men  about  expeditions  to  the
West  and  East  Indies,  and  I  feel  confident,  that  when  it  will
please  your  Majesty  to  take  the  matter  into  serious  consideration,
with  the  intention  of  profiting  by  it,  there  will  be  means  of  ob-
taining very  able  and  experienced  men.  There  are  also  many  rich
merchants  who  will  gladly  join  in  the  commerce  with  East  India,
and  yet  more  willingly  if  this  northern  passage  be  found ;  but
as  to  the  West  Indies,  they  all  think"  that  far  greater  armaments
will  be  required.  It  is  true  that  the  voyage  is  also  shorter,  and
those  who  have  some  knowledge  of  the  intercourse  which  may  be
established  with  those  parts,  promise  great  success.  They  also
prove  this  by  such  good  reasons,  that  we  may  well  believe  them.^


qu'il  a  un  pilote,  lequel  a  deja  fait  ce  meme  voyage,  et  est  plus  experi-
inente  et  capable  que  I'Anglois.  C'est  a  elle  de  commander  son  inten-
tention.  J'ai  eu  plusieurs  conf6rences  avec  d'autres,  soit  pour  les
voyages  des  Indes  d'Orient  ou  d'Occident,  et  suis  assure,  quand  il  lui
plaira  d'y  penser  h  bon  escient,  et  pour  en  tirer  du  fruit,  qu'il  y  aura
moyen  de  lui  faire  avoir  de  tres-bons  hommes,  et  fort  experimentes  ;  qu'il
y  a  aussi  de  riches  marchands  lesquels  seront  de  la  partie  pour  le  com-
merce des  Indes  d'Orient,  et  plus  volontiers  encore  si  ce  passage  du  nord
est  trouve  :  mais,  quant  aux  Indes  d'Occident,  ils  tiennent  tons  qu'il  y
faut  employer  un  plus  grand  appareil  de  forces.  II  est  vrai  que  le
voyage  est  aussi  beaucoup  plus  court  ;  et  ceux  qui  ont  quelque  connois-
sance  des  entreprises  qu'on  y  peut  dresser,  en  promettanfc  tout  bon
succes,  dont  ils  discourent  avec  de  si  bonnes  raisons,  qu'il  y  a  sujet  d'y
ajouter  foi  ;  j'en  attendrai  ses  commandemens,  priant  Dieu,  Sire,  qu'il
donne  k  sa  Majeste  et  a  sa  Royale  famille  tout   heur  et   prosperite.

Votre  etc.

P.  JEANNIN.
De  la  Haye  ce  vingt-cinquieme  Janvier  1609.


1  Probably  Nai.

2  The  principal  advocate  of  the  West  Indian  enterprise  was  William  Usse-
linex,  who  at  that  very  time  published  several  very  eloquent  pamphlets  in  its
defence.     He  is  most  probably  the  person  referred  to  by  Jeannin.


254  EXTRACTS  FROM  BRODHEAD.

I  am  expecting  your  Majesty's  commands,  praying  God,  sire,  that

lie  may  give   to  your  Majesty  and  to  the  whole  Royal  family  all

happiness  and  prosperity.

P.  JEANNIN.

The  Hague,  the  25th  of  January,  1609.


EXTRACTS    CONCERNING   A   SHIP    BOOK    FOUND    AT
AMSTERDAM  BY  JOHN  ROMEYN  BRODHEAD,  ESQ.

I.    TROM    BKODHEAD,   EEPOKT    TO    THE    ASSEMBLY    OF    THE    STATE
OF    NEW    YORK,   QUOTED    BY    o'CALEAGHAN,  HIST.  OF
NEAV    NETHERL.  I,  p.   33.^

The  only  trace  of  this  voyage  that  was  to  be  discovered  in  the
papers  of  the  East  India  Companj^,  consisted  of  a  memorandum
in  one  of  the  ship  books,  stating  the  fact  that  the  yacht  Halve
Maaii,  of  forty  lasts  burden,  had  been  sent  toward  the  north  in  the
year  1608.


II.    FROM    BRODHEAD,   HIST.   OF  N.   YORK,  p.   41.

The  subsequent  career  of  the  Half  Moon  may  perhaps  interest
the  curious.  The  small  ship  book  before  referred  to,  which  I  found
in  1841,  in  the  Company's  archives  at  Amsterdam,  besides
recording  the  return  of  the  yacht  on  the  15th  of  July  1610,  states
that,  on  the  9th  of  May,  1611,  she  sailed  in  company  with  other
vessels  to  the  East  Indies  under  the  command  of  Laurens  Reael,
and  that,  on  the  6th  of  March,  1615,  she  was  wrecked  and  lost  on
the  island  of  Mauritius.

'  Great  efiforts  have  been  made  to  procure  facsimiles  of  these  two  docu-
ments, but  in  vain.  The  editor  of  the  joresent  volume  has,  however,  received
from  Holland  a  MS.  copy  of  the  first  document,  from  the  above  quoted
privately  printed  work  of  Mr.  Murphy.  But  as  Mr.  Murphy  seemed  desirous
not  to  let  the  writer  of  the  present  pages  obtain  a  glimpse  of  that  pamphlet,
it  would  have  been  contrary  to  the  rules  of  literary  intercourse  to  take  from  him
in  secret  what  he  would  not  communicate  openly.  The  title  of  Mr.  Murphy's
pamphlet,  together  with  a  descriptive  note  from  a  catalogue  of  Mr.  Fr.  Muller,
of  Amsterdam,  is  to  be  found  in  our  bibliogvapliical  list.


EXTRACTS    FROM    A    CHARTER,    ETC.  255


EXTRACTS     FROM    A    CHARTER    GRANTED    TO    THE

COMPANY   OF   THE   MERCHANTS  DISCOVERERS

OF     THE     NORTH-WEST     PASSAGE,

apud  Bletsoe,   July  26 fh,    1612.


A.  Beginning.

James,  by  the  grace  of  God  king  of  England,  etc.  Whereas,  we
are  credibly  informed  that  our  cozens  and  councellors  Henry
Charles  Earl  of  Northampton,  keeper  of  the  privy  scale  ;  Charles
Earl  of  Nottingham,  admirall  of  England  ;  Thomas  Earl  of  Suffolk,
chamberlain  of  our  own  household ;  our  right  trusty  and  well
beloued  cozen  Henry  Earl  of  Southampton ;  William  Earl  of
Salisbury,  our  right  trusty  and  well  beloued  Theophilus  Lord
Walden,  Sir  Thomas  Smith  Maunsell,  Sir  Walter  Hope,  Sir
Dudley  Diggs,  Sir  James  Lancerote,  Knights ;  Rebecca  Lady
Romney,  Francis  Jones,  one  of  the  aldermen  of  our  city  of
London;  John  Wolstenholme,  Esq.,  John  Edred  Robert  Sandy,
William  Greenwell,  Nicholas  Seats,  Hovet  Stapers,  William
Russell,  John  Mericks,  Abraham  Chamberleine,  Philippe  Burlo-
mathis,  merchants  of  the  cittie  of  London ;  the  Muscovy  Company
and  the  East  India  Company  of  the  sixth  voyage,  did  in  Aprill
one  thousand  six  hundred  and  tene,  with  great  charge  sett  fourth  a
shippe  called  the  Discoverye,  and  certaine  persons  under  the  com-
mand of  Henry  Hudson  to  search  and  find  out  a  passage  by  the
north-west  of  America  to  the  sea  of  Sur,  commonly  called  the
south  Sea,  and  have  in  that  voyage  found  a  streight  or  narrow  sea
by  the  which  they  hope  and  purpose  to  advance  a  trade  to  the
great  kingdoms  of  Tartaria,  China,  Japan,  Solomons  Islands,
Chili,  the  Philippins  and  other  countrys  in  or  upon  the  said  sea  .  .  .

B.   Summary  of  the  grant  fat  the  bottom  of  the  charter  J.

This  bill  conteyneth  your  Majesty's  grant  unto  the  merchants  of
London,    discoverers   of  the  north-west  passage,  to  be  made  and


256  EXTRACTS    FROM    RAFn's

treated  a  corporate  body,  and  to  be  invested  with  powers  and
capacities  thereunto  incident,  so  that  the  trade  through  that
passage  may  be  managed  with  some  order  and  government,  and
not  loosely  at  the  discretion  of  every  private  adventurer.  The
frame  and  constitutions  of  this  company  is  not  restrained  to  any
number  certain,  nor  confined  to  any  particular  citty,  town  or  place,
nor  tending  to  any  degree  of  monopoly.  The  Prince  is  the
supreme  protector,  under  your  Majesty,  of  this  company.  The
custom  subsidy,  and  impost  accruing  to  your  Majesty  of  all  goods
and  merchandize  shipped  outwards  and  homewards  through  the
said  passage,  in  the  7th  year  after  the  date  of  the  present  patent
(by  which  time  it  is  conceived  the  trade  may  settle  and  growe  some-
what beneficiall)  are  therein  graunted  to  the  first  discoverers,  in
consideration  of  their  charges  in  the  discovery  ;  and  the  like  graimt
to  Captain  Button,  and  the  masters  and  marines  in  the  two  shippes
lately  sett  forth  for  the  perfecting  of  the  said  discoverye,  of  the
customs,  subsidy  and  impost  happening  in  the  5th  year  after  the
date  of  the  present  patent  (which  as  supposed  will  be  a  lesse
matter),  in  consideration  of  their  services  therein.


EXTRACTS     FROM     RAFN'S     ANTIQUITATES
AMERICAN.E,   p.  295.


GRIPLA.


Nunc  dicendum  est,  quid  e  regione  Groenlandise  objaceat  et
recessibus,  ante  commemoratis.  Furdustrandee  nomen  terree  est,
ubi  tantum  gelu  est,  ut  quantum  scire  datur,  inhabituri  non  pos-
sit ;  ab  ea  austrum  versus  est  Hellulandia,  regio  Scrselingorum
appellata ;  inde  brevi  spatio  abest  Vinlandia  Bona,  quam  nonnuUi
ex  Africa  protendi  aestimant.  Inter  Vinlandiam  et  Groenlandiam
est  Ginnungayap,  quod  influit  ex  mari  dicto  oceano,  totuni  terra-
rum  orbem  ambiente.


ANTIQUITATES    AMERICANS.  257

P.  300.     DESCRIPTIO  GRCENLANDI.^  AUCTORE  IVARE  BARDI,   folio.
(treatise  of   IVER  BOTY  )

Hse  relationes  servatoo  sunt  ab  archiepiscopo  Nidrosiensi  Erico
Walckendorpb,  qui  anno  1516,  novam  ad  Groenlandiam  iterum
inveniendam  expeditionem  moliens,  varia  ad  hujus  terrae  descrip-
tionem  pertinentia  collegit.  Prseter  supra,  p.  282,  allata  manu-
scripta  et  editiones,  quarum  Extrupii  ex  manuscripto  Regise
Dresdensis  Bibliotheca?,  G.  No.  52a,  signato  est  desumta,  alias
versiones  qusedam  adhiberi  merentur.  \Here  foUoius  the  title  in
English,  as  to  be  found  on  page  230.]

Quam  multifariara  nominum  topographicorum  in  Danicis  manu-
scriptis,  et  graviorem  quidem  in  duobus  horum  vetustissimis  editioni-
bus  depravationem  consideremus,  similis,  et  ex  aliqua  parte  pessima,
confusio  in  translatione,  quae  tria  porro  diversi  generis  idiomata,
Germaniae,  Belgise  et  Angliae  permeaverat,  minime  erit  miranda.
At  nihilominus  dictara  versionem  vetustissimo  cuidarn  originalis
exemplari,  quod  bonas  quasdam  lectiones  servaverat,  superinstruc-
tam  esse  cernimus,  quam  igitur  (P  notatam)  in  hac  collatione  negli-
gere  noluimus.  Addidit  hujus  transcripti  auctor  (p.  230)  ipsam
relationem  in  insulis  Fiereyensibus  fuisse  repertam,  in  an  old
reckoning  book  ivritten  above  one  hundred  yeeres  ago.


OTHER    NAMES    OF     HUDSON'S     STRAIT,    HUDSON'S

BAY,  HUDSON'S  TOUCHES,  HUDSON'S  POINT,

AND  HUDSON'S  RIVER.

Hudson^ s  Strait :  Rio  Nevado  (Sebastian  Cabot,  1498).

Hudson's  Bay:  Baia  dos  Medaos  (Ortelius,  from  the  Portuguese
1558-1570).

Hudson's  Touches:  Jan  Mayen  Island  (Jan  May,  1611).

Hudson'' s  Point :  Rudson's  Point  (a  corruption ;  Zorgdrager,
Scoresby.)

Hudson'' s  River :  Rio  de  Gamas,  Rio  Grande  (Spaniards,  1525-
1600);  Cahohatatea  (Indian  name);  Manhattan's  Rivier,  Groote
Rivier,  Noort  Rivier,  Montaigne  Rivier,  Maurits  Rivier  (Dutch
Maps,  1615  to  1664).

33


258


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL     LIST,

CONTAINING    THE    BOOKS,    MAPS,   ETC.,   ETC.,  MENTIONED    IN
THE    PRESENT    WOKK.


Adeltjng.  Geschichte  der  Schiffahrten  und  Versuche  welche
zur  Entdeckung  des  nordostliclien  Weges  nach  Japan  und  China
von  verschiedenen  Nationen  unternommen  wurden.  Zum  Behufe
der  Erdbeschreibung  und  Naturgeschichte  dieser  Gegenden  ent-
worfen  von  Johann  Christoph  Adelung.     Halle,  4to,  1768.

Akerly.  An  Essay  on  the  Geology  of  the  Hudson  river,  and
the  adjacent  regions  :  illustrated  by  a  geological  section  of  the
country,  from  the  neighbourhood  of  Sandy  Hook,  in  New  Jersey,
northward,  through  the  highlands  in  New  York,  towards  the
Catskill  Mountains :  by  Samuel  Akerly,  one  of  the  Vice-Presi-
dents of  the  New  York  I/yceum  of  Natural  History.  New  York,
12mo,  1820.

Alcedo,  see  Thompson.

American  Biography.  The  Library  of  American  Biography.
Edited  by  Jared  Sparks,  assisted  by  several  of  the  most  distin-
guished writers.  First  Series.  Portraits.  Ten  vols.,  12mo,  New
York.     Vol.  X,  pp.  187-261.     Life  of  Hudson,  by  R.  H.  Cleveland:

Antiquitates    Americans    sive    Scriptores    Septentrionales

rerum  ante-Columbianarum  in  America.

Samling  af  de  i  nordens  Oldskrifter  indeholdte  Efterretninger  vmde  gamle
Nordboers  Opdagelsesreiser  til  America,  fra  det  10  de  til  det  14  de  Aarhun-
drede.

Edidit  Societas  Regia  Antiquariorum  Septentrionalium.     Hafnise.

1837.     (Edited  by  C.  Rafn.)

Arch^ologia  Americana,  see  Gallatin.

Barrow.  A  Chronological  History  of  Voyages  into  the  Arctic
Regions;    undertaken    chiefly   for   the  purpose  of   discovering  a


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL    LIST.  259

North-east,  North-Avest,  or  Polar  Passage,  between  the  Atlantic
and  Pacific  :  from  the  earliest  periods  of  Scandinavian  navigation
to  the  recent  expeditions  under  the  orders  of  Captains  Ross  and
Buchan,  by  Sir  John  Barrow,  F.Pt.S,     London,  1818.

Beechey.  a  Voyage  of  Discovery  towards  the  North  Pole,
performed  in  His  Majesty's  ships  Dorothea  and  Trent,  under  the
command  of  Captain  David  Buchan,  R.N.,  1818;  to  which  is
added  a  Summary  of  all  the  early  attemjits  to  reach  the  Pacific  by
the  way  of  the  Pole.  By  Captain  F.  W.  Beechey,  R.N.,  F.R.S.
one  of  the  lieutenants  of  the  expedition.  Published  by  autho-
rity of  the  Lords  Commissioners  of  the  Admiralty.  (With  a  map
and  many  illustrations.)     8vo.     London,  1843.

Begin  en  Vooktgang  von  de  Nederlandsche  Oostindische
Compagnie.  2  vols.,  4to,  obi.,  consisting  of  twenty-one  parts  with
separate  pagination.  Amsterdam,  1646.  (Daniell's  Map,  part  i,
p.  13 ;  Hudson's  Voyage,  part  i,  p.  54.)

Beke,  see  De  Veer,  Gere.it.

Bescherelle.  Grand  Dictionnaire  de  Geographic  imiverselle,
ancienne  et  moderne.  Par  M.  Bescherelle,  aine.  4  vols.,  4to,
Paris,  1856-7.

Beschryvinghe  van  Virginia,  Nieuw  Nederlandt,  Niew-
Engelandt,  en  d'Eylanden  Bermudes,  Barbados,  en  S.  ChristofFel.
Dienstelyck  voor  elck  een  derwaerts  handelende,  en  alle  voor-
planten  van  Nieuw  Colonien,  met  Koperen  figuren  verciert.  't  Ams-
terdam, by  Joost-Hartgers,  Bouckverkooper  op  dem  Dam,  bezyden
't  Stadthuys,  op  de  hoeck  van  de  Kalverstraet,  in  de  Boeck-
winckel,  anno  1651.     4to.     Title,  60  pp.     Map.

BiBLioGRAPHiE  Neerlando-Russe,  See  Ortelius.

BiDDEE,  see  Cabot.

BioGRAPHiA  Britannica,  or  the  Lives  of  the  most  eminent
persons  who  have  flourished  in  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  from
the  earliest  ages  down  to  the  present  times  :  collected  from  the
best  authorities,  both  printed  and  manuscript,  and  digested  in  the
manner  of  Mr.  Bajde's  Historical  and  Critical  Dictionary.  London,
folio,  MDCCL.  (Volume  the  fourth,  pp.  2691-2695.  Hudson,  Henry),

BiOGRAPHiE  Universelee,  ancienne  et  moderne,  ou  Histoire,
par  ordre  alphabetique  de  la  vie  publique  et  privee  de  tons  les
hommes  qui  se  sont  distingues  par  leurs  ecrits,  leurs  actions,  leurs


260  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL    LIST.

talents,  leurs  vertus  ou  leiirs  crimes.  Ouvrage  entierement  neuf,
redige  par  une  Societe  de  Gens  de  lettres  at  de  Savants.  Tome
xxi.     Paris,  1818.     (Page  10-12,  Hudson  Henri.)

Blaeu,  "Wilh.  et  Joh.  Le  Grand  Atlas,  ou  Cosmographie
Blaviane,  en  lequel  est  exactement  descritte  la  terre,  la  mer  et  le
ciel.     Amsterdam.     J.  Blaew.     1663.     12  voL,  fol.

Blefkin.  Dithmari  Blefkenii  Islandia,  sive  populorum  &
mii'abilium  qua3  in  ea  Insula  reperiunter,  accuratior  Descriptio  :
cui  de  Gronlandia  sub  finem  quaedam  adjecta.  Lugduni  Batavo-
rum.  Ex  Typograplieio  Henrici  ab  Haestens.  cioiocvii,  160.
pp.  71.

Brockhaus.  Allgemeine  deutsche  Real  Encyklopadie  fiir  die
gebildeten  Stande.  Conversations  Lexikon.  Zehnte  verbesserte
und  vermehrte  Auflage  in  15  Banden.  Leipzig  :  1851-55.  (Vol.  viii,
p.  102,  Hudson's  bay).

This  edition,  which  is  to  be  found  in  the  reading-room  of  the  British
Museum, does  not  contain  the  Anskoeld  Myth;  on  the  contrary,  the  discovery
of  Hudson's  Strait  is  attributed  to  Sebastian  Cabot.  But  in  the  earlier  edi-
tions, we  believe  down  to  the  eighth,  the  Anskoeld  story  exists.

Bkodhead.  History  of  the  State  of  New  York,  by  John
Romeyn  Brodhead.  First  Period,  1609-1664.  Illustrated  with  a
Map  of  New  Netherlands,  according  to  the  charters  granted  by
the  States  General,  on  the  11th  of  October,  1614,  and  the  3rd  of
June,  1621.     Svo.     New  York,  1853.

BucHAN,  see  Jeannin.

Cabot  (Sebastian).  His  great  Planisphere.  A  copy  of  this
celebrated  work,  bearing  the  date  of  1544,  is  preserved  in  the
Imperial  Library  in  Paris.  This  map  is  pasted  upon  a  roller.  On
both  sides  of  the  engraving  there  are  pasted  explanations  in  letter-
press, on  one  side  in  Spanish  and  on  the  other  in  Latin.  The
whole  map  is  very  large.  The  Latin  letterpress  alone  fills  more
than  twenty  pages  in  a  reprint  which  we  are  about  to  speak  of.
It  is  in  one  of  these  letterpress  explanations  that  the  date  of  1544
occurs.  Mr.  Jomard  has  published  part  of  the  map  in  his  "  Monu-
ments de  Geographie"  ;  that  is  to  say,  three  of  the  four  sheets  it  is
composed  of.  But  the  most  important  sheet,  containing  North
America,  is  yet  wanting.  The  letterpress  also  has  not  yet  ap-
peared.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL    LIST.  261

There  seems  to  have  been  a  second  eJition  of  this  map  published
in  the  year  1549,  probably  in  England,  where  Sebastian  Cabot  was
then  residing.  This  is  to  be  concluded  from  a  book  by  Nathan
Chytreeus,  called  "  Itinerum  Delicise."  Chytrseus  travelled  through
various  parts  of  Europe  and  visited  Oxford  in  1566.  He  there
copied  a  series  of  inscriptions,  corresponding,  except  in  some  very
slight  respects,  with  the  Latin  explanations  of  the  Paris  map  ;  but
with  that  important  difference,  that  the  date  is  1549  instead  of
1544.    These  inscriptions  are  reprinted  in  the  "  Itinerum  Delicise."

In  Hakluyt's  Collection  we  find  the  following  heading:  "  A71
extract  taken  out  of  the  Map  of  Sebastian  Cabot,  cut  by  Clement
Adams,  concerning  his  Discovery  of  the  West  Indies,  lohich  is  to  be
scene  in  Her  Majesties^  privie  Gallerie  at  Westminster,  and  in  many
other  ancient  merchants'  Houses.'^  This  heading  is  followed  by  a
description  of  Baccalaos  or  Terra  Nova,  which  is  evidently  bor-
rowed from  the  1544  or  1549  edition  of  the  Cabot  map,  but  it  is
not  by  any  means  a  literal  copy.  One  important  change  consists  in
the  alteration  of  the  date  of  the  voyage  described  in  it,  which  is
1494  in  the  earlier  edition  and  1497  in  that  of  Clement  Adams.
Adams  has  besides  completely  altered  the  phraseology  of  his  text,
which  he  has  made  most  bombastic;  lengthening  out  the  passages  by
superfluous  additions,  so  that  his  text  is  by  about  one-third  longer
than  that  of  the  original,  without  containing  any  new  information.

It  would  seem  doubtful  from  Hakluyt's  above-quoted  heading,
whether  Adams  had  copied  the  whole  of  Cabot's  map  or  merely
the  delineation  of  Terra  Nova ;  because  the  word  extract  might
refer  to  an  extract  made  by  Adams  from  Cabot's  map,  or  to  an
extract  made  from  Adams's  map  by  Hakluyt.  This  doubt  is
removed  by  a  passage  in  the  third  volume,  p.  807,  of  Purchas'
Pilgrims,  where  the  same  map  is  more  fully  described.  Purchas
has  evidently  himself  seen  the  map,  which  was  most  likely  the
identical  copy  also  seen  before  by  Hakluyt  in  Whitehall  Gallery.
It  is  not  certain  whether  another  map  mentioned  by  Willes  as
having  been  in  the  library  of  the  Earl  of  Bedford,  is  also  identical
with  that  seen  at  Whitehall.  This  map  contained  a  delineation
of  Hudson's  Strait,  the  description  of  which  we  have  reprinted
in  the  Introduction.  This  description  does  not  correspond  in
all  its    parts  with    the    1511    map,    and    there    arc   besides    some


262  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL    LIST.

more  details  given  by  Willes,  which  are  in  still  stronger  contra-
distinction with  the  indications  of  the  Paris  copy.  This  circum-
stance has  led  us  to  the  supposition  that  the  Earl  of  Bedford's
copy  also  belonged  to  the  Clement  Adams'  edition,  and  that  Adams
had  altered  the  lines  of  the  chart  as  well  as  the  words  of  the
text.  We  cannot  suppose  that  he  would  have  dared  to  do  so  in
Cabot's  lifetime,  and  therefore  think  that  Adams'  map  was  pub-
lished after  Cabot's  death  (about  1557).

A  Memoir  of  Sebastian  Cabot,  with  a  Review  of  the  His-
tory of  Maritime  Discovery.  Illustrated  by  Documents  from  the
Rolls  now  first  published,  by  R.  Biddle,     London,  1831.

Notices  concerning  John  Cabot   and  his  son  Sebastian ;

transcribed  and  translated  from  original  manuscripts  in  the  Macrian
Library  at  Venice,  by  Rawdon  Brown.  Communicated  to  the
Society  by  Edw.  Cheney.  Philobiblon  Society,  Bibliographical
and  Historical  Miscellanies.     London,  1854-56.

Catlin.     Letters  and  notes  on  the  Manners,  Cvistoms,  and  Con-
dition of  the  North  American  Indians,  by  George  Catlin.    Written  •
during  eight  years  travel,  from  1832  to  1839,  amongst  the  Wildest
Tribes  of  Indians  in  North  America.     With  312  Plates.     2  vols.,
royal  8vo,  pp.  264  and  266.     New  York,  1841.

Chytr^us.     Variorum  in  Europa  itinerum   Delicise,   seu,   ex

variis  Manuscriptis  selectiora  tantum  inscriptionum,    maxime  re-

centium  Monumenta. . .  .Omnia  nuper  collecta  et  hoc  modo  digesta

a  Nathane  Chytrseo.     Herbornae  Nassoviorum,  1594.

(The  same  book,  second  edition,  ibid.,  1599  ;  the  same  book,  third  edition,
ibid.,l(iOCy.)

Cleveland,  see  Amekican  Biography.

Collections  of  the  New  York  Hist.  Soc.  For  the  year  1809.
Vol.  i.     New  York,  1811,  8vo.

P.  19.  A  discourse  designed  to  commemorate  the  discovery  of
New  York  by  Henry  Hudson,  delivered  before  the  New  York
Hist.  Soc,  Sept.  4th,  1809,  being  the  completing  of  the  second
century  since  the  event.  By  Samuel  Miller,  D.D.,  one  of  the
pastors  of  the  first  Presbyterian  Church  in  the  city  of  New  York,
and  member  of  the  Hist.  Soc.

P.  41.  A  Communication  from  Dr.  Mitchill,  with  respect  to  the
several  sorts  of  fish  to  be  found  in  the  Hudson.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL    LIST.  263

P.  45.  The  Relation  of  De  Verazzano  to  the  King  of  France,
of  the  Land  by  him  discovered  in  the  name  of  H.M.

P.  61.  The  Voyage  of  H.  Hudson  towards  the  North  Pole,
anno  1607.

P.  81.  A  Second  Voyage  of  H.  Hudson  for  finding  a  Passage
to  the  East  Indies  by  the  N.E.,  anno  1608.

P.  102.  The  third  Voyage  of  H.  Hudson  towards  Nova  Zem-
bla,  etc.,  and  along  the  coast  to  42  degrees  and  a  half,  and  up  the
river  (the  Hudson)  to  42  degrees,  anno  1609.

Collections  of  the  New  York  Hist.  Soc.  Second  Series.  Vol.  i.
New  York,  1841,  8vo.

P.  37.     Verazzano's  Voyage.

P.  69.  Indian  Traditions  on  the  First  Arrival  of  the  Dutch  on
Manhattan  Island.

P.  75.     Lambrechtsen's  History  of  New  Netherlands.

P.  125.     Van  der  Donck,  Description  of  New  Netherlands.

P.  281.     Extracts  from  De  Laet's  New  World.

P.  317.     Juet's  Journal  of  Hudson's  Voyage.

CoNYEKSATioisrs  LEXICON,  see  Brockiiaus.

Daniel.  Map  of  Spitzbergen,  London,  1612,  see  Begin  nnd
Voortgang,  part,  i,  p.  13.  (^The  hioiuleclye  loJdch  up  to  the  present
day  loe  have  been  able  to  obtam  of  this  neio  country,  ivhich  our
people  call  Spitzbergen  and  the  English  Greenland,  we  are  going
to  represent,  in  a  small  map,  in  which  we  folloiv,  for  the  most
part,  the  Design  made  in  London,  m  1612,  by  John  Daniel).  The
map  in  the  Begin  und  Voortgang,  to  which  this  notice  alludes,
corresponds  in  almost  eveiy  particular  with  the  map  of  Spitzbergen
in  the  last  edition  of  Hessel  Gerritz's  "  Hudson,"  which  is  also  to
be  found  in  a  special  work  on  Spitzbergen  by  Hessel  Gerritz,
published  in  two  editions  in  the  year  1613.

Davis.  The  Seaman's  Secrets.  Devided  into  two  partes,
wherein  is  taught  the  three  kindes  of  sayling,  Horizontall,  Para-
doxall,  and  sayling  upon  a  great  circle  :  also  an  Horizontall  Tyde
Table,  for  the  easie  finding  of  the  ebbing  and  flowing  of  the  Tydes,
with  a  Regiment  newly  calculated  for  the  finding  of  the  Declina-
tion of  the  Sunne,  and  many  other  most  necessary  rules  and
instruments,  not  heretofore  set  foorth  by  any.  Newly  corrected  by
the  author,  John  Davis,  of  Sandrudge,  neere  Darthmouth,  in  the


264  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL    LIST.

countie  of  Devon,  Gent.  Imprinted  at  London  by  Thomas  Dawson.
4to,  1607.

De  Laet.  Nieuwe  Wereldt  ofte  Beschrijvinghe  van  West-
Indien  wt  veelerhande  Schriften  ende  Aenteekoningen  van  ver-
scheyden  Natien  by  een  versamelt  door  Joannes  de  Laet,  ende
mit  noodighe  Kaerten  en  Tafels  voorsien.  Tot  Leyden,  In  de
Druckerye  van  Isaack  Elzeviei",  anno  1625.  Met  Privilegia  der
Ho.  Mo.  Heeren  Staten  Generael,  voor  12  Jaren.  Fol.  Title,
xxii  a,  526  pages.  Chapter  vii  to  xi,  pp.  100-109,  description  of
New  Netherland.

Beschrijvinghe  van  West-Indien   door  Joannes   De

Laet.  Tweede  druk  :  In  ontallycke  plaetsen  verbetert,  vermeer-
dert,  met  eenige  nieuwe  caerten,  beelden  van  verscheijden  dieren
ende  planten  verciert.    Tot  Leyden  by  de  Elzeviers.  Ao.  1630,  fol.

De  Qtjik,  see  Gerritz-Hessel.

De  Veer  Gerrit.  Three  voyages  by  the  North-East  towards
Cathay  and  China,  undertaken  by  the  Dutch  in  the  years  1594,
1595,  and  1596,  with  their  Discovery  of  Spitzbergen,  their  resi-
dence of  ten  months  in  Novaya  Zemlya,  and  their  safe  return  in
two  open  boats.  Edited  by  C.  T.  Beke,  Ph.D.,  F.S.A.  8vo,
London,  1853  (Hakluyt  Society).

DoNCK  (Adrian  Van  der).  Vertoogh  van  Nieu  Nederland,
Weghens  de  Gheleghentheydt,  en  soberen  Staet  deszelfs.  In's
Graven-Hage,  ghedruckt  by  Michiel  Hael,  Bouckverkooper  woon-
ende  op  't  Buyten-Hof,  tegenover  de  Gevange-Voort.  1650,  4to.
Title,  49  pages  ;  a  vignette  in  wood  on  the  title.

Vertoogh  van  Nieu  Nederland  und  Breeden  Raedt

aende  Vereeniche  Nederlandsche  Provintsen.  Two  rare  tracts,
printed  in  1649-1650,  relating  to  the  Administration  of  Affairs  in
New  Netherland.  Translated  from  the  Dutch  by  Henry  C.  Murphy.
4to.    New  York,  1854.

Beschrijvinge    van   Nieuw-Nederlant,    ghelyck   het

tegenwoordigh  in  Staet  is,  Begrijpende  de  Nature,  Aert,  gele-
gentheyt  en  Vruchtbaerheyt  van  het  selve  Lant ;  mitsgaders  de
proffijtelijcke  ende  gewenste  trevallen,  die  aldaer  tot  onderhout
der  Menschen  (soo  uyt  haer  selven  als  van  buyten  ingebracht)
gevonden  woorden.  Als  mede  de  maniere  en  onghemeyne  eygen-
schappen  van  de  Wilden  ofte  Natureleen  van  den  Lande.     Ende


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL    LIST.  265

een  bysonder  verhael  van  den  wonderlijcken  Aert  ende  het  Weesen
der  Bevers;  daer  noch  by  gevoeght  is  een  d'scours  over  de  gele-
gentheyt  van  Nieuw-Nederlandt,  tusscben  een  Nederlandts  Patriot,
ende  een  Nieuw  Nederlander.  Beschreven  door  Adriaen  van  der
Donck,  beyder  Recbten  Doctoor,  die  tegenwoordigh  nocb  ni  Nieuw
Nederlandt  is.  t'  Amsterdam.  By  Evert  Nieuwbof,  Bouckver-
kooper,  woonende  op  't  Ruslandt  in't  Schrijfboeck,  anno  1655,  4to.

A  second  edition,  under  nearly  tbe  same  title.     4to.

Amsterdam,  1656.

Du  Ponceau.  Report  made  to  the  Historical  and  Literary
Committee  of  tbe  American  Philosopbical  Society  by  their  Cor-
responding Secretary  on  Languages  of  the  American  Indians.  By
P.  E.  Duponceau.     8vo.      Philadelphia.

Eden.  A  treatyse  of  the  Newe  India,  with  other  new  founde
landes  and  Ilandes,  as  well  Eastwards  as  Westwards,  as  they  are
knowen  and  founde  in  these  oure  days,  after  the  description  of
Sebastian  Munster,  in  his  booke  of  Universal  Cosmographie ;
wherein  the  diligent  reader  may  see  the  good  successe  and  rewards
of  noble  and  honeste  enterprises,  by  the  which  not  only  worldly
ryches  are  obtayned,  but  also  God  is  glorified,  and  the  Christian
fayth  enlarged.  Translated  out  of  Latin  into  English,  by  Richard
Eden.  Prceter  speyn  sub  spe.  Imprinted  at  London,  in  Lombard-
street,  by  Edward  Sutton,  1553.

The  History  of  Travayle  in  the  West  and  East  Indies,  and

other  countreys  lying  eyther  way,  towardes  the  fruitfull  and  ryche
Moluccaes.  As  Moscovia,  Persia,  Arabia,  Syria,  Aegypte,  Ethio-
pia, Guinea,  China  in  Cathayo  and  Giapan.  With  a  Discourse  of
the  N.W.  Passage.  ("  In  the  Hande  of  our  Lord  be  all  the  corners
of  the  Earthy — PsAL.  94.)  Gathered  in  parte  and  done  into
Englyshe  by  Richarde  Eden.  Newly  set  in  order,  augmented  and
finished  by  Richarde  Willes.  Imprinted  at  London  by  Richarde
Jugge,  1577.     Cum  privilegio.      See  also  Martyr.

FoKSTEK.  Geschichte  der  Entdeckungen  und  SchifFahrten  im
Norden  aller  Nationen,  von  J.  H.  Forster,  Dr.  der  Medicin  und
der  Weltweisheit,  etc.     Berlin,  1784.

History  of  the  voyages  and  discoveries  made  in  the

North,  translated  from  the  German  of  John  Reinhold  Forster,
T.U.D.,  and  elucidated  by  several  Maps.     London,  4to,  1786.

34


266  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL    LIST.

FoxE.  North-west  Fox,  or  Fox  from  the  North-west  Passage,
beginning  with  King  Arthur,  Malga,  Octhur,  the  two  Zenis  of
Iscland,  Estotiland,  and  Dorgia ;  following  with  briefe  abstracts
of  the  voyages  of  Cabot,  Frohisher,  Davis,  Wayrnouth,  Knight,
Hudson,  Button,  Gibbons,  Bylot,  Baffin,  Hawkridge :  together
with  the  Courses,  Distance,  Latitudes,  Longitudes,  Variations,
Depths  of  Seas,  Sets  of  Tydes,  Currents,  Races,  and  Over-Falls,
with  other  observations,  accidents,  and  remarkable  things,  as  our
Miseries  and  Sufferings.  Mr.  James  Hall's  three  voyages  to
Groynland,  with  a  Topographicall  Description  of  the  Countries,
the  Salvages  lives  and  treacheries,  how  our  men  have  beene  slayne
by  them  there,  with  the  commodities  of  all  those  parts,  whereby
the  Marchant  may  have  Trade,  and  the  Mariner  Imployment.
Demonstrated  in  a  Polar  Card,  wherein  are  all  the  Maines,  Seas,
and  Islands  herein  mentioned.  With  the  author  his  own  Voyage,
being  the  xvith,  with  the  opinions  and  collections  of  the  most
famous  Mathematicians  and  Cosmographers  ;  with  a  Probabilitie  to
prove  the  same  by  Marine  Remonstrations,  compared  by  the  Ebbing
and  Flowing  of  the  Sea,  experimented  with  places  of  our  owne  coast.
By  Captaine  Luke  Foxe,  of  Kingstone  upon  Hull,  Cajjt.  and  Pylot
for  the  voyage,  in  His  Majesties'  Pinnace  the  Charles.  Printed
by  His  Majesties'  Commands.  Printed  by  B.  Alsop  and  Tho.
Favvcet,  dwelling  in  Grub-street.      4to  Map,  1635  {qttoted -p.  Ivii).

Frobisher.  a  true  discourse  of  the  late  voyages  of  discoverie,
for  the  finding  of  a  passage  to  Cathaya,  by  the  North-Weast,
under  the  conduct  of  Martin  Frobisher,  Generall.  Devided  into
three  Bookes.  In  the  first  wherof  is  shewed  his  first  voyage,
wherein  also  by  the  way  is  sette  out  a  Geographicall  Description
of  the  Worlde  and  what  partes  thereof  have  bin  discovered  by  the
Navigations  of  the  Englishmen.  Also,  there  are  annexed  certayne
reasons  to  prove  all  partes  of  the  Worlde  habitable  ;  with  a  gene-
rall Mappe  adjoyned.  In  the  second,  is  set  out  his  second  voyage
with  the  adventures  and  accidents  thereof.  In  the  thirde,  is  de-
clared the  strange  fortunes  which  hapned  in  the  third  voyage,  with
a  severall  description  of  the  countrey  and  the  people  there  inhabit-
ing. With  a  particular  Card  thereunto  adioyned  of  3Ieta  Incognita,
so  farre  forth  as  the  secrets  of  the  voyage  may  permit.  At  London.
Imprinted  by  Henry  Bynnyman,  servant  to  the  Right  Honourable


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL    LIST.  267

Sir  Christopher  Hatton,  viz.,  Charaberlaine.  Anno  Domini,  1578,
4to,  pp.  68.

Gallatin.  Synopsis  of  the  Indian  Tribes  of  North-America,
by  Albert  Gallatin,  LL.D.

Arcbffiologia  Americana.  Transactions  and  Collections  of  the  Amei'icau
Antiquarian  Society.  Published  by  Direction  of  the  Society.  Vol.  i,  8vo,
pp.  436.  Worcester,  Mass.,  18'20  ;  vol.  ii,  Map,  8vo,  pp.  xxx  and  573.  Cam-
bridge, 1836;  vol.  iii,  pp.  cxxxviii  and  377.  Boston,  printed  for  the  Society,
1857  (vol.  ii,  p.  44).

Galtano.  Tratado  dos  varios,  e  diversos  caminhos  por  onde
nos  tempos  passados  a  pimenta  e  especiaria  veio  do  India  as  nossas
partes,  e  assim  de  todos  os  descubrimentos  antigos  e  modernos
que  sao  feitos  ate  a  era  de  1550  com  os  nomes  particulares  das
pessoas  que  os  ficerao,  em  que  tempos  e  suas  alturas.  8o,  Lisboa,
por  1560.

Galvao.  Tratado  dos  descobrimentos  antigos  e  modernos,
feitos  ate  a  Era  de  1550,  com  os  nomes  particulares  das  pessoas
que  OS  fizerao  :  e  em  que  tempos,  e  as  suas  alturas,  e  dos  desvaira-
dos  caminhos  por  vnde  a  pimenta  e  especiaria  veyo  da  India  as
nossas  partes  ;  obra  certo  muy  notavel,  e  copiosa.  Composto  pelo
famoso  Antonio  Galvao.  Lisboa  Occidental  na  Officina  Ferrei-
riana,  mdccxxxi.     (We  quote  this  edition.)

Geeuitz-Hessel.  Detectio  Freti.  Fikst  Edition.  Exemplar
Libelli  supplicis,  Potentissimo  Hispaniarum  Regi  exhibiti  a  Capi-
taneo  Petro  Fernandez  de  Quir :  super  Detectione  quintse  orbis
terrarum  partis,  cui  Australise  Incognitse  nomen  est.  Item,  Relatio
super  Freto  per  M.  Hudsonum  Anglum  qutesito,  ac  in  parte
detecto  supra  Provincias  Terrse  Novae,  novseque  Hispaniae  Chinam
et  Cathaiam  versus  ducturo  :  una  cum  Freti  ipsius,  quatenus  iam
detectus  est.  Tabula  Nautica.  Nee  non  Isaaci  Massse  Harlemensis
Samoiediee  atque  Tingoessae  Regionum  ad  Orientem  ultra  Fretura
Weygats  in  Tartaria  sitarum,  nuperque  Imperio  Moscovito  adquisi-
tarium  descriptio.  Et  Tractus  eiusdem  Tabula  Russia.  Latine
versa  ab  R.  Vitellio.  Amsterodami.  Ex  ofRcina  Hesselij  Gerardi,
anno  1612.

Contents :

1.  In  tractatus  sequentes  Prolegomena  ad  Lectorem  :  signed
Hesselius  Gerardus  Assumensis  Philogeographus.  Six  pages.
{These  Prolegomena  are  reprinted  in  the  present  hook,  pp.  236,  241  )i


268  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL    LIST.

2.  Relatio  memorialis  libelli  supplicis  Majestati  suae  oblati,
per  Capitaneum  Petrum  Fernandez  de  Quir,  etc. . .     Eleven  pages.

3.  Samojedarum. . .  .effigies  (a  woodcut).     One  page.

4.  Apographum  Descriptionis  Regionum  Siberiee  Samojediae  et
Tingoesia^.     Eight  pages.

5.  Itinerum  atque  Fluviorum,  Ortum  &  Aquilonem  versus  in
Moscoviam  &  Siberiam  Samojediam  etc. . . ,  .ducentium,  Descrip-
tio.  Thirteen  pages,  one  page  white,  one  white  leaf;  then  follows  :
Descriptio  ac  delineatio  Geographica  Detectionis  Freti.  Sive,
Transitvs  ad  Occasum,  supra  terras  Americanas,  in  Chinam  atq :
Japonem  ducturi,  Recens  investigati  ab  M.  Henrico  Hudsono
Anglo.  Item,  Narratio  Ser™".  Regi  Hispanise  facta,  super  tractu,
in  quinta  Orbis  terrarum  parte,  cui  Avstralise  Incognitse  nomen
est,  recens  detecto,  per  Capitaneum  Petrum  Ferdinandez  de  Quir.
Vna  cum  descriptione  Terrse  Samoiedarvm  et  Tingoesiorvm,  in
Tartaria  ad  Ortum  Freti  Waygats  sitae  nuperq  •  Imperio  Mosco-
vitarum  subactte.  Amsterodami,  Exdifficina  Hesselij  Gerardi.  Anno
1612.  Three  pages  {reprinted  in  the  present  volume,  pp.  185-
189).

Second  Edition.  The  Second  Edition,  or  what,  perhaps,  may
be  called  so,  has  been  produced  in  the  following  manner.  The
first  title  has  been  cut  away,  and  the  supplement,  with  its  title,
Descrijitio  ac  Deli?ieatio,  etc.,  has  been  placed  at  the  beginning.
Nearly  all  the  existing  copies  of  the  1612  edition  answer  this
description.

In  both  shapes  the  1612  edition  ought  to  contain  the  following
maps.  a.  The  World  in  two  hemispheres;  b.  Hudson's  map;
c.  Massa's  map  of  Nova  Zembla,  etc.  (a  fac-simile  in  Dr.  Beke's
De  Veer).

Thikd  Edition.  Descriptio  ac  delineatio  Geographica  Detec-
tionis Freti.  Sive,  Transitus  ad  Occasum  supra  terras  Americanas,
in  Chinam  atq:  Japonem  ducturi,  Recens  investigati  ab  M.  Henrico
Hudsono  Anglo.  Item,  Exegesis  Regi  Hispanise  facta,  super  tractu
recens  detecto,  in  quinta  Orbis  parte,  cui  nomen,  Avstralis  In-
cognita. Cum  descriptione  Terrarum  Samoiedarum,  et  Tinga»sio-
rum,  in  Tartaria  ad  Ortum  Freti  Waygats  sitarum,  nuperq:  sceptro
Moscovitarum  adscitarum.  Amsterodami,  Ex  officina  Hesselij
Gerardi.     Anno  1613.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL    LIST.  269

Contents :

1.  Prolegomena.     Three  pages.

2.  Descriptio,  etc.  (Hudson's  Voyage,  see  present  volume,  189-
194).     Three  pages.

3.  Exegesis  Libelli  supplicis  oblati  Regise  Majestati  Hispanise
a  Duce  Petro  Fernandez  de  Quir,  etc.     Ten  pages.

4.  Descriptio  Kegionum  Siberiaj,  Samojedise,  Tingojesiae,  etc.
Seven  pages,  one  page  white.

5.  Brevis  Descriptio  itinerum  ducentium,  &  fluviorum  labentium.
e  Moscovia  Orientem  &  Aquilonem  versus.  (^Signed  by  Isaac
Massa,  Haerlem.)     Eleven  pages,  one  page  white.

6.  In  prefatione,  etc.  [Description  of  Nai's  Voyage.)  Three
pages.

8.  De  detectione  terrse  polaris  sub  latitude  octoginta  graduum
(by  Hessel  Gerritz).     Three  pages.

9.  Balena  woodcut.  One  page,  one  page  white.  For  maps  and
plates  see  next  edition.

FoTJKTH  Edition.  The  fourth  edition  is  almost  identical  with  the
third,  only  it  contains  an  appendix  of  four  pages,  consisting —
a.  Of  a  preface  by  Hessel  Gerritz,  beginning  with  the  following
words  :  Cum  temere  et  inconsiderate  antea  scripserim.  .  .  .One  page.
h.  Of  a  treatise  by  Peter  Plancius,  intitled  :  Refutatio  rationum
quibus  Angli  Dominationem  piscationis  ad  insulam  Spitzbergen-
sem.  .pretendere.  .conantur.     Three  pages.

The  third  and  fourth  editions  ought  to  contain  the  following
illustrations,  a.  The  World  in  two  hemispheres,  b.  Hudson's
Map.  c.  Massa's  Map.  d.  An  engraving  representing  two  sea-
horses, e.  In  the  fourth  edition  there  ought  to  be  a  map  of  Spitz-
bergen  and  Nova  Zembla.

Beschryvinghe  vander  Samoyeden  Landt  in  Tarta-

rien  Nieulijcks  onder  't  ghebiedt  der  Moscoviten  gebracht.  Wt
de  Russche  tale  overgheset,  anno  1609.  Met  een  verhael  vande
opsoekingh  ende  ontdeckinge  vande  nieuwe  deurgang  ofte  straet
int  Noord-westen  na  de  Rijcken  van  China  ende  Cathay ;  ende
een  Memorial  gepresenteert  aenden  Conningh  van  Spaengien,
belanghende  de  ontdeckinghe  ende  gheleghenheyt  van  't  Land
ghenaemt  Australia  Incognita,  't  Amsterdam,  by  Hessel  Ger-
ritsz.,  Boeckvercooper  opt  Water  inde  Pascaert.     Anno  1612.


2t0  bibliographical  list.

Contents :

1.  Tot  den  Leser  [Preface,  translation  of  the  preface  to  the  Latin
edition  of  \G\2 .)    Six  pages.

2.  Verhael  van  d'  ontdeckinghe  vande  nieu-ghesoclite  Strate
in't  Noord-westen,  om  te  seylen  boven  langhs  de  Landen  van
America  en  Japan,  ghedaen  door  Mr.  Henry  Hudson.  Three
pages,  one  white.

3.  Copie  van  de  Beschryvinge  der  Landen  Siberia,  Samoesia,
etc.     Eight  pages.

4  Een  Cort  Verhael  vande  Wege  ende  Rivieren  uyt  Moscovien
Oostwaerts,  etc.     Fourteen  pages.

5.  Verhael  Van  seker  Memoriael  ghepresenteert  aen  zyne  Ma-
jesteyt  by  den  Capiteyn  Pedro  Fernandez  de  Guir.  Six  pages,
one  page  blank.

GiLBEKT.  A  Discourse  of  a  Discoverie  for  a  new  passage  to
Cataja,  written  by  Sir  Humfrey  Gilbert,  Knight.  Imprinted  at
London  by  Henry  Middleton,  for  Richarde  Thones,  anno  Domini
1576,  Aprilis  12.    (Map.)    See  also  Hakluyt's  Collections,  iii,  p.  16.

Hakluyt.  Divers  voyages  touching  the  discoverie  of  America,
and  the  Islands  adiacent  unto  the  same,  made  first  of  all  by  our
Englishmen,  and  afterward  by  the  Frenchmen  and  Britons  :  and
certaine  notes  of  advertisements  for  observations,  necessarie  for
such  as  shall  heereafter  make  the  like  attempt.  With  two  mappes
annexed  heereunto  for  the  plainer  understanding  of  the  whole
matter,  by  Richard  Hakluyt.  Imprinted  at  London  for  Thomas
Woodcocke,  1582.

Hakluyt  (Richard,  Prebendary  of  Bristol  in  the  year  1582).
Divers  Voyages  touching  the  Discovery  of  America,  and  the  Islands
adjacent;  collected  and  published.  Edited,  with  Notes  and  an
Introduction,  by  John  "Winter  Jones,  Esq.,  of  the  British  Museum.
8vo,  London,  1850  (Hakluyt  Society).

Hamel.  Tradescant  der  Aeltere,  1618,  in  Russland.  Der
Handelsverkehr  zwischen  England  und  Russland  in  seiner  Entste-
hung.  Riickblick  auf  einige  der  alteren  Reisen  im  Norden.
Geschichtliche  Beitrage  mitgetheilt  der  Kaiserlichen  Akademie
der  Wissenschaften  zu  St.  Petersburg,  von  Dr.  J.  Hamel,  Akade-
miker,  etc.  Mit  Tradescant's  Portrait  und  einer  Karte.  4o,  1847,
St.  Petersburg.     Leipzig.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL    LIST,  271

Haskel  and  Smith.  A  complete  Descriptive  and  Statistical
Gazetteer  of  the  United  States  of  America,  containing  a  particular
description  of  the  states,  territories,  countries,  districts,  parishes,
cities,  towns  and  villages,  mountains,  rivers,  lakes,  canals,  and
railroads;  with  an  Abstract  of  the  Census  and  Statistics  for  1840.
By  Daniel  Haskel,  A.M.,  and  T.  Calvin  Smith.  New  York,  8vo,
pp.  752.     1844.

Heckeweluer.  a  narrative  of  the  Mission  of  the  United
Brethren  among  the  Delaware  and  Mohegan  Indians,  from  1704
to  1808;  interspersed  with  anecdotes,  historical  facts,  speeches  of
Indians,  and  other  interesting  matter,  by  John  Heckewelder.  4to,
Philadelphia,  1820.

HoMEM.  A  Portolano  of  nine  large  Charts  on  vellum,  drawn
on  a  plane  scale  by  D.  H.     MS.,  British  Museum.

No.  4.  A  Chart  of  the  World,  on  a  jjlane  scale  :
*'  Universalis   Mundi  figura  atque   Navigationum  Orbis  terrarum
scitus."    Diegus  Homem  cosmographus  fecit  hoc  opus  anno  salutis
1558.

No.  10.  The  Eastern  Coast  of  North  America,  the  West  Indian  Islands,
with  the  westernmost  coasts  of  Europe  and  Africa,  southward  to  Cape  Eosse.

{^Quoted  p.  xcvii.)

Jeannin.  Les  Negociations  du  President  Jeannin,  publiees
dans  les  Collections  des  Memoires  relatifs  a  I'Histoire  de  France,
depuis  I'avenement  de  Henri  IV,  jusqu'a  la  Paix  de  Paris  conclue
en  1763  ;  avec  des  Notices  sur  chaque  auteur  et  des  observations
sur  chaque  Ouvrage,  par  M.  Petitot,  Paris,  1822.

Lettre  au  Eoi  ecrite  par  JM.  Jeannin,  le  dit  jour  vingt-cinqui^me  Janvier
1C09,  sur  la  recherche  du  passage  du  Nord.

Vol.  XV,  p.  141.  See  also  Pantheon  litteraire  ;  Choix  de  Chroniques
et  Memoires,  sur  I'Histoire  de  France,  avec  Notices  litteraires  par
J.  A.  C.  Buchon.  Paris,  1838.  Negociations  du  President  Jeannin,
p.  578.

Jonas.  Brevis  Comentarius  de  Islandia :  quo  scriptorum  de
hac  Insula  errores  deteguntur,  et  extraneorum  quorundum  convitijs
ac  calumnijs  quibus  Islandis  liberius  insultare  solent,  occurritur;
per  Arngrimum  Jonam  Islandum.

A  briefe  Commentarie  of  Island  :  wherein  the  errors  of  such  as  have  written
concerning  this  Island  are  detected,  and  the  slanders  and  reproaches  of  cer-


272  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL    LIST.

taine  strangers  which  they  have  used  over-boldly  against  the  people  of  Island
are  confuted,  by  Arngrimus  Jonas  of  Island.  Written  at  Holen  Hialtedalein
Island,  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1592,  the  17  of  the  Kalends  of  May.

See  Hakluyt's  Voj'ages,  vol.  i,  p.  515.

Jones,  see  Hakluyt.

Lambkechtsen.  Korte  Beschrijving  van  de  Ontdekking  en
der  verdere  Lotgevallen  van  Nieuw-Nederland,  weleer  eene  volk-
planting  van  het  gemeenebest  der  vereenigde  Nederlanden  in
America,  door  Mr.  N.  C.  Lambrechtsen  van  Ritthem.  Te  Middel-
burg,  blj  S.  van  Benthem,  mdcccxvtii.  With  a  Map  of  New
Netherland.

Lelewel.  Geographie  du  Moyen  age,  etudiee  par  Joachim
Lelewel,  accompagnee  d' Atlas  et  de  Cartes  dans  chaque  volume.
4  vols.,   8vo,  Bruxelles,   1852,     Atlas,  4to  obi.     Bruxelles,  1850.

LiNSCHOTEN  (van  Huyghen).  Itinerario  Voyagie  ofte  Schip-
vaert,  von  Jan  Huj'ghen  van  Linschoten,  Folio.  Amsterdam,
1595,  with  following  supplements  :  a.  Beschrijvinghe  van  Guinea.
b.  Reys  Geschrijft  van  de  Navigatien  der  Portugaluysers.  c.  Een
seker.  d.  Extract  vande  Renten  des  Coninghs  var  Spaengien.  The
same,  second  edition,  folio,  Amsterdam,  1604  and  1605.  Third
edition,  folio,  Amsterdam,  1614.  Fourth  edition,  folio,  Amsterdam,
1624.     Fifth  edition,  folio,  Amsterdam,  1644.

Voyagie  ofte  shipvaert,  van  Jan  Huyghen  van  Lin-
schoten, van  by  Noorden  vm  langes  Xoorwegen  de  Noortcaep,
Laplant,  Vinlant,  Ruslandt,  de  Witte  Zee,  de  Custen  van  Can-
denoes,  Swetenoes,  Pitzora,  etc.,  door  de  strate  ofte  Engte  van
Nassau  tot  voorby  de  Revier  Oby.  Waer  inne  seer  distinctelicken
verhaels  ghewijse  beschreven  ende  aenghewesen  wordt,  alle  t'
ghene  dat  hem  op  de  selve  Reyse  van  dach  tot  dach  bejeghent
en  voorghecomen  is.  Met  de  afbeeldtsels  van  alle  de  Custen,
Hoecken,  Landen,  Opdoeningen,  Streckinghen,  Coursen,  Mijlen,
ende  d'ander  merckelicke  dingen  meer  :  Gelijc  als  hy  't  alles  selfs
sichtelicken  end  waerachtelicken  nae  't  leven  uytgewerpen  ende
gheannoteert  heeft,  etc.  Anno  1594  end  1598.  Ghedruct  tot
Franeker,  by  Gerard  Ketel.  Containing  a  large  number  of  geo-
graphical diagrams.  Second  edition.  The  same  title.  Amster-
dam, 1624.

Lopez  de  Gomara      La  Historia  General  de  las  Indias,   con


BIB.MOGRAPHICAL    LIST.  273

todos  descubrimientos,  y  cosas  notables  que  han  acaescido  en  ellas,
dende  que  se  ganaron  hasta  agora,  escrita  por  Francisco  Lopez
de  Gomara,  clerigo.  Aiiadiose  de  nuevo  la  descripcion  y  tra^a
de  las  Indias,  con  una  Tabla  alphabetica  de  las  Provincias,  Islas,
Puertos,  Ciudades,  y  nombres  de  conquistadores  y  varones  prin-
cipales  que  alia  han  passado.     En  Anvers.     Anno  m.d.liiii.

J  HIKE  (LiiTKE).  lexbipeKpaTHoe  nvTcuiecTBie  bi  ctuepHbiii  JcjoecTuii
OKeanii,  coBepuiennoe  no  noBcitniio  DMnepaiopa  AjeKcan^pa  I,  na  BoennoMi.
Opnrt  "HoBaa  3eMja,"  Bb  1821,  1822,  1823  h  1824  rojaxi,  •I'.iOTa  Kaniiraui-
JeiiienaiiTOMT.   0e4opoMT>   JuiKe.      CanuTncTopOypri  1828.     (2  Vols.  4to.  maps.)

lAiTKE.  Viermalige  Reise  durch  das  nordliche  Eismeer.  Ger-
man translation  by  Erman  (forming  vol.  ii  of  Berghaus's  Kabinets-
Bibliothek  der  neuesten  Reisen).     8vo,  Berlin,  1835.

M'Clintock.  The  Voyage  of  the  Fox  in  the  Arctic  Seas.  A
Narrative  of  the  Discovery  of  the  Fate  of  Sir  John  Franklin  and  his
Companions,  by  Captain  Sir  F.  Leopold  M'Clintock,  R.N.,  LL.D.,
Honorary  Member  Royal  Dublin  Society.  With  Maps  and  Illus-
trations.    London,  1859.

Makco  Polo.  The  travels  of  Marco  Polo,  a  Venetian,  in  the
thirteenth  century ;  being  a  description  by  that  early  traveller  of
remarkable  places  and  things  in  the  Eastern  parts  of  the  World.
Translated  from  the  Italian,  with  notes,  by  William  Marsden.
With  Maps.     London,  1818,  4to.

Marsden,  see  Marco  Polo.

Martyk.  De  orbe  novo  Petri  Martyris  Anglerii  Mediolanensis,
Protonotarij,  &  Caroli  quinti  Senatoris,  Decades  octo,  diligent!
temporum  observatione  &  utilissimis  annotationibus  illustratse,
suoque  nitori  restituta^ ;  Lahore  et  industria  Richardi  Hakluyti,
Oxoniensis  Angli.  Additus  est  in  usum  lectoris  accuratus  totius
operis  index.     Parisiis,  m.d.lxxxvii.

The  Decades  of  the  Newe  Worlde  or  West  India,

conteynyng  the  navigations  and  conquestes  of  the  Spanyardes,
with  the  particular  description  of  the  moste  ryche  and  large  landes
and  ilandes  lately  found  in  the  West-Ocean  perteynyng  to  the
inheritaunce  of  the  kinges  of  Spayne.  In  the  which  the  diligent
reader  may  not  only  consyder  what  commoditie  may  hereby  chaunce
to  the  hole  Christian  Worlde  in  the  tyme  to  come,  but  also  learne
many  secreates  touchynge  the  lande,  the  sea,  and  the  starres,  very


274  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL    LIST.

necessarie  to  be  knowe  to  al  such  as  shal  atternpte  any  naviga-
tions, or  otherwise  have  delite  to  beholde  the  strange  and  woonder-
full  woorkes  of  God  and  nature.  Wrytten  in  the  Latine  tounge
by  Peter  Martyr  of  Angleria,  and  translated  into  Englysche  by
Rycharde  Eden.  Londini.  In  sedibus  Guilhelmi  Powell,  anno
1555.

Meteren  (Van).  Emanuels  van  Meteren  Historic  der  Neder-
landscher  ende  haerder  Naburen  Oorlogen  ende  Geschiedenissen,
Tot  den  Jare  MVicxii.  Nu  de  laestemael  bij  hem  voor  sijne
doodt  merckelyck  verbetert  end  in  xxxii  Boecken  voltrocken.  Is
mede  hier  by  gevoegt  des  Autheurs  leven.  Verrijckt  beneffens
de  Land-Caerte  met  by  na  hondert  correcte  Conterfeijtsels  vande
voortreflijeste  Personagien  in  dese  Historic  verhaelt.  Alle  cierlijck
na  d'  leven  ghedaen  ende  in  Coperen  platen  gesteken.  Gedruckt
int'  Jaer  ons  Heeren  mdcxiv.  In  s'  Graven-Haghe  by  Hille-
brandt  Jacobssz,  Ordinaris  ende  Ghesvooren  Drucker  van  de  Hog.
ende  Mo.  Heeren  Staten  Generael,  anno  1614.  Met  Privilegie.
Folio,  pp.  671.     (Map.)

MoLYNEXJX  Globe.  This  Globe  is  mentioned  by  John  Davis,
in  a  work  called  "  The  World's  hydrographical  Description,"  4to,
London,  1594,  from  which  an  extract,  containing  the  passage  here
alluded  to  is  to  be  found  in  Hakluyt's  Collection,  vol.  iii,  p.  120.
The  following  is  the  passage  in  question  :  "  Hoio  far  I  proceeded
and  in  ivhatfournie  this  discovery  lyeth,  doth  appear e  upon  the  globe
ivhich  Master  Sanderson  to  his  verye  great  charge  hath  published,
whose  labouring  endeavor  for  the  good  of  his  countrie  deserveth  great
favor  and  commendation.  Made  by  Master  Henry  MuUineux,  a
■man  loell  qualified,  of  a  good  judgment,  and  verye  expert  in  many
excellent  practises,  in  my  selfe  being  the  onely  means  with  Master
Sanderson  to  imply  Master  MuUineux  therein,  whereby  he  is  now
growne  to  a  most  exquisite  perfections

A  later  edition  of  the  same  Globe  is  to  be  found  in  the  Library
of  the  Middle  Temple.  It  is  about  two  feet  high,  and  bears  the
following  inscription  :  Lectoris.  In  hoc  globo  scribendo,  amice
lector,  ubique  sequuti  sumus  castigatissimas  chartas  marinas,  qui-
bus  Hispani  et  Lusitani  in  suis  Americis  et  Orientalibus  Indicis
navigationibus  utuntur.  Nee  non  Anglicorum  aliquot  hominum
excellentium  probatissimas  geographicas  descriptiones  in  septen-


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL    LIST.  275

trionalibus  hujus  Globi  delineandis  partibus,  summa  cum  fide,
diligentia,  summaque  cura  imitati  sumus.  Anno  Domini  1603.
Emerius  Mulleneux,  Angl.  sumptibus  Guilelmi  Sanderson!  Lon-
dinensis  descripsit.

There  are  also  some  other  inscriptions,  especially  a  long  dedi-
cation to  Queen  Elizabeth ;  and  the  following  note,  which  is  in
letterpress  :  This  globe,  belonging  to  the  honourable  Society  of  the
Middle  Temple,  ivas  repaired  in  the  gear  1818  bg  F.  Sf  W.  Neivton,
Globe  makers,  Chancery  Lane.

Sir  John  Barrow,  who  saw  the  globe  shortly  after  its  restoration,
thought  that  the  date  (1603)  must  be  wrong,  because  Davis  had  made
mention  of  this  globe  in  1594.  Sir  John  is,  however,  mistaken.
The  globe  in  the  Middle  Temple  Library  contains  Barents'  deli-
neation oi  Nova  Zembla,  which  was  drawn  in  1596  and  published
in  1598.  The  date  of  the  globe  is  therefore  very  probably  correct,
only  the  copy  in  the  Middle  Temple  is  not  of  the  first  edition.

MouLTON,  see  Yates.

MuiLKEKK,  Mynheer  Berg  van  Dussen.  Bydragen  tot  Ges-
chiedenis  onzer  Kolonizatie  in  Noord-America.  Two  parts,  with-
out place  or  date.     (Amsterdam,  about  1851.)

MuLLER,  see  Bibliographie  Neerlando-Russe,  see  Murphy,
see  Ortelius.

Murphy.  Henry  Hudson  in  Holland.  An  inquiry  into  the
origin  and  object  of  the  voyage  which  led  to  the  discovery  of  the
Hudson  River.  With  bibliographical  notes.  By  H.  C.  Murphy.
Hague,  large  8vo,  pp.  72.     1859.

Apres  V impression  de  cette  feuille  f  ai  regu  la  notice  tres-interes-
sante  de  Mr.  H,  C.  Murphy  (^Ministre  des  Etats-  Unis  atipres  de  la
cour  des  Pags-Bas),  sur  H.  Hudson  et  le  livre  de  Massa,  travail
hautement  remarquable  qui  traite  a,  fond  tout  ce  qui  se  rapporte  A
ce  sujet.  Cette  notice  qui  rC est  tiree  qu^d,  tres-petit  nombre  d'ex-
emplaires  et  pas  dans  le  commerce  7i'est  fitt  distribue  par  rauteur
qu'd  peu  de  personnes.  Fred.  Muller,  Bibliographic  Neerlando-
Russe,  p.  172.

Mr.  Murphy  is  said  to  be  a  studious  man,  who  bestows  con-
siderable pains  on  his  researches.  He  is  the  translator  of  Va?i
der  Doncli's  Vertoogh  {see  Donck).

Navareixe.     Colleccion  de  los  viages  y  descubrimientos  que


276  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL    LIST.

hicieron  por  mar  los  Espanoles  desde  fines  del  siglo  xv.  con  varlos
documentos  ineditos  concernientes  a  la  Historia  de  la  Marina
Castellana  y  de  los  establecimientos  espanoles  en  Indias,  coor-
dinada  e  illustrada  por  Don  Martin  Fernandez  de  Navarrete,  de  la
orden  de  San  Juan,  etc.,  etc.     Tom.  v.     Madrid.,  80,  1825-37.

North  American  Review  and  Miscellaneous  Journal.     Com-,
menced  in  May,  1815,  at  Boston.     Vols,  i  to  ix,  forming  the  First
Series.     Published  from  May,   1815,  to  September,  1819.     New
Series,  vols,  x  to  Ixxxv,  from  January,   1820,  to  October,   1857,
and  continued  quarterly.     Two  parts  forming  a  volume.

O'Callaghan.  History  of  New  Netherlands;  or.  New  York
under  the  Dutch,  by  E.  B.  O'Callaghan.  Two  vols.,  8vo,  New
York,  1846  [quoted  pp.  Ivi,  Ivii).

Ortelius.  Ortelii,  abr.  Theatrum  orbis  Terrarum.  Antverp.
Aegid.  Coppenius  Diesth.  1570,  fol.  [Re'miprimi  par  le  me  me
editeur  en  1571  et  en  1573,  et  puis  chez  Plantin  en  1584,  1592,
1595,  1601,  1624,  etc.)  Fr.  Muller,  Bibliographic  Neerlando-
Russe,  p.  118.

Petitot,  see  Jeannin.

Philobiblon  Society  Miscellanies,  see  Cabot.

PoNTANUs.  Rerum  et  urbis  Amstelodamensium  Historia.  In
qua  Hollandise  primum  atque  inde  Amstelandise,  oppidique  natales,
exordia  progressus,  privilegia,  statuta,  eventaque  mirabilia  cum
novis  urbis  incrementis  comercijsque  ac  navigationibus  longinquis,
aliaque  ad  politiam  spectiantia,  additis  suo  loco  tabulis  eri  incisis,
ad  hsec  usque  tempora,  observata  annorum  serie  accurate  omnia
deducuntur.  Auctore  Job.  Isacio  Pontano.  Accedunt  sub  calcem
auctores  vetustiores  duo  nunquam  editi.  Quorum  nomina  et
seriem  versa  pagella  indicabit.  Amsterodami.  Sub  Cane  vigilant!
excudit  Judocus  Hondius.  An.  D.  1611.  (Folio,  pp.  292  ;  App.,
pp.  40.)

Historische   Beschryvinghe  der  seer  wijt  beroemde

Coop-Stadt  Amsterdam.  Waerinne  benevens  de  eerste  beginselen
ende  opcomsten  der  Stadt,  verscheyden  Privilegien,  ordonantien,
ende  andere  ghedenskweerdighe  Geschiedenissen,  met  het  ghene
de  nieuwe  vergrootinghen  der  Stadt,  als  oock  de  handel  ende
verre  rcysen  ende  Politic  betrefFende  is,  tot  desen  tegenwoordighen
tijt,  nae  het  vervolch  der  jaeren  verhaelt  werdt.     Eerst  in  Latyn


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL    LIST.  277

ghestelt  una  beschreven  door  Joh.  Isacium  Pontacum.  Ende  by
den  selven  oock  voderhandt  weersticb  overslen  ende  op  veel
plaetsen  vermeerdert  ende  verbetert.  Ende  nu  wt  des  Autbeurs
laetste  Copije  in  Nederduyts  overgheset  door  Petrum  Montanum.
Alles  met  copere  Figuren  afghebeelt  ende  verciert.  Tot  Amster-
dam, ghedruckt  by  Judocum  Hondium,  woonende  in  de  Calver
Straet,  in  den  Wackeren  Hont.     Anno  1614.     Met  Privilegie.

PuRCHAS.  His  Pilgrimage,  or  Relations  of  the  World  and  the
Religions  observed  in  all  ages  and  places  discovered  from  the
creation  unto  the  present.  In  foure  parts.  With  briefe  descrip-
tion of  the  countries,  nations,  states,  discoveries,  private  and  publike
customes,  and  the  most  remarkable  rarities  of  nature,  or  humane
Industrie  in  the  same.  London,  by  William  Hanby  for  Henrie
Fetherstone.  1613.  Folio.  Contains  an  account  of  Hudson's
Voyage  from  Gerritz.

His  Pilgrimage.     The  third  edition,  much  enlarged,  with

additions  through  the  whole  work.  London,  1617.  Folio.  This
edition  is,  at  least  as  regards  the  chapter  on  Hudson,  like  the  one
of  1626.     The  Hudson  chapter  is  to  be  found  on  pp.  924-926.

Hakluytus  Posthumus,  or  Purchas  his  Pilgrimes.     Con-

tayning  a  History  of  the  World,  in  Sea  Voyages  and  Lande
Travells,  by  Englishmen  and  others.  Wherein  God's  Wonders  in
Nature  and  Providence,  the  acts,  arts,  varieties,  and  vanities  of
men,  with  a  world  of  the  world's  rarities,  are  by  a  world  of  Eye-
withnesse  related  to  the  world.  Some  left  written  by  Mr.  Hakluyt
at  his  death,  more  since  added,  his  also  perused  and  perfected.
All  examined,  abbreviated,  illustrated  with  notes,  enlarged  with
discourses,  adorned  loith  pictures  and  expressed  in  maps,  in  fower
parts,  each  containing  five  Bookes.  Purchas,  his  Pilgrimage.  The
fourth  edition,  much  enlarged,  with  additions,  etc.  London,  by
William  Hanby  for  Henry  Fetherstone.    1625-6.  Folio.  Five  vols.

Rafn,  see  Antiquixates  American.^.

Ramusio.  Navigazioni  e  viaggi  raccolti  gia  da  M.  C.  B.  Ra-
musio.      Vinegia,  Giunti.     3  vol.  in  fol.      1550-1613.

RiBERO,  see  Sprengel.

RuNDALL  (Thomas,  Esq.)  Narratives  of  early  voyages  under-
taken for  the  Discovery  of  a  passage  to  Cathaja  and  India,  by  the
N.  West ;    with  selection   from    the    Records  of  the  Worshipful


218  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL    LIST.

Fellowship  of  the  Merchants  of  London  trading  into  the  East
Indies,  and  from  MSS.  in  the  Library  of  the  British  Museum,  now
first  published.     1849.     London  (Hakluyt  Society).

ScoRESBY.  An  Account  of  the  Arctic  Regions,  with  a  History
and  Description  of  the  Northern  Whale-Fishery,  by  W.  Scoresby,
jun.,  F.R.S.E.    (Maps  and  Illustrations.)    Two  vols.    Edinb  ,  1820.

Smith.  Description  of  New  England,  by  Capt.  John  Smith.
London.     4to,  pp.  61,  and  a  Map.     1616.

Sparks,  see  American  Biography.

Sprengel.  Ueber  T.  Ribero's  alteste  Welt  Charte,  von  M.  C.
Sprengel.  Weimar,  1795.  Containing  the  following  Map  :  Charte
von  America  aus  der  altesten  noch  unedirten  Welt-Karte  von
Diego  Ribero,  Cosmograph  Karls  V.  vom  Jahre  1529,  ausgehoben
und  nach  dem  handschriftlichen  Originale  in  gleicher  Grosse  ge-
zeichnet  von  F.  K.  Gussefeld.

SxoAV.  The  Annales  or  Generall  Chronicle  of  England,  begun
first  by  Maister  John  Stow,  and  after  him  continued  and  augmented
with  matters  forreyne  and  domestique,  auncient  and  moderne,  unto
the  ende  of  this  yeere  1614,  by  Edmond  Howes,  Gentleman.  Lon-
dini.     Impensis  Thomse  Adams,  1615.

Thompson.  The  Geographical  and  Historical  Dictionary  of
America  and  the  West-Indies,  containing  an  entire  translation  of
the  Spanish  work  of  Don  Antonio  de  Alcedo,  with  large  additions
and  compilations  from  modern  voyages  and  travels,  and  from  ori-
ginal and  authentic  information,  by  G.  A.  Thompson,  Esq.  In  five
volumes.  London,  4to,  1812-1815.  (Vol.  ii,  pp.  263 -266.  Hudson.)

AViLLES.  For  M.  Cap.  Furbysher's  Passage  by  the  Northwest,
Or  China  in  Cathayo,  situated  in  the  East  side  of  Great  Asy.  Of
the  Hand  Giapan,  and  other  litle  lies  in  the  East  Ocean,  by  the
way  from  Cathayo  to  the  Moluccaes,  by  Richarde  Willes.  To  the
ryght  honourable  and  vertuous  Ladie,  the  Lady  Anne,  Countesse
of  Warwyke.     (Eden,  History  of  Travayle  in  the  Indies,  p.  230).

Winter  Jones,  see  Hakluyt.

Yates  and  Moulton,  History  of  New  York,  including  its
Aboriginal  and  Colonial  Annals,  by  John  V.  N.  Yates  and  Joseph
W.  Moulton.  8vo.  New  York,  vol.  i,  A.  Goodrich,  1824  j  vol.  ii,
E.  Bliss,  1826.


INDEX.


Adams,    Clement,   his   Map,   a   pre-
tended copy  of  Seb.  Cabot's  Map,

civ,  clii,  clxxi
Adelung,  see  Bibl.  list
Adrey,  John,  one  of  the  crew,  second

voyage,  23
Akerly,  see  Bibl.  list
Albany,  see  Hudson's  river
Alcedo,  see  Bibl.  list  (Thompson)
American  Ant.  Soc,  see  Bibl.  list  (An-

tiquitates  American£e) ;  Biography,

see  Bibl.  list
Anian,   Strait   of,   a   mere   delusion,

clxxiv
Anskoeld,  Brockhaus',  corruption  of

the    name    of    Johannes    Kolnus,

xcviii
Antiquitates  Americanae,  see  Bibl.  list
Appendix,  contents  of,  1
Archeologia  Americana,  see  Bibl.  list
Archives  of  the  East  India  Company,

search   for  materials    relating   to

Hudson,  XXXV


Baccalaos,  meaning  of  the  term,
Ixxxvi  ;  or  cod  fish,  Ixxvii,  Ixxviii

Balak,  see  Belgians

Barentson,  see  Barents

Barents,  Wm.,  see  Dutch  ;  map-
making  ;  papers  of,  li  ;  writings,
229

Barnes,  John,  one  of  the  crew,  second
voyage,  23

Barrow  (Sir  John),  see  Bibl.  list

Barton,  Dr.,  Legend  of  Hudson's
arrival  among  the  Indians,  xli,  179 ;
confirms  the  tradition  of  Hecke-
welder,  179

Bassendiue,  see  Moscovy  Company

Baxter,  Thomas,  one  of  the  crew,
first  voyage,  1

Beacon  Hill,  89  ;  see  Hudson's  river

Bear  Island  or  Cherie's   Island,  see


Hudson's  geographical  notions,
clxi  ;  touched  by  Hudson,  cxc,  22

Beechey,  see  Bibl.  list

Begin  en  Voortgang  van  de  Neder-
landshe  Oost  Indische  Compagnie,
reprint  of  Van  Meteren,  account  of
Hudson,  xxviii ;  French  translation,
by  Constantin  de  Renneville,  xxix  ;
see  Bibl.  list

Beke,  Dr.,  see  Bibl.  list  (De  Veer)

Belgians,  origin  of  their  expeditions,
Oliver  Brunei's  expedition,  his  an-
terior adventures,  cxxxi  ;  Brunei
made  a  prisoner  by  the  Russians,
sent  to  the  Oby,  and  to  Nova
Zembla,  is  sent  to  Antwerp,  calls
on  John  Balak,  cxxxii  ;  Brunei
goes  to  Enchuysen,  sails  to  the
Pechora,  is  shipwrecked,  cxxxiii ;
Brunei  is  introduced  to  Mercator,
Balak's  letter,  cxxxiii ;  first  Dutch
expedition,  Brunei,  Moucheron,
Peter  Plancius,  cxxxiv  ;  Mouche-
ron (Balthasar  de),  his  undertak-
ings;  Plancius  (Peter),  founds  a
school  of  navigation,  his  pupils,
Barentz  and  Heemskerk,  cxxxv

Belgium,  emigrants  from,  in  Holland
and  Zealand,  xxi

Bell  Sound,  clxxxix  ;  see  Spitzbergen

Bescherelle,  see  Bibl.  list

Beschryvinge  van  Virginia,  Nieuw
Nederlandt,  etc.,  xxxiv;  see  Bibl.
list

Best,  see  Bibl.  list  (Frobisher)

Beuberry,  James,  one  of  the  crew,
first  voyage,  1

Bibliographical  materials,  li

Biddle,  see  Bibl.  list  (Cabot)

Biographia  Britannica,  see  Bibl.  list

Biographic  Universelle,  see  Bibl.  list

Bird,  Cape,  see  Vogel  Ilooke

Blaeu,  see  Bibl.  list

Blefkin,  see  Bibl.  list


2S0


INDEX.


Bonets,  meaning  of  the  word,  50

Braunch,  John,  cook,  second  voyage,
23

Brede  Bay,  see  Lousie  Bay

Breyde-Fiord,  see  Lousie  Bay

Brockhaus,  see  Bibl.  list  ;  Conversa-
tions Lexicon,  see  Anskoeld

Brodhead,  Romeyn  John,  researches
in  the  European  Archives  for  docu-
ments, Iv  ;  History  of  the  State  of
New  York,  Ivi  ;  see  Bibl.  list

Browne,  see  Moscovy  Company

Brownel,  see  Brunei

Brunei,  Oliver,  mentioned  by  Hudson,
40  ;  see  Belgians

Burrough,  his  voyage,  cxxv;  discovers
Burrough  strait,  cxxviii ;  Strait,
see  Novaya  Zembla

Busse  island,  a  geographical  illusion,
its  origin,  cix  ;  not  to  be  seen,  49

Bus  island,  see  Hudson's  geographical
notions,  clxix

Button,  three  ships  sent  out  (1612)
for  his  search  for  Hudson,  188  ;  ex-
pedition in  search  of  Hudson,  194

Cabot,  John,  influence  of  the  Scandi-
navians upon  him,  Ixii  ;  his  early
history,  Ixvii;  supposed  death,  Ixxii

J.,  S.,  Ludovico    and    Sancio,

patent  of  1496,  Ixviii

J.  and  S.,  start  the  search  for  a

N.W.  and  N.  E.  way  to  China,  Ixiii;
origin  of  this  scheme,  ib.,  Ixvi;  first
expedition,  discovery  of  America,
Ixvii  ;  first  expedition,  its  date,
Ixviii;  Pasqualigo's  letter,  ib.;  first
voyage  and  discovery  of  America,
Ixxi

S.  Search  for  N.  W.  passage,

1498,  Ixxii  ;  voyages  in  1516  or
1517,  ib.  ;  discoverer  of  Hudson's
and  Davis'  strait,  Ixxxiii;  his  return
to  England  in  1548,  ciii  ;  re-enters
the  English  service,  his  adventures
since  1497,  cxx,  cxxi  ;  his  plan  to
sail  to  the  north-east,  its  origin,  at
first  intended  for  Venice,  cxxii-iii  ;
planisphere,  Clement  Adams'  copy,
clxxi  ;  the  real  originator  of  the
logbook,  his  precepts  followed  by
the  Moscovy  Company,  clxxix  ;  see
longitude  ;  see  map-making

Canada,  the  coast  of,  clxxii

Cape  Charles,  see  Virginia


Cape  Cod  discovered  by  Captain  Gos-
nold,  66  ;  Juet's  and  Purchas'  mis-
takes about  its  latitude,  ii5. ;  whether
discovered  by  Hudson,  165

Cape  Hopewell,  Scandinavia,  43

Cape  of  Norway  (North  Cape),  147

Cape  Sable,  55

Cape  Severo-Vostochnoi,  see  Hudson's
geographical  notions,  civ

Cape  Tabin,  see  Hudson's  geographi-
cal notions,  cliv,  civ;  cxcv;  (Cape
of  Tartary),  Promontorium  Scythi-
cum,  36

Cape  Taimur,  see  Hudson's  geogra-
phical notions,  civ

Cape  Tapin,  Pliny's  only  authority,
cliv

Cape  Walsinghara,  see  Davis

Cape  Weggs,  see  King  James  his  Cape

Cape  Wolstenholme,  96,  106

Cartier,  see  French

Cartwrighte,  John,  see  Waymouth

Cathay  or  Northern  China,  vaguely
described  by  Rubruquis  and  Marco
Polo,  Ixx  ;  searched  for  by  the
Cabots,  supposed  to  be  found,  Ixx

Catlin,  see  Bibl.  list

Catskill  Landing,  87 ;  mountain,  see
Hudson's  river

Chancellor,  Richard,  reaches  Russia,
cxxv

Charles's  island,clxxxvi;  see  Hudson's
geographical  notions,  clxii  ;  see
Mount  Charles

Cherie  Island,  see  Bear  Island

Chesapeake,  see  Virginia  ;  Bay  en-
tered by  Hudson,  73

Ghytrseus,  see  Bibl.  list

Claudia  Island  (Maria's  Vineyeard),
see  Verazzano

Cod,  crew  of  the  Half  Moon,  fishing
for,  57

Cogswell,  Joseph,  see  Verrazzano

Professor,  translation  of  Ve-


razzano's  letter,  side  notes,  ]

Colbert,  see  Coolbrand;  Colbert,  Cole-
burne,  Coolbrand,  see  Coleburne

Colburne  (Colbert  or  Coolbrand),
Master,  fourth  voyage,  xliii,  ccx,
93,  98,  180  ;  see  Coolbrand

Coligny,  see  French

Collections  of  the  Hist.  Soc.  of  New
York,  see  Bibl.  list

Colin 's  Cape,  see  Hudson's  geographi-
cal notions,  clxii,  clxxxvii


INDEX.


281


Collins  Cape  discovered,  14  ;  in  81°
30',  16

Collins,  William,  mate,  first  voyage,
1  ;  lands  on  the  shore  of  Spitz-
bergen,  14

Colman,  John,  boatswain  of  the  crew,
first  voyage,  1  ;  lands  on  the  shore
of  Spitzbergen,  14;  his  death,  30

Colman's  point,  80

Columbus,  influence  of  the  Scandina-
vians upon  him,  he  visits  Iceland,
Ixii

Compass,  see  Longitude

Coney  Island,  tradition  about  Hud-
son's landing,  xlii;  see  Hudson's
river

Cooke,  John,  one  of  the  crew,  first
voyage,  1  ;  boatswain,  second
voyage,  23  ;  goes  on  shore  in  Nova
Zembla,  33

Cornelisoon,  see  Dutch

Cortereal,  Gaspar  de,  his  voyage,  dis-
covery of  S.  Lawrence  river,  Ixxvi ;
explores  Newfoundland,  Ixxvi

Cortez,  Ferdinand,  interest  in  the
search  of  a  passage,  relatio  quarto,
Ixxxiv  ;  plan,  Ixxxv

Costin  Shar,  cxcv  ;  exploration  of,
cxcvi

Costing  Shar  (Costing  Sarch),  name
of  Strait  in  Nova  Zembla,  40

Cris,  name  given  by  the  Mexicans  to
a  flame-shaped  poinard,  188

Cross-staff,  15

Cumberland  Strait,  see  Davis

Current  near  Greenland,  4,  29  ;  near
Scandinavia,  47,  49,  51  ;  near  the
new  England  shore,  62,  63

Currents,  N.E.,  clxxxviii ;  near  Nova
Zembla,  34  ;  polar,  76,  95


Da  Cosa,  see  Map-making

Daniel,  clix,  clx

Davis,  John,  first  voyage,  ex  ;  dis-
covers the  south  of  Greenland,  and
calls  it  Desolation,  discoversGilbert's
Sound,  discovers  Cape  Walsingham,
explores  Cumberland  Strait,  cxii  ;
second  voyage,  reaches  the  south
of  Greenland,  reaches  Gilbert  Sound,
mutiny,  cxiii,  cxiv  ;  second  voyage,
sends  the  Mermaid  home,  sails  in
the  Moonshine,  explores  Cumber-
land     Strait,     Frobisher     Strait,


Hudson's  Strait,  Davis'  Inlet,
Tovuctoke  Inlet,  csv;  third  voyage,
sails  to  Gilbert  Sound,  tries  to  set
up  a  pinnace  destroyed  by  the  Es-
quimaux, leaves  Gilbert  Sound,
sails  up  to  72°  12',  returns,  crosses
Davis'  Strait,  explores  Cumberland
Strait,  visits  Frobisher's  and  Hud-
son's Strait,  cxvii-viii  ;  see  Bibl.
list.  ;  see  map-making

Davis'  Inlet,  see  Davis

Davis'  Strait,  see  Davis,  John  ;  clxx  ;
exploration  of,  cxliv ;  discovered
by  Cabot,  Cabot's  map,  Mr.  D'Ave-
zac's  opinion,  Ixxiii

Day,  Richard,  one  of  the  crew,  first
voyage,  1

Deer  Point,  39  ;  see  Nova  Zembla

De  la  Dale,  see  Dutch

De  Laet,  John,  Director  of  Dutch
East  India  Company,  xxix  ;  cele-
brated geographer,  his  description
of  America,  its  character,  xxxii  ;
makes  Hudson  return  to  Amsterdam,
xxxiii ;  tries  to  connect  the  voyage
of  H.  Hudson  with  the  West  India
Company's  claim,  xxxiii  ;  manu-
script materials,  false  rumour  about
their  having  turned  up,  xxxiv  ;
Nieuw  Werelt,  when  published,
XXXV  ;  see  Bibl.  list

Denmark,  see  Hudson's  geographical
notions,  clxii

Desolation,  see  Davis

De  Veer  Gerrit,  see  Bibl.  list

Diggs,  see  Cape  Digs

Donck's,  Van  der.  Description  of  New
Netherland, xxxvii;  new  statements
seem  to  be  spurious,  xxxvii  ;
Vertoogh  van  Nieuw  Nederland,
its  purpose,  xxxix ;  Beschry vinghe
van  Nieuw  Nederland,  its  purpose,
inventions  with  regard  to  Hudson's
career,  xxxix  ;  legend  of  Hudson's
arrival  among  the  Indians,  xli  ;
fictions,  xl  ;  sources,  xli  ;  note
about  Wampum  or  bead  money,  li  ;
description,  extracts  from,  about
Hudson's  third  voyage,  167;  anxiety
to  prove  that  New  Netherland  be-
longs by  right  to  the  Dutch,  170  ;
observations  about  the  Wampum,
285  ;  see  Bibl.  list

Drake,  Francis,  see  Frobisher

Drift  wood,  in  the  Gulf  stream,  25,  27

3G


INDEX.


Dutch,  first  expedition,  Enchuysen
men,  Vaick,  Maelson,  Nai,  Lin-
schoten,  cxxxiii  ;  the  Mercury,
Linschoten,  Tetgales,  Cornelisoon,
cxxxv ;  the  Swan,  Nai,  Strick-
botte,  Dela  Dale,  Splindler,  cxxxv;
Amsterdam  vessel,  commanded  by
Barents,  cxxxvi ;  they  sail,cxxxvi;
Nai  and  Tetgales  penetrate  into
Kara  Sea,  believe  to  have  passed
the  Oby,  cxxxvii;  Barents  separates
from  the  others;  Nai  and  Tetgales
sail  through  Pel's  Strait,  calling
it  Nassau  Strait,  cxxxvii  ;  different
instructions  given  to  Nai  and  Tet-
gales by  Maelson,  and  to  Barents
by  Plancius,  cxxxvii  ;  Barents  dis-
covers the  Orange  Islands,  returns,
meets  Nai  and  Tetgales,  they  sail
home  together,  cxxxviii  ;  Lin-
schoten's  exaggerated  account,
cxxxviii ;  second  expedition,  seven
ships  under  Nai  and  Barents,  no
success,  Moucheron  and  his  friends
give  up  the  N.E.  search,  cxxxviii  ;
third  expedition,  Plancius'  plans,
rewards  promised  by  the  States,
two  vessels  fitted  out  under  Heems-
kerk,  Barents,  and  Ryp,  cxxxix  ;
Ryp  and  Barents  quarrel,  dis-
covery of  Bear  Island,  discovery  of
Spitzbergen,  cxxxix  ;  Spitzbergen
explored,  Dr.  Beke's  and  Mr
Peterman's  theory,  Hondius's
opinion,  cxl  ;  Barents  and  Ryp
separate,  Barents  sails  to  Nova
Zembla,  winters  and  dies,  Heem
skerk's  return,  cxli

Dyre-fiord,  see  Derefer

Du  Ponceau,  see  Bibl.  list


East  India  Company,  its  purpose,  and
privilege,  cc  ;  Archives  of  the,  at
Middleburg,fateof,  xxxvi  ;  present
state  of,  XXXV

Eden,  see  Bibl.  list

Edge's  Journal,  xix

Enchuysen,  see  Dutch

England,  see  Hudson's  geographical
notions,  clxii

English,  privileges  of  the  Hanse,
profits  from  them  no  longer
adequate  to  the  sacrifices,  cii  ;
suffer  from   the    changes    in   the


roads    of    trade,    cii  ;     return    of

Sebastian  Cabot,  ciii
Engroneland,  4  ;  of  the  Zeni,  cxciii
Esopus  Island,  see  Hudson's  river
Everet,  see  Juet

Fair  Foreland,  clxxxvi

Faroe  Islands,  22,  149

Faroer  Islands,  see  Hudson's  geogra-
phical notions,  clxii

Feirce,  Michel,  one  of  the  crew,
second  voyage,  23

Fishing  for  cod  and  herrings,  57  ;
savages,  59,  60

Florida,  meaning  of  the  term,  Ixxxvi

Foreland  Fiord,  clxxxvii

Foreland,  see  Prince  Henries  Cape

Forster,  see  Bibl.  list

Fotherby's  Journal,  xix

Foxe's,  Luke,  Captain,  description  of
Hudson's  fourth  voyage,  180  ;
(North-west  Fox)  its  character,
xlii ;  insinuations,  xliii ;  see  Bibl.
list

French,  North  West  Expeditions
begin,  Ixxviii ;  discover  the  St.
Lawrence  river,  Ixxix ;  colonize
North  America,  Cartier,  Roberval,
Coligny,  c  ;  continue  their  fishe-
ries near  Newfoundland,  ib.

Probisher,  Gilbert,  and  Willis,  their
illusions,  civ

' Martin,  his  voyages,  their  cha-
racter, their  originality  much  ex-
aggerated, cvi  ;  advised  by  Willes,
Gilbert,  Barrow,  Dee,  Hakluyt,  and
Lok,  ib.  ;  brings  much  powerful  in-
terest to  bear  on  his  enterprise,  ib.;
first  voyage,  cvii ;  second  and  third
voyage,  cviii;  voyages  produce  geo-
graphical errors,  ib.;  tries  to  raise
money  for  a  fourth  voyage,  his
ill-success,  assistance  of  Francis
Drake  and  of  the  Earl  of  Leicester,
ex  ;  voyages,  their  geographical  re-
sults, cix

Frobisher's  Strait,  exploration  of,
cxliv  ;  see  Davis  ;  errors  as  to  its
situation,  cviii-cix  ;  (Lumley's  In-
let), clxx  ;  see  Bibl.  list  ;  see  also
Willes  and  Hakluyt,  Bibl.  list ;  see
map  making

Gallatin,  see  Bibl.  list
Galvao,  see  Bibl.  list


INDEX,


Gamas,  Rio  de,  see  Hudson's  river

Gemma,  see  map  making

Geographical  notions  of  the  fifteenth
century,  Ixiv

Gerrard,  see  Gerritz

Gerritz,  or  Gerrard  Hessel,  names
ypitzbergen,  5  ;  his  position,  xliii  ;
Collection  of  Voyages,  xliv,  xlv  ;
German  reprints,  xlviii  ;  charac-
teristics of  them,  xliv  ;  accounts  of
Hudson's  two  last  voyages,  181  ;
third  and  fourth  voyage  from  the
Prolegomena,  153;  Hudson's  third
and  fourth  voyage  from  the  Latin
edition  of  1612,  185  ;  Hudson's
third  and  fourth  voyage  from  the
Second  Latin  edition,  1613,  189  ;
see  Bibl.  list

Gilbert,  Humfrey,  attributes  a  voyage
for  a  north-west  passage  to  Scolmus,
a  Dane,  cv ;  see  north-west  passage ;
see  Bibl.  list

Gilbert's  Sound,  see  Davis

Gilby,  Humfrey,  one  of  crew,  second
voyage,  23

Godyn,  one  of  the  Directors  of  the
Dutch  West  India  Company,
165

Gomez,  Estevan,  Peter  Martyr's
opinion  about  him,  Ixxxzii  ;  unde-
served contempt,  Ixxxviii  ;  chart,
ib.;  meets  Cabot  at  Badajoz,  Ixxxix;
opposed  by  Peter  Martyr,  ib.;  offers
to  find  a  north-west  j^assage,  ib.  ;
opposed  by  the  king  of  Portugal,
xc  ;  sails,  ib.;  his  explorations,  ib.;
captures  savages,  ib.  ;  outline  of
Hudson's  river,  xci;  anecdote  about
clavos  or  esclavos,  ib. ;  did  he  explore
the  Hudson's  River  ?  xcii  ;  was  he
acquainted  with  Verazzano's  voy-
age I  xciii

Gosnold,  Bartholomew,  discovers  Cape
Cod,  66

Greenland,  called  Greenland,  Grone-
land,  and  Engroneland,  Ixi;  called
Grocland  by  Koluus,  xcviii;  history
of  its  geography,  Zeui  chart,  Hon-
dius'  map  copied  from  the  Zeni,
Ortelius,  Mercatoi',  Frobisher  made
use  of  it,  clxiii ;  exploration  of,
ib.;  given  unto  the  Zealanders  to
fish,  cxci;  names  of,  4,  20  ;  Hold
with  Hope,  the  land  of,  6  ;  Mount
of  God's  Mercie,  3  ;  Young's  Cape,


ib.;  is  Spitzbergen,  clxix  ;  see  Hud-
son's geographical  notions

Grocland,  see  Greenland

Groneland,  4;  is  Greenland,  clxix

Gronland,  see  Groneland

Gylbert,  Adrian,  receives  letters
patent  for  a  north-west  voyage,  ex


Hakluyt's  Headland,  clxxxvii ;  see
Hudson's  geographical  notions

Hakluyt,  see  Bibl.  list

Half  Moon,  The,  compelled  by  the
crew  to  enter  Dartmouth,  166;  de-
tained at  Dartmouth,  and  returns
to  the  fatherland  1610,  ib. ;  sails
to  the  Canary  islands,  167

Hamel,  von,  see  Bibl.  list

Haskel  and  Smith,  see  Bibl.  list

ffeckewelder,  Dr.,  legend  of  Hudson's
arrival  among  the  Indians,  xli;  see
Bibl.  list

Henry  VII  assists  Seb.  Cabot,  Ixxii  ;
patent  to  the  Cabots  iu  1496,  Ixviii ;
privilege  to  the  three  Portuguese,
Ixxvii

Henry  VIII,  Thome's  letter  to  him,
xciv  ;  sends  out  a  north-west  ex-
pedition in  1527,  fate  of  that  ex-
pedition, xcv

Herrings,  near  Nova  Scotia,  57

Hilles,  Thomas,  one  of  the  crew,
second  voyage,  23;  sees  a  mermaid,
•  28

Hist.  Soc.  of  New  York,  see  Collec-
tions, Bibl.  list

Hold  with  Hope,  clxxxv

Holland,  sudden  growth  of,  xxi;  see
Hudson's  geographical  notions,  clxii

Homem,  Diego,  see  Bibl.  list  and  map
making

Hondius,  Jodocus,  map  of  Arctic  re-
gions, xlix

Hopoghan,  see  Hoboken

Hore,  Master,  his  expedition,  xcv

Hudson,  Henry  :  i.  Notices  concern-
ing his  i^erson  :  Biographical  frag-
ments, clxx  ;  he  could  not  well
understand  Dutch,  xxxiv  ;  his  long
stay  in  Holland  according  to  Van
der  Donck,  xl,  167  ;  his  and  Plan-
cius'  intercourse,  xlviii,  181,  186,
187,  191  ;  his  intercourse  with
Jeannin,  cxcvii  ;  was  he  a  gentle-
man i  clxxvi


284


INDEX.


-  II.  Papers  left  by  him:  His  share
in  Playse's  logbook  of  the  first  voy-
age, vi,  vii,  xix,  145,  14C ;  his  own
journal  of  the  second  voyage,  vii,
viii ;  his  share  in  Juet's  journal  of
the  third  voyage,  x;  Van  Meteren's
account  of  the  third  voyage  proba-
bly due  to  Hudson,xxviii;  fragments
of  Hudson's  own  journal  of  the  third
voyage  in  De  Laet,  xxxii,  158;  ab-
stract of  his  journal  of  the  fourth
voyage,  xii,  xiii,  xiv,  93  ;  letter
from  Iceland,  xv,  135  ;  chart  of
Hudson's  Bay  and  Strait,  xliv-
xlvi.

III.  His  geographical  opinions,

cliv-clxxvi

IV.  Summarg  of  his  career,  iii

V.  First  Voyage.  Hudson  takes

sacrament  at  Saint  Ethelburga,
April  19, 1607;  his  crew,  1;  sails  to
the  North  Pole,  ib. ;  mentioned  as
author  of  part  of  the  logbook  of  the
first  voyage,  1-12  ;  Young's  Cape
discovered,  clxxxiv,  3,  6;  Mount  of
God's  Mercy  discovered,  clxxxiv,
3,6,8;  Hold  with  Hope,  clxxxv,  7;
Spitzbergen  first  seen,  8 ;  the  first
navig-ator  who  sailed  along  the  ice
barrier,  clxxxvi ;  Vogel  Hooke
Vogel-hoeck,  Bird  Cape,  Fair  Fore-
land), clxxxvi,  9;  Charles  Island,
clxxxvii,  10;  Foreland  Fiord  (the
Great  Indraught),  clxxxvii,  11  ;
west  coast  of  Spitzbergen;  morses;
seals,  11;  colour  of  the  sea,  ib.,  12,
13;  Collins  sees  the  north  of  Spitz-
bergen ;  Colin's  Cape  ;  Hondius'
chart,  clxxxvii,  13;  Newland  of  the
Dutch,  13  ;  Hakluyt's  Headland,
Hondius'  chart,  clxxxvii,  145;  Col-
man  and  Collins  land  on  the  north
shore  of  Spitzbergen,  14 ;  Whale
Bay  discovered,  clxxxvii,  14,  20,
145;  a  whale  comes  under  the  keel
of  Hudson's  ship  in  Whale  Bay,  14;
footprints  of  animals,  ib.\  passage
to  the  north  stopped  by  ice  ;  no
passage  between  78^°  and  82°,  16;
highest  latitude  reached  by  Hud-
son ;  north-east  current  1  clxxxix  ;
discovery  of  Bell  Sound,  ib.,  17 ;
Ice  Sound,  12;  Point  Lookout,  20;
intends  to  return  by  the  north  of
Greenland   through  Davis'  Strait,


ih.;  southern  part  of  Spitzbergen,
cxcii,  21  ;  Bear  Island,  cxc,  22 ;
Faroe  Island,  ib.,  ib.  ;  Hudson's
Touches  (Jan  Mayen),  cxcii,  145 ;
Hudson's  Point;  Young's  Foreland,
cxcii ;  Faroe  Isle,  22  ;  home,  ib. ;
the  original  plan  of  his  first  voy-
age developed  by  late  experience,
cxciii

—  VI.  Second  Voyage.  His  crew,
23 ;  Lowfoot  (Loff"oet),  LofFoden
Island,  Norway,  24;  North  Cape,
35;  driftwood,  ib.,  27;  search  for  a
passage  between  Spitzbergen  and
Nova  Zembla,  cxcvii,  27,  28;  whales
seen,  28;  mermaid  seen  by  Hilles
and  Rayner,  28-139;  bears  roaring
on  the  ice;  seals,  30;  Nova  Zembla
in  sight,  32  ;  Swart  Clifie  (Nova
Zembla),  ib.  ;  Yuzhnuy  Gusinuy
Musi  (Nova  Zembla),  ib. ;  Cooke,
Juet,  and  Ludlow  go  on  shore,  33;
grass  in  Nova  Zembla,  ib.;  crosses
in  Nova  Zembla,  ib.  ;  whale  fins
found  in  Nova  Zembla,  34;  birds
and  eggs  in  Nova  Zembla,  ib.;  Cost-
ing Shar  river  and  island,  cxcv,  35;
Hudson  intends  to  pass  the  Oby,
cxcv,  36;  Juet  lands,  36;  deer  in
Nova  Zembla,  37;  theriver  searched,
38;  Deer  Point,  39;  ice  formed  by
the  many  rivers,  ib. ;  Ludlow  Ar-
nold goes  ashore,  ib.;  Wardhuus,
Cape  Hopewell,  North  Kiene,  North
Cape,  43  ;  Hudson  unfit  to  go
through  Vaigats  Strait,  cxcv  ;  in-
tends to  try  for  a  passage  through
Frobisher's  or  Hudson's  Strait,
cxcv,  44 ;  summary  of  his  second
voyage,  cxciv-cxcvi

VII.  Third  Voyage,  from  Van

Meteren's  Hist,  der  Nederlanden  ;
Meteren's  erroneous  reference  to
30th  book,  147  ;  Hudson  at  Am-
sterdam, cxcix-ccii ;  his  vessel  a
vlieboat,  147  ;  Half  Moon,  154,
254 ;  Goede  Hoop,  cciii  ;  crew
partly  English,  partly  Dutch,  ccv,
148  ;  mate  a  Dutchman,  151,  ccv  ;
Hudson's  propositions  ;  either  to
go  to  the  coast  of  America,  as
suggested  by  some  letters  and
maps  sent  to  him  by  Captain
Smith,  or  to  direct  their  search  to
Davis's    Strait,    148 ;    directs    his


INDEX.


285


course  northwards  to  Nova  Zembla;
some  of  his  men  had  been  in  the
East  Indies;  quarrels  between  Eng-
lish and  Dutch,  148;  John  Smith's
maps,  ccvi,  148;  North  Cape,  45,
147;  Assumption  Point,  Scandi-
navia, 46;  sun  spot,  ccvii,  46;  Lo-
foote,  ih.,  47  ;  Wardhouse,  46;  Sen-
jen  (Zenam,  Sanieu),  ib.  ;  Faroe
Islands,  Strome  and  Muggenes,  48,
149;  Busse  Island,  sought  for  in
vain,  49 ;  Nova  Scotia  (Nova
Francia,  Newfoundland),  55,  160,
154;  Banc  des  Sables,  off  Mahony
Bay,  57;  fishing  for  cod  and  her-
rings, ib.\  savages,  59,  60;  cuts  a
new  fore  mast,  60,  149  ;  quarrels
with  savages,  61,  149;  Barnstaple
Peninsula,  savages,  64;  tobacco  and
pipes.  65;  copper,  ^■|5l.;  Cape  Cod  (?)
155  ;  Barnstaple,  whether  called
New  IloUcind  by  Hudson,  165  ;
Stage  Harbour,  Massachusetts,  65;
James  River  (King's  River),  Vir-
ginia, 70;  off  Nag's  Head,  South
Carolina,  72  ;  banks  of  Virginia,
73;  York  River,  ih.;  reaches  Cape
Charles,  74,  156;  New  Point  Com-
fort, 74;  Virginia  Islands  probably
Smith  Islands,  ih.;  Delaware  Bay,
ib..,  157  ;  Sandy  Hook,  77,  157  ;
Staten  Island,  78 ;  Coney  Island,  pro-
bable landing  place,^5. ;  furs,  mantles
of  feathers,  hemp,  ib.  ;  dried  cur-
rants, ib.;  several  sailors  land,  ih.;
yellow  and  red  copper,  ib.;  stores  of
maize,  ih.;  the  country  full  of  great
oaks,  ib.;  the  natives  come  aboard
and  seem  very  glad  and  civil,  ib.;
mouth  of  Hudson's  river  explored
by  Hudson,  ib.;  natives  bring  to-
bacco in  exchange  for  knives  and
beads,  ih.;  John  Colman  lands,  80;
slain  in  the  fight,  ih.  ;  Colman's
Point,  where  Colman  was  buried,
ih.;  East  Sandbank  in  the  Narrows,
good  harbour,  81;  intercourse  with
Indian ;  two  men  taken ;  one  escapes ;
Indians  accused  of  treachery  by
Juet  ;  they  bring  copper  and  pots  ;
they  bring  oysters;  twenty  canoes
full  of  men,  ih.,  82;  Hudson's  river
full  of  fish,  salmon,  83;  Verplanck
Point,  i^.;  Hony  Point,  ib.;  Round
Top,  ih.  ;   Catskill  or  Kaatshenge


mountains,  ih.;  Hudson  lands,  84,
161;  neighbourhood  of  Albany,  84;
Indians  bring  maize,  pompions,  and
furs,  ib.;  bring  beavers' and  otters'
skins  ;  scene  of  drunkenness,  85  ;
highest  point  reached  in  Hudson's
river  by  Hudson,  ih.;  boat  expedi-
tion to  the  sources  of  Hudson's
river,  return,  ih.,  158  ;  Hudson's
Town,  87;  stores  of  chestnuts,  ih.;
Esopus  Island,  89;  trade  with  In-
dians, 150;  they  bring  maize;  ap-
proach in  a  canoe,  89;  supposed  to
be  treacherous,  90;  a  stone  to  cut
glass  with  (Aprilis  ?)  ih.;  a  cliff,
supposed  copper  or  silver  mine,  91;
Hooken,  opposite  New  York,  ih.;
Skirmish  and  slaughter  of  Indians,
%. ;  fight  with  Indians,  Hudson's
river,  by  Juet's  order,  ih.;  Manna-
hata  (Manhattan),  the  country  of
New  York,  ih.;  leaves  the  coast  of
America,  92;  the  mate,  a  Dutch-
man, advises  to  winter  in  New-
foundland, to  which  he  is  opposed
by  Hudson,  who,  fearing  they
would  consume  their  provisions,
sails  to  Ireland,  151  ;  arrives  at
Dartmouth,  93,  151;  the  company
order  Hudson  to  return,  but  he  is
commanded  by  the  government  not
to  leave  England,  153;  return  of
Half  Moon  to  Amsterdam ;  Half
Moon  finally  lost,  254;  summary  of
his  third  navigation,  cxcvi
—  VIII.  Fourth  Voyage.  Table
ccx;  abstract  of  the  journal,  93;
sails  from  Saint  Katharine's  Pool,
ih.;  Harwich,  98;  Sheppey  Island,
ih.;  Coleburne  (Colbert,  Coolbrand)
sent  to  London  with  a  letter  to  the
Adventurers,  93,  98,  180;  Orkney
and  Shetland  Islands,  94,98;  Faroer
(Farre)  Islands,  ih. ;  Westmony
(Westman  or  Westmanna)  Islands,
ib.;  Iceland,  Hudson's  letter,  ib.,
135;  Mount  Hecla,  98;  Dyre-fiord
(Derefer,  Diraford),  99 ;  Breyde-
fiord  (Lousie  Bay),  ib.  ;  Green-
land, S,  E.  (Frobisher's  Straits),  ih
Greenland,  E.,  Groneland,  ib.,  99
Greenland,  S.  E.  (Desolation),  ih.
Resolution  Island,  95,  100;  coast
of  Labrador,  95;  (Akpatok)  Desire
Provoketh,  ih.,   102;  Saddle  Back


286


INDEX.


and  neighbouring  islands  (Isles  of
God's  Mercy),  96,  103;  Long  Island
(Hold  with  Hope),  96;  great  and
whirling  sea,  97  ;  entered  one
hundred  leagues  further  than  any
one  else  had  been,  101;  Mutiny  in
Ungava  Bay,  ib. ;  ice,  aground  in
one  hundred  and  twenty  fathom
depth,  102  ;  Jackmau's  Sound  (a
great  bay),  103;  driftwood,  ib.  ;
a  covey  of  partridges,  ib.;  North
Bluff,  104;  North  Coast,  Upper
Savage  Islands,  ib. ;  South  Coast,
Prince  Henries  Cape  or  Foreland,
ib.  ;  Queen  Anne's  Cape  or  Fore-
land, 105  ;  King  James  his  Cape,
ib.;  Mount  Charles,  ib.;  Salisbury
Island  (Salisbury  Foreland),  97,
105  ;  Salsburie,  106  ;  Cape  Wol-
steuholme,  Cape  Diggs,  scurvy
grass,  fowls,  97,  107  ;  they  lose
their  anchor,  109  ;  sea  of  two
colours,  black  and  white,  ib. ;  North
Bay,  ib.;  Michaelmasse  Bay,  pro-
bably Hannah  Bay,  ib. ;  they  see
footing  of  a  man,  ib.  ;  they  strike
on  a  rock,  ib. ;  Juet,  the  mate,
and  Clement,  the  boatswain,  de-
posed, Bylot  and  Wilson  in  their
stead,  ib.,  137  ;  they  spend  three
months  in  a  labyrinth  without  end,
find  a  place,  haul  the  ship  aground,
and  are  frozen  in,  110;  John  Wil-
liams, gunner,  dies,  111;  Greene's
bad  condition,  ib.  ;  his  conspiracy
and  quarelling,  112,  Hudson  dis-
putes with  the  carpenter  about  the
building  of  a  house  on  shore,  ib. ;
they  suffer  greatly  from  cold,  113  ;
stores  of  ptarmigan,  which  left  the
place  with  the  coming  spring,  ib.;
antiscorbutic  medicine,  114  ;  In-
dian comes  to  their  ship,  ib.  ;  they
go  a  fishing  and  catch  five  hundred
fish,  115;  Green  and  Wilson  con-
tinue to  plot  to  take  the  net  and
the  shallop,  ib.;  they  weigh  and
start  north-west,  fall  again  into  the
ice  in  sight  of  land,  116  ;  Hudson
orders  a  search  for  bread,  117  ;
Green  and  Wilson  tell  Pricket  that
they  will  shift  the  company,  ib.  ;
Greene  tells  Prickett  that  he  must
take  his  fortune  in  the  shallop,  118  ;
(jireeu    and    Wilson    swear   on   the


bible  not  to  harm  any  man,i5.;  Juet
endeavours  to  persuade  Prickett  to
join  the  mutineers,  118  ;  Michel
Perie,  John  Thomas,  Adrian  Moler
join  Green,  119  ;  Prickett  endea-
vours to  persuade  the  mutineers  to
desist,  ib.  ;  Bennet  follows  Green,
ib.  ;  Prickett  obtains  from  Green
and  Wilson  that  the  carpenter
should  be  spared,  120;  Prickett  be-
seeches the  mutineers  to  desist,  121 ;
Green  and  another  man  bind  Hud-
son, ib.;  the  crew  put  all  the  officers
outof  theship  and  sail  home  to  Eng-
land, 122  ;  the  shallop  is  hauled  up
to  the  ship  side,  and  the  sick  men
put  in,  121;  the  carpenter  follows
Hudson,  his  farewell,  122  ;  names
of  the  persons  exposed  in  the
shallop,  ib.  ;  the  shallop  is  left  to
its  fate,  123  ;  they  came  to  an
island  and  anchor,  ib. ;  they  find  a
weede  which  they  called  cockle
grass,  ib.;  Greene  proposes  to  Juet
the  charge  of  the  ship,  124  ;  they
go  north-east  contrary  to  Juet's
desire  who  wanted  to  go  north-
west, ib.  ;  they  reach  foure  islands,
probably  not  far  from  Portland
point,  ib.  ;  Green  accuses  Prickett
of  treason,  125  ;  they  reach  the
Romney's  island  (certainly  near
the  Mosquito  bay),  ib. ;  they  go
into  Mosquito  bay,  ib. ;  they  lose
their  way,  126  ;  they  double  the
point  of  the  north  land,  ib. ;  they
come  nearer  to  the  mouth  of  the
streights  (Cape  Diggs)  and  anchor,

127  ;  they  meet  some  Esquimaux,

128  ;  Indian  manner  of  fowling
(with  a  snare),  ib. ;  Esquimaux
dogs,  129  ;  Indians  prove  traitors,
130  ;  Prickett  assailed  by  the
savages,  ib. ;  Green  slain,  ib. ;
Wilson  dies,  131  ;  Verse  dies,  ib.  ;
Isles  of  God's  mercy.  Cape  Chidley,
132  ;  desolations  (south-east  coast
of  Greenland,  ib.  ;  near  the  coast
of  Ireland,  133  ;  Juet's  death,  ib.  ;
they  reach  the  Bay  of  Galway,
Dursey  island,  Fowey,  assistance
of  Waymouth  and  Taylor,  134;
they  arrive  at  Plymouth,  135  ;  the
king  orders  an  expedition  for  the
search    of  him    and   of   his   com-


INDEX.


287


panions,  183  ;  mutiny,  according
to  Hessel  Gerritz,  193

Hudson's  (Rudson's)  Point,  cxcii

Hudson's  River,  discovered  by  Ver-
razzano,  Ixxxi,  211 ;  did  Gomez
explore  it  ?  xcii  ;  called  Rio  de
Gamas,  xciii  ;  Spreugel's  opinion,
xciii  ;  on  early  maps  taken  from
Ribeiro,  copied  by  Lok,  from  Ve-
razzano,  cli  ;  oysters  and  beanes
brought  by  Indians,  82  ;  stores  of
salmon  found  in,  83  ;  very  pleasant
place  to  build  a  town  on,  89  ;
Dutch,  supposed  to  be  the  first  dis-
coverers, 170  ;  said  to  be  discovered
by  the  Spaniards,  Van  der  Donck.
170  ;  called  Mauritius  river,  172  ;
see  Hudson's  third  voyage  ;  see
Bibl.  list,  Verrazzano

Hudson's  Strait,  discovered  by  Cabot,
cxliv;  Wilkes'  note,  Ixxiii;  Galvani,
ccxvi ;  navigated  by  the  Portuguese,
xcvi,  xcvii;  not  discovei'ed  by  Aus-
koeld,  xcviii;  entered  by  Frobisher,
cvii;  its  mouth,  crossed  by  Davis,
cxv,cxviii ;  called  furious  overfall  on
the  Molyneux  globe,  mentioned  as
such  by  Hudson,  cxcv,  44  ;  Way-
mouth  sails  into  it,  cxix  ;  title  and
prolegomena  to  the  first  edition  of
the  Detectio  Freti,  236  ;  see  Davis

Hudson's  Touches,  csci,  cxcii,  145  ;
see  Edge's  logbook

Hudson,  John,  son  of  Henry  Hudson,
one  of  the  crew,  first  voyage,  1  ;
second  voyage,  23  ;  is  exposed  with
his  father,  120,  142


Ice  barrier,  the  great,  see  Hudson's
geographical  notions,  clxii

Iceland,  letter  from,  probably  by
Hudson,  authorship  doubtful,  xv  ;
exploration  of,  cxliii

Ice  Sound,  see  Spitzbergen

Inclinations  of  the  needle,  observa-
tions of,  4,  25,  26,  29,  31,  34

Indians,  mouth  of  the  Hudson,  two
of  them  come  aboard,  the  one  is
taken,  but  leaps  over  board,  81 ;  ac-
cused of  treachery  by  Juet,  ih. ;  in-
tercourse with,  Juet's  distrust,  82;
bring  copper  and  pots,  ih.;  twenty-
eight  canoes  of,  ih. ;  bring  maize,
pompions,  and  tobacco,  84;  opinion


with  regard  to  the  first  discoverers
of  the  New  Netherlands,  169,  170  ;
tradition  concerning  Hudson's  first
intercourse  with  them,  173  ;  tra-
ditions concerning  the  first  land-
ing of  Henry  Hudson  on  the  shores
of  New  York,  third  voyage,  173  ;
reception  of  the  whites,  175,  176,
177,  178  ;  Hudson's  arrival  among
them,  legends,  xli;  trade  with,  150  ;
savages  in  Barnstaple  Peninsula,
64  ;  savages  of  Nova  Scotia,  inter-
course with,  59,  60 ;  savages  of
Nova  Scotia,  quarrels  with  them,
61  ;  savages,  French  trade  with,  in
Nova  Scotia,  60

Indraught,  see  Spitzbergen

Iver  Boty,  a  Gronlander,  his  treatise,
230

Ivuctoke  Inlet,  see  Davis


Jackman,  Charles,  see  Muscovy  Com-
pany
James'  River,  70

Jan  Mayen,  discovered  by  Hudson  ;
identical   with   Hudson's   Tutches,
cxci
Jeannin,  the   president,   ambassador
of  Henry   IV   of  France   at    the
Hague,  cxcvii  ;  see  Bibl.  list
Jonas,  Angrim,  see  Bibl.  list
Juan  Fernandez,  see  Nantucket
Juan  Luis,  island  of,  see  Nantucket
Juet,   Robert,   mate,  second  voyage,
23;  his  nationality,  x,  xi;  probably
an  Englishman,  xi;  his  name  spelled
Everet,  36  ;  called  of  Limehouse,
third  voyage,  45;  Journal  of  second
voyage,  viii,  23,  30,  45;  journal  of
third  voyage,  viii;  its  character,  ix  ;
position  on  the   card  of  the   Half
Moon,  X  ;    goes  on  shore  in  Nova
Zembla,  33;  Juet's  career  after  the
third  voyage,  xi


Kara  Bay,  see  Hudson's  geographical
notions,  clvi

Kara  Sea,  cxcv  ;  see  Novaya  Zembla  ;
Hudson's  geographical  notions,
clvi

King  James  his  Newland,  see  Spitz-
bergen


288


INDEX.


King's  River,  see  James  River

Knatshenge,  see  Catskill

Knight,  James,  one  of  the  crew,  first

voyage,  1
Knight,  John,  his  north-west  voyage,

cxx
Kolnus,    Johannes,    his    voyage    to

Greenland,  corruption  of  his  name

into  Scolmus,  and  Anskoeld,  xcviii
Kostin     Shar     (Kostinscharck),    see

Hudson's     geographical    notions,

clvii


Labrador,  the  coasts  of,  clxxii
Lambrechtsen's  history  of  NewNether-
land,  statements  borrowed  from
early  documents  at  Middelburg,
xxxvi;  extracts  from,  164;  see  Bibl.
list;  see  also  Collections,  Bibl.  list


Latitude,  nearly  correct  observations
made  ;  very  early  instruments  im-
perfect;  errors  very  common  ;  im-
pediments to  correct  observations
in  the  north,  cxlviii  ;  observations
on,  2,  6,  8,  10,  11,  12,  16,  16,  17,
19,  20,  21,  23,  24,  26,  28,  29,  30,  31,
34,  36,  41,  42,  43,  45,  46,  47,  48,  49,
50,  51,  52,  53,  54,  56,  57,  58,  60,  61,
62,  63,  64,  66,  68,  69,  70,  71,  72,
149,  150

Leicester,  Earl  of,  see  Frobisher

Lelewel,  see  Bibl.  list

Le  Maire,  Jacob,  a  ship's  captain,
discoverer  of  the  Straits  of  Le
Maire,  xxiii

Le  Maire,  Isaac,  a  merchant  from  An-
twerp, xxiii

Linschoteu,  see  Bibl.  list ;  see  Dutch  ;
see  mapmaking

Loffoet  (Loffoden)  Islands,  see  Hud-
son's geographical  notions,  clxi

Lok,  see  Hudson's  River

Long  Island,  see  Hudson's  Bay

Longitude,  Cabot's  system  of  observ-
ing them  by  magnetic  variations,
cxlvii;  not  observed  by  early  navi-
gators; not  by  Hudson;  Davis'  ob-
servations incorrect;  Cabot's  obser-
vations of  the  mouth  of  Hudson's
Strait,  nearly  correct,  cxlvii

Lookout  Point,  see  Spitzbergen

Lopez  de  Gomara,  see  Bibl.  list


Lowfoot,  43

Ludlow,    Arnold    goes   on   shore   in

Nova  Zembla,  33
Lumley's  Inlet   (Frobisher's  Strait),

cxcvi
Liitke,  see  Bibl.  list
Liitke  and  Barents  land,  see  Novaya

Zembla


M'CIintock,  see  Bibl.  list

Maelson,  see  Dutch

Magna  Britannia,  96

Mahony  Bay,  see  Banc  des  sables

Maize  brought  by  Hudson's  river
Indians,  161

Mannitto,  Indian  great  or  supreme
being,  175

Map  making,  modern  system  of ;
its  origin  ;  first  maps,  their
character  ;  first  charts,  their
character  ;  early  Hydrographers  :
Da  Cosa,  Cabot,  Ribeiro,  Homem,
cl  ;  planispheres  and  portolani  ;
Ribeiro's  and  Cabot's  planispheres,
cli  ;  Barents,  Davis,  Frobisher,
Linschoten,  Molyneux  globe,  cliii  ;
Gemma,  Mercator,  Ortelius,  clii  ;
Maps;  Hondius' chart  (1611),  cliii;
Hudson's  chart  (1610  and  1611),
cliii ;  Marco  Polo,  see  Bibl.  list  ;
his  Cathay,  Ixvii,  Ixx

Martha's  vineyard,  see  Verazzano

Mast-spend,  a,  meaning  of  the  term,
52

Matsyn  land,  see  Hudson's  geogra-
phical notions,  clviii

Matthew's  land,  see  Novaya  Zembla

Mercator,  see  Belgians ;  see  map-
making

Mermaid,  28

Meteren  (Van),  Belgian  emigrant  ;
Dutch  consul,  xxiv ;  publishes
his  memoirs ;  character  of  this
book,  XXV  ;  it  consists  of  two  parts,
XXV  ;  Hudson's  voyage  in  the
second  part,  xxvi  :  false  reference
to  the  30th  book,  account  reprinted
in  Begin  en  Voortgang,  xxviii  ;
Hudson's  third  voyage,  147  ;  see
Bibl.  list

Miller,  Doctor,  essay  on  Hudson's
third  voyage,  liv  ;  see  collections

Muscovy  Company,  Bassendine,
Woodcock  and  Browne,  are  ordered


INDEX.


289


to  search  to  the  east  and  west  of
Nova  Zembla,  cxxviii  ;  attention
paid  by  the,  to  Cabot's  prints,
logbook,  observations,  clxxvii,
clxxx  ;  Pet  and  Jackman  sail  to
Wardhuus  ;  they  separate,  cxxviii  ;
Pet  reaches  Nova  Zembla  ;  dis-
covers Pet's  Strait  ;  reaches  the
Sea  of  Kara  ;  struggles  with  the
ice  ;  is  joined  by  Jackman,  cxxix  ;
their  return  ;  renewed  struggle
with  the  ice  ;  they  pass  back
through  Pet's  Strait  ;  Pet's  return  ;
Jackman's  death,  cxxix-xxx  ;  a
vessel  reaches  the  mouth  of  the
Oby  ;  agents  of  the  Muscovy  Com-
pany procure  information  with
regard  to  the  roads  to  the  Oby,
cxxx  ;  protest  in  the  state  paper
office,  cxci

Moucheron,  Balthasar  de,  a  merchant
from  Antwerp,  xxii ;  see  Belgians

Moulton,  see  Yates

Mount  of  God's  mercy,  clxxxiv,  8  ;
see  Greenland

Muggenes,  see  Faroe

Muilkerk,  see  Bibl.  list

Murphy's  Hudson  in  Holland ;  no
copy  to  be  procured,  Ivii,  Ix  ;  Mur-
phy, see  Bibl.  list

Nai,  see  Dutch

Nantucket  discovered  by  the  Span-
iards, cxlvi  ;  Island  called  Juan
Luis,  or  Juan  Fernandez,  c

Narraganset  Bay,  see  Verazzano

Nassau  Strait,  see  Nova  Zembla  and
Dutch

Navarette,  see  Bibl.  list

Netherlands,  revolution  in  the,  xx  ;
political  parties  ;  Belgian  emi-
grants, Calvinists,  Orangists,  demo-
crats, war  party ;  Arminians,
Republicans,  peace  party.  Truce
of  Antwerp  negociated  by  Jeannin.
Oldenbarnevelt  and  Hugo  Grotius,
leaders  of  the  Arminian  or  Repub-
lican party  ;  Peter  Plancius  one  of
the  chiefs  of  the  Calvinist  or
Belgian  party,  both  wished  to
obtain  Hudson's  services.  The
East  India  Company  formed  by
Oldenbarnevelt,  its  privileges  ;
cxcviii,  cc

New  Brunswick,  the  coasts  of,  clxxii


New  England  shore,  clxxii

Newfoundland,  the  coasts  of,  clxxii  ;
exploration  of,  cxlv ;  meaning  of
the  term,  53  ;  bank  of,  55  ;  see
Cortereal

Newland,  see  Spitzbergen

New  Netherland,  Dutch  title  to,
xxxvii  ;  description  of,  by  Van  der
Donck,  xxxvii

New  Point  Comfort,  see  Virginia

New  World  ;  its  existence  noticed  by
S.  Cabot,  Ixxi

New  York  historical  society,  collec-
tions of,  liv

Nieuland,  or  the  land  under  80°,
clxxxvii ;  Spitzbergen,  see  Hudson's
geographical  notions,  clxi

North  American  coast,  exploration  of,
cxlv  ;  review,  see  Bibl.  list

North  Cape  of  Tartary,  see  Cape
Tapin  ;  see  Hudson's  geographical
notions,  clxi

North-eastern  search,  its  beginning,
cxx

North  Kien,see  Hudson's  geographical
notions,  clxi

North  Kiene,  43

North  Pole,  Hudson's  expedition  to,  1

North  star,  observation  of,  by  Juet,
52,  56

North-west  passage,  the  search  for,
begun  by  S.  Cabot,  Ixxi;  search
for,  advocated  by  Frobisher,  Gil-
bert, and  Willis,  ciii  ;  rumours  of
its  discovery,  Ixxxv

North-western  expeditions,  character
in  first  and  in  second  period,  Ixxiv,
Ixxv  ;  expedition  to  the  north-west
in  1536  ;  Master  Hore,  his  ship's
company,  great  sufferings,  cannibal-
ism, xcv

Nova  Prancia,  149

Nova  Scotia,  the  coasts  of,  clxxii

Nova  Zembla,  crosses  found  there,
33;  birds  and  eggs,  34,  35;  herd  of
white  deer,  37  ;  ice  formed  by  the
many  rivers,  39  ;  whale  finnes,  34  ;
Costin  Shar,  35  ;  Costin  Shar,  bay
and  river,  37;  pleasant  and  green;
deer  feeding  there,  39  ;  group,  voy-
ages to,  and  explorations  of,  cxli-ii,
cxcv ;  group,  see  Hudson's  geo-
graphical notions,  clvii  ;  Swarte
klip  (Swart  Cliffe),  32,  33  ;  disco-
vered by  Willoughby,  cxxiv

37


290


INDEX.


Novaya  Zembla,  description  of ;  its
islands,  Waigats  ;  JSovaya  Zemiya
proper,  cxxvi ;  descrij^tion  of ;  ef-
forts of  north-eastern  navigators  to
pass  beyond  or  through  it,  cxxvii  ;
a  natvii-al  barrier  between  Spitz-
bergen  sea  and  Kara  sea,  cxxvii  ;
Matthew's  Land,  Llitke  and  Ba-
rents' Land,  cxxvi ;  Waigats  disco-
vered, cxxvii:  Burrough  Strait  dis-
covered, cxxviii

Oby  (Ob),  Hudson  intends  to  pass  by
the,  36

Oby  river,  cxcv  ;  mouth  of,  see  Hud-
son's geographical  notions,  clvi

O'Callaghan,  history  of  New  Nether-
land,  Ivi

O'Callaghan,  see  Bibl.  list

Oldenbarnevelt,  see  Netherlands  poli-
tical parties

Orange  Islands,  see  Nova  Zembla  and
Dutch

Orkney,  Isles  of,  98

Ortelius,  see  Bibl.  list  ;  see  Map  mak-
ing; map  of  Amercia,  Hudson's  Bay
drawn  upon  it;  Hudson's  Bay  call-
ed Baia  dos  Medaos,  clxx

Overfall,  the  furious,  see  Hudson
Strait,  cxcvi

Pigeons,  brought  by  Hudson's  River
Indians,  162

Pantheon  Litturaire,  see  Bibl.  list.

Pasqualigo,  Lorenz,  see  Cabot

Pet  (Arthur),  see  Moscovy  Comp.

Philobiblon  Society,  see  Cabot,  Bibl.
list

Plancius,  Peter,  communicated  with
Hudson,  1609,  186  ;  probably  re~
ceived  Hudson's  chart,  xlvi ;  see
Netherlands  political  parties

Playse  or  Pleyce,  John,  one  of  the
crew,  first  voyage;  his  logbook;  au-
thorship of,  whether  divided  or  not;
character  of,  v,  vi,  vii;  his  rank,  vii

Pleyce,  see  Playse

Pontanus,  see  Bibl.  list

Pontanus's  history  of  Amsterdam,xlix

Portuguese  north-western  voyages
begun,  Ixxv;  three  proposed  north-
west expeditions,  Ixxvii  ;  begin
their  cod  fisheries,  Ixxvii;  explora-
tions in  the  north-west  from  1529


to  1.570  ;  they  discover  Hudson's
Bay,  xcvi

Poughkeepsie,  89  ;  see  Hudson's  river

Pricket,  Abacuk,  larger  discourse  of
the  fourth  voyage  ;  its  character,
xiv,  98;  Purchas'  opinion  about  it

Promontorium  Scythicum,  see  Cape
Tapin

Purchas,  documents  in  his  Pilgrims  ;
origin  of  these  documents,  iv;  side
notes  about  Spitzbergen  and  Nova
Zembla,  xvi,  xvii,  13,  40  ;  motive
appended  to  Wydhouse's  paper,
xvii;  Pilgrims,  fragments  in,  xviii;
Pilgrimage,  chapter  entitled  of
Iludson/s  Discoveries  and  Death,
and  side  notes  to  it,  xviii ;  post-
script to  Pricket's  discourse,  xvii ;
see  Bibl.  list

Queen's  Cape,  see  Queen's  Foreland

Rafn,    see    Antiquitates    Americanse,

Bibl.  list
Ramusio,  see  Bibl.  list
Rayner,    Robert,    one    of  the    crew,

second  voyage, 23 ;  sees  a  mermaid, 28
Ribeiro,  Juan,  his   planisphere,  xci ;

present  at  Badajoz,  ib. ;  mistakes

regarding  Gomez's  discovery,  xcii ;

see  map  making
Rio  de  Gamas,  see  Hudson's  river
Rio  de  Tormenta,  clxxi;  see  Hudson's

Bay
Roberval,  see  French
Round  Top,  see  Hudson's  river
Rundall,  see  Bibl,  list
Russian  coast,  exploration  of,  cxliii
Russia,  northern   shore  of,  clvi  ;  see

Hudson's  geographical  notions
Ryp,  see  Dutch

Saddle  Back,  96

Sail,  lay  it  a  trie,  meaning  of  the  term,

52
St.  Lawrence,  exploration  of,  cxlv  ;

see  Cortereal
Salisbury  Island,  97  ;  see  Cape  Salis-

burie
Salmon  in  Hudson's  river,  161
Sandy  Hook,  see  Hudson's  river
Sanien,  see  Senjeu
Scandinavians,  their  discoveries,  lix  ;

their   settlements   in    Iceland  and

Greenland,  Ix  ;  they  construct  geo-


INDEX.


291


graphical  systems  of  their  own,  Ix,
Ixi;  geographical  communications,
Ixi,  Ixii

Scandinavia,  northern  part  of,  see
Hudson's  geographical  notions,  clx

Scoresby,  see  Bibl.  list

Scotland,  clxii ;  see  Hudson's  geogra-
phical notions

Sea,  colour  of  the,  black,  11  ;  blue
and  green,  12;  blue — blue  sea  freest
from  ice,  13;  green,  ih.;  black,  26,
41  ;  Dr.  Scoresby's  observations,
cxiv;  Hudson's  observations  on,  ih.

Seals,  an  incredible  number  near  Nova
Zembla,  30;  see  Spitzbergen

Seamen's  secrets,  by  Davis,  clxxx  ;
Davis'  Molyneux  globe,  cliii

Seven  Islands,  see  Spitzbergen

Shetland,  clxii;  see  Hudson's  geogra-
phical notions ;  islands  of,  1

Shotland,  see  Shetland

Siberia,  coast  of,  civ  ;  see  Hvidson's
geographical  notions

Skrutton,  James,  one  of  the  crew,
first  voyage,  1

Smith,  see  Haskel  and  Smith

Smith,  Captain  John,  see  Bibl.  list

Smith  Islands,  see  Virginia

Soundings,  6^7,  59,  59

Spaniards,  search  for  a  passage  along
the  west  coast  of  America  ;  under-
take fishing  expeditions  to  New-
foundland, xcix  ;  sail  to  Hudson's
river  and  to  Nantucket,  c

Spanish,  N.  W.  expedition,  begins  ;
Dorvelos  ;  Agramonte  ;  Velasco,
Ixxxii,  Ixxxiv

Sparks,  see  American  Biography

Spitzbergen  discovered,  cxxxix  ;  ex-
ploration of,  cxliii  ;  names  of,  4  ;
given  by  Hessel  Gerritz,  5  ;  Vogel
Hooke,  Dr.  Petermaun's  opinions
about  its  situation,  9  ;  indraught
or  inlet  between  Charles  Island  and
Spitzbergen,  10,  11  ;  west  coast  of,
11;  morses  seen  near,  ih. ;  seals
seen  near,  ih.  ;  discovery  of,  by  Sir
Hugh  Willoughby,  according  to
Purchas'  opinion,  13,  40  ;  great
warmth  in  80°  of  latitude,  14  ;  land
stretching  into  82°,  supposed  to  be
the  Seven  Islands,  15  ;  no  passage
between  78°  30'  and  82°,  16  ;  Bell
Sound,  17  ;  Ice  Sound,  18  ;  Point
Lookout,  20  ;  Whale  Bay,  14,  20  ;


the  southern  point  of,  21;  see  Hud-
son's geographical  notions

Splindlei-,  see  Dutch

Sprengel,  see  Bibl.  list

Stacie,  Philip,  carpenter,  second  voy-
age, 23

Staten  Island,  see  Hudson's  river

Stony  Point,  see  Hudson's  river

Stov/,  see  Bibl.  list

Strickbolle,  see  Dutch

Stromo,  see  Faroe

Strutton,  James,  one  of  the  crew,
second  voyage,  23

Sturgeon,  in  Hudson's  river,  161

Sun,  observations  on  the,  12,  15,  24,
26,  29,  30,  31,  34,  35,  41,  43,  48,
50,  61

Sun's  spot,  46

Tabin,  see  Cape  Tabin

Tetgales,  see  Dutch

Thorne,  Robert,  plan  of  sailing  across
the  north  pole,  xciv  ;  letter  to
Henry  VIII,  ih.

Thompson,  see  Bibl.  list

Tobacco  and  pipes  in  Barnstaple  Pen-
insula, 65

Tom  son,  Richard,  one  of  the  crew,
second  voyage,  23

Ungara  Bay,  see  mutiny

Urdaneta,  a  friar,  his  pretended  voy-
age through  the  north-west  pas-
sage, cv

Usselincx,  William,  an  Antwerp  mer-
chant, founder  of  the  West  India
Company,  xxiii


Vaigats  Straits,  cxcv

Valek,  see  Dutch

Vardoehuus  Island,  43

Variations,  observations  of,  2  ;  of  the
needle,  23,  24;  west,  25,  47,  49,  53,
54,  55,  56,  68,  61,  62,  68,  69,  72,
77,  82,  92

Verazzano,  Juan  de,  his  geographical
notions,  Ixxx;  his  letter;  appendix
to  it,  Ixxxii;  report  to  the  king  of
France,  199;  voyage  and  discovery
of  Hudson's  river,  1;  original  letter
preserved  in  the  Magliabecchian
library  in  Florence,  1;  searches  for
the  passage   to    Cathaya ;    crosses


292


INDEX.


Atlantic;  reaches  Carolina;  ascends
the  coast;  discovers  the  mouth  of
the  Hudson  ;   enters  it  ;  discovers
Narraganset  Bay  and  Claudia  Is-
land ;  returns  ;  writes   to   Francis
the   First,  Ixxxi,  Ixxxii;  probable
death,  scv;  see  Hudson's  river
Verplanck  Point,  see  Hudson's  river
Vines  and  grapes,  Hudson's  river,  162
Vlie  boat,  called  tiute  by  the  French,

147
Vogel  Hoeck,  clxxxvi


Waigats,  see  Novaya  Zembla

Wardhuys  (Wardhuus),  see  Hudson's
geographical  notions,  clxi

Water,  colour  of,  in  the  Gulf  stream,
51

Waterford  red  hook,  87

Wampum  or  bead  money,  observa-
tions about,  235  ;  see  Van  der
Donck

Waymouth,  his  voyage  ;  sails  up  to
68°  53';  mutiny  caused  by  John
Cartwright;  returns  ;  enters  Hud-
son's Strait,  cxix;  Foxe  and  Bar-
row's opinion  about  his  voyage,
cxix

Weymouth's,  Captain  George,  endea-
vours of,  finding  the  passage,  and
failure,  190;  logbooks  fell  into  the
hands  of  Plancius,  191

West  India  Company,  Dutch,  its  cha-
racter and  origin,  xxix,  xxx,  xxxi

Whale  Bay,  clxxxvii


Whales  and  morses  observed  near
Spitzbergen,  cxciv

Widewes,  see  Wydhouse

Willes,  see  Bibl.  list;  see  north-west
passage

Willoughby,  Sir  Hugh,  Purchas'  opi-
nion about  his  discovery,  13,  40

Willoughby's  Land,  13,  40

Willoughby  discovers  Nova  Zembla  ;
perishes  in  Lapland,  cxxiii-iv;  see
Moscovy  Company

Willoughby's  Land,  clviii;  see  Hud-
son's geographical  notions

Winwood,  see  Weymouth,  186

Woodcock,  see  Moscovy  Company

Woodhouse,  see  Wydhouse

Wydhouse  (Woodhouse,  Widowes,
Wydowse),  Thomas,  note  found  in
the  desk  of — last  document  pub-
lished in  the  Pilgrims,  xvi

Wydowse,  see  Wydhouse

Yates  and  Moulton,  "  History  of  the
State  of  New  York,"  Iv;  see  Bibl.  list

Young,  James,  one  of  the  crew,
first  voyage,  1  ;  discovers  Young's
Cape  (Greenland),  cxcii  ;  discovers
Young's  Foreland  (Van  Mayen),  ib.

Young's  Cape  or  Greenland,  clxxxiv,
cxcii

Young's  Foreland  (Jan  Mayen),  cxcii

Zeni,  the  brothers,  the  chart  of,  clxiv-

clxviii,  3
Zenam,  see  Senjen
Zorgdrager,  see  Bibl.  list


T.  KICHARDS,  GREAT  QUEEN  STREET.


"'■■'''''■''''•':'"'•' ''^•'''••''■''^r'':K^3ni:iinft-tK^'tit!i}ir:^^:^^
