Anne Askew, The Examinations (1546-1547)
============================================
Anne Askew (1521-1546). The First and Latter Examinations — her own account of interrogation for heresy (denying transubstantiation), with John Bale's commentary; the first substantial autobiographical writing by an Englishwoman, ending at the stake. Text: John Bale's edition (Marburg, 1547), via the Parker Society Select Works of John Bale (Cambridge, 1849). Raw OCR via Internet Archive. Public Domain.

ASKEWE.

Cj^e  first  Cpmtnat^::

on  of  9inm  gsfeetoe,  Iattlj)e  mar--
t6£  (IBlucgtracson  of

^  I— »

[Wood-cut  of  an  angel
holding  the  bible,  and  tram-
pling on  a  dragon  wearing  a
triple  crown.]^

o  m

or  Jt3

o

jPauoure  is  lii'sceBtful/anti  bttotpe  is  a
bagne  tfignge.  23ut  a  fcooman  t^at  fearet^
tbe  HorUe  ts  toortfige  to  be  pragsetr.  S'fie
openetS  fitt  mout^e  to  togsUome  /  anU  m
itx  language  is  tje  Ubyt  of  grace,
^roberb.  xxxf.

[1  The  original  editions  have  genemlly  cuts  in  the  centre  of  the
titles  of  the  different  pieces.  One  of  these  has  been  given  as  a
specimen  with  Sir  John  Oldcastle's  Examination ;  but  it  is  not  con-
sidered necessary  to  continue  it  beyond  that  specimen.]

JOHN  BALE

TO

THE  CHRISTIAN  READERS.

THE  PREFACE  OF  HER  FIRST  EXAMINATION

Among  other  most  singular  offices,  diligent  reader,  which
the  Lord  hath  appointed  to  be  done  in  the  earnest  spirit  of
EHas  by  the  forerunners  of  his  latter  appearance,  this  is  one
very  special  to  be  noted  :  "They  shall  turn  the  hearts  of  their
ancient  elders  into  the  children,"  Mai.  iv. ;  and  the  unbe-
lievers of  their  time  to  the  wisdom  of  those  righteous  fathers,
as  did  John  Baptist  afore  his  first  coming,  Luke  i. :  that  is,
(saith  Bedas,  ca.  68.  de  Temporum  ratione,)  the  faith  and  fer-  Bede'spro-

,  phecy.

vent  zeal  of  the  prophets  and  apostles  shall  they  plant  in
their  hearts,  which  shall  in  those  days  live  and  be  among
men  conversant,  and  then  will  break  forth  (saith  he  as  a  very
true  prophet)  such  horrible  persecution,  as  will  first  of  all
take  from  the  world  those  mighty  Eliases  by  triumphant  mar-
tyrdom, to  the  terrifying  of  other  in  the  same  faith,  of  whom
some  shall  become  through  that  occasion  most  glorious  mar-  Two  sorts,
tyrs  unto  Christ  also,  and  some  very  wicked  apostates  for
feigning  his  lively  doctrine:  for  by  the  said  Bedas's  testimony,
in  the  beginning  of  the  same  chapter,  two  most  certain  signs
shall  we  then  have  that  the  latter  judgment-day  is  at  hand;
the  return  of  Israel's  remnant  unto  their  Lord  God,  and  the  Two  signs,
horrible  persecution  of  Antichrist.

Confer  with  this  treated  scripture  and  former  prophecy  of
that  virtuous  man  Bedas  the  world's  alteration  now,  with
the  terrible  turmoilings  of  our  time ;  and,  as  in  a  most  clear
mirror,  ye  shall  well  perceive  them  at  this  present  to  be  in
most  quick  working.  And  as  concerning  the  Israelites  or  Israelites.
Jews,  I  have  both  seen  and  known  of  them  in  Germany
most  faithful  christian  behevers.  Neither  is  it  in  the  pro-
phecy (Hosea  iii.)  that  they  should  at  that  day  be  all  con-
verted, no  more  than  they  were  at  John  Baptist's  preaching,
Luke  i. ;  for,  as  Esay  reporteth,  "  Though  the  posterity  of

138

EXAMINATIONS  OF  ANNE  ASKEWE.

Jacob  be  as  the  sea  sand  (innumerable),  yet  shall  but  a  rem-
nant of  them  convert  them  unto  their  Lord  God."  Esay  x.
"  And  though  the  Lord  hath  sifted  that  house  of  Israel  (as
bruised  corn  in  a  sieve)  among  all  other  nations,"'  Amos  ix. ;
yet  shall  not  that  remnant  of  theirs  perish,  but  at  that  day
be  saved,  through  the  only  election  of  grace,  Romans  ix.

Preachers.  Now  conccming  the  aforesaid  forerunners,  in  this  most
wonderful  change  of  the  world  before  the  latter  end  thereof,  I
think  within  this  realm  of  England,  besides  other  nations
abroad,  the  spirit  of  Elias  was  not  at  all  asleep  in  good

Tyndaie.  WiUiam  Tyndale,  Robert  Barnes,  and  such  other  more,
whom  Antichrist's  violence  hath  sent  hence  in  fire  to  heaven,
as  Elias  went  afore  in  the  fiery  chariot,  4  Regum  ii.  These
turned  the  hearts  of  the  fathers  into  the  children,  such  time
as  they  took  from  a  great  number  of  our  nation,  by  their
goodly  preachings  and  writings,  the  corrupted  belief  of  the
pope  and  his  wastrye  workers  (which  were  no  fathers,  but
cruel  robbers  and  destroyers,  Joan,  x.)  reducing  them  again
to  the  true  faith  of  Abraham  and  Peter,  Gen.  xv.  and  Matt.

The  fathers,  xvi.  The  sure  belief  in  Christ's  birth  and  passion,  which
Adam  and  Noe  sucked  out  of  the  first  promise  of  God,  Jacob
and  Moses  out  of  the  second,  David  and  the  prophets  out  of
the  third,  and  so  forth  the  apostles  and  fathers  out  of  the
other  scriptures,  so  firmly  planted  they  in  the  consciences
of  many,  that  no  cruel  kind  of  death  could  avert  them  from

Martyrs.  it :  as  WO  havc  for  example  their  constant  disciples,  and
now  strange  witnesses  of  Jesus  Christ,  John  Lassels  and  Anne
Askewe,  with  their  other  two  companions,  very  glorious  mar-
tyrs afore  God,  (what  though  they  be  not  so  afore  the  wrong-
judging  eyes  of  the  world?)  whom  the  bloody  remnant  of
Antichrist  put  unto  most  cruel  death  at  Smithneld,  at  London,
in  the  year  of  our  -Lord  M.D.XLVL  in  July.

If  they  be  only  (as  was  John  Baptist)  "  great  afore  the
Lord""  by  the  holy  scriptures'  allowance,  which  are  strongly
adorned  with  the  graces  of  his  Spirit,  as  faith,  force,  under-
standing, wisdom,  patience,  love,  long-sufferance,  and  such-like;

Christian     I  dare  boldly  aflSrm  these  four  mighty  witnesses  also  to  be  the

martyrs.  ga^e,  SO  wcll  as  the  martyrs  of  the  primitive  or  apostles'
church.  For  so  strongly  had  these  those  virtues  as  they,  and
so  boldly  objected  their  bodies  to  the  death  for  the  undefiled
christian  behef,  against  the  malignant  synagogue  of  Satan,  as

PREFACE  OF  HER  FIRST  EXAMINATION.

139

ever  did  they;  for  no  tyranny  admitting  any  create  or  cor-  Bread,
ruptible  substance  for  their  eternal  Hving  God.     If  their
blind  babies,  to  prove  them  unlike,  do  object  against  me
the  miracles  shewed  at  their  deaths  more  than  at  these,  as
that  unfaithful  generation  is  ever  desirous  of  wonders,  Matt,  xii.;  Miracles.
I  would  but  know  of  them,  what  miracles  were  shewed  when
John  Baptist's  head  was  cut  off  in  the  prison,  Mark.  vi.  ;
and  when  James  the  apostle  was  beheaded  at  Hierusalem?
Acto.  xii.    These  two  were  excellent  afore  God :  what  though
they  were  but  miserable  wretches,  hght  fellows,  seditious
heretics,  busy  knaves,  and  lousy  beggars  in  the  sight  of  noble
king  Herod  and  his  honourable  council  of  prelates  ?   For  had  Rochets,
not  rochets  and  side-gowns  been  at  hand,  haply  they  had  not
so  lightly  died.

If  they  allege  Stephen,  to  maintain  their  purpose,  that  he  Stephen,
at  his  death  beheld  heaven  open ;  I  ask  them  again,  what
they  were  which  see  it  more  than  his  own  person  ?    Sure  I
am  that  their  wicked  predecessors  there  present  see  it  not :
for  they  stopped  their  ears  when  he  told  them  thereof.  Acts  vii.
If  they  yet  bring  forth  the  other  histories  of  apostles  and  Leg.nds.
martyrs,  1  answer  them,  that  all  they  are  of  no  such  autho-
rity, as  these  here  afore.    The  pope's,  indeed,  were  much
fuller  of  miracles  than  ever  were  Christ's,  as  his  self  told  us
they  should  be  so,  Matt.  xiv.    Yet  wrought  friar  Forest,  Forest.
John  Fisher,  and  Thomas  More,  no  miracles:  what  though  Mo^e.
now  many  be  registered  in  their  lives  and  legends  by  the
friars  of  France,  Italy,  and  Spain  ?    Besides  that,  John  Coch-
leus  hath  written  of  them,  ad  Paulum  Pontificem,  ad  Begem
Henricum,  and  also  in  their  defence  against  doctor  Sampson.
With  that  Erasmus  did  also  ad  Huttenum,  P.  M.  ad  Gas-  writers.
param  Agrippam,  Albertus  Pighius,  Rivius,  Fichardus,  and
a  great  sort  more.    And  as  for  the  holy  maid  of  Kent  with
doctor  Bocking,  though  they  wrought  great  wonders  by  their
life,  yet  appeared  none  at  their  deaths.     Of  his  own  chosen
martyrs  Christ  looketh  for  none  other  miracle  but  that  only
they  persevere  faithful  to  the  end.  Matt,  x.,  and  never  deny
his  verity  afore  men,  Luke  xii.    For  that  worthy  victory
of  the  sinful  world  standeth  in  the  invincibleness  of  faith,
and  not  in  miracles  and  wonders,  as  those  wavering  wits  sup-
pose, 1  John  V.

Right  wonderfully  will  this  appear  in  the  two  conflicts

140

EXAMINATIONS  OF  ANNE

ASKEWE.

Anne  As-     hereafter  followiaoj  which  the  faithful  servant  of  Jesu,  Anne

kewe.  o  ^  '

Askewe,  a  gentlewoman  very  young,  daintv,  and  tender,  had
with  that  outraging  synagogue  in  two  examinations,  about  the
twenty-fifth  year  of  her  age,  whom  [which]  she  sent  abroad
by  her  own  handwritino^.  The  handhns  of  her  other  three
companions  shall  be  shewed  in  other  several  treatises  at  leisure.

God  s  power.  For  the  glory  and  great  power  of  the  Lord,  so  manifestly  ap-
pearing in  his  elect  vessels,  may  not  now  perish  at  all  hands,
and  be  unthankfully  neglected,  but  be  spread  the  world  over
as  well  in  Latin  as  Enghsh,  to  the  perpetual  infamy  of  so  wil-

B-okscon-   fully  crucl  and  spiteful  tyrants.     Xothinor  at  all  shall  terrify

deninecL  t/  i.  ^  o  t/

us,  nor  yet  in  any  point  let  us  of  our  purpose,  that  our  books
are  now  in  England  condemned  and  brent  by  the  bishops  and
priests  with  their  frantic  affinity,  the  great  antichrist's  up-
holders, which  seek  by  all  practices  possible  to  turn  over  the

Latin.  king's  most  noble  and  godly  enterprise.  But  it  will  from
henceforth  occasion  us  to  set  forth  in  the  Latin  also  that
afore  we  wrote  only  in  the  Enghsh,  and  so  make  their  spi-
ritual wickedness  and  treason  known  much  further  off.  What
availeth  it  Joachim  to  burn  Hieremy's  prophecy  by  the  un-
gracious counsel  of  his  prelates,  Hiere.  xxxvi. ;  either  yet
Antiochus  to  set  fire  on  the  other  scriptures  ?  Macha.  i.

God  will  be        After  the  apostles  were  brouo^ht  afore  the  council  and

known.  ^  o

straitly  commanded  to  cease  from  preaching,  they  preached
much  more  than  afore.  Acto.  iv.  In  most  terrible  perse-
cutions of  the  primitive  church  were  the  examinations  and
answers,  torments  and  deaths,  of  the  constant  martyrs  written,
and  sent  abroad  all  the  whole  world  over,  as  testifieth  Euse-
bius  Csesariensis  in  his  Ecclesiastic  History.  Their  copies
abound  yet  everywhere.     Great  slaughter  and  burning  hath

John  wic-  been  here  in  Enojland  for  John  Wicliffe's  books,  ever  since  the
year  of  our  Lord  M.CCC.LXXXIL ;  yet  have  not  one  of
them  throughly  perished.  I  have  at  this  hour  the  titles  of
a  hundred  and  forty-four  of  them  which  are  many  more  in
number :  for  some  of  them  under  one  title  comprehendeth

canonisse.  two  books,  somo  three,  some  four ;  yea,  one  of  them  con-
taineth  twelve.  I  think  not  the  contrary  but,  ere  the  world
be  at  a  full  end,  God  will  so  glorify  that  twenty  times  con-
demned heretic,  execrated,  cursed,  spitted,  and  spatted  at,
that  all  your  popish  writers,  before  his  time  and  after,  will
be  reckoned  but  vile  swineherds  to  him,  for  the  good  favour

PREFACE  OF  HER  FIRST  EXAMINATION.

141

he  bare  to  Christ''s  holj  gospel.  A  very  madness  it  is  to
strive  against  God,  when  he  will  have  the  long  iniquities
known:  as  the  godly  wise  man  Gamaliel  said,  Acto.  v.  "If Gamaliel,
this  enterprise  that  is  now  taken  against  you  be  of  God,  ye
shall  never  be  able  with  all  your  tyrannous  practices  to  dis-
solve it."

Now  concerning^  that  blessed  woman  Anne  Askewe,  which  Anne  as-
lately  suffered  the  tyranny  of  this  world  for  right  witness'
sake.  In  Lincolnshire  was  she  born  of  a  very  ancient  and
noble  stock,  Sir  William  Askewe,  a  worthy  knight,  being  her
father.  But  no  worthiness  in  the  flesh,  neither  yet  any
worldly  nobleness,  availeth  to  God- ward,  afore  whom  is  no  ac-
ceptation of  person.  Acto.  x.  Only  is  it  faith  with  his  true  love  Tmenobiiity.
and  fear,  which  maketh  us  accept,  noble,  and  worthy  children
unto  God,  Joan.  i. ;  whereof  by  his  gift  she  had  wonderful
abundance.  Such  a  one  was  she  as  was  Lydia  the  purple-  Lydia.
seller,  whose  heart  opened  by  the  godly  preaching  of  Paul  at
Thyatira.  Acto.  xvi.  For  diligent  heed  gave  she  to  his  word,
when  it  was  once  taught  without  superstition,  and  would  no
longer  be  a  false  worshipper,  or  idolater,  after  the  wicked
school  of  antichrist ;  but  became  from  thenceforth  a  true
worshipper,  worshipping  her  Lord  God  (which  is  a  Spirit,  and
not  bread)  in  spirit  and  in  verity,  according  to  that  word  of
his,  Joan.  iv.  The  gospel  of  Christ  bare  she  in  her  heart,  as  did
the  holy  maid  Ceciha,  and  never  after  ceased  from  the  study  cediia.
thereof,  nor  from  godly  communication  and  prayer,  till  she
was  clearly  by  most  cruel  torments  taken  from  this  wretched
world.

By  her  do  I  here,  dear  friends  in  the  Lord,  as  did  the
faithful  brethren  in  France,  at  the  cities  of  Lyons  and  Vienna,
by  a  like  faithful  young  woman  called  Blandina,  which  was  Biandina.
there  put  to  death  with  three  mighty  companions  more  among
other  (as  this  was)  for  her  christian  belief,  about  the  year  of
our  Lord  C.LXX.,  in  the  primitive  spring  of  their  Christianity.
They  wrote  unto  their  brethren  in  the  lands  of  Asia  and  Phry-
gia,  very  far  off,  her  mighty  strange  sufferings  for  Christ's-
faith,  which  they  knew  nothing  of  afore:  I  write  here  unto  you
in  England  the  double  process  of  this  noble  woman,  whereof
ye  are  not  ignorant,  forsomuch  as  it  was  there  so  manifestly
done  among  you.  Coupled  I  have  these  two  examples  together,
because  I  find  them  in  so  many  points  agree.     Blandina  was

142

EXAMINATIONS  OF  ANNE  ASKEWE.

Anne  As-  joung  and  tender  ;  so  was  Anne  Askewe  also  :  but  that  which
was  frail  of  nature  in  them  both,  Christ  made  most  strong  hy

Companions,  his  grace.  Blandina  had  three  earnest  companions  in  Christ,
Maturus,  Sanctus,  and  Attains,  so  fervently  faithful  as  herself :
so  had  Anne  Askewe  three  fire-fellows,  a  gentleman  called
John  Lassels  her  instructor,  a  priest,  and  a  tailor  called  John
Adlam,  men  in  Christ's  verity  unto  the  end  most  constant.

Recanters.  With  Blandiua  were  in  prison  to  the  number  of  ten,  which
renied  the  truth,  and  were  clearly  forsaken  of  God  for  it.
How  many  fell  from  Christ  besides  Crome  and  Shaxton,  when
Anne  Askewe  stood  fast  by  him,  I  am  uncertain.  But  I
counsel  them,  as  St  John  counselled  the  Laodiceans,  in  the
miserable  state  they  are  now  in,  to  buy  them  through  tried
gold  of  Christ,  lest  they  perish  altogether.  Apoc.  iii.    If  they

The  chancel,  had  not  Still  remained  in  that  chancel,  whom  Christ  com-
manded John  in  no  wise  to  measure,  Apoc.  xi.,  they  had
never  so  shamefully  blasphemed,  like  as  Bedas  also  toucheth
in  his  former  prophecy  ^

Courage.  Prompt  was  Blandina,  and  of  most  lofty  courage,  in  ren-

dering her  life  for  the  liberty  of  faith:  no  less  lively  and
quick  was  Anne  Askewe  in  all  her  imprisonments  and  torments.

Racked.  Great  was  the  love  Blandina  had  to  Christ :  no  less  was  the
love  of  Anne  Askewe.  Blandina  never  fainted  in  torment:
no  more  did  Anne  Askewe  in  spirit,  when  she  was  so  terribly
racked  of  Wrisley  the  chancellor,  and  lUche,  that  the  strings
of  her  arms  and  eyes  were  perished.  Blandina  derided  the
cruelty  of  the  tyrants :  so  did  Anne  Askewe  the  madness  of

Burne<i.  the  bishops  and  their  speechmen.'l  Red  burning  plates  of  iron
and  of  brass  had  Blandina  put  to  her  sides  :  so  had  Anne
Askewe  the  flaminoj  brands  of  fire.  Full  of  God  and  his  veri-
ties  was  Blandina :  so  was  Anne  Askewe  to  the  very  end.
Christ  wonderfully  triumphed  in  Blandina :  so  did  he  in  Anne
Askewe,  when  she  made  no  noise  on  the  rack,  and  so  earnestly

Beasts.  aftcrward  rejoiced  in  him.  Blandina  was  given  forth  to  wild
beasts  to  be  devoured  :  so  was  Anne  Askewe  to  cruel  bishops
and  priests,  whom  Christ  calleth  ravening  wolves,  devourers,
and  thieves.  Matth.  vii.  and  Joan.  x.  Blandina  upon  the
scaffold  boldly  reprehended  the  pagan  priests  of  their  error :
so  did  Anne  Askewe,  when  she  was  fast  tied  to  the  stake,  with

Shaxton.  stomach  rebuke  that  blasphemous  apostate  Shaxton,  with  the
[1  De  Temp.  Ratione,  cap.  68.  Ed.  Col.  1612.  Vol.  n.  p.  101. J

PREFACE  OF  HER  FIRST  EXAMINATION.

143

bishops'  and  priests'  generation,  for  their  manifest  maintenance
of  idolatry.

Blandina  at  the  stake  shewed  a  visage  unterrified  :  so  did
Anne  Askewe  a  countenance  stout,  mighty,  and  earnest.  In-
defatigable was  the  spirit  of  Blandina :  so  was  the  spirit  of
Anne  Askewe.   The  love  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Graces.
Ghost,  and  hope  of  the  crown  of  martyrdom,  greatly  mitigated
the  pain  in  Blandina :  so  did  those  three  worthy  graces  the
terror  of  all  torments  in  Anne  Askewe.    JThe  strong  Spirit  of
Christ  gave  stomach  to  Blandina,  both  to  laugh  and  dance  ;
the  same  mighty  Spirit  (and  not  the  pope's  desperate  spirit)  spirit,
made  Anne  Askewe  both  to  rejoice  and  sing  in  the  prison.  J  So
bold  was  Blandina  (saith  Eusebius'^),  that  with  a  presumption  of
stomach  she  commoned^  with  Christ  unseen :  I  suppose  Anne
Askewe's  latter  examination  will  shew  her  not  to  be  much  less.  High  sto-
Gentle  was  Blandina  to  the  christian  believers,  and  terrible  to
their  adversaries :  so  was  Anne  Askewe  very  lowly  to  true
teachers,  but  scornful  and  high-stomached  to  the  enemies  of
truth.    Many  were  converted  by  the  sufferance  of  Blandina :
a  far  greater  number  by  the  burning  of  Anne  Askewe.
Though  Blandina  were  young,  yet  was  she  called  the  mother  Mother,
of  martyrs :  many  men  have  supposed  Anne  Askewe  for  her
christian  constancy  to  be  no  less.    Blandina  prayed  for  her
persecutors  :  so  did  Anne  Askewe,  most  fervently.    The  ashes  Ashes,
of  Blandina  and  other  martyrs  were  thrown  into  the  flood  of
Rhodanus :  what  was  done  with  the  ashes  of  Anne  Askewe
and  her  companions,  1  cannot  yet  tell.

All  these  former  reports  of  Blandina,  and  many  more  be-
sides, hath  Eusebius  in  Ecclesiastica  Historia,  libr.  v.  cap.  1,  Authors.
2,  and  3,  Hugo  Floriacensis,  Hermannus  Contractus,  Vincen-
tius,  Antoninus,  Petrus  Equilinus,  and  other  historians  more.
And  as  touching  Anne  Askewe,  these  two  examinations,  with
her  other  known  handhngs  in  England,  are  witnesses  for  her
sufficient.  Thus  hath  not  the  fire  taken  Anne  Askewe  all  Not  aii  dead,
whole  from  the  world,  but  left  her  here  unto  it  more  pure,
perfect,  and  precious  than  afore,  as  it  will  also  John  Lassels
within  short  space :  so  that  concerning  her  it  may  well  be
said  that  Paul  verifieth,  2  Cor.  xii.      The  strength  of  God  is

[2  Hist.  Ecc.  Lib.  v.  cap.  1—3.  Ed.  Cantab.  Gul.  Reading.  1720.
pp.  206 — 9.]

[3  Commoned :  communed.]

144

EXAMINATIONS  OF  ANNE  ASKEWE.

Weakness,  here  made  perfect  by  weakness."  "When  she  seemed  most  fee-
ble, then  was  she  most  strong.  And  gladly  she  rejoiced  in  that
weakness,  that  Christ's  power  might  strongly  dwell  in  her.
Thus  chooseth  the  Lord  the  foolish  of  this  world  to  confound
the  wise,  and  the  weak  to  deface  the  mighty ;  yea,  things
despised,  and  thought  very  vile,  to  bring  things  unto  nought,
which  the  world  hath  in  most  high  reputation.   I  think,  if  this

Martyrs.  martyr  were  rightly  conferred  with  those  canonized  martyrs,
which  hath  had,  and  yet  hath  still,  censings  and  singings,
massings  and  ringings,  in  the  pope's  English  church,  cause
with  cause,  and  reason  with  reason,  (as  haply  hereafter  they

Example,  shall,)  she  should  be  a  great  blemish  unto  them.  An  example
of  strong  sufferance  might  this  holy  martyr  be  unto  all  them
that  the  Lord  shall  after  like  manner  put  forward  in  this  hor-
rible fury  of  antichrist,  to  the  glory  of  his  persecuted  church.
Amen.

A  TABLE

COMPENDIOUS  OF  THIS  FIRST  BOOK.

PAGE

Age  of  Anne  Askewe   140

Algerus  a  monk    154

Anne  Askewe's  life   141

Anne  Askewe's  three  companions.  142

Anne  Askewe  not  all  dead   143

Antichrist's  workings   167

Antiochus  burnt  scriptures   165

Archdeacon  of  London   164

Arnoldus  Bostius   168

Articles  of  the  pope's  faith  175,  176

Barnes  and  Tyndale    138

Beasts  eat  the  priest's  God   159

Beda's  prophecy   137

Belief  in  priests'  lechery   176

Blandina  with  Anne  Askewe   141

Books  condemned  and  burnt. ..165,  181

Books  not  yet  answered   181

Books  of  John  Wicliffe   140

Bonner  a  crafty  wolf         162,  170,  180

Bonner  playeth  the  fox  162 — 165

Bonner  a  false  surgeon   166

Boxers  of  their  God   168

Bread  in  a  box   168

Caiaphas  of  London          165,  167,  170

Catholic  not  esteemed   178

Chancellor  of  London....  155,  160,  172

Christ's  divinity    155

Christ  judged  a  heretic   167

Comparison  of  Blandina    141

Counsels  for  recanting   142

Crome  and  Shaxton   142

Delays  of  deliverance   179

Doctrine  of  the  supper    150

Dogs  of  rhetoric    173

Drunkenness  of  priests   159

Druids  are  pagan  priests  152,  171

Eternity  diverse    139

English  women,  learned   156

England  all  for  the  pope   171

[bale.]

PAGE

Eva  an  anchoress    168

Examinations,  written    140

Faith  of  the  Fathers   138

Faith  of  the  pope   175

Feast  of  Corpus  Christi   168

Fire  taketh  not  all  away   143

Forerunners  of  Christ   137

Friars,  for  their  mass   171

Germans  railed  on    181

God  a  spirit,  and  no  bread   159

God  falleth,  and  is  eaten   158

God  in  the  box   168

Guimundus  Aversanus    154

Hawking  of  bishops    163

Helias,  spirit  in  our  age    138

Henry  Spenser  warreth   171

Heresy  is  Christ's  doctrine   167

Hieremy's  prophecy  burnt   165

Hilda,  a  woman  learned   156

Historians,  divers    143

Hypocrites  resisted   183

Host,  a  God  of  the  papist's    159

James  the  apostle   139

Idolaters  without  wit   159

Ignorant  magistrates    153

In  God's  stead   170

Joachim  burnt  scriptures    165

John  Baptist,  great   138

John  Wicliffe  s  books    140

John  Wicliffe  disputeth   171

John  VVicliffe  and  Huss   183

John  Frith  ofFendeth   164

John  Lassels  martyred    138

Israelites  converted   138

Judas  sent  to  betray           157,  164,  167

King  to  be  honoured    183

Kings'  godly  enterprise   151,  181

Kings,  in  God's  cause  resisted   183

10

146

A  TABLE.

Kingdom  of  the  pope.

PAGE

180,  m

Peryn,  a  foxish  friar   154,  159,

Peryn  houseleth  a  mouse

Peryn's  three  sermons

Peryn,  the  pope's  ape

Practice  of  priests  158, 162,.170,

Priests'  ministration  in  sin

Priests  are  tempters  151,  157,

Priest's  mass  helpeth  not

Priests  of  Lincoln

Private  masses

Lechery  honoured    176

Legends  and  histories    139

Lordships  of  the  clergy   173, 175

Man  wounded   153,  167,  168

Marrying  of  priests  175,  178

Martyrs  of  the  pope   144

Martyrs  hallowed  and  censed    144

Mass,  is  not  of  faith  149,  176

Mass  is  no  good  work   152

Mass  a  mammetrouse  mazon   165

Masses,  private  and  common. ..152,  171

Mice  houseled  of  papists    154

Miracles  looked  for   139

Mouse  eateth  God    154

New  martyrs  of  Christ   138

New  miracles  of  faith   176

New  saints  of  the  pope   139

Nobility,  whereof  it  riseth   141

No  field  yet  gotten   181

No  sureties  for  Christ   156

Objection  of  papists   139

Obey  and  pray   183

Offence  of  priests  dangerous   161

Order  of  popish  schools   158,  159

171,181
154,  159
181,  182

  182

179, 180
150, 168
167,  180

  153

173,  174
152,  171

PAGH

Quarrellings  of  papists   173,  178

Question  very  beastish    158,  171

Questmonger  for  antichrist  160,  167, 170

Racked  was  Anne  Askewe   142

Really,  is  not  of  belief    148

Reniers  of  Christ   142

Receiving  of  the  priest    153

Rochester  and  More    139

Sacrament,  what  it  is   148

Sampson  and  Winchester   181

Scripture  judged  heresy   169

Shaxton  and  Crome   142

Silence  for  the  pope    181

Standish,  a  blasphemous  papist....  172

Steven  done  to  death    139

Temples,  God  dwelleth  not  in   170

Temptations  of  Bonner  164,165,166,172

Thomas  Walden  a  friar   154

Thomas  More  and  Rochester   139

Tyndale  and  Barnes    138

Titles  of  Wicliffe's  books   140

Verity  deemed  heresy    167

Viper's  whelps   I71

Unsufficient  make  they  Christ   177

Walter  Hunt,  a  doctor    164

Whoredom  is  honoured   176

Why  Christ  is  renied   142

Winchester's  mouse  houseled...! 54,  159

Winchester  and  Sampson   181

Winchester  the  pope's  bear   182

Winchester  at  Utrecht   182

Wits  soft  and  tender    182

Women,  learned   156

Wrisley  and  Riche   142

God  save  the  King.

THE  FIRST  EXAMINATION

OF  THE  WORTHY  SEKVANT  OF  GOD,

MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE,

THE  YOUNGER  DAUGHTER  OF  SIR  WILLIAM  ASKEWE,  KNIGHT,
OF  LINCOLNSHIRE,  LATELY  MARTYRED  IN  SMITH-
FIELD,  BY  THE  ROMISH  POPE'S  ^  UPHOLDERS  2.

THE  CENSURE  OF  JUDGMENT  OF  JOHN  BALE  THERE-
UPON, AFTER  THE  SACRED  SCRH'TURES
AND  CHRONICLES 3.

*0f  no  less  christian  constancy  was  this  faithful  witness
and  holj  martyr  of  God,  Anne  Askewe,  nor  no  less  a  fast
member  of  Christ  by  her  mighty  persistance  in  his  verity  at
this  time  of  mischief,  than  was  the  aforenamed  Blandina  in
the  primitive  church.  This  shall  well  appear  in  her  two
examinations  or  tyrannous  handlings,  here  following,  whom
[which]  she  wrote  with  her  own  hand  at  the  instant  desire  of
certain  faithful  men  and  women,  yea,  rather  at  the  secret
motion  of  God,  that  the  truth  thereof  miorht  be  known  the
world  over :  as  within  short  space  it  will  be,  if  the  Latin

[1  Pope's,  not  in  fii'st  edition.]

[2  The  first  edition  has  the  following  addition  to  the  title :  "  Anne
Askewe  stood  fast  by  this  verity  of  God  to  the  end.

Psalm  cxvi.
The  verity  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever.
Prov.  XXXI.

Favour  is  deceitful,  and  beauty  is  a  vain  thing ;  but  a  woman  that
feareth  the  Lord  is  worthy  to  be  praised :  she  openeth  her  mouth  to
wisdom,  and  in  her  languge  is  the  law  of  grace."]

[3  Not  in  the  first  edition.]

[4  Not  in  the  first  edition.  Listead  of  it  the  following  appears: —
"Here  hast  thou  (gentle  reader)  the  two  examinations  of  Anne  Askewe,
wliich  she  A^Tote  with  her  own  hand  at  the  instant  desire  of  certain
faithful  men  and  women,  by  the  which  (if  thou  mark  diligently  the
commmiications  both  of  her  and  of  her  examiners)  thou  mayest  easily
prove  the  spirits,  as  S.  John  the  Apostle  giveth  you  counsel.  1  John  iiii.
Then  shalt  thou  know  the  tree  by  the  fruit,  and  the  man  by  his  work.
Anne  Askewe."]

10—2

148

THE  FIRST  EXAMINATION

speech  can  carry  it.  Mark  well  the  communication  here,
Spirit  both  of  her  and  her  examiners,  so  proving  their  spirits,  as
St  John  the  Apostle  giveth  you  counsel,  1  John  iv.  And
then  shall  ye  know  the  tree  by  his  fruit,  and  the  man  by
his  work.

Anxe  Askewe.

To  satisfy  your  expectation,  good  people  (saith  she),  this  was  my
first  examiuation,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord,  M.D.XLV.^  and  in  the  month
Christopher  of  March.     First  Christopher  Dare  examined  me  at  Sadler's  Hall,

Dare,  i  ^

being  one  of  the  quest,  and  asked  if  I  did  not  believe  that  the  sacra-
ment hanging  over  the  altar  was  the  veiy  body  of  Christ  really.
Then  I  demanded  this  question  of  him,  wherefore  St  Stephen  was  stoned
to  death?  And  he  said  he  could  not  tell.  Then  I  answered  that  no
more  would  I  assoil  his  vain  question.

John  Bale.

A  sacrament  (saith  St  Augustine^)  is  a  sign,  shape,  or  simi-
litude, of  that  it  representeth,  and  no  God,  nor  yet  thing

Reauy.  represented.  This  word  real,  or  really,  is  not  of  belief ;  for  it
is  not  in  all  the  sacred  scriptures.  Only  is  it  sophistically  bor-
rowed of  the  pagans'  learning  by  Winchester  and  his  fellows,
to  corrupt  our  christian  faith.  Beware  of  that  filthy  poison.
The  perfect  behef  of  Stephen,  Acto.  vii.;  Paul,  Acto.  xvii. ;
and  of  Solomon,  3  Regum  viii.  et  2  Parali.  vi.,  was  that  God
^'dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  with  hands."  Agreeable  unto
this  was  the  faith  of  this  godly  woman,  which  neither  could

The  box.      beheve  that  he  dwelleth  in  the  box.    God  saith,  Esay  Ivi.

"  Heaven  is  my  seat,"  not  the  box.     David  saith.  Psalm  cxiii.

[Psai. cxv.]  "Our  God  is  in  heaven,"  not  in  the  pix.  Christ  taught  us  to
say,  when  we  pray,  Matt.  vi.  Luke  xi.  "Our  Father,  which
art  in  heaven,"  and  not.  Our  Father,  which  art  in  the  box.
Now  discern  and  judge.

There  are  no  references  or  notes  in  the  the  margin  of  the  1st

ed.]

[2  *aMDxlv.'  1st  ed.]

Si  enim  sacramenta  quamdam  similitudinem  earum  rerum,  qua-
rum  sacramenta  sunt,  non  haberent,  omnino  sacramenta  non  essent.
— S.  Aug.  Epist.  xxxiii.  Op.  Ed.  Ben.  Par.  1679.  Vol.  ii.  col.  267.  f.
Hsec  enim  sacramenta  sunt,  in  quibus  non  quid  sint,  sed  quid  osten-
dant,  semper  adtenditur:  quoniam  signa  sunt  rerum,  aliud  cxistentia,
et  aliud  significantia. — Id.  cont.  Max.  Lib.  ii.  c.  22.  Vol.  viii.  col.
725.j

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

149

AXXE  ASKEWE

Secondly,  he  said,  that  there  was  a  woman  which  did  testify,  that  I
should  read,  how  that  God  was  not  in  temples  made  with  hands.  Then  Temries.
I  shewed  him  the  seventh  and  the  seventeenth  chapter  of  the  Apostles'
Acts,  what  Stephen  and  Paul  had  said  therein.  Whereupon  he  asked
me,  how  I  took  those  sentences?  I  answered,  that  I  would  not  throw
pearls  among  swine,  for  acorns  were  good  enough.

John  Bale.

An  ignorant  woman,  yea,  a  beast  without  faith,  is  herein
allowed  to  judge  the  holy  scriptures  heresy,  and,  against  all
good  laws,  admitted  to  accuse  this  godly  woman,  the  servant  Accusers,
of  Christ,  for  an  heinous  heretic,  for  the  only  reading  of
them.  As  perverse  and  blasphemous  was  this  questmonger
as  she,  and  as  beastly  ignorant  in  the  doctrine  of  health;  yet
is  neither  of  them  judged  ill  of  the  world,  but  the  one  per-
mitted to  accuse  this  true  member  of  Christ,  and  the  other  to
condemn  her.  Wherefore  her  answer,  out  of  the  seventh
chapter  of  Matthew,  was  most  fit  for  them :  for  they  are
no  better  than  swine,  that  so  contemn  the  precious  treasure  of
the  gospel  for  the  mire  of  men's  traditions.

AXN'E  AsKEWE.

Thirdly,  he  asked  me  wherefore  I  said  that  I  had  rather  read^  five
lines  in  the  bible  than  to  hear  five  masses  in  the  temple.  I  confessed  Masses,
that  I  said  no  less  :  not  for  the  dispraise  of  either  the  epistle  or  the
gospel;  but  because  the  one  did  greatly  edify  me,  and  the  other
nothing  at  all:  as  Saint  Paul  doth  witness,  in  the  ninth 5  chapter  of
his  first  epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  where  as  he  doth  say, "If  the  trump
giveth  an  uncertain  sound,  who  will  prepare  himself  to  the  battle  ?*

John  Bale.

A  commandment  hath  Christ  given  us  to  search  the  holy
scriptures,  John  v.,  for  in  them  only  is  the  life  eternal.
"Blessed  is  he  (saith  Christ  unto  John)  which  readeth  and
heareth  the  words  of  this  prophecy,"  Apoc.  i.  But  of  the
Latin  popish  mass  is  not  one  word  in  all  the  bible,  and  there-
fore it  pertaineth  not  to  faith.  A  strait  commandment  have
Almighty  God  given,  Deut.  xii.,  that  nothing  be  added  to
his  word,  nor  yet  taken  from  it.  "  Put  thou  nothing  unto  his  God's  word,
words  (saith  Solomon,  Prov.  xxx.),  lest  thou  be  found,  in  so
doing,  a  reprobate  person,  and  a  liar."   St  Paul  willed  nothing

[4  1st  ed.  'to  read.']  p  1st  ed.  reads,  'fourteenth.*]

150

THE.  FIRST  EXAMINATION

to  be  uttered  in  a  dead  speech.  1  Cor.  xiv.  (as  are  your  mass
and  matins),  but  silence  always  to  be  in  the  congregations,
where  as  is  no  interpreter ;  for  five  words  (saith  he)  availeth
more  to  understanding,  than  ten  thousand  words  with  the
tongue.  This  proveth  temple-service  of  the  papists  all  the
year  to  be  worth  nothing.

A>'>-E  ASKEWE.

The  priest.  Fourthly,  he  laid  unto  my  charge  that  I  should  say,  if  an  ill  priest

ministered,  it  was  the  devil,  and  not  God.  My  answer  was,  that  I
never  spake  such  thing ;  but  this  was  my  saying,  that  whatsoever  he
■were,  which  ministered  unto  me,  his  ill  conditions  could  not  hurt  my
faith;  but  in  spirit  I  received,  nevertheless,  the  body  and  blood  of
Christ.

John  Bale.

Christ  saith,  John  vi.,  "Have  not  I  chosen  you  twelve,  and
Judas.  yet  one  of  you  is  a  devil?"  meaning  Judas,  that  false  and
unfaithful  priest.  !N"o  less  saith  Peter,  2  Peter  ii.,  of  those
lying  curates,  by  whom  the  truth  is  blasphemed,  and  the
people  made  merchandise  of  in  their  covetousness.  If  the
ill  fruit,  then,  be  all  one  with  the  ill  tree  in  naucjhtiness,  the
work  of  a  devil  must  be  devilish.  But  God  said  unto  the
wicked  priests,  Esay  i.,  Hier.  vi.,  Amos  v.,  and  Mala,  ii.,  that
Sacrifices,  he  abliorrcd  their  sacrifices,  and  also  hated  them,  even  at  the
very  heart,  willing  both  heaven  and  earth  to  mark  it.  Into
Judas  entered  Satan,  after  the  sop  was  given  him,  John  xiii.,
whereas  the  other  apostles  received  the  body  and  blood  of
Christ.  The  table  was  all  one  to  them  both,  so  was  the  bread
which  their  mouths  received.  The  inward  receivings,  then,
in  Peter  and  Judas  made  all  the  diversity,  which  was  belief
and  unbelief,  or  faith  and  unfaithfulness ;  as  Christ  largely
The  sixth  of  declareth  in  the  vith  of  John,  where  as  he  shewed  aforehand

John.  ^  '

the  full  doctrine  of  that  mystical  supper.  Only  he  that
believcth  hath  there  the  promise  of  the  life  everlasting,  and
not  he  that  eateth  the  material  bread.  Of  God  are  they
taught,  and  not  of  men,  which  truly  understand  this  doctrine.

AXXE  AsKEWE.

Confession.  Fifthly,  he  asked  me  what  I  said  concerning  confession  ?  I  answered
him  my  meaning,  which  was  as  St  James  saith,  that  every  man  ought
to  acknowledge^  his  faults  to  other,  and  the  one  to  pray  for  the  other.

[1  1st  ed.  'knowledge.']

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

151

John  Bale.

This  confession  only  do  the  scripture  appoint  us,  Jac.  v.
as  we  have  offended  our  neighbour.  But  if  we  have  offended
God,  we  must  sorrowfully  acknowledge  it  before  him,  and  he
(saith  St  John,  John  i.)  hath  faithfully  promised  to  forgive
us  our  sins,  if  we  so  do,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unright-
eousness. If  the  law  of  truth  be  in  the  priest's  mouth,  he  Priest,
is  to  be  sought  unto  for  godly  counsel.  Mala.  ii.  But  if  he
be  a  blasphemous  hypocrite,  or  superstitious  fool,  he  is  to  be
shunned  as  a  most  pestilent  poison.

AjSTfE  AsKEWE.

Sixthly,  he  asked  me  what  I  said  to  the  king's  book?    And  I  an-  The  king's

°  book.

swered  him,  that  I  could  say  nothing  to  it,  because  I  never  saw  it.
John  Bale.

All  crafty  ways  possible  sought  this  crafty  questmonger,
or  else  the  devil  in  him,  to  bring  this  poor  innocent  lamb  to
the  slaughter-place  of  antichrist.  Much  after  this  sort  sought
the  wicked  Pharisees,  by  certain  of  their  own  faction,  or  Pharisees,
hired  sateUites,  with  the  Herodians,  to  bring  Christ  in  danger
of  Caesar,  and  so  to  have  him  slain.  Matt,  xxii.,  Mar.  xii.,
Luke  xxi.

AXXE  AsKEWE.

Seventhly,  he  asked  me  if  I  had  the  Spirit  of  God  in  me  ?  I  answered,
if  I  had  not,  I  was  but  a  reprobate  or  cast-away.

John  Bale.

Elect  are  of  God  (saith  Peter)  through  the  sanctifying  of
the  Spirit,  1  Peter  i.  In  every  true  christian  believer  dwelleth
the  Spirit  of  God.  John  xiv.  Their  souls  are  the  sanctified  The  spirit,
temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  1  Corinth,  iii.  "  He  that  hath  not
the  Spirit  of  Christ  (saith  Paul)  is  none  of  Christ's."  Rom.  viii.
To  them  is  the  Holy  Ghost  given  which  heareth  the  gospel
and  believeth  it,  and  not  unto  them  which  will  be  justified  by
their  works.  Gala.  ii.  All  these  worthy  scriptures  confirm
her  saying.

Axnt:  Askewe.

Then  he  said  he  had  sent  for  a  priest  to  examine  me,  which  was
there  at  hand.  The  priest  asked  me,  what  I  said  to  the  sacrament  of
the  altar ;  and  required  much  to  know  therein  my  meaning.  But  I
desired  him  again  to  hold  me  excused  concerning  that  matter.  None
other  answer  would  I  make  him,  because  I  perceived  him  a  papist.

152

THE  FIRST  EXAMINATION

John  Bale.

Mocking  priests  (saith  Esay)  hath  rule  of  the  Lord's  peo-
ple, whose  voices  are  in  their  drunkenness.  Bid  that  may  be
bidden,  forbid  that  may  be  forbidden,  keep  back  that  may  be
kept  back,  here  a  little  and  there  a  little.  Esay  xxviii.  A
plague  shall  come  upon  these:  for  why  ?  they  "have  changed
the  ordinances,  and  made  the  everlasting  testament  of  none
effect."  Esay  xxiv.  '-'They  withhold  (saith  St  Paul)  the  verity
of  God  in  unrighteousness."  Rom.  i.  "  They  breed  cockatrice'
eggs,  saith  Esay,  and  weave  the  spider'^s  web.  Whoso  eateth  of
their  eggs  dieth ;  but  if  one  treadeth  upon  them,  there  cometh
up  a  serpent."

Anne  Askewe.

Eighthly,  he  asked  me  if  I  did  not  think  that  private  masses  didi
help  souls  departed.  And  I  said,  it  was  great  idolatry  to  believe  more
in  them  than  in  the  death  that  2  Christ  died  for  us.

John  Bale.

Here  riseth  the  serpent  of  the  cockatrice'  eggs,  workmanly
to  fulfil  the  afore  alleged  prophecy.  If  their  masses  had  been
of  God's  creation,  ordinance,  or  commandment ;  or  if  they  had
been  in  any  point  necessary  for  man's  behoof,  they  had  been
registered  in  the  book  of  life,  which  is  the  sacred  bible.  But
Masses  therein  is  neither  mention  of  mass  private  nor  public  ;  several
^"'^^  nor  common;  single  nor  double;  high  nor  low;  by  foot  nor
on  horseback,  or  by  note,  as  they  call  it.  If  they  be  things
added  by  man's  invention  (as  they  can  be  none  other,  not  be-
ing there  named),  then  am  I  sure  that  the  scriptures  call  them
filthiness,  rust,  chaif,  draff,  swill,  drunkenness,  fornication,
menstrue,  man's  dirt,  adders'  eggs,  poison,  snares,  the  bread  of
wicked  lies,  and  the  cup  of  God's  curse.  Their  original  ground
Draids.  should  scom  to  be  taken  of  the  Druids,  or  pagan  priests,  which
inhabited  this  realm  long  afore  Christ's  incarnation,  and  had
then  practised  sacrifices,  public  and  private.  Look  Cornelius,
Tacitus,  Caius  Julius,  Plinius,  Strabo,  and  such  other  authors.
That  name  of  privation  added  unto  their  mass  clearly  de-
priveth  it  of  christian  communion,  where  one  man  eateth  up
all,  and  distributeth  nothing.

[1  1st  ed.  'did  not  help.']
[2  1st  ed.  '  which.']

Mockers.

A  serpent
riseth.

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

153

How  such  ware  should  help  the  souls  departed,  I  cannot  For souu.
tell ;  but  well  1  wot  that  the  wounded  man  between  Jerusalem
and  Jericho  had  no  help  of  them.  Luke  x.  The  Samaritan,
■which  was  reckoned  but  a  pagan  among  them,  was  his  only
comfort.  In  the  most  popish  time  was  never  more  horrible
blasphemy  than  this  is.  This  wickedness  impugneth  all  the
promises  of  God  concerning  faith  and  remission  of  sins.  It
repugneth  also  to  the  whole  doctrine  of  the  gospel.  The
application  of  Christ''s  supper  availeth  only  them  that  be  alive,
taking,  eating,  and  drinking,  that  is  therein  ministered.  No
more  can  the  priest's  receiving  that  sacrament  profit  another  JJJIjPJfg'*''
man,  than  can  his  receiving  of  baptism,  or  of  penance,  as  they
call  it.  If  it  profiteth  not  the  quick,  how  can  it  profit  the
dead  ?  No  sacrifice  is  the  mass,  nor  yet  good  work ;  but  a
blasphemous  profanation  of  the  Lord's  holy  supper,  a  mani-
fest wickedness,  an  horrible  idolatry,  and  a  foul  abomination ;
being  thus  a  rite  of  worshipping  without  the  word,  yea,  against
the  express  word  of  God.

AXNE  AsKEWE.

Then  they  had  me  from 3  thence  unto  my  Lord  Mayor.     And  he  Mayor,
examined  me,  as  they  had  before ;  and  I  answered  him  directly  in  all
things,  as  I  had^  the  quest  afore.

John  Bale.

After  this  sort  was  Christ  led  from  the  examination  of  the
clergy  to  Pilate.  Matth.  xxvii.  In  that  the  examination  of  the
mayor  and  the  quest  was  all  one,  ye  may  well  know  that  they
had  both  one  schoolmaster,  even  the  brutish  bishop  of  London.  Bonner
The  ignorant  magistrates  of  England  will  neither  be  godly-
wise  with  David  and  Solomon,  nor  yet  embrace  the  earnest
instructions  of  God,  to  be  learned  in  the  scriptures,  Ps.  ii.
Sapien.  vi. ;  but  still  be  wicked  ministers  and  cruel  servant
slaves  to  antichrist  and  the  devil.  Apoc.  xvii.  More  fit  are  ignorance,
such  witless  mayors  and  graceless  officers,  as  knoweth  not
white  from  black,  and  light  from  darkness,  (Esay  v.)  to  feed
swine,  or  to  keep  kaddows^  than  to  rule  a  christian  common-
alty. A  terrible  day  abideth  them  which  thus  ordereth  the
innocent.  Jaco.  ii.

[3  The  word  *  from,'  is  not  in  the  1st  ed.]

[4  Instead  of  '  had,'  the  1st  ed.  reads  '  answered.']

[5  A  jackdaw,  Halliwell.    He  spells  it 'caddow.'J

154

THE  FIRST  EXAMINATION

Anne  Ask  ewe.

Beside  this,  my  Lord  Mayor  laid  one  thing  unto  my  charge  which
was  never  spoken  of  me,  but  of  them :  and  that  was,  whether  a  mouse
eating  the  host  received  God,  or  no  ?  This  question  did  I  never  ask ;
but,  indeed,  they  asked  it  of  me,  whereunto  I  made  them  no  answer,
but  smiled.

John  Bale.

Is  not  here  (think  you)  well-favoured  and  well-fashioned
divinity,  to  establish  an  article  of  the  christian  faith  ?  Wily
Winchester  1  answereth  this  question,  as  foolish  as  it  is,  in
his  Wise  Detection  of  the  Devil's  Sophistry.  "  Believe,"
saith  he,  "  that  a  mouse  cannot  devour  God."  Yet  reporteth
he  after,  in  fol.  21,  that  Christ's  body  may  as  well  dwell  in  a

peryn.  mousc  as  in  Judas.  Then  folio weth  friar  Fynk,  (friar  Peryn  2,
I  should  say,)  a  bachelor  of  the  same  school :  and  he  answer-
eth in  the  end  of  his  third  sermon,  that  the  sacrament  eaten  of
a  mouse  is  the  very  and  real  body  of  Christ.  And  when  he
hath  affirmed  it  to  be  no  derogation  to  Christ's  presence  to  lie
in  the  maw  of  that  mouse,  he  divideth  me  the  one  from  the
other,  the  sacrament  from  Christ's  body,  concluding  that
though  the  sacrament  be  digested  in  the  mouse''s  maw,  yet  is
not  Christ's  body  there  consumed.  0  blasphemous  beasts,  and
blind  blundering  Balaamites !

Because  these  two  workmen  be  scant  witty  in  their  own
occupation,  I  shall  bring  them  forth  here  two  old  artificers  of

Guimundus.  theirs  to  help  them ;  Guimundus  Aversanus,  a  bishop,  to  help
bishop  Stephen,  and  Thomas  Walden^,  a  friar,  to  help  friar
Peryn.  The  sacraments  (say  they  both)  are  not  eaten  of  mice,
though  they  seem  so  to  be  in  the  exterior  similitudes ;  for
the  virtues  (saith  Guimundus)  of  holy  men  are  not  eaten
of  beasts,  when  they  are  eaten  of  them.    Lib.  11.,  de  Cor-

waidenus.  pove  ct  Saiiguine  Domini.  No,  marry,  (quoth  Walden,)  no
more  is  the  painter's  occupation  destroyed  when  his  picture  is
destroyed.     Mark  this  geer  for  your  learning.     But  now

Aigerus.  comoth  Algcrus,  a  monk,  more  crafty  than  they  both,  and  he
saith  (Lib.  11.  cap.  1,  de  Eucharistia)  that  as  well  is  this  meat

[1  Gardiner,  Bp.  of  Winchester.  Detection  of  the  Devil's  Sophis-
try, p.  16.     Also  in  Confutation  against  Cranmer,  p.  66.  1.  30.]

[2  Three  notable  and  godly  Sermons  by  W.  Peryn.  Imprynted  by
Nicholas  Hyll.  8vo.  London,  1546.]

[3  Doctrinale,  Lib.  11.  cap.  60.  fol.  lix.  Ed.  Paris,  1521.]

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEVVE.

155

spiritual,  as  material,  because  David  calleth  it  the  bread  of
angels,  and  a  bread  from  heaven.  Ps.  Ixxvii.  That  which  is
material  in  this  bread  (saith  he)  is  consumed  by  digestion ;  but
that  which  is  spiritual  remaineth  uncorrupted*.

If  we  would  attend  well  unto  Christ's  divinity,  and  let
these  oiled  divines  dispute  among  old  gossips,  we  should  soon
discharge  mice  and  rats,  weak  stomachs,  and  parbreaking
drunkards,  of  a  far  other  sort  than  this  :  he  that  eateth  my
flesh  (saith  Christ,  Jo.  vi.),  and  drinketh  my  blood,  dwelleth  in
me,  and  I  in  him."  This  eating  is  all  one  with  the  dwelling,
and  is  neither  for  mice  nor  rats,  burnt  chancels,  not  drunken
priests :  for  as  we  eat  we  dwell,  and  as  we  dwell  we  eat,  by
a  grounded  and  perfect  faith  in  him.  The  substance  of  that
most  goodly  refection  lieth  not  in  the  mouth  eating,  nor  yet  in
the  belly  feeding,  though  they  be  necessary,  but  in  the  only
spiritual  or  soul  eating.  No  wise  man  will  think  that  Christ
will  dwell  in  a  mouse,  nor  yet  that  a  mouse  can  dwell  in  Christ,  Faj^^-
though  it  be  the  doctrine  of  these  doughty  dowsepers;  for  they
shall  find  no  scriptures  for  it.  If  these  men  were  not  enemies
to  faith,  and  friends  to  idolatry,  they  would  never  teach  such
filthy  learning.  More  of  this  shall  I  write  (God  wiUing)  in
the  answer  of  their  books.  Nota.

AXXE  ASKEWE.

Then  the  bishop's  chancellor  rebuked  me,  and  said,  that  I  was  much
to  blame  for  uttering  the  scriptures :  for  St  Paul  (he  said)  forbade
women  to  speak  or  to  talk  of  the  word  of  God.  I  answered  liim  that  Women.
I  knew  Paul's  meaning  so  well  as  he,  which  is  (1  Corinth,  xiv.)  that  a
woman  ought  not  to  speak  in  the  congregation  by  the  way  of  teaching.
And  then  I  asked  him  how  many  women  he  had  seen  go  into  the  pulpit
and  preach.  He  said  he  never  saw  none.  Then  I  said  he  ought  to  find
no  fault  in  poor  women,  except  they  had  oflfended  the  law.

John  Bale.

Courteous  enough  is  her  answer  here  to  this  quarrelling

In  illo  Sacramento  Christ  us  est,  quoniam  corpus  est  Christi.
Non  ergo  corporalis  esca,  sed  spiritualis  est :  si  ergo  spiritualis  et  non
corporalis  esca,  quomodo  corporali  secessui  obnoxia  ?  Cibus  enim
spiritualis  nobis  communis  est  cum  angelis;  quia  panem  angelorum
manducavit  homo:  cibus  carnalis  communis  est  nobis  cum  bestiis.
Bestialis  defectum  patitur  digestionis ;  angelicus  gloriam  servat  in-
corniptionis. — Lib.  ii.  c.  1.  de  Sacramento.  Op.  Algeri  in  Bibliothec.
Patrum.  Tom.  iv.  Paris.  1624.]

156

THE  FIRST  EXAMINATION

Scripture  and  (as  appeareth)  unlearned  chancellor.  JSIany  godly  women,
both  in  the  old  law  and  the  new,  were  learned  in  the  scrip-
tures, and  made  utterance  of  them  to  the  glory  of  God,  as  we
read  of  Elizabeth,  Mary,  and  Anna  the  widow,  Luke  i.  and  ii. :
yet  were  they  not  rebuked  for  it.  Yea,  Mary,  Christ's  mo-
ther, retained  all  that  was  afterward  written  of  him,  Luke  ii. :
yet  was  it  not  imputed  to  her  as  an  offence.  Christ  blamed
not  the  woman  that  cried  while  he  was  in  preaching,  Happy

Women.  ^ho  womb  that  bare  thee."  Luke  xi.  The  women  that  gave
knowledge  to  his  disciples  that  he  was  risen  from  death  to  life,
discomfited  not  he,  but  solaced  them  with  his  most  glorious
appearance.  Matth.  xxviii.  John  xx.  In  the  primitive  church
(specially  in  St  Jerome's  time)  was  it  a  great  praise  unto  wo-
men to  be  learned  in  the  scriptures.     Great  commendation

English       giveth  our  Enghsh  chronicles  to  Helena,  L>sula,  and  Hilda,

women.  ^  ^

women  of  our  nation,  for  being  learned  also  in  the  scriptures.
Such  a  woman  was  the  said  Hilda  as  openly  disputed  in  them
against  the  superstitions  of  certain  bishops.  But  this  chan-
cellor, belike,  chanced  upon  that  blind  popish  work,  which
Walter  Hunt.  Walter  Huut,  a  white  friar,  wrote  fourscore  years  ago.  Contra
Doctrices  Mulieres,  against  school-women,  or  else  some  other
like  blind  Romish  beggai  ies.

AXNE  ASKEWE.

Prison.  TliGH  my  Lord  Mayor  commanded  me  to  ward.    I  asked  him  if

sureties  would  not  seiTe  me.  And  he  made  me  short  answer  that  he
would  take  none.  Then  was  I  had  to  the  Counter,  and  there  remained
seven  ^  days,  no  friend  admitted  to  speak  with  me.

John  Bale.

Christ  trod-  Hcro  is  ChHst  yet  trodden  on  the  heel  by  that  wicked
heel.  serpent  which  tempted  Eve.  Gen.  iii.  His  faithful  member
for  beUeving  in  him  is  here  thrown  in  prison.  And  no  marvel,
for  it  was  his  own  promise  :  Ye  shall  be  brought  before  rulers
and  deputies  (saith  he)  for  my  truth's  sake,"  Matth.  x.  ''Ye
shall  be  betrayed  of  your  own  nation  and  kindred,  and  so
thrown  in  prison,"  Luke  xxi.  "  If  they  have  persecuted  me,
think  not  but  they  will  persecute  you,"  John  xv.  This  serpent
is  again  become  the  prince  of  this  world,  and  holdeth  the
governors  thereof  captive.  John  xiv.    Sureties  would  be  taken

[1  'xii.'  in  1st  ed.]

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

157

for  a  thief  or  a  murderer,  but  not  for  Christ's  member,  the
bishop's  chancellor  being  at  hand,  nor  yet  her  friends  permit-
ted to  comfort  her.

AXXE  AsKEWE.

But,  in  the  mean  time,  there  was  a  priest  sent  to  me,  which  said^  Afiiend.
he  was  commanded  of  the  bishop  to  examine  me,  and  to  give  me
good  counsel ;  which  he  did  not.  But  first  he  asked  me  for  what  cause
I  was  put  into  the  Counter  ?  And  I  told  him  I  could  not  tell.  Then  he
said  it  was  great  pity  that  I  should  be  there  without  cause,  and  con-
cluded he  was 3  very  sorry  for  me.

John  Bale.

0  temptation  of  Satan !  Christ,  being  in  the  sohtary  wil-
derness alone,  was  after  this  flattermg  sort  assaulted  first  of
his  enemy.  Matt.  iv.  This  Judas  was  sent  afore  to  give  Judas,
a  friendly  kiss,  the  more  deeply  to  trap  the  innocent  in  snare.
But  God's  wisdom  made  her  to  perceive  what  he  was.  A
false  prophet  is  soon  known  by  his  fruits,  among  them  that
are  godly-wise.  Matt.  vii.  She  considered,  with  Solomon,
that  "more  to  profit  are  the  stripes  of  a  friend  than  the  fraudu-
lent kisses  of  a  deceitful  enemy."  Prov.  xxvii.

Anne  Askewe.

Secondly,  he  said,  it  was  told  him  that  I  should  deny  the  sacra-  The  sacra-
ment of  the  altar.    And  I  answered  him  again,  that  that  I  had  said,  I
had  said.

John  Bale.

In  this  brief  answer  she  remembered  Solomon's  counsel,
"Answer  not  a  fool  after  his  foolishness."  "  Beware  of  them
(saith  Christ)  which  come  in  sheep's  clothing,  for  inwardly
they  are  most  ravening  wolves."  Matt.  vii.  "God  destroyeth
the  crafts  of  the  wicked  (saith  Job),  so  that  they  are  not
able  to  perform  that  they  take  in  hand."  Job  v.

Anne  Askewe.

Thh'dly,  he  asked  me  if  I  were  shriven,  I  told  him,  no.  Then  he
said  he  would  bring  one  to  me  for  to  shrive  me.  And  I  told  him  so
that  I  might  have  one  of  these  three,  that  is  to  say,  Dr  Crome,  Sir
Gyllam,  or  Huntington,  I  was  contented,  because  I  knew  them  to  be
men  of  wisdom.    As  for  you,  or  any  other,  I  will  not  dispraise,  because

[2  'said,  that  he  was  commanded,'  1st  ed.j
[3  'that  he  was,'  1st  ed.]

158

THE  FIRST  EXAMINATION

I  know  ye  not.  Then  he  said,  I  would  not  have  you  think,  but  that  I,
or  another  that  shall  be  brought  you,  shall  be  as  honest  as  they ;  for  if
we  were  not,  ye  may  be  sure  the  king  would  not  suffer  us  to  preach.
Then  I  answered  by  the  saying  of  Solomon,  "  By  communing  with
the  wise  I  may  learn  wisdom ;  but  by  talking  with  a  fool  I  shall  take
scathe."   Prov.  i.

John  Bale.

See  how  this  adversary  compasseth  hke  a  ravening  lion
to  devour  this  lamb.   1  Pet.  v.    Now  tempteth  he  her  with

Confession,  confession,  which  hath  been  such  a  bait  of  theirs  as  hath
brought  into  their  nets  and  snares  the  mightiest  princes  of
the  world,  both  kings  and  emperors.    See  here  if  they  leave

Practice.  any  subtilty  unsought  to  obtain  their  prey.  He  reckoned  by
this  to  win  his  purpose,  which  way  soever  she  had  taken.
If  she  had  been  confessed  to  him,  he  had  known  which  way
she  had  been  bent.  If  she  had  utterly  refused  confession,  he
had  more  matter  to  accuse  her  of.  O  subtil  seed  of  the
serpent !  This  part  played  your  old  generation,  the  Pharisees
and  priests,  with  Christ,  to  bring  him  in  danger  of  the  law.
Matt.  xxii.  and  John  viii.  No  christian  erudition  bringeth
this  priest,  not  yet  good  counsels  of  the  scripture ;  but,  as

The^f^ypo-  Esay  saith,  "  The  hypocrite  imagineth  abomination  against  God,
to  famish  the  hungry,  and  withhold  drink  from  the  thirsty.
Yet  shall  not  the  eyes  of  the  seeing  be  dim,  nor  ears  of
the  hearing  be  deaf."  Esay  xxxii.    If  the  king  admit  such

Preachers,  preachors  (as  I  cannot  think  it),  a  §ore  plague  remaineth  both
to  him  and  to  his  people.

AyyE  AsKEWE.

Fourthly,  he  asked  me,  if  the  host  should  fall,  and  a  beast  did  eat
it,  whether  the  beast  did  receive  God  or  no  ?  I  answered,  Seeing  ye
have  taken  the  pains  to  ask  this  question,  I  desire  you  also^  to  take  so
much  pain  more  as  to  assoil  it  yom-self ;  for  I  will  not  do  it,  because  I
perceive  ye  come  to  tempt  me.  And  he  said  it  was  against  the  order
of  schools,  that  he  which  asked  the  question  should  answer  it.  I
told  him  I  was  but  a  woman,  and  knew  2  not  the  course  of  schools.

John  Bale.

Beastly  was  that  question,  and  of  a  more  beastly  brain
propounded,  to  this  woman.    Little  need  shall  other  men

['  The  words  *to  take  so  much  pain  more  as,'  are  not  in  the  1st  ed.]
[2  '  and  I  knew  not,'  1st  ed.]

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

159

have  to  manifest  their  blasphemous  follies,  when  they  do  it  so

plainly  themselves.    Who  ever  heard  afore  that  their  host

was  a  god,  and  might  fall  and  be  eaten  of  a  beast,  till  they  ^^^"^"g

now  so  beastly  told  the  tale  ?    Though  St  Paul,  where  as  it

is  rightly  ministered,  doth  call  it  the  body  of  the  Lord,

1  Cor.  ii.,  yet  doth  he  not  call  it  a  god.    Though  Christ  saith,

**  This  is  my  body,"  (Matt,  xxvi.,  Mark  xiv.,  Luke  xxii.),  yet

saith  he  not.  This  is  a  God ;  for  God  is  a  spirit,  and  no  body.

John  iv.    Where  God  is  eaten,  it  is  of  the  spirit,  and  neither

of  mouse  nor  rat,  as  Winchester  and  Peryn,  with  other  like  Winchester.

popish  heretics,  have  taught  now  of  late  by  their  own  hand-  ^^^^^

writings.    Our  God  is  in  heaven,  and  cannot  fall,  nor  be

eaten  of  beasts.    If  they  have  such  a  god  as  may  both  fall

and  so  be  eaten,  as  this  priest  here  confesseth,  it  is  some  false

or  counterfeit  god  of  their  own  making.     If  he  may  putrefy,

or  be  consumed  of  worms,  mould,  rust,  or  fire,  Baruch  saith  An  idoi.

it  is  an  idol,  and  no  god.  Baruch  vi.

These  witless  idolaters  have  no  grace  in  this  age  to  hide
their  old  leo^erdemains  :  they  fare  like  those  drunken  gossips.  Like  oid

c  «/  or'  gossips.

which  tell  more  than  all,  when  their  heads  be  full  of  well-
gingered  ale.  "  The  proud  crown  of  the  drunken  Ephraimites
(saith  Esay)  shall  be  trodden  under  foot."  "  The  priests  and
the  prophets  do  stagger,  they  are  so  overseen  with  wine."
Esay  xxviii.  "  They  stumble  in  the  streets,  and  have  stained
themselves  with  blood."  Thren.  iv.  "All  the  dwellers  of  Judah
(saith  the  Lord)  shall  I  fill  with  drunkenness,  both  the  kings  Drunkenness,
and  the  priests."  "  I  will  neither  pardon  them,  spare  them,  nor
yet  have  pity  on  them."  Jer.  xiii.  "And  where  as  that  drunken-
ness is  (saith  Solomon),  there  is  no  counsel  kept."  Prov.  xxxi.
In  the  end  this  hypocrite,  full  like  himself,  allegeth  to  this  Hypocrite,
woman  a  manner  used  of  his  old  predecessors  in  the  schools
of  falsehood ;  but  from  the  schools  of  truth  he  bringeth
nothing  to  the  comfort  of  her  conscience.  He  declareth  full
workmanly  in  this,  what  h'e  and  his  generation  seeketh  by
such  their  spiritual  and  justifying  works,  ex  opere  operato,

Anne  Asrewe.

Fifthly,  he  asked  me  if  I  intended  to  receive  the  sacrament  at  HowseU.
Easter,  or  no  ?  I  answered,  that  else  I  were  no  christian  woman,  and
that 3  I  did  rejoice  that  the  time  was  so  near  at  hand.    And  then  he
departed  thence,  with  many  fair  words.

[3  1st  ed.  *  their;'  apparently  a  misprint.]

160

THI5  FIIIST  EXAMINATION

John  Bale.

This  hungry  wolf  practiseth,  by  all  crafty  ways  possible,
to  suck  the  blood  of  this  innocent  lamb.     Is  not  that,  think

Spiritually,   you,  an  holy  cougrcgation  which  is  thus  spiritually  occupied?

Some  godly-wise  men  will  wonder  that  they  be  not  ashamed.
But  marvel  not  of  it ;  for  the  Holy  Ghost  saith  that  the
same  holy  mother,  which  had  hatched  them  up  in  oils  and

A  whore.     shavings,  is  an  unshamefaced  whore.  Apoc.  xvii.,  and  Dan.  viii.

Then,  of  very  nature,  must  her  whelps  be  shameless  children.

Dogs.  Such  shameless  dogs  are  they  (saith  Esay)as  be  never  satis-
fied." Esay  XX.  "  When  they  kill  you  (saith  Christ),  they  shall
think  they  do  God  good  service,"  John  xvi. ;  so  greatly  have
their  malice  blinded  them,  Sapi.  ii.,  which  is  partly  the
drunkenness  afore  spoken  of.

A.vNE  Ask  EWE.

And  the  twenty-third  day  of  March  my  cousin  Brittanye  came  into
the  Counter  to  me,  and  asked  me  ^  whether  I  might  be  put  to  bail,  or
no?  Then  went  he  immediately  unto  my  Lord  Mayor,  desiring  him  2  to
Bailing.  be  SO  good  lord  unto  me,  that  I  might  be  bailed.  My  lord  answered 3
and  said  that  he  would  be  glad  to  do  the  best  that^  in  him  lay;  how-
beit,  he  could  not  bail  me  without  the  consent  of  a  spiritual  officer:
so  requiring  him  to  go  and  speak  with  the  Chancellor  of  London ;  for,
he  said,  like  as  he  could  not  commit  me  to  prison  without  the  consent
of  a  spiritual  officer,  no  more  could  he  bail  me  without  consent  of
the  same.

John  Bale.

True  is  it  here  that  is  written  of  St  John  in  the  Apoca-
lypse, that  "  antichrist  is  worshipped  of  the  potentates  and
kings  of  the  earth."  Apoc.  xviii.  The  mayor  of  London,
which  is  the  king's  lieutenant,  and  representeth  there  his  own
person,  standeth  here  like  a  dead  idol,  or  like  such  a  servant
slave  who  can  do  nothing  within  his  own  city  concerning  their
matters.  "  Who  is  like  the  beast  ?"  saith  St  John  ;  "  who  is
able  to  war  with  him  ?"  "  lie  hath  brought  all  lands  and
their  kingdoms  in  fear,"  saith  Esay  :  "  the  strength  of  their
cities  hath  he  taken  away,  and  restrained  the  deliverance  of
Examples,  their  prisoucrs."  Esay  xiv.  The  parents  of  him  that  was
born  blind  feared  this  spiritual  tyranny  or  captivity  of  theirs,

'me,'  is  not  found  in  the  Ist  ed,]
[2  *  desiring  of  him,'  Ist  ed.]

[3  *  answered  him,'  Ist  ed.]  '  that  lay  in  him,'  let  ed.]

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

161

such  time  as  they  were  examined  of  the  bishops  for  the  sight
of  their  son.  John  ix.  Such  as  beheved  in  Christ  among  the
chief  rulers  of  the  Jews  would  not  be  acknown  thereof,  for  ^  custom,
fear  of  hke  violence.  John  xii.  Xo  new  thing  is  it  then  in
that  spiritual  generation,  but  a  custom  of  old  antiquity.  Both
Christ  and  his  apostles  have  suffered  hke  tyranny  under  them ;
but  never  did  they  yet  minister  it  to  any  creature  after  their
example.

AXNE  ASKEAVE.

So,  upon  that,  he  went  to  the  Chancellor,  requiring  of  him  as  he
did  afore  of  my  Lord  Mayor.  He  answered  him  that  the  matter  was  so
heinous,  that  he  durst  not  of  himself^  do  it,  without  my  lord  of  London
were  made  privy  thereunto :  but  he  said  he  would  speak  unto  my  lord
in  it,  and  bade  him  repair  unto  him  the  next  morrow,  and  he  should
well  know  my  lord's  pleasure.

John  Bale.

"  Righteousness  judge  they  sin,  and  sin  righteousness,"
Esay  V.  ;  so  imperfect  is  their  sight,  John  xii.,  in  that
God  hath  given  them  up  to  their  own  lusts."  Rom.  i.  What
an  heinous  matter  is  it  here  holden  to  believe  in  Christ  after  Faith  in

.  .  Christ.

the  scriptures,  and  not  after  their  superstitious  manner  !  For
none  other  cause  could  they  lay  to  this  woman,  as  ye  have
heard  here  afore,  and  as  ye  shall  hereafter  perceive  more
largely.  Whatsoever  it  be  to  offend  God  or  man,  their  of-
fence may  be  no  less  than  prison  and  death.  The  Turk  is  not  T>Tanny.
more  vengeable  than  is  this  spiteful  spiritual  generation.  Yet
boast  they  Christ's  religion  and  the  holy  mother  church.

AXXE  ASKEWE.

And  upon  the  morrow  after  he  came  thither,  and  spake  both  with
the  Chancellor  and  with  my  lord  bishop  of  London.  My  lord  de-
clared unto  him  that  he  was  very  well  contented  that  I  should  come
forth  to  a  communication;  and  appointed  me  to  appear  afore ^  him
the  next  day  after,  at  three  of  the  clock  at  afternoon.  Moreover  he
said  unto  him,  that  he  would  there  should  be  at  that  examination  such
learned  men  as  I  was  affectioned  unto,  that  they  might  see  and"  make
report  that  I  was  handled  with  no  rigour.  He  answered  him  that  he
knew  no  man  that  I  was^  more  affectioned  to  than  other.  Then  said
the  bishop.  Yes,  as  I  understand,  she  is  affectioned  to  Dr  Crome,  Sir

[5  ^on  himself,'  1st  ed.]  [6  'before,'  1st  ed.]

["  'and  also  make,'  Isted.]       T"*  'had  more  affection  to,'  1st  ed.]

[bale.]

162

THE  FIRST  EXAMINATION

Gyllam  Whitehead,  and  Huntingdon,  that  they  might  hear  the  matter;
for  she  did  know  them  to  be  learned  and  of  a  godly  judgment.

John  Bale.

A  foxish  favour  was  this,  both  of  the  chancellor  and  bishop,
and  such  a  benevolent  gentleness  as  not  only  sought  her  blood,
but  also  the  blood  of  all  them  which  are  here  named,  if  they

A  wolf.  had  then  come  to  this  examination.  For  the  evening  afore,
as  I  am  credibly  informed,  the  bishop  made  boast  among  his
own  sort,  that  if  they  came  thither,  he  would  tie  them  a  great
deal  shorter.  A  voice  was  this  full  like  to  him  that  uttered
it :  for  thereby  he  appeareth  not  one  that  that  will  save  and
feed,  but  such  a  one  as  rather  seeketh  to  kill  and  destroy.

Foxes.  John  X.  "  The  foxes  run  over  the  hill  of  Sion,"  saith  Jeremy,
"because  she  is  fallen  from  God."  Thren.  v.  "  0  Israel,"  saith
the  Lord,  "thy  prophets  are  like  the  wily  foxes  upon  the  dry
fields."  Ezek.  xiii.  The  poet  hath  a  by-word,  that  happy
is  he  which  can  take  heed  by  another  man's  hurt.  1  add  this
here,  that  ye  should  beware  if  ye  come  in  like  danger  of  any

A  priest.  such  foxish  bishop.  By  one  of  his  day-devils,  whom  the  Cai-
phas  sent  to  commune  with  the  woman  in  prison,  he  knew  part
of  her  meaning,  and  what  they  were  also  which  favoured  her
opinions.  Yea,  he  craftily  undermined  this  gentleman  which
entreated  for  her,  if  ye  mark  it  well.  Trust  not  too  much  in
the  flatterous  fawning  of  such  wily-  foxes.

Anxe  Askewe.

Also  he  required  my  cousin  Brittayne,  that  he  should  earnestly
A  thief.  persuade  me  to  utter  even  the  very  bottom  of  my  heart.  And  he  sware
by  his  fidelity,  that  no  man  should  take  any  advantage  of  my  words ;
neither  1  would  he  lay  ought  to  my  charge  for  any  thing  that  I  should
there  speak :  but  if  I  said  any  manner  of  thing  amiss,  he,  with  other
more,  would  be  glad  to  reform  me  therein  with  most  godly  counsel.

John  Bale.

Judas.  O  vengeable  tyrant  and  devil !  How  subtilly  seekest  thou

the  blood  of  this  innocent  woman,  under  a  colour  of  friendly
handling !  God  once  commanded  thee  earnestly  in  no  case  to
compass  thy  neighbour  with  deceit,  to  the  effusion  of  his  blood.
Lev.  xix.  But  his  commandment  thou  reckonest  but  a  Can-
terbury tale.    By  swearing  by  thy  fidelity,  thou  art  not  all

[1  *  Neither  yet,'  1st  ed.]

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

163

unlike  unto  Herod,  whom  Christ,  for  Hke  practices,  first  to  Herod,
put  John  and  then  him  to  death,  called  also  a  most  crafty  cruel
fox.  Luke  xiii.  Thou  labourest  here  to  have  this  woman  in
snare,  with  certain  of  her  friends.  But  God  put  in  her  mind
at  this  time  to  reckon  thee  a  dog  and  a  swine,  Matth.  vii.,
and  thereupon  to  have  few  words.

Anne  Askewe.

On  the  morrow  after,  my  lord  of  London  sent  for  me  at  one  of  the
clock,  his  hour  being  appointed  at  three.  And  as  I  came  before  him,  a  false  liar,
he  said  he  was  very  sorry  of  my  trouble,  and  desired  to  know  my
opinion  in  such  matters  as  were  laid  against  me.  He  required  me
also  boldly  in  any  wise  2  to  utter  the  secrets  of  my  heart,  bidding  me
not  to  fear  in  any  point ;  for  whatsoever  I  did  say  within  his  house,  no
man  should  hurt  me  for  it.  I  answered,  Forsomuch  as  your  lordship
hath  3  appointed  three  of  the  clock,  and  my  friends  shall  not  come  till
that  hour,  I  desire  you  to  pardon  me  of  giving  answer  till  they  come.

John  Bale.

In  this  preventing  of  the  hour  may  the  diligent  perceive  a  tyrant,
the  greediness  of  this  Babylon  bishop,  or  bloodthirsty  wolf,
concerning  his  prey.  "  Swift  are  their  feet,"  saith  David,
"  in  the  effusion  of  innocent  blood,  which  have  fraud  in  their
tongues,  venom  in  their  lips,  and  most  cruel  vengeance  in  their
mouths."  Ps.  xiii.  20.  David,  in  that  Psalm,  much  marvelleth
in  the  spirit  that,  taking  upon  them  the  spiritual  governance
of  the  people,  they  can  fall  in  such  frenzy  or  forgetfulness  of
themselves,  as  to  believe  it  lawful  thus  to  oppress  the  faithful,
and  to  devour  them  with  as  little  compassion  as  he  that
greedily  devoureth  a  piece  of  bread.  If  such  have  read  any-
thing of  God,  they  have  little  minded  their  true  duty  therein.
"More  swift,"  saith  Jeremy,  "are  our  cruel  persecutors  than
the  eagles  of  the  air.  They  follow  upon  us  over  the  moun-  Eagies.
tains,  and  lay  privy  wait  for  us  in  the  wilderness."  Thren.  iv.
He  that  will  know  the  crafty  hawking  of  bishops,  to  bring  in
their  prey,  let  him  learn  it  here.  Judas,  I  think,  had  never
the  tenth  part  of  their  cunning  workmanship.  Mark  it  here,
and  in  that  which  foUoweth.

Anne  Askewe.

Then  said  he,  that  he  thought  it  meet  to  send  for  those  four  men  More  iambs

to  devour.

[2  *in  any  wise  boldly,'  1st  ed.]

[3  'your  lordship  appointed/  1st  ed.]

11—2

164

THE  FIRST  EXAMINATION

•u-liicli  were  aforenamed  and  appointed.  Then  I  desired  him  not  to  put
them  to  the  pain ;  for  it  should  not  need,  because  the  two  gentlemen
which  were  my  friends  were  able  enough  to  testify  that  I  should  say.
Anon  after  he  went  into  his  galleiy  with  ^Master  Spylman,  and  willed
him  any  wise,  that  he  should  exhort  me  to  utter  all  that  I  thought.

John  Bale.

Christ  sheweth  us  in  the  viith.  chapter  of  Matthew,  and  in
other  places  more  of  the  gospel,  how  we  shall  know  a  false
prophet,  or  an  hypocrite,  and  willeth  us  to  beware  of  them.
Their  manner  is,  as  the  devil's  is,  flatteringly  to  tempt,  and
deceitfully  to  trap,  that  they  may  at  the  latter  most  cruelly
slay,  "  Such  a  one  (saith  David)  hath  nothing  in  his  tongue
but  plain  deceit.  He  layeth  wait  for  the  innocent,  with  no
less  cruelty  than  a  lion  for  a  sheep.  He  lurketh  to  ravish  up
the  poor ;  and  when  he  hath  gotten  him  into  his  net,  then
throweth  he  him  down  by  his  authority."  Psalm  ix.  This  is
the  third  temptation  of  this  bishop,  that  the  woman  should
utter  to  her  own  confusion.

A>'XE  ASKEWE.

Archdeacon.  In  the  mean  while  he  commanded  his  archdeacon  to  commune
with  me,  who  said  unto  me,  ISIistress,  wherefore  are  ye  accused?  I
answered.  Ask  my  accusers ;  for  I  know  not  as  yet.  Then  took  he  my
book  out  of  my  hand  and  said.  Such  books  as  this  is^  hath  brought
you  to  the  trouble  ye  are  in.  Beware,  saith  he,  beware;  for  he  that
made  it  was  burnt  in  Smithfield.  Then  I  asked  him  if  he  were  sure
that  it  was  true  that  he  had  spoken.    And  he  said,  he  knew  well  the

A  liar.  book  was  of  John  Frith's  making.  Then  I  asked  him  if  he  were  not
ashamed  to  judge  ^  of  the  book  before  he  saw  it  within,  or  yet  knew
the  truth  thereof.  I  said  also,  that  such  unadvised  and  hasty  judgment
is  a  token  apparent  of  a  veiy  slender  wit.  Then  I  opened  the  book
and  shewed  it  him.  He  said  he  thought  it  had  been  another ;  for  he
could  find  no  fault  therein.  Then  I  desired  him  to  be  no  more 3  so
swift  in  judgment,  till  he  thoroughly  knew  the  truth ;  and  so  he  de-
parted.

John  Bale.

Judas.  Here  sendeth  he  forth  another  Judas  of  his,  to  betray  this

true  servant  of  God.  Mark  the  good  workmanship  hardily,
and  tell  me  if  they  be  not  of  the  spring  of  the  serpent.  Much
are  they  offended  with  books,  for  that  they  so  plainly  do  mani-

The  word  *is'  is  not  in  the  1st  ed.]
p-^  'for  to  judge,'  1st  ed  ]  [3  'no  more  to  be,'  1st  ed.]

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

165

fest  their  mischiefs.  John  Frith  is  a  great  mote  in  their  eyes,  John  Frith,
for  so  turning  over  their  purgatory,  and  heaving  at  their  most
monstrous  mass  or  mammetrous^  mazan,  which  signifieth  bread,
or  feeding.  Notwithstanding,  Daniel  calleth  it  Maozim,  be-
tokeninor  strength,  or  defence,  Dan.  xi.,  because  the  false  wor-
shippings  thereof  should  be  so  mightily  defended  by  worldly
authority  and  power.    Xo  new  thino'  is  it  that  good  men  and  Books  con.

J  i:  o  O  deraned.

their  books  are  destroyed  now-a-days,  when  they  touch  the
mischiefs  of  that  generation  :  for  Joakim  the  king  of  Judah
cut  Jeremy's  prophecies  in  pieces  with  a  penknife,  and  in  his
madness  threw  them  into  the  fire,  commanding  both  Jeremy
which  taught  them,  and  Baruch  that  wrote  them,  to  be  put  to
death.  Jer.  xxxvi.  When  king  Antiochus  had  set  upon  the
altars  of  God  the  abominable  idol  of  desolation  (which  is  now
the  popish  mass),  Matth.  xxiv.,  the  books  of  God's  law  com-
manded he  to  be  torn  in  pieces  and  burnt  in  the  fire,  sending  Books  bumt.
forth  thereupon  this  cruel  proclamation,  that  whatsoever  he
was  which  had  a  book  of  the  Lord's  testament  found  upon
him,  or  that  endeavoured  themselves  to  live  after  the  laws  of
God,  the  king's  commandment  was,  they  should  be  put  to
death.  1  Mace.  i.

A>3E  ASKEWE.

Immediately  after  came  my  cousin  Brittayne  in,  with  divers  other,
as  Master  Haw  5,  of  Gray's  Imi,  and  such  other  like.  Then  my  lord  of
London  persuaded  my  cousin  Brittayne  as  he  had  done  oft  before,
which  was  that  I  should  utter  the  bottom  of  my  heart  in  any  wise.

John  Bale.

This  is  the  fourth  temptation,  or  crafty  calling  upon,  to
utter  her  mind,  that  he  might  say  of  her,  as  Caiphas  said  of  caiphas.
Christ,  Matth.  xxvi.,  "  What  need  we  any  more  witnesses  ?
Lo,  now  you  have  heard  a  blasphemy"  or  an  heresy.  How
say  ye  now  to  it,  which  are  her  friends  ?  Is  she  not  guilty  of
death  ?  If  they  should  have  said  nay  unto  this,  they  should
have  been  so  in  as  deep  danger  as  she.  This  serpentine  prac-
tice was  as  well  to  trap  them  as  her :  let  it  not  be  unmarked.  Practice.

Ajvxe  Aseewe.

My  lord  said,  after  that,  unto  me,  that  he  would  I  should  credit
the  counsel  of  my  friends  in  his  behalf,  which  was  that  I  should  utter  satan.

\}  Mammetrous  or  mawmetrous  :  idolatrous.]
[5  *Haule,'  1st  ed.]

166

THE  FIRST  EXAMINATION

all  things  which i  burdened  my  conscience.  For  he  assured  me^  that
I  should  not  need  to  stand  in  doubt  to  say  anything:  for  like  as
he  promised  them,  he  said,  he  promised  me,  and  would  perform  it;
which  was  that  neither  he,  nor  any  man  for  him,  should  take  me  at
advantage  of  any  word  that  3  I  should  speak.  And  therefore  he  bade  me
Tempter.  say  my  mind  without  fear.  I  ansAvered  him  that  I  had  nought  to  say ;
for  my  conscience,  I  thanked  God,  was  bui'dened  with  nothing.

John  Bale.

Still  followetli  tills  ghostly  enemy  his  former  temptation,
and  calleth  upon  mortal  utterance,  or  utterance  full  of  death,
that  he  might  cry  with  Caiphas,  Luke  xxii.,  "  What  need  we
further  testimony  ?  Her  own  mouth  hath  accused  her."  We
are  able  witnesses  thereof,  for  our  own  ears  have  heard  it.  Thus
"  lay  they  wait  for  blood,"  saith  Solomon,  "  and  lurk  pri-
vily for  the  innocent  without  a  cause."  Prov.  i.  "  Consent
not,"  saith  he,  "  unto  such  tyrants,  if  they  entice  thee ;  for
though  their  words  appear  as  honey,"  Prov.  xvi.,  "  yet  shalt
thou  find  them  in  the  end  so  bitter  as  wormwood."  Prov.  v.
Though  that  whorish  generation  pretendeth  a  colour  of  gen-
tleness, "  yet  biteth  it  at  the  latter  like  a  serpent,  and  stingeth
like  an  adder,  throwing  forth  poison."  Prov.  xxiii.

AXXE  ASEEWE.

Then  brought  he  forth  this  unsavoury  similitude,  that  if  a  man  had
a  wound,  no  wise  surgeon  would  administer  help  unto  it,  before  he  had
seen  it  uncovered.  In  like  case,  saith  he,  I  can  give  you  no  good
counsel,  unless  I  know  wherewith  your  conscience  is  burdened.  I
answered,  that  my  conscience  was  clear  in  all  things,  and  for  to  lay  a
plaister  unto  the  whole  skin,  it  might  appear  much  folly.

John  Bale.

Hath  he  not  now  (think  you)  much  need  of  help,  which
seeketh  to  such  a  surgeon  ?  Uncircumspect  is  that  patient,
and  most  commonly  unfortunate,  which  goeth  to  a  common
A  murderer,  murderer  to  be  healed  of  his  disease.  Christ  bade  us  ever-
more to  beware  of  all  such,  unless  we  would  be  worried.
Matth.  vii.  The  nature  of  these.  Lord,  saith  David,  "  is  not  to
make  whole,  but  to  persecute  them  thou  hast  smitten,  and  to
Botches.      add  wounds  unto  wound."  Ps.  Ixviii.    Their  own  botches  are

[1  *  that,'  instead  of '  which/  1st  ed.]      p  '  insured  me,'  1st  ed.]
[3  Uhat'  omitted  in  1st  ed.]

Caiphas.

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

167

insanable,  Esay  i.,  for  the  multitude  of  their  mischiefs.  Jer.
XXX.  The  priest  and  the  Levite  which  travelled  between  Je-
rusalem and  Jericho  healed  not  the  wounded  man,  yet  were
they  no  murderers.  Luke  x.  Who  can  think  that  he  will
unburden  the  conscience,  which  studieth  nothing  else  but  to
overload  it  with  most  grievous  and  dangerous  burdens  ?
Matth.  xxiii.

Anne  Askewe.

Then  ye  drive  me,  saith  lie,  to  lay  to  your  charge  your  own  report,
which  is  this.  Ye  did  say,  he  that  doth  receive  the  sacrament  by  the
hands  of  an  ill  priest,  or  a  sinner,  he  receiveth  the  devil,  and  not  God.
To  that  I  answered,  that  I  never  spake  such  words  ;  but  as  I  said  afore,
both  to  the  quest  and  to  my  Lord  Mayor,  so  say  I  now  again,  that  the
wickedness  of  the  priest  should  not  hurt  me,  but  in  spirit  and  in  faith
I  received  no  less  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ.  Then  said  the
bishop  unto  me.  What  a"*  saying  is  this !  In  spirit  ?  I  will  not  take  you
at  that  advantage.  Then  I  answered,  My  lord,  without  faith,  and
spirit  I  cannot  receive  him  worthily.

John  Bale.

Now  sheweth  this  Caiphas  whereabout  he  goeth,  for  all
his  false  flattering  colours  afore.  And,  seeing  he  can  win
none  advantage  to  his  purpose  of  her  own  communication,  he
shaketh  the  bowgets^  of  his  provided  Judases  and  betrayers  of
innocent  blood.  He  bringeth  forth  such  stuff  and  store  as
that  wicked  quest  had  gathered  of  her  answer  to  them,  to
flatter  and  to  please  his  tyranny  therewith.  It  is  to  be
feared  that  as  far  was  the  fear  of  God  here  from  them
as  from  him.  Psalm  xiii. ;  for  as  well  practised  they  this
mischief  against  her  as  he.  Mark  here  the  natural  working
of  a  very  full  antichrist.  He  defendeth  sin  in  his  own  gene-  Antichrist,
ration,  and  condemneth  virtue  in  Christ's  dear  member.
Malice,  pride,  whoredom,  sodomitry,  with  other  most  devil-
ish vices,  reckoneth  he  not  to  hurt  the  ministration  of  a
priest;  yet  judgeth  it  he  an  heresy,  no  less  worthy  than
death,  to  believe  that  Christ's  flesh  and  blood  is  received  in
faith  and  spirit.  AVhat,  though  it  be  Christ's  most  earnest
doctrine,  Jo.  vi,;  'What  a  saying,  saith  this  bishop,  is  this  !  In
spirit  ?  I  will  not  take  you  at  the  worst,'  saith  he  ;  as  though
it  were  a  most  heinous  heresy.    But  most  discreet  and  godly

*what  saying,'  1st  ed.]  bowgets:  budgets.]

IGS

THE  FIRST  EXAMINATION

was  the  woman's  answer,  declarino:  her  a  right  member  of
Priests.  Christ ;  whereas  those  priests  whom  he  here  defendeth  are
unworthy  receivers  and  members  of  the  devil.  Joh.  xiii.  and
1  Cor.  xi.  Thus  is  an  antichrist  here  known  bv  his  fruits,
for  he  uttereth  blasphemy  against  God.  Dan.  vii.  Apoc.  xiii.
He  calleth  evil  good,  and  good  evil.    Esaj  v.  and  Prov  iii.

A>3E  ASKEWE.

Then  he  laid  unto  me,  that  I  should  say  that  the  sacrament  re-
Bread,         mainmg  in  the  pix  was  but  bread.    I  answered,  that  I  never  said  so ;

but  indeed  the  quest  asked  me  such  ai  question,  whereiinto  I  would
not  answer  (I  said)  till  such  time  as  they  had  assoiled  me  this  ques-
stephen.      tiou  of  mine,  wherefore  Stephen  was  stoned  to  death  ?  They  said  they
knew  not.     Then  said  I  again,  no  more  would  I  tell  them  what  it  was.

John  Bale.

0  idolous  shepherd  !  saith  Zacharv  ;  thou  seekest  not  to

Beasts.       heal  the  wounded,  but  to  eat  the  flesh  of  the  fat.    Zach.  xi.

"  The  watchmen  of  Israel,"  saith  the  Lord,  are  very  blind
beasts,  and  shameless  dogs.  They  have  no  understanding,  but
follow  their  own  beastly  ways  for  covetousness."  Esay  Ivi.
Who  ever  read  in  the  scripture,  or  authorised  chronicle,  that

The  box.  bread  in  a  box  should  be  Christ's  body  ?  Where  or  when
commanded  he  his  most  holy  body  so  to  be  bestowed?  What
have  ye  to  lay  for  this  doctrine  of  yours  ?  Are  ye  not  yet
ashamed  of  your  unreverent  and  blasphemous  beastliness  ?
Will  ye  still  pluck  our  christian  belief  from  the  right  hand  of
God,  the  eternal  Father,  and  send  it  to  a  box  of  your
brainish  devising  ?

Ilonorius.  The  first  bearer  of  it  was  pope  Honorius  the  third,  in  the

year  of  our  Lord  M.CC.XVL,  after  the  manifold  revelations  of
divers  religious  women  :  neither  was  there  any  great  honour
given  to  it  of  the  common  people,  till  a  sorry  solitary  sister,

Eva  reclusa.  or  anchorcss,  in  the  land  of  Leodium,  or  Luke,  called  Eva,
after  certain  visions,  had  procured  of  pope  Urbanus  the
fourth,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  M.CC.LXIIIL,  the  feast  of
Corpus  Christi  to  be  holden  solemn  all  Christendom  over ;

Bostius.  as  testifieth  Arnoldus  Bostius,  Epist.  vi.  ad  Johannem  Pal-
leanydorum.  In  all  the  twelve  hundred  years  afore  that
was  it  neither  boxed,  nor  pixed,  honoured,  nor  censed  univer-
sally. And  see  what  an  horrible  work  here  is  now  for  the
\}  '  such  question,'  1st  ed.J

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

169

boxing  thereof,  and  what  a  great  heresy  it  is  to  believe  that
Christ  dwell  not  therein,  contrary  both  to  his  own  and  to  his
apostles'  doctrine!    Mark  also  how  this  God's  creature  is  Judases.
here  handled  for  it,  and  how  subtilly  she  is  betrayed  of  the
bishop's  beagles  and  limbs  of  the  devil.

Anxe  Askewe.

Then  laid  my  lord  it  unto  me,  that  I  had  alleged  a  certain  text  of
the  scripture.  I  answered  that  I  alleged  none  other  but  St  Paul's  own
saying  to  the  Athenians  in  the  seventeenth  chapter  of  the  Apostles'
Acts,  that  God  dwelleth  not  in  temples  2  made  with  hands.  Then  asked  Temples,
he  me  what  my  faith 3  was  in  that  matter?  I  answered  him,  I  believe
as  the  scripture  doth  teach  me.  Then  inquired  he  of  me.  What  if  the  a  Tempter,
scripture  doth  say  that  it  is  the  body  of  Christ  ?  I  believe,  said  I,  like
as  the  scripture  doth  teach  me.  Then  asked  he  again.  What  if  the
scripture  doth  say  that  it  is  not  the  body  of  Christ  ?  My  answer  was
still,  I  believe  as  the  scripture  informeth  me.  And  upon  this  argument
he  tarried  a  great  while,  to  have  driven  me  to  make  him  an  answer  to
his  mind.  Howbeit,  I  would  not,  but  concluded  thus  with  him,  that  I
believed  therein,  and  in  all  other  things,  as  Christ  and  his  holy  apostles
did  leave  them.

John  Bale.

See  what  an  horrible  sin  here  was !  She  alleged  the  scriptures,
scripture  for  her  belief;  which  is  a  sore  and  dangerous  matter,
for  it  is  against  the  pope's  canon  laws,  and  against  the
customs  of  holy  church.  Since  king  Henry's  days  the
fourth  hath  it  been  a  burning  matter  only  to  read  it  in
the  English  tongue,  and  was  called  Wicliffe's  learning,  till
now  of  late  years.  And  it  will  not  be  well  with  holy  church
till  it  be  brought  to  that  point  again ;  for  it  maketh  many
heretics  against  holy  church.  O  incipient  papists !  these
are  your  corrupted  practices  and  abominable  studies,  to  drive
the  simple  from  God;  and  yet  ye  think  he  seeth  you  not.
Ps.  xiii.  St  Paul  saith,  (Rom.  xv.)  "  Whatsoever  things  are
written  in  the  scriptures  are  written  for  our  learning,  that
we  through  patience  and  comfort  in  them  might  have  hope ;"
and  ye  will  rob  us  thereof.  Christ  commanded  all  peoples,  Christ
both  men  and  women  (Job.  v.),  to  search  the  scriptures,  if  they
think  to  have  everlasting  life ;  for  that  hfe  is  no  where  but
in  them ;  yet  will  you,  in  pain  of  death,  keep  them  still  from

[2  '  temple,'  1st  ed.]

[3  'faith  and  behef,'  1st  ed.]

170

THE  FIRST  EXAMINATION

them.  For  ye  take  upon  you  to  sit  in  God's  stead,  and  think,
by  that  usurped  office,  that  you  may  overturn  all.  2  Thess.  ii.
But  Christ  bade  us  to  beware  both  of  you  and  your  chap-
lains, when  he  said,  "There  shall  arise  false  Christs  and  false
prophets,  working  many  great  wonders,  and  saying,  Lo !
here  is  Christ,  and  there  is  Christ.  Beheve  them  not."
Matt.  xxiv.  And  therefore  alleged  this  woman  unto  your
questmongers  (the  dogs  that  Christ  warned  us  of,  Matt,  vii.),
and  now  unto  you,  that  saying  of  St  Paul,  that  God  dwelleth
not  in  temples  made  with  hands,  which  also  were  the  words
of  Solomon  long  afore,  3  Reg.  iii.,  and  of  Stephen,  Actor,  vii.,
in  his  time.  That  scripture  so  much  offended  you,  that  you
would  needs  know  thereof  the  understanding.  For  such
texts  as  agree  not  with  the  cloynings  of  your  conjurors,  and
the  conveyances  of  your  sorcerers,  must  needs  be  seasoned
with  Aristotle's  physics,  and  sauced  with  John  Donse's
subtleties.  Here  make  ye  a  wonderful  turmoiling  to  wring
out  of  this  woman's  belief  in  that  matter,  that  she  might
either  become  a  creature  of  your  old  god  the  pope,  or  else  be
burnt :  yet  have  she  not  once  removed  her  foot  from  the  hard
foundation,  or  saving  rock,  Jesus  Christ.  1  Cor.  xi.  Blessed
be  his  holy  name  for  it.

Anne  Askewe.

Few  words.  Then  he  asked  me  why  I  had  so  few  words.  And  I  answered,  God
hath  given  me  the  gift  of  knowledge,  but  not  of  utterance.  And
Solomon  saith  that  "  woman  of  few  words  is  a  gift  of  God."   Prov.  xix.

John  Bale.

When  Christ  stood  before  Caiphas,  he  asked  him,  much
after  this  sort,  wherefore  he  had  so  few  words  ?  Thou  an-
swerest  nothing,  saith  he,  to  those  things  which  are  laid  against

Silence.      thoo  of  thoso  mcu.    Nevertheless  he  held  his  peace.  Mar.  xiv.

But  when  he  was  once  thoroughly  compelled  by  the  name  of
the  living  God  to  speak,  and  had  uttered  a  very  few  words,
he  took  him  at  such  advantage,  though  they  were  the  eternal
verity  as  he  was  able  through  them  to  procure  his  death,

Bonner.  (Matt.  XX vi.)  *,  like  as  this  bloody  bishop  Bonner,  of  the  same
generation,  did  at  the  latter  by  this  faithful  woman.

Anne  Askewe.

Thirdly,  my  lord  laid  unto  my  charge,  that  I  should  say  that  the

In  God's
stead.

Temples.

OF  MLSTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

171

mass  was  idolatry.  I  answered  him,  No,  I  said  not  so.  Howbeit,  I  said,

the  quest  did  ask  me,  whether  private  masses  ^  did  reUeve  souls  de-  Private

^  masses.

parted,  or  no?  Unto  whom  then  I  answered,  O  Lord,  what  idolatry
is  this,  that  we  should  rather  believe  in  private  masses,  than  in  the
healthsome  death  of  the  dear  Son  of  God !  Then  said  my  lord  again.
What  an  answer  was  that !  Though  it  were  but  mean,  said  I,  yet  was
it  good 2  enough  for  the  question.

John  Bale.

About  the  latter  days  of  John  Wicliffe,  in  the  year  of  our
Lord  M.CCC.LXXXIL,  as  Henry  Spenser,  then  bishop  of
Norwich,  was  with  great  number  of  English  warriors  be-
sieging the  town  of  Ypres,  in  Flanders,  in  the  quarrel  of
pope  Urbanus  the  sixth,  the  vessels  of  perdition,  the  very
organs  of  Satan,  the  four  orders  of  begging  friars,  preached
all  England  over,  that  the  most  holy  father  of  theirs  had
liberally  opened  the  well  of  mercy,  and  granted  clean  remission
to  all  them  that  would  either  fight,  or  give  any  thing  towards
the  maintenance  of  those  wars,  in  that  quarrel  of  holy  church
against  schismatics  and  heretics  :  for  then  was  this  popish  mass  Mass.
in  great  controversy,  like  it  is  now.  Moreover  they  promised,
by  virtue  of  his  great  pardons,  to  send  the  souls  departed  to
heaven ;  and  divers  of  them  said,  they  had  seen  them  fly  up
out  of  the  churchyards  from  their  graves  thitherwards.

This  most  deviUsh  blasphemy,  with  such  other  like,  pro-
voked the  said  John  Wicliffe,  the  very  organ  of  God,  and  John  wic-
vessel  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  not  only  to  reply  then  against  them
at  Oxford  in  the  open  schools,  but  also  to  write  a  great  num-
ber of  books  against  that  pestilent  popish  kingdom  of  theirs,
like  as  Martin  Luther  hath  done  also  in  our  time,  with  many
other  godly  men.  And  hke  as  those  false  prophets,  the  friars,
did  then  attribute  unto  the  pope's  pardons  the  remission  of
sins,  the  deliverance  from  damnation,  and  the  free  entrance
of  heaven,  which  particularly  belongeth  to  the  payment  of
Christ's  blood  (1  Pet.  i.  and  1  Job.  i.);  so  do  these  false
anointed,  or  blasphemous  bishops  and  priests  now,  attribute
them  again  unto  their  private  and  pubHc  masses,  the  pope's
own  wares,  as  prowling  and  pilfering  as  the  pardons,  with  no
less  blasphemy.  The  devilishness  of  this  new  doctrine  of
theirs  shall  be  refelled  in  my  books  against  friar  Peryn  and
Winchester,  and  therefore  I  write  the  less  here.

[1  '  mass,'  1st  ed.]  [2  '  it  was  good,'  1st  ed.]

172

THE  FIRST  EXAMINATION

Anne  Askewe.

Then  I  told  my  lord  that  there  was  a  priest  which  did  hear  what  I
Chancellor,  said  there  before  my  Lord  Mayor  and  them.  With  that  the  chancellor
answered,  Which  was  the  same  priest  ?  So  she  spake  it  in  very  deed
(saith  he)  before  my  Lord  Mayor  and  me.  Then  were  there  certain
priests,  as  Dr  Standish,  and  other,  which  tempted  me  much  to  know
my  mind.  And  I  answered  them  always  thus,  That  I  have  said^  to  my
lord  of  London,  I  have  said.

John  Bale.

By  this  ye  may  see  that  the  bishops  have  every  where
Watchmen,  their  watchmen,  lest  the  king's  officers  should  do  any  thing
contrary  to  their  bloody  behoof.  This  chancellor  would  not
have  thus  answered  hardily  so  agreeable  to  her  tale,  had  it
not  been  to  their  advantage  against  her,  as  hereafter  will
appear.  Mark  here  the  fashion  of  these  tempting  serpents,
Standish  and  his  fellows,  and  tell  me  if  they  be  not  like  unto
Vipers.       those  viper's  whelps  which  came  to  John  Baptist  (Matth.  iii.)

and  to  Christ  Jesus  preaching  (Luke  xii.)  I  think  ye  shall
find  them  the  same  generation.

Anne  Askeave.

A  tempter.  And  then  Dr  Standish  desired  my  lord  to  bid  me  say  my  mind  con-
cerning that  2  same  text  of  St  Paul.  I  answered  that  it  was  against
St  Paul's  learning,  that  I,  being  a  woman,  should  interpret  the  scrip-
tures, specially  where  so  many  wise  learned  men  were.

John  Bale.

It  is  not  yet  half  a  score  of  years  ago,  since  this  blasphe-
mous idiot  Standish  compared  in  a  lewd  sermon  of  his  the
dear  price  of  our  redemption,  or  precious  blood  of  Christ,  to
the  blood  of  a  filthy  swine,  like  himself  a  swine.  And  for
his  good  doing  he  is  now  become  a  daw  (a  doctor,  I  should
say)  of  the  pope's  divinity,  and  a  scholastical  interpreter  of
the  scriptures  to  his  behoof.  Here  would  the  swinish  gentle-
man have  proved,  both  that  St  Stephen  died  a  heretic,  and
St  Paul  a  schismatic,  for  teaching  that  God  dwelleth  not  in
temples  made  with  hands  (Acts  vii  and  xvii.),  if  he  might
have  reasoned  out  the  matter  with  this  woman.  But  she  took
a  swine  for  a  swine,  and  would  lay  no  pearls  before  him,  as
Christ  had  charged  her  afore  (Matth.  vii.) ;  for  all  their  inter-

[1  *  that  that  I  have  said,'  1st  ed.]  p  the,'  1st  ed.J

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

173

rogations  are  now  about  the  temple  and  temple  wares.
(Matth.  xxvi.)

Anne  Askewe.

Then  my  lord  of  London  said  he  was  informed,  that  one  should  Accuser,
ask  of  me  if  I  would  receive  the  sacrament  at  Easter,  and  I  made  a
mock  of  it.  Then  I  desired  that  mine  accuser  might  come  forth,
which  my  lord  would  not.  But  he  said  again  unto  me,  I  sent  one  to
give  you  good  counsel,  and  at  the  first  word  ye  called  him  papist.
Tiiat  I  denied  not,  for  I  perceived  he  was  no  less :  yet  made  I  none
answer  unto  it  3.

John  Bale.

No  comfortable  scriptures,  nor  yet  any  thing  to  the  soul's
consolation,  may  come  out  of  the  mouths  of  these  spiritual
fathers,  but  dog's  rhetoric  and  cur's  courtesy,  knavings,  {J^of^^^*^^
brawlings,  and  quarrellings.  When  she  was  in  the  midst  of
them,  she  might  well  have  said,  with  David,  "Deliver  me,
Lord,  from  the  quarrelous  dealings  of  men,  that  I  may  keep
thy  commandments.  I  deal  with  the  thing  that  is  lawful  and
right :  0  give  me  not  over  to  these  oppressors,  let  not  these
proud  quarrellers  do  me  wrong."  Ps.  cxviii.  [cxix.]  But
among  all  these  quarrellings  her  accusers  might  not  be  seen,
which  were  the  grounders  of  them.

Anne  Askewe.

Then  he  rebuked  me,  and  said  that  I  should  report  that  there  were  Threescore
bent 4  against  me  threescore  priests  at  Lincoln.  Indeed  (quoth  1)  I  said  p""'^^^*'
so ;  for  my  friends  told  me,  if  I  did  come  to  Lincoln,  the  priests  would
assault  me,  and  put  me  to  great  trouble,  as  thereof  they  had  made
their  boast.    And  when  I  heard  it,  I  went  thither  indeed,  not  being
afraid,  because  I  knew  my  matter  to  be  good.    Moreover,  I  remained
there  six  days,  to  see  what  would  be  said  unto  me.    And  as  I  was  in  Priests,
the  minster,  reading  upon  the  bible,  they  resorted  unto  me,  by  two,
and  by  two,  by  five  and  by  six,  minding  to  have  spoken  to  me ;  yet
went  they  their  ways  again,  without  words  speaking.

John  Bale.

Rebukes  in  that  generation  are  much  more  ready  at  hand  Lordship,
than  either  christian  admonishments  or  gentle  exhortations,
though  they  be  all  spirituals.    And  that  cometh  by  reason  of
their  lordships,  which  wanteth  due  furnishing  out,  unless  they

[3  *made  I  him  none  answer,'  1st  ed.]
[4  *benten,'  1st  ed.J

174

THE  FIRST  EXAMINATION

have  tyrannous  brags  and  brawlings.  Herein  follow  they
the  examples  of  their  natural  predecessors,  the  Jewish  bishops,
Pharisees,  and  priests,  Joh.  vii.  and  ix.    She  might  full  well

Hypocrisy,  gay  that  the  priests  were  against  her;  for  hypocrisy  and
idolatry  were  never  yet  with  him  whose  blessed  quarrel  she
took.  Mark  the  fourth  chapter  of  John,  and  so  forth,  almost
to  the  end  of  his  gospel.  Behold  also,  how  his  apostles  and
disciples  were  handled  of  the  priests  after  his  glorious  ascen-
sion, (Acts  iv.  and  all  that  book  following,)  and  ye  shall  find
it  no  new  thing.  "The  servant  is  no  better  than  her  master,"
which  suffered  of  that  mahgnant  generation  like  quarrellings

Wanderers,  and  handlings.  John  xv.  See  here  how  they  wondered
upon  her  by  couples,  as  their  forefathers  wondered  upon
Christ  for  preaching  and  doing  miracles.

Axsi:  AsKEWE.

Then  my  lord  asked,  if  there  were  not  one  that  did  speak  unto  me.
I  told  him.  Yes,  that  there  was  one  of  them  at  the  last,  -which  did
speak  to  me  indeed.  And  my  lord  then  asked  me  what  he  said.  And
I  told  him,  his  words  were  of  i  so  small  effect,  that  I  did  not  now  re-
member them.

John  Bale.

So  far  was  not  Lincoln  from  London,  but  the  bishop  there
had  knowledge  of  this  tragedy.    Hereby  may  ye  see  their
Occupying.   splHtual  occupyiug  against  Christ' and  his  faithful  members.

Such  is  the  study  (saith  St  John)  of  that  congregation,  which
is  a  spirituality,  called  Sodom,  and  Egypt.  They  rejoice  in
mischiefs  among  themselves,  and  send  messages  one  to  another,
against  God's  witnesses,  when  they  are  vexed  by  them.
Apoc.  xi.

Axnt:  Askewe.

Scripture.  Then  said  my  lord.  There  are  many  that  read  and  know  the  scrip-

ture, and  yet  do  not  2  follow  it,  nor  live  thereafter.  I  said  again,  My
lord,  I  would  3  that  all  men  knew  my  conversation  and  living  in  all
points ;  for  I  am  so  sure  of  myself  this  hour,  that  there  are  none  able
to  prove  any  dishonesty  by  me.  If  you  know  any  that  can  do  it,  I
pray  you  bring  them  forth.

John  Bale.

I  marvel  that  bishops  cannot  see  this  in  themselves,  that

'  of  small  effect,'  1st  ed.]
[2  '  and  yet  not  follow  it,'  1st  ed  ]       [3*1  would  wish,'  1st  ed,]

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

175

they  are  also  no  followers  of  the  scriptures :  but  peradven-  Followers,
ture  they  never  read  them,  but  as  they  find  them  by  chance,
in  their  popish  portifoUums  and  masking  books ;  or  else
they  think  all  the  scriptures  fulfilled  when  they  have  said
their  matins  and  their  masses.  Christ  said  to  the  hypocrite,
"Why  seest  thou  the  mote  that  is  in  thy  neighbour's
eye,  and  seest  not  the  beam  that  is  in  thine  own  eye  ?"
Luke  vi.,  Matth.  vii.  Christ  forbade  his  bishops,  under  pain
of  damnation,  to  take  any  lordships  upon  them,  Luke  xii. :  ^JJ^^gJions
how  is  this  followed  of  our  prelates  ?  He  commanded  them
also  to  possess  neither  gold  nor  silver,  Matth.  x. :  how  is
this .  commandment  obeyed  ?  If  we  looked  so  earnestly  to
Christ's  instructions,  as  we  look  to  the  pope's,  to  be  observed,
these  would  also  be  seen  to,  by  act  of  parliament,  so  well  as
priests'  marriage,  whom  Christ  never  inhibited.  I  doubt  it  Marriage,
not  but  this  will  also  be  one  day  seen  to.  Godly  did  this
woman  here,  in  defending  her  innocence ;  for  St  Peter  saith,
(1  Pet.  iv.)  "  See  that  none  of  you  suffer  as  an  evil  doer ;
but  in  your  hard  sufferings  commit  yourselves  unto  God  with
well-doing,  as  unto  your  faithful  Creator."

Anne  Askewe.

Then  my  lord  went  away,  and  said  he  would  entitle  somewhat  of
my  meaning.    And  so  he  writ  ^  a  great  circumstance ;  but  what  it  was,  He  wnteth
I  have  not  all  in  memory,  for  he  would  not  suffer  me  to  have  the  copy
thereof.    Only  do  I  remember  this  final^  portion  of  it.

John  Bale.

Here  wrote  he  certain  articles  of  the  pope's  Romish  faith,
willing  her  to  subscribe  unto  them,  and  so  blaspheme  God,  or
else  to  burn.  His  seeking  was  here  to  make  her  worship  the
first  beast,  whose  deadly  wound  is  healed  again.  Apoc.  xiii.
But  she  would  not  so  have  her  name  rased  out  of  the  Lamb's
book  of  life.  Apoc.  xx.  Rather  would  she  contend  to  the
end,  hoping  by  the  might  of  his  Spirit  at  the  last  to  over-
come, and  so  to  be  clothed  with  the  promised  white  apparel.
Apoc.  iii.

Anne  Askewe.

*Be  it  known,'  saith  he, 'to 6  all  men,  that  I,  Anne  Askewe,  do  confess
this  to  be  my  faith  and  belief,  notwithstanding  my  7  reports  made  afore

wrote,'  1st  ed.]
[6  '  of  all  men,'  1st  ed.]

[5  'small,'  1st  ed.]
Qu.  ani/f]

176

THE  FIRST  EXAMINATION

Holy
lechery.

New  faith.

Canonised
lechery.

Priapists.

to  the  contrary.  I  believe  that  they  which  are  houseled  at  the  hands
of  a  priest,  whether  his  conversation  be  good  or  not,  do  receive  the
body  and  blood  of  Christ  in  substance  really.  Also  T  do  believe  it^
after  the  consecration,  whether  it  be  received  or  reserved,  to  be  no  less
than  the  very  body  and  blood  of  Christ  in  substance.  Finally,  I  do
believe  in  this,  and  in  all  other  sacraments  of  holy  chui'ch,  in  all
points  according  to  the  old  catholic  faith  of  the  same.  In  witness
whereof  I,  the  said  Anne,  have  subscribed  my  name.*  There  was
somewhat  more  in  it,  which,  because  I  had  not  the  copy,  I  cannot
remember  2.

John  Bale.

All  the  world  knoweth,  that  neither  in  Christ's  time,  nor
yet  in  the  days  of  his  apostles,  was  any  such  confession  of
faith  ;  neither  yet  in  the  church  that  followed  after,  by  the
space  of  much  more  than  a  thousand  years.  What  have
christian  men's  conscience  then  to  do  with  such  a  prodigious
confession?  Are  not  Christ  and  his  disciples  teachers  sufficient
enough  for  our  christian  belief,  and  their  holy  doctrines
lawful,  but  we  must  have  unsavoury  brabblements  ?  We  must
now  believe  in  the  bawdry  of  priests,  or  that  their  sodomitry
and  whoredom,  for  want  of  marriage,  can  be  no  impediment
to  their  god-making.  What  is  it  else  to  be  sworn  unto  the
belief  of  such  articles,  but  to  honour  their  abominable  lechery  ?
0  most  swinish  sacrificers  of  Baal- peer  !  Psalm  cv.  You  is
it,  that  the  apostle  Judas  in  his  canonical  epistle  speaketh  of.
Ye  have  turned  the  grace  of  God  into  your  lechery,  denying
our  only  governor,  Jesus  Christ.  The  holy  Ghost  sheweth
us  (Apoc.  xxi.  and  xxii.)  that  none  are  of  the  new  hallowed
city,  or  congregation  of  the  Lord,  which  worketh  abomina-
tion, or  maintaineth  lies,  as  ye  do  them  both  here.

Anne  Askewe.

Then  he  read  it  to  me,  and  asked  me  if  I  did  agree  to  it.  And  I
Scripture.  g^id  again,  I  believe  so  much  thereof  as  the  body  of  scripture 3  doth
agree  to-*.  Wherefore  I  desire  you  that  ye  will  add  that  thereto.  Then
he  answered,  that  I  should  not  teach  him  what  he  should  write.  With
that  he  went  forth  into  his  great  chamber,  and  read  the  same  bill
before  the  audience,  which  inveigled  and  willed  me  to  set  to  my  hand  5,
saying  also,  that  I  had  favour  shewed  me.

[1  *that,'  instead  of  'it,'  1st  ed.]  'now  remember,*  1st  ed.J

[3  *as  the  holy  scripture,*  1st  ed.]  'unto,'  1st  ed.J

[5  'and  willed  to  set  my  hand,'  1st  ed.]

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

177

John  Bale.

la  every  matter  concerning  our  christian  belief  is  the
scripture  reckoned  unsufficient  of  this  wicked  generation.  God  unsuffident.
was  not  wise  enough  in  setting  the  order  thereof,  but  they
must  add  thereunto  their  swibber-swill,  that  he  may  abhor  it
in  us,  as  he  did  in  the  Jews'  ceremonies.  Esa.  i. ;  Jer.  vii. ;
Zach.  vii. ;  Amos  v. ;  Mic.  vi.  But  this  godly  woman  would
corrupt  her  faith  with  no  such  beggary,  lest  she  in  so  doing
should  admit  them  and  their  pope  to  sit  in  her  conscience  The  pope,
above  the  eternal  God,  which  is  their  daily  study.  2  Thess.  ii.
A  virgin  was  she  in  that  behalf,  redeemed  from  the  earth
and  following  the  Lamb,  and  having  in  her  forehead  the
Father's  name  written.    Apoc.  xiv.

Anne  AskEwe.

Then  said  the  bishop,  I  miglit  thank  other,  and  not  myself,  of  the
favour  I  found  6  at  his  hand ;  for  he  considered,  he  said,  that  I  had  Favour,
good  friends,  and  also  that  I  was  come  of  a  worshipful  stock.  Then
answered  one  Christopher,  a  servant  to  master  Denny,  Rather  ought
ye,  my  lord,  to  have  done  it  in  such  case,  for  God's  sake  than  for
man's.

John  Bale.

Spiritual  will  these  fathers  be  named,  and  yet  they  do
all  to  be  seen  of  men.  Matt,  xxiii.  Their  old  conditions  will
change  when  the  blackamorian  change  his  skin,  and  the  cat
of  the  mountain  her  spots.  Jer.  xiii.  If  I  sought  to  please
men,  saith  St  Paul,  I  were  not  the  servant  of  Christ."  Gal.  i.
When  this  tyrannous  bishop  can  do  no  more  mischief,  then
flattereth  he  the  world,  seeking  to  have  thanks  where  he
hath  none  deserved.  And  as  concerning  the  love,  or  true
fear  of  God  (as  is  here  laid  unto  him),  he  hath  none  at  all.
Ps.  xiii.

Anne  Askewe.

Then  my  lord  sat  down,  and  took  me  the  writing  to  set  thereto  my
hand,  and  I  writ  after  this  manner,  '  I  Anne  Askewe  do  believe  all  Catholic,
manner  things  contained  in  the  faith  of  the  catholic  church.'  Then,
because  I  did  add  unto  it  'the  catholic  church,'  he  flung  into  his  cham-
ber in  a  great  fury.  With  that  my  cousin  Brittayne  followed  him,  de-
siring him  for  God's  sake  to  be  good  lord  unto  me.  He  answered  that
I  was  a  woman,  and  that  he  was  nothing  deceived  in  me.     Then  my  A  woman.

[6  'that  I  found,'  1st  ed.]

[bale.]

178

THE  FIRST  EXAMINATION

cousin  Brittayne  desired  him  to  take  me  as  a  woman,  and  not  to  set
my  weak  woman's  wit  to  his  lordship's  great  i  wisdom.

John  Bale.

Was  not  this,  think  you,  a  sore  matter  to  be  so  grievously
taken  of  this  prelate  ?  but  that  they  are  naturally  giren
Catholic.  to  such  quarrellings,  Matt,  xxiii.  This  word  'catholic'  was
not  wont  to  o&nd  them.  How  becometh  it  then  now  a
name  so  odious  ?  Peradventure,  through  this  only  occasion  :
they  knew  not  till  now  of  late  years  (for  it  come  of  the
Greek)  the  true  signification  thereof ;  as  that  it  is  so  much  to
say  in  the  English  as  the  uniyersal,  or  whole.  Aforetime
they  took  it  mean  their  oiled  congregation  alone.  But  now
they  perceive  that  it  includeth  the  laity  so  well  as  them,  no
longer  they  do  esteem  it.  Other  cause  can  I  none  conjecture,
why  they  should  more  contemn  it  than  afore.

AXNT  ASKZWE.

"Weston,  Then  went  in  unto  him  Doctor  Weston,  and  said,  that  the  cause

why  I  did  write  there  the  eathohc  church  was,  that  I  understood  not
the  church  written  afore.  So  with  much  ado  they  persuaded  my  lord
to  come  out  again,  and  to  take  my  name  with  the  names  of  the  -
sureties;  which  were  my  cousin  Brittayne,  and  master  Spylman,  of
Gray's  Inn.

John  Bale.

For  an  holy  church  will  they  be  taken,  and  seem  much
Laiiy-  to  differ  from  the  lewd  lousy  laity,  or  profane  multitude  of
the  common  people,  by  reason  of  their  holy  unctions  and
shavings,  which  came  from  their  pope  ;  most  specially  because
they  have  nothing  ado  with  marriage,  reckoned  a  most  conta-
gious poison  to  holy  orders,  as  their  foresaid  Romish  faith
Sodomites,  hath  taught,  which  bringeth  up  all  his  children  in  Sodom
and  Gomorrah.  Jude  i. ;  Apoc.  xi.  And  this  point  have
they  learned  of  their  predecessors,  the  old  Pharisees  and
priests,  which  were  not  sicut  ceteri  hommitm,  as  the  common
sort  of  men  are,  but  holy,  spiritual,  ghostly  fathers.  Luke
xviii.  Wherefore  they  will  not  now  be  called  a  catholic,  but
an  holy  spiritual  church.

Ajn-xe  Askewe.

This  being  done,  we  thought  that  I  should  have  been  put  to  bail
[1  'very  great,'  1st  ed.]         [3  'my  sureties,'  1st  ed.]

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

179

immediately,  according  to  the  order  of  the  law.  Howbeit,  he  would  Many  delays,
not  suffer  it,  but  committed  me  from  thence  to  prison  again,  until  the
next  morrow.  And  then  he  willed  me  to  appear  in  the  Guildhall ;  and
so  I  did :  notwithstanding,  they  would  not  put  me  to  bail  there  nei-
ther, but  read  the  bishop's  witting  3  unto  me,  as  before,  and  so  com-
manded me  again  to  prison.

John  Bale.

A  very  serviture  of  Egypt  is  it  to  be  in  danger  of  these
papistic  bishops,  as  in  this  act  doth  appear.  See  what  cavil-
lations  this  Pharaoh  did  seek  here  to  hold  this  christian  Pharaoh
woman  still  under  his  captivity ;  so  loth  is  the  greedy  wolf
to  depart  from  his  desired  prey.  Joh.  x.  These  delays,
and  these  sendings  from  Caiphas  to  Pilate,  and  from  Pilate
again  to  Annas  in  Paul's,  were  not  else  but  to  seek  more  Practice,
matter  against  her,  and  to  know  more  deeply  who  were  her
friends  and  maintainors.  They  that  shall  confer  the  fashions
of  this  termagant  bishop  concerning  this  woman  with  the
cruel  manners  of  great  Pharaoh  in  the  deliverance  of  the
people  of  Israel  at  God's  commandment,  Exod.  v.,  or  with
the  handling  of  the  Jews'  spiritualty  concerning  Christ,  Matt,
xxvi.  and  Joh.  xviii.,  they  shall  not  find  them  all  unlike.

Anne  Askewe.

Then  were  my  sureties  appointed  to  come  afore*  them  on  the  mor-
row5  in  Paul's  church;  which  did  so  indeed.  Notwithstanding,  they  Knavery
would  once  again  have  broken  off  with  them,  because  they  would  not
be  bound  also  for  another  woman,  at  their  pleasure,  whom  they  knew
not ;  nor  yet  what  matter  was  laid  unto  her  charge.  Notwithstanding,
at  the  last,  after  much  ado,  and  reasoning  to  and  fro,  they  took  a  bond
of  them  of  recognisance  for  my  forthcoming.  And  thus  I  was,  at  the
last,  delivered.

Written  by  me,  Anne  Askewe.

John  Bale.

"No  verity,"  saith  Oseas  the  prophet,  "no  mercy,  nor
yet  knowledge  of  God,  is  how  in  the  earth ;  but  abominable
vices  have  everywhere  gotten  the  overhand,  one  blood- guilti-
ness following  another."  Oseas  iv.  Think  you  that  the  bishops  With  priests,
and  priests  could  take  so  cruel  ways  and  would  work  so  false
feats,  if  they  had  the  true  fear  of  God,  or  yet  reckoned  to  feel
a  righteous  judge  at  the  latter  day  ?   Suppose  it  not.  Not

[3  'writing,'  1st  ed.]

[*  'before  them,'  1st  ed.]  p  'next  morrow,'  1st  ed.]

12—2

ISO

THE  FIRST  EXAMINATION

only  minded  they  to  shew  no  mercy  to  this  woman,  but  also
to  worry  all  her  friends  and  acquaintance ;  which  is  most  ex-
treme cruelty  and  malice.

The  other  woman,  whom  they  would  here  most  craftily
have  delivered  with  this,  (as  I  am  credibly  informed,)  was  a
popish  quean,  which  they  had  afore  provided  both  to  betray

Practice.  her  and  accuse  her.  In  more  deep  danger  of  the  law  at  that
time  was  this  for  her  false  accusement  without  record,  than
was  the  other  which  was  so  falsely  accused.  Fain  would  the
prelates,  therefore,  have  had  her  at  liberty,  but  they  feared

Subtlety.  much  to  be  noted  partial.  Mark  this  crafty  point  for  your
learning,  and  tell  me  if  they  be  not  a  subtle  generation.
More  of  their  spiritual  packings  and  conveyances  for  the  death
of  this  faithful  woman  and  most  dear  member  of  Christ,  Anne
Askewe,  shall  ye  well  perceive  in  the  latter  part  here  follow-
ing by  her  own  confession  and  handwriting,  also  to  the  honour
of  God  and  their  great  dishonour.    So  be  it^.

"  Vain  is  the  conversation  which  you  received  by  the  tra-
ditions of  your  fathers."  1  Pet.  i.

"  The  verity  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever."  Ps.  cxvi.

THE  COjN'CLUSION.

Here  hast  thou,  gentle  reader,  the  first  examination  of  the
martyr  of  Christ,  Anne  Askewe,  with  my  simple  elucidation

BLshops.  upon  the  same,  wherein  thou  mayest  clearly  behold  how
bishops  and  priests  so  spiritually  to  be  occupied  now- a- days,  as
is  the  greedy  wolf  that  ravenous  runneth  upon  his  prey.  For
the  tyrannous  behaviour  in  their  cruel  predecessors  have  they
no  manner  of  shame.  Neither  yet  repent  they  their  own  blas-
phemous treason  against  God  and  his  verity :  what  though  their

Kmgdom  of  most  wretched  consciences  do  daily  accuse  them  thereof  ?  The
kingdom  of  God,  which  is  a  true  faith  in  his  word,  or  a  per-
fect knowledge  of  the  gospel,  do  they  not  seek  to  uphold  ;  but
violently  they  speak  ill  of  it,  trouble  it,  persecute  it,  chase  it,

Sngdom  because  it  is  of  him,  and  from  within.  Luke  xvii.  The  king-
dom of  the  pope,  which  cometh  with  outward  observation  of
days,  persons,  places,  times,  meats,  garments,  and  ceremonies,

[1  Here  concludes  the  first  edition  of  Anne  Askewe's  First  Exa-
mination.]

OF  MISTRESS  AXNE  ASKEWE.

181

they  magnify  above  the  moon,  because  it  is  from  without,  and
to  their  pecuUar  advantage  in  the  loitering  reign  of  idleness.

Thev  have  thought,  and  jet  think,  by  their  terrible  tur-
moilings  to  turn  over  all,  and  to  change  the  most  noble  enter-  a  change,
prise  of  our  king  yet  once  again,  leisurely,  to  the  pope's
behoof.  But  the  godly-wise  man  Solomon  saith,  There  is
no  policy,  there  is  no  practice,  no,  there  is  no  counsel  that  can
anything  prevail  against  the  Lord."  Prov.  xxi.  They  reckon  PoUcy.
that  with  fire,  water,  and  sword,  they  are  able  to  answer  all
books  made  against  their  abuses,  and  so  to  discharore  their  in-
vincible  arguments,  (for  otherwise  they  have  not  assoiled  them
as  yet ;)  but  truly  they  are  sore  deceived  therein,  as  shall
well  appear.  They  suppose  that  by  consuming  a  score  or
two  in  the  fire  they  have  gotten  the  field  of  the  Lamb  and
his  host.  Apoc.  xvii.  IS'o,  they  rather  by  that  means  add  No  &si±
strength  thereunto,  and  so  diminish  their  own.  I  dare  boldly
say  unto  them,  that,  by  burning  Anne  Askewe  and  her  three
companions,  they  have  one  thousand  less  of  their  popish  belief
than  they  had  afore.  They  think  also,  by  condemning  and
burning  our  books,  to  put  us  to  silence.  But  that  will  surely  Books,
bring  double  upon  them,  if  they  be  not  ware,  Apoc.  xviii.;  for
"  if  we  should  be  still,  the  very  stones  would  speak  in  these
days,"  Luke  xix.,  and  detect  their  horrible  treason  against
God  and  the  king.

If  they  mind  to  hold  their  idle  offices  still,  and  hereafter
to  have  profit  of  their  old  sale  wares,  as  diriges,  masses,  and
such  other ;  my  counsel  were  that  they  did  by  them  as  they
now  do  by  their  pope,  the  great  master  and  first  founder  of
them.  A  subtle  silence  is  among  them  concerning  him,  and
hath  been  ever  since  his  first  putting  down.  Ye  shall  not  now
hear  a  word  spoken  against  him  at  Paul's  cross,  nor  yet
against  his  old  juggling  feats.  And  indeed  it  is  a  good  wise
way  to  set  him  up  again.  TTinchester  and  Sampson  made  a
little  brag  at  the  beginning,  to  seem  yet  to  do  somewhat ;  but
since  they  have  repented  it,  and  made  a  large  amends  for  it
other  ways.  Friar  Peryn  began  to  write  in  defence  of  their  Pen-n.
monstrous  mass ;  but  now  of  late  days  and  he  cannot  find
therein  one  blasphemous  abuse  justly  to  be  reprehended.  Men
say  there  be  crafty  knaves  abroad  in  the  world  in  all  ages.
Well,  this  poHtic  silence  would  do  well  also,  peradventure,  in
other  matters :  for  the  more  rufflings  they  make,  and  the
more  murder  they  do  for  that  idle  kingdom  of  theirs,  the

182

THE  FIRST  EXAMINATION

Take  heed.  morG  clear  the  verity  appeareth,  and  the  more  vile  their  sor-
cerous  wares  ;  for  the  more  dirt  be  shaken,  they  say,  the  more
it  stinketh.

So  outrageously  to  rail  in  their  preachings  of  the  noble

Germans  g^^^  leamod  Gormaus  (which  of  all  nations  loveth  our  king
most  entirely)  for  secluding  their  pope  and  changing  their
masses,  they  do  not  wisely  for  themselves.  They  are  not  so
ill-beloved  of  their  country  merchants  which  customably  tra-
velleth  thither,  but  they  know  what  is  there  both  said  and

S?*^"'  done  against  them.  By  that  means  came  Peryn's  book  of
his  three  most  idolatrous  and  foxish  sermons  first  of  all  to
my  hands,  wherein  he  rhetorically  calleth  them,  in  the  hot
zeal  of  his  Romish  father,  the  erroneous  Germans,  subtle- witted
heretics,  obstinate  adversaries,  new-fangled  expositors,  per-
verse sacramentaries,  blasphemous  apostates,  wicked  wretches,
devihsh  hars,  lewd  livers,  and  abominable  believers,  with  such
other  like.  But  certainly  I  know  that  they  will  one  day  be
even  with  him,  and  with  other  like  apes  of  antichrist,  for

Winchester,  it.  Whou  the  Pope's  great  dancing  bear,  a  proud  pranking
prelate  of  theirs,  was  the  last  year  with  the  emperor  Charles,
at  his  forth-going  against  the  said  Germans,  his  bragging
beagles  were  not  ashamed  to  boast  it  in  the  open  streets  of
Utrecht,  in  Holland,  that  the  Pope  should  again  have  his  full
sway  in  England.  Of  a  likelihood  they  know  there  some
secret  mysteries  in  working.  I  say  yet,  beware  of  that  subtle
generation,  which  seeketh  not  else  but  to  work  all  mischief.

Gentle  and  soft  wits  are  oft-times  offended,  that  we  are
now-a-days  so  vehement  in  rebukes.    But  this  would  I  fain

Modesty.  kuow  of  them,  what  modesty  they  would  use  (as  they  call  it)
if  they  were  compelled  to  fight  with  dragons,  hydras,  and
other  odible  monsters ;  how  patient  they  would  be,  and  how
gentle,  if  a  ravenous  wolf  came  upon  them,  they  having
able  weapon  to  put  him  aside.  Surely  I  know  no  kind  of
charity  to  be  shewed  to  the  devil.  Of  none  other  nature
is  Moses'  serpent,  but  to  eat  up  the  serpents  of  Pharaoh's

Oak-grove,  sorccrers,  Exod.  vii.  If  we  did  suffer  any  longer  the  oak-
grove  of  Baal  to  stand  about  the  altar  of  the  Lord,  we
should  much  offend  his  commandment.  Judg.  vi.  If  I  should
hold  my  peace,  and  not  speak  in  this  age,  the  verity  so  blas-

con»cience.  phemcd ;  my  conscience  would  both  accuse  me  and  condemn
me  of  the  unconsiderance  of  my  Lord  God.  More  precious
is  the  thing  which  is  in  daily  controversy  and  peril  (which

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

183

is  now  God's  true  honour),  than  is  all  this  world's  treasure
here.  What  Christian  heart  can  abide  it,  to  see  the  creature,
yea,  not  of  God,  but  of  man,  worshipped  in  the  stead  of
God,  and  say  nothing  therein  ?

Solomon  saith,  there  is  "a  time  to  speak,  as  well  as  a  time
to  keep  silence,  and  a  time  as  well  to  hate  as  a  time  to  love,"
Eccles.  iii.  With  a  perfect  hate.  Lord,  (saith  David,)  have  Hate  them.
I  hated  those  bloodthirsty  enemies  which  were  in  their  pre-
sumption against  thee,"  Ps.  cxxxix.  Strongly,  and  with  most
mighty  stomach,  are  hypocrites  to  be  invaded,  which  will  not
give  place  to  the  verity.  !Mark  how  mightily  Moses  resisted  Examples.
Pharaoh,  Helias  king  Achab,  Heliseus  Joram,  Zachary
Joas,  Daniel  the  idolaters,  John  Baptist  the  Pharisees  and
Herod,  Stephen  the  Jews,  the  Apostles  the  bishops  and  priests.
Christ  rebuked  his  disciple  Peter,  and  bade  him  come  after
him,  devil,  Matt.  xvi. ;  yet  called  he  Judas  his  friend,  Matt,
xxvi.  Necessary  is  it  that  the  elect  flock  of  God  do  hate
the  unclean  fowls,  which  yet  hold  their  habitation  in  Babylon,
Apoc.  xviii.  John  Wicliffe  and  John  Huss  confess  in  their  wiciiffe and
writings,  that  they  were  by  strong  force  inwardly  con-
strained of  God  to  work  against  the  great  antichrist.  Eras-
mus boldly  uttered  it,  that  God  for  the  evils  of  this  latter
age  hath  provided  sharp  physicians.  "Quench  not  the  Spirit  spirit,
(saith  St  Paul),  despise  not  prophecies,"  1  Thess.  v.  "1  put
my  earnest  words  into  thy  mouth,"  saith  the  Lord  to
Jeremy,  "  that  thou  shouldest  both  destroy  and  build,"  Jer.  i.
Let  this  suffice  ye  concerning  our  rebukes ;  for  they  are  God's
enemies  whom  we  invade.

If  ye  perceive  it,  and  feel  it,  on  the  other  side,  that
*'  the  waves  of  the  sea  are  great  also,  and  doth  horribly  rage  "  waves,
in  these  days,  Psa.  xcii.,  consider  again  (saith  David)  that  "the
Lord,  which  dwelleth  on  high,  is  a  great  deal  mightier  than
they :"  as  he  is  of  power  to  cease  the  storm,  and  make  the
weather  calm,  Psa.  cvi.,  so  is  he  able  to  change  a  king's
mdignation  (which  is  but  death)  into  most  peaceable  favour  Pray  and
and  loving  gentleness,  Prov.  xvi.;  "  for  the  heart  of  a  king
is  evermore  in  the  hand  of  God,"  Prov.  xxi.  His  eternal
pleasure  it  is,  that  ye  should  honour  your  king  as  his  im-
mediate minister  concerning  your  bodies  and  hves,  1  Pet.  ii.,
and  that  ye  should  with  gentleness  obey  the  temporal  rulers,
Kom.  xiii.  :  but  such  spiritual  hypocrites,  both  bishops  and
priests,  as  are  continual  haters  of  his  heavenly  verity,  would

184  THE  FIRST  EXAMINATION  OF  ANNE  ASKEWE.

he  that  we  should  hold  for  most  detestable  apostates  and
blasphemous  reprobates ;  as  did  Christ  and  his  apostles,  which
never  obeyed  them,  but  most  sharply  rebuked  them,  Matt,
xxiii.,  Acts  XX.,  and  2  Pet.  ii.

The  grace  of  that  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  ever  with  them
which  rightly  hate  that  synagogue  of  Satan,  as  did  Anne
Askewe,  Amen.

"God  standeth  by  the  generation  of  the  righteous,"  Ps.  xiii.

Thus  endeth  the  first  examination  of  Anne  Askewe,
lately  done  to  death  by  the  Romish  Pope's  malicious  rem-
nant, and  now  canonised  in  the  precious  blood  of  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ.  Imprinted  at  Marpurg,  in  the  land  of  Hessen,
in  November,  anno  1546.

The  voice  of  Anne  Askewe  out  of  the  54th  Psalm  of
David,  called  Deus,  in  nomine  tuo.

For  thy  name''s  sake  be  my  refuge,
And  in  thy  truth  my  quarrel  judge.
Before  thee.  Lord,  let  me  be  heard,
And  with  favour  my  tale  regard.
Lo,  faithless  men  against  me  rise,
And  for  thy  sake  my  death  practise.
My  life  they  seek  with  main  and  might.
Which  have  not  thee  afore  their  sight.
Yet  helpest  thou  me  in  this  distress,
Saving  my  soul  from  cruelness.
I  wot  thou  wilt  revenge  my  wrong.
And  visit  them,  ere  it  be  long.
I  will  therefore  my  whole  heart  bend.
Thy  gracious  name.  Lord,  to  commend.
From  evil  thou  hast  delivered  me,
Declaring  what  mine  enemies  be.

Praise  to  God.
"  Whosoever  liveth,  and  believeth  in  me,  shall  never
die."  Joh.  xi.

[Wood- cut  with  the  motto  Amor  vincit  o^nnia.]

"  He  that  heareth  my  words,  and  believeth  on  him  that
sent  me,  hath  everlasting  life,  and  shall  not  come  into
damnation,  but  pass  from  death  unto  life."    Joh.  v.

THE  SECOND  EXAMINATION

OP

ANNE  ASKEWE.

C{)e  ilattre  €^ammatp:

on  of  Sinne  gs^fe^toe,  laWpe  mar-

toitj^  tSe  I3Iu£BtiacBon  of
gjojan  33ale.

"VTood-cut
S   5  as  in  the  first

Exaniiiiation .

s  8^

VI

2)  foull  poure  out  sprtte  bpo  all  (Ics^
(sapt!)  Goti)  pour  sonncs  anti  pour  tioug!)«
ters  stall  propjtcgc.  Sintj  tofio  so  cucr  call
on  tje  name  of  tje  lorbt/s^all  bt  saucb.

3)0l)Cl.

JOHN  BALE

TO  THE

CHRISTIAX  READERS.

In  the  primitive  church,  as  the  horrible  persecutions  in-
creased, many  diligent  writers  collected  the  godly  answers
and  triumphant  sufferings  of  the  martyrs,  as  necessary  ex-
amples of  christian  constancy  to  be  followed  of  other.  Of  this
number  was  Lucas,  which  wrote  the  Apostles'  Acts.  So  were
after  him  Linus,  Marcellus,  Egesippus,  Meliton  Asianus,  Abdius
Babylonius,  Josephus  Antiochenus,  Clemens  Alexandrinus,
Antherus,  Phileas,  Eusebius,  Isicephorus,  and  a  great  sort
more.  Fabianus,  not  a  chair-bishop,  but  a  pulpit-bishop  of
Rome,  ordained  in  his  time  for  that  only  office  seven  deacons
and  so  many  notaries,  about  the  year  of  our  Lord  CCXXXVL,
that  they  should  faithfully  register  their  martyrdoms,  to  hold
them  in  continual  remembrance,  as  witnesseth  Platina,  Poly-
dorus,  Masseus,  and  such  chroniclers.  Xo  less  necessary  is
that  office  now,  though  few  men  attempt  it,  nor  no  less  pro-
fitable to  the  christian  commonwealth,  than  it  was  in  those
terrible  days.  For  now  are  persecutions  all  Christendom
over,  so  well  as  were  then.  Xow  are  the  true  Christians  Martyrs,
vexed  of  the  sitting  bishops  for  their  christian  belief,  so  well
as  then.  Xow  are  they  reviled,  punished,  imprisoned,  and
have  all  evil  spoken  against  them  for  Christ's  verity's  sake,
Matth.  v.,  so  well  as  then.

And  what  can  be  more  comfortable  to  the  sufferers  than  sufferers,
to  know  the  earnest  constancy  of  their  troubled  companions
in  that  kingdom  of  patience,  Apoc.  i.,  or  to  mark  in  them
the  strong  working  of  faith,  and  behold  the  mighty  majesty
of  God  in  their  agonies  ?  What  though  they  were  afore  sinners
of  the  world,  St  Bernard^  saith  in  his  homilies  upon  Solo-  Berr.?.rdus.
mon's  Canticles,  that  the  godly  sufferance  of  martyrs  hath

[1  The  Editor  has  not  been  able  to  discover  these  words  in  the
works  of  St  Bernard,  but  something  similar  will  be  found  in  the  homilies
on  Canticles  by  Gillebert,  which  are  appended  to  those  of  Bernard.
See  Serm.  xxui.  Op.  Bernard.  Ed.  Ben.  Paris.  Yol.  n.  col.  75.]

188  THE  SECOND  EXAMINATION  OF  ANNE  ASKEWE.

given  as  good  erudition  to  the  christian  church  as  ever  did
the  doctrine  of  the  saints.  Then  is  it  meet  that  some  be
stirring,  and  not  that  all  men  in  these  days  be  idle,  concerning
that  godly  office.    Many  have  suffered  in  this  realm  of  late

BaTO^esand  years  by  the  bold  calling  on  of  antichrist's  furious  advocates,
vrhose  latter  confessions,  causes,  and  answers,  are  a  great  deal
more  notable  and  godly,  if  they  be  rightly  weighed,  than
ever  were  the  confessions,  causes,  and  answers  of  the  old
canonized  martyrs,  which  in  the  pope's  English  church  have
had  so  many  solemnities,  services,  and  censings.    Many  have

Recanters.  also  most  dcspcrately  recanted  through  their  most  wicked
persuasions  and  threatenings ;  in  whose  vain  recantations  are
both  to  be  seen  their  blasphemies  against  God,  and  manifest
treasons  against  their  king.

Now  in  conferring  these  martyrs,  the  old  with  the  new,
and  the  pope's  with  Christ's,  I  seclude  first  of  all  the  Britain
church,  or  the  primitive  church  of  this  realm,  which  never

Britain  had  authoHty  of  the  Romish  pope.  Her  martyrs  indeed
were  agreeable  to  that  Christ  spake  afore  in  the  gospel  con-
cerning his  martyrs,  whereby  we  should  know  them ;  as  we
evidently  find  in  the  lines  of  Emerita,  king  Lucie's  sister,
Amphibalus,  Albanus,  Aaron,  Julius,  Dionothus,  and  such

Christ.  other.  "  I  send  you  forth,"  saith  he,  "  as  sheep  among
wolves.  Men  shall  deliver  ye  up  in  their  councils  and  syna-
gogues. Ye  shall  be  brought  before  rulers  and  kings,  and  be
hated  of  all  men  in  a  manner  for  my  name's  sake."  Matth.  x.
"  Cast  not  afore  in  your  minds  what  answer  to  make.  For
I  in  that  hour  shall  give  ye  both  utterance  and  wisdom  which

Bishops.      all  your  adversaries  shall  not  be  able  to  withstand."  Luke  xxi.

"  They  shall  excommunicate  you,  or  condemn  you  for  heretics.
Yea,  they  shall  bring  you  in  such  hate  of  the  world,  that
whosoever  killeth  you  will  think  he  doeth  God  great  service.
And  this  shall  they  do  because  they  know  rightly  neither  the
Father  nor  yet  me."    John  xvi.

Many  other  Uke  sentences  left  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in
his  holy  gospel,  that  we  should  always  by  them  discern  his
true  martyrs  from  the  pope's  and  Mahomefs  counterfeit
martyrs.  In  England  here,  since  the  first  plantation  of  the
pope's  English  church  by  Augustine  and  other  Romish  monks
of  Benet's  superstition,  two  kinds  of  martyrs  hath  been  :  one  of
monastery-builders  and  chantry -founders,  whom  the  temporal

JOHN  BALE  TO  THE  CHRISTIAN  READERS.

189

princes  and  secular  magistrates  have  diversly  done  to  death,
sometime  for  disobedience,  and  sometime  for  manifest  treason  ;
as  we  have  Wallenus  of  Crowland,  Thomas  of  Lancaster,  Martyrs.
Richard  Scrope,  Becket  and  such  other.   The  images  of  these
have  been  set  up  in  their  temples,  like  the  old  gods  of  the
pagans,  and  have  had  their  vigils,  holy-days,  ringings,  sacri-
ficings,  candles,  offerings,  feastings,  and  much  ado  besides,  as
they  had.    The  other  sort  were  preachers  of  the  gospel,  or  Other  mar-
poor  teachers  hereof  in  corners,  when  the  persecution  was^^"'
such  that  it  might  not  be  taught  abroad.    And  these  poor
souls,  or  true  servants  of  God,  were  put  to  death  by  the  holy
spiritual  fathers,  bishops,  priests,  monks,  canons,  and  friars,
for  heresy  and  lollery,  they  say.    These  christian  martyrs
were  never  solemnized  of  them :  no,  they  had  not  so  much
as  a  penny  dirge  or  a  groat  mass  of  requiem,  no  more  than  no  dirge,
had  John  Baptist  and  Stephen  among  the  Jews ;  but  they
have  been  holden  for  condemned  heretics  ever  since.

Who  ever  heard  any  goodness  yet  reported  of  Dionothus,
with  his  thousand  and  two  hundred  companions,  whom  Angus-  Augustine,
tine  caused  to  be  slain  at  Westchester  in  his  church's  begin-
ning, because  they  would  not  preach  as  he  did  appoint  them,
nor  baptize  after  the  Romish  manner,  neither  yet  hallow  the
Easter  feast  as  they  did  ?  Many  a  blessed  creature,  both  men
and  women,  have  been  brent  since  John  Wicliffe's  time  and  wiciifre.
afore,  for  only  disclosing  the  Pharisees'  yokes  and  teaching
the  gospel's  liberty :  and  them  have  that  bawdy  bloody
synagogue  of  Satan  defamed,  blasphemed,  condemned,  ex-
ecrated and  cursed  to  hell  as  most  detestable  heretics  and
dogs;  whereas,  if  they  were  of  Christ,  they  ought  (in  case
they  were  their  haters  or  enemies)  to  suffer  them,  to  say  well  sufter.
of  them,  to  do  them  good,  and  to  pray  for  them,  Matth.  v.,
Luke  vi.,  and  not  thus  to  use  more  tyranny  over  them  than
ever  did  Saracen,  Turk,  tyrant  or  devil.  A  great  difference
is  there  of  the  martyrs  whom  they  make  from  the  martyrs
whom  they  canonise ;  of  them  whom  they  damn  from  them
whom  they  worship  :  yea,  so  great  a  difference  or  diversity
between  them  (if  ye  mark  them  well),  as  is  between  gold  and
dirt,  or  light  and  darkness.

The  martyrs  whose  deaths  they  have  procured  by  all  Martyrs,
ages  of  their  bloodthirsty  church,  hearkened  unto  Christ,  held
of  righteousness,  and  sought  their  Lord  God  in  spirit,  Esa.

190  THE  SECOND  EXAMINATION  OF  ANNE  ASKEWE.

Compare.

Miracles.

li. ;  but  the  martyrs  for  the  most  part  whom  they  have
with  so  many  Latin  waihngs,  torches,  and  candle-burnings,
magnified  in  their  temples,  hearkened  to  the  pope,  held  of
his  unrighteousness,  and  sought  out  his  superstitious  idolatries.
In  the  conferring  of  their  old  canonised  martyrs  with  our
newly-condemned  martyrs  here,  Anne  Askewe  and  her  other
three  companions,  with  such  like,  their  difference  will  be  much
more  easily  perceived.  First  let  us  begin  with  Thomas
Becket,  which  was  so  glorious  a  martyr  and  precious  advocate
of  theirs,  that  they  made  his  blood  equal  with  Christ's  blood,
and  desired  to  climb  to  heaven  thereby.  Many  wonderful
miracles  could  that  mitred  patron  of  theirs  do  in  those  days,
when  the  monks  had  friar  Bacon's  books  and  knew  the  be-
stowing of  friar  Bungay's  mists;  but  now  he  can  do  none  at
all.  This  Becket  in  all  flourishing  doings  hearkened  to  the
pope,  defended  his  pompous  kingdom,  supported  his  church's
excess,  and  wretchedly  died  for  the  sinful  hberties  of  the
same.  Anne  Askewe  and  her  sort  gave  dihgent  heed  to  their
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  sought  the  kingdom  of  heaven  in  daily
repentance,  mightily  detested  all  idolatrous  worshippings,  and
in  conclusion  suffered  most  triumphant  death  for  the  same.

Concerning  other  martyrs.  As  Wenefrid,  otherwise  called
Boniface,  a  monk,  and  archbishop  of  Magunce,  was  slain
confirming  neophytes,  or  professing  his  newly-baptized  brood
to  the  Romish  pope's  obedience ;  there  was  found  about
him  a  casket  full  of  relics,  or  dead  men's  bones,  when  he  was
put  to  death  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  755.  Anne  Askewe  and
her  fellowship  had  none  other  relics  about  them,  when  they
stood  at  the  stake  to  be  brent  in  Smithfield,  but  a  bundle  of
the  sacred  scriptures  inclosed  in  their  hearts,  and  ready  to
be  uttered  against  antichrist's  idolatries.  St  Clare  of  Or-
chester,  contemning  lawful  marriage,  made  himself  an  idle
priest,  and  was  beheaded  in  his  own  garden  by  procurement
ciitancus.  of  a  womau.  St  Clitank  of  South  Wales  was  in  like  case
stabbed  in  with  a  dagger,  because  a  young  maiden  loved  him.
The  only  true  honour  of  God  was  it,  and  no  worldly  cause,
Edwinus.  that  Anne  Askewe  and  her  company  died  for.  St  Edwin,
being  well  armed,  was  slain  in  battle  at  Hatfield,  in  the
Edwardus.  uorth ;  and  St  Edward,  riding  a  hunting  in  the  forest  of
Warham  in  the  west,  was  killed  upon  his  horse  in  drinking  a
cup  of  wine.    And  all  this  was  done  for  the  kingdoms  of  this

Right  mar-
tyrs.

Bonifacius
Anglus.

Clarus.

JOHN  BALE  TO  THE  CHRISTIAN  READERS.

191

world.  The  martyrdom  of  Anne  Askewe  and  her  brethren
was  neither  in  battling  nor  hunting,  riding  nor  drinking  ;  but
in  that  right  course  which  Christ  prescribed  unto  his  disciples,
under  the  cruel  bishops,  for  his  only  glory.

St  Cadoc  of  Cowbridge,  a  bishop,  was  pierced  through  cadocus.
with  a  spear,  as  he  stood  at  his  mass  at  one  of  the  clock  after
noon,  because  he  would  be  of  the  order  of  martyrs.    St  El-
phege,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  was  stoned  to  death  of  the
Danes,  because  he  would  not  pay  them  three  thousand  marks,
in  the  year  of  our  Lord  M.  and  XII.   Of  such  martyrs  much
doubted  Lanfrancus,  which  succeeded  him  in  that  office  about  Lanfrancus.
a  fourscore  years  after,  and  disputed  thereof  with  Anselmus^
The  cause  of  Anne  Askewe  and  her  companions  was  neither
madness  nor  money,  but  the  only  seeking  of  their  Lord  God
aright.     As  St  Indract,  with  other  devout  pilgrims  of  Rome,  indraetus.
lay  in  bed  at  their  inn  in  Shapwick  by  Glastonbury,  their
throats  were  cut  in  the  night  for  money,  which  was  reckoned
to  be  in  their  pilgrims'  scrips.     St  Juthware,  a  virgin,  was  Juthwara.
beheaded  also  for  laying  fresh  cheese,  or  cruds^,  whether
ye  will,  to  her  breasts.    The  cause  of  Anne  Askewe  and  her
other  fellows,  conferred  with  Chrisfs  scriptures,  seeraeth  a
far  other  matter.    Hewald  the  black,  and  Hewald  the  white,  Hewaidi  duo.
two  Enghsh  monks,  going  from  place  to  place  with  cruets,
chalice  and   super-altar,  to  do  their  daily  sacrifices,  were
done  to  death  in  Frisland  by  the  bowers''  of  the  country  for
teaching  a  strange  religion,  and  are  worshipped  at  Cologne
for  martyrs.    For  bearing  about  Christ's  testament,  which  is
most  heavenly  treasure,  and  for  spreading  the  wholesome
doctrine  thereof,  was  Anne  Askewe  and  her  sort  brent  by  the  ^nneAs.
priests'  procurement ;  yet  ask  they  no  honour  for  it.

Ositha,  running  away  from  her  husband  by  the  enticement  ositha.

\}  The  passage  occurs  in  the  life  of  Lanfranc  prefixed  to  his  works,
cap.  XVI.  ed.  Bened.  p.  15.  Intiraavit  Abbati  [Anselmo]  Antistes  Cantuar-
iensis  quasi  conquerendo,  quod  homines  illius  patriae  colerent  quosdam
sanctos,  quos  ille  non  afFectaret,  et  maxime,  ait,  quemdam  Elfegum  hujus
sedis  archiprsesulem :  quern  non  solum  inter  sanctos,  sed  et  inter  mar-
tyres  numerare  contendunt,  cum  constet  ilium  non  pro  fide  Christi,
sed  quia  ab  inimicis,  a  quibus  captus  tenebatur,  se  redimere  noluerit,
interemptum  fuisse.  Ad  hsec  Anselmus  hujus  reddit  rationem.  Cer-
tum  est,  inquit,  quia,  &c.  &c.  In  the  issue,  Lanfranc.  . . .  B.  Elfegum  ut
vera  magnum  et  martyrem  gloriosum  devote  veneratus  est.]

[2  Cruds:  curds.]  [3  Bowers:  archers.]

192         THE  SECOND  EXAMINATION  OF  ANNE  ASKEWE.

of  two  monks,  became  a  professed  nun,  and  was  murdered

wenefrida.  of  the  Daues.  Weuofrida,  by  counsel  of  a  priest,  disdain-
ously  refusing  the  marriage  of  a  prince  christened,  lost  her

Maxentia.  head  for  it.  Maxentia  also  played  a  part  not  all  unlike  to
this.  Such  pild  popish  martyrdoms,  compared  to  the  mar-
tyrdom of  Anne  Askewe  and  her  faithful  company,  is  as  is

Guiiheimus.  rusty  irou  compared  to  pure  silver.  St  William  of  Rochester,
a  Scot,  leaving  both  wife  and  household,  idly  to  trudge  on
pilgrimage,  was  stricken  in  the  head  with  an  axe  of  his  own

Thomas.  compauion  by  the  way.  St  Thomas  of  Dover  was  such  a
one  as  was  slain  of  the  Frenchmen  for  hiding  the  church's
jewels,  crosses,  chalices  and  copes.  No  such  light  corrupt-
ible vanities  were  they  that  Anne  Askewe  and  her  constant

Youngsaints.  brethren  died  for,  but  for  the  precious  verity  of  God.  Young
St  William  of  Norwich,  young  St  Kobert  of  Bury,  young
St  Hugh  of  Lincoln,  young  St  Melor  of  Cornwall,  young
St  Kenelm  of  Gloucester,  young  St  Eldred  of  "Ramsey,  and
his  brother,  with  such  other  hke,  were  but  very  babes  (they
say),  and  were  martyred  of  the  Jews,  and  of  other  enemies.
Wherefore  their  martyrdoms  shall  be  but  babyish  in  compari-
son of  these,  the  verity  having  by  them  so  small  furtherance.

Foiiianus.  Foillauus  and  his  three  brethren,  going  homeward  in  the

night,  after  they  had  well  hankered  with  St  Gertrude  and
her  nuns,  were  killed  in  a  wood  of  one  murderer,  and  their
horses  sold  in  the  next  market-town.  Justinianus,  St  Davy's
father  in  Wales,  was  slain  in  a  garden  of  his  three  monks,
because  he  compelled  them  to  do  more  labour  than  he  would

Kiiianus.  do  himsclf.  After  Kilianus  was  come  home  from  Rome,  he  was
murdered  in  his  cell,  with  other  holy  pilgrims,  by  a  woman,

Ursula.  as  they  lay  there  asleep  in  the  night.  St  Ursula  also,  and  her
she  pilgrims,  with  their  chaplains,  nurses,  and  sucking  babes,
were  but  homely  handled  at  Cologne  of  the  Iluns  and  Picts
(if  that  legend  be  true),  as  they  were  coming  homewards

Prove  the    from  Romc.    Compare  me  Anne  Askewe  and  her  condemned

^^"'^  company  with  these  clouted,  canonized,  solemnized,  censed,
matinsed,  and  massed  martyrs,  and  tell  me  by  the  gospel's
trial  which  of  them  seem  most  christianlike  martyrs.  Yea,

Edmundus,  brinff  St  Edmund  of  Bury,  St  Fremund  of  Dunstable,  St

Fremundus,  ©  t/  '  •  «

andoiher.  Ethelbcrt  of  Hertford,  St  Oswald  of  Gloucester,  St  Oswin  of
Tynemouth,  and  St  Winstan  of  Evesham,  (which  are  the  best
of  the  English  martyrs,)  to  the  touchstone  of  God''s  word  ;

JOHN  BALE  TO  THE  CHRISTIAN  READERS.

193

and  ye  shall  find  their  martyrdoms  and  causes  full  unlike  to
theirs  whom  the  bishops  murder  now  apace  in  England.

In  all  these  English  martyrs  rehearsed  here  afore  ye
shall  find  very  few  colours  or  tokens,  that  Christ  said  his  mar-  Tokens,
tyrs  should  be  known  by,  unless  ye  take  pilgrimings,  popes*
relics,  women,  battles,  huntings,  idleness,  monkeries,  money,
treasure,  worldly  kingdoms,  contempt  of  marriage,  supersti-
tions, and  such  other  vanities,  for  them.  And  then  will  I  say,
and  not  lie  in  it,  that  ye  are  much  better  overseen  than
learned  in  the  scriptures  of  God,  as  your  old  blind  bluddering
predecessors  hath  been.    Ye  will  ask  me  here,  if  I  reckon
England  then  all  barren  of  christian  martyrs.     Nay,  marry.  The  author,
do  I  not ;  for  I  know  it  hath  had  good  store  since  the  pope's  Good  store,
faith  came  first  into  England,  to  the  gospePs  obscuration,
though  their  names  be  not  known  to  all  men.  Great  tyranny
was  shewed  by  the  heathenish  emperors  and  kings  at  the
first  preaching  of  the  gospel  in  the  primitive  church  of  the
Britains  by  the  cruel  calling  on  of  the  pagan  priests.     But  Britannish.
nothing  like  to  that  hath  been  shewed  since  in  the  English  English,
church  by  the  spiritual  tyrant  of  Rome  and  his  mitred  ter-
magants, at  the  provocation  of  their  oiled  swill-bowls  and
blind  Balaamites.    For  they  most  cruelly  brent  those  inno-
cents which  did  but  only  read  the  testament  of  God  in  their
mother-tongue  ;  and  do  not  yet  repent  them  of  that  mischief,
but  continue  therein.

If  ye  mark  well  these  two  examinations  of  Anne  Askewe,
ye  shall  find  in  her  and  her  other  three  companions,  besides
other  whom  the  bishops  in  our  time  and  afore  hath  brent,
the  express  tokens  that  Christ  sealeth  his  martyrs  with.  Tokens.
They  appeared  as  sheep  among  wolves.    They  were  thrown
in  strong  prison.    They  were  brought  forth  into  councils
and  synagogues.    Their  answers  were  out  of  God's  Spirit  Answers,
(as  herein  appeareth),  and  not  out  of  their  own.     They  were
reviled,  mocked,  stocked,  racked,  execrated,  condemned,  and
murdered,  as  is  said  afore,  by  a  spirituality  also,  as  he  pro-
mised they  should  be,  Matt,  xxiii.  and  xxiv.   Yea,  those  spiri-
tual tyrants,  besides  their  mortal  malice  upon  the  innocent  Tyrants,
bodies,  have  most  blasphemously  uttered  in  their  spiteful
sermons  and  writings,  that  their  souls  are  damned ;  as  is  to
be  seen  in  the  books  of  Winchester  and  Peryn.  But  let  them  Winchester.

Peryn.

beware  lest  they  damn  not  their  own  wretched  souls.  For

r        -1  13
[bale.]

194  THE  SECOND  EXAMINATION  OF  ANNE  ASKEWE.

full  sure  we  are  by  Christ's  strong  promise,  Luke  xii.,  that
their  souls  they  cannot  harm  with  all  their  pope''s  black
curses.  Full  sweetly  rest  they  now  in  the  peace  of  God,
where  their  slanderous  and  malicious  judgments  cannot  hurt

Epkures,  them  at  all.  Sapi.  iii.  Let  those  epicures,  pigs,  damn  them
with  as  many  blasphemous  lies  as  they  can  imagine ;  for  other
armour  they  have  not:  and  we  shall  on  the  other  side
canonise  them  again  with  the  mighty  words  and  promises  of
Christ,  which  they  shall  never  be  able  to  resist.    The  Father

Light.  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  grant  the  light  of  his  word  so  to
spread  the  world  over,  that  the  dark  mists  of  Satan  may
clearly  be  expelled,  to  the  special  comfort  of  his  redeemed
church,  and  glory  of  his  eternal  name.  Amen.

THE  LATTER  EXAMINATION

OF  THE  WORTHY  SERVANT  OF  GOD,

MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE,

THE  YOUNGER  DAUGHTER  OF  SIR  WILLIAM  ASKEWE,  KNIGHT,
OF  LINCOLNSHIRE,  LATELY  MARTYRED  IN  SMITHFIELD,
BY  THE  WICKED  SYNAGOGUE  OF  ANTICHRIST.

THE  CENSURE  OR  JUDGMENT   OF  JOHN  BALE  THERE-
UPON, AFTER  THE  SACRED  SCRIPTURES
AND  CHRONICLES.

Christ  willed  his  most  dear  apostle  and  secretary,  St  st  John.
John  the  Evangelist,  to  signify  by  writing  to  the  overseer  or
preacher  of  the  congregation  of  Pergamos,  that  there  are  only
his  faithful  members  murdered  where  Satan  inhabiteth  or
holdeth  residence.  And  for  example  he  bringeth  forth  his
constant  witness  Antipas,  which  was  there  most  cruelly  slain
of  that  synagogue  of  his,  for  confessing  the  verity.  Apoc.  ii.
That  behemoth  (saith  Job),  that  leviathan,  that  Satan,  reign-  satan.
eth  as  a  most  mighty  king  over  all  the  spiritual  children  of
pride.  Job  xhi.  A  murderer  (saith  Christ  to  the  spirituality  of
the  Jews)  and  a  blasphemous  liar  is  that  father  of  yours,  and
hath  been  from  the  world's  beginning.  John  viii.  These
manners  hath  he  not  yet  left,  but  continueth  them  still  in  his
wicked  posterity.

In  the  primitive  church  (as  testifieth  Bedas)  they  perse-
cuted the  hairs  of  Christ's  head,  which  was  so  pure  as  the  chnsfs  hairs,
white  wool  that  is  apt  to  receive  all  colours.  Apoc.  i.  They
slew  those  true  believers  which  his  word  and  Spirit  had  de-
pured'  from  all  false  worshippings,  and  made  fit  for  all  tribu-
lations to  be  suffered  for  his  name's  sake.    In  these  latter
days  they  meddle  with  his  feet,  which  are  hke  unto  brass  chrisfs  feet,
burning  as  it  were  in  an  hot  furnace.  Apoc.  i.     For  they  that
believe  now  agreeably  to  his  word,  and  not  after  their  cor-
rupted and  cursed  customs,  are  consumed  in  the  fire  :  as  Fire,
hereafter  will  appear  by  this  godly  woman  Anne  Askewe,
which  with  other  more  was  brent  at  London,  in  the  year  of
our  Lord  M.D.XLVL,  for  the  faithful  testimony  of  Jesu  against

p  Depured  :  purified.  Halliwcll.]

13—2

196

THE  LATTEil  EXAMINATION

antichrist :  whose  latter  handhng  here  folio  weth  in  course,
Copy.  like  as  I  received  it  in  copy  by  certain  Dutch  merchants  com-
ing from  thence,  which  had  been  at  their  burning,  and  be-
holden the  tyrannous  violence  there  shewed.  First  out  of
prison  she  wrote  unto  a  secret  friend  of  hers  after  this  manner
following.

Anne  Askewe.

I  do  perceive,  dear  friend  in  the  Lord,  that  thou  art  not  yet  per-
suaded throughly  in  the  truth  concerning  the  Lord's  supper,  because
Christ  said  unto  his  apostles :  "  Take,  eat ;  this  is  my  body  which  is
given  for  you."  In  giving  forth  the  bread  as  an  outward  sign  or
token  to  be  received  at  the  mouth,  he  minded  them  in  a  perfect  belief
to  receive  that  body  of  his  which  should  die  for  the  people,  or  to  think
the  death  thereof  the  only  health  and  salvation  of  their  souls.  The
bread  and  the  wine  were  left  us  for  a  sacramental  communion,  or  a
mutual  participation  of  the  inestimable  benefits  of  his  most  precious
death  and  blood-shedding ;  and  that  we  should  in  the  end  thereof  be
thankful  together  for  that  most  necessary  grace  of  our  redemption.
For  in  the  closing  up  thereof,  he  said  thus :  "  This  do  ye  in  remem-
brance of  me ;  yea,  so  oft  as  ye  shall  eat  it  or  drink  it,"  Luke  xxii.
and  1  Cor.  xi.  Else  should  we  have  been  forgetful  of  that  we  ought
to  have  in  daily  remembrance,  and  also  been  altogether  unthankful
for  it.

John  Bale.

Agreeable  to  this  woman's  doctrine  here  are  the  scrip-
Edere  and    tures  of  both  tcstamonts  I   wherein  these  words  edere  and

bibere.  '

bibere,  to  eat  and  to  drink,  are  oft-times  spiritually  taken  for
ci^edere,  to  believe  or  receive  in  faith.  "  The  poor,"  saith
David,  "  shall  eat  and  be  satisfied.  All  that  seek  to  please
the  Lord  shall  praise  him,  and  their  souls  shall  never  perish."

Believe.  Ps.  xxL  [xxii.]  "  They  that  eat  me,"  saith  the  verity  of  God,
"  shall  hunger  more  and  more,  and  they  that  drink  me  shall
thirst  more  desirously  for  me."  Eccles.  xxiv.  "Unless  ye  eat  the
flesh  of  the  Son  of  man,"  saith  Christ,  and  drink  his  blood,
ye  can  have  no  life  in  you."  John  vi.  These  scriptures  ex-
pound the  doctors  spiritually,  yea,  the  papists  and  all.  Where

Evangelists,  as  the  othcr  three  evangelists,  Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke,
sheweth  nothing  else  of  the  Lord's  supper  but  the  plain
history,  St  John,  writing  last  of  them  all,  manifests  there

Doctrine.  the  whole  Complete  doctrine  and  full  understanding  thereof,
after  Christ's  own  instructions  and  meaning.  Required  is  it
there,  that  the  true  receivers  thereof  be  taught  of  God,  and

Christ.

Remember.

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

197

learned  of  the  heavenly  Father,  and  not  of  sinful  men's  cus-
toms.

The  work  of  God,  or  that  pleaseth  God,  is  not  there  the  Faith,
putting  of  bread  into  the  mouth  and  bellj,  but  to  believe  or
exactly  to  consider,  that  Christ  died  for  us  to  cleanse  us  from
sin,  to  join  us  into  one  mystical  body,  and  to  give  us  life  ever-
lasting ;  and  that  there  is  none  other  but  he  that  can  procure
us  that  life :  for  that  which  entereth  the  mouth  feedeth  only
the  body  ;  but  that  entereth  faith  feedeth  the  soul.     "  I  am  Christ,
the  living  bread,"  saith  he,  "  which  came  down  from  heaven.
He  only  that  believeth  in  me  hath  the  life  everlasting."  John
vi.  "  The  Spirit  is  it  that  quickeneth  ;"  the  fleshly  understand-
ing, or  only  mouth-eating,  profiteth  nothing  at  all.    Here  will
an  obstinate  papist  peradventure  say,  that  we  attribute  nothing
to  the  corporal  communion.     Yes,  we  reverently  grant  that,  communion,
rightly  ministered  after  Christ's  institution,  it  both  confirm-
eth  our  faith  in  the  necessary  considerations  of  his  death,  and
also  stirreth  up  that  brotherly  christian  love  which  we  ought  Love,
to  have  towards  our  neighbour,  besides  that  this  faithful  wo-
man hath  spoken  here  of  it  afore.    And  these  are  the  only
fruits  which  he  requireth  of  us  in  that  supper  or  sacramental
meeting.

Anne  Askewe.

Therefore  it  is  meet  that  in  prayers  we  call  unto  God  to  graft  in
our  foreheads  the  true  meaning  of  the  Holy  Ghost  concerning  this
communion.  For  St  Paul  doth  say  that  "the  letter  slayeth ;  the  Letter,
spirit  is  it  only  that  giveth  life,"  2  Cor.  iii.  Mark  well  the  sixth  chap-
ter of  John,  where  all  is  applied  unto  faith.  Note  also  the  fourth
chapter  of  St  Paul's  second  epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  and  in  the  end
thereof  ye  shall  find  plainly,  that  "the  things  which  are  seen  are  tem-
poral, but  they  that  are  not  seen  are  everlasting."  Yea,  look  in  the
third  chapter  to  the  Hebrews,  and  ye  shall  find  that  "  Christ  as  a  son,"  Christ
and  no  servant,  ruleth  "over  his  house  ;  whose  house  are  we,  (and  not
the  dead  temple,)  if  we  hold  fast  the  confidence  and  rejoicing  of  that
hope  to  the  end."  Wherefore,  as  saith  the  Holy  Ghost,  "to  day  if  ye
shall  hear  his  voice,  harden  not  your  hearts,"  &c.    Ps.  xciv.

John  Bale.

By  the  foreheads  understand  she  the  hearts,  or  minds,  of  Foreheads,
men  ;  for  so  they  are  taken  of  St  John,  Apoc.  vii.  and  xxii.  I
cannot  but  ^  think  that  herein  she  had  respect  unto  the  plate  of

P  'but,'  not  in  Mr  Off'or's  copy.]

198

THE  LATTER  EXAMINATION

fine  gold  which  the  Lord  commanded  to  be  set  upon  Aaron's  fore-
head, for  the  acceptation  of  the  people  of  Israel,  Exod.  xxviii. ;

Hearts.  for  here  would  she  all  men's  hearts  to  be  endued  and  horhtened
with  the  most  pure  Spirit  of  Christ,  for  the  understanding
of  that  most  holj  and  necessary  communion,  the  corrupted
dreams  and  phantasies  of  sinful  men  set  apart.  She  knew  by
the  singular  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  they  are  lying  mas-
ters, procurers  of  idolatry,  and  most  spiteful  enemies  to  the

Liars.  soul  of  man,  that  applieth  that  office  to  the  corruptible  lips,
which  belongeth  to  an  uncorrupted  faith,  so  setting  the  crea-
ture, that  is,  corruptible  bread,  in  place  of  the  Creator,  Christ,
both  God  and  man,  Rom.  i.,  lamenting  it  with  the  righteous
at  the  very  heart-root.    And  in  this  she  shewed  herself  to  be

Member.  member  of  Christ's  mystical  body,  1  Cor.  xii.,  religiously
careful  for  her  christian  brethren  and  sisters,  lest  they  should
take  harm  of  the  pope's  mass-mongers.

Anxe  Asrewe.

The  Sum  of  my  Examination  afore  the  King's  Council  at  Greenwich.

Companions.  Your  request,  as  concerning  my  prison-fellows,  I  am  not  able  to
satisfy,  because  I  heard  not  their  examinations.  But  the  effect  of
mine  was  this :  I,  being  before  the  council,  was  asked  of  master

Kyme.  Kymo.  I  answered  that  my  lord  chancellor  knew  already  my  mind  in
that  matter.  They  with  that  answer  were  not  contented ;  but  said,  it
was  the  king's  pleasure  that  I  should  open  the  matter  to  them.  I
answered  them  plainly,  that  I  would  not  so  do ;  but,  if  it  were  the
king's  pleasure  to  hear  mo,  I  would  shew  him  the  truth.     Then  they

Soioman.  Said,  it  was  not  meet  for  the  king  with  me  to  be  troubled.  I
answered,  that  Solomon  was  reckoned  the  wisest  king  that  ever  lived,
yet  misliked  he  not  to  hear  two  poor  common  women ;  much  more  his
grace  a  simple  woman  and  a  faithful  subject.  So,  in  conclusion,  I
made  them  none  other  answer  in  that  matter.

John  Bale,

Kyme.  Concerning  master  Kyme,  this  should  seem  to  be  the  mat-

ter. Iler  father,  Sir  William  Askewe,  knight,  and  his  father,
old  master  Kyme,  were  sometime  of  familiarity  and  neighbours
within  the  county  of  Lincolnshire.  AVhereupon  the  said  Sir
William  covenanted  with  him  for  lucre  to  have  his  eldest
daughter  married  with  his  son  and  heir  (as,  in^  an  ungodly

'  a  natural,'  Mr  Offer's  copy.]
[2  *  in,'  not  in  Mr  Offer's  copy.]

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

199

manner,  it  is  in  England  mucli  used  among  noble  men) ;  and  An  use.
as  it  was  her  chance  to  die  afore  the  time  of  marriage,  to  save
the  money,  he  constrained  this  to  supply  her  room :  so  that,
in  the  end,  she  was  compelled  against  her  will,  or  free  consent,
to  marry  with  him.    Notwithstanding,  the  marriage  once  past,  Married,
she  demeaned  herself  hke  a  christian  wife,  and  had  by  him  (as
I  am  informed)  two  children.    In  process  of  time,  by  oft  read-
ing the  sacred  bible,  she  fell  clearly  from  all  old  superstitions
of  papistry  to  a  perfect  belief  in  Jesus  Christ :  whereby  she
so  offended  the  priests  (as  is  to  be  seen  after  3),  that  he,  at  their
suggestion,  violently  drove  her  out  of  his  house.    Whereupon  Exiled,
she  thought  herself  free  from  that  uncomely  kind  of  coacted
marriage,  by  this  doctrine  of  St  Paul,  1  Cor.  vii.:  "  If  a  faith-
ful woman  have  an  unbelieving  husband,  which  will  not  tarry
with  her,  she  may  leave  him.   For  a  brother  or  sister  is  not  in
subjection  to  such;"  specially  where  as  the  marriage  afore  is
unlawful.    Upon  this  occasion  (I  hear  say)  she  sought  of  the
law  a  divorcement  from  him,  namely,  and  above  all,  because  Divorcement,
he  so  cruelly  drove  her  out  of  his  house  in  despite  of  Christ's
verity.    She  could  not  think  him  worthy  of  her  marriage,
which  so  spitefully  hated  God,  the  chief  author  of  marriage.
Of  this  matter  was  she  first  examined  (I  think)  at  his*  labour  a  beast
and  suit.

Anne  Askewe.

Then  my  lord  chancellor  asked  me  of  my  opinion  in  the  sacrament.
My  answer  was  this :  I  believe  that  so  oft  as  I,  in  a  christian  congre-
gation, do  receive  the  bread,  in  remembrance  of  Christ's  death,  and
with  thanksgiving,  according  to  his  holy  instruction,  I  receive  there-
with also  the  fruits ^  of  his  most  glorious  passion.  The  bishop  of  Winchester.
Winchester  bade  me  make  a  direct  answer.  I  said,  I  would  not  sing
a  new  song  to  the  Lord  in  a  strange  land.

John  Bale.

Direct  enough  was  this  answer  after  Christ's  single  doc-  Answer,
trine,  but  not  after  the  pope's  double  and  covetous  meaning,
for  his  oiled  querister's  advantage.     And  here  was  at  hand
his  general  advocate,  or  steward,  to  look  upon  the  matter,

[3  *  afore,'  Mr  Offer's  copy.]

[4  'his  instant,'  Mr  Offor's  copy.]

[5  'the  fruits  also,'  Mr  Offor's  copy.]

200

THE  LATTER  EXAMINATION

that  nothing  should  perish  pertaining  to  the  maintenance  of
his  superstitious  vain-glory,  if  any  crafty  policy  might  help
it.    What  offended  this  godly  christian  woman  here,  either
Tyrant.  opiniou  or  faith,  ye  cruel  and  vengeable  tyrants?  but

that  ye  must  (as  David  saith)  temper  your  tongues  with
venomous  words,  to  destroy  the  innocent,  Ps.  Ixiii.  Could
ye  have  brought  in  against  her  a  matter  of  more  danger
concerning  your  laws,  to  deprive  her  of  life,  ye  would  have
Danger.  douo  it;  such  is  your  ghostly  charity.  But  be  sure  of  it,  as
haughty  as  you  are  now,  the  hard  plague  thereof  will  be
yours,  when  the  great  vengeance  shall  fall  for  shedding  of
innocents'  blood.  Matt,  xxiii.

Anne  Askewe.

Then  the  bishop  said  I  spake  in  parables.  I  answered,  it  was  best
for  him ;  for  if  I  shew  you  the  open  truth  (quoth  I),  ye  will  not  accept
it.  Then  he  said  I  was  a  parrot.  I  told  him  again  I  was  ready  to
suffer  all  things  at  his  hands;  not  only  his  rebukes,  but  all  that
should  follow  besides,  yea,  and  that  gladly.  Then  had  I  divers  rebukes
of  the  council,  because  I  would  not  express  my  mind  in  all  things  as
they  would  have  me.  But  they  were  not,  in  the  mean  time,  unan-
swered, for  all  that ;  which  now  to  rehearse  were  too  much  :  for  I  was
with  them  there  about  five  hours.  Then  the  clerk  of  the  council
conveyed  me  from  thence  to  my  lady  Garnish.

John  Bale.

Most  commonly  Christ  used  to  speak  in  dark  simiU-
tudes,  or  ^  parables,  when  he  perceived  his  audience  rather
given  to  the  hearing  of  pharisaical  constitutions,  or  ^  customs,
than  to  his  heavenly  verity.  Matt,  xiii.,  i\Iark  iv.,  Luke  vii.
Which  rule  this  woman,  his^  true  disciple,  forgot  not  here,
Winchester,  in  Communing  with  this  proud  bishop,  whom  she  knew^  always
a  most  obstinate  withstander  of  that  wholesome  verity  of  his.
And  as  concerning  mocks  and  scornful  revilings,  they  have
Mockers,  been  ever  in  that  generation  of  scorners  more  plenteous
than  good  counsels  to  the  righteous ;  and  therefore,  as  a
name  after  their  conditions,  it  is  unto  them  appropriate  of
the  Holy  Ghost  in  many  places  of  the  scriptures.  "  In  the
latter  days,"  saith  Judas  the  apostle,  "  shall  come  mockers,
walking  in  ungodliness,  after  all  *  their  own  lusts.  These

[1  *and,'  Mr  Offoi-'s  copy.]  [2  'being  his,'  Mr  Offer's  copy.]

[3  *knew  to  be,'  Mr  Offer's  copy.]
[*  '  all  after,'  Mr  Offer's  copy.]

Parables.

Rebukes.

Five  houn.

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

201

are  they  which  separate  themselves"  from  the  common  sort  Hypocrites,
bj  a  name  of  spiritualty,  being  in  conversation  beastly,  and
having  no  spirit  that  is  godly.    "  But,  dearly  beloved,"  saith
he,    ground  yourselves  upon  our  most  holy  faith,"  &c.

Anne  Askewe.

The  next  day  I  was  brought  again  before  the  council.  Then  would
they  needs  know  of  me  what  I  said  to  the  sacrament.  I  answered.  Sacrament,
that  I  had  already  5  said  that  I  could  say.  Then,  after  divers  words,
they  bade  me  go  by.  Then  came  my  lord  Lyle,  my  lord  of  Essex,
and  the  bishop  of  Winchester,  requiring  me  earnestly  that  I  should
confess  the  sacrament  to  be  flesh,  blood,  and  bone.  Then  said  I  to
my  lord  Parr  and  my  lord  Lyle,  that  it  was  great  shame  for  them  to  Godly,
counsel  contrary  to  their  knowledge.  Whereunto,  in  few  words,  they
did  say,  that  they  would  gladly  all  things  were  well.

John  Bale.

Always  have  the  worldly  governors  shewed  more  gentle-
ness and  favour  to  the  word  of  God,  than  the  consecrate
priests  and  prelates :  as  we  have  for  example  in  the  old
law,  that  Ezekias,  the  king  of  Judah,  would  in  no  case,  at  Michea^.
their  calhng  on,  put  Micheas  the  true  prophet  unto  death,
when  he  had  prophesied  the  destruction  of  Samaria  for  their
idolatry,  and  for  the  tyranny  of  their  princes  and  false  pro-
phets, Mich.  i.  and  iii.  Neither  would  the  princes,  at  the
priests'  heady  exclamations,  murder  Jeremy  for  the  Lord's
verity  preaching,  but  mercifully  delivered  him  out  of  their
malicious  hands,  Jer.  xxvi.  Pilate,  in  like  case,  concerning
the  new  law,  pleaded  with  the  Jews'  spiritualty  to  have
saved  Christ  from  the  death.  Matt,  xxvi.,  John  xviii.  So  did
the  captain  Claudius  Lysias  deliver  Paul  from  their  mortal  Lysias.
malice,  after  that  the  high  priest  Ananias  had  commanded
him  to  be  smitten,  and  his  retinue  conspired  his  death.  Acts
xxiii.  At  the  priests'  only  provocation  was  it,  that  the
heathenish  emperors  so  grievously  vexed  and  tormented  the
christian  believers  in  the  primitive  church ;  as  testifieth  Ege-  caesars.
sippus,  Clemens  Alexandrius,  Eusebius,  and  other  old  his-
torians.

Anne  Askewe.

The6  bishop  said  he  would  speak  with  me  familiarly.  I  said,  So  did

[5  *  already  had,'  Mr  Offer's  copy.]
[6  «  Then  the,'  Mr  Offer's  copy.]

202

THE  LATTER  EXAMINATION

Winchester.  Judas,  when  he  unfriendlily  betrayed  Christ.  Then  desu-ed  the  bishop
to  speak  with  me  alone.  But  that  I  refused.  He  asked  me  why  ?  I
said,  that  in  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses  every  matter  should
stand,  after  Christ's  and  Paul's  doctrine.    Matth.  xviii.  and  2  Cor.  xiii.

John  Bale.

Did  she  not  (think  you)  hit  the  nail  on  the  head,  in
Treason.  thus  taunting  this  bishop  ?  Yes ;  for  as  great  offence  doth
he  to  Christ,  that  giveth  one  of  his  beUeving  members  unto
death,  as  did  he  that  betrayeth  first  his  own  body.  *'  That
ye  have  done  unto  these  Utile  ones"  (shall  he  say  at  the
latter  day)  "which  have  believed  in  me,  ye  have  done  unto
Christ's.  mine  own  person,"  Matt.  xxv.  AYhoso  toucheth  them  (saith
Zachary)  shall  touch  the  apple  of  the  Lord's  own  eye,"  Zach.  ii.
But  this  belie veth  not  that  perverse  generation.

Anxe  Askewe.

Sacrament.  Then  my  lord  chancellor  began  to  examine  me  again  of  the  sacra-
ment. Then  I  asked  him  how  long  he  would  halt  on  both  sides?
Then  would  he  needs  know  where  I  found  that  ?  I  said,  in  the  scrip-
ture, 3  Kings  xviii.     Then  he  went  his  way.

John  Bale.

Of  Helias  the  prophet  were    these   words  spoken  to
Halt.        the  people  of  Israel,  such  time  as  they  halted  between  two
opinions,  or  walked  unrightly  between  the  true  living  God
England.     and  the  false  God  Baal,  as  we  do  now  in  England,  between
Christ's  gospel  and  the  pope's  old  rotten  customs.  We
slenderly  consider  with  St  Paul,  that  Christ  will  have  no
fellowship  or  concord  with  Behal,  hght  with  darkness,  right-
eousness with  unrighteousness,  the  temple  of  God  with  images,
or  the  true  believers  with  the  infidels,  2  Cor.  vi.    For  all
our  new  gospel,  yet  will  we  still  bear  the  stranger's  yoke
Tepidi.       with  the  unbehevers,  and  so  become  neither  hot  nor  cold,
that  God  may  spue  us  out  of  his  mouth  as  unsavoury  morsels
(Apoc.  iii.),  saying  unto  us,  as  to  the  foolish  virgins,  "  Yerily
I  know  you  not,"  Matt.  xxv.

A>-yE  Askewe.

Burnt.  Then  the  bishop  said,  I  should  be  burnt.    I  answered,  that  I

had  searched  all  the  scriptures,  yet  could  I  never  find  there  that  either
Christ  or  his  apostles  put  any  creature  to  death.  Well,  well,  said  I,
"God  will  laugh  your  threatenings  to  scorn."  Ps.  ii.  Then  was  I  com-
manded to  stand  aside.

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

203

John  Bale.

Among  other  signs  that  the^  scripture  giveth  us  to  know
an  antichrist  by,  it  sheweth  that  it^  shall  be  an  "  adversary"  Antichrist.
(2  Thes.  ii.),  "an  unsatiable  dog"  (Esa.  Ivi.),  "a  pursuing
enemy"  (Ps.  iv.),  "an  enemy  to^  the  sanctuary"  (Ps.  Ixxiii.),  [Ps.ixxiv.]
"  a  ravening  wolf"  (Matt,  vii ;  Lu.  x ;  Jo.  x  ;  Acts,  xx.),  and
a  most  cruel  murderer"  (Dan.  xi ;  Jo.  x  ;  Apoc.  xiii.)  "  Unto
such,"  saith  St  John,  "it  is*  given  to  vex  men  with  the^  heat  xoburn.
of  fire"  (Apoc.  xvi.)  The  wickedness  of  priests  (saith  Jeremy)
sheddeth  innocents'  blood ;  yea,  (say  they,)  ye  must  be  burnt,
ye  must  dwell  among  the  Gentiles,  (Threno.  iv.),  or  be  com-
mitted to  prison  of  the  worldly  powers,  and  so  put  unto
death  by  them.     We  marvel  not,  therefore,  though  these
parts  be  played  of  proud  bishops,  considering  the  Holy  Ghost  Pnests.
must  be  found  true  in  his  fore-judgments,  and  that  some  there
must  be  to  do  the  feats.    But  truly  did  this  woman  conclude
with  the  prophecy  of  David,  Ps.  ii.  "  that  God  which  dwelleth
in  heaven  shall  have  their  tyranny  in  derision,"  and  bring  all
their  wicked  counsels  to  nought  in  the  clear  opening  of  his
word,  have  they  never  so  many  painted  colours  of  false  right-
eousness.

Akxe  Askewe.

Then  came  master  Paget  to  me  with  many  glorious  words,  and  paget
desired  me  to  speak  my  mind  to  him.   I  might  (he  said)  deny  it  again,
if  need  were.     I  said  that  I  would  not  deny  the  truth.    He  asked
me  how  I  could  avoid  the  very  words  of  Christ,  "  Take,  eat ;  this  is  my
body,  which  shall  be  broken  for  you."  I  answered,  that  Christ's  mean-  Christ's
ing  was  there,  as  in 6  other  places  of  the  scripture:  "I  am  the  door"
(John  X.),  "I  am  the  vine"  (John  xv.),  "Behold  the  Lamb  of  God"
(John  i,),  "The  rock-stone  was  Christ"  (1  Cor.  x.),  and  such  other
like.    Ye  may  not  here,  said  I,  take  Christ  for  the  material  thing
that  he  is  signified  by ;  for  then  ye  will  make  him  a  very  door,  a  signify,
vine,  a  lamb,  and  a  stone,  clean  contrary  to  the  Holy  Ghost's  meaning.
All  these,  indeed,  do  signify  Christ,  like  as  the  bread  doth  his  body  in
that  place.    And  though  he  did  say  there,  "  Take,  eat  this  in  remem-  Remem-
brance of  me yet  did  he  not  bid  them  hang  up  that  bread  in  a
box,  and  make  it  a  God,  or  bow  to  it.

[1  'holy,'  Mr  Oflfor's  copy.]  [2  'he,'  Mr  Offor's  copy.]
[3  '  in,'  Mr  Oflfor's  copy.]  'is  it,'  Mr  Offor's  copy.]

[5  *  the,'  not  in  Mr  Oflfor's  copy.]
*in  these,'  Mr  Oflfor's  copy.]

204

THE  LATTER  EXAMINATION

John  Bale.

Much  ado  is  here  made,  and  many  ^  ways  are  sought  out,
to  bring  this  ■woman  into  their  corrupted  and  false  behef,  that

Idolatry.  the  Corruptible  creature,  made  with  hands,  might  stand  in
place  of  the  eternal  Creator  or  Maker,  God  and  man,  for  the
priests'  advantage.  But  all  is  in  vain.  In  no  case  would  he^
accept  it.    But^  nothing  less  minded  Christ  than  to  dwell  in

Not  in  bread,  the  bread,  or  to  become  a  feeding  for  the  body,  when  he  said,
"  Take,  eat ;  this  is  my  body  : "  for  a  contrary  doctrine  he
taught  his  disciples  the  year  afore  his  last  supper,  as  we  have
in  the  sixth  chapter  of  John,  where  as  he  declareth  his  flesh

Spiritual.  to  be  a  spiritual  meat,  his  blood  a  spiritual  drink,  and  both
them  to  be  received  in  faith,  the  bread  and  the  wine  remain-
ing, as  signs  of  his  everlasting  covenant.  Reason  is  it,  that  he

The  eater,  rather  be  judged  the  receiver  in"^  that  refection,  than  he  which
liveth  not  thereby,  which  is  the  soul,  and  not  the  body.
What  needed  Christ  to  have  given  to  those  bodies  a  new
bodily  feeding,  which  were  sufficiently  fed  afore  with  the
passover  lamb,  if  he  had  not  meant  therein  some  other  thing  ^?

But  he  sufficiently  enough  declareth  his  own  mean-
ing, Luke  xxii.,  where  he  commandeth  us  to  do  it  in  his
remembrance,  and  not  to  make  him  again  by  blowing  upon
the  bread.    This  sacramental  eating  and  drinking  in  his

Remem-      remembrance  St  Paul  more  largeh^  declareth,   1  Cor.  xi.

brance.  o    «/  '

"  So  oft,*'  saith  he,  "  as  ye  shall  eat  of  that  bread,  and  drink
of  that  cup,  ye  shall  shew  the  Lord's  death  till  he  come."

Till  he  come.  If  jq  camcstly  mark  that  latter  clause,  "  till  he  come,"  ye
shall  well  perceive  that  his  bodily  presence  in  the  bread  is
utterly  denied  there.  Moreover,  in  the  aforesaid  22d  chapter  of
St  Luke,  because  we  should  not  be  too  scrupulous,  Christ
sheweth  what  that  wine  and  bread  of  his  supper  were,  yea,
as  he  left  them  there,  even  in  these  words:    I  say  unto  you,"

Fruit  of  the  salth  ho,  "that  henceforth  I  shall  not  drink  of  this  fruit  of

vine.  '

the  vine  (or  eat  of  this  fruit  of  wheat)  till  the  kingdom  of
God  be  come,"  or,  ''till  I  drink  it  new  with  you  in  my  Father's
kingdom,"  Matt,  xxvi.,  Mark  xiv.  Here  calleth  it  he  the
juice  of  the  grape,  or  fruit  of  the  vine,  and  not  the  blood

[1  '  subtil,'  Ur  Offer's  copy.]  [2  '  so,'  Mr  Oflfor's  copy.]

[3  '  But,'  not  in  Mr  Oflfor's  copy.]
[4  'which  hveth  in,'  Mr  Oflfoi-'s  copy.]
[5  '  manner  of  thing,'  Mr  Offoi-'s  copy.]

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

205

issuing  from  his  body.    Yet  is  that  cup  (as  St  Paul  saith)
"  the  partaking  of  Christ's  blood,  and  the  bread  th^t  we  Partaking,
partake  there,  the  partaking  of  Christ's  body,"  1  Cor.  x.
But  this  is  in  faith  and  spirit,  as  afore  in  John.

Anne  Askewe.

Then  he  compared  it  unto  the  king,  and  said,  that  the  more  his
majesty's  honour  is  set  forth,  the  more  commendable  it  is.     Then  Paget,
said  I,  that  it  was  an  abominable  shame  unto  him  to  make  no  better    /)  ;  ,
of  the  eternal  word  of  God  than  of  his  tenderly  conceived  fantasy.
Far  other  meaning  requireth  God  therein,  than  men's  idle  wit  can  idle  wit.
devise,  whose  doctrine  is  but  lies  without  his  heavenly  verity.  Then
he  asked  me,  if  I  would  confer  with  some  wise  man?    That  offer,  I
said,  I  would  not  refuse.    Then  he  told  the  council.     And  so  went
I  to  my  ladies  agam  6.

John  Bale.

*****

first  Patron  S  i^rances,  as  we  find  in  the  history  of  his  idola-
trous feast,  and  also  in  the  book  of  conformities  of  Frances  to
Christ,  written  by  an  Italish  friar  called  Bartholomew  Pi-
sanus.  In  Frances  (they  say)  is  expressed  the  full  significa-
tion of  Christ,  by  reason  of  his  wounds.  And  Paget  here
compareth  Christ's  presence  in  the  sacrament  to  the  king's
presence,  I  wot  not  where.  And  as  great  pleasure  I  think
he  doth  the  king  therein,  as  though  he  threw  dust  in  his

[6  In  the  two  copies  which  have  been  compared  and  collated  for
this  edition,  the  folios  22  and  23  have  been  pasted  together,  so  that  the
latter  page  of  the  first,  and  the  former  page  of  the  latter  were  con-
cealed, and  the  top  of  fol.  23  cut  off  to  the  extent  of  about  four  lines,
which  is,  it  may  be  feared,  lost.  The  copy  in  the  British  Museum  re-
mains so  pasted ;  that  in  the  possession  of  George  Offer,  Esq.  of  Grove
House,  Hackney,  who  kindly  allowed  the  editor  the  use  of  it,  the
editor  has  carefully  separated,  and  the  contents  formerly  concealed

now  appear,  with  the  exception-  of  the  four  lines  above  alluded  to

These  were  evidently  cut  off,  because  the  commencement  of  a  para-
graph of  Anne  Askew's  narration  is  made  thus  to  coincide  with
similar  commencement  on  fol.  22,  which  is  concealed,  and  the  narra-
tive thus  appears  to  be  continued  without  interruption.  It  would
seem  as  though  this  had  been  done  to  spare  the  reputation  of  Paget,
who  is  somewhat  roughly  handled  by  Bale.  The  words  or  letters  in
italics  are  supplied  from  conjecture,  the  print  being  damaged  by  the
paste.  The  part  so  concealed  commences  here  with  the  words  "  Then
he  compared"  and  terminates  with  the  words  "our  damnation."]

206

THE  LATTER  EXAMINATION

face,  or  salt  in  his  eyes;  but  that  such  flattering  Gnathos
must  do  their  feats,  though  they  be  most  blasphemous.
Neither  head  nor  taz'l  hath  this  witless  compar?>o?i  of  his,  to
make  good  his  enterprise  with  this  woman.  And  much
doubt  it  is  whether  he  maketh  here  Christ  a  shadow  to  the
king,  or  the  king  a  shadoiu  to  Christ :  but  he  should  seem
rather  to  take  Christ  for  the  shadow.  O  graceless  papists,
when  will  ye  be  godly-wise  ?  Thus  is  your  own  dam-
nation \

•  *  *  *  *

Ax>-E  ASKEWE.

Then  came  to  me  doctor  Coxe  and  doctor  Robinson.  In  conclu-
sion, we  could  not  agree.  Then  they  made  me  a  bill  of  the  sacrament,
willing  me  to  set  my  hand  thereunto ;  but  I  would  not.  Then  on  the
Sunday  I  was  sore  sick,  thinking  no  less  than  to  die ;  therefore  I
desired  to  speak  with  Latimer.  It  would  no  be.  Then  was  I  sent  to
Newgate,  in  my  extremity  of  sickness ;  for  in  all  my  hfe  afore  was  I
never  in  such  pain.  Thus  the  Lord  strengthen  you  in  the  truth.  Pray,
pray,  pray.

John  Bale.

What  an  hurly-burly  is  here  for  this  new  belief,  that
Christ  should  dwell  in  the  bread,  which  is  man's  creature,
and  not  God's !  Christ  is  "  the  living  bread,  which  came
from  heaven,"  John  vi.  But  this  is  not  sufficient  (say  the
priests),  unless  ye  believe  also  that  he  is  that  dead  bread
which  came  from  the  wafer-baker''s.  And  thereunto  must
ye  set  your  own  handwriting,  else  it  will  not^  be  allowed  in
the  spiritual  court.  For  he  that  speaketh  great  things  and
blasphemies  (which  is  antichrist),  making  war  with  the  saints,
will  have  it  so.  Apoc.  xiii.  In  the  apostle's  time,  and  many
years  after,  it  was  enough  for  a  christian  man's  righteous-
ness, to  beheve  with  the  heart  that  Jesus  is  the  Lord,  and
that  God  raised  him  up  from  the  dead.  Rom.  x.  But
now  we  must  believe  that  he  cometh  down  again,  at  the
will  of  the  priests,  to  be  impaned,  or  inbreaded,  for  their
belly's  commonwealth,  like  as  he  afore  came  down  at  the
will  of  his  heavenly  Father,  to  be  incarnated,  or  infleshed,  for

\}  About  four  lines  are  here  wanting :  the  part  of  the  word  dam-
nation is  the  catch  word  at  the  bottom  of  the  page,  fol.  23.]
[2  '  will  it  not,'  Mr  Oflfor's  copy.]

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

207

our  universal  souVs  health.  And  unto  this  we  must  set  our
handwriting,  that  we  may  be  known  for  antichrist's  cattle  :
else  shall  we  to  stinking  Newgate,  by  their  spiritual  appoint-  Newgate,
ment,  be  we  never  so  sick,  and,  within  a  while  after,  to
the  fire  in  Smithfield ;  for  Christ's  member  must  with  him
taste  both  esell  and  gall.

Anne  Askewe.

The  Confession  of  me  Anne  Askewe,  for  the  time  I  was  in  Newgate,
concerning  my  belief.

I  find  in  the  scriptures  (saith  she)  that  Christ  took  the  bread,  and  Bread,
gave  it  to  his  disciples,  saying,  "  Eat,  this  is  my  body,  which  shall  be
broken  for  you meaning  in  substance  his  own  very  body,  the  bread
being  thereof  an  only  sign,  or  sacrament.     For,  after  like  manner  of
speaking,  he  said  he  would  break  down  the  temple,  and  in  three  days
build  it  up  again,  signifying  his  own  body  by  the  temple,  as  St  John  Temple,
declareth  it  (Jo.  ii.),  and  not  the  stony  temple  itself.     So  that  the
bread  is  but  a  remembrance  of  his  death,  or  a  sacrament  of  thanks-
giving for  it,  whereby  we  are  knit  unto  him  by  a  communion  of  chris-
tian love;  although  there  be  many  that  cannot  perceive  the  true
meaning  thereof :  for  the  veil  that  ISIoses  put  over  his  face  before  the  Moses'  veil,
children  of  Israel,  that  they  should  not  see  the  clearness  thereof,
Exod.  xxxiv.  and  2  Cor.  iii.,  I  perceive  the  same  veil  remaineth  to
this  day;  but  when  God  shall  take  it  away,  then  shall  these  blind
men  see.

John  Bale.

Ye  will  say,  peradventure,  here,  that  the  similitude  of
bread  and  of  the  temple  are  not  like ;  for  he  blessed  the
bread  with  thanksgiving.  So  will  ye  say  another  time,  for
your  pleasure  and  advantage,  that  he  blessed  the  temple  also,  Blessed,
and  called  it  both  the  house  of  his  Father,  and  also  the
house  of  prayer.  I  pray  ye,  be  as  good  here  to  your  mar-
ket-place as  ye  are  to  your  sale- wares  therein,  for  your  own^
bellies'  sake :  for  the  one  will  not  do  well  to  your  commo-
dity in  idleness  without  the -other.  But  take  good  heed  of  it,
if  ye  list;  for  Christ  hath  already  called  one  of  them  an  house  lempie.
of  merchandise  and  a  den  of  thieves,  by  reason  of  your  un-
lawful occupying  therein.  Jo.  ii.  and  Lu.  xix.  He  hath  also
promised  to  overthrow  it  (Matt,  xxiv.),  and  not  leave  one  stone
thereof  standing  upon  another  (Mar.  xiii.),  because  ye  have
not  regarded  the  time  of  your  visitation,  or  not  accepted  his
[3  *  only,'  Mr  Oflfor's  copy.]

208

THE  LATTER  EXAMINATION

Warning,  eternal  word  of  health.  A  warning  might  the  turning  over  of
your  monasteries  have  been  unto  you,  if  ye  were  not,  as  ye  are,
altogether  blind.

I  cannot  think  the  contrary  but  he  calleth  the  other  also,
as  ye  handle  it  now-a-days  in  the  pope's  old  toys  of  convey-

Themass.  aucc,  ''the  abomiuation  of  desolation,"  or  such  an  abominable
idol  as,  subverting  Christ's  true  religion,  will  be  your  final

Idols.  destruction,  both  here  and  in  the  world  to  come ;  for  idols
are  called  abomination  all  the  scriptures  over.  Yet  shall  it
endure  (saith  Daniel)  somewhere  unto  the  end  of  all.  Dan.
ix.     Whereby  ye  may  well  perceive  that  it  comprehendeth

Tiberius.      not  ouly  the  triumphant  streamers  of  Tiberius,  or  golden

Caligula,  imagos  of  CaHgula,  which  both  prevented  the  subversion  of
Jerusalem,  but  some  other  idol  else  which  should  continue.
And  it  followeth  in  the  gospel  text,  that  he  should  sit  in  the
holy  place  for  the  time  of  his  continuance  (Matt,  xxiv.),  and

Masses.  not  iu  the  pagans'  temples.  Tell  me  if  your  masses  be  done
any  where  else  than  in  your  hallowed  sanctuaries,  upon  your
sanctified  altars,  and  in  your  holy  ornaments  and  consecrate
cups  ?  Neither  may  any  do  them,  unless  they  be  anointed
thereunto  by  your  bishops  and  sorcerers.

Antichrist.  jS'ot  without  the  holy  place  (saith  Christ)  is  that  abo-

mination, but  in  it.  Matt.  xxiv.  "  Antichrist,"  saith  St  Paul,
"  shall  sit,"  not  without,  but  "  within  the  very  temple  of  God."
(2  Thess,  ii.)  The  papacy  is  not  without,  but  within  the  very
church  of  Christ:  what  though  it  be  no  part  thereof?  (Apoc.

Shun  them,  xi.)  Therefore  shall  it  be  meet  that  we  beware,  and  separate
ourselves  from  them  at  the  admonishments  of  his  holy  doc-
trine, lest  we  be  partakers  with  you  in  their  promised  damna-

TheveiL  ^iou.  Apoc.  xviii.  By  the  veil  over  Moses's  face  she  meaneth
the  blind  confidence  that  many  men  yet  have  in  old  Jewish
ceremonies  and  beggarly  traditions  of  men,  as  St  Paul  doth
call  them  (Gala,  iv.),  whereby  the  verity  of  God  is  sore
blemished.  The  spiritual  knowledge  which  cometh  by  the
clear  doctrine  of  the  gospel  ministereth  no  such  impediments

Darkness,  of  darkucss ;  but  all  things  are  clearly  seen  to  them  that^  are
endued  therewith.  They  can  be  deceived  by  none  of  Satan's
subtle  conveyers,  but  perceiveth  all  things,  which  have  ob-

sight.        tained  the  pure  eyes  of  faith.

[1  '  which,'  Mr  Offer's  copy.]

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

209

Anne  Askewe.

For  it  is  plainly  expressed  in  the  history  of  Bel,  in  the  bible,  that
God  dwelleth  in  nothing  material.  "  O  king,"  saith  Daniel,  "  be  not
deceived."  Dan.  xiv.  "  For  God  will  be  in  nothing  that  is  made  with
hands  of  men,"  Acts  vii.  O  what  stiff-necked  people  are  these,  that
will  always  resist  the  Holy  Ghost !  But  as  their  fathers  have  done,  so
do  they,  because  they  have  stony  hearts.

Written  by  me,  Anne  Askewe,  that  neither  wish  death,  nor  yet  fear
his  might,  and  as  merry  as  one  that  is  bound  towards  heaven.  "  Truth
is  laid  in  prison."  Lu.  xxi.  "  The  law  is  turned  to  wormwood."  Amos
yi.  "  And  there  can  no  right  judgment  go  forth."  Esay  lix.

John  Bale.

Mark  here  how  graciously  the  Lord  keepeth  promise  with  Promise,
this  poor  servant  of  his.       He  that  believeth  on  me,"  saith
Christ,  "  out  of  his  belly  shall  flow  rivers  of  living  water."
John  vii.    Neither  lasheth  this  woman  out  in  her  extreme
troubles   language  of  despair,  nor  yet  blasphemous  words
against  God,  with  the  unbelieving  ;  but  uttereth  the  scriptures  Faith,
with  wonderful  abundance,  to  his  laud  and  praise.     She  re-
buketh  here  the  most  pestilent  vice  of  idolatry,  not  by  old
narrations  and  fables,  but  by  the  most  pure  word  of  God,  as
did  Daniel  and  Stephen.    And  in  the  end  she  sheweth  the
strong  stomach  of  a  most  christian  martyr,  in  that  she  neither  a  martyr,
desireth^  the  death,  neither  yet  standeth  in  fear  of  the  vio-
lence or  extremity  thereof.    What  a  constancy  was  this  of  a
woman,  frail,  tender,  young,  and  most  deliciously  brought  up!
But  that  Christ'^s  Spirit  was  mighty  in  her,  who  bade  her  be
of  good  cheer ;  for  though  the  tyrants  of  this  world  have  Tyrants,
power  to  slay  the  body,  yet  have  they  no  power  over  the
soul.    Matt.  XX.    Neither  have  they  power  in  the  end  to
diminish  one  hair  of  the  head.  Luke  xxi.

She  fainteth  not  in  the  midst  of  the  battle,  (1  Cor.  ix.)  stedfast.
but  persevereth  strong  and  stedfast  to  the  very  end,  Matt,  x ;
not  doubting  but  to  have,  for  her  faithful  perseverance,  the
crown  of  eternal  Hfe.  Apoc.  ii.  So  merry  am  I,  (saith  she,
good  creature,  in  the  midst  of  Newgate,)  as  one  that  is  bound
towards  heaven."  A  voice  was  this  of  a  most  worthy  and
valiant  witness  in  the  painful  kingdom  of  patience.  Apoc.  i.  Vaiiant
She  faithfully  reckoned  of  her  Lord  God,  that  he  is  not  as

[2  *  desirous,'  Mr  Offer's  copy.]

[bale.]

14

210

THE  LATTER  EXAMINATION

men  are^  Num.  xxiii.,  but  most  sure  of  word  and  pro-
mise, Ps.  cxliv.  ;  and  that  he  would  most  faithfully  keep  co-
venant with  her  when  time  should  come.   Apoc.  ii.    She  had

Faith.  it  most  grouudcdly  planted  in  her  heart,  that  though  heaven
and  earth  did  pass,  yet  could  not  his  words  and  promise
pass  by  unfulfilled.    Luke  xxi.    Ashamed  may  those  carnal

Heichesites.  Helchositcs^  be,  which  have  not  only  denied  the  verity  of
iheir  Lord  God,  but  also  most  shamefully  blasphemed  and  dis-
honoured both  it  and  themselves  for  the  pleasure  of  a  year  or
two  to  dwell  still  in  this  flesh.  They  consider  not  that  he,
with  whom  they  mock,  hath  power  to  send  them  to  hell  for
their  blasphemy.    Luke  xii.    They  shall  not  find  it  a  matter

Inconstant,  light,  for  their  inconstancy  to  be  vomited  out  of  the  mouth
of  God,  as  unsavoury  morsels,  Apoc.  iii.  :  neither  shall  they
prove  it  a  Christmas  game  to  be  denied  of  Christ  before  his
heavenly  Father  and  his  angels,  for  denying  here  his  verity.
Matth.  x.

Anne  Askewe.

Prayer  ^  forgive  US  all  our  sins,  and  receive  us  graciously.    As  for  the

works  of  our  hands,  we  will  no  more  call  upon  them ;  for  it  is  thou.
Lord,  that  art  our  God.  Thou  shewest  ever  mercy  unto  the  father-
less. O  if  they  would  do  this,  saith  the  Lord,  I  should  heal  their
sores,  yea,  with  all  my  heart  would  I  love  them.  O  Ephraim,  what
have  I  to  do  with  idols  any  more  ?  Whoso  is  wise  shall  understand
this ;  and  he  that  is  rightly  instructed  will  regard  it.  For  the  ways
of  the  Lord  are  righteous ;  such  as  are  godly  will  walk  in  them.  As
for  the  wicked,  they  will  stumble  at  them.     Osee  xiv.

John  Bale.

All  these  words  alleged  she  out  of  the  last  chapter  of
oseas.  Oseas  the  prophet,  where  as  he  pronounced  the  destruction  of
Samaria  for  the  only  vice  of  idolatry.  In  the  word  of  the
Lord  she  declareth  herself  therein  to  detest  and  abhor  that
vice  above  all,  and  to  repent  from  the  heart  that  she  hath
Idolatry.  at  any  time  worshipped  the  works  of  men's  hands,  either
stone,  wood,  bread,  wine,  or  any  such  like,  for  the  eternal
living  God.  Consequently  she  confesseth  him  to  be  her  only
God,  and  that  she  had  at  that  time  trust  in  none  other  else,
neither  for  the  remission  of  her  sins,  nor  yet  souFs  comfort  at

[1  '  is  not  as  men  are,  fickle,'  Mr  Offor*s  copy.]
[2  Heretics  of  the  2nd  century,  who  held  opinions  much  resembling
those  of  the  Ebionites.    Lardner,  Vol.  viii.  p.  614".  ed.  1838.]

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

211

her  need.  And,  like  such  a  one  as  is  unfeignedly  converted
unto  the  Lord,  she  asketh  of  the  spiritual  Ephraimites  in  his  Ephraimites.
word,  what  she  hath  any  more  to  do  with  idols,  or  why  they
should  so  tyrannously  enforce  her  to  the  worshipping  of
them,  considering  that  he  so  earnestly  abhorreth  them.
Finally,  two  sorts  of  people  she  reckoneth  to  be  in  the  world,  xwoaorts.
and  sheweth  the  divers  manner  of  them :  the  one,  in  the
spirit  of  Christ,  obeyeth  the  word ;  the  other,  in  the  spirit  of
error,  contemneth  it.  And,  hke  as  St  Paul  doth  say,  "to  the
one  part  is  it  the  savour  of  life  unto  life ;  and  to  the  other
the  savour  of  death  unto  death."    2  Cor.  ii.

Anne  Askewe.

"Solomon"  (saith  St  Stephen)  "builded  an  house  for  the  God  of  st Stephen.
Jacob.  Howbeit,  the  Highest 3  dvvelleth  not  in  temples  made  with  hands :
as  saith  the  prophet,  Esay,  Ixvi.  Heaven  is  my  seat,  and  the  earth
is  my  foot-stool.     What  house  will  ye  build  for  me  ?  saith  the  Lord ;
or  what  place  is  it  that  I  shall  rest  in  ?    Hath  not  my  hand  made  all
these  things  ?  "  Acts  vii.     "  Woman,  believe  me  "  (saith  Christ  to  the  Temple.  ^
Samaritan),  "  the  time  is  at  hand  that  ye  shall  neither  in  this  mountain,
nor  yet  at  Jerusalem,  worship  the  Father.     Ye  worship  ye  know  not
what ;  but  we  know  what  we  worship :  for  salvation  cometh  of  the  Worship.
Jews.   But  the  hour  cometh,  and  now  is,  wherein  the  true  wor&hippers
shall  worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and  in  verity."    John  iv.  "Labour
not"  (saith  Christ)  "for  the  meat  that  perisheth,  but  for  that  endureth  Meat,
into  life 4  everlasting,  which  the  Son  of  man  shall  give  you;  for  him
God  the  Father  hath  sealed."  Jo.  vi.

John  Bale.

Here  bring  she  three  strong  testimonies  of  the  new  Three  bui-
Testament,  to  confirm  her  own  christian  belief  therewith,  and
also  both  to  confute  and  condemn  the  most  execrable  heresy
and  false  filthy  belief  of  the  papists.  The  first  of  them
proveth  that  the  eternal  God  of  heaven  will  neither  be  wrapt
up  in  a  clout,  nor  yet  shut  up  in  a  box :  the  second  declareth,
that  in  no  place  of  the  earth  is  he  to  be  sought,  neither  yet
to  be  worshipped,  but  within  us,  in  spirit  and  verity  :  the
third  of  them  concludetli,  that  Christ  is  a  feeding  for  the
soul,  and  not  for  the  body.  Moreover,  he  is  such  a  meat  as
neither  corrupteth,  mouldeth,  nor  perisheth ;  neither  yet  con-
sumeth  or  wasteth  away  in  the  belly.  Let  not  the  Romish  Romists.
pope's  remnant  in  England  think  but  in  condemning  the

[3  '  highest  of  all,'  Mr  Oflfor's  copy.]
[4  Uhe  life,'  Mr  Oflfor's  copy.]

14—2

212

THK  LATIER  EXAMINATION

Lo  here,
see  there.

faith  of  this  godly  woman  they  also  condemn  the  verity
of  the  Lord,  unless  they  can  discharge  these  three  texts
of  the  scripture  with  other  three  more  effectual ;  as  I  think
they  shall  not  nisi  ad  calendas  Grcecas.  If  they  allege,
for  their  part,  the  saying  of  Christ,  Matt,  xxiv.,  "  Lo,  here
is  Christ,  or  there  is  Christ,"  they  are  confounded  by  that
which  folio weth,  wherein  he  earnestly  chargeth  his  faith-
ful followers  not  to  beheve  it,  calling  the  teachers  of  such
doctrine  false  anointed,  deceivable  prophets,  and  sorcerous
workmen.    Mar.  xiii.

The  sum  of  the  Condemnation  of  me,  Anne  Askewe,  at  Guildtiall.

They  said  to  me  there,  that  I  was  an  heretic,  and  condemned  by
the  law,  if  I  would  stand  in  my  opinion.  I  answered  that  I  was  no
heretic,  neither  yet  deserved  I  any  death  by  the  law  of  God :  but  as
concerning  the  faith  which  I  uttered  and  wrote  to  the  council,  I  would
not,  I  said,  deny  it,  because  I  knew  it  true.  Then  would  they  needs
know  if  I  would  deny  the  sacrament  to  be  Christ's  body  and  blood.  I
said,  Yea:  for  the  same  Son  of  God  that  was  born  of  the  Virgin
Mary,  is  now  glorious  in  heaven,  and  will  come  again  from  thence,  at
the  latter  day,  hke  as  he  went  up.  Acts  i.  And  as  for  that  ye  call
yom'  God,  is  but  a  piece  of  bread.  For  a  more  proof  thereof  (mark
it  when  ye  list)  let  it  lie  in  the  box  but  three  months,  and  it  will  be
Mould  in  the  mould,  and  so  turn  to  nothing  that  is  good.  Whereupon  I  am  per-
suaded that  it  cannot  be  God.

box.

Christ  con-
demned.

Member.

John  Bale.

Christ  Jesus,  the  eternal  Son  of  God,  was  condemned  of
this  generation  for  a  seditious  heretic,  a  breaker  of  their
sabbath,  a  subverter  of  their  people,  a  defiler  of  their  laws,
and  a  destroyer  of  their  temple,  or  holy  church,  Joh.  vli.  ;
Luk.  xxiii.  ;  Matt.  xxvi.  ;  Mar.  xiv.  ;  and  suffered  death  for
it,  at  their  procurement,  by  the  law  then  used.  Is  it,  then,
any  marvel  if  his  inferior  subject  here,  and  faithful  member,  do
the  same,  at  the  cruel  calling  on  and  violent  vengeance  of  their
posterity  "?  Xo,  no ;  the  servant  must  follow  her  master,  and
the  foot  her  head,  and  may  be  found  in  that  point  no  freer
than  he,  Jo.  xiii.  St  Augustine,  defining  a  sacrament,  calleth
it,  in  one  place,    a  sign  of  an  holy  thing ' in  another  place,

[}  Sacrificium  ergo  visibile  invisibilis  sacrificii  sacramentum,  id
est,  sacrum  signum  est. — S.  Aug.  de  Civ.  Dei.  Lib.  x.  cap.  v.  Op.  Ben.
Ed.  Par.  Tom.  vii.  col.  241.1

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

213

"a  visible  shape  of  an  invisible  grace 2;"  whose  office  is  to  in-
struct, animate,  and  strengthen  our  faith  towards  God,  and
not  to  take  it  to  itself,  and  so  deprive  him  thereof.  Christ's
body  and  blood  are  neither  signs  nor  shadows,  but  the  very  no  signs,
effectual  things  indeed  signified  by  those  figures  of  bread  and
wine.  But  how  that  dry  and  corruptible  cake  of  theirs
should  become  a  god,  many  men  wonder  now-a-days,  in  the
light  of  the  gospel,  like  as  they  have  done  aforetime  also ;
and  specially,  why  the  wine  should  not  be  accepted  and  set  The  wine,
up  for  a  god  also,  so  well  as  the  bread,  considering  that
Christ  made  so  much  of  the  one  as  of  the  other.

AXNE  ASKEWE.

After  that  they  willed  me  to  have  a  priest,  and  then  I  smiled.
Then  they  asked  me  if  it  were  not  good.     I  said  I  would  confess  my  Confess,
faults  to  God,  for  I  was  sure  that  he  would  hear  me  with  favour.  And
so  we  were  condemned,  without  a  quest.

John  Bale.

Priests  of  godly  knowledge  she  did  not  refuse;  for  she  Teachers,
knew  that  they  are  the  messengers  of  the  Lord,  and  that  his
holy  words  are  to  be  sought  at  their  mouths.  Mala.  ii.  Of
them  she  instantly  desired  to  be  instructed,  and  it  was  denied
her,  as  is  written  above  ^.   What  should  she  then  else  do  but
return  unto  her  Lord  God,  in  whom  she  knew  to  be  abundance
of  mercy  for  all  them  which  do  from  the  heart  repent  ?
Deutero.  xxx.    As  for  the  other  sort  of  priests,  she  did  not  Baais  priests,
amiss  to  laugh  them  and  their  maintainers  to  scorn ;  for  so
doth  God  also.  Psalm  ii.,  and  curseth  both  their  absolutions
and  blessings.  Mala.  ii.    A  thief  or  a  murderer  should  not
have  been  condemned  without  a  quest,  by  the  laws  of  Eng-
land :  but  the  faithful  members  of  Jesus  Christ,  for  the  spite  Tyranny,
and  hate  that  this  world  hath  to  his  verity,  must  have  another
kind  of  tyranny  added  thereunto,  besides  the  unrighteous  be-
stowing of  that  law.    "  Woe  be  unto  you,"  (saith  the  eternal
God  of  heaven  by  his  prophet,)  or  damnation  be  over  your
heads,    that  make  wicked  laws  and  devise  cruel  things  for  the  wicked  laws.
poor  oppressed  innocents."  Esay  x.    "  Woe  unto  him  that

[2  Signacula  quidem  rerum  divinarum  sunt  visibilia. — Id.  de  Cate-
chizandis  rudibus.  Tom.  vi.  col.  293.]
[3  '  afore/  Mr  Oflfor's  copy.]

214

THE  LATTER  EXAMINATION

buildeth  Babylon  with  blood,  and  maintaineth  that  wicked
city  still  in  unrighteousness,"  Abac.  ii. ;  Xahum  iii. ;  Ezek.  xxiv.

Remem-
brance.

Apostles.

Eating.

The  sum  of
belief.

Xv^  X  O  beastly

O  constant
martyr
Acts'vii.
Acts  xvii.

AyXE  ASKEWE.

!My  belief  which  I  wrote  to  the  council  was  this  :  That  the  sacra-
mental bread  was  left  us  to  be  received  with  thanksgiving  in  remem-
brance of  Christ's  death,  the  only  memory  of  our  souls'  recovery;  and
that  thereby  we  also  received  the  whole  benefits  and  fruits  of  his  most
glorious  passion.

John  Bale.

We  read  not  in  the  gospel,  that  the  material  bread  at
Christ's  holy  supper  was  any  otlierwise  taken  of  the  apostles
than  thus  ;  neither^  that  Christ,  our  Master  and  Saviour,
required  any  other  taking  of  them.  If  so  many  strange  doubts
had  been  therein,  and  so  high  difficulties,  as  be  moved  and
are  in  controversy  among  men  now-a-days,  both  papists  and
other,  they  could  no  more  have  been  left  undiscussed  of  him
than  other  high  matters  were.  The  disciples  asked  here
neither  how,  nor  what ;  as  doubtless  they  would  have  done,  if
he  had  minded  them  to  have  taken  the  bread  for  him.  They
thought  it  enough  to  take  it  in  his  remembrance,  like  as  he
then  plainly  taught  them,  Luke  xxii.  The  eating  of  his  flesh
and  drinking  of  his  blood  therein,  to  the  relieving  of  their
souls'  thirst  and  hunger,  they  knew  to  pertain  unto  faith,
according  to  his  instructions  in  the  sixth  of  John.  What  have
this  godly  woman  then  offended,  which  neither  have  denied
his  incarnation  nor  death  in  this  her  confession  of  faith,  but
most  firmly  and  groundedly  trusted  to  receive  the  fruits  of
them  both  ?

AXXE  ASKEWE.

Then  would  they  needs  know  whether  the  bread  in  the  box  were
God,  or  no.  I  said,  "  God  is  a  spirit,  and  will  be  worshipped  in  spirit
and  in  tnith."  Jo.  iv.  Then  they  demanded,  "Will  you  plainly  deny
Christ  to  be  in  the  sacrament?  I  answered,  that  I  believed  faith-
fully the  eternal  Son  of  God  not  to  dwell  there.  In  witness  whereof
I  recited  again  the  history  of  Bel,  and  the  xivth  chapter  of  Daniel  2,
the  viith  and  xviith  of  the  Acts,  and  the  xxivth  of  Matthew,  conclud-

[1  'Neither  yet,'  Mr  Ofifor's  copy.]

[2  The  thirteenth  and  fourteenth  chapters  of  Daniel  contain  the
apocryphal  part,  viz.  the  History  of  Susannah  and  that  of  Bel  and  the
Dragon.]

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

215

ing  thus,  I  neither  wish  death,  nor  yet  fear  his  might.    God  have  the
praise  thereof  with  thanks  !

John  Bale.

Among  the  old  idolaters,  some  took  the  sun,  some  the  ow  idolaters,
moon,  some  the  fire,  some  the  water,  with  such  other  like,  for
their  gods  ;  as  witnesseth  Diodorus  Siculus,  Herodotus^  PHnius,
Lactantius,  and  divers  authors  more.    Now  come  our  doting
papists  here,  wading  yet  more  deeper  in  idolatry,  and  they  New  idoia-
must  have  bread  for  their  god,  yea,  a  wafer- cake,  which  is
scarce  worthy  to  be  called  bread.    In  what  sorrowful  case
are  christian  people  now-a-days,  that  they  may  worship  their
Lord  and  Redeemer,  Jesus  Christ,  in  no  shape  that  his
heavenly  Father  hath  set  him  forth  in,  but  in  such  a  shape
only  as  the  wafer-baker  hath  imagined  by  his  slender  wit !  a  wafer.
God's  creatures  were  they  whom  the  idolaters  took  for  their
gods,  but  this  cake  is  only  the  baker's  creature;  for  he  alone
made  it  bread,  if  it  be  bread ;  and  so  much  is  it  a  more  un-
worthy god  than  the  other.    Far  was  it  from  Christ  to  teach
his  disciples  to  worship  such  a  god,  either  yet  to  have  him-
self honoured  in  such  a  similitude.    Nothing  is  here  spoken  The  supper,
against  the  most  holy  table  of  the  Lord,  but  against  that
most  abominable^  idol  of  the  priests,  which  hath  most  detest-
ably blemished  that  most  godly  and  wholesome  communion.

A  glorious  witness  of  the  Lord  did  this  blessed  woman  Answer,
shew  herself  in  the  answer-making  to  this  blasphemous  beg-
gary, when  she  said  that  God  was  a  spirit,  and  no  wafer- cake,
and  would  be  worshipped  in  spirit  and  verity,  and  not  in
superstition  and  juggling  of  the  idol  priests.    Godly  was  she  Anidoi.
to  deny  Christ's  presence  in  that  execrable  idol,  but  much
more  godly  to  give  her  life  for  it.    Her  alleged  scriptures
prove  that  God  dwelleth  not  in  temples,  but  a  foul  abomina-
tion in  his  stead,  as  is  shewed  afore.    In  that  she  feareth  not
the  power  of  death,  she  declareth  herself  a  most  constant  Death,
martyr,  praising  her  Lord  God  for  his  gift.    She  called  to
remembrance  the  promises  of  her  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that
they  should  see  no  death  which  observed  his  word,  Jo.  viii. ;
again,   "  they  that  believed  on  him   should  joyfully  pass
through  from  death  unto  hfe."   John  v.    And  upon  these
promises  she  most  strongly  trusted.     She  considered  also,  Promises,
with  Peter,  "  that  Christ  had  swallowed  up  death,  to  make  us

[3  *  that  abominable,'  Mr  OfFor's  copy.]

216

THE  LATTER  EXAMINATION

the  heh's  of  eyerlastincr  hfe,"  1  Pet.  iii.  ;  moreover,  "  that  he
had  overthrown  him  which  sometime  had  the  rule  of  death,"
Hebr.  ii.  and  also  taken  away  the  sharp  sting  of  the  death
itself."    Osee  xiii.

A^-XE  ASKEWE.

My  Letter  sent  to  the  Lord  Chancellor.
To  the  Chan-       The  Lord  God.  by  whom  all  creatui-es  have  their  being,  bless  you
with  the  hght  of  his  knowledge.  Amen.

My  duty  to  your  lordship  remembered,  &c.

It  might  please  you  to  accept  this  my  bold  suit,  as  the  suit  of  one
which  upon  due  consideration  is  moved  to  the  same,  and  hopeth  to
obtain.    My  request  to  your  lordship  is  only,  that  it  may  please  the

The  king.  same  to  be  a  mean  for  me  to  the  king's  majesty,  that  his  grace  may  be
certified  of  these  few  lines  which  I  have  written  concerning  my  belief ;
which  when  it  shall  be  truly  conferred  with  the  hard  judgment  given
me  for  the  same,  I  think  his  grace  shall  perceive^  me  to  be  weighed  in
an  uneven  pair  of  balances.    But  I  remit  my  matter  and  cause  to

To  God.  Almighty  God,  which  rightly  judgeth  all  secrets.  And  thus  I  commend
your  lordship  unto  the  governance  of  him,  and  fellowship  of  all
saints.  Amen.

By  yom-  handmaid,

axxe  askewe.

John  Bale.

Strong.  In  this  bill  to  the  chancellor  it  appeareth  plain,  all  fro-

ward  affections  sequestered,  what  this  woman  was.  She  is
not  here  dejected  with  the  desperate,  for  unrighteous  handling,
mourning,  cui^sing,  and  sorrowing,  as  they  do  commonly  :  but
standing  up  strongly  in  the  Lord,  most  gently  she  obeyeth
the  powers,  she  blesseth  her  vexers  and  pursuers,  and  wisheth

Obedience,  them  the  light  of  God's  necessary  knowledge.  Lu.  vi.  She
considereth  the  powers  to  be  ordained  of  God,  Rom.  xiii. ;
and  though  their  authority  be  sore  abused,  yet,  with  Christ
and  his  apostles,  she  humbly  submitteth  herself  to  them,
thinking  to  suffer  under  them,  as  no  ill- doer,  but  as  Christ's
true  servant,  1  Pet.  iv.     Notwithstanding  she  layeth  forth

Her  matter,  here,  both  before  chancellor  and  king,  the  matter  whereupon
she  is  condemned  to  death,  that  they,  according  to  their
bounden  duty,  might  more  rightly  weigh  it,  3  Kegum  x.  :
not  that  she  coveted  thereby  to  avoid  the  death,  but  to  put

Their  office,  them  iu  remembrance  of  their  office  concerning  the  sword,
which  thev  ouo-ht  not  vainlv  to  minister,  Rom.  xiii.  and  that

'  well  perceive,'  Mr  Offer's  copy.]

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

217

they  should  also  be  without  excuse  of  ignorance  in  the  day
of  reckoning  for  permitting  such  violence  to  be  done,  Rom.  ii.
In  the  end,  yet  to  make  all  sure,  she  committeth  her  cause
and  quarrel  to  God ;  wherein  she  declareth  her  only  hope  to  to  God.
be  in  him,  and  no  man.    Psalm  cxlv.

AXNE  ASKEWE.

My  Faith  briefly  written  to  the  King's  Grace.

1  Anne  Askewe,  of  good  memory,  although  God  hath  given  me

the  bread  of  adversity  and  the  water  of  trouble,  yet  not  so  much  as  Trouble,
my  sins  have  deserved,  desire  this  to  be  known  to  your  grace :  That,
forasmuch  as  I  am  by  the  law  condemned  for  an  an  evildoer,  here  I
take  heaven  and  earth  to  record  that  I  shall  die  in  my  innocence.
And,  according  to  that  I  have  said  first,  and  will  say  last,  I  utterly
abhor  and  detest  all  heresies.    And,  as  concerning  the  supper  of  the  Heresies.
Lord,  I  believe  so  much  as  Christ  hath  said  therein,  which  he  con-
firmed with  his  most  blessed  blood.    I  believe  also  so  much  as  he
willed  me  to  follow  and  believe,  and  so  much  as  the  catholic  church  of
him  doth  teach  ;  for  I  will  not  forsake  the  commandment  of  his  holy
lips.    But  look  what  God  hath  charged  me  with  his  mouth,  that  have  I  Faith,
shut  up  in  my  heart.     And  thus  briefly  I  end,  for  lack  of  learning.

A>^E  Askewe.

John  Bale.

In  this  she  dischargeth  herself  to  the  world,  against  all  Discharge,
wrongful  accusations  and  judgments  of  heresy  ;  what  though
it  be  not  accepted  to  that  blind  world,  unto  whom  the  Lord
said  by  his  prophet,     Your  thoughts  are  not  my  thoughts,
neither  are  your  ways  my  ways ;  but  so  far  as  the  heavens
are  higher  than  the  earth,  so  far  do  my  ways  exceed  yours,
and  my  thoughts  yours?"  Esa.  Iv.    Heresy  is  not  to  dissent  Heresy,
from  the  church  of  Rome  in  the  doctrine  of  faith,  as  Lanfran-
cus  in  his  book  de  Eucharistia  adversus  Berengarimn^,  and
Thomas  Walden  in  his  work  of  Sermons^  (Serm.  21.),  defineth
it ;  but  heresy  is  a  voluntary  dissenting  from  the  scriptures'^  of  what  it  is.
God,  and  also  a  blasphemous  depraving  of  them  for  the  wretched

2  [Verum,  O  infelix  anima !  de  hseresi  ad  perjurium  prius  transisti ;
nunc  iterum  de  perjurio  ad  hseresim  remeasti :  propterea  traditus  in
reprobum  sensum  sanctam  Romanam  ecclesiam  vocas  ecclesiam  malig-
nantium,  concilium  vanitatis,  sedem  Sathanse.  Et  hoc  impio  ore  gar-
risti,  quod  garrisse  nemo  legitur,  non  hsereticus,  non  schismaticus,  non
falsus  aliquis  Christianus. — Lanfranci  de  Corp.  et  Sang.  Domini,  c.  xvL
Ed.  Bened.  Fol.  Par.  1648,  p.  242.]

Walden.  Sacramentalia,  tot.  viii.  cap.  43.  fol.  137.  Ed.  Paris,  1535.]
[4  'verity  of  the  scriptures,'  Mi'  OfFor's  copy.]

218

THE  LATTER  EXAMINATION

belly's  sake,  and  to  maintain  the  pomps  of  this  world.  Thus
it  is  defined  of  St  Jerome,  in  Commentariis  Jere},  St  Augus-
tine^ and  Isidorus^  agreeing  to  the  same.  Consider,  then,  whe-

who  isthe  ther  he  be  the  thief  that  sitteth  upon  the  bench,  or  he  that
standeth  at  the  bar  ;  the  popish  clergy  that  condemneth,  or  the
innocent  that  is  condemned.  Athanasius,  in  his  book  de  Fuga
adversus  Arrianos,  calleth  them  the  heretics  which  seeketh  to
have  the  christian  believers  murdered  as  did  the  said  Arians.
This  godly  woman,  her  innocence  to  clear,  laboureth  not  here

The  king,  to  an  inferior  member  of  the  realm,  but  to  the  head  thereof,
the  king's  own  person,  whom  she  believeth  to  be  the  high
minister  of  God,  the  father  of  the  land,  and  upholder  of  the
people,  Sapi.  vi.,  that  he  might  faithfully  and  rightly  judge
her  cause.  But  who  can  think  that  ever  it  came  before  him  ?
Not  I,  for  my  part.

Axist:  Askewe.

The  effect  of  my  Examination  and  handling,  since  my  departure  from
Newgate.

On  Tuesday  I  was  sent  from  Newgate  to  the  sign  of  the  Crown,
Rich.         where  as  Master  Rich  and  the  bishop  of  London  with  all  their  power

and  flattering  words  went  about  to  persuade  me  from  God ;  but  I  did

not  esteem  their  glosing  pretences.  Then  came  there  to  me  Nicholas
shaxton.      Shaxton,  and  counselled  me  to  recant,  as  he  had  done.     Then  I  said

to  him,  that  it  had  been  good  for  him  never  to  have  been  bom;  with

many  other  like  words.

John  Bale.

Satan.  After  that  Christ  had  once  overcome  Satan  in  the  desert,

where  he  had  fasted  long  time  (Matth.  iv.),  we  read  not  in
the  scriptures  that  he  was  much  assaulted  or  vexed  of  the
world,  the  flesh,  and  the  fiend,  which  are  reckoned  the  com-

Threeghostiy  mou  euemics  of  man.  But  yet  we  find  in  the  gospel,  that
these  three  ghostly  enemies,  the  prelates,  the  priests,  and  the
lawyers,  or  the  bishops,  Pharisees,  and  scribes,  never  left

\}  Nulla  enim  haeresis  nisi  propter  gulam  ventrem que  construitur. —
Op.  S.  Hieron.  Ed.  Ben.  Par.  Tom.  iii.  col.  543.]

[2  Hsereticus  est,  ut  mea  fert  opinio,  qui  alicujus  temporalis  com-
modi  et  maxime  glorise  principatusque  sui  gratia,  falsas  ac  novas  opi-
niones  vel  gignit  aut  sequitur. — S.  Aug.  de  Utilitate  Credendi,  cap.  i.
Op.  Ed.  Ben.  Par.  1685.  Tom.  viii.  col.  45.]

p  Sed  et  quicunque  alitor  scripturam  sanctam  intelligit,  quam  sen-
sus  Spiritus  sancti  flagitat,  a  quo  conscripta  est,  licet  de  ecclesia  non
recesserit,  tamen  htereticus  appellari  potest. — Isidori,  Op.  Tom.  m.  p.
361.    Ed.  Romce,  1803.]

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

219

him  afterwards,  till  they  had  thoroughly  procured  his  death.
Mark  it,  I  desire  you,  if  it  be  any  otherwise  with  his  dear
member.     What  other  enemies  tempteth  here  Anne  Askewe,
than  the  bishop  of  London,  master  Rich,  and  Dr  Shaxton,
besides  the  great  Caiphas  of  Winchester,  with  his  spiteful  (I  Winchester,
should  say  spiritual)  rabble,  or  who  else  procureth  her  death?
Ye  will  think,  perad venture,  concerning  master  Rich,  that
though  he  be  an  enemy,  yet  he  is  no  spiritual  enemy,  because  spiritual,
he  is  not  anointed  with  the  pope's  grease.     But  then  are  ye
much  deceived ;  for  it  is  the  spirit  of  blasphemy,  avarice,  and
malice,  and  not  the  oil,  that  maketh  them  spiritual.  And
whereas  they  are  anointed  in  the  hand  with  oil,  he  is  in  the
heart  anointed  with  the  spirit  of  mammon,  betraying,  with  Mammon.
Judas,  at  the  bishop's  calling  on,  the  poor  innocent  souls  for
money,  or,  at  the  least,  for  an  ambitious  favour*.

0  Shaxton,  I  speak  now  unto  thee,  and  (I  think)  in  the  Shaxton.
voice  of  God.  What  devil  bewitched  thee  to  play  this  most
blasphemous  part,  as  to  become,  of  a  faithful  teacher,  a
tempting  spirit  ?  Was  it  not  enough  that  thou,  and  such  as
thou  art,  had  forsaken  your  Lord  God,  and  trodden  his  verity
most  unreverently  under  your  feet,  but  with  such  feats  as
this  is  thou  must  yet  procure  thee  a  more  deeper  or  double  Double,
damnation  ?  Rightly  said  this  true  servant  of  God,  that  "  it
had  been  better  for  thee  and  thy  fellows  that  ye  never  had
been  born."  Ye  were  called  of  God  to  a  most  blessed  office.
If  ye  had  been  worthy  that  vocation,  as  ye  are  but  swine,  unworthy.
Matth.  vii.,  ye  had  persevered  faithful  and  constant  to  the
end,  Matth.  x.,  "  and  so  have  worthily  received  the  crown
thereof,"  Apoc.  ii.  But  the  love  of  your  beastly  flesh  hath
very  far  in  you  overweighed  the  love  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ.  Ye  now  shew  what  ye  are  indeed,  "  even  wavering
reeds,  with  every  blast  moved "  (Lu.  vii.),  yea,  very  faint-
hearted cowards  and  hypocrites,  Apoc.  iii.  Ye  abide  not  in  Hypocrites,
the  sheepfold,  as  true  shepherds,  but  ye  flee,  like  hirelings,
Jo.  X.  Had  ye  been  builded  upon  the  hard  rock,  as  ye
were  on  the  fickle  sand  (Matth.  vii.),  neither  Romish  floods,
nor  English  winds,  had  overthrown  you.  But  now  look  only,
after  your  deserving,  for  this  terrible  judgment  of  God  ;  "for  Judgment,
them"  (saith  St  Paul)  "  which  voluntarily  blaspheme  the  truth,
after  they  have  received  the  gospel  in  faith,  and  in  the  Holy
Ghost,  remaineth  no  expiation  of  sin,  but  the  fearful  judg-

[4  'for  ambitious  favour,'  Mr  Offor's  copy.]

220

THE  LATTER  EXAMINATION

ment  of  hell-fire for  a  mock  have  thej  made  of  the  Son  of
God.     Hebr.  vi.  and  x.

A_X.VE  ASKEWE.

Then  master  Rich  sent  me  to  the  Tower,  where  I  remained  till
three  of  the  clock.  Then  came  Rich  and  one  of  the  council,  charging
me,  upon  my  obedience,  to  shew  unto  them  if  I  knew  man  or  woman
of  my  sect.  My  answer  was  that  I  knew  none.  Then  they  asked  me
of  my  lady  of  SuflPolk,  my  lady  of  Sussex,  my  lady  of  Hertford,  my
lady  Denny,  and  my  lady  Fitzwilliams.  I  said,  that  if  I  should  pro-
nounce any  thing  against  them,  I  were  i  not  able  to  prove  it.

John  Bale.

Babylon.  Xcver  was  such^  turmoiling  on  earth  as  now-a  days^,  for

that  wretched  blind  kingdom  of  the  Romish  pope.  But  trust
upon  it  truly,  ye  terrible  termagants  of  hell,  "  there  is  no
practice,  there  is  no  wisdom,  there  is  no  counsel,  that  can
against  the  Lord  prevail."   Proverb,  xxi.    Ye  look  to  be

Obedience,  obeyed  in  all  devilishness ;  but  ye  consider  not,  that  where
God  is  dishonoured  by  your  obedience,  there  belongeth  none

A  sect.  to  you.  Actor,  v.  Ye  have  much  ado  here  with  sects,  as
though  it  were  a  great  heresy  rightly  to  believe  in  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ,  after  the  gospel,  and  not  after  your  Romish
father.  But  where  was  ever  yet  a  more  pestilent  and  devilish
sect  than  is  that  Sodomitish  sect  whom  ye  here  so  earnestly
maintain  with  tyranny  and  mischief?  How  greedily  seek
you  the  slaughter  of  God's  true  servants,  ye  blood-thirsty
wolves,  as  the  Holy  Ghost  doth  call  you,  Ps.  xxv. !  If  the
virtuous  ladies  and  most  noble  women,  whose  lives  ye  seek  in
your  mad  raging  fury,  as  ravishing  hons  in  the  dark,  (Ps.
ix.),  have  thrown  off  their  shoulders,  for  "  Christ's  easy  and
gentle  burden"  (Matth.  xi ),  the  pope's  uneasy  and  import-
able yoke  (Luke  xi.),  happy  are  they  that  ever  they  were
born  ;  for  thereby  have  they  procured  a  great  quiet  ^  and

Health.  health  to  their  souls.  For  Christ's  word  is  quick,  and  bring-
eth  nothing  else  to  the  soul  but  life."  Hebr.  iv.  The  pope's
old  traditions  and  customs,  being  nothing  but  the  wisdom  of
the  flesh,  are  very  poison  and  death.   Rom.  viii.

A^s-NE  ASKEWE.

The  king.  Then  said  they  unto  me,  that  the  kmg  was  informed  that  I  could

[1  *that  I  were,'  Mr  Offor's  copy.]
[2  '  there  such,'  Mr  Offor's  copy.]
[3  '  as  is  now- a- days,'  Mr  Offor's  copy.]
*  quietness,'  Mr  Offor's  copy.]

Rich,

Christian
ladies.

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

221

name,  if  I  would,  a  great  number  of  my  sect.  Then  I  answered,  that
the  king  was  as  well  deceived  in  that  behalf,  as  dissembled  with  in
other  matters.

John  Bale.

Great  Ahasuerus,  king  of  the  Persians  and  Medes,  was  Mardocheus.
informed  that  the  servant  of  God,  Mordecai,  was  a  traitor,
which,  nevertheless,  had  discovered  two  traitors  a  little  afore,
and  so  saved  the  king's  life.    Hester  iii.     But  Haman,  that  Haman.
false  counsellor  which  so  informed  the  king,  was  in  the  end
proved  a  traitor  indeed  (as  I  doubt  it  not  but  some^  will  be
found  after  this),  and  was  worthily  hanged  for  it ;  "so  falling
into  the  snare  that  his  self  had  prepared  for  other."   Ps.  vii.
Albertus  Pighius,  Cochl[eus,  Eckius,  and  such  other  pestilent
papists,  have  filled  all  Christendom  with  railing  books  of  our  Papists,
king,  for  renouncing  the  Romish  pope's  obedience  ;  but  thereof
ye  inform  not  his  grace :  no,  nor  yet  defend  ye,  nor  yet  crafty,
excuse,^  his  godly  act  in  that  behalf;  but  ye  are,  as  it  ap-
peareth^,  very  well  contented  that  he  be  ill  spoken  of  for  it.

It  is  not  a  year  ago  since  our  Winchester  was  at  Utrecht
in  Holland,  where  as  the  said  Pighius  dwelt,  and  was  for  his  Pighius.
papistry  in  great  authority  :   I  know  certainly  the  man
there  was  much  more  easy  to  please  in  that  cause,  than  in  an-
other sleeveless  matter  of  his  own,  concerning  Martin  Bucer.  Bucer.
His  gallants  also  warranted  there  (I  know  to  whom)  that  the
Romish  pope,  by  the  emperor's  good  help,  should  within  few
years  have  in  England  as  great  authority  as  ever  he  had
afore.  I  doubt  not  but  somewhat  they  knew  of  their  master''s
good  conveyance  ;  but  of  this  is  not  the  king  informed.  I  could
write  here  of  many  other  mysteries  concerning  the  Observant  observants.
Friars,  and  other  ranging  Rome-runners,  what  news  they
receive  weekly  out  of  England  from  the  papists  there,  and  in
what  hope  they  are  put  of  their  return  thither  again ;  for  I
have  seen  their  bragging  letters  thereof,  sent  from  Emerick  Letters,
to  Friesland,  and  from  the  country  of  Cologne  into  West-
phalia.   Of  this,  and  such  other  conveyances,  the  king  is  not
yet  informed,  but  (I  trust)  he  shall  be.

Anne  Askewe.

Then  commanded  they  me  to  shew  how  I  was  maintained  in  the
[5  *  some  of  these,'  Mr  OfFor's  copy.  ]

[6  '  neither  excuse  ye,  nor  yet  defend  ye,'  Mr  OfFor's  copy.]
[■^  *as  appeareth,'  Mr  OfFor's  copy.]

222

THE  LATTER  EXAMINATION

Joseph.

Paul.

Onesimus.

Counter,  and  who  willed  me  to  stick  by  my  opinion.  I  said,  that
there  was  no  creature  that  therein  did  strengthen  me.  And  as  for  the
help  that  I  had  in  the  Counter,  it  was  by  the  means  of  my  maid;  for,
as  she  went  abroad  in  the  streets,  she  made  to  the  prentices,  and  they
by  her  did  send  me  money.    But  who  they  were,  I  never  knew.

John  Bale.

Joseph  was  in  prison  under  Pharaoh,  the  fierce  king  of
Egypt ;  yet  was  he  favourably  handled,  and  no  man  forbidden
to  comfort  him.  Gen.  xxxix.  When  John  Baptist  was  in  strong
durance  under  Herod,  the  tyrant  of  Galilee,  his  disciples  did
freely  visit  him,  and  were  not  rebuked  for  it.  Matt.  xi.
Paul  being  imprisoned,  and  in  chains,  at  Rome,  under  the
most  furious  tyrant  Nero,  was  never  blamed  for  sending  his
servant  Onesimus  abroad,  nor  yet  for  writing  by  him  to  his
friends  for  succour,  Philem.  1.  Neither  yet  was  Philemon
troubled  for  reheving  him  there  by  the  said  Onesimus ;  nor
yet  his  old  friend,  Onesiphorus,  for  personally  there  visiting
him,  and  supporting  him  with  his  money,  like  as  he  had  done
afore  also  at  Ephesus.  Now  confer  these  stories,  and  such
other  hke,  with  the  present  handhng  of  Anne  Askewe ;  and  ye
shall  well  perceive  our  English  rulers  and  judges,  in  their  new
Christianity  of  renouncing  the  pope,  to  exceed  all  other  ty-
rants in  all  cruelty,  spite,  and  vengeance.  But  look  to  have
it  no  otherwise,  so  long  as  mitred  prelates  are  of  counsel.
Be  ashamed,  cruel  beasts,  be  ashamed ;  for  all  Christendom
wondereth  on  vour  madness  above  all.

Gentle-
women.

Ay:sE  Askewe.

Then  they  said  that  there  were  divers  gentlewomen  that  gave  me
money.  But  I  knew  not  their  names.  Then  they  said  that  there
were  divers  ladies  that  had  sent  me  money.     I  answered,  that  there

Ladies.

Noble
women.

that  my  lady  of  Hertford  sent  it  me:  and  another  in  a  violet  coat
did  give  me  eight  shillings,  and  said  that  my  lady  Denny  sent  it  me.
Whether  it  were  true,  or  no,  I  cannot  tell ;  for  I  am  not  sure  who  sent
it  me,  but  as  the  men  did  say.

John  Bale.

In  the  time  of  Christ's  preaching,  what  though  the  holy
clergy  were  not  pleased  therewith,  but  judged  it  (as  they  do
still  to  this  day)  most  horrible  heresy  ?  yet  certain  noble
women,  as  Mary  Magdalene,  Johanna  the  wife  of  Chusa,
Herod's  high  steward,  Susanna,  and  many  other,  followed

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

223

him  from  Galilee,  and  ministered  unto  him  of  their  substance
concerning  his  bodily  needs.  Luke  viii.  These,  with  many
other  more,  after  he  was  by  the  said  clergy  done  to  most  cruel
death  for  the  verity  preaching,  both  prepared  ointments  and
spices  to  anoint  his  body  (Lu.  xxiv.),  and  also  proclaimed  abroad
his  glorious  resurrection  to  his  apostles  and  other,  (Jo.  xx.)
contrary  to  the  bishops'  inhibition  (Actor,  iv.) :  yet  read  we  not
that  any  man  or  woman  was  racked  for  the  accusement  of
them.  A  woman  among  the  Macedonians,  dwelling  in  the
city  of  Thyatira,  and  called  Lydia  by  name,  a  purple-seller,  Lydia.
very  rich  in  merchandise,  received  Paul,  Silas,  and  Timothy,
with  other  suspected  brethren,  into  her  house,  and  abundantly
relieved  them  there  (Actor,  xvi.) ;  yet  was  she  not  troubled
for  it.  In  like  manner  at  Thessalonica  a  great  number  of
the  Greeks,  and  many  noble  women  among  them,  behoved  Nobie

women*

Paul's  forbidden  doctrine,  and  resorted  boldly  both  to  him
and  to  Silas  (Actor,  xvii) ;  yet  were  they  not  cruelly  handled
for  it.

Be  ashamed  then,  ye  tyrants  of  England,  that  your  hor-  Tyrants,
rible  tyrannies  should  exceed  all  other,  Jews  or  Gentiles,
Turks  or  idolaters.  More  noble  were  these  women  here  re-
hearsed for  thus  relieving  Christ  and  his  members,  than  for
any  other  act,  either  yet  degree  of  nobility  ;  for  whereas  all
other  have  perished,  these  shall  never  perish,  but  be  con-
served in  the  most  noble  and  worthy  scriptures  of  God,  the
tyrannous  bishops  and  priests^  there  condemned.  A  thorough  Prelates,
christian  charity  is  not  hghtly  terrified  with  the  tempests  of
worldly  afflictions,  no  more  than  true  faith  is  changed  in  men  Faith,
that  be  christianly  constant.  Such  cannot  refuse  ^but  con-
sider that  it  is  both  glorious  to  be  afflicted  for  Christ  (1  Peter
iii.),  and  also  most  meritorious  to  relieve  them  here  in  their
afflictions  (Matth.  xxv.)  Unto  that  christian  office  hath  Christ
promised  the  life  everlasting  at  the  latter  day,  whereas  mass-  Massnear-
hearing  is  like  to  remain  without  reward,  except  it  be  in  hell,
for  idolatry  and  blasphemy.  Xot  unto  them  that  in  prison
visiteth  murderers  and  thieves  (if  ye  mark  well  the  text)  is
this  reward  promised,  (for  they  are  not  there  allowed  for
Christ's  dear  members,)  but  unto  them  that  relieve  the  afflicted
for  his  verity's  sake,

[1  '  with  theu'  tyrannous  maintainers,*  Mr  Oflfor's  copy.]
[2  '  chose  but  consider,'  Mr  Offer's  copy.]

224

THE  LAT'lER  EXAMINATION

The  rack.

Anne  Askzwe.

Then  they  said,  there  were  of  the  council  that  did  maintain  me.
And  I  said,  no.  Then  they  did  put  me  on  the  rack,  because  I  con-
fessed no  ladies  or  gentlewomen  to  be  of  my  opinion :  and  thereon  they
kept  me  a  long  time  :  and  because  I  lay  still,  and  did  not  cry,  my  lord
chancellor  and  master  Rich  took  pains  to  rack  me  in  their  own  hands,
till  I  was  nigh  dead.

John  Bale.

Jsicodemus.

Xicodemus,  one  of  the  high  council,  was  sore  rebuked,
among  the  seniors  of  the  Jews,  for  defending  Christ's  inno-
cence when  thev  went  about  to  slay  him  (Jo.  vii.) :  and  there-
fore it  is  no  new  thing  that  Christ's  doctrine  hath  supportation
among  the  councils  of  this  world.  All  men  be  not  of  one  cor-
rupted appetite,  nor  vet  of  one  ungracious  diet.  Christ  pro-
mised his  disciples,  that  thej  in  one  household  should  find
Friends.  both  his  eucmies  and  friends.  "  I  am  come,"  saith  he,  "  to
set  man  at  variance  against  his  father,  and  dauc^hter  acrainst
her  mother,  and  the  daughter-in-law  against  the  mother-in-
law.  He  that  loveth  his  father  or  mother,  his  son  or  daugh-
ter, his  prince  or  governor.,  above  me,  he  is  not  meet  for  me.'*
High  treason.  Matth.  X.  I  fear  me  this  will  be  judged  high  treason.  But
no  matter  :  so  long  as  it  is  Christ's  word,  he  shall  be  also
under  the  same  judgment  of  treason.  Let  no  man  care  to  be
condemned  with  him  ;  for  in  the  end  he'  shall  be  able  to  rectify
all  wrongs.

Mark  here  an  example  most  wonderful,  and  see  how  madly
Frenxy.       in  their  raging  furies  men  forget  themselves  and  lose  their

CO  c

right  wits  now-a-days.  A  king's  high  counsellor,  a  judge
over  life  and  death,  yea,  a  lord  chancellor  of  a  most  noble
realm,  is  now  become  a  most  vile  slave  for  antichrist,  and  a
A  tormentor,  most  cruel  tormoutor.  Without  all  discretion,  honesty,  or
manhood,  he  casteth  off  his  gown,  and  taketh  here  upon  him
the  most  vile  office  of  an  hangman,  and  pulleth  at  the  rack
wrisieyand  most  villainousl V.  0  WHslev^  and  Rich,  two  false  Christians
and  blasphemous  apostates  from  God !  What  chaplain  of  the
pope  hath  enchanted  you,  or  what  devil  of  hell  bewitched
you,  to  execute  upon  a  poor  condemned  woman  so  prodigious
a  kind  of  tyranny  ?  Even  the  very  mammon  of  iniquity,  and
that  insatiable  hunger  of  avarice  which  compelled  Judas  to

P  'for  he  in  the  end,'  Mr  Offer's  copy.]
[2  This  name  is  now  ^v^itten  Wriothesley.]

Mammon.

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

225

betray  unto  death  his  most  loving  Master.  Jo.  xii.  The
winnings  were  not  small  that  ye  reckoned  upon,  when  ye  took
on  ye  that  cruel  enterprise,  and  would  have  had  so  many
great  men  and  women  accused.  But  what  else  have  ye  won  wretches,
in  the  end  than  perpetual  shame  and  confusion?  God  hath
suffered  you  so  to  discover  your  own  mischiefs,  that  ye  shall
no  more  be  forgotten  of  the  world  than  are  Adonisedech,  Saul,  Tyrants.
Jeroboam,  Manasses,  Holofernes,  Haman,  Tryphon,  Herod,
Nero,  Trajanus,  and  such  other  horrible  tyrants.

And  as  concerning  the  innocent  woman,  whom  you  so
cruelly  tormented,  where  could  be  seen  a  more  clear  and  open
experiment  of  Christ's  dear  member,  than  in  her  mighty
sufferings  ?  Like  a  lamb  she  lay  still  without  noise  of  crying,  a  iamb,
and  suffered  your  utmost  violence,  till  the  sinews  of  her  arms
were  broken,  and  the  strings  of  her  eyes  perished  in  her
head.   Right  far  doth  it  pass  the  strength  of  a  young,  tender,  Tyrants,
weak,  and  sick  woman  (as  she  was  at  that  time,  to  your  more
confusion)  to  abide  so  violent  handling,  yea,  or  yet  of  the
strongest  man  that  liveth.     Think  not,  therefore,  but  that
Christ  hath  suffered  in  her,  and  so  mightily  shewed  his  power,  Christ,
that  in  her  weakness  he  hath  laughed  your  mad  enterprises
to  scorn.  Ps.  ii.    Where  was  the  fear  of  God,  ye  tyrants  ?
Where  was  your  Christian  profession,  ye  hell-hounds?  Where
was  your  oath  and  promise  to  do  true  justice,  ye  abominable
perjurers,  when  ye  went  about  these  cursed  feats?  More  fit  Perjurers,
are  ye  for  swine-keeping  than  to  be  of  a  prince's  council,
or  yet  to  govern  a  christian  commonwealth.     If  Christ  have
said  unto  them  which  do  but  offend  his  little  ones  that  believe
in  him,  that  it  were  better  they  had  a  millstone  tied  about  a  miiistone.
their  necks,  and  were  so  thrown  into  the  bottom  of  the  sea
(Lu.  xvii.),  what  will  he  say  to  them  who^  so  villainously  pull
at  the  rack  in  their  mischievous  mahce  ?  These  are  but  warn-
ings ;  take  heed  if  ye  Ust,  for  a  full  sorrowful  plague  will
follow  hereafter.

Anne  Askewe.

Then  the  lieutenant  caused  me  to  be  loosed  from  the  rack.    Incon-  Unloosed,
tinently  I  swooned,  and  then  they  recovered  me  again.    After  that  I
sat  two  long  hours  reasoning  with  my  lord  chancellor,  upon  the  bare
floor,  where  as  he  with  many  flattering  words  persuaded  me  to  leave

[3  'that,'  Mr  Offer's  copy.]

[bale.]

15

226

THE  LATTER  EXAMINATION

Persevere.  my  Opinion.  But  my  Lord  God  (I  thank  his  everlasting  goodness)  gave
me  grace  to  persevere,  and  will  do  (I  hope)  to  the  very  end.

John  Bale.

Practice.  Evermore  have  the  old  moody  tyrants  used  this  practice

of  devihshness.  As  they  have  perceived  themselves  not  to
prevail  by  extreme  handlings,  they  have  sought  to  prove
masteries  by  the  contrary.  With  gay  glosing  words,  and  fair
flattering  promises,  they  have  craftily  compassed  the  servants
of  God,  to  cause  them  consent  to  their  wickedness.     And  in

Temptation,  this  tempting  occupation  are  Wrisley  and  Rich  very  cun-
ning. Notwithstanding,  they  shall  never  find  the  chosen  of
God  all  one  with  the  forsaken  reprobates.  The  elect  vessels
hold  the  eternal  God  for  their  most  special  treasure,  and
have  him  in  such  entire  love,  that  they  had  much  liefer
to  lose  themselves  than  him.  The  wicked  desperates  have
the  voluptuous  pleasures  of  this  vain  world  so  dear,  that

Two  sorts,  they  had  liefer  to  forsake  God,  and  all  his  works,  than  to
be  sequestered  from  them.    This  godly  young  woman  refer-

Praise.  roth  praiso  unto  her  Lord  God,  that  he  hath  not  left  her  in
this  painful  conflict  for  his  verity's  sake,  but  persevered  strong
with  her,  being  in  hope  that  he  would  so  still  continue  with
her  to  the  very  end,  as  without  fail  he  did.

Wrisley.  Many  men  wonder^,  now-a-days,  that  Wrisley,  which

was  in  my  lord  Cromwell's  time  so  earnest  a  doer  against
the  pope,  is  now  become  again  for  his  pedlary  wares  so
mighty  a  captain.  But  they  remember  not  the  common  adage,
that  honour  changeth  manners,  and  lucre  judgments.  These

Innkeepers,  great  iunkecpors  (they  say)  had  liefer  to  have  one  good
horseman  to  host,  than  six  men  on  foot;  specially  if  they
wear  velvet  hoods  or  fine  rochettes.  What  else  followeth
Christ  but  beggary  and  sorrows,  which  are  very  hateful  to

Profit.  the  world?  Where  fatness  is  caught  of  every  man's  labour,
there  is  yet  somewhat  to  be  looked  for.  If  his  christian
zeal  be  such,  that  he  will  have  no  she  heretics  go^  unpun-
ished, let  him  do,  first  of  all,  as  we  read  of  divers  rightful
governors  among  the  heathen :    let  him  search  his  own

My  lady.  houso  wcll.  Peradvouturo  he  may  find  about  my  lady  his
wife  a  relic  of  no  little  virtue,  a  practice  of  Pythagoras,

[1  *  sore  wonder,*  Mr  Offer's  copy.]
[2  '  go,'  not  in  Mr  Offor's  copy.]

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

227

or  an  old  midwife's  blessing,  whicli  she  carrieth  closely  on
her  for  preservation  of  her  honour.  Her  opinion  is  (folks  Honour,
say),  that  as  long  as  she  hath  that  upon  her,  her  worldly  wor-
ship can  never  decay.  I  pray  God  this  provision  in  short
space  deceiveth  her  not,  as  it  hath  done  Pope  Silvester  the
Second,  and  as  it  did  of  late  years  Thomas  Wolsey,  our  cardinal,
late  cardinal.  This  heresy  goeth  neither  to  the  rack  nor  to
the  fire,  to  Newgate  nor  yet  Smithfield,  as  continually  doth
the  poor  gospel.

Anne  Askewe.

Then  was  I  brouglit  to  an  liouse,  and  laid  in  a  bed,  with  as  weary
and  painful  bones  as  ever  had  patient  Job,  I  thank  my  Lord  God
thereof.  Then  my  lord  chancellor  sent  me  word,  if  I  would  leave  my  a  tyrant,
opinion,  I  should  want  nothing:  if  I  would  not,  I  should  forth  to
NeviTgate,  and  so  be  burnt.  I  sent  him  again  word,  that  I  would  rather
die  than  break  3  mv  faith.  Thus  the  Lord  open  the  eves  of  their  blind  Sweet

woni^ti*

hearts,  that  the  truth  may  take  place !  Farewell,  my  dear  friend,  and
pray,  pray,  pray.

John  Bale.

Behold  in  this  last  parcel  most  evident  signs  of  a  chris-
tian martyr,  and  faithful  witness  of  God,  besides  that  went  a  martyr,
afore.  She  allegeth  not,  in  all  this  long  process,  lying  legends,
popish  fables,  nor  yet  old  wives"*  parables,  but  the  most
hvely  authorities  the  examples  of  the  sacred  Bible.    She  put-
teth  herself  here  in  remembrance,  not  of  desperate  Cain,  God's  crea-
nor  yet  of  sorrowful  Judas,  but  of  most  patient  Job,  for
example  of  godly  sufferance.    For  anguish  and  pain  of  her
broken  joints,  and  bruised  arms  and  eyes,  she  curseth  not
the  time  that  ever  she  was  born,  as  the  manner  of  the  un-
faithful is ;  but  she  highly  magnifieth  and  praiseth  God  for
it.    Neither  was  she  perverted  with  flattering  promises,  nor  chr^t's  ser-
yet  overcome  with  terrible  threatenings  of  death.  Neither
doubted  she  the  stink  of  Newgate,  nor  yet  the  burning  fire
in  Smithfield ;  but  coveted  rather  death  of  her  body  for  the
sincere  doctrine  of  Christ,  than  Hfe  of  the  same  under  the
idolatrous  doctrine  of  the  Romish  pope.     She  desired  God
to  take  mercy  of  her  enemies,  and  exhorted  all  christian
people  instantly  to  pray  for  them.    If  these  be  not  the  fruits  a  very  saint,
of  a  true  believer,  what  other  fruits'*  can  we  ask?

[3  *  than  to  break,'  Mr  Offer's  copy.]
[4  'else,'  Mr  Offer's  copy.]

15 — 2

228

THE.  L.\TTER  EXAMINATION

Death.

Chronicles.

Death.

No  fear.

Harvest

Racked.

No  noise.

Anne  Askewe's  Answer  unto  John  Lassel's  Letter.
O  friend,  most  dearly  beloved  in  God,  I  marvel  not  a  little  what
should  move  you  to  judge  in  me  so  slender  a  faith,  as  to  fear  death,
which  is  the  end  of  all  misery.  In  the  Lord  I  desire  of  you  not  to  be-
lieve of  me  such  wickedness  ;  for  I  doubt  it  not  but  God  will  perform
his  work  in  me,  like  as  he  hath  begun.

John  Bale.

which  are  common  readers
where  they  ever  read  of  a

I  would  but  know  of  them
of  chronicles  and  saints'  lives,  wnere  tney  ever
more  fervent  and  lively  faith  than  was  in  this  godly  young
"woman?  As  light  a  matter  esteemed  she  death  as  did  Elea-
zarus,  that  ancient  senior,  or  yet  the  seven  Maccabees  with
their  most  worthy  mother  (2  Maccab.  vi.  and  vii.);  for  she
said  it  was  ^  but  the  end  of  all  sorrows.  She  reckoned  not,
with  the  covetous  man,  the  remembrance  thereof  bitter,  (Ecclus.
xiv.),  but,  with  the  righteous,  she  thought  it  a  most  ready
and  swift  passage  unto  life.  (Jo.  v.)  The  fear  of  death
judged  she  great  wickedness  in  a  christian  behever,  and  was
in  full  hope  that  God  would  not  suffer  her  to  be  troubled
therewith.  For  why  ?  death  loseth  us  no  Hfe,  but  bringeth
it  in  unto  us,  like  as  the  hard  winter  bringeth  in  the  most
pleasant  summer.  Who  can  think  that^  when  the  sun  goeth
down  it  utterly  so  perisheth  ?  Death  unto  the  righteous
believer  is  as  a  profitable  harvest,  which,  after  sweat  and
labour,  bringeth  in  most  delectable  fruits.  None  otherwise
thought  it  Anne  Askewe  than  a  very  entrance  of  Hfe,  when
she  had  it  thus  in  desire,  and  faithfully  trusted,  with  Paul,
that  God  would  finish  in  her  that  he  then  began,  to  his  own
glory.  Philip,  i.

AyyT.  Askewe.

I  understand  the  council  is  not  a  httle  displeased  that  it  should  be
reported  abroad,  that  I  was  racked  in  the  Tower,  They  say  now,  that
they  did  there  was  but  to  fear  me:  whereby  I  perceive  they  are
ashamed  of  their  own  uncomely  doings,  and  fear  much  lest  the  king's
majesty  should  have  information  thereof:  wherefore  they  would  no
man  to  noise  it.  "Well,  their  cruelty  God  forgive  them.  Your  heart
in  Christ  Jesu.    Farewell,  and  pray.

John  Bale.

Hypocrites  and  tyrants  would  never  be  gladly  known

[1  *  that  it  was,'  Mr  Offer's  copy.]
[2  'that,'  not  in  Mr  Off'or's  copy.]

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASK  EWE.

229

abroad  for  that  thev  are  indeed ;  but  for  that  they  are
not,  they  look  always  to  be  gloriously  noised.  Wrisley  and  wnsiey  and
Eich  would  yet  be  judged  of  the  world  two  sober  wise  men
and  very  sage  counsellors.  But  this  tyrannous  example  of
theirs  maketh  a  most  manifest  shew  of  the  contrary  :  yea,
and  the  God  of  heaven  will  have  it  so  known  to  the  universal
world,  to  their  ignominy  and  shame.  So  is  he  wont  to
reward  all  cruel  apostates,  as  he  rewarded  Julianus,  for  their  JuUanus.
wilful  contempt  of  his  verity.  The  martyr  of  Christ  for
her  patient  sufferance  shall  leave  here  behind  her  a  glorious
report ;  whereas  these  forsworn  enemies  and  pursuers  of  his
word  have  purchased  themselves  a  perpetual  infamy  by  their
cruelty  and  mischief.  In  excuse  of  their  madness,  they  say  An  excuse,
they  did  it  only  to  fear  her.  Is  it  not  now  (think  you)
a  proper  fraying  play,  when  our  arms  and  eyes  are  com-
pelled to  leave  their  natural  holds '?  Ye  meant  no  light
dalliance,  when  ye  would  have  had  so  many  great  women
accused,  and  took  the  hangman's  office  upon  your  own  pre-
cious persons.  0  tormentors  and  tyrants  abominable !  ye  fear  Tyrznu.
lest  your  temporal  and  mortal  king  should  know  your  mad
frenzies ;  but  of  the  eternal  King,  which  will  rightly  punish
you  for  it  with  the  devil  and  his  angels  (unless  ye  sore
repent  it),  ye  have  no  fear  at  all.  It  is  so  honest  a  part  ye
have  played,  that  ye  will  not  have  it  noised.  But  I  promise  no  noise,
you  so  to  divulge  this  unseemly  fact  of  yours  in  the  Latin,
that  all  Christendom  over  it  shall  be  known  what  ye  are.

A>->-E  ASKEWE.

I  have  read  the  process  which  is  reported,  of  them  that  know  not
the  truth,  to  be  my  recantation.  But  as  sure  as  the  Lord  liveth,  I
never  meant  thing  less  than  to  recant.  Notwithstanding  this,  I
confess  that  in  my  first  troubles  I  was  examined  of  the  bishop  of
London  about  the  sacrament.  Yet  had  they  no  grant  of  my  mouth.  Of  Caiphas.
'but  this,  that  I  believed  therein,  as  the  word  of  God  did  bind  me  to
believe.    More  had  they  never  of  me.

John  Bale.

In  the  end  of  her  first  examination  is  this  matter  treated
of  more  at  large.  Here  do  she  repeat  it  again  only  to  be
known  for  Christ's  stedfast  member,  and  not  antichrist's,  chnst-s
To  the  voice  of  him  she  faithfully  obeyed,  but  the  voice  of
that  Romish  monster  and  other  strangers  she  regarded  not.
Joh.  X.    As  she  perceived,  when  she  was  before  the  bishop  Bonner.

230

THE  LATTER  EXAMINATION

of  London,  that  all  passed  still  after  their  old  tyranny,  and
nothing  after  the  rules  of  scripture,  she  suspected  their
doctrine  more  than  afore,  and  thought  them  none  other  than
Christ  warned  his  disciples  to  beware  of.   Luke  xii.  Where-

woives.  upon  she  thoroughly  covenanted  with  herself  never  to  deny
his  verity  afore  men  at  their  calling  on,  lest  he  should  again
deny  her  before  his  eternal  Father.    Matt.  x.    For  if  the

Salvation.  *  confessing  thereof  bringeth  salvation,  as  St  Paul  saith  it  doth
(Rom.  X.),  the  denying  thereof,  on  the  other  side,  must  needs
bring  in  damnation.

AXXE  ASKEWE.

Then  he  made  a  copy,  which  is  now  in  print,  and  required  me  to
set  thereunto  my  hand ;  but  I  refused  it.  Then  my  two  sureties  did
will  me  in  no  wise  to  stick  thereat,  for  it  was  no  great  matter,  they
Handwriting.  Said.  Then,  with  much  ado,  at  the  last  I  wrote  thus :  "  I,  Anne  Askewe,
do  believe  this,  if  God's  word  do  agree  to  the  same,  and  the  true
catholic  church."

John  Bale.

Commonly  is  it  spoken  of  popish  priests,  that  in  doing
God's  stead,  their  false  feats  they  sit  in  God's  stead.     This  point  followed
the  bluddering  bishop  of  London  here,  which  for  their  old
fantasied  superstition  laboured  in  this  woman  to  displace  the
Buiided.      sincere  verity  of  the  Lord.     But  so  surely  was  she  builded
upon  the  hard  rock,  that  neither  for  enmity  nor  friendship
would  she  once  remove  her  foot.  Matt.  vii.   Neither  anguish,
trouble,  torment,  nor  fire,  could  separate  her  from  that  love
A  lamb.      of  her  Lord  God.    Rom.  viii.    Though  she  were  for  his
sake  rebuked  and  vexed,  and  also  appointed  as  a  sheep  to  be
slain.  Psalm  xliii.  [xliv.],  yet  did  she  strongly  through  him
overcome,  and  have  (I  doubt  it  not)  obtained  the  crown  of
life.     Apoc.  ii.

Anne  Askewe.

Then  the  bishop,  being  in  great  displeasure  with  me,  because  I
Prison.        made  doubts  in  my  writing,  commanded  me  to  prison  ;  where  I  was

awhile :  but  afterwards,  by  the  means  of  friends,  I  came  out  again.

Here  is  the  truth  of  that  matter.  And  as  concerning  the  thing  that
Eucharist,     ye  covet  most  to  kuow,  rcsort  to  the  sixth  of  John,  and  be  ruled  always

thereby.   Thus  fare  ye  well,  quoth  Anne  Askewe.

John  Bale.

In  all  the  scriptures  we  read  not  that  either  Christ,  or
Prison.       yet  his  apostlcs,  commanded  any  man  or  woman  to  prison  for

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

231

their  faith,  as  this  tyrant  bishop  did  here.  But  indeed  we
find  that  Christ's  holy  apostles  were^  commanded  to  prison
of  the  same  spitefully  spiritual  generation,  Acts  iv.  v.  xii.  xvi.
Christ  willed  his  true  believers  to  look  for  none  other  at  their
spiritual  hands  than  imprisonments  and  death.  Matt.  x.
Joh.  xvi.  And  therefore  said  Peter  unto  him,  "  I  am  ready
to  go  with  thee,  Lord,  both  into  prison  and  to  death."  Luke
xxii.  Paul  greatly  complaineth  of  his  imprisonments  and
scourgings  by  them.  2  Cor.  xi.  Divers  in  the  congregation
of  Smyrna  were  imprisoned  by  that  fierce  synagogue  of  smyma.
Satan.  Apoc.  ii.  Esay,  prophesying  the  conditions  of  the
spiritual  antichrist,  saith  among  other,  that  he  should  hold  Antichrist,
men  captive  in  prison.  Esay  xiv.  Ezekiel  reporteth  that
he  should  churlishly  check,  and  in  cruelty  rule.  Ezek.  xxxiv.
Zachary  sheweth  that  he  should  eat  up  the  flesh  of  the  fat-
test. Zach.  xi.  Daniel  declareth  that  he  should  persecute
with  sword  and  fire ;  and  St  John  verifieth  that  he  should  be  with  fire,
all  drunk  with  the  blood  of  the  witnesses  of  Jesu.  Apoc.  xvii.
And  therefore  in  these  feats  bishops  do  but  their  kinds.

Thus  endeth  the  Latter  Examination.

The  Confession  of  her  Faith  which  Anne  Askewe  made  in
Newgate,  afore  she  suffered.

I,  Anne  Askewe,  of  good  memory,  although  my  merciful  Father
hath  given  me  the  bread  of  adversity  and  the  water  of  trouble,  yet  not  Trouble,
so  much  as  my  sins  have  deserved,  confess  myself  here  a  sinner  before
the  throne  of  his  heavenly  majesty,  desiring  his  eternal  mercy.  And
forsomuch  as  I  am  by  the  law  unrighteously  condemned  for  an  evil-  Condemned,
doer  concerning  opinions,  I  take  the  same  most  merciful  God  of  mine,
which  hath  made  both  heaven  and  earth,  to  record,  that  I  hold  no
opinions  contrary  to  his  holy  word.

JojiN  Bale.

What  man  of  sober  discretion  can  judge  this  woman  ill,
indifferently  but  marking  this  her  last  confession  ?  Not  a  prove  her.
few  of  most  evident  arguments  are  therein  to  prove  her  the
true  servant  of  God.  Her  wits  were  not  once  distracted,
for  all  her  most  tyrannous  handlings.  She  was  still  of  a
perfect  memory,  accounting  her  imprisonments,  revilings,
rackings,  and  other  torments,  but  the  bread  of  adversity  and

[1  '  were  oft-times,'  Mr  Offer's  copy.]

232

THE  LATTER  EXAMINATION

the  water  of  trouble,  as  David  did  afore  her.    Psalm  Ixxix.

Frmtsof  As  the  loving  child  of  God,  she  received  them  without
grudge,  and  thought  them  deserved  on  her  party.  She  took
them  as^  his  hand  of  mercy,  and  gave  most  high  thanks  for

Obedient  to  them.  She  meekly  confessed  herself  in  his  sight  a  sinner,
but  not  an  heinous  heretic,  as  she  was  falsely  judged  of  the
world.  In  that  matter  she  took  him  most  strongly  to  wit-
ness, that  though  in  faith  she  were  not  agreeable  to  the
world's  wild  opinion,  yet  was  she  not  therein  contrary  to  his
heavenly  truth.  She  had  afore  that  proved  their  spirits,
conferring  both  their  judgments  (1  Job.  iv.),  and  perceived
them  far  unlike.    Esay  Iv.

Anke  Askette.

No  heretic.  And  I  ti'ust  in  my  merciful  Lord,  which  is  the  giver  of  all  grace,
that  he  will  graciously  assist  me  against  all  evil  opinions,  which  are
contrary  to  his  blessed  verity.  For  I  take  him  to  witness,  that  I  have,
do,  and  will  do  unto  my  life's  end,  utterly  abhor  them  to  the  utmost
of  my  power.    But  this  is  the  heresy  which  they  report  me  to  hold,

Bread.  that  after  the  priest  hath  spoken  the  words  of  consecration  there
remaineth  bread  still.

John  Bale.

Consider  without  froward,  partial,  or  wilful  affection,  the
points  herein  contained,  and  then  judge  of  what  heart  or

Prove  yet.  conscionce  they  have  risen.  The  hope  of  this  woman  was
only  in  God.  Him  she  confessed  to  be  of  all  grace  the
giver.  Alone  in  his  mercy  she  trusted.  She  instantly  desired
him  to  defend  her  from  all  errors.  She  abhorred  all  here-
sies.   She  detested  men's  superstitious  inventions,  and  most

Fruusof  firmly  cleaved  to  his  eternal  word.  If  these,  with  those  tbat
went  afore,  be  not  true  figures  ^  of  Christianity,  or  of  a  perfect
member  of  God's  election,  what  fruits  will  we  demand  ?  St
Paul  saith,  "  No  man  can  confess  that  Jesus  is  the  Lord"  (as
she  hath  done  here)  "but  in  the  holy  Ghost."  1  Cor.  xii.  David
also  specifieth  that  the  Lord  never  forsaketh  them  that^  call
upon  his  name,  and  put  their  trust  in  him.    Ps.  ix.    And  as

Consecration,  touching  the  priest's  consecration,  which  is  such  a  charm  of
enchantment  which  may  not  be  done  but  by  an  oiled  ofiicer
of  the  pope''s  generation,  she  did  godly  to  reject  it  in  that

[1  *for,'  Mr  Offer's  copy.]

[2  *  be  not  fruits  of  true  Christianity,'  Mr  Offer's  copy.]
[3  'them  which,'  Mr  Offer's  copy.]

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

233

clouting  kind;  for  in  all  the  bible  is  not^,  that  any  man  can
make  of  a  dry  wafer-cake  a  new  saviour,  a  new  redeemer,  a  wafer,
new  Christ,  or  a  new  God ;  no,  though  he  should  utter  all
the  words  and  scriptures  therein.

Anne  Askewe.

But  they  both  say,  and  also  teach  it  for  a  necessary  article  of  faith,
that  after  those  words  be  once  spoken,  there  remaineth  no  bread ;  but
even  the  selfsame  body  that  hung  upon  the  cross  upon  Good-Friday,
both  flesh,  blood  and  bone.  To  this  belief  of  theirs  say  I  nay.  For  Bread,
then  were  our  common  creed  false,  which  saith  "  that  he  sitteth  on  the
right  hand  of  God  the  Father  Almighty,  and  from  thence  shall  come  Shall  come,
to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead."  Lo,  this  is  the  heresy  that  I  hold,
and  for  it  must  suffer  the  death.

John  Bale.

Of  antichrist  read  we  in  the  scriptures,  that  he  and  his  Antichrist,
apostles  should  do  false  miracles.  Matth.  xxiv.  2  Thes.  ii.  and
Apoc.  xiii.    We  find  also  in  the  selfsame  places,  that  he
should  exalt  himself  above  all  that  is  called  God,  or  that  is
worshipped  as  God.    Who  ever  heard  of  so  great  a  wonder,
that  a  dry  cake  should^  become  a  god  to  be  worshipped  ?  A
miracle  were  this  above  all  the  miracles  that  ever  were  wrought,  Miracie.
and  a  work  above  all  the  works  that  ever  were  done,  if  it
were  true,  as  it  is  most  false.  Though  our  eternal  God  created
heaven  and  earth  in  the  first  beginning,  and  formed  all  other
creatures  (Gen.  i.),  yet  read  we  not  of  him  that  he  made  of
his  creatures  any  new  god  to  be  worshipped.    In  that  point  No  God.
are  our  oiled  antichrists  afore  him.    And  whereas  he  rested
wholly  in  the  seventh  day  in^  that  office  of  creation  (Gen.  ii.),
and  never  took  it  upon  him  since  that  time,  as  testifieth  John
Chrysostom,   Augustine,  Jerome,  Bedas,  Alcuinus,  and  all  Doctors,
their  other  doctors ;  yet  will  they  take  upon  them  to  create
every  day  afresh,  and  when  their  old  god  stinketh  in  the  box.  Mould  in
remove  him  out  of  the  way,  and  put  a  new  in  his  room.
Yea,  they  can  make  of  bread  (which  is  man's  corruptible
creature,  and  ordained  only  to  be  eat)  such  a  god  as  shall
stand  checkmate*^  with  the  great  God  of  heaven,  and,  perad-

[4  'is  it  not,'  Mr  Offor's  copy.]

[5  '  might,'  Mr  Offor's  copy.]

[6  '  from  that  oflSce,*  Mr  Offor's  copy.  ]

[■^  *  check-mate,'  or  an  equality :  see  Halliwell's  Dictionary  of  ^
Archaic  and  Provincial  Words.]

234

THE  LATTER  EXAMINATION

venture,   deface  him  also.     0  blasphemous  wretches  and
God-makers,  thicves !    Be  onco  ashamed  of  your  abominable  bhndness,  and
submit  yourselves  to  a  just  reformation.

Anne  Askewe.

But  as  touching  the  holy  and  blessed  supper  of  the  Lord,  I  believe
it  to  be  a  most  necessary  remembrance  of  his  glorious  sufferings  and
death.  Moreover,  I  believe  as  much  therein  as  my  eternal  and  only
Redeemer,  Jesus  Christ,  would  I  should  believe.  Finally,  I  believe  all
those  scriptures  to  be  true  whom  he  hath  confirmed  with  his  precious
blood.

John  Bale.

No  goodly  institution,  nor  ordinance  of  Christ,  do  this
faithful  woman  contemn ;  but  reverently  submitteth  herself
thereunto,  in  the  kind  that  he  did  leave  them.  She  protesteth
here  to  believe  so  much  as  can  be  shewn  by  the  scriptures  of
both  testaments.  And  what  is  more  to  be  required  of  a
christian  believer  ?  Only  did  she  in  conscience  refuse  and
abhor  the  idle  observations,  the  pagan's  superstitions,  the  sor-
cerer's enchantments,  and  the  most  perilous  idolatries,  which
the  Romish  pope  and  his  clergy  have  added  to  their  mass  for
covetousness.  In  this  (I  suppose)  she  remembered  the  words
of  St  Paul,  1  Cor.  ii.,  "My  talking,"  said  he,  and  my
preaching,  was  not  with  persuasible  or  enticing  words  of  man's
corrupt  wisdom,  but  in  utterance  of  the  spirit  and  of  power ;
that  your  faith  should  not  stand  in  the  wisdom  of  men,  but
in  the  power  of  God."  "  For  that"  (saith  Christ)  "  which
seemeth  high  and  holy  afore  men,  is  filthy  abomination  before
God.'^  Luke  xvi.

Anne  Askewe.

Yea,  and,  as  St  Paul  saith,  these  scriptures  are  enough  ^  for  our
learning  and  salvation,  that  Christ  hath  left  here  with  us,  so  that  I
believe  we  need  no  unwritten  verities  to  rule  his  church  with.  There-
Hope,  fore  look  what  he  hath  laid  unto  me  with  his  own  mouth,  in  his  holy
gospel,  that  have  I,  with  God's  grace,  closed  up  in  my  heart.  And  my
full  trust  is,  as  David  saith,  that  it  shall  be  "  a  lantern  to  my  footsteps,"
Psalm  cxviii.  [cxix.]

John  Bale.

Still  are  these  fruits  of  inestimable  wholesomeness,  declaring
'are  sufficient  for  our  learning,*  Mr  Offor's  copy.]

The  supper.

Scriptures.

Without
mass.

Idolatry.

Man's  wis-
dom.

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

235

this  woman  a  most  perfect  and  innocent  member  of  Jesus
Christ.    In  this  whole  process  (mark  it  hardily)  she  runneth
not  for  succour  to  the  muddy  waters  or  broken  pits  of  the
PhiUstines  (Jer.  ii.),  which  are  the  corrupt  doctrines  and  tra-
ditions of  men;  but  she  seeketh  to  the  very  well-spring  of  Prove  stiii.
health  and  fountain  of  salvation,  John  iv.     All  unwritten
verities  left  she  to  those  wavering  wanderers  which  eternally  ^
perisheth  with  them;  and  in  the  verities  written  appointed  FniUs of
she  to  journey,  among  the  true  christian  believers,  towards
the  land  everlasting.     In  all  her  affairs  most  firmly  she
cleaveth  to  the  scriptures  of  God,  which  giveth  both  spirit
and  life,  John  vi.     "  As  the  hart  in  the  forest  desireth  the
pleasant  water-brooks,  so  longed  her  soul  and  was  desirous  of
the  manifest  glory  of  the  eternal  God,"  Ps.  xli.  [xlii.]    If  her  Her  God.
portion  be  not  in  the  land  of  the  living,  Ps.  cxU.  [cxlii.]  yea,
if  she  be  not  allowed  a  citizen  with  the  saints,  Eph.  ii.,  and  her
name  registered  in  the  book  of  life,  Apoc.  xx.,  it  will  be  hard
with  many.    But  certain  and  sure  I  am,  that  with  Mary,  a  sure  part.
Martha's  sister,  such  a  sure  part  hath  she  chosen  as  will  not
be  taken  away  from  her.  Lu.  x.

An^t:  Askewe.

There  be  some  that  do  say  that  I  deny  the  eucharist,  or  thanks-
givings; but  those  people  do  untruly  report  of  me ;  for  I  both  say  and  Eucharist,
believe  it,  that  if  it  were  ordered  like  as  Christ  instituted  it  and  left
it,  a  most  singular  comfort  were  it*  unto  us  all.  But  as  concerning
your  mass,  as  it  is  now  used  in  our  days,  I  do  say  and  believe  it  to  be  Mass,  an  idol,
the  most  abominable  idol  that  is  in  the  world :  for  my  God  will  not
be  eaten  with  teeth,  neither  yet  dieth  he  again.  And  upon  these
words,  that  I  have  now  spoken,  will  I  suffer  death.

John  Bale.

All  the  works  of  God,  and  ordinances  of  Christ,  she  re-  obedience,
verently  admitted,  as  grounded  matters  of  christian  belief ;
but  the  Romish  pope's  creatures  would  she  in  no  case  allow
to  stand  up  checkmate  with  them.    The  mass  (which  is,  in  xhemass.
all  points,  of  all  that  filthy  antichrist's  creation)  took  she  for
the  most  execrable  idol  upon  earth.    And  rightly ;  for  none

[2  'which  will  eternally,'  Mr  Offer's  copy.]

[3  '  or  sacrament  of  thank sgiring,'  Mr  Offer's  copy.]

[4  '  it  were,'  Mr  Offer's  copy.]

236

THE  L.\TTER  EXAMINATION

other  Is  the  child  to  be  reckoned  than  was  his  father  afore
him,  be  he  man  or  beast.    The  whelp  of  a  dog  is  none  other

Idolaters,  than  a  dog,  when  he  cometh  once  to  his  age.  "  Idols,''  saith
Da^'id,  "  are  like  them  that  make  them :  so  they  also  which

An  idol.  put  their  trust  in  them,"  Psalm  cxiii.  [cxv.]  An  idol  doth
Zachary  call  that  proud  slaughterous  shepherd,  Zacharj  xi.
Who  then  can  deny  his  prodigious  ordinances  to  be  the  same  ?
What  other  is  the  work  of  an  idolatrous  worker  than  an
execrable  idol "?  And  look  what  properties  anv  idol  hath  had,
or  feats  hath  wrought  yet  since  the  world's  beginning,  the
pope's  prodigious  mass  hath  had  and  wrought  the  same,  with
many  conveyances  more.

Popes.  Of  popes  hath  it  received  disguisings,  instruments,  bless-

ings, turnings,  and  legerdemains,  with  many  strange  observ-
ances borrowed   of  the  Jews'    and  pagans'   old  sacrifices,

Monks.  besides  pardons  for  deliverance  of  souls.  Of  monks  have  it
gotten  a  purgatory,  after  many  strange  apparitions,  with  a
long  ladder,  from  thence  to  scale  heaven  with.  It  hath
attained  also  to  be  a  remedy  for  all  diseases,  both  in  man

Universities,  and  boast,  witli  innumerable  superstitions  else.  Of  the  uni-
versities^ have  it  cauo:ht  all  the  subtilties  and  craft v  learninors
of  the  profane  philosophers,  to  be  defended  by ;  as  is  to  be
seen  in  the  works  of  their  sententioners,  like  as  I  have  shewed

The  mass,  in  the  Mystcry  of  Iniquity,  foho  33.  It  serveth  all  witches
in  their  witchery,  all  sorcerers,  charmers,  enchanters,  dream-
ers, soothsayers,  necromancers,  conjurers,  cross-diggers,  devil-
raisers,  miracle-doers,  dog-leeches,  and  bawds;  for  without  a
mass  they  cannot  well  work  their  feats.    The  lawyers  like-

Profitabie.  wiso,  which  sock  in  Westminister  Hall  to  get  most  money  by
falsehood,  can  neither  be  well  without  it.  It  upholdeth  vain-
glory, pride,  ambition,  avarice,  gluttony,  sloth,  idleness,  hypo-
crisy, heresy,  tyranny,  and  all  other  devilishness  besides.  It

Necessary,  maiutaineth  the  spiritual  soldiers  of  antichrist  in  all  super-
fluous living  and  wanton  lecherous  lusts,  with  the  chaste
occupyings  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah.

What  other  ghostly  fruits  it  hath,  I  shall  more  largly

Miracles  of   shcw  in  mj  book,  called  the  "  ^Miracles  of  the  Mass  against

the  mass.     Pervn."    Perchanco,  some  devout  mass-hearers  will  lay  for
the  holiness  thereof,  that  it  containeth  both  epistle  and  gospel.
Truly  that  epistle  and  that  gospel  may  well  have  a  name  of
[1    Of  universities  and  their  doctors,'  Mr  Offer's  copy.]

OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

237

life,  as  St  John  saith  of  the  church  of  Sardis,  Apoc.  iii. ;  yet
is  it  in  that  office  of  massing  none  other  than  the  dead  or
mortifying  letter,  2  Cor.  iii, :  for  the  spirit  that  should  quicken  Dead  letter,
is  clearly  taken  from  it ;  so  that  nothing  else  remaineth
thereof  to  the  common  people  but  a  dead  noise  and  an  idle
sound,  as  it  is  now  in  the  Romish  language.  Who  can  say
but  it  was  the  scripture  that  Satan  alleged  unto  Christ  upon  satan.
the  pinnacle  of  the  temple  ?  Matth.  iv. :  yet  remaineth  it  there
still,  after  his  ungracious  handling  thereof,  as  a  false,  crafty
suggestion,  a  devilish  error,  or  a  shield  of  his  wickedness ;
and  will  do  evermore.  Where  are  the  names  of  God,  of  his
angels,  and  of  his  saints,  more  rife  than  among  witches,
charmers,  enchanters,  and  sorcerers?  Yet  can  ye  not  say
that  they  are  among  them  to  any  man's  salvation,  as  they
would  be  in  right  handling.  What  it  is  that  serveth  an  idol,  An  idoi.
let  godly- wise  men  conjecture,  which  are  not  ignorant  how
angel  became  a  devil.

Aane  Askewe.

0  Lord,  I  have  more  enemies  now  than  there  be  hairs  on  my  head.  Enemies.
Yet,  Lord,  let  them  never  overcome  me  with  vain  words.     But  fight
thou,  Lord,  in  my  stead ;  for  on  thee  cast  I  my  care.    With  all  the
spite  they  can  imagine  they  fall  upon  me,  which  am  thy  poor  creature.
Yet,  sweet  Lord,  let  me  not  set  by  them  which  are  against  thee ;  for  in  Hate  them,
thee  is  my  whole  delight.

John  Bale.

O  blessed  woman  and  undoubted  citizen  of  heaven !  Adversaries.
Truth  it  is  that  thou  hast  had  many  adversaries,  yea,  and  a
far  greater  number  of  them  than  thou  hast  here  reckoned.
And  the  more  thou  hast  had,  the  greater  is  now  thy  victory
in  Christ.  The  great  body  of  the  beast  thou  hast  had  to
enemy,  which  comprehendeth  the  malignant  muster  of  Satan  Haters,
on  the  one  side,  and  the  earthly  worshippers  of  his  blasphem-
ous beastliness  on  the  other  side,  Dan.  xi. ;  Apoc.  xiii.,  "whose
number  is  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,  infinite,"  Apoc.  xx.  But
consider  again  what  friendship  thou  hast  gotten  for  it,  on  the  Friends,
other  part.  Thou  hast  now  to  friend,  for  thy  faithful  per-
severance against  those  idol-mongers,  the  sempiternal  Trinity,
the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  John  xiv.,  with
the  glorious  multitude  of  angels,  the  patriarchs  2,  apostles,  and
martyrs,  with  all  the  elect  number,  from  righteous  Abel
[2  '  prophets,'  Mr  Oflfor's  copy.]

238      LA.TTER  EXAMINATION  OF  MISTRESS  ANNE  ASKEWE.

Favourers,  liitherto.  Thou  hast  also  here  upon  earth,  and  evermore
shall  have,  the  favour  of  all  them  which  have  not  bowed  to
that  filthy  beast,  "  whose  names  are  registered  in  the  book  of
life,"  Apoc.  xxi.    And  as  for  thy  ungodly  and  cruel  enemies,

Northfoik.  as  dust  iu  the  wind  the  Lord  will  scatter  them  from  the  face
of  the  earth,  be  they  never  so  stout  and  many.   Ps.  i.

AXXE  AsKEWE.

And,  Lord,  I  heartily  deshe  of  thee  that  thou  wilt  of  thy  most
merciful  goodness  forgive  them  that  violence  which  they  do  and  have
Prayer.  done  to  me.  Open  also  thou  their  blind  hearts,  that  they  may
hereafter  do  that  thing  in  thy  sight  which  is  only  acceptable  before
thee,  and  to  set  forth  thy  verity  aright,  without  all  vain  fantasies  of
sinful  men.    So  be  it.  0  Lord,  so  be  it.  By  me,  Anne  Askewe.

John  Bale.

Afore  here  she  confessed  with  David,  that  on  God  she
had  cast  her  care,  and  that  in  him  was  all  her  heart's  dehght,
Ps.  Ix.  She  desired  him  also  never  to  fail  her  in  this  hard
conflict,  but  strongly  to  assist  her,  and  in  no  case  to  permit
her  to  be  overcome  by  the  flattering  world,  neither  yet  to
give  place  to  his  enemies.  And  I  doubt  it  not  but  these  are
most  evident  signs  that  she  was  his  faithful  servant.  I  know
certainly  that  "  all  the  power  of  hell  cannot  prevail  against
so  earnest  a  faith,"  Matth.  xvi.  For  he  hath  so  spoken  it
there  which  cannot  lie.  Lu.  xxii. ;  1  Pet.  i.  In  this  latter
part  she  sheweth  the  nature  of  Christ's  lively  member,  and
of  a  perfect  Christian  martyr  in  two  points.  First,  she  desir-
eth  God  to  forgive  her  enemies,  as  Christ  desired  him  in
the  time  of  his  passion,  Lu.  xxiii.,  and  as  holy  Stephen  also
did  for  the  time  of  his  death,  Acto.  vii. :  secondly,  she  desir-
eth  their  hearts  to  be  opened,  that  they  may  truly  believe
and  be  saved,  Acto.  xvi.  This  supernatural  eff'ect  of  charity
had  she  only  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  which  "  willeth  not  the
death  of  a  froward  sinner,  but  rather  that  he  be  from  his
wickedness  turned,  and  so  live."  Ezek.  xxxiii.  Thus  is  she  a
saint  canonised  in  Christ's  blood,  though  she  never  have  other
canonisation  of  pope,  priest,  nor  bishop.

"  The  destroyer  shall  be  destroyed  without  hands."  Dan.

viii.

Sweet
woman.

God's  tnie
servant.

Christ's
meuibers.

Charity.

A  saint

THE  BALLAD  WHICH  AXNE  ASKEWE  :\IADE  AND  SAXG
WHEN  SHE  WAS  IN  NEWGATE.

Like  as  the  armed  knight,

Appointed  to  the  field,
With  this  world  will  I  fight,

And  Christ^  shall  be  my  sliield.

Faith  is  that  weapon  strong,
Which  will  not  fail  at  need :

My  foes,  therefore,  among
Therewith  will  I  proceed.

As  it  is  had  in  strength

And  force  of  Cliriste's  way,

It  will  prevail  at  length,

Though  all  the  devils  say  nay.

Faith  in  the  fathers  old
Obtained  righteousness ;

Which  make  me  very  bold
To  fear  no  world's  distress.

I  now  rejoice  in  heart,
And  hope  bid  me  do  so ;

For  Christ  will  take  my  part.
And  ease  me  of  my  woe.

Thou  say'st,  Lord,  whoso  knock,
To  them  wilt  thou  attend  ;

Undo  therefore  the  lock.

And  thy  strong  power  send.

!More  enemies  now  T  have
Than  hairs  upon  my  head  :

Let  them  not  me  deprave,
But  fight  thou  in  my  stead.

[1  *  Faith,'  Mr  Offer's  copy.]

240

A  BALLAD.

On  thee  my  care  I  cast,

For  all  their  cruel  spite:
I  set  not  by  their  haste ;

For  thou  art  my  delight.

I  am  not  she  that  list

My  anchor  to  let  fall
For  every  drizzling  mist,

Mj  ship  substantial.

Not  oft  use  I  to  write,

In  prose,  nor  yet  in  rhyme ;

Yet  will  I  shew  one  sight
That  I  saw  in  my  time.

I  saw  a  royal  throne.

Where  justice  should  have  sit.

But  in  her  stead  was  one
Of  moody,  cruel  wit.

Aborbed  was  righteousness,

As  of  the  raginoj  flood :
Satan,  in  his  excess.

Sucked  up  the  guiltless  blood.

Then  thought  I,  Jesus  Lord,
When  thou  shall  judge  us  all,

Hard  is  it  to  record

On  these  men  what  will  fall.

Yet,  Lord,  I  thee  desire,

For  that  they  do  to  me.
Let  them  not  taste  the  hire

Of  their  iniquity.

FINIS.

God  save  the  King.

God  hath  chosen  the  weak  things  of  the  world  to  con-
found things  which  are  mighty  ;  yea,  and  things  of  no  repu-
tation, that  no  flesh  should  presume  in  his  sight  ^"  1  Cor.  i.

[1  *  yea,  and  things  of  no  reputation,  for  to  bring  to  nought  things
of  reputation,  that  no  flesh  should  presume  in  his  sight.'  1  Cor.  i.
Mr  Offer's  copy.]

THE  CONCLUSION.

Thus  hast  thou,  diligent  reader,  the  end  of  these  two
examinations  and  answers  of  the  most  christian  martyr,  Anne
Askewe,  with  other  additions  besides.  Mark  in  them  the  hor-
rible mad  fury  of  antichrist  and  the  devil,  how  they  work  Antichrist
in  this  age  by  their  tyrannous  members,  to  bring  the  last
vengeance  swiftly  upon  them.     Aforetime  hath  not  been
seen  such  frantic  outrage  as  is  now ;  the  judges,  without  all
sober  discretion,  running  to  the  rack,  tugging,  hauling,  and  Compassion,
pulling  thereat,  like  tormentors  in  a  play.    Compare  me  here
Pilate  with  AYrisley,  the  high  chancellor  of  England,  with
Rich,  and  with  other  which  will  be  counted  no  small  moats ;
and  see  how  much  the  pagan  judge  excelleth  in  virtue  and
wisdom  the  false  christened  judge,  yea,  rather,  prodigious
tyrant.    When  Pilate  had  inquired  what  accusation  the  Jewish  Piiate.
clergy  had  against  Christ,  he  perceived  they  did  all  of  malice,
and  refused  to  meddle  therein,  John  xviii.    In  Wrisley  and  wrisicy.
Rich  is  no  such  equity ;  but  they  rather  seek  occasion  to
accomplish  the  full  malice  of  antichrist.

Pilate  shewed  the  accused  all  favour  possible:  he  exa-
mined him  privately,  he  gave  him  friendly  words,  he  bade
him  not  fear  to  speak,  he  heard  him  with  gentleness,  he  coun-
selled with  him,  that  he  might  the  more  freely  suppress  their
mad  fury,  and  he  promised  they  should  do  him  no  wrong,
in  case  he  should  utter  his  full  mind.  John  xviii.  Far  con-
trary to  this  were  Wrisley  and  Rich,  which,  not  all  ignorant
of  the  bishops'  beastly  errors,  mahciously,  without  fear  of
God,  and  shame  of  the  world,  executed  upon  this  godly  woman
most  terrible  tyranny.  Pilate  spake  for  the  innocent,  excused  niate.
him,  defended  him,  laid  forth  the  law,  pleaded  for  him
sharply,  required  them  to  shew  mercy,  alleged  for  him  their
custom,  declared  him  an  innocent,  and  sought  by  all  means
to  dehver  him.  Matt,  xxvii.  These  perjured  magistrates,  Wris-  wrisiey.
ley  and  Rich,  not  only  examined  this  innocent  woman  with
rigour,  but  also  hated  her,  scorned  her,  reviled  her,  con-

24:2      LATTER  EXAMINATION  OF  MISTRESS  ANN  ASKEWE.

demned  her  for  an  heretic,  and,  with  unspeakable  torments,
sought  to  enforce  her  to  brinfr  bv  accusation  other  noble  men
and  women  to  death.

piute.  Moreover,  Pilate  would  shed  no  innocent  blood,  but  la-

boured to  mitigate  the  bishops'  fury,  and  instanted^  them,  as
they  were  religious,  to  shew  godly  favour,  concluding  that
he  could  by  no  law  of  justice  judge  him  worthy  to  die.

wrisiey.  Mark  XV.  These  vengeablo  tyrants,  AVrisley  and  Rich,  in-
satiably thirsted,  not  only  the  innocent  blood  of  this  faithful
servant  of  God,  but  also  the  blood  of  the  noble  duchess  of
Suffolk,  the  blood  of  the  worthy  countess  of  Hertford,  and
the  virtuous  countess  of  Sussex,  the  blood  of  the  faithful

Ladies.  lady  Dcuny,  of  the  good  lady  Fitzwilliams,  and  other
godly  women  more,  such  widows  and  wives  as  Paul,  Peter,
and  John  commendeth  in  their  epistles,  besides  the  blood  of
certain  noble  men  of  the  kino;'s  his^h  council ;  and  all  at  the

Pilate.  spiteful  calling  on  of  the  bishops.  Slack  ear  gave  Pilate  to
the  priests ;  he  regarded  not  their  displeasure,  he  detected
their  protervous-  madness,  by  delays  he  deferred  the  sen-
tence, and  finally  washed  his  hands,  as  one  that  was  clear

wmiey  and  from  their  tyranny.  Luke  xxiii.  Swift  ear  gave  "Wrislcy  and
Rich,  with  their  wicked  afiinity,  to  the  puffed  up  porkhngs
of  the  pope,  Gardiner,  Bonner,  and  such  other.  They  fol-
lowed their  cruel  counsel,  they  imprisoned  her,  judged  her,
condemned  her,  and  racked  her,  at  the  last,  with  their  own
polluted,  bloody  tormentors'  hands,  till  the  vems  and  sinews
burst.

If  ye  mark  the  scriptures  well,  ye  shall  easily  perceive
Pilate.       that  Pilate  was  not  in  fault  of  Christ's  buffetings,  beatings,
scornings,  face-spittings,  crowning  with  thorns,  and  such  other
PriesU.       extreme  handlings ;   but  the  malicious  bishops  and  priests,
which  waged  Judas  to  betray  him,  hired  false  witnesses  to
accuse  him,  monied  the  multitude  to  defame  him,  feigned
false  matter  against  him,  compelled  the  law  and  terrified  the
judge  to  have  full^  mischief  accomplished,  as  our  bishops
Pilate.        have  done  in  this  cruel  act,   and  such  other.     When  the
priests  would  have  blemished  his  name  by  the  ignominious

[1  ^to  instant,  to  importune,'  Halliwell's  Dictionary  of  Archaic  and
Provincial  Words.]

[-  forward,  presuming.]

[3  'have  their  full,'  Mr  Offor's  copy.]

THE  CONCLUSION.

243

death  which  he  suffered  among  thieves  on  the  cross,  Pilate
proclaimed  it  glorious  unto  all  the  world,  writing  his  title  in
Hebrew,  Greek,  and  Latin, — "Jesus  of  Nazareth,  King  of
the  Jews,""  and  would  not,  at  their  instant  calling  on,  change
it.  John  xix.  Wrisley  and  Rich,  with  their  ungracious  affinity,  wrisiey.
have  in  every  point  followed  here  the  execrable  affects  of
the  priests.    Favourably  Pilate  licensed  Joseph  of  Arimathea
to  take  down  Christ's  body,  and  to  bury  it.  Matt,  xxvii.
Wrisiey  commanded  this  martyr  of  God,  with  her  faithful
companions,  to  be  burnt  to  ashes.    Pilate  was  ignorant  ofpuate.
God's  laws,  and  a  pagan;  Wrisiey  and  Rich  knew*  both  the  wrisiey.
law  and  the  gospel,  and  are  Christians:  the  more  is  it  to
their  damnation  to  execute  such  Turkish  tyranny.

Now  to  conclude  with  Anne  Askewe,  as  the  argument
of  this  book  requireth.    In  the  year  of  our  Lord  1546,
and  in  the  month  of  July,  at  the  prodigious  procurement  of
antichrist's  furious  remnant,  Gardiner,  and  Bonner,  and  such
like,  she  suffered  most  cruel  death  in  Smithfield,  with  her
three  faithful  companions,  John  Lassels,  a  gentleman  which  Martyrs,
had  been  her  instructor ;  John  Adlam,  a  tailor ;  and  a  priest,
so  constant  in  the  verity  against  the  said  antichrist's  super-
stitions as  they,  whose  name  at  this  time  I  had  not.  Credibly
am  I  informed  by  divers  Dutch  merchants  which  were  there
present,  that  in  the  time  of  their  sufferings  the  sky,  abhor-  a  sign,
ring  so  wicked  an  act,  suddenly  altered  colour,  and  the  clouds
from  above  gave  a  thunder-clap,  not  all  unlike  to  that  is
written  Psalm  Ixxvi.    The  elements  both  declared  therein  the  [Psai.ixxvii.
high  displeasure  of  God  for  so  tyrannous  a  murder  of  inno-  God-s  hand,
cents,  and  also  expressly  signified  his  mighty  hand  present
to  the  comfort  of  them  which  trusted  in  him,  besides  the  most
wonderful  mutation  which  will,  within  short  space,  thereupon
follow.    And  like  as  the  centurion,  with  those  that  were  with  centurion,
him,  for  the  tokens  shewed  at  Christ's  death,  confessed  him
to  be  the  Son  of  God,  Matt,  xxvii. ;  so  did  a  great  number
at  the  burning  of  these  martyrs,  upon  the  sight  of  this  open
experiment,  affirm  them  to  be  his  faithful  members.

Full  many  a  christian  heart  have  risen,  and  will  rise,  christians,
from  the  pope  to  Christ,  through  the  occasion  of  their  con-
suming in  the  fire.    As  the  saying  is,  of  their  ashes  will
more  of  the  same  opinion  arise.    Many  a  one  saith  yet,  both
[4  '  know,'  Mr  Offer's  copy.]

16—2

214      LATTER  EXAMINATION  OF  MISTUESS  ANN  ASKEWE.

Take  heed,  in  England  and  Diitchland  also,  "  Oh  that  woman,  that
woman!  Oh  those  men,  those  men!"  If  the  pope's  genera-
tion and  wicked  remnant  make  many  more  such  martyrs,
they  are  like  to  mar  all  their  market  in  England.  It  were
best  for  them  now-a-days  to  let  men  be  at  liberty  for  their

Ceremonies,  holy  father's  gaudy  ceremonies,  as  they  are  for  bear-baitings,
cock-fightings,  tennis-play,  tables,  tumbling,  dancing,  or  hunt-
ing ;  who  list  and  who  may :  for  as  little  have  those  tra-
ditions of  his  of  the  word  of  God  in  their  proudest  out-

Tenderiings.  show,  as  they  have.  Here  will  some  tender  stomachs  bo
grieved,  and  report,  that  in  our  heady  hastiness  we  refuse
to  suffer  with  our  weak  brethren,  according  to  the  doctrine
of  St  Paul.  But  I  say  unto  them,  whatsoever  they  be,
which  are  so  scrupulous  wanderers,  that  they  most  execrably
err  in  so  bestowing  the  scriptures ;  for  abominable  is  that
tolerance  of  our  brethren's  weakness,  where  God  is  by
idolatrous  superstitions  disobeyed,  dishonoured,  and  bias-
Hypocrisy,  phemed.  A  plain  practice  were  this  of  Satan  in  hypocrisy
to  uphold  all  deviUshness.

Papists.  On  the  other  side  was  there  another  sort,  at  the  death

of  these  blessed  martyrs,  and  they  judged  of  this  alteration
of  the  air  and  thunder-clap,  as  did  the  Jewish  bishops  with
their  perverted  multitude,  which,  wagging  their  heads,
railed,  reviled,  jangled,  jested,  scorned,  cursed,  mocked,  and
mowed,  at  Christ's  precious  sufferings  on  the  cross.  Matt.

Priests.  xxvii.  aud  Luke  xxiii.  These  were  the  idle  priests^  at
London  and  their  beastly  ignorant  broods,  with  old  supersti-

Bawds.  tious  bawds  and  brethels,  the  pope's  Wind  cattle.  These
cried  there,  like  mad  moody  bedlams,  as  they  heard  the
thunder,  "  They  are  damned,  they  are  damned,"  their  wise
preachers  outasing^  the  same  at  Paul's  cross.  Indeed,  full
nobly  are  they  overseen  in  the  bible,  that  judge  the  thun-
ders to  signify  damnation.    Thunder,  saith  the  scripture,  is

Thunders,  tho  voice  of  God.  Ecclus.  xHii.  Thunder  is  the  helping
power  of  the  Lord,  Job  xxvi.,  and  no  damnation.  Christ
called  John  and  James  the  sons  of  thunder,  Mark  iii. ;  which
betokeneth  that  they  should  be  earnest  preachers,  and  no

Thunder.     children  of  damnation.    The  Lord  by  thunder  sheweth  his

[1  *idle-witted  priests,'  Mr  Offer's  copy.]

[2  *  outasing,'  making  a  tumult.  See  Halliweirs  Dictionary  of  Ar-
chaic and  of  Provincial  Words.]

THE  CONCLUSION.

245

inscrutable  working.  Job  xxxyiii.  Moses  received  the  law,
Helias  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  the  apostles  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  all  in  thunder.  What  wicked  soul  will  saj  they  received
so  damnation?

As  the  lamb  had  opened  the  first  seal  of  the  book,  the  Apocalypse,
voice  that  went  forth  was  as  it  had  been  thunder,  Rev.  vi.;
which  is  no  damnation,  but  a  sharp  calling  of  the  people  to
God-ward.    The  thunderings  that  appeared  when  the  angel  Thunders,
filled  his  censer,  Rev.  viii.,  were  no  damnations,  but  God's
earnest  words,  rebuking  the  world  for  sin.    The  best  in-
terpreters do  call  those  thunderings  which  came  from  the
throne  of  God,  Rev.  iv.,  such  verities  of  the  scripture  as  terri-
fieth  sinners,  and  no  damnations.    Neither  were  the  seven
thunderings  which  gave  their  voices.  Rev.  x.,  any  other
than  mysteries,  at  their  times  to  be  opened.    Eucherius  Eucherius.
Lugdunensis,  and  other  morahsers,  call  thunders  in  the
scriptures  the  voices  of  the  gospel,  and  their  lightnings  the
clear  opening  of  the  same.    If  thunder  be  a  threatening,  or
a  fearful  judgment- of  God  (as  in  Ps.  ciii.),  it  is  to  them  that
abide  here,  and  not  to  them  that  depart  from  hence.  A
token  is  it  also  that  the  horrible  tyrants  shall  be  as  the  For  t\Tant3.
meal-dust,  that  the  wind  taketh  away  suddenly.    Isa.  xxix.
If  the  plague  do  follow  of  thunder,  as  it  did  in  Egypt,  when  Northfoik.
Moses  stretched  forth  his  rod,  Exod.  ix.,  it  shall  hght  upon
them  which  shewed  the  tyrannous  \'iolence  to^  the  people  of
God,  as  it  did  upon  Pharaoh  and  his  cruel  ministers.

At  the  mighty  voice  which  was  both  sensibly  heard
and  understanded  of  the  apostles  from  heaven,  that  the
Father  was  and  would  be  glorified  by  Christ,  the  people  said  Mark  weii.
notliing  but,  "  It  thundereth,"  Job.  xii. ;  for  nothing  else  they
understood  thereof.     What   Anne  Askewe  and  her  com-
panions both  heard  and  see  in  this  thunder,  to  their  souls'
consolation  in  their  painful  sufferings,  no  mortal  understand-
ing can  discern.    Only  was  it  Stephen  (and,  peradventure,  a  st  Stephen,
few  disciples)  that  saw  the  heavens  opened  when  he  suffered,
and  not  the  cruel  multitude  which  ran  upon  him  with  stones.
Acts  vii.    Let  beastly  blind  babblers  and  bawds,  with  their
charming  chaplains,  then,  prate  at  large  out  of  their  malicious
spirit  and  idle  brains.    We  have  in  abundance  the  verity  of
God's  word  and  promise,  to  prove  them  both  saved  and  God-s  word.
[3  '  OD,'  Mr  Offer's  copy.]

246      LATTER  EXAMINATION  OF  MISTRESS  ANN  ASKEWE.

glorified  in  Christ.  For  God  ever  preserveth  them  which
trust  in  him.  Ps.  xvi.  "  All  that  call  upon  his  holy  name
are  saved."  Joel  ii.  What  reasonable  man  will  think  that
they  can  be  lost,  which  have  their  Lord  God  more  dear  than
their  own  lives  ?  *'No  man  shall  be  able  (saith  Christ)  to
pluck  my  sheep  out  of  my  hands ;  but  I  will  give  them  eternal
life."  Job.  X.  *' Believe  (saith  Paul  to  the  jailer  at  Philippos)
on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved,  and  thy
whole  household."  Acts  xvi.  "Thev  that  seem  in  the  sight  of
the  unwise  to  go  to  destruction,  do  rest  in  the  peace  of  God,
and  are  replenished  with  immortality,"  Wisd.  iii.: — with  other
innumerable  scriptures  to  the  praise  of  God,  whose  name  be
glorified,  world  without  end.  Amen.

Finis.
God  save  the  King.

Thus  endeth  the  latter  conflict  of  Anne  Askewe,  lately
done  to  death  by  the  Romish  pope's  malicious  remnant,  and
now  canonised  in  the  precious  blood  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ.

Imprinted  at  Marpurg,  in  the  land  of  Hessen,  16  die
Januarii,  anno  1547.